Albert G. Mackey, An Encyclopedia of Freemasonry and Its Kindred Sciences (1878)
==========================================================================
Mackey's definitive Masonic encyclopedia — the standard reference for Masonic history, symbolism, and biography. Indispensable for any Masonic collection. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

it


t


s


Eng


Ah'Rucrae


This  project  is  made  possible  by  a  grant  from  the  Institute  of  Museum  and  Library  Services  as  administered  by  the  Pennsylvania  Department  of  Education  through  the  Office  of  Commonwealth  Libraries


V


NEW  AND  REVISED  EDITION.


AN  ENCYCLOPAEDIA

OF

FREEMASONRY

AND

ITS  KINDRED  SCIENCES:

COMPRISING

THE  WHOLE  RANGE  OP  ARTS,  SCIENCES  AND  LITERATURE  AS  CONNECTED

WITH  THE  INSTITUTION.


BT

ALBERT  G.  MACKEY,  M.D.,

AUTHOR  OP  “  LEXICON  OP  FREEMASONRY,”  “  A  TEXT-BOOK  OP  MASONIO  JURISPRUDENCE,”
“SYMBOLISM  OF  FREEMASONRY,”  ETC.,  ETC.


CONTAINING  ALSO  AN  ADDENDUM,  GIVING  THE  RESULTS  OF  SUBSEQUENT  STUDY,
RESEARCH  AND  DISCOVERY  TO  THE  PRESENT  TIME.


BY

CHARLES  T.  McCLENACHAN,

AUTHOR  OP  “THE  BOOK  OP  THE  ANCIENT  ACCEPTED  SCOTTISH  RITE  OP  FREEMASONRY,"
“  FORMS  AND  CEREMONIES,”  ETC.


WITH  ILLUSTRATIONS.


“  Nature  indeed  inspires  devotion.  The  air  is  full  of  signs,  the  sky  of  tokens,  the  ground  of  memo¬
randa  and  signatures ;  every  objeot  is  oovered  with  hints  that  speak  intelligibly  to  the  intelligent.”


PHILADELPHIA:

L.  H.  EVERTS  &  CO.,

18V)  1‘


REVISED  EDITION,  WITH  ADDENDUM.



PREFACE.


T  ONCE  delivered  an  address  before  a  Lodge  on  the  subject  of  the  external
changes  which  Freemasonry  had  undergone  since  the  period  of  its  revival  in
the  commencement  of  the  eighteenth  century.  The  proper  treatment  of  the  topic
required  a  reference  to  German,  to  French,  and  to  English  authorities,  with  some
of  which  I  am  afraid  that  many  of  my  auditors  were  not  familiar.  At  the  close
of  the  address,  a  young  and  intelligent  brother  inquired  of  me  how  he  could
obtain  access  to  the  works  which  I  had  cited,  and  of  many  of  which  he  confessed,
as  well  as  of  the  facts  that  they  detailed,  he  now  heard  for  the  first  time.  It  is
probable  thqjt  my  reply  was  not  altogether  satisfactory ;  for  I  told  him  that  I  knew
of  no  course  that  he  could  adopt  to  attain  that  knowledge  except  the  one  that  had
been  pursued  by  myself,  namely,  to  spend  his  means  in  the  purchase  of  Masonic
books  and  his  time  in  reading  them.

But  there  are  few  men  who  have  the  means,  the  time,  and  the  inclination  for
the  purchase  of  numerous  books,  some  of  them  costly  and  difficult  to  be  obtained,
and  for  the  close  and  attentive  reading  of  them  which  is  necessary  to  master  any
given  subject.

It  was  this  thought  that,  just  ten  years  ago,  suggested  to  me  the  task  of  collecting
materials  for  a  work  which,  under  one  cover,  would  furnish  every  Mason  who
might  consult  its  pages  the  means  of  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  all  matters  connected
with  the  science,  the  philosophy,  and  the  history  of  his  Order.

But  I  was  also  led  to  the  prosecution  of  this  work  by  a  higher  consideration.
I  had  myself  learned,  from  the  experience  of  my  early  Masonic  life,  that  the
character  of*the  Institution  was  elevated  in  every  one’s  opinion  just  in  proportion
to  the  amount  of  knowledge  that  he  had  acquired  of  its  symbolism,  philosophy,
and  history.

If  Freemasonry  was  not  at  one  time  patronized  by  the  learned,  it  was  because
the  depths  of  its  symbolic  science  and  philosophy  had  not  been  sounded.  If  it  is
now  becoming  elevated  and  popular  in  the  estimation  of  scholars,  it  owes  that
elevation  and  that  popularity  to  the  labors  of  those  who  have  studied  its  intel-


T


V)


PREFACE.


lectual  system  and  given  the  result  of  their  studies  to  the  world.  The  scholar
will  rise  from  the  perusal  of  Webb’s  Monitor,  or  the  Hieroglyphic  Chart  of  Cross,
with  no  very  exalted  appreciation  of  the  literary  character  of  the  Institution
of  which  such  works  profess  to  be  an  exponent.  But  should  he  have  met  with
even  Hutchinson’s  Spirit  of  Masonry,  or  Town’s  Speculative  Masonry,  which  are
among  the  earlier  products  of  Masonic  literature,  he  will  be  conscious  that  the
system  which  could  afford  material  for  such  works  must  be  worthy  of  investigation.

Oliver  is  not  alone  in  the  belief  that  the  higher  elevation  of  the  Order  is  to  be
attributed  “almost  solely  to  the  judicious  publications  on  the  subject  of  Freema¬
sonry  which  have  appeared  during  the  present  and  the  end  of  the  last  century.”
It  is  the  press  that  is  elevating  the  Order ;  it  is  the  labor  of  its  scholars  that  is
placing  it  in  the  rank  of  sciences.  The  more  that  is  published  by  scholarly  pens
on  its  principles,  the  more  will  other  scholars  be  attracted  to  its  investigation.

At  no  time,  indeed,  has  its  intellectual  character  been  more  justly  appreciated
than  at  the  present  day.  At  no  time  have  its  members  generally  cultivated  its
science  with  more  assiduity.  At  no  time  have  they  been  more  zealous  in  the
endeavor  to  obtain  a  due  enlightenment  on  all  the  topics  which  its  system
comprehends.

It  was  the  desire  to  give  my  contribution  towards  the  elevation  of  the  Order,  by
aiding  in  the  dissemination  of  some  of  that  light  and  knowledge  which  are  not
so  easy  of  access,  that  impelled  me  ten  years  ago  to  commence  the  preparation
of  this  work  —  a  task  which  I  have  steadily  toiled  to  accomplish,  and  at  which,
for  the  last  three  years,  I  have  wrought  with  unintermitted  labor  that  has  per¬
mitted  but  little  time  for  other  occupation,  and  none  for  recreation.

And  now  I  present  to  my  brethren  the  result  not  only  of  those  years  of  toil,  but
of  more  than  thirty  years  of  study  and  research  —  a  work  which  will,  I  trust,  or
at  least  I  hope,  supply  them  with  the  materials  for  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  much
that  is  required  to  make  a  Masonic  scholar.  Encyclopaedic  learning  is  not  usually
considered  as  more  than  elementary.  But  knowing  that  but  few  Masons  can
afford  time  to  become  learned  scholars  in  our  art  by  an  entire  devotion  to  its
study,  I  have  in  important  articles  endeavored  to  treat  the  subject  exhaustively,
and  in  all  to  give  that  amount  of  information  that  must  make  future  ignorance
altogether  the  result  of  disinclination  to  learn.

Ido  not  present  this  work  as  perfect,  for  I  well  know  that  the  culminating  point
of  perfection  can  never  be  attained  by  human  effort.  But,  under  many  adverse
circumstances,  I  have  sought  to  make  it  as  perfect  as  I  could.  Encyclopaedias
are,  for  the  most  part,  the  result  of  the  conjoined  labor  of  many  writers.  In  this
work  I  have  had  no  help.  Every  article  was  written  by  myself.  I  say  this  not  to
excuse  my  errors  —  for  I  hold  that  no  author  should  wilfully  permit  an  error  to


PREFACE.


vii


pollute  his  pages  —  but  rather  to  account  for  those  that  may  exist.  I  have
endeavored  to  commit  none.  Doubtless  there  are  some.  If  I  knew  them,  I
would  correct  them ;  but  let  him  who  discovers  them  remember  that  they  have
been  unwittingly  committed  in  the  course  of  an  exhaustive  and  unaided  task.

One  of  the  inevitable  results  of  preparing  a  work  containing  so  great  a  variety
and  so  large  a  number  of  articles  arranged  in  alphabetical  order  is  the  omission
of  a  few  from  their  proper  places.  These,  however,  have  been  added  in  a  Sup¬
plement;  and  where  any  article  is  not  found  in  the  body  of  the  work,  the
inspector  is  requested  to  refer  to  the  Supplement,  where  it  will  probably  be
discovered.

For  twelve  months,  too,  of  the  time  in  which  I  have  been  occupied  upon  this
work,  I  suffered  from  an  affection  of  the  sight,  which  forbade  all  use  of  the  eyes  for
purposes  of  study.  During  that  period,  now  happily  passed,  all  authorities  were
consulted  under  my  direction  by  the  willing  eyes  of  my  daughters  —  all  writing
was  done  under  my  dictation  by  their  hands.  I  realized  for  a  time  the  picture  so
often  painted  of  the  blind  bard  dictating  his  sublime  verses  to  his  daughters.  It
was  a  time  of  sorrow  for  the  student  who  could  not  labor  with  his  own  organs  in
his  vocation ;  but  it  was  a  time  of  gladness  to  the  father  who  felt  that  he  had
those  who,  with  willing  hearts,  could  come  to  his  assistance.  To  the  world  this  is
of  no  import ;  but  I  could  not  conscientiously  close  this  prefatory  address  without
referring  to  this  circumstance  so  gratifying  to  a  parent’s  heart.  Were  I  to  dedicate
this  work  at  all,  my  dedication  should  be  —  To  Filial  Affection.

Albert  G.  Mackey,  M.  D.

1440  M  Street,  Washington,  D.  C.,

January  1,  1874.


AARON


A.

ABBREVIATIONS


Aaron.  Hebrew  pnx,  Aharon,  a  word
of  doubtful  etymology,  but  generally  sup-
osed  to  signify  a  mountaineer.  He  was  the
rother  of  Moses,  and  the  first  high  priest
under  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  whence  the
riesthood  established  by  that  lawgiver  is
nown  as  the  “  Aaronic.”  He  is  alluded
to  in  the  English  lectures  of  the  second
degree,  in  reference  to  a  certain  sign  which
is  said  to  have  taken  its  origin  from  the  fact
that  Aaron  and  Hur  were  present  on  the
hill  from  which  Moses  surveyed  the  battle
which  Joshua  was  waging  with  the  Amale-
kites,  when  these  two  supported  the  weary
arms  of  Moses  in  an  upright  posture,  be¬
cause  upon  his  uplifted  hands  the  fate  of  the
battle  depended.  (See  Exodus  xvii.  10-
12.)  Aaron  is  also  referred  to  in  the  latter
section  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  in  connec¬
tion  with  the  memorials  that  were  deposited
in  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  In  the  degree
of  “  Chief  of  the  Tabernacle,”  which  is  the
23d  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,  the
presiding  officer  represents  Aaron,  and  is
styled  “Most  Excellent  High  Priest.”  In
the  24th  degree  of  the  same  Rite,  or  “  Prince
of  the  Tabernacle,”  the  second  officer  or
Senior  Warden  also  personates  Aaron.

Aaron's  Rod.  The  method  by  which
Moses  caused  a  miraculous  judgment  as  to
which  tribe  should  be  invested  with  the
priesthood,  is  detailed  in  the  Book  of  Num¬
bers  (ch.  xvii.).  He  directed  that  twelve
rods  should  be  laid  up  in  the  Holy  of  Holies
of  the  Tabernacle,  one  for  each  tribe ;  that
of  Aaron  of  course  represented  the  tribe  of
Levi.  On  the  next  day  these  rods  were
brought  out  and  exhibited  to  the  people,
and  while  all  the  rest  remained  dry  and
withered,  that  of  Aaron  alone  budded  and
blossomed  and  yielded  fruit.  There  is  no


mention  in  the  Pentateuch  of  this  rod  hav¬
ing  been  placed  in  the  ark,  but  only  that  it
was  put  before  it.  But  as  St.  Paul,  or  the
author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  asserts
that  the  rod  and  the  pot  of  manna  were
both  within  the  ark,  Royal  Arch  Masons
have  followed  this  later  authority.  Hence
the  rod  of  Aaron  is  found  in  the  ark ;  but
its  import  is  only  historical,  as  if  to  iden¬
tify  the  substitute  ark  as  a  true  copy  of  the
original,  which  had  been  lost.  No  symbol¬
ical  instruction  accompanies  its  discovery.

Ab.  3N-  1.  The  11th  month  of  the
Hebrew  civil  year  and  corresponding  to  the
months  July  and  August,  beginning  with
the  new  moon  of  the  former.  2.  It  is  also  a
Hebrew  word,  signifying/at/ter,  and  will  be
readily  recognized  by  every  Mason  as  a  com¬
ponent  part  of  the  name  Hiram  Abif  which
literally  means  Hiram  his  father.  See  Abif.

Abacus.  A  term  which  has  been  lately,
but  erroneously,  used  in  this  country  to
designate  the  official  staff  of  the  Grand  Mas¬
ter  of  the  Templars.  The  word  has  no  such
meaning ;  for  an  abacus  is  either  a  table  used
for  facilitating  arithmetical  calculations,  or
is  in  architecture  the  crowning  plate  of  a
column  and  its  capital.  The  Grand  Mas¬
ter’s  staff  was  a  baculus,  which  see.

Abaddon.  A  Hebrew  word  JH3N,
signifying  destruction.  By  the  Rabbins  it  is
interpreted  as  the  place  of  destruction,  and  is
the  second  of  the  seven  names  given  by
them  to  the  region  of  the  dead.  In  the
Apocalypse  it  is  rendered  by  the  Greek
word  'AnoXXvuv,  Apotlyon,  and  means  the
destroyer.  In  this  sense  it  is  used  as  a  sig¬
nificant  word  in  the  high  degrees.

Abbreviations.  Abbreviations  of
technical  terms  or  of  official  titles  are  of
very  extensive  use  in  Masonry.  They  were,

1


2


ABBREVIATIONS


ABBREVIATIONS


however,  but  rarely  employed  in  the  earlier
Masonic  publications.  For  instance,  not
one  is  to  be  found  in  the  first  edition  of
Anderson’s  Constitutions.  Within  a  com¬
paratively  recent  period  they  have  greatly
increased,  especially  among  French  writers,
and  a  familiarity  with  them  is  therefore
essentially  necessary  to  the  Masonic  stu¬
dent.  Frequently,  among  English  and  al¬
ways  among  French  authors,  a  Masonic  ab¬
breviation  is  distinguished  by  three  points,

in  a  triangular  form  following  the  letter,
which  peculiar  mark  was  first  used,  accord¬
ing  to  Ragon,  on  the  12th  of  August,  1774,
by  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  in  an  ad¬
dress  to  its  subordinates.  No  authoritative
explanation  of  the  meaning  of  these  points
has  been  given,  but  they  may  be  supposed
to  refer  to  the  three  lights  around  the  altar,
or  perhaps  more  generally  to  the  number
three,  and  to  the  triangle,  both  important
symbols  in  the  Masonic  system.

Before  proceeding  to  give  a  list  of  the
principal  abbreviations,  it  may  be  observed
that  the  doubling  of  a  letter  is  intended  to
express  the  plural  of  that  word  of  which  the
single  letter  is  the  abbreviation.  Thus,  in
French,  F.\  signifies  “  Frere,”  or  “  Broth¬
er,”  and  FF.\  “Freres,”  or  “Brothers.”
And  in  English,  L.\  is  sometimes  used  to
denote  “Lodge,”  and  LL.\  to  denote
“  Lodges.”  This  remark  is  made  once  for
all,  because  I  have  not  deemed  it  necessary
to  augment  the  size  of  the  list  of  abbrevia¬
tions  by  inserting  these  plurals.  If  the  in¬
spector  finds  S.\  G.\  I.-,  to  signify  “Sover¬
eign  Grand  Inspector,”  he  will  be  at  no  loss
to  know  that  SS.\  GG.\  II.’.  must  denote
“Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors.”

A.-.  Dep.\  Anno  Depositions.  In  the
Year  of  the  Deposite.  The  date  used  by
Royal  and  Select  Masters.

A.’.  and  A.-.  Ancient  and  Accepted.

A.'.  F.\  M.\  Ancient  Freemasons.

A.-.  F.\  and  A.'.  M.\  Ancient  Free  and
Accepted  Mason.

A.-.  Inv.\  Anno  Inventionis.  In  the  Year
of  the  Discovery.  The  date  used  by  Royal
Arch  Mason.

A.-.  L.\  AnnoLucis.  In  the  Year  of  Light.
The  date  used  by  Ancient  Craft  Masons.

A.-.  L.\  G.\  D.\  G.\  A.‘.  D.\  L’U.’.  A
la  Gloire  du  Grand  Architects  de  V  TJnivers.
To  the  Glorv  of  the  Grand  Architect  of  the
Universe.  (French.)  The  usual  caption  of
French  Masonic  documents.

A.’.  L’O.’.  A  V  Orient.  At  the  East.
(French.)  The  seat  of  the  Lodge.

A.-.  M.\  Anno  Mundi.  In  the  Year  of
the  World.  The  date  used  in  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Rite.

A.-.  0.\  Anno  Ordinis.  In  the  Year  of
the  Order.  The  date  used  by  Knights
Templars.


A. -.  Y.\  M.\  Ancient  York  Mason.

B. \  A.-.  Buisson  Ardente.  Burning  Bush.

B. \  B.\  Burning  Bush.

C. \  C.\  Celestial  Canopy.

C. \  H.\  Captain  of  the  Host.

D. ’.  Deputy.

D.\  G.\  G.\  n.\  P.\  Deputy  General
Grand  High  Priest.

D.\  G.\  H.\  P.\  Deputy  Grand  High
Priest.

D.\  G.\  M.\  Deputy  Grand  Master.

D. \  D.\  G.\  M.\  District  Deputy  Grand
Master.

E. \  Eminent;  Excellent.

E.\  A.\  Entered  Apprentice.

Ec.\  Ecossaise.  (French.)  Scottish;  be¬
longing  to  the  Scottish  Rite.

E.\  G.\  C.\  Eminent  Grand  Commander.

E. \  V.’.  Ere  Vulgaire.  (French.)  Vul¬
gar  Era  ;  Year  of  the  Lord.

F. \  Frere.  Brother.  (French.)

F.\  C.\  Fellow  Craft.

F. \  M.\  Free  Mason.  Old  Style.

G. \  Grand.

G.\  A.'.  O.’.  T.\  U.-.  Grand  Architect  of
the  Universe.

G.\  C.\  Grand  Chapter;  Grand  Council.

G.\  Com.’.  Grand  Commandery ;  Grand
Commander.

G.\  E.\  Grand  Encampment;  Grand
East.

G.\  G.\  C.’.  General  Grand  Chapter.

G.’.  G.’.  H.’.  P.\  General  Grand  High
Priest.

G.’.  H.’.  P.’.  Grand  High  Priest.

G.\  L.-.  Grand  Lodge.

G.'.  M.\  Grand  Master.

G.’.  O.’.  Grand  Orient.

G. ’.  R.’.  A.’.  C.\  Grand  Royal  Arch
Chapter.

H. ’.  A.’.  B.’.  Hiram  Abif.

H. ’.  E.’.  Holy  Entire.

Ill.’.  Illustrious.

I. ’.  N.’.  R.’.  I.’.  lesus  Nazarenm,  Bex
Iudceorum.  (Latin.)  Jesus  of  Nazareth,
King  of  the  Jews.

I. ’.  T.\  N.\  O.’.  T.’.  G.’.  A.’.  O.’.  T.’.  U.’.
In  the  Name  of  the  Grand  Architect  of  the
Universe.  Often  forming  the  caption  of
Masonic  documents.

J. ’.  W.\  Junior  Warden.

K. \  King.

K —  H.’.  Kadosh,  Knight  of  Kadosh.

K.’.  M.’.  Knight  of  Malta.

K. ’.  T.’.  Knight  Templar.

L. \  Lodge.

LL.’.  Lodges.

M. \  Mason.

M.’.  C.’.  Middle  Chamber.

M.’.  E.’.  Most  Eminent;  Most  Excellent.

M.\  E.’.  G.’.  H.’.  P.’.  Most  Excellent
Grand  High  Priest.

M.\  E.’.  G.’.  M.’.  Most  Eminent  Grand
Master,  (of  Knights  Templars.)


ABDA


ABIF


3


M.\  L.\  Mire  Loge.  (French.)  Mother
Lodge.

M.\  M.\  Master  Mason.

M.\  M.\  Mo  is  M ago  unique.  (French.)
Masonic  Month.  March  is  the  first  Masonic
month  among  French  Masons.

M.‘.  W.\  Most  Worshipful.

O. \  Orient.

OB.\  Obligation.

P. '.  M.\  Past  Master.

P.'..S.\  Principal  Sojourner.

R.\  A.’.  Royal  Arch.

R.\  C.\  or  R.\  jv.  Rose  Croix.  Appended
to  the  signature  of  one  having  that  degree.

R.'.  E.\  Right  Eminent.

R.\  F.\  Respectable  Frlre.  (French.)
Worshipful  Brother.

R.\  L.\  or  R.'.  □  .•.  Respectable  Loge.
(French.)  Worshipful  Lodge.

R. \  W.\  Right  Worshipful.

S. \  Scribe.

S.\  C.\  Supreme  Council.

S.\  G.*.  I.-.  G.\  Sovereign  Grand  In¬
spector  General.

S.\  P.\  R.\  S.\  Sublime  Prince  of  the
Royal  Secret.

S.\  S.\  Sanctum  Sanctorum  or  Holy  of
Holies.

S.\  S.-.  S.\  Trois  fois  Salut.  (French.)
Thrice  greeting.  A  common  caption  to
French  Masonic  circulars  or  letters.

S. \  W.\  Senior  Warden.

T. \  C.\  F.\  Tees  Chere  Frere.  (French.)
Very  Dear  Brother.

T.\  G.\  A.-.  0.\  T.\  U.\  The  Grand
Architect  of  the  Universe.

V.’.  or  Ven.\  Venerable.  (French.)  Wor¬
shipful.

V.\  L.\  Vraie  lumiire.  (French.)  True
light.

V. ’.  W.\  Very  Worshipful.

W. \  M.\  Worshipful  Master.

1  I  Lodge.

p^l  .'.  Lodges.

Prefixed  to  the  signature  of  a  Knight
Templar  or  a  member  of  the  A.  and
A.  Scottish  Rite  below  the  33d  degree.

Prefixed  to  the  signature  of  a  Grand
or  Past  Grand  Commander  of
Knights  Templars  or  a  Mason  of
the  33d  degree  in  the  Scottish  Rite.

Prefixed  to  the  signature  of  a
Grand  or  Past  Grand  Master  of
Knights  Templars  and  the  Grand
Commander  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.

Alula.  A  word  used  in  some  of  the
high  degrees.  He  was  the  father  of  Adoni-
ram.  (See  1  Kings  iv.  6.)  Lenning  is
wrong  in  saying  that  he  is  represented  by
one  of  the  officers  in  the  degree  of  Master
in  Israel.  He  has  confounded  Abda  with
his  son.  ( Encyc.  der  Freimaur.)


Abdamon.  The  name  of  the  orator
in  the  14th  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection,
or  the  Sacred  Vault  of  James  VI.  It  means
a  servant,  from  abad,  “to  serve,”  although
somewhat  corrupted  in  its  transmission  into
the  rituals.  Lenning  says  it  is  the  Hebrew
Habdamon,  “a  servant;”  but  there  is  no
such  word  in  Hebrew.

Abelites.  A  secret  Order  which  ex¬
isted  about  the  middle  of  the  18th  century
in  Germany,  called  also  “  the  Order  of
Abel.”  The  organization  was  in  possession
of  peculiar  signs,  words,  and  ceremonies  of
initiation,  but,  according  to  Gadicke  ( Frei -
maurer  Lexicon ),  it  had  no  connection  with
Freemasonry.

Abibalk.  In  the  Elu  of  the  French
Rite,  the  name  of  the  chief  of  the  three
assassins.  Derived  most  probably  from
the  Hebrew  obi  and  balah,  ’DX  and
which  mean  father  of  destruction.  Lenning,
following  the  Thuileur  de  l’ Ecossisme  of
Delaunay,  makes  it  signify  from  the  same
roots,  but  in  defiance  of  the  rules  of  He¬
brew  construction,  “  he  who  destroys  the
father.”

Abide  by.  See  Stand  to  and  abide  by.

Abif'.  An  epithet  which  has  been  ap¬
plied  in  Scripture  to  that  celebrated  builder
who  was  sent  to  Jerusalem  by  King  Hiram,
of  Tyre,  to  superintend  the  construction  of
the  Temple.  The  word,  which  in  the  origi¬
nal  Hebrew  is  V2N,  and  which  may  be
pronounced  Abiv  or  Abif,  is  compounded
of  the  noun  in  the  construct-state  ’3X,
Abi,  meaning  “father,”  and  the  pronomi¬
nal  suffix  1,  which,  with  the  preceding
vowel  sound,  is  to  be  sounded  as  iv  or
if,  and  which  means  “  his  ;  ”  so  that  the
word  thus  compounded  Abif  literally  and
grammatically  signifies  “  his  father.”  The
word  is  found  in  2  Chronicles  iv.  16,  in
the  following  sentence:  “The  pots  also,
and  the  shovels,  and  the  flesh  hooks,  and
all  their  instruments  did  Huram  his  father
make  to  King  Solomon.”  The  latter  part
of  this  verse  is  in  the  original  as  follows :

V3N  onn  rury

Shelomoli  lamelech  Abif  Huram  gnasah

Luther  has  been  more  literal  in  his  ver¬
sion  of  this  passage  than  the  English  trans¬
lators,  and  appearing  to  suppose  that  the
word  Abif  is  to  be  considered  simply  as  an
appellative  or  surname,  he  preserves  the
Hebrew  form,  his  translation  being  as  fol¬
lows:  “  Machte  Huram  Abif  dem  Konige
Salomo.”  The  Swedish  version  is  equally
exact,  and,  instead  of  “  Hiram  his  father,”
gives  us  “  Hyram  Abiv.”  In  the  Latin  Vul¬
gate,  as  in  the  Knglish  version,  the  words
are  rendered  “Hiram  pater  ejus.”  I  have
little  doubt  that  Luther  and  the  Swedish


4


ABIF


ABLE


translator  were  correct  in  treating  the  word
Abif  as  an  appellative.  In  Hebrew,  the  word
ab,  or  “  father,”  is  often  used,  honoris  causa ,
as  a  title  of  respect,  and  may  then  signify
friend,  counsellor,  wise  man,  or  something
else  of  equivalent  character.  Thus,  Dr.
Clarke,  commenting  on  the  word  abrech,  in
Genesis  xli.  43,  says:  “Father  seems  to
have  been  a  name  of  office,  and  probably
father  of  the  king  or  father  of  Pharaoh  might
signify  the  same  as  the  king's  minister
among  us.”  And  on  the  very  passage  in
which  this  word  Abif  is  used,  he  says:
“.DN,  father,  is  often  used  in  Hebrew  to
signify  master,  inventor,  chief  operator.”
Gesenius,  the  distinguished  Hebrew  lexi¬
cographer,  gives  to  this  word  similar  signi¬
fications,  such  as  benefactor,  master,  teacher,
and  says  that  in  the  Arabic  and  the  Ethi-
opic  it  is  spoken  of  one  who  excels  in  any¬
thing.  This  idiomatic  custom  was  pursued
by  the  later  Hebrews,  for  Buxtorf  tells  us,
in  his  Talmudic  Lexicon,  that  “among  the
Talmudists  abba,  father,  was  always  a  title
of  honor,”  and  he  quotes  the  following  re¬
marks  from  a  treatise  of  the  celebrated
Maimonides,  who,  when  speaking  of  the
grades  or  ranks  into  which  the  Rabbinical
doctors  were  divided,  says :  “  The  first  class
consists  of  those  each  of  whom  bears  his
own  name,  without  any  title  of  honor;  the
second  of  those  who  are  called  Rabbanim  ;
and  the  third  of  those  who  are  called  Rabbi,
and  the  men  of  this  class  also  receive  the
cognomen  of  Abba,  Father.”

Again,  in  2  Chronicles  ii.  13,  Hiram,  the
king  of  Tyre,  referring  to  the  same  Hiram,
the  widow’s  son,  who  is  spoken  of  subse¬
quently  in  reference  to  King  Solomon  as
“  his  father,”  or  Abif  in  the  passage  already
cited,  writes  to  Solomon :  “  And  now  I
have  sent  a  cunning  man,  endued  with
understanding,  of  Huram  my  father’s.”
The  only  difficulty  in  this  sentence  is  to  be
found  in  the  prefixing  of  the  letter  lamed
S,  before  Huram,  which  has  caused  our
translators,  by  a  strange  blunder,  to  render
the  words  V Huram  abi,  as  meaning  “of
Huram  my  father’s,”  *  instead  of  “  Huram
my  father.”  Luther  has  again  taken  the
correct  view  of  this  subject,  and  translates
the  word  as  an  appellative :  “  So  sende  ich
nun  einen  w'eisen  Mann,  der  Berstand  hat,
Huram  Abif ;  ”  that  is,  “  So  now  I  send  you
a  wise  man  who  has  understanding,  Huram
Abif.”  The  truth  I  suspect  is,  although  it
has  escaped  all  the  commentators,  that  the
lamed  in  this  passage  is  a  Chaldaism  which
is  sometimes  used  by  the  later  Hebrew
writers,  who  incorrectly  employ  *7,  the  sign


♦It  maybe  remarked  that  this  could  not  be
the  true  meaning,  for  the  father  of  King  Hiram
was  not  another  Hiram,  but  Abibaal.


of  the  dative  for  the  accusative  after  transi¬
tive  verbs.  Thus,  in  Jeremiah  (xl.  2),  we
have  such  a  construction :  vayakach  rab
tabachim  V  Iremyahu  ;  that  is,  literally,  “and
the  captain  of  the  guards  took  for  Jere¬
miah,”  where  the  7,  I,  or  for,  is  a  Chaldaism
and  redundant,  the  true  rendering  being,
“  and  the  captain  of  the  guards  took  Jere¬
miah.”  Other  similar  passages  are  to  be
found  in  Lamentations  iv.  5,  Job  v.  2,  etc.
In  like  manner  I  suppose  the  S  before
Huram,  which  the  English  translators  have
rendered  by  the  preposition  “of,”  to  be
redundant  and  a  Chaldaic  form,  and  then
the  sentence  should  be  read  thus:  “I  have
sent  a  cunning  man,  endued  with  under¬
standing,  Huram  my  father;”  or  if  con¬
sidered  as  an  appellative,  as  it  should  be,
“  Huram  Abi.”

From  all  this  I  conclude  that  the  word
Ab,  with  its  different  suffixes,  is  always  used
in  the  Books  of  Kings  and  Chronicles,  in
reference  to  Hiram  the  builder,  as  a  title
of  respect.  When  King  Hiram  speaks  of
him  he  calls  him  “  my  father  Hiram,”
Hiram  Abi;  and  when  the  writer  of  the
Book  of  Chronicles  is  speaking  of  him  and
King  Solomon  in  the  same  passage,  he  calls
him  “Solomon’s  father”  —  “his  father,”
Hiram  Abif.  The  only  difference  is  made  by
the  different  appellation  of  the  pronouns  my
and  his  in  Hebrew.  To  both  the  kings  of
Tyre  and  of  Judah  he  bore  the  honorable
relation  of  Ab,  or  “  father,”  equivalent  to
friend,  counsellor,  or  minister.  He  was
“Father  Hiram.”  The  Masons  are  there¬
fore  perfectly  correct  in  refusing  to  adopt
the  translation  of  the  English  version,  and
in  preserving,  after  the  example  of  Luther,
the  word  Abif  as  an  appellative,  surname,
or  title  of  honor  and  distinction  bestowed
upon  the  chief  builder  of  the  Temple.

Abiram.  One  of  the  traitorous  crafts¬
men,  whose  act  of  perfidy  forms  so  impor¬
tant  a  part  of  the  third  degree,  receives  in
some  of  the  high  degrees  the  name  of  Abi¬
ram  Akirop.  These  words  certainly  have  a
Hebrew  look ;  but  the  significant  words  of
Masonry  have,  in  the  lapse  of  time  and  in
their  transmission  through  ignorant  teach¬
ers,  become  so  corrupted  in  form  that  it  is
almost  impossible  to  trace  them  to  any  in¬
telligent  root.  They  may  be  Hebrew  or
they  may  be  anagrammatized  (see  Ana¬
gram)  ;  but  it  is  only  chance  that  can  give
us  the  true  meaning  which  they  undoubt¬
edly  have.

Able.  There  is  an  archaic  use  of  the
word  able  to  signify  suitable.  Thus,  Chaucer
says  of  a  monk  that  “he  was  able  to  ben  an
abbot,”  that  is,  suitable  to  be  an  abbot.
In  this  sense  the  old  manuscript  Constitu¬
tions  constantly  employ  the  word,  as  when
they  say  that  the  apprentice  should  be


ABLUTION


ABRAHAM


5


“  able  of  birth  and  limbs  as  he  ought  to
be,”  that  is,  that  he  should  be  of  birth
suitable  for  a  member  of  the  Craft,  and  of
limbs  suitable  to  perform  the  labors  of  a
craftsman.

Ablution.  A  ceremonial  purification
by  washing,  much  used  in  the  Ancient
Mysteries  and  under  the  Mosaic  dispensa¬
tion.  It  is  also  employed  in  some  of  the
high  degrees  of  Masonry.  The  better
technical  term  for  this  ceremony  is  lustra¬
tion,  which  see.

Abnct.  The  band  or  apron,  made  of
fine  linen,  variously  wrought,  and  worn  by
the  Jewish  priesthood.  It  seems  to  have
been  borrowed  directly  from  the  Egyptians,
upon  the  representations  of  all  of  whose
gods  is  to  be  found  a  similar  girdle.  Like
the  zennaar,  or  sacred  cord  of  the  Brah¬
mins,  and  the  white  shield  of  the  Scandi¬
navians,  it  is  the  analogue  of  the  Masonic
apron.

Aborigines.  A  secret  society  which
existed  in  England  about  the  year  1783,
and  of  whose  ceremony  of  initiation  the
following  account  is  contained  in  the  Brit¬
ish  Magazine  of  that  date.  The  presiding
officer,  who  was  styled  the  Original,  thus
addressed  the  candidate:

Original.  Have  you  faith  enough  to  be
made  an  Original  ?

Candidate.  I  have.

Original.  Will  you  be  conformable  to  all
honest  rules  which  may  support  steadily
the  honor,  reputation,  welfare,  and  dignity
of  our  ancient  undertaking?

Candidate.  I  will.

Original.  Then,  friend,  promise  me  that
you  will  never  stray  from  the  paths  of
Honor,  Freedom,  Honesty,  Sincerity,  Pru¬
dence,  Modesty,  Reputation,  Sobriety,  and
True  Friendship.

Candidate.  I  do.

Which  done,  the  crier  of  the  court  com¬
manded  silence,  and  the  new  member,  being
uncovered,  and  dropping  on  his  right  knee,
had  the  following  oath  administered  to  him
by  the  servant,  the  new  member  laying  his
right  hand  on  the  Cap  of  Honor,  and  Nim¬
rod  holding  a  staff  over  his  head:

“  You  swear  by  the  Cap  of  Honor,  by
the  Collar  of  Freedom,  by  the  Coat  of
Honesty,  by  the  Jacket  of  Sincerity,  by
the  shirt  of  Prudence,  by  the  Breeches  of
Modesty,  by  the  Garters  of  Reputation,  by
the  Stockings  of  Sobriety,  and  by  the  Steps
of  True  Friendship,  never  to  depart  from
these  laws.”

Then  rising,  with  the  staff  resting  on  his
head,  he  received  a  copy  of  the  laws  from
the  hands  of  the  Grand  Original,  with  these
words,  “  Enjoy  the  benefits  hereof.”

He  then  delivered  the  copy  of  the  laws
to  the  care  of  the  servant,  after  which  the


word  was  given  by  the  secretary  to  the  new
member,  viz. :  Eden,  signifying  the  garden
where  Adam,  the  great  aboriginal,  was
formed.

Then  the  secretary  invested  him  with
the  sign,  viz. :  resting  his  right  hand  on
his  left  side,  signifying  the  first  conjunction
of  harmony.

It  had  no  connection  with  Freemasonry,
but  was  simply  one  of  those  numerous  imi¬
tative  societies  to  which  that  Institution  has
given  rise.

Abrac.  In  the  Leland  MS.  it  is  said
that  the  Masons  conceal  “  the  wey  of  wyn-
ninge  the  facultye  of  Abrac.”  Mr.  Locke
(if  it  was  he  who  wrote  a  commentary  on
the  manuscript)  says,  “  Here  I  am  utterly
in  the  dark.”  It  means  simply  “the  way
of  acquiring  the  science  of  Abrac.”  The
science  of  Abrac  is  the  knowledge  of  the
power  and  use  of  the  mystical  abraxas,
which  see.

Abracadabra.  A  term  of  incanta¬
tion  which  was  formerly  worn  about  the
neck  as  an  amulet  against  several  diseases,
especially  the  tertian  ague.  It  was  to  be
written  on  a  triangular  piece  of  parchment
in  the  following  form  :

ABRACADABRA

ABRACADABR

ABRACADAB

ABRACADA

ABRACAD

ABRACA

ABRAC

ABRA

ABR

AB

A

It  is  said  that  it  first  occurs  in  the  Car¬
men  de  Morbis  et  Remediis  of  Q.  Serenus
Sammonicus,  a  favorite  of  the  Emperor
Severus  in  the  2d  and  3d  centuries,  and  is
generally  supposed  to  be  derived  from  the
word  abraxas.  Higgins,  ( Celt.  Druids,  p.
246,)  who  is  never  in  want  of  an  etymology,
derives  it  from  the  Irish  abra,  “god,”  and
cad,  “  holy,”  and  makes  abra-cad-abra,
therefore,  signify  abra  —  the  holy  —  abra.

Abraham.  The  founder  of  the  He¬
brew  nation.  The  patriarch  Abraham  is
personated  in  the  degree  or  Order  of  High
Priesthood,  which  refers  in  some  of  its  cer¬
emonies  to  an  interesting  incident  in  his
life.  After  the  amicable  separation  of  Lot
and  Abraham,  when  the  former  was  dwell¬
ing  in  the  plain  in  which  Sodom  and  its
neighboring  towns  were  situated,  and  the
latter  in  the  valley  of  Mamre  near  Hebron,
a  king  from  beyond  the  Euphrates,  whose
name  was  Chedorlaomer,  invaded  lower
Palestine,  and  brought  several  of  the


6


ABRAHAM


ABRAXAS


smaller  states  into  a  tributary  condition.
Among  these  were  the  five  cities  of  the
plain,  to  which  Lot  had  retired.  As  the
yoke  was  borne  with  impatience  by  these
cities,  Chedorlaomer,  accompanied  by  four
other  kings,  who  were  probably  his  tribu¬
taries,  attacked  and  defeated  the  kings  of
the  plain,  plundered  their  towns,  and  car¬
ried  their  people  away  as  slaves.  Among
those  who  suffered  on  this  occasion  was
Lot.  As  soon  as  Abraham  heard  of  these
events,  he  armed  three  hundred  and  eigh¬
teen  of  his  slaves,  and,  with  the  assistance
of  Aner,  Eshcol,  and  Mamre,  three  Amo-
ritish  chiefs,  he  pursued  the  retiring  in¬
vaders,  and  having  attacked  them  near  the
Jordan,  put  them  to  flight,  and  then  re¬
turned  with  all  the  men  and  goods  that
had  been  recovered  from  the  enemy.  On
his  way  back  he  was  met  by  Melchizedek,
the  king  of  that  place,  and  who  was,  like
Abraham,  a  worshipper  of  the  true  God.
Melchizedek  refreshed  Abraham  and  his
people  with  bread  and  wine;  and  while
consenting  to  receive  back  the  persons  who
had  been  liberated  from  captivity,  he  re¬
quested  Abraham  to  retain  the  goods.  But
Abraham  positively  refused  to  retain  any
of  the  spoils,  although,  by  the  customs  of
the  age,  he  was  entitled  to  them,  and  de¬
clared  that  he  had  sworn  that  he  would  not
take  “  from  a  thread  even  to  a  shoelatchet.”
Although  the  conduct  of  Abraham  in  this
whole  transaction  was  of  the  most  honor¬
able  and  conscientious  character,  the  inci¬
dents  do  not  appear  to  have  been  introduced
into  the  ritual  of  the  High  Priesthood  for
any  other  reason  except  that  of  their  con¬
nection  with  Melchizedek,  who  was  the
founder  of  an  Order  of  Priesthood.

Abraliam,  Antoine  Firmin.  A
Mason  who  made  himself  notorious  at  Paris,
in  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  by
the  manufacture  and  sale  of  false  Masonic
diplomas  and  by  trading  in  the  higher  de¬
grees,  from  which  traffic  he  reaped  for  some
time  a  plentiful  harvest.  The  Supreme
Council  of  France  declared,  in  1811,  all  his
diplomas  and  charters  void  and  deceptive.
He  is  the  author  of  “  L’Art  du  Tuileur,
dedie'  it  tous  les  M&qons  des  deux  hemi¬
spheres,”  a  small  volume  of  20  pages  8vo,
printed  at  Paris  in  1803,  and  published
from  1800  to  1808  a  periodical  work  en¬
titled  “  Le  Miroir  de  la  v£rite,  dedi6  ^  tous
les  Masons,”  3  vols.,  8vo.  This  contains
many  interesting  details  concerning  the
history  of  Masonry  in  France.  In  1811
there  was  published  at  Paris  a  “Circulaire
du  Supreme  Conseil  du  33e  degr6,  etc.,  rela¬
tive  it  la  vente,  par  le  Sieur  Abraham  de
grades  et  cahiers  Ma<;onniques,”  (8vo,  15
pp.,)  from  which  it  is  evident  that  Abraham
was  nothing  else  but  a  Masonic  charlatan.


Abraxas.  Basilides,  the  head  of  the
Egyptian  sect  of  Gnostics,  taught  that
there  were  seven  emanations,  or  aeons,  from
the  Supreme  God ;  that  these  emanations
engendered  the  angels  of  the  highest  order ;
that  these  angels  formed  a  heaven  for  their
habitation,  and  brought  forth  other  angels
of  a  nature  inferior  to  their  own ;  that  in
time  other  heavens  were  formed  and  other
angels  created,  until  the  whole  number
of  angels  and  their  respective  heavens
amounted  to  365,  which  were  thus  equal  to
the  number  of  days  in  a  year;  and,  finally,
that  over  all  these  an  omnipotent  lord  —  in¬
ferior,  however,  to  the  Supreme  God  —  pre¬
sided,  whose  name  was  Abraxas.  Xow  this
word  Abraxas,  in  the  numerical  force  of
its  letters  when  written  in  Greek,  ABPAHA2,
amounts  to  365,  the  number  of  words  in  the
Basilidean  system,  as  well  as  the  number
of  days  in  the  year,  thus:  A,  1.,,  B,  2..,  P,
100..,  A,  1..,  E,  60..,  A,  1...  2  200  =  365.  The
god  Abraxas  was  therefore  a  type  or  sym¬
bol  of  the  year,  or  of  the  revolution  of  the
earth  around  the  sun.  This  mystical  refer¬
ence  of  the  name  of  a  god  to  the  annual
period  was  familiar  to  the  ancients,  and  is
to  be  found  in  at  least  two  other  instances.
Thus  among  the  Persians  the  letters  of  the
name  of  the  god  Mithras,  and  of  Belenus
among  the  Gauls,  amounted  each  to  365.


M  =  40
E  =  5

1  =  10

e  =  9

p  =  100
a  =  1

2  =  200  =  365


B  =  2

H  =  8

A  =  30
E  =  5

N=  50
O  =  70
2  =  200  =  365


The  word  Abraxas,  therefore  from  this
mystical  value  of  the  letters  of  which  it  was
composed,  became  talismanic,  and  was  fre¬
quently  inscribed,  sometimes  with  and
sometimes  without  other  superstitious  in¬
scriptions,  on  stones  or  gems  as  amulets,
many  of  which  have  been  preserved  or  are
continually  being  discovered,  and  are  to  be
found  in  the  cabinets  of  the  curious.

There  have  been  many  conjectures  among
the  learned  as  to  the  derivation  of  the  word
Abraxas.  Beausobre  ( Histoire  du  Maniche-
isme,  vol.  ii.)  derives  it  from  the  Greek,
A/3^of  leu,  signifying  “  the  magnificent
Saviour,  he  who  heals  and  preserves.”  Bel-
lermann,  ( Essay  on  the  Gems  of  the  An¬
cients)  supposed  it  to  be  compounded  of
three  Coptic  words  signifying  “the  holy
word  of  bliss.”  Pignorius  and  Yandelin
think  it  is  composed  of  four  Hebrew  and
three  Greek  letters,  whose  numerical  value
is  365,  and  which  are  the  initials  of  the
sentence :  “  saving  men  bj  wood,  i.  e.  the
cross.”

Abraxas  Stones.  Stones  on  which


ABSENCE


ACACIA


7


the  word  Abraxas  and  other  devices  are
engraved,  and  which  were  used  by  the
Egyptian  Gnostics  as  amulets.

Absence.  Attendance  on  the  com¬
munications  of  his  Lodge,  on  all  convenient
occasions,  is  considered  as  one  of  the  duties
of  every  Mason,  and  hence  the  old  charges
of  1722  (ch.  iii.)  say  that  “  in  ancient  times
no  Master  or  Fellow  could  be  absent  from  it
[the  Lodge],  without  incurring  a  severe  cen¬
sure,  until  it  appeared  to  the  Master  and
Wardens  that  pure  necessity  hindered
him.”  Fines  have  by  some  Lodges  been
inflicted  for  non-attendance,  but  a  pecuni¬
ary  penalty  is  clearly  an  unmasonic  punish¬
ment,  (see  Fines;)  and  even  that  usage  is
now  discontinued,  so  that  attendance  on
ordinary  communications  is  no  longer  en¬
forced  by  any  sanction  of  law.  It  is  a  duty
the  discharge  of  which  must  be  left  to  the
conscientious  convictions  of  each  Mason.
In  the  case,  however,  of  a  positive  sum¬
mons  for  any  express  purpose,  such  as  to
stand  trial,  to  show  cause,  etc.,  the  neglect
or  refusal  to  attend  might  be  construed
into  a  contempt,  to  be  dealt  with  according
to  its  magnitude  or  character  in  each  par¬
ticular  case.

Acacia.  An  interesting  and  important
symbol  in  Freemasonry.  Botanicallv,  it  is
the  acacia  vera  of  Tournefort,  and  the  mi¬
mosa  nilotica  of  Linnaeus.  It  grew  abun¬
dantly  in  the  vicinity  of  Jerusalem,  where
it  is  still  to  be  found,  and  is  familiar  in  its
modern  use  as  the  tree  from  which  the  gum
arabic  of  commerce  is  derived.

Oliver,  it  is  true,  says  that  “  there  is  not
the  smallest  trace  of  any  tree  of  the  kind
growingso  far  north  as  Jerusalem,”  ( Landm .
ii.  149 ;)  but  this  statement  is  refuted
by  the  authority  of  Lieutenant  Lynch,  who
saw  it  growing  in  great  abundance  in  Jeri¬
cho,  and  still  farther  north.  ( Exped .  to  Dead
Sea,  p.  262.)  The  Rabbi  Joseph  Schwarz,
who  is  excellent  authority,  says :  “  The
Acacia  (Sliittim)  tree,  A1  Sunt,  is  found  in
Palestine  erf  different  varieties  ;  it  looks  like
the  Mulberry  tree,  attains  a  great  height,
and  has  a  hard  wood.  The  gum  which  is
obtained  from  it  is  the  gum  arabic.”  (De¬
scriptive  Geography  and  Historical  Sketch  of
Palestine,  p.  308,  Leeser’s  translation.  Phila.,
1850.)  Schwarz  was  for  sixteen  years  a
resident  of  Palestine,  and  wrote  from  per¬
sonal  observation.  The  testimony  of  Lynch
and  Schwarz  should,  therefore,  forever  settle
the  question  of  the  existence  of  the  acacia
in  Palestine.

The  acacia,  which,  in  Scripture,  is  always
called  Shittah,  and  in  the  plural  Shittim,
was  esteemed  a  sacred  wood  among  the  He¬
brews.  Of  it  Moses  was  ordered  to  make
the  tabernacle,  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  the
table  for  the  shewbread,  and  the  rest  of  the


sacred  furniture.  Isaiah,  in  recounting  the
promises  of  God’s  mercy  to  the  Israelites
on  their  return  from  the  captivity,  tells
them  that,  among  other  things,  he  will
plant  in  the  wilderness,  for  their  relief  and
refreshment,  the  cedar,  the  acacia,  (or,  as  it
is  rendered  in  our  common  version,  the
shittah ,)  the  fir,  and  other  trees.

The  first  thing,  then,  that  we  notice  in
this  symbol  of  the  acacia,  is  that  it  had
been  always  consecrated  from  among  the
other  trees  of  the  forest  by  the  sacred  pur-
oses  to  which  it  was  devoted.  By  the
ew,  the  tree  from  whose  wood  the  sanc¬
tuary  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  holy  ark
had  been  constructed  would  ever  be  viewed
as  more  sacred  than  ordinary  trees.  The
early  Masons,  therefore,  very  naturally  ap¬
propriated  this  hallowed  plant  to  the
equally  sacred  purpose  of  a  symbol,  which
was  to  teach  an  important  divine  truth  in
all  ages  to  come.

Having  thus  briefly  disposed  of  the  natu¬
ral  history  of  this  plant,  we  may  now  pro¬
ceed  to  examine  it  in  its  symbolic  relations.

First.  The  acacia,  in  the  mythic  system
of  Freemasonry,  is  preeminently  the  sym¬
bol  of  the  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL  —
that  important  doctrine  which  it  is  the
great  design  of  the  Institution  to  teach.
As  the  evanescent  nature  of  the  flower,
which  “  cometh  forth  and  is  cut  down,”
reminds  us  of  the  transitory  nature  of
human  life,  so  the  perpetual  renovation  of
the  evergreen  plant,  which  uninterruptedly
presents  the  appearance  of  youth  and  vigor,
is  aptly  compared  to  that  spiritual  life  in
which  the  soul,  freed  from  the  corruptible
companionship  of  the  body,  shall  enjoy  an
eternal  spring  and  an  immortal  youth.
Hence,  in  the  impressive  funeral  service
of  our  Order,  it  is  said  that  “  this  evergreen
is  an  emblem  of  our  faith  in  the  immortal¬
ity  of  the  soul.  By  this  we  are  reminded
that  we  have  an  immortal  part  within  us,
which  shall  survive  the  grave,  and  which
shall  never,  never,  never  die.”  And  again,
in  the  closing  sentences  of  the  monitorial
lecture  of  the  third  degree,  the  same  senti¬
ment  is  repeated,  and  we  are  told  that  by
“  the  ever-green  and  ever-living  sprig  ”  the
Mason  is  strengthened  “  with  confidence
and  composure  to  look  forward  to  a  blessed
immortality.”  Such  an  interpretation  of
the  symbol  is  an  easy  and  a  natural  one;
it  suggests  itself  at  once  to  the  least  reflec¬
tive  mind;  and  consequently,  in  some  one
form  or  another,  is  to  be  found  existing  in
all  ages  and  nations.  It  was  an  ancient
custom,  —  which  is  not,  even  now,  alto¬
gether  disused,  —  for  mourners  to  carry  in
their  hands  at  funerals  a  sprig  of  some  ever¬
green,  generally  the  cedar  or  the  cypress,  and
to  deposit  it  in  the  grave  of  the  deceased.


8


ACACIA


ACACIA


According  to  Dalclio,*  the  Hebrews  always
planted  a  sprig  of  the  acacia  at  the  head
of  the  grave  of  a  departed  friend.  Potter
tells  us  that  the  ancient  Greeks  “  had  a
custom  of  bedecking  tombs  with  herbs  and
flowers.”  f  All  sorts  of  purple  and  white
flowers  were  acceptable  to  the  dead,  but
principally  the  amaranth  and  the  myrtle.
The  very  name  of  the  former  of  these
plants,  which  signifies  “  never  fading,”
would  seem  to  indicate  the  true  symbolic
meaning  of  the  usage,  although  archaeolo¬
gists  have  generally  supposed  it  to  be  sim¬
ply  an  exhibition  of  love  on  the  part  of
the  survivors.  Ragon  says,  that  the  an¬
cients  substituted  the  acacia  for  all  other
plants  because  they  believed  it  to  be  incor¬
ruptible,  and  not  liable  to  injury  from  the
attacks  of  any  kind  of  insect  or  other  ani¬
mal —  thus  symbolizing  the  incorruptible
nature  of  the  soul.

Hence  we  see  the  propriety  of  placing
the  sprig  of  acacia,  as  an  emblem  of  im¬
mortality,  among  tbe  symbols  of  that  de¬
gree,  all  of  whose  ceremonies  are  intended
to  teach  us  the  great  truth  that  “  the  life
of  man,  regulated  by  morality,  faith,  and
justice,  will  be  rewarded  at  its  closing
hour  by  the  prospect  of  Eternal  Bliss.”  j
So,  therefore,  says  Dr.  Oliver,  when  the
Master  Mason  exclaims  “  my  name  is  Aca¬
cia,”  it  is  equivalent  to  saying,  “  I  have
been  in  the  grave  —  I  have  triumphed  over
it  by  rising  from  the  dead  —  and  being  re¬
generated  in  the  process,  I  have  a  claim  to
life  everlasting.”

The  sprig  of  acacia,  then,  in  its  most
ordinary  signification,  presents  itself  to  the
Master  Mason  as  a  symbol  of  the  immor¬
tality  of  the  soul,  being  intended  to  remind
him,  by  its  evergreen  and  unchanging  na¬

*  “  This  custom  among  the  Hebrews  arose
from  this  circumstance.  Agreeably  to  their
laws,  no  dead  bodies  were  allowed  to  be  interred
within  the  walls  of  the  city ;  and  as  the  Cohens,
or  Priests,  were  prohibited  from  crossing  a  grave,
it  was  necessary  to  place  marks  thereon,  that
they  might  avoid  them.  For  this  purpose  the
acacia  was  used.”  (Daleho,  Oration,  p.  27,  note.)
I  object  to  the  reason  assigned  by  Daleho,  but
of  the  existence  of  the  custom  there  can  be  no
question,  notwithstanding  the  denial  or  doubt
of  Dr.  Oliver.  Blount  (Travels  in  the  Levant,
p.  197,)  says,  speaking  of  the  Jewish  burial  cus¬
toms,  “  those  who  bestow  a  marble  stone  over
any  [grave]  have  a  hole  a  yard  long  and  a  foot
broad,  in  which  they  plant  an  evergreen,  which
6eems  to  grow  from  the  body  and  is  carefully
watched.”  Hasselquist  (Travels,  p.  28,)  confirms
his  testimony.  1  borrow  the  citations  from
Brown,  (Antiquities  of  the  Jews,  vol.  ii.,  p.  356,)
but  have  verified  the  reference  to  Hasselquist.
The  work  of  Blount  I  have  not  been  enabled  to
consult.

f  Antiquities  of  Greece,  p.  569.

j  Dr.  Crueefix,  MS.  quoted  by  Oliver.  Land¬
marks,  ii.  2.


ture,  of  that  better  and  spiritual  part  with¬
in  us,  which,  as  an  emanation  from  the
Grand  Architect  of  the  Universe,  can  never
die.  And  as  this  is  the  most  ordinary,  the
most  generally  accepted  signification,  so
also  is  it  the  most  important;  for  thus,  as
the  peculiar  symbol  of  immortality,  it  be¬
comes  the  most  appropriate  to  an  Order
all  of  whose  teachings  are  intended  to  in¬
culcate  the  great  lesson  that  “life  rises  out
of  the  grave.”  But  incidental  to  this  the
acacia  has  two  other  interpretations  which
are  well  worthy  of  investigation.

Secondly,  then,  the  acacia  is  a  symbol  of
innocence.  The  symbolism  here  is  of  a
peculiar  and  unusual  character,  depending
not  on  any  real  analogy  in  the  form  or  use
of  the  symbol  to  the  idea  symbolized,  but
simply  on  a  double  or  compound  meaning
of  the  word.  For  aKataa,  in  the  Greek  lan¬
guage,  signifies  both  the  plant  in  question
and  the  moral  quality  of  innocence  or
purity  of  life.  In  this  sense  the  symbol
refers,  primarily,  to  him  over  whose  soli¬
tary  grave  the  acacia  was  planted,  and
whose  virtuous  conduct,  whose  integrity  of
life  and  fidelity  to  his  trusts  have  ever  been
presented  as  patterns  to  the  craft,  and  con¬
sequently  to  all  Master  Masons,  who,  by
this  interpretation  of  the  symbol,  are  in¬
vited  to  emulate  his  example.

Hutchinson,  indulging  in  his  favorite
theory'  of  Christianizing  Masonry,  when  he
comes  to  this  signification  of  the  symbol,
thus  enlarges  on  the  interpretation  :  “  We
Masons,  describing  the  deplorable  estate  of
religion  under  the  Jewish  law,  speak  in
figures: — ‘Her  tomb  was  in  the  rubbish
and  filth  cast  forth  of  the  temple,  and  Aca¬
cia  wove  its  branches  over  her  monument ;  ’
akaJcia  being  the  Greek  word  for  innocence,
or  being  free  from  sin ;  implying  that  the
sins  and  corruptions  of  the  old  law  and
devotees  of  the  Jewish  altar  had  hid  reli¬
gion  from  those  who  sought  her,  and  she
was  only  to  be  found  where  innocence  sur¬
vived,  and  under  the  banner  of  the  divine
Lamb;  and  as  to  ourselves,  professing  that
we  were  to  be  distinguished  by  our  Acacy,
or  as  true  Acacians  in  our  religious  faith
and  tenets.”  *

But,  lastly,  the  acacia  is  to  be  considered
as  the  symbol  of  initiation.  This  is  by
far  the  most  interesting  of  its  interpreta¬
tions,  and  was,  we  have  every  reason  to
believe,  the  primary  and  original ;  the
others  being  but  incidental.  It  leads  us  at
once  to  the  investigation  of  the  significant
fact  that  in  all  the  ancient  initiations  and
religious  mysteries  there  was  some  plant
peculiar  to  each,  which  was  consecrated  by
its  own  esoteric  meaning,  and  which  oceu-

*■  Hutchinson’s  Spirit  of  Masonry,  Lect.  IX.,


ACACIAN


ACADEMY


9


pied  an  important  position  in  the  celebra¬
tion  of  the  rites,  so  that  the  plant,  what¬
ever  it  might  be,  from  its  constant  and
prominent  use  in  the  ceremonies  of  initia¬
tion,  came  at  length  to  be  adopted  as  the
symbol  of  that  initiation.

Thus,  the  lettuce  was  the  sacred  plant
which  assumed  the  place  of  the  acacia  in
the  mysteries  of  Adonis.  (See  Lettuce.)
The  lotus  was  that  of  the  Brahminical  rites
of  India,  and  from  them  adopted  by  the
Egyptians.  (See  Lotus.)  The  Egyptians
also  revered  the  erica  or  heath;  and  the
mistletoe  was  a  mystical  plant  among  the
Druids.  (See  Erica  aud  Mistletoe.)  And,
lastly,  the  myrtle  performed  the  same  office
of  symbolism  in  the  mysteries  of  Greece
that  the  lotus  did  in  Egypt  or  the  mistle¬
toe  among  the  Druids.  See  Myrtle.

In  all  of  these  ancient  mysteries,  while
the  sacred  plant  was  a  symbol  of  initiation,
the  initiation  itself  was  symbolic  of  the
resurrection  to  a  future  life,  and  of  the  im¬
mortality  of  the  soul.  In  this  view,  Free¬
masonry  is  to  us  now  in  the  place  of  the
ancient  initiations,  and  the  acacia  is  sub¬
stituted  for  the  lotus,  the  erica,  the  ivy,  the
mistletoe,  and  the  myrtle.  The  lesson  of
wisdom  is  the  same  —  the  medium  of  im¬
parting  it  is  all  that  has  been  changed.

Returning,  then,  to  the  acacia,  we  find
that  it  is  capable  of  three  explanations.
It  is  a  symbol  of  immortality,  of  innocence,
and  of  initiation.  But  these  three  signifi¬
cations  are  closely  connected,  and  that
connection  must  be  observed,  if  we  desire
to  obtain  a  just  interpretation  of  the  sym¬
bol.  Thus,  in  this  one  symbol,  we  are
taught  that  in  the  initiation  of  life,  of
which  the  initiation  in  the  third  degree  is
simply  emblematic,  innocence  must  for  a
time  lie  in  the  grave,  at  length,  however,
to  be  called,  by  the  word  of  the  Grand
Master  of  the  Universe,  to  a  blissful  im¬
mortality.  Combine  with  this  the  recol¬
lection  of  the  place  where  the  sprig  of  aca¬
cia  was  planted,  —  Mount  Calvary,  —  the
place  of  sepulture  of  him  who  “  brought
life  and  immortality  to  light,”  and  who,  in
Christian  Masonry,  is  designated,  as  he  is
in  Scripture,  as  “the  lion  of  the  tribe  of
Judah;”  and  remember,  too,  that  in  the
mystery  of  his  death,  the  wood  of  the  cross
takes  the  place  of  the  acacia,  and  in  this
little  and  apparently  insignificant  symbol,
but  which  is  really  and  truly  the  most  im¬
portant  and  significant  one  in  Masonic
science,  we  have  a  beautiful  suggestion  of
all  the  mysteries  of  life  and  death,  of  time
and  eternity,  of  the  present  and  of  the
future.

Acacian.  A  word  introduced  by
Hutchinson,  in  his  “Spirit  of  Masonry,”
to  designate  a  Freemason  in  reference  to
13


the  akakia,  or  innocence  with  which  he  was
to  be  distinguished,  from  the  Greek  word
amnia.  (See  the  preceding  article.)  The
Acacians  constituted  an  heretical  sect  in
the  primitive  Christian  Church,  who  de¬
rived  their  name  from  Acacius,  Bishop  of
Caesarea;  and  there  was  subsequently  an¬
other  sect  of  the  same  name  Acacius,
Patriarch  of  Constantinople.  But  it  is
needless  to  say  that  the  Hutchinsonian
application  of  the  word  Acacian  to  signify
a  Freemason  has  nothing  to  do  w'ith  the
theological  reference  of  the  term.

Academy.  The  4th  degree  of  the
Rectified  Rose  Croix  of  Schroeder.

Academy  of  Ancients  or  of  Se¬
crets.  ( Academie  des  Secrets.)  A  society
instituted  at  Warsaw,  in  1767,  by  M.  Thoux
de  Salverte,  and  founded  on  the  principles
of  another  which  bore  the  same  name,  and
which  had  been  established  at  Rome,  about
the  end  of  the  16th  century,  by  John  Bap¬
tiste  Porta.  The  object  of  the  institution
was  the  advancement  of  the  natural  sci¬
ences  and  their  application  to  the  occult
philosophy.

Academy  of  Sages.  An  order  which
existed  in  Sweden  in  1770,  deriving  its
origin  from  that  founded  in  London  by
Elias  Ashmole,  on  the  doctrines  of  the
New  Atlantis  of  Bacon.  A  few  similar
societies  were  subsequently  founded  in
Russia  and  France,  one  especially  noted
by  Thory  ( Act .  Lat.)  as  having  been  estab¬
lished  in  1776  by  the  mother  Lodge  of
Avignon.

Academy  of  Secrets.  See  Acad¬
emy  of  Ancients.

Academy  of  Sublime  Masters
of  the  Luminous  King.  Founded
in  France,  in  1780.  by  Baron  Blaerfindy,
one  of  the  Grand  Officers  of  the  Philo¬
sophic  Scotch  Rite.  The  Academy  of  the
Luminous  Ring  was  dedicated  to  the  phil¬
osophy  of  Pythagoras,  and  was  divided
into  three  degrees.  The  first  and  second
were  principally  occupied  with  the  history
of  Freemasonry,  and  the  last  with  the
dogmas  of  the  Pythagorean  school,  and
their  application  to  the  highest  grades  of
science.  The  historical  hypothesis  which
was  sought  to  be  developed  in  this  Acad¬
emy  was  that  Pythagoras  was  the  founder
of  Freemasonry.

Academy  of  True  Masons.

Founded  at  Montpelier,  in  France,  by  Dorn
Pernetty,  in  1778,  and  occupied  with  in¬
structions  in  hermetic  science,  which  were
developed  in  six  degrees,  viz. :  1.  The  True
Mason ;  2.  The  True  Mason  in  the  Right
Way;  3.  Knight  of  the  Golden  Key;  4.
Knight  of  Iris;  5.  Knight  of  the  Argo¬
nauts;  6.  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece.
The  degrees  thus  conferred  constituted  the


10


ACADEMY


ACCEPTED


Philosophic  Scotch  Rite,  which  was  the
system  adopted  by  the  Academy.  It  after¬
wards  changed  its  name  to  that  of  Russo-
Swedish  Academy,  which  circumstance
leads  Thory  to  believe  that  it  was  con¬
nected  with  the  Alchemical  Chapters  which
at  that  time  existed  in  Russia  and  Sweden.
The  entirely  hermetic  character  of  the
Academy  of  True  Masons  may  readily  be
perceived  in  a  few  paragraphs  cited  by
Clavel  from  a  discourse  by  Goyer  de  Ju-
milly  at  the  installation  of  an  Academy  in
Martinico.  “  To  seize,”  says  the  orator,
“  the  pencil  of  Hermes ;  to  engrave  the
doctrines  of  natural  philosophy  on  your
columns ;  to  call  Flamel,  the  Philaletes,
the  Cosmopolite,  and  our  other  masters  to
my  aid  for  the  purpose  of  unveiling  the
mysterious  principles- of  the  occult  sci¬
ences, —  these,  illustrious  knights,  appear
to  be  the  duties  imposed  on  me  by  the  cere¬
mony  of  your  installation.  The  fountain
of  Count  Trevisan,  the  pontifical  w!ater.
the  peacock’s  tail,  are  phenomena  with
which  you  are  familiar,”  etc.,  etc.

Academy,  Platonic.  Founded  in
1480  by  Marsilius  Ficinus,  at  Florence,
under  the  patronage  of  Lorenzo  de  Medi-
cis.  It  is  said  by  the  Masons  of  Tuscany
to  have  been  a  secret  society,  and  is  sup-
osed  to  have  had  a  Masonic  character,
ecause  in  the  hall  where  its  members  held
their  meetings,  and  which  still  remains,
many  Masonic  symbols  are  to  be  found.
Clavel  supposes  it  to  have  been  a  society
founded  by  some  of  the  honorary  members
and  patrons  of  the  fraternity  of  Freema¬
sons  who  existed  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and
who,  having  abandoned  the  material  design
of  the  institution,  confined  themselves  to
its  mystic  character.  If  his  suggestion  be
correct,  this  is  one  of  the  earliest  instances
of  the  separation  of  speculative  from  oper¬
ative  Masonry.

Acanthus.  A  plant,  described  by
Dioscorides,  with  broad,  flexible,  prickly
leaves,  which  perish  in  the  winter  and
sprout  again  at  the  return  of  spring.  It
is  found  in  the  Grecian  islands  on  the  bor¬
ders  of  cultivated  fields  or  gardens,  and  is
common  in  moist,  rocky  situations.  It  is
memorable  for  the  tradition  which  assigns
to  it  the  origin  of  the  foliage  carved  on  the
capitals  of  Corinthian  and  composite  col¬
umns.  Hence,  in  architecture,  that  part
of  the  Corinthian  capital  is  called  the
Acanthus  which  is  situated  below  the  aba¬
cus,  and  which,  having  the  form  of  a  vase
or  bell,  is  surrounded  by  two  rows  of
leaves  of  the  acanthus  plant.  Callima¬
chus,  who  invented  this  ornament,  is  said
to  have  had  the  idea  suggested  to  him  by
the  following  incident.  A  Corinthian
maiden,  who  was  betrothed,  fell  ill,  and


died  just  before  the  appointed  time  of  her
marriage.  Her  faithful  and  grieving  nurse
placed  on  her  tomb  a  basket  containing
many  of  her  toys  and  jewels,  and  covered
it  with  a  flat  tile.  It  so  happened  that  the
basket  was  placed  immediately  over  an
acanthus  root,  which  afterwards  grew  up
around  the  basket  and  curled  over  undei*
the  superincumbent  resistance  of  the  tile,
thus  exhibiting  a  form  of  foliage  which
was,  on  its  being  seen  by  the  architect,
adopted  as  a  model  for  the  capital  of
a  new  order ;  so  that  the  story  of  affection
was  perpetuated  in  marble.  Dudley  (Na-
ology,  p.  1G4, )  thinks  the  tale  puerile,  and
supposes  that  the  acanthus  is  really  the  lotus
of  the  Indians  and  Egyptians,  and  is  sym¬
bolic  of  laborious  but  effectual  effort  ap¬
plied  to  the  support  of  the  world. '  With
him,  the  symbolism  of  the  acanthus  and
the  lotus  are  identical.  See  Lotus.

Accepted.  A  term  in  Freemasonry
which  is  synonymous  with  “initiated”  or
“  received  into  the  society.”  Thus,  we  find
in  the  Regulations  of  1663,  such  expres¬
sions  as  these;  “No  person  who  shall
hereafter  be  accepted  a  Freemason,  shall
be  admitted  into  a  Lodge  or  assembly  until
he  has  brought  a  certificate  of  the  time  and
place  of  his  acceptation  from  the  Lodge  that
accepted  him,  unto  the  Master  of  that  limit
or  division  where  such  Lodge  is  kept.”  The
word  seems  to  have  been  first  used  in  1663,
and  in  the  Regulations  of  that  year  is  con¬
stantly  employed  in  the  place  of  the  olden
term  “  made,”  as  equivalent  to  “  initiated.”
This  is  especially  evident  in  the  6th  Regu¬
lation,  which  says,  “  that  no  person  shall
be  accepted  unless  he  be  twenty-one  years
old  or  more ;  ”  where  accepted  clearly  means
initiated.  As  the  word  was  introduced  in
1663,  its  use  seems  also  to  have  soon  ceased,
for  it  is  not  found  in  any  subsequent  docu¬
ments  until  1738;  neither  in  the  Regula¬
tions  of  1721,  nor  in  the  Charges  approved
in  1722;  except  once  in  the  latter,  where
“  laborers  and  unaccepted  Masons  ”  are
spoken  of  as  distinguished  from  and  in¬
ferior  to  “Freemasons.”  In  the  Regula¬
tions  of  1721,  the  words  “made,”  “en¬
tered,”  or  “admitted,”  are  constantly
employed  in  its  stead.  But  in  1738,  An¬
derson,  who,  in  publishing  the  2d  edition  of
the  Book  of  Constitutions,  made  many
verbal  alterations  which  seem  subsequently
to  have  been  disapproved  of  by  the  Grand
Lodge,  (s ze  Book  of  Constitutions,)  again  in¬
troduced  the  word  accepted.  Thus,  in  the
5th  of  the  Regulations  of  1721,  which  in  the
edition  of  1723  read  as  follows:  “But  no
man  can  be  made  or  admitted  a  member  of
a  particular  Lodge,”  etc.,  he  changed  the
phraseology  so  as  to  make  the  article  read :
“No  man  can  be  accepted  a  member  of  a


ACCLAMATION


ACHAD


11


particular  Lodge,”  etc.  And  so  attached
does  he  appear  to  have  become  to  this  word,
that  he  changed  the  very  name  of  the  Order,
by  altering  the  title  of  the  work,  which,  in
the  edition  of  1723,  was  “The  Constitutions
of  the  Freemasons,”  to  that  of  “The  Con¬
stitutions  of  the  Ancient  and  Honorable
Society  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.”
Although  many  of  the  innovations  of  the
edition  of  1738  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions
were  subsequently  repudiated  by  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  omitted  in  succeeding  editions,
the  title  of  “  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  ”
wras  retained,  and  is  now  more  generally
used  than  the  older  and  simpler  one  of
“Freemasons,”  to  distinguish  the  society.
(See  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.)  The  word
accepted,  however,  as  a  synonym  of  initiated,
has  now  become  obsolete.  The  modern
idea  of  an  accepted  Mason  is  that  he  is  one
distinguished  from  a  purely  operative  or
stone-mason,  who  has  not  been  admitted  to
the  freedom  of  the  company ;  an  idea  evi¬
dently  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the  use
of  the  word  in  the  Charges  of  1722,  already
quoted.

Acclamation.  A  certain  form  of
words  used  in  connection  with  the  battery.
In  the  Scottish  rite  it  is  hoschea ;  in  the
French,  vivat;  and  in  the  rite  of  Misraim,
hallelujah.  In  the  York,  it  is  so  mote  it  be.

Accolade.  From  the  Latin  ad  and
collum,  around  the  neck.  It  is  generally
but  incorrectly  supposed  that  the  accolade
means  the  blow  given  on  the  neck  of  a
newly  created  knight  with  the  flat  of  the
sword.  The  best  authorities  define  it  to  be
the  embrace,  accompanied  with  the  kiss
of  peace,  by  which  the  new  knight  was  at
his  creation  welcomed  into  the  Order  of
Knighthood  by  the  sovereign  or  lord  who
created  him.  See  the  word  Knighthood.

Accord.  We  get  this  word  from  the
two  Latin  ones  ad  cor,  to  the  heart,  and
hence  it  means  hearty  consent.  Thus  in
Wiclif’s  translation  we  find  the  phrase  in
Philippians,  which  in  the  Authorized  Ver¬
sion  is  “  with  one  accord,”  rendered  “  with
one  will,  with  one  heart.”  Such  is  its  sig¬
nification  in  the  Masonic  formula,  “free
will  and  accord,”  that  is  “  free  will  and
hearty  consent.”  See  Free  Will  and  Accord.

Accusation.  See  Charge.

Accuser.  In  every  trial  in  a  Lodge  for
an  offence  against  the  laws  and  regulations
or  the  principles  of  Masonry  any  Master
Mason  may  be  the  accuser  of  another,  but  a
profane  cannot  be  permitted  to  prefer
charges  against  a  Mason.  Yet,  if  circum¬
stances  are  knowrn  to  a  profane  upon  which
charges  ought  to  be  predicated,  a  Master
Mason  may  avail  himself  of  that  informa¬
tion,  and  out  of  it  frame  an  accusation  to
be  presented  to  the  Lodge.  And  such


accusation  will  be  received  and  investigated,
although  remotely  derived  from  one  who  is
not  a  member  of  the  Order.

It  is  not  necessary  that  the  accuser
should  be  a  member  of  the  same  Lodge.  It
is  sufficient  if  he  is  an  affiliated  Mason ;
but  it  is  generally  held  that  an  unaffiliated
Mason  is  no  more  competent  to  prefer
charges  than  a  profane.

In  consequence  of  the  Junior  Warden
being  placed  over  the  Craft  during  the  hours
of  refreshment,  and  of  his  being  charged
at  the  time  of  his  installation  to  see  “  that
none  of  the  Craft  be  suffered  to  convert  the
purposes  of  refreshment  into  those  of  in¬
temperance  and  excess,”  it  has  been  very
generally  supposed  that  it  is  his  duty,  as
the  prosecuting  officer  of  the  Lodge,  to
prefer  charges  against  any  member  who,
by  his  conduct,  has  made  himself  amenable
to  the  penal  jurisdiction  of  the  Lodge.  I
know  of  no  ancient  regulation  which  im¬
poses  this  unpleasant  duty  upon  the  Junior
Warden;  but  it  does  seem  to  be  a  very
natural  deduction,  from  his  peculiar  pre¬
rogative  as  the  custos  morum  or  guardian
of  the  conduct  of  the  Craft,  that  in  all
cases  of  violation  of  the  law  he  should,
after  due  efforts  towards  producing  a  re¬
form,  be  the  proper  officer  to  bring  the
conduct  of  the  offending  brother  to  the
notice  of  the  Lodge.

Aceldama,  from  the  Syro-Clialdaic,
meaning  field  of  blood,  so  called  because  it
was  purchased  with  the  blood- money  which
was  paid  to  Judas  Iscariot  for  betraying
his  Lord.  It  is  situated  on  the  slope
of  the  hills  beyond  the  valley  of  Hinnom
and  to  the  south  of  Mount  Zion.  The
earth  there  was  believed,  by  early  writers,
to  have  possessed  a  corrosive  quality,  by
means  of  which  bodies  deposited  in  it  were
quickly  consumed ;  and  hence  it  was  used
by  the  Crusaders,  then  by  the  Knights
Hospitallers,  and  afterwards  by  the  Arme¬
nians,  as'  a  place  of  sepulture,  and  the
Empress  Helen  is  said  to  have  built  a
charnel-house  in  its  midst.  Hr.  Robinson
[Biblical  Researches,  i.,  p.  524,)  says  that  the
field  is  not  now  marked  by  any  boundary
to  distinguish  it  from  the  rest  of  the  field,
and  the  former  charnel-house  is  now  a
ruin.  The  field  of  Aceldama  is  referred  to
in  the  ritual  of  the  Knights  Templars.

Acerellos,  II.  S.  A  nom  de  plume
assumed  by  Carl  Roessler,  a  German  Ma¬
sonic  writer.  See  Roessler.

Aolmd.  One  of  the  names  of  God.
The  word  inN,  Achad,  in  Hebrew  signi¬
fies  one  or  unity.  It  has  been  adopted  by
the  Masons  as  one  of  the  appellations  of
the  Deity  from  that  passage  in  Deuter¬
onomy  (vi.  4) :  “  Hear,  O  Israel,  the  Lord
thy  God  is  [Achad]  one ;  ”  and  which  the


12


ACHARON


ACQUITTAL


Jews  wear  on  their  phylacteries,  and  pro¬
nounce  with  great  fervor  as  a  confession  of
their  faith  in  the  unity  of  God.  Speaking
of  God  as  Achad,  the’  Rabbins  say,  “  God
is  one  [Achad)  and  man  is  one  (Achad).
Man,  however,  is  not  purely  one,  because
he  is  made  up  of  elements  and  has  another
like  himself;  but  the  oneness  of  God  is  a
oneness  that  has  no  boundary.”

Acliaron  Scliilton.  In  Hebrew
JtaStf'  jnnx,  signifying  the  new  kingdom.
Significant  words  in  some  of  the  high
degrees.

Acliias.  A  corruption  of  the  Hebrew
Achijah ,  the  brother  of  Jah ;  a  significant
word  in  some  of  the  high  degrees.

Achishar.  Mentioned  in  1  Kings  (iv.
6)  under  the  name  of  Ahishar,  and  there
described  as  being  “over  the  household”
of  King  Solomon.  This  was  a  situation
of  great  importance  in  the  East,  and  equiv¬
alent  to  the  modern  office  of  Chamberlain.
The  Steward  in  a  Council  of  Select  Masters
is  said  to  represent  Achishar.

Achtariel.  A  kabbalistic  name  of  God
belonging  to  the  Crown  or  first  of  the  ten
sephiroth;  and  hence  signifying  the  Crown
or  God.

Acknowledged.  When  one  is  ini¬
tiated  into  the  degree  of  Most  Excellent
Master,  he  is  technically  said  to  be  “re¬
ceived  and  acknowledged”  as  a  Most  Ex¬
cellent  Master.  This  expression  refers  to
the  tradition  of  the  degree  which  states
that  when  the  Temple  had  been  completed
and  dedicated,  King  Solomon  received  and
acknowledged  the  most  expert  of  the  crafts¬
men  as  most  excellent  Masters.  That  is,
he  received  them  into  the  exalted  rank  of
perfect  and  acknowledged  workmen,  and
acknowledged  their  right  to  that  title.  The
verb  to  acknowledge  here  means  to  own  or
admit  to  belong  to,  as  to  acknowledge^
son.

Aeoiismatici.  The  primary  class  of
the  disciples  of  Pythagoras,  who  served  a
five  years’  probation  of  silence,  and  were
hence  called  acousmatici  or  hearers.  Ac¬
cording  to  Porphyry,  they  received  only
the  elements  of  intellectual  and  moral  in¬
struction,  and,  after  the  expiration  of  their
term  of  probation,  they  were  advanced
to  the  rank  of  Mathematici.  See  Pythag¬
oras.

Acquittal.  Under  this  head  it  may
be  proper  to  discuss  two  questions  of  Ma¬
sonic  law.  1.  Can  a  Mason,  having  been
acquitted  by  the  courts  of  the  country  of
an  offence  with  which  he  has  been  charged,
be  tried  by  his  Lodge  for  the  same  offence?
And,  2.  Can  a  Mason,  having  been  acquitted
by  his  Lodge  on  insufficient  evidence,  be
subjected,  on  the  discovery  and  production
of  new  and  more  complete  evidence,  to  a


second  trial  for  the  same  offence?  To  both
of  these  questions  the  correct  answer  would
seem  to  be  in  the  affirmative.

1.  An  acquittal  of  a  crime  by  a  temporal
court  does  not  relieve  a  Mason  from  an
inquisition  into  the  same  offence  by  his
Lodge;  for  acquittals  may  be  the  result  of
some  technicality  of  law,  or  other  cause,
where,  although  the  party  is  relieved  from
legal  punishment,  his  guilt  is  still  manifest
in  the  eyes  of  the  community;  and  if  the
Order  were  to  be  controlled  by  the  action
of  the  courts,  the  character  of  the  Institu¬
tion  might  be  injuriously  affected  by  its
permitting  a  man,  who  had  escaped  without
honor  from  the  punishment  of  the  law,  to
remain  a  member  of  the  Fraternity.  In
the  language  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Texas,
“  an  acquittal  by  a  jury,  while  it  may,  and
should,  in  some  circumstances,  have  its  in¬
fluence  in  deciding  on  the  course  to  be
pursued,  yet  has  no  binding  force  in  Ma¬
sonry.  We  decide  on  our  own  rules,  and
our  own  view  of  the  facts.”  ( Proc .  G.  L.
Tex.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  273.)

2.  To  come  to  a  correct  apprehension  of
the  second  question,  we  must  remember
that  it  is  a  long-settled  principle  of  Ma¬
sonic  law,  that  every  offence  which  a  Mason
commits  is  an  injury  to  the  whole  Frater¬
nity,  inasmuch  as  that  the  bad  conduct  of
a  single  member  reflects  discredit  on  the
whole  Institution.  This  is  a  very  old  and
well-established  principle  of  the  Institu¬
tion  ;  and  hence  we  find  the  old  Gothic
Constitutions  declaring  that  “a  Mason  shall
harbor  no  thief  or  thief’s  retainer,”  and
assigning  as  a  reason,  “  lest  the  Craft  should
come  to  shame.”  The  safety  of  the  Insti¬
tution  requires  that  no  evil-disposed  mem¬
ber  should  be  tolerated  with  impunity  in
bringing  disgrace  on  tbe  Craft.  And,  there¬
fore,  although  it  is  a  well-known  maxim
of  the  common  law  —  nemo  debet  bis  puniri
pro  uno  delicto  —  that  is,  “that  no  one
should  be  twice  placed  in  peril  of  punish¬
ment  for  the  same  crime;”  yet  we  must
also  remember  that  other  and  fundamental
maxim  —  sains  populi  suprema  lex — which
may,  in  its  application  to  Masonry,  be  well
translated:  “the  well-being  of  the  Order
is  the  first  great  law.”  To  this  everything
else  must  yield ;  and,  therefore,  if  a  mem¬
ber,  having  been  accused  of  a  heinous  of¬
fence  and  tried,  shall,  on  his  trial,  for  want
of  sufficient  evidence,  be  acquitted,  or,  being
convicted,  shall,  for  the  same  reason,  be
punished  by  an  inadequate  penalty  —  and
if  he  shall  thus  be  permitted  to  remain  in
the  Institution  with  the  stigma  of  the
crime  upon  him,  “  whereby  tne  Craft  comes
to  shame ;  ”  then,  if  new  and  more  suffi¬
cient  evidence  shall  be  subsequently  dis¬
covered,  it  is  just  and  right  that  a  new


ACTA


ADAM


13


trial  shall  be  had,  so  that  he  may,  on  this
newer  evidence,  receive  that  punishment
which  will  vindicate  the  reputation  of  the
Order.  No  technicalities  of  law,  no  plea
of  autrefois  acquit,  nor  mere  verbal  excep¬
tion,  should  be  allowed  for  the  escape  of  a
guilty  member;  for  so  long  as  he  lives  in
the  Order,  every  man  is  subject  to  its  disci¬
pline.  A  hundred  wrongful  acquittals  of
a  bad  member,  who  still  bears  with  him  the
reproach  of  his  evil  life,  can  never  dis¬
charge  the  Order  from  its  paramount  duty
of  protecting  its  own  good  fame  and  re¬
moving  the  delinquent  member  from  its
fold.  To  this  great  duty  all  private  and
individual  rights  and  privileges  must  suc¬
cumb,  for  the  well-being  of  the  Order  is  the
first  great  law  in  Masonry.

Acta  Latomornm,  ou  Chronologie
de  l’histoire  de  la  Franche-Ma<jonnerie
franqaise  et  etrangere,  etc.  That  is:
“The  Acts  of  the  Freemasons,  or  a  chrono¬
logical  history  of  French  and  Foreign
Freemasonry,  etc.”  This  work,  written  or
compiled  by  Claude  Antoine  Thory,  was

fublished  at  Paris,  in  2  vols.,  8vo,  in  1815.
t  contains  the  most  remarkable  facts  in
the  history  of  the  Institution  from  obscure
times  to  the  year  1814;  the  succession  of
Grand  Masters,  a  nomenclature  of  rites,
degrees,  and  secret  associations  in  all  the
countries  of  the  world,  and  a  bibliography
of  the  principal  works  on  Freemasonry
published  since  1723,  with  a  supplement  in
which  the  author  has  collected  a  variety  of
rare  and  important  Masonic  documents.
Of  this  work,  which  has  never  been  trans¬
lated  into  English,  Lenning  says,  [Encycl.
der  Freimaurerei )  that  it  is,  without  dis¬
pute,  the  most  scientific  work  on  Freema¬
sonry  that  French  literature  has  ever  pro¬
duced.  It  must,  however,  be  confessed
that  in  the  historical  portion  Thory  has
committed  many  errors  in  respect  to  Eng¬
lish  and  American  Freemasonry,  and  there¬
fore,  if  ever  translated,  the  work  will  re¬
quire  much  emendation.  See  Thory.

Acting  Grand  Master.  The  Duke
of  Cumberland  having  in  April,  1752,  been
elected  Grand  Master  of  England,  it  was
resolved  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  in  compli¬
ment  to  him,  that  he  should  have  the  privi¬
lege  of  nominating  a  peer  of  the  realm  as
Acting  Grand  Master,  who  should  be  em¬
powered  to  superintend  the  Society  in  his
absence;  and  that  at  any  future  period,
when  the  fraternity  should  have  a  prince
of  the  blood  at  their  head,  the  same  privi¬
lege  should  be  granted.  The  officer  thus
provided  to  be  appointed  is  now  called,
in  the  Constitutions  of  England,  the  Pro
Grand  Master.

In  the  American  system,  the  officer  who
performs  the  duties  of  Grand  Master  in


case  of  the  removal,  death,  or  inability  of
that  officer,  is  known  as  the  Acting  Grand
Master.  For  the  regulations  which  pre¬
scribe  the  proper  person  to  perform  these
duties  see  the  words  Succession  to  Office.

Active  Aotlge.  A  Lodge  is  said  to
be  active  when  it  is  neither  dormant  nor
suspended,  but  regularly  meets  and  is  occu¬
pied  in  the  labors  of  Masonry.

Active  Member.  An  active  mem¬
ber  of  a  Lodge  is  one  who,  in  contradis¬
tinction  to  an  honorary  member,  assumes
all  the  burdens  of  membership,  such  as
contributions,  arrears,  and  participation  in
its  labors,  and  is  invested  with  all  the
rights  of  membership,  such  as  speaking,
voting,  and  holding  office.

Actual  Past  Masters.  Those  who
receive  the  degree  of  Past  Master  in  sym¬
bolic  Lodges,  as  a  part  of  the  installation
service,  when  elected  to  preside,  are  called
“ Actual  Past  Masters,”  to  distinguish  them
from  those  who  pass  through  the  ceremony
in  a  Chapter,  as  simply  preparatory  to
taking  the  Royal  Arch,  and  who  are  dis¬
tinguished  as  “  Virtual  Past  Masters.”  See
Past  Master.

Adad.  The  name  of  the  principal  god
among  the  Syrians,  and  who,  as  represent¬
ing  the  sun,  had,  according  to  Macrobius,
( Saturnal .,  i.  23,)  an  image  surrounded  by
rays.  Macrobius,  however,  is  wrong,  as
Selden  has  shown  [De  Diis  Syris,  i.  6),  in
confounding  Adad  with  the  Hebrew  Achad,
or  one  —  a  name,  from  its  signification  of
unity,  applied  to  the  Grand  Architect  of
the  Universe.  The  error  of  Macrobius,
however,  has  been  perpetuated  by  the  in¬
ventors  of  the  high  degrees  of  Masonry,
who  have  incorporated  Adad,  as  a  name  of
God,  among  their  significant  words.

Adam.  The  name  of  the  first  man.
The  Hebrew  word  DIN)  AT)aM,  signifies
man  in  a  generic  sense,  the  human  species
collectively,  and  is  said  to  be  derived  from
TOIX,  ADaMaH,  the  ground,  because
the  first  man  was  made  out  of  the  dust  of
the  earth,  or  from  ADaM,  to  be  red,  in
reference  to  his  ruddy  complexion.  It  is
most  probably  in  this  collective  sense,  as
the  representative  of  the  whole  human
race,  and,  therefore,  the  type  of  humanity,
that  the  presiding  officer  in  a  Council  of
Knights  of  the  Sun,  the  28th  degree  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,
is  called  Father  Adam,  and  is  occupied
in  the  investigation  of  the  great  truths
which  so  much  concern  the  interests  of
the  race.  Adam,  in  that  degree,  is  man
seeking  after  divine  truth.  The  Kabbalists
and  Talmudists  have  invented  many  things
concerning  the  first  Adam,  none  of  which
are,  however,  worthy  of  preservation.  See
Knight  of  the  Sun.


14


ADAMS


ADDRESSES


Adams,  John  Quincy,  the  sixth
President  of  the  United  States,  who  served
from  1825  to  1829.  Mr.  Adatns,  who  has
been  very  properly  described  as  “  a  man  of
strong  points  and  weak  ones,  of  vast  read¬
ing  and  wonderful  memory,  of  great  cre¬
dulity  and  strong  prejudices,”  became  noto¬
rious  in  the  latter  years  of  his  life  for  his
virulent  opposition  to  Freemasonry.  The
writer  already  quoted,  and  who  had  an  ex¬
cellent  opportunity  of  seeing  intimately
the  workings  of  the  spirit  of  anti-Masonry,
says  of  Mr.  Adams:  “He  hated  Freema¬
sonry,  as  he  did  many  other  things,  not
from  any  harm  that  he  had  received  from
it  or  personally  knew  respecting  it,  but
because  his  credulity  had  been  wrought
upon  and  his  prejudices  excited  against  it
by  dishonest  and  selfish  politicians,  who
were  anxious,  at  any  sacrifice  to  him,  to
avail  themselves  of  the  influence  of  his
commanding  talents  and  position  iu  public
life  to  sustain  them  in  the  disreputable
work  in  which  they  were  enlisted.  In  his
weakness,  he  lent  himself  to  them.  He
united  his  energies  to  theirs  in  an  imprac¬
ticable  and  unworthy  cause.”  (C.  W.  Moore,
Freemason’s  Mag.,  vol.  vii.,  p.  314.)  The  re¬
sult  was  a  series  of  letters  abusive  of  Free¬
masonry,  directed  to  leading  politicians,
and  published  in  the  public  journals  from
1831  to  1833.  A  year  before  his  death  they
were  collected  and  published  under  the
title  of  “  Letters  on  the  Masonic  Institu¬
tion,  by  John  Quincy  Adams.”  Boston,
1847,  8 vo,  pp.  284.  Some  explanation
of  the  cause  of  the  virulence  with  which
Mr.  Adams  attacked  the  Masonic  Insti¬
tution  in  these  letters  may  be  found  in
the  following  paragraph  contained  in  an
anti-Masonic  work  written  by  one  Henry
Gassett,  and  affixed  to  his  “  Catalogue  of
Books  on  the  Masonic  Institution.”  (Bos¬
ton,  1852.)  “It  had  been  asserted  in  a
newspaper  in  Boston,  edited  by  a  Masonic
dignitary,  that  John  Q.  Adams  was  a  Ma¬
son.  In  answer  to  an  inquiry  from  a  per¬
son  in  New  York  State,  whether  he  was
so,  Mr.  Adams  replied  that  ‘he  was  not,
and  never  should  be.’  These  few  words,
undoubtedly,  prevented  his  election  a  second
term  as  President  of  the  United  States.  His
competitor,  Andrew  Jackson,  a  Freemason,
was  elected.”  Whether  the  statement  con¬
tained  in  the  italicized  words  be  true  or
not,  is  not  the  question.  It  is  sufficient
that  Mr.  Adams  was  led  to  believe  it,  and
hence  his  ill-will  to  an  association  which
had,  as  he  supposed,  inflicted  this  political
evil  on  him,  and  baffled  his  ambitious  views.

Adar.  Hebrew,  the  sixth  month

of  the  civil  and  the  twelfth  of  the  ecclesi¬
astical  year  of  the  Jews.  It  corresponds
to  a  part  of  February  and  of  March.


Adarel.  Angel  of  Fire.  Referred  to  in
the  Hermetic  degree  of  Knight  of  the  Sun.
Probably  from  "nx,  A  dr,  splendor,  and
Sx,  FI,  God,  i.  e.  the  splendor  of  God  or
Divine  splendor.

Addresses,  Masonic.  Dr.  Oliver,

speaking  of  the  Masonic  discourses  which
began  to  be  published  soon  after  the  re¬
organization  of  Masonry,  in  the  commence¬
ment  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  which
he  thinks  were  instigated  by  the  attacks
made  on  the  Order,  to  which  they  were  in¬
tended  to  be  replies,  says :  “  Charges  and
addresses  were  therefore  delivered  by  breth¬
ren  in  authority  on  the  fundamental  prin¬
ciples  of  the  Order,  and  they  were  printed
to  show  that  its  morality  was  sound,  and
not  iu  the  slightest  degree  repugnant  to  the
precepts  of  our  most  holy  religion.  These
were  of  sufficient  merit  to  insure  a  wide
circulation  among  the  Fraternity,  from
whence  they  spread  into  the  world  at  large,
and  proved  decisive  in  fixing  the  credit  of
the  Institution  for  solemnities  of  character
and  a  taste  for  serious  and  profitable  inves¬
tigations.”

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  ad¬
dresses,  periodically  delivered  and  widely
published,  have  continued  to  exert  an  ex¬
cellent  effect  in  behalf  of  the  Institution,
by  explaining  and  defending  the  principles
on  which  it  is  founded.

The  first  Masonic  address  of  which  we
have  any  notice  was  delivered  on  the  24th
of  June,  1719,  before  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  by  the  celebrated  John  Theophi-
lus  Desaguliers,  LL.  D.  and  F.  R.  S.  The
Book  of  Constitutions,  under  that  date,
savs“Bro.  Desaguliers  made  an  eloquent
oration  about  Masons  and  Masonry.”  Dr.
Oliver  states  that  this  address  was  issued
in  a  printed  form,  but  no  copy  of  it  nowr
remains  —  at  least  it  has  escaped  the  re¬
searches  of  the  most  diligent  Masonic
bibliographers.

On  the  20th  of  May,  1725,  Martin
Folkes,  then  Deputy  Grand  Master,  de¬
livered  an  address  before  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  which  is  cited  in  the  Free¬
mason’s  Pocket  Companion  for  1759,  but
no  entire  copy  of  the  address  is  now
extant.

The  third  Masonic  address  of  which  we
have  any  knowledge  is  one  entitled,  “A
Speech  delivered  to  the  Worshipful  and
Ancient  Society  of  Free  and  Accepted  Ma¬
sons,  at  a  Grand  Lodge  held  at  Merchants’
Hall,  in  the  city  of  York,  on  St.  John’s
Day,  Dec.  27,  1726,  the  Right  Worshipful
Charles  Bathurst,  Esq.,  Grand  Master.  By
the  Junior  Grand  Warden.  Olim  meminisse
juvabit.  York:  Printed  by  Thomas  Gent,
for  the  benefit  of  the  Lodge.”  It  was
again  published  at  London  in  1729,  in


ADDRESSES


ADEPT


15


Benj.  Cole’s  edition  of  the  Ancient  Consti¬
tutions,  and  has  been  subsequently  re¬
printed  in  1858  in  the  London  Freemason’s
Magazine ,  from  which  it  was  copied  in  C.
W.  Moore’s  Freemason’s  Magazine ,  pub¬
lished  at  Boston,  Mass.  This  is,  therefore,
the  earliest  Masonic  address  to  which  we
have  access.  It  contains  a  brief  sketch  of
the  history  of  Masonry,  written  as  Masonic
history  was  then  written.  It  is,  however,
remarkable  for  advancing  the  claim  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  York  to  a  superiority  over
that  of  London.

The  fourth  Masonic  address  of  whose
existence  we  have  any  knowledge  is  “A
Speech  delivered  at  a  Lodge  held  at  the
Carpenters’  Arms  the  31st  of  December,
1728,  by  Edw.  Oakley,  late  Provincial
Senior  Grand  Warden  in  Carmarthen.”
This  speech  was  reprinted  by  Cole  at  Lon¬
don  in  1751.

America  has  the  honor  of  presenting  the
next  attempt  at  Masonic  oratory.  The
fifth  address,  and  the  first  American,  which
is  extant,  is  one  delivered  in  Boston,  Mass.,
on  June  24th,  1734.  It  is  entitled  “A  Dis¬
sertation  upon  Masonry,  delivered  to  a
Lodge  in  America,  June  24th,  1734.  Christ’s
Kegm.”  It  was  discovered  by  Bro.  C.  W.
Moore  in  the  archives  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Massachusetts,  and  published  by  him  in
his  magazine  in  1849.  This  address  is  well
written,  and  of  a  symbolic  character,  as
the  author  allegorizes  the  Lodge  as  a  type
of  heaven.

And,  sixthly,  we  have  “An  Address  made
to  the  body  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons
assembled  at  a  Quarterly  Communication,
held  near  Temple  Bar,  December  11,  1735,
by  Martin  Clare,  Junior  Grand  Warden.”
Martin  Clare  was  distinguished  in  his
times  as  a  Mason.  He  had  been  authorized
by  the  Grand  Lodge  to  revise  the  lectures,
which  task  he  performed  with  great  satis¬
faction  to  the  Craft.  This  address,  which
Dr.  Oliver  has  inserted  in  his  Golden  Re¬
mains,  has  been  considered  of  value  enough
to  be  translated  into  the  French  and  Ger¬
man  languages.

After  this  period,  Masonic  addresses
rapidly  multiplied,  so  that  it  would  be  im¬
possible  to  record  their  titles  or  even  the
names  of  their  authors.

What  Martial  says  of  his  own  epigrams,
that  some  were  good,  some  bad,  and  a  great
many  middling,  may,  with  equal  propriety
and  justice,  be  said  of  Masonic  addresses.
Of  the  thousands  that  have  been  delivered,
many  have  been  worth  neither  printing
nor  preservation.

One  thing,  however,  is  to  be  remarked :
that  within  a  few  years  the  literary  char¬
acter  of  these  productions  has  greatly  im¬
proved.  Formerly,  a  Masonic  address  on


some  festival  occasion  of  the  Order  was
little  more  than  a  homily  on  brotherly  love
or  some  other  Masonic  virtue.  Often  the
orator  was  a  clergyman,  selected  by  the
Lodge  on  account  of  his  moral  character
or  his  professional  ability.  These  clergy¬
men  were  frequently  among  the  youngest
members  of  the  Lodge,  and  men  who  had
no  opportunity  to  study  the  esoteric  con¬
struction  of  Masonry.  In  such  cases  we
will  find  that  the  addresses  were  generally
neither  more  nor  less  than  sermons  under
another  name.  They  contain  excellent
general  axioms  of  conduct,  and  sometimes
encomiums  on  the  laudable  design  of  our
Institution.  But  we  look  in  vain  in  them
for  any  ideas  which  refer  to  the  history  or
to  the  occult  philosophy  of  Masonry.  They
accept  the  definition  that  “  Freemasonry  is
a  science  of  morality,  veiled  in  allegory
and  illustrated  by  symbols,”  only  in  part.
They  expatiate  on  the  science  of  morality,
but  they  say  nothing  of  the  symbols  or  the
allegories.  But,  as  I  have  already  said,
there  has  been  an  evident  improvement
within  a  few  years,  in  this  country  especi¬
ally,  for  the  reform  has  not  equally  ex¬
tended  to  England.  Many  of  the  addresses
nowr  delivered  are  of  a  higher  order  of  Ma¬
sonic  literature.  The  subjects  of  Masonic
history,  of  the  origin  of  the  Institution,  of
its  gradual  development  from  an  operative
art  to  a  speculative  science,  of  its  symbols,
and  of  its  peculiar  features  which  distin¬
guish  it  from  all  other  associations,  have
been  ably  discussed  in  many  recent  Ma¬
sonic  addresses,  and  thus  have  the  efforts  to
entertain  an  audience  for  an  hour  become
not  only  the  means  of  interesting  instruction
to  the  hearers,  but  also  valuable  contribu¬
tions  to  the  literature  of  Freemasonry.

It  is  in  this  way  that  Masonic  addresses
should  be  written.  All  platitudes  and  old
truisms  should  be  avoided;  sermonizing,
which  is  good  in  its  place,  is  out  of  place
here.  No  one  should  undertake  to  deliver
a  Masonic  address  unless  he  knows  some¬
thing  of  the  subject  on  which  he  is  about
to  speak,  and  unless  he  is  capable  of  say¬
ing  what  w  ill  make  every  Mason  who  hears
him  a  wiser  as  well  as  a  better  man,  or  at
least  what  will  afford  him  the  opportunity
of  becoming  so.

Adolph.  Greek  for  a  Brother.  The
fourth  degree  of  the  order  of  the  Palladium.
Reghellini  says  that  there  exists  in  the
Masonic  archives  of  Douai  the  ritual  of  a
Masonic  Society,  called  Adelphs,  which  has
been  communicated  to  the  Grand  Orient,
but  which  he  thinks  is  the  same  as  the
Primitive  Rite  of  Narbonne.

Adopt.  One  fully  skilled  or  well
versed  in  any  art;  from  the  Latin  word
“  Adeptus,”  having  obtained,  because  the


16


ADEPT


ADJOURNMENT


Adept  claimed  to  be  in  the  possession  of
all  the  secrets  of  his  peculiar  mystery.  The
Alchemists  or  Hermetic  philosophers  as¬
sumed  the  title  of  Adepts.  (See  Alchemy.)
Of  the  Hermetic  Adepts,  who  were  also
sometimes  called  Rosicrucians,  Spence  thus
writes,  in  1740,  to  his  mother:  “  Have  you
ever  heard  of  the  people  called  Adepts?
They  are  a  set  of  philosophers  superior  to
whatever  appeared  among  the  Greeks  and
Romans.  The  three  great  points  they
drive  at,  is  to  be  free  from  poverty,  distem¬
pers,  and  death  ;  and,  if  you  believe  them,
they  have  found  out  one  secret  that  is  ca¬
pable  of  freeing  them  from  all  three.  There
are  never  more  than  twelve  of  these  men
in  the  whole  world  at  a  time;  and  we  have
the  happiness  of  having  one  of  the  twelve
at  this  time  in  Turin.  I  am  very  well  ac¬
quainted  with  him,  and  have  often  talked
with  him  of  their  secrets,  as  far  as  he  is
allowed  to  talk  to  a  common  mortal  of
them.”  ( Spence’s  Letter  to  his  Mother ,  in
Singer’s  Anecdotes,  p.  403.)  In  a  similar
allusion  to  the  possession  of  abstruse  knowl¬
edge,  the  word  is  applied  to  some  of  the
high  degrees  of  Masonry.

Adept,  Prince.  One  of  the  names
of  the  28th  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Rite.  (See  Knight  of  the  Sun.)
It  was  the  23d  degree  of  the  System  of
the  Chapter  of  Emperors  of  the  East  and
West  of  Clermont.

Adept,  the.  A  hermetic  degree  of
the  collection  of  A.  Viany.  It  is  also  the
4th  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Relaxed  Observ¬
ance,  and  the  1st  of  the  high  degrees  of
the  Rite  of  Elects  of  Truth.  “  It  has  much
analogy,”  says  Thory,  “  with  the  degree  of
Knight  of  the  Sun  in  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Rite.”  It  is  also  called  “  Chaos  dis¬
entangled.”

Adeptus  Adoptatus.  The  7th  de¬
gree  of  the  Rite  of  Zinnendorf,  consisting  of
a  kind  of  chemical  and  pharmaceutical  in¬
struction.

Adeptus  Coronatus.  Called  also
Templar  Master  of  the  Key.  The  7th  degree
of  the  Swedish  Rite,  (which  see.)

Adeptus  Exemptus.  The  7th  de¬
gree  of  the  system  adopted  by  those  Ger¬
man  Rosicrucians  who  were  known  as  the
“  Gold-und  Rosenkreutzer,”  or  the  Gold
and  Rosy  Cross,  and  whom  Lenning  sup¬
poses  to  have  been  the  first  who  engrafted
Rosicrucianism  on  Masonry.

Adhering  Mason.  Those  Masons
who,  during  the  anti-Masonic  excitement
in  this  country,  on  account  of  the  supposed
abduction  of  Morgan,  refused  to  leave  their
Lodges  and  renounce  Masonry,  were  so
called.  They  embraced  among  their  num¬
ber  some  of  the  wisest,  best,  and  most  in¬
fluential  men  of  the  country.


Adjournment.  C.  W.  Moore  ( Free¬
masons’  Mag.,  xii.,  p.  290,)  says :  “  We  sup¬
pose  it  to  be  generally  conceded  that  Lodges
cannot  properly  be  adjourned.  It  has  been
so  decided  by  a  large  proportion  of  the
Grand  Lodges  in  this  country,  and  tacitly,
at  least,  concurred  in  by  all.  We  are  not
aware  that  there  is  a  dissenting  voice  among
them.  It  is,  therefore,  safe  to  assume  that
the  settled  policy  is  against  adjournment.”
The  reason  which  he  assigns  for  this  rule,
is  that  adjournment  is  a  method  used  only
in  deliberative  bodies,  such  as  legislatures
and  courts,  and  as  Lodges  do  not  partake
of  the  character  of  either  of  these,  adjourn¬
ments  are  not  applicable  to  them.  The
rule  which  Bro.  Moore  lays  down  is  un¬
doubtedly  correct,  but  the  reason  which  he
assigns  for  it  is  not  sufficient.  If  a  Lodge
were  permitted  to  adjourn  by  the  vote  of  a
majority  of  its  members,  the  control  of  the
labor  would  be  placed  in  their  hands.  But
according  to  the  whole  spirit  of  the  Masonic
system,  the  Master  alone  controls  and
directs  the  hours  of  labor.  In  the  5th  of
the  Old  Charges,  approved  in  1722,  it  is
declared  that  “  All  Masons  employed  shall
meekly  receive  their  wages  without  mur¬
muring  or  mutiny,  and  not  desert  the  Master
till  the  work  is  finished.”  Now  as  the  Master
alone  can  know  when  “  the  work  is  fin¬
ished,”  the  selection  of  the  time  of  closing
must  be  vested  in  him.  He  is  the  sole
judge  of  the  proper  period  at  which  the
labors  of  the  Lodge  should  be  terminated,
and  he  may  suspend  business  even  in  the
middle  of  a  debate,  if  he  supposes  that  it
is  expedient  to  close  the  Lodge.  Hence  no
motion  for  adjournment  can  ever  be  ad¬
mitted  in  a  Masonic  Lodge.  Such  a  motion
would  be  an  interference  with  the  preroga¬
tive  of  the  Master,  and  could  not  therefore
be  entertained.

This  prerogative  of  opening  and  closing
his  Lodge  is  necessarily  vested  in  the  Mas¬
ter,  because,  by  the  nature  of  our  Institu¬
tion,  he  is  responsible  to  the  Grand  Lodge
for  the  good  conduct  of  the  body  over
which  he  presides.  He  is  charged,  in  those
questions  to  which  he  is  required  to  give  his
assent  at  his  installation,  to  hold  the  Land¬
marks  in  veneration,  and  to  conform  to
every  edict  of  the  Grand  Lodge;  and  for
any  violation  of  the  one  or  disobedience  of
the  other  by  the  Lodge,  in  his  presence,  he
would  be  answerable  to  the  supreme  Ma¬
sonic  authority.  Hence  the  necessity  that
an  arbitrary  power  should  be  conferred
upon  him,  by  the  exercise  of  which  he  may
at  any  time  be  enabled  to  prevent  the  adop¬
tion  of  resolutions,  or  the  commission  of  any
act  which  would  be  subversive  of,  or  contrary
to,  those  ancient  laws  and  usages  which  he
has  sworn  to  maintain  and  preserve.


ADMIRATION


ADONAI


17


Admiration,  Sign  of.  A  mode  of
recognition  alluded  to  in  the  Most  Excel¬
lent  Master’s  degree,  or  the  6th  of  the  Amer¬
ican  Rite.  Its  introduction  in  that  place  is
referred  to  a  Masonic  legend  in  connection
with  the  visit  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba  to
King  Solomon,  and  which  states  that,
moved  by  the  wide-spread  reputation  of
the  Israelitish  monarch,  she  had  repaired
to  Jerusalem  to  inspect  the  magnificent
works  of  which  she  had  heard  so  many
encomiums.  Upon  arriving  there,  and  be¬
holding  for  the  first  time  the  Temple,  which
glittered  with  gold,  and  which  was  so  ac¬
curately  adjusted  in  all  its  parts  as  to  seem
to  be  composed  of  but  a  single  piece  of
marble,  she  raised  her  hands  and  eyes  to
heaven  in  an  attitude  of  admiration,  and
at  the  same  time  exclaimed,  “  Rabboni !  ”
equivalent  to  saying,  “  A  most  excellent
master  hath  done  this !  ”  This  action  has
since  been  perpetuated  in  the  ceremonies
of  the  degree  of  Most  Excellent  Master.
The  legend  is,  however,  no  doubt  apocry¬
phal,  and  is  really  to  be  considered  only  as
allegorical,  like  so  many  other  of  the  le¬
gends  of  Masonry.  See  Sheba,  Queen  of.

Admission.  Although  the  Old
Charges,  approved  in  1722,  use  the  word
admitted  as  applicable  to  those  who  are
initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  Freema¬
sonry,  yet  the  General  Regulations  of  1721
employ  the  term  admission  in  a  sense  dif¬
ferent  from  that  of  initiation.  By  the  word
makiny  they  imply  the  reception  of  a  pro¬
fane  into  the  Order,  but  by  admission  they
designate  the  election  of  a  Mason  into  a
Lodge.  Thus  we  find  such  expressions  as
these  clearly  indicating  a  difference  in  the
meaning  of  the  two  words.  In  Reg.  v. —
“No  man  can  be  made  or  admitted  a  Ma¬
son  of  a  particular  Lodge.”  In  Reg.  vi.  —
“  But  no  man  can  be  entered  a  brother  in
any  particular  Lodge,  or  admitted  to  be  a
member  thereof.”  And  more  distinctly  in
Reg.  viii.  —  “  No  set  or  number  of  brethren
shall  withdraw  or  separate  themselves  from
the  Lodge  in  which  they  were  made  breth¬
ren  or  were  afterwards  admitted  members.”
This  distinction  has  not  always  been  rig¬
idly  preserved  by  recent  writers ;  but  it  is
evident  that,  correctly  speaking,  we  should
always  say  of  a  profane  who  has  been  ini¬
tiated  that  he  has  been  made  a  Mason,  and
of  a  Mason  who  has  been  affiliated  with  a
Lodge,  that  he  has  been  admitted  a  mem¬
ber.  The  true  definition  of  admission  is,
then,  the  reception  of  an  unaffiliated  bro¬
ther  into  membership.  See  Affiliation.

Admonition.  According  to  the  ethics
of  Freemasonry,  it  is  made  a  duty  obliga¬
tory  upon  every  member  of  the  Order  to
conceal  the  faults  of  a  brother,  —  that  is,
not  to  blazon  forth  his  errors  and  infirmi-
C  2


ties,  —  to  let  them  be  learned  by  the  world
from  some  other  tongue  than  his,  and  to
admonish  him  of  them  in  private.  So
there  is  another  but  a  like  duty  of  obliga¬
tion,  which  instructs  him  to  whisper  good
counsel  in  his  brother’s  ear  and  to  warn
him  of  approaching  danger.  And  this
refers  not  more  to  the  danger  that  is  with¬
out  aud  around  him  than  to  that  which  is
within  him;  not  more  to  the  peril  that
springs  from  the  concealed  foe  who  would
waylay  him  and  covertly  injure  him,  than
to  that  deeper  peril  of  those  faults  and  in¬
firmities  which  lie  within  his  own  heart,
and  which,  if  not  timely  crushed  by  good
and  earnest  resolution  of  amendment,  will,
like  the  ungrateful  serpent  in  the  fable,
become  warm  with  life  only  to  sting  the
bosom  that  has  nourished  them.

Admonition  of  a  brother’s  fault  is,  then,
the  duty  of  every  mason,  and  no  true  one
will,  for  either  fear  or  favor,  neglect  its
performance.  But  as  the  duty  is  Masonic,
so  is  there  a  Masonic  way  in  which  that
duty  should  be  discharged.  We  must  ad¬
monish  not  with  self-sufficient  pride  in  our
own  reputed  goodness  —  not  in  imperious
tones,  as  though  we  looked  down  in  scorn
upon  the  degraded  offender  —  not  in  lan¬
guage  that,  by  its  harshness,  will  wound
rather  than  win,  will  irritate  more  than  it
will  reform  ;  but  with  that  persuasive  gen¬
tleness  that  gains  the  heart  —  with  the
all-subduing  influences  of  “  mercy  unre¬
strained”  —  with  the  magic  might  of  love
—  with  the  language  and  the  accents  of
affection,  which  mingle  grave  displeasure
for  the  offence  with  grief  and  pity  for  the
offender.

This,  and  this  alone,  is  Masonic  admo¬
nition.  I  am  not  to  rebuke  my  brother  in
anger,  for  I  too  have  my  faults,  and  I  dare
not  draw  around  me  the  folds  of  my  gar¬
ment  lest  they  should  be  polluted  by  my
neighbor’s  touch ;  but  I  am  to  admonish
in  private,  not  before  the  world,  for  that
would  degrade  him ;  and  I  am  to  warn  him,
perhaps  from  my  own  example,  how  vice
ever  should  be  followed  by  sorrow,  for  that
goodly  sorrow  leads  to  repentance,  and  re¬
pentance  to  amendment,  and  amendment
to  joy.

Adonai.  In  Hebrew  being  the

plural  of  excellence  foi  Adon,  and  signify¬
ing  the  Lord.  The  Jews,  who  reverently
avoided  the  pronunciation  of  the  sacred
name  Jehovah,  were  accustomed,  when¬
ever  that  name  ofcurred,  to  substitute  for
it  the  word  Adonai  in  reading.  As  to  the
use  of  the  plural  form  instead  of  the  sin¬
gular,  the  Rabbins  say,  “  Every  word  indic¬
ative  of  dominion,  though  singular  in
meaning,  is  made  plural  in  form.”  This  is
called  the  “  pluralis  excelleutiae.”  The


18


ADONHIRAM


ADONHIRAMITE


Talmudists  also  say,  (Buxtroff,  Lex.  Talm.,)
that  the  telragrammaton  is  called  Shem
hamphorash,  the  name  that  is  explained,
because  it  is  explained,  uttered,  and  set
forth  by  the  word  Aclonai.  (See  Jehovah
and  Shem  Hamphorash.)  Adonai  is  used
as  a  significant  word  in  several  of  the  high
degrees  of  Masonry,  and  may  almost  always
be  considered  as  allusive  to  or  symbolic
of  the  True  Word.

Adonliiram.  This  has  been  adopted
by  the  disciples  of  Adonhiramite  Masonry
as  the  spelling  of  the  name  of  the  person
known  in  Scripture  and  in  other  Masonic
systems  as  Adoniram,  (which  see.)  They
correctly  derive  the  word  from  the  Hebrew
Adon  and  hiram ,  signifying  the  master  who
is  exalted,  which  is  the  true  meaning  of
Adoniram,  the  ,"f  or  h  being  omitted  in  the
Hebrew  by  the  coalescence  of  the  two
words.  Hiram  Abif  has  also  sometimes
been  called  Adonliiram,  the  Adon  having
been  bestowed  on  him  by  Solomon,  it  is
said,  as  a  title  of  honor.

AdonMramite  Masonry.  Of  the
numerous  controversies  which  arose  from
the  middle  to  near  the  end  of  the  18th  cen¬
tury  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  and  espe¬
cially  in  France,  among  the  students  of
Masonic  philosophy,  and  which  so  fre¬
quently  resulted  in  the  invention  of  new
degrees  and  the  establishment  of  new  rites,
not  the  least  prominent  was  that  which  re¬
lated  to  the  person  and  character  of  the
Temple  builder.  The  question,  Who  was
the  architect  of  King  Solomon’s  Temple  ?
was  answered  differently  by  different  the¬
orists,  and  each  answer  gave  rise  to  a  new
system,  a  fact  by  no  means  surprising  in
those  times,  so  fertile  in  the  production  of
new  Masonic  systems.  The  general  theory
was  then,  as  it  is  now,  that  this  architect
was  Hiram  Abif,  the  widow’s  son,  who  had
been  sent  to  King  Solomon  by  Hiram,  King
of  Tyre,  as  a  precious  gift,  and  “  a  curious
and  cunning  workman.”  This  theory  was
sustained  by  the  statements  of  the  Jewish
Scriptures,  so  far  as  they  threw  any  light
on  the  Masonic  legend.  It  was  the  theory
of  the  English  Masons  from  the  earliest
times ;  was  enunciated  as  historically  cor¬
rect  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Con¬
stitutions,  published  in  1723;  has  continued
ever  since  to  be  the  opinion  of  all  English
and  American  Masons ;  and  is,  at  this  day,
the  only  theory  entertained  by  any  Mason
in  the  two  countries  who  has  a  theory  at  all
on  the  subject.  This,  therefore,  is  the  ortho¬
dox  faith  of  Masonry.

But  such  was  not  the  case,  in  the  last
century,  on  the  continent  of  Europe.  At
first,  the  controversy  arose  not  as  to  the
man  himself,  but  as  to  his  proper  appella¬
tion.  All  parties  agreed  that  the  architect


of  the  Temple  was  that  Hiram,  the  widow’s
sou,  who  is  described  in  the  first  Book  of
Kings,  chapter  vii.,  verses  13  and  14,  and  in
the  second  Book  of  Chronicles,  chapter  ii.,
verses  13  and  14,  as  having  come  out  of
Tyre  with  the  other  workmen  of  the  Temple
who  had  been  sent  by  King  Hiram  to  Solo¬
mon.  But  one  party  called  him  Hiram.
Abif,  and  the  other,  admitting  that  his  orig¬
inal  name  was  Hiram,  supposed  that,  in
consequence  of  the  skill  he  had  displayed  in
the  construction  of  the  Temple,  he  had  re¬
ceived  the  honorable  affix  of  Adon,  signify¬
ing  Lord  or  Master ,  whence  his  name
became  Adonhiram.

There  was,  however,  at  the  Temple  an¬
other  Adoniram,  of  whom  it  will  be  neces¬
sary  in  passing  to  say  a  few  words,  for  the
better  understanding  of  the  present  sub¬
ject.

The  first  notice  that  we  have  of  this
Adoniram  in  Scripture  is  in  the  2d  Book
of  Samuel,  chapter  xx.,  verse  24,  where,  in
the  abbreviated  form  of  his  name,  Adoram,
he  is  said  to  have  been  “over  the  tribute”
in  the  house  of  David;  or,  as  Gesenius
translates  it,  “  prefect  over  the  tribute  ser¬
vice,”  or,  as  we  might  say  in  modern  phrase,
principal  collector  of  the  taxes.

Seven  years  afterwards,  we  find  him  ex¬
ercising  the  same  office  in  the  household
of  Solomon  ;  for  it  is  said  in  1  Kings  iv.
6,  that  Adoniram,  “  the  son  of  Abda,  was
over  the  tribute.”  And  lastly,  we  hear  of
him  still  occupying  the  same  station  in  the
household  of  King  Rehoboam,  the  succes¬
sor  of  Solomon.  Forty-seven  years  after
he  is  first  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  Samuel,
he  is  stated  (1  Kings  xii.  18)  to  have  been
stoned  to  death,  while  in  the  discharge  of
his  duty,  by  the  people,  who  were  justly  in¬
dignant  at  the  oppressions  of  his  master.
Although  commentators  have  been  at  a  loss
to  decide  whether  the  tax-receiver  under
David,  under  Solomon,  and  under  Reho-
boam  was  the  same  person,  there  seems  to
be  no  reason  to  doubt  it ;  for,  as  Kitto  says,
( Encyc .  Bib.,)  “it  appears  very  unlikely
that  even  two  persons  of  the  same  name
should  successively  bear  the  same  office,  in
an  age  when  no  example  occurs  of  the
father’s  name  being  given  to  his  son.  We
find  also  that  not  more  than  forty-seven
years  elapse  between  the  first  and  last-
mentioned  of  the  Adoniram  who  was  ‘  over
the  tribute ;  ’  and  as  this,  although  a  long
term  of  service,  is  not  too  long  for  one  life,
and  as  the  person  who  held  the  office  in  the
beginning  of  Rehoboam’s  reign  had  served
in  it  long  enough  to  make  himself  odious
to  the  people,  it  appears  or  the  whole  most
probable  that  one  and  the  same  person  is
intended  throughout.”

The  legends  and  traditions  of  Masonry


ADONHIRAMITE

•which  connect  this  Adoniram  with  the
Temple  at  Jerusalem  derive  their  support
from  a  single  passage  in  the  first  Book  of
Kings  (chapter  v.  14),  where  it  is  said  that
Solomon  made  a  levy  of  thirty  thousand
workmen  from  among  the  Israelites ;  that
he  sent  these  in  courses  of  ten  thousand  a
month  to  labor  on  Mount  Lebanon,  and
that  he  placed  Adoniram  over  these  as
their  superintendent.

The  ritual-makers  of  France,  who  were
not  all  Hebrew  scholars,  nor  well  versed  in
Biblical  history,  seem,  at  times,  to  have
confounded  two  important  personages,  and
to  have  lost  all  distinction  between  Hiram
the  builder,  who  had  been  sent  from  the
court  of  the  king  of  Tyre,  and  Adoniram,
who  had  always  been  an  officer  in  the  court
of  King  Solomon.  And  this  error  was  ex¬
tended  and  facilitated  when  they  had  pre¬
fixed  the  title  Adon,  that  is  to  say,  lord  or
master,  to  the  name  of  the  former,  making
him  Adon  Hiram,  or  the  Lord  Hiram.

Thus,  in  the  year  1744,  one  Louis  Tra-
venol  published  at  Paris,  under  the  pseu¬
donym  of  Leonard  Gabanon,  a  work
entitled,  Catechisme  des  Franc-  Matrons,
•precede  (Tune  abrege  de  I’histoire  d’Adoram,
etc.,  et  d’une  explication  des  ceremonies  qui
s' observant  a  lareception  des  Mat  t  res,  etc.  In
this  work  the  author  says :  “  Besides  the

cedars  of  Lebanon,  Hiram  made  a  much
more  valuable  gift  to  Solomon,  in  the  per¬
son  of  Adonhiram,  of  his  own  race,  the  son
of  a  widow  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali.  His
father,  who  was  named  Hur,  was  an  excel¬
lent  architect  and  worker  in  metals.  Solo¬
mon,  knowing  his  virtues,  his  merit,  and
his  talents,  distinguished  him  by  the  most
eminent  position,  intrusting  to  him  the
construction  of  the  Temple  and  the  super¬
intendence  of  all  the  workmen.”

From  the  language  of  this  extract,  and
from  the  reference  in  the  title  of  the  book
to  Adorarn,  which  we  know  was  one  of  the
names  of  Solomon’s  tax-collector,  it  is  evi¬
dent  that  the  author  of  the  catechism  has
confounded  Hiram  Abif,  who  came  out  of
Tyre,  with  Adoniram,  the  son  of  Abda,  who
had  always  lived  at  Jerusalem;  that  is  to
say,  with  unpardonable  ignorance  of  Scrip¬
ture  history  and  Masonic  tradition,  he  has
supposed  the  two  to  be  one  and  the  same
person.  Notwithstanding  this  literary  blun¬
der,  the  catechism  became  popular  with
many  Masons  of  that  day,  and  thus  arose
the  first  schism  or  error  in  relation  to  the
legend  of  the  third  degree.

At  length,  other  ritualists,  seeing  the  in¬
consistency  of  referring  the  character  of
Hiram,  the  widow’s  son,  to  Adoniram,  the
receiver  of  taxes,  and  the  impossibility  of
reconciling  the  discordant  facts  in  the  life
of  both,  resolved  to  cut  the  Gordian  knot


ADONHIRAMITE  19

by  refusing  any  Masonic  position  to  the
former,  and  making  the  latter,  alone,  the
architect  of  the  Temple.  It  cannot  be  denied
that  Josephus  states  that  Adoniram,  or,  as
he  calls  him,  Adoram,  was,  at  the  very  be¬
ginning  of  the  labor,  placed  over  the  work¬
men  who  prepared  the  materials  on  Mount
Lebanon,  aud  that  he  speaks  of  Hiram,  the
widow’s  son,  simply  as  a  skilful  artisan,
especially  in  metals,  who  had  only  made  all
the  mechanical  works  about  the  Temple
according  to  the  will  of  Solomon.  This
apparent  color  of  authority  for  their  opin¬
ions  was  readily  claimed  by  the  Adoniram-
ites,  and  hence  one  of  their  most  prominent
ritualists,  Guillemain  de  St.  Victor,  (Fee.
Free.,)  propounds  their  theory  thus:  “  Weall
agree  that  the  Master’s  degree  is  founded  on
the  architect  of  the  temple.  Now,  Scripture
says  very  positively,  in  the  4th  verse  of  the
5th  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Kings,  that  the
person  was  Adonhiram.  Josephus  and  all
the  sacred  writers  say  the  same  thing,  and
undoubtedly  distinguish  him  from  Hiram
the  Tyrian,  the  worker  in  metals.  So  that
it  is  Adonhiram,  then,  whom  we  are  bound
to  honor.”

There  were,  therefore,  in  the  eighteenth
century,  from  about  the  middle  to  near  the
end  of  it,  three  schools  among  the  Masonic
ritualists,  the  members  of  which  were  di¬
vided  in  opinion  as  to  the  proper  identity
of  this  Temple  builder:

1 .  Those  who  supposed  him  to  be  Hiram,
the  son  of  a  widow  of  the  tribe  of  Naph¬
tali,  whom  the  king  of  Tyre  had  sent  to
King  Solomon,  and  whom  they  designated
as  Hiram  Abif.  This  was  the  original  and
most  popular  school,  and  which  we  now
suppose  to  have  been  the  orthodox  one.

2.  Those  who  believed  this  Hiram  that
came  out  of  Tyre  to  have  been  the  archi¬
tect,  but  who  supposed  that,  in  consequence
of  his  excellence  of  character,  Solomon
had  bestowed  upon  him  the  appellation  of
Adon,  “Lord”  or  “Master,”  calling  him
Adonhiram.  As  this  theory  was  wholly
unsustained  by  Scripture  history  or  pre¬
vious  Masonic  tradition,  the  school  which
supported  it  never  became  prominent  or
popular,  and  soon  ceased  to  exist,  although
the  error  on  which  it  is  based  is  repeated
at  intervals  in  the  blunder  of  some  modern
French  ritualists.

3.  Those  who,  treating  this  Hiram,  the
widow’s  son,  as  a  subordinate  and  unimpor¬
tant  character,  entirely  ignored  him  in  their
ritual,  and  asserted  that  Adoram,  or  Adoni¬
ram,  or  Adonhiram,  as  the  name  was  spelled
by  these  ritualists,  the  son  of  Abda,  the
collector  of  tribute  and  the  superintendent
of  the  levy  on  Mount  Lebanon,  was  the
true  architect  of  the  Temple,  and  the  one
to  whom  all  the  legcudary  incidents  of  the


20


ADONHIRAMITE


ADONHIRAMITE


third  degree  of  Masonry  were  to  be  re¬
ferred.  This  school,  in  consequence  of  the
boldness  with  which,  unlike  the  second
school,  it  refused  all  compromise  with  the
orthodox  party  and  assumed  a  wholly  inde¬
pendent  theory,  became,  for  a  time,  a  prom¬
inent  schism  in  Masonry.  Its  disciples
bestowed  upon  the  believers  in  Hiram
Abif  the  name  of  Hiramite  Masons,  adopted
as  their  own  distinctive  appellation  that
of  Adonhiramites,  and,  having  developed
the  system  which  they  practised  into  a  pe¬
culiar  rite,  called  it  Adonhiramite  Masonry.

Who  was  the  original  founder  of  the  rite
of  Adonhiramite  Masonry,  and  at  what
precise  time  it  was  first  established,  are
questions  that  cannot  now  be  answered
with  any  certainty.  Thory  does  not  at¬
tempt  to  reply  to  either  in  his  Nomencla¬
ture  of  Rites,  where,  if  anything  was  known
on  the  subject,  we  would  be  most  likely  to
find  it.  Ragon,  it  is  true,  in  his  Ortho-
doxie  Marfo  unique,  attributes  the  rite  to  the
Baron  de  Tschoudy.  But  as  he  also  as¬
signs  the  authorship  of  the  Receuil  Pre-
cieux  (a  work  of  which  I  shall  directly
speak  more  fully)  to  the  same  person,  in
which  statement  he  is  known  to  be  mis¬
taken,  there  can  be  but  little  doubt  that  he
is  wrong  in  the  former  as  well  as  in  the
latter  opinion.  The  Chevalier  de  Lussy,
better  known  as  the  Baron  de  Tschoudy,
was,  it  is  true,  a  distinguished  ritualist.
He  founded  the  Order  of  the  Blazing  Star,
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  operations
of  the  Council  of  Emperors  of  the  East
and  West;  but  I  have  met  with  no  evi¬
dence,  outside  of  Ragon’s  assertion,  that
he  established  or  had  anything  to  do  with
the  Adonhiramite  rite.

I  am  disposed  to  attribute  the  develop¬
ment  into  a  settled  system,  if  not  the  actual
creation,  of  the  rite  of  Adonhiramite  Ma¬
sonry  to  Louis  Guillemain  de  St.  Victor,
who  published  at  Paris,  in  the  year  1781,
a  work  entitled  Receuil  Precieux  de  la  Ma-
gonnerie  Adonhiramite,  etc.

As  this  volume  contained  only  the  ritual
of  the  first  four  degrees,  it  was  followed,
in  1785,  by  another,  which  embraced  the
higher  degrees  of  the  rite.  Ho  one  who
peruses  these  volumes  can  fail  to  perceive
that  the  author  writes  like  one  who  has
invented,  or,  at  least,  materially  modified
the  rite  which  is  the  subject  of  his  labors.
At  all  events,  this  work  furnishes  the  only
authentic  account  that  we  possess  of  the
organization  of  the  Adonhiramite  system  of
Masonry.

The  rite  of  Adonhiramite  Masonry  con¬
sisted  of  twelve  degrees,  which  were  as
follows,  the  names  being  given  in  French
as  well  as  in  English :

1.  Apprentice — Apprente.


2.  Fellow-Craft — Compagnon.

3.  Master  Mason  —  Maitre.

4.  Perfect  Master  —  Maitre  Par/ ait.

5.  Elect  of  Nine  —  Elu  des  Neuf.

6.  Elect  of  Perignan  —  Elu  de  Perignan.

7.  Elect  of  Fifteen  —  Elu  des  Quinze.

8.  Minor  Architect  —  Petit  Architecte.

9.  Grand  Architect,  or  Scottish  Fellow-
Craft  —  Grand  Architecte,  ou  Compagnon
Ecossais.

10.  Scottish  Master  —  Maitre  Ecossais.

11.  Knight  of  the  Sword,  Knight  of  the
East,  or  of  the  Eagle  —  Chevalier  de  I’fZpee,
Chevalier  de  V  Orient,  ou  de  I’Aigle.

12.  Knight  of  Rose  Croix  —  Chevalier
Rose  Croix.

This  is  the  entire  list  of  Adonhiramite
degrees.  Thory  and  Ragon  have  both
erred  in  giving  a  thirteenth  degree,  namely,
the  Noachite,  or  Prussian  Knight.  They
have  fallen  into  this  mistake  because  Guil¬
lemain  has  inserted  this  degree  at  the  end
of  his  second  volume,  but  simply  as  a  Ma¬
sonic  curiosity,  having  been  translated,  as
he  says,  from  the  German  by  M.  de  Beraye.
It  has  no  connection  with  the  preceding
series  of  degrees,  and  Guillemain  posi¬
tively  declares  that  the  Rose  Croix  is  the
ne  plus  ultra,  the  summit  and  termination,
of  his  rite.

Of  these  twelve  degrees,  the  first  ten  are
occupied  with  the  transactions  of  the  first
Temple;  the  eleventh  with  matters  relating
to  the  construction  of  the  second  Temple;
and  the  twelfth  with  that  Christian  sym¬
bolism  of  Freemasonry  which  is  peculiar
to  the  Rose  Croix  of  every  rite.  All  of
the  degrees  have  been  borrowed  from  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,  with  slight
modifications,  which  have  seldom  improved
their  character.  On  the  whole,  the  extinc¬
tion  of  the  Adonhiramite  Rite  can  scarcely
be  considered  as  a  loss  to  Masonry.

Before  concluding,  a  few  words  may  be
said  on  the  orthography  of  the  title.  As
the  rite  derives  its  peculiar  characteristic
from  the  fact  that  it  founds  the  third  de¬
gree  on  the  assumed  legend  that  Adoniram,
the  son  of  Abda  and  the  receiver  of  tribute,
was  the  true  architect  of  the  Temple,  and
not  Hiram  the  widow’s  son,  it  should  prop¬
erly  have  been  styled  the  Adoniramite  Rite,
ani  not  the  Adonhiramite;  and  so  it  would
probably  have  been  called  if  Guillemain,
who  gave  it  form,  had  been  acquainted
with  the  Hebrew  language,  for  he  would
then  have  known  that  the  name  of  his  hero
was  Adoniram  and  not  Adonhiram.  The
term  Adonhiramite  Masons  should  really
have  been  applied  to  the  second  school  de¬
scribed  in  this  article,  whose  disciples  ad¬
mitted  that  Hiram  Abif  was  the  architect
of  the  Temple,  but  who  supposed  that  Sol¬
omon  had  bestowed  the  prefix  Adon  upon


ADONIRAM


ADONIS


21


him  as  a  mark  of  honor,  calling  him  Adon-
hiram.  But  Guillemain  having  committed
the  blunder  in  the  name  of  his  Rite,  it  con¬
tinued  to  be  repeated  by  his  successors,  and
it  would  perhaps  now  be  inconvenient  to
correct  the  error.  Ragon,  however,  and  a
few  other  recent  writers,  have  ventured  to
take  this  step,  and  in  their  works  the  sys¬
tem  is  called  Adoniramite  Masonry.

Adoniram.  The  first  notice  that  we
have  of  Adoniram  in  Scripture  is  in  the
2d  Book  of  Samuel  (xx.  24),  where,  in  the
abbreviated  form  of  his  name  Adoram,  be
is  said  to  have  been  “over  the  tribute,”  in
the  house  of  David,  or,  as  Gesenius  trans¬
lates  it,  “  prefect  over  the  tribute  service,
tribute  master,”  that  is  to  say,  in  modern
phrase,  he  was  the  chief  receiver  of  the
taxes.  Clarke  calls  him  “Chancellor  of
the  Exchequer.”  Seven  years  afterwards
we  find  him  exercising  the  same  office  in
the  household  of  Solomon,  for  it  is  said  (1
Kings  iv.  6)  that  “Adoniram  the  son  of
Abda  was  over  the  tribute.”  And  lastly,
we  hear  of  him  still  occupying  the  same
station  in  the  household  of  King  Reho-
boam,  the  successor  of  Solomon.  Forty-
seven  years  after  he  is  first  mentioned  in
the  Book  of  Samuel,  he  is  stated  (1  Kings
xii.  18)  to  have  been  stoned  to  death,  while
in  the  discharge  of  his  duty,  by  the  people,
who  were  justly  indignant  at  the  oppres¬
sions  of  his  master.  Although  commenta¬
tors  have  been  at  a  loss  to  determine
whether  the  tax -receiver  under  David,
under  Solomon,  and  under  Rehoboam  was
the  same  person,  there  seems  to  be  no
reason  to  doubt  it;  for,  as  Kitto  says,  “  It
appears  very  unlikely  that  even  two  per¬
sons  of  the  same  name  should  successively
bear  the  same  office,  in  an  age  when  no
example  occurs  of  the  father’s  name  being
given  to  his  son.  We  find,  also,  that  not
more  than  forty-seven  years  elapse  between
the  first  and  last  mention  of  the  Adoniram
who  was  ‘over  the  tribute;’  and  as  this,
although  a  long  term  of  service,  is  not  too
long  for  one  life,  and  as  the  person  who
held  the  office  in  the  beginning  of  Reho-
boam’s  reign  had  served  in  it  long  enough
to  make  himself  odious  to  the  people,  it
appears,  on  the  whole,  most  probable  that
one  and  the  same  person  is  intended
throughout.”  ( Encyc .  Bib.  Lit.)

Adoniram  plays  an  important  role  in  the
Masonic  system,  especially  in  the  high
degrees,  but  the  time  of  action  in  which
he  appears  is  confined  to  the  period  occu¬
pied  in  the  construction  of  the  Temple.
The  legends  and  traditions  which  connect
him  with  that  edifice  derive  their  support
from  a  single  passage  in  the  1st  Book  of
Kings  (v.  14),  where  it  is  said  that  Solo¬
mon  made  a  levy  of  thirty  thousand  work¬


men  from  among  the  Israelites;  that  he
sent  these  in  courses  of  ten  thousand  a
month  to  labor  on  Mount  Lebanon,  and
that  he  placed  Adoniram  over  these  as
their  superintendent.  From  this  brief
statement  the  Adoniramite  Masons  have
deduced  the  theory,  as  may  be  seen  in  the
preceding  article,  that  Adoniram  was  the
architect  of  the  Temple;  while  the  Hiram-
ites,  assigning  this  important  office  to  Hi¬
ram  Abif,  still  believe  that  Adoniram  oc¬
cupied  an  important  part  in  the  construction
of  that  edifice.  He  has  been  called  “  the
first  of  the  Fellow  Crafts ;  ”  is  said  in  one
tradition  to  have  been  the  brother-in-law
of  Hiram  Abif,  the  latter  having  demanded
of  Solomon  the  hand  of  Adoniram’s  sister
in  marriage ;  and  that  the  nuptials  were
honored  by  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Tyre
with  a  public  celebration ;  and  another  tra¬
dition,  preserved  in  the  Royal  Master’s
degree,  informs  us  that  he  was  the  one  to
whom  the  three  Grand  Masters  had  in¬
tended  first  to  communicate  that  knowledge
which  they  had  reserved  as  a  fitting  reward
to  be  bestowed  upon  all  meritorious  crafts¬
men  at  the  completion  of  the  Temple.  It
is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  these  and
many  other  Adoniramic  legends,  often  fan¬
ciful,  and  without  any  historical  authority,
are  but  the  outward  clothing  of  abstruse
symbols,  some  of  which  have  been  pre¬
served,  and  others  lost  in  the  lapse  of  time
and  the  ignorance  and  corruptions  of  mod¬
ern  ritualists.

Adoniram,  in  Hebrew,  DTJTX,  com¬
pounded  of  px,  ADON,  Lord,  and  DID,
HiRaM,  altitude,  signifies  the  Lord  of  alti¬
tude.  It  is  a  word  of  great  importance,
and  frequently  used  among  the  sacred  words
of  the  high  degrees  in  all  the  Rites.

Adoniramite  Masonry.  See
Adonhiramite  Masonry.

Adonis,  Mysteries  of.  An  investi¬
gation  of  the  mysteries  of  Adonis  peculi¬
arly  claims  the  attention  of  the  Masonic
student :  first,  because,  in  their  symbolism
and  in  their  esoteric  doctrine,  the  religious
object  for  which  they  were  instituted,  and
the  mode  in  which  that  object  is  attained,
they  bear  a  nearer  analogical  resemblance
to  the  Institution  of  Freemasonry  than  do
any  of  the  other  mysteries  or  systems  of
initiation  of  the  ancient  world ;  and,
secondly,  because  their  chief  locality  brings
them  into  a  very  close  connection  with  the
early  history  and  reputed  origin  of  Free¬
masonry.  For  they  were  principally  cele¬
brated  at  By  bios,  a  city  of  Phoenicia,
whose  scriptural  name  was  Gebal,  and
whose  inhabitants  were  the  Giblites  or
Giblemites,  who  are  referred  to  in  the  1st
Book  of  Kings  (chap.  v.  18)  as  being  the
“  stone-squarers  ”  employed  by  King  Solo-


22


ADONIS


ADONIS


mon  in  building  the  Temple.  Hence  there
must  have  evidently  been  a  very  intimate
connection,  or  at  least  certainly  a  very  fre¬
quent  intercommunication,  between  the
workmen  of  the  first  Temple  and  the  in¬
habitants  of  Byblos,  the  seat  of  the  Adoni-
sian  mysteries,  and  the  place  whence  the
worshippers  of  that  rite  were  disseminated
over  other  regions  of  country.

These  historical  circumstances  invite  us
to  an  examination  of  the  system  of  initia¬
tion  which  was  practised  at  JByblos,  because
we  may  find  in  it  something  that  was
probably  suggestive  of  the  symbolic  system
of  instruction  which  was  subsequently  so
prominent  a  feature  in  the  system  of  Free¬
masonry.

Let  us  first  examine  the  myth  on  which
the  Adonisiac  initiation  was  founded.  The
mythological  legend  of  Adonis  is,  that  he
was  the  son  of  Myrrha  and  Cinyras,  King
of  Cyprus.  Adonis  was  possessed  of  such
surpassing  beauty,  that  Venus  became
enamored  with  him,  and  adopted  him  as
her  favorite.  Subsequently  Adonis,  who
was  a  great  hunter,  died  from  a  wound  in¬
flicted  by  a  wild  boar  on  Mount  Lebanon.
Venus  flew  to  the  succor  of  her  favorite,
but  she  came  too  late.  Adonis  was  dead.
On  his  descent  to  the  infernal  regions,  Pro¬
serpine  became,  like  Venus,  so  attracted  by
his  beauty,  that,  notwithstanding  the  en¬
treaties  of  the  goddess  of  love,  she  refused
to  restore  him  to  earth.  At  length  the
prayers  of  the  desponding  Venus  were
listened  to  with  favor  by  Jupiter,  who
reconciled  the  dispute  between  the  two
goddesses,  and  by  whose  decree  Proserpine
■was  compelled  to  consent  that  Adonis
should  spend  six  months  of  each  year
alternately  with  herself  and  Venus.

This  is  the  story  on  which  the  Greek
poet  Bion  founded  his  exquisite  idyll  en¬
titled  the  Epitaph  of  Adonis,  the  beginning
of  which  has  been  thus  rather  inefficiently
“done  into  English.”

“  I  and  the  Loves  Adonis  dead  deplore :

The  beautiful  Adonis  is  indeed
Departed,  parted  from  us.  Sleep  no  more
In  purple,  Cypris !  but  in  watchet  weed,

All  wretched  !  beat  thv  breast  and  all  aread—
‘Adonis  is  no  more.’  The  Loves  and  I
Lament  him.  ‘  Oh !  her  grief  to  see  him  bleed,
Smitten  by  white  tooth  on  whiter  thigh,
Out-breathing  life’s  faint  sigh  upon  the  moun¬
tain  high.’  ”

It  is  evident  that  Bion  referred  the
contest  of  Venus  and  Proserpine  for  Adonis
to  a  period  subsequent  to  his  death,  from
the  concluding  lines,  in  which  he  says:
“  The  Muses,  too,  lament  the  son  of  Ciny¬
ras,  and  invoke  him  in  their  song;  but  he
does  not  heed  them,  not  because  he  does


not  wish,  but  because  Proserpine  will  not
release  him.”  This  was,  indeed,  the  favor¬
ite  form  of  the  myth,  and  on  it  was  framed
the  symbolism  of  the  ancient  mystery.

But  there  are  other  Grecian  mythologues
that  relate  the  tale  of  Adonis  differently.
According  to  these,  he  was  the  product  of
the  incestuous-  connection  of  Cinyras  and
Myrrha.  Cinyras  subsequently,  on  discov¬
ering  the  crime  of  his  daughter,  pursued
her  with  a  drawn  sword,  intending  to  kill
her.  Myrrha  entreated  the  gods  to  make
her  invisible,  and  they  changed  her  into  a
myrrh  tree.  Ten  months  after  the  myrrh
tree  opened,  and  the  young  Adonis  was
born.  This  is  the  form  of  the  myth  that
has  been  adopted  by  Ovid,  who  gives  it
with  all  its  moral  horrors  in  the  tenth  book
(298-524)  of  his  Metamorphoses.

Venus,  who  was  delighted  with  the  ex¬
traordinary  beauty  of  the  boy,  put  him  in
a  coffer,  unknown  to  all  the  gods,  and  gave
him  to  Proserpine  to  keep  and  to  nurture
in  the  under  world.  But  Proserpine  had
no  sooner  beheld  him  than  she  became
enamored  with  him  and  refused,  when
Venus  applied  for  him,  to  surrender  him
to  her  rival.  The  subject  was  then  referred
to  Jupiter,  who  decreed  that  Adonis  should
have  one-third  of  the  year  to  himself,
should  be  another  third  with  Venus,  and
the  remainder  of  the  time  with  Proserpine.
Adonis  gave  his  own  portion  to  Venus,  and
lived  happily  with  her  till,  having  offended
Diana,  he  was  killed  by  a  wild  boar.

The  mythographer  Pharnutus  gives  a
still  different  story,  and  says  that  Adonis
was  the  grandson  of  Cinyras,  and  fled  with
his  father,  Ammon,  into  Egypt,  whose
people  he  civilized,  taught  them  agricul¬
ture,  and  enacted  many  wise  laws  for  their
government.  He  subsequently  passed  over
into  Syria,  and  was  wounded  in  the  thigh
by  a  wild  boar  while  hunting  on  Mount
Lebanon.  His  wife,  Isis,  or  Astarte,  and
the  people  of  Phoenicia  and  Egypt,  sup¬
posing  that  the  wound  was  mortal,  pro¬
foundly  deplored  his  death.  But  he  after¬
wards  recovered,  and  their  grief  was  re¬
placed  by  transports  of  joy.  All  the  myths,
it  will  be  seen,  agree  in  his  actual  or  sup¬
posed  death  by  violence,  in  the  grief  for  his
loss,  in  his  recovery  or  restoration  to  life,
and  in  the  consequent  joy  thereon.  And
on  these  facts  are  founded  the  Adonisian
mysteries  which  were  established  in  his
honor.

Of  these  mysteries  we  are  now  to  speak.
The  mysteries  of  Adonis  are  said  to  have
been  first  established  at  Babylon,  and  thence
to  have  passed  over  into  Syria,  their  princi¬
pal  seat  being  at  the  city  of  Byblos,  in  that
country.  The  legend  on  which  the  mys¬
teries  was  founded  contained  a  recital  of  his


ADONIS


ADONIS


23


tragic  death  and  his  subsequent  restoration
to  life,  as  has  just  been  related.  The  mys¬
teries  were  celebrated  in  a  vast  temple  at
Byblos.  The  ceremonies  commenced  about
the  season  of  the  year  when  the  river
Adonis  began  to  be  swollen  by  the  floods  at
its  source.

The  Adonis,  now  called  Nahr  el  Ibrahim,
or  Abraham’s  river,  is  a  small  river  of
Syria,  which,  rising  in  Mount  Lebanon,
enters  the  Mediterranean  a  few  miles  south
of  Byblos.  Maundrell,  the  great  traveller,
records  the  fact  which  he  himself  witnessed,
that  after  a  sudden  fall  of  rain  the  river,
descending  in  floods,  is  tinged  with  a  deep
red  by  the  soil  of  the  hills  in  which  it  takes
its  rise,  and  imparts  this  color  to  the  sea,
into  which  it  is  discharged,  for  a  consider¬
able  distance.  The  worshippers  of  Adonis
were  readily  led  to  believe  that  this  reddish
discoloration  of  the  water  of  the  river  was  a
symbol  of  his  blood.  To  this  Milton  alludes
when  speaking  of  Thamrauz,  which  was  the
name  given  by  the  idolatrous  Israelites  to
the  Syrian  god :

“  Thammuz  came  next  behind,

Whose  annual  wound  in  Lebanon  allured
The  Syrian  damsels  to  lament  his  fate,

In  am’rous  ditties,  all  a  summer’s  day ;

While  smooth  Adonis,  from  his  native  rock,

Ran  purple  to  the  sea,  suffused  with  blood
Of  Thammuz  yearly  wounded.” — Paradise  Lost.

Whether  the  worship  of  Thammuz
among  the  idolatrous  and  apostate  Jews
was  or  was  not  identical  with  that  of
Adonis  among  the  Syrians  has  been  a  topic
of  much  discussion  among  the  learned.
The  only  reference  to  Thammuz  in  the
Scriptures  is  in  the  Book  of  Ezekiel,  (viii.
14.)  The  prophet  there  represents  that  he
was  transported  in  spirit,  or  in  a  vision,  to
the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  that,  being
led  “  to  the  door  of  the  gate  of  the  house
of  Jehovah,  which  was  towards  the  north,
he  beheld  there  women  sitting  weeping  for
Thammuz.”  The  Vulgate  has  translated
Thammuz  by  Adonis :  “  Et  ecce  ibi  mulieres
sedebant,  plangentes  Adonidem;  ”  i.  e.,  “And
behold  women  were  sitting  there,  mourning
for  Adonis.”  St.  Jerome,  in  his  commen¬
tary  on  this  passage,  says  that  since,  accord¬
ing  to  the  heathen  fable,  Adonis  had  been
slain  in  the  month  of  June,  the  Syrians
gave  the  name  of  Thammuz  to  this  month,
when  they  annually  celebrated  a  solemnity,
in  which  he  is  lamented  by  the  women  as
dead,  and  his  subsequent  restoration  to  life
is  celebrated  with  songs  and  praises.  And
in  a  passage  of  another  work  he  laments
that  Bethlehem  was  overshadowed  by  a
grave  of  Thammuz,  and  that  “  in  the  cave
where  the  infant  Christ  once  cried  the  lover
of  Venus  was  bewailed,”  thus  evidently


making  Thammuz  and  Adonis  identical.
The  story  of  Thammuz,  as  related  in  the
ancient  work  of  Ibn  Wahshik  on  The  Agri¬
culture  of  the  Nabatheans,  and  quoted  at
length  by  Maimonides  in  his  Moreh  Nevoch-
im,  describes  Thammuz  as  a  false  prophet,
who  was  put  to  death  for  his  idolatrous
practices,  but  nothing  in  that  fable  connects
him  in  any  way  with  Adonis.  But  in  the
Apology  of  St.  Melito,  of  which  the  Syriac
translation  remains,  we  have  the  oldest
Christian  version  of  the  myth.  Mr.  W.  A.
Wright,  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,
gives,  in  Smith’s  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  the
following  liberal  rendering  of  the  Syriac :
“  The  sons  of  Phoenicia  worshipped  Balthi,
the  queen  of  Cyprus.  For  she  loved
Tamuzo,  the  son  of  Cuthar,  the  king  of  the
Phoenicians,  and  forsook  her  kingdom,  and
came  and  dwelt  in  Gebal,  a  fortress  of  the
Phoenicians,  and  at  that  time  she  made  all
the  villages  subject  to  Cuthar,  the  king.
For  before  Tamuzo  she  had  loved  Ares,  and
committed  adultery  with  him,  and  Hephaes¬
tus,  her  husband,  caught  her  and  was  jeal¬
ous  of  her;  and  he  ( i .  e.,  Ares,)  came  and
slew  Tamuzo  on  Lebanon,  while  he  made
a  hunting  among  the  wild  boars.  And
from  that  time  Balthi  remained  in  Gebal,
and  died  in  the  city  of  Apatha,  where
Tamuzo  was  buried.”  This  is  nothing  more
than  the  Syrian  myth  of  Adonis;  and,  as
St.  Melito  lived  in  the  second  century,  it
was  doubtless  on  his  authority  that  Jerome
adopted  the  opinion  that  the  Thammuz  of
“alienated  Judah”  was  the  same  as  the
Adonis  of  Syria;  an  opinion  which,  al¬
though  controverted  by  some,  has  been  gen¬
erally  adopted  by  subsequent  commenta¬
tors.

The  sacred  rites  of  the  Adonisian  mys¬
teries  began  with  mourning,  and  the  days
which  were  consecrated  to  the  celebration
of  the  death  of  Adonis  were  passed  in  lugu¬
brious  cries  and  wailings,  the  celebrants
often  scourging  themselves.  On  the  hist
of  the  days  of  mourning,  funereal  rites  were
performed  in  honor  of  the  god.  On  the
following  day  the  restoration  of  Adonis  to
life  was  announced,  and  was  received  with
the  most  enthusiastic  demonstrations  ot
joy.

Duncan,  in  a  very  well  written  work  on
The  Religions  of  'Profane  Antiquity,  (p.
350,)  gives  a  similar  description  of  these
rites:  “The  objects  represented  were  the
grief  of  Venus  and  the  death  and  resurrec¬
tion  of  Adonis.  An  entire  week  was  con¬
sumed  in  these  ceremonies ;  all  the  houses
were  covered  with  crape  or  black  linen  ;
funeral  processions  traversed  the  streets ;
while  the  devotees  scourged  themselves,
uttering  frantic  cries.  The  orgies  were  then
commenced,  in  which  the  mystery  ol  the


24


ADONIS


ADONIS


death  of  Adonis  was  depicted.  During  the
next  twenty-four  hours  all  the  people  fasted ;
at  the  expiration  of  which  time  the  priests
announced  the  resurrection  of  the  god.  Joy
now  prevailed,  and  music  and  dancing  con¬
cluded  the  festival.”

Movers,  who  is  of  high  authority  among
scholars,  says,  in  his  Phonizier,  (vol.  i.,  p.
200,)  that  “the  celebration  of  the  Adon-
isian  mysteries  began  with  the  disappear¬
ance  of  Adonis,  after  which  follows  the
search  for  him  by  the  women.  The  myth
represents  this  by  the  search  of  the  goddess
after  her  beloved,  which  is  analogous  to  the
search  of  Persephone  in  the  Eleusinia ;  of
Harmonia  at  Samothrace;  of  Io  in  Antioch.
In  autumn,  when  the  rains  washed  the  red
earth  on  its  banks,  the  river  Adonis  was
of  a  blood-red  color,  which  was  the  signal
for  the  inhabitants  of  Byblos  to  begin  the
lament.  Then  they  said  that  Adonis  was
killed  by  Mars  or  the  boar,  and  that  his
blood,  running  in  the  river,  colored  the
water.”

Julius  Fermicius  Maternus,  an  ecclesi¬
astical  writer  of  the  fourth  century,  thus
describes  the  funereal  ceremonies  and  the
resurrection  of  Adonis  in  his  treatise  De
Errore  Profanarum  Peligionum,  dedicated
to  the  Emperors  Constantius  and  Constans:
“On  a  certain  night  an  image  is  laid  out
upon  a  bed  and  bewailed  in  mournful
strains.  At  length,  when  all  have  suffi¬
ciently  expressed  their  feigned  lamentation,
light  is  introduced,  and  the  priest,  having
first  anointed  the  lips  of  those  who  had
been  weeping,  whispers  with  a  gentle  mur¬
mur  the  following  formula,  which  in  the
original  is  in  the  form  of  a  Greek  distich :
Have  courage ,  ye  initiates  !  The  god  having
been  preserved  out  of  grief,  salvation  will  arise
to  us.”

This  annunciation  of  the  recovery  or
resurrection  of  Adonis  was  made,  says
Sainte-Croix,  in  his  Mysteres  du  Paganisme,
(t.  ii.,  p.  106,)  by  the  inhabitants  of  Alexan¬
dria  to  those  of  Byblos.  The  letter  which
was  to  carry  the  news  was  placed  in  an
earthen  vessel  and  intrusted  to  the  sea,
which  floated  it  to  Byblos,  where  Phoeni¬
cian  women  were  waiting  on  the  shore  to
receive  it.  Lucian  says,  in  his  treatise
on  The  Syrian  Goddess,  that  a  head  wras
every  year  transported  from  Egypt  to  By¬
blos  by  some  supernatural  means.  Both
stories  are  probably  apocryphal,  or  at  least
the  act  was,  if  performed  at  all,  the  result
of  the  cunning  invention  of  the  priests.

Sainte-Croix  describes,  from  Lucian’s
treatise  on  The  Syrian  Goddess,  the  magnifi¬
cence  of  the  temple  at  Hierapolis;  but  he
certainly^  found  no  authority  in  that  writer
for  stating  that  the  mysteries  of  Adonis  were
there  celebrated.  The  Rites  practised  at


Hierapolis  seem  rather  to  have  had  some
connection  with  the  arkite  worship,  which
prevailed  so  extensively  in  the  pagan  world
of  antiquity.  The  magnificent  temple,
which  in  after  times  the  Roman  Crassus
plundered,  aud  the  treasures  of  which  it
took  several  days  to  weigh  and  examine,
was  dedicated  to  Astarte,  the  goddess  who
presided  over  the  elements  of  nature  and
the  productive  seeds  of  things,  and  who  was
in  fact  the  mythological  personification  of
the  passive  powers  of  Nature.

The  mythological  legend,  which  has  been
detailed  in  the  beginning  of  this  article,
was  but  the  exoteric  story,  intended  for  the
uninitiated.  There  was  also  —  as  there  was
in  all  these  myrstical  initiations  of  the  an¬
cients,  an  esoteric  meaning  —  a  sacred  and
secret  symbolism,  which  constituted  the
arcana  of  the  mysteries,  and  which  was
communicated  only  to  the  initiated.

Adonis,  which  is  derived  from  the  He¬
brew  px,  Adon  —  lord  or  master — was
one  of  the  titles  given  to  the  sun ;  and
hence  the  worship  of  Adonis  formed  one
of  the  modifications  of  that  once  most  ex¬
tensive  system  of  religion  —  sun  worship.
Godwyn,  in  his  Moses  and  Aaron,  (1.  iv.,
c.  2,)  says:  “Concerning  Adonis,  whom
sometimes  ancient  authors  call  Osiris,
there  are  two  things  remarkable :  aphanis-
mos,  the  death  or  loss  of  Adonis ;  and
heuresis,  the  finding  of  him  again.  By  the
death  or  loss  of  Adonis  we  are  to  under¬
stand  the  departure  of  the  sun ;  by  his
finding  again  we  are  to  understand  his
return.”

Macrobius,  in  his  Saturnalia,  more  fully
explains  the  allegoiy  thus:  “Philoso¬
phers  have  given  the  name  of  Venus  to
the  superior  or  northern  hemisphere,  of
which  we  occupy  a  part,  and  that  of  Pro¬
serpine  to  the  inferior  or  southern.  Hence,
among  the  Assyrians  and  Phoenicians,  Ve¬
nus  is  said  to  be  in  tears  when  the  sun,  in
his  annual  course  through  the  twelve  signs
of  the  zodiac,  passes  over  to  our  antipodes;
for  of  these  twelve  signs  six  are  said  to  be
superior  and  six  inferior.  When  the  sun
is  in  the  inferior  signs,  and  the  days  are
consequently"  short,  the  goddess  is  supposed
to  weep  for  the  temporary  death  or  priva¬
tion  of  the  sun,  detained  by"  Proserpine,
whom  we  regard  as  the  divinity  of  the
southern  or  antipodal  regions.  And  Adonis
is  said  to  be  restored  to  Venus  when  the
sun,  having  traversed  the  six  inferior  signs,
enters  those  of  our  hemisphere,  bringing
with  it  an  increase  of  light  and  lengthened
days.  The  boar,  which  is  supposed  to
have  killed  Adonis,  is  an  emblem  of  win¬
ter;  for  this  animal,  covered  with  rough
bristles,  delights  in  cold,  wet,  and  miry  sit¬
uations,  and  his  favorite  food  is  the  acorn,


ADONIS


ADONIS


25


a  fruit  which  is  peculiar  to  winter.  The
sun  is  said,  too,  to  be  wounded  by  winter,
since  at  that  season  we  lose  its  light  and
heat,  which  are  the  effects  produced  by
death  upon  animated  beings.  Venus  is
represented  on  Mount  Lebanon  in  an  atti¬
tude  of  grief;  her  head,  bent  and  covered
with  a  veil,  is  supported  by  her  left  hand
near  her  breast,  and  her  countenance  is
bathed  in  tears.  This  figure  represents  the
earth  in  winter,  when,  being  veiled  in  clouds
and  deprived  of  the  sun,  its  energies  have
become  torpid.  The  fountains,  like  the
eyes  of  Venus,  are  overflowing,  and  the
fields,  divested  of  their  flowers,  present  a
joyless  appearance.  But  when  the  sun  has
emerged  from  the  southern  hemisphere  and
passed  the  vernal  equinox,  Venus  is  once
more  rejoiced,  the  fields  are  again  embel¬
lished  with  flowers,  the  grass  springs  up  in
the  meadows,  and  the  trees  recover  their
foliage.”

Such  is  supposed  by  mythologists  in  gen¬
eral  to  have  been  the  esoteric  doctrine  of
the  Adonisian  initiation,  hence  said  to  be
a  branch  of  that  worship  of  the  sun  that
at  one  time  so  universally  prevailed  over
the  world.  And  as  this  allegory,  when  thus
interpreted,  must  have  been  founded  on  the
fact  that  the  solar  orb  disappeared  for  sev¬
eral  months  of  winter,  it  followed  that  the
allegory  must  have  been  invented  by  some
hyperborean  people,  to  whom  only  such
an  astronomical  phenomenon  could  be
familiar.  This  is  the  view  taken  by  the
learned  M.  Baillie  in  his  Histoire  de
I’Astronomie  Ancienne,  who  founds  on  it
his  favorite  theory  that  all  learning  and
civilization  originally  came  from  the  cir¬
cumpolar  regions.

This  tendency  to  symbolize  the  changing
seasons  and  the  decaying  and  renewed
strength  of  the  sun  was  common  first  to
the  mythology  of  the  old  Aryan  race,  and
then  to  that  of  every  nation  which  de¬
scended  from  it.  In  Greece,  especially,  we
have  the  myths  of  Linus,  whose  melan¬
choly  fate  was  bewailed  at  the  season  of
the  grape  picking,  and  whose  history,  al¬
though  confused  by  various  statements,
still  makes  him  the  analogue  of  Adonis ;
so  that  what  is  said  of  one  might  very
properly  be  applied  to  the  other.  On  this
subject  the  following  remarks  of  O.  K.
Muller,  in  his  History  of  Greek  Litera¬
ture,  (]).  23,)  will  be  found  interesting:
“This  Linus,”  he  says,  “evidently  belongs
to  a  class  of  deities  or  demigods  of  which
many  instances  occur  in  the  religions  of
Greece  and  Asia  Minor  —  boys  of  extraor¬
dinary  beauty  and  in  the  flower  of  youth,
who  are  supposed  to  have  been  drowned,
or  devoured  by  raging  dogs,  or  destroyed
by  wild  beasts,  and  whose  death  is  lamented
D


in  the  harvest  or  other  periods  of  the  hot
season.  The  real  object  of  lamentation
was  the  tender  beauty  of  spring  destroyed
by  the  summer  heat,  and  other  phenomena
of  the  same  kind,  which  the  imagination
of  these  early  times  invested  with  a  per¬
sonal  form,  and  represented  as  gods  or
beings  of  a  divine  nature.”  It  would  not
be  difficult  to  apply  all  this  to  the  myth  of
Adonis,  who,  like  Linus,  was  supposed  to
be  a  symbol  of  the  dying  and  of  the  resus¬
citating  sun.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  Payne  Knight
observes,  this  notion  of  the  mourning  for
Adonis  being  a  testimony  of  grief  for  the
absence  of  the  sun  during  the  winter,  is
not  to  be  too  readily  acquiesced  in.  Thus
Lobeck,  in  his  Aglaophamus,  very  perti¬
nently  inquires  why  those  nations  whose
winter  was  the  mildest  and  shortest  should
so  bitterly  bewail  the  regular  changes  of
the  seasons  as  to  suppose  that  even  a  god
was  slain ;  and  he  observes,  with  a  great
appearance  of  reason,  that  even  were  this
the  case,  the  mournful  and  the  joyful  parts
of  the  festival  should  have  been  celebrated
at  different  periods  of  the  year :  the  former
at  the  coming  on  of  winter,  and  the  latter
at  the  approach  of  summer.  It  is  not,
perhaps,  easy  to  answer  these  objections.

Of  all  the  mythologers,  the  Abbe  Banier
is  the  only  one  who  has  approximated  to
what  appears  to  be  the  true  interpretation
of  the  myth.  In  his  erudite  work  entitled
La  Mythologie  et  les  Fables  expliquees  par
I’Histoire,  he  discusses  the  myth  of  Adonis
at  great  length.  He  denies  the  plausibility
of  the  solar  theory,  which  makes  Adonis,
in  his  death  and  resurrection,  the  symbol
of  the  sun’s  setting  and  rising,  or  of  his
disappearance  in  winter  and  his  return  in
summer ;  he  thinks  the  alternate  mourning
and  joy  which  characterized  the  celebration
of  the  mysteries  may  be  explained  as  re¬
ferring  to  the  severe  but  not  fatal  wound
of  Adonis,  and  his  subsequent  recovery
through  the  skill  of  the  physician  Cocy-
tus;  or,  if  this  explanation  be  rejected,  he
then  offers  another  interpretation,  which
is,  I  think,  much  nearer  to  the  truth :

“  But  if  any  be  tenacious  of  the  opinion
that  Adonis  died  of  his  wound,  I  shall  ac¬
count  for  that  joy  which  succeeded  the
mourning  on  the  last  day  of  the  festival
by  saying  it  imported  that  he  was  pro¬
moted  to  divine  honors,  and  that  room
was  no  longer  left  for  sorrow ;  but  that,
having  mourned  for  his  death,  they  were
now  to  rejoice  at  his  deification.  The
priests,  who  would  not  have  been  in  favor
of  a  tradition  which  taught  that  the  god
whom  they  had  served  was  subject  to  death,
sought  to  conceal  it  from  the  people,  and
invented  the  allegorical  explication  which


26


ADOPTION


ADOPTION


I  have  been  refuting.”  (Tom.  iii.,  liv.  vii.,
ch.  x.)

While,  therefore,  we  may  grant  the  pos¬
sibility  that  there  was  originally  some  con¬
nection  between  the  Sabean  worship  of  the
sun  and  the  celebration  of  the  Adonisiau
festival,  we  cannot  forget  that  these  myste¬
ries,  in  common  with  all  the  other  sacred
initiations  of  the  ancient  world,  had  been
originally  established  to  promulgate  among
the  initiates  the  once  hidden  doctrine  of
a  future  life.  The  myth  of  Adonis  in
Syria,  like  that  of  Osiris  in  Egypt,  of  Atys
in  Samothrace,  or  of  Dionysus  in  Greece,
presented,  symbolically,  the  two  great  ideas
of  decay  and  restoration  :  sometimes  figured
as  darkness  and  light,  sometimes  as  winter
and  summer,  sometimes  as  death  and  life,
but  always  maintaining,  no  matter  what
was  the  framework  of  the  allegory,  the  in¬
separable  ideas  of  something  that  was  lost
and  afterwards  recovered,  as  its  interpreta¬
tion,  and  so  teaching,  as  does  Freemasonry
at  this  day,  by  a  similar  system  of  allegor¬
izing,  that  after  the  death  of  the  body
comes  the  eternal  life  of  the  soul.  The
inquiring  Freemason  will  thus  readily  see
the  analogy  in  the  symbolism  that  exists
between  Adonis  in  the  mysteries  of  the
Giblemites  at  Byblos  and  Hiram  the
Builder  iu  his  own  institution.

Adoption,  Masonic.  The  adoption
by  the  Lodge  of  the  child  of  a  Mason  is
practised,  with  peculiar  ceremonies,  in
some  of  the  French  and  German  Lodges,
and  has  been  recently  introduced,  but  not
with  the  general  approbation  of  the  Craft,
into  one  or  two  Lodges  of  this  country.
Clavel,  in  his  Histoire  Pittoresqne  de  la
Franc- Maconnerie.,  (p.  39,)  gives  the  fol¬
lowing  account  of  the  ceremonies  of  adop¬
tion.

“  It  is  a  custom,  in  many  Lodges,  when
the  wife  of  a  Mason  is  near  the  period  of
her  confinement,  for  the  Hospitaller,  if  he
is  a  physician,  and  if  not,  for  some  other
brother  who  is,  to  visit  her,  inquire  after
her  health,  in  the  name  of  the  Lodge,  and
to  offer  her  his  professional  services,  and
even  pecuniary  aid  if  he  thinks  she  needs
it.  Nine  days  after  the  birth  of  her  child,
the  Master  and  Wardens  call  upon  her
to  congratulate  her  on  the  happy  event.
If  the  infant  is  a  boy,  a  special  communi¬
cation  of  the  Lodge  is  convened  for  the
purpose  of  proceeding  to  its  adoption.  The
hall  is  decorated  with  flowers  and  foliage,
and  censers  are  prepared  for  burning  in¬
cense.  Before  the  commencement  of  labor,
the  child  and  its  nurse  are  introduced  into
an  ante-room.  The  Lodge  is  then  opened,
and  the  Wardens,  who  are  to  act  as  god¬
fathers,  repair  to  the  infant  at  the  head  of
a  deputation  of  five  brethren.  The  chief


of  the  deputation,  then  addressing  the
nurse,  exhorts  her  not  only  to  watch  over
the  health  of  the  child  that  has  been  in¬
trusted  to  her  care,  but  also  to  cultivate  his
youthful  intellect,  and  to  instruct  him  with
truthful  and  sensible  conversation.  The
child  is  then  taken  from  the  nurse,  placed
by  its  father  upon  a  cushion,  and  carried  by
the  deputation  into  the  Lodge  room.  The
procession  advances  beneath  an  arch  of
foliage  to  the  pedestal  of  the  east,  where  it
stops.

“  ‘  Whom  bring  you  here,  my  brethren?  ’
says  the  Master  to  the  godfathers.

“  ‘The  son  of  one  of  our  brethren  whom
the  Lodge  is  desirous  of  adopting,’  is  the
reply  of  the  Senior  Warden.

“  ‘  What  are  his  names,  and  what  Masonic
name  will  you  give  him  ?  ’

“  The  Warden  replies,  adding  to  the  bap¬
tismal  and  surname  of  the  child  a  charac¬
teristic  name,  such  as  Truth,  Devotion,  Be¬
nevolence,  or  some  other  of  a  similar  nature.

“  The  Master  then  descends  from  his  seat,
approaches  the  louveteau  or  lewis,  (for  such
is  the  appellation  given  to  the  son  of  a
Mason,)  and  extending  his  hands  over  its
head,  offers  up  a  prayer  that  the  child  may
render  itself  worthy  of  the  love  and  care
which  the  Lodge  intends  to  bestow  upon  it.
He  then  casts  incense  into  the  censers,  and
pronounces  the  Apprentice’s  obligation,
which  the  godfathers  repeat  after  him  in
the  name  of  the  louveteau.  Afterwards  he
puts  a  white  apron  on  the  infant,  pro¬
claiming  it  to  be  the  adopted  child  of  the
Lodge,  and  causes  this  proclamation  to  be
received  with  the  honors.

“As  soon  as  this  ceremony  has  been  per¬
formed,  the  Master  returns  to  his  seat,  and
having  caused  the  Wardens  with  the  child
to  be  placed  in  the  north-west  corner  of  the
Lodge,  he  recounts  to  the  former  the  duties
which  they  have  assumed  as  godfathers.
After  the  Wardens  have  made  a  suitable
response,  the  deputation  which  had  brought
the  child  into  the  Lodge  room  is  again
formed,  and  having  carried  it  out,  it  is
restored  to  its  nurse  in  the  anteroom.

“  The  adoption  of  a  louveteau  binds  all
the  members  of  the  Lodge  to  watch  over
his  education,  and  subsequently  to  aid  him,
if  it  be  necessary,  in  establishing  himself
in  life.  A  circumstantial  account  of  the
ceremony  is  drawn  up,  which  having  been
signed  by  all  the  members  is  delivered  to
the  father  of  the  child.  This  document
serves  as  a  dispensation,  which  relieves  him
from  the  necessity  of  passing  through  the
ordinary  preliminary  examinations  when,
at  the  proper  age,  he  is  desirous  of  partici¬
pating  in  the  labors  of  Masonry.  He  is
then  only  required  to  renew  his  obligations.”

Iu  the  United  States,  the  ceremony  has


ADOPTIVE


ADOPTIVE


27


been  recently  practised  by  a  few  Lodges,
the  earliest  instance  being  that  of  Foyer
Maqonnique  Lodge  of  New  Orleans,  in
1859.  The  Supreme  Council  for  the  South¬
ern  Jurisdiction,  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite,  has  published  the  ritual  of  Masonic
Adoption  for  the  use  of  the  members  of
that  rite.  The  ritual  for  which,  under  the
title  of  “Offices  of  Masonic  Baptism,
Eeception  of  a  Louveteau  and  Adoption,”
is  a  very  beautiful  one,  and  is  the  com¬
position  of  Brother  Albert  Pike.  It  is
scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  the  word
Baptism  there  used  has  not  the  slightest
reference  to  the  Christian  sacrament  of  the
same  name.

Adoptive  Masonry.  An  organiza¬
tion  which  bears  a  very  imperfect  resem¬
blance  to  Freemasonry  in  its  forms  and
ceremonies,  and  which  was  established  in
France  for  the  initiation  of  females,  has
been  called  by  the  French  “  Maqonnefie
d’ Adoption,”  or  Adoptive  Masonry,  and  the
societies  in  which  the  initiations  take  place
have  received  the  name  of  “  Loges  d’ Adop¬
tion,”  or  Adoptive  Lodges.  This  appellation
is  derived  from  the  fact  that  every  female
or  Adoptive  Lodge  is  obliged,  by  the  regu¬
lations  of  the  association,  to  be,  as  it  were,
adopted  by,  and  thus  placed  under  the
guardianship  of,  some  regular  Lodge  of
Freemasons.

As  to  the  exact  date  which  we  are  to  as¬
sign  for  the  first  introduction  of  this  system
of  female  Masonry,  there  have  been  several
theories,  some  of  which,  undoubtedly,  are
wholly  untenable,  since  they  have  been
founded,  as  Masonic  historical  theories  too
often  are,  on  an  unwarrantable  mixture  of
facts  and  fictions  —  of  positive  statements
and  problematic  conjectures.  Mons.  J.  S.
Boubge,  a  distinguished  French  Mason,  in
his  Etudes  Maqonniques,  places  the  origin
of  Adoptive  Masonry  in  the  17th  century,
and  ascribes  its  authorship  to  Queen  Hen¬
rietta  Maria,  the  widow  of  Charles  I.  of
England;  and  he  states  that  on  her  return
to  France,  after  the  execution  of  her  hus¬
band,  she  took  pleasure  in  recounting  the
secret  efforts  made  by  the  Freemasons  of
England  to  restore  her  family  to  their  posi¬
tion  and  to  establish  her  son  on  the  throne
of  his  ancestors.  This,  it  will  be  recollected,
was  once  a  prevalent  theory,  now  exploded,
of  the  origin  of  Freemasonry  —  that  it  was
established  by  the  Cavaliers,  as  a  secret
political  organization,  in  the  times  of  the
English  civil  war  between  the  king  and  the
Parliament,  and  as  an  engine  for  the  support
of  the  former.  M.  Boubee  adds,  that  the
queen  made  known  to  the  ladies  of  her
court,  in  her  exile,  the  words  and  signs  em¬
ployed  by  her  Masonic  friends  in  England
as  their  modes  of  recognition,  and  by  this


means  instructed  them  in  some  of  the  mys¬
teries  of  the  Institution,  of  which,  he  says,
she  had  been  made  the  protectress  after  the
death  of  the  king.  This  theory  is  so  full
of  absurdity,  and  its  statements  so  flatly
contradicted  by  well-known  historical  facts,
that  we  may  at  once  reject  it  as  wholly
apocryphal.

Others  have  claimed  Russia  as  the  birth¬
place  of  Adoptive  Masonry  ;  but  in  assign¬
ing  that  country  and  the  year  1712  as  the
place  and  time  of  its  origin,  they  have  un¬
doubtedly  confounded  it  with  the  chivalric
Order  of  Saint  Catharine,  tvhich  was  in¬
stituted  by  the  Czar  Peter  the  Great  in
honor  of  the  Czarina  Catharine,  and  which,
although  at  first  it  consisted  of  persons  of
both  sexes,  was  subsequently  confined  exclu¬
sively  to  females.  But  the  Order  of  Saint
Catharine  was  in  no  manner  connected  with
that  of  Freemasonry.  It  was  simply  a
Russian  order  of  female  knighthood.

The  truth  seems  to  be  that  the  regular
Lodges  of  Adoption  owed  their  existence
to  those  secret  associations  of  men  and  wo¬
men  which  sprang  up  in  France  before  the
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and
which  attempted  in  all  of  their  organiza¬
tion,  except  the  admission  of  female  mem¬
bers,  to  imitate  the  Institution  of  Freema¬
sonry.  Clavel,  who,  in  his  Histoire  Pit-
toresque  de  la  Franc- Maqonnerie,  an  interest¬
ing  but  not  always  a  trustworthy  work,
adopts  this  theory,  says  that  female  Ma¬
sonry  was  instituted  about  the  year  1730;
that  it  made  its  first  appearance  in  France,
and  that  it  was  evidently  a  product  of  the
French  mind.  No  one  will  be  disposed  to
doubt  the  truth  of  this  last  sentiment.  The
proverbial  gallantry  of  the  French  Masons
was  most  ready  and  willing  to  extend  to
women  some  of  the  blessings  of  that  Insti¬
tution,  from  which  the  churlishness,  as  they
would  call  it,  of  their  Anglo-Saxon  brethren
had  excluded  her.

But  the  Masonry  of  Adoption  did  not  at
once  and  in  its  very  beginning  assume  that
peculiarly  imitative  form  of  Freemasonry
which  it  subsequently  presented,  nor  was  it
recognized  as  having  any  connection  with
our  own  Order  until  more  than  thirty  years
after  its  first  establishment.  Its  progress
was  slow  and  gradual.  In  the  course  ot
this  progress  it  affected  various  names  and
rituals,  many  of  which  have  not  been
handed  down  to  us.  It  was  evidently  con¬
vivial  and  gallant  in  its  nature,  and  at  first
seems  to  have  been  only  an  imitation  of
Freemasonry,  inasmuch  as  that  it  was  a
secret  society,  having  a  form  of  initiation
and  modes  of  recognition.  A  specimen  of
one  or  two  of  these  secret  female  associa¬
tions  may  not  be  uninteresting.

One  of  the  earliest  of  these  societies  was


28


ADOPTIVE


ADOPTIVE


that  which  was  established  in  the  year  1743,
at  Paris,  under  the  name  of  the  “  Ordre  des
Felicitaires,”  which  we  might  very  appro¬
priately  translate  as  the  “  Order  of  Happy
Folks.”  The  vocabulary  and  all  the  em¬
blems  of  the  order  were  nautical.  The
sisters  made  symbolically  a  voyage  to  the
island  of  Felicity,  in  ships  navigated  by
the  brethren.  There  were  four  degrees,
namely,  those  of  Cabin-boy,  Captain,  Com¬
modore,  and  Vice-Admiral,  and  the  Grand
Master,  or  presiding  officer,  was  called  the
Admiral.  Out  of  this  society  there  sprang
in  1745  another,  which  was  called  the
“  Knights  and  Ladies  of  the  Anchor,”
which  is  said  to  have  been  somewhat  more
refined  in  its  character,  although  for  the
most  part  it  preserved  the  same  formulary
of  reception.

Two  years  afterwards,  in  1747,  the  Cheva¬
lier  Beauchaine,  a  very  zealous  Masonic
adventurer,  and  the  Master  for  life  of  a
Parisian  Lodge,  instituted  an  androgynous
system  under  the  name  of  the  “  Ordre  des
Fendeurs,”  or  “  the  Order  of  Wood-Cutters,”
whose  ceremonies  were  borrowed  from
those  of  the  well-known  political  society
of  the  Carbonari.  All  parts  of  the  ritual
had  a  reference  to  the  sylvan  vocation  of
wood-cutting,  just  as  that  of  the  Carbonari
referred  to  coal-burning.  The  place  of
meeting  was  called  a  wood-yard,  and  was
supposed  to  be  situated  in  a  forest ;  the  pre¬
siding  officer  was  styled  Pere  Maitre,  which
might  be  idiomatically  interpreted  as  Good¬
man  Master ;  and  the  members  were  desig¬
nated  as  cousins,  a  practice  evidently  bor¬
rowed  from  the  Carbonari.  The  reunions
of  the  “Wood-Cutters”  enjoyed  the  pres¬
tige  of  the  highest  fashion  in  Paris ;  and
the  society  became  so  popular  that  ladies
and  gentlemen  of  the  highest  distinction  in
France  united  with  it,  and  membership  was
considered  an  honor  which  no  rank,  how¬
ever  exalted,  need  disdain.  It  was  conse¬
quently  succeeded  by  the  institution  of
many  other  and  similar  androgynous  so¬
cieties,  the  very  names  of  which  it  would
be  tedious  to  enumerate.

Out  of  all  these  societies  —  which  resem¬
bled  Freemasonry  only  in  their  secrecy,
their  benevolence,  and  a  sort  of  rude  imita¬
tion  of  a  symbolic  ceremonial  —  at  last  arose
the  true  Lodges  of  Adoption,  which  so  far
claimed  a  connection  with  and  a  dependence
on  Masonry  as  that  Freemasons  alone  were
admitted  among  their  male  members  —  a
regulation  which  did  not  prevail  in  the  ear¬
lier  organizations.

It  was  about  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
century  that  the  Lodges  of  Adoption  began
to  attract  attention  in  France,  whence  they
speedily  spread  into  other  countries  of
Europe  —  into  Germany,  Poland,  and  even


Russia ;  England  alone,  always  conserva¬
tive  to  a  fault,  steadily  refusing  to  take  any
cognizance  of  them.  The  Masons,  says
Clavel,  embraced  them  with  enthusiasm  as
a  practicable  means  of  giving  to  their  wfres
and  daughters  some  share  of  the  pleasures
which  they  themselves  enjoyed  in  their
mystical  assemblies.  And  this,  at  least,
may  be  said  of  them,  that  they  practised
with  commendable  fidelity  and  diligence
the  greatest  of  the  Masonic  virtues,  and
that  the  banquet  and  balls  which  alv'ays
formed  an  important  part  of  their  cere¬
monial  were  distinguished  by  numerous
acts  of  charity.

The  first  of  these  Lodges  of  which  w’e
have  any  notice  was  that  established  in
Paris,  in  the  year  1760,  by  the  Count  de
Bernouville.  Another  w^as  instituted  at
Kimuegen,  in  Holland,  in  1774,  over  which
the  Prince  of  Waldeck  and  the  Princess  of
Orange  presided.  In  1775,  the  Lodge  of
Saint  Antoine,  at  Paris,  organized  a  de¬
pendent  Lodge  of  Adoption,  of  which  the
Duchess  of  Bourbon  was  Grand  Mistress
and  the  Duke  of  Chartres  Grand  Master.
In  1777,  there  was  an  Adoptive  Lodge  of
La  Candeur,  over  uThich  the  Duchess  of
Bourbon  presided,  assisted  by  such  noble
ladies  as  the  Duchess  of  Chartres,  the
Princess  Lamballe,  and  the  Marchioness
de  Genlis ;  and  we  hear  of  another  gov¬
erned  by  Madame  Helvetius,  the  wife  of
the  illustrious  philosopher ;  so  that  it  will
be  perceived  that  fashion,  wealth,  and  lit¬
erature  combined  to  give  splendor  and  in¬
fluence  to  this  new  order  of  female  Masonry.

At  first  the  Grand  Orient  of  France
appears  to  have  been  unfavorably  disposed
to  these  pseudo-Masonic  and  androgynous
associations,  but  at  length  they  became  so
numerous  and  so  popular  that  a  persistence
in  opposition  would  have  evidently  been
impolitic,  if  it  did  not  actually  threaten  to
be  fatal  to  the  interests  and  permanence
of  the  Masonic  Institution.  The  Grand
Orient,  therefore,  yielded  its  objections,
and  resolved  to  avail  itself  of  that  which
it  could  not  suppress.  Accordingly,  on
the  10th  of  June,  1774,  it  issued  an  edict
by  which  it  assumed  the  protection  and
control  of  the  Lodges  of  Adoption.  Rules
and  regulations  v?ere  provided  for  their
government,  among  which  were  two  :  first,
that  no  males  except  regular  Freemasons
should  be  permitted  to  attend  them;  and,
secondly,  that  each  Lodge  should  be  placed
under  the  charge  and  held  under  the  sanc¬
tion  of  some  regularly  constituted  Lodge
of  Masons,  whose  Master,  or,  in  his  ab¬
sence,  his  deputy,  should  be  the  presiding
officer,  assisted  by  a  female  President  or
Mistress;  and  such  has  since  been  the  or¬
ganization  of  all  Lodges  of  Adoption.


ADOPTIVE


ADOPTIVE


29


A  Lodge  of  Adoption,  under  the  regula¬
tions  established  in  1774,  consists  of  the
following  officers :  a  Grand  Master,  a  Grand
Mistress,  an  Orator,  an  Inspector,  an  In¬
spectress,  a  Depositor  and  a  Depositress ;
or,  as  these  might  more  appropriately  be
translated,  a  Male  and  Female  Guardian,
a  Master  and  a  Mistress  of  Ceremonies,
and  a  Secretary.  All  of  these  officers  wear
a  blue  watered  ribbon  in  the  form  of  a  col¬
lar,  to  which  is  suspended  a  golden  trowel,
and  all  the  brethren  and  sisters  have  white
aprons  and  gloves.

The  Rite  of  Adoption  consists  of  four
degrees,  whose  names  in  French  and  Eng¬
lish  are  as  follows :

1.  Apprentie,  or  Female  Apprentice.

2.  Compagnonne,  or  Craftswoman.

3.  Maitresse,  or  Mistress.

4.  Parfaite  Maitresse ,  or  Perfect  Mistress.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  degrees  of  Adop¬
tion,  in  their  names  and  their  apparent
reference  to  the  gradations  of  employment
in  an  operative  art,  are  assimilated  to  those
of  legitimate  Freemasonry ;  but  it  is  in  those
respects  only  that  the  resemblance  holds
good.  In  the  details  of  the  ritual  there  is  a
vast  difference  between  the  two  Institutions.

There  was  a  fifth  degree  added  in  1817
—  by  some  modern  writers  called  “Female
elect,”  — Sublime  Dame  Ecossaise ,  or  Sover¬
eign  Illustrious  Dame  Ecossaise;  but  it
seems  to  be  a  recent  and  not  generally
adopted  innovation.  At  all  events,  it  con¬
stituted  no  part  of  the  original  Rite  of
Adoption.

The  first,  or  Female  Apprentice’s  degree,
is  simply  preliminary  in  its  character,  and
is  intended  to  prepare  the  candidate  for
the  more  important  lessons  which  she  is  to
receive  in  the  succeeding  degrees.  She  is
presented  with  a  white  apron  and  a  pair
of  white  kid  gloves.  The  apron  is  given
with  the  following  charge,  in  which,  as  in
all  the  other  ceremonies  of  the  Order,  the
Masonic  system  of  teaching  by  symbolism
is  followed :

“  Permit  me,  my  sister,  to  decorate  you
with  this  apron,  which,  as  the  symbol  of
virtue,  kings,  princes,  and  princesses  have
esteemed,  and  will  ever  esteem  it  an  honor
to  wear.”

On  receiving  the  gloves,  the  candidate  is
thus  addressed :

“The  color  of  these  gloves  will  admon¬
ish  you  that  candor  and  truth  are  virtues
inseparable  from  the  character  of  a  female
Mason.  Take  your  place  among  us,  and  be
pleased  to  listen  to  the  instructions  which
we  are  about  to  communicate  to  you.”

The  following  charge  is  then  addressed
to  the  candidate  by  the  Orator :

“My  dear  Sister  :  —  Nothing  is  better  cal¬
culated  to  assure  you  of  the  high  esteem  our


society  entertains  for  you,  than  your  admission
as  a  member,  thus  giving  you  a  proof  of  our
sincere  attachment.  The  vulgar,  who  are
always  ignorant,  have  very  naturally  enter¬
tained  the  most  ridiculous  prejudices  against
our  Order.  Without  any  just  reason  they
have  conceived  an  enmity  which  has  induced
them  to  circulate  the  most  scandalous  rumors
concerning  us.  But  how  is  it  possible  that
they,  without  the  light  of  truth,  should  be  en¬
abled  to  form  a  correct  judgment?  They  are
incapable  of  appreciating  the  good  that  we  do
by  affording  relief  to  our  fellow-creatures  in
distress.

“Your  sex,  my  dear  sister,  having  for  a
long  time  been  denied  admission  to  our  soci¬
ety,  alone  has  had  the  right  to  think  us  unjust.
What  satisfaction  must  you,  therefore,  now
enjoy,  in  perceiving  that  Freemasonry  is  a
school  of  decorum  and  virtue,  and  that  our
laws  are  intended  to  restrain  the  violence  of
our  passions,  and  to  make  us  more  deserving
of  your  confidence  and  esteem.  We  have
hitherto  frequently  found  ourselves  at  a  loss
in  our  meetings  for  the  agreeable  conversation
of  your  amiable  sex,  and  hence  we  have  at
length  determined  to  invite  you  into  our  soci¬
ety  by  the  endearing  name  of  sisters,  with  the
hope  that  we  shall  hereafter  pass  our  time
more  delightfully  in  your  pleasant  company,
as  well  as  give  additional  respect  to  our  Insti¬
tution.

“We  call  our  Lodge  the  temple  of  virtue,
because  we  endeavor,  by  the  exercise  of  char¬
ity,  to  do  all  the  good  we  can  to  our  fellow-
creatures,  and  seek  to  subdue  our  own  pas¬
sions.  The  obligation  that  we  take,  not  to
reveal  our  mysteries,  prevents  pride  and  self-
love  from  lurking  in  our  hearts,  so  that  we
are  enabled  without  ostentation  to  perform
all  the  good  deeds  which  we  are  bound  to
practise.

“  The  name  of  sister,  that  we  bestow  upon
you,  evinces  the  esteem  that  we  have  enter¬
tained  for  your  person  in  selecting  you  to  par¬
ticipate  in  our  happiness  and  to  cultivate,  with
us,  the  principles  of  virtue  and  benevolence.

“Having  now  made  you  acquainted  with
the  nature  of  our  Institution,  we  are  well  as¬
sured  that  the  light  of  wisdom  and  virtue  will
henceforth  direct  your  conduct,  and  that  you
will  never  reveal  to  the  profane  those  myste¬
ries  which  should  ever  carefully  be  preserved
by  the  maintenance  of  the  strictest  silence.
May  the  Omnipotent  Deity  give  you  that
strength  which  will  always  enable  you  to  sup¬
port  the  character  of  a  sincere  female  Mason.”

It  will  be  seen  that  throughout  this
charge  there  runs  a  vein  of  gallantry,
which  gives  the  true  secret  of  the  motives
which  led  to  the  organization  of  the  soci¬
ety,  and  which,  however  appropriate  to  a
Lodge  of  Adoption,  would  scarcely  be  in
place  in  a  Lodge  of  the  legitimate  Order.

In  the  second  degree,  or  that  of  Com¬
pagnonne,  or  “Craftswoman,”  corresponding
to  our  Fellow  Craft,  the  Lodge  is  made  the


30


ADOPTIVE


ADOPTIVE


symbol  of  the  Garden  of  Eden,  and  the
candidate  passes  through  a  mimic  repre¬
sentation  of  the  temptation  of  Eve,  the
fatal  effects  of  which,  culminating  in  the
deluge  and  the  destruction  of  the  human
race,  are  impressed  upon  her  in  the  lecture
or  catechism.

Here  we  have  a  scenic  representation  of
the  circumstances  connected  with  that
event,  as  recorded  in  Genesis.  The  can¬
didate  plays  the  role  of  our  common  mother.
In  the  centre  of  the  Lodge,  which  repre¬
sents  the  garden,  is  placed  the  tree  of  life,
from  which  ruddy  apples  are  suspended.
The  serpent,  made  with  theatrical  skill  to
represent  a  living  reptile,  embraces  in  its
coils  the  trunk.  An  apple  plucked  from
the  tree  is  presented  to  the  recipient,  who
is  persuaded  to  eat  it  by  the  promise  that
thus  alone  can  she  prepare  herself  for  re¬
ceiving  a  knowledge  of  the  sublime  mys¬
teries  of  Freemasonry.  She  receives  the
fruit  from  the  tempter,  but  no  sooner  has
she  attempted  to  bite  it,  than  she  is  startled
by  the  sound  of  thunder  ;  a  curtain  which
has  separated  her  from  the  members  of  the
Lodge  is  suddenly  withdrawn,  and  she  is
detected  in  the  commission  of  the  act  of
disobedience.  She  is  sharply  reprimanded
by  the  Orator,  who  conducts  her  before  the
Grand  Master.  This  dignitary  reproaches
her  with  her  fault,  but  finally,  with  the
consent  of  the  brethren  and  sisters  present,
he  pardons  her  in  the  merciful  spirit  of  the
Institution,  on  the  condition  that  she  will
take  a  vow  to  extend  hereafter  the  same
clemency  to  the  faults  of  others.

All  of  this  is  allegorical  and  very  pretty,
and  it  cannot  be  denied  that  on  the  sensi¬
tive  imaginations  of  females  such  cere¬
monies  must  produce  a  manifest  impres¬
sion.  But  it  is  needless  to  say  that  it  is
nothing  like  Masonry.

There  is  less  ceremony,  but  more  sym¬
bolism,  in  the  third  degree,  or  that  of
“  Mistress.”  Here  are  introduced,  as  parts
of  the  ceremony,  the  tower  of  Babel  and
the  theological  ladder  of  Jacob.  Its  rounds,
however,  differ  from  those  peculiar  to  true
Masonry,  and  are  said  to  equal  the  virtues
in  number.  The  lecture  or  catechism  is
very  long,  and  contains  some  very  good
points  in  its  explanations  of  the  symbols
of  the  degree.  Thus,  the  tower  of  Babel
is  said  to  signify  the  pride  of  man  —  its
base,  his  folly  —  the  stones  of  which  it  was
composed,  his  passions  —  the  cement  which
united  them,  the  poison  of  discord  —  and
its  spiral  form,  the  devious  and  crooked
ways  of  the  human  heart.  In  this  manner
there  is  an  imitation,  not  of  the  letter  and
substance  of  legitimate  Freemasonry,  for
nothing  can  in  these  respects  be  more  dis¬
similar,  but  of  that  mode  of  teaching  by


symbols  and  allegories  which  is  its  peculiar
characteristic.

The  fourth  degree,  or  that  of  “  Perfect
Mistress,”  corresponds  to  no  degree  in  legit¬
imate  Masonry.  It  is  simply  the  summit
of  the  Rite  of  Adoption,  and'  hence  is  also
called  the  “Degree  of  Perfection.”  Al¬
though  the  Lodge,  in  this  degree,  is  sup¬
posed  to  represent  the  Mosaic  tabernacle
in  the  wilderness,  yet  the  ceremonies  do
not  have  the  same  reference.  In  one  of
them,  however,  the  liberation,  by  the  can¬
didate,  of  a  bird  from  the  vase  in  which  it
had  been  confined  is  said  to  symbolize  the
liberation  of  man  from  the  dominion  of  his
passions ;  and  thus  a  far-fetched  reference  is  *
made  to  the  liberation  of  the  Jews  from
Egyptian  bondage.  On  the  whole,  the
ceremonies  are  very  disconnected,  but  the
lecture  or  catechism  contains  some  excel¬
lent  lessons.  Especially  does  it  furnish  us
with  the  official  definition  of  Adoptive  Ma¬
sonry,  which  is  in  these  words:

“It  is  a  virtuous  amusement  by  which
we  recall  a  part  of  the  mysteries  of  our
religion ;  and  the  better  to  make  man  know
his  Creator,  after  we  have  inculcated  the  du¬
ties  of  virtue,  we  deliver  ourselves  up  to  the
sentiments  of  a  pure  and  delightful  friend¬
ship  by  enjoying  in  our  Lodges  the  pleasures
of  society  —  pleasures  which  among  us  are
always  founded  on  reason,  honor,  and  inno¬
cence.”

Apt  and  appropriate  description  of  an
association,  secret  or  otherwise,  of  agreeable
and  virtuous,  well-bred  men  and  women,
but  having  not  the  slightest  application  to
the  design  or  form  of  true  Freemasonry.

The  author  of  La  Vraie  Magonnerie
<T  Adoption,  who  has  given  the  best  ritual
of  the  Rite,  thus  briefly  sums  up  the  objects
of  the  -Institution :

“The  first  degree  contains  only,  as  it
ought,  moral  ideas  of  Masonry  ;  the  second
is  the  initiation  into  the  first  mysteries,
commencing  with  the  sin  of  Adam,  and
concluding  with  the  Ark  of  Xoah  as  the
first  favor  which  God  granted  to  men  ;  the
third  and  fourth  are  merely  a  series  of  types
and  figures  drawn  from  the  Holy  Scriptures,
by  which  we  explain  to  the  candidate  the
virtues  which  she  ought  to  practise.”

The  fourth  degree,  being  the  summit  of
the  Rite  of  Adoption,  is  furnished  with  a
“  table-lodge,”  or  the  ceremony  of  a  ban¬
quet,  which  immediately  succeeds  the  clos¬
ing  of  the  Lodge,  and  which,  of  course,  adds
much  to  the  social  pleasure  and  nothing  to
the  instructive  character  of  the  Rite.  Here,
also,  there  is  a  continued  imitation  of  the
ceremonies  of  the  Masonic  Institution  as
they  are  practised  in  France,  where  the
ceremoniously  conducted  banquet,  at  which
Masons  only  are  present,  is  always  an  ac-


ADOPTIVE


ADOPTIVE


31


cotnpaniment  of  the  Master’s  Lodge.  Thus,
as  in  ihe  banquets  of  the  regular  Lodges  of
the  French  Rite,  the  members  always  use  a
symbolical  language  by  which  they  desig¬
nate  the  various  implements  of  the  table
and  the  different  articles  of  food  and  drink,
calling,  for  instance,  the  knives  “  swords,”
the  forks  “  pikes,”  the  meats  “  materials,”
and  bread  a  “rough  ashlar;  ”  so,  in  imita¬
tion  of  this  custom,  the  Rite  of  Adoption
has  established  in  its  banquets  a  technical
vocabulary,  to  be  used  only  at  the  table.
Thus  the  Lodge  room  is  called  “  Eden,”
the  doors  “  barriers,”  the  minutes  a  “  lad¬
der,”  a  wineglass  is  styled  a  “  lamp,”  and  its
contents  “  oil,”  —  water  being  “  white  oil  ”
and  wine  “  red  oil.”  To  fill  your  glass  is
“  to  trim  your  lamp,”  to  drink  is  “to  extin¬
guish  your  lamp,”  with  many  other  eccen¬
tric  expressions.

Much  taste,  and  in  some  instances,  mag¬
nificence,  are  displayed  in  the  decorations
of  the  Lodge  rooms  of  the  Adoptive  Rite.
The  apartment  is  separated  by  curtains  iuto
different  divisions,  and  contains  ornaments
and  decorations  which  of  course  vary  in  the
different  degrees.  The  orthodox  Masonic
idea  that  the  Lodge  is  a  symbol  of  the
world  is  here  retained,  and  the  four  sides
of  the  hall  are  said  to  represent  the  four
continents  —  the  entrance  being  called  “  Eu¬
rope,”  the  right  side  “  Africa,”  the  left
“  America,”  and  the  extremity  in  which  the
Grand  Master  and  Grand  Mistress  are
seated  “  Asia.”  There  are  statues  repre¬
senting  Wisdom,  Prudence,  Strength,  Tem¬
perance,  Honor,  Charity,  Justice,  and
Truth.  The  members  are  seated  along  the
sides  in  two  rows,  the  ladies  occupying  the
front  one,  and  the  whole  is  rendered  as
beautiful  and  attractive  as  the  taste  can
make  it.

The  Lodges  of  Adoption  flourished  greatly
in  France  after  their  recognition  by  the
Grand  Orient.  The  Duchess  of  Bourbon,
who  was  the  first  that  received  the  title  of
Grand  Mistress,  was  installed  with  great
pomp  and  splendor,  in  May,  1775,  in  the
Lodge  of  St.  Antoine ,  in  Paris.  She  presided
over  the  Adoptive  Lodge  Le  Candeur  until
1780,  when  it  was  dissolved.  Attached  to
the  celebrated  Lodge  of  the  Nine  Sisters,
which  had  so  many  distinguished  men  of
letters  among  its  members,  was  a  Lodge  of
Adoption  bearing  the  same  name,  which  in
1778  held  a  meeting  at  the  residence  of
Madame  Helvetius  in  honor  of  Benjamin
Franklin,  then  our  ambassador  at  the
French  court.  During  the  reign  of  terror
of  the  French  revolution,  Lodges  of  Adop¬
tion,  like  everything  that  was  gentle  or
humane,  almost  entirely  disappeared.  But
with  the  accession  of  a  regular  government
they  were  resuscitated,  and  the  Empress


Josephine  presided  at  the  meeting  of  one
at  Strasburg  in  the  year  1805.  They  con¬
tinued  to  flourish  under  the  imperial  dy¬
nasty,  and  although  less  popular,  or  I
should  rather  say,  less  fashionable,  under
the  restoration,  they  subsequently  recovered
their  popularity,  and  are  still  in  existence
in  France.

As  interesting  appendages  to  this  article,
it  may  not  be  improper  to  insert  two  ac¬
counts,  one  of  the  installation  of  Madame
Cesar  Moreau,  as  Grand  Mistress  of  Adop¬
tive  Masonry,  in  the  Lodge  connected  with
the  regular  Lodge  La  Jerusalem  des  Val¬
ues  Egyptiennes,  on  the  8th  July,  1854,  and
the  other  of  the  reception  of  the  celebrated
Lady  Morgan,  in  1819,  in  the  Lodge  La
Belle  et  Bonne,  as  described  by  her  in  her
Diary.

The  account  of  the  installation  of  Ma¬
dame  Moreau,  which  is  abridged  from  the
Franc- Magon,  a  Parisian  periodical,  is  as
follows :

The  fete  was  most  interesting  and  admi-
ably  arranged.  After  the  introduction  in
due  form  of  a  number  of  brethren  and
sisters,  the  Grand  Mistress  elect  was  an¬
nounced,  and  she  entered,  preceded  by  the
five  lights  of  the  Lodge  and  escorted  by  the
Inspectress,  Depositress,  Oratrix,  and  Mis¬
tress  of  Ceremonies.  Mons.  J.  S.  Boubee,
the  Master  of  the  Lodge  La  Jerusalem  des
Vallees  Egyptiennes,  conducted  her  to  the
altar,  where,  having  installed  her  into  office
and  handed  her  a  mallet  as  the  symbol  of
authority,  he  addressed  her  in  a  copy  of
verses,  whose  merit  will  hardly  claim  for
them  a  repetition.  To  this  she  made  a  suit¬
able  reply,  and  the  Lodge  then  proceeded  to
the  reception  of  a  young  lady,  a  part  of  the
ceremony  of  which  is  thus  described  :

“  Of  the  various  trials  of  virtue  and  forti¬
tude  to  which  she  was  subjected,  there  was
one  which  made  a  deep  impression,  not
only  on  the  fair  recipient,  but  on  the  whole
assembled  company.  Four  boxes  were
placed,  one  before  each  of  the  male  officers;
the  candidate  was  told  to  open  them,  which
she  did,  and  from  the  first  and  second  drew
faded  flowers,  and  soiled  ribbons  and  laces,
which  being  placed  in  an  open  vessel  were
instantly  consumed  by  fire,  as  an  emblem
of  the  brief  duration  of  such  objects;  from
the  third  she  drew  an  apron,  a  blue  silk
scarf,  and  a  pair  of  gloves;  and  from  the
fourth  a  basket  containing  the  working
tools  in  silver  gilt.  She  was  then  con¬
ducted  to  the  altar,  where,  on  opening  a
fifth  box,  several  birds  which  had  been  con¬
fined  in  it  escaped,  which  was  intended  to
teach  her  that  liberty  is  a  condition  to
which  all  men  are  entitled,  and  of  which  no
one  can  be  deprived  without  injustice.
After  having  taken  the  vow,  sho  was  in-


32


ADOPTIVE


ADOPTIVE


structed  in  the  modes  of  recognition,  and
having  been  clothed  with  the  apron,  scarf,
and  gloves,  and  presented  with  the  imple¬
ments  of  the  Order,  she  received  from  the
Grand  Mistress  an  esoteric  explanation  of
all  these  emblems  and  ceremonies.  Ad¬
dresses  were  subsequently  delivered  by  the
Orator  and  Oratrix,  an  ode  was  sung,  the
poor  or  alms  box  was  handed  round,  and
the  labors  of  the  Lodge  were  then  closed.’'

Madame  Moreau  lived  only  six  months
to  enjoy  the  honors  of  presiding  officer  of
the  Adoptive  Kite,  for  she  died  of  a  pulmo¬
nary  affection  at  an  early  age,  on  the  11th
of  the  succeeding  January.

The  Lodge  of  Adoption  in  which  Lady
Morgan  received  the  degrees  at  Paris,  in
the  year  1819,  was  called  La  Belle  et  Bonne.
This  was  the  pet  name  which  long  before
had  been  bestowed  by  Voltaire  on  his
favorite,  the  Marchioness  de  Villette,  under
whose  presidency  and  at  whose  residence  in
the  Faubourg  St.  Germaine  the  Lodge  was
held,  and  hence  the  name  with  which-  all
France,  or  at  least  all  Paris,  was  familiarly
acquainted  as  the  popular  designation  of
Madame  de  Villette.

Lady  Morgan,  in  her  description  of  the
Masonic  fete,  says  that  when  she  arrived  at
the  Hotel  la  Villette,  where  the  Lodge  was
held,  she  found  a  large  concourse  of  dis¬
tinguished  persons  ready  to  take  part  in  the
ceremonies.  Among  these  were  Prince
Paul  of  Wurtemberg,  the  Count  de  Cazes,
elsewhere  distinguished  in  Masonry,  the
celebrated  Denon,  the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,
and  the  illustrious  actor  Talma.  The  busi¬
ness  of  the  evening  commenced  with  an  in¬
stallation  of  the  officers  of  a  sister  Lodge,
after  which  the  candidates  were  admitted.
Lady  Morgan  describes  the  arrangements
as  presenting,  when  the  doors  were  opened,
a  spectacle  of  great  magnificence.  A  pro¬
fusion  of  crimson  and  gold,  marble  busts,  a
decorated  throne  and  altar,  an  abundance
of  flowers,  and  incense  of  the  finest  odor
which  filled  the  air,  gave  to  the  whole  a
most  dramatic  and  scenic  effect.  Music  of
the  grandest  character  mingled  its  harmony
with  the  mysteries  of  initiation,  which
lasted  for  two  hours,  and  when  the  Lodge
was  closed  there  was  an  adjournment  to  the
hall  of  refreshment,  where  the  ball  was
opened  by  the  Grand  Mistress  with  Prince
Paul  of  YVurtemberg.  Lady  Morgan,  upon
whose  mind  the  ceremony  appears  to  have
made  an  impression,  makes  one  remark
worthy  of  consideration :  “  That  so  many
women,”  she  says,  “young  and  beautiful
and  worldly,  should  never  have  revealed
the  secret,  is  among  the  miracles  which  the
much  distrusted  sex  are  capable  of  work¬
ing.”  In  fidelity  to  the  vow  of  secrecy,  the
female  Masons  of  the  Adoptive  Kite  have


proved  themselves  fully  equal  to  their
brethren  of  the  legitimate  Order.

Notwithstanding  that  Adoptive  Masonry
has  found  an  advocate  in  no  less  distin¬
guished  a  writer  than  Chemin  Dupontfcs,
who,  in  the  Encyclopedic  Martinique,  calls
it  “  a  luxury  in  Masonry,  and  a  pleasant  re¬
laxation  which  cannot  do  any  harm  to  the
true  mysteries  which  are  practised  by  men
alone,”  it  has  been  very  generally  con¬
demned  by  the  most  celebrated  French,
German,  English,  and  American  Masons.

Gaedicke,  in  the  Freirnaurer  Lexicon,
speaks  slightingly  of  it  as  established  on
insufficient  grounds,  and  expresses  his
gratification  that  the  system  no  longer  ex¬
ists  in  Germany.

Thorv,  in  his  History  of  the  Foundation
of  the  Grand  Orient  (p.  361),  says  that  the
introduction  of  Adoptive  Lodges  was  a  con¬
sequence  of  the  relaxation  of  Masonic  dis¬
cipline;  and  he  asserts  that  the  permitting
of  women  to  share  in  mysteries  which
should  exclusively  belong  to  men  is  not  in
accordance  with  the  essential  principles  of
the  Masonic  Order.  The  Abbe  Kobin,  the
author  of  an  able  work  entitled  Recherches
sur  les  Initiations  Anciennes  et  Modernes,
maintains  that  the  custom  of  admitting
women  into  Masonic  assemblies  will  per¬
haps  be,  at  some  further  period,  the  cause
of  the  decline  of  Masonry  in  France.  The
prediction  is  not,  however,  likely  to  come
to  pass ;  for  while  legitimate  Masonry  has
never  been  more  popular  or  prosperous  in
France  than  it  is  at  this  day,  it  is  the
Lodges  of  Adoption  that  appear  to  have
declined.

Other  writers  in  other  countries  have
spoken  in  similar  terms,  so  that  it  is  beyond
a  doubt  that  the  general  sentiment  of  the
Fraternity  is  against  this  system  of  female
Masonry.

Lenning  is,  however,  more  qualified  in
his  condemnation,  and  says,  in  his  Encyclo-
pddie  der  Freirnaurerei,  that  while  leaving
it  undecided  whether  it  is  prudent  to  hold
assemblies  of  women  with  ceremonies
which  are  called  Masonic,  yet  it  is  not  to
be  denied  that  in  these  female  Lodges  a
large  amount  of  charity  has  been  done.

Adoptive  Masonry  has  its  literature,  al¬
though  neither  extensive  nor  important,  as
it  comprises  only  books  of  songs,  addresses,
and  rituals.  Of  the  latter  the  most  valu¬
able  are — 1.  La  Mayonnerie  des  Femmes,
published  in  1775,  and  containing  only  the
first  three  degrees;  for  such  was  the  system
when  recognized  by  the  Grand  Orient  of
France  in  that  year.  2.  La  Yraie  MaQon-
nerie  d’ Adoption,  printed  in  1787.  This
work,  which  is  by  Guillemr  in  de  St.  Victor,
is  perhaps  the  best  that  has  been  published
on  the  subject  of  the  Adoptive  Kite,  and  is


ADOPTIVE


ADOPTIVE


33


the  first  that  introduces  the  fourth  degree,
of  which  Guillemain  is  supposed  to  have
been  the  inventor,  since  all  previous  rituals
include  only  the  three  degrees.  3.  Magon-
nerie  d’  Adoption  pour  lea  Femmes,  contained
in  the  second  part  of  E.  J.  Chappron’s
Necessaire  Mago  unique,  and  printed  at  Paris
in  1817.  This  is  valuable  because  it  is  the
first  ritual  that  contains  the  fifth  degree.
4.  La  Franc- Magonnerie  des  Femmes.  This
work,  which  is  by  Charles  Monselet,  is  of
no  value  as  a  ritual,  being  simply  a  tale
founded  on  circumstances  connected  with
Adoptive  Masonry.

In  Italy,  the  Carbonari,  or  “Charcoal-
Burners,”  a  secret  political  society,  imitated
the  Freemasons  of  France  in  instituting  an
Adoptive  Rite,  attached  to  their  own  asso¬
ciation.  Hence  an  Adoptive  Lodge  was
founded  at  Naples  in  the  beginning  of  this
century,  over  which  presided  that  friend  of
Masonry,  Queen  Caroline,  the  wife  of  Fer¬
dinand  II.  The  members  were  styled
Giardiniere,  or  Female  Gardeners;  and
they  called  each  other  Cugine,  or  Female
Cousins,  in  imitation  of  the  Carbonari,  who
were  recognized  as  Buoni  Cugini,  or  Good
Cousins.  The  Lodges  of  Giardiniere  flour¬
ished  as  long  as  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Car¬
bonari  existed  at  Naples.

Adoptive  Masonry,  American.
The  Rite  of  Adoption  as  practised  on  the
continent  of  Europe,  and  especially  in
France,  has  never  been  introduced  into
America.  The  system  does  not  accord  with
the  manners  or  habits  of  our  people,  and
undoubtedly  never  would  become  popular.
But  Rob.  Morris  attempted,  in  1855,  to  in¬
troduce  an  imitation  of  it,  which  he  had  in¬
vented,  under  the  name  of  the  “  American
Adoptive  Rite.”  It  consisted  of  a  ceremony
of  initiation,  which  was  intended  as  a  pre¬
liminary  trial  of  the  candidate,  and  of  five
degrees,  named  as  follows:  1.  Jephthah’s
Daughter,  or  the  daughter’s  degree.  2.
Ruth,  or  the  widow’s  degree.  3.  Esther,  nr
the  wife’s  degree.  4.  Martha,  or  the  sister’s
degree.  5.  Electa,  or  the  Christian  Mar¬
tyr’s  degree.  The  whole  assemblage  of  the
five  degrees  was  called  the  Eastern  Star.

The  objects  of  this  Rite,  as  expressed  by
the  framer,  were  “to  associate  in  one  com¬
mon  bond  the  worthy  wives,  widows,
daughters,  and  sisters  of  Freemasons,  so  as  to
make  their  adoptive  privileges  available  for
all  the  purposes  contemplated  in  Masonry  ;
to  secure  to  them  the  advantages  of  their
claim  in  a  moral,  social,  and  charitable
point  of  view,  and  from  them  the  perform¬
ance  of  corresponding  duties.”  Hence  no
females  but  those  holding  the  above  recited
relations  to  Freemasons  were  eligible  for
admission.  The  male  members  were  called
“Protectors;”  the  female,  “Stellae;”  there-
E  3


unions  of  these  members  were  styled  “  Con¬
stellations  ;  ”  and  the  Rite  was  presided  over
and  governed  by  a  “Supreme  Constella¬
tion.”  There  is  some  ingenuity  and  even
beauty  in  many  of  the  ceremonies,  although
it  is  by  no  means  equal  in  this  respect  to
the  French  Adoptive  system.  Much  dis¬
satisfaction  was,  however,  expressed  by  the
leading  Masons  of  the  country  at  the  time  of
its  attempted  organization ;  and  therefore,
notwithstanding  very  strenuous  efforts  were
made  by  its  founder  and  his  friends  to  estab¬
lish  it  in  some  of  the  Western  States,  it  was
slow  in  winning  popularity.  It  has,  how¬
ever,  within  a  few  years  past,  gained  much
growth  under  the  name  of  “  The  Eastern
Star.”  Bro.  Albert  Pike  has  also  recently
printed,  for  the  use  of  Scottish  Rite  Masons,
The  Masonry  of  Adoption.  It  is  in  seven
degrees,  and  is  a  translation  from  the  French
system,  but  greatly  enlarged,  and  is  far  su¬
perior  to  the  original.

The  last  phase  of  this  female  Masonry
to  which  our  attention  is  directed  is  the
system  of  androgynous  degrees  which  are
practised  to  some  extent  in  the  United
States.  This  term  “androgynous”  is  de¬
rived  from  two  Greek  words,  aner-andros,  a
man,  and  gune,  a  woman,  and  it  is  equiva¬
lent  to  the  English  compound  masculo-fem-
inine.  It  is  applied  to  those  “  side  degrees  ”
which  are  conferred  on  both  males  and
females.  The  essential  regulation  prevail¬
ing  in  these  degrees,  is  that  they  can  be
conferred  only  on  Master  Masons  (and  in
some  instances  only  Royal  Arch  Masons)
and  on  their  female  relatives,  the  peculiar
relationship  differing  in  the  different  de¬
grees.

Thus  there  is  a  degree  generally  called
the  “  Mason’s  Wife,”  which  can  be  con¬
ferred  only  on  Master  Masons,  their  wives,
unmarried  daughters  and  sisters,  and  their
widowed  mothers.  Another  degree,  called
the  “Heroine of  Jericho,”  is  conferred  only
on  the  wives  and  daughters  of  Royal  Arch
Masons;  and  the  third,  the  only  one  that
has  much  pretension  of  ceremony  or  ritual,
is  the  “  Good  Samaritan,”  whose  privileges
are  confined  to  Royal  Arch  Masons  and
their  wives.

In  some  parts  of  the  United  States  these
degrees  are  very  popular,  while  in  other
places  they  are  never  practised,  and  are
strongly  condemned  as  modern  innovations.
The  fact  is,  that  by  their  friends  as  well  as
their  enemies  these  so-called  degrees  have
been  greatly  misrepresented.  When  fe¬
males  are  told  that  in  receiving  these  de¬
grees  they  are  admitted  into  the  Masonic
Order,  and  are  obtaining  Masonic  informa¬
tion,  under  the  name  of  “  Ladies’  Ma¬
sonry,”  they  are  simply  deceived.  When
a  woman  is  informed  that,  by  passing


34


ADOPTIVE


ADVANCEMENT


through  the  brief  and  unimpressive  cere¬
mony  of  any  one  of  these  degrees,  she  has
become  a  Mason,  the  deception  is  still  more
gross  and  inexcusable.  But  it  is  true  that
every  woman  who  is  related  by  ties  of  con¬
sanguinity  to  a  Master  Mason  is  at  all
times  and  under  all  circumstances  pecu¬
liarly  entitled  to  Masonic  protection  and
assistance.  Now,  if  the  recipient  of  an
androgynous  degree  is  candidly  instructed
that,  by  the  use  of  these  degrees,  the  female
relatives  of  Masons  are  put  in  possession
of  the  means  of  making  their  claims  known
by  what  may  be  called  a  sort  of  oral  testi¬
mony,  which,  unlike  a  written  certificate,
can  be  neither  lost  nor  destroyed ;  but  that,
by  her  initiation  as  a  “  Mason’s  Wife  ”  or  as
a  “  Heroine  of  Jericho,”  she  is  brought  no
nearer  to  the  inner  portal  of  Masonry  than
she  was  before  —  if  she  is  honestly  told  all
this,  then  there  can  hardly  be  any  harm,
and  there  may  be  some  good  in  these  forms
if  prudently  bestowed.  But  all  attempts  to
make  Masonry  of  them,  and  especially  that
anomalous  thing  called  “Female Masonry,”
are  reprehensible,  and  are  well  calculated
to  produce  opposition  among  the  well-in¬
formed  and  cautious  members  of  the  Fra¬
ternity.

Adoptive  Masonry,  Egyptian.

A  system  invented  by  Cagliostro.  See
Egyptian  Masonry.

Adoration.  The  act  of  paying  di¬
vine  worship.  The  Latin  word  adorare  is
derived  from  ad,  “  to,”  and  os,  oris,  “  the
mouth,”  and  we  thus  etymologically  learn
that  the  primitive  and  most  general  method
of  adoration  was  by  the  apjjlication  of  the
fingers  to  the  mouth.  Hence  we  read  in
Job,  (xxxi.  26,)  “If  I  beheld  the  sun  when
it  shined,  or  the  moon  walking  in  bright¬
ness,  and  my  heart  hath  been  secretly  en¬
ticed,  or  my  mouth  hath  kissed  my  hand,  this
also  were  an  iniquity  to  be  punished  by  the
judges ;  for  I  should  have  denied  the  God
that  is  above.”  Here  the  mouth  kissing
the  hand  is  an  equipollent  expression  to
adoration,  as  if  he  had  said,  “If  I  have
adored  the  sun  or  the  moon.”  This  mode
of  adoration  is  said  to  have  originated
among  the  Persians,  who,  as  worshippers
of  the  sun,  always  turned  their  faces  to  the
east  and  kissed  their  hands  to  that  lumi¬
nary.  The  gesture  was  first  used  as  a  to¬
ken  of  respect  to  their  monarchs,  and  was
easily  transferred  to  objects  of  worship.
Other  additional  forms  of  adoration  were
used  in  various  countries,  but  in  almost
all  of  them  this  reference  to  kissing  was  in
some  degree  preserved.  Among  the  ancient
Romans  the  act  of  adoration  was  thus  per¬
formed  :  The  worshipper,  having  his  head
covered,  applied  his  right  hand  to  his  lips,
thumb  erect,  and  the  forefinger  resting  on


it,  and  then,  bowing  his  head,  he  turned
round  from  right  to  left.  And  hence  Apu-
leius  ( Apolog .)  uses  the  expression  “  to  ap¬
ply  the  hand  to  the  lips,”  manum  labris
admovere,  to  express  the  act  of  adoration.
The  Grecian  mode  of  adoration  differed
from  the  Roman  in  having  the  head  uncov¬
ered,  which  practice  was  adopted  by  the
Christians.  The  Oriental  nations  cover  the
head,  but  uncover  the  feet.  They  also  ex¬
press  the  act  of  adoration  by  prostrating
themselves  on  their  faces  and  applying
their  foreheads  to  the  ground.  The  an¬
cient  Jews  adored  by  kneeling,  sometimes
by  prostration  of  the  whole  body,  and  by
kissing  the  hand.  This  act,  therefore,  of
kissing  the  hand,  was  an  early  and  a  very
general  symbol  of  adoration.  But  we  must
not  be  led  into  the  error  of  supposing  that
a  somewhat  similar  gesture  used  in  some
of  the  high  degrees  of  Freemasonry  has
any  allusion  to  an  act  of  worship.  It  refers
to  that  symbol  of  silence  and  secrecy  which
is  figured  in  the  statues  of  Harpocrates,
the  god  of  silence.  The  Masonic  idea  of
adoration  has  been  well  depicted  by  the
mediaeval  Christian  painters,  who  repre¬
sented  the  act  by  angels  prostrated  before  a
luminous  triangle.

Advanced.  This  word  has  two  tech¬
nical  meanings  in  Masonry.

1.  We  speak  of  a  candidate  as  being
advanced  when  he  has  passed  from  a  lower
to  a  higher  degree ;  as  we  say  that  a  candi¬
date  is  qualified  for  advancement  from  the
Entered  Apprentice’s  degree  to  that  of  a
Fellow  Craft  when  he  has  made  that  “  suit¬
able  proficiency  in  the  former  which,  by
the  regulations  of  the  Order,  entitle  him
to  receive  the  initiation  into  and  the  in¬
structions  of  the  latter.  And  when  the
Apprentice  has  thus  been  promoted  to  the
second  degree  he  is  said  to  have  advanced
in  Masonry.

2.  The  wTord  is  peculiarly  applied  to  the
initiation  of  a  candidate  into  the  Mark
degree,  which  is  the  fourth  in  the  Ameri¬
can  modification  of  the  York  Rite.  The
Master  Mason  is  thus  said  to  be  “  advanced
to  the  honorary  degree  of  a  Mark  Master,”
to  indicate  either  that  he  has  now  been
promoted  one  step  beyond  the  degrees  of
Ancient  Craft  Masonry  on  his  way  to  the
Royal  Arch,  or  to  express  the  fact  that  he
has  been  elevated  from  the  common  class
of  Fellow  Crafts  to  that  higher  and  more
select  one  which,  according  to  the  tradi¬
tions  of  Masonry,  constituted,  at  the  first
Temple,  the  class  of  Mark  Masters.  See
Mark  Master.

Advancement  Hurried.  Noth¬
ing  can  be  more  certain  than  that  the  proper
qualifications  of  a  candidate  for  admission
into  the  mysteries  of  Freemasonry,  and  the


ADVANCEMENT


ADVANCEMENT


35


necessary  proficiency  of  a  Mason  who  seeks
advancement  to  a  higher  degree,  are  the
two  great  bulwarks  which  are  to  protect
the  purity  and  integrity  of  our  Institution.
Indeed,  I  know  not  which  is  the  most  hurt¬
ful —  to  admit  an  applicant  who  is  un¬
worthy,  or  to  promote  a  candidate  who  is
ignorant  of  his  first  lessons.  The  one
affects  the  external,  the  other  the  internal
character  of  the  Institution.  The  one
brings  discredit  upon  the  Order  among  the
profane,  who  already  regard  us,  too  often,
with  suspicion  and  dislike;  the  other  in¬
troduces  ignorance  and  incapacity  into  our
ranks,  and  dishonors  the  science  of  Masonry
in  our  own  eyes.  The  one  covers  our  walls
with  imperfect  and  worthless  stones,  which
mar  the  outward  beauty  and  impair  the
strength  of  our  temple  ;  the  other  fills  our
interior  apartments  with  confusion  and  dis¬
order,  and  leaves  the  edifice,  though  exter¬
nally  strong,  both  inefficient  and  inappro¬
priate  for  its  destined  uses.

But,  to  the  candidate  himself,  a  too
hurried  advancement  is  often  attended  with
the  most  disastrous  effects.  As  in  geometry,
so  in  Masonry,  there  is  no  “  royal  road  ”  to
perfection.  A  knowledge  of  its  principles
and  its  science,  and  consequently  an  ac¬
quaintance  with  its  beauties,  can  only  be
acquired  by  long  and  diligent  study.  To
the  careless  observer  it  seldom  offers,  at  a
hasty  glance,  much  to  attract  his  attention
or  secure  his  interest.  The  gold  must  be
deprived,  by  careful  manipulation,  of  the
dark  and  worthless  ore  which  surrounds
and  envelops  it,  before  its  metallic  lustre
and  value  can  be  seen  and  appreciated.

Hence,  the  candidate,  who  hurriedly
passes  through  his  degrees  without  a  due
examination  of  the  moral  and  intellectual
purposes  of  each,  arrives  at  the  summit  of
our  edifice  without  a  due  and  necessary
appreciation  of  the  general  symmetry  and
connection  that  pervade  the  whole  system.
The  candidate,  thus  hurried  through  the
elements  of  our  science,  and  unprepared,  by
a  knowledge  of  its  fundamental  principles,
for  the  reception  and  comprehension  of  the
corollaries  which  are  to  be  deduced  from
them,  is  apt  to  view  the  whole  system  as  “  a
rude  and  indigested  mass”  of  frivolous
ceremonies  and  puerile  conceits,  whose  in¬
trinsic  value  will  not  adequately  pay  him
for  the  time,  the  trouble,  and  expense  that
he  has  incurred  in  his  forced  initiation.
To  him,  Masonry  is  as  incomprehensible  as
was  the  veiled  statue  of  Isis  to  its  blind
worshippers,  and  he  becomes,  in  conse¬
quence,  either  a  useless  drone  in  our  hive,
or  speedily  retires  in  disgust  from  all  parti¬
cipation  in  our  labors.

But  the  candidate  who  by  slow  and  pain¬
ful  steps  has  proceeded  through  each  apart¬


ment  of  our  mystic  temple,  from  its  porch
to  its  sanctuary,  pausing  in  his  progress  to
admire  the  beauties  and  to  study  the  uses
of  each,  learning,  as  he  advances,  “  line
upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept,”  is
gradually  and  almost  imperceptibly  imbued
with  so  much  admiration  of  the  Institution,
so  much  love  for  its  principles,  so  much
just  appreciation  of  its  design  as  a  conserva¬
tor  of  divine  truth,  and  an  agent  of  human
civilization,  that  he  is  inclined,  on  behold¬
ing,  at  last,  the  whole  beauty  of  the  finished
building,  to  exclaim,  as  did  the  wondering
Queen  ofSheba :  “  A  Most  Excellent  Master
must  have  done  all  this !  ”

The  usage  in  many  jurisdictions  of  this
country,  when  the  question  is  asked  in  the
ritual  whether  the  candidate  has  made  suit¬
able  proficiency  in  his  preceding  degree,  is
to  reply,  “  Such  as  time  and  circumstances
would  permit.”  I  have  no  doubt  that  this
was  an  innovation  originally  invented  to
evade  the  law,  which  has  always  required  a
due  proficiency.  To  such  a  question  no
other  answer  ought  to  be  given  than  the
positive  and  unequivocal  one  that  “  he  has.”
Neither  “time  nor  circumstances”  should
be  permitted  to  interfere  with  his  attain¬
ment  of  the  necessary  knowledge,  nor  ex¬
cuse  its  absence.  This,  with  the  whole¬
some  rule,  very  generally  existing,  which
requires  an  interval  between  the  conferring
of  the  degrees,  would  go  far  to  remedy  the
evil  of  too  hurried  and  unqualified  ad¬
vancement,  of  which  all  intelligent  Masons
are  now  complaining.

After  these  views  of  the  necessity  of  a
careful  examination  of  the  claims  of  a  can¬
didate  for  advancement  in  Masonry,  and  the
necessity,  for  his  own  good  as  well  as  that
of  the  Order,  that  each  one  should  fully
prepare  himself  for  this  promotion,  it  is
proper  th.at  we  should  next  inquire  into
the  laws  of  Masonry,  by  which  the  wisdom
and  experience  of  our  predecessors  have
thought  proper  to  guard  as  well  the  rights
of  those  who  claim  advancement  as  the
interests  of  the  Lodge  which  is  called  upon
to  grant  it.  This  subject  has  been  so  fully
treated  in  Mackey’s  Text  Book  of  Masonic
Jurisprudence,  (b.  iii.,  ch.  i.,  p.  165,  and
seq.,)  that  I  shall  not  hesitate  to  incorpo¬
rate  the  views  in  that  work  into  the  present
article.

The  subject  of  the  petition  of  a  candidate
for  advancement  involves  three  questions
of  great  importance:  First,  how  soon,  atter
receiving  the  first  degree,  can  he  apply  for
the  second?  Secondly,  what  number  ot
black  balls  is  necessary  to  constitute  a  re¬
jection?  And  thirdly,  what  time  must
elapse,  after  a  first  rejection,  before  the
Apprentice  can  renew  his  application  for
advancement?


36


ADVANCEMENT


ADVANCEMENT


1.  How  soon,  after  receiving  a  former  de¬
gree,  can  a  candidate  apply  for  advancement
to  the  next  f  The  necessity  of  a  full  com-

rehension  of  the  mysteries  of  one  degree,
efore  any  attempt  is  made  to  acquire  those
of  a  second,  seems  to  have  been  thoroughly
appreciated  from  the  earliest  times;  and
hence  all  the  Ancient  Constitutions  have
rescribed  that  “the  Master  shall  instruct
is  Apprentice  faithfully,  and  make  him  a
perfect  workman.”  But  if  there  be  an  ob¬
ligation  on  the  part  of  the  Master  to  in¬
struct  his  Apprentice,  there  must  be,  of
course,  a  correlative  obligation  on  the  part  of
the  latter  to  receive  and  profit  by  those  in¬
structions.  Accordingly,  unless  this  obli¬
gation  is  discharged,  and  the  Apprentice
makes  himself  acquainted  with  the  mys¬
teries  of  the  degree  that  he  has  already
received,  it  is,  by  general  consent,  admitted
that  he  has  no  right  to  be  intrusted  with
further  and  more  important  information.
The  modern  ritual  sustains  this  doctrine,
by  requiring  that  the  candidate,  as  a  quali¬
fication  in  passing  onward,  shall  have  made
“  suitable  proficiency  in  the  preceding  de¬
gree.”  This  is  all  that  the  general  law  pre¬
scribes.  Suitable  proficiency  must  have
been  attained,  and  the  period  in  which  that
condition  will  be  acquired  must  necessarily
depend  on  the  mental  capacity  of  the  can¬
didate.  Some  men  will  become  proficient
in  a  shorter  time  than  others,  and  of  this
fact  the  Master  and  the  Lodge  are  to  be  the
judges.  An  examination  should  therefore
take  place  in  open  Lodge,  and  a  ballot  im¬
mediately  following  will  express  the  opi¬
nion  of  the  Lodge  on  the  result  of  that
examination,  and  the  qualification  of  the
candidate.

F rom  the  difficulty  with  which  the  second
and  third  degrees  were  formerly  obtained
—  a  difficulty  dependent  on  the  fact  that
they  were  only  conferred  in  the  Grand
Lodge  —  it  is  evident  that  Apprentices
must  have  undergone  a  long  probation  be¬
fore  they  had  an  opportunity  of  advance¬
ment,  though  the  precise  term  of  the  pro¬
bation  was  decided  by  no  legal  enactment.
Several  modern  Grand  Lodges,  however,
looking  with  disapprobation  on  the  rapidity
with  which  the  degrees  are  sometimes  con¬
ferred  upon  candidates  wholly  incompe¬
tent,  have  adopted  special  regulations,  pre¬
scribing  a  determinate  period  of  probation
ior  each  degree.  This,  however,  is  a  local
lav/,  to  be  obeyed  only  in  those  j  urisdictions
in  which  it  is  of  force.  The  general  law
of  Masonry  makes  no  such  determinate
provision  of  time,  and  demands  only  that
the  candidate  shall  give  evidence  of  “suit¬
able  proficiency.”

2.  What  nuniber  of  black  balls  is  necessary
to  constitute  a  rejection  f  Here  we  are  en¬


tirely  without  the  guidance  of  any  express
law,  as  all  the  Ancient  Constitutions  are
completely  silent  upon  the  subject.  It
would  seem,  however,  that  in  the  advance¬
ment  of  an  Apprentice  or  Fellow  Craft,  as
well  as  in  the  election  of  a  profane,  the
ballot  should  be  unanimous.  This  is  strictly
in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  Ma¬
sonry,  which  require  unanimity  in  admis¬
sion,  lest  improper  persons  be  intruded,  and
harmony  impaired.  Greater  qualifications
are  certainly  not  required  of  a  profane  ap¬
plying  for  initiation  than  of  an  initiate
seeking  advancement;  nor  can  there  be  any
reason  why  the  test  of  those  qualifications
should  not  be  as  rigid  in  the  one  case  as  in
the  other.  It  may  be  laid  down  as  a  rule,
therefore,  that  in  all  cases  of  balloting  for
advancement  in  any  of  the  degrees  of  Ma¬
sonry,  a  single  black  ball  will  reject.

3.  What  time  must  elapse,  after  a  first  re¬
jection,  before  the  Apprentice  or  Fellow  Craft
can  renew  his  application  for  advancement  to
a  higher  degree?  Here,  too,  the  Ancient
Constitutions  are  silent,  and  we  are  left  to
deduce  our  opinions  from  the  general  prin¬
ciples  and  analogies  of  Masonic  law.  As
the  application  for  advancement  to  a  higher
degree  is  founded  on  a  right  enuring  to  the
Apprentice  or  Fellow  Craft  by  virtue  of
his  reception  into  the  previous  degree  —
that  is  to  say,  as  the  Apprentice,  so  soon  as
he  has  been  initiated,  becomes  invested
with  the  right  of  applying  for  advancement
to  the  second  —  it  seems  evident  that,  as
long  as  he  remains  an  Apprentice  “  in  good
standing,”  he  continues  to  be  invested  with
that  right.  Now,  the  rejection  of  his  peti¬
tion  for  advancement  by  the  Lodge  does
not  impair  his  right  to  apply  again,  be¬
cause  it  does  not  affect  his  rights  and  stand¬
ing  as  an  Apprentice ;  it  is  simply  the
expression  of  the  opinion  that  the  Lodge
does  not  at  present  deem  him  qualified  for
further  progress  in  Masonry.  We  must
never  forget  the  difference  between  the  right
of  applying  for  advancement  and  the  right
of  advancement.  Every  Apprentice  pos¬
sesses  the  former,  but  no  one  can  claim  the
latter  until  it  is  given  to  him  by  the  unani¬
mous  vote  of  the  Lodge.  And  as,  there¬
fore,  this  right  of  application  or  petition  is
not  impaired  by  its  rejection  at  a  particular
time,  and  as  the  Apprentice  remains  pre¬
cisely  in  the  same  position  in  his  own  de¬
gree,  after  the  rejection,  as  he  did  before,
it  seems  to  follow,  as  au  irresistible  deduc¬
tion,  that  he  may  again  apply  at  the  next
regular  communication,  and,  if  a  second
time  rejected,  repeat  his  applications  at  all
future  meetings.  The  Entered  Apprentices
of  a  Lodge  are  competent,  at  all  regular
communications  of  their  Lodge,  to  petition
for  advancement.  Whether  that  petition


ADYTUM


AFFILIATED


shall  be  granted  or  rejected  is  quite  another
thing,  and  depends  altogether  on  the  favor
of  the  Lodge.  And  what  is  here  said  of  an
Apprentice,  in  relation  to  advancement  to
the  second  degree,  may  be  equally  said  of  a
Fellow  Craft  in  reference  to  advancement
to  the  third.

This  opinion  has  not,  it  is  true,  been  uni¬
versally  adopted,  though  no  force  of  au¬
thority,  short  of  an  opposing  landmark,
could  make  one  doubt  its  correctness.  For
instance,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  California
decided,  in  1857,  that  “  the  application  of
Apprentices  or  Fellow  Crafts  for  advance¬
ment  should,  after  they  have  been  once
rejected  by  ballot,  be  governed  by  the  same
principles  which  regulate  the  ballot  on  peti¬
tions  for  initiation,  and  which  require  a  pro¬
bation  of  one  year.”

This  appears  to  be  a  singular  decision  of
Masonic  law.  If  the  reasons  which  prevent
the  advancement  of  an  Apprentice  or  Fel¬
low  Craft  to  a  higher  degree  are  of  such  a
nature  as  to  warrant  the  delay  of  one  year,
it  is  far  better  to  prefer  charges  against  the
petitioner,  and  to  give  him  the  opportunity
of  a  fair  and  impartial  trial.  In  many
cases,  a  candidate  for  advancement  is  re¬
tarded  in  his  progress  from  an  opinion,  on
the  part  of  the  Lodge,  that  he  is  not  yet
sufficiently  prepared  for  promotion  by  a
knowledge  of  the  preceding  degree  —  an
objection  which  may  sometimes  be  removed
before  the  recurrence  of  the  next  monthly
meeting.  In  such  a  case,  a  decision  like
that  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  California
would  be  productive  of  manifest  injustice.
It  is,  therefore,  a  more  consistent  rule,  that
the  candidate  for  advancement  has  a  right
to  apply  at  every  regular  meeting,  and  that
whenever  any  moral  objections  exist  to  his
taking  a  higher  degree,  these  objections
should  be  made  in  the  form  of  charges,  and
their  truth  tested  by  an  impartial  trial.  To
this,  too,  the  candidate  is  undoubtedly  en¬
titled,  on  all  the  principles  of  justice  and
equity.

Adytum.  The  most  retired  and  secret
part  of  the  ancient  temples,  into  which  the
people  were  not  permitted  to  enter,  but  which
was  accessible  to  the  priests  only,  was  called
the  adytum.  And  hence  the  derivation  of
the  word  from  the  Greek  privative  preterite
a,  and  Sveiv,  to  enter  —  that  which  is  not  to
be  entered.  In  the  adytum  was  generally
to  be  found  a  taphos,  or  tomb,  or  some
relics  or  sacred  images  of  the  god  to  whom
the  temple  was  consecrated.  It  being  sup¬
posed  that  temples  owed  their  origin  to  the
superstitious  reverence  paid  by  the  ancients
to  their  deceased  friends,  and  as  most  of
the  gods  were  men  who  had  been  deified  on
account  of  their  virtues,  temples  were,
perhaps,  at  first  only  stately  monuments


37

erected  in  honor  of  the  dead.  Hence  the
interior  of  the  temple  was  originally  no¬
thing  more  than  a  cavity  regarded  as  a
place  for  the  reception  of  a  person  interred,
and  in  it  was  to  be  found  the  soros,  or  coffin,
the  taphos,  or  tomb,  or,  among  the  Scandi¬
navians,  the  barrow  or  mound  grave.  In
time,  the  statue  or  image  of  a  god  took  the
place  of  the  coffin ;  but  the  reverence  for
the  spot  as  one  of  peculiar  sanctity  re¬
mained,  and  this  interior  part  of  the  tem¬
ple  became,  among  the  Greeks,  the  or/noc,  or
chapel,  among  the  Romans  the  adytum,  or
forbidden  place,  and  among  the  Jews  the
kodesh  hakodashim,  the  holy  of  holies.  (See
Sanctum  Sanctorum .)  “The  sanctity  thus
acquired,”  says  Dudley,  ( Naolbgy ,  p.  393,)
“  by  the  cell  of  interment  might  readily
and  with  propriety  be  assigned  to  any
fabric  capable  of  containing  the  body  of
the  departed  friend,  or  the  relic,  or  even
the  symbol,  of  the  presence  or  existence
of  a  divine  personage.”  And  thus  it  has
happened  that  there  was  in  every  ancient
temple  an  adytum  or  most  holy  place.  The
adytum  of  the  small  temple  of  Pompeii  is
still  in  excellent  preservation.  It  is  carried
some  steps  above  the  level  of  the  main
building,  and,  like  the  Jewish  sanctuary,
is  without  light.

yKneid.  Bishop  Warburton  [Div.  Ley.)
has  contended,  and  his  opinion  has  been
sustained  by  the  great  majority  of  subse¬
quent  commentators,  that  Virgil,  in  the
sixth  book  of  his  immortal  Epic,  has,  under
the  figure  of  the  descent  of  iEneas  into  the
infernal  regions,  described  the  ceremony  of
initiation  into  the  Ancient  Mysteries.

AEon.  This  word,  in  its  original  Greek,
a'tuv,  signifies  the  age  or  duration  of  any¬
thing.  The  Gnostics,  however,  used  it  in
a  peculiar  mode  to  designate  the  intelli¬
gent,  intellectual,  and  material  powers  or
natures  which  flowed  as  emanations  from
the  Bvflof,  or  Infinite  Abyss  of  Deity,  and
which  were  connected  with  their  divine
fountain  as  rays  of  light  are  with  the  sun.
See  Gnosticism.

AEra  Architeetonioa.  Lat.  Archi¬
tectonic  Era.  Used  in  some  modern  Ma¬
sonic  lapidary  inscriptions  to  designate  the
date  more  commonly  known  as  annus  lucis ,
the  year  of  light.

Affiliated  Mason.  A  Mason  who
holds  membership  in  some  Lodge.  The
word  affiliation  is  derived  from  the  French
affilier,  which  Richelet  (Diet,  de  la  langue
Franqaise )  defines,  “  to  communicate  to  any
one  a  participation  in  the  spiritual  benefits
of  a  religious  order,”  and  he  says  that  such
a  communication  is  called  an  “affiliation.”
The  word,  as  a  technical  term,  is  not  found
in  any  of  the  old  Masonic  writers,  who
always  use  admission  instead  of  affiliation.


38


AFFIRMATION


AFRICAN


There  is  no  precept  more  explicitly  ex¬
pressed  in  the  Ancient  Constitutions  than
that  every  Mason  should  belong  to  a  Lodge.
The  foundation  of  the  law  which  imposes
this  duty  is  to  be  traced  as  far  back  as  the
Gothic  Constitutions  of  926,  which  tell  us
that  “the  workman  shall  labor  diligently
on  work-days,  that  he  may  deserve  his
holydays.”  The  obligation  that  every  Ma¬
son  should  thus  labor  is  implied  in  all  the
subsequent  Constitutions,  which  always
speak  of  Masons  as  working  members  of  the
Fraternity,  until  we  come  to  the  Charges
approved  in  1722,  which  explicitly  state
that  “  every  Brother  ought  to  belong  to
a  Lodge,  and  to  be  subject  to  its  By-Laws
and  the  General  Regulations.”

Affirmation.  The  question  has  been
mooted  whether  a  Quaker,  or  other  person
having  peculiar  religious  scruples  in  refer¬
ence  to  taking  oaths,  can  receive  the  de¬
grees  of  Masonry  by  taking  an  affirmation.
Now,  as  the  obligations  of  Masonry  are
symbolic  in  their  character,  and  the  forms
in  which  they  are  administered  constitute
the  essence  of  the  symbolism,  there  cannot
be  a  doubt  that  the  prescribed  mode  is  the
only  one  that  ought  to  be  used,  and  that
affirmations  are  entirely  inadmissible.  The
London  Freemason’s  Quarterly  { 1828,  p.  286,)
says  that  “  a  Quaker’s  affirmation  is  bind¬
ing.”  This  is  not  denied:  the  only  ques¬
tion  is  whether  it  is  admissible.  Can  the
obligations  be  assumed  in  any  but  one  way,
unless  the  ritual  be  entirely  changed?  and
can  any  “man  or  body  of  men”  at  this
time  make  such  a  change  without  affecting
the  universality  of  Masonry  ?  Bro.  Chase
( Masonic  Digest,  p.  448,)  says  that  “  confer¬
ring  the  degrees  on  affirmation  is  no  viola¬
tion  of  the  spirit  of  Freemasonry,  and
neither  overthrows  nor  affects  a  land¬
mark.”  And  in  this  he  is  sustained  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Maine  (1823) ;  but  the
only  other  Grand  Lodges  which  have  ex¬
pressed  an  opinion  on  this  subject  —  namely,
those  of  Missouri,  Tennessee,  Kentucky,
Delaware,  Virginia,  and  Pennsylvania  —
have  made  an  opposite  decision.  The  en¬
tire  practice  of  Lodges  in  this  country
is  also  against  the  use  of  an  affirmation.
There  is  no  landmark  more  clear  and  cer¬
tain  than  that  which  prescribes  the  mode
of  entering  upon  the  covenant,  and  it,  by
implication,  excludes  the  affirmation,  or
any  other  kind  but  the  one  prescribed.

Africa.  Freemasonry  was  first  at¬
tempted  to  be  introduced  into  Africa  in
1735,  through  the  appointment,  in  that
year,  of  Richard  Hull,  Esq.,  by  Lord  Wey¬
mouth,  Grand  Master  of  England,  as  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Master  at  Gambay,  in  West
Africa.  In  the  following  year  the  Earl  of
Loudoun  appointed  Dr.  David  Creighton


Provincial  Grand  Master  of  Cape  Coast
Castle.  At  present  there  is  a  District  Grand
Master  for  South  Africa,  and  the  English
Lodges  on  that  continent  are  under  the  con¬
trol,  through  him,  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England.  I  doubt,  however,  whether  any
Lodges  were  established  at  an  early  period
on  the  African  continent  by  these  provin¬
cial  deputations.  At  all  events,  the  first
African  Lodge  that  I  find  marked  in  Hutch¬
inson’s  Register  of  the  English  Lodges  is  at
Bulam,  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  under  the
date  of  1792,  and  numbered  as  495.  At
present  there  are  eighteen  Lodges  in  Af¬
rica  under  the  English  jurisdiction,  fourteen
of  which  are  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
one  at  Bathurst  on  the  river  Gambia,  three
at  Cape  Coast  Castle,  and  one  at  Sierra
Leone.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  has
a  Lodge  under  its  jurisdiction  at  the  Cape
of  Good  Hope,  and  several  have  been  estab¬
lished  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  in
Mauritius,  Egypt,  and  Algeria.

African  Architects,  Order  of.
Sometimes  called  African  Builders;  F rench,
Architectes  de  I’Afrique;  German,  African-
ische  Bauherren.

Of  all  the  new  sects  and  modern  degrees
of  Freemasonry  which  sprang  up  on  the
continent  of  Europe  during  the  eighteenth
century,  there  was  none  which,  for  the
time,  maintained  so  high  an  intellectual
position  as  the  Order  of  African  Archi¬
tects,  called  by  the  French  Architectes  de
I’Afrique,  and  by  the  Germans  Africanische
Bauherren.  A  Masonic  sect  of  this  name
had  originally  been  established  in  Ger¬
many  in  the  year  1756,  but  it  does  not
appear  to  have  attracted  much  attention,
or,  indeed,  deserved  it;  and  hence,  amid
the  multitude  of  Masonic  innovations  to
which,  almost  every  day  was  giving  birth
and  ephemeral  existence,  it  soon  disap¬
peared.  But  the  society  which  is  the  sub¬
ject  of  the  present  article,  although  it  as¬
sumed  the  name  of  the  original  African
Architects,  was  of  a  very  different  charac¬
ter.  It  may,  however,  be  considered,  as  it
was  established  only  eleven  years  after¬
wards,  as  a  remodification  of  it.

The  new  Order  of  African  Architects  owed
its  existence  to  the  Masonic  zeal  and  lib¬
eral  views  of  that  great  monarch,  Frederick
II.  of  Prussia,  to  whom,  also,  the  now  flour¬
ishing  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite  traces  its
origin.  No  monarch  in  the  royal  catalogue
of  Europe  ever  was  so  intimately  connected
with,  or  took  so  much  interest  in.  Masonic
affairs  as  the  illustrious  King  of  Prussia.
He  was  to  the  modern  Institution  what
tradition  says  Solomon  of  Israel  was  to  the
ancient ;  and  if  his  life  had  been  prolonged
for  a  few  more  years,  until  the  Masonic
orders  which  he  had  established  and  pat-


AFRICAN


AFRICAN


39


ronized  had  acquired  sufficient  vigor  for
self-support,  and  until  the  vast  Masonic
designs  which  his  wisdom  and  zeal  had
initiated  had  gained  permanent  strength
through  his  influence,  there  can  be  little
doubt  that  the  Order  of  African  Architects
would  now  have  been  the  ruling  power  of
the  Masonic  world.  It  would  not,  it  is
true,  have  opposed  the  propagation  of  other
sects,  nor  interfered  with  the  active  and
dogmatic  jurisdiction  of  supreme  councils
or  of  Grand  Lodges,  for  its  favorite  motto
was  tolerance  of  all ;  but  by  its  intellectual
power,  and  by  the  direction  which  it  would
have  given  to  Masonic  studies,  it  would
have  vastly  elevated  the  character  of  the
Institution,  and  would  have  hastened  that
millennium  for  which  all  Masonic  students
are  even  now  so  fondly  looking,  when  every
Lodge  shall  be  an  academy  of  science.

The  memory  of  a  society  whose  inten¬
tions,  although  unfortunately  frustrated  by
adverse  circumstances,  were  so  praiseworthy,
should  never  be  allowed  to  pass  into  obli¬
vion,  but  rather  should  be  preserved  for
imitation,  and  in  some  fortunate  future  for
resuscitation.  Hence  I  flatter  myself  that
the  present  article,  in  which  I  shall  endeavor
to  give  some  details  of  its  object  and  history,
will  not  be  altogether  without  gratification
to  the  reader  who  takes  any  interest  in  the
subject  of  Masonic  progress.  In  the  eigh¬
teenth  century  adventurous  Masons  sought
to  build  many  temples  after  their  own  de¬
vices,  most  of  which  have  fallen  into  decay  ;
but  the  Order  of  African  Architects  is  a
block  from  the  ruins  which  is  well  worthy
of  preservation.

Frederick  II.,  King  of  Prussia,  who  had
been  initiated  while  a  prince  and  in  the
lifetime  of  his  father,  soon  after  he  ascended
the  throne,  directed  the  attention  of  his
great  and  inquiring  mind  to  the  condition
of  Freemasonry,  for  which,  from  his  first
acquaintance  with  it,  he  had  conceived  a
strong  attachment.  He  soon  perceived
that  it  was  no  longer  what  it  once  had  been,
what  it  was  capable  of  being,  and  vvhat  it
was,  in  his  opinion,  intended  to  be.  The
great  minds  in  its  bosom,  who  in  the  olden
time  had  devoted  their  attention  to  science
and  philosophy,  had  passed  away,  and  the
Masonic  leaders,  such  as  Hund  and  Knigge
and  Rosa  and  Zinnendorf,  were  occupying
themselves  in  the  manufacture  of  unmean¬
ing  degrees  and  the  organization  of  rival
rites,  in  which  a  pompous  ceremonial  was
substituted  for  philosophical  research.

Frederick,  appreciating  the  capacity  of
Freemasonry  fora  higher  destiny,  conceived
the  plan  of  an  interior  order  which  might
assume  the  place  and  perform  the  functions
of  a  Masonic  academy.  The  king  com¬
municated  these  ideas  to  several  distin¬


guished  Masons,  the  most  prominent  of
whom  were  Dr.  John  Ernest  Stahl  and  the
Counsellor  Charles  Frederick  Koppen.  To
them  he  intrusted  the  duty  of  carrying  his
design  of  a  Masonic  reformation  into  effect

Accordingly,  in  the  year  1767,  at  Berlin,
Koppen,  as  the  first  Grand  Master,  assisted
by  Stahl  and  several  other  men  of  letters,
established  a  new  Masonic  sect,  order,  or
rite —  call  it  which  you  please  —  upon  the
old  and  almost  extinct  society  of  African
Builders,  whose  name  they  preserved  and
whose  system  they  extended  and  perfected,
but  whose  character  they  entirely  changed,
by  such  important  modifications  as  gave  to
the  new  Institution  an  original  condition.
They  formed  a  code  of  statutes  in  conformity
with  the  views  of  the  king,  and  which  were
therefore  very  different  from  those  which
regulated  the  other  Masonic  bodies  of  the
same  period.  They  commenced  with  the
declaration  that  the  principles  which
should  govern  them  were  to  fear  God,  to
honor  the  king,  to  be  prudent  and  discreet,
and  to  exercise  universal  tolerance  towards
all  other  Masonic  sects,  but  to  affiliate  with
none.  Hence,  when  the  Baron  Hund,  the
author  and  chief  director  of  the  widely
spread  Rite  of  Strict  Observance,  whose  in¬
fluence  had  extended  over  so  many  con¬
tending  sects  of  German  and  French  Ma¬
sonry,  sought  to  establish  a  union  with  the
growing  Order  of  African  Architects,  they
peremptorily  declined  all  his  solicitations.
As  long  as  the  Order  existed,  it  remained
independent  of  and  unconnected  with  every
other.  In  fact,  it  carried  its  opposition  to
any  mingling  with  rival  rites  to  such  an  ex¬
tent  that  the  Duke  Ferdinand  of  Brunswick,
when  an  applicant  for  admission  into  its
fold,  was  rejected  simply  because  he  had
formerly  taken  an  active  part  iu  the  con¬
tentions  of  several  of  the  Masonic  sects.

The  Order  of  African  Architects  made
the  history  of  Freemasonry  its  peculiar
study.  Its  members  were  occupied  with
profound  researches  into  the  nature  and  de¬
sign  of  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  in  which  they
found,  as  they  supposed,  the  origin  of  our
Institution,  and  investigated  the  character
of  all  the  secret  societies  which  were  in  any
way  assimilated  to  Freemasonry.  They
also  diligently  cultivated  the  sciences,  and
especially  mathematics.  At  their  meetings
they  read  essays  on  these  various  subjects,
and  the  members  communicated  to  each
other  the  results  of  their  investigations.
They  published  many  important  documents
on  the  subjects  which  they  had  discussed,
some  of  which  are  still  extant,  and  have
afforded  literary  aid  of  great  value  to  sub¬
sequent  Masonic  writers.

Every  year,  during  the  life  of  King  Fred¬
erick,  tho  Order  bestowed  a  medal  of  the


40


AFRICAN


AFRICAN


value  of  fifty  ducats  on  the  writer  of  the
best  essay  on  the  history  of  Masonry.

The  receptions  were  always  gratuitous,
notwithstanding  which  the  Chapters  always
relieved  such  members  as  became  indigent
and  in  need  of  assistance.

The  meetings  were  always  of  a  scientific
or  literary  character,  and  in  some  of  the
Chapters  the  proceedings  were  conducted  in
the  Latin  language  —  a  sufficient  evidence
of  the  educated  attainments  of  the  members.

In  their  receptions  of  candidates  they  were
exceedingly  rigorous,  respecting  neither
wealth  nor  rank  nor  political  influence  if
moral  and  intellectual  qualifications  were
wanting,  an  example  of  which  has  already
been  given  in  the  rejection  of  the  Duke  of
Brunswick  alluded  to  above.

In  their  ceremonies  they  were  very  simple,
making  no  use  of  aprons,  collars,  or  other
decorations.  They  looked  more  to  the
spirit  and  intent  of  Masonry  than  to  its
outward  form.

Their  epithet  of  “Africans”  they  de¬
rived  from  the  fact  that  in  their  studies  of
Masonic  history  they  commenced  with
Egypt,  in  the  mysteries  of  whose  priest¬
hood  they  believed  that  they  had  found
the  origin  of  the  modern  Institution.
Hence  one  of  their  most  popular  works
was  the'“Crata  Repoa;  or  Initiations  in
the  Ancient  Mysteries  of  the  Egyptian
Priests,”  written  by  their  founder  and
Grand  Master,  the  Counsellor  Charles  F red-
erick  Koppen ;  a  work  which,  published
first  at  Berlin  in  the  year  1770,  passed
through  many  editions  and  was  subse¬
quently  translated  into  French,  and  was
deemed  of  so  much  importance  as  to  be  ed¬
ited  by  Ragon  as  late  as  the  year  1821.  It
was  a  standard  authority  among  the  African
Architects.

Frederick  the  Great  was  very  liberal  to
this  society,  which,  indeed,  may  well  be
considered  as  the  offspring  of  lais  genius.
A  year  after  its  organization  he  caused  a
splendid  building  to  be  erected  for  its  sole
use  in  Silesia,  under  the  special  superin¬
tendence  of  his  architect,  the  Herr  Meil.
He  endowed  it  with  sufficient  funds  for  the
establishment  of  a  library,  a  museum  of
natural  history,  and  a  chemical  laboratory,
and  supplied  it  with  furniture  in  a  style  of
elegance  that  was  worthy  of  the  king  and
the  Order.  In  this  library  was  amassed,
by  the  efforts  of  the  members  and  the  con¬
tributions  of  friends,  among  whom  the
most  conspicuous  was  the  Prince  de  Lich¬
tenstein,  of  Vienna,  a  large  collection  of
manuscripts  and  rare  works  on  Masonry
and  the  kindred  sciences,  which  no  other
Masonic  society  could  equal  in  value.

While  its  royal  protector  lived  the  Order
was  prosperous  and  of  course  popular,  for


prosperity  and  popularity  go  together  in
Masonry,  as  in  all  other  mundane  affairs.
But  Frederick  died  in  the  year  1786,  nine¬
teen  years  after  the  first  establishment  of
the  society,  and  in  the  following  year  the
Order  of  African  Architects  ceased  to  exist,
having  not  quite  completed  its  second  de¬
cade.  A  Lodge,  or,  rather,  Chapter,  it  is
true,  is  said  to  have  continued  to  meet  in
Berlin  until  the  year  1806,  but  it  exercised
no  Masonic  influence,  and  must,  in  all  pro¬
bability,  have  greatly  deteriorated  from  the
character  of  the  original  foundation.

Such  is  the  history  of  an  institution
which,  in  its  incipiency,  gave  every  promise
of  exerting  a  most  wholesome  influence  on
the  Masonic  Order,  and  which,  if  it  had
lasted  to  the  present  day,  and  had  been
always  controlled  by  intellectual  leaders
like  those  who  directed  its  early  days,  must
have  contributed  most  powerfully  and  suc¬
cessfully  to  the  elevation  of  Freemasonry
throughout  the  world.

Of  the  esoteric  or  internal  organization
of  such  a  society,  some  account,  however
meagre,  cannot  fail  to  be  interesting  to  the
Masonic  student.

G'adicke,  in  the  Preimaurer  -  Lexicon,
quotes  from  a  ritual  of  the  Order  —  that,
namely,  which  was  founded  in  1756,  and  to
which  the  more  recent  Order  of  Frederick
succeeded— the  following  legendary  account
of  its  origin,  a  legend  certainly  more  curious
than  authentic :

“  When  the  number  of  buildere  in  the
East  was  greatly  reduced  by  the  continued
prevalence  of  wars,  they  resolved  to  travel
into  Europe,  and  there  to  form  new  estab¬
lishments  for  themselves.  Many  of  them
came  into  England  with  Prince  Edward,
the  sou  of  Henry  III.,  and  were  soon  after¬
wards  summoned  from  that  kingdom  into
Scotland  by  the  Lord  Stuart.  Their  estab¬
lishment  in  Prussia  occurred  about  the
Masonic  year  2307.  They  were  endowed
w’ith  lands,  and  received,  besides,  the  privi¬
lege  of  retaining  the  ancient  usages  of  the
brotherhood  which  they  had  brought  with
them,  subject  to  the  very  proper  restriction
that  in  all  other  respects  they  should  con¬
form  to  the  ordinary  law’s  and  customs  of
the  country  in  which  they  happened  to  re¬
side.  Gradually  they  obtained  the  protec¬
tion  of  several  monarchs :  in  Sweden,  that
of  King  Ing,  about  the  year  1125  ;  in  Eng¬
land,  of  Richard  the  lion-hearted,  about
1190  ;  in  Ireland,  of  Henry  II.,  the  father
of  Richard,  in  1180;  and  finally,  in  Scot¬
land,  of  Alexander  III.,  who  was  contem¬
porary  with  St.  Louis,  about  the  year
1284.”

This  legend  could  not,  however,  have
been  admitted  as  veracious  by  the  founders
of  the  second  Order  of  African  Architects.


AFRICAN


AGAPiE


41


whose  history  has  been  the  subject  of  the
present  article.  They  could  have  looked
upon  it  only  as  a  symbolical  adumbration
of  the  historic  truth  that  Masonry  came
originally  from  Egypt  and  the  East,  and
was  gradually,  and  often  by  fortuitous  cir¬
cumstances, —  among  which  the  Crusades
played  an  important  part,  —  extended  and
ramified  into  the  various  countries  of
Europe.

As  the  Order  of  African  Architects  pro¬
fessed  itself  to  be  a  Masonic  organization,
all  its  instructions  were  of  course  based
upon  the  three  fundamental  degrees  of
Ancient  Craft  Masonry.  The  degrees  of
the  Rite,  for  such  it  is  clearly  entitled  to  be
called,  were  eleven  in  number,  divided  into
two  classes,  designated  as  “  Temples.”  The
first  temple  consisted  simply  of  the  three
degrees  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  but  the
instructions  in  these  three  degrees  were  far
more  extensive  and  historical  than  in  any
other  Rite,  and  were  intended  to  prepare
the  initiate  for  the  profounder  investiga¬
tions  into  Masonic  history  which  occupied
the  higher  degrees.  It  was  not,  indeed,
until  the  candidate  had  arrived  at  the
seventh  degree  that  the  veil  of  mystery  as
to  the  real  design  of  the  institution  was  re¬
moved.  Until  he  became  the  possessor  of
that  degree,  he  did  not  reap  the  full  ad¬
vantage  of  the  researches  of  the  Order.
The  degrees  were  named  and  classified  as
follows :

FIRST  TEMPLE.

1.  Apprentice.

2.  Fellow  Craft.

3.  Master  Mason.

SECOND  TEMPLE.

4.  Architect,  or  Apprentice  of  Egyptian
secrets.

5.  Initiate  into  Egyptian  secrets.

6.  Cosmopolitan  Brother.

7.  Christian  Philosopher.

8.  Master  of  Egyptian  secrets.

9.  Squire  of  the  Order.

10.  Soldier  of  the  Order.

11.  Knight  of  the  Order.

The  last  three  were  called  superior  de¬
grees,  and  were  conferred  only  as  a  second
or  higher  class,  with  great  discrimination,
upon  those  who  had  proved  their  worthi¬
ness  of  promotion.

The  assemblies  of  the  brethren  were
called  Chapters.  The  central  or  superin¬
tending  power  was  styled  a  Grand  Chapter,
and  it  was  governed  by  the  following  twelve
officers :

1.  Grand  Master.

2.  Deputy  Grand  Master.

3.  Senior  Grand  Warden.

F


4.  Junior  Grand  Warden.

5.  Drapier.

6.  Almoner.

7.  Tricoplerius,  or  Treasurer.

8.  Graphiarius,  or  Secretary.

9.  Seneschal.

10.  Standard  Bearer.

11.  Marshal.

12.  Conductor.

The  African  Architects  were  not  the  only
society  which  in  the  eighteenth  century
sought  to  rescue  Masonry  from  the  impure
hands  of  the  charlatans  into  which  it  had
well-nigh  fallen.

African  Brother.  One  of  the  de¬
grees  of  the  Rite  of  the  Clerks  of  Strict
Observance.

African  Brothers.  One  of  the

titles  given  to  the  African  Architects,  which
see.

African  Builders.  See  African
Architects.

African  ILodges.  See  Negro  Lodges.

Agapse.  The  agapse,  or  love-feasts,
were  banquets  held  during  the  first  three
centuries  in  the  Christian  Church.  They
were  called  “  love-feasts,”  because,  after  par¬
taking  of  the  Sacrament,  they  met,  both  rich
and  poor,  at  a  common  feast  —  the  former
furnishing  the  provisions,  and  the  latter,
who  had  nothing,  being  relieved  and  re¬
freshed  by  their  more  opulent  brethren.
Tertullian  ( Apologia ,  cap.  xxxix.,)  thus
describes  these  banquets:  “We  do  not  sit
down  before  we  have  first  offered  up  prayers
to  God;  we  eat  and  drink  only  to  satisfy
hunger  and  thirst,  remembering  still  that
we  are  to  worship  God  by  night:  we  dis¬
course  as  in  the  presence  of  God,  knowing
that  He  hears  us :  then,  after  water  to  wash
our  hands,  and  lights  brought  in,  every  one
is  moved  to  sing  some  hymn  to  God,  either
out  of  the  Scripture,  or,  as  he  is  able,  of  his
own  composing.  Prayer  again  concludes
our  feast,  and  we  depart,  not  to  fight  and
quarrel,  or  to  abuse  those  we  meet,  but  to
pursue  the  same  care  of  modesty  and  chas¬
tity,  as  men  that  have  fed  at  a  supper  of
philosophy  and  discipline,  rather  than  a
corporeal  feast.”

Dr.  August  Kestner,  Professor  of  The¬
ology,  published  in  Vienna,  in  1819,  a
work  in  which  he  maintains  that  the  agapse,
established  at  Rome  by  St.  Clement,  in  the
reign  of  Domitian,  were  mysteries  which
partook  of  a  Masonic,  symbolic,  and  reli¬
gious  character.

In  the  Rosicrucian  degrees  of  Masonry
we  find  an  imitation  of  these  love-feasts  of
the  primitive  Christians ;  and  the  cere¬
monies  of  the  banquet  in  the  degree  of
Rose  Croix  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite,  especially  as  practised  by  French


42


AGATE


AGE


Chapters,  are  arranged  with  reference  to
the  ancient  agapae.  Reghellitii,  indeed,
finds  an  analogy  between  the  table-lodges
of  modern  Masonry  and  these  love-feasts  of
the  primitive  Christians.

Agate.  A  stone  varying  in  color,  but
of  great  hardness,  being  a  variety  of  the
flint.  The  agate,  in  Hebrew  SHeBO,
was  the  centre  stoue  of  the  third  row  in
the  breastplate  of  the  high-priest,  and  on  it
was  engraved  the  name  of  the  tribe  of
Naphtali.  Agates  often  contain  representa¬
tions  of  leaves,  mosses,  etc.,  depicted  by
the  hand  of  nature.  Some  of  the  represen¬
tations  on  these  are  exceedingly  singular.
Thus,  on  one  side  of  one  in  the  possession
of  Velchius  was  a  half  moon,  and  on  the
other  a  star.  Kircher  mentions  one  which
had  a  representation  of  an  armed  heroine;
another,  in  the  church  of  St.  Mark  in
Venice,  which  had  a  representation  of  a
king’s  head,  crowned;  and  a  third  which
contained  the  letters  I.  N.  R.  I.  In  the
collections  of  antiquaries  are  also  to  be
found  many  gems  of  agate  on  which  mys¬
tical  inscriptions  have  been  engraved,  the
significations  of  which  are,  for  the  most
part,  no  longer  understood.

Agate,  Stone  of.  Among  the  Ma¬
sonic  traditions  is  one  which  asserts  that
the  stone  of  foundation  was  formed  of  agate.
This,  like  everything  connected  with  the
legend  of  the  stone,  is  to  be  mystically  in¬
terpreted.  In  this  view,  agate  is  a  symbol
of  strength  and  beauty,  a  symbolism  derived
from  the  peculiar  character  of  the  agate,
which  is  distinguished  for  its  compact  for¬
mation  and  the  ornamental  character  of  its
surface.  See  Stone  of  Foundation.

Age,  X<awful.  One  of  the  qualifica¬
tions  for  candidates  is  that  they  shall  be  of
“  lawful  age.”  What  that  age  must  be  is
not  settled  by  any  universal  law  or  land¬
mark  of  the  Order.  The  Ancient  Regula¬
tions  do  not  express  any  determinate  num¬
ber  of  years  at  the  expiration  of  which  a
candidate  becomes  legally  eutitled  to  apply
for  admission.  The  language  used  is,  that
he  must  be  of  “mature  and  discreet' age.”
But  the  usage  of  the  Craft  has  differed  in
various  countries  as  to  the  construction  of
the  time  when  this  period  of  maturity  and
discretion  is  supposed  to  have  arrived.  The
sixth  of  the  Regulations,  adopted  in  1G63,
prescribes  that  “  no  person  shall  be  accepted
unless  he  be  twenty-one  years  old  or  more ;  ”
but  the  subsequent  Regulations  are  less  ex¬
plicit.  At  Frankfort-on-the-Main,  the
age  required  is  twenty ;  in  the  Lodges  of
Switzerland,  it  has  been  fixed  at  twenty-
one.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Hanover  pre¬
scribes  the  age  of  twenty-five,  but  permits
the  son  of  a  Mason  to  be  admitted  at  eigh¬
teen.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Hamburg  de¬


crees  that  the  lawful  age  for  initiation  shall
be  that  which  in  any  country  has  been
determined  by  the  laws  of  the  land  to  be
the  age  of  majority.  The  Grand  Orient  of
France  requires  the  candidate  to  be  twenty-
one,  unless  he  be  the  son  of  a  Mason  who
has  performed  some  important  service  to
the  Order,  or  unless  he  be  a  young  man
who  has  served  six  months  in  the  army,
when  the  initiation  may  take  place  at
the  age  of  eighteen.  In  Prussia  the  re¬
quired  age  is  twenty- five.  In  England
it  is  twenty-one,  except  in  cases  where
a  dispensation  has  been  granted  for  an  ear¬
lier  age  by  the  Grand  or  Provincial  Grand
Master.  In  Ireland  the  age  must  be  twenty-
one,  except  in  cases  of  dispensation  granted
by  the  Grand  Master  or  Grand  Lodge.  In
the  United  States,  the  usage  is  general
that  the  candidate  shall  not  be  less  than
twenty-one  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  his
initiation,  and  no  dispensation  can  issue
for  conferring  the  degrees  at  an  earlier
period.

Age,  Masonic.  In  all  of  the  Masonic
Rites  except  the  York,  a  mystical  age  is
appropriated  to  each  degree,  and  the  ini¬
tiate  who  has  received  the  degree  is  said  to
be  of  such  or  such  an  age.  Thus,  the  age
of  an  Entered  Apprentice  is  said  to  be  three
years;  that  of  a  Fellow  Craft,  five;  and  that
of  a  Master  Mason,  seven.  These  ages  are
not  arbitrarily  selected,  but  have  a  refer¬
ence  to  the  mystical  value  of  numbers  and
their  relation  to  the  different  degrees.
Thus,  three  is  the  symbol  of  peace  and  con¬
cord,  and  has  beei^called  in  the  Pythago¬
rean  system  the  number  of  perfect  har¬
mony,  and  is  appropriated  to  that  degree,
which  is  the  initiation  into  an  Order  whose
fundamental  principles  are  harmony  and
brotherly  love.  Five  is  the  symbol  of  active
life,  the  union  of  the  female  principle  two
and  the  male  principle  three ,  and  refers  in
this  way  to  the  active  duties  of  man  as  a
denizen  of  the  world,  which  constitutes  the
symbolism  of  the  Fellow  Craft’s  degree;
and  seven,  as  a  venerable  and  perfect  num¬
ber,  is  symbolic  of  that  perfection  which  is
supposed  to  be  attained  in  tbe  Master’s  de¬
gree.  In  a  way  similar  to  this,  all  the  ages
of  the  other  degrees  are  symbolically  and
mystically  explained.  It  has  already  been
said  that  this  system  does  not  prevail  in
the  York  Rite.  It  is  uncertain  whether  it
ever  did  and  has  been  lost,  or  whether  it  is
a  modern  innovation  on  the  symbolism  of
Masonry  invented  for  the  later  Rites.  Some¬
thing  like  it,  however,  is  to  be  found  in
the  battery,  which  still  exists  in  the  York
Rite,  and  which,  like  the  Masonic  age,  is
varied  in  the  different  degrees.  See  Bat¬
tery.

The  Masonic  ages  are  —  and  it  will  thus


A.GLA


AGRIPPA


43


be  seen  that  they  are  all  mystic  numbers  —
3,  5,  7,  9,  15,  27,  63,  81.

Agla.  One  of  the  cabalistic  names  of
God,  which  is  composed  of  the  initials
of  the  words  of  the  following  sentence:
'J1X  D1?!?1?  131  nnN,  A  tah  Gibor  Lolam  Adonai,
“  thou  art  mighty  forever,  O  Lord.”  This
name  the  Kabbalists  arranged  seven  times
in  the  centre  and  the  six  points  of  two
interlacing  triangles,  which  figure  they
called  the  Shield  of  David,  and  they  used  it
as  a  talisman,  believing  that  it  would  cure
wounds,  extinguish  fires,  and  perform  other
wonders.  See  Shield  of  David.

Agnostus,  Irenteus.  This  is  sup¬
posed  by  Kloss,  ( Bibliog .,  No.  2497,)  to  have
been  a  nom  de  plume  of  Gotthardus  Arthu-
sius,  a  co-rector  in  the  Gymnasium  of
Frankfort-on-the-Main,  and  a  writer  of
some  local  celebrity  in  the  beginning  of  the
seventeenth  century.  (See  Arthusius.)  Under
this  assumed  name  of  Irenaeus  Agnostus,
he  published,  between  the  years  1617  and
1620,  many  works  on  the  subject  of  the
Rosicrucian  Fraternity,  which  John  Val¬
entine  Andrea  had  about  that  time  estab¬
lished  in  Germany.  Among  those  works
were  the  Fortalicium  Scientice,  1617 ;  Cly-
peum  Veritatis,  1618  ;  * Speculum  Constantice,
1618 ;  Fons  Gratice,  1616 ;  Frater  non
Frater,  1619 ;  Thesaurus  Fidei,  1619 ;
Portus  Tranquillitatis,  1620,  and  several
others  of  a  similar  character  and  equally
quaint  title.

Agnus  Dei.  The  Agnus  Dei,  Lamb
of  God,  also  called  the  Paschal  Lamb,  or
the  Lamb  offered  in  tl£  paschal  sacrifice,  is
one  of  the  jewels  of  a  Commandery  of
Knights  Templars  in  America,  and  is  worn
by  the  Generalissimo.

The  lamb  is  one  of  the  earliest  symbols
of  Christ  in  the  iconography  of  the  Church,
and  as  such  was  a  representation  of  the
Saviour,  derived  from  that  expression  of
St.  John  the  Baptist  (John  i.  28,)  who,  on
beholding  Christ,  exclaimed,  “  Behold  the
Lamb  of  God.”  “  Christ,”  says  Didron,
( Christ .  Iconog.,  i.  318,)  “shedding  his  blood
for  our  redemption,  is  the  Lamb  slain  by
the  children  of  Israel,  and  with  the  blood
of  which  the  houses  to  be  preserved  from
the  wrath  of  God  were  marked  with  the
celestial  tau.  The  Paschal  Lamb  eaten  by
the  Israelites  on  the  night  preceding  their
departure  from  Egypt  is  the  type  of  that
other  divine  Lamb  of  whom  Christians  are
to  partake  at  Easter,  in  order  thereby  to
free  themselves  from  the  bondage  in  which
they  are  held  by  vice.”

The  earliest  representation  that  is  found
in  Didron  of  the  Agnus  Dei  is  of  the  sixth
century,  and  consists  of  a  lamb  supporting
in  his  right  foot  a  cross.  In  the  eleventh
century  we  find  a  banneret  attached  to  this


cross,  and  the  lamb  is  then  said  to  support
“the  banner  of  the  resurrection.”  This  is
the  modern  form  in  which  the  Agnus  Dei
is  represented.

Agrippa,  Henry  Cornelius.

Henry  Cornelius  Agrippa,  who  was  distin¬
guished  as  one  of  the  greatest  of  occult
philosophers,  was  born  in  the  city  of
Cologne,  on  the  14th  of  September,  1486.
He  was  descended  from  a  noble  family,  and
was  personally  remarkable  for  his  varied
talents  and  extensive  genius.  In  early
youth,  he  acted  as  thesecretary  of  the  Empe¬
ror  Maximilian,  and  subsequently  served  in
the  army  of  the  same  monarch  in  Italy,
where  he  received  the  honor  of  knighthood
for  his  gallant  conduct  in  the  field.  He  also
devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  law  and
physic,  and  received  from  the  university
the  degree  of  doctorate  in  each  of  those
faculties.  Of  his  literary  attainments,  he
gives  an  ample  description  in  one  of  his
epistles,  in  which  he  says :

“I  am  tolerably  well  skilled  in  eight
languages,  and  so  completely  a  master  of
six,  that  I  not  only  understand  and  speak
them,  but  can  even  make  an  elegant  oration,
or  dictate  and  translate  in  them.  I  have
also  a  pretty  extensive  knowledge  in  some
abstruse  studies,  and  a  general  acquaintance
with  the  whole  circle  of  sciences.”

There  is  some  vanity  in  this,  but  it  must
be  confessed  that  there  was  much  learn¬
ing  to  excuse  the  weakness.  The  temper
of  Agrippa  was  variable  and  irascible,
and  his  disposition  bold  and  independent.
Hence  his  pen  was  continually  giving
offence,  and  he  was  repeatedly  engaged  in
difficulties  with  his  contemporaries,  and
more  especially  with  the  priests,  wdio  per¬
secuted  him  with  unrelenting  rigor.  He
travelled  much,  and  visited  France,  Spain,
Italy,  and  England  —  sometimes  engaged
in  the  delivery  of  philosophical  lectures,
sometimes  in  public  employments,  and
sometimes  in  the  profession  of  arms.

In  1509  he  delivered  lectures  on  Reuch-
lin’s  treatise,  De  Verbo  Mirifico,  which  in¬
volved  him  in  a  controversy  with  the  Fran¬
ciscans;  and  he  wrote  a  work  on  the  Excel¬
lence  of  Women,  which  also  gave  offence  to
the  ecclesiastics,  in  consequence  of  which
he  was  obliged  to  pass  over  into  England,
where  he  wrote  a  commentary  on  St.  Paul’s
Epistles.  He  afterwards  returned  to  Co¬
logne,  where  he  delivered  lectures  on  di¬
vinity.  In  1515)  we  find  him  reading  lec¬
tures  on  Mercurius  Trismegistus ;  but  his  ill
fortune  followed  him,  and  he  soon  left  that
city,  his  departure  being,  according  to  his
biographer,  rather  like  a  flight  than  a  re¬
treat.

In  1518  he  was  at  Metz,  where  he  was  for
some  time  employed  as  a  syndic  and  couu-


44


AGRIPPA


AGRIPPA


sellor ;  but,  having  refuted  a  popular  notion,
that  St.  Anne  had  three  husbands,  and  hav¬
ing  dared  to  defend  an  old  woman  who  had
been  accused  of  witchcraft,  his  old  enemies,
the  monks,  once  more  renewed  their  ill
offices,  and  he  was  compelled  to  leave  the
city  of  Metz,  bequeathing  to  it,  as  his  re¬
venge,  the  character  of  being  the  step¬
mother  of  all  useful  learning  and  virtue.
Thence  he  retired  to  Cologne  in  1520,  and
to  Geneva  in  1521,  where  poverty  seems  to
have  pressed  hardly  upon  him.

In  1524  he  was  at  Lyons,  in  France,
where  Francis  I.  bestowed  a  pension  upon
him,  and  appointed  him  physician  to  the
king’s  mother ;  an  office,  however,  which  he
lost  in  1525,  in  consequence  of  twice  giving
offence  to  his  royal  mistress.  First,  be¬
cause  he  expressed  his  dislike  at  being  em¬
ployed  by  her  in  astrological  calculations
concerning  the  affairs  of  France,  an  em¬
ployment  which  he  deemed  derogatory  to  a
queen’s  physician  ;  and  next,  because,  when
he  did  make  those  calculations,  he  inter¬
preted  the  stars  unfavorably  for  the  king’s
enterprises.  Agrippa  was  not  of  a  temper
to  brook  this  dismissal  with  equanimity,
and  accordingly  we  find  him,  in  one  of  his
letters  written  at  this  time,  denouncing  the
queen  mother  for  a  most  atrocious  and  per¬
fidious  sort  of  Jezebel — pro  atrocissima  et
perfida  quadam  Jezabela.

In  1528  he  repaired  to  Antwerp,  and  the
year  after  received  from  Margaret  of  Aus¬
tria,  Governess  of  the  low  countries,  the
appointment  of  historiographer  to  the  em¬
peror.  The  History  of  the  Government  of
Charles  V.  was  his  only  contribution  to  the
duties  of  this  office.  Soon  after  Margaret
died,  and  Agrippa  again  came  into  collision
with  his  old  ecclesiastical  persecutors,
whose  resentment  was  greatly  excited  by  his
treatise  On  the  Vanity  of  the  Sciences,  which
he  published  in  1530,  and  another  work
soon  after,  written  On  the  Occult  Philosophy.
His  pension  was  discontinued,  and  in  1531
he  was  incarcerated  in  the  prison  at  Brus¬
sels.  From  this  he  was,  however,  soon
liberated,  and  after  a  few  more  adventures,
he  finally  retired  to  Grenoble,  in  France,
where  he  died  in  1535 ;  some  writers  say
in  abject  poverty,  and  in  the  public  hospi¬
tal,  but  this  has  been  denied  by  Gabriel
Naude.

The  treatise  on  occult  philosophy  is  the
most  important  of  the  works  of  Agrippa,
and  which  has  given  to  him  the  false  repu¬
tation  of  being  a  hermetic  adept  and  a  ma¬
gician.  Thus,  Paulus  Jovius  says,  that  he
was  always  accompanied  by  a  devil,  in  the
shape  of  a  black  dog,  wearing  a  collar  con¬
taining  some  necromantic  inscription,  and
that  when  he  was  about  to  die  he  released
the  dog  with  an  imprecation,  after  which


the  animal  fled  to  the  river  Soane,  into
which  he  leaped,  and  was  never  heard  of
more.  Martin  del  Rio  says  that  when
Agrippa  travelled,  he  used  to  pay  his  score
at  the  inns  in  money  which  at  the  time
appeared  to  be  good,  but  in  a  few  day3
turned  out  to  be  pieces  of  horn  or  shelly  a
tale  which  reminds  us  of  one  of  the  stories
in  the  Arabian  Nights.  The  same  author
retails  another  apocryphal  anecdote  about
a  student  who,  during  Agrippa’s  temporary
abseuce,  was  strangled  in  the  magician’s
library  by  an  irate  demon,  and  into  whose
dead  body  Agrippa,  on  his  return,  caused
the  devil  to  enter,  and  walk  several  times
across  the  public  square  at  Louvain,  and
finally  to  drop  dead,  whereby  the  death
appeared  to  be  a  natural  one,  and  suspicion
was  thus  averted  from  Agrippa.  The  truth
is,  however,  that  the  treatise  on  occult
philosophy  was  of  so  abstruse  and  mystical
a  character,  that  the  author  found  it  neces¬
sary  to  write  a  key  to  it,  which  he  reserved
for  his  most  intimate  friends,  and  in  which
he  explained  its  esoteric  meaning.

Masonic  historians  have  very  generally
attempted  to  connect  Agrippa  with  that
Institution,  or  at  least  with  cognate  mystical
societies.  Thus,  Gadicke  (Freirnaurer- Lexi¬
con)  says :  “  A  society  for  the  cultivation  of
the  secret  sciences,  which  he  founded  at
Paris,  and  which  extended  through  Ger¬
many,  England,  France,  and  Italy,  was  the
first  ever  established  by  a  learned  man,  and
was  the  pattern  and  parent  of  all  subse¬
quent  similar  societies.”

Lenning  ( Encyc .  jpr  Freimaurerei)  also
states  that  “  It  is  reported  that  Agrippa
established  in  Paris  a  secret  society  for  the
practice  of  the  abstruse  sciences,  which  be¬
came  the  basis  of  the  many  mystical  asso¬
ciations  which  have  been  since  originated.”

But  a  writer  in  the  Monthly  Review  (Lon¬
don,  vol.  xxv.,  anno  1798,  p.  304,)  is  still
more  explicit  on  this  subject.  His  language
is  as  follows:  *‘In  the  year  1510  Henry
Cornelius  Agrippa  came  to  London,  and,
as  appears  by  his  correspondence,  ( Opus -
cula,  t.  ii .,  p.  1073,  etc.,)  he  founded  a  secret
society  for  alchemical  purposes,  similar  to
one  which  he  had  previously  instituted  at
Paris,  in  concert  with  Laudolfo,  Brixianus,
Xanthus,  and  other  students  at  that  uni¬
versity.  The  members  of  these  societies
did  agree  on  private  signs  of  recognition  ;
and  they  founded,  in  various  parts  of  Eu¬
rope,  corresponding  associations  for  the
prosecution  of  the  occult  sciences.  This
practice  of  initiation,  or  secret  incorpora¬
tion,  thus  and  then  first  introduced,  has
been  handed  down  to  our  own  times ;  and
hence  apparently  the  mysterious  Eleusinian
confederacies  now  known  as  the  Lodges  of
Freemasonry.”


AGRIPPA


AHA BATH


45


In  1856  there  was  published  in  London  a
Life  of  Cornelius  Agrippa  von  Nettesheim,
Doctor  and  Knight,  commonly  known  as  a
Magician.  By  Henry  Morley.  This  is  a
curious  and  trustworthy  work,  and  con¬
tains  a  good  summary  of  Agrippa,  and  in¬
teresting  accounts  of  the  times  in  which
he  lived.

As  Agrippa  has,  whether  justly  or  not,
been  thrown  into  a  connection  with  Freema¬
sonry,  a  brief  view  of  his  occult  philosophy
may  not  be  uninteresting.  But  it  must  be
always  borne  in  mind,  that  this  philosophy
was  what  he  called  it,  “  occulta philosophia,”

—  occult,  hidden ;  containing,  like  all  the
science  of  the  alchemists,  more  in  its  inmost
recesses  than  appears  on  its  surface,  and
that  he  himself,  aware  of  its  esoteric  char¬
acter,  had  written  a  key,  by  which  his  in¬
timate  friends  might  be  able  to  interpret  its
concealed  meaning  and  enjoy  its  fruits.
Ragon  ( Orthod .  Mac.,  ch.  xxviii.,)  gives  a
resume  of  the  doctrines,  from  which  the  fol¬
lowing  is  condensed :

Agrippa  said  that  there  were  three  worlds

—  the  elementary,  the  celestial,  and  the  intel¬
lectual, —  each  subordinate  to  the  one  above
it.  It  is  possible  to  pass  from  the  knowl¬
edge  of  one  world  to  that  of  another,  and
even  to  the  archetype  itself.  It  is  this  scale
of  ascent  that  constitutes  what  is  called
Magism,  a  profound  contemplation,  em¬
bracing  nature,  quality,  substance,  virtues,
similitudes,  differences,  the  art  of  uniting,
separating,  and  compounding  —  in  short,

«  the  entire  operations  of  the  universe.  It  is
a  sacred  art,  which  must  not  be  divulged,
and  to  whose  reality  and  certainty  the  uni¬
versal  connection  of  all  things  testifies.

There  are  abstruse  doctrines  on  the  ele¬
ments,  of  which  each  performed  a  particu¬
lar  function.  Fire}  isolated  from  all  matter,
manifests  upon  it,  however,  its  presence
and  action;  earth  is  the  support  of  the  ele¬
ments  and  the  reservoir  of  the  celestial  in¬
fluences;  water  is  the  germ  of  all  animals;
and  air  is  a  vital  spirit,  which  penetrates
all  beings,  and  gives  them  consistency  and
life.

There  is  a  sublime,  secret,  and  necessary
cause  which  leads  to  truth.

The  world,  the  heavens,  and  the  stars
have  souls,  which  are  in  affinity  with  our
own.

The  world  lives,  and  has  its  organs  and
its  senses.  This  is  the  microcosm.

Imprecations  are  of  efficacy  in  attaching
themselves  to  beings,  and  in  modifying
them.

Names  have  a  potential  quality.  Magic
has  its  language,  which  language  is  an
image  of  signatures,  and  hence  the  effect
of  invocations,  evocations,  adjurations,  con¬
jurations,  and  other  formulae.


Numbers  are  the  first  cause  of  the  con¬
nection  of  things.  To  each  number  is
attached  a  peculiar  property  — thus :  Unity
is  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  things,  but
has  no  beginning  nor  end  itself.  God  is
the  monad.  The  binary  is  a  bad  number.
The  ternary  is  the  soul  of  the  world.  The
quaternary  is  the  basis  of  all  numbers.  The
quinary  is  a  powerful  number;  it  is  effica¬
cious  against  poisons  and  evil  spirits.  The
decade,  or  denary,  is  the  completion  of  all
things.  The  intelligence  of  God  is  incor¬
ruptible,  eternal,  present  everywhere,  influ¬
encing  everything.

The  human  spirit  is  corporeal,  but  its
substance  is  very  subtle,  and  readily  unites
with  the  universal  spirit,  the  soul  of  the
world,  which  is  in  us.

This  is  some  part  of  the  occult  philosophy
of  Agrippa,  who,  however,  has  said,  in  ref¬
erence  to  abstruse  theories,  almost,  if  not
altogether,  unintelligible,  like  these,  that
all  that  the  books  undertake  to  teach  on
the  subjects  of  magic,  astrology,  and  alchemy
are  false  and  deceptive,  if  they  are  under¬
stood  in  the  letter ;  but  that  to  appreciate
them,  to  draw  any  good  out  of  them,  we
must  seek  the  mystic  sense  in  which  they
are  enveloped ;  a  doctrine  which  applies  to
Freemasonry,  as  well  as  to  the  hermetic
philosophy,  and  the  truth  of  which  is  now
universally  admitted  by  the  learned.  The
Freemason  who  expects  to  find  in  the  ab¬
struse  writings  of  Agrippa  anything  directly
referring  to  his  own  Institution  will  be
greatly  disappointed;  but  if  he  looks  in
the  pages  of  that  profound  thinker  for
lessons  of  philosophy  and  ethics,  which
have  a  common  origin  with  those  that  are
taught  in  the  Masonic  system,  his  labor
will  not  have  been  in  vain,  and  he  will  be
disposed  to  place  the  wise  Cornelius  in  the
same  category  with  Pythagoras,  and  many
other  philosophers  of  the  olden  time,  whom
the  Craft  have  delighted  to  call  their  ancient
brethren,  because,  without  being  Free¬
masons  in  outward  form  and  ceremony,
they  have  always  taught  true  Masonic  doc¬
trine.  It  is  not,  perhaps,  inappropriate  to
give  to  such  unaffiliated  teachers  of  the
true  Masonic  doctrine  the  title  of  “  Un¬
initiated  Freemasons.”

Ahabath  Olam.  Two  Hebrew  words
signifying  eternal  love.  The  name  of  a
prayer  which  was  used  by  the  Jews  dispersed
over  the  whole  Roman  Empire  during  the
times  of  Christ.  It  was  inserted  by  Dcr-
mott  in  his  Ahiman  Rezon,  and  copied  into
several  others,  with  the  title  of  “  A  Prayer
repeated  in  the  Royal  Arch  Lodge  at  Jeru¬
salem.”  The  prayer  was  most  probably
adopted  by  Dermott,  and  the  fictitious  title
given  to  it  of  a  “Royal  Arch  Prayer”  in
consequence  of  the  allusion  in  it  to  the


46


AHIAH


AHIMAN


“  holy,  great,  mighty,  and  terrible  name  of
God.”

Ahiali.  So  spelled  in  the  common  ver¬
sion  of  the  Bible,  (1  Kings  iv.  3,)  but,  ac¬
cording  to  the  Hebrew  orthography, the  word
should  be  spelled  and  pronounced  Achiah.
He  and  Elihoreph  (or  Elichoreph)  were  the
sopherim,  scribes  or  secretaries  of  King
Solomon.  In  the  ritual  of  the  7th  degree
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,  accord¬
ing  to  the  modern  American  ritual,  these
personages  are  represented  by  the  two
Wardens.

Ahiman  Rezon.  The  title  given  to
their  Book  of  Constitutions  by  that  schism
from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  which
took  place  about  the  middle  of  the  last  cen¬
tury,  and  which  was  known  as  the  “  Ancient
Masons,”  in  contradistinction  to  the  legiti¬
mate  Grand  Lodge  and  its  adherents,  who
were  called  the  “  Moderns,”  and  whose
code  of  laws  was  contained  in  Anderson’s
work  known  as  the  Book  of  Constitutions.
The  title  is  derived  from  three  Hebrew
words,  D'ntf,  ahim,  “brothers;”  HJO?
manah,  “to  appoint,”  or  “to  select,”  (in
the  sense  of  being  placed  in  a  peculiar
class,  see  Isaiah  liii.  12 ;)  and  J2H,  ratzon ,
“the  will,  pleasure,  or  meaning;”  and
hence  the  combination  of  the  three  words
in  the  title,  Ahiman  Rezon,  signifies  “  the
will  of  selected  brethren  ”  =  the  law  of  a
class  or  society  of  men  who  are  chosen  or
selected  from  the  rest  of  the  world  as
brethren.  This  is  the  etymology  that  I
proposed  many  years  ago,  and  I  have  seen
no  good  reason  since  for  abandoning  it.
Two  other  derivations,  however,  one  ante¬
cedent  and  the  other  subsequent  to  this,
have  been  suggested.  Dr.  Dalcho  {Alum.
Rez.  of  South  Carolina,  p.  159,  2d  ed.,)  derives
it  from  ahi,  “a  brother,”  manah,  “to  pre¬
pare,”  and  rezon, “  secret;”  so  that,  as  he  says,
“  Ahiman  Rezon  literally  means  the  secrets
of  a  prepared  brother.”  But  the  best  mean¬
ing  of  manah  is  that  which  conveys  the
idea  of  being  placed  in  or  appointed  to  a
certain,  exclusive  class,  as  we  find  in  Isaiah,
(liii.  12,)  “  he  was  numbered  ( nimenah )  with
the  transgressors,”  placed  in  that  class,
being  taken  out  of  every  other  order  of
men.  And  although  rezon  may  come  from
ratzon,  “a  will  or  law,”  it  can  hardly  be
elicited  by  any  rules  of  etymology  out  of
the  Chaldee  word  raz,  “  a  secret,”  the  termi¬
nation  in  on  being  wanting  ;  and  besides  the
book  called  the  Ahiman  Rezon  does  not
contain  the  secrets,  but  only  the  public
laws  of  Masonry.  The  derivation  ofDalcho
seems  therefore  inadmissible.  Not  less  so
is  that  of  Bro.  W.  S.  Rockwell,  who  {Ahim.
Rez.  of  Georgia,  1859,  p.  3,)  thinks  the  de¬
rivation  may  be  found  in  the  Hebrew,
pDN,  arnun,  “a  builder”  or  “architect,”


and  JH,  rezon,  as  a  noun,  “prince,”  and
as  an  adjective,  “royal,”  and  hence,  Ahiman
Rezon,  according  to  this  etymology,  will
signify  the  “  royal  builder,”  or,  symboli¬
cally,  the  “Freemason.”  But  to  derive
ahiman  from  amun,  or  rather  amon,  which
is  the  masoretic  pronunciation,  is  to  place
all  known  laws  of  etymology  at  defiance.
Rockwell  himself,  however,  furnishes  the
best  argument  against  his  strained  deriva¬
tion,  when  he  admits  that  its  correctness
will  depend  on  the  antiquity  of  the  phrase,
which  he  acknowledges  that  he  doubts.
In  this,  he  is  right.  The  phrase  is  alto¬
gether  a  modern  one,  and  has  Dermott,  the
author  of  the  first  work,  bearing  the  title
for  its  inventor.  Rockwell’s  conjectural
derivation  is,  therefore,  for  this  reason,  still
more  inadmissible  than  Dalcho’s.

But  the  history  of  the  origin  of  the  book
is  more  important  and  more  interesting
than  the  history  of  the  derivation  of  its
title.

The  close  of  the  first  quarter  of  the
eighteenth  century  found  the  Masons  of  the
south  of  England  congregated  under  the
authority  of  a  governing  body  at  London,
whose  title  was  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Free
and  Accepted  Masons  of  England.  But
from  causes,  upon  which  it  is  here  unneces¬
sary  to  dwell,  a  schism  soon  afterwards  took
place,  and  a  portion  of  the  brethren,  having
seceded  from  the  main  body  organized  an
independent  Grand  Lodge.  This  they
called  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  York
Masons,  and  stigmatized  the  members  of
the  original  body  as  “  Moderns,”  by  way  of
insinuating  that  they  themselves  were  of
the  primitive  or  original  stock,  and  that
their  opponents  were  innovators  of  a  later
birth.  The  former  of  these  contending
bodies;  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  had,
in  the  year  1722,  caused  Dr.  James  An¬
derson  to  collect  and  compile  all  the
statutes  and  regulations  by  which  the  Fra¬
ternity  had  in  former  times  been  governed ;
and  these,  after  having  been  submitted
to  due  revision,  were  published  in  1723,
by  Anderson,  with  the  title  of  The  Con¬
stitutions  of  the  Freemasons.  This  work,
of  which  several  other  editions  subsequently
appeared,  has  always  been  called  the  Book
of  Constitutions,”  and  contains  the  foun¬
dations  of  the  written  law  by  which  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  and  the  Lodges
deriving  from  it,  both  in  that  country  and
in  America,  are  governed.  But  when  the
Ancient  York  Masons  established  their
schismatic  Grand  Lodge,  they  found  it
necessary,  also,  to  have  a  Book  of  Constitu¬
tions;  and  accordingly,  Lf.urence  Dermott,
who  was  at  one  time  their  Grand  Secretary,
and  afterwards  their  Deputy  Grand  Master,
compiled  such  a  work,  the  first  edition  of


AHIMAN


AHIMAN


47


which  was  published  by  James  Bedford,  at
London,  in  1756,  with  the  following  title:
“  Ahiman  Rezon :  or  a  Help  to  a  Brother ;
showing  the  Excellency  of  Secrecy,  and  the
first  cause  or  motive  of  the  Institution  of
Masonry;  the  Principles  of  the  Craft;  and
the  Benefits  from  a  strict  Observance  there¬
of,  etc.,  etc. ;  also  the  Old  and  New  Regula¬
tions,  etc.  To  which  is  added  the  greatest
collection  of  Masons’  Songs,  etc.  By  Bro.
Laurence  Dermott,  Secretary.”  8vo,  209  pp.

A  second  edition  was  published  in  1764,
with  this  title :  “Ahiman  Rezon  :  or  a  Help
to  all  that  are  or  would  be  Free  and  Ac¬
cepted  Masons;  containing  the  Quintes¬
sence  of  all  that  has  been  published  on  the
Subject  of  Freemasonry,  with  many  Addi¬
tions,  which  renders  this  Work  more  use¬
ful  than  any  other  Book  of  Constitutions
now  extant.  By  Lau.  Dermott,  Secretary.”
London,  1764.  8vo,  224  pp.

A  third  edition  was  published  in  1778,
with  the  following  title:  “Ahiman  Rezon:
or  a  Help  to  all  that  are  or  would  be  Free
and  Accepted  Masons,  (with  many  Addi¬
tions.)  By  Lau.  Dermott,  D.G.M.  Printed
for  James  Jones,  Grand  Secretary;  and
Sold  by  Peter  Shatwell,  in  the  Strand.
London,  1778.”  8vo,  232  pp.

Five  other  editions  were  published :  the
4th,  whose  date  is  unknown  to  me,  but  it
must  have  been  in  1779;  the  5th  in  1780  ;
the  6th  in  1800  ;  the  7th  in  1807 ;  and  the
8th  in  1813.  In  this  year,  the  Ancient
Grand  Lodge  was  dissolved  by  the  union
of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  of  England,  and
a  new  Book  of  Constitutions  having  been
adopted  for  the  united  body,  the  Ahiman
Rezon  became  useless,  and  no  subsequent
edition  was  ever  published.

The  earlier  editions  of  this  work  are
among  the  rarest  of  Masonic  publications.
Hence  they  are  highly  prized  by  collectors,
and  I  esteem  myself  fortunate  in  being  the
possessor  of  exemplars  of  the  second,  third,
and  seventh  editions.

In  the  year  1855,  Mr.  Leon  Hyneman,
of  Philadelphia,  who  was  engaged  in  a  re¬
print  of  old  standard  Masonic  works,  (an
enterprise  which  should  have  received  bet¬
ter  patronage  than  it  did,)  republished  the
second  edition,  with  a  few  explanatory
notes.

As  this  book  contains  those  principles  of
Masonic  law  by  which,  for  three-fourths  of
a  century,  a  large  and  intelligent  portion
of  the  Craft  wrere  governed;  and  as  it  is
now  becoming  rare  and,  to  the  generality
of  readers,  inaccessible,  some  brief  review
of  its  contents  may  not  be  uninteresting.

The  Preface  or  Address  to  the  Reader,
which  is  a  long  one,  contains  what  pur¬
ports  to  be  a  history  of  Masonry,  whose
origin,  under  that  name,  Dermott  places  at


the  building  of  Solomon’s  Temple.  This
history,  which  after  all  is  not  worth  much,
includes  some  very  caustic  remarks  on  the
revivers  of  Freemasonry  in  1717,  whose
Grand  Lodge  he  calls  “  a  self-created  as¬
sembly.”

There  is  next  a  “  Phylacteria  for  such
Gentlemen  as  may  be  inclined  to  become
Freemasons.”  This  article,  which  was  not
in  the  first  edition,  but  appeared  for  the
first  time  in  the  second,  consists  of  direc¬
tions  as  to  the  method  to  be  pursued  by  one
who  desires  to  be  made  a  Freemason.  This
is  followed  by  an  account  of  what  Dermott
calls  “  Modern  Masonry,”  that  is,  the  sys¬
tem  pursued  by  the  original  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  and  of  the  differences  existing
between  it  and  “  Ancient  Masonry,”  or  the
system  of  the  seceders.  He  contends  that
there  are  material  differences  between  the
two  systems ;  that  of  the  Ancients  being
universal,  and  that  of  the  Moderns  not;  a
Modern  being  able  with  safety  to  communi¬
cate  all  his  secrets  to  an  Ancient,  while  an
Ancient  cannot  communicate  his  to  a
Modern ;  a  Modern  being  unable  to  enter  an
Ancient  Lodge,  while  an  Ancient  can
easily  enter  a  Modern  one ;  all  of  which,  in
his  opinion,  show  that  the  Ancients  have
secrets  which  are  not  in  the  possession  of  the
Moderns.  This,  he  considers,  a  convincing
proof  that  the  Modern  Masons  were  innova¬
tors  upon  the  established  system,  and  had  in¬
stituted  their  Lodges  and  framed  their  ritual
without  a  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  arcana
of  the  Craft.  But  the  Modern  Masons,  with
more  semblance  of  truth,  thought  that  the
additional  secrets  of  the  Ancients  were  only
innovations  that  they  had  made  upon  the
true  body  of  Masonry;  and  hence,  they
considered  their  ignorance  of  these  newly
invented  secrets  was  the  best  evidence  of
their  own  superior  antiquity.

Dermott  has  next  published  the  famous
Leland  MS.,  together  with  the  commen¬
taries  of  Locke.  A  copy  of  the  resolutions
adopted  in  1772,  by  the  Grand  Lodges  of
Ireland  and  Scotland,  in  which  they  recog¬
nized  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients,  con¬
cludes  the  preface  or  introduction,  which
in  the  third  edition  consists  of  62  pages.

The  Ahiman  Rezon  proper,  then,  begins
with  23  pages  of  an  encomium  on  Masonry,
and  an  explanation  of  its  principles.  Many
a  modern  Masonic  address  is  better  written,
and  contains  more  important  and  instruc¬
tive  matter  than  this  prefatory  discourse.

On  the  27th  page  we  find  “  The  Old
Charges  of  the  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.”
These  Charges  were  first  printed  in  Ander¬
son’s  Constitutions,  in  1723,  and  have  always
been  considered  of  the  highest  value  as
Masonic  law.  Dermott’s  Charges  are  in¬
terpolated  and  much  altered,  being  a  copy


48


AHIMAN


AHIMAN


of  those  in  Ariderson’s  1738  edition,  and
are  therefore  deemed  of  no  authority.

Fifty  pages  are  next  occupied  with  the
“General  Regulations  of  the  Free  and
Accepted  Masons.”  These  are  borrowed
from  the  second  edition  of  Anderson,  which
edition  has  never  been  in  great  repute.  But
even  here,  Dermott’s  alterations  and  inno¬
vations  are  so  considerable  as  to  render  this
part  of  his  work  entirely  untrustworthy  as
an  exponent  of  Masonic  law.

The  rest  of  the  book,  comprising  more
than  a  hundred  pages,  consists  of  “  A  Col¬
lection  of  Masonic  Songs,”  of  the  poetical
merits  of  which  the  less  said  the  better  for
the  literary  reputation  of  the  writers.

Imperfect,  however,  as  was  this  work,  it
for  a  long  time  constituted  the  statute  book
of  the  “  Ancient  Masons  and  hence  those
Lodges  in  America  which  derived  their
authority  from  the  Dermott  or  Ancient
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  accepted  its  con¬
tents  as  a  true  exposition  of  Masonic  law  ;
and  several  of  their  Grand  Lodges  caused
similar  works  to  be  compiled  for  their  own
government,  adopting  the  title  of  Ahiman
Rezon,  which  thus  became  the  peculiar
designation  of  the  volume  which  contained
the  fundamental  law  of  the  “Ancients,”
while  the  original  title  of  Book  of  Con¬
stitutions  continued  to  be  retained  by  the
“  Moderns,”  to  designate  the  volume  used
by  them  for  the  same  purpose.

Of  the  Ahiman  Rezons  compiled  and
published  in  America,  the  following  are  the
principal.

1.  “  Ahiman  Rezon  abridged  and  digested :
as  a  help  to  all  that  are  or  would  be  Free  and
Accepted  Masons,  etc.  Published  by  order
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania;  by
William  Smith,  D.D.”  Philadelphia,  1783.
A  new  Ahiman  Rezon  was  published  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  in  1825.

2.  “  Charges  and  Regulations  of  the  An¬
cient  and  Honorable  Society  of  Free  and
Accepted  Masons,  extracted  from  the  Ahi¬
man  Rezon,  etc.  Published  by  the  consent
and  direction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Nova
Scotia.”  Halifax,  1786.

3.  “  The  New  Ahiman  Rezon,  containing
the  Laws  and  Constitution  of  Virginia,  etc.
By  John  K.  Reade,  present  Deputy  Grand
Master  of  Virginia,  etc.”  Richmond,  1791.
Another  edition  was  published  in  1818,  by
James  Henderson.

4.  “The  Maryland  Ahiman  Rezon  of
Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  containing  the
History  of  Masonry  from  the  establishment
of  the  Grand  Lodge  to  the  present  time ;
with  their  Ancient  Charges,  Addresses,
Prayers,  Lectures,  Prologues,  Epilogues,
Songs,  etc.,  collected  from  the  Old  Records,
Faithful  Traditions  and  Lodge  Books;  by
G.  Keating.  Compiled  by  order  of  the


Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland.”  Baltimore,
1797.

5.  “  The  Ahiman  Rezon  and  Masonic
Ritual,  published  by  the  order  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  North  Carolina  and  Ten¬
nessee.”  Newbern,  N.  C.,  1805.

6.  “  An  Ahiman  Rezon,  for  the  use  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina,  An¬
cient  York  Masons,  and  the  Lodges  under
the  Register  and  Masonic  Jurisdiction
thereof.  Compiled  and  arranged  with  con¬
siderable  additions,  at  the  request  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  and  published  bv  their  au¬
thority.  By  Brother  Frederick  Dalcho,
M.  D.,  etc.”  Charleston,  S.  C.,  1807.  A
second  edition  was  published  by  the  same
author,  in  1822,  and  a  third,  in  1852,  by
Dr.  Albert  G.  Mackey.  In  this  third  edi¬
tion,  the  title  was  changed  to  that  of  “  The
Ahiman  Rezon,  or  Book  of  Constitutions,
etc.”  And  the  work  was  in  a  great  measure
expurgated  of  the  peculiarities  of  Dermott,
and  made  to  conform  more  closely  to  the
Audersonian  Constitutions.  A  fourth  edi¬
tion  was  published  by  the  same  editor,  in
1871,  in  which  everything  antagonistic  to
the  original  Book  of  Constitutions  has  been
omitted.

7.  “The  Freemason’s  Library  and  Gen¬
eral  Ahiman  Rezon:  containing  a  delinea¬
tion  of  the  true  principles  of  Freemasonry,
etc. ;  by  Samuel  Cole.”  Baltimore,  1817.
8vo,  332  +  92  pp.  There  was  a  second  edi¬
tion  in  1826.

8.  “  Ahiman  Rezon  :  prepared  under  the
direction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Georgia;
by  Wm.  S.  Rockwell,  Grand  Master  of
Masons  of  Georgia.”  Savannah,  1859.
4to  and  8vo,  404  pp.  But  neither  this
work  nor  the  third  and  fourth  editions  of
the  Ahiman  Rezon  of  South  Carolina  have
any  connection  in  principle  or  theory  with
the  Ahiman  Rezon  of  Dermott.  They  have
borrowed  the  name  from  the  “Ancient  Ma¬
sons,”  but  they  derive  all  their  law  and
their  authorities  from  the  “Moderns,”  or
the  legal  Masons  of  the  last  century.

9.  “The  General  Ahiman  Rezon  and
Freemason’s  Guide,  by  Daniel  Sickles.”
New  York,  1866.  8vo,  pp.  408.  This
book,  like  Rockwell’s,  has  no  other  connec¬
tion  with  the  archetypal  work  of  Dermott
but  the  name.

Many  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  the  United
States  having  derived  their  existence  and
authority  from  the  Dermott  Grand  Lodge,
the  influence  of  his  Ahiman  Rezon  was  for
a  long  time  exercised  over  the  Lodges  of
this  country ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  only  within
a  comparatively  recent  period,  that  the
true  principles  of  Masonic  law,  as  ex¬
pounded  in  the  first  editions  of  Anderson’s
Constitutions,  have  been  uni  versally  adopted
among  American  Masons.


AHIMAN


AHOLIAB


49


It  must,  however,  be  observed,  in  justice
to  Dermott,  who  has  been  rather  too  grossly
abused  by  Mitchell  and  a  few  other  writers,
that  the  innovations  upon  the  old  laws  of
Masonry,  which  are  to  be  found  in  the
Ahiman  Rezon,  are  for  the  most  part  not  to
be  charged  upon  him,  but  upon  Dr.  Ander¬
son  himself,  who,  for  the  first  time,  intro¬
duced  them  into  the  second  edition  of  the
Book  of  Constitutions,  published  in  1738.
It  is  surprising,  and  accountable  only  on
the  ground  of  sheer  carelessness  on  the  part
of  the  supervising  committee,  that  the
Grand  Lodge  should,  in  1738,  have  ap¬
proved  of  these  alterations  made  by  Ander¬
son,  and  still  more  surprising  that  it  was
not  until  1755  that  a  new  or  third  edition
of  the  Constitutions  should  have  been  pub¬
lished,  in  which  these  alterations  of  1738
were  expunged,  and  the  old  regulations
and  the  old  language  restored.  But  what¬
ever  may  have  been  the  causes  of  this  over¬
sight,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that,  at  the
time  of  the  schism,  the  edition  of  the  Book
of  Constitutions  of  1738  was  considered  as
the  authorized  exponent  of  Masonic  law
by  the  original  or  regular  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  and  was  adopted,  with  but  little
change,  by  Dermott  as  the  basis  of  his
Ahiman  Rezon.  How  much  this  edition  of
1738  differed  from  that  of  1723,  which  is
now  considered  the  only  true  authority  for
ancient  law,  and  how  much  it  agreed  with
Dermott’s  Ahiman  Rezon,  will  be  evident
.from  the  following  specimens  of  the  first
of  the  Old  Charges,  correctly  taken  from
each  of  the  three  works:

First  of  the  Old  Charges  in  the  Book  of
Constitutions,  edit.,  1723.

“A  Mason  is  obliged  by  his  tenure  to  obey
the  moral  law ;  and  if  he  rightly  understands
the  Art,  he  will  never  be  a  stupid  Atheist,
nor  an  irreligious  libertine.  But  though  in
aucient  times  Masons  were  charged,  in
every  country,  to  be  of  the  religion  of  that
country  or  nation,  whatever  it  was,  yet  it
is  now  thought  more  expedient  only  to
oblige  them  to  that  religion  in  which  all  men
agreed,  leaving  their  particular  opinions  to
themselves ;  that  is  to  be  good  men  and  true,
or  men  of  honor  and  honesty,  by  whatever
denominations  or  persuasions  they  may  be
distinguished ;  whereby  Masonry  becomes
the  centre  of  union,  and  the  means  of  con¬
ciliating  true  friendship  among  persons  that
must  have  remained  at  a  perpetual  dis¬
tance.”

First  of  the  Old  Charges  in  the  Book  of
Constitutions,  edit.,  1738.

“A  Mason  is  obliged  by  his  tenure  to  ob¬
serve  the  moral  law,  as  a  (rue  Noachida  ;
and  if  he  rightly  understands  the  Craft,  he
will  never  be  a  stupid  Atheist,  nor  an  irre¬
ligious  libertine,  nor  act  against  conscience.

G  4


“  In  ancient  times,  the  Christian  Masons
were  charged  to  comply  with  the  Christian
usages  of  each  country  where  they  travelled  or
worked.  But  Masonry  being  found  in  all  na¬
tions, even  of  divers  religions,  they  are  now  only
charged  to  adhere  to  that  religion  in  which
all  men  agree,  (leaving  each  brother  to  his
own  particular  opinions ; )  that  is,  to  be  good
men  and  true,  men  of  honor  and  honesty,
by  whatever  names,  religions,  or  persuasions
they  may  be  distinguished ;  for  they  all
agree  in  the  three  great  articles  of  Noah
enough  to  preserve  the  cement  of  the  Lodge.
Thus,  Masonry  is  the  centre  of  their  union,
and  the  happy  means  of  conciliating  per¬
sons  that  otherwise  must  have  remained  at
a  perpetual  distance.”

First  of  the  Old  Charges  in  Dermott’s
Ahiman  Rezon.

“A  Mason  is  obliged  by  his  tenure  to  ob¬
serve  the  moral  law,  as  a  true  Noachida ;
and  if  he  rightly  understands  the  Craft,  he
will  never  be  a  stupid  Atheist,  nor  an  irre¬
ligious  libertine,  nor  act  against  conscience.

“  In  ancient  times,  the  Christian  Masons
were  charged  to  comply  with  the  Christian
usages  of  each  country  where  they  travelled
or  worked ;  being  found  in  all  nations,  even
of  divers  religions.

“  They  are  generally  charged  to  adhere  to
that  religion  in  which  all  men  agree,  (leav¬
ing  each  brother  to  his  own  particular  opi¬
nions;)  that  is,  to  be  good  men  and  true,
men  of  honor  and  honesty,  by  whatever
names,  religions,  or  persuasions  they  may  be
distinguished ;  for  they  all  agree  in  the  three
great  articles  of  Noah  enough  to  preserve  the
cement  of  the  Lodge.

“  Thus,  Masonry  is  the  centre  of  their
union,  and  the  happy  means  of  conciliating
persons  that  otherwise  must  have  remained
at  a  perpetual  distance.”

The  italics  in  the  second  and  third  ex¬
tracts  will  show  what  innovations  Anderson
made,  in  1738,  on  the  Charges  as  origin¬
ally  published  in  1723,  and  how  closely
Dermott  followed  him  in  adopting  these  in¬
novations.  There  is,  in  fact,  much  less  dif¬
ference  between  the  Ahiman  Rezon  of  Der¬
mott,  and  Anderson’s  edition  of  the  Book  of
Constitutions,  printed  in  1738,  than  there
is  between  the  latter  and  the  first  edition
of  the  Constitutions,  printed  in  1723.  But
the  great  points  of  difference  between  the
“  Ancients  ”  and  the  “  Moderns,”  points
which  kept  them  apart  for  so  many  years,
are  to  be  found  in  their  work  and  ritual,
for  an  account  of  which  the  reader  is  re¬
ferred  to  the  article  Ancients.

Aliisar.  See  Achishar.

Aholiub.  A  skilful  artificer  of  the
tribe  of  Dan,  who  was  appointed,  together
with  Bezaleel,  to  construct  the  tabernacle
in  the  wilderness  and  the  ark  of  the  cove-


50


AHRIMAN


AID


nant.  He  is  referred  to  in  the  Royal  Arch  de¬
gree  of  the  English  and  American  systems.

Akriman.  The  principle  of  evil  in
the  system  of  Zoroaster,  and  as  such  op¬
posed  to  Ormuzd,  the  principle  of  good.
He  emanated,  pure,  from  the  primitive
light,  and  was  the  second  born — Ormuzd
being  the  first ;  but  Ahriman,  yielding  to
pride,  ambition,  and  hatred  of  the  first  born,
or  principle  of  good,  was  condemned  by  the
Eternal  to  dwell  for  12,000  years  in  that  part
of  space  where  no  ray  of  light  reaches,  at
the  end  of  which  time  the  contest  between
Light  and  Darkness,  or  Good  and  Evil,  will
terminate.  See  Zoroaster.

Aiclmialotarcii.  The  title  given  by
the  Jews  to  the  Prince  of  the  Captivity,  or
representative  of  the  kings  of  Israel  at
Babylon.  See  Prince  of  the  Captivity.

Aid  and  Assistance.  The  duty  of
aiding  and  assisting,  not  only  all  worthy
distressed  Master  Masons,  but  their  widows
and  orphans  also,  “wheresoever  dispersed
over  the  face  of  the  globe,”  is  one  of  the
most  important  obligations  that  is  imposed
upon  every  brother  of  the  “  mystic  tie”  by
the  whole  scope  and  tenor  of  the  Masonic
Institution.  The  regulations  for  the  exer¬
cise  of  this  duty  are  few,  but  rational.  In
the  first  place,  a  Master  Mason  who  is  in
distress  has  a  greater  claim,  under  equal
circumstances,  to  the  aid  and  assistance  of
his  brother,  than  one  who,  being  in  the
Order,  has  not  attained  that  degree,  or  who
is  altogether  a  profane.  This  is  strictly  in
accordance  with  the  natural  instincts  of  the
human  heart,-  which  will  always  prefer  a
friend  to  a  stranger,  or,  as  it  is  rather  ener¬
getically  expressed  in  the  language  of  Long
Tom  Coffin,  “  a  messmate  before  a  shipmate,
a  shipmate  before  a  stranger,  and  a  stranger
before  a  dog ;  ”  and  it  is  also  strictly  in  ac¬
cordance  with  the  teaching  of  the  Apostle
of  the  Gentiles,  who  has  said:  “As  we  have
opportunity,  therefore,  let  us  do  good  to  all
men,  especially  unto  them  who  are  of  the
household.”

But  this  exclusiveness  is  only  to  be  prac¬
tised  under  circumstances  which  make  a
selection  imperatively  necessary.  Where
the  grant  of  relief  to  the  profane  would  in¬
capacitate  us  from  granting  similar  relief
to  our  brother,  then  must  the  preference  be
given  to  him  who  is  “  of  the  household.”
But  the  earliest  symbolic  lessons  of  the
ritual  teach  the  Mason  not  to  restrict  his
benevolence  within  the  narrow  limits  of  the
Fraternity,  but  to  acknowledge  the  claims
of  all  men,  who  need  it,  to  assistance.  In¬
wood  has  beautifully  said :  “  The  humble
condition  both  of  property  and  dress,  of
penury  and  want,  in  which  you  were  re¬
ceived  into  the  Lodge,  should  make  you  at
all  times  sensible  of  the  distresses  of  poverty,


and  all  you  can  spare  from  the  call  of  na¬
ture  and  the  due  care  of  your  families,
should  only  remain  in  your  possession  as  a
ready  sacrifice  to  the  necessities  of  an  un¬
fortunate,  distressed  brother.  Let  the  dis¬
tressed  cottage  feel  the  warmth  of  your
Masonic  zeal,  and,  if  possible,  exceed  even
the  unabating  ardor  of  Christian  charity.
At  your  approach  let  the  orphan  cease  to
weep,  and  in  the  sound  of  your  voice  let  the
widow  forget  her  sorrow.”

Another  restriction  laid  upon  this  duty
of  aid  and  assistance  by  the  obligations  of
Masonry  is,  that  the  giver  shall  not  be
lavish  beyond  his  means  in  the  disposition
of  his  benevolence.  What  he  bestows
must  be  such  as  he  can  give  “  without  ma¬
terial  injury  to  himself  or  family.”  No
man  should  wrong  his  wife  or  children  that
he  may  do  a  benefit  to  a  stranger,  or  even
to  a  brother.  The  obligations  laid  on  a
Mason  to  grant  aid  and  assistance  to  the
needy  and  distressed  seem  to  be  in  the  fol¬
lowing  gradations:  first,  to  his  family;
next,  to  his  brethren;  and,  lastly,  to  the
world  at  large.

So  far  this  subject  has  been  viewed  in  a
general  reference  to  that  spirit  of  kindness
which  should  actuate  all  men,  and  which  it
is  the  object  of  Masonic  teaching  to  im¬
press  on  the  mind  of  every  Mason  as  a
common  duty  of  humanity,  and  whose  dis¬
position  Masonry  only  seeks  to  direct  and
guide.  But  there  is  another  aspect  in  which
this  subject  may  be  considered,  namely,
in  that  peculiar  and  technical  one  of  Ma¬
sonic  aid  and  assistance  due  from  one  Ma¬
son  to  another.  Here  there  is  a  duty  de¬
clared,  and  a  correlative  right  inferred ;  for
if  it  is  the  duty  of  one  Mason  to  assist
another,  it  follows  that  every  Mason  has
the  right  to  claim  that  assistance  from  his
brother.  It  is  this  duty  that  the  obliga¬
tions  of  Masonry  are  especially  intended  to
enforce ;  it  is  this  right  that  they  are  in¬
tended  to  sustain.  The  symbolic  ritual  of
Masonry  which  refers,  as,  for  instance,  in
the  first  degree,  to  the  virtue  of  benevo¬
lence,  refers  to  it  in  the  general  sense  of  a
virtue  which  all  men  should  practise.  But
when  the  Mason  reaches  the  third  degree,
he  discovers  new  obligations  which  restrict
and  define  the  exercise  of  this  duty  of  aid
and  assistance.  So  far  as  his  obligations
control  him,  the  Mason,  as  a  Mason,  is  not
legally  bound  to  extend  his  aid  beyond  the
just  claimants  in  his  own  Fraternity.  To
do  good  to  all  men  is  of  course  inculcated
and  recommended ;  to  do  good  to  the  house¬
hold  is  enforced  and  made  compulsory  by
legal  enactment  and  sanction.

Now,  as  there  is  here,  on  one  side,  a  duty,
and  on  the  other  side  a  right,  it  is  proper
to  inquire  what  are  the  regulations  or  laws


AID


AIX-LA-CHAPELLE


51


by  which  this  duty  is  controlled  and  this
right  maintained.

The  duty  to  grant  and  the  right  to  claim
relief  Masonically  is  recognized  in  the  fol¬
lowing  passage  of  the  Old  Charges  of
1722:

“  But  if  you  discover  him  to  be  a  true
and  genuine  brother,  you  are  to  respect
him  accordingly ;  and  if  he  is  in  want,  you
must  relieve  him  if  you  can,  or  else  direct
him  how  he  may  be  relieved.  You  must
employ  him  some  days,  or  else  recommend
him  to  be  employed.  But  you  are  not
charged  to  do  beyond  your  ability ;  only  to
prefer  a  poor  brother,  who  is  a  good  man
and  true,  before  any  other  people  in  the
same  circumstances.”

This  written  law  agrees  in  its  conditions
and  directions,  so  far  as  it  goes,  with  the
unwritten  law  of  the  Order,  and  from  the
two  we  may  deduce  the  following  principles:

1.  The  applicant  must  be  a  Master  Ma¬
son.  In  1722,  the  charitable  benefits  of
Masonry  were  extended,  it  is  true,  to  En¬
tered  Apprentices,  and  an  Apprentice  was
recognized,  in  the  language  of  the  law,  as
“a  true  and  genuine  brother.”  But  this
was  because  at  that  time  only  the  first  de¬
gree  was  conferred  in  subordinate  Lodges,
Fellow  Crafts  and  Master  Masons  being
made  in  the  Grand  Lodge.  Hence  the
great  mass  of  the  Fraternity  consisted  of
Apprentices,  and  many  Masons  never  pro¬
ceeded  any  further.  But  the  second  and
third  degrees  are  now  always  conferred  in
subordinate  Lodges,  and  very  few  initiates
voluntarily  stop  short  of  the  Master’s  de¬
gree.  Hence  the  mass  of  the  Fraternity
now  consists  of  Master  Masons,  and  the  law
which  formerly  applied  to  Apprentices  is,
under  our  present  organization,  made  ap¬
plicable  only  to  those  who  have  become
Master  Masons.

2.  The  applicant  must  be  worthy.  W e
are  to  presume  that  every  Mason  is  “  a  good
man  and  true”  until  the  Lodge  which  has
jurisdiction  over  him  has  pronounced  to
the  contrary.  Every  Mason  who  is  “in
good  standing,”  that  is,  who  is  a  regularly
contributing  member  of  a  Lodge,  is  to  be
considered  as  “  worthy,”  in  the  technical
sense  of  the  term.  An  expelled,  a  sus¬
pended,  or  a  non-affiliated  Mason,  does  not
meet  the  required  condition  of  “  a  regu¬
larly  contributing  member.”  Such  a  Ma¬
son  is  therefore  not  “  worthy,”  and  is  not
entitled  to  Masonic  assistance.

3.  The  giver  is  not  expected  to  exceed
his  ability  in  the  amount  of  relief.  The
written  law  says,  “  you  are  not  charged  to
do  beyond  your  ability  ;  ”  the  ritual  says,
that  your  relief  must  be  “  without  material
injury  to  yourself  or  family.”  The  princi¬
ple  is  the  same  in  both.


4.  The  widow  and  orphans  of  a  Master
Mason  have  the  claim  of  the  husband  and
father  extended  to  them.  The  written  law
says  nothing  explicitly  on  this  point,  but
the  unwritten  or  ritualistic  law  expressly
declares  that  it  is  our  duty  “  to  contribute
to  the  relief  of  a  worthy,  distressed  brother,
his  widow  and  orphans.”

5.  And  lastly,  in  granting  relief  or  assist¬
ance,  the  Mason  is  to  be  preferred  to  the
profane.  He  must  be  placed  “  before  any
other  people  in  the  same  circumstances.”

These  are  the  laws  which  regulate  the
doctrine  of  Masonic  aid  and  assistance.
They  are  often  charged  by  the  enemies  of
Masonry  with  a  spirit  of  exclusiveness.
But  it  has  been  shown  that  they  are  in
accordance  with  the  exhortation  of  the
Apostle,  who  would  do  good  “  especially  to
those  who  are  of  the  household,”  and  they
have  the  warrant  of  the  law  of  nature ;  for
every  one  will  be  ready  to  say,  with  that
kindest-hearted  of  men,  Charles  Lamb,  “  I
can  feel  for  all  indifferently,  but  I  cannot
feel  for  all  alike.  I  can  be  a  friend  to  a
worthy  man,  who,  upon  another  account,
cannot  be  my  mate  or  fellow.  I  cannot
like  all  people  alike.”  And  so  as  Masons,
while  we  should  be  charitable  to  all  persons
in  need  or  in  distress,  there  are  only  certain
ones  who  can  claim  the  aid  and  assistance
of  the  Order,  or  of  its  disciples,  under  the
positive  sanction  of  Masonic  law.

Aitclieson-IIaven  Manuscript.
A  manuscript  record  formerly  preserved
in  the  archives  of  the  Aitcheson-Haven
Lodge,  which  met  at  Musselburgh  in  Scot¬
land,  but  which  is  now  the  property  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.  The  MS.  is  en¬
grossed  in  the  minute-book  of  the  Aitche-
son  Lodge,  and  is  dated  29th  of  May,  A.  D.
1666.  It  has  never  been  published.  In
Laurie’s  History  of  Freemasonry,  (ed.  1859,)
there  has  been  inserted  “  one  narration  ot
the  founding  of  the  craft  of  Masonry,  and
by  whom  it  hath  been  cherished,”  which
Bro.  D.  Murray  Lyon  says  is  a  modern  and
somewhat  imperfect  rendering  of  the  Ait¬
cheson-Haven  MS.,  and  not,  therefore,  a
safe  text  to  be  followed.

Aix  -  la  -  Cliapelle.  (Tn  German,
Aachen.)  A  city  of  Germany,  remarkable
in  Masonic  history  for  a  persecution  which
took  place  in  the  eighteenth  century,  and  of
which  Gadicke  ( Freimaur .  Lex.)  gives  the
following  account.  In  the  year  1779,  Lud¬
wig  Grienemann,  a  Dominican  monk,  de¬
livered  a  course  of  lenten  sermons,  in  which
he  attempted  to  prove  that  the  Jews  who
crucified  Christ  were  Freemasons,  that  Pi¬
late  and  Herod  were  Wardens  in  a  Mason’s
Lodge,  that  Judas,  previous  to  his  betrayal
of  his  Master,  was  initiated  into  the  Order,
and  that  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  which


52


AKIROP


ALARM


he  is  said  to  have  returned,  was  only  the
fee  which  he  paid  for  his  initiation.  Aix-
la-Chapelle  being  a  Roman  Catholic  city,
the  magistrates  were  induced,  by  the  influ¬
ence  of  Grienemann,  to  issue  a  decree,  in
which  they  declared  that  any  one  who
should  permit  a  meeting  of  the  Freemasons
in  his  house  should,  for  the  first  offence,  be
fined  100  florins,  for  the  second  200,  and
for  the  third  be  banished  from  the  city.
The  mob  became  highly  incensed  against
the  Masons,  and  insulted  all  whom  they
suspected  to  be  members  of  the  Order.  At
length  Peter  Schuff,  a  Capuchin,  jealous  of
the  influence  which  the  Dominican  Grie¬
nemann  was  exerting,  began  also,  with
augmented  fervor,  to  preach  against  Free¬
masonry,  and  still  more  to  excite  the  pop¬
ular  commotion.  In  this  state  of  affairs,
the  Lodge  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  applied  to
the  princes  and  Masonic  Lodges  in  the
neighboring  territories  for  assistance  and
protection,  which  were  immediately  ren¬
dered.  A  letter  in  French  was  received
by  both  priests,  in  which  the  writer,  who
stated  that  he  was  one  of  the  former  digni¬
taries  of  the  Order,  strongly  reminded
them  of  their  duties,  and,  among  other
things,  said  that  “  many  priests,  a  pope,
several  cardinals,  bishops,  and  even  Do¬
minican  and  Capuchin  monks,  had  been,
and  still  were,  members  of  the  Order.”  Al¬
though  this  remonstrance  had  some  effect,
peace  was  not  altogether  restored  until  the
neighboring  free  imperial  states  threatened
that  they  would  prohibit  the  monks  from
collecting  alms  in  their  territories  unless
they  ceased  to  excite  the  popular  commo¬
tion  against  the  Freemasons.

Akirop.  The  name  given,  in  the  ritual
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,  to  one
of  the  ruffians  celebrated  in  the  legend
of  the  third  degree.  The  word  is  said  in
the  ritual  to  signify  an  assassin.  It  might
probably  be  derived  from  3lp,  KaRaB,  to
assault  or  join  battle ;  but  is  just  as  proba¬
bly  a  word  so  corrupted  by  long  oral  trans¬
mission  that  its  etymology  can  no  longer
be  traced.  See  Abiram.

Alabama.  One  of  the  Southern
United  States  of  .  America.  Masonry  was
established  in  this  State  in  the  beginning
of  the  nineteenth  century.  Mitchell,  (Hist,
of  Freemas.,  i.  630,)  whose  accuracy  is,  how¬
ever,  not  to  be  depended  on,  says  that  it
was  planted,  as  he  thinks,  in  this  jurisdic¬
tion  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee  and
North  Carolina.  If  he  be  so  far  right,  we
must  also  add  the  Grand  Lodge  of  South
Carolina,  which,  in  1819,  granted  a  war¬
rant  to  Claiborne  Lodge  No.  51,  afterwards
called  Alabama  Lodge.  In  1821,  there
were  at  least  nine  Lodges  in  Alabama,
holding  warrants  under  different  jurisdic¬


tions,  viz.:  Halo,  21;  Rising  Virtue,  30;
Madison,  21 ;  Alabama,  21 ;  Alabama,  51 ;
Farrar,  41;  St.  Stephens, — ;  Moulton,  34;
and  Russellville,  36.  On  the  11th  of  June,
1821,  these  nine  Lodges  met  in  convention
in  the  town  of  Cahawba,  and  organized  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Alabama  on  the  14th  of
thesame  month ;  Thomas  W.  Farrar  having
been  elected  Grand  Master,  and  Thomas  A.
Rogers  Grand  Secretary.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Alabama  was
organized  on  the  2d  of  June,  1827,  at  the
town  of  Tuscaloosa,  and  at  the  same  time
and  place  a  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and
Select  Masters  was  established.

On  the  27th  of  October,  1860,  Sir  Knt.
B.  B.  French,  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand
Encampment  of  the  United  States,  issued
his  mandate  for  the  formation  of  a  Grand
Commandery  of  Alabama.

Alapa.  In  classical  Latinity  given  by
the  master  to  his  manumitted  slave  as  a
symbol  of  manumission,  and  as  a  reminder
that  it  was  the  last  unrequited  indignity
which  he  was  to  receive.  Hence,  in  medi¬
aeval  times,  the  same  word  was  applied  to
the  blow  inflicted  on  the  cheek  of  the
newly-created  knight  by  the  sovereign
who  created  him  with  the  same  symbolic
signification.  This  was  sometimes  repre¬
sented  by  the  blow  on  the  shoulder  with
the  flat  of  a  sword,  which  has  erroneously
been  called  the  accolade.  See  Knighthood.

Alarm.  The  verb,  “to  alarm,”  signi¬
fies,  in  Freemasonry,  “  to  give  notice  of  the
approach  of  some  one  desiring  admission.”
Thus,  “to  alarm  the  Lodge,”  is  to  inform
the  Lodge  that  there  is  some  one  without
who  is  seeking  entrance.”  As  a  noun,  the
word  “alarm”  has  two  significations.  1.
An  alarm  is  a  warning  given  by  the  Tiler,  or
other  appropriate  officer,  by  which  he  seeks
to  communicate  with  the  interior  of  the
Lodge  or  Chapter.  In  this  sense  the  ex¬
pression  so  often  used,  “  an  alarm  at  the
door,”  simply  signifies  that  the  officer  out¬
side  has  given  notice  of  his  desire  to  com¬
municate  with  the  Lbdge.  2.  An  alarm  is
also  the  peculiar  mode  in  which  this  notice
is  to  be  given.  In  modern  Masonic  works,
the  number  of  knocks  given  in  an  alarm
is  generally  expressed  by  musical  notes.
Thus,  three  distinct  knocks  would  be  desig-

nated  thus,  a  g  g ;  two  rapid  and  two  slow

ones  thus,  g  a  J'J';  and  three  knocks  three

times  repeated  thus,  J  g  a
etc.  As  to  the  derivation  of  the  word,  a
writer  in  Notes  and  Queries  (1  Ser.  ii.,
151,)  ingeniously  conjectures  that  it  come3
from  the  old  French  d  Varme,  which  in
modern  times  is  aux  armes,  “to  arms!”
The  legal  meaning  of  to  alarm,  is  not  to


ALBAN


ALCHEMY


53


frighten ,  but  to  make  one  aware  of  the
necessity  of  defence  or  protection.  And
this  is  precisely  the  Masonic  signification
of  the  word.

Albsin,  St.  See  Saint  Alban.

Albertus  Magnus.  A  scholastic
philosopher  of  the  Middle  Ages,  of  great
erudition,  but  who  had  among  the  vulgar
the  reputation  of  being  a  magician.  He
was  born  at  Lauingen,  in  Swabia,  in  1205,
of  an  illustrious  family,  his  sub-title  being
that  of  Count  of  Bollstadt.  He  studied
at  Padua,  and  in  1223  entered  the  Order
of  the  Dominicans.  In  1249,  he  became
head-master  of  the  school  at  Cologne.  In
1260,  Pope  Alexander  VI.  conferred  upon
him  the  bishopric  of  Ratisbon.  In  1262,
he  resigned  the  episcopate  and  returned  to
Cologne,  and,  devoting  himself  to  philo¬
sophic  pursuits  for  the  remainder  of  His  life,
died  there  in  1280.  His  writings  were  very
voluminous,  the  edition  published  at  Lyons,
in  1651,  amounting  to  twenty-one  large
folio  volumes.  Albertus  has  been  con¬
nected  with  the  Operative  Masonry  of  the
Middle  Ages  because  he  has  been  supposed
by  many  to  have  been  the  real  inventor  of
the  German  Gothic  style  of  architecture.
Heidelofi',  in  his  Bauhiitte  des  Mittelalters,
says,  that  “  he  recalled  into  life  the  sym¬
bolic  language  of  the  ancients,  which  had
so  long  lain  dormant,  and  adapted  it  to  suit
architectural  forms.”  The  Masons  accepted
his  instructions,  and  adopted  in  consequence
that  system  of  symbols  which  were  secretly
communicated  only  to  the  members  of  their
own  body,  and  served  even  as  a  medium  of
intercommunication.  He  is  asserted  to
have  designed  the  plan  for  the  construction
of  the  Cathedral  of  Cologne,  and  to  have
altered  the  Constitution  of  the  Masons,  and
to  have  given  to  them  a  new  set  of  laws.

Albrecht,  Henry  Christoph.  A
German  author,  who  published  at  Hamburg,
'  in  1792,  the  first  and  only  part  of  a  work  en¬
titled  Materialen  zu  einer  critischen  Geschicte
der  Freimaurerei,  i.  e.,  Collections  towards  a
Critical  ilistory  of  Freemasonry.  Kloss
says  that  this  was  one  of  the  first  attempts
at  a  clear  and  rational  history  of  the  Order.
Unfortunately,  the  author  never  comjdeted
his  task,  and  only  the  first  part  of  the  work
ever  appeared.  Albrecht  was  the  author
also  of  another  work  entitled,  Geheime
Geschicte  einers  Rosenkreuzers,  or  Secret  His¬
tory  of  a  Rosicrucian,  and  of  a  series  of
papers  which  appeared  in  the  Berlin  Archiv.
derZeit,  contain  i  ng  “  N  otices  of  F  reemason  ry
in  the  first  half  of  the  Sixteenth  Century.”
Albrecht  adopted  the  theory  first  advanced
by  the  Abbe'  Grandidier,  that  Freemasonry
owes  its  origin  to  the  stone-masons  of
Strasburg.

Alchemy.  The  Neo-Platonicians  in¬


troduced  at  an  early  period  of  the  Chris¬
tian  era  an  apparently  new  science,  which
they  called  en Lorr/ga  hpa,  or  the  Sacred
Science,  which  materially  influenced  the
subsequent  condition  of  the  arts  and  sci¬
ences.  The  books  from  which  the  sacred
science  was  taught  were  called  Chemia,
supposed  to  be  derived  from  Cham,  the  son
of  Noah,  to  whom  was  attributed  its  in¬
vention.  In  the  fifth  century  arose,  as  the
name  of  the  science,  alchemia,  derived  from
the  Arabic  definite  article  al  being  added
to  chemia;  and  Julius  Firmicius,  in  a  work
On  the  Influence  of  the  Stars  upon  the  Fate
of  Man,  uses  the  phrase  “scientia  alche-
miae.”  From  this  time  the  study  of  al¬
chemy  was  openly  followed.  In  the  Middle
Ages,  and  up  to  the  end  of  the  seventeenth
century,  it  was  an  i  mportant  science,  studied
by  some  of  the  most  distinguished  philoso¬
phers,  such  as  Avicenna,  Albertus  Magnus,
Raymond  Lulli,  Roger  Bacon,  Elias  Ash-
mole,  and  many  others.

Alchemy  —  called  also  the  Hermetic
Philosophy,  because  it  is  said- to  have  been
first  taught  in  Egypt  by  Hermes  Trisme-
gestus  —  was  engaged  in  three  distinct  pur¬
suits  :

1.  The  discovery  of  the  philosopher’s
stone,  by  which  all  the  inferior  metals
could  be  transmuted  into  gold.

2.  The  discovery  of  an  alkahest,  or  uni¬
versal  solvent  of  all  things.

3.  The  discovery  of  a  panacea,  or  univer¬
sal  remedy,  under  the  name  of  elixir  vitse,
by  which  all  diseases  were  to  be  cured  and
life  indefinitely  prolonged.

It  is  not  surprising  that  alchemy,  putting
forth  such  pretensions  as  these,  should,  by
those  whodid  not  understand  its  true  nature,
have  been  flippantly  defined  as  “ars  sine
arte,  cujus  principium  est  mentiri,  medium
laborare  et  finis  mendicari,”  an  art  without
an  art,  whose  beginning  is  falsehood,  its
middle  labor,  and  its  end  beggary.  But
while  there  were  undoubtedly  many  fools
who  understood  the  language  of  alchemy
only  in  its  literal  sense,  and  many  charla¬
tans  who  used  it  for  selfish  purposes,  it
cannot  be  denied  that  there  must  have  been
something  in  it  better  than  mere  pretension,
to  invite  the  attention  and  engage  the  labors
of  so  many  learned  men.

Hitchcock,  a  learned  American  writer,
who  published,  in  1857,  Remarks  upon  Al¬
chemy  and  the  Alchemists ,  says  (p.  x.)  that
“the  genuine  alchemists  were  religious
men,  who  passed  their  time  in  legitimate
pursuits,  earning  an  honest  subsistence,
and,  in  religious  contemplations,  studying
how  to  realize  in  themselves  the  union  of
the  divine  and  human  nature  expressed  in
man  by  an  enlightened  submission  to  God’s
will;  and  they  thought  out  and  published,


>


54


ALDWORTH


ALDWORTH


after  a  manner  of  their  own,  a  method  of
attaining  or  entering  upon  this  state,  as
the  only  rest  of  the  soul.”  And  in  another
place  (p.  22)  he  says:  “The  subject  of  al¬
chemy  was  Man;  while  the  object  was  the
perfection  of  Man,  which  was  supposed  to
centre  in  a  certain  unity  with  the  Divine
nature.”

The  alchemists  were,  in  their  philosophy,
undoubtedly  in  advance  of  their  age,  and,
being  unwilling  to  make  their  opinions
openly  known  to  a  world  not  yet  prepared
to  receive  and  to  appreciate  them,  they
communicated  their  thoughts  to  each  other
in  a  language  and  in  symbols  understood
only  by  themselves.  Thus  they  spoke  of
Man  as  a  Stone,  and  the  fire  which  puri¬
fied  the  Stone  was  the  series  of  trials  and
temptations  by  which  man’s  moral  nature
is  to  be  purified.  So,  too,  sulphur,  mer¬
cury,  salt,  and  many  other  things,  were
symbols  by  which  they  taught  lessons  of
profound  religious  import  to  the  true  adepts,
which,  being  misunderstood  by  others,  led
thousands  into  the  vain  and  useless  search
for  some  tangible  method  of  transmuting
the  baser  metals  into  gold.  “  Who,”  says
one  of  these  philosophers,  “  is  to  blame  ?
the  Art,  or  those  who  seek  it  upon  false
principles?”

Freemasonry  and  alchemy  have  sought
the  same  results,  (the  lesson  of  Divine  Truth
and  the  doctrine  of  immortal  life,)  and  they
have  both  sought  it  by  the  same  method
of  symbolism.  It  is  not,  therefore,  strange
that  in  the  eighteenth  century,  and  per¬
haps  before,  we  find  an  incorporation  of
much  of  the  science  of  alchemy  into  that
of  Freemasonry.  Hermetic  rites  and  Her¬
metic  degrees  were  common,  and  their
relics  are  still  to  be  found  existing  in  de¬
grees  which  do  not  absolutely  trace  their
origin  to  alchemy,  but  which  show  some
of  its  traces  in  their  rituals.  The  28th  de¬
gree  of  the  Scottish  Rite,  or  the  Knight
of  the  Sun,  is  entirely  a  hermetic  degree,
and  claims  its  parentage  in  the  title  of
“  Adept  of  Masonry,”  by  which  it  is  some¬
times  known.

A  Id  worth,  the  Hon.  Sirs.  This
lady  received,  about  the  year  1735,  the  first
and  second  degrees  of  Freemasonry  in
Lodge  No.  44,  at  Doneraile,  in  Ireland.
The  circumstances  connected  with  this  sin¬
gular  initiation  were  first  published  in  1807,
at  Cork,  and  subsequently  republished  by
Spencer,  the  celebrated  Masonic  bibliopole,
in  London.  It  may  be  observed,  before
proceeding  to  glean  from  this  work  the
narrative  of  her  initiation,  that  the  authen¬
ticity  of  all  the  circumstances  was  con¬
firmed  on  their  first  publication  by  an
eye-witness  to  the  transaction.

The  Hon.  Elizabeth  St.  Leger  was  born


about  the  year  1713,  and  tvas  the  youngest
child  and  only  daughter  of  the  Right  Hon.
Arthur  St.  Leger,  first  Viscount  Doneraile,
of  Ireland,  who  died  in  1727,  and  was  suc¬
ceeded  by  his  eldest  son,  the  brother  of  our
heroine.  Subsequently  to  her  initiation
into  the  mysteries  of  Freemasonry  she
married  Richard  A  Id  worth,  Esq.,  of  New¬
market,  in  the  county  of  Cork.

Lodge  No.  44,  in  which  she  was  initiated,
was,  in  some  sort,  an  aristocratic  Lodge,
consisting  principally  of  the  gentry  and
most  respectable  and  wealthy  inhabitants
of  the  country  around  Doneraile.  The
communications  were  usually  held  in  the
town,  but  during  the  Mastership  of  Lord
Doneraile,  under  whom  his  sister  was  ini¬
tiated,  the  meetings  were  often  held  at  his
Lordship’s  residence.

It  was  during  one  of  these  meetings  at
Doneraile  House*  that  this  female  initia¬
tion  took  place,  the  story  of  which  Spen¬
cer,  in  the  memoir  to  which  we  have
referred,  relates  in  the  following  words:

“It  happened  on  this  particular  occasion
that  the  Lodge  was  held  in  a  room  sepa¬
rated  from  another,  as  is  often  the  case,  by
stud  and  brickwork.  The  young  lady,  being
giddy  and  thoughtless,  and  determined
to  gratify  her  curiosity,  made  her  arrange¬
ments  accordingly,  and,  with  a  pair  of
scissors,  (as  she  herself  related  to  the  mo¬
ther  of  our  informant,)  removed  a  portion
of  a  brick  from  the  wall,  and  placed  her¬
self  so  as  to  command  a  full  view  of  every¬
thing  which  occurred  in  the  next  room  ;  so
placed,  she  witnessed  the  two  first  degrees
in  Masonry,  which  was  the  extent  of  the
proceedings  of  the  Lodge  on  that  night.
Becoming  aware,  from  what  she  heard,
that  the  brethren  were  about  to  separate,
for  the- first  time  she  felt  tremblingly  alive
to  the  awkwardness  and  danger  of  her  sit¬
uation,  and  began  to  consider  how  she
could  retire  without  observation.  She  be¬
came  nervous  and  agitated,  and  nearly
fainted,  but  so  far  recovered  herself  as  to
be  fully  aware  of  the  necessity  of  with¬
drawing  as  quickly  as  possible;  in  the  act
of  doing  so,  being  in  the  dark,  she  stum¬
bled  against  and  overthrew  something,  said
to  be  a  chair  or  some  ornamental  piece  of
furniture.  The  crash  w'as  loud ;  and  the
Tiler,  who  was  on  the  lobby  or  landing  on
which  the  doors  both  of  the  Lodge  room
and  that  where  the  honorable  Miss  St.
Leger  was,  opened,  gave  the  alarm,  burst
open  the  door  and,  with  a  light  in  one
hand  and  a  drawn  sword  in  the  other,  ap-

*  A  writer  in  the  London  Freemason’s  Quar¬
terly  Review  1 1839,  p.  322, )  says  that  she  was  con¬
cealed  in  a  clock-case  in  the  regular  Lodge  room,
in  Maberly’s  house  of  entertainment  at  York.
But  the  locus  in  quo  is  not  material


ALETHOPHILE


ALFADER


55


[»eared  to  the  now  terrified  and  fainting
ady.  He  was  soon  joined  by  the  members
of  the  Lodge  present,  and  luckily  ;  for  it  is
asserted  that  but  for  the  prompt  appearance
of  her  brother,  Lord  Doneraile,  and  other
steady  members,  her  life  would  have  fallen
a  sacrifice  to  what  was  then  esteemed  her
crime.  The  first  care  of  his  Lordship  was
to  resuscitate  the  unfortunate  lady  without
alarming  the  house,  and  endeavor  to  learn
from  her  an  explanation  of  what  had  oc¬
curred  ;  having  done  so,  many  of  the  mem¬
bers  being  furious  at  the  transaction,  she
was  placed  under  guard  of  the  Tiler  and  a
member,  in  the  room  where  she  was  found.
The  members  re-assembled  and  deliberated
as  to  what,  under  the  circumstances,  was
to  be  done,  and  over  two  long  hours  she
could  hear  the  angry  discussion  and  her
death  deliberately  proposed  and  seconded.
At  length  the  good  sense  of  the  majority
succeeded  in  calming,  in  some  measure,  the
angry  and  irritated  feelings  of  the  rest  of
the  members,  when,  after  much  had  been
said  and  many  things  proposed,  it  was  re¬
solved  to  give  her  the  option  of  submitting
to  the  Masonic  ordeal  to  the  extent  she  had
witnessed,  (Fellow  Craft,)  and  if  she  re¬
fused,  the  brethren  were  again  to  consult.
Being  waited  on  to  decide,  Miss  St.  Leger,
exhausted  and  terrified  by  the  storminess
of  the  debate,  which  she  could  not  avoid
partially  hearing,  and  yet,  notwithstanding
ali,  with  a  secret  pleasure,  gladly  and  un¬
hesitatingly  accepted  the  offer.  She  was
accordingly  initiated.’'

Mrs.,  or,  as  she  was  appropriately  called,
Sister  Aldworth,  lived  many  years  after,
but  does  not  seem  ever  to  have  forgotten
the  lessons  of  charity  and  fraternal  love
which  she  received  on  her  unexpected  ini¬
tiation  into  the  esoteric  doctrines  of  the
Order.  “  Placed  as  she  was,”  says  the
memoir  we  have  quoted,  “  by  her  marriage
with  Mr.  Aldworth,  at  the  head  of  a  very
large  fortune,  the  poor  in  general,  and  the
Masonic  poor  in  particular,  had  good  rea¬
son  to  record  her  numerous  and  bountiful
acts  of  kindness;  nor  were  these  accompa¬
nied  with  ostentation  —  far  from  it.  It  has
been  remarked  of  her,  that  her  custom  was
to  seek  out  bashful  misery  and  retiring
poverty,  and  with  a  well-directed  liberality,
soothe  many  a  bleeding  heart.”

Aletliopliile,  Lover  of  Truth.  The5th
degree  of  the  Order  of  African  Architects.

Alexander  I.,  Emperor  of  Russia.
Alexander  I.  succeeded  Paul  I.  in  the  year
1801,  and  immedietely  after  his  accession
renewed  the  severe  prohibitions  of  his  pre¬
decessor  against  all  secret  societies,  and
especially  Freemasonry.  In  1803,  M.  Boe-
ber,  counsellor  of  state  and  director  of  the
military  school  at  St.  Petersburg,  resolved


to  remove,  if  possible,  from  the  mind  of
the  emperor  the  prejudices  which  he  had
conceived  against  the  Order.  Accordingly,
in  an  audience  which  he  had  solicited  and
obtained,  he  described  the  objects  of  the
Institution  and  the  doctrine  of  its  mysteries
in  such  a  way  as  to  lead  the  emperor  to
rescind  the  obnoxious  decrees,  and  to  add
these  words :  “  What  you  have  told  me  of
the  Institution  not  only  induces  me  to
grant  it  my  protection  and  patronage,  but
even  to  ask  for  initiation  into  its  mysteries.
Is  this  possible  to  be  obtained?”  M.  Boe-
ber  replied,  “  Sire,  I  cannot  myself  reply
to  the  question.  But  I  will  call  together
the  Masons  of  your  capital,  and  make  your
Majesty’s  desire  known;  and  I  have  no
doubt  that  they  will  be  eager  to  comply
with  your  wishes.”  Accordingly  Alexan¬
der  was  soon  after  initiated,  and  the  Grand
Lodge  Astrea  of  Russia  was  in  consequence
established,  of  which  M.  Boeberwas  elected
Grand  Master.

Alexandria,  School  of.  When
Alexander  built  the  city  of  Alexandria  in
Egypt,  with  the  intention  of  making  it  the
seat  of  his  empire,  he  invited  thither  learned
men  from  all  nations,  who  brought  with
them  their  peculiar  notions.  The  Alex¬
andria  school  of  philosophy  which  was
thus  established,  by  the  commingling  of
Orientalists,  Jews,  Egyptians,  and  Greeks,
became  eclectic  in  character,  and  exhibited
a  heterogeneous  mixture  of  the  opinions  of
the  Egyptian  priests,  of  the  Jewish  Rabbis,
of  Arabic  teachers,  and  of  the  disciples  of
Plato  and  Pythagoras.  From  this  school
we  derive  Gnosticism  and  the  Kabbala,
and,  above  all,  the  system  of  symbolism  and
allegory  which  lay  at  the  foundation  of  the
Masonic  philosophy.  To  no  ancient  sect,
indeed,  except  perhaps  the  Pythagoreans,
have  the  Masonic  teachers  been  so  much
indebted  for  the  substance  of  their  doc¬
trines,  as  well  as  the  esoteric  method  of
communicating  them,  as  to  that  of  the
School  of  Alexandria.  Both  Aristobulus
and  Philo,  the  two  most  celebrated  chiefs
of  this  school,  taught,  although  a  century
intervened  between  their  births,  the  same
theory,  that  the  sacred  writings  of  the  He¬
brews  were,  by  their  system  of  allegories,
the  true  source  of  all  religious  and  philo¬
sophic  doctrine,  the  literal  meaningof  which
alone  was  for  the  common  people,  the  eso¬
teric  or  hidden  meaning  being  kept  for  the
initiated.  Freemasonry  still  carries  into
practice  the  same  theory.

Alfader.  The  chief  god  of  the  Scan¬
dinavians.  The  Edda  says  that  in  Asgard,
or  the  abode  of  the  gods,  the  supreme  god
had  twelve  names,  the  first  of  which  was
Alfader,  equivalent  to  the  Greek  Pantopatcr,
or  the  Universal  Father.


56


ALGABIL


ALLOWED


Algabil.  A  name  of  the  Su¬

preme  God,  signifying  THE  BUILDER,
having  an  etymological  relation  to  the
Giblim,  or  Builders  of  Gebal,  who  acted  an
important  part  in  the  construction  of  the
Temple  of  Solomon.  It  is  equivalent  to
the  Masonic  epithet  of  God,  “  the  Grand
Architect  of  the  Universe.”  I  insert  this
word  on  the  authority  of  Urquhart,  who
gives  it  in  hi3  Pillars  of  Hercules,  ii.  67.

Alincourt,  Francois  tl\  A  French
gentleman,  who,  in  the  year  1776,  was  sent
with  Don  Oyres  de  Ornellas  Pracjao,  a  Por¬
tuguese  nobleman,  to  prison,  by  the  gov¬
ernor  of  the  island  of  Madeira,  for  being
Freemasons.  They  were  afterwards  sent  to
Lisbon,  and  confined  in  a  common  jail  for
fourteen  months,  where  they  would  have
perished  had  not  the  Masons  of  Lisbon
supported  them,  through  whose  interces¬
sion  with  Don  Martinro  de  Mello  they  were
at  last  released.  Smith,  Use  and  Abuse  of
Freemasonry,  p.  206.

Allegiance.  Every  Mason  owes  alle¬
giance  to  the  Lodge,  Chapter,  or  other
body  of  which  he  is  a  member,  and  also  to
the  Grand  Lodge,  Grand  Chapter  or  other
supreme  authority  from  which  that  body
has  received  its  charter.  But  this  is
not  a  divided  allegiance.  If,  for  instance,
the  edicts  of  a  Grand  and  a  Subordinate
Lodge  conflict,  there  is  no  question  which
is  to  be  obeyed.  Supreme  or  governing
bodies  in  Masonry  claim  and  must  receive
a  paramount  allegiance.

Allegory.  A  discourse  or  narrative
in  which  there  is  a  literal  and  a  figurative
sense,  a  patent  and  a  connected  meaning;
the  literal  or  patent  sense  being  intended,
by  analogy  or  comparison,  to  indicate  the
figurative  or  concealed  one.  Its  derivation
from  the  Greek,  a\lot;  and  ayopeiv,  to  say
something  different,  that  is,  to  say  something
where  the  language  is  one  thing  and  the
true  meaning  another,  exactly  expresses
the  character  of  an  allegory.  It  has  been
said  that  there  is  no  essential  difference
between  an  allegory  and  a  symbol.  There
is  not  in  design,  but  there  is  in  their
character.  An  allegory  may  be  interpreted
without  any  previous  conventional  agree¬
ment,  but  a  symbol  cannot.  Thus  the
legend  of  the  third  degree  is  an  allegory,
evidently  to  be  interpreted  as  teaching  a
restoration  to  life;  and  this  we  learn  from
the  legend  itself,  without  any  previous  un¬
derstanding.  The  sprig  of  acacia  is  a  sym¬
bol  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  But
this  we  know  only  because  such  meaning
had  been  conventionally  determined  when
the  symbol  was  first  established.  It  is  evi¬
dent,  then,  that  an  allegory  whose  meaning
is  obscure,  is  imperfect.  The  enigmatical
meaning  should  be  easy  of  interpretation ;


and  hence  Lemiere,  a  French  poet,  has
said:  “  L’allegorie  habite  un  palais  dia-
phane,”  —  Allegory  lives  in  a  transparent,
palace.  All  the  legends  of  Freemasonry
are  more  or  less  allegorical,  and  whatever
truth  there  may  be  in  some  of  them  in  a
historical  point  of  view,  it  is  only  as  allegories
or  legendary  symbols  that  they  are  of  i  m  port-
auce.  The  English  lectures  have  therefore
very  properly  defined  Freemasonry  to  be
“a  system  of  morality  veiled  in  allegory
and  illustrated  by  symbols.”

The  allegory  was  a  favorite  figure  among
the  ancients,  and  to  the  allegorizing  spirit
are  we  to  trace  the  construction  of  the
entire  Greek  and  Roman  mythology.  Not
less  did  it  prevail  among  the  older  Aryan
nations,  and  its  abundant  use  is  exhibited
in  the  religions  of  Brahma  and  Zoroaster.
The  Jewish  Rabbins  were  greatly  addicted
to  it,  and  carried  its  employment,  as  Mai-
monides  intimates,  ( More  Nevochim,  III.,
xliii.,)  sometimes  to  an  excess.  Their  Mir
drash,  or  system  of  commentaries  on  the
sacred  book,  is  almost  altogether  allegorical.
Aben  Ezra,  a  learned  Rabbi  of  the  twelfth
century,  says,  “The  Scriptures  are  like
bodies,  and  allegories  are  like  the  garments
with  which  they  are  clothed.  Some  are
thin  like  fine  silk,  and  others  are  coarse  and
thick  like  sackcloth.”  Our  Lord,  to  whom
this  spirit  of  the  Jewish  teachers  in  his  day
was  familiar,  inculcated  many  truths  in
parables,  all  of  which  were  allegories.  The
primitive  Fathers  of  the  Christian  Church
were  thus  infected;  and  Origen,  (Epist.  ad
Ham.,)  who  was  especially  addicted  to  the
habit,  tells  us  that  all  the  Pagan  philoso¬
phers  should  be  read  in  this  spirit:  “hoc
facere  solemus  quando  philosophos  legi-
mus.”  Of  modern  allegorizing  writers,  the
most  interesting  to  Masons  are  Lee,  the
author  of  The  Temple  of  Solomon  por¬
trayed  by  Scripture  Light,  and  John  Bun-
yan,  who  wrote  Solomon’s  Temple  Spirit¬
ualized.

Allocution.  The  address  of  the  pre¬
siding  officer  of  a  Supreme  Council  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite  is  some¬
times  so  called.  It  was  first  used  by  the
Council  for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the
United  States,  and  is  derived  from  the
usage  of  the  Roman  Church,  where  certain
addresses  of  the  Pope  to  the  Cardinals  are
called  allocutions,  and  this  is  to  be  traced
to  the  customs  of  Pagan  Rome,  where  the
harangues  of  the  Generals  to  their  soldiers
were  called  allocutions.

Allowed.  In  the  old  manuscript  Con¬
stitutions,  this  word  is  found  in  the  now
unusual  sense  of  “  accepted.”  Thus,  “  Every
Mason  of  the  Craft  that  is  Mason  allowed,
ye  shall  do  to  him  as  ye  would  be  done  unto
yourself.”  Mason  allowed  means  Mason


ALL-SEEING


ALMOND


57


accepted,  that  is,  approved.  Phillips,  in  his
New  World  of  Worih,  (1690,)  defines  the
verb  allow,  “  to  give  or  grant ;  to  ap¬
prove  of;  to  permit  or  suffer.”  Latimer,
in  one  of  his  sermons,  uses  it  in  this  sense
of  approving  or  accepting,  thus:  “St.
Peter,  in  forsaking  his  old  boat  and  nets,
was  allowed  as  much  before  God  as  if  he
had  forsaken  all  the  riches  in  the  world.”
In  a  similar  sense  is  the  word  used  in  the
Office  of  Public  Baptism  of  Infants,  in  the
Common  Prayer-Book  of  the  Church  of
England.

All-Seeing  Eye.  An  important  sym¬
bol  of  the  Supreme  Being,  borrowed  by  the
Freemasons  from  the  nations  of  antiquity.
Both  the  Hebrews  and  the  Egyptians  ap¬
pear  to  have  derived  its  use  from  that
natural  inclination  of  figurative  minds  to
select  an  organ  as  the  symbol  of  the  func¬
tion  which  it  is  intended  peculiarly  to  dis¬
charge.  Thus,  the  foot  was  often  adopted
as  the  symbol  of  swiftness,  the  arm  of
strength,  and  the  hand  of  fidelity.  On  the
same  principle,  the  open  eye  was  selected  as
the  symbol  of  watchfulness,  and  the  eye  of
God  as  the  symbol  of  divine  watchfulness
and  care  of  the  universe.  The  use  of  the
symbol  in  this  sense  is  repeatedly  to  be  found
in  the  Hebrew  writers.  Thus,  the  Psalmist
says  (Ps.  xxxiv.  15) :  “  The  eyes  of  the
Lord  are  upon  the  righteous,  and  his  ears
are  open  to  their  cry,”  which  explains  a
subsequent  passage,  (Ps.  cxxi.  4,)  in  which
it  is  said :  “  Behold,  he  that  keepeth  Israel
shall  neither  slumber  nor  sleep.”

In  the  Apocryphal  “  Book  of  the  Conver¬
sation  of  God  with  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai,”
translated  by  the  Rev.  W.  Cureton  from  an
Arabic  MS.  of  the  fifteenth  century,  and
published  by  the  Philobiblon  Society  of
London,  the  idea  of  the  eternal  watchful¬
ness  of  God  is  thus  beautifully  allegorized:

“Then  Moses  said  to  the  Lord,  O  Lord,
dost  thou  sleep  or  not?  The  Lord  said
unto  Moses,  I  never  sleep :  but  take  a  cup
and  fill  it  with  water.  Then  Moses  took  a
cup  and  filled  it  with  water,  as  the  Lord
commanded  him.  Then  the  Lord  cast  into
the  heart  of  Moses  the  breath  of  slumber ;
so  he  slept,  and  the  cup  fell  from  his  hand,
and  the  water  which  was  therein  was  spilled.
Then  Moses  awoke  from  his  sleep.  Then
said  God  to  Moses,  I  declare  by  my  power,
and  by  my  glory,  that  if  I  were  to  with¬
draw  my  providence  from  the  heavens  and
the  earth,  for  no  longer  a  space  of  time
than  thou  hast  slept,  they  would  at  once
fall  to  ruin  and  confusion,  like  as  the  cup
fell  from  thy  hand.”

On  the  same  principle,  the  Egyptians
represented  Osiris,  their  chief  deity,  by  the
symbol  of  an  open  eye,  and  placed  this
hieroglyphic  of  him  in  all  their  temples.

H


His  symbolic  name,  on  the  monuments,  was
represented  by  the  eye  accompanying  a
throne,  to  which  was  sometimes  added  an
abbreviated  figure  of  the  god,  and  some¬
times  what  has  been  called  a  hatchet,  but
which,  I  consider,  may  as  correctly  be  sup¬
posed  to  be  a  representation  of  a  square.

The  All-Seeing  Eye  may  then  be  con¬
sidered  as  a  symbol  of  God  manifested  in
his  omnipresence  —  his  guardian  and  pre¬
serving  character  —  to  which  Solomon  al¬
ludes  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  (xv.  3),  when
he  says :  “  The  eyes  of  Jehovah  are  in  every
place,  beholding  (or,  as  it  might  be  more
faithfully  translated,  watching)  the  evil  and
the  good.”  It  is  a  symbol  of  the  Omni¬
present  Deity.

AII-SohIV  Day.  The  2d  of  Novem¬
ber.  A  festival  in  the  Romish  Church  for
prayers  in  behalf  of  all  the  faithful  dead.  It
is  kept  as  a  feast  day  by  Chapters  of  Rose
Croix.

Almanac,  Masonic.  Almanacs  for
the  special  use  of  the  Fraternity  are  annu¬
ally  published  in  many  countries  of  Europe,
but  the  custom  has  not  extended  to  Amer¬
ica.  As  early  as  1752,  we  find  an  Almanack
des  Francs- Magons  au  Ecosse  published  at
the  Hague.  This,  or  a  similar  work,  was
continued  to  be  published  annually  at  the
same  place  until  the  year  1778.  The  first
English  work  of  the  kind  appeared  in  1775,
under  the  title  of  “  The  Freemason’s  Cal¬
endar,  or  an  Almanac  for  the  year  1775.
Containing,  besides  an  accurate  and  useful
calendar  of  all  remarkable  occurrences  for
the  year,  many  useful  and  curious  particu¬
lars  relating  to  Masonry.  Inscribed  to
Lord  Petre,  G.  M.,  by  a  Society  of  Breth¬
ren.  London,  printed  for  the  Society  of
Stationers.”  This  work  was  without  any
official  authority,  but  two  years  after  the
Freemason's  Calendar  for  1777  was  pub¬
lished  “  under  the  sanction  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England.”  Works  of  this  uselul
kind  continue  to  be  annually  published  in
Great  Britain  and  Ireland  under  the  name
of  Pocket  Books,  in  Germany  under  that  of
Taschenbilcher,  and  in  France  under  that  of
Calendriers.

Almighty.  In  Hebrew  '12'  7X,  El

Shaddai.  The  name  by  which  God  was
known  to  the  patriarchs  before  he  an¬
nounced  himself  to  Moses  by  his  tetra-
grammatonic  name  of  Jehovah.  (See
Exodus  vi.  3.)  It  refers  to  his  power  and
might  as  the  Creator  and  Ruler  of  the  uni¬
verse,  and  hence  is  translated  in  the  Sep-
tuagint  by  nav-oKpaTup,  and  in  the  \  ulgate
by  omnipotens.

Almond-Tree.  When  it  is  said  in
the  passage  of  Scripture  from  the  twelfth
chapter  of  Eccles.,  read  during  the  ceremo¬
nies  of  the  third  degree,  “  the  almond-tree


58


ALMONER


ALPHA


shall  flourish,”  reference  is  made  to  the
white  flowers  of  that  tree,  and  the  allegoric
signification  is  to  old  age,  when  the  hairs
of  the  head  shall  become  gray.

Almoner.  An  officer  elected  or  ap¬
pointed  in  the  continental  Lodges  of  Europe
to  take  charge  of  the  contents  of  the  alms-
box,  to  carry  into  effect  the  charitable  reso¬
lutions  of  the  Lodge,  and  to  visit  sick  and
needy  brethren.  A  physician  is  usually
selected  in  preference  to  any  other  member
for  this  office.  An  almoner  is  to  be  also
found  in  some  of  the  English  Lodges,  al¬
though  the  office  is  not  recognized  by  law.
In  the  United  States  the  officer  does  not
exist,  his  duties  being  performed  by  a  com¬
mittee  of  charity.  It  is  an  important
office  in  all  bodies  of  the  Scottish  Kite.

Alins-Bov.  A  box  which,  towards
the  close  of  the  Lodge,  is  handed  around
by  an  appropriate  officer  for  the  reception
of  such  donations  for  general  objects  of
charity  as  the  brethren  may  feel  disposed
to  bestow.  This  laudable  custom  is  very
generally  practised  in  the  Lodges  of  Eng¬
land,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  and  univer¬
sally  in  those  of  the  Continent.  The
newly-initiated  candidate  is  expected  to
contribute  more  liberally  than  the  other
members.  Bro.  Hyde  Clarke  says  [Lon.
Freem.  Mag.,  1859,  p.  1166,)  that  “some
brethren  are  in  the  habit,  on  an  occasion
of  thanksgiving  with  them,  to  contribute
to  the  box  of  the  Lodge  more  than  on  other
occasions.”  This  custom  has  not  been
adopted  in  the  Lodges  of  America,  except
in  those  of  French  origin  and  in  those  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.

Almsgiving.  Although  almsgiving,
or  the  pecuniary  relief  of  the  destitute,
was  not  one  of  the  original  objects  for
which  the  Institution  of  Freemasonry  was
established,  yet,  as  in  every  society  of  men
bound  together  by  a  common  tie,  it  becomes
incidentally,  yet  necessarily',  a  duty  to  be
practised  by  all  its  members  in  their  indi¬
vidual  as  well  as  in  their  corporate  capacity.
In  fact,  this  virtue  is  intimately  interwoven
with  the  whole  superstructure  of  the  Insti¬
tution,  and  its  practice  is  a  necessary  corol¬
lary  from  all  its  principles.  At  an  early
period  in  his  initiation  the  candidate  is
instructed  in  the  beauty  of  charity  byT  the
most  impressive  ceremonies,  which  are  not
easily  to  be  forgotten,  and  which,  with  the
same  benevolent  design,  are  repeated  from
time  to  time  during  his  advancement  to  ;
higher  degrees,  in  various  forms  and  under
different  circumstances.  “The  true  Ma¬
son,”  says  Bro.  Pike,  “must  be,  and  must
have  a  right  to  be,  content  with  himself;
and  he  can  be  so  only  when  he  lives  not
for  himself  alone,  but  for  others  who  need
bis  assistance  and  have  a  claim  upon  his


sympathy.”  And  the  same  eloquent  writer
lays  down  this  rule  for  a  Mason’s  almsgiv¬
ing:  “Give,  looking  for  nothing  again,
without  consideration  of  future  advantages;
give  to  children,  to  old  men,  to  the  un¬
thankful,  and  the  dying,  and  to  those  you
shall  never  see  again  ;  for  else  your  alms
or  courtesy  is  not  charity,  but  traffic  and
merchandise.  And  omit  not  to  relieve  the
needs  of  your  enemy  and  him  who  does
you  injury.”  See  Exclusiveness,  Masonic.

Alnwick  Manuscript.  This  man¬
uscript,  which  is  now  in  the  possession  of
Bro.  E.  F.  Turnbull  of  Alnwick,  (Eng.,)  is
written  on  twelve  quarto  pages  as  a  preface
to  the  minute-book  of  the  “Company  and
Fellowship  of  Freemasons  of  a  Lodge  held
at  Alnwick,”  where  it  appears  under  the
heading  of  “  The  Masons’  Constitutions.”
The  date  of  the  document  is  Sept.  20th,
1701,  “being  the  general  head-meeting
day.”  It  was  first  published  in  1871  in
Hughan’s  Masonic  Sketches  and  Reprints,
(Amer.  ed.,)  and  again  in  1872  by  the  same
author  in  his  Old  Charges  of  the  British
Freemasons.  In  the  preface  to  this  latter
work,  Bro.  Woodford  says  of  the  records  of
this  old  Lodge  that,  “  ranging  from  1703  to
1757  they  mostly  refer  to  indentures,  fines,
and  initiations,  the  Lodge  from  first  to  last
remaining  true  to  its  operative  origin.  The
members  were  required  annually  to  ‘appear
at  the  Parish  Church  of  Alnwick  with
their  approns  on  and  common  squares
aforesaid  on  St.  John’s  Day  in  Christmas,
when  a  sermon  was  provided  and  preached
by  some  clergyman  at  their  appointment.’
A.  D.  1708.”

A1  -om-Jali.  In  the  Egyptian  mys¬
teries,  this  is  said  to  have  been  the  name
given  to  the  aspirant  in  the  highest  degree
as  the  secret  name  of  the  Supreme  Being.
In  its  component  parts  we  may  recognize
the  Al  or  El  of  the  Hebrews,  the  Aum
or  triliteral  name  of  the  Indian  mysteries,
and  the  pi’  JAH  °f  the  Syrians.

Aloyau.  Sociclc  tie  1’.  The  word
Aloxjau  signifies,  in  French,  a  loin  of  beef,
and  hence  the  title  of  this  society  in  Eng¬
lish  would  be  The  Society  of  the  Loin.  It
was  a  Masonic  association,  which  existed  in
France  lor  about  fifteen  years,  until  its
members  were  dispersed  by  the  revolution.
They  are  said  to  have  been  in  possession
of  many  valuable  documents  relating  to  the
Knights  Templars  and  their  successors.
See  Temple,  Order  of  the.

Alpha  and  Omega.  The  first  and
last  letters  of  the  Greek  language,  referred
to  in  the  Royal  Master  and  some  of  the
higher  degrees.  They  are  explained  by
this  passage  in  Revelations  ch.  xxii.,  v.  13.
“  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning
I  and  the  end,  the  first  and  the  last.”  Alpha


ALPHABET


ALPINA


59


and  Omega  is,  therefore,  one  of  the  appella¬
tions  of  God,  equivalent  to  the  beginning
and  end  of  all  things,  and  so  referred  to  in
Isaiah  xii.  4,  “I  am  Jehovah,  the  first  and
the  last.”

Alphabet,  Angels’.  In  the  old
rituals  of  the  fourth  or  Secret  Master’s  de¬
gree  of  the  Scottish  and  some  other  Rites,
we  find  this  passage:  “The  seventy-two
names,  like  the  name  of  the  Divinity,  are
to  be  taken  to  the  Kabbalistic  Tree  and  the
Angels’  Alphabet.”  The  Kabbalistic  Tree
is  a  name  given  by  the  Kabbalists  to  the
arrangement  of  the  ten  Sephiroth,  (which
see.)  The  Angels’  Alphabet  is  called  by  the
Hebrews  i — p-Hnn  ^ro,  chetab  hamalachim,
or  the  writing  of  the  angels.  Gaffarel  says
[Curios.  Inouis.,  ch.  xiii.  2,)  that  the  stars,
according  to  the  opinion  of  the  Hebrew
writers,  are  ranged  in  the  heavens  in  the
form  of  letters,  and  that  it  is  possible  to
read  there  whatsoever  of  importance  is  to
happen  throughout  the  universe.  And  the
great  English  Hermetic  philosopher,  Robert
Flud,  says,  in  his  Apology  for  the  Brethren
of  the  Rosy  Ch'oss,  that  there  are  characters
in  the  heavens  formed  from  the  disposition
of  the  stars,  just  as  geometric  lines  and
ordinary  letters  are  formed  from  points ;  and
he  adds,  that  those  to  whom  God  has  granted
the  hidden  knowledge  of  reading  these
characters  will  also  know  not  only  what¬
ever  is  to  happen,  but  all  the  secrets  of
philosophy.  The  letters  thus  arranged  in
the  form  of  stars  are  called  the  Angels’
Alphabet.  They  have  the  power  and  artic¬
ulation  but  not  the  form  of  the  Hebrew
letters,  and  the  Kabbalists  say  that  in  them
Moses  wrote  the  tables  of  the  law.  The
astrologers,  and  after  them  the  alchemists,
made  much  use  of  this  alphabet;  and  its  in¬
troduction  into  any  of  the  high  degree
rituals  is  an  evidence  of  the  influence  ex¬
erted  on  these  degrees  by  the  Hermetic
philosophy.  Agrippa  in  his  Occult  Phil¬
osophy,  and  Kircher  in  his  GEdipus  Egyp¬
tians,  and  some  other  writers,  have  given
copies  of  this  alphabet.  It  may  also  be
found  in  Johnson’s  Typographia.  But  it
is  in  the  mystical  books  of  the  Kabbalists
that  we  must  look  for  full  instructions  on
this  subject.

Alphabet,  Hebrew.  Nearly  all  of
the  significant  words  in  the  Masonic  rituals
are  of  Hebrew  origin,  and  in  writing  them
in  the  rituals  the  Hebrew  letters  are  fre¬
quently  used.  For  convenience  of  reference,
that  alphabet  is  here  given.  The  Hebrews,
like  other  ancient  nations,  had  no  figures,
and  therefore  made  use  of  the  letters  of
their  alphabet  instead  of  numbers,  each
letter  having  a  particular  numerical  value.
They  are,  therefore,  affixed  in  the  follow¬
ing  table :


Aleph

N

A

1

Beth

3

B

2

Gimel

J

G

3

Daleth

“1

D

4

He

n

H

5

Vau

V  or  0

6

Zain

r

Z

7

Cheth

17

CH

8

Teth

D

T

9

Yod

»

lor  Y

10

Caph

3

C  or  K

20

Lamed

S

L

30

Mem

0

M

40

Nun

J

N

50

Samech

D

S

60

Ain

2!

Guttural

70

Pe

5

P

80

Tsaddi

V

Tz

90

Koph

p

Q  or  K

100

Resh

7

R

200

Shin

&

SH

300

Tau

n

T

400

Final  Caph

l

CorK

500

Final  Mem

D

M

600

Final  Nun

I

N

700

Final Pe

n

P

800

Final  Tsaddi

r

TZ

900

Alphabet,  Masonic.  See  Cipher.

Alphabet,  Samaritan.  It  is  be¬
lieved  by  scholars  that,  previous  to  the
captivity,  the  alphabet  now  called  the  Sa¬
maritan  was  employed  by  the  Jews  in
transcribing  the  copies  of  the  law,  and  that
it  was  not  until  their  return  from  Babylon
that  they  adopted,  instead  of  their  ancient
characters,  the  Chaldee  or  square  letters,
now  called  the  Hebrew,  in  which  the  sacred
text,  as  restored  by  Ezra,  was  written.
Hence,  in  the  more  recent  rituals  of  the
Scottish  Rite,  especially  those  used  in  the
United  States,  the  Samaritan  character  is
beginning  to  be  partially  used.  For  conve¬
nience  of  reference,  it  is  therefore  here  in¬
serted.  The  letters  are  the  same  in  number
as  the  Hebrew,  with  the  same  power  and  the
same  names,  the  only  difference  is  in  form.


Aleph

A

Lamed

2

Beth

9

Mem

3

Gimel

7

Nun

J

Daleth

Samech

He

Ayin

V

Yau

Pe

P

Zain

Tsade

VHf

Cheth

Koph

P

Teth

Resch

<\

Yod

nr

Shin

AVV

Kaph

Tau

A

Alpina.  Tn  1836,  and  some  years  after¬
wards,  General  Assemblies  of  the  Masons


60


ALTAR


ALTENBERG


of  Switzerland  were  convened  at  Zurich,
Berne,  and  Basle,  which  resulted  in  the
union  of  the  two  Masonic  authorities  of
that  confederation,  under  the  name  of  the
Grand  Lodge  Alpina.  The  new  Grand
Lodge  was  organized  at  Zurich,  by  fourteen
Lodges,  on  the  22d  of  June,  1844.

Altar.  The  most  important  article  of
furniture  in  a  Lodge  room  is  undoubtedly
the  altar.  It  is  worth  while,  then,  to  in¬
vestigate  its  character  and  its  relation  to
the  altars  of  other  religious  institutions.
The  definition  of  an  altar  is  very  simple.
It  is  a  structure  elevated  above  the  ground,
and  appropriated  to  some  service  connected
with  worship,  such  as  the  offering  of  obla¬
tions,  sacrifices,  or  prayers.

Altars,  among  the  ancients,  were  gener¬
ally  made  of  turf  or  stone.  When  perma¬
nently  erected  and  not  on  any  sudden
emergency,  they  were  generally  built  in
regular  courses  of  masonry,  and  usually  in
a  cubical  form.  Altars  were  erected  long
before  temples.  Thus,  Noah  is  said  to  have
erected  one  as  soon  as  he  came  forth  from
the  ark.  Herodotus  gives  the  Egyptians
the  credit  of  being  the  first  among  the  hea¬
then  nations  who  invented  altars.

Among  the  ancients,  both  Jews  and  Gen¬
tiles,  altars  were  of  two  kinds  —  for  incense
and  for  sacrifice.  The  latter  were  always
erected  in  the  open  air,  outside  and  in  front
of  the  Temple.  Altars  of  incense  only  were
permitted  within  the  Temple  walls.  Ani¬
mals  were  slain,  and  offered  on  the  altars
of  burnt-odcrings.  On  the  altars  of  in¬
cense,  bloodless  sacrifices  were  presented
and  incense  was  burnt  to  the  Deity.

The  Masonic  altar,  which,  like  every¬
thing  else  in  Masonry,  is  symbolic,  appears
to  combine  the  character  and  uses  ot  both
of  these  altars.  It  is  an  altar  of  sacrifice,
for  on  it  the  candidate  is  directed  to  lay  his
passions  and  vices  as  an  oblation  to  the
Deity,  while  he  offers  up  the  thoughts  of  a
pure  heart  as  a  fitting  incense  to  the  Grand
Architect  of  the  Universe.  The  altar  is,
therefore,  the  most  holy  place  in  a  Lodge.

Among  the  ancients,  the  altar  was  always
invested  with  peculiar  sanctity.  Altars
were  places  of  refuge,  and  the  supplicants
who  fled  to  them  were  considered  as  having
placed  themselves  under  the  protection  of
the  deity  to  whom  the  altar  was  conse¬
crated,  and  to  do  violence  even  to  slaves
and  criminals  at  the  altar,  or  to  drag  them
from  it,  was  regarded  as  an  act  of  violence
to  the  deity  himself,  and  was  hence  a  sacri¬
legious  crime.

The  marriage  covenant  among  the  an¬
cients  was  always  solemnized  at  the  altar,
and  men  were  accustomed  to  make  all  their
solemn  contracts  and  treaties  by  taking
oaths  at  altars.  An  oath  taken  or  a  vow
made  at  the  altar  was  considered  as  more


solemn  and  binding  than  one  assumed
under  other  circumstances.  Hence,  Han¬
nibal’s  father  brought  him  to  the  Cartha¬
ginian  altar  when  he  was  about  to  make
him  swear  eternal  enmity  to  the  Roman
power.

In  all  the  religions  of  antiquity,  it  was
the  usage  of  the  priests  and  the  people  to
pass  around  the  altar  in  the  course  of  the
sun,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  east,  by  the  way
of  the  south,  to  the  west,  singing  pmans  or
hymns  of  praise  as  a  part  of  their  worship.

From  all  this  we  see  that  the  altar  in
Masonry  is  not  merely  a  convenient  article
of  furniture,  intended,  like  a  table,  to  hold
a  Bible.  It  is  a  sacred  utensil  of  religion,
intended,  like  the  altars  of  the  ancient
temples,  for  religious  uses,  and  thus  iden¬
tifying  Masonry,  by  its  necessary  existence
in  our  Lodges,  as  a  religious  institution.
Its  presence  should  also  lead  the  contem¬
plative  Mason  to  view  the  ceremonies  in
which  it  is  employed  with  solemn  reverence,
as  being  part  of  a  really  religious  worship.

The  situation  of  the  altar  in  the  French
and  Scottish  Rites  is  in  front  of  the  Wor¬
shipful  Master,  and,  therefore,  in  the  East.
In  the  York  Rite,  the  altar  is  placed  in  the
centre  of  the  room,  or  more  properly  a
little  to  the  East  of  the  centre.

The  form  of  a  Masonic  altar  should  be
a  cube,  about  three  feet  high,  and  of  cor¬
responding  proportions  as  to  length  and
width,  having,  in  imitation  of  the  Jewish
altar,  four  horns,  one  at  each  corner.  The
Holy  Bible  with  the  Square  and  Compass


EAST.


should  be  spread  open  upon  it,  while  around
it  are  to  be  placed  three  lights.  These
lights  are  to  be  in  the  East,  West,  and
South,  and  should  be  arranged  as  in  the
annexed  diagram.  The  stars  show  the
position  of  the  light  in  the  East,  West,
and  South.  The  black  dot  represents  the
position  North  of  the  altar  where  there  is
no  light,  because  in  Masonry  the  North  is
the  place  of  darkness.

Altenberg,  Congress  of.  Alten-
berg  is  a  small  place  in  the  Grand  Dukedom
of  Weimar,  about  two  miles  from  the  city  of
Jena.  In  the  month  of  June,  1764,  the
notorious  Johnson,  or  Leucht,  who  called


ALTENBERG


AMENDMENT


61


himself  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Knights
Templars  and  the  head  of  the  Rite  of
Strict  Observance,  assembled  a  Masonic
congress  for  the  purpose  of  establishing
this  Rite  and  its  system  of  Templar  Ma¬
sonry.  But  he  was  denounced  and  expelled
by  the  Baron  de  Hund,  who,  having  proved
Johnson  to  be  an  impostor  and  charlatan,
was  himself  proclaimed  Grand  Master  of
the  German  Masons  by  the  congress.  See
Johnson  and  Hund;  also  Strict  Observance,
Rite  of.

Altenberg,  L.oclge  at.  One  of  the

oldest  Lodges  in  Germany  is  the  Lodge  of
“  Archimedes  at  the  Three  Tracing  Boards,”
[Archimedes  zu  den  drei  Reissbrettern,)  in
Altenberg.  It  was  instituted  January  31,
1742,  by  a  deputation  from  Leipsic.  In
1775  it  joined  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Berlin,
but  in  1788  attached  itself  to  the  Eclectical
Union  at  Frankfort-on-the-Main,  which
body  it  left  in  1801,  and  established  a  direc¬
tory  of  its  own,  and  installed  a  Lodge  at
Gera  and  another  at  Schnesberg.  In  the
year  1803  the  Lodge  published  a  Book  of
Constitutions  in  a  folio  of  244  pages,  a  work
now  rare,  and  which  Lenning  says  is  one
of  the  most  valuable  contributions  to  Ma¬
sonic  literature.  In  1804  the  Lodge  struck
a  medal  upon  the  occasion  of  erecting  a
new  hall.  In  1842  it  celebrated  its  centen¬
nial  anniversary.

Amaranth.  A  plant  well  known  to
the  ancients,  and  whose  Greek  name  signi¬
fies  “  never  withering.”  It  is  the  Celosia
cristata  of  the  botanists.  The  dry  nature
of  the  flowers  causes  them  to  retain  their
freshness  for  a  very  long  time,  and  Pliny
says,  although  incorrectly,  that  if  thrown
into  water  they  will  bloom  anew.  Hence
it  is  a  symbol  of  immortality,  and  was  used
by  the  ancients  in  their  funeral  rites.  It
is  often  placed  on  coffins  at  the  present  day
with  a  like  symbolic  meaning,  and  is  hence
one  of  the  decorations  of  a  iSorrow  Lodge.

Amar-jah.  Hebrew  H’  'I  ON,  God
spake ;  a  significant  word  in  the  high  de¬
grees  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.

Amazons,  Order  ©f.  Thory  gives
this  in  his  Nomenclature  des  Grades  as  an
androgynous  degree  practised  in  America.
I  have  no  knowledge  of  it,  and  think  that
Thory  is  in  error.  Ragon  says  ( Tuill.  Gen.,
89,)  that  it  was  created  in  the  United  States
in  1740,  but  met  with  no  success.

Amen.  The  response  to  every  Masonic
prayer  is,  “So  mote  it  be:  Amen.”  The
word  Amen  signifies  in  Hebrew  verily,  truly ,
certainly.  “  Its  proper  place,”  says  Gese-
nius,  “  is  where  one  person  confirms  the
words  of  another,  and  adds  his  wish  for
success  to  the  other’s  vows.”  It  is  evident,
then,  that  it  is  the  brethren  of  the  Lodge,
and  not  the  Master  or  Chaplain,  who  should
pronounce  the  word.  It  is  a  response  to


the  prayer.  The  Talmudists  have  many
superstitious  notions  in  respect  to  this
word.  Thus,  in  one  treatise,  (  Uber  Musar,)
it  is  said  that  whosoever  pronounces  it  with
fixed  attention  and  devotion,  to  him  the
gates  of  Paradise  will  be  opened ;  and,
again,  whosoever  enunciates  the  word  rap¬
idly,  his  days  shall  pass  rapidly  away,  and
whosoever  dwells  upon  it,  pronouncing  it
distinctly  and  slowly,  his  life  shall  be  pro¬
longed.

Amendment.  All  amendments  to
the  by-laws  of  a  Lodge  must  be  submitted
to  the  Grand  Lodge  for  its  approval.

An  amendment  to  a  motion  pending  be¬
fore  a  Lodge  takes  precedence  of  the  orig¬
inal  motion,  and  the  question  must  be  put
upon  the  amendment  first.  If  the  amend¬
ment  be  lost,  then  the  question  will  be  on
the  motion ;  if  the  amendment  be  adopted,
then  the  question  will  be  on  the  original
motion  as  so  amended;  and  if  then  this
question  be  lost,  the  whole  motion  falls  to
the  ground.

The  principal  Parliamentary  rules  in
relation  to  amendments  which  are  appli¬
cable  to  the  business  of  a  Masonic  Lodge
are  the  following:

1.  An  amendment  must  he  made  in  one
of  three  ways,  —  by  adding  or  inserting  cer¬
tain  words,  by  striking  out  certain  words,
or  by  striking  out  certain  words  and  insert¬
ing  others.

2.  Every  amendment  is  susceptible  of  an
amendment  of  itself,  but  there  can  be  no
amendment  of  the  amendment  of  an  amend¬
ment;  such  a  piling  of  questions  one  upon
another  would  tend  to  embarrass  rather
than  to  facilitate  business.  “The  object
which  is  proposed  to  be  effected  by  such  a
proceeding  must  be  sought  by  rejecting  the
amendment  to  the  amendment,  and  then
submitting  the  proposition  in  the  form  of
an  amendment  of  the  first  amendment  in
the  form  desired.”  Cushing  [Elem.  Law
and  Pract.  Ley.  Ass.,  £1306)  illustrates  this
as  follows :  “  If  a  proposition  consists  of
AB,  and  it  is  proposed  to  amend  by  insert¬
ing  CD,  it  may  be  moved  to  amend  the
amendment  by  inserting  EF ;  but  it  cannot
be  moved  to  amend  this  amendment,  as,
for  example,  by  inserting  G.  The  only
mode  by  which  this  can  be  reached  is  to
reject  the  amendment  in  the  form  in  which
it  is  presented,  namely,  to  insert  EF,  and
to  move  it  in  the  form  in  which  it  is  desired
to  be  amended,  namely,  to  insert  EFG.”

3.  An  amendment  once  rejected  cannot
be  again  proposed.

4.  An  amendment  to  strike  out  certain
words  having  prevailed,  a  subsequent  mo¬
tion  to  restore  them  is  out  of  order.

5.  An  amendment  may  be  proposed  which
will  entirely  change  the  character  and  sub-

I  stance  of  the  original  motion.  The  incon-


62


AMERICAN


AMERICAN


sistency  or  incompatibility  of  a  proposed
amendment  with  the  proposition  to  be
amended,  though  an  argument,  perhaps,  for
its  rejection  by  the  Lodge,  is  no  reason  for
its  suppression  by  the  presiding  officer.

6.  An  amendment,  before  it  has  been  pro¬
posed  to  the  body  for  discussion,  may  be
withdrawn  by  the  mover;  but  after  it  has
once  been  in  possession  of  the  Lodge,  it  can
only  be  withdrawn  by  leave  of  the  Lodge.
In  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  leave
must  be  obtained  by  unanimous  consent;
but  the  usage  in  Masonic  bodies  is  to  re¬
quire  only  a  majority  vote.

7.  An  amendment  having  been  with¬
drawn  by  the  mover,  may  be  again  pro¬
posed  by  another  member.

8.  Several  amendments  may  be  proposed
to  a  motion  or  several  amendments  to  an
amendment,  and  the  question  will  be  put
on  them  in  the  order  of  their  presentation.
But  as  an  amendment  takes  precedence  of
a  motion,  so  an  amendment  to  an  amend¬
ment  takes  precedence  of  the  original
amendment.

9.  An  amendment  does  not  require  a
seconder,  although  an  original  motion  al¬
ways  does.

There  are  many  other  rules  relative  to
amendments  which  prevail  in  Parliamen¬
tary  bodies,  but  these  appear  to  be  the  only
ones  which  regulate  this  subject  in  Ma¬
sonic  assemblies.

American  Mysteries.  Among  the
many  evidences  of  a  former  state  of  civili¬
zation  among  the  aborigines  of  this  country
which  seem  to  prove  their  origin  from  the
races  that  inhabit  the  Eastern  hemisphere,
not  the  least  remarkable  is  the  existence  of
Fraternities  bound  by  mystic  ties,  and  claim¬
ing,  like  the  Freemasons,  to  possess  an  eso¬
teric  knowledge,  which  they  carefully  con¬
ceal  from  all  but  the  initiated.  De  Witt
Clinton  relates,  on  the  authority  of  a  respec¬
table  native  minister,  who  had  received  the
signs,  the  existence  of  such  a  society  among
the  Iroquois.  The  number  of  the  members
was  limited  to  fifteen,  of  whom  six  were  to
be  of  the  Seneca  tribe,  five  of  the  Oneidas,
two  of  the  Cayugas,  and  two  of  the  St.  Regis.
They  claim  that  their  institution  has  existed
from  the  era  of  the  creation.  The  times  of
their  meeting  they  keep  secret,  and  throw
much  mystery  over  all  their  proceedings.

Brinton  tells  us  in  his  interesting  and
instructive  work  on  The  Myths  of  the  New
World,  (p.  285,)  that  among  the  red  race
of  America  “  the  priests  formed  societies
of  different  grades  of  illumination,  only  to
be  entered  by  those  willing  to  undergo
trying  ordeals,  whose  secrets  were  not
to  be  revealed  under  the  severest  penalties.
The  Algonkins  bad  three  such  grades  —  the
waubeno,  the  meda,  and  the  jossakeed,  the
last  being  the  highest.  To  this  no  white


man  was  ever  admitted.  All  tribes  appear
to  have  been  controlled  by  these  secret  so¬
cieties.  Alexander  von  Humboldt  mentions
one,  called  that  of  the  Botuto,  orHoly  Trum¬
pet,  among  the  Indians  of  the  Orinoko,
whose  members  must  vow  celibacy,  and
submit  to  severe  scourgings  and  fasts.  The
Collahuayas  of  Peru  were  a  guild  of  itine¬
rant  quacks  and  magicians,  who  never  re¬
mained  permanently  in  one  spot.”

American  Rite.  It  has  been  pro¬
posed,  and  I  think  with  propriety,  to  give
this  name  to  the  series  of  degrees  conferred
in  the  United  States.  The  York  Rite,  which
is  the  name  by  which  they  are  usually
designated,  is  certainly  a  misnomer,  for  the
York  Rite  properly  consists  of  only  the  de¬
grees  of  Entered  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,
and  Master  Mason,  including  in  the  last
degree  the  Holy  Royal  Arch.  This  was  the
Masonry  that  existed  in  England  at  the
time  of  the  revival  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in
1717.  The  abstraction  of  the  Royal  Arch
from  the  Master’s  degree,  and  its  location  as
a  separate  degree,  produced  that  modifica¬
tion  of  the  York  Rite  which  now  exists  in
England,  and  which  should  properly  be
called  the  Modern  York  Rite,  to  distin¬
guish  it  from  the  Ancient  York  Rite,  which
consisted  of  only  three  degrees.  But  in  the
United  States  still  greater  additions  have
been  made  to  the  Rite,  through  the  labors
of  Webb  and  other  lecturers,  and  the  influ¬
ence  insensibly  exerted  on  the  Order  by
the  introduction  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Rite  into  this  country.  The  Ameri¬
can  modification  of  the  York  Rite,  or  the
American  Rite,  consists  of  ninedegrees,viz. :

Given  in  Sym¬
bolic  Lodges,  and
under  the  control
of  Grand  Lodges.

Given  in  Chap¬
ters,  and  under  the
control  of  Grand
Chapters.

Given  in  Coun¬
cils,  and  under  the
control  of  Grand
Councils.

A  tenth  degree,  called  Super-Excellent
Master,  is  conferred  in  some  Councils  as  an
honorary  rather  than  as  a  regular  degree;
but  even  as  such  it  is  repudiated  by  many
Grand  Councils.  To  these,  perhaps,  should
be  added  three  more  degrees,  namely,
Knight  of  the  Red  Cross,  Knight  Temp¬
lar,  and  Knight  of  Malta,  which  are  given
in  Commanderies,  and  are  under  the  con¬
trol  of  Grand  Commanderies,  or,  as  they  are
sometimes  called,  Grand  Encampments.
But  the  degrees  of  the  Commandery,  which
are  also  known  as  the  degrees  of  Chivalry,
can  hardly  be  called  a  part  of  the  American
Rite.  The  possession  of  the  eighth  and  ninth
degrees  is  not  considered  a  necessary  quali-


1.  Entered  Apprentice.

2.  Fellow  Craft.

3.  Master  Mason.

4.  Mark  Master.

5.  Past  Master.

6.  Most  Excellent  Master.

7.  Holy  Royal  Arch.

8.  Royal  Master.

9.  Select  Master.


AMETH


ANACHRONISM


63


location  for  receiving  them.  The  true
American  Rite  consists  only  of  the  nine
degrees,  above  enumerated.

There  is,  or  may  be,  a  Grand  Lodge,
Grand  Chapter,  Grand  Council,  and  Grand
Commandery  in  each  State,  whose  jurisdic¬
tion  is  distinct  and  sovereign  within  its  own
territory.  There  is  no  General  Grand
Lodge,  or  Grand  Lodge  of  the  U  nited  States ;
but  there  is  a  General  Grand  Chapter  and
a  Grand  Encampment,  to  which  the  Grand
Chapters  and  Grand  Commanderies  of
some,  but  not  all,  of  the  States  are  subject.

Ameili.  Properly,  Emeth,  which  see.

Amethyst.  Hebrew  nnbnx,  achlemah.
The  ninth  stone  in  the  breastplate  of  the
high  priest.  On  it  was  inscribed  the  tribe  of
Gad.  The  amethyst  is  a  stone  in  hardness
next  to  the  diamond,  and  of  a  deep  red  and
blue  color  resembling  the  breast  of  a  dove.

Ainieists,  Order  of.  A  secret  asso¬
ciation  of  students,  once  very  extensively
existing  among  the  universities  of  Northern
Germany.  Thory  says  that  this  association
was  first  established  in  the  College  of  Cler¬
mont,  at  Paris.  An  account  of  it  was  pub¬
lished  at  Halle,  in  1799,  by  F.  C.  Laukhard,
under  the  title  of  Der  Mosellaner-oder  Ami-
ciste/wrden  nach  seiner  Enstehuni /,  inneren
Verfassung  und  Verbreitung.  The  Order
was  finally  suppressed  by  the  imperial
government.

Amis  Reunis,  Loge  dies.  The

Lodge  of  United  Friends,  founded  at  Paris
about  1 772,  was  distinguished  for  the  talents
of  many  of  its  members,  among  whom  was
Savalette  des  Langes,  and  played  for  many
years  an  important  part  in  the  affairs  of
French  Masonry.  In  its  bosom  was  origi¬
nated,  in  1773,  the  Rite  of  Philalethes.  In
1785  it  convoked  the  first  Congress  of  Paris,
for  the  laudable  purpose  of  endeavoring  to
disentangle  Freemasonry  from  the  almost
inextricable  confusion  into  which  it  had
fallen  by  the  invention  of  so  many  rites
and  new  degrees.  The  Lodge  was  in  pos¬
session  of  a  valuable  library  for  the  use  of
its  members,  and  had  an  excellent  cabinet
of  the  physical  and  natural  sciences.  Upon
the  death  of  Savalette,  who  was  the  soul  of
the  Lodge,  it  fell  into  decay,  and  its  books,
manuscripts,  and  cabinet  were  scattered.
All  of  its  library  that  was  valuable  was
transferred  to  the  archives  of  the  Mother
Lodge  of  the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.
Barruel  gives  a  brilliant  picture  of  the  con¬
certs,  balls,  and  suppers  given  by  this
Lodge  in  its  halcyon  days,  to  which  the
Cresuses  of  Masonry  congregated,  while  a
few  superior  members  were  engaged,  as  he
says,  in  hatching  political  and  revolution¬
ary  schemes,  but  really  in  plans  for  the  ele¬
vation  of  Masonry  as  a  philosophic  institu¬
tion.


Ammon.  See  Amun.

Aminonitish  War.  A  war  to  which
allusion  is  made  in  the  Fellow  Craft’s
degree.  The  Ammonites  were  the  de¬
scendants  of  the  younger  son  of  Lot,  and
dwelt  east  of  the  river  Jordan,  but  origi¬
nally  formed  no  part  of  the  land  of  Canaan,
the  Israelites  having  been  directed  not  to
molest  them  for  the  sake  of  their  great  pro¬
genitor,  the  nephew  of  Abraham.  But  in
the  time  of  Jephthah,  their  king  having
charged  the  Israelites  with  taking  away  a
part  of  his  territory,  the  Ammonites  crossed
the  river  Jordan  and  made  war  upon  the
Israelites.  Jephthah  defeated  them  with
great  slaughter,  and  took  an  immense
amount  of  spoil.  It  was  on  account  of
this  spoil —  in  which  they  had  no  share  —
that  the  Ephraiinites  rebelled  against  Jeph¬
thah,  and  gave  him  battle.  See  Ephraim-
ites.

Ampliihalus.  See  Saint  Amphibalus.

Ample  Form.  When  the  Grand
Master  is  present  at  the  opening  or  closing
of  the  Grand  Lodge,  it  is  said  to  be  opened
or  closed  “  in  ample  form.”  Any  ceremony
performed  by  the  Grand  Master  is  said  to
be  done  “in  ample  form;”  when  per¬
formed  by  the  Deputy,  it  is  said  to  be  “  in
due  form ;  ”  and  by  any  other  temporarily
presiding  officer,  it  is  “  in  form.”  See
Form.

Amulet.  See  Talisman.

Amun.  The  supreme  god  among  the
Egyptians.  He  was  a  concealed  god,  and
is  styled  “the  Celestial  Lord  who  sheds
light  on  hidden  things.”  From  him  all
things  emanated,  though  he  created  noth¬
ing.  He  corresponded  with  the  Jove  of
the  Greeks,  and,  consequently,  with  the
Jehovah  of  the  Jews.  His  symbol  was  a
ram,  which  animal  was  sacred  to  him.  On
the  monuments  he  is  represented  with  a
human  face  and  limbs  free,  having  two  tall
straight  feathers  on  his  head,  issuing  from
a  red  cap ;  in  front  of  the  plumes  a  disc  is'
sometimes  seen.  His  body  is  colored  a  deep
blue.  He  is  sometimes,  however,  repre¬
sented  with  the  head  of  a  ram,  and  the
Greek  and  Roman  writers  in  general  agree
in  describing  him  as  being  ram-headed.
There  is  some  confusion  on  this  point.
Kenrick  says  that  Nouf  was,  in  the  major¬
ity  of  instances,  the  ram-headed  god  of  the
Egyptians;  but  he  admits  that  Amun  may
have  been  sometimes  so  represented.

Anachronism.  Ritual  makers,  espe¬
cially  when  they  have  been  ignorant  and
uneducated,  have  often  committed  ana¬
chronisms  by  the  introduction  into  Ma¬
sonic  ceremonies  of  matters  entirely  out
of  time.  Thus,  the  use  of  a  bell  to  indi¬
cate  the  hour  of  the  night,  practised  in  the
third  degree;  the  placing  of  a  celestial  and


64


ANAGRAM


ANCHOR


a  terrestrial  globe  on  the  summit  of  the
pillars  of  the  porch,  in  the  second  degree;
and  quotations  from  the  New  Testament
and  references  to  the  teachings  of  Christ,
in  the  Mark  degree,  are  all  anachronisms.
But,  although  it  were  to  be  wished  that
these  disturbances  of  the  order  of  time  had
been  avoided,  the  fault  is  not  really  of
much  importance.  The  object  of  the  rit¬
ualist  was  simply  to  convey  an  idea,  and
this  he  has  done  in  the  way  which  he  sup¬
posed  would  be  most  readily  comprehended
by  those  for  whom  the  ritual  was  made.
The  idea  itself  is  old,  although  the  mode
of  conveying  it  may  be  new.  Thus,  the
bell  is  used  to  indicate  a  specific  point  of
time,  the  globes  to  symbolize  the  univer¬
sality  of  Masonry,  and  passages  from  the
New  Testament  to  inculcate  the  practice
of  duties  whose  obligations  are  older  than
Christianity.

Anagram.  The  manufacture  of  ana¬
grams  out  of  proper  names  or  other  words
has  always  been  a  favorite  exercise,  some¬
times  to  pay  a  compliment,  —  as  when  Dr.
Burney  made  Honor  esl  a  Nilo  out  of  Hora¬
tio  Nelson, —  and  sometimes  for  purposes
of  secrecy,  as  when  Roger  Bacon  concealed
under  an  anagram  one  of  the  ingredients
in  his  recipe  for  gunpowder,  that  the  world
might  not  too  easily  become  acquainted
with  the  composition  of  so  dangerous  a
material.  The  same  method  was  adopted
by  the  adherents  of  the  house  of  Stuart
when  they  manufactured  their  system  of
high  degrees  as  a  political  engine,  and  thus,
under  an  anagrammatic  form,  they  made
many  words  to  designate  their  friends  or,
principally,  their  enemies  of  the  opposite
party.  Most  of  these  words  it  has  now
become  impossible  to  restore  to  their  orig¬
inal  form,  but  several  are  readily  decipher¬
able.  Thus,  among  the  Assassins  of  the
third  degree,  who  symbolized,  with  them,
the  foes  of  the  monarchy,  we  recognize
Romvel  as  Cromwell ,  and  Hoben  as  Bohun,
Earl  of  Essex.  It  is  only  thus  that  we  can
ever  hope  to  trace  the  origin  of  such  words
in  the  high  degrees  as  Tercy,  Stolkin,  Mor-
phey,  etc.  To  look  for  them  in  any  Hebrew
root  would  be  a  fruitless  task.  The  deri¬
vation  of  many  of  them,  on  account  of  the
obscurity  of  the  persons  to  whom  they
refer,  is,  perhaps,  forever  lost;  but  of  others
the  research  for  their  meaning  may  be  more
successful.

Ananiali.  The  name  of  a  learned
Egyptian,  who  is  said  to  have  introduced
the  Order  of  Mizraim  from  Egypt  into
Italy.  Dr.  Oliver  ( Landm .,  ii.  75,)  states
the  tradition,  but  doubts  its  authenticity.  It
is  in  all  probability  apocryphal.  See  Hiz-
raim,  Bite  of.


Anchor  and  Ark.  The  anchor,  as  a

symbol  of  hope,  does  not  appear  to  have
belonged  to  the  ancient  and  classic  system
of  symbolism.  The  Goddess  Spes,  or  Hope,
was  among  the  ancients  represented  in  the
form  of  an  erect  woman,  holding  the  skirts
of  her  garments  in  her  left  hand,  and  in
her  right  a  flower-shaped  cup.  As  an  em¬
blem  of  hope,  the  anchor  is  peculiarly  a
Christian,  and  thence  a  Masonic,  symbol.
It  is  first  found  inscribed  on  the  tombs  in
the  catacombs  of  Rome,  and  the  idea  of
using  it  is  probably  derived  from  the  lan¬
guage  of  St.  Paul,  (Heb.  vi.  19,)  “which
hope  we  have  as  an  anchor
of  the  soul  both  sure  and
steadfast.”  The  primitive
Christians  “looked  upon
life  as  a  stormy  voyage,
and  glad  were  the  voy¬
agers  when  it  was  done,
and  they  had  arrived  safe  in  port.  Of  this
the  anchor  was  a  symbol,  and  when  their
brethren  carved  it  over  the  tomb,  it  was  to
them  an  expression  of  confidence  that  he
who  slept  beneath  had  reached  the  haven
of  eternal  rest.”  (Kip,  Catacombs  of  Rome,
p.  112.)  The  strict  identity  between  this
and  the  Masonic  idea  of  the  symbol  will  be
at  once  observed.

“  The  anchor,”  says  Mrs.  Jameson,  [Sac.
and  Legend ,  Art.  I.,  34,)  “is  the  Christian
symbol  of  immovable  firmness,  hope,  and
patience;  and  we  find  it  very  frequently
in  the  catacombs  and  on  the  ancient  Chris¬
tian  gems.”  It  is  the  peculiar  attribute  of
St.  Clement,  and  is  often  inscribed  on
churches  dedicated  to  him.  •

But  there  is  a  necessary  connection  be¬
tween  an  anchor  and  a  ship,  and  hence,
the  latter  image  has  also  been  adopted  as  a
symbol  of  the  voyage  of  life;  but,  unlike  the
anchor,  it  was  not  confined  to  Christians,
but  was  with  the  heathens  also  a  favorite
emblem  of  the  close  of  life.  Kip  thinks
the  idea  may  have  been  derived  from  them
by  the  Christian  fathers,  who  gave  it  a  more
elevated  meaning.  The  ship  is  in  Masonry
substituted  by  the  ark.  Mrs.  Jameson  says,
[ut  supra,)  that  “  the  Ark  of  Noah  floating
safe  amid  the  deluge,  in  which  all  things
else  were  overwhelmed,  was  an  obvious
symbol  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  .  .  .  The
bark  of  St.  Peter  tossed  in  the  storm,  and
by  the  Redeemer  guided  safe  to  land,  was
also  considered  as  symbolical.”

These  symbolical  views  have  been  intro¬
duced  into  Masonry,  with,  however,  the
more  extended  application  which  the  uni¬
versal  character  of  the  Masonic  religious
faith  required.  Hence,  in  the  third  degree,
whose  teachings  all  relate  to  life  and  death,
“  the  ark  and  anchor  are  emblems  of  a


ANCHOR


ANCIENT


65


well-grounded  hope  and  a  well-spent  life.
They  are  emblematical  of  that  divine  ark
which  safely  wafts  us  over  this  tempestuous
sea  of  troubles,  and  that  anchor  which  shall
safely  moor  us  in  a  peaceful  harbor  where  the
wicked  cease  from  troubling  and  the  weary
shall  find  rest.”  Such  is  the  language  of  the
lecture  of  the  third  degree,  and  it  gives
all  the  information  that  is  required  on  the
esoteric  meaning  of  these  symbols.  The
history  I  have  added  of  their  probable  ori¬
gin  will  no  doubt  be  interesting  to  the  Ma¬
sonic  student.

Anchor,  Knight  of  the.  See

Knight  of  the  Anchor.

Anchor,  Order  of  Knights  and
Ladies  of  the.  A  system  of  androgy¬
nous  Masonry  which  arose  in  France  in  the
year  1745.  It  was  a  schism  which  sprang
out  of  the  Order  of  Felicity,  from  which  it
differed  only  in  being  somewhat  more  re¬
fined,  and  in  the  adoption  of  other  words
of  recognition.  Its  existence  was  not  more
durable  than  that  of  its  predecessor.  See
Felicity ,  Order  of.

Ancient  and  Accepted  Kite.

See  Scottish  Rite.

Ancient  Craft  Masonry.  This  is
the  name  given  to  the  three  symbolic  de¬
grees  of  Entered  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,
and  Master  Mason.  The  degree  of  Royal
Arch  is  not  generally  included  under  this
appellation;  although,  when  considered  (as
it  really  is)  a  complement  of  the  third  de¬
gree,  it  must  of  course  constitute  a  part  of
Ancient  Craft  Masonry.  In  the  articles  of
union  between  the  two  Grand  Lodges  of
England,  adopted  in  1813,  it  is  declared
that  “pure  Ancient  Masonry  consists  of
three  degrees  and  no  more ;  viz. :  those
of  the  Entered  Apprentice,  the  Fellow
Craft,  and  the  Master  Mason,  including
the  Supreme  Order  of  the  Holy  Royal
Arch.”

Ancient  Free  and  Accepted
Masons.  The  title  most  generally  as¬
sumed  by  the  English  and  American  Grand
Lodges.  See  Titles  of  Grand  Lodges.

Ancient  Masons.  Ancients  was  the
name  assumed  by  the  schismatic  body  of
Masons  who,  in  1738,  seceded  from  the
regular  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  who
at  the  same  time  insultingly  bestowed  upon
the  adherents  of  that  body  the  title  of
Moderns.  Thus  Dermott,  in  his  Ahiman
Rezon,  (p.  63,)  divides  the  Masons  of  Eng¬
land  into  two  classes,  as  follows :

“The  Ancients,  under  the  name  of  Free
and  Accepted  Masons.  The  Moderns,  under
the  name  of  Freemasons  of  England.  And
though  a  similarity  of  names,  yet  they  dif¬
fer  exceedingly  in  makings,  ceremonies,
knowledge,  Masonical  language,  and  instal-
I  6


lations ;  so  much  so,  that  they  always  have
been,  and  still  continue  to  be,  two  dis¬
tinct  societies ,  directly  independent  of  each
other.”

To  understand,  therefore,  anything  of  the
meaning  of  these  two  terms,  we  must  be
acquainted  with  the  history  of  the  schism
of  the  self-styled  Ancients  from  the  legal
Grand  Lodge  of  England.  No  Masonic
student  should  be  ignorant  of  this  history,
and  I  propose,  therefore,  to  give  a  brief
sketch  of  it  in  the  present  article.

In  the  year  1738,  a  number  of  brethren
in  London,  having  become  dissatisfied  with
certain  transactions  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  separated  themselves  from  the
regular  Lodges,  and  began  to  hold  meetings
and  initiate  candidates  without  the  sanction
and  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  Pres¬
ton,  who  has  given  a  good  account  of  the
schism,  does  not,  however,  state  the  causes
which  led  to  the  dissatisfaction  of  the  re¬
cusant  brethren.  But  Thory  {Ad.  Lat.,  i.
36,)  attributes  it  to  the  fact  that  the  Grand
Lodge  had  introduced  some  innovations,
altering  the  rituals  and  suppressing  many
of  the  ceremonies  which  had  long  been  in
use.  This  is  also  the  charge  made  by  Dermott.
It  is  certain  that  changes  were  made,  espe¬
cially  in  some  of  the  modes  of  recognition,
and  these  changes,  it  is  believed,  were  in¬
duced  by  the  publication  of  a  spurious
revelation  by  the  notorious  Samuel  Prich¬
ard,  Preston  himself  acknowledges  that
innovations  took  place,  although  he  attri¬
butes  them  to  a  time  subsequent  to  the  first
secession.

Just  about  this  time  some  dissensions
had  occurred  between  the  Grand  Lodge  at
London  and  that  at  York,  and  the  seceding
brethren,  taking  advantage  of  this  condi¬
tion  of  affairs,  assumed,  but  without  au¬
thority  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  York,  the
name  of  Ancient  York  Masons.  Matters
were,  however,  subsequently  accommo¬
dated  ;  but  in  the  next  year  the  difficulties
were  renewed,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  per¬
sisting  in  its  innovations  and  ritualistic
changes,  the  seceding  brethren  declared
themselves  independent,  and  assumed  the
appellation  of  Ancient  Masons,  to  indicate
their  adhesion  to  the  ancient  forms,  while,
for  a  similar  purpose,  they  denominated  the
members  of  the  regular  Lodges,  Modern
Masons,  because,  as  was  contended,  they
had  adopted  new  forms  and  usages.  The
seceders  established  a  new  Grand  Lodge  in
London,  and,  under  the  claim  that  they
were  governed  by  the  Ancient  York  Con¬
stitutions,  which  had  been  adopted  at  that
city  in  the  year  926,  thev  gained  over  many
influential  persons  in  England,  and  were
even  recognized  by  the  Grand  Lodges  of


66


ANCIENT


ANCIENT


Scotland  and  Ireland.  The  Ancient  York
Lodges,  as  they  were  called,  greatly  in¬
creased  in  England,  and  became  so  popular
in  America  that  a  majority  of  the  Lodges
and  provincial  Grand  Lodges  established  in
this  country  during  the  eighteenth  century
derived  their  warrants  from  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Ancient  York  Masons.  In  the
year  1756,  Laurence  Dermott,  then  Grand
Secretary,  and  subsequently  the  Deputy
Grand  Master  of  the  schismatic  Grand
Lodge,  published  a  Book  of  Constitutions
for  the  use  of  the  Ancient  Masons,  under
the  title  of  Ahiman  Rezon,  which  work
went  through  several  editions,  and  became
the  code  of  Masonic  law  for  all  who  ad¬
hered,  either  in  England  or  America,  to  the
Ancient  York  Grand  Lodge,  while  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Moderns,  or  the  regular
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  its  ad¬
herents,  were  governed  by  the  regulations
contained  in  Anderson’s  Constitutions,  the
first  edition  of  which  had  been  published
in  1723.

The  dissensions  between,  the  two  Grand
Lodges  of  England  lasted  until  the  year
1813,  when,  as  will  be  hereafter  seen,  the
two  bodies  became  consolidated  under  the
name  and  title  of  the  United  Grand  Lodge
of  Ancient  Freemasons  of  England.  Four
years  afterwards  a  similar  and  final  recon¬
ciliation  took  place  in  America,  by  the
union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  in  South
Carolina.  At  this  day  all  distinction  be¬
tween  the  Ancients  and  Moderns  has
ceased,  and  it  lives  only  in  the  memory  of
the  Masonic  student.

What  were  the  precise  differences  in  the
rituals  of  the  Ancients  and  the  Moderns,
it  is  now  perhaps  impossible  to  discover,  as
from  their  esoteric  nature  they  were  only
orally  communicated ;  but  some  shrewd
and  near  approximations  to  their  real  na¬
ture  may  be  drawn  by  inference  from  the
casual  expressions  which  have  fallen  from
the  advocates  of  each  in  the  course  of  their
long  and  generally  bitter  controversies.

I  have  already  said  that  the  regular
Grand  Lodge  is  stated  to  have  made  certain
changes  in  the  modes  of  recognition,  in
consequence  of  the  publication  of  Samuel
Prichard’s  spurious  revelation.  These
changes  were,  as  we  traditionally  learn,  a
simpie  transposition  of  certain  words,  by
which  that  which  had  originally  been  the
first  became  the  second,  and  that  which  had
been  the  second  became  the  first.  Hence  Dr.
Dalcho,  the  compiler  of  the  original  Ahi¬
man  Rezon  of  South  Carolina,  who  was
himself  made  in  an  Ancient  Lodge,  but
was  acquainted  with  both  systems,  says,
(Edit.  1822,  p.  193,)  11  The  real  difference  in
point  of  importance  was  no  greater  than  it
would  be  to  dispute  whether  the  glove  should


be  placed  first  upon  the  right  or  on  the  left.'”
A  similar  testimony  as  to  the  character  of
these  changes  is  furnished  by  an  address  to
the  Duke  of  Athol,  the  Grand  Master  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients,  in  which  it
is  said:  “  I  would  beg  leave  to  ask,  whether
two  persons  standing  in  the  Guildhall  of
London,  the  one  facing  the  statues  of  Gog
and  Magog,  and  the  other  with  his  back
turned  on  them,  could,  with  any  degree  of
propriety,  quarrel  about  their  stations ;  as
Gog  must  be  on  the  right  of  one,  and  Ma¬
gog  on  the  right  of  the  other.  Such  then,
and  far  more  insignificant,  is  the  disputa¬
tious  temper  of  the  seceding  brethren,  that
on  no  better  grounds  than  the  above  they
choose  to  usurp  a  power  and  to  aid  in  open
and  direct  violation  of  the  regulations  they
had  solemnly  engaged  to  maintain,  and  by
every  artifice  possible  to  be  devised  endeav¬
ored  to  increase  their  numbers.”  It  was
undoubtedly  to  the  relative  situation  of  the
pillars  of  the  porch,  and  the  appropriation
of  their  names  in  the  ritual,  that  these  in¬
nuendoes  referred.  As  we  have  them  now,
they  were  made  by  the  change  effected  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Moderns,  which  trans¬
posed  the  original  order  in  which  they
existed  before  the  change,  and  in  which
order  they  are  still  preserved  by  the  conti¬
nental  Lodges  of  Europe.

It  is  then  admitted  that  the  Moderns  did
make  innovations  in  the  ritual;  andalthough
Preston  asserts  that  the  changes  were  made
by  the  regular  Grand  Lodge  to  distinguish
its  members  from  those  made  by  the  An¬
cient  Lodges,  it  is  evident,  front  the  lan¬
guage  of  the  address  just  quoted,  that  the
innovations  were  the  cause  and  not  the
effect  of  the  schism,  and  the  inferential
evidence  is  that  the  changes  were  made  in
consequence  of,  and  as  a  safeguard  against,
spurious  publications,  and  were  intended,
as  I  have  already  stated,  to  distinguish  im¬
postors  from  true  Masons,  and  not  schis¬
matic  or  irregular  brethren  from  those  who
were  orthodox  and  regular.

But  outside  of  and  beyond  this  transpo¬
sition  of  words,  there  was  another  difference
existing  between  the  Ancients  and  the
Moderns.  Dalcho,  who  was  acquainted
with  both  systems,  says  that  the  Ancient
Masons  were  in  possession  of  marks  of  re¬
cognition  known  only  to  themselves.  His
language  on  this  subject  is  positive.  “The
Ancient  York  Masons,”  he  says,  “were
certainly  in  possession  of  the  original,  uni¬
versal  marks,  as  they  were  known  and
given  in  the  Lodges  they  had  left,  and
which  had  descended  through  the  Lodge  of
York,  and  that  of  England,  down  to  their
day.  Besides  these,  we  find  they  had  pecu¬
liar  marlis  of  their  own,  which  were  un¬
known  to  the  body  from  which  they  had


ANCIENT


ANCIENT


67


separated,  and  were  unknown  to  the  rest  of
the  Masonic  world.  We  have,  then,  the
evidence  that  they  had  two  sets  of  marks  ;
viz. :  those  which  they  had  brought  with
them  from  the  original  body,  and  those
which  they  had,  we  must  suppose,  them¬
selves  devised.”  (P.  192.)

Dermott,  in  his  Ahiman  Rezon,  confirms
this  statement  of  Dalcho,  if,  indeed,  it  needs
confirmation.  He  says  that  “a  Modern
Mason  may  with  safety  communicate  all
his  secrets  to  an  Ancient  Mason,  but  that
an  Ancient  Mason  cannot,  with  like  safety,
communicate  all  his  secrets  to  a  Modern
Mason  without  further  ceremony.”  And
he  assigns  as  a  reason  for  this,  that  “as  a
science  comprehends  an  art  (though  an  art
cannot  comprehend  a  science),  even  so  An¬
cient  Masonry  contains  everything  valua¬
ble  among  the  Moderns,  as  well  as  many
other  things  that  cannot  be  revealed  with¬
out  additional  ceremonies.”

Now,  what  were  these  “other  things”
known  by  the  Ancients,  and  not  known  by
the  Moderns  ?  What  were  these  distinctive
marks,  which  precluded  the  latter  from
visiting  the  Lodges  of  the  former?  Written
history  is  of  course  silent  as  to  these  eso¬
teric  matters.  But  tradition,  confirmed  by,
and  at  the  same  time  explaining,  the  hints
and  casual  intimations  of  contemporary
writers,  leads  us  to  the  almost  irresistible
inference  that  they  were  to  be  found  in  the
different  constructions  of  the  third,  or
Master’s  degree,  and  the  introduction  into
it  of  the  Royal  Arch  element ;  for,  as  Dr.
Oliver  {Hist.  Eng.  R.  A.,  p.  21,)  says,  “the
division  of  the  third  degree  and  the  fabri¬
cation  of  the  English  Royal  Arch  appear,
on  their  own  showing,  to  have  been  the
work  of  the  Ancients.”  And  hence  the
Grand  Secretary  of  the  regular  Grand
Lodge,  or  that  of  the  Moderns,  replying  to
the  application  of  an  Ancient  Mason  from
Ireland  for  relief,  says:  “Our  society  ( i .  e.
the  Moderns)  is  neither  Arch,  Royal  Arch,
nor  Ancient,  so  that  you  have  no  right  to
partake  of  our  charity.”

This,  then,  is  the  solution  of  the  diffi¬
culty.  The  Ancients,  besides  preserving
the  regular  order  of  the  words  in  the  first
and  second  degrees,  which  the  Moderns  had
transposed,  (a  transposition  which  has  been
retained  in  the  Lodges  of  Britain  and
America,  but  which  has  never  been  ob¬
served  by  the  continental  Lodges  of  Europe,
who  continue  the  usage  of  the  Ancients,)
also  finished  the  otherwise  imperfect  third
degree  with  its  natural  complement,  the
Royal  Arch,  a  complement  with  which  the
Moderns  were  unacquainted,  or  which  they,
if  they  knew  it  once,  had  lost.

For  some  years  the  Ancient  Lodges  ap¬
pear  to  have  worked  on  an  independent


system,  claiming  the  original  right  which
every  body  of  Masons  had  to  assemble  and
work  without  a  warrant.  Here,  however,
they  were  evidently  in  error,  for  it  was  well
known  that  on  the  revival  of  Masonry,  in
the  year  1717,  this  right  had  been  relin¬
quished  by  the  four  London  Lodges  that
were  then  in  operation,  and  which  consti¬
tuted  the  Grand  Lodge.  This  objection  the
Ancients  pretended  to  meet  by  declaring
that  the  Grand  Lodge  organized  in  1717
was  not  legally  constituted,  only  four  Lodges
having  been  engaged  in  the  organization,
while,  as  they  said,  five  were  required.
Here  again  they  were  in  error,  as  there  is
no  evidence  of  any  such  regulation  having  *
ever  existed.  And,  therefore,  to  place
themselves  in  a  less  irregular  position,  they
organized,  in  1757,  a  Grand  Lodge  of  their
own,  which  was  subsequently  known  by  the
title  of  “The  Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and  Ac¬
cepted  Masons  of  England,  according  to
the  old  Constitutions,”  while  the  regular
body  was  known  as  “  The  Grand  Lodge  of
Free  and  Accepted  Masons  under  the  Con¬
stitution  of  England.”

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  Grand
Masters  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients
from  its  organization  to  its  dissolution  :
1753,  Robert  Turner ;  1755,  Edward

Vaughan ;  1757,  Earl  of  Blessington ;

1761,  Earl  of  Kelly;  1767,  Thomas  Mat¬
thew;  1771,  3d  Duke  of  Athol;  1775,  4th
Duke  of  Athol;  1782,  Earl  of  Antrim;
1791,  4th  Duke  of  Athol;  1813,  Duke  of
Kent,  under  whom  the  reconciliation  of
the  two  Grand  Lodges  was  accomplished.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  Masons
was,  shortly  after  its  organization,  recog¬
nized  by  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Scotland  and
Ireland,  and,  through  the  ability  and  en¬
ergy  of  its  officers,  but  especially  Laurence
Dermott,  at  one  time  its  Grand  Secretary,
and  afterwards  its  Deputy  Grand  Master,
and  the  author  of  its  Ahiman  Rezon,  or
Book  of  Constitutions,  it  extended  its  in¬
fluence  and  authority  into  foreign  coun¬
tries  and  into  the  British  Colonies  of
America,  where  it  became  exceedingly
popular,  and  where  it  organized  several
Provincial  Grand  Lodges,  as,  for  instance,
in  Massachusetts,  New  York,  Pennsylvania,
Virginia,  and  South  Carolina,  where  the
Lodges  working  under  this  authority  were
generally  known  as  “Ancient  York  Lodges.”

In  consequence  of  this,  dissensions  existed,
not  only  in  the  mother  country  but  also  in
America,  for  many  years,  between  the
Lodges  which  derived  their  warrants  from
the  Grand  Lod<re  of  Ancients  and  those
which  derived  theirs  from  the  regular  or
so-called  Grand  Lodge  of  Moderns.  But
the  Duke  of  Kent  having  been  elected,  in
1813,  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Aucicuts,


68


ANCIENT


ANDERSON


while  his  brother,  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  was
Grand  Master  of  the  Moderns,  a  perma¬
nent  reconciliation  was  effected  between
the  rival  bodies,  and  by  mutual  compro¬
mises  the  present  “  United  Grand  Lodge  of
Ancient  Freemasons  of  England”  was  es¬
tablished.

Similar  unions  were  consummated  in
America,  the  last  being  that  of  the  two  Grand
Lodges  of  South  Carolina,  in  1817,  and  the
distinction  between  the  Ancients  and  the
Moderns  was  forever  abolished,  or  remains
only  as  a  melancholy  page  in  the  history
of  Masonic  controversies.

Ancient  Reformed  Rite.  A  Rite
differing  very  slightly  from  the  French
Rite,  or  Rite  Moderne,  of  which,  indeed,  it
is  said  to  be  only  a  modification.  It  is
practised  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Holland
and  the  Grand  Orient  of  Belgium.  It  was
established  in  1783  as  one  of  the  results  of
the  Congress  of  Wilhelmsbad.

Ancient  of  Ways.  A  title  applied,
in  the  visions  of  Daniel,  to  Jehovah,  to  sig¬
nify  that  his  days  are  beyond  reckoning.
Used  by  Webb  in  the  Most  Excellent  Mas¬
ter’s  song.

“  Fulfilled  is  the  promise

By  the  Ancient  of  Days,

To  bring  forth  the  cape-stone
With  shouting  and  praise.”

Ancients.  See  Ancient  Masons.

Ancient,  Tlse.  The  third  degree  of
the  German  Union  of  Twenty -two.

Ancient  York  Masons.  One  of
the  names  assumed  by  the  Lodges  of  An¬
cient  Masons ,  which  see.

Anderson,  James.  The  Rev.  James
Anderson,  D.  D.,  is  well  known  to  all  Ma¬
sons  as  the  compiler  of  the  celebrated  Book
of  Constitutions.  He  was  born  at  Edin¬
burgh,  Scotland,  on  the  5th  of  August,
1684.  Fie  removed  to  London, — at  what
time  is  not  known,  —  and  became  the  min¬
ister  of  the  Scotch  Presbyterian  Church  in
Swallow  Street,  Piccadilly.  Chambers,  in
his  Scottish  Biography,  describes  him  as  “  a
learned  but  imprudent  man,  who  lost  a
considerable  part  of  his  property  in  deep
dabbling  in  the  South  Sea  scheme.”  He
was  the  author  of  an  elaborate  but  very
singular  work,  entitled  Royal  Genealogies.
But  he  is  principally  indebted  for  his  repu¬
tation  to  his  labors  on  the  Ancient  Consti¬
tutions  of  Freemasonry.  It  is  probable  that
he  was  a  member  of  one  of  the  four  old
Lodges  of  London  which,  in  1717,  organ¬
ized  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  At  all
events,  he  is  found,  four  years  after,  taking
an  interest  in  the  concerns  of  the  Craft,
and  having  so  much  reputation  among  his
brethren  as  to  have  been  selected  to  dis¬
charge  the  difficult  duties  of  a  historiogra¬
pher.  On  the  29th  of  September,  1721,  he


was  commissioned  by  the  Grand  Lodge  to
collect  and  compile  the  history,  charges,  and
regulations  of  the  Fraternity  from  the  then
existing  ancient  Constitutions  of  the  Lodges.
On  the  27th  of  December  following,  his
work  was  finished,  and  the  Grand  Lodge
appointed  a  committee  of  fourteen  learned
brethren  to  examine  and  report  upon  it.
Their  report  was  made  on  the  25th  of
March,  1722;  and,  after  a  few  amend¬
ments,  Anderson’s  work  was  formally  ap-
roved,  and  ordered  to  be  printed  for  the
enefit  of  the  Lodges,  which  was  done  in
1723.  This  is  now  the  well-known  Book
of  Constitutions,  which  contains  the  his¬
tory  of  Masonry,  (or,  more  correctly,  archi¬
tecture,)  the  ancient  charges,  and  the  gen¬
eral  regulations,  as  the  same  were  in  use  in
many  old  Lodges.  In  1738  a  second  edi¬
tion  was  published.  The  edition  of  1723
has  become  exceedingly  rare,  and  copies
of  it  bring  fancy  prices  among  the  collect¬
ors  of  old  Masonic  books.  Its  intrinsic
value  is  derived  only  from  the  fact  that  it
contains  the  first  printed  copy  of  the  Old
Charges  and  also  the  General  Regulations.
The  history  of  Masonry  which  precedes
these,  and  constitutes  the  body  of  the
work,  is  fanciful,  unreliable,  and  preten¬
tious  to  a  degree  that  often  leads  to  ab¬
surdity.  The  Craft  is  greatly  indebted  to
Anderson  for  his  labors  in  reorganizing  the
Institution,  but  doubtless  it  would  have
been  better  if  he  had  contented  himself
with  giving  the  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge
from  1717  to  1738,  which  are  contained  in
his  second  edition,  and  with  preserving  for
us  the  charges  and  regulations,  which,
without  his  industry,  might  have  been
lost.  No  Masonic  writer  would  now  ven¬
ture  to  quote  Anderson  as  authority  for  the
history  of  the  Order  anterior  to  the  eigh¬
teenth  century.  It  must  also  be  added  that
in  the  republication  of  the  Old  Charges
in  the  edition  of  1738,  he  made  several
important  alterations  and  interpolations,
which  justly  gave  some  offence  to  the
Grand  Lodge,  and  which  render  the
second  edition  of  no  authority  in  this  re¬
spect.

In  1730,  Dr.  Anderson,  in  reply  to  some
libellous  attacks  on  the  Order,  and  espe¬
cially  the  pretended  exposition  of  Prich¬
ard,  published  A  Defence  of  Masonry,  which
he  subsequently  appended  to  the  second
edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions.  This
is  the  earliest  scholarly  discussion  of  the
character  of  the  Masonic  institution,  and
proves  that  Anderson  was  a  man  of  learn¬
ing  and  extensive  reading.  He  died  on
May  28,  1739,  aged  55  years.

Anderson  Manuscript.  In  the
first  edition  of  the  Constitutions  of  the  Free¬
masons,  published  by  Dr.  Anderson  in  1723,


ANDRE


ANDROGYNOUS


69


there  is  on  page  32,  a  copy  of  a  manuscript,
which  he  calls  “  a  certain  record  of  Free¬
masons,  written  in  the  reign  of  King  Ed¬
ward  IV.”  Preston  also  cites  it  in  his  Illus¬
trations,  (p.  133,)  but  states  that  it  is  said  to
have  been  in  the  possession  of  Elias  Ash-
mole,  but  was  unfortunately  destroyed,  with
other  papers  on  the  subject  of  Masonry,  at
the  Revolution.  Anderson  makes  no  refer¬
ence  to  Ashmole  as  the  owner  of  the  MS.,
nor  to  the  fact  of  its  destruction.  If  the
statement  of  Preston  was  confirmed  by  other
evidence,  its  title  would  properly  be  the
“  Ashmole  MS. ;  ”  but  as  it  was  first  pub¬
lished  by  Anderson,  Bro.  Hughan  has  very
properly  called  it  the  “  Anderson  Manu¬
script.”  It  contains  the  Prince  Edwin
legend.

Andre,  Christopher  Karl.  An

active  Mason,  who  resided  at  Briinn,  in
Moravia,  where,  in  1798,  he  was  the  Direc¬
tor  of  the  Evangelical  Academy.  He  was
very  zealously  employed,  about  the  end  of
the  last  century,  in  connection  with  other
distinguished  Masons,  in  the  propagation
of  the  Order  in  Germany.  He  was  the
editor  and  author  of  a  valuable  periodical
work,  which  was  published  in  5  numbers,
8vo,  at  Gotha  and  Halle  under  the  title  of
Der  Freimaurer  oder  compendiose  Bibliotheh
alles  Wissencour  digen  iiber  geheime  Gesell-
schaften.  The  Freemason,  or  a  Compen¬
dious  Library  of  everything  worthy  of
notice  in  relation  to  Secret  Societies.  Be¬
sides  valuable  extracts  from  contemporary
Masonic  writers,  it  contains  several  essays
and  treatises  by  the  editor.

Andreii,  John  Valentine.  This
distinguished  philosopher  and  amiable
moralist,  who  has  been  claimed  by  many
writers  as  the  founder  of  the  Rosicrucian
Order,  was  born  on  the  17th  of  August,
1586,  at  the  small  town  of  Herrenberg,  in
Wilrtemberg,  where  his  father  exercised
clerical  functions  of  a  respectable  rank.
After  receiving  an  excellent  education  in
his  native  province,  he  travelled  extensively
through  the  principal  countries  of  Europe,
and  on  his  return  home  received  the  ap¬
pointment,  in  1614,  of  deacon  in  the  town
of  Vaihingen.  Four  years  after  he  was
promoted  to  the  office  of  superintendent  at
Kalw.  In  1639  he  was  appointed  court
chaplain  and  a  spiritual  privy  councillor,
and  subsequently  Protestant  prelate  of
Adelberg,  and  almoner  of  the  Duke  of
Wurtembcrg.  He  died  on  the  27th  of  June,
1654,  at  the  age  of  sixty-eight  years.

Andrea  was  a  man  of  extensive  acquire¬
ments  and  of  a  most  feeling  heart.  By  his
great  abilities  he  was  enabled  to  elevate
himself  beyond  the  narrow  limits  of  the
prejudiced  age  in  which  he  lived,  and  his
literary  labors  were  exerted  for  the  reforma¬


tion  of  manners,  and  for  the  supply  of  the
moral  wants  of  the  times.  His  writings,
although  numerous,  were  not  voluminous,
but  rather  brief  essays  full  of  feeling,  judg¬
ment,  and  chaste  imagination,  in  which
great  moral,  political,  and  religious  senti¬
ments  were  clothed  in  such  a  language  of
sweetness,  and  yet  told  with  such  boldness
of  spirit,  that,  as  Herder  says,  he  appears,
in  his  contentious  and  anathematizing  cen¬
tury,  like  a  rose  springing  up  among  thorns.
Thus,  in  his  Menippus,  one  of  the  earliest
of  his  works,  he  has,  with  great  skill  and
freedom,  attacked  the  errors  of  the  Church
and  of  his  contemporaries.  His  Herculis
Christiani  Luctus,  xxiv.,  is  supposed  by
some  persons  to  have  given  indirectly,  if
not  immediately,  hints  to  John  Bunyan
for  his  Pilgrim’s  Progress.

One  of  the  most  important  of  his  works,
however,  or  at  least  one  that  has  attracted
most  attention,  is  his  Fama  Fraternitatis,
published  in  1615.  This  and  the  ChemiscJie
Hochzeit  Christiani  Rosencreuz,  or  Chemical
Nuptials,  by  Christian  Rosencreuz,  which  is
also  attributed  to  him,  are  the  first  works  in
which  the  Order  of  the  Rosicrucians  is  men¬
tioned.  Arnold,  in  his  Ketzergesckicte,  or  His¬
tory  of  Heresy,  contends,  from  these  works,
that  Andrea  was  the  founder  of  the  Rosicru¬
cian  Order ;  others  claim  a  previous  exist¬
ence  for  it,  and  suppose  that  he  was  simply
an  annalist  of  the  Order ;  while  a  third  party
deny  that  any  such  Order  was  existing  at  the
time,  or  afterwards,  but  that  the  whole  was
a  mere  mythical  rhapsody,  invented  by
Andrea  as  a  convenient  vehicle  in  which
to  convey  his  ideas  of  reform.  But  the
whole  of  this  subject  is  more  fully  discussed
under  the  head  of  llosicrucianism,  which
see.

Andrew,  Apprentice  and  Fel¬
low  Craft  of  St.  (Fr.,  Apprenti  et  Com-
pagnon  de  St.  Andre;  Ger.,  Andreas  lehr-
ling  und  Geselle.)  The  fourth  degree  of  the
Swedish  Rite,  which  is  almost  precisely  the
same  as  the  Elu  Secret  of  the  French  Rite.

Andrew,  Cross  of  St.  See  Cross,
St.  Andrew’s.

Andrew,  Favorite  of  St.  (Fr.,

Frtre  favori  de  St.  Andre.)  Usually  called
“  Knight  of  the  Purple  Collar.”  The  ninth
degree  of  the  Swedish  Rite.

Andrew,  <*rand  Seoteli  Knight
of  St.  See  Knight  of  St.  Andrew.

Androgynous  Degrees.  (From
< ivj/p ,  a  man,  and  ywrj,  a  woman.)  Those  de¬
grees  of  Masonry  which  are  conferred  on
both  men  and  women.  Besides  the  degrees
of  the  Adoptive  Rite,  which  are  practised
in  France,  there  are  several  of  these  degrees
which  are,  as  “sides  degrees,”  conferred
in  this  country.  Such  are  the  “Mason’s
Wife,”  conferred  on  the  wives,  daughters,


70


ANDROGYNOUS


ANIMAL


sisters,  and  mothers  of  Master  Masons,  and
the  “  Knight  and  Heroine  of  Jericho,”  con¬
ferred  on  the  wives  and  daughters  of  Royal
Arch  Masons.  A  few  years  ago,  Rob.  Morris
invented,  and  very  generally  promulgated
through  the  Western  States  of  this  country,
a  series  of  androgynous  degrees,  which  he
called  “  The  Star  of  the  East.”  There  is
another  androgynous  degree,  sometimes
conferred  on  the  wives  of  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
sons,  known  as  the  “  Good  Samaritan.”

In  some  parts  of  the  United  States  these
degrees  are  very  popular,  while  in  other
places  they  are  never  practised,  and  are
strongly  condemned  as  improper  innova¬
tions.  The  fact  is,  that  by  their  friends  as
well  as  by  their  enemies,  these  so-called
degrees  have  been  greatly  misrepresented.
When  females  are  told  that  in  receiving
these  degrees  they  are  admitted  into  the
Masonic  Order,  and  are  obtaining  Masonic
information  under  the  name  of  “  Ladies’
Masonry,”  they  are  simply  deceived.  Every
woman  connected  by  ties  of  consanguinity
to  a  Master  Mason  is  peculiarly  entitled  to
Masonic  assistance  and  protection.  If  she
is  told  this,  and  also  told  that  by  these  an¬
drogynous  degrees  she  is  to  be  put  in  pos¬
session  of  the  means  of  making  her  claims
known  by  a  sort  of  what  may  be  called
oral  testimony,  but  that  she  is  by  their  pos¬
session  no  nearer  to  the  portals  of  Masonry
than  she  was  before,  if  she  is  honestly  told
this,  then  I  can  see  no  harm,  but  the  pos¬
sibility  of  some  good,  in  these  forms  if  care¬
fully  bestowed  and  prudently  preserved.
But  all  attempts  to  make  Masonry  of  them,
and  especially  that  anomalous  thing  called
Ladies’  Masonry,  are  wrong,  imprudent,  and
calculated  to  produce  opposition  among  the
well-informed  and  cautious  members  of  the
Fraternity.

Androgynous  Masonry.  That  so-
called  Masonry  which  is  dedicated  to  the
cultivation  of  the  androgynous  degrees.
The  Adoptive  Rite  of  France  is  Androgyn¬
ous  Masonry.

Angel.  Angels  were  originally  in  the
Jewish  theogony  considered  simply  as  mes¬
sengers  of  God,  as  the  name  Malachim  im¬
ports,  and  the  word  is  thus  continually  used
in  the  early  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testa¬
ment.  It  was  only  after  the  captivity  that
the  Jews  brought  from  Babylon  their  mys¬
tical  ideas  of  angels  as  instruments  of  crea¬
tive  ministration,  such  as  the  angel  of  fire,
of  water,  of  earth,  or  of  air.  These  doctrines
they  learned  from  the  Chaldean  sages,  who
had  probably  derived  them  from  Zoroaster
and  the  Zendavesta.  In  time  these  doc¬
trines  were  borrowed  by  the  Gnostics,  and
through  them  they  have  been  introduced
into  some  of  the  high  degrees;  such,  for  in¬
stance,  as  the  Knight  of  the  Sun,  in  whose


ritual  the  angels  of  the  four  elements  play
an  important  part.

Angelic  Ilrothers.  (Ger.,  Engels-
briider.)  Sometimes  called,  after  their
founder,  Gichtelites  or  Gichte/ianer.  A
mystical  sect  of  religious  fanatics  founded
by  one  Gichtel,  about  the  close  of  the  seven¬
teenth  century,  in  the  United  Netherlands.
After  the  death  of  their  founder  in  1710,
they  gradually  became  extinct,  or  were  con¬
tinued  only  in  secret  union  with  the  Rosi¬
er  ucians.

Angels’  Alphabet.  See  Alphabet,

Angels’ .

Angerona.  The  name  of  a  pagan
deity  worshipped  among  the  Romans.
Pliny  calls  her  the  goddess  of  silence,  and
calmness  of  mind.  Hence  her  statue  has
sometimes  been  introduced  among  the  or¬
naments  of  Masonic  edifices.  She  is  repre¬
sented  with  her  finger  pressed  upon  her
lips.  See  Harpocrates,  for  what  is  further
to  be  said  upon  this  symbol.

Angle.  The  inclination  of  two  lines
meeting  in  a  point.  Angles  are  of  three
kinds — acute,  obtuse,  and  right  angles.  The
right  angle,  or  the  angle  of  90  degrees,  is
the  only  one  recognized  in  Masonry,  be¬
cause  it  is  the  form  of  the  trying  square,  one
of  the  most  important  working  tools  of  the
profession,  and  the  symbol  of  morality.

Angular  Triad.  A  name  given  by
Oliver  to  the  three  presiding  officers  of  a
Royal  Arch  Chapter.

Animal  Worship.  The  worship  of
animals  is  a  species  of  idolatry  that  was
especially  practised  by  the  ancient  Egyp¬
tians.  Temples  were  erected  by  this  people
in  their  honor,  in  which  they  were  fed  and
cared  for  during  life;  to  kill  one  of  them
was  a  crime  punishable  with  death ;  and
after  death,  they  were  embalmed,  and  in¬
terred  in  the  catacombs.  This  worship  was
derived  first  from  the  earlier  adoration  of
the  stars,  to  certain  constellations  of  which
the  names  of  animals  had  been  given  ;  next,
from  an  Egyptian  tradition  that  the  gods,
being  pursued  by  Typlion,  had  concealed
themselves  under  the  forms  of  animals ;
and  lastly,  from  the  doctrine  of  the  metem¬
psychosis,  according  to  which  there  was  a
continual  circulation  of  the  souls  of  men
and  animals.  But  behind  the  open  and
popular  exercise  of  this  degrading  worship
the  priests  concealed  a  symbolism  full  of
philosophical  conceptions.

Mr.  Gliddon  says  in  his  OtiaEgyptiaca,  (p.
94,)  that  “animal  worship  among  the  Egyp¬
tians  was  the  natural  and  unavoidable  con¬
sequence  of  the  misconception,  by  the  vul¬
gar,  of  those  emblematical  figures  invented
by  the  priests  to  record  their  own  philo¬
sophical  conception  of  absurd  ideas.  As
the  pictures  and  effigies  suspended  in  early


ANN  ALES


ANOINTING


71


Christian  churches,  to  commemorate  a  per¬
son  or  an  event,  became  in  time  objects  of
worship  to  the  vulgar,  so,  in  Egypt,  the
esoteric  or  spiritual  meaning  of  the  em¬
blems  was  lost  in  the  gross  materialism  of
the  beholder.  This  esoteric  and  allegorical
meaning  was,  however,  preserved  by  the
priests,  and  communicated  in  the  mysteries
alone  to  the  initiated,  while  the  unin¬
structed  retained  only  the  grosser  concep¬
tion.”

Annalcs  Clironologiques,  Lite-
raires  et  Historiques  de  la  Maqonnerie  de
la  Pays-Bas,  &  dater  de  1  Janvier,  1814,  i.e.
Chronological,  Literary,  and,  Historical  An¬
nals  of  the  Masonry  of  the  Netherlands  from
the  year  1814.  This  work,  edited  by  Bros.
Melton  and  De  Margny,  was  published  at
Brussels,  in  five  volumes,  during  the  years
1823-26.  It  consists  of  an  immense  col¬
lection  of  French,  Dutch,  Italian,  and  Eng¬
lish  Masonic  documents  translated  into
French.  Kloss  extols  it  highly  as  a  work
which  no  Masonic  library  should  be  with¬
out.  Its  publication  was  unfortunately  dis¬
continued  in  1826  by  the  Belgian  revolution.

Annales  Originis  Magni  GaJli-
aruin  Orient  is,  etc.  This  history  of
the  Grand  Orient  of  France  is,  in  regard  to
its  subject,  the  most  valuable  of  the  works
of  C.  A.  Tliory.  It  comprises  a  full  account
of  the  rise,  progress,  changes,  and  revolu¬
tions  of  French  Freemasonry,  with  nume¬
rous  curious  and  inedited  documents,  no¬
tices  of  a  great  number  of  rites,  a  fragment
on  Adoptive  Masonry,  and  other  articles  of
an  interesting  nature.  It  was  published  at
Paris,  in  1812,  in  1  vol.  of  471  pp.,  8vo.  See
Kloss,  No.  4,088.

Anniversary.  See  Festivals.

Anno  Deposition  is.  In  the  Year  of
the  Deposite ;  abbreviated  A.\  Dep.\  The
date  used  by  Royal  and  Select  Masters,
which  is  found  by  adding  1000  to  the  vul¬
gar  era;  thus,  1860  +-  1000  =  2860.

Anno  Ilebraico.  In  the  Hebrew
Year ;  abbreviated  A.-.  H.\  The  same  as
Anno  Mundi ;  which  see.

Anno  Invcntionis.  In  the  Year  of  the
Discovery  ;  abbreviated  A.’.  I.*.  or  A.'.  Inv.\
The  date  used  by  Royal  Arch  Masons.
Found  by  adding  530  to  the  vulgar  era;
thus,  1860  +  530  =  2390.

Anno  laieis.  In  the  Year  of  Light  ;
abbreviated  A.-.  L.\  The  date  used  in  an¬
cient  Craft  Masonry ;  found  by  adding  4000
to  the  vulgar  era ;  thus,  1860+4000  =  5860.

Anno  Mumli.  In  the  Year  of  the
World.  The  date  used  in  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Rite ;  found  by  adding  3760  to
the  vulgar  era  until  September.  After  Sep¬
tember,  add  one  year  more ;  this  is  because
the  year  used  is  the  Hebrew  one,  which  be¬
gins  in  September.  Thus,  July,  1860  +


3760  =  5620,  and  October,  1860  +-  3760  +-
1=5621.

Anno  Ordinis.  In  the  Year  of  the
Order;  abbreviated  A.'.  O.'.  The  date  used
by  Knights  Templars;  found  by  subtract¬
ing  1118  from  the  vulgar  era ;  thus,  1860  —
1118  =  742.

Anmiaire.  Some  French  Lodges  pub¬
lish  annually  a  record  of  their  most  im¬
portant  proceedings  for  the  past  year,  and
a  list  of  their  members.  This  publication
is  called  an  Annuaire,  or  Annual.

Annual  Communicaliou.  All  the
Grand  Lodges  of  the  United  States,  except
those  of  Massachusetts,  and  Maryland,  the
District  of  Columbia,  and  Pennsylvania,
hold  only  one  annual  meeting ;  thus  reviv¬
ing  the  ancient  custom  of  a  yearly  Grand
Assembly.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachu¬
setts,  like  that  of  England,  holds  Quarterly
Communications.  At  these  annual  com¬
munications  it  is  usual  to  pay  the  represen¬
tatives  of  the  subordinate  Lodges  a  per  diem
allowance,  which  varies  in  different  Grand
Lodges  from  one  to  three  dollars,  and  also
their  mileage  or  travelling  expenses.

Annual  Proceedings.  Every
Grand  Lodge  in  the  United  States  pub¬
lishes  a  full  account  of  its  proceedings  at
its  Annual  Communication,  to  which  is  also
almost  always  added  a  list  of  the  subordi¬
nate  Lodges  and  their  members.  Some  of
these  Annual  Proceedings  extend  to  a
considerable  size,  and  they  are  all  valuable
as  giving  an  accurate  and  official  account
of  the  condition  of  Masonry  in  each  State
for  the  past  year.  They  also  frequently  con¬
tain  valuable  reports  of  committees  on  ques¬
tions  of  Masonic  law.  The  reports  of  the
Committees  of  Foreign  Correspondence  are
especially  valuable  in  these  pamphlets.  See
Correspondence,  Committee  on  Foreign.

Annuities.  In  England,  one  of  the
modes  of  distributing  the  charities  of  a
Lodge  is  to  grant  annuities  to  aged  mem¬
bers  or  to  the  widows  and  orphans  of  those
who  are  deceased.  In  1842  the  “  Royal
Masonic  Benevolent  Annuity  Fund”  was
established,  which  grants  its  charities  iii
this  way.

Anointing.  The  act  of  consecrating
any  person  or  thing  by  the  pouring  on
of  oil.  The  ceremony  of  anointing  was
emblematical  of  a  particular  sauctifica-
tion  to  a  holy  and  sacred  use.  As  such
it  was  practised  by  both  the  Egyptians
and  the  Jews,  and  many  representations
are  to  be  seen  among  the  former  of  the  per¬
formance  of  this  holy  Rite.  Wilkinson  in¬
forms  us,  ( Anc .  Egypt.,  iv.  280,)  that  with
the  Egyptians  the  investiture  to  any  sacred
office  was  confirmed  by  this  external  sign  ;
and  that  priests  and  king3  at  the  time  of
their  consecration  were,  after  they  had  been


72  ANONYMOUS

attired  in  their  full  robes,  anointed  by  the
pouring  of  oil  upon  the  bead.  The  Jewish
Scriptures  mention  several  instances  in
which  unction  was  administered,  as  in  the
consecration  of  Aaron  as  high  priest,  and
of  Saul  and  David,  of  Solomon  and  Jo-
ash,  as  kings.  The  process  of  anointing
Aaron  is  fully  described  in  Exodus  (xxix.
7).  After  he  had  been  clothed  in  all  his
robes,  with  the  mitre  and  crown  upon  his
head,  it  is  said,  “  then  shalt  thou  take  the
anointing  oil  and  pour  it  upon  his  head,  and
anoint  him.”

The  ceremony  is  still  used  in  some  of  the
high  degrees  of  Masonry,  and  is  always
recognized  as  a  symbol  of  sanctification,  or
the  designation  of  the  person  so  anointed
to  a  sacred  use,  or  to  the  performance  of  a
particular  function.  Hence,  it  forms  an
important  part  of  the  ceremony  of  installa¬
tion  of  a  high  priest  in  the  order  of  High
Priesthood  as  practised  in  America.

As  to  the  form  in  which  the  anointing
oil  was  poured,  Buxtorf  ( Lex .  Taira.,  p.  267,)
quotes  the  Rabbinical  tradition  that  in  the
anointment  of  kings  the  oil  was  poured  on
the  head  in  the  form  of  a  crown,  that  is,
in  a  circle  around  the  head ;  while  in  the
anointment  of  the  priests  it  was  poured  in
the  form  of  the  Greek  letter  X,  that  is,  on
the  top  of  the  head,  in  the  shape  of  a  St.
Andrew’s  cross.

Anonymous  Society.  A  society
formerly  existing  in  Germany,  wThich  con¬
sisted  of  72  members,  namely,  24  Appren¬
tices,  24  Fellow  Crafts,  and  24  Masters.  It
distributed  much  charity,  but  its  real  object
was  the  cultivation  of  the  occult  sciences.
Its  members  pretended  that  its  Grand
Master  was  one  Tajo,  and  that  he  resided  in
Spain.

AnsyreeJi.  A  sect  found  in  the  moun¬
tains  of  Lebanon,  of  Northern  Syria.  Like
the  Druses,  towards  whom,  however,  they
entertain  a  violent  hostility,  and  the  Assas¬
sins,  they  have  a  secret  mode  of  recognition
and  a  secret  religion,  which  does  not  appear
to  be  well  understood  by  them.  “  How¬
ever,”  says  Rev.  Mr.  Lyde,  who  visited
them  in  1852,  “there  is  one  in  which  they
all  seem  agreed,  and  which  acts  as  a  kind
of  Freemasonry  in  binding  together  the
scattered  members  of  their  body,  namely,
secret  prayers  which  are  taught  to  every
male  child  of  a  certain  age,  and  are  re¬
peated  at  stated  times,  in  stated  places,
and  accompanied  with  religious  rites.  The
Ansyreeh  arose  about  the  same  time  with
the  Assassins,  and,  like  them,  their  religion
appears  to  be  an  ill-digested  mixture  of
Judaism,  Christianity,  and  Mohammedan¬
ism.  To  the  Masonic  scholars  these  secret
sects  of  Syria  present  an  interesting  study,
because  of  their  supposed  connection  with
the  Templars  during  the  Crusades,  the  en-


ANTI-MASONIC

tire  results  of  which  are  yet  to  be  investi¬
gated.

Anted iluvian  Masonry.  Among

the  traditions  of  Masonry,  which,  taken
literally,  become  incredible,  but  which,  con¬
sidered  allegorically,  may  contain  a  pro¬
found  meaning,  not  the  least  remarkable
are  those  which  relate  to  the  existence  of  a
Masonic  system  before  the  Flood.  Thu3,
Anderson  (Const.  1st  ed.,  p.  3,)  6ays:
“  Without  regarding  uncertain  accounts,  we
may  safely  conclude  the  old  world,  that
lasted  1656  years,  could  not  be  ignorant  of
Masonry.”  Dr.  Oliver  has  devoted  the
twenty-eighth  lecture  in  his  Historical  Land¬
marks  to  an  inquiry  into  “the  nature  and
design  of  Freemasonry  before  the  Flood ;  ”
but  he  admits  that  any  evidence  of  the
existence  at  that  time  of  such  an  Institu¬
tion  must  be  based  on  the  identity  of  Free¬
masonry  and  morality.  “  We  may  safely
assume,”  he  says,  “  that  whatever  had  for
its  object  and  end  an  inducement  to  the
practice  of  that  morality  which  is  founded
on  the  love  of  God,  may  be  identified  with
primitive  Freemasonry.”

The  truth  is,  that  antediluvian  Masonry
is  alluded  to  only  in  what  is  called  the
“  ineffable  degrees  ;  ”  and  that  its  only  im¬
portant  tradition  is  that  of  Enoch,  who  is
traditionally  supposed  to  be  its  founder,  or,
at  least,  its  great  hierophant.  See  Enoch.

Antliem.  The  anthem  was  originally
a  piece  of  church  music  sung  by  alternate
voices.  The  word  afterwards,  however,
came  to  be  used  as  a  designation  of  that
kind  of  sacred  music  which  consisted  of
certain  passages  taken  out  of  the  Scriptures,
and  adapted  to  particular  solemnities.  In
the  permanent  poetry  and  music  of  Ma¬
sonry  the  anthem  is  very  rarely  used.  The
spirit  of  Masonic  poetry  is  lyrical,  and
therefore  the  ode  is  almost  altogether  used
(except  on  some  special  occasions)  in  the
solemnities  and  ceremonials  of  the  Order.
There  are  really  no  Masonic  anthems.

Anti-Masonic  Books.  There  is  no
country  of  the  civilized  world  where  Free¬
masonry  has  existed,  in  which  opposition
to  it  has  not,  from  time  to  time,  exhibited
itself;  although  it  has  always  been  over¬
come  by  the  purity  and  innocence  of  the
Institution.  The  earliest  opposition  by  a
government  of  which  we  have  any  record,
is  that  of  1425,  in  the  third  year  of  the
reign  of  Henry  VI.,  of  England,  when  the
Masons  were  forbidden  to  confederate  in
chapters  and  congregations.  This  law  was,
however,  never  executed,  and  since  that
period  Freemasonry  has  met  with  no  per¬
manent  or  important  opposition  in  England.
The  Roman  Catholic  religion  has  always
been  anti-Masonic,  and  hence  edicts  have
constantly  been  promulgated  by  popes  and
sovereigns  in  Roman  Catholic  countries


I


ANTI-MASONIC


ANTI-MASONIC


73


against  the  Order.  The  most  important  of
these  edicts  is  the  bull  of  Pope  Clement
XII.,  which  was  issued  on  the  28th  of
April,  1738,  the  authority  of  which  bull  is
still  in  existence,  and  forbids  any  pious
Catholic  from  uniting  with  a  Masonic
Lodge  under  the  severest  penalties  of  eccle¬
siastical  excommunication.

In  the  United  States,  where  there  are
neither  popes  to  issue  bulls  nor  kings  to
promulgate  edicts,  the  opposition  to  Free¬
masonry  had  to  take  the  form  of  a  political
party.  Such  a  party  was  organized  in  this
country  in  the  year  1826,  soon  after  the
disappearance  of  one  William  Morgan.
The  object  of  this  party  was  professedly  to
put  down  the  Masonic  Institution  as  sub¬
versive  of  good  government,  but  really  for
the  political  aggrandizement  of  its  leaders,
who  used  the  opposition  to  Freemasonry
merely  as  a  stepping-stone  to  their  own
advancement  to  office.  But  the  public  vir¬
tue  of  the  masses  of  the  American  people
repudiated  a  party  which  was  based  on  such
corrupt  and  mercenary  views,  and  its
ephemeral  existence  was  followed  by  a  total
annihilation.

A  society  which  has  been  deemed  of  so
much  importance  as  to  be  the  victim  of  so
many  persecutions,  must  needs  have  had  its
enemies  in  the  press.  It  was  too  good  an
Institution  not  to  be  abused.  Accordingly,
Freemasonry  had  no  sooner  taken  its  com¬
manding  position  as  one  of  the  teachers  of
the  world,  than  a  host  of  adversaries  sprang
up  to  malign  its  character  and  to  misrepre¬
sent  its  objects.  Hence,  in  the  catalogue  of
a  Masonic  library,  the  anti-Masonic  books
will  form  no  small  part  of  the  collection.

Anti-Masonic  works  may  very  properly
be  divided  into  two  classes.  1.  Those
written  simply  for  the  purposes  of  abuse,
in  which  the  character  and  objects  of  the
Institution  are  misrepresented.  2.  Those
written  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  reveal-
iug  its  ritual  and  esoteric  doctrines.  The
former  of  these  classes  is  always  instigated
by  malignity,  the  latter  by  mean  cupidity.
The  former  class  alone  comes  strictly
within  the  category  of  “anti-Masonic
books,”  although  the  two  classes  are  often
confounded;  the  attack  on  the  principles
of  Masonry  being  sometimes  accompanied
with  a  pretended  revelation  of  its  myste¬
ries,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  pseudo
revelations  are  not  unfrequently  enriched  by
the  most  liberal  abuse  of  the  Institution.

The  earliest  authentic  work  which  con¬
tains  anything  in  opposition  to  Freema¬
sonry  is  The  Natural  History  of  /Stafford¬
shire,  by  Robert  Riot,  which  was  printed
at  Oxford  in  the  year  1686.  It  is  only  in
one  particular  part  of  the  work  that  Ur.
Plot  makes  any  invidious  remarks  against
K


the  Institution ;  and  we  should  freely  for¬
give  him  for  what  he  has  said  against  it,
when  we  know  that  his  recognition  of  the
existence,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  of  a
society  which  was  already  of  so  much  im¬
portance  that  he  was  compelled  to  acknowl¬
edge  that  he  had  “  found  persons  of  the
most  eminent  quality  that  did  not  disdain
to  be  of  this  fellowship,”  gives  the  most
ample  refutation  of  those  writers  who  as¬
sert  that  no  traces  of  the  Masonic  Institu¬
tion  are  to  be  found  before  the  beginning  of
the  eighteenth  century.  A  triumphant  reply
to  the  attack  of  Dr.  Plot  is  to  be  found
in  the  third  volume  of  Oliver’s  Golden,
Remains  of  the  Early  Masonic  Writers.

A  still  more  virulent  attack  on  the  Order
was  made  in  1730,  by  Samuel  Prichard,
which  he  entitled  “Masonry  dissected,  being
an  universal  and  genuine  description  of  all
its  branches  from  the  original  to  the  present
time.”  This  work  went  through  a  great
many  editions,  and  was  at  last,  in  1738,  re¬
plied  to  by  the  celebrated  Dr.  James  Ander¬
son,  in  a  pamphlet  entitled  “  A  Defence  of
Masonry,  occasioned  by  a  pamplet  called
Masonry  Dissected.”  It  was  appended  to
the  second  edition  of  Anderson’s  Constitu¬
tions.  It  is  a  learned  production,  well
worth  perusal  for  the  information  that  it
gives  in  reference  to  the  sacred  rites  of  the
ancients,  independent  of  its  polemic  char¬
acter.  About  this  time  the  English  press
was  inundated  by  pretended  revelations  of
the  Masonic  mysteries,  published  under
the  queerest  titles,  such  as  “Jachin  and
Boaz ;  or,  An  authentic  key  to  the  door  of
Freemasonry,”  published  in  1762;  “  Hiram,
or  the  Grand  Master  Key  to  both  Ancient
and  Modern  Freemasonry,”  which  ap¬
peared  in  1766 ;  “  The  Three  Distinct
Knocks,”  published  in  1768,  and  a  host  of
others  of  a  similar  character,  which  were,
however,  rather  intended,  by  ministering
to  a  morbid  and  unlawful  curiosity,  to  put
money  into  the  purses  of  their  compilers,
than  to  gratify  any  vindictive  feelings
against  the  Institution.

Some,  however,  of  these  works  were
amiable  neither  in  their  inception  nor  in
their  execution,  and  appear  to  have  been
dictated  by  a  spirit  that  may  be  character¬
ized  as  being  anything  else  except  Chris¬
tian.  Thus,  in  the  year  1768,  a  sermon
was  preached,  we  may  suppose,  but  cer¬
tainly  published,  at  London,  with  the  fol¬
lowing  ominous  title:  “  Masonry  the  Way  to
Hell;  a  Sermon  wherein  is  clearly  proved,
both  from  Reason  and  Scripture,  that  all
who  profess  the  Mysteries  are  in  a  State  of
Damnation.”  This  sermon  appears  to  have
been  a  favorite  with  the  ascetics,  for  in  less
than  two  years  it  was  translated  into  French
and  German.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it


74


ANTI-MASONIC


ANTI-MASONIC


gave  offence  to  the  liberal-minded,  and  many
replies  to  it  were  written  and  published,
among  which  was  one  entitled  Masonry  the
Turnpike- Road  to  Happiness  in  this  Life,  and
Eternal  Happiness  Hereafter,  which  also
found  its  translation  into  German.

In  1797  appeared  the  notorious  work  of
John  Robison,  entitled  “  Proofs  of  a  Con¬
spiracy  against  all  the  Religions  and  Gov¬
ernments  of  Europe,  carried  on  in  the  secret
meetings  of  Freemasons,  Illuminati,  and
Reading  Societies.”  Robison  was  a  gen¬
tleman  and  a  scholar  of  some  repute,  a
professor  of  natural  philosophy,  and  Secre¬
tary  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh.
Hence,  although  his  theory  is  based  on
false  premises  and  his  reasoning  fallacious
and  illogical,  his  language  is  more  decorous
and  his  sentiments  less  malignant  th^n
generally  characterize  the  writers  of  auti-
Masonic  books.  A  contemporary  critic  in
the  Monthly  Review  (vol.  xsv.,  p.  315,)  thus
correctly  estimates  the  value  of  his  work :
“  On  the  present  occasion,”  says  the  re¬
viewer,  “  we  acknowledge  that  we  have  felt
something  like  regret  that  a  lecturer  in
natural  philosophy,  of  whom  his  country
is  so  justly  proud,  should  produce  any  work
of  literature  by  which  his  high  character
for  knowledge  and  for  judgment  is  liable
to  be  at  all  depreciated.”  Robison’s  book
owes  its  preservation  at  this  day  from  the
destruction  of  time  only  to  the  perma¬
nency  and  importance  of  the  Institution
which  it  sought  to  destroy,  Masonry,
which  it  villified,  has  alone  saved  it  from
the  tomb  of  the  Capulets.

This  work  closed  the  labors  of  the  anti-
Masonic  press  in  England.  No  work  abu¬
sive  of  the  Institution  of  any  importance
has  appeared  in  that  country  since  the
attack  of  Robison.  The  Manuals  of  Rich¬
ard  Carlile  and  the  Theologico-astronomi-
cal  sermons  of  the  Rev.  Robert  Taylor  are
the  productions  of  .men  who  do  not  profess
to  be  the  enemies  of  the  Order,  but  who
have  sought,  by  their  peculiar  views,  to
give  to  Freemasonry  an  origin,  a  design,
and  an  interpretation  different  from  that
which  is  received  as  the  general  sense  of
the  Fraternity.  The  works  of  these  writers,
although  erroneous,  are  not  inimical.

The  French  press  was  prolific  in  the  pro¬
duction  ofanti-Masonic  publications.  Com¬
mencing  with  La  Grande  Lumiere,  which
was  published  at  Paris,  in  1734,  soon  after
the  modern  introduction  of  Masonry  into
France,  but  brief  intervals  elapsed  without
the  appearance  of  some  work  adverse  to
the  Masonic  Institution.  But  the  most
important  of  these  was  certainly  the  pon¬
derous  effort  of  the  Abb6  Barruel,  pub¬
lished  in  four  volumes,  in  1797,  under  the
title  of  Memoires  pour  servir  a  I’histoire  du


Jacobinisme.  The  French  Revolution  was
at  the  time  an  accomplished  fact.  The
Bourbons  had  passed  away,  and  Barruel,
as  a  priest  and  a  royalist,  was  indignant  at
the  change,  and,  in  the  bitterness  of  his
rage,  he  charged  the  whole  inception  and
success  of  the  political  movement  to  the
machinations  of  the  Freemasons,  whose
Lodges,  he  asserted,  were  only  Jacobinical
clubs.  The  general  scope  of  his  argument
was  the  same  as  that  which  was  pur¬
sued  by  Professor  Robison ;  but  while
both  were  false  in  their  facts  and  fallacious
in  their  reasoning,  the  Scotchman  was  calm
and  dispassionate,  while  the  Frenchman
was  vehement  and  abusive.  No  work,  per¬
haps,  was  ever  printed  which  contains  so
many  deliberate  misstatements  as  disgrace
the  pages  of  Barruel.  Unfortunately,  the
work  was,  soon  after  its  appearance,  trans¬
lated  into  English.  It  is  still  to  be  found
on  the  shelves  of  Masonic  students  and
curious  work  collectors,  as  a  singular  speci¬
men  of  the  extent  of  folly  and  falsehood
to  which  one  may  be  led  by  the  influences
of  bitter  party  prejudices.

The  anti-Masonic  writings  of  Italy  and
Spain  have,  with  the  exception  of  a  few
translations  from  French  and  English  au¬
thors,  consisted  only  of  bulls  issued  by
popes  and  edicts  pronounced  by  the  Inqui¬
sition.  The  anti-Masons  of  those  coun¬
tries  had  it  all  their  own  way,  and,  scarcely
descending  to  argument  or  even  to  abuse,
contented  themselves  with  practical  perse¬
cution.

In  Germany,  the  attacks  on  Freemasonry
were  less  frequent  than  in  England  or
France.  Still  there  were  some,  and  among
them  may  be  mentioned  one  whose  very
title  would  leave  no  room  to  doubt  of  its
anti-Masonic  character.  It  is  entitled,  Be-
weiss  dass  die  Freimaurer-GeseUschaft  in
alien  Staaten,  u.  s.  w.,  that  is,  “  Proofs  that
the  Society  of  Freemasons  is  in  every  coun¬
try  not  only  useless,  but,  if  not  restricted,
dangerous,  and  ought  to  be  interdicted.”
This  work  was  published  at  Dantzic,  in
1764,  and  was  intended  as  a  defence  of  the
decree  of  the  Council  of  Dantzic  against
the  Order.  The  Germans,  however,  have
given  no  such  ponderous  works  in  behalf
of  anti-Masonry  as  the  capacious  volumes
of  Barruel  and"  Robison.  The  attacks  on
the  Order  in  that  country  have  principally
been  by  pamphleteers.

In  the  United  States,  anti-Masonic  writ¬
ings  were  scarcely  known  until  they  sprung
out  of  the  Morgan  excitement  in  1826.
The  disappearance  and  alleged  abduction
of  this  individual  gave  birth  to  a  rancorous
opposition  to  Masonry,  and  the  country
was  soon  flooded  with  anti-Masonic  works.
Most  of  these  were,  however,  merely  pam-


ANTI-MASONIC


ANTI-MASONIC


75


plilets,  which  had  only  an  ephemeral  exist¬
ence,  and  have  long  since  been  consigned
to  the  service  of  the  trunk-makers  or  suf¬
fered  a  literary  metempsychosis  in  the
paper-mill.  Two  only  are  worthy,  from
their  size,  (their  only  qualification,)  for  a
place  in  a  Masonic  catalogue.  The  first  of
these  is  entitled,  “  Letters  on  Masonry  and
Anti-Masonry,  addressed  to  the  Hon.  John
Quincy  Adams.  By  William  L.  Stone.”
This  work,  which  was  published  at  New
York  in  1832,  is  a  large  octavo  of  556
pages.

The  work  of  Mr.  Stone,  it  must  be  ac¬
knowledged,  is  not  abusive.  If  his  argu¬
ments  are  illogical,  they  are  at  least  con¬
ducted  without  malignity.  If  his  state¬
ments  are  false,  his  language  is  decorous.
He  was  himself  a  Mason,  and  he  has  been
compelled,  by  the  force  of  truth,  to  make
many  admissions  which  are  favorable  to
the  Order.  The  book  was  evidently  written
for  a  political  purpose,  and  to  advance  the
interests  of  the  anti -Masonic  party.  It
presents,  therefore,  nothing  but  partisan
views,  and  those,  too,  almost  entirely  of  a
local  character,  having  reference  only  to
the  conduct  of  the  Institution  as  exhibited
in  what  is  called  “the  Morgan  affair.”
Masonry,  according  to  Mr.  Stone,  should
be  suppressed  because  a  few  of  its  mem¬
bers  are  supposed  to  have  violated  the  laws
in  a  village  of  the  State  of  New  York.  As
well  might  the  vices  of  the  Christians  of
Corinth  have  suggested  to  a  contemporary
of  St.  Paul  the  propriety  of  suppressing
Christianity.

The  next  anti -Masonic  work  of  any
prominence  published  in  this  country  is
also  in  the  epistolary  style,  and  is  entitled,
“  Letters  on  the  Masonic  Institution.  By
John  Quincy  Adams.”  It  is  an  octavo  of
281  pages,  and  was  published  at  Boston  in
1847.  Mr.  Adams,  whose  eminent  public
services  have  made  his  life  a  part  of  the
history  of  his  country,  has  very  properly
been  described  as  “a  man  of  strong  points
and  weak  ones,  of  vast  reading  and  wonder¬
ful  memory,  of  great  credulity  and  strong
rejudice.”  In  the  latter  years  of  his  life,
e  became  notorious  for  his  virulent  oppo¬
sition  to  Freemasonry.  Deceived  and  ex¬
cited  by  the  misrepresentations  of  the  anti-
Masons,  he  united  himself  with  that  party,
and  threw  all  his  vast  energies  and  abilities
into  the  political  contests  then  waging.
The  result  was  this  series  of  letters,  abusive
of  the  Masonic  Institution,  which  he  di¬
rected  to  leading  politicians  of  the  country,
and  which  were  published  in  the  public
journals  from  1831  to  1833.  These  letters,
which  are  utterly  unworthy  of  the  genius,
learning,  and  eloquence  of  the  author,  dis¬
play  a  most  egregious  ignorance  of  the


whole  design  and  character  of  the  Masonic
Institution.  The  “  oath  ”  and  “  the  murder
of  Morgan  ”  are  the  two  bugbears  which
seem  continually  to  float  before  the  excited
vision  of  the  writer,  and  on  these  alone  he
dwells  from  the  first  to  the  last  page.

Except  the  letters  of  Stone  and  Adams,
I  scarcely  know  another  anti-Masonic  book
published  in  America  that  can  go  beyond
the  literary  dignity  of  a  respectably-sized
pamphlet.  A  compilation  of  anti-Masonic
documents  was  published  at  Boston,  in
1830,  by  James  C!  Odiorne,  who  has  thus
in  part  preserved  for  future  reference  the
best  of  a  bad  class  of  writings.  In  1831,
Henry  Gassett,  of  Boston,  a  most  virulent
anti-Mason,  distributed,  at  his  own  ex¬
pense,  a  great  number  of  anti-Masonic
books,  which  had  been  published  during
the  Morgan  excitement,  to  the  principal
libraries  of  the  United  States,  on  whose
shelves  they  are  probably  now  lying  cov¬
ered  with  dust;  and,  that  the  memory  of  his
good  deed  might  not  altogether  be  lost,  he
published  a  catalogue  of  these  donations  in
1852,  to  which  he  has  prefixed  an  attack  on
Masonry.

Anti-Masonic  Party.  A  party  or¬
ganized  in  this  country  soon  after  the  com¬
mencement  of  the  Morgan  excitement,  pro¬
fessedly,  to  put  down  the  Masonic  Institu¬
tion  as  subversive  of  good  government,  but
really  for  the  political  aggrandizement  of
its  leaders,  who  used  the  opposition  to
Freemasonry  merely  as  a  stepping-stone  to
their  own  advancement  to  office.  The
party  held  several  conventions ;  endeavored,
sometimes  successfully,  but  oftener  unsuc¬
cessfully,  to  enlist  prominent  statesmen  in
its  ranks,  and  finally,  in  1831,  nominated
William  Wirt  and  Amos  Ellmaker  as  its
candidates  for  the  Presidency  and  the  Vice-
Presidency  of  the  United  States.  Each  of
these  gentlemen  received  but  seven  votes,
bejng  the  whole  electoral  vote  of  Vermont,
which  was  the  only  State  that  voted  for
them.  So  signal  a  defeat  was  the  death¬
blow  of  the  party,  and  from  the  year  1833
it  quietly  withdrew  from  public  notice,  and
now  is  happily  no  longer  in  existence.
William  L.  Stone,  the  historian  of  anti-
Masonry,  has  with  commendable  imparti¬
ality  expressed  his  opinion  of  the  character
of  this  party,  when  he  says  that  “  the  fact
is  not  to  be  disguised — contradicted  it  can¬
not  be — that  anti-Masonry  had  become
thoroughly  political,  and  its  spirit  was  vin¬
dictive  towards  the  Freemasons  without
distinction  as  to  guilt  or  innocence.”
[Letters,  xxxviii.,  p.  418.)  Notwithstand¬
ing  the  opposition  that  from  time  to  time
has  been  exhibited  to  Freemasonry  in
every  country,  America  is  the  only  one
where  it  assumed  the  form  of  a  political


76


ANTI-MASONRY


ANTIQUITY


party.  This,  however,  may  very  justly  be
attributed  to  the  peculiar  nature  of  our
popular  institutions.  With  us,  the  ballot-
box  is  considered  the  most  potent  engine
for  the  government  of  rulers  as  well  as
people,  and  is,  therefore,  resorted  to  in
cases  in  which,  in  more  despotic  govern¬
ments,  the  powers  of  the  Church  and  State
would  be  exercised.  Hence,  the  anti-
Masonic  convention  holden  at  Phila¬
delphia,  in  1830,  did  not  hesitate  to  make
the  following  declaration  as  the  cardinal
principle  of  the  party.  “The  object  of
anti-Masonry,  in  nominating  and  electing
candidates  for  the  Presidency  and  Vice-
Presidency,  is  to  deprive  Masonry  of  the
support  which  it  derives  from  the  power
and  patronage  of  the  executive  branch  of
the  United  States  Government.  To  effect
this  object,  will  require  that  candidates,
besides  possessing  the  talents  and  virtues
requisite  for  such  exalted  stations,  be
known  as  men  decidedly  opposed  to  secret
societies.”  This  issue  having  been  thus
boldly  made  was  accepted  by  the  people ;
and  as  principles  like  these  were  funda¬
mentally  opposed  to  all  the  ideas  of  liberty,
personal  and  political,  into  which  the
citizens  of  the  country  had  been  indoc¬
trinated,  the  battle  was  made,  and  the  anti-
Masonic  party  was  not  only  defeated  for
the  time,  but  forever  annihilated.

Anti-Masonry.  Opposition  to  Free¬
masonry.  There  is  no  country  in  which
Masonry  has  ever  existed  in  which  this
opposition  has  not  from  time  to  time  ex¬
hibited  itself;  although,  in  general,  it  has
been  overcome  by  the  purity  and  innocence
of  the  Institution.  The  earliest  opposition
by  a  government,  of  which  we  have  any
record,  is  that  of  1425,  in  the  third  year
of  the  reign  of  Henry  VI.,  of  England,
when  the  Masons  were  forbidden  to  con¬
federate  in  Chapters  and  Congregations.
This  law  was,  however,  never  executed.
Since  that  period,  Freemasonry  has  met
with  no  permanent  opposition  in  England.
The  Roman  Catholic  religion  has  always
been  anti-Masonic,  and  hence  edicts  have
always  existed  in  the  Roman  Catholic
countries  against  the  Order.  But  the  anti-
Masonry  which  has  had  a  practical  effect  in
inducing  the  Church  or  the  State  to  inter¬
fere  with  the  Institution,  and  endeavor  to
suppress  it,  will  come  more  properly  under  ;
the  head  of  Persecutions,  to  which  the
reader  is  referred.

Antin,  l>uke  d\  Elected  perpetual
Grand  Master  of  the  Masons  of  France,  on
the  24th  of  June,  1738.  He  held  the  office
until  1743,  when  he  died,  and  was  succeeded
by  the  Count  of  Clermond.  Clavel  (Hist.
Pittoresq.,  p.  141,)  relates  an  instance  of  the
fidelity  and  intrepidity  with  which,  on  one


occasion,  he  guarded  the  avenues  of  the
Lodge  from  the  official  intrusion  of  a
commissary  of  police  accompanied  by  a
band  of  soldiers.

Antipodean^.  (Les  Anlipodiens.)  The
name  of  the  sixtieth  degree  of  the  collection
of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Antiquity,  Lodge  of.  The  oldest
Lodge  in  England,  and  one  of  the  four
which  concurred  in  February,  1717,  in  the
meeting  at  the  Apple-Tree  tavern,  London,
in  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England.  At  that  time,  the  Lodge  of  An¬
tiquity  met  at  the  Goose  and  Gridiron,  in
St.  Paul’s  Church-yard.  This,  with  the
other  three  Lodges,  did  not  derive  their
warrants  from  the  Grand  Lodge,  but  “  acted
by  immemorable  Constitution.”

Antiquity  Manuscript.  This  cele¬
brated  MS.  is  now,  and  has  long  been,  in
the  possession  of  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity,
at  London.  It  is  stated  in  the  subscription
to  have  been  written,  in  168G,  by  “  Robert
Padgett,  Clearke  to  the  Worshipful  Society
of  the  Freemasons  of  the  city  of  London.”
The  whole  manuscript  was  first  published
by  W.  J.  Hughan  in  his  Old  Charges  of
British  Freemasons,  (p.  64,)  but  a  part
had  been  previously  inserted  by  Preston
in  his  Illustrations,  (b.  ii.,  sect,  vi.)  And
here  we  have  evidence  of  a  criminal  in¬
accuracy  of  the  Masonic  writers  of  the  last
century,  who  never  hesitated  to  alter  or  in¬
terpolate  passages  in  old  documents  when¬
ever  it  was  required  to  confirm  a  pre-con-
ceived  theory.  Thus,  Preston  had  intimated
that  there  was  before  1717  an  Installation
ceremony  for  newly-elected  Masters  of
Lodges,  (which  is  not  true,)  and  inserts
what  he  calls,  “the  ancient  Charges  that
were  used  on  this  occasion,”  taken  from
the  MS.  of  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity.  To
confirm  the  statement,  that  they  were  used
for  this  purpose,  he  cites  the  conclusion  of
the  MS.  in  the  following  words :  “  These
be  all  the  charges  and  covenants  that
ought  to  be  read  at  the  instalment  of  Master,
or  making  of  a  Freemason  or  Free¬
masons.”  The  words  in  italics  are  not  to
be  found  in  the  original  MS.,  but  were  in¬
serted  by  Preston.  Bro.  E.  Jackson  Barron
had  an  exact  transcript  made  of  this  MS.,
which  he  carefully  collated,  from  which
copy  it  was  published  by  Bro.  Hughan.
Bro.  Barron  gives  the  following  description
of  the  document:

“The  MS.  copy  of  the  Charges  of  Free¬
masons  is  on  a  roll  of  parchment  nine
feet  long  by  eleven  inches  wide,  the  roll
being  formed  of  four  pieces  of  parchment
glued  together ;  and  some  few  years  ago  it
was  partially  mounted  (but  not  very  skil¬
fully)  on  a  backing  of  parchment  for  its
better  preservation.


ANTIQUITY


ANTIQUITY


77


“  The  Rolls  are  headed  by  an  engraving
of  the  Royal  Arms,  after  the  fashion  usual
in  deeds  of  the  period ;  the  date  of  the
engraving  in  this  case  being  fixed  by  the
initials  at  the  top,  I.  2,  R.

“  Under  this  engraving  are  emblazoned
in  separate  shields  the  Arms  of  the  city  of
London,  which  are  too  well  known  to  re¬
quire  description,  and  the  Arms  of  the
Masons  of  London,  Sable  on  a  chevron  be¬
tween  three  castles  argent,  a  pair  of  compasses
of  the  first  surrounded  by  appropriate  mant¬
ling.

“The  writing  is  a  good  specimen  of  the
ordinary  law  writing  of  the  times,  inter¬
spersed  with  words  in  text.  There  is  a
margin  of  about  an  inch  on  the  left  side,
which  is  marked  by  a  continuous  double
red  ink  line  throughout,  and  there  are  sim¬
ilar  double  lines  down  both  edges  of  the
parchment.  The  letter  W  is  used  through¬
out  the  MS.  for  V,  with  but  two  or  three
exceptions.”

Antiquity  of  Freemasonry.

Years  ago,  in  writing  an  article  on  this
subject  under  the  impressions  made  upon
me  by  the  fascinating  theories  of  Dr.  Oli¬
ver,  though  I  never  completely  accepted
his  views,  I  was  led  to  place  the  organiza¬
tion  of  Freemasonry,  as  it  now  exists,  at
the  building  of  Solomon’s  Temple.  Many
years  of  subsequent  research  have  led  me
greatly  to  modify  the  views  I  had  previ¬
ously  held.  Although  I  do  not  rank  my-
pelf  among  those  modern  iconoclasts  who
refuse  credence  to  every  document  whose
authenticity,  if  admitted,  would  give  to
the  Order  a  birth  anterior  t<f  the  beginning
of  the  last  century,  I  confess  that  1  cannot
find  any  incontrovertible  evidence  that
would  trace  Masonry,  as  now  organized,
beyond  the  Building  Corporations  of  the
Middle  Ages.  In  this  point  of  view  I  speak
of  it  only  as  an  architectural  brotherhood,
distinguished  by  signs,  by  words,  and  by
brotherly  ties  which  have  not  been  essen¬
tially  changed,  and  by  symbols  and  legends
which  have  only  been  developed  and  ex¬
tended,  while  the  association  has  undergone
a  transformation  from  an  operative  art  to
a  speculative  science.

But  then  these  Building  Corporations  did
not  spring  up  in  all  their  peculiar  organi¬
zation —  different,  as  it  was,  from  that  of
other  guilds  —  like  Autochthones,  from  the
soil.  They,  too,  must  have  had  an  origin
and  an  archetype,  from  which  they  de¬
rived  their  peculiar  character.  And  I  am
induced,  for  that  purpose,  to  look  to  the
Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers,  which  were
spread  over  Europe  by  the  invading  forces
of  the  empire.  But  these  have  been  traced
to  Numa,  who  gave  to  them  that  mixed
practical  and  religious  character  which


they  are  known  to  have  possessed,  and  in
which  they  were  imitated  by  the  mediaeval
architects.

We  must,  therefore,  look  at  Freemasonry
in  two  distinct  points  of  view :  First,  as  it
is  —  a  society  of  Speculative  Architects  en¬
gaged  in  the  construction  of  spiritual  tem¬
ples,  and  in  this  respect  a  development
from  the  Operative  Architects  of  the  tenth
and  succeeding  centuries,  who  were  them¬
selves  offshoots  from  the  Travelling  Free¬
masons  of  Como,  who  traced  their  origin
to  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Builders.  In
this  direction,  I  think,  the  line  of  descent
is  plain,  without  any  demand  upon  our
credulity  for  assent  to  its  credibility.

But  Freemasonry  must  be  looked  at  also
from  another  stand-point.  Not  only  does
it  present  the  appearance  of  a  speculative
science,  based  on  an  operative  art,  but  it
also  very  significantly  exhibits  itself  as  the
symbolic  expression  of  a  religious  idea.  In
other  and  plainer  words,  we  see  in  it  the
important  lesson  of  eternal  life,  taught  by
a  legend  which,  whether  true  or  false,  is
used  in  Masonry  as  a  symbol  and  an  alle¬
gory.

But  whence  came  this  legend  ?  Was  it
invented  in  1717  at  the  revival  of  Free¬
masonry  in  England?  We  have  evidence
of  the  strongest  circumstantial  character,
derived  from  the  Sloane  Manuscript  No.
8,329.  recently  exhumed  from  the  shelves  of
the  British  Museum,  that  this  very  legend
was  known  to  the  Masons  of  the  seven¬
teenth  century  at  least.

Then,  did  the  Operative  Masons  of  the
Middle  Ages  have  a  legend  also?  The  evi¬
dence  is  that  they  did.  The  Compagnons
de  la  Tour,  who  were  the  offshoots  of  the
old  Masters’  Guilds,  had  a  legend.  We
know  what  the  legend  was,  and  we  know
that  its  character  was  similar  to,  although
not  in  all  the  details  precisely  the  same  as,
the  Masonic  legend.  It  was,  however,  con¬
nected  with  the  Temple  of  Solomon.

Again :  Did  the  builders  of  the  Middle
Ages  invent  their  legend,  or  did  they  ob¬
tain  it  from  some  old  tradition?  The
question  is  interesting,  but  its  solution
either  way  would  scarcely  affect  the  an¬
tiquity  of  Freemasonry.  It  is  not  the  form
of  the  legend,  but  its  spirit  and  symbolic
design,  with  which  we  have  to  do.

This  legend  of  the  third  degree  as  we
now  have  it,  and  as  we  have  had  it  for  a
certain  period  of  two  hundred  and  fifty
years,  is  intended,  by  a  symbolic  represen¬
tation,  to  teach  the  resurrection  from  death,
and  the  divine  dogma  of  eternal  life.  All
Masons  know  its  character,  and  it  is  neither
expedient  nor  necessary  to  dilate  upon  it.

But  can  we  find  such  a  legend  elsewhere?
Certainly  we  can.  Not  indeed  the  same


78


ANTIQUITY


ANTON


legend ;  not  the  same  personage  as  its  hero ;
not  the  same  details ;  but  a  legend  with  the
same  spirit  and  design  ;  a  legend  funereal
in  character,  celebrating  death  and  resur¬
rection,  solemnized  in  lamentation  and
terminating  in  joy.  Thus,  in  the  Egyptian
Mysteries  of  Osiris,  the  image  of  a  dead
man  was  borne  in  an  argha,  ark  or  coffin,
by  a  procession  of  initiates;  and  this  inclo¬
sure  in  the  coffin  or  interment  of  the  body
was  called  the  aphanism,  or  disappearance,
and  the  lamentation  for  him  formed  the
first  part  of  the  Mysteries.  On  the  third
day  after  the  interment,  the  priests  and
initiates  carried  the  coffin,  in  which  was
also  a  golden  vessel,  down  to  the  river
Nile.  Into  the  vessel  they  poured  water
from  the  river;  and  then  with  the  cry  of
E  vpr/Kauev  ayaXhuyeOa,  “  We  have  found
him,  let  us  rejoice,”  they  declared  that
the  dead  Osiris,  who  had  descended  into
Hades,  had  returned  from  thence,  and  was
restored  again  to  life ;  and  the  rejoicings
which  ensued  constituted  the  second  part
of  the  Mysteries.  The  analogy  between
this  and  the  legend  of  Freemasonry  must
be  at  once  apparent.  Now,  just  such  a
legend,  everywhere  differing  in  particulars,
but  everywhere  coinciding  in  general  char¬
acter,  is  to  be  found  in  all  the  old  religions
— in  sun  worship,  in  tree  worship,  in  animal
worship.  It  was  often  perverted,  it  is  true,
from  the  original  design.  Sometimes  it  was
applied  to  the  death  of  winter  and  the  birth
of  spring,  sometimes  to  the  setting  and  the
subsequent  rising  of  the  sun,  but  always
indicating  a  loss  and  a  recovery.

Especially  do  we  find  this  legend,  and  in
a  purer  form,  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries.
At  Samothrace,  at  Eleusis,  at  Byblos  —  in
all  places  where  these  ancient  religions  and
mystical  rites  were  celebrated  —  we  find  the
same  teachings  of  eternal  life  inculcated  by
the  representation  of  an  imaginary  death
and  apotheosis.  And  it  is  this  legend,  and
this  legend  alone,  that  connects  Speculative
Freemasonry  with  the  Ancient  Mysteries
of  Greece,  of  Syria,  and  of  Egypt.

The  theory,  then,  that  I  advance  on  the
subject  of  the  antiquity  of  Freemasonry  is
this:  I  maintain  that,  in  its  present  pecu¬
liar  organization,  it  is  the  successor,  with
certainty,  of  the  Building  Corporations  of
the  Middle  Ages,  and  through  them,  with
less  certainty  but  with  great  probability,  of
the  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers.  Its  con¬
nection  with  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  as
its  birthplace,  may  have  been  accidental,
—  a  mere  arbitrary  selection  by  its  invent¬
ors,  —  and  bears,  therefore,  only  an  alle¬
gorical  meaning;  or  it  may  be  historical,
and  to  be  explained  by  the  frequent  com¬
munications  that  at  one  time  took  place
between  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks  and  the


Romans.  This  is  a  point  still  open  for  dis¬
cussion.  On  it  I  express  no  fixed  opinion.
The  historical  materials  upon  which  to
base  an  opinion  are  as  yet  too  scanty.  But
I  am  inclined,  I  confess,  to  view  the  Temple
of  Jerusalem  and  the  Masonic  traditions
connected  with  it  as  a  part  of  the  great
allegory  of  Masonry.

But  in  the  other  aspect  in  which  Free¬
masonry  presents  itself  to  our  view,  and  to
which  I  have  already  adverted,  the  ques¬
tion  of  its  antiquity  is  more  easily  settled.
As  a  brotherhood,  composed  of  symbolic
Masters  and  Fellows  and  Apprentices,  de¬
rived  from  an  association  of  Operative
Masters,  Fellows,  and  Apprentices, — those  •
building  spiritual  temples  as  these  built
material  ones,  —  its  age  may  not  exceed
five  or  six  hundred  years ;  but  as  a  secret
association,  containing  within  itself  the
symbolic  expression  of  a  religious  idea,
it  connects  itself  with  all  the  Ancient
Mysteries,  which,  with  similar  secrecy,
gave  the  same  symbolic  expression  to  the
same  religious  idea.  These  Mysteries  were
not  the  cradles  of  Freemasonry :  they  were
only  its  analogues.  But  I  have  no  doubt
that  all  the  Mysteries  had  one  common
source,  perhaps,  as  it  has  been  suggested,
some  ancient  body  of  priests;  and  1  have
no  more  doubt  that  Freemasonry  has  de¬
rived  its  legend,  its  symbolic  mode  of  in¬
struction,  and  the  lesson  for  which  that
instruction  was  intended,  either  directly  or
indirectly  from  the  same  source.  In  this
view  the  Mysteries  become  interesting  to
the  Mason  as  a  study,  and  in  this  view
only.  And  sof  when  I  speak  of  the  anti¬
quity  of  Masonry,  I  must  say,  if  I  would
respect  the  axioms  of  historical  science,
that  its  body  came  out  of  the  Middle  Ages,
but  that  its  spirit  is  to  be  traced  to  a  far
remoter  period.

Anton,  Dr.  Carl  Gottlob  ton.  A

German  Masonic  writer  of  considerable  rep¬
utation,  who  died  at  Gorlitz  on  the  17th  of
November,  1S18.  He  is  the  author  of  two
historical  works  on  Templarism,  both  of
which  are  much  esteemed.  1.  Versuchs  einer
Gcschichte  des  Tempelherren  ordens,  i.e.  His¬
torical  Essays  on  the  Order  of  Knights
Templars.  Leipzig,  1779.  And,  2.  Unter-
suchung  iibcr  das  Geheimnis  und  die  Ge-
braucke  dcr  Tempelherren,  i.e.  An  Inquiry
into  the  Mystery  and  Usages  of  the  Knights
Templers.  Dessau,  1728.  He  also  pub¬
lished  at  Gorlitz,  in  1805,  and  again  in
1819,  A  brief  essay  on  the  Culdees,  Ueber
die  Culdeer.

Anton  Hieronymus.  In  the  ex¬
amination  of  a  German  “  steinmetz,”  or
stonemason,  this  is  said  to  have  been  the
name  of  the  first  Mason.  It  is  unquestion¬
ably  a  corruption  of  Adon  Hiram.


APE


APOCALYPSE


79


Ape  and  ILion,  Knight  of  the.

See  Knight  of  the  Ape  and  Lion.

Aphanism.  In  the  Ancient  Mysteries,
there  was  always  a  legend  of  the  death  or
disappearance  of  some  hero  god,  and  the
subsequent  discovery  of  the  body  and  its
resurrection.  The  concealment  of  this  body
by  those  who  had  slain  it,  was  called  the
aphanism,  from  the  Greek,  atfavi^u,  to  con¬
ceal.  As  these  Mysteries  may  be  considered
as  a  type  of  Masonry,  as  some  suppose,  and
as,  according  to  others,  both  the  Mysteries
and  Masonry  are  derived  from  one  common
and  ancient  type,  the  aphanism,  or  conceal¬
ing  of  the  body,  is  of  course  to  be  found  in
the  third  degree.  Indeed,  the  purest  kind
of  Masonic  aphanism  is  the  loss  or  conceal¬
ment  of  the  word.  See  Mysteries,  and
Euresis.

Apocalypse,  Masonry  of  the.

The  adoption  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist
as  one  of  the  patrons  of  our  Lodges,  has
given  rise,  among  the  writers  on  Free¬
masonry,  to  a  variety  of  theories  as  to  the
original  cause  of  his  being  thus  connected
with  the  Institution.  Several  traditions
have  been  handed  down  from  remote
periods,  which  claim  him  as  a  brother,
among  which  the  Masonic  student  will  be
familiar  with  that  which  represents  him  as
having  assumed  the  government  of  the
Craft,  as  Grand  Master,  after  the  demise  of
John  the  Baptist.  I  confess  that  I  am  not
willing  to  place  implicit  confidence  in  the
correctness  of  this  legend,  and  I  candidly
subscribe  to  the  prudence  of  Dalcho’s  re¬
mark,  that  “it  is  unwise  to  assert  more
than  we  can  prove,  and<  to  argue  against
probability.”  There  must  have  been,  how¬
ever,  in  some  way,  a  connection  more  or
less  direct  between  the  Evangelist  and  the
institution  of  Freemasonry,  or  he  would
not  from  the  earliest  times  have  been  so
universally  claimed  as  one  of  its  patrons.
If  it  was  simply  a  Christian  feeling  —  a  re¬
ligious  veneration — which  gave  rise  to  this
general  homage,  I  see  no  reason  why  St.
Matthew,  St.  Mark,  or  St.  Luke  might  not
as  readily  and  appropriately  have  been
selected  as  one  of  the  “  lines  parallel.”
But  the  fact  is  that  there  is  something,  both
in  the  life  and  in  the  writings  of  St.  John
the  Evangelist,  which  closely  connects  him
with  our  mystic  Institution.  He  may
not  have  been  a  Freemason  in  the  sense
in  which  we  now  use  the  term ;  but  it
will  be  sufficient,  if  it  can  be  shown  that
he  was  familiar  with  other  mystical  in¬
stitutions,  which  are  themselves  generally
admitted  to  have  been  more  or  less  inti¬
mately  connected  with  Freemasonry  by
deriving  their  existence  from  a  common
origin.

Such  a  society  was  the  Essenian  Fra¬


ternity  —  a  mystical  association  of  specula¬
tive  philosophers  among  the  Jews,  whose
organization  very  closely  resembled  that  of
the  Freemasons,  and  who  are  even  supposed
by  some  to  have  derived  their  tenets  and
their  discipline  from  the  builders  of  the
Temple.  As  Oliver  observes,  their  institu¬
tion  “  may  be  termed  Freemasonry,  retain¬
ing  the  same  form  but  practised  under
another  name.”  Now  there  is  little  doubt
that  St.  John  was  an  Essene.  Calmet  posi¬
tively  asserts  it;  and  the  writings  and  life
of  St.  John  seem  to  furnish  sufficient  in¬
ternal  evidence  that  he  was  originally  of
that  brotherhood.

But  it  seems  to  me  that  St.  John  was
more  particularly  selected  as  a  patron  of
Freemasonry  in  consequence  of  the  mys¬
terious  and  emblematic  nature  of  the  Apoc¬
alypse,  which  evidently  assimilated  the
mode  of  teaching  adopted  by  the  Evangel¬
ist  to  that  practised  by  the  Fraternity.  If
anyone  who  has  investigated  theceremonies
performed  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  the
Spurious  Freemasonry  as  it  has  been  called
of  the  Pagans,  will  compare  them  with  the
mystical  machinery  used  in  the  Book  of
Revelations,  he  will  find  himself  irresisti¬
bly  led  to  the  conclusion  that  St.  John  the
Evangelist  was  intimately  acquainted  with
the  whole  process  of  initiation  into  these
mystic  associations,  and  that  he  has  selected
its  imagery  for  the  ground-work  of  his  pro¬
phetic  book.  Mr.  Faber,  in  his  Origin  of
Pagan  Idolatry,  (vol.  ii.,  b.  vi.,  ch.  6,)  has,
with  great  ability  and  clearness,  shown
that  St.  John  in  the  Apocalypse  applies
the  ritual  of  the  ancient  initiations  to  a
spiritual  and  prophetic  purpose.

“The  whole  machinery  of  the  Apoca¬
lypse,”  says  Mr.  Faber,  “  from  beginning  to
end,  seems  to  me  very  plainly  to  have  been
borrowed  from  the  machinery  of  the  An¬
cient  Mysteries;  and  this,  if  we  consider
the  nature  of  the  subject,  was  done  with
the  very  strictest  attention  to  ppetical  de¬
corum.

“St.  John  himself  is  made  to  personate
an  aspirant  about  to  be  initiated ;  and,  ac¬
cordingly,  the  images  presented  to  his
mind’s  eye  closely  resemble  the  pageants
of  the  Mysteries  both  in  nature  and  in  order
of  succession.

“  The  prophet  first  beholds  a  door  opened
in  the  magnificent  temple  of  heaven;  and
into  this  he  is  invited  to  enter  by  the  voice
of  one  who  plays  the  hierophant.  Here  he
witnesses  the  unsealing  of  a  sacred  book,
and  forthwith  lie  is  appalled  by  a  troop  of
ghastly  apparitions,  which  flit  in  horrid  suc¬
cession  before  his  eyes.  Among  these  are
preeminently  conspicuous  a  vast  serpent,
the  well-known  symbol  of  the  great  father;
and  two  portentous  wild  beasts,  which


80


APOCALYPSE


APORRHETA


severally  come  up  out  of  the  sea  and  out
of  the  earth.  Such  hideous  figures  cor¬
respond  with  the  canine  phantoms  of  the
Orgies,  which  seem  to  rise  out  of  the
ground,  and  with  the  polymorphic  images
of  the  hero  god  who  was  universally  deemed
the  offspring  of  the  sea.

“  Passing  these  terrific  monsters  in  safety,
the  prophet,  constantly  attended  by  his
angel  hierophant,  who  acts  the  part  of  an
interpreter,  is  conducted  into  the  presence
of  a  female,  who  is  described  as  closely  re¬
sembling  the  great  mother  of  pagan  theol¬
ogy.  Like  Isis  emerging  from  the  sea  and
exhibiting  herself  to  the  aspirant  Apuleius,
this  female  divinity,  upborne  upon  the
marine  wild  beast,  appears  to  float  upon
the  surface  of  many  waters.  She  is  said  to
be  an  open  and  systematical  harlot,  just  as
the  great  mother  was  the  declared  female
principle  of  fecundity;  and  as  she  was
always  propitiated  by  literal  fornication
reduced  to  a  religious  system,  and  as  the
initiated  were  made  to  drink  a  prepared
liquor  out  of  a  sacred  goblet,  so  this  harlot
is  represented  as  intoxicating  the  kings  of
the  earth  with  the  golden  cap  of  her  pros¬
titution.  On  her  forehead  the  very  name
of  Mystery  is  inscribed;  and  the  label
teaches  us  that,  in  point  of  character,  she
is  the  great  universal  mother  of  idolatry.

“  The  nature  of  this  mystery  the  officiating
hierophant  undertakes  to  explain ;  and  an
important  prophecy  is  most  curiously  and
artfully  veiled  under  the  very  language  and
imagery  of  the  Orgies.  To  the  sea-born
great  father  was  ascribed  a  threefold  state  —
he  lived,  he  died,  and  he  revived;  and  these
changes  of  condition  were  duly  exhibited
in  the  Mysteries.  To  the  sea-born  wild
beast  is  similarly  ascribed  a  threefold
state  —  he  lives,  he  dies,  he  revives.  While
dead,  he  lies  floating  on  the  mighty  ocean,
just  like  Horus  or  Osiris,  or  Siva  or  Vish-
nou.  When  he  revives  again,  like  those
kindred  deities,  he  emerges  from  the  waves;
and,  whetSer  dead  or  alive,  he  bears  seven
heads  and  ten  horns,  corresponding  in  num¬
ber  with  the  seven  ark-preserved  Rishis  and
the  ten  aboriginal  patriarchs.  Nor  is  this
all:  as  the  worshippers  of  the  great  father
bore  his  special  mark  or  stigma,  and  were
distinguished  by  his  name,  so  the  worship¬
pers  of  the  maritime  beast  equally  bear  his
mark  and  are  equally  decorated  by  his  ap¬
pellation.

“  At  length,  however,  the  first  or  doleful
part  of  these  sacred  Mysteries  draws  to  a
close,  and  the  last  or  joyful  part  is  rapidly
approaching.  After  the  prophet  has  beheld
the  enemies  of  God  plunged  into  a  dread¬
ful  lake  or  inundation  of  liquid  fire,  which
corresponds  with  the  infernal  lake  or  deluge
of  the  Orgies,  he  is  introduced  into  a  splen¬


didly-illuminated  region,  expressly  adorned
with  the  characteristics  of  that  Paradise
which  was  the  ultimate  scope  of  the  ancient
aspirants ;  while  without  the  holy  gate  of
admission  are  the  whole  multitude  of  the
profane,  dogs,  and  sorcerors,  and  whoremon¬
gers,  and  murderers,  and  idolators,  and  who¬
soever  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie.”

Such  was  the  imagery  of  the  Apocalypse.
In  close  resemblance  to  the  machinery  of
the  Mysteries,  and  the  intimate  connection
between  their  system  and  that  of  Freema¬
sonry,  very  naturally  induced  our  ancient
brethren  to  claim  the  patronage  of  an
apostle  so  preeminently  mystical  in  his
writings,  and  whose  last  and  crowning
work  bore  so  much  of  the  appearance,  in
in  an  outward  form,  of  a  ritual  of  initia¬
tion.

Apocalypse,  Order  of  the.  An

Order  instituted  about  the  end  of  the  sev¬
enteenth  century,  by  one  Gabrino,  who
called  himself  the  Prince  of  the  Septenary
Number  and  Monarch  of  the  Holy  Trin¬
ity.  He  enrolled  a  great  number  of  arti-
zans  in  his  ranks.  According  to  Thory,
some  of  the  provincial  Lodges  of  France
made  a  degree  out  of  Gabrino’s  system.
The  jewel  of  the  Order  was  a  naked  sword
and  a  blazing  star.  Reghellini  (iii.  72)
thinks  that  this  Order  was  the  precursor
of  the  degrees  afterwards  introduced  by  the
Masons  who  practised  the  Templar  system.

Apocalyptic  Degrees.  Those  de¬
grees  which  are  founded  on  the  Revelation  of
St.  John,  or  whose  symbols  and  machinery
of  initiation  are  derived  from  that  work,
are  called  Apocalyptic  degrees.  Of  this
nature  are  several  of  the  high  degrees ;
such,  for  instance,  as  the  17th,  or  Knight
of  the  East  and  West  of  the  Scottish  Rite.

Aporrhcta.  Greek,  a-xoppri-a.  The  holy
things  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries  which  were
known  only  to  the  initiates,  and  were  not  to
be  disclosed  to  the  profane,  were  called  the
aporrheta.  What  are  the  aporrheta  of  Free¬
masonry?  what  are  the  arcana  of  which
there  can  be  no  disclosure?  is  a  question
that  for  some  years  past  has  given  rise  to
much  discussion  among  the  disciples  of  the
Institution.  If  the  sphere  and  number  of
these  aporrheta  be  very  considerably  ex¬
tended,  it  is  evident  that  much  valuable  in¬
vestigation  by  public  discussion  of  the  sci¬
ence  of  Masonry  will  be  prohibited.  On
the  other  hand,  if  the  aporrheta  are  re¬
stricted  to  only  a  few  points,  much  of  the
beauty,  the  permanency,  and  the  efficacy  of
Freemasonry  which  are  dependent  on  its
organization  as  a  secret  and  mystical  asso¬
ciation  will  be  lost.  We  move  between
Scvlla  and  Charybdis,  and  it  is  difficult  for
a  Masonic  writer  to  know  how  to  steer  so  as,
in  avoiding  too  frank  an  exposition  of  the


APPEAL


APPRENTICE


81


principles  of  the  Order,  not  to  fall  by  too
much  reticence  into  obscurity.  The  Eu¬
ropean  Masons  are  far  more  liberal  in  their
views  of  the  obligation  of  secrecy  than  the
English  or  the  American.  There  are  few
things,  indeed,  which  a  French  or  German
Masonic  writer  will  refuse  to  discuss  with
the  utmost  frankness.  It  is  now  beginning
to  be  very  generally  admitted,  and  English
and  American  writers  are  acting  on  the  ad¬
mission,  that  the  only  real  aporrheta  of
Freemasonry  are  the  modes  of  recognition,
and  the  peculiar  and  distinctive,  ceremonies
of  the  Order ;  and  to  these  last  it  is  claimed
that  reference  may  be  publicly  made  for  the
purpose  of  scientific  investigation,  provided
that  the  reference  be  so  made  as  to  be  ob¬
scure  to  the  profane,  and  intelligible  only
to  the  initiated.

Appeal,  Right  of.  The  right  of
appeal  is  an  inherent  right  belonging  to
every  Mason,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  is  the
appellate  body  to  whom  the  appeal  is  to  be
made.

Appeals  are  of  two  kinds :  1st,  from  the
decision  of  the  Master;  2dly,  from  the  de¬
cision  of  the  Lodge.  Each  of  these  will
require  a  distinct  consideration.

1.  Appeals  from  the  Decision  of  the  Mas¬
ter.  It  is  now  a  settled  doctrine  in  Masonic
law  that  there  can  be  no  appeal  from  the
decision  of  a  Master  of  a  Lodge  to  the
Lodge  itself.  But  an  appeal  always  lies
from  such  decision  to  the  Grand  Lodge,
which  is  bound  to  entertain  the  appeal  and
to  inquire  into  the  correctness  of  the  deci¬
sion.  Some  writers  have  endeavored  to
restrain  the  despotic  authority  of  the  Mas¬
ter  to  decisions  in  matters  strictly  relating
to  the  work  of  the  Lodge,  while  they  con¬
tend  that  on  all  questions  of  business  an
appeal  may  be  taken  from  his  decision  to
the  Lodge.  But  it  would  be  unsafe,  and
often  impracticable,  to  draw  this  distinc¬
tion,  and  accordingly  the  highest  Masonic
authorities  have  rejected  the  theory,  and
denied  the  power  in  a  Lodge  to  entertain
an  appeal  from  any  decision  of  the  pre¬
siding  officer.

The  wisdom  of  this  law  must  be  appa¬
rent  to  any  one  who  examines  the  nature
of  the  organization  of  the  Masonic  institu¬
tion.  The  Master  is  responsible  to  the
Grand  Lodge  for  the  good  conduct  of  his
Lodge.  To  him  and  to  him  alone  the  su¬
preme  Masonic  authority  looks  for  the  pre¬
servation  of  order,  and  the  observance  of
the  Constitutions  and  the  Landmarks  of
the  Order  in  the  body  over  which  he  pre¬
sides.  It  is  manifest,  then,  that  it  would  be
highly  unjust  to  throw  around  a  presiding
officer  so  heavy  a  responsibility,  if  it  were
in  the  power  of  the  Lodge  to  overrule  his
decisions  or  to  control  his  authority.


2.  Appeals  from  the  Decisions  of  the
Lodge.  Appeals  may  be  made  to  the  Grand
Lodge  from  the  decisions  of  a  Lodge,  on
any  subject  except  the  admission  of
members,  or  the  election  of  candidates ;  but
these  appeals  are  more  frequently  made  in
reference  to  conviction  and  punishment
after  trial.

When  a  Mason,  in  consequence  of  charges
preferred  against  him,  has  been  tried,  con¬
victed,  and  sentenced  by  his  Lodge,  he  has
an  inalienable  right  to  appeal  to  the  Grand
Lodge  from  such  conviction  and  sentence.

His  appeal  may  be  either  general  or
specific.  That  is,  he  may  appeal  on  the
ground,  generally,  that  the  whole  of  the
proceedings  have  been  irregular  or  illegal,
or  he  may  appeal  specifically  against  some
particular  portion  of  the  trial;  or  lastly,
admitting  the  correctness  of  the  verdict,
and  acknowledging  the  truth  of  the  charges,
he  may  appeal  from  the  sentence,  as  being
too  severe  or  disproportionate  to  the  offence.

Appendant  Orders.  In  the  Tem¬
plar  system  of  the  United  States,  the  de¬
grees  of  Knight  of  the  Bed  Cross,  and
Knight  of  Malta,  are  called  Appendant  Or¬
ders  because  they  are  conferred  as  append¬
ages  to  that  of  Knight  Templar,  which  is
the  principal  degree  of  the  Commandery.

Apple-Tree  Tavern.  The  place
where  the  four  Lodges  of  London  met  in
1717,  and  organized  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England.  It  was  situated  in  Charles  Street,
Covent  Garden.

Apprenti.  French  for  Apprentice.

Apprentice.  See  Apprentice,  Entered.

Apprentice  Architect.  (. Apprenti
Architected)  A  degree  in  the  collection  of
Fustier.

Apprentice  Architect,  Perfect.

[Apprenti  Architecte  Parfait.)  A  degree  in
the  collection  of  Le  Page.

Apprentice  Architect,  Prus¬
sian.  [Apprenti  Architecte  Prussian.)  A
degree  in  the  collection  of  Le  Page.

Apprentice  Cohen.  [ApprentiCoen.)
A  degree  in  the  collection  of  the  Archives
of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philosophic
Rite.

Apprentice,  Egyptian.  [Apprenti,
Egyptien. )  The  first  degree  of  the  Egyptian
Bite  of  Cagliostro.

Apprentice,  Entered.  The  first
degree  of  Freemasonry,  in  all  the  Rites,  is
that  of  Entered  Apprentice.  In  French,  it
is  called  apprenti;  in  Spanish,  aprendiz ;
in  Italian,  apprendentc ;  and  in  German,
lehrling :  in  all  of  which  the  radical  mean¬
ing  of  the  word  is  a  learner.  Like  the
lesser  Mysteries  of  the  ancient  initiations,
it  is  in  Masonry  a  preliminary  degree,  in¬
tended  to  prepare  the  candidate  for  the
higher  and  fuller  instructions  of  the  sue-


6


82


APPRENTICE


APPRENTICE


ceeding  degrees.  It  is  therefore,  although
supplying  no  valuable  historical  informa¬
tion,  replete,  in  its  lecture,  with  instruc¬
tions  on  the  internal  structure  of  the  Order.
Until  late  in  the  seventeenth  century,  Ap¬
prentices  do  not  seem  to  have  been  con¬
sidered  as  forming  any  part  of  the  confra¬
ternity  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons;  for
although  they  are  incidentally  mentioned
in  the  Old  Constitutions  of  the  fifteenth,
sixteenth,  and  seventeenth  centuries,  these
records  refer  only  to  Masters  and  Fellows
as  constituting  the  Craft,  and  this  distinc¬
tion  seems  to  have  been  one  rather  of  posi¬
tion  than  of  degree.  The  Sloane  Manu¬
script,  No.  3,329,  which  Findel  supposes  to
have  been  written  at  the  end  of  the  seven¬
teenth  century,  describes  a  just  and  perfect
Lodge  as  consisting  of  “  two  Interprentices,
two  Fellow  Crafts,  and  two  Masters,”  which
shows  that  by  that  time  the  Apprentices
had  been  elevated  to  a  recognized  rank  in
the  Fraternity.  In  the  Manuscript  signed
“  Mark  Kypling,”  which  Hughan  entitles
“Manuscript  Constitutions,  No.  4,”  the
date  of  which  is  1693,  there  is  a  still  further
recognition  in  what  is  there  called  “  the
Apprentice  Charge,”  one  item  of  which  is,
that  “  he  shall  keepe  councell  in  all  things
spoken  in  Lodge  or  chamber  by  any  Masons,
Fellows,  or  Freemasons.”  This  indicates
that  they  were  admitted  to  a  closer  com¬
munion  with  the  members  of  the  Craft.
But  notwithstanding  these  recognitions,  all
the  manuscripts  up  to  1704  show  that  only
“Masters  and  Fellows”  were  summoned  to
the  assembly.  During  all  this  time,  when
Masonry  was  in  fact  an  operative  art,  there
was  but  one  degree  in  the  modern  sense  of
the  word.  Early  in  the  eighteenth  century,
if  not  earlier,  Apprentices  must  have  been
admitted  to  the  possession  of  this  degree ;
for  after  what  is  called  the  revival  of  1717,
Entered  Apprentices  constituted  the  bulk
of  the  Craft,  and  they  only  were  initiated
in  the  Lodges,  the  degrees  of  Fellow  Craft
and  Master  Mason  being  conferred  by  the
Grand  Lodge.  This  is  not  left  to  conjecture.
The  thirteenth  of  the  General  Regulations,
approved  in  1721,  says  that  “Apprentices
must  be  admitted  Masters  and  Fellow
Crafts  only  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  unless  by
a  dispensation.”  But  this  having  been
found  very  inconvenient,  on  the  22d  No¬
vember,  1725,  the  Grand  Lodge  repealed
the  article,  and  decreed  that  the  blaster  of
a  Lodge,  with  his  Wardens  and  a  compe¬
tent  number  of  the  Lodge  assembled  in  due
form,  can  make  Masters  and  Fellows  at
discretion.

The  mass  of  the  Fraternity  being  at  that
time  composed  of  Apprentices,  they  exer¬
cised  a  great  deal  of  influence  in  the  legis¬
lation  of  the  Order;  for  although  they  could


not  represent  their  Lodge  in  the  Quarterly
Communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  —  a
duty  which  could  only  be  discharged  by  a
Master  or  Fellow,  —  yet  they  were  always
permitted  to  be  present  at  the  grand  feast,
and  no  General  Regulation  could  be  altered
or  repealed  without  their  consent ;  and,  of
course,  in  all  the  business  of  their  particular
Lodges,  they  took  the  most  promiuent  part,
for  there  were  but  few  Masters  or  Fellows
in  a  Lodge,  in  consequence  of  the  difficulty
and  inconvenience  of  obtaining  the  degree,
which  could  only  be  done  at  a  Quarterly
Communication  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

But  as  soon  as  the  subordinate  Lodges
were  invested  with  the  power  of  conferring
all  the  degrees,  the  Masters  began  rapidly
to  increase  in  numbers  and  in  corresponding
influence.  And  now,  the  bulk  of  the  Fra¬
ternity  consisting  of  Master  Masons,  the
legislation  of  the  Order  is  done  exclusively
by  them,  and  the  Entered  Apprentices  and
Fellow  Crafts  have  sunk  into  comparative
obscurity,  their  degrees  being  considered
only  as  preparatory  to  the  greater  initiation
of  the  Master’s  degree.

Apprentice,  Hermetic.  ( Apprenti
Hermetique.)  The  thirteenth  degree  of  the
collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France.

Apprentice,  Kabbalistic.  (Ap¬
prenti  Cabalistique.)  A  degree  in  the  collec¬
tion  of  the  Archives  of  the  Mother  Lodge
of  the  Philosophic  Rite.

Apprentice  Mason.  (Apprenti  Ma-
qon.)  The  Entered  Apprentice  of  French
Masonry.

Apprentice  Masoness.  (Apprentie
Magonne.)  The  first  degree  of  the  French
Rite  of  Adoption.  The  word  Masoness  is  a
neologism ;  but  it  is  in  accordance  with  the
genius  of  our  language;  and  I  know  not
how  else  to  translate  into  English  the
French  word  Maqonne,  which  means  a
woman  who  has  received  the  degrees  of  the
Rite  of  Adoption,  unless  by  the  use  of  the
awkward  phrase,  Female  Mason.  To  ex¬
press  this  idea,  we  might  introduce  as  a
technicality  the  word  Masoness.

Apprentice  Masoness,  Egyp¬
tian.  (Apprentie  Magonne  Egyptienne.)
The  first  degree  of  Cagliosh’s  Egyptian
Rite  of  Adoption.

Apprentice,  Mystic.  (Apprenti
Mystique.)  A  degree  in  the  collection  of  M.
Pvron.

Apprentice  of  Paracelsus.  (Ap¬
prenti  de  Paraeetse.)  A  degree  in  the  collec¬
tion  of  M.  Peuvret.  There  existed  a  series
of  these  Paracelsian  degrees  —  Apprentice,
Fellow  Craft,  and  Master.  They  were  all
most  probably  forms  of  Hermetic  Masonry.

Apprentice  of  the  Egyptian  Se-
I  Cl’etS.  (Apprenti  des  secrets  Egyptians.)  The


APPRENTICE


APRON


83


first  degree  of  the  Order  of  African  Archi¬
tects.

Apprentice  Philosopher,  toy
the  Number  3.  (Apprenti  Philosopke
par  le  Nombre  3.)  A  degree  in  the  collection
of  M.  Peuvret.

Apprentice  Philosopher,  Her¬
metic.  ( Apprenti  Philosopke  Hermetique.)
A  degree  in  the  collection  of  M.  Peuvret.

Apprentice  Philosopher  to  the
Number  9.  ( Apprenti  Philosopke  au
Nombre  9. )  A  degree  in  the  collection  of
M.  Peuvret.

Apprentice  Pillar.  See  Prentice
Pillar.

Apprentice,  Scottish.  ( Apprenti
Ecossais.)  This  degree,  and  that  of  Trini¬
tarian  Scottish  Apprentice,  (Apprenti  Ecos-
sais  Trinitaire,)  are  contained  in  the  collec¬
tion  of  Pyron.

Apprentice  Theosophist.  (Ap-
renti  Theosophe.)  The  first  degree  of  the
ite  of  Swedenborg.

Apron.  There  is  no  one  of  the  sym¬
bols  of  Speculative  Masonry  more  impor¬
tant  in  its  teachings,  or  more  interesting  iu
its  history,  than  the  lambskin,  or  white
leather  apron.  Commencing  its  lessons  at
an  early  period  in  the  Mason’s  progress,  it
is  impressed  upon  his  memory  as  the  first
gift  which  he  receives,  the  first  symbol
which  is  explained  to  him,  and  the  first
tangible  evidence  which  he  possesses  of  his
admission  into  the  Fraternity.  Whatever
may  be  his  future  advancement  in  the
“  royal  art,”  into  whatsoever  deeper  arcana
his  devotion  to  the  mystic  Institution  or
his  thirst  for  knowledge  may  subsequently
lead  him,  with  the  lambskin  apron  —  his
first  investiture  —  he  never  parts.  Chang¬
ing,  perhaps,  its  form  and  its  decorations,
and  conveying,  at  each  step,  some  new  but
still  beautiful  allusion,  its  substance  is  still
there,  and  it  continues  to  claim  the  honored
title  by  which  it  was  first  made  known  to
him,  on  the  night  of  his  initiation,  as  “  the
badge  of  a  Mason.”

If  in  less  important  portions  of  our  ritual
there  are  abundant  allusions  to  the  manners
and  customs  of  the  ancient  world,  it  is  not
to  be  supposed  that  the  Masonic  rite  of  in¬
vestiture —  the  ceremony  of  clothing  the
newly-initiated  candidate  with  this  dis¬
tinctive  badge  of  his  profession  —  is  with¬
out  its  archetype  in  the  times  and  practices
long  passed  away.  It  would,  indeed,  be
strange,  while  all  else  in  Masonry  is  cov¬
ered  with  the  veil  of  antiquity,  that  the
apron  alone,  its  most  significant  symbol,
should  be  indebted  for  its  existence  to  the
invention  of  a  modern  mind.

On  the  contrary,  we  shall  find  the  most
satisfactory  evidence  that  the  use  of  the
apron,  or  some  equivalent  mode  of  investi¬


ture,  as  a  mystic  symbol,  was  common  to
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  from  the  earliest
periods.

Among  the  Israelites  the  girdle  formed
a  part  of  the  investiture  of  the  priesthood.
In  the  mysteries  of  Mithras,  in  Persia,  the
candidate  was  invested  with  a  white  apron.
In  the  initiations  practised  in  Hindostan,
the  ceremony  of  investiture  w'as  preserved,
but  a  sash,  called  the  sacred  zennar,  was
substituted  for  the  apron.  The  Jewish  sect
of  the  Essenes  clothed  their  novices  with
a  white  robe.  The  celebrated  traveller
Ksempfer  informs  us  that  the  Japanese,
who  practise  certain  rites  of  initiation,  in¬
vest  their  candidates  with  a  white  apron,
bound  round  the  loins  with  a  zone  or  gir¬
dle.  In  the  Scandinavian  rites,  the  mili¬
tary  genius  of  the  people  caused  them  to
substitute  a  white  shield,  but  its  presenta¬
tion  was  accompanied  by  an  emblematic
instruction  not  unlike  that  which  is  con¬
nected  with  the  Mason’s  apron.

“The  apron,”  says  Dr.  Oliver,  (S.  and S.,
Lect.  X.,  p.  196,)  “appears  to  have  been  in
ancient  times  an  honorary  badge  of  distinc¬
tion.  In  the  Jewish  economy  none  but  the
superior  orders  of  the  priesthood  were  per¬
mitted  to  adorn  themselves  with  orna¬
mented  girdles,  which  were  made  of  blue,
purple,  and  crimson,  decorated  with  gold,
upon  a  ground  of  fine  white  linen,  while
the  inferior  priests  wore  only  plain  white.
The  Indian,  the  Persian,  the  Jewish,  the
Ethiopian,  and  the  Egyptian  aprons,  though
equally  superb,  all  bore  a  character  dis¬
tinct  from  each  other.  Some  were  plain
white  ones,  others  striped  with  blue,  pur¬
ple,  and  crimson ;  some  were  of  wrought
gold,  others  adorned  and  decorated  with
superb  tassels  and  fringes.  In  a  word,
though  the  principal  honor  of  the  apron
may  consist  in  innocence  of  conduct  and
purity  of  heart,  yet  it  certainly  appears
through  all  ages  to  have  been  a  most  ex¬
alted  badge  of  distinction.  In  primitive
times  it  was  rather  an  ecclesiastical  than  a
civil  decoration ;  although  in  some  cases
the  apron  was  elevated  to  great  superiority
as  a  national  trophy.  The  royal  standard
of  Persia  was  originally  an  apron  in  form
and  dimensions.  At  this  day  it  is  connected
with  ecclesiastical  honors;  for  the  chief
dignitaries  of  the  Christian  church,  wher¬
ever  a  legitimate  establishment,  with  the
necessary  degrees  of  rank  and  subordina¬
tion  is  formed,  are  invested  with  aprons  as
a  peculiar  badge  of  distinction,  which  is  a
collateral  proof  of  the  fact  that  Masonry
wasoriginally'incorporated  with  the  various
systems  of  divine  worship  used  by  every
people  in  the  ancient  world.  Masonry  re¬
tains  the  symbol  or  shadow  ;  it  cannot  have
renounced  the  reality  or  substance.”


84


APRON


APRON


In  the  Masonic  apron  two  things  are
essential  to  the  due  preservation  of  its  sym¬
bolic  character  —  its  color  and  its  material.

1.  As  to  its  color.  The  color  of  a  Mason’s
apron  should  be  pure  unspotted  white.
This  color  has,  in  all  ages  and  countries,
been  esteemed  an  emblem  of  innocence
and  purity.  It  was  with  this  reference  that
a  portion  of  the  vestments  of  the  Jewish
priesthood  was  directed  to  be  white.  In
the  Ancient  Mysteries  the  candidate  was
always  clothed  in  white.  “The  priests  of
the  Romans,”  says  Festus,  “were  accus¬
tomed  to  wear  white  garments  when  they
sacrificed.”  In  the  Scandinavian  rites  it
has  been  seen  that  the  shield  presented  to
the  candidate  was  white.  The  Druids
changed  the  color  of  the  garment  pre¬
sented  to  their  initiates  with  each  degree ;
white,  however,  was  the  color  appropriated
to  the  last,  or  degree  of  perfection.  And
it  was,  according  to  their  ritual,  intended
to  teach  the  aspirant  that  none  were  ad¬
mitted  to  that  honor  but  such  as  were
cleansed  from  all  impurities  both  of  body
and  mind.  In  the  early  ages  of  the  Chris¬
tian  church  a  white  garment  was  always
placed  upon  the  catechumen  who  had  been
newly  baptized,  to  denote  that  he  had  been
cleansed  from  his  former  sins,  and  was
thenceforth  to  lead  a  life  of  purity.  Hence
it  was  presented  to  him  with  this  solemn
charge  :  “  Receive  the  white  and  undefiled
garment,  and  produce  it  unspotted  before
the  tribunal  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that
you  may  obtain  eternal  life.”  From  all
these  instances  we  learn  that  white  apparel
was  anciently  used  as  an  emblem  of  purity,
and  for  this  reason  the  color  has  been  pre¬
served  in  the  apron  of  the  Freemason.

2.  As  to  its  material.  A  Mason’s  apron
must  be  made  of  lambskin.  No  other  sub¬
stance,  such  as  linen,  silk,  or  satin,  could  be
substituted  without  entirely  destroying  the
emblematic  character  of  the  apron,  for  the
material  of  the  Mason’s  apron  constitutes
one  of  the  most  important  symbols  of  his
profession.  The  lamb  has  always  been  con¬
sidered  as  an  appropriate  emblem  of  inno¬
cence.  And  hence  we  are  taught,  in  the
ritual  of  the  first  degree,  that,  “by  the
lambskin,  the  Mason  is  reminded  of  that
purity  of  life  and  rectitude  of  conduct
which  is  so  essentially  necessary  to  his  gain¬
ing  admission  into  the  Celestial  Lodge
above,  where  the  Supreme  Architect  of  the
Universe  forever  presides.”

The  true  apron  of  a  Mason  must  then  be
of  unspotted  lambskin,  from  14  to  16  inches
wide,  from  12  to  14  deep,  with  a  fall  about
3  or  4  inches  deep,  square  at  the  bottom,  and
without  device  or  ornament  of  any  kind.
The  usage  of  the  Craft  in  this  country  has,
for  a  few  years  past,  allowed  a  narrow  edg¬


ing  of  blue  ribbon  in  the  symbolic  de¬
grees,  to  denote  the  universal  friendship
which  constitutes  the  bond  of  the  society,
and  of  which  virtue  blue  is  the  Masonic
emblem.  But  this  undoubtedly  is  an  inno¬
vation,  for  the  ancient  apron  was  without
any  edging  or  ornament.  In  the  Royal
Arch  degree  the  lambskin  is,  of  course,  con¬
tinued  to  be  used,  but,  according  to  the
same  modern  custom,  there  is  an  edging  of
red,  to  denote  the  zeal  and  fervency  which
should  distinguish  the  possessors  of  that
degree.  All  extraneous  ornaments  and  de¬
vices  are  in  bad  taste,  and  detract  from  the
symbolic  character  of  the  investiture.  But
the  silk  or  satin  aprons,  bespangled  and
painted  and  embroidered,  which  have  been
gradually  creeping  into  our  Lodges,  have  no
sort  of  connection  with  Ancient  Craft  Ma¬
sonry.  They  are  an  innovation  of  our
French  brethren,  who  are  never  pleased
with  simplicity,  and  have,  by  their  love  of
tinsel  in  their  various  newly-invented  cere¬
monies.  effaced  many  of  the  most  beautiful
and  impressive  symbols  of  our  Institution.
A  Mason  who  understands  and  appreciates
the  true  symbolic  meaning  of  his  apron,
would  no  more  tolerate  a  painted  or  em¬
broidered  satin  one  than  an  artist  would  a
gilded  statue.  By  him,  the  lambskin,  and
the  lambskin  alone,  would  be  considered
as  the  badge  “  more  ancient  than  the  Golden
Fleece,  or  Roman  Eagle,  and  more  honor¬
able  than  the  Star  and  Garter.”

The  Grand  Lodge  of  England  is  precise
in  its  regulations  for  the  decorations  of  the
apron,  which  are  thus  laid  down  in  its
Constitution.

“  Entered  Apprentices.  —  A  plain  white
lambskin,  from  fourteen  to  sixteen  inches
wide,  twelve  to  fourteen  inches  deep,  square
at  bottom,  and  without  ornament;  white
strings.

“  Fellow  Craft.  — A  plain  white  lambskin,
similar  to  that  of  the  Entered  Apprentices,
with  the  addition  only  of  two  sky-blue
rosettes  at  the  bottom.

“  Master  Masons.  — The  same,  with  sky-
blue  lining  and  edging,  one  and  a  half  inch
deep,  and  an  additional  rosette  on  the  fall
or  flap,  and  silver  tassels.  No  other  color
or  ornament  shall  be  allowed,  except  to
officers  and  past  officers  of  Lodges  who
may  have  the  emblems  of  their  offices  in
silver  or  white  in  the  centre  of  the  apron ;
and  except  as  to  the  members  of  the  Prince
of  Wales’  Lodge,  No.  324,  who  are  allowed
to  wear  a  narrow  internal  border  of  garter-
blue  in  their  aprons.

“  Grand  Stewards,  present  and  past. —
Aprons  of  the  same  dimensions  lined  with
crimson,  edging  of  the  same  color  three
and  a  half  inches,  and  silver  tassels.  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Stewards,  while  in  office,  the


APRON


ARCHEOLOGY


85


same,  except  that  the  edging  is  only  two
inches  wide.  The  collars  of  the  Grand
Steward’s  Lodge  to  be  crimson  ribbon,  four
inches  broad.

“  Grand  Officers  of  the  United  Grand
Lodge ,  present  and  past. —  Aprons  of  the
same  dimensions,  lined  with  garter-blue,
edging  three  and  a  half  inches,  ornamented
with  gold,  and  blue  strings;  and  they  may
have  the  emblems  of  their  offices,  in  gold
or  blue,  in  the  centre.

“  Provincial  Grand  Officers,  present  and
past. — Aprons  of  the  same  dimensions,
lined  with  garter-blue,  and  ornamented
with  gold  and  with  blue  strings :  they  must
have  the  emblems  of  their  offices  in  gold  or
blue  in  the  centre  within  a  double  circle,  in
the  margin  of  which  must  be  inserted  the
name  of  the  province.  The  garter-blue
edging  to  the  aprons  must  not  exceed  two
inches  in  width.

“  The  apron  of  the  Deputy  Grand  Master
to  have  the  emblem  of  his  office  in  gold
embroidery  in  the  centre,  and  the  pome¬
granate  and  lotus  alternately  embroidered
in  gold  on  the  edging.

The  apron  of  the  Grand  Master  is  orna¬
mented  with  the  blazing  sun  embroidered
in  gold  in  the  centre;  on  the  edging  the
pomegranate  and  lotus  with  the  seven-eared
wheat  at  each  corner,  and  also  on  the  fall ;
all  in  gold  embroidery ;  the  fringe  of  gold
bullion.

“  The  apron  of  the  pro  Grand  Master  the
same.

“  The  Masters  and  Past  Masters  of  Lodges
to  wear,  in  lieu  and  in  the  places  of  the
three  rosettes  on  the  Master  Mason’s  apron,
perpendicular  lines  upon  horizontal  lines,
thereby  forming  three  several  sets  of  two
right  angles ;  the  length  of  the  horizontal
lines  to  be  two  inches  and  a  half  each,  and
of  the  perpendicular  lines  one  inch ;  these
emblems  to  be  of  ribbon,  half  an  inch
broad,  and  of  the  same  color  as  the  lining
and  edging  of  the  apron.  If  Grand  Officers,
similar  emblems  of  garter-blue  or  gold.”

In  this  country,  although  there  is  evi¬
dence  in  some  old  aprons,  still  existing,
that  rosettes  were  formerly  worn,  there  are
now  no  distinctive  decorations  for  the
aprons  of  the  different  symbolic  degrees.
The  only  mark  of  distinction  is  in  the
mode  of  wearing;  and  this  differs  in  the
different  jurisdictions,  some  wearing  the
Master’s  apron  turned  up  at  the  corner,  and
others  the  Fellow  Craft’s.  The  authority
of  Cross,  in  his  plate  of  the  Royal  Master’s
degree  v'.;!  the  older  editions  of  his  Hiero¬
glyphic  Chart,  conclusively  shows  that  he
taught  the  former  method ;  although  the
latter  is  now  the  more  common  usage.

As  we  advance  to  the  higher  degrees,  we
find  the  apron  varying  iu  its  decorations


and  in  the  color  of  its  border,  which  are,
however,  always  symbolical  of  some  idea
taught  in  the  degree.

Araunah.  See  Oman.

Arbitration.  In  the  Old  Charges,
Masons  are  advised,  in  all  cases  of  dispute
or  controversy,  to  submit  to  the  arbitration
of  the  Masters  and  Fellows,  rather  than  to
go  to  law.

Arcana.  Latin.  Secret  things,  or
mysteries  which  it  is  forbidden  to  reveal.
See  Secrets.

Arcani  Disciplina.  The  mode  of
initiation  into  the  primitive  Christian
church.  See  Discipline  of  the  Secret.

Arch,  Antiquity  of  the.  Writers
on  architecture  have,  until  within  a  few
years,  been  accustomed  to  suppose  that  the
invention  of  the  arch  and  keystone  was
not  anterior  to  the  era  of  Augustus.  But
the  researches  of  modern  antiquaries  have
traced  the  existence  of  the  arch  as  far
back  as  460  years  before  the  buildiug  of
King  Solomon’s  Temple,  and  thus  rescued
Masonic  traditions  from  the  charge  of  ana¬
chronism.  See  Keystone.

Arch,  Catenarian.  See  Catenarian

Arch  of  Enoch.  The  13th  degree
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
is  sometimes  so  called.  See  Knight  of  the
Ninth  Arch.

Arch  of  Heaven.  Job,  xxvi.  11,
compares  heaven  to  an  arch  supported  by
pillars.  “The  pillars  of  heaven  tremble
and  are  astonished  at  his  reproof.”  Dr.
Cutbush,  on  this  passage,  remarks,  “  The
arch  in  this  instance  is  allegorical,  not  only
of  the  arch  of  heaven,  but  of  the  higher
degree  of  Masonry,  commonly  called  the
Holy  Royal  Arch.  The  pillars  which  sup¬
port  the  arch  are  emblematical  of  Wisdom
and  Strength ;  the  former  denoting  the
wisdom  of  the  Supreme  Architect,  and  the
latter  the  stability  of  the  Universe.” — Am.
Ed.  Brewster's  Encyc.

Arch  of  Solomon,  Royal.  The
13th  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite  is  sometimes  so  called,  by  which  it  is
distinguished  from  the  Royal  Arch  degree
of  the  English  and  American  systems.

Arch  of  steel.  The  grand  honors
are  conferred,  in  the  French  Rite,  by  two
ranks  of  brethren  elevating  and  crossing
their  drawn  swords.  They  call  it  voule
d’acier.

Arch  of  Zerubbabcl,  Royal.  The

7th  degree  of  the  American  Rite  is  some¬
times  so  called  to  distinguish  it  from  the
Royal  Arch  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite,  which  is  called  the  Royal
Arch  of  Solomon.

Arch,  Royal.  See  Royal  Arch.

Arcliujology .  The  science  which  is  en-


86


ARCHETYPE


ARCHITECTURE


gaged  in  the  study  of  those  minor  branches
of  antiquities  which  do  not  enter  into  the
course  of  general  history,  such  as  national
architecture,  genealogies,  manners,  cus¬
toms,  heraldic  subjects,  and  others  of  a  simi¬
lar  nature.  The  archaeology  of  Freema¬
sonry  has  been  made,  within  a  recent
period,  a  very  interesting  study,  and  is
much  indebted  for  its  successful  pursuit  to
the  labors  of  Kloss  and  Findel  in  Ger¬
many,  and  to  Thory  and  Ragon  in  France,
and  to  Oliver,  Lyon,  Hughan,  and  many
living  writers,  in  England.  The  scholars
of  this  science  have  especially  directed  their
attention  to  the  collection  of  old  records,
and  the  inquiry  into  the  condition  and  or¬
ganization  of  Masonic  and  other  secret  as¬
sociations  during  the  Middle  Ages.  In
America,  the  late  William  S.  Rockwell  was
a  diligent  student  of  Masonic  archaeology,
and  several  others  in  this  country  have
labored  assiduously  in  the  same  inviting
field.

Archetype.  The  principal  type,  figure,
pattern,  or  example  whereby  and  whereon
a  thing  is  formed.  In  the  science  of  sym¬
bolism,  the  archetype  is  the  thing  adopted
as  a  symbol,  whence  the  symbolic  idea  is
derived.  Thus  we  say  the  Temple  is  the
archetype  of  the  Lodge,  because  the  former
is  the  symbol  whence  all  the  Temple  sym¬
bolism  of  the  latter  is  derived.

Architect.  In  laying  the  corner¬
stones  of  Masonic  edifices,  and  in  dedicating
them  after  they  are  finished,  the  architect
of  the  building,  although  he  may  be  a  pro¬
fane,  is  required  to  take  a  part  in  the  cere¬
monies.  In  the  former  case,  the  square,
level,  and  plumb  are  delivered  to  him  with
a  charge  by  the  Grand  Master ;  and  in  the
latter  case  they  are  returned  by  him  to  that
officer.

Architect,  African.  See  African

Architects.

Architect  by  3, 5,  and  7,  Grand.

( Grande  Architecte  par  3,  5,  ell .)  A  degree
in  the  manuscript  of  Peuvret’s  collection.

Architect,  Grand.  (Architecte
Grande.)  1.  The  sixth  degree  of  the  Rite
of  Martinism.  2.  The  fourth  degree  of  the
Rite  of  Elect  Cohens.  3.  The  twenty-
third  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.  4.
The  twenty-fourth  degree  in  the  collection
of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Architect,  Grand  Master.  See
Grand  Master  Architect.

Architect.  Little.  ( Architecte  Petit.)

1.  The  twenty-third  degree  of  the  collection
of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

2.  The  twenty-second  degree  of  the  Rite
of  Mizraim.

Architect  of  Solomon.  ( Architecte
de  Salomon .)  A  degree  in  the  manuscript
collection  of  M.  Peuvret.


Architect,  Perfect.  ( Architecte
Parfait.)  The  twenty-eighth  degree  of  the
Rite  of  Mizraim.  The  twenty-fifth,  twenty-
sixth,  twenty-seventh  degrees  of  the  same
Rite  are  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,  and
Master  Perfect  Architect.

Architect,  Perfect  and  Sub¬
lime  Grand.  (Architecte,  Parfait  et
Sublime  Grande.)  A  degree  in  the  collec¬
tion  of  the  Loge  des  Amis  R6unis  at
Calais.

Architectonicus.  Latin.  Relating
to  architecture.  Thus,  Vitruvius  says,
“  rationes  architectonicae,”  the  rules  of
architecture.  But  as  Architecton  signifies
a  Master  Builder,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland,  in  some  Latin  inscriptions,  has
used  the  word  architectonicus,  to  denote  Ma¬
sonic  or  relating  to  Freemasonry.  In  the  in¬
scription  on  the  corner-stone  of  the  Royal
Exchange  of  Edinburgh,  we  find  “  fratres
architectonici  ”  used  for  Freemasons ;  and  in
the  Grand  Lodge  diploma,  a  Lodge  is  called
“  societas  architectonica;”  but  the  usage  of
the  word  in  this  sense  has  not  been  gen¬
erally  adopted.

Architecture.  The  art  of  construct¬
ing  dwellings,  as  a  shelter  from  the  heat
of  summer  and  the  cold  of  winter,  must
have  been  resorted  to  from  the  very  first
moment  in  which  man  became  subjected  to
the  power  of  the  elements.  Architecture
is,  therefore,  not  only  one  of  the  most  im¬
portant,  but  one  of  the  most  ancient  of
sciences.  Rude  and  imperfect  must,  how¬
ever,  have  been  the  first  efforts  of  the
human  race,  resulting  in  the  erection  of
huts  clumsy  in  their  appearance,  and  ages
must  have  elapsed  ere  wisdom  of  design
combined  strength  of  material  with  beauty
of  execution.

As  Geometry  is  the  science  on  which
Masonry  is  founded,  Architecture  is  the  art
from  which  it  borrows  the  language  of  its
symbolic  instruction.  In  the  earlier  ages
of  the  Order  every  Mason  was  either  an
operative  mechanic  or  a  superintending
architect.  And  something  more  than  a
superficial  knowledge  of  the  principles  of
architecture  is  absolutely  essential  to  the
Mason  who  would  either  understand  the
former  history  of  the  Institution  or  appre¬
ciate  its  present  objects.

There  are  five  orders  of  architecture :  the
Doric,  the  Ionic,  the  Corinthian,  the  Tus¬
can,  and  the  Composite.  The  first  three
are  the  original  orders,  and  were  invented
in  Greece;  the  last  two  are  of  later  forma¬
tion,  and  owe  their  existence  to  Italy.
Each  of  these  orders,  as  well  as  the  other
terms  of  architecture,  so  far  as  they  are
connected  with  Freemasonry,  will  be  found
under  its  appropriate  head  throughout  this
work.


ARCHITECTURE


ARK


87


The  Books  of  Constitutions,  commenced
by  Anderson  and  continued  by  Entick  and
Noorthouck,  contain,  under  the  title  of  a
History  of  Freemasonry,  in  reality  a  history
of  the  progress  of  architecture  from  the
earliest  ages.  In  the  older  manuscript
Constitutions  the  science  of  geometry,  as
well  as  architecture,  is  made  identical  with
Masonry;  so  that  he  who  would  rightly
understand  the  true  history  of  Freema¬
sonry  must  ever  bear  in  mind  the  distinc¬
tion  between  Geometry,  Architecture,  and
Masonry,  which  is  constantly  lost  sight  of
in  these  old  records.

Architecture,  Piece  of.  (Morgeau
d’ architecture.)  The  name  given  in  French
Lodges  to  the  minutes.

Archives.  This  word  means,  properly,
a  place  of  deposit  for  records;  but  it  means
also  the  records  themselves.  Hence  the
archives  of  a  Lodge  are  its  records  and
other  documents.  The  legend  in  the  second
degree,  that  the  pillars  of  the  Temple  were
made  hollow  to  contain  the  archives  of
Masonry,  is  simply  a  myth,  and  a  very
modern  one.

Archives,  Grand  Guardian  of

the.  An  officer  in  the  Grand  Council  of
Rites  of  Ireland  who  performs  the  duties
of  Secretary  General.

Archives,  Grand  Keeper  of  the.

An  officer  in  some  of  the  bodies  of  the  high
degrees  whose  duties  are  indicated  by  the
name.  In  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  he
is  called  Grand  Garde  des  timbres  et  Sceaux,
as  he  combines  the  duties  of  a  keeper  of
the  archives  and  a  keeper  of  the  seals.

Archiviste.  An  officer  in  French
Lodges  who  has  the  charge  of  the  archives.
The  Germans  call  him  Archivar.

Ardarcl.  A  word  in  the  high  degrees,
used  as  the  name  of  the  angel  of  fire.  It
is  a  distorted  form  of  Adariel,  the  splendor
of  God.

Arelim.  A  word  used  in  some  of  the
rituals  of  the  high  degrees.  It  is  found  in
Isaiah,  (xxxiii.  7,)  where  it  is  translated,
in  the  A.  V.,  “  valiant  ones,”  and  by  Lowth,
“  mighty  men.”  It  is  a  doubtful  word,  and
is  probably  formed  from  ariel,  the  lion  of
God.  D’Herbelot  says  that  Mohammed
called  his  uncle  Hamseh,  on  account  of
his  valor,  the  lion  of  God.  In  the  Kabba-
la,  Arelim  is  the  angelic  name  of  the  third
sephirah.

Areopagus.  The  third  apartment  in
a  Council  of  Kadosh  is  so  called.  It  rep¬
resents  a  tribunal,  and  the  name  is  derived
from  the  celebrated  court  of  Athens.

Aril li iuct ic.  That  science  which  is
engaged  in  considering  the  properties  and
powers  of  numbers,  and  which,  from  its
manifest  necessity  in  all  the  operations  of
weighing,  numbering,  and  measuring,  must


have  had  its  origin  in  the  remotest  ages  of
the  world.

In  the  lecture  of  the  degree  of  Grand
Master  Architect,  the  application  of  this
science  to  Freemasonry  is  made  to  consist
in  its  reminding  the  Mason  that  he  is  con¬
tinually  to  add  to  his  knowledge,  never  to
subtract  anything  from  the  character  of  his
neighbor,  to  multiply  his  benevolence  to  his
fellow-creatures,  and  to  divide  his  means
with  a  suffering  brother.

Ark.  In  the  ritual  of  the  American
Royal  Arch  degree  three  arks  are  referred
to:  1.  The  Ark  of  Safety,  or  of  Noah;  2.
The  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  or  of  Moses ;  3.
The  Substitute  Ark,  or  the  Ark  of  Zerub-
babel.  In  what  is  technically  called  “the
passing  of  the  veils,”  each  of  these  arks
has  its  commemorative  illustration,  and  in
the  order  in  which  they  have  been  named.
The  first  was  constructed  by  Shem,  Ham,
and  Japheth,  the  sons  of  Noah  ;  the  second
by  Moses,  Aholiab,  and  Bezaleel ;  and  the
third  was  discovered  by  Joshua,  Haggai,
and  Zerubbabel.

Ark.  and  Anchor.  See  Anchor  and
Ark.

Ark  and  I>ove.  An  illustrative  de¬
gree,  preparatory  to  the  Royal  Arch,  and
usually  conferred,  when  conferred  at  all,
immediately  before  the  solemn  ceremony
of  exaltation.  The  name  of  Noachite,
sometimes  given  to  it,  is  incorrect,  as  this
belongs  to  a  degree  in  the  Ancient  Scottish
Rite.  It  is  very  probable  that  the  degree,
which  now,  however,  has  lost  much  of
its  significance,  was  derived  from  a  much
older  one  called  the  Royal  Ark  Mariners,  to
which  the  reader  is  referred.  The  legend
and  symbolism  of  the  ark  and  dove  formed
an  important  part  of  the  spurious  Free¬
masonry  of  the  ancients.

Ark  Mariners.  See  Royal  Ark
Mariners.

Ark,  IVoali’s,  or  the  Ark  of  Safety,
constructed  by  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth,
under  the  superintendence  of  Noah,  and  in
it,  as  a  chosen  tabernacle  of  refuge,  the
patriarch’s  family  took  refuge.  It  has  been
called  by  many  commentators  a  tabernacle
of  Jehovah;  and  Dr.  Jarvis,  speaking  of  the
word  -iny,  ZoHaR,  which  has  been  trans¬
lated  window,  says  that,  in  all  other  pas¬
sages  of  Scripture  where  this  word  occurs,
it  signifies  the  meridian  light,  the  brightest
effulgence  of  day,  and  therefore  it  could
not  have  been  an  aperture,  but  a  source  of
light  itself.  He  supposes  it  therefore  to
have  been  the  divine  Shekinah,  or  Glory
of  Jehovah,  which  afterwards  dwelt  be¬
tween  the  cherubim  over  the  Ark  of  the
Covenant  in  the  tabernacle  and  the  temple.
Church  of  the  Redeemed,  I.,  20.

Ark  of  the  Covenant.  The  Ark


88


ARK


ARK


of  the  Covenant  or  of  the  Testimony  was  a
chest  originally  constructed  by  Moses  at
God’s  command,  (Exod.  xxv.  16,)  in  which
were  kept  the  two  tables  of  stone,  on  which
were  engraved  the  ten  commandments.  It
contained,  likewise,  a  golden  pot  filled  with
manna,  Aaron’s  rod,  and  the  tables  of  the
covenant.  It  was  at  first  deposited  in  the
most  sacred  place  of  the  tabernacle,  and
afterwards  placed  by  Solomon  in  the  Sanc¬
tum  Sanctorum  of  the  Temple,  and  was
lost  upon  the  destruction  of  that  building
by  the  Chaldeans.  The  later  history  of
this  ark  is  buried  in  obscurity.  It  is  sup¬
posed  that,  upon  the  destruction  of  the  first
Temple  by  the  Chaldeans,  it  was  carried  to
Babylon  among  the  other  sacred  utensils
which  became  the  spoil  of  the  conquerors.
But  of  its  subsequent  fate  all  traces  have
been  lost.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  it
was  not  brought  back  to  Jerusalem  by  Ze-
rubbabel.  The  Talmudists  say  that  there
were  five  things  which  were  the  glory  of
the  first  Temple  that  were  wanting  in  the
second ;  namely,  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,
the  Shekinah  or  Divine  Presence,  the
Urim  and  Thummim,  the  holy  fire  upon
the  altar,  and  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  The
Rev.  Salem  Towne,  it  is  true,  has  en¬
deavored  to  prove,  by  a  very  ingenious
argument,  that  the  original  Ark  of  the
Covenant  was  concealed  by  Josiah,  or  by
others,  at  some  time  previous  to  the  destruc¬
tion  of  Jerusalem,  and  that  it  was  after¬
wards,  at  the  building  of  the  second  Temple,
discovered  and  brought  to  light.  But  such
a  theory  is  entirely  at  variance  with  all  the
legends  of  the  degree  of  Select  Master  and
of  Royal  Arch  Masonry.  To  admit  it
would  lead  to  endless  confusion  and  con¬
tradictions  in  the  traditions  of  the  Order.
It  is,  besides,  in  conflict  with  the  opinions
of  the  Rabbinical  writers  and  every  He¬
brew  scholar.  Josephus  and  the  Rabbins
allege  that  in  the  second  Temple  the  Holy
of  Holies  was  empty,  or  contained  only  the
Stone  of  Foundation  which  marked  the
place  which  the  ark  should  have  occupied.

The  ark  was  made  of  shittim  wood,
overlaid,  within  and  without,  with  pure
gold.  It  was  about  three  feet  nine  inches
long,  two  feet  three  inches  wide,  and  of  the
same  extent  in  depth.  It  had  on  the  side
two  rings  of  gold,  through  which  were
placed  staves  of  shittim  wood,  by  which,
when  necessary,  it  was  borne  by  the  Levites.
Its  covering  was  of  pure  gold,  over  which
were  placed  two  figures  called  cherubim,
■with  expanded  wings.  The  covering  of  the
ark  was  called  kaphiret,  from  kaphar,  “  to
forgive  sin,”  and  hence  its  English  name  of
“  mercy-seat,”  as  being  the  place  where  the
intercession  for  sin  was  made.

The  researches  of  archaeologists  in  the


last  few  years  have  throtvn  much  light  on
the  Egyptian  mysteries.  Among  the  cere¬
monies  of  that  ancient  people  was  one
called  the  Procession  of  Shrines,  which  is
mentioned  in  the  Rosetta  stone,  and  de¬
picted  on  the  Temple  walls.  One  of  these
shrines  was  an  ark,  which  was  carried  in
procession  by  the  priests,  who  supported  it
on  their  shoulders  bv  staves  passing  through
metal  rings.  It  was  thus  brought  into  the
Temple  and  deposited  on  a  stand  or  altar,
that  the  ceremonies  prescribed  in  the  ritual
might  be  performed  before  it.  The  con¬
tents  of  these  arks  were  various,  but  always
of  a  mystical  character.  Sometimes  the  ark
would  contain  symbols  of  Life  and  Stabili¬
ty;  sometimes  the  sacred  beetle,  the  symbol
of  the  Sun  ;  and  there  was  always  a  repre¬
sentation  of  two  figures  of  the  goddess
Theme  or  Truth  and  Justice,  which  over¬
shadowed  the  ark  with  their  wings.  These
coincidences  of  the  Egyptian  and  Hebrew
arks  must  have  been  more  than  accidental.

Ark,  Substitute.  The  chest  or  coffer
which  constitutes  a  part  of  the  furniture,
and  is  used  in  the  ceremonies  of  a  Chapter
of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  and  in  a  Council
of  Select  Masters  according  to  the  Ameri¬
can  system,  is  called  by  Masons  the  Substi¬
tute  Ark,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  other
ark,  that  which  was  constructed  in  the
wilderness  under  the  direction  of  Moses,
and  which  is  known  as  the  Ark  of  the
Covenant.  This  the  Substitute  Ark  was
made  to  represent  under  circumstances  that
are  recorded  in  the  Masonic  traditions,  and
especially  in  those  of  the  Select  Degree.

The  ark  used  in  Royal  Arch  and  Cryptic
Masonry  in  this  country  is  generally  of
this  form  :


Prideaux,  on  the  authority  of  Lightfoot,
contends  that,  as  an  ark  was  indispensable
to  the  Israelitish  worship,  there  was  in  the
second  Temple  an  ark  which  had  been  ex¬
pressly  made  for  the  purpose  of  supplying
the  place  of  the  first  or  original  ark,  and
which,  without  possessing  any  of  its  pre¬
rogatives  or  honors,  was  of  precisely  the
same  shape  and  dimensions,  and  was  de¬
posited  in  the  same  place.  The  Masonic
legend,  whether  authentic  or  not,  is  simple
and  connected.  It  teaches  that  there  was
an  ark  in  the  second  Temple,  but  that  it
was  neither  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,
which  had  been  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  of
the  first  Temple,  nor  one  that  had  been  con-


ARK


ARMS


89


strncted  as  a  substitute  for  it  after  the
building  of  the  second  Temple.  It  was
that  ark  which  was  presented  to  us  in  the
Select  Master’s  degree,  and  which  being  an
exact  copy  of  the  Mosaical  ark,  and  in¬
tended  to  replace  it  in  case  of  its  loss,  is
best  known  to  Freemasons  as  the  Substitute
Ark.

Lightfoot  gives  these  Talmudic  legends,
in  his  Prospect  of  the  Temple,  in  the  follow¬
ing  language  :  “  It  is  fancied  by  the  Jews,
that  Solomon,  when  he  built  the  Temple,
foreseeing  that  the  Temple  should  be  de¬
stroyed,  caused  very  obscure  and  intricate
vaults  under  ground  to  be  made,  wherein
to  hide  the  ark  when  any  such  danger
came;  that  howsoever  it  went  with  the
Temple,  yet  the  ark,  which  was  the  very
life  of  the  Temple,  might  be  saved.  And
they  understand  that  passage  in  2  Chron.
xxxv.  3,  ‘  Josiah  said  unto  the  Levites,  Put
the  holy  ark  into  the  house  which  Solomon,
the  son  of  David,  did  build,’  etc.,  as  if
Josiah,  having  heard  by  the  reading  of
Moses’  manuscript,  and  by  Huldah’s  proph¬
ecy  of  the  danger  that  hung  over  Jerusa¬
lem,  commanded  to  convey  the  ark  into
this  vault,  that  it  might  be  secured;  and
with  it,  say  they,  they  laid  up  Aaron’s  rod,
the  pot  of  manna,  and  the  anointing  oil.
For  while  the  ark  stood  in  its  place  upon
the  stone  mentioned  — -  they  hold  that
Aaron’s  rod  and  the  pot  of  manna  stood
before  it;  but,  now,  were  all  conveyed  into
obscurity  —  and  the  stone  upon  which  the
ark  stood  lay  over  the  mouth  of  the  vault.
But  Rabbi  Solomon,  which  useth  not,
ordinarily,  to  forsake  such  traditions,  hath
given  a  more  serious  gloss  upon  the  place;
namely,  that  whereas  Manasseh  and  Amon
had  removed  the  ark  out  of  its  habitation,
and  set  up  images  and  abominations  there
of  their  own  —  Joshua  speaketh  to  the
priests  to  restore  it  to  its  place  again.
What  became  of  the  ark,  at  the  burning  of
the  temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  we  read
not;  it  is  most  likely  it  went  to  the  fire
also.  However  it  sped,  it  was  not  in  the
second  Temple;  and  is  one  of  the  five  choice
things  that  the  Jews  reckon  wanting  there.
Yet  they  had  an  ark  there  also  of  their  own
making,  as  they  had  a  breastplate  of  judg¬
ment;  which,  though  they  both  wanted
the  glory  of  the  former,  which  was  giving
of  oracles,  yet  did  they  stand  current  as  to
the  other  matters  of  their  worship,  as  the
former  breastplate  and  ark  had  done.”

The  idea  of  the  concealment  of  an  ark
and  its  accompanying  treasures  always  pre¬
vailed  in  the  Jewish  church.  The  account
given  by  the  Talmudists  is  undoubtedly
mythical ;  but  there  must,  as  certainly,  have
been  some  foundation  for  the  myth,  for
every  myth  has  a  substratum  of  truth.
'  M  ’


The  Masonic  tradition  differs  from  the  rab¬
binical,  but  is  in  every  way  more  reconcil¬
able  with  truth,  or  at  least  with  probability.
The  ark  constructed  by  Moses,  Aholiab,
and  Bezaleel  was  burnt  at  the  destruction
of  the  first  Temple ;  but  there  was  an  exact
representation  of  it  in  the  second.

Asdkite  Worship.  The  almost  uni¬
versal  prevalence  among  the  nations  of
antiquity  of  some  tradition  of  a  long  past
deluge,  gave  rise  to  certain  mythological
doctrines  and  religious  ceremonies,  to  which
has  been  given  the  name  of  arkite  wor¬
ship,  which  was  very  extensively  diffused.
The  evidence  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the
sacred  feeling  which  was  entertained  for
the  sacredness  of  high  mountains,  derived,
it  is  supposed,  from  recollections  of  an
Ararat,  and  from  the  presence  in  all  the
Mysteries  of  a  basket,  chest,  or  coffer,
whose  mystical  character  bore  apparently
a  reference  to  the  ark  of  Noah.  On  the
subject  of  this  arkite  worship,  Bryant,
Faber,  Higgins,  Banier,  and  many  other
writers,  have  made  learned  investigations,
which  may  be  consulted  with  advantage  by
the  Masonic  archaeologist.

Armenb iisolie.  The  poor-box;  the
name  given  by  German  Masons  to  the  box
in  which  collections  of  money  are  made  at
a  Table-Lodge  for  the  relief  of  poor  breth¬
ren  and  their  families.

Amies.  A  corrupted  form  of  Hermes,
found  in  the  Landsdowne  and  some  other
old  manuscripts.

Armiger.  1.  A  bearer  of  arms.  The
title  given  by  heralds  to  the  esquire  who
waited  on  a  knight.  2.  The  sixth  degree
of  the  Order  of  African  Architects.

Armory.  An  apartment  attached  to
the  asylum  of  a  Commandery  of  Knights
Templars,  in  which  the  swords  and  other
parts  of  the  costume  of  the  knights  are  de¬
posited  for  safe  keeping.

Arms  of  Masonry.  Stow  says
that  the  Masons  were  incorporated  as  a
company  in  the  twelfth  year  of  Henry  IV.,
1412.  Their  arms  were  granted  to  them,  in
1472,  by  William  Hawkesloe,  Clarenceux
King-at-Arms,  and  are  azure  on  a  chevron
between  three  castles  argent;  a  pair  of  com¬
passes  somewhat  extended,  of  the  first.
Crest  a  castle  of  the  second.  They  were
adopted,  subsequently,  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England.  The  Athol  Grand  Lodge
objected  to  this  as  an  unlawful  assumption
by  the  Modern  Grand  Lodge  of  Speculative
Freemasons  of  the  arms  of  the  Operative
Masons.  They  accordingly  adopted  another
coat,  which  Dermott  blazons  as  follows:
Quarterly  per  squares,  counterchanged  vert.
In  the  first  quarter,  azure,  a  lion  rampant,
or.  In  the  second  quarter,  or,  an  ox  passant
sable.  In  the  third  quarter,  or,  a  man  with


90


ARRAS


ASHE


hands  erect  proper,  robed  crimson  and
ermine.  In  the  fourth  quarter,  azure,  an
eagle  displayed  or.  Crest,  the  holy  ark  of  the
covenant  proper,  supported  by  cherubim.
Motto,  Kodes  la  Adonai,  that  is,  Holiness  to
the.  Lord.

These  arms  are  derived  from  the  “  tetrar-
chical”  (as Sir  Thos.  Browne  calls  them),  or
general  bannersofthe  four  principal  tribes:
for  it  is  said  that  the  twelve  tribes,  during
their  passage  through  the  wilderness,  were
encamped  in  a  hollow  square,  three  on  each
side,  as  follows:  Judah,  Zebulun,  and  Is-
sachar,  in  the  east,  under  the  general  ban¬
ner  of  Judah;  Dan,  Asher,  and  Naphtali,
in  the  north,  under  the  banner  of  Dan  ;
Ephraim,  Manasseli,  and  Benjamin,  in  the
west,  under  the  banner  of  Ephraim ;  and
Reuben,  Simeon,  and  Gad,  in  the  south,
under  Reuben.  See  Banners.

Arras,  Primordial  Chapter  of.
Arras  is  a  town  in  the  north-western  part
of  France,  where,  in  the  year  1747,  Charles
Edward  Stuart,  the  Pretender,  established
a  Sovereign  Primordial  and  Metropolitan
Chapter  ofRosicrucian  Freemasons.  Apor-
tion  of  the  charter  of  this  body  is  given  by
Ragon  in  his  Orthodoxie  Maqonique.  In
1853,  the  Count  de  Hamel,  prefect  of  the
department,  discovered  an  authentic  copy,
in  parchment,  of  this  document  bearing  the
date  of  April  15,  1747,  which  he  deposited
in  the  departmental  archives.  This  docu¬
ment  is  as  follows:

“  We,  Charles  Edward,  king  of  England,
France,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  and  as  such
Substitute  Grand  Master  of  the  Chapter  of
H.,  known  by  the  title  of  Knight  of  the
Eagle  and  Pelican,  and  since  our  sorrows
and  misfortunes  by  that  of  Rose  Croix,
wishing  to  testify  our  gratitude  to  the  Ma¬
sons  of  Artois,  and  the  officers  of  the  city
of  Arras,  for  the  numerous  marks  of  kind¬
ness  which  they  in  conjunction  with  the
officers  of  the  garrison  of  Arras  have  lav¬
ished  upon  us,  and  their  attachment  to  our
person,  shown  during  a  residence  of  six
months  in  that  city,

“  We  have  in  favor  of  them  created  and
erected,  and  do  create  and  erect  by  the
present  bull,  in  the  aforesaid  city  of  Arras,
a  Sovereign  Primordial  Chapter  of  Rose
Croix,  underjhe  distinctive  title  of  Scottish
Jacobite,  (Ecosse  Jacobite,)  to  be  ruled  and
governed  by  the  Knights  Lagneau  and
Robespierre;  Avocats  Hazard,  and  his  two
sons,  physicians ;  J.  B.  Lucet,  our  uphol¬
sterer,  and  Jerome  Cellier,  our  clock-maker,
giving  to  them  and  to  their  successors  the
power  not  only  to  make  knights,  but  even
to  create  a  Chapter  in  whatever  town  they
may  think  fit,  provided  that  two  Chapters
shall  not  be  created  in  the  same  town  how¬
ever  populous  it  may  be.


“And  that  credit  maybe  given  to  our
present  bull,  we  have  signed  it  with  our
hand  and  caused  to  be  affixed  thereunto  the
secret  seal,  and  countersigned  by  the  secre¬
tary  of  our  cabinet,  Thursday,  15th  of
the  second  month  of  the  year  of  the  incar¬
nation,  1747.

“Charles  Edward  Stuart.

“Countersigned,  Berkley.”

This  Chapter  created  a  few  others,  and
in  1780  established  one  in  Paris,  under  the
distinctive  title  of  Chapter  of  Arras,  in  the
valley  of  Paris.  It  united  itself  to  the
Grand  Orient  of  France  on  the  27th  De¬
cember,  1801.  It  was  declared  First  Suf¬
fragan  of  the  Scottish  Jacobite  Chapter,
with  the  right  to  constitute  otheis.  The
Chapter  established  at  Arras,  by  the  Pre¬
tender,  was  named  the  “Eagle  and  Peli¬
can,”  and  Oliver  ( Orig.  of  JR.  A.,  p.  22,)  from
this  seeks  to  find,  perhaps  justifiably,  a
connection  between  it  and  the  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.
of  the  Royal  Order  of  Scotland.

Arrest  of  Charter.  To  arrest  the
charter  of  a  Lodge  is  a  technical  phrase  by
which  is  meant  to  suspend  the  work  of  a
Lodge,  to  prevent  it  from  holding  its
usual  communications,  and  to  forbid  it  to
transact  any  business  or  to  do  any  work.
A  Grand  Master  cannot  revoke  the  warrant
of  a  Lodge;  but  if,  in  his  opinion,  the
good  of  Masonry  or  any  other  sufficient
cause  requires  it,  he  may  suspend  the  oper¬
ation  of  the  warrant  until  the  next  commu¬
nication  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  which  body
is  alone  competent  to  revise  or  approve  of
his  action.

Arthnsius.  Gotthardns.  A  learned

Dane,  Rector  of  the  Gymnasium  at  Frank-
fort-on-the-Main,  who  wrote  many  works
on  Rosicrucianism,  under  the  assumed
name  of  Irenseus  Agnostus.  See  Agnostus.

Art  Royal.  See  Boyal  Art.

Arts.  In  the  Masonic  phrase,  “arts,
parts,  and  points  of  the  Mysteries  of  Ma¬
sonry  ;”  arts  means  the  knowledge  or  things
made  known,  parts  the  degrees  into  which
Masonry  is  divided,  and  points  the  rules
and  usages.  See  Parts,  and  also  Points.

Arts,  liberal.  See  Liberal  Arts  and
!  Sciences.

Ascension  Ray.  Also  called  Holy
Thursday.  A  festival  of  the  Christian
church  held  in  commemoration  of  the  as¬
cension  of  our  Lord  forty  days  after  Easter.
It  is  celebrated  as  a  feast  day  by  Chapters
of  Rose  Croix.

Ashe,  R.  R..  Rev.  Jonathan.

A  literary  plagiarist  who  resided  in  Bristol,
England.  In  1813  he  published  The  Masonic
Manual;  or,  Lectures  on  Freemasonry.  Ashe
does  not,  it  is  true,  pretend  to  originality,
but  abstains  from  giving  credit  to  Hutch¬
inson,  from  whom  he  has  taken  at  least


ASHER


ASHMOLE


91


two-thirds  of  his  book.  In  1843  an  edi¬
tion  was  published  by  Spencer,  with  valua¬
ble  notes  by  Dr.  Oliver.

Aslicr,  Dr.  Carl  Wilhelm.  The

first  translator  into  German  of  the  Halli-
well  MS.,  which  he  published  at  Hamburg,
in  1842,  under  the  title  of  Aelteste  TJrkunde
der  Freimaurerei  in  England.  This  work
contains  both  the  original  English  docu¬
ment  and  the  German  translation.

Ashlar.  “Freestone  as  it  comes  out
of  the  quarry.”  —  Bailey.  In  Speculative
Masonry  we  adopt  the  ashlar  in  two  differ¬
ent  states,  as  symbols  in  the  Apprentice’s
degree.  The  Rough  Ashlar,  or  stone  in  its
rude  and  unpolished  condition,  is  emblem¬
atic  of  man  in  his  natural  state — ignorant,
uncultivated,  and  vicious.  But  when  edu¬
cation  has  exerted  its  wholesome  influence
in  expanding  his  intellect,  restraining  his
passions,  and  purifying  his  life,  he  then  is
represented  by  the  Perfect  Ashlar,  which,
under  the  skilful  hands  of  the  workmen,
has  been  smoothed,  and  squared,  and  fitted
for  its  place  in  the  building.  In  the  older
lectures  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  Per¬
fect  Ashlar  is  not  mentioned,  but  its  place
was  supplied  by  the  Broached  Thurnel.

Aslimole,  Elias.  A  celebrated  anti¬
quary,  and  the  author  of,  among  other
works,  the  w’ell-known  History  of  the  Order
of  the  Garter,  and  founder  of  the  Ashmo-
lean  Museum  at  Oxford.  He  was  born  at
Litchfield,  in  England,  on  the  23d  May,
1617,  and  died  at  London  on  the  18th  May,
1692.  He  was  made  a  Freemason  on  the
16th  October,  1646,  and  gives  the  follow¬
ing  account  of  his  reception  in  his  Diary,
p.  303.

“  1646.  October  16.  4  Hor.,  30  minutes
post  merid.,  I  was  made  a  Freemason  at
Warrington,  in  Lancashire,  with  Colonel
Henry  Main  waring,  of  Karticham,  in
Cheshire ;  the  names  of  them  who  were
then  at  the  Lodge,  Mr.  Richard  Penket
Warden,  Mr.  James  Collier,  Mr.  Richard
Sankev,  Henry  Littler,  John  Ellam,  and
Hugh  Brewer.”

In  another  place  he  speaks  of  his  being
admitted  into  the  Fellowship,  (Diary,  p.
362,)  for  thirty-six  years  afterwards  makes
the  following  entry :

“  1682.  March  10.  About  5  Hor.,  post
merid.,  I  received  a  summons  to  appear  at
a  Lodge  to  be  held  the  next  day  at  Masons’
Hall,  in  London.

“11.  Accordingly,  I  went,  and  about
noon  was  admitted  into  the  Fellowship  of
Freemasons,  by  Sir  William  Wilson,  knight,
Capt.  Richard  Borthwick,  Mr.  William
Wodman,  Mr.  William  Wife.

“  I  was  the  senior  fellow  among  them,
(it  being  thirty-five  years  since  I  was  ad¬
mitted  ;)  there  was  present  besides  myself


the  fellows  afternamed :  Mr.  Thomas  Wife,
Master  of  the  Masons’  company  this  pres¬
ent  year ;  Mr.  Thomas  Shorthofe,  Mr.

Thomas  Shadbolt,  -  Waidsford,  Esq.,

Mr.  Nicholas  Young,  Mr.  John  Shorthofe,
Mr.  William  Hamon,  Mr.  John  Thompson,
and  Mr.  William  Stanton.  We  all  dined  at
the  Half-Moon-Tavern  in  Cheapside,  at  a
noble  dinner  prepared  at  the  charge  of  the
new  Accepted  Masons.”

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  intention
expressed  by  Ashmole  to  write  a  history  of
Freemasonry  was  never  carried  into  effect.
His  .laborious  research  as  evinced  in  his
exhaustive  work  on  the  Order  of  the  Garter,
would  lead  us  to  have  expected  from  his
antiquarian  pen  a  record  of  the  origin  and
early  progress  of  our  Institution  more  val¬
uable  than  any  that  we  now  possess.  The
following  remarks  on  this  subject,  con¬
tained  in  a  letter  from  Dr.  Knipe,  of  Christ
Church,  Oxford,  to  the  publisher  of  Ash-
mole’s  Life,  while  it  enables  us  to  form
some  estimate  of  the  loss  that  Masonic
literature  has  suffered,  supplies  interesting
particulars  which  are  worthy  of  preserva¬
tion.

“  As  to  the  ancient  society  of  Freemasons,
concerning  whom  you  are  desirous  of  know¬
ing  what  may  be  known  with  certainty,  I
shall  only  tell  you,  that  if  our  worthy
Brother,  E.  Ashmole,  Esq.,  had  executed
his  intended  design,  our  Fraternity  had
been  as  much  obliged  to  him  as  the  Breth¬
ren  of  the  most  noble  Order  of  the  Garter.
I  would  not  have  you  surprised  at  this  ex¬
pression,  or  think  it  all  too  assuming.  The
sovereigns  of  that  Order  have  not  disdained
our  fellowship,  and  there  have  been  times
when  emperors  were  also  Freemasons.
What  from  Mr.  E.  Ashmole’s  collection  I
could  gather  was,  that  the  report  of  our
society’s  taking  rise  from  a  bull  granted  by
the  Pope,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  III.,  to
some  Italian  architects  to  travel  over  all
Europe,  to  erect  chapels,  was  ill-founded.
Such  a  bull  there  was,  and  those  architects
were  Masons ;  but  this  bull,  in  the  opinion
of  the  learned  Mr.  Ashmole,  was  confirma¬
tive  only,  and  did  not  by  any  means  create
our  Fraternity,  or  even  establish  them  in
this  kingdom.  But  as  to  the  time  and
manner  of  that  establishment,  something  I
shall  relate  from  the  same  collections.  St.
Alban  the  Proto-Martyr  of  England,  estab¬
lished  Masonry  here ;  and  from  his  time  it
flourished  more  or  less,  according  as  the
world  went,  down  to  the  days  of  King
Athelstan,  who,  for  the  sake  of  his  brother
Edwin,  granted  the  Masons  a  charter  un¬
der  our  Norman  princes.  They  frequently
received  extraordinary  marks  of  royal  fa¬
vor.  There  is  no  doubt  to  be  made,  that
the  skill  of  Masons,  which  was  always


92


ASIA


ASSASSINS


transcendent,  even  in  the  most  barbarous
times, — their  wonderful  kindness  and  at¬
tachment  to  each  other,  how  different  so¬
ever  in  condition,  and  their  inviolable
fidelity  in  keeping  religiously  their  secret, —
must  expose  them  in  ignorant,  troublesome,
and  suspicious  times  to  a  vast  variety  of
adventures,  according  to  the  different  fate
of  parties  and  other  alterations  in  govern¬
ment.  By  the  way,  I  shall  note  that  the
Masons  were  always  loyal,  which  exposed
them  to  great  severities  when  power  wore
the  trappings  of  justice,  and  those  who
committed  treason  punished  true  men  as
traitors.  Thus,  in  the  third  year  of  the
reign  of  Henry  VI.,  an  act  of  Parliament
was  passed  to  abolish  the  society  of  Masons,
and  to  hinder,  under  grievous  penalties,  the
holding  Chapters,  Lodges,  or  other  regular
assemblies.  Yet  this  act  was  afterwards
repealed,  and  even  before  that,  King  Henry
VI.,  and  several  of  the  principal  lords  of  his
court,  became  fellows  of  the  Craft.”

Asia,  Initiated  Knights  and
Brothei'S  of.  This  Order  was  intro¬
duced  in  Berlin,  or,  as  some  say,  in  Vienna,
in  the  year  1780,  by  a  schism  of  several
members  of  the  German  Bose  Croix.  They
adopted  a  mixture  of  Christian,  Jewish,
and  Mohammedan  ceremonies,  to  indicate,
as  Ragon  supposes,  their  entire  religious
tolerance.  Their  object  was  the  study  of
the  natural  sciences  and  the  search  for  the
universal  panacea  to  prolong  life.  Thory
charges  them  with  this;  but  may  it  not
have  been,  as  with  the  Alchemists,  merely
a  symbol  of  immortality?  They  forbade
all  inquiries  into  the  art  of  transmutation
of  metals.  The  Grand  Synedrion,  properly
the  Grand  Sanhedrim,  which  consisted  of
seventy-two  members  and  was  the  head  of
the  Order,  had  its  seat  at  Vienna.  The
Order  was  founded  on  the  three  symbolic
degrees,  and  attached  to  them  nine  others,
as  follows:  4.  Seekers;  5.  Sufferers;  6.  Ini¬
tiated  Knights  and  Brothers  of  Asia  in
Europe;  7.  Masters  and  Sages;  8.  Royal
Priests,  or  True  Brothers  of  Rose  Croix ;
9.  Melchizedek.  The  Order  no  longer
exists.  Many  details  of  it  will  be  found
in  Luchet’s  Essai  sur  les  Illumines.

Asia,  Perfect  Initiates  of.  A
rite  of  very  little  importance,  consisting
of  seven  degrees,  and  said  to  have  been
invented  at  Lyons.  A  very  voluminous
manuscript,  translated  from  the  German,
was  sold  at  Paris,  in  1821,  to  M.  Bailleul,
and  came  into  the  possession  of  Ragon,
who  reduced  its  size,  and,  with  the  assist¬
ance  of  Des  Etangs,  modified  it.  I  have
no  knowledge  that  it  was  ever  worked.

Ask,  Seek,  Knock.  In  referring
to  the  passage  of  Matthew  vii.  7,  “  Ask,
and  it  shall  be  given  you ;  seek,  and  you


shall  find;  knock,  and  it  shall  he  opened
unto  you.”  Dr.  Clarke  says:  “These  three
words  —  ask ,  seek,  knock  —  include  the  ideas
of  want,  loss,  and  earnestness .”  The  appli¬
cation  made  to  the  passage  theologically  is
equally  appropriate  to  it  in  a  Masonic
Lodge.  You  ask  for  acceptance,  you  seek  for
light,  you  knock  for  initiation ,  which  in¬
cludes  the  other  two.

Aspirant.  One  who  eagerly  seeks  to
know  or  to  attain  something.  Thus,  War-
burton  speaks  of  “  the  aspirant  to  the  Mys¬
teries.”  It  is  applied  also  to  one  about  to
be  initiated  into  Masonry.  There  seems,
however,  to  be  a  shade  of  difference  in
meaning  between  the  words  candidate  and
aspirant.  The  candidate  is  one  who  asks
for  admission ;  and  the  term,  from  Can¬
didas,  white,  refers  to  the  purity  of  charac¬
ter  required.  The  aspirant  is  one  already
elected  and  in  process  of  initiation,  and
coming  from  aspiro,  to  seek  eagerly,  refers
to  the  earnestness  with  which  he  prosecutes
his  search  for  light  and  truth.

Assassins.  The  Islimaelians  or  Assas¬
sins  constituted  a  sect  or  confraternity,
which  was  founded  by  Hassan  Sabah,  about
the  year  1090,  in  Persia.  The  name  is  de¬
rived,  it  is  supposed,  from  their  immoderate
use  of  the  plant  haschish,  or  henbane,
which  produced  a  delirious  frenzy.  The
title  given  to  the  chief  of  the  Order  was
Sheik/i-el-Jebel,  which  has  been  translated
the  “Old  Man  of  the  Mountain,”  but  which
Higgins  has  shown  (Anacal.,  i.  700,)  to  mean
literally,  “  The  Sage  of  the  Kabbala  or  Tra¬
ditions.”  Von  Hammer  has  written  a  His¬
tory  of  the  Assassins,  but  his  opposition  to
secret  societies  has  led  him  to  speak  with  so
much  prejudice  that,  although  his  historical
statements  are  interesting,  his  philosophical
deductions  have  to  be  taken  with  many
grains  of  allowance.  Godfrey  Higgins  has
probably  erred  on  the  other  side,  and  by  a
too  ready  adherence  to  a  preconceived  the¬
ory  has,  in  his  Anaca/ypsis,  confounded
them  with  the  Templars,  whom  he  consid¬
ers  as  the  precursors  of  the  Freemasons.
In  this,  as  in  most  things,  the  middle  course
appears  to  be  the  most  truthful.

The  Assassins  were  a  secret  society,  that
is  to  say,  they  had  a  secret  esoteric  doc¬
trine,  which  was  imparted  only  to  the  ini¬
tiated.  Hammer  says  that  they  had  a
graduated  series  of  initiations,  the  names
of  which  he  gives  as  Apprentices,  Fellows,
and  Masters ;  they  had,  too,  an  oath  of
passive  obedience,  and  resembled,  he  as¬
serts,  in  many  respects,  the  secret  societies
that  subsequently  existed  in  Europe.  They
were  governed  by  a  Grand  Master  and
Priors,  and  had  regulations  and  a  special
religious  code,  in  all  of  which  Von  Ham¬
mer  finds  a  close  resemblance  to  the  Tem-


ASSASSINS


ASSEMBLY


93


plars,  the  Hospitallers,  and  the  Teutonic
Knights.  Between  the  Assassins  and  the
Templars  history  records  that  there  were
several  amicable  transactions  not  at  all
consistent  with  the  religious  vows  of  the
latter  and  the  supposed  religious  faith  of
the  former,  and  striking  coincidences  of
feeling,  of  which  Higgins  has  not  been
slow  to  avail  himself  in  his  attempt  to
prove  the  close  connection,  if  not  absolute
identity,  of  the  two  Orders.  It  is.  most
probable,  as  Sir  John  Malcolm  contends,
that  they  were  a  race  of  Softs,  the  teachers
of  the  secret  doctrine  of  Mohammed.  Von
Hammer  admits  that  they  produced  a  great
number  of  treatises  on  mathematics  and
jurisprudence;  and,  forgetting  for  a  time
his  bigotry  and  his  prejudice,  he  attributes
to  Hassan,  their  founder,  a  profound  knowl¬
edge  of  philosophy  and  mathematical  and
metaphysical  sciences,  and  an  enlightened
spirit,  under  whose  influence  the  civiliza¬
tion  of  Persia  attained  a  high  degree;  so
that  during  his  reign  of  forty-six  years  the
Persian  literature  attained  a  point  of  excel¬
lence  beyond  that  of  Alexandria  under  the
Ptolemies,  and  of  France  under  Francis  I.
The  old  belief  that  they  were  a  confederacy
of  murderers  —  whence  we  have  taken  our
English  word  assassins  —  must  now  be  aban¬
doned  as  a  figment  of  the  credulity  of  past
centuries,  and  we  must  be  content  to  look
upon  them  as  a  secret  society  of  philoso¬
phers,  whose  political  relations,  however,
merged  them  into  a  dynasty.  If  we  inter¬
pret  Freemasonry  as  a  generic  term,  signi¬
fying  a  philosophic  sect  which  teaches
truth  by  a  mystical  initiation  and  secret
symbols,  then  Higgins  was  not  very  far  in
error  in  calling  them  the  Freemasons  of
the  East.

Assassins  of  the  Third  Degree.

There  is  iu  Freemasonry  a  legend  of  cer¬
tain  unworthy  Craftsmen  who  entered  into
a  conspiracy  to  extort  from  a  distinguished
brother  a  secret  of  which  he  was  the  pos¬
sessor.  The  legend  is  altogether  symbolic,
and  when  its  symbolism  is  truly  compre¬
hended,  becomes  surpassingly  beautiful.
By  those  who  look  at  it  as  having  the  pre¬
tension  of  an  historical  fact,  it  is  sometimes
treated  with  indifference,  and  sometimes
considered  an  absurdity.  But  it  is  not  thus
that  the  legends  and  symbols  of  Masonry
must  be  read,  if  we  would  learn  their  true
spirit.  To  behold  the  goddess  in  all  her
glorious  beauty,  the  veil  that  conceals  her
statue  must  be  withdrawn.  Masonic  writers
who  have  sought  to  interpret  the  symbolism
of  the  legend  of  the  conspiracy  of  the  three
assassins,  have  not  agreed  always  in  the  in¬
terpretation,  although  they  have  finally  ar¬
rived  at  the  same  result,  namely,  that  it  has
a  spiritual  signification.  Those  who  trace  I


Speculative  Masonry  to  the  ancient  solar
worship,  of  whom  Ragon  may  be  con¬
sidered  as  the  exponent,  find  in  this  legend
a  symbol  of  the  conspiracy  of  the  three
winter  months  to  destroy  the  life-giving
heat  of  the  sun.  Those  who,  like  the  dis¬
ciples  of  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance,  trace
Masonry  to  a  Templar  origin,  explain  the
legend  as  referring  to  the  conspiracy  of  the
three  renegade  knights  who  falsely  accused
the  Order,  and  thus  aided  King  Philip  and
Pope  Clement  to  abolish  Templarism,  and
to  slay  its  Grand  Master.  Hutchinson  and
Oliver,  who  labored  to  give  a  Christian  in¬
terpretation  to  all  the  symbols  of  Masonry,
referred  the  legend  to  the  crucifixion  of  the
Messiah,  the  type  of  which  is,  of  course,
the  slaying  of  Abel  by  his  brother  Cain.
Others,  of  whom  the  Chevalier  Ramsay  was
the  leader,  sought  to  give  it  a  political  sig¬
nificance  ;  and,  making  Charles  the  First
the  type  of  the  Builder,  symbolized  Crom¬
well  and  his  adherents  as  the  conspirators.
The  Masonic  scholars  whose  aim  has  been
to  identify  the  modern  system  of  Free¬
masonry  with  the  Ancient  Mysteries,
and  especially  with  the  Egyptian,  which
they  supposed  to  be  the  germ  of  all  the
others,  interpret  the  conspirators  as  the
symbol  of  the  Evil  Principle,  or  Typhon,
slaying  the  Good  Principle,  or  Osiris;  or,
when  they  refer  to  the  Zoroastic  Mysteries
of  Persia,  as  Ahriman  contending  against
Ormuzd.  And  lastly,  in  the  Philosophic
degrees,  the  myth  is  interpreted  as  signify¬
ing  the  war  of  Falsehood,  Ignorance,  and
Superstition  against  Truth.  Of  the  sup¬
posed  names  of  the  three  Assassins,  there  is
hardly  any  end  of  variations,  for  they  ma¬
terially  differ  in  all  the  principal  Rites.
Thus,  we  have  the  three  JJJ.  in  the  York
and  American  Rites.  In  the  Adonhiramite
system  we  have  Romvel,  Gravelot,  and
Abiram.  In  the  Scottish  Rite  we  find  the
names  given  in  the  old  rituals  as  Jubelum
Akirop,  sometimes  Abiram,  Jubelo  Romvel,
and  Jubela  Gravelot.  Schterke  and  Oter-
fut  are  in  some  of  the  German  rituals,
while  other  Scottish  rituals  have  Abiram,
Romvel,  and  Hobhen.  In  all  these  names
there  is  manifest  corruption,  and  the  patience
of  many  Masonic  scholars  has  been  well-
nigh  exhausted  in  seeking  for  some  plausi¬
ble  and  satisfactory  derivation.

Assembly.  The  meetings  of  the
Craft  during  the  operative  period  in  the
Middle  Ages,  were  called  “  assemblies,”
which  appear  to  have  been  tantamount  to
the  modern  Lodges,  and  they  are  constantly
spoken  of  in  the  Old  Constitutions.  The
word  assembly  was  also  often  used  in  these
documents  to  indicate  a  larger  meeting  of
the  whole  Craft,  and  which  was  equivalent
I  to  the  modern  Grand  Lodge,  which  was


94


ASSISTANCE


ATELIER


held  annually.  The  York  MS.,  about  the
year  1600,  says,  “that  King  Athelstan  gave
the  Masons  a  charter  and  commission  to
hold  every  year  an  assembly  wheresoever
they  would  in  the  realm  of  England,”  and
this  statement,  whether  true  or  false,  is  re¬
peated  in  all  the  old  records.  Preston
says,  speaking  of  that  mediaeval  period,
that  “  a  sufficient  number  of  Masons  met
together  within  a  certain  district,  with  the
consent  of  the  sheriff  or  chief  magistrate
of  the  place,  were  empowered  at  this  time
to  make  Masons,”  etc.  To  this  assembly,
every  Mason  was  bound,  when  summoned,
to  appear.  Thus,  in  the  Harleian  MS.,
1650,  it  is  ordained  that  “  every  Master
and  Fellow  come  to  the  Assembly,  if  it  be
within  five  miles  about  him,  if  he  have  any
warning.”  The  term,  “  General  Assembly,”
to  indicate  the  annual  meeting,  is  first  used
in  the  MS.  of  1663,  as  quoted  by  Preston.
In  the  Old  Constitutions,  printed  in  1722
by  Roberts,  and  which  claims  to  be  taken
from  a  MS.  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the
term  used  is  “  Yearly  Assembly.”  An¬
derson  speaks  of  an  Old  Constitution
which  used  the  word  “  General ;  ”  but  his
quotations  are  not  always  verbally  accu¬
rate.

Assistance.  See  Aid  and  Assistance.
Associates  of  the  Temple.  Dur¬
ing  the  Middle  Ages,  many  persons  of  rank,
who  were  desirous  of  participating  in  the
spiritual  advantages  supposed  to  be  enjoyed
by  the  Templars  in  consequence  of  the  good
works  done  by  the  Fraternity,  but  who
were  unwilling  to  submit  to  the  discipline
of  the  brethren,  made  valuable  donations
to  the  Order,  and  were,  in  consequence,  ad¬
mitted  into  a  sort  of  spiritual  connection
with  it.  These  persons  were  termed  “As¬
sociates  of  the  Temple.”  The  custom  was
most  probably  confined  to  England,  and
many  “of  these  Associates”  had  monu¬
ments  and  effigies  erected  to  them  in  the
Temple  Church  at  London.

Association.  Although  an  associa¬
tion  is  properly  the  union  of  men  into  a
society  for  a  common  purpose,  the  word  is
scarcely  ever  applied  to  the  Order  of  Free¬
masonry.  Yet  its  employment,  although  un¬
usual,  would  not  be  incorrect,  for  Freemason¬
ry  is  an  association  of  men  for  a  common  pur¬
pose.  Washington  uses  the  term  when  he
calls  Freemasonry  “an  association  whose
rinciples  lead  to  purity  of  morals,  and  are
eneficial  of  action.”  Letter  to  G.  L.  of
So.  Ca.

Astrrca.  The  Grand  Lodge  established
in  Russia,  on  the  30th  August,  1815,  as¬
sumed  the  title  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Astraea.  It  held  its  Grand  East  at  St.
Petersburg,  and  continued  in  existence
until  1822.


Astronomy.  The  science  which  in¬
structs  us  in  the  laws  that  govern  the
heavenly  bodies.  Its  origin  is  lost  in  the
mists  of  antiquity  ;  for  the  earliest  inhabi¬
tants  of  the  earth  must  have  been  attracted
by  the  splendor  of  the  glorious  firmament
above  them,  and  would  nave  sought  in  the
motions  of  its  luminaries  for  the  readiest
and  most  certain  method  of  measuring  time.
With  astronomy  the  system  of  Free¬
masonry  is  intimately  connected.  From
that  science  many  of  our  most  significant
emblems  are  borrowed.  The  Lodge  itself
is  a  representation  of  the  world ;  it  is
adorned  with  the  images  of  the  sun  and
moon,  whose  regularity  and  precision  fur¬
nish  a  lesson  of  wisdom  and  prudence ;  its
pillars  of  strength  and  establishment  have
been  compared  to  the  two  columns  which
the  ancients  placed  at  the  equinoctial
points  as  supporters  of  the  arch  of  heaven  ;
the  blazing  star,  which  was  among  the
Egyptians  a  symbol  of  Anubis,  or  the  dog-
star,  whose  rising  foretold  the  overflowing
of  the  Nile,  shines  in  the  east;  while
the  clouded  canopy  is  decorated  with  the
beautiful  Pleiades.  The  connection  be¬
tween  our  Order  and  astronomy  is  still
more  manifest  in  the  spurious  Freemasonry
of  antiquity,  where,  the  pure  principles  of
our  system  being  lost,  the  symbolic  instruc¬
tion  of  the  heavenly  bodies  gave  place  to
the  corrupt  Sabean  worship  of  the  sun,
and  moon,  and  stars  —  a  worship  whose  in¬
fluences  are  seen  in  all  the  mysteries  of
Paganism.

Asylum.  During  the  session  of  a
Commandery  of  Knights  Templars,  a  part
of  the  room  is  called  the  asylum;  the  word
has  hence  been  adopted,  by  the  figure  sy¬
necdoche,  to  signify  the  place  of  meeting  of
a  Commandery.

Asylum  for  Aged  Freemasons.

The  Asylum  for  Worthy,  Aged  and  Decayed
Freemasons  is  a  magnificent  edifice  at
Croydon  in  Surrey,  England.  The  charity
was  established  by  Dr.  Crucefix,  after  six¬
teen  years  of  herculean  toil,  such  as  few
men  but  himself  could  have  sustained.  He
did  not  live  to  see  it  in  full  operation,  but
breathed  his  last  at  the  very  time  when  the
cope-stone  was  placed  on  the  building.
Since  the  death  of  Dr.  Crucefix,  it  has  been
amalgamated  with  the  Provident  Annuity
and  Benevolent  Association  of  the  Grand
Lodge.

Atelier.  The  French  thus  call  the
place  where  the  Lodge  meets  or  the  Lodge
room.  The  word  signifies  a  workshop  or
place  where  several  workmen  are  assembled
under  the  same  master.  The  word  is  ap¬
plied  in  French  Masonry  not  only  to  the
place  of  meeting  of  a  Lodge,  but  also  to
that  of  a  Chapter,  Council,  or  any  other


ATHEIST


AUDITOR


95


Masonic  body.  Bazot  says  [Man.  Mngon ,
65,)  that  atelier  is  more  particularly  applied
to  the  table -Lodge,  or  Lodge  when  at
banquet,  but  that  the  word  is  also  used  to
designate  any  reunion  of  the  Lodge.

Atheist.  Oue  who  does  not  believe
in  the  existence  of  God.  Such  a  creed  can
only  arise  from  the  ignorance  of  stupidity
or  a  corruption  of  principle,  since  the
whole  universe  is  filled  with  the  moral  and
physical  proofs  of  a  Creator.  He  who
does  not  look  to  a  superior  and  superin¬
tending  power  as  his  maker  and  his  judge,
is  without  that  coercive  principle  of  salu¬
tary  fear  which  should  prompt  him  to  do
good  and  to  eschew  evil,  and  his  oath  can,
of  necessity,  be  no  stronger  than  his  word.
Masons,  looking  to  the  dangerous  tendency
of  such  a  tenet,  have  wisely  discouraged  it,
by  declaring  that  no  atheist  can  be  admitted
to  participate  in  their  Fraternity;  and  the
better  to  carry  this  law  into  effect,  every
candidate,  before  passing  through  any  of
the  ceremonies  of  initiation,  is  required,
publicly  aud  solemnly,  to  declare  his  trust
in  God.

Athelstan.  The  grandson  of  the
great  Alfred  ascended  the  throne  of  Eng¬
land  in  924,  and  died  in  940.  The  Old  Con¬
stitutions  describe  him  as  a  great  patron  of
Masonry.  Thus,  one  of  them,  the  Roberts
MS.,  printed  in  1722,  and  claiming  to  be  five
hundred  years  old,  says:  “He  began  to
build  many  Abbies,  Monasteries,  and  other
religious  houses,  as  also  castles  and  divers
Fortresses  for  defence  of  his  realm.  He
loved  Masons  more  than  his  father;  he
greatly  study’d  Geometry ,  and  sent  into
many  lands  for  men  expert  in  the  science.
He  gave  them  a  very  large  charter  to  hold
a  yearly  assembly,  and  power  to  correct
offenders  in  the  said  science;  and  the  king
himself  caused  a  General  Assembly  of  all
Masons  in  his  realm,  at  York,  and  there
were  made  many  Masons,  and  gave  them  a
deep  charge  for  observation  of  all  such
articles  as  belonged  unto  Masonry,  and  de¬
livered  them  the  said  Charter  to  keep.”

Athol  Masons.  The  Duke  of  Athol
having  been  elected  Grand  Master  by  the
schismatic  Grand  Lodge  in  London,  which
was  known  as  the  “  Ancients,”  an  office
held  in  his  family  until  1813,  the  body  has
been  commonly  styled  the  “  Athol  Grand
Lodge,”  and  those  who  adhered  to  it
“  Athol  Masons.”  See  Ancient  Masons.

Attendance.  See  Absence.

Attoiiclicmcnt.  The  name  given  by
the  French  Masons  to  what  the  English
call  the  grip.

Attributes.  The  collar  and  jewel
appropriate  to  an  officer  are  called  his  at¬
tributes.  The  working  tools  and  imple¬
ments  of  Masonry  are  also  called  its  attri¬


butes.  The  word  in  these  senses  is  much
more  used  by  French  than  by  English  Ma¬
sons.

Atwood,  Henry  C.  At  one  time  of
considerable  notoriety  in  the  Masonic  his¬
tory  of  New  York.  He  was  born  in  Con¬
necticut  about  the  beginning  of  the  present
century,  and  removed  to  the  city  of  New
York  about  1825,  in  which  year  he  organ¬
ized  a  Lodge  for  the  purpose  of  introduc¬
ing  the  system  taught  by  Jeremy  L.  Cross,
of  whom  Atwood  was  a  pupil.  This  system
met  with  great  opposition  from  some  of  the
most  distinguished  Masons  of  the  State,
who  favored  the  ancient  ritual,  which  had
existed  before  the  system  of  Webb,  from
whom  Cross  received  his  lectures,  had  been
invented.  Atwood,  by  great  smartness  and
untiring  energy,  succeeded  in  making  the
system  which  he  taught  eventually  popu¬
lar.  He  took  great  interest  in  Masonry,
and  being  intellectually  clever,  although
not  learned,  he  collected  a  great  number  of
admirers,  while  the  tenacity  with  which
he  maintained  his  opinions,  however  un¬
popular  they  might  be,  secured  for  him  as
many  enemies.  He  was  greatly  instru¬
mental  in  establishing,  in  1837,  the  schis¬
matic  body  known  as  the  St.  John’s  Grand
Lodge,  and  was  its  Grand  Master  at  the
time  of  its  union,  in  1850,  with  the  legiti¬
mate  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York.  Atwood
edited  a  small  Masonic  periodical  called
The  Sentinel,  which  was  remarkable  for  the
virulent  and  unmasonic  tone  of  its  articles.
He  was  also  the  author  of  a  Masonic  Moni¬
tor  of  some  pretensions.  He  died  in  1860.

Atys.  The  Mysteries  of  Atys  in  Phry¬
gia,  aud  those  of  Cybele  his  mistress,  like
their  worship,  much  resembled  those  of
Adonis  and  Bacchus,  Osiris  and  Isis.  Their
Asiatic  origin  is  universally  admitted,  and
was  with  great  plausibility  claimed  by
Phrygia,  which  contested  the  palm  of  anti¬
quity  with  Egypt.  They,  more  than  any
other  people,  mingled  allegory  with  their
religious  worship,  and  were  great  inventors
of  fables ;  and  their  sacred  traditions  as  to
Cybele  and  Atys,  whom  all  admit  to  be
Phrygian  gods,  were  very  various.  In  all,
as  we  learn  from  Julius  Firmicus,  they
represented  by  allegory  the  phenomena  of
nature,  and  the  succession  of  physical  facts
under  the  veil  of  a  marvellous  history.

Their  feasts  occurred  at  the  equinoxes,
commencing  with  lamentation,  mourning,
groans,  and  pitiful  cries  for  tbe  death  of
Atys,  and  ending  with  rejoicings  at  his
restoration  to  life.

Auditor.  An  officer  in  the  Supreme
Council  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite
for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United
States.  His  duty  is,  with  the  Committee
on  Finance,  to  examine  aud  report  on  the


96


AUFSEHER


AUSTRIA


account  of  the  Inspector  and  other  officers.
This  duty  of  auditing  the  accounts  of  the
Secretary  and  Treasurer  is  generally  in¬
trusted,  in  Masonic  bodies,  to  a  special  com¬
mittee  appointed  for  the  purpose.  In  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  the  auditing
committee  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers
for  the  year,  and  twenty-four  Masters  of
Lodges  in  the  London  district,  taken  by
rotation.

Aufselier.  The  German  name  for  the
Warden  of  a  Lodge.  The  Senior  Warden
is  called  Erste  Aufseher,  and  the  Junior
Warden,  Zweite  Aufselier.  The  word  liter¬
ally  means  an  overseer.  Its  Masonic  appli¬
cation  is  technical.

Augustine,  St.  See  Saint  Augus¬
tine.

Alim.  A  mystic  syllable  among  the
Hindus,  signifying  the  Supreme  God  of
Gods,  which  the  Brahmans,  from  its  awful
and  sacred  meaning,  hesitate  to  pronounce
aloud,  and  in  doing  so  place  one  of  their
hands  before  the  mouth  so  as  to  deaden  the
sound.  This  tri-literal  name  of  God,  which
is  as  sacred  among  the  Hindus  as  the  Te-
tragrainmatam  is  among  the  Jews,  is  com¬
posed  of  three  Sanskrit  letters,  sounding
AUM.  The  first  letter,  A,  stands  for  the
Creator ;  the  second,  U,  for  the  Preserver ;
and  the  third,  M,  for  the  Destroyer,  or
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva.  Benfey,  in  his
Sanskrit  -  English  Dictionary,  defines  the
word  as  “a  particle  of  reminiscence;”  and
this  may  explain  the  Brahmanical  say¬
ing,  that  a  Brahman  beginning  or  ending
the  reading  of  a  part  of  the  Veda  or  Sacred
Books,  must  always  pronounce,  to  himself,
the  syllable  AUM ;  for  unless  that  syllable
precede,  his  learning  will  slip  away  from
him,  and  unless  it  follow,  nothing  will  be
long  retained.  An  old  passage  in  the
Parana  says,  “All  the  rites  ordained  in
the  Vedas,  the  sacrifices  to  fire,  and  all
sacred  purifications,  shall  pass  away,  but
the  word  AUM  shall  never  pass  away,  for
it  is  the  symbol  of  the  Lord  of  all  things.”
The  word  has  been  indifferently  spelled,
O’M,  AOM,  and  AUM ;  but  the  last  is  evi¬
dently  the  most  proper,  as  the  second  letter
is  OO  =  U  in  the  Sanskrit  alphabet.

Aumont.  Said  to  have  been  the  suc¬
cessor  of  Molay  as  Grand  Master,  and
hence  called  the  Restorer  of  the  Order  of
the  Templars.  There  is  a  tradition,  alto¬
gether  fabulous,  however,  which  states  that
he,  with  seven  other  Templars,  fled,  after
the  dissolution  of  the  Order,  into  Scotland,
disguised  as  Operative  Masons,  and  there
secretly  and  under  another  name  founded
a  new  Order;  and  to  preserve  as  much  as
possible  the  ancient  name  of  Templars,  as
well  as  to  retain  the  remembrance  of  the
clothing  of  Masons,  in  which  disguise  they  j


had  fled,  they  chose  the  name  of  Free¬
masons,  and  thus  founded  Freemasonry.
The  society  thus  formed,  instead  of  con¬
quering  or  rebuilding  the  Temple  of  Jeru¬
salem,  was  to  erect  symbolical  temples.
This  is  one  of  the  forms  of  the  Templar
theory  of  the  origin  of  Freemason.

Auserwalilter.  German  for  Elu  or
Elect.

Austin.  See  Saint  Augustine.

Australasia.  Masonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  this  remote  region  at  a  very
early  period  after  its  settlement,  and  Lodges
were  first  established  at  Sidney,  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  about  the  year
1828.  There  are  now  over  one  hundred
and  fifty  Lodges  at  work  in  different  parts
of  Australasia,  under  warrants  from  the
Provincial  Grand  Lodges  of  Victoria  at
Melbourne,  New  South  Wales  at  Sidney,
Queensland  at  Brisbane,  South  Australia
at  Adelaide,  and  New  Zealand  at  Auckland.
All  of  these  bodies  derive  their  original  au¬
thority  from  the  Grand  Lodges  of  England
and  Ireland,  and  the  Lodges  work  in  the
York  Rite.

Austria.  Freemasonry  was  introduced
into  Austria,  in  1742,  by  the  establishment
at  Vienna  of  the  Lodge  of  the  Three
Cannons.  But  it  was  broken  up  by  the
government  in  the  following  year,  and
thirty  of  its  members  were  imprisoned  for
having  met  in  contempt  of  the  authorities.
Maria  Theresa  was  an  enemy  of  the  Insti¬
tution,  and  prohibited  it  in  1764.  Lodges,
however,  continued  to  meet  secretly  in
Vienna  and  Prague.  In  1780,  Joseph  II.
ascended  the  throne,  and  under  his  liberal
administration  Freemasonry,  if  not  actu¬
ally  encouraged,  was  at  least  tolerated,  and
many  .new  Lodges  were  established  in  Aus¬
tria,  Hungary,  Bohemia,  and  Transyl¬
vania,  under  the  authority  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Germany,  in  Berlin.  Delegates
from  these  Lodges  met  at  Vienna  in  1784,
and  organized  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Austria,
electing  the  Count  of  Dietrichstein,  Grand
Master.  The  attempt  of  the  Grand  Lodge
at  Berlin  to  make  this  a  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  was  successful  for  only  a  short  time,
and  in  1785  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Austria
again  proclaimed  its  independence.

During  the  reign  of  Joseph  II.,  Austrian
Masonry  was  prosperous.  Notwithstanding
the  efforts  of  its  enemies,  the  monarch
could  never  be  persuaded  to  prohibit  it.  But
in  1785  he  was  induced  to  issue  instruc¬
tions  by  which  the  number  of  the  Lodges
was  reduced,  so  that  not  more  than  three
were  permitted  to  exist  in  each  city;  and  he
ordered  that  a  list  of  the  members  and  a
note  of  the  times  of  meeting  of  each  Lodge
should  be  annually  delivered  to  the  magis¬
trates.


AUTHENTIC


AZARIAH


97


On  the  death  of  Joseph,  he  was  suc¬
ceeded  by  Francis  II.,  who  yielded  to  the
machinations  of  the  anti-Masons,  and  dis¬
solved  the  Lodges.  In  1801,  he  issued  a
decree  which  forbade  the  employment  of
any  one  in  the  public  service  who  was  at¬
tached  to  any  secret  society.  Austria  has
since  been  closed  to  Freemasonry,  and  its
Institution  ha3  now  no  recognized  existence
there.

Authentic.  Formerly,  in  the  science
of  Diplomatics,  ancient  manuscripts  were
termed  authentic  when  they  were  originals,
and  in  opposition  to  copies.  But  in  mod¬
ern  times  the  acceptation  of  the  word  has
been  enlarged,  and  it  is  now  applied  to  in¬
struments  which,  although  they  may  be
copies,  bear  the  evidence  of  having  been
executed  by  proper  authority.  So  of  the
old  records  of  Masonry,  the  originals  of
many  have  been  lost,  or  at  least  have  not
yet  been  found.  Yet  the  copies,  if  they
can  be  traced  to  unsuspected  sources  within
the  body  of  the  Craft  and  show  the  inter¬
nal  marks  of  historical  accuracy,  are  to  be
reckoned  as  authentic.  But  if  their  origin
is  altogether  unknown,  and  their  statements
or  style  conflict  with  the  known  character
of  the  Order  at  their  assumed  date,  their
authenticity  is  to  be  doubted  or  denied.

Authenticity  of  the  Scriptures.
A  belief  in  the  authenticity  of  the  Scrip¬
tures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  as  a
religious  qualification  of  initiation  does  not
constitute  one  of  the  laws  of  Masonry,  for
such  a  regulation  would  destroy  the  uni¬
versality  of  the  Institution,  and  under  its
action  none  but  Christians  could  become
eligible  for  admission.  But  in  1856  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio  declared  “that  a
distinct  avowal  of  a  belief  in  the  divine
authority  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  should  be
required  of  every  one  who  is  admitted  to
the  privileges  of  Masonry,  and  that  a  de¬
nial  of  the  same  is  an  offence  against  the
Institution,  calling  for  exemplary  disci¬
pline.”  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that
the  enunciation  of  this  principle  met  with
the  almost  universal  condemnation  of  the
Grand  Lodges  and  Masonic  jurists  of  this
country.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio  subse¬
quently  repealed  the  regulation.  In  1857,
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Texas  adopted  a  simi¬
lar  resolution ;  but  the  general  sense  of  the
Fraternity  has  rejected  all  religious  tests
except  a  belief  in  God.

Autopsy.  (Greek,  avror^a,  a  seeing  with
one's  own  eyes.)  The  complete  communica¬
tion  of  the  secrets  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries,
when  the  aspirant  was  admitted  into  the
Bacellum,  or  most  sacred  place,  and  was  in¬
vested  by  the  hierophant  with  all  the  apor-
rheta,  or  sacred  things,  which  constituted
the  perfect  knowledge  of  the  initiate.  A
N  7


similar  ceremony  in  Freemasonry  is  called
the  Rite  of  Intrusting.  See  Mysteries.

Auxiliary  Ilegrees.  According  to
Oliver,  [Landm.,  ii.  345,)  the  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  of  France,  in  addition  to  the  thirty-
three  regular  degrees  of  the  Rite,  confers  six
others,  which  he  calls  “  Auxiliary  Degrees.”
They  are,  1.  Elu  de  Perignan.  2.  Petit
Architect.  3.  Grand  Architecte,  or  Com-
pagnon  Ecossais.  4.  Maitre  Ecossais.  5.
Knight  of  the  East.  6.  Knight  Rose  Croix.
I  cannot  trace  Oliver’s  authority  for  this
statement,  and  doubt  it,  at  least  as  to  the
names  of  the  degrees.

Avenue.  Forming  avenue  is  a  cere¬
mony  sometimes  practised  in  the  lower  de¬
grees,  but  more  generally  in  the  higher
ones,  on  certain  occasions  of  paying  honors
to  superior  officers.  The  brethren  form  in
two  ranks  facing  each  other.  If  the  de¬
gree  is  one  in  which  swords  are  used,  these
are  drawn  and  elevated,  being  crossed  each
with  the  opposite  sword.  The  swords  thus
crossed  constitute  what  is  called  “  the  arch
of  steel.”  The  person  to  whom  honor  is
to  be  paid  passes  between  the  opposite
ranks  and  under  the  arch  of  steel.

Avignon,  Illuminati  of.  [Illu¬
mines  d’ Avignon.)  A  Rite  instituted  by
Pernetti  at  Avignon,  in  France,  in  1770,
and  transferred  in  the  year  1778  to  Mont¬
pellier,  under  the  name  of  the  Academy
of  True  Masons.  The  Academy  of  Avignon
consisted  of  only  four  degrees,  the  three  of
symbolic  or  St.  John’s  Masonry,  and  a
fourth  called  the  True  Mason,  which  was
made  up  of  instructions,  Hermetical  and
Swedenborgian.  See  Pernetti.

Avouchment.  See  Vouching.

Award.  In  law,  the  judgment  pro¬
nounced  by  one  or  more  arbitrators,  at  the
request  of  two  parties  who  are  at  variance.
“If  any  complaint  be  brought”  say  the
Charges  published  by  Anderson,  “  the
brother  found  guilty  shall  stand  to  the
award  and  determination  of  the  Lodge.”

Ayes  and  Noes.  It  is  not  according
to  Masonic  usage  to  call  for  the  ayes  and
noes  on  any  question  pending  before  a
Lodge.

Aynon.  Aynon,  Agnon,  Ajuon,  and
Dyon  are  all  used  in  the  old  manuscript  Con¬
stitutions  for  one  whom  they  call  the  son  of
the  king  of  Tyre,  but  it  is  evidently  meant
for  Hiram  Abif.  Each  of  these  words  is
most  probably  a  corruption  of  the  Flebrew
Adon  or  Lord,  so  that  the  reference  would
clearly  be  to  Adon  Hiram  or  Adoniram,  with
whom  Hiram  was  often  confounded  ;  a  con¬
fusion  to  be  found  in  later  times  in  the
Adonhirnmite  Rite.

Azariali.  The  old  French  rituals  have
Azarins.  A  name  in  the  high  degrees  sig¬
nifying,  Helped  of  God.


98


BAAL


BABYLON


B.


Baal.  Hebrew,  He  was  the  chief
divinity  among  the  Phoenicians,  the  Ca-
naanites,  and  the  Babylonians.  The  word
signifies  in  Hebrew  lord  or  master.  It  was
among  the  orientalists  a  comprehensive
term,  denoting  divinity  of  any  kind  with¬
out  reference  to  class  or  to  sex.  The  Saba-
ists  understood  Baal  as  the  sun,  and  Baalim,
in  the  plural,  were  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,
“  the  host  of  heaven.”  Whenever  the  Is¬
raelites  made  one  of  their  almost  periodi¬
cal  deflections  to  idolatry,  Baal  seems  to
have  been  the  favorite  idol  to  whose  wor¬
ship  they  addicted  themselves.  Hence  he
became  the  especial  object  of  denunciation
with  the  prophets.  Thus,  in  1  Kings  (xviii.,)
we  see  Elijah  showing,  by  practical  dem¬
onstration,  the  difference  between  Baal  and
Jehovah.  The  idolators,  at  his  instigation,
called  on  Baal,  as  their  sun-god,  to  light  the
sacrificial  fire,  from  morning  until  noon,
because  at  noon  be  had  acquired  his  great¬
est  intensity.  And  after  noon,  no  fire  hav¬
ing  been  kindled  on  the  altar,  they  began
to  cry  aloud,  and  to  cut  themselves  in  token
of  mortification,  because  as  the  sun  de¬
scended  there  was  no  hope  of  his  help.  But
Elijah,  depending  on  Jehovah,  made  his
sacrifice  towards  sunset,  to  show  the  great¬
est  contrast  between  Baal  and  the  true  God.
And  when  the  people  saw  the  fire  come
down  and  consume  the  offering,  they  ac¬
knowledged  the  weakness  of  their  idol,  and
falling  on  their  faces  cried  out,  Jehovah  hu
hahelohim  —  “  Jehovah,  he  is  the  God.”
And  Hosea  afterwards  promises  the  people
that  they  shall  abandon  their  idolatry,  and
that  he  would  take  away  from  them  the
Shemoth  hahbaalim,  the  names  of  the  Baal¬
im,  so  that  they  should  be  no  more  remem¬
bered  by  their  names,  and  the  people  should
in  that  day  “  know  Jehovah.”

Hence  we  see  that  there  was  an  evident
antagonism  in  the  orthodox  Hebrew  mind
between  Jehovah  and  Baal.  The  latter  was,
however,  worshipped  by  the  Jews,  when¬
ever  they  became  heterodox,  and  by  all  the
Oriental  or  Shemitic  nations  as  a  supreme
divinity,  representing  the  sun  in  some  of
his  modifications  as  the  ruler  of  the  day.
In  Tyre,  Baal  was  the  sun,  and  Ashtaroth,
the  moon.  Baal peor,  the  lord  of  priapism,
was  the  sun  represented  as  the  generative
principle  of  nature,  and  identical  with  the
phallus  of  other  religions.  Baal-gad  was
the  lord  of  the  multitude,  (of  stars,)  that  is,
the  sun  as  the  chief  of  the  heavenly  host.
In  brief,  Baal  seems  to  bave  been  wherever
his  cultus  was  established,  a  development
or  form  of  the  old  sun  worship.

Babel.  In  Hebrew,  ;  which  the


writer  of  Genesis  connects  with  SSa,  balal,
“  to  confound,”  in  reference  to  the  confu¬
sion  of  tongues ;  but  the  true  derivation  is
probably  from  BAB-EL,  “  the  gate  of  El  ”
or  the  “  gate  of  God,”  because  perhaps  a
temple  was  the  first  building  raised  by  the
primitive  nomads.  It  is  the  name  of  that
celebrated  tower  attempted  to  be  built  on
the  plains  of  Shinar,  a.  m.  1775,  about  one
hundred  and  forty  years  after  the  deluge,
and  which,  Scripture  informs  us,  was  de¬
stroyed  by  a  special  interposition  of  the
Almighty.  The  Noachite  Masons  date  the
commencement  of  their  order  from  this  de¬
struction,  and  much  traditionary  informa¬
tion  on  this  subject  is  preserved  in  the
degree  of  “Patriarch  Noachite.”  At
Babel,  Oliver  says  that  what  has  been
called  Spurious  Freemasonry  took  its  ori¬
gin.  That  is  to  say,  the  people  there  aban¬
doned  the  worship  of  the  true  God,  and  by
their  dispersion  lost  all  knowledge  of  his
existence,  and  of  the  principles  of  truth
upon  which  Masonry  is  founded.  Hence
it  is  that  the  rituals  speak  of  the  lofty  tower
of  Babel  as  the  place  where  language  was
confounded  and  Masonry  lost.  See  Oman.

This  is  the  theory  first  advanced  by  An¬
derson  in  his  Constitutions,  and  subse¬
quently  developed  more  extensively  by  Dr.
Oliver  in  all  his  works,  but  especially  in
his  Landmarks.  As  history,  the  doctrine  is
of  no  value,  for  it  wants  the  element  of
authenticity.  But  in  a  symbolic  point  of
view  it  is  highly  suggestive.  If  the  tower
of  Babel  represents  the  profane  world  of
ignorance  and  darkness,  and  the  threshing-
floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite  is  the  symbol
of  Freemasonry,  because  the  Solomonic
Temple,  of  which  it  was  the  site,  is  the  pro¬
totype  of  the  spiritual  temple  which  Ma¬
sons  are  erecting,  then  we  can  readily
understand  how  Masonry  and  the  true  use
of  language  is  lost  in  one  and  recovered  in
the  other,  and  how  the  progress  of  the  can¬
didate  in  his  initiation  may  properly  be
compared  to  the  progress  of  truth  from  the
confusion  and  ignorance  of  the  Babel
builders  to  the  perfection  and  illumination
of  the  temple  builders,  which  temple  buil¬
ders  all  Freemasons  are.  And  so,  when
in  the  ritual  the  neophyte,  being  asked
“  whence  he  comes  and  whither  is  he
travelling,”  replies,  “  from  the  lofty  tower
of  Babel,  where  language  was  confounded
and  Masonry  lost,  to  the  threshing-floor  of
Oman  the  "Jebusite,  where  language  was
restored  and  Masonry  found,”  the  ques¬
tions  and  answers  become  intelligible  from
this  symbolic  point  of  view.

Babylon.  The  ancient  capital  of


BABYLON


BACON


99


Chaldea,  situated  on  both  sides  of  the  Eu¬
phrates,  and  once  the  most  magnificent
city  of  the  ancient  world.  It  was  here
that,  upon  the  destruction  of  Solomon’s
Temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar  in  the  year  of
the  world  3394,  the  Jews  of  the  tribes  of
Judah  and  Benjamin,  who  were  the  inhab¬
itants  of  Jerusalem,  were  conveyed  and
detained  in  captivity  for  seventy-two  years,
until  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia,  issued  a  decree
for  restoring  them,  and  permitting  them  to
rebuild  their  temple,  under  the  superin¬
tendence  of  Zerubbabel,  the  Prince  of  the
Captivity,  and  with  the  assistance  of  Joshua
the  High  Priest  and  Haggai  the  Scribe.

Babylon  the  Great,  as  the  prophet  Dan¬
iel  calls  it,  was  situated  four  hundred  and
seventy-five  miles  in  a  nearly  due  east  di¬
rection  from  Jerusalem.  It  stood  in  the
midst  of  a  large  and  fertile  plain  on  each
side  of  the  river  Euphrates,  which  ran
through  it  from  north  to  south.  It  was
surrounded  with  walls  which  were  eighty-
seven  feet  thick,  three  hundred  and  fifty  in
height,  and  sixty  miles  in  compass.  These
were  all  built  of  large  bricks  cemented
together  with  bitumen.  Exterior  to  the
walls  was  a  wide  and  deep  trench  lined
with  the  same  material.  Twenty-five  gates
on  each  side,  made  of  solid  brass,  gave
admission  to  the  city.  From  each  of  these
gates  proceeded  a  wide  street  fifteen  miles
in  length,  and  the  whole  was  separated  by
means  of  other  smaller  divisions,  and  con¬
tained  six  hundred  and  seventy-six  squares,
each  of  which  was  two  miles  and  a  quarter
in  circumference.  Two  hundred  and  fifty
towers  placed  upon  the  walls  afforded  the
means  of  additional  strength  and  protec¬
tion.  Within  this  immense  circuit  were  to
be  found  palaces  and  temples  and  other
edifices  of  the  utmost  magnificence,  which
have  caused  the  wealth,  the  luxury,  and
splendor  of  Babylon  to  become  the  favorite
theme  of  the  historians  of  antiquity,  and
which  compelled  the  prophet  Isaiah,  even
while  denouncing  its  downfall,  to  speak  of
it  as  “  the  glory  of  kingdoms,  the  beauty
of  the  Chaldees’  excellency.”

Babylon,  which,  at  the  time  of  the  de¬
struction  of  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  con¬
stituted  a  part  of  the  Chaldean  empire,  was
subsequently  taken,  B.  C.  538,  after  a  siege
of  two  years,  by  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia.

Babylon,  Red  Crons  of.  Another
name  for  the  degree  of  Babylonish  Pass,
which  see.

Babylonish  Captivity.  See  Cap¬
tivity.

Babylonish  Pass.  A  degree  given
in  Scotland  by  the  authority  of  the  Grand
Royal  Arch  Chapter.  It  is  also  called  the
Red  Cross  of  Babylon,  and  is  almost  iden¬
tical  with  the  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross


conferred  in  Commanderies  of  Knights
Templars  in  America  as  a  preparatory
degree.

Back.  Freemasonry,  borrowing  its
symbols  from  every  source,  has  not  neg¬
lected  to  make  a  selection  of  certain  parts
of  the  human  body.  From  the  back  an
important  lesson  is  derived,  which  is  fit¬
tingly  developed  in  the  third  degree.
Hence,  in  reference  to  this  symbolism,
Oliver  says :  “  It  is  a  duty  incumbent  on
every  Mason  to  support  a  brother’s  charac¬
ter  in  his  absence  equally  as  though  he
were  present ;  not  to  revile  him  behind  his
back,  nor  suffer  it  to  be  done  by  others,
without  using  every  necessary  attempt  to
prevent  it.”  And  Hutchinson,  referring  to
the  same  symbolic  ceremony,  says :  “  The
most  material  part  of  that  brotherly  love
which  should  subsist  among  Masons  is  that
of  speaking  well  of  each  other  to  the
world;  more  especially  it  is  expected  of
every  member  of  this  Fraternity  that  he
should  not  traduce  a  brother.  Calumny
and  slander  are  detestable  crimes  against
society.  Nothing  can  be  viler  than  to  tra¬
duce  a  man  behind  his  back;  it  is  like  the
villany  of  an  assassin  who  has  not  virtue
enough  to  give  his  adversary  the  means  of
self-defence,  but,  lurking  in  darkness,  stabs
him  whilst  he  is  unarmed  and  unsuspicious
of  an  enemy.”  See  Five  Points  of  Fellow¬
ship.

Bacon,  Francis.  Baron  of  Veru-
lam,  commonly  called  Lord  Bacon.  Nico¬
lai  thinks  that  a  great  impulse  was  exercised
upon  the  early  history  of  Freemasonry  by
the  New  Atlantis  of  Lord  Bacon.  In  this
learned  romance  Bacon  supposes  that  a
vessel  lands  on  an  unknown  island,  called
Bensalem,  over  which  a  certain  King  Sol¬
omon  reigned  in  days  of  yore.  This  king
had  a  large  establishment,  which  was
called  the  House  of  Solomon,  or  the  college
of  the  workmen  of  six  days,  namely,  the
days  of  the  creation.  He  afterwards  de¬
scribes  the  immense  apparatus  which  was
there  employed  in  physical  researches.
There  were,  says  he,  deep  grottoes  and
towers  for  the  successful  observation  of
certain  phenomena  of  nature;  artificial
mineral  waters;  large  buildings,  in  which
meteors,  the  wind,  thunder,  and  rain  were
imitated;  extensive  botanic  gardens ;  entire
fields,  in  which  all  kinds  of  animals  were
collected,  for  the  study  of  their  instincts  and
habits;  houses  filled  with  all  the  wonders
of  nature  and  art ;  a  great  number  of  learned
men,  each  of  whom,  in  his  own  country,
had  the  direction  of  these  things;  they
made  jou  rneys  and  observations ;  they  wrote,
they  collected,  they  determined  results,  and
deliberated  together  as  to  what  was  proper
to  be  published  and  what  concealed.


100


BACON


BACULUS


This  romance  became  at  once  very  pop¬
ular,  and  everybody’s  attention  was  at¬
tracted  by  the  allegory  of  the  House  of
Solomon.  But  it  also  contributed  to  spread
Bacon’s  views  on  experimental  knowledge,
and  led  afterwards  to  the  institution  of  the
Royal  Society,  to  which  Nicolai  attributes
a  common  object  with  that  of  the  Society
of  Freemasons,  established,  he  says,  about
the  same  time,  the  difference  being  only
that  one  was  esoteric  and  the  other  exoteric
in  its  instructions.  But  the  more  immedi¬
ate  effect  of  the  romance  of  Bacon  was  the
institution  of  the  Society  of  Astrologers,  of
which  Elias  Ashmole  was  a  leading  mem¬
ber.  Of  this  society  Nicolai,  in  his  work
on  the  Origin  and  History  of  Rosicrucianism
and  Freemasonry,  says:

“  Its  object  was  to  build  the  House  of
Solomon,  of  the  New  Atlantis,  in  the
literal  sense,  but  the  establishment  was
to  remain  as  secret  as  the  island  of  Ben-
salcm  —  that  is  to  say,  they  were  to  be  en¬
gaged  in  the  study  of  nature  —  but  the
instruction  of  its  principles  was  to  remain
in  the  society  in  an  esoteric  form.  These
philosophers  presented  their  idea  in  a
strictly  allegorical  method.  First,  there
were  the  ancient  columns  of  Hermes,  by
which  Iamblichus  pretended  that  he  had
enlightened  all  the  doubts  of  Porphyry.
You  then  mounted,  by  several  steps,  to  a
chequered  floor,  divided  into  four  regions,
to  denote  the  four  superior  sciences ;  after
which  came  the  types  of  the  six  days’  work,
which  expressed  the  object  of  the  society,
and  which  were  the  same  as  those  found  on
an  engraved  stone  in  my  possession.  The
sense  of  all  which  was  this :  God  created
the  world,  and  preserves  it  by  fixed  prin¬
ciples,  full  of  wisdom;  he  who  seeks  to
know  these  principles — that  is  to  say,  the
interior  of  nature  —  approximates  to  God,
and  he  who  thus  approximates  to  God
obtains  from  his  grace  the  power  of  com¬
manding  nature.”

This  society,  he  adds,  met  at  Masons’  Hall
in  Basinghall  Street,  because  many  of  its
members  were  also  members  of  the  Masons’
Company,  into  which  they  all  afterwards
entered  and  assumed  the  name  of  Free  and
Accepted  Masons,  and  thus  he  traces  the
origin  of  the  Order  to  the  New  Atlantis
and  the  House  of  Solomon  of  Lord  Bacon.
It  is  only  a  theory,  but  it  seems  to  throw
tome  light  on  that  long  process  of  incuba¬
tion  which  terminated  at  last,  in  1717,  in
the  production  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England.  The  connection  of  Ashmole
with  the  Masons  is  a  singular  one,  and  has
led  to  some  controversy.  The  views  of
Nicolai,  if  not  altogether  correct,  may
suggest  the  possibility  of  an  explanation.
Certain  it  is  that  the  eminent  astrologers


of  England,  as  we  learn  from  Ash  mole’s
Diary,  were  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  the
Masons  in  the  seventeenth  century.

Bacillus.  The  staff  of  office  borne
by  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars,  in
ecclesiology,  baculus  is  the  name  given  to
the  pastoral  staff  carried  by  a  bishop  or  an
abbot  as  the  ensign  of  his  dignity  and
authority.  In  pure  Latinity,  baculus  means
a  long  stick  or  staff,  which  was  commonly
carried  by  travellers,  by  shepherds,  or  by
infirm  aud  aged  persons,  and  afterwards,
from  affectation,  by  the  Greek  philosophers.
In  early  times,  this  staff,  made  a  little
longer,  was  carried  by  kings  and  persons  in
authority,  as  a  mark  of  distinction,  and
was  thus  the  origin  of  the  royal  sceptre.
The  Christian  church,  borrowing  many  of
its  usages  from  antiquity,  and  alluding
also,  it  is  said,  to  the  sacerdotal  power
which  Christ  conferred  when  he  sent  the
apostles  to  preach,  commanding  them  to
take  with  them  staves,  adopted  the  pasto¬
ral  staff,  to  be  borne  by  a  bishop,  as  sym¬
bolical  of  his  power  to  inflict  pastoral  cor¬
rection  ;  and  Darandus  says,  “  By  the  pas¬
toral  staff  is  likewise  understood  the  au¬
thority  of  doctrine.  For  by  it  the  infirm
are  supported,  the  wavering  are  confirmed,
those  going  astray  are  drawn  to  repentance.”
Catalin  also  says,  “  That  the  baculus,  or
episcopal  staff,  is  an  ensign  not  only  of
honor,  but  also  of  dignity,  power,  and  pas¬
toral  jurisdiction.”

Honorius,  a  writer  of  the  twelfth  cen¬
tury,  in  his  treatise  De  Gemma  Animce.
gives  to  this  pastoral  staff  the  names  both
of  baculus  and  virga.  Thus  he  says,
“  Bishops  bear  the  staff  ( baculum ),  that  by
their  teaching  they  may  strengthen  the
weak  in  their  faith ;  and  they  carry  the
rod  ( virgam ),  that  by  their  power  they  may
correct  the  unruly.”  And  this  is  strikingly
similar  to  the  language  used  by  St.  Bernard
in  the  Rule  which  he  drew  up  for  the
government  of  the  Templars.  In  Art.  lxviii.,
he  says,  “  the  Master  ought  to  hold  the
staff  and  the  rod  ( baculum  et  virgam)  in  his
hand,  that  is  to  say  the  staff  [baculum),  that
he  may  support  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,
and  the  rod  [virgam),  that  he  may  with  the
zeal  of  rectitude  strike  down  the  vices  of
delinquents.”

The  transmission  of  episcopal  ensigns
from  bishops  to  the  heads  of  ecclesiastical
associations  was  not  difficult  in  the  Middle
Ages;  and  hence  it  afterwards  became  one
of  the  insignia  of  abbots,  and  the  heads  of
confraternities  connected  with  the  Church,
as  a  token  of  the  possession  of  powers  of
ecclesiastical  jurisdiction.

Now,  as  the  Papal  bull,  Omne  datum  Op¬
timum,  invested  the  Grand  Master  of  the
Templars  with  almost  episcopal  jurisdiction


BACULUS


BADGE


101


over  the  priests  of  his  Order,  he  bore  the
baculus,  or  pastoral  staff,  as  a  mark  of  that
jurisdiction,  and  thus  it  became  a  part  of
the  Grand  Master’s  insignia  of  office.

The  baculus  of  the  bishop,  the  abbot,  and
the  confraternities,  was  not  precisely  the
same  in  form.  The  earliest  episcopal  staff
terminated  in  a  globular  knob,  or  a  tau
cross.  This  was,  however,  soon  replaced
by  the  simple-curved  termination,  which
resembles  and  is  called  a  crook,  in  allusion
to  that  used  by  shepherds  to  draw  back  and
recall  the  sheep  of  their  flock  which  have
gone  astray,  thus  symbolizing  the  expres¬
sion  of  Christ,  “  I  am  the  good  Shepherd,
and  know  my  sheep,  and  am  known  of
mine.”

The  baculus  of  the  abbot  does  not  differ
in  form  from  that  of  a  bishop,  but  as  the
bishop  carries  the  curved  part  of  his  staff
pointing  forward,  to  show  the  extent  of  his
episcopal  jurisdiction,  so  the  abbot  carries
his  pointing  backward,  to  signify  that  his
authority  is  limited  to  his  monastery.

The  baculi,  or  staves  of  the  confraterni¬
ties,  were  surmounted  by  small  tabernacles,
with  images  or  emblems,  on  a  sort  of  carved
cap,  having  reference  to  the  particular  guild
or  confraternity  by  whom  they  were  borne.

The  baculus  of  the  Knights  Templars,
which  was  borne  by  the  Grand  Master  as
the  ensign  of  his  office,  in  allusion  to  his
quasi  episcopal  jurisdiction,  is  described
and  delineated  in  Mlinter,  Burnes,  Addi¬
son,  and  all  the  other  authorities,  as  a  staff,
on  the  top  of  which  is  an  octagonal  figure,
surmounted  with  a  cross  patee.  The  cross,
of  course,  refers  to  the  Christian  character
of  the  Order,  and  the  octagon  alludes,  it  is
said,  to  the  eight  beatitudes  of  our  Saviour
in  his  Sermon  on  the  Mount.

The  pastoral  staff  is  variously  designated,
by  ecclesiastical  writers,  as  virga,  ferulu,
cambuita,  crocia,  and  pedum.  From  crocia,
whose  root  is  the  Latin  crux,  and  the  Italian
croce,  a  cross,  we  get  the  English  crozier.

Pedum,  another  name  of  the  baculus,  sig¬
nifies,  in  pure  Latinity,  a  shepherd’s  crook,
and  thus  strictly  carries  out  the  symbolic
idea  of  a  pastoral  charge.  Hence,  looking
to  the  pastoral  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand
Master  of  the  Templars,  his  staff  of  office
is  described  under  the  title  of  11  pedum  ma-
gistrale  seu  patriarchate, ”  that  is,  a  “  ma¬
gisterial  or  patriarchal  staff,”  in  the  Rtatuta
CommilitonumOrdinis  Templi,”  or  the  “  Stat¬
utes  of  the  Fellow-soldiers  of  the  Order
of  the  Temple,”  as  a  part  of  the  investi¬
ture  of  the  Grand  Master,  in  the  following
words  :

“  Pedum  magistrate  seu  patriarchate,  au-
r cum,  in  cacumine  cujus  crux  Ordinis  super
orbem  exaltalur that  is,  “a  magisterial
or  patriarchal  staff  of  gold,  on  the  top  of


which  is  a  cross  of  the  Order,  surmounting
an  orb  or  globe.”  ( Stat .  xxviii.,  art.  358.)
But  of  all  these  names,  baculus  is  the  one
more  commonly  used  by  writers  to  desig¬
nate  the  Templar  pastoral  staff.

In  the  year  1859  this  staff  of  office  was
first  adopted  at  Chicago  by  the  Templars
of  the  United  States,  during  the  Grand
Mastership  of  Sir  William  B.  Hubbard.
But,  unfortunately,  at  that  time  it  received
the  name  of  abacus,  a  misnomer,  which  has
continued  to  the  present  day,  on  the  author¬
ity  of  a  literary  blunder  of  Sir  Walter  Scott,
so  that  it  has  fallen  to  the  lot  of  American
Masons  to  perpetuate,,  in  the  use  of  this
word,  an  error  of  the  great  novelist,  result¬
ing  from  his  too  careless  writing,  at  which
he  would  himself  have  been  the  first  to
smile,  had  his  attention  been  called  to  it.

Abacus,  in  mathematics,  denotes  an  in¬
strument  or  table  used  for  calculation,  and
in  architecture  an  ornamental  part  of  a
column;  but  it  nowhere,  in  English  or
Latin,  or  any  known  language,  signifies
any  kind  of  a  staff.

Sir  Walter  Scott,  -who,  undoubtedly  was
thinking  of  baculus,  in  the  hurry  of  the  mo¬
ment  and  a  not  improbable  confusion  of
words  and  thoughts,  wrote  abacus,  when,  in
his  novel  of  Ivanhoe,  he  describes  the  Grand
Master,  Lucas  Beaumanoir.as  bearing  in  his
hand  “that  singular  abacus,  or  staff  office,”
committed  a  very  gross,  but  not  very
uncommon,  literary  blunder,  of  a  kind  that
is  quite  familiar  to  those  who  are  conver¬
sant  with  the  results  of  rapid  composition,
where  the  writer  often  thinks  of  one  word
and  writes  another.

Baden.  Freemasonry  was  introduced
at  an  early  period  into  the  Grand  Duchy
of  Baden,  and  was  for  a  long  time  popular.
An  electoral  decree  in  1785  abolished  all
secret  societies,  and  the  Masons  suspended
their  labors.  These  were  revived  in  1805,
by  the  establishment  of  a  new  Lodge,  and
eventually,  in  1809,  of  the  Grand  Orient  of
Baden  atManheim.  In  1813,  the  meetings
were  again  prohibited  by  Grand  Ducal  au¬
thority.  In  1846  and  1847,  by  the  liberality
of  the  sovereign,  the  Masons  were  per¬
mitted  to  resume  their  labors,  and  three
Lodges  were  formed,  namely,  at  Manheim,
Carlsruhe,  and  Breiburg,  which  united  with
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Bayreuth.

Badge.  A  mark,  sign,  token,  or  thing,
says  Webster,  by  which  a  person  is  dis¬
tinguished  in  a  particular  place  or  employ¬
ment,  and  designating  his  relation  to  a
person  or  to  a  particular  occupation.  It  is
in  heraldry  the  same  thing  as  a  cognizance:
thus,  the  followers  and  retainers  of  the  house
of  Percy  wore  a  silver  crescent  as  a  badge
of  their  connection  with  that  family;  the
white  lion  borne  on  the  left  arm  was  the


102


BADGE


BALDNVTN


badge  of  the  house  of  Howard,  Earl  of
Surrey ;  the  red  rose  that  of  the  house  of
Lancaster;  and  the  white  rose,  of  York.
So  the  apron,  formed  of  white  lambskin,  is
worn  by  the  Freemason  as  a  badge  of  his
profession  and  a  token  of  his  connection
with  the  Fraternity.  See  Apron.

Badge  of  a  Mason.  The  lambskin
apron  is  so  called.  See  Apron.

Badge,  Royal  Arcli.  The  Royal
Arch  badge  is  the  triple  tau,  which  see.

Bafomet.  See  Baphomet.

Bag.  The  insignia,  in  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  of  the  Grand  Secretary.
Thus  Preston,  describing  a  form  of  Masonic
procession,  says :  “  The  Grand  Secretary,
with  his  bag.”  The  bag  is  supposed  to  con¬
tain  the  seal  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  of  which
the  Grand  Secretary  is  the  custodian ;  and
the  usage  is  derived  from  that  of  the  Lord
Chancellors  preserving  the  Great  Seal  of
the  kingdom  in  a  richly  embroidered  bag.
The  custom  also  existed  in  America  many
years  ago,  and  Dalcho,  in  his  Ahiman
Rezon  of  South  Carolina,  published  in
1807,  gives  a  form  of  procession,  in  which
he  describes  the  Grand  Secretary  with  his
bag.  In  1729,  Lord  Kingston,  being  Grand
Master,  provided  at  his  own  cost  “  a  fine
velvet  bag  for  the  Secretary.”

Bagulkal.  A  significant  word  in  the
high  degrees.  Lenning  says  it  is  a  cor¬
ruption  of  the  Hebrew  Begoal-kol,  “  all  is
revealed.”  Pike  says,  Bagulkol,  with  a
similar  reference  to  a  revelation.  Rock¬
well  gives  in  his  MS.,  Bekalkel,  without  any
meaning.  The  old  rituals  interpret  as  sig¬
nifying  “the  faithful  guardian  of  the
sacred  ark,”  a  derivation  clearly  fanciful.

Balirdt,  Karl  Friedericli.  A
German  doctor  of  theology,  who  was  born,
in  1741,  at  Bischofswerda,  and  died  in
1792.  He  is  described  by  one  of  his  biog¬
raphers  as  being  “  notorious  alike  for  his
bold  infidelity  and  for  his  evil  life.”  I
know  not  why  Thory  and  Lenning  have
given  his  name  a  place  in  their  vocabu¬
laries,  as  his  literary  labors  bore  no  rela¬
tion  to  Freemasonry,  except  inasmuch  as
that  he  was  a  Mason,  and  that  in  1787,  with
several  other  Masons,  he  founded  at  Halle
a  secret  society  called  the  “  German  U nion,”
or  the  “Two  and  Twenty,”  in  reference  to
the  original  number  of  its  members.  The
object  of  this  society  was  said  to  be  the  en¬
lightenment  of  mankind.  It  was  dissolved
in  1790,  by  the  imprisonment  of  its  founder
for  having  written  a  libel  against  the  Prus¬
sian  Minister  Woellner.  It  is  incorrect  to
call  this  system  of  degree  a  Masonic  Rite.
See  German  Union.

Baldachin.  In  architecture,  a  canopy
supported  by  pillars  over  an  insulated  altar.
In  Masonry,  it  has  been  applied  by  some


writers  to  the  canopy  over  the  Master’s
chair.  The  German  Masons  give  this
name  to  the  covering  of  the  Lodge,  and
reckon  it  therefore  among  the  symbols.

Baldrick.  A  portion  of  military
dress,  being  a  scarf  passing  from  the
shoulder  over  the  breast  to  ’the  hip.  In
the  dress  regulations  of  the  Grand  En¬
campment  of  Knights  Templars  of  the
United  States,  adopted  in  1862,  it  is  called
a  “  scarf,”  and  is  thus  described :  “  Five
inches  wide  in  the  whole,  of  white  bordered
with  black,  one  inch  on  either  side,  a  strip
of  navy  lace  one-fourth  of  an  inch  wide  at
the  inner  edge  of  the  black.  On  the  front
centre  of  the  scarf,  a  metal  star  of  nine
points,  in  allusion  to  the  nine  founders  of
the  Temple  Order,  inclosing  the  Passion
Cross,  surrounded  by  the  Latin  motto,  ‘  In
hoc  signo  vinces ;  ’  the  star  to  be  three
and  three-quarter  inches  in  diameter.  The
scarf  to  be  worn  from  the  right  shoulder
to  the  left  hip,  with  the  ends  extending  six
inches  below  the  point  of  intersection.”

Baldwyn  II.  The  successor  of  God¬
frey  of  Bouillon  as  king  of  Jerusalem.  In
his  reign  the  Order  of  Knights  Templars
was  instituted,  to  whom  he  granted  a  place
of  habitation  within  the  sacred  inclosure
of  the  Temple  on  Mount  Moriah.  He  be¬
stowed  on  the  Order  other  marks  of  favor,
and,  as  its  patron,  his  name  has  been  re¬
tained  in  grateful  remembrance,  and  often
adopted  as  a  name  of  Commanderies  of
Masonic  Templars.

Baldwyn  Encampment.  An

original  Encampment  of  Knights  Templars
at  Bristol,  in  England,  said  to  have  been
established  from  time  immemorial,  and  re¬
fusing  to  recognize  the  authority  of  the
Grand  Conclave  of  England.  Four  other
Encampments  of  the  same  character  are
said  to  have  existed  in  London,  Bath,  York,
and  Salisbury.  From  a  letter  written  by
Davyd  W.  Nash,  Esq.,  a  prominent  mem¬
ber  of  the  Bristol  Encampment,  in  1853,
and  from  a  circular  issued  by  the  body  in
1857,  I  derive  the  following  information.

The  Order  of  Knights  Templars  had  ex¬
isted  in  Bristol  from  time  immemorial,
and  the  Templars  had  large  possessions  in
that  ancient  city.  About  the  beginning  of
this  century,  Bro.  Henry  Smith  introduced
from  France  three  degrees  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Rite,  which,  with  the  degree
of  Rose  Croix,  long  previously  connected
with  the  Encampment,  were  united  with
the  Templar  degrees  into  an  Order  called
the  Royal  Order  of  Knighthood,  so  that  the
Encampment  conferred  the  following  seven
degrees:  1.  Masonic  Knight  Templar;  2.
Knight  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem  ;  3.  Knight
of  Palestine;  4.  Knight  of  Rhodes;  5.
;  Knight  of  Malta ;  6.  Knight  Rose  Croix


BALDWYN


BALLOT


103


of  Heredom;  7.  Grand  Elected  Knight
of  Kadosh.  A  candidate  for  admission
must  be  a  Royal  Arch  Mason ;  but  the  de¬
grees  are  not  necessarily  taken  in  the  order
in  which  they  have  been  named,  the  can¬
didate  being  permitted  to  commence  at  any
point.

Nash  gives  the  following  account  of  the
nature  of  the  difficulties  with  the  Grand
Conclave  of  England :

“The  Duke  of  Sussex  having  been  in¬
stalled  a  Knight  Templar  at  Paris,  I  be¬
lieve  by  Sir  Sidney  Smith,  then  Grand
Master,  was  created  Grand  Master  of  the
Knights  Templars  in  England.  From  some
cause  or  other,  he  never  would  countenance
the  Christian  degrees  connected  with  Ma¬
sonry,  and  would  not  permit  a  badge  of  one
of  these  degrees  to  be  worn  in  a  Craft
Lodge.  In  London,  of  course,  he  ruled
supreme,  and  the  meetings  of  Knights
Templars  there,  if  they  continued  at  all,
were  degraded  to  the  mere  level  of  public-
house  meetings.  On  the  death  of  the  Duke
of  Sussex,  it  was  resolved  to  rescue  the
Order  from  its  degraded  position,  and  the
Grand  Conclave  of  England  was  formed,
some  of  the  officers  of  the  Duke  of  Sussex’s
original  Encampment,  which  he  held  once,
and  I  believe,  once  only,  being  then  alive.

“In  the  meantime,  of  the  three  original
Encampments  of  England,  —  the  genuine
representatives  of  the  Knights  of  the  Tem¬
ple, —  two  had  expired,  those  of  Bath  and
York,  leaving  Bristol  the  sole  relic  of  the
Order,  with  the  exception  of  the  Encamp¬
ments  that  had  been  created  in  various  parts
of  the  country,  not  holding  under  any
legitimate  authority,  but  raised  by  knights
who  had,  I  believe,  without  exception,  been
created  in  the  Encampment  of  Baldwyn,
at  Bristol.

“  Under  these  circumstances  the  Knights
of  Baldwyn  felt  that  their  place  was  at  the
head  of  the  Order;  and  though  willing  for
the  common  good  to  submit  to  the  autho¬
rity  of  Col.  Tynte  or  any  duly  elected
Grand  Master,  they  could  not  yield  prece¬
dence  to  the  Encampment  of  Observance,
(the  original  Encampment  of  the  Duke  of
Sussex,)  derived  from  a  foreign  and  spuri¬
ous  source,  the  so-called  Order  of  the  Tem¬
ple  in  Paris ;  nor  could  they  consent  to
forego  the  privileges  which  they  held  from
an  immemorial  period,  or  permit  their  an¬
cient  and  well-established  ceremonies,  cos¬
tume,  and  laws  to  be  revised  by  persons
for  whose  knowledge  and  judgment  they
entertained  a  very  reasonable  and  well-
grounded  want  of  respect.  The  Encamp¬
ment  of  Baldwyn,  therefore,  refused  to  send
representatives  to  the  Grand  Conclave  of
England,  or  to  acknowledge  its  authority
in  Bristol,  until  such  time  as  its  claims


should  be  treated  with  the  consideration  it
is  believed  they  deserve.”*

In  1857  the  Baldwyn  Encampments  at
Bristol  and  Bath  sought  a  reconciliation
with  the  Grand  Conclave  of  England,  but
were  repulsed ;  and  consequently  in  the  same
year  they  established  or,  to  use  their  own
word,  “revived”  the  “Ancient  Supreme
Grand  and  Royal  Encampment  of  Masonic
Knights  Templars,”  with  a  constituency  of
seven  bodies,  and  elected  Nash,  Grand
Master.  But  this  body  did  not  have  a  long
or  a  prosperous  existence,  and  in  1860  the
“  Camp  of  Baldwyn  ”  surrendered  its  in¬
dependence,  and  was  recognized  as  a  con¬
stituent,  but  with  immemorial  existence,  of
the  Grand  Conclave  of  England  and  Wales.

Balkis.  The  name  given  by  the  ori¬
entalists  to  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  who  visited
King  Solomon,  and  of  whom  they  relate  a
crowd  of  fables.  See  Sheba,  Queen  of.

Ballot.  In  the  election  of  candidates,
Lodges  have  recourse  to  a  ballot  of  white
and  black  balls.  Unanimity  of  choice,  in
this  case,  is  always  desired  and  demanded ;
one  black  ball  only  being  required  to  reject
a  candidate.  This  is  an  inherent  privilege
not  subject  to  dispensation  or  interference
of  the  Grand  Lodge,  because  as  the  Old
Charges  say,  “  The  members  of  a  particular
Lodge  are  the  best  judges  of  it;  and  be¬
cause,  if  a  turbulent  member  should  be  im¬
posed  upon  them,  it  might  spoil  their
harmony  or  hinder  the  freedom  of  their
communications,  or  even  break  and  dis¬
perse  the  Lodge,  which  ought  to  be  avoided
by  all  true  and  faithful.”

In  balloting  for  a  candidate  for  initiation,
every  member  is  expected  to  vote.  No  one
can  be  excused  from  sharing  the  responsi¬
bility  of  admission  or  rejection,  except  by
the  unanimous  consent  of  the  Lodge.
Where  a  member  has  himself  no  personal
or  acquired  knowledge  of  the  qualifications
of  the  candidate,  he  is  bound  to  give  faith
to  the  recommendation  of  his  brethren  of
the  reporting  committee,  who,  he  is  to  pre¬
sume,  would  not  make  a  favorable  report  on
the  petition  of  an  unworthy  applicant.

The  most  correct  usage  in  balloting  for
candidates  is  as  follows :

The  committee  of  investigation  having
reported  favorably,  the  Master  of  the
Lodge  directs  the  Senior  Deacon  to  prepare
the  ballot-box.  The  mode  in  which  this  is
accomplished  is  as  follows :  The  Senior
Deacon  takes  the  ballot-box,  and,  opening
it,  places  all  the  white  and  black  balls  in¬
discriminately  in  one  compartment,  leaving
the  other  entirely  empty.  He  then  pro-

*See  letter  of  Davyd  W.  Nash  to  the  author
of  An  Historical  /Sketch  of  the  Order  of  Knights
Templars,  by  Theo.  S.  Gourdin.  Charleston,  S.
C.,  Xt>oI,  p.  1 .


104


BALLOT


BALLOT


ceeds  with  the  box  to  the  Junior  and  Senior
Wardens,  who  satisfy  themselves  by  an  in¬
spection  that  no  ball  has  been  left  in  the
compartment  in  which  the  votes  are  to  be
deposited.  The  box  in' this  and  the  other
instance  to  be  referred  to  hereafter,  is  pre¬
sented  to  the  inferior  officer  first,  and  then
to  his  superior,  that  the  examination  and
decision  of  the  former  may  be  substantiated
and  confirmed  by  the  higher  authority  of
the  latter.  Let  it,  indeed,  be  remembered,
that  in  all  such  cases  the  usage  of  Masonic
circumambulation  is  to  be  observed,  and  that,
therefore,  we  must  first  pass  the  Junior’s
station  before  we  can  get  to  that  of  the
Senior  Warden.

These  officers  having  thus  satisfied  them¬
selves  that  the  box  is  in  a  proper  condition
for  the  reception  of  the  ballots,  it  is  then
placed  upon  the  altar  by  the  Senior  Deacon,
who  retires  to  his  seat.  The  Master  then
directs  the  Secretary  to  call  the  roll,  which
is  done  by  commencing  with  the  Worship¬
ful  Master,  and  proceeding  through  all  the
officers  down  to  the  youngest  member.  As
a  matter  of  convenience,  the  Secretary
generally  votes  the  last  of  those  in  the
room,  and  then,  if  the  Tiler  is  a  member
of  the  Lodge,  he  is  called  iu,  while  the
Junior  Deacon  tiles  for  him,  and  the  name
of  the  applicant  having  been  told  him,  he
is  directed  to  deposit  his  ballot,  which  he
does  and  then  retires.

As  the  name  of  each  officer  and  member
is  called,  he  approaches  the  altar,  and  hav¬
ing  made  the  proper  Masonic  salutation  to
the  Chair,  he  deposits  his  ballot  and  retires
to  his  seat.  The  roll  should  be  called  slow¬
ly,  so  that  at  no  time  should  there  be  more
than  one  person  present  at  the  box,  for  the
great  object  of  the  ballot  being  secrecy,  no
brother  should  be  permitted  so  near  the
member  voting  as  to  distinguish  the  color
of  the  ball  he  deposits.

The  box  is  placed  on  the  altar,  and  the
ballot  is  deposited  with  the  solemnity  of  a
Masonic  salutation,  that  the  voters  may  be
duly  impressed  with  the  sacred  and  respon¬
sible  nature  of  the  duty  they  are  called  on
to  discharge.  The  system  of  voting  thus
described,  is,  therefore,  far  better  on  this
account  than  that  sometimes  adopted  in
Lodges,  of  handing  round  the  box  for  the
members  to  deposit  their  ballots  from  their
seats.

The  Master  having  inquired  of  the
Wardens  if  all  have  voted,  then  orders  the
Senior  Deacon  to  “take  charge  of  the
ballot-box.”  That  officer  accordingly  re¬
pairs  to  the  altar,  and  taking  possession  of
the  box,  carries  it,  as  before,  to  the  Junior
Warden,  who  examines  the  ballot,  and  re-
orts,  if  all  the  balls  are  white,  that  “the
ox  is  clear  in  the  South,”  or,  if  there  is


one  or  more  black  balls,  that  “the  box  is
foul  in  the  South.”  The  Deacon  then
carries  it  to  the  Senior  Warden,  and  after¬
wards  to  the  Master,  who,  of  course,  make
the  same  report,  according  to  the  circum¬
stance,  with  the  necessary  verbal  variations
of  “West”  and  “East.”

If  the  box  is  clear  —  that  is,  if  all  the
ballots  are  white  —  the  Master  then  an¬
nounces  that  the  applicant  has  been  duly
elected,  and  the  Secretary  makes  a  record
of  the  fact.  But  if  the  box  is  foul,  the
Master  inspects  the  number  of  black  balls ;
if  he  finds  only  one,  he  so  states  the  fact
to  the  Lodge,  and  orders  the  Senior  Deacon
again  to  prepare  the  ballot-box.  Here  the
same  ceremonies  are  passed  through  that
have  already  been  described.  The  balls
are  removed  into  one  compartment,  the  box
is  submitted  to  the  inspection  of  the
Wardens,  it  is  placed  upon  the  altar,  the
roll  is  called,  the  members  advance  and
deposit  their  votes,  the  box  is  scrutinized,
and  the  result  declared  by  the  Wardens  and
Master.  If  again  one  black  ball  be  found,
or  if  two  or  more  appeared  on  the  first
ballot,  the  Master  announces  that  the  pe¬
tition  of  the  applicant  has  been  rejected,
and  directs  the  usual  record  to  be  made  by
the  Secretary  and  the  notification  to  be
given  to  the  Grand  Lodge.

Balloting  for  membership  or  affiliation  is
subject  to  the  same  rules.  In  both  cases
“  previous  notice,  one  month  before,”  must
be  given  to  the  Lodge,  “  due  inquiry  into
the  reputation  and  capacity  of  the  candi¬
date”  must  be  made,  and  “the  unanimous
consent  of  all  the  members  then  present”
must  be  obtained.  Nor  can  this  unanimity
be  dispensed  with  in  one  case  any  more
than  it  can  in  the  other.  It  is  the  inherent
privilege  of  every  Lodge  to  judge  of  the
qualifications  of  its  own  members,  “  nor  is
this  inherent  privilege  subject  to  a  dispen¬
sation.”

Ballot-Sox.  The  box  in  which  the
ballots  or  little  balls  used  in  voting  for  a
candidate  are  deposited.  It  should  be  di¬
vided  into  two  compartments,  one  of  which
is  to  contain  both  black  and  white  balls,  from
which  each  member  selects  one,  and  the
other,  which  is  closed  with  an  aperture,  to
receive  the  ball  that  is  to  be  deposited.
Various  methods  have  been  devised  by
which  secrecy  may  be  secured,  so  that  a
voter  may  select  and  deposit  the  ball  he
desires  without  the  possibility  of  its  being
seen  whether  it  is  black  or  white.  That
now  most  in  use  in  this  country  is  to  have
the  aperture  so  covered  by  a  part  of  the
box  as  to  prevent  the  band  from  being  seen
when  the  ball  is  deposited.

Ballot.  Reconsideration  oi'tlie.
See  Reconsideration  of  the  Ballot.


BALLOT


BALTIMORE


105


Ballot,  Secrecy  of  the.  The

secrecy  of  the  ballot  is  as  essential  to  its
perfection  as  its  unanimity  or  its  indepen¬
dence.  If  the  vote  were  to  be  given  viva
voce,  it  is  impossible  that  the  improper  influ¬
ences  of  fear  or  interest  should  not  some¬
times  be  exerted,  and  timid  members  be
thus  induced  to  vote  contrary  to  the  dictates
of  their  reason  and  conscience.  Hence,  to
secure  this  secrecy  and  protect  the  purity
of  choice,  it  has  been  wisely  established  as
a  usage,  not  only  that  the  vote  shall  in
these  cases  be  taken  by  a  ballot,  but  that
there  shall  be  no  subsequent  discussion  of
the  subject.  Not  only  has  no  member  a
right  to  inquire  how  his  fellows  have  voted,
but  it  is  wholly  out  of  order  for  him  to  ex¬
plain  his  own  vote.  And  the  reason  of
this  is  evident.  If  one  member  has  a  right
to  rise  in  his  place  and  announce  that  he
deposited  a  white  ball,  then  every  other
member  has  the  same  right;  and  in  a
Lodge  of  twenty  members,  where  an  ap-
lication  has  been  rejected  by  one  black
all,  if  nineteen  members  state  that  they
did  not  deposit  it,  the  inference  is  clear
that  the  twentieth  Brother  has  done  so,  and
thus  the  secrecy  of  the  ballot  is  at  once  de¬
stroyed.  The  rejection  having  been  an¬
nounced  from  the  Chair,  the  Lodge  should  at
once  proceed  to  other  business,  and  it  is  the
sacred  duty  of  the  presiding  officer  peremp¬
torily  and  at  once  to  check  any  rising  dis¬
cussion  on  the  subject.  Nothing  must  be
done  to  impair  the  inviolable  secrecy  of  the
ballot.

Ballot,  Unanimity  of  the.  Una¬
nimity  in  the  choice  of  candidates  is  con¬
sidered  so  essential  to  the  welfare  of  the
Fraternity,  that  the  Old  Regulations  have
expressly  provided  for  its  preservation  in
the  following  words:

“  But  no  man  can  be  entered  a  Brother
in  any  particular  Lodge,  or  admitted  to  be
a  member  thereof,  without  the  unanimous
consent  of  all  the  members  of  that  Lodge
then  present  when  the  candidate  is  pro-
osed,  and  their  consent  is  formally  asked
y  the  Master;  and  they  are  to  signify
their  consent  or  dissent  in  their  own  pru¬
dent  way,  either  virtually  or  in  form,  but
with  unanimity;  nor  is  this  inherent  privi¬
lege  subject  to  a  dispensation  ;  because  the
members  of  a  particular  Lodge  are  the  best
judges  of  it;  and  if  a  fractious  member
should  be  imposed  on  them,  it  might  spoil
their  harmony,  or  hinder  their  freedom;  or
even  break  and  disperse  the  Lodge,  which
ought  to  be  avoided  by  all  good  and  true
breth  ren.”

The  rule  of  unanimity  here  referred  to
is,  however,  applicable  only  to  this  country,
in  all  of  whose  Grand  Lodges  it  is  strictly
enforced.  Anderson  tells  us,  in  the  second
0


edition  of  the  Constitutions,  under  the
head  of  New  Regulations,  (p.  155,)  that  “it
was  found  inconvenient  to  insist  upon
unanimity  in  several  cases;  and,  therefore,
the  Grand  Masters  have  allowed  the  Lodges
to  admit  a  member  if  not  above  three  bal¬
lots  are  against  him  ;  though  some  Lodges
desire  no  such  allowance.”  And  accord¬
ingly,  the  present  constitution  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  says:  “No  person  can
be  made  a  Mason  in  or  admitted  a  member
of  a  Lodge,  if,  on  the  ballot,  three  black
balls  appear  against  him.  Some  Lodges
wish  for  no  such  indulgence,  but  require
the  unanimous  consent  of  the  members
present;  some  admit  one  black  ball,  some
two:  the  by-laws  of  each  Lodge  must,
therefore,  guide  them  in  this  respect ;  but
if  there  be  three  black  balls,  such  person
cannot,  on  any  pretence,  be  admitted.”
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  prescribes
unanimity,  unless  there  is  a  by-law  of  the
subordinate  Lodge  to  the  contrary.  The
constitution  of  Scotland  is  indefinite  on
this  subject,  simply  requiring  that  the
brethren  shall  “have  expressed  themselves
satisfied  by  ballot  in  open  Lodge,”  but  it
does  not  say  whether  the  ballot  shall  be
or  not  be  unanimous.  In  the  continental
Lodges,  the  modern  English  regulation  pre¬
vails.  It  is  only  in  the  Lodges  of  the
United  States  that  the  ancient  rule  of
unanimity  is  strictly  enforced.

Unanimity  in  the  ballot  is  necessary  to
secure  the  harmony  of  the  Lodge,  which
may  be  as  seriously  impaired  by  the  ad¬
mission  of  a  candidate  contrary  to  the
wishes  of  one  member  as  of  three  or  more  ;
for  every  man  has  his  friends  and  his  influ¬
ence.  Besides,  it  is  unjust  to  any  member,
however  humble  he  may  be,  to  introduce
among  his  associates  one  whose  presence
might  be  unpleasant  to  him,  and  whose
admission  would  probably  compel  him  to
withdraw  from  the  meetings,  or  even  alto¬
gether  from  the  Lodge.  Neither  would
any  advantage  really  accrue  to  a  Lodge  by
such  a  forced  admission  ;  for  while  receiv¬
ing  a  new  and  untried  member  into  its
fold,  it  would  be  losing  an  old  one.  For
these  reasons,  in  this  country,  in  every
one  of  its  jurisdictions,  the  unanimity  of
the  ballot  is  expressly  insisted  on  ;  and  it  is
evident,  from  what  has  been  here  said,  that
any  less  stringent  regulation  is  a  violation
of  the  ancient  law  and  usage.

Balsamo.  Joseph.  See  Cagliosfro.

Baltimore  Convention.  A  Ma¬
sonic  Congress  which  met  in  the  city  of
Baltimore  on  the  8th  of  May,  1843,  in
consequence  of  a  recommendation  made  by
a  preceding  convention  which  had  met  in
Washington  city  in  March,  1842.  It  con¬
sisted  of  delegates  from  the  States  of  New


106


BALUSTER


BANNERS


Hampshire,  Rhode  Island,  New  York,
Maryland,  District  of  Columbia,  North
Carolina,  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  Ala¬
bama,  Florida,  Tennessee,  Ohio,  Missouri,
and  Louisiana.  Its  professed  objects  were
to  produce  uniformity  of  Masonic  work  and
to  recommend  such  measures  as  should  tend
to  the  elevation  of  the  Order.  It  continued
in  session  for  nine  days,  during  which  time
it  was  principally  occupied  in  an  attempt
to  perfect  the  ritual,  and  in  drawing  up  ar¬
ticles  for  the  permanent  organization  of  a
TriennialMasonicConvention  of  the  United
States,  to  consist  of  delegates  from  all  the
Grand  Lodges.  In  both  of  these  efforts  it
failed,  although  several  distinguished  Ma¬
sons  took  part  in  its  proceedings;  the  body
was  too  small,  (consisting,  as  it  did,  of  only
twenty-three  members,)  to  exercise  any  de¬
cided  popular  influence  on  the  Fraternity.
Its  plan  of  a  Triennial  Convention  met  with
very  general  opposition,  and  its  proposed
ritual,  familiarly  known  as  the  “Baltimore
work,”  has  almost  become  a  myth.  Its  only
practical  result  was  the  preparation  and
publication  of  Moore’s  Trestle  Board,  a
Monitor  which  has,  however,  been  adopted
only  by  a  limited  number  of  American
Lodges.  The  “Baltimore  work”  did  not
materially  differ  from  that  originally  estab¬
lished  by  Webb.  Moore’s  Trestle  Board  pro¬
fesses  to  be  an  exposition  of  its  monitorial
art ;  a  statement  which,  however,  is  denied
y  Dr.  Dove,  who  was  the  President  of  the
Convention,  and  the  controversy  on  this
point  at  the  time  between  these  two  emi¬
nent  Masons  was  conducted  with  too  much
bitterness.

Baluster.  A  small  column  or  pilaster,
corruptly  called  a  bannister;  in  French,
balusire.  Borrowing  the  architectural  idea,
the  Scottish  Rite  Masons  apply  the  word
baluster  to  any  official  circular  or  other
document  issuing  from  a  Supreme  Council.

Balzac,  Iiouis  Charles.  A  F rench
architect  of  some  celebrity,  and  member  of
the  Institute  of  Egypt.  He  founded  the
Lodge  of  the  Great  Sphinx  at  Paris.  He  was
also  a  poet  of  no  inconsiderable  merit,  and
was  the  author  of  many  Masonic  canticles
in  the  French  language,  among  them  the
well-known  hymn  entitled,  “Taisons  nous,
plus  de  bruit,”  the  music  of  which  was  com¬
posed  by  M.  Riguel.  He  died  March  31,
1820,  at  which  time  he  was  inspector  of  the
public  works  in  the  prefecture  of  the  Seine.

Banners,  Boyal  Arch.  Much
difficulty  has  been  experienced  by  ritualists
in  reference  to  the  true  colors  and  proper
arrangements  of  the  banners  used  in  an
American  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons.
It  is  admitted  that  they  are  four  in  number,
and  that  their  colors  are  blue,  purple,  scar¬
let  and  white;  and  it  is  known,  too,  that


the  devices  on  these  banners  are  a  lion,  an
ox,  a  man,  and  an  eagle ;  but  the  doubt  is
constantly  arising  as  to  the  relation  between
these  devices  and  these  colors,  and  as  to
which  of  the  former  is  to  be  appropriated
to  each  of  the  latter.  The  question,  it  is
true,  is  one  of  mere  ritualism,  but  it  is  impor¬
tant  that  the  ritual  should  be  always  uniform,
and  hence  the  object  of  the  present  article  is
to  attempt  the  solution  of  this  question.

The  banners  used  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chap¬
ter  are  derived  from  those  which  are  sup¬
posed  to  have  been  borne  by  the  twelve
tribes  of  Israel  during  their  encampment
in  the  wilderness,  to  which  reference  is
made  in  the  second  chapter  of  the  Book  of
Numbers,  and  the  second  verse:  “Every
man  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  pitch
by  his  own  standard.”  But  as  to  what
were  the  devices  on  the  banners,  or  what
were  their  various  colors,  the  Bible  is  abso¬
lutely  silent.  To  the  inventive  genius  of
the  Talmudists  are  we  indebted  for  all  that
we  know  or  profess  to  know  on  this  subject.
These  mystical  philosophers  have  given  to
us  with  wonderful  precision  the  various  de¬
vices  which  they  have  borrowed  from  the
death-bed  prophecy  of  Jacob,  and  have
sought,  probably  in  their  own  fertile  im¬
aginations,  for  the  appropriate  colors.

The  English  Royal  Arch  Masons,  whose
system  differs  very  much  from  that  of  their
American  Companions,  display  in  their
Chapters  the  twelve  banners  of  the  tribes
in  accordance  with  the  Talmudic  devices
and  colors.  These  have  been  very  elabo¬
rately  described  by  Dr.  Oliver,  in  his  His¬
torical  Landmarks,  and  beautifully  exem¬
plified  by  Companion  Harris,  in  his  Royal
Arch  Tracing  Boards.

But  our  American  Royal  Arch  Masons,
as  we  have  seen,  use  only  four  banners,
being  those  attributed  by  the  Talmudists  to
the  four  principal  tribes  —  Judah,  Eph¬
raim,  Reuben,  and  Dan.  The  devices  on
these  banners  are  respectively  a  lion,  an  ox,
a  man,  and  an  eagle.  As  to  this  there  i3
no  question ;'  all  authorities,  such  as  they
are,  agreeing  on  this  point.  But,  as  has
been  before  said,  there  is  some  diversity  of
opinion  as  to  the  colors  of  each,  and  neces¬
sarily  as  to  the  officers  by  whom  they  should
be  borne.

Some  of  the  Targumists,  or  Jewish  bibli¬
cal  commentators,  say  that  the  color  of  the
banner  of  each  tribe  was  analogous  to  that
of  the  stone  which  represented  that  tribe  in
the  breastplate  of  the  high  priest.  If  this
were  correct,  then  the  colors  of  the  banners
of  the  four  leading  tribes  would  be  red  and
green,  namely,  red  for  Judah,  Ephraim,
and  Reuben,  and  green  for  Dan ;  these
being  the  colors  of  the  precious  stones  sar¬
donyx,  ligure,  carbuncle,  and  chrysolite,


BANQUET


BAPTISM


107


by  which  these  tribes  were  represented  in
the  high  priest’s  breastplate.  Such  an
arrangement  would  not,  of  course,  at  all
suit  the  symbolism  of  the  American  Royal
Arch  banners.

Equally  unsatisfactory  is  the  disposition
of  the  colors  derived  from  the  arms  of  spec¬
ulative  Masonry,  as  first  displayed  by  Der-
mott  in  his  Ahiman  Rezon,  which  is  fa¬
miliar  to  all  American  Masons,  from  the
copy  published  by  Cross,  in  his  Hieroglyphic
Chart.  In  this  piece  of  blazonry,  the  two
fields  occupied  by  Judah  and  Dan  are  azure,
or  blue,  and  those  of  Ephraim  and  Reuben
are  or,  or  golden  yellow ;  an  appropriation
of  colors  altogether  uncongenial  with  Royal
Arch  symbolism.

We  must,  then,  depend  on  the  Talmudic
writers  solely  for  the  disposition  and  ar¬
rangement  of  the  colors  and  devices  of  these
banners.  From  their  works  we  learn  that
the  color  of  the  banner  of  Judah  was  white ;
that  of  Ephraim  scarlet;  that  of  Reuben
purple ;  and  that  of  Dan  blue  ;  and  that  the
devices  of  the  same  tribes  were  respectively
the  lion,  the  ox,  the  man,  and  the  eagle.

Hence,  under  this  arrangement  —  and  it
is  the  only  one  upon  which  we  can  depend
—  the  four  banners  iu  a  Chapter  of  Royal
Arch  Masons,  working  in  the  American
Rite,  must  be  distributed  as  follows  among
the  banner-bearing  officers :

1st.  An  eagle,  on  a  blue  banner.  This
represents  the  tribe  of  Dan,  and  is  borne
by  the  Grand  Master  of  the  first  veil.

2d.  A  man,  on  a  purple  banner.  This
represents  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  and  is  borne
by  the  Grand  Master  of  the  second  veil.

3d.  An  ox,  on  a  scarlet  banner.  This
represents  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  and  is  borne
by  the  Grand  Master  of  the  third  veil.

4th.  A  lion,  on  a  white  banner.  This
represents  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  is  borne
by  the  Royal  Arch  Captain.

Banquet.  See  Table-  Lodge.

Baphomct.  The  imaginary  idol,  or,
rather,  symbol,  which  the  Knights  Tem¬
plars  were  accused  of  employing  in  their
mystic  rights.  The  forty-second  of  the
charges  preferred  against  them  by  Pope
Clement  is  in  these  words:  “Item  quod
ipsi  per  singulas  provincias  habeant  idola:
videlicet  capita  quorum  aliqua  habebant
tres  tacics,  el  alia  unum :  et  aliqua  cranium
humanum  habebant.”  Also,  that  in  all  of
the  provinces  they  have  idols,  namely,
heads,  of  which  some  had  three  faces,  some
one,  and  some  had  a  human  skull.  Von
Hammer,  a  bitter  enemy  of  the  Templars,
in  his  book  entitled,  The  Mystery  of  Baph¬
omet  Revealed,  (see  Hammer,)  revived  this
old  accusation,  and  attached  to  the  Baph-
omet  an  impious  signification.  He  de¬
rived  the  name  from  the  Greek  words  flatpij,


baptism,  and  /it/n f,  wisdom,  and  thence  sup¬
posed  that  it  represented  the  admission  of
the  initiated  into  the  secret  mysteries  of
the  Order.  From  this  gratuitous  assump¬
tion  he  deduces  his  theory,  set  forth  even
in  the  very  title  of  his  work,  that  the  Tem¬
plars  were  convicted,  by  their  own  monu¬
ments,  of  being  guilty  as  Gnostics  and
Ophites,  of  apostasy,  idolatry,  and  impu¬
rity.  Of  this  statement  he  offers  no  other
historical  testimony  than  the  Articles  of
Accusation,  themselves  devoid  of  proof,
but  through  which  the  Templars  were
made  the  victims  of  the  jealousy  of  the
pope  and  the  avarice  of  the  king  of  France.

Others  again  have  thought  that  they
could  find  in  Baphomet  a  corruption  of
Mahomet,  and  hence  they  have  asserted
that  the  Templars  had  been  perverted  from
their  religious  faith  by  the  Saracens,  with
whom  they  had  so  much  intercourse,  some¬
times  as  foes  and  sometimes  as  friends.
Nicolai,  who  wrote  an  Essay  on  the  Accusa¬
tions  brought  against  the  Templars,  published
at  Berlin,  in  1782,  supposes,  but  doubtingly,
that  the  figure  of  the  Baphomet,  “figura
Baffometi,”  which  was  depicted  on  a  bust
representing  the  Creator,  was  nothing  else
but  the  Pythagorean  pentagon,  the  symbol
of  health  and  prosperity,  borrowed  by  the
Templars  from  the  Gnostics,  who  in  turn
had  obtained  it  from  the  School  of  Pythag¬
oras.

King,  in  his  learned  work  on  the  Gnos¬
tics,  thinks  that  the  Baphomet  may  have
been  a  symbol  of  the  Manicheans,  with
whose  wide-spreading  heresy  in  the  Middle
Ages  he  does  not  doubt  that  a  large  portion
of  the  inquiring  spirits  of  the  Temple  had
been  intoxicated.

Amid  these  conflicting  views,  all  merely
speculative,  it  will  not  be  uncharitable  or
unreasonable  to  suggest  that  the  Baphomet,
or  skull  of  the  ancient  Templars,  was,  like
the  relic  of  their  modern  Masonic  represent¬
atives,  simply  an  impressive  symbol  teach¬
ing  the  lesson  of  mortality,  and  that  the  lat¬
ter  has  really  been  derived  from  the  former.

Baptism,  Masonic.  The  term  “  Ma¬
sonic  Baptism  ”  has  been  recently  applied
in  this  country  by  some  authorities  to  that
ceremony  which  is  used  in  certain  of  the
high  degrees,  and  which,  more  properly,
should  be  called  “Lustration.”  It  has
been  objected  that  the  use  of  the  term  is
calculated  to  give  needless  offence  to  scru¬
pulous  persons  who  might  suppose  it  to  be
an  imitation  of  a  Christian  sacrament.
But,  in  fact,  the  Masonic  baptism  has  no
allusion  whatsoever,  either  in  form  or  de¬
sign,  to  the  sacrament  of  the  Church.  It
is  simply  a  lustration  or  purification  by
water,  a  ceremony  which  was  common  to
all  the  ancient  initiations.  See  Lustration.


108


BARD


BARRUEL


Bard.  A  title  of  great  dignity  and
importance  among  the  ancient  Britons,
which  was  conferred  only  upon  men  of
distinguished  rank  in  society,  and  who
filled  a  sacred  office.  It  was  the  third  or
lowest  of  the  three  decrees  into  which
Druidism  was  divided.  See  Druidism.

Bastard.  The  question  of  the  ineli¬
gibility  of  bastards  to  be  made  Freemasons
was  first  brought  to  the  attention  of  the
Craft  by  Brother  Chalmers  T.  Patton,
who,  in  several  articles  in  The  London  Free¬
mason,  in  1869,  contended  that  they  were
excluded  from  initiation  by  the  Ancient
Regulations.  Subsequently,  in  his  compi¬
lation  entitled  Freemasonry  and  its  Jurispru¬
dence,  published  in  1872,  he  cites  several  of
the  Old  Constitutions  as  explicitly  declaring
that  the  men  made  Masons  shall  be  “  no
bastards.”  This  is  a  most  unwarrantable
interpolation  not  to  be  justified  in  any
writer  on  jurisprudence;  for  on  a  careful
examination  of  all  the  old  manuscript
copies  which  have  been  published,  no
such  words  are  to  be  found  in  any  one  of
them.  As  an  instance  of  this  literary  dis-
iugenuousness,  (to  use  no  harsher  term,)  I
quote  the  following  from  his  work,  (p.  60 :)

“  The  charge  in  this  second  edition  [of  An¬
derson’s  Constitutions]  is  in  the  following
unmistakable  words :  ‘  The  men  made  Ma¬
sons  must  be  freeborn,  no  bastard,  (or  no
bondmen,)  of  mature  age  and  of  good  re¬
port,  hale  and  sound,  not  deformed  or  dis¬
membered  at  the  time  of  their  making.’”

Now,  with  a  copy  of  this  second  edition
lying  open  before  me,  I  find  the  passage  thus
printed:  “The  men  made  Masons  must  be
freeborn,  (or  no  bondmen,)  of  mature  age
and  of  good  report,  hale  and  sound,  not
deformed  or  dismembered  at  the  time  of
their  making.”  The  words  “ no  bastard”
are  Patton’s  interpolation.

Again,  Patton  quotes  from  Preston  the
Ancient  Charges  at  makings, in  these  words:

“  That  he  that  be  made  be  able  in  all  de¬
grees;  that  is,  freeborn,  of  a  good  kindred,
true,  and  no  bondsman  or  bastard,  and  that
he  have  his  right  limbs  as  a  man  ought  to
have.”

But  on  referring  to  Preston,  (edition  of
1775,  and  all  subsequent  editions,)  we  find
the  passage  to  be  correctly  thus :  “  That  he
that  be  made  be  able  in  all  degrees ;  that  is,
freeborn,  of  a  good  kindred,  true,  and  no
bondsman,  and  that  he  have  his  limbs  as  a
man  ought  to  have.”

Positive  law  authorities  should  not  be
thus  cited,  not  merely  carelessly,  but  with
designed  inaccuracy  to  support  a  theory.

But  although  there  is  no  regulation  in
the  Old  Constitutions  which  explicitly  pro¬
hibits  the  initiation  of  bastards,  it  may  be  ’
implied  from  their  language  that  such  pro-  ,


hibition  did  exist.  Thus,  in  all  the  old
manuscripts,  we  find  such  expressions  as
these:  he  that  shall  be  made  a  Mason
“  must  be  freeborn  and  of  good  kindred,”
(Sloane  MS.,)  or  “come  of  good  kindred,”
(Edinburgh  Kilwinning  MS.,)  or,  as  the
Roberts  MS.  more  definitely  has  it,  “  of
honest  parentage.”

It  is  not,  I  therefore  think,  to  be  doubted
that  formerly  bastards  were  considered  as
ineligible  for  initiation,  on  the  same  prin¬
ciple  that  they  were,  as  a  degraded  class,
excluded  from  the  priesthood  in  the  Jew¬
ish  and  the  primitive  Christian  church.
But  the  more  liberal  spirit  of  modern  times
has  long  since  made  the  law  obsolete,  be¬
cause  it  is  contrary  to  the  principles  of  jus¬
tice  to  punish  a  misfortune  as  if  it  was  a
crime.

Bnrefeet.  See  Discalceation.

Barruel,  Abbe.  Augustin  Barruel,
generally  known  as  the  Abbe  Barruel,  who
was  born,  October  2, 1741,  at  Villeneuve  de
Berg,  in  France,  and  who  died  October  5,
1820,  was  an  implacable  enemy  of  Free¬
masonry.  He  was  a  prolific  writer,  but
owes  his  reputation  principally  to  the
work  entitled  Memoires  pour  servir  a  V  His-
toire  da  Jacobinisme,  4  vols.,  8vo,  published
in  London  in  1797.  In  this  work  he  charges
the  Freemasons  with  revolutionary  prin¬
ciples  in  politics  and  with  infidelity  in  re¬
ligion.  He  seeks  to  trace  the  origin  of  the
Institution  first  to  those  ancient  heretics
the  Manicheans,  and  through  them  to  the
Templars,  against  whom  he  revives  the  old
accusations  of  Philip  the  Fair  and  Clement
the  Fifth.  His  theory  of  the  Templar  ori¬
gin  of  Masonry  is  thus  expressed  (ii.  377).
“'Your  whole  school  and  all  your  Lodges  are
derived  from  the  Templars.  After  the  ex¬
tinction  of  their  Order,  a  certain  number
of  guilty  knights,  having  escaped  the  pro¬
scription,  united  for  the  preservation  of
their  horrid  mysteries.  To  their  impious
code  they  added  the  vow  of  vengeance
against  the  kings  and  priests  who  destroyed
their  Order,  and  against  all  religion  which
anathematized  their  dogmas.  They  made
adepts,  who  should  transmit  from  genera¬
tion  to  generation  the  same  mysteries  of
iniquity,  the  same  oaths,  and  the  same
hatred  of  the  God  of  the  Christians,  and
of  kings,  and  of  priests.  These  mysteries
have  descended  to  you,  and  you  continue
to  perpetuate  their  impiety,  their  vows,  and
their  oaths.  Such  is  your  origin.  The  lapse
of  time  and  the  change  of  manners  have
varied  a  part  of  your  symbols  and  your
frightful  systems  ;  but  the  essence  of  them
remains,  the  vows,  the  oaths,  the  hatred,
and  the  conspiracies  are  the  same.”  It  is
not  astonishing  that  Lawrie  [Hist.,  p.  50,)
i  should  have  said  of  the  writer  of  such


BASKET


BAY


109


statements,  that  “that  charity  and  forbear¬
ance  which  distinguish  the  Christian
character  are  never  exemplified  in  the
work  of  Barruel ;  and  the  hypocrisy  of  his
pretensions  are  often  betrayed  by  the  fury
of  his  zeal.  The  tattered  veil  behind  which
he  attempts  to  cloak  his  inclinations  often
discloses  to  the  reader  the  motives  of  the
man  and  the  wishes  of  his  party.”  Al¬
though  the  attractions  of  his  style  and  the
boldness  of  his  declamation  gave  Barruel  at
one  time  aprominent  place  among  anti-Ma-
sonic  writers,  his  work  is  now  seldom  read
and  never  cited  in  Masonic  controversies,
for  the  progress  of  truth  has  assigned  their
just  value  to  its  extravagant  assertions.

Basket.  The  basket  or  fan  was  among
the  Egyptians  a  symbol  of  the  purification
of  souls.  The  idea  seems  to  have  been
adopted  by  other  nations,  and  hence,  “  in¬
itiations  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries,”  says
Mr.  Rolle  ( Culte  de  Bacch.,  i.  30),  “being
the  commencement  of  a  better  life  and  the
perfection  of  it,  could  not  take  place  till
the  soul  was  purified.  The  fan  had  been
accepted  as  the  symbol  of  that  purification
because  the  mysteries  purged  the  soul  of
sin,  as  the  fan  cleanses  the  grain.”  John
the  Baptist  conveys  the  same  idea  of  puri¬
fication  when  he  says  of  the  Messiah,  “  His
fan  is  in  his  hand,  and  he  will  thoroughly
purge  his  floor.”  The  sacred  basket  in  the
Ancient  Mysteries  was  called  the  liknon,  and
the  one  who  carried  it  was  termed  the  lik-
nophoros,  or  basket-bearer.  Indeed,  the
sacred  basket,  containing  the  first  fruits  and
offerings,  was  as  essential  in  all  solemn
processions  of  the  mysteries  of  Bacchus  and
other  divinities  as  the  Bible  is  in  the
Masonic  procession.  As  lustration  was  the
symbol  of  purification  by  water,  so  the
mystical  fan  or  winnowing-basket  was,  ac¬
cording  to  Sainte  Croix,  ( Mgst .  du  Pag.,  t.
ii.,  p.  81,)  the  symbol  in  the  Bacchic  rites
of  a  purification  by  air.

Basle,  Congress  of.  A  Masonic
Congress  was  held  Sept.  24,  1848,  at  Basle,
in  Switzerland,  consisting  of  one  hundred
and  six  members,  representing  eleven
Lodges,  under  the  patronage  of  the  Swiss
Grand  Lodge  Alpina.  The  Congress  was
principally  engaged  upon  the  discussion
of  the  question,  “What  can  and  what  ought
Freemasonry  to  contribute  towards  the  wel¬
fare  of  mankind  locally,  nationally,  and
internationally?”  The  conclusion  to  which
the  Congress  appeared  to  arrive  upon  this
question  was  briefly  this:  “Locally,  Free¬
masonry  ought  to  strive  to  make  every  bro¬
ther  a  good  citizen,  a  good  father,  and  a
good  neighbor,  whilst  it  ought  to  teach  him
to  perform  every  duty  of  life  faithfully;
nationally,  a  Freemason  ought  to  strive  to
promote  and  to  maintain  the  welfare  and


the  honor  of  his  native  land,  to  love  and
to  honor  it  himself,  and,  if  necessary,  to
place  his  life  and  fortune  at  its  disposal ;
internationally,  a  Freemason  is  bound  to
go  still  further :  he  must  consider  himself
as  a  member  of  that  one  great  family,  —  the
whole  human  race,  —  who  are  all  children
of  one  and  the  same  Father,  and  that  it  is
in  this  sense,  and  with  this  spirit,  that  the
Freemason  ought  to  work  if  he  would  ap¬
pear  worthily  before  the  throne  of  Eternal
Truth  and  Justice.”  The  Congress  appears
to  have  accomplished  no  practical  result.

Baton.  The  truncheon  or  staff  of  a
Grand  Marshal,  and  always  carried  by  him
in  processions  as  the  ensign  of  his  office.
It  is  a  wooden  rod  about  eighteen  inches
long.  In  the  military  usage  of  England,
the  baton  of  the  Earl  Marshal  was  orig¬
inally  of  wood,  but  in  the  reign  of  Richard
II.  it  was  made  of  gold,  and  delivered  to
him  at  his  creation,  a  custom  which  is  still
continued.  In  the  patent  or  commission
granted  by  that  monarch  to  the  Duke  of
Surrey  the  baton  is  minutely  described  as
“  baculum  aureum  circa  utramque  finem
de  nigro  annulatum,”  a  golden  wand,  having
black  rings  around  each  end,  — a  description
that  will  very  well  suit  for  a  Masonic  baton.

Bat  Parliament.  The  Parliament
which  assembled  in  England  in  the  year
1425,  during  the  minority  of  Henry  VI.,
to  settle  the  disputes  between  the  Duke  of
Gloucester,  the  Regent,  and  the  Bishop  of
Winchester,  the  guardian  of  the  young
king’s  person,  and  which  was  so  called  be¬
cause  of  the  bats  or  clubs  with  which  the
servants  of  the  contending  factions,  who
were  stationed  at  the  entrances  of  the  Par¬
liament  House,  were  armed.  This  Parlia¬
ment  passed  the  celebrated  Act  restraining
the  meeting  of  Masons  in  Chapters.  See
Laborers,  Statutes  of.

Bavaria.  Freemasonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  Bavaria,  from  France,  in  1737.
The  meetings  of  the  Judges  were  sus¬
pended  in  1784  by  the  reigning  duke,
Charles  Theodore,  and  the  Act  of  suspen¬
sion  was  renewed  in  1799  and  1804  by
Maximilian  Joseph,  the  king  of  Bavaria.
The  Order  was  subsequently  revived  in
1812  and  in  1817.  The  Grand  Lodge  of
Bayreuth  was  constituted  under  the  appel¬
lation  of  the  “  Grand  Lodge  zu  Sonne.”
In  1868  a  Masonic  conference  took  place
of  the  Lodges  under  its  jurisdiction,  and  a
constitution  was  adopted,  which  guarantees
to  every  confederated  Lodge  perfect  free¬
dom  of  ritual  and  government,  provided
the  Grand  Lodge  finds  these  to  be  Masonic.

Bay-Trco.  An  evergreen  plant,  and
a  symbol  in  Freemasonry  of  the  immortal
nature  of  Truth.  By  the  buv-tree  thus  re¬
ferred  to  in  the  ritual  of  the  Knight  of  the


110


BAZOT


BEAUSEANT


Red  Cross,  is  meant  the  laurel,  which,  as  an
evergreen,  was  among  the  ancients  a  symbol
of  immortality.  It  is,  therefore,  properly
compared  with  truth,  which  Josephus
makes  Zerubbabel  say  is  “  immortal  and
eternal.”

Bazot,  Fticine  Francois.  A

French  Masonic  writer,  born  at  Nievre,
March  31,  1782.  He  published  at  Paris,  in
1810,  a  Vocabulaire  des  Francs  -  Masons,
which  was  translated  into  Italian,  and  in
1811  a  Manuel  du  Franc- Ma^on,  which  is
one  of  the  most  judicious  works  of  the  kind
published  in  France.  He  was  also  the
author  of-  Morale  de  la  Franc- Magonnerie,
and  the  T uileur  Expert  des  33  degree,  which
is  a  complement  to  his  Manuel.  Bazot  was
distinguished  for  other  literary  writings  on
subjects  of  general  literature,  such  as  two
volumes  of  Tales  and  Poems,  A  Eulogy  on
the  Abbe  de  V Epee,  and  as  the  editor  of  the
Biographic  Nouvelle  des  Contemporaires,  in
20  volumes.

B.  I).  §.  P.  H.  G.  F.  In  the  French
rituals  of  the  Knights  of  the  East  and
West,  these  letters  are  the  initials  of  Beaute,
Divinite,  Sagesse,  Puissame,  Honneur,
Gloire,  Force,  which  correspond  to  the
letters  of  the  English  rituals,  B.  D.  W .  P.
H.  G.  S.,  which  are  the  initials  of  equiva¬
lent  words.

Beadle.  An  officer  in  a  Council  of
Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  correspond¬
ing  to  the  Junior  Deacon  of  a  symbolic
Lodge.  The  beadle,  bedellus,  (DuCange,)
is  one,  says  Junius,  who  proclaims  and  exe¬
cutes  the  will  of  superior  powers.

Beaton,  Mrs.  One  of  those  fortu¬
nate  females  who  is  said  to  have  obtained
possession  of  the  Masons’  secrets.  The  fol¬
lowing  account  of  her  is  given  in  A  General
History  of  the  County  of  Norfolk,  published
in  1829,  (vol.  2,  p.  1304.)  Mrs.  Beaton,  who
was  a  resident  of  Norfolk,  England,  was
commonly  called  the  Freemason,  from  the
circumstance  of  her  having  contrived  to
conceal  herself,  one  evening,  in  the  wain¬
scoting  of  a  Lodge- room,  where  she  learned
the  secret — at  the  knowledge  of  which
thousands  of  her  sex  have  in  vain  at¬
tempted  to  arrive.  She  was,  in  many  re¬
spects,  a  very  singular  character,  of  which
one  proof  adduced  is  that  the  secret  of  the
Freemasons  died  with  her.  She  died  at
St.  John  Maddermarket,  Norwich,  July,
1802,  aged  eighty-five.

Beaneenifer.  From  Beauseant,  and
fero,  to  carry.  The  officer  among  the  old
Knights  Templars  whose  duty  it  was  to
carry  the  Beauseant  in  battle.  The  office
is  still  retained  in  some  of  the  high  degrees
which  are  founded  on  Templarism.

Beaucliaine.  The  Chevalier  Beau-
chaine  was  one  of  the  most  fanatical  of  the


irremovable  Masters  of  the  Ancient  Grand
Lodge  of  France.  He  had  established  his
Lodge  at  the  “  Golden  Sun,”  an  inn  in  the
Rue  St.  Victor,  Paris,  where  he  slept,  and
for  six  francs  conferred  all  the  degrees  of
Freemasonry'.  On  August  17,  1747,  he  or¬
ganized  the  Order  of  Fendeurs,  or  Wood¬
cutters,  at  Paris.

Beauseant.  The  vexillum  belli,  or
war  banner  of  the  ancient  Templars,  which
is  also  used  by  the
modern  Masonic  Or¬
der.  The  upper  half
of  the  banner  was
black,  and  the  lower
half  white;  black  to
typify  terror  to  foes,
and  white  fairness  to
friends.  It  bore  the
pious  inscription,  Non
nobis,  Domine  non  no¬
bis,  sed  nomini  tuo  da
gloriam.  It  is  frequently,  says  Barrington,
[Intro,  to  Her.,  p.  121,)  introduced  among
the  decorations  in  the  Temple  Church,
and  on  one  of  the  paintings  on  the  wall,
Henry  I.  is  represented  with  this  ban¬
ner  in  his  hand.  As  to  the  derivation  of
the  word,  there  is  some  doubt  among
writers.  Bauseant  or  Bausant  was,  in  old
French,  a  pie-bald  or  party-colored  horse;
and  the  word  Bawseant  is  used  in  the  Scot¬
tish  dialect  with  a  similar  reference  to  two
colors.  Thus,  Burns  says :

“His  honest,  sonsie,  baws’nt  face,”

where  Dr.  Currie,  in  his  Glossary  of  Burns,
explains  bawsent  as  meaning,  “  having  a
white  stripe  down  the  face.”  It  is  also
supposed  by  some  that  the  word  bauseant
may  be  only'  a  form,  in  the  older  lan¬
guage,  of  the  modern  French  word  bienseant,
which  signifies  something  decorous  or  hand¬
some;  but  I  much  prefer  the  former  deriva¬
tion,  where  beauseant  would  signify  simply
a  parti -colored  banner.  With  regard  to
the  double  signification  of  the  white  and
black  banner,  the  orientalists  have  a
legend  of  Alexander  the  Great,  which  may
be  appropriately'  quoted  on  the  present  oc¬
casion,  as  given  by  Weil  in  his  Biblical
Legends,  p.  70.

Alexander  was  the  lord  of  light  and
darkness:  when  he  went  out  with  his  army
the  light  was  before  him,  and  behind  him
was  the  darkness,  so  that  he  was  secure
against  all  ambuscades;  and  by  means  of  a
miraculous  white  and  black  standard  he
had  also  the  power  to  transform  the  clearest
day  into  midnight  and  darkness,  or  black
night  into  noon-day',  just  as  he  unfurled
the  one  or  the  other.  Thus  he  was  uncon¬
querable,  since  he  rendered  his  troops  in-


BEAUTY


BEHAVIOR


111


visible  at  bis  pleasure,  and  came  down  sud¬
denly  upon  his  foes.  Might  there  not
have  been  some  connection  between  the
mythical  white  and  black  standard  of
Alexander  and  the  Beauseant  of  the  Tem¬
plars?  We  know  that  the  latter  were
familiar  with  oriental  symbolism.

Beauseant  was  also  the  war-cry  of  the
Ancient  Templars.

Beauty.  Said  to  be  symbolically  one
.  of  the  three  supports  of  a  Lodge.  It  is
represented  by  the  Corinthian  column,  be¬
cause  the  Corinthian  is  the  most  beautiful
of  the  ancient  orders  of  Architecture;  and
by  tbe  Junior  Warden,  because  he  symbol¬
izes  the  meridian  sun  —  the  most  beautiful
object  in  the  heavens.  Hiram  Abif  is  also
said  to  be  represented  by  the  column  of
Beauty,  because  the  Temple  was  indebted
to  his  skill  for  its  splendid  decorations.
The  idea  of  Beauty  as  one  of  the  supports
of  the  Lodge  is  found  in  the  earliest  rituals
of  the  eighteenth  century,  as  well  as  the
symbolism  which  refers  it  to  the  Corinthian
column  and  the  Junior  Warden.  Preston
first  introduced  the  reference  to  the  Corin¬
thian  column  and  to  Hiram  Abif.  Beauty,
n“lfc<Qn.  tipkiret,  was  the  sixth  of  the
Kabbalistic  Sephiroth,  and,  with  J  ustice  and
Mercy,  formed  the  second  Sephirotic  triad;
and  from  the  Kabbalists  the  Masons  most
probably  derived  the  symbol.  See  Supports
of  the  Lodge.

Beauty  and  Bands.  The  names
of  the  two  rods  spoken  of  by  the  prophet
Zechariah  as  symbolic  of  his  pastoral  office.
This  expression  was  in  use  in  portions  of
the  old  Masonic  ritual  in  England ;  but  in
the  system  of  Dr.  Hemming,  which  was
adopted  at  the  union  of  the  two  Grand
Lodges  in  1813,  this  symbol,  with  all  refer¬
ence  to  it,  was  expunged,  and,  as  Dr.  Oliver
says,  (Sym.  Die.,)  “it  is  nearly  forgotten,
except  by  a  few  old  Masons,  who  may  per¬
haps  recollect  the  illustration  as  an  inci¬
dental  subject  of  remark  among  the  Fra¬
ternity  of  that  period.”

Becker.  See  Johnson.

Becker,  Rudolph  Zaeharias.
A  very  zealous  Mason  of  Gotha,  who  pub¬
lished,  in  1786,  an  historical  essay  on  the
Bavarian  Illuminati,  under  the  title  of
Grundsatze  Verfassung  und  Schicksale  des
llluminatens  Ordeu  in  Baiem.  He  was  a
very  popular  writer  on  educational  sub¬
jects;  his  Instructive  Tales  of  Joy  and  Sor-
row  were  so  highly  esteemed,  that  a
half  million  copies  of  it  were  printed  in
German  and  other  languages.  He  died  in
1802.

Bddarride,  The  Brothers.  The

Brothers  Marc,  Michel,  and  Joseph  Bddar-
ride  were  Masonic  charlatans,  notorious
for  their  propagation  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim,


having  established  in  1813,  at  Paris,  under
the  partly  real  and  partly  pretended  au¬
thority  of  Lechangeur,  the  inventor  of
the  Rite,  a  Supreme  Puissance  for  France,
and  organized  a  large  number  of  Lodges.
Of  these  three  brothers,  who  were  Israelites,
Michel,  who  assumed  the  most  prominent
position  in  the  numerous  controversies
which  arose  in  French  Masonry  on  ac¬
count  of  their  Rite,  died  February  16, 1856.
Marc  died  ten  years  before,  in  April,  1846.
Of  Joseph,  who  was  never  very  prominent,
we  have  no  record  as  to  the  time  of  his
death.  See  Mizraim,  Bite  of.

Beets ive.  The  bee  was  among  the  •
Egyptians  the  symbol  of  an  obedient  peo¬
ple,  because,  says  Horapollo,of  all  animals,
the  bee  alone  had  a  king.  Hence,  looking
at  the  regulated  labor  of  these  insects  when
congregated  in  their  hive,  it  is  not  surpris¬
ing  that  a  beehive  should  have  been  deemed
an  appropriate  emblem  of  systemized  in¬
dustry.  Freemasonry  has  therefore  adopted
the  beehive  as  a  symbol  of  industry,  a  vir¬
tue  taught  in  the  ritual,  which  says  that  a
Master  Mason  “works  that  he  may  receive
wages,  the  better  to  support  himself  and
family,  and  contribute  to  the  relief  of  a
worthy,  distressed  broth  er,  his  widow  and  or¬
phans  ;  ”  and  in  the  Old  Charges,  which  tell
us  that  “  all  Masons  shall  work  honestly  on
working  days,  that  they  may  live  credit¬
ably  on  holidays.”  There  seems,  however,
to  be  a  more  recondite  meaning  connected
with  this  symbol.  The  ark  has  already
been  shown  to  have  been  an  emblem  com¬
mon  to  Freemasonry  and  the  Ancient  Mys¬
teries,  as  a  symbol  of  regeneration  —  of  the
second  birth  from  death  to  life.  Now,  in  the
Mysteries,  a  hive  was  the  type  of  the  ark.
“Hence,”  says  Faber,  ( Orig.  of  Pag.  Idol.,
vol.  ii.,  133,)  “  both  thediluvian  priestesses
and  the  regenerated  souls  were  called  bees;
hence,  bees  were  feigned  to  be  produced  from
the  carcase  of  a  cow,  which  also  symbol¬
ized  the  ark ;  and  hence,  as  the  great  father
was  esteemed  an  infernal  god,  honey  was
much  used  both  in  funeral  rites  and  in  the
Mysteries.”

Behavior.  The  subject  of  a  Ma¬
son’s  behavior  is  one  that  occupies  much
attention  in  both  the  ritualistic  and  the
monitorial  instructions  of  the  Order.  In
“  the  Charges  of  a  Freemason,”  extracted
from  the  ancient  records,  and  first  pub¬
lished  in  the  Constitutions  of  1723,  the
sixth  article  is  exclusively  appropriated  to
the  subject  of  “  Behavior.”  It  is  divided
into  six  sections,  as  follows:  1.  Behavior
in  the  Lodge  while  constituted.  2.  Be¬
havior  after  the  Lodge  is  over  and  the
Brethren  not  gone.  3.  Behavior  when
Brethren  meet  without  strangers,  but  not
in  a  Lodge  formed.  4.  Behavior  in  pres-


112


BEHOLD


BENDEKAR


ence  of  strangers  not  Masons.  5.  Behavior
at  home  and  in  your  neighborhood.  8.  Be¬
havior  towards  a  strange  brother.  The
whole  article  constitutes  a  code  of  moral
ethics  remarkable  for  the  purity  of  the
principles  it  inculcates,  and  is  weil  worthy
of  the  close  attention  of  every  Mason.  It
is  a  complete  refutation  of  the  slanders  of
anti-Masonic  revilers.  As  these  charges  are
to  be  found  in  all  the  editions  of  the  Book
of  Constitutions,  and  in  many  recent  Ma¬
sonic  works,  they  are  readily  accessible  to
every  one  who  desires  to  read  them.

Behold  Your  Master.  When,  in
the  installation  services,  the  formula  is
used,  “  Brethren,  behold  your  master,”  the
expression  is  not  simply  exclamatory,  but
is  intended,  as  the  original  use  of  the  word
behold  implies,  to  invite  the  members  of
the  Lodge  to  fix  their  attention  upon  the
new  relations  which  have  sprung  up  be¬
tween  them  and  him  who  hits  just  been
elevated  to  the  Oriental  Chair,  and  to  im¬
press  upon  their  minds  the  duties  which
they  owe  to  him  and  which  he  owes  to
them.  In  like  mauner,  when  the  formula
is  continued,  “Master,  behold  your  breth¬
ren,”  the  Master’s  attention  is  impressively
directed  to  the  same  change  of  relations
and  duties.  These  are  not  mere  idle  words,
but  convey  an  important  lesson,  and  should
never  be  omitted  in  the  ceremony  of  instal¬
lation.

Bel.  hi,  Bel ,  is  the  contracted  form  of
Sp3.  Baal ,  and  was  worshipped  by  the  Baby¬
lonians  as  their  chief  deity.  The  Greeks
and  Romans  so  considered  and  translated
the  word  by  Zeus  and  Jupiter.  It  has,
with  Jah  and  On,  been  introduced  into  the
Royal  Arch  system  as  a  representative  of
the  Tetragrammeion,  which  it  and  the
accompanying  words  have  sometimes  igno¬
rantly  been  made  to  displace.  At  the  ses¬
sion  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the
United  States,  in  1871,  this  error  was  cor¬
rected;  and  while  the.Tetragrammeton  was
declared  to  be  the  true  omnific  word,  the
other  three  were  permitted  to  be  retained
as  merely  explanatory.

Belenus.  Belenus,  the  Baal  of  the
Scripture,  was  identified  with  Mithras  and
with  Apollo,  the  god  of  the  sun.  A  forest
in  the  neighborhood  of  Lausanne  is  still
known  as  Sauvebelin,  or  the  forest  of  Be¬
lenus,  and  traces  of  this  name  are  to  be
found  in  many  parts  of  England.  The
custom  of  kindling  fires  about  midnight  on
the  eve  of  the  festival  of  St.  John  the  Bap¬
tist,  at  the  moment  of  the  summer  solstice,
which  was  considered  by  the  ancients  a
season  of  rejoicing  and  of  divination,  is  a
vestige  of  Druidism  in  honor  of  this  deity.
It  is  a  significant  coincidence  that  the  nu¬
merical  value  of  the  letters  of  the  word


Belenus,  like  those  of  Abraxas  and  Mith¬
ras,  all  representatives  of  the  sun,  amounts
to  365,  the  exact  number  of  the  days  in  a
solar  year.  See  Abraxas.

Belgium.  Soon  after  the  separation
of  Belgium  from  the  Netherlands,  an  inde¬
pendent  Masonic  jurisdiction  was  de¬
manded  by  the  former.  Accordingly,  in
May,  1833,  the  Grand  Orient  of  Belgium
was  established,  which  has  under  its  juris¬
diction  about  sixty  Lodges.  There  is  also  '
a  Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Rite,  which,  Findel  says,  was
constituted  in  the  year  1817.

Belief,  Religious.  The  fundamen¬
tal  law  of  Masonry  contained  in  the  first
of  the  Old  Charges  collected  in  1723,  and
inserted  in  the  Book  of  Constitutions  pub¬
lished  in  that  year,  sets  forth  the  true  doc¬
trine  as  to  what  the  Institution  demands
of  a  Mason  in  reference  to  his  religious
belief  in  the  following  words :  “  A  Mason
is  obliged,  by  his  tenure,  to  obey  the  moral
law  ;  and  if  he  rightly  understands  the  art,
he  will  never  be  a  stupid  atheist  nor  an
irreligious  libertine.  But  though  in  an¬
cient  times  Masons  were  charged  in  every
country  to  be  of  the  religion  of  that  coun¬
try  or  nation,  whatever  it  was,  yet  it  is  now
thought  more  expedient  only  to  oblige
them  to  that  religion  in  which  all  men
agree,  leaving  their  particular  opinions  to
themselves.”  Anderson,  in  his  second  edi¬
tion,  altered  this  article,  calling  a  Mason  a
true  Noachida,  and  saying  that  Masons
“  all  agree  in  the  three  great  articles  of
Noah,”  which  is  incorrect,  since  the  Pre¬
cepts  of  Noah  were  seven.  See  Religion
of  Masonry.

Bells.  The  use  of  a  bell  in  the  cere¬
monies  of  the  third  degree,  to  denote  the
hour,-  is,  manifestly,  an  anachronism,  for
bells  were  not  invented  until  the  fifth  cen¬
tury.  But  Freemasons  are  not  the  only
people  who  have  imagined  the  existence  of
bells  at  the  building  of  the  Temple.  Henry
Stephen  tells  us  ( Apologie  pour  Herodote,
ch.  39,)  of  a  monk  who  boasted  that  when
he  was  at  Jerusalem  he  obtained  a  vial
which  contained  some  of  the  sounds  of
King  Solomon’s  bells.  The  blunders  of  a
ritualist  and  the  pious  fraud  of  a  relic-
monger  have  equal  claims  to  authenticity.
The  Masonic  anachronism  is,  however,  not
worth  consideration,  because  it  is  simply
intended  for  a  notation  of  time  —  a  method
of  expressing  intelligibly  the  hour  at  which
a  supposed  event  occurred.

Benae.  A  significant  word  in  Sym¬
bolic  Masonry,  obsolete  in  many  of  the
modern  systems,  and  whose  derivation  is
uncertain.  See  Maebenac.

Bendekar.  A  significant  word  in
the  high  degrees.  One  of  the  Princes  or


BENEDICT


BENGAL


113


Intendants  of  Solomon,  in  whose  quarry
some  of  the  traitors  spoken  of  in  the  third
degree  were  found.  He  is  mentioned  in
the  catalogue  of  Solomon’s  princes,  given
in  1  Kings  iv.  9.  The  Hebrew  word  is
TpT|3,  the  son  of  him  who  divides  or  pierces.
In  some  old  rituals  we  find  Bendaca  a  cor¬
ruption.

Benedict  XIV.  A  Roman  pontiff
whose  family  name  was  Prosper  Lamber-
tini.  He  was  born  at  Bologna  in  1675,
succeeded  Clement  XII.  as  Pope  in  1740,
and  died  in  1758.  He  was  distinguished  for
his  learning  and  was  a  great  encourager  of
the  Arts  and  Sciences.  He  was,  however,  an
implacable  enemy  of  secret  societies,  and
issued  on  the  18th  of  May,  1751,  his  cele¬
brated  bull,  renewing  and  perpetuating
that  of  his  predecessor  which  excommuni¬
cated  the  Freemasons.  For  an  account  of
it,  see  Bull.

Benediction.  The  solemn  invoca¬
tion  of  a  blessing  in  the  ceremony  of  clos¬
ing  a  Lodge  is  called  the  benediction.  The
usual  formula  is  as  follows :

“  May  the  blessing  of  Heaven  rest  upon
us,  and  all  regular  Masons ;  may  brotherly
love  prevail,  and  every  moral  and  social
virtue  cement  us.”  The  response  is,  “  So
mote  it  be.  Amen ;  ”  which  should  always
be  audibly  pronounced  by  all  the  brethren.

Beneficiary.  One  who  receives  the
support  or  charitable  donations  of  a  Lodge.
Those  who  are  entitled  to  these  benefits  are
affiliated  Masons,  their  wives  or  widows,
their  widowed  mothers,  and  their  minor
sons  and  unmarried  daughters.  Unaffili¬
ated  Masons  cannot  become  the  benefici¬
aries  of  a  Lodge,  but  affiliated  Masons
cannot  be  deprived  of  its  benefits  on
account  of  non-payment  of  dues.  Indeed,
as  this  non-payment  often  arises  from
poverty,  it  thus  furnishes  a  stronger  claim
for  fraternal  charity.

Benefit  Fund.  In  1798,  a  society
was  established  in  London,  under  the
patronage  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  the  Earl
of  Moira,  and  all  the  other  acting  officers
of  the  Grand  Lodge,  whose  object  was  “  the
relief  of  sick,  aged,  and  imprisoned  breth¬
ren,  and  the  protection  of  their  widows,
children,  and  orphans.”  The  payment  of
one  guinea  per  annum  entitled  every
member,  when  sick  or  destitute,  or  his
widow  and  orphans  in  case  of  his  death,
to  a  fixed  contribution.

Benefit  funds  of  this  kind  have  been  gen¬
erally  unknown  to  the  Masons  of  America,
although  some  Lodges  have  established
a  fund  for  the  purpose.  The  Lodge  of
Strict  Observance  in  the  city  of  New  York,
and  others  in  Troy,  Ballston,  Schenectady,
etc.,  some  years  ago,  adopted  benefit  funds.
In  1844,  several  members  of  the  Lodges  in
P  8


Louisville,  Kentucky,  organized  a  society
under  the  title  of  the  “Friendly  Sons  of
St.  John.”  It  was  constructed  after  the
model  of  the  English  society  already  men¬
tioned.  No  member  was  received  after
forty-five  years  of  age,  or  who  was  not  a
contributing  member  of  a  Lodge  ;  the  per
diem  allowance  to  sick  members  was
seventy-five  cents ;  fifty  dollars  were  appro¬
priated  to  pay  the  funeral  expenses  of  a
deceased  member,  and  twenty-five  for  those
of  a  member’s  wife;  on  the  death  of  a
member  a  gratuity  was  given  to  his  family ;
ten  per  cent,  of  all  fees  ana  dues  was  ap¬
propriated  to  an  orphan  func  ;  and  it  was
contemplated,  if  the  funds  world  justify,  to
pension  the  widows  of  deceased  members,
if  their  circumstances  required  it.

I  am  convinced  that  the  establishment
in  Lodges  of  such  benefit  funds  *s  in  op¬
position  to  the  pure  system  of  Masonic
charity.  They  have,  therefore,  been  very
properly  discouraged  by  several  Grand
Lodges.

Benevolence.  Cogan,  in  his  work
On  the  Passions,  thus  defines  Benevo¬
lence:  “When  our  love  or  desire  of  good
goes  forth  to  others,  it  is  termed  good-will
or  benevolence.  Benevolence  embraces  all
beings  capable  of  enjoying  any  portion  of
good ;  and  thus  it  becomes  universal  benevo¬
lence,  which  manifests  itself  by  being
pleased  with  the  share  of  good  every  crea¬
ture  enjoys,  in  a  disposition  to  increase  it,
in  feeling  an  uneasiness  at  their  sufferings,
and  in  the  abhorrence  of  cruelty  under
every  disguise  or  pretext.”  This  spirit
should  pervade  the  hearts  of  all  Masons,
who  are  taught  to  look  upon  mankind  as
formed  by  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  uni¬
verse  for  the  mutual  assistance,  instruction,
and  support  of  each  other.

Benevolence,  Fund  of.  A  fund
established  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
which  is  intrusted  to  a  committee  or  Lodge
of  Benevolence,  consisting  of  all  the  present
and  past  Grand  Officers,  all  actual  Masters
of  Lodges,  and  twelve  Past  Masters.  The
object  of  this  fund  is  to  relieve  such  indi¬
gent  Masons  as  may  be  recommended  by
their  respective  Lodges.  The  opportunity
for  imposition,  afforded  by  application  to
separate  Lodges,  is  thus  avoided.  Several
similar  associations,  under  the  name  of
Boards  of  Relief,  have  been  organized  in
several  of  the  cities  of  this  country.  See
Board  of  Relief.

Bengabec.  Found  in  some  old  rituals
of  the  high  degrees  for  Bendekar,  as  the
name  of  an  Intendant  of  Solomon.  It  is
Benyabdr  in  the  catalogue  of  Solomon’s
officers,  1  Kings  iv.  13,  the  son  of  Geber,  or
the  son  of  the  strong  man.

Bengal.  Masonry  was  introduced


114


BENJAMIN


BIBLE


into  Bengal  in  the  year  1729,  by  the  estab¬
lishment  of  a  Lodge  under  a  dispensation
granted  by  Lord  Kingston,  the  Grand
Master  of  England-  In  the  succeeding
year,  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  granted  a  dis¬
pensation  for  a  Provincial  Grand  Master
of  East  India,  at  Bengal.  There  are  now
in  the  province  of  Bengal  a  District  Grand
Lodge,  situated  at  Calcutta,  with  twenty-
one  subordinate  Lodges;  a  District  Grand
Chapter,  with  nine  subordinate  Chapters;  a
Provincial  Grand  Conclave  of  Knights
Templars,  with  three  subordinate  Encamp¬
ments;  and  a  provincial  Grand  Lodge  of
Mark  Master  Masons,  with  two  subordinate
working  Lodges.

Benjaiuiu.  A  significant  word  in
several  of  the  degrees  which  refer  to  the
second  Temple,  because  it  was  only  the
tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  that  re¬
turned  from  the  captivity  to  rebuild  it.
Hence,  in  the  Masonry  of  the  second  Tem¬
ple,  Judah  and  Benjamin  have  superseded
the  columns  of  Jachin  and  Boaz;  a  change
the  more  easily  made  because  of  the  iden¬
tity  of  the  initials.

Benkliiirim.  Corruptly  spelled  ben-
chorim  in  most  of  the  old  rituals.  A  sig¬
nificant  word  in  the  high  degrees,  probably
signifying  one  that  is  freeborn,  from  D'HITjO,
son  of  the  freeborn.

Benyali,  or  Beniah.  Lenning  gives
this  form,  Benayah.  The  son  of  Jah,  a  sig¬
nificant  word  in  the  high  degrees.

Beritli.  Heb.,  jT”Q>  a  covenant.  A
significant  word  in  several  of  the  high
degrees.

Berlin.  The  capital  of  the  kingdom  of
Prussia,  and  the  seat  of  three  Grand  Lodges,
namely;  the  Grand  National  Mother  Lodge,
founded  in  1744;  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Germany,  founded  in  1770;  and  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Royal  York  of  Friendship,
founded  in  1798.  See  Germany.

Bernard,  I>avitl.  An  expelled  Ma¬
son,  under  whose  name  was  published,  in
the  year  1829,  a  pretended  exposition  en¬
titled,  Light  on  Masonry.  It  was  one  of
the  fruits  of  the  anti-Masonic  excitement
of  the  day.  It  is  a  worthless  production,
intended  as  a  libel  on  the  Institution.

Bernard,  Saint.  St.  Bernard,  born
in  France,  in  1091,  was  the  founder  of  the
Order  of  Cistercian  Monks.  He  took  great
interest  in  the  success  of  the  Knights  Tem-
lars,  whose  Order  he  cherished  throughout
is  whole  life.  His  works  contain  numer¬
ous  letters  recommending  them  to  the
favor  and  protection  of  the  great.  In
1128,  he  himself  drew  up  the  Rule  of  the
Order,  and  among  his  writings  is  trrbe  found
a  Sermo  exhortatorius  ad  Milites  Templi,  or
an  Exhortation  to  the  Soldiers  of  the  Tem¬
ple,  a  production  full  of  sound  advice.  To


j  the  influence  of  Bernard  and  his  untiring
offices  of  kindness,  the  Templars  were
greatly  indebted  for  their  rapid  increase  in
wealth  and  consequence.  He  died  in  the
|  year  1153.

Beryl.  Heb.,  A  precious

stone,  the  first  in  the  fourth  row  of  the  high-
priest’s  breastplate.  Its  color  is  bluish-green.
It  was  ascribed  to  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.

Beyerle,  Francois  Louis  de.  A
French  Masonic  writer  of  some  promi¬
nence  towards  the  close  of  the  eighteenth
century.  He  was  a  leading  member  of  the
Rite  of  Strict  Observance,  in  which  his
adopted  name  was  Egnes  a  Flore.  He
wrote  a  criticism  on  the  Masonic  Congress
of  Wilhelmsbad,  which  was  published
under  the  title  of  Oraiio  de  C'onventu  gen-
erali  Latomorum  apud  aquas  Wilhelminas,
prope  Hanauviam.  He  also  wrote  an  Essai
sur  la  Franc- Magonnerie,  on  du  but  essentielet
fondamentaledela  Franc-  Magonnerie  ;  trans¬
lated  the  second  volume  of  Frederic  Nico¬
lai’s  essay  on  the  crimes  imputed  to  the  Tem-

Slars,  and  was  the  author  of  several  other
lasouic  works  of  less  importance.  He  was  a
member  of  the  French  Constitutional  Con¬
vention  of  1792.  He  wrote  also  some
political  essays  on  finances,  and  was  a  con¬
tributor  on  the  same  subject  to  the  Ency¬
clopedic  Mcthodique.

Bezaleel.  One  of  the  builders  of  the
Ark  of  the  Covenant.  See  Aholiab.

Bible.  The  Bible  is  properly  called  a
greater  light  of  Masonry,  for  from  the  cen¬
tre  of  the  Lodge  it  pours  forth  upon  the
East,  the  West,  and  the  South  its  refulgent
rays  of  Divine  truth.  The  Bible  is  used
among  Masons  as  the  symbol  of  the  will
of  God,  however  it  may  be  expressed.  And,
therefore,  whatever  to  any  people  expresses
that  will  may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for
the  Bible  in  a  Masonic  Lodge.  Thus,  in  a
Lodge  consisting  entirely  of  Jews,  the  Old
Testament  alone  may  be  placed  upon  the
altar,  and  Turkish  Masons  make  use  of
the  Koran.  Whether  it  be  the  Gospels  to
the  Christian,  the  Pentateuch  to  the  Israel¬
ite,  the  Koran  to  the  Mussulman,  or  the
Yedas  to  the  Brahman,  it  everywhere  Ma-
sonicallv  conveys  the  same  idea  —  that  of
the  symbolism  of  the  Divine  Will  revealed
to  man.

The  history  of  the  Masonic  symbolism
of  the  Bible  is  interesting.  It  is  referred
to  in  the  manuscripts  before  the  revival  as
the  book  upon  which  the  covenant  was
taken,  but  it  was  never  referred  to  as  a
great  light.  In  the  oldest  ritual  that  we
have,  which  is  that  of  1724,  —  a  copy  of
which  from  the  Royal  Library  of  Berlin  is
given  by  Krause,  ( Drei  alt.  Kunsturk,  i.  32,)
—  there  is  no  mention  of  the  Bible  as  one
of  the  lights.  Preston  made  it  a  part  of


BIBLE


BLACK


115


the  furniture  of  the  Lodge;  but  in  rituals
of  about  1760  it  is  described  as  one  of  the
three  great  lights.  In  the  American  sys¬
tem,  the  Bible  is  both  a  piece  of  furniture
and  a  great  light.

Bible-Bearer.  In  Masonic  proces¬
sions  the  oldest  Master  Mason  present  is
enerally  selected  to  carry  the  open  Bible,
quare,  and  Compasses  on  a  cushion  before
the  Chaplain.  This  brother  is  called  the
Bible-Bearer.

Bibliography.  Of  the  bibliography
of  Freemasonry  very  little,  in  comparison
with  the  importance  of  the  subject,  has
been  published.  In  this  country  we  have
only  William  Gowan’s  Catalogue  of  Books
on  Freemasonry  and  Kindred  Subjects ,  New
York,  1858,  which  contains  the  titles  of
very  few  rare  works  and  no  foreign  ones.
The  catalogue  of  books  in  the  library  of
Pythagoras  Lodge,  published  some  years
ago,  is  really  valuable  but  not  extensive.
Garrett’s  Catalogue  of  Books  on  the  Masonic
Institution,  Boston,  1852,  is  full  of  scurrility
and  falsehood,  by  no  means  atoned  for  by
the  account  of  anti  -  Masonic  literature
which  it  contains.  To  the  Masonic  stu¬
dent  it  is  utterly  worthless.  In  French,
we  have  a  Bibliographic  des  Ouvrages,  Opus¬
cules  Encycliques  ou  ecrits  les  plus  rernar-
quables,  publics  sur  I’histoire  de  la  Franc-
Maqonherie  depuis,  1723,  jusques  en  1814.
It  is  by  Thory,  and  is  contained  in  the  first
volume  of  his  Acta  Latomorum.  Though
not  full,  it  is  useful,  especially  in  respect
to  French  works,  and  it  is  to  be  regretted
that  it  stops  at  a  period  anterior  to  the
Augustan  age  of  Masonic  literature.  But
the  most  valuable  contribution  to  Masonic
bibliography  is  the  German  work  of  Dr.
Georg  KIoss,  entitled  Bibliographic  der
Freimaurerei,  published  at  Frankfort  in
1844.  Up  to  the  date  of  its  publication,  it
is  an  almost  exhaustive  work,  and  contains
the  titles  of  about  six  thousand  volumes.
Nothing  has  since  appeared  of  any  value
on  the  subject.

Bielfeld,  Jacob  Frederick.

Baron  Bielfeld  was  born  March  31,  1717,
and  died  April  5,  1770.  He  was  envoy
from  the  court  of  Prussia  to  the  Hague,
and  a  familiar  associate  of  Frederick  the
Great  in  the  youthful  days  of  that  prince
before  he  ascended  the  throne.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Lodge  of  the
Three  Globes  in  Berlin,  which  afterwards
became  a  Grand  Lodge.  Through  his  in¬
fluence  Frederick  was  induced  to  become
a  Mason.  In  Bielteld’s  Freundschaftlicher
Briefe,  or  Familiar  Letters,  are  to  be  found
an  account  of  the  initiation  of  the  prince,
and  other  curious  details  concerning  Free¬
masonry.

Birkliead,  Matthew.  A  Mason


who  owes  his  reputation  to  the  fact  that
he  was  the  author  of  the  universally-known
Entered  Apprentice’s  song,  beginning :

“  Come  let  us  prepare,

We  Brothers  that  are
Assembled  on  merry  occasions ;

Let’s  drink,  laugh,  and  sing;

Our  wine  has  a  spring.

Here ’s  a  health  to  an  Accepted  Mason.”

This  song  was  first  published  in  the  Book
of  Constitutions,  in  1723,  but  must  have
been  composed  at  an  earlier  date,  as  Birk-
head  is  there  spoken  of  as  being  deceased.
He  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  player,  but
nothing  more  is  known  of  his  life.

Blaek.  Black,  in  the  Masonic  ritual,
is  constantly  the  symbol  of  grief.  This  is
perfectly  consistent  with  its  use  in  the
world,  where  black  has  from  remote  anti¬
quity  been  adopted  as  the  garment  of
mourning.

In  Masonry  this  color  is  confined  to
but  a  few  degrees,  but  everywhere  has
the  single  meaning  of  sorrow.  Thus  in
the  French  Rite,  during  the  ceremony
of  raising  a  candidate  to  the  Master’s
degree,  the  Lodge  is  clothed  in  black
strewed  with  tears,  as  a  token  of  grief  for
the  loss  of  a  distinguished  member  of  the
Fraternity,  whose  tragic  history  is  com¬
memorated  in  that  degree.  This  usage  is
not,  however,  observed  in  the  York  Rite.
The  black  of  the  Elected  Knights  of  Nine,
the  Illustrious  Elect  of  Fifteen,  and  the
Sublime  Knights  Elected,  in  the  Scottish
Rite,  has  a  similar  import.

In  the  degree  of  Noachite,  black  appears
to  have  been  adopted  as  a  symbol  of  grief,
tempered  with  humility,  which  is  the  virtue
principally  dilated  on  in  the  degree.

The  garments  of  the  Knights  Templars
were  originally  white,  but  after  the  death
of  their  martyred  Grand  Master,  James  de
Molay,  the  modern  Knights  assumed  a
black  dress  as  a  token  of  grief  for  his  loss.
The  same  reason  led  to  the  adoption  of
black  as  the  appropriate  color  in  the  Scottish
Rite  of  the  Knights  of  Kadosh  and  the  Sub¬
lime  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret.  The
modern  American  modification  of  the  Tem¬
plar  costume  destroys  all  reference  to  this
historical  fact.

One  exception  to  this  symbolism  of  black
is  to  be  found  in  the  degree  of  Select  Mas¬
ter,  where  the  vestments  are  of  black  bor¬
dered  with  red;  the  combination  of  the  two
colors  showing  that  the  degree  is  properly
placed  between  the  Royal  Arch  and  Tem¬
plar  degrees,  while  the  black  is  a  symbol
of  silence  and  secrecy,  the  distinguishing
virtues  of  a  Select  Master.

Blaek  Ball.  The  ball  used  in  a  Ma¬
sonic  ballot  by  those  who  do  not  wish  the


116


BLACK-BOARD


BLAZING


candidate  to  be  admitted.  Hence,  when  an
applicant  is  rejected,  he  is  said  to  be
“  black  balled.”  The  use  of  black  balls
may  be  traced  as  far  back  as  to  the  ancient
Romans.  Thus,  Ovid  says  {Met.  xv.  41),
that  in  trials  it  was  the  custom  of  the
ancients  to  condemn  the  prisoner  by  black
pebbles  or  to  acquit  him  by  white  ones.

“  Mos  erat  antiquis  niveis  atrisque  lapillis,

His  damnare  reos,  illis  absolvere  culpa.”

Black-board.  In  German  Lodges  the
Schviartze  Tafel,  or  Black  Board,  is  that  on
which  the  names  of  applicants  for  admis¬
sion  are  inscribed,  so  that  every  visitor  may
make  the  necessary  inquiries  whether  they
are  or  are  not  worthy  of  acceptance.

Black  Brothers,  Order  of  the.
Lenning  says  that  the  Schwartzen  Br  iider  was
one  of  the  College  Societies  of  the  German
Universities.  The  members  of  the  Order,
however,  denied  this,  and  claimed  an  origin
as  early  as  1675.  Thory  (Act.  Lat.,  i.  313,)
says  that  it  was  largely  spread  through  Ger¬
many,  having  its  seat  for  a  long  time  at
Giessen  and  at  Marburg,  which  in  1783
was  removed  to  Frankfort  on  the  Oder.  The
same  writer  asserts  that  at  first  the  mem¬
bers  observed  the  dogmas  and  ritual  of  the
Kadosh,  but  that  afterwards  the  Order,  be¬
coming  a  political  society,  gave  rise  to  the
Free  Corps,  which  in  1813  was  commanded
by  Major  Lutzow.

Blazing  Star.  The  Blazing  Star,
■which  is  not,  howrever,  to  be  confounded
with  the  Five-Pointed  Star,  is  one  of  the
most  important  symbols  of  Freemasonry,
and  makes  its  appearance  in  several  of  the
degrees.  “It  is,”  says  Hutchinson,  “the
first  and  most  exalted  object  that  demands
our  attention  in  the  Lodge.”  It  undoubt¬
edly  derives  this  importance,  first,  from  the
repeated  use  that  is  made  of  it  as  a  Ma¬
sonic  emblem  ;  and  secondly,  from  its  great
antiquity  as  a  symbol  derived  from  other
and  older  systems.

Extensive  as  has  been  the  application  of
this  symbol  in  the  Masonic  ritual,  it  is  not
surprising  that  there  has  been  a  great  dif¬
ference  of  opinion  in  relation  to  its  true
signification.  But  this  difference  of  opinion
has  been  almost  entirely  confined  to  its  use
in  the  first  degree.  In  the  higher  degrees,
where  there  has  been  less  opportunity  of
innovation,  the  uniformity  of  meaning  at¬
tached  to  the  star  has  been  carefully  pre¬
served.

In  the  twenty-eighth  degree  of  the  An¬
cient  and  Accepted  Rite,  the  explanation
given  of  the  Blazing  Star,  is,  that  it  is  sym¬
bolic  of  a  true  Mason,  who,  by  perfecting
himself  in  the  way  of  truth,  that  is  to  say,
by  advancing  in  knowledge,  becomes  like  a
blazing  star,  shining  with  brilliancy  in  the


midst  of  darkness.  The  star  is,  therefore,
in  this  degree,  a  symbol  of  truth.

In  the  fourth  degree  of  the  same  Rite,  the
star  is  again  said  to  be  a  symbol  of  the  light
of  Divine  Providence  pointing  out  the  way
of  truth.

In  the  ninth  degree,  this  symbol  is  called
“  the  star  of  direction ;  ”  and  while  it  primi¬
tively  alludes  to  an  especial  guidance  given
for  a  particular  purpose  expressed  in  the
degree,  it  still  retains,  in  a  remoter  sense,
its  usual  signification  as  an  emblem  of  Di¬
vine  Providence  guiding  and  directing  the
pilgrim  in  his  journey  through  life.

When,  however,  we  descend  to  Ancient
Craft  Masonry,  we  shall  find  a  considerable
diversity  in  the  application  of  this  symbol.

In  the  earliest  rituals,  immediately  after
the  revival  of  1717,  the  Blazing  Star  is  not
mentioned,  but  it  was  not  long  before  it
was  introduced.  In  the  ritual  of  1735  it
is  detailed  as  a  part  of  the  furniture  of  a
Lodge,  with  the  explanation  that  the  “  Mo¬
saic  Pavement  is  the  Ground  Floor  of  the
Lodge,  the  Blazing  Star  the  Centre,  and  the
Indented  Tarsel  the  Border  round  about
it  I”  In  a  primitive  Tracing  Board  of  the
Entered  Apprentice,  copied  by  Oliver,  in
his  Historical  Landmarks,  (i.  133,)  without
other  date  than  that  it  was  “  published
early  in  the  last  century,”  the  Blazing  Star
occupies  a  prominent  position  in  tGe  cen¬
tre  of  the  Tracing  Board.  Oliver  says  that
it  represented  Beauty,  and  was  called
“  the  glory  in  the  centre.”

In  the  lectures  subsequently  prepared  by
Dunckerley,  and  adopted  by  the  Grand
Lodge,  the  Blazing  Star  was  said  to  repre¬
sent  “  the  star  which  led  the  wise  men  to
Bethlehem,  proclaiming  to  mankind  the
nativity  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  here  con¬
ducting  our  spiritual  progress  to  the  Author
of  our  redemption.”

In  the  Prestonian  lecture,  the  Blazing
Star,  with  the  Mosaic  Pavement  and  the
Tasselated  Border,  are  called  the  Orna¬
ments  of  the  Lodge,  and  the  Blazing  Star
is  thus  explained :

“  The  Blazing  Star,  or  glory  in  the  centre,
reminds  us  of  that  awful  period  when  the
Almighty  delivered  the  two  tables  of  stone,
containing  the  ten  commandments,  to  his
faithful  servant  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai,
when  the  rays  of  his  divine  glory  shone  so
bright  that  none  could  behold  it  without
fear  and  trembling.  It  also  reminds  us  of
the  omnipresence  of  the  Almighty,  over¬
shadowing  us  with  his  divine  love,  and  dis¬
pensing  his  blessings  amongst  us ;  and  by
its  being  placed  in  the  centre,  it  further  re¬
minds  us,  that  wherever  we  may  be  as¬
sembled  together,  God  is  in  the  midst  of  us,
seeing  our  actions,  and  observing  the  secret
intents  and  movements  of  our  hearts.”


BLAZING


BLAZING


117


In  the  lectures  taught  by  Webb,  and
very  generally  adopted  in  this  country,  the
Blazing  Star  is  said  to  be  “  commemorative
of  the  star  which  appeared  to  guide  the
wise  men  of  the  East  to  the  place  of  our
Saviour’s  nativity,”  and  it  is  subsequently
explained  as  hieroglyphically  representing
divine  Providence.  But  the  commemora¬
tive  allusion  to  the  Star  of  Bethlehem
seeming  to  some  to  be  objectionable,  from
its  peculiar  application  to  the  Christian
religion,  at  the  revision  of  the  lectures
made  in  1843  by  the  Baltimore  Convention,
this  explanation  was  omitted,  and  the  allu¬
sion  to  divine  Providence  alone  retained.

In  Hutchinson’s  system,  the  Blazing  Star
is  considered  a  symbol  of  Prudence.  “  It
is  placed,”  says  he,  “  in  the  centre,  ever  to
be  present  to  the  eye  of  the  Mason,  that
his  heart  may  be  attentive  to  the  dictates
and  steadfast  in  the  laws  of  Prudence;  —
for  Prudence  is  the  rule  of  all  virtues;
Prudence  is  the  path  which  leads  to  every
degree  of  propriety  ;  Prudence  is  the  chan¬
nel  whence  self-approbation  flows  forever  ;
she  leads  us  forth  to  worthy  actions,  and,  as
a  Blazing  Star,  enlighteneth  us  through  the
dreary  and  darksome  paths  of  this  life.”
(<S^.  of  Mas.,  Lect.  V.,  p.  68.)  Hutchinson
also  adopted  Dunckerley’s  allusion  to  the
Star  of  Bethlehem,  but  only  as  a  secondary
symbolism.

In  another  series  of  lectures  formerly  in
use  in  America,  but  which  I  believe  is  now
abandoned,  the  Blazing  Star  is  said  to  be
“  emblematical  of  that  Prudence  which
ought  to  appear  conspicuous  in  the  conduct
of  every  Mason;  and  is  more  especially
commemorative  of  the  star  which  appeared
in  the  east  to  guide  the  wise  men  to  Beth¬
lehem,  and  proclaim  the  birth  and  the
presence  of  the  Son  of  God.”

The  Masons  on  the  Continent  of  Europe,
speaking  of  the  symbol,  say :  “  It  is  no
matter  whether  the  figure  of  which  the
Blazing  Star  forms  the  centre  be  a  square,
triangle,  or  circle,  it  still  represents  the
sacred  name  of  God,  as  an  universal  spirit
who  enlivens  our  hearts,  who  purifies  our
reason,  who  increases  our  knowledge,  and
who  makes  us  wiser  and  better  men.”

And  lastly,  in  the  lectures  revised  by
Dr.  Hemming  and  adopted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  at  the  union  in  1813,
and  now  constituting  the  authorized  lectures
of  that  jurisdiction,  we  find  the  following
definition :

“  The  Blazing  Star,  or  glory  in  the  centre,
refers  us  to  the  sun,  which  enlightens  the
earth  with  its  refulgent  rays,  dispensing  its
blessings  to  mankind  at  large,  and  giving
light  and  life  to  all  things  here  below.”

Hence  we  find  that  at  different  times  the
Blazing  Star  has  been  declared  to  be  a  sym¬


bol  of  divine  Providence,  of  the  Star  of
Bethlehem,  of  Prudence,  of  Beauty,  and
of  the  Sun.  Before  we  can  attempt  to  de¬
cide  upon  these  various  opinions,  and  adopt
the  true  signification,  it  is  necessary  to  ex¬
tend  our  investigations  into  the  antiquity
of  the  emblem,  and  inquire  what  was  the
meaning  given  to  it  by  the  nations  who
first  established  it  as  a  symbol.

Sabaism,  or  the  worship  of  the  stars,  was
one  of  the  earliest  deviations  from  the  true
system  of  religion.  One  of  its  causes  was
the  universally  established  doctrine  among
the  idolatrous  nations  of  antiquity,  that
each  star  was  animated  by  the  soul  of  a
hero  god,  who  had  once  dwelt  incarnate
upon  earth.  Hence,  in  the  hieroglyphical
system,  the  star  denoted  a  god.  To  this
signification,  allusion  is  made  by  the  pro¬
phet  Amos,  when  he  says  to  the  Israelites,
while  reproaching  them  tor  their  idolatrous
habits:  “  But  ye  have  borne  the  tabernacle
of  your  Moloch  and  Chiun  your  images,
the  star  of  your  god,  which  ye  made  to
yourselves.”  Amos  v.  26.

This  idolatry  was  early  learned  by  the
Israelites  from  their  Egyptian  taskmasters;
and  so  unwilling  were  they  to  abandon  it,
that  Moses  found  it  necessary  strictly  to
forbid  the  worship  of  anything  “that  is  in
heaven  above ;  ”  notwithstanding  which  we
find  the  Jews  repeatedly  committing  the
sin  which  had  been  so  expressly  forbidden.
Saturn  was  the  star  to  whose  worship  they
were  more  particularly  addicted  under  the
names  of  Moloch  and  Chiun,  already  men¬
tioned  in  the  passage  quoted  from  Amos.
The  planet  Saturn  was  worshipped  under
the  names  of  Moloch,  Malcom  or  Milcom  by
the  Ammonites,  the  Canaanites,  the  Phoeni¬
cians,  and  the  Carthaginians,  and  under  that
of  Chiun  by  the  Israelites  in  the  desert.  Sa¬
turn  was  worshipped  among  the  Egyptians
under  the  name  of  Raiphan,  or,  as  it  is
called  in  the  Septuagint,  Remphan.  St.
Paul,  quoting  the  passage  of  Amos,  says,
“  ye  took  up  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch  and
the  star  of  your  god  Remphan.”

Hale,  in  his  Analysis  of  Chronology,  says,
in  alluding  to  this  passage  of  St.  Paul,
“  There  is  no  direct  evidence  that  the  Israel¬
ites  worshipped  the  dog-star  in  the  wilder¬
ness,  except  this  passage ;  but  the  indirect
is  very  strong,  drawn  from  the  general  pro¬
hibition  of  the  worship  of  the  sun,  moon,
and  stars,  to  which  they  must  have  been
prone.  And  this  was  peculiarly  an  Egyp¬
tian  idolatry,  where  the  dog-star  was  wor¬
shipped,  as  notifying  by  his  heliacal  rising,
or  emersion  from  the  sun’s  rays,  the  regu¬
lar  commencement  of  the  periodical  inun¬
dation  of  the  Nile.  And  the  Israelito
sculptures  at  the  cemetery  of  Kibroth-Hat-
taavah,  or  graves  of  lust,  in  the  neighbor-


118


BLAZING


BLOW


hood  of  Sinai,  remarkably  abound  in  hie¬
roglyphics  of  the  dog-star,  represented  as  a
human  figure  with  a  dog’s  head.  That
they  afterwards  sacrificed  to  the  dog-star,
there  is  express  evidence  in  Josiah’s  de¬
scription  of  idolatry,  where  the  Syriac
Mazalotk  (improperly  termed  planets)  de¬
notes  the  dog-star;  in  Arabic,  Mazaroth.”

Fellows,  in  his  Exposition  of  the  Mys¬
teries,  says  that  this  dog-star,  the  Anubis
of  the  Egyptians,  is  the  Blazing  Star  of
Masonry,  and  supposing  that  the  latter  is
a  symbol  of  Prudence,  which  indeed  it  was
in  some  of  the  ancient  lectures,  he  goes  on
to  remark:  “  What  connection  can  possibly
exist  between  a  star  and  prudence,  except
allegorically  in  reference  to  the  caution
that  was  indicated  to  the  Egyptians  by  the
first  appearance  of  this  star,  which  warned
them  of  approaching  danger.”  But  it  will
hereafter  be  seen  that  he  has  totally  misap¬
prehended  the  true  signification  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  symbol.  The  work  of  Fellows,  it
may  be  remarked,  is  an  unsystematic  com¬
pilation  of  undigested  learning;  but  the
student  who  is  searching  for  truth  must
carefully  eschew  all  his  deductions  as  to
the  genius  and  spirit  of  Freemasonry.

Notwithstanding  a  few  discrepancies  may
have  occurred  in  the  Masonic  lectures,  as
arranged  at  various  periods  and  by  different
authorities,  the  concurrent  testimony  of  the
ancient  religions,  and  the  hieroglyphic  lan¬
guage,  prove  that  the  star  was  a  symbol  of
God.  It  was  so  used  by  the  prophets  of
old  in  their  metaphorical  style,  and  it  has
so  been  generally  adopted  by  Masonic  in¬
structors.  The  application  of  the  Blazing
Star  as  an  emblem  of  the  Saviour,  has
been  made  by  those  writers  who  give  a
Christian  explanation  of  our  emblems,  and
to  the  Christian  Mason  such  an  applica¬
tion  will  not  be  objectionable.  But  those
who  desire  to  refrain  from  anything  that
may  tend  to  impair  the  tolerance  of  our
system,  will  be  disposed  to  embrace  a  more
universal  explanation,  which  may  be  re¬
ceived  alike  by  all  the  disciples  of  the
Order,  whatever  may  be  their  peculiar  reli¬
gious  views.  Such  persons  will  rather  ac¬
cept  the  expression  of  Dr.  Oliver,  who,
though  much  disposed  to  give  a  Christian
character  to  our  Institution,  says,  “the
great  Architect  of  the  Universe  is  there¬
fore  symbolized  in  Freemasonry  by  the
Blazing  Star,  as  the  herald  of  our  salva¬
tion.”  ( Syrnb .  Glory,  p.  292.)

Before  concluding,  a  lew  words  may  be
said  as  to  the  form  of  the  Masonic  symbol.
It  is  not  an  heraldic  star  or  estoille,  for  that
always  consists  of  six  points,  while  the  Ma¬
sonic  star  is  made  with  five  points.  This,
perhaps,  was  with  some  involuntary  allu¬
sion  to  the  five  Points  of  Fellowship.  But


the  error  has  been  committed  in  all  our
modern  Tracing  Boards  of  making  the  star
with  straight  points,  which  form,  of  course,
does  not  represent  a  blazing  star.  Guillim
(Disp.  of  Herald)  says:  “All  stars  should
be  made  with  waved  points,  because  our
eyes  tremble  at  beholding  them.”

In  the  early  Tracing  Board  already  re¬
ferred  to,  the  star  with  five  straight  points
is  superimposed  upon  another  of  five  wav¬
ing  points.  But  the  latter  are  now  aban¬
doned,  and  we  have  in  the  representations
of  the  present  day  the  incongruous  symbol
of  a  blazing  star  with  five  straight  points.
In  the  centre  of  the  star  there  was  always
laced  the  letter  G,  which,  like  the  He-
rew  yod,  was  a  recognized  symbol  of
God,  and  thus  the  symbolic  reference  of
the  Blazing  Star  to  divine  Providence  is
greatly  strengthened.

(Blazing  Star,  Order  of  the.  The
Baron  Tschoudy  was  the  author  of  a  work
entitled  The  Blazing  Star.  (See  Tschoudy.)
On  the  principles  inculcated  in  this  work,
he  established,  says  Thorv,  at  Paris,  in  1766,
an  order  called  “The  Order  of  the  Blazing
Star,”  which  consisted  of  degrees  of  chiv¬
alry  ascending  to  the  Crusades,  after  the
Templar  system  of  (Ramsay.  It  never,
however,  assumed  the  prominent  position
of  an  active  Rite.

Blessing.  See  Benediction.

Blind.  A  blind  man  cannot  be  initi¬
ated  into  Masonry  under  the  operation  of
the  old  regulation,  which  requires  physical
perfection  in  a  candidate.

Blindness.  Physical  blindness  in
Masonry,  as  in  the  language  of  the  Scrip¬
tures,  is  symbolic  of  the  deprivation  of
moral  and  intellectual  light.  It  is  equiva¬
lent  to  the  darkness  of  the  Ancient  Myste¬
ries  in  which  the  neophytes  were  enshrouded
for  periods  varying  from  a  few  hours  to  many
days.  The  Masonic  candidate,  therefore,
represents  one  immersed  in  intellectual
darkness,  groping  in  the  search  for  that
Divine  light  and  truth  which  are  the  ob¬
jects  of  a  Mason’s  labor.  See  Darkness.

Blow.  The  three  blows  given  to  the
Builder,  according  to  the  legend  of  the
third  degree,  have  been  differently  inter¬
preted  as  symbols  in  the  different  systems
of  Masonry,  but  always  with  some  reference
to  adverse  or  malignant  influences  exercised
on  humanity,  of  whom  Hiram  is  considered
as  the  type.  Thus,  in  the  symbolic  degrees
of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  the  three  blows
are  said  to  be  typical  of  the  trials  and  temp¬
tations  to  which  man  is  subjected  in  youth
and  manhood,  and  to  death,  whose  victim
he  becomes  in  old  age.  Hence  the  three
Assassins  are  the  three  stages  of  human  life.
In  the  high  degrees,  such  as  the  Kadoshe3,
which  are  founded  on  the  Templar  system.


BLUE


BLUE


119


of  Ramsay,  the  reference  is  naturally  made
to  the  destruction  of  the  Order,  which  was
effected  by  the  combined  influences  of
Tyranny,  Superstition,  and  Ignorance,
which  are  therefore  symbolized  by  the  three
blows ;  while  the  three  Assassins  are  also
said  sometimes  to  be  represented  by  Squire
de  Floreau,  Naffodei,  and  the  Prior  of
Montfaucon,  the  three  perjurers  who  swore
away  the  lives  of  De  Molay  and  his
Knights.  In  the  astronomical  theory  of
Freemasonry,  which  makes  it  a  modern
modification  of  the  ancient  sun-worship,  a
theory  advanced  by  Ragon,  the  three  blows
are  symbolic  of  the  destructive  influences
of  the  three  winter  months,  by  which  Hiram,
or  the  Sun,  is  shorn  of  his  vivifying  power.
Des  Etangs  has  generalized  the  Templar
theory,  and,  supposing  Hiram  to  be  the  sym¬
bol  of  eternal  reason,  interprets  the  blows
as  the  attacks  of  those  vices  which  deprave
and  finally  destroy  humanity.  However
interpreted  for  a  special  theory,  Hiram  the
Builder  always  represents,  in  the  science  of
Masonic  symbolism,  the  principle  of  good;
and  then  the  three  blows  are  the  contend¬
ing  principles  of  evil.

Blue.  This  is  emphatically  the  color
of  Masonry.  It  is  the  appropriate  tincture
of  the  Ancient  Craft  degrees.  It  is  to  the
Mason  a  symbol  of  universal  friendship  and
benevolence,  because,  as  it  is  the  color  of
the  vault  of  heaven,  which  embraces  and
covers  the  whole  globe,  we  are  thus  re¬
minded  that  in  the  breast  of  every  brother
these  virtues  should  be  equally  as  extensive.
It  is  therefore  the  only  color,  except  white,
which  should  be  used  in  a  Master’s  Lodge.
Decorations  of  any  other  color  would  be
highly  inappropriate.

Among  the  religious  institutions  of  the
Jews,  blue  was  an  important  color.  The
robe  of  the  high  priest’s  ephod,  the  ribbon
for  his  breastplate,  and  for  the  plate  of  the
mitre,  were  to  be  blue.  The  people  were
directed  to  wear  a  ribbon  of  this  color  above
the  fringe  of  their  garments ;  and  it  was  the
color  of  one  of  the  veils  of  the  tabernacle,
where,  Josephus  says,  it  represented  the
element  of  air.  The  Hebrew  word  used  on
these  occasions  to  designate  the  color  blue
is  nSj/Y  tekelet;  and  this  word  seems  to  have
a  singular  reference  to  the  symbolic  char¬
acter  of  the  color,  for  it  is  derived  from  a
root  signifying  perfection;  now  it  is  well-
known  that,  among  the  ancients,  initiation
into  the  mysteries  and  "perfection  were  sy¬
nonymous  terms ;  and  hence  the  appropriate
color  of  the  greatest  of  all  the  systems  of
initiation  may  well  be  designated  by  a  word
which  also  signifies  perfection.

This  color  also  held  a  prominent  position
in  the  symbolism  of  the  Gentile  nations  of
antiquity.  Among  the  Druids,  blue  was


the  symbol  of  truth,  and  the  candidate,  in
the  initiation  into  the  sacred  rites  of  Druid-
ism,  was  invested  with  a  robe  composed  of
the  three  colors  white,  blue,  and  green.

The  Egyptians  esteemed  blue  as  a  sacred
color,  and  the  body  of  Amun,  the  princi¬
pal  god  of  their  theogony,  was  painted  light
blue,  to  imitate,  as  Wilkinson  remarks,
“  his  peculiarly  exalted  and  heavenly
nature.”

The  ancient  Babylonians  clothed  their
idols  in  blue,  as  we  learn  from  the  prophet
Jeremiah.  The  Chinese,  in  their  mystical
philosophy,  represented  blue  as  the  symbol
of  the  deity,  because,  being,  as  they  say,
compounded  of  black  and  red,  this  color  is
a  fit  representation  of  the  obscure  and
brilliant,  the  male  and  female,  or  active
and  passive  principles.

The  Hindoos  assert  that  their  god,  Vishnu,
was  represented  of  a  celestial  blue,  thus  in¬
dicating  that  wisdom  emanating  from  God
was  to  be  symbolized  by  this  color.

Among  the  mediaeval  Christians  blue
was  sometimes  considered  as  an  emblem  of
immortality,  as  red  was  of  the  divine  love.
Portal  says  that  blue  was  the  symbol  of
perfection,  hope,  and  constancy.  “  The
color  of  the  celebrated  dome,  azure,”  says
Weale,  in  his  treatise  on  Symbolic  Colors,
“  was  in  divine  language  the  symbol  of
eternal  truth  ;  in  consecrated  language,  of
immortality ;  and  in  profane  language,  of
fidelity.”

Besides  the  three  degrees  of  Ancient
Craft  Masonry,  of  which  blue  is  the  appro¬
priate  color,  this  tincture  is  also  to  be  found
in  several  other  degrees,  especially  of  the
Scottish  Rite,  where  it  bears  various  sym¬
bolic  significations ;  all,  however,  more  or
less  related  to  its  original  character,  as  rep¬
resenting  universal  friendship  and  benevo¬
lence.

In  the  degree  of  Grand  Pontiff,  the  nine¬
teenth  of  the  Scottish  Rite,  it  is  the  pre¬
dominating  color,  and  is  there  said  to  be
symbolic  of  the  mildness,  fidelity,  and  gen¬
tleness  which  ought  to  be  the  character¬
istics  of  every  true  and  faithful  brother.

In  the  degree  of  Grand  Master  of  all
Symbolic  Lodges,  the  blue  and  yellow,
which  are  its  appropriate  colors,  are  said
to  refer  to  the  appearance  of  Jehovah  to
Moses  on  Mount  Sinai  in  clouds  of  azure
and  gold,  and  hence  in  this  degree  the
color  is  rather  an  historical  than  a  moral
symbol.

The  blue  color  of  the  tunic  and  apron,
which  constitutes  a  part  of  the  investiture
of  a  Prince  of  the  Tabernacle,  or  twenty-
fourth  degree  in  the  Scottish  Rite,  alludes  to
the  whole  symbolic  character  of  the  degree,
whose  teachings  refer  to  our  removal  from
this  tabernacle  of  clay  to  “  that  house  not


120


BLUE


BODE


made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.”
The  blue  in  this  degree  is,  therefore,  a
symbol  of  heaven,  the  seat  of  our  celestial
tabernacle.

Blue  Blanket.  The  Lodge  of  Jour¬
neymen,  in  the  city  of  Edinburgh,  is  in
possession  of  a  blue  blanket,  which  is  used
as  a  banner  in  Masonic  processions.  The
history  of  it  is  thus  given  in  the  London
Magazine:

A  number  of  Scotch  mechanics  followed
Allan,  Lord  Steward  of  Scotland,  to  the
holy  wars  in  Palestine,  and  took  with  them
a  banner,  on  which  were  inscribed  the  fol¬
lowing  words  from  the  51st  Psalm,  viz. :
“In  bona  voluntate  tua  edificentur  muri
Hierosolymee.”  Fighting  under  the  ban¬
ner,  these  valiant  Scotchmen  were  present
at  the  capture  of  Jerusalem,  and  other
towns  in  the  Holy  Land;  and,  on  their  re¬
turn  to  their  own  country,  they  deposited
the  banner,  which  they  styled  “  The  Ban¬
ner  of  the  Holy  Ghost,”  at  the  altar  of  St.
Eloi,  the  patron  saint  of  the  Edinburgh
Tradesmen,  in  the  church  of  St.  Giles.  It
was  occasionally  unfurled,  or  worn  as  a
mantle  by  the  representatives  of  the  trades
in  the  courtly  and  religious  pageants  that
in  former  times  were  of  frequent  occurrence
in  the  Scottish  capital.  In  1482,  James
III.,  in  consequence  of  the  assistance  which
he  had  received  from  the  Craftsmen  of
Edinburgh,  in  delivering  him  from  the
castle  in  which  he  was  kept  a  prisoner,  and
aying  a  debt  of  6,000  marks  which  he
ad  contracted  in  making  preparations  for
the  marriage  of  his  son,  the  Duke  of  Roth-
say,  to  Cecil,  daughter  of  Edward  IV.,  of
England,  conferred  on  the  good  town
several  valuable  privileges,  and  renewed
to  the  Craftsmen  their  favorite  banner  of
“The  Blue  Blanket.”  James’s  queen,  Mar¬
garet  of  Denmark,  to  show  her  gratitude
and  respect  to  the  Crafts,  painted  on  the
banner,  with  her  own  hands,  a  St.  Andrew’s
cross,  a  crown,  a  thistle,  and  a  hammer,
■with  the  following  inscription  :  “  Fear  God
and  honor  the  king:  grant  him  a  long  life
and  a  prosperous  reign,  and  we  shall  ever
pray  to  be  faithful  for  the  defence  of  his
sacred  majesty’s  royal  person  till  death.”
The  king  decreed  that  in  all  time  coming,
this  flag  should  be  the  standard  of  the
Crafts  within  burgh,  and  that  it  should  be
unfurled  in  defence  of  their  own  rights,
and  in  protection  of  their  sovereign.  The
privilege  of  displaying  it  at  the  Masonic
procession  was  granted  to  the  journeymen,
in  consequence  of  their  original  connec¬
tion  with  the  Masons  of  Mary’s  Chapel,
one  of  the  fourteen  incorporated  trades  of
the  city.

“The  Blue  Blanket”  was  long  in  a  very
tattered  condition ;  but  some  years  ago  it


was  repaired  by  lining  it  with  blue  silk,  so
that  it  can  be  exposed  without  subjecting  it
to  much  injury.

Blue  Degrees.  The  first  three  de¬
grees  of  Freemasonry  are  so  called  from
the  blue  color  which  is  peculiar  to  them.

Blue  Dodge.  A  symbolic  Lodge,  in
which  the  first  three  degrees  of  Masonry
are  conferred,  is  so  called  from  the  color  of
its  decorations.

Blue  Masonry.  The  degrees  of  En¬
tered  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,  and  Master
Mason  are  called  Blue  Masonry.

Blue  Master.  In  some  of  the  high
degrees,  these  words  are  used  to  designate
a  Master  Mason.

Board  of  General  Purposes.

An  organization  attached  to  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  consisting  of  a  Presi¬
dent  and  twenty-four  other  members,  with
the  Grand  Master,  Pro  Grand  Master,
Deputy  Grand  Master,  and  the  Grand
Wardens.  The  President  and  ten  of  the
twenty-four  members  are  annually  nomi¬
nated  by  the  Grand  Master,  and  the  re¬
maining  fourteen  are  elected  by  the  Grand
Lodge  from  the  Masters  and  Past  Mastere
of  the  Lodges.  This  board  has  authority
to  hear  and  determine  all  subjects  of  Ma¬
sonic  complaints,  or  irregularity  respecting
Lodges  or  individual  Masons,  when  regu¬
larly  brought  before  it,  and  generally  to
take  cognizance  of  all  matters  relating  to
the  Craft.

Board  of  Relief.  See  Relief,  Board
of.

Boaz.  The  name  of  the  left  hand  pil¬
lar  that  stood  at  the  porch  of  King  Solo¬
mon’s  Temple.  It  is  derived  from  the  He¬
brew  3,  b,  “in,”  and  Jty,  oaz,  “strength,”
and  signifies  “  in  strength.”  See  Pillars  of
the  Porch.

Bode.  Joliann  Joachim  Chris¬
toph.  Born  in  Brunswick,  16th  of  Janu¬
ary,  1730.  One  of  the  most  distinguished
Masons  of  his  time.  In  his  youth  he  was
a  professional  musician,  but  in  1757  he
established  himself  at  Hamburg  as  a  book¬
seller,  and  was  initiated  into  the  Masonic
Order.  He  obtained  much  reputation  by  the
translation  of  Sterne’s  Sentimental  Journey,
and  Tristram  Shandy  ;  of  Goldsmith’s  I7car
of  Wakefield  ;  Smollett’s  Humphrey  Clinker;
and  of  Fielding’s  Tom  Jones,  from  the  Eng¬
lish  ;  and  of  Montaigne’s  works  from  the
French.  To  Masonic  literature  he  made
many  valuable  contributions;  among  oth¬
ers,  he  translated  from  the  French  Bonne¬
ville’s  celebrated  work  eutitled  Les  Jesuites
chassis  de  la  Magonnerie  et  leur  poignard  brise
par  les  Magons,  which  contains  a  compari¬
son  of  Scottish  Masonry  with  the  Templar-
ism  of  the  fourteenth  century.  Bode  was
at  one  time  a  zealous  promoter  of  the  Rite


BOEBER


BONAIM


121


of  Strict  Observance,  but  afterwards  became
one  of  its  most  active  opponents.  In  1790
he  joined  the  Order  of  the  Illuminati,  ob¬
taining  the  highest  degree  in  its  second
class,  and  at  the  Congress  of  Wilhelmsbad
he  advocated  the  opinions  of  Weishaupt.
No  man  of  his  day  was  better  versed
than  he  in  the  history  of  Freemasonry,  or

f»ossessed  a  more  valuable  and  extensive
ibrary;  no  one  was  more  diligent  in  in¬
creasing  his  stock  of  Masonic  knowledge,  or
more  anxious  to  avail  himself  of  the  rarest
sources  of  learning.  Hence,  he  has  always
held  an  exalted  position  among  the  Masonic
scholars  of  Germany.  The  theory  which  he
had  conceived  on  the  origin  of  Freemason¬
ry,  —  a  theory,  however,  which  the  investi¬
gations  ofsubsequent  historians  have  proved
to  be  untenable,  —  was,  that  the  Order
was  indented  by  the  Jesuits,  in  the  seven¬
teenth  century,  as  an  instrument  for  the  re¬
establishment  of  the  Roman  Church  in  Eng¬
land,  covering  it  for  their  own  purposes  un¬
der  the  mantle  of  Templarism.  Bode  died
at  Weimar  on  the  13th  of  December,  1793.

Boeber,  Johann.  A  Royal  Coun¬
cillor  of  State  and  Director  of  the  School  of
Cadets  at  St.  Petersburg  during  the  reign
of  Alexander  I.  In  1805  he  induced  the
emperor  to  revoke  the  edicts  made  by  Paul
I.  and  himself  against  the  Freemasons.
His  representations  of  the  true  character
of  the  Institution  induced  the  emperor  to
seek  and  obtain  initiation.  Boeber  may
be  considered  as  the  reviver  of  Masonry  in
the  Russian  dominions,  and  was  Grand
Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  from  1811
to  1814.

Boehinen,  Jacob.  The  most  cele¬
brated  of  the  Mystics  of  the  sixteenth  and
seventeenth  centuries,  born  near  Gorlitz,
in  1575,  and  died  in  1624.  His  system
attracted,  and  continued  to  attract  long
after  his  death,  many  disciples  in  Germany.
Among  these,  in  time,  were  several  Free¬
masons,  who  sought  to  incorporate  the
mystical  dogmas  of  their  founder  with  the
teachings  of  Freemasonry,  so  as  to  make
the  Lodges  merely  schools  of  theosophy.
Indeed,  the  Theosophic  Rites  of  Freema¬
sonry,  which  prevailed  to  a  great  extent
about  the  middle  of  the  last  century  in
Germany  and  France,  were  indebted  for
most  of  their  ideas  to  the  mysticism  of
Jacob  Boehinen.

Bobeumnn,  Karl  Adolf.  Born  in
1770,  in  Denmark,  where  he  was  the  pos¬
sessor  of  a  large  estate.  The  character  of
having  “  performed  many  charitable  deeds,”
which  is  bestowed  upon  him  by  Findel,  is
probably  based  on  the  statement  of  Len-
ning,  that  he  gave  800,000  thalers  to  the
Orphan  Asylum  at  Stockholm.  Lenning,
however,  says  that  it  was  given  in  1767 ;

Q


and  as  that  was  three  years  before  Bohe-
mann  was  born,  the  error  is  obvious.  Thory
attributes  the  gift  to  a  M.  Bohman,  and
the  similarity  of  names  may  have  given
rise  to  the  mistake.  Bohemann  was  a  very
zealous  member  of  the  Order  of  Asiatic
Brethren,  and  was  an  active  promulgator
of  the  high  degrees.  Invited  into  Sweden,
in  1802,  by  the  Duke  of  Sudermania,  who
was  an  ardent  inquirer  into  Masonic  sci¬
ence,  he  was  appointed  Court  Secretary.
He  attempted  to  introduce  his  system  of
high  degrees  into  the  kingdom,  but  having
been  detected  in  the  effort  to  intermingle
revolutionary  schemes  with  his  high  de¬
grees,  he  was  first  imprisoned  and  then
banished  from  the  country,  his  society  being
interdicted.  He  returned  to  Germany,  but
is  not  heard  of  after  1815,  when  he  pub¬
lished  at  Pyrmont  a  justification  of  him¬
self.  Findel  (Hist.,  p.  560,)  calls  him  an
imposter,  but  I  know  not  why.  He  was
rather  a  Masonic  fanatic,  who  was  ignorant
of  or  had  forgotten  the  wide  difference  that
there  is  between  Freemasonry  and  political
intrigue.

Bohemia.  Freemasonry  was  insti¬
tuted  in  Bohemia,  in  1749,  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland.  In  1776  it  was  highly
prosperous,  and  continued  so  until  the
commencement  of  the  French  Revolution,
when  it  was  suppressed  by  the  Austrian
government.

Bombay.  Under  a  deputation  from
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  the  District
Grand  Lodge  of  Bombay  was  established
in  1861.  Masonry  is  in  an  excellent  con¬
dition  in  the  District.

Bonaim.  The  Hebrew  word  for  build¬
ers,  and  used  in  1  Kings  v.  18,  to  desig¬
nate  a  portion  of  the  workmen  on  the
Temple :  “  And  Solomon’s  builders  and
Hiram’s  builders  did  hew  them.”  Oliver,
in  his  Dictionary  and  in  his  Landmarks,
gives  a  mythical  account  of  them  as  Fel¬
low  Crafts,  divided  into  Lodges  by  King
Solomon,  but,  by  a  grammatical  blunder,
he  calls  them  Benai,  substituting  the  He¬
brew  constructive  for  the  nominative  case,
.and  changing  the  participial  o  into  e.  The
Bonaim  seem  to  be  distinguished,  by  the
author  of  the  Book  of  Kings,  from  the
Gibalim,  and  the  translators  of  the  author¬
ized  version  have  called  the  former  builders
and  the  latter  stone-squarers.  It  is  probable
that  the  Bonaim  were  an  order  of  work¬
men  inferior  to  the  Gibalim.  Anderson,  in
both  of  his  editions  of  the  Book  of  Consti¬
tutions,  blunders  grammatically,  like  Oli¬
ver,  and  calls  them  Bonai,  saying  that  they
were  “setters,  layers,  or  builders,  or  light
Fellow  Crafts,  in  number  80,000.”  This
idea  seems  to  have  been  perpetuated  in  the
modern  rituals.


122


BONDMAN


BOOK


Bondman.  In  the  fourth  article  of
the  Halliwell  MS.,  which  is  supposed  to  con¬
tain  the  old  Gothic  or  York  Constitutions,
it  is  said  that  the  Master  shall  take  good
care  that  he  make  no  bondman  an  ap¬
prentice,  or,  as  it  is  in  the  original  lan¬
guage:

“  The  fonrthe  artvcut  thys  moste  be,

That  the  Mayster  hymn  wel-be-se,

That  he  no  bondman  prentys  make.”

The  regulation  is  repeated  in  all  the
subsequent  regulations,  and  is  still  in  force.
See  Freeborn.

Bone.  This  word,  which  is  now  cor¬
ruptly  pronounced  in  one  syllable,  is  the
Hebrew  word  boneh,  rma?  builder,”  from
the  verb  banah,  rm  to  build.”  It  was
peculiarly  applied,  as  an  epithet,  to  Hiram
Abif,  who  superintended  the  construction
of  the  Temple  as  its  chief  builder.  Master
Masons  will  recognize  it  as  the  terminal
portion  of  a  significant  word.  Its  true  pro¬
nunciation  would  be,  in  English  letters,
bonay ;  but  the  corruption  into  one  syllable
as  bone  has  become  too  universal  ever  to  be
corrected.

Bone  Box.  In  the  early  lectures  of
the  last  century,  now  obsolete,  we  find  the
following  catechism :

“  Q.  Have  you  any  key  to  the  secrets  of  a
Mason  ?

“A.  Yes.

“  Q.  Where  do  you  keep  it?

“  A.  In  a  bone  box,  that  neither  opens
nor  shuts  but  with  ivory  keys.”

The  bone  box  is  the  mouth,  the  ivory
keys  the  teeth.  And  the  key  to  the  secrets
is  afterwards  said  to  be  the  tongue.  These
questions  were  simply  used  as  tests,  and
were  subsequently  varied.  In  a  later  lec¬
ture  it  is  called  the  “  bone-bone  box.”

Bonneville,  Chevalier  de.  On
the  24th  of  November,  1754,  he  founded
the  Chapter  of  the  high  degrees  known
as  the  Chapter  of  Clermont.  All  the
authorities  assert  this  except  Rebold  (Hist,
de  trois  G.  L.,  p.  46),  who  says  that  he  was
not  its  founder  but  only  the  propagator  of
its  degrees.  Lenning  ( Encycl .)  has  con¬
founded  him  with  Nicolas  de  Bonneville,
who  was  born  six  years  after  the  founda¬
tion  of  the  Chapter.

Bonneville,  Nicolas  de.  An

historian  and  literateur,  born  at  Evreux,
in  France,  March  13,  1760.  He  was
the  author  of  a  work,  published  in  1788,
entitled,  Les  Jesuites  chassis  de  la  Magon-
nerie  et  leur  poignard  bri.se  par  les  Magons,
divided  into  two  parts,  of  the  first  of  which
the  sub-title  was,  La  Magonnerie  ecossoise
comparee  avec  les  trois  professions  et  le  Secret
des  Templiers  de  14e  Siecle  ;  and  of  the  sec¬
ond,  Memete  des  quatre  voeux  de  la  Com-


pagnie  de  S.  Ignale,  et  des  quatre  grades  de  la
Magonnerie  de  8.  Jean.  He  also  translated
into  French,  Thomas  Paine’s  Essay  on  the
Origin  of  Freemasonry;  a  work,  by  the  way,
which  was  hardly  worth  the  trouble  of
translation.  De  Bonneville  had  an  exalted
idea  of  the  difficulties  attendant  upon  writ¬
ing  a  history  of  Freemasonry,  for  he  says
that,  to  compose  such  a  work,  supported  by
dates  and  authentic  facts,  it  would  require  a
period  equal  to  ten  times  the  age  of  man  ;
a  statement  which,  although  exaggerated,
undoubtedly  contains  an  element  of  truth.
His  Masonic  theory  was  that  the  Jesuits
had  introduced  into  the  symbolic  degrees
the  history  of  the  life  and  death  of  the
Templars,  and  the  doctrine  of  vengeance  for
the  political  and  religious  crime  of  their
destruction ;  and  that  they  had  imposed
upon  four  of  the  higher  degrees  the  four
vows  of  their  congregation.  De  Bonneville
was  imprisoned  as  a  Girondist  in  1793.  He
was  the  author  of  a  History  of  Modern  Eu¬
rope,  in  3  vols.,  published  in  1792,  and  died
in  1828.

Book  of  Charges.  There  seems,  if
we  may  judge  from  the  references  in  the
old  records  of  Masonry,  to  have  formerly
existed  a  book  under  this  title,  containing
the  Charges  of  the  Craft ;  equivalent,  proba¬
bly,  to  the  Book  of  Constitutions.  Thus,
the  Matthew  Cooke  MS.  of  the  latter  part
of  the  fifteenth  century  (An.  533)  speaks
of  “  other  charges  mo  that  ben  wryten  in
the  Boke  of  Chargys.”

Book  of  Constitutions.  The  Book
of  Constitutions  is  that  work  in  which  is
contained  the  rules  and  regulations  adopted
for  the  government  of  the  fraternity  of
Freemasons.  Undoubtedly,  a  society  so
orderly  and  systematic  must  always  have
been  governed  by  a  prescribed  code  of  laws ;
but-,  in  the  lapse  of  ages,  the  precise  regula¬
tions  which  were  adopted  for  the  direction
of  the  Craft  in  ancient  times  have  been  lost.
The  earliest  record  that  we  have  of  any
such  Constitutions  is  in  a  manuscript,  first
published,  in  1723,  by  Anderson,  and  which
he  said  was  written  in  the  reign  of  Edward
IV.  Preston  quotes  the  same  record,  and
adds,  that  “  it  is  said  to  have  been  in  the
possession  of  the  famous  Elias  Ashmole,
and  unfortunately  destroyed,”  a  statement
which  had  not  been  previously  made  by
Anderson.  To  Anderson,  therefore,  we
must  look  in  our  estimation  of  the  authen¬
ticity  of  this  document;  and  that  we  cannot
too  much  rely  upon  his  accuracy  as  a  trans¬
criber  is  apparent,  not  only  from  the  internal
evidence  of  style,  but  also  from  the  fact
that  he  made  important  alterations  in  his
copy  of  it  in  his  edition  of  1738.  Such  as
it  is,  however,  it  contains  the  following  par-
.  ticulars.


BOOK


BOOK


123


“Though  the  ancient  records  of  the
brotherhood  in  England  were,  many  of
them,  destroyed  or  lost  in  the  wars  of  the
Saxons  and  Danes,  yet  King  Athelstane
(the  grandson  of  King  Alfred  the  Great,  a
mighty  architect),  the  first  anointed  king
of  England,  and  who  translated  the  Holy
Bible  into  the  Saxon  tongue  (a.  d.  930),
when  he  had  brought  the  land  into  rest  and
peace,  built  many  great  works,  and  encour¬
aged  many  Masons  from  France,  who  were
appointed  overseers  thereof,  and  brought
with  them  the  charges  and  regulations  of
the  Lodges,  preserved  since  the  Roman
times ;  who  also  prevailed  with  the  king  to
improve  the  Constitution  of  the  English
Lodges,  according  to  the  foreign  model,  and
to  increase  the  wages  of  working  Masons.

“  The  said  king’s  brother,  Prince  Edwin,
being  taught  Masonry,  and  taking  upon
him  the  charges  of  a  Master  Mason,  for  the
love  he  had  to  the  said  Craft  and  the  hon¬
orable  principles  whereon  it  is  grounded,
purchased  a  free  charter  of  King  Athelstane
for  the  Masons  having  a  correction  among
themselves  (as  it  was  anciently  expressed),
or  a  freedom  and  power  to  regulate  them¬
selves,  to  amend  what  might  happen  amiss,
and  to  hold  a  yearly  communication  and
general  assembly.

“  Accordingly,  Prince  Edwin  summoned
all  the  Masons  in  the  realm  to  meet  him  in
a  congregation  at  York  (a.  d.  926),  who
came  and  composed  a  general  Lodge,  of
which  he  was  Grand  Master ;  and  having
brought  with  them  all  the  writings  and
records  extant,  some  in  Greek,  some  in
Latin,  some  in  French,  and  other  lan¬
guages,  from  the  contents  thereof,  that  as¬
sembly  did  frame  the  Constitutions  and
Charges  of  an  English  Lodge,  and  made  a
law  to  preserve  and  observe  the  same  in  all
time  coming.”

Other  records  have  from  time  to  time
been  discovered,  most  of  them  recently,
which  prove  beyond  all  doubt  that  the  Fra¬
ternity  of  Freemasons  were,  at  least  in  the
14th,  15th,  16th,  and  17th  centuries,  in  pos¬
session  of  manuscript  Constitutions  con¬
taining  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the
Craft.

In  the  year  1717,  Freemasonry,  which
had  somewhat  fallen  into  decay  in  the
south  of  England,  was  revived  by  the  or¬
ganization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London ;
and,  in  the  next  year,  the  Grand  Master
having  desired,  says  Anderson,  “  any  breth¬
ren  to  bring  to  the  Grand  Lodge  any  old
writings  and  records  concerning  Masons
and  Masonry,  in  order  to  show  the  usages
of  ancient  times,  several  old  copies  of  the
Gothic  Constitutions  were  produced  and
collated.”

But  these  Constitutions  having  been


found  to  be  very  erroneous  and  defective  —
probably  from  carelessness  or  ignorance  in
their  frequent  transcription  —  in  Septem¬
ber,  1721,  the  Duke  of  Montagu,  who  was
then  Grand  Master,  ordered  Brother  James
Anderson  to  digest  them  “in  a  new  and
better  method.”

Anderson  having  accordingly  accom¬
plished  the  important  task  that  had  been
assigned  him,  in  December  of  the  same
year  a  committee,  consisting  of  fourteen
learned  brethren,  was  appointed  to  examine
the  book  ;  and  they,  in  the  March  commu¬
nication  of  the  subsequent  year,  having  re¬
ported  their  approbation  of  it,  it  was,  after
some  amendments,  adopted  by  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  published,  in  1723,  under  the
title  of  “The  Constitutions  of  the  Free¬
masons,  containing  the  History,  Charges,
Regulations,  etc.,  of  that  Most  Ancient  and
Right  Worshipful  Fraternity.  For  the  use
of  the  Lodges.”

A  second  edition  was  published  in  1738,
under  the  superintendence  of  a  committee
of  Grand  Officers.  But  this  edition  con¬
tained  so  many  alterations,  interpolations,
and  omissions  of  the  Charges  and  Regula¬
tions  as  they  appeared  in  the  first,  as  to
show  the  most  reprehensible  inaccuracy  in
its  composition,  and  to  render  it  utterly
worthless  except  as  a  literary  curiosity.  It
does  not  seem  to  have  been  very  popular,
for  the  printers,  to  complete  their  sales,  were
compelled  to  commit  a  fraud,  and  to  pre¬
sent  what  they  pretended  to  be  a  new  edi¬
tion  in  1746,  but  which  was  really  only  the
edition  of  1738,  with  a  new  title-page
neatly  pasted  in,  the  old  one  being  can¬
celled.  Of  this  literary  fraud,  I  have  a
copy  in  my  library,  and  have  recently  seen
another  one  in  the  possession  of  a  Mason
of  Washington  city.

In  1754,  Bro.  Jonathan  Scott  presented
a  memorial  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  “  showing
the  necessity  of  a  new  edition  of  the  Book
of  Constitutions.”  It  was  then  ordered  that
the  book  “should  be  revised,  and  neces¬
sary  alterations  and  additions  made  consist¬
ent  with  the  laws  and  rules  of  Masonry ;  ”
all  of  which  would  seem  to  show  the  dissatis¬
faction  of  the  Fraternity  with  the  errors  of
the  second  edition.  Accordingly,  a  third
edition  was  published  in  1756,  under  the
editorship  of  John  Entick.  He  also  pub¬
lished  the  fourth  edition  in  1767.

In  1784,  John  Noorthouck  published  by
authority  the  fifth  edition.  This  was  well
printed  in  quarto,  with  numerous  notes,  and
is  considered  as  the  most  valuable  edition.

The  sixth  and  seventh  editions  were
edited  by  William  Williams,  and  published
in  1815  and  in  1827.  The  eighth  edition
was  published,  in  1841,  by  William  Henry
White,  who  was  the  Grand  Secretary.  In


124


BOOK


BOOK


each  of  these  last  three  editions  the  his¬
torical  part  was  omitted,  and  nothing  was

fiven  but  the  Charges,  Regulations,  and
<aws.

The  Book  of  Constitutions  was  repub¬
lished  in  America  and  in  Ireland  ;  but  these
eight  editions,  enumerated  above,  are  the
only  original  editions  of  the  Book  of  Con¬
stitutions  which  were  officially  authorized
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

The  Book  is  carried  in  all  processions
before  the  Grand  Master,  on  a  velvet  cush¬
ion,  and  the  right  of  so  carrying  it  is  vested
in  the  Master  of  the  oldest  Lodge  —  a  priv¬
ilege  which  arose  from  the  following  cir¬
cumstances.  During  the  reign  of  Queen
Anne,  Freemasonry  was  in  a  languishing
condition,  in  consequence  of  the  age  and
infirmities  of  the  Grand  Master,  Sir  Chris¬
topher  Wren.  On  his  death,  and  the  ac¬
cession  of  George  the  First  to  the  throne,
the  fout  old  Lodges  then  existing  in  London
determined  to  revive  the  Grand  Lodge,
which  had  for  some  years  been  dormant,
and  to  renew  the  quarterly  communications
and  the  annual  feast.  This  measure  they
accomplished,  and  resolved,  among  other
things,  that  no  Lodge  thereafter  should  be
permitted  to  act,  (the  four  old  Lodges  ex¬
cepted,)  unless  by  authority  of  a  charter
granted  by  the  Grand  Master,  with  the  ap-
robation  and  consent  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
n  consequence  of  this,  the  old  Masons  in
the  metropolis  vested  all  their  inherent
privileges  as  individuals  in  the  four  old
Lodges,  in  trust,  that  they  would  never
suffer  the  ancient  landmarks  to  be  infringed ;
wyhile  on  their  part  these  bodies  consented
to  extend  their  patronage  to  every  Lodge
which  should  thereafter  be  regularly  con¬
stituted,  and  to  admit  their  Masters  and
Wardens  to  share  with  them  all  the  privi¬
leges  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  that  of  prece¬
dence  only  excepted.  The  extension  of  the
Order,  however,  beginning  to  give  to  the
new  Lodges  a  numerical  superiority  in  the
Grand  Lodge,  it  was  feared  they  would  at
length  be  able,  by  a  majority,  to  subvert
the  privileges  of  the  original  Masons  of
England,  which  had  been  centred  in  the
four  old  Lodges.  On  this  account,  a  code
of  articles  was  drawn  up,  with  the  consent
of  all  the  brethren,  for  the  future  govern¬
ment  of  the  society.  To  this  was  annexed
a  regulation  binding  the  Grand  Master  and
his  successors,  and  the  Master  of  every
newly  constituted  Lodge,  to  preserve  these
regulations  inviolable;  and  declaring  that
no  new  regulation  could  be  proposed,  ex¬
cept  at  the  third  quarterly  communication,
and  requiring  it  to  be  publicly  read  at  the
annual  feast  to  every  brother,  even  to  the
youngest  Apprentice,  when  the  approbation
of  at  least  two-thirds  of  those  present


should  be  requisite  to  render  it  obligatory.
To  commemorate  this  circumstance,  it  has
been  customary  for  the  Master  of  the  oldest
Lodge  to  attend  every  grand  installation,
and,  taking  precedence  of  all  present,  the
Grand  Master  excepted,  to  deliver  the
Book  of  Constitutions  to  the  newly  installed
Grand  Master,  on  his  promising  obedience
to  the  ancient  charges  and  general  regula¬
tions.

BookofC'onstitntionsGiiar<le<l
by  the  Tiler’s  Sword.  An  emblem
painted  on  the  Master’s  carpet,  and  in¬
tended  to  admonish  the  Mason  that  he
should  be  guarded  in  all  his  words  and
actions,  preserving  unsullied  the  Masonic
virtues  of  silence  and  cifcumspection.
Such  is  Webb’s  definition  of  the  emblem,
which  is  a  very  modern  one,  and  I  am  in¬
clined  to  think  was  introduced  by  that
lecturer.  The  interpretation  of  Webb  is  a
very  unsatisfactory  one.  The  Book  of  Con¬
stitutions  is  rather  the  symbol  of  constituted
law  than  of  silence  and  circumspection,  and
wrhen  guarded  by  the  Tiler’s  sword  it
would  seem  properly  to  symbolize  regard
for  and  obedience  to  law,  a  prominent
Masonic  duty.

Book  of  Gold.  In  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  the  book  in  which
the  transactions,  statutes,  decrees,  balus¬
ters,  and  protocols  of  the  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  or  a  Grand  Consistory  are  contained.

Book  of  the  Lav.  The  Holy  Bible,
which  is  always  open  in  a  Lodge  as  a  sym¬
bol  that  its  light  should  be  diffused  among
the  brethren.  The  passages  on  which  it  is
opened  differ  in  the  different  degrees.  See
Scriptures,  Reading  of  the.

Masonically,  the  Book  of  the  Law  is  that
sacred  book  which  is  believed  by  the  Mason
of  any  particular  religion  to  contain  the
revealed  will  of  God;  although,  technically,
among  the  Jews  the  Torah,  or  Book  of  the
Law,  means  only  the  Pentateuch  or  five
books  of  Moses.  Thus,  to  the  Christian
Mason  the  Book  of  the  Law  is  the  Old  and
New  Testaments;  to  the  Jew,  the  Old
Testament ;  to  the  Mussulman,  the  Koran ;
to  the  Brahman,  the  Vedas;  and  to  the
Parsee,  the  Zendavesta.

The  Book  of  the  Law  is  an  important
symbol  in  the  Royal  Arch  degree,  concern¬
ing  which  there  was  a  tradition  among  the
Jews  that  the  Book  of  the  Law  was  lost
during  the  captivity,  and  that  it  was  among
the  treasures  discovered  during  the  build¬
ing  of  the  second  Temple.  The  same  opin¬
ion  was  entertained  by  the  early  Christian
fathers,  such,  for  instance,  as  Irenaeus,
Tertullian,  and  Clemens  Alexandrinus ;
“for,”  says  Prideaux,  “  they  (the  Christian
fathers)  hold  that  all  the  Scriptures  were
lost  and  destroyed  in  the  Babylonish  cap-


BOOKS


BRAZIL


125


tivity,  and  that  Ezra  restored  them  all
again  by  Divine  revelation.”  The  truth  of
the  tradition  is  very  generally  denied  by
biblical  scholars,  who  attribute  its  origin
to  the  fact  that  Ezra  collected  together  the
copies  of  the  law,  expurgated  them  of  the
errors  which  had  crept  into  them  during
the  captivity,  and  arranged  a  new  and  cor¬
rect  edition.  But  the  truth  or  falsity  of
the  legend  does  not  affect  the  Masonic  sym¬
bolism.  The  Book  of  the  Law  is  the  will
of  God,  which,  lost  to  us  in  our  darkness,
must  be  recovered  as  precedent  to  our
learning  what  is  TRUTH.  As  captives  to
error,  truth  is  lost  to  us ;  when  freedom  is
restored,  the  first  reward  will  be  its  dis¬
covery.

Books,  Anti-Masonic.  See  Anti-
Masonic  Books.

Border,  Tesselated.  See  Tessel-
ated  Border.

Bourn.  A  limit  or  boundary ;  a  word
familiar  to  the  Mason  in  the  Monitorial
Instructions  of  the  Fellow  Craft’s  degree,
where  he  is  directed  to  remember  that  we
are  travelling  upon  the  level  of  time  to  that
undiscovered  country  from  whose  bourn  no
traveller  returns;  and  to  the  reader  of
Shakespeare,  from  whom  the  expression  is
borrowed,  in  the  beautiful  soliloquy  of
Hamlet:

“  Who  would  fardels  bear,

To  grunt  and  sweat  under  a  weary  life  ;

But  that  the  dread  of  something  after  death  —
The  undiscovered  country,  from  whose  bourn
No  traveller  returns  —  puzzles  the  will.”

Act  III.,  Scene  1.

Box-Master.  In  the  Lodges  of  Scot¬
land  the  Treasurer  was  formerly  sometimes
so  called.  Thus,  in  the  minutes  of  the
Lodge  of  Journeymen  of  Edinburgh,  it  was
resolved,  in  1726,  that  the  Warden  be  in¬
structed  “to  uplift  and  receive  for  the  use
of  the  society  all  such  sums  of  money
which  are  due  and  indebted  to  them  or
their  former  Box-masters  or  predecessors
in  office.”

Boys’  School.  The  Royal  Masonic
Institution  for  Boys  is  a  charity  of  the
Masons  of  England.  It  was  founded  in
the  year  1798,  for  clothing  and  educating
the  sons  of  indigent  and  deceased  brethren,
according  to  the  situation  in  life  they  are
most  probably  destined  to  occupy,  and  in¬
culcating  such  religious  instruction  as  may
be  conformable  to  the  tenets  of  their  pa¬
rents,  and  ultimately  apprenticing  them  to
suitable  trades.  It  is  still  existing  in  a
flourishing  condition.  Similar  schools
have  been  established  by  the  Masons  of
France  and  Germany.

Brnli iiiaiilsin.  The  religious  system

S>ractised  by  the  Hindus.  It  presents  a  pro-
ound  and  spiritual  philosophy,  strangely


blended  with  the  basest  superstitions.  The
Vedas  are  the  Brahmanical  Book  of  the
Law,  although  the  older  hymns  springing
out  of  the  primitive  Aryan  religion  have
a  date  far  anterior  to  that  of  comparatively
modern  Brahmanism.  The  “Laws  of
Menu  ”  are  really  the  text-book  of  Brah¬
manism;  yet  in  the  Vedic  hymns  we  find
the  expression  of  that  religious  thought
that  has  been  adopted  by  the  Brahmans
and  the  rest  of  the  modern  Hindus.  The
learned  Brahmans  have  an  esoteric  faith,
in  which  they  recognize  and  adore  one
God,  without  form  or  quality,  eternal,  un¬
changeable,  and  occupying  all  space;  but
confining  this  hidden  doctrine  to  their  in¬
terior  schools,  they  teach,  for  the  multitude,
an  open  or  esoteric  worship,  in  which  the
incomprehensible  attributes  of  the  supreme
and  purely  spiritual  God  are  invested  with
sensible  and  even  human  forms.  In  the
Vedic  hymns  all  the  powers  of  natbre  are
personified,  and  become  the  objects  of  wor¬
ship,  thus  leading  to  an  apparent  polythe¬
ism.  But,  as  Mr.  J.  F.  Clarke  ( Ten  Great
Religions,  p.  90,)  remarks,  “behind  this
incipient  polytheism  lurks  the  original
monotheism ;  for  each  of  these  gods,  in
turn,  becomes  the  Supreme  Being.”  And
Max  Muller  says,  [Chips,  i.  2,)  that  “it
would  be  easy  to  find  in  the  numerous
hymns  of  the  Veda  passages  in  which
almost  every  important  deity  is  repre¬
sented  as  supreme  and  absolute.”  This
most  ancient  religion  —  believed  in  by  one-
seventh  of  the  world’s  population,  that
fountain  from  which  has  flowed  so  much
of  the  stream  of  modern  religious  thought,
abounding  in  mystical  ceremonies  and
ritual  prescriptions,  worshipping,  as  the
Lord  of  all,  “the  source  of  golden  light,”
having  its  ineffable  name,  its  solemn
methods  of  initiation,  and  its  symbolic  rites
—  is  well  worth  the  serious  study  of  the
Masonic  scholar,  because  in  it  he  will  find
much  that  will  be  suggestive  to  him  in  the
investigations  of  the  dogmas  of  his  Order,

Brazen  Serpent.  See  Serpent  and
Cross.

Brazen  Serpent,  Knight  of  the.

See  Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent.

Brazil.  The  first  organized  Masonic
authority  at  Brazil,  the  Grande  Oriente  do
Brazil,  was  established  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,
in  the  ybar  1821,  by  the  division  of  one
Lodge  into  three.

The  Emperor,  Dom  Pedro  I.,  was  soon
after  initiated  in  one  of  these  Lodges,  and
immediately  proclaimed  Grand  Master;  but
finding  that  the  Lodges  of  that  period  were
nothing  else  but  political  clubs,  he  ordered
them  to  be  closed  in  the  following  year,
1822.  After  his  abdication  In  1831,  Ma¬
sonic  meetings  again  took  place,  and  a  new


126


BREAD


BREASTPLATE


authority,  under  the  title  of  “  Grande  Ori-
ente  Brazileiro,”  was  established.

Some  of  the  old  members  of  the  “Grande
Oriente  do  Brazil  ”  met  in  November  of  the
same  year  and  reorganized  that  body;  so
that  two  supreme  authorities  of  the  French
Rite  existed  in  Brazil.

In  1832,  the  Visconde  de  Jequitinhonha,
having  received  the  necessary  powers  from
the  Supreme  Council  of  Belgium,  estab¬
lished  a  Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Rite;  making  thus  a  third
contending  body,  to  which  was  soon  added
a  fourth  and  fifth,  by  the  illegal  organiza¬
tions  of  the  Supreme  Councils  of  their  own,
by  the  contending  Grand  Orientes.  In
1835,  disturbances  broke  out  in  the  legiti¬
mate  Supreme  Council,  some  of  its  Lodges
having  proclaimed  the  Grand  Master  of  the
Grand  Orient  of  Brazil  their  Grand  Com¬
mander,  and  thus  formed  another  Supreme
Council.  In  1842,  new  seeds  of  dissension
were  planted  by  the  combination  of  this
revolutionary  faction  with  the  Grande  Ori¬
ente  Brazileiro,  which  body  then  abandoned
the  French  Rite,  and  the  two  formed  a  new'
Council,  which  proclaimed  itself  the  only
legitimate  authority  of  the  Scotch  Rite  in
Brazil.  But  it  would  be  useless  as  well  as
painful,  to  continue  the  record  of  these  dis¬
sensions,  which  like  a  black  cloud  darkened
for  years  the  Masonic  sky  of  Brazil.

Things  are  now  in  a  better  condition,  and
Freemasonry  in  Brazil  is  united  under  the
one  head  of  the  Grand  Orient  and  Su¬
preme  Council.

Bread,  Consecrated.  Consecrated
bread  and  wine,  that  is  to  say,  bread  and
wine  used,  not  simply  for  food,  but  made
sacred  by  the  purpose  of  symbolizing  a
bond  of  brotherhood,  and  the  eating  and
drinking  of  which  are  sometimes  called
the  “  Communion  of  the  Brethren,”  is
found  in  some  of  the  higher  degrees,  such
as  the  Order  of  High  Priesthood  in  the
American  Rite,  and  the  Rose  Croix  of  the
French  and  Scottish  Rites.

It  was  in  ancient  times  a  custom  reli¬
giously  observed,  that  those  who  sacrificed
to  the  gods  should  unite  in  partaking  of  a
part  of  the  food  that  had  been  offered.
And  in  the  Jewish  church  it  was  strictly
commanded  that  the  sacrificers  should  “eat
before  the  Lord,”  and  unite  in  a  feast  of
joy  on  the  occasion  of  their  offerings.  By
this  common  partaking  of  that  which  had
been  consecrated  to  a  sacred  purpose,  those
who  partook  of  the  feast  seemed  to  give  an
evidence  and  attestation  of  the  sincerity  with
which  they  made  the  offering;  while  the
feast  itself  was,  as  it  were,  the  renewal  of  the
covenant  of  friendship  between  the  parties.

Breadth  of  the  Lodge.  See  Form
of  the  Lodge,


Breast.  In  one  of  the  Old  Lectures,
quoted  by  Dr.  Oliver,  it  is  said,  “  A  Ma¬
son’s  breast  should  be  a  safe  and  sacred  re¬
pository  for  all  your  just  and  lawful  secrets.
A  brother’s  secrets,  delivered  to  me  as  such,
I  would  keep  as  my  own  ;  as  to  betray  that
trust  might  be  doing  him  the  greatest  in¬
jury  he  could  sustain  in  this  mortal  life;
nay,  it  would  be  like  the  villany  of  an  as¬
sassin  who  lurks  in  darkness  to  stab  his  ad¬
versary  when  unarmed  and  least  prepared
to  meet  an  enemy.”

It  is  true,  that  the  secrets  of  a  Mason,
confided  as  such,  should  be  as  inviolate  in
the  breast  of  him  who  has  received  them
as  they  were  in  his  own  before  they  were
confided.  But  it  would  be  wrong  to  con¬
clude  that  in  this  a  Mason  is  placed  in  a
position  different  from  that  which  is  occu-

})ied  by  every  honorable  man.  No  man  of
lonor  is  permitted  to  reveal  a  secret  which
he  has  received  under  the  pledge  of  secrecy.
But  it  is  as  false  as  it  is  absurd,  to  charge
that  either  the  man  of  honor  or  ihe  Mason
is  bound  by  any  such  obligation  to  protect
the  criminal  from  the  vindication  of  the
law.  It  must  be  left  to  every  man  to  de¬
termine  by  his  own  conscience  whether  he
is  at  liberty  to  betray  a  knowledge  of  facts
with  which  he  could  not  have  become  ac¬
quainted  except  under  some  such  pledge.
No  court  of  law  would  attempt  to  extort  a
communication  of  facts  made  known  by  a

Jienitent  to  his  confessor  or  a  client  to  his
awyer;  for  such  a  communication  would
make  the  person  communicating  it  infa¬
mous.  In  this  case,  Masonry  supplies  no
other  rule  than  that  which  is  found  in  the
acknowledged  codes  of  Moral  Ethics.

Breastplate.  Called  in  Hebrew
jt?n,  chosen,  or  HStPO  pf'H,  chosen  mish-
pet,  the  breastplate  of  judgment,  because
through  it  the  high  priest  received  divine
responses,  and  uttered  his  decisions  on  all
matters  relating  to  the  good  of  the  com¬
monwealth.  It  was  a  piece  of  embroidered
cloth  of  gold,  purple,  scarlet,  and  fine
white,  twined  linen.  It  was  a  span,  or
about  nine  inches  square,  when  doubled,
and  made  thus  strong  to  hold  the  precious
stones  that  were  set  in  it.  It  bad  a  gold
ring  at  each  corner,  to  the  uppermost  of
which  were  attached  golden  chains,  by
which  it  was  fastened  to  the  shoulder-pieces
of  the  ephod ;  while  from  the  two  lowermost
went  two  ribbons  of  blue,  by  which  it  was
attached  to  the  girdle  of  the  ephod,  and
thus  held  secure  in  its  place.  In  the  breast¬
plate  were  set  twelve  precious  jewels,  on  each
of  which  was  engraved  the  name  of  one  of
the  twelve  tribes.  The  stones  were  arranged
in  four  rows,  three  stones  in  each  row.  As  to
the  order  of  arrangement  and  the  names  of
the  stones,  there  has  been  some  difference


BREASTPLATE


BREASTPLATE


127


among  the  authorities.  The  authorized
version  of  the  Bible  gives  them  in  this
order  :  Sardius,  topaz,  carbuncle,  emerald,
sapphire,  diamond,  ligure,  agate,  ame¬
thyst,  beryl,  onyx,  jasper.  This  is  the  pat¬
tern  generally  followed  in  the  construction
of  Masonic  breastplates,  but  modern  re¬
searches  into  the  true  meaning  ofthe  Hebrew
names  of  the  stones  have  shown  its  inac¬
curacy.  Especially  must  the  diamond  be
rejected,  as  no  engraver  could  have  cut  a
name  on  this  impenetrable  gem,  to  say  noth¬
ing  of  the  pecuniary  value  of  a  diamond
of  a  size  to  match  the  rest  of  the  stones.
Josephus  [Ant.  III.,  vii.,)  gives  the  stones
in  the  following  order :  Sardonyx,  topaz,
.emerald;  carbuncle,  jasper,  sapphire;
ligure,  amethyst,  agate;  chrysolite,  onyx,
beryl.  Kalisch,  in  his  Commentary  on  Ex¬
odus,  gives  a  still  different  order:  Corne¬
lian,  (or  sardius,)  topaz,  smaragdus ;  car¬
buncle,  sapphire,  emerald;  ligure,  agate,
amethyst;  chrysolite,  onyx,  jasper.  But
perhaps  the  Vulgate  translation  is  to  be
preferred  as  an  authority,  because  it  was
made  in  the  fifth  century,  at  a  time  when
the  old  Hebrew  names  of  the  precious
stones  were  better  understood  than  now.
The  order  given  in  that  version  is  shown
in  the  following  diagram :


Emerald.

Topaz.

Sardius.

Jasper.

Sapphire.

Carbuncle.

Amethyst.

Agate.

Ligure.

Beryl.

Onyx.

Chrysolite.

A  description  of  each  of  these  stones,
with  its  symbolic  signification,  will  be
found  under  the  appropriate  head.

On  the  stones  were  engraved  the  names
of  the  twelve  tribes,  one  on  each  stone.
The  order  in  which  they  were  placed,  ac¬
cording  to  the  Jewish  Targums,  was  as
follows,  having  a  reference  to  the  respective
ages  of  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob:


Levi.

Simeon.

Reuben.

Zebulun.

IsSACIIAR.

Judah.

Gad.

Napiitali.

Dan.

Benjamin.

Joseph.

Asiier.

The  differences  made  by  different  writers
in  the  order  of  the  names  of  the  stones
arises  only  from  their  respective  transla¬
tions  of  the  Hebrew  words.  These  original
names  are  detailed  in  Exodus,  (xxviii.,)
and  admit  of  no  doubt,  whatever  doubt
there  may  be  as  to  the  gems  which  they
were  intended  to  represent.  These  Hebrew
names  are  as  follows :


np-u

rntoD

DIN

*

*

*

Bareket.

PlTDAH.

Odem.

,  oSiT

*VSD

*

*

*

Yahalom.

Saphir.

Is  opec  ir.

noSrtN

■Dtr

nuh

*

*

*

AcnLAMAH.

Shebo.

Leshem.

nfltr*

□mr

*

*

*

Yashpah.

Shoham.

Tabshish.

The  breastplate  which  was  used  in  the
first  Temple  does  not  appear  to  have  been
returned  after  the  Captivity,  for  it  is  not
mentioned  in  the  list  of  articles  sent  back
by  Cyrus.  The  stones,  on  account  of  their
great  beauty  and  value,  were  most  proba¬
bly  removed  from  their  original  arrange¬
ment  and  reset  in  various  oynamfents  by
their  captors.  A  new  one  was  made  for
the  services  of  the  second  Temple,  which,
according  to  Josephus,  when  worn  by  the
high  priest,  shot  forth  brilliant  rays  of
fire  that  manifested  the  immediate  presence
of  Jehovah.  But  he  adds  that  two  hun¬
dred  years  before  his  time  this  miraculous
power  had  become  extinct  in  consequence
of  the  impiety  of  the  nation.  It  was  sub¬
sequently  carried  to  Rome  together  with
the  other  spoils  of  the  Temple.  Of  the
subsequent  fate  of  these  treasures,  and
among  them  the  breastplate,  there  are  two
accounts :  one,  that  they  were  conveyed  to
Carthage  by  Genseric  after  his  sack  of
Rome,  and  that  the  ship  containing  them
was  lost  on  the  voyage ;  the  other,  and,  as
King  thinks,  (Ant.  Gems,  137,)  the  more
probable  one,  that  they  had  been  trans¬
ferred  long  before  that  time  to  Byzantium,
and  deposited  by  Justinian  iu  the  treasury
of  St.  Sophia.

The  breastplate  is  worn  in  American
Chapters  of  the  Royal  Arch  by  the  High
Triest  as  an  essential  part  of  his  official


128


BREAST


BRIDGE


vestments.  The  symbolic  reference  of  it,
as  given  by  Webb,  is  that  it  is  to  teach  him
always  to  bear  in  mind  his  responsibility
to  the  laws  and  ordinances  of  the  Institu¬
tion,  and  that  the  honor  and  interests  of
his  Chapter  should  be  always  near  his
heart.  This  does  not  materially  differ  from
the  ancient  symbolism,  for  one  of  the  names
given  to  the  Jewish  breastplate  was  the
“  memorial,”  because  it  was  designed  to
remind  the  high  priest  how  dear  the  tribes
whose  names  it  bore  should  be  to  his  heart.

The  breastplate  does  not  appear  to  have
been  original  with  or  peculiar  to  the  Jew¬
ish  ritual.  The  idea  was,  most  probably,
derived  from  the  Egyptians.  Diodorus
Siculus  says,  (1.  i.,  c.  75,)  that  among  them
the  chief  judge  bore  about  his  neck  a  chain
of  gold,  from  which  hung  a  figure  or  image,
[lufimv,)  composed  of  precious  stones,  which
was  called  Troth,  and  the  legal  proceed¬
ings  only  commenced  when  the  chief  judge
had  assumed  this  image.  HSlian  (lib.  34)
confirms  this  account  by  saying  that  the
image  was  engraved  on  sapphire,  and  hung
about  the  neck  of  the  chief  judge  with  a
golden  chain.  Peter  du  Val  says  that  he
saw  a  mummy  at  Cairo,  round  the  neck  of
which  was  a  chain,  to  which  a  golden  plate
was  suspended,  on  which  the  image  of  a  bird
was  engraved.  See  Urim  and  Thummim.

Breast,  The  Faithful.  One  of  the
three  precious  jewels  of  a  Fellow  Craft.  It
symbolically  teaches  the  initiate  that  the
lessons  which  he  has  received  from  the  in¬
structive  tongue  of  the  Master  are  not  to
be  listened  to  and  lost,  but  carefully  treas¬
ured  in  his  heart,  and  that  the  precepts  of
the  Order  constitute  a  covenant  which  he
is  faithfully  to  observe.

Breast  to  Breast.  See  Five  Points
of  Fellowship.

Brethren.  This  word,  being  the
plural  of  Brother  in  the  solemn  style,  is
more  generally  used  in  Masonic  language,
instead  of  the  common  plural,  Brothers.
Thus,  Masons  always  speak  of  “The  Breth¬
ren  of  the  Lodge,”  and  not  of  “  The  Broth¬
ers  of  the  Lodge.”

Brethren  of  the  Bridge.  See

Bridge  Builders  of  the  Middle  Ages.

Brethren  of  the  Mystic  Tie.

The  term  by  which  Masons  distinguish
themselves  as  the  members  of  a  confra¬
ternity  or  brotherhood  united  by  a  mysti¬
cal  bond.  See  Mystic  Tie.

Bridge  Builders  of  the  Middle
Ages.  Before  speaking  of  the  Pontifices ,
or  the  “Fraternity  of  Bridge  Builders,”
whose  history  is  closely  connected  with
that  of  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle
Ages,  it  will  be  as  well  to  say  something
of  the  word  which  they  assumed  as  the
title  of  their  brotherhood.


The  Latin  v/ord pontifex,  with  its  equiva¬
lent  English  pontiff,  literally  signifies,  “the
builder  of  a  bridge,”  from  pons,  “a  bridge,”
and  facere,  “  to  make.”  But  this  sense,
which  it  must  have  originally  possessed,  it
seems  very  speedily  to  have  lost,  and  we,
as  well  as  the  Romans,  only  recognize  pon-
tifex  or  pontiff  am  significant  of  a  sacerdotal
character.

Of  all  the  colleges  of  priests  in  ancient
Rome,  the  most  illustrious  was  that  of  the
Pontiffs.  The  College  of  Pontiffs  was
established  by  Xuma,  and  originally  con¬
sisted  of  five,  but  was  afterwards  increased
to  sixteen.  The  whole  religious  system  of  the
Romans,  the  management  of  all  the  sacred
rites,  and  the  government  of  the  priest-  ,
hood,  was  under  the  control  and  direction
of  the  College  of  Pontiffs,  of  which  the  Ponti-
fex  Maximus,  or  High  Priest,  was  the  pre¬
siding  officer  and  the  organ  through  which
its  decrees  were  communicated  to  the  peo¬
ple.  Hence,  when  the  Papal  Church  estab¬
lished  its  seat  at  the  city  of  Rome,  its
Bishop  assumed  the  designation  of  Pontifex
Maximus  as  one  of  his  titles,  and  Pontiff
and  Pope  are  now  considered  equivalent
terms.

The  question  naturally  arises  as  to  what
connection  there  was  between  religious
rites  and  the  building  of  bridges,  and  why
a  Roman  priest  bore  the  name  which  liter¬
ally  denoted  a  bridge  builder.  Etymolo¬
gists  have  in  vain  sought  to  solve  the  prob¬
lem,  and,  after  all  their  speculation,  fail
to  satisfy  us.  One  of  the  most  tenable
theories  is  that  of  Schmitz,  who  thinks  the
Pontifices  were  so  called  because  they  super¬
intended  the  sacrifices  on  a  bridge,  allud¬
ing  to  the  Argean  sacrifices  ou  the  Sublician
bridge.  But  Varro  gives  a  more  probable
explanation  when  he  tells  us  that  the  Sub¬
lician  bridge  was  built  by  the  Pontifices ;
and  that  it  was  deemed,  from  its  historic
association,  of  so  sacred  a  character,  that  no
repairs  could  be  made  on  it  without  a  pre¬
vious  sacrifice,  which  was  to  be  conducted
by  the  Chief  Pontiff  in  person.  The  true
etymology  is,  however,  undoubtedly  lost;
yet  it  may  be  interesting,  as  well  as  sugges¬
tive,  to  know  that  in  old  Rome  there  was,
even  in  a  mere  title,  supposing  that  it  was
nothing  more,  some  sort  of  connection
between  the  art  or  practice  of  bridge
building  and  the  mysterious  sacerdotal  rites
established  by  Numa,  a  connection  which
was  subsequently  again  developed  in  the
Masonic  association  which  is  the  subject  of
the  present  article.  Whatever  may  have
been  this  connection  in  pagan  Rome,  we
find,  after  the  establishment  of  Christianity
and  in  the  Middle  Ages,  a  secret  Fraternity
organized,  as  a  branch  of  the  Travelling
Freemasons  of  that  period,  whose  members


BRIDGE


BRIDGE


129


were  exclusively  devoted  to  the  building  of
bridges,  and  who  wTere  known  as  Pontifices,
or  “  Bridge  Builders,”  and  styled  by  the
French  lea  Frerea  Pontifes,  or  Pontifical
Brethren,  and  by  the  Germans  Briicken-
britder,  or  “  Brethren  of  the  Bridge.”  It  is
of  this  Fraternity  that,  because  of  their  as¬
sociation  in  history  with  the  early  corpora¬
tions  of  Freemasons,  it  is  proposed  to  give  a
brief  sketch.

In  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries,
the  methods  of  intercommunication  be¬
tween  different  countries  were  neither  safe
nor  convenient.  Travellers  could  not  avail
themselves  of  the  comforts  of  either  mac¬
adamized  roads  or  railways.  Stage-coaches
were  unknown.  He  who  was  compelled
by  the  calls  of  business  to  leave  his  home,
trudged  as  a  pedestrian  wearily  on  foot,  or  as
an  equestrian,  if  his  means  permitted  that
mode  of  journeying ;  made  his  solitary  ride
through  badly-constructed  roads,  where  he
frequently  became  the  victim  of  robbers,
who  took  his  life  as  well  as  his  purse,  or
submitted  to  the  scarcely  less  heavy  exac¬
tions  of  some  lawless  Baron,  who  claimed
it  as  his  high  prerogative  to  levy  a  tax  on
every  wayfarer  who  passed  through  his  do¬
mains.  Inns  were  infrequent,  incommodi¬
ous,  and  expensive,  and  the  weary  traveller
could  hardly  have  appreciated  Shenstone’s
declaration,  that

“Whoe’er  has  travelled  life’s  dull  round,
Where’er  his  stages  may  have  been,

May  sigh  to  think  he  still  has  found
His  warmest  welcome  at  an  inn.”

But  one  of  the  greatest  embarrassments
to  which  the  traveller  in  this  olden  time
was  exposed  occurred  when  there  was  a
necessity  to  cross  a  stream  of  water.  The
noble  bridges  of  the  ancient  Greeks  and
Romans  had  been  destroyed  by  time  or
war,  and  the  intellectual  debasement  of  the
dark  ages  had  prevented  their  renewal.
Hence,  when  refinement  and  learning  began
to  awaken  from  that  long  sleep  which  fol¬
lowed  the  invasion  of  the  Goths  and  Van¬
dals  and  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  Roman
Empire,  the  bridgeless  rivers  could  only  be
crossed  by  swimming  through  the  rapid
current,  or  by  fording  the  shallow  places.

The  earliest  improvement  towards  a  re¬
moval  of  these  difficulties  consisted  in  the
adoption  of  rafts  or  boats,  and  gilds  or
corporations  of  raftsmen  and  boatmen,
under  the  names  of  Linuncularii,  Linfrarii,
and  Utricularii,  were  formed  to  transport
travellers  and  merchandise  across  rivers.
But  the  times  were  lawless,  and  these  water¬
men  oftener  plundered  than  assisted  their
patrons.  Benevolent  persons,  therefore,
saw  the  necessity  of  erecting  hostelries  on
the  banks  of  the  rivers  at  frequented  places,
B,  9


and  of  constructing  bridges  for  the  trans¬
portation  of  travellers  and  their  goods.

All  the  architectural  labors  of  the  period
were,  as  is  well  known,  intrusted  to  the
gilds  or  corporations  of  builders  who,  un¬
der  the  designation  of  “  Travelling  Freema¬
sons,”  passed  from  country  to  country,  and,
patronized  by  the  Church,  erected  those  mag¬
nificent  cathedrals,  monasteries,  and  other
public  edifices,  many  of  which  have  long
since  crumbled  to  dust,  but  a  few  of  which
still  remain  to  attest  the  wondrous  ability
of  these  operative  brethren.  Alone  skilled
in  the  science  of  architecture,  from  them
alone  could  be  derived  workmen  capable
of  constructing  safe  and  enduring  bridges.

Accordingly,  a  portion  of  these  “  Freema¬
sons,”  withdrawing  from  the  general  body,
united,  under  the  patronage  of  the  Church,
into  a  distinct  corporation  of  Frlres  Pontifes,
or  Bridge  Builders.  The  name  wThich  they
received  in  Germany  was  that  of  Briicken-
brUder,  or  Brethren  of  the  Bridge.

A  legend  of  the  Church  attributes  their
foundation  to  Saint  Benezet,  who  accord¬
ingly  became  the  patron  of  the  Order,  as
Saint  John  was  of  the  Freemasons  proper.
Saint  Benezet  was  a  shepherd  of  Avilar,  in
France,  who  was  born  in  the  year  11G5.
“He  kept  his  mother’s  sheep  in  the
country,”  says  Butler,  the  historian  of  the
saints,  “being  devoted  to  the  practices  of
piety  beyond  his  age;  when  moved  by
charity  to  save  the  lives  of  many  poor  per¬
sons,  who  were  frequently  drowned  in
crossing  the  Rhone,  and,  being  inspired  by
God,  he  undertook  to  build  a  bridge  over
that  rapid  river  at  Avignon.  He  obtained
the  approbation  of  the  Bishop,  proved  his
mission  by  miracles,  and  began  the  work
in  1177,  which  he  directed  during  seven
years.  He  died  when  the  difficulty  of  the
undertaking  was  over,  in  1184.  His  body
was  buried  upon  the  bridge  itself,  which
was  not  completely  finished  till  four  years
after  his  decease,  the  structure  whereof  was
attended  with  miracles  from  the  first  laying
of  the  foundations  till  it  was  completed,  in
1188.”

Divesting  this  account,  which  Butler  has
drawn  from  the  Acta  Sanctorum  of  the  Bol-
landists,  of  the  miraculous,  the  improba¬
ble,  and  the  legendary,  the  naked  fact  re¬
mains  that  Benezet  was  engaged,  as  the
principal  conductor  of  the  work,  in  the
construction  of  the  magnificent  bridge  at
Avignon,  with  its  eighteen  arches.  As
this  is  the  most  ancient  of  the  bridges  of
Europe  built  after  the  commencement  of
the  restoration  of  learning,  it  is  most  prob¬
able  that  he  was,  as  he  is  claimed  to  have
been,  the  founder  of  that  Masonic  corpora¬
tion  of  builders  who,  under  the  name  of
Brethren  of  the  Bridge,  assisted  him  in  the


130


BRIDGE


BROACHED


undertaking,  and  who,  on  the  completion
of  their  task,  were  engaged  in  other  parts
of  France,  of  Italy,  and  of  Germany,  in
similar  labors.

After  the  death  of  Saint  Benezet,  he
was  succeeded  by  Johannes  Benedictus,  to
whom,  as  “  Prior  of  the  Bridge,”  and  to  his
brethren,  a  charter  was  granted  in  1187,  by
which  they  obtained  a  chapel  and  cemetery,
with  a  chaplain.

In  1185,  one  year  after  the  death  of  Saint
Benezet,  the  Brethren  of  the  Bridge  com¬
menced  the  construction  of  the  Bridge  of
Saint  Esprit,  over  the  Rhone  at  Lyons.
The  completion  of  this  work  greatly  ex¬
tended  the  reputation  of  the  Bridge  Build¬
ers,  and  in  1189  they  received  a  charter
from  Pope  Clement  III.  The  city  of  Avig¬
non  continued  to  be  their  headquarters,  but
they  gradually  entered  into  Italy,  Spain,
Germany,  Sweden,  and  Denmark.  The
Swedish  chronicles  mention  one  Benedict,
between  the  years  1178  and  1191,  who  was
a  Bishop  and  bridge  builder  at  Skara,  in
that  kingdom.  Could  he  have  been  the
successor,  already  mentioned,  of  Benezet,
who  had  removed  from  Avignon  to  Sweden  ?
As  late  as  1590  we  find  the  Order  existing
at  Lucca,  in  Italy,  where,  in  1562,  John  de
Medicis  exercised  the  functions  of  its  chief
under  the  title  of  Mag  is  ter,  or  Master.  How
the  Order  became  finally  extinct  is  not
known ;  but  after  its  dissolution  much  of
the  property  which  it  had  accumulated
passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Knights  Hos¬
pitallers  or  Knights  of  Malta.

The  gild  or  corporation  of  Bridge  Build¬
ers,  like  the  corporation  of  Travelling  Free¬
masons,  from  which  it  was  an  offshoot,  was
a  religious  institution,  but  admitted  laymen
into  the  society.  In  other  words,  the  work¬
men,  or  the  great  body  of  the  gild,  were
of  course  secular,  but  the  patrons  were  dig¬
nitaries  of  the  Church.  When  by  the  mul¬
tiplication  of  bridges  the  necessity  of  their
employment  became  less  urgent,  and  when
the  numbers  of  the  workmen  were  greatly
increased,  the  patronage  of  the  Church  was
withdrawn,  and  the  association  was  dis¬
solved,  or  soon  after  fell  into  decay;  its
members,  probably,  for  the  most  part,  re¬
uniting  with  the  corporations  of  Masons
from  whom  they  had  originally  been  de¬
rived.  Nothing  has  remained  in  modern
Masonry  to  preserve  the  memory  of  the
former  connection  of  the  Order  with  the
bridge  builders  of  the  Middle  Ages,  except
the  ceremony  of  opening  a  bridge,  which
is  to  be  found  in  the  rituals  of  the  last  cen¬
tury;  but  even  this  has  now  almost  become
obsolete.

Lenning,  who  has  appropriated  a  brief
article  in  his  Encyclopadie  der  Freimaurerei
to  the  Bruckenbriider,  or  Brethren  of  the


Bridge,  incorrectly  calls  them  an  Order  of
Knights.  They  took,  he  says,  vows  of  celi¬
bacy  and  poverty,  and  also  to  protect  trav¬
ellers,  to  attend  upon  the  sick,  and  to  build
bridges,  roads,  and  hospitals.  Several  of
the  inventors  of  high  degrees  have,  he
thinks,  sought  to  revive  the  Order  in  some
of  the  degrees  which  they  have  established,
and  especially  in  the  Knights  of  the  Sword,
which  appears  in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite  as  the  fifteenth  degree,  or  Knights  of
the  East;  but  I  can  find  no  resemblance
except  that  in  the  Knights  of  the  Sword
there  is  in  the  ritual  a  reference  to  a  river
and  a  bridge.  I  am  more  inclined  to  be¬
lieve  that  the  nineteenth  degree  of  the
same  Rite,  or  Grand  Pontiff,  was  once  con¬
nected  with  the  Order  wTe  have  been  con¬
sidering;  and  that,  while  the  primitive
ritual  has  been  lost  or  changed  so  as  to
leave  no  vestige  of  a  relationship  between
the  two,  the  name  which  is  still  retained
may  have  been  derived  from  the  Frlres
Pontifes  of  the  twelfth  century.

This,  however,  is  mere  conjecture,  with¬
out  any  means  of  proof.  All  that  we  do
positively  know  is,  that  the  bridge  builders
of  the  Middle  Ages  were  a  Masonic  associa¬
tion,  and  as  such  are  entitled  to  a  place  in
all  Masonic  histories.

Brief.  The  diploma  or  certificate  in
some  of  the  high  degrees  is  so  called.

Bright.  A  Mason  is  said  to  be  “bright”
who  is  well  acquainted  writh  the  ritual,  the
forms  of  opening  and  closing,  and  the  cer¬
emonies  of  initiation.  This  expression
does  not,  however,  in  its  technical  sense,
appear  to  include  the  superior  knowledge
of  the  history  and  science  of  the  Institu¬
tion,  and  many  bright  Masons  are,  there¬
fore,  not  necessarily  learned  Masons ;  and,
on  the  contrary,  some  learned  Masons  are
not  well  versed  in  the  exact  phraseology
of  the  ritual.  The  one  knowledge  depends
on  a  retentive  memory,  the  other  is  de¬
rived  from  deep  research.  It  is  scarcely
necessary  to  say  which  of  the  two  kinds  of
knowledge  is  the  more  valuable.  The  Ma¬
son  whose  acquaintance  with  the  Institu¬
tion  is  confined  to  what  he  learns  from  its
esoteric  ritual  w’ill  have  but  a  limited  idea
of  its  science  and  philosophy.  And  yet
a  knowledge  of  the  ritual  as  the  founda¬
tion  of  higher  knowledge  is  essential.

Broached  Thurnel.  In  the  An-
dersonian  lectures  of  the  early  part  of  the
eighteenth  century  the  Immovable  Jewels
of  the  Lodge  are  said  to  be  “the  Tarsel
Board,  Rough  Ashlar,  and  Broached  Thur¬
nel;”  and  in  describing  their  uses  it  is
taught  that  “  the  Rough  Ashlar  is  for  the
Fellow  Crafts  to  try  their  jewels  on,  and  the
Broached  Thurnel  for  the  Entered  Appren¬
tices  to  learn  to  work  upon.”  Much  difficulty


BROKEN


BROTHERLY


131


lias  been  met  with  in  discovering  wliat  the
Broached  Thurnel  really  was.  Dr.  Oliver,
most  probably  deceived  by  the  use  to  which
it  was  assigned,  says  ( Diet.  Symb.  Mas.)
that  it  was  subsequently  called  the  Rough
Ashlar.  This  is  evidently  incorrect,  be¬
cause  a  distinction  is  made  in  the  original
lecture  between  it  and  the  Rough  Ashlar,
the  former  being  for  the  Apprentices  and
the  latter  for  the  Fellow  Crafts.  Krause
(Kunsturkunden,  i.  73,)  has,  by  what  au¬
thority  I  know  not,  translated  it  by  Dreh-
bank,  which  means  a  turning-lathe,  an
implement  not  used  by  Operative  Masons.
Now  what  is  the  real  meaning  of  the  word?
If  we  inspect  an  old  trac¬
ing  board  of  the  Appren¬
tice’s  degree  of  the  date
when  the  Broached  Thur¬
nel  was  in  use,  we  shall
find  depicted  on  it  three
symbols,  two  of  which
will  at  once  be  recognized
as  the  Tarsel,  or  Trestle
Board,  and  the  Rough
Ashlar,  just  as  we  have
them  at  the  present  day ;  while  the  third
symbol  will  be  that  depicted  in  the  margin,
namely,  a  cubical  stoue  with  a  pyramidal
apex.  This  is  the  Broached  Thurnel.  It
is  the  symbol  which  is  still  to  be  found,
with  precisely  the  same  form,  in  all  French
tracing  boards,  under  the  name  of  the
pierre  cubique,  or  cubical  stone,  and  which
has  been  replaced  in  English  and  Ameri¬
can  tracing  boards  and  rituals  by  the  Per¬
fect  Ashlar.  For  the  derivation  of  the
words,  we  must  go  to  old  and  now  almost
obsolete  terms  of  architecture.  On  inspec¬
tion,  it  will  at  once  be  seen  that  the  Broached
Thurnel  has  the  form  of  a  little  square
turret  with  a  spire  springing  from  it.  Now,
broach,  or  broche,  says  Parker,  (Gloss,  of
Terms  in  Architect.,  p.  97,)  is  “  an  old  Eng¬
lish  term  for  a  spire,  still  in  use  in  some
parts  of  the  country,  as  in  Leicestershire,
where  it  is  said  to  denote  a  spire  springing
from  the  tower  without  any  intervening
parapet.  Thurnel  is  from  the  old  French
tourne/le,  a  turret  or  little  tower.  The
Broached  Thurnel,  then,  was  the  Spired
Turret.  It  was  a  model  on  which  appren¬
tices  might  learn  the  principles  of  their
art,  because  it  presented  to  them,  in  its
various  outlines,  the  forms  of  the  square  and
the  triangle,  the  cube  and  the  pyramid.”

Broken  Column.  Among  the  He¬
brews,  columns,  or  pillars,  were  used  meta¬
phorically  to  signify  princes  or  nobles,  as
if  they  were  the  pillars  of  a  state.  Thus,
in  Psalm  xi.  3,  the  passage,  reading  in  our
translation,  “If  the  foundations  be  de¬
stroyed,  what  can  the  righteous  do?”  is,  in
the  original,  “  when  the  columns  are  over¬


thrown,”  i.  e.  when  the  firm  supporters  of
what  is  right  and  good  have  perished.  So
the  passage  in  Isaiah  xix.  10  should  read:
“  her  (Egypt’s)  columns  are  broken  down,”
that  is,  the  nobles  of  her  state.  In  Free¬
masonry,  the  broken  column  is,  as  Master
Masons  well  know,  the  emblem  of  the  fall
of  one  of  the  chief  supporters  of  the  Craft.
The  use  of  the  column  or  pillar  as  a  mon¬
ument  erected  over  a  tomb  was  a  very  an¬
cient  custom,  and  was  a  very  significant
symbol  of  the  character  and  spirit  of  the
person  interred.  See  Monument.

Brother.  The  term  which  Freema¬
sons  apply  to  each  other.  Freemasons  are
brethren,  not  only  by  common  participa¬
tion  of  the  human  nature,  but  as  professing
the  same  faith;  as  being  jointly  engaged  in
the  same  labors,  and  as  being  united  by  a
mutual  covenant  or  tie,  whence  they  are
also  emphatically  called  “  Brethren  of  the
Mystic  Tie.”  See  Companion.

Brotherhood.  When  our  Saviour
designated  his  disciples  as  his  brethren,  he
implied  that  there  was  a  close  bond  of  union
existing  between  them,  which  idea  was
subsequently  carried  out  by  St.  Peter  in
his  direction  to  “  love  the  brotherhood.”
Hence  the  early  Christians  designated
themselves  as  a  brotherhood,  a  relation¬
ship  unknown  to  the  Gentile  religions;
and  the  ecclesiastical  and  other  confrater¬
nities  of  the  Middle  Ages  assumed  the
same  title  to  designate  any  association  of
men  engaged  in  the  same  common  object,
governed  by  the  same  rules,  and  united  by
an  identical  interest.  The  association  or
fraternity  of  Freemasons  is,  in  this  sense,
called  a  brotherhood.

Brotherly  Kiss.  See  Kiss,  Fraternal.

Brotherly  Love.  At  a  very  early
period  in  the  course  of  his  initiation,
a  candidate  for  the  mysteries  of  Free¬
masonry  is  informed  that  the  great  tenets
of  the  Order  are  Brotherly  Love,  Re¬
lief,  and  Truth.  These  virtues  are  illus¬
trated,  and  their  practice  recommended  to
the  aspirant,  at  every  step  of  his  progress ;
and  the  instruction,  though  continually  va¬
ried  in  its  mode,  is  so  constantly  repeated,
as  infallibly  to  impress  upon  his  mind
their  absolute  necessity  in  the  constitution
of  a  good  Mason.

Brotherly  Love  might  very  well  be
supposed  to  be  an  ingredient  in  the  organ¬
ization  of  a  society  so  peculiarly  consti¬
tuted  as  that  of  Freemasonry.  But  the
brotherly  love  which  we  inculcate  is  not  a
mere  abstraction,  nor  is  its  character  left
to  any  general  and  careless  understanding
of  the  candidate,  who  might  be  disposed  to
give  much  or  little  of  it  to  his  brethren,
according  to  the  peculiar  constitution  of
his  own  mind,  or  the  extent  of  his  own


132


BROTHERS


BRUCE


generous  or  selfish  feelings.  It  is,  on  the
contrary,  closely  defined ;  its  object  plain¬
ly  denoted;  and  the  very  mode  and  manner
of  its  practice  detailed  in  words,  and  il¬
lustrated  by  symbols,  so  as  to  give  neither
cause  for  error  nor  apology  for  indiffer¬
ence.

Every  Mason  is  acquainted  with  the  Five
Points  of  Fellowship  —  he  knows  their
symbolic  meaning  —  he  can  never  forget
the  interesting  incidents  that  accompanied
their  explanation ;  and  while  he  has  this
knowledge,  and  retains  this  remembrance,
he  can  be  at  no  loss  to  understand  what  are
his  duties,  and  what  must  be  his  conduct,
in  relation  to  the  principle  of  Brotherly
Love.  See  Five  Points  of  Fellowship  and
Tenets  of  Freemasons.

Brothers  of  the  Rosy  Cross.  See

Rosierucians.

Browne,  John.  In  1798  John
Browne  published,  in  London,  a  work  en¬
titled  “The  Master  Key  through  all  the
Degrees  of  a  Freemason’s  Lodge,  to  which
is  added,  Eulogiums  and  Illustrations  upon
Freemasonry.”  In  1802,  he  published  a
second  edition  under  the  title  of  “  Browne’s
Masonic  Master  Key  through  the  three
degrees,  by  way  of  polyglot.  Under  the
sanction  of  the  Craft  in  general,  contain¬
ing  the  exact  mode  of  working,  initiation,
passing  and  raising  to  the  sublime  degree
of  a  Master.  Also,  the  several  duties  of
the  Master,  officers,  and  brethren  while  in
the  Lodge,  with  every  requisite  to  render
the  accomplished  Mason  an  explanation  of
all  the  hieroglyphics.  The  whole  inter¬
spersed  writh  illustrations  on  Theology,
Astronomy,  Architecture,  Arts,  Sciences,
&c.,  many  of  Avhich  are  by  the  editor.”
Browne  had  been,  he  says,  the  Past  Master
of  six  Lodges,  and  wrote  his  work  not  as
an  offensive  exposition,  but  as  a  means  of
giving  Masons  a  knowledge  of  the  ritual.
It  is  considered  to  be  a  very  complete  rep¬
resentation  of  the  Prestonian  lectures,  and
as  such  was  incorporated  by  Krause  in  hi3
“  drei  altesten  Kunsturkunden.”  The  work
is  printed  in  a  very  complicated  cipher,  the
key  to  which,  and  without  which  the  book
is  wholly  unintelligible,  was,  by  way  of
caution,  delivered  only  personally,  and  to
none  but  those  who  had  reached  the  third
degree.  The  explanation  of  this  “  mystical
key,”  as  Browne  calls  it,  is  as  follows.  The
word  Browne  supplies  the  vowels,  thus,


b  r  o  w  n  e


and  these  six  vowels  in  turn
a  e  i  o  u  v


a  e  i  ouy’

represent  six  letters,  thus,-; - - .  Ini

r  ’  ’  k  c  o  1  n  u


tial  capitals  are  of  no  value,  and  supernume¬
rary  letters  are  often  inserted.  The  words  are
kept  separate,  but  the  letters  of  one  word
are  often  divided  between  two  or  three.


Much  therefore  is  left  to  the  shrewdness  of
the  decipherer.  The  initial  sentence  of
the  wrork  may  be  adduced  as  a  specimen.
Vbs  Rplrbsrf  wbss  ostm  ronvrpm  Pongth
Mrlwdgr,  which  is  thus  deciphered  :  Please
to  assist  me  in  opening  the  Lodge.  The  work
is  now  exceedingly  rare.

Bril.  See  Vielle  Bru,  Rite  of.

Bruce,  Robert.  The  introduction
of  Freemasonry  into  Scotland  has  been  at¬
tributed  by  some  writers  to  Robert,  King
ofScotland,  commonly  called  Robert  Bruce,
who  is  said  to  have  established  in  1314  the
Order  of  Herodem,  for  the  reception  of
those  Knights  Templars  who  had  taken
refuge  in  his  dominions  from  the  persecu¬
tions  of  the  pope  and  the  king  of  France.
Thory  (Act.  Lat.,  i.  6,)  copies  the  following
from  a  manuscript  in  the  library  of  the
Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philosophical  Rite:

“Robert  Bruce,  King  ofScotland,  under
the  name  of  Robert  Bruce,  created,  on  the
24th  June,  1314,  after  the  battle  of  Ban¬
nockburn,  the  Order  of  St.  Andrew  of  the
Thistle,  to  which  has  been  since  united
that  of  Herodem,  for  the  sake  of  the  Scotch
Masons,  who  composed  a  part  of  the  thirty
thousand  men  with  whom  he  had  conquered
an  army  of  a  hundred  thousand  English¬
men.  He  reserved,  in  perpetuity,  to  him¬
self  and  his  successors,  the  title  of  Grand
Master.  He  founded  the  Royal  Grand
Lodge  of  the  Order  of  Herodem  at  Kil¬
winning,  and  died,  crowned  with  glory  and
honor,  the  9th  of  July,  1329.”

Dr.  Oliver,  (Landm.,  ii.  13,)  referring
to  the  abolition  of  the  Templar  Order  in
England,  when  the  Knights  were  compelled
to  enter  the  Preceptories  of  the  Knights
of  St.  John,  as  dependants,  says  :

“  In  Scotland,  Edward,  who  had  overrun
the  country  at  the  time,  endeavored  to  pur¬
sue  the  same  course ;  but,  on  summoning
the  Knights  to  appear,  only  two,  Walter
de  Clifton,  the  Grand  Preceptor,  and  an¬
other,  came  forward.  On  their  examina¬
tion,  they  confessed  that  all  the  rest  had
fled ;  and  as  Bruce  was  advancing  with  his
army  to  meet  Edward,  nothing  further  was
done.  The  Templars,  being  debarred  from
taking  refuge  either  in  England  or  Ireland,
had  no  alternative  but  to  join  Bruce,  and
give  their  active  support  to  his  cause.
Thus,  after  the  battle  of  Bannockburn,
in  1314,  Bruce  granted  a  charter  of  lands
to  Walter  de  Clifton,  as  Grand  Master  of
the  Templars,  for  the  assistance  which  they
rendered  on  that  occasion.  Hence  the
Royal  Order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.  was  frequenly
practised  under  the  name  of  Templary.”

Lawrie,  or  the  author  of  Lawrie’s  Book,
who  is  excellent  authority  for  Scottish  Ma¬
sonry,  does  not  appear,  however,  to  give
any  credit  to  the  narrative.  Whatever


BRUN


BULL


133


Bruce  may  have  done  for  the  higher  de¬
grees,  there  is  no  doubt  that  Ancient  Craft
Masonry  was  introduced  into  Scotland  at
an  earlier  period.  But  it  cannot  be  denied
that  Bruce  was  one  of  the  patrons  and  en-
couragers  of  Scottish  Freemasonry.

Briin,  Abraham  Van.  A  wealthy
Mason  of  Hamburg,  who  died  at  an  ad¬
vanced  age  in  1768.  For  many  years  he
had  been  the  soul  of  the  Society  of  True
and  Ancient  Rosicrucians,  which  soon  after
his  death  was  dissolved.

Brunswick,  Congress  of.  It  was
convoked,  in  1775,  by  Ferdinand,  Duke  of
Brunswick.  Its  object  was  to  eflect  a  fusion
of  the  various  Rites ;  but  it  terminated  its
labors,  after  a  session  of  six  weeks,  without
success.

Buenos  Ayres.  There  is  much  un¬
certainty  of  detail  in  the  early  history  of
Freemasonry  in  the  Argentine  Republic.
To  Brother  A.  G.  Goodall,  of  New  York,
who  visited  the  South  American  States
some  years  ago,  are  we  indebted  for  the
most  authentic  accounts  of  the  introduc¬
tion  of  Masonry  into  those  countries.  He
says  that  Lodges  were  in  existence  in
Buenos  Ayres  about  the  year  1846,  but  in
consequence  of  the  unsettled  state  of  society
their  labors  were  suspended,  and  it  was  not
until  1853  that  the  Order  commenced  a
ermanent  career  in  the  Rio  de  Plata,
anuary  19,  1854,  Excelsior  Lodge  was
established  at  Buenos  Ayres  by  a  War¬
rant  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  It
worked  in  the  York  Rite  and  in  the  Eng¬
lish  language.  Two  other  Lodges  were
subsequently  established  by  the  same  au¬
thority,  one  working  in  English  and  one  in
German.  In  1856  there  was  an  irregular
body  working  in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite,  which  claimed  the  prerogatives  of  a
Grand  Lodge,  but  it  was  never  recognized,
and  soon  ceased  to  exist.  In  September
13,  1858,  a  Supreme  Council  and  Grand
Orient  was  established  by  the  Supreme
Council  of  Paraguay.  This  body  is  still  in
active  operation  under  the  title  of  The  Su¬
preme  Council  of  the  Argentine  Republic,
Orient  of  Buenos  Ayres.  In  1801  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  issued  a  Warrant  for  the
establishment  of  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,
which  is  in  fraternal  alliance  with  the  Su¬
preme  Council,  and  by  the  consent  of  the
latter  is  authorized  to  establish  symbolic
Lodges.

Bull.  A  monstrous  corruption,  in  the
American  Royal  Arch,  of  the  word  Bel.
Up  to  a  recent  period,  it  was  combined
with  another  corruption,  Lun,  in  the  muti¬
lated  form  of  Bu/i-Lun,  under  which  dis¬
guise  the  words  Remand  On  were  presented
to  the  neophyte.

Bulilc,  Johann  Gottlieb.  Pro¬


fessor  of  Philosophy  in  the  University  of
Gottingen,  who,  not  being  himself  a  Mason,
published,  in  1804,  a  work  entitled,  Ueber
den  Unsprung  und  die  vornehmsten  Schicksale
des  Ordens  der  Rosenkreuzer  und  Freimau-
rer,  that  is,  “  On  the  Origin  and  the  Princi¬
pal  Events  of  the  Orders  of  Rosicrucianism
and  Freemasonry.”  This  work,  illogical
in  its  arguments,  false  in  many  of  its  state¬
ments,  and  confused  in  its  arrangement,
was  attacked  by  Frederick  Nicolai  in  a
critical  review  of  it  in  1806,  and  is  spoken
of  very  slightingly  even  by  De  Quincey,
himself  no  very  warm  admirer  of  the  Masonic
Institution,  who  published,  in  1824,  in  the
London  Magazine ,  (vol.  ix.,)  a  loose  transla¬
tion  of  it,  “abstracted,  re-arranged,  and
improved,”  under  the  title  of  Historico-
critical  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  of  the  Ro¬
sicrucians  and,  the  Freemasons.  Buhle’s
theory  was  that  Freemasonry  was  invented
in  the  year  1629,  by  John  Valentine  An¬
drea.  Buhle  was  born  at  Brunswick  in
1753,  became  Professor  of  Philosophy  at
Gottingen  in  1787,  and,  having  afterwards
taught  in  his  native  city,  died  there  in  1821.

Builder.  The  chief  architect  of  the
Temple  of  Solomon  is  often  called  “the
Builder.”  But  the  word  is  also  applied
generally  to  the  Craft ;  for  every  specula¬
tive  Mason  is  as  much  a  builder  as  was
his  operative  predecessor.  An  American
writer  (F.  S.  Wood)  thus  alludes  to  this
symbolic  idea.  “  Masons  are  called  moral
builders.  In  their  rituals,  they  declare
that  a  more  noble  and  glorious  purpose
than  squaring  stones  and  hewing  timbers
is  theirs, — fitting  immortal  nature  for  that
spiritual  building  not  made  with  hands,
eternal  in  the  heavens.”  And  he  adds,
“  The  builder  builds  for  a  century ;  Masons
for  eternity.”  In  this  sense,  “the  builder”
is  the  noblest  title  that  can  be  bestowed
upon  a  Mason.

Builder,  Smitten.  See  Smitten
Builder.

Builders,  Corporations  of.  See

Stone-Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages.

Bui.  Oliver  says  that  this  is  one  of
the  names  of  God  among  the  ancients.  I
can  find  no  such  word  in  any  oriental  lan¬
guage.  It  is  really  a  Masonic  mutilation
of  the  word  Bel.  See  Buh.

Bull,  Papal.  An  edict  or  proclama¬
tion  issued  from  the  Apostolic  Chancery,
with  the  seal  and  signature  of  the  pope,
written  in  Gothic  letters  and  upon  coarse
parchment.  It  derives  its  name  from  the
leaden  seal  which  is  attached  to  it  by  a
cord  of  hemp  or  silk,  and  which  in  mediae¬
val  Latin  is  called  bulla.  Several  of  these
bulls  have  from  time  to  time  been  fulmi¬
nated  against  Freemasonry  and  other  secret
societies,  subjecting  them  to  the  heaviest


134


BULLETIN


BURNING


ecclesiastical  punishments,  even  to  the
greater  excommunication.  According  to
these  bulls,  a  Freemason  is  ipso  facto  ex¬
communicated  by  continuing  his  member¬
ship  in  the  society,  and  is  thus  deprived
of  all  spiritual  privileges  while  living,
and  the  rites  of  burial  when  dead.

Of  these  bulls,  the  first  was  promulgated
by  Clement  XII.,  on  the  27th  of  April,
1738;  this  was  repeated  and  made  perpetual
by  Benedict  XIV.,  on  the  18th  of  May,
1775.  On  the  13th  of  August,  1814,  an
edict  continuing  these  bulls  was  issued  by
the  Cardinal  Gonsalvi,  Secretary  of  State  of
Pius  VII. ;  and  lastly,  similar  denunciatory
edicts  have  within  recent  years  been  uttered
by  Pius  IX.  Notwithstanding  these  reiter¬
ated  denunciations  and  attempts  at  Papal
suppression,  the  Mason  may  say  of  his
Order  as  Galileo  said  of  the  earth,  b  pur  si
muove.

Bulletin.  The  name  given  by  the
Grand  Orient  of  France  to  the  monthly
publication  which  contains  the  official
record  of  its  proceedings.  A  similar  work
is  issued  by  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite  for  the  South¬
ern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  of
America,  and  by  several  other  Supreme
Councils  and  Grand  Orients.

Bunyan,  John.  “The  well-known
author  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress.”  He  lived
in  the  seventeenth  century,  and  was  the
most  celebrated  allegorical  writer  of  Eng¬
land.  His  work  entitled  Solomon’s  Temple
Spiritualized  will  supply  the  student  of
Masonic  symbolism  with  many  valuable
suggestions.

Burdens,  Bearers  of.  A  class  of
workmen  at  the  Temple  mentioned  in  2
Chron.  ii.  18,  and  referred  to  by  Masonic
writers  as  the  Ish  Sabal,  which  see.

Burial.  The  right  to  be  buried  with
the  ceremonies  of  the  Order  is  one  that,
under  certain  restrictions,  belongs  to  every
Master  Mason.

None  of  the  ancient  Constitutions  con¬
tain  any  law  upon  this  subject,  nor  can
the  exact  time  be  now  determined  when
funeral  processions  and  a  burial  service
were  first  admitted  as  regulations  of  the
Order.

The  celebrated  caricature  of  a  mock  pro¬
cession  of  the  “Scald  Miserable  Masons,”
as  it  was  called,  was  published  in  1742,  and
represented  a  funeral  procession.  This
would  seem  to  imply  that  Masonic  funeral
processions  must  have  been  familiar  at  that
time  to  the  people ;  for  a  caricature,  how¬
ever  distorted,  must  have  an  original  for
its  foundation.

The  first  official  notice,  however,  that  we
have  of  funeral  processions  is  in  Novem¬
ber,  1754.  A  regulation  was  then  adopted


which  prohibited  any  Mason  from  attend¬
ing  a  funeral  or  other  procession  clothed  in
any  of  the  jewels  or  badges  of  the  Craft,
except  by  dispensation  of  the  Grand  Mas¬
ter  or  his  deputy.

There  are  no  further  regulations  on  this
subject  in  any  of  the  editions  of  the  Book
of  Constitutions  previous  to  the  modern
code  which  is  now  in  force  in  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England.  But  Preston  gives  us
the  rules  on  this  subject,  which  have  now
been  adopted  by  general  consent  as  the  law
of  the  Order,  in  the  following  words:

“No  Mason  can  be  interred  with  the
formalities  of  the  Order  unless  it  be  at  his
own  special  request  communicated  to  the
Master  of  the  Lodge  of  which  he  died  a
member  —  foreigners  and  sojourners  ex¬
cepted;  nor  unless  he  has  been  advanced
to  the  third  degree  of  Masonry,  from  which
restriction  there  can  be  no  exception.
Fellow  Crafts  or  Apprentices  are  not  en¬
titled  to  the  funeral  obsequies.”

The  only  restrictions  prescribed  by  Pres¬
ton  are,  it  will  be  perceived,  that  the  de¬
ceased  must  have  been  a  Master  Mason,
that  he  had  himself  made  the  request,  and
that  he  was  affiliated,  which  is  implied  by
the  expression  that  he  must  have  made  the
request  for  burial  of  the  Master  of  the
Lodge  of  which  he  was  a  member.  Fellow
Crafts  and  Entered  Apprentices  are  not
permitted  to  join  in  a  funeral  procession  ;
and,  accordingly,  we  find  that  in  the  form
of  procession  laid  down  by  Preston  no
place  is  assigned  to  them,  in  which  he  has
been  followed  by  all  subsequent  monitorial
writers.

The  regulation  of  1754,  which  requires  a
dispensation  from  the  Grand  Master  for  a
funeral  procession,  is  not  considered  of
force  in  this  country,  and  accordingly,  in
America,  Masons  have  generally  been  per¬
mitted  to  bury  their  dead  without  the
necessity  of  such  dispensation.

Burning  Busli.  In  the  third  chap¬
ter  of  Exodus  it  is  recorded  that,  while
Moses  was  keeping  the  flock  of  Jethro  on
Mount  Horeb,  “the  angel  of  the  Lord
appeared  unto  him  in  a  flame  of  fire  out
of  the  midst  of  a  bush,”  and  there  com¬
municated  to  him  for  the  first  time  his
Ineffable  Name.  This  occurrence  is  com¬
memorated  in  the  “Burning  Bush”  of  the
Royal  Arch  degree.  In  all  the  systems  of
antiquity,  fire  is  adopted  as  a  symbol  of
Deity ;  and  the  “  Burning  Bush,”  or  the
bush  filled  with  fire  which  did  not  consume,
whence  came  forth  the  Tetragrammaton,
the  symbol  of  Divine  Light  and  Truth,  is
considered,  in  the  higher  degrees  of  Ma¬
sonry,  like  the  “Orient”  in  the  lower,  as
the  great  source  of  true  Masonic  light  ;
wherefore  Supreme  Councils  of  the  33d


BURNES


BY-LAWS


135


degree  date  their  balustres,  or  official  doc¬
uments,  “near  the  B.\  B.\,”  or  “Burning
Bush,”  to  intimate  that  they  are,  in  their
own  Rite,  the  exclusive  source  of  all  Ma¬
sonic  instruction.

Burnes,  James.  A  distinguished
Mason,  and  formerly  Provincial  Grand
Master  of  Western  India.  He  is  the  author
of  an  interesting  work  entitled  a  "Sketch  of
the  History  of  the  Knights  Templars.  By
James  Burnes,LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Knight  of  the
Royal  Hanoverian  Guelphic  Order;”  pub¬
lished  at  London,  in  1840,  in  74  -f-  (30  pages
in  small  quarto.

Burns,  Robert.  The  celebrated
Scottish  poet,  of  whose  poetry  William
Pitt  has  said  “  that  he  could  think  cf  none
since  Shakespeare’s  that  had  so  much  the
appearance  of  sweetly  coming  from  na¬
ture;”  was  born  at  Kirk  Alloway,  near  the
town  of  Ayr,  on  the  25th  of  January,  1759,
and  died  on  the  22d  of  July,  1796.  He
was  initiated  into  Freemasonry  in  the  town
of  Irvine,  in  1781,  and  was  at  one  time  the
Master  of  a  Lodge  at  Mauchline,  where  he
presided  with  great  credit  to  himself,  as
appears  from  the  following  remarks  of  the
philosophic  Dugald  Stewart.  “In  the
course  of  the  same  season,  I  was  led  by
curiosity  to  attend  for  an  hour  or  two  a
Masonic  Lodge  in  Mauchline,  where  Burns
presided.  He  had  occasion  to  make  some
short,  unpremeditated  compliments  to  dif¬
ferent  individuals  from  whom  he  had  no
reason  to  expect  a  visit,  and  everything  he
said  was  happily  conceived  and  forcibly  as
well  as  fluently  expressed.”  The  slander¬
ous  charge  that  he  acquired  the  habits  of
dissipation,  to  which  he  was  unfortunately
addicted,  at  the  festive  meetings  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  Lodges,  has  been  triumphantly  re¬
futed  by  a  writer  in  the  London  Free¬
mason's  Magazine,  (vol.  v.,  p.  291,)  and  by
the  positive  declarations  of  his  brother
Gilbert,  who  asserts  that  these  habits  were
the  result  of  his  introduction,  several  years
after  his  attendance  on  the  Lodges,  to  the
hospitable  literary  society  of  the  Scottish
metropolis.

Burns  consecrated  some  portion  of  his
wonderful  poetic  talent  to  the  service  of
the  Masonic  Order,  to  which  he  appears
always  to  have  been  greatly  attached.
Among  his  Masonic  poetic  effusions  every


Mason  is  familiar  with  that  noble  farewell
to  his  brethren  of  Tarbolton  Lodge  com¬
mencing,

Adieu!  a  heart-warm,  fond  adieu!

Dear  brothers  of  the  mystic  tie !

On  the  25th  of  January,  1820,  a  monument
was  erected  to  his  memory,  by  public  sub¬
scription,  at  his  birthplace;  the  corner¬
stone  of  which  was  laid  with  appropriate
Masonic  honors  by  the  Deputy  Grand
Master  of  the  Ancient  Mother  Lodge  Kil¬
winning,  assisted  by  all  the  Masonic  Lodges
in  Ayrshire.

Business.  Everything  that  is  done
in  a  Masonic  Lodge,  relating  to  the  initia¬
tion  of  candidates  into  the  several  degrees,
is  called  its  work  or  labor ;  all  other  trans¬
actions  such  as  are  common  to  other  asso¬
ciations  come  under  the  head  of  business,
and  they  are  governed  with  some  peculiar
differences  by  rules  of  order,  as  in  other
societies.  See  Order,  Rules  of.

Byblos.  An  ancient  city  of  Phoenicia,
celebrated  for  the  mystical  worship  of
Adonis,  who  was  slain  by  a  wild  boar.  It
was  situated  on  a  river  of  the  same  name,
whose  waters,  becoming  red  at  a  certain
season  of  the  year  by  the  admixture  of  the
clay  which  is  at  its  source,  were  said  by  the
celebrants  of  the  mysteries  of  Adonis  to
be  tinged  with  the  blood  of  that  god.  This
city,  so  distinguished  for  the  celebration  of
these  mysteries,  was  the  Gebal  of  the  He¬
brews,  the  birthplace  of  the  Giblemites,  or
stone- squarers,  who  wrought  at  the  building
of  King  Solomon’s  Temple;  and  thus  those
who  have  advanced  the  theory  that  Free¬
masonry  is  the  successor  of  the  Ancient
Mysteries,  think  that  they  find  in  this
identity  of  Byblos  and  Gebal  another  point
of  connection  between  these  Institutions.

By-Laws.  Every  subordinate  Lodge
is  permitted  to  make  its  own  by-laws,  pro¬
vided  they  do  not  conflict  with  the  regula¬
tions  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  nor  with  the
ancient  usages  of  the  Fraternity.  But  of
this,  the  Grand  Lodge  is  the  only  judge,
and  therefore  the  original  by-laws  of  every
Lodge,  as  well  as  all  subsequent  alterations
of  them,  must  be  submitted  to  the  Grand
Lodge  for  approval  and  confirmation  before
they  can  become  valid.


136


CABALA


CABUL


C.


Cabala.  Now  more  correctly  and
enerally  written  Kabbala,  which  see.  Its
erivatives  also,  such  as  Cabalist,  Cabalistic
Mason,  etc.,  will  be  found  under  the  titles
Kabbalist,  Kabbalistic  Mason,  etc.

Cabiric  Mysteries.  The  Cabiri
were  gods  whose  worship  was  first  estab¬
lished  in  the  island  of  Samothrace,  where
the  Cabiric  Mysteries  were  practised.  The
gods  called  the  Cabiri  were  originally  two,
and  afterwards  four,  in  number,  and  are
supposed  by  Bryant  [Anal.  Ant.  Myth.,  iii.
342,)  to  have  referred  to  Noah  and  bis  three
sons,  the  Cabiric  Mysteries  being  a  modifi¬
cation  of  the  arkite  worship.  In  these
mysteries  there  was  a  ceremony  called  the
“  Cabiric  Death,”  in  which  was  represented,
amid  the  groans  and  tears  and  subsequent
rejoicings  of  the  initiates,  the  death  and
restoration  to  life  of  Cadmillus,  the  youngest
of  the  Cabiri.  The  legend  recorded  that  he
was  slain  by  his  three  brethren,  who  after¬
wards  fled  with  his  virile  parts  in  a  mystic
basket.  His  body  was  crowned  with  flow¬
ers,  and  was  buried  at  the  foot  of  Mount
Olympus.  Clement  of  Alexandria  speaks
of  the  legend  as  the  sacred  mystery  of  a  bro¬
ther  slain  by  his  brethren,  “  frater  trucid-
atus  a  fratribus.”

There  is  much  perplexity  connected  with
the  subject  of  these  mysteries,  but  it  is  gen¬
erally  supposed  that  they  were  instituted  in
honor  of  Atys,  the  son  of  Cybele  or  Deme¬
ter,  of  whom  Cadmillus  was  but  another
name.  According  to  Macrobius,  Atys  was
one  of  the  appellations  of  the  sun,  and  we
know  that  the  mysteries  were  celebrated  at
the  vernal  equinox.  They  lasted  three
days,  during  which  they  represented  in  the
person  of  Atys,  or  Cadmillus,  the  enigmati¬
cal  death  of  the  sun  in  winter,  and  his  re¬
generation  in  the  spring.  In  all  probabil¬
ity,  in  the  initiation,  the  candidate  passed
through  a  drama,  the  subject  of  which  was
the  violent  death  of  Atys.  The  “  Cabiric
Death  ”  was,  in  fact,  a  type  of  the  Hiramic,
and  the  legend,  so  far  as  it  can  be  under¬
stood  from  the  faint  allusions  of  ancient
authors,  was  very  analogous  in  spirit  and
design  to  that  of  the  third  degree  of  Free¬
masonry.

Many  persons  annually  resorted  to  Samo¬
thrace  to  be  initiated  into  the  celebrated
mysteries,  among  whom  are  mentioned  Cad¬
mus,  Orpheus,  Hercules,  and  Ulysses.
Jamblichus  says,  in  his  life  of  Pythagoras,
that  from  those  of  Lemnos  that  sage  de¬
rived  much  of  his  wisdom.  The  mysteries
of  the  Cabiri  were  much  respected  among
the  common  people,  and  great  care  was
taken  in  their  concealment.  The  priests


made  use  of  a  language  peculiar  to  the
rites.

The  mysteries  were  in  existence  at  Samo¬
thrace  as  late  as  the  eighteenth  year  of  the
Christian  era,  at  which  time  the  Emperor
Germanicus  embarked  for  that  island,  to  be
initiated,  but  wa3  prevented  from  accom¬
plishing  his  purpose  by  adverse  winds.

Cable  Tow.  The  word  “  tow  ”  signi¬
fies,  properly,  a  line  wherewith  to  draw.
Richardson  '{Diet.)  defines  it  as  “that  which
tuggeth,  or  with  which  we  tug  or  draw.”
A  cable  tow  is  a  rope  or  line  for  drawing
or  leading.  The  word  is  purely  Masonic,
and  in  some  of  the  writers  of  the  early  part
of  the  last  century  wre  find  the  expression
“  cable  rope.”  Prichard  so  uses  it  in  1730.
The  German  word  for  a  cable  or  rope  is
cabeltau,  and  thence  our  cable  tow  is  proba¬
bly  derived.

In  its  first  inception,  the  cable  tow  seems
to  have  been  used  only  as  a  physical  means
of  controlling  the  candidate,  and  such  an
interpretation  is  still  given  in  the  Entered
Apprentice’s  degree.  But  in  the  second  and
third  degrees  a  more  modern  symbolism
has  been  introduced,  and  the  cable  tow  is
in  these  grades  supposed  to  symbolize  the
covenant  by  which  all  Masons  are  tied,  thus
reminding  us  of  the  passage  in  Hosea  (xi.
4),  “I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man,
with  bands  of  love.”

Cable  Tow's  Length.  Gadicke
says  that,  “  according  to  the  ancient  laws
of  Freemasonry,  every  brother  must  attend
his  Lodge  if  he  is  within  the  length  of  his
cable  tow.”  The  old  writers  define  the
length  of  a  cable  tow,  which  they  sometimes
called  “  a  cable’s  length,”  to  be  three  miles
for  an  Entered  Apprentice.  But  the  ex¬
pression  is  really  symbolic,  and,  as  it  was
defined  by  the  Baltimore  Convention  in
1842,  means  the  scope  of  a  man’s  reasonable
ability.

Cabal.  A  district  containing  twenty
cities  which  Solomon  gave  to  Hiram,  king
of  Tyre,  for  his  assistance  in  the  construc¬
tion  of  the  Temple.  Clark  (Comm.)  thinks
it  likely  that  they  were  not  given  to  Hiram
so  that  they  should  be  annexed  to  his  Ty¬
rian  dominions,  but  rather  to  be  held  as
security  for  the  money  which  he  had  ad¬
vanced.  This,  however,  is  merely  conject¬
ural.  The  district  containing  them  is
placed  by  Josephus  in  the  north-west  part
of  Galilee,  adjacent  to  Tyre.  Hiram  does
not  appear  to  have  been  satisfied  with  the
gift ;  why,  is  uncertain.  Kitto  thinks  be¬
cause  they  were  not  situated  on  the  coast.
A  Masonic  legend  says  because  they  were
ruined  and  dilapidated  villages,  and  in


CADET


CEMENT  ARIUS


137


token  of  his  dissatisfaction,  Hiram  called
the  district  Gabul.  The  meaning  of  this
word  is  not  known.  Josephus,  probably
by  conjecture  from  the  context,  says  it
means  “unpleasing.”  Hiller  (Onomast.)
and,  after  him,  Bates  [Did.)  suppose  that
is  derived  from  the  particle  3,  and
nothing.  The  Talmudic  derivation  from
CBL,  tied  with  fetters,  is  Talmudically  child¬
ish.  The  dissatisfaction  of  Hiram  and  its
results  constitute  the  subject  of  the  legend
of  the  degree  of  Intimate  Secretary  in  the
Scottish  Kite.

Cadet  -  Gassicourt,  Charles

Louis.  The  author  of  the  celebrated
work  entitled  Le  Tombeau  de  Jacques  Mo-
lay,  which  was  published  at  Paris,  in  1796,
and  in  which  he  attempted,  like  Barruel
and  Robison,  to  show  that  Freemasonry
was  the  source  and  instigator  of  all  the
political  revolutions  which  at  that  time
were  convulsing  Europe.  Cadet-Gassicourt
was  himself  the  victim  of  political  perse¬
cution,  and,  erroneously  attributing  his
sufferings  to  the  influences  of  the  Masonic
Lodges  in  France,  became  incensed  against
the  Order,  and  this  gave  birth  to  his  libel¬
lous  book.  But  subsequent  reflection  led
him  to  change  his  views,  and  he  became  an
ardent  admirer  of  the  Institution  which  he
had  formerly  maligned.  He  sought  initi¬
ation  into  Freemasonry,  and  in  1805  was
elected  as  Master  of  the  Lodge  l’Abeille  in
Paris.  He  was  born  at  Paris,  Jan.  23, 1769,
and  died  in  the  same  city  Nov.  21,  1821.

Cadiuillus.  The  youngest  of  the
Cabiri,  and  as  he  is  slain  in  the  Cabiric
Mysteries,  he  becomes  the  analogue  of  the
Builder  in  the  legend  of  Freemasonry.

Caduecus.  The  Caduceus  was  the
magic  wand  of  the  god  Hermes.  It  was
an  olive  staff  twined  with  fillets,  which
were  gradually  converted  to  wings  and  ser¬
pents.  Hermes,  or  Mercury,  was  the  mes¬
senger  of  Jove.  Among  his  numerous  attri¬
butes,  one  of  the  most  important  was  that  of
conducting  disembodied  spirits  to  the  other
world,  and,  on  necessary  occasions,  of  bring¬
ing  them  back.  He  was  the  guide  of  souls,
and  the  restorer  of  the  dead  to  life.  Thus,
Horace,  in  addressing  him,  says :

“  Unspotted  spirits  you  consign
To  blissful  seats  and  joys  divine,

And  powerful  with  your  golden  wand
The  light  unburied  crowd  command.”

Virgil  also  alludes  to  this  attribute  of
the  magic  wand  when  he  is  describing  the
flight  of  Mercury  on  his  way  to  bear  Jove’s
warning  message  to  Alneas:

“His  wand  betakes;  with  this  pale  ghost  he  calls
From  Pluto’s  realms,  or  sends  to  Tartarus
shore.”

8


And  Statius,  imitatingthis  passage,  makes
the  same  allusion  in  his  Thebaid,  (I.  314,)
thus  translated  by  Lewis.

“  He  grasps  the  wand  which  draws  from  hollow
graves,

Or  drives  the  trembling  shades  to  Stygian
waves ;

With  magic  power  seals  the  watchful  eye

In  slumbers  soft  or  causes  sleep  to  fly.”

The  history  of  this  Caduceus,  or  magic
wand,  will  lead  us  to  its  symbolism.  Mer¬
cury,  who  had  invented  the  lyre,  making  it
out  of  the  shell  of  the  tortoise,  exchanged
it  with  Apollo  for  the  latter’s  magical  wand.
This  wand  was  simply  an  olive  branch
around  which  were  placed  two  fillets  of
ribbon.  Afterwards,  when  Mercury  was  in
Arcadia,  he  encountered  two  serpents  en¬
gaged  in  deadly  combat.  These  he  sepa¬
rated  with  his  wand ;  hence  the  olive  wand
became  the  symbol  of  peace,  and  the  two
fillets  were  replaced  by  the  two  serpents,
thus  giving  to  the  Caduceus  its  well-known
form  of  a  staff,  around  which  two  serpents
are  entwined.

Such  is  the  legend  ;  but  we  may  readily
see  that  in  the  olive,  as  the  symbol  of  im¬
mortality,  borne  as  the  attribute  of  Mer¬
cury,  the  giver  of  life  to  the  dead,  we
have  a  more  ancient  and  profounder  sym¬
bolism.  The  serpents,  symbols  also  of  im¬
mortality,  are  appropriately  united  with
the  olive  wand.  The  legend  also  accounts
for  a  later  and  secondary  symbolism  —  that
of  peace.

The  Caduceus  then  —  the  original  mean¬
ing  of  which  word  is  a  herald’s  staff —  as
the  attribute  of  a  life-restoring  God,  is  in
its  primary  meaning  the  symbol  of  immor¬
tality  ;  so  in  Freemasonry  the  rod  of  the
Senior  Deacon,  or  the  Master  of  Ceremo¬
nies,  is  but  an  analogue  of  the  Hermean
Caduceus.  This  officer,  as  leading  the  as¬
pirant  through  the  forms  of  initiation  into
his  new  birth  or  Masonic  regeneration,  and
teaching  him  in  the  solemn  ceremonies  of
the  third  degree  the  lesson  of  eternal  life,
may  well  use  the  magic  wand  as  a  represen¬
tation  of  it,  which  was  the  attribute  of  that
ancient  deity, who  brought  the  dead  into  life.

Crementarius.  Latin.  A  builder  of
walls,  a  mason  from  ccemmta,  rough  un¬
hewn  stones  as  they  come  from  the  quarry.
In  mediaeval  Latin,  the  word  is  used  to  des¬
ignate  an  operative  mason.  Du  Cange
cites  Magisfer Ccementarior um as  used  to  des¬
ignate  him  who  presided  over  the  building
of  edifices,  that  is,  the  Master  of  the  works.
It  has  been  adopted  by  some  modern  writers
as  a  translation  of  the  word  Freemason.  Its
employment  for  that  purpose  is  perhaps
more  correct  than  that  of  the  more  usual
word  latomus,  which  owes  its  use  to  the  au¬
thority  of  Thory.


138


CAGLIOSTRO


CAGLIOSTRO


Cagliostro.  Of  all  the  Masonic  char¬
latans  who  flourished  in  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury  the  Count  Cagliostro  was  most  promi¬
nent,  whether  we  consider  the  ingenuity  of
his  schemes  of  deception,  the  extensive
field  of  his  operations  through  almost  every
country  of  Europe,  or  the  distinguished
character  and  station  of  many  of  those  whose
credulity  made  them  his  victims.  The  his¬
tory  of  Masonry  in  that  century  would  not
be  complete  without  a  reference  to  this
rince  of  Masonic  impostors.  To  write  the
istory  of  Masonry  in  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury  and  to  leave  out  Cagliostro,  would  be
like  enacting  the  play  of  Hamlet  and  leav¬
ing  out  the  part  of  the  Prince  of  Denmark.
And  yet  Carlyle  has  had  occasion  to
complain  of  the  paucity  of  materials  for
such  a  work.  Indeed,  of  one  so  notorious
as  Cagliostro  comparatively  but  little  is  to
be  found  in  print.  The  only  works  upon
which  he  who  would  write  his  life  mustde-
depend  are  a  Life  of  him  published  in  Lon¬
don,  1787;  Memoirs,  in  Paris,  1786;  and
Memoirs  Authendques,  Strasburg,  1786;  a
Life ,  in  Germany,  published  at  Berlin,  1787;
another  in  Italian,  published  at  Rome  in
1791 ;  and  a  few  fugitive  pieces,  consisting
chiefly  of  manifestoes  of  himself  and  his
disciples.

Joseph  Balsamo,  subsequently  known  a3
Count  Cagliostro,  was  the  son  of  Peter  Bal¬
samo  and  Felicia  Braconieri,  both  of  mean
extraction,  who  was  born  on  the  8th  of  June,
1743,  in  the  city  of  Palermo.  Upon  the  death
of  his  father,  he  was  taken  under  the  pro¬
tection  of  his  maternal  uncles,  who  caused
him  to  be  instructed  in  the  elements  of  re¬
ligion  and  learning,  by  both  of  which  he
profited  so  little,  that  he  eloped  several
times  from  the  Seminary  of  St.  Roch,  near
Palermo,  where  he  had  been  placed  for  his
instruction.  At  the  age  of  thirteen  he  was
carried  to  the  Convent  of  the  Good  Brother¬
hood  at  Castiglione.  There,  having  as¬
sumed  the  habit  of  a  novice,  he  was  placed
under  the  tuition  of  the  apothecary,  from
whom  he  learned  the  principles  of  chemis¬
try  and  medicine.  His  brief  residence  at
the  convent  was  marked  by  violations  of
many  of  its  rules;  and  finally,  abandoning
it  altogether,  he  returned  to  Palermo.
There  he  continued  his  vicious  courses,  and
was  frequently  seized  and  imprisoned  for
infractions  of  the  law.  At  length,  having
cheated  a  goldsmith,  named  Marano,  of  a
large  amount  of  gold,  he  was  compelled  to
flee  from  his  native  country.

He  then  repaired  to  Messina,  where  he
became  acquainted’ with  one  Altotas,  who
pretended  to  be  a  great  chemist.  Together
they  proceeded  to  Alexandria  in  Egypt,
where,  by  means  of  certain  chemical,  or
perhaps  rather  by  financial,  operations,


they  succeeded  in  collecting  a  considerable
amount  of  money.  Their  next  appearance
is  in  the  island  of  Malta,  where  they
worked  for  some  time  in  the  laboratory  of
the  Grand  Master  Pinto.  There  Altotaa
died,  and  Balsamo,  or  —  as  I  shall  hence¬
forth  call  him  by  the  name  which  he  sub¬
sequently  assumed  —  Cagliostro,  proceeded
to  visit  Naples,  under  the  protection  of  a
Knight  of  Malta,  to  whom  he  had  been  re¬
commended  by  the  Grand  Master.  He  sub¬
sequently  united  his  fortunes  to  a  Sicilian
prince,  who  was  addicted  to  the  study  of
chemistry,  and  who  carried  him  to  visit  his
estates  in  Sici ly.  He  took  this  opportunity
of  revisiting  Messina,  where  he  deserted
his  princely  patron,  and  became  the  asso¬
ciate  of  a  dissolute  priest,  with  whom  he
went  to  Naples  and  Rome.  In  the  latter
place,  which  he  visited  for  the  first  time,  he
assumed  several  characters,  appearing
sometimes  in  an  ecclesiastical,  and  some¬
times  in  a  secular  habit.  His  principal
occupation  at  this  period  was  that  of  fill¬
ing  up  outlines  of  copperplate  engravings
wdth  India  ink,  which  he  sold  for  pen-and-
ink  drawings.  Cagliostro  could  do  nothing
without  a  mingling  of  imposture.

About  this  time  he  made  the  acquaint¬
ance  of  a  young  woman,  Lorenza  Feliciani,
whom  he  married,  and  to  whom  her  parents
gave  a  trifling  dower,  but  one  which  was
proportioned  to  her  condition.  'J  his  wo¬
man  subsequently  made  a  principal  figure
in  his  history,  partaking  of  his  manifold
adventures,  aiding  him  in  his  impostures,
and  finally  betraying  his  confidence,  by  be¬
coming  the  chief  witness  against  him  on
his  trial  at  Rome.

I  shall  say  nothing  here  or  hereafter  of
the  domestic  life  of  this  well-assorted  cou¬
ple,  except  that,  by  the  woman’s  own  con¬
fession,  it  was  guided  by  the  most  immoral
principles,  and  marked  by  the  most  licen¬
tious  practices.

Soon  after  his  marriage  he  became  ac¬
quainted  with  a  notorious  adventurer  —  his
countryman  —  called  the  Marquis  Agliata,
whose  character  strongly  resembled  his
own,  and  with  one  Ottavio  Nicastro,  an  ac¬
complished  villain,  who  subsequently  fin¬
ished  his  career  on  the  gibbet.

This  triumvirate  of  rogues  occupied
themselves  in  the  manufacture  of  forged
notes  and  bonds,  with  which  they  amassed
considerable  sums  of  money.  But  the
course  of  roguery,  like  that  of  true  love,
“  never  does  run  smooth ;  ”  and,  having
quarrelled  about  a  division  of  the  spoils,
Nicastro,  finding  himself  cheated  by  his
comrades,  betrayed  them  to  the  police,  who
sought  to  arrest  them.  But  Cagliostro  and
his  wife,  accompanied  by  the  Marquis  Ag¬
liata,  learning  the  design,  made  their  es-


CAGLIOSTRO


CAGLIOSTRO


139


cape,  and  travelled  towards  Venice.  They
stopped  a  short  time  at  Bergamo,  for  the
purpose  of  replenishing  their  exhausted
purses  by  a  resumption  of  their  forgeries :
the  municipal  authorities  however,  discov¬
ering  their  project,  banished  them  from  the
city.  The  marquis  fled  alone,  carrying
with  him  the  funds,  and  leaving  Cagliostro
and  his  wife  in  so  destitute  a  condition,
that  they  were  compelled  to  beg  their  way
as  pilgrims  through  Sardinia  and  Genoa.
At  length  they  arrived  at  Antibes,  in  Spain.
Here,  by  the  practice  of  a  little  of  his  usual
chicanery,  the  count  was  enabled  to  recruit
his  impoverished  fortunes.  Thence  they
travelled  to  Barcelona,  where  they  re¬
mained  six  months,  living  upon  those
whom  they  could  delude,  and  finally  re¬
tired  to  Lisbon,  whence  they  subsequently
went  to  England.

In  the  year  1772  we  find  Cagliostro  in
London,  where  he  remained  about  twelve
months.  During  this  period  he  attempted
to  practise  his  chemical  secrets,  but  not,  it
appears,  with  much  success;  as  he  was
compelled  to  sell  some  of  his  jewels  to  ob¬
tain  the  means  of  subsistence,  and  was  at
length  thrown  into  the  King’s  Bench  prison
by  his  creditors.  Being  released  from  con¬
finement,  he  passed  over  into  France,  and
was  engaged  for  some  years  in  visiting  the
different  capitals  of  Europe,  where  he  pro¬
fessed  to  be  in  possession  of  the  Hermetic
secrets  for  restoring  youth,  prolonging  life,
and  transmuting  the  baser  metals  into  gold.
Dupes  were  not  wanting,  and  Cagliostro
seems  to  have  been  successful  in  his  schemes
for  enriching  himself  by  “  obtaining  money
under  false  pretences.”  In  1776  Cagliostro
again  repaired  to  London.  Here  he  ap¬
peared  with  renovated  fortunes,  and,  taking
a  house  in  a  fashionable  neighborhood,  at¬
tracted  attention  by  the  splendor  of  his
domestic  establishment.

In  London,  during  this  visit,  Cagliostro
became  connected  with  the  Order  of  Free¬
masonry.  In  the  month  of  April  he  re¬
ceived  the  degrees  in  Esperance  Lodge,  No.
289,  which  then  met  at  the  King’s  Head
Tavern.  Cagliostro  did  not  join  the  Order
with  disinterested  motives,  or  at  least  he
determined  in  a  very  short  period  after  his
initiation  to  use  the  Institution  as  an  in¬
strument  for  the  advancement  of  his  per¬
sonal  interests.  Here  he  is  said  to  have  in¬
vented,  in  1777,  that  grand  scheme  of  im¬
posture  under  the  name  of  “  Egyptian
Masonry,”  by  the  propagation  of  which  he
subsequently  became  so  famous  as  the  great
Masonic  charlatan  of  his  age.

London  did  not  fail  to  furnish  him  with
a  fertile  field  for  his  impositions,  and  the
English  Masons  seemed  noways  reluctant
to  become  his  dupes  ;  but,  being  ambitious


for  the  extension  of  his  Rite,  and  anxious
for  the  greater  income  which  it  promised,
he  again  passed  over  to  the  Continent,
where  he  justly  anticipated  abundant  suc¬
cess  in  its  propagation.

As  this  Egyptian  Masonry  constituted
the  great  pursuit  of  the  rest  of  his  life,
and  was  the  instrument  which  he  used  for
many  years  to  make  dupes  of  thousands  of
credulous  persons,  among  whom  not  a  few
princes,  nobles,  and  philosophers  are  to  be
counted,  it  is  proper  that,  in  any  biography
of  this  great  charlatan,  some  account  should
be  given  of  the  so-called  Masonic  scheme
of  which  he  was  the  founder.  This  ac¬
count  is  to  be  derived,  as  all  accounts
hitherto  published  on  the  same  subject
have  been,  from  the  book  which  came  into
the  possession  of  the  Inquisition  at  the
trial  of  Cagliostro,  and  which  purports  to
contain  the  rituals  of  his  degrees.  Of  this
work,  which  Carlyle  calls  in  his  rough
style  a  “  certain  expository  Masonic  order-
book  of  Cagliostro’s,”  the  author  of  the
Italian  biography,*  who  writes,  however,  in
the  interest  of  the  Church,  and  with  the
sanction  of  the  Apostolic  Chamber,  says,
that  the  style  is  so  elegant,  that  it  could
not  have  been  composed  by  himself;  but  he
admits  that  the  materials  were  furnished
by  Cagliostro,  and  put  into  form  by  some
other  person  of  greater  scholarship.  Be
this  as  it  may,  this  book  furnishes  us  with
the  only  authentic  account  of  the  Masonry
of  Cagliostro,  and  to  its  contents  we  must
resort,  as  very  fully  extracted  in  the  Com¬
pendia  della  Vita.

Cagliostro  states  that  in  England  he  pur¬
chased  some  manuscripts  from  one  George
Coston,  which  treated  of  Egyptian  Ma¬
sonry,  but  with  a  system  somewhat  magical
and  superstitious.  Upon  this  plan,  how¬
ever,  he  resolved  to  build  up  a  new  ritual
of  Masonry.  Assuming  the  title  of  Grand
Cophta,  —  a  title  derived  from  that  of  the
high  priests  of  Egypt,  —  Cagliostro  prom¬
ised  his  followers  to  conduct  them  to  per¬
fection  by  means  of  moral  and  physical
regeneration :  By  the  first,  to  make  them
find  the  primal  matter,  or  philosopher’s
stone,  and  the  acacia,  which  consolidates
in  man  the  powers  of  the  most  vigorous
youth  and  renders  him  immortal ;  by  the
second,  to  teach  him  how  to  procure  the
pentagon,  which  restores  man  to  his  prim¬
itive  state  of  innocence,  forfeited  by  the
original  sin.  He  supposes  Egyptian  Ma¬
sonry  was  instituted  by  Enoch  and  Elias,
who  propagated  it  in  different  parts  of  the
world,  but  that  with  time  it  lost  much  of
its  purity  and  splendor.  All  Masonry  but

*  Compendio  della  Vita  e  dellr  Gestu  di  Gui*-
seppe  Balxumo  denominate  il  Conte  Cagliostro,
Roma,  1791,  p.  87.


140


CAGLIOSTRO


CAGLIOSTRO


his  own  he  called  mere  buffoonery,  and
Adoptive  Masonry  he  declares  to  have
been  almost  destroyed.  The  object,  there¬
fore,  of  Egyptian  Masonry  was  to  restore
to  its  original  lustre  the  Masonry  of  either
sex.  The  ceremonies  were  conducted  with
great  splendor.  The  Grand  Cophta  was
supposed  to  be  invested  with  the  faculty  of
commanding  angels;  he  wa3  invoked  on
all  occasions,  and  everything  was  supposed
to  be  accomplished  througn  the  force  of
his  power,  imparted  to  him  by  the  Deity.
Egyptian  Masonry  was  very  tolerant ;  men
of  all  religions  were  admitted,  provided
they  acknowledged  the  existence  of  God
and  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  had
been  previously  initiated  into  the  ordinary
Masonry.  There  were  three  degrees,  as  in
Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  and  men  elevated
to  the  rank  of  Masters  took  the  names  of
the  ancient  prophets,  while  women  as¬
sumed  those  of  the  Sybils.  The  oath  ex¬
acted  from  the  former  was  in  the  following
words:  “I  promise,  I  engage,  and  I  swear
never  to  reveal  the  secrets  which  shall  be
imparted  to  me  in  this  temple,  and  blindly
to  obey  my  superiors.”  The  oath  of  the
women  differed  slightly  from  this:  “I
swear,  before  the  eternal  God  of  the  Grand
Mistress,  and  of  all  who  hear  me,  never  to
write,  or  cause  to  be  written,  anything  that
shall  pass  under  my  eyes,  condemning  my¬
self,  in  the  event  of  imprudence,  to  be
punished  according  to  the  laws  of  the  Grand
Founder  and  of  all  my  superiors.  I  like¬
wise  promise  the  exact  observance  of  the
other  six  commandments  imposed  on  me,
that  is  to  say,  love  of  God,  respect  for  my
sovereign,  veneration  for  religion  and  the
laws,  love  of  my  fellow-creatures,  an  at¬
tachment  without  bounds  for  our  Order,  and
the  blindest  submission  to  the  rules  and  code
of  our  ritual,  such  as  they  may  be  commu¬
nicated  to  me  by  the  Grand  Mistress.”

In  the  ceremonial  of  admitting  a  woman
to  the  degree  of  Apprentice,  the  Grand
Mistress  breathed  upon  the  face  of  the  re-
cipiendarv  from  the  forehead  to  the  chin,
saying,  “  I  thus  breathe  upon  you  to*  cause
the  truths  possessed  by  us  to  germinate  and
penetrate  within  your  heart;  I  breathe
upon  you  to  fortify  your  spiritual  part;  I
breathe  upon  you  to  confirm  you  in  the
faith  of  your  brothers  and  sisters,  according
to  the  engagements  that  you  have  con¬
tracted.  We  create  you  a  legitimate  daugh¬
ter  of  the  true  Egyptian  adoption  and  of
the  Lodge  X. ;  we  will  that  you  be  recog¬
nized  as  such  by  all  the  brothers  and  sis¬
ters  of  the  Egyptian  ritual,  and  that  you
enjoy  the  same  prerogatives  with  them.
Lastly,  we  impart  to  you  the  supreme
pleasure  of  being,  henceforth  and  forever,
a  Freemason.”


In  the  admission  of  a  man  to  the  degree
of  Companion  or  Fellow-Craft,  the  Grand
Master  addressed  the  candidate  in  the  fol¬
lowing  words :  “  By  the  power  that  I  hold
from  the  Grand  Cophta,  the  founder  of  our
Order,  and  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  confer
upon  you  the  degree  of  Companion,  and
constitute  you  a  guardian  of  the  new
science,  in  which  we  are  preparing  to  make
you  a  participator,  by  the  sacred  names
of  Helios,  Mene,  Tetragrammaton.”

In  the  admission  of  a  disciple  into  the
degree  of  Master,  Cagliostro  was  careful  to
adopt  a  ceremonial  which  might  make  an
impression  of  his  own  powers  and  those  of
his  Rite  upon  the  recipiendary.  The  in¬
quisitorial  biographer  is  lavish  of  the
charges  of  immorality,  sacrilege,  and  blas¬
phemy,  in  his  account  of  these  ceremonies.
Such  charges  were  to  be  expected  when  the
Church  was  dealing  with  Masonry,  either  in
its  pure,  or  its  spurious  form ;  for  Masons
had  long  before  been  excommunicated
in  a  mass  by  repeated  papal  bulls.  It  is
not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the  descrip¬
tion  of  the  ritual  gives  no  color  to  these
charges.  We  find  there,  indeed,  extrava¬
gant  pretensions  to  powers  not  possessed,
gaudy  trappings,  and  solemn  pageantry,
which  might  impress  the  imaginations  of
the  weak,  and  unfulfilled  promises,  which
could  only  deceive  the  too  confiding ;  but
everything  was  done  under  the  cloak  of
morality  and  religion :  for  Cagliostro  was
careful  to  declare  in  his  patents,  that  he
labored  only,  and  wished  his  disciples  to
labor,  “for  the  glory  of  the  Eternal  and
for  the  benefit  of  humanity.”  This  might
have  been,  nay,  undoubtedly  was,  hypoc¬
risy  ;  but  it  was  certainly  neither  sacrilege
nor  blasphemy.

We  proceed  now  to  give  a  specimen  from
this  “  Inquisition  biographer,”  to  use  a
Carlylism,  of  the  ritual  of  admission  into
the  degree  of  Master.

A  young  girl  (sometimes  it  was  a  boy)
was  taken  in  a  state  of  innocence,  who  was
called  pupil  or  dove.  Then  the  Master  of
the  Lodge  imparted  to  this  child  the  power
that  he  had  received  before  the  first  fall,  a
power  which  more  particularly  consisted  in
commanding  the  pure  spirits.  These  spirits
were  seven  in  number:  they  were  said  to
surround  the  throne  of  the  Deity,  and  to
govern  the  seven  planets;  their  names,  ac¬
cording  to  Cagliostro’s  book,  being  Asael,
Michael,  Raphael,  Gabriel,  Uriel,  Zobia-
chel,  and  Anachiel.  The  dove  was.brougnt
before  the  Master.  The  members  addressed
a  prayer  to  Heaven,  that  it  would  vouch¬
safe  the  exercise  of  that  power  which  it  had
granted  to  the  Grand  Cophta.  The  pupil,
or  dove,  also  prayed  to  obtain  the  grace  of
working  according  to  the  behests  of  the


CAGLIOSTRO


CAGLIOSTRO


141


Grand  Master,  and  of  serving  as  a  mediator
between  him  and  the  spirits,  who  on  that
account  are  called  intermediates.  Clothed
in  a  long  white  robe,  ornamented  with  blue
ribbon  and  a  red  scarf,  and,  having  received
the  sufflation,  she  was  inclosed  in  the  taber¬
nacle,  a  place  hung  with  white.  It  had  au
entrance  door,  a  window  through  which  the
dove  made  herself  heard,  and  within  was  a
bench  and  a  little  table,  whereon  burned
three  tapers.  The  Master  repeated  his
prayer,  and  began  to  exercise  the  power
that  he  pretended  to  have  received  from
the  Grand  Cophta,  in  virtue  of  which  he
summoned  the  seven  angels  to  appear  be¬
fore  the  eyes  of  the  pupil.  When  she  an¬
nounced  that  they  were  present,  he  charged
her,  by  the  power  granted  by  God  to  the
Grand  Cophta,  and  by  the  Grand  Cophta
imparted  to  himself,  that  she  ask  the  angel
N.  whether  the  candidate  had  the  qualities
and  the  merits  requisite  for  the  degree  of
Master.  After  having  received  an  affirma¬
tive  answer,  he  proceeded  to  the  other  cere¬
monies  for  completing  the  reception  of  the
candidate.

There  is  but  little  in  the  ceremony  of
admitting  women  to  the  degree  of  Mistress.
The  dove  being  placed  as  we  have  just  de¬
scribed,  she  was  ordered  to  make  one  of  the
seven  angels  appear  in  the  tabernacle,  and
to  ask  him  whether  it  was  permitted  to  lift
the  black  veil  with  which  the  initiate  was
covered.  Other  superstitious  ceremonies
followed,  and  the  Venerable  ordered  the
dove  to  command  the  presence  of  the  six
other  angels,  and  to  address  to  them  the  fol¬
lowing  commandmeift :  “  By  the  power
which  the  Grand  Cophta  has  given  to  my
Mistress,  and  by  that  which  I  hold  from
her,  and  by  my  innocence,  I  command  you,
primitive  angels,  to  consecrate  the  orna¬
ments,  by  passing  them  through  your
hands.”  These  ornaments  were  the  gar¬
ments,  the  symbols  of  the  Order,  and  a
crown  of  artificial  roses.  When  the  dove
had  attested  that  the  angel  had  performed
the  consecration,  she  was  desired  to  cause
Moses  to  appear,  in  order  that  he  also
might  bless  the  ornaments,  and  might  hold
the  crown  of  roses  in  his  hand  during  the
rest  of  the  ceremonies ;  she  afterwards
passed  through  the  window  of  the  taberna¬
cle  the  garments,  the  symbols,  and  the
gloves,  whereon  was  written,  “  I  am  man,”
and  all  were  presented  to  the  initiate.
Other  questions  were  now  put  to  the  dove ;
but  above  all  to  know  whether  Moses  had
held  the  crown  in  his  hand  the  whole  time,
and  when  she  answered  “  yes,”  it  was
placed  upon  the  head  of  the  initiate.  Then,
after  other  rites  equally  imposing,  the  dove
was  questioned  anew,  to  learn  if  Moses  and
the  seven  angels  had  approved  of  this  re¬


ception  ;  finally,  the  presence  of  the  Grand
Cophta  was  invoked,  that  he  might  bless
and  confirm  it;  after  which  the  Lodge  was
closed.

Cagliostro  professed  that  the  object  of  his
Masonry  was  the  perfecting  of  his  disciples
by  moral  and  physical  regeneration,  and
the  ceremonies  used  to  produce  these  results
were  of  a  character  partly  mesmeric  and
partly  necromantic.  They  are  too  long  for
detail.  It  is  sufficient  to  say,  that  they
showed  the  ingenuity  of  their  inventor,
and  proved  his  aptitude  for  the  profession
of  a  charlatan.

He  borrowed,  however,  a  great  deal  from
ordinary  Masonry.  Lodges  were  conse¬
crated  with  great  solemnity,  and  were  dedi¬
cated  to  Saint  John  the  Evangelist,  because,
as  he  said,  of  the  great  affinity  that  exists
between  the  Apocalypse  and  the  working
of  his  ritual.

The  principal  emblems  used  in  the  Rite
were  the  septangle,  the  triangle,  the  trowel,
the  compass,  the  square,  the  gavel,  the
death’s  head,  the  cubical  stone,  the  rough
stone,  the  triangular  stone,  the  wooden
bridge,  Jacob’s  ladder,  the  phoenix,  the
globe,  Time,  and  others,  similar  to  those
which  have  always  been  used  in  Ancient
Craft  Masonry.

Having  instituted  this  new  Rite,  out  of
which  he  expected,  as  a  never-failing  mine,
to  extract  a  fortune,  he  passed  over  from
London  to  the  Hague,  and  thence  to  Italy,
assuming  at  Venice  the  title  of  Marquis  de
Pellegrini,  and  afterwards  into  Germany,
everywhere  establishing  Lodges  and  gain¬
ing  disciples,  many  of  whom  are  found  in
the  highest  ranks  of  the  nobility:  and  thu3
he  may  be  traced  through  Saxony,  Ger¬
many,  and  Poland,  arriving  in  the  spring
of  1780  at  St.  Petersburg,  in  Russia;
whence,  however,  he  was  soon  driven  out
by  the  police,  and  subsequently  visited
Vienna,  Frankford,  and  Strasburg.  In
all  these  journeys,  he  affected  a  magnifi¬
cence  of  display  which  was  not  without  its
effect  upon  the  weak  minds  of  his  deluded
followers.  His  Italian  biographer  thus
describes  the  style  of  his  travelling  and
living :

“  The  train  he  commonly  took  with  him
corresponded  to  the  rest ;  he  always  trav¬
elled  post,  with  a  considerable  suit:  cou¬
riers,  lackeys,  body-servants,  domestics  of
all  sorts,  sumptuously  dressed,  gave  an  air
of  reality  to  the  high  birth  vaunted.  The
very  liveries  which  were  made  in  Paris  cost
twenty  louis  each.  Apartments  furnished
in  the  height  of  the  fashion,  a  magnificent
table  opened  to  numerous  guests,  rich
dresses  for  himself  and  wife,  corresponded
to  his  luxurious  way  of  life.  His  feigned
generosity  likewise  made  a  great  noise:


142


CAGLIOSTRO


CAGLIOSTRO


often  he  gratuitously  doctored  the  poor,
ami  even  gave  them  alms.”

In  1783,  Cagliostro  was  at  Strasburg,
making  converts,  relieving  the  poor,  and
giving  his  panacea,  the  “  Extract  of  Sat¬
urn,”  to  the  hospitals.  Here  he  found  the
Cardinal  Prince  de  Rohan,  who  expressed
a  wish  to  see  lain.  Cagliostro’s  insolent
reply  is  an  instance  of  that  boastful  assur¬
ance  which  he  always  assumed,  with  the
intention  of  forcing  men  into  a  belief  of
his  lofty  pretension  :  “  If  Monseigneur  the
cardinal  is  sick,  let  him  come  to  me,  and  I
will  cure  him  ;  if  he  is  well,  he  has  no  need
of  me,  I  none  of  him.”  This  reply  had
the  desired  effect,  and  the  imbecile  cardi¬
nal  sought  the  acquaintance  which  the
charlatan  had  seemed  so  indifferent  to  cul¬
tivate.

Shortly  after,  Cagliostro  visited  Paris,
where  he  became  involved  with  the  Cardi¬
nal  de  Rohan  and  the  Countess  de  la
Motte-Valois,  in  the  celebrated  swindling
transaction  of  the  diamond  necklace,  which
attracted  at  the  time  the  attention  of  all
Europe,  and  still  excites  great  interest
among  the  learned.

The  history,  or,  rather,  the  romance  of
this  diamond  necklace,  is  worth  telling  in
brief  words.  Boehmer,  the  king’s  jeweller
at  Paris,  had  exhausted  all  his  skill  and
resources  in  the  construction  of  a  diamond
necklace,  which  he  hoped  to  dispose  of  to
the  Duchess  du  Barry,  one  of  the  royal
mistresses.  But  the  necklace,  when  com¬
pleted,  was  of  such  exorbitant  value  —  not
less  than  seventy  thousand  pounds,  or
almost  half  a  million  of  dollars  —  as  to  be
beyond  the  purchasing  power  of  even  a
king’s  favorite.  The  necklace,  therefore,
remained  on  the  jeweller’s  hands  for  three
years,  as  so  much  dead  and  locked-up  cap¬
ital.  In  vain  did  he  attempt  to  excite  the
cupidity  of  the  queen,  Marie  Antoinette:
she  felt  that  it  was  a  luxury  in  which  she
dared  not  indulge  in  the  crippled  condition
of  the  French  finances.  But  there  were
others  who  had  seen  and  longed  for  the
possession  of  the  costly  gaud.  The  Count¬
ess  de  Valois,  an  adventuress  about  the
court,  resolved  upon  a  stupendous  course
of  fraud,  through  which  she  might  obtain
the  coveted  prize  and  convert  its  gems  into
ready  money.  She  invited  to  her  assist¬
ance  Cagliostro,  who  was  then  in  Paris
working  at  his  Egyptian  Masonry,  and,
through  his  influence  over  the  Cardinal
Rohan,  secured  the  complicity,  innocent
or  guilty  as  it  may  be,  of  the  credulous
prince.  A  woman  named  d’Oliva  —  some
say  it  was  Valois  herself,  of  whose  name
Oliva  was  most  probably  the  anagram  —
was  engaged  to  personate  the  queen,  and
through  a  contract,  to  which  the  forged


signature  of  Marie  Antoinette  was  affixed,
and  through  the  guarantee  afforded  by  the
cardinal,  —  who,  however,  claimed  that  he
was  himself  deceived,  —  Boehmer  was  in¬
duced  to  surrender  the  necklace  to  the
countess  for  the  queen,  as  he  supposed,  on
terms  of  payment  in  instalments.  But
the  first  instalment,  and  then  the  second,
remaining  unpaid,  the  jeweller,  becoming
impatient  for  his  money,  made  a  personal
application  to  the  queen,  when  for  the  first
time  the  fraud  was  discovered.  In  the
meantime  the  necklace  had  disappeared.
But  it  was  known  that  the  countess,  from
a  state  of  indigence,  had  suddenly  risen  to
the  possession  of  wealth ;  that  her  hus¬
band,  de  la  Motte,  had  been  in  England
selling  diamonds,  —  for  the  necklace,  too
costly  to  be  sold  as  a  whole,  could  be  more
readily  disposed  of  when  taken  to  pieces,  —
and  that  Cagliostro,  too,  was  in  possession
of  funds,  for  which  hardly  the  income  of
his  Egyptian  Masonry  would  account.  The
Cardinal  de  Rohan  alone  appears  to  have
derived  no  pecuniary  advantage  from  the
transaction.  He  was,  however,  arrested
and  placed  in  the  Bastile,  whither  he  was
speedily  followed  by  his  two  accomplices,
the  countess  and  Cagliostro.  The  cardinal,
either  because  no  evidence  could  be  found
of  his  guilt,  —  for  he  stoutly  asserted  his
innocence,  —  or  because  of  his  ecclesiastical
character,  was  soon  liberated.  But  as  a
suspicion  still  hovered  over  him,  he  was
banished  from  the  court.  The  countess
and  Cagliostro  endured  a  longer  imprison¬
ment,  but  were  subsequently  released  from
confinement  and  ordered  to  leave  the  king¬
dom.  The  countess  proceeded  to  England,
where  she  printed  her  vindication,  and
attempted  to  expose  the  queen.  Count
Cagliostro  also  repaired  to  England,  to
resume  his  adventures.  There  he  pub¬
lished  the  memoirs  of  his  life,  in  which  he
also  seeks  to  vindicate  himself  in  the  affair
of  the  diamond  necklace.  And  hence,  ac¬
cording  to  the  account  of  the  actors,  no¬
body  was  guilty;  for  the  queen  asseverated
her  innocence  as  strongly  as  any,  and  per¬
haps  with  greater  truth.  Nothing  is  certain
in  the  whole  story  except  that  Boehmer
lost  his  necklace  and  his  money,  and  the
obscurity  in  which  the  transaction  has  been
left  has  afforded  an  ample  field  of  specula¬
tion  for  subsequent  inquirers.

During  Cagliostro’s  residence  in  Eng¬
land,  on  this  last  visit,  he  was  attacked  by
the  editor  Morand,  in  the  Courier  de
V Europe,  in  a  series  of  abusive  articles,  to
which  Cagliostro  replied  in  a  letter  to  the
English  people.  But,  although  he  had  a
few  Egyptian  Lodges  in  London  under  his
government,  he  appears,  perhaps  from  Mo-
rand’s  revelations  of  his  character  and  life,


CAHIER


CALENDAR


143


to  have  lost  his  popularity,  and  he  left
England  permanently  in  May,  1787.

He  went  to  Savoy,  Sardinia,  and  other
places  in  the  south  of  Europe,  and  at  last,  in
May,  1789,  by  an  act  of  rash  temerity,  pro¬
ceeded  to  Rome, where  he  organized  an  Egyp¬
tian  Lodge  under  the  very  shadow  of  the  V  at-
ican.  But  this  was  more  than  the  Church,
which  had  been  excommunicating  Free¬
masonry  for  fifty  years,  was  willing  to  en¬
dure.  On  the  27th  of  December  of  that
year,  on  the  festival  of  St.  John  the  Evan¬
gelist,  to  whom  he  had  dedicated  his
Lodges,  the  Holy  Inquisition  arrested  him,
and  locked  him  up  in  the  Castle  of  San  An¬
gelo.  There,  after  such  a  trial  as  the  In¬
quisition  is  wont  to  give  to  the  accused  —
in  which  his  wife  is  said  to  have  been  the
principal  witness  against  him — he  was
convicted  of  having  formed  “societies  and
conventicles  of  Freemasonry.”  His  manu¬
script,  entitled  Mcigonnerie  Egyptienne,  was
ordered  to  be  burned  by  the  public  execu¬
tioner,  and  he  himself  was  condemned  to
death ;  a  sentence  which  the  pope  subse¬
quently  commuted  for  that  of  perpetual
imprisonment.  Cagliostro  appealed  to  the
French  Constituent  Assembly,  but  of  course
in  vain.  Thenceforth  no  more  is  seen  of
him.  For  four  years  this  adventurer,  who
had  filled  during  his  life  so  large  a  space
in  the  world’s  history,  —  the  associate  of
princes,  prelates,  and  philosophers ;  the  in¬
ventor  of  a  spurious  Rite,  which  had,  how¬
ever,  its  thousands  of  disciples, — languished
within  the  gloomy  walls  of  the  prison  of
St.  Leo,  in  the  Duchy  of  Urbino,  and  at
length,  in  the  year  1795,  in  a  fit  of  apo¬
plexy,  bade  the  world  adieu.

Cahier.  French.  A  number  of  sheets
of  parchment  or  paper  fastened  together  by
one  end.  The  word  is  used  by  French  Ma¬
sons  to  designate  a  small  book  printed,  or
in  manuscript,  containing  the  ritual  of  a
degree.  The  word  has  been  borrowed  from
French  history,  where  it  denotes  the  re¬
ports  and  proceedings  of  certain  assem¬
blies,  such  as  the  clergy,  the  States-Gen-
eral,  etc.

Cairns.  Celtic,  cams.  Heaps  of  stones
of  a  conical  form  erected  by  the  Druids.
Some  suppose  them  to  have  been  sepul¬
chral  monuments,  others  altars.  They
were  undoubtedly  of  a  religious  character,
since  sacrificial  fires  were  lighted  upon
them,  and  processions  were  made  around
them.  These  processions  were  analogous
to  the  circumambulations  in  Masonry,  and
were  conducted,  like  them,  with  reference  to
the  apparent  course  of  the  sun.  Thus,  To-
land,  in  his  Letters  on  the  Celtic  Religion,
(Let.  II.,  xvii.,)  says  of  these  mystical  pro¬
cessions,  that  the  people  of  the  Scottish
islands  “  never  come  to  the  ancient  sacri¬


ficing  and  fire-hallowing  Cams  but  they
walk  three  times  round  them  from  east  to
west,  according  to  the  course  of  the  sun.
This  sanctified  tour,  or  round  by  the  south,
is  called  Deaseal,  as  the  unhallowed  contrary
one  by  the  north,  Tuapholl;”  and  he  says
that  Deaseal  is  derived  from  “  Deas,  the  right
(understanding  hand),  and  soil,  one  of  the
ancient  names  of  the  sun,  the  right  hand  in
this  round  being  ever  next  the  heap.”  In
all  this  the  Mason  will  be  reminded  of  the
Masonic  ceremony  of  circumambulation
around  the  altar  and  the  rules  which  gov¬
ern  it.

Calcott,  Wellins.  A  distinguished
Masonic  writer  of  the  eighteenth  century,
and  the  author  of  a  work  published  in  1769,
under  the  title  of  “  A  Candid  Disquisition
of  the  Principles  and  Practices  of  the
Most  Ancient  and  Honorable  Society  of
Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  together  with
some  Strictures  on  the  Origin,  Nature,  and
Design  of  that  Institution,”  in  which  he
has  traced  Masonry  from  its  origin,  ex¬
plained  its  symbols  and  hieroglyphics,  its
social  virtues  and  advantages,  suggested
the  propriety  of  building  halls  for  the  pe¬
culiar  and  exclusive  practice  of  Masonry,
and  reprehended  its  slanderers  with  great
but  judicious  severity.  This  was  the  first
extended  effort  to  illustrate  philosophically
the  science  of  Masonry,  and  was  followed,
a  few  years  after,  by  Hutchinson’s  admira¬
ble  work ;  so  that  Oliver  justly  says  that
“  Calcott  opened  the  mine  of  Masonry,
and  Hutchinson  worked  it.”

Calendar.  Freemasons,  in  affixing
dates  to  their  official  documents,  never
make  use  of  the  common  epoch  or  vulgar
era,  but  have  one  peculiar  to  themselves,
which,  however,  varies  in  the  different
rites.  Era  and  epoch  are,  in  this  sense,
synonymous.

Masons  of  the  York,  American,  and
French  Rites,  that  is  to  say,  the  Masons
of  England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  France,
Germany,  and  America  date  from  the  cre¬
ation  of  the  world,  calling  it  “  Anno  Lu-
cis,”  which  they  abbreviate  A.’.  L.\,  signi¬
fying  fa  the  Year  of  Light.  Thus  with  them
the  year  1872  is  A.\  L.\  5872.  This  they
do,  not  because  they  believe  Freemasonry
to  be  coeval  with  the  creation,  but  with
a  symbolic  reference  to  the  light  of  Ma¬
sonry.

In  the  Scotch  Rite,  the  epoch  also  begins
from  the  date  of  the  creation,  but  Masons
of  that  Rite,  using  the  Jewish  chronology,
would  call  the  year  1872  A.’.  M.\  or  Anno
Mundi  (in  the  Year  ofthe  World)  5632.  They
sometimes  use  the  initials  A.-.  H.\,  signi¬
fying  AnnoHebraico,  or,  in  the  Hebrew  ymr.
They  have  also  adopted  the  Hebrew  months,
and  the  year,  therefore,  begins  with  them


144


CALENDAR


CALLING


in  the  middle  of  September.  See  Months ,
Hebrew.

Masons  of  the  York  and  American  Rites
begin  the  year  on  the  first  of  January,  but
in  the  French  Rite  it  commences  on  the
first  of  March,  and  instead  of  the  months
receiving  their  usual  names,  they  are  des¬
ignated  numerically,  as  first,  second,  third,
etc.  Thus,  the  1st  of  January,  1872,  would
be  styled,  in  a  French  Masonic  document,
the  “  1st  day  of  the  11th  Masonic  month,
Anno  Lucis,  5872.”  The  French  some¬
times,  instead  of  the  initials  A.’.  L.\,  use
L’an  de  la  V.'.  L.\ ,  or  Vraie  Lumiere,  that
is,  Year  of  True  Light.

Royal  Arch  Masons  commence  their
epoch  with  the  year  in  which  Zerubbabel
began  to  build  the  second  Temple,  which
was  530  years  before  Christ.  Their  style
for  the  year  1872  is,  therefore,  A.'.  Inv.\,
that  is,  Anno  Invenlionis,  or,  in  the  Year  of
the  Discovery,  2402.

Royal  and  Select  Masters  very  often
make  use  of  the  common  Masonic  date,
Anno  Lucis,  but  properly  they  should  date
from  the  year  in  which  Solomon’s  Temple
was  completed ;  and  their  style  would  then
be,  Anno  Deposition is,  or,  in  the  Year  of  the
Deposite,  and  they  would  date  the  year
1872  as  2872.

Knights  Templars  use  the  epoch  of  the
organization  of  their  Order  in  1118.  Their
style  for  the  year  1872  is  A.-.  O.'.,  Anno
Ordinis,  or,  in  the  Year  of  the  Order,  754.

I  subjoin,  for  the  convenience  of  refer¬
ence,  the  rules  for  discovering  these  differ¬
ent  dates.

1.  To  find  the  Ancient  Craft  date.  Add
4000  to  the  vulgar  era.  Thus  1872  and
4000  are  5872.

2.  To  find  the  date  of  the  Scotch  Rite.  Add
3760  to  the  vulgar  era.  Thus  1872  and
3760  are  5632.  After  September  add  one
year  more.

3.  To  find  the  date  of  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
sonry.  Add  530  to  the  vulgar  era.  Thus
530  and  1872  are  2402.

4.  To  find  the  Royal  and  Select  Masters'
date.  Add  1000  to  the  vulgar  era.  Thus
1000  and  1872  are  2872.

5.  To  find  the  Knights  Templar s’  date.
Subtract  1118  from  the  vulgar  era.  Thus
1118  from  1872  is  754.

The  following  will  show,  in  one  view,  the
date  of  the  year  1872  in  all  the  branches
of  the  Order :

Year  of  the  Lord,  A.D.  1872 — Vulgar
era.

Year  of  Light,  A.1.  L.\  5872  —  Ancient
Craft  Masonry.

Year  of  the  World,  A.’.  M.\  5632  —
Scotch  Rite.

Year  of  the  Discovery,  A.’.  I.'.  2402  —
Royal  Arch  Masonry.


Year  of  the  Deposite,  A.-.  Dep.\  2872  —
Royal  and  Select  Masters.

Year  of  the  Order,  A.-.  0.\  754 — Knights
Templars.

California.  The  Grand  Lodge  of
California  was  organized  on  the  19th  of
April,  1850,  in  the  city  of  Sacramento,  by
the  delegates  of  three  legally  constituted
Lodges  working,  at  the  time,  under  char¬
ters  from  the  Grand  Lodges  of  the  District
of  Columbia,  Connecticut,  and  Missouri.
Its  present  seat  is  at  San  Francisco,  and
there  are  215  Lodges  under  its  jurisdiction.
The  Grand  Chapter  and  Grand  Command-
ery  were  organized  in  1854.

Calling  Off.  A  technical  term  in
Masonry,  which  signifies  the  temporary
suspension  of  labor  in  a  Lodge  without
passing  through  the  formal  ceremony  of
closing.  The  full  form  of  the  expression
is  to  call  from  labor  to  refreshment,  and  it
took  its  rise  from  the  former  custom  of  di¬
viding  the  time  spent  in  the  Lodge  between
the  work  of  Masonry  and  the  moderate  en¬
joyment  of  the  banquet.  The  banquet
formed  in  the  last  century  an  indispensable
part  of  the  arrangements  of  a  Lodge  meet¬
ing.  “At  a  certain  hour  of  the  evening,”
says  Brother  Oliver,  “  with  certain  cere¬
monies,  the  Lodge  was  called  from  labor  to
refreshment,  when  the  brethren  enjoyed
themselves  with  decent  merriment.”  That
custom  no  longer  exists;  and  although  in
England  almost  always,  and  in  this  coun¬
try  occasionally,  the  labors  of  the  Lodge
are  concluded  with  a  banquet;  yet  the
Lodge  is  formally  closed  before  the  breth¬
ren  proceed  to  the  table  of  refreshment.
Calling  off  in  American  Lodges  is  now  only
used,  except  in  a  certain  ceremony  of  the
third  degree,  when  it  is  desired  to  have  an¬
other  meeting  at  a  short  interval,  and  the
Master  desires  to  avoid  the  tediousness  of
closing  and  opening  the  Lodge.  Thus,  if
the  business  of  the  Lodge  at  its  regular
meeting  has  so  accumulated  that  it  cannot
be  transacted  in  one  evening,  it  has  be¬
come  the  custom  to  call  off  until  a  subse¬
quent  evening,  when  the  Lodge,  instead  of
being  opened  with  the  usual  ceremony,  is
simply  “called  on,”  and  the  latter  meeting
is  considered  as  only  a  continuation  of  the
former.  This  custom  is  very  generally
adopted  in  Grand  Lodges  at  their  Annual
Communications,  which  are  opened  at  the
beginning  of  the  session,  called  off  from
day  to  day,  and  finally  closed  at  its  end.  I
do  not  know  that  any  objection  has  ever
been  advanced  against  this  usage  in  Grand
Lodges,  because  it  seems  necessary  as  a
substitute  for  the  adjournment,  which  is
resorted  to  in  other  legislative  bodies,  but
which  is  not  admitted  in  Masonry.  But
much  discussion  has  taken  place  in  refer-


CALLING


CALVARY


145


ence  to  the  practice  of  calling  off  in  Lodges,
some  authorities  sustaining  and  others  con¬
demning  it.  Thus,  twenty  years  ago,  the
Committee  of  Correspondence  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Mississippi  proposed  this  ques¬
tion:  “In  case  of  excess  of  business,  can¬
not  the  unfinished  be  laid  over  until  the
next  or  another  day,  and  must  the  Lodge
be  closed  in  form,  and  opened  the  next,  or
the  day  designated  for  the  transaction  of
that  business?”  To  this  question  some
authorities,  and  among  others  Brother  C.
W.  Moore,  {Mag.,  Vol.  XII.,  No.  10,)  reply
in  the  negative,  while  other  equally  good
jurists  differ  from  them  in  opinion.

The  difficulty  seems  to  be  in  this,  that  if
the  regular  meeting  of  the  Lodge  is  closed
in  form,  the  subsequent  meeting  becomes  a
special  one,  and  many  things  which  could
be  done  at  a  regular  communication  cease
to  be  admissible.  The  recommendation,
therefore,  of  Brother  Moore,  that  the  Lodge
should  be  closed,  and,  if  the  business  be  un¬
finished,  that  the  Master  shall  call  a  spe¬
cial  meeting  to  complete  it,  does  not  meet
the  difficulty,  because  it  is  a  well-settled
principle  of  Masonic  law  that  a  special
meeting  cannot  interfere  with  the  business
of  a  preceding  regular  one.

As,  then,  the  mode  of  briefly  closing  by
adjournment  is  contrary  to  Masonic  law  and
usage,  and  cannot,  therefore,  be  resorted  to,
as  there  is  no  other  way  except  by  calling  off
to  continue  the  character  of  a  regular  meet¬
ing,  and  as,  during  the  period  that  the  Lodge
is  called  off,  it  is  under  the  government  of
the  Junior  W arden,  and  Masonic  discipline
is  thus  continued,  I  am  clearly  of  opinion
that  calling  off  from  day  to  day  for  the
purpose  of  continuing  work  or  business  is,
as  a  matter  of  convenience,  admissible.
The  practice  may  indeed  be  abused.  But
there  is  a  well-known  legal  maxim  which
says,  Ex  abusu  non  arguitar  in  nsum.  “  No
argument  can  be  drawn  from  the  abuse  of
a  thing  against  its  use.”  Thus,  a  Lodge
cannot  be  called  off  except  for  continuance
of  work  and  business,  nor  to  an  indefinite
day,  for  there  must  be  a  good  reason  for
the  exercise  of  the  practice,  and  the  breth¬
ren  present  must  be  notified  before  dispers¬
ing  of  the  time  of  re-assembling  ;  nor  can
a  Lodge  at  one  regular  meeting  be  called
off  until  the  next,  for  no  regular  meeting
of  a  Lodge  is  permitted  to  run  into  another,
but  each  must  be  closed  before  its  successor
can  be  opened.

Calling  On.  When  a  Lodge  that  is
called  off  at  a  subsequent  time  resumes
work  or  business,  it  is  said  to  be  “  called
on.”  The  full  expression  is  “called  on
from  refreshment  to  labor.”

Calumny.  See  Back.

Calvary.  Mount  Calvary  is  a  small
T  10


hill  or  eminence,  situated  due  west  from
Mount  Moriah,  on  which  the  Temple  of
Solomon  was  built.  It  was  originally  a
hillock  of  notable  eminence,  but  has,  in
more  modern  times,  been  greatly  reduced
by  the  excavations  made  in  it  for  the  con¬
struction  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Sepul¬
chre.  There  are  several  coincidences  which
identify  Mount  Calvary  with  the  small  hill
where  the  “  newly-made  grave,”  referred  to
in  the  third  degree,  was  discovered  by  the
weary  brother.  Thus,  Mount  Calvary  was
a  small  hill ;  it  was  situated  in  a  westward
direction  from  the  Temple,  and  near  Mount
Moriah;  and  it  was  on  the  direct  road  from
Jerusalem  to  Joppa,  and  is  the  very  spot
where  a  weary  brother,  travelling  on  that
road,  would  find  it  convenient  to  sit  down
to  rest  and  refresh  himself ;  it  was  outside  the
gate  of  the  Temple ;  it  has  at  least  one  cleft
in  the  rock,  or  cave,  which  was  the  place
which  subsequently  became  the  sepulchre
of  our  Lord.  Hence  Mount  Calvary  has
always  retained  an  important  place  in  the
legendary  history  of  Freemasonry,  and
there  are  many  traditions  connected  with  it
that  are  highly  interesting  in  their  import.

One  of  these  traditions  is,  that  it  was  the
burial-place  of  Adam,  in  order,  says  the  old
legend,  that  where  he  lay,  who  effected  the
ruin  of  mankind,  there  also  might  the  Sa¬
viour  of  the  world  suffer,  die,  and  be  buried.
Sir  R.  Torkington,  who  published  a  pil¬
grimage  to  Jerusalem  in  1517,  says  that
“  under  the  Mount  of  Calvary  is  another
chapel  of  our  Blessed  Lady  and  St.  John
the  Evangelists,  that  was  called  Golgotha ;
and  there,  right  under  the  mortise  of  the
cross,  was  found  the  head  of  our  forefather,
Adam.”  Golgotha,  it  will  be  remembered,
means,  in  Hebrew,  “the  place  of  a  skull
and  there  may  be  some  connection  between
this  tradition  and  the  name  of  Golgotha,  by
which,  the  Evangelists  inform  us,  in  the
time  of  Christ  Mount  Calvary  was  known.
Calvary,  or  Calvaria,  has  the  same  significa¬
tion  in  Latin.

Another  tradition  states  that  it  was  in
the  bowels  of  Mount  Calvary  that  Enoch
erected  his  nine-arched  vault,  and  deposited
on  the  foundation-stone  of  Masonry  that
Ineffable  Name,  whose  investigation,  as  a
symbol  of  divine  truth,  is  the  great  object
of  Speculative  Masonry.

A  third  tradition  details  the  subsequent
discovery  of  Enoch’s  deposit,  by  King  Solo¬
mon,  whilst  making  excavations  in  Mount
Calvary  during  the  Building  of  the  Temple.

On  this  hallowed  spot  was  Christ  the
Redeemer  slain  and  buried.  It  was  there
that,  rising  on  the  third  day  from  his  sep¬
ulchre,  he  gave,  by  that  act,  the  demonstra¬
tive  evidence  of  the  resurrection  of  the
body  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul.


146


CAMP


CANDLESTICK


And  it  is  this  spot  that  lias  been  selected,
in  the  legendary  history  of  Freemasonry,  to
teach  the  same  sublime  truth,  the  develop¬
ment  of  which  by  a  symbol  evidently  forms
the  design  of  the  third  or  Master’s  degree.

Camp.  A  portion  of  the  parapherna¬
lia  decorated  with  tents,  flags,  and  pennons
of  a  Consistory  of  Sublime  Princes  of  the
Royal  Secret,  or  thirty-second  degree  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.
It  constitutes  the  tracing  board,  and  is  worn
on  the  apron  of  the  degree.  It  is  highly
symbolic,  and  represents  an  imaginary  Ma¬
sonic  camp.  Its  symbolism  is  altogether
esoteric.

Campe.  Joachim  Heinrich.  A

Doctor  of  Theology,  and  Director  of  Schools
in  Dessau  and  Hamburg,  who  was  born  in
1746,  and  died  Oct.  22,  1818.  He  was  the
author  of  many  works  on  philosophy  and
education,  and  was  a  learned  and  zealous
Mason,  as  is  shown  in  his  correspondence
with  Lessing.

Canada.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada
was  formed  out  of  the  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  by  a  Convention  of  Lodges  in  the
year  1855.  It  is  formed  upon  the  model
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  having
a  Board  of  General  Purposes,  and  similar
regulations  as  to  representation.

Candidate.  An  applicant  for  admis¬
sion  into  Masonry  is  called  a  candidate.
The  Latin  candidatus  means  clothed  in
white,  candidis  vestibus  indutus.  In  ancient
Rome,  he  who  sought  office  from  the  peo¬
ple  wore  a  wffiite  shining  robe  of  a  peculiar
construction,  flowing  open  in  front,  so  as  to
exhibit  the  wounds  he  had  received  in  his
breast.  From  the  color  of  his  robe  or  toga
Candida,  he  was  called  candidatus,  whence
the  word  candidate.  The  derivation  will
serve  to  remind  the  Mason  of  the  purity  of
conduct  and  character  which  should  dis¬
tinguish  all  those  who  are  candidates  for
admission  into  the  order.  The  qualifica¬
tions  of  a  candidate  in  Masonry  are  some¬
what  peculiar.  He  must  be  freeborn,
under  no  bondage,  of  at  least  twenty-one
years  of  age,  in  the  possession  of  sound
senses,  free  from  any  physical  defect  or  dis¬
memberment,  and  of  irreproachable  man¬
ners,  or,  as  it  is  technically  termed,  ‘‘  under
the  tongue  of  good  report.”  No  atheist,
eunuch,  or  woman  can  be  admitted.  The
requisites  as  to  age,  sex,  and  soundness  of
body  have  reference  to  the  operative  char¬
acter  of  the  Institution.  We  can  only  ex¬
pect  able  workmen  in  able-bodied  men.
The  mental  and  religious  qualifications
refer  to  the  duties  and  obligations  which  a
Freemason  contracts.  An  idiot  could  not
understand  them,  and  an  atheist  would  not
respect  them.  Even  those  who  possess  all
these  necessary  qualifications  can  be  ad¬


mitted  only  under  certain  regulations.  Not
more  than  five  candidates  can  be  received
at  one  time,  except  in  urgent  cases,  when  a
dispensation  may  be  granted  by  the  Grand
Master,  and  no  applicant  can  receive  more
than  two  degrees  on  the  same  day.  To  the
last  rule  there  can  be  no  exception.

Candidates,  Advancement  of.

See  Advancement,  Hurried.

Candlestick,  Golden.  The  golden
candlestick  of  seven  branches,  which  is  a
part  of  the  furniture  of  a  Royal  Arch
Chapter,  is  derived  from  “  the  holy  candle¬
stick  ”  which  Moses  was  instructed  to  con¬
struct  of  beaten  gold  for  the  use  of  the
tabernacle.  Smith  (Diet,  of  the  Bible)  thus
abbreviates  Liglitfoot’s  explanation  of  the
description  given  in  Exodus.  “  The  foot
of  it  was  gold,  from  which  went  up  a  shaft
straight,  which  was  the  middle  light.  Near
the  foot  was  a  golden  dish  wrought  almond-
wise;  and  a  little  above  that  a  golden  knop,
and  above  that  a  golden  flower.  Then  two
branches  one  on  each  side  bowed,  and
coming  up  as  high  as  the  middle  shaft.  On
each  of  them  were  three  golden  cups  placed
almondwise,  in  sharp, scallop-shell  fashion;
above  which  was  a  golden  knop,  a  golden
flower,  and  the  socket.  Above  the  branches
on  the  middle  shaft  was  a  golden  boss,
above  which  rose  two  shafts  more ;  above
the  coming  out  of  these  was  another  boss
and  two  more  shafts,  and  then  on  the  shaft
upwards  were  three  golden  scallop-cups,  a
knop,  and  a  flower;  so  that  the  heads  of
the  branches  stood  an  equal  height.”  In
the  tabernacle,  the  candlestick  was  placed
opposite  the  table  of  sliew-bread,  which  it
was  intended  to  illumine,  in  an  oblique
position,  so  that  the  lamps  looked  to  the
east  and  south.  What  became  of  the
candlestick  between  the  time  of  Moses  and
that  of  Solomon  is  unknown ;  but  it  does
not  appear  to  have  been  present  in  the  first
Temple,  which  was  lighted  by  ten  golden
candlesticks  similarly  embossed,  and  which
were  connected  by  golden  chains  and
formed  a  sort  of  railing  before  the  veil.

These  ten  candlesticks  became  the  spoil
of  the  Chaldean  conqueror  at  the  time  of
the  destruction  of  the  Temple,  and  could
not  have  been  among  the  articles  after¬
wards  restored  by  Cyrus ;  for  in  the  second
Temple,  built  by  Zerubbabel,  we  find  only
a  single  candlestick  of  seven  branches,  like
that  of  the  tabernacle.  Its  form  has  been
perpetuated  on  the  Arch  of  Titus,  on  which
it  was  sculptured  with  other  articles  taken
by  that  monarch,  and  carried  to  Rome  as
spolia  opima,  after  he  had  destroyed  the
Herodian  Temple.  This  is  the  candlestick
which  is  represented  as  a  decoration  in  a
Royal  Arch  Chapter.

Tn  Jewish  symbolism,  the  seven  branches


CANOPY


CAPITULAR


147


were  supposed  by  some  to  refer  to  the
seven  planets,  and  by  others  to  the  seventh
day  or  Sabbath.  The  primitive  Christians
made  it  allusive  to  Christ  as  the  “light  of
the  world,”  and  in  this  sense  it  is  a  favorite
symbol  in  early  Christian  art.  In  Masonry
it  seems  to  have  no  symbolic  meaning,
unless  it  be  the  general  one  of  light;  but
is  used  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter  simply  to
indicate  that  the  room  is  a  representation
of  the  tabernacle  erected  near  the  ruins
of  the  first  Temple,  for  the  purpose  of  tem¬
porary  worship  during  the  building  of  the
second,  and  in  which  tabernacle  this  can¬
dlestick  is  supposed  to  have  been  present.

Canopy.  Oliver  says  that  in  the  Ma¬
sonic  processions  of  the  Continent  the
Grand  Master  walks  under  a  gorgeous
canopy  of  blue,  purple,  and  crimson  silk,
with  gold  fringes  and  tassels,  borne  upon
staves,  painted  purple  and  ornamented  with
gold,  by  eight  of  the  oldest  Master  Masons
present;  and  the  Masters  of  private  Lodges
walk  under  canopies  of  light  blue  silk  with
silver  tassels  and  fringes,  borne  by  four
members  of  their  own  respective  companies.
The  canopies  are  in  the  form  of  an  oblong
square,  and  are  in  length  six  feet,  in  breadth
and  height  three  feet,  having  a  semicircular
covering.  The  framework  should  be  of
cedar,  and  the  silken  covering  ought  to
hang  down  two  feet  on  each  side.  This  is,
properly  speaking,  a  Baldachin.  See  that
word.

Canopy,  Clouded.  The  clouded
canopy ,  or  starry-decked  heaven,  is  a  symbol
of  the  first  degree,  and  is  of  such  important
significance  that  Lenning  calls  it  a  “  funda¬
mental  symbol  of  Freemasonry.”  In  the  lec¬
tures  of  the  York  Rite,  the  clouded  canopy  is
described  as  the  covering  of  the  Lodge,  teach¬
ing  us,  as  Krause  says,  “that  the  primitive
Lodge  is  confined  within  no  shut  up  building,
but  that  it  is  universal,  and  reaches  to  heaven,
and  especially  teaching  that  in  every  clime
under  heaven  Freemasonry  has  its  seat.”
And  Giidicke  says,  “  Every  Freemason
knows  that  by  the  clouded  canopy  we  mean
the  heavens,  and  that  it  teaches  how  widely
extended  is  our  sphere  of  usefulness.  There
is  no  portion  of  the  inhabited  world  in
which  our  labor  cannot  be  carried  for¬
ward,  as  there  is  no  portion  of  the  globe
without  its  clouded  canopy.”  Hence,  then,
the  German  interpretation  of  the  symbol  is
that  it  denotes  the  universality  of  Free¬
masonry,  an  interpretation  that  does  not
precisely  accord  with  the  English  and
American  systems,  in  which  the  doctrine
of  universality  is  symbolized  by  the  form
and  extent  of  the  Lodge.  The  clouded
canopy  as  the  covering  of  the  Lodge  seems
rather  to  teach  the  doctrine  of  aspiration
for  a  higher  sphere;  it  is  thus  denued  in


this  work  under  the  head  of  Covering  of  the
Lodge ,  which  see.

Canzler,  Carl  Christian.  A

librarian  of  Dresden,  born  Sept.  30,  1733,
died  Oct.  16, 1786.  He  was  an  earnest,  learn¬
ed  Freemason,  who  published  in  a  literary
journal,  conducted  by  himself  and  A.  G.
Meissner  at  Leipsic,  in  1783-85,  under  the
title  of  Fur  dltere  Litteratur  und  neuere  Lec¬
ture,  many  interesting  articles  on  the  sub¬
ject  of  Freemasonry.

Cape-Stone,  or,  as  it  would  more  cor¬
rectly  be  called,  the  cope-stone,  (but  the
former  word  has  been  consecrated  to  us  by
universal  Masonic  usage,)  is  the  topmost  A
stone  of  a  building.  To  bring  it  forth,
therefore,  and  to  place  it  in  its  destined
position,  is  significative  that  the  building  is
completed,  which  event  is  celebrated,  even
by  the  operative  Masons  of  the  present  day,
with  great  signs  of  rejoicing.  Flags  are
hoisted  on  the  top  of  every  edifice  by  the
builders  engaged  in  its  construction,  as  soon
as  they  have  reached  the  topmost  post,  and
thus  finished  their  labors.  This  is  the
“  celebration  of  the  cape-stone,”  — the  cele¬
bration  of  the  completion  of  the  building,  —
when  tools  are  laid  aside,  and  rest  and  re¬
freshment  succeed  for  a  time  to  labor.  This
is  the  event  in  the  history  of  the  Temple
which  is  commemorated  in  the  degree  of
Most  Excellent  Master,  the  sixth  in  the
American  Rite.  The  day  set  apart  for  the
celebration  of  the  cape-stone  of  the  Temple  is
the  day  devoted  to  rejoicing  and  thanks¬
giving  for  the  completion  of  that  glorious
structure.  Hence  there  seems  to  be  an  im¬
propriety  in  the  ordinary  use  of  the  Mark
Master’s  keystone  in  the  ritual  of  the  Most
Excellent  Master.  That  keystone  was  de¬
posited  in  silence  and  secrecy ;  while  the
cape-stone,  as  the  legend  and  ceremonies
tell  us,  was  placed  in  its  position  in  the
presence  of  all  the  Craft.

Capitular  Degrees.  The  degrees
conferred  under  the  charter  of  an  American
Royal  Arch  Chapter,  which  are  Mark
Master,  Past  Master,  MostExcellent  Master,
and  Royal  Arch  Mason.  The  capitular
degrees  are  almost  altogether  founded  on
and  composed  of  a  series  of  events  in  Ma¬
sonic  history.  Each  of  them  has  attached
to  it  some  tradition  or  legend  which  it  is
the  design  of  the  degree  to  illustrate,  and
the  memory  of  which  is  preserved  in  its
ceremonies  and  instructions.  Most  of  these
legends  are  of  symbolic  signification.  But
this  is  their  interior  sense.  In  their  out¬
ward  and  ostensible  meaning,  they  appear
before  us  simply  as  legends.  To  retain
these  legends  in  the  memory  of  Masons  ap¬
pears  to  have  been  the  primary  design  in
the  establishment  of  the  higher  degrees;
and  as  the  information  intended  to  be  com-


148


CAPITULAR


CAPTIVITY


raunicated  in  these  degrees  is  of  an  histor¬
ical  character,  there  can  of  course  be  but
little  room  for  symbols  or  for  symbolic  in¬
struction  ;  the  profuse  use  of  which  would
rather  tend  to  an  injury  than  to  a  benefit,
by  complicating  the  purposes  of  the  ritual
and  confusing  the  mind  of  the  aspirant.
These  remarks  refer  exclusively  to  the  Mark
and  Most  Excellent  Master’s  degree  of  the
American  Rite,  but  are  not  so  applicable  to
the  Royal  Arch,  which  is  eminently  sym¬
bolic.  The  legends  of  the  second  Temple,
and  the  lost  word,  the  peculiar  legends  of
that  degree,  are  among  the  most  prominent
symbols  of  the  Masonic  system.

Capitular  Masonry.  The  Masonry
conferred  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the
York  and  American  Rites.  There  are
Chapters  in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted,
Scottish,  and  in  the  French  and  other
Rites ;  but  the  Masonry  therein  conferred  is
not  called  capitular.

Captain  General.  The  third  offi¬
cer  in  a  Commandery  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars.  He  presides  over  the  Commandery
in  the  absence  of  his  superiors,  and  is  one
of  its  representatives  in  the  Grand  Com¬
mandery.  His  duties  are  to  see  that  the
council  chamber  and  asylum  are  duly  pre¬
pared  for  the  business  of  the  meetings,  and
to  communicate  all  orders  issued  by  the
Grand  Council.  His  station  is  on  the  left
of  the  Grand  Commander,  and  his  jewel  is
a  level  surmounted  by  a  cock.  See  Cock.

Captain  of  the  Guard.  The  sixth
officer  in  a  Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters.  In  the  latter  degree  he  is  said  to
represent  Azariah,  the  son  of  Nathan,  who
had  command  of  the  twelve  officers  of  the
king’s  household,  (1  Kings  iv.  7.)  His
duties  correspond  in  some  measure  with
those  of  a  Senior  Deacon  in  the  primary
degrees.  His  post  is,  therefore,  on  the
right  of  the  throne,  and  his  jewel  is  a
trowel  and  battle-axe  within  a  triangle.

Captain  of  the  Most.  The  fourth
officer  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter.  He  rep¬
resents  the  general  or  leader  of  the  Jewish
troops  who  returned  from  Babylon,  and
who  was  called  “  Sar  el  hatzaba ,”  and  was
equivalent  to  a  modern  general.  The  word
Host  in  the  title  means  army.  He  sits  on
the  right  of  the  Council  in  front,  and  wears
a  white  robe  and  cap  or  helmet,  with  a  red
sash,  and  is  armed  with  a  sword.  His
jewel  is  a  triangular  plate,  on  which  an
armed  soldier  is  engraved.

Captivity.  The  Jews  reckoned  their
national  captivities  as  four, —  the  Babylo¬
nian,  Medean,  Grecian,  and  Roman.  The
present  article  will  refer  only  to  the  first,
when  there  was  a  forcible  deportation  of
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebu-
zaradan,  the  general  of  King  Nebuchad¬


nezzar,  and  their  detention  at  Babylon
until  the  reign  of  Cyrus,  which  alone  is
connected  with  the  history  of  Masonry,
and  is  commemorated  in  the  Royal  Arch
degree.

Between  that  portion  of  the  ritual  of  the
Royal  Arch  which  refers  to  the  destruction
of  the  first  Temple,  and  that  subsequent
part  which  symbolizes  the  building  of  the
second,  there  is  an  interregnum  (if  we  may
be  allowed  the  term)  in  the  ceremonial  of  the
degree,  which  must  be  considered  as  a  long
interval  in  history,  the  filling  up  of  which,
like  the  interval  between  the  acts  of  a  play,
must  be  left  to  the  imagination  of  the  specta¬
tor.  This  interval  represents  the  time  passed
in  the  captivity  of  the  Jews  at  Babylon.
That  captivity  lasted  for  seventy  years,  —
from  the  reign  of  Nebuchadnezzar  until  that
of  Cyrus,  —  although  but  fifty-two  of  these
years  are  commemorated  in  the  Royal  Arch
degree.  This  eveDt  took  place  in  the  year
C88  B.  c.  It  was  not,  however,  the  begin¬
ning  of  the  “seventy  years’  captivity,”
which  had  been  foretold  by  the  prophet
Jeremiah,  which  commenced  eighteen  years
before.  The  captives  were  conducted  to
Babylon.  What  was  the  exact  number
removed  we  have  no  means  of  ascertain¬
ing.  We  are  led  to  believe,  from  certain
passages  of  Scripture,  that  the  deportation
was  not  complete.  Calmet  says  that  Nebu¬
chadnezzar  carried  away  only  the  principal
inhabitants,  the  warriors  and  artisans  of
every  kind,  and  that  he  left  the  husband¬
men,  the  laborers,  and,  in  general,  the
poorer  classes,  that  constituted  the  great
body  of  the  people.  Among  the  prisoners
of  distinction,  Josephus  mentions  the  high
priest,  Seraiah,  and  Zephaniah,  the  priest
that  was  next  to  him,  with  the  three  rulers
that  guarded  the  Temple,  the  eunuch  who
was  over  the  armed  men,  seven  friends  of
Zedekiah,  his  scribe,  and  sixty  other  rulers.
Zedekiah,  the  king,  had  attempted  to  escape
previous  to  the  termination  of  the  siege,
but  being  pursued,  was  captured  and  car¬
ried  to  Riblah,  the  headquarters  of  Nebu¬
chadnezzar,  where,  having  first  been  com¬
pelled  to  behold  the  slaughter  of  his
children,  his  eyes  were  then  put  out,  and
he  was  conducted  in  chains  to  Babylon.

A  Masonic  tradition  informs  us  that  the
captive  Jews  were  bound  by  their  conquer¬
ors  with  triangular  chains,  and  that  this
was  done  by  the  Chaldeans  as  an  additional
insult,  because  the  Jewish  Masons  were
known  to  esteem  the  triangle  as  an  emblem
of  the  sacred  name  of  God,  and  must  have
considered  its  appropriation  to  the  form  of
their  fetters  as  a  desecration  of  the  Tetra-
grammaton.

Notwithstanding  the  ignominious  mode
of  their  conveyance  from  Jerusalem,  and


CAPTIVITY


CARBONARISM


149


the  vindictiveness  displayed  by  their  con¬
queror  in  the  destruction  of  their  city  and
Temple,  they  do  not  appear,  on  their  arrival
at  Babylon,  to  have  been  subjected  to  any
of  the  extreme  rigors  of  slavery.  They
were  distributed  into  various  parts  of  the
empire,  some  remaining  in  the  city,  while
others  were  sent  into  the  provinces.  The
latter  probably  devoted  themselves  to  agri¬
cultural  pursuits,  while  the  former  were
engaged  in  commerce  or  in  the  labors  of
architecture.  Smith  says  that  the  captives
were  treated  not  as  slaves  but  as  colonists.
They  were  permitted  to  retain  their  per¬
sonal  property,  and  even  to  purchase  lands
and  erect  houses.  Their  civil  and  religious
government  was  not  utterly  destroyed,  for
they  kept  up  a  regular  succession  of  kings
and  hiih  priests,  one  of  each  of  whom
returned  with  them,  as  will  be  seen  here¬
after,  on  their  restoration.  Some  of  the
principal  captives  were  advanced  to  offices
of  dignity  and  power  in  the  royal  palace,
and  were  permitted  to  share  in  the  councils
of  state.  Their  prophets,  Daniel  and  Eze¬
kiel,  with  their  associates,  preserved  among
their  countrymen  the  pure  doctrines  of
their  religion.  Although  they  had  neither
place  nor  time  of  national  gathering,  nor
temple,  and  therefore  offered  no  sacrifices,
yet  they  observed  the  Mosaic  laws  with
respect  to  the  rite  of  circumcision.  They
preserved  their  tables  of  genealogy  and  the
true  succession  to  the  throne  of  David.  The
rightful  heir  being  called  the  Head  of  the
Captivity,*  Jehoiachin,  who  was  the  first
king  of  Judea  carried  captive  to  Babylon,
was  succeeded  by  his  son  Shealtiel,  and  he
by  his  son  Zerubbabel,  who  was  the  Head
of  the  Captivity,  or  nominal  prince  of
Judea  at  the  close  of  the  captivity.  The
due  succession  of  the  high  priesthood  was
also  preserved,  for  Jehosadek,  who  was  the
high  priest  carried  by  Nebuchadnezzar
to  Babylon,  where  he  died  during  the  cap¬
tivity,  was  succeeded  by  his  eldest  son,
Joshua.  The  Jewish  captivity  terminated
in  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  Cyrus,  b.  c.
536.  Cyrus,  from  his  conversations  with
Daniel  and  the  other  Jewish  captives  of
learning  and  piety,  as  well  as  from  his
perusal  of  their  sacred  books,  more  espe¬
cially  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  had  become
imbued  with  a  knowledge  of  true  religion,
and  hence  had  even  publicly  announced  to
his  subjects  his  belief  in  the  God  “  which
the  nation  of  the  Israelites  worshipped.”
He  was  consequently  impressed  with  an
earnest  desire  to  fulfil  the  prophetic  decla¬
rations  of  which  he  was  the  subject,  and

®So  says  the  Talmud,  but  Smith  (Diet,  of  the
Bible)  affirms  that  the  assertion  is  unsupported
by  proof.  The  Masonic  legends  conform  to  the
Talmudic  statement.


to  rebuild  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem.  Cy¬
rus  therefore  issued  a  decree  by  which  the
Jews  were  permitted  to  return  to  their
country.  According  to  Milman,  42,360  be¬
sides  servants  availed  themselves  of  this
permission,  and  returned  to  Jerusalem
under  Zerubbabel  their  prince  and  Joshua
their  high  priest,  and  thus  ended  the  first
or  Babylonian  captivity,  the  only  one
which  has  any  connection  with  the  legends
of  Freemasonry  as  commemorated  in  the
Royal  Arch  degree.

Clarausiiis.  A  Roman  emperor,  who
assumed  the  purple  A.  D.  287.  Of  him
Preston  gives  the  following  account,  which
may  or  may  not  be  deemed  apocryphal,  ac¬
cording  to  the  taste  and  inclination  of  the
reader.  “  By  assuming  the  character  of  a
Mason,  he  acquired  the  love  and  esteem  of
the  most  enlightened  part  of  his  subjects.
He  possessed  real  merit,  encouraged  learn¬
ing  and  learned  men,  and  improved  the
country  in  the  civil  arts.  In  order  to  es¬
tablish  an  empire  in  Britain,  he  brought
into  his  dominions  the  best  workmen  and
artificers  from  all  parts;  all  of  whom,  un¬
der  his  auspices,  enjoyed  peace  and  tran¬
quillity.  Among  the  first  class  of  his  favor¬
ites  he  enrolled  the  Masons :  for  their
tenets  he  professed  the  highest  veneration,
and  appointed  Albanus,  his  steward,  the
principal  superintendent  of  their  assem¬
blies.  Under  his  patronage,  Lodges  and
conventions  of  the  Fraternity  were  formed,
and  the  rites  of  Masonry  regularly  prac¬
tised.  To  enable  the  Masons  to  hold  a
general  council,  to  establish  their  own  gov¬
ernment  and  correct  errors  among  them¬
selves,  he  granted  to  them  a  charter,  and
commanded  Albanus  to  preside  over  them
in  person  as  Grand  Master.”  Anderson
also  gives  the  legend  of  Carausius  in  the
second  edition  of  his  Constitutions,  and  adds
that  this  is  asserted  by  all  the  old  copies
of  the  Constitutions,  and  the  old  English
Masons  firmly  believed  it.”  But  the  fact  is
that  Anderson  himself  does  not  mention
the  tradition  in  his  first  edition,  published
in  1723,  nor  is  any  reference  to  Carausius
to  be  found  in  any  of  the  old  manuscripts
now  extant.  The  legend  is,  it  is  true,  in¬
serted  in  Krause’s  Manuscript;  but  this
document  is  of  very  little  authority,  hav¬
ing  been,  most  probably,  a  production  of  the
early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and
of  a  cotemporary  of  Anderson,  written  per¬
haps  between  1723  and  1738,  which  would
account  for  the  omission  of  it  in  the  first
edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  and
its  insertion  in  the  second.  The  reader
may  hence  determine  for  himself  what  au¬
thenticity  is  to  be  given  to  the  Carausian
legend.

Carbonarisiu.  A  secret  political  so*


150


CARBUNCLE


CASSIA


ciety  which  sprang  up  in  Italy  in  the  be¬
ginning  of  the  nineteenth  century.  It  is
entitled  to  no  place  in  a  Masonic  Encyclo¬
paedia,  except  that  the  word  affords  an  op¬
portunity  of  repudiating  the  theory  that  it
was  in  any  way  connected  with  Freema¬
sonry,  although  the  Carbonari  appear  to
have  borrowed  many  of  their  forms  from
the  Freemasons.  The  members  called  each
other  “  cousins.”

Carbuncle.  In  Hebrew,  i'lD'O,  bara¬
keth ,  the  third  stone  in  the  first  row  of  the
high  priest’s  breastplate,  according  to  the
authorized  version,  but  the  first  stone  in
the  second  row,  according  to  the  Septua-
gint.  Braun,  a  writer  on  the  sacerdotal
vestments  of  the  Hebrews,  (Amsterdam,
1680,)  supposes  that  the  baraketh  was  a
smaragdus  or  emerald,  which  view  is  sus¬
tained  bv  Kalisch,  and  is  in  accordance
with  the  Septuagint  translation.  The  Tal¬
mudists  derive  baraketh  from  a  word  signi¬
fying  “  to  shine  with  the  brightness  of
fire,”  which  would  seem  to  indicate  some
stone  of  a  coruscant  color,  and  would  ap¬
ply  to  the  bright  green  of  the  emerald  as
well  as  to  the  bright  red  of  the  carbuncle.
The  stone,  whatever  it  was,  was  referred  to
the  tribe  of  Judah.  The  carbuncle  in
Christian  iconography  signifies  blood  and
suffering,  and  is  symbolical  of  the  Lord’s
passion.  Five  carbuncles  placed  on  a  cross
symbolize  the  five  wounds  of  Christ.

Cardinal  Points.  The  north,  west,
east,  and  south  are  so  called  from  the
Latin  cardo,  a  hinge,  because  they  are  the
principal  points  of  the  compass  on  which
all  the  others  hinge  or  hang.  Each  of
them  has  a  symbolic  signification  in  Ma¬
sonry,  which  will  be  found  under  their  re¬
spective  heads.  Dr.  Brinton.  in  an  inter¬
esting  Treatise  on  the  Symbolism  and  My¬
thology  of  the  Red  Race  of  America,  has  a
chapter  on  the  sacred  number  four ;  the  only
one,  he  says,  that  has  any  prominence  in
the  religions  of  the  red  race,  and  which
he  traces  to  the  four  cardinal  points.  The
reason,  he  declares,  is  to  be  “found  in  the
adoration  of  the  cardinal  points;”  and  he
attributes  to  this  cause  the  prevalence  of
the  cross  as  a  symbol  among  the  aborigines
of  America,  the  existence  of  which  $o  sur¬
prised  the  Catholic  missionaries  that  they
“  were  in  doubt  whether  to  ascribe  the  fact
to  the  pious  labors  of  St.  Thomas  or  the
sacrilegious  subtlety  of  Satan.”  The  arms
of  the  cross  referred  to  the  cardinal  points,
and  represented  the  four  winds,  the  bringers
of  rain.  The  theory  is  an  interesting  one,
and  the  author  supports  it  with  many  in¬
genious  illustrations.  In  the  symbolism
of  Freemasonry  each  of  the  cardinal  points
has  a  mystical  meaning.  The  East  repre¬
sents  Wisdom;  the  West,  Strength;  the


South,  Beauty;  and  the  North,  Dark¬
ness.

Cardinal  Virtues.  The  pre-eminent
or  principal  virtues  on  which  all  the  others
hinge  or  depend.  They  are  temperance,
fortitude,  prudence,  and  justice.  1  hey  are
referred  to  in  the  ritual  of  the  first  degree,
and  will  be  found  in  this  work  under  their
respective  heads.  Oliver  says  ( Revelation  of
a  Square,  ch.  i.,)  that  in  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury  the  Masons  delineated  the  symbols  of
the  four  cardinal  virtues  by  an  acute  angle
variously  disposed.  Thus,  suppose  you
face  the  east,  the  angle  symbolizing  tem¬
perance  will  point  to  the  south,  >.  It  was
called  a  Guttural.  Fortitude  was  denoted
by  a  saltire,  or  St.  Andrew’s  Cross,  X .  Thi3
was  the  Pectoral.  The  symbol  of  prudence
was  an  acute  angle  pointing  towards  the
south-east,  7,  and  was  denominated  a
Manual ;  and  justice  had  its  angle  towards
the  north,  <,  and  was  called  a  Pedestal  or
Pedal.

Carlile,  Richard.  A  printer  and

bookseller  of  London,  who  in  1819  was
fined  and  imprisoned  for  the  publication
of  Paine’s  Age  of  Reason,  and  Palmer’s
Light  of  Nature.  He  also  wrote  and  pub¬
lished  several  pretended  expositions  of
Masonry,  which,  after  his  death,  were  col¬
lected,  in  1845,  in  one  volume,  under  the
title  of  a  Manual  of  Freemasonry,  in  three
parts.  Carlile  was  a  professed  Atheist,
and,  although  a  fanatical  reformer  of  what
he  supposed  to  be  the  errors  of  the  age,  was
a  man  of  some  ability.  His  Masonic  works
are  interspersed  with  considerable  learning,
and  are  not  as  abusive  of  the  Order  as  ex¬
positions  generally  are.  He  was  born  in
1790,  and  died  in  1843,  in  London.  For
ten  years  before  his  death  his  religious
opinions  had  been  greatly  modified.

Carpet.  The  chart  or  tracing  board
on  which  the  emblems  of  a  degree  are  de¬
picted  tor  the  instruction  of  a  candidate.
“  Carpets  ”  were  originally  drawn  on  the
floor  with  chalk  or  charcoal,  and  at  the
closeof  the  Lodge  obliterated.  Toavoid  this
trouble,  they  were  subsequently  painted  on
cloth,  which  was  laid  on  the  floor;  hence
they  were  called  carpets.  Carpets,  or
charts,  as  they  are  at  the  present  time  com¬
monly  designated,  are  now  generally  sus¬
pended  from  the  wall,  or  from  a  framework
in  the  Lodge.

Casniaran.  The  angel  of  air.  Re¬
ferred  to  in  the  degree  of  Scottish  Knight
of  St.  Andrew.  The  etymology  is  uncer¬
tain.

Cassia.  A  corruption  of  acacia,  which
undoubtedly  arose  from  the  common  habit,
among  illiterate  people,  of  sinking  the
sound  of  the  letter  A  in  the  pronunciation
j  of  any  word  of  which  it  constitutes  the  ini-


CASTELLAN


CATHARINE


151


tial  syllable,  apothecary  for  apothecary,  and
prentice  for  apprentice.  The  word  prentice,
by  the  way,  is  almost  altogether  used  in  the
old  records  of  Masonry,  which  were,  for
the  most  part,  the  productions  of  unedu¬
cated  men.  Unfortunately,  however,  the  cor¬
ruption  of  acacia  into  cassia  has  not  always
been  confined  to  the  illiterate ;  but  the  long
employment  of  the  corrupted  form  has  at
length  introduced  it,  in  some  instances,
among  a  few  of  our  writers.  Even  Dr.
Oliver  has  sometimes  used  the  objectiona¬
ble  corruption,  notwithstanding  he  has
written  so  much  upon  the  symbolism  of  the
acacia.

There  is  a  plant  which  was  called  by  the
ancients  cassia,  but  it  is  entirely  different
from  the  acacia.  The  acacia  was  a  sacred
plant;  the  cassia  an  ignoble  plant,  having
no  sacred  character.  The  former  is  in  Ma¬
sonry  profoundly  symbolic ;  the  latter  has
no  symbolism  whatever.  The  cassia  is  only
three  times  mentioned  in  Scripture,  but
always  as  an  aromatic  plant  forming  a  por¬
tion  of  some  perfume.  There  is,  indeed,
strong  reason  for  believing  that  the  cassia
was  only  a  coarse  kind  of  cinnamon,  and
that  it  did  not  grow  in  Palestine,  but  was
imported  from  the  East.  Cassia,  therefore,
has  no  rightful  place  in  Masonic  language,
and  its  use  should  be  avoided  as  a  vulgar
corruption.

Castellan.  In  Germany,  the  Super¬
intendent  or  Steward  of  a  Lodge  building,
in  which  he  resides.  He  is  either  a  serving
brother  or  an  actual  member  of  the  Lodge,
and  has  the  care  of  the  building  and  its
contents.

Casting  Toice  or  Vote.  The

twelfth  of  the  thirty-nine  General  Regula¬
tions  prescribes  that  “all  matters  are  to  be
determined  in  the  Grand  Lodge  by  a  ma¬
jority  of  votes.  Each  member  having  one
vote  and  the  Grand  Master  having  two
votes.”  From  this  law  has  arisen  the  uni¬
versal  usage  of  giving  to  the  Master  of  the
Lodge  a  casting  vote  in  addition  to  his  own
when  there  is  a  tie.  The  custom  is  so  uni¬
versal,  and  has  been  so  long  practised,  that,
although  I  can  find  no  specific  law  on  the
subject,  the  right  may  be  considered  as
established  by  prescription.  It  may  be  re¬
marked  that  the  Masonic  usage  is  probably
derived  from  the  custom  of  the  London
Livery  Companies  or  Gilds,  where  the  cast¬
ing  vote  has  always  been  given  by  the  presid¬
ing  officers  in  all  cases  of  equality,  a  rule
that  Inis  been  recognized  by  Act  of  Parlia¬
ment.

Catafalque.  A  temporary  structure
of  wood,  appropriately  decorated  with
funereal  symbols  and  representing  a  tomb
or  cenotaph.  It  forms  a  part  of  the  deco¬
rations  of  a  Sorrow  Lodge,  and  is  also


used  in  the  ceremonies  of  the  third  degree
in  Lodges  of  the  French  Rite.

Catch  Questions.  Questions  not  in¬
cluded  in  the  Catechism,  but  adopted  from
an  early  period  to  try  the  pretensions  of  a
stranger,  such  as  this  used  by  American
Masons:  “  Where  does  the  Master  hang  his
hat?  ”  and  by  the  French,  “  Comment  etes-
vous  entr6  dans  le  Temple  de  Salomon  ?  ”
Such  as  these  are  of  course  unsanctioned  by
authority.  But  Dr.  Oliver,  in  an  essay  on
this  subject  preliminary  to  the  fourth  vol¬
ume  of  his  Golden  Remains,  gives  a  long
list  of  these  “  additional  tests,”  which  had
been  reduced  to  a  kind  of  system,  and  were
practised  by  the  English  Masons  of  the
eighteenth  century.  Among  them  were
such  as  these.  What  is  the  punishment  of
a  cowan?  What  does  this  stone  smell  of?
If  a  brother  were  lost,  where  would  you  look
for  him?  How  blows  a  Mason’s  wind?  and
many  others  of  the  same  kind.  Of  these
tests  or  catch  questions,  Dr.  Oliver  says,
“  that  they  were  something  like  the  conun¬
drums  of  the  present  day— difficult  of  com¬
prehension  ;  admitting  only  of  one  answer,
which  appeared  to  have  no  direct  corres¬
pondence  with  the  question,  and  applicable
only  in  consonance  with  the  mysterious
terms  and  symbols  of  the  Institution.”
Catch  questions  in  this  country,  at  least,
seem  to  be  getting  out  of  use,  and  some  of
the  most  learned  Masons  at  the  present  day
would  find  it  difficult  to  answer  them.

Catechism.  From  the  earliest  times
the  oral  instructions  of  Masonry  have  been
communicated  in  a  catecheti<§il  form.  Each
degree  has  its  peculiar  catechism,  the  knowl¬
edge  of  which  constitutes  what  is  called  a
“  bright  Mason.”  The  catechism,  indeed,
should  be  known  to  every  Mason,  for  every
aspirant  should  be  thoroughly  instructed
in  that  of  the  degree  to  which  he  has  at¬
tained  before  he  is  permitted  to  make  fur¬
ther  progress.  The  rule,  however,  is  not
rigidly  observed ;  and  many  Masons,  unfortu¬
nately,  are  very  ignorant  of  all  but  the  rudi¬
mentary  parts  of  their  catechism,  which
they  derive  only  from  hearing  portions  of
it  communicated  at  the  opening  and  clos¬
ing  of  the  Lodge.

Catenarian  Arcli.  If  a  rope  be
suspended  loosely  by  its  two  ends,  the
curve  into  which  it  falls  is  called  a  catena¬
rian  curve,  and  this  inverted  forms  the
catenarian  arch,  which  is  said  to  be  the
strongest  of  all  arches.  As  the  form  of  a
symbolic  Lodge  is  an  oblong  square,  that
of  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  according  to  the
English  ritual,  is  a  catenarian  arch.

Catharine  II.  Catharine  the  Great,
Empress  of  Russia,  in  1 7t>2,  prohibited  by
an  edict  all  Masonic  meetings  in  her  do¬
minions.  But  subsequently  better  senti-


152


CAUTION


CEDARS


merits  prevailed,  and  having  learned  the
true  character  of  the  Institution,  she  not
only  revoked  her  order  of  prohibition,  but
invited  the  Masons  to  re-establish  their
Lodges  and  to  constitute  new  ones,  and
went  so  far  as  to  proclaim  herself  the  Pro¬
tectress  of  the  Lodge  of  Clio,  at  Moscow.
During  the  remainder  of  her  reign  Free¬
masonry  was  in  a  flourishing  condition  in
Russia,  and  many  of  the  nobles  organized
Lodges  in  their  palaces.  She  died  Novem¬
ber  6,  1796,  and  the  persecutions  against
the  Order  were  renewed  by  her  successor.

Caution,  it  was  formerly  the  custom
to  bestow  upon  an  Entered  Apprentice,  on
his  initiation,  a  new  name,  which  was
“  caution.”  The  custom  is  now  very  gen¬
erally  discontinued,  although  the  principle
which  it  inculcated  should  never  be  for¬
gotten.

The  Old  Charges  of  1723  impress  upon  a
Mason  the  necessity,  when  in  the  presence
of  strangers  not  Masons,  to  be  “  cautious  in
his  words  and  carriage,  that  the  most  pene¬
trating  stranger  shall  not  be  able  to  dis¬
cover  or  find  out  what  is  not  proper  to  be
intimated ;  ”  as  these  Charges  were  particu¬
larly  directed  to  Apprentices,  who  then  con¬
stituted  the  great  body  of  the  Fraternity,  it
is  evident  that  the  “new  name”  gave  rise
to  the  Charge,  or,  more  likely,  that  the
Charge  gave  rise  to  the  “  new  name.”

Cavern.  In  the  Pagan  mysteries  of
antiquity  the  initiations  were  often  per¬
formed  in  caverns,  of  which  a  few,  like  the
cave  of  Eleplmnta  in  India,  still  remain  to
indicate  by  Their  form  and  extent  the
character  of  the  rites  that  were  then  per¬
formed.  The  cavern  of  Elephanta,  which
was  the  most  gorgeous  temple  in  the  world,
is  one  hundred  and  thirty  feet  square,  and
eighteen  feet  high.  It  is  supported  by  lour
massive  pillars,  and  its  walls  are  covered
with  statues  and  carved  symbolic  decora¬
tions.  The  sacellum,  or  sacred  place,  which
contained  the  phallic  symbol,  was  in  the
western  extremity,  and  accessible  only  to
the  initiated.  The  caverns  of  Salsette,
greatly  exceeded  in  magnitude  that  of  Ele¬
phanta,  being  three  hundred  in  number,
all  adorned  with  symbolic  figures,  among
which  the  phallic  emblems  were  predomi¬
nant,  which  were  placed  in  the  most'’  secret
caverns,  accessible  only  by  private  en¬
trances.  In  every  cavern  was  a  basin  to
contain  the  consecrated  water  of  ablution,
on  the  surface  of  which  floated  the  sacred
lotus  flower.  All  these  caverns  were  places
of  initiation  into  the  Hindu  mysteries,
and  every  arrangement  was  made  for  the
performance  of  the  most  impressive  cere¬
monies.

Faber  ( J/ys.  Cab.,  ii.  257,)  says  that
“  wherever  the  Cabiric  Mysteries  were


practised,  they  were  always  in  some  man¬
ner  or  other  connected  with  caverns;”  and
he  mentions,  among  other  instances,  the
cave  Zirinthus,  within  whose  dark  recesses
the  most  mysterious  Rites  of  the  Samothra-
cian  Cabiri  were  performed.

Maurice,  (Ind.  Ant.,  iii.  536,)  speaking
of  the  subterranean  passages  of  the  Tem¬
ple  of  Isis,  in  the  island  of  Phile  in  the
river  Nile,  says,  “it  was  in  these  gloomy
caverns  that  the  grand  and  mystic  arcana
of  the  goddess  were  unfolded  to  the  adoring
aspirant,  while  the  solemn  hymns  of  initia¬
tion  resounded  through  the  long  extent  of
these  stony  recesses.”

Many  of  the  ancient  oracles,  as,  for  in¬
stance,  that  of  Trophonius  in  Bceotia,  were
delivered  in  caves.  Hence,  the  cave — sub¬
terranean,  dark,  and  silent — was  mingled  in
the  ancient  mind  with  the  idea  of  mystery.

In  the  ceremonies  of  Masonry,  we  find
the  cavern  or  vault  in  what  is  called  the
Cryptic  Masonry  of  the  American  Rite,
and  also  in  the  high  degrees  of  the  French
and  Scottish  Rites,  in  which  it  is  a  symbol
of  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  crime
impenetrable  to  the  light  of  truth.

In  reference  to  the  practical  purposes  of
the  cavern,  as  recorded  in  the  legend  of
these  degrees,  it  may  be  mentioned  that
caverns,  which  abounded  in  Palestine  in
consequence  of  the  geological  structure  of
the  country,  are  spoken  of  by  Josephus  as
places  of  refuge  for  banditti ;  and  Mr.
Phillott  says,  in  Smith’s  Dictionary,  that  it
was  the  caves  which  lie  beneath  and  around
so  many  of  the  Jewish  cities  that  formed
the  last  hiding-places  of  the  Jewish  leaders
in  the  war  with  the  Romans.

Cedars  of  Lebanon.  In  scriptural
symbology,  the  cedar-tree,  says  Wemyss,
[Syrnb.  Lang.  Scrip.,)  was  the  symbol  of
eternity,  because  its  substance  never  decays
nor  rots.  Hence,  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant
was  made  of  cedar ;  and  those  are  said  to
utter  things  worthy  of  cedar  who  write
that  which  no  time  ought  to  obliterate.

The  Cedars  of  Lebanon  are  frequently
referred  to  in  the  legends  of  Masonry,  es¬
pecially  in  the  higher  degrees ;  not.  however,
on  account  of  any  symbolical  signification,
but  rather  because  of  the  use  made  of  them
by  Solomon  and  Zerubbabel  in  the  con¬
struction  of  their  respective  Temples.  Mr.
Phillott  ( Smith’s  Did.  Bible )  thus  describes
the  grove  so  celebrated  in  scriptural  and
Masonic  history

The  grove  of  trees  known  as  the  Cedars
of  Lebanon  consists  of  about  four  hundred
trees,  standing  quite  alone  in  a  depression
of  the  mountain  with  no  trees  near,  about
six  thousand  four  hundred  feet  above  the
sea,  and  three  thousand  below  the  summit.
About  eleven  or  twelve  are  very  large  and


CELEBRATION


CENTAINE


153


old,  twenty-five  large,  fifty  of  middle  size,
and  more  than  three  hundred  younger  and
smaller  ones.  The  older  trees  have  each
several  trunks  and  spread  themselves  wide¬
ly  round,  but  most  of  the  others  are  of
cone-like  form,  and  do  not  send  out  wide,
lateral  branches.  In  1550,  there  were
twenty-eight  old  trees;  in  1739,  Pococke
counted  fifteen,  but  the  number  of  trunks
makes  the  operation  of  counting  uncertain.
They  are  regarded  with  much  reverence  by
the  native  inhabitants  as  living  records  of
Solomon’s  power,  and  the  Maronite  patri¬
arch  was  formerly  accustomed  to  celebrate
there  the  festival  of  the  Transfiguration  at
an  altar  of  rough  stones.

Celebration.  The  third  degree  of
Fessler’s  Rite.  See  Fessler’s  Fite.

Celestial  Alphabet.  See  Alphabet
of  Angels.

Celtic  Mysteries.  See  Druidism.

Celts.  The  early  inhabitants  of  Italy,
Gaul,  Spain,  and  Britain.  They  are  sup¬
posed  to  have  left  Asia  during  one  of  the
Aryan  emigrations,  and,  having  travelled  in
a  westerly  direction,  to  have  spread  over
these  countries  of  Europe.  The  Celtic
Mysteries  or  the  Sacred  Rites  which  they
instituted  are  known  as  Druidism,  which
see.

Cement.  The  cement  which  in  Oper¬
ative  Masonry  is  used  to  unite  the  various
parts  of  a  building  into  one  strong  and
durable  mass,  is  borrowed  by  Speculative
Masonry  as  a  symbol  to  denote  that
brotherly  love  which  binds  the  Masons  of
all  countries  in  one  common  brotherhood.
As  this  brotherhood  is  recognized  as  being
perfected  among  Master  Masons  only,  the
symbol  is  very  appropriately  referred  to  the
third  degree.

Cemeteries,  Masonic.  The  desire
to  select  some  suitable  spot  wherein  to  de¬
posit  the  remains  of  our  departed  kindred
and  friends  seems  almost  innate  in  the
human  breast.  The  stranger’s  field  was
bought  with  the  accursed  bribe  of  betrayal
and  treason,  and  there  is  an  abhorrence  to
depositing  our  loved  ones  in  places  whose
archetype  was  so  desecrated  by  its  purchase-
money.  The  churchyard,  to  the  man  of
sentiment,  is  as  sacred  as  the  church  itself.
The  cemetery  bears  a  hallowed  character,
and  we  adorn  its  graves  with  vernal  flowers
or  with  evergreens,  to  show  that  the  dead,
though  away  from  our  presence  visibly,
still  live  and  bloom  in  our  memories.  The
oldest  of  all  the  histories  that  time  has
saved  to  us  contains  an  afTecting  story  of
this  reverence  of  the  living  for  the  dead,
when  it  tells  us  how  Abraham,  when  Sarah,
his  beloved  wife,  had  died  in  a  strange
land,  reluctant  to  bury  her  among  stran¬
gers,  purchased  from  the  sons  of  Heth  the
U


cave  of  Machpelah  for  a  burial-place  for
his  people.

It  is  not,  then,  surprising  that  Masons,
actuated  by  this  spirit,  should  have  been
desirous  to  consecrate  certain  spots  as  rest¬
ing-places  for  themselves  and  for  the  strange
brethren  who  should  die  among  them.  A
writer  in  the  London  Freemason’ s  Magazine
for  1858  complained  that  there  was  not  in
England  a  Masonic  cemetery,  nor  portion
of  an  established  cemetery  especially  dedi¬
cated  to  the  interment  of  the  brethren  of
the  Craft.  This  neglect  cannot  be  charged
against  the  Masons  of  America,  for  there
is  scarcely  a  city  or  town  of  considerable
size  in  which  the  Masons  have  not  pur¬
chased  and  appropriated  a  suitable  spot  as
a  cemetery  to  be  exclusively  devoted  to  the
use  of  the  Fraternity.  These  cemeteries
are  often,  and  should  always  be,  dedicated
with  impressive  ceremonies;  and  it  is  to  be
regretted  that  our  rituals  have  provided  no
sanctioned  form  of  service  for  these  occa¬
sions.

Censer.  A  small  vessel  of  metal  fitted
to  receive  burning  coals  from  the  altar,  and
on  which  the  incense  for  burning  was  sprin¬
kled  by  the  priest  in  the  Temple.  Among
the  furniture  of  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter  is  to
be  found  the  censer,  which  is  placed  upon
the  altar  of  incense  within  the  sanctuary,
as  a  symbol  of  the  pure  thoughts  and
grateful  feelings  which,  in  so  holy  a  place,
should  be  offered  up  as  a  fitting  sacrifice  to
the  great  I  AM.  In  a  similar  symbolic
sense,  the  censer,  under  the  name  of  the
11  pot  of  incense,”  is  found  among  the  em¬
blems  of  the  third  degree.  See  Pot  of
Incense.  The  censer  also  constitutes  a
part  of  the  Lodge  furniture  in  many  of  the
high  degrees.

Censor.  Gadicke  says  this  is  not  an
officer,  but  is  now  and  then  introduced  into
some  of  the  Lodges  of  Germany.  He  is
commonly  found  where  the  Lodge  has  its
own  private  house,  in  which,  on  certain
days,  mixed  assemblies  are  held  of  Free¬
masons  and  their  families  and  friends.
Of  those  assemblies  the  Censor  has  the
superintendence.

Censure.  In  Masonic  law,  the  mild¬
est  form  of  punishment  that  can  be  in¬
flicted,  and  may  be  defined  to  be  a  formal
expression  of  disapprobation,  without  other
result  than  the  effect  produced  upon  the
feelings  of  him  who  is  censured.  It  is
adopted  by  a  resolution  of  the  Lodge  on  a
motion  made  at  a  regular  communication;
it  requires  only  a  bare  majority  of  votes  for
its  passage,  does  not  affect  the  Masonic
standing  of  the  person  censured,  and  may
be  revoked  at  any  subsequent  regular  com¬
munication.

Ceutaiue,  Order  of.  A  mystical


154


CERTIFICATE


CENTENNIAL

society  of  the  last  century  which  admitted  J
females.  It  was  organized  at  Bordeaux,  in
1735.  Leaning  says  that  at  a  later  period
some  of  its  adherents  attempted  to  engraft
it  upon  Freemasonry,  but  without  effect.

Centennial.  That  which  happens
every  hundred  years.  Masonic  bodies  that
have  lasted  for  that  period  very  generally
celebrate  the  occasion  by  a  commemorative
festival.  On  the  4th  of  November,  1852,
almost  all  of  the  Lodges  of  the  United
States  celebrated  the  centennial  anniversary
of  the  initiation  of  George  Washington  as
a  Freemason.

Centralists.  A  society  which  existed
in  Europe  from  1770  to  1780.  It  made  use
of  Masonic  forms  at  its  meeting  simply  to
conceal  its  secrets.  Leaning  calls  it  an  al¬
chemical  association,  but  says  that  it  had
religious  and  political  tendencies.  Gadicke
thinks  that  its  object  was  to  propagate
Jesuitism.

Central  Point.  See  Point  within  a
Circle.

Centre,  Opening  on  the.  In  the

English  ritual,  a  Master  Mason’s  Lodge  is
said  to  be  opened  on  the  centre,  because  the
brethren  present,  being  all  Master  Masons,
are  equally  near  and  equally  distant  from
that  imaginary  central  point  which  among
Masons  constitutes  perfection.  Neither  of
the  preliminary  degrees  can  assert  the  same
conditions,  because  the  Lodge  of  an  Entered
Apprentice  may  contain  all  the  three  classes,
and  that  of  a  Fellow  Craft  may  include
some  Master  Masons;  and  therefore  the
doctrine  of  perfect  equality  is  not  carried
out  in  either.  An  attempt  was  made,  but
without  success,  in  the  Trestle  Board,
published  under  the  sanction  of  the  Balti¬
more  Masonic  Convention,  to  introduce  the
custom  into  the  American  Lodges.

Cephas.  A  word  which  in  the  Syriac
signifies  a  rock  or  stone,  and  is  the  name
which  was  bestowed  by  Christ  upon  Simon,
when  he  said  to  him,  “Thou  art  a  rock,”
which  the  Greeks  rendered  by  Ilirpoc,  and
the  Latins  by  Petrus,  both  words  meaning
“a  rock.”  It  is  used  in  the  degree  of
Royal  Master,  and  there  alludes  to  the
Stone  of  Foundation.

Ceremonies.  The  outer  .garments
which  cover  and  adorn  Freemasonry  as
clothing  does  the  human  body.  Although
ceremonies  give  neither  life  nor  truth  to
doctrines  or  principles,  yet  they  have  an
admirable  influence,  since  by  their  use
certain  things  are  made  to  acquire  a  sacred
character  which  they  would  not  otherwise
have  had;  and  hence,  Lord  Coke  has  most
wisely  said,  that  “  prudent  antiquity  did,
for  more  solemnity  and  better  memory  and
observation  of  that  which  is  to  be  done,
express  substances  under  ceremonies.”


Ceremonies,  Master  of.  See  Master

of  Ceremonies.

Ceres.  Among  the  Romans,  the  god¬
dess  of  agriculture;  but  among  the  more
poetic  Greeks  she  was  worshipped  under
the  name  of  Demeter,  as  the  symbol  of  the
prolific  earth.  To  her  is  attributed  the
institution  of  the  Eleusinian  Mysteries  in
Greece,  the  most  popular  of  all  the  ancient
initiations.

Cerneau,  Joseph.  A  French  jew¬
eller,  born  at  Villeblerin,  in  1763,  and  who
in  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century
removed  to  the  city  of  New  York,  where
in  1807  he  established  a  spurious  body
under  the  title  of  “Sovereign  Grand  Con¬
sistory  of  the  United  States  of  America,  its
Territories  and  Dependencies.”  This  Ma¬
sonic  charlatan,  who  claimed  the  right  to
organize  bodies  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite,  was  expelled  and  his
pretensions  denounced,  in  1813,  by  the
legal  Supreme  Council  sitting  at  Charles¬
ton,  South  Carolina.  Cerneau  and  his  adhe¬
rents  gave  much  trouble  in  the  Scottish
Rite  for  many  years,  and  the  bodies  which
he  had  formed  were  not  entirely  dissolved
until  long  after  the  establishment  of  a
legal  Supreme  Council  for  the  Northern
Jurisdiction.

Certificate.  A  diploma  issued  by  a
Grand  Lodge,  or  by  a  subordinate  Lodge
under  its  authority,  testifying  that  the
holder  thereof  is  a  true  and  trusty  brother,
and  recommending  him  to  the  hospitality
of  the  Fraternity  abroad.  The  character
of  this  instrument  has  sometimes  been
much  misunderstood.  It  is  by  no  means
intended  to  act  as  a  voucher  for  the  bearer,
nor  can  it  be  allowed  to  supersede  the  ne¬
cessity  of  a  strict  examination.  A  stranger,
however,  having  been  tried  and  proved  by
a  more  unerring  standard,  his  certificate
then  properly  comes  in  as  an  auxiliary  tes¬
timonial,  and  will  be  permitted  to  afford
good  evidence  of  his  correct  standing  in  his
Lodge  at  home ;  for  no  body  of  Masons,
true  to  the  principles  of  their  Order,  would
grant  such  an  instrument  to  an  unworthy
brother,  or  to  one  who,  they  feared,  might
make  an  improper  use  of  it.  But  though
the  presence  of  a  Grand  Lodge  certificate
be  in  general  required  as  collateral  evidence
of  worthiness  to  visit,  or  receive  aid,  its  ac¬
cidental  absence,  which  may  arise  in  vari¬
ous  ways,  as  from  fire,  captivity,  or  ship¬
wreck,  should  not  debar  a  strange  brother
from  the  rights  guaranteed  to  him  by  our
Institution,  provided  he  can  offer  other  evi¬
dence  of  his  good  .character.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  New  York  ha«,  upon  this  subject,
taken  the  proper  stand  in  the  following
regulation  :  “  That  no  Mason  be  admitted
to  any  subordinate  Lodge  under  the  juris-


CHAILLOU


CHALDEA


155


diction  of  this  Grand  Lodge,  or  receive  the
charities  of  any  Lodge,  unless  he  shall,  on
such  application,  exhibit  a  Grand  Lodge
certificate,  duly  attested  by  the  proper  au¬
thorities,  except  he  is  known  to  the  Lodge  to
be  a  worthy  brother.”

The  certificate  system  has  been  warmly
discussed  by  the  Grand  Lodges  of  the
United  States,  and  considerable  opposition
to  it  has  been  made  by  some  of  them  on
the  ground  that  it  is  an  innovation.  If  it
is  an  innovation,  it  certainly  is  not  one  of
the  present  day,  as  we  may  learn  from  the
Regulations  made  in  General  Assembly  of
the  Masons  of  England,  on  St.  John  the
Evangelist’s  day,  1663,  during  the  Grand
Mastership  of  the  Earl  of  St.  Albans,  one
of  which  reads  as  follows:

“  That  no  person  hereafter  who  shall  be
accepted  a  Freemason  shall  be  admitted
into  any  Lodge  or  Assembly,  until  he  has
brought  a  certificate  of  the  time  and  place
of  his  acceptation  from  the  Lodge  that  ac¬
cepted  him,  unto  the  Master  of  that  limit
or  division  where  such  Lodge  is  kept.”

Chaillou  de  Joinville.  He  played
an  important  part  in  the  Freemasonry  of
France  about  the  middle  of  the  last  cen¬
tury,  especially  during  the  schisms  which
at  that  time  existed  in  the  Grand  Lodge.
In  1761,  he  was  an  active  member  of  the
Council  of  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West,
or  Rite  of  Perfection,  which  had  been  estab¬
lished  in  1758.  Under  the  title  of  “Sub¬
stitute  General  of  the  Order,  Ven.  Master
of  the  First  Lodge  in  France,  called  St.
Anthony’s,  Chief  of  the  Eminent  Degrees,
Commander,  and  Sublime  Prince  of  the
Royal  Secret,  etc.,  etc.,  etc.,”  he  signed  the
Patent  of  Stephen  Morin,  authorizing  him
to  extend  the  Royal  Order  in  America,
which  was  the  first  step  that  subsequently
led  to  the  establishment  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Rite  in  the  United  States.  In
1762,  the  Prince  of  Clermont,  Grand  Mas¬
ter  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France,  removed
the  dancing-master  Lacorne,  whom  he  had
previously  appointed  his  Substitute  Gene¬
ral,  and  who  had  become  distasteful  to  the
respectable  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
and  put  Chaillou  de  Joinville  in  his  place.
This  action  created  a  schism  in  the  Grand
Lodge,  during  which  De  Joinville  appears
to  have  acted  with  considerable  energy,
but  eventually  he  became  almost  as  noto¬
rious  as  his  predecessor,  by  issuing  irregular
charters  and  deputations.  On  the  death  of
the  Prince  of  Clermont,  in  1771,  the  La-
cornists  regained  much  of  their  influence,
and  De  Joinville  appears  quietly  to  have
passed  away  from  the  field  of  French  Ma¬
sonry  and  Masonic  intrigues.

Chain,  Mystic.  To  form  the  mystic
chain  is  for  the  brethren  to  make  a  circle,


holding  each  other  by  the  hands,  as  in  sur¬
rounding  a  grave,  etc.  Each  brother  crosses
his  arms  in  front  of  his  body,  so  as  to  give
his  right  hand  to  his  left  hand  neighbor,  and
his  left  hand  to  his  right  hand  neighbor.
The  French  call  it  chaine  d’union.  It  is  a
symbol  of  the  close  connection  of  all  Ma¬
sons  in  one  common  brotherhood.

Chain  of  Flowers.  In  French  Ma¬
sonry,  when  a  Lodge  celebrates  the  day  of
its  foundation,  or  the  semi-centennial  mem¬
bership  of  one  of  the  brethren,  or  at  the
initiation  of  a  louveteau,  the  room  is  deco¬
rated  with  wreaths  of  flowers  called  “  chaine
de  fleurs.”

Chain  of  Union.  See  Chain,  Mystic.

Chain,  Triangular.  One  of  the

legends  of  Freemasonry  tells  us  that  when
the  Jewish  Masons  were  carried  as  cap¬
tives  from  Jerusalem  to  Babylon  by  Neb¬
uchadnezzar,  they  were  bound  by  triangu¬
lar  chains,  which  was  intended  as  an  addi¬
tional  insult,  because  to  them  the  triangle,
or  delta,  was  a  symbol  of  the  Deity,  to  be
used  only  on  sacred  occasions.  The  legend
is  of  course  apocryphal,  and  is  worth  noth¬
ing  except  as  a  legendary  symbol.

Chair.  A  technical  term  signifying  the
office  of  Master  of  a  Lodge.  Thus,  “he  is
eligible  to  the  chair”  is  equivalent  to  “he
is  eligible  to  the  office  of  Master.”  The
word  is  applied  in  the  same  sense  to  the
presiding  office  in  other  Masonic  bodies.

Chairman.  The  presiding  officer  of
a  meeting  or  committee.  In  all  committees
of  a  Lodge,  the  Worshipful  Master,  if  he
chooses  to  attend,  is  ex-officio  chairman ;  as
is  the  Grand  Master  of  any  meeting  of  the
Craft  when  he  is  present.

Chair,  Master  in  the.  The  Ger¬
man  Masons  call  the  Worshipful  Master,
“  der  Meister  im  Stuhl,”  or  the  Master  in
the  Chair.

Chair,  Oriental.  The  seat  or  office
of  the  Master  of  a  Lodge  is  thus  called  —
sometimes,  more  fully,  the  “  Oriental  Chair
of  King  Solomon.”

Chair,  Passing  the.  The  ceremony
of  inducting  the  Master  elect  of  a  Lodge
into  his  office  is  called  “  passing  the  chair.”
He  who  has  once  presided  over  a  Lodge  as
its  Master,  is  said  to  have  “  passed  the
chair,”  hence  the  title  “Past  Master.”

Chaldea.  A  large  tract  of  country,
lying  in  a  nearly  north-west  and  south¬
east  direction  for  a  distance  of  four  hun¬
dred  miles  along  the  course  of  the  rivers
Euphrates  and  Tigris,  with  an  average
width  of  one  hundred  miles.  The  kingdom
of  Chaldea,  of  which  Babylon  was  the
chief  city,  is  celebrated  in  Masonic  history
as  the  place  where  the  Jewish  captives  were
conducted  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusa¬
lem.  At  that  time  Nebuchadnezzar  was


156


CHALDEANS


CHAPEAU


the  king.  His  successors,  during  the  cap¬
tivity,  were  Evilmerodach,  Neriglissar,
Labosordacus,  and  Belshazzar.  In  the
seventeenth  year  of  his  reign,  the  city  of
Babylon  was  taken,  and  the  Chaldean
kingdom  subverted  by  Cyrus,  king  of  Per¬
sia,  who  terminated  the  captivity  of  the
Jews,  and  restored  them  to  their  native
country.

Chaldeans  or  Chaldees.  The

ancient — Diodorus  Siculus  says  the  “  most
ancient  ” — inhabitants  of  Babylonia.  There
was  among  them,  as  among  the  Egyptians,
a  true  priestly  caste,  which  was  both  exclu¬
sive  and  hereditary  ;  for  although  not  every
Chaldean  was  a  priest,  yet  no  man  could
be  a  priest  among  them  unless  he  were  a
Chaldean.”  “At  Babylon,”  says  Dr.  Smith,
(Anc.  Hint,  of  (he  East,  p.  398,)  “  they  were  in
all  respects  the  ruling  order  in  the  body  pol¬
itic,  uniting  in  themselves  the  characters  of
the  English  sacerdotal  and  military  classes.
They  filled  all  the  highest  offices  of  state
under  the  king,  who  himself  belonged  to
the  order.”  The  Chaldean  priests  were
famous  for  their  astronomical  science,  the
study  of  which  was  particularly  favored  by
the  clear  atmosphere  and  the  cloudless
skies  of  their  country,  and  to  which  they
were  probably  urged  by  their  national
worship  of  the  6un  and  the  heavenly  hosts.
Diodorus  Siculus  says  that  they  passed
their  whole  lives  in  meditating  questions  of
philosophy,  and  acquired  a  great  reputation
for  their  astrology.  They  were  addicted
especially  to  the  art  of  divination,  and
framed  predictions  of  the  future.  They
sought  to  avert  evil  and  to  insure  good  by
purifications,  sacrifices,  and  enchantments.
They  were  versed  in  the  arts  of  prophesy¬
ing  and  explaining  dreams  and  prodigies.
All  this  learning  among  the  Chaldeans  was
a  family  tradition;  the  son  inheriting  the
profession  and  the  knowledge  of  the  priest¬
hood  from  his  father,  and  transmitting  it
to  his  descendants.  The  Chaldeans  were
settled  throughout  the  whole  country,  but
there  were  some  special  cities,  such  as
Borsippa,  Ur,  Sippera,  and  Babylon,  where
they  had  regular  colleges.  The  reputation
of  the  Chaldeans  for  prophetic  and  magical
knowledge  was  so  great,  that  astrologers,
and  conjurers  in  general,  were  styled  Baby¬
lonians  and  Chaldeans,  just  as  the  wander¬
ing  fortune-tellers  of  modern  times  are
called  Egyptians  or  gypsies,  and  Ars  Chal-
dceorum  was  the  name  given  to  all  occult
sciences.

Chalice.  A  cup  used  in  religious  rites.
It  forms  a  part  of  the  furniture  of  a  Com-
mandery  of  Knights  Templars,  and  of
some  of  the  higher  degrees  of  the  French
and  Scottish  Rites.  It  should  be  made
either  of  silver  or  of  gilt  metal.  The  stem


of  the  chalice  should  be  about  four  inches
high,  and  the  diameter  from  three  to  six.

Chalk,  Charcoal,  and  Clay.  By
these  three  substances  are  beautifully  sym¬
bolized  the  three  qualifications  for  the  ser¬
vitude  of  an  Entered  Apprentice — freedom,
fervency,  and  zeal.  Clialk  is  the  freest  of
all  substances,  because  the  slightest  touch
leaves  a  trace  behind.  Charcoal,  the  most
fervent,  because  to  it,  when  ignited,  the
most  obdurate  metals  yield ;  and  clay,  the
most  zealous,  because  it  is  constantly  em¬
ployed  in  man’s  service,  and  is  as  constant¬
ly  reminding  us  that  from  it  we  all  came,
and  to  it  we  must  all  return.  In  the  earlier
lectures  of  the  last  century’,  the  symbols,
with  the  same  interpretation,  were  given
as  “  Chalk,  Charcoal,  and  Earthen  Pau.”

Chamber,  Middle.  See  Middle
Chamber.

Chamber  of  Refleetion.  In  the

French  and  Scottish  Rites,  a  small  room
adjoining  the  Lodge,  in  which,  preparatory
to  initiation,  the  candidate  is  enclosed  for
the  purpose  of  indulging  in  those  serious
meditations  which  its  sombre  appearance,
and  the  gloomy  emblems  with  which  it  is
furnished,  are  calculated  to  produce.  It  is
also  used  in  some  of  the  high  degrees  for  a
similar  purpose.  Its  employment  is  very
appropriate,  for,  as  Gadicke  well  observes,
“  it  is  only  in  solitude  that  we  can  deeply
reflect  upon  our  present  or  future  under¬
takings,  and  blackness,  darkness,  or  solitari¬
ness,  is  ever  a  symbol  of  death.  A  man  who
has  undertaken  a  thing  after  mature  re¬
flection  seldom  turns  back.”

Chancellor.  An  officer  in  a  Council
of  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,  correspond¬
ing  in  some  respects  to  the  Senior  Warden
of  a  Symbolic  Lodge.

Chancellor,  Grand.  An  officer  in
the  Supreme  Councils  and  Grand  Consisto¬
ries  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite,  whose  duties  are  somewhat  similar  to
those  of  a  Corresponding  Secretary.

Chaos.  A  confused  and  shapeless
mass,  such  as  is  supposed  to  have  existed
before  God  reduced  creation  into  order.  It
is  a  Masonic  symbol" of  the  ignorance  and
intellectual  darkness  from  which  man  is
rescued  by  the  light  and  truth  of  Masonry.
Hence,  ordo  ab  chao,  or,  “order  out  of
chaos,”  is  one  of  the  mottoes  of  the  Insti¬
tution.

Chaos  Disentangled.  One  of  the

names  formerly  given  to  the  twenty-eighth
degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  or  Knight  of  the  Sun.  It  is  like¬
wise  found  in  the  collection  of  M.  Pyron.
Discrete  and  Wise  Chaos  are  the  forty-ninth
and  fiftieth  degrees  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Chapeau.  The  cocked  hat  worn  in
this  country  by  Knights  Templars.  The


CHAPEL


CHARGES


157


regulations  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of
the  United  States,  in  1862,  prescribes  that  it
shall  be  “the  military  chapeau,  trimmed
with  black  binding,  one  white  and  two
black  plumes,  and  appropriate  cross  on  the
left  side.’'

Chapel.  The  closets  and  anterooms
so  necessary  and  convenient  to  a  Lodge  lor
various  purposes,  are  dignified  by  German
Masons  with  the  title  of  “  Capelan,  or
chapels.”

Chapel,  St.  Mary’s.  The  oldest
Lodge  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  whose  min¬
utes,  according  to  Lawrie,  extend  as  far
back  as  the  year  1598.  They  show  that
Thomas  Boswell,  Esq.,  of  Auchinleck,  was
made  a  Warden  of  the  Lodge  in  the  year
1600,  and  that  the  Hon.  Robert  Moray,
Quartermaster-General  of  the  Army  in
Scotland,  was  created  a  Master  Mason  in
1641.  These  facts  show  that  at  that  early
period  persons  who  were  not  operative
Masons  by  profession  were  admitted  into
the  Order.

Chapiter.  The  uppermost  part  of  a
column,  pillar,  or  pilaster,  serving  as
the  head  or  crowning,  and  placed  imme¬
diately  over  the  shaft  and  under  the  en¬
tablature.  The  pillars  which  stood  in  front
of  the  porch  of  King  Solomon’s  Temple
were  adorned  with  chapiters  of  a  peculiar
construction,  which  are  largely  referred  to,
and  their  symbolism  explained,  in  the  Fel¬
low  Craft’s  degree.  See  Pillars  of  the
Porch.

Chaplain.  The  office  of  Chaplain  of
a  Lodge  is  one  which  is  not  recognized  in
the  ritual  of  this  country,  although  often
conferred  by  courtesy.  The  Master  of  a
Lodge  in  general  performs  the  duties  of  a
Chaplain.

Chaplain,  Grand.  An  office  in  a
Grand  Lodge  of  very  modern  date.  It  was
first  instituted  on  the  1st  of  May,  1775,  on
the  occasion  of  the  laying  of  the  corner¬
stone  of  the  Freemasons’  Hall  in  London.
This  office  is  now  universally  recognized  by
the  Grand  Lodges  of  this  country.  His
duties  are  confined  to  offering  up  prayer  at
the  communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
and  conducting  its  devotional  exercises  on
public  occasions.

Chapter.  In  early  times  the  meetings
of  Masons  were  called  not  only  Lodges,  but
Chapters  and  Congregations.  Thus,  the
statute  enacted  in  the  third  year  of  the
reign  of  Henry  VI.,  of  England,  A.  D.
1425,  declares  that  “Masons  shall  not  con¬
federate  in  Chapters  and  Congregations.”
The  word  is  now  exclusively  appropriated
to  designate  the  bodies  in  which  degrees
higher  than  the  symbolic  are  conferred.
Thus,  there  are  Chapters  of  Royal  Arch
Masons  in  the  York  and  American  Rites


and  Chapters  of  Rose  Croix  Masons  in  the
Ancient  and  Accepted.

Chapter,  General  Grand.  See

General  Grand  Chapter.

Chapter,  Grand.  See  Grand  Chap¬
ter.

Chapter  Mason.  A  colloquialism
denoting  a  Royal  Arch  Mason.

Chapter  Masonry.  A  colloquial¬
ism  intended  to  denote  the  degrees  con¬
ferred  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter.

Chapter,  Rose  Croix.  See  Rose
Croix,  Prince  of.

Chapter,  Royal  Arch.  A  convo¬
cation  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  is  called  a
Chapter.  In  Great  Britain,  Royal  Arch
Masonry  is  connected  with  and  under  the
government  of  the  Grand  Lodge;  but  in
America,  the  jurisdictions  are  separate.
Here,  a  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  is
empowered  to  give  the  preparatory  degrees
of  Mark,  Past,  and  Most  Excellent  Master ;
although,  of  course,  the  Chapter,  when
meeting  in  either  of  these  degrees,  is  called
a  Lodge.  In  some  Chapters,  the  degrees
of  Royal  and  Select  Master  are  also  given
as  preparatory  degrees;  but  in  most  of  the
States,  the  control  of  these  is  conferred
upon  separate  bodies,  called  “  Councils  of
Royal  and  Select  Masters.”

The  presiding  officers  of  a  Chapter  are
the  High  Priest,  King,  and  Scribe,  who
are,  respectively,  representatives  of  Joshua,
Zerubbabel,  and  Haggai.  In  the  English
Chapters,  these  officers  are  generally  styled
either  by  the  founders’  names,  as  above,  or
as  First,  Second,  and  Third  Principals.  In
the  Chapters  of  Ireland  the  order  of  the
officers  is  King,  High  Priest,  and  Scribe.
Chapters  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  in  this
country  are  primarily  under  the  jurisdic¬
tion  of  State  Grand  Chapters,  as  Lodges
are  under  Grand  Lodges;  and  secondly,
under  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the
United  States,  whose  meetings  are  held  tri¬
ennial  ly,  and  which  exercises  a  general
supervision  over  this  branch  of  the  Order
throughout  the  Union.  See  Royal  Arch.

Chapters.  Irish.  See  Irish  Chapters.

Characteristic  Xante.  See  Order
Name.

Charcoal.  See  Chalk,  Charcoal,  and
Clay.

Charge.  So  called  from  the  “Old
Charges,”  because,  like  them,  it  contains
an  epitome  of  duty.  It  is  the  admonition
which  is  given  by  the  presiding  officer,  at
the  close  of  the  ceremony  of  initiation,  to
the  candidate,  and  which  the  latter  receives
standing,  as  a  token  of  respect.  There  is
a  charge  for  each  degree,  which  is  to  be
found  in  all  the  monitors  and  manuals  from
Preston  onwards.

Charges.  The  “Masons’  Constitu-


158


CHARGES


CHARITY


tions  ”  are  old  records,  containing  a  history,
very  often  somewhat  apocryphal,  of  the
origin  and  progress  of  Masonry,  and  regu¬
lations  for  the  government  of  the  Craft.
These  regulations  are  called  “  Charges,”
and  are  generally  the  same  in  substance,
although  they  differ  in  number,  in  the  dif¬
ferent  documents.  These  charges  are  di¬
vided  into  “Articles”  and  “Poiuts;”  al¬
though  it  would  be  difficult  to  say  in  what
the  one  section  differs  in  character  from  the
other,  as  each  details  the  rules  which  should
govern  a  Mason  in  his  conduct  towards  his
“  lord,”  or  employer,  and  to  his  brother
workmen.  The  oldest  of  these  charges  is
to  be  found  in  the  York  Constitutions,  (if
they  are  authentic,)  and  consists  of  Fifteen
Articles  and  Fifteen  Points.  It  was  re¬
quired  by  the  Constitutions  of  the  time  of
Edward  III.,  “  that,  for  the  future,  at  the
making  or  admission  of  a  brother,  the  con¬
stitutions  and  charges  should  be  read.”
This  regulation  is  still  preserved  in  form,
in  modern  Lodges,  by  the  reading  of  “the
charge”  by  the  Master  to  a  candidate  at
the  close  of  the  ceremony  of  his  reception
into  a  degree.

Charges  of  1722.  The  Fraternity
had  long  been  in  possession  of  many
records,  containing  the  ancient  regulations
of  the  Order;  when,  in  1722,  the  Duke  of
Montague  being  Grand  Master  of  England,
the  Grand  Lodge  finding  fault  with  their
antiquated  arrangement,  it  was  directed
that  they  should  be  collected,  and  after  be¬
ing  properly  digested,  be  annexed  to  the
Book  of  Constitutions,  then  in  course  of
publication  under  the  superintendence  of
Dr.  James  Anderson.  This  was  accord¬
ingly  done,  and  the  document  now  well-
known  under  the  title  of  The  Old  Charges
of  the  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  constitutes,
by  universal  consent,  a  part  of  the  funda¬
mental  law  of  our  Order.  The  charges  are
divided  into  six  general  heads  of  duty,  as
follows:  1.  Concerning  God  and  religion.
2.  Of  the  civil  magistrate,  supreme  and
subordinate.  3.  Of  Lodges.  4.  Of  Mas¬
ters,  Wardens,  Fellows,  and  Apprentices.
5.  Of  the  management  of  the  Craft  in  work¬
ing.  6.  Of  behavior  under  different  cir¬
cumstances,  and  in  various  conditions.
These  charges  contain  succinct  directions
for  the  proper  discharge  of  a  Mason’s  du¬
ties,  in  whatever  position  he  may  be  placed,
and  are,  as  modern  researches  have  shown,
a  collation  of  the  charges  contained  in  the
Old  Records,  and  from  them  have  been
abridged,  or  by  them  suggested,  all  those
well-known  directions  found  in  our  moni¬
tors,  which  Masters  are  accustomed  to  read
to  candidates  on  their  reception.  See
Records,  Old.

Charity.  “  Though  I  speak  with  the  I


tongues  of  men  and  of  angels,  and  have  not
charity,  I  am  become  as  sounding  brass,  or
a  tinkling  cymbal.  And  though  I  have  the
gift  of  prophecy,  and  understand  all  mys¬
teries  and  knowledge,  and  have  all  faith,  so
that  I  could  remove  mountains,  and  have
not  charity,  I  am  nothing.”  (1  Corinth,
xiii.  1,  2.)  Such  was  the  language  of  an
eminent  apostle  of  the  Christian  church,
and  such  is  the  sentiment  that  constitutes
the  cementing  bond  of  Freemasonry.  The
apostle,  in  comparing  it  with  faith  and
hope,  calls  it  the  greatest  of  the  three,  and
hence  in  Masonry  it  is  made  the  topmost
round  of  its  mystic  ladder.  We  must  not
fall  into  the  too  common  error  that  charity
is  only  that  sentiment  of  commiseration
which  leads  us  to  assist  the  poor  with  pecu¬
niary  donations.  Its  Masonic,  as  well  as
its  Christian  application  is  more  noble  and
more  extensive.  The  word  used  by  the
apostle  is,  in  the  original,  ’ayd-r/,  or  love,  a
word  denoting  that  kindly  state  of  mind
which  renders  a  person  full  of  good-will
and  affectionate  regard  towards  others.
John  Wesley  expressed  his  regret  that  the
Greek  had  not  been  correctly  translated  as
love  instead  of  charity,  so  that  the  apostolic
triad  of  virtues  would  have  been,  not  “  faith,
hope,  and  charity,”  but  “  faith,  hope,  and
love.”  Then  would  we  have  understood
the  comparison  made  by  St.  Paul,  when  he
said,  “  Though  I  bestow'  all  my  goods  to
feed  the  poor,  and  though  I  give  my  body
to  be  burned,  and  have  not  love,  it  profiteth
me  nothing.”  Guided  by  this  sentiment,
the  true  Mason  will  “suffer  long  and  he
kind.”  He  will  be  slow  to  anger  and  easy
to  forgive.  He  will  stay  his  falling  brother
by  gentle  admonition,  and  warn  him  with
kindness  ofapproaching  danger.  He  will  not
open  his  ear  to  his  slanderers,  and  will  close
his  lips  against  all  reproach.  His  faults
and  his  follies  will  be  locked  in  his  breast,
and  the  prayer  for  mercy  will  ascend  to
Jehovah  for  his  brother’s  sins.  Nor  will
these  sentiments  of  benevolence  be  confined
to  those  who  are  bound  to  him  by  ties  of
kindred  or  worldly  friendship  alone ;  but,
extending  them  throughout  the  globe,  he
will  love  and  cherish  all  who  sit  beneath
the  broad  canopy  of  our  universal  Lodge.
For  it  is  the  boast  of  our  Institution,  that
a  Mason,  destitute  and  worthy,  may  find  in
every  clime  a  brother,  and  in  every  land  a
home.

Charity, Committee  on.  See  Com¬
mittee  on  Charity.

Charity  Fund.  Many  Lodges  and
Grand  Lodges  have  a  fund  especially  ap¬
propriated  to  charitable  purposes,  and
which  is  not  used  for  the  disbursement  of
the  current  expenses,  but  which  is  appro¬
priated  to  the  relief  of  indigent  brethren,


CHARLATAN


CHARTER


159


their  widows  and  orphans.  The  charity
fund  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,
which  was  bequeathed  to  it  by  Stephen
Girard,  and  which  is  the  largest  in  this
country,  considerably  exceeds  fifty  thou¬
sand  dollars.

Charlatan.  A  charlatan  is  a  babbling
mountebank,  who  imposes  on  the  populace
by  large  pretensions  and  high  sounding
words.  A  charlatan  in  Masonry  is  one  who
seeks  by  a  display  of  pompous  ceremonial,
and  often  by  claims  to  supernatural  powers,
to  pervert  the  institution  of  Masonry  to
the  acquisition  of  gain,  or  the  gratification
of  a  paltry  ambition.  Every  man,  says  a
distinguished  writer,  is  a  charlatan  wrho  ex¬
torts  money  by  charging  for  sixpenny  trash
the  amount  that  should  only  be  paid  for
works  of  science,  and  that,  too,  under  the
plea  of  conveying  knowledge  that  cannot
otherwise  be  obtained  (Load.  Freem.  Mag.,
1844,  p.  505).  The  eighteenth  century  pre¬
sented  many  examples  of  these  Masonic
charlatans,  of  whom  by  far  the  greatest
was  Cagliostro;  nor  has  the  nineteenth
century  been  entirely  without  them.

Charlemagne.  The  great  Charles,
King  of  France,  who  ascended  the  throne
in  the  year  768,  is  claimed  by  some  Masonic
writers  as  a  patron  of  Masonry.  This  is
perhaps  because  architecture  flourished  in
France  during  his  reign,  and  because  he
encouraged  the  arts  by  inviting  the  archi¬
tects  and  travelling  Freemasons,  who  were
then  principally  confined  to  Italy,  to  visit
France  and  engage  in  the  construction  of
important  edifices.

Charles  Martel.  He  was  the  founder
of  the  Carlovingian  dynasty,  and  governed
France  withsupreme  power  from  716  to  741,
under  the  title  of  Duke  of  the  Franks.  He
is  claimed  by  the  authors  of  the  Old  Records
as  one  of  the  patrons  of  Masonry.  Thus,
the  Landsdowne  manuscript  says:  “There
was  one  of  the  Royall  Line  of  France  called
Chariest  Marshall,  and  he  was  a  man  that
loved  well  the  said  Craft  and  took  upon
him  the  Rules  and  Manners,  and  after  that
By  the  Grace  of  God  he  was  elect  to  be
the  King  ot  France,  and  when  he  was  in
his  Estate  he  helped  to  make  those  Masons
that  were  now,  and  sett  them  on  Work  and
gave  them  Charges  and  Manners  and  good
pay  as  he  had  learned  of  other  Masons,  and
confirmed  them  a  Charter  from  yeare  to
yeare  to  hold  their  Assembly  when  they
would,  and  cherished  them  right  well,  and
thus  came  this  Noble  Craft  into  France.”

Rebold  {Hist.  Gen.)  has  accepted  this
legend  as  authentic,  and  says:  “In  740,
Charles  Martel,  who  reigned  in  France
under  the  title  of  Mayor  of  the  Palace,  at
the  request  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings,  sent
many  workmen  and  Masters  into  England.”


Charles  I.,  and  SI.  For  their  sup¬
posed  connection  with  the  origin  of  Free¬
masonry,  see  Stuart  Masonry.

Charles  XIII.  The  Duke  of  Siider-
manland  was  distinguished  for  his  attach¬
ment  to  Masonry.  In  1809  he  ascended  the
throne  of  Sweden  under  the  title  of  Charles
XIII.  Having  established  the  Masonic
order  of  knighthood  of  that  name,  he  ab¬
dicated  in  favor  of  Charles  John  Berna-
dotte,  but  always  remained  an  active  and
zealous  member  of  the  Order.  There  is  no
king  on  record  so  distinguished  for  his  at¬
tachment  to  Freemasonry  as  Charles  XIII.,
of  Sweden,  and  to  him  the  Swedish  Masons
are  in  a  great  measure  indebted  for  the
high  position  that  the  Order  has  maintained
during  the  present  century  in  that  country.

Charles  XIII.,  Order  of.  An  order
of  knighthood  instituted  in  1811  by  Charles
XIII.,  King  of  Sweden,  and  which  was  to
be  conferred  only  on  the  principal  digni¬
taries  of  the  Masonic  institution  in  his  do¬
minions.  In  the  manifesto  establishing
the  Order,  the  king  says:  “To  give  to
this  society  (the  Masonic)  a  proof  of  our
gracious  sentiments  towards  it,  we  w'ill  and
ordain  that  its  first  dignitaries  to  the
number  which  we  may  determine,  shall  in
future  be  decorated  with  the  most  intimate
proof  of  our  confidence,  and  which  shall  be
for  them  a  distinctive  mark  of  the  highest
dignity.”  The  number  of  Knights  are
twenty-seven,  all  Masons,  and  the  King  of
Sweden  is  the  perpetual  Grand  Master.
The  color  of  the  ribbon  is  red,  and  the
jewel  a  maltese  cross  pendent  from  an  im¬
perial  crown.

Charleston.  A  city  in  the  United
States  of  America,  and  the  metropolis  of
the  State  of  South  Carolina.  It  was  there
that  the  first  Supreme  Council  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  was
established  in  1801,  whence  all  other  Su¬
preme  Councils  have  emanated,  directly  or
indirectly.  Hence,  it  has  assumed  the
title  of  “Mother  Council  of  the  world.”
Its  seat  was  removed  in  1870  to  the  city  of
Washington.  See  Scottish  Hite.

Charms,  Magical.  See  Talisman.

Chart.  1.  A  map  on  which  is  delineated
the  emblems  of  a  degree,  to  be  used  for  the
instruction  of  candidates,  formerly  called  a
carpet,  which  see.  2.  The  title  given  by-
Jeremy  L.  Cross  to  his  Hieroglyphic
Monitor,  which  acquired  on  its  first  ap¬
pearance  in  the  Lodges  of  America  a  pop¬
ularity  that  it  has  not  yet  entirely  lost.
Hence  the  word  chart  is  still  sometimes
used  colloquially  and  improperly  to  desig¬
nate  any  other  Masonic  manual  of  moni¬
torial  instruction.

Charter.  Often  used  for  Warrant  of
Constitution,  which  see.


160


CHARTERED


CHEREAU


Chartered  Lodge.  A  Lodge  work-  I
ing  under  the  authority  of  a  Charter  or
Warrant  of  Constitution  issued  by  a  Grand  '
Lodge  as  distinguished  from  a  Lodge  work¬
ing  under  a  dispensation  issued  by  a  Grand
Master.  Chartered  Lodges  only  are  entitled
to  representation  in  the  Grand  Lodge.
They  alone  can  make  by-laws,  elect  mem¬
bers,  or  have  their  officers  installed.  They
are  the  constituent  bodies  of  a  jurisdiction,
and  by  their  representatives  compose  the
Grand  Lodge.

Charter  Member.  A  Mason  whose
name  is  attached  to  the  petition  upon  which
a  Charter  or  Warrant  of  Constitution  has
been  granted  to  a  Lodge,  Chapter,  or  other
subordinate  body.

Charter  of  Cologne.  See  Cologne,
Charier  of.

Charter  of  Transmission.  See

Transmission,  Charter  of.

Chasidim.  In  Hebrew,  D’l’Cn.
meaning  saints.  The  name  of  a  sect  which
existed  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees,  and
which  was  organized  for  the  purpose  of  op¬
posing  innovations  upon  the  Jewish  faith.
Their  essential  principles  were  to  observe
all  the  ritual  laws  of  purification,  to  meet
frequently  for  devotion,  to  submit  to  acts
of  self-denial  and  mortification,  to  have  all
things  in  common,  and  sometimes  to  with¬
draw  from  society  and  to  devote  themselves
to  contemplation.  Lawrie,  who  seeks  to
connect  them  with  the  Masonic  institution
as  a  continuation  of  the  Masons  of  the  Solo¬
monic  era,  describes  them  as  “  a  religious
Fraternity,  or  an  order  of  the  Knights  of
the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  who  bound
themselves  to  adorn  the  porches  of  that
magnificent  structure,  and  to  preserve  it
from  injury  aud  decay.  This  association
was  composed  of  the  greatest  men  of  Israel,
who  were  distinguished  for  their  charitable
and  peaceful  dispositions,  and  always  sig¬
nalized  themselves  by  their  ardent  zeal  for
the  purity  and  preservation  of  the  Temple.”

Chasianier,  Benedict.  A  French
Mason,  who  in  the  year  1767  introduced
into  England  a  modification  of  the  Rite
of  Pernetty,  in  nine  degrees,  and  estab-
tished  a  Lodge  in  London  under  the  name
of  the  “Illuminated  Theosophists;”  which,
however,  according  to  Lenning,  soon  aban¬
doned  the  Masonic  forms,  and  was  con¬
verted  into  a  mere  theosophic  sect,  intended
to  propagate  the  religious  system  of  Sweden¬
borg.  Mr.  White,  in  his  Life  of  Emanuel
Swedenborg,  (Lond.,  1868,  p.  683.)  gives  an
account  of  “  The  Theosophical  Society,  in¬
stituted  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  the
Heavenly  Doctrines  of  the  New  Jerusalem
by  translating,  printing,  and  publishing
the  theological  writings  of  Emanuel  Swe¬
denborg.”  This  society  was  formed  in  ;


1784,  and  met  on  Sundays  and  Thursdays
at  chambers  in  New  Court,  Middle  Temple,
for  the  discussion  of  Swedenborg’s  writings.
Among  the  twenty-five  persons  mentioned
by  White  as  having  either  joined  the  so¬
ciety  or  sympathized  with  its  object,  we
find  the  name  of  “  Benedict  Chastanier,
French  Surgeon,  62  Tottenham  Court.”
The  nine  degrees  of  Chastanier’s  Rite  of
Illuminated  Theosophists  are  as  follows:
1,  2,  and  3,  Symbolic  degrees ;  4,  5,  6,  The¬
osophic  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,  and
Master;  7,  Sublime  Scottish  Mason,  or  Ce¬
lestial  Jerusalem;  8,  Blue  Brother;  and  9,
Red  Brother.

Chastity.  In  the  Halliwell  MS.  of
the  Constitutions  of  Masonry,  written  not
later  than  the  latter  part  of  the  fourteenth
century,  and  purporting  to  be  a  copy  of  the
Regulations  adopted  at  York  in  926,  the
seventh  point  is  in  these  words  :

“  Thou  schal  not  by  thy  maystres  wyf  lv,

Ny  by  thy  felows  yn  no  manner  wyse,

Lest  the  Craft  wolde  the  despyse;

Ny  by  thy  felows  eoncubvne,

No  more  thou  woldest  be  dede  by  thyne.”

Again,  in  the  Constitutions  known  as  the
Matthew  Cooke  MS.,  the  date  of  which  is
about  the  latter  part  of  the  fifteenth  century,
the  same  regulation  is  enforced  in  these
words:  “The  7th  Point.  That  he  covet
not  the  wyfe  ne  the  daughter  of  his
masters,  neither  of  his  fellows  but  if  [un¬
less]  it  be  in  marriage.”  So  all  through
the  Old  Constitutions  and  Charges,  we  find
this  admonition  to  respect  the  chastity  of
our  brethren’s  wives  and  daughters;  an  ad¬
monition  which,  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to
say,  is  continued  to  this  day.

Chasuble.  The  outer  dress  worn  by
the  priest  at  the  altar  service,  and  is  an
imitation  of  the  old  Roman  toga.  It  is  a
circular  cloth,  which  falls  down  over  the
body  so  as  completely  to  cover  it,  with  an
aperture  in  the  centre  for  the  head  to  pass
through.  It  is  used  in  the  ceremonies  of
the  Rose  Croix  degree.

Checkered  Floor.  See  Mosaic  Pave¬
ment.

C’hef-d’oeuyre.  It  was  a  custom
among  many  of  the  gilds,  and  especially
among  the  Compagnons  da  Devoir,  who
sprung  up  in  the  sixteenth  century  in
France,  on  the  decay  of  Freemasonry  in
that  kingdom,  and  as  one  of  its  results,  to
require  every  Apprentice,  before  he  could
be  admitted  to  the  freedom  of  the  gild,
to  present  a  piece  of  finished  work  as  a

Eroof  of  his  skill  in  the  art  in  which  he  had
een  instructed.  The  piece  of  work  was
called  his  chef -d’ oeuvre,  or  masterpiece.

Chereau.  Antoine  Guillianme.

A  painter  in  Paris,  who  published,  in  1806,


CHERUBIM


CHINA


161


two  hermetico-philosophical  brochures  en¬
titled,  Explication  de  la  Pierre  Cubique,  and
Explication  de  la  Croix  Philosophique ;  or
Explanations  of  the  Cubical  Stone  and  of
the  Philosophical  Cross.'  These  works  are
brief,  but  give  much  interesting  informa¬
tion  on  the  ritualism  and  symbolism  of  the
high  degrees.  They  have  been  republished
by  Tessier  in  his  Manuel  General ,  without,
however,  any  acknowledgment  to  the  orig¬
inal  author.

Cherubim.  The  second  order  of  the
angelic  hierarchy,  the  first  being  the  sera¬
phim.  The  two  cherubim  that  overtopped
the  mercy-seat  or  covering  of  the  ark,  in
the  holy  of  holies,  were  placed  there  by
Moses,  in  obedience  to  the  orders  of  God :
“  And  thou  shalt  make  two  cherubim  of
gold,  of  beaten  work  shalt  thou  make  them,
in  the  two  ends  of  the  mercy-seat.  And
the  cherubim  shall  stretch  forth  their
wings  on  high,  covering  the  mercy -seat
with  their  wings,  and  their  faces  shall  look
one  to  another;  towards  the  mercy -seat
shall  the  faces  of  the  cherubim  be.”  (Exod.
xxv.  17,  19.)  It  was  between  these  cheru¬
bim  that  the  Sliekinah  or  divine  presence
rested,  and  from  which  issued  the  Bathkol
or  voice  of  God.  Of  the  form  of  these
cherubim,  we  are  ignorant.  Josephus  says,
that  they  resembled  no  known  creature,
but  that  Moses  made  them  in  the  form  in
which  he  saw  them  about  the  throne  of
God ;  others,  deriving  their  ideas  from  what
is  said  of  them  by  Ezekiel,  Isaiah,  and  St.
John,  describe  them  as  having  the  face  and
breast  of  a  man,  the  wings  of  an  eagle,  the
belly  of  a  lion,  and  the  legs  and  feet  of  an
ox,  which  three  animals,  with  man,  are  the
symbols  of  strength  and  wisdom.  But  all
agree  in  this,  that  they  had  wings,  and  that
these  wings  were  extended.  The  cherubim
were  purely  symbolic.  But  although  there
is  great  diversity  of  opinion  as  to  their  ex¬
act  signification,  yet  there  is  a  very  general
agreement  that  they  allude  to  and  sym¬
bolize  the  protecting  and  overshadowing
power  of  the  Deity.  Reference  is  made  to
the  extended  wings  of  the  cherubim  in  the
degree  of  lloyal  Master.

Cliesed.  A  word  which  is  most  gen¬
erally  corrupted  into  Hesed.  It  is  the  He¬
brew  ion,  and  signifies  mercy.  Hence,
it  very  appropriately  refers  to  that  act  of
kindness  and  compassion  which  is  com¬
memorated  in  the  degree  of  Select  Master
of  the  American  system.  It  is  the  fourth
of  the  Kabbalistic  Sephiroth,  and  is  com¬
bined  in  a  triad  with  Beauty  and  Justice.

Chevalier.  Employed  by  the  French
Masons  as  the  equivalent  of  Knight  in  the
name  of  any  degree  in  which  the  latter
word  is  used  by  English  Masons,  as  Cheva¬
lier  du  Soleil,  for  the  Knight  of  the  Sun,  or
V  11


Chevalier  de  V  Orient  for  Knight  of  the
East.  The  German  word  is  Ritter.

chibbelum.  A  significant  word  used
in  the  rituals  of  the  last  century,  which  de¬
fine  it  to  mean  “a  worthy  Mason.”  It  is  a
corruption  of  Giblim.

Chicago,  Congress  of.  A  conven¬
tion  of  distinguished  Masons  of  the  United
States,  held  at  the  city  of  Chicago  in  Sep¬
tember,  1859,  during  the  session  of  the
Grand  Encampment  and  General  Grand
Chapter,  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  a
General  Grand  Lodge,  or  a  Permanent  Ala-
sonic  Congress.  Its  results  were  not  of  a
successful  character;  and  the  death  of  its
moving  spirit,  Cyril  Pearl,  which  occurred
soon  after,  put  an  end  to  all  future  at¬
tempts  to  carry  into  effect  any  of  its  pre¬
liminary  proceedings.

Chief  of  the  Tabernacle.  The
twenty-third  degree  in  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  It  commemorates
the  institution  of  the  order  of  the  priest¬
hood  in  Aaron  and  his  sons  Eleazar  and
Ithamar.  Its  principal  officers  are  three,
a  Sovereign  Sacrificer  and  two  High  Priests,
now  called  by  the  Supreme  Councils  of
America  the  Most  Excellent  High  Priest
and  Excellent  Priests,  and  the  members  of
the  “  Hierarchy”  or  “  Court,”  as  the  Lodge
is  now  styled,  are  called  Levites.  The
apron  is  white,  lined  with  deep  scarlet  and
bordered  with  red,  blue,  and  purple  ribbon.
A  golden  chandelier  of  seven  branches  is
painted  or  embroidered  on  the  centre
of  the  apron.  The  jewel,  which  is  a
thurible,  is  worn  from  a  broad  yellow,
purple,  blue,  and  scarlet  sash  from  the  left
shoulder  to  the  right  hip.

Chief  of  the  Twelve  Tribes.
( Chef  des  douze  Tribus.)  The  eleventh  de¬
gree  of  the  Chapter  of  Emperors  of  the
East  and  West.  It  is  also  called  Illustrious
Elect.

Chiefs  of  Masonry.  A  title  for¬
merly  given  in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite  to  Princes  of  Jerusalem.  It
seems  now  to  be  more  appropriate  to  In¬
spectors  General  of  the  thirty-third  degree.

Chili.  Freemasonry  was  introduced
into  Chili,  in  1841,  by  the  Grand  Orient  of
France.  Lodges  were  subsequently  organ¬
ized  in  1850  and  1851  by  the  Grand  Lodges
of  Massachusetts  and  California.  On  the
20th  of  April  a  Grand  Lodge  was  formed,
and  a  Grand  Chapter  soon  after.

China.  Masonry  was  introduced  many
years  ago  into  China  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England.  A  Provincial  Grand  Lodge
exists  at  Hong-Kong,  and  several  Lodges.
These  are  mainly  supported  by  the  foreign
population.  There  are  also  Chapters  and  un
Encampment  of  Knights  Templars,  under
the  English  authority.


162


CHINESE


CHRISTIANIZATION


Chinese  Secret  Societies.  In

China,  as  in  all  other  countries,  secret  so¬
cieties  have  existed,  such  as  the  Tien-tee-
whee,  or  Association  of  Heaven  and  Earth,
and  the  Tien-lee,  or  Society  of  Celestial
Reason.  But  the  attempt  to  trace  any
analog)’  between  them  and  Freemasonry
is  a  mistaken  one.  These  societies  have  in
general  been  of  a  political  character,  with
revolutionary  tendencies,  and  as  such  have
been  prohibited  by  the  government,  some¬
times  under  the  penalty  of  the  death  or
banishment  of  their  members.  Their  simi¬
larity  to  Masonry  consists  only  in  these
points:  that  they  have  forms  of  initiation,
an  esoteric  instruction,  and  secret  modes  of
recognition.  Beyond  these  all  further  re¬
semblance  fails.

Chisel.  In  the  American  Rite  the
chisel  is  one  of  the  working  tools  of  a
Mark  Master,  and  symbolizes  the  effects  of
education  on  the  human  mind.  For  as  the
artist,  by  the  aid  of  this  instrument,  gives
form  and  regularity  to  the  shapeless  mass
of  stone,  so  education,  by  cultivating  the
ideas  and  by  polishing  the  rude  thoughts,
transforms  the  ignorant  savage  into  the
civilized  being.

In  the  English  ritual,  the  chisel  is  one
of  the  working  tools  of  the  Entered  Ap¬
prentice,  with  the  same  reference  to  the
advantages  of  education.  Preston  (B.  IL,
Sect,  vi.,)  thus  elaborates  its  symbolism  as
one  of  the  implements  of  Masonry  :  “  The
chisel  demonstrates  the  advantages  of  dis¬
cipline  and  education.  The  mind,  like  the
diamond  in  its  original  state,  is  unpolished;
but  as  the  effects  of  the  chisel  on  the  ex¬
ternal  coat  soon  presents  to  view  the  latent
beauties  of  the  diamond,  so  education  dis¬
covers  the  latent  virtues  and  draws  them
forth  to  range  the  large  field  of  matter  and
space,  in  order  to  display  the  summit  of
human  knowledge,  —  our  duty  to  God  and
to  man.”  But  the  idea  is  not  original
with  Preston.  It  is  found  in  Hutchin¬
son,  who,  however,  does  not  claim  it  as
his  awn.  It  formed,  most  probably,  a  por¬
tion  of  the  lectures  of  the  period.  In  the
French  system,  the  chisel  is  placed  on  the
tracing  board  of  the  Fellow  Craft  as  an
implement  with  which  to  work  upon  and
polish  the  Rough  Ashlar.  It  has,  there¬
fore,  there  the  same  symbolic  signification.

Chivalry.  The  origin  of  chivalry  is
involved  in  very  great  obscurity.  Almost
every  author  who  has  written  on  this  sub¬
ject  has  adopted  an  hypothesis  of  his  own.
Some  derive  the  institution  from  the  eques¬
trian  order  of  ancient  Rome,  while  others
trace  it  to  the  tribes  who,  under  the  name
of  Northmen,  about  the  ninth  century,
invaded  the  southern  parts  of  Europe.
Warburton  ascribes  the  origin  of  chivalry


j  to  the  Arabians;  Pinkerton,  Mallet,  and
I  Percy,  to  the  Scandinavians.  Clavel  de-
rives  it  from  the  secret  societies  of  the
Persians,  which  were  the  remains  of  the
mysteries  of  Mithras.  In  Christendom,  it
gave  rise  to  the  orders  of  knighthood,  some
of  which  have  been  incorporated  into  the
Masonic  system.  See  Knighthood.

Christ,  Order  of.  After  the  over¬
throw  of  the  Order  of  Knights  Templars
throughout  Europe,  Dennis  I.,  King  of
Portugal,  in  1317  solicited  of  Pope  John
XXII.  permission  to  re-establish  the  Order
of  the  Temple  in  his  dominions  under  the
name  of  the  Order  of  Christ,  and  to  restore
to  it  the  possessions  which  had  been  wrested
from  the  Templars.  The  pope  consented,
approved  the  statutes  which  had  been  sub¬
mitted  to  him,  and,  in  1319,  confirmed  the
institution,  reserving  to  himself  and  to  his
successors  the  right  of  creating  knights,
which  has  given  rise  to  the  pontifical
branch  of  the  Order  which  exists  at  Rome.
The  knights  follow  the  rule  of  St.  Bene¬
dict,  and  conform  in  all  points  to  the  stat¬
utes  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple.  The
Grand  Mastership  is  vested  in  the  king  of
Portugal,  and  the  Order  having  been  secu¬
larized  in  1789,  the  members  were  divided
into  the  three  classes  of  six  Grand  Crosses,
four  hundred  and  fifty  Commanders,  and
an  unlimited  number  of  knights.  It  was
designated  the  Most  Noble  Order,  and  none
but  those  nobly  descended,  of  unsullied  char¬
acter,  could  be  admitted.  That  the  grand¬
father  had  been  a  mechanic  was  an  impedi¬
ment  to  the  exaltation  even  of  knights  of
the  third  class.  The  Grand  Crosses  and  Com¬
manders  had  generally  valuable  grants  and
great  pri  vileges ;  the  latter  were  also  enjoyed
by  the  knights,  with  pensions  with  rever¬
sion  to  their  wives.

Christianization  of  Freema¬
sonry.  The  interpretation  of  the  sym¬
bols  of  Freemasonry  from  a  Christian
point  of  view  is  a  theory  adopted  by  some
of  the  most  distinguished  Masonic  writers
of  England  and  "this  country,  but  one
which  I  think  does  not  belong  to  the  an¬
cient  system.  Hutchinson,  and  after  him
Oliver,  —  profoundly  philosophical  as  are
the  Masonic  speculations  of  both,  —  have,
I  am  constrained  to  believe,  fallen  into  a
great  error  in  calling  the  Master  Mason’s
degree  a  Christian  institution.  It  is  true
that  it  embraces  within  its  scheme  the  great
truths  of  Christianity  upon  the  subject  of
the  immortality  of  the  soul  and  the  resur¬
rection  of  the  body ;  but  this  was  to  be
presumed,  because  Freemasonry  is  truth,
and  all  truth  must  be  identical.  But  the
origin  of  each  is  different ;  their  histories
are  dissimilar.  The  principles  of  Free-
i  masonry  preceded  the  advent  of  Chris-


CHURCH


CIPHER


163


tianity.  Its  symbols  and  its  legends  are
derived  from  the  Solomonic  Temple  and
from  the  people  even  anterior  to  that.  Its
religion  comes  from  the  ancient  priesthood ;
its  faith  was  that  primitive  one  of  Noah
and  his  immediate  descendants.  If  Ma¬
sonry  were  simply  a  Christian  institution,
the  Jew  and  the  Moslem,  the  Brahman  and
the  Buddhist,  could  not  conscientiously
partake  of  its  illumination.  But  its  uni¬
versality  is  its  boast.  In  its  language  citi¬
zens  of  every  nation  may  converse;  at  its
altar  men  of  all  religions  may  kneel ;  to
its  creed  disciples  of  every  faith  may  sub¬
scribe.

Yet  it  cannot  be  denied  that  since  the
advent  of  Christianity  a  Christian  element
has  been  almost  imperceptibly  infused  into
the  Masonic  system,  at  least  among  Chris¬
tian  Masons.  This  has  been  a  necessity;
for  it  is  the  tendency  of  every  predomi¬
nant  religion  to  pervade  with  its  influence
all  that  surrounds  it  or  is  about  it,  whether
religious,  political,  or  social.  This  arises
from  a  need  of  the  human  heart.  To  the
man  deeply  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  his
religion,  there  is  an  almost  unconscious
desire  to  accommodate  and  adapt  all  the
business  and  the  amusements  of  life,  —  the
labors  and  the  employments  of  his  every¬
day  existence,  —  to  the  in-dwelling  faith  of
his  soul.

The  Christian  Mason,  therefore,  while
acknowledging  and  appreciating  the  great
doctrines  taught  in  Masonry,  and  also  while
grateful  that  these  doctrines  were  preserved
in  the  bosom  of  his  ancient  Order  at  a  time
when  they  were  unknown  to  the  multitudes
of  the  surrounding  nations,  is  still  anxious
to  give  to  them  a  Christian  character;  to
invest  them,  in  some  measure,  with  the  pe¬
culiarities  of  his  own  creed,  and  to  bring
the  interpretation  of  their  symbolism  more
nearly  home  to  his  own  religious  senti¬
ments.

The  feeling  is  an  instinctive  one,  belong¬
ing  to  the  noblest  aspirations  of  our  human
nature;  and  hence  we  find  Christian  Ma¬
sonic  writers  indulging  in  it  to  an  almost
unwarrantable  excess,  and,  by  the  extent
of  their  sectarian  interpretations,  materially
affecting  the  cosmopolitan  character  of  the
Institution.

This  tendency  to  Christianization  has,  in
some  instances,  been  so  universal,  and  has
prevailed  for  so  long  a  period,  that  certain
symbols  and  myths  have  been,  in  this  way,
so  deeply  and  thoroughly  imbued  with  the
Christian  element  as  to  leave  those  who
have  not  penetrated  into  the  cause  of  this
peculiarity,  in  doubt  whether  they  should
attribute  to  the  symbol  an  ancient  or  a
modern  and  Christian  origin.

Church,  Freemasons  of  the.


An  Architectural  College  was  organized  in
London,  in  the  year  1842,  under  the  name
of  “  Freemasons  of  the  Church  for  the  Re¬
covery,  Maintenance,  and  Furtherance  of
the  True  Principles  and  Practice  of  Archi¬
tecture.”  The  founders  announced  their  ob¬
jects  to  be  “the  rediscovery  of  the  ancient
principles  of  architecture;  the  sanction  of
good  principles  of  building,  and  the  con¬
demnation  of  bad  ones ;  the  exercise  of
scientific  and  experienced  judgment  in  the
choice  and  use  of  the  most  proper  mate¬
rials  ;  the  infusion,  maintenance,  and  ad¬
vancement  of  science  throughout  architec¬
ture;  and  eventually,  by  developing  the
powers  of  the  College  upon  a  just  and
beneficial  footing,  to  reform  the  whole  prac¬
tice  of  architecture,  to  raise  it  from  its  pres¬
ent  vituperated  condition,  and  to  bring
around  it  the  same  unquestioned  honor
which  is  at  present  enjoyed  by  almost  every
other  profession.”  The  Builder,  vol.  i.,
p.  23.

One  of  their  own  members  has  said  that
“  the  title  was  not  intended  to  express  any
conformity  with  the  general  body  of  Free¬
masons,  but  rather  as  indicative  of  the  pro¬
fessed  views  of  the  College,  namely,  the  re¬
covery,  maintenance,  and  furtherance  of
the  free  principles  and  practice  of  architec¬
ture.”  And  that,  in  addition,  they  made
it  an  object  of  their  exertions  to  preserve
or  effect  the  restoration  of  architectural  re¬
mains  of  antiquity  threatened  unneces¬
sarily  with  demolition  or  endangered  by
decay.  But  it  is  evident,  from  the  close
connection  of  modern  Freemasonry  with
the  building  gilds  of  the  Middle  Ages,  that
any  investigations  into  the  condition  of
mediaeval  architecture  must  throw  light  on
Masonic  history.

Cipher  Writing.  Cryptography,  or
the  art  of  writing  in  cipher,  so  as  to  com
ceal  the  meaning  of  what  is  written  from
all  except  those  who  possess  the  key,  may
be  traced  to  remote  antiquity.  De  la
Guilletiere  ( Lacedcemon )  attributes  its  ori¬
gin  to  the  Spartans,  and  Polybius  says  that
more  than  two  thousand  years  ago  MSneas
Tacitus  had  collected  more  than  twenty
different  kinds  of  cipher  which  were  then
in  use.  Kings  and  generals  communicated
their  messages  to  officers  in  distant  prov¬
inces,  by  means  of  a  preconcerted  cipher;
and  the  system  has  always  been  employed
wherever  there  was  a  desire  or  a  necessity
to  conceal  from  all  but  those  who  were  en¬
titled  to  the  knowledge  the  meaning  of  a
written  document.

The  Druids,  who  were  not  permitted  by
the  rules  of  their  Order  to  commit  any  part
of  their  ritual  to  ordinary  writing,  pre¬
served  the  memory  of  it  by  the  use  of  the
letters  of  the  Greek  alphabet.  The  Kab-


164


CIPHER


CIPHER


balists  concealed  many  words  by  writing
them  backwards:  a  method  which  is  still
pursued  by  the  French  Masons.  The  old
alchemists  also  made  use  of  cipher  writing,
in  order  to  conceal  those  processes  the
knowledge  of  which  was  intended  only  for
the  adepts.  Thus  Roger  Bacon,  who  dis¬
covered  the  composition  of  gunpowder,  is
said  to  have  concealed  the  names  of  the  in¬
gredients  under  a  cipher  made  by  a  trans¬
position  of  the  letters.

Cornelius  Agrippa  tells  us,  in  his  Occult
Philosophy,  that  the  ancients  accounted  it
unlawful  to  write  the  mysteries  of  God
with  those  characters  with  which  profane
and  vulgar  things  were  written ;  and  he
cites  Porphyry  as  saying  that  the  ancients
desired  to  conceal  God,  and  divine  virtues,
by  sensible  figures  which  were  visible,  yet
signified  invisible  things,  and  therefore  de¬
livered  their  great  mysteries  in  sacred
letters,  and  explained  them  by  symbolical
representations.  Porphyry  here,  undoubt¬
edly,  referred  to  the  invention  and  use  of
hieroglyphics  by  the  Egyptian  priests;  but
these  hieroglyphic  characters  were  in  fact
nothing  else  but  a  form  of  cipher  intended
to  conceal  their  instructions  from  the  un¬
initiated  profane.

Peter  Aponas,  an  astrological  writer  of
the  thirteenth  century,  gives  us  some  of  the
old  ciphers  which  were  used  by  the  Kabba-
lists,  and  among  others  one  alphabet  called
“  the  passing  of  the  river,”  which  is  re¬
ferred  to  in  some  of  the  high  degrees  of
Masonry.

But  we  obtain  from  Agrippa  one  alpha¬
bet  in  cipher  which  is  of  interest  to  Masons,
and  which  he  says  was  once  in  great  esteem
among  the  Kabbalists,  but  which  has  now,
he  adds,  become  so  common  as  to  be  placed
among  profane  things.  He  describes  this
cipher  as  follows,  ( Philos .  Occult.,  lib.  iii.,
cap.  3.)  The  twenty-seven  characters  (in¬
cluding  the  finals)  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet
were  divided  into  three  classes  of  nine  in
each,  and  these  were  distributed  into  nine
squares,  made  by  the  intersection  of  two
horizontal  and  two  vertical  lines,  forming,
the  following  figure :


3

2

1

6

5

4

9

8

7

In  eacb  of  these  compartments  three
letters  were  placed;  as,  for  instance,  in  the
first  compartment,  the  first,  tenth,  and
nineteenth  letters  of  the  alphabet;  in  the


|  second  compartment,  the  second,  eleventh,
and  twentieth,  and  so  on.  The  three
letters  in  each  compartment  were  distin¬
guished  from  each  other  by  dots  or  accents.
Thus,  the  first  compartment,  or  1_,  repre¬
sented  the  first  letter,  or  ;  the  same  com¬
partment  with  a  dot,  thus,  Ll,  represented
the  tenth  letter,  or  “) ;  or  with  two  dots,
thus,  l^,  it  represented  the  nineteenth  letter,
or  p;  and  so  with  the  other  compartments ;
the  ninth  or  last  representing  the  ninth,
eighteenth,  and  twenty-seventh  letters,
or  V,  accordingly  as  it  was  figured
or  ^1,  without  a  dot  in  the  centre  or
with  one  or  two.

About  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  the
French  Masons  adopted  a  cipher  similar  to
this  in  principle,  but  varied  in  the  details,
among  which  was  the  addition  of  four
compartments,  made  by  the  oblique  inter¬
section  of  two  lines  in  the  form  of  a  St.
Andrew’s  Cross.  Thi3  cipher  was  never
officially  adopted  by  the  Masons  of  any
other  country,  but  was  at  one  time  assumed
by  the  American  Royal  Arch;  although  it
is  now  becoming  obsolete  there.  It  is,  how¬
ever,  still  recognized  in  all  the  “  Tuilleurs”
of  the  Frencn  Rite.  It  has  become  so
common  as  to  be  placed,  as  Agrippa  said
of  the  original  scheme,  “  among  profane
things.”  Its  use  would  certainly  no  longer
subserve  any  purpose  of  concealment.
Rockwell  openly  printed  it  in  his  Ahiman
Rezon  of  Georgia ;  and  it  is  often  used  by
those  who  are  not  initiated,  as  a  means  of
amusement.

There  is,  therefore,  really  no  recognized
cipher  in  use  in  Ancient  Craft  Masonry.
Brown  and  Finch,  who  printed  rituals  in¬
tended  only  for  the  use  of  Masons,  and  not
as  expositions,  invented  ciphers  for  their
own  use,  and  supplied  their  initiated  read¬
ers  with  the  key.  Without  a  key,  their
works  are  unintelligible,  except  by  the  art
of  the  decipherer.

Although  not  used  in  symbolic  Masonry,
the  cipher  is  common  in  the  high  degrees,
of  which  there  is  scarcely  one  which  has  not
its  peculiar  cipher.  But  for  the  purposes
of  concealment,  the  cipher  is  no  longer  of
any  practical  use.  The  art  of  deciphering
has  been  brought  to  so  great  a  state  of  per¬
fection  that  there  is  no  cipher  so  compli¬
cated  as  to  bid  defiance  for  many  hours  to
the  penetrating  skill  of  the  experienced  de¬
cipherer.  Hence,  the  cipher  has  gone  out
of  use  in  Masonry  as  it  has  among  diplo¬
matists,  who  are  compelled  to  communi¬
cate  with  their  respective  countries  by
methods  more  secret  than  any  that  can  be
supplied  by  a  despacch  written  in  cipher.
Edgar  A.  Poe  has  justly  said,  in  his  story
of  The  Gold  Bug,  that  “  it  may  well  be
doubted  whether  human  ingenuity  can  con-


CIRCLE


CIRCUM  AM  BUL  ATION  165


stnict  an  enigma  of  the  kind,  which  hu¬
man  ingenuity  may  not,  by  proper  appli¬
cation,  resolve.”

Circle.  The  circle  being  a  figure  which
returns  into  itself,  and  having  therefore
neither  beginning  nor  end,  it  has  been
adopted  in  the  symbology  of  all  countries
and  times  as  a  symbol  sometimes  of  the
universe  and  sometimes  of  eternity.  With
this  idea  in  the  Zoroasteric  mysteries  of
Persia,  and  frequently  in  the  Celtic  myste¬
ries  of  Druidisra,  the  temple  of  initiation
was  circular.  In  the  obsolete  lectures  of
the  old  English  system,  it  was  said  that
“  the  circle  has  ever  been  considered  sym¬
bolical  of  the  Deity ;  for  as  a  circle  appears
to  have  neither  beginning  nor  end,  it  may
be  justly  considered  a  type  of  God,  without
either  beginning  of  days  or  ending  of  years.
It  also  reminds  us  of  a  future  state,  where
we  hope  to  enjoy  everlasting  happiness  and
joy.”  But  whatever  refers  especially  to
the  Masonic  symbolism  of  the  circle  will  be
more  appropriately  contained  in  the  article
on  the  Point  within  a  Circle.

Circular  Temples.  These  were  used
in  the  initiations  of  the  religion  of  Zoroas¬
ter.  Like  the  square  temples  of  Masonry,
and  the  other  mysteries,  they  were  sym¬
bolic  of  the  world ;  and  the  symbol  was
completed  by  making  the  circumference  of
the  circle  a  representation  of  the  zodiac.
In  the  mysteries  of  Druidism  also,  the
temples  were  sometimes  circular.

Circumambulation,  Rite  of.  Cir-
cumambulation  is  the  name  given  by  sacred
archaeologists  to  that  religious  rite  in  the
ancient  initiations  which  consisted  in  a
formal  procession  around  the  altar,  or
other  holy  and  consecrated  object.  The
same  Rite  exists  in  Freemasonry.

In  ancient  Greece,  when  the  priests  were
engaged  in  the  rite  of  sacrifice,  they  and
the  people  always  walked  three  times  round
the  altar  while  singing  a  sacred  hymn.  In
making  this  procession,  great  care  was
taken  to  move  in  imitation  of  the  course
of  the  sun.  For  this  purpose,  they  com¬
menced  at  the  east,  and  passing  on  by  the
way  of  the  south  to  the  west  and  thence  by
the  north,  they  arrived  at  the  east  again.*
By  this  means,  as  it  will  be  observed,  the
right  hand  was  always  placed  to  the  altar.f

This  ceremony  the  Greeks  called  moving
f(c  6e^ia  ev  def la,  from  the  right  to  the  right,


*  The  strophe  of  the  ancient  hymn  was  sung  in
going  from  the  east  to  the  west ;  the  antistrophe
in  returning  to  the  east,  and  the  epode  while
standing  still.

t  “  After  this,”  says  Potter,  “  they  stood  about
the  altar,  and  the  priest,  turning  towards  the
right  hand,  went  round  it  and  sprinkled  it  witli
meal  and  holy  water.”  —  Antiquities  of  Greece,
B.  II.,  eh.  iv.,  p.  206.


which  was  the  direction  of  the  motion,  and
the  Romans  applied  to  it  the  term  dextro-
vorsum,  or  dextrorsum,  which  signifies  the
same  thing.  Thus,  Plautus  ( Curcul.  I.,  i.  70,)
makes  Palinurus,  a  character  in  his  comedy
of  Curcv.Uo,  say  :  “  If  you  would  do  rever¬
ence  to  the  gods,  you  must  turn  to  the
right  hand.”  Si  deos  salutas  dextroversum
censeo.  Gronovius,  in  commenting  on  this
passage  of  Plautus,  says :  “  In  worshipping
and  praying  to  the  gods,  they  were  ac¬
customed  to  turn  to  the  right  hand.”

A  hymn  of  Callimachus  has  been  pre¬
served,  which  is  said  to  have  been  chanted
by  the  priests  of  Apollo  at  Delos,  while
performing  this  ceremony  of  circumambu-
lation,  the  substance  of  which  is  “we
imitate  the  example  of  the  sun,  and  follow
his  benevolent  course.”

Among  the  Romans,  the  ceremony  of
circumambulation  was  always  used  in  the
rites  of  sacrifice,  of  expiation  or  purifica¬
tion.  Thus  Virgil  [AEn.,  vi.  229,)  describes
Chorinaeus  as  purifying  his  companions  at
the  funeral  of  Misenus,  by  passing  three
times  around  them  while  aspersing  them
with  the  lustral  waters;  and  to  do  so  conve¬
niently,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should
have  moved  with  his  right  hand  towards
them.

“  Idem  ter  socios  pura  circumt.ulit  unda,
Spargens  rore  levi  et  ramo  felicis  olivae.”

That  is :

Thrice  with  pure  water  compass’d  he  the  crew,
Sprinkling,  with  olive  branch,  the  gentle  dew.

In  fact,  so  common  was  it  to  unite  the
ceremony  of  circumambulation  with  that
of  expiation  or  purification,  or,  in  other
words,  to  make  a  circuitous  procession  in
performing  the  latter  rite,  that  the  term
lustrare,  whose  primitive  meaning  is  “to
purity,”  came  at  last  to  be  synonymous
with  circuire,  to  walk  round  anything,  and
hence  a  purification  and  a  circumambula¬
tion  were  often  expressed  by  the  same
word.

Among  the  Hindus,  the  same  rite  of  cir¬
cumambulation  has  always  been  practised.
As  an  instance,  we  may  cite  the  ceremonies
which  are  to  be  performed  by  a  Brahman,
upon  first  rising  from  bed  in  the  morning,
an  accurate  account  of  which  has  been
given  by  Mr.  Colebrooke  in  the  sixth  vol¬
ume  of  the  Asiatic  Researches.  The  priest
having  first  adored  the  sun,  while  directing
his  face  to  the  east,  then  walks  towards  the
west  by  the  way  of  the  south,  saying,  at
the  same  time,  “  I  follow  the  course  of  the
sun,”  which  he  thus  explains:  “As  the
sun  in  his  course  moves  round  the  world
by  way  of  the  south,  so  do  I  follow  that


1G6  CIRCUMSPECTION


CIVILIZATION


luminary,  to  obtain  the  benefit  arising  from
a  journey  round  the  earth  by  the  way  of
the  south.”

Lastly,  we  may  refer  to  the  preservation
of  this  Rite  among  the  Druids,  whose
“mystical  dance”  around  the  cairn,  or
sacred  stones,  was  nothing  more  nor  less
than  the  Rite  of  circumambulation.  On
these  occasions,  the  priest  always  made
three  circuits  from  east  to  west,  by  the
right  hand,  around  the  altar  or  cairn,  ac¬
companied  by  all  the  worshippers.  And  so
sacred  was  the  rite  once  considered,  that  we
learn  from  Toland  ( Celt.  Rel.  and  Learn.,
II.,  xvii.,)  that  in  the  Scottish  Isles,  once  a
principal  seat  of  the  Druidical  religion,  the
people  “  never  come  to  the  ancient  sacrific¬
ing  and  fire-hallowing  cairns,  but  they  walk
three  times  around  them,  from  east  to  west,
according  to  the  course  of  the  sun.”  This
sanctified  tour,  or  round  by  the  south,  he
observes,  is  called  Dcaseal,  as  the  contrary,
or  unhallowed  one  by  the  north,  is  called
Tmpholl.  And,  he  further  remarks,  that
this  word  Deaseal  was  derived  “  from  Deas,
the  right  (understanding  hand)  and  soil,
one  of  the  ancient  names  of  the  sun;  the
right  hand  in  this  round  being  ever  next
the  heap.”

This  Rite  of  circumambulation  undoubt¬
edly  refers  to  the  doctrine  of  sun-worship,
because  the  circumambulation  was  always
made  around  the  sacred  place,  just  as  the
sun  was  supposed  to  move  around  the
earth;  and  although  the  dogma  of  sun-
worship  does  not  of  course  exist  in  Free¬
masonry,  we  find  an  allusion  to  it  in  the
Rite  of  circumambulation,  which  it  pre¬
serves,  as  well  as  in  the  position  of  ~the
officers  of  a  Lodge  and  in  the  symbol  of  a
point  within  a  circle.

Circumspection.  A  necessary  watch¬
fulness  is  recommended  to  every  man,  but
in  a  Mason  it  becomes  a  positive  duty,  and
the  neglect  of  it  constitutes  a  heinous
crime.  On  this  subject,  the  Old  Charges
of  1722  (vi.  4,)  are  explicit.  “You  shall
be  cautious  in  your  words  and  carriage,
that  the  most  penetrating  stranger  shall
not  be  able  to  discover  or  find  out  what  is
not  proper  to  be  imitated  ;  and  sometimes
you  shall  divert  a  discourse  and  manage  it
prudently  for  the  honor  of  the  Worshipful
Fraternity.”

City  of  David.  A  section  in  the
southern  part  of  Jerusalem,  embracing
Mount  Zion,  where  a  fortress  of  the  Jebu-
sites  stood,  which  David  reduced,  and  where
he  built  a  new  palace  and  city,  to  which  he
gave  his  own  name.

City  of  the  Great  King.  Jerusa¬
lem,  so  called  in  Psalm  xlviii.  2,  and  by
the  Saviour  in  Matt.  v.  35.

Civilization  and  Freemasonry.


Those  who  investigate  in  the  proper  spirit
the  history  of  Speculative  Masonry,  will
be  strongly  impressed  with  the  peculiar
relations  that  exist  between  the  history  of
Masonry  and  that  of  civilization.  They
will  find  these  facts  to  be  patent:  that
Freemasonry  has  ever  been  the  result  of
civilization ;  that  in  the  most  ancient  times
the  spirit  of  Masonry  and  the  spirit  of
civilization  have  always  gone  together;
that  the  progress  of  both  has  been  with
equal  strides;  that  where  there  has  been
no  appearance  of  civilization  there  ha3
been  no  trace  of  Masonry;  and,  finally,
that  wherever  Masonry  has  existed  in  any
of  its  forms,  there  it  has  been  surrounded
and  sustained  by  civilization,  which  social
condition  it  in  turn  elevated  and  purified.

Speculative  Masonry,  therefore,  seems
to  have  been  a  necessary  result  of  civiliza¬
tion.  It  is,  even  in  its  primitive  and  most
simple  forms,  to  be  found  among  no  bar¬
barous  or  savage  people.  Such  a  state  of
society  has  never  been  capable  of  intro¬
ducing  or  maintaining  its  abstract  princi¬
ples  of  Divine  truth.

But  while  Speculative  Masonry  is  the
result  of  civilization,  existing  only  in  its
bosom  and  never  found  among  barbarous
or  savage  races,  it  has,  by  a  reactionary
law  of  sociology,  proved  the  means  of  ex¬
tending  and  elevating  the  civilization  to
which  it  originally  owed  its  birth.  Civil¬
ization  has  always  been  progressive.  That
of  Pelasgic  Greece  was  far  behind  that
which  distinguished  the  Hellenic  period
of  the  same  country.  The  civilization  of
the  ancient  world  was  inferior  to  that  of
the  modern,  and  every  century  shows  an
advancement  in  the  moral,  intellectual,  and
social  condition  of  mankind.  But  in  this
progress  from  imperfection  to  perfection
the  influence  of  those  speculative  systems
that  are  identical  with  Freemasonry  has
always  been  seen  and  felt.  Let  us,  for  an
example,  look  at  the  ancient  heathen  world
and  its  impure  religions.  While  the  people
of  Paganism  bowed,  in  their  ignorance,  to
a  many-headed  god,  or,  rather,  worshipped
at  the  shrines  of  many  gods,  whose  mytho¬
logical  history  and  character  must  have
exercised  a  pernicious  effect  on  the  moral
purity  of  their  worshippers,  Speculative
Philosophy,  in  the  form  of  the  “Ancient
Mysteries,”  was  exercising  its  influence
upon  a  large  class  of  neophytes  and  disci¬
ples,  by  giving  this  true  symbolic  interpre¬
tation  of  the  old  religious  myths.  In  the
adyta  of  their  temples  in  Greece  and  Rome
and  Egypt,  in  the  sacred  caves  of  India,
and  in  the  consecrated  groves  of  Scandina¬
via  and  Gaul  and  Britain,  these  ancient
sages  were  secretly  divesting  the  pagan  faith
of  its  polytheism  and  of  its  anthropomor-


CLANDESTINE


CLAY


167


pliic  deities,  and  were  establishing  a  pure
monotheism  in  its  place,  and  illustrating,
by  a  peculiar  symbolism,  the  great  dogmas
—  since  taught  in  Freemasonry  —  of  the
unity  of  God  and  the  immortality  of  the
soul.  And  in  modern  times,  when  the  reli¬
gious  thought  of  mankind,  under  a  better
dispensation,  has  not  required  this  purifi¬
cation,  Masonry  still,  in  other  ways,  exerts
its  influence  in  elevating  the  tone  of  civil¬
ization  ;  for  through  its  working  the  social
feelings  have  been  strengthened,  the  amen¬
ities  and  charities  of  life  been  refined  and
extended,  and,  as  we  have  had  recent  rea¬
son  to  know  and  see,  the  very  bitterness  of
strife  and  the  blood-guiltiness  of  war  have
been  softened  and  oftentimes  obliterated.

We  then  arrive  at  these  conclusions,
namely,  that  Speculative  Masonry  is  a
result  of  civilization,  for  it  exists  in  no
savage  or  barbarous  state  of  society,  but
has  always  appeared  with  the  advent  in
any  country  of  a  condition  of  civilization,
“  grown  with  its  growth  and  strengthened
with  its  strength ;  ”  and,  in  return,  has
proved,  by  a  reactionary  influence,  a  potent
instrument  in  extending,  elevating,  and
refining  the  civilization  which  gave  it
birth,  by  advancing  its  moral,  intellectual,
and  religious  character.

Clandestine.  The  ordinary  meaning
of  this  word  is  secret,  hidden.  The  French
word  clandestin,  from  which  it  is  derived,  is
defined  by  Boiste  to  be  something  “  fait  en
cachette  et  coutre  les  lois,”  done  in  a  hiding-
place  and  against  the  laws,  which  better
suits  the  Masonic  signification,  which  is
illegal,  not  authorized.

Clandestine  Lodge.  A  body  of
Masons  uniting  in  a  Lodge  without  the
consent  of  a  Grand  Lodge,  or,  although
originally  legally  constituted,  continuing
to  work  after  its  charter  has  been  revoked,
is  styled  a  “  Clandestine  Lodge.”  Neither
Anderson  nor  Entick  employ  the  word.  It
was  first  used  in  the  Book  of  Constitutions
in  a  note  by  Noorthouck,  on  page  239  of
his  edition.

Clandestine  Mason.  One  made
in  or  alfiliated  with  a  clandestine  Lodge.
With  clandestine  Lodges  or  Masons,  regu¬
lar  Masons  are  forbidden  to  associate  or
converse  on  Masonic  subjects.

Clare,  Martin.  A  celebrated  Mason
of  England  in  the  last  century.  He  was  a
man  of  some  distinction  in  literary  circles,
for  he  was  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society.
In  1732  he  was  appointed  by  the  Grand
Lodge  to  revise  the  system  of  lectures,
which  at  this  time  was  the  one  that  had
been  prepared  by  Anderson  and  Desagu-
liers.  In  1735  he  was  appointed  Junior
Grand  Warden,  and  in  1741,  Deputy  Grand
Master.  He  was  distinguished  for  zeal  and


intelligence  in  Masonry,  and  made  several
improvements  in  the  ritual.  He  translated
into  English  a  work  which  had  been  pub¬
lished  the  preceding  year,  in  Dublin,  under
the  title  of  Relation  Apologique  et  Historique
de  la  Societe  des  Franc- Magons.  In  1735,  he
delivered  an  address  before  the  Grand
Lodge,  which  was  translated  into  French
and  German.  Clare’s  lectures  were  a  great
improvement  on  those  which  preceded
them,  and  continued  to  be  a  standard  of
English  ritualism  until  superseded  in  or
about  1770  by  the  still  better  system  of
Dunckerley.

Classification  of  Masons.  Oliver

says,  in  his  Landmarks  and  in  his  Dic¬
tionary,  that  ancient  Masonic  tradition  in¬
forms  us  that  the  speculative  and  operative
Masons  who  were  assembled  at  the  build¬
ing  of  the  Temple  were  arranged  in  nine
classes,  under  their  respective  Grand  Mas¬
ters  ;  viz.,  30,000  Entered  Apprentices,  un¬
der  their  Grand  Master  Adoniram ;  80,000
Fellow  Crafts,  under  Hiram  Abif;  2000
Mark  Men,  under  Stolkyn ;  1000  Master
Masons,  under  Mohabin;  600  Mark  Mas¬
ters,  under  Ghiblim ;  24  Architects,  under
Joabert ;  1 2  Grand  Architects,  under  Adoni¬
ram  ;  45  Excellent  Masons,  under  Hiram
Abif ;  9  Super-Excellent  Masons,  under
Tito  Zadok ;  besides  the  Ish  Sabbal,  or  la¬
borers.  The  tradition  is,  however,  rather
apocryphal.

Clay  Ground.  In  the  clay  ground
between  Succoth  and  Zeredatha,  Hiram
Abif  cast  all  the  sacred  vessels  of  the  Tem¬
ple,  as  well  as  the  pillars  of  the  porch.
This  spot  was  about  thirty-five  miles  in  a
north-east  direction  from  Jerusalem;  and  it
is  supposed  that  Hiram  selected  it  for  his
foundry,  because  the  clay  which  abounded
there  was,  by  its  great  tenacity,  peculiarly
fitted  for  making  moulds.  The  Masonic
tradition  on  this  subject  is  sustained  by  the
authority  of  Scripture.  See  1  Kings  vii.  46,
and  2  Chron.  iv.  17.  Morris,  in  his  Freema¬
sonry  in  the  Holy  Land,  gives  the  following
interesting  facts  in  reference  to  this  locality.
“  A  singular  fact  came  to  light  under  the
investigations  of  my  assistant  at  Jerusa¬
lem.  He  discovered  that  the  jewellers  of
that  city,  at  the  present  day,  use  a  par¬
ticular  species  of  brown,  arenaceous  clay  in
making  moulds  for  casting  small  pieces  in
brass,  etc.  Inquiring  whence  this  clay
comes,  they  reply,  ‘From  Seikoot,  about
two  days’ journey  north-east  of  Jerusalem.’
Here,  then,  is  a  satisfactory  reply  to  the
question,  Where  was  the  ‘clay  ground’
of  Hiram’s  foundries?  It  is  the  best  ma¬
trix-clay  existing  within  reach  of  Hiram
Abif,  and  it  is  found  only  in  ‘the  clay
ground  between  Succoth  and  Zeredatha;’
and  considerable  as  was  the  distance,  and


168


CLEAN


CLERKS


extremely  inconvenient  as  was  the  locality,
so  important  did  that  master-workman
deem  it,  to  secure  a  sharp  and  perfect
mould  for  his  castings,  that,  as  the  Biblical
record  informs  us,  he  established  his  fur¬
naces  there.”

Clean  Hands.  Clean  hauds  are  a
symbol  of  purity.  The  psalmist  says,  “  that
he  only  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the
Lord,  or  shall  stand  in  his  holy  place,  who
hath  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart.”
Hence,  the  washing  of  the  hands  is  an  out¬
ward  sign  of  an  internal  purification ;  and
the  psalmist  says  in  another  place,  “  I  will
wash  my  hands  in  innocence.  And  I  will
encompass  thine  altar,  Jehovah.”  In  the
Ancient  Mysteries  the  washing  of  the
hands  was  always  an  introductory  ceremony
to  the  initiation ;  and,  of  course,  it  was  used
symbolically  to  indicate  the  necessity  of
purity  from  crime  as  a  qualification  of  those
who  sought  admission  into  the  sacred  rites ;
and  hence,  on  a  temple  in  the  Island  of
Crete,  this  inscription  was  placed:  “  Cleanse
your  feet,  wash  your  hands,  and  then  en¬
ter.”  Indeed,  the  washing  of  hauds,  as
symbolic  of  purity,  was  among  the  ancients
a  peculiarly  religious  rite.  No  one  dared
to  pray  to  the  gods  until  he  had  cleansed
his  hands.  Thus,  Homer  makes  Hector
say :

“  Xcpal  <J*  avbroioiv  Ail  al$or:a  o?vov

A Zuiiat.”  Iliad,  vi.  266.

"  I  dread  with  unwashed  hands  to  bring
My  incensed  wine  to  Jove  an  offering.”

In  a  similar  spirit  of  religion,  iEneas,
when  leaving  burning  Troy,  refuses  to  en¬
ter  the  Temple  of  Ceres  until  his  hands,
polluted  by  recent  strife,  had  been  washed
in  the  living  stream.

“  Me  hello  e  tanto  digressum  et  coede  recenti,
Attractare  nefas,  donee  me  fiumine  vivo
Abluero.”  (JEn.,  ii.  718.)

“  In  me,  now  fresh  from  war  and  recent  strife,
'T  is  impious  the  sacred  things  to  touch,

Till  in  the  living  stream  myself  I  bathe.”


The  same  practice  prevailed  among  the
Jews,  and  a  striking  instance  of  the  sym¬
bolism  is  exhibited  in  that  well-known  ac¬
tion  of  Pilate,  who,  when  the  Jews  clam¬
ored  for  Jesus  that  they  might  crucify  him,
appeared  before  the  people,  and,  having
taken  water,  washed  his  hands,  saying  at
the  same  time,  “I  am  innocent  of  the
blood  of  this  just  man,  see  ye  to  it.”

The  white  gloves  worn  by  Masons  as  a
part  of  their  clothing,  alluded  to  this  sym¬
bolizing  of  clean  hands  ;  and  what  in  some
of  the  high  degrees  has  been  called  “  Ma¬


sonic  Baptism”  is  nothing  else  but  th«
symbolizing,  by  a  ceremony,  this  doctrine
of  clean  hands  as  the  sign  of  a  pure  heart.

Cleave.  The  word  to  cleave  is  twice
used  in  Masonry,  and  each  time  in  an  oppo¬
site  sense.  First,  in  the  sense  of  adhering,
where  the  sentence  in  which  it  is  employed
is  in  the  Past  Master’s  degree,  and  is  taken
from  the  37  th  Psalm:  “  Let  my  tongue  cleave
to  the  roof  of  my  mouth;”  second,  in  the
Master’s  decree,  where,  in  the  expres¬
sion,  “The  flesh  cleaves  from  the  bone,”
it  has  the  intransitive  meaning  of  to  sepa¬
rate,  and  is  equivalent  to  “the  flesh  parts,
or  separates,  itself  from  the  bone.”  In  this
latter  use  the  word  is  obsolete,  and  used
only  technically  as  a  Masonic  term.

Clefts  of  the  Rocks.  The  whole
of  Palestine  is  very  mountainous,  and  these
mountains  abound  in  deep  clefts  or  caves,
which  were  anciently  places  of  refuge  to
the  inhabitants  in  time  of  war,  and  were
often  used  as  lurking  places  for  robbers.  It
is,  therefore,  strictly  in  accordance  with
geographical  truth  that  the  statement,  in
relation  to  the  concealment  of  certain  per¬
sons  in  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  is  made  in
the  third  degree.  See  the  latter  part  of  the
article  Caverns.

Clement  XII.  A  pope  who  assumed
the  pontificate  on  the  12th  of  August,  1730,
and  died  on  the  6th  of  February,  1740.
On  the  28th  of  April,  1738,  he  published
his  celebrated  bull  of  excommunication,
entitled  in  Eminenti  Apostolalus  Specula,  in
which  we  find  these  words,  “  For  which
reason  the  temporal  and  spiritual  commu¬
nities  are  enjoined,  in  the  name  of  holy
obedience,  neither  to  enter  the  society  of
Freemasons,  to  disseminate  its  principles,
to  defend  it,  nor  to  admit  nor  conceal  it
within  their  houses  or  palaces,  or  else¬
where,  under  pain  of  excommunication
ipso  facto,  for  all  acting  in  contradiction  to
this,  and  from  which  the  pope  only  can
absolve  the  dying.”  Clement  was  a  bitter
persecutor  of  the  Masonic  Order,  and  hence
he  caused  his  Secretary  of  State,  the  Car¬
dinal  Firrao,  to  issue  on  the  14th  of  Jan¬
uary,  1739,  a  still  more  stringent  edict  for
the  Papal  States,  in  which  death  and  con¬
fiscation  of  property,  without  hope  of
mercy,  was  the  penalty,  or,  as  the  original
has  it,  “sotto  Pena  della  morte,  e  confisca-
zione  de  beni  da  incorressi,  irremissibil-
mente  senz  a  speranza  di  grazia.”

Clerks  of  Strict  Observance.
Known  also  as  the  Spiritual  Branch  of
the  Templars,  or  Clerici  Ordinis  Templarii.
This  was  a  schism  from  the  Order  or  Rite
of  Strict  Observance,  and  was  founded
by  Starck  in  1767.  The  members  of  this
Rite  established  it  as  a  rival  of  the  latter
system.  They  claimed  a  pre-eminence  not


CLERMONT


CLOSING


169


only  over  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance,  but
also  over  ali  the  Lodges  of  ordinary  Ma¬
sonry,  and  asserted  that  they  alone  pos¬
sessed  the  true  secrets  of  the  Order,  and
knew  the  place  where  the  treasures  of  the
Templars  were  deposited.  For  a  further
history  of  this  Rite,  see  the  word  Starck.
The  Rite  consisted  of  seven  degrees,  viz.,
1,2,  and  3.  Symbolic  Masonry.  4.  Junior
Scottish  Mason,  or  Jungschotte.  5.  Scot¬
tish  Master,  or  Knight  of  St.  Andrew.

6.  Provincial  Capitular  of  the  Red  Cross.

7.  Magus,  or  Knight  of  Purity  and  Light.
This  last  was  subdivided  into  five  sections,
as  follows:  I.  Knight  Novice  of  the  third
year.  II.  Knight  Novice  of  the  fifth  year.

III.  Knight  Novice  of  the  seventh  year.

IV.  Levite,  and  V.  Priest.  Ragon  errs
in  calling  this  the  Rite  of  Lax  Observance.

Clermont,  Chapter  of.  On  the
24th  of  November,  1754,  the  Chevalier  de
Bonneville  established  in  Paris  a  Chapter
of  the  high  degrees  under  this  name,  which
was  derived  from  the  Jesuitical  Chapter  of
Clermont.  This  society  was  composed  of
many  distinguished  persons  of  the  court
and  city,  who,  disgusted  with  the  dissen¬
sions  of  the  Parisian  Lodges,  determined
to  separate  from  them.  They  adopted  the
Templar  system,  which  had  been  created  at
Lyons,  in  1743,  after  the  reform  of  Ramsay,
and  their  Rite  consisted  at  first  of  but  six
degrees,  viz.,  1,  2,  3.  St.  John’s  Masonry.
4.  Knight  of  the  Eagle.  5.  Illustrious
Knight  or  Templar.  6.  Sublime  Illustrious
Knight.  But  soon  after  the  number  of
these  degrees  was  greatly  extended.  The
Baron  de  Hund  received  the  high  degrees
in  this  Chapter,  and  derived  from  them  the
idea  of  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance,  which
he  subsequently  established  in  Germany.

Clermont,  College  of.  A  college
of  Jesuits  in  Paris,  where  James  II.,  after
his  flight  from  England,  in  1(188,  resided
until  his  removal  to  St.  Germains.  During
his  residence  there,  he  is  said  to  have
sought  the  establishment  of  a  system  of
Freemasonry,  the  object  of  which  should
be  the  restoration  of  the  House  of  Stuart  to
the  throne  of  England.  Relics  of  this  at¬
tempted  system  are  still  to  be  found  in
many  of  the  high  degrees,  and  the  Chapter
of  Clermont,  subsequently  organized  in
Paris,  appears  to  have  had  some  reference
to  it.

Clermont,  Count  of.  Louis  of
Bourbon,  prince  of  the  blood  and  Count
of  Clermont,  was  elected  by  sixteen  of  the
Paris  Lodges  perpetual  Grand  Master,  for
the  purpose  of  correcting  the  numerous
abuses  which  had  crept  into  French  Ma¬
sonry.  He  did  not,  however,  fulfil  the  ex¬
pectations  of  the  French  Masons ;  for  the
next  year  he  abandoned  the  supervision  of
W


the  Lodges,  and  new  disorders  arose.  He
still,  however,  retained  the  Grand  Master¬
ship,  and  died  in  1771,  being  succeeded  by
his  nephew,  the  Duke  of  Chartres.

Clinton,  I>o  Witt.  A  distinguished
statesman,  who  was  born  at  Little  Britain,
New  York,  March  2,  1769,  and  died  on
the  11th  February,  1828.  He  entered  the
Masonic  Order  in  1793,  and  the  next  year
was  elected  Master  of  his  Lodge.  In  1806,
he  was  elevated  to  the  position  of  Grand
Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  NewYork,  and
in  1814,  to  that  of  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand
Encampment.  In  1816,  he  was  elected
General  Grand  High  Priest  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States.  In
1813,  he  became  unwittingly  complicated
with  the  Spurious  Consistory,  established
by  Joseph  Cerneau  in  the  city  of  New
York,  but  he  took  no  active  part  in  its  pro¬
ceedings,  and  soon  withdrew  from  all  con¬
nection  with  it.  When  the  anti-Masonic
excitement  arose  in  this  country  in  1826,  in
consequence  of  the  affair  of  William  Morgan,
whom  the  Masons  were  accused  of  having
put  to  death,  Mr.  Clinton  was  Governor  of
the  State  of  New  York,  and  took  all  the  ne¬
cessary  measures  for  the  arrest  of  the  sup¬
posed  criminals.  But,  although  he  offered  a
liberal  reward  for  their  detection,  he  was
charged  by  the  anti-Masons  with  official
neglect  and  indifference,  charges  which
were  undoubtedly  false  and  malicious.
Spenser,  the  special  attorney  of  the  State,
employed  for  the  prosecution  of  the
offenders,  went  so  far  as  to  resign  his  office,
and  to  assign,  as  a  reason  for  his  resignation,
the  want  of  sympathy  and  support  on  the
part  of  the  Executive.  But  all  of  the  ac¬
cusations  and  insinuations  are  properly  to
be  attributed  to  political  excitement,  anti-
Masonry  having  been  adopted  soon  after
its  origin  by  the  politicians  as  an  engine
for  their  advancement  to  office.  Clinton
was  an  honorable  man  and  a  true  patriot.
He  was  also  an  ardent  and  devoted  Mason.

Closing.  The  duty  of  closing  the
Lodge  is  as  imperative,  and  the  ceremony
as  solemn,  as  that  of  opening  ;  nor  should  it
ever  be  omitted  through  negligence,  nor
hurried  over  with  haste,  but  everything
should  be  performed  with  order  and  pre¬
cision,  so  that  no  brother  shall  go  away
dissatisfied.  From  the  very  nature  of  our
constitution,  a  Lodge  cannot  properly  be
adjourned.  It  must  be  closed  either  in  due
form,  or  the  brethren  called  off  to  refresh¬
ment.  But  an  adjournment  on  motion,  as
in  other  societies,  is  unknown  to  the  Order.
The  Master  can  alone  dismiss  the  brethren,
and  that  dismission  must  take  place  after
a  settled  usage.  In  Grand  Lodges  which
meet  for  several  days  successively,  the  ses-
I  siou  is  generally  continued  from  day  to


170.


CLOTHED


COCK


day,  by  calling  to  refreshment  at  the  termi¬
nation  of  each  day’s  sitting.

Clothed.  A  Mason  is  said  to  be
properly  clothed  when  he  wears  white
leather  gloves,  a  white  apron,  and  the  jewel
of  his  Masonic  rank.  The  gloves  are  now
often,  hut  improperly,  dispensed  with,  ex¬
cept  on  public  occasions.  “  No  Mason  is
permitted  to  enter  a  Lodge  or  join  in  its
labors  unless  he  is  properly  clothed.”
Lenning,  speaking  of  Continental  Masonry,
under  the  article  Kleidung  in  his  Lexicon,
says,  that  the  clothing  of  a  Freemason  con¬
sists  of  apron,  gloves,  sword,  and  hat.  In
the  York  and  American  Rites,  the  sword
and  hat  are  used  only  in  the  degrees  of
chivalry.  In  the  earliest  code  of  lectures
arranged  by  Anderson  and  Desaguliers,  at
the  revival  in  1717,  the  symbolical  clothing
of  a  Master  Mason  was  said  to  be  “skull¬
cap  and  jacket  yellow,  and  nether  garments
blue,”  in  allusion  to  the  brass  top  and  steel
legs  of  a  pair  of  compasses.  After  the
middle  of  the  century,  he  was  said  to  be
“  clothed  in  the  old  colors,  viz.,  purple,
crimson, and  blue;”  and  the  reason  assigned
for  it  was,  “  because  they  are  royal,  and
such  as  the  ancient  kings  and  princes  used
to  wear.”  The  actual  dress  of  a  Master
Mason  was,  however,  a  full  suit  of  black,
with  white  neckcloth,  apron,  gloves,  and
stockings;  the  buckles  being  of  silver,  and
the  jewels  being  suspended  from  a  white
ribbon  by  way  of  collar.  For  the  clothing
and  decorations  of  the  different  degrees,
see  Regalia.

Clothing  the  Todge.  In  the  “  Gen¬
eral  Regulations,”  approved  by  the  Gfand
Lodge  of  England  in  1721,  it  is  provided
in  article  seven  that  “  Every  new  Brother
at  his  making  is  decently  to  cloath  the
Lodge,  that  is,  all  the  Brethren  present ;
and  to  deposit  something  for  the  relief  of
indigent  and  decayed  Brethren.”  By  “cloth¬
ing  the  Lodge”  was  meant  furnishing  the
Brethren  with  gloves  and  aprons.  The
regulation  no  longer  exists.  It  is  strange
that  Oliver  should  have  quoted  as  the  au¬
thority  for  this  usage  a  subsequent  regula¬
tion  of  1767.

Clouded  Canopy.  See  Canopy,
Clouded.

Cloud.  Pillar  of.  See  Pillar  of  Fire
and  Cloud.

Cloudy.  A  word  sometimes  improper¬
ly  used  by  the  Wardens  of  a  Lodge  when
reporting  an  unfavorable  result  of  the  ballot.
The  proper  word  is  foul.

Clubs.  The  eighteenth  century  was
distinguished  in  England  by  the  existence
of  numerous  local  and  ephemeral  associa¬
tions  under  the  name  of  clubs,  where  men
of  different  classes  of  society  met  for  amuse¬
ment  and  recreation.  Each  profession  and


trade  had  its  club,  and  “whatever  might  be
a  man’s  character  or  disposition,”  says
Oliver,  “  he  would  find  in  Loudon  a  club
that  would  square  with  his  ideas.”  Addi¬
son,  in  his  paper  on  the  origin  of  clubs
(Spectator  No.  9),  remarks:  “Man  is  said
to  be  a  social  animal,  and  as  an  instance  of
it  we  may  observe  that  we  take  all  occa¬
sions  and  pretences  of  forming  ourselves
into  those  little  nocturnal  assemblies  which
are  commonly  known  by  the  name  of  clubs.
When  a  set  of  men  find  themselves  agree
in  any  particular,  though  never  so  trivial,
they  establish  themselves  into  a  kind  of
fraternity  and  meet  once  or  twice  a  week,
upon  the  account  of  such  a  fantastic  resem¬
blance.”  Hard  drinking  was  characteristic
of  those  times,  and  excesses  too  often
marked  the  meetings  of  these  societies.  It
was  at  this  time  that  the  institution  of
Freemasonry  underwent  its  revival  com¬
monly  known  as  the  revival  of  1717,  and
it  is  not  strange  that  its  social  character
was  somewhat  affected  by  the  customs  of
the  day.  The  Lodges  therefore  assumed
at  that  time  too  much  of  a  convivial  char¬
acter,  derived  from  the  customs  of  the  ex¬
isting  clubs  and  coteries;  but  the  moral  and
religious  principles  upon  which  the  Insti¬
tution  was  founded  prevented  any  undue
indulgence;  and  although  the  members
were  permitted  the  enjoyment  of  decent  re¬
freshment,  there  was  a  standing  law  which
provided  against  all  excess.

Coat  of  the  Tiler.  In  olden  times
it  was  deemed  proper  that  the  Tiler  of  a
Lodge,  like  the  beadle  of  a  parish,  —  whose
functions  were  in  some  respects  similar, —
should  be  distinguished  by  a  tawdry  dress.
In  a  schedule  of  the  regalia,  records,  etc.,
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  all  England,  taken
at  York  in  1779,  to  be  found  in  Hughan’s
Masonic  Sketches  and  Reprints,  (p.  33,)  we
find  the  following  item:  “a  blue  cloth
coat  with  a  red  collar  for  the  Tyler.”

Coclileus.  A  very  corrupt  word  in
the  fourth  degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite;  there
said  to  signify  in  the  form  of  a  screw,  and  to
be  the  name  of  the  winding  staircase  which
led  to  the  middle  chamber.  The  true  Latin
word  is  cochlea.  But  the  matter  is  so  his¬
torically  absurd  that  the  word  ought  to  be
and  is  rejected  in  the  modern  rituals.

Cock.  The  ancients  made  the  cock  a
symbol  of  courage,  and  consecrated  him  to
Mars,  Pallas,  and  Bellona,  deities  of  war.
Some  have  supposed  that  it  is  in  reference
to  this  quality  that  the  cock  is  used  in  the
jewel  of  the  Captain-General  of  an  En¬
campment  of  Knights  Templars.

Reghellini,  however,  gives  a  different
explanation  of  this  symbol.  He  says  that
the  cock  was  the  emblem  of  the  sun  and
of  life,  and  that  as  the  ancient  Christians


COCKADE


COLLAR


171


allegorically  deplored  the  death  of  the  solar
orb  in  Christ,  the  cock  recalled  its  life  and
resurrection.  The  cock,  we  know,  was  a
symbol  among  the  early  Christians,  and  is
repeatedly  to  be  found  on  the  tombs  in  the
catacombs  of  Rome.  Hence  I  am  induced
to  believe  that  we  should  give  a  Christian
interpretation  to  the  jewel  of  a  Knight
Templar  as  symbolic  of  the  resurrection.

Cockade.  Some  few  of  the  German
Lodges  have  a  custom  of  permitting  their
members  to  wear  a  blue  cockade  in  the  hat
as  a  symbol  of  equality  and  freedom  —  a
symbolism  which,  as  Lenning  says,  it  is
difficult  to  understand,  and  the  decoration
is  inappropriate  as  a  part  of  the  clothing
of  a  Mason.  Yet  it  is  probable  that  it  was
a  conception  of  this  kind  that  induced  Cag-
liostro  to  prescribe  the  cockade  as  a  part  of
the  investiture  of  a  female  candidate  in  the
initiation  of  his  Lodges.  Clavel  says  the
Venerable  or  Master  of  a  French  Lodge
wears  a  black  cockade.

Cockle  Shell.  The  cockle  shell  was
worn  by  pilgrims  in  their  hats  as  a  token
of  their  profession ;  now  used  in  the  cere¬
monies  of  Templarism.  See  Scollop  Shell.

Ccetus.  Latin.  An  assembly.  It  is
incorrectly  used  in  some  old  Latin  Masonic
diplomas  for  a  Lodge.  It  is  used  by  Lau¬
rence  Dermott  in  a  diploma  dated  Sept.
10,  1764,  where  he  signs  himself  “Sec.
M.  Ccetus,”  or  Secretary  of  the  Grand
Lodge.

Coffin.  In  the  Ancient  Mysteries  the
aspirant  could  not  claim  a  participation
in  the  highest  secrets  until  lie  had  been
placed  in  the  Pastes,  bed  or  coffin.  The
placing  him  in  the  coffin  was  called  the
symbolical  death  of  the  mysteries,  and  his
deliverance  was  termed  a  raising  from  the
dead.  Hence  arose  a  peculiarity  in  the
Greek  verb  teleutao,  which,  in  the  active
voice,  signified  “  I  die,”  and  in  the  middle
voice,  “I  am  initiated.”  “The  mind,”
says  an  ancient  writer,  quoted  by  Stobseus,
“  is  affected  in  death  just  as  it  is  in  the
initiation  into  the  mysteries.  And  word
answers  to  word,  as  well  as  thing  to  thing;
for  reXevTav  is  to  die ,  and  reXciodai,  to  be  ini¬
tiated.”  The  coffin  in  Masonry  is  found  on
tracing  boards  of  the  early  part  of  the  last
century,  and  has  always  constituted  a  part
of  the  symbolism  of  the  third  degree,  where
the  reference  is  precisely  the  same  as  that
of  the  Pastos  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries.

Colicn.  jHA  A  Hebrew  word  signify¬
ing  a  priest.  The  French  Masonic  writers,
indulging  in  a  Gallic  custom  of  misspelling
all  names  derived  from  other  languages,
universally  spell  it  coin.

Cohens,  Elected.  See  Pascalis,  Mar¬
tin.

Cole,  Benjamin.  He  published  at


London,  in  1728,  and  again  in  1731,  the
Old  Constitutions,  engraved  on  thirty  cop¬
per  plates,  under  the  title  of  A  Book  of  the
Ancient  Constitutions  of  the  Free  and  Ac¬
cepted  Masons.  In  1751,  Cole  printed  a
third  edition,  with  the  title  of  “The  An¬
cient  Constitutions  and  Charges  of  Free¬
masons,  with  a  true  representation  of  their
noble  Art  in  several  Lectures  or  Speeches.”
Subsequent  editions  were  published  up  to
1794.  Brother  Richard  Spencer,  the  well-
known  Masonic  bibliographer,  says  that
Cole  engraved  his  plates  from  a  MS.  which
he  calls  the  “Constitutions  of  1726,”  or
from  a  similar  MS.  by  the  same  scribe.
Brother  Hughan  published  in  1869,  in  a
limited  edition  of  seventy  copies,  a  litho¬
graph  fac-simile  of  the  1729  edition  of
Cole.

Cole,  Samuel.  He  was  at  one  time
the  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Maryland,  and  the  author  of  a  work  en¬
titled  The  Freemason1  s  Library ,  or  General
Ahiman  Rezon ,  the  first  edition  of  which
appeared  in  1817,  and  the  second  in  1826.
It  is  something  more  than  a  mere  monitor
or  manual  of  the  degrees,  and  greatly  ex¬
cels  in  literary  pretensions  the  contempo¬
rary  works  of  Webb  and  Cross.

Cole’s  Manuscript.  The  MS.  from
which  Cole  is  supposed  to  have  made  his
engraved  Constitutions.  It  is  in  the  pos¬
session  of  Bro.  Richard  Spencer,  who  pub¬
lished  it  1871,  under  the  title  of  A  Book
of  the  Ancient  Constitutions  of  the  Free
and  Accepted  Masons.  Anno  Dom.,  1726.
The  sub-title  is  “The  Beginning  and  First
Foundation  of  the  Most  Worthy  Craft  of
Masonry,  with  the  charges  thereunto  be¬
longing.”  In  1739,  a  tract  was  published
by  Mrs.  Dodd  with  this  latter  title,  to
which  is  added,  “  By  a  deceased  Brother,
for  the  benefit  of  his  widow.”  Spencer,
who  has  a  copy  of  it,  thinks  that  it  is  the
same  as  the  MS.  of  1726,  from  which  Cole
took  his  engraved  work.

Collar.  An  ornament  worn  around
the  neck  by  the  officers  of  Lodges,  to  which
is  suspended  a  jewel  indicative  of  the
wearer’s  rank.  The  color  of  the  collar
varies  in  the  different  grades  of  Masonry.
That  of  a  symbolic  Lodge  is  blue;  of  a
Past  Master,  purple;  of  a  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
son,  scarlet ;  of  a  Secret  Master,  white  bor¬
dered  with  black ;  of  a  Perfect  Master,
green,  etc.  These  colors  are  not  arbitrary,
but  are  each  accompanied  with  a  symbolic
signification.

In  the  United  States,  the  collar  worn  by
Grand  officers  in  the  Grand  Lodge  is,  pro¬
perly,  purple  edged  with  gold.  In  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  the  Grand  officers  wear
chains  of  gold  or  metal  gilt  instead  of  col¬
lars,  but  on  other  occasions,  collars  of  rib-


172


COLLEGES


COLOGNE


bon,  garter  blue,  four  inches  broad,  em¬
broidered  or  plain.

The  use  of  the  collar  in  Masonry,  as  an
official  decoration,  is  of  very  old  date.  It
is  a  regulation  that  its  form  should  be  tri¬
angular  ;  that  is,  that  it  should  terminate
on  the  breast  in  a  point.  The  symbolical
reference  is  evident.  The  Masonic  collar
is  derived  from  the  practices  of  heraldry  ;
collars  are  worn  not  only  by  municipal
officers  and  officers  of  State,  but  also  by
knights  of  the  different  orders  as  a  part  of
their  investiture.

Colleges,  Masonic.  There  was  at
one  time  a  great  disposition  exhibited  by
the  Fraternity  of  the  United  States  to
establish  colleges,  to  be  placed  under  the
supervision  of  Grand  Lodges.  The  first
one  ever  endowed  in  this  country  was  that
at  Lexington,  in  Missouri,  established  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  that  State,  in  October,
1841,  which  for  some  time  pursued  a  pros¬
perous  career.  Other  Grand  Lodges,  such
as  those  of  Kentucky,  Mississippi,  Ar¬
kansas,  North  Carolina,  Florida,  and  a  few
others,  subsequently  either  actually  organ¬
ized  or  took  the  preliminary  steps  for  or¬
ganizing  Masonic  colleges  in  their  respec¬
tive  jurisdictions.  But  experience  has
shown  that  there  is  an  incongruity  between
the  official  labors  of  a  Grand  Lodge  as  the
Masonic  head  of  the  Order,  and  the  su¬
perintendence  and  support  of  a  college.
Hence,  these  institutions  have  been  very
generally  discontinued,  and  the  care  of  pro¬
viding  for  the  education  of  indigent  chil¬
dren  of  the  Craft  has  been  wisely  com¬
mitted  to  the  subordinate  Lodges.

The  late  Thomas  Brow'n,  the  distinguished
Grand  Master  of  Florida,  thus  expressed
the  following  correct  views  on  this  subject.

“  We  question  if  the  endowment  of
colleges  and  large  seminaries  of  learning,
under  the  auspices  and  patronage  of  Ma¬
sonic  bodies,  be  the  wisest  plan  tor  the  ac¬
complishment  of  the  great  design,  or  is  in
accordance  with  the  character  and  princi¬
ples  of  the  Fraternity.  Such  institutions
savor  more  of  pageantry  than  utility;  and
as  large  funds,  amassed  for  such  purposes,
must  of  necessity  be  placed  under  the  con¬
trol  and  management  of  comparatively  few,
it  will  have  a  corrupting  influence,  promote
discord,  and  bring  reproach  upon  the  Craft.
The  principlesof  Masonry  do  not  sympathize
with  speculations  in  stock  and  exchange
brokerage.  Such,  we  fear,  will  be  the  evils
attendant  on  such  institutions,  to  say  noth¬
ing  of  the  questionable  right  and  policy  of
drawing  funds  from  the  subordinate  Lodges,
which  could  be  appropriated  by  their  pro¬
per  officers  more  judiciously,  economically,
and  faithfully  to  the  accomplishment  of
the  same  great  and  desirable  object  in  the


true  Masonic  spirit  of  charity,  which  is  the
bond  of  peace.”

Collegia  Artificuin.  Colleges  of

Artificers.  See  Homan  Colleges  of  Artificers.

Collegium.  In  Roman  jurisprudence,
a  collegium,  or  college,  expressed  the  idea
of  several  persons  united  together  in  any
office  or  for  any  common  purpose.  It  re¬
quired  not  less  than  three  to  constitute  a.
college,  according  to  the  law  maxim,  “Tres
faciunt  collegium,”  and  hence,  perhaps,  the
Masonic  rule  that  not  fewer  than  three
Master  Masons  can  form  a  Lodge.

Cologne,  Cathedral  of.  The  city
of  Cologne,  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  is
memorable  in  the  history  of  Freemasonry
for  the  connection  of  its  celebrated  Cathe¬
dral  with  the  labors  of  the  Steinmetzen  of
Germany  in  the  Middle  Ages,  whence  it  be¬
came  the  seat  of  one  of  the  most  important
Lodges  of  that  period.  It  has  been  asserted
that  Albertus  Magnus  designed  the  plan,
and  that  he  there  also  altered  the  Constitu¬
tion  of  the  Fraternity,  and  gave  it  a  new
code  of  laws.  It  is  at  least  clear  that  in
this  Cathedral  the  symbolic  principles  of
Gothic  architecture,  tiie  distinguishing  style
of  the  Travelling  Freemasons,  were  carried
out  in  deeper  significance  than  in  any  other
building  of  the  time.  Whether  the  docu¬
ment  known  as  the  Charter  of  Cologne  be
authentic  or  not,  the  fact  that  it  is  claimed
to  have  emanated  from  the  Lodge  of  that
place,  gives  to  the  Cathedral  an  importance
in  the  views  of  the  Masonic  student.

The  Cathedral  of  Cologne  is  one  of  the
most  beautiful  religious  edifices  in  the
world,  and  the  vastest  construction  of
Gothic  architecture.  The  primitive  Cathe¬
dral,  which  was  consecrated  in  873,  was
burned  in  1248.  The  present  one  was  com¬
menced  in  1249.  and  the  work  upon  it  con¬
tinued  until  1509.  But  during  that  long
period  the  labors  were  often  interrupted  by
the  sanguinary  contests  which  raged  be¬
tween  the  city  and  its  archbishops,  so  that
only  the  choir  and  the  chapels  which  sur¬
rounded  it  were  finished.  In  the  eighteenth
century  it  suffered  much  from  the  ignorance
of  its  own  canons,  who  subjected  it  to  un¬
worthy  mutilations,  and  during  the  French
revolution  it  was  used  as  a  military  depot.
Ini  820,  this  edifice,  ravaged  by  men  and  mu¬
tilated  by  time,  began  to  excite  serious  anxi-
'eties  for  the  solidity  of  its  finished  portions.
The  debris  of  the  venerable  pile  were  even
about  to  be  overthrown,  when  archaeologic
zeal  and  religious  devotion  came  to  the
rescue.  Societies  were  formed  for  its  resto¬
ration  by  the  aid  of  permanent  subscrip¬
tions,  which  were  liberally  supplied;  and  it
was  resolved  to  finish  the  gigantic  struc¬
ture  according  to  the  original  plans  which
had  been  conceived  by  Gerhard  de  Saint


COLOGNE


COLOGNE


173


Trond,  the  ancient  master  of  the  works.
The  works  were  renewed  under  the  direc¬
tion  of  M.  Zwiner.  The  building  is  not
yet  completed ;  but  even  in  its  unfinished
condition  is,  says  Mr.  Seddon  ( Ramb .  on
the  Rhine,  p.  16),  “without  question,  one
of  the  most  stupendous  structures  ever  con¬
ceived.”

Cologne,  Charter  of.  This  is  an
interesting  Masonic  document,  originally
written  in  Latin,  and  purporting  to  have
been  issued  in  1535.  Its  history,  as  given
by  those  who  first  offered  it  to  the  public,
and  who  claim  that  it  is  authentic,  is  as
follows.  From  the  year  1519  to  1601,  there
existed  in  the  city  of  Amsterdam,  in  Hol¬
land,  a  Lodge  whose  name  was  Het  V reden-
dall,  or  The  Valley  of  Peace.  In  the  latter
year,  circumstances  caused  the  Lodge  to  be
closed,  but  in  1637  it  was  revived,  by  four
of  its  surviving  members,  under  the  name
of  Frederick’s  Vredendall,  or  Frederick’s
Valley  of  Peace.  In  this  Lodge,  at  the  time
of  its  restoration,  there  was  found  a  chest,
bound  with  brass  and  secured  by  three
locks  and  three  seals,  which,  according  to
a  protocol  published  on  the  29th  of  Janu¬
ary,  1637,  contained  the  following  docu¬
ments  :

1.  The  original  warrant  of  constitution
of  the  Lodge  Het  Vredendall,  written  in
the  English  language.  2.  A  roll  of  all  the
members  of  the  Lodge  from  1519  to  1601.
3.  The  original  charter  given  to  the  brother¬
hood  at  the  city  of  Cologne,  and  which  is
now  known  among  Masonic  historians  as
the  Charter  of  Cologne.

It  is  not  known  liow  long  these  docu¬
ments  remained  in  possession  of  the  Lodge
at  Amsterdam.  But  they  were  subsequently
remitted  to  the  charge  of  Bro.  James  Van
Vasner,  Lord  of  Opdem,  whose  signature
is  appended  to  the  last  attestation  of  the
Hague  register,  under  the  date  of  the  2d
of  February,  1638.  After  his  death,  they
remained  among  the  papers  of  his  family
until  1790,  when  M.  Walpenaer,  one  of  his
descendants,  presented  them  to  Brother
Van  Boetzelaer,  who  was  then  the  Grand
Master  of  the  Lodges  of  Holland.  Subse¬
quently  they  fell  into  the  hands  of  some
person  whose  name  is  unknown,  but  who,  in
1816,  delivered  them  to  Prince  Frederick.

There  is  a  story  that  the  prince  received
these  documents  accompanied  by  a  letter,
written  in  a  female  hand,  and  signed  “  C.,
child  of  V.  J.”  In  this  letter  the  writer
states  that  she  had  found  the  documents
among  the  papers  of  her  father,  who  had
received  them  from  Mr.  Van  Boetzelaer.
It  is  suspected  that  the  authoress  of  the
letter  was  the  daughter  of  Brother  Van
Jeylinger,  who  was  the  successor  of  Van
Boetzelaer  as  Grand  Master  of  Holland.


There  is  another  version  of  the  history
which  states  that  these  documents  had  long
been  in  the  possession  of  the  family  of  Was-
senaer  Van  Opdem,  by  a  member  of  which
they  were  presented  to  Van  Boetzelaer,
who  subsequently  gave  them  to  Van  Jey¬
linger,  with  strict  injunctions  to  preserve
them  until  the  restitution  of  the  Orange
regency.  The  originals  are  now,  or  were
very  lately,  deposited  in  the  archives  of  a
Lodge  at  Namur,  on  the  Meuse;  but  copies
of  the  charter  were  given  to  the  Fraternity
under  the  following  circumstances:

In  the  year  1819,  Prince  Frederick  of
Nassau,  who  was  then  the  Grand  Master  of
the  National  Grand  Lodge  of  Holland,  con¬
templating  a  reformation  in  Masonry,  ad¬
dressed  a  circular  on  this  subject  to  all  the
Lodges  under  his  jurisdiction,  for  the  pur-  #
pose  of  enlisting  them  in  behalf  of  his  pro¬
ject,  and  accompanied  this  circular  with
copies  of  the  charter,  which  he  had  caused
to  be  taken  in  facsimile,  and  also  of  the
register  of  the  Amsterdam  Lodge,  Valley
of  Peace,  to  which  I  have  already  referred
as  contained  in  the  brass-mounted  chest.

A  transcript  of  the  charter  in  the  original
Latin,  w'ith  all  its  errors,  was  published,
in  1818,  in  the  Annales  Magonniques.  The
document  was  also  presented  to  the  public
in  a  German  version,  in  1819,  by  Dr.  Fred.
Heldmann ;  but  his  translation  has  been
proved,  by  Lenning  and  others,  to  be  ex¬
ceedingly  incorrect.  In  1821,  Dr.  Krause
published  it  in  his  celebrated  work  entitled,
The  Three  Oldest  Masonic  Documents.  It
has  been  frequently  published  since  in  a
German  translation,  in  whole  or  in  part,  but
is  accessible  to  the  English  reader  only  in
Burnes’  Sketch  of  the  History  of  the  Knights
Templars:  London,  1840,  in  D.  Murray
Lyons’  translation  of  Findel’s  History  of
Freemasonry ,  and  in  the  American  Quarterly
Review  of  Freemasonry,  where  it  was  pub¬
lished  with  copious  notes  by  the  author
of  the  present  work.  P.  J.  Schouten,  a
Dutch  writer  on  the  history  of  Freema¬
sonry,  who  had  undoubtedly  seen  the  orig¬
inal  document,  describes  it  as  being  written
on  parchment  in  Masonic  cipher,  in  the
Latin  language,  the  characters  uninjured
by  time,  and  the  subscription  of  the  names
not  in  cipher,  but  in  the  ordinary  cursive
character.  The  Latin  is  that  of  the  Middle
Ages,  and  is  distinguished  by  many  incor¬
rectly  spelled  words,  and  frequent  gram¬
matical  solecisms.  Thus,  we  find  “bagistri  ”
for  “  magistri,”  “trigesimo”  for  “tricesi-
ino,”  “ad  nostris  ordinem”  for  “ad  nos¬
trum  ordinem,”  etc.

Of  the  authenticity  of  this  document,  it
is  but  fair  to  say  that  there  are  well-founded
doubts  among  many  Masonic  writers.  The
learned  antiquaries  of  the  University  of


174


COLOGNE


COLUMBIA


Leyden  have  testified  that  the  paper  on
which  the  register  of  the  Lodge  at  the
Hague  is  written,  is  of  the  same  kind  that
was  used  in  Holland  at  the  commencement
of  the  seventeenth  century,  which  purports
to  be  its  date,  and  that  the  characters  in
which  it  is  composed  are  of  the  same  period.
This  register,  it  will  be  remembered,  refers
to  the  charter  of  Cologne  as  existing  at
that  time;  so  that  if  the  learned  men  of
Leyden  have  not  been  deceived,  the
fraud  —  supposing  that  there  is  one  in  the
charter  —  must  be  more  than  two  centuries
old.

Dr.  Burnes  professes  to  have  no  faith  in
the  document,  and  the  editors  of  the  Hermes
at  once  declare  it  to  be  surreptitious.  But
the  condemnation  of  Burnes  is  too  sweep-
*  ing  in  its  character,  as  it  includes  with  the
charter  all  other  German  documents  on
Freemasonry;  and  the  opinion  of  the  edit¬
ors  of  the  Hermes  must  be  taken  with  some
grains  of  allowance,  as  they  were  at  the
time  engaged  in  a  controversy  with  the
Grand  Master  of  Holland,  and  in  the  de¬
fence  of  the  high  degrees,  whose  claims  to
antiquity  this  charter  would  materially  im¬
pair.  Dr.  Oliver,  on  the  other  hand,  quotes
it  unreservedly,  in  his  Landmarks,  as  an
historical  document  worthy  of  credit ;
and  Reghelliui  treats  it  as  authentic.  In
Germany,  the  Masonic  authorities  of  the
highest  reputation,  such  as  Heldermann,
Morsdorf,  Kloss,  and  many  others,  have  re¬
pudiated  it  as  a  spurious  production,  most
probably  of  the  beginning  of  the  present
century.  Kloss  objects  to  the  document,
that  customs  are  referred  to  in  it  that  .were
not  known  in  the  rituals  of  initiation  until
1731 ;  that  the  higher  degrees  were  nowhere
known  until  1725 ;  that  none  of  the  eighteen
copied  documents  have  been  found;  that
the  declaimer  against  Templar  Masonry
was  unnecessary  in  1535,  as  no  Templar
degrees  existed  until  17-41 ;  that  some  of  the
Latin  expressions  are  not  such  as  were
likely  to  have  been  used;  and  a  few  other
objections  of  a  similar  character.  Bobrik,
who  published,  in  1840,  the  Text,  Transla¬
tion,  and  Examination  of  the  Cologne  Docu¬
ment,  also  advances  some  strong  critical
arguments  against  its  authenticity.  On  the
whole,  the  arguments  to  disprove  the  gen¬
uineness  of  the  charter  appear  to  be  very
convincing,  and  are  strong  enough  to  throw
at  least  great  doubt  upon  it  as  being  any¬
thing  else  but  a  modern  forgery.

Cologne,  Congress  of.  A  Congress
which  is  said  to  have  been  convened  in
1525,  by  the  most  distinguished  Masons  of
the  time,  in  the  city  of  Cologne,  as  the
representatives  of  nineteen  Grand  Lodges,
and  who  issued  the  celebrated  manifesto,  in
defence  of  the  character  and  aims  of  the


Institution,  known  as  the  Charter  of  Co¬
logne.  Whether  this  Congress  was  ever
held  is  a  mooted  point  among  Masonic
writers,  most  of  them  contending  that  it
never  was,  and  that  it  is  simply  an  inven¬
tion  of  the  early  part  of  the  j>resent  cen¬
tury.  See  Cologne,  Charter  of.

Colonial  Lodges.  Lodges  in  the
colonies  of  Great  Britain  are  under  the
immediate  supervision  and  jurisdiction  of
Provincial  Grand  Lodges,  to  which  title
the  reader  is  referred.

Colorado.  Freemasonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  the  territory  of  Colorado  in
1860,  in  which  year  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Kansas  chartered  Golden  City  Lodge  at
Golden  City.  In  1861  two  other  Lodges,
Rocky  Mountain  at  Gold  Hill  and  Summit
Lodge  at  Parkville,  were  chartered  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Nebraska.  On  August
2,  1861,  representatives  from  these  three
Lodges  met  in  convention  at  Golden  City,
and  organized  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Colo¬
rado,  the  Grand  East  of  which  was  placed
at  Denver.  J.  M.  Chivington  was  elected
first  Grand  Master.  Chapters  of  Royal
Arch  Masons  and  a  Commandery  of
Knights  Templars  were  subsequently  in¬
troduced.

Colors,  Symbolism  of.  Wemvss,

in  his  Claris  Syrnbolica,  says:  “  Color,  which
is  outwardly  seen  on  the  habit  of  the  body,
is  symbolically  used  to  denote  the  true
state  of  the  person  or  subject  to  which  it
is  applied,  according  to  its  nature.”  This
definition  may  appropriately  be  borrowed
on  the  present  occasion,  and  applied  to  the
system  of  Masonic  colors.  The  color  of  a
vestment  or  of  a  decoration  is  never  arbi¬
trarily  adopted  in  Freemasonry.  Every
color  is  selected  with  a  view  to  its  power
in  the  symbolic  alphabet,  and  it  teaches  the
initiate  some  instructive  moral  lesson,  or
refers  to  some  important  historical  fact  in
the  system.

Frederic  Portal,  a  French  archaeologist,
has  written  a  valuable  treatise  on  the  sym¬
bolism  of  colors,  under  the  title  of  Des
Coulcurs  Syrnboliques  dans  Vantiquite,  le
moyen  uge  et  les  temps  modemes,  which  is
well  worth  the  attention  of  Masonic  stu¬
dents.  The  Masonic  colors  are  seven  in
number,  namely :  1.  blue;  2,  purple;  3,
red ;  4,  white ;  5,  black ;  6,  green ;  7,  yel¬
low  ;  8,  violet.  See  those  respective  titles.

Columbia,  British.  Freemasonry
was  introduced  into  British  Columbia  by
the  Grand  Lodges  of  England  and  Scot¬
land.  On  October  21st,  1871,  a  convention
was  held,  with  the  consent  of  the  Provin¬
cial  Grand  Master,  for  the  purpose  of  pre¬
liminary  action.  On  the  26tli  of  December
following,  a  Lodge  of  Master  Masons  was
opened,  and  an  independent  Grand  Lodge


COLUMBIA


COMMANDERY


175


organized,  with  the  title  of  “The  Grand
Lodge  of  Ancient,  Free,  and  Accepted  Ma¬
sons  for  the  Province  of  British  Columbia.”

Columbia,  District  of.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  the  District  of  Columbia  was  or¬
ganized  Dec.  11th,  1810,  by  Lodges  having
warrants  from  Maryland  and  Virginia,  and
Valentine  Reintzel  was  elected  Grand  Mas¬
ter.  The  Grand  Chapter  formed,  originally,
a  component  part  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Maryland  and  the  District  of  Columbia;
but  the  connection  was  dissevered  in  1867,
and  an  independent  Grand  Chapter  formed,
which  has  now  five  Chapters  under  its
jurisdiction.  There  is  neither  a  Grand
Commandery  nor  Grand  Council  in  the
Territory,  but  several  Commanderies  sub¬
ordinate  to  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the
United  States,  and  a  Council  of  Royal  and
Select  Masters  chartered  by  the  Grand
Council  of  Massachusetts.  The  Scottish
Rite,  has  also  been  successfully  cultivated,
and  there  are  in  operation  a  Lodge  of  Per¬
fection  and  a  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix.

Column.  A  round  pillar  made  to
support  as  well  as  to  adorn  a  building,
whose  construction  varies  in  the  different
orders  of  architecture.  In  Masonry,  col¬
umns  have  a  symbolic  signification  as  the
supports  of  a  Lodge,  and  are  known  as  the
Columns  of  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty.
The  broken  column  is  also  a  symbol  in
Masonry.  See  the  titles  Supports  of  a  Lodge,
and  Broken  Column.

Combination  of  Masons.  The

combination  of  the  Freemasons  in  the
fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  to  de¬
mand  a  higher  rate  of  wages,  which  even¬
tually  gave  rise  to  the  enactment  of  the
Statutes  of  Laborers,  is  thus  described  by  a
writer  in  the  Gentleman's  Magazine,  (Jan.
1740,  p.  17 :)  “King  Edward  III.  took  so
reat  an  affection  to  Windsor,  the  place  of
is  birth,  that  he  instituted  the  Order  of
the  Garter  there,  and  rebuilt  and  enlarged
the  castle,  with  the  church  and  chapel  of
St.  George.  This  was  a  great  work  and
required  a  great  many  hands;  and  for  the
carrying  of  it  on  writs  were  directed  to  the
sheriffs  of  several  counties  to  send  thither,
under  the  penalty  of  £100  each,  such  a
number  of  masons  by  a  day  appointed.
London  sent  forty,  so  did  Devon,  Somerset,
and  several  other  counties;  but  several
dying  of  the  plague,  and  others  deserting
the  service,  new  writs  were  issued  to  send
up  supplies.  Yorkshire  sent  sixty,  and
other  counties  proportionably,  and  orders
were  given  that  no  one  should  entertain
any  of  these  runaway  masons,  under  pain
of  forfeiture  of  all  their  goods.  Hereupon,
the  masons  entered  into  a  combination  not
to  work,  unless  at  higher  wages.  They
agreed  upon  tokens,  etc.,  to  know  one  an¬


other  by,  and  to  assist  one  another  against
being  impressed,  and  not  to  work  unless
free  and  on  their  own  terms.  Hence  they
called  themselves  Freemasons;  and  this
combination  continued  during  the  carrying
on  of  these  buildings  for  several  years.  The
wars  between  the  two  Houses  coming  on  in
the  next  reign,  the  discontented  herded
together  in  the  same  manner,  and  the  gen¬
try  also  underhand  supporting  the  malcon¬
tents,  occasioned  several  Acts  of  Parliament
against  the  combination  of  masons  and
other  persons  under  that  denomination,  the
titles  of  which  Acts  are  still  to  be  seen  in
the  printed  statutes  of  those  reigns.”  Ash-
mole,  in  his  History  of  the  Order  of  the
Garter,  (p.  80,)  confirms  the  fact  of  the  im¬
pressment  of  workmen  by  King  Edward  ;
and  the  combination  that  followed  seems
but  a  natural  consequence  of  this  oppres¬
sive  act;  but  the  assertion  that  the  origin
of  Freemasonry  as  an  organized  institution
of  builders  is  to  be  traced  to  such  a  combi¬
nation,  is  not  supported  by  the  facts  of
history,  and,  indeed,  the  writer  himself
admits  that  the  Masons  denied  its  truth.

Commander.  1.  The  presiding  of¬
ficer  in  a  Commandery  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars.  His  style  is  “Eminent,”  and  the
jewel  of  his  office  is  a  cross,  from  which
issue  rays  of  light.  2.  The  Superinten¬
dent  of  a  Commandery,  as  a  house  or  resi¬
dence  of  the  Ancient  Knights  of  Malta,  was
so  called.

Commander,  Grand.  See  Grand

Commander.

Commander-in-Cliief.  The  pre¬
siding  officer  in  a  Consistory  of  Sublime
Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret  in  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  His  style  is
“  Illustrious.”  In  a  Grand  Consistory  the
presiding  officer  is  a  Grand  Coinmander-in-
Chief,  and  he  is  styled  “Very  Illustrious.”

Commandery.  1.  In  the  United
States  all  regular  assemblies  of  Knights
Templars  are  called  Commanderies,  and
must  consist  of  the  following  officers:  Emi¬
nent  Commander,  Generalissimo,  Captain
General,  Prelate,  Senior  Warden,  Junior
Warden,  Treasurer,  Recorder,  Warder,
Standard  Bearer,  Sword  Bearer,  and  Sen¬
tinel.  These  Commanderies  derive  their
warrants  of  Constitution  from  a  Grand
Commandery,  or,  if  there  is  no  such  body
in  the  State  in  which  they  are  organized,
from  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United
States.  They  confer  the  degrees  of  Knight
of  the  Red  Cross,  Knight  Templar,  and
Knight  of  Malta.

In  a  Commandery  of  Knights  Templars,
the  throne  is  situated  in  the  East.  Above
it  are  suspended  three  banners :  the  centre
one  bearing  a  cross,  surmounted  by  a  glory ;
the  left  one  having  inscribed  on  it  the  em-


176


COMMANDERY


COMMITTEE


blems  of  the  Order,  and  the  right  one,  a  '
paschal  lamb.  The  Eminent  Commander  (
is  seated  on  the  throne;  the  Generalissimo,  '
Prelate,  and  Past  Commanders  on  his  right;
the  Captain  General  on  his  left;  the  Treas¬
urer  and  Recorder,  as  in  a  Symbolic  Lodge;
the  Senior  Warden  at  the  south-west  angle
of  the  triangle,  and  upon  the  right  of  the  I
first  division;  the  Junior  Warden  at  the
north-west  angle  of  the  triangle,  and  on
the  left  of  the  third  division;  the  Standard
Bearer  in  the  West,  between  the  Sword
Bearer  on  his  right,  and  the  Warder  on  his
left;  and  in  front  of  him  is  a  stall  for  the
initiate.  The  Knights  are  arranged  in
equal  numbers  on  each  side,  and  in  front
of  the  throne.

2.  The  houses  or  residences  of  the  Knights
of  Malta  were  called  Commanderies,  and
the  aggregation  of  them  in  a  nation  was
called  a  Priory  or  Grand  Priory.

Commandery,  Grand.  When  three
or  more  Commanderies  are  instituted  in  a
State,  they  may  unite  and  form  a  Grand
Commandery,  under  the  regulations  pre¬
scribed  by  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the
United  States.  They  have  the  superinten¬
dence  of  all  Commanderies  of  Knights
Templars  that  are  holden  in  their  respec¬
tive  jurisdictions.

A  Grand  Commandery  meets,  at  least,
annually,  and  its  officers  consist  of  a  Grand
Commander,  Deputy  Grand  Commander,
Grand  Generalissimo,  Grand  Captain  Gen¬
eral,  Grand  Prelate,  Grand  Senior  and
Junior  Warden,  Grand  Treasurer,  Grand
Recorder,  Grand  Warder,  Grand  Standard
Bearer,  and  Grand  Sword  Bearer.

Committee.  To  facilitate  the  trans¬
action  of  business,  a  Lodge  or  Grand  Lodge
often  refers  a  subject  to  a  particular  com¬
mittee  for  investigation,  and  report.  By
the  usages  of  Masonry,  committees  of  this
character  are  always  appointed  by  the  pre¬
siding  officer;  and  the  Master  of  a  Lodge,
when  present  at  the  meeting  of  a  committee,
may  act.  if  he  thinks  proper,  as  its  chair¬
man  ;  for  the  Master  presides  over  any  as¬
semblage  of  the  Craft  in  his  jurisdiction.

Committee,  General.  By  the  Con¬
stitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
all  matters  of  business  to  be  brought  under
the  consideration  of  the  Grand  Lodge
must  previously  be  presented  to  a  General
Committee,  consisting  of  the  Present  and
Past  Grand  Officers,  and  the  Master  of
every  regular  Lodge,  who  meet  on  the
Wednesday  immediately  preceding  each
quarterly  communication.  No  such  regu¬
lation  exists  in  any  of  the  Grand  Lodges
of  this  country.

Committee  of  Charity.  In  most
Lodges  there  is  a  standing  Committee  of
Charity,  appointed  at  the  beginning  of  the


year,  to  which,  in  general,  applications  for
relief  are  referred  by  the  Lodge.  In  cases
where  the  Lodge  does  not  itself  take  imme¬
diate  action,  the  committee  is  also  invested
with  the  power  to  grant  relief  to  a  limited
amount  during  the  recess  of  the  Lodge.

Committee  of  Finance.  In  many
Lodges  the  Master,  Wardens,  Treasurer,
and  Secretary'  constitute  a  Committee  of
Finance,  to  which  is  referred  the  general
supervision  of  the  finances  of  the  Lodge.

Committee  on  Foreign  Cor¬
respondence.  In  none  of  the  Grand
Lodges  of  this  country,  forty  years  ago,
was  such  a  committee  as  that  on  foreign
correspondence  ever  appointed.  A  few  of
them  had  corresponding  secretaries,  to
whom  were  intrusted  the  duty  of  attending
to  the  correspondence  of  the  body :  a  duty
w'hich  was  very  generally  neglected.  A  re¬
port  on  the  proceedings  of  other  bodies
w'as  altogether  unknown.  Grand  Lodges
met  and  transacted  the  local  business  of
their  own  jurisdictions  without  any  refer¬
ence  to  what  was  passing  abroad.”

But  within  the  last  twenty  or  thirty
years,  improvements  in  this  respect  began
to  show  themselves.  Intelligent  Masons
saw  that  it  would  no  longer  do  to  isolate
themselves  from  the  Fraternity  in  other
countries,  and  that,  if  any  moral  or  intel¬
lectual  advancement  was  to  be  expected,  it
must  be  derived  from  the  intercommunica¬
tion  and  collision  of  ideas ;  and  the  first
step  towards  this  advancement  was  the  ap¬
pointment  in  every'  Grand  Lodge  of  a  com¬
mittee,  whose  duty  it  should  be  to  collate
the  proceedings  of  other  jurisdictions,  and
to  eliminate  from  them  the  most  important
items.  These  committees  were,  however,
very  slow  in  assuming  the  functions  which
devolved  upon  them,  and  in  coming  up  to
the  full  measure  of  their  duties.  At  first
their  reports  were  little  more  than  “  reports
of  progress.”  No  light  was  derived  from
their  collation,  and  the  bodies  which  had
appointed  them  were  no  wiser  after  their
report:,  had  been  read  than  they  were
before.

ik?  r.  specimen  of  the  first  condition  and
subsequent  improvement  of  these  com¬
mittees  on  foreign  correspondence,  let  us
take  at  random  the  transactions  of  any
Grand  Lodge  old  enough  to  have  a  history
and  intelligent  enough  to  have  made  any
progress;  and,  for  this  purpose,  the  pro¬
ceedings  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio,  two
volumes  of  which  lie  conveniently'  at  hand,
will  do  as  well  as  any  other.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio  was  organized
in  January',  1808.  From  that  time  to  1829,
its  proceeding-  contain  no  reference  to  a
committee  on  correspondence;  and  except,
I  think,  a  single  allusion  to  the  Wash-


COMMITTEE


COMMITTEE


177


ington  Convention,  made  in  the  report  of
a  special  committee,  the  Masons  of  Ohio
seem  to  have  had  no  cognizance,  or  at
least  to  have  shown  no  recognition,  of  any
Masonry  which  might  be  outside  of  their
own  jurisdiction.

But  in  the  year  1830,  for  the  first  time,  a
committee  was  appointed  to  report  on  the
foreign  correspondence  of  the  Grand  Lodge.
This  committee  bore  the  title  of  the  “  Com¬
mittee  on  Communications  from  Foreign
Grand  Lodges,”  etc.,  and  made  during  the
session  a  report  of  eight  lines  in  length,
which  contained  just  the  amount  of  infor¬
mation  that  could  be  condensed  in  that
brief  space,  and  no  more.  In  1831,  the  re¬
port  was  fifteen  lines  long  ;  in  1832,  ten
lines;  in  1833,  twelve  lines ;  and  so  on  for
several  years,  the  reports  being  sometimes
a  little  longer  and  sometimes  a  little  shorter ;
but  the  length  being  always  measured  by
lines,  and  not  by  pages,  until,  in  1837,
there  was  a  marked  falling  off,  the  report
consisting  only  of  one  line  and  a  half.  Of
this  report,  which  certainly  cannot  be  ac¬
cused  of  verbosity,  the  following  is  an  ex¬
act  copy :  “  Nothing  has  been  presented  for
the  consideration  of  your  committee  re¬
quiring  the  action  of  the  Grand  Lodge.”

In  1842,  the  labors  of  the  committee
began  to  increase,  and  their  report  fills  a
page  of  the  proceedings.  Things  now  rap¬
idly  improved.  In  1843,  the  report  was
three  pages  long;  in  1845,  four  pages;  in
1840,  seven;  in  1848,  nearly  thirteen;  in
1853,  fourteen;  in  1856,  thirty ;  and  in
1857 ,  forty-six.  Thenceforward  there  is  no
more  fault  to  be  found.  The  reports  of  the
future  committees  were  of  full  growth,
and  we  do  not  again  hear  such  an  unmean¬
ing  phrase  as  “  nothing  requiring  the  ac¬
tion  of  the  Grand  Lodge.”

The  history  of  these  reports  in  other
Grand  Lodges  is  the  same  as  that  in  Ohio.
Beginning  with  a  few  lines,  which  an¬
nounced  the  absence  of  all  matters  worthy
of  consideration,  they  have  grown  up  to
the  full  stature  of  elaborate  essays,  extend¬
ing  to  one  hundred  and  sometimes  to  one
hundred  and  fifty  pages,  in  which  the  most
important  and  interesting  subjects  of  Ma¬
sonic  history,  philosophy,  and  jurispru¬
dence  are  discussed,  generally  with  much
ability.

At  this  day  the  reports  of  the  commit¬
tees  on  foreign  correspondence  in  all  the
Grand  Lodges  of  this  country  constitute  an
important  portion  of  the  literature  of  the
Institution.  The  chairmen  of  these  com¬
mittees —  for  the  other  members  fill,  for
the  most  part,  only  the  post  of  “  sleeping
partners”  —  are  generally  men  of  educa¬
tion  and  talent,  who,  by  the  very  occupa¬
tion  in  which  they  are  employed,  of  read-
X  12


ing  the  published  proceedings  of  all  the
Grand  Lodges  in  correspondence  with  their
own,  have  become  thoroughly  conversant
with  the  contemporary  history  of  the  Order,
while  a  great  many  of  them  have  extended
their  studies  in  its  previous  history.

The  “  reportorial  corps,”  as  these  hard-
laboring  brethren  are  beginning  to  call
themselves,  exercise,  of  course,  a  not  trifl¬
ing  influence  in  the  Order.  These  com¬
mittees  annually  submit  to  their  respective
Grand  Lodges  a  mass  of  interesting  infor¬
mation,  which  is  read  with  great  avidity  by
their  brethren.  Gradually  —  for  at  first  it
was  not  their  custom  —  they  have  added  to
the  bare  narration  of  facts  their  comments
on  Masonic  law  and  their  criticisms  on  the
decisions  made  in  otherjurisdictions.  These
comments  and  criticisms  have  very  naturally
their  weight,  sometimes  beyond  their  actual
worth  ;  and  it  will  not  therefore  be  impro¬
per  to  take  a  glance  at  what  ought  to  be
the  character  of  a  report  on  foreign  corres¬
pondence.

In  the  first  place,  then,  a  reporter  of  for¬
eign  correspondence  should  be,  in  the  most
literal  sense  of  Shakespeare’s  words,  “  a
brief  chronicler  of  the  times.”  His  report
should  contain  a  succinct  account  of  every¬
thing  of  importance  that  is  passing  in  the
Masonic  world,  so  far  as  his  materials  sup¬
ply  him  with  the  information.  But,  re¬
membering  that  he  is  writing  for  the  in¬
struction  of  hundreds,  perhaps  thousands,
many  of  whom  cannot  spare  much  time,
and  many  others  who  have  no  inclination
to  spare  it,  he  should  eschew  the  sin  of  te¬
diousness,  never  forgetting  that  “  brevity  is
the  soul  of  wit.”  He  should  omit  all  de¬
tails  that  have  no  special  interest;  should
husband  his  space  for  important  items,  and
be  exceedingly  parsimonious  in  the  use  of
unnecessary  expletives,  whose  only  use  is
to  add  to  the  length  of  a  line.  In  a  word,
he  should  remember  that  he  is  not  an
orator,  but  an  historian.  A  rigid  adherence
to  these  principles  would  save  the  expense
of  many  printed  pages  to  his  Grand  Lodge,
and  the  waste  of  much  time  to  his  readers.
These  reports  will  form  the  germ  of  future
Masonic  history.  The  collected  mass  will
be  an  immense  one,  and  it  should  not  be
unnecessarily  enlarged  by  the  admission  of
trivial  items.

In  the  next  place,  although  I  admit
that  these  “  brethren  of  the  reportorial
corps”  have  peculiar  advantages  in  read¬
ing  the  opinions  of  their  contemporaries
on  subjects  of  Masonic  jurisprudence,  they
would  be  mistaken  in  supposing  that  these
advantages  must  necessarily  make  them
Masonic  lawyers.  Ex  quovis  ligno  non  fit
Mercurius.  It  is  not  every  man  that  will
make  a  lawyer.  A  peculiar  turn  of  mind


178


COMMITTEE


COM  M  UXICATIOX


and  a  habit  of  close  reasoning,  as  well  as
a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  law  it¬
self,  are  required  to  fit  one  for  the  investi¬
gation  of  questions  of  jurisprudence.  Re¬
porters,  therefore,  should  assume  the  task
of  adjudicating  points  of  law  with  much
diffidence.  They  should  not  pretend  to
make  a  decision  ex  cathedra,  but  only  to  ex¬
press  an  opinion;  and  that  opinion  they
should  attempt  to  sustain  by  arguments
that  may  convince  their  readers.  Dogma¬
tism  is  entirely  out  of  place  in  a  Masonic
report  on  foreign  correspondence.

But  if  tediousness  and  dogmatism  are
displeasing,  how  much  more  offensive  must
be  rudeness  and  personality.  Courtesy  is
a  Masonic  as  well  as  a  knightly  virtue,  and
the  reporter  who  takes  advantage  of  his
official  position  to  speak  rudely  of  his
brethren,  or  makes  his  report  the  vehicle
of  scurrility  and  abuse,  most  strangely  for¬
gets  the  duty  and  respect  which  he  owes  to
the  Grand  Lodge  which  he  represents  and
the  Fraternity  to  which  he  addresses  him¬
self.

And,  lastly,  a  few  words  as  to  style.
These  reports,  I  have  already  said,  consti¬
tute  an  important  feature  of  Masonic  liter¬
ature.  It  should  be,  then,  the  object  and
aim  of  every  one  to  give  to  them  a  tone  and
character  which  shall  reflect  honor  on  the
society  whence  they  emanate,  and  enhance
the  reputation  of  their  authors.  The  style
cannot  always  be  scholarly,  but  it  should  al¬
ways  be  chaste;  it  may  sometimes  want
eloquence,  but  it  should  never  be  marked
by  vulgarity.  Coarseness  of  language  and
slang  phrases  are  manifestly  out  of  place  in
a  paper  which  treats  of  subjects  such  as
naturally  belong  to  a  Masonic  document.
Wit  and  humor  we  would  not,  of  course,
exclude.  The  Horatian  maxim  bids  us
sometimes  to  unbend,  and  old  Menander
thought  it  would  not  do  always  to  appear
wise.  Even  the  solemn  Johnson  could
sometimes  perpetrate  a  joke,  and  Sidney
Smith  has  enlivened  his  lectures  on  moral
philosophy  with  numerous  witticisms.
There  are  those  who  delight  in  the  stateli¬
ness  of  Coleridge ;  but  for  ourselves  we  do
not  object  to  the  levity  of  Lamb,  though
we  would  not  care  to  descend  to  the  vul¬
garity  of  Rabelais.

To  sum  up  the  whole  matter  in  a  few
words,  these  reports  on  foreign  correspon¬
dence  should  be  succinct,  and,  if  you  please,
elaborate  chronicles  of  all  passing  events
in  the  Masonic  world ;  they  should  express
the  opinions  of  their  authors  on  points  of
Masonic  law,  not  as  judicial  dicta,  but  sim¬
ply  as  opinions,  not  to  be  dogmatically  en¬
forced,  but  to  be  sustained  and  supported
by  the  best  arguments  that  the  writers  can
produce ;  they  should  not  be  made  the  ve¬


hicles  of  personal  abuse  or  vituperation;
and,  lastly,  they  should  be  clothed  in  lan¬
guage  worthy  of  the  literature  of  the  Order.

Committee.  Private.  The  well-
known  regulation  which  forbids  private
committees  in  the  Lodge,  that  is,  select
conversations  between  two  or  more  mem¬
bers,  in  which  the  other  members  are  not
permitted  to  join,  is  derived  from  the  Old
Charges:  “You  are  not  permitted  to  hold
private  committees  or  separate  conversa¬
tion,  without  leave  from  the  Master,  nor  to
talk  of  anything  impertinent  or  unseemly,
nor  to  interrupt  the  Master  or  Wardens,  or
any  brother  speaking  to  the  Master.”

Committee,  Report  of.  See  Re¬
port  of  a  Committee.

Common  Gavel.  See  Gavel.

Communication.  The  meeting  of
a  Lodge  is  so  called.  There  is  a  peculiar
significance  in  this  term.  “  To  communi¬
cate,”  which,  in  the  Old  English  form,  was
“  to  common,”  originally  meant  to  share  in
common  with  others.  The  great  sacrament
of  the  Christian  church,  which  denotes  a
participation  in  the  mysteries  of  the  religion
and  a  fellowship  in  the  church,  is  called  a
“  communion,”  which  is  fundamentally  the
same  as  a  “  communication,”  for  he  who
partakes  of  the  communion  is  said  “  to
communicate.”  Hence,  the  meetings  of
Masonic  Lodges  are  called  communications,
to  signify  that  it  is  not  simply  the  ordinarv
meeting  of  a  society  for  the  transaction  of
business,  but  that  such  meeting  is  the  fel¬
lowship  of  men  engaged  in  a  common  pur¬
suit,  and  governed  by  a  common  principle,
and  that  there  is  therein  a  communication
or  participation  of  those  feelings  and  sen¬
timents  that  constitute  a  true  brotherhood.

The  communications  of  Lodges  are  regu-
:  lar  or  stated  and  special  or  emergent.
Regular  communications  are  held  under
the  provision  of  the  by-laws,  but  special
communications  are  called  by  order  of  the
Master.  It  is  a  regulation  that  no  special
communication  can  alter,  amend,  or  rescind
the  proceedings  of  a  regular  communica-
tion.

Communication.  Grand.  The

meeting  of  a  Grand  Lodge.

Communication  of  Degrees.

When  the  peculiar  mysteries  of  a  degree
are  bestowed  upon  a  candidate  by  mere
verbal  description  of  the  bestower,  without
his  being  made  to  pass  through  the  consti¬
tuted  ceremonies,  the  degree  is  technically
said  to  be  communicated.  This  mode  is,
however,  entirely  confined  in  this  country
to  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.
The  degrees  may  ’n  that  Rite  be  thus  con¬
ferred  in  any  place  where  secrecy  is  se¬
cured;  but  the  prerogative  of  communi-
.  eating  is  restricts!  to  the  presiding  officers


COMMUNICATION


COMPAGNONAGE


179


of  bodies  of  the  Rite,  who  may  communicate
certain  of  the  degrees  upon  candidates  who
have  been  previously  duly  elected,  and  to
Inspectors  and  Deputy  Inspectors  General
of  the  thirty-third  degree,  who  may  com¬
municate  all  the  degrees  of  the  Rite,  except
the  last,  to  any  persons  whom  they  may
deem  qualified  to  receive  them.

Communication,  Quarterly.
Anciently,  Grand  Lodges,  which  were  then
called  General  Assemblies  of  the  Craft,
were  held  annually.  But  it  is  said  that  the
Grand  Master  Inigo  Jones  instituted  quar¬
terly  communications  at  the  beginning  of
the  seventeenth  century,  which  were  con¬
tinued  by  his  successors,  the  Earl  of  Pem¬
broke  and  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  until  the
infirmities  of  the  latter  compelled  him  to
neglect  them.  On  the  revival  in  1717,  pro¬
vision  was  made  for  their  resumption;  and
in  the  twelfth  of  the  thirty-nine  Regula¬
tions  of  1721  it  was  declared  that  the  Grand
Lodge  must  have  a  quarterly  communica¬
tion  about  Michaelmas,  Christmas,  and
Lady-Day.  These  quarterly  communica¬
tions  are  still  retained  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  and  in  this  country  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  but  all
other  American  Grand  Lodges  have  adopted
the  old  system  of  annual  communications.

Communion  of  tlie  ISretlircn.
See  Bread,  Consecrated.

Como.  A  city  of  Lombardy,  which
was  the  principal  seat  of  that  body  of
architects  who,  under  the  name  of  Travel¬
ling  Freemasons,  wandered  over  Europe
during  the  Middle  Ages,  and  constructed
cathedrals,  monasteries,  and  other  religious
edifices.  A  school  of  architecture  was  es¬
tablished  at  Como  which  obtained  so  much
renown  that,  according  to  Muratori,  the
masons  and  bricklayers  of  that  place,  in
consequence  of  their  superiority  in  their
art,  received  the  appellation  of  Magistri
Comacini,  or  Masters  of  Como,  a  title  which
became  generic  to  all  those  of  the  profes¬
sion.  To  the  school  of  Como,  architects  of
all  nations  flocked  for  instruction.  Itebold
intimates  that  it  was  the  successor  of  the
Roman  Colleges  of  Builders,  and  that,  like
them,  it  had  its  secret  teachings  and  mys¬
teries.

Compngnon.  In  French  Masonry,  a
Fellow  Craft  is  so  called,  and  the  grade  da
Compagnon  is  the  degree  of  Fellow  Craft.

C'ompagHonuge.  This  is  the  name
which  is  given  in  France  to  certain  mysti¬
cal  associations  formed  between  workmen
of  the  same  or  an  analogous  handicraft,
whose  object  is  to  afford  mutual  assistance
to  the  members.  It  was  at  one  time  con¬
sidered  among  handicraftsmen  as  the  second
degree  of  the  novitiate,  before  arriving  at
the  mallrise,  or  mastership,  the  first  being,


of  course,  that  of  apprentice;  and  work¬
men  were  admitted  into  it  only  after  five
years  of  apprenticeship,  and  on  the  produc¬
tion  of  a  skilfully  constructed  piece  of  work,
which  was  called  their  chef-d’oeuvre.

Tradition  gives  to  Compagnonage  a  He¬
braic  origin,  which  to  some  extent  assimi¬
lates  it  to  the  traditional  history  of  Free¬
masonry  as  springing  out  of  the  Solomonic
Temple.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  it
arose,  in  the  twelfth  century,  out  of  a  part
of  the  corporation  of  workmen.  These,
who  prosecuted  the  labors  of  their  craft
from  province  to  province,  could  not  shut
their  eyes  to  the  narrow  policy  of  the  gilds  .
or  corporations,  which  the  masters  were
constantly  seeking  to  make  more  exclusive.
Thence  they  perceived  thq  necessity  of
forming  for  themselves  associations  or  con¬
fraternities,  whose  protection  should  ac¬
company  them  in  all  their  laborious  wan¬
derings,  and  secure  to  them  employment
and  fraternal  intercourse  when  arriving  in
strange  towns.

The  Compagnons  de  la  Tour,  which  is  the
title  assumed  by  those  who  are  the  mem¬
bers  of  the  brotherhoods  of  Compagnonage,
have  legends,  which  have  been  traditionally
transmitted  from  age  to  age,  by  which,  like
the  Freemasons,  they  trace  the  origin  of
their  association  to  the  Temple  of  Ring
Solomon.  These  legends  are  three  in  num¬
ber,  for  the  different  societies  of  Compag¬
nonage  recognize  three  different  founders,
and  hence  made  three  different  associations,
which  are :

1.  The  Children  of  Solomon.

2.  The  Children  of  Maitre  Jacques.

3.  The  Children  of  Pere  Soubise.

These  three  societies  or  classes  of  the

Compagnons  are  irreconcileable  enemies,
and  reproach  each  other  with  the  imagin¬
ary  contests  of  their  supposed  founders.

The  Children  of  Solomon  pretend  that
King  Solomon  gave  them  their  devoir,  or
gild,  as  a  reward  for  their  labors  at  the
Temple,  and  that  he  had  there  united  them
into  a  brotherhood.

The  Children  of  Maitre  Jacques  say  that
their  founder,  who  was  the  son  of  a  cele¬
brated  architect  named  Jacquain,  or
Jacques,  was  one  of  the  chief  Masters  of
Solomon,  and  a  qplleague  of  Hiram.  He
was  born  in  a  small  city  of  Gaul  named
Carte,  and  now  St.  Romille,  but  which  we
should  in  vain  look  for  on  the  maps.

From  the  age  of  fifteen  he  was  employed
in  stone-cutting.  He  travelled  in  Greece,
where  he  learned  sculpture  and  architec¬
ture  ;  afterwards  went  to  Egypt,  and  thence
to  Jerusalem,  where  he  constructed  two  pil¬
lars  with  so  much  skill  that  he  was  imme¬
diately  received  as  a  Master  of  the  Craft.

|  Maitre  Jacques  and  his  colleague  Pore  Sou-


180


COMPAGNONAGE


COMPAGNONAGE


bise,  after  the  labors  of  the  Temple  were
completed,  resolved  to  go  together  to  Gaul,
swearing  that  they  would  never  separate;
but  the  union  did  not  last  very  long  in
consequence  of  the  jealousy  excited  in
Pere  Soubise  by  the  ascendency  of  Maitre
Jacques  over  their  disciples.  They  parted,
and  the  former  landed  at  Bordeaux,  and
the  latter  at  Marseilles.

Oue  day,  Maitre  Jacques,  being  far  away
from  his  disciples,  was  attacked  by  ten  of
those  of  Pere  Soubise.  To  save  himself,  he
fled  into  a  marsh,  where  he  sustained  him¬
self  from  sinking  by  holding  on  to  the  reeds,
and  was  eventually  rescued  by  his  disci-
les.  He  then  retired  to  Saint  Baume,  but
eing  soon  after  betrayed  by  a  disciple,
named,  according  to  some,  Jeron,  and  ac¬
cording  to  otners,  Jamais,  he  was  assassi¬
nated  by  five  blows  of  a  dagger,  in  the
forty-seventh  year  of  his  age,  four  years  and
nine  days  after  his  departure  from  Jerusa¬
lem.  On  his  robe  was  subsequently  found
a  reed  which  he  wore  in  memory  of  his
having  been  saved  in  the  marsh,  and  thence¬
forth  his  disciples  adopted  the  reed  as  the
emblem  of  their  Order.

Pere  Soubise  is  not  generally  accused  of
having  taken  any  part  in  the  assassination.
The  tears  which  he  shed  over  the  tomb  of
his  colleague  removed  in  part  the  suspi¬
cions  which  had  at  first  rested  on  him.
The  traitor  who  committed  the  crime  sub¬
sequently,  in  a  moment  of  deep  contrition,
cast  himself  into  a  well,  which  the  disci¬
ples  of  Maitre  Jacques  filled  up  with  stones.
The  relics  of  the  martyr  were  long  pre¬
served  in  a  sacred  chest,  and,  when  his  dis¬
ciples  afterwards  separated  into  different
crafts,  his  hat  was  given  to  the  hatters,  his
tunic  to  the  stone-cutters,  his  sandals  to  the
locksmiths,  his  mantle  to  the  joiners,  his
girdle  to  the  carpenters,  and  his  staff  to  the
Cartwrights.

According  to  another  tradition,  Maitre
Jacques  was  no  other  than  Jacques  de  Mo-
lay,  the  last  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars,
who  had  collected  under  his  banner  some
of  the  Children  of  Solomon  that  had  sepa¬
rated  from  the  parent  society,  and  who,
about  1268,  conferred  upon  them  a  new
devoir  or  gild.  P&re  Soubise  is  said,  in  the
same  legend,  to  have  l^en  a  Benedictine
monk,  who  gave  to  the  carpenters  some
special  statutes.  This  second  legend  is
generally  recognized  as  more  truthful  than
the  first.  From  this  it  follows  that  the
division  of  the  society  of  Compagnonage
into  three  classes  dates  from  the  thirteenth
century,  and  that  the  Children  of  Maitre
Jacques  and  of  Pere  Soubise  are  more
modern  than  the  Children  of  Solomon,  from
whom  they  were  a  dismemberment.

The  organization  of  these  associations  of


Compagnonage  reminds  one  very  strongly
of  the  somewhat  similar  organization  of
the  stone-masons  of  Germany  and  of  other
countries  in  the  Middle  Ages.  To  one  of
these  classes  every  handicraftsman  in
France  was  expected  to  attach  himself.
There  was  an  initiation,  and  a  system  of
degrees  which  were  four  in  number:  the
Accepted  Companion,  the  Finished  Com¬
panion,  the  Initiated  Companion,  and,
lastly,  the  Affiliated  Companion.  There
were  also  signs  and  words  as  modes  of  re¬
cognition,  and  decorations,  which  varied  in
the  different  devoirs;  but  to  all,  the  square
and  compasses  was  a  common  symbol.

As  soon  as  a  Craftsman  had  passed
through  his  apprenticeship,  he  joined  one
of  these  gilds,  and  commenced  his  journey
over  France,  which  was  called  the  tour  de
France,  in  the  course  of  which  he  visited
the  principal  cities,  towns,  and  villages,
stopping  for  a  time  wherever  he  could  se¬
cure  employment.  In  almost  every  town
there  was  a  house  of  call,  presided  over
always  by  a  woman,  who  was  affectionately
called  “  la  Mere,”  or  the  Mother,  and  the
same  name  was  given  to  the  house  itself.
There  the  Compagnons  held  their  meetings
and  annually  elected  their  officers,  and  trav¬
elling  workmen  repaired  there  to  obtain
food  and  lodging,  and  the  necessary  infor¬
mation  which  might  lead  to  employment.

When  two  Companions  met  on  the  road,
one  of  them  addressed  the  other  with  the
topage,  or  challenge,  being  a  formula  of
words,  the  conventional  reply  to  which
would  indicate  that  the  other  was  a  member
of  the  same  devoir.  If  such  was  the  case,
friendly  greetings  ensued.  But  if  the  reply
was  not  satisfactory,  and  it  appeared  that
they  belonged  to  different  associations,  a  war
of  words,  and  even  of  blows,  was  the  result.
Such  was  formerly  the  custom,  but  through
the  evangelic  labors  of  Agricol  Perdiquier,
a  journeyman  joiner  of  Avignon,  who  trav¬
elled  through  France  inculcating  lessons  of
brotherly  love,  a  better  spirit  now  exists.

In  each  locality  the  association  has  a
chief,  who  is  annually  elected  by  ballot  at
the  General  Assembly  of  the  Craft.  He  is
called  the  First  Compagnon  of  Dignity.
He  presides  over  the  meetings,  which  ordi¬
narily  take  place  on  the  first  Sunday  of
every  month,  and  represents  the  society  in
its  intercourse  with  other  bodies,  with  the
Masters,  or  with  the  municipal  authorities.

Compagnonage  has  been  exposed,  at  va¬
rious  periods,  to  the  persecutions  of  the
Church  and  the  State,  as  well  as  to  the  oppo¬
sition  of  the  Corporations  of  Masters,  to
which,  of  course,  its  designs  were  antagonis¬
tic,  because  it  opposed  their  monopoly.  Un¬
like  them,  and  particularly  the  Corporation
of  Freemasons,  it  was  not  under  the  protec-


COMPAGNONS


CONCORDATS


181


tion  of  the  Church.  The  practice  of  its  mysti¬
cal  receptions  was  condemned  by  the  Faculty
of  Theology  at  Paris,  in  1655,  as  impious.
But  a  hundred  years  before,  in  1541,  a  de-
iree  of  Francis  I.  had  interdicted  the  Com-
pagnons  de  la  Tour  from  binding  themselves
by  an  oath,  from  wearing  swords  or  canes,
from  assembling  in  a  greater  number  than
five  outside  of  their  Masters’  houses,  or
from  having  banquets  on  any  occasion.
During  the  sixteenth,  seventeenth,  and
eighteenth  centuries,  the  parliaments  were
continually  interposing  their  power  against
the  associations  of  Compagnonage,  as  well
as  against  other  fraternities.  The  effects
of  these  persecutions,  although  embarrass¬
ing,  were  not  absolutely  disastrous.  In
spite  of  them,  Compagnonage  was  never
entirely  dissolved,  although  a  few  of  the
trades  abandoned  their  devoirs;  some  of
which,  however,  —  such  as  that  of  the  shoe¬
makers,  —  were  subsequently  renewed.  And
at  this  day,  the  gilds  of  the  workmen  still
exist  in  France,  having  lost,  it  is  true,  much
of  their  original  code  of  religious  dogmas
and  symbols,  and,  although  not  recognized
by  the  law,  always  tolerated  by  the  muni¬
cipal  authorities  and  undisturbed  by  the
police.  To  the  Masonic  scholar,  the  history
of  these  devoirs  or  gilds  is  peculiarly  inter¬
esting.  In  nearly  all  of  them  the  Temple
of  Solomon  prevails  as  a  predominant  sym¬
bol,  while  the  square  and  compass,  their
favorite  and  constant  device,  would  seem,
in  some  way,  to  identify  them  with  Free¬
masonry  so  far  as  respects  the  probability
of  a  common  origin.

Compagnons  de  la  Tonr.  The
title  assumed  by  the  workmen  in  France
who  belong  to  the  different  gilds  of  Com¬
pagnonage,  which  see.

Companion.  A  title  bestowed  by
Royal  Arch  Masons  upon  each  other,  and
equivalent  to  the  word  brother  in  symbolic
Lodges.  It  refers,  most  probably,  to  the
companionship  in  exile  and  captivity  of  the
ancient  Jews,  from  the  destruction  of  the
Temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar  to  its  restora¬
tion  by  Zerubbabel,  under  the  auspices  of
Cyrus.  In  using  this  title  in  a  higher  de-
ree,  the  Masons  who  adopted  it  seem  to
ave  intimated  that  there  was  a  shade  of
difference  between  its  meaning  and  that  of
brother.  The  latter  refers  to  the  universal
fatherhood  of  God  and  the  universal  bro¬
therhood  of  man ;  but  the  former  represents
n  companionship  or  common  pursuit  of  one
object — the  common  endurance  of  suffering
or  the  common  enjoyment  of  happiness.
Companion  represents  a  closer  tie  than
brother.  The  one  is  a  natural  relation  shared
by  all  men ;  the  other  a  connection,  the  result
of  choice  and  confined  to  a  few.  All  men
are  our  brethren,  not  all  our  companions.


Compasses.  As  in  Operative  Ma¬
sonry,  the  compasses  are  used  for  the  ad¬
measurement  of  the  architect’s  plans,  and
to  enable  him  to  give  those  just  proportions
which  will  insure  beauty  as  well  as  stability
to  his  work ;  so,-  in  Speculative  Masonry,  is
this  important  implement  symbolic  of  that
even  tenor  of  deportment,  that  true  stand¬
ard  of  rectitude  which  alone  can  bestow
happiness  here  and  felicity  hereafter.  Hence
are  the  compasses  the  most  prominent  em¬
blem  of  virtue,  the  true  and  only  measure
of  a  Mason’s  life  and  conduct.  As  the
Bible  gives  us  light  on  our  duties  to  God,
and  the  square  illustrates  our  duties  to  our
neighborhood  and  brother,  so  the  compasses
give  that  additional  light  which  is  to  in¬
struct  us  in  the  duty  we  owe  to  ourselves
—  the  great,  imperative  duty  of  circum¬
scribing  our  passions,  and  keeping  our  de¬
sires  within  due  bounds.  “  It  is  ordained,”
says  the  philosophic  Burke,  “in  the  eternal
constitution  of  things,  that  men  of  intem¬
perate  passions  cannot  be  free ;  their  pas¬
sions  forge  their  fetters.”  Those  brethren
who  delight  to  trace  our  emblems  to  an  as¬
tronomical  origin,  find  in  the  compasses  a
symbol  of  the  sun,  the  circular  pivot  rep¬
resenting  the  body  of  the  luminary,  and
the  diverging  legs  his  rays.

In  the  earliest  rituals  of  the  last  century,
the  compasses  are  described  as  a  part  of  the
furniture  of  the  Lodge,  and  are  said  to  be¬
long  to  the  Master.  Some  change  will  be
found  in  this  respect  in  the  ritual  of  the
present  day.  See  Square  and  Compasses.

Composite.  One  of  the  five  orders
of  architecture  introduced  by  the  Romans,
and  compounded  of  the  other  four,  whence
it  derives  its  name.  Although  it  combines
strength  with  beauty,  yet,  as  it  is  a  com¬
paratively  modern  invention,  it  is  held  in
little  esteem  among  Freemasons.

Concealment  of  the  Body.  See
Aphanism.

Conclave.  Commanderies  of  Knights
Templars  in  England  and  Canada  are
called  Conclaves,  and  the  Grand  Encamp¬
ment  the  Grand  Conclave.  The  word  is
also  applied  to  the  meetings  in  some  other
of  the  high  degrees.  The  word  is  derived
from  the  Latin  con,  “  with,”  and  clavis,  “  a
key,”  to  denote  the  idea  of  being  locked
up  in  seclusion,  and  in  this  sense  was  first
applied  to  the  apartment  in  which  the  car¬
dinals  are  literally  locked  up  when  met  to
elect  a  pope.

Concordats.  A  secret  order  estab¬
lished  in  Prussia,  by  M.  Lang,  on  the  wreck
of  the  Tugendverein,  which  latter  body
was  instituted  in  1790  as  a  successor  of  the
Illuminati,  and  suppressed  in  1812  by  the
Prussian  government,  on  account  of  its  sup¬
posed  political  tendencies.


182


CONFEDERACIES


CONSERVATORS


Confederacies.  A  title  given  to  the
yearly  meetings  of  the  Masons  in  the  time  of
Henry  VI.,  of  England,  and  used  in  the
celebrated  statute  passed  in  the  third  year
of  his  reign,  and  which  begins  thus:
“  Whereas,  by  yearly  congregations  and
confederacies  made  by  the  Masons  in  their
General  Assemblies,  etc.”  See  Laborers ,
Statutes  of.

Conference  Eodges.  Assemblies
of  the  members  of  a  Lodge  sometimes  held
in  Germany.  Their  object  is  the  discussion
of  the  financial  and  other  private  matters
of  the  Lodge.  Lodges  of  this  kind  held
in  France  are  said  to  be  “en  famille.”
There  is  no  such  arraugement  in  English
or  American  Masonry.

Conferring  Degrees.  When  a  can¬
didate  is  initiated  into  any  degree  of  Ma¬
sonry  in  due  form,  the  degree  is  said  to
have  been  conferred,  in  contradistinction  to
the  looser  mode  of  imparting  its  secrets  by
communication.

Confusion  of  Tongues.  The

Tower  of  Babel  is  referred  to  in  the  ritual
of  the  third  degree  as  the  place  where
language  was  confounded  and  Masonry  lost.
Hence,  in  Masonic  symbolism,  as  Masonry
professes  to  possess  a  universal  language,
the  confusion  of  tongues  at  Babel  is  a  sym¬
bol  of  that  intellectual  darkness  from  which
the  aspirant  is  seeking  to  emerge  on  his
passage  to  that  intellectual  light  which  is
imparted  by  the  Order.  See  Threshing-
Floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite.

Congregations.  In  the  Old  Records
and  Constitutions  of  Masonry,  the  yearly
meetings  of  the  Craft  are  so  called.  Thus,
in  the  Halliwell  MS.  it  is  said,  “  Every
Master  that  is  a  Mason  must  be  at  the
General  Congregation.”  What  are  now
called  “  Communications  of  a  Grand  Lodge”
were  then  called  “  Congregations  of  the
Craft.”  See  Assembly,  General.

Congresses,  Masonic.  At  various
times  in  the  history  of  Freemasonry  con¬
ferences  have  been  held,  in  which,  as  in
the  General  Councils  of  the  Church,  the
interests  of  the  Institution  have  been  made
the  subject  of  consideration.  These  con¬
ferences  have  received  the  name  of  Ma¬
sonic  Congresses.  Whenever  a  respectable
number  of  Masons,  invested  with  delibera¬
tive  powers,  assemble  as  the  representa¬
tives  of  different  countries  and  jurisdic¬
tions,  to  take  into  consideration  matters
relating  to  the  Order,  such  a  meeting  will
be  properly  called  a  Congress.  Of  these
Congresses  some  have  been  productive  of
little  or  no  effect,  while  others  have  un¬
doubtedly  left  their  mark ;  nor  can  it  be
doubted,  that  if  a  General  or  Ecumenical
Congress,  consisting  of  representatives  of
all  the  Masonic  powers  of  the  world,  were


to  meet,  with  an  eye  single  to  the  great  ob¬
ject  of  Masonic  reform,  and  were  to  be
guided  by  a  liberal  and  conciliatory  spirit
of  compromise,  such  a  Congress  might  at
the  present  day  be  of  incalculable  advan¬
tage.

The  most  important  Congresses  that
have  met  since  the  year  926  are  those  of
York,  Strasburg,  Ratisbon,  Spire,  Cologne,
Basle,  Jena,  Altenberg,  Brunswick,  Ly¬
ons,  Wolfenbuttel,  Wilhelmsbad,  Paris,
Washington,  Baltimore,  Lexington,  and
Chicago.  See  them  under  their  respective
titles.

Consecration.  The  appropriating  or
dedicating,  with  certain  ceremonies,  any¬
thing  to  sacred  purposes  or  offices  by  sepa¬
rating  it  from  common  use.  Hobbes,  in  his
Leviathan,  (p.  iv.,  c.  44,)  gives  the  best  de¬
finition  of  this  ceremony.  “  To  consecrate
is,  in  Scripture,  to  offer,  give,  or  dedicate,
in  pious  and  decent  language  and  gesture,
a  man,  or  any  other  thing,  to  God,  by  sepa¬
rating  it  from  common  use.”  Masonic
Lodges,  like  ancient  temples  and  modern
churches,  have  always  been  consecrated.
The  rite  of  consecration  i3  performed  by
the  Grand  Master,  when  the  Lodge  is  said
to  be  consecrated  in  ample  form;  by  the
Deputy  Grand  Master,  when  it  is  said  to  be
consecrated  in  due  form;  or  by  the  proxy
of  the  Grand  Master,  when  it  is  said  to  be
consecrated  in  form.  The  Grand  Master,
accompanied  by  his  officers,  proceeds  to  the
hall  of  the  new  Lodge,  where,  after  the
performance  of  those  ceremonies  which  are
described  in  all  manuals  and  monitors,  he
solemnly  consecrates  the  Lodge  with  the
elements  of  corn,  wine,  and  oil,  after  which
the  Lodge  is  dedicated  and  constituted,
and  the  officers  installed.

Consecration,  Elements  of.
Those  things,  the  use  of  which  in  the  cere¬
mony  as  constituent  and  elementary  parts
of  it,  are  necessary  to  the  perfecting  and
legalizing  of  the  act  of  consecration.  In
Freemasonry,  these  elements  ar e  corn,  wine,
and  oil,  which  see.

Conserrators  of  Masonry.  About

the  year  1859,  a  Mason  of  some  distinction
in  this  country  professed  to  have  discov¬
ered,  by  his  researches,  what  he  called
“  the  true  Preston-Webb  Work,”  and  at¬
tempted  to  introduce  it  into  various  juris¬
dictions,  sometimes  in  opposition  to  the
wishes  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  leading
Masons  of  the  State.  To  aid  in  the  prop¬
agation  of  this  ritual,  he  communicated  it
to  several  persons,  who  were  bound  to  use
all  efforts  —  to  some,  indeed,  of  question¬
able  propriety  —  to  secure  its  adoption  by
their  respective  Grand  Lodges.  These
Masons  were  called  by  him  “  Conserva¬
tors,”  and  the  order  or  society  which  they


CONSERVATORS


CONSTITUTIONS


183


constituted  was  called  the  “Conservators’
Association.”  This  association,  and  the
efforts  of  its  chief  to  extend  his  ritual,  met
with  the  very  general  disapproval  of  the
Masons  of  the  United  States,  and  in  some
jurisdictions  led  to  considerable  disturb¬
ance  and  bad  feeling.

Conservators,  Grand.  See  Grand
Conservators.

Consistory.  The  meetings  of  mem¬
bers  of  the  thirty-second  degree,  or  Sub¬
lime  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret  in  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  are
called  Consistories.  The  elective  officers
are,  according  to  the  ritual  of  the  Southern
Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States,  a  Com¬
mander -in -Chief,  Seneschal,  Preceptor,
Chancellor,  Minister  of  State,  Almoner,
Registrar,  and  Treasurer.  In  the  Northern
Jurisdiction  it  is  slightly  different,  the
second  and  third  officers  being  called  Lieu¬
tenant-Commanders.  A  Consistory  confers
the  thirty-first  and  thirty-second  degrees
of  the  Rite.

Consistory,  Grand.  See  Grand
Consistory.

Constable,  Grand.  The  fourth  offi¬
cer  in  a  Grand  Consistory.  It  is  the  title
which  was  formerly  given  to  the  leader  of
the  land  forces  of  the  Knights  Templars.

Constantine.  See  Bed  Cross  of  Rome
and  Constantine.

Constituted,  ^Legally.  The  phrase,
a  legally-constituted  Lodge,  is  often  used
Masonically  to  designate  any  Lodge  work¬
ing  under  proper  authority,  which  neces¬
sarily  includes  Lodges  working  under  dis¬
pensation;  although,  strictly,  a  Lodge
cannot  be  legally  constituted  until  it  has
received  its  warrant  or  charter  from  the
Grand  Lodge.  But  so  far  as  respects  the
regularity  of  their  work,  Lodges  under  dis¬
pensation  and  warranted  Lodges  have  the
same  standing.

Constitution  of  a  Lodge.  Any

number  of  Master  Masons,  not  less  than
seven,  being  desirous  of  forming  a  new
Lodge,  having  previously  obtained  a  dis¬
pensation  from  the  Grand  Master,  must
apply  by  petition  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of
the  State  in  which  they  reside,  praying  for
a  Charter,  or  Warrant  of  Constitution,  to
enable  them  to  assemble  as  a  regular  Lodge.
Their  petition  being  favorably  received,  a
warrant  is  immediately  granted,  and  the
Grand  Master  appoints  a  day  for  its  conse¬
cration  and  for  the  installation  of  its  offi¬
cers.  The  Lodge  having  been  consecrated,
the  Grand  Master,  or  person  acting  as  such,
declares  the  brethren  “  to  be  constituted  and
formed  into  a  regular  Lodge  of  Free  and
Accepted  Masons,”  after  which  the  officers
of  the  Lodge  are  installed.  In  this  decla¬
ration  of  the  Master,  accompanied  with  the


appropriate  ceremonies,  consists  the  con¬
stitution  of  the  Lodge.  Until  a  Lodge  is
thus  legally  constituted,  it  forms  no  compo¬
nent  of  the  constituency  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  can  neither  elect  officers  nor  mem¬
bers,  and  exists  only  as  a  Lodge  under  dis¬
pensation  at  the  will  of  the  Grand  Master.
See  Dispensation,  Lodges  under.

Constitutions  of  1762.  This  is  the
name  of  one  of  that  series  of  Constitutions,
or  Regulations,  which  have  always  been
deemed  of  importance  in  the  history  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite;  al¬
though  the  Constitutions  of  1762  have
really  nothing  to  do  with  that  Rite,  having
been  adopted  long  before  its  establishment.
In  the  year  1758,  there  was  founded  at
Paris  a  Masonic  body  which  assumed  the
title  of  the  Chapter,  or  Council,  of  Empe¬
rors  of  the  East  and  West,  and  which  body
organized  a  Rite  known  as  the  Rite  of  Per¬
fection,  consisting  of  twenty-five  degrees,
and  in  the  same  year  the  Rite  was  carried
to  Berlin  by  the  Marquis  de  Bernez.  In
the  following  year,  a  Council  of  Princes
of  the  Royal  Secret,  the  highest  degree  con¬
ferred  in  the  Rite,  was  established  at  Bor¬
deaux.  On  Sept.  21,  1762,  nine  Commis¬
sioners  met  and  drew  up  Constitutions  for
the  government  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection,
which  have  been  since  known  as  the  “  Con¬
stitutions  of  1762.”  Of  the  place  where
the  Commissioners  met,  there  is  some
doubt.  Of  the  two  copies,  hereafter  to  be
noticed,  which  are  in  the  archives  of  the
Southern  Supreme  Council,  that  of  Dela-
hogue  refers  to  the  Orients  of  Paris  and
Berlin,  while  that  of  Aveilhe'  says  that  they
were  made  at  the  Grand  Orient  of  Bor¬
deaux.  Thory  also  (Act.  Lat.,  i.  79,)  names
Bordeaux  as  the  place  of  their  enactment,
and  so  does  Ragon,  (Orthod.  Mat}.,  133;)  al¬
though  he  doubts  their  authenticity,  and
says  that  there  is  no  trace  of  any  such
document  at  Bordeaux,  nor  any  recollec¬
tion  there  of  the  Consistory  which  is  said
to  have  drawn  up  the  Constitutions.  To
this  it  may  be  answered,  that  in  the
Archives  of  the  Mother  Supreme  Council
at  Charleston  there  are  two  manuscript
copies  of  these  Constitutions — one  written
by  Jean  Baptiste  Marie  Delahogue  in
1798,  and  which  is  authenticated  by  Count
de  Grasse,  under  the  seal  of  the  Grand
Council  of  the  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,
then  sitting  at  Charleston ;  and  another,
written  by  Jean  Baptiste  Aveilh6  in  1797.
This  copy  is  authenticated  by  Long,  Dela¬
hogue,  De  Grasse,  and  others.  Both  docu¬
ments  are  written  in  French,  and  are  al¬
most  substantially  the  same.  The  trans¬
lated  title  of  Delahogue’s  copy  is  as  fol¬
lows  :

“Constitutions  and  Regulations  drawn


184


CONSTITUTIONS


CONSTITUTIONS


up  by  nine  Commissioners  appointed  by
the  Grand  Council  of  the  Sovereign  Princes
of  the  Royal  Secret  at  the  Grand  Orients
of  Paris  and  Berlin,  by  virtue  of  the  de¬
liberation  of  the  fifth  day  of  the  third  week
of  the  seventh  month  of  the  Hebrew  Era,
5662,  and  of  the  Christian  Era,  1762.  To  be
ratified  and  observed  by  the  Grand  Councils
of  the  Sublime  Knights  and  Princes  of  Ma¬
sonry  as  well  as  by  the  particular  Councils
and  Grand  Inspectors  regularly  constituted
in  the  two  Hemispheres.”  The  title  of
Aveilh6’s  manuscript  differs  in  this,  that  it
says  the  Constitutions  were  enacted  “  at  the
Grand  Orient  of  Bordeaux,”  and  that  they
were  “  transmitted  to  our  Brother  Stephen
Morin,  Grand  Inspector  of  all  the  Lodges  in
the  New  World.”  I  am  inclined  to  think
that  this  is  a  correct  record,  and  that  the
Constitutions  were  prepared  at  Bordeaux.

The  Constitutions  of  1762  consist  of
thirty-five  articles,  and  are  principally  oc¬
cupied  in  providing  for  the  government  of
the  Rite  established  by  the  Council  of  Em-
erors  of  the  East  and  West  and  of  the
odies  under  it.

The  Constitutions  of  1762  were  pub¬
lished  at  Paris,  in  1832,  in  the  liecueil  des
Actes  du  Supreme  Cornell  de  France.  They
were  also  published,  in  1859,  in  this
country ;  but  the  best  printed  exemplar
of  them  is  that  published  in  French  and
English  in  the  Book  of  Grand  Constitu¬
tions,  edited  by  Bro.  Albert  Pike,  which  is
illustrated  with  copious  and  valuable  anno¬
tations  by  the  editor,  who  is  the  Sovereign
Grand  Commander  of  the  Southern  Su¬
preme  Council.

Constitutions  of  1786.  These  are
regarded  by  the  members  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  as  the  funda¬
mental  law  of  their  Rite.  They  are  said
to  have  been  established  by  Frederick  II.,
of  Prussia,  in  the  last  year  of  his  life;  a
statement,  however,  that  has  been-  denied
by  some  writers,  and  the  controversies  as  to
their  authenticity  have  made  them  a  subject
of  interest  to  all  Masonic  scholars.  Bro.
Albert  Pike,  the  Grand  Commander  of  the
Supreme  Council  for  the  Southern  Juris¬
diction  of  the  United  States,  published
them,  in  1872,  in  Latin,  French,  aud  Eng¬
lish  ;  and  I  avail  myself  of  his  exhaustive
annotations,  because  he  has  devoted  to  the
investigation  of  their  origin  and  their  au¬
thenticity  more  elaborate  care  than  any
other  writer.

Of  these  Constitutions,  there  are  two  ex-
amplars,  one  in  French  and  one  in  Latin,
between  which  there  are,  however,  some
material  differences.  For  a  long  time  the
French  examplar  only  was  known  in  this
country.  It  is  supposed  by  Bro.  Pike  that
it  was  brought  to  Charleston  by  Count  de


Grasse,  and  that  under  its  provisions  he
organized  the  Supreme  Council  in  that
place.  They  were  accepted  by  the  Southern
Supreme  Council,  and  are  still  regarded
by  the  Northern  Council  as  the  only  au¬
thentic  Constitutions.  But  there  is  abun¬
dant  internal  evidence  of  the  incomplete¬
ness  and  incorrectness  of  the  French  Con¬
stitutions,  of  whose  authenticity  there  is  no
proof,  nor  is  it  likely  that  they  were  made
at  Berlin  and  approved  by  F rederick,  as  they
profess.

The  Latin  Constitutions  were  probably
not  known  in  France  until  after  the  Revo¬
lution.  In  1834,  they  were  accepted  as  au¬
thentic  by  the  Supreme  Council  of  France,
and  published  there  in  the  same  year.  A
copy  of  this  was  published  in  America,  in
1859,  by  Bro.  Pike.  These  Latin  Constitu¬
tions  of  1786  have  been  recently  accepted
by  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Southern
Jurisdiction  in  preference  to  the  French  ver¬
sion.  Most  of  the  other  Supreme  Councils
—  those,  namely,  of  England  and  Wales,
of  Italy,  and  of  South  America,  —  have
adopted  them  as  the  law  of  the  Rite,  re¬
pudiating  the  French  version  as  of  no  au¬
thority-.

The  definite  and  well  authorized  conclu¬
sions  to  which  Bro.  Pike  has  arrived  on
the  subject  of  these  Constitutions  have
been  expressed  by  that  eminent  Mason  in
the  following  language :

“We  think  we  may  safely  say,  that  the
charge  that  the  Grand  Constitutions  were
forged  at  Charleston  is  completely  dis¬
proved,  and  that  it  will  be  contemptible
hereafter  to  repeat  it.  No  set  of  speculat¬
ing  Jews  constituted  the  Supreme  Council
established  there ;  and  those  who  care  for
the  reputations  of  Colonel  Mitchell,  and
Doctors  Dalcho,  Auld,  and  Moultrie,  may
well  afiord  to  despise  the  scurrilous  libels
of  the  Ragons,  Clavels,  and  Folgers.

“And,  secondly,  that  it  is  not  by  any
means  proven  or  certain  that  the  Constitu¬
tions  were  not  really  made  at  Berlin,  as
they  purport  to  have  been,  and  approved
by  Frederick.  We  think  that  the  prepon¬
derance  of  the  evidence,  internal  and  ex¬
ternal,  is  on  the  side  of  their  authenticity,
apart  from  the  positive  evidence  of  the  cer¬
tificate  of  1832.

“  And,  thirdly,  that  the  Supreme  Council
at  Charleston  had  a  perfect  right  to  adopt
them  as  the  law  of  the  new  Order ;  no
matter  where,  when,  or  by  whom  they
were  made,  as  Anderson’s  Constitutions
were  adopted  in  Symbolic  Masonry;  that
they  are  and  always  have  been  the  law  of
the  Rite,  because  they  were  so  adopted;
and  because  no  man  has  ever  lawfully  re¬
ceived  the  degrees  of  the  Rite  without
swearing  to  maintain  them  as  its  supreme


CONSTITUTIONS


»


COOKE’S


185


law  ;  for  as  to  the  articles  themselves,  there
is  uo  substantial  difference  between  the
French  and  Latin  copies.

“  And,  fourthly,  that  there  is  not  one
particle  of  proof  of  any  sort,  circumstan¬
tial  or  historical,  or  by  argument  from  im¬
probability,  that  they  are  not  genuine  and
authentic.  In  law,  documents  of  great
age,  found  in  the  possession  of  those  in¬
terested  under  them,  to  whom  they  right¬
fully  belong,  and  with  whom  they  might
naturally  be  expected  to  be  found,  are  ad¬
mitted  in  evidence  without  proof,  to  estab¬
lish  title  or  facts.  They  prove  themselves,
and  to  be  avoided  must  be  disproved  by
evidence.  There  is  no  evidence  against  the
genuineness  of  these  Grand  Constitutions .”

Constitutions,  Old.  See  Records,
Old.

Constitutions,  Secret.  See  Secret
Constitutions.

Consummatuin  est.  Latin.  It  is
finished.  A  phrase  used  in  some  of  the
higher  degrees  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite.  It  is  borrowed  from  the  ex¬
pression  used  by  our  Lord  when  he  said,
on  the  cross,  “  It  is  finished, ’’.meaning  that
the  work  which  had  been  given  him  to  do
had  been  executed.  It  is,  therefore,  appro¬
priately  used  in  the  closing  ceremonies  to
indicate  that  the  sublime  work  of  the  de¬
grees  is  finished,  so  that  all  may  retire  in
peace.

Contemplative.  To  contemplate  is,
literally,  to  watch  and  inspect  the  Temple.
The  augur  among  the  Romans,  having
taken  his  stand  on  the  Capitoline  Hill,
marked  out  with  his  wand  the  space  in  the
heavens  he  intended  to  consult.  This  space
he  called  the  templum.  Having  divided
his  templum  into  two  parts  from  top  to
bottom,  he  watched  to  see  what  would
occur.  The  watching  of  the  templum  was
called  contemplating  ;  and  hence  those  who
devoted  themselves  to  meditation  upon  sa¬
cred  subjects  assumed  this  title.  Thus,
among  the  Jews,  the  Essenes  and  the
Therapeutists,  and,  among  the  Greeks,  the
school  of  Pythagoras,  were  contemplative
sects.  Among  the  Freemasons,  the  word
speculative  is  used  as  equivalent  to  contem¬
plative.  See  Speculative  Masonry.

Continental  Lodges.  This  expres¬
sion  is  used  throughout  this  work,  as  it
constantly  is  by  English  writers,  to  desig¬
nate  the  Lodges  on  the  continent  of  Europe
which  retain  many  usages  which  have  either
been  abandoned  by,  or  never  were  observed
in,  the  Lodges  of  England,  Ireland,  and
Scotland,  as  well  as  the  United  States  of
America.  The  words  Continental  Masonry
are  employed  in  the  same  sense.

Contumacy.  In  civil  law,  it  is  the  re¬
fusal  or  neglect  of  a  party  accused  to  appear
Y


and  answer  to  a  charge  preferred  against
him  in  a  court  of  justice.  In  Masonic
jurisprudence,  it  is  disobedience  of  or  re¬
bellion  against  superior  authority,  as  when
a  Mason  refuses  to  obey  tbe  edict  of  his
Lodge,  or  a  Lodge  refuses  to  obey  that  of
the  Grand  Master  or  the  Grand  Lodge.
The  punishment,  in  the  former  case,  is  gen¬
erally  suspension  or  expulsion  ;  in  the  lat¬
ter,  arrest  of  charter  or  forfeiture  of  warrant.

Convention.  In  a  State  or  Territory
where  there  is  no  Grand  Lodge,  but  three
or  more  Lodges  holding  their  Warrants  of
Constitution  from  Grand  Lodges  outside
of  the  Territory,  these  Lodges  may  meet
together  by  their  representatives,  —  who
should  properly  be  the  first  three  officers
of  each  Lodge,  —  and  take  the  necessary
steps  for  the  organization  of  a  Grand  Lodge
in  that  State  or  Territory.  This  preparatory
meeting  is  called  a  Convention.  A  Presi¬
dent  and  Secretary  are  chosen,  and  a  Grand
Lodge  is  formed  by  the  election  of  a  Grand
Master  and  other  proper  officers,  when  the
old  warrants  are  returned  to  the  Grand
Lodges,  and  new  ones  taken  out  from  the
newly-formed  Grand  Lodge.  Not  less  than
three  Lodges  are  required  to  constitute  a
Convention.  The  first  Convention  of  this
kind  ever  held  was  that  of  the  four  old
Lodges  of  London,  which  met  at  the  Apple-
Tree  Tavern,  in  February,  1717,  and  formed
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

Convention  Niglit.  A  title  some¬
times  given  in  the  minutes  of  English
Lodges  to  a  Lodge  of  emergency.  Thus,
in  the  minutes  of  Constitution  Lodge,  No.
390,  (London,)  we  read:  “This  being  a
Convention  Night  to  consider  the  state  of
the  Lodge,”  etc.

Conversation.  Conversation  among
the  brethren  during  Lodge  hours  is  for¬
bidden  by  the  Charges  of  1722  in  these
words:  “You  are  not  to  hold  private  com¬
mittees  or  separate  conversation  without
leave  from  the  Master.”

Convoeation.  The  meetings  of  Chap¬
ters  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  are  so  called
from  the  Latin  convocatio,  a  calling  to¬
gether.  It  seems  very  properly  to  refer  to
the  convoking  of  the  dispersed  Masons  at
Jerusalem  to  rebuild  the  second  Temple,
of  which  every  Chapter  is  a  representation.

Convocation,  Grand.  The  meet¬
ing  of  a  Grand  Chapter  is  so  styled.

Cooke’s  Manuscript.  The  old
document  commonly  known  among  Ma¬
sonic  scholars  as  “  Matthew  Cooke’s  Manu¬
script,”  because  it  was  first  given  to  the
public  by  that  distinguished  brother,  was
published  by  him,  in  1861,  from  the  original
in  the  British  Museum,  which  institution
purchased  it,  on  the  14th  of  October,  1859,
I  from  Mrs.  Caroline  Baker.  Its  principal


186


COPE


.  CORNER


value  is  derived  from  the  fact,  as  Brother
Cooke  remarks,  that  until  its  appearance
“there  was  no  prose  work  of  such  un¬
doubted  antiquity  known  to  be  in  exist¬
ence  on  the  subject.”

Brother  Cooke  gives  the  following  ac¬
count  of  the  MS.  in  his  preface  to  its  re¬
publication  :

“By  permission  of  the  Trustees  of  the
British  Museum,  the  following  little  work
has  been  allowed  to  be  copied  and  pub¬
lished  in  its  entire  form.  The  original  is
to  be  found  among  the  additional  manu¬
scripts  in  that  national  collection,  and  is
numbered  23,198.

“Judging  from  the  character  of  the
handwriting  and  the  form  of  contractions
employed  by  the  scribe,  it  was  most  proba¬
bly  written  in  the  latter  portion  of  the  fif¬
teenth  century,  [about  1490,  says  Hughan,]
and  may  be  considered  a  very  clear  speci¬
men  of  the  penmanship  of  that  period.

“  By  whom  or  for  whom  it  was  originally
penned  there  is  no  means  of  ascertaining;
but,  from  the  style,  it  may  be  conjectured
to  have  belonged  to  some  Master  of  the
Craft,  and  to  have  been  used  in  assemblies
of  Masons  as  a  text-book  of  the  traditional
history  and  laws  of  the  Fraternity.”

Cope-Stone.  See  Cape-Stone.

Cord,  Hindu  Sacred.  See  Zen-
naar.

Cord.  Silver.  See  Silver  Cord.

Cord,  Threefold.  See  Threefold
Cord,

Cordon.  The  Masonic  decoration,
which  in  English  is  called  the  collar,  is
styled  by  the  French  Masons  the  cordon.

Corinthian  Order.  This  is  the
lightest  and  most  ornamental  of  the  pure
orders,  and  possesses  the  highest  degree  of
richness  and  detail  that  architecture  at¬
tained  under  the  Greeks.  Its  capital  is  its
great  distinction,  and  is  richly  adorned
with  leaves  of  acanthus,  olive,  etc.,  and
other  ornaments.  The  column  of  Beauty
which  supports  the  Lodge  is  of  the  Corin¬
thian  order,  and  its  appropriate  situation
and  symbolic  officer  are  in  the  South.

Corner,  North-East.  See  North-
East  Corner.

Corner-Stone,  Symbolism  of
the.  The  corner-stone  is  the  stone  which
lies  at  the  corner  of  two  walls,  and  forms
the  corner  of  the  foundation  of  an  edifice.
In  Masonic  buildings  it  is  now  always
placed  in  the  north-east ;  but  this  rule  was
not  always  formerly  observed.  As  the
foundation  on  which  the  entire  structure  is
supposed  to  rest,  it  is  considered  by  Opera¬
tive  Masons  as  the  most  important  stone  in
the  edifice.  It  is  laid  with  impressive  cere¬
monies  ;  the  assistance  of  Speculative  Ma¬
sons  is  often,  and  ought  always  to  be,  in-


«

viled  to  give  dignity  to  the  occasion;  and
for  this  purpose  freemasonry  has  provided
an  especial  ritual  which  is  to  govern  the
proper  performance  of  that  duty.

Among  the  ancients  the  corner-stone  of
important  edifices  was  laid  with  impressive
ceremonies.  These  are  well  described  by
Tacitus  in  the  history  of  the  rebuilding
of  the  Capitol.  After  detailing  the  pre¬
liminary  ceremonies,  which  consisted  in  a
procession  of  vestals,  who  with  chaplets  of
flowers  encompassed  the  ground  and  conse¬
crated  it  by  libations  of  living  water,  he
adds  that,  after  solemn  prayer,  Helvidius,
to  whom  the  care  of  rebuilding  the  Capitol
had  been  committed,  “  laid  his  hand  upon
the  fillets  that  adorned  the  foundation
stone,  and  also  the  cords  by  which  it  wras  to
be  drawn  to  its  place.  In  that  instant  the
magistrates,  the  priests,  the  senators,  the
Roman  knights,  and  a  number  of  citizens,
all  acting  with  one  effort  and  general  de¬
monstrations  of  joy,  laid  hold  of  the  ropes
and  dragged  the  ponderous  load  to  its  des¬
tined  spot.  They  then  threw  in  ingots  of
gold  and  silver,  and  other  metals  which  had
never  been  melted  in  the  furnace,  but  still
retained,  untouched  by  human  art,  their
first  formation  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth.”

The  symbolism  of  the  corner-stone  when
duly  laid  with  Masonic  rites  is  full  of  sig¬
nificance,  which  refers  to  its  form,  to  its
situation,  to  its  permanence,  and  to  its  con¬
secration.

As  to  its  form,  it  must  be  perfectly  square
on  its  surfaces,  and  in  its  solid  contents
a  cube.  Now  the  square  is  a  symbol  of
morality,  and  the  cube  of  truth.  In  its
situation  it  lies  between  the  north,  the
place  of  darkness,  and  the  east,  the  place
of  light;  and  hence  this  position  symbo¬
lizes  the  Masonic  progress  from  darkness
to  light,  and  from  ignorance  to  knowledge.
The  permanence  and  durability  of  the
corner-stone,  which  lasts  long  after  the
building  in  whose  foundation  it  was  placed
has  fallen  into  decay,  is  intended  to  remind
the  Mason  that,  when  this  earthly  house
of  his  tabernacle  shall  have  passed  away,
he  has  within  him  a  sure  foundation  of
eternal  life— a  corner-stone  of  immortality
—  an  emanation  from  that  Divine  Spirit
whieh  pervades  all  nature,  and  which,
therefore,  must  survive  the  tomb,  and  rise,
triumphant  and  eternal,  above  the  decay¬
ing  dust  of  death  and  the  grave.

The  stone,  when  deposited  in  its  appro¬
priate  place,  is  carefully  examined  with  the
necessary  implements  of  Operative  Ma¬
sonry, —  the  square,  the  level,  and  the
plumb,  themselves  all  symbolic  in  mean¬
ing, —  and  is  then  declared  to  be  “well
formed,  true,  and  trusty.”  Thus  the  Ma¬
son  is  taught  that  his  virtues  are  to  be


CORN


CORYBANTE3


187


tested  by  temptation  and  trial,  by  suffering
and  adversity,  before  they  can  be  pro¬
nounced  by  the  Master  Builder  of  souls  to
be  materials  worthy  of  the  spiritual  build¬
ing  of  eternal  life,  fitted,  “  as  living  stones,
for  that  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal
in  the  heavens.”

And  lastly,  in  the  ceremony  of  depositing
the  corner-stone,  the  elements  of  Masonic
consecration  are  produced,  and  the  stone  is
solemnly  set  apart  by  pouring  corn,  wine,
and  oil  upon  its  surface,  emblematic  of  the
Nourishment,  Refreshment,  and  Joy  which
are  to  be  the  rewards  of  a  faithful  perform¬
ance  of  duty.

The  corner-stone  does  not  appear  to  have
been  adopted  by  any  of  the  heathen  na¬
tions,  but  to  have  been  as  the  eben pinah,  pe¬
culiar  to  the  Jews,  from  whom  it  descended
to  the  Christians.  In  the  Old  Testament,  it
seems  always  to  have  denoted  a  prince  or
high  personage,  and  hence  the  Evangelists
constantly  use  it  in  reference  to  Christ,  who
is  called  the  “  chief  corner-stone.”  In  Ma¬
sonic  symbolism,  it  signifies  a  true  Mason,
and  therefore  it  is  the  first  character  which
the  Apprentice  is  made  to  represent  after
his  initiation  has  been  completed.

Corn  of  Nourishment.  One  of
the  three  elements  of  Masonic  consecration.
See  Corn,  Wine,  and  Oil.

Corn,  Wine,  and  Oil.  Corn,  wine,
and  oil  are  the  Masonic  elements  of  con¬
secration.  The  adoption  of  these  symbols
is  supported  by  the  highest  antiquity.
Corn,  wine,  and  oil  were  the  most  im¬
portant  productions  of  Eastern  countries;
they  constituted  the  wealth  of  the  people,
and  were  esteemed  as  the  supports  of  life
and  the  means  of  refreshment.  David
enumerates  them  among  the  greatest  bless¬
ings  that  we  enjoy,  and  speaks  of  them  as
“  wine  that  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man,
and  oil  to  make  his  face  shine,  and  bread
which  strengthened  man’s  heart.”  Ps.
civ.  14.  In  devoting  anything  to  religious
purposes,  the  anointing  with  oil  was  con¬
sidered  as  a  necessary  part  of  the  ceremony,
a  rite  which  has  descended  to  Christian  na¬
tions.  The  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,
and  all  its  holy  vessels,  were,  by  God’s  ex¬
press  command,  anointed  with  oil;  Aaron
and  his  two  sons  were  set  apart  for  the
priesthood  with  the  same  ceremony ;  and
the  prophets  and  kings  of  Israel  were  con¬
secrated  to  their  offices  by  the  same  rite.
Hence,  Freemasons’  Lodges,  which  are  but
temples  to  the  Most  High,  are  consecrated
to  the  sacred  purposes  for  which  they  were
built  by  strewing  corn,  wine,  and  oil  upon
the  “Lodge,"  the  emblem  of  the  Holy  Ark.
Thus  does  this  mystic  ceremony  instruct
us  to  be  nourished  with  the  hidden  manna
of  righteousness,  to  be  refreshed  with  the


Word  of  the  Lord,  and  to  rejoice  with/oy
unspeakable  in  the  riches  of  divine  grace.
“Wherefore,  my  brethren,”  says  the  vener¬
able  Harris,  [Disc.  iv.  81,)  “wherefore  do
you  carry  corn,  wine,  and  oil  in  your  pro¬
cessions,  but  to  remind  you  that  in  the
pilgrimage  of  human  life  you  are  to  im¬
part  a  portion  of  your  bread  to  feed  the
hungry,  to  send  a  cup  of  your  wine  to  cheer
the  sorrowful,  and  to  pour  the  healing  oil
of  your  consolation  into  the  wounds  which
sickness  hath  made  in  the  bodies,  or  afflic¬
tion  rent  in  the  hearts,  of  your  fellow-trav¬
ellers  ?  ”

In  processions,  the  corn  alone  is  carried
in  a  golden  pitcher,  the  wine  and  oil  are
placed  in  silver  vessels,  and  this  is  to  re¬
mind  us  that  the  first,  as  a  necessity  and
the  “staff  of  life,”  is  of  more  importance
and  more  worthy  of  honor  than  the  others,
which  are  but  comforts.

Cornucopia.  The  horn  of  plenty.
The  old  pagan  myth  tells  us  that  Zeus  was
nourished  during  his  infancy  in  Crete  by
the  daughters  of  Melissus,  with  the  milk  of
the  goat  Amalthea.  Zeus,  when  he  came
to  the  empire  of  the  world,  in  gratitude
placed  Amalthea  in  the  heavens  as  a  con¬
stellation,  and  gave  one  of  her  horns  to  his
nurses,  with  the  assurance  that  it  should
furnish  them  with  a  never  failing  supply
of  whatever  they  might  desire.  Hence  it
is  a  symbol  of  abundance,  and  as  such  has
been  adopted  as  the  jewel  of  the  Stewards
of  a  Lodge,  to  remind  them  that  it  is  their
duty  to  see  that  the  tables  are  properly  fur¬
nished  at  refreshment,  and  that  every  bro¬
ther  is  suitably  provided  for.  Among  the
deities  whose  images  are  to  be  found  in
the  ancient  Temples  at  Elora,  in  Hindu¬
stan,  is  the  goddess  Ana  Puma,  whose  name
is  compounded  of  Ana,  signifying  corn,
and  Puma,  meaning  plenty.  She  holds  a
corn  measure  in  her  hand,  and  the  whole
therefore  very  clearly  has  the  same  allusion
as  the  Masonic  Horn  of  plenty.

Correspondence.  See  Committee  on
Foreign  Correspondence.

Corresponding;  Grand  Secre¬
tary.  An  officer  of  a  Grand  Lodge  to
whom  was  formerly  intrusted,  in  some
Grand  Lodges,  the  Foreign  Correspon¬
dence  of  the  body.  The  office  is  now  dis¬
used,  being  retained  only  in  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Massachusetts.

Corybanles,  Mysteries  of.  Rites
instituted  in  Phrygia  in  honor  of  Atys,  the
lover  of  Cybele.  The  goddess  was  sup¬
posed  first  to  bewail  the  death  of  her  lover,
and  afterwards  to  rejoice  for  his  restoration
to  life.  The  ceremonies  were  a  scenical
representation  of  this  alternate  lamentation
and  rejoicing,  and  of  the  sufferings  of  Atys,
who  was  placed  in  an  ark  or  coffin  during


188


COSMOPOLITE


COUSTOS


the  mournful  part  of  the  orgies.  If  the  de¬
scription  of  these  rites,  given  by  Sainte-
Croix  from  various  anoient  authorities,  be
correct,  they  were  but  a  modification  of  the
Eleusinian  mysteries.

Cosmopolite.  The  third  degree  of
the  Rite  of  African  Architects.

Council.  In  several  of  the  high  de-

S-ees  of  Masonry  the  meetings  are  styled
ouncils;  as  a  Council  of  Royal  and  Se¬
lect  Masters,  or  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  or
Knights  of  the  Red  Cross.

Council  Chamber.  A  part  of  the
room  in  which  the  ceremonies  of  the
Knights  of  the  Red  Cross  are  performed.
Council,  Grand.  See  Grand  Council.
Council  of  Knights  of  the  lied
Cross.  A  body  in  which  the  first  degree
of  the  Templar  system  in  this  country  is
conferred.  It  is  held  under  the  Charter  of
aCommandery  of  KnightsTemplars,  which,
when  meeting  as  a  council,  is  composed
of  the  following  officers:  A  Sovereign
Master,  Chancellor,  Master  of  the  Palace,
Prelate,  Master  of  Despatches,  Master  of
Cavalry,  Master  of  Infantry,  Standard
Bearer,  Sword  Bearer, Warder,  and  Sentinel.

Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Msisters.  The  united  body  in  which  the
Royal  and  Select  degrees  are  conferred.
In  some  jurisdictions  this  Council  confers
also  the  degree  of  Super-Excellent  Master.

Council  of  Royal  Rasters.  The
body  in  which  the  degree  of  Royal  Master,
the  eighth  in  the  American  Rite,  is  con¬
ferred.  It  receives  its  Charter  from  a
Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Mas¬
ters,  and  has  the  following  officers  :  Thrice
Illustrious  Grand  Master,  Illustrious
Hiram  of  Tyre,  Principal  Conductor  of
the  Works,  Master  of  the  Exchequer,  Mas¬
ter  of  Finances,  Captain  of  the  Guards,
Conductor  of  the  Council,  and  Steward.

Council  of  Select  Rasters.  The
body  in  which  the  degree  of  Select  Mas¬
ters,  the  ninth  in  the  American  Rite,  is
conferred.  It  receives  its  Charter  from  a
Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Mas¬
ters.  Its  officers  are:  Thrice  Illustrious
Grand  Master,  Illustrious  Hiram  of  Tyre,
Principal  Conductor  of  the  Works,  Treas¬
urer,  Recorder,  Captain  of  the  Guards,
Conductor  of  the  Council,  and  Steward.

Council  of  the  Trinity.  An  inde¬
pendent  Masonic  jurisdiction,  in  which  are
conferred  the  degrees  of  Knight  of  the
Christian  Mark,  and  Guard  of  the  Con¬
clave,  Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  and
the  Holy  and  Thrice  Illustrious  Order  of
the  Cross.  They  are  conferred  after  the
Encampment  degrees.  They  are  Christian
degrees,  and  refer  to  the  crucifixion.

Council,  Supreme.  See  Supreme
Council.


Courtesy.  Politeness  of  manners,  as
the  result  of  kindness  of  disposition,  was
one  of  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  the
knights  of  old.  “No  other  human  laws
enforced,”  says  M.  de  St.  Palaye,  “as  chiv¬
alry  did,  sweetness  and  modesty  of  temper,
and  that  politeness  which  the  word  courtesy
was  meant  perfectly  to  express.”  We  find,
therefore,  in  the  ritual  of  Templarism,  the
phrase  “a  true  and  courteous  knight;”  and
Knights  Templars  are  in  the  habit  of  clos¬
ing  their  letters  to  each  other  with  the  ex¬
pression,  Yours  in  all  knightly  courtesy.
Courtesy  is  also  a  Masonic  virtue,  because
it  is  the  product  of  a  feeling  of  kindness;  but
it  is  not  so  specifically  spoken  of  in  the  sym¬
bolic  degrees,  where  brotherly  love  assumes
its  place,  as  it  is  in  the  orders  of  knighthood.

Coustos,  John.  The  sufferings  in¬
flicted,  in  1743,  by  the  Inquisition  at  Lisbon,
cn  John  Coustos,  a  Freemason,  and  the
Master  of  a  Lodge  in  that  city;  and  the
fortitude  with  which  he  endured  the  severest
tortures,  rather  than  betray  his  trusts  and
reveal  the  secrets  that  had  been  confided  to
him.  constitute  an  interesting  episode  in
the  history  of  Freemasonry.  Coustos,  after
returning  to  England,  published,  in  1746,
a  book,  detailing  his  sufferings,  from  which
the  reader  is  presented  with  the  following
abridged  narrative.

John  Coustos  wras  born  at  Berne,  in
Switzerland,  but  emigrated,  in  1716,  with
his  father  to  England,  where  he  became  a
naturalized  subject.  In  1743  he  removed
to  Lisbon,  in  Portugal,  and  began  the  prac¬
tice  of  his  profession,  which  was  that  of  a
lapidary,  or  dealer  in  precious  stones.

In  consequence  of  the  bull  or  edict  of
Pope  Clement  XII.  denouncingthe  Masonic
institution,  the  Lodges  at  Lisbon  were  not
held  at  public  houses,  as  was  the  custom  in
England  and  other  Protestant  countries,
but  privately,  at  the  residences  of  the
members.  Of  one  of  these  Lodges,  Cous¬
tos,  who  was  a  zealous  Mason,  was  elected
the  Master.  A  female,  who  was  cognizant
of  the  existence  of  the  Lodge  over  which
Coustos  presided,  revealed  the  circumstance
to  her  confessor,  declaring  that,  in  her
opinion,  the  members  were  “monsters  in
nature,  who  perpetrated  the  most  shocking
crimes.”  In  consequence  of  this  informa¬
tion,  it  was  resolved,  by  the  Inquisition,
that  Coustos  should  be  arrested  and  sub¬
jected  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  “  Holy
Office.”  He  was  accordingly  seized,  a  few
nights  afterwards,  in  a  coffee-house  —  the
public  pretence  of  the  arrest  being  that  he
was  privy  to  the  stealing  of  a  diamond,  of
which  they  had  falsely  accused  another
jeweller,  the  friend  and  W ardeu  of  Coustos,
whom  also  they  had  a  short  time  previously
arrested.


COUSTOS


COUSTOS


189


Coustos  was  then  carried  to  the  prison  of
the  Inquisition,  and  after  having  been
searched  and  deprived  of  all  his  money,
papers,  and  other  things  that  he  had  about
him,  he  was  led  to  a  lonely  dungeon,  in
which  he  was  immured,  being  expressly
forbidden  to  speak  aloud  or  knock  against
the  walls,  but  if  he  required  anything,  to
beat  with  a  padlock  that  hung  on  the  out¬
ward  door,  and  which  he  could  reach  by
thrusting  his  arm  through  the  iron  grate.
“  It  was  there,”  says  he,  “  that,  struck  with
the  horrors  of  a  place  of  which  I  had
heard  and  read  such  baleful  descriptions,  I
plunged  at  once  into  the  blackest  melan¬
choly  ;  especially  when  I  reflected  on  the
dire  consequences  with  which  my  confine¬
ment  might  very  possibly  be  attended.”

On  the  next  day  he  was  led,  bare-headed,
before  the  President  and  four  Inquisitors,
who,  after  having  made  him  reply  on  oath
to  several  questions  respecting  his  name,
his  parentage,  his  place  of  birth,  his  reli¬
gion,  and  the  time  he  had  resided  in  Lisbon,
exhorted  him  to  make  a  full  confession  of
all  the  crimes  he  had  ever  committed  in
the  whole  course  of  his  life ;  but,  as  he  re¬
fused  to  make  any  such  confession,  declar¬
ing  that,  from  his  infancy,  he  had  been
taught  to  confess  not  to  man  but  to  God,
he  was  again  remanded  to  his  dungeon.

Three  days  after,  he  was  again  brought
before  the  Inquisitors,  and  the  examination
was  renewed.  This  was  the  first  occasion
on  which  the  subject  of  Freemasonry  was
introduced,  and  there  Coustos  for  the  first
time  learned  that  he  had  been  arrested  and
imprisoned  solely  on  account  of  his  con¬
nection  with  the  forbidden  Institution.

The  result  of  this  conference  was,  that
Coustos  was  conveyed  to  a  deeper  dungeon,
and  kept  there  in  close  confinement  for
several  weeks,  during  which  period  he  was
taken  three  times  before  the  Inquisitors.
In  the  first  of  these  examinations  they
again  introduced  the  subject  of  Free¬
masonry,  and  declared  that  if  the  Institu¬
tion  was  as  virtuous  as  their  prisoner  con¬
tended  that  it  was,  there  was  no  occasion  for
concealing  so  industriously  the  secrets  of  it.
Coustos  did  not  reply  to  this  objection  to  the
Inquisitorial  satisfaction,  ana  he  was  re¬
manded  back  to  his  dungeon,  where  a  few
days  after  he  fell  sick.

After  his  recovery,  he  was  again  taken
before  the  Inquisitors,  who  asked  him  sev¬
eral  new  questions  with  regard  to  the  tenets
of  Freemasonry  —  among  others,  whether
he,  since  his  abode  in  Lisbon,  had  received
any  Portuguese  into  the  society?  He  re¬
plied  that  ne  had  not.

When  he  was  next  brought  before  them,
“  they  insisted,”  he  says,  “  upon  my  letting
them  into  the  secrets  of  Freemasonry;


threatening  me,  in  case  I  did  not  comply.”
But  Coustos  firmly  and  fearlessly  refused  to
violate  his  obligations.

After  several  other  interview's,  in  which
the  effort  was  unavailingly  made  to  extort
from  him  a  renunciation  of  Masonry,  he
was  subjected  to  the  torture  of  which  be
gives  the  following  account:

“  I  was  instantly  conveyed  to  the  torture-
room,  built  in  form  of  a  square  tower,
where  no  light  appeared  but  what  two  can¬
dles  gave  ;  and  to  prevent  the  dreadful  cries
and  shocking  groans  of  the  unhappy  victims
from  reachingtheears  of  theother  prisoners,
the  doors  are  lined  with  a  sort  of  quilt.

“  The  reader  will  naturally  suppose  that
I  must  be  seized  with  horror,  when,  at  my
entering  this  infernal  place,  I  saw  myself,
on  a  sudden,  surrounded  by  six  wretches,
who,  after  preparing  the  tortures,  stripped
me  naked,  (all  to  linen  drawers,)  when,
laying  me  on  my  back,  they  began  to  lay
hold  of  every  part  of  my  body.  First,  they
put  round  my  neck  an  iron  collar,  which
was  fastened  to  the  scaffold ;  they  then  fixed
a  ring  to  each  foot;  and  this  being  done,
they  stretched  my  limbs  with  all  their
might.  They  next  wound  two  ropes  round
each  arm,  and  two  round  each  thigh,  which
ropes  passed  under  the  scaffold,  through
holes  made  for  that  purpose,  and  were  all
drawn  tight  at  the  same  time,  by  four  men,
upon  a  signal  made  for  this  purpose.

“The  reader  will  believe  that  my  pains
must  be  intolerable,  when  I  solemnly  de¬
clare  that  these  ropes,  which  were  of  the  size
of  one’s  little  finger,  pierced  through  my
flesh  quite  to  the  bone,  making  the  blood
gush  out  at  eight  different  places  that  were
thus  bound.  As  I  persisted  in  refusing  to
discover  any  more  than  what  has  been  seen
in  the  interrogatories  above,  the  ropes  were
thus  drawn  together  four  different  times.
At  my  side  stood  a  physician  and  a  sur¬
geon,  who  often  felt  my  temples,  to  judge
of  the  danger  I  might  be  in  —  by  which
means  my  tortures  were  suspended,  at  in¬
tervals,  that  I  might  have  an  opportunity
of  recovering  myself  a  little.

“  Whilst  1  was  thus  suffering,  they  were
so  barbarously  unjust  as  to  declare,  that,
were  I  to  die  under  the  torture,  I  should  be
guilty,  by  my  obstinacy,  of  self-murder.  In
tine,  the  last  time  the  ropes  were  drawn
tight,  I  grew  so  exceedingly  weak,  occa¬
sioned  by  the  blood’s  circulation  being
stopped,  and  the  pains  I  endured,  that  I
fainted  quite  away;  insomuch  that  I  was
carried  back  to  my  dungeon,  without  per¬
ceiving  it.

“These  barbarians,  finding  that  the  tor¬
tures  above  described  could  not  extort  any
further  discovery  from  me;  but  that,  the
more  they  made  me  suffer,  the  more  fer*


190


COUSTOS


COVENANT


vently  I  addressed  my  supplications,  for  pa¬
tience,  to  heaven ;  they  were  so  inhuman,
six  weeks  after,  as  to  expose  me  to  another
kind  of  torture,  more  grievous,  if  possible,
than  the  former.  They  made  me  stretch
my  arms  in  such  a  manner  that  the  palms
of  my  hands  were  turned  outward ;  when,
by  the  help  of  a  rope  that  fastened  them
together  at  the  wrist,  and  which  they  turned
by  an  engine,  they  drew  them  gently  nearer
to  one  another  behind,  in  such  a  manner
that  the  back  of  each  hand  touched,  and
stood  exactly  parallel  one  to  another;
whereby  both  my  shoulders  were  dislo¬
cated,  and  a  considerable  quantity  of  blood
issued  from  my  mouth.  This  torture  was
repeated  thrice;  after  which  I  was  again
taken  to  my  dungeon,  and  put  into  the
hands  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  who,  in
setting  my  bones,  put  me  to  exquisite  pain.

“Two  months  after,  being  a  little  re¬
covered,  I  was  again  conveyed  to  the  torture-
room,  and  there  made  to  undergo  another
kind  of  punishment  twice.  The  reader
may  judge  of  its  horror,  from  the  following
description  thereof.

“  The  torturers  turned  twice  around  my
body  a  thick  iron  chain,  which,  crossing
upon  my  stomach,  terminated  afterwards  at
my  wrists.  They  next  set  my  back  against
a  thick  board,  at  each  extremity  whereof
was  a  pulley,  through  which  there  ran  a
rope,  that  catched  the  ends  of  the  chains  at
my  wrists.  The  tormentors  then  stretched
these  ropes,  by  means  of  a  roller,  pressed
or  bruised  my  stomach,  in  proportion  as  the
means  were  drawn  tighter.  They  tortured
me  on  this  occasion  to  such  a  degree,  that
my  wrists  and  shoulders  were  put  out  of  joint.

“  The  surgeons,  however,  set  them  pres¬
ently  after;  but  the  barbarians  not  yet
having  satiated  their  cruelty,  made  me
undergo  this  torture  a  second  time,  which
I  did  with  fresh  pains,  though  with  equal
constancy  and  resolution.  I  was  then  re¬
manded  back  to  my  dungeon,  attended  by
the  surgeons,  who  dressed  my  bruises;  and
here  I  continued  until  their  auto-da-fe,  or
gaol  delivery.”

On  that  occasion,  he  was  sentenced  to
work  at  the  galleys  for  four  years.  Soon,
however,  after  he  had  commenced  the
degrading  occupation  of  a  galley  slave,
the  injuries  which  he  had  received  during
his  inquisitorial  tortures  having  so  much
impaired  his  health,  that  he  was  unable  to
undergo  the  toils  to  which  he  had  been
condemned,  he  was  sent  to  the  infirmary,
where  he  remained  until  October,  1744,
when  he  was  released  upon  the.  demand  of
the  British  minister,  as  a  subject  to  the
king  of  England.  He  was,  however,
ordered  to  leave  the  country.  This,  it  may
be  supposed,  he  gladly  did,  and  repaired  to


London,  where  he  published  the  account
of  his  sufferings  in  a  book  entitled  “The
Sufferings  of  JohnCoustos  for  Freemasonry,
and  his  refusing  to  turn  Catholic,  in  the
Inquisition  at  Lisbon,  &c.,  &c.”  London,
1746  ;  8vo,  400  pages.  Such  a  narrative
is  well  worthy  of  being  read.  John  Coustos
has  not,  by  his  literary  researches,  added
anything  to  the  learning  or  science  of  our
Order ;  yet,  by  his  fortitude  and  fidelity
under  the  severest  sufferings,  inflicted  to
extort  from  him  a  knowledge  he  was  bound
to  conceal,  he  has  shown  that  Freemasonry
makes  no  idle  boast  in  declaring  that  its
secrets  “  are  locked  up  in  the  depository  of
faithful  breasts.”

Couvreur.  The  title  of  an  officer  in  a
French  Lodge,  equivalent  to  the  English
Tiler.

Couvrir  1c  Temple.  A  French  ex¬
pression  for  the  English  one  to  close  the
Lodge.  But  it  has  also  another  significa¬
tion.  “To  cover  the  Temple  to  a  bro¬
ther,”  means,  in  French  Masonic  language,
to  exclude  him  from  the  Lodge.

Covenant  of  Masonry.  As  a  cov¬
enant  is  defined  to  be  a  contract  or  agree¬
ment  between  two  or  more  parties  on  certain
terras,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  when  a
man  is  made  a  Mason  he  enters  into  a  cov¬
enant  with  the  Institution.  On  his  part
he  promises  to  fulfil  certain  promises  and
to  discharge  certain  duties,  for  which,  ou
the  other  part,  the  Fraternity  bind  them¬
selves  by  an  equivalent  covenant  of  friend¬
ship,  protection,  and  support.  This  cove¬
nant  must  of  course  be  repeated  and  modi¬
fied  with  every  extension  of  the  terms  of
agreement  on  both  sides.  The  covenant  of
an  Entered  Apprentice  is  different  from
that  of  a  Fellow  Craft,  and  the  covenant
of  the  latter  from  that  of  a  Master  Mason.
As  we  advance  in  Masonry  our  obligations
increase,  but  the  covenant  of  each  degree
is  not  the  les3  permanent  or  binding  be¬
cause  that  of  a  succeeding  one  has  been  su-
peradded.  The  second  covenant  does  not
impair  the  sanctity  of  the  first.

This  covenant  of  Masonry  is  symbolized
and  sanctioned  by  the  most  important  and
essential  of  all  the  ceremonies  of  the  Insti¬
tution.  It  is  the  very  foundation  stone
which  supports  the  whole  edifice,  and,  un¬
less  it  be  properly  laid,  no  superstructure
can  with  any  safety  be  erected.  It  is  in¬
deed  the  covenant  that  makes  the  Mason.

A  matter  so*  important  as  this,  in  estab¬
lishing  the  relationship  of  a  Mason  with
the  Craft,  —  this  baptism,  so  to  speak,  by
which  a  member  is  inaugurated  into  the
Institution,  —  must  of  course  be  attended
with  the  most  solemn  and  binding  ceremo¬
nies.  Such  has  been  the  case  in  all  coun¬
tries.  Covenants  have  always  been  solem-


COVENANT


COWAN


191


nized  with  certain  solemn  forms  and  reli¬
gious  observances  which  gave  them  a  sacred
sanction  in  the  minds  of  the  contracting
parties.  The  Hebrews,  especially,  invested
their  covenants  with  the  most  imposing
ceremonies.

The  first  mention  of  a  covenant  in  form
that  is  met  with  in  Scripture  is  that  re¬
corded  in  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  Genesis,
where,  to  confirm  it,  Abraham,  in  obedi¬
ence  to  the  Divine  command,  took  a  heifer,
a  she-goat,  and  a  ram,  “and  divided  them  in
the  midst,  and  laid  each  piece  one  against
another.”  This  dividing  a  victim  into  two
parts,  that  the  covenanting  parties  might
pass  between  them,  was  a  custom  not  con¬
fined  to  the  Hebrews,  but  borrowed  from
them  by  all  the  heathen  nations.

In  tbebook  of  Jeremiah  itis  againalluded
to,  and  the  penalty  for  the  violation  of  the
covenant  is  also  expressed.

“  And  I  will  give  the  men  that  have
transgressed  my  covenant,  which  have  not
performed  the  words  of  my  covenant  which
they  have  made  before  me,  when  they  cut
the  calf  in  twain ,  and  passed  between  the
parts  thereof,

“The  princes  of  Judah,  and  the  princes  of
Jerusalem,  the  eunuchs,  and  the  priests,  and
all  the  people  of  the  land,  which  passed
between  the  parts  of  the  calf;

“  I  will  even  give  them  into  the  hand  of
their  enemies,  and  into  the  hand  of  them
that  seek  their  life :  and  their  dead  bodies
shall  be  for  meat  unto  the  fowls  of  the  heaven,
and  to  the  beasts  of  the  earth.”  Jeremiah
xxxiv.  18,  19,  20.

These  ceremonies,  thus  briefly  alluded  to
in  the  passages  which  have  been  quoted,  were
performed  in  full,  as  follows.  The  attentive
Masonic  student  will  not  fail  to  observe  the
analogies  to  those  of  his  own  Order.

The  parties  entering  into  a  covenant  first
selected  a  proper  animal,  such  as  a  calf  or
a  kid  among  the  Jews,  a  sheep  among  the
Greeks,  or  a  pig  among  the  Romans.  The
throat  was  then  cut  across,  with  a  single
blow,  so  as  to  completely  divide  the  wind-

Eipe  and  arteries,  without  touching  the
one.  This  was  the  first  ceremony  of  the
covenant.  The  second  was  to  tear  open
the  breast,  to  take  from  thence  the  heart
and  vitals,  and  if  on  inspection  the  least  im¬
perfection  was  discovered,  the  body  was
considered  unclean,  and  thrown  aside  for
another.  The  third  ceremony  was  to  di¬
vide  the  body  in  twain,  and  to  place  the
two  parts  to  the  north  and  south,  so  that
the  parties  to  the  covenant  might  pass
between  them,  coming  from  the  east  and
going  to  the  west.  The  carcass  was  then
left  as  a  prey  to  the  wild  beasts  of  the
field  and  the  vultures  of  the  air,  and  thus
the  covenant  was  ratified.


Covering  of  the  Lodge.  As  the

lectures  tell  us  that  our  ancient  brethren
met  on  the  highest  hills  and  lowest  vales,
from  this  it  is  inferred  that,  as  the  meetings
were  thus  in  the  open  air,  the  only  covering
must  have  been  the  over-arching  vault  of
heaven.  Hence,  in  the  symbolism  of  Ma¬
sonry,  the  covering  of  the  Lodge  is  said  to
be  “a  clouded  canopy  or  starry- decked
heaven.”  The  terrestrial  Lodge  of  labor
is  thus  intimately  connected  with  the  ce¬
lestial  Lodge  of  eternal  refreshment.  The
symbolism  is  still  farther  extended  to  re¬
mind  us  that  the  whole  world  is  a  Mason’s
Lodge,  and  heaven  its  sheltering  cover.

Cowan.  This  is  a  purely  Masonic
term,  and  signifies  in  its  technical  meaning
an  intruder,  whence  it  is  always  coupled
with  the  word  eavesdropper.  It  is  not  found
in  any  of  the  old  manuscripts  of  the  Eng¬
lish  Masons  anterior  to  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury,  unless  we  suppose  that  lowen,  met
with  in  many  of  them,  is  a  clerical  error  of
the  copyists.  It  occurs  in  the  Schaw  manu¬
script,  a  Scotch  record  which  bears  the
date  of  1598,  in  the  following  passage :
“That  no  Master  nor  Fellow  of  Craft  re¬
ceive  any  cowans  to  work  in  his  society  or
company,  nor  send  none  of  his  servants  to
work  with  cowans."  In  the  second  edition
of  Anderson’s  Constitutions,  published  in
1738,  we  find  the  word  in  use  among  the
English  Masons,  thus :  “  But  Free  and  Ac¬
cepted  Masons  shall  not  allow  cowans  to
work  with  them,  nor  shall  they  be  em¬
ployed  by  cowans  without  an  urgent  neces¬
sity  ;  and  even  in  that  case  they  shall  not
teach  cowans,  but  must  have  a  separate
communication.”  There  can,  I  think,  be
but  little  doubt  that  the  word,  as  a  Masonic
term,  comes  to  us  from  Scotland,  and  it  is
therefore  in  the  Scotch  language  that  we
must  look  for  its  signification.

Now,  Jamieson,  in  his  Scottish  Diction¬
ary,  gives  us  the  following  meanings  of  the
word :

“Cowan,  s.  1.  A  term  of  contempt;
applied  to  one  who  does  the  work  of  a  Ma¬
son,  but  has  not  been  regularly  bred.

“  2.  Also  used  to  denote  one  who  builds  dry
walls,  otherwise  denominated  a  dry-diker.

“  3.  One  unacquainted  with  the  secrets
of  Freemasonry.”

And  he  gives  the  following  examples  as
his  authorities :

“  ‘  A  boat-carpenter,  joiner,  cowan  (or
builder  of  stone  without  mortar),  get  1«.  at
the  minimum  and  good  maintenance.’  P.
Morven,  Argyles.  Statistic.  Acct.,  X.,  267.  N.

“  ‘  Cowans.  Masons  who  build  dry-stone
dikes  or  walls.’  P.  Halkirk,  Carthn.  Sta¬
tistic.  Acct.,  XIX.,  24.  N.”

In  the  Bob  Boy  of  Scott,  the  word  is  used
by  Allan  Inverach,  who  says :


192


CRAFT


CREED


“She  does  not  value  a  Cawmil  mair  as  a
cowan.”

The  word  has  therefore,  I  think,  come  to
the  English  Fraternity  directly  from  the
Operative  Masons  of  Scotland,  among  whom
it  was  used  to  denote  a  pretender,  in  the
exact  sense  of  the  tirst  meaning  of  Jamieson.

There  is  no  word  that  has  given  Masonic  j
scholars  more  trouble  than  this  in  tracing
its  derivation.  Many  years  ago,  1  sought
to  find  its  root  in  the  Greek  evuv,  kuon,  a
dog;  and  referred  to  the  fact  that  in  the  ■
early  ages  of  the  Church,  when  the  myste¬
ries  of  the  new  religion  were  communicated
only  to  initiates  under  the  veil  of  secrecy,
infidels  were  called  “dogs,”  a  term  probably
suggested  by  such  passages  as  Matthew
vii.  6,  “Give  not  that  which  is  holy  to
dogs;”  or,  Philip,  iii.  2,  “Beware  of  dogs,
beware  of  evil  workers,  beware  of  the  con¬
cision.”  This  derivation  has  been  adopted
by  Oliver,  and  many  other  writers;  and
although  I  am  not  now  inclined  to  insist
upon  it,  I  still  think  it  a  very  probable  one,
which  may  serve  until  a  better  shall  be  pro¬
posed.  Jamieson’s  derivations  are  from  the
old  Swedish  kujon ,  kuzhjohn,  a  silly  fellow,
and  the  French  coion,  coyon,  a  coward,  a
base  fellow.  No  matter  how  we  get  the
word,  it  seems  always  to  convey  an  idea  of
contempt.  The  attempt  to  derive  it  from  the
chouans  of  the  French  revolution  is  mani¬
festly  absurd,  for  it  has  been  shown  that
the  word  was  in  use  long  before  the  French
revolution  was  even  meditated.

Craft.  It  is  from  the  Saxon  croeft,
which  indirectly  signifies  skill  or  dexterity
in  any  art.  In  reference  to  this  skill,  there¬
fore,  the  ordinary  acceptation  is  a  trade  or
mechanical  art,  and  collectively,  the  per¬
sons  practising  it.  Hence,  “the  Craft,”  in
Speculative  Masonry,  signifies  the  whole
body  of  Freemasons,  wherever  dispersed.

Craft  Masonry,  Ancient.  See
Ancient  Craft  Masonry.

Crafted.  A  word  sometimes  collo¬
quially  used,  instead  of  the  Lodge  term
“  passed,”  to  designate  the  advancement  of
a  candidate  to  the  second  degree.  It  is  not
only  a  colloquialism,  but  I  think  also  an
Americanism.

Craftsman.  A  Mason.  The  word
originally  meant  any  one  skilful  in  his
art,  and  is  so  used  by  our  early  writers.
Thus  Chaucer,  in  his  Knights’ '  Tale,  v.
1889,  says  :

“For  in  the  land  there  was  no  craftesman,
That  geometry  or  arsmetrike  can,

Nor  pourtravor,  nor  carver  of  images,

That  Theseus  ne  gave  him  meat  and  wages.
The  theatre  to  make  and  to  devise.”

Create.  In  chivalry,  when  any  one  re¬
ceived  the  order  of  knighthood,  he  was  said


to  be  created  a  knight.  The  word  “dub”
had  also  the  same  meaning.  The  word
created  is  used  in  Commanderies  of  Knights
Templars  to  denote  the  elevation  of  a  can¬
didate  to  that  degree.  See  Uub.

Creation.  Preston  ( Illust .,  B.  I., Sect.  3.)
says,  “  From  the  commencement  of  the
world,  we  may  trace  the  foundation  of
Masonry.  Ever  since  symmetry  began,
and  harmony  displayed  her  charms,  our
Order  has  had  a  being.”  Language  like
this  has  been  deemed  extravagant,  and  just¬
ly,  too,  if  the  words  are  to  be  taken  in  their
literal  sense.  The  idea  that  the  Order  of
Masonry  is  coeval  with  the  creation,  is  so
absurd,  that  the  pretension  cannot  need
refutation.  But  the  fact  is,  that  Ander¬
son,  Preston,  and  other  writers  who  have
indulged  in  such  statements,  did  not  mean
by  the  word  Masonry  anything  like  an  or¬
ganized  Order  or  Institution  bearing  any
resemblance  to  the  Freemasonry  of  the
present  day.  They  simply  meant  to  indi¬
cate  that  the  great  moral  principles  on
which  Freemasonry  is  founded,  and  by
which  it  professes  to  be  guided,  have  al¬
ways  formed  a  part  of  the  divine  govern¬
ment,  and  been  presented  to  man  from  his
first  creation  for  his  acceptance.  The  words
quoted  from  Preston  are  unwise,  because
they  are  liable  to  misconstruction.  But  the
symbolic  idea  which  they  intended  to  con¬
vey,  namely,  that  Masonry  is  truth,  and
that  truth  is  co-existent  with  man’s  crea¬
tion,  is  correct,  and  cannot  be  disputed.

Creed,  A  Mason's.  Although  Free¬
masonry  is  not  a  dogmatic  theology,  and  is
tolerant  in  the  admission  of  men  of  every
religious  faith,  it  would  be  wrong  to  sup¬
pose  that  it  is  without  a  creed.  On  the
contrary,  it  has  a  creed,  the  assent  to  which
it  rigidly  enforces,  and  the  denial  of  which
is  absolutely  incompatible  with  member¬
ship  in  the  Order.  This  creed  consists  of
two  articles:  First,  a  belief  in  God,  the
Creator  of  all  things,  who  is  therefore  re¬
cognized  as  the  Grand  Architect  of  the
Universe;  and  secondly,  a  belief  in  the
eternal  life,  to  which  this  present  life  is
but  a  preparatory  and  probationary  state.
To  the  first  of  these  articles  assent  is  ex¬
plicitly  required  as  soon  as  the  threshold
of  the  Lodge  is  crossed.  The  second  is  ex¬
pressively  taught  by  legends  and  symbols,
and  must  be  implicitly  assented  to  by  every
Mason,  especially  by  those  who  have  re¬
ceived  the  third  degree,  which  is  altogether
founded  on  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection
to  a  second  life.

At  the  revival  of  Masonry  in  1717,  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  set  forth  the  law,
as  to  the  religious  creed  to  be  required  of  a
Mason,  in  the  following  words,  to  be  found
in  the  charges  approved  by  that  body.


CREUZER


CROMWELL


193


“  In  ancient  times,  Masons  were  charged
in  every  country  to  be  of  the  religion  of
that  country  or  nation,  whatever  it  was ;
yet  it  is  now  thought  more  expedient  only
to  oblige  them  to  that  religion  in  which  all
men  agree,  leaving  their  particular  opinions
to  themselves.”

This  is  now  considered  universally  as  the
recognized  law  on  the  subject.

Creuzer,  Georg  Friederich.
George  Frederick  Creuzer,  who  was  born
in  Germany  in  1771,  and  was  a  professor  at
the  University  of  Heidelberg,  devoted  him¬
self  to  the  study  of  the  ancient  religions,
and,  with  profound  learning,  established  a
peculiar  system  on  the  subject.  His  theory
was,  that  the  religion  and  mythology  of  the
ancient  Greeks  were  borrowed  from  a  far
more  ancient  people,  —  a  body  of  priests
coming  from  the  East,  —  who  received  them
as  a  revelation.  The  myths  and  traditions
of  this  ancient  people  were  adopted  by
Hesiod,  Homer,  and  the  later  poets,  al¬
though  not  without  some  misunderstanding
of  them;  and  they  were  finally  preserved
in  the  Mysteries,  and  became  subjects  of
investigation  for  the  philosophers.  This
theory  Creuzer  has  developed  in  his  most
important  work,  entitled  Symbolik  und
Mythologie  der  alten  Vdlker,  besonders  der
Greichen,  which  was  published  at  Leipsic
in(  1819.  There  is  no  translation  of  this
work  into  English;  but  Guigniaut  pub¬
lished  at  Paris,  in  1824,  a  paraphrastic
translation  of  it,  under  the  title  of  Reli¬
gions  de  I’Antiguite  considerees  principale-
ment  dans  leur  Formes  Symboliques  et  Mxytho-
logiques.  Creuzer’s  views  throw  much  light
on  the  symbolic  history  of  Freemasonry.
He  died  in  1858.

Crimes,  Masonic.  In  Masonry,
every  offence  is  a  crime,  because,  in  every
violation  of  a  Masonic  law,  there  is  not
only  sometimes  an  infringement  of  the
rights  of  an  individual,  but  always,  super¬
induced  upon  this,  a  breach  and  violation
of  public  rights  and  duties,  which  affect
the  whole  community  of  the  Order  con¬
sidered  as  a  community.

The  first  class  of  crimes  which  are  laid
down  in  the  Constitutions,  as  rendering
their  perpetrators  liable  to  Masonic  juris¬
diction,  are  offences  against  the  moral  law.
“  Every  Mason,”  say  the  old  Charges  of
1722,  “  is  obliged  by  his  tenure  to  obey  the
moral  law.”  The  same  charge  continues
the  precept  by  asserting,  that  if  he  rightly
understands  the  art,  he  will  never  be  a
stupid  atheist,  nor  an  irreligious  libertine.
Atheism,  therefore,  which  is  a  rejection  of
a  supreme,  superintending  Creator,  and  ir¬
religious  libertinism,  which,  in  the  lan¬
guage  of  that  day,  signified  a  denial  of  all
moral  responsibility,  are  offences  against
Z  18


the  moral  law,  because  they  deny  its  valid¬
ity  and  contemn  its  sanctions ;  and  hence
they  are  to  be  classed  as  Masonic  crimes.

Again  :  the  moral  law  inculcates  love  of
God,  love  of  our  neighbor,  and  duty  to  our¬
selves.  Each  of  these  embraces  other  in¬
cidental  duties  which  are  obligatory  on
every  Mason,  and  the  violation  of  any  one
of  which  constitutes  a  Masonic  crime.

The  love  of  God  implies  that  we  should
abstain  from  all  profanity  and  irreverent
use  of  his  name.  Universal  benevolence  is
the  necessary  result  of  love  of  our  neighbor.
Cruelty  to  one’s  inferiors  and  dependents,
uncharitableness  to  the  poor  and  needy,  and
a  general  misanthropical  neglect  of  our
duty  as  men  to  our  fellow-beings,  exhibit¬
ing  itself  in  extreme  selfishness  and  indiffer¬
ence  to  the  comfort  or  happiness  of  all
others,  are  offences  against  the  moral  law,
and  therefore  Masonic  crimes.  Next  to
violations  of  the  moral  law,  in  the  category
of  Masonic  crimes,  are  to  be  considered  the
transgressions  of  the  municipal  law,  or  the
law  of  the  land.  Obedience  to  constituted
authority  is  one  of  the  first  duties  which  is
impressed  upon  the  mind  of  the  candidate;
and  hence  he  who  transgresses  the  laws  of
the  government  under  which  he  lives  vio¬
lates  the  teachings  of  the  Order,  and  is
guilty  of  a  Masonic  crime.  But  the  Order
will  take  no  cognizance  of  ecclesiastical  or
political  offences.  And  this  arises  from  the
very  nature  of  the  society,  which  eschews
all  controversies  about  national  religion  or
state  policy.  Hence  apostasy,  heresy,  and
schisms,  although  considered  in  some  gov¬
ernments  as  heinous  offences,  and  subject
to  severe  punishment,  are  not  viewed  as
Masonic  crimes.  Lastly,  violations  of  the
Landmarks  and  Regulations  of  the  Order
are  Masonic  crimes.  Thus,  disclosure  of
any  of  the  secrets  which  a  Mason  has  pro¬
mised  to  conceal ;  disobedience  and  want
of  respect  to  Masonic  superiors;  the  bring¬
ing  of  “  private  piques  or  quarrels  ”  into  the
Lodge;  want  of  courtesy  and  kindness  to
the  brethren  ;  speaking  calumniously  of  a
Mason  behind  his  back,  or  in  any  other  way
attempting  to  injure  him,  as  by  striking
him  except  in  self-defence,  or  violating  his
domestic  honor,  is  each  a  crime  in  Masonry.
Indeed,  whatever  is  a  violation  of  fidelity
to  solemn  engagements,  a  neglect  of  pre¬
scribed  duties,  or  a  transgression  of  the  car¬
dinal  principles  of  friendship,  morality,  and
brotherly  love,  is  a  Masonic  crime.

Cromlech.  A  large  stone  resting  on
two  or  more  stones,  like  a  table.  Crom¬
lechs  are  found  in  Brittany,  Denmark,
Germany,  and  some  other  parts  of  Europe,
and  are  supposed  to  have  been  used  in  the
Celtic  mysteries.

Cromwell.  The  AbM  Larudan  pub-


194


CROMWELL


CROSS


lished  at  Amsterdam,  in  1746,  a  book  enti¬
tled  Lea  Franco-Masons  Ecrases,  of  which
Kloss  says  (Bibliog.  der  Freimaurerei,  No.
1874,)  that  it  is  the  armory  from  which  all
the  abuse  of  Freemasonry  by  its  enemies
has  been  derived.  Larudan  was  the  first
to  advance  in  this  book  the  theory  that
Oliver  Cromwell  was  the  founder  of  Free¬
masonry.  He  says  that  Cromwell  estab¬
lished  the  Order  i'or  the  furtherance  of  his
political  designs;  adopting  with  this  view,
as  its  governing  principles,  the  doctrines  of
liberty  and  equality,  and  bestowed  upon  its
members  the  title  of  Freemasons,  because
his  object  was  to  engage  them  in  the  build¬
ing  of  a  new  edifice,  that  is  to  say,  to  re¬
form  the  human  race  by  the  extermination
of  kings  and  all  regal  powers.  He  selected
for  this  purpose  the  design  of  rebuilding
the  Temple  of  Solomon.  This  Temple,
erected  by  divine  command,  had  been  the
sanctuary  of  religion.  After  years  of  glory
and  magnificence,  it  had  been  destroyed  by
a  formidable  army.  The  people  who  there
worshipped  had  been  conveyed  to  Babylon,
whence,  after  enduring  a  rigorous  captivity,
they  had  been  permitted  to  return  to  Jeru¬
salem  and  rebuild  the  Temple.  This  his¬
tory  of  the  Solomonic  Temple  Cromwell
adopted,  says  Larudan,  as  an  allegory  on
which  to  found  his  new  Order.  The  Tem-
le  in  its  original  magnificence  was  man  in
is  primeval  state  of  purity ;  its  destruc¬
tion  and  the  captivity  of  its  worshippers
typified  pride  and  ambition,  which  have
abolished  equality  and  introduced  depend¬
ence  among  men;  and  the  Chaldean  de¬
stroyers  of  the  glorious  edifice  are  the
kings  who  have  trodden  on  an  oppressed
people.

It  was,  continues  the  Abb6,  in  the  year
1648  that  Cromwell,  at  an  entertainment
given  by  him  to  some  of  his  friends,  pro-
osed  to  them,  in  guarded  terms,  the  estab-
shment  of  a  new  society,  which  should
secure  a  true  worship  of  God,  and  the  de¬
liverance  of  man  from  oppression  and  tyr¬
anny.  The  proposition  was  received  with
unanimous  favor ;  and  a  few  days  after,  at  a
house  in  King  Street,  and  at  six  o’clock  in
the  evening,  (for  the  Abbe  is  particular  as
to  time  and  place,)  the  Order  of  Freema¬
sonry  was  organized,  its  degrees  established,
its  ceremonies  and  ritual  prescribed,  and
several  of  the  adherents  of  the  future  Pro¬
tector  initiated.  The  Institution  was  used
by  Cromwell  for  the  advancement  of  his
projects,  for  the  union  of  the  contending
parties  in  England,  for  the  extirpation
of  the  monarchy,  and  his  own  subsequent
elevation  to  supreme  power.  It  extended
from  England  into  other  countries,  but
was  always  careful  to  preserve  the  same
doctrines  of  equality  and  liberty  among


men,  and  opposition  to  all  monarchical
government.  Such  is  the  theory  of  the
Abb6  Larudan,  who,  although  a  bitter
enemy  of  Masonry,  writes  with  seeming
fairness  and  mildness.  But  it  is  hardly
necessary  to  say  that  this  theory  of  the
origin  of  Freemasonry  finds  no  support
either  in  the  legends  of  the  Institution,  or
in  the  authentic  history  that  is  connected
with  its  rise  and  progress.

Cross.  We  can  find  no  symbolism  of
the  cross  in  the  primitive  degrees  of  An¬
cient  Craft  Masonry.  It  does  not  appear
among  the  symbols  of  the  Apprentice,  the
Fellow  Craft,  the  Master,  or  the  Royal
Arch.  This  is  undoubtedly  to  be  attri¬
buted  to  the  fact  that  the  cross  was  con¬
sidered,  by  those  who  invented  those  de¬
grees,  only  in  reference  to  its  character  as
a  Christian  sign.  The  subsequent  archaeo¬
logical  investigations  that  have  given  to  the
cross  a  more  universal  place  in  iconogra¬
phy  were  unknown  to  the  rituals.  It  is
true,  that  it  is  referred  to,  under  the  name
of  the  rode  or  rood,  in  the  manuscript  of  the
fourteenth  century,  published  by  Halliwell;
this  was,  howrever,  one  of  the  Constitutions
of  the  Operative  Freemasons,  who  were
fond  of  the  symbol,  and  were  indebted  for
it  to  their  ecclesiastical  origin,  and  to  their
connection  with  the  Gnostics,  among  whom
the  cross  was  a  much  used  symbol.  But  on
the  revival  in  1717,  when  the  ritual  was
remodified,  and  differed  very  greatly  from
that  meagre  one  in  practice  among  the
mediaeval  Masons,  all  allusion  to  the  cross
was  left  out,  because  the  revivalists  laid
down  the  principle  that  the  religion  of
Speculative  (Masonry  was  not  sectarian  but
universal.  And  although  this  principle
was  in  some  points,  as  in  the  “lines  par¬
allel,”  neglected,  the  reticence  as  to  the
Christian  sign  of  salvation  has  continued
to  the  present  day ;  so  that  the  cross  cannot
be  considered  as  a  symbol  in  the  primary
and  original  degrees  of  Masonry.

But  in  the  high  degrees,  the  cross  has  been
introduced  as  an  importantsymbol.  In  some
of  them,  —  those  which  arfe  to  be  traced  to
the  Temple  system  of  Ramsay, — it  is  to  be
viewed  with  reference  to  its  Christian
origin  and  meaning.  Thus,  in  the  original
Rose  Croix  and  Kadosh,  —  no  matter  what
may  be  the  modern  interpretation  given  to
it,  —  it  was  simply  a  representation  of  the
cross  of  Christ  in  others  of  a  philosophi¬
cal  character,  such  as  the  Ineffable  degrees,
the  symbolism  of  the  cross  was  in  all  prob¬
ability  borrowed  from  the  usages  of  an¬
tiquity,  for  from  the  earliest  times  and  in
almost  all  countries  the  cross  has  been  a
sacred  symbol.  It  is  depicted  on  the
oldest  monuments  of  Egypt,  Assyria,  Per¬
sia,  and  Hindustan.  It  was,  says  Faber,


CROSS


CROSS


195


( Cabir.,  ii.  390,)  a  symbol  throughout  the
pagan  world  long  previous  to  its  becoming
an  object  of  veneration  to  Christians.  In
ancient  symbology  it  was  a  symbol  of  eter¬
nal  life.  M.  de  Mortillet,  who  in  1866
published  a  work  entitled  Le  Signe  de  la
Croix  avant  le  Christianisme,  found  in  the
very  earliest  epochs  three  principal  symbols
of  universal  occurrence :  viz.,  the  circle ,
th e  pyramid,  and  the  cross.  Leslie,  ( Man’s
Origin  and  Destiny ,  p.  312,)  quoting  from
him  in  reference  to  the  ancient  worship  of
the  cross,  says,  “  It  seems  to  have  been  a
worship  of  such  a  peculiar  nature  as  to  ex¬
clude  the  worship  of  idols.”  This  sacred¬
ness  of  the  crucial  symbol  may  be  one
reason  why  its  form  was  often  adopted,
especially  by  the  Celts,  in  the  construction
of  their  temples.

Of  the  Druidical  veneration  of  the  cross,
Higgins  quotes  from  the  treatise  of  Sche-
dius,  De  Moribus  Germanorum,  (xxiv.,)  the
following  remarkable  paragraph.

“  The  Druids  seek  studiously  for  an  oak-
tree,  large  and  handsome,  growing  up  with
two  principal  arms  in  the  form  of  a  cross,
beside  the  main,  upright  stem.  If  the  two
horizontal  arms  are  not  sufficiently  adapted
to  the  figure,  they  fasten  a  cross  beam  to  it.
This  tree  they  consecrate  in  this  manner.
Upon  the  right  branch  they  cut  in  the  bark,
in  fair  characters,  the  word  HESUS;  upon
the  middle  or  upright  stem,  the  word
TAR  AMIS;  upon  the  left  branch,  BELE-
NUS  ;  over  this,  above  the  going  off  of  the
arms,  they  cut  the  name  of  God,  THAU.
Under  all  the  same  repeated,  THAU.  This
tree,  so  inscribed,  they  make  their  kebla  in
the  grove,  cathedral,  or  summer  church,
towards  which  they  direct  their  faces  in  the
offices  of  religion.”

Mr.  Brinton,  in  his  interesting  work  en¬
titled  Symbolism;  The  Myths  of  the  New
World ,  has  the  following  remarks :

“The  symbol  that  beyond  all  others  has
fascinated  the  human  mind,  thecross,  finds
here  its  source  and  meaning.  Scholars  have
pointed  out  its  sacredness  in  manj^natural
religions,  and  have  reverently  accepted  it
as  a  mystery,  or  offered  scores  of  conflict¬
ing,  and  often  debasing,  interpretations.
It  is  but  another  symbol  of  the  four  cardinal
points,  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  This  will
luminously  appear  by  a  study  of  its  use
and  meaning  in  America.”  (P.  95.)  And
Mr.  Brinton  gives  many  instances  of  the
religious  use  of  the  cross  by  several  of  the
aboriginal  tribes  of  this  continent,  where
the  allusion,  it  must  be  confessed,  seems
evidently  to  be  to  the  four  cardinal  points,
or  the  four  winds,  or  four  spirits  of  the
earth.  If  this  be  so,  and  if  it  is  probable
that  a  similar  reference  was  adopted  by  the
Celtic  and  other  ancient  peoples,  then  we


would  have  in  the  cruciform  temple  as
much  a  symbolism  of  the  world,  of  which
the  four  cardinal  points  constitute  the
boundaries,  as  we  have  in  the  square,  the
cubical,  and  the  circular.

Cross,  Double.  See  Cross,  Patri¬
archal.

Cross,  Jerusalem.  A  Greek  cross
between  four  crosslets.  It  was  adopted  by
Baldwyn  as  the  arms
of  the  kingdom  of  Je¬
rusalem,  and  has  since
been  deemed  a  symbol
of  the  Holy  Land.  It
is  also  the  jewel  of  the
Knights  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre.  Symboli¬
cally,  the  four  small
crosses  typify  the  four
wounds  of  the  Saviour
in  the  hands  and  feet,  and  the  large  central
cross  shows  forth  his  death  for  that  world
to  which  the  four  extremities  point.

Cross,  Maltese.  A  cross  of  eight
points,  worn  by  the
Knights  of  Malta.  It
is  heraldically  de¬
scribed  as  “a  cross
pattee,  but  the  ex¬
tremity  of  each  pat-
t6e  notched  at  a  deep
angle.”  The  eight
points  are  said  to
refer  symbolically  to
the  eight  beatitudes.

Cross  of  Constantine.  See  La-
barum.

Cross  of  Salem.  Called  also  the
Pontifical  Cross,  because  it  is  borne  before
the  pope.  It  is  a  cross,  the
upright  piece  being  crossed
by  three  lines,  the  upper  and
lower  shorter  than  the  mid¬
dle  one.  It  is  the  insignia
of  the  Grand  Master  and
Past  Grand  Masters  of  the
Grand  Encampment  of
Knights  Templars  of  the
United  States,  and  also  of
the  Sovereign  Grand  Com¬
mander  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.

Cross,  I'assion.  The  cross  on  which
Jesus  suffered  crucifixion.  It  is  the  most
common  form  of  the  cross.

When  rayonnant,  or  having  rays
issuing  from  the  point  of  inter¬
section  of  the  limbs,  it  is  the  in¬
signia  of  the  Commander  of  a
Commandery  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars,  according  to  the  American
system.

Cross,  Patriarchal.  A  cross,  the
upright  piece  being  twice  crossed,  the  up-


196


CROSS


CROSS


per  arms  shorter  than  the  lower.  It  is
so  called  because  it  is  borne  before  a  Patri¬
arch  in  the  Roman
Church.  It  is  the  in¬
signia  of  the  officers  of
the  Grand  Encamp¬
ment  of  Knights  Tem-

Slars  of  the  United
tates,  and  of  all  pos¬
sessors  of  the  thirty-
third  degree  in  the
Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite.

Cross,  Si.  Andrew’s.  A  saltier  or
cross  whose  decussation  is  in  the  form  of
the  letter  X.  Said  to  be
the  form  of  cross  on  which
St.  Andrew  suffered  mar¬
tyrdom.  As  he  is  the  pa¬
tron  saint  of  Scotland,  the
St.  Andrew’s  cross  forms  a
part  of  the  jewel  of  the
Grand  Master  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland,  which
is  “  a  brilliant  star,  having
in  the  centre  a  field,  azure,  charged  with  a
St.  Andrew  on  the  cross,  gold ;  pendant
therefrom  the  Compasses  extended,  with
the  Square  and  Segment  of  a  Circle  of  90° ;
the  points  of  the  Compasses  resting  on  the
Segment.  In  the  centre,  between  the
Square  and  Compasses,  the  Sun  in  full
glory.”  The  St.  Andrew’s  cross  is  also  the
jewel  of  the  twenty-ninth  degree  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  or
Grand  Scottish  Knight  of  St.  Andrew.

Cross,  Tau.  The  cross  on  which  St.
Anthony  is  said  to  have  suffered  martyr¬
dom.  It  is  in  the  form  of
the  letter  T.  See  Tau.

Cross,  Templar.
Andre  Favin,  a  French  her¬
aldic  writer,  says  that  the
original  badge  of  the
Knights  Templars  was  a
Patriarchal  Cross,  and
Clarke,  in  his  History  of
Knighthood,  states  the  same
fact;  but  this  is  an  error.  At  first,  the
Templars  wore  a  white  mantle  without  any
cross.  But  in  1146  Pope  Eugenius  III.
prescribed  for  them  a  red  cross  on  the
breast,  as  a  symbol
of  the  martyrdom  to
which  they  were  con¬
stantly  exposed.  The
cross  of  the  Hospital¬
lers  was  white  on  a
black  mantle,  and
that  of  the  Templars
was  different  in  color
but  of  the  same  form,
namely,  a  cross  patt6e.  In  this  it  differed
Lorn  the  true  Maltese  cross,  worn  by  the
Knights  of  Malta,  which  was  a  cross  patte'e,


the  limbs  deeply  notched  so  as  to  make  a
cross  of  eight  points.  Sir  Walter  Scott,  with
his  not  unusual  heraldic  inaccuracy,  and
Higgins,  who  is  not  often  inaccurate,  but
only  fanciful  at  times,  both  describe  the
Templar  cross  as  having  eight  points,  thus
confounding  it  with  the  cross  of  Malta.
In  the  statutes  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple,
the  cross  prescribed  is  that  depicted  in  the
Charter  of  Transmission,  and  is  a  cross
pattee.

Cross,  Teutonic.  The  cross  for¬
merly  worn  by  the  Teutonic  Knights.  It
is  described  in  heraldry  as  “  a  cross  po¬
tent,  sable,  (black,)  charged  with  anotner
cross  double  potent  or,
(gold,)  and  surcharged
with  an  escutcheon  ar¬
gent  (silver,)  bearing
a  double-headed  eagle
(sable).  It  has  been
adopted  as  the  jewel
of  the  Kadosh  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite  in  the
United  States,  but  the  original  jewel  of  the
degree  was  a  Latin  or  Passion  Cross.

Cross,  Thrice  Illustrious  Order
of  the.  A  degree  formerly  conferred  in
this  country  on  Knights  Templars,  but  now
extinct.  Its  meetings  were  called  Councils,
and  under  the  authority  of  a  body  which
styled  itself  the  Ancient  Council  of  the
Trinity.  The  degree  is  no  longer  con¬
ferred.

Cross,  Triple.  See  Cross  of  Salem.

Cross-Bearing  Men.  ( ilri  Cruci-
geri .)  A  name  sometimes  assumed  by  the
Rosicrucians.  Thus,  in  the  Miracula  Na¬
tures,  (Anno  1619,)  there  is  a  letter  addressed
to  the  Fraternity  of  the  Rosy  Cross,  which
begins:  “  Philosophi  Fratres,  Viri  Cruci-
geri,” — Brother  Philosophers,  Cross-Bearing
Men.

Crossing  tlie  Hirer.  The  Kabba-
lists  have  an  alphabet  so  called,  in  allusion
to  the  crossing  of  the  river  Euphrates  by
the  Jew#  on  their  return  from  Babylon  to
Jerusalem  to  rebuild  the  Temple.  It  has
been  adopted  in  some  of  the  high  degrees
which  refer  to  that  incident.  Cornelius
Agrippa  gives  a  copy  of  the  alphabet  in
his  Occult  Philosophy.

Cross,  Jeremy  L..  A  teacher  of  the
Masonic  ritual,  who,  during  his  lifetime,
was  extensively  known,  and  for  some  time
very  popular.  He  was  born  June  27, 1783,
at  Haverhill,  New  Hampshire,  and  died
at  the  same  place,  in  1861.  Cross  was  ad¬
mitted  into  tne  Masonic  Order  in  1808,  and
soon  afterwards  became  a  pupil  of  Thomas
Smith  Webb,  whose  modifications  of  the
Preston  lectures  and  of  the  higher  degrees
were  generally  accepted  by  the  Masons  of
i  the  United  States.  Cross,  having  acquired


CROSS-LEGGED


CRUCEFIX


197


a  competent  knowledge  of  Webb’s  system,
began  to  travel  and  disseminate  it  through¬
out  the  country.  In  1819  he  published
The  True  Masonic  Chart  or  Hieroglyphic
Monitor,  in  which  he  borrowed  liberally
from  the  previous  work  of  Webb.  In  fact,
the  Chart  of  Cross  is,  in  nearly  all  its  parts,
a  mere  transcript  of  the  Monitor  of  Webb,
the  first  edition  of  which  was  published  in
1797.  Webb,  it  is  true,  took  the  same
liberty  with  Preston,  from  whose  Illustra¬
tions  of  Masonry  he  borrowed  largely.  The
engraving  of  the  emblems  constituted,  how¬
ever,  an  entirely  new  and  original  feature
in  the  Hieroglyphic  Chart,  and,  as  furnish¬
ing  aids  to  the  memory,  rendered  the  book
of  Cross  at  once  very  popular ;  so  much  so,
indeed,  that  for  a  long  time  it  almost  alto¬
gether  superseded  that  of  Webb.  In  1820
Cross  published  The  Templars'  Chart,  which,
as  a  monitor  of  the  degrees  of  chivalry,
met  with  equal  success.  Both  of  these
works  have  passed  through  numerous  edi¬
tions.

Cross  received  the  appointment  of  Grand
Lecturer  from  many  Grand  Lodges,  and
travelled  for  many  years  very  extensively
through  the  United  States,  teaching  his
system  of  lectures  to  Lodges,  Chapters,
Councils,  and  Encampments.

He  possessed  little  or  no  scholarly  at¬
tainments,  and  his  contributions  to  the  lit¬
erature  of  Masonry  are  confined  to  the  two
compilations  already  cited.  In  his  latter
years  he  became  involved  in  a  schismatic
effort  to  establish  a  spurious  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.  But
he  soon  withdrew  his  name,  and  retired  to
the  place  of  his  nativity,  where  he  died  at
the  advanced  age  of  seventy-eight.

Although  Cross  was  not  a  man  of  any
very  original  genius,  yet  a  recent  writer  has
announced  the  fact  that  the  symbol  of  the
monument  in  the  third  degree,  unknown  to
the  system  of  either  Preston  or  Webb,  was
invented  by  him.  See  Monument.

t'ross-iegged Knights.  IntheMid-
dle  Ag  es  it  was  the  custom  to  bury  the  body
of  a  Knight  Templar  with  one  leg  crossed
over  the  other ;  and  on  many  monuments  in
the  churches  of  Europe,  the  effigies  of  these
knights  are  to  be  found,  often  in  England,
of  a  diminutive  size,  with  the  legs  placed
in  this  position.  The  cross-legged  posture
was  not  confined  to  the  Templars,  but  was
appropriated  to  all  persons  who  had  as¬
sumed  the  cross  and  taken  a  vow  to  fight  in
defence  of  the  Christian  religion.  The  pos¬
ture,  of  course,  alluded  to  the  position  of
the  Lord  while  on  the  cross.

Cross-legged  Masons.  A  name
given  to  the  Knights  Templars  who  in  the
sixteenth  century  united  themselves  with
the  Masonic  Lodge  at  Sterling,  in  Scot¬


land.  The  allusion  is  evidently  to  the  fu¬
neral  posture  of  the  Templars,  so  that  a
“  cross-legged  Mason  ”  must  have  been  at
the  time  synonymous  with  a  Masonic
Knight  Templar.

Crotona.  One  of  the  most  prominent
cities  of  the  Greek  colonists  in  Southern
Italy,  where,  in  the  sixth  century,  Pythag¬
oras  established  his  celebrated  school.  As
the  early  Masonic  writers  were  fond  of
citing  Pythagoras  as  a  brother  of  theirCraft,
Crotona  became  connected  with  the  history
of  Masonry,  and  was  often  spoken  of  as
one  of  the  most  renowned  seats  of  the  In¬
stitution.  Thus,  in  the  Leland  MS.,  whose
authenticity  is  now,  however,  doubted,  it  is
said  that  Pythagoras  “framed  a  grate  Lodge
at  Groton,  and  maked  many  Maconnes,”
in  which  sentence  Groton,  it  must  be  re¬
marked,  is  an  evident  corruption  of  Cro¬
tona.

Crow.  An  iron  implement  used  to
raise  heavy  stones.  It  is  one  of  the  work¬
ing-tools  of  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  and  sym¬
bolically  teaches  him  to  raise  his  thoughts
above  the  corrupting  influence  of  worldly-
mindedness.

Crown.  A  portion  of  Masonic  regalia
worn  by  officers  who  represent  a  king,  more
especially  King  Solomon.  In  Ancient
Craft  Masonry,  however,  the  crown  is  dis¬
pensed  with,  the  hat  having  taken  its  place.

Crown,  Kniglit  of  the.  See  Knight
of  the  Crown.

Crown,  Princesses  of  the.

[Princesses  de  la  Couronne.)  A  species  of
androgynous  Masonry  established  at  Sax¬
ony  in  1770.  It  existed  for  only  a  brief
period.

Crowned  Martyrs.  See  Four
Crowned  Martyrs.

Crowning  of  Masonry.  Le  cou-
ronnement  de  la  Mac/mnerie.  The  sixty-
first  degree  of  the  collection  of  the  Metro¬
politan  Chapter  of  France.

Crueefix,  Robert  T.  An  English
Mason,  distinguished  for  his  services  to  the
Craft.  Robert  Thomas  Crucefix,  M.D.,
LL.D.,  was  born  in  Holborn,  Eng.,  in  the
year  1797,  and  received  his  education  at  Mer¬
chant  Tailors’  School.  After  leaving  school,
he  became  the  pupil  of  Mr.  Chamberlayne,
a  general  and  celebrated  practitioner  of  his
day,  at  Clerkenwell;  he  afterwards  became
a  student  at  St.  Bartholomew’s  Hospital,
and  was  a  pupil  of  the  celebrated  Aberne-
thy.  On  receiving  his  diploma  as  a  mem¬
ber  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  in
1810  he  went  out  to  India,  where  he  re¬
mained  but  a  short  time;  upon  his  return
he  settled  in  London,  and  he  continued  to
reside  there  till  the  year  1845,  when  he  re¬
moved  to  Milton-on-Thames,  where  he
spent  the  rest  of  his  life  till  within  a  few


198


CRUCIFIX


CRUX


weeks  before  his  decease,  when  he  removed,  I
for  the  benefit  of  his  declining  health,  to
Bath,  where  he  expired  February  25,  1850.
Dr.  Crucefix  was  initiated  into  Masonry  in
1829,  and  during  the  greater  part  of  his  life
discharged  the  duties  of  important  offices
in  theGrand  Lodge  of  England,  of  which  he
was  a  Grand  Deacon,  and  in  several  subordi¬
nate  Lodges,  Chapters,  and  Encampments.
He  was  an  earnest  promoter  of  all  the  Ma¬
sonic  charities  of  England,  of  one  of  which,
the  “  Asylum  for  Aged  and  Decayed  Free¬
masons,”  he  was  the  founder.  In  1834,  he  es¬
tablished  the  Freemason’s  Quarterly  Review,
and  continued  to  edit  it  for  six  years,  during
which  period  he  contributed  many  valuable
articles  to  its  pages.

In  1840,  through  the  machinations  of  his
enemies,  (for  he  was  too  great  a  man  not  to
have  had  some,)  he  incurred  the  displeasure
of  the  ruling  powers;  and  on  charges  which,
undoubtedly,  were  not  sustained  by  suffi¬
cient  evidence,  he  was  suspended  by  the
Grand  Lodge  for  six  months,  and  retired
from  active  Masonic  life.  But  he  never
lost  the  respect  of  the  Craft,  nor  the  affec¬
tion  of  the  leading  Masons  who  were  his
contemporaries.  On  his  restoration,  he
again  began  to  labor  in  behalf  of  the  In¬
stitution,  and  spent  his  last  days  in  ad¬
vancing  its  interests.  To  his  character,  his
long-tried  friend,  the  venerable  Oliver,  pays
this  tribute.  “  Dr.  Crucefix  did  not  pretend
to  infallibility,  and,  like  all  other  public
men,  he  might  be  sometimes  wrong ;  but
his  errors  were  not  from  the  heart,  and  al¬
ways  leaned  to  the  side  of  virtue  and  be¬
neficence.  He  toiled  incessantly  for  the
benefit  of  his  brethren,  and  was  anxious
that  all  inestimable  blessings  should  be
conveyed  by  Masonry  on  mankind.  In
sickness  or  in  health  he  was  ever  found  at
his  post,  and  his  sympathy  was  the  most
active  in  behalf  of  the  destitute  brother,
the  widow,  and  the  orphan.  His  persever¬
ance  never  flagged  for  a  moment ;  and  he
acted  as  though  he  had  made  up  his  mind  to
live  and  die  in  obedience  to  the  calls  of  duty.”

Crucifix.  A  cross  with  the  image  of
the  Saviour  suspended  on  it.  A  part  of  the
furniture  of  a  Commanderv  of  Knights
Templars  and  of  a  Chapter'of  Princes  of
Rose  Croix.

Crusades.  There  was  between  Free¬
masonry  and  the  Crusades  a  much  more
intimate  relation  than  has  generally  been
supposed.  In  the  first  place,  the  commu¬
nications  frequently  established  by  the
Crusaders,  and  especially  the  Knights
Templars,  with  the  Saracens,  led  to  the
acquisition,  by  the  former,  of  many  of  the
dogmas  of  the  secret  societies  of  the  East,
such  as  the  Essenes,  the  Assassins,  and
the  Druses.  These  were  brought  by  the  j


knights  to  Europe,  and  subsequently,  on
the  establishment  by  Ramsay  and  his  con¬
temporaries  and  immediate  successors  of
Templar  Masonry,  were  incorporated  into
the  high  degrees,  and  still  exhibit  their
influence.  Indeed,  it  is  scarcely  to  be
doubted  that  many  of  these  degrees  were
invented  with  a  special  reference  to  the
events  which  occurred  in  Syria  and  Pales¬
tine.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  Scottish  de¬
gree  of  Knights  of  the  East  and  West
must  have  originally  alluded,  a3  its  name
imports,  to  the  legend  which  teaches  a
division  of  the  Masons  after  the  Temple
was  finished,  when  the  Cr^ft  dispersed,  —  a
part  remaining  in  Palestine,  as  the  Assi-
deans,  whom  Lawrie,  citing  Scaliger,  calls
the  “  Knights  of  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,”
and  another  part  passing  over  into  Europe,
whence  they  returned  on  the  breaking  out
of  the  Crusades.  This,  of  course,  is  but  a
legend,  yet  the  influence  is  felt  in  the  inven¬
tion  of  the  higher  rituals.

But  the  influence  of  the  Crusades  on  the
Freemasons  and  the  architecture  of  the
Middle  Ages  is  of  a  more  historical  charac¬
ter.  In  1836,  Mr.  Westmacott,  in  a  course
of  lectures  on  art  before  the  Royal  Acad¬
emy,  remarked  that  the  two  principal  causes
which  materially  tended  to  assist  the  resto¬
ration  of  literature  and  the  arts  in  Europe
were  Freemasonry  and  the  Crusades.  The
adventurers,  he  said,  who  returned  from
the  Holy  Laud  brought  back  some  ideas
of  various  improvements,  particularly  in
architecture,  and,  along  with  these,  a  strong
desire  to  erect  castellated,  ecclesiastical,
and  palatial  edifices,  to  display  the  taste
they  had  acquired  ;  and  in  less  than  a  cen¬
tury  from  the  first  Crusade  above  six  hun¬
dred  buildings  of  the  above  description
had  been  erected  in  southern  and  western
Europe.  This  taste  was  spread  into  almost
all  countries  by  the  establishment  of  the
Fraternity  of  Freemasons,  who,  it  appears,
had,  under  some  peculiar  form  of  brother¬
hood,  existed  for  an  immemorial  period  in
Syria  and  other  parts  of  the  East,  from
whence  some  bands  of  them  migrated  to
Europe,  and  after  a  time  a  great  efflux  of
these  ingenious  men  —  Italian,  German,
French,  Spanish,  etc. — had  spread  them¬
selves  in  communities  through  all  civilized
Europe;  and  in  all  countries  where  they
settled  we  find  the  same  style  of  architec¬
ture  from  that  period,  but  differing  in  some
points  of  treatment,  as  suited  the  climate.

Crux  Ansata.  This  signifies,  in  Latin,
the  cross  with  a  handle.  It  is  formed  by  a  tau
cross  surmounted  by  a  circle  or,  more  prop¬
erly,  an  oval.  It  was  one  of  the  most  sig¬
nificant  of  the  sj  mbols  of  the  ancient
Egyptians,  and  is  depicted  repeatedly  on
(  their  monuments  borne  in  the  hands  of


CRYPT


CUNNING


199


their  deities,  and  especially  Phtha.  Among
them  it  was  the  symbol  of
life,  and  with  that  meaning  it
has  been  introduced  into  some
of  the  higher  degrees  of  Masonry.

The  crux  ansata,  surrounded  by  a
serpent  in  a  circle,  is  the  symbol
of  immortality,  because  the  cross
was  the  symbol  of  life,  and  the
serpent  of  eternity.

Crypt.  From  the  Greek,

Kpiirrr/.  A  concealed  place,  or  subterranean
vault.  The  caves,  or  cells  under  ground,  in
which  the  primitive  Christians  celebrated
their  secret  worship,  were  called  cryptse ;  and
the  vaults  beneath  our  modern  churches  re¬
ceive  the  name  of  crypts.  The  existence  of
crypts  or  vaults  under  the  Temple  of  Solo¬
mon  is  testified  to  by  the  earliest  as  well
as  by  the  most  recent  topographers  of  Je¬
rusalem.  Their  connection  with  the  legend¬
ary  history  of  Masonry  is  more  fully  noticed
under  the  head  of  Secret  Vault.

Cryptic  Degrees.  The  degrees  of
Royal  and  Select  Master.  Some  modern
ritualists  have  added  to  the  list  the  degree
of  Super-Excellent  Master;  but  this,  al¬
though  now  often  conferred  in  a  Cryptic
Council,  is  not  really  a  Cryptic  degree,
since  its  legend  has  no  connection  with  the
crypt  or  secret  vault.

Cryptic  Masonry.  That  division
of  the  Masonic  system  which  is  directed  to
the  investigation  and  cultivation  of  the
Cryptic  degrees.  It  is,  literally,  the  Ma¬
sonry  of  the  secret  vault.

Cteis.  Greek,  ktu<;.  The  female  per¬
sonification  of  the  productive  principle.
It  generally  accompanied  the  phallus,  as
the  Indian  yoni  did  the  lingam ;  and  as  a
symbol  of  the  prolific  powers  of  nature,
was  extensively  venerated  by  the  nations
of  antiquity.  See  Phallus.

Cubical  Stone.  This  symbol  is  called
by  the  French  Masons,  pierre  cubique,  and
by  the  German,  cubik  stein.  It  is  the  Per¬
fect  Ashlar  of  the  English  and  American
systems.  See  Ashlar,  Perfect.

Cubit.  A  measure  of  length,  origi¬
nally  denoting  the  distance  from  the  elbow
to  the  extremity  of  the  middle  finger,  or
the  fourth  part  of  a  well-proportioned  man’s
stature.  The  Hebrew  cubit,  according  to
Bishop  Cumberland,  was  twenty-one  inches ;
but  only  eighteen  according  to  other  au¬
thorities.  There  were  two  kinds  of  cubits,
the  sacred  and  profane,  — the  former  equal
to  thirty-six,  and  the  latter  to  eighteen
inches.  It  is  by  the  common  cubit  that
the  dimensions  of  the  various  parts  of  the
Temple  are  to  be  computed.

Culdeea.  When  St.  Augustine  came
over,  in  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  cen¬
tury,  to  Britain,  for  the  purpose  of  convert¬


ing  the  natives  to  Christianity,  he  found
the  country  already  occupied  by  a  body  of
priests  and  their  disciples,  who  were  dis¬
tinguished  for  the  pure  and  simple  apos¬
tolic  religion  which  they  professed.  These
were  the  Culdees,  a  name  said  by  some  to
be  derived  from  Cultores  Dei,  or  worship¬
pers  of  God ;  but  by  others,  with,  perhaps,
more  plausibility,  from  the  Gaelic,  Cuildich,
which  means  a  secluded  corner,  and  evi¬
dently  alludes  to  their  recluse  mode  of  life.
The  Culdees  are  said  to  have  come  over
into  Britain  with  the  Roman  legions ;  and
thus  it  has  been  conjectured  that  these
primitive  Christians  were  in  some  way  con¬
nected  with  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Archi¬
tects,  branches  of  which  body,  it  is  well
known,  everywhere  accompanied  the  le¬
gionary  armies  of  the  empire.  The  chief
seat  of  the  Culdees  was  in  the  island  of
Iona,  where  St.  Columba,  coming  out  of
Ireland,  with  twelve  brethren,  in  the  year
563,  established  their  principal  monastery.
At  Avernethy,  the  capital  of  the  kingdom
of  the  Piets,  they  founded  another  in  the
year  600,  and  subsequently  other  principal
seats  at  Dunkeld,  St.  Andrew’s,  Brechin,
Dunblane,  Dumferline,  Kirkaldy,  Melrose,
and  many  other  places  in  Scotland.  A
writer  in  the  London  Freemasons'  Quar¬
terly  Review  (1842,  p.  36,)  says  they  were
little  solicitous  to  raise  architectural  struc¬
tures,  but  sought  chiefly  to  civilize  and  so¬
cialize  mankind  by  imparting  to  them  the
knowledge  of  those  pure  principles  which
they  taught  in  their  Lodges.  Lenning  and
Gadicke,  however,  both  state  that  the  Cul¬
dees  had  organized  within  themselves,  and
as  a  part  of  their  social  system,  Corpora¬
tions  of  Builders;  and  that  they  exercised
the  architectural  art  in  the  construction
of  many  sacred  edifices  in  Scotland,  Ire¬
land,  and  Wales,  and  even  in  other  coun¬
tries  of  Northern  Europe.  Gadicke  also
claims  that  the  York  Constitutions  of  the
tenth  century  were  derived  from  them.
But  neither  of  these  German  lexicographers
has  furnished  us  with  authorities  upon
which  these  statements  are  founded.  It  is,
however,  undeniable,  that  Masonic  writers
have  always  claimed  that  there  was  a  con¬
nection —  it  might  be  only  a  mythical  one
—  between  these  apostolic  Christians  and
the  early  Masonry  of  Ireland  and  Scotland.
The  Culdees  were  opposed  and  persecuted
by  the  adherents  of  St.  Augustine,  and  were
eventually  extinguished  in  Scotland.  But
their  complete  suppression  did  not  take
place  until  about  the  fourteenth  century.

Cunning.  Used  by  old  English  writ¬
ers  in  the  sense  of  skilful.  Thus,  in  1  Kings
viii.  14,  it  is  said  of  the  architect  who  was
sent  by  the  king  of  Tyre  to  assist  King
Solomon  in  the  construction  of  his  Temple,


200


CUP


DA  COSTA


that  he  was  “  cunning  to  work  in  all  works
in  brass.”

Cup  of  Bitterness.  ( Calice  LAmer-
tume.)  A  ceremony  in  the  first  degree  of
the  French  Rite.  It  is  a  symbol  of  the
misfortunes  and  sorrows  that  assail  us  in
the  voyage  of  life,  and  which  we  are  taught
to  support  with  calmness  and  resignation.

Curetes.  Priests  of  ancient  Crete,
whose  mysteries  were  celebrated  in  honor
of  the  Mother  of  the  Gods,  and  bore,  there¬
fore,  some  resemblance  to  the  Eleusinian
rites.  The  neophyte  wa3  initiated  in  a
cave,  where  he  remained  closely  confined
for  thrice  nine  days.  Porphyry  tells  us
that  Pythagoras  repaired  to  Crete  to  re¬
ceive  initiation  into  their  rites.

Curiosity.  It  is  a  very  general  opin¬
ion  among  Masons  that  a  candidate  should
not  be  actuated  by  curiosity  in  seeking
admission  into  the  Order.  But,  in  fact,
there  is  no  regulation  nor  landmark  on  the
subject.  An  idle  curiosity  is,  it  is  true,  the
characteristic  of  a  weak  mind.  But  to  be
influenced  by  a  laudable  curiosity  to  pene¬
trate  the  mysteries  of  an  Institution  vener¬
able  for  its  antiquity  and  its  universality,
is  to  be  controlled  by  a  motive  which  is
not  reprehensible.  There  are,  indeed,  in
legends  of  the  high  degrees,  some  instances
where  curiosity  is  condemned ;  but  the  cu¬
riosity,  in  these  instances,  led  to  an  intru¬
sion  into  forbidden  places,  and  is  very  dif¬
ferent  from  the  curiosity  or  desire  for
knowledge  which  leads  a  profane  to  seek
fairly  and  openly  an  acquaintance  with
mysteries  which  he  has  already  learned  to
respect.

Curious.  Latin,  curiosus,  from  cura,


care.  An  archaic  expression  for  careful.
Thus  in  Masonic  language,  which  abounds
in  archaisms,  an  evidence,  indeed,  of  its
antiquity,  Hiram  Abif  is  described  as  a
“  curious  and  cunning  workman,”  that  is  to
say,  “  careful  and  skilful.”

Customs,  Ancient.  See  Usages.

Cynocephalus.  The  figure  of  a  man
with  the  head  of  a  dog.  A  very  general
and  important  hieroglyphic  among  the  an¬
cient  Egyptians.  It  was  with  them  a  sym¬
bol  of  the  sun  and  moon  ;  and  in  their  mys¬
teries  they  taught  that  it  had  indicated  to
Isis  the  place  where  the  body  of  Osiris  lay
concealed.  The  possessor  of  the  high  de¬
grees  of  Masonry  will  be  familiar  with  the
symbol  of  a  dog,  which  is  used  in  those  de¬
grees  because  that  animal  is  said  to  have
pointed  out  on  a  certain  occasion  an  im¬
portant  secret.  Hence  the  figure  of  a  dog
is  sometimes  found  engraved  among  the
symbols  on  old  Masonic  diplomas.

Cyrus.  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia,  was  a
great  conqueror,  and  after  having  reduced
nearly  all  Asia,  he  crossed  the  Euphrates,
and  laid  siege  to  Babylon,  which  he  took
by  diverting  the  course  of  the  river
which  ran  through  it.  The  Jews,  who
had  been  carried  away  by  Nebuchad¬
nezzar  on  the  destruction  of  the  Temple,
were  then  remaining  as  captives  in  Baby¬
lon.  These  Cyrus  released  a.  m.  3466,  or
B.  c.  538,  and  sent  them  back  to  Jerusa¬
lem  to  rebuild  the  house  of  God,  under  the
care  of  Joshua,  Zerubbabel,  and  Haggai.
Hence,  from  this  connection  of  Cyrus  with
the  history  of  Masonry,  he  plays  an  im¬
portant  part  in  the  rituals  of  many  of  the
high  degrees.


D.


Da  Costa  Hyppolito,  Jose.  A

Portuguese  who  was  initiated  into  Masonry
in  the  beginning  of  this  century,  and  was
subsequently  persecuted  by  the  Inquisition,
and  was  rescued  only  in  time  to  save  his
life  by  the  aid  of  English  brethren  who  got
him  under  the  protection  of  the  English
flag.  He  then  passed  over  into  England,
where  he  lived  for  several  years,  becoming
a  zealous  Mason  and  devoting  himself  to
Masonic  literature.  In  1811,  he  published
in  London  a  Narrative  of  his  persecution
in  Lisbon,  by  the  Inquisition,  for  the  pre¬
tended  crime  of  Freemasonry,  in  2  vols.,
8vo.  He  wrote  also  a  History  of  the  Dio¬


nysian  Artificers,  in  which  he  attempts  to
connect  Freemasonry  with  the  Dionysian
and  other  mysteries  of  the  ancients.  He
begins  with  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  as¬
suming  that  Dionysus,  Bacchus,  Adonis,
Thammuz,  and  Apollo  were  all  various
names  for  the  sun,  whose  apparent  move¬
ments  are  represented  by  the  death  and
resurrection  referred  to  in  the  ceremonies.
But  as  the  sun  is  typified  as  being  dead  or
hidden  for  three  months  under  the  horizon,
he  thinks  that  these  mysteries  must  have
originated  in  a  cold  climate  as  far  north  as
latitude  66°,  or  among  a  people  living  near
the  polar  circle.  He  therefore  attributes


DADUCHOS


DALCHO


201


the  invention  of  these  mysteries  to  the
ancient  Scythians  or  Massagetae,  of  whom
he  confesses  that  we  know  nothing.  He
afterwards  gives  the  history  of  the  l)iony-
siac  or  Orphic  mysteries  of  Eleusis,  and
draws  a  successful  parallel  between  the  ini¬
tiation  into  these  and  the  Masonic  initia¬
tion.  His  disquisitions  are  marked  by
much  learning,  although  his  reasoning  may
not  always  carry  conviction.

Daduclios.  A  torch  -  bearer.  The
title  given  to  an  officer  in  the  Eleusinian
mysteries,  who  bore  a  torch  in  commemo¬
ration  of  the  torch  lit  by  Ceres  at  the  fire
of  Mt.  Etna,  and  carried  by  her  through
the  world  in  her  search  for  her  daughter.

Dagger.  In  the  high  degrees  a  symbol
of  Masonic  vengeance,  or  the  punishment
of  crime.  See  Vengeance.

Dais.  From  the  French  dais,  a  canopy.
The  raised  floor  at  the  head  of  a  banquet¬
ing- room,  designed  for  guests  of  distinction;
so  called  because  it  used  to  be  decorated
with  a  canopy.  In  Masonic  language,  the
dais  is  the  elevated  portion  of  the  eastern
art  of  the  Lodge  room,  which  is  occupied
y  Past  Masters  and  the  dignitaries  of  the  Or¬
der.  This  should  be  elevated  th  ree  steps  above
the  floor.  The  station  of  the  Junior  Warden
is  raised  one,  and  that  of  the  Senior  two.

DalcSio,  Frederick,  M.  D.  One
of  the  founders  of  the  Supreme  Council  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United
States.  He  was  born  in  the  city  of  London
in  the  year  1770,  of  Prussian  parents.  His
father  had  been  a  distinguished  officer
under  Frederick  the  Great,  and,  having
been  severely  wounded,  was  permitted  to
retire  to  England  for  his  health.  He  was
a  very  earnest  Mason,  and  transmitted  his
sentiments  to  his  son.  At  his  death,  this
son  was  sent  for  by  an  uncle,  who  had  a
few  years  before  emigrated  to  Baltimore.
Here  he  obtained  a  good  classical  education,
after  which  he  devoted  himself  successfully
to  the  study  of  medicine,  including  a  more
extensive  course  of  botany  than  is  common
in  medical  schools.

Having  received  hi3  degree  of  Doctor  of
Medicine,  he  took  a  commission  in  the
medical  department  of  the  American  army.
With  his  division  of  the  army  he  came  to
South  Carolina,  and  was  stationed  at  Fort
Johnson,  in  Charleston  harbor.  Here  some
difficulty  arose  between  Dr.  Dalcho  and  his
brother  officers,  in  consequence  of  which
he  resigned  his  place  in  the  army  in  1799.
He  then  removed  to  Charleston,  where  he
formed  a  partnership  in  the  practice  of
physic  with  Isaac  Auld,  and  he  became  a
member  of  the  Medical  Society,  and  a
trustee  of  the  Botanic  Garden,  established
through  its  influence.

2  A


On  the  12th  June,  1818,  Dr.  Dalcho  was
admitted  to  the  priesthood  of  the  Protest¬
ant  Episcopal  Church.  On  the  23d  of
February,  he  was  elected  assistant  minister
of  St.  Michael’s  Church,  in  Charleston.
He  died  on  the  24th  of  November,  1836,  in
the  sixty-seventh  year  of  his  age,  and  the
seventeenth  of  his  ministry  in  St.  Michael’s
Church.

The  principal  published  work  of  Dr.
Dalcho  is,  An  Historical  Account  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  Church  in  South  Caro¬
lina.  He  also  published  a  work  entitled
The  Evidence  from  Prophecy  for  the  Truth
of  Christianity  and  the  Divinity  of  Christ ;
besides  several  sermons  and  essays,  some
of  which  were  the  result  of  considerable
labor  and  research.  He  was  also  the  pro¬
jector,  and  for  a  long  time  the  principal
conductor,  of  the  Gospel  Messenger ,  then
the  leading  organ  of  the  Episcopal  Church
in  South  Carolina.

The  Masonic  career  of  Dr.  Dalcho  closely
connects  him  with  the  history  of  York  Ma¬
sonry  in  South  Carolina,  and  with  that  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
throughout  the  United  States.

He  was  initiated  in  a  York  or  Athol
Lodge  at  the  time  when  the  jurisdiction  of
South  Carolina  was  divided  by  the  exist¬
ence  and  the  dissensions  of  two  Grand
Lodges,  the  one  deriving  its  authority  from
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted
Masons  of  England,  and  the  other  from  the
spurious  or  Athol  Grand  Lodge  of  York
Masons.

His  constant  desire  appears,  however,  to
have  been  to  unite  these  discordant  ele¬
ments,  and  to  uproot  the  evil  spirit  of  Ma¬
sonic  rivalry  and  contention  which  at  that
time  prevailed  —  a  wish  which  was  hap¬
pily  gratified,  at  length,  by  the  union  of
the  two  Grand  Lodges  of  South  Carolina  in
1817,  a  consummation  to  which  he  himself
greatly  contributed.

In  1801  Dr.  Dalcho  received  the  thirty-
third  and  ultimate  degree,  or  Sovereign
Grand  Inspector  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite ;  and  May  31, 1801,  he
became  instrumental  in  the  establishment
at  Charleston  of  the  Supreme  Council  for
the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United
States,  of  which  body  he  was  appointed
Grand  Secretary,  and  afterwards  Grand
Commander;  which  latter  position  he  oc¬
cupied  until  1823,  when  he  resigned.

September  23,  1801,  he  delivered  an  ora¬
tion  before  the  Sublime*Grand  Lodge  in
Charleston.  This  and  another  delivered
March  21,  1803,  before  the  same  body,  ac¬
companied  by  a  learned  historical  appen¬
dix,  were  published  in  the  latter  year  un¬
der  the  general  name  of  Dalcho' s  Orations.
The  work  was  soon  after  republished  in


202


DAMASCUS


DANGER


Dublin  by  the  Grand  Council  of  TTeredom,
or  Prince  M:isons  of  that  city  ;  and  McCosh
says  that  there  were  other  editions  issued
in  Europe,  which,  however,  I  have  never
seen.  The  oration  of  1803  and  the  appen¬
dix  furnish  the  best  information  that  up  to
that  day,  and  for  many  years  afterwards, was
accessible  to  the  Craft  in  relation  to  the  his¬
tory  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite  in  this  country.

In  1807,  at  the  request  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  York  Masons  of  South  Carolina,
he  published  an  “  Ahiman  Rezon,”  which
was  adopted  as  the  code  for  the  government
of  the  Lodges  under  the  jurisdiction  of  that
body.  This  work,  as  was  to  be  expected
from  the  character  of  the  Grand  Lodge
which  it  represented,  was  based  on  the  pre¬
vious  book  of  Laurence  Dermott.

In  1808  he  was  elected  Corresponding
Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Ancient  York  Masons,  and  from  that  time
directed  the  influences  of  his  high  position  to
the  reconciliation  of  the  Masonic  difficul¬
ties  in  South  Carolina.

In  1817  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and
Accepted  Masons  and  that  of  Ancient  York
Masons  of  South  Carolina  became  united
under  the  name  of  “  The  Grand  Lodge  of
Ancient  Freemasons  of  South  Carolina.”
Dr.  Dalcho  took  a  very  active  part  in  this
reunion,  and  at  the  first  annual  communi¬
cation  he  was  elected  Grand  Chaplain.
The  duties  of  this  office  he  faithfully  per¬
formed,  and  for  many  years  delivered  a
public  address  or  sermon  on  the  Festival
of  St.  John  the  Evangelist.

In  1822  he  prepared  a  second  edition  of
the  “Ahiman  Rezon,”  which  was  published
the  following  year,  enriched  with  many
notes.  Some  of  these  notes  he  would  have
hardly  written,  with  the  enlarged  experience
of  the  present  day  ;  but  on  the  whole  the
second  edition  was  an  improvement  on  the
first.  Although  retaining  the  peculiar  title
which  had  been  introduced  by  Dermott,  it
ceased  in  a  great  measure  to  follow  the
principles  of  the  “  Ancient  Masons.”

In  1823  Dalcho  became  involved  in  an
unpleasant  controversy  with  some  of  his
Masonic  associates,  in  consequence  of  diffi¬
culties  and  dissensions  which  at  that  time
existed  in  the  Scottish  Rite;  and  his  feel¬
ings  were  so  wounded  by  the  unmasonic
spirit  which  seemed  to  actuate  his  antago¬
nists  and  former  friends,  that  he  resigned
the  office  of  Grand  Chaplain,  and  retired
for  the  remainder  of  his  life  from  all  par¬
ticipation  in  the  active  duties  of  Masonry.

Damascus.  An  ancient  and  impor¬
tant  city  of  Syria,  situated  on  the  road
between  Babylon  and  Jerusalem,  and  said
in  Masonic  tradition  to  have  been  one  of
the  resting-places  of  the  Masons  who,


under  the  proclamation  of  Cyrus,  returned
from  the  former  to  the  latter  city  to  rebuild
the  Temple.  An  attempt  was  made  in
1868  to  introduce  Freemasonry  into  Da¬
mascus,  and  a  petition,  signed  by  fifteen
applicants,  for  a  charter  for  a  Lodge  was
sent  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England;  but
the  petition  was  rejected  on  the  ground
that  all  the  petitioners  were  members  of
Grand  Lodges  under  other  Grand  Lodge
jurisdictions.

Dame.  In  one  of  the  York  and  some
of  the  other  old  manuscripts,  we  find  the
direction  to  the  Apprentice  that  he  shall
not  so  act  as  to  bring  harm  orshame,  during
his  apprenticeship,  “  either  to  his  Master
or  Dame.”  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that
this  gives  any  color  to  the  theory  fhat  in
the  ancient  Masonic  gilds  women  were  ad¬
mitted.  The  word  was  used  in  the  same
sense  as  it  still  is  in  the  public  schools  of
England,  where  the  old  lady  who  keeps  the
house  at  which  the  pupils  board  and  lodge,
is  called  “  the  dame.”  The  Compagnons
de  la  Tour  in  France  called  her  “la  mere,”
or  the  mother.  It  must,  however,  be  ac¬
knowledged,  that  women,  under  the  title  of
sisters,  were  admitted  as  members,  and  given
the  freedom  of  the  company,  in  the  old
Livery  Companies  of  London, — a  custom
which  Herbert  {Hist.  Liv.  Comp.,  i.  83,)
thinks  was  borrowed,  on  the  reconstitution
of  the  companies  by  Edward  III.,  from
the  religious  gilds.  See  this  subject  dis¬
cussed  under  the  title  Sisters.

Dames  of  5It.  Tabor.  An  an¬
drogynous  Masonic  society,  established
about  the  year  1818,  under  the  auspices
of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.  Its  design
was  to  give  charitable  relief  to  destitute
females.

Dames  of  the  Order  of  St.  John.

Religious  ladies  who,  from  its  first  institu¬
tion,  had  been  admitted  into  the  Fraternity
of  Knights  Hospitallers  of  St.  John  of  Je¬
rusalem.  The  rules  for  their  reception
were  similar  to  those  for  the  Knights,  and
the  proofs  of  noble  descent  which  were
required  of  them  were  sometimes  more
rigid.  They  had  many  conventual  estab¬
lishments  in  France,  Italy,  and  Spain.

Damoiscl.  A  name  given  in  the
times  of  chivalry  to  a  page  or  candidate
for  knighthood.

Dan.  One  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,
whose  blue  banner,  charged  with  an  eagle,
is  borne  by  the  Grand  Master  of  the  First
;  Veil  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter.

Danger."  In  all  the  old  Constitutions
and  Charges,  Masons  are  taught  to  exercise
brotherly  love,  and  to  deal  honestly  and
truly  with  each  other,  whence  results  the
duty  incumbent  upon  every  Mason  to  warn
his  brother  of  approaching  danger.  That


DANNEBROG


D’ASSIGNY


203


this  duty  may  never  be  neglected,  it  is  im¬
pressed  upon  every  Master  Mason  by  a
significant  ceremony.

Daniiebrog.  The  banner  of  Den¬
mark  containing  a  red  cross.  It  is  founded
upon  the  tradition,  which  reminds  us  of
that  of  Constantine,  that  Waldemar  II.,
of  Denmark,  in  1219  saw  in  the  heavens
a  fiery  cross,  which  betokened  his  victory
over  the  Esthonians.

Dantzie.  In  the  year  1768,  on  the
3d  of  October,  the  burgomaster  and  magis¬
trates  of  the  city  of  Dantzie  commenced
a  persecution  against  Freemasonry,  which
Institution  they  charged  with  seeking  to
undermine  the  foundations  of  Christianity,
and  to  establish  in  its  place  the  religion  of
nature.  Hence,  they  issued  a  decree  for¬
bidding  every  citizen,  inhabitant,  and  even
stranger  sojourning  in  the  city,  from  any
attempt  to  re-establish  the  society  of  Free¬
masons,  which  was  thenceforth  to  be  re¬
garded  “  as  forever  abolished,”  under  penal¬
ties  of  fine  and  imprisonment.

Darius.  The  successor  of  Cyrus  on
the  throne  of  Persia,  Babylon,  and  Medea.
He  pursued  the  friendly  policy  of  his  pre¬
decessor  in  reference  to  the  Jews,  and  con¬
firmed  the  decrees  of  that  monarch  by  a
new  edict.  In  the  second  year  of  his  reign,
Haggai  and  Zechariah,  encouraged  by  this
edict,  induced  their  countrymen  to  resume
the  work  of  restoring  the  Temple,  which
was  finished  four  years  afterwards.  Darius
is  referred  to  in  the  degrees  of  Princes  of
Jerusalem,  the  sixteenth  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  and  of  Knight
of  the  Red  Cross  in  the  American  Rite.

Darkness.  Darkness  has,  in  all  the
systems  of  initiation,  been  deemed  a  sym¬
bol  of  ignorance,  and  so  opposed  to  light,
which  is  the  symbol  of  knowledge.  Hence
the  rule,  that  the  eye  should  not  see  until
the  heart  has  conceived  the  true  nature  of
those  beauties  which  constitute  the  myste¬
ries  of  the  Order.  In  the  Ancient  Myste¬
ries,  the  aspirant  was  always  shrouded  in
darkness,  as  a  preparatory  step  to  the  recep¬
tion  of  the  full  light  of  knowledge.  The
time  of  this  confinement  in  darkness  and
solitude  varied  in  the  different  mysteries.
Among  the  Druids  of  Britain  the  period
was  nine  days  and  nights ;  in  the  Grecian
Mysteries  it  was  three  times  nine  days;
while  among  the  Persians,  according  to
Porphyry,  it  was  extended  to  the  almost
incredible  period  of  fifty  days  of  darkness,
solitude,  and  fasting.

Because,  according  to  all  the  cosmogo¬
nies,  darkness  existed  before  light  was  cre¬
ated,  darkness  was  originally  worshipped
as  the  first-born,  as  the  progenitor  of  day
and  the  state  of  existence  before  creation.
The  apostrophe  of  Young  to  Night  embod¬


ies  the  feelings  which  gave  origin  to  this
debasing  worship  of  darkness :

“  O  majestic  night !

Nature’s  great  ancestor!  day’s  elder  born  !

And  fated  to  survive  the  transient  sun !

By  mortals  and  immortals  seen  with  awe  !  ”

Freemasonry  has  restored  darkness  to  its
proper  place  as  a  state  of  preparation  ;  the
symbol  of  that  antemundane  chaos  from
whence  light  issued  at  the  divine  command  ;
of  the  state  of  nonentity  before  birth,  and
of  ignorance  before  the  reception  of  knowl¬
edge.  Hence,  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries,
the  release  of  the  aspirant  from  solitude
and  darkness  was  called  the  act  of  regen¬
eration,  and  he  was  said  to  be  born  again,
or  to  be  raised  from  the  dead.  And  in
Masonry,  the  darkness  which  envelops  the
mind  of  the  uninitiated  being  removed  by
the  bright  effulgence  of  Masonic  light,
Masons  are  appropriately  called  “  the  sons
of  light.”

In  Dr.  Oliver’s  Signs  and  Symbols  there
is  a  lecture  “  On  the  Mysterious  Darkness
of  the  Third  Degree.”  This  refers  to  the
ceremony  of  enveloping  the  room  in  dark¬
ness  when  that  degree  is  conferred  —  a  cere¬
mony  once  always  observed,  but  now,  in
this  country  at  least,  frequently  but  impro¬
perly  omitted.  The  darkness  here  is  a
symbol  of  death,  the  lesson  taught  in  the
degree,  while  the  subsequent  renewal  of
light  refers  to  that  other  and  subsequent
lesson  of  eternal  life.

Darmstadt,  Grand  Lodge  of.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Darmstadt,  in  Ger¬
many,  under  the  distinctive  appellation  of
the  Grand  Lodge  zur  Eintracht,  was  estab¬
lished  on  the  23d  of  March,  1846,  by  three
Lodges,  in  consequence  of  a  dissension  be¬
tween  them  and  the  Eclectic  Union.  The
latter  body  had  declared  that  the  religion
of  Freemasonry  was  universal,  and  that
Jews  could  be  admitted  into  the  Order.
Against  this  liberal  declaration  a  Lodge  at
Frankfort  had  protested,  and  had  been
erased  from  the  roll  for  contumacy.  Two
other  Lodges,  at  Mainz  and  at  Darmstadt,
espoused  its  cause,  and  united  with  it  in
forming  a  new  Grand  Lodge  for  southern
Germany,  founded  on  the  dogma  “  that
Christian  principles  formed  the  basis  on
which  they  worked.”  It  was,  in  fact,  a
dispute  between  tolerance  and  intolerance.
Nevertheless,  the  body  was  taken  under  the
patronage  of  the  Grand  Duke  of  Hesse,
and  was  recognized  by  most  of  the  Grand
Lodges  of  Germany.

D'Assigny,  Doctor  Fifichl.  A
Mason  of  Dublin,  Ireland,  who  published,
in  1744,  at  Dublin,  A  Serious  and  Impartial
Enquiry  into  the  Cause  of  the  present  Decay  of
Freemasonry  in  the  Kingdom  of  Ireland.  It


204


DATES


DEAF


contained  an  abstract  of  the  history  of
Freemasonry,  and  several  allusions  to  the
Itoval  Arch  degree,  on  account  of  which
it  has  been  cited  by  Dermott  in  his  Ahiman  j
Rezon.  Bro.  Huglian,  who  is  the  possessor
of  a  copy  of  this  exceedingly  scarce  book,
also  quotes  a  passage  from  it  of  some  im¬
portance.  “  I  am  informed,”  says  D’As-
signy,  “  that  in  that  city  (York)  is  held  an
assembly  of  Master  Masons,  under  the  title
of  Royal  Arch  Masons.”  If  true,  this
would  settle  an  important  point  in  relation
to  the  history  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree.
Hughan  doubts  its  accuracy ;  and,  indeed,
D’Assigny  —  if  we  may  judge  from  other
remarks  in  his  Enquiry — does  not  seem  to
have  been  acquainted  with  the  true  char¬
acter  of  the  Royal  Arch.

Dates,  Masonic.  See  Calendar.

Dathan.  A  Reubenite  who,  with  Korah
and  Abiram,  revolted  against  Moses  and
unlawfully  sought  the  priesthood.  In  the
first  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Numbers,  where
the  whole  account  is  given,  it  is  said  that
as  a  punishment  the  earth  opened  and
swallowed  them  up.  The  incident  is  re¬
ferred  to  in  the  Order  of  High  Priesthood,
an  honorary  degree  of  the  American  Rite,
which  is  conferred  upon  the  installed  High
Priests  of  Royal  Arch  Chapters.

Daughter,  Mason’s.  See  Mason's
Wife  and  Daughter.

Daughter  of  a  Mason.  The  daugh¬
ter  of  a  Mason  is  entitled  to  certain  pecu¬
liar  privileges  and  claims  upon  the  Fra¬
ternity  arising  from  her  relationship  to  a
member  of  the  Craft.  There  has  been  some
difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  time  and
manner  in  which  the  privileges  cease.
Masonic  jurists,  however,  very  generally  in¬
cline  to  the  opinion  that  they  are  termi¬
nated  by  marriage.  If  a  Mason’s  daughter
marries  a  profane,  she  absolves  her  con¬
nection  with  the  Fraternity.  If  she  marries
a  Mason,  she  exchanges  her  relation  of  a
Mason’s  daughter  for  that  of  a  Mason’s
wife.

David.  David  has  no  place  in  Masonic
history,  except  that  which  arises  from  the
fact  that  he  was  the  father  of  King  Solomon,
and  his  predecessor  on  the  throne  of  Israel.
To  him,  however,  were  the  Jews  indebted
for  the  design  of  a  Temple  in  Jerusalem,
the  building  of  which  was  a  favorite  object
with  him.  For  this  purpose  he  purchased
Mount  Moriah,  which  had  been  the  thresh¬
ing-floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite ;  but  David
had  been  engaged  in  so  many  wars,  that  it
did  not  seem  good  to  the  Lord  that  he
should  be  permitted  to  construct  so  sacred
an  edifice.  This  duty,  therefore,  he  left  to
his  son,  whom,  before  dying,  he  furnished
with  plans  and  with  means  to  accomplish
the  task.  Though  David  is  a  favorite  sub¬


ject  among  the  Kabbalists  and  the  Mussul¬
mans,  who  relate  many  curious  traditions
concerning  him,  he  is  not  alluded  to  in  the
legends  or  symbolism  of  Masonry,  except
incidentally  as  the  father  of  Solomon.

David,  Shield  of.  See  Shield  oj
David.

Dazard,  Michel  Francois.  Bom

atChateaudun,  in  France,  May  2, 1781.  He
was  a  devoted  student  of  Masonry,  and
much  occupied  in  the  investigation  of  the
high  degrees  of  all  the  Rites.  He  was  an
opponent  of  the  Supreme  Council,  against
which  body  he  wrote,  in  1812,  a  brochure
of  forty-eight  pages  entitled  Extrail  des
colonnes  gravees  du  Plre  de  Famille,  vallee  d’
Angers.  Kloss  calls  it  an  important  and
exhaustive  polemic  document.  It  attempts
to  expose,  supported  by  documents,  what
the  author  and  his  party  called  the  illegal
pretensions  of  the  Supreme  Council,  and
the  arrogance  of  its  claim  to  exclusive  juris¬
diction  in  France.  Dazard  was  the  author
of  several  other  interesting  discourses  on
Masonic  subjects.

Deacon.  In  every  Symbolic  Lodge,
there  are  two  officers  who  are  called  the
Senior  and  Junior  Deacons.  The  former
is  appointed  by  the  Master,  and  the  latter
by  the  Senior  Warden.  It  is  to  the  Deacons
that  the  introduction  of  visitors  should  be
properly  intrusted.  Their  duties  compre¬
hend,  also,  a  general  surveillance  over  the
security  of  the  Lodge,  and  they  are  the
proxies  of  the  officers  by  whom  they  are
appointed.  Hence  their  jewel,  in  allu¬
sion  to  the  necessity  of  circumspection
and  justice,  is  a  square  and  compasses.
In  the  centre,  the  Senior  Deacon  wears
a  sun,  and  the  Junior  Deacon  a  moon,
which  serve  to  ‘  distinguish  their  respec¬
tive  ranks.  In  the  English  system,  the
jewel  of  the  Deacons  is  a  dove,  in  allusion
to  the  dove  sent  forth  by  Noah.  In  the
Rite  of  Mizraim,  the  Deacons  are  called
acolytes.

The  office  of  Deacons  in  Masonry  ap¬
pears  to  have  been  derived  from  the  usages
of  the  primitive  church.  In  the  Greek
church,  the  Deacons  were  always  the-iv.<j/-)0(,
pylori  or  doorkeepers,  and  in  the  Apostoli¬
cal  Constitutions  the  Deacon  was  ordered  to
stand  at  the  men’s  door,  and  the  sub-Deacon
at  the  women’s,  to  see  that  none  came  in  or
went  out  during  the  oblation.

In  the  earliest  rituals  of  the  last  century,
there  is  no  mention  of  Deacons,  and  the
duties  of  those  officers  were  discharged
partly  by  the  Junior  Warden  and  partly  by
the  Senior  and  Junior  Entered  Apprentices.

Deacon’s  Rod.  See  Rod,  Deacons.

Deaf  and  Dumb.  Deaf  mutes,  as  im¬
perfect  men,  come  under  the  provisions  of  the
Old  Constitutions,  and  are  disqualified  for


DEATH


DECALOGUE


205


initiation.  Someyearsago,  however,  aLodge
in  Paris,  captivated  by  the  eclat  of  the  pro¬
ceeding,  and  unmindful  of  the  ancient  land¬
mark,  initiated  a  deaf  mute,  who  was  an  intel¬
ligent  professor  in  the  Deaf  and  Dumb  Asy¬
lum.  All  the  instructions  were  given
through  the  medium  of  the  language  of  the
deaf  mutes.  It  scarcely  need  be  said  that
this  cannot  be  recognized  as  a  precedent.

Dentil.  The  Scandinavians,  in  their
Edda,  describing  the  residence  of  Death  in
Hell,  where  she  was  cast  by  her  father,
Loke,  say  that  she  there  possesses  large
apartments,  strongly  built,  and  fenced  with

fates  of  iron.  Her  hall  is  Grief;  her  table,
'amine;  Hunger,  her  knife;  Delay,  her
servant;  Faintness,  her  porch;  Sickness
and  Pain,  her  bed;  and  her  tent,  Curs¬
ing  and  Howling.  But  the  Masonic  idea
of  death,  like  the  Christians,  is  accom¬
panied  with  no  gloom,  because  it  is  repre¬
sented  only  as  a  sleep,  from  whence  we
awaken  into  another  life.  Among  the  an¬
cients,  sleep  and  death  were  fabled  as  twins.
Old  Gorgias,  when  dying,  said,  “  Sleep  is
about  to  deliver  me  up  to  his  brother ;  ”
but  the  death-sleep  of  the  heathen  was  a
sleep  from  which  there  was  no  awaking.
The  popular  belief  wa3  annihilation,  and
the  poets  and  philosophers  fostered  the
people’s  ignorance,  by  describing  death  as
the  total  and  irremediable  extinction  of  life.
Thus  Seneca  says  —  and  he  was  too  philo¬
sophic  not  to  have  known  better — “  that  after
death  there  comes  nothing ;  ”  while  Virgil,
who  doubtless  had  been  initiated  into  the
mysteries  of  Eleusis,  nevertheless  calls  death
“an  iron  sleep,  an  eternal  night:  ”  yet  the
Ancient  Mysteries  were  based  upon  the
dogma  of  eternal  life,  and  their  initiations
were  intended  to  represent  a  resurrection.
Masonry,  deriving  its  system  of  symbolic
teachings  from  these  ancient  religious  asso¬
ciations,  presents  death  to  its  neophytes  a3
the  gate  or  entrance  to  eternal  existence.
To  teach  the  doctrine  of  immortality  is  the
great  object  of  the  third  degree.  In  its
ceremonies  we  learn  that  life  here  is  the
time  of  labor,  and  that,  working  at  the
construction  of  a  spiritual  temple,  we  are
worshipping  the  Grand  Architect,  for  whom
we  build  that  temple.  But  we  learn  also
that,  when  that  life  is  ended,  it  closes  only
to  open  upon  a  newer  and  higher  one,
where,  in  a  second  temple  and  a  purer  Lodge,
the  Mason  will  find  eternal  truth.  Death,
therefore,  in  Masonic  philosophy,  is  the
symbol  of  initiation  completed,  perfected,
and  consummated.

Death  of  the  Mysteries.  Each
of  the  ancient  religious  Mysteries,  those
quasi  Masonic  associations  of  the  heathen
world,  was  accompanied  by  a  legend,  —
which  was  always  of  a  funereal  character, —


representing  the  death,  by  violence,  of  the
deity  to  whom  it  was  dedicated,  and  his  sub¬
sequent  resurrection  or  restoration  to  life.
Hence,  the  first  part  of  the  ceremonies  of
initiation  was  solemn  and  lugubrious  in
character,  while  the  latter  part  was  cheerful
and  joyous.  These  ceremonies  and  this
legend  were  altogether  symbolical,  and  the
great  truths^if  the  unity  of  God  and  the
immortality  of  the  soul  were  by  them  in¬
tended  to  be  dramatically  explained.

This  representation  of  death,  which  finds
its  analogue  in  the  third  degree  of  Masonry,
has  been  technically  called  the  Death  of
the  Mysteries.  It  is  sometimes  more  pre¬
cisely  defined,  in  reference  to  any  special
one  of  the  Mysteries,  as  “  the  Cabiric  death  ”
or  “the  Bacchic  death,”  as  indicating  the
death  represented  in  the  Mysteries  of  the
Cabiri  or  of  Dionysus.

Debate.  Debates  in  a  Masonic  Lodge
must  be  conducted  according  to  the  frater¬
nal  principles  of  the  Institution.  In  the
language  of  Dr.  Oliver,  “  the  strictest  cour¬
tesy  should  be  observed  during  a  debate,  in
a  Mason’s  Lodge,  on  questions  which  elicit
a  dilference  of  opinion ;  and  any  gross  vio¬
lation  of  decorum  and  good  order  is  sure  to
be  met  by  an  admonition  from  the  chair.”
It  must  be  always  remembered  that  the
object  of  a  Masonic  discussion  is  to  elicit
truth,  and  not  simply  to  secure  victory.

When,  in  a  debate,  a  brother  desires  to
speak,  he  rises  and  addresses  the  chair.
The  presiding  officer  calls  him  by  his  name,
and  thus  recognizes  his  right  to  the  floor.
While  he  is  speaking,  he  is  not  to  be  inter¬
rupted  by  any  other  member,  except  on  a
point  of  order.  If  called  to  order  by  any
member,  the  speaker  is  immediately  to  take
his  seat  until  the  point  is  stated,  when  the
Master  will  make  his  decision  without  de¬
bate.  The  speaker  will  then  rise  and  re¬
sume  his  discourse,  if  not  ruled  out  by  the
Master.  During  the  time  that  he  is  speak¬
ing,  no  motion  is  permissible.  Every
member  is  permitted  to  speak  once  on  the
subject  under  discussion ;  nor  can  he  speak
a  second  time,  except  by  permission  of  the
Master,  unless  there  is  a  more  liberal  pro¬
vision  in  the  by-laws  of  the  Lodge.  There
are  to  this  rule  two  exceptions,  namely,
when  a  member  rises  to  explain,  and  when
the  mover  of  the  resolution  closes  the  de¬
bate  by  a  second  speech  to  which  he  is  en¬
titled  by  parliamentary  law.

Decalogue.  The  ten  commandments
of  the  Masonic  law,  as  delivered  from
Mount  Sinai  and  recorded  in  the  twentieth
chapter  of  Exodus,  are  so  called.  They
are  not  obligatory  upon  a  Mason  as  a  Ma¬
son,  because  the  Institution  is  tolerant  and
cosmopolite,  and  cannot  require  its  mem¬
bers  to  give  their  adhesion  to  any  religious


20G


DECIU3


DEDICATION


dogmas  or  precepts,  excepting  those  which
express  a  belief  in  the  existence  of  God,
and  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  No  par¬
tial  law  prescribed  for  a  particular  religion
can  be  properly  selected  for  the  government
of  an  Institution  whose  great  characteristic
is  its  universality.  See  Moral  Law.

Decitis.  The  nom  de  plume  of  C.  L.
Reinhold,  a  distinguished  Masonic  writer.
See  Reinhold.

Declaration  of  Candidates.

Every  candidate  for  initiation  is  required
to  make,  “upon  honor,”  the  following  dec¬
laration  before  an  appropriate  officer  or
committee.  That,  unbiassed  by  the  impro-
er  solicitation  of  friends  and  uninfluenced
y  mercenary  motives,  he  freely  and  volun¬
tarily  offers  himself  as  a  candidate  for  the
mysteries  of  Masonry;  that  he  is  prompted
to  solicit  the  privileges  of  Masonry  by  a
favorable  opinion  conceived  of  the  Institu¬
tion  and  a  desire  of  knowledge ;  and  that  he
will  cheerfully  conform  to  all  the  ancient
usages  and  established  customs  of  the  Fra¬
ternity.  This  form  is  very  old.  It  is  to  be
found  in  precisely  the  same  words  in  the
earliest  edition  of  Preston.  It  is  required
by  the  English  Constitution,  that  the  can¬
didate  should  subscribe  his  name  to  the
declaration  which  is  made  before  the  Stew¬
ards.  But  in  this  country  the  declaration
is  made  orally,  and  usually  before  the
Senior  Deacon.

Declaration  of  file  Master.  Every
Master  of  a  Lodge,  after  his  election  and
before  his  installation,  is  required  to  give,
in  the  presence  of  the  brethren,  his  assent
to  the  following  fifteen  charges  and  regula¬
tions.

1.  Do  you  promise  to  be  a  good  man  and
true,  and  strictly  to  obey  the  moral  law  ?
2.  Do  you  promise  to  be  a  peaceable  citizen,
and  cheerfully  to  conform  to  the  laws  of
the  country  in  which  you  reside  ?  3.  Do
you  promise  not  to  be  concerned  in  plots
and  conspiracies  against  the  government  of
the  country  in  which  you  live,  but  patiently
to  submit  to  the  decisions  of  the  law  and
the  constituted  authorities?  4.  Do  you
promise  to  pay  proper  respect  to  the  civil
magistrates,  to  work  diligently,  live  credit¬
ably,  and  act  honorably  by  all  men?  5.  Do
you  promise  to  hold  in  veneration  the  orig¬
inal  rulers  and  patrons  of  the  Order  of
Freemasonry,  and  their  regular  successors,
supreme  and  subordinate,  according  to  their
stations ;  and  to  submit  to  the  awards  and
resolutions  of  your  brethren  in  Lodge  con¬
vened,  in  every  case  consistent  with  the
constitutions  of  the  Order?  6.  Do  you
promise,  as  much  as  in  you  lies,  to  avoid
private  piques  and  quarrels,  and  to  guard
against  intemperance  and  excess?  7.  Do
you  promise  to  be  cautious  in  your  behavior,


courteous  to  your  brethren,  and  faithful  to
your  Lodge?  8.  Do  you  promise  to  respect
genuine  and  true  brethren,  and  to  discoun¬
tenance  impostors  and  all  dissenters  from
the  Ancient  Landmarks  and  Constitutions
of  Masonry?  9  Do  you  promise,  accord¬
ing  to  the  best  of  your  abilities,  to  promote
the  general  good  of  society,  to  cultivate  the
social  virtues,  and  to  propagate  the  knowl¬
edge  of  the  mystic  art,  according  to  our
statutes  ?  10.  Do  you  promise  to  pay  hom¬
age  to  the  Grand  Master  for  the  time  being,
and  to  his  officers  when  duly  installed ;  and
strictly  to  conform  to  every  edict  of  the
Grand  Lodge  or  General  Assembly  of
Masons  that  is  not  subversive  of  the  prin¬
ciples  and  groundwork  of  Masonry?  11.
Do  you  admit  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of
any  man,  or  body  of  men,  to  make  innova¬
tions  in  the  body  of  Masonry?  12.  Do  you
promise  a  regular  attendance  on  the  com¬
mittees  and  communications  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  on  receiving  proper  notice,  and  to
pay  attention  to  all  the  duties  of  Masonry,
on  convenient  occasions  ?  13.  Do  you  ad¬
mit  that  no  new  Lodge  can  be  formed  with¬
out  permission  of  the  Grand  Lodge;  and
that  no  countenance  ought  to  be  given  to
any  irregular  Lodge,  or  to  any  person  clan¬
destinely  initiated  therein,  as  being  con¬
trary  to  the  ancient  charges  of  the  Order?
14.  Do  you  admit  that  no  person  can  be
regularly  made  a  Freemason  in,  or  admitted
a  member  of,  any  regular  Lodge,  without
previous  notice,  and  due  inquiry  into  his
character?  15.  Do  you  agree  that  no  vis¬
itors  shall  be  received  into  your  Lodge  with¬
out  due  examination,  and  producing  proper
vouchers  of  their  having  been  initiated
in  a  regular  Lodge  ?

Decorations.  A  Lodge  room  ought,
besides  its  necessary  furniture,  to  be  orna¬
mented  with  decorations  which,  while  they
adorn  and  beautify  it,  will  not  be  unsuit¬
able  to  its  sacred  character.  On  this  sub¬
ject,  Dr.  Oliver,  in  his  Book  of  the  Lodge ,
(ch.  v.,  p.  70,)  makes  the  following  judi¬
cious  remarks.  “  The  expert  Mason  will  be
convinced  that  the  walls  of  a  Lodge  room
ought  neither  to  be  absolutely  naked  nor
too  much  decorated.  A  chaste  disposal  of
symbolical  ornaments  in  the  right  places,
and  according  to  propriety,  relieves  the
dulness  and  vacuity  of  a  blank  space,  and,
though  but  sparingly  used,  will  produce  a
striking  impression,  and  contribute  to  the
general  beauty  and  solemnity  of  the  scene.”

Dedication  of  a  Dodge.  Among
the  ancients  every  temple,  altar,  statue,  or
sacred  place  was  dedicated  to  some  divinity.
The  Romans,  during  the  Republic,  confided
this  duty  to  their  consuls,  praetors,  censors,
or  other  chief  magistrates,  and  afterwards
to  the  emperors.  According  to  the  Papirian


DEDICATION


DEDICATION


207


law,  the  dedication  must  have  been  author¬
ized  by  a  decree  of  the  senate  and  the  peo¬
ple,  and  the  consent  of  the  college  of  augurs.
The  ceremony  consisted  in  surrounding  the
temple  or  object  of  dedication  with  gar¬
lands  of  flowers,  whilst  the  vestal  virgins

f»oured  on  the  exterior  of  the  temple  the
ustral  water.  The  dedication  was  com¬
pleted  by  a  formula  of  words  uttered  by  the
pontiff1,  and  the  immolation  of  a  victim,
whose  entrails  were  placed  upon  an  altar
of  turf.  The  dedication  of  a  temple  was
always  a  festival  for  the  people,  and  was
annually  commemorated.  While  the  Pa¬
gans  dedicated  their  temples  to  different
deities,  —  sometimes  to  the  joint  worship
of  several,  —  the  monotheistic  Jews  dedi¬
cated  their  religious  edifices  to  the  one
supreme  Jehovah.  Thus,  David  dedicated
with  solemn  ceremonies  the  altar  which  he
erected  on  the  threshing-floor  of  Oman
the  Jebusite,  after  the  cessation  of  the
plague  which  had  afflicted  his  people ;  and
Calmet  conjectures  that  he  composed  the
thirtieth  Psalm  on  this  occasion.  The  Jews
extended  this  ceremony  of  dedication  even
to  their  private  houses,  and  Clarke  tells  us,
in  reference  to  a  passage  on  this  subject  in
the  book  of  Deuteronomy,  that  “  it  was  a
custom  in  Israel  to  dedicate  a  new  house  to
God  with  prayer,  praise,  and  thanksgiving ;
and  this  was  done  in  order  to  secure  the
divine  presence  and  blessiug,  for  no  pious
or  sensible  man  could  imagine  he  could
dwell  safely  in  a  house  that  was  not  under
the  immediate  protection  of  God.”

According  to  the  learned  Selden,  there
was  a  distinction  among  the  Jews  between
consecration  and  dedication,  for  sacred
things  were  both  consecrated  and  dedicated,
while  profane  things,  such  as  private  dwell¬
ing-houses,  were  only  dedicated.  Dedica¬
tion  was,  therefore,  a  less  sacred  ceremony
than  consecration.  This  distinction  has
also  been  preserved  among  Christians,
many  of  whom,  and,  in  the  early  ages,  all,
consecrated  their  churches  to  the  worship
of  God,  but  dedicated  them  to,  or  placed
them  under,  the  especial  patronage  of  some
particular  saint.  A  similar  practice  pre¬
vails  in  the  Masonic  institution ;  and  there¬
fore,  while  we  consecrate  our  Lodges  “  to
the  honor  of  God’s  glory,”  we  dedicate
them  to  the  patrons  of  our  Order.

Tradition  informs  us  that  Masonic  Lodges
were  originally  dedicated  to  King  Solomon,
because  he  was  our  first  Most  Excellent
Grand  Master.  In  the  sixteenth  century
St.  John  the  Baptist  seems  to  have  been
considered  as  the  peculiar  patron  of  Free¬
masonry  ;  but  subsequently  this  honor  was
divided  between  the  two  Saints  John,  the
Baptist  and  the  Evangelist;  and  modern
Lodges,  in  this  country  at  least,  are  uni¬


versally  erected  or  consecrated  to  God,  and
dedicated  to  the  Holy  Saints  John.  In  the
Hemming  lectures,  adopted  in  1813,  at  the
time  of  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges
of  England,  the  dedication  was  changed
from  the  Saints  John  to  King  Solomon,
and  this  usage  now  prevails  very  generally
in  England ;  but  the  ancient  dedication  to
the  Saints  John  has  never  been  abandoned
by  the  American  Lodges.

The  formula  in  Webb  which  dedicates
the  Lodge  “to  the  memory  of  the  Holy
Saint  John,”  was,  undoubtedly,  an  inad¬
vertence  on  the  part  of  that  lecturer,  since
in  all  his  oral  teachings  he  adhered  to  the
more  general  system,  and  described  a  Lodge
in  his  esoteric  work  as  being  “  dedicated  to
the  Holy  Saints  John.”  This  is  now  the
universal  practice,  and  the  language  used
by  Webb  becomes  contradictory  and  absurd
when  compared  with  the  fact  that  the  fes¬
tivals  of  both  saints  are  equally  celebrated
by  the  Order,  and  that  the  27th  of  Decem¬
ber  is  not  less  a  day  of  observance  in  the
Order  than  the  24th  of  June.

In  one  of  the  old  lectures  of  the  last
century,  this  dedication  to  the  two  Saints
John  is  thus  explained:

“  Q.  Our  Lodges  being  finished,  fur¬
nished,  and  decorated  with  ornaments,
furniture,  and  jewels,  to  whom  were  they
consecrated  ?

“A.  To  God.

“  Q.  Thank  you,  brother;  and  can  you
tell  me  to  whom  they  were  first  dedicated?

“A.  To  Noah,  who  was  saved  in  the
ark.

“  Q.  And  by  what  name  were  the  Masons
then  known  ?

“A.  They  were  called  Noachidse,  Sages,
or  Wise  Men.

“  Q.  To  whom  were  the  Lodges  dedicated
during  the  Mosaic  dispensation?

“  A .  To  Moses,  the  chosen  of  God,  and
Solomon,  the  son  of  David,  kingf  of  Israel,
who  was  an  eminent  patron  of  the  Graft.

“  Q.  And  under  what  name  were  the
Masons  known  during  that  period?

“A.  Under  the  name  of  Dionysiacs,
Geometricians,  or  Masters  in  Israel.

“  Q.  But  as  Solomon  was  a  Jew,  and
died  long  before  the  promulgation  of  Chris¬
tianity,  to  whom  were  they  dedicated  under
the  Christian  dispensation?

“A.  From  Solomon  the  patronage  of
Masonry  passed  to  St.  John  the  Baptist.

“  Q.  And  under  what  name  were  they
known  after  the  promulgation  of  Christi¬
anity  ?

“  A.  Under  the  name  of  Essenes,  Archi¬
tects,  or  Freemasons.

“  Q.  Why  were  the  Lodges  dedicated  to
St.  John  the  Baptist?

“  A.  Because  he  was  the  forerunner  of


208


DEDICATION


DEDICATION


our  Saviour,  and,  by  preaching  repentance
and  humiliation,  drew  the  first  parallel  of
the  Gospel.

“  Q.  Had  St.  John  the  Baptist  any
equal  ?

“A.  He  had;  St.  John  the  Evangelist.

“  Q.  AVhy  is  he  said  to  be  equal  to  the
Baptist?

“A.  Because  he  finished  by  his Jearning
what  the  other  began  by  his  zeal,  and  thus
drew  a  second  line  parallel  to  the  former;
ever  since  which  time  Freemasons’  Lodges,
in  all  Christian  countries,  have  been  dedi¬
cated  to  the  one  or  the  other,  or  both,  of
these  worthy  and  worshipful  men.”

There  is  another  old  lecture,  adopted  into
the  Prestonian  system,  which  still  further
developed  these  reasons  for  the  Johannite
dedication,  but  with  slight  variations  in
some  of  the  details.

“  From  the  building  of  the  first  Temple
at  Jerusalem  to  the  Babylonish  captivity,
Freemasons’  Lodges  were  dedicated  to  King
Solomon  ;  from  thence  to  the  coming  of  the
Messiah,  they  were  dedicated  to  Zerub-
babel,  the  builder  of  the  second  Temple;
and  from  that  time  to  the  final  destruction
of  the  Temple  by  Titus,  in  the  reign  of
Vespasian,  they  were  dedicated  to  St.  John
the  Baptist ;  but  owing  to  the  many  massa¬
cres  and  disorders  which  attended  that  mem¬
orable  event,  Freemasonry  sunk  very  much
into  decay ;  many  Lodges  were  entirely
broken  up,  and  but  few  could  meet  in  suf¬
ficient  numbers  to  constitute  their  legality  ;
and  at  a  general  meeting  of  the  Craft,  held
in  the  city  of  Benjamin,  it  was  observed
that  the  principal  reason  for  the  decline  of
Masonry  was  the  want  of  a  Grand  Master
to  patronize  it.  They  therefore  deputed
seven  of  their  most  eminent  members  to
wait  upon  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  who
was  at  that  time  Bishop  of  Ephesus,  re¬
questing  him  to  take  the  office  of  Grand
Master.  He  returned  for  answer,  that
though  well  stricken  in  years  (being  up¬
wards  of  ninety),  yet  having  been  initiated
into  Masonry  in  the  early  part  of  his  life,
he  would  take  upon  himself  that  office.
He  thereby  completed  by  his  learriingwhat
the  other  St.  John  effected  by  his  zeal,  and
thus  drew  what  Freemasons  term  a  ‘line
parallel ;  ’  ever  since  which  time  Freema¬
sons’  Lodges,  in  all  Christian  countries,
have  been  dedicated  both  to  St.  John  the
Baptist  and  St.  John  the  Evangelist.”

So  runs  the  tradition,  but,  as  it  wants
every  claim  to  authenticity,  a  more  philo¬
sophical  reason  may  be  assigned  for  this
dedication  to  the  two  Saints  John.

One  of  the  earliest  deviations  from  the
pure  religion  of  the  Noachidse  was  distin¬
guished  by  the  introduction  of  sun  wor¬
ship.  The  sun,  in  the  Egyptian  mysteries,


was  symbolized  by  Osiris,  the  principal  ob¬
ject  of  their  rites,  and  whose  name,  accord¬
ing  to  Plutarch  and  Macrobius,  signified
the  prince  and  leader,  the  soul  of  the  uni¬
verse  and  the  governor  of  the  stars.  .Ma¬
crobius  [Saturn.,  1.  i.,  c.  18,)  says  that  the
Egyptians  worshipped  the  sun  as  the  only
divinity;  and  they  represented  him  under
different  forms,  according  to  the  different
phases,  of  his  infancy  at  the  winter  solstice
in  December,  his  adolescence  at  the  vernal
equinox  in  March,  his  manhood  at  the
summer  solstice  in  June,  and  his  old  age
at  the  autumnal  equinox  in  September.

Among  the  Phoenicians,  the  sun  was
adored  under  the  name  of  Adonis,  and  in
Persia,  under  that  of  Mithras.  In  the  Gre¬
cian  mysteries,  the  orb  of  day  was  repre¬
sented  by  one  of  the  officers  who  superin¬
tended  the  ceremony  of  initiation;  and  in
the  Druidical  rites  his  worship  was  intro¬
duced  as  the  visible  representative  of  the
invisible,  creative,  and  preservative  princi¬
ple  of  nature.  In  short,  wherever  the  spu¬
rious  Freemasonry  existed,  the  adoration
of,  or,  at  least,  a  high  respect  for,  the  solar
orb  constituted  a  part  of  its  system.

In  Freemasonry,  the  sun  is  still  retained
as  an  important  symbol.  This  fact  must
be  familiar  to  every  Freemason  of  any  in¬
telligence.  It  occupies,  indeed,  its  appro¬
priate  position,  simply  as  a  symbol,  but,
nevertheless,  it  constitutes  an  essential  part
of  the  system.  “As  an  emblem  of  God’s
power,”  says  Hutchinson,  (Sp.  of  Mai.,  led.
iv.,  p.  53,)  “his  goodness,  omnipresence,
and  eternity,  the  Lodge  is  adorned  with  the
image  of  the  sun,  which  he  ordained  to
rise  from  the  east  and  open  the  day;  there¬
by  calling  forth  the  people  of  the  earth  to
their  worship  and  exercise  in  the  walks  of
virtue.”

“  The  government  of  a  Mason’s  Lodge,”
says  Oliver,  (Signs  and  Sym.,  1.  xi.,)  “is
vested  in  three  superior  officers,  who  are
seated  in  the  East,  West,  and  South,  to
represent  the  rising,  setting,  and  meridian
sun.”

The  sun,  obedient  to  the  all-seeing  eye;
is  an  emblem  in  the  ritual  of  the  third  de¬
gree,  and  the  sun  displayed  within  an  ex¬
tended  compass  constitutes  the  jewel  of  the
Past  Master  in  the  American  system,  and
that  of  the  Grand  Master  in  the  English.

But  it  is  a  needless  task  to  cite  authori¬
ties  or  multiply  instances  to  prove  how
intimately  the  sun,  as  a  symbol,  is  con¬
nected  with  the  whole  system  of  Freema¬
sonry.

It  is  then  evident  that  the  sun,  either  as
an  object  of  worship,  or  of  symbolization,
has  always  formed  an  important  part  of
what  has  been  called  the  two  systems  of
Freemasonry,  the  Spurious  and  the  Pure.


DEDICATION


DEDICATION


209


To  the  ancient  sun  worshippers,  the
movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies  must
have  been  something  more  than  mere  as¬
tronomical  phenomena;  they  were  the
actions  of  the  deities  whom  they  adored,
and  hence  were  invested  with  the  solem¬
nity  of  a  religious  character.  But,  above
all,  the  particular  periods  when  the  sun
reached  his  greatest  Northern  and  Southern
declination,  at  the  winter  and  summer  sol¬
stices,  by  entering  the  zodaical  signs  of  Can¬
cer  and  Capricorn,  marked  as  they  would
be  by  the  most  evident  effects  on  the  sea¬
sons,  and  on  the  length  of  the  days  and
nights,  could  not  have  passed  unobserved,
but,  on  the  contrary,  must  have  occupied
an  important  place  in  their  ritual.  Now
these  important  days  fall  respectively  on
the  21st  of  June  and  the  21st  of  December.
Hence,  these  solstitial  periods  were  among
the  principal  festivals  observed  by  the  Pa¬
gan  nations.  Du  Pauw  (Dies,  on  Egyp.
and  Chinese ,  ii.  159,)  remarks  of  the  Egyp¬
tians,  that  “  they  had  a  fixed  festival  at
each  new  moon;  one  at  the  summer,  and
one  at  the  winter  solstice,  as  well  as  the
vernal  and  autumnal  equinoxes.”

The  Druids  always  observed  the  festivals
of  midsummer  and  midwinter  in  June
and  December.  The  former  for  a  long
time  was  celebrated  by  the  Christian  de¬
scendants  of  the  Druids.  “  The  eve  of  St.
John  the  Baptist,”  says  Chambers,  [Inf.
for  the  People,  No.  89,)  “variously  called
midsummer  eve,  was  formerly  a  time  of
high  observance  amongst  the  English,  as  it
still  is  in  Catholic  countries.  Bonfires
were  everywhere  lighted,  round  which  the
people  danced  with  joyful  demonstrations,
occasionally  leaping  through  the  flame.”
Higgins  {Celt.  Druids,  p.  165,)  thus  alludes
to  the  celebration  of  the  festival  of  mid¬
winter  in  the  ancient  world.

“The  festival  of  the  25th  of  December
was  celebrated,  by  the  Druids  in  Britain
and  Ireland,  with  great  fires  lighted  on  the

tops  of  the  hills . On  the  25th

of  December,  at  the  first  moment  of  the
day,  throughout  all  the  ancient  world,  the
birthday  of  the  god  Sol  was  celebrated.
This  was  the  moment  when,  after  the  sup¬
posed  winter  solstice  and  the  lowest  point
of  his  degradation  below  our  hemisphere,
he  began  to  increase  and  gradually  to  as¬
cend.  At  this  moment,  in  all  the  ancient
religions,  his  birthday  was  kept;  from  India
to  the  Ultima  Thule,  these  ceremonies  par¬
took  of  the  same  character:  everywhere
the  god  was  feigned  to  be  born,  and  his
festival  was  celebrated,  with  great  rejoic¬
ings.”

Our  ancestors  finding  that  the  Church,
according  to  its  usage  of  purifying  Pagan
festivals  by  Christian  application,  had  ap-
2  B  14


propriated  two  days  near  those  solstitial
periods  to  the  memory  of  two  eminent
saints,  incorporated  these  festivals  by  the
lapse  of  a  few  days  into  the  Masonic  cal¬
endar,  and  adopted  these  worthies  as  pat¬
rons  of  our  Order.  To  this  change,  the
earlier  Christian  Masons  were  the  more
persuaded  by  the  peculiar  character  of
these  saints.  St.  John  the  Baptist,  by  an¬
nouncing  the  approach  of  Christ,  and  by
the  mystic  ablution  to  which  he  subjected
his  proselytes,  and  which  was  afterwards
adopted  in  the  ceremony  of  initiation  into
Christianity,  might  well  be  considered  as
the  Grand  Hierophant  of  the  Church ;  while
the  mysterious  and  emblematic  nature  of
the  Apocalypse  assimilated  the  mode  of
instruction  adopted  by  St.  John  the  Evan¬
gelist  to  that  practised  by  the  Fraternity.

We  are  thus  led  to  the  conclusion  that
the  connection  of  the  Saints  John  with  the
Masonic  institution  is  rather  of  a  symbolic
than  of  an  historical  character.  In  dedi¬
cating  our  Lodges  to  them,  we  do  not  so
much  declare  our  belief  that  they  were  emi¬
nent  members  of  the  Order,  as  demonstrate
our  reverence  for  the  great  Architect  of  the
Universe  in  the  symbol  of  his  most  splen¬
did  creation,  the  great  light  of  day.

In  conclusion  it  may  be  observed  that
the  ceremony  of  dedication  is  merely  the
enunciation  of  a  form  of  words,  and  this
having  been  done,  the  Lodge  is  thus,  by
the  consecration  and  dedication,  set  apart
as  something  sacred  to  the  cultivation  of
the  principles  of  Masonry,  under  that  pe¬
culiar  system  which  acknowledges  the  two
Saints  John  as  its  patrons.

Royal  Arch  Chapters  are  dedicated  to
Zerubbabel,  Prince  or  Governor  of  Judah,
and  Commanderies  of  Knights  Templars  to
St.  John  the  Almoner.  Mark  Lodges
should  be  dedicated  to  Hiram  the  Builder ;
Past  Masters’  to  the  Sts.  John,  and  Most
Excellent  Masters’  to  King  Solomon.

Dedication  of  the  Temple.
There  are  five  dedications  of  the  Temple
of  Jerusalem  which  are  recorded  in  Jew¬
ish  history.  1.  The  dedication  of  the  Solo¬
monic  Temple,  B.  c.  1004.  2.  The  dedica¬
tion  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  when  it  was
purified  from  the  abominations  of  Ahaz,
B.  c.  726.  3.  The  dedication  of  Zerub-
babel’s  Temple,  B.  c.  513.  4.  The  dedica¬
tion  of  the  Temple  when  it  was  purified
after  Judas  Maccabseus  had  driven  out  the
Syrians,  B.  c.  164.  5.  The  dedication  of

Herod’s  Temple,  B.  c.  22.  The  fourth  of
these  is  still  celebrated  by  the  Jews  in  their
“  Feast  of  the  Dedication.”  The  first  only
is  connected  with  the  Masonic  ritual,  and
is  commemorated  in  the  Most  Excellent
Master’s  degree  of  the  American  Rite  as
the  “  Celebration  of  the  Cape  -  Stone.”


210


DEFAMATION


DEGREES


This  dedication  was  made  by  King  Solo¬
mon  in  the  year  of  the  world  3000,  and
lasted  eight  days,  commencing  in  the  month
of  Tisri,  15th  day,  during  the  Feast  of  Tab¬
ernacles.  The  dedication  of  the  Temple
is  called,  in  the  English  system  of  Lectures,
“  the  third  grand  offering  which  consecrates
the  floor  of  a  Mason's  Lodge.”  The  same
Lectures  contain  a  tradition  that  on  that
occasion  King  Solomon  assembled  the
nine  Deputy  Grand  Masters  in  the  holy
place,  from  which  all  natural  light  had  been
carefully  excluded,  and  which  only  received
the  artificial  light  which  emanated  from  the
east,  west,  and  south,  and  there  made  the
necessary  arrangements.  The  legend  must
be  considered  as  a  myth;  but  the  inimitable
prayer  and  invocation  which  were  offered
up  by  King  Solomon  on  the  occasion  are
recorded  in  the  eighth  chapter  of  the  first
Book  of  Kings,  which  contains  the  scrip¬
tural  account  of  the  dedication.

Defamation.  See  Back.

Definition  of  Freemasonry.
“  The  definitions  of  F reemasonry,”  says  Oli¬
ver,  in  his  Historical  Landmarks  of  Free¬
masonry,  “  have  been  numerous ;  but  they
all  unite  in  declaring  it  to  be  a  system  of
morality,  by  the  practice  of  which  its  mem¬
bers  may  advance  their  spiritual  interest,
and  mount  by  the  theological  ladder  from
the  Lodge  on  earth  to  the  Lodge  in  heaven.
It  is  a  mistake,  however,  to  suppose  that
Freemasonry  is  a  system  of  religion.  It  is
but  the  handmaiden  to  religion,  although
it  largely  and  effectually  illustrates  oue
great  branch  of  it,  which  is  practice.”
The  definition  in  the  English  Lectures  is
most  often  quoted,  which  says  that  “Free¬
masonry  is  a  beautiful  system  of  morality
veiled  in  allegory  and  illustrated  by  sym¬
bols.”

But  a  more  comprehensive  and  exact  def¬
inition  is,  that  it  is  a  science  which  is  en¬
gaged  in  the  search  after  Divine  Truth,  and
which  employs  symbolism  as  its  method  of
instruction.

Deformity.  The  old  Constitutions
declare  that  the  candidate  for  Masonry
must  be  a  “  perfect  youth,  having  no  maim
or  defect  in  his  body.”  The  Masonic  law
of  physical  qualifications  is  derived  from
the  Mosaic,  which  excluded  from  the  priest¬
hood  a  man  having  any  blemishes  or  de¬
formities.  The  regulation  in  Masonry  con¬
stitutes  one  of  the  landmarks,  and  is  illus¬
trative  of  the  symbolism  of  the  Institution.
The  earliest  of  the  old  Constitutions,  that
ot  the  Halliwell  MS.,  has  this  language  on
the  subject:

“  To  the  Craft  it  were  great  shame
To  make  a  halt  man  and  a  lame,

For  an  imperfect  man  of  such  blood
Should  do  the  Craft  but  little  good.”


This  question  has  been  fully  discussed  in
the  author’s  Text  Book  of  Masonic  Juris¬
prudence,  pp.  96-113.

Degrees.  The  word  degree,  in  its  prim¬
itive  meaning,  signifies  a  step.  The  de¬
grees  of  Freemasonry  are  then  the  steps  by
which  the  candidate  ascends  from  a  lower
to  a  higher  condition  of  knowledge.  It  is
now  the  opinion  of  the  best  scholars,  that
the  division  of  the  Masonic  system  into  de¬
grees  was  the  work  of  the  revivalists  of  the
beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  ;  that
before  that  period  there  was  but  one  de¬
gree,  or  rather  one  common  platform  of
ritualism  ;  and  that  the  division  into  Mas¬
ters,  Fellows,  and  Apprentices  was  simply
a  division  of  ranks,  there  being  but  one  ini¬
tiation  for  all.  In  1717  the  whole  body  of
the  Fraternity  consisted  only  of  Entered
Apprentices,  who  were  recognized  by  the
thirty-nine  Regulations,  compiled  in  1720,
as  among  the  law-givers  of  the  Craft,  no
change  in  those  Regulations  being  allowed
unless  first  submitted  “  even  to  the  young¬
est  Apprentice.”  In  the  old  Charges,  col¬
lected  by  Anderson  and  approved  in  1722,
the  degree  of  Fellow  Craft  is  introduced  as
being  a  necessary  qualification  for  Grand
Master,  although  the  word  degree  is  not
used.  “No  brother  can  be  a  ...  .  Grand
Master  unless  he  has  been  a  Fellow  Craft
before  his  election.”  And  in  the  “  Man¬
ner  of  constituting  a  New  Lodge  ”  of  the
same  date,  the  Master  and  Wardens  are
taken  from  “  among  the  Fellow  Crafts,”
which  Dermott  explains  by  saying  that
“they  were  called  Fellow  Crafts  because
the  Masons  of  old  times  never  gave  any
man  the  title  of  Master  Mason  until  he
had  first  passed  the  chair.”  In  the  thir¬
teenth  of  the  Regulations  of  1720,  approved
in  1721,  the  orders  or  degrees  of  Master  and
Fellow  Craft  are  recognized  in  the  follow¬
ing  words :  “  Apprentices  must  be  admitted
Masters  and  Fellow  Crafts  only  in  the
Grand  Lodge.”  Between  that  period  and
1738,  the  system  of  degrees  had  been  per¬
fected  ;  for  Anderson,  who,  in  that  year,
published  the  second  edition  of  the  Book
of  Constitutions,  changed  the  phraseology
of  the  old  Charge  to  suit  the  altered  con¬
dition  of  things,  and  said,  “a  Prentice,
when  of  age  and  expert,  may  become  an
Enter’d  Prentice  or  a  Free-Mason  of  the
lowest  degree,  and  upon  his  due  improve¬
ment  a  Fellow-Craft  and  a  Master-Ma¬
son.”  No  such  words  are  found  in  the
Charges  as  printed  in  1723 ;  and  if  at  that
time  the  distinction  of  the  three  degrees
had  been  as  well  defined  as  in  1738,  Ander¬
son  would  not  have  failed  to  insert  the
same  language  in  his  first  edition.  That
he  did  not,  leads  to  the  fair  presumption
that  the  ranks  of  Fellow  Craft  and  Master


DEGREES


DEISM


211


were  not  then  absolutely  recognized  as  dis¬
tinctive  degrees.  The  earliest  ritual  ex¬
tant,  which  is  contained  in  the  Grand
Mystery,  published  in  1725,  makes  no
reference  to  any  degrees,  but  gives  only
what  I  suppose  was  the  common  initiation
in  use  about  that  time.  The  division  of
the  Masonic  system  into  three  degrees  must
have  grown  up  between  1717  and  1780,
but  in  so  gradual  and  imperceptible  a  man¬
ner  that  we  are  unable  to  fix  the  precise
date  of  the  introduction  of  each  degree.
In  1717  there  was  evidently  but  one  degree,
or  rather  one  form  of  initiation,  and  one
catechism.  Perhaps  about  1721  the  three
degrees  were  introduced,  but  the  second
and  third  were  not  perfected  for  many
years.  Even  as  late  as  1735  the  Entered
Apprentice’s  degree  contained  the  most
prominent  form  of  initiation,  and  he  who
was  an  Apprentice  was,  for  all  practical
purposes,  a  Freemason.  It  was  not  until
repeated  improvements,  by  the  adoption  of
new  ceremonies  and  new  regulations,  that
the  degree  of  Master  Mason  took  the  place
which  it  now  occupies;  having  been  con¬
fined  at  first  to  those  who  had  passed  the
chair.

Degrees,  Ancient  Craft.  See  An¬
cient  Craft  Masonry.

Degrees,  Androgynous.  Degrees
that  are  conferred  on  females  as  well  as
males.  See  Androgynous  Masonry.

Degrees,  Apocalyptic.  See  Apoc¬
alyptic  Degrees.

Degrees,  High.  See  Hautes  Grades.

Degrees,  Honorary.  See  Hono¬
rary  Degrees.

Degrees,  Ineffable.  See  Ineffable

Degrees.

Degrees  of  Chivalry.  The  reli¬
gious  and  military  orders  of  knighthood
which  existed  in  the  Middle  Ages,  such  as  the
Knights  Templars  and  Knights  of  Malta,
which  were  incorporated  into  the  Masonic
system  and  conferred  as  Masonic  degrees,
have  been  called  Degrees  of  Chivalry.
They  are  Christian  in  character,  and  seek  to
perpetuate  in  a  symbolic  form  the  idea  on
which  the  original  Orders  were  founded.
The  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross,  although  con¬
ferred,  in  this  country,  in  a  Commandery
of  Knights  Templars,  and  as  preliminary
to  that  degree,  is  not  properly  a  degree  of
chivalry.

Degrees  of  Knowledge.  Fessler
was  desirous  of  abolishing  all  the  high  de¬
grees,  but  being  unable  to  obtain  the  con¬
sent  of  the  Royal  York  Grand  Lodge,  he
composed  out  of  them  a  new  system  of  five
degrees  which  he  called  Degrees  of  Knowl¬
edge,  Erkcnntnissstufen ,  to  each  of  which
was  annexed  a  form  of  initiation.  “The
Degrees  of  Knowledge,”  says  Findel,  {Hist.,


497,)  “  consisted  of  a  regular  detailed  course
of  instruction  in  each  system  of  the  Lodges,
whether  extinct  or  in  full  activity,  and
were  to  end  with  a  complete  critical  re¬
modelling  of  the  history  of  Freemasonry,
and  of  the  Fraternity  of  Freemasons  from
the  most  ancient  period  to  our  own  day.”
See  Fessler’ s  Fite.

Degrees,  Philosophical.  See

Philosophical  Degrees.

Degrees,  Symbolic.  See  Symbolic
Degrees.

Deism.  In  an  abstract  sense,  Deism,
or  Theism,  is  the  belief  in  God,  but  the
word  is  generally  used  to  designate  those
who,  believing  in  God,  reject  a  belief  in  *
the  Scriptures  as  a  revelation.  The  sect
of  Deists  —  which,  in  the  seventeenth  and
eighteenth  centuries,  enrolled  among  its
followers  many  great  intellects,  such  as
Toland,  Collins,  Lord  Herbert  of  Cher-
bury,  Hume,  Gibbon,  and  Voltaire— is  said
by  Findel  (Hist.,  p.  126,)  to  have  “neces¬
sarily  exercised  an  important  influence  on
the  Fraternity  of  Masons;”  and,  he  adds,
that  “  we  cannot  doubt  that  it  contributed
essentially  to  its  final  transformation  from
an  operative  to  a  universal  speculative  so¬
ciety.”  The  refutation  of  this  remarkable
assertion  is  best  found  in  the  first  of  the
Charges  adopted  at  the  revival  in  1717,
and  which  was  published  in  the  Constitu¬
tions  of  1723 :  “  A  Mason  is  obliged,  by
his  tenure,  to  obey  the  moral  law ;  and  if
he  rightly  understands  the  art,  he  will
never  be  a  stupid  atheist  nor  an  irreligious
libertine,”  where  the  words  irreligious  lib¬
ertine  refer  to  the  freethinkers  or  deists  of
that  period.  It  is  evident,  then,  that  the
Deists  could  have  had  no  influence  at  that
time  in  moulding  the  Masonic  organization.
There  is  still  better  evidence  to  be  found  in
the  old  records  of  Freemasonry  during
several  preceding  centuries,  when  the  Oper¬
ative  was  its  dominant  character,  and  when
the  dogmas  of  Christianity  were  fully  re¬
cognized.  which  must  necessarily  have  been
the  case,  since  Freemasonry  during  that
period  was  under  the  patronage  of  the
Church.  There  is,  in  fact,  no  evidence  to
sustain  Findel’s  theory,  that  in  the  transi¬
tion  stage  from  the  operative  to  the  specu¬
lative,  when  such  men  as  the  deeply-reli-
gious  Ashmole  were  among  its  members,
the  Deists  could  have  infused  any  of  their
principles  into  its  organization  or  exercised
any  influence  in  changing  its  character.

Freemasonry,  at  that  time  sectarian,  de¬
manded  almost  a  Christian  belief — at  all
events,  a  Christian  allegiance  —  from  its
disciples.  It  is  now  more  tolerant,  and
Deism  presents  no  disqualification  for  ini¬
tiation.  An  atheist  would  be  rejected,  but
none  would  now  be  refused  admission  ou


212


DEITY


DENMARK


religious  grounds  who  subscribed  to  the
dogmas  of  a  belief  in  God  and  a  resurrec¬
tion  to  eternal  life.

Dcitj1.  See  Grand  Architect  of  the  Uni¬
verse.

Delalandc,  Charles  Florent

Jacques.  A  French  litterateur  of  this
century,  who  was  the  author  of  many  di¬
dactic  and  poetic  articles  on  Masonry
inserted  in  the  Miroir  de  la  Verite,  the
Annales  Magonniques,  and  other  collections.
He  was  also  the  author  of  the  Defense  et
Apologie  de  la  Franche- Magonnerie,  ou  Re¬
futation  des  Accusations  dirigies  contre  elle
d  differ entes  Epoques  et  par  divers  Autems,
a  prize  essay  before  a  Lodge  in  Leghorn,
published  in  1814.  He  founded  the  ar¬
chives  of  the  Lodge  of  the  Philosophic
Rite  at  Douay,  France.

Ilelalamle,  Joseph  Jerome
Francois.  One  of  the  most  distin¬
guished  French  astronomers  of  the  eigh¬
teenth  century.  He  was  born  in  1732  and
died  in  1807.  He  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  and  pub¬
lished,  in  1774,  an  able  memoir  upon  the
History  of  Freemasonry,  which  was  sub¬
sequently  incorporated  in  the  twentieth
volume  of  the  Encyclopedic  Methodique.

Delaunay,  Francois  11.  Stanis¬
laus.  A  French  litterateur  and  historian,
and  author  of  many  works  on  Masonry,  the
principal  of  which  is  the  Tuileur  des  trente
trois  degree  de  l’ Ecossisme  du  Rite  Ancien  et
Accepte.  This  is  a  work  of  great  erudition,
and  of  curious  research  in  reference  to  the
etymology  of  the  words  of  the  Rite.  These
etymologies,  however,  are  not  always  cor¬
rect;  and,  indeed,  some  of  them  are  quite
absurd,  betraying  a  want  of  the  proper  ap¬
preciation  of  the  construction  of  Hebrew,
from  which  language  all  of  the  words  are
derived.

Delaware.  The  Grand  Lodge  of
Delaware  was  organized  on  the  6th  of
June,  1806.  Its  seat  is  at  Wilmington.  The
Grand  Chapter  was  instituted  in  1818,  but
having  suspended  labor  for  many  years,  a
new  organization  was  established  by  the
General  Grand  High  Priest  of  the  United
States  in  1869.

Delegates.  Past  Masters,  or  others
sent  by  a  Lodge  to  represent  it  in  the  Grand
Lodge,  in  place  of  the  Master  and  Wardens,
if  these  are  absent,  are  in  some  of  the
American  jurisdictions  called  delegates.
The  word  is  a  modern  one,  and  without  good
authority.  Those  who  represent  a  Lodge
in  the  Grand  Lodge,  whether  the  Master
and  Wardens  or  their  proxies,  are  properly
representatives.

Delta.  A  triangle.  The  name  of  a
piece  of  furniture  in  a  Coinmandery  of
Knights  Templars,  which,  being  of  a  trian¬


gular  form,  derives  its  name  from  the  Greek
letter  A,  delta.  It  is  also  the  title  given,  in
the  French  and  Scottish  Rites,  to  the  lumi¬
nous  triangle  which  encloses  the  Ineffable
name.  See  Triangle.

Demeter.  The  Greek  name  of  Ceres,
which  see.

Demit.  A  Mason  is  said  to  demil  from
his  Lodge  when  he  withdraws  his  member¬
ship  ;  and  a  demit  is  a  document  granted  by
the  Lodge  which  certifies  that  that  demis¬
sion  has  been  accepted  by  the  Lodge,  and
that  the  demitting  brother  is  clear  of  the
books  and  in  good  standing  as  a  Mason.
To  demit,  which  is  the  act  of  the  member,  is
then  to  resign  ;  and  to  grant  a  demit,  which
is  the  act  of  the  Lodge,  is  to  grant  a  certifi¬
cate  that  the  resignation  has  been  accepted.
It  is  derived  from  the  F  rench  reflective  verb  se
demetire,  w'hich,  according  to  the  dictionary
of  the  Academy,  means  “  to  withdraw  from
an  office,  to  resign  an  employment.”  Thus  it
gives  as  an  example,  “  11  s’est  d6mis  de  sa
charge  en  faveur  d’un  tel,”  he  resigned  (de-
miited)  his  office  in  favor  of  such  a  one.

The  application  for  a  demit  is  a  matter
of  form,  and  there  is  no  power  in  the  Lodge
to  refuse  it,  if  the  applicant  has  paid  all  his
dues  and  is  free  of  all  charges.  It  is
true  that  a  regulation  of  1722  says  that  no
number  of  brethren  shall  withdraw  or  sepa¬
rate  themselves  from  the  Lodge  in  which
they  were  made,  without  a  dispensation;
yet  I  do  not  see  how  the  law  can  be  en-
j  forced,  for  Masonry  being  a  voluntary  as¬
sociation,  there  is  no  power  in  any  Lodge
to  insist  on  any  brother  continuing  a  con¬
nection  with  it  which  he  desires  to  sever.
See,  ou  this  subject,  the  author’s  Text  Book
of  Masonic  Jurisprudence,  book  iii.,  chap,
iii.,  sect.  vi.

The  usual  object  in  applying  for  a  demit
is  to  enable  the  brother  to  join  some  other
Lodge,  into  which  he  cannot  be  admitted
without  some  evidence  that  he  was  in  good
standing  in  his  former  Lodge.  This  is  in
accordance  with  an  old  law  found  in  the
Regulations  of  1663  in  the  following  words:
“No  person  hereafter  who  shall  be  accepted
a  Freemason,  shall  be  admitted  into  any
Lodge  or  Assembly  until  he  has  brought  a
certificate  of  the  time  and  place  of  his  ac¬
ceptation  from  the  Lodge  that  accepted  him,
unto  the  Master  of  that  limit  or  division
where  such  Lodge  is  kept.”  See  the  cor¬
rupt  word  Dimit.

Denmark.  The  first  Masonic  Lodge
in  Denmark  was  opened  in  Copenhagen,  by
Baron  G.  O.  Munich,  on  the  11th  of  No¬
vember,  1743,  undera  charter,  ashe  claimed,
from  the  Lodge  of  the  Three  Globes  in
Berlin.  In  the  next  year  a  new  Lodge
named  Zorobabel  was  formed  by  members
1  who  separated  from  the  former  Lodge.  Both


DEPOSITE


DEPUTY


213


of  these  bodies,  however,  appear  to  have
been  imperfect  in  their  constitution.  This
imperfection  was  subsequently  rectified.
The  first  Lodge,  having  changed  its  name
to  St.  Martin,  received  in  1749  a  warrant
from  Lord  Byron,  who  was  then  Grand
Master  of  England.  Lord  Cranstoun  had
previously,  in  October,  1745,  granted  a
warrant  to  the  second  Lodge.  Preston  says
that  Lord  Byron  issued  a  Provincial  Patent
for  Denmark,  in  other  words,  established  a
Provincial  Grand  Lodge.  Calcott  says  he
appointed  Count  Denneskiold  Laurwig
Provincial  Grand  Master  for  Denmark  and
Norway.  The  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of
Denmark  must  then  have  been  established
in  1749  ;  but  a  writer  in  the  London  Free¬
mason’s  Quarterly  Magazine  for  September,
1853,  places  its  date  at  1745,  and  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Denmark  is  said  in  the  recent
calendars  to  have  been  organized  in  1747.
These  dates  are  irreconcilable.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  Denmark  was  actually  founded
in  1792.  A  Lodge  had  been  established  at
Copenhagen,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot¬
land,  under  the  name  of  “Le  petit  Nombre
and  in  1753  its  Master  was  elevated  by  that
body  to  the  rank  of  a  Provincial  Grand
Master.  The  vicinity  of  Denmark  to  Ger¬
many  caused  the  introduction  of  many  of
the  Rites  which  agitated  the  latter  country.
But  the  primitive  Lodges  worked  in  the
York  Rite.  On  January  6th,  1855,  King
Christian  VIII.,  who,  when  crowned  Prince,
had  assumed  the  Protectorship  of  the
Danish  Lodges,  and  who  was  distinguished
for  his  Masonic  zeal,  introduced  the  Rite
of  Zinnendorf  according  to  the  Swedish
system,  which  was  adopted  as  the  national
Rite  of  Denmark.

Deposite.  The  deposite  of  the  sub¬
stitute  ark  is  celebrated  in  the  degree  of
Select  Master,  and  is  supposed  to  have  taken
lace  in  the  last  year  of  the  building  of
olomon’s  Temple,  or  1000  B.  c.  This  is
therefore  adopted  as  the  date  in  Cryptic
Masonry.

In  the  legendary  history  of  Freemasonry
as  preserved  in  the  Cryptic  degrees,  two
deposites  are  spoken  of ;  the  deposite  of  the
substitute  Ark,  and  the  deposite  of  the
Word,  both  being  referred  to  the  same  year
and  being  different  parts  of  one  transac¬
tion.  They  have,  therefore,  sometimes
been  confounded.  The  deposite  of  the  Ark
was  made  by  the  three  Grand  Masters;  that
of  the  Word  by  Hiram  Abif  alone.

Deposite,  Year  of.  Bee  Anno  De-
positionis.

Depth  of  the  Lodge.  This  is  said
to  be  from  the  surface  to  the  centre,  and  is
the  expression  of  an  idea  connected  with  the
symbolism  of  the  form  of  the  Lodge  as  in¬
dicating  the  universality  of  Masonry.  The


oldest  definition  was  that  the  depth  ex¬
tended  “  to  the  centre  of  the  earth,”  which,
says  Dr.  Oliver,  is  the  greatest  extent  that
can  be  imagined.  See  Form  of  the  Lodge.

Deputation.  The  authority  granted
by  the  Grand  Master  to  a  brother  to  act
as  Provincial  Grand  Master  was  formerly
called  a  deputation.  Thus,  in  Anderson’s
Constitutions,  (2d  edition,  1738,  p.  191,)  it  is
said,  “  Lovel,  Grand  Master,  granted  a  depu¬
tation  to  Sir  Edward  Matthews  to  be  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Master  of  Shropshire.”  It
was  also  used  in  the  sense  in  which  dispensa¬
tion  is  now  employed  to  denote  the  Grand
Master’s  authority  for  opening  a  Lodge.
In  German  Masonry,  a  deputation  is  a  com¬
mittee  of  one  Lodge  appointed  to  visit  and
confer  with  some  other  Lodge.

Depute  Grand  Master.  Depute
is  a  Scotticism  used  in  the  “  Laws  and  Regu¬
lations  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  ”  to
designate  the  officer  known  in  England  and
America  as  Deputy  Grand  Master.

Deputy.  In  French  Masonry,  the
officers  who  represent  a  Lodge  in  the
Grand  Orient  are  called  its  deputies.  The
word  is  also  used  in  another  sense.  When
two  Lodges  are  affiliated,  that  is,  have
adopted  a  compact  of  union,  each  appoints
a  deputy  to  represent  it  at  the  meetings
of  the  other.  He  is  also  called  garant
( Tamitie ,  and  is  entitled  to  a  seat  in  the
East.

Deputy  Grand  Chapter.  In  the

Constitution  adopted  in  January,  1798,  by
the  “Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the
Northern  States  of  America,”  which  after¬
wards  became  the  “  General  Grand  Chap¬
ter,”  it  was  provided  that  Grand  Bodies  of
the  system  should  be  established  in  the  dif¬
ferent  States,  which  should  be  known  as
“  Deputy  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapters.”
But  in  the  succeeding  year,  on  the  adop¬
tion  of  a  new  Constitution,  the  title  was
changed  to  “  State  Grand  Chapters.”  Mas¬
sachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  and  New  York
are  the  only  States  in  which  Deputy  Grand
Chapters  were  organized.

Deputy  Grand  Master.  The  as¬
sistant  and,  in  his  absence,  the  representa¬
tive  of  the  Grand  Master.  The  office
originated  in  the  year  1721,  when  the  Duke
of  Montagu  was  authorized  by  the  Grand
Lodge  to  appoint  a  Deputy.  The  object
evidently  was  to  relieve  a  nobleman,  who
was  Grand  Master,  from  troublesome  de¬
tails  of  office.  The  Constitutions  give  a
Deputy  Grand  Master  no  other  preroga¬
tives  than  those  which  he  claims  in  the
Grand  Master’s  right.  He  presides  over
the  Craft  in  the  absence  of  the  Grand  Mas¬
ter,  and,  on  the  death  of  that  officer,  suc¬
ceeds  to  his  position  until  a  new  election.
In  England,  and  in  a  few  States  of  Ameri-


214


DEPUTY


DESAGULIERS


ca,  he  is  appointed  by  the  Grand  Master ;
hut  the  general  usage  in  this  country  is  to
elect  him.

Deputy  Lodge.  In  Germany,  a
Deputationa-Loye,  or  Deputy  Lodge,  was
formed  by  certain  members  of  a  Lodge  who
lived  at  a  remote  distance  from  it,  and  who
met  under  the  name  and  by  the  authority
of  the  mother  Lodge,  through  whom  alone
it  was  known  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  or  the
other  Lodges.  Such  bodies  are  not  known
in  England  or  America,  and  are  not  now
so  common  in  Germany  as  formerly.

Deputy  Master.  In  England,  when
the  Grand  Master  is  also  Master  of  a  pri¬
vate  Lodge,  his  functions  are  performed  by
an  officer  appointed  by  him,  and  called  a
Deputy  Master,  who  exercises  all  the  pre¬
rogatives  and  enjoys  all  the  privileges  of  a
regular  Master.  In  Germany,  the  Master
of  every  Lodge  is  assisted  by  a  Deputy  Mas¬
ter,  who  is  either  appointed  by  the  Master,
or  elected  by  the  members,  and  who  exer¬
cises  the  powers  of  the  Master  in  the  ab¬
sence  of  that  officer.

Dermott,  Laurence.  He  was  at

first  the  Grand  Secretary,  and  afterwards
the  Deputy  Grand  Master,  of  that  body  of
Masons  who,  in  1739,  seceded  from  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  called  them¬
selves  “Ancient  York  Masons,”  stigmatiz¬
ing  the  regular  Masons  as  “moderns.”
In  1756,  Dermott  published  the  Book  of
Constitutions  of  his  Grand  Lodge,  under
the  title  of  “  Ahiman  Rezon ;  or  a  help  to
all  that  are  or  would  be  Free  and  Accepted
Masons,  containing  the  quintessence  of  all
that  has  been  published  on  the  subject  of
Freemasonry.”  This  work  passed  through
several  editions,  the  last  of  which  was
edited,  in  1813.  by  Thomas  Harper,  the
Deputy  Grand  Master  of  the  Ancient  Ma¬
sons,  under  the  title  of  “  The  Constitutions
of  Freemasonry,  or  Ahiman  Rezon.”  .

Dermott  was  undoubtedly  the  moving
and  sustaining  spirit  of  the  great  schism
which,  from  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
to  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,
divided  the  Masons  of  England;  and  his
character  has  not  been  spared  by  the  ad¬
herents  of  the  constitutional  Grand  Lodge.
Lawrie  [Hist.,  p.  117,)  says  of  him:  “The
unfairness  with  which  he  has  stated  the
proceedings  of  the  moderns,  the  bitterness
with  which  he  treats  them,  and  the  quackery
and  vainglory  with  which  he  displays  his
own  pretensions  to  superior  knowledge,  de¬
serve  to  be  reprobated  by  every  class  of
Masons  who  are  anxious  for  the  purity  of
their  Order  and  the  preservation  of  that
charity  and  mildness  which  ought  to  char¬
acterize  all  their  proceedings.”  I  am  afraid
that  there  is  much  truth  in  this  estimate  of
Dermott’s  character.  As  a  polemic,  he  was  j


sarcastic,  hitter,  uncompromising,  and  not
altogether  sincere  or  veracious.  But  in  intel¬
lectual  attainments  he  was  inferior  to  none
of  his  adversaries,  and  in  a  philosophical
appreciation  of  the  character  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  institution  he  was  in  advance  of  the
spirit  of  his  age.  Doubtless  he  dismem¬
bered  the  third  degree,  and  to  him  we  owe
the  establishment  of  English  Royal  Arch
Masonry.  He  had  the  assistance  of  Ram¬
say,  but  he  did  not  adopt  Ramsay’s  Scottish
degree.  Royal  Arch  Masonry,  as  we  now
have  it,  came  from  the  fertile  brain  and  in¬
trepid  heart  of  Dermott.  It  was  finally
adopted  by  his  opponents  in  1813,  and  it  is
hardly  now  a  question  that  the  change  ef¬
fected  by  him  in  the  organization  of  the
York  Rite  in  1740  has  been  of  evident  ad¬
vantage  to  the  service  of  Masonic  sym¬
bolism.

Derwentwater.  Charles  Radcliffe,
titular  Earl  of  Derwentwater,  which  title
he  assumed  on  the  death  of  the  unmarried
son  of  his  brother,  James  Radcliffe,  Earl
of  Derwentwater,  who  was  executed  for
rebellion  in  1716,  in  London,  was  the  first
Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
France,  to  which  office  he  was  elected  on
the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in
1725.  Charles  Radcliffe  was  arrested  with
his  brother,  Lord  Derwentwater,  in  1715,
for  having  taken  part  in  the  rebellion  of
that  year  to  restore  the  house  of  Stuart  to
the  throne.  Both  were  convicted  of  trea¬
son,  and  the  Earl  suffered  death,  but  his
brother  Charles  made  his  escape  to  France,
and  thence  to  Rome,  where  he  received  a
trifling  pension  from  the  Pretender.  After
a  residence  of  some  years,  he  went  to  Paris,
where,  with  the  Chevalier  Maskelyne,  Mr.
Heguettv,  and  some  other  Englishmen,  he
established  a  Lodge  in  the  Rue  des  Bou-
cheries,  which  was  followed  by  the  organi¬
zation  of  several  others,  and. Radcliffe,  who
had  taken  the  title  of  Earl  of  Derwent¬
water  on  the  death  of  his  youthful  nephew,
the  son  of  the  last  Earl,  was  elected  Grand
Master.  Leaving  France  for  a  time,  in
1733  he  was  succeeded  in  the  Grand  Mas¬
tership  by  Lord  Harnouester.  Radcliffe
made  many  visits  to  England  after  that
time  in  unsuccessful  pursuit  of  a  pardon.
Finally,  on  the  attempt  of  the  young  Pre¬
tender  to  excite  a  rebellion  in  1745,  he
sailed  from  France  to  join  him,  and  the
vessel  in  which  he  had  embarked  having
been  captured  by  an  English  cruiser,  he  was
carried  to  London  and  decapitated  De¬
cember  8,  1746.

Desaguliers,  John  Theopbilus.

Of  those  who  were  engaged  in  the  revival
of  Freemasonry  in  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century,  none  performed  a  more
important  part  than  he  to  whom  may  be


DESAGULIERS


DESAGULIERS


215


well  applied  the  epithet  of  the  Father  of
Modern  Speculative  Masonry,  and  to  whom,
perhaps,  more  than  any  other  person,  is  the
present  Grand  Lodge  of  England  indebted
for  its  existence.  A  sketch  of  his  life,
drawn  from  the  scanty  materials  to  be  found
in  Masonic  records,  and  in  the  brief  notices
of  a  few  of  his  contemporaries,  cannot  fail
to  be  interesting  to  the  student  of  Masonic
history.

The  Rev.  John  Theophilus  Desaguliers,
LL.  D.,  F.  R.  S.,  was  born  on  the  12th  of
March,  1683,  at  Rochelle,  in  France.  He
was  the  son  of  a  French  Protestant  cler¬
gyman  ;  and,  his  father  having  removed  to
England  as  a  refugee  on  the  revocation  of
the  edict  of  Nantes,  he  was  educated  at
Christ  Church,  Oxford.where  he  took  lessons
of  the  celebrated  Keill  in  experimental  phi¬
losophy.  In  1713  he  received  the  degree
of  Master  of  Arts,  and  in  the  same  year
succeeded  Dr.  Keill  as  a  lecturer  on  ex¬
perimental  philosophy  at  Hart  Hall.  In
the  year  1714  he  removed  to  Westminster,
where  he  continued  his  course  of  lectures,
being  the  first  one,  it  is  said,  who  ever  lec¬
tured  upon  physical  science  in  the  metrop¬
olis.  At  this  time  he  attracted  the  notice
and  secured  the  friendship  of  Sir  Isaac
Newton.  His  reputation  as  a  philosopher
obtained  for  him  a  fellowship  in  the  Royal
Society.  He  was  also  about  this  time  ad¬
mitted  to  clerical  orders,  and  appointed  by
the  Duke  of  Chandos  his  chaplain,  who
also  presented  him  to  the  living  of  Whit¬
church.  In  1718  he  received  from  the  Uni¬
versity  of  Oxford  the  degree  of  Doctor  of
Laws,  and  was  presented  by  the  Earl  of
Sunderland  to  a  living  in  Norfolk,  which
he  afterwards  exchanged  for  one  in  Essex.
He  maintained,  however,  his  residence  in
London,  where  he  continued  to  deliver  his
lectures  until  his  death.

His  contributions  to  science  consist  of  a
Treatise  on  the  Construction  of  Chimneys ,
translated  from  the  French,  and  published
in  1716;  A  Course  of  Experimental  Philoso¬
phy,  in  two  volumes,  4to,  published  in
1734;  and  in  1735  he  edited  an  edition  of
Gregory’s  Elements  of  Catoptrics  and  Diop¬
trics.  He  also  translated  from  the  Latin
Gravesandes’  Mathematical  Elements  of
Natural  Philosophy.

In  the  clerical  profession  he  seems  not  to
have  been  an  ardent  worker,  and  his  theo¬
logical  labors  were  confined  to  the  publica¬
tion  of  a  single  sermon  on  repentance.  He
was  in  fact  more  distinguished  as  a  scientist
than  as  a  clergyman,  and  Priestly  calls  him
“  an  indefatigable  experimental  philoso¬
pher.”

It  is,  however,  as  a  Mason  that  Dr.  De¬
saguliers  will  most  attract  our  attention.
Soon  after  his  arrival  in  London  he  was


made  a  Mason  in  the  Lodge  meeting  at
Goose  and  Gridiron,  in  St.  Paul’s  church¬
yard,  which  subsequently  took  the  name  of
the  “  Lodge  of  Antiquity.”  “  The  peculiar
principles  of  the  Craft,”  says  Dr.  Oliver,
“struck  him  as  being  eminently  calculated
to  contribute  to  the  benefit  of  the  com¬
munity  at  large,  if  they  could  be  redirected
into  the  channel  from  which  they  had  been
diverted  by  the  retirement  of  Sir  Chris¬
topher  Wren.”  It  is  said  that  he  visited
that  veteran  architect,  and  from  his  con¬
versations  with  him  was  induced  to  inau¬
gurate  those  measures  which  led  in  1717  to
the  revival  of  Freemasonry  in  the  south
of  England.  The  reputation  of  Desagu¬
liers  as  a  man  of  science  enabled  him  to  se¬
cure  the  necessary  assistance  of  older  Ma¬
sons  to  carry  the  design  of  revival  into
effect,  and,  supported  by  the  activity  and
zeal  of  many  brethren,  he  succeeded  in  ob¬
taining  a  meeting  of  the  four  London  Lodges
in  1717  at  the  Apple-Tree  Tavern,  where
the  Grand  Lodge  was  constituted  in  due
form,  and  at  a  subsequent  meeting,  on  St.
John  the  Baptist’s  day,  Antony  Sayer  was
elected  Grand  Master.  In  1719  Desaguliers
was  elevated  to  the  throne  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  succeeding  George  Payne,  and  being
thus  the  third  Grand  Master  after  the
revival.  He  paid  much  attention  to  the
interests  of  the  Fraternity,  and  so  elevated
the  character  of  the  Order,  that  the  records
of  the  Grand  Lodge  show  that  during  his
administration  several  of  the  older  brethren
who  had  hitherto  neglected  the  Craft  re¬
sumed  their  visits  to  the  Lodges,  and  many
noblemen  were  initiated  into  the  Institu¬
tion.

Dr.  Desaguliers  was  peculiarly  zealous  in
the  investigation  and  collection  of  the  old
records  of  the  society,  and  to  him  we  are
principally  indebted  for  the  preservation
of  the  “Charges  of  a  Freemason”  and  the
preparation  of  the  “  General  Regulations,”
which  are  found  in  the  first  edition  of  the
Constitutions ;  which,  although  attributed
to  Dr.  Anderson,  were  undoubtedly  com¬
piled  under  the  supervision  of  Desaguliers.
Anderson,  we  suppose,  did  the  work,  while
Desaguliers  furnished  much  of  the  ma¬
terial  and  the  thought.  One  of  the  first  con¬
troversial  works  in  favor  of  Freemasonry,
namely,  A  Detection  of  Dr.  Plots'  Account
of  the  Freemasons,  was  also  attributed  to  his
pen  ;  but  he  is  said  to  have  repudiated  the
credit  of  its  authorship,  of  which  indeed
the  paper  furnishes  no  internal  evidence.
In  1721  he  delivered  before  the  Grand
Lodge  what  the  records  call  “  an  eloquent
oration  about  Masons  and  Masonry.”  It
does  not  appear  that  it  was  ever  published,
at  least  no  copy  of  it  is  extant,  although
Kloss  puts  the  title  at  the  head  of  his  Cato-


216


DESAGULIERS


DES


logue  of  Masonic  Orations.  It  is,  indeed,
the  first  Masonic  address  of  which  we  have
any  notice,  and  would  be  highly  interesting,
because  it  would  give  us,  in  all  probability,
as  Kloss  remarks,  the  views  of  the  Masons
of  that  day  in  reference  to  the  design  of  the
Institution.

After  his  retirement  from  the  office  of
Grand  Master,  in  1720,  Desaguliers  was
three  times  appointed  Deputy  Grand  Mas¬
ter:  in  1723,  by  the  Duke  of  Warton;  in
1724,  by  the  Earl  of  Dalkeith;  in  1725,  by
Lord  Paisly;  and  during  this  period  of
service  he  did  many  things  for  the  benefit
of  the  Craft;  among  others,  initiating  that
scheme  of  charity  which  was  subsequently
developed  in  what  is  now  known  in  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  as  the  Fund  of
Benevolence.

After  this,  Dr.  Desaguliers  passed  over
to  the  Continent,  and  resided  for  a  few
years  in  Holland.  In  1731  he  was  at  the
Hague,  and  presided  as  Worshipful  Master
of  a  Lodge  organized  under  a  special  dep¬
utation  for  the  purpose  of  initiating  and
passing  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  who  was
subsequently  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  and
then  Emperor  of  Germany.  The  duke
was,  during  the  same  year,  made  a  Master
Mason  in  England.

On  his  return  to  England,  Desaguliers
was  considered,  from  his  position  in  Ma¬
sonry,  as  the  most  fitting  person  to  confer
the  degrees  on  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who
was  accordingly  entered,  passed,  and  raised
in  an  occasional  Lodge,  held  on  two  occa¬
sions  at  Kew,  over  which  Dr.  Desaguliers
presided  as  Master.

Dr.  Desaguliers  was  very  attentive  to  his
Masonic  duties,  and  punctual  in  his  attend¬
ance  on  the  communications  of  the  Grand
Lodge.  His  last  recorded  appearance  by
name  is  on  the  19th  of  March,  1741,  but  a
few  years  before  his  death.

Of  Desagulier’s  Masonic  and  personal
character,  Dr.  Oliver  gives,  from  tradition,
the  following  description :

“There  were  many  traits  in  his  charac¬
ter  that  redound  to  his  immortal  praise.
He  was  a  grave  man  in  private  life,  almost
approaching  to  austerity ;  but  he  could
relax  in  the  private  recesses  of  a  tiled
Lodge,  and  in  company  with  brothers  and
fellows,  where  the  ties  of  social  intercourse
are  not  particularly  stringent.  He  consid¬
ered  the  proceedings  of  the  Lodge  as  strictly
confidential ;  and  being  persuaded  that  his
brothers  by  initiation  actually  occupied  the
same  position  as  brothers  by  blood,  he  was
undisguisedly  free  and  familiar  in  the  mu¬
tual  interchange  of  unrestrained  courtesy.
In  the  Lodge  he  was  jocose  and  free¬
hearted,  sang  his  song,  and  had  no  objec¬
tion.  to  his  share  of  the  bottle,  although


one  of  the  most  learned  and  distinguished
men  of  his  day.’'

In  1713,  Desaguliers  had  married  a
daughter  of  William  Pudsey,  Esq.,  by
whom  he  had  two  sons,  — ■  Alexander,  who
was  a  clergyman,  and  Thomas,  who  went
into  the  army,  and  became  a  colonel  of
artillery  and  an  equerry  to  George  III.

The  latter  days  of  Dr.  Desaguliers  are
said  to  have  been  clouded  with  sorrow  and
poverty.  De  Feller,  in  the  Biographie
Universello,  says  that  he  became  insane,
dressing  sometimes  as  a  harlequin,  and
sometimes  as  a  clown,  and  that  in  one  of
these  fits  of  insanity  he  died.  And  Caw-
thorn,  in  a  poem  entitled  The  Vanity  of
Human  Enjoyments,  intimates,  in  the  fol¬
lowing  lines,  that  Desaguliers  was  in  very
necessitous  circumstances  at  the  time  of
his  death :

“  IIow  poor,  neglected  Desaguliers  fell !

How  he  who  taught  two  gracious  kings  to  view
All  Boyle  ennobled  and  all  Bacon  knew,

Died  in  a  cell,  without  a  friend  to  save,
Without  a  guinea,  and  without  a  grave.”

But  the  accounts  of  the  French  biogra¬
pher  and  the  English  poet  are  most  prob¬
ably  both  apocryphal,  or,  at  least,  much
exaggerated;  for  Nichols,  who  knew  him
personally,  and  has  given  a  fine  portrait
of  him  in  the  ninth  volume  of  his  Literary
Anecdotes,  says  that  he  died  on  the  29th
of  February,  1744,  at  the  Bedford  Coffee
House,  and  was  buried  in  the  Savoy.

To  few  Masons  of  the  present  day,  except
to  those  who  have  made  Freemasonry  a
subject  of  especial  study,  is  the  name  of
Desaguliers  very  familiar.  But  it  is  well
they  should  know  that  to  him,  perhaps,
more  than  to  any  other  man,  are  we  in¬
debted  for  the  present  existence  of  Free¬
masonry  as  a  living  institution  ;  for  when,
in  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,
Masonry  had  fallen  into  a  state  of  deca¬
dence  which  threatened  its  extinction,  it
was  Desaguliers  who,  by  his  energy  and
enthusiasm,  infused  a  spirit  of  zeal  into
his  contemporaries,  which  culminated  in
the  revival  of  the  year  1717 ;  and  it  was
his  learning  and  social  position  that  gave
a  standing  to  the  Institution,  which  brought
to  its  support  noblemen  and  men  of  influ¬
ence,  so  that  the  insignificant  assemblage
of  four  London  Lodges  at  the  Apple-Tree
Tavern  has  expanded  into  an  association
which  now  overshadows  the  entire  civilized
world.  And  the  moving  spirit  of  all  this
was  John  Theopliilus  Desaguliers.

Des  Etangs,  Nicholas  Charles.
A  Masonic  reformer,  who  was  born  at  Alli-
champs,  in  France,  on  the  7th  of  September,
1763,  and  died  at  Paris  on  the  6th  of  May,
1847.  He  was  initiated,  in  1797,  into  Ma-


DESIGN


DEUCHAR


217


sonry  in  the  Lodge  L’Heureuse  Rencontre.
He  subsequently  removed  to  Paris,  where,
in  1822,  he  became  the  Master  of  the  Lodge
of  Trinosopbs,  which  position  he  held  for
nine  years.  Thinking  that  the  ceremonies
of  the  Masonic  system  in  France  did  not
respond  to  the  dignity  of  the  Institution,
but  were  gradually  being  diverted  from  its
original  design,  he  determined  to  com¬
mence  a  reform  in  the  recognized  dogmas,
legends,  and  symbols,  which  he  proposed  to
present  in  new  forms  more  in  accord  with
the  manners  of  the  present  age.  There
was,  therefore,  very  little  of  conservation
in  the  system  of  Des  Etangs.  It  was,  how¬
ever,  adopted  for  a  time  by  many  of  the
Parisian  Lodges,  and  Des  Etangs  was
loaded  with  honors.  His  Rite  embraced
five  degrees,  viz.,  1,  2,  3,  the  Symbolic  de¬
grees;  4,  the  Rose  Croix  rectified;  5,  the
Grand  Elect  Kuight  Ivadosh.  He  gave  to
his  system  the  title  of  “  Masonry  Restored
to  its  True  Principles,”  and  fully  developed
it  in  his  work  entitled  Veritable  Lien  des
Peuples,  which  was  first  published  in  1823.
Des  Etangs  also  published  in  1825  a  very
able  reply  to  the  calumnies  of  the  Abb6
Barruel,  under  the  title  of  La  Franc-Ma-
tpnnerie  jmtifee  de  toute  les  calomnies  repan-
dues  contre  elles.  In  the  system  of  Des
Etangs,  the  Builder  of  the  Temple  is  sup¬
posed  to  symbolize  the  Good  Genius  of  Hu¬
manity  destroyed  by  Ignorance,  Falsehood,
aud  Ambition;  and  hence  the  third  degree
is  supposed  to  typify  the  battle  between  lib¬
erty  and  despotism.  In  the  same  spirit,  the
justness  of  destroying  impious  kings  is  con¬
sidered  the  true  dogma  of  the  Rose  Croix.
In  fact,  the  tumults  of  the  F  rench  revolution,
in  which  Des  Etangs  took  no  inconsider¬
able  share,  had  infected  his  spirit  with  a
political  temperament,  which  unfortunately
appears  too  prominently  in  many  portions
of  his  Masonic  system.  Notwithstanding
that  he  incorporated  two  of  the  high  de¬
grees  into  his  Rite,  Des  Etangs  considered
the  three  Symbolic  degrees  as  the  only  legi¬
timate  Masonry,  and  says  that  all  other
degrees  have  been  instituted  by  various
associations  and  among  different  peoples
on  occasions  when  it  was  desired  to  re¬
venge  a  death,  to  re-establish  a  prince,  or
to  give  success  to  a  sect.

Design  of  Freemasonry.  It  is
neither  charity  nor  almsgiving,  nor  the  cul¬
tivation  of  the  social  sentiment;  for  both
of  these  are  merely  incidental  to  its  organ¬
ization  ;  but  it  is  the  search  after  truth,
and  that  truth  is  the  unity  of  God  and  the
immortality  of  the  soul.  The  various  de¬
grees  or  grades  of  initiation  represent  the
various  stages  through  which  the  human
mind  passes,  and  the  many  difficulties
which  men,  individually  or  collectively,
2  C


must  encounter  in  their  progress  from  igno¬
rance  to  the  acquisition  of  this  truth.

Destruction  of  the  Temple.  The

Temple  of  King  Solomon  was  destroyed
by  Nebuchadnezzar,  King  of  the  Chaldees,
during  the  reign  of  Zedekiah,  A.  M.  3416,
B.  c.  588,  and  just  four  hundred  and  sixteen
years  after  its  dedication.  Although  the
city  was  destroyed  and  the  Temple  burnt,
the  Masonic  legends  state  that  the  deep
foundations  of  the  latter  were  not  affected.
Nebuchadnezzar  caused  the  city  of  Jerusa¬
lem  to  be  levelled  to  the  ground,  the  royal
palace  to  be  burned,  the  Temple  to  be  pil¬
laged  as  well  as  destroyed,  and  the  inhabi¬
tants  to  be  carried  captive  to  Babylon.
These  events  are  symbolically  detailed  in
the  Royal  Arch,  and,  in  allusion  to  them,
the  passage  of  the  Book  of  Chronicles  which
records  them  is  appropriately  read  during
the  ceremonies  of  this  part  of  the  degree.

Detached  Degrees.  Side  or  hono¬
rary  degrees  outside  of  the  regular  succes¬
sion  of  degrees  of  a  Rite,  and  which,  being
conferred  without  the  authority  of  a  su¬
preme  controlling  body,  are  said  to  be  to
the  side  of  or  detached  from  the  regular
regime.  The  word  detached  is  peculiar  to
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.
Thus,  in  the  circular  of  the  Southern  Su¬
preme  Council,  October  10, 1802,  is  the  fol¬
lowing:  “  Besides  those  degrees  which  are
in  regular  succession,  most  of  the  Inspec¬
tors  are  in  possession  of  a  number  of  de¬
tached  degrees,  given  in  different  parts  of
the  world,  and  which  they  generally  com¬
municate,  free  of  expense,  to  those  breth¬
ren  who  are  high  enough  to  understand
them.”

DeueHiar  Charters.  Warrants  some
of  which  are  still  in  existence  in  Scotland,
and  which  are  used  to  authorize  the  work¬
ing  of  the  Knights  Templars  degree  by
certain  Encampments  in  that  country.
They  were  designated  “Deuchar  Charters,”
on  account  of  Alexander  Deuchar,  an  en¬
graver  and  heraldic  writer,  having  been
the  chief  promoter  of  the  Grand  Conclave
and  its  first  Grand  Master.  To  his  exer¬
tions,  also,  the  Supreme  Grand  Royal  Arch
Chapter  of  Scotland  may  be  said  to  have
owed  its  origin.  He  appears  to  have  be¬
come  acquainted  with  Knight  Templarism
early  in  the  present  century  through  breth¬
ren  who  had  been  dubbed  under  a  warrant
emanating  from  Dublin,  and  which  was
held  by  Fratres  serving  in  the  Shropshire
Militia.  This  corps  was  quartered  in  Edin¬
burgh  in  1798;  aud  in  all  probability  it
was  through  the  instrumentality  of  its
members  that  the  first  Grand  Assembly
of  Knights  Templars  was  first  set  up  in
Edinburgh.  Subsequently,  this  gave  place
to  the  Grand  Assembly  of  High  Knights


218


DEUS


DEVICE


Templars  in  Edinburgh,  working  under  a
charter,  No.  31,  of  the  Early  Grand  En¬
campment  of  Ireland,  of  which  in  1807
Deuchar  was  Grand  Master.  The  Deuchar
Charters  authorized  Encampments  to  install
“Knights  Templars  and  Knights  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem,”  —  one  condition  on
which  these  warrants  were  held  being
“that  no  communion  or  intercourse  shall
be  maintained  with  any  Chapter  or  En¬
campment,  or  body  assuming  that  name,
holding  meetings  of  Knights  Templars
under  a  Master  Mason’s  Charter.”  In
1837  the  most  of  these  warrants  were  for¬
feited,  and  the  Encampments  erased  from
the  roll  of  the  Grand  Conclave,  on  account
of  not  making  the  required  returns.

Dons  Menmque  Jus.  God  and
my  right.  The  motto  of  the  thirty-third
decree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  and  hence  adopted  as  that  also
of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Rite.  It  is
a  Latin  translation  of  the  motto  of  the
royal  arms  of  England,  which  is  “  Dieu
et  mon  droit,”  and  concerning  which  we
have  the  following  tradition.  Richard  Cceur
de  Leon,  besieging  Gisors,  in  Normandy,  in
1198,  gave,  as  a  parole,  “Dieu  et  mon  droit,”
because  Philip  Augustus,  king  of  France,
had,  without  right,  taken  that  city,  which
then  belonged  to  England.  Richard,  hav¬
ing  been  victorious  with  that  righteous
parole,  hence  adopted  it  as  his  motto;  and
it  was  afterwards  marshalled  in  the  arms
of  England.

Development.  The  ancients  often
wrote  their  books  on  parchment,  which
were  made  up  into  a  roll,  hence  called  a  vol¬
ume,  from  volvere,  “  to  roll  up.”  Thus,  he
who  read  the  book  commenced  by  unrolling
it,  a  custom  still  practised  by  the  Jews  in
reading  their  Sacred  Law,  and  it  was  not
until  the  whole  volume  was  unrolled  and  read
that  he  became  the  master  of  its  contents.
Now,  in  the  Latin  language,  to  unfold  or  to
unroll  was  devolvere,  whence  we  get  our
English  word  to  develop.  The  figurative
signification  thus  elicited  from  etymology
may  be  well  applied  to  the  idea  of  the  de¬
velopment  of  Masonry.  The  system  of
Speculative  Masonry  is  a  volume  closely
folded  from  unlawful  eyes,  and  he  who
would  understand  its  true  intent  and  mean¬
ing  must  follow  the  old  proverb,  and  “  com¬
mence  at  the  beginning.”  There  is  no
royal  road  of  arriving  at  this  knowledge.
It  can  be  attained  only  by  laborious  re¬
search.  The  student  must  begin  as  an  Ap¬
prentice,  by  studying  the  rudiments  that
are  unfolded  on  its  first  page.  Then  as  a
Fellow  Craft  still  more  of  the  precious
writing  is  unrolled,  and  he  acquires  new
ideas.  As  a  Master  he  continues  the  oper¬
ation,  and  possesses  himself  of  additional


material  for  thought.  But  it  is  not  until
the  entire  volume  lies  unrolled  before  him,
in  the  highest  degree,  and  the  whole  specu¬
lative  system  of  its  philosophy  is  lying  out¬
spread  before  him,  that  he  can  pretend  to
claim  a  thorough  comprehension  of  its
plan.  It  is  then  only  that  he  has  solved
the  problem,  and  can  exclaim,  “  the  end
has  crowned  the  work.”  The  Mason  who
looks  only  on  the  ornamental  covering  of
the  roll  knows  nothing  of  its  contents.
Masonry  is  a  scheme  of  development ;  and
he  who  has  learned  nothing  of  its  design,
and  who  is  daily  adding  nothing  to  his
stock  of  Masonic  ideas,  is  simply  one  who
is  not  unrolling  the  parchment.  It  is  a
custom  of  the  Jews  on  their  Sabbath,  in  the
synagogue,  that  a  member  should  pay  for  the
privilege  of  unrolling  the  Sacred  Law.  So,
too,  the  Mason,  who  would  uphold  the  law
of  his  Institution,  must  pay  for  the  privi¬
lege,  not  in  base  coin,  but  in  labor  and  re¬
search,  studying  its  principles,  searching
out  its  design,  and  imbibing  all  of  its  sym¬
bolism;  and  the  payment  thus  made  will
purchase  a  rich  jewel.

Device.  A  term  in  heraldry  signify¬
ing  any  emblem  used  to  represent  a  family,
person,  nation,  or  society,  and  to  distin¬
guish  such  from  any  other.  The  device  is
usually  accompanied  with  a  suitable  motto
applied  in  a  figurative  sense,  and  its  essence
consists  in  a  metaphorical  similitude  be¬
tween  the  thing  representing  and  that  rep¬
resented.  Thus,  the  device  of  a  lion  repre¬
sents  the  courage  of  the  person  bearing  it.
The  oak  is  the  device  of  strength;  the
palm,  of  victory;  the  sword,  of  honor;  and
the  eagle,  of  sovereign  power.  The  several
sections  of  the  Masonic  sodality  are  dis¬
tinguished  by  appropriate  devices.

1.  Ancient  Craft  Masonry.  Besides  the
arms  of  Speculative  Masonry,  which  are  de¬
scribed  in  this  work  under  the  appropriate
head,  the  most  common  device  is  a  square
and  compass.

2.  Royal  Arch  Masonry.  The  device  is
a  triple  tau  within  a  triangle.

3.  Knight  Templarism.  The  ancient
device,  which  was  borne  on  the  seals  and
banners  of  the  primitive  Order,  was  two
knights  riding  on  one  horse,  in  allusion  to
the  vow  of  poverty  taken  by  the  founders.
The  modern  device  of  Masonic  Templarism
is  a  cross  pattee.

4.  Scottish  Rite  Masonry.  The  device  is
a  double-headed  eagle  crowned ,  holding  in  his
claios  a  sword.

5.  Royal  and  Select  Masters.  The  device
is  a  trowel  suspended  within  a  triangle,  in
which  the  allusion  is  to  the  tetragrammaton
symbolized  by  the  triangle  or  delta,  and
the  workmen  at  the  first  Temple  symbolized
by  the  trowel.


DEVOIR


DIMIT


219


6.  Bose  Croix  Masonry.  The  device  is  a
cross  charged,  with  a  rose  ;  at  its  foot  an  eagle
and  a  pelican.

7.  Knight  of  the  Sun.  This  old  degree  of
philosophical  Masonry  has  for  its  device
rays  of  light  issuing  from  a  triangle  inscribed
within  a  circle  of  darkness,  which  “teaches  us,”
says  Oliver,  “  that  when  man  was  enlight¬
ened  by  the  Deity  with  reason,  he  became
enabled  to  penetrate  the  darkness  and  ob¬
scurity  which  ignorance  and  superstition
have  spread  abroad  to  allure  men  to  their
destruction.”

Each  of  these  devices  is  accompanied  by
a  motto  which  properly  forms  a  part  of  it.
These  mottoes  will  be  found  under  the
head  of  Motto.

The  Italian  heralds  have  paid  peculiar
attention  to  the  subject  of  devices,  and  have
established  certain  laws  for  their  construc¬
tion,  which  are  generally  recognized  in
other  countries.  These  laws  are,  1.  That
there  be  nothing  extravagant  or  monstrous
in  the  figures.  2.  That  figures  be  never
joined  together  which  have  no  relation  or
affinity  with  one  another.  3.  That  the
human  body  should  never  be  used.  4.  That
the  figures  should  be  few  in  number,  and  5,
That  the  motto  should  refer  to  the  device,
and  express  with  it  a  common  idea.  Ac¬
cording  to  P.  Bouhours,  the  figure  or  em¬
blem  was  called  the  body,  and  the  motto
the  soul  of  the  device.

Devoir.  The  gilds  or  separate  com¬
munities  in  the  system  of  French  compag-
nonage  are  called  devoirs.  See  Compag-
nonage.

Devoir  of  a  Knight.  The  original
meaning  of  devoir  is  duty ;  and  hence,  in
the  language  of  chivalry,  a  knight’s  devoir
comprehended  the  performance  of  all  those
duties  to  which  he  was  obligated  by  the
laws  of  knighthood  and  the  vows  taken  at
his  creation.  These  were  the  defence  of
widows  and  orphans,  the  maintenance  of
justice,  and  the  protection  of  the  poor  and
weak  against  the  oppressions  of  the  strong
and  great.  Thus,  in  one  of  Beaumont  and
Fletcher’s  plays,  the  knight  says  to  the
lady :

“  Madame,  if  any  service  or  devoir
Of  a  poor  errant  knight  may  right  your  wrongs,
Command  it ;  I  am  prest  to  give  you  succor,

For  to  that  holy  end  I  bear  my  armor.”

Knight  of  the  Burning  Pestle.  Act  II.,  Scene  1.

The  devoir  of  a  Knight  Templar  was
originally  to  protect  pilgrims  on  their  visit
to  the  Holy  Land,  and  to  defend  the  holy
places.  The  devoir  of  a  modern  Knight
Templar  is  to  defend  innocent  virgins,  des¬
titute  widows,  helpless  orphans,  and  the
Christian  religion.

Devotions.  The  prayers  in  a  Com-


mandery  of  Knights  Templars  are  techni¬
cally  called  the  devotions  of  the  knights.

Dialectics.  That  branch  of  logic
which  teaches  the  rules  and  modes  of  rea¬
soning.  Dialecticke  and  dialecticus  are  used
as  corruptions  of  the  Latin  dialectica  in
some  of  the  old  manuscript  Constitutions,
instead  of  logic,  in  the  enumeration  of  the
seven  liberal  arts  and  sciences.

Diamond.  A  precious  stone;  in  He¬
brew,  nSni-  It  was  the  third  stone  in  the
second  row  of  the  high  priest’s  breastplate,
according  to  the  enumeration  of  Aben  Ezra,
and  corresponded  to  the  tribe  of  Zebulun.
But  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  diamond
was  known  in  the  time  of  Moses  ;  and  if  it
was,  its  great  value  and  its  insusceptibility
to  the  impression  of  a  graving-tool  would
have  rendered  it  totally  unfit  as  a  stone  in
the  breastplate.  The  Vulgate  more  prop¬
erly  gives  the  jasper.

Dieseal.  A  term  used  by  the  Druids
to  designate  the  circumambulation  around
the  sacred  cairns,  and  is  derived  from  two
words  signifying  “  on  the  right  of  the  sun,”
because  the  circumambulation  was  always
in  imitation  of  the  course  of  the  sun,  with
the  right  hand  next  to  the  cairn  or  altar.
See  Circumambulation.

Dieu  et  moil  Droit.  See  Deus  Me-
umque  Jus.

Dieu  le  Tent.  God  wills  it.  The
war-cry  of  the  old  Crusaders,  and  hence
adopted  as  a  motto  in  the  degrees  of  Tem-
plarism.

Dignitaries.  The  Master,  the  War¬
dens,  the  Orator,  and  the  Secretary  in  a
French  Lodge  are  called  dignitaries.  The
corresponding  officers  in  the  Grand  Orient
are  called  Grand  Dignitaries.  In  English
and  American  Masonic  language  the  term
is  usually  restricted  to  high  officers  of  the
Grand  Lodge.

Dimit.  A  modern,  American,  and
wholly  indefensible  corruption  of  the  tech¬
nical  word  Demit.  As  the  use  of  this  cor¬
rupt  form  is  beginning  to  be  very  prevalent
among  American  Masonic  writers,  it  is
proper  that  we  should  inquire  which  is  the
correct  word,  Demit  or  Dimit.

For  almost  a  century  and  a  half  the
Masonic  world  has  been  content,  in  its
technical  language,  to  use  the  word  demit.
But  within  a  few  years,  a  few  admirers  of
neologisms  —  men  who  are  always  ready  to
believe  that  what  is  old  cannot  be  good,
and  that  new  fashions  are  always  the  best
—  have  sought  to  make  a  change  in  the
well-established  word,  and,  by  altering  the
e  in  the  first  syllable  into  an  i,  they  make
another  word  dimit,  which  they  assert  is
the  right  one.  It  is  simply  a  question  of
orthography,  and  must  be  settled  first  by
reference  to  usage,  and  then  to  etymology,


220


DIMIT


DIMIT


to  discover  which  of  the  wrords  sustains,  by
its  derivation,  the  true  meaning  which  is
intended  to  be  conveyed.

It  is  proper,  however,  to  premise  that
although  in  the  seventeenth  century  Sir
Thomas  Browne  used  the  word  demil  as  a
verb,  meaning  “  to  depress,”  and  Bishop
Hall  used  dimU  as  signifying  to  send  away,
yet  both  words  are  omitted  by  all  the  early
lexicographers.  Neither  of  them  is  to  be
found  in  Phillips,  in  1706,  nor  in  Blunt,  in
1707,  nor  in  Bailey,  in  1732.  Johnson  and
Sheridan,  of  a  still  later  date,  have  in¬
serted  in  their  dictionaries  demit ,  but  not
dimit;  but  Walker,  Richardson,  and  Web¬
ster  give  both  words,  but  only  as  verbs.
The  verb  to  demit  or  to  dimit  may  be  found,
but  never  the  noun  a  demit  or  a  dimit.  As
a  noun  substantive,  this  word,  however  it
may  be  spelled,  is  unknown  to  the  general
language,  and  is  strictly  a  technical  expres¬
sion  peculiar  to  Freemasonry.

As  a  Masonic  technicality  we  must  then
discuss  it.  And,  first,  as  to  its  meaning.

Dr.  Oliver,  who  omits  dimit  in  his  Dic¬
tionary  of  Symbolical  Masonry,  defines  demit
thus :  “  A  Mason  is  said  to  demit  from  the
Order  when  he  withdraws  from  all  connec¬
tion  with  it.”  It  will  be  seen  that  he
speaks  of  it  here  only  as  a  verb,  and  makes
no  reference  to  its  use  as  a  noun.

Macoy,  in  his  Cyclopaedia,  omits  demit,
but  defines  dimit  thus :  “  From  the  Latin
dimitto,  to  permit  to  go.  The  act  of  with¬
drawing  from  membership.”  To  say  noth¬
ing  of  the  incorrectness  of  this  definition,  to
w’hich  reference  will  hereafter  be  made,
there  is  in  it  a  violation  of  the  principles
of  language  which  is  wrnrthy  of  note.  No
rule  is  better  settled  than  that  which  makes
the  verb  and  the  noun  derived  from  it  have
the  same  relative  signification.  Thus,  “  to
discharge”  means  “to  dismiss;”  “a  dis¬
charge  ”  means  “  a  dismission ;  ”  “  to  ap¬
prove”  means  “to  express  liking;”  “an
approval  ”  means  “  an  expression  of  liking ;”
“to  remit”  means  “to  relax;”  “a  remis¬
sion  ”  means  “  a  relaxation,”  and  so  with  a
thousand  other  instances.  Now,  according
to  this  rule,  if  “to  demit”  means  “to  per¬
mit  to  go,”  then  “  a  dimit  ”  should  mean
“  a  permission  to  go.”  The  withdrawal  is
something  subsequent  and  consequent,  but
it  may  never  take  place.  According  to
Macoy’s  definition  of  the  verb,  the  grant¬
ing  of  “a  dimit”  does  not  necessarily  lead
to  the  conclusion  that  the  Mason  who  re¬
ceived  it  has  left  the  Lodge.  He  has  only
been  permitted  to  do  so.  This  is  contrary'
to  the  universally  accepted  definition  of
the  word.  Accordingly,  when  he  comes  to
define  the  word  as  a  noun,  he  gives  it  the
true  meaning,  which,  however,  does  not
agree  with  his  previous  definition  as  a  verb.


In  instituting  the  inquiry  which  of  these
two  words  is  the  true  one,  we  must  first
look  to  the  general  usage  of  Masonic  writ¬
ers  ;  for,  after  all,  the  rule  of  Horace  holds
good,  that  in  the  use  of  words  we  must  be
governed  by  custom  or  usage,

- “  whose  arbitrary  sway

Words  and  the  forms  of  language  must  obey.”

If  we  shall  find  that  the  universal  usage
of  Masonic  writers  until  a  very  recent  date
has  been  to  employ  the  form  demit,  then
we  are  bound  to  believe  that  it  is  the  cor¬
rect  form,  notwithstanding  a  few  writers
have  very  recently  sought  to  intrude  the
form  dimit  upon  us.

Now,  how  stands  the  case?  The  first
time  that  we  find  the  word  demit  used  is
in  the  second  edition  of  Anderson’s  Consti¬
tutions,  Anno  1732,  p.  153.  There  it  is  said
that  on  the  25th  of  November,  1723,  “it
was  agreed  that  if  a  Master  of  a  particular
Lodge  is  deposed,  or  demits,  the  Senior
Warden  shall  forthwith  fill  the  Master’s
Chair.”

The  word  continued  in  use  as  a  technical
word  in  the  Masonry'  of  England  for  many
years.  In  the  editions  of  the  Constitutions
published  in  1756,  p.  310,  the  passage  just
quoted  is  again  recited,  and  the  word  demit
is  again  employed  in  the  fourth  edition  of
the  Constitutions  published  in  1769,  p.  358.

In  the  second  edition  of  Dermott’s
“Ahiman  Rezon,”  published  in  1764,  (I
have  not  the  first,)  p.  52,  and  in  the  third
edition,  published  in  1778,  p.  58,  the  word
demit  is  employed.  Oliver,  it  will  be  seen,
uses  it  in  his  Dictionary,  published  in  1853.
But  the  word  seems  to  have  become  obso¬
lete  in  England,  and  to  resign  is  now  cou-
stantly  used  by  English  Masonic  writers  in
the  place  of  to  demit.

In  America,  however,  the  word  has  been
and  continues  to  be  in  universal  use,  and
has  always  been  spelled,  until  very  recently,
demit.

Thus  we  find  it  used  by  Taunehill,  Man¬
ual,  1845,  p.  59 ;  Morris,  Code  of  Masonic
Law,  1856,  p.  289;  by  Hubbard,  in  1851;
by  Chase,  Digest,  1859,  p.  104;  hy  Mitch¬
ell,  Masonic  History,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  556,  592,
and  by  all  the  Grand  Lodges  whose  pro¬
ceedings  I  have  examined  up  to  the  year
1860,  and  probably  beyond  that  date.

On  the  contrary,  the  word  dimit  is  of
very  recent  origin,  and  has  been  used  only
within  a  few  years.  Usage,  therefore,  both
English  and  American,  is  clearly  in  favor
of  demit,  and  dimit  must  be  considered  as
an  interloper,  and  ought  to  be  consigned
to  the  tomb  of  the  Capulets.

And  now  we  are  to  inquire  whether  this
usage  is  sustained  by  the  principles  of  ety-


DIMIT


DIMIT


221


mology.  First,  let  ua  obtain  a  correct  defi¬
nition  of  the  word.

To  demit,  in  Masonic  language,  means
simply  to  resign.  The  Mason  who  demits
from  his  Lodge  resigns  from  it.  The  word
is  used  in  the  exact  sense,  for  instance,  in
the  Constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Wisconsin,  where  it  is  said:  “No  brother
shall  be  allowed  to  demit  from  any  Lodge
unless  for  the  purpose  of  uniting  with  some
other.”  That  is  to  say  :  “No  brother  shall
be  allowed  to  resign  from  any  Lodge.”

Now  what  are  the  respective  meanings
of  demit  and  dimit  in  ordinary  language?

There  the  words  are  found  to  be  entirely
different  in  signification.

To  demit  is  derived  first  from  the  Latin
demittere  through  the  French  demetlre.  In
Latin  the  prefixed  particle  de  has  the
weight  01  down;  added  to  the  verb  mitfere,
to  send,  it  signifies  to  let  down  from  an
elevated  position  to  a  lower.  Thus,  Caesar
used  it  in  this  very  sense,  when,  in  describ¬
ing  the  storming  of  Avaricum,  (Bel.  Gal.,
vii.  28,)  he  says  that  the  Roman  soldiers
did  not  let  themselves  down,  that  is,  de¬
scend  from  the  top  of  the  wall  to  the  level
ground.  The  French,  looking  to  this  ref¬
erence  to  a  descent  from  a  higher  to  a
lower  position,  made  their  verb  se  demettre,
used  in  a  reflective  sense,  signify  to  give  up
a  post,  office,  or  occupation,  that  is  to  say,
to  resign  it.  And  thence  the  English  use
of  the  word  is  reducible,  which  makes  to
demit  signify  to  resign.  We  have  another
word  in  our  language  also  derived  from  de¬
mettre,  and  in  which  the  same  idea  of  resig¬
nation  is  apparent.  It  is  the  word  demise,
which  was  originally  confined  to  express
a  royal  death.  The  old  maxim  was  that
“  the  king  never  dies.”  So,  instead  of  say¬
ing  “the  death  of  the  king,”  they  said
“  the  demise  of  the  king,”  thereby  meaning
his  resignation  of  the  crown  to  his  succes¬
sor.  The  word  is  now  applied  more  gene¬
rally,  and  we  speak  of  the  demise  of  Mr.
Pitt,  or  any  other  person.

To  dimit  is  derived  from  the  Latin  dimit-
tcre.  The  prefixed  particle  di  or  dis  has
the  effect  of  off  from,  and  hence  dimittere
means  to  send  away.  Thus,  Terence  uses  it
to  express  the  meaning  of  dismissing  or
sending  away  an  army.

Both  words  are  now  obsolete  in  the  Eng¬
lish  language.  Theyr  were  formerly  used,
but  in  the  different  senses  already  indicated.

Thus,  Hollinshed  employs  demit  to  signi¬
fy  a  surrender,  yielding  up  or  resignation
of  a  franchise.

Bishop  Hall  uses  dimit  to  signify’  a  send¬
ing  away  of  a  servant  by  his  master.

Demit,  as  a  noun,  is  not  known  in  good
English  ;  the  correlative  nouns  of  the  verbs
to  demit  and  to  dimit  are  demission  and  di¬


mission.  “A  demit”  is  altogether  a  Ma¬
sonic  technicality,  and  is,  moreover,  an
Americanism  of  very  recent  usage.

It  is  then  evident  that  to  demit  is  the
proper  word,  and  that  to  use  to  dimit.  is  to
speak  and  write  incorrectly.  When  a  Ma¬
son  “demits  from  a  Lodge,”  we  mean  that
he  “  resigns  from  a  Lodge,”  because  to  demit
means  to  resign.  But  what  does  any  one
mean  when  he  says  that  a  Mason  “  dimits
from  a  Lodge”?  To  dimit  means,  as  we
have  seen,  to  send  away,  therefore  “  he  di¬
mits  from  the  Lodge”  is  equivalent  to  say¬
ing  “  he  sends  away  from  the  Lodge,”  which
of  course  is  not  only  bad  English,  but  sheer
nonsense.  If  dimit  is  to  be  used  at  all,  as
it  is  an  active,  transitive  verb,  it  must  be
used  only  in  that  form,  and  we  must  either
say  that  “  a  Lodge  dimits  a  Mason,”  or  that
“a  Mason  is  dimitted  by  his  Lodge.”

I  think  that  I  have  discovered  the  way
in  which  this  blunder  first  arose.  Robert
Morris,  in  his  Code  of  Masonic  Law,  p.  289,
has  the  following  passage:

“A  ‘demit,’  technically  considered,  is
the  act  of  withdrawing,  and  applies  to  the
Lodge  and  not  to  the  individual.  A  Mason
cannot  demit,  in  the  strict  sense,  but  the
Lodge  may  demit  (dismiss)  him.”

It  is  astonishing  how  the  author  of  this
passage  could  have  crowded  into  so  brief  a
space  so  many  violations  of  grammar,  law,
and  common  sense.  First,  to  demit  means
to  withdraw,  and  then  this  withdrawal  is
made  the  act  of  the  Lodge  and  not  of  the
individual,  as  if  the  Lodge  withdrew  the
member  instead  of  the  member  withdraw¬
ing  himself.  And  immediately  afterwards,
seeing  the  absurdity  of  this  doctrine,  and  to
make  the  demission  the  act  of  the  Lodge,
he  changes  the,  signification  of  the  word,
and  makes  to  demit  mean  to  dismiss.  Cer¬
tainly  it  is  impossible  to  discuss  the  law  of
Masonic  demission  when  such  contrary
meanings  are  given  to  the  word  in  one  anci
the  same  paragraph.

But  certain  wiseacres,  belonging  prob¬
ably  to  that  class  who  believe  that  there  is
always  improvement  in  change,  seizing
upon  this  latter  definition  of  Morris,  that  to
demit  meant  to  dismiss,  and  seeing  that  this
was  a  meaning  which  the  word  never  had,
and,  from  its  derivation  from  demittere,
never  could  have,  changed  the  word  from
demit  to  dimit,  which  really  does  have  the
meaning  of  sending  away  or  dismissing.
But  as  the  Masonic  act  of  demission  does
not  mean  a  dismissal  from  the  Lodge,  be¬
cause  that  would  be  an  expulsion,  but
simply  a  resignation,  the  word  dimit  cannot
properly  be  applied  to  the  act.

A  Mason  demits  from  the  Lodge;  he  re¬
signs.  He  takes  out  his  demit,  (a  strictly
technical  expression  and  altogether  con-


222


DIOCESAN


DIONYSIAN


fined  to  this  country;)  he  asks  for  and  re¬
ceives  an  acceptance  of  his  resignation.

Diocesan.  The  fifth degreeof  Bahrdt’s
German  Union.

Dionysian  Architects.  The  priests
of  Bacchus,  or,  as  the  Greeks  called  him,
Dionysus,  having  devoted  themselves  to
architectural  pursuits,  established  about
1000  years  before  the  Christian  era  a  so¬
ciety  or  fraternity  of  builders  in  Asia
Minor,  which  is  styled  by  the  ancient
writers  the  Fraternity  of  Dionysian  Archi¬
tects,  and  to  this  society  was  exclusively
confined  the  privilege  of  erecting  temples
and  other  public  buildings.

The  members  of  the  Fraternity  of  Diony¬
sian  Architects  were  linked  together  by  the
secret  ties  of  the  Dionysian  mysteries,  into
which  they  had  all  been  initiated.  Thus
constituted,  the  Fraternity  was  distinguished
by  many  peculiarities  that  strikingly  as¬
similate  it  to  our  Order.  In  the  exercise
of  charity,  the  “  more  opulent  were  sa¬
credly  bound  to  provide  for  the  exigencies
of  the  poorer  brethren.”  For  the  facilities
of  labor  and  government,  they  were  divided
into  communities  called  cwomiai,  each  of
which  was  governed  by  a  Master  and  War¬
dens.  They  held  a  general  assembly  or
grand  festival  once  a  year,  which  was  sol¬
emnized  with  great  pomp  and  splendor.
They  employed  in  their  ceremonial  observ¬
ances  many  of  the  implements  which  are
still  to  be  found  among  Freemasons,  and
used,  like  them,  a  universal  language,  by
which  one  brother  could  distinguish  another
in  the  dark  as  well  as  in  the  light,  and
which  served  to  unite  the  members  scat¬
tered  over  India,  Persia,  and  Syria,  into
one  common  brotherhood.  The  existence
of  this  order  in  Tyre,  at  the  time  of  the
building  of  the  Temple,  is  universally  ad¬
mitted;  and  Hiram,  the  widow’s  son,  to
whom  Solomon  intrusted  the  superintend¬
ence  of  the  workmen,  as  an  inhabitant  of
Tyre,  and  as  a  skilful  architect  and  cunning
and  curious  workman,  was,  very  probably,
one  of  its  members.  Hence,  we  may  legi¬
timately  suppose  that  the  Dionvsians  were
sent  by  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  to  assist
King  Solomon  in  the  construction  of  the
house  he  was  about  to  dedicate  to  Jehovah,
and  that  they  commuuicated  to  their  Jew¬
ish  feliow-laborers  a  knowledge  of  the  ad¬
vantages  of  their  Fraternity,  and  invited
them  to  a  participation  in  its  mysteries  and
privileges.  In  this  union,  however,  the
apocryphal  legend  of  the  Dionysians  would
naturally  give  way  to  the  true  legend  of
the  Masons,  which  was  unhappily  fur¬
nished  by  a  melancholy  incident  that  oc¬
curred  at  the  time.  The  latter  part  of  this  j
statement  is,  it  is  admitted,  a  mere  specula¬
tion,  but  one  that  has  met  the  approval  of  ;


Lawrie,  Oliver,  and  our  best  writers;  and
although  this  connection  between  the
Dionysian  Architects  and  the  builders  of
King  Solomon  may  not  be  supported  by
documentary  evidence,  the  traditionary
theory  is  at  least  plausible,  and  offers  noth¬
ing  which  is  either  absurd  or  impossible.
If  accepted,  it  supplies  the  necessary  link
which  connects  the  Pagan  with  the  Jewish
mysteries.

The  history  of  this  association  subse¬
quently  to  the  Solomonic  era  has  been  de¬
tailed  by  Masonic  writers,  who  have  derived
their  information  sometimes  from  conjec¬
tural  and  sometimes  from  historical  au¬
thority.  About  300  years  B.  c.,  they  were
incorporated  by  the  kings  of  Pergamos  at
Teos,  which  was  assigned  to  them  as  a  settle¬
ment,  and  where  they  continued  for  centu¬
ries  as  an  exclusive  society  engaged  in  the
erection  of  works  of  art  and  the  celebra¬
tion  of  their  mysteries.  Notwithstanding
the  edict  of  the  Emperor  Theodosius  which
abolished  all  mystical  associations,  they
are  said  to  have  continued  their  existence
down  to  the  time  of  the  Crusades,  and
during  the  constant  communication  which
was  kept  up  between  the  two  continents
passed  over  from  Asia  to  Europe,  where
they  became  known  as  the  “  Travelling
Freemasons”  of  the  Middle  Ages,  into
whose  future  history  they  thus  became
merged.

Dionysian  Mysteries.  These  mys¬
teries  were  celebrated  throughout  Greece
and  Asia  Minor,  but  principally  at  Athens,
where  the  years  were  numbered  by  them.
They  were  instituted  in  honor  of  Bacchus,
or,  as  the  Greeks  called  him,  Dionysus,  and
were  introduced  into  Greece  from  Egypt.
In  these  mysteries,  the  murder  of  Dionysus
by  the  Titans  was  commemorated,  in  which
legend  he  is  evidently  identified  with  the
Egyptian  Osiris,  who  was  slain  by  his  bro¬
ther  Typhon.  The  aspirant,  in  the  cere¬
monies  through  which  he  passed,  repre¬
sented  the  murder  of  the  god  and  his
restoration  to  life,  which,  says  the  Baron  de
Sacy,  (Notes  on  Sainte- Croix,  ii.  86,)  were
the  subject  of  allegorical  explanations  alto¬
gether  analogous  to  those  which  wTere  given
to  the  rape  of  Proserpine  and  the  murder
of  Osiris.

The  commencement  of  the  mysteries  was
signalized  by  the  consecration  of  an  egg,  in
allusion  to  the  mundane  egg  from  which
all  things  were  supposed  to  have  sprung.
The  candidate  having  been  first  purified  by
water,  and  crowned  with  a  myrtle  branch,
was  introduced  into  the  vestibule,  and
there  clothed  in  the  sacred  habiliments.
He  was  then  delivered  to  the  conductor,
who,  after  the  mystic  warning,  enac,  ena c,
core  pepTjfoi,  “Depart  hence,  all  ye  pro-


DIONYSIAN


DISCALCEATION


223


fane  I  ”  exhorted  the  candidate  to  exert  all
his  fortitude  and  courage  in  the  dangers
and  trials  through  which  he  was  about  to

SHe  was  then  led  through  a  series  of
caverns,  a  part  of  the  ceremonies
which  Stobseus  calls  “  a  rude  and  fearful
march  through  night  and  darkness.”  Dur¬
ing  this  passage  he  was  terrified  by  the
howling  of  wild  beasts,  and  other  fearful
noises;  artificial  thunder  reverberated
through  the  subterranean  apartments,  and
transient  flashes  of  lightning  revealed  mon¬
strous  apparitions  to  his  sight.  In  this
state  of  darkness  and  terror  he  was  kept
for  three  days  and  nights,  after  which  he
commenced  the  aphanism  or  mystical  death
of  Bacchus.  He  was  now  placed  on  the
pastos  or  couch,  that  is,  he  was  confined  in
a  solitary  cell,  where  he  could  reflect  seri¬
ously  on  the  nature  of  the  undertaking  in
which  he  was  engaged.  During  this  time,
he  was  alarmed  with  the  sudden  crash  of
waters,  which  was  intended  to  represent
the  deluge.  Typhon,  searching  for  Osiris,
or  Dionysus,  for  they  are  here  identical,  dis¬
covered  the  ark  in  which  he  had  been  se¬
creted,  and,  tearing  it  violently  asunder,
scattered  the  limbs  of  his  victim  upon  the
waters.  The  aspirant  now  heard  the  la¬
mentations  which  were  instituted  for  the
death  of  the  god.  Then  commenced  the
search  of  Rhea  for  the  remains  of  Diony¬
sus.  The  apartments  were  filled  with
shrieks  and  groans;  the  initiated  mingled
with  their  howlings  of  despair  the  frantic
dances  of  the  Corybantes ;  everything  was
a  scene  of  distraction,  until,  at  a  signal
from  the  hierophant,  the  whole  drama
changed ; — the  mourning  was  turned  to  joy ;
the  mangled  body  was  found ;  and  the  as¬
pirant  was  released  from  his  confinement,
amid  the  shouts  of  Evpr/Kauev,  E vyxa‘poyev,
“  We  have  found  it;  let  us  rejoice  together.”
The  candidate  was  now  made  to  descend
into  the  infernal  regions,  w’here  he  beheld
the  torments  of  the  wicked  and  the  re¬
wards  of  the  virtuous.  It  was  now  that  he
received  the  lecture  explanatory  of  the
Rites,  and  was  invested  with  the  tokens
which  served  the  initiated  as  a  means  of
recognition.  He  then  underwent  a  lustra¬
tion,  after  which  he  was  introduced  into
the  holy  place,  where  he  received  the  name
of  epopt,  and  was  fully  instructed  in  the
doctrine  of  the  mysteries,  which  consisted
in  a  belief  in  the  existence  of  one  God  and
a  future  state  of  rewards  and  punishments.
These  doctrines  were  inculcated  by  a  va¬
riety  of  significant  symbols.  After  the
performance  of  these  ceremonies,  the  aspi¬
rant  was  dismissed,  and  the  Rites  concluded
with  the  pronunciation  of  the  mvstic  words,
Knox  Ompax.  Sainte-Croix  {Myst.  du  Pap.,
ii.  90,)  says  that  the  murder  of  Dionysus


by  the  Titans  was  only  an  allegory  of  the
physical  revolutions  of  the  world ;  but  these
were  in  part,  in-the  ancient  initiations,  sig¬
nificant  of  the  changes  of  life  and  death
and  resurrection.

Dionysus.  The  Greek  name  of  Bac¬
chus.  See  Dionysian  Mysteries.

Diploma.  Literally  means  something
folded.  From  the  Greek,  Sm'Aoi).  The  word
is  applied  in  Masonry  to  the  certificates
granted  by  Lodges,  Chapters,  and  Com-
manderies  to  their  members,  which  should
always  be  written  on  parchment.  The  more
usual  word,  however,  is  Certificate,  which  see.
In  the  Scottish  Rite  they  are  called  Patents.

Director  of  Ceremonies,
Grand.  An  officer  in  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  who  has  the  care  of  the  rega¬
lia,  clothing,  insignia,  and  jewels  belong¬
ing  to  the  Grand  Lodge.  His  jewel  is  two
batons  crossed  in  saltire.

Directory.  In  German  Lodges,  the
Master  and  other  officers  constitute  a  coun¬
cil  of  management,  under  the  name  of  Di-
rectorium  or  Directory.

Directory,  Roman  Helretic.
The  name  assumed  in  1739  by  the  Su¬
preme  Masonic  authority  at  Lausanne,  in
Switzerland.  See  Switzerland.

Disealeeation,  Rite  of.  The  cere¬
mony  of  taking  off  the  shoes,  as  a  token  of
respect,  whenever  we  are  on  or  about  to
approach  holy  ground.  It  is  referred  to  in
Exodus  iii.  5,  where  the  angel  of  the
Lord,  at  the  burning  bush,  exclaims  to
Moses :  “  Draw  not  nigh  hither ;  put  off
thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place
whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground.”  It
is  again  mentioned  in  Joshua  v.  15,  in  the
following  words:  “And  the  captain  of  the
Lord’s  host  said  unto  Joshua,  Loose  thy
shoe  from  off  thy  foot ;  for  the  place  whereon
thou  standest  is  holy.”  And  lastly,  it  is  al¬
luded  to  in  the  injunction  given  in  Ecclesi¬
astes  v.  1 :  “  Keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest
to  the  house  of  God.”

The  Rite,  in  fact,  always  was,  and  still  is,
used  among  the  Jews  and  other  Oriental
nations  when  entering  their  temples  and
other  sacred  edifices.  It  does  not  seem  to
have  been  derived  from  the  command  given
to  Moses ;  but  rather  to  have  existed  as  a
religious  custom  from  time  immemorial,
and  to  have  been  borrowed,  as  Mede  sup¬
poses,  by  the  Gentiles,  through  tradition,
from  the  patriarchs.

The  direction  of  Pythagoras  to  his  dis¬
ciples  was  in  these  words:  Awroi^r/ror  die
Kai  rpooKwei  —  that  is,  “Offer  sacrifice  and
worship  with  thy  shoes  off.”

Justin  Martyr  says  that  those  who  came
to  worship  in  the  sanctuaries  and  temples
j  of  the  Gentiles  were  commanded  by  their
|  priests  to  put  off  their  shoes.


224


DISCIPLINE


DISCIPLINE


Drusius,  in  his  Notes  on  the  Book  of
Joshua,  says  that  among  most  of  the  East¬
ern  nations  it  was  a  pious  duty  to  tread  the
pavement  of  the  temple  with  unshod  feet.

Maimonides,  the  great  expounder  of  the
Jewish  law,  asserts  [Beth  Habbechirah,  c.
vii.,)  that  “it  was  not  lawful  for  a  man  to
come  into  the  mountain  of  God’s  house
with  his  shoes  on  his  feet,  or  with  his  staff,
or  in  his  working  garments,  or  with  dust  on
his  feet.”

Rabbi  Solomon,  commenting  on  the  com¬
mand  in  Leviticus  xix.  30,  “  Ye  shall  rev¬
erence  my  sanctuary,”  makes  the  same  re¬
mark  in  relation  to  this  custom.  On  this
subject,  Oliver  [Hist.  Landm.,  ii.  481,)  ob¬
serves:  “  Now  the  act  of  going  with  naked
feet  was  always  considered  a  token  of  hu¬
mility  and  reverence ;  and  the  priests,  in
temple  worship,  always  officiated  with  feet
uncovered,  although  it  was  frequently  in¬
jurious  to  their  health.”

Mede  quotes  Zago  Zaba,  an  Ethiopian
bishop,  who  was  ambassador  from  David,
king  of  Abyssinia,  to  John  III.,  of  Portu¬
gal,  as  saying:  “  We  are  not  permitted  to
enter  the  church  except  barefooted.”

The  Mohammedans,  when  about  to  per¬
form  their  devotions,  always  leave  their
slippers  at  the  door  of  the  mosque.  The
Druids  practised  the  same  custom  when¬
ever  they  celebrated  their  sacred  rites ;  and
the  ancient  Peruvians  are  said  always  to
have  left  their  shoes  at  the  porch  when
they  entered  the  magnificent  temple  con¬
secrated  to  the  worship  of  the  sun.

Adam  Clarke  {Comm,  on  Exod .)  thinks
that  the  custom  of  worshipping  the  Deity
barefooted,  was  so  general  among  all  na¬
tions  of  antiquity,  that  he  assigns  it  as  one
of  his  thirteen  proofs  that  the  whole  hu¬
man  race  have  been  derived  from  one
family.

Finally,  Bishop  Patrick,  speaking  of  the
origin  of  this  Rite,  says,  in  his  Commenta¬
ries  :  “  Moses  did  not  give  the  first  begin¬
ning  to  this  Rite,  but  it  was  derived  from
the  patriarchs  before  him,  and  transmitted
to  future  times  from  that  ancient,  general
tradition;  for  we  find  no  command  in  the
law  of  Moses  for  the  priests  performing  the
service  of  the  temple  without  shoes,  but  it
is  certain  they  did  so  from  immemorial  cus¬
tom  ;  and  so  do  the  Mohammedans  and
other  nations  at  this  day.”

Discipline  Arcani.  See  Discipline
of  the  Secret.

Discipline.  This  word  is  used  by
Masons,  in  its  ecclesiastical  sense,  to  sig¬
nify  the  execution  of  the  laws  by  which  a
Lodge  is  governed,  and  the  infliction  of  the
penalties  enjoined  against  offenders  who
are  its  members,  or,  not  being  members,  live
within  its  jurisdiction.  To  discipline  a  Ma¬


son  is  to  subject  him  to  punishment.  See
Jurisdiction  and  Punishment.

Discipline  of  the  Secret.  There
existed  in  the  earlier  ages  of  the  Christian
church,  a  mystic  and  secret  worship,  from
which  a  portion  of  the  congregation  was
peremptorily  excluded,  and  whose  privacy
was  guarded,  with  the  utmost  care,  from
the  obtrusive  eyes  of  all  who  had  not  been
duly  initiated  into  the  sacred  rites  that
qualified  them  to  be  present.

This  custom  of  communicating  only  to  a
portion  of  the  Christian  community,  the
more  abstruse  doctrines  and  more  sacred
ceremonies  of  the  church,  is  known  among
ecclesiastical  writers  by  the  name  of  “  Dis-
ciplixa  Arcaxi,”  or  “The  Discipline  of
the  Secret.”

Converts  were  permitted  to  attain  a
knowledge  of  all  the  doctrines,  and  par¬
ticipate  in  the  sacraments  of  the  church,
only  after  a  long  and  experimental  proba¬
tion.  The  young  Christian,  like  the  dis¬
ciple  of  Pythagoras,  was  made  to  pass
through  a  searching  ordeal  of  time  and
patience,  by  which  his  capacity,  his  fidelity,
and  his  other  qualifications  were  strictly
tested.  For  this  purpose,  different  ranks
were  instituted  in  the  congregation.  The
lowest  of  these  were  the  Catechumens.
These  were  occupied  in  a  study  of  the  ele¬
mentary  principles  of  the  Christian  religion.
Their  connection  with  the  church  was  not
consummated  by  baptism,  to  which  rite
they  were  not  admitted,  even  as  spectators,
it  being  the  symbol  of  a  higher  degree  ;  but
their  initiation  was  accompanied  with
solemn  ceremonies,  consisting  of  prayer,
signing  with  the  cross,  and  the  imposition
of  hands  by  the  priest.  The  next  degree
was  that  of  the  Competentes,  or  seekers.

When  a  Catechumen  had  exhibited  sat¬
isfactory  evidences  of  his  proficiency  in  re¬
ligious  knowledge,  he  petitioned  the  Bishop
for  the  Sacrament  of  baptism.  His  name
was  then  registered  in  the  books  of  the
church.  After  this  registration,  the  can¬
didate  underwent  the  various  ceremonies
appropriate  to  the  degree  upon  which  he
was  about  to  enter.  He  was  examined  by
the  bishop  as  to  his  attainments  in  Christi¬
anity,  and,  if  approved,  was  exorcised  for
twenty  days,  during  which  time  he  was
subjected  to  rigorous  fasts,  and,  having
made  confession,  the  necessary  penance  was
prescribed.  He  was  then,  for  the  first  time,
instructed  in  the  words  of  the  Apostles’
creed,  a  symbol  of  which  the  Catechumens
were  entirely  ignorant.

Another  ceremony  peculiar  to  the  Com¬
petentes,  was  that  of  going  about  with
their  faces  veiled.  St.  Augustine  explains
[  the  ceremony  by  saying  that  the  Compe-
i  tentes  went  veiled  in  public  as  an  image  of


DISCIPLINE


DISCIPLINE


225


the  slavery  of  Adam  after  his  expulsion
from  Paradise,  and  that,  after  baptism,  the
veils  were  taken  away  as  an  emblem  of  the
liberty  of  the  spiritual  life  which  was  ob¬
tained  by  the  sacrament  of  regeneration.
Some  other  significant  ceremonies,  but  of
a  less  important  character,  were  used,  and
the  Competent,  having  passed  through  them
all,  was  at  length  admitted  to  the  highest
degree.

The  Fideles,  or  Faithful ,  constituted  the
third  degree  or  order.  Baptism  was  the
ceremony  by  which  the  Competeutes,  after
an  examination  into  their  proficiency,  were
admitted  into  this  degree.  “  They  were
thereby,”  says  Bingham,  “made  complete
and  perfect  Christians,  and  were,  upon  that
account,  dignified  with  several  titles  of
honor  and  marks  of  distinction  above  the
Catechumens.”  They  were  called  Illumi¬
nati,  or  Illuminated,  because  they  had  been
enlightened  as  to  those  secrets  which  were
concealed  from  the  inferior  orders.  They
were  also  called  Initiati,  or  Initiated,  be¬
cause  they  were  admitted  to  a  knowledge
of  the  sacred  mysteries;  and  so  commonly
was  this  name  in  use,  that,  when  Chrysos¬
tom  and  the  other  ancient  writers  spoke  of
their  concealed  doctrines,  they  did  so  in
ambiguous  terms,  so  as  not  to  be  under¬
stood  by  the  Catechumens,  excusing  them¬
selves  for  their  brief  allusions,  by  saying,
“  the  Initiated  know  what  we  mean.”  And
so  complete  was  the  understanding  of  the
ancient  Fathers  of  a  hidden  mystery,  and
an  initiation  into  them,  that  St.  Am¬
brose  has  written  a  book,  the  title  of  which
is,  Concerning  those  who  are  Initiated  into
the  Mysteries.  They  were  also  called
the  Perfect,  to  intimate  that  they  had  at¬
tained  to  a  perfect  knowledge  of  all  the
doctrines  and  sacraments  of  the  church.

There  were  certain  prayers,  which  none
but  the  Faithful  were  permitted  to  hear.
Among  these  was  the  Lord’s  prayer,  which,
for  this  reason,  was  commonly  called  Ora-
tio  Fidelium,  or,  “  The  Prayer  of  the  Faith¬
ful.”  They  were  also  admitted  to  hear  dis¬
courses  upon  the  most  profound  mysteries
of  the  church,  to  which  the  Catechumens
were  strictly  forbidden  to  listen.  St.  Am¬
brose,  in  the  book  written  by  him  to  the
Inititated,  says  that  sermons  on  the  subject
of  morality  were  daily  preached  to  the
Catechumens;  but  to  the  Initiated  they
gave  an  explanation  of  the  Sacraments,
which,  to  have  spoken  of  to  the  unbaptized,
would  have  rather  been  like  a  betrayal  of
mysteries  than  instruction.  And  St.  Au¬
gustine,  in  one  of  his  sermons  to  the  Faith¬
ful,  says:  “Having  now  dismissed  the
Catechumens,  you  alone  have  we  retained
to  hear  us,  because,  in  addition  to  those
things  which  belong  to  all  Christians  in
2D  15


common,  we  are  now  about  to  speak  in  an
especial  manner  of  the  Heavenly  Mysteries,
which  none  can  hear  except  those  who,
by  the  gift  of  the  Lord,  are  able  to  com¬
prehend  them.”

The  mysteries  of  the  church  were  di¬
vided,  like  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  into  the
lesser  and  the  greater.  The  former  was
called  “  Missa  Catechumenorum,”  or  the
Mass  of  the  Catechumens,  and  the  latter,
“  Missa  Fidelium,”  or  the  Mass  of  the
Faithful.  The  public  service  of  the  church
consisted  of  the  reading  of  the  Scripture,
and  the  delivery  of  a  sermon,  which  was
entirely  of  a  moral  character.  These  being
concluded,  the  lesser  mysteries,  or  mass  of
the  Catechumens,  commenced.  The  deacon
proclaimed  in  a  loud  voice,  “  Ne  quis  audi-
entium ,  ne  quis  infidelium,”  that  is,  “Let
none  who  are  simply  hearers,  and  let  no
infidels  be  present.”  All  then  who  had  not
acknowledged  their  faith  in  Christ  by  plac¬
ing  themselves  among  the  Catechumens,
and  all  Jews  and  Pagans,  were  caused  to
retire,  that  the  Mass  of  the  Catechumens
might  begin.  And  now,  for  better  security,
a  deacon  was  placed  at  the  men’s  door  and
a  sub-deacon  at  the  women’s,  for  the  dea¬
cons  were  the  door-keepers,  and,  in  fact,
received  that  name  in  the  Greek  church.
The  Mass  of  the  Catechumens  —  jyhich  con¬
sisted  almost  entirely  of  prayers,  with  the
Episcopal  benediction  —  was  then  per¬
formed.

This  part  of  the  service  having  been
concluded,  the  Catechumens  were  dismissed
by  the  deacons,  with  the  expression,  “  Cat¬
echumens,  depart  in  peace.”  The  Compe-
tentes,  however,  or  those  who  had  the
second  or  intermediate  degree,  remained
until  the  prayers  for  those  who  were  pos¬
sessed  of  evil  spirits,  and  the  supplications
for  themselves,  were  pronounced.  After
this,  they  too  were  dismissed,  and  none
now  remaining  in  the  church  but  the
Faithful,  the  Missa  Fidelium,  or  greater
mysteries,  commenced.

The  formula  of  dismission  used  by  the
deacon  on  this  occasion  was:  “Holy
things  for  the  holy,  let  the  dogs  depart,”
Sancta  sanctis,  foris  canes.

The  Faithful  then  all  repeated  the  creed,
which  served  as  an  evidence  that  no  in¬
truder  or  uninitiated  person  was  present;
because  the  creed  was  not  revealed  to  the
Catechumens,  but  served  as  a  password  to
prove  that  its  possessor  was  an  initiate.
After  prayers  had  been  offered  up,  —  which,
however,  differed  from  the  supplications  in
the  former  part  of  the  service,  by  the  in¬
troduction  of  open  allusions  to  the  most
abstruse  doctrines  of  the  church,  which
were  never  named  in  the  presence  of  the
Catechumens,  —  the  oblations  were  made.


226


DISCOVERY


DISPENSATIONS


and  the  Eucharistical  Sacrifice,  or  Lord’s
Supper,  was  celebrated.  Prayers  and  invo¬
cations  followed,  and  at  length  the  service
was  concluded,  and  the  assembly  was  dis¬
missed  by  the  benediction,  “  Depart  in
peace.”

Bingham  records  the  following  rites  as
having  been  concealed  from  the  Catechu¬
mens,  and  intrusted,  as  the  sacred  myste¬
ries,  only  to  the  Faithful :  the  manner  of
receiving  baptism  ;  the  ceremony  of  confir¬
mation;  the  ordination  of  priests;  the
mode  of  celebrating  the  Eucharist ;  the
liturgy,  or  divine  service;  and  the  doc¬
trine  of  the  Trinity,  the  creed,  and  the
Lord’s  prayer,  which  last,  however,  were
begun  to  be  explained  to  the  Competentes.

Such  was  the  celebrated  Discipline  of  the
Secret  in  the  early  Christian  church.  That
its  origin,  so  far  as  the  outward  form  was
concerned,  is  to  be  found  in  the  Mysteries
of  Paganism,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  as  has
been  thus  expressed  by  the  learned  Mos-
heiin :  “  Religion  having  thus,  in  both  its
branches,  the  speculative  as  well  as  the
practical,  assumed  a  twofold  character, —
the  one  public  or  common,  the  other  pri¬
vate  or  mysterious,— it  was  not  long  before
a  distinction  of  a  similar  kind  took  place
also  in  the  Christian  discipline  and  form
of  divine  •worship ;  for,  observing  that  in
Egypt,  as  well  as  in  other  countries,  the
heathen  worshippers,  in  addition  to  their
public  religious  ceremonies,  —  to  which
every  one  was  admitted  without  distinc¬
tion, —  had  certain  secret  and  most  sacred
rites,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of
‘  mysteries,’  and  at  the  celebration  of
which  none  but  persons  of  the  most  ap¬
proved  faith  and  discretion  were  permitted
to  be  present,  the  Alexandrian  Christians
first,  and  after  them  others,  were  beguiled
into  a  notion  that  they  could  not  do  better
than  make  the  Christian  discipline  accom¬
modate  itself  to  this  model.”

Discovery  of  the  Body.  See  Eu-
resis.

Discovery,  Tear  of  the.  “  Anno

Inventiouis,”  or  “  in  the  Year  of  the  Dis¬
covery,”  is  the  style  assumed  by  the  Royal
Arch  Masons,  in  commemoration  of  an
event  which  took  place  soon  after  the  com¬
mencement  of  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple
by  Zerubbabel.

Dispensation.  A  permission  to  do
that  which,  without  such  permission,  is
forbidden  by  the  Constitutions  and  usages
of  the  Order.

Du  Cange  ( Glossarium )  defines  a  dispen¬
sation  to  be  a  prudent  relaxation  of  a  gene¬
ral  law.  Provida  juris  communis  rdaxatio.
While  showing  how  much  the  ancient  ec¬
clesiastical  authorities  were  opposed  to  the
granting  of  dispensations,  since  they  pre¬


ferred  to  pardon  the  offence  after  the  law
had  been  violated,  rather  than  to  give  a
previous  license  for  its  violation,  he  adds,
“  but  however  much  the  Roman  Pontiffs
and  pious  Bishops  felt  of  reverence  for  the
ancient  Regulations,  they  were  often  com¬
pelled  to  depart  in  some  measure  from
them,  for  the  utility  of  the  church ;  and
this  milder  measure  of  acting  the  jurists
called  a  dispensation.”

This  power  to  dispense  with  the  provisions
of  law  in  particular  cases  appears  to  be  in¬
herent  in  the  Grand  Master;  because,  al¬
though  frequently  referred  to  in  the  old
Regulations,  it  always  is  as  if  it  were  a
power  already  in  existence,  and  never  by
way  of  a  new  grant.  There  is  no  record
of  any  Masonic  statute  or  constitutional
provision  conferring  this  prerogative  in  dis¬
tinct  words.  The  instances,  however,  in
which  this  prerogative  may  be  exercised
are  clearly  enumerated  in  various  places
of  the  Old  Constitutions,  so  that  there  can
be  no  difficulty  in  understanding  to  what
extent  the  prerogative  extends.

The  power  of  granting  dispensations  is
confided  to  the  Grand  Master,  or  his  repre¬
sentative,  but  should  not  be  exercised  ex¬
cept  on  extraordinary  occasions,  or  for  ex¬
cellent  reasons.  The  dispensing  power  is
confined  to  only  four  circumstances:  1.  A
Lodge  cannot  be  opened  and  held  unless  a
Warrant  of  Constitution  be  first  granted  by
the  Grand  Lodge ;  but  the  Grand  Master
may  issue  his  dispensation,  empowering  a
constitutional  number  of  brethren  to  open
and  hold  a  Lodge  until  the  next  communi¬
cation  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  At  this  com¬
munication,  the  dispensation  of  the  Grand
Master  is  either  revoked  or  confirmed.
A  Lodge  under  dispensation  is  not  per¬
mitted  to  be  represented,  nor  to  vote  in  the
Grand  Lodge.  2.  Not  more  than  five  can¬
didates  can  be  made  at  the  same  communi¬
cation  of  a  Lodge;  but  the  Grand  Master,
on  the  showing  of  sufficient  cause,  may  ex¬
tend  to  a  Lodge  the  privilege  of  making  as
many  more  as  he  may  think  proper.  3.
No  brother  can,  at  the  same  time,  belong
to  two  Lodges  within  three  miles  of  each
other.  But  the  Grand  Master  may  dis¬
pense  with  this  regulation  also.  4.  Every
Lodge  must  elect  and  install  its  officers  on
the  constitutional  night,  which,  in  most
Masonic  jurisdictions,  precedes  the  anni¬
versary  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist.  Should
it,  however,  neglect  this  duty,  or  should
any  officer  die,  or  be  expelled,  or  remove
permanently,  no  subsequent  election  or  in¬
stallation  can  take  place,  except  under  dis¬
pensation  of  the  Grand  Master.

Dispensation,  Dodges  under.
See  Lodges  under  Dispensation.
Dispensations  of  Religion.  An


DISPENSATIONS


DISPERSION


227


attempt  has  been  made  to  symbolize  the
Pagan,  the  Jewish,  and  the  Christian  dis-

Sensations  by  a  certain  ceremony  of  the
[aster’s  degree  which  dramatically  teaches
the  resurrection  of  the  body  and  the  im¬
mortality  of  the  soul.  The  reference  made
in  this  ceremony  to  portions  of  the  first,
second,  and  third  degrees  is  used  to  demon¬
strate  the  difference  of  the  three  dispensa¬
tions  in  the  reception  of  these  two  dogmas.
It  is  said  that  the  unsuccessful  effort  in  the
Entered  Apprentice’s  degree  refers  to  the
heathen  dispensation,  where  neither  the
resurrection  of  the  body  nor  the  immor¬
tality  of  the  soul  was  recognized ;  that  the
second  unsuccessful  effort  in  the  Fellow
Craft’s  degree  refers  to  the  Jewish  dispensa¬
tion,  where,  though  the  resurrection  of  the
body  was  unknown,  the  immortality  of  the
soul  was  dimly  hinted ;  and  that  the  final
and  successful  effort  in  the  Master’s  degree
symbolizes  the  Christian  dispensation,  in
which,  through  the  teachings  of  the  Lion
of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  both  the  resurrection
of  the  body  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul
were  clearly  brought  to  light.  This  sym¬
bolism,  which  was  the  invention  of  a  peri¬
patetic  lecturer  in  the  South  about  fifty
years  ago,  is  so  forced  and  fanciful  in  its
character,  that  it  did  not  long  survive  the
local  and  temporary  teachings  of  its  in¬
ventor,  and  is  only  preserved  here  as  an
instance  of  how  symbols,  like  metaphors,
may  sometimes  run  mad.

But  there  is  another  symbolism  of  the
three  degrees,  as  illustrating  three  dispen¬
sations,  which  is  much  older,  having  ori¬
ginated  among  the  lecture-makers  of  the
eighteenth  century,  which  for  a  long  time
formed  a  portion  of  the  authorized  ritual,
and  is  still  repeated  with  approbation  by
some  distinguished  writers.  In  this  the
three  degrees  are  said  to  be  symbols,  in  the
progressive  knowledge  which  they  impart
of  the  Patriarchal,  the  Mosaic,  and  the
Christian  dispensations.

The  first,  or  Entered  Apprentice’s  de¬
gree,  in  which  but  little  Masonic  light  is
communicated,  and  which,  indeed,  is  only
preparatory  and  introductory  to  the  two
succeeding  degrees,  is  said  to  symbolize  the
first,  or  Patriarchal  dispensation,  the  ear¬
liest  revelation,  where  the  knowledge  of
God  was  necessarily  imperfect,  his  wor¬
ship  only  a  few  simple  rites  of  devotion,
and  the  religious  dogmas  merely  a  general
system  of  morality.  The  second,  or  Fellow
Craft’s  degree,  is  symbolic  of  the  second  or
Mosaic  dispensation,  in  which,  while  there
were  still  many  imperfections,  there  was
also  a  great  increase  of  religious  knowl¬
edge,  and  a  nearer  approximation  to  divine
truth,  with  a  promise  in  the  future  of  a
better  theodicy.  But  the  third,  or  Master


Mason’s  degree,  which,  in  its  original  con¬
ception,  before  it  was  dismembered  by  the
innovations  of  the  Royal  Arch,  was  per¬
fect  and  complete  in  its  consummation  of
all  Masonic  light,  symbolizes  the  last,  or
Christian  dispensation,  where  the  great  and
consoling  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  to
eternal  life  is  the  crowning  lesson  taught
by  its  Divine  founder.  This  subject  is  very
fully  treated  by  the  Rev.  James  Watson,
in  an  address  delivered  at  Lancaster,
Eng.,  in  1795,  and  contained  in  Jones’s
Masonic  Miscellanies ,  p.  245 ;  better,  I  think,
by  him  than  even  by  Hutchinson.

Beautiful  as  this  symbolism  may  be,  and
appropriately  fitting  in  all  its  parts  to  the
laws  of  symbolic  science,  it  is  evident  that
its  origin  cannot  be  traced  farther  back
than  to  the  period  when  Masonry  was  first
divided  into  three  distinctive  degrees ;  nor
could  it  have  been  invented  later  than  the
time  when  Masonry  was  deemed,  if  not  an
exclusively  Christian  organization,  at  least
to  be  founded  on  and  fitly  illustrated  by
Christian  dogmas.  At  present,  this  sym¬
bolism,  though  preserved  in  the  specula¬
tions  of  such  Christian  writers  as  Hutchin¬
son  and  Oliver,  and  those  who  are  attached
to  their  peculiar  school,  finds  no  place  in
the  modern  cosmopolitan  rituals.  It  may
belong,  as  an  explanation,  to  the  history
of  Masonry,  but  can  scarcely  make  a  part
of  its  symbolism.

Dispersion  of  Mankind.  The

dispersion  of  mankind  at  the  tower  of  Ba¬
bel  and  on  the  plain  of  Shinar,  which  is
recorded  in  the  book  of  Genesis,  has  given
rise  to  a  Masonic  tradition  of  the  following
purport.  The  knowledge  of  the  great  truths
of  God  and  immortality  were  known  to
Noah,  and  by  him  communicated  to  his
immediate  descendants,  the  Noachidse  or
Noachites,  by  whom  the  true  worship  con¬
tinued  to  be  cultivated  for  some  time  after
the  subsidence  of  the  deluge ;  but  when  the
human  race  were  dispersed,  a  portion  lost
sight  of  the  divine  truths  which  had  been
communicated  to  them  from  their  common
ancestor,  and  fell  into  the  most  grievous  the¬
ological  errors,  corrupting  the  purity  of  the
worship  and  the  orthodoxy  of  the  religious
faith  which  they  had  primarily  received.

These  truths  were  preserved  in  their  in¬
tegrity  by  but  a  very  few  in  the  patriarchal
line,  while  still  fewer  were  enabled  to  re¬
tain  only  dim  and  glimmering  portions  of
the  true  light.

The  first  class  was  confined  to  the  direct
descendants  of  Noah,  and  the  second  was
to  be  found  among  the  priests  and  philoso¬
phers,  and,  perhaps,  still  later,  among
the  poets  of  the  heathen  nations,  and
among  those  whom  they  initiated  into  the
secrets  of  these  truths.


228


DISPUTES


DORIC


The  system  of  doctrine  of  the  former
class  has  been  called  by  Masonic  writers
the  “Pure  or  Primitive  Freemasonry”  of
antiquity,  and  that  of  the  latter  class  the
“Spurious  Freemasonry”  of  the  same  pe¬
riod.  These  terms  were  first  used  by  Dr.
Oliver,  and  are  intended  to  refer — the  word
pure  to  the  doctrines  taught  by  the  de¬
scendants  of  Noah  in  the  Jewish  line,  and
the  word  spurious  to  those  taught  by  his
descendants  in  the  heathen  or  Gentile  line.

Disputes.  The  spirit  of  all  the  An¬
cient  Charges  and  Constitutions  is,  that
disputes  among  Masons  should  be  settled
by  an  appeal  to  the  brethren,  to  whose
award  the  disputants  were  required  to  sub¬
mit.  Thus,  in  an  Old  Record  of  the  fif¬
teenth  century,  it  is  provided,  among  other
charges,  that  “  yf  any  discorde  schall  be  bi-
twene  hym  and  his  felows,  he  schall  abey
hyra  mekely  and  be  stylle  at  the  byddyng
of  his  Master  or  of  the  Wardeyne  of  his
Master,  in  his  Master’s  absens,  to  the  holy
day  folowyng,  and  that  he  accorde  then  at
the  dispocition  of  his  felows.”  A  similar
regulation  is  to  be  found  in  all  the  other
old  Charges  and  Constitutions,  and  is  con¬
tinued  in  operation  at  this  day  by  the
Charges  approved  in  1722,  which  express
the  same  idea  in  more  modern  language.

Distinctive  Title.  In  the  rituals,
all  Lodges  are  called  Lodges  of  St.  John,
but  every  Lodge  has  also  another  name  by
which  it  is  distinguished.  This  is  called
its  distinctive  title.  This  usage  is  preserved
in  the  diplomas  of  the  continental  Masons,
especially  the  French,  where  the  specific
name  of  the  Lodge  is  always  given  as  well
as  the  general  title  of  St.  John,  which  it
has  in  common  with  all  other  Lodges.
Thus,  a  diploma  issued  by  a  French  Lodge
whose  name  on  the  Register  of  the  Grand
Orient  would  perhaps  be  La  V6rite,  will
purport  to  have  been  issued  by  the  Lodge
of  St.  John,  under  the  distinctive  title  of
La  Verite,  “  Par  la  Loge  de  St.  Jean  sub  la
title  distinctive  de  la  Verity.”  The  expres¬
sion  is  never  used  in  English  or  American
diplomas.

Distress,  Sign  of.  See  Sign  of  Dis¬
tress.

District  Deputy  Grand  Master.

An  officer  appointed  to  inspect  old  Lodges,
consecrate  new  ones,  install  their  officers,
and  exercise  a  general  supervision  over  the
Fraternity  in  the  districts  where,  from  the
extent  of  the  jurisdiction,  the  Grand  Mas¬
ter  or  his  Deputy  cannot  conveniently  at¬
tend  in  person.  He  is  considered  as  a  Grand
officer,  and  as  the  representative  of  the
Grand  Lodge  in  the  district  in  which  he
resides.  In  England,  officers  of  this  de¬
scription  are  called  Provincial  Grand  Mas¬
ters.


District  Grand  Lodges.  In  the

Constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land,  “  Provincial  Grand  Lodges  abroad,”
that  is,  Grand  Lodges  in  colonies  or  foreign
countries,  are  called  District  Grand  Lodges.
But  the  title  of  Provincial  Grand  Lodges
is  most  commonly  used  in  actual  practice.

Documents,  Three  Oldest.  See
Krause.

Dog.  A  symbol  in  the  higher  degrees.

See  Cynocephalus.

Dolmen.  A  name  given  in  France  to
the  Celtic  stone  tables  termed  in  England
“  cromlechs.”

Dominican  Republic.  Masonry,

in  the  Dominican  Republic,  has  for  its
centre  the  National  Grand  Orient,  which
possesses  the  supreme  authority  and  which
practises  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite.  The  Grand  Orient  is  divided
into  a  National  Grand  Lodge,  under  which
are  all  the  Symbolic  Lodges;  a  sovereign
Grand  Chapter  General,  under  which  are
all  Chapters ;  and  a  Supreme  Council,  w hich
controls  the  higher  degrees  of  the  Rite.

Donats.  A  class  of  men  who  were  at¬
tached  to  the  Order  of  St.  John  of  Jeru¬
salem,  or  Knights  of  Malta.  They  did  not
take  the  vows  of  the  Order,  but  were  em¬
ployed  in  the  different  offices  of  the  con¬
vent  and  hospital.  In  token  of  their  con¬
nection  with  the  Order,  they  wore  what
was  called  the  demi-cross.  See  Knight  of
Malta.

Door.  Every  well  constructed  Lodge
room  should  be  provided  with  two  doors,
— one  on  the  left  hand  of  the  Senior  War¬
den,  communicating  with  the  preparation
room,  the  other  on  his  right  hand,  commu¬
nicating  with  the  Tiler’s  apartment.  The
former  of  these  is  called  the  inner  door,  and
is  under  the  charge  of  the  Senior  Deacon  ;
the  latter  is  called  the  outer  door,  and  is
under  {he  charge  of  the  Junior  Deacon.
In  a  well  furnished  Lodge,  each  of  these
doors  is  provided  with  two  knockers,  one
on  the  inside  and  the  other  on  the  outside;
and  the  outside  door  has  sometimes  a  small
aperture  in  the  centre  to  facilitate  commu¬
nications  between  the  Junior  Deacon  and
the  Tiler.  This,  however,  isa  modern  inno¬
vation,  and  I  very  much  doubt  its  propriety
and  expediency.  No  communication  ought
legally  to  be  held  between  the  inside  and
the  outside  of  the  Lodge  except  through
the  door,  which  should  be  opened  only  after
regular  alarm  duly  reported,  and  on  the
order  of  the  Worshipful  Master.

Doric  Order.  The  oldest  and  most
original  of  the  three  Grecian  orders.  It  is
remarkable  for  robust  solidity  in  the  col¬
umn,  for  massive  grandeur  in  the  entabla¬
ture,  and  for  harmonious  simplicity  in  its
construction.  J  he  distinguishing  charac-


DORMANT


DRAMATIC


229


teristic  of  this  order  is  the  want  of  a  base.
The  flutings  are  few,  large,  and  very  little
concave.  The  capital  has  no  astragal,  but
only  one  or  more  fillets,  which  separate  the
flutings  from  the  torus.  The  column  of
strength  which  supports  the  Lodge  is  of
the  Doric  order,  and  its  appropriate  situa¬
tion  and  symbolic  officer  are  in  the  West.
See  Orders  of  Architecture.

Dormant  Lodge.  A  Lodge  whose
Charter  has  not  been  revoked,  but  which
has  ceased  to  meet  and  work  for  a  long
time,  is  said  to  be  dormant.  It  can  be  re¬
stored  to  activity  only  by  the  authority  of
the  Grand  Master  or  the  Grand  Lodge  on
the  petition  of  some  of  its  members,  one
of  whom,  at  least,  ought  to  be  a  Past  Master.

Dormer.  In  the  Lectures,  according
to  the  present  English  system,  the  orna¬
ments  of  a  Master  Mason’s  Lodge  are  said
to  be  the  porch,  dormer,  and  stone  pave¬
ment.  The  dormer  is  the  window  which
is  supposed  to  give  light  to  the  Holy  of
Holies.  In  the  Glossary  of  Architecture,
a  dormer  is  defined  to  be  a  window
pierced  through  a  sloping  roof,  and  placed
in  a  small  gable  which  rises  on  the  side
of  the  roof.  This  symbol  is  not  preserved
in  the  American  system.

Dotage.  The  regulations  of  Masonry
forbid  the  initiation  of  an  old  man  in  his
dotage;  and  very  properly,  because  the  im¬
becility  of  his  mind  would  prevent  his
comprehension  of  the  truths  presented  to
him.

Doable  Cube.  A  cubical  figure,
whose  length  is  equal  to  twice  its  breadth
and  height.  Solomon’s  Temple  is  said  to
have  been  of  this  figure,  and  hence  it  has
sometimes  been  adopted  as  the  symbol  of
a  Masonic  Lodge.  Dr.  Oliver  [Diet.  Symb.
Mas.)  thus  describes  the  symbolism  of  the
double  cube:  “The  heathen  deities  were
many  of  them  represented  by  a  cubical
stone.  Pausanius  informs  us  that  a  cube
was  the  symbol  of  Mercury,  because,  like
the  cube,  he  represented  Truth.  In  Arabia,
a  black  stone  in  the  form  of  a  double  cube
was  reputed  to  be  possessed  of  many  occult
virtues.  Apollo  was  some  time  worshipped
under  the  symbol  of  a  square  stone;  and  it
is  recorded  that  when  a  fatal  pestilence
raged  at  Delphi,  the  oracle  was  consulted
as  to  the  means  proper  to  be  adopted  for
the  purpose  of  arresting  its  progress,  and
it  commanded  that  the  cube  should  be  dou¬
bled.  This  was  understood  by  the  priests
to  refer  to  the  altar,  which  was  of  a  cubical
form.  They  obeyed  the  injunction,  increas¬
ing  the  altitude  of  the  altar  to  its  prescribed
dimensions,  like  the  pedestal  in  a  Mason’s
Lodge,  and  the  pestilence  ceased.”

Double-Headed  Eagle.  See  Ea¬
gle,  Double- Headed.


Dove.  In  ancient  symbolism,  the  dove
represented  purity  and  innocence;  in  eccle-
siology,  it  is  a  symbol  of  the  Holy  Spirit.
In  Masonry,  the  dove  is  only  viewed  in  ref¬
erence  to  its  use  by  Noah  as  a  messenger.
Hence,  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
doves  are  the  jewels  of  the  Deacons,  because
these  officers  are  the  messengers  of  the
Masters  and  Wardens.  They  are  not  so
used  in  this  country.  In  an  honorary  or
side  degree  formerly  conferred  in  America,
and  called  the  “  Ark  and  Dove,”  that  bird
is  a  prominent  symbol.

Dracscke,  Johan  Heinrich
Dernhardt.  A  celebrated  pulpit  ora¬
tor  of  great  eloquence,  who  presided  over
the  Lodge  “ Oelzweig ,”  in  Bremen,  for  three
years,  and  whose  contributions  to  Masonic
literature  were  collected  and  published  in
1865,  by  A.  W.  Muller,  under  the  title  of
Bishop  Draseke  as  a  Mason.  Of  this  work
Findel  says  that  it  “contains  a  string  of
costly  pearls  full  of  Masonic  eloquence.”

Drake,  Francis,  M.  D.  Francis
Drake,  M.  D.,  F.  R.  S.,  a  celebrated  anti¬
quary  and  historian,  was  initiated  in  the
city  of  York  in  1725,  and,  as  Hughan  says,
“soon  made  his  name  felt  in  Masonry.”
His  promotion  was  rapid ;  for  in  the  same
year  he  was  chosen  Junior  Grand  Warden
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  York,  and  in  1726
delivered  an  address,  which  was  published
with  the  following  title :  “  A  Speech  deliv¬
ered  to  the  Worshipful  and  Ancient  Society
of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  at  a  Grand
Lodge  held  at  Merchants’  Hall,  in  the  city
of  York,  on  St.  John’s  Day,  December  the
27th,  1726.  The  Right  Worshipful  Charles
Bathurst,  Esq.,  Grand  Master.  By  the  Ju¬
nior  Grand  Warden.  Olim  meminisse  Juva-
bit.  York.”  This  address  was  so  much
esteemed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London,
that  it  caused  its  republication  in  1729.  In
this  work  Drake  makes  the  important  state¬
ment  that  the  first  Grand  Lodge  in  Eng¬
land  was  held  at  York  ;  and  that  while  it
recognizes  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand
Lodge  in  London  as  Grand  Master  of  Eng¬
land,  it  claims  that  its  own  Grand  Master
is  Grand  Master  of  all  England.

Dramatic  literature  of  Ma¬
sonry.  Freemasonry  has  frequently  sup¬
plied  play-writers  with  a  topic  for  the  ex¬
ercise  of  their  genius.  Kloss  ( Bibliog .,  p.
300,)  gives  the  titles  of  no  less  than  forty-
one  plays  of  which  Freemasonry  has  been
the  subject.  The  earliest  Masonic  play  is
noticed  by  Thory  [Fond.  G.  0.,  p.  360,)  as
having  been  performed  at  Paris,  in  1739,
under  the  title  of  Les  Frimagons.  Editions
of  it  were  subsequently  published  at  Lou¬
don,  Brunswick,  and  Strasburg.  In  1741,
we  have  Das  Geheimniss  der  Frimaurer  at
Frankfort  and  Leipsic.  France  and  Ger-


230


DRESDEN


DRUIDICAL


many  made  many  other  contributions  to
the  Masonic  drama.  Even  Denmark  sup¬
plied  one  in  1745,  and  Italy  in  1785.  The
English  dramatists  give  us  only  a  panto¬
mime,  Harlequin  Freemason,  which  was
brought  out  at  Covent  Garden  in  1781,
and  Solomon's  Temple,  an  oratorio.  Tem-
plarism  has  not  been  neglected  by  the
dramatists.  Kalchberg,  in  1788,  wrote  Die
Te/npleherren,  a  dramatic  poem  in  five  acts.
Odon  de  Saint- Amand,  Grand  MaUre  des
Templiers,  a  melo-drama  in  three  acts,  wa3
performed  at  Paris  in  1806.  Jacques  Molai,
a  melo-drama,  was  published  at  Paris  in
1807,  and  La  Mart  de  Jacques  Molai,  a
tragedy,  in  1812.  Some  of  the  plays  on
F reemasonry  were  intended  to  do  honor  to
the  Order,  and  many  to  throw  ridicule  upon
it.  From  the  specimens  I  have  seen,  I  am
not  inclined  to  regret  that  the  catalogue  of
the  Masonic  drama  is  not  more  copious.

Dresden,  Congress  of.  A  General
Congress  of  the  Lodges  of  Saxony  was
held  in  Dresden,  where  the  representatives
of  twelve  Lodges  were  present.  In  this
Congress  it  was  determined  to  recognize
only  the  Masonry  of  St.  John,  and  to  con¬
struct  a  National  Grand  Lodge.  Accord¬
ingly,  on  September  27,  1811,  the  National
Grand  Lodge  of  Saxony  was  established  in
the  city  of  Dresden,  which  was  soon  joined
by  all  the  Saxon  Lodges,  with  the  excep¬
tion  of  one  in  Leipsic.  Although  it  recog¬
nizes  only  the  Symbolic  degrees,  it  permits
great  freedom  in  the  selection  of  a  ritual;
and,  accordingly,  some  of  its  Lodges  work
in  the  Rite  of  Fessler,  and  others  in  the
Rite  of  Berlin.

Dress  of  a  Mason.  See  Clothed.

Drop  Cloth.  A  part  of  the  furniture
used  in  the  ceremony  of  initiation  into  the
third  degree.  It  should  be  made  of  very
strong  material,  with  a  looped  rope  at  each
corner  and  one  in  the  middle  of  each  side,
by  which  it  may  be  securely  held.

Druidical  Mysteries.  The  Druids
were  a  sacred  order  of  priests  who  existed
in  Britain  and  Gaul,  but  whose  mystical
rites  were  practised  in  most  perfection  in
the  former  country,  where  the  isle  of  An-
glesea  was  considered  as  their  principal
seat.  Higgins  thinks  that  they  were  also
found  in  Germany,  but  against  this  opinion
we  have  the  positive  statement  of  Caesar.

The  meanings  given  to  the  word  have
been  very  numerous,  and  most  of  them
wholly  untenable.  The  Romans,  seeing
that  they  worshipped  in  groves  of  oak.
because  that  tree  was  peculiarly  sacred
among  them,  derived  their  name  from  the
Greek  word,  Apvf,  drus ;  thus  absurdly
seeking  the  etymology  of  a  word  of  an
older  language  in  one  comparatively  mod¬
ern.  Their  derivation  would  have  been


more  reasonable  had  they  known  that  in
Sanscrit  drama  is  an  oak,  from  dru,  wood.
It  has  also  been  traced  to  the  Hebrew  with
equal  incorrectness,  for  the  Druids  were
not  of  the  Semitic  race.  Its  derivation  is
rather  to  be  sought  in  the  Celtic  language.
The  Gaelic  word  Dmiah  signifies  a  holy  or
wise  man;  in  a  bad  sense,  a  magician ;  and
this  we  may  readily  trace  to  the  Aryan
druh,  applied  to  the  spirit  of  night  or  dark¬
ness,  whence  we  have  the  Zend  dru,  a  ma¬
gician.  Druidism  was  a  mystical  profes¬
sion,  and  in  the  olden  time  mystery  and
magic  were  always  confounded.  Vailencey
(Coll.  Feb.  Hib.,  iii.  503,)  says:  “Welsh,
Drud ,  a  Druid,  i.  e.  the  absolver  or  remitter
of  sins;  so  the  Irish  Drui,  a  Druid,  most
certainly  is  from  the  Persic  duru,  a  good
and  holy  man  ;  ”  and  Ousely  ( Coll.  Orient.,
iv.  302,)  adds  to  this  the  Arabic  dari,  which
means  a  wise  man.  Bosworth  (A.  S.  Did.)
gives  dry,  pronounced  dru,  as  the  Anglo-
Saxon  for  “  a  magician,  sorcerer,  druid.”
I  think  that  with  the  old  Celts  the  Druids
occupied  the  same  place  as  the  Magi  did
with  the  old  Persians.

Druidism  was  divided  into  three  orders
or  degrees,  which  were,  beginning  with  the
lowest,  the  Bards,  the  Prophets,  and  the
Druids.  Higgins  thinks  that  the  prophets
were  the  lowest  order,  but  he  admits  that
it  is  not  generally  allowed.  The  constitu¬
tion  of  the  Order  was  in  many  respects  like
that  of  the  Freemasons.  In  every  country
there  was  an  Arch-Druid  in  whom  all  au¬
thority  was  placed.  In  Britain  it  is  said  that
there  were  under  him  three  arch-flamens  or
priests,  and  twenty-five  flamens.  There
was  an  annual  assembly  for  the  administra¬
tion  of  justice  and  the  making  of  laws,  and,
besides,  four  quarterly  meetings,  which  took
place  on  the  days  when  the  sun  reached
his  equinoctial  and  solstitial  points.  The
latter  two  would  very  nearly  correspond  at
this  time  with  the  festivals  of  St.  John  the
Baptist  and  St.  John  the  Evangelist.  It
was  not  lawful  to  commit  their  ceremonies
or  doctrines  to  writing,  and  Csesar  says
(Bell.  Gall.,  vi.  13,)  that  they  used  the
Greek  letters,  which  was,  of  course,  as  a
cipher  ;  but  Higgins  (p.  90)  says  that  one
of  the  Irish  Ogum  alphabets,  which  Toland
calls  secret  vrriting,  “  was  the  original,  sa¬
cred,  and  secret  character  of  the  Druids.”

The  places  of  worship,  which  were  also
places  of  initiation,  were  of  various  forms:
circular,  because  a  circle  was  an  emblem
of  the  universe ;  or  oval,  in  allusion  to  the
mundane  egg,  from  which,  according  to  the
Egyptians,  our  first  parents  issued ;  or  ser¬
pentine,  because  a  serpent  was  a  symbol  of
Hu,  the  druidical  Noah;  or  winged,  to
represent  the  motion  of  the  Divine  Spirit ;
i  or  cruciform,  because  a  cross  was  the  em-


DRUSES


DUALISM


231


blem  of  regeneration.  Their  only  covering
was  the  clouded  canopy,  because  they  deemed
it  absurd  to  confine  the  Omnipotent  be¬
neath  a  roof;  and  they  were  constructed
of  embankments  of  earth,  and  of  unhewn
stones,  unpolluted  with  a  metal  tool.  Nor
was  any  one  permitted  to  enter  their  sacred
retreats,  unless  he  bore  a  chain.

The  ceremony  of  initiation  into  the
Druidical  Mysteries  required  much  pre¬
liminary  mental  preparation  and  physical
purification.  The  aspirant  was  clothed
with  the  three  sacred  colors,  white,  blue,
and  green;  white  as  the  symbol  of  Light,
blue  of  Truth,  and  green  of  Hope.  When
the  rites  of  initiation  were  passed,  the  tri¬
colored  robe  was  changed  for  one  of  green ;
in  the  second  degree,  the  candidate  was
clothed  in  blue;  and  having  surmounted
all  the  dangers  of  the  third,  and  arrived  at
the  summit  of  perfection,  he  received  the
red  tiara  and  flowing  mantle  of  purest  white.
The  ceremonies  were  numerous,  the  physi¬
cal  proofs  painful,  and  the  mental  trials
appalling.  They  commenced  in  the  first
degree,  with  placing  the  aspirant  in  the
astos,  bed  or  coffin,  where  his  symbolical
eath  was  represented,  and  they  terminated
in  the  third,  by  his  regeneration  or  restora¬
tion  to  life  from  the  womb  of  the  giantess
Ceridwin,  and  the  committal  of  the  body
of  the  newly  born  to  the  waves  in  a  small
boat,  symbolical  of  the  ark.  The  result
was,  generally,  that  he  succeeded  in  reach¬
ing  the  safe  landing-place,  but  if  his  arm
was  weak,  or  his  heart  failed,  death  was  the
almost  inevitable  consequence.  If  he  re¬
fused  the  trial  through  timidity,  he  was
contemptuously  rejected,  and  declared  for¬
ever  ineligible  to  participate  in  the  sacred
rites.  But  if  he  undertook  it  and  suc¬
ceeded,  he  was  joyously  invested  with  all
the  privileges  of  Druidism.

The  doctrines  of  the  Druids  were  the
same  as  those  entertained  by  Pythagoras.
They  taught  the  existence  of  one  Supreme
Being;  a  future  slate  of  rewards  and  pun¬
ishments;  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and
a  metempsychosis;  and  the  object  of  their
mystic  rites  was  to  communicate  these  doc¬
trines  in  symbolic  language,  an  object  and
a  method  common  alike  to  Druidism,  to  the
Ancient  Mysteries  and  to  Modern  Free¬
masonry.

Druses.  A  sect  of  mystic  religionists
who  inhabit  Mounts  Lebanon  and  Anti-
Lebanon,  in  Syria.  They  settled  there
about  the  tenth  century,  and  are  said  to
be  a  mixture  of  Cuthites  or  Kurds,  Mardi
Arabs,  and  possibly  of  Crusaders;  all  of
whom  were  added,  by  subsequent  immigra¬
tions,  to  the  original  stock  to  constitute  the
present  or  modern  race  of  Druses.  Their
religion  is  a  heretical  compound  of  Juda¬


ism,  Christianity,  and  Mohammedism;  the
last  of  which,  greatly  modified,  predomi¬
nates  in  their  faith.  They  have  a  regular
order  of  priesthood,  the  office  being  filled
by  persons  consecrated  for  the  purpose,
comprising  principally  the  emirs  and
sheiks,  who  form  a  secret  organization  di¬
vided  into  several  degrees,  keep  the  sacred
books,  and  hold  secret  religious  assemblies.
Their  sacred  books  are  written  in  anti¬
quated  Arabic.  The  Druses  are  divided
into  three  classes  or  degrees,  according  to
religious  distinctions.  To  enable  one  Druse
to  recognize  another,  a  system  of  passwords
is  adopted,  without  an  interchange  of  which
no  communication  is  made  that  may  give
an  idea  of  their  religious  tenets.  (Tien’s
Druse  Religion  Unveiled.)

Dr.  Clarke  tells  us  in  his  Travels  that  “  one
class  of  the  Druses  are  to  the  rest  what  the
initiated  are  to  the  profane,  and  are  called
Okkals,  which  means  spiritualists;  and
they  consider  themselves  superior  to  their
countrymen.  They  have  various  degrees
of  initiation.”

Col.  Churchill,  in  his  Ten  Years'  Resi¬
dence  on  Mount  Lebanon,  tells  us  that
among  this  singular  people  there  is  an
order  having  many  similar  customs  to  the
Freemasons.  It  requires  a  twelvemonth’s
probation  previous  to  the  admission  of  a
member.  Both  sexes  are  admissible.  In
the  second  year  the  novice  assumes  the  dis¬
tinguishing  mark  of  the  white  turban,  and
afterwards,  by  degrees,  is  allowed  to  par¬
ticipate  in  the  whole  of  the  mysteries.
Simplicity  of  attire,  self-denial,  temperance,
and  irreproachable  moral  conduct  are  es¬
sential  to  admission  to  the  order.

All  of  these  facts  have  led  to  the  theory,
—  based,  however,  I  think,  on  insufficient
grounds,  —  that  the  Druses  are  an  offshoot
from  the  early  Freemasons,  and  that  their
connection  with  the  latter  is  derived  from
the  Crusaders,  who,  according  to  the  same
theory,  are  supposed  to  have  acquired  their
Freemasonry  during  their  residence  in  Pal¬
estine.  Some  writers  go  so  far  as  to  say
that  the  degree  of  Prince  of  Lebanon,  the
twenty-second  in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite,  refers  to  the  ancestors  of  these
mystical  mountaineers  in  Syria.

Duad.  The  number  two  in  the  Pytha¬
gorean  system  of  numbers.  See  Two.

Dualism.  In  the  old  mythologies,
there  was  a  doctrine  which  supposed  the
world  to  have  been  always  governed  by  two
antagonistic  principles,  distinguished  as
the  good  and  the  evil  principle.  This  doc¬
trine  pervaded  all  the  Oriental  religions.

Thus  in  the  system  of  Zoroaster  we  have
Ahriman  and  Ormuzd,  and  in  the  Hebrew
cosmogony  we  find  the  Creator  and  the  Ser¬
pent.  There  has  been  a  remarkable  devel-


232


DUB


DUNCKERLEY


opment  of  this  system  in  the  three  degrees
of  Symbolic  Masonry,  which  everywhere
exhibit  in  their  organization,  their  symbol¬
ism,  and  their  design,  the  pervading  influ¬
ences  of  this  principle  of  dualism.  Thus,
in  the  first  degree,  there  is  Darkness  over¬
come  by  Light;  in  the  second,  Ignorance
dispersed  by  Knowledge,  and  in  the  third,
Death  conquered  by  Eternal  Life.

Dub.  In  the  ancient  ceremonies  of
chivalry,  a  knight  was  made  by  giving  him
three  strokes  on  the  neck  with  the  flat  end
of  the  sword,  and  he  was  then  said  to  be
“  dubbed  a  knight.”  Dubbing  is  from  the
Saxon,  dubban,  to  strike  with  a  blow.  Sir
Thomas  Smith  (Eng.  Commonwealth),  who
wrote  in  the  sixteenth  century,  says :
“  And  when  any  man  is  made  a  knight,  he,
kneeling  down,  is  strooken  of  the  prince,
with  his  sword  naked,  upon  the  back  or
shoulder,  the  prince  saying,  Sue  or  sois  chev¬
alier  au  nom  de  Dieu,  and  (in  times  past)
they  added  St.  George,  and  at  his  arising
the  prince  saveth,  Avancey .  This  is  the
manner  of  dubbing  of  knights  at  this  pres¬
ent  ;  and  that  terme  dubbing  was  the  old
terme  in  this  point,  and  not  creation.”

Due  Hast  and  West.  A  Lodge  is
said  to  be  situated  due  East  and  West  for
reasons  which  have  varied  at  different
periods  in  the  ritual  and  lectures.  See
Orientation.

Due  Examination.  That  sort  of
examination  which  is  correct  and  pre¬
scribed  by  law.  It  is  one  of  the  three
modes  of  proving  a  strange  brother ;  the
other  two  being  strict  trial  and  lawful  in¬
formation.  See  Vouching.

Due  Form.  When  the  Grand  Lodge
is  opened,  or  any  other  Masonic  ceremony
performed,  by  the  Deputy  Grand  Master  in
the  absence  of  the  Grand  Master,  it  is  said
to  be  done  in  due  form.  Subordinate
Lodges  are  always  said  to  be  opened  and
closed  in  due  form.  It  is  derived  from  the
French  word  du,  and  that  from  devoir,  “to
owe,”  —  that  which  is  owing  or  ought  to  be
done.  Due  form  is  the  form  in  which  au
act  ought  to  be  done  to  be  done  rightly.
French :  En  due  forme.

Due  Guard.  A  mode  of  recognition
which  derives  its  name  from  its  object,
which  is  to  duly  guard  the  person  using
it  in  reference  to  his  obligations,  and  the
penalty  for  their  violation.  The  Due
Guard  is  an  Americanism,  and  of  compara¬
tively  recent  origin,  being  unknown  to  the
English  and  continental  systems.  In  some
of  the  old  rituals  of  the  date  of  1757,  the
expression  is  used,  but  only  as  referring  to
what  is  now  called  the  Sign.

Duelling.  Duelling  has  always  been
considered  a  Masonic  crime,  and  most  of
the  Grand  Lodges  have  enacted  statutes  by


which  Masons  who  engage  in  duels  with
each  other  are  subject  to  expulsion.  The
Monde  Magonnique  (May,  1858,)  gives  the
following  correct  view  on  this  subject:  “A
Freemason  who  allows  himself  to  be  in¬
volved  in  a  duel,  and  who  possesses  not
sufficient  discretion  to  be  able  to  make
reparation  without  cowardice,  and  without
having  recourse  to  this  barbarous  extrem¬
ity,  destroys  by  that  impious  act  the  con¬
tract  which  binds  him  to  his  brethren.  His
sword  or  his  pistol,  though  it  may  seem  to
spare  his  adversary,  still  commits  a  mur¬
der,  for  it  destroys  his  brothers  —  from  that
time  fraternity  no  longer  exists  for  him.”

Dues.  The  payment  of  annual  dues
by  a  member  to  his  Lodge  is  a  compara¬
tively  modern  custom,  and  one  that  cer¬
tainly  did  not  exist  before  the  revival  of
1717.  As  previous  to  that  period,  accord¬
ing  to  Preston,  Lodges  received  no  war¬
rants,  but  a  sufficient  number  of  brethren
meeting  together  were  competent  to  prac¬
tise  the  rites  of  Masonry,  and  as  soon  as
the  special  business  which  called  them
together  had  been  accomplished,  they  sepa¬
rated,  there  could  have  been  no  permanent
organization  of  Speculative  Masons,  and  no
necessity  for  contributions  to  constitute  a
Lodge  fund.  Dues  must  therefore  have
been  unknown  except  in  the  Lodges  of
Operative  Masons,  which,  as  we  find,  espe¬
cially  in  Scotland,  had  a  permanent  exist¬
ence.  There  is,  accordingly,  no  regulation
in  any  of  the  old  Constitutions  for  the  pay¬
ment  of  dues.  It  is  not  a  general  Masonic
duty,  in  which  the  Mason  is  affected  to  the
whole  of  the  Craft,  but  an  arrangement
between  himself  and  his  Lodge,  with  which
the  Grand  Lodge  ought  not  to  interfere.
As  the  payment  of  dues  is  not  a  duty  owing
to  the  Craft  in  general,  so  the  non-payment
of  them  is  not  an  offence  against  the  Craft,
but  simply  against  his  Lodge,  the  only  pun¬
ishment  for  which  should  be  striking  from
the  roll  or  discharge  from  membership.
It  is  now  the  almost  universal  opinion  of
Masonic  jurists  that  suspension  or  expul¬
sion  from  the  Order  is  a  punishment  that
should  never  be  inflicted  lor  non-payment
of  dues.

Dumbness.  Although  the  faculty  of
speech  is  not  one  of  the  five  human  senses,
it  is  important  as  the  medium  of  communi¬
cating  instruction,  admonition,  or  reproof,
and  the  person  who.  does  not  possess  it  is
unfitted  to  perform  the  most  important  du¬
ties  of  life.  Hence  dumbness  disqualifies  a
candidate  for  Masonic  initiation.

Dummy.  A  word  used  in  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Minnesota  to  signify  what  is
more  usually  called  a  substitute  in  the  Royal
Arch  degree.

Dunckerley,  Thomas.  No  one,


DUNCKERLEY


DUNCKERLEY


233


among  the  Masons  of  England,  occupied  a
more  distinguished  position  or  played  a
more  important  part  in  the  labors  of  the
Craft  duri  ng  the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth
century  than  Thomas  Dunckerley,  whose
private  life  was  as  romantic  as  his  Masonic
was  honorable.

Thomas  Dunckerley  was  born  in  the
city  of  London  on  the  23d  of  October,

1724.  He  was  the  reputed  son  of  Mr. -

and  Mrs.  Mary  Dunckerley,  but  really
owed  his  birth  to  a  personage  of  a  much
higher  rank  in  life,  being  the  natural  son
of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  afterwards  George

II.,  to  whom  he  bore,  as  his  portrait
shows,  a  striking  resemblance.  It  was
not  until  after  his  mother’s  death  that  he
became  acquainted  with  the  true  history
of  his  birth ;  so  that  for  more  than  half  of
his  life  this  son  of  a  king  occupied  a  very
humble  position  on  the  stage  of  the  world,
and  was  sometimes  even  embarrassed  with
the  pressure  of  poverty  and  distress.

At  the  age  of  ten  he  entered  the  navy,
and  continued  in  the  service  for  twenty-six
years,  acquiring,  by  his  intelligence  and
uniformly  good  conduct,  the  esteem  and
commendation  of  all  his  commanders.  But
having  no  personal  or  family  interest,  he
never  attained  to  any  higher  rank  than
that  of  a  gunner.  During  all  this  time,
except  at  brief  intervals,  he  was  absent
from  England  on  foreign  service.

He  returned  to  his  native  country  in
January,  17G0,  to  find  that  his  mother  had
died  a  few  days  before,  and  that  on  her
death-bed  she  had  made  a  solemn  declara¬
tion,  accompanied  by  such  details  as  left
no  possible,  doubt  of  its  truth,  that  Thomas
was  the  illegitimate  son  of  King  George

II.,  born  while  he  was  Prince  of  Wales.
The  fact  of  the  birth  had,  however,  never
been  communicated  by  the  mother  to  the
prince,  and  George  II.  died  without  know¬
ing  that  he  had  such  a  son  living.

Dunckerley,  in  the  account  of  the  affair
which  he  left  among  his  posthumous  pa¬
pers,  says :  “  This  information  gave  me
great  surprise  and  much  uneasiness;  and
as  I  was  obliged  to  return  immediately  to
my  duty  on  board  of  the  Vanguard,  I  made
it  known  to  no  person  at  that  time  but
Captain  Swanton.  He  said  that  those  who
did  not  know  me  could  look  on  it  to  be
nothing  more  than  a  gossip’s  story.  We
were  then  bound  a  second  time  to  Quebec,
and  Captain  Swanton  did  promise  me  that
on  our  return  to  England  he  would  en¬
deavor  to  get  me  introduced  to  the  king,
and  that  he  would  give  me  a  character;
but  when  we  came  back  to  England  the
king  was  dead.”

Dunckerley  had  hoped  that  his  case
would  have  been  laid  before  hia  royal
2  E


father,  and  that  the  result  would  have
been  an  appointment  equal  to  his  birth.
But  the  frustration  of  these  hopes  by  the
death  of  the  king  seems  to  have  discour¬
aged  him,  and  no  efforts  appear  for  some
time  to  have  been  made  by  him  or  his
friends  to  communicate  the  facts  to  George

III.,  who  had  succeeded  to  the  throne.

In  1761  he  again  left  England  as  a  gun¬
ner  in  Lord  Anson’s  fleet,  and  did  not  re¬
turn  until  1764,  at  which  time,  finding
himself  embarrassed  with  a  heavy  debt,
incurred  in  the  expenses  of  his  family,  (for
he  had  married  in  early  life,  in  the  year
1744,)  knowing  no  person  who  could  au¬
thenticate  the  story  of  his  birth,  and  seeing
no  probability  of  gaining  access  to  the  ear
of  the  king,  he  sailed  in  a  merchant  vessel
for  the  Mediterranean.  He  had  previously
been  granted  superannuation  in  the  navy
in  consequence  of  his  long  services,  and
received  a  small  pension,  the  principal  part
of  which  he  left  for  the  support  of  his  family
during  his  absence.

But  the  romantic  story  of  his  birth  began
to  be  publicly  known  and  talked  about,  and
in  1766  attracted  the  attention  of  several
persons  of  distinction,  who  endeavored,  but
without  success,  to  excite  the  interest  of
the  Princess  Dowager  of  Wales  in  his  be¬
half.

In  1767,  however,  the  declaration  of  his
mother  was  laid  before  the  king,  who  was
George  III.,  the  grandson  of  his  father.
It  made  an  impression  on  him,  and  inquiry
into  his  previous  character  and  conduct 1
having  proved  satisfactory,  on  May  7, 1767,
the  king  ordered  Dunckerley  to  receive  a
pension  of  £100,  which  was  subsequently
increased  to  £800,  together  with  a  suite  of
apartments  in  Hampton  Court  Palace.  He
also  assumed,  and  was  permitted  to  bear,
the  royal  arms,  with  the  distinguishing
badge  of  the  bend  sinister,  and  adopted  as
his  motto  the  appropriate  words  “  Fato  non
merito.”  In  his  familiar  correspondence,
and  in  his  book-plates,  he  used  the  name
of  “  Fitz-George.”

In  1770  he  became  a  student  of  law,  and
in  1774  was  called  to  the  bar;  but  his  fond¬
ness  for  an  active  life  prevented  him  from
ever  making  much  progress  in  the  legal
profession.

Dunckerley  died  at  Portsmouth  in  the
year  1795,  at  the  ripe  age  of  seventy -one;
but  his  last  years  were  embittered  by  the
misconduct  of  his  son,  whose  extravagance
and  dissolute  conduct  necessarily  afflicted
the  mind  while  it  straitened  the  means  of
the  unhappy  parent.  Every  effort  to  re¬
claim  him  proved  utterly  ineffectual ;  and
on  the  death  of  his  father,  no  provision
being  left  for  his  support,  he  became  a
vagrant,  living  for  the  most  part  on  Ma-


234


DUNCKERLEY


DUNCKERLEY


sonic  charity.  At  last  he  became  a  brick¬
layer’s  laborer,  and  was  often  seen  ascend¬
ing  a  ladder  with  a  hod  on  his  shoulders.
His  misfortunes  and  his  misconduct  at
length  found  an  end,  and  the  grandson  of
a  king  of  England  died  a  pauper  in  a  cellar
of  St.  Giles.

The  Masonic  career  of  Dunckerley,  if
less  remarkable  than  his  domestic  life,  is
more  interesting  to  the  Freemason.  There
is  no  record  of  the  exact  time  of  his  recep¬
tion  into  the  Order;  but  it  must  have  been
not  long  before  1757,  as  he  in  that  year  de¬
livered  an  address,  as  we  should  now  call
it,  before  the  Lodges  of  Plymouth,  which
was  published  at  the  time  under  the  title
of  “The  Light  and  Truth  of  Masonry  Ex¬
plained,  being  the  Substance  of  a  Charge
Delivered  at  Plymouth  in  1757.”  In  the
title  of  this  production  he  styles  himself
simply  a  “Master  Mason,”  showing  that
he  had  not  been  long  enough  in  the  Order
to  have  obtained  official  position,  and  in
the  body  of  the  charge  he  apologizes  for
the  apparent  presumption  of  one  “  who  had
been  so  few  years  a  Mason.”  It  is  probable
that  he  was  initiated  about  the  year  1755,
and,  as  he  was  at  that  time  in  the  navy,  in
one  of  the  Lodges  of  Plymouth,  which  was
then,  as  now,  frequented  by  vessels  of  war.
In  this  charge,  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  a
prayer,  written  by  Dunckerley,  appears  for
the  first  time,  which,  slightly  abridged,  has
ever  since  been  used  in  all  English  and
American  Lodges  at  the  initiation  of  a  can¬
didate.

Oliver  says  that  shortly  after  his  return
to  England  he  wras  elected  the  Master  of  a
Lodge.  This  must  have  been  in  the  year
1766  or  1767 ;  for  in  the  latter  year  he  re¬
ceived  from  Lord  Blanev,  the  Grand  Mas¬
ter,  the  deputation  for  Provincial  Grand
Master  of  Hampshire,  which,  I  suppose,
would  scarcely  have  been  given  him  if  he
had  not  “  passed  the  chair.”  Preston  speaks
of  his  “  indefatigable  assiduity  ”  in  the  dis¬
charge  of  the  duties  of  the  office,  and  of  the
considerable  progress  of  Masonry  in  the
province  through  his  instrumentality.  He
was  soon  after  appointed  to  the  superin¬
tendency  of  the  Lodges  in  Dorsetshire,
Essex,  Gloucestershire,  Somersetshire,  and
Herefordshire.  And  some  years  afterwards,
the  Grand  Lodge,  in  grateful  testimony  of
his  zeal  in  the  cause  of  Masonry,  resolved
that  he  should  rank  as  a  Past  Senior  Grand
Warden,  and  in  all  processions  take  place
next  the  present  Senior  Grand  Warden  for
the  time  being.  During  the  rest  of  his  life
Dunckerley  received  many  evidences  of  the
high  esteem  in  which  he  was  held  by  the
Masonic  authorities  of  the  day,  and  at  the
time  of  his  death  was  occupying  the  follow¬
ing  prominent  positions,  in'addition  to  that


of  Provincial  Grand  Master,  which  ap¬
pointment  he  held  from  the  Prince  of
Wales,  viz.,  Grand  Superintendent  and
Past  Grand  Master  of  Royal  Arch  Masons
of  Bristol  and  several  counties,  appointed
by  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  and  Supreme
Grand  Master  of  the  Knights  of  Rosa  Cru-
cis,  Templars,  and  Kadosh,  under  Prince
Edward,  afterwards  Duke  of  Kent.  His
royal  kinsmen  did  not  neglect  his  claims  to
patronage.

But  far  higher  than  any  of  these  titles
and  offices,  and  of  far  more  lasting  impor¬
tance  to  the  Craft,  was  the  position  occupied
by  Dunckerley  as  an  instructor  of  the
Lodges,  and  a  reformer,  or  at  least  a  re¬
modeller,  of  the  system  of  lectures.  To
these  duties  he  was  called  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  which  authorized  him
to  construct  a  new  code  of  lectures,  a  care¬
ful  revision  of  the  existing  ritual,  and  a
collation  of  all  ancient  formulas.

For  this  task  he  was  pre-eminently  quali¬
fied.  Possessed  of  a  fair  share  of  learning,
and  imbued  with  a  philosophical  spirit,  he
was  prepared  to  amplify  the  existing  sys¬
tem  of  Martin  Clare  by  the  addition  of
much  new  symbolism,  and  the  improve¬
ment  of  that  which  had  already  been  in¬
troduced  by  his  predecessor.  He  was  also
liberal  in  his  views,  and  not  partaking  of
the  prejudices  then  so  active  against  what
were  called  the  innovations  of  Dermott,
he  did  not  hesitate  to  avail  himself  of  his
labors,  as  that  schismatic  had  previously
not  hesitated  to  profit  by  the  suggestions
of  the  Chevalier  Ramsay.  Oliver  says,
that  he  often  visited  the  Lodges  of  the
“  Ancients,”  for  the  purpose  of  ascertain¬
ing  what  were  the  essential  differences
between  the  two  systems,  and  of  that  which
was  good  he  culled  the  best,  and  trans¬
planted  it  into  the  workings  of  the  legiti¬
mate  Grand  Lodge.

The  results  were  not  evanescent,  but  are
felt  even  in  the  ritual  of  the  present  day.
The  most  important  was  that  which  af¬
fected  the  third  degree.  Dunckerley  re¬
constructed  the  Royal  Arch  of  Dermott,
and  introduced  it  into  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England ;  not,  however,  without  opposition,
which  was  only  overcome,  Oliver  says,  by
the  patronage  of  the  Duke  of  Clarence,
and  his  own  personal  influence.  By  this
innovation,  the  true  Word,  which  had
hitherto  been  a  part  of  the  Master’s  degree,
was  transferred  to  the  Royal  Arch,  and  the
third  degree  was  made  incomplete,  and  re¬
quired  to  be  supplemented  by  a  higher  one,
which  should  supply  its  deficiency.  The
Master’s  degree,  as  now  given  in  England
and  America,  differs  very  considerably  from
that  which  was  left  by  Martin  Clare,  and
is  indebted  for  its  present  organization  to


DUNCKERLEY


EAGLE


235


the  labors  of  Dunckerley.  It  might,  indeed,
be  properly  called  Dunckerlev’s  degree.
Dunckerley  also  introduced  into  his  system
of  lectures  some  new  symbols.  Thus  to
him  is  ascribed  the  adoption  of  the  “  lines
parallel,”  as  a  symbol  of  the  two  Saints
John,  and  the  “  theological  ladder.”

Dunckerley  wrote  nothing  of  great  im¬
portance.  His  contributions  to  Masonic
literature  seem  to  have  been  confined  to  a
couple  of  charges  or  addresses,  delivered  in
1757  and  in  1769,  and  to  a  brief  chrono¬
logical  sketch  of  the  Order  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars,  which  was  published  in  the  3d  vol¬
ume  of  the  Freemason's  Magazine.  He  was
also  the  author  of  some  Masonic  poetry,
and  two  of  his  odes  are  inserted  in  Noor-
thouck’s  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitu¬
tions.  But  his  most  effective  labors  were
almost  altogether  esoteric  and  his  instruc¬
tions  oral,  and  his  industry  in  this  way
seems  to  have  been  indefatigable,  and  his
influence  extensive.  The  results  are  felt,
as  has  already  been  said,  to  the  present
day.  His  popularity  as  a  lecturer  is  to  be
attributed  to  the  active  character  of  his
mind,  and  his  thorough  mastership  of  the
subjects  which  he  taught,  and  the  fluency
of  his  delivery.

His  conduct  was  irreproachable,  and
hence  he  was  fortunate  in  securing  the  es¬
teem  and  regard  of  the  Craft,  and  the
friendship  of  the  most  distinguished  Ma¬
sons  who  were  his  contemporaries.  Preston
styles  him  “  that  truly  Masonic  luminary ;  ”
and  Oliver  says  that  “  he  was  the  oracle  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  and  the  accredited  inter¬
preter  of  its  Constitutions.  His  decision,


like  the  law  of  the  Medes  and  Persians,  was
final  on  all  points,  both  of  doctrine  and  dis¬
cipline,  and  against  it  there  was  no  appeal.”

Were  I  to  attempt  a  comparative  esti¬
mate  of  his  character  as  a  Masonic  scholar,
in  reference  to  his  predecessors,  his  con¬
temporaries,  and  his  successors  in  English
Masonry,  I  should  say  that  he  was  the
superior  of  both  Anderson  and  Desaguiiers,
but  inferior  to  Preston,  to  Hutchinson,  and
to  Oliver.  Among  his  contemporaries  he
certainly  had  a  well-deserved  reputation,
and  is  clearly  entitled  to  the  appellation
that  was  bestowed  upon  him,  of  being  a
learned  and  philosophical  Mason.

Dupaty,  Louis  Euiannel
Charles  Merrier.  The  author  of
many  Masonic  songs  and  other  fugitive
pieces  inserted  in  the  Annales  Magonniques.
He  wrote  in  1810,  with  Reveroui  de  Saint-
Cyr,  a  comic  opera  entitled  “  Cagliostro
ou  les  Illumines.”  In  1818,  he  published
a  Masonic  tale  entitled  “  l’Harmonie.”
He  was  a  poet  and  dramatic  writer  of  some
reputation,  born  in  the  Gironde  in  1775,
elected  to  the  French  Academy  in  1835,
and  died  in  1851.

Duty.  The  duty  of  a  Mason  as  a  if
honest  man  is  plain  and  easy.  It  requires
of  him  honesty  in  contracts,  sincerity  in
affirming,  simplicity  in  bargaining,  and
faithfulness  in  performing.  To  sleep  little,
and  to  study  much ;  to  say  little,  and  to
hear  and  think  much;  to  learn,  that  he  may
be  able  to  do;  and  then  to  do  earnestly
and  vigorously  whatever  the  good  of  his
fellows,  his  country  and  mankind  requires,
are  the  duties  of  every  Mason.


E.


Eagle.  The  eagle,  as  a  symbol,  is  of
great  antiquity.  In  Egypt,  Greece,  and
Persia,  this  bird  was  sacred  to  the  sun.
Among  the  Pagans  it  was  an  emblem  of
Jupiter,  and  with  the  Druids  it  was  a  sym¬
bol  of  their  supreme  god.  In  the  Scrip¬
tures,  a  distinguished  reference  is  in  many
instances  made  to  the  eagle ;  especially  do
we  find  Moses  (Exod.  xix.  4,)  representing
Jehovah  as  saying,  in  allusion  to  the  belief
that  this  bird,  assists  its  feeble  young  in
their  flight  by  bearing  them  upon  its  own
pinions,  “  Ye  have  seen  what  I  aid  unto  the
Egyptians,  and  how  I  bare  you  on  eagles’
wings,  and  brought  you  unto  myself.”  Not
less  elevated  was  the  symbolism  of  the


eagle  among  the  Pagans.  Thus,  Cicero,
speaking  of  the  myth  of  Ganymede  carried
up  to  Jove  on  an  eagle’s  back,  says  that  it
teaches  us  that  the  truly  wise,  irradiated  by
the  shining  light  of  virtue,  become  more
and  more  like  God,  until  by  wisdom  they
are  borne  aloft  and  soar  to  him.  The  her¬
alds  explain  the  eagle  as  signifying  the
same  thing  among  birds  as  the  lion  does
among  quadrupeds.  It  is,  they  say,  the
most  swift,  strong,  laborious,  generous,  and
bold  of  all  birds,  and  for  this  reason  it  has
been  made,  both  by  ancients  and  moderns,
the  symbol  of  majesty.  In  the  jewel  of  the
Rose  Croix  degree  is  found  an  eagle  dis¬
played  at  the  foot  of  the  cross ;  aud  it  is


236


EAGLE


EAGLE


there  very  appropriately  selected  as  a  sym¬
bol  of  Christ,  in  his  divine  character,  bear¬
ing  the  children  of  his  adoption  on  his
wings,  teaching  them  with  unequalled  love
and  tenderness  to  poise  their  unfledged
wings  and  soar  from  the  dull  corruptions
of  earth  to  a  higher  and  holier  sphere.
And  for  this  reason  the  eagle  in  the  jewel
of  that  degree  is  very  significantly  repre¬
sented  as  having  the  wings  displayed  as  if
in  the  very  act  of  flight.

Eagle  and  Pelican,  Knight  of
the.  See  Knight  of  the  Eagle  and  Pelican.

Eagle,  Double  -  Headed.  The
eagle  displayed,  that  is,  with  extended
wings,  as  if  in  the  act  of  flying,  has  always,
from  the  majestic  character  of  the  bird,
been  deemed  an  emblem  of  imperial  power.
Marius,  the  consul,  first  consecrated  the
eagle,  about  eight  years  B.  c.,  to  be  the  sole
Roman  standard  at  the  head  of  every  legion,
and  hence  it  became  the  standard  of  the
Roman  empire  ever  afterwards.  As  the
single-headed  eagle  was  thus  adopted  as
the  symbol  of  imperial  power,  the  double¬
headed  eagle  naturally  became  the  repre¬
sentative  of  a  double  empire;  and  on  the
division  of  the  Roman  dominions  into  the
eastern  and  western  empire,  which  were
afterwards  consolidated  by  the  Carlovin-
gian  race  into  what  was  ever  after  called
the  Holy  Roman  empire,  the  double-headed
eagle  was  assumed  as  the  emblem  of  this
double  empire ;  one  head  looking,  as  it  were,
to  the  West,  or  Rome,  and  the  other  to  the
East,  or  Byzantium.  Hence  the  escutcheons
of  many  persons  now  living,  the  descend¬
ants  of  the  princes  and  counts  of  the  Holy
Roman  empire,  are  placed  upon  the  breast
of  a  double-headed  eagle.  Upon  the  disso¬
lution  of  that  empire,  the  emperors  of  Ger¬
many,  who  claimed  their  empire  to  be  the
representative  of  ancient  Rome,  assumed
the  double-headed  eagle  as  their  symbol,
and  placed  it  in  their  arms,  which  were
blazoned  thus :  Or,  an  eagle  displayed  sable,
having  two  heads,  each  inclosed  within  an
amulet,  or  beaked  and  armed  gules,  holding
in  his  right  claw  a  swrnrd  and  sceptre  or,
and  in  his  left  the  imperial  mound.  Russia
also  bears  the  double-headed  eagle,  having
added,  says  Brewer,  that  of  Poland  to  her
own,  and  thus  denoting  a  double  empire.
It  is,  however,  probable  that  the  double¬
headed  eagle  of  Russia  is  to  be  traced  to
some  assumed  representation  of  the  Holy
Roman  empire  based  upon  the  claim  of
Russia  to  Byzantium ;  for  Constantine,  the
Byzantine  emperor,  is  said  to  have  been  the
first  who  assumed  this  device  to  intimate
the  division  of  the  empire  into  East  and
West.

The  statement  of  Millington  ( Heraldry
in  History,  Poetry,  and  Romance,  p.  290,)  is


doubtful,  that  “  the  double-headed  eagle  of
the  Austrian  and  Russian  empires  was  first
assumed  during  the  second  Crusade,  and
typified  the  great  alliance  formed  by  the
Christian  sovereigns  of  Greece  and  Ger¬
many  against  the  enemy  of  their  common
faith,  and  it  is  retained  by  Russia  and
Austria  as  representations  of  those  em¬
pires.”  The  theory  is  more  probable  as
well  as  more  generally  accepted  which  con¬
nects  the  symbol  with  the  eastern  and  west¬
ern  empires  of  Rome.  It  is,  however,  agreed
by  all  that  while  the  single-headed  eagle
denotes  imperial  dignity,  the  extension  and
multiplication  of  that  dignity  is  symbolized
by  the  two  heads.

The  double-headed  eagle  was  probably
first  introduced  as  a  symbol  into  Masonry
in  the  year  1758.  In  that  year  the  body
calling  itself  the  Council  of  Emperors  of
the  East  and  West  was  established  in  Paris.
The  double-headed  eagle  was  likely  to  have
been  assumed  by  this  Council  in  reference
to  the  double  jurisdiction  which  it  claimed,
and  which  is  represented  so  distinctly  in  its
title.  Its  ritual,  which  consisted  of  twenty-
five  degrees,  all  of  which  are  now  contained
in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,
was  subsequently  established  in  the  city  of
Berlin,  and  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  the  Three  Globes.  Frederick  II.,  king
of  Prussia,  who  was  the  head  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  is  said  to  have
merged  this  body  into  his  own  Rite,  adding
to  its  twenty-five  degrees  eight  more,  so  as  to
make  the  thirty- three  degrees  of  which  that
Rite  is  now  composed.  The  double-headed
eagle  was  then  adopted  as  the  symbol  of
the  thirty-third  and  ultimate  degree.  The
whole  Rite  being  considered  as  a  repre¬
sentative  of  the  Holy  Empire,  as  is  indi¬
cated  by  the  titles  of  two  of  its  officers,


who  are  still  called  the  Secretary  and  the
Treasurer  of  the  Holy  Empire,  the  double¬
headed  eagle,  which  was  the  ensign,  as  it
has  been  seen,  of  that  empire,  was  appropri¬
ately  adopted  as  the  symbol  of  the  govern¬
ing  degree  of  the  Rite.

The  jewel  of  the  thirty-third  degree,  or


EAGLE


EAST


237


Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  General  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  is  a
double-headed  eagle  (which  was  originally
black,  but  is  now  generally  of  silver),  a

olden  crown  resting  on  both  heads,  wings

isplayed,  beak  and  claws  of  gold,  his
talons  grasping  a  wavy  sword,  the  emblem
of  cherubic  tire,  the  hilt  held  by  one  talon,
the  blade  by  the  other.  The  banner  of  the
Order  is  also  a  double  -  headed  eagle
crowned.

Eagle,  Knight  of  the.  See  Knight

of  the  Eagle.

Eagle,  Knight  of  the  American.

See  Knight  of  the  American  Eagle.

Eagle,  Knight  of  the  Black.

See  Knight  of  the  Black  Eagle.

Eagle,  Knight  of  the  Gold.  See

Knight  of  the  Gold  Eagle.

Eagle,  Knight  of  the  Prussian.

See  Knight  of  the  Prussian  Eagle.

Eagle,  Knight  of  the  Red.  See

Knight  of  the  Red  Eagle.

Eagle,  Knight  of  the  White  and

Black.  See  Knight  of  the  White  and
Black  Eagle.

Eagles,  Knight  of  the  Two
Crowned.  See  Knight  of  the  Two
Crowned  Eagles.

Ear  of  Corn.  This  was,  among  all
the  ancients,  an  emblem  of  plenty.  Ceres,
who  was  universally  worshipped  as  the
goddess  of  abundance,  and  even  called  by
the  Greeks  Demeter,  a  manifest  corruption
of  Gemeter,  or  mother  earth,  was  symboli¬
cally  represented  with  a  garland  on  her
head  composed  of  ears  of  corn,  a  lighted
torch  in  one  hand,  and  a  cluster  of  poppies
and  ears  of  corn  in  the  other.  And  in  the
Hebrew,  the  most  significant  of  all  lan¬
guages,  the  two  words,  which  signify  an  ear
of  corn,  are  both  derived  from  roots  which
give  the  idea  of  abundance.  For  shibboleth,
which  is  applicable  both  to  an  ear  of  corn
and  a  flood  of  water,  has  its  root  in  shabal,
to  increase  or  to  flow  abundantly ;  and  the
other  name  of  corn,  dagan,  is  derived  from
the  verb  dagah,  signifying  to  multiply,  or
to  be  increased.

Ear  of  corn,  which  is  a  technical  expres-
tion  in  the  second  degree,  has  been  some¬
times  ignorantly  displaced  by  a  sheaf  of
wheat.  This  is  done  in  America,  under  the
mistaken  supposition  that  corn  refers  only
to  Indian  maize,  which  was  unknown  to  the
ancients.  But  corn  is  a  generic  word,  and
includes  wheat  and  every  other  kind  of
grain.  This  is  its  legitimate  English  mean¬
ing,  and  hence  an  ear  of  corn,  which  is  an
old  expression,  and  the  right  one,  would
denote  a  stalk,  but  not  a  sheaf  of  wheat.  See
Shibboleth.

Ear,  Tlie  Listening.  The  listening
ear  is  one  of  the  three  precious  jewels  of  a


Fellow  Craft  Mason.  In  the  Hebrew  lan¬
guage,  the  verb  shemong,  signifies

not  only  to  hear,  but  also  to  understand  and
to  obey.  Hence,  when  Jesus  said,  after  a
parable,  “  he  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him
hear,”  he  meant  to  denote  that  he  who
hears  the  recital  of  allegories  should  en¬
deavor  to  discover  their  hidden  meaning,
and  be  obedient  to  their  teaching.  This  is
the  true  meaning  of  the  symbol  of  the  lis¬
tening  ear,  which  admonishes  the  Fellow
Craft  not  only  that  he  should  receive  les¬
sons  of  instruction  from  his  teacher,  but
that  he  should  treasure  them  in  his  breast,
so  as  to  ponder  over  their  meaning  and
carry  out  their  design.

Earthen  Pan.  In  the  lectures  of  the
early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century  used  as
a  symbol  of  zeal,  together  with  chalk  and
charcoal,  which  represented  freedom  and
fervency.  In  the  modern  lectures  it  has
been  substituted  by  clay.  Pan  once  signi¬
fied  hard  earth,  a  meaning  which  is  now
obsolete,  though  from  it  we  derive  the  name
of  a  cooking  utensil.

East.  The  East  has  always  been  con¬
sidered  peculiarly  sacred.  This  was,  with¬
out  exception,  the  case  in  all  the  Ancient
Mysteries.  In  the  Egyptian  rites,  espe¬
cially,  and  those  of  Adonis,  which  were
among  the  earliest,  and  from  which  the
others  derived  their  existence,  the  sun  was
the  object  of  adoration,  and  his  revolutions
through  the  various  seasons  were  fictitiously
represented.  The  spot,  therefore,  where
this  luminary  made  his  appearance  at  the
commencement  of  day,  and  where  his  wor¬
shippers  were  wont  anxiously  to  look  for
the  first  darting  of  his  prolific  rays,  was  es¬
teemed  as  the  figurative  birthplace  of  their
god,  and  honored  with  an  appropriate  degree
of  reverence.  And  even  among  those  nations
where  sun-worship  gave  place  to  more
enlightened  doctrines,  the  respect  for  the
place  of  sun-rising  continued  to  exist.
The  camp  of  Judah  was  placed  by  Moses
in  the  East  as  a  mark  of  distinction  ;  the
tabernacle  in  the  wilderness  was  placed  due
East  and  West;  and  the  practice  was  con¬
tinued  in  the  erection  of  Christian
churches.  Hence,  too,  the  primitive  Chris¬
tians  always  turned  towards  the  East  in
their  public  prayers,  which  custom  St.  Au¬
gustine  ( Serm .  Dom.  in  Monte,  c.  5,)  ac¬
counts  for  “  because  the  East  is  the  most
honorable  part  of  the  world,  being  the  re¬
gion  of  light  whence  the  glorious  sun
arises.”  And  hence  all  Masonic  Lodges,
like  their  great  prototype  the  Temple  of
Jerusalem,  are  built,  or  supposed  to  be
built,  due  East  and  West ;  and  as  the  North
is  esteemed  a  place  of  darkness,  the  East,  on
the  contrary,  is  considered  a  place  of  light.

In  the  primitive  Christian  church,  ac-


238


EAST


ECLECTIC


cording  to  St.  Ambrose,  in  the  ceremonies  |
accompanying  the  baptism  of  a  catechu¬
men,  “he  turned  towards  the  West,  the
image  of  darkness,  to  abjure  the  world,  and
towards  the  East,  the  emblem  of  light,  to
denote  his  alliance  with  Jesus  Christ.”
And  so,  too,  in  the  oldest  lectures  of  the
last  century,  the  Mason  is  said  to  travel
from  the  West  to  the  East,  that  is,  from
darkness  to  light.  In  the  Prestonian  sys¬
tem,  the  question  is  asked,  “  What  induces
you  to  leave  the  West  to  travel  to  the
East?”  And  the  answer  is:  “In  search
of  a  Master,  and  from  him  to  gain  instruc¬
tion.”  The  same  idea,  if  not  precisely  the
same  language,  is  preserved  in  the  modern
and  existing  rituals.

The  East,  being  the  place  where  the  Mas¬
ter  sits,  is  considered  the  most  honorable
part  of  the  Lodge,  and  is  distinguished  from
the  rest  of  the  room  by  a  dais,  or  raised
platform,  which  is  occupied  only  by  those
who  have  passed  the  Chair.

Bazot  (Manuel,  p.  154,)  says:  “The  ven¬
eration  which  Masons  have  for  the  East,
confirms  the  theory  that  it  is  from  the
East  that  the  Masonic  cult  proceeded,  and
that  this  bears  a  relation  to  the  primitive
religion  whose  first  degeneration  was  sun-
worship.

East  and  West,  Knight  of  the.

See  Knight  of  the  E<ast  and  West.

East,  Grand.  The  place  where  a
Grand  Lodge  holds  its  communications,
and  whence  are  issued  its  edicts,  is  often
called  its  Grand  East.  Thus,  the  Grand
East  of  Boston  would,  according  to  this
usage,  be  placed  at  the  head  of  documents
emanating  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massa¬
chusetts.  Grand  Orient  has  sometimes  been
used  instead  of  Grand  East,  but  improperly.
Orient  might  be  admissible  as  signifying
East,  but  Grand  Orient  having  been  adopted
as  the  name  of  certain  Grand  Bodies,  such
as  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  which  is
tantamount  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France,
the  use  of  the  term  might  lead  to  confu¬
sion.  Thus,  the  Orient  of  Paris  is  the  seat
of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.  The  ex¬
pression  Grand  East,  however,  is  almost
exclusively  confined  to  this  country;  and
even  here  is  not  in  universal  use.

East  Indies.  See  India.

East,  Knight  of  the.  See  Knight
of  the  East.

Easter.  Easter  Sunday,  being  the  day
celebrated  by  the  Christian  church  in  com¬
memoration  of  the  resurrection  of  the
Lord  Jesus,  is  appropriately  kept  as  a  feast-
day  by  Rose  Croix  Masons.

Easter  Monday.  On  this  day,  in
every  third  year,  Councils  of  Kadosh  in
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
hold  their  elections.


Eastern  Star,  Order  of  the.  An

American  Adoptive  Rite,  called  the  “Order
of  the  Eastern  Star,”  invented  by  Bro.
Robert  Morris,  and  somewhat  popular  in
this  country.  It  consists  of  five  degrees,
viz.,  1,  Jephtha’s  daughter,  or  the  daughter’s
degree ;  2,  Ruth,  or  the  widow’s  degree ;  3,
Esther,  or  the  wife’s  degree ;  4,  Martha,  or
the  sister’s  degree;  5,  Electa,  or  the  Benevo¬
lent.  It  is  entirely  different  from  Euro¬
pean  or  French  Adoptive  Masonry.  Re¬
cently,  this  Order  has  undergone  a  thorough
organization,  and  been  extended  into  other
countries,  especially  into  South  America.

East  Port.  An  error  of  ignorance  in
the  Landsdowne  Manuscript,  where  the  ex¬
pression,  “  the  city  of  East  Port,”  occurs  as
a  corruption  of  “  the  cities  of  the  East.”

Eavesdropper.  A  listener.  The
punishment  which  was  directed  in  the  old
lectures,  at  the  revival  of  Masonry  in  1717,
to  be  inflicted  on  a  detected  cowan  was:
“  To  be  placed  under  the  eaves  of  the  house
in  rainy  weather,  till  the  water  runs  in  at
his  shoulders  and  out  at  his  heels.”  The
French  inflict  a  similar  punishment.  “On
le  met  sous  une  gouttiere,  une  pompe,  ou  une
fontaine,  jusquA  ce  qu’il  soit  mouille  depuis
la  tete  jusqu’aux  pieds.”  Hence  a  listener  is
called  an  eavesdropper.  The  word  is  not,  as
has  by  some  been  supposed,  a  peculiar  Ma¬
sonic  term,  but  is  common  to  the  language.
Skinner  gives  it  in  his  Eiymologieon,  and  calls
it  “  vox  sane  elegantissima ;”  and  Blackstone
(Comm.,  iv.  13,)  thus  defines  it:  “Eaves¬
droppers,  or  such  as  listen  under  walls,  or
windows,  or  the  eaves  of  a  house,  to  hearken
after  discourse,  and  thereupou  to  frame
slanderous  and  mischievous  talcs,  are  a
common  nuisance  and  presentable  at  the
court  leet;  or  are  indictable  at  the  sessions,
and  punishable  by  fine  and  finding  sureties
for  their  good  behavior.”

Ebony  Box.  A  symbol  in  the  high
degrees  of  the  human  heart,  and  is  intended
to  teach  reserve  and  taciturnity,  which
should  be  inviolably  maintained  in  regard
to  the  incommunicable  secrets  of  the  Order.
When  it  is  said  that  the  ebony  box  con¬
tained  the  plans  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon,
the  symbolic  teaching  is,  that  in  the  human
heart  are  deposited  the  secret  designs  and
motives  of  our  conduct  by  which  we  pro¬
pose  to  erect  the  spiritual  temple  of  our
lives.

Eclectic  Masonry.  From  the  Greek,

bcXesTtKoc, eklektikos,  which  means  selecting.
Those  philosophers  who,  in  ancient  times,
selected  from  the  various  systems  of  phil¬
osophy  such  doctrines  as  appeared  most
conformable  to  truth  were  called  “eclectic
philosophers.”  So  the  confederation  of
Masons  in  Germany,  which  consisted  of
Lodges  that  selected  the  degrees  which


ECLECTIC


ECOSSAIS


239


they  thought  most  conformable  to  ancient
Freemasonry,  was  called  the  eclectic  union,
and  the  Masonry  which  it  adopted  received
the  name  of  Eclectic  Masonry.  See  Eclec¬
tic  Union.

Eclectic  Rite.  The  Rite  practised
by  the  Eclectic  Union,  which  see.

Eclectic  Union.  The  fundamental
idea  of  a  union  of  the  German  Lodges  for
the  purpose  of  purifying  the  Masonic  sys¬
tem  of  the  corruptions  which  had  been  in¬
troduced  by  the  numerous  degrees  founded
on  alchemy,  theosophy,  and  other  occult
sciences  which  at  that  time  flooded  the  con¬
tinent  of  Europe,  originated,  in  1779,  with
the  Baron  Von  Ditfurth,  who  had  been
a  prominent  member  of  the  Rite  of  Strict
Observance:  although  Lenning  attributes
the  earlier  thought  of  a  circular  letter  to
Von  Knlgge.  But  the  first  practical  step
towards  this  purification  was  taken  in  1783
by  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodges  of  Frank-
fort-on-the-Main  and  of  Wetzlar.  These
two  bodies  addressed  an  encyclical  letter  to
the  Lodges  of  Germany,  in  which  they  in¬
vited  them  to  enter  into  an  alliance  for  the
purpose  of  “  re-establishing  the  Royal  Art
of  Freemasonry.”  The  principal  points  on
which  this  union  or  alliance  was  to  be
founded  were,  1.  That  the  three  symbolic
degrees  only  were  to  be  acknowledged  by
the  united  Lodges.  2.  That  each  Lodge
was  permitted  to  practise  for  itself  such
high  degrees  as  it  might  select  for  itself,
but  that  the  recognition  of  these  was  not
to  be  made  compulsory  on  the  other  Lodges.
3.  That  all  the  united  Lodges  were  to  be
equal,  none  being  dependent  on  any  other.
These  propositions  were  accepted  by  seve¬
ral  Lodges,  and  thence  resulted  the  Eclec-
lisckes  Bund,  or  Eclectic  Union  of  Germany,
at  the  head  of  which  is  the  “  Mother  Grand
Lodge  of  the  Eclectic  Union  ”  at  Frank-
fort-on-the-Main.  The  system  of  Mason¬
ry  practised  by  this  union  is  called  the
Eclectic  system,  and  the  Rite  recognized
by  it  is  the  Eclectic  Rite,  which  consists
of  only  the  three  degrees  of  Apprentice,
Fellow  Craft,  and  Master  Mason.

Ecossais.  This  is  a  French  word,
which  is  most  generally  to  be  translated  as
Scottish  Master.  The  term  was  introduced
by  the  Chevalier  Ramsay,  who  first  invented
the  degree,  which  he  called  Ecossais  be¬
cause  he  claimed  that  his  system  of  Ma¬
sonry  came  from  Scotland.  From  this
original  degree  of  Ramsay  numerous  others
have  sprung  up  under  the  same  or  similar
name;  all  of  them,  however,  concurring  in
one  particular,  namely,  that  of  detailing
the  method  adopted  for  the  preservation
of  the  true  Word.  The  American  Mason
will  understand  the  character  of  the  system
of  Ecossaism,  as  it  may  be  called,  when  he
is  told  that  the  Select  Master  of  his  own


Rite  is  really  an  Ecossias  degree.  It  is
found,  too,  in  many  other  Rites.  Thus,  in
the  French  Rite,  it  is  the  fifth  degree.  In
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  the
thirteenth  degree  or  Knights  of  the  Ninth
Arch  is  properly  an  Ecossais  degree.  The
Ancient  York  Rite  is  without  an  Ecossais
degree,  but  its  principles  are  set  forth  in  the
instructions  of  the  Royal  Arch.

Some  idea  of  the  extent  to  which  these
degrees  have  been  multiplied  may  be  formed
from  the  fact  that  Oliver  has  a  list  of
eighty  of  them ;  Ragon  enumerates  eighty-
three;  and  the  Baron  Tschoudy,  rejecting
twenty-seven  which  he  does  not  consider
legitimate,  retains  a  far  greater  number  to
whose  purity  he  does  not  object.

In  the  Ecossais  system  there  is  a  legend,
a  part  of  which  has  been  adopted  in  all
the  Ecossais  degrees,  and  which  has  in  fact
been  incorporated  into  the  mythical  his¬
tory  of  Masonry.  It  is  to  the  effect  that
the  builder  of  the  Temple  engraved  the
word  upon  a  triangle  of  pure  metal,  and,
fearing  that  it  might  be  lost,  he  always
bore  it  about  his  person,  suspended  from
his  neck,  with  the  engraved  side  next  to
his  breast.  In  a  time  of  great  peril  to  him¬
self,  he  cast  it  into  an  old  dry  well,  which
was  in  the  south-east  corner  of  the  Temple,
where  it  was  afterwards  found  by  three
Masters.  They  were  passing  near  the  well
at  the  hour  of  meridian,  and  were  attracted
by  its  brilliant  appearance  ;  whereupon  one
of  them,  descending  by  the  assistance  of  his
comrades,  obtained  it,  and  carried  it  to  King
Solomon.  But  the  more  modern  form  of
the  legend  dispenses  with  the  circumstance
of  the  dry  well,  and  says  that  the  builder
deposited  it  in  the  place  which  had  been
purposely  prepared  for  it,  and  where  cen¬
turies  afterwards  it  was  found.  And  this
amended  form  of  the  legend  is  more  in  ac¬
cord  with  the  recognized  symbolism  of  the
loss  and  the  recovery  of  the  Word.

Ecossais.  1.  The  fourth  degree  of
Ramsay’s  Rite,  and  the  original  whence  all
the  degrees  of  Ecossaism  have  sprung.  2.
The  fifth  degree  of  the  French  Rite.  3.
The  Ecossais  degrees  constitute  the  fourth
class  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim,  —  from  the
fourteenth  to  the  twenty-first  degree.  In
the  subsequent  articles  only  the  principal
Ecossais  degrees  will  be  mentioned.

Ecossais  Architect,  Perfect.
(Ecossais  Architecte  Par/ait.)  A  degree  in
the  collection  of  M.  Pyron.

Ecossais,  English.  ( Ecoss .  Anglais.)
A  degree  in  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Phil¬
osophic  Rite.

Ecossais,  Faithful.  (Ecossais  Fi¬
ddle.)  See  Vielle  Bru.

Ecossais,  French.  The  thirty-fifth
degree  of  the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan
I  Chapter  of  France.


240


ECOSSAIS


EDICT


Ecossais,  Grantl.  The  fourteenth
degree  of  the  Scottish  Kite  is  so  called  in
some  of  the  French  rituals.

Ecossais,  Grand  Architect.

(Grand Architect  Ecossais.)  The  forty-fifth
degree  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France.

Ecossais,  Grand  Master.  Form¬
erly  the  sixth  degree  of  the  Capitular  sys¬
tem,  practised  in  Holland.

Ecossais,  Knight.  A  synonym  of
the  ninth  degree  of  Illuminism.  It  is  more
commonly  called  Uluminatus  Dirigens.

Ecossais,  Master.  The  fifth  degree
of  the  Rite  of  Zinnendorf.  It  was  also  for¬
merly  among  the  high  degrees  of  the  Ger¬
man  Chapter  and  those  of  the  Rite  of  the
Clerks  of  Strict  Observance.  It  is  said  to
have  been  composed  by  Baron  Hund.

Ecossais  XoTice.  A  synonym  of
the  eighth  degree  of  Illuminism.  It  is
more  commonly  called  Illuminatus  Major.

Ecossais  of  Clermont.  The  thir¬
tieth  degree  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter
of  France.

Ecossais  of  England.  A  degree
in  the  collection  of  M.Le  Rouge.

Ecossais  of  Franville.  The  thir¬
ty-first  degree  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter
of  France.

Ecossais  of  Hiram.  A  degree
in  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philosophic
Scotch  Rite.

Ecossais  of  Messina.  A  degree  in
the  nomenclature  of  M.  Fustier.

Ecossais  of  Montpellier.  The

thirty-sixth  degree  of  the  Metropolitan
Chapter  of  France.

Ecossais  of  Naples.  The  forty-
second  degree  of  the  collection  of  the
Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Ecossais  of  Perfection.  The
thirty- ninth  degree  of  the  collection  of  the
Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Ecossais  of  Prussia.  A  degree  in
the  archives  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the
Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

Ecossais  of  St.  Andrew.  A  not
unusual  form  of  Ecossaism,  and  found  in
several  Rites.  1.  The  second  degree  of  the
Clerks  of  Strict  Observance;  2.  The  twen¬
ty-first  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim  ;  3.
The  twenty-ninth  degree  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  is  also  an  Ecos¬
sais  of  St.  Andrew ;  *4.  The  sixty-third
degree  of  the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan
Chapter  of  France  is  an  Ecossais  of  St.
Andrew  of  Scotland ;  5.  The  seventy-fifth
degree  of  the  same  collection  is  called  Ecos¬
sais  of  St.  Andrew  of  the  Thistle.

Ecossais  of  St.  George.  A  degree
in  the  collection  of  Le  Page.

Ecossais  of  the  Forty.  (Ecossais  des
Quarante.)  The  thirty-fourth  degree  of  the


collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France.

Ecossais  of  the  Lodge  of  Prince
Edward.  A  degree  in  the  collection  of
Pyron.  This  was  probably  a  Stuart  degree,
and  referred  to  Prince  Charles  Edward,  the
young  Pretender.

Ecossais  of  the  Sacred  Tault  of
James  VI.  1.  The  thirty-third  degree
of  the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chap¬
ter  of  France,  said  to  have  been  composed
by  the  Baron  Tschoudy.  2.  The  twentieth
degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.  3.  In  the
French  rituals,  this  name  has  been  given  to
the  fourteenth  degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite.
Chemin  Dupontfes  says  that  the  degree  was
a  homage  paid  to  the  kings  of  Scotland.
Nothing,  however,  of  this  can  be  found  in
its  present  ritual ;  but  it  is  very  probable
that  the  degree,  in  its  first  conception,  and
in  some  ritual  that  no  longer  exists,  was  an
offspring  of  the  bouse  of  Stuart,  of  which
James  VI.  was  the  first  English  king.

Ecossais  of  the  Three  J.  J.  J.

1.  The  thirty-second  degree  of  the  collec¬
tion  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

2.  The  nineteenth  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Mizraim.  The  three  J.  J.  J.  are  the  ini¬
tials  of  Jourdain,  Jaho,  Jachin.

Ecossais  of  Toulouse.  A  degree
in  the  archives  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the
Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

Ecossais  of  the  Triple  Trian¬
gle.  The  thirty-seventh  degree  of  the  col¬
lection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France.

Ecossais,  Parisian.  So  Thory  has
it;  but  Ragon,  and  all  the  other  nomencla-
tors,  give  it  as  Ecossais  Panissifcre.  The
seventeenth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Ecossais,  Perfect.  A  degree  in  the
archives  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philo¬
sophic  Scottish  Rite.

Ecossism.  A  name  given  by  French
Masonic  writers  to  the  thirty-three  degrees
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.
This,  in  English,  would  be  equivalent  to
Scottish  Masonry,  which  see.

Ecuador.  Masonry  was  introduced
into  the  Republic  of  Ecuador,  in  the  year
1857,  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  Peru,  which
organized  a  Symbolic  Lodge  and  Chapter
of  the  eighth  degree  in  Guayaquil ;  but  in
consequence  of  the  opposition  of  the  priests,
these  bodies  did  not  flourish,  and  at  the
end  of  two  years  their  members  surrendered
their  warrants  and  ceased  to  pursue  their
Masonic  labors.

Edict  of  Cyrus.  Five  hundred  and
thirty-six  years  before  the  Christian  era,
Cyrus  issued  his  edict  permitting  the  Jews
to  return  from  the  captivity  at  Babylon  to
Jerusalem,  and  to  rebuild  the  House  of  the
Lord.  At  the  same  time  he  restored  to


EDICTS


EGG


241


them  all  the  sacred  vessels  and  precious
ornaments  of  the  first  Temple,  which  had
been  carried  away  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and
which  were  still  in  existence.  This  is  com¬
memorated  in  the  Royal  Arch  degree  of
the  York  and  American  Rites.  It  is  also
referred  to  in  the  fifteenth  degree,  or  Knight
of  the  East  of  the  Scottish  Rite.

Edicts.  The  decrees  of  a  Grand  Mas¬
ter  or  of  a  Grand  Lodge  are  called  Edicts,
and  obedience  to  them  is  obligatory  on  all
the  Craft.

Edinburgh.  The  capital  of  Scotland.
The  Official  Register  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland,  published  at  the  end  of  its
“Laws  and  Constitutions,”  (Edit.  1852,  p.
60,)  states  that  the  “  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,
No.  1,”  was  instituted  in  1518;  and  the
Charter  of  Cologne  speaks  of  the  existence
of  a  Lodge  in  that  city  in  1535,  but  the  au¬
thenticity  of  this  document  is  now  gener¬
ally  disputed.  Lawrie,  however,  [Hist.
Freem.,  p.  102,)  says  that  the  Minutes  of  St.
Mary’s  Lodge,  which  is  the  oldest  Lodge
in  Edinburgh,  extend  as  far  back  as  the
year  1598.  See  Scotland.

Edinburgh.  Congress  of.  It  was
convoked,  in  1736,  by  William  St.  Clair  of
Rosliti,  Patron  of  the  Masons  of  Scotland,
(whose  mother  Lodge  was  at  Kilwinning,)
with  the  view  of  abdicating  his  dignity  as
hereditary  Grand  Patron,  with  all  the  privi¬
leges  granted  in  1430,  by  King  James  II.,
to  the  family  of  Roslin,  and  afterwards  to
organize  Masonry  upon  a  new  basis.  The
members  of  thirty-two  Lodges  uniting  for
this  purpose,  constituted  the  new  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland,  and  elected  St.  Clair
Grand  Master.  See  St.  Clair.

Edwin.  The  son  of  Edward,  Saxon
king  of  England,  who  died  in  924,  and  was
succeeded  by  his  eldest  son  Athelstan.
The  Masonic  tradition  is  that  Athelstan
appointed  his  brother  Edwin  the  Patron
of  Masonry  in  England,  and  gave  him  what
the  Old  Records  call  a  free  Charter  to  hold
an  Annual  Communication  or  General  As¬
sembly,  under  the  authority  of  which  he
summoned  the  Masons  of  England  to  meet
him  in  a  Congregation  at  York,  where  they
met  in  926  and  formed  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England.  The  Old  Records  say  that
these  Masons  brought  with  them  many  old
writings  and  records  of  the  Craft,  some  in
Greek,  some  in  Latin,  some  in  French,  and
other  languages,  and  from  these  framed
the  document  now  known  as  the  York  Con¬
stitutions,  whose  authenticity  has  been  in
recent  years  so  much  a  subject  of  contro¬
versy  among  Masonic  writers.  Prince  Ed¬
win  died  two  years  before  his  brother,  and
a  report  was  spread  of  his  being  put  wrong¬
fully  to  death  by  him;  “but  this,”  says
Preston,  “  is  so  improbable  in  itself,  so  in-
2  F  16


consistent  with  the  character  of  Athelstan,
and,  indeed,  so  slenderly  attested,  as  to  be
undeserving  a  place  in  history.”  William
of  Malmesbury,  the  old  chronicler,  relates
the  story,  but  confesses  that  it  had  no  bet¬
ter  foundation  than  some  old  ballads.  But
now  come  the  later  Masonic  antiquaries,
who  assert  that  Edwin  himself  is  only  a
myth,  and  that,  in  spite  of  the  authority  of
a  few  historical  writers,  Athelstan  had  no
son  or  brother  of  the  name  of  Edwin.
W oodford  ( Old  Charges  of  the  Brit.  Free¬
masons,  p.  xiv.,)  thinks  that  the  Masonic
tradition  points  to  Edwin,  king  of  Northum¬
bria,  whose  rendezvous  was  once  at  Auldby,
near  York,  and  who  in  627  aided  in  the
building  of  a  stone  church  at  York,  after
his  baptism  there,  with  Roman  workmen.
“Tradition,”  he  says,  “  sometimes  gets  con¬
fused  after  the  lapse  of  time;  but  I  believe
the  tradition  is  in  itself  true  which  links
Masonry  to  the  church  building  at  York
by  the  Operative  Brotherhood,  under  Ed¬
win,  in  627,  and  to  a  gild  Charter  under
Athelstan,  in  927.”

The  legend  of  Prince  Edwin,  of  course,
requires  some  modification,  but  we  should
not  be  too  hasty  in  rejecting  altogether  a
tradition  which  has  been  so  long  and  so
universally  accepted  by  the  Fraternity,  and
to  which  Anderson,  Preston,  Krause,  Oli¬
ver,  and  a  host  of  other  writers,  have  sub¬
scribed  their  assent.  The  subject  will  be
fully  discussed  under  the  head  of  York  Le¬
gend,  which  see.

Egg,  Mundane.  It  was  a  belief  of
almost  all  the  ancient  nations,  that  the
world  was  hatched  from  an  egg  made  by
the  Creator,  over  which  the  Spirit  of  God
was  represented  as  hovering  in  the  same
manner  as  a  bird  broods  or  flutters  over  her
eggs.  Faber,  [Pag.  Idol.,  i.  4,)  who  traced
everything  to  the  Arkite  worship,  says  that
this  egg,  which  was  a  symbol  of  the  resur¬
rection,  was  no  other  than  the  ark  ;  and  as
Dionysus  was  fabled  in  the  Orphic  hymns
to  be  born  from  an  egg,  he  and  Noah  were
the  same  person ;  wherefore  the  birth  of
Dionysus  or  Brahma,  or  any  other  hero
god  from  an  egg,  was  nothing  more  than
the  egress  of  Noah  from  the  ark.  Be  this
as  it  may,  the  egg  has  been  always  deemed
a  symbol  of  the  resurrection,  and  hence  the
Christian  use  of  Easter  eggs  on  the  great
feast  of  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord.  As
this  is  the  most  universally  diffused  of  all
symbols,  it  is  strange  that  it  has  found  no
place  in  the  symbolism  of  Freemasonry,
which  deals  so  much  with  the  doctrine  of
the  resurrection,  of  which  the  egg  was
everywhere  the  recognized  symbol.  It  was,
however,  used  by  the  ancient  architects,
and  from  them  was  adopted  by  the  Ope¬
rative  Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  one  of


242


EGLINTON


EGYPTIAN


whose  favorite  ornaments  was  the  ovolo,  or
egg-moulding.

Eglinton  Manuscript.  An  Old

Record  supposed  to  be  of  the  date  of  1599.
It  is  so  named  from  its  having  been  dis¬
covered  some  years  ago  in  the  charter  chest
at  Eglinton  Castle.  It  is  a  Scottish  manu¬
script,  and  is  valuable  for  its  details  of
early  Masonry  in  Scotland.  In  it,  Edin¬
burgh  is  termed  “the  first  and  principal
Lodge,”  and  Kilwinning  is  called  “  the
heid  and  secund  Ludge  of  Scotland  in  all
tyme  cuming.”  An  exact  copy  of  it  was
taken  by  Bro.  D.  Murray  Lyon,  and  first
published  by  Bro.  W.  J.  Hughan  in  his
Unpublished  Records  of  the  Craft.

Egyptian  Masonry.  See  Cagliostro-

Egyptian  Mysteries.  Egypt  has
always  been  considered  as  the  birthplace
of  the  mysteries.  It  was  there  that  the
ceremonies  of  initiation  were  first  estab¬
lished.  It  was  there  that  truth  was  first
veiled  in  allegory,  and  the  dogmas  of  reli¬
gion  were  first  imparted  under  symbolic
forms.  From  Egypt  —  “the  land  of  the
winged  globe”  —  the  land  of  science  and
philosophy,  “peerless  for  stately  tombs
and  magnificent  temples  —  the  land  whose
civilization  was  old  and  mature  before  other
nations,  since  called  to  empire,  had  a
name”  —  this  system  of  symbols  was  dis¬
seminated  through  Greece  and  Rome  and
other  countries  of  Europe  and  Asia,  giving
origin,  through  many  intermediate  steps,  to
that  mysterious  association  which  is  now  rep¬
resented  by  the  Institution  of  Freemasonry.

To  Egypt,  therefore,  Masons  have  always  j
looked  with  peculiar  interest,  as  the  cradle
of  that  mysterious  science  of  symbolism
whose  peculiar  modes  of  teaching  they
alone,  of  all  modern  institutions,  have  pre¬
served  to  the  present  day.

The  initiation  into  the  Egyptian  myste¬
ries  was,  of  all  the  systems  practised  by
the  ancients,  the  most  severe  and  impres¬
sive.  The  Greeks  at  Eleusis  imitated  it  to
some  extent,  but  they  never  reached  the
magnitude  of  its  forms  nor  the  austerity  of
its  discipline.  The  system  had  been  organ¬
ized  for  ages,  and  the  priests,  who  alone
were  the  hierophants. —  the  explainers  of
the  mysteries,  or,  as  we  should  call  them
in  Masonic  language,  the  Masters  of  the
Lodges,  —  were  educated  almost  from  child¬
hood  for  the  business  in  which  they  were
engaged.  That  “  learning  of  the  Egyp¬
tians,”  in  which  Moses  is  said  to  have  been
so  skilled,  was  all  imparted  in  these  myste¬
ries.  It  was  confined  to  the  priests  and  to
the  initiates;  and  the  trials  of  initiation
through  which  the  latter  had  to  pass  were
so  difficult  to  be  endured,  that  none  but  those
who  were  stimulated  by  the  most  ardent
thirst  for  knowledge  dared  to  undertake
them  or  succeeded  in  submitting  to  them.


The  priesthood  of  Egypt  constituted  a
sacred  caste,  in  whom  the  sacerdotal  func¬
tions  were  hereditary.  They  exercised  also
an  important  part  in  the  government  of  the
state,  and  the  kings  of  Egypt  were  but  the
first  subjects  of  its  priests.  They  had
originally  organized,  and  continued  to  con¬
trol,  the  ceremonies  of  initiation.  Their
doctrines  were  of  two  kinds  —  exoteric  or
public,  which  were  communicated  to  the
multitude,  and  esoteric  or  secret,  which
were  revealed  only  to  a  chosen  few ;  and  to
obtain  them  it  was  necessary  to  passthrough
an  initiation  which  wTas  characterized  by
the  severest  trials  of  courage  and  fortitude.

The  principal  seat  of  the  mysteries  was
at  Memphis,  in  the  neighborhood  of  the
great  Pyramid.  They  were  of  two  kinds,
the  greater  and  the  less;  the  former  being
the  mysteries  of  Osiris  and  Serapis,  the
latter  those  of  Isis.  The  mysteries  of  Osi¬
ris  were  celebrated  at  the  autumnal  equinox,
those  of  Serapis  at  the  summer  solstice,  and
those  of  Isis  at  the  vernal  equinox.

The  candidate  was  required  to  exhibit
proofs  of  a  blameless  life.  For  some  days
previous  to  the  commencement  of  the  cere¬
monies  of  initiation,  he  abstained  from  all
unchaste  acts,  confined  himself  to  an  ex¬
ceedingly  light  diet,  from  which  animal
food  was  rigorously  excluded,  and  purified
himself  by  repeated  ablutions.

Apuleius,  [Met.,  lib.  xi.,)  wrho  had  been
initiated  in  all  of  them,  thus  alludes,  with
cautious  reticence,  to  those  of  Isis:  “The
priest,  all  the  profane  being  removed  to  a
distance,  taking  hold  of  me  by  the  hand,
brought  me  into  the  inner  recesses  of  the
sanctuary  itself,  clothed  in  a  new  linen
garment.  Perhaps,  curious  reader,  you
may  be  eager  to  know  what  was  then  said
and  done  I  would  tell  you  were  it  lawful
for  me  to  tell  you ;  you  should  know  it  if
it  were  lawful  for  you  to  hear.  But  both
the  ears  that  heard  those  things  and  the
tongue  that  told  them  would  reap  the  evil
results  of  their  rashness.  Still,  however,
kept  in  suspense,  as  you  probably  are,  with
religious  longing,  I  will  not  torment  you
with  long-protracted  anxiety.  Hear,  there¬
fore,  but  believe  what  is  the  truth.  I  ap¬
proached  the  confines  of  death,  and,  having
trod  on  the  threshold  of  Proserpine,  I  re¬
turned  therefrom,  being  borne  through  all
the  elements.  At  midnight  I  saw  the  sun
shining  with  its  brilliant  light;  and  I  ap¬
proached  the  presence  of  the  sods  beneath
and  the  gods  above,  and  stood  near  and
worshipped  them.  Behold,  I  have  related
to  you  things  of  which,  though  heard  by
you,  you  must  necessarily  remain  ignorant.”

The  first  degree,  as  we  may  term  it,  of
Egyptian  initiation  was  that  into  the  mys¬
teries  of  Isis.  What  was  its  peculiar  import,
we  are  unable  to  say.  Isis,  says  Knight,


EGYPTIAN


EGYPTIAN


243


was,  among  the  later  Egyptians,  the  per¬
sonification  of  universal  nature.  To  Apu-
leius  she  says:  “I  am  nature  —  the  parent
of  all  things,  the  sovereign  of  the  elements,
the  primary  progeny  of  time.”  Plutarch
tells  us  that  on  the  front  of  the  temple  of
Isis  was  placed  this  inscription:  “I,  Isis,
am  all  that  has  been,  that  is,  or  shall  be,
and  no  mortal  hath  ever  unveiled  me.”
Thus  we  may  conjecture  that  the  Isiac
mysteries  were  descriptive  of  the  alternate
decaying  and  renovating  powers  of  nature.
Higgins,  (AnacaL,  ii.  102,)  it  is  true,  says
that  during  the  mysteries  of  Isis  were  cele¬
brated  the  misfortunes  and  tragical  death
of  Osiris  in  a  sort  of  drama;  and  Apuleius
asserts  that  the  initiation  into  her  myste¬
ries  is  celebrated  as  bearing  a  close  resem¬
blance  to  a  voluntary  death,  with  a  preca¬
rious  chance  of  recovery.  But  Higgins
gives  no  authority  for  his  statement,  and
that  of  Apuleius  cannot  be  constrained  into
any  reference  to  the  enforced  death  of
Osiris.  It  is,  therefore,  probable  that  the
ceremonies  of  this  initiation  were  simply
preparatory  to  that  of  the  Osirian,  and
taught,  by  instructions  in  the  physical  laws
of  nature,  the  necessity  of  moral  purifica¬
tion,  a  theory  which  is  not  incompatible
with  all  the  mystical  allusions  of  Apuleius
when  he  describes  his  own  initiation.

The  mysteries  of  Serapis  constituted  the
second  degree  of  the  Egyptian  initiation.
Of  these  rites  we  have  but  a  scanty  knowl¬
edge.  Herodotus  is  entirely  silent  concern¬
ing  them,  and  Apuleuis,  calling  them  “  the
nocturnal  orgies  of  Serapis,  a  god  of  the  first
rank,”  only  intimates  that  they  followed
those  of  Isis,  and  were  preparatory  to  the
last  and  greatest  initiation.  Serapis  is  said
to  have  been  only  Osiris  while  in  Hades;
and  hence  the  Serapian  initiation  might
have  represented  the  death  of  Osiris,  but
leaving  the  lesson  of  resurrection  for  a  sub¬
sequent  initiation.  But  this  is  merely  a  con¬
jecture.

In  the  mysteries  of  Osiris,  which  were  the
consummation  of  the  Egyptian  system,  the
lesson  of  death  and  resurrection  was  sym¬
bolically  taught;  and  the  legend  of  the
murder  of  Osiris,  the  search  for  the  body,
its  discovery  and  restoration  to  life  is  scen-
ically  represented.  This  legend  of  initia¬
tion  was  as  follows.  Osiris,  a  wise  king  of
Egypt,  left  the  care  of  his  kingdom  to  his
wife  Isis,  and  travelled  for  three  years  to
communicate  to  other  nations  the  arts  of
civilization.  During  his  absence,  his  broth¬
er  Typhon  formed  a  secret  conspiracy  to
destroy  him  and  to  usurp  his  throne.  On
his  return,  Osiris  was  invited  by  Typhon
to  an  entertainment  in  the  month  of  No¬
vember,  at  which  all  the  conspirators  were
present.  Typhon  produced  a  chest  inlaid
with  gold,  and  promised  to  give  it  to  any


person  present  whose  body  would  most  ex¬
actly  fit  it.  Osiris  was  tempted  to  try  the
experiment;  but  he  had  no  sooner  laid
down  in  the  chest,  than  the  lid  was  closed
and  nailed  down,  and  the  chest  thrown  into
the  river  Nile.  The  chest  containing  the
body  of  Osiris  was,  after  being  for  a  long
time  tossed  about  by  the  waves,  finally
cast  up  at  Byblos  in  Phoenicia,  and  left  at
the  foot  of  a  tamarisk  tree.  Isis,  over¬
whelmed  with  grief  for  the  loss  of  her  hus¬
band,  set  out  on  a  journey,  and  traversed
the  earth  in  search  of  the  body.  After
many  adventures,  she  at  length  discovered
the  spot  whence  it  had  been  thrown  up  by
the  waves,  and  returned  with  it  in  triumph
to  Egypt.  It  was  then  proclaimed,  with
the  most  extravagant  demonstrations  of
joy,  that  Osiris  was  risen  from  the  dead
and  had  become  a  god.  Such,  with  slight
variations  of  details  by  different  writers,
are  the  general  outlines  of  the  Osiric  le¬
gend  which  was  represented  in  the  drama
of  initiation.  Its  resemblance  to  the  Hi-
ramic  legend  of  the  Masonic  system  will
be  readily  seen,  and  its  symbolism  will  be
easily  understood.  Osiris  and  Typhon  are
the  representatives  of  the  two  antagonistic
principles — good  and  evil,  light  and  dark¬
ness,  life  and  death.

There  is  also  an  astronomical  interpreta¬
tion  of  the  legend  which  makes  Osiris  the
sun  and  Typhon  the  season  of  winter,
which  suspends  the  fecundating  and  fertil¬
izing  powers  of  the  sun  or  destroys  its  life,
to  be  restored  only  by  the  return  of  invig¬
orating  spring.

The  sufferings  and  death  of  Osiris  were
the  great  mystery  of  the  Egyptian  religion.
His  being  the  abstract  idea  of  the  divine
goodness,  his  manifestation  upon  earth,  his
death,  his  resurrection,  and  his  subsequent
office  as  judge  of  the  dead  in  a  future  state,
look,  says  Wilkinson,  like  the  early  revela¬
tion  of  a  future  manifestation  of  the  deity
converted  into  a  mythological  fable.

Into  these  mysteries  Herodotus,  Plu¬
tarch,  and  Pythagoras  were  initiated,  and
the  former  two  have  given  brief  accounts
of  them.  But  their  own  knowledge  must
have  been  extremely  limited,  for,  as  Clem¬
ent  of  Alexandria  (Strom.,  v.  7,)  tells  us,
the  more  important  secrets  were  not  re¬
vealed  even  to  all  the  priests,  but  to  a
select  number  of  them  only.

Egyptian  Priests,  Initiations  of
the.  In  the  year  1770,  there  was  pub¬
lished  at  Berlin  a  work  entitled  Grata  Re-
poa ;  oder  Einweihungen  der  Egypfischen
Priester,  i.  e.  Crata  Kepoa ;  or,  Initiations
of  the  Egyptian  Priests.  This  book  was
subsequently  republished  in  1778,  and
translated  into  French  under  the  revision
of  Ragon,  and  published  at  Paris  in  1821,
by  Bailleul.  It  professed  to  give  the  whole


244


EHEYEH


EHEYEH


formula  of  the  iuitiation  into  the  mysteries

Eractised  by  the  ancient  Egyptian  priests.

enning  cites  the  work,  and  gives  an  out¬
line  of  the  system  as  if  he  thought  it  an
authentic  relation  ;  but  Giidicke  more  pru¬
dently  says  of  it  that  he  doubts  that  there
are  more  mysteries  described  in  the  book
than  were  ever  practised  by  the  ancient
Egyptian  priests.  The  French  writers
have  generally  accepted  it  as  genuine.
Forty  years  before,  the  Abb6  Terrasson  had
written  a  somewhat  similar  work,  in  which
he  pretended  to  describe  the  initiation  of
a  Prince  of  Egypt.  Kloss,  in  his  Bibli¬
ography,  has  placed  this  latter  work  under
the  head  of  “Romances  of  the  Order;  ”  and  a
similar  place  should  doubtless  be  assigned  to
theCrataRepoa.  The  curious  may,  however,
be  gratified  by  a  brief  detail  of  the  system.

According  to  the  Crata  Repoa,  the  priests
of  Egypt  conferred  their  initiation  at
Thebes.  The  mysteries  were  divided  into
the  following  seven  degrees.  1.  Pastoph-
oros.  2.  Neocoros.  3.  Melanophoros.  4.
Kistophoros.  5.  Balahate.  6.  Astrono-
mos.  7.  Propheta.  The  first  degree  was
devoted  to  instructions  in  the  physical
sciences;  the  second,  to  geometry  and  archi¬
tecture.  In  the  third  degree,  the  candidate
was  instructed  in  the  symbolical  death  of
Osiris,  and  was  made  acquainted  with  the
hieroglyphical  language.  In  the  fourth,  he
was  presented  with  the  book  of  the  laws  of
Egypt,  and  became  a  judge.  The  instruc¬
tions  of  the  fifth  degree  were  dedicated  to
chemistry,  and  of  the  sixth  to  astronomy
and  the  mathematical  sciences.  In  the
seventh  and  last  degree  the  candidate  re¬
ceived  a  detailed  explanation  of  all  the
mysteries,  his  head  was  shaved,  and  he  was
presented  with  a  cross,  which  he  was  con¬
stantly  to  carry,  a  white  mantle,  and  a
square  head  dress.  To  each  degree  was  af-
tached  a  word  and  sign.  Any  one  who
should  carefully  read  the  Crata  Repoa,
would  be  convinced  that,  so  far  from
being  founded  on  any  ancient  system  of
initiation,  it  was  simply  a  modern  in¬
vention  made  up  out  of  the  high  degrees
of  continental  Masonry.  It  is  indeed  sur-

!>rising  that  Lenning  and  Ragon  should
lave  treated  it  as  if  it  had  the  least  claims
to  antiquity.

Eheyeh  aslier  EJieyeli.  The  pro¬
nunciation  of  rvn<oc\s*  rvim  which
means,  I  am  that  I  am,  and  is  one  of  the
pentateuchal  names  of  God.  It  is  related
in  the  third  chapter  of  Exodus,  that  when
God  appeared  to  Moses  in  the  burning
bush,  and  directed  him  to  go  to  Pharaoh
and  to  the  children  of  Israel  in  Egypt,
Moses  required  that,  as  preliminary  to  his
mission,  he  should  be  instructed  in  the
name  of  God,  so  that,  when  he  was  asked
by  the  Israelites,  he  might  be  able  to  prove


his  mission  by  announcing  what  that  name
was;  and  God  said  to  him.n’n^dEheyeh,)
I  am  that  I  am;  and  he  directed  him  to  say,

“  I  am  hath  sent  you.”  Eheyeh  asher  eheyeh

is,  therefore,  the  name  of  God,  in  which
Moses  was  instructed  at  the  burning  bush.

Maimonides  thinks  that  when  the  Lord
ordered  Moses  to  tell  the  people  that  n’H N
(Eheyeh)  sent  him,  he  did  not  mean  that
he  should  only  mention  his  name;  for  if
they  were  already  acquainted  with  it,  he
told  them  nothing  new,  and  if  they  were
not,  it  was  not  likely  that  they  would  be
satisfied  by  saying  such  a  name  sent  me,  for
the  proof  would  still  be  wanting  that  this
was  really  the  name  of  God;  therefore,  he
not  only  told  them  the  name,  but  also  taught
them  its  signification.  In  those  times,  Sa-
baism  being  the  predominant  religion,  al¬
most  all  men  were  idolaters,  and  occupied
themselves  in  the  contemplation  of  the
heavens  and  the  sun  and  the  stars,  with¬
out  any  idea  of  a  personal  God  in  the
world.  Now,  the  Lord,  to  deliver  his  people
from  such  an  error,  said  to  Moses,  “  Go  and
tell  them  I  AM  THAT  I  AM  hath  sent  me
unto  you,” which  name  JTnN>  (Eheyeh,)
signifying  Being,  is  derived  from  H'li,  '
(heyeh,)  the  verb  of  existence,  and  which,
being  repeated  so  that  the  second  is  the
predicate  of  the  first,  contains  the  mys¬
tery.  This  is  as  if  he  had  said,  “  Ex¬
plain  to  them  that  I  am  what  I  am:  that  is,
that  my  Being  is  within  myself,  indepen¬
dent  of  every  other,  different  from  all  other
beings,  who  are  so  alone  by  virtue  of  my
distributing  it  to  them,  and  might  not  have
been,  nor  could  actually  be,  such  without

it. ”  So  that  n’nN  denotes  the  Divine
Being  Himself,  by  which  he  taught  Moses
not  only  the  name,  but  the  infallible  de¬
monstration  of  the  Fountain  of  Existence,
as  the  name  itself  denotes.  The  Kabba-
lists  say  that  Eheyeh  is  the  crown  or  high¬
est  of  the  Sephiroth,  and  that  it  is  the
name  that  was  hidden  in  the  most  secret
place  of  the  tabernacle.

The  Talmudists  had  many  fanciful  exer-
citations  on  this  word  rrnK,  and,  among
others,  said  that  it  is  equivalent  to  nin\
and  the  four  letters  of  which  it  is  formed
possess  peculiar  properties.  X  is  in  He¬
brew  numerically  equivalent  to  1,  and  *  to
10,  which  is  equal  to  11 ;  a  result  also  ob¬
tained  by  taking  the  second  and  third
letters  of  the  holy  name,  or  H  and  1,  which
are  5  and  6,  amounting  to  11.  But  the  5
and  6  invariably  produce  the  same  number
in  their  multiplication,  for  5  times  5  are
25,  and  6  times  6  are  36,  and  this  invari¬
able  product  of  n  and  *)  was  said  to  denote
the  unchangeableness  of  the  First  Cause.
Again,  lam,  n*f7N,  commences  with  {<  or
1,  the  beginning  of  numbers,  and  Jehovah,
nvp»  with  ♦  or  10,  the  end  of  numbers,


EIGHT


ELECT


245


which  signified  that  God  was  the  begin¬
ning  and  end  of  all  things.  The  phrase,
Eheyeh  asher  eheyeli,  is  of  importance  in  the
study  of  the  legend  of  the  Royal  Arch  sys¬
tem.  Some  years  ago,  that  learned  Mason,
William  S.  Rockwell,  while  preparing  his
A  hi  man  Rezon  for  the  State  of  Georgia,
undertook,  but  beyond  that  jurisdiction
unsuccessfully,  to  introduce  it  as  a  password
to  the  veils.

Eight.  Among  the  Pythagoreans  the
number  eight  was  esteemed  as  the  first  cube,
being  formed  by  the  continued  multiplica¬
tion  of  2  X  2  X  2,  and  signified  friendship,
prudence,  counsel,  and  justice;  and,  as  the
cube  or  reduplication  of  the  first  even  num¬
ber,  it  was  made  to  refer  to  the  primitive
law  of  nature,  which  supposes  all  men  to
be  equal.  Christian  numerical  symbolo-
gists  have  called  it  the  symbol  of  the  resur¬
rection,  because  Jesus  rose  on  the  8th  day,
i.  e.  the  day  after  the  7th,  and  because  the
name  of  Jesus  in  Greek  numerals,  corres¬
ponding  to  its  Greek  letters,  is  10,  8,  200,
70,  400,  200,  which,  being  added  up,  is  888.
Hence,  too,  they  call  it  the  Dominical  Num¬
ber.  As  8  persons  were  saved  in  the  ark,
those  who,  like  Faber,  have  adopted  the
theory  that  the  Arkite  Rites  pervaded
all  the  religions  of  antiquity,  find  an  iin-

Kortant  symbolism  in  this  number,  and  as
Toah  was  the  type  of  the  resurrection,  they
again  find  in  it  a  reference  to  that  doctrine.
It  can,  however,  be  scarcely  reckoned
among  the  numerical  symbols  of  Masonry.

Eiglity-Onc.  A  sacred  number  in
the  high  degrees,  because  it  is  the  square
of  nine,  which  is  again  the  square  of  three.
The  Pythagoreans,  however,  who  considered
the  nine  as  a  fatal  number,  especially
dreaded  eighty-one,  because  it  was  pro¬
duced  by  the  multiplication  of  nine  bv  itself.

El,  Sx.  One  of  the  Hebrew  names  of
God,  signifying  the  Mighty  One.  It  is  the
root  of  many  of  the  other  names  of  Deity,
and  also,  therefore,  of  many  of  the  sacred
words  in  the  high  degrees.  Bryant  ( Anc .
Myth.,  i.  16,)  says  it  was  the  true  name  of
God,  but  transferred  by  the  Sabians  to  the
sun,  whence  the  Greeks  borrowed  their
hellos.

Elclianan,  pnSx-  God  has  graciously
given.  In  the  authorized  version,  it  is  im¬
properly  translated  Elhanan.  Jerome  says
that  it  meant  David,  because  in  2  Sam.
xxi.  19,  it  is  said  that  Elchanan  slew  Go¬
liath.  A  significant  word  in  the  high  de¬
grees,  which  has  undergone  much  corrup¬
tion  and  various  changes  of  form.  In  the
old  rituals  it  is  Eleham.  Lenning  gives  El-
chanam,  and  incorrectly  translates,  mercy
of  God;  Delaunay  calls  it  Eliham,  and
translates  it,  God  of  the  people,  in  which
Pike  concurs.


Elders.  This  word  is  used  in  some  of
the  old  Constitutions  to  designate  those
Masons  who,  from  their  rank  and  age,  were
deputed  to  obligate  Apprentices  when  ad¬
mitted  into  the  Craft.  Thus  in  the  Con¬
stitutions  of  Masonrie,  preserved  in  the  ar¬
chives  of  the  Lodge  at  York,  with  the  date
of  1704,  and  which  were  first  published  by
Bro.  Wm.  J.  Hughan,  {Hist.  Frem.  in  York,
p.  98,)  we  find  this  expression,  Tunc,  unus  ex
Senioribus  Teneat  librum,  etc.,  which  in
another  manuscript,  dated  1693,  preserved
in  the  same  archives,  and  for  the  publica¬
tion  of  which  we  are  also  indebted  to  Bro.
Hughan,  the  same  passage  is  thus  trans¬
lated,  “  Then  one  of  the  elders  takeing  the
Booke,  and  that  hee  or  shee  that  is  to  bee
made  Mason  shall  lay  their  hands  thereon,
and  the  charge  shall  be  given.”

Elect.  See  Elu.

Elect  JBirotlier.  The  seventh  de¬
gree  of  the  Rite  of  Zinnendorf  and  of  the
National  Grand  Lodge  of  Berlin.

Elect  Cohens,  Order  of.  See

Paschalis,  Martin.

Elect  Commander,  ( Elu  Com-
mandeur.)  A  degree  mentioned  in  Fus-
tier’s  nomenclature  of  degrees.

Elect,  Grand.  ( Grand  Elu.)  The
fourteenth  degree  of  the  Chapter  of  the
Emperors  of  the  East  and  West.  The
same  as  the  Grand  Elect,  Perfect  and  Sub¬
lime  Mason  of  the  Scottish  Rite.

Elect  Eady,  Sublime.  [Dame,  Elu
Sublime.)  An  androgynous  degree  con¬
tained  in  the  collection  of  Pyron.

Elect,  Eittle  English.  (Petit  Elu
Anglais.)  The  Little  English  Elect  was  a
degree  of  the  Ancient  Chapter  of  Cler¬
mont.  The  degree  is  now  extinct.

Elect  Master.  ( Maitre  Elu.)  1.
The  thirteenth  degree  of  the  collection  of
the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.  2.
The  fifth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Zinnendorf.

Elect  of  Fifteen.  (Elu  des  Quinze.)
The  tenth  degree  in  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite.  The  place  of  meet¬
ing  is  called  a  chapter;  the  emblematic
color  is  black,  strewed  with  tears  ;  and  the
principal  officers  are  a  Thrice  illustrious
Master  and  two  Inspectors.  The  history  of
this  degree  develops  the  continuation  and
conclusion  of  the  punishment  inflicted  on
three  traitors  who,  just  before  the  conclu¬
sion  of  the  Temple,  had  committed  a  crime
of  the  most  atrocious  character.  The  de¬
gree  is  now  more  commonly  called  Illustrious
Elu  of  the  Fifteen.  The  same  degree  is
found  in  the  Chapter  of  Emperors  of  the
East  and  West,  and  in  the  Rite  of  Miz-
raim.

Elect  of  London.  (Eh is  des  Lon-
dres.)  The  seventieth  degree  of  the  collec¬
tion  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.


246


ELECT


ELEMENTS


Elect  of  Nine.  (Elu  deg  Neuf.)  The!
ninth  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  |
Rite.  In  the  old  rituals  there  were  two  |
officers  who  represented  Solomon  and
Stolkin.  But  in  the  revised  ritual  of  the
Southern  Jurisdiction,  the  principal  officers
are  a  Master  and  two  Inspectors.  The
meetings  are  called  Chapters.  The  degree
details  the  mode  in  which  certain  traitors,
who,  just  before  the  completion  of  the  Tem¬
ple,  had  been  engaged  in  an  execrable
deed  of  villanv,  received  their  punishment.
The  symbolic  colors  are  red,  white,  and
black  ;  the  white  emblematic  of  the  purity
of  the  knights;  the  red,  of  the  crime  which
was  committed;  and  the  black,  of  grief.
This  is  the  first  of  the  elu  degrees,  and  the
one  on  which  the  whole  elu  system  has
been  founded.

Elect  of  Nine  and  Fifteen.  [Au-
gerwdhlte  der  Neun  und  der  Funfzehn.)  The
first  and  second  points  of  the  fourth  degree
of  the  old  system  of  the  Royal  York  Lodge
of  Berlin.

Elect  of  Perigman.  ( Elu  de  Pe-

rignan.)  A  degree  illustrative  of  the  pun¬
ishment  inflicted  upon  certain  criminals
whose  exploits  constitute  a  portion  of  the
legend  of  Symbolic  Masonry.  The  sub¬
stance  of  this  degree  is  to  be  found  in  the
Elect  of  Nine,  and  Elect  of  Fifteen  in  the
Scottish  Rite,  with  both  of  which  it  is
closely  connected.  It  is  the  sixth  degree
of  the  Adonhiramite  Rite.  See  Perignan.

Elect  of  tlie  New  Jerusalem.
Formerly  the  eighth  and  last  of  the  high
degrees  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Berlin.

Elect  of  tlie  Twelve  Tribes.  [Elu
des  douse  Tribus.)  The  seventeenth  degree
of  the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter
of  France.

Elect  of  Truth.  Kite  of.  [Rite  des
Elus  de  la  Verite.)  This  Rite  was  instituted
in  1776,  by  the  Lodge  of  Perfect  Union,  at
Rennes,  in  France.  A  few  Lodges  in  the
interior  of  France  adopted  this  regime;  but,
notwithstanding  its  philosophical  character,
it  never  became  popular,  and  finally,  about
the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century,  fell  into
disuse.  It  consisted  of  twelve  degrees  di¬
vided  into  two  classes,  as  follows :

1st  Class.  Knights  Adepts.  1.  Appren¬
tice;  2.  Fellow  Craft;  3.  Master;  4.  Per¬
fect  Master.

2d  Class.  Elects  of  Truth.  5.  Elect  of
Nine;  6.  Elect  of  Fifteen;  7.  Master  Elect;
8.  Architect ;  9.  Second  Architect ;  10.
Grand  Architect;  11.  Knight  of  the  East;
12.  Prince  of  Rose  Croix.

Eleet  of  Twelve.  See  Knight  Elect
of  Twelve.

Eleet.  Perfeet.  (Parfait  Elu.)  The
twelfth  degree  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter
of  France,  and  also  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.


Elect,  Perfeet  and  Sublime
Mason.  See  Perfection,  Degree  of.

Elect  Philosopher.  A  degree

under  this  name  is  found  in  the  instruc¬
tions  of  the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite,  and
in  the  collection  of  Vianv.

Elect  Secret,  Severe  Inspector.
( Elu  Secret,  Severe  Inspecteur .)  The  four¬
teenth  degree  of  the  collection  of  the  Me¬
tropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Elect,  Sovereign.  (Elu  Souverain.)
The  fifty-ninth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Miz¬
raim.

Elect,  Snblime.  [Elu  Sublime.)  The
fifteenth  degree  of  the  collection  of  the  Me¬
tropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Elect,  Supreme.  (Elu  Supreme.)
The  seventy-fourth  degree  of  the  collection
of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.
It  is  also  a  degree  in  the  collection  of
M.  Pyron,  and,  under  the  name  of  Tab¬
ernacle  of  Perfect  Elect,  is  contained  in
the  archives  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the
Philosophic  Rite.

Election  of  Officers.  The  election
of  the  officers  of  a  Lodge  is  generally  held
on  the  meeting  which  precedes  the  festival
of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  and  sometimes
on  that  festival  itself.  Should  a  Lodge
fail  to  make  the  election  at  that  time,  no
election  can  be  subsequently  held  except
by  dispensation;  and  it  is  now  very  gener¬
ally  admitted,  that  should  any  one  of  the
officers  die  or  remove  from  the  jurisdiction
during  the  period  for  which  he  was  elected,
no  election  can  take  place  to  supply  the
vacancy,  but  the  office  must  be  filled  tem¬
porarily  until  the  next  election.  If  it  be
the  Master,  the  Senior  Warden  succeeds  to
the  office.  For  the  full  exposition  of  the
law  on  this  subject,  see  Vacancy.

Elective  Officers.  In  this  country,
all  the  officers  of  a  Symbolic  Lodge  except
the  Deacons,  Stewards,  and  sometimes  the
Tiler,  are  elected  by  the  members  of  the
Lodge.  In  England,  the  rule  is  different.
There  the  Master,  Treasurer,  and  Tiler  only
are  elected ;  the  other  officers  are  appointed
by  the  Master.

Eleham.  See  Elchanan.

Elements.  It  was  the  doctrine  of  the
old  philosophies,  sustained  by  the  author¬
ity  of  Aristotle,  that  there  were  four  prin¬
ciples  of  matter — fire,  air,  earth,  and  water,
—  which  they  called  elements.  Modern
science  has  shown  the  fallacy  of  the  theory.
But  it  was  also  taught  by  the  Kabbalists,
and  afterwards  by  the  Rosicrucians,  who,
according  to  the  Abb6  de  Yillars,  (Le  Comte
'  de  Gabalis,)  peopled  them  with  supernatural
beings  called,  in  the  fire,  Salamanders;  in
the  air,  Sylphs ;  in  the  earth,  Gnomes ;  and
in  the  water,  Undines.  From  the  Rosicru¬
cians  and  the  Kabbalists,  the  doctrine


ELEPHANTA


ELEUSINIAN


247


passed  over  into  some  of  the  high  degrees  of
Masonry,  and  is  especially  referred  to  in  the
Ecossais  or  Scottish  Knight  of  St.  Andrew,
originally  invented  by  the  Chevalier  Ram¬
say.  In  this  degree  we  find  the  four  angels
of  the  four  elements  described  as  Andarel,
the  angel  of  fire;  Casmaran,  of  air;  Tal-
liad,  of  water ;  and  Furlac,  of  earth ;  and
the  signs  refer  to  the  same  elements.

Eleplianta.  The  cavern  of  Elephanta,
situated  on  the  island  of  Gharipour,  in  the
Gulf  of  Bombay,  is  the  most  ancient  tem¬
ple  in  the  world,  and  was  the  principal
place  for  the  celebration  of  the  mysteries
of  India.  It  is  one  hundred  and  thirty-five
feet  square  and  eighteen  feet  high,  sup¬
ported  by  tour  massive  pillars,  and  its  walls
covered  on  all  sides  with  statues  and  carved
decorations.  Its  adytum  at  the  western  ex¬
tremity,  which  was  accessible  only  to  the
initiated,  was  dedicated  to  the  Phallic  wor¬
ship.  On  each  side  were  cells  and  passages
for  the  purpose  of  initiation,  and  a  sacred
orifice  for  the  mystical  representation  of
the  doctrine  of  regeneration.  See  Maurice’s
Indian  Antiquities,  for  a  full  description  of
this  ancient  scene  of  initiation.

Eleusinian  Mysteries.  Of  all  the
mysteries  of  the  ancient  religions,  those
celebrated  at  the  village  of  Eleusis,  near
the  city  of  Athens,  were  the  most  splendid
and  the  most  popular.  To  them  men  came,
says  Cicero,  from  the  remotest  regions  to
be  initiated.  They  were  also  the  most  an¬
cient,  if  we  may  believe  St.  Epiphanius,
who  traces  them  to  the  reign  of  Inachus,
more  than  eighteen  hundred  years  before
the  Christian  era.  They  were  dedicated
to  the  goddess  Demeter,  the  Ceres  of  the
Romans,  who  was  worshipped  by  the
Greeks  as  the  symbol  of  the  prolific  earth ;
and  in  them  were  scenically  represented
the  loss  and  the  recovery  of  Persephone,  and
the  doctrines  of  the  unity  of  God  and  the
immortality  of  the  soul  were  esoterically
taught.  The  learned  Faber  believed  that
there  was  an  intimate  connection  between
the  Arkite  worship  and  the  mysteries  of
Eleusis;  but  Faber’s  theory  was  that  the
Arkite  rites,  which  he  traced  to  almost  all
the  nations  of  antiquity,  symbolized,  in  the
escape  of  Noah  and  the  renovation  of  the
earth,  the  doctrines  of  the  resurrection  and
the  immortal  life.  Plutarch  ( De  Is.  et  Os. )
says  that  the  travels  of  Isis  in  search  of
Osiris  were  not  different  from  those  of
Demeter  in  searcji  of  Persephone  ;  and
this  view  has  been  adopted  by  St.  Croix
( Myst .  du  Pug.)  and  by  Creuzer,(iS'y»i6.;)  and
hence  we  may  well  suppose  that  the  recov¬
ery  of  the  former  at  Byblos,  and  of  the  lat¬
ter  in  Hades,  were  both  intended  to  sym¬
bolize  the  restoration  of  the  soul  after
death  to  eternal  life.  The  learned  have


generally  admitted  that  when  Virgil,  in  the
sixth  book  of  his  AEneid,  depicted  the  de¬
scent  of  iEneas  into  hell,  he  intended  to
give  a  representation  of  the  Eleusinian
mysteries.

The  mysteries  were  divided  into  two
classes,  the  lesser  and  the  greater.  The
lesser  mysteries  were  celebrated  on  the
banks  of  the  Ilissus,  whose  waters  supplied
the  means  of  purification  of  the  aspirants.
The  greater  mysteries  were  celebrated  in
the  temple  at  Eleusis.  An  interval  of  six
months  occurred  between  them,  the  former
taking  place  in  March  and  the  latter  in
September ;  which  has  led  some  writers  to
suppose  that  there  was  some  mystical  refer¬
ence  to  the  vernal  and  autumnal  equinoxes.
But,  considering  the  character  of  Demeter
as  the  goddess  of  Agriculture,  it  might  be
imagined,  although  this  is  a  mere  conjec¬
ture,  that  the  reference  was  to  seed-time  and
harvest.  A  year,  however,  was  required  to
elapse  before  the  initiate  into  the  lesser
mysteries  was  granted  admission  into  the
greater.

In  conducting  the  mysteries,  there  wTere
four  officers,  namely:  1.  The  Hierophant,
or  explainer  of  the  sacred  things.  As  the
pontifex  maximus  in  Rome,  so  he  was  the
chief  priest  of  Attica ;  he  presided  over  the
ceremonies  and  explained  the  nature  of  the
mysteries  to  the  initiated.  2.  The  Da-
douchus,  or  torch-bearer,  who  appears  to
have  acted  as  the  immediate  assistant  of
the  Hierophant.  3.  The  Hieroceryx,  or
sacred  herald,  who  had  the  general  care  of
the  temple,  guarded  it  from  the  profana¬
tion  of  the  uninitiated,  and  took  charge  of
the  aspirant  during  the  trials  of  initiation.
4.  The  Epibom.us,  or  altar-server,  who  con¬
ducted  the  sacrifices.

Theceremoniesofinitiationintothelesser
mysteries  were  altogether  purificatory,  and
intended  to  prepare  the  neophyte  for  his
reception  into  the  more  sublime  rites  of
the  greater  mysteries.  This,  an  ancient
poet,  quoted  by  Plutarch,  illustrates  by
saying  that  sleep  is  the  lesser  mysteries  of
the  death.  The  candidate  who  desired  to
pass  through  this  initiation  entered  the
modest  temple,  erected  for  that  purpose  on
the  borders  of  the  Ilissus,  and  there  sub¬
mitted  to  the  required  ablutions,  typical  of
moral  purification.  The  Dadouchus  then
placed  his  feet  upon  the  skins  of  the  vic¬
tims  which  had  been  immolated  to  Jupiter.
Hesychius  says  that  only  the  left  foot  was
placed  on  the  skins.  In  this  position  he
was  asked  if  he  had  eaten  bread,  and  if  he
was  pure;  and  his  replies  being  satisfactory,
he  passed  through  other  symbolic  cere¬
monies,  the  mystical  signification  of  which
was  given  to  him,  an  oath  of  secresy  having
been  previously  administered.  The  initiate


248


ELEUSINIAN


ELEUSINIAN


into  the  lesser  mysteries  was  called  a  mys-
fes,  a  title  which,  being  derived  from  a
Greek  word  meaning  to  shut  the  eyes,  sig¬
nified  that  he  was  yet  blind  as  to  the  greater
truths  thereafter  to  be  revealed.

The  greater  mysteries  lasted  for  nine
days,  and  were  celebrated  partly  on  the
Thriasian  plain,  which  surrounded  the  tem¬
ple,  and  partly  in  the  temple  of  Eleusis
itself.  Of  this  temple,  one  of  the  most
magnificent  and  the  largest  in  Greece,  not
a  vestige  is  now  left.  Its  antiquity  was
very  great,  having  been  in  existence,  ac¬
cording  to  Aristides  the  rhetorician,  when
the  Dorians  marched  against  Athens.  It
was  burned  by  the  retreating  Persians
under  Xerxes,  but  immediately  rebuilt,
and  finally  destroyed  with  the  city  by
Alaric,  “  the  Scourge  of  God,”  and  all  that
is  now  left  of  Eleusis  and  its  spacious  tem¬
ple  is  the  mere  site  occupied  by  the  insig¬
nificant  Greek  village  of  Lepsina,  an  evi¬
dent  corruption  of  the  ancient  name.

The  public  processions  on  the  plain  and
on  the  sacred  way  from  Athens  to  Eleusis
were  made  in  honor  of  Demeter  and  Perse¬
phone,  and  made  mystical  allusions  to
events  in  the  life  of  both,  and  of  the  infant
Iacchus.  These  processions  were  made  in
the  daytime,  but  the  initiation  was  noc¬
turnal,  and  was  reserved  for  the  nights  of
the  sixth  and  seventh  days.

The  herald  opened  the  ceremonies  of
initiation  into  the  greater  mysteries  by  the
proclamation,  e/caf,  eKar,  ears  pefaloi,  “  Re¬
tire,  O  ye  profane.”  Thus  were  the  sacred
precincts  tiled.  The  aspirant  was  clothed
with  the  skin  of  a  calf.  An  oath  of  secrecy
was  administered,  and  he  was  then  asked,
“Have  you  eaten  bread?”  The  reply  to
which  was,  “  I  have  fasted ;  I  have  drunk
the  sacred  mixture;  I  have  taken  it  out  of
the  chest ;  I  have  spun ;  I  have  placed  it  in
the  basket,  and  from  the  basket  laid  it  in
the  chest.”  By  this  reply,  the  aspirant
showed  that  he  had  been  duly  prepared  by
initiation  into  the  lesser  mysteries;  for
Clement  of  Alexandria  says  that  this
formula  was  a  shibboleth,  or  password,  by
which  the  mvstse,  or  initiates,  into  the
lesser  mysteries  were  known  as  such,  and
admitted  to  the  epopteia  or  greater  initia¬
tion.  The  gesture  of  spinning  wool,  in  imi¬
tation  of  what  Demeter  did  in  the  time  of
her  affliction,  seemed  also  to  be  used  as  a
sign  of  recognition.

The  aspirant  was  now  clothed  in  the  sa¬
cred  tunic,  and  awaited  in  the  vestibule  the
opening  of  the  doors  of  the  sanctuary.

What  subsequently  took  place  must  be
left  in  great  part  to  conjecture,  although
modern  writers  have  availed  themselves
of  all  the  allusions  that  are  to  be  found  in
the  ancients.  The  temple  consisted  of


three  parts :  the  megaron,  or  sanctuary,  cor¬
responding  to  the  holy  place  of  the  Temple
of  Solomon  ;  the  anactoron,  or  holy  of  ho¬
lies,  and  a  subterranean  apartment  beneath
the  temple.  Each  of  these  was  probably
occupied  at  a  different  portion  of  the  initia¬
tion.  The  representation  of  the  infernal
regions,  and  the  punishment  of  the  unini¬
tiated  impious  was  appropriated  to  the  sub¬
terranean  apartment,  and  was,  as  Sylvestre
de  Sacy  says,  [Notes  to  fit.  Croix ,  i.  360,)  an
episode  of  the  drama  which  represented  the
adventures  of  Isis,  Osiris,  and  Typhon,  or
of  Demeter,  Persephone,  and  Pluto.  This
drama,  the  same  author  thinks,  represented
the  carrying  away  of  Persephone,  the
travels  of  Demeter  in  search  of  her  lost
daughter,  her  descent  into  hell  ;  the  union
of  Pluto  with  Persephone,  and  was  termi¬
nated  by  the  return  of  Demeter  into  the
upper  world  and  the  light  of  day.  The
representation  of  this  drama  commenced
immediately  after  the  profane  had  been
sent  from  the  temple.  And  it  is  easy  to
understand  how  the  groans  and  wail¬
ings  with  which  the  temple  at  one  time
resounded  might  symbolize  the  sufferings
and  the  death  of  man,  and  the  subse¬
quent  rejoicings  at  the  return  of  the  god¬
dess  might  be  typical  of  the  joy  for  the
restoration  of  the  soul  to  eternal  life.
Others  have  conjectured  that  the  drama  of
the  mysteries  represented,  in  the  deporta¬
tion  of  Persephone  to  Hades  by  Pluto,  the
departure,  as  it  were,  of  the  sun,  or  the
deprivation  of  its  vivific  power  during  the
winter  months,  and  her  reappearance  on
earth,  the  restoration  of  the  prolific  sun  in
summer.  Others  again  tell  us  that  the
last  act  of  the  mysteries  represented  the
restoration  to  life  of  the  murdered  Zagreus,
or  Dionysus,  by  Demeter.  Diodorus  says
that  the  members  of  the  body  of  Zagreus
lacerated  by  the  Titans  was  represented  in
the  ceremonies  of  mysteries,  as  well  as  in
the  Orphic  hymns ;  but  he  prudently  adds
that  he  was  not  allowed  to  reveal  the  de¬
tails  to  the  uninitiated.  Whatever  was
the  precise  method  of  symbolism,  it  is  evi¬
dent  that  the  true  interpretation  was  the
restoration  from  death  to  eternal  life,  and
that  the  funereal  part  of  the  initiation  re¬
ferred  to  a  loss,  and  the  exultation  after¬
wards  to  a  recovery.  Hence  it  was  folly
to  deny  the  coincidence  that  exists  between
this  Eleusinian  drama  and  that  enacted  in
the  third  degree  of  Masonry.  It  is  not
claimed  that  the  one  was  the  uninterrupted
successor  of  the  other,  but  there  must  have
been  a  common  ideal  source  for  the  origin  of
both.  The  lesson,  the  dogma,  the  symbol,
and  the  method  of  instruction  are  the  same.
Having  now,  as  Pindar  says,  “descended
beneath  the  hollow  earth,  and  beheld  those


ELEUSINIAN


ELOQUENCE


249


mysteries,”  the  initiate  ceased  to  be  a
m'ystes,  or  blind  man,  and  was  thenceforth
called  an  epopt,  a  word  signifying  he  who
beholds.

The  Eleusinian  mysteries,  which,  by
their  splendor,  surpassed  all  contemporary
institutions  of  the  kind,  were  deemed  of  so
much  importance  as  to  be  taken  under  the
special  protection  of  the  state,  and  to  the
council  of  five  hundred  were  intrusted  the
observance  of  the  ordinances  which  regu¬
lated  them.  By  a  law  of  Solon,  the  magis¬
trates  met  every  year  at  the  close  of  the
festival,  to  pass  sentence  upon  any  who  had
violated  or  transgressed  any  of  the  rules
which  governed  the  administration  of  the
sacred  rites.  Any  attempt  to  disclose  the
esoteric  ceremonies  of  initiation  was  pun¬
ished  with  death.  Plutarch  tells  us,  in  his
Life  of  Ale' blades,  that  that  votary  ofpleasure
was  indicted  for  sacrilege,  because  he  had
imitated  the  mysteries,  and  shown  them  to
his  companions  in  the  same  dress  as  that
worn  by  the  Hierophant ;  and  we  get  from
Livy  (xxxi.  14,)  the  following  relation  :

Two  Acarnanian  youths,  who  had  not
been  initiated,  accidentally  entered  the
temple  of  Demeter  during  the  celebration
of  the  mysteries.  They  were  soon  detected
by  their  absurd  questions,  and  being  carried
to  the  managers  of  the  temple,  although
it  was  evident  that  their  intrusion  was  ac¬
cidental,  they  were  put  to  death  for  so  hor¬
rible  a  crime.  It  is  not,  therefore,  surpris¬
ing  that,  in  the  account  of  them,  we  should
find  such  uncertain  and  even  conflicting
assertions  of  the  ancient  writers,  who  hesi¬
tated  to  discuss  publicly  so  forbidden  a
subject.

The  qualifications  for  initiation  were  ma¬
turity  of  age  and  purity  of  life.  Such  was
the  theory,  although  in  practice  these
qualifications  were  not  always  rigidly  re¬
garded.  But  the  early  doctrine  was  that
nonebutthe  pure,  morally  and  ceremonially,
could  be  admitted  to  initiation.  At  first,
too,  the  right  of  admission  was  restricted
to  natives  of  Greece;  but  even  in  the  time
of  Herodotus  this  law  was  dispensed  with,
and  the  citizens  of  all  countries  were  con¬
sidered  eligible.  So  in  time  these  myste¬
ries  were  extended  beyond  the  limits  of
Greece,  and  in  the  days  of  the  empire  they
were  introduced  into  Rome,  where  they  be¬
came  exceedingly  popular.

The  scenic  representations,  the  partici¬
pation  in  secret  signs  and  words  of  recog¬
nition, the  instruction  in  a  peculiar  dogma,
and  the  establishment  of  a  hidden  bond  of
fraternity,  gave  attraction  to  these  myste¬
ries,  which  lasted  until  the  very  fall  of  the
Roman  empire,  and  exerted  a  powerful  in¬
fluence  on  the  mystical  associations  of  the
Middle  Ages.  The  bond  of  union  which
2  G


connects  them  with  the  modern  initiations
of  Freemasonry  is  evident  in  the  common
thought  which  pervades  and  identifies  both  ;
though  it  is  difficult,  and  perhaps  impos¬
sible,  to  trace  all  the  connecting  links  of
the  historic  chain.  We  see  the  beginning
and  we  see  the  end  of  one  pervading  idea,
but  the  central  point  is  hidden  from  us  to
await  some  future  discoverer.

Eleven.  In  the  Prestonian  lectures,
eleven  was  a  mystical  number,  and  was  the
final  series  of  steps  in  the  winding  stairs
of  the  Fellow  Craft,  which  were  said  to
consist  of  3,  5,  7,  9,  and  11.  The  eleven
was  referred  to  the  eleven  apostles  after  the
defection  of  Judas,  and  to  the  eleven  sons
of  Jacob  after  Joseph  went  into  Egypt.
But  when  the  lectures  were  revived  by
Hemming,  the  eleven  was  struck  out.  In
Templar  Masonry,  however,  eleven  is  still
significant  as  being  the  constitutional  num¬
ber  required  to  open  a  Commandery  ;  and
here  it  is  evidently  allusive  of  the  eleven
true  disciples.

Eligibility  for  Initiation.  See

Qualifications  of  Candidates.

Eliliorepli.  One  of  Solomon’s  secre¬
taries.  See  Ahiah.

Elizabeth  of  England.  Preston
(. Illustrations ,  B.  IV.,  $  iv.,)  states  that  the
following  circumstance  is  recorded  of  this
sovereign :  Hearing  that  the  Masons  were
in  possession  of  secrets  which  they  would
not  reveal,  and  being  jealous  of  all  secret
assemblies,  she  sent  an  armed  force  to  York,
with  intent  to  break  up  their  annual  Grand
Lodge.  This  design,  however,  was  happily
frustrated  by  the  interposition  of  Sir
Thomas  Sackville,  who  took  care  to  initi¬
ate  some  of  the  chief  officers  whom  she
had  sent  on  this  duty.  They  joined  in
communication  with  the  Masons,  and  made
so  favorable  a  report  to  the  queen  on  their
return  that  she  countermanded  her  orders,
and  never  afterwards  attempted  to  disturb
the  meetings  of  the  Fraternity.  The  icon¬
oclasts,  of  course,  assert  that  the  story  is
void  of  authenticity.

Elizabeth  of  Portugal.  In  May,
1792,  this  queen,  having  conceived  a  suspi¬
cion  of  the  Lodges  in  Madeira,  gave  an
order  to  the  governor  to  arrest  all  the  Free¬
masons  in  the  island,  and  deliver  them  over
to  the  Inquisition.  The  rigorous  execution
of  this  order  occasioned  an  emigration  of
many  families,  ten  of  whom  repaired  to
New  York,  and  were  liberally  assisted  by
the  Masons  of  that  city.

Elohim.  O'hSn.  A  name  applied  in
Hebrew  to  any  deity,  but  sometimes  also
to  the  true  God.  According  to  Lanci,  it
means  the  most  beneficent.  It  is  not,  how¬
ever,  much  used  in  Masonry.

Eloquence  of  Masonry.  Lawyers


250


ELU


EMBLEM


boast  of  the  eloquence  of  the  bar,  and
oint  to  the  arguments  of  counsel  in  well
nown  cases ;  the  clergy  have  the  eloquence
of  the  pulpit  exhibited  in  sermons,  many
of  which  have  a  world-wide  reputation;
and  statesmen  vaunt  of  the  eloquence  of
Congress  —  some  of  the  speeches,  however,
being  indebted,  it  is  said,  for  their  power
and  beauty,  to  the  talent  of  the  stenographic
reporter  rather  than  the  member  who  is
supposed  to  be  the  author.

Freemasonry,  too,  has  its  eloquence,
which  is  sometimes,  although  not  always,
of  a  very  high  order.  This  eloquence  is  to
be  found  in  the  addresses,  orations,  and
discourses  which  have  usually  beeu  de¬
livered  on  the  great  festivals  of  the  Order,
at  consecrations  of  Lodges,  dedications  of
halls,  and  the  laying  of  foundation-stones.
These  addresses  constitute,  in  fact,  the
principal  part  of  the  early  literature  of
Freemasonry.  See  Addresses,  Masonic.

Elu.  The  fourth  degree  of  the  French
Rite.  See  Elus.

Elul.  V?X.  The  sixth  month  of  the
ecclesiastical  and  the  twelfth  of  the  civil
year  of  the  Jews.  The  twelfth  also,  there¬
fore,  of  the  Masonic  calendar  used  iu  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  It
begius  on  the  new  moon  of  August  or  Sep¬
tember,  and  consists  of  twenty-nine  days.

Elus.  The  French  word  elu  means
elected;  and  the  degrees,  whose  object  is  to
detail  the  detection  and  punishment  of  the
actors  in  the  crime  traditionally  related  in
the  third  degree,  are  called  Elus,  or  the
degrees  of  the  Elected,  because  they  re¬
ferred  to  those  of  the  Craft  who  were
chosen  or  elected  to  make  the  discovery,
and  to  inflict  the  punishment.  They  form
a  particular  system  of  Masonry,  and  are  to
be  found  in  every  Rite,  if  not  in  all  in
name,  at  least  in  principle.  In  the  York
and  American  Rites,  the  Elu  is  incorporated
in  the  Master’s  degree ;  in  the  French  Rite
it  constitutes  an  independent  degree ;  and  in
the  Scottish  Rite  it  consists  of  three  de¬
grees,  the  ninth,  tenth,  and  eleventh.  Ra-
gon  counts  the  five  preceding  degrees  among
the  Elus,  but  they  more  properly  belong  to
the  Order  of  Masters.  The  symbolism  of
these  Elu  degrees  has  been  greatly  mistaken
and  perverted  by  anti-Masonic  writers,  who
have  thus  attributed  to  Masonry  a  spirit  of
vengeance  which  is  not  its  characteristic.
They  must  be  looked  upon  as  conveying
only  a  symbolic  meaning.  Those  higher
degrees,  in  which  the  object  of  the  election
is  changed  and  connected  with  Templarism,
are  more  properly  called  Kadoshes.  Thory
says  that  all  the  Elus  are  derived  from  the
degree  of  Kadosh,  which  preceded  them.
The  reverse,  I  think,  is  the  truth.  The
Elu  system  sprang  naturally  from  the


Master’s  degree,  and  was  only  applied  to
Templarism  when  De  Molay  was  substituted
for  Hiram  the  Builder.

Emanation.  Literally,  “a  flowing
forth.”  The  doctrine  of  emanations  was  a
theory  predominant  in  many  of  the  Ori¬
ental  religions,  such,  especially,  as  Brah¬
manism  and  Barseeism,  and  subsequently
adopted  by  the  Kabbalists  and  the  Gnostics,
and  taught  by  Philo  and  Plato.  It  assumed
that  all  things  emanated,  flowed  forth,
(which  is  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word,)
or  were  developed  and  descended  by  de¬
grees  from  the  Supreme  Being.  Thus,  in
the  ancient  religion  of  India,  the  anima
mundi,  or  soul  of  the  word,  the  mys¬
terious  source  of  all  life,  was  identified
with  Brahma,  the  Supreme  God.  The
doctrine  of  Gnosticism  was  that  all  be¬
ings  emanated  from  the  Deity ;  that  there
was  a  progressive  degeneration  of  these
beings  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest
emanation,  and  a  final  redemption  and
return  of  all  to  the  purity  of  the  Creator.
Philo  taught  that  the  Supreme  Being  was
the  Primitive  Light  or  the  Archetype  of
Light,  whose  rays  illuminate,  as  from  a
common  source,  all  souls.  The  theory  of
emanations  is  interesting  to  the  Mason,
because  of  the  reference  in  many  of  the
higher  degrees  to  the  doctrines  of  Philo,
the  Gnostics,  and  the  Kabbalists.

Emauuel.  A  sacred  word  in  some  of
the  high  degrees,  being  one  of  the  names
applied  in  Scripture  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
It  is  a  Greek  form  from  the  Hebrew,  Im¬
manuel,  and  signifies  “  God  is  with

lib.

Embassy.  The  embassy  of  Zerubba-
bel  and  four  other  Jewish  chiefs  to  the
court  of  Darius,  to  obtain  the  protection
of  that  monarch  from  the  encroachments
of  the  Samaritans,  who  interrupted  the
labors  in  the  reconstruction  of  the  Temple,
constitutes  the  legend  of  the  sixteenth  de¬
gree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite,  and  also  of  the  Red  Cross  degree  of
the  American  Rite,  which  is  surely  bor¬
rowed  from  the  former.  The  history  of
this  embassy  is  found  in  the  eleventh  book
of  the  Antiquities  of  Josephus,  whence  the
Masonic  ritualists  have  undoubtedly  taken
it.  The  only  authority  of  Josephus  is  the
apocryphal  record  of  Esdras,  and  the  au¬
thenticity  of  the  whole  transaction  is  doubt¬
ed  or  denied  by  modern  historians.

Emblem.  The  emblem  is  an  occult
representation  of  something  unknown  or
concealed  by  a  sign  or  thing  that  is  known.
Thus,  a  square  is  in  Freemasonry  an  em¬
blem  of  morality ;  a  plumb  line,  of  recti¬
tude  of  conduct ;  and  a  level,  of  equality
of  human  conditions.  Emblem  is  very  gen¬
erally  used  as  synonymous  with  symbol,  al-


EMERALD


EMPERORS


251


though  the  two  words  do  not  express  ex¬
actly  the  same  meaning.  An  emblem  is
properly  a  representation  of  an  idea  by  a
visible  object,  as  in  the  examples  quoted
above;  but  a  symbol  is  more  extensive  in
its  application,  includes  every  representa¬
tion  of  an  idea  by  an  image,  whether  that
image  is  presented  immediately  to  the
senses  as  a  visible  and  tangible  substance,
or  only  brought  before  the  mind  by  words.
Hence  an  action  or  event  as  described,  a
myth  or  legend,  may  be  a  symbol ;  and
hence,  too,  it  follows  that  while  all  emblems
are  symbols,  all  symbols  are  not  emblems.
See  Symbol.

Emerald.  In  Hebrew,  "J3D,  caphak.
It  was  the  first  stone  in  the  first  row  of  the
high  priest’s  breastplate,  and  was  referred
to  Levi.  Adam  Clarke  says  it  is  the  same
stone  as  the  smaragdus,  and  is  of  a  bright
green  color.  Josephus,  the  Septuagint,
and  the  Jerusalem  Targum  understood  by
the  Hebrew  word  the  carbuncle,  which  is
red.  The  modern  emerald,  as  everybody
knows,  is  green.

Emergency.  The  general  law  of  Ma¬
sonry  requires  a  month  to  elapse  between
the  time  of  receiving  a  petition  for  initia¬
tion  and  that  of  balloting  for  the  candi¬
date,  and  also  that  there  shall  be  an  in¬
terval  of  one  month  between  the  reception
of  each  of  the  degrees  of  Craft  Masonry.
Cases  sometimes  occur  when  a  Lodge  de¬
sires  this  probationary  period  to  be  dis¬
pensed  with,  so  that  the  candidate’s  peti¬
tion  may  be  received  and  balloted  for  at
the  same  communication,  or  so  that  the  de¬
grees  may  be  conferred  at  much  shorter  in¬
tervals.  As  some  reason  must  be  assigned
for  the  application  to  the  Grand  Master  for
the  dispensation,  such  reason  is  generally
stated  to  be  that  the  candidate  is  about  to
go  on  a  long  journey,  or  some  other  equally
valid.  Cases  of  this  kind  are  called,  in  the
technical  language  of  Masonry,  cases  of
emergency.  It  is  evident  that  the  emer-
ency  is  made  for  the  sake  of  the  candi-
ate,  and  not  for  that  of  the  Lodge  or  of
Masonry.  The  too  frequent  occurrence  of
applications  for  dispensations  in  cases  of
emergency  have  been  a  fruitful  source  of
evil,  as  thereby  unworthy  persons,  escap¬
ing  the  ordeal  of  an  investigation  into
character,  have  been  introduced  into  the
Order;  and  even  where  the  candidates  have
been  worthy,  the  rapid  passing  through  the
degrees  prevents  a  due  impression  from
being  made  on  the  mind,  and  the  candidate
fails  to  justly  appreciate  the  beauties  and
merits  of  the  Masonic  system.  Hence,
these  cases  of  emergency  have  been  very
unpopular  with  the  most  distinguished
members  of  the  Fraternity.  In  the  olden
time  the  Master  and  Wardens  of  the


Lodge  were  vested  with  the  prerogative  of
deciding  what  was  a  case  of  emergency;
but  modern  law  and  usage  (in  this  country,
at  least,)  make  the  Grand  Master  the  sole
judge  of  what  constitutes  a  case  of  emer¬
gency.

Emergesat  Lodge.  A  Lodge  held
at  an  emergent  meeting.

Emergent  Meeting.  The  meeting
of  a  Lodge  called  to  elect  a  candidate,  and
confer  the  degrees  in  a  case  of  emergency,
or  for  any  other  sudden  and  unexpected
cause,  has  been  called  an  emergent  meet¬
ing.  The  term  is  not  very  common,  but  it
has  been  used  by  W.  S.  Mitchell  and  a  few
other  writers.

Emeritus.  Latin ;  plural,  emeriti.
The  Romans  applied  this  word  —  which
comes  from  the  verb  emerere,  to  be  greatly
deserving  —  to  a  soldier  who  had  served  out
his  time;  hence,  in  the  Supreme  Councils
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
of  this  country,  an  active  member,  who  re¬
signs  his  seat  by  reason  of  age,  infirmity,
or  for  other  cause  deemed  good  by  the
Council,  may  be  elected  an  Emeritus  mem-'
ber,  and  will  possess  the  privilege  of  pro¬
posing  measures  and  being  heard  in  debate,
but  not  of  voting.

Emctli.  Hebrew,  One  of  the

words  in  the  high  degrees.  It  signifies
integrity,  fidelity,  firmness,  and  constancy  in
keeping  a  promise,  and  especially  Truth,
as  opposed  to  falsehood.  In  the  Scottish
Rite,  the  Sublime  Knights  Elect  of  Twelve
of  the  eleventh  degree  are  called  “  Princes
Emeth,”  which  means  simply  men  of  ex¬
alted  character  who  are  devoted  to  truth.

Eminent.  The  title  given  to  the
Commander  or  presiding  officer  of  a  Com-
mandery  of  Knights  Templars,  and  to  all
officers  below  the  Grand  Commander  in  a
Grand  Commandery.  The  Grand  Com¬
mander  is  styled  “  Right  Eminent,”  and  the
Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Encampment
of  the  United  States,  “Most  Eminent.”
The  word  is  from  the  Latin  eminens,  “stand¬
ing  above,”  and  literally  signifies  “exalted
in  rank.”  Hence,  it  is  a  title  given  to  the
cardinals  in  the  Roman  Church.

Emperor  of  Lebanon.  (Empereur
du  Liban.)  This  degree,  says  Thory,  (Act.
Lat.,  i.  311,)  which  was  a  part  of  the  col¬
lection  of  M.  Le  Rouge,  was  composed  in
the  isle  of  Bourbon,  in  1778,  by  the  Mar¬
quis  de  Beurnonville,  who  was  then  Na¬
tional  Grand  Master  of  all  the  Lodges  of
India.

Emperors  of  the  East  ami  West.

In  1758  there  was  established  in  Paris  a
Chapter  called  the  “Council  of  Emperors
of  the  East  and  West.”  The  members  as¬
sumed  the  titles  of  “Sovereign  Prince  Ma¬
sons,”  “Substitutes  General  of  the  Royal


252


EMPERORS


ENGLAND


Art,”  “  Grand  Superintendents  and  officers
of  the  Grand  and  Sovereign  Lodge  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem.”  Their  ritual,  which
was  based  on  the  Templar  system,  con¬
sisted  of  twenty-five  degrees,  as  follows:
1  to  19,  the  same  as  the  Scottish  Rite;  20,
Grahd  Patriarch  Noachite;  21,  Key  of  Ma¬
sonry  ;  22,  Prince  of  Lebanon ;  23,  Knight
of  the  Sun;  24,  Kadosh;  25,  Prince  of  the
Royal  Secret.  It  granted  warrants  for
Lodges  of  the  high  degrees,  appointed
Grand  Inspectors  and  Deputies,  and  estab¬
lished  several  subordinate  bodies  in  the
interior  of  France,  among  which  was  a
“  Council  of  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,”
at  Bordeaux.  In  1763,  one  Pincemaille,
the  Master  of  the  Lodge  La  Candeur,  at
Metz,  began  to  publish  an  exposition  of
these  degrees  in  the  serial  numbers  of  a
work  entitled,  Conversations  Allegoriques  sur
la  Franche-Magonnerie.  In  1764,  the  Grand
Lodge  of  France  offered  him  300  livres  to
suppress  the  book.  Pincemaille  accepted
the  bribe,  but  continued  the  publication,
which  lasted  until  1766.

In  1758,  the  year  of  their  establishment
in  France,  the  degrees  of  this  Rite  of  Here-
dom,  or  of  Perfection,  as  it  was  called,  were
carried  by  the  Marquis  de  Bernez  to  Berlin,
and  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
Three  Globes.

Between  the  years  1760  and  1765,  there
was  much  dissension  in  the  Rite.  A  new
Council,  called  the  Knights  of  the  East,
was  established  at  Paris,  in  1760,  as  the
rival  of  the  Emperors  of  the  East  and
West.  The  controversies  of  these  two  bod¬
ies  were  carried  into  the  Grand  Lodge,
which,  in  1766,  was  compelled,  for  the  sake
of  peace,  to  issue  a  decree  in  opposition  to
the  high  degrees,  excluding  the  malcon¬
tents,  and  forbidding  the  symbolical  Lodges
to  recognize  the  authority  of  these  Chap¬
ters.  But  the  excluded  Masons  continued
to  work  clandestinely  and  to  grant  war¬
rants.  From  that  time  until  its  dissolution,
the  history  of  the  Council  of  the  Emperors
of  the  East  and  West  is  but  a  history  of
continuous  disputes  with  the  Grand  Lodge
of  France.  At  length,  in  1781,  it  was  com-
letely  absorbed  in  the  Grand  Orient,  and
as  no  longer  an  existence.

The  assertion  of  Thory,  (Act.  Lat.,)  and
of  Ragon,  ( Orthod .  Mac.,)  that  the  Council
of  the  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West  was
the  origin  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite,  —  Frederick  of  Prussia  having  added
eight  to  the  original  twenty-five, — although
it  has  been  denied,  does  not  seem  destitute
of  truth.  It  is  very  certain,  if  the  docu¬
mentary  evidence  is  authentic,  that  the
Constitutions  of  1762  were  framed  by  this
Council ;  and  it  is  equally  certain  that  under
these  Constitutions  a  patent  was  granted  to


Stephen  Morin,  through  whom  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  was  established
in  America.

Emunah.  Sometimes  spelled

Arnunah,  but  not  in  accordance  with  the
Masoretic  points.  A  significant  word  in
the  high  degrees  signifying  fidelity,  espe¬
cially  in  fulfilling  one’s  promises.

Encampment.  All  regular  assem¬
blies  of  Knights  Templars  were  formerly
called  Encampments,  and  are  still  so  called
in  England.  They  are  now  styled  Com-
manderies  in  this  country,  and  Grand  En¬
campments  of  the  States  are  called  Grand
Commanderies.  See  Commander])  and  Com-
mandery ,  Grand.

Encampment,  General  Grand.

The  title,  before  the  adoption  of  the  Con¬
stitution  of  1856,  of  the  Grand  Encamp¬
ment  of  the  United  States.

Encampment,  Grand.  The  Grand
Encampment  of  the  United  States  was  in¬
stituted  on  the  22d  of  June,  1816,  in  the
city  of  New  York.  It  consists  of  a  Grand
Master,  Deputy  Grand  Master,  and  other
Grand  officers  who  are  similar  to  those  of
a  Grand  Commandery,  with  Past  Grand
officers  and  the  representatives  of  the
various  Grand  Commanderies,  and  of  the
subordinate  Commanderies  deriving  their
warrants  immediately  from  it.  It  exercises
jurisdiction  over  all  the  Templars  of  the
United  States,  and  meets  triennially.  The
term  Encampment  is  borrowed  from  mili¬
tary  usage,  and  is  very  properly  applied  to
the  temporary  congregation  at  stated
periods  of  the  army  of  Templars,  who  may
be  said  to  be,  for  the  time  being,  in  camp.

Encyclical.  Circular  ;  sent  to  many
places  or  persons.  Encyclical  letters,  con¬
taining  information,  advice,  or  admonition,
are  sometimes  issued  by  Grand  Lodges  or
Grand  Masters  to  the  Lodges  and  Masons
of  a  jurisdiction.  The  worxl  is  not  in  very
common  use;  but  I  find  that  in  1848  the
Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina  issued  “  an
encyclical  letter  of  advice,  of  admonition,
and'  of  direction,”  to  the  subordinate  Lodges
under  her  jurisdiction  ;  and  that  a  similar
letter  was  issued  in  1865  by  the  Grand
Master  of  Iowa.

En  famille.  French,  meaning  as  a
family.  In  French  Lodges,  during  the
reading  of  the  minutes,  and  sometimes
when  the  Lodge  is  engaged  in  the  discus¬
sion  of  delicate  matters  affecting  only  it¬
self,  the  Lodge  is  said  to  meet  “  en  famille,”
at  which  time  visitors  are  not  admitted.

England.  I  shall  give  a  brief  resume
of  the  history  of  Freemasonry  in  England
as  it  has  hitherto  been  written,  and  is  now
generally  received  by  the  Fraternity.  It  is
but  right,  however,  to  say,  that  recent  re¬
searches  have  thrown  doubts  on  the  authen-


ENGLAND


ENGLAND


253


ticity  of  many  of  the  statements, — that  the
legend  of  Prince  Edwin  has  been  doubted  ;
the  establishment  of  a  Grand  Lodge  at
York  in  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth
century  denied ;  and  the  existence  of  any
thing  but  Operative  Masonry  before  1717
controverted.  These  questions  are  still  in
dispute;  but  the  labors  of  Masonic  anti¬
quaries,  through  which  many  old  records
and  ancient  constitutions  are  being  con¬
tinually  exhumed  from  the  British  Museum
and  from  Lodge  libraries,  will  eventually
enable  us  to  settle  upon  the  truth.

According  to  Anderson  and  Preston,  the
first  charter  granted  in  England  to  the
Masons,  as  a  body,  was  bestowed  by  King
Athelstan,  in  926,  upon  the  application  of
his  brother,  Prince  Edwin.  “  Accordingly,”
says  a  legend  first  cited  by  Anderson,
“  Prince  Edwin  summoned  all  the  Masons
in  the  realm  to  meet  him  in  a  congregation
at  York,  who  came  and  composed  a  Gen¬
eral  Lodge,  of  which  he  was  Grand  Master ;
and  having  brought  with  them  all  the  writ¬
ings  and  records  extant,  some  in  Greek,
some  in  Latin,  some  in  French,  and  other
languages,  from  the  contents  thereof  that
assembly  did  frame  the  Constitution  and
Charges  of  an  English  Lodge.”

From  this  assembly  at  York,  the  rise  of
Masonry  in  England  is  generally  dated ;
from  the  statutes  there  enacted  are  derived
the  English  Masonic  Constitutions ;  and
from  the  place  of  meeting,  the  ritual  of  the
English  Lodges  is  designated  as  the  “  An¬
cient  York  Rite.”

For  a  long  time,  the  York  Assembly  ex¬
ercised  the  Masonic  jurisdiction  over  all
England;  but  in  1567  the  Masons  of  the
southern  part  of  the  island  elected  Sir
Thomas  Gresham,  the  celebrated  merchant,
their  Grand  Master.  He  was  succeeded  by
the  illustrious  architect,  Inigo  Jones.  There
were  now  two  Grand  Masters  in  England
who  assumed  distinctive  titles;  the  Grand
Master  of  the  north  being  called  Grand
Master  of  all  England,  while  he  who  pre¬
sided  in  the  south  was  called  Grand  Master
of  England.

In  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury,  Masonry  in  the  south  of  England  had
fallen  into  decay.  The  disturbances  of  the
revolution,  which  placed  William  III.  on
the  throne,  and  the  subsequent  warmth  of
political  feelings  which  agitated  the  two
parties  of  the  state,  had  given  this  peace¬
ful  society  a  wound  fatal  to  its  success.  Sir
Christopher  Wren,  the  Grand  Master  in  the
reign  ot  Queen  Anne,  had  become  aged,  in¬
firm,  and  inactive,  and  hence  the  general
assemblies  of  the  Grand  Lodge  had  ceased
to  take  place.  There  were,  in  the  year
1715,  but  four  Lodges  in  the  south  of  Eng¬
land,  all  working  in  the  city  of  London.


These  four  Lodges,  desirous  of  reviving  the
prosperity  of  the  Order,  determined  to
unite  themselves  under  a  Grand  Master,
Sir  Christopher  Wren  being  now  dead,  and
none  having,  as  yet,  been  appointed  in  his
place.  They  therefore  “  met  at  the  Apple-
Tree  Tavern ;  and  having  put  into  the  chair
the  oldest  Master  Mason,  (being  the  Master
of  a  Lodge,)  they  constituted  themselves  a
Grand  Lodge,  pro  tempore ,  in  due  form,  and
forthwith  revived  the  quarterly  communi¬
cation  of  the  officers  of  Lodges,  (called  the
Grand  Lodge,)  resolved  to  hold  the  annual
assembly  and  feast,  and  then  to  choose  a
Grand  Master  from  among  themselves,  till
they  should  have  the  honor  of  a  noble
brother  at  their  head.”

Accordingly,  on  St.  John  the  Baptist’s
day,  1717,  the  annual  assembly  and  feast
were  held,  and  Mr.  Anthony  Sayer  duly
proposed  and  elected  Grand  Master.  The
Grand  Lodge  adopted,  among  its  regula¬
tions,  the  following:  “That  the  privilege
of  assembling  as  Masons,  which  had  hith¬
erto  been  unlimited,  should  be  vested  in
certain  Lodges  or  assemblies  of  Masons
convened  in  certain  places ;  and  that  every
Lodge  to  be  hereafter  convened,  except  the
four  old  Lodges  at  this  time  existing,  should
be  legally  authorized  to  act  by  a  warrant
from  the  Grand  Master,  for  the  time  being,
granted  to  certain  individuals  by  petition,
with  the  consent  and  approbation  of  the
Grand  Lodge  in  communication,  and  that,
without  such  warrant,  no  Lodge  should  be
hereafter  deemed  regular  or  constitutional.”

In  compliment,  however,  to  the  four  old
Lodges,  the  privileges  which  they  had  al¬
ways  possessed  under  the  old  organization
were  particularly  reserved  to  them  ;  and  it
was  enacted  that  “no  law,  rule,  or  regula¬
tion,  to  be  hereafter  made  or  passed  in
Grand  Lodge,  should  ever  deprive  them  of
such  privilege,  or  encroach  on  any  land¬
mark  w'hich  was  at  that  time  established
as  the  standard  of  Masonic  government.”

The  Grand  Lodges  of  York  and  of  Lon¬
don  kept  up  a  friendly  intercourse,  and  mu¬
tual  interchange  of  recognition,  until  the
latter  body,  in  1725,  granted  a  warrant  of
constitution  to  some  Masons  who  had  se¬
ceded  from  the  former.  This  unmasonic
act  was  severely  reprobated  by  the  York
Grand  Lodge,  and  produced  the  first  inter¬
ruption  to  the  harmony  that  had  long  sub¬
sisted  between  them.  It  was,  however,  fol¬
lowed  some  years  after  by  another  unjusti¬
fiable  act  of  interference.  In  1735,  the
Earl  of  Crawford,  Grand  Master  of  Eng¬
land,  constituted  two  Lodges  within  the  ju¬
risdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  York,  and
granted,  without  its  consent,  deputations
for  Lancashire,  Durham,  and  Northumber¬
land.  “  This  circumstance,”  says  Preston,


254


ENGLAND


ENOCH


( Illust .,  p.  184,)  “  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York  I
highly  resented,  and  ever  afterward  viewed
the  proceedings  of  the  brethren  in  the
south  with  a  jealous  eye.  All  friendly  in¬
tercourse  ceased,  and  the  York  Masons,
from  that  moment,  considered  their  inte¬
rests  distinct  from  the  Masons  under  the
Grand  Lodge  in  London.”

Three  years  after,  in  1738,  several  brethren,
dissatisfied  with  the  conduct  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  seceded  from  it,  and  held
unauthorized  meetings  for  the  purpose  of  ini¬
tiation.  Taking  advantage  of  the  breach
between  the  Grand  Lodges  of  York  and
London,  they  assumed  the  character  of
York  Masons.  On  the  Grand  Lodge’s  de¬
termination  to  put  strictly  in  execution  the
laws  against  such  seceders,  they  still  fur¬
ther  separated  from  its  jurisdiction,  and
assumed  the  appellation  of  “Ancient  York
Masons .”  They  announced  that  the  ancient
landmarks  were  alone  preserved  by  them;
and,  declaring  that  the  regular  Lodges  had
adopted  new  plans,  and  sanctioned  inno¬
vations,  they  branded  them  with  thenameof
“Modern  Masons.”  In  1739,  they  established
a  new  Grand  Lodge  in  London,  under  the
name  of  the  “Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient
York  Masons,”  and,  persevering  in  the  meas¬
ures  they  had  adopted,  held  communications
and  appointed  annual  feasts.  They  were
soon  afterward  recognized  by  the  Masons
of  Scotland  and  Ireland,  and  were  encour¬
aged  and  fostered  by  many  of  the  nobility.
The  two  Grand  Lodges  continued  to  exist,
and  to  act  in  opposition  to  each  other,  ex¬
tending  their  schisms  into  other  countries,  j
especially  into  America,  until  the  year  1813,
when,  under  the  Grand  Mastership  of  the
Duke  of  Sussex,  they  were  united  under
the  title  of  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of
England.

Such  is  the  history  of  Freemasonry  in
England  as  uninterruptedly  believed  by  all
Masons  and  Masonic  writers  for  nearly  a
century  and  a  half.  Recent  researches
have  thrown  great  doubts  on  its  entire  ac¬
curacy.  Until  the  year  1717,  the  details
are  either  traditional,  or  supported  only  by
manuscripts  whose  authenticity  has  not  yet
been  satisfactorily  proved.  Much  of  the
history  is  uncertain ;  some  of  it,  especially
as  referring  to  York,  is  deemed  apocryphal
by  Hughan  and  other  laborious  writers.
Yet,  as  the  hereditary  tradition  of  the
Order,  it  cannot  be  safely  or  justly  thrown
altogether  aside;  though  it  should  be  re¬
ceived  with  many  reservations  until  the
profound  researches  of  Masonic  antiquaries,
now  being  actively  pursued  in  England,
shall  have  been  brought  to  a  satisfactory
conclusion.  The  investigations  on  this  im¬
portant  subject  should  be  conducted  with
impartial  judgment,  and  with  an  earnest  !


desire  to  find  the  truth,  and  not  to  uphold
a  theory.  The  legend  may  not  be  true ;  but
if  it  has  been  long  accepted  and  venerated
as  truth,  it  should  not  be  rejected  until  there
is  incontestable  evidence  of  its  falsity.  In
criticisms  of  this  kind  we  should  remember
the  caution  of  an  eminent  metaphysician,
that  “  the  hand  that  cannot  build  a  hovel
may  demolish  a  palace.”  So  tar,  the  re¬
searches  of  these  inquiries  into  the  early
history  of  English  Freemasonry,  of  whom
Bro.  Hughan,  of  Cornwall,  may  justly  be
considered  as  the  chief,  have  been  generally
conducted  with  earnest  fairness  and  labori¬
ous  learning.  See  York.

Englct.  A  corruption  of  Euclid,  found
in  the  Old  Constitutions  known  as  the
Mattheiv  Cooke  MS.,  “  wherefore  y*  for-
sayde  maister  Englet  ordegnet  thei  were
passing  of  com  ing  schold  be  passing  hon¬
oured,”  (line  674r-7.)  I  am  inclined  to  think
that  the  copyist  has  mistaken  a  badly-made
old  English  u  for  an  n,  and  that  the  origi¬
nal  had  Euglet,  which  would  be  a  nearer
approximation  to  Euclid.

Engrave.  In  French  Lodges,  buriner,
to  engrave,  is  used  instead  of  ecrire,  to
write.  The  “  engraved  tablets  ”  are  the
“  written  records.”

Enlightened.  This  word,  equivalent
to  the  Latin  illuminatus,  is  frequently  used
to  designate  a  Freemason  as  one  who  has
been  rescued  from  darkness,  and  received
intellectual  light.  Webster’s  definition
shows  its  appositeness:  “Illuminated;  in¬
structed;  informed;  furnished  with  clear
views.”  Many  old  Latin  diplomas  com¬
mence  with  the  heading,  “  Omnibus  illu-
minatis,”  i.  e.,  “  to  all  the  enlightened.*

Enlightenment,  Shock  of.  See
Shock  of  Enlightenment.

Enoch.  Though  the  Scriptures  fur¬
nish  but  a  meagre  account  of  Enoch,  the
traditions  of  Freemasonry  closely  connect
him,  by  numerous  circumstances,  with  the
early  history  of  the  Institution.  All,  in¬
deed,  that  we  learn  from  the  Book  of  Gene¬
sis  on  the  subject  of  his  life  is,  that  he  was
the  seventh  of  the  patriarchs ;  the  son  of
Jared,  and  the  great-grandfather  of  2soah  ;
that  he  was  born  in  the  year  of  the  world
622 ;  that  his  life  was  one  of  eminent  virtue,
so  much  so,  that  he  is  described  as  “  walk¬
ing  with  God  ;  ”  and  that  in  the  year  987
his  earthly  pilgrimage  was  terminated,  (as
the  commentators  generally  suppose,)  not  by
death,  but  by  a  bodily  translation  to  heaven.

In  the  very  commencement  of  our  in¬
quiries,  we  shall  find  circumstances  in  the
life  of  this  great  patriarch  that  shadow
forth,  as  it  were,  something  of  that  mysti¬
cism  with  which  the  traditions  of  Masonry
have  connected  him.  His  name,  in  the
Hebrew  language,  Henoch,  signifies


ENOCH


ENOCH


255


to  initiate  and  to  instruct,  and  seems  intended
to  express  the  fact  that  he  was,  as  Oliver
remarks,  the  first  to  give  a  decisive  charac¬
ter  to  the  rite  of  initiation,  and  to  add  to
the  practice  of  divine  worship  the  study
and  application  of  human  science.  In
confirmation  of  this  view,  a  writer  in  the
Freemason's  Quarterly  Review  says,  on  this
subject,  that  “  it  seems  probable  that  Enoch
introduced  the  speculative  principles  into
the  Masonic  creed,  and  that  he  originated
its  exclusive  character,”  which  theory  must
be  taken,  if  it  is  accepted  at  all,  with  very
considerable  modifications.

The  years  of  his  life  may  also  be  supposed
to  contain  a  mystic  meaning,  for  they
amounted  to  three  hundred  and  sixty-five,
being  exactly  equal  to  a  solar  revolution.
In  all  the  ancient  rites  this  number  has  oc¬
cupied  a  prominent  place,  because  it  was
the  representative  of  the  annual  course  of
that  luminary  which,  as  the  great  fructifier
of  the  earth,  was  the  peculiar  object  of
divine  worship.

Of  the  early  history  of  Enoch,  we  know
nothing.  It  is,  however,  probable  that,  like
the  other  descendants  of  the  pious  Seth,  he
assed  his  pastoral  life  in  the  neighbor-
ood  of  Mount  Moriah.  From  the  other
patriarchs  he  differed  only  in  this,  that,  en¬
lightened  by  the  divine  knowledge  which
had  been  imparted  to  him,  he  instructed
his  contemporaries  in  the  practice  of  those
rites,  and  in  the  study  of  those  sciences,  with
wjiich  he  had  himself  become  acquainted.

The  Oriental  writers  abound  in  tradition¬
ary  evidence  of  the  learning  of  the  venera¬
ble  patriarch.  One  tradition  states  that  he
received  from  God  the  gift  of  wisdom  and
knowledge,  and  that  God  sent  him  thirty
volumes  from  heaven,  filled  with  all  the  se¬
crets  of  the  most  mysterious  sciences.  The
Babylonians  supposed  him  to  have  been  in¬
timately  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the
stars;  and  they  attribute  to  him  the  inven¬
tion  of  astrology.  The  Rabbins  maintain
that  he  was  taught  by  God  and  Adam  how
to  sacrifice,  and  how  to  worship  the  Deity
aright.  The  kabbalistic  book  of  Raziel
says  that  he  received  the  divine  mysteries
from  Adam,  through  the  direct  line  of  the
preceding  patriarchs.

The  Greek  Christians  supposed  him  to
have  been  identical  with  the  first  Egyptian
Hermes,  who  dwelt  at  Sais.  They  say  he
was  the  first  to  give  instruction  on  the  ce¬
lestial  bodies  ;  that  he  foretold  the  deluge
that  was  to  overwhelm  his  descendants;
and  that  he  built  the  Pyramids,  engraving
thereon  figures  of  artificial  instruments  and
the  elements  of  the  sciences,  fearing  lest
the  memory  of  man  should  perish  in  that
general  destruction.  Eupolemus,  a  Grecian
Writer,  makes  him  the  same  as  Atlas,  aud


attributes  to  him,  as  the  Pagans  did  to  that
deity,  the  invention  of  astronomy.

Mr.  Wait,  in  his  Oriental  Antiquities,
quotes  a  passage  from  Bar  Hebrseus,  a  Jew¬
ish  writer,  which  asserts  that  Enoch  was
the  first  who  invented  books  and  writing;
that  he  taught  men  the  art  of  building
cities;  that  he  discovered  the  knowledge
of  the  Zodiac  and  the  course  of  the  planets ;
and  that  he  inculcated  the  worship  of  God
by  fasting,  prayer,  alms,  votive  offerings,
and  tithes.  Bar  Hebraeus  adds,  that  he
also  appointed  festivals  for  sacrifices  to  the
sun  at  the  periods  when  that  luminary  en¬
tered  each  of  the  zodiacal  signs ;  but  this
statement,  which  would  make  him  the  au¬
thor  of  idolatry,  is  entirely  inconsistent
with  all  that  we  know  of  his  character,
from  both  history  and  tradition,  and  arose,
as  Oliver  supposes,  most  probably  from  a
blending  of  the  characters  of  Enos  and
Enoch.

In  the  study  of  the  sciences,  in  teaching
them  to  his  children  and  his  contempora¬
ries,  and  in  instituting  the  rites  of  initiation,
Enoch  is  supposed  to  have  passed  the  years
of  his  peaceful,  his  pious,  and  his  useful
life,  until  the  crimes  of  mankind  had  in¬
creased  to  such  a  height  that,  in  the  ex¬
pressive  words  of  Holy  Writ,  “  every  imag¬
ination  of  the  thoughts  of  man’s  heart  was
only  evil  continually.”  It  was  then,  ac¬
cording  to  a  Masonic  tradition,  that  Enoch,
disgusted  with  the  wickedness  that  sur¬
rounded  him,  and  appalled  at  the  thought
of  its  inevitable  consequences,  fled  to  the
solitude  and  secrecy  of  Mount  Moriah,  and
devoted  himself  to  prayer  and  pious  con¬
templation.  In  was  on  that  spot  —  then
first  consecrated  by  this  patriarchal  hermit¬
age,  and  afterwards  to  be  made  still  more
holy  by  the  sacrifices  of  Abraham,  of  David,
and  of  Solomon  —  that  we  are  informed
that  the  Shekinah  or  sacred  presence  ap¬
peared  to  him,  and  gave  him  those  instruc¬
tions  which  were  to  preserve  the  wisdom
of  the  antediluvians  to  their  posterity  when
the  world,  with  the  exception  of  but  one
family,  should  have  been  destroyed  by  the
forthcoming  flood.  The  circumstances
which  occurred  at  that  time  are  recorded
in  a  tradition  which  forms  what  has  been
called  the  great  Masonic  “Legend  of
Enoch,”  and  which  runs  to  this  effect:

Enoch,  being  inspired  by  the  Most  High,
and  in  commemoration  of  a  wonderful  vi¬
sion,  built  a  temple  under  ground,  and  ded¬
icated  it  to  God.  His  son,  Methuselah,
constructed  the  building;  although  he  was
not  acquainted  with  his  father’s  motives
for  the  erection.  This  temple  consisted  of
nine  brick  vaults,  situated  perpendicularly
beneath  each  other,  and  communicating  by
apertures  left  in  the  arch  of  each  vault.


256


ENOCH


ENOCH


Enoch  then  caused  a  triangular  plate  of
gold  to  be  made,  each  side  of  which  was  a
cubit  long;  he  enriched  it  with  the  most
precious  stones,  and  encrusted  the  plate
upon  a  stone  of  agate  of  the  same  form.
On  the  plate  he  engraved,  in  ineffable  char¬
acters,  the  true  name  of  Deity,  and,  placing
it  on  a  cubical  pedestal  of  white  marble,
he  deposited  the  whole  within  the  deepest
arch.

When  this  subterranean  building  was
completed,  he  made  a  door  of  stone,  and
attaching  to  it  a  ring  of  iron,  by  which  it
might  be  occasionally  raised,  he  placed  it
over  the  opening  of  the  uppermost  arch,
and  so  covered  it  over  that  the  aperture
could  not  be  discovered.  Enoch  himself
was  not  permitted  to  enter  it  but  once  a
year;  and  on  the  death  of  Enoch,  Methu¬
selah,  and  Lainech,  and  the  destruction  of
the  world  by  the  deluge,  all  knowledge  of
this  temple,  and  of  thesacred  treasure  which
it  contained,  was  lost  until,  in  after  times,
it  was  accidentally  discovered  by  another
worthy  of  Freemasonry,  who,  like  Enoch,
was  engaged  in  the  erection  of  a  temple  on
the  same  spot.

The  legend  goes  on  to  inform  us  that
after  Enoch  had  completed  the  subterra¬
nean  temple,  fearing  that  the  principles  of
those  arts  and  sciences  which  he  had  culti¬
vated  with  so  much  assiduity  would  be  lost
in  that  general  destruction  of  which  he  had
received  a  prophetic  vision,  he  erected  two
pillars, — the  one  of  marble,  to  withstand  the
influence  of  fire,  and  the  other  of  brass,  to
resist  the  action  of  water.  On  the  pillar  of
brass  he  engraved  the  history  of  the  cre¬
ation,  the  principles  of  the  arts  and  sci¬
ences,  and  the  doctrines  of  Speculative
Freemasonry  as  they  were  practised  in  his
times;  and  on  the  one  of  marble  he  in¬
scribed  characters  in  hieroglyphics,  im¬
porting  that  near  the  spot  where  they  stood
a  precious  treasure  was  deposited  in  a  sub¬
terranean  vault.

Josephus  gives  an  account  of  these  pil¬
lars  in  the  first  book  of  his  Antiquities.
He  ascribes  them  to  the  children  of  Seth,
which  is  by  no  means  a  contradiction  of
the  Masonic  tradition,  since  Enoch  was  one
of  these  children.  “  That  their  inventions,”
says  the  historian,  “  might  not  be  lost  before
they  were  sufficiently  known,  upon  Adam’s
prediction  that  the  world  was  to  be  de¬
stroyed  at  one  time  by  the  force  of  fire  and
at  auqther  time  by  the  violence  and  quan¬
tity  of  water,  they  made  two  pillars  —  the
one  of  brick,  the  other  of  stone;  they  in¬
scribed  their  discoveries  on  them  both,  that
in  case  the  pillar  of  brick  should  be  de¬
stroyed  by  the  flood,  the  pillar  of  stone
might  remain  and  exhibit  those  discoveries
to  mankind,  and  also  inform  them  that


there  was  another  pillar  of  brick  erected  by
them.  Now  this  remains  in  the  land  of
Siriad  to  this  day.”

Enoch,  having  completed  these  labors,
called  his  descendants  around  him  on
Mount  Moriah,  and  having  warned  them
in  the  most  solemn  manner  of  the  conse¬
quences  of  their  wickedness,  exhorted  them
to  forsake  their  idolatries  and  return  once
more  to  the  worship  of  the  true  God.  Ma¬
sonic  tradition  informs  us  that  he  then  de¬
livered  up  the  government  of  the  G'raft  to
his  grandson,  Lamech,  and  disappeared
from  earth.

Enoch,  Brother.  ( Frlre  Enoch.)
Evidently  the  nom  de  plume  of  a  French
writer  and  the  inventor  of  a  Masonic  rite.
He  published  at  Liege,  in  1773,  two  works :
1.  Le  Vrai  Franc- Magon,  in  276  pages;  2.
Lettres  Magonniques  pour  servir  de  Supple¬
ment  au  Vrai  Franc-Magon.  The  design  of
the  former  of  these  works  was  to  give  an
account  of  the  origin  and  object  of  Free¬
masonry,  a  description  of  all  the  degrees,
and  an  answer  to  the  objections  urged
against  the  Institution.  The  historical
theories  of  Frfcre  Enoch  were  exceedingly
fanciful  and  wholly  untenable.  Thus,  die
asserts  that  in  the  year  814,  Louis  the  Fair
of  France,  being  flattered  by  the  fidelity
and  devotion  of  the  Operative  Masons,  or¬
ganized  them  into  a  society  of  four  degrees,
granting  the  Masters  the  privilege  of  wear¬
ing  swords  in  the  Lodge, — a  custom  still
continued  in  French  Lodges,  —  and,  having
been  received  into  the  Order  himself,  ac¬
cepted  the  Grand  Mastership  on  the  festival
of  St.  John  the  Evangelist  in  the  year  814.
Other  equally  extravagant  opinions  make
his  book  rather  a  source  of  amusement
than  of  instruction.  His  definition  of
Freemasonry  is,  however,  good.  He  says
that  it  is  ‘‘a  holy  and  religious  society  of
men  who  are  friends,  which  has  for  its
foundation,  discretion ;  for  its  object,  the
service  of  God,  fidelity  to  the  sovereign,
and  love  of  our  neighbor ;  and  for  its  doc¬
trine,  the  erection  of  an  allegorical  build¬
ing  dedicated  to  the  virtues,  which  it  teaches
with  certain  signs  of  recognition.”

Enoch,  Eegcnd  of.  This  legend  is
detailed  in  a  preceding  article.  It  never
formed  any  part  of  the  old  system  of  Ma¬
sonry,  and*  was  first  introduced  from  Tal¬
mudic  and  Eabbinical  sources  into  the  high
degrees,  where,  however,  it  is  really  to  be
viewed  rather  as  symbolical  than  as  his¬
torical.  Enoch  himself  is  but  the  symbol
of  initiation,  and  his  legend  is  intended
symbolically  to  express  the  doctrine  that
the  true  Word  or  divine  truth  was  preserved
in  the  ancient  initiations.

Enoch,  Rite  of.  A  Rite  attempted
to  be  established  at  Liege,  in  France,  about


EN  SOPH


EPHRAIMITES


257


the  year  1773.  It  consisted  of  four  de¬
grees,  viz.,  1.  Manouvre,  or  Apprentice,
whose  object  was  friendship  and  benevo¬
lence.  2.  Ouvrier,  or  Fellow  Craft,  whose
object  was  fidelity  to  the  Sovereign.  3.
Maitre,  or  Master,  whose  object  was  sub¬
mission  to  the  Supreme  Being.  4.  Archi-
tecte,  whose  object  was  the  perfection  of  all
the  virtues.  The  Rite  never  made  much
progress.

En  Soph.  SID  1’X.  In  the  Kabbalis-
tic  doctrines,  the  Divine  Word,  or  Supreme
Creator,  is  called  the  En  Soph,  or  rather  the
Or  En  Soph,  the  Infinite  Intellectual  Light.
The  theory  is,  that  all  things  emanated
from  this  Primeval  Light.  See  Kabbala.

Entered.  When  a  candidate  receives
the  first  degree  of  Masonry  he  is  said  to  be
entered.  It  is  used  in  the  sense  of  admitted,
or  introduced ;  a  common  as  well  as  a  Ma¬
sonic  employment  of  the  word,  as  when  we
say,  “  the  youth  entered  college ;  ”  or,  “  the
soldier  entered  the  service.”

Entered  Apprentice.  See  Appren¬
tice.

Entiek,  John.  An  English  clergy¬
man,  born  in  1713,  who  took  much  interest
in  Freemasonry  about  the  middle  of  the
eighteenth  century.  He  revised  the  third
and  fourth  editions  of  Anderson’s  Constitu¬
tions,  by  order  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  They
were  published  in  1756  and  1767.  Both  of
these  editions  were  printed  in  quarto  form,
and  have  the  name  of  Entiek  on  the  title-
page.  In  1769  another  edition  was  pub¬
lished  in  octavo,  being  an  exact  copy  of
the  1767  edition,  except  a  slight  alteration
of  the  title-page,  from  which  Entick’s  name
is  omitted,  and  a  brief  appendix,  which
carries  the  transactions  of  the  Grand  Lodge
up  to  1769.  On  a  careful  collation,  I  can
find  no  other  differences.  Kloss  does  not
appear  to  have  seen  this  edition,  for  he
only  refers  to  it  briefly  in  his  Bibliographic,
as  No.  147,  without  full  title,  on  the  au¬
thority  of  Krause.  Entiek  was  also  the
author  of  many  Masonic  sermons,  a  few
of  which  were  published.  Oliver  speaks
of  him  as  a  man  of  grave  and  sober  habits,
a  good  Master  of  his  Lodge,  a  fair  disciplin¬
arian,  and  popular  with  the  Craft.  But
Entiek  did  not  confine  his  literary  labors
to  Masonry.  He  was  the  author  of  a  His¬
tory  of  the  War  which  ended  in  1763,  in  5
vols.,  8vo ;  and  a  History  of  London,  in  4
vols.,  8vo.  As  an  orthoepist  he  had  consid¬
erable  reputation,  and  published  a  Latin
and  English  Dictionary,  and  an  English
Spelling  Dictionary.  He  died  in  1773.

Entombment.  An  impressive  cere¬
mony  in  the  degree  of  Perfect  Master  of
the  Scottish  Rite.

Entrance,  Points  of.  See  Points
of  Entrance.

2  H


Entrance,  Shock  of.  See  Shock
of  Entrance.

Envy.  This  meanest  of  vices  has  al¬
ways  been  discouraged  in  Masonry.  The
fifth  of  the  Old  Charges,  approved  in
1722,  says:  “None  shall  discover  envy  at
the  prosperity  of  a  brother.”

Eons.  In  the  doctrine  of  Gnosticism,
divine  spirits  occupying  the  intermediate
state  which  was  supposed  to  exist  between
the  Supreme  Being  and  the  Jehovah  of  the
Jewish  theology,  whom  the  Gnostics  called
only  a  secondary  deity.  These  spiritual
beings  were  indeed  no  more  than  abstrac¬
tions,  such  as  Wisdom,  Faith,  Prudence,  etc.
They  derived  their  name  from  the  Greek
aiuv,  an  age,  in  reference  to  the  long  du¬
ration  of  their  existence.  Valentinius  said
there  were  but  thirty  of  them  ;  but  Basilides
reckons  them  as  three  hundred  and  sixty-
five,  which  certainly  has  an  allusion  to  the
days  of  the  solar  year.  In  some  of  the
philosophical  degrees,  references  are  made
to  the  Eons,  whose  introduction  into  them
is  doubtless  to  be  attributed  to  the  con¬
nection  of  Gnosticism  with  certain  of  the
high  degrees.

Eons,  Rite  of  tlie.  Ragon  ( Tuil-
leur  Gen.,  186,)  describes  this  Rite  as  one
full  of  beautiful  and  learned  instruction,
but  scarcely  known,  and  practised  only  in
Asia,  being  founded  on  the  religious  dog¬
mas  of  Zoroaster.  I  doubt  the  existence
of  it  as  a  genuine  Rite.  Ragon’s  informa¬
tion  is  very  meagre.

Ephod.  The  sacred  vestment  worn  by
the  high  priest  of  the  Jews  over  the  tunic
and  outer  garment.  It  was  without  sleeves,
and  divided  below  the  arm-pits  into  two
parts  or  halves,  one  falling  before  and  the
other  behind,  and  both  reaching  to  the
middle  of  the  thighs.  They  were  joined
above  on  the  shoulders  by  buckles  and  two
large  precious  stones,  on  which  were  in¬
scribed  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes,  six
on  each.  The  ephod  was  a  distinctive
mark  of  the  priesthood.  It  was  of  two
kinds,  one  of  plain  linen  for  the  priests,  and
another,  richer  and  embroidered,  for  the
high  priest,  which  was  composed  of  blue,
purple,  crimson,  and  fine  linen.  The  robe
worn  by  the  High  Priest  in  a  Royal  Arch
Chapter  is  intended  to  be  a  representation,
but  hardly  can  be  called  an  imitation,  of  the
ephod.

Ephraimites.  The  descendants  of
Ephraim.  They  inhabited  the  centre  of
Judea  between  the  Mediterranean  and  the
river  Jordan.  The  character  given  to  them
in  the  ritual  of  the  Fellow  Craft’s  degree,
of  being  “  a  stiffnecked  and  rebellious
people,”  coincides  with  history,  which  de¬
scribes  them  as  haughty,  tenacious  to  a
fault  of  their  rights,  and  ever  ready  to  re-


17


258


EPOCH


EQUES


gist  the  pretensions  of  the  other  tribes,  and
more  especially  that  of  Judah,  of  which
they  were  peculiarly  jealous.  The  circum¬
stance  in  their  history  which  has  been  ap¬
propriated  for  a  symbolic  purpose  iD  the
ceremonies  of  the  second  degree  of  Ma¬
sonry,  may  be  briefly  related  thus.  The
Ammonites,  who  were  the  descendants  of
the  younger  son  of  Lot,  and  inhabited  a
tract  of  country  east  of  the  river  Jordan,
had  been  always  engaged  in  hostility
against  the  Israelites.  Ou  the  occasion  re¬
ferred  to,  they  had  commenced  a  war  upon
the  pretext  that  the  Israelites  had  deprived
them  of  a  portion  of  their  territory.  Jeph-
tha,  having  been  called  by  the  Israelites  to
the  head  of  their  army,  defeated  the  Am¬
monites,  but  had  not  called  upon  the
Ephraiinites  to  assist  in  the  victory.  Hence,
that  high-spirited  people  were  incensed,  and
more  especially  as  they  had  had  no  share
in  the  rich  spoils  obtained  by  Jephtha  from
the  Ammonites.  They  accordingly  gave
him  battle,  but  were  defeated  with  great
slaughter  by  the  Gileadites,  or  countrymen
of  Jephtha,  with  whom  alone  he  resisted
their  attack.  As  the  land  of  Gilead,  the
residence  of  Jephtha,  was  on  the  west  side
of  the  Jordan,  and  as  the  Ephraimites
lived  on  the  east  side,  in  making  their  in¬
vasion  it  was  necessary  that  they  should
cross  the  river,  and  after  their  defeat,  in  at¬
tempting  to  effect  a  retreat  to  their  own
country,  they  were  compelled  to  recross  the
river.  But  Jephtha,  aware  of  this,  had
placed  forces  at  the  different  fords  of  the
river,  who  intercepted  the  Ephraimites,  and
detected  their  nationality  by  a  peculiar  de¬
fect  in  their  pronunciation.  For  although
the  Ephraimites  did  not  speak  a  dialect
different  from  that  of  the  other  tribes,  they
had  a  different  pronunciation  of  some
words,  and  an  inability  to  pronounce  the
letter  or  SH,  which  they  pronounced  as
if  it  were  □  or  S.  Thus,  when  called  upon
to  say  SHIBBOLETH,  they  pronounced
it  SIBBOLETH,  “which  trifling  defect,”
says  the  ritual,”  proved  them  to  be  enemies.”
The  test  to  a  Hebrew  was  a  palpable  one,
for  the  two  words  have  an  entirely  different
signification  ;  shibboleth  meaning  an  ear  of
corn,  and  sibboleth,  a  burden.  The  biblical
relation  will  be  found  in  the  twelfth  chapter
of  the  Book  of  Judges.

Epoch.  In  chronology,  a  certain  point
of  time  marked  by  some  memorable  event
at  which  the  calculation  of  years  begins.
Different  peoples  have  different  epochs  or
epocha.  Thus,  the  epoch  of  Christians
is  the  birth  of  Christ;  that  of  Jews,  the
creation  of  the  world;  and  that  of  Moham¬
medans,  the  flight  of  their  prophet  from
Mecca.  See  Calendar.

Epopt.  This  was  the  name  given  to


one  who  had  passed  through  the  Great
Mysteries,  and  been  permitted  to  behold
what  was  concealed  from  the  mystae,  who
had  only  been  initiated  into  the  Lesser.  It
signifies  an  eye-witness,  and  is  derived
from  the  Greek,  e-o-revu,  to  look  into,  to  be¬
hold.  The  epopts  repeated  the  oath  of
secrecy  which  had  been  administered  to
them  on  their  initiation  into  the  Lesser
Mysteries,  and  were  then  conducted  into
the  lighted  interior  of  the  sanctuary  and
permitted  to  behold  what  the  Greeks  em¬
phatically  termed  “  the  sight,”  avroxjjia.
The  epopts  alone  were  admitted  to  the
sanctuary,  for  the  mystae  were  confined  to
the  vestibule  of  the  temple.  The  epopts
were,  in  fact,  the  Master  Masons  of  the
Mysteries,  while  the  mystae  were  the  Ap¬
prentices  and  Fellow  Crafts  ;  these  words
being  used,  of  course,  only  in  a  comparative
sense.

Equality.  Among  the  ancient  icon-
ologists,  equality  was  symbolized  by  a  fe¬
male  figure  holding  in  one  hand  a  pair  of
scales  equipoised  and  in  the  other  a  nest
of  swallows.  The  moderns  have  substi¬
tuted  a  level  for  the  scales.  And  this  is
the  Masonic  idea.  In  Masonry,  the  level
is  the  symbol  of  that  equality  which,  as
Higgins  (Anac.,  i.  790,)  says,  is  the  very
essence  of  Freemasonry.  “All,  let  their
rank  in  life  be  what  it  may,  when  in  the
Lodge  are  brothers  —  brethren  with  the
Father  at  their  head.  No  person  can  read
the  Evangelists  and  not  see  that  this  is
correctly  Gospel  Christianity.”

Equerry.  An  officer  in  some  courts
who  has  the  charge  of  horses.  I  do  not
know  why  the  title  has  been  introduced
into  some  of  the  high  degrees.

Eques.  A  Latin  word  signifying
knight.  Every  member  of  the  Bite  of
Strict  Observance,  on  attaining  to  the  sev¬
enth  or  highest  degree,  received  a  “char¬
acteristic  name,”  which  was  formed  in  Latin
by  the  addition  of  a  noun  in  the  ablative
case,  governed  by  the  preposition  a  or  ab,
to  the  word  Eques,  as  “  Eques  it  Serpente,”
or  Knight  of  the  Serpent,  “Eques  ab  Aquila,”
or  Knight  of  the  Eagle,  etc.,  and  by  this
name  he  was  ever  afterwards  known  in  the
Order.  Thus  Bode,  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Rite,  was  recognized  as  “  Eques  k  Lilio
Convallium,”  or  Knight  of  the  Lily  of  the
Valleys,  and  the  Baron  Hund,  another
founder,  as  “Eques  ab  Euse,"  or  Knight  of
the  Sword.  A  similar  custom  prevailed
among  the  Illuminati  and  in  the  Royal
Order  of  Scotland.  Eques  signified  among
the  Romans  a  knight,  but  in  the  Middle
Ages  the  knight  was  called  miles;  although
the  Latin  word  miles  denoted  only  a  soldier,
yet,  by  the  usage  of  chivalry,  it  received
the  nobler  signification.  Indeed,  Muratori


EQUES


ERICA


259


says,  on  the  authority  of  an  old  inscription,
that  Eques  was  inferior  in  dignity  to  Miles.
See  Miles.

Eques  Professus.  Professed  Knight.
The  seventh  and  last  degree  of  the  Rite
of  Strict  Observance.  Added,  it  is  said,  to
the  original  series  by  Von  Hund.

Equilateral  Triangle.  See  Tri¬
angle.

Equity.  The  equipoised  balance  is  an
ancient  symbol  of  equity.  On  the  medals,
this  virtue  is  represented  by  a  female  hold¬
ing  in  the  right  hand  a  balance,  and  in  the
left  a  measuring  wand,  to  indicate  that  she
gives  to  each  one  his  just  measure.  In  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,  the  thirty-first
degree,  or  Grand  Inspector  Inquisitor  Com¬
mander,  is  illustrative  of  the  virtue  of
equity ;  and  hence  the  balance  is  a  promi¬
nent  symbol  of  that  degree,  as  it  is  also  of
the  sixteenth  degree,  or  Princes  of  Jerusa¬
lem,  because,  according  to  the  old  rituals,
they  were  chiefs  in  Masonry,  and  adminis¬
tered  justice  to  the  inferior  degrees.

Equivocation.  The  words  of  the
covenant  of  Masonry  require  that  it  should
be  made  without  evasion,  equivocation,  or
mental  reservation.  This  is  exactly  in  ac¬
cordance  with  the  law  of  ethics  in  relation
to  promises  made.  And  it  properly  applies
in  this  case,  because  the  covenant,  as  it  is
called,  is  simply  a  promise,  or  series  of
promises,  made  by  the  candidate  to  the
Fraternity  — to  the  brotherhood  into  whose
association  he  is  about  to  be  admitted.  In
making  a  promise,  an  evasion  is  the  eluding
or  avoiding  the  terms  of  the  promise;  and
this  is  done,  or  attempted  to  be  done,  by
equivocation,  which  is  by  giving  to  the
words  used  a  secret  signification,  different
from  that  which  they  were  intended  to  con¬
vey  by  him  who  imposed  the  promise,  so
as  to  mislead,  or  by  a  'mental  reservation,
which  is  a  concealment  or  withholding  in
the  mind  of  the  promiser  of  certain  condi¬
tions  under  which  he  makes  it,  which  con¬
ditions  are  not  known  to  the  one  to  whom
the  promise  is  made.  All  of  this  is  in
direct  violation  of  the  law  of  veracity.  The
doctrine  of  the  Jesuits  is  very  different.
Suarez,  one  of  their  most  distinguished
casuists,  lays  it  down  as  good  law,  that  if
any  one  makes  a  promise  or  contract,  he
may  secretly  understand  that  he  does  not
sincerely  promise,  or  that  he  promises  with¬
out  any  intention  of  fulfilling  the  promise.
This  is  not  the  rule  of  Masonry,  which  re¬
quires  that  the  words  of  the  covenant  be
taken  in  the  patent  sense  which  they  were
intended  by  the  ordinary  use  of  language
to  convey.  It  adheres  to  the  true  rule  of
ethics,  which  is,  as  Paley  says,  that  a  prom¬
ise  is  binding  in  thesensein  which  the  prom¬
iser  supposed  the  promisee  to  receive  it.


Eranoi.  Among  the  ancient  Greeks
there  were  friendly  societies,  whose  object
was,  like  the  modern  Masonic  Lodges,  to  re¬
lieve  the  distresses  of  their  necessitous  mem¬
bers.  They  were  permanently  organized,
and  had  a  common  fund  by  the  voluntary
contributions  of  the  members.  If  a  mem¬
ber  was  reduced  to  poverty,  or  was  in  tem¬
porary  distress  for  money,  he  applied  to  the
eranos,  and,  if  worthy,  received  the  neces¬
sary  assistance,  which  was,  however,  ad¬
vanced  rather  as  a  loan  than  a  gift,  and  the
amount  was  to  be  returned  when  the  recip¬
ient  was  in  better  circumstances.  In  the
days  of  the  Roman  empire  these  friendly
societies  were  frequent  among  the  Greek  *
cities,  and  were  looked  on  with  suspicion
by  the  emperors,  as  tending  to  political
combinations.  Smith  says  (Did.  Gr.  and
Rom.  Ant.)  that  the  Anglo-Saxon  gilds,  or
fraternities  for  mutual  aid,  resembled  the
eranoi  of  the  Greeks.  In  their  spirit,  these
Grecian  confraternities  partook  more  of  the
Masonic  character,  as  charitable  associa¬
tions,  than  of  the  modern  friendly  societies,
where  relief  is  based  on  a  system  of  mu¬
tual  insurance;  for  the  assistance  was  given
only  to  cases  of  actual  need,  and  did  not
depend  on  any  calculation  of  natural  con¬
tingencies.

Erica.  The  Egyptians  selected  the
erica  as  a  sacred  plant.  The  origin  of  the
consecration  of  this  plant  will  be  peculiarly
interesting  to  the  Masonic  student.  There
was  a  legend  in  the  mysteries  of  Osiris,
which  related  that  Isis,  when  in  search  of
the  body  of  her  murdered  husband,  dis¬
covered  it  interred  at  the  brow  of  a  hill  near
which  an  erica  grew ;  and  hence,  after  the
recovery  of  the  body  and  the  resurrection
of  the  god,  when  she  established  the  mys¬
teries  to  commemorate  her  loss  and  her  re¬
covery,  she  adopted  the  erica  as  a  sacred
plant,  in  memory  of  its  having  pointed  out
the  spot  where  the  mangled  remains  of
Osiris  were  concealed.

Ragon  ( Cours  des  Initiations,  p.  151,)  thus
alludes  to  this  mystical  event :  “  Isis  found
the  body  of  Osiris  in  the  neighborhood  of
Biblos,  and  near  a  tall  plant  called  the  erica.
Oppressed  with  grief,  she  seated  herself  on
the  margin  of  a  fountain,  whose  waters  is¬
sued  from  a  rock.  This  rock  is  the  small
hill  mentioned  in  the  ritual ;  the  erica  has
been  replaced  by  the  acacia,  and  the  grief
of  Isis  has  been  changed  for  that  of  the
Fellow  Crafts.”

The  lexicographers  define  epeisv  as  “  the
health  plant;  ”  but  it  is  really,  as  Plutarch
asserts,  the  tamarisk  tree;  and  Schwenk
( Die  Mgthofogie  der  Semiten,  p.  248,)  says
that  Phyloe,  so  renowned  among  the  an¬
cients  as  one  of  the  burial-places  of  Osiris,
and  among  the  moderns  for  its  wealth  of


260


ERNEST


ESSENES


architectural  remains,  contains  monuments
in  which  the  grave  of  Osiris  is  overshad¬
owed  by  the  tamarisk.

Ernest  and  Falk.  Ernst  und  Falk.
Gesprache  fur  Freimaurerei,  i.  e.,  “  Ernest
and  Falk.  Conversations  on  Freemasonry,”
is  the  title  of  a  German  work  written  by
Gottfried  Ephraim  Lessing,  and  first  pub¬
lished  in  1778.  Ernest  is  an  inquirer,  and
Falk  a  Freemason,  who  gives  to  his  inter¬
locutor  a  very  philosophical  idea  of  the
character,  aims,  and  objects  of  the  Institu¬
tion.  The  work  has  been  faithfully  trans¬
lated  by  Bro.  Kenneth  R.  H.  Mackenzie,
F.  S.  A.,  in  the  London  Freemason’s  Quar¬
terly  Magazine,  in  1854,  and  continued  and
finished,  so  far  as  the  author  had  completed
it,  in  the  London  Freemason  in  1872.  Fin-
del  says  of  this  work,  that  it  is  one  of  the
best  things  that  has  ever  been  written  upon
Freemasonry.

Erwin  von  Steinbach.  A  distin¬
guished  German,  who  was  born,  as  his  name
imports,  at  Steinbach,  near  Buhl,  about
the  middle  of  the  13th  century.  He  was
the  master  of  the  works  at  the  Cathedral
of  Strasburg,  the  tower  of  which  he  com¬
menced  in  1275.  He  finished  the  tower  and
doorway  before  his  death,  which  was  in
1318.  He  was  at  the  head  of  the  German
Fraternity  of  Stonemasons,  who  were  the
precursors  of  the  modern  Freemasons.
See  Strasburg.

Esoteric  Masonry.  That  secret
portion  of  Masonry  which  is  known  only
to  the  initiates  as  distinguished  from  exo¬
teric  Masonry,  or  monitorial,  which  is  acces¬
sible  to  all  who  choose  to  read  the  manuals
and  published  works  of  the  Order.  The
words  are  from  the  Greek,  'eaurepiKo^,  in¬
ternal,  and  'e^crrepiKog,  external,  and  were
first  used  by  Pythagoras,  whose  philosophy
was  divided  into  the  exoteric,  or  that
taught  to  all,  and  the  esoteric,  or  that
taught  to  a  select  few  ;  and  thus  his  disci¬
ples  were  divided  into  two  classes,  accord¬
ing  to  the  degree  of  initiation  to  which  they
had  attained,  as  being  either  fully  admitted
into  the  society,  and  invested  with  all  the
knowledge  that  the  Master  could  commu¬
nicate,  or  as  merely  postulants,  enjoying
only  the  public  instructions  of  the  school,
and  awaiting  the  gradual  reception  of  fur¬
ther  knowledge.  This  double  mode  of  in¬
struction  was  borrowed  by  Pythagoras
from  the  Egyptian  priests,  whose  theology
was  of  two  kinds  —  the  one  exoteric,  and
addressed  to  the  people  in  general ;  the
other  esoteric,  and  confined  to  a  select  num¬
ber  of  the  priests  and  to  those  who  pos¬
sessed,  or  were  to  possess,  the  regal  power.
And  the  mystical  nature  of  this  concealed
doctrine  was  expressed  in  their  symbolic
language  by  the  images  of  sphinxes  placed


at  the  entrance  of  their  temples.  Two  cen¬
turies  later,  Aristotle  adopted  the  system
of  Pythagoras,  and,  in  the  Lyceum  at
Athens,  delivered  in  the  morning  to  his
select  disciples  his  subtle  and  concealed
doctrines  concerning  God,  Nature,  and
Life,  and  in  the  evening  lectured  on  more
elementary  subjects  to  a  promiscuous  audi¬
ence.  These  different  lectures  he  called
his  Morning  and  his  Evening  Walk.

Essenes.  Lawrie,  in  his  History  of
Freemasonry ,  in  replying  to  the  objection,
that  if  the  Fraternity  of  Freemasons  had
flourished  during  the  reign  of  Solomon,  it
would  have  existed  in  Judea  in  after  ages,
attempts  to  meet  the  argument  by  showing
that  there  did  exist,  after  the  building  of
the  Temple,  an  association  of  men  resem¬
bling  Freemasons  in  the  nature,  ceremo¬
nies,  and  object  of  their  institution.  The
association  to  which  he  here  alludes  is  that
of  the  Essenes,  whom  he  subsequently  de¬
scribes  as  an  ancient  Fraternity  originat¬
ing  from  an  association  of  architects  who
were  connected  with  the  building  of  Solo¬
mon’s  Temple.

Lawrie  evidently  seeks  to  connect  his¬
torically  the  Essenes  with  the  Freemasons,
and  to  impress  his  readers  with  the  identity
of  the  two  Institutions.  I  am  not  pre¬
pared  to  go  so  far;  but  there  is  such  a  simi¬
larity  between  the  two,  and  such  remarka¬
ble  coincidences  in  many  of  their  usages,  as
to  render  this  Jewish  sect  an  interesting
study  to  every  Freemason,  to  whom  there¬
fore  some  account  of  the  usages  and  doc¬
trines  of  this  holy  brotherhood  will  not,
perhaps,  be  unacceptable.

At  the  time  of  the  advent  of  Jesus  Christ,
there  were  three  religious  sects  in  Judea  —
the  Pharisees,  the  Sadducees,  and  the  Es¬
senes;  and  to  one  of  these  sects  every  Jew
was  compelled  to  unite  himself.  The  Sa¬
viour  has  been  supposed  by  many  writers
to  have  been  an  EsseDe,  because,  while  re¬
peatedly  denouncing  the  errors  of  the  two
other  sects,  he  has  nowhere  uttered  a  word
of  censure  against  the  Essenes;  and  be¬
cause,  also,  many  of  the  precepts  of  the
New  Testament  are  to  be  found  among  the
laws  of  this  sect.

In  ancient  authors,  such  as  Josephus,
Philo,  Porphyry,  Eusebius,  and  Pliny,  who
have  had  occasion  to  refer  to  the  subject,
the  notices  of  this  singular  sect  have  been
so  brief  and  unsatisfactory,  that  modern
writers  have  found  great  difficulty  in  pro¬
perly  understanding  the  true  character  of
Essenism.  And  yet  our  antiquaries,  never
weary  of  the  task  of  investigation,  have  at
length,  within  a  recent  period,  succeeded
in  eliciting,  from  the  collation  of  all  that
has  been  previously  written  on  the  subject,
very  correct  details  of  the  doctrines  and


ESSENES


ESSENES


20 1


practices  of  the  Essenes.  Of  these  writers,
none,  I  think,  have  been  more  successful
than  the  laborious  German  critics  Frankel
and  Rappaport.  Their  investigations  have
been  ably  and  thoroughly  condensed  by
Dr.  Christian  D.  Ginsburg,  whose  essay  on
The  Essenes,  their  History  and  Doctrines,
(Lond.,  1864,)  has  supplied  the  most  ma¬
terial  facts  contained  in  the  present  article.

It  is  impossible  to  ascertain  the  precise
date  of  the  development  of  Essenism  as  a
distinct  organization.  The  old  writers  are
so  exaggerated  in  their  statements,  that
they  are  worth  nothing  as  historical  au¬
thorities.  Philo  says,  for  instance,  that
Moses  himself  instituted  the  order,  and
Josephus  that  it  existed  ever  since  the  an¬
cient  time  of  the  Fathers;  while  Pliny  as¬
serts,  with  mythical  liberality,  that  it  has
continued  for  thousands  of  ages.  Dr.
Ginsburg  thiuks  that  Essenism  was  a  grad¬
ual  development  of  the  prevalent  religious
notions  out  of  Judaism,  a  theory  which
Dr.  Dellinger  repudiates.  But  Rappaport,
who  was  a  learned  Jew,  thoroughly  con¬
versant  with  the  Talmud  and  other  He¬
brew  writings,  and  who  is  hence  called  by
Ginsburg  “  the  corypheus  of  Jewish  critics,”
asserts  that  the  Essenes  were  not  a  distinct
sect,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  but
simply  an  order  of  Judaism,  and  that  there
never  was  a  rupture  between  them  and  the
rest  of  the  Jewish  community.  This  theory
is  sustained  by  Frankel,  a  learned  German,
who  maintains  that  the  Essenes  were  sim¬
ply  an  intensification  of  the  Pharisaic  sect,
and  that  they  were  the  same  as  the  Chasi¬
dim,  whom  Lawrie  calls  the  Kassideans,
and  of  whom  he  speaks  as  the  guardians
of  King  Solomon’s  Temple.  If  this  view
be  the  correct  one,  and  there  is  no  good
reason  to  doubt  it,  then  there  will  be  an¬
other  feature  of  resemblance  and  coinci¬
dence  between  the  Freemasons  and  the  Es¬
senes  ;  for,  as  the  latter  was  not  a  religious
sect,  but  merely  a  development  of  Judaism,
an  order  of  Jews  entertaining  no  heterodox
opinions,  but  simply  carrying  out  the  reli¬
gious  dogmas  of  their  faith  with  an  un¬
usual  strictness  of  observance,  so  are  the
Freemasons  not  a  religious  sect,  but  simply
a  development  of  the  religious  idea  of  the
age.  The  difference,  however,  between
Freemasonry  and  Essenism  lies  in  the
spirit  of  universal  tolerance  prominent  in
the  one  and  absent  in  the  other.  Free¬
masonry  is  Christian  as  to  its  membership
in  general,  but  recognizing  and  tolerating
in  its  bosom  all  other  religions:  Essenism,
on  the  contrary,  was  exclusively  and  in¬
tensely  Jewish  in  its  membership,  its  usages,
and  its  doctrines.

The  Essenes  are  first  mentioned  by  Jose¬
phus  as  existing  in  the  days  of  Jonathan


the  Maccabsean,  one  hundred  and  sixty-six
years  before  Christ.  The  Jewish  historian
repeatedly  speaks  of  them  at  subsequent
periods ;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  they
constituted  one  of  the  three  sects  which  di¬
vided  the  Jewish  religious  world  at  the  ad¬
vent  of  our  Saviour,  and  of  this  sect  he  is
supposed,  as  has  been  already  said,  to  have
been  a  member.

On  this  subject,  Ginsburg  says:  “Jesus,
who  in  all  things  conformed  to  the  Jewish
law,  and  who  was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,
and  separate  from  sinners,  would,  there¬
fore,  naturally  associate  himself  with  that
order  of  Judaism  which  was  most  congenial
to  his  holy  nature.  Moreover,  the  fact  that
Christ,  with  the  exception  of  once,  was  not
heard  of  in  public  till  his  thirtieth  year,
implying  that  he  lived  in  seclusion  with
this  Fraternity,  and  that,  though  he  fre¬
quently  rebuked  the  Scribes,  Pharisees,  and
Sadducees,  he  never  denounced  the  Es¬
senes,  strongly  confirms  this  decision.”
But  he  admits  that  Christ  neither  adopted
nor  preached  their  extreme  doctrines  of  as¬
ceticism.

After  the  establishment  of  Christianity,
the  Essenes  fade  out  of  notice,  and  it  has
been  supposed  that  they  were  among  the
earliest  converts  to  the  new  faith.  Indeed,
De  Quincey  rather  paradoxically  asserts
that  they  were  a  disguised  portion  of  the
early  Christians.

The  etymology  of  the  word  has  not  been
settled.  Yet,  among  the  contending  opin¬
ions,  the  preferable  one  seems  to  be  that  it
is  derived  from  the  Hebrew  CHASID,
—  holy,  pious,  —  which  connects  the  Es¬
senes  with  the  Chasidim,  a  sect  which  pre¬
ceded  them,  and  of  whom  Lawrie  says,
(quoting  from  Scaliger,)  that  they  were  “an
order  of  the  Knights  of  the  Temple  of
Jerusalem,  who  bound  themselves  to
adorn  the  porches  of  that  magnificent  struc¬
ture,  and  to  preserve  it  from  injury  and
decay.”

The  Essenes  were  so  strict  in  the  ob¬
servance  of  the  Mosaic  laws  of  purity,  that
they  were  compelled,  for  the  purpose  of
avoiding  contamination,  to  withdraw  al¬
together  from  the  rest  of  the  Jewish  nation
and  to  form  a  separate  community,  which
thus  became  a  brotherhood.  The  same
scruples  which  led  them  to  withdraw  from
their  less  strict  Jewish  brethren  induced
most  of  them  to  abstain  from  marriage,
and  hence  the  unavoidable  depletion  of
their  membership  by  death  could  only  be
repaired  by  the  initiation  of  converts.  They
had  a  common  treasury,  in  which  was  de¬
posited  whatever  any  one  of  them  possessed,
and  from  this  the  wants  of  the  whole  com¬
munity  were  supplied  by  stewards  appoint¬
ed  by  the  brotherhood,  so  that  they  had


262


ESSENES


ESSENES


everything  in  common.  Hence  there  was
no  distinction  among  them  of  rich  and
poor,  or  masters  and  servants ;  but  the  only
gradation  of  rank  which  they  recognized
was  derived  from  the  degrees  or  orders  into
which  the  members  were  divided,  and
which  depended  on  holiness  alone.  They
lived  peaceably  with  all  men,  reprobated
slavery  and  war,  and  would  not  eveu  manu¬
facture  any  warlike  instruments.  They
were  governed  by  a  president,  who  was
elected  by  the  whole  community;  and
members  who  had  violated  their  rules  were,
after  due  trial,  excommunicated  or  ex¬
pelled.

As  they  held  no  communication  outside
of  their  own  fraternity,  they  had  to  raise
their  own  supplies,  and  some  were  engaged
in  tilling,  some  in  tending  flocks,  others  in
making  clothing,  and  others  in  preparing
food.  They  got  up  before  sunrise,  and,
after  singing  a  hymn  of  praise  for  the  re¬
turn  of  light,  which  they  did  with  their
faces  turned  to  the  east,  each  one  repaired
to  his  appropriate  task.  At  the  fifth  hour,
or  eleven  in  the  forenoon,  the  morning
labor  terminated.  The  brethren  then  again
assembled,  and  after  a  lustration  in  cold
water,  they  put  on  white  garments  and
proceeded  to  the  refectory,  where  they  par¬
took  of  the  common  meal,  which  was  always
of  the  most  frugal  character.  A  mysterious
silence  was  observed  during  this  meal,
which,  to  some  extent,  had  the  character
of  a  sacrament.  The  feast  being  ended,
and  the  priest  having  returned  thanks,  the
brethren  withdrew  and  put  off  their  wrhite
garments,  resumed  their  working- clothes
and  their  several  employments  until  even¬
ing,  when  they  again  assembled  as  before,
to  partake  of  a  common  meal.

They  observed  the  Sabbath  with  more
than  Judaic  strictness,  regarding  even  the
removal  of  a  vessel  as  a  desecration  of  the
holy  day.  On  that  day.  each  took  his  seat
in  the  synagogue  in  becoming  attire :  and,
as  they  had  no  ordained  ministers,  any  one
that  liked  read  out  of  the  Scriptures,  and
another,  experienced  in  spiritual  matters,
expounded  the  passages  that  had  been  read.
The  distinctive  ordinances  of  the  brother¬
hood  and  the  mysteries  connected  with  the
Tetragrammaton  and  the  angelic  worlds
were  the  prominent  topics  of  Sabbatical
instruction.  In  particular,  did  they  pay
attention  to  the  mysteries  connected  with
the  Tetragrammaton,  or  the  Shem  hampho-
rash,  the  expository  name ,  and  the  other
names  of  God  which  play  so  important  a
part  in  the  mystical  theosophy  of  the  Jew¬
ish  Kabbalists,  a  great  deal  of  which  has
descended  to  the  Freemasonry  of  our  own
days.

Josephus  describes  them  as  being  distin¬


guished  for  their  brotherly  love,  and  for
their  charity  in  helping  the  needy,  and
showing  mercy.  He  says  that  they  are
just  dispensers  of  their  anger,  curbers  of
their  passions,  representatives  of  fidelity,
ministers  of  peace,  and  every  word  with
them  is  of  more  force  than  an  oath.  They
avoid  taking  an  oath,  and  regard  it  as
worse  than  perjury;  for  they  say  that  he
who  is  not  believed  without  calling  on  God
to  witness,  is  already  condemned  of  per¬
jury.  He  also  states  that  they  studied
with  great  assiduity  the  writings  of  the
ancients  on  distempers  and  their  remedies,
alluding,  as  it  is  supposed,  to  the  magical
works  imputed  by  the  Talmudists  to  Solo¬
mon.

It  has  already  been  observed  that,  in
consequence  of  the  celibacy  of  the  Essenes,
it  was  found  necessary  to  recruit  their  ranks
by  the  introduction  of  converts,  who  were
admitted  by  a  solemn  form  of  initiation.
The  candidate,  or  aspirant,  was  required  to
pass  through  a  novitiate  of  two  stages,
which  extended  over  three  years,  before  ho
was  admitted  to  a  full  participation  in  the
privileges  of  the  Order.  Upon  entering
the  first  stage,  which  lasted  for  twelve
months,  the  novice  cast  all  his  possessions
into  the  common  treasury.  He  then  re¬
ceived  a  copy  of  the  regulations  of  the
brotherhood,  and  was  presented  with  a
spade,  an  apron,  and  a  white  robe.  The
spade  was  employed  to  bury  excrement,  the
apron  was  used  at  the  daily  lustrations,  and
the  white  robe  was  worn  as  a  symbol  of
purity.  During  all  this  period  the  aspi¬
rant  was  considered  as  being  outside  the
order,  and,  although  required  to  observe
some  of  the  ascetic  rules  of  the  society,  he
was  not  admitted  to  the  common  meai.  At
the  end  of  the  probationary  year,  the  aspi¬
rant,  if  approved,  was  advanced  to  the
second  stage,  which  lasted  two  years,  and
was  then  called  an  apjyroacher.  During
this  period  he  was  permitted  to  unite  with
the  brethren  in  their  lustrations,  but  was
not  admitted  to  the  common  meal,  nor  to
hold  any  office.  Should  this  second  stage
of  probation  be  passed  with  approval,  the
approacker  became  an  associate,  and  was
admitted  into  full  membership,  and  at
length  allowed  to  partake  of  the  common
meal.

There  was  a  third  rank  or  degree,  called
the  disciple  or  companion ,  in  which  there
was  a  still  closer  union.  Upon  admission
to  this  highest  grade,  the  candidate  was
bound  by  a  solemn  oath  to  love  God,  to  be
just  to  all  men,  to  practise  charity,  main¬
tain  truth,  and  to  conceal  the  secrets  of  the
society  and  the  mysteries  connected  with
the  Tetragammaton  and  the  other  names
of  God.


ESSENE3


ESTHER


263


These  three  sections  or  degrees,  of  aspi¬
rant,  associate,  and  companion,  were  sub¬
divided  into  four  orders  or  ranks,  distin¬
guished  from  each  other  by  different  de¬
grees  of  holipes3;  and  so  marked  were
these  distinctions,  that  if  one  belonging  to
a  higher  degree  of  purity  touched  one  of
a  lower  order,  he  immediately  became  im¬
pure,  and  could  only  regain  his  purity  by  a
series  of  lustrations.

The  earnestness  and  determination  of
these  Essenes,  says  Ginsburg,  to  advance  to
the  highest  state  of  holiness,  were  seen  in
their  self-denying  and  godly  life,  and  it
may  fairly  be  questioned  whether  any  reli¬
gious  system  has  ever  produced  such  a  com¬
munity  of  saints.  Their  absolute  confi¬
dence  in  God  and  resignation  to  the  deal¬
ings  of  Providence;  their  uniformly  holy
and  unselfish  life ;  their  unbounded  love  of
virtue  and  utter  contempt  for  worldly  fame,
riches,  and  pleasures;  their  industry,  tem¬
perance,  modesty,  and  simplicity  of  life;
their  contentment  of  mind  and  cheerful¬
ness  of  temper;  their  love  of  order,  and
abhorrence  of  even  the  semblance  of  false¬
hood;  their  benevolence  and  philanthropy ;
their  love  for  the  brethren,  and  their  fol¬
lowing  peace  with  all  men ;  their  hatred
of  slavery  and  war ;  their  tender  regard  for
children,  and  reverence  and  anxious  care
for  the  aged ;  their  attendance  on  the  sick,
and  readiness  to  relieve  the  distressed;
their  humility  and  magnanimity;  their
firmness  of  character  and  power  to  subdue
their  passions;  their  heroic  endurance
under  the  most  agonizing  sufferings  for
righteousness’  sake;  and  their  cheerfully
looking  forward  to  death,  as  releasing  their
immortal  souls  from  the  bonds  of  the  body,
to  be  forever  in  a  state  of  bliss  with  their
Creator,  —  have  hardly  found  a  parallel  in
the  history  of  mankind.

Lawrie,  in  his  History  of  Freemasonry ,
gives,  on  the  authority  of  Pictet,  of  Bas-
nage,  and  of  Philo,  the  following  con¬
densed  recapitulation  of  what  has  been
said  in  the  preceding  pages  of  the  usages
of  the  Essenes:

When  a  candidate  was  proposed  for
admission,  the  strictest  scrutiny  was  made
into  his  character.  If  his  life  had  hitherto
'  been  exemplary,  and  if  lie  appeared  capable
of  curbing  his  passions,  and  regulating  his
conduct  according  to  the  virtuous,  though
austere,  maxims  of  their  order,  he  was  pre¬
sented,  at  the  expiration  of  his  novitiate,
with  a  white  garment,  as  an  emblem  of  the
regularity  of  his  conduct  and  the  purity  of
his  heart.  A  solemn  oath  was  then  ad¬
ministered  to  him,  that  he  would  never  di¬
vulge  the  mysteries  of  the  Order;  that  he
would  make  no  innovations  on  the  doctrines
of  the  society ;  and  that  he  would  continue


in  that  honorable  course  of  piety  and  virtue
which  he  had  begun  to  pursue.  Like  Free¬
masons,  they  instructed  the  young  member
in  the  knowledge  which  they  derived  from
their  ancestors.  They  admitted  no  women
into  their  order.  They  had  particular
signs  for  recognizing  each  other,  which
have  a  strong  resemblance  to  those  of  Free¬
masons.  They  had  colleges  or  places  of
retirement,  where  they  resorted  to  practise
their  rites  and  settle  the  affairs  of  the  so¬
ciety  ;  and,  after  the  performance  of  these
duties,  they  assembled  in  a  large  hall,
where  an  entertainment  was  provided  for
them  by  the  president  or  master  of  the
college,  who  allotted  a  certain  quantity  of
provisions  to  every  individual.  They  abol¬
ished  all  distinctions  of  rank ;  and  if  pref¬
erence  was  ever  given,  it  was  given  to
piety,  liberality,  and  virtue.  Treasurers
were  appointed  in  every  town,  to  supply
the  wants  of  indigent  strangers.”

Lawrie  thinks  that  this  remarkable  coin¬
cidence  between  the  chief  features  of  the
Masonic  and  Essenian  fraternities  can  be
accounted  for  only  by  referring  them  to  the
same  origin  ;  and,  to  sustain  this  view,  he
attempts  to  trace  them  to  the  Kassideans,
or  Assideans,  more  properly  the  Chasidim,
“  an  association  of  architects  who  were
connected  with  the  building  of  Solomon’s
Temple.”  But,  aside  from  the  considera¬
tion  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
Chasidim  were  a  body  of  architects,  —  for
they  were  really  a  sect  of  Jewish  puritans,
who  held  the  Temple  in  especial  honor, — we
cannot  conclude,  from  a  mere  coincidence
of  doctrines  and  usages,  that  the  origin  of
the  Essenes  and  the  Freemasons  is  identi¬
cal.  Such  a  course  of  reasoning  would
place  the  Pythagoreans  in  the  same  cate¬
gory  :  a  theory  that  has  been  rejected  by
the  best  modern  critics.

The  truth  appears  to  be  that  the  Essenes,
the  School  of  Pythagoras,  and  the  Free¬
masons,  derive  their  similarity  from  that
spirit  of  brotherhood  which  has  prevailed
in  all  ages  of  the  civilized  world,  the  inhe¬
rent  principles  of  which,  as  the  results  of
any  fraternity, —  all  the  members  of  which
are  engaged  in  the  same  pursuit  and  as¬
senting  to  the  same  religious  creed,  —  are
brotherly  love,  charity,  and  that  secrecy
wdiich  gives  them  their  exclusiveness.  And
hence,  between  all  fraternities,  ancient  and
modern,  these  “  remarkable  coincidences”
will  be  found.

Esther.  The  second  degree  of  the
American  Adoptive  Rite  of  the  Eastern
Star.  It  is  also  called  “  the  wdfe’s  degree,”
and  in  its  ceremonies  comprises  the  history
of  Esther  the  wife  and  queen  of  Ahasuerus,
king  of  Persia,  as  related  in  the  Book  of
Esther.


2G4


ETERNAL


ETHICS


Et^rntil  Life.  The  doctrine  of  eter¬
nal  life  is  taught  in  the  Master’s  degree,  as
it  was  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries  of  ail  na¬
tions.  See  Immortality  of  the  Soul.

Eternity.  The  ancient  symbol  of
eternity  was  a  serpent  in  the  form  of  a  cir¬
cle,  the  tail  being  placed  in  the  mouth.
The  simple  circle,  the  figure  which  has
neither  beginning  nor  end,  but  returns
continually  into  itself,  was  also  a  symbol
of  eternity.

Ethics  of  Freemasonry.  There
is  a  Greek  word,  iOog  {ethos),  which  signifies
custom,  from  which  Aristotle  derives  another
word  f/6og,  {ethos,)  which  means  ethics ;  be¬
cause,  as  he  says,  from  the  custom  of  doing
good  acts  arises  the  habit  of  moral  virtue.
Ethics,  then,  is  the  science  of  morals  teach¬
ing  the  theory  and  practice  of  all  that  is
good  in  relation  to  God  and  to  man,  to  the
state  and  the  individual ;  it  is,  in  short,  to
use  the  emphatic  expression  of  a  German
writer,  “  the  science  of  the  good  ”  Ethics
being  thus  engaged  in  the  inculcation  of
moral  duties,  there  must  be  a  standard  of
these  duties,  an  authoritative  ground-prin¬
ciple  on  which  they  depend,  a  doctrine
that  requires  their  performance,  making
certain  acts  just  those  that  ought  to  be  done,
and  which,  therefore,  are  duties,  and  that
forbid  the  performance  of  others  which  are,
therefore,  offences.  Ethics,  then,  as  a  sci¬
ence,  is  divisible  into  several  species,  vary¬
ing  in  name  and  character,  according  to  the
foundation  on  which  it  is  built.

Thus  we  have  the  Ethics  of  Theology,
which  is  founded  on  that  science  which
teaches  the  nature  and  attributes  of  God ;
and,  as  this  forms  a  part  of  all  religious
systems,  every  religion,  whether  it  be
Christianity,  or  Judaism,  Brahmanism,  or
Buddhism,  or  any  other  form  of  recognized
worship,  has  within  its  bosom  a  science  of
theological  ethics  which  teaches,  accord¬
ing  to  the  lights  of  that  religion,  the  du¬
ties  which  are  incumbent  on  man  from  his
relations  to  a  Supreme  Being.  And  then
we  have  the  Ethics  of  Christianity,  which,
being  founded  on  the  Scriptures,  recog¬
nized  by  Christians  as  the  revealed  will  of
God,  is  nothing  other  than  theological
ethics  applied  to  and  limited  by  Chris¬
tianity.

Then,  again,  we  have  the  Ethics  of  Phi¬
losophy,  which  is  altogether  speculative,
and  derived  from  and  founded  on  man’s
speculations  concerning  God  and  himself.
There  might  be  a  sect  of  philosophers  who
denied  the  existence  of  a  Superintending
Providence;  but  it  would  still  have  a  sci¬
ence  of  ethics  referring  to  the  relations  of
man  to  man,  although  that  system  would
be  without  strength,  because  it  would  have
no  Divine  sanction  for  its  enforcement.


And,  lastly,  we  have  the  Ethics  of  Free¬
masonry,  whose  character  combines  those
of  the  three  others.  The  first  and  second
systems  in  the  series  above  enumerated  are
founded  on  religious  dogmas;  the  third  on
philosophical  speculations.  Now,  as  Free¬
masonry  claims  to  be  a  religion,  in  so  far
as  it  is  founded  on  a  recognition  of  the  re¬
lations  of  man  and  God,  and  a  philosophy
in  so  far  as  it  is  engaged  in  speculations
on  the  nature  of  man,  as  an  immortal,  so¬
cial,  and  responsible  being,  the  ethics  of
Freemasonry  will  be  both  religious  and
philosophical.

The  symbolism  of  Masonry,  which  is  its
peculiar  mode  of  instruction,  inculcates  all
the  duties  which  we  owe  to  God  as  being
his  children,  and  to  men  as  being  their
brethren.  “There  is,”  says  Dr.  Oliver,
“  scarcely  a  point  of  duty  or  morality  which
man  has  been  presumed  to  owe  to  God,  his
neighbor,  or  himself,  under  the  Patriarchal,
the  Mosaic,  or  the  Christian  dispensation,
which,  in  the  construction  of  our  symboli¬
cal  system,  has  been  left  untouched.”
Hence,  be  says,  that  these  symbols  all
unite  to  form  “a  code  of  moral  and  theo¬
logical  philosophy ;  ”  the  term  of  which  ex¬
pression  would  have  been  better  if  he  had
called  it  a  “a  code  of  philosophical  and
theological  ethics.”

At  a  very  early  period  of  his  initiation,
the  Mason  is  instructed  that  he  owes  a
threefold  duty,  —  to  God,  his  neighbor,  and
himself,  —  and  the  inculcation  of  these  du¬
ties  constitutes  the  ethics  of  Freemasonrv.

Now,  the  Tetragrammaton,  the  letter  6,
and  many  other  symbols  of  a  like  charac¬
ter,  impressively  inculcate  the  lesson  that
there  is  a  God  in  whom  “  we  live,  and
move,  and  have  our  being,”  and  of  whom
the  apostle,  quoting  from  the  Greek  poet,
.tells  us  that  “  we  are  his  offspring.”  To
him,  then,  as  the  Universal  Father,  does
the  ethics  of  Freemasonry  teach  us  that
we  owe  the  duty  of  loving  and  obedient
children.

And,  then,  the  vast  extent  of  the  Lodge,
making  the  whole  world  the  common  home
of  all  Masons,  and  the  temple,  in  which
we  all  labor  for  the  building  up  of  our
bodies  as  a  spiritual  house,  are  significant
symbols,  which  teach  us  that  we  are  not
only  the  children  of  the  Father,  but  fel¬
low-workers,  laboring  together  in  the  same
task  and  owing  a  common  servitude  to  God
as  theGrand  Architect  of  the  universe  —  the
Algabil  or  Master  Builder  of  the  world  and
all  that  is  therein  ;  and  thus  these  symbols
of  a  joint  labor,  for  a  joint  purpose,  tell  us
that  there  is  a  brotherhood  of  man :  to  that
brotherhood  does  the  ethics  of  Freemasonry
teach  us  that  we  owe  the  duty  of  fraternal
kindness  in  all  its  manifold  phases.


ETHIOPIA


EUCLID


265


And  so  we  find  that  the  ethics  of  Free¬
masonry  is  really  founded  on  the  two  great
ideas  of  the  universal  fatherhood  of  God
and  the  universal  brotherhood  of  man.

Ethiopia.  A  tract  of  country  to  the
south  of  Egypt,  and  watered  by  the  upper
Nile.  The  reference  to  Ethiopia,  in  the
Master’s  degree  of  the  American  Rite,  as
a  place  of  attempted  escape  for  certain
criminals,  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  English
or  French  rituals,  and  I  am  inclined  to
think  that  this  addition  to  the  Hiramic  le¬
gend  is  an  American  interpolation.  The
selection  of  Ethiopia,  by  the  ritualist,  as  a
place  of  refuge,  seems  to  be  rather  inappro-
riate  when  we  consider  what  must  have
een  the  character  of  that  country  in  the
age  of  Solomon.

Etymology.  For  the  etymology  of
the  word  Mason,  see  Mason,  derivation  of.

Euclid.  In  the  year  of  the  world  3650,
which  was  646  years  after  the  building  of
King  Solomon’s  Temple,  Euclid,  the  cele¬
brated  geometrician,  was  born.  His  name
has  been  always  associated  with  the  history
of  Freemasonry,  and  in  the  reign  of  Ptol¬
emy  Soter,  the  Order  is  said  to  have  greatly
flourished  in  Egypt,  under  his  auspices.
The  well  known  forty-seventh  problem
of  his  first  book,  although  not  discovered
by  him,  but  long  before  by  Pythagoras,  has
been  adopted  as  a  symbol  in  the  third  de¬
gree.

Euclid,  Legend  of.  All  the  old
manuscript  Constitutions  contain  the  well
known  “  legend  of  Euclid,”  whose  name  is
presented  to  us  as  the  “  Worthy  Clerk  Eu¬
clid”  in  every  conceivable  variety  of  cor¬
rupted  form.  I  select,  of  these  Old  Re¬
cords,  the  so-called  Dowland  Manuscript,
from  which  to  give  the  form  of  this  Euclid¬
ian  legend  of  the  old  Masons.  The  Dow¬
land  Manuscript,  although  apparently  writ¬
ten  in  the  seventeenth  century,  is  believed,
on  good  authority,  to  be  only  a  copy,  in
more  modern  and  more  intelligible  lan¬
guage,  of  an  earlier  manuscript  of  the  year
1530.  And  it  is  because  of  its  easier  in¬
telligibility  by  modern  readers  that  I  have
selected  it,  in  preference  to  any  of  the  older
records,  although  in  each  the  legend  is  sub¬
stantially  the  same.  The  legend  is  in  the
following  words :

“  Moreover,  when  Abraham  and  Sara  his
wife  went  into  Egipt,  there  he  taught  the
Seaven  Sciences  to  the  Egiptians ;  and  he
had  a  worthy  Scoller  that  height  Ewclyde,
and  he  learned  right  well,  and  was  a  master
of  all  the  vij  Sciences  libera.ll.  And  in  his
dayes  it  befell  that  the  lord  and  the  estates
of  the  realme  had  soe  many  sonns  that
they  had  gotten  some  by  their  wifes  and
some  by  other  ladyes  of  the  realme;  for
that  land  is  a  liott  land  and  a  plentious  of
2  I


generacion.  And  they  had  not  competent
livehode  to  find  with  their  children  ;  where¬
fore  they  made  much  care.  And  then  the
King  of  the  land  made  a  great  counsell
and  a  parliament,  to  witt,  how  they  might
find  their  children  honestly  as  gentlemen.
And  they  could  find  no  manner  of  good
way.  And  then  they  did  crye  through  all
the  realme,  if  there  were  any  man  that
could  enforme  them,  that  he  should  come
to  them,  and  he  should  be  soe  rewarded  for
his  travail,  that  he  should  hold  him  pleased.

“After  that  this  cry  was  made,  then
came  this  worthy  clarke  Ewclyde,  and  said
to  the  King  and  to  all  his  great  lords :  ‘  If
yee  will,  take  me  your  children  to  governe,
and  to  teach  them  one  of  the  Seaven  Sci¬
ences,  wherewith  they  may  live  honestly  as
gentlemen  should,  under  a  condition  that
yee  will  grant  me  and  them  a  commission
that  I  may  have  power  to  rule  them  after
the  manner  that  the  science  ought  to  be
ruled.’  And  that  the  King  and  all  his
counsell  granted  to  him  anone,  and  sealed
their  commission.  And  then  this  worthy
tooke  to  him  these  lords’  sonns,  and  taught
them  the  science  of  Geometrie  in  practice,
for  to  work  in  stones  all  manner  of  worthy
worke  that  belongeth  to  buildinge  churches,
temples,  castells,  towres,  and  mannors,  and
all  other  manner  of  buildings  ;  and  he  gave
them  a  charge  on  this  manner: ”

Here  follow  the  usual  “  charges  ”  of  a
Freemason  as  given  in  all  the  old  Consti¬
tutions;  and  then  the  legend  concludes
with  these  words :

“And  thus  was  the  science  grounded
there ;  and  that  worthy  Master  Ewclyde
gave  it  the  name  of  Geometrie.  And  now
it  is  called  through  all  this  land  Masonrye.”

This  legend,  considered  historically,  is
certainly  very  absurd,  and  the  anachronism
which  makes  Euclid  the  contemporary  of
Abraham  adds,  if  possible,  to  the  absurdity.
But  interpreted  as  all  Masonic  legends
should  be  interpreted,  as  merely  intended
to  convey  a  Masonic  truth  in  symbolic  lan¬
guage,  it  loses  its  absurdity,  and  becomes
invested  with  an  importance  that  we  should
not  otherwise  attach  to  it.

Euclid  is  here  very  appropriately  used  as
a  type  of  geometry,  that  science  of  which
he  was  so  eminent  a  teacher ;  and  the  myth
or  legend  then  symbolizes  the  fact  that
there  was  in  Egypt  a  close  connection  be¬
tween  that  science  and  the  great  moral  and
religious  system  which  was  among  the
Egyptians,  as  well  as  other  ancient  nations,
what  Freemasonry  is  at  the  present  day — •
a  secret  institution,  established  for  the  in¬
culcation  of  the  same  principles,  and  in¬
culcating  them  in  the  same  symbolic  man¬
ner.  So  interpreted,  this  legend  corre¬
sponds  to  all  the  developments  of  Egyptian


2GG


EULOGY


EXAMINATION


history,  which  teach  us  how  close  a  con¬
nection  existed  in  that  country  between
the  religious  and  scientific  systems.  Thus
Kenrick  (Jnc.  Eg.,  i.  383)  tells  us  that
“when  we  read  of  foreigners  [in  Egypt]
being  obliged  to  submit  to  painful  and  te¬
dious  ceremonies  of  initiation,  it  was  not
that  they  might  learn  the  secret  meaning
of  the  rites  of  Osiris  or  Isis,  but  that  they
might  partake  of  the  knowledge  of  astron¬
omy,  physic,  geometry,  and  theology.”

The  legend  of  Euclid  belongs  to  that
class  of  narrations  which,  in  another  work,
I  have  ventured  to  call  “The  Mythical
Symbols  of  Freemasonry.”

Eulogy.  Masonry  delights  to  do  honor
to  the  memory  of  departed  brethren  by  the
delivery  of  eulogies  of  their  worth  and
merit,  which  are  either  delivered  at  the
time  of  their  burial,  or  at  some  future  pe¬
riod.  The  eulogy  forms  the  most  important

Kart  of  the  ceremonies  of  a  Sorrow  Lodge.

ut  the  language  of  the  eulogist  should  be
restrained  within  certain  limits;  while  the
veil  of  charity  should  be  thrown  over  the
frailties  of  the  deceased,  the  praise  of  his
virtues  should  not  be  expressed  with  exag¬
gerated  adulation.

Eiiinolpus.  A  king  of  Eleusis,  who
founded,  about  the  year  1374  B.  o.,  the  Mys¬
teries  of  Eleusis.  His  descendants,  the
Eumolpidse,  presided  for  twelve  hundred
years  over  these  Mysteries  as  Hierophants.

Eumicli.  It  is  usual,  in  the  most  cor¬
rect  rituals  of  the  third  degree,  especially
to  name  eunuchs  as  being  incapable  of  ini¬
tiation.  In  none  of  the  old  Constitutions
and  Charges  is  this  class  of  persons  alluded
to  by  name,  although  of  course  they  are
comprehended  in  the  general  prohibition
against  making  persons  who  have  any
blemish  or  maim.  However,  in  the  Charges
which  were  published  by  Dr.  Anderson,
in  his  second  edition,  they  are  included  in
the  list  of  prohibited  candidates.  It  is
probable  from  this  that  at  that  time  it  was
usual  to  name  them  in  the  point  of  OB.
referred  to ;  and  this  presumption  derives
strength  from  the  fact  that  Dermott,  in
copying  his  Charges  from  those  of  Ander¬
son’s  second  edition,  added  a  note  com¬
plaining  of  the  “moderns”  for  having  dis¬
regarded  this  ancient  law’,  in  at  least  one
instance.  The  question  is,  however,  not
worth  discussion,  except  as  a  matter  of
ritual  history,  since  the  legal  principle  is
alreadv  determined  that  eunuchs  cannot
be  initiated  because  they  are  not  perfect
men,  “  having  no  maim  or  defect  in  their
bodies.”

Euphrates.  One  of  the  largest  and
most  celebrated  rivers  of  Asia.  Rising  in
the  mountains  of  Armenia  and  flowing  into
the  Persian  gulf,  it  necessarily  lies  between


Jerusalem  and  Babylon.  In  the  ritual  of
the  higher  degrees  it  is  referred  to  as  the
stream  over  which  the  Knights  of  the  East
won  a  passage  by  their  arms  in  returning
from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem.

Euresis.  From  the  Greek,  evplaie,  a
discovery.  That  part  of  the  initiation  in
the  Ancient  Mysteries  which  represented
the  finding  of  the  body  of  the  god  or  hero
whose  death  and  resurrection  was  the  sub¬
ject  of  the  initiation.  The  euresis  has  been
adopted  in  Freemasonry,  and  forms  an  es¬
sential  portion  of  the  ritual  of  the  third
degree.

Evangelist.  See  St.  John  the  Evan¬
gelist.

Evergreen.  An  evergreen  plant  is  a
symbol  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  Tho
ancients,  therefore,  as  well  as  the  moderns,
planted  evergreens  at  the  heads  of  graves.
Freemasons  wear  evergreens  at  the  funerals
of  their  brethren,  and  cast  them  into  the
grave.  The  acacia  is  the  plant  which
should  be  used  on  these  occasions,  but
where  it  cannot  be  obtained,  some  other
evergreen  plant,  especially  the  cedar,  is
used  as  a  substitute.  See  Acacia.

Exalted.  A  candidate  is  said  to  be
exalted,  when  he  receives  the  degree  of
Holy  Royal  Arch,  the  seventh  in  American
Masonry.  Exalted  means  elevated  or  lifted
up,  and  is  applicable  both  to  a  peculiar  cere¬
mony  of  the  degree,  and  to  the  fact  that
this  degree,  in  the  Rite  in  which  it  is  prac¬
tised,  constitutes  the  summit  of  ancient
Masonry.

The  rising  of  the  sun  of  spring  from  his
wintry  sleep  into  the  glory  of  the  vernal
equinox  was  called  by  the  old  sun-worship¬
pers  his  “exaltation;”  and  the  Fathers  of
the  Church  afterwards  applied  the  same
term  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  St.

.  Athanasius  says  that  by  the  expression,
“God  hath  exalted  him,”  St.  Paul  meant
the  resurrection.  Exaltation,  therefore,
technically  means  a  rising  from  a  lower  to
a  higher  sphere,  and  in  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
sonry  may  be  supposed  to  refer  to  the  being
lifted  up  out  of  the  first  temple  of  this  life
into  the  second  temple  of  the  future  life.
The  candidate  is  raised  in  the  Master’s  de¬
gree,  he  is  exalted  in  the  Royal  Arch.  In
both  the  symbolic  idea  is  the  same.

Examination  of  Candidates.
It  is  an  almost  universal  rule  of  the  modern
Constitutions  of  Masonry,  that  an  examina¬
tion  upon  thesubjects  which  had  been  taught
in  the  preceding  degree  shall  be  required
of  every  brother  who  is  desirous  of  receiv¬
ing  a  higher  degree;  and  it  is  directed  that
this  examination  shall  take  place  in  an
open  Lodge  of  the  degree  upon  which  the
examination  is  made,  that  all  the  members
present  may  have  an  opportunity  of  judg-


EXAMINATION


EXCELLENT


267


ing  from  actual  inspection  of  the  proficiency
and  fitness  of  the  candidate  for  the  advance¬
ment  to  which  he  aspires.  The  necessity
of  an  adequate  comprehension  of  the  mys¬
teries  of  one  degree,  before  any  attempt  is
made  to  acquire  a  higher  one,  seems  to  have
been  duly  appreciated  from  the  earliest
times;  and  hence  the  Old  York  Constitu¬
tions  of  926,  or  the  document  usually  re¬
garded  as  such,  prescribe,  “  that  if  the  Mas¬
ter  have  an  Apprentice,  he  shall  thoroughly
teach  him,  so  that  he  may  perfectly  under¬
stand  his  Craft.”  But  there  is  no  evidence
that  the  system  of  examining  candidates  as
to  their  proficiency,  before  their  advance¬
ment,  is  other  than  a  modern  improvement,
and  first  adopted  not  very  early  in  the  pres¬
ent  century.

Examination  of  the  Ballot-
Box.  This  is  always  done  during  the  bal¬
lot  for  a  candidate,  by  presenting  the  box
first  to  the  Junior  Warden,  then  to  the
Senior,  and  lastly  to  the  Master,  each  of
whom  proclaims  the  result  as  “clear”  or
“foul.”  This  order  is  adopted  so  that  the
declaration  of  the  inferior  officer,  as  to  the
state  of  the  ballots,  may  be  confirmed  and
substantiated  by  his  superior.

Examination  of  Visitors.  The
due  examination  of  strangers  who  claim  the
right  to  visit,  should  be  intrusted  only  to
the  most  skilful  and  prudent  brethren  of
the  Lodge.  And  the  examining  committee
should  never  forget,  that  no  man  applying
for  admission  is  to  be  considered  as  a  Ma¬
son,  however  strong  may  be  his  recommen¬
dations,  until  by  undeniable  evidence  he
has  proved  himself  to  be  such.

All  the  necessary  forms  and  antecedent
cautions  should  be  observed.  Inquiries
should  be  made  as  to  the  time  and  place  of
initiation,  as  a  preliminary  step  the  Tiler’s
OB,  of  course,  never  being  omitted.  Then
remember  the  good  old  rule  of  “commenc¬
ing  at  the  beginning.”  Let  everything  pro¬
ceed  in  regular  course,  not  varying  in  the
slightest  degree  from  the  order  in  which  it
is  to  be  supposed  that  the  information
sought  was  originally  received.  Whatever
be  the  suspicions  of  imposture,  let  no  ex¬
pression  of  those  suspicions  be  made  until
the  final  decree  for  rejection  is  uttered.  And
let  that  decree  be  uttered  in  general  terms,
such  as,  “  I  am  not  satisfied,”  or  “  I  do  not
recognize  you,”  and  not  in  more  specific
language,  such  as,  “  You  did  not  answer  this
inquiry, ”  or  “  You  are  ignorant  on  that
point.”  The  candidate  for  examination  is
only  entitled  to  know  that  he  has  not  com¬
plied  generally  with  the  requisitions  of  his
examiner.  To  descend  to  particulars  is  al¬
ways  improper  and  often  dangerous.  Above
all,  never  ask  what  the  lawyers  call  “  lead¬
ing  questions,”  which  include  in  themselves


the  answers,  nor  in  any  manner  aid  the
memory  or  prompt  the  forgetfulness  of  the
party  examined,  by  the  slightest  hints.  If
he  has  it  in  him  it  will  come  out  without
assistance,  and  if  he  has  it  not,  he  is  clearly
entitled  to  no  aid.  The  Mason  who  is  so
unmindful  of  his  obligations  as  to  have  for¬
gotten  the  instructions  he  has  received,
must  pay  the  penalty  of  his  carelessness,
and  be  deprived  of  his  contemplated  visit
to  that  society  whose  secret  modes  of  recog¬
nition  he  has  so  little  valued  as  not  to  have
treasured  them  in  his  memory.

Lastly,  never  should  an  unjustifiable
delicacy  weaken  the  rigor  of  these  rules.
Bemember,  that  for  the  wisest  and  most
evident  reasons,  the  merciful  maxim  of  the
law,  which  says  that  it  is  better  that  ninety-
nine  guilty  men  should  escape  than  that
one  innocent  man  should  be  punished,  is
with  us  reversed,  and  that  in  Masonry  it  is
better  that  ninety  and  nine  true  men  should
be  turned  away  from,  the  door  of  a  Lodge  than
that  one  cowan  should  be  admitted.

Excavations.  Excavations  beneath
Jerusalem  have  for  some  years  past  been  in
progress,  under  the  direction  of  the  Eng¬
lish  society,  which  controls  the  “  Palestine
Exploration  Fund,”  and  many  important
discoveries,  especially  interesting  toMasons,
have  been  made.  For  the  results,  see  Jeru¬
salem.

Excellent.  A  title  conferred  on  the
Grand  Captain  of  the  Host,  and  Grand
Principal  Sojourner  of  a  Grand  Chapter,
and  on  the  King  and  Scribe  of  a  subordi¬
nate  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  in
America.

Excellent  Masons.  Dr.  Oliver
[Hist.  Landm.,  i.  420,)  gives  a  tradition
that  at  the  building  of  Solomon’s  Temple
there  were  nine  Lodges  of  Excellent  Ma¬
sons,  having  nine  in  each,  which  were  dis¬
tributed  as  follows:  Six  Lodges,  or  fifty-
four  Excellent  Masons  in  the  quarries;
three  Lodges,  or  twenty-seven  Excellent
Masons  in  the  forest  of  Lebanon ;  eight
Lodges,  or  seventy-two  Excellent  Masons
engaged  in  preparing  the  materials;  and
nine  Lodges,  or  eighty-one  Excellent  Ma¬
sons  subsequently  employed  in  building  the
Temple.  Of  this  tradition  there  is  not  the
slightest  support  in  authentic  history,  and
it  must  have  been  invented  altogether  for
a  symbolic  purpose,  in  reference  perhaps  to
the  mystical  numbers  which  it  details.

Excellent  Master.  A  degree  in
the  Irish  system  which,  with  Super-Excel¬
lent  Master,  is  given  as  preparatory  to  the
Royal  Arch.  It  is  given  in  a  Lodge  gov¬
erned  by  a  Master  and  two  Wardens,  and
refers  to  the  legation  of  Moses.

Excellent,  Most.  See  Most  Excel¬
lent.


268


EXCELLENT


EXCLUSIVENESS


Excellent,  Right.  See  Right  Ex¬
cellent.

Excellent,  Super.  See  Super-Ex¬
cellent.

Excellent,  Very.  See  Very  Excel¬
lent.

Exclusion.  In  England  the  Grand
Lodge  only  expels  from  the  rights  and

Erivileges  of  Masonry.  But  a  subordinate
odge  may  exclude  a  member  after  giving
him  due  notice  of  the  charge  preferred
against  him,  and  of  the  time  appointed  for
its  consideration.  The  name  of  any  one
so  excluded,  and  the  cause  of  his  exclusion
must  be  sent  to  the  Grand  Secretary.  No
Mason  excluded  is  eligible  to  any  other
Lodge  until  the  Lodge  to  which  he  applies
has  been  made  acquainted  with  his  exclu¬
sion,  and  the  cause,  so  that  the  brethren
may  exercise  their  discretion  as  to  his  ad¬
mission.  In  America,  the  word  used  as
synonymous  with  exclusion  is  striking  from
the  roll,  except  that  the  latter  punishment
is  only  inflicted  for  non-payment  of  Lodge
dues.

Exclusiveness  of  Masonry.  The

exclusiveness  of  Masonic  benevolence  is  a
charge  that  has  frequently  been  made
against  the  Order;  and  it  is  said  that  the
charity  of  which  it  boasts  is  always  con¬
ferred  on  its  own  members  in  preference
to  strangers.  It  cannot  be  denied  that
Masons,  simply  as  Masons,  have  ever  been
more  constant  and  more  profuse  in  their
charities  to  their  own  brethren  than  to  the
rest  of  the  world;  that  in  apportioning  the
alms  which  God  has  given  them  to  bestow,
they  have  first  looked  for  the  poor  in  their
own  home  before  they  sought  those  who
were  abroad;  and  that  their  hearts  have
felt  more  deeply  for  the  destitution  of  a
brother  than  a  stranger.

The  principle  that  governs  the  institution
of  Freemasonry,  in  the  distribution  of  its
charities,  and  the  exercise  of  all  the  friendly
affections,  is  that  which  was  laid  down  by
St.  Paul  for  the  government  of  the  infant
church  at  Galatia:  “As  we  have  therefore
opportunity,  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men,
especially  unto  them  who  are  of  the  house¬
hold.”

This  sentiment  of  preference  for  one’s
own  household,  thus  sanctioned  by  apos¬
tolic  authority,  is  the  dictate  of  human  na¬
ture,  and  the  words  of  Scripture  find  their
echo  in  every  heart.  “  Blood,”  says  the
Spanish  proverb,  “is  thicker  than  water,”
and  the  claims  of  kindred,  of  friends  and
comrades  to  our  affections,  must  not  be
weighed  in  the  same  scale  with  those  of
the  stranger,  who  has  no  stronger  tie  to
bind  him  to  our  sympathies,  than  that  of  a
common  origin  from  the  founder  of  our
race.  All  associations  of  men  act  on  this


principle.  It  is  acknowledged  in  the
church,  which  follows  with  strict  obedience
the  injunction  of  the  apostle;  and  in  the
relief  it  affords  to  the  distressed,  in  the
comforts  and  consolations  which  it  imparts
to  the  afflicted,  and  in  the  rights  and
privileges  which  it  bestows  upon  its  own
members,  distinguishes  between  those  who
have  no  community  with  it  of  religious
belief,  and  those  who,  by  worshipping  at
the  same  altar,  have  established  the  higher
claim  of  being  of  the  household.

It  is  recognized  by  all  other  societies,
which,  however  they  may,  from  time  to
time,  and  under  the  pressure  of  peculiar
circumstances,  extend  temporary  aid  to
accidental  cases  of  distress,  carefully  pre¬
serve  their  own  peculiar  funds  for  the  re¬
lief  of  those  who,  by  their  election  as  mem¬
bers,  by  their  subscription  to  a  written  con¬
stitution,  and  by  the  regular  payment  of
arrears,  have  assumed  the  relationship  which
St.  Paul  defines  as  being  of  the  household.

It  is  recognized  by  governments,  which,
however  liberally  they  may  frame  their
laws,  so  that  every  burden  may  bear  equally
on  all,  and  each  may  enjoy  the  same  civil
and  religious  rights,  never  fail,  in  the  privi¬
leges  which  they  bestow,  to  discriminate
between  the  alien  and  foreigner,  whose  visit
is  but  temporary  or  whose  allegiance  is
elsewhere,  and  their  own  citizens,  the  chil¬
dren  of  their  household.

This  principle  of  preference  is  universally
diffused,  and  it  is  well  that  it  is  so.  It  is
well  that  those  who  are  nearer  should  be
dearer ;  and  that  a  similitude  of  blood,  an
indentity  of  interest,  or  a  community  of
purpose,  should  give  additional  strength  to
the  ordinary  ties  that  bind  man  to  man.
Man,  in  the  weakness  of  his  nature,  re¬
quires  this  security.  By  his  own  unaided
efforts,  he  cannot  accomplish  the  objects  of
his  life  nor  supply  the  necessary  wants  of
his  existence.  In  this  state  of  utter  help¬
lessness,  God  has  wisely  and  mercifully
provided  a  remedy  by  implanting  in  the
human  breast  a  love  of  union  and  an
ardent  desire  for  society.  Guided  by  this
instinct  of  preservation,  man  eagerly  seeks
the  communion  of  man,  and  the  weakness
of  the  individual  is  compensated  by  the
strength  of  association.  It  is  to  this  con¬
sciousness  of  mutual  dependence,  that  na¬
tions  are  indebted  for  their  existence,  and
governments  for  their  durability.  And
under  the  impulse  of  the  same  instinct  of
society,  brotherhoods  and  associations  are
formed,  whose  members,  concentrating
their  efforts  for  the  attainment  of  one  com¬
mon  object,  bind  themselves  by  voluntary
ties  of  love  and  friendship,  more  powerful
than  those  which  arise  from  the  ordinary
sentiments  and  feelings  of  human  nature.


EXCUSE


EXPOSITIONS


269


Excuse.  Many  Lodges  in  the  last
century  and  in  the  beginning  of  this  in¬
flicted  pecuniary  fines  for  non-attendance
at  Lodge  meetings,  and  of  course  excuses
were  then  required  to  avoid  the  penalty.
But  this  has  now  grown  out  of  use.  Ma¬
sonry  being  considered  a  voluntary  institu¬
tion,  fines  for  absence  are  not  inflicted,  and
excuses  are  therefore  not  now  required.
The  infliction  of  a  fine  would,  it  is  sup¬
posed,  detract  from  the  solemnity  of  the
obligation  which  makes  attendance  a  duty.
The  old  Constitutions,  however,  required
excuses  for  non-attendance,  although  no
penalty  was  prescribed  for  a  violation  of
the  rule.  Thus,  in  the  Matthew  Cooke
Manuscript  (fifteenth  century),  it  is  said,
“  that  every  master  of  this  art  should  be
warned  to  come  to  his  congregation  that
they  come  duly,  but  if  ( unless )  they  may  be
excused  by  some  manner  of  cause.”  And
in  the  Halliwell  Manuscript,  which  pur¬
ports  to  contain  the  York  Constitutions  of
926,  it  is  written :

“That  every  mayster,  that  is  a  Mason,

Must  ben  at  the  generale  congregaeyon,

So  that  he  hyt  resonebly  y-colde
Where  that  the  semble  shall  be  holde;

And  to  that  semble  he  must  nede  gon,

But  he  have  a  resenabul  skwsacyon.”

Executive  Powers  of  a  Grand
Lodge.  See  Grand  Lodge.

Exemplification  of  the  Work.

This  term  is  of  frequent  use  in  American
Masonry.  When  a  lecturer  or  teacher  per¬
forms  the  ceremonies  of  a  degree  for  in¬
struction,  using  generally  one  of  the  Ma¬
sons  present  as  a  substitute  for  the  candi¬
date,  he  is  said  “to  exemplify  the  work.”
It  is  done  for  instruction,  or  to  enable  the
members  of  the  Grand  or  subordinate
Lodge  to  determine  on  the  character  of
the  ritual  that  is  taught  by  the  exemplifier.

Exoteric.  Public,  not  secret.  See
Esoteric.

Expert.  In  Lodges  of  the  French
Rite,  tnere  are  two  officers  called  First  and
Second  Experts,  whose  duty  it  is  to  assist
the  Master  of  Ceremonies  in  the  initiation
of  a  candidate.  In  Lodges  of  Perfection
of  the  Scottish  Rite,  there  are  similar
officers  who  are  known  as  the  Senior  and
Junior  Expert.

Expositions.  Very  early  after  the
revival  of  Masonry,  in  the  beginning  of
the  eighteenth  century,  pretended  exposi¬
tions  of  the  ritual  of  Masonry  began  to  be
published.  The  following  catalogue  com¬
prises  the  most  notorious  of  these  pseudo¬
revelations.  The  leading  titles  only  are
given.

1.  The  Grand  Mystery  of  Freemasons
Discovered.  Loudon,  1724.


2.  The  Secret  History  of  the  Freemason¬
ry.  London,  1725.

3.  Masonry  Dissected,  by  Samuel  Prich¬
ard.  London,  1730.  There  were  several
subsequent  editions,  and  a  French  transla¬
tion  in  1737,  and  a  German  one  in  1736

4.  The  Secrets  of  Masonry  made  known
to  all  men,  by  S.  P.  [Samuel  Prichard.]
London, 1737.

5.  Masonry  further  dissected.  London.
1738.

6.  The  Mystery  of  Masonry.  London,
1737.

7.  Le  Secret  des  Franc-Masons,  par  M.
l’Abb§  Perau.  Geneva,  1742.

8.  Cat6chisme  des  Franc-Masons,  par
Leonard  Gabanon  (Louis  Travenol).  Paris,
1745.  He  published  several  editions,  vary¬
ing  the  titles.

9.  L’Ordre  de  Franc-Masons  trahi  et  le
Secret  des  Mopses  revile.  Amsterdam,
1745.  Many  subsequent  editions,  and  a
German  and  a  Dutch  translation.

10.  Solomon  in  all  his  Glory.  London,
1766.

11.  Jachin  and  Boaz.  London,  1750.

12.  The  Three  Distinct  Knocks.  Lon¬
don,  1767.

13.  Hiram  ;  or,  The  Grand  Master  Key.
London,  1764.

14.  The  Freemason  Stripped  Naked,  by
Charles  Warren.  London,  1769.

15.  Shibboleth ;  or,  Every  Man  a  Free¬
mason.  Dublin,  1775.

16.  Receuil  precieux  de  la  Masonnerie
Adonhiramite,  par  Louis  Guillemin  de  St.
Victor.  Paris,  1781.  This  work  was  not
written  with  an  unfriendly  purpose,  and
many  editions  of  it  were  published.

17.  The  Master  Key,  by  I.  Browne.  Lon¬
don,  1794.  Scarcely  an  exposition,  since
the  cipher  in  which  it  is  printed  renders  it
a  sealed  book  to  all  who  do  not  possess  the
key.

18.  A  Masonic  Treatise,  with  an  Eluci¬
dation  on  the  Religious  and  Moral  Beauties
of  Freemasonry,  etc./  by  W.  Finch.  Lon¬
don,  1801.

19.  Manual  of  Freemasonry,  in  three
parts,  by  the  late  Richard  Carlisle.  Now
first  collected  in  one  volume.  London,
1845.

20.  Illustrations  of  Masonry,  by  William
Morgan.  The  first  edition  is  without  date
or  place,  but  it  was  probably  printed  at
Batavia,  in  1828.

21.  Light  on  Masonry,  by  David  Bernard.
Utica,  N.  Y.,  1829.

22.  A  Ritual  of  Freemasonry,  by  Avery
Allvn.  New  York,  1852.

There  have  been  several  other  American
expositions,  but  the  compilers  have  only
been  servile  copyists  of  Morgan,  Ber¬
nard,  and  Allyn.  It  has  been,  and  con-


270


EXPULSION


EXPULSION


tinues  to  be,  simply  the  pouring  out  of  one
vial  into  another.

The  expositions  which  abound  in  the
French,  German,  and  other  continental
languages,  are  not  attacks  upon  Freema¬
sonry,  but  are  written  often  under  author¬
ity,  for  the  use  of  the  Fraternity.  The
usages  of  continental  Masonry  permit  a
freedom  of  publication  that  would  scarcely
be  tolerated  by  the  English  or  American
Fraternity.

Expulsion.  Expulsion  is,  of  all  Ma¬
sonic  penalties,  the  highest  that  can  be  in¬
flicted  on  a  member  of  the  Order,  and
hence  it  has  been  often  called  a  Masonic
death.  It  deprives  the  expelled  of  all  the
rights  and  privileges  that  he  ever  enjoyed,
not  only  as  a  member  of  the  particular
Lodge  from  which  he  has  been  ejected,  but
also  of  those  which  were  inherent  in  him
as  a  member  of  the  Fraternity  at  large.  He
is  at  once  as  completely  divested  of  his  Ma¬
sonic  character  as  though  he  had  never
been  admitted,  so  far  as  regards  his  rights,
w’hile  his  duties  and  obligations  remain  as
firm  as  ever,  it  being  impossible  for  any
human  power  to  cancel  them.  He  can  no
longer  demand  the  aid  of  his  brethren,  nor
require  from  them  the  performance  of  any
of  the  duties  to  which  he  was  formerly  en¬
titled,  nor  visit  any  Lodge,  nor  unite  in  any
of  the  public  or  private  ceremonies  of  the
Order.  He  is  considered  as  being  without
the  pale,  and  it  would  be  criminal  in  any
brother,  aware  of  his  expulsion,  to  hold
communication  with  him  on  Masonic  sub¬
jects.

The  only  proper  tribunal  to  impose  this
heavy  punishment  is  a  Grand  Lodge.  A
subordinate  Lodge  tries  its  delinquent
member,  and  if  guilty  declares  him  ex¬
pelled.  But  the  sentence  is  of  no  force  un¬
til  the  Grand  Lodge,  under  whose  jurisdic¬
tion  it  is  working,  has  confirmed  it.  And
it  is  optional  with  the  Grand  Lodge  to  do
so,  or,  as  is  frequently  done,  to  reverse  the  de¬
cision  and  reinstate  the  brother.  Some  of
the  Lodges  in  this  country  claim  the  right
to  expel  independently  of  the  action  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  but  the  claim  is  not  valid.
The  very  fact  that  an  expulsion  is  a  penalty,
affecting  the  general  relations  of  the  pun¬
ished  brother  with  the  whole  Fraternity,
proves  that  its  exercise  never  could  with
propriety  be  intrusted  to  a  body  so  circum¬
scribed  in  its  authority  as  a  subordinate
Lodge.  Besides,  the  general  practice  of
the  Fraternity  is  against  it.  The  English
Constitutions  vest  the  power  to  expel  ex¬
clusively  in  the  Grand  Lodge.  “The  sub¬
ordinate  Lodge  may  suspend  and  report
the  case  to  the  Grand  Lodge.  If  the  offence
and  evidence  be  sufficient,  expulsion  is  de¬
creed.”


All  Masons,  whether  members  of  Lodges
or  not,  are  subject  to  the  infliction  of  this
punishment  when  found  to  merit  it.  Resig¬
nation  or  withdrawal  from  the  Order  does
not  cancel  a  Mason’s  obligations,  norexempt
him  from  that  wholesome  control  which
the  Order  exercises  over  the  moral  conduct
of  its  members.  The  fact  that  a  Mason,
not  a  member  of  any  particular  Lodge,  but
who  has  been  guilty  of  immoral  or  unma-
sonic  conduct,  can  be  tried  and  punished
by  any  Lodge  within  whose  jurisdiction  he
may  be  residing,  is  a  point  on  which  there
is  no  doubt.

Immoral  conduct,  such  as  would  subject
a  candidate  for  admission  to  rejection,
should  be  the  only  offence  visited  with
expulsion.  As  the  punishment  is  general,
affecting  the  relation  of  the  one  expelled
with  the  whole  Fraternity,  it  should  not  be
lightly  imposed  for  the  violation  of  any
Masonic  act  not  general  in  its  character.
The  commission  of  a  grossly  immoral  act
is  a  violation  of  the  contract  entered  into
between  each  Mason  and  his  Order.  If
sanctioned  by  silence  or  impunity,  it  would
bring  discredit  on  the  Institution,  and  tend
to  impair  its  usefulness.  A  Mason  who  is
a  bad  man  is  to  the  Fraternity  what  a  mor¬
tified  limb  is  to  the  body,  and  should  be
treated  with  the  same  mode  of  cure,  —  he
should  be  cut  off,  lest  his  example  spread,
and  disease  be  propagated  through  the
constitution.

Expulsion  from  one  of  what  is  called  the
higher  degrees  of  Masonry,  such  as  a  Chap¬
ter  or  an  Encampment,  does  not  affect  the
relations  of  the  expelled  party  to  Blue
Masonry.  A  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
sons  is  not  and  cannot  be  recognized  as  a
Masonic  body  by  a  Lodge  of  Master  Masons
by  any  of  the  modes  of  recognition  known
to  Masonry.  The  acts,  therefore,  of  a  Chap¬
ter  cannot  be  recognized  by  a  Master  Ma¬
son’s  Lodge  any  more  than  the  acts  of  a
literary  or  charitable  society  wholly  uncon¬
nected  with  the  Order.  Besides,  by  the
present  organization  of  Freemasonry,  Grand
Lodges  are  the  supreme  Masonic  tribunals.
If,  therefore,  expulsion  from  a  Chapter  of
Royal  Arch  Masons  involved  expulsion
from  a  Blue  Lodge,  the  right  of  the  Grand
Lodge  to  hear  and  determine  causes,  and
to  regulate  the  internal  concerns  of  the
Institution,  would  be  interfered  with  by
another  body  beyond  its  control.  But  the
converse  of  this  proposition  does  not  hold
good.  Expulsion  from  a  Blue  Lodge  in¬
volves  expulsion  from  all  the  higher  de¬
grees;  because,  as  they  are  composed  of
Blue  Masons,  the  members  could  not  of
right  sit  and  hold  communications  on  Ma¬
sonic  subjects  with  one  who  was  an  expelled
Mason.


EXTENDED


EZEA


271


Extended  Wings  of  the  Chem«

foim.  An  expression  used  in  the  ceremo¬
nies  of  Royal  Master,  the  tenth  degree  of
the  American  Rite,  and  intended  to  teach
symbolically  that  he  who  comes  to  ask  and
to  seek  Divine  Truth  symbolized  by  the
True  Word,  should  begin  by  placing  him¬
self  under  the  protection  of  that  Divine
Power  who  alone  is  Truth,  and  from  whom
alone  Truth  can  be  obtained.  Of  him  the
cherubim  with  extended  wings  in  the  Holy
of  Holies  were  a  type.

Extent  of  the  Eodge.  The  extent
of  a  Mason’s  Lodge  is  said  to  be  in  height
from  the  earth  to  the  highest  heavens ;  in
depth,  from  the  surface  to  the  centre;  in
length,  from  east  to  west ;  and  in  breadth,
from  north  to  south.  The  expression  is  a
symbolic  one.  and  is  intended  to  teach  the
extensive  boundaries  of  Masomy  and  the
coterminal  extension  of  Masonic  charity.
See  Form  of  the  Lodge.

External  Qualifications.  The
external  qualifications  of  candidates  for
initiation  are  those  which  refer  to  their
outward  fitness,  based  upon  moral  and  reli¬
gious  character,  the  frame  of  body,  the
constitution  of  the  mind,  and  social  posi¬
tion.  Hence  they  are  divided  into  Moral ,
Religious,  Physical,  Mental,  and  Polit¬
ical,  for  all  of  which  see  the  respective
words.  The  expression  in  the  ritual,  that
“  it  is  the  internal  and  not  the  external
qualifications  that  recommend  a  man  to  be
made  a  Mason,”  it  is  evident,  from  the  con¬
text,  refers  entirely  to  “worldly  wealth  and
honors,”  which,  of  course,  are  not  to  be
taken  “into  consideration  in  inquiring  into
the  qualifications  of  a  candidate.”

Extinct  Eodge.  A  Lodge  is  said  to
be  extinct  which  has  ceased  to  exist  and
work,  which  is  no  longer  on  the  registry  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  and  whose  Charter  has
been  revoked  for  mis-use  or  forfeited  for
non-tree.

Extra  Communication.  The

same  as  Special  Communication,  which  see.

Extraneous.  Not  regularly  made;
clandestine.  The  word  is  now  obsolete  in
Tthis  signification,  but  was  so  used  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  a  motion
adopted  March  31,  1735,  and  reported  by
Anderson  in  his  1738  edition  of  the  Consti¬
tutions,  p.  182.  “  No  extraneous  brothers,
that  is,  not  regularly  made,  but  clandestine,
.  .  .  .  shall  be  ever  qualified  to  par¬
take  of  the  Mason’s  general  charity.”

Extrusion.  Used  in  the  Constitution
of  the  Royal  Order  of  Scotland  for  expul¬
sion.  “  If  a  brother  shall  be  convicted  of
crime  by  any  Court  of  Justice,  such  brother
shall  be  permanently  extruded.”  (Sect.  29.)
Not  in  use  elsewhere  as  a  Masonic  term.


Eye.  See  All-Seeing  Eye.

Ezekiel,  Temple  of.  See  Temple
of  Ezekiel.

Ezel.  In  Hebrew,  viXTl  px,  eben  hah-
ezel,  the  stone  of  the  departure,  viz.,  a
mile-stone.  An  old  testimonial  stone  in
the  neighborhood  of  Saul’s  residence,  tho
scene  of  the  parting  of  David  and  Jona¬
than,  and  the  mark  beyond  w'hich  the  fall¬
ing  of  Jonathan’s  arrow'  indicated  danger.
Hence,  a  wrord  adopted  in  the  honorary
degree  called  the  “  Mason’s  wife  and
daughter.”

Ezra.  There  are  two  persons  named
Ezra  who  are  recorded  in  Scripture.  1.
Ezra,  a  leading  priest  among  the  first  colo¬
nists  who  came  up  to  Jerusalem  with  Ze-
rubbabel,  and  who  is  mentioned  by  Nehe-
miah ;  and,  2.  Ezra,  the  celebrated  Jewish
scribe  and  restorer  of  the  law’,  who  visited
Jerusalem  forty-two  years  after  the  second
Temple  had  been  completed.  Calmet,
however,  says  that  this  second  Ezra  had
visited  Jerusalem  previously  in  company
w'ith  Zerubbabel.  Some  explanation  of
this  kind  is  necessary  to  reconcile  an  other¬
wise  apparent  inconsistency  in  the  English
system  of  the  Royal  Arch,  which  makes
two  of  its  officers  represent  Ezra  and  Ne-
hemiah  under  the  title  of  scribes,  while  at
the  same  time  it  makes  the  time  of  the
ritual  refer  to  the  laying  of  the  foundation
of  the  second  Temple,  and  yet  places  in  the
scene,  as  a  prominent  actor,  the  later  Ezra,
who  did  not  go  up  to  Jerusalem  until  more
than  forty  years  after  the  completion  of  the
building.  It  is,  I  think,  more  probable
that  the  Ezra  w'ho  is  said  in  the  ritual  to
have  wrought  with  Joshua,  Haggai,  and
Zerubbabel,  was  intended  by  the  original
framer  of  the  ritual  to  refer  to  the  first
Ezra,  who  is  recorded  by  Nehemiah  as  hav¬
ing  been  present ;  and  that  the  change  was
made  in  the  reference,  w'ithout  due  consid¬
eration,  by  some  succeeding  ritualist,  whose
mistake  has  been  carelessly  perpetuated  by
those  who  followed  him.  Dr.  Oliver  (Hist.
Landmarks,  ii.  428,)  attempts  to  reconcile
the  difficulty,  and  to  remove  the  anachron¬
ism,  by  saying  that  Esdras  w’as  the  scribe
under  Joshua,  Haggai,  and  Zerubbabel,
and  that  he  w’as  succeeded  in  this  impor¬
tant  office  by  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  But  the
English  ritual  makes  no  allusion  to  this
change  of  succession  ;  and  if  it  did,  it  would
not  enable  us  to  understand  how  Ezra  and
Nehemiah  could  be  present  as  scribes  when
the  foundations  of  the  second  Temple  were
laid,  and  the  important  secrets  of  the  Royal
Arch  degree  were  brought  to  light,  unless
the  Ezra  meant  is  the  one  who  came  to  Je-
rusalem  with  Nehemiah.  There  is  a  con-
|  fusion  in  all  this  which  should  be  rectified.


272


FELICITY


F.\


F.


F.*.  In  French  Masonic  documents  the
abbreviation  of  Frtre,  or  Brother.  FF.\  is
the  abbreviation  of  Frlres,  or  Brethren.

Fabre-Palaprat, Bernard  Ray¬
mond.  The  restorer,  or,  to  speak  more
correctly,  the  organizer  of  the  Order  of  the
Temple* at  Paris,  of  which  he  was  elected
Grand  Master  in  1804.  He  died  at  Pau,  in
the  lower  Pyrenees,  February  18, 1838.  See
Temple,  Order  of  the.

Facility  of  Aforac.  In  the  so-called
Leland  Manuscript,  it  is  said  that  Masons
“  conceal  the  way  of  wynninge  the  facultye
of  Abrac.”  That  is,  that  they  conceal  the
method  of  acquiring  the  powers  bestowed
by  a  knowledge  of  the  magical  talisman
that  is  called  Abracadabra.  See  Abraca¬
dabra  and  Leland  Manuscript.

Faith.  In  the  theological  ladder,  the
explanation  of  which  forms  a  part  of  the
ritual  of  the  first  degree  of  Masonry,  faith
is  said  to  typify  the  lowest  round.  Faith,
here,  is  synonymous  with  confidence  or  trust,
and  hence  we  find  merely  a  repetition  of
the  lesson  which  had  been  previously
taught  that  the  first,  the  essential  qualifi¬
cation  of  a  candidate  for  initiation,  is  that
he  should  trust  in  God.

In  the  lecture  of  the  same  degree,  it  is
said  that  “Faith  may  be  lost  in  sight;
Hope  ends  in  fruition  ;  but  Charity  extends
beyond  the  grave,  through  the  boundless
realms  of  eternity.”  And  this  is  said,  be¬
cause  as  faith  is  “the  evidence  of  things
not  seen,”  when  we  see  we  no  longer  be¬
lieve  by  faith  but  through  demonstration  ;
and  as  hope  lives  only  in  the  expectation
of  possession,  it  cease3  to  exist  when  the
object  once  hoped  for  is  at  length  enjoyed,
but  charity,  exercised  on  earth  in  acts  of
mutual  kindness  and  forbearance,  is  still
found  in  the  world  to  come,  in  the  sublimer
form  of  mercy  from  God  to  his  erring  crea¬
tures.

Faithful  Breast.  See  Breast,  the

Faithful.

Fall  of  Water.  See  Waterfall.

Family  Lodge.  A  Lodge  held  es-

fiecially  for  the  transaction  of  private  and
ocal  business  of  so  delicate  a  nature  that  it
is  found  necessary  to  exclude,  during  the
session,  the  presence  of  all  except  members.
In  France  a  Lodge  when  so  meeting  is  said
to  be  en  famille,  and  the  meeting  is  called
a  tenue  de  famille  or  family  session ;  in
Germany  such  Lodges  are  called,  some¬
times,  Familien- Logen,  but  more  generally
Conferenz- Imogen.  See  Conference  Lodge.

Fasces.  The  bundle  of  rods  borne  be¬
fore  the  Roman  magistrates  as  an  ensign
of  their  authority.  In  French  Masonry,


faisceau,  or  fasces,  is  used  to  denote  a  num.
ber  of  speeches  or  records  tied  up  in  a  roll
and  deposited  in  the  archives.

Favorite  Brother  of  St.  An¬
drew.  The  ninth  degree  of  the  Swedish
Rite.

Favorite  Brother  of  St.  John.

The  eighth  degree  of  the  Swedish  Rite.

Feast.  The  convocation  of  the  Craft
together  at  an  annual  feast,  for  the  lauda¬
ble  purpose  of  promoting  social  feelings,
and  cementing  the  bonds  of  brotherly  love
by  the  interchange  of  courtesies,  is  a  time-
honored  custom,  which  is  unfortunately

f rowing  into  disuse.  The  “  Assembly  and
east”  are  words  constantly  conjoined  in
the  Book  of  Constitutions.  At  this  meet¬
ing,  no  business  of  any  kind,  except  the
installation  of  officers,  was  transacted,  and
the  day  was  passed  in  innocent  festivity.
The  election  of  officers  always  took  place
at  a  previous  meeting,  in  obedience  to  a
regulation  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  in  1720,  as  follows :  “  It  was
agreed,  in  order  to  avoid  disputes  on  the
annual  feast-day,  that  the  new  Grand
Master  for  the  future  shall  be  named  and
proposed  to  the  Grand  Lodge  some  time
before  the  feast.”

Feasts  of  the  Order.  The  festi¬
vals  of  St.  John  the  Baptist  and  St.  John
the  Evangelist,  June  24th  and  December
27th,  are  so  called.

Feeling.  One  of  the  five  human
senses,  and  esteemed  by  Masons  above  all
the  others.  For  as  Anthony  Brewer,  an
old  dramatist,  says  :

“  Though  one  hear,  and  see.  and  smell,  and  taste,
If  he  wants  touch,  he  is  counted  but  a  block.”

Fees  of  Honor.  In  the  <?rand

Lodge  of  England  every  Grand  officer,  on
his  election  or  re-election,  is  required  to
pay  a  sum  of  money,  varying  from  two  to
twenty  guineas.  The  sums  thus  paid  for
honors  bestowed  are  technically  called
“  fees  of  honor.”  A  similar  custom  pre¬
vails  in  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Ireland  and
Scotland;  but  the  usage  is  unknown  in
this  country.

Felicity,  Order  of.  An  androgy¬
nous  secret  society,  founded  in  1743,  at
Paris,  by  M.  Chambonnet.  It  was  among
the  first  of  the  pseudo-Masonic  associa¬
tions,  or  coteries,  invented  by  French  Ma¬
sons  to  gratify  the  curiosity  and  to  secure
the  support  of  women.  It  had  a  ritual  and
a  vocabulary  which  were  nautical  in  their
character,  and  there  was  a  rather  too  free
indulgence  in  the  latitude  of  gallantry.


FELD


FENDEURS


273


It  consisted  of  four  degrees,  Cabin  boy,
Master,  Commodore,  and  Vice  Admiral.
The  chief  of  the  order  was  called  Admiral,
and  this  position  was  of  course  occupied
by  M.  Chambonnet,  the  inventor  of  the
system.

Feld  IiOge.  What  is  designated  in
England  ana  America  as  a  Military  or
Travelling  Lodge  is  called  in  Germany  a
Feld  Loge.  Sometimes,  “  ein  ambulante
Loge.”

Fellow.  The  Saxon  word  for  fellow
is  felaw.  Spelman  derives  it  from  two
words,  fe  and  loy,  which  signifies  bound  in
mutual  trust;  a  plausible  derivation,  and
not  unsuited  to  the  meaning  of  the  word.
But  Hicks  gives  a  better  etymology  when
he  derives  it  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  folgian,
“  to  follow,”  and  thus  a  fellow  would  be  a
follower ,  a  companion,  an  associate.  In  the
Middle  Ages,  the  Operative  Masons  were
divided  into  Masters  and  Fellows.  Thus
in  the  Harleian  MS.  it  is  said:  “Now  I
will  rehearse  other  charges  in  singular  for
Maisters  and  Fellowes."  Those  who  were  of
greater  skill  held  a  higher  position  and
were  designated  as  Masters,  while  the
masses  of  the  fraternity,  the  commonalty,
as  we  might  say,  were  called  Fellows.  In
the  Matthew  Cooke  MS.  this  principle  is
very  plainly  laid  down.  There  it  is  written
that  Euclid  “  ordained  that  they  who  were
passing  of  cunning  should  be  passing  hon¬
ored,  and  commanded  to  call  the  cunninger
Master  ....  and  commanded  that  they
that  were  less  of  wit  should  not  be  called
servant  nor  subject,  but  Fellow,  for  nobility
of  their  gentle  blood.”  (Lines  675-688/)
From  this  custom  has  originated  the  mod¬
ern  title  of  Fellow  Craft,  given  to  the  second
degree  of  Speculative  Masonry;  although
not  long  after  the  revival  of  1717  the  Fel¬
lows  ceased  to  constitute  the  main  body  of
the  Fraternity,  the  Masters  having  taken
and  still  holding  that  position.

Fellow  Craft.  The  second  degree
of  Freemasonry  in  all  the  Rites  is  that  of
the  Fellow  Craft.  In  French  it  is  called
Compagnon ;  in  Spanish,  Compahero ;  in
Italian,  Compagno  ;  and  in  German,  Gesell;
in  all  of  which  the  radical  meaning  of  the
word  is  a  fellow  workman,  thus  showing  the
origin  of  the  title  from  an  operative  insti¬
tution.  Like  the  degree  of  Apprentice,  it
is  only  preparatory  to  the  higher  initia¬
tion  of  the  Master ;  and  yet  it  differs  essen¬
tially  from  it  in  its  symbolism.  For,  as
the  first  degree  was  typical  of  youth,  the
second  is  supposed  to  represent  the  stage
of  manhood,  and  hence  the  acquisition  of
science  is  made  its  prominent  characteristic.
While  the  former  is  directed  in  all  its  sym¬
bols  and  allegorical  ceremonies  to  the  puri¬
fication  of  the  heart,  the  latter  is  intended
2  K  18


by  its  lessons  to  cultivate  the  reasoning
faculties  and  improve  the  intellectual  pow¬
ers.  Before  the  eighteenth  century,  the
great  body  of  the  Fraternity  consisted  of
Fellow  Crafts,  who  are  designated  in  all  the
old  manuscripts  as  “  Fellows.”  After  the
revival  in  1717,  the  Fellow  Crafts,  who  then
first  began  to  be  called  by  that  name,  lost
their  prominent  position,  and  the  great
body  of  the  brotherhood  was,  for  a  long
time,  made  up  altogether  of  Apprentices,
while  the  government  of  the  Institution
was  committed  to  the  Masters  and  Fellows,
both  of  whom  were  made  only  in  the  Grand
Lodge  until  1725,  when  the  regulation  was
repealed,  and  subordinate  Lodges  were  per¬
mitted  to  confer  these  two  degrees.

Fellow  Craft  Perfect  Architect.
( Compagnon  Parfait  Architect.)  The  twen¬
ty-sixth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.
There  are  several  other  degrees  which,  like
this,  are  so  called,  not  because  they  have
any  relation  to  the  orignal  second  degree
of  Symbolic  Masonry,  but  to  indicate  that
they  constitute  the  second  in  any  particular
series  of  degrees  which  are  preparatory  to
the  culmination  of  that  series.  Thus,  in  the
Rite  of  Mizraim,  we  have  the  Master  Per¬
fect  Architect,  which  is  the  twenty-seventh
degree,  while  the  twenty-fifth  and  twenty-
sixth  are  Apprentice  and  Fellow  Craft  Per¬
fect  Architect.  So  we  have  in  other  rites  and
systems  the  Fellow  Craft  Cohen,  Hermetic,
and  Kabbalistic  Fellow  Craft,  where  Master
Cohen  and  Hermetic  and  Kabbalistic  Mas¬
ter  are  the  topmost  degrees  of  the  different
series.  Fellow  Craft  in  all  these,  and  many
other  instances  like  them,  means  only  the
second  preparation  towards  perfection.

Fellowship.  Five  Points  of.  See
Points  of  Fellowship.

Female  Masonry.  See  Adoption,

Rite  of.

Female  Masons.  The  landmarks
of  Speculative  Masonry  peremptorily  ex¬
clude  females  from  any  active  participation
in  its  mysteries.  But  there  are  a  few  in¬
stances  in  which  the  othewise  unalterable
rule  of  female  exclusion  has  been  made  to
yield  to  the  peculiar  exigencies  of  the  occa¬
sion  ;  and  some  cases  are  well  authenticatd
where  this  “Salique  law”  has  been  vio¬
lated  from  necessity,  and  females  have  been
permitted  to  receive  at  least  the  first  de¬
gree.  Such,  however,  have  been  only  the
exceptions  which  have  given  confirmation
to  the  rule.  See  Aldworth,  Beaton,  and
Xentrailles.

Fendenrs.  L’Ordre  des  Fendeurs,
i.  e.  the  Order  of  Wood-cutters,  was  a  secret
society  established  at  Paris,  in  1743,  by  the
Chevalier  Beauchain.  The  Lodge  repre¬
sented  a  forest,  and  was  generally  held  in
a  garden.  It  was  androgynous,  and  had


274


FERDINAND


FESSLER


secret  signs  and  words,  and  an  allegorical
language  borrowed  from  the  profession  of
wood-cutting.  The  Abb^  Barruel  (tom.  ii.,
p.  345,)  thought  that  the  Order  originated
in  the  forests  among  the  actual  wood-cut¬
ters,  and  that  many  intelligent  inhabitants
of  the  city  having  united  with  them,  the
operative  business  of  felling  trees  was  aban¬
doned,  and  Philosophic  Lodges  were  estab¬
lished, — a  course  of  conversion  from  Oper¬
ative  to  Speculative  precisely  like  that,  he
says,  which  occurred  in  Masonry,  and  this
conversion  was  owing  to  the  number  of
Fendeurs  who  were  also  Freemasons.

Fcrdinaud  IV.  This  king  of  the
two  Sicilies,  on  the  12th  of  September,
1775,  issued  an  edict  forbidding  the  meeting
of  Masons  in  Lodges  in  his  dominions,
under  penalty  of  death.  In  1777,  at  the
solicitation  of  his  queen,  Caroline,  this
edict  was  repealed,  and  Masonry  was  once
more  tolerated;  but  in  1781  the  decree  was
renewed.

Ferdinand  VI.  In  1751,  Ferdinand
VI.,  king  of  Spain,  at  the  solicitation  of
Joseph  Ferrubia,  Visitor  of  the  Holy  In¬
quisition,  enforced  in  his  dominions  the
bull  of  excommunication  of  Pope  Bene¬
dict  XIV.,  and  forbade  the  congregation
of  Masons  under  the  highest  penalties  of
law.  In  the  Journal  of  Freemasonry,  Vi¬
enna,  1784,  (pp.  176-224,)  will  be  found  a
translation  from  Spanish  into  German  of
Ferrubia’s  “Act  of  Accusation,”  which
gave  rise  to  this  persecution.

Ferdinand  VII.  The  king  of  Spain
who  bore  this  title  was  one  of  the  greatest
bigots  of  his  time.  He  had  no  sooner  as¬
cended  the  throne  in  1814,  than  he  re¬
established  the  Inquisition,  which  had  been
abolished  by  his  predecessor,  proscribed  the
exercise  of  Freemasonry,  and  ordered  the
closing  of  all  the  Lodges,  under  the  heaviest
penalties.  In  September  following,  twenty-
five  persons,  among  whom  were  several
distinguished  noblemen,  were  arrested  as
“suspected  of  Freemasonry.”  On  March
30,  1818,  a  still  more  rigorous  edict  was
issued,  by  which  those  convicted  of  being
Freemasons  were  subjected  to  the  most
severe  punishments,  such  as  banishment  to
India  and  confiscation  of  goods,  or  some¬
times  death  by  a  cruel  form  of  execution.
But  the  subsequent  revolution  of  1820  and
the  abolition  of  the  Inquisition  removed
these  blots  from  the  Spanish  records.

Fervency.  From  the  middle  of  the
last  century,  ardent  devotion  to  duty,  fervor
or  fervency,  was  taught  as  a  Masonic  virtue
in  the  lectures  of  the  first  degree,  and  sym¬
bolized  by  charcoal,  because,  as  later  rituals
say,  all  metals  were  dissolved  by  the  fervor
of  ignited  charcoal.  Subsequently,  in  the
higher  degrees,  fervency  and  zeal  were  sym¬
bolized  by  the  color  scarlet,  which  is  the


appropriate  tincture  of  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
sonry.

Fessler,  Ignaz  Aurelius.  A  dis¬
tinguished  German  writer  and  Masonic  re¬
former,  and  was  born  at  Czurendorf,  in  Hun¬
gary,  in  1756.  He  was  the  son  of  very  poor
parents.  His  mother,  who  was  a  bigoted
Catholic,  had  devoted  him  to  a  monastic
life,  and  having  been  educated  at  the  Jesuit
school  of  Raab,  he  took  holy  orders  in  1772,
and  was  removed  to  the  Capuchin  monas¬
tery  in  Vienna.  In  consequence,  however,
of  his  exposure  to  the  Emperor  Joseph  II.
of  monastic  abuses,  he  incurred  the  perse¬
cutions  of  his  superiors.  But  the  emperor,
having  taken  him  under  his  protection,
nominated  him,  in  1783,  as  ex-professor  of
the  Oriental  languages  in  the  University
of  Lemberg.  But  the  monks  having  threat¬
ened  him  with  legal  proceedings,  he  fled  to
Breslau  in  1788,  where  he  subsequently
was  appointed  the  tutor  of  the  son  of  the
Prince  of  Corolath.  Here  he  established  a
secret  Order,  called  by  him  the  “  Ever-
geten,”  which  bore  a  resemblance  to  Free¬
masonry  in  its  organization,  and  was  in¬
tended  to  effect  moral  reforms,  which  at
the  time  he  thought  Masonry  incapable  of
producing.  The  Order,  however,  never
really  had  an  active  existence,  and  the  at¬
tempt  of  Fessler  failed  by  the  dissolution,
in  1793,  of  the  society.  In  1791  he  adopted
the  Lutheran  faith,  and,  having  married,
settled  in  Berlin,  where  until  1806  he  was
employed  as  a  superintendent  of  schools.
He  wrote  during  this  period  several  his¬
torical  works,  which  gave  him  a  high  repu¬
tation  as  an  author.  But  the  victorious
progress  of  the  French  army  in  Prussia
caused  him  to  lose  his  official  position.
Having  heen  divorced  from  his  wife  in  1802,
he  again  married,  and,  retiring  in  1803  from
Berlin,  betook  himself  to  the  quietude  of  a
country  life.  Becoming  now  greatly  em¬
barrassed  in  pecuniary  matters,  he  received
adequate  relief  from  several  of  the  German
Lodges,  for  which  he  expressed  the  most
lively  gratitude.  In  1808  he  accepted  the
position  of  a  professor  in  the  University  of
St.  Petersburg,  which,  however,  he  was
soon  compelled  to  relinquish  in  consequence
of  the  intrigues  of  the  clergy,  who  were
displeased  with  his  liberal  views.  Subse¬
quently  he  was  appointed  superintendent
of  the  Evangelical  community,  over  nine
Russian  departments,  and  Ecclesiastical
President  of  the  consistory  at  Saratow,  with
a  large  salary.  In  1827,  on  the  invitation
of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  he  removed
permanently  to  St.  Petersburg,  where,  in
1833,  he  received  the  appointment  of  Ec¬
clesiastical  Counsellor,  and  died  there  De¬
cember  15,  1S39,  at  the  advanced  age  of
eighty-three  years.

Fessler  was  initiated  into  Masonry  at


FESSLER


FESSLER


275


Lemberg,  in  1783,  and  immediately  devoted
himself  to  the  study  of  its  science  and  his¬
tory.  In  June,  1796,  he  affiliated  with  the
Lodge  Royal  York,  zur  Freundschaft,  in
Berlin, and  having  been  made  oueof  its  Sub¬
lime  Council,  was  invested  with  the  charge
of  revising  and  remodelling  the  entire  ritual
of  the  Lodge,  which  was  based  on  the  high  de¬
grees  of  the  French  system.  To  the  accom¬
plishment  of  this  laborious  task,  Fessler  at
once,  and  for  a  long  time  afterwards,  de¬
voted  his  great  intellect  and  his  indefati¬
gable  energies.  In  a  very  short  period  he
succeeded  in  a  reformation  of  the  symbolic
degrees,  and  finding  the  brethren  unwilling
to  reject  the  high  degrees,  which  were  four
in  number,  then  practised  by  the  Lodge,  he
remodelled  them,  retaining  a  considerable
part  of  the  French  ritual,  but  incorporated
with  it  a  portion  of  the  Swedish  system.  The
work  thus  accomplished  met  with  general
approbation.  In  his  next  task  of  forming
a  new  Constitution  he  was  not  so  success¬
ful,  although  at  length  he  induced  the  Royal
York  Lodge  to  assume  the  character  and
rank  of  a  Grand  Lodge,  which  it  did  in
1798,  with  seven  subordinate  Lodges  under
its  obedience.  Again  Fessler  commenced
the  work  of  a  revision  of  the  ritual.  He
had  always  been  opposed  to  the  high  degree
system.  He  proposed,  therefore,  the  abo¬
lition  of  everything  above  the  degree  of
Master.  In  this,  however,  he  was  warmly
opposed,  and  was  compelled  to  abandon  his
project  of  reducing  German  Masonry  to  the
simplicity  of  the  English  system.  Yet  he
was  enabled  to  accomplish  something,  and
had  the  satisfaction,  in  1800,  of  metamor¬
phosing  the  Elu,  the  Ecossais,  and  the  Rose
Croix,  of  the  old  ritual  of  the  Royal  York
Lodge  into  the  “  degrees  of  knowledge,”
which  constitute  the  Rite  known  as  the
Rite  of  Fessler.

In  1798,  Fessler  had  been  elected  Deputy
Grand  Master  when  there  were  but  three
Lodges  under  the  Grand  Lodge.  In  1801,
by  his  persevering  activity,  the  number  had
been  increased  to  sixteen.  Still,  notwith¬
standing  his  meritorious  exertions  in  be¬
half  of  Masonry,  he  met  with  that  ingrati¬
tude,  from  those  whom  he  sought  to  serve,
which  appears  to  be  the  fate  of  almost  all
Masonic  reformers.  In  1802,  wearied  with
the  opposition  of  his  antagonists,  he  re¬
nounced  all  the  offices  that  he  had  filled,
and  resigned  from  the  Grand  Lodge.
Thenceforth  he  devoted  himself  in  a  more
retired  way  to  the  pursuits  of  Masonry.

Before  Fessler  resigned,  he  had  con¬
ceived  and  carried  out  the  scheme  of  estab¬
lishing  a  great  union  of  scientific  Masons,
who  should  devote  themselves  to  the  inves¬
tigation  of  the  history  of  Masonry.  Of  this
society  Mossdorf,  Fischer,  and  many  other


distinguished  Masons,  were  members.  See
Scientific  Masons.

Fessler’s  contributions  to  the  literature
of  Freemasonry  were  numerous  and  valu¬
able.  His  chief  work  was,  An  Attempt  to
Furnish,  a  Critical  History  of  Freemasonry
and  the  Masonic  Fraternity  from  the  earliest
times  to  the  year  1802.  This  work  was  never
printed,  but  only  sold  in  four  folio  manu¬
script  volumes,  at  the  price  of  £30,  to  per¬
sons  who  pledged  themselves  eventually  to
return  it.  It  was  a  mistake  to  circumscribe
the  results  of  his  researches  within  so  nar¬
row  a  field.  But  he  published  many  other
works.  His  productions  were  mostly  his¬
torical  and  judicial,  and  made  a  great  im¬
pression  on  the  German  Masonic  mind.
His  collected  works  were  published  in  Ber¬
lin,  from  1801  to  1807,  but,  unfortunately,
they  have  never  been  translated  into  Eng¬
lish.  The  object  of  all  he  wrote  was  to
elevate  Freemasonry  to  the  highest  sphere
of  intellectual  character.

Fessler,  Rite  of.  This  Rite,  which
was  prepared  by  Fessler  at  the  request  of
the  Grand  Lodge  Royal  York  of  Berlin,
consisted  of  nine  degrees,  as  follows :

1.  Entered  Apprentice.

2.  Fellow  Craft.

3.  Master  Mason.

These  but  slightly  differ  from  the  same
degrees  in  all  the  Rites,  and  are  followed
by  six  other  degrees,  which  he  called  the
higher  knowledge ,  namely:

4.  The  Holy  of  Holies.  —  This  degree  is
occupied  in  a  critical  exposition  of  the  vari¬
ous  hypotheses  which  have  been  proposed
as  to  the  origin  of  F reemasonry ;  as,  whether
it  sprang  from  the  Templars,  from  the
Cathedral  of  Strasburg,  from  the  Rose
Croix  of  the  seventeenth  century,  from
Oliver  Cromwell,  from  the  Cathedral  of
St.  Paul’s  at  London,  from  that  of  the
Palace  of  Kensington,  or  from  the  Jesuits.

5.  Justification. — Critical  examination  of
the  origin  of  certain  of  the  high  degrees,
such  as  the  Ecossais  and  the  Chapter  of
Clermont.

6.  Celebration.  —  Critical  examination  of
the  four  following  systems :  Rose  Croix,
Strict  Observance,  African  Architects,  and
Initiated  Brothers  of  Asia.

7.  True  Light.  —  Critical  examination  of
the  Swedish  System,  the  System  of  Zin-
nendorf,  the  Royal  Arch  of  England,  of
the  succession  of  the  Mysteries,  and  of  all
systems  and  their  ramifications.

8.  The  Country.  —  Examination  of  the
origin  of  the  Mysteries  of  the  Divine  King¬
dom,  introduced  by  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ;  of
the  exoteric  doctrines  communicated  by
him  immediately  to  his  disciples,  and  of
those  which  sprang  up  after  his  death,  up
to  the  time  of  the  Gnostics.


276


FESTIVALS


FIFTEEN


9.  Perfection.  —  A  complete  critical  his¬
tory  of  all  Mysteries  comprehended  in  ac¬
tual  Freemasonry.

Both  Clavel  and  Ragon  say  that  the
rituals  of  these  degrees  were  drawn  up
from  the  rituals  of  the  Golden  Rose  Croix,
of  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance,  of  the  Il¬
luminated  Chapter  of  Sweden,  and  the  An¬
cient  Chapter  of  Clermont.  Fessler’s  Rite
was,  perhaps,  the  most  abstrusely  learned
and  philosophical  of  all  the  Masonic  sys¬
tems  ;  but  it  did  not  have  a  long  existence,
as  it  was  abandoned  by  the  Grand  Lodge,
which  had  at  first  accepted  it,  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  adopting  the  Ancient  York  Rite
under  the  Constitutions  of  England.

Festivals.  In  all  religions  there  have
been  certain  days  consecrated  to  festive  en¬
joyment,  and  hence  called  festivals.  Sir
Isaac  Newton  (on  Daniel,  p.  204,)  says :
“The  heathen  were  delighted  with  the
festivals  of  their  gods,  and  unwilling  to  part
with  these  delights ;  and,  therefore,  Gregory
Thaumaturgus,  who  died  in  265,  and  was
Bishop  of  Neocaesarea,  to  facilitate  their
conversion,  instituted  annual  festivals  to
the  saints  and  martyrs.  Hence  it  came  to
ass  that,  for  exploding  the  festivals  of  the
eathens,  the  principal  festivals  of  the
Christians  succeeded  in  their  room ;  as  the
keeping  of  Christmas  with  joy,  and  feast¬
ing,  and  playing,  and  sports,  in  the  room
of  the  Bacchinalia  and  Saturnalia;  the  cele¬
brating  of  May  day  with  flowers,  in  the
room  of  the  F lor  alia ;  and  the  keeping  of
festivals  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  John  the
Baptist,  and  divers  of  the  apostles,  in  the
room  of  the  solemnities  at  the  entrance  of
the  sun  into  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  in  the
old  Julian  Calendar.”  The  Masons,  bor¬
rowing  from  and  imitating  the  usage  of
the  Church,  have  also  always  had  their
festivals  or  days  of  festivity  and  celebra¬
tion.  The  chief  festivals  of  the  Operative
or  Stone  Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages  were
those  of  St.  John  the  Baptist  on  the  24th
June,  and  the  Four  Crowned  Martyrs  on
the  4th  November.  The  latter  were,  how¬
ever,  discarded  by  the  Speculative  Masons ;
and  the  festivals  now  most  generally  cele¬
brated  by  the  Fraternity  are  those  of  St.
John  the  Baptist,  June  24,  and  St.  John
the  Evangelist,  December  27.  These  are
the  days  kept  in  this  country.  Such,  too,
was  formerly  the  case  in  England ;  but  the
annual  festival  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  now  falls  on  the  Wednesday  fol¬
lowing  St.  George’s  day,  April  23,  that
saint  being  the  patron  of  England.  For
a  similar  reason,  St.  Andrew’s  day,  Novem¬
ber  30,  is  kept  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland.  In  Ireland  the  festivals  kept
are  those  of  the  two  Saints  John.

Fidelity.  See  Fides.


Fides.  In  the  lecture  of  the  first  degree,
it  is  said  that  “our  ancient  brethren  wor¬
shipped  deity  under  the  name  of  Fides  or
Fidelity,  which  was  sometimes  represented
by  two  right  hands  joined,  and  sometimes
by  two  human  figures  holding  each  other
by  the  right  hands.”  The  deity  here  re¬
ferred  to  was  the  goddess  Fides,  to  whom
Numa  first  erected  temples,  and  whose
priests  were  covered  by  a  white  veil  as  a
symbol  of  the  purity  which  should  charac¬
terize  Fidelity.  No  victims  were  slain  on
her  altars,  and  no  offerings  made  to  her
except  flowers,  wine,  and  incense.  Her
statues  were  represented  clothed  in  a  white
mantle,  with  a  key  in  her  hand  and  a  dog
at  her  feet.  The  virtue  of  Fidelity  is,
however,  frequently  symbolized  in  ancient
medals  by  a  heart  in  the  open  hand,  but
more  usually  by  two  right  hands  clasped.
Horace  calls  her  “incorrupta  fides,”  and
makes  her  th  e  sister  of  J ustice ;  while  Cicero
says  that  that  which  is  religion  towards
God  and  piety  towards  our  parents  is  fidel¬
ity  towards  our  fellow-men.  There  was
among  the  Romans  another  deity  called
Fidius,  who  presided  over  oaths  and  con¬
tracts,  a  very  usual  form  of  imprecation
being  “Me  Dius  Fidius  adjuvet,”  that  is,
so  help  me  the  god  Fidius.  Noel  [Did.
Fab.)  says  that  there  was  an  ancient  marble
at  Rome  consecrated  to  the  god  Fidius,  on
which  was  depicted  two  figures  clasping
each  other’s  hands  as  the  representatives  of
Honor  and  Truth,  without  which  there  can
be  no  fidelity  nor  truth  among  men.  Ma¬
sonry,  borrowing  its  ideas  from  the  ancient
poets,  also  makes  the  right  hand  the  sym¬
bol  of  Fidelity.

Fiducial  Sign.  That  is,  the  sign  of
confiding  trust,  called  also  the  sign  of
Truth  and  Hope.  One  of  the  signs  of  the
English  Royal  Arch  system,  which  is  thus
explained  by  Dr.  Oliver,  [Did.  Symb.
Mas.)  “The  fiducial  sign  shows  us  if  we
prostrate  ourselves  with  our  face  to  the
earth,  we  thus  throw  ourselves  on  the
mercy  of  our  Creator  and  Judge,  looking
forward  with  humble  confidence  to  his  holy
promises,  by  which  alone  we  hope  to  pass
through  the  ark  of  our  redemption  into
the  mansion  of  eternal  bliss  and  glory
to  the  presence  of  Him  who  is  the  great
I  AM,  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  Begin¬
ning  and  the  Ending,  the  First  and  the
Last.”

Fifteen.  A  sacred  number  symbolic
of  the  name  of  God,  because  the  letters  of
the  holy  name  n\  JAH,  are  equal,  in  the
Hebrew  mode  of  numeration  by  the  letters
of  the  alphabet,  to  fifteen;  for  is  equal
to  ten,  and  n  is  equal  to  five.  Hence,
from  veneration  for  this  sacred  name,  the
Hebrews  do  not,  in  ordinary  computations.


FINANCES


FIRE


277


•when  they  wish  to  express  the  number
fifteen,  make  use  of  these  two  letters,  but
of  two  others,  which  are  equivalent  to  nine
and  six.

Finances.  According  to  universal
usage  in  Masonry,  the  Treasurer  of  the
Lodge  or  other  body  is  the  banker  or  de¬
positary  of  the  finances  of  the  Lodge.
They  are  first  received  by  the  Secretary,
who  receipts  for  them,  and  immediately
pays  them  over  to  the  Treasurer.  The
Treasurer  distributes  them  under  the  orders
of  the  Master  and  the  consent  of  the  Lodge.
This  consent  can  only  be  known  officially
to  him  by  the  statement  of  the  Secretary.
And  hence  all  orders  drawn  on  the  Treas¬
urer  for  the  disbursement  of  money  should
be  countersigned  by  the  Secretary.

Finch,  William.  A  Masonic  char¬
latan,  who  flourished  at  the  end  of  the  last
and  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.
Finch  was  a  tailor  in  Canterbury,  who,
having  been  expelled  for  some  misconduct
by  the  Grand  Lodge,  commenced  a  system
of  practical  Masonry  on  his  own  account,
and  opened  a  Lodge  in  his  house,  where  he
undertook  to  initiate  candidates  and  to
give  instructions  in  Masonry.  He  pub¬
lished  a  great  number  of  pamphlets,  many
of  them  in  a  cipher  of  his  own,  which  he
pretended  were  for  the  instruction  of  the
Fraternity.  Among  the  books  published
by  him  are  A  Masonic  Treatise,  with  an  Elu¬
cidation  on  the  Religious  and  Moral  Beauties
of  Freemasonry,  etc. ;  printed  at  Canterbury
in  1802.  The  Lectures,  Laws,  and  Ceremo¬
nies  of  the  Holy  Arch  Degree  of  Freemasonry,
etc.:  Lambeth,  1812.  The  Origin  of  Free¬
masons,  etc. :  London,  1816.  Finch  found
many  dupe8,  and  made  a  great  deal  of
money.  But  having  on  one  occasion  been
sued  by  an  engraver  named  Smith,  for
money  due  for  printing  his  plates,  Finch
pleaded  an  offset  of  money  due  by  Smith
for  initiation  and  instruction  in  Masonry.
Smith  brought  the  Grand  Secretary  and
other  distinguished  Masons  into  court,  who
testified  that  Finch  was  an  impostor.  In
consequence  of  this  exposure,  Finch  lost
credit  with  the  community,  and,  sinking
into  obscurity,  died  sometime  after,  1816,
in  abject  poverty.

As  it  is  impossible  to  read  Finch’s  Trea¬
tises  without  a  knowledge  of  the  cipher
employed  by  him,  the  following  key  will
be  found  useful.  We  owe  it  to  the  re¬
searches  of  Bro.  H.  C.  Levander,  (Freem.
Mag.  and  Rev.,  1859,  p.  490.)  In  the  first
art  of  the  book  the  cipher  used  is  formed
y  reversing  the  alphabet,  writing  z  for  a,  y
for  b,  etc.  The  cipher  used  on  the  title-
page  differs  somewhat  from  this,  as  will  be
seen  from  the  following  tables  :


FOR  THE  TITLE-PAGE.

Cipher,  a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  f,  g,  h,  i,  j,  k,  1,  m,  n,
o,  p,  q,  r,  s,  t,  u,  v,  w,  x,  y,  z.

Key.  b,  d,  f,  h,  j,  1,  n,  p,  r,  t,  v,  x,  z,  y,  w,
u,  s,  q,  o,  m,  k,  i,  g,  e,  c,  a.

FOR  THE  FIRST  PART.

Cipher,  a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  f,  g,  h,  i,  j,  k,  1,  m,  n,
o,  p,  q,  r,  s,  t,  u,  v,  w,  x,  y,  z.

Key.  z,  y,  x,  w,  v,  u,  t,  s,  r,  q,  p,  o,  n,  m,
1,  K  j,  b  K  g,  $  e,  d,  c,  b,  a.

In  the  second  part  of  the  work,  a  totally
different  system  is  employed.  The  words
may  be  deciphered  by  taking  the  last  letter,
then  the  first,  then  the  last  but  one,  then
the  second,  and  so  on.  Two  or  three  words
are  also  often  run  into  one ;  for  example,
ereetemhdrdoh,  is  he  ordered  them.  The  nine
digits  represent  certain  words  of  frequent
recurrence,  a  repetition  of  the  same  digit
denoting  the  plural ;  thus,  1  stands  for
Lodge;  11,  for  Lodges;  3,  Fellow  Craft;
33,  Fellow  Crafts,  etc.

Fines.  Fines  for  non-attendance  or
neglect  of  duty  are  not  now  usually  im¬
posed  in  Masonic  bodies,  because  each
member  is  bound  to  the  discharge  of  these
duties  by  a  motive  more  powerful  than
any  that  could  be  furnished  by  a  pecuniary
penalty.  The  imposition  of  such  a  penalty
would  be  a  tacit  acknowledgment  of  the
inadequacy  of  that  motive,  and  would  hence
detract  from  its  solemnity  and  its  binding
nature.  It  cannot,  however,  be  denied  that
the  records  of  old  Lodges  show  that  it
was  formerly  a  common  custom  to  impose
fines  for  a  violation  of  the  rules.

Fire.  The  French,  in  their  Table
Lodges,  called  the  drinking  a  toast,  feu,  or
fire.

Fire  Philosophers.  See  Theo-
sophists.

Fire,  Pillars  of.  See  Pillars  of  Fire.

Fire,  Purification  by.  See  Puri¬
fication.

Fire-Worsl»ip>.  Of  all  the  ancient
religions,  fire-worship  was  one  of  the  ear¬
liest,  next  to  Sabaism ;  and  even  of  this  it
seems  only  to  have  been  a  development,  as
with  the  Sabaists  the  sun  was  deemed  the
Universal  Fire.  “Darius,”  says  Quintus
Curtius,  “  invoked  the  sun  as  Mithras,  the
sacred  and  eternal  fire.”  It  was  the  faith
of  the  ancient  Magi  and  the  old  Persians,
still  retained  by  their  modern  descendants
the  Parsees.  But  with  them  it  was  not  an
idolatry.  The  fire  was  venerated  only  as  a
visible  symbol  of  the  Supreme  Deity,  of
the  creative  energy,  from  whom  all  things
come,  and  to  whom  all  things  ascend.  The
flame  darting  upwards  to  meet  its  divine
original,  the  mundane  fire  seeking  an


278


FISH


FIVE


ascension  to  and  an  absorption  into  the  ce¬
lestial  fire,  or  God  himself,  constituted  what
has  been  called  “the  flame-secret”  of  the
fire-worshippers.  This  religion  was  not
only  very  ancient,  but  also  very  universal.
From  India  it  passed  over  into  Egypt,  and
thence  extended  to  the  Hebrews  and  to  the
Greeks,  and  has  shown  its  power  and  preva¬
lence  even  in  modern  thought.  On  the
banks  of  the  Nile,  the  people  did  not,  in¬
deed,  fall  down  like  the  old  Persians  and
worship  fire,  but  they  venerated  the  fire-
secret  and  its  symbolic  teaching.  Hence
the  Pyramids,  (pyr  is  Greek  for  fire,)  the
representation  of  ascending  flame;  and
Jennings  Hargrave  shrewdly  says  that
what  has  been  supposed  to  be  a  tomb,  in
the  centre  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  was  in
reality  a  depository  of  the  sacred,  ever¬
burning  fire.  Monoliths  were  everywhere
in  antiquity  erected  to  fire  or  to  the  sun,
as  the  type  of  fire.  Among  the  Hebrews,
the  sacred  idea  of  fire,  as  something  con¬
nected  with  the  Divine  Being,  was  very
prominent.  God  appeared  to  Moses  in  a
flame  of  fire;  he  descended  on  Mount
Sinai  in  the  midst  of  flames;  at  the  Tem¬
ple  the  fire  descended  from  heaven  to  con¬
sume  the  burnt-offering.  Everywhere  in
Scripture,  fire  is  a  symbol  of  the  holiness
of  God.  The  lights  on  the  altar  are  the
symbols  of  the  Christian  God.  The  puri¬
fying  power  of  fire  is  naturally  deduced
from  this  symbol  of  the  holiness  of  the  ele¬
ment.  And  in  the  high  degrees  of  Mason¬
ry,  as  in  the  ancient  institutions,  there  is  a
purification  by  fire,  coming  down  to  us
insensibly  and  unconsciously  from  the  old
Magian  cultus.  In  the  Mediaeval  ages
there  was  a  sect  of  “  fire- philosophers  ”  —
phi/osophi  per  ignem  —  who  were  a  branch
or  offshoot  of  Rosicrucianism,  with  which
Freemasonry  has  so  much  in  common.
These  fire-philosophers  kept  up  the  venera¬
tion  for  fire,  and  cultivated  the  “  fire-se¬
cret,”  not  as  an  idolatrous  belief,  but  modi¬
fied  by  their  hermetic  notions.  They  were
also  called  “  theosophists,”  and  through
them,  or  in  reference  to  them,  we  find
the  theosophic  degrees  of  Masonry,  which
sprang  up  in  the  eighteenth  century.  As
fire  and  light  are  identical,  so  the  fire,
which  was  to  the  Zoroastrians  the  symbol
of  the  Divine  Being,  is  to  the  Mason,  under
the  equivalent  idea  of  light,  the  symbol  of
Divine  Truth,  or  of  the  Grand  Architect.

Fish.  The  Greek  word  for  fish  is
IX9Y2.  Now  these  five  letters  are  the  ini¬
tials  of  the  five  words  ir/ermx;  Xp/orof  Qeov
Y/of  ZuT7}p,  that  is,  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of
God,  the  Saviour.  Hence  the  early  Chris¬
tians  adopted  the  fish  as  a  Christian  sym¬
bol  ;  and  it  is  to  be  found  on  many  of  their
tombs,  and  was  often  worn  as  an  ornament.


Clement  of  Alexandria,  in  writing  of  the
ornaments  that  a  Christian  may  constantly
wear,  mentions  the  fish  as  a  proper  device
for  a  ring,  as  serving  to  remind  the  Chris¬
tian  of  the  origin  of  his  spiritual  life,  the
fish  referring  to  the  waters  of  baptism.
The  Vesica  Piseis,  which  is  an  oval  figure,
pointed  at  both  ends,  and  representing  the
air  bladder  of  a  fish,  was  adopted,  and  is
still  often  used  as  the  form  of  the  seal  of
religious  houses  and  confraternities.  Mar-
goliouth  (  Vest,  of  Gen.  Freem.,  45,)  says:
“In  former  days,  the  Grand  Master  of  our
Order  used  to  wear  a  silver  fish  on  his  per¬
son  ;  but  it  is  to  be  regretted  that,  amongst
the  many  innovations  which  have  been  of
late  introduced  into  the  society  to  con¬
ciliate  the  prejudices  of  some  who  cannot
consistently  be  members  of  it,  this  beauti¬
ful  emblem  has  disappeared.”

Five.  Among  the  Pythagoreans  five
was  a  mystical  number,  because  it  was
formed  by  the  union  of  tbe  first  even  num¬
ber  and  the  first  odd,  rejecting  unity;  and
hence  it  symbolized  the  mixed  conditions
of  order  and  disorder,  happiness  and  mis¬
fortune,  life  and  death.  The  same  union
of  the  odd  and  even,  or  male  and  female,
numbers  made  it  the  symbol  of  marriage.
Among  the  Greeks  it  was  a  symbol  of  the
world,  because,  says  Diodorus,  it  repre¬
sented  ether  and  the  four  elements.  It
was  a  sacred  round  number  among  the
Hebrews.  In  Egypt,  India,  and  other
Oriental  nations,  says  Gesenius,  the  five
minor  planets  and  the  five  elements  and
elementary  powers  were  accounted  sacred.
It  was  the  pentas  of  the  Gnostics  and  the
Hermetic  Philosophers;  it  was  the  symbol
of  their  quintessence,  the  fifth  or  highest
essence  of  power  in  a  natural  body.  In
Masonry,  five  is  a  sacred  number,  inferior
only  in  importance  to  three  and  seven.  It
is  especially  significant  in  the  Fellow
Craft’s  degree,  where  five  are  required  to
hold  a  Lodge,  and  where,  in  the  winding
stairs,  the  five  steps  are  referred  to  the
orders  of  architecture  and  the  human
senses.  In  the  third  degree,  we  find  the
reference  to  the  five  points  of  fellowship
and  their  symbol,  the  five-pointed  star.
Geometry,  too,  which  is  deemed  synony¬
mous  with  Masonry,  is  called  the  fifth  sci¬
ence;  and,  in  fact,  throughout  nearly  all  the
degrees  of  Masonry,  we  find  abundant  allu¬
sions  to  five  as  a  sacred  and  mystical
number.

Five-Pointed  Star.  The  five-

pointed  star,  which  is  not  to  be  con¬
founded  with  the  blazing  star,  is  not  found
among  the  old  symbols  of  Masonry;  in¬
deed,  some  writers  have  denied  that  it  is  a
Masonic  emblem  at  all.  It  is  undoubtedly
of  recent  origin,  and  was  probably  intro-


FIVE


FLORIDA


279


duced  by  Jeremy  Cross,  who  placed  it
among  the  plates  in  the  emblems  of  the
third  degree  prefixed  to  his  Hieroglyphic
Chart.  It  is  not  mentioned  in  the  ritual
or  the  lecture  of  the  third  degree,  but  the
Masons  of  this  country  have,  by  tacit  con¬
sent,  referred  to  it  as  a  symbol  of  the  Five
Points  of  Fellowship.  The  outlines  of  the
five-pointed  star  are  the  same  as  those  of
the  pentalpha  of  Pythagoras,  which  was
the  symbol  of  health.  M.  Joinard,  in  his
Description  de  VEgypte,  (tom.  viii.,  p.  423,)
says  that  the  star  engraved  on  the  Egyptian
monuments,  where  it  is  a  very  common
hieroglyphic,  has  constantly  five  points,
never  more  nor  less.

Five  Points  of  Fellowship.  See

Points  of  Fellowship.

Five  Senses.  The  five  senses  of  Hear¬
ing,  Seeing,  Feeling,  Tasting,  and  Smelling
are  introduced  into  the  lecture  of  the  Fel¬
low  Craft  as  a  part  of  the  instructions  of
that  degree.  See  each  word  in  its  appro¬
priate  place.  In  the  earlier  lectures  of  the
eighteenth  century,  the  five  senses  were
explained  in  the  first  degree  as  referring  to
the  five  who  make  a  Lodge.  Their  subse¬
quent  reference  to  the  winding  stairs,  and
tlieir  introduction  into  the  second  degree,
were  modern  improvements.  As  these
senses  are  the  avenues  by  which  the  mind
receives  its  perceptions  of  things  exterior
to  it,  and  thus  becomes  the  storehouse  of
ideas,  they  are  most  appropriately  referred
to  that  degree  of  Masonry  whose  professed
object  is  the  pursuit  and  acquisition  of
knowledge.

Fixed  Fights.  In  the  old  lectures
of  the  last  century,  the  fixed  lights  were  the
three  windows  always  supposed  to  exist  in
the  East,  South,  and  West.  Their  uses  were,
according  to  the  ritual,  “  to  light  the  men  to,
at,  and  from  their  work.”  In  the  modern
lectures  they  have  been  omitted,  and  their
place  as  symbols  supplied  by  the  lesser  lights.

Flaming  Sword.  A  sword  whose
blade  is  of  a  spiral  or  twisted  form  is  called
by  the  heralds  a  flaming  sword,  from  its  re¬
semblance  to  the  ascending  curvature  of  a
flame  of  fire.  Until  very  recently,
this  was  the  form  of  the  'filer’s
sword.  Carelessness  or  ignorance
has  now  in  many  Lodges  substi¬
tuted  for  it  a  common  sword  of  any
form.  The  flaming  sword  of  the
Tiler  refers  to  the  flaming  sword
which  guarded  the  entrance  to
Paradise,  as  described  in  Genesis,

(iii.  24:)  “So  he  drove  out  the
man ;  and  he  placed  at  the  east  of
the  garden  of  Eden  cherubim,
and  a  fiaming  sword  which  turned
every  way,  to  keep  the  way  of  the
tree  of  life;”  or,  as  Raphnll  has


translated  it,  “the  flaming  sword  which  re-
volveth,  to  guard  the  way  to  the  tree  of
life.”  In  former  times,  when  symbols  and
ceremonies  were  more  respected  than  they
are  now;  when  collars  were  worn,  and  not
ribbons  in  the  button-hole;  and  when  the
standing  column  of  the  Senior  Warden,
and  the  recumbent  one  of  the  Junior  dur¬
ing  labor,  to  be  reversed  during  refresh¬
ment,  were  deemed  necessary  for  the  com¬
plete  furniture  of  the  Lodge,  the  cavalry
sword  was  unknown  as  a  Masonic  imple¬
ment,  and  the  Tiler  always  bore  a  flaming
sword.  It  were  better  if  we  could  get  back
to  the  old  customs.

Floats.  Pieces  of  timber,  made  fast
together  with  rafters,  for  conveying  bur¬
dens  down  a  river  with  the  stream.  The
use  of  these  floats  in  the  building  of  the
Temple  is  thus  described  in  the  letter  of
King  Hiram  to  Solomon :  “  And  we  will
cut  wood  out  of  Lebanon,  as  much  as  thou
shalt  need;  and  we  will  bring  it  to  thee  in
floats  by  sea  to  Joppa;  and  thou  shalt
carry  it  up  to  Jerusalem.”  2  Chron.  ii.  16.

Floor.  The  floor  of  a  properly  con¬
structed  Lodge  room  should  be  covered
with  alternate  squares  of  black  and  white,
to  represent  the  Mosaic  pavement  which
was  the  ground  floor  of  King  Solomon’s
Temple.

Floor-Cloth.  A  frame-work  of  board
or  canvas,  on  which  the  emblems  of  any
particular  degree  are  inscribed,  for  the  as¬
sistance  of  the  Master  in  giving  a  lecture.
It  is  so  called  because  formerly  it  was  the
custom  to  inscribe  these  designs  on  the
floor  of  the  Lodge  room  in  chalk,  which
was  wiped  out  when  the  Lodge  was  closed.
It  is  the  same  as  the  “  Carpet,”  or  “Trac¬
ing  Board.”

Flooring.  The  same  as  floor-cloth,
which  see.

Florida.  Freemasonry  was  first  intro¬
duced  into  Florida,  in  1806,  by  the  organi¬
zation,  in  the  city  of  St  Augustine,  of  St.
Fernando  Lodge  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Georgia.  In  the  year  1811,  it  was  sup¬
pressed  by  a  mandate  of  the  Spanish  gov¬
ernment.  In  1820,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
South  Carolina  granted  a  Charter  to  Flo¬
ridian  Virtue  Lodge,  No.  28,  but,  in  conse¬
quence  of  the  hostility  of  the  political  and
religious  authorities,  it  did  not  long  exist.
In  1824,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Caro¬
lina  granted  another  Charter  for  Esperanza
Lodge  at  St.  Augustine,  which  body,  how¬
ever,  became  extinct  after  a  year  by  tho
removal  of  most  of  its  members  to  Ha¬
vana.  In  1826,  the  Grand  Lodges  of
Tennessee  and  Georgia  granted  warrants
for  the  establishment  respectively  of  Jack-
son  Lodge  at  Tallahassee,  Washington
I  Lodge  at  Quincy,  and  Harmony  Lodge  at


280


FLUDD


FOLKES


Mariana.  On  the  5th  July,  1830,  delegates
from  these  three  Lodges  met  at  Tallahassee,
and  organized  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Florida.

Fludd,  Robert.  Robert  Fludd,  or,
as  he  called  himself  in  his  Latin  writings,
Robertus  de  Fluctibus,  was  in  the  seven¬
teenth  century  a  prominent  member  of  the
Rosicrucian  Fraternity.  He  was  born  in
England  in  1574,  and  having  taken  the  de¬
grees  of  Bachelor  and  Master  of  Arts  at
St.  John’s  College,  Oxford,  he  commenced
the  study  of  physic,  and  in  due  time  took
the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Medicine.  He
died  in  1637.  In  1616,  he  commenced  the
publication  of  his  works  and  became  a
volumiuous  writer,  whose  subject  and  style
were  equally  dark  and  mysterious.  The
most  important  of  his  publications  are
Apologia  Compendaria,  Fraternitatem  de
Rosea  Cruce,  suspicionis  et  infamioe  maculis
aspersum  abluens,”  (Leyden,  1616,)  i.  e.,  A
Brief  Apology,  clearing  the  Fraternity  of  the
Rosy  Cross  from,  the  stigma  of  suspicion  and
infamy  with  which  they  have  been  aspersed  ;
and  Tractalus  Apologeticus  integritatem  Socie-
iatis  de  Rosea  Cruce  defendens  contra  Liba-
nium  et  alios,  (Leyden,  1617,)  or,  An  Apol¬
ogetic  Tract  defending  the  purity  of  the  So¬
ciety  of  the  Rosy  Cross  from  the  attacks  of
Libanius  and  others.  And  last,  and  wildest
of  all,  was  his  extravagant  work  on  magic,
the  kabbala,  alchemy,  and  Rosicrucianism,
entitled  Summum  bonum,  quod  est  verum
magice,  cabalce,  alchymice,  fratrum  Rosce
Crucis  verorum  verce  subjectum.  Rosicruci¬
anism  was  perhaps  indebted  more  to  Fludd
than  to  any  other  person  for  its  introduc¬
tion  from  Germany  into  England,  and  it  may
have  had  its  influence  in  moulding  the  form
of  Speculative  Freemasonry;  but  I  am  not

nared  to  go  as  far  as  a  distinguished  wrriter
e  London  Freemason’s  Magazine,  (April,
1858,)  who  says  that“  Fludd  must  be  consid¬
ered  as  the  immediate  father  of  Freemasonry
as  Andrea  was  its  remote  father.”  Nicolai
more  rationally  remarks  that  Fludd,  like
Andrea,  exerted  a  considerable  and  benefi¬
cial  influence  on  the  manners  of  his  age.
His  explanation  of  the  Rose  Croix  is  worth
quoting.  He  says  that  it  symbolically  sig¬
nifies  the  cross  dyed  with  the  blood  of  the
Saviour ;  a  Christian  idea  which  was  in  ad¬
vance  of  the  original  Rosicrucians.

Folkes,  Martin.  From  his  acquaint¬
ance  with  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  and  his
intimacy  with  Dr.  Desaguliers,  Martin
Folkes  was  induced  to  take  an  active  part
in  the  reorganization  of  Freemasonry  in
the  beginning  of  the  last  century,  and  his
literary  attainments  and  prominent  position
in  the  scientific  world  enabled  him  to  ex¬
ercise  a  favorable  influence  on  the  character
of  the  Institution.  He  was  descended
from  a  good  family,  being  the  eldest  son  of


Martin  Folkes,  Esq.,  Counsellor  at  Law,  and
Dorothy,  the  daughter  of  Sir  William
Howell,  Knt.,  of  the  county  of  Norfolk.
He  was  born  in  Queen  Street,  Leicester
Inn  Fields,  Westminster,  October  29,  1690.
In  1707  he  was  entered  at  Clare  Hall,  Cam¬
bridge,  and  in  1713  elected  a  Fellow  of
the  Royal  Society,  of  which,  in  1723,  he
was  appointed  Vice  President.  In  1727,
on  the  death  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  he  be¬
came  a  candidate  for  the  Presidency,  in
which  he  was  defeated  by  Sir  Hans  Sloane,
who,  however,  renewed  his  appointment  as
Vice  President,  and  in  1741,  on  the  resig¬
nation  of  Sloane  as  President,  he  was
elected  his  successor.  In  1742,  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  Royal  Academy
of  Sciences  of  Paris,  and  in  i746  received
the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Laws  from  the
Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge.

In  1750,  he  was  elected  President  of  the
Society  of  Antiquaries.  To  this  and  to  the
Royal  Society  he  contributed  many  essays,
and  published  a  work  entitled,  A  Table  of
English  Silver  Coins,  which  is  still  much  es¬
teemed  as  a  numismatic  authority.  On
September  26,  1751,  he  was  struck  with
paralysis,  from  which  he  never  completely
recovered.  On  November  30,  1753,  he  re¬
signed  the  Presidency  of  the  Royal  Society,
but  retained  that  of  the  Society  of  Anti¬
quaries  until  his  death.  In  1733,  he  visited
Italy,  and  remained  there  until  1735,  dur¬
ing  which  time  he  appears  to  have  ingrati¬
ated  himself  with  the  Masons  of  that
country,  for  in  1742  they  struck  a  medal  in
his  honor,  a  copy  of  which  is  to  be  found
in  Thory’s  History  of  the  Foundation  of  the
Grand  Orient  of  France.  On  one  side  is  a
pyramid,  a  sphinx,  some  Masonic  ciphers,
and  the  two  pillars,  and  on  the  obverse  a
likeness  of  Folkes.

Of  the  Masonic  life  of  Folkes  we  have
but  few  records.  In  1725,  he  was  appointed
Deputy  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  and  is  recorded  as  having  paid
great  attention  to  the  duties  of  his  office.
Anderson  says  that  he  presided  over  the
Grand  Lodge  in  May  of  that  year,  and
:  prompted  a  most  agreeable  communica¬
tion.”  But  he  held  no  office  afterwards;
yet  he  is  spoken  of  as  having  taken  great  in¬
terest  in  the  Institution,  Of  his  literary
contributions  to  Masonry  nothing  remains.

The  Pocket  Companion  cites  an  address
by  him,  in  1725,  before  the  Grand  Lodge,
probably  at  that  very  communication  to
which  Anderson  has  alluded,  but  it  is  un¬
fortunately  no  longer  extant.  He  died  June
28,  1754,  and  was  buried  in  the  Chancel  of
Hillington  Church  near  Lynn,  Norfolk.
He  left  a  wife  and  t.vo  daughters,  an  only
son  having  died  before  him.

Nichols,  who  knew  him  personally,  says


FOOL


FORM


281


( Lit.Anecd.,11 .  591,)  of  him:  “Hig  knowl¬
edge  was  very  extensive,  his  judgment  ex¬
act  and  accurate,  and  the  precision  of  his
ideas  appeared  from  the  perspicuity  and
conciseness  of  his  expression  in  his  dis¬
courses  and  writings  on  abstruse  and  diffi¬
cult  topics . He  had  turned  his

thoughts  to  the  study  of  antiquity  and  the
polite  arts  with  a  philosophical  spirit,
which  he  had  contracted  by  the  cultivation
of  the  mathematical  sciences  from  his
earliest  youth.”  His  valuable  library  of
more  than  five  thousand  volumes  was  sold
for  £3,090  at  auction  after  his  decease.

Fool.  A  fool,  as  one  not  in  possession
of  sound  reason,  a  natural  or  idiot,  is  intel¬
lectually  unfit  for  initiation  into  the  mys¬
teries  of  Freemasonry,  because  he  is  in¬
capable  of  comprehending  the  principles  of
the  Institution,  and  is  without  any  moral
responsibility  for  a  violation  or  neglect  of
its  duties.

Footstone.  The  corner  -  stone.  “  To
level  the  footstone  ”  =  to  lay  the  corner¬
stone.  Thus,  Oliver:  “Solomon  was  en¬
abled  to  level  the  footstoue  of  the  Temple
in  the  fourth  year  of  his  reign.”

Foot  to  Foot.  The  old  lectures  of
the  last  century  descanted  on  the  symbolism
of  foot  to  foot  as  teaching  us  “  that  indo¬
lence  should  not  permit  the  foot  to  halt  or
wrath  to  turn  our  steps  out  of  the  way ;
but  forgetting  injuries  and  selfish  feelings,
and  remembering  that  man  was  born  for
the  aid  of  his  fellow-creatures,  not  for  his
own  enjoyments  only,  but  to  do  that  which
is  good,  we  should  be  swift  to  extend  our
mercy  and  benevolence  to  all,  but  more
particularly  to  a  brother  Mason.”  The
present  lecture  on  the  same  subject  gives  the
same  lesson  more  briefly  and  more  emphati¬
cally,  when  it  says,  “  we  should  never  halt
nor  grow  weary  in  the  service  of  a  brother
Mason.”

Fords  of  the  Jordan.  The  slaugh¬
ter  of  the  Ephraimitesat  the  passages  or  fords
of  the  river  Jordan,  which  is  described  in  the
twelfth  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Judges,  is  re¬
ferred  to  in  the  ritual  of  the  Fellow  Craft’s
degree.  Morris,  in  his  Freemasonry  in  the
Holy  Land,  (p.  316,)  says :  “  The  exact  locali¬
ty  of  these  fords  (or  ‘  passages,’  as  the  Bible
terms  them,)  cannot  now  be  designated,
but  most  likely  they  were  those  nearly  due
east  of  Seikoot  and  opposite  Mizpah.  At
these  fords,  in  summer  time,  the  water  is  not
more  than  three  or  four  feet  deep,  the  bottom
being  composed  of  a  hard  limestone  rock.
If,  as  some  think,  the  fords,  thirty  miles
higher  up,  are  those  referred  to,  the  same  de¬
scription  will  apply.  At  either  place,  the
Jordan  is  about  eighty  feet  wide,  its  banks
encumbered  by  a  dense  growth  of  tama¬
risks,  cane,  willows,  thorn-bushes,  and  other
2  L


low  vegetation  of  the  shrubby  and  thorny
sorts,  which  make  it  difficult  even  to  ap¬
proach  the  margin  of  the  stream.  The
Arabs  cross  the  river  at  the  present  day,
at  stages  of  low  water,  at  a  number  of
fords,  from  the  one  near  the  point  where
the  Jordan  leaves  the  Sea  of  Galilee  down
to  the  Pilgrims’  Ford,  six  miles  above  the
Dead  Sea.”

Foreign  Country.  The  lecture  of
the  third  degree  begins  by  declaring  that
the  recipient  was  induced  to  seek  that
sublime  degree  “  that  he  might  perfect  him¬
self  in  Masonry,  so  as  to  travel  into  foreign
countries,  and  work  and  receive  wages  as  a
Master  Mason.”

Thousands  have  often  heard  this  ritual¬
istic  expression  at  the  opening  and  closing
of  a  Master’s  Lodge,  without  dreaming  for
a  moment  of  its  hidden  and  spiritual  mean¬
ing,  or,  if  they  think  of  any  meaning  at  all,
they  content  themselves  by  interpreting  it
as  referring  to  the  actual  travels  of  the  Ma¬
sons,  after  the  completion  of  the  Temple,
into  the  surrounding  countries  in  search  of
employment,  whose  wages  were  to  be  the
gold  and  silver  which  they  could  earn  by  the
exercise  of  their  skill  in  the  operative  art.

But  the  true  symbolic  meaning  of  the
foreign  country  into  which  the  Master  Ma¬
son  travels  in  search  of  wages  is  far  dif¬
ferent.

The  symbolism  of  this  life  terminates
with  the  Master’s  degree.  The  completion
of  that  degree  is  the  lesson  of  death  and  the
resurrection  to  a  future  life,  where  the  TRUE
word,  or  Divine  Truth,  not  given  in  this,
is  to  be  received  as  the  reward  of  a  life
worthily  spent  in  its  search.  Heaven,  the
future  life,  the  higher  state  of  existence
after  death,  is  the  foreign  country  in  which
the  Master  Mason  is  to  enter,  and  there  he
is  to  receive  his  wages  in  the  reception  of
that  truth  which  can  be  imparted  only  in
that  better  land.

Foresters’  Degrees.  This  title  has
been  given  to  certain  secret  associations
which  derive  their  symbols  and  ceremonies
from  trades  practised  in  forests,  such  as  the
Carbonari,  or  Charcoal-burners ;  the  Fen-
deurs,  or  Wood-cutters;  the  Sawyers,  etc.
They  are  all  imitative  of  Freemasonry.

Forest  of  Lebanon.  See  Lebanon.

Forfeiture  of  Charter.  A  Lodge
may  forfeit  its  charter  for  misconduct,  and
when  forfeited,  the  warrant  or  charter  is
revoked  by  the  Grand  Lodge.  See  Revoca¬
tion  of  Charter.

Form.  In  Masonry,  an  official  act  is
said  to  be  done,  according  to  the  rank  of
the  person  who  does  it,  either  in  ample  form,
in  due  form,  or  simply  in  form.  Thus,  when
the  Grand  Lodge  is  opened  by  the  Grand
Master  in  person,  it  is  said  to  be  opened  in


282


FORM


FORTY


ample  form ;  when  by  the  Deputy  Grand
Master,  it  is  said  to  be  in  due  form ;  when
by  any  other  qualified  officer,  it  is  said  to
be  in  form.  The  legality  of  the  act  is  the
same  whether  it  be  done  in  form  or  in
ample  form  ;  and  the  expletive  refers  only
to  the  dignity  of  the  officer  by  whom  the
act  is  performed.

Form  ol'  the  L,odge.  The  form  of
a  Mason’s  Lodge  is  said  to  be  an  oblong
square,  having  its  greatest  length  from  east
to  west,  and  its  greatest  breadtli  from  north
to  south.  This  oblong  form  of  the  Lodge
has,  I  think,  a  symbolic  allusion  that  has
not  been  adverted  to  by  any  other  writer.

If,  on  a  map  of  the  world,  we  draw  lines
which  shall  circumscribe  just  that  portion
which  was  known  and  inhabited  at  the
time  of  the  building  of  Solomon’s  Temple,
these  lines,  running  a  short  distance  north
and  south  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  and
extending  from  Spain  to  Asia  Minor,  will
form  an  oblong  square,  whose  greatest  length
will  be  from  east  to  west,  and  whose  greatest
breadth  will  be  from  north  to  south,  as  is
shown  in  the  annexed  diagram.


There  is  a  peculiar  fitness  in  this  theory,
which  is  really  only  making  the  Masonic
Lodge  a  symbol  of  the  world.  It  must  be
remembered  that,  at  the  era  of  the  Temple,
the  earth  was  supposed  to  have  the  form  of
a  parallelogram,  or  “  oblong  square.”  Such
a  figure  inscribed  upon  a  map  of  the  world,
and  including  only  that  part  of  it  which
was  known  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  would
present  just  such  a  square,  embracing  the
Mediterranean  Sea  and  the  countries  lying
immediately  on  its  northern,  southern,  and
eastern  borders.  Beyond,  far  in  the  north,
would  be  Cimmerian  deserts  as  a  place  of
darkness,  while  the  pillars  of  Hercules  in
the  west,  on  each  side  of  the  Straits  of  Ga-
des  —  now  Gibraltar  —  might  appropriately
be  referred  to  the  two  pillars  that  stood  at
the  porch  of  the  Temple.  Thus  the  world
itself  would  be  the  true  Mason’s  Lodge,  in
which  he  was  to  live  and  labor.  Again :
the  solid  contents  of  the  earth  below,  “from
the  surface  to  the  centre,”  and  the  profound
expanse  above,  “from  the  earth  to  the
highest  heavens,”  would  give  to  this  paral¬


lelogram  the  outlines  of  a  double  cube,  and
meet  thereby  that  definition  which  says
that  “  the  form  of  the  Lodge  ought  to  be  a
double  cube,  as  an  expressive  emblem  of
the  powers  of  light  and  darkness  in  the
creation.”

Formula.  A  prescribed  mode  or  form
of  doing  or  saying  anything.  The  word  is
derived  from  the  technical  language  of  the
Roman  law,  where,  after  the  old  legal  ac¬
tions  had  been  abolished,  suits  were  prac¬
tised  according  to  certain  prescribed  lorms
called  formula.

Formulas  in  Freemasonry  are  very  fre¬
quent.  They  are  either  oral  or  monitorial.
Oral  formulas  are  those  that  are  employed
in  various  parts  of  the  ritual,  such  as  the
opening  anu  closing  of  a  Lodge,  the  investi¬
ture  of  a  candidate,  etc.  From  the  fact  of
their  oral  transmission  they  are  frequently
corrupted  or  altered,  which  is  one  of  the
most  prolific  sources  of  non-conformity  so
often  complained  of  by  Masonic  teach¬
ers.  Monitorial  formulas  are  those  that  are
committed  to  writing,  and  are  to  be  found
in  the  various  monitors  and  manuals.  They
are  such  as  relate  to  public  installations,
to  laying  foundation-stones,  to  dedica¬
tions  of  halls,  to  funerals,  etc.  Their
monitorial  character  ought  to  preserve
them  from  change;  but  uniformity  is  not
even  here  always  attained,  owing  to  the
whims  of  the  compilers  of  manuals  or  of
monitors,  who  have  often  unnecessarily
changed  the  form  of  words  from  the
original  standard.

Fortitude.  One  of  the  four  cardi¬
nal  virtues,  whose  excellencies  are  di¬
lated  on  in  the  first  degree.  It  not  only
instructs  the  worthy  Mason  to  bear  the  ills
of  life  with  becoming  resignation,  “taking
up  arms  against  a  sea  of  trouble,”  but.  by  its
intimate  connection  with  a  portion  of  our
ceremonies,  it  teaches  him  to  let  no  dan¬
gers  shake,  no  pains  dissolve  the  inviolable
fidelity  he  owes  to  the  trusts  reposed  in
him.  Or,  in  the  words  of  the  old  Presto-
nian  lecture,  it  is  “a  fence  or  security
against  any  attack  that  might  be  made
upon  him,  by  force  or  otherwise,  to  extort
from  him  any  of  our  Royal  Secrets.”

Spence,  in  his  Pohjmetis,  (p.  139.)  when
describing  the  moral  virtues,  says  of  Forti¬
tude:  “She  maybe  easily  known  by  her
erect  air  and  military  dress,  the  spear  she
rests  on  with  one  hand,  and  the  sword  which
she  holds  in  the  other.  She  lias  a  globe
under  her  feet;  I  suppose  to  show  that  the
Romans,  by  means  of  this  virtue,  were  to
subdue  the  whole  world.”

Forty -Seventh  Problem.  The
forty-seventh  problem  of  Euclid’s  first  book,
which  has  been  adopted  as  a  symbol  in  the
Master’s  degree,  is  thus  enunciated:  “I«*


FORTY


FORTY


283


any  right-angled  triangle,  the  square  which
is  described  upon  the  side  subtending  the
right  angle  is  equal  to  the  squares  described
upon  the  sides  which  contain  the  right
angle.”  Thus,  in  a  triangle  whose  perpen¬
dicular  is  3  feet,  the  square  of  which  is  9,
and  whose  base  is  4  feet,  the  square  of
which  is  16,  the  liypothenuse,  or  subtend¬
ing  side,  will  be  5  feet,  the  square  of  which
will  be  23,  which  is  the  sum  of  9  and  16.
This  interesting  problem,  on  account  of  its
great  utility  in  making  calculations  and
drawing  plans  for  buildings,  is  sometimes
called  the  “  Carpenter’s  Theorem.”

For  the  demonstration  of  this  problem
the  world  is  indebted  to  Pythagoras,  who,
it  is  said,  was  so  elated  after  making  the
discovery,  that  he  made  an  offering  of  a
hecatomb,  or  a  sacrifice  of  a  hundred
oxen,  to  the  gods.  The  devotion  to  learn¬
ing  which  this  religious  act  indicated  in
the  mind  of  the  ancient  philosopher  has
induced  Masons  to  adopt  the  problem  as  a
memento,  instructing  them  to  be  lovers  of
the  arts  and  sciences.

The  triangle,  whose  base  is  4  parts,  whose
perpendicular  is  3,  and  whose  liypothenuse
is  5,  and  which  would  exactly  serve  for  a
demonstration  of  this  problem,  was,  accord¬
ing  to  Plutarch,  a  symbol  frequently  em¬
ployed  by  the  Egyptian  priests,  and  hence
it  is  called  by  M.  Jomard,  in  his  Exposi¬
tion  du  Systime  Mttrique  dcs  Anciens  Egyp-
tiens,  the  Egyptian  triangle.  It  was,  with
the  Egyptians,  the  symbol  of  universal  na¬
ture,  —  the  base  representing  Osiris,  or  the
male  principle;  the  perpendicular,  Isis,  or
the  female  principle ;  and  the  hypothenuse,
Horus,  their  son,  or  the  produce  of  the  two
principles.  They  added  that  3  was  the
first  perfect  odd  number,  that  4  was  the
square  of  2,  the  first  even  number,  and
that  5  was  the  result  of  3  and  2.

But  the  Egyptians  made  a  still  more  im¬
portant  use  of  this  triangle.  It  was  the
standard  of  all  their  measures  of  extent,
and  was  applied  by  them  to  the  building
of  the  pyramids.  The  researches  of  M.
Jomard,  on  the  Egyptian  system  of  meas¬
ures,  published  in  the  magnificent  work  of
the  French  savans  on  Egypt,  has  placed  us
completely  in  possession  of  the  uses  made
by  the  Egyptians  of  this  forty-seventh
problem  of  Euclid,  and  of  the  triangle
which  formed  the  diagram  by  which  it  was
demonstrated.

If  we  inscribe  within  a  circle  a  triangle,
whose  perpendicular  shall  be  300  parts,
whose  base  shall  be  400  parts,  and  whose
hypothenuse  shall  be  500  parts,  which,  of
course,  bear  the  same  proportion  to  each
other  as  3,  4,  and  5;  then  if  we  let  a  per¬
pendicular  fall  from  the  angle  of  the  per¬
pendicular  and  base  to  the  hypothenuse,


and  extend  it  through  the  hypothenuse  to
the  circumference  of  the  circle,  this  chord
or  line  will  be  equal  to  480  parts,  and  the
two  segments  of  the  hypothenuse,  on  each
side  of  it,  will  be  found  equal,  respectively,
to  180  and  320.  From  the  point  where
this  chord  intersects  the  hypothenuse  let
another  line  fall  perpendicularly  to  the
shortest  side  of  the  triangle,  and  this  line
will  be  equal  to  144  parts,  while  the  shorter
segment,  formed  by  its  junction  with  the
perpendicular  side  of  the  triangle,  will  be
equal  to  108  parts.  Hence,  we  may  derive
the  following  measures  from  the  diagram:
500,  480,  400,  320,  180,  144,  and  108,  and
all  these  without  the  slightest  fraction.
Supposing,  then,  the  500  to  be  cubits,  we
have  the  measure  of  the  base  of  the  great
pyramid  of  Memphis.  In  the  400  cubits
of  the  base  of  the  triangle  we  have  the
exact  length  of  the  Egyptian  stadium.
The  320  gives  us  the  exact  number  of
Egyptian  cubits  contained  in  the  Hebrew
and  Babylonian  stadium.  The  stadium  of
Ptolemy  is  represented  by  the  480  cubits,
or  length  of  the  line  falling  from  the  right
angle  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle,
through  the  hypothenuse.  The  number
180,  which  expresses  the  smaller  segment
of  the  hypothenuse,  being  doubled,  will
give  360  cubits,  which  will  be  the  stadium
of  Cleomedes.  By  doubling  the  144,  the
result  will  be  288  cubits,  or  the  length  of
the  stadium  of  Archimedes;  and  by  dou¬
bling  the  108,  we  produce  216  cubits,  or
the  precise  value  of  the  lesser  Egyptian
stadium.  In  this  manner,  we  obtain  from
this  triangle  all  the  measures  of  length
that  were  in  use  among  the  Egyptians ;
and  since  this  triangle,  whose  sides  are
equal  to  3,  4,  and  5,  was  the  very  one  that
most  naturally  would  be  used  in  demon¬
strating  the  forty-seventh  problem  of  Eu¬
clid;  and  since  by  these  three  sides  the
Egyptians  symbolized  Osiris,  Isis,  and  Ho¬
rus,  or  the  two  producers  and  the  product,
the  very  principle,  expressed  in  symbolic
language,  which  constitutes  the  terms  of
the  problem  as  enunciated  by  Pythagoras,
that  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  two  sides
will  produce  the  square  of  the  third,  we
have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  forty-
seventh  problem  was  perfectly  known  to
the  Egyptian  priests,  and  by  them  commu¬
nicated  to  Pythagoras.

Dr.  Lardner,  in  his  edition  of  Euclid,
says:  “Whether  we  consider  the  forty-
seventh  proposition  with  reference  to  the
peculiar  and  beautiful  relation  established
in  it,  or  to  its  innumerable  uses  in  every
department  of  mathematical  science,  or  to
its  fertility  in  the  consequences  derivable
from  it,  it  must  certainly  be  esteemed  the
most  celebrated  and  important  in  the  whole


284


FOUL


FOUR


of  the  elements,  if  not  in  the  whole  range,
of  mathematical  science.  It  is  by  the  influ¬
ence  of  this  proposition,  and  that  which
establishes  the  similitude  of  equiangular
triangles,  (in  the  sixth  book,)  that  geom¬
etry  has  been  brought  under  the  dominion
of  algebra ;  and  it  is  upon  the  same  princi¬
ples  that  the  whole  science  of  trigonometry
is  founded.

“The  XXXIId  and  XLVIIth  proposi¬
tions  are  said  to  have  been  discovered  by
Pythagoras,  and  extraordinary  accounts  are
given  of  his  exultation  upon  his  first  percep¬
tion  of  their  truth.  It  is,  however,  supposed
by  some  that  Pythagoras  acquired  a  knowl¬
edge  of  them  in  Egypt,  and  was  the  first  to
make  them  known  in  Greece.”

Foul.  The  ballot-box  is  said  to  be
“  foul”  when,  in  the  ballot  for  the  initiation
or  advancement  of  a  candidate,  one  or  more
black  balls  are  found  in  it.

Foundation-Stone.  This  term  has
been  repeatedly  used  by  Dr.  Oliver,  and
after  him  by  some  other  writers,  to  desig¬
nate  the  chief  or  corner-stone  of  the  Tem¬
ple  or  any  other  building.  Thus,  Oliver
says,  “  the  Masonic  days  proper  for  laying
the  foundation-stone  of  a  Mason’s  Lodge
are  from  the  loth  of  April  to  the  15th  of
May ;  ”  evidently  meaning  the  corner¬
stone.  The  usage  is  an  incorrect  one.
The  foundation-stone,  more  properly  the
stone  of  foundation ,  is  very  different  from
the  corner-stone.

Foundation,  Stone  of.  See  Stone

of  Foundation.

Fountain.  In  some  of  the  high  de¬
grees  a  fountain  constitutes  a  part  of  the
furniture  of  the  initiation.  In  the  science
of  symbology,  the  fountain,  as  representing
a  stream  of  continually  flowing  water,  is  a
symbol  of  refreshment  to  the  weary ;  and  so
it  might  be  applied  in  the  degrees  in  which
it  is  found,  although  there  is  no  explicit
interpretation  of  it  in  the  ritual,  where  it
seems  to  have  been  introduced  rather  as  an
exponent  of  the  dampness  and  darkness  of
the  place  which  was  a  refuge  for  criminals
and  a  spot  fit  for  crime.  Brother  Pike  re¬
fers  to  the  fountain  as  “  tradition,  a  slender
stream  flowing  from  the  Past  into  the  Pres¬
ent,  which,  even  in  the  thickest  darkness
of  barbarism,  keeps  alive  some  memory  of
the  Old  Truth  in  the  human  heart.”  But
this  beautiful  idea  is  not  found  in  the  sym¬
bolism  as  interpreted  in  the  old  rituals.

Four.  Four  is  the  tetrad  or  quaternary
of  the  Pythagoreans,  and  it  is  a  sacred
number  in  the  high  degrees.  The  Pytha¬
goreans  called  it  a  perfect  number,  and
hence  it  has  been  adopted  as  a  sacred  num¬
ber  in  the  degree  of  Perfect  Master.  In
many  nations  of  antiquity  the  name  of  God
consists  of  four  letters,  as  the  Adad  of  the


Syrians,  the  Ahum  of  the  Egyptians,  the
0EO2  of  the  Greeks,  the  Deus  of  the  Ro¬
mans,  and  pre-eminently  the  Tetragramma-
ton  or  lour- lettered  name  of  the  Jews.  But
in  Symbolic  Masonry  this  number  has  no
special  significance.

Four  Crowned  Martyrs.  The

legend  of  “The  Four  Crowned  Martyrs”
should  be  interesting  to  Masonic  scholars,
because  it  is  one  of  the  few  instances,  per¬
haps  the  only  one,  in  which  the  church
has  been  willing  to  do  honor  to  those  old
workers  in  stone,  whose  services  it  readily
secured  in  the  Mediaeval  ages,  but  with
whom,  as  with  their  successors  the  modern
Freemasons,  it  has  always  appeared  to  be
in  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  antagonism.
Besides,  these  humble  but  true-hearted  con¬
fessors  of  the  faith  of  Christianity  were
adopted  by  the  Stone-masons  of  Germany
as  the  patron  saints  of  Operative  Masonry,
just  as  the  two  Saints  John  have  been
since  selected  as  the  patrons  of  the  Specu¬
lative  branch  of  the  Institution.

The  late  Dr.  Christian  Ehrmann,  of
Strasburg,  who  for  thirty  years  had  de¬
voted  his  attention  to  this  and  to  kindred
subjects  of  Masonic  archaeology,  has  sup¬
plied  us  with  the  most  interesting  details
of  the  life  and  death  of  the  Four  Crowned
Martyrs.

The  Roman  Church  has  consecrated  the
8th  of  November  to  the  commemoration  of
these  martyrs,  and  yearly,  on  that  day,
offers  up  the  prayer:  “Grant,  we  beseech
thee,  0  Almighty  God,  that  as  we  have
been  informed  of  the  constancy  of  the  glo¬
rious  martyrs  in  the  profession  of  Thy
faith,  so  we  may  experience  their  kindness
in  recommending  us  to  Thy  mercy.”  The
Roman  Breviary  of  1474  is  more  explicit,
and  mentions  them  particularly  by  name.

It  is,  therefore,  somewhat  remarkable,
that,  although  thus  careful  in  their  com¬
memoration,  the  missals  of  the  church
give  us  no  information  of  the  deeds  of  these
holy  men.  It  is  only  from  the  breviaries
that  we  can  learn  anything  of  the  act  on
which  the  commemoration  in  the  calendar
was  founded.  Of  these  breviaries,  Ehr¬
mann  has  given  full  citations  from  two :
the  Breviary  of  Rome,  published  in  1474,
and  the  Breviary  of  Spire,  published  in
1478.  These,  with  some  few  extracts  from
other  books  on  the  subject,  have  been  made
accessible  to  us  by  George  Kloss,  in  bis  in¬
teresting  work  entitled,  Freimaurerei  in
ihrer  wahren  Bedeutung,  or  Freemasonry  in
its  true  Significance.

The  Breviarium  Romanum  is  much  more
complete  in  its  details  than  the  Breviarium
Spireme;  and  yet  the  latter  contains  a  few
incidents  that  are  not  related  in  the  former.
Both  agree  in  applying  to  the  Four  Crowned


FOUR


FOUR


285


Martyrs  the  title  of  “  quadratarii."  Now
quadratarius,  in  the  Latin  of  the  lower  age,
signified  a  Stone-squarer  or  a  Mason.  This
will  remind  us  of  the  passage  in  the  Book
of  Kings,  thus  translated  in  the  authorized
version :  “And  Solomon’s  builders  and  Hi¬
ram’s  builders  did  hew  them,  and  the  stone-
gquarers.”  It  is  evident  from  the  use  of
this  word  11  quadratarii"  in  the  ecclesiasti¬
cal  legends,  as  well  as  from  the  incidents
of  the  martyrdom  itself,  that  the  four  mar¬
tyrs  were  not  simply  sculptors,  but  stone¬
cutters  and  builders  of  temples:  in  other
words,  Operative  Masons.  Nor  can  we
deny  the  probability  of  the  supposition,
that  they  were  members  of  one  of  those  col¬
leges  of  architects,  which  afterwards  gave
birth  to  the  gilds  of  the  Middle  Ages,  the
corporations  of  builders,  and  through  these
to  the  modern  Lodges  of  Freemasons.  Sup¬
posing  the  legend  to  be  true,  or  even  ad¬
mitting  that  it  is  only  symbolical,  we  must
acknowledge  that  there  has  been  good  rea¬
son  why  the  Operative  Masons  should  have
selected  these  martyrs  as  the  patron  saints
of  their  profession.

And  now  let  us  apply  ourselves  to  the
legend.  Taking  the  Roman  Breviary  as
the  groundwork,  and  only  interpolating  it
at  the  proper  points  with  the  additional
incidents  related  in  the  Breviary  of  Spire,
we  have  the  following  result  as  the  story
of  the  Four  Crowned  Martyrs.

In  the  last  quarter  of  the  third  century
Diocletian  was  emperor  of  the  Roman  em¬
pire.  In  his  reign  commenced  that  series
of  persecutions  of  the  Christian  church,
which  threatened  at  one  time  to  annihilate
the  new  religion,  and  gave  to  the  period
among  Christian  writers  the  name  of  the
.Era  of  Martyrs.  Thousands  of  Christians,
who  refused  to  violate  their  consciences  by
sacrificing  to  the  heathen  gods,  became  the
victims  of  the  bigotry  and  intolerance,  the
hatred  and  the  cruelty,  of  the  Pagan  priests
and  the  Platonic  philosophers ;  and  the
scourge,  the  cross,  or  the  watery  grave
daily  testified  to  the  constancy  and  firm¬
ness  of  the  disciples  of  the  prophet  of
Nazareth.

Diocletian  had  gone  to  the  province  of
Pannonia,  that  he  might  by  his  own  pres¬
ence  superintend  the  bringing  of  metals
and  stones  from  the  neighboring  mines  of
Noricum,  wherewith  to  construct  a  temple
consecrated  to  the  sun-god,  Apollo.  Among
the  six  hundred  and  twenty-two  artisans
whom  he  had  collected  together  for  this

Kose  were  four  —  by  name  Claudius,
jrius,  Symphorianus,  and  Nichostra-
tus  —  said  to  have  been  distinguished  for
their  skill  as  Stone-masons.  They  had  aban¬
doned  the  old  heathen  faith  and  were  in
secret  Christians,  doing  all  their  work  as


Masons  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.

The  Breviary  of  Spires  relates  here  an
additional  occurrence,  which  is  not  con¬
tained  in  the  Breviary  of  Rome,  and  which,
as  giving  a  miraculous  aspect  to  the  legend,
must  have  made  it  doubly  acceptable  to  the
pious  Christians  of  the  fifteenth  century,
upon  whose  religious  credulity  one  could
safely  draw  without  danger  of  a  protest.

It  seems  that,  in  company  with  our  four
blessed  martyrs,  there  worked  another  Ma¬
son,  one  Simplicius,  who  was  also  a  Mason,
but  a  heathen.  While  he  was  employed
in  labor  near  them,  he  wondered  to  see  how
much  they  surpassed  in  skill  and  cunning
all  the  other  artisans.  They  succeeded  in
all  that  they  attempted,  while  he  was  un¬
fortunate,  and  always  breaking  his  working
tools.  At  last  he  approached  Claudius,  and
said  to  him :

“Strengthen,  I  beseech  thee,  my  tools,
that  they  may  no  longer  break.”

Claudius  took  them  in  his  hands,  and
said:

“  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
be  these  tools  henceforth  strong  and  faith¬
ful  to  their  work.”

From  this  time,  Simplicius  did  his  work
well,  and  succeeded  in  all  that  he  attempted
to  do.  Amazed  at  the  change,  Simplicius
was  continually  asking  his  fellow-workmen
how  it  was  that  the  tools  had  been  so
strengthened  that  now  they  never-  broke.
At  length  Claudius  replied  :

“  God,  who  is  our  Creator,  and  the  Lord
of  all  things,  has  made  his  creatures
strong.”

Then  Simplicius  inquired :

“  Was  not  this  done  by  the  God  Zeus?  ”

To  this  Claudius  replied  :

“  Repent,  O  my  brother,  of  what  thou
hast  said,  for  thou  hast  blasphemed  God,
our  Creator,  whom  alone  we  worship;  that
which  our  own  hands  have  made  we  do  not
recognize  as  a  God.”

With  these  and  such  sentences  they  con¬
verted  Simplicius  to  the  Christian  faith,
who,  being  baptized  by  Cvrillus,  bishop  of
Antioch,  soon  afterwards  suffered  martyr¬
dom  for  his  refusal  to  sacrifice  to  the  Pagan
gods.

But  to  return  from  this  episode  to  the  le¬
gend  of  the  Four  Martyrs :  It  happened
that  one  day  Diocletian  issued  an  order,
that  out  of  a  niece  of  marble  should  be  con¬
structed  a  noble  statue  of  Apollo  sitting  in
his  chariot.  And  now  all  the  workmen
and  the  philosophers  began  to  consult  on
the  subject,  and  each  one  had  arrived  at  a
different  opinion.

And  when  at  length  they  had  found  a
huge  block  of  stone,  which  had  been  brought
from  the  Island  of  Thasos,  it  proved  that


286


FOUR


FOUR


the  marble  was  not  fit  for  the  statue  which
Diocletian  had  commanded;  and  now  be¬
gan  a  great  war  of  words  between  the  mas¬
ters  of  the  work  and  the  philosophers.  But
one  day  the  whole  of  the  artisans,  six  hun¬
dred  and  twenty-two  in  number,  with  five
philosophers,  came  together,  that  they
might  examine  the  defects  and  the  veins
of  the  stone,  and  there  arose  a  still  more
wonderful  contest  between  the  workmen
and  the  philosophers.

Then  began  the  philosophers  to  rail
against  Claudius,  Symphorianus,  Nicho-
stratus,  and  Simplicius,  and  said:

“  Why  do  ye  not  hearken  to  the  com¬
mands  of  our  devout  emperor,  Diocletian,
and  obey  his  will.”

And  Claudius  answered  and  said  :

“  Because  we  cannot  offend  our  Creator
and  commit  a  sin,  whereof  we  should  be
found  guilty  in  his  sight.”

Then  said  the  philosophers  :

“From  this  it  appears  that  you  are
Christians.”

And  Claudius  replied :

“  Truly  we  are  Christians.”

Hereupon  the  philosophers  chose  other
Masons,  and  caused  them  to  make  a  statue
of  Esculapius  out  of  the  stone  which  had
been  rejected,  which,  after  thirty-one  days,
they  finished  and  presented  to  the  philoso¬
phers.  These  then  informed  the  emperor
that  the  statue  of  Esculapius  was  finished,
when  he  ordered  it  to  be  brought  before
him  for  inspection.  But  as  soon  as  he  saw
it  he  was  greatly  astonished,  and  said :

“  This  is  a  proof  of  the  skill  of  these  men,
who  receive  my  approval  as  sculptors.”

It  is  very  apparent  that  this,  like  all
other  legends  of  the  church,  is  insufficient
in  its  details,  and  that  it  leaves  many  links
in  the  chain  of  the  narrative  to  be  supplied
by  the  fancy  or  the  judgment  of  the  read¬
ers.  It  is  equally  evident  from  what  has
already  been  said,  in  connection  with  what
is  subsequently  told,  that  the  writer  of  the
legend  desired  to  make  the  impression  that
it  was  through  the  influence  of  Claudius
and  the  other  Christian  Masons  that  the
rest  of  the  workmen  were  persuaded  that
the  Thasian  stone  was  defective  and  unfit
for  the  use  of  a  sculptor ;  that  this  was  done
by  them  because  they  were  unwilling  to
engage  in  the  construction  of  the  statue  of
a  Pagan  god  ;  that  this  was  the  cause  of  the
controversy  between  the  workmen  and  the
philosophers ;  that  the  latter  denied  the  de¬
fectiveness  of  the  stone ;  and,  lastly,  that
they  sought  to  prove  its  fitness  by  causing
other  Masons,  who  were  not  Christians,  to
make  out  of  it  a  statue  of  Esculapius.
These  explanations  are  necessary  to  an  un¬
derstanding  of  the  legend,  which  proceeds
os  follows :


As  soon  as  Diocletian  had  expressed  his
admiration  of  the  statue  of  Esculapius,  the
philosopher  said :

“Most  mighty  Caesar,  know  that  these
men  whom  your  majesty  has  praised  for
their  skill  in  Masonry,  namely,  Claudius,
Symphorianus,  Nichostratus,  and  Castorius,
are  Christians,  and  by  magic  spells  or  in¬
cantations  make  men  obedient  to  their
will.”

Then  said  Diocletian :

“  If  they  have  violated  the  laws,  and  if
your  accusations  be  true,  let  them  suffer  the
punishment  of  sacrilege.”

But  Diocletian,  in  consideration  of  their
skill,  sent  for  the  Tribune  Lampadius,  and
said  to  him  :

“  If  they  refuse  to  offer  sacrifice  to  the
sun-god  Apollo,  then  let  them  be  scourged
with  scorpions.  But  if  they  are  willing  to
do  so,  then  treat  them  with  kindness.”

For  five  days  sat  Lampadius  in  the  same
place,  before  the  temple  of  the  sun-god,
and  called  on  them  by  the  proclamation  of
the  herald,  and  showed  them  many  dreadful
things,  and  all  sorts  of  instruments  for  the
punishment  of  martyrs,  and  then  he  said  to
them :

“  Hearken  to  me  and  avoid  the  doom  of
martyrs,  and  be  obedient  to  the  mighty
prince,  and  offer  a  sacrifice  to  the  sun-god,
for  no  longer  can  I  speak  to  you  in  gentle
words.”

But  Claudius  replied  for  himself  and  for
his  companions  with  great  boldness :

“  This  let  the  Emperor  Diocletian  know :
that  we  truly  are  Christians,  and  never  can
depart  from  the  worship  of  our  God.”

Thereupon  the  Tribune  Lampadius,  be¬
coming  enraged,  caused  them  to  be  stripped
and  to  be  scourged  with  scorpions,  while  a
.herald,  by  proclamation,  announced  that
this  was  done  because  they  had  disobeyed
the  commands  of  the  emperor.  In  the
same  hour  Lampadius,  being  seized  by  an
evil  spirit,  died  on  his  seat  of  judgment.

As  soon  as  the  wife  and  the  domestics  of
Lampadius  heard  of  his  death,  they  ran
with  great  outcries  to  the  palace.  Diocle¬
tian,  when  he  had  learned  what  had  hap¬
pened,  ordered  four  leaden  coffins  to  be
made,  and  that  —  Claudius  and  his  three
companions  being  placed  therein  alive  —
they  should  be  thrown  into  the  river  Dan¬
ube.  This  order  Nicetius,  the  assistant  of
Lampadius,  caused  to  be  obeyed,  and  thus
the  faithful  Masons  suffered  the  penalty
and  gained  the  crown  of  martyrdom.

There  are  some  legend  books  which  give
the  names  of  the  Four  Crowned  Martyrs  as
Severus,  Severianus.  Carpophorus,  and  Vic-
torinus,  and  others  again  which  speak  of
five  confessors  who,  a  few  years  afterwards,
suffered  martyrdom  for  refusing  to  sacrifice


FOUR


FOURFOLD


287


Jo  the  Pagan  gods,  and  whose  names  being
at  the  time  unknown,  Pope  Melchiades
caused  them  to  be  distinguished  in  the
church  calendar  as  the  Four  Crowned
Martyrs:  an  error,  says  Jacob  de  Voragine,
which,  although  subsequently  discovered,
was  never  corrected.  But  the  true  legend
of  the  Four  Crowned  Martyrs  is  that  which
has  been  given  above  from  the  best  author¬
ity,  the  Roman  Breviary  of  1474.

“On  the  other  side  of  the  Esquiline,”
says  Mrs.  Jameson,  (in  her  Sacred  and  Le¬
gendary  Art,  vol.  ii.,  p.  624,)  “and  on  the
road  leading  from  the  Coliseum  to  the  Lat-
eran,  surmounting  a  heap  of  sand  and
ruins,  we  come  to  the  church  of  the  ‘  Quat-
tro  Coronati,’  the  Four  Crowned  Brothers.
On  this  spot,  sometime  in  the  fourth  cen¬
tury,  were  found  the  bodies  of  four  men
who  had  suffered  decapitation,  whose  names
being  then  unknown,  they  were  merely  dis¬
tinguished  as  Coronati,  crowned — that  is,
with  the  crown  of  martyrdom.”

There  is  great  obscurity  and  confusion  in
the  history  of  these.

Their  church,  Mrs.  Jameson  goes  on  to
say,  is  held  in  particular  respect  by  the
builders  and  stone-cutters  of  Rome.  She
has  found  allusion  to  these  martyr  Masons
not  only  in  Roman  art,  but  in  the  old  sculp¬
ture  and  stained  glass  of  Germany.  Their
effigies,  she  tells  us,  are  easily  distinguished
by  the  fact,  that  they  stand  in  a  row,  bear¬
ing  palms,  with  crowns  upon  their  heads
and  various  Masonic  implements  at  their
feet — such  as  the  rule,  the  square,  the  mal¬
let,  and  the  chisel.

They  suffered  on  the  8th  of  November,
287,  and  hence  in  the  Roman  Catholic  mis¬
sal  that  day  is  dedicated  to  their  commem¬
oration.  From  their  profession  as  Stone¬
masons  and  from  the  pious  firmness  with
which  they  refused,  at  the  cost  of  their  lives,
to  consecrate  their  skill  in  their  art  to  the
construction  of  Pagan  temples,  they  have
been  adopted  by  the  Stone-masons  of  Ger¬
many  as  the  Patron  Saints  of  Operative  Ma¬
sonry.  Thus  the  oldest  regulation  of  the
Stone-masons  of  Strasburg,  which  has  the
date  of  the  year  1459,  commences  with  the
following  invocation:  “In  the  name  of  the
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  of  our  gracious  Mother  Mary,
and  also  of  her  Blessed  Servants,  the  Four
Crowned  Martyrs  of  everlasting  memory.”

Such  allusions  are  common  in  the  German
Masonic  documents  of  the  Middle  Ages.
It  is  true,  however,  that  the  English  Ala-
sons  ceased  at  a  later  period  to  refer  in
their  constitutions  to  those  martyrs,  although
they  undoubtedly  borrowed  many  of  their
usages  from  Germany.  Yet  the  Halliwell
Manuscript  of  the  Constitutions  of  Ma¬
sonry,  one  of  the  oldest  of  the  English


Records,  whose  date  is  variously  traced
from  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  to  the  middle
of  the  fifteenth  century,  under  the  title  of
“ars  quatuor  coronatorum,”  gives  a  rather
copious  detail  of  the  legend,  which  is  here
inserted  with  only  those  slight  alterations
of  its  antiquated  phraseology  which  are
necessary  to  render  it  intelligible  to  modern
readers,  although  in  doing  so  the  rhyme  of
the  original  is  somewhat  destroyed:

“  Pray  we  now  to  God  Almighty,

And  to  His  Mother,  Mary  bright,

That  we  may  keep  these  articles  here
And  these  points  well  altogether,

As  did  those  holy  martyrs  four
That  were  in  this  Craft  of  great  honor.

They  were  as  good  Mason  as  on  eartli  shall  go,
Gravers  and  image  makers  they  were  also,
For  they  were  workmen  of  the  best,

The  emperor  had  them  in  great  liking;
lie  invoked  them  an  image  to  make,

That  might  be  worshiped  for  his  sake;

Such  idols  he  had  in  his  day
To  turn  the  people  from  Christ’s  law,

But  they  were  steadfast  in  Christ’s  religion
And  to  their  Craft,  without  denial ;

They  loved  well  God  and  all  his  doctrines,
And  were  in  his  service  evermore.

True  men  they  were,  in  that  day,

And  lived  well  in  God’s  law ;

They  resolved  no  idols  for  to  make,

For  no  good  that  they  might  take  ;

To  believe  on  that  idol  for  their  god,

They  would  not  do  so,  though  he  were  mad,
For  they  would  not  forsake  their  true  faith,
And  believe  on  his  false  religion.

The  emperor  caused  to  take  them  at  once
And  put  them  in  a  deep  prison.

The  sorer  he  punished  them  in  that  place,
The  more  joy  was  to  them  of  Christ’s  grace.
Then  when  he  saw  no  other  way,

To  death  he  caused  them  to  go.

Who  so  will  of  their  life  more  know,

By  the  book  he  may  it  learn,

In  the  legends  of  the  saints,

The  names  of  the  four  crowned  ones.

Their  feast  will  be,  without  denial,

After  All  Hallows,  the  eighth  day.”

The  devotion  of  these  saints,  which  led
to  the  introduction  of  their  legend  into  an
ancient  Constitution  of  Masonry,  shows
how  much  they  were  reverenced  by  the
Craft.  In  fact,  the  Four  Crowned  Martyrs
were  to  the  Stone-cutters  of  Germany  and
to  the  earlier  Operative  Masons  of  England
what  St.  John  the  Baptist  and  St.  John  the
Evangelist  became  to  their  successors,  the
Speculative  Freemasons  of  the  eighteenth
century.

Fourfold  Cord.  In  the  ritual  of  the
Past  Master’s  degree  in  this  country  we
find  the  following  expression:  “A  twofold
cord  is  strong,  a  threefold  cord  is  stronger,
but  a  fourfold  cord  is  not  easily  broken.”
The  expression  is  taken  from  a  Hebrew
proverb  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  book
of  Ecclesiastes,  (iv.  12:)  “And  if  one  pre¬
vail  against  him,  two  shall  withstaud  him  ;


288


FOURTEEN


FRANCE


and  a  threefold  cord  is  not  easily  broken.”
The  form  of  the  Hebrew  proverb  has  been
necessarily  changed  to  suit  the  symbolism
of  the  degree.

Fourteen.  It  is  only  necessary  to
remind  the  well-informed  Mason  of  the
fourteen  days  of  burial  mentioned  in  the
legend  of  the  third  degree.  Now,  this  pe¬
riod  of  fourteen  was  not,  in  the  opinion
of  Masonic  symbologists,  an  arbitrary  se¬
lection,  but  was  intended  to  refer  to  or
symbolize  the  fourteen  days  Of  lunary  dark¬
ness,  or  decreasing  light,  which  intervene
between  the  full  moon  and  its  continued
decrease  until  the  end  of  the  lunar  month.
In  the  Egyptian  mysteries,  the  body  of
Osiris  is  said  to  have  been  cut  into  fourteen
pieces  by  Typhon,  and  thrown  into  the
Nile.  Plutarch,  speaking  of  this  in  his
treatise  On  Isis  and  Osiris,  thus  explains
the  symbolism  of  the  number  fourteen,
which  comprises  the  Masonic  idea :  “  The
body  of  Osiris  was  cut,”  says  Plutarch,
“  into  fourteen  pieces ;  that  is,  into  as  many
parts  as  there  are  days  between  the  full
moon  and  the  new.  This  circumstance  has
reference  to  the  gradual  diminution  of  the
lunary  light  during  the  fourteen  days  that
follow  the  full  moon.  The  moon,  at  the
end  of  fourteen  days,  enters  Taurus,  and
becomes  united  to  the  sun,  from  whom  she
collects  fire  upon  her  disk  during  the  four¬
teen  days  which  follow.  She  is  then  found
every  month  in  conjunction  with  him  in
the  superior  parts  of  the  signs.  The  equi¬
noctial  year  finishes  at  the  moment  when
the  sun  and  moon  are  found  united  with
Orion,  or  the  star  of  Orus,  a  constellation
placed  under  Taurus,  which  unites  itself
to  the  Neomenia  of  spring.  The  moon
renews  herself  in  Taurus,  and  a  few  days
afterwards  is  seen,  in  the  form  of  a  cres¬
cent,  in  the  following  sign,  that  is,  Gemini,
the  home  of  Mercury.  Then  Orion,  united
to  the  sun  in  the  attitude  of  a  formidable
warrior,  precipitates  Scorpio,  his  rival,  into
the  shades  of  night;  for  he  sets  every  time
Orion  appears  above  the  horizon.  The
day  becomes  lengthened,  and  the  germs  of
evil  are  by  degrees  destroyed.  It  is  thus
that  the  poet  Nonnus  pictures  to  us  Typhon
conquered  at  the  end  of  winter,  when  the
sun  arrives  in  Taurus,  and  when  Orion
mounts  into  the  heavens  with  him.”

Fr  ance.  The  early  history  of  Ma¬
sonry  in  France  is,  from  the  want  of  au¬
thentic  documents,  in  a  state  of  much
uncertainty.  Kloss,  in  his  Geschichte  der
Freimaurerei  in  Frankreich,  (vol.  i.,  p.  14,1
says,  in  reference  to  the  introduction  of
Freemasonry  into  that  kingdom,  that  the
earliest  date  of  any  certainty  is  1725.  Yet
he  copies  the  statement  of  the  Sgeau  Rompu,
—  a  work  published  in  1745,  —  that  the  ear¬


liest  recognized  date  of  its  introduction  is
1718;  and  the  Abbe  Robin  says  that  noth¬
ing  of  it  is  to  be  found  farther  back  than
1720.

Lalande,  the  great  astronomer,  was  the
author  of  the  article  on  Freemasonry  in  the
Encyclopedia  Methodique,  and  his  account
has  been  generally  recognized  as  authentic
by  succeeding  writers.  According  to  him,
Lord  Derwentwater,  the  Chevalier  Maske-
leyne,  Mr.  Heguetty,  and  some  other  Eng¬
lishmen,  (the  names  being  corrupted,  of
course,  according  to  French  usage,)  founded,
in  1725,  the  first  Lodge  in  Paris.  It  was
held  at  the  house  of  an  English  confec¬
tioner  named  Hure,  in  the  Rue  de  Bouch-
eries.  In  ten  years  the  number  of  Lodges
in  Paris  had  increased  to  six,  and  there
were  several  also  in  the  provincial  towns.

As  the  first  Paris  Lodge  had  been  opened
by  Lord  Derwentwater,  he  was  regarded  as
the  Grand  Master  of  the  French  Masons,
without  any  formal  recognition  on  the  part
of  the  brethren,  at  least  until  1736,  when
the  six  Lodges  of  Paris  formally  elected
Lord  Harnouester  as  Provincial  Grand  Mas¬
ter;  in  1738,  he  was  succeeded  by  the  Duke
D’ Antin ;  and  on  the  death  of  the  Duke,  in
1743,  the  Count  de  Clermont  was  elected  to
supply  his  place.

Organized  Freemasonry  in  France  dates
its  existence  from  this  latter  year.  In
1735,  the  Lodges  of  Paris  had  petitioned
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  for  the  estab¬
lishment  of  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,
which,  on  political  grounds,  had  been  re¬
fused.  In  1743,  however,  it  was  granted,
and  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  France
was  constituted  under  the  name  of  the
“Grand  Loge  Anglaise  de  France.”  The
Grand  Master,  the  Count  de  Clermont,  was,
however,  an  inefficient  officer ;  anarchy  and
confusion  once  more  invaded  the  Frater¬
nity  ;  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge
was  prostrated;  and  the  establishment  of
Mother  Lodges  in  the  provinces,  with  the
original  intention  of  superintending  the
proceedings  of  the  distant  provincial  Lodges,
instead  of  restoring  harmony,  as  was  vainly
expected,  widened  still  more  the  breach.
For,  assuming  the  rank  and  exercising  the
functions  of  Grand  Lodges,  they  ceased  all
correspondence  with  the  metropolitan  body,
and  became  in  fact  its  rivals.

Under  these  circumstances,  the  Grand
Lodge  declared  itself  independent  of  Eng¬
land  in  1756,  and  assumed  the  title  of  the
“National  Grand  Lodge  of  France.”  It
recognized  only  the  three  degrees  of  Ap¬
prentice,  Fellow  Craft,  and  Master  Mason,
and  was  composed  of  the  grand  officers  to
be  elected  out  of  the  body  of  the  Frater¬
nity,  and  of  the  Masters  for  life  of  the  Pa¬
risian  Lodges ;  thus  formally  excluding  the


FRANCE


FRANCE


289


provincial  Lodges  from  any  participation  in
the  government  of  the  Craft.

But  the  proceedings  of  this  body  were
not  less  stormy  than  those  of  its  predeces¬
sor.  The  Count  de  Clermont  appointed,  in
succession,  two  deputies,  both  of  whom  had
been  displeasing  to  the  Fraternity.  The
last,  Lacorne,  was  a  man  of  such  low  origin
and  rude  manners,  that  the  Grand  Lodge
refused  to  meet  him  as  their  presiding
officer.  Irritated  at  this  pointed  disrespect,
he  sought  in  the  taverns  of  Paris  those
Masters  who  had  made  a  traffic  of  initia¬
tions,  but  who,  heretofore,  had  submitted  to
the  control,  and  been  checked  by  the  au¬
thority  of,  the  Grand  Lodge.  F rom  among
them  he  selected  officers  devoted  to  his  ser¬
vice,  and  undertook  a  complete  reorganiza¬
tion  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

The  retired  members,  however,  protested
against  these  illegal  proceedings;  and  in
the  subsequent  year,  the  Grand  Master  con¬
sented  to  revoke  the  authority  he  had  be¬
stowed  upon  Lacorne,  and  appointed  as  his
deputy,  M.  Chaillou  de  Jonville.  The  re¬
spectable  members  now  returned  to  their
seats  in  the  Grand  Lodge ;  and  in  the  trien¬
nial  election  which  took  place  in  June,
1765,  the  officers  who  had  been  elected  dur¬
ing  the  Deputy  Grand  Mastership  of  La¬
corne  were  all  removed.  The  displaced
officers  protested,  and  published  a  defama¬
tory  memoir  on  the  subject,  and  were  in
consequence  expelled  from  Masonry  by  the
Grand  Lodge.  Ill  feeling  on  both  sides
was  thus  engendered,  and  carried  to  such  a
height,  that,  at  one  of  the  communications
of  the  Grand  Lodge,  the  expelled  brethren,
attempting  to  force  their  way  in,  were  re¬
sisted  with  violence.  The  next  day  the
lieutenant  of  police  issued  an  edict,  forbid¬
ding  the  future  meetings  of  the  Grand
Lodge.

The  expelled  party,  however,  still  con¬
tinued  their  meetings.  The  Count  de
Clermont  died  in  1771 ;  and  the  excluded
brethren  having  invited  the  Duke  of  Char¬
tres  (afterwards  Duke  of  Orleans)  to  the
Grand  Mastership,  he  accepted  the  appoint¬
ment.  They  now  offered  to  unite  with  the
Grand  Lodge,  on  condition  that  the  latter
would  revoke  the  decree  of  expulsion.  The
proposal  was  accepted,  and  the  Grand  Lodge
went  once  more  into  operation.

Another  union  took  place,  which  has
since  considerably  influenced  the  character
of  French  Masonry.  During  the  troubles
of  the  preceding  years,  Masonic  bodies
were  instituted  in  various  parts  of  the  king¬
dom,  which  professed  to  confer  degrees  of
a  higher  nature  than  those  belonging  to
Craft  Masonry,  and  which  have  since  been
known  by  the  name  of  the  High  De¬
grees.  These  Chapters  assumed  a  right  to
2  M  19


organize  and  control  Symbolic  or  Blue
Lodges,  and  this  assumption  had  been  a
fertile  source  of  controversy  between  them
and  the  Grand  Lodge.  By  the  latter  body
they  had  never  been  recognized,  but  the
Lodges  under  their  direction  had  often  been
declared  irregular,  and  their  members  ex¬
pelled.  They  now,  however,  demanded  a
recognition,  and  proposed,  if  their  request
was  complied  with,  to  bestow  the  govern¬
ment  of  the  “hautes  grades”  upon  the
same  person  who  was  at  the  head  of  the
Grand  Lodge.  The  compromise  was  made,
the  recognition  was  decreed,  and  the  Duke
of  Chartres  was  elected  Grand  Master  of
all  the  Councils,  Chapters,  and  Scotch
Lodges  of  France.

But  peace  was  not  yet  restored.  The
party  who  had  been  expelled,  moved  by  a
spirit  of  revenge  for  the  disgrace  formerly
inflicted  on  them,  succeeded  in  obtaining
the  appointment  of  a  committee  which  was
empowered  to  prepare  a  new  Constitution.
All  the  Lodges  of  Paris  and  the  provinces
were  requested  to  appoint  deputies,  who
were  to  form  a  convention  to  take  the  new
Constitution  into  consideration.  This  con¬
vention,  or,  as  they  called  it,  National  As¬
sembly,  met  at  Paris  in  December,  1771.
The  Duke  of  Luxemburg  presided,  and  on
the  twenty-fourth  of  that  month  the  An¬
cient  Grand  Lodge  of  France  was  declared
extinct,  and  in  its  place  another  substituted,
with  the  title  of  Grand  Orient  de  France.

Notwithstanding  the  declaration  of  ex¬
tinction  by  the  National  Assembly,  the
Grand  Lodge  continued  to  meet  and  to
exercise  its  functions.  Thus  the  Fraternity
of  France  continued  to  be  harassed,  by  the
bitter  contentions  of  these  rival  bodies,  until
the  commencement  of  the  revolution  com-

Eelled  both  the  Grand  Orient  and  the  Grand
lodge  to  suspend  their  labors.

On  the  restoration  of  civil  order,  both
bodies  resumed  their  operations,  but  the
Grand  Lodge  had  been  weakened  by  the
death  of  many  of  the  perpetual  Masters,
who  had  originally  been  attached  to  it ;  and
a  better  spirit  arising,  the  Grand  Lodge
was,  by  a  solemn  and  mutual  declaration,
united  to  the  Grand  Orient  on  the  28th  of
June,  1799.

Dissensions,  however,  continued  to  arise
between  the  Grand  Orient  and  the  different
Chapters  of  the  high  degrees.  Several  of
those  bodies  had  at  various  periods  given  in
their  adhesion  to  the  Grand  Orient,  and
again  violated  the  compact  of  peace.  Fi¬
nally,  the  Grand  Orient,  perceiving  that
the  pretensions  of  the  Scotch  Rite  Masons
would  be  a  perpetual  source  of  disorder,  de¬
creed  on  the  16th  of  September,  1805,  that
the  Supreme  Council  of  the  thirty-third  de¬
gree  should  thenceforth  become  an  indo*


200


FRANCIS


FRANKLIN


pendent  body,  with  the  power  to  confer
warrants  of  constitution  for  all  the  degrees
superior  to  the  eighteenth,  or  Rose  Croix ;
while  the  Chapters  of  that  and  the  inferior
degrees  were  placed  under  the  exclusive
control  of  the  Grand  Orient.

But  the  concordat  was  not  faithfully  ob¬
served  by  either  party,  and  dissensions  con¬
tinued  to  exist  with  intermittent  and  un¬
successful  attempts  at  reconciliation,  which
was,  however,  at  last  effected  in  some  sort  in
1841.  The  Masonic  obedience  of  France  is
now  divided  between  the  two  bodies,  and
the  Grand  Orient  and  the  Supreme  Council
now  both  exist  as  independent  powers  in
French  Masonry.  The  constant  tendency
of  the  former  to  interfere  in  the  administra¬
tion  of  other  countries  would  furnish  an
unpleasant  history  for  the  succeeding  thirty
years,  at  last  terminated  by  the  refusal  of
all  the  Grand  Lodges  in  the  United  States,
and  some  in  Europe,  to  hold  further  Ma¬
sonic  communication  with  it;  a  breach
which  every  good  Mason  must  desire  to  see
eventually  healed.  One  of  the  most  extra¬
ordinary  acts  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France
has  been  the  recent  abolition  of  the  office  of
GrandMaster,  the  duties  being  performed  by
the  President  of  the  Council  of  the  Order.

Francis  II.,  Emperor  of  Germany,
was  a  bitter  enemy  of  Freemasonry.  In
1789,  he  ordered  all  the  Lodges  in  his  do¬
minions  to  be  closed,  and  directed  all  civil
and  military  functionaries  to  take  an  oath
never  to  unite  with  any  secret  society,  under
pain  of  exemplary  punishment  and  desti¬
tution  of  office.  In  1794,  he  proposed  to
the  diet  of  Ratisbon  the  suppression  of
the  Freemasons,  the  Illuminati,  and  all
other  secret  societies.  The  diet,  controlled
by  the  influence  of  Prussia,  Brunswick,  and
Hanover,  refused  to  accede  to  the  proposi¬
tion,  replying  to  the  emperor  that  he  might
interdict  the  Lodges  in  his  own  states,  but
that  others  claimed  Germanic  liberty.  In
1801,  he  renewed  his  opposition  to  secret
societies,  and  especially  to  the  Masonic
Lodges,  and  all  civil,  military,  and  ecclesi¬
astical  functionaries  were  restrained  from
taking  any  part  in  them  under  the  penalty
of  forfeiting  their  offices.

Francken,  Henry  A.  The  first
Deputy  Inspector  General  appointed  by
Stephen  Morin,  under  his  commission  from
the  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West.
Francken  received  his  degrees  and  his  ap-
ointment  at  Kingston,  Jamaica.  The
ate  is  not  known,  but  it  must  have  been
between  1762  and  1767.  Francken  soon
afterwards  repaired  to  the  United  States,
where  he  gave  the  appointment  of  a  Deputy
to  Moses  M.  Hayes,  at  Boston,  and  organ¬
ized  a  council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  at
Albany.  He  may,  I  think,  be  considered


as  the  first  propagator  of  the  high  degrees
in  the  United  States.

Franc  -  Jlacon,  Franc  -  Hacon-

nerie.  The  French  names  of  Freevvison
and  of  Freemasonry.  The  construction  of
these  words  is  not  conformable  to  the  genius
or  the  idiom  of  the  French  language,  which
would  more  properly  employ  the  terms
“Ma(;on  libre,”  and  “Maqonnerie  libre;”
and  hence  Laurens,  in  his  Essais  historiqucs
et  critiques  sur  la  Franc- Mayo  nncrie,  adduces
their  incorporation  into  the  language  as  an
evidence  that  the  Institution  in  France  was
derived  directly  from  England,  the  words
being  a  literal  and  unidiomatic  translation
of  the  English  titles.  But  he  blunders  in
supposing  that  Franc-Mason  and  Franc-
Masonry  are  any  part  of  the  English  lan¬
guage.

Frankfort-cn-lhe-Hain.  A  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Lodge  was  established  in  this
city,  in  1766,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land.  In  the  dissensions  which  soon  after
prevailed  among  the  Masons  of  Germany,
the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Frankfort,
not  finding  itself  supported  by  its  mother
Grand  Lodge,  declared  itself  independent
in  1782.  Since  1825,  it  has  worked  under
the  title  of  the  “  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Eclec¬
tic  Union  of  Freemasons.”

Franklin,  Benjamin.  This  sage
and  patriot  was  born  in  the  city  of  Boston,
Massachusetts,  on  the  6th  of  January,  1706.
Of  the  time  and  place  of  his  initiation  as  a
Freemason  we  have  no  positive  evidence;
it  was,  however,  certainly  anterior  to  the
year  1734,  and  he  was  probably  made  a
Mason  in  England  during  a  temporary  visit
which  he  paid  to  that  country.  On  the  24th
of  June,  1734,  a  petition  was  signed  by  him¬
self  and  several  brethren  residing  at  Phila¬
delphia,  and  presented  to  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Massachusetts,  praying  for  a  Constitution
to  hold  a  Lodge  in  that  city.  The  prayer
of  the  petition  was  granted,  and  Franklin
was  appointed  the  first  Master.  “  He  was,”
says  C.  W.  Moore,  “  probably  invested  with
special  powers,  for  we  find  that  in  Novem¬
ber  following  he  affixes  to  his  name  the
title  of  ‘  Grand  Master  of  Pennsylvania.’  ”
(Freemason' s  Magazine,  vol.  v.,  105.)  In
November,  1734,  Franklin  applied  to  Henry
Price,  w’ho  had  received  from  England  au¬
thority  to  establish  Masonry  in  this  country,
for  a  confirmation  of  those  powers  conferred
by  the  first  deputation  or  warrant.  It  is
probable  that  the  request  was  granted,  al¬
though  I  can  find  no  record  of  the  fact.
In  1734,  Franklin  edited  an  edition  of  An¬
derson’s  Constitutions,  which  was  proba¬
bly  the  first  Masonic  work  published  in
America.

While  Frankliu  was  in  France  as  the
Ambassador  from  this  country,  he  appeare


FRATER


FREDERICK


291


to  have  taken  much  interest  in  Masonry.
He  affiliated  with  the  celebrated  Lodge  of
the  Nine  Sisters,  of  which  Lalande,  Court
de  Gebelin,  and  other  celebrities  of  French
literature,  were  members.  He  took  a  prom¬
inent  part  in  the  initiation  of  Voltaire,  and
on  his  death  acted  as  Senior  Warden  of  the
Lodge  of  Sorrow  held  in  his  memory.  The
Lodge  of  Niue  Sisters  held  Franklin  in  such
esteem  that  it  struck  a  medal  in  his  honor,
of  which  a  copy,  supposed  to  be  the  only
one  now  in  existence,  belongs  to  the  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Mecklenburg.

Frater.  Latin,  Brother.  A  term
borrowed  from  the  monks  by  the  Military
Orders  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  applied  by
the  members  to  each  other.  It  is  constant¬
ly  employed  in  England  by  the  Masonic
Knights  Templars,  and  is  beginning  to  be
adopted,  although  not  very  generally,  in
the  United  States.  When  speaking  of  two
or  more,  it  is  an  error  of  ignorance,  some¬
times  committed,  to  call  them  /raters.  The
correct  plural  is  fratres.

Fraternally.  The  usual  mode  of
subscription  to  letters  written  by  one  Ma¬
son  to  another  is,  “  I  remain,  fraternally,
yours.”

Fraternity.  The  word  was  originally
used  to  designate  those  associations  formed
in  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  for  the  pur¬
suit  of  special  religious  and  ecclesiastical
purposes,  such  as  the  nursing  of  the  sick,
the  support  of  the  poor,  the  practice  of  par¬
ticular  devotions,  etc.  They  do  not  date
earlier  than  the  thirteenth  century.  The
name  was  subsequently  applied  to  secular
associations,  such  as  the  Freemasons.  The
word  is  only  a  Latin  form  of  the  Anglo-
Saxon  Brotherhood.

In  the  earliest  lectures  of  the  last  century
we  find  the  word  fraternity  alluded  to  iu
the  following  formula:

“  Q.  How  many  particular  points  per¬
tain  to  a  Freemason?

“A.  Three:  Fraternity,  Fidelity,  and
Taciturnity.

“  Q.  What  do  they  represent?

“A.  Brotherly  Love,  Relief,  and  Truth
among  all  Right  Masons.”

Fraternize.  To  recognize  as  a
brother;  to  associate  with  Masonically.

Frederick  of  Nassau.  Prince
Frederick,  son  of  the  king  of  the  Nether¬
lands,  was  for  many  years  the  Grand  Master
of  the  National  Grand  Lodge  of  that  king¬
dom.  He  was  ambitious  of  becoming  a
Masonic  reformer,  and  in  addition  to  his
connection  with  the  Charter  of  Cologne,  an
account  of  which  has  been  given  under
that  head,  he  attempted,  in  1819,  to  intro¬
duce  a  new  Rite.  He  denounced  the  high
degrees  as  being  contrary  to  the  true  intent
of  Masonry ;  and  in  a  circular  to  all  the


Lodges  under  the  obedience  of  the  National
Grand  Lodge,  he  proposed  a  new  system,
to  consist  of  five  degrees,  namely,  the  three
symbolic,  and  two  more  as  complements  or
illustrations  of  the  third,  which  he  called
Elect  Master  and  Supreme  Elect  Master.
Some  few  Lodges  adopted  this  new  system,
but  most  of  them  rejected  it.  The  Grand
Chapter,  wffiose  existence  it  had  attacked,
denounced  it.  The  Lodges  practising  it  in
Belgium  were  dissolved  in  1830,  but  a  few
of  them  probably  still  remain  in  Holland.
The  full  rituals  of  the  two  supplementary
degrees  are  printed  in  the  second  volume
of  Hermes,  and  an  attentive  perusal  of  them
does  not  give  an  exalted  idea  of  the  inven¬
tive  genius  of  the  Prince.

Frederick  the  Great.  Frederick
II.,  king  of  Prussia,  surnamed  the  Great,
was  born  on  the  24th  of  January,  1712,  and
died  on  the  17th  of  August,  1786,  at  the
age  of  seventy-four  years  and  a  few  months.
He  was  initiated  as  a  Mason,  at  Brunswick,
on  the  night  of  the  14th  of  August,  1738,
not  quite  two  years  before  he  ascended  the
throne.

In  English,  we  have  two  accounts  of  this
initiation, —  one  by  Campbell,  in  his  work  on
Frederick  the  Great  and  his  Times ,  and  the
other  by  Carlyle  in  his  History  of  Frederick
the  Second.  Both  are  substantially  the  same,
because  both  are  merely  translations  of  the
original  account  given  by  Bielfeld  in  his
Frcundschaftliche  Briefe,  or  Familiar  Let¬
ters.  The  Baron  von  Bielfeld  was,  at  the
time,  an  intimate  companion  of  the  Prince,
and  was  present  at  the  initiation.

Bielfeld  tells  us  that  in  a  conversation
which  took  place  on  the  6th  of  August  at
Loo,  (but  Carlyle  corrects  him  as  to  lime
and  place,  and  says  it  probably  occurred  at
Minden,  on  the  17th  of  July,)  the  institu¬
tion  of  Freemasonry  had  been  enthusiastic
cally  lauded  by  the  Count  of  Lippe  Bucke-
burg.  The  Crow'n  Prince  soon  after  pri¬
vately  expressed  to  the  Count  his  wish  to
join  the  society.  Of  course,  this  wish  was
to  be  gratified.  The  necessary  furniture
and  assistance  for  conferring  the  degrees
were  obtained  from  the  Lodge  at  Hamburg.
Bielfeld  gives  an  amusing  account  of  the
embarrassments  which  were  encountered  in
passing  the  chest  containing  the  Masonic
implements  through  the  custom-house
without  detection.  Campbell,  quoting  from
Bielfeld,  says :

“The  whole  of  the  14th  (August)  was
spent  in  preparations  for  the  Lodge,  and  at
twelve  at  night  the  Prince  Royal  arrived,
accompanied  by  Count  Wartenslefen,  a
captain  in  the  king’s  regiment  at  Potsdam.
The  Prince  introduced  him  to  us  as  a  can¬
didate  whom  he  very  warmly  recommended,
and  begged  that  he  might  be  admitted  im-


292


FREDERICK


FREDERICK


mediately  after  himself.  At  the  same  time,
he  desired  that  he  might  be  treated  like
any  private  individual,  and  that  none  of
the  usual  ceremonies  might  be  altered  on
his  account.  Accordingly,  he  was  admitted
in  the  customary  form,  and  I  could  not  suf¬
ficiently  admire  his  fearlessness,  his  com¬
posure,  and  his  address.  After  the  double
reception,  a  Lodge  was  held.  All  was  over
by  four  in  the  morning,  and  the  Prince  re¬
turned  to  the  ducal  palace,  apparently  as
well  pleased  with  us  as  we  were  charmed
with  him.”

Of  the  truth  of  this  account  there  never
has  been  any  doubt.  Frederick  the  Great
was  certainly  a  Mason.  But  Carlyle,  in  his
usual  sarcastic  vein,  adds:  “The  Crown
Prince  prosecuted  his  Masonry  at  Reins-
berg  or  elsewhere,  occasionally,  for  a  year  or
two,  but  was  never  ardent  in  it,  and  very
soon  after  his  accession  left  off  altogether.
....  A  Royal  Lodge  was  established  at
Berlin,  of  which  the  new  king  consented  to
be  patron ;  but  he  never  once  entered  the
palace,  and  only  his  portrait  (a  welcomely
good  one,  still  to  be  found  there)  presided
over  the  mysteries  of  that  establishment.”

Now  how  much  of  truth  with  the  sar¬
casm,  and  how  much  of  sarcasm  without
the  truth,  there  is  in  this  remark  of  Carlyle,
is  just  what  the  Masonic  world  is  bound  to
discover.  Until  further  light  is  thrown
upon  the  subject  by  documentary  evidence
from  the  Prussian  Lodges,  the  question  can¬
not  be  definitely  answered.  But  what  is
the  now  known  further  Masonic  history  of
Frederick  ?

Bielfeld  tells  us  that  the  zeal  of  the
Prince  for  the  Fraternity  induced  him  to
invite  the  Baron  Von  Oberg  and  himself
to  Reinsberg,  where,  in  1739,  they  founded
a  Lodge,  into  which  Keyserling,  Jordan,
Moolendorf,  Queis,  and  Fredersdorf  (Fred¬
erick’s  valet)  were  admitted.

Bielfeld  is  again  our  authority  for  stating
that  on  the  20th  of  June,  1740,  King  Fred¬
erick — for  he  had  then  ascended  the  throne
—  held  a  Lodge  at  Charlottenburg,  and,  as
Master  in  the  chair,  initiated  Prince  William
of  Prussia,  his  brother,  the  Margrave
Charles  of  Brandenburg,  and  Frederick
William,  Duke  of  Holstein.  The  Duke  of
Holstein  was  seven  years  afterwards  elected
Adjutant  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  Three  Globes  at  Berlin.

We  hear  no  more  of  Frederick’s  Masonry
In  the  printed  records  until  the  16th  of
July,  1774,  when  he  granted  his  protection
to  the  National  Grand  Lodge  of  Germany,
and  officially  approved  of  the  treaty  with
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  by  -which  the
National  Grand  Lodge  was  established.  In
the  year  1777,  the  Mother  Lodge  “  Royal
York  of  Friendship,”  at  Berlin,  celebrated,


by  a  festival,  the  King’s  birthday,  on  which
occasion  Frederick  wrote  the  following
letter,  which,  as  it  is  the  only  printed  dec¬
laration  of  his  opinion  of  Freemasonry
that  is  now  extant,  is  well  worth  copying:

“  I  cannot  but  be  sensible  of  the  new
homage  of  the  Lodge  ‘Royal  York  of
Friendship  ’  on  the  occasion  of  the  anni¬
versary  of  my  birth,  bearing,  as  it  does,  the
evidence  of  its  zeal  and  attachment  for  my
person.  Its  orator  has  well  expressed  the
sentiments  which  animate  all  its  labors;
and  a  society  which  employs  itself  only  in
sowing  the  seed  and  bringing  forth  the
fruit  of  every  kind  of  virtue  in  my  domin¬
ions  may  always  be  assured  of  my  protec¬
tion.  It  is  the  glorious  task  of  every  good
sovereign,  and  I  will  never  cease  to  fulfil  it.
And  so  I  pray  God  to  take  you  and  your
Lodge  under  his  holy  and  deserved  pro¬
tection.  Potsdam,  this  14th  of  February,
1777.  —  Frederick.”

In  the  circular  issued  by  the  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  of  Sovereign  Inspectors  from  Charles¬
ton,  South  Carolina,  on  the  10th  of  October,
1802,  it  is  stated  that  “  on  the  first  of  May,
1786,  the  Grand  Constitution  of  the  thirty-
third  degree,  called  the  Supreme  Council
of  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors  General,  was
finally  ratified  by  his  Majesty  the  King  of
Prussia,  who,  as  Grand  Commander  of  the
Order  of  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret,  pos¬
sessed  the  sovereign  Masonic  power  over  all
the  Craft.  In  the  new  Constitution,  this
high  power  was  conferred  on  a  Supreme
Council  of  nine  brethren  in  each  nation,
who  possess  all  the  Masonic  prerogatives,
in  their  own  district,  that  his  Majesty  in¬
dividually  possessed,  and  are  sovereigns  of
Masonry.”

The  “  Livre  d’Or  ”  of  the  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  of  France  contains  a  similar  statement,
but  with  more  minute  details.  It  says  that
on  the  1st  of  May,  1786,  Frederick  II.,  King
of  Prussia,  caused  the  high  degrees  ana
Masonic  Constitutions  of  the  Ancient  Rite
to  be  revived.  He  added  eight  degrees  to
the  twenty-five  already  recognized  in  Prus¬
sia,  and  founded  a  Supreme  Council  of
thirty-three  degrees,  of  which  he  himself
constructed  the  regulations  in  eighteen
articles.

It  must  not  be  concealed  that  the  truth
of  these  last  statements  has  been  contro¬
verted;  not,  however,  by  positive  evidence,
but  simply  on  grounds  of  probability.  Len-
ning  denies  it,  because  he  says  that  Fred¬
erick  had,  for  the  last  fifteen  years  of  his
life,  abandoned  all  direct  and  indirect  ac¬
tivity  in  Masonry;  and  he  adds,  that  he
was  said  to  be  decidedly  opposed  to  the
high  degrees  because,  in  common  with
many  of  the  respectable  brethren  and
Lodges  of  Germany,  he  thought  that  he


FREDERICK


FREDERICK


2911


saw  in  them  the  root  of  all  the  corruptions
in  Masonry,  and  the  seed  of  the  discord
which  existed  between  different  Lodges  and
systems.  But  for  this  assertion  of  the  King’s
antipathy  to  the  high  degrees,  Lenning
gives  no  other  authority  than  indefinite  re¬
report.

Keghellini  (t.  2,  p.  263,)  says  that  the
opponents  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite  had  denied  that  Frederick  could  have
had  anything  to  do  with  the  establishment
of  the  Constitutions  of  May,  1786,  because
the  King,  although  the  protector  of  the
Order,  had  never  been  either  its  Chief  or
its  Grand  Master ;  and  because  it  w'as  im¬
possible  for  him  to  have  approved  of  any
Masonic  regulations,  since  he  had  not  been
able,  in  consequence  of  severe  illness,
to  attend  to  the  affairs  of  his  kingdom  for
eleven  months  before  his  death,  which  took
place  in  August,  1786.

The  idea  that  Frederick  never  had  been
Grand  Master  of  the  Prussian  Lodges
seems  to  be  inferred  from  a  passage  in  Mi-
rabeau’s  Histoire  de  la  Monarchic  Prussienne,
which  is  in  the  following  words :  “  It  is  a
great  pity  that  Frederick  II.  never  carried
his  zeal  so  far  as  to  become  the  Grand
Master  of  the  German,  or  at  least  of  the
Prussian,  Lodges.  His  power  would  have
been  greatly  increased,  and  perhaps  many
of  his  military  enterprises  would  have
taken  another  turn,  if  he  had  never  been
embroiled  with  the  superiors  of  this  associ¬
ation.”  Mirabeau  acknowledges  himself
to  be  indebted  for  this  remark  to  Fischer’s
Oeschide  Friederich  II.  But  I  look  in
vain  in  Thory,  or  any  other  historians  of
Masonry,  for  an  account  of  those  embroil¬
ments  of  which  Fischer,  and  Mirabeau  after
him,  have  spoken.

That  Frederick  did  not,  in  his  latter  days,
take  that  active  interest  in  Masonry  which
had  distinguished  the  beginning  of  his
reign,  although  he  always  continued  to  be
artial  to  the  Institution,  is  attempted  to
e  accounted  for  by  the  author  of  a  German
work  entitled  Erwinia.  I  am  not  acquaint¬
ed  with  the  book;  but  an  extract  from  it
•  was  published  several  years  ago  by  that
distinguished  Masonic  antiquary,  Giles  F.
Yates,  in  the  Boston  Magazine.  It  seems,
from  the  anecdote  there  related,  that  Gen.
Wallgrave,  an  officer  of  distinction,  and
one  of  the  members  of  a  select  Lodge  in
Berlin  over  which  Frederick  had  presided
for  many  years,  had  been  guilty  of  treason¬
able  practices,  which  became  known  to  his
Master.  While  the  Lodge  was  in  session,
the  King  communicated  the  fact  that  one
of  the  brethren,  whose  name  he  did  not
disclose,  had  violated  the  laws  of  the  Order
and  of  the  State.  He  called  upon  him  to
make  a  full  confession,  in  open  Lodge,  of


his  guilt,  and  to  ask  forgiveness,  on  which
conditions,  as  a  Mason,  he  consented  to
pardon  and  forget  the  offence.  Wallgrave,
however,  did  not  avail  himself  of  the  fra¬
ternal  offer ;  when  the  monarch,  expressing
his  regret  at  the  conviction  that  no  Mason¬
ic  sentiment  could  prevail  even  among  so
small  a  number  as  composed  that  Lodge,
closed  it,  and  laid  down  the  gavel,  which
he  never  afterwards  resumed,  and  Wall¬
grave  was  subsequently  punished.  The
author  adds,  that  from  the  moment  Fred¬
erick  had  been  thus  forced  to  break  the  ties
which  bound  him  to  a  brother  Mason  he
ceased  to  engage  in  the  active  work  of  a
Lodge.  But  this  did  not  induce  him  to
dissolve  his  connection  with  the  Order,
which,  to  the  day  of  his  death,  he  never
ceased  to  honor,  and  to  extend  to  it  his
protection  and  patronage.

The  evidence  of  the  connection  of  Fred¬
erick  with  the  Institution  in  his  latter  days,
and  of  his  organization  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  are,  it  must  be
confessed,  derived  only  from  the  assertions
made  in  the  Grand  Constitutions  of  1786,
and  from  the  statements  of  the  earliest
bodies  that  have  received  and  recognized
these  Constitutions.  If  the  document  is
not  authentic,  and  if  those  who  made  the
statements  here  have  been  mistaken  or  been
dishonest,  then  the  proof  of  Frederick’s  in¬
terest  and  labors  in  Masonry  must  fall  to
the  ground.  Yet,  on  the  other  side,  the
oppugners  of  the  theory  that  in  May,  1786,
the  King  signed  the  Constitutions, — which
fact  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  establish
his  Masonic  character, — have  been  able  to
bring  forward  in  support  of  their  denial
little  more  than  mere  conjecture,  and,  in
some  instances,  perversions  of  acknowledged
history.  Brother  Albert  Pike,  in  the  edi¬
tion  of  the  Grand  Constitutions  which  he
prepared  for  the  use  of  the  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction,  and  pub¬
lished  in  1872,  has  most  thoroughly  inves¬
tigated  this  subject  with  the  learning  of
a  scholar  and  the  acumen  of  a  lawyer.
While  unable  to  advance  any  new  facts,  he
has  collected  all  the  authorities,  and  has,
by  the  most  irrefragable  arguments,  shown
that  the  conclusions  of  those  who  deny  the
authenticity  of  the  Constitutions  of  1786,
and  Frederick’s  connection  with  them,  are
illogical,  and  are  sustained  only  by  false
statements  and  wild  conjecture.  Brother
Pike  very  candidly  says  :

“There  is  no  doubt  that  Frederick  came
to  the  conclusion  that  the  great  pretensions
of  Masonry  in  the  blue  degrees  were  mere¬
ly  imaginary  and  deceptive.  He  ridiculed
the  Order,  and  thought  its  ceremonies  mere
child’s  play ;  and  some  of  his  sayings  to
that  effect  have  been  preserved.  But  it


294


FREDERICK


FREE


does  not  at  all  follow  that  he  might  not  at
a  later  day  have  found  it  politic  to  put
himself  at  the  head  of  an  Order  that  had
become  a  power;  and,  adopting  such  of  the
degrees  as  were  not  objectionable,  to  reject
all  that  were  of  dangerous  tendency,  that
had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Jesuits,  or
been  engrafted  on  the  Order  by  the  Illumi¬
nati.”

It  is  evident  that  the  question  of  what
active  part  Frederick  took  in  the  affairs  of
Masonry  is  not  yet  settled.  Those  who
claim  him  as  having  been,  to  within  a  short
period  before  his  death,  an  active  patron
of  and  worker  in  the  Order,  attempt  to  sus¬
tain  their  position  by  the  production  of
certain  documents.  Those  who  deny  that
position  assert  that  those  documents  have
been  forged.  Yet  it  must  be  admitted  that
the  proofs  of  forgery  that  have  been  offered
are  not  such  as  in  an  ordinary  criminal
trial  would  satisfy  a  jury.

Frederick  William  III.  King
of  Prussia,  and,  although  not  a  Freemason,
a  generous  patron  of  the  Order.  On  De¬
cember  29,  1797,  he  wrote  to  the  Lodge
Royal  York  of  Friendship,  at  Berlin,  these
words:  “I  have  never  been  initiated,  as
ever)7  one  knows,  but  I  am  far  from  con¬
ceiving  the  slightest  distrust  of  the  inten¬
tions  of  the  members  of  the  Lodge.  I  be¬
lieve  that  its  design  is  noble,  and  founded
on  the  cultivation  of  virtue ;  that  its  methods
are  legitimate,  and  that  even7  political  ten¬
dency  is  banished  from  its  operations.
Hence,  I  shall  take  pleasure  in  manifesting
on  all  occasions  my  good-will  and  my  affec¬
tion  to  the  Lodge  Royal  York  of  Friend¬
ship,  as  well  as  to  ever)7  other  Lodge  in  my
dominions.”  In  a  similar  tone  of  kindness
towards  Masonry,  he  wrote  three  months
afterwards  to  Fessler.  And  when  he  issued,
October  20, 1798,  an  edict  forbidding  secret
societies,  he  made  a  special  exemption  in
favor  of  the  Masonic  Lodges.  To  the  time
of  his  death,  he  was  always  the  avowed
friend  of  the  Order.

Free.  The  word  “  free,”  in  connection
with  “  Mason,”  originally  signified  that  the
person  so  called  was  free  of  the  company  or
gild  of  incorporated  Masons.  For  those
operative  Masons  who  were  not  thus  made
free  of  the  gild,  were  not  permitted  to  work
with  those  who  were.  A  similar  regulation
still  exists  in  many  parts  of  Europe,  al¬
though  it  is  not  known  to  this  country.
The  term  appears  to  have  been  first  thus
used  in  the  tenth  century,  when  the  travel¬
ling  Freemasons  were  incorporated  by  the
Roman  Pontiff.  See  Travelling  Freemasons.

In  reference  to  the  other  sense  of  free  as
meaning  not  bound,  not  in  captivity,  it  is  a
rule  of  Masonry  that  no  one  can  be  initiated
who  is  at  the  time  restrained  of  his  liberty.


The  Grand  Lodge  of  England  extends
this  doctrine,  that  Masons  should  be  free  in
all  their  thoughts  and  actions,  so  far,  that
it  will  not  permit  the  initiation  of  a  candi¬
date  who  is  only  temporarily  in  a  place  of
confinement.  In  the  year  1782,  the  Master
of  the  Royal  M  ilitury  Lodge  at  Woolwich
being  confined,  most  probably  for  debt,  in
the  King’s  Bench  prison,  at  London,  the
Lodge,  which  was  itinerant  in  its  character
and  allowed  to  move  from  place  to  place
with  its  regiment,  adjoumea,  with  its  war¬
rant  of  Constitution,  to  the  Master  in  prison,
where  several  Masons  were  made.  The
Grand  Lodge,  being  informed  of  the  cir¬
cumstances,  immediately  summoned  the
Master  and  Wardens  of  the  Lodge  “to
answer  for  their  conduct  in  making  Masons
in  the  King’s  Bench  prison,”  and,  at  the
same  time,  adopted  a  resolution,  affirming
that  “  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  principles
of  Freemasonry7  for  any  Freemason’s  Lodge
to  be  held,  for  the  purpose  of  making,  pass¬
ing,  or  raising  Masons,  in  any  prison  or
place  of  confinement.”

Free  and  Aceepted.  The  title  of
“  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  ”  was  first  used
by  Dr.  Anderson  in  the  second  edition  of  the
Book  of  Constitutions,  published  in  1738,
the  title  of  which  is  “  The  History  and
Constitutions  of  the  Most  Ancient  and  Hon¬
orable  Fraternity  of  Free  and  Accepted
Masons.”  In  the  first  edition  of  1723,  the
title  was  “The  Constitutions  of  the  Free¬
masons.”  The  newer  title  continued  to  be
used  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  in
which  it  was  followed  by  those  of  Scotland
and  Ireland  ;  and  a  majority  of  the  Grand
Lodges  in  this  country  have  adopted  the
same  style,  and  call  themselves  Grand
Lodges  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.
See  Accepted.  The  old  lectures  formerly
used  in  England  give  the  following  account
of  the  origin  of  the  term :

“  The  Masons  who  were  selected  to  build
the  Temple  of  Solomon  were  declared  Free,
and  were  exempted,  together  with  their  de¬
scendants,  from  imposts,  duties,  and  taxes.
They  had  also  the  privilege  to  bear  arms.

At  the  destruction  of  the  Temple  by  Nebu-  •
chadnezzar,  the  posterity  of  these  Masons
were  carried  into  captivity  with  the  ancient
Jews.  But  the  good-will  of  Cyrus  gave
them  permission  to  erect  a  second  Temple,
having  set  them  at  liberty  for  that  purpose.

It  is  from  this  epoch  that  we  bear  the  name
of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.”

Free  Born .  In  all  the  old  Constitutions,
free  birth  is  required  as  a  requisite  to  the  re¬
ception  of  Apprentices.  Thus  the  Lands-
downe  MS.  says,  “  That  the  prentice  be  able
of  birth,  that  is,  free  born.”  So  it  is  in  the
Edinburgh  Kilwinning,  the  York,  the  An¬
tiquity,  and  in  every  other  manuscript  that


FREE


FREEMASON


295


has  been  so  far  discovered.  And  hence,
the  modern  Constitutions  framed  in  1721
continue  the  regulation.  After  the  aboli¬
tion  of  slavery  in  the  West  Indies  by  the
British  Parliament,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  changed  the  word  “  free  born  ”  into
“free,”  but  the  ancient  landmark  never
has  been  removed  in  this  country.

The  non-admission  of  a  slave  seems  to
have  been  founded  upon  the  best  of  rea¬
sons;  because,  as  Freemasonry  involves  a
solemn  contract,  no  one  can  legally  bind
himself  to  its  performance  who  is  not  a  free
agent  and  the  master  of  his  own  actions.
That  the  restriction  is  extended  to  those
who  were  originally  in  a  servile  condition,
but  who  may  have  since  acquired  their  lib¬
erty,  seems  to  depend  on  the  principle  that
birth  in  a  servile  condition  is  accompanied
by  a  degradation  of  mind  and  abasement
of  spirit  which  no  subsequent  disenthral-
ment  can  so  completely  efface  as  to  render
the  party  qualified  to  perform  his  duties,  as
a  Mason,  with  that  “  freedom,  fervency,  and
zeal  ”  which  are  said  to  have  distinguished
our  ancient  brethren.  “Children,”  says
Oliver,  “cannot  inherit  a  free  and  noble
spirit  except  they  be  born  of  a  free  woman.”

The  same  usage  existed  in  the  spurious
Freemasonry  or  the  mysteries  of  the  ancient
world.  There,  no  slave,  or  man  born  in
slavery,  could  be  initiated;  because  the
prerequisites  imperatively  demanded  that
the  candidate  should  not  only  be  a  man  of
irreproachable  manners,  but  also  a  freeborn
denizen  of  the  country  in  which  the  mys¬
teries  were  celebrated.

Some  Masonic  writers  have  thought  that
in  this  regulation,  in  relation  to  free  birth,
some  allusion  is  intended,  both  in  the  mys¬
teries  and  in  Freemasonry,  to  the  relative
conditions  and  characters  of  Isaac  and  Ish-
mael.  The  former  —  the  accepted  one,  to
whom  the  promise  was  given  — r  was  the  son
of  a  free  woman,  and  the  latter,  who  was
cast  forth  to  have  “  his  hand  against  every
man  and  every  man’s  hand  against  him,”
was  the  child  of  a  slave.  Wherefore,  we
read  that  Sarah  demanded  of  Abraham,
“  Cast  out  this  bondwoman  and  her  son ;
for  the  son  of  the  bondwoman  shall  not  be
heir  with  my  son.”  Dr.  Oliver,  in  speaking
of  the  grand  festival  with  which  Abraham
celebrated  the  weaning  of  Isaac,  says  that
he  “  had  not  paid  the  same  compliment  at
the  weaning  of  Ishmael,  because  he  was  the
son  of  a  bondwoman,  and  consequently
could  not  be  admitted  to  participate  in  the
Freemasonry  of  his  father,  which  could  only
be  conferred  on  free  men  born  of  free  wo¬
men.”  The  ancient  Greeks  were  of  the
same  opinion ;  for  they  used  the  word
JovXoTpeirda,  or  “slave  manners,”  to  desig¬
nate  any  very  great  impropriety  of  manners.


Freedom.  This  is  defined  to  be  a
state  of  exemption  from  the  control  or
power  of  another.  The  doctrine  that  Ma¬
sons  should  enjoy  unrestrained  liberty,  and
be  free  in  all  their  thoughts  and  actions,
is  carried  so  far  in  Masonry,  that  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  will  not  permit  the  ini¬
tiation  of  a  candidate  who  is  only  tempo¬
rarily  deprived  of  his  liberty,  or  even  in  a
place  of  confinement.  See  Free.

It  is  evident  that  the  word  freedom  is
used  in  Masonry  in  a  symbolical  or  meta¬
physical  sense  differing  from  its  ordinary
signification.  While,  in  the  application  of
the  words  free  born  and  freeman,  we  use
them  in  their  usual  legal  acceptation,  we
combine  freedom  with  fervency  and  zeal
as  embodying  a  symbolic  idea.  Gadicke,
under  the  word  Freiheit,  in  his  Freimaurer-
Lexicon,  thus  defines  the  word :

“  A  word  that  is  often  heard  among  us,
but  which  is  restricted  to  the  same  limita¬
tion  as  the  freedom  of  social  life.  W e  have
in  our  assemblies  no  freedom  to  act  each
one  as  he  pleases.  But  we  are,  or  should
be,  free  from  the  dominion  of  passion,
pride,  prejudice,  and  all  the  other  follies  of
human  nature.  We  are  free  from  the  false
delusion  that  we  need  not  be  obedient  to
the  laws.”  Thus  he  makes  it  equivalent  to
integrity ;  a  sense  that  I  think  it  bears  in
the  next  article.

Freedom,  Fervency,  and  Zeal.

The  earliest  lectures  in  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury  designated  freedom,  fervency,  and  zeal
as  the  qualities  which  should  distinguish
the  servitude  of  Apprentices,  and  the  same
symbolism  is  found  in  the  ritual  of  the
present  day.  The  word  f  reedom  is  not  here
to  be  taken  in  its  modern  sense  of  liberty,
but  rather  in  its  primitive  Anglo-Saxon
meaning  of  frankness,  generosity,  a  generous
willingness  to  work  or  perform  one's  duty.
So  Chaucer  uses  it  in  the  Prior's  Tale,
(v.  46 :)

“A  knight  there  was,  and  that  a  worthy  man,
That  fro  the  time  that  he  first  began
To  riden  out,  he  loved  chivalrie,

Trouthe  and  Honour,  Freedom  and  Chivalrie.”

See  Fervency  and  Zeal.

Freeman.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land,  some  years  ago,  erased  from  their  list
of  the  qualifications  of  candidates  the  word
“  free  born,”  and  substituted  for  it  “  free¬
man.”  Their  rule  now  reads,  “every  can¬
didate  must  be  a  freeman.”  This  has  been
generally  considered  an  unauthorized  vio¬
lation  of  a  landmark.

Freemason.  One  who  has  been  ini¬
tiated  into  the  mysteries  of  the  fraternity
of  Freemasonry.  Freemasons  are  so  called
to  distinguish  them  from  the  Operative  or


296


FREEMASON


FREEMASONRY


Stone-masons,  who  constituted  an  inferior  '
class  of  workmen,  and  out  of  whom  they
sprang.  See  Stone-Masons  and  Travelling  \
Freemasons.  The  meaning  of  the  epithet
free,  as  applied  to  Mason,  is  given  under
the  word  Free.  In  the  old  lectures  of  the
last  century  a  Freemason  was  described  as
being  “a  freeman,  born  of  a  freewoman,
brother  to  a  king,  fellow  to  a  prince,  or
companion  to  a  beggar,  if  a  Mason,”  and
by  this  was  meant  to  indicate  the  univer¬
sality  of  the  brotherhood.

The  word  “Freemason”  was  until  re¬
cently  divided  into  two  words,  sometimes
with  and  sometimes  without  a  hyphen;
and  we  find  in  all  the  old  books  and  manu¬
scripts  “Free  Mason”  or  “ Free- Mason.”
But  this  usage  has  been  abandoned  by  all
good  writers,  and  “Freemason”  is  now
always  spelled  as  one  word.  The  old  Con¬
stitutions  constantly  used  the  word  Mason.
Freemason  appears  only  in  the  Harleian
MS.,  dated  1670.  Yet  the  word  was  em¬
ployed  at  a  very  early  period  in  the  parish
registers  of  England,  and  by  some  writers.
Thus,  in  the  register  of  the  parish  of  Ast-
bury  we  find  these  items :

“  1685.  Smallwood,  Jos.,  fils  Jos.  Hen-
shaw,  Freemason,  bapt.  3°  die  Nov.

“  1697.  Jos.  fil  Jos.  Henshaw,  Freema¬
son,  buried  7  April.”

But  the  most  singular  passage  is  one
found  in  Cawdray’s  Treasurie  of  Similies,

Sublished  in  1609,  and  which  he  copied  from
ishop  Coverdale’s  translation  of  Werd-
muller’s  A  Spiritual  and  most  Precious  Perle,  \
which  was  published  in  1550.  It  is  as  fol¬
lows:  “As  the  Free -Mason  heweth  the
hard  stones  ....  even  so  God  the  Heav¬
enly  Free -Mason  buildeth  a  Christian1
church.”  But,  in  fact,  the  word  was  used  :
at  a  much  earlier  period,  and  occurs,  Stein-
brenner  says,  (Orig.  and  Early  Hist  of  Mas.,
p.  110,)  for  the  first  time  in  a  statute  passed
in  1350,  in  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  Edward
I.,  where  the  wages  of  a  master  Freemason
are  fixed  at  4  pence,  and  of  other  masons
at  3  pence.  The  original  French  text  of
the  statute  is  “Mestre  de  franche-peer.”
“Here,”  says  Steinbrenner,  “  the  word  Free¬
mason  evidently  signifies  a  free-stone  ma¬
son —  one  who  works  in  free-stone,  (Fr.
franche-peer,  i.  e.,  franche-pierre.)  as  distin¬
guished  from  the  rough  mason,  who  merely
built  walls  of  rough,  unhewn  stone.”  This
latter  sort  of  workmen  was  that  class  called
by  the  Scotch  Masons  cowans,  whom  the
Freemasons  were  forbidden  to  work  with,
whence  we  get  the  modern  use  of  that
word.  Ten  years  after,  in  1360,  we  have  a
statute  of  Edward  III.,  in  which  it  is  or¬
dained  that  “every  mason  shall  finish  his
work,  be  it  of  free-stone  or  of  rough-stone,”
where  the  French  text  of  the  statute  is  ‘


“  de  franche-pere  ou  de  grosse-pere.”  Thus
it  seems  evident  that  the  word  free-mwson
was  originally  used  in  contradistinction
to  rough-mason.  The  old  Constitutions
sometimes  call  these  latter  masons  rough-
laners.

Freemasonry,  History  of.  It  is

the  opprobrium  of  Freemasonry  that  its
history  has  never  yet  been  written  in  a
spirit  of  critical  truth;  that  credulity,  and
not  incredulity,  has  been  the  foundation  on
which  all  Masonic  historical  investigations
have  hitherto  been  built ;  that  imagination
has  too  often  “lent  enchantment  to  the
view ;  ”  that  the  missing  links  of  a  chain
of  evidence  have  been  frequently  supplied
by  gratuitous  invention ;  and  that  state¬
ments  of  vast  importance  have  been  care¬
lessly  sustained  by  the  testimony  of  docu¬
ments  whose  authenticity  has  not  been
proved.

And  this  leads  me  to  the  important  ques¬
tion  :  How  is  the  history  of  Freemasonry
to  be  written,  so  that  the  narrative  shall
win  the  respect  of  its  enemies,  and  secure
the  assent  and  approbation  of  its  friends?

In  the  first  place,  we  must  begin  by  a
strict  definition  of  the  word  Masonry.  If
we  make  it  synonymous  with  Freemasonry,
then  must  we  confine  ourselves  closely  to
the  events  that  are  connected  with  the  In¬
stitution  in  its  present  form  and  organ¬
ization.  We  may  then  say  that  Ma¬
sonry  received  a  new  organization  and  a
restoration  in  the  beginning  of  the  eight¬
eenth  century.  We  may  trace  this  very
Institution,  with  an  older  but  not  dissimilar
form,  in  the  Masonic  guilds  of  Europe;  in
the  corporations  of  Stone-masons  of  Ger¬
many ;  in  the  travelling  Freemasons  of  the
Middle  Ages,  and  connect  it  with  the  Col¬
leges  of  Architects  of  Iiome.  Such  a  his¬
tory  will  not  want  authentic  memorials  to
substantiate  its  truth,  and  there  will  be  no
difficulty  in  conferring  upon  the  Institution
an  enviable  antiquity.

But  if  we  confound  the  term  Masonry  with
Geometry,  with  Architecture,  or  with  Moral
Science,  we  shall  beget  in  the  mind,  equally
of  the  writer  and  the  reader,  such  a  confu¬
sion  of  ideas  as  can  never  lead  to  any  prac¬
tical  result.  And  yet  this  has  been  the  pre¬
vailing  error  of  all  the  great  English  writ¬
ers  on  Masonry  in  the  last,  and,  with  a  few
exceptions,  even  in  the  present  century.
At  one  moment  they  speak  of  Masonry  as
a  mystical  institution  which,  in  its  then
existing  form,  was  familiar  to  their  readers.
Soon  afterwards,  perhaps  on  the  same  page,
a  long  paragraph  is  found  to  refer,  without
any  change  of  name,  under  the  identical
term  Masonry,  to  the  rise  of  Architecture,
to  the  progress  of  Geometry,  or  perhaps  to
the  condition  of  the  moral  virtues.


FREEMASONRY


FREEMASONS


297


Thus  Preston,  in  his  Illustrations  of  Ma¬
sonry,  begins  his  section  on  the  Origin  of
Masonry  by  stating  that,  “  from  the  com¬
mencement  of  the  world  we  may  trace  the
foundation  of  Masonry.”  And  he  adds:
“  Ever  since  symmetry  began  and  lia«rmony
displayed  her  charms,  our  Order  has  had  a
being.”  But,  after  we  have  read  through
the  entire  chapter,  we  find  that  it  is  not  to
Freemasonry,  such  as  we  know  and  recog¬
nize  it,  that  the  author  has  been  referring,
but  to  some  great  moral  virtue,  to  the  social
feeling,  to  the  love  of  man  for  man,  which,
as  inherent  in  the  human  breast,  must  have
existed  from  the  very  creation  of  the  race,
and  necessarily  have  been  the  precursor  of
civilization  and  the  arts.

Oliver,  who,  notwithstanding  the  valua¬
ble  services  which  he  has  rendered  to  Ma¬
sonry,  was  unfortunately  too  much  given
to  abstract  speculations,  has  “out-heroded
Herod,”  and,  in  commenting  on  this  pas¬
sage  of  Pr.eston,  proclaims  “  that  our  science
existed  before  the  creation  of  this  globe,  and
was  diffused  amidst  the  numerous  systems
with  which  the  grand  empyreum  of  uni¬
versal  space  is  furnished.”  But  on  further
reading,  we  find  that  by  Speculative  Ma¬
sonry  the  writer  means  “  a  system  of  ethics
founded  on  the  belief  of  a  God,”  and  that
in  this  grandiloquent  sentence  he  does  not
refer  to  the  Freemasonry  of  whose  history
he  is  professing  to  treat,  but  to  the  exist¬
ence  of  such  a  belief  among  the  sentient
intelligences  who,  as  he  supposes,  inhabit
the  planets  and  stars  of  the  solar  system.

Anderson  is  more  modest  in  his  claims,
and  traces  Masonry  only  to  Adam  in  the
garden  of  Eden  ;  but  soon  we  find  that  he,
too,  is  treating  of  different  things  by  the
same  name,  and  that  the  Masonry  of  the
primal  patriarch  is  not  the  Freemasonry  of
our  day,  but  Geometry  and  Architecture.

Now,  all  this  is  to  write  romance,  not  his¬
tory.  Such  statements  may  be  said  to  be
what  the  French  call  famous  de  parler  —
rhetorical  flourishes,  having  much  sound,
and  no  meaning.  But  when  the  reader
meets  with  them  in  books  written  by  men
of  eminence,  professedly  intended  to  give
the  true  history  of  the  Order,  he  either  aban¬
dons  in  disgust  a  study  which  has  been
treated  with  so  much  folly,  or  he  is  led  to
adopt  theories  which  he  cannot  maintain,
because  they  are  absurd.  In  the  former
case  Freemasonry  perhaps  loses  a  disciple;
in  the  latter,  he  is  ensnared  by  a  delusion.

The  true  history  of  Freemasonry  is  much
in  its  character  like  the  history  of  a  nation.
It  has  its  historic  and  its  pre-historic  era.
In  its  historic  era,  the  Institution  can  be
regularly  traced  through  various  antece¬
dent  associations,  similar  in  design  and
organization,  to  a  comparatively  remote
2  N


period.  Its  connection  with  these  associa¬
tions  can  be  rationally  established  by  au¬
thentic  documents,  and  by  other  evidence
which  no  historian  would  reject.  Thus
dispassionately  and  philosophically  treated,
as  though  it  were  the  history  of  an  empire
that  was  under  investigation,  —  no  claim
being  advanced  that  cannot  be  substanti¬
ated,  no  assertion  made  that  cannot  be
proved,  —  Freemasonry  —  the  word  so  used
meaning,  without  evasion  or  reservation,
precisely  what  everybody  supposes  it  to
mean  —  can  be  invested  with  an  antiquity
sufficient  for  the  pride  of  the  most  exacting
admirer  of  the  Society.

And  then,  for  the  pre-historic  era,  —  that
which  connects  it  with  the  mysteries  of  the
Pagan  world,  and  with  the  old  priests  of
Eleusis,  of  Samothrace,  or  of  Syria,  —  let
us  honestly  say  that  we  now  no  longer
treat  of  Freemasonry  under  its  present  or¬
ganization,  which  we  know  did  not  exist
in  those  days,  but  of  a  science  peculiar,
and  peculiar  only,  to  the  Mysteries  and  to
Freemasonry,  —  a  science  which  we  may
call  Masonic  symbolism,  and  which  con¬
stituted  the  very  heart-blood  of  the  ancient
and  the  modern  institutions,  and  gave  to
them,  while  presenting  a  dissimilarity  of
form,  an  identity  of  spirit.  And  then,  in
showing  the  connection  and  in  tracing  the
germ  of  Freemasonry  in  those  pre-historic
days,  although  we  shall  be  guided  by  no
documents,  and  shall  have  no  authentic
spoken  or  written  narratives  on  which  to
rely,  we  shall  find  fossil  thoughts  embalmed
in  those  ancient  intellects  precisely  like
the  living  ones  which  crop  out  in  modern
Masonry,  and  which,  like  the  fossil  shells
and  fishes  of  the  old  physical  formations
of  the  earth,  show,  by  their  resemblance  to
living  specimens,  the  graduated  connection
of  the  past  with  the  present.

No  greater  honor  could  accrue  to  any
man  than  that  of  having  been  the  founder
of  a  new  school  of  Masonic  history,  in
which  the  fictions  and  loose  statements  of
former  Winters  would  be  rejected,  and  in
which  the  rule  would  be  adopted  that  has
been  laid  down  as  a  vital  maxim  of  all  in¬
ductive  science,  —  in  words  that  have  been
chosen  as  his  motto  by  a  recent  powerful
investigator  of  historical  truth  :

“Not  to  exceed  and  not  to  fall  short  of
facts  —  not  to  add  and  not  to  take  away.
To  state  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and
nothing  but  the  truth.”

Freeimi.sons  of  the  Church.  An
architectural  college  was  organized  in  Lon¬
don,  in  the  year  1842,  under  the  name  of
“  Freemasons  of  the  Church  for  the  Recov¬
ery,  Maintenance,  and  Furtherance  of  the
True  Principles  and  Practice  of  Architec¬
ture.”  The  founders  of  the  association


298


FREE-WILL


FRENCH


announced  their  objects  to  be  “the  redis¬
covery  of  the  ancient  principles  of  archi¬
tecture;  the  sanction  of  good  principles  of
building,  and  the  condemnation  of  bad
ones;  the  exercise  of  scientific  and  expe¬
rienced  judgment  in  the  choice  and  use  of
the  proper  materials;  the  infusion,  main¬
tenance,  and  advancement  of  science
throughout  architecture;  and  eventually,
by  developing  the  powers  of  the  college
upon  a  just  and  beneficial  footing,  to  reform
the  whole  practice  of  architecture,  to  raise
it  from  its  present  vituperated  condition,
and  to  bring  around  it  the  same  unques¬
tioned  honor  which  is  at  present  enjoyed
by  almost  every  other  profession.”  One  of
their  members  has  said  that  the  title  as¬
sumed  was  not  intended  to  express  any
conformity  with  the  general  body  of  Free¬
masons,  but  rather  as  indicative  of  the  pro¬
found  views  of  the  college,  namely,  the
recovery,  maintenance,  and  furtherance  of
the  free  principles  and  practice  of  archi¬
tecture  ;  and  that,  in  addition,  they  made
it  an  object  of  their  exertions  to  preserve
or  effect  the  restoration  of  architectural
remains  of  antiquity,  threatened  unnecessa¬
rily  with  demolition  or  endangered  by  de¬
cay.  But  it  is  evident,  from  the  close
connection  of  modern  Freemasonry  with
the  building  gilds  of  the  Middle  Ages,  that
any  investigation  into  the  condition  of
Mediaeval  architecture  must  throw  light  on
Masonic  history.

Free-Will  and  Accord.  There  is
one  peculiar  feature  in  the  Masonic  Insti¬
tution  that  must  commend  it  to  the  respect
of  every  generous  mind.  In  other  associa¬
tions  it  is  considered  meritorious  in  a  mem¬
ber  to  exert  his  influence  in  obtaining
applications  for  admission;  but  it  is  wholly
uncongenial  with  the  spirit  of  our  Order
to  persuade  any  one  to  become  a  Mason.
Whosoever  seeks  a  knowledge  of  our  mys¬
tic  rites,  must  first  be  prepared  for  the
ordeal  in  his  heart;  he  must  not  only  be
endowed  with  the  necessary  moral  qualifi¬
cations  which  would  fit  him  forpgimissiou
into  our  ranks,  but  he  must  come,  too,  un¬
influenced  by  friends  and  unbiassed  by
uu worthy  motives.  This  is  a  settled  land¬
mark  of  the  Order;  and,  therefore,  nothing
can  be  more  painful  to  a  true  Mason  than
to  see  this  landmark  violated  by  young  and
heedless  brethren.  For  it  cannot  be  denied
that  it  is  sometimes  violated;  and  this
habit  of  violation  is  one  of  those  unhappy
influences  sometimes  almost  insensibly  ex¬
erted  upon  Masonry  by  the  existence  of
the  many  secret  societies  to  which  the
present  age  has  given  birth,  and  which  re¬
semble  Masonry  in  nothing  except  in  hav¬
ing  some  sort  of  a  secret  ceremony  of
initiation.  These  societies  are  introducing


into  some  parts  of  our  country  such  phrase¬
ology  as  a  “  card  ”  for  a  “  demit,”  or  “  wor¬
thy  ”  for  “  worshipful,”  or  “ brothers”  for
“  brethren,”  And  there  are  some  men  who,
coming  among  us  imbued  with  the  princi¬
ples  and  accustomed  to  the  usages  of  these
modern  societies,  in  which  the  persevering
solicitation  of  candidates  is  considered  as  a
legitimate  and  even  laudable  practice,
bring  with  them  these  preconceived  no¬
tions,  and  consider  it  their  duty  to  exert
all  their  influence  in  persuading  their
friends  to  become  members  of  the  Craft.
Men  who  thus  misunderstand  the  true
policy  of  our  Institution  should  be  in¬
structed  by  their  older  and  more  experi¬
enced  brethren  that  it  is  wholly  in  opposi¬
tion  to  all  our  laws  and  principles  to  ask
any  man  to  become  a  Mason,  or  to  exercise
any  kind  of  influence  upon  the  minds  of
others,  except  that  of  a  truly  Masonic  life
and  a  practical  exemplification  of  its  tenets,
by  which  they  may  be  induced  to  ask  ad¬
mission  into  our  Lodges.  We  must  not
seek,  —  we  are  to  be  sought.

And  if  this  were  not  an  ancient  law,
imbedded  in  the  very  cement  that  upholds
our  system,  policy  alone  would  dictate  an
adherence  to  the  voluntary  usage.  We
need  not  now  fear  that  our  Institution  will
suffer  from  a  deficiency  of  members.  Our
greater  dread  should  be  that,  in  its  rapid
extension,  less  care  may  be  given  to  the
selection  of  candidates  than  the  interests
and  welfare  of  the  Order  demand.  There
can,  therefore,  be  no  excuse  for  the  prac¬
tice  of  persuading  candidates,  and  every
hope  of  safety  in  avoiding  such  a  practice.
It  should  always  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
candidate  who  comes  to  us  not  of  his  own
“  free-will  and  accord,”  but  induced  by  the
persuasions  of  his  friends, — no  matter  how
worthy  he  otherwise  may  be,  —  violates,  by
so  coming,  the  requirements  of  our  Institu¬
tion  on  the  very  threshold  of  its  temple,
and,  in  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred,
fails  to  become  imbued  with  that  zealous
attachment  to  the  Order  which  is  absolutely
essential  to  the  formation  of  a  true  Ma¬
sonic  character.

Freimaurer.  German  for  Freemason.
Mauer  means  “  a  wall,”  and  mauem,  “to
build  a  wall.”  Hence,  literally,  freimaurer
is  a  “  builder  of  walls”  who  is  free  of  his
gild,  from  the  fact  that  the  building  of
walls  was  the  first  occupation  of  masons.

Freimaurerei.  German  for  Free¬
masonry.

French.  Benjamin  Brown.  A

distinguished  Mason  of  the  United  States,
who  was  born  at  Chester,  in  New  Hamp¬
shire,  September  4,  1800,  and  died  at  the
city  of  Washington,  where  he  had  long  re¬
sided,  on  August  12,  1870.  He  was  initi-


FRENCH


FUND


299


ated  into  Masonry  in  1825,  and  during  his
whole  life  took  an  active  interest  in  the
affairs  of  the  Fraternity.  He  served  for
many  years  as  General  Grand  Secretary  of
the  General  Grand  Chapter,  and  Grand  Re¬
corder  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the
United  States.  In  1846,  soon  after  his  ar¬
rival  in  Washington,  he  was  elected  Grand
Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  District,
a  position  which  he  repeatedly  occupied.
In  1859  he  was  elected  Grand  Master  of  the
Templars  of  the  United  States,  a  distin¬
guished  position  which  he  held  for  six
years,  having  been  re-elected  in  1862.  His
administration,  during  a  period  of  much
excitement  in  the  country,  was  marked  by
great  firmness,  mingled  with  a  spirit  of
conciliation.  He  was  also  a  prominent
member  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was
the  Lieutenant  Grand  Commander  of  the
Supreme  Council  for  the  Southern  Juris¬
diction  of  the  United  States.

Brother  French  was  possessed  of  much
intellectual  ability,  and  contributed  no
small  share  of  his  studies  to  the  literature
of  Masonry.  His  writings,  which  have  not
yet  been  collected,  were  numerous,  and
consisted  of  Masonic  odes,  many  of  them
marked  with  the  true  poetic  spirit,  eloquent
addresses  on  various  public  occasions,
learned  dissertations  on  Masonic  law,  and
didactic  essays,  which  were  published  at  the
time  in  various  periodicals.  His  decisions
on  Templar  law  have  always  been  esteemed
of  great  value.

French  Rile.  {Rite  Frangais  on
Modeme.)  The  French  or  Modern  Rite  is
one  of  the  three  principal  Rites  of  Freema¬
sonry.  It  consists  of  seven  degrees,  three
symbolic  and  four  higher,  viz. :  1.  Appren¬
tice;  2.  Fellow-Craft;  3.  Master;  4.  Elect;
5.  Scotch  Master  ;  6.  Knight  of  the  East ;
7.  Rose  Croix.  This  Rite  is  practised  in
France,  in  Brazil,  and  in  Louisiana.  It
was  founded,  in  1786,  by  the  Grand  Orient
of  France,  who,  unwilling  to  destroy  entire¬
ly  the  high  degrees  which  were  then  prac¬
tised  by  the  different  Rites,  and  yet  anxious
to  reduce  them  to  a  smaller  number  and  to
greater  simplicity,  extracted  these  degrees
out  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection,  making  some
few  slight  modifications.  Most  of  the  au¬
thors  who  have  treated  of  this  Rite  have
given  to  its  symbolism  an  entirely  astro¬
nomical  meaning.  Among  these  writers,
we  may  refer  to  Ragon,  in  his  Cours  Phi-
losophique,  as  probably  the  most  scientific.

Ragon,  in  his  Tuileur  General ,  (p.  51,)
says  that  the  four  degrees  of  the  French
Rite,  which  were  elaborated  to  take  the
place  of  the  thirty  degrees  of  the  Scottish
Kite,  have  for  their  basis  the  four  physical
proofs  to  which  the  recipiendary  submits  in


the  first  degree.  And  that  the  symbolism
further  represents  the  sun  in  his  annual
progress  through  the  four  seasons.  Thus,
the  Elect  degree  represents  the  element  of
Earth  and  the  season  of  Spring  ;  the  Scot¬
tish  Master  represents  Air  and  the  Summer;
the  Knight  of  the  East  represents  Water
and  Autumn ;  and  the  Rose  Croix  repre¬
sents  Fire;  but  he  does  claim  that  it  is  con¬
secrated  to  Winter,  although  that  would  be
the  natural  conclusion.

The  original  Rose  Croix  was  an  eminent¬
ly  Christian  degree,  which,  being  found  in¬
convenient,  was  in  1860  substituted  by  the
Philosophic  Rose  Croix,  which  now  forms
the  summit  of  the  French  Rite.

Friendly  Societies.  Societies  first
established  towards  the  end  of  the  last  cen¬
tury,  in  England,  for  the  relief  of  mechanics,
laborers,  and  other  persons  who  derived  their
support  from  their  daily  toil.  By  the  week¬
ly  payment  of  a  stipulated  sum,  the  mem¬
bers  secured  support  and  assistance  from
the  society  when  sick,  and  payment  of  the
expenses  of  burial  when  they  died.  These
societies  gave  origin  to  the  Odd  Fellows
and  other  similar  associations,  but  they
have  no  relation  whatever  to  Freemasonry.

Friend  of  St.  Jolin.  The  sixth  de¬
gree  of  the  system  practised  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Sweden.  It  is  comprehended  in
the  degree  of  Knight  of  the  East  and  West.

Friend  of  Truth.  The  filth  degree
of  the  Rite  of  African  Architects.  •

Friendship.  Leslie,  in  1741,  de¬
livered  the  first  descant  on  Friendship  as
peculiarly  a  Masonic  virtue.  He  was  fol¬
lowed  by  Hutchinson,  Preston,  and  other
writers,  and  now  in  the  modern  lectures  it
is  adopted  as  one  of  the  precious  jewels  of
a  Master  Mason.  Of  universal  friendship,
blue  is  said  to  be  the  symbolic  color.  “  In
regular  gradation,”  says  Munkhouse,  [Disc.,
i.  17,)  “and  by  an  easy  descent,  brotherly
love  extends  itself  to  lesser  distinct  societies
or  to  particular  individuals,  and  thus  be¬
comes  friendship  either  of  convenience  or
of  personal  affection.”  Cicero  says,  “  Ami-
citia  nisi  inter  bonos  non  potest,”  Friend¬
ship  can  exist  only  among  the  good.

Fund  of  Benevolence.  A  fund
established  many  years  ago  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  principally  through  the
exertions  of  Dr.  Crucefix.  The  regulations
for  its  management  are  as  follows.  Its  dis¬
tribution  and  application  is  directed  by  the
Constitution  to  be  monthly,  for  which  pur¬
pose  a  committee  or  Lodge  of  Benevolence
is  holden  on  the  last  Wednesday  of  every
month.  This  Lodge  consists  of  all  the
present  and  past  Grand  officers,  all  actual
Masters  of  Lodges,  and  twelve  Past  Masters.
The  brother  presiding  is  bound  strictly  to
enforce  all  the  regulations  of  the  Craft  re-


t


300  FUND

specting  the  distribution  of  the  fund,  and
must  be  satisfied,  before  any  petition  is  read,
that  all  the  required  formalities  have  been
complied  with.  To  every  petition  must  be
added  a  recommendation,  signed  in  open
Lodge  by  the  Master,  Wardens,  and  a  ma¬
jority  of  the  members  then  present,  to
which  the  petitioner  does  or  did  belong,  or
from  some  other  contributing  Lodge,  certi¬
fying  that  they  have  known  him  to  have
been  in  reputable,  or  at  least  tolerable,  cir¬
cumstances,  and  that  he  has  been  not  less
than  two  years  a  subscribing  member  to  a
regular  Lodge.

Funds  of  the  Fodge.  The  funds  of
the  Lodge  are  placed  in  the  keeping  of  the
Treasurer,  to  whom  all  moneys  received  by
the  Secretary  must  be  immediately  paid.
Hence  each  of  these  officers  is  a  check  on
the  other.  And  hence,  too,  the  “  Thirty-
nine  Regulations”  of  1721  say  that  the
Treasurer  should  be  “a  brother  of  good
worldly  substance,”  lest  impecuniosity
should  tempt  him  to  make  use  of  the  Lodge
funds.

Funeral  Rites.  See  Burial.

Furlae.  A  word  in  the  high  degrees,
whose  etymology  is  uncertain,  but  probably
Arabic.  It  is  said  to  signify  the  angel  of
the  earth.

Furniture  of  a  Lodge.  The  Bible,
square,  aud  compasses  are  technically  said
to  constitute  the  furniture  of  a  Lodge.
They  are  respectfully  dedicated  to  God,  the
Master  of  the  Lodge,  and  the  Craft.  Our
English  brethren  differ  from  us  in  their  ex¬
planation  of  the  furniture.  Oliver  gives
their  illustration,  from  the  English  lectures,
as  follows :

“  The  Bible  is  said  to  derive  from  God
to  man  in  general,  because  the  Almighty
has  been  pleased  to  reveal  more  of  his


G

divine  will  by  that  holy  book  than  by  any
other  means.  The  compasses,  being  the
chief  implement  used  in  the  construction
of  all  architectural  plans  and  designs,  are
assigned  to  the  Grand  Master  in  particular
as  emblems  of  his  dignity,  he  being  the
chief  head  and  ruler  of  the  Craft.  The
square  is  given  to  the  whole  Masonic  body,
because  we  are  all  obligated  within  it,  and
are  consequently  bound  to  act  thereon.”
But  the  lecture  of  the  early  part  of  the  last
century  made  the  furniture  consist  of  the
Mosaic  Pavement,  Blazing  Star,  and  the  In¬
dented  Tarsel,  while  the  Bible,  square,  and
compass  were  considered  as  additional
furniture.

Fustier.  An  officer  of  the  Grand
Orient  of  France  in  the  beginning  of  this
century.  In  1810,  he  published,  and  pre¬
sented  to  the  Grand  Orient,  a  Geographical
Chart  of  the  Lodges  in  France  and  its  Depen¬
dencies.  He  was  the  author  of  several
memoirs,  dissertations,  etc.,  on  Masonic
subjects,  and  of  a  manuscript  entitled  No¬
menclature  Alphabetique  des  Grades.  Oliver
[Landmarks,  ii.  95,)  says  that  he  promul¬
gated  a  new  system  of  sixty-four  degrees.
I  think  he  has  mistaken  Fustier’s  catalogue
of  degrees  invented  by  others  for  a  system
established  by  himself.  I  can  find  no  rec¬
ord  elsewhere  of  such  a  system.  Lenning
says  ( Encyc .  der  Freimaurerei )  that  Fustier
was  a  dealer  in  Masonic  decorations  and  in
the  transcript  of  rituals,  of  which  he  had
made  a  collection  of  more  than  four  hun¬
dred,  which  he  sold  at  established  prices.

Future  Fife.  Lorenzo  de  Medici
said  that  all  those  are  dead,  even  for  the
present  life,  who  do  not  believe  in  a  future
state.  The  belief  in  that  future  life,  it  is
the  object  of  Freemasonry,  as  it  was  of  the
ancient  initiations,  to  teach.


G.


G.  As  in  all  Roman  Catholic  and  in
many  Protestant  churches  the  cross,  en¬
graved  or  sculptured  in  some  prominent
position,  will  be  found  as  the  expressive
symbol  of  Christianity,  so  in  every  Masonic
Lodge  a  letter  G  may  be  seen  in  the  east,
either  painted  on  the  wall  or  sculptured  in
wood  or  metal,  and  suspended  over  the
Master’s  chair.  This  is,  in  fact,  if  not  the
most  prominent,  certainly  the  most  familiar,
of  all  the  symbols  of  Freemasonry.  It  is
the  one  to  which  the  poet  Burns  alluded  in


those  well-known  and  often-quoted  lines,
in  which  he  speaks  of

“ - that  hieroglyphic  bright,

Which  none  but  Craftsmen  ever  saw ;  ”

that  is  to  say,  ever  saw  understanding^  —
ever  saw,  knowing  at  the  same  time  what  it
meant.

There  is  an  uncertainty  as  to  the  exact
time  when  this  symbol  was  first  introduced
into  Speculative  Masonry.  It  was  not  de¬
rived,  in  its  present  form,  from  the  opera-


G


G


301


tive  Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  who  be¬
stowed  upon  Freemasonry  so  much  of  its
symbolism,  for  it  is  not  found  among  the
architectural  decorations  of  the  old  cathe¬
drals.  Dr.  Oliver  says  it  was  “  in  the  old
lectures ;  ”  but  this  is  an  uncertain  expres¬
sion.  From  Prichard’s  Masonry  Dissected,
which  was  published  in  1730,  it  would  seem
that  the  symbol  was  not  in  use  at  that  date.
But  it  may  have  been  omitted.  If  Tubal
Cain,  which  was  published  in  1768,  is,  as
it  purported  to  be,  identical  with  Prichard’s
work,  the  question  is  settled ;  for  it  contains
the  lecture  on  the  letter  G,  to  which  refer¬
ence  will  directly  be  made.

It  is,  however,  certain  that  the  symbol
was  well  known  and  recognized  in  1766,  and
some  few  years  before.  The  book  entitled
Solomon  in  all  his  Glory,  the  first  edition
of  which  appeared  in  that  year,  and  is  said,
on  the  title-page,  to  be  a  translation  of  a
French  original,  contains  the  reference  to
and  the  explanation  of  the  symbol.  The
work  contains  abundant  internal  evidence
that  it  is  a  translation,  and  hence  the  sym¬
bol  may,  like  some  others  of  the  system
subsequent  to  1717,  have  been  first  intro¬
duced  on  the  Continent,  and  then  returned
in  the  translation,  all  of  which  would  indi¬
cate  a  date  some  years  anterior  to  1776  for
the  time  of  its  adoption.

In  the  ritual  contained  in  Tubal  Cain,
(p.  18,)  or,  if  that  be  only  a  reprint,  in  Ma¬
sonry  Dissected,  that  is  to  say,  in  1768  or
in  1730,  there  is  a  test  which  is  called  “The
Repeating  the  Letter  G,”  and  which  Dr.
Oliver  gives  in  his  Landmarks  (i.  454)  as  a
part  of  the  “  old  lectures.”  It  is  doggerel
verse,  and  in  the  form  of  a  catechism  be¬
tween  an  examiner  and  a  respondent,  a
form  greatly  affected  in  these  old  lectures,
and  is  as  follows :

“Resp. —  In  the  Midst  of  Solomon’s  Temple
there  stands  a  G,

A  letter  for  all  to  read  and  see ;

But  few  there  be  that  understand
What  means  the  letter  G.

“  Ex.  —  My  friend,  if  you  pretend  to  be
Of  this  Fraternity,

You  can  forthwith  and  rightly  tell
What  means  that  letter  G.

“  Resp.  —  By  sciences  are  brought  about,
Bodies  of  various  kinds,

Which  do  appear  to  perfect  sight ;
But  none  but  males  snail  know  my
mind.

“  Ex.  —  The  Right  shall.

“Resp.  — If  Worshipful.

“Ex.  —  Both  Right  and  Worshipful  I  am;
To  hail  you  I  have  command,

That  you  forthwith  let  me  know.
As  I  you  may  understand.


“  Resp.  —  By  letters  four  and  science  five,

This  G  aright  doth  stand;

In  a  due  art  and  proportion ;

You  have  your  answer,  Friend.”

And  now  as  to  the  signification  of  the
symbol.  We  may  say,  in  the  first  place,
that  the  explanation  is  by  no  means,  and
never  has  been,  esoteric.  As  the  symbol  it¬
self  has  always  been  exposed  to  public  view,
forming,  as  it  does,  a  prominent  part  of  the
furniture  of  a  Lodge,  to  he  seen  by  every
one,  so  our  Masonic  authors,  from  the
earliest  times,  have  not  hesitated  to  write,
openly  and  in  the  plainest  language,  of  its
signification.  The  fact  is,  that  the  secret
instruction  in  reference  to  this  symbol  re¬
lates  not  to  the  knowledge  of  the  symbol
itself,  hut  to  the  mode  in  which,  and  the
object  for  which,  that  knowledge  has  been
obtained.

Hutchinson,  who  wrote  as  early  as  1776,
says,  in  his  Spirit  of  Masonry,  (Lect.  viii.,j
“  It  is  now  incumbent  on  me  to  demonstrate
to  you  the  great  signification  of  the  letter
G,  wherewith  Lodges  and  the  medals  of
Masons  are  ornamented.

“To  apply  it  to  the  name  of  God  only  is
depriving  it  of  part  of  its  Masonic  import;
although  I  have  already  shown  that  the
symbols  used  in  Lodges  are  expressive  of
the  Divinity’s  being  the  great  object  of  Ma¬
sonry  as  Architect  of  the  world.

“This  significant  letter  denotes  Geome¬
try,  which,  to  artificers,  is  the  science  by
which  all  their  labors  are  calculated  and
formed ;  and  to  Masons  contains  the  deter¬
mination,  definition,  and  proof  of  the  order,
beauty,  and  wonderful  wisdom  of  the  power
of  God  in  His  creation.”

Again,  Dr.  Frederick  Dalcho,  a  distin¬
guished  Mason  of  South  Carolina,  in  one
of  his  Orations,  delivered  and  published  in
1801,  uses  the  following  language:

“  The  letter  G,  which  ornaments  the  Mas¬
ter’s  Lodge,  is  not  only  expressive  of  the
name  of  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  uni¬
verse,  but  also  denotes  the  science  of  Geom¬
etry,  so  necessary  to  artists.  But  the  adop¬
tion  of  it  by  Masons  implies  no  more  than
their  respect  for  those  inventions  which
demonstrate  to  the  world  the  power,  the
wisdom,  and  beneficence  of  the  Almighty
Builder  in  the  works  of  the  creation.”

Lastly,  Dr.  Oliver  has  said,  in  his  Golden
Remains  of  the  Early  Masonic  Writers,  that
“  the  term  G.  A.  O.  T.  U.  is  used  among
Masons  for  this  great  and  glorious  being,
designated  by  the  letter  G,  that  it  may  be
applied  by  every  brother  to  the  object  of
his  adoration.”

More  quotations  are  unnecessary  to  show
that  from  the  earliest  times,  since  "the  adop¬
tion  of  the  letter  as  a  symbol,  its  explaua-


302  G

tion  has  not  been  deemed  an  esoteric  or  se¬
cret  part  of  the  ritual.  No  Masonic  writer
has  hesitated  openly  to  give  an  explanation
of  its  meaning.  The  mode  in  which,  and
the  purpose  for  which,  that  explanation
was  obtained  are  the  only  hidden  things
about  the  symbol.

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  letter  G,  as
a  symbol,  was  ever  admitted  into  the  Ma¬
sonic  system.  The  use  of  it,  as  an  initial,
would  necessarily  confine  it  to  the  English
language  and  to  modern  times.  It  wants,
therefore,  as  a  symbol,  the  necessary  char¬
acteristics  of  both  universality  and  anti¬
quity.  The  Greek  letter  gamma  is  said  to
have  been  venerated  by  the  Pythagoreans
because  it  was  the  initial  of  yeuyerpia,  or
Geometry.  But  this  veneration  could  not
have  been  shared  by  other  nations  whose
alphabet  had  no  gamma ,  and  where  the
word  for  geometry  was  entirely  different.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  letter  G
is  a  very  modern  symbol,  not  belonging  to
any  old  system  anterior  to  the  origin  of  the
English  language.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  corrup¬
tion  m  the  old  Hebrew  Kabbalistic  symbol,
the  letter  yod,  t,  by  which  the  sacred  name
of  God  —  in  fact,  the  most  sacred  name,  the
Tetragrammatou  —  is  expressed.  This  let¬
ter,  yod,  is  the  initial  letter  of  the  word
mn\  or  Jehovah,  and  is  constantly  to  be
met  with  among  Hebrew  writers,  as  the
abbreviation  or  symbol  of  that  most  holy
name,  which,  indeed,  was  never  written  at
length.  Now,  as  G  is  in  like  manner  the
initial  of  God,  the  English  equivalent  of
the  Hebrew  Jehovah,  the  letter  has  been
adopted  as  a  symbol  intended  to  supply  to
modern  Lodges  the  place  of  the  Hebrew
symbol.  First  adopted  by  the  English
ritual  makers,  it  has,  without  remark,  been
transferred  to  the  Masonry  of  the  Conti¬
nent,  and  it  is  to  be  found  as  a  symbol  in
all  the  systems  of  Germany,  France,  Spain,
Italy,  Portugal,  and  every  other  country
where  Masonry  has  been  introduced;  al¬
though  in  Germany  only  can  it  serve,  as  it
does  in  England,  for  an  intelligent  symbol.

The  letter  G,  then,  has  in  Masonry  the
same  force  and  signification  that  the  letter
yod  had  among  the  Kabbalists.  It  is  only  a
symbol  of  the  Hebrew  letter,  and,  as  that
is  a  symbol  of  God,  the  letter  G  is  only  a
symbol  of  a  symbol.  As  for  its  reference
to  geometry,  Kloss,  the  German  Masonic
historian,  says  that  the  old  Operative  Ma¬
sons  referred  the  entire  science  of  geometry
to  the  art  of  building,  which  gave  to  the
modern  English  Masons  occasion  to  em¬
brace  the  whole  system  of  Freemasonry
under  the  head  of  Geometry,  and  hence
the  symbol  of  that  science,  as  well  as  of
God,  was  adopted  for  the  purpose  of  giving
elevation  to  the  Fellow  Craft’s  degree.


GABAOC

Indeed,  the  symbol,  made  sacred  by  its
reference  to  the  Grand  Geometrician  of  the
universe,  was  well  worthy  to  be  applied  to
that  science  which  has,  from  the  remotest
times,  been  deemed  synonymous  with  Ma¬
sonry.

Gabaon.  A  significant  word  in  the
high  degrees.  Oliver  says,  ( Landm .,  i.  335,)
“  in  philosophical  Masonry,  heaven,  or,
more  correctly  speaking,  the  third  heaven,  is
denominated  Mount  Gabaon,  which  is
feigned  to  be  accessible  only  by  the  seven
degrees  that  compass  the  winding  staircase.
These  are  the  degrees  terminating  in  the
Royal  Arch.”  Gabaon  is  defined  to  signify
“  a  high  place.”  It  is  the  Septuagint  and
Vulgate  form  of  |U’3J,  Gibeon,  which  was
the  city  in  which  the  tabernacle  was  sta¬
tioned  during  the  reigns  of  David  and  Sol¬
omon.  The  word  means  a  city  built  on  a  hill,
and  is  referred  to  in  2  Chron.  i.  3.  “So
Solomon,  and  all  the  congregation  with  him,
went  to  the  high  place  that  was  at  Gibeon;
for  there  was  the  tabernacle  of  the  congre¬
gation  of  God.”

In  a  ritual  of  the  middle  of  the  last  cen¬
tury,  it  is  said  that  Gabanon  is  the  name
of  a  Master  Mason.  This  word  is  a  striking
evidence  of  the  changes  which  Hebrew
words  have  undergone  in  their  transmission
to  Masonic  rituals,  and  of  the  almost  im¬
possibility  of  tracing  them  to  their  proper
root.  It  would  seem  difficult  to  find  a  con¬
nection  between  Gabanon  and  any  known
Hebrew  word.  But  if  we  refer  to  Guille-
main’s  Ritual  of  Adonhiramite  Masonry,  we
will  fiud  the  following  passage:

“  Q.  How  is  a  Master  called?

“  A.  Gabaoc,  which  is  the  name  of  the
place  where  the  Israelites  deposited  the
ark  in  the  time  of  trouble.

“  Q.  What  does  this  signify?

“A.  That  the  heart  of  a  Mason  ought  to
be  pure  enough  to  be  a  temple  suitable  for
God.”

There  is  abundant  internal  evidence  that
these  two  rituals  came  from  a  common
source,  and  that  Gabaoc  is  a  French  distor¬
tion,  as  Gabanon  is  an  English  one,  of  some
unknown  word — connected,  however,  with
the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  as  the  place  where
that  article  was  deposited.

Now,  we  learn  from  the  Jewish  records
that  the  Philistines,  who  had  captured  the
ark,  deposited  it  “  in  the  house  of  Abinadab
that  was  in  Gibeah  ;  ”  and  that  David,  sub¬
sequently  recapturing  it,  carried  it  to  Jeru¬
salem,  but  left  the  tabernacle  at  Gibeon.
The  ritualist  did  not  remember  that  the
tabernacle  at  Gibeon  was  without  the  ark,
but  supposed  that  :t  was  still  in  thatsacred
shrine.  Hence,  Gabaoc  or  Gabanon  must
have  been  corrupted  from  either  Gibeah  or
Gibeon,  because  the  ark  was  considered  to


GABAONNE


GAVEL


303


be  at  some  time  in  both  places.  But  Gib-
eon  had  already  been  corrupted  by  the
Septuagint  and  the  Vulgate  versions  into
Gabaon;  and  this  undoubtedly  is  the  word
from  which  Gabanon  is  derived,  through
either  the  Septuagint  or  the  Vulgate,  or
perhaps  from  Josejjhus,  who  calls  it  Gabao.

Gakaonne.  In  French  Masonic  lan¬
guage,  the  widow  of  a  Master  Mason.  De¬
rived  from  Gabaon.

Gabor.  Heb.,  strong.  A  signifi¬
cant  word  in  the  high  degrees.

Gabriel.  Heb.,  a  man  of  God.

The  name  of  one  of  the  archangels,  referred
to  in  some  of  the  high  degrees.

Gaetliekc,  Joliann  Christian.
A  bookseller  of  Berlin,  born  on  the  1-1  th
of  December,  1763,  and  initiated  into  Ma¬
sonry  in  1804.  He  took  much  interest  in
the  Order,  and  was  the  author  of  several
works,  the  most  valuable  and  best  known
of  which  is  the  Freimaurer- Lexicon,  or
Freemason’s  Lexicon,  published  in  1818  ;
which,  although  far  inferior  to  that  of  Len-
ning,  which  appeared  four  years  afterwards,
is,  as  a  pioneer  work,  very  creditable  to  its
author.  The  Lexicon  was  translated  into
English  and  published  in  the  London  Free¬
mason's  Magazine.

Galahad.  Also  spelled  Galaad.  Most
probablj  a  corruption  of  Gilead.  Said  in
the  old  rituals  to  have  been  the  keeper  of
the  Seals  in  the  Scottish  degree  of  Knights
of  the  Ninth,  Arch  or  Sacred  Vault  of
James  VI.

G.*.  A.*.  O.*.  T.*.  IJ.'.  An  abbrevia¬
tion  of  Grand  Architect  of  the  Universe,  which
see.

Garinus.  Said  in  the  old  ritual  of
the  degree  of  Knights  of  the  East  and  West
to  have  been  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,
between  whose  hands  the  first  Knights  of
that  Order  took,  in  1182,  their  vows.  It  is
a  corruption,  by  the  French  ritualists,  of
Garimond  or  Garimund,  Patriarch  of  Je¬
rusalem,  before  whom  the  Hospitallers  took
their  three  vows  of  obedience,  chastity,  and
poverty.

Gassicourt,  Cadet  de.  An  apothe¬
cary  of  Paris,  who,  in  the  year  1796,  pub¬
lished  a  work  entitled  Le  Tombeau  de
Jacques  Molai,  ou  histoire  secrlte  et  abregee
dcs  inities  anciens  et  modernes.  In  this  book,
which  embraced  all  the  errors  of  Barruel
and  Robison,  he  made  the  same  charges  of
atheism  and  conspiracy  against  the  Frater¬
nity,  and  loaded  the  Chevalier  Ramsay,  the
inventor  of  some  of  the  high  degrees,  with
the  most  vehement  indignation  as  a  libertine
and  traitor.  ButDe  Gassicourt  subsequently
acknowledger!  his  folly  in  writing  against
a  society  of  which  he  really  knew  nothing.
In  fact,  in  1805,  he  solicited  admission  into
the  Order,  and  was  initiated  in  the  Lodge
“  I’Abeille,”  at  Paris,  where,  in  the  various


offices  of  Orator  and  Master,  which  he  filled,
he  taught  and  recommended  that  Institu¬
tion  which  he  had  once  abused ;  and  even
on  a  public  occasion  pronounced  the  eulogy
of  that  Ramsay  whom  he  had  formerly
anathematized.

Gaston,  John.  Grand  Dube  of  Tus¬
cany;  in  1737  he  inaugurated  a  persecu¬
tion  against  the  Freemasons  in  his  domin¬
ions.  See  Tuscany.

Gates  of  the  Temple.  In  the  sys¬
tem  of  Freemasonry,  the  Temple  of  Solo¬
mon  is  represented  as  having  a  gate  on  the
east,  west,  and  south  sides,  but  none  on  the
north.  In  reference  to  the  historical  Tem¬
ple  of  Jerusalem,  such  a  representation  is
wholly  incorrect.  In  the  walls  of  the  build¬
ing  itself  there  were  no  places  of  entrance
except  the  door  of  the  porch,  which  gave
admission  to  the  house.  But  in  the  sur¬
rounding  courts  there  were  gates  at  every
point  of  the  compass.  The  Masonic  idea
of  the  Temple  is,  however,  entirely  symbolic.
TheTemple  is  to  the  Speculati  veMason  only
a  symbol  not  an  historical  building,  and
the  gates  are  imaginary  and  symbolic  also.
They  are,  in  the  first  place,  symbols  of  the
progress  of  the  sun  in  his  daily  course,
rising  in  the  east,  culminating  to  the  me¬
ridian  in  the  south,  and  setting  in  the  west.
They  are  also,  in  the  allegory  of  life,  which
it  is  the  object  of  the  third  degree  to  illus¬
trate,  symbols  of  the  three  stages  of  youth,
manhood,  and  old  age,  or,  more  properly  of
birth,  life,  and  death.

Gauge.  See  Tuenty-four-Inch  Gauge.

Gauntlets.  Gloves  formerly  made  of
steel  and  worn  by  knights  as  a  protection
to  their  hands  in  battle.  They  have  been
adopted  in  the  United  States,  as  a  part  of
the  costume  of  a  Knight  Templar,  under  a
regulation  of  the  Grand  Encampment,
which  directs  them  to  be  “  of  buff  leather,
the  flap  to  extend  four  inches  upwards  from
the  wrist,  and  to  have  the  appropriate  cross
embroidered  in  gold,  on  the  proper  colored
velvet,  two  inches  in  length.”

Gavel.  The  common  gavel  is  one  of
the  working  tools  of  an  Entered  Apprentice.
It  is  made  use  of  by  the  Operative  Mason
to  break  off  the  corners  of  the  rough  ashlar,
and  thus  fit  it  the  better  for  the  builder’s  use,
and  is  therefore  adopted  as  a  symbol  in
Speculative  Masonry,  to  admonish  us  of
the  duty  of  divesting  our  minds  and  con¬
sciences  of  all  the  vices  and  impurities  of
life,  thereby  fitting  our  bodies  as  living
stones  for  that  spiritual  building  not  made
with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.

It  borrows  its  name  from  its  shape,  being
that  of  the  gable  or  gavel  end  of  a  house ;
and  this  word  again  comes  from  the  Ger¬
man  gipfel,  a  summit,  top,  or  peak,  —  the
idea  of  a  pointed  extremity  being  common
to  all.


304


GEBAL


GENERAL


The  true  form  of  the  gavel  is  that  of  the

sto  n  e-mason’s
hammer.  It  is
to  be  made  with
a  cutting  edge,
as  in  the  annex¬
ed  engraving,
that  it  may  be
used  “  to  break
off  the  corners  of  rough  stones,”  an  opera¬
tion  which  could  never  be  effected  by  the
common  hammer  or  mallet.  The  gavel
thus  shaped  will  give,  when  looked  at  in
front,  the  exact  representation  of  the  gavel
or  gable  end  of  a  house,  whence,  as  I  have
already  said,  the  name  is  derived.

The  gavel  of  the  Master  is  also  called  a
“Hiram,”  because,  like  that  architect,  it
governs  the  Craft  and  keeps  order  in  the
Lodge,  as  he  did  in  the  Temple.

Gebal.  A  city  of  Phoenicia,  on  the
Mediterranean,  and  under  Mount  Lebanon.
It  was  the  Byblos  of  the  Greeks,  wffierethe
worship  of  Adonis,  the  Syrian  Thammuz,
wTas  celebrated.  The  inhabitants,  who  were
Giblites  or,  in  Masonic  language,  Giblemites,
are  said  to  have  beeu  distinguished  for  the
art  of  stone-carving,  and  are  called  in  the
first  Book  of  Kings  “  stone-squarers.”  See
Giblirru

Gedaliah.  The  second  officer  in  a
Council  of  Super-Excellent  Masters  repre¬
sents  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Pashur.  An
historical  error  has  crept  into  the  ritual  of
this  degree  in  reference  to  the  Gedaliah
who  is  represented  in  it.  I  have  sought
to  elucidate  the  question  in  my  work
on  Cryptic  Masonry  in  the  following
manner:

There  are  five  persons  of  the  name  of
Gedaliah  who  are  mentioned  in  Scripture,
but  only  two  of  them  were  contemporary
with  the  destruction  of  the  Temple.

Gedaliah  the  son  of  Pashur  is  mentioned
by  the  prophet  Jeremiah  (xxxviii.  1)  as  a
prince  of  the  court  of  Zedekiah.  He  was
resent  at  its  destruction,  and  is  known  to
ave  been  one  of  the  advisers  of  the  king.  It
was  through  his  counsels,  and  those  of  his
colleagues,  that  Zedekiah  was  persuaded  to
deliver  up  the  prophet  Jeremiah  to  death,
from  which  he  was  rescued  only  by  the  in¬
tercession  of  a  eunuch  of  the  palace.

The  other  Gedaliah  was  the  son  of  Ahi-
kam.  He  seems  to  have  been  greatly  in
favor  with  Nebuchadnezzar,  for  after  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  deporta¬
tion  of  Zedekiah,  he  was  appointed  by  the
Chaldean  monarch  as  his  satrap  or  govern¬
or  over  Judea.  He  took  up  his  residence
at  Mizpah,  where  he  was  shortly  afterwards
murdered  by  Ishmael,  one  of  the  descend¬
ants  of  the  house  of  David.

The  question  now  arises,  which  of  these


two  is  the  one  referred  to  in  the  ceremonies
of  a  Council  of  Super- Excellent  Masters?
I  think  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
founders  of  the  degree  intended  the  second
officer  of  the  Council  to  represent  the  former,
and  not  the  latter  Gedaliah  —  the  son  of
Pashur,  and  not  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahi-
kam ;  the  prince  of  Judah,  and  not  the
governor  of  Judea.

We  are  forced  to  this  conclusion  by  vari¬
ous  reasons.  The  Gedaliah  represented  iu
the  degree  must  have  been  a  resident  of
Jerusalem  during  the  siege,  and  at  the  very
time  of  the  assault,  which  immediately
preceded  the  destruction  of  the  Temple  anti
the  city.  Now,  we  know  that  Gedaliah  the
son  of  Pashur  was  with  Hezekiah  as  one
of  his  advisers.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is
most  unlikely  that  Gedaliah  the  son  of
Ahikam  could  have  been  a  resident  of
Jerusalem,  for  it  is  not  at  all  probable  that
Nebuchadnezzar  would  have  selected  such
an  one  for  the  important  and  confidential
office  of  a  satrap  or  governor.  We  should
rather  suppose  that  Gedaliah  the  son  of
Ahikam  had  been  carried  away  to  Babylon
after  one  of  the  former  sieges;  that  he  had
there,  like  Daniel,  gained  by  his  good  con¬
duct  the  esteem  and  respect  of  the  Chal¬
dean  monarch ;  that  he  had  come  back  to
Judea  with  the  army;  and  that,  on  the
taking  of  the  city,  he  had  been  appointed
governor  by  Nebuchadnezzar.  Such  being
the  facts,  it  is  evident  that  he  could  not
have  been  in  the  council  of  King  Zedekiah,
advising  and  directing  his  attempted  escape.

The  modern  revivers  of  the  degree  of
Super-Excellent  Master  have,  therefore,
been  wrong  in  supposing  that  Gedaliah  the
son  of  Ahikam,  and  afterwards  governor  of
Judea,  was  the  person  represented  by  the
second  officer  of  the  Council.  He  was  Ge¬
daliah  the  son  of  Pashur,  a  wicked  man,
one  of  Zedekiah’s  princes,  and  was  most
probably  put  to  death  by  Nebuchadnezzar,
with  the  other  princes  and  nobles  whom  he
captured  in  the  plains  of  Jericho.

Gemara.  See  Talmud.

General  Assembly.  See  Assembly.

General  Grand  Chapter.  Until
the  year  1797,  the  Royal  Arch  degree  and
the  degrees  subsidiary  to  it  were  conferred
in  this  country,  either  in  irresponsible  bodies
calling  themselves  Chapters,  but  obedient
to  no  superior  authority,  or  in  Lodges  work¬
ing  under  a  Grand  Lodge  Warrant.  On
the  24th  of  October,  1797,  a  convention  of
committees  from  three  Chapters,  namely,
St.  Andrew’s  Chapter  of  Boston,  Temple
Chapter  of  Albany,  and  Newburyport
Chapter,  was  held  at  Boston,  which  re¬
commended  to  the  several  Chapters  with¬
in  the  States  of  New  Hampshire,  Massa¬
chusetts,  Rhode  Island,  Connecticut,  Ver-


GENERAL


GENERAL


305


mont,  and  New  York,  to  hold  a  convention
at  Hartford  on  the  fourth  Wednesday  of
January  ensuing,  to  form  a  Grand  Chapter
for  the  said  States.

Accordingly,  on  the  24th  of  January,
1798,  delegates  from  St.  Andrew’s  Chapter
of  Boston,  Mass. ;  King  Cyrus  Chapter  of
Newburyport,  Mass. ;  Providence  Chapter
of  Providence,  R.  I. ;  Solomon  Chapter  of
Derby,  Conn.;  Franklin  Chapter  of  Nor¬
wich,  Conn.;  Franklin  Chapter  of  New
Haven,  Conn. ;  and  Hudson  Chapter  of
Hudson,  N.  Y. ;  to  which  were  the  next
day  added  Temple  Chapter  of  Albany,  N.
Y.,  and  Horeb  Chapter  of  Whitestown,
N.  Y.,  assembled  at  Hartford  in  Conven¬
tion,  and,  having  adopted  a  Constitution,  or¬
ganized  a  governing  body  which  they  styled,
“The  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the
Northern  States  of  America.”  This  body
assumed  in  its  Constitution  jurisdiction  over
only  the  States  of  New  England  and  New
York,  and  provided  that  Deputy  Grand
Chapters,  subject  to  its  obedience,  should
be  organized  in  those  States.  Ephraim
Kirby,  of  Litchfield,  Conn.,  was  elected
Grand  High  Priest;  and  it  was  ordered  that
the  first  meeting  of  the  Grand  Chapter
should  be  held  at  Middletown,  Conn.,  on
the  third  Wednesday  of  September  next
ensuing.

On  that  day  the  Grand  Chapter  met,  but
the  Grand  Secretary  and  Grand  Chaplain
were  the  only  Grand  ofiicers  present.  The
Grand  King  was  represented  by  a  proxy.
The  Grand  Chapter,  however,  proceeded  to
an  election  of  Grand  officers,  and  the  old
officers  were  elected.  The  body  then  ad¬
journed  to  meet  in  January,  1799,  at  Provi¬
dence,  R.  I.

On  the  9th  of  January,  1799,  the  Grand
Chapter  met  at  Providence,  the  Deputy
Grand  Chapters  of  Massachusetts,  Rhode
Island,  and  New  York  being  represented.
At  this  meeting,  the  Constitution  was
very  considerably  modified,  and  the  Grand
Chapter  assumed  the  title  of  “  The  General
Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  for  the
six  Northern  States  enumerated  in  the  pre¬
amble.”  The  meetings  were  directed  to  be
held  septennially ;  and  the  Deputy  Grand
Chapters  were  in  future  to  be  called  “State
Grand  Chapters.”  No  attempt  was,  how¬
ever,  made  in  words  to  extend  the  jurisdic¬
tion  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  beyond
the  States  already  named.

On  the  9th  of  January,  1806,  a  meeting
of  the  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter
was  held  at  Middletown,  representatives
being  present  from  the  States  of  Rhode
Island,  Connecticut,  Vermont,  and  New
York.  The  Constitution  was  again  revised.
The  title  was  for  the  first  time  assumed  of
“  The  General  Grand  Chapter  of  Royal


Arch  Masons  for  the  United  States  of
America,”  and  jurisdiction  was  extended
over  the  whole  country.  This  year  may,
therefore,  be  considered  as  the  true  date  of
the  establishment  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter.

In  1826,  the  septennial  meetings  were
abolished,  and  the  General  Grand  Chapter
has  ever  since  met  triennially.

The  General  Grand  Chapter  consists  of
the  present  and  past  Grand  High  Priests,
Deputy  Grand  High  Priests,  Grand  Kings
and  Scribes  of  the  State  Grand  Chapters,
and  the  Past  General  Grand  officers.

The  officers  are  a  General  Grand  High
Priest,  Deputy  General  Grand  High  Priest,
General  Grand  King,  General  Grand  Scribe,
General  Grand  Treasurer,  General  Grand
Secretary,  General  Grand  Chaplain,  Gen¬
eral  Grand  Captain  of  the  Host,  and  Gen¬
eral  Grand  Royal  Arch  Captain.

It  originally  possessed  large  prerogatives,
extending  even  to  the  suspension  of  Grand
Chapters;  but  by  its  present  Constitution
it  has  “  no  power  of  discipline,  admonition,
censure,  or  instruction  over  the  Grand
Chapters,  nor  any  legislative  powers  what¬
ever  not  specially  granted”  by  its  Consti¬
tution.  It  may,  indeed,  be  considered  as
scarcely  more  than  a  great  Masonic  Con¬
gress  meeting  triennially  for  consultation.
But  even  with  these  restricted  powers,  it  is
capable  of  doing  much  good.

General  Grand  High  Priest.
The  presiding  officer  of  the  General  Graud
Chapter  of  tiie  United  States  of  America.
He  is  elected  every  third  year  by  the  Gen¬
eral  Grand  Chapter.  The  title  was  first
assumed  in  1799,  although  the  General
Grand  Chapter  did  not  at  that  time  extend
its  jurisdiction  beyond  six  of  the  Northern
States.

General  Grand  Lodge.  Ever
since  the  Grand  Lodges  of  this  country
began,  at  the  commencement  of  the  Revo¬
lutionary  war,  to  abandon  their  dependence
on  the  Grand  Lodges  of  England  and  Scot¬
land, —  that  is  to  say,  as  soon  as  they
emerged  from  the  subordinate  position  of
Provincial  Grand  Lodges,  and  were  com-
pellen  to  assume  a  sovereign  and  indepen¬
dent  character, — attempts  have,  from  time
to  time,  been  made  by  members  of  the
Craft  to  destroy  this  sovereignty  of  the
State  Grand  Lodges,  and  to  institute  in  its
place  a  superintending  power,  to  be  consti¬
tuted  either  as  a  Grand  Master  of  North
America  or  as  a  General  Grand  Lodge  of  the
UnitedStates.  Led,  perhaps,  by  the  analogy
of  the  united  Colonies  under  one  federal
head,  or,  in  the  very  commencement  of  the
Revolutionary  struggle,  controlled  by  long
habits  of  dependence  on  the  mother  Grand
Lodges  of  Europe,  the  contest  hud  no


306


GENERAL


GENERAL


sooner  begun,  and  a  disseverance  of  politi¬
cal  relations  between  England  and  America
taken  place,  than  the  attempt  was  made  to
institute  the  office  of  Grand  Master  of  the
United  States,  the  object  being  —  of  which
there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  —  to  invest
Washington  with  the  distinguished  dignity.

The  effort  emanated,  it  appears,  with  the
military  Lodges  in  the  army.  For  a  full
account  of  it  we  are  indebted  to  the  indus¬
trious  researches  of  Bro.  E.  G.  Storer,  who
published  the  entire  Minutes  of  the  “Amer¬
ican  Union  Lodge,”  attached  to  the  Con¬
necticut  line,  in  his  work  on  The  Early
Records  of  Freemasonry  in  the  State  of  Con¬
necticut.

On  the  27th  of  December,  1779,  the
Lodge  met  to  celebrate  the  day  at  Morris¬
town,  in  New  Jersey,  which,  it  will  be  re¬
membered,  was  then  the  winter-quarters  of
the  army.  At  that  communication  —  at
which,  it  may  be  remarked,  by  the  way,
“  Bro.  Washington”  is  recorded  among  the
visitors  —  a  petition  was  read,  represent¬
ing  the  present  state  of  Freemasonry  to
the  several  Deputy  Grand  Masters  in  the
United  States  of  America,  desiring  them  to
adopt  some  measures  for  appointing  a  Grand
Master  over  said  States.

The  petition  purports  to  emanate  from
“Ancient  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  in
the  several  lines  of  the  army  ;  ”  and  on  its
being  read,  it  was  resolved  that  a  committee
be  appointed  from  the  different  Lodges  in
the  army,  and  from  the  staff,  to  meet  in
convention  at  Morristown  on  the  7th  of
February  next.  Accordingly,  on  the  7th
of  February,  1780,  a  convention,  called  in
the  records  “  a  committee,”  met  at  Morris¬
town.  This  convention  adopted  an  address
to  the  “  Grand  Masters  of  the  several
Lodges  in  the  respective  United  States-.”
The  recommendations  of  this  address  were
that  the  said  Grand  Masters  should  adopt
and  pursue  the  most  necessary  measures
for  establishing  one  Grand  Lodge  in  Amer¬
ica,  to  preside  over  and  govern  all  other
Lodges  of  whatsoever  degree  or  denomina¬
tion,  licensed  or  to  be  licensed,  upon  the
continent;  that  they  should  nominate,  as
Grand  Master  of  said  Lodge,  a  brother
whose  merit  and  capacity  may  be  adequate
to  a  station  so  important  and  elevated  ;
and  that  his  name  should  be  transmitted
“to  our  Grand  Mother  Lodge  in  Europe”
for  approbation  and  confirmation.

This  convention  contained  delegates  from
the  States  of  Massachusetts,  Connecticut,
New  York,  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,
Delaware,  and  Maryland.  Between  the
time  of  its  conception,  on  the  27th  of  De¬
cember,  1779,  and  that  of  its  meeting  on
the  7th  of  February,  1780,  that  is  to  say  in
January,  1780,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Penn¬


sylvania  had  held  an  emergent  meeting,
and  in  some  measure  anticipated  the  pro¬
posed  action  of  the  convention  by  electing
General  Washington  Grand  Master  of  the
United  States.

From  the  contemporaneous  character  of
these  events,  it  would  seem  probable  that
there  was  some  concert  of  action  between
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  and  the
Masons  of  Morristown.  Perhaps,  the  ini¬
tiative  having  been  taken  by  the  latter  in
December,  the  former  determined  to  give
its  influence,  in  January,  to  the  final  recom¬
mendations  which  were  to  be  made  in  the
following  February.  All  this,  however,
although  plausible,  is  but  conjecture.
Nothing  appears  to  have  resulted  from  the
action  of  either  body.  The  only  further
reference  which  I  find  to  the  subject,  in
subsequent  Masonic  documents,  is  the  dec¬
laration  of  a  convention  held  in  1783,  to
organize  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland,
where  it  is  remarked  that  “  another  Grand
Lodge  was  requisite  before  an  election
could  be  had  of  a  Grand  Master  for  the
United  States.”

But  the  attempt  to  form  a  General  Grand
Lodge,  although,  on  this  occasion,  unsuc¬
cessful,  was  soon  to  be  renewed.  In  1790,
the  proposition  was  again  made  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Georgia,  and  here,  true  to
the  Roman  axiom,  Tempora  mutantur  et
nos  mutamur  in  illis,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Pennsylvania  became  the  opponent  of  the
measure,  and  declared  it  to  be  impracti¬
cable.

Again,  in  1799,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
South  Carolina  renewed  the  proposition,
and  recommended  a  convention  to  be  held
at  the  city  of  Washington  for  the  purpose
of  establishing  a  “Superintending  Grand
Lodge  of  America.”  The  reasons  assigned
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina  for
making  this  proposition  are  set  forth  in  the
circular  which  it  issued  on  the  subject  to
its  sister  Grand  Lodges.  They  are  “  to
draw  closer  the  bonds  of  union  between  the
different  Lodges  of  the  United  States,  and
to  induce  them  to  join  in  some  systematic
plan  whereby  the  drooping  spirit  of  the
Ancient  Craft  may  be  revived  and  become
more  generally  useful  and  beneficial,  and
whereby  Ancient  Masonry,  so  excellent  and
beautiful  in  its  primitive  institution,  may
be  placed  upon  such  a  respectable  and  firm
basis  in  this  western  world  as  to  bid  defi¬
ance  to  the  shafts  of  malice  or  the  feeble
attempts  of  any  foreign  disclaimers  to
bring  it  into  disrepute.”  The  allusion
here  is  to  the  Abbe  Barruel,  who  had  just
published  his  abusive  and  anti-Masonic
History  of  Jacobinism.

Several  Grand  Lodges  acceded  to  the
proposition  for  holding  a-  convention,  al-


GENERAL


GENERAL


307


though  they  believed  the  scheme  of  a
“Superintending  Grand  Lodge”  inexpedi¬
ent  and  impracticable;  but  they  were  will¬
ing  to  send  delegates  for  the  purpose  of
producing  uniformity  in  the  Masonic  sys¬
tem.  The  convention,  however,  did  not
assemble.

•  The  proposition  was  again  made  in  1803,
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  North  Carolina,
and  with  a  like  want  of  success.

In  1806,  the  subject  of  a  General  Grand
Lodge  was  again  presented  to  the  consid¬
eration  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  the  Union,
and  propositions  were  made  for  conventions
to  be  held  in  Philadelphia  in  1807,  and  in
Washington  city  in  1808,  neither  of  which
was  convened.  The  “  Proceedings  ”  of  the
various  Grand  Lodges  in  the  years  1806,
1807,  and  1808  contain  allusions  to  this
subject,  most  of  them  in  favor  of  a  conven¬
tion  to  introduce  uniformity,  but  unfavor¬
able  to  the  permanent  establishment  of  a
General  Grand  Lodge.  North  Carolina,
however,  in  1807,  expressed  the  opinion
that  “  a  National  Grand  Lodge  should  pos¬
sess  controlling  and  corrective  powers  over
all  Grand  Lodges  under  its  jurisdiction.”

An  unsuccessful  attempt  was  again  made
to  hold  a  convention  at  Washington  in
January,  1811,  “  for  the  purpose  of  forming
a  Superintending  Grand  Lodge  of  Amer¬
ica.”

After  the  failure  of  this  effort,  the  Grand
Lodge  of  North  Carolina,  which  seems  to
have  been  earnest  in  its  endeavors  to  ac¬
complish  its  favorite  object,  again  proposed
a  convention,  to  be  convoked  at  Washing¬
ton  in  1812.  But  the  effort,  like  all  which
had  preceded  it,  proved  abortive.  No  con¬
vention  was  held.

The  effort  seems  now,  after  all  these  dis¬
couraging  efforts,  to  have  been  laid  upon
the  shelf  for  nearly  ten  years.  At  length,
however,  the  effort  for  a  convention  which
had  so  often  failed  was  destined  to  meet
with  partial  success,  and  one  rather  extem¬
poraneous  in  its  character  was  held  in
Washington  on  the  8th  of  March,  1822.
Over  this  convention,  which  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Maryland  rather  equivocally  de¬
scribes  as  “composed  of  members  of  Con¬
gress  and  strangers,”  the  renowned  orator
and  statesman  Henry  Clay  presided.  A
strong  appeal,  most  probably  from  the  facile
pen  of  its  eloquent  president,  was  made  to
the  Grand  Lodges  of  the  country  to  concur
in  the  establishment  of  a  General  Grand
Lodge.  But  the  appeal  fell  upon  unwilling
ears,  and  the  Grand  Lodges  continued  firm
in  their  opposition  to  the  organization  of
such  a  superintending  body.

The  subject  was  again  brought  to  the
attention  of  the  Fraternity  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Maryland,  which  body,  at  its


communication  in  May,  1845,  invited  its
sister  Grand  Lodges  to  meet  in  convention
at  Baltimore  on  the  23d  of  September,  1847,
for  the  purpose  of  reporting  a  Constitution
of  a  General  Grand  Lodge.

This  convention  met  at  the  appointed
time  and  place,  but  only  seven  Grand
Lodges  were  represented  by  twice  that
number  of  delegates.  A  Constitution  was
formed  for  a  “Supreme  Grand  Lodge  of
the  United  States,”  which  was  submitted
for  approval  or  rejection  to  the  Grand
Lodges  of  the  Union.  The  opinion  ex¬
pressed  of  that  Constitution  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Ohio,  “that  it  embraced,  in  seve¬
ral  of  its  sections,  indefinite  and  unmeaning
powers,  to  which  it  was  impossible  to  give
a  definite  construction,  and  that  it  gave  a
jurisdiction  to  the  body  which  that  Grand
Lodge  would  in  no  event  consent  to,”  seems
to  have  been  very  generally  concurred  in
by  the  other  Grand  bodies,  and  the  “  Su¬
preme  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States”
never  went  into  operation.  The  formation
of  its  Constitution  was  its  first,  its  last,  and
its  only  act.

The  next  action  that  we  find  on  this
much  discussed  subject  was  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  New  York,  which  body  recom¬
mended,  in  1848,  that  each  of  the  Grand
Lodges  should  frame  the  outlines  of  a  Gen¬
eral  Grand  Constitution  such  as  would  be
acceptable  to  it,  and  send  it  with  a  delegate
to  a  convention  to  be  holden  at  Boston  in
1850,  at  the  time  of  meeting  of  the  Gen¬
eral  Grand  Chapter  and  Geueral  Grand  En¬
campment.  The  committee  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  New  York,  who  made  this  recom¬
mendation,  also  presented  the  outlines  of  a
General  Grand  Constitution.

This  instrument  defines  the  jurisdic¬
tion  of  the  proposed  General  Grand
Lodge  as  intended  to  be  “over  all  contro¬
versies  and  disputes  between  the  different
Grand  Lodges  which  may  become  parties
to  the  compact,  when  such  controversies
are  referred  for  decision ;  and  the  decisions
in  all  cases  to  be  final  w'hen  concurred  in
by  a  majority  of  the  Grand  Lodges  present;”
but  it  disclaims  all  appeals  from  State  Grand
Lodges  or  their  subordinates  in  matters  re¬
lating  to  their  own  internal  affairs.  It  is
evident  that  the  friends  of  the  measure  had
abated  much  of  their  pretensions  since  the
year  1779,  when  they  wanted  a  Grand
Lodge  of  America,  “to  preside  over  and
govern  all  other  Lodges  of  whatsoever  de¬
gree  or  denomination,  licensed  or  to  be
licensed,  on  the  continent.”

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Rhode  Island  also
submitted  the  draft  of  a  General  Grand
Constitution,  more  extensive  in  its  details
than  that  presented  by  New  York,  but  sub¬
stantially  the  same  in  principle.  The


308


GENERAL


GENUFLECTION


Grand  Lodge  of  the  District  of  Columbia
also  concurred  in  the  proposition.  The
convention  did  not,  however,  meet;  for  the
idea  of  a  Supreme  Grand  Lodge  was  still
an  unpopular  one  with  the  Craft,  in  Jan¬
uary,  1850,  Texas  expressed  the  general
sentiment  of  the  Fraternity  when  it  said:
“The  formation  of  a  General  Grand  Lodge
will  not  accomplish  the  desired  end.  The
same  feeling  and  spirit  that  now  lead  to
difficulties  between  the  different  Grand
Lodges  would  produce  insubordination  and
disobedience  of  the  edicts  of  a  General
Grand  Lodge.”

But  another  attempt  was  to  be  made  by
its  friends  to  carry  this  favorite  measure,
and  a  convention  of  delegates  was  held  at
Lexington,  Ky.,  in  September,  1853,  during
the  session  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter
and  Encampment  at  that  city.  This  con¬
vention  did  little  more  than  invite  the
meeting  of  a  fuller  convention,  whose  dele¬
gates  should  be  clothed  with  more  plenary
powers,  to  assemble  at  Washington  in  Jan¬
uary,  1855.

The  proposed  convention  met  at  Wash¬
ington,  and  submitted  a  series  of  nine  propo¬
sitions  styled  “Articles  of  Confederation.”
The  gist  of  these  articles  is  to  be  found  in
the  initial  one,  and  is  in  these  words :  “All
matters  of  difficulty  which  may  hereafter
arise  in  any  Grand  Lodge,  or  between  two
or  more  Grand  Lodges  of  the  United  States,
which  cannot  by  their  own  action  be  satis¬
factorily  adjusted  or  disposed  of,  shall,  if
the  importance  of  the  case  or  the  common
welfare  of  the  Fraternity  demand  it,  be
submitted,  with  accompanying  evidence  and
documents,  to  the  several  Grand  Lodges  in
their  individual  capacities;  and  the  con¬
current  decision  thereon  of  two-thirds  of
the  whole  number,  officially  communicated,
shall  be  held  authoritative,  binding,  and
final  on  all  parties  concerned.”

The  provisions  of  these  articles  were  to
be  considered  as  ratified,  and  were  to  take
effect  as  soon  as  they  were  approved  by
twenty  Grand  Lodges  of  the  United  States.
It  is  needless  to  say  that  this  approbation
was  never  received,  and  the  proposed  con¬
federation  failed  to  assume  a  permanent
form.

It  will  be  perceived  that  the  whole  ques¬
tion  of  a  General  Grand  Lodge  is  here,  at
once  and  in  full,  abandoned.  The  proposition
was  simply  for  a  confederated  league,  with
scarcely  a  shadow  of  power  to  enforce  its
decisions,  with  no  penal  jurisdiction  what¬
soever,  and  with  no  other  authority  than
that  which,  from  time  to  time,  might  be
delegated  to  it  by  the  voluntary  consent  of
the  parties  entering  into  the  confederation.
If  the  plan  had  been  adopted,  the  body
would,  in  all  probability,  have  died  in  a


few  years  of  sheer  debility.  There  was  no
principle  of  vitality  to  keep  it  together.

But  the  friends  of  a  General  Grand  Lodge
did  not  abandon  the  hope  of  effecting  their
object,  and  in  1857  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Maine  issued  a  circular,  urging  the  forma¬
tion  of  a  General  Grand  Lodge  at  a  con¬
vention  to  be  held  at  Chicago  in  September,
1859,  during  the  session  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter  and  General  Grand  En¬
campment  at  that  city.  This  call  was  gen¬
erally  and  courteously  responded  to;  the
convention  was  held,  but  it  resulted  in  a
failure,  and  since  then  all  idea  of  a  Gen¬
eral  Grand  Lodge  appears  to  have  been
abandoned.

Generalissimo.  The  second  officer
in  a  Commandery  of  Knights  Templars,  and
one  of  its  representatives  in  the  Grand
Commaudery.  His  duty  is  to  receive  and
communicate  all  orders,  signs,  and  peti¬
tions;  to  assist  the  Eminent  Commander,
and,  in  his  absence,  to  preside  over  the
Commandery.  His  station  is  on  the  right
of  the  Eminent  Commander,  aad  his  jewel
is  a  square,  surmounted  by  a  paschal
lamb.

The  use  of  the  title  in  Templarism  is  of
very  recent  origin,  and  peculiar  to  this
country.  No  such  officer  was  known  in
the  old  Order.  It  is,  besides,  inappropriate
to  a  subordinate  officer,  being  derived  from
the  French  generalissime,  and  that  from  the
Italian  generalissimo,  both  signifying  a  su¬
preme  commander.  It  has  the  same  mean¬
ing  in  English.

Gentleman  Mason.  In  some  of
the  old  lectures  of  the  last  century  this  title
is  used  as  equivalent  to  Speculative  Free¬
mason.  Thus  they  had  the  following  cate¬
chism  :

“  Q.  What  do  you  learn  by  being  a  Gen¬
tleman  Mason?

“A.  Secrecy,  Morality,  and  Good-Fellow¬
ship.

“  Q.  What  do  you  learn  by  being  an
Operative  Mason?

“A.  Hew,  Square,  Mould  stone,  lay  a
Level,  and  raise  a  Perpendicular.”

Hence  we  see  that  Gentleman  Mason  was
in  contrast  with  Operative  Mason.

Genuflection.  Bending  the  knees
has,  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  been  consid¬
ered  as  an  act  of  reverence  and  humility,
and  hence  Pliny,  the  Roman  naturalist,
observes,  that  “  a  certain  degree  of  religious
reverence  is  attributed  to  the  knees  of  a
man.”  Solomon  placed  himself  in  this  po¬
sition  when  he  prayed  at  the  consecration
of  the  Temple;  and  Masons  use  the  same
posture  in  some  portions  of  their  ceremo¬
nies,  as  a  token  of  solemn  reverence.  In
Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  during  prayer,  it  is
the  custom  for  the  members  to  stand,  but  in


GEOMETRICAL


GERMANY


309


the  higher  degrees,  kneeling,  and  generally
on  one  knee,  is  the  more  usual  form.
Geometrical  Master  Mason.  A

term  in  use  in  England  during  the  last  cen¬
tury.  By  the  primitive  regulations  of  the
Grand  Chapter,  an  applicant  for  the  Royal
Arch  degree  was  required  to  produce  a  cer¬
tificate  that  he  was  “  a  Geometrical  Master
Mason,”  and  had  passed  the  chair.  The
word  Geometrical  was  here  synonymous
with  Speculative.

Geometric  Points.  In  the  lan¬
guage  of  French  Masonry,  this  name  is
given  to  the  four  cardinal  points  of  the
compass,  because  they  must  agree  with  the
four  sides  of  a  regular  Temple  or  Lodge.
They  are  a  symbol  of  regularity  and  per¬
fection.

Geometry.  In  the  modern  rituals,
geometry  is  said  to  be  the  basis  on  which
the  superstructure  of  Masonry  is  erected ;
and  in  the  old  Constitutions  of  the  Medi¬
eval  Freemasons  of  England  the  most
prominent  place  of  all  the  sciences  is  given
to  geometry,  which  is  made  synonymous
with  Masonry.  Thus,  in  the  Halliwell  MS.,
which  dates  not  later  than  the  latter  part  of
the  fourteenth  century,  the  Constitutions
of  Masonry  are  called  “the  Constitution  of
the  art  of  geometry  according  to  Euclid,”
the  words  geometry  and  Masonry  being
used  indifferently  throughout  the  document;
and  in  the  Harleian  MS.  it  is  said,  “  thus
the  craft  Geometry  was  governed  there,  and
that  worthy  Master  (Euclid)  gave  it  the
name  of  Geometry,  and  it  is  called  Masonrie
in  this  land  long  after.”  In  another  part
of  the  same  MS.  it  is  thus  defined :  “  The
fifth  science  is  called  Geometry,  and  it
teaches  a  man  to  mete  and  measure  of  the
earth  and  other  things,  which  science  is
Masonrie.”

The  Egyptians  were  undoubtedly  one  of
the  first  nations  who  cultivated  geometry
as  a  science.  “  It  was  not  less  useful  and
necessary  to  them,”  as  Goguet  observes,
( Orig.  des  Lois.,  I.,  iv.  4,)  “  in  the  affairs  of
life,  than  agreeable  to  their  speculatively
philosophical  genius.”  From  Egypt,  which
was  the  parent  both  of  the  sciences  and  the
mysteries  of  the  Pagan  world,  it  passed
over  into  other  countries ;  and  geometry
and  Operative  Masonry  have  ever  been
found  together,  the  latter  carrying  into  ex¬
ecution  those  designs  which  were  first
traced  according  to  the  principles  of  the
former.

Speculative  Masonry  is,  in  like  manner,
intimately  connected  with  geometry.  In
deference  to  our  operative  ancestors,  and,
in  fact,  as  a  necessary  result  of  our  close
connection  with  them,  Speculative  Free¬
masonry  derives  its  most  important  symbols
from  this  parent  science.  Hence  it  is  not


strange  that  Euclid,  the  most  famous  of
geometricians,  should  be  spoken  of  in  all
the  Old  Records  as  a  founder  of  Ma¬
sonry  in  Egypt,  and  that  a  special  legend
should  have  been  invented  in  honor  of  his
memory.

Georgia.  Freemasonry  was  intro¬
duced  at  a  very  early  period  into  the  pro¬
vince  of  Georgia.  Roger  Lacey  is  said  to
have  been  the  first  Provincial  Grand  Mas¬
ter,  and  to  him  the  warrant  for  Solomon’s
Lodge,  at  Savannah,  was  directed  in  1735.
Rockwell  (Ahim.  Rez.,  p.  323,)  denies  this,
and  thinks  that  there  was  an  earlier  Lodge
organized  by  Lacey,  perhaps  in  1730.  The
original  warrant  of  Solomon’s  Lodge  has,
however,  been  destroyed,  and  we  have  no
authentic  evidence  on  the  subject ;  although
it  is  very  generally  conceded  that  the  intro¬
duction  of  organized  Masonry  into  Georgia
does  not  date  later  than  the  year  1735.
There  is  no  evidence,  except  tradition,  of
the  existence  of  an  earlier  Lodge.  In  1786
—  Mitchell,  (Hist.,  i.  570,)  with  his  usual
typographical  inaccuracy,  says  1776  —  the
Independent  Grand  Lodge  of  Georgia  was
formed,  Samuel  Elbert,  (again  Mitchell
blunders  and  says  Elliot,)  the  last  Provin¬
cial  Grand  Master  resigning  his  position  to
William  Stephens,  who  was  elected  the  first
Grand  Master.

Gorman  Union  of  Two  and
Twenty.  A  secret  society  founded  in
Germany,  in  1786,  by  Dr.  Bahrdt,  whose
only  connection  with  Freemasonry  was
that  Bahrdt  and  the  twenty-one  others  who
founded  it  were  Masons,  and  that  they  in¬
vited  to  their  co-operation  the  most  dis¬
tinguished  Masons  of  Germany.  The
founder  professed  that  the  object  of  the  as¬
sociation  was  to  diffuse  intellectual  light,
to  annihilate  superstition,  and  to  perfect
the  human  race.  Its  instruction  was  di¬
vided  into  six  degrees,  as  follows:  1.  The
Adolescent;  2.  The  Man ;  3.  The  Old  Man ;
4.  The  Mesopolite ;  5.  The  Diocesan ;  6.
The  Superior.  The  first  three  degrees  were
considered  a  preparatory  school  for  the  last
three,  out  of  which  the  rules  of  the  society
were  chosen.  It  lasted  only  four  years,  and
was  dissolved  by  the  imprisonment  of  its
founder  for  a  political  libel,  most  of  its
members  joining  the  Illuminati.  The  pub¬
lication  of  a  work  in  1789  entitled  Mehr
Noten  als  Text,  etc.,  i.  e.,  More  Notes  than
Text,  or  The  German  Union  of  XXII.,  which
divulged  its  secret  organization,  tended  to
hasten  its  dissolution.  See  Bahrdt.

Germany.  Of  all  countries  Germany
plays  the  most  important  part  in  the  history
of  ancient  Masonry,  since  it  was  there  that
the  gilds  of  Operative  Stone-masons  first
assumed  that  definite  organization  which
subsequently  led  to  the  establishment  of


310


GHIBLIM


GILDS


Speculative  Freemasonry.  But  it  was  not
until  a  later  date  that  the  latter  institution
obtained  a  footing  on  German  soil.  Findel
{Hist.,  p.  238,)  says  that  as  early  as  1730
temporary  Lodges,  occupied  only  in  the
communication  of  Masonic  knowledge  and
in  the  study  of  the  ritual,  were  formed  at
different  points.  But  the  first  regular  Lodge
was  established  at  Hamburg,  in  1733,  under
a  warrant  of  Lord  Strathmore,  Grand  Mas¬
ter  of  England;  which  did  not,  however,
come  into  active  operation  until  four  years
later.  Its  progress  was  at  first  slow ;  but,
under  the  patronage  of  Frederick  the  Great,
it  assumed  a  firm  footing,  which  it  has  never
lost,  and  nowhere  is  Freemasonry  now  more
popular  or  more  deserving  of  popularity.
Its  scholars  have  brought  to  the  study  of
its  antiquities  and  its  philosophy  all  the
laborious  research  that  distinguishes  the
Teutonic  mind,  and  the  most  learned  works
on  these  subjects  have  emanated  from  the
German  press.  The  detailed  history  of  its
progress  would  involve  the  necessity  of  no
ordinary  volume.

Ghiblim.  The  form  in  which  Dr.
Anderson  spells  Giblim.  In  the  Book  of
Constitutions,  ed.  1738,  page  70,  it  is  stated
that  in  1350  “John  de  Spoulee,  call’d  Mas¬
ter  of  the  Ghiblim,"  rebuilt  St.  George’s
chapel.

Gibalim.  A  Masonic  corruption  of
Giblim,  the  Giblites,  or  men  of  Gebal.  See
Giblim.

Giblim.  Heb.,  D^J.  A  significant
word  in  Masonry.  It  is  the  plural  of  the
Gentile  noun  Gibli,  (the  g  pronounced
hard,)  and  means,  according  to  the  idiom
of  the  Hebrew,  Giblites,  or  inhabitants  of
the  city  of  Gebal.  The  Giblim,  or  Giblites,
are  mentioned  in  Scripture  as  assisting
Solomon’s  and  Hiram’s  builders  to  prepare  .
the  trees  and  the  stones  for  building  the
Temple,  and  from  this  passage  it  is  evident
that  they  were  clever  artificers.  The  pas¬
sage  is  in  1  Kings  v.  18,  and,  in  our  common
version,  is  as  follows:  “And  Solomon’s
builders  and  Hiram’s  builders  did  hew
them,  and  the  stone-squarers ;  so  they  pre¬
pared  timber  and  stones  to  build  the  house,”
where  the  word  translated  in  the  authorized
versiou  by  stone-squarers  is,  in  the  original,
Giblim.  It  is  so  also  in  that  translation
known  as  the  Bishop’s  Bible.  The  Geneva
version  has  masons.  The  French  version
of  Martin  has  tailleurs  de  pierres,  following
the  English ;  but  Luther,  in  his  German
version,  retains  the  original  word  Giblim.

It  is  probable  that  the  English  transla¬
tion  followed  the  Jewish  Targum,  which
has  a  word  of  similar  import  in  this  pas¬
sage.  The  error  has,  however,  assumed
importance  in  the  Masonic  ritual,  where
Giblim  is  supposed  to  be  synonymous  with  j


a  Mason.  And  Sir  Wm.  Drummond  con¬
firms  this  by  saying,  in  his  Origines,  (vol.
iii.,  b.  v.,  ch.  iv.,  p.  129,)  that  “  the  Gibalim
were  Master  Masons  who  put  the  finishing
hand  to  King  Solomon’s  Temple.”  See
Gebal.

Gilds.  The  word  gild,  guild,  or  geld,
from  the  Saxon  gildan,  to  pay,  originally
meant  a  tax  or  tribute,  and  hence  those
fraternities  which,  in  the  early  ages,  con¬
tributed  sums  to  a  common  stock,  were
called  Gilds.  Cowell,  the  old  English  jurist,
defines  a  Gild  to  be  “a  fraternity  or  com¬
monality  of  men  gathered  together  into
one  combination,  supporting  their  common
charge  by  mutual  contribution.”

Societies  of  this  kind,  but  not  under  the
same  name,  were  known  to  the  ancient
Greeks  and  Romans,  and  their  artificers
and  traders  were  formed  into  distinct  com¬
panies  which  occupied  particular  streets
named  after  them.  But  according  to  Dr.
Lujo  Brentano,  who  published,  in  1870,  an
essay  on  The  Hustoi'y  and  Development  of
Gilds,  England  is  the  birthplace  of  the  Med¬
iaeval  Gilds,  from  whom  he  says  that  the
modern  Freemasons  emerged.  They  ex¬
isted,  however,  in  every  country  of  Europe,
and  we  identify  them  in  the  Compagnons
de  la  Tour  of  France,  and  the  Baucorpora-
tionen  of  Germany.  The  difference,  how¬
ever,  was  that  while  they  were  patronized
by  the  municipal  authorities  in  England,
they  were  discouraged  by  both  the  Church
and  State  on  the  Continent.

The  Gilds  in  England  were  of  three
kinds,  Religious  Gilds,  Merchant  Gilds,
and  Craft  Gilds,  specimens  of  all  of  which
still  exist,  although  greatly  modified  in
their  laws  and  usages.  The  Religious  or
Ecclesiastical  Gilds  are  principally  found
in  Roman  Catholic  countries,  where,  under
the  patronage  of  the  Church,  they  often  ac¬
complish  much  good  by  the  direction  of
their  benevolence  to  particular  purposes.
Merchant  Gilds  are  exemplified  in  the
twelve  great  Liverv  Companies  of  London.
And  the  modern  Trades  Unions  are  noth¬
ing  else  but  Craft  Gilds  under  another
name.  But  the  most  interesting  point  in
the  history  of  the  Craft  Gilds  is  the  fact
that  from  them  arose  the  Brotherhoods  of
the  Freemasons.

Brentano  gives  the  following  almost  ex¬
haustive  account  of  the  organization  and
customs  of  the  Craft  Gilds :

“  The  Craft  Gilds  themselves  first  sprang
up  amongst  the  free  craftsmen,  when  they
were  excluded  from  the  fraternities  which
had  taken  the  place  of  the  family  unions,
and  later  among  the  bondmen,  when  they
ceased  to  belong  to  the  familia  of  their
lord.  Like  those  Frith  Gilds,  the  object
of  the  early  Craft  Gilds  was  to  create  rela-


GILDS


GILDS


311


tions  as  if  among  brothers ;  and  above  all
things,  to  grant  to  their  members  that  as¬
sistance  which  the  member  of  a  family
might  expect  from  that  family.  As  men’s
wants  had  become  different,  this  assistance
no  longer  concerned  the  protection  of  life,
limbs,  and  property,  for  this  was  provided
for  by  the  Frith  Gilds,  now  recognized  as
the  legitimate  authority;  but  the  princi¬
pal  object  of  the  Craft  Gilds  was  to  secure
their  members  in  the  independent,  unim-
aired,  and  regular  earning  of  their  daily
read  by  means  of  their  craft.

“The  very  soul  of  the  Craft  Gild  was
its  meetings,  which  brought  all  the  Gild
brothers  together  every  week  or  quarter.
These  meetings  were  always  held  with  cer¬
tain  ceremonies,  for  the  sake  of  greater
solemnity.  The  box,  having  several  locks
like  that  of  the  Trade  Unions,  and  contain¬
ing  the  charters  of  the  Gild,  the  statutes,
the  money,  and  other  valuable  articles,  was
opened  on  such  occasions,  and  all  present
had  to  uncover  their  heads.  These  meetings
possessed  all  the  rights  which  they  them¬
selves  had  not  chosen  to  delegate.  They
elected  the  presidents  (originally  called
Aldermen,  afterwards  Masters  and  War¬
dens)  and  other  officials,  except  in  those
cases  already  mentioned,  in  which  the  Mas¬
ter  was  appointed  by  the  king,  the  bishop,
o’  the  authorities  of  the  town.  As  a  rule,
the  Gilds  were  free  to  choose  their  Masters,
either  from  their  own  members,  or  from
men  of  higher  rank,  though  they  were
sometimes  limited  in  their  choice  to  the
former.

“The  Wardens  summoned  and  presided
at  the  meetings,  with  their  consent  enacted
ordinances  for  the  regulation  of  the  trade,
saw  these  ordinances  properly  executed,
and  watched  over  the  maintenance  of  the
customs  of  the  Craft.  They  had  the  right
to  examine  all  manufactures,  and  a  right
of  search  for  all  unlawful  tools  and  pro¬
ducts.  They  formed,  with  the  assistance
of  a  quorum  of  Gild  brothers,  the  highest
authority  in  all  the  concerns  of  the  Gild.
No  Gild  member  could  be  arraigned  about
trade  matters  before  any  other  judge.  We
have  still  numerous  documentary  proofs  of
the  severity  and  justice  with  which  the
Wardens  exercised  their  judicial  duties.
Whenever  they  held  a  court,  it  was  under
special  forms  and  solemnities;  thus,  for
instance,  in  1275  the  chief  Warden  of  the
masons  building  Strasburg  cathedral  held
a  court  sitting  under  a  canopy.

“  Resides  being  brotherhoods  for  the  care
of  the  temporal  welfare  of  their  members,
the  Craft  Gilds  were,  like  the  rest  of  the
Gilds,  at  the  same  time  religious  fraterni¬
ties.  In  the  account  of  the  origin  of  the
Company  of  Grocers,  it  is  mentioned  that


at  the  very  first  meeting  they  fixed  a  sti¬
pend  for  the  priest,  who  had  to  conduct
their  religious  services  and  pray  for  their
dead.  In  this  respect  the  Craft  Gilds  of
all  countries  are  alike ;  and  in  reading  their
statutes,  one  might  fancy  sometimes  that
the  old  craftsmen  cared  only  for  the  well¬
being  of  their  souls.  All  had  particular
saints  for  patrons,  after  whom  the  society
was  frequently  called ;  and,  where  it  was
possible,  they  chose  one  who  had  some  re¬
lation  to  their  trade.  They  founded  masses,
altars,  and  painted  windows  in  cathedrals;
and  even  at  the  present  day  their  coats  of
arms  and  their  gifts  range  proudly  by  the
side  of  those  of  kings  and  barons.  Some¬
times  individual  Craft  Gilds  appear  to  have
stood  in  special  relation  to  a  particular
church,  by  virtue  of  which  they  bad  to
perform  special  services,  and  received  in
return  a  special  share  in  all  the  prayers  of
the  clergy  of  that  church.  In  later  times,
the  Craft  Gilds  frequently  went  in  solemn
procession  to  their  churches.  We  find  in¬
numerable  ordinances  also  as  to  the  support
of  the  sick  and  poor ;  and  to  afford  a  set¬
tled  asylum  for  distress,  the  London  Com¬
panies  early  built  dwellings  near  their
halls.  The  chief  care,  however,  of  the
Gildmen  was  always  directed  to  the  wel¬
fare  of  the  souls  of  the  dead.  Every  year
a  requiem  was  sung  for  all  departed  Gild
brothers,  when  they  were  all  mentioned  by
name;  and  on  the  death  of  any  member,
special  services  were  held  for  his  soul,  and
distribution  of  alms  was  made  to  the  poor,
who,  in  return,  had  to  offer  up  prayers  for
the  dead,  as  is  still  the  custom  in  Roman
Catholic  countries.”

In  a  History  of  the  English  Guilds,  edited
by  Toulmin  Smith  from  old  documents  in
the  Record' Office  at  London,  and  published
by  the  Early  English  Text  Society,  we  find
many  facts  confirmatory  of  those  given  by
Brentano,  as  to  the  organization  of  these
organizations.

The  testimony  of  these  old  records  shows
that  a  religious  element  pervaded  the  Gilds,
and  exercised  a  very  powerful  influence
over  them.  Women  were  admitted  to  all
of  them,  which  Herbert  ( Liv .  Comp.,  i.  83,)
thinks  was  borrowed  from  the  Ecclesiastical
Gilds  of  Southern  Europe;  and  the  breth¬
ren  and  sisters  were  on  terms  of  complete
equality.  There  were  fees  on  entrance,
yearly  and  special  payments,  and  fines  for
wax  for  lights  to  burn  at  the  altar  or  in
funeral  rites.  The  Gilds  had  set  days  of
meeting,  known  as  “  morning  speeches,”  or
“  days  of  spekyngges  totiedare  for  here
comune  profyte,”  and  a  grand  festival  on
the  patron  saint’s  day,  when  the  members
assembled  for  worship,  almsgiving,  feast¬
ing,  and  for  nourishing  of  brotherly  love.


312


GILKES


GLOBE


Mystery  plays  were  often  performed.  They
had  a  treasure-chest,  the  opening  of  which
was  a  sign  that  business  had  begun.  While
it  remained  open  all  stood  with  uncovered
heads,  when  cursing  and  swearing  and  all
loose  conduct  were  severely  punished.  The
Gild  property  consisted  of  land,  cattle,
money,  etc.  The  expenditure  was  on  the
sick  poor  and  aged,  in  making  good  losses
by  robbery,  etc.  Loans  were  advanced,
pilgrims  assisted,  and,  in  one  city,  “  any
good  girl  of  the  Gild”  was  to  have  a  dowry
on  marriage,  if  her  father  could  not  pro¬
vide  it.  Poor  travellers  were  lodged  and
fed.  Roads  were  kept  in  repair,  and
churches  were  sustained  and  beautified.
They  wore  a  particular  costume,  which  was
enforced  by  their  statutes,  whence  come  the
liveries  of  the  London  Companies  of  the
present  day  and  the  “clothing”  of  the  Free¬
masons.

An  investigation  of  the  usages  of  these
Mediaeval  Gilds,  and  a  comparison  of  their
regulations  with  the  old  Masonic  Constitu¬
tions,  will  furnish  a  fertile  source  of  inter¬
est  to  the  Masonic  archaeologist,  and  will
throw  much  light  on  the  early  history  of
Freemasonry.

Gilkes,  Peter  William.  Born  in
London  in  1765,  and  died  in  1833.  He
was  celebrated  for  his  perfect  knowledge
of  the  ritual  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry
according  to  the  English  ritual,  which  he
successfully  taught  for  many  years.  His
reputation  in  England  as  a  Masonic  teacher
was  very  great.

Girdle.  In  ancient  symbology  the
girdle  was  always  considered  as  typical  of
chastity  and  purity.  In  the  Brahmanical
initiations,  the  candidate  was  presented
with  the  Zennar,  or  sacred  cord,  as  a  part
of  the  sacred  garments;  and  Gibbon  says
that  “  at  the  age  of  puberty  the  faithful.
Persian  was  invested  with  a  mysterious
girdle;  fifteen  genuflections  were  required
after  he  put  on  the  sacred  girdle.”  The
old  Templars  assumed  the  obligations  of
poverty,  obedience,  and  chastity ;  and  a
girdle  was  given  them,  at  their  initiation,
as  a  symbol  of  the  last  of  the  three  vows.
As  a  symbol  of  purity,  the  girdle  is  still
used  in  many  chivalric  initiations,  and
may  be  properly  considered  as  the  analogue
of  the  Masonic  apron.

Glaire.  Peter  Maurice.  A  dis¬
tinguished  Mason,  who  was  born  in  Switzer¬
land  in  1713,  and  died  in  1819.  In  1764,
he  went  to  Poland,  and  became  the  inti¬
mate  friend  of  King  Stanislaus  Poniatow-
ski,  who  confided  to  him  many  important
diplomatic  missions.  During  his  residence
in  Poland,  Glaire  greatly  patronized  the
Freemasons  of  that  kingdom,  and  estab¬
lished  there  a  Rite  of  seven  degrees.  He


returned  to  Switzerland  in  1788,  where  he
continued  to  exercise  an  interest  in  Free¬
masonry,  and  in  1810  was  elected  Grand
Master  for  three  years,  and  in  1813,  for  life
of  the  Roman  Grand  Orient  of  Helvetia,
which  body  adopted  his  Rite.

Gleason,  Benjamin.  A  lecturer
and  teacher  of  the  Masonic  ritual,  accord¬
ing  to  the  system  of  Webb,  in  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  from  1806  to  1842.
Gleason  is  said  to  have  been  a  inan  of  lib¬
eral  education,  and  a  graduate  in  1802  of
Brown  University.  He  became  soon  after
a  pupil  of  Thomas  Smith  Webb,  whose
lectures  he  taught  in  Massachusetts  and
elsewhere.  The  assertion  of  some  writers
that  Gleason  went  to  England  and  lectured
before  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  which
recognized  his  or  Webb’s  system  as  being
the  same  as  that  of  Preston,  is  highly  im¬
probable  and  wants  confirmation.

Globe.  In  the  second  degree,  the  celes¬
tial  and  terrestrial  globes  have  been  adopted
as  symbols  of  the  universal  extension  of
the  Order,  and  as  suggestive  of  the  univer¬
sal  claims  of  brotherly  love.  The  symbol
is  a  very  ancient  one,  and  is  to  be  found  in
the  religious  systems  of  many  countries.
Among  the  Mexicans  the  globe  >vas  the
symbol  of  universal  power.  But  the  Ma¬
sonic  symbol  appears  to  have  been  derived
from,  or  at  least  to  have  an  allusion  to,
the  Egyptian  symbol  of  the  winged,  globe.
There  is  nothing  more  common  among  the
Egyptian  monuments  than  the  symbol  of  a
globe  supported  on  each  side  by  a  serpent,
and  accompanied  with  wings  extended  wide
beyond  them,  occupying  nearly  the  whole
of  the  entablature  above  the  entrance  of
many  of  their  temples.  We  are  thus  re¬
minded  of  the  globes  on  the  pillars  at  the
entrance  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon.  The
winged  globe,  as  the  symbol  of  Cneph,  the
Creator  Sun,  was  adopted  by  the  Egyptians
as  their  national  device,  as  the  Lion  is  that
of  England,  or  the  Eagle  of  the  United
States.  In  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  Isa¬
iah,  where  the  authorized  version  of  King
James’sBible  has  “  Woe  to  the  landshadow¬
ing  with  wings,”  Lowth,  after  Bochart,
translates,  “  Ho !  to  the  land  of  the
winged  cymbal,”  supposing  the  Hebrew
Sjtyp  to  mean  the  sistrum,  which  was  a
round  instrument,  consisting  of  a  broad
rim  of  metal,  having  rods  passing  through
it,  and  some  of  which,  extending  beyond
the  sides,  would,  says  Bishop  Lowth,  have
the  appearance  of  wings,  and  be  expressed
by  the  same  Hebrew  word.  But  Rosellini
translates  the  passage  differently,  and  says,
“  Ho,  land  of  the  winged  globe.”

Dudley,  in  his  Naologg,  (p.  18,)  says
that  the  knowledge  of  the  spherical  figure
of  the  earth  was  familiar  to  the  Egyptians


GLORY


GLOVES


313


iu  the  early  ages,  in  which  some  of  their
temples  were  constructed.  Of  the  round
figure  described  above,  he  says  that  al¬
though  it  be  called  a  globe,  an  egg,  the
symbol  of  the  world  was  perhaps  intended  ;
and  he  thinks  that  if  the  globes  of  the
Egyptian  entablatures  were  closely  ex¬
amined,  they  would  perhaps  be  found  of  an
oval  shape,  figurative  of  the  creation,  and
not  bearing  any  reference  to  the  form  of
the  world.

The  interpretation  of  the  Masonic  globes,
as  a  symbol  of  the  universality  of  Masonry,
would  very  well  agree  with  the  idea  of  the
Egyptian  symbol  referring  to  the  extent  of
creation.  That  the  globes  on  the  pillars,
placed  like  the  Egyptian  symbol  before
the  temple,  were  a  representation  of  the
celestial  and  terrestrial  globes,  is  a  very
modern  idea.  In  the  passage  of  the  Book
of  Kings,  whence  Masonry  has  derived  its
ritualistic  description,  it  is  said,  (1  Kings
vii.  16,)  “And  he  made  two  chapiters  of
molten  brass,  to  set  upon  the  tops  of  the
pillars.”  In  the  Masonic  ritual  it  is  said
that  “the  pillars  were  surmounted  by  two
pomels  or  globes.”  Now  pomel,  is  the

very  word  employed  by  Rabbi  Solomon  in
his  commentary  on  this  passage,  a  word
which  signifies  a  globe  or  spherical  body.
The  Masonic  globes  were  really  the  chap¬
iters  described  in  the  Book  of  Kings.  Again
it  is  said,  (1  Kings  vii.  22,)  “  Upon  the  top
of  the  pillars  was  lily  work.”  We  now
know  that  the  plant  here  called  the  lily
was  really  the  lotus,  or  the  Egyptian  water-
lily.  But  among  the  Egyptians  the  lotus
was  a  symbol  of  the  universe ;  and  hence,
although  the  Masons  in  their  ritual  have
changed  the  expanded  flower  of  the  lotus,
which  crowned  the  chapiter  and  surmounted
each  pillar  of  the  porch,  into  a  globe,  they
have  retained  the  interpretation  of  univer¬
sality.  The  Egyptian  globe  or  egg  and
lotus  or  lily  and  the  Masonic  globe  are  all
symbols  of  something  universal,  and  the
Masonic  idea  has  only  restricted  by  a
natural  impulse  the  idea  to  the  universality
ot  the  Order  and  its  benign  influences.  But
it  is  a  pity  that  Masonic  ritualists  did  not
reserve  the  Egyptian  and  scriptural  sym-
ol  of  the  lotus  surrounding  a  ball  or  sphere,
and  omit  the  more  modern  figures  of  globes
celestial  and  terrestrial.

Glory,  Symbol  of.  The  Blazing  Star
in  the  old  lectures  was  called  “the  glory
in  the  centre,”  because  it  was  placed  in  the
centre  of  the  floor-cloth,  and  represented
the  glorious  name  of  Deity.  Hence  Dr.
Oliver  gives  to  one  of  his  most  interesting
works,  which  treats  of  the  symbolism  of  the
Blazing  Star,  the  title  of  The  symbol  of
Glory.

Gloves.  In  the  continental  Rites  of
2  P


Masonry,  as  practised  in  France,  in  Ger¬
many,  and  in  other  countries  of  Europe,  it
is  an  invariable  custom  to  present  the  new¬
ly-initiated  candidate  not  only,  as  we  do,
with  a  white  leather  apron,  but  also  with
two  pair  of  white  kid  gloves,  —  one  a  man’s
pair  for  himself,  and  the  other  a  woman’s,  —
to  be  presented  by  him  in  turn  to  his  wife
or  his  betrothed,  according  to  the  custom
of  the  German  Masons,  or,  according  to  the
French,  to  the  female  whom  he  most  es¬
teems,  which,  indeed,  amounts,  or  should
amount,  to  the  same  thing.

There  is  in  this,  of  course,  as  there  is
in  everything  else  which  pertains  to  Free¬
masonry,  a  symbolism.  The  gloves  given
to  the  candidate  for  himself  are  intended
to  teach  him  that  the  acts  of  a  Mason
should  be  as  pure  and  spotless  as  the  gloves
now  given  to  him.  In  the  German  Lodges,
the  word  used  for  ads  is,  of  course,  hand-
lung,  or  handlings,  “  the  works  of  his  hands,”
which  makes  the  symbolic  idea  more  im¬
pressive.

Dr.  Robert  Plot  —  no  friend  of  Masonry,
but  still  an  historian  of  much  research  —
says,  in  his  Natural  History  of  Staffordshire,
that  the  Society  of  Freemasons  in  his  time
(and  he  wrote  in  1686)  presented  their  can¬
didates  with  gloves  for  themselves  and  their
wives.  This  shows  that  the  custom,  still
preserved  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  once
was  practised  in  England;  although  there,
as  well  as  in  America,  it  is  discontinued,
which  is  perhaps  to  be  regretted.

But  although  the  presentation  of  the
gloves  to  the  candidate  is  no  longer  prac¬
tised  as  a  ceremony  in  England  or  America,
yet  the  use  of  them  as  a  part  of  the  proper
professional  clothing  of  a  Mason  in  the
duties  of  the  Lodge  or  in  processions,  is
still  retained ;  and  in  many  well-regulated
Lodges  the  members  are  almost  as  regularly
clothed  in  their  white  gloves  as  in  their
white  aprons.

The  symbolism  of  the  gloves,  it  w’ill  be
admitted,  is  in  fact  hut  a  modification  of
that  of  the  apron.  They  both  signify  the
same  thing,  both  are  allusive  to  a  purifica¬
tion  of  life.  “  Who  shall  ascend,”  says  the
Psalmist,  “into  the  hill  of  the  Lord?  or
who  shall  stand  in  his  holy  place?  He
that  hath  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart.”
The  apron  may  be  said  to  refer  to  the  “  pure
heart;”  the  gloves,  to  the  “clean  hands.”
Both  are  significant  of  purification — of  that
purification  which  was  always  symbolized
by  the  ablution  which  preceded  the  ancient
initiations  into  the  sacred  mysteries.  But
while  our  American  and  English  Masons
have  adhered  only  to  the  apron,  and  rejected
the  gloves  as  a  Masonic  symbol,  the  latter
appear  to  be  far  more  important  in  symbolic
science,  because  the  allusions  to  pure  or


314


GLOVES


GNOSTICS


clean  hands  are  abundant  in  all  the  ancient
writers.

“  Hands,”  says  Weuiyss,  in  his  Clavis
Symbolica,  “  are  the  symbols  of  human  ac¬
tions — pure  hands  are  pure  actions;  unjust
hands  are  deeds  of  injustice.”  There  are
numerous  references  in  sacred  or  profane
writers  to  this  symbolism.  The  washing
of  the  hands  has  the  outward  sign  of  an
internal  purification.  Hence  the  Psalmist
says,  “  I  will  wash  my  hands  in  innocence,
and  I  will  encompass  thine  altar,  Jehovah.”

In  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  the  washing  of
the  hands  was  always  an  introductory  cere¬
mony  to  the  initiation,  and,  of  course,  it
was  used  symbolically  to  indicate  the  ne¬
cessity  of  purity  from  crime  as  a  qualifica¬
tion  of  those  who  sought  admission  into
the  sacred  rites ;  and  hence  on  a  temple  in
the  island  of  Crete  this  inscription  was
laced:  “Cleanse  your  feet,  wash  your
ands,  and  then  enter.”

Indeed,  the  washing  of  hands,  as  sym¬
bolic  of  purity,  was  among  the  ancients  a
peculiarly  religious  rite.  No  one  dared  to
ray  to  the  gods  until  he  had  cleansed  his
ands.  Thus,  Homer  makes  Hector  say,

“  I  dread  with  unwashed  hands  to  bring
My  incensed  wine  to  Jove  an  offering.”

The  same  practice  existed  among  the
Jews;  and  a  striking  instance  of  the  sym¬
bolism  is  exhibited  in  that  well-known  ac¬
tion  of  Pilate,  who,  when  the  Jews  clam¬
ored  for  Jesus  that  they  might  crucify  him,
appeared  before  the  people,  and,  having
taken  water,  washed  his  hands,  saying  at
the  same  time,  “I  am  innocent  of  the
blood  of  this  just  man.  See  ye  to  it.”  In
the  Christian  Church  of  the  Middle  Ages,
gloves  were  always  worn  by  bishops  or
priests  when  in  the  performance  of  ecclesi¬
astical  functions.  They  were  made  of  linen
and  were  white;  and  Durandus,  a  celebrated
ritualist,  says  that  “  by  the  white  gloves
were  denoted  chastity  and  purity,  because
the  hands  were  thus  kept  clean  and  free
from  all  impurity.”

There  is  no  necessity  to  extend  examples
any  further.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the
use  of  the  gloves  in  Masonry  is  a  symbolic
idea,  borrowed  from  the  ancient  and  uni¬
versal  language  of  symbolism,  and  was  in¬
tended,  like  the  apron,  to  denote  the  neces¬
sity  of  purity  of  life.

The  builders,  who  associated  in  com¬
panies,  who  traversed  Europe  and  were  en¬
gaged  in  the  construction  of  palaces  and
cathedrals,  have  left  to  us,  as  their  de¬
scendants,  their  name,  their  technical  lan¬
guage,  and  the  apron,  that  distinctive  piece
of  clothing  by  which  they  protected  their
garments  from  the  pollutions  of  their  labo¬


rious  employment.  Did  they  also  bequeath
to  us  their  gloves?  This  is  a  question
which  some  modern  discoveries  will  at  last
enable  us  to  solve.  '

M.  Didron,  in  his  Annales  Archeologiquet,
presents  us  with  an  engraving  copied  from
the  painted  glass  of  a  window  in  the  Cathe¬
dral  of  Chartres,  in  France.  The  painting
was  executed  in  the  thirteenth  century,  and
represents  a  number  of  operative  masons
at  work.  Three  of  them  are  adorned  with
laurel  crow’ns.  May  not  these  be  intended
to  represent  the  three  officers  of  a  Lodge?
All  of  the  masons  wear  gloves.  M.  Didron
remarks  that  in  the  old  documents  which
he  has  examined  mention  is  often  made  of
gloves  which  are  intended  to  be  presented
to  masons  and  stone-cutters.  In  a  subse¬
quent  number  of  the  Annales,  he  gives  the
following  three  examples  of  this  fact:

In  the  year  1331,  the  Chatelan  of  Vil-
laines,  in  Duemois,  bought  a  considerable
quantity  of  gloves  to  be  given  to  the  work¬
men,  in  order,  as  it  is  said,  “  to  shield  their
hands  from  the  stone  and  lime.”

In  October,  1383,  as  he  learns  from  a
document  of  that  period,  three  dozen  pair
of  gloves  were  bought  and  distributed  to
the  masons  when  they  commenced  the
buildings  at  the  Chartreuse  of  Dijon.

And,  lastly,  in  1486  or  1487,  twenty-two
pair  of  gloves  were  given  to  the  masons
and  stone-cutters  who  were  engaged  in  work
at  the  city  of  Amiens.

It  is  thus  evident  that  the  builders  —  the
operative  masons — of  the  Middle  Ages  wore
gloves  to  protect  their  hands  from  the
effects  of  their  work.  It  is  equally  evident
that  the  Speculative  Masons  have  received
from  their  operative  predecessors  the  gloves
as  well  as  the  apron,  both  of  which,  being
used  by  the  latter  for  practical  uses,  have
been,  in  the  spirit  of  symbolism,  apprepri-
ated  by  the  former  to  “  a  more  noble  and
glorious  purpose.”

Gnostics.  The  general  name  of  Gnos¬
tics  has  been  employed  to  designate  several
sects  that  sprung  up  in  the  eastern  parts
of  the  Roman  empire  about  the  time  of  the
advent  of  Christianity ;  although  it  is  sup¬
posed  that  their  principal  doctriues  had
been  taught  centuries  before  in  many  of
the  cities  of  Asia  Minor.  The  word  Gnos¬
ticism  is  derived  from  the  Greek  Gnosie  or
knowledge,  and  was  a  term  used  in  the  ear¬
liest  days  of  philosophy  to  signify  the  sci¬
ence  of  divine  things,  or,  as  Matter  says,
“  superior  or  celestial  knowledge.”  He
thinks  the  word  was  first  used  by  the  Jew¬
ish  philosophers  of  the  famous  school  of
Alexandria.  The  favorite  opinion  of
scholars  is  that  the  sect  of  Gnostics  arose
among  the  philosophers  who  were  the  con¬
verts  of  Paul  and  the  other  Apostles,  and


GNOSTICS


GOD


315


who  sought  to  mingle  the  notions  of  the
Jewish  Egyptian  school,  the  speculations
of  the  Kabbalists,  and  the  Grecian  and
Asiatic  doctrines  with  the  simpler  teachings
of  the  new  religion  which  they  had  em¬
braced.  They  believed  that  the  writings  of
the  Apostles  enunciated  only  the  articles  of
the  vulgar  faith  ;  but  that  there  were  eso¬
teric  traditions  which  had  been  transmitted
from  generation  to  generation  in  mysteries,
to  which  they  gave  the  name  of  Gnosti¬
cism  or  Gnosis.  King  says  ( Gnostics ,  p.  7,)
that  they  drew  the  materials  out  of  which
they  constructed  their  system  from  two  re¬
ligions,  viz.,  the  Zeudavesta  and  its  modi¬
fications  in  the  Kabbala,  and  the  reformed
Brah manical  religion,  as  taught  by  the
Buddhist  missionaries.

Notwithstanding  the  large  area  of  coun¬
try  over  which  this  system  of  mystical  phi¬
losophy  extended,  and  the  number  of  dif¬
ferent  sects  that  adopted  it,  the  same  fun¬
damental  doctrine  was  everywhere  held  by
the  chiefs  of  Gnosticism.  This  was,  that
the  visible  creation  was  not  the  work  of  the
Supreme  Deity,  but  of  the  Demiurgus,  a
simple  emanation,  and  several  degrees  re¬
moved  from  the  Godhead.  To  the  latter,
indeed,  styled  by  them  “the  unknown
Father,”  they  attributed  the  creation  of  the
intellectual  world,  the  iEons  and  Angels,
while  they  made  the  creation  of  the  world
of  matter  the  work  of  the  Demiurgus.

Gnosticism  abounded  in  symbols  and
legends,  in  talismans  and  amulets,  many
of  which  were  adopted  into  the  popular  su¬
perstitions  of  the  Mediaeval  ages.  It  is,  too,
interesting  to  the  student  of  Masonic  anti¬
quities  because  of  its  remote  connection
with  that  Order,  some  of  whose  symbols
have  been  indirectly  traced  to  a  Gnostic
origin.  The  Druses  of  Mount  Lebanon
were  supposed  to  be  a  sect  of  Gnostics;  and
the  constant  intercourse  which  was  main¬
tained  during  the  Crusades  between  Europe
and  Syria  produced  an  effect  upon  the
Western  nations  through  the  influence  of
the  pilgrims  and  warriors.

Towards  the  Manicheans,  the  most
prominent  offshoot  of  Gnosticism,  the
Templars  exercised  a  tolerant  spirit  very
inconsistent  with  the  professed  objects  of
their  original  foundation,  which  led  to  the
charge  that  they  were  affected  by  the
dogmas  of  Manicheism.

The  strange  ceremonies  observed  in  the
initiation  into  various  secret  societies  that
existed  in  the  Lower  Empire  are  said  to
have  been  modelled  on  the  Gnostic  rites  of
the  Mithraic  Cave.

The  architects  and  stone-masons  of  the
Middle  Ages  borrowed  many  of  the  princi¬
ples  of  ornamentation,  by  which  they  deco¬
rated  the  ecclesiastical  edifices  which  they


constructed,  from  the  abstruse  symbols  of
the  Gnostics.

So,  too,  we  find  Gnostic  symbols  in  the  Her¬
metic  Philosophy  and  in  the  system  of  Ro-
sicrucianism ;  and  lastly,  many  of  the  sym¬
bols  still  used  by  Freemasonry  —  such,  for
instance,  as  the  triangle  within  a  circle,  the
letter  G,  and  the  pentacle  of  Solomon  —
have  been  traced  to  a  Gnostic  source.

Goat,  Biding  the.  The  vulgar  idea
that  “  riding  the  goat  ”  constitutes  a  part
of  the  ceremonies  of  initiation  in  a  Ma¬
sonic  Lodge  has  its  real  origin  in  the  su¬
perstition  of  antiquity.  The  old  Greeks
and  Romans  portrayed  their  mystical  god
Pan  in  horns  and  hoof  and  shaggy  hide,
and  called  him  “  goat-footed.”  When  the
demonology  of  the  classics  was  adopted
and  modified  by  the  early  Christians,  Pan
gave  way  to  Satan,  who  naturally  inherited
his  attributes;  so  that  to  the  common  mind
the  Devil  was  represented  by  a  lie-goat,
and  his  best  known  marks  were  the  horns,
the  beard,  and  the  cloven  hoofs.  Then
came  the  witch  stories  of  the  Middle  Ages,
and  the  belief  in  the  witch  orgies,  where,
it  was  said,  the  Devil  appeared  riding  on
a  goat.  These  orgies  of  the  witches,  where,
amid  fearfully  blasphemous  ceremonies,
they  practised  initiation  into  their  Satanic
rites,  became,  to  the  vulgar  and  the  illiter¬
ate,  the  type  of  the  Masonic  mysteries;  for,
as  Dr.  Oliver  says,  it  was  in  England  a
common  belief  that  the  Freemasons  were
accustomed  in  their  Lodges  “  to  raise  the
Devil.”  So  the  “  riding  of  the  goat,”  which
was  believed  to  be  practised  by  the  witches,
was  transferred  to  the  Freemasons;  and  the
saying  remains  to  this  day,  although  the
belief  has  very  long  since  died  out.

God.  A  belief  in  the  existence  of  God
is  an  essential  point  of  Speculative  Ma¬
sonry —  so  essential,  indeed,  that  it  is  a
landmark  of  the  Order  that  no  Atheist  can
be  made  a  Mason.  Nor  is  this  left  to  an
inference ;  for  a  specific  declaration  to  that
effect  is  demanded  as  an  indispensable
preparation  for  initiation.  And  hence
Hutchinson  says  that  the  worship  of  God
“  was  the  first  and  corner-stone  on  which
our  originals  thought  it  expedient  to  place
the  foundation  of  Masonry.”  The  religion
of  Masonry  is  cosmopolitan,  universal ;  but
the  required  belief  in  God  is  not  incom¬
patible  with  this  universality;  for  it  is  the
belief  of  all  peoples.  “  Be  assured,”  savs
Godfrey  Higgins,  “that  God  is  equally
present  with  the  pious  Hindoo  in  the  tem¬
ple,  the  Jew  in  the  synagogue,  the  Moham¬
medan  in  the  mosque,  and  the  Christian  in
the  church.”  There  never  has  been  a  time
since  the  revival  of  Freemasonry,  when
this  belief  in  God  as  a  superintending
power  did  not  form  a  part  of  the  system.


516


GODFATHER


GOOD


The  very  earliest  rituals  that  are  extant,
going  back  almost  to  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century,  contain  precisely  the
same  question  as  to  the  trust  in  God  which
is  found  in  those  of  the  present  day;  and
the  oldest  manuscript  Constitutions,  dating
as  far  back  as  the  fifteenth  century  at  least,
all  commence  with,  or  contain,  ail  invoca¬
tion  to  the  “  Mighty  Father  of  Heaven.”
There  never  was  a  time  when  the  dogma
did  not  form  an  essential  part  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  system.

Godfather.  In  French  Lodges  the
member  who  introduces  a  candidate  for
initiation  is  called  his  “parrain,”  or  “god¬
father.”

Goetlio,  John  Wolfgang  Ton.

This  illustrious  German  poet  was  much  at¬
tached  to  Freemasonry.  He  was  initiated
on  the  eve  of  the  festival  of  St.  John  the
Baptist,  in  1780;  and  on  the  eve  of  the  same
festival,  in  1830,  the  Masons  of  Weimar
celebrated  the  semi-centennial  anniversary
of  his  admission  into  the  Order,  of  which,
in  a  letter  to  the  musical  composer,  Zeeter,
who  had  been,  like  himself,  initiated  on  the
same  day  fifty  years  before,  he  speaks  with
great  gratification  as  his  “  Masonic  jubi¬
lee.”  He  says,  “  The  gentlemen  have  treated
this  epoch  with  the  greatest  courtesy.  I
responded  to  it  in  the  most  friendly  man¬
ner  on  the  following  day.”  Goethe’s  writ¬
ings  contain  many  favorable  allusions  to
the  Institution.

Golden  Candlestick.  The  golden
candlestick  which  was  made  by  Moses  for
the  service  of  the  tabernacle,  and  was  after¬
wards  deposited  in  the  holy  place  of  the
temple,  to  throw  light  upon  the  altar  of
incense,  and  the  table  of  showbread,  was
made  wholly  of  pure  gold,  and  had  seven
branches;  that  is,  three  on  each  side,  and
cne  in  the  centre.  These  branches  were  at
equal  distances,  and  each  one  was  adorned
with  flowers  like  lilies,  gold  knobs  after
the  form  of  an  apple,  and  similar  ones  re¬
sembling  an  almond.  Upon  the  extremi¬
ties  of  the  branches  were  seven  golden
lamps,  which  were  fed  with  pure  olive-oil,
and  lighted  every  evening  by  the  priests  on
duty.  Its  seven  branches  are  explained  in
the  Ineffable  degrees  as  symbolizing  the
seven  planets.  It  is  also  used  as  a  deco¬
ration  in  Chapters  of  the  Royal  Arch,  but
apparently  without  any  positive  symbolic
signification.

Golden  Fleece.  In  the  lecture  of
the  first  degree,  it  is  said  of  the  Mason’s
apron,  that  it  is  “  more  ancient  than  the
Golden  Fleece  or  Roman  Eagle,  more  hon¬
orable  than  the  Star  and  Garter.”  The  refer¬
ence  is  here  evidently  not  to  the  Argo-
nautic  expedition  in  search  of  the  golden
fleece,  nor  to  the  deluge,  of  which  that


event  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  figure,
as  Dr.  Oliver  incorrectly  supposes,  ( Symb .
Did.,)  but  to  certain  decorations  of  honor
with  which  the  apron  is  compared.  The
eagle  was  to  the  Romans  the  ensign  of  im¬
perial  power;  the  Order  of  the  Golden
Fleece  was  of  high  repute  as  an  Order  of
Knighthood.  It  was  established  in  Flan¬
ders,  in  1429,  by  the  Duke  of  Burgundy,
who  selected  the  fleece  for  its  badge  be¬
cause  wool  was  the  staple  production  of  the
country.  It  has  ever  been  considered,  says
Clark,  one  of  the  most  illustrious  Orders  in
Europe.  The  Order  of  the  Garter  was,  and
is  still  considered,  the  highest  decoration
that  can  be  bestowed  upon  a  subject  by  a
sovereign  of  Great  Britain.  Thus,  the  apron
is  proudly  compared  with  the  noblest  decora¬
tions  of  ancient  Rome  and  of  modern  Eu¬
rope.  But  the  Masons  may  have  been  also
influenced  in  their  selection,  of  a  reference
to  the  Golden  Fleece,  by  the  fact  that  in
the  Middle  Ages  it  was  one  of  the  most  im¬
portant  symbols  of  the  Hermetic  philoso¬
phers.

Golden  Key,  Kniglit  of  the.

See  Knight  of  the  Golden  Key.

Golden  Lanee,  Knight  of  the.

See  Knight  of  the  Golden  Lance.

Golgotha.  Greek,  Tolyoda,  from  the
Hebrew,  rM?l,  Gulgoleth,  “a  skull.”
The  name  given  by  the  Jews  to  Calvary,
the  place  of  Christ’s  crucifixion  and  burial.
It  is  a  significant  word  in  Templar  Mason¬
ry.  See  Calvary.

Good  Samaritan.  An  androgy¬
nous,  honorary  or  side  degree  conferred  in
the  United  States  with  rather  impressive
ceremonies.  It  is,  of  course,  as  a  degree  to
be  conferred  on  females,  unconnected  with
Masonic  history  or  traditions,  but  draws  its
allusions  from  the  fate  of  Lot’s  wife,  and  from
the  parable  of  the  Good  Samaritan  related
in  the  Gospels.  The  passages  of  Scripture
which  refer  to  these  events  are  read  during
the  ceremony  of  initiation.  This  degree  is
to  be  conferred  only  on  Royal  Arch  Masons
and  their  wives,  and  in  conferring  it  two
Good  Samaritans  must  always  be  present,
one  of  whom  must  be  a  Royal  Arch  Mason.
Much  dignity  and  importance  has  been
given  to  this  degree  by  its  possessors ;  and
it  is  usual  in  many  places  for  a  certain
number  of  Good  Samaritans  to  organize
themselves  into  regular,  but  of  course  inde¬
pendent,  bodies  to  hold  monthly  meetings
under  the  name  of  Assemblies,  to  elect
proper  officers,  and  receive  applications  for
initiation.  In  this  manner  the  assemblies
of  Good  Samaritans,  consisting  of  male  and
female  members,  hear  a  very  near  resem¬
blance  to  the  female  Lodges,  which,  under
the  name  of  “Maqonnerie  d’ Adoption,”
prevail  in  France.


GOOD


GOTHIC


317


Good  Shepherd.  Our  Saviour  called
himself  the  Good  Shepherd.  Thus,  in
St.  John’s  Gospel,  (x.  14,  15,  16,)  he  says:
“  I  am  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  know  my
sheep,  and  am  known  of  mine.  As  the
Father  knoweth  me,  even  so  know  I  the
Father:  and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the
sheep.  And  other  sheep  I  have,  which  are
not  of  this  fold:  them  also  must  I  bring,
and  they  shall  hear  my  voice ;  and  there
shall  be  one  fold,  and  one  Shepherd.”
Hence,  in  Masonic  as  well  as  in  Christian
symbolism,  Christ  is  naturally  called  the
Good  Shepherd.

Good  Shepherd,  Sign  of  the.

When  Jesus  was  relating  (Luke  xv.)  the
parable  in  which  one  having  lost  a  sheep
goes  into  the  wilderness  to  search  for  it,  he
said :  “  And  when  he  hath  found  it,  he
layeth  it  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing.”  Mr.
Hettner,  a  German  writer  on  Greek  cus¬
toms,  says :  “  When  the  Greek  carries
home  his  lamb,  he  slings  it  round  his  neck,
holding  it  by  the  feet  crossed  over  the
breast.  This  is  to  be  seen  with  us  also,
but  the  sight  is  especially  attractive  at
Athens,  for  it  was  in  this  manner  that  the
ancients  represented  Hermes  as  the  guar¬
dian  and  multiplier  of  flocks;  so  stood  the
statue  of  Hermes  at  Olympia,  Occhalia,
and  Tanagra.  Small  marble  statues  of  this
kind  have  even  come  down  to  us,  one  of
which  is  to  be  seen  in  the  Pembroke  col¬
lection  at  Wilton  House;  another,  a  smaller
one,  in  the  Stoa  of  Hadrian,  at  Athens.
This  representation,  however,  appears  most
frequently  in  the  oldest  works  of  Christian
art,  in  which  the  laden  Hermes  is  turned
into  a  laden  Christ,  who  often  called  him¬
self  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  expressly  says
in  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke,  that  when  the
shepherd  finds  the  sheep,  he  lays  it  joyfully
on  his  shoulder.”

Now,  although  the  idea  of  the  Good
Shepherd  may  have  been  of  Pagan  origin,
yet  derived  from  the  parable  of  our  Saviour
in  St.  Luke  and  his  language  in  St.  John,
it  was  early  adopted  by  the  Christians  as  a
religious  emblem.  The  Good  Shepherd
bearing  the  sheep  upon  his  shoulders,  the
two  hands  of  the  Shepherd  crossed  upon
his  breast  and  holding  the  legs  of  the  sheep,
is  a  very  common  subject  in  the  paintings
of  the  earliest  Christian  era.  It  is  an  ex-
ressive  symbol  of  the  Saviour’s  love  — of
iin  who  taught  us  to  build  the  new  temple
of  eternal  life  —  and,  consequently,  as
Didron  says,  “the  heart  and  imagination
of  Christians  have  dwelt  fondly  upon  this
theme;  it  has  been  unceasingly  repeated
under  every  possible  aspect,  and  may  be
almost  said  to  have  been  worn  threadbare
bv  Christian  art.  From  the  earliest  ages,
Christianity  completely  made  it  her  own.”


And  hence  the  Christian  degree  of  Rose
Croix  has  very  naturally  appropriated  the
“  sign  of  the  Good  Shepherd,”  the  repre¬
sentation  of  Christ  bearing  his  once  lost
but  now  recovered  sheep  upon  his  shoul¬
ders,  as  one  of  its  most  impressive  symbols.

Goose  and  Gridiron.  An  alehouse
with  this  sign,  in  London  House- Yard,  at
the  north  end  of  St.  Paul’s.  In  1717  the
Lodge  of  Antiquity  met  at  the  Goose  and
Gridiron,  and  it  was  there  that  the  first
quarterly  communication  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  after  the  revival  of  1717,
was  held  on  the  24th  of  June,  1717.

Gonnogons.  A  secret  society  estab¬
lished  in  1724,  in  England,  in  opposition
to  Freemasonry.  One  of  its  rules  was  that
no  Freemason  could  be  admitted  until  he
was  first  degraded,  and  had  then  renounced
the  Masonic  Order.  It  wras  absurdly  and
intentionally  pretentious  in  its  character;
claiming,  in  ridicule  of  Freemasonry,  a  great
antiquity,  and  pretending  that  it  was  de¬
scended  from  an  ancient  society  in  China.
There  wras  much  antipathy  between  the
two  associations,  as  will  appear  from  the
following  doggerel,  published  in  1729  by
Henry  Carey :

“  The  Masons  and  the  Gormogons
Are  laughing  at  one  another,

While  all  mankind  are  laughing  at  them  ;
Then  why  do  they  make  such  a  bother?

“  They  bait  their  hook  for  simple  gulls,

And  truth  with  bam  they  smother;

But  when  they  ’ve  taken  in  their  culls,

Why  then  ’t is  —  Welcome,  Brother!”

The  Gormogons  made  a  great  splutter  in
their  day,  and  published  many  squibs  against
Freemasonry;  yet  that  is  still  living,  while
the  Gormogons  were  long  ago  extinguished.
They  seemed  to  have  flourished  for  but  a
very  few  years.

Gothic  Architecture.  Of  all  the

styles  of  architecture,  the  Gothic  is  that
which  is  most  intimately  connected  with
the  history  of  Freemasonry,  having  been
the  system  peculiarly  practised  by  the
Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages.  To  what
country  or  people  it  owes  its  origin  has
never  been  satisfactorily  determined;  al¬
though  it  has  generally  been  conjectured
that  it  was  of  Arabic  or  Saracenic  extrac¬
tion,  and  that  it  was  introduced  into  Eu¬
rope  by  persons  returning  from  the  Cru¬
sades.  Tne  Christians  who  had  been  in
the  Holy  Wars  received  there  an  idea  of
the  Saracenic  works,  which  they  imitated
on  their  return  to  the  West,  and  refined
on  them  as  they  proceeded  in  the  building
of  churches.  The  Italians,  Germans,
French,  and  Flemings,  with  Greek  refugees,
united  in  a  fraternity  of  architects  and


318


GOTHIC


GRAND


ranged  from  country  to  country,  and  erected
buildings  according  to  the  Gothic  style,
which  they  had  learned  during  their
visits  to  the  East,  and  whose  fundamental
principles  they  improved  by  the  addition
of  other  details  derived  from  their  own
architectural  taste  and  judgment.  Hence
Sir  Christopher  Wren  thinks  that  this  style
of  the  Mediaeval  Freemasons  should  be
rather  called  the  Saracenic  than  the  Gothic.
This  style,  which  was  distinguished,  by  its
pointed  arches,  and  especially  by  the  per¬
pendicularity  of  its  lines,  from  the  rounded
arch  and  horizontal  lines  of  previous  styles,
was  altogether  in  the  hands  of  those  archi¬
tects  who  were  known,  from  the  tenth  to
the  sixteenth  centuries,  as  Freemasons,  and
who  kept  their  system  of  building  as  a
secret,  and  thus  obtained  an  entire  mo¬
nopoly  of  both  domestic  and  ecclesiastical
architecture.  At  length,  when  the  gilds  or
fraternities  of  Freemasons,  “who  alone,”
says  Mr.  Hope,  “  held  the  secrets  of  Gothic
art,”  were  dissolved,  the  style  itself  was
lost,  and  was  succeeded  by  what  Paley  says
(Man.  of  Goth.  Arch.,  p.  15,)  was  “a worse
than  brazen  era  of  architecture.”  For  fur¬
ther  details,  see  Travelling  Freemasons.

Gothic  Constitutions.  A  title
sometimes  given  to  the  Constitutions  which
are  supposed  to  have  been  adopted  by  the
Freemasons  at  the  city  of  York,  in  the
tenth  century,  and  so  called  in  allusion  to
the  Gothic  architecture  which  was  intro¬
duced  into  England  by  the  Fraternity.  A
more  correct  and  more  usual  designation  of
these  laws  is  the  York  Constitutions,  which
see.

Gothic  Mysteries.  See  Scandina¬
vian  Mysteries.

Gourgas,  John  James  Joseph.

A  merchant  of  New  York,  who  was  born
in  France  in  1777,  and  received  a  member
of  the  Scottish  Rite  in  1806.  His  name  is
intimately  connected  with  the  rise  and  pro¬
gress  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite  in  the  Northern  Jurisdiction  of  the
United  States.  Through  his  representa¬
tions  and  his  indefatigable  exertions,  the
Mother  Council  at  Charleston  was  induced
to  denounce  the  spurious  Consistory  of
Joseph  Cerneau  in  the  city  of  New  York,
and  to  establish  there  a  Supreme  Council
for  the  Northern  Jurisdiction,  of  which  Bro.
Gourgas  was  elected  the  Secretary  General.
He  continued  to  hold  this  office  until  1832,
when  he  was  elected  Sovereign  Grand  Com¬
mander.  In  1851,  on  the  removal  of  the
Grand  East  of  the  Supreme  Council  to
Boston,  he  resigned  his  office  in  favor  of
Brother  Giles  Fonda  Yates,  but  continued
to  take  an  active  interest,  so  far  as  his  age
would  permit,  in  the  Rite  until  his  death,
which  occurred  at  Newr  York  on  February


14,  1865,  at  the  ripe  old  age  of  eighty-eight,
and  being  at  the  time  probably  the  oldest
possessor  of  the  thirtieth  degree  in  the  world.
Brother  Gourgas  was  distinguished  for  the
purity  of  his  life  and  the  powers  of  his  in¬
tellect.  His  Masonic  library  was  very  val¬
uable,  and  especially  rich  in  manuscripts.
His  correspondence  with  Dr.  Moses  Hol¬
brook,  at  one  time  Grand  Commander  of
the  Southern  Council,  is  in  the  Archives  of
that  body,  and  bears  testimony  to  his  large
Masonic  attainments.

Grades.  Degrees  in  Masonry  are
sometimes  so  called.  It  is  a  French  word.
See  Degrees.

Grammar.  One  of  the  seven  liberal
arts  and  sciences,  which  forms,  with  Logic
and  Rhetoric,  a  triad  dedicated  to  the  cul¬
tivation  of  language.  “  God,”  says  Sanc-
tius,  “  created  man  the  participant  of  rea¬
son  ;  and  as  he  willed  him  to  be  a  social
being,  he  bestowed  upon  him  the  gift  of
language,  in  the  perfecting  of  which  there
are  three  aids.  The  first  is  Grammar ,
which  rejects  from  language  all  solecisms
and  barbarous  expressions;  the  second  is
Logic,  which  is  occupied  with  the  truthful¬
ness  of  language ;  and  the  third  is  Rhetoric,
which  seeks  only  the  adornment  of  lan¬
guage.”

Grand  Architect.  A  degree  in
several  of  the  Rites  modelled  upon  the
twelfth  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite.  It  is,  1.  The  sixth  degree
of  the  Reform  of  St.  Martin  ;  2.  The  four¬
teenth  of  the  Rite  of  Elected  Cohens ;  3.
The  twenty-third  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim ;
and  4.  The  twenty-fourth  of  the  Metropol¬
itan  Chapter  of  France.

Grand  Architect  of  the  Uni¬
verse.  The  title  applied  in  the  technical
language  of  Freemasonry  to  the  Deity.  It
is  appropriate  that  a  society  founded  on
the  principles  of  architecture,  which  sym¬
bolizes  the  terms  of  that  science  to  moral
purposes,  and  whose  members  profess  to  be
the  architects  of  a  spiritual  temple,  should
view  the  Divine  Being,  under  whose  holy
law  they  are  constructing  that  edifice,  as
their  Master  Builder  or  Grand  Architect.

Grand  Chapter.  A  Grand  Chapter
consists  of  the  High  Priests,  Kings,  and
Scribes,  for  the  time  being,  of  the  several
Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction,  of  the  Past
Grand  and  Deputy  Grand  High  Priests,
Kings, and  Scribes  of  thesaid  Grand  Chapter.
In  some  Grand  Chapters  Past  High  Priests
are  admitted  to  membership,  but  in  others
they  are  not  granted  this  privilege,  unless
they  shall  have  served  as  Grand  and  Dep¬
uty  Grand  High  Priests,  Kings,  or  Scribes.
Grand  Chapters  have  the  sole  government
and  superintendence  of  the  several  Royal
Arch  Chapters  and  Lodges  of  Most  Excel-


GRAND


GRAND


319


lent  Past  and  Mark  Masters  within  their
several  jurisdictions.

Until  the  year  1797,  there  was  no  organ¬
ization  of  Grand  Chapters  in  the  United
States.  Chapters  were  held  under  the  au¬
thority  of  a  Master’s  Warrant,  although  the
consent  of  a  neighboring  Chapter  was
generally  deemed  expedient.  But  in  1797,
delegates  from  several  of  the  Chapters  in
the  Northern  States  assembled  at  Boston
for  the  purpose  of  deliberating  on  the  ex¬
pediency  of  organizing  a  Grand  Chapter
for  the  government  and  regulation  of  the
several  Chapters  within  the  said  States.
This  convention  prepared  an  address  to  the
Chapters  in  New  York  and  New  England,
disclaiming  the  power  of  any  Grand  Lodge
to  exercise  authority  over  Royal  Arch
Masons,  and  declaring  it  expedient  to  es¬
tablish  a  Grand  Chapter.  In  consequence
of  this  address,  delegates  from  most  of  the
States  above  mentioned  met  at  Hartford
in  January,  1798,  and  organized  a  Grand
Chapter,  formed  and  adopted  a  Constitu¬
tion,  and  elected  and  installed  their  officers.
This  example  was  quickly  followed  by  other
parts  of  the  Union,  and  Grand  Chapters
now  exist  in  nearly  all  the  States.

The  officers  of  a  Grand  Chapter  are  usu¬
ally  the  same  as  those  of  a  Chapter,  with
the  distinguishing  prefix  of  “Grand”  to
the  titles.  The  jewels  are  also  the  same,
but  enclosed  within  a  circle.  In  England
and  Scotland  the  Grand  Chapter  bears  the
title  of  Supreme  Grand  Chapter.

Grand  Commander.  The  presid¬
ing  officer  of  a  Grand  Commandery  of
Knights  Templars.

Grand  Commander  of  the  East*
ern  Star.  ( Grand  Commandeur  de
V Etoile  d’ Orient.)  A  degree  in  Byron’s
collection.

Grand  Conclave.  The  title  of  the
presiding  body  of  Templarism  in  England
is  the  “Grand  Conclave  of  the  Religious
and  Military  Order  of  Masonic  Knights
Templars.”

Grand  Conservators.  On  July  1,
1814,  the  Grand  Mastership  of  the  Order  in
France,  then  held  by  Prince  CambacGrbs,
was,  in  consequence  of  the  political  troubles
attendant  upon  the  restoration  of  the  mon¬
archy,  declared  vacant  by  the  Grand  Orient.
On  August  12,  the  Grand  Orient  decreed
that  the  functions  of  Grand  Master  should
be  provisionally  discharged  by  a  commis¬
sion  consisting  of  three  Grand  officers,  to
be  called  Grand  Conservators,  and  Mac¬
donald,  Duke  of  Tarentum,  the  Count  de
Beurnonville,  and  Timbrune,  Count  de
Valence,  were  appointed  to  that  office.

Grand  Consistory.  The  governing
body  over  a  State  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite;  subject,  however,  to


the  superior  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme
Council  of  the  Thirty-third.  The  members
of  the  Grand  Consistory  are  required  to  he
in  possession  of  the  thirty-second  degree.

Grand  Council.  The  title  given  to
the  first  three  officers  of  a  Royal  Arch
Chapter.  Also  the  name  of  the  superin¬
tending  body  of  Cryptic  Masonry  in  any
jurisdiction.  It  is  composed  of  the  first
three  officers  of  each  Council  in  the  juris¬
diction.  Its  officers  are:  Most  Puissant
Grand  Master,  Thrice  Illustrious  Deputy
Grand  Master,  Illustrious  Grand  Conductor
of  the  Works,  Grand  Treasurer,  Grand  Re¬
corder,  Grand  Chaplain,  Grand  Marshal,
Grand  Captain  of  the  Guards,  Grand  Con¬
ductor  of  the  Council,  and  Grand  Steward.

Grand  East.  The  city  in  which  the
Grand  Lodge,  or  other  governing  Masonic
Body,  is  situated,  and  whence  its  official
documents  emanate,  is  called  the  Grand
East.  Thus,  a  document  issued  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts  would  be
dated  from  the  “  Grand  East  of  Boston,”
or  if  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana,
it  would  be  the  “  Grand  East  of  New  Or¬
leans.”  The  place  where  a  Grand  Lodge
meets  is  therefore  called  a  Grand  East.
The  word  is  in  constant  use  on  the  conti¬
nent  of  Europe  and  in  America,  but  seldom
employed  in  England,  Scotland,  or  Ireland.

Grand  Encampment.  See  En¬
campment,  Grand.

Grand  High  Priest.  The  presid¬
ing  officer  of  a  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter
in  the  American  system.  The  powers  and
prerogatives  of  a  Grand  High  Priest  are
far  more  circumscribed  than  those  of  a
Grand  Master.  As  the  office  has  been  con¬
stitutionally  created  by  the  Grand  Chapter,
and  did  not  precede  it  as  that  of  Grand
Masters  did  the  Grand  Lodges,  he  possesses
no  inherent  prerogatives,  but  those  only
which  are  derived  from  and  delegated  to
him  by  the  Constitution  of  the  Grand  Chap¬
ter  and  regulations  formed  under  it  for  the
government  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry.

Grand  Inquiring  Commander.
The  sixty-sixth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Miz-
raim.

Grand  Inspector,  Inquisitor
Commander.  The  thirty-first  degree
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.
It  is  not  an  historical  degree,  but  simply  a
judicial  power  of  the  higher  degrees.  The
place  of  meeting  is  called  a  Supreme  Tri¬
bunal.  The  decorations  are  white,  and  the
presiding  officer  is  styled  Most  Perfect
President.  The  jewel  of  the  degree  is  a
Teutonic  cross  of  silver  attached  to  white
watered  ribbon.

Grand  Eodge.  A  Grand  Lodge  is  the
dogmatic  and  administrative  authority  of
Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  or  the  three  Syrn-


320


GRAND


GRAND


bolicdegrees.  Undefined  in  theold  Charges
of  1725  as  “consisting  of  and  formed  by  the
Masters  and  Wardens  of  all  the  regular
Lodges  upon  record,  with  the  Grand  Master
at  their  head,  and  his  Deputy  on  his  left
hand,  and  the  Grand  Wardens  in  their  pro¬
per  places.”  This  definition  refers  to  a  very
modern  organization,  for  of  Grand  Lodges
thus  constituted  we  have  no  written  evi¬
dence  previous  to  the  year  1717,  when  Free¬
masonry  was  revived  in  England.  Previ¬
ous  to  that  time  the  administrative  au¬
thority  of  the  Craft  was  exercised  by  a
General  Assembly  of  the  Masons  of  a  ju¬
risdiction  which  met  annually.  (See  Assem¬
bly.)  The  true  history  of  Grand  Lodges
commences,  therefore,  from  what  has  been
called  the  era  of  the  revival.

In  1717,  there  were  only  four  Lodges
in  existence  in  London,  and  no  others  in
the  whole  south  of  England.  These  four
Lodges  determimed,  if  possible,  to  revive
the  Institution  from  its  depressed  state,  and
accordingly  they  met  in  February,  1717,  at
the  Apple-Tree  Tavern,  (whose  name  has
thus  been  rendered  famous  for  all  time;)  and
after  placing  the  oldest  Master  Mason,  who
was  the  Master  of  a  Lodge,  in  the  chair,
they  constituted  themselves  into  a  Grand
Lodge,  and  resolved,  says  Preston,  “  to  re¬
vive  the  quarterly  communications  of  the
Fraternity.”  On  the  following  St.  John
the  Baptist’s  day,  the  Grand  Lodge  was
duly  organized,  and  Mr.  Anthony  Sayre
was  elected  Grand  Master,  who  “  appointed
his  Wardens,  and  commanded  the  brethren
of  the  four  old  Lodges  to  meet  him  and
the  Wardens  quarterly  in  communication.”
From  that  time  Grand  Lodges  have  been
uninterruptedly  held;  receiving,  however,
at  different  periods,  various  modifications.

A  Grand  Lodge  is  invested  with  power
and  authority  over  all  the  Craft  w'ithin  its
jurisdiction.  It  is  the  Supreme  Court  of
Appeal  in  all  Masonic  cases,  and  to  its
decrees  implicit  obedience  must  be  paid
by  every  Lodge  and  every  Mason  situated
within  its  control.  The  government  of
Grand  Lodges  is,  therefore,  completely  des¬
potic.  While  a  Grand  Lodge  exists,  its
edicts  must  be  respected  and  obeyed  with¬
out  examination  by  its  subordinate  Lodges.

This  autocratic  power  of  a  Grand  Lodge
is  based  upon  a  principle  of  expediency,  and
derived  from  the  fundamental  law  estab¬
lished  at  the  organization  of  Grand  Lodges
in  the  beginning  of  the  last  century.  In
so  large  a  body  as  the  Craft,  it  is  absolutely
necessary  that  there  should  be  a  supreme
controlling  body  to  protect  the  Institution
from  anarchy,  and  none  could  be  more  con¬
veniently  selected  than  one  which,  by  its
representative  character,  is,  or  ought  to  be,
composed  of  the  united  wisdom,  prudence,


and  experience  of  all  the  subordinate
Lodges  under  its  obedience ;  so  that  the
voice  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  nothing  else
than  the  voice  of  the  Craft  expressed  by
their  representatives.  Hence  the  twelfth
of  the  General  Regulations  declares  that
“  the  Grand  Lodge  consists  of,  and  is  formed
by,  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  all  the
regular  particular  Lodges  upon  record.”

Bo  careful  has  the  Institution  been  to
preserve  the  dogmatic  and  autocratic  power
of  tnc  Grand  Lodge,  that  all  elected  Masters
are  required,  at  the  time  of  their  installa¬
tion,  to  make  the  following  declaration:

“  You  agree  to  hold  in  veneration  the
original  rulers  and  patrons  of  the  Order  of
Freemasonry,  and  their  regular  successors,
supreme  and  subordinate,  according  to
their  stations;  and  to  submit  to  the  awards
and  resolutions  of  your  brethren  in  Grand
Lodge  convened,  in  every  case,  consistent
with  the  Constitutions  of  the  Order.

“You  promise  to  pay  homage  to  the
Grand  Master  for  the  time  being,  and  to
his  officers  when  duly  installed,  and  strictly
to  conform  to  every  edict  of  the  Grand
Lodge.”

The  organization  of  new  Grand  Lodges
in  America  has  followed  that  adopted,  in
essential  particulars,  by  the  four  Lodges
which  established  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land  in  1717.  When  it  is  desired  to  or¬
ganize  a  Grand  Lodge,  three  or  more  le¬
gally-constituted  Lodges,  working  in  any
State,  territory,  or  other  independent  po¬
litical  division,  where  no  Grand  Lodge  al¬
ready  exists,  may  meet  in  convention,
adopt  by-laws,  elect  officers,  and  organize
a  Grand  Lodge.  The  Lodges  within  its
jurisdiction  then  surrender  their  Warrants
of  constitution  to  the  Grand  Lodges  from
which  they  respectively  had  received  them,
and  accept  others  from  the  newlv-organ-
ized  Grand  Lodge,  which  thenceforward
exercises  all  Masonic  jurisdiction  over  the
State  in  which  it  has  been  organized.

A  Grand  Lodge  thus  organized  consists
of  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  all  the
Lodges  under  its  jurisdiction,  and  such
Past  Masters  as  may  enroll  themselves  or
be  elected  as  members.  Past  Masters  are
not,  however,  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge
by  inherent  right,  but  only  by  courtesy,
and  no  Past  Master  can  remain  a  member
of  the  Grand  Lodge  unless  he  is  attached
to  some  subordinate  Lodge  in  its  jurisdic¬
tion.

All  Grand  Lodges  are  governed  by  the
following  officers:  Grand  Master,  Deputy
Grand  Master,  Senior  and  Junior  Grand
Wardens,  Grand  Treasurer,  and  Grand
Secretary.  These  are  usually  termed  the
Grand  officers;  in  addition  to  them  there
are  subordinate  officers  appointed  by  the


GRAND


GRAND


321


Grand  Master  and  the  Grand  Wardens,
such  as  Grand  Deacons,  Grand  Stewards,
Grand  Marshal,  Grand  Pursuivant,  Grand
Sword  Bearer,  and  Grand  Tiler ;  but  their
number  and  titles  vary  in  different  Grand
Lodges.

Grand  Lodge  Manuscript.  A

roll  of  parchment,  nine  inches  in  length
and  five  in  breadth,  containing  the  Legend
of  the  Craft  and  the  Old  Charges.  It  is

Served  in  the  archives  of  the  Grand
ge  of  England,  but  there  is  no  record
of  how  it  got  there.  Affixed  to  it  is  the
date  A.  D.  1132,  which  is  evidently  an  error,
and  was  most  probably  intended  for  1632,
perhaps  1532,  for  in  the  sixteenth  century
manuscripts  there  is  a  very  slight  differ¬
ence  in  the  form  of  the  1  and  the  5.  This
manuscript  was  first  noticed  by  Brother  W.
J.  Hughan,  who  transcribed  it,  and  pub¬
lished  it  in  his  Old  Charges  of  British  Free¬
masons.

Grand  Master.  The  presiding  offi¬
cer  of  the  symbolic  degrees  in  a  jurisdic¬
tion.  He  presides,  of  course,  over  the
Grand  Lodge,  and  has  the  right  not  only
to  be  present,  but  also  to  preside  in  every
Lodge,  with  the  Master  of  the  Lodge  on
his  left  hand,  and  to  order  his  Grand  War¬
dens  to  attend  him,  and  act  as  Wardens  in
that  particular  Lodge.  He  has  the  right
of  visiting  the  Lodges  and  inspecting  their
books  and  mode  of  work  as  often  as  he
pleases,  or,  if  unable  to  do  so,  he  may  de-
ute  his  Grand  officers  to  act  for  him.  He
as  the  power  of  granting  dispensations  for
the  formation  of  new  Lodges  ;  which  dis¬
ensations  are  of  force  until  revoked  by
imself  or  the  Grand  Lodge.  He  may  also
grant  dispensations  for  several  other  pur¬
poses,  for  which  see  the  article  Dispensa¬
tion.  Formerly,  the  Grand  Master  ap¬
pointed  his  Grand  officers,  but  this  regula¬
tion  has  been  repealed,  and  the  Grand  offi¬
cers  are  now  all  elected  by  the  Grand
Lodges.

When  the  Grand  Master  visits  a  Lodge,
he  must  be  received  with  the  greatest  re¬
spect,  and  the  Master  of  the  Lodge  should
always  offer  him  the  chair,  which  the
Grand  Master  may  or  may  not  accept  at
his  pleasure.

Should  the  Grand  Master  die,  or  be  ab¬
sent  from  the  jurisdiction  during  his  term
of  office,  the  Deputy  Grand  Master  assumes
his  powers,  or,  if  there  be  no  Deputy,  then
the  Grand  Wardens  according  to  seniority.

Grand  Master  Architect.  ( Grand
Maitre  Architect.)  The  twelfth  degree  in  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  This
is  strictly  a  scientific  degree,  resembling  in
that  respect  the  degree  of  Fellow  Craft.
In  it  the  principles  of  architecture  and  the
connection  of  the  liberal  arts  with  Masonry
2  Q  21


are  unfolded.  Its  officers  are  three  —  a
Master,  and  two  Wardens.  The  Chapter
is  decorated  with  white  and  red  hangings,
and  furnished  with  the  five  orders  of  archi¬
tecture,  and  a  case  of  mathematical  instru¬
ments.  The  apron  is  white,  lined  with
blue;  and  the  jewel  is  a  gold  medal,  on
which  are  engraved  the  orders  of  architec¬
ture.  It  is  suspended  by  a  stone-colored
ribbon.

Grand  Master  Mason.  The  title
given  to  the  Grand  Master  in  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland.

Grand  Master  of  all  Symbolic
Lodges.  (  Venerable  Maitre  de  toutes  les
Loges.)  The  twentieth  degree  in  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  The  presiding
officer  is  styled  Venerable  Grand  Master,
and  is  assisted  by  two  Wardens  in  the  west.
The  decorations  of  the  Lodge  are  blue  and
yellow.  The  old  ritual  contains  some  inter¬
esting  instructions  respecting  the  first  and
second  Temple.

Among  the  traditions  preserved  by  the
possessors  of  this  degree,  is  one  which
states  that  after  the  third  Temple  was  de¬
stroyed  by  Titus,  the  son  of  Vespasian,  the
Christian  Freemasons  who  were  then  in
the  Holy  Land,  being  filled  with  sorrow,
departed  from  home  with  the  determina¬
tion  of  building  a  fourth,  and  that,  dividing
themselves  into  several  bodies,  they  dis¬
persed  over  the  various  parts  of  Europe.
The  greater  number  went  to  Scotland,  and
repaired  to  the  town  of  Kilwinning,  where
they  established  a  Lodge  and  built  an  ab¬
bey,  and  where  the  records  of  the  Order
were  deposited.  This  tradition,  preserved
in  the  original  rituals,  is  a  very  strong  pre¬
sumptive  evidence  that  the  degree  owed  its
existence  to  the  Templar  system  of  Ramsay.

Grand  Master  of  Light.  One  of
the  various  names  bestowed  on  the  degree
of  Knight  of  St.  Andrew.

Grand  Offerings.  According  to  the
English  system  of  lectures,  three  important
events  recorded  in  Scripture  are  designated
as  the  three  grand  offerings  of  Masonry,
because  they  are  said  to  have  occurred  on
Mount  Moriah,  which  symbolically  repre¬
sents  the  ground-floor  of  the  Lodge.  These
three  grand  offerings  are  as  follows :  The
first  grand  offering  was  when  Abraham
prepared  to  offer  up  his  son  Isaac;  the  sec¬
ond  was  when  David  built  an  altar  to  stay
the  pestilence  with  which  his  people  were
afflicted ;  and  the  third  was  when  Solomon
dedicated  to  Jehovah  the  Temple  which  he
had  completed.  See  Ground-Floor  of  the
Lodge.

Grand  Officers.  The  elective  officers
of  a  superintending  Masonic  body,  such  as
Grand  Lodge,  Grand  Chapter,  etc.,  are  so
called.  The  appointed  officers  are  desig-


322


GRAND


GRAND


nated  as  subordinate  officers ;  but  this  dis¬
tinction  is  not  always  strictly  observed.

Grand  Orient.  Most  of  the  Grand
Lodges  established  by  the  Latin  races,
such  as  those  of  France,  Spain,  Italy,  and
the  South  American  States,  are  called
Grand  Orients.  The  word  is  thus,  in  one
sense,  synonymous  with  Grand  Lodge;  but
these  Grand  Orients  have  often  a  more  ex¬
tensive  obedience  than  Grand  Lodges,  fre¬
quently  exercising  jurisdiction  over  the
highest  degrees,  from  which  English  and
American  Grand  Lodges  refrain.  Thus,
the  Grand  Orient  of  F ranee  exercises  juris¬
diction  not  only  over  the  seven  degrees  of
its  own  Rite,  but  also  over  the  thirty-three
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted,  and  over  all
the  other  Rites  which  are  practised  in
France.

Grand  Orient  is  also  used  in  English,
and  especially  in  American,  Masonry  to  in¬
dicate  the  seat  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
highest  Masonic  power,  and  is  thus  equiva¬
lent  to  Grand  East,  which  see.

Grand  Pontiff.  ( Grand  Pontife  ou
Sublime  Ecossais.)  The  nineteenth  degree
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.
The  degree  is  occupied  in  an  examination
of  the  Apocalyptic  mysteries  of  the  New
Jerusalem.  Its  officers  are  a  Thrice  Puis¬
sant  and  one  Warden.  The  Thrice  Puis¬
sant  is  seated  in  the  east  on  a  throne
canopied  with  blue,  and  wears  a  white  satin
robe.  The  Warden  is  in  the  west,  and  holds
a  staff  of  gold.  The  members  are  clothed
in  white,  with  blue  fillets  embroidered  with
twelve  stars  of  gold,  and  are  called  True
and  Faithful  Brothers.  The  decorations
of  the  Lodge  are  blue  sprinkled  with  gold
stars.

Grand  Principals.  The  first  three
officers  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  England
are  so  called.  They  are  respectively  desig¬
nated  as  Z.,  H.,  and  J.,  meaning  Zerubba-
bel,  Haggai,  and  Joshua.

Grand  Prior.  1.  Each  chief  or  con¬
ventual  bailiff  of  the  eight  languages  of
the  Order  of  Malta  was  called  a  Grand
Prior.  There  were  also  other  Grand  Priors,
under  whom  were  several  Commanderies.
The  Grand  Priors  of  the  Order  were  twenty-
six  in  number.  2.  The  third  officer  in  the
Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite  for  the  Southern  Ju¬
risdiction  of  the  United  States.  See  Prior.

Grand  Secretary.  The  recording
and  corresponding  officer  of  a  Grand  Lodge,
whose  signature  must  be  attached  to  every
document  issued  from  the  Grand  Lodge;
where  there  is  no  Grand  Register  or  Keeper
of  the  Seals,  he  is  the  custodian  of  the  Seal
of  the  Grand  Lodge.  The  Regulations  of
1722  had  provided  for  the  office,  but  no  ap¬
pointment  was  made  until  1723,  when  Wil¬


liam  Cowper  was  chosen  by  the  Grand
Lodge.  The  office  was  therefore  at  first  an
elective  one,  but  Anderson,  in  his  edition
of  1738,  says  that  “  ever  since,  the  new
Grand  Master,  upon  his  commencement,
appoints  the  Secretary,  or  continues  him
by  returning  him  the  books.”  This  usage
is  still  pursued  by  the  modern  Grand  Lodge
of  England;  but  in  every  jurisdiction  of
this  country  the  office  of  Grand  Secretary
is  an  elective  one.  The  jewel  of  the  Grand
Secretary  is  a  circle  enclosing  two  pens
crossed.  His  badge  of  office  was  formerly
a  bag.  See  Bag.

Grand  Stewards.  Officers  of  a  Grand

Lodge,  whose  duty  it  is  to  prepare  and  serve
at  the  Grand  Feast.  This  duty  was  at  first
performed  by  the  Grand  Wardens,  but  in
1720  they  were  authorized  “to  take  some
Stewards  to  their  assistance.”  This  was
sometimes  done  and  sometimes  omitted,  so
that  often  there  were  no  Stewards,  In  1732,
the  Stewards,  to  the  number  of  twelve,
wrere  made  permanent  officers ;  and  it  was
resolved  that  in  future,  at  the  annual  eleo-
tion,  each  Steward  should  nominate  his
successor.  At  present,  in  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  eighteen  Grand  Stewards  are
annually  appointed  from  eighteen  different
Lodges.  Each  Lodge  recommends  one  of
its  subscribing  members,  who  is  nominated
by  the  former  Steward  of  that  Lodge,  and
the  appointment  is  made  by  the  Grand
Master.  The  number  of  Grand  Stewards
in  this  country  seldom  exceeds  two,  and
the  appointment  is  made  in  some  Grand
Lodges  by  the  Grand  Master,  and  in  others
by  the  Junior  Grand  Warden.  The  jewel
of  a  Grand  Steward  is  a  cornucopia  within
a  circle,  and  his  badge  of  office  a  white  rod.

Grand  Stewards’  Lodge.  Ac¬
cording  to  the  Constitutions  of  England,
the  past  and  present  Grand  Stewards  con¬
stitute  a  Lodge,  which  has  no  number,  but
is  registered  in  the  Grand  Lodge  books  at
the  head  of  all  other  Lodges.  It  is  repre¬
sented  in  the  Grand  Lodge  by  its  Master,
Wardens,  and  Past  Masters,  but  has  no
power  of  making  Masons.  The  institution
lias  not  been  introduced  into  this  country
except  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland,
where  the  Grand  Stewards’  Lodge  acts  as  a
Committee  of  Grievances  during  the  recess
of  the  Grand  Lodge.

Grand  Tiler.  An  officer  who  per¬
forms  in  a  Grand  Lodge  the  same  duties
that  a  Tiler  does  in  a  subordinate  Lodge.
The  Grand  Tiler  is  prohibited  from  being  a
member  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  because  his
duties  outside  of  the  door  w'ould  prevent
his  taking  part  in  the  deliberations  of  the
body.

Grand  Treasurer.  The  office  of
Grand  Treasurer  was  provided  for  by  the


GRAND


GRAVE


323


Regulations  of  1722,  and  in  1724,  on  the
organization  of  the  Committee  of  Charity,
it  was  enacted  that  a  Treasurer  should  be
appointed.  But  it  was  not  until  1727  that
the  office  appears  to  have  been  really  filled
by  the  selection  of  Nathaniel  Blakerly.
But  as  he  was  elected  Deputy  Grand  Mas¬
ter  in  the  same  year,  and  yet  continued  to
perform  the  duties  of  Treasurer,  it  does  not
appear  to  have  been  considered  as  a  dis¬
tinct  appointment.  In  1738,  he  demitted
the  office,  when  Revis,  the  Grand  Secretary,
was  appointed.  But  he  declined  on  the
ground  that  the  offices  of  Secretary  and
Treasurer  should  not  be  held  by  the  same
person,  —  “the  one  being  a  check  on  the
other.”  So  that,  in  1739,  it  was  made  a
permanent  office  of  the  Grand  Lodge  by
the  appointment  of  Bro.  John  Jesse.  It  is
an  elective  office ;  and  it  was  provided,  by
the  Old  Regulations,  that  he  should  be  “  a
brother  of  good  worldly  substance.”  The
duties  are  similar  to  those  of  the  Treasurer
of  a  subordinate  Lodge.  The  jewel  is  a
circle  enclosing  two  keys  crossed,  or  in
saltire.  According  to  ancient  custom,  his
badge  of  office  was  a  white  staff,  but  this  is
generally  disused  in  this  country.

Grand  Wardens.  The  Senior  and
Junior  Grand  Wardens  are  the  third  and
fourth  officers  of  a  Grand  Lodge.  Their
duties  do  not  differ  very  materially  from
those  of  the  corresponding  officers  of  a  sub¬
ordinate  Lodge,  but  their  powers  are  of
course  more  extensive.

The  Grand  Wardens  succeed  to  the  gov¬
ernment  of  the  Craft,  in  order  of  rank,
upon  the  death  or  absence  from  the  juris¬
diction  of  the  Grand  and  Deputy  Grand
Masters.  See  Succession  to  the  Chair.

It  is  also  their  prerogative  to  accompany
the  Grand  Master  in  his  visitations  of  the
Lodges,  and  when  there  to  act  as  his  War¬
dens.

In  the  absence  of  the  Senior  Grand  War¬
den,  the  Junior  does  not  occupy  the  west,
but  retains  his  position  in  the  south.
Having  been  elected  and  installed  to  pre¬
side  in  the  south,  and  to  leave  that  station
only  for  the  east,  the  temporary  vacancy
in  the  west  must  be  supplied  by  the  ap¬
pointment  by  the  Grand  Master  of  some
other  brother.  See  Wardens.

On  the  same  principle,  the  Senior  Grand
Warden  does  not  supply  the  place  of  the
absent  Deputy  Grand  Master,  but  retains
his  station  in  the  west.

The  old  Charges  of  1722  required  that
no  one  could  be  a  Grand  Warden  until  he
had  been  the  Master  of  a  Lodge.  The  rule
still  continues  in  force,  either  by  specific
regulations  or  by  the  force  of  usage.

By  the  Regulations  of  1721,  the  Grand
Master  nominated  the  Grand  Wardens,  but


if  his  nomination  was  not  approved,  the
Grand  Lodge  proceeded  to  an  election.  By
the  present  Constitutions  of  England  the
power  of  appointment  is  vested  absolutely
in  the  Grand  Master.  In  this  country  the
Grand  Wardens  are  elected  by  the  Grand
Lodge.

Grasse  Tilly,  Alexandre  Fran¬
cois  Auguste  Comte  de.  He  was

the  son  of  the  Comte  de  Grasse  who  com¬
manded  the  French  fleet  that  had  been  sent
to  the  assistance  of  the  Americans  in  their
revolutionary  struggle.  De  Grasse  Tilly
was  born  at  Versailles,  in  France,  about  the
year  1766.  He  was  initiated  in  the  Mother
Scottish  Lodge  du  Contrat  Social,  and  sub¬
sequently,  going  over  to  America,  resided
for  some  time  in  the  island  of  St.  Domingo,
whence  he  removed  to  the  city  of  Charleston,
in  South  Carolina,  where,  in  1796,  he  affili¬
ated  with  the  French  Lodge  la  Candeur.
In  1799,  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Lodge  la  Reunion  Fran^aise,  of  which  he
was  at  one  time  the  Venerable  or  Master.
In  1802,  the  Comte  de  Grasse  was  a  mem¬
ber  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Rite,  which  had  been  estab¬
lished  the  year  before  at  Charleston ;  and  in
the  same  year  he  received  a  patent  as
Grand  Commander  for  life  of  the  French
West  India  islands.  In  1802  he  returned
to  St.  Domingo,  and  established  a  Supreme
Council  of  the  Scottish  Rite  at  Port  au
Prince.  In  1804  he  went  to  Europe,  and
labored  with  great  energy  for  the  extension
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.  On
September  22,  1804,  he  founded  at  Paris  a
Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite,  of  which  body  he  was,
until  1806,  the  Grand  Commander.  On
March  5,  1805,  he  organized  a  Supreme
Council  at  Milan,  in  Italy,  and  on  July  4,
1811,  another  at  Madrid,  in  Spain.  The
Comte  de  Grasse  was  an  officer  in  the
French  army,  and  was  taken  prisoner  by
the  English  and  detained  in  England  until
1815,  when  he  returned  to  Paris.  Fie  im¬
mediately  resumed  his  functions  as  Grand
Commander  of  a  body  which  took  the  un¬
authorized  pretentious  title  of  the  Supreme
Council  of  America.  For  several  years
Scottish  Masonry  in  France  was  convulsed
with  dissensions,  which  De  Grasse  vainly
labored  to  reconcile.  Finally,  in  1818,  he
resigned  his  post  as  Grand  Commander,
and  was  succeeded  by  the  Comte  Decazes.
From  that  period  he  appears  to  have  passed
quietly  out  of  the  Masonic  history  of  F ranee,
and  probably  died  soon  after.

Grave.  The  grave  is,  in  the  Master’s
degree,  the  analogue  of  the  pastos,  couch
or  coffin,  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  and  is
intended  scenically  to  serve  the  same  pur¬
pose.  The  grave  is,  therefore,  in  that  de-


324


GREATER


GREGORIAN'S


gree,  intended,  in  connection  with  the  sprig
of  acacia,  to  teach  symbolically  the  great
Masonic  doctrine  of  a  future  life.

Greater  Lights.  See  Lights,  Sym¬
bolic.

Greece.  In  1867,  the  first  steps  were
taken  to  establish  a  Grand  Lodge  in  Greece
by  the  Lodges  which  had  been  recently
founded  there  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  Italy,
but  owing  to  various  causes  the  organiza¬
tion  did  not  succeed,  and  until  1872  the
Grecian  Lodges  were  presided  over  by  a
Deputy  Grand  Master,  appointed  by  and
the  representative  of  the  Grand  Orient  of
Italy.

On  July  22,  1872,  the  Lodges  of  Greece
met  at  Athens,  and  organized  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Greece,  electing  His  Imperial
Highness  Prince  Rkodocanakis  the  first
Grand  Master.  The  Order  is  now  repre¬
sented  by  seven  Lodges,  at  Svra,  Athens,
Piraeus,  Chalkis,  Corfu,  Patras,  Lamia,  and
Argos.

At  the  same  time  a  Supreme  Council  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
was  organized.  The  seat  of  both  bodies  is
at  Athens.

Greece,  Mysteries  in.  The  princi¬
pal  Pagan  mysteries  celebrated  in  Greece
were  the  Eleusinian  and  the  Bacchic,  both
of  which  see.

Green.  Green,  as  a  Masonic  color,  is
almost  confined  to  the  four  degrees  of  Per¬
fect  Master,  Knight  of  the  East,  Knight  of
the  Red  Cross,  and  Prince  of  Mercy.  In
the  degree  of  Perfect  Master  it  is  a  symbol
of  the  moral  resurrection  of  the  candidate,
teaching  him  that  being  dead  to  vice  he
should  hope  to  revive  in  virtue.

In  the  degree  of  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross,
this  color  is  employed  as  a  symbol  of  the
immutable  nature  of  truth,  which,  like  the
bay  tree,  will  ever  fiourish  in  immortal
green.

This  idea  of  the  unchanging  immortality
of  that  which  is  divine  and  true,  was  al¬
ways  connected  by  the  ancients  with  the
color  of  green.  Among  the  Egyptians,  the
god  Phtha,  the  active  spirit,  the  creator  and
regenerator  of  the  world,  the  goddess
Pascht,  the  divine  preserver,  and  Thoth,  the
instructor  of  men  in  the  sacred  doctrines  of
truth,  were  all  painted  in  the  hieroglyphic
system  with  green  flesh.

Portal  says,  in  his  essay  on  Symbolic
Colors,  that  “green  was  the  symbol  of  vic¬
tory  ;  ”  and  this  reminds  us  of  the  motto
of  the  Red  Cross  Knights,  “  magna  est  veri-
tas  et  prevalebit,” —  great  is  truth  and
mighty  above  all  things;  and  hence  green  is
the  symbolic  color  of  that  degree.

In  the  degree  of  Prince  of  Mercy,  or  the
twenty-sixth  degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite,
green  is  also  symbolic  of  truth,  and  is  the


appropriate  color  of  the  degree,  because
truth  is  there  said  to  be  the  palladium  of
the  Order.

In  the  degree  of  Knight  of  the  East,  in
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,
green  is  also  the  symbolic  color.  We  may
very  readily  suppose,  from  the  close  con¬
nection  of  this  degree  in  its  ritual  with  that
of  the  Red  Cross  Knight,  that  the  same
symbolic  explanation  of  the  color  would
apply  to  both,  and  I  think  that  such  an  ex-
lanation  might  very  properly  be  made;
ut  it  is  generally  supposed  by  it3  posses¬
sors  that  the  green  of  the  Knights  of  the
East  alludes  to  the  waters  of  the  river  Eu¬
phrates,  and  hence  its  symbolism  is  not
moral  but  historical.

The  evergreen  of  the  third  degree  is  to
the  Master  Mason  an  emblem  of  immortal¬
ity.  Green  was  wnth  the  Druids  a  symbol
of  hope,  and  the  virtue  of  hope  with  a  Ma¬
son  illustrates  hope  of  immortality.  In  all
the  Ancient  Mysteries,  this  idea  was  carried
out,  and  green  symbolized  the  birth  of  the
world,  and  the  moral  creation  or  resurrec¬
tion  of  the  initiate.  If  we  apply  this  to  the
evergreen  of  the  Master  Mason  we  shall
again  find  a  resemblance,  for  the  acacia  is
emblematic  of  a  new  creation  of  the  body,
and  a  moral  and  physical  resurrection.

Greeting.  This  word  means  saluta¬
tion,  and,  under  the  form  of  “  Thrice  Greet¬
ing,”  it  is  very  common  at  the  head  of  Ma¬
sonic  documents.  In  the  beginning  of  the
last  century  it  was  usual  at  the  meeting  of
Masons  to  say,  “  God’s  good  greeting  be  to
this  our  happy  meeting.”  Brown  gives  the
formula  as  practised  in  1800 :  “  The  recom¬
mendation  I  bring  is  from  the  right  worthy
and  worshipful  brothers  and  fellows  of  the
Holy  Lodge  of  St.  John,  who  greet  your
worship  well.”  This  formula  is  obsolete,
but  the  word  greeting  is  still  in  use  among
Freemasons.  In  Masonic  documents  it  is
sometimes  found  in  the  form  of  S.\  S.\  S.\,
which  three  letters  are  the  initials  of  the
Latin  word  salutem  or  health,  three  times
repeated,  and  therefore  equivalent  to
“  Thrice  Greeting.”

Gregorians.  An  association  estab¬
lished  early  in  the  eighteenth  century  in
ridicule  of  and  in  opposition  to  the  Free¬
masons.  There  was  some  feud  between  the
two  Orders,  but  the  Gregorians  at  last  suc¬
cumbed,  and  long  ago  became  extinct.
They  lasted,  however,  at  least  until  the  end
of  the  century,  for  there  is  extant  a  Sermon
preached  before  them  in  1797.  They  must
too,  by  that  time,  have  changed  their  char¬
acter,  for  Prince  William  Frederick  of
Gloucester  was  then  their  presiding  officer ;
and  Dr.  Munkhouse,  the  author  of  that
sermon,  who  was  a  very  ardent  Mason,
speaks  in  high  terms  of  the  Order  as  an


GREINEMANN


GUGOMOS


325


ally  of  Freemasonry,  and  distinguished  for
its  “  benign  tendency  and  salutary  effects.’’

Groiuciuaun,  Ludwig.  A  Do¬
minican  monk,  who,  while  preaching  a
course  of  Lent  sermons  at  Aix-la-Chapelle
in  1779,  endeavored  to  prove  that  the  Jews
who  crucified  Jesus  were  Freemasons;  that
Pilate  and  Herod  were  Wardens  in  a  Ma¬
sonic  Lodge;  and  that  Judas,  before  he  be¬
trayed  his  Lord,  had  been  initiated  in  the
synagogue,  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  which
he  returned  being  the  amount  of  his  fee  for
initiation.  With  discourses  like  these,
Greinemann,  who  had  threatened,  if  his
followers  would  assist  him,  he  would  slay
every  Freemason  he  met  with  his  own  hand,
so  excited  the  people,  that  the  magistrates
were  compelled  to  issue  an  edict  forbidding
the  assemblies  of  the  Freemasons.  Peter
Schuff,  a  Capuchin,  also  vied  with  Greine-
manu  in  the  labor  of  persecution,  and  peace
was  not  restored  until  the  neighboring  free
imperial  states  threatened  that,  if  the
monks  did  not  refrain  from  stirring  up  the
mob  against  Freemasonry,  they  should  be
prohibited  from  collecting  alms  in  their
territories.

Grip.  This  word  is  peculiar  to  Masonic
language.  It  is  not  to  be  found  in  any
English  dictionary  except  Webster’s,  where
it  is  marked  as  “  obsolete  or  vulgar.”  The
correct  equivalent  English  word  is  “  gripe,”
which  is  used  also  in  one  or  two  Masonic
works  of  the  beginning  of  the  last  century ;
but  g rip  was  very  soon  adopted  as  the  tech¬
nical  word  of  Masonry ;  and  so  uninter¬
rupted  has  been  its  use,  that  at  length,  not¬
withstanding  the  derogatory  remark  of
Webster,  it  has  passed  into  the  colloquial
language  of  the  day  to  signify  a  grasp  of
the  hand.  But  in  Masonry  the  meaning  of
the  word  is  somewhat  different.  German
Masons  call  it  der  griff,  and  French  ones,
l  attouehement.

Groton.  In  the  Leland  Manuscript,  a
corruption  of  Crotona,  where  Pythagoras
established  his  school.

Ground-Floor  of  tlie  Lodge.

Mount  Moriah,  on  which  the  Temple  of
Solomon  was  built,  is  symbolically  called
the  ground-floor  of  the  Lodge,  and  hence  it
is  said  that  “  the  Lodge  rests  on  holy
ground.”  This  ground-floor  of  the  Lodge
is  remarkable  for  three  great  events  re¬
corded  in  Scripture,  and  which  are  called
“  the  three  grand  offerings  of  Masonry.”  It
was  here  that  Abraham  prepared,  as  a  token
of  his  faith,  to  offer  up  his  beloved  son
Isaac — this  w’as  the  first  grand  offering  ;  it
was  here  that  David,  when  his  people  were
afflicted  with  a  pestilence,  built  an  altar,  and
offered  thereon  peace-offerings  and  burnt-of¬
ferings  to  appease  the  wrath  of  God  —  this


was  the  second  grand  offering;  and  lastly,  it
was  here,  that  when  the  Temple  was  com¬
pleted,  King  Solomon  dedicated  that  mag¬
nificent  structure  to  the  service  of  Jehovah,
with  the  offering  of  pious  prayers  and  many
costly  presents  —  and  this  was  the  third
grand  offering.

This  sacred  spot  was  once  the  threshing-
floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite,  and  from  him
David  purchased  it  for  fifty  shekels  of
silver.  The  Kabbalists  delight  to  invest  it
with  still  more  solemn  associations,  and  de¬
clare  that  it  was  the  spot  on  which  Adam
was  born  and  Abel  slain.  See  Holy  Ground.

Ground-Floor  of  King  Solo¬
mon’s  Temple.  This  is  said  to  have
been  a  Mosaic  pavement,  consisting  of
black  and  white  stones  laid  lozengewise,
and  surrounded  by  a  tesselated  border.  The
tradition  of  the  Order  is  that  Entered  Ap¬
prentices’  Lodges  were  held  on  the  ground-
floor  of  King  Solomon’s  Temple;  and  hence
a  Mosaic  pavement,  or  a  carpet  representing
one,  is  a  very  common  decoration  of  Ma¬
sonic  Lodges.  See  Mosaic  Pavement ,  and
Grand  Offerings.

Guard.  See  Due  Guard.

G  uard  of  the  Conclave.  See  Knight
of  the  Christian  Mark.

Guards.  Officers  used  in  working  the
rituals  of  the  Red  Cross  and  Templar  de¬
grees.  They  do  not  constitute  regular
officers  of  a  Council  or  Commandery,  but
are  appointed  pro  re  natd.

Guerricr  de  Dumast.  A  distin¬
guished  French  Mason,  born  at  Nancy  on
February  26,  1796.  He  is  the  author  of  a
poem  entitled  La  Magonnerie,  in  three  can¬
tos,  enriched  with  historical,  etymological,
and  critical  notes,  published  in  1820.  For
this  work  he  received  from  the  Lodge
Frferes  Artistes,  of  which  he  was  the  orator,
a  gold  medal.  He  was  the  author  of  several
other  works  both  Masonic  and  secular.

Gugomos,  Baron  Von.  An  im¬
postor  in  Masonry,  who,  in  1775,  appeared
in  Germany,  and,  being  a  member  of  the
Order  of  Strict  Observance,  claimed  that
he  had  been  delegated  by  the  Unknown
Superiors  of  the  Holy  See  at  Cyprus  to
establish  a  new  Order  of  Knights  Templars.
Calling  himself  Dux  and  High  Priest,  he
convoked  a  Masonic  Congress  at  Wies¬
baden,  which,  notwithstanding  the  warning
of  Dr.  Bode,  was  attended  by  many  influen¬
tial  members  of  the  Fraternity.  His  pre¬
tensions  were  so  absurd,  that  at  length  his
imposture  was  detected,  and  he  escaped
secretly  out  of  Wiesbaden.  In  1786,  Gu¬
gomos  confessed  the  imposition,  and,  it  is
said,  asserted  that  he  had  been  employed
as  a  tool  by  the  Jesuits  to  perform  this  part,
that  Freemasonry  might  be  injured.


326


GUIBBS


HAGGAI


Guibbs.  The  names  given  to  the  As¬
sassins  of  the  third  degree  by  some  of  the
inventors  of  the  high  degrees,  are  of  so
singular  a  form  as  to  have  almost  irresist¬
ibly  led  to  the  conclusion  that  these  names
were  bestowed  by  the  adherents  of  the
house  of  Stuart  upon  some-  of  their  ene¬
mies  as  marks  of  infamy.  Such,  for  in¬
stance,  is  Romvel,  the  name  of  one  of  the
Assassins  in  certain  Scottish  degrees,  which
is  probably  a  corruption  of  Cromwell.
Jubelum  Guibbs,  another  name  of  one  of
these  traitors,  lias  much  puzzled  the  Ma¬
sonic  etymologists.  I  think  that  I  have
found  its  origin  in  the  name  of  the  Rev.
Adam  Gib,  who  was  an  antiburgher  clergy¬
man  of  Edinburgh.  When  that  city  wras
taken  possession  of  by  the  young  Pre¬
tender,  Charles  Edward,  in  1745,  the  clergy
generally  fled.  But  Gib  removed  only  three
miles  from  the  city,  where,  collecting  his
loyal  congregation,  he  hurled  anathemas
for  five  successive  Sundays  against  the  Pre¬
tender,  and  boldly  prayed  for  the  downfall
of  the  rebellion.  He  subsequently  joined
the  loyal  army,  and  at  Falkirk  took  a  rebel
prisoner.  So  active  was  Gib  in  his  oppo¬
sition  to  the  cause  of  the  house  of  Stuart,
and  so  obnoxious  had  he  become,  that  sev¬
eral  attempts  were  made  by  the  rebels  to
take  his  life.  On  Charles  Edward’s  refurn
to  France,  he  erected  in  1747  his  “Primor¬
dial  Chapter  ”  at  Arras ;  and  in  the  compo¬
sition  of  the  high  degrees  there  practised,
it  is  very  probable  that  he  bestowed  the
name  of  his  old  enemy  Gib  on  the  most
atrocious  of  the  Assassins  who  figure  in  the
legend  of  third  degree.  The  letter  u  was
doubtless  inserted  to  prevent  the  French,
in  pronouncing  the  name,  from  falling  into
the  soft  sound  of  the  G  and  calling  the
word  Jib.  The  additional  b  and  s  were  the
natural  and  customary  results  of  a  French
attempt  to  spell  a  foreign  proper  name.


Guillemaln  de  St.  Victor,

Louis.  A  distinguished  French  writer,
who  published  several  works  on  Freema¬
sonry,  the  most  valuable  and  best  known
of  which  is  his  Recueil  Pr'ecieux  de  la  Ma-
gonnerie  Adonhiramite ,  first  issued  at  Paris
in  1782.  This  work,  of  which  several  edi¬
tions  were  published,  contains  the  cate¬
chisms  of  the  first  four  degrees  of  Adoni-
ramite  Masonry,  and  an  account  of  several
other  degrees,  and  is  enriched  with  many
learned  notes.  Ragon,  who  speaks  high¬
ly  of  the  work,  erroneously  attributes  its
authorship  to  the  celebrated  Baron  de
Tschoudy.

Gustavus  IV.,  King  of  Sweden.  He

was  initiated  into  Masonry,  at  Stockholm,
on  the  10th  of  March,  1793.  Ten  years
after,  on  the  9th  of  March,  1803,  Gustavu3
issued  an  Ordonnance  by  which  he  re¬
quired  all  the  secret  societies  in  his  domin¬
ions  to  make  known  to  the  stadtholders  of
the  cities  where  they  resided,  and  in  the
provinces  to  his  governors,  not  only  the
formula  of  the  oath  which  they  adminis¬
tered  to  their  members,  but  the  duties
which  they  prescribed,  and  the  object  of
their  association;  and  also  to  submit  at  any
time  to  a  personal  inspection  by  the  officers
of  government.  But  at  the  end  of  the  Or¬
donnance  the  King  says:  “The  Freemasons,
who  are  under  our  immediate  protection,
are  alone  excepted  from  this  inspection,
and  from  this  Ordonnance  in  general.”

Guttural  Point  of  Entrance.
From  the  Latin  guttur,  the  throat.  The
throat  is  that  avenue  of  the  body  wrhich  is
most  employed  in  the  sins  of  intemperance,
and  hence  it  suggests  to  the  Mason  certain
symbolic  instructions  in  relation  to  the  vir¬
tue  of  temperance.  See  Perfect  Points  of
Entrance.

Gymnosopbist.  The  eighth  degree
of  the  Kabbalistic  Rite.


H.


H.*.  A.*.  B.'.  An  abbreviation  of
Hiram  Abif.

Hadeeses.  An  Arabic  word,  signify¬
ing  the  traditions  handed  down  by  Moham¬
med  and  preserved  by  the  Mohammedan
doctors.  They  are  said  to  amount  to  5266
in  number.  Many  of  the  traditions  of  Mo¬
hammedan  Masonry  are  said  to  be  bor¬
rowed  from  the  Hadeeses,  just  as  much  of
the  legendary  lore  of  European  Masonry  is
to  be  found  in  the  Jewish  Talmud.

Hagar.  The  old  lectures  taught  the


doctrine,  and  hence  it  was  the  theory  of
the  Masons  of  the  eighteenth  century,  that
the  landmark  which  requires  all  candidates
for  initiation  to  be  free  born  is  derived  from
the  fact  that  the  promise  which  was  given
to  Isaac,  the  free-born  son  of  Abraham  and
Sarah,  was  denied  to  Ishmael,  the  slave-
born  son  of  the  Egyptian  bondwoman  Ha¬
gar.  This  theory  is  entertained  by  Oliver
in  all  his  writings,  as  a  part  of  the  old  Ma¬
sonic  system.  See  Free  Born.

Haggai.  According  to  Jewish  tradi-


HAGUE


HALL


327


tion,  Haggai  was  born  in  Babylon  during  the
captivity,  and  being  a  young  man  at  the
time  of  the  liberation  by  Cyrus,  he  came
to  Jerusalem  in  company  with  Joshua  and
Zerubbabel,  to  aid  in  the  rebuilding  of  the
Temple.  The  work  being  suspended  during
the  reigns  of  the  two  immediate  successors
of  Cyrus,  on  the  accession  of  Darius,  Hag-
gai  urged  the  renewal  of  the  undertaking,
and  for  that  purpose  obtained  the  sanction
of  the  King.  Animated  by  the  courage
and  patriotism  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah,
the  people  prosecuted  the  work  with  vigor,
and  the  second  Temple  was  completed  and
dedicated  in  the  year  516  B.  c.

In  the  Royal  Arch  system  of  America,
Haggai  represents  the  scribe,  or  third  offi¬
cer  of  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter.  In  the  Eng¬
lish  system  he  represents  the  second  offi¬
cer,  and  is  called  the  prophet.

Hague,  The.  A  city  of  the  Nether¬
lands,  formerly  South  Holland.  Free¬
masonry  was  introduced  there  in  1731  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  when  an
occasional  Lodge  was  opened  for  the  initia¬
tion  of  Francis,  Duke  of  Lorraine,  after¬
wards  Emperor  of  Germany.  Between
that  year  and  1735  an  English  and  a  Dutch
Lodge  were  regularly  instituted,  from  which
other  Lodges  in  Holland  subsequently  pro¬
ceeded.  In  1749,  the  Lodge  at  the  Hague
assumed  the  name  of  “  The  Mother  Lodge
of  the  Royal  Union,”  whence  resulted  the
National  Grand  Lodge,  which  declared  its
independence  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land  in  1770.  See  Netherlands.

Hah.  The  Hebrew  definite  article
“  the.”  It  forms  the  second  syllable  of  the
Substitute  Word.

Hail  or  Hale.  This  word  is  used
among  Masons  with  two  very  different  sig¬
nifications.  1.  When  addressed  as  an  in¬
quiry  to  a  visiting  brother,  it  has  the  same
import  as  that  in  which  it  is  used  under
like  circumstances  by  mariners.  Thus:
“Whence  do  you  hail?  ”  that  is,  “of  what
Lodge  are  you  a  member?”  Used  in  this
sense,  it  comes  from  the  Saxon  term  of  salu¬
tation"  hjel,”  and  should  be  spelled  “hail.”
2.  Its  second  use  is  confined  to  what
Masons  understand  by  the  “  tie,”  and  in
this  sense  it  signifies  to  conceal,  being  de¬
rived  from  the  Saxon  word  “  uelan,”  to
hide,  the  e  being  pronounced  in  Anglo-
Saxon  as  a  in  the  word  fate.  By  the  rules
of  etymology,  it  should  be  spelled  “  hale.”
The  preservation  of  this  Saxon  word  in  the
Masonic  dialect,  while  it  has  ceased  to  exist
in  the  vernacular,  is  a  striking  proof  of  the
antiquity  of  the  Order  and  its  ceremonies
in  England.  “In  the  western  parts  of
England,”  says  Lord  King,  (Chit.  Hist.  Ap.
Creed,  p.  178,)  “  at  this  very  day,  to  hele
over  anything  signifies,  among  the  common


people,  to  cover  it ;  and  he  that  covereth  an
house  with  tile  or  slate  is  called  a  lielliar.”

Hall  Committee.  A  committee  es¬
tablished  in  all  Lodges  and  Grand  Lodges
which  own  the  building  in  which  they  meet,
to  which  is  entrusted  the  supervision  of  the
building.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  England
first  appointed  its  Hall  Committee  in  1772,
for  the  purpose  of  superintending  the  erec¬
tion  of  the  hall  which  had  been  projected.

Hall,  Masonic.  For  a  long  time
after  the  revival  of  Masonry  in  1717,  Ma¬
sonic  Lodges  continued  to  meet,  as  they
had  done  before  that  period,  in  taverns.
Thus,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  was
organized,  and,  to  use  the  language  of  An¬
derson,  “  the  quarterly  communications
were  revived,”  by  four  Lodges,  whose  re¬
spective  places  of  meeting  were  the  Goose
and  Gridiron  Ale-House,  the  Crown  Ale-
House,  the  Apple-Tree  Tavern,  and  the
Rummer  and  Grapes  Tavern.  For  many
years  the  Grand  Lodge  held  its  quarterly
meetings  sometimes  at  the  Apple-Tree,  but
principally  at  the  Devil  Tavern,  and  kept
the  Grand  Feast  at  the  hall  of  one  of  the
Livery  companies.  The  first  Lodge  in
Paris  was  organized  at  a  tavern  kept  in  the
Rue  des  Boucheries  by  one  Hure,  and  the
Lodges  subsequently  organized  in  France
continued  to  meet,  like  those  of  England,
in  public  houses.  The  custom  was  long
followed  in  other  countries  of  Europe.  In
America  the  practice  ceased  only  at  a  com¬
paratively  recent  period,  and  it  is  possible
that  in  some  obscure  villages  it  has  not  yet
been  abandoned.

At  as  early  a  period  as  the  beginning  of
the  fourteenth  century,  the  Gilds,  or  Livery
Companies,  of  London  had  their  halls  or
places  of  meeting,  and  in  which  they  stored
their  goods  for  sale.  At  first  these  were
mean  buildings,  but  gradually  they  rose
into  importance,  and  the  Goldsmith’s  Hall,
erected  in  the  fifteenth  century,  is  said  to
have  been  an  edifice  of  large  dimensions
and  of  imposing  appearance.  These  halls,
probably,  as  they  were  very  common  in  the
eighteenth  century,  were  suggestive  to  the
Freemasons  of  similar  edifices  for  their
own  Fraternity;  but  undoubtedly  the  ne¬
cessity,  as  the  Association  grew  into  im¬
portance,  of  a  more  respectable,  more  con¬
venient,  and  more  secure  locality  than  was
afforded  by  temporary  resort  to  taverns  and
ale-houses  must  have  led  to  the  erection  of
isolated  edifices  for  their  own  special  use.

The  first  Masonic  Hall  of  which  we  have
any  account  is  the  one  that  was  erected  by
the  Lodge  at  Marseilles,  in  France,  in  the
year  1765.  Smith  describes  it  very  fully
in  his  Use  and  Abuse  of  Freemasonry,  and
calls  it  “a  very  magnificent  hall.”  In
1772,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  made


328


IIALL


HALL


preliminary  arrangements  for  the  construc¬
tion  of  a  hall,  a  considerable  sum  having
been  already  subscribed  for  that  purpose.
On  the  1st  of  May,  1775,  the  foundation-
stone  of  the  new  edifice  was  laid  in  solemn
form,  according  to  a  ceremonial  which  was
then  adopted,  and  which,  with  a  few  modi¬
fications,  continues  to  be  used  at  the  pres¬
ent  day  on  similar  occasions.  On  the
corner-stone  it  was  designated  as  Aula  La-
tamorum,  “  The  Freemason’s  Hall.”  It  was
finished  in  less  than  twelve  months,  and
was  dedicated,  on  the  23d  of  May,  177(1,  to
Masonry,  Virtue,  and  Universal  Benevolence ;
a  formula  still  adhered  to  without  variation
in  the  English  and  American  rituals.

In  the  same  year,  the  Lodge  at  Newcas¬
tle,  stimulated  by  the  enterprise  of  the
London  Freemasons,  erected  a  hall;  an  ex¬
ample  which  was  followed,  two  years  after¬
wards,  by  the  Lodge  of  Sunderland.  And
after  this  the  erection  of  isolated  halls  for
Masonic  purposes  became  common  not  only
in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  but  all
over  the  Continent,  wherever  the  funds  of
a  Lodge  would  permit  of  the  expenditure.

In  America,  Lodges  continued  to  be  held
in  taverns  up  to  a  very  recent  period.  It
is  not  now  considered  reputable;  although,
as  has  been  already  remarked,  the  custom
is,  perhaps,  not  entirely  discontinued,  espe¬
cially  in  remote  country  villages.  It  is
impossible  to  tell  at  what  precise  period
and  in  what  locality  the  first  Masonic  hall
was  erected  in  this  country.  It  is  true  that
in  a  Boston  paper  of  1773  we  find  (Moore’s
Mag.,  xv.  162,)  an  advertisement  summon¬
ing  the  Masons  to  celebrate  the  festival  of
St.  John  the  Evangelist  at  “  Freemason’s
Hall ;  ”  but,  on  examination,  we  learn  that
this  was  no  other  than  a  room  in  the  Green
Dragon  Tavern.  Other  buildings,  such  as
the  Exchange  Coffee-House,  only  partially
used  for  Masonic  purposes,  were  subse¬
quently  erected  in  Boston,  and  received  by
courtesy,  but  not  by  right,  the  name  of
“  Masonic  Halls ;  ”  but  it  was  not  until
1832  that  the  first  independent  hall  was
built  in  that  city,  which  received  the  name
of  the  Masonic  Temple,  a  title  which  has
since  been  very  usually  conferred  on  the
halls  in  the  larger  cities.  We  may  suppose
that  it  was  about  this  time,  when  a  resusci¬
tation  of  Masonic  energy,  which  had  been
paralyzed  by  the  anti-Masonic  opposition,
had  commenced  to  develop  itself,  that  the
Lodges  and  Grand  Lodges  began  to  erect
halls  for  their  peculiar  use.  At  present
there  is  no  dearth  of  these  buildings,  and
Boston,  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Wash¬
ington,  Cincinnati,  and  other  large  cities,
present  edifices  for  Masonic  use  of  imposing
grandeur  and  architectural  beauty  to  the
eye  of  the  spectators,  while  buildings  of


less  pretentious  appearance,  and  yet  credit¬
able  to  the  Institution  of  which  they  are
the  abiding-places,  are  to  be  found  scattered
all  over  the  land.

In  this  country,  as  well  as  in  Britain,  the
construction  of  Masonic  Halls  is  governed
by  no  specific  rules,  and  is  too  often  left  to
the  judgment  and  taste  of  the  architect,  and
hence,  if  that  person  be  not  an  experienced
Freemason,  the  building  is  often  erected
without  due  reference  to  the  ritual  require¬
ments  of  the  Order.  But  in  these  particulars,
says  Oliver,  the  Masons  of  the  Continent
are  governed  by  a  Ritual  of  Building,  and
he  quotes,  as  a  specimen  of  the  Helvetian
Ritual  in  reference  to  the  laying  of  the
foundation-stone  of  a  Masonic  Hall,  the
following  directions :

“A  Mason,  assisted  by  two  others,  if
there  be  a  dearth  of  workmen,  or  distress,
or  war,  or  peril,  or  threats  of  danger,  may
begin  the  work  of  building  a  Lodge ;  but  it
is  better  to  have  seven  known  and  sworn
workmen.  The  Lodge  is,  as  we  know,  due
east  and  west;  but  its  chief  window  or  its
chief  door  must  look  to  the  east.  On  a  day
allowed  and  a  place  appointed,  the  whole
company  of  builders  set  out  after  high  noon
to  lay  the  first  stone.”

Far  more  practical  are  the  directions  of
Dr.  Oliver  himself  for  the  construction  of  a
Masonic  Hall,  given  in  his  Book  of  the
Lodge,  (ch.  iii,)  which  is  here  condensed.

“  A  Masonic  Hall  should  be  isolated,  and,
if  possible,  surrounded  with  lofty  walls,  so
as  to  be  included  in  a  court,  and  apart  from
any  other  buildings,  to  preclude  the  possi¬
bility  of  being  overlooked  by  cowans  or
eavesdroppers.  As,  however,  such  a  situa¬
tion  in  large  towns  can  seldom  be  obtained,
the  Lodge  should  be  formed  in  an  upper
story ;  and  if  there  be  any  contiguous  build¬
ings,  the  windows  should  be  either  in  the
roof,  or  very  high  from  the  floor.  These
windows  ought  to  be  all  on  one  side  —  the
south,  if  practicable  —  and  furnished  with
proper  ventilation,  that  the  brethren  be  not
incommoded,  when  pursuing  their  accus¬
tomed  avocations,  by  the  heat  of  the  Lodge.
The  room,  to  preserve  a  just  proportion,
must,  of  course,  be  lofty.  It  should  be  fur¬
nished  with  a  pitched  roof,  open  within,
and  relieved  with  an  ornamental  framework
of  oak,  or  painted  so  as  to  represent  that
species  of  timber.  It  should  be  supported
on  corbels  running  along  the  cornice,  on
which  should  be  engraven  Masonic  orna¬
ments.  The  dimensions  of  the  room,  in
length  and  breadth,  will  depend  in  a  great
measure  on  the  situation  of  the  Lodge,  or
the  space  which  is  assigned  for  its  position;
and  this  will  often  be  extremely  circum¬
scribed  in  a  large  and  populous  place,
where  building  land  is  scarce  and  dear,


HALL


HALL


329


or  the  fund  inadequate  to  any  extensive
operations.  But  in  all  cases  a  due  propor¬
tion  should  be  observed  in  the  several  mem¬
bers  of  the  fabric  wherever  it  is  practicable,
that  no  unsightly  appearance  may  offend
the  eye,  by  disturbing  that  general  harmony
of  parts  which  constitutes  the  beauty  and
excellence  of  every  architectural  produc¬
tion.

“The  principal  entrance  to  the  Lodge
room  ought  to  face  the  east,  because  the  east
is  a  place  of  light  both  physical  and  moral ;
and  therefore  the  brethren  have  access  to
the  Lodge  by  that  entrance,  as  a  symbol  of
mental  illumination.  The  approaches  to
the  Lodge  must  be  angular,  for  a  straight
entrance  is  unmasonic  and  cannot  be  toler¬
ated.  The  advance  from  the  external
avenue  to  the  east  ought  to  consist  of
three  lines  and  two  angles.  The  first  line
passes  through  a  small  room  or  closet  for
the  accommodation  of  visitors.  At  the  ex¬
tremity  of  this  apartment  there  ought  to  be
another  angular  passage  leading  to  the
Tiler’s  room  adjacent  to  the  Lodge;  and
from  thence,  by  another  right  angle,  you
are  admitted  into  the  presence  of  the
brethren  with  your  face  to  the  Light.

“  In  every  convenient  place  the  architect
should  contrive  secret  cryptse  or  closets.
They  are  of  indispensable  utility ;  but  in
practice  are  not  sufficiently  attended  to  in
this  country.  On  the  Continent  they  are
numerous,  and  are  dignified  with  the  name
of  chapels.  Two  of  these  apartments  have
already  been  mentioned  —  a  room  for  vis¬
itors  and  the  Tiler’s  room ;  added  to  which
there  ought  to  be  a  vestry,  where  the  orna¬
ments,  furniture,  jewels,  and  other  regalia
are  deposited.  This  is  called  the  treasury,
or  Tiler’s  conclave,  because  these  things  are
under  his  especial  charge,  and  a  communi¬
cation  is  usually  made  to  this  apartment
from  the  Tiler’s  room.  There  ought  to  be
also  a  chapel  for  preparations,  hung  with
black,  and  having  only  one  small  light,
placed  high  up,  near  the  ceiling ;  a  chapel
for  the  dead  furnished  with  a  table,  on
which  are  a  lamp  and  emblems  of  mortal¬
ity  ;  the  Master’s  conclave,  where  the
records,  the  warrants,  the  minutes,  and
every  written  document  are  kept.  To  this
room  the  Worshipful  Master  retires  when
the  Lodge  is  called  from  labor  to  re¬
freshment,  and  at  other  times  when  his
resence  in  the  Lodge  is  not  essential ;  and
ere  he  examines  the  visitors,  for  which
purpose  a  communication  is  formed  be¬
tween  his  conclave  and  the  visitor’s  chapel.
It  is  furnished  with  blue.  And  here  he
transacts  the  Lodge  business  with  his  Sec¬
retary.  The  Ark  of  the  Covenant  is  also
deposited  in  this  apartment.  None  of  these
closets  should  exceed  twelve  feet  square,
2  It


and  may  be  of  smaller  dimensions,  accord¬
ing  to  circumstances.  In  the  middle  of  the
hall  there  should  be  a  movable  trap-door
in  the  floor,  seven  feet  long  and  three  or
four  feet  broad,  opening  into  a  small  crypt,
about  three  feet  in  depth,  the  use  of  which
is  known  to  none  but  perfect  Masons,  who
have  passed  through  all  the  symbolical  de¬
grees.  All  of  these  particulars  may  not  be
equally  necessary  to  the  construction  of  a
Masonic  Hall ;  but  a  close  attendance  to
their  general  spirit  and  direction,  or  to
similar  regulations,  should  be  impressed  on
every  Lodge  that  undertakes  the  construc¬
tion  of  a  building  exclusively  for  Masonic
purposes ;  and  such  a  building  only  is  en¬
titled  to  be  called  a  Masonic  Hall.”

The  division  in  the  American  Rite  of  the
degrees  among  different  bodies  imposes  the
necessity,  or  at  least  the  convenience,  when
erecting  a  Masonic  Hall  in  this  country,
of  appropriating  some  of  the  rooms  to  the
uses  of  Ancient  Craft  Lodges,  some  to
Royal  Arch  Chapters,  some  to  Royal  and
Select  Councils,  and  some  to  Commanderies
of  Knights  Templars.  It  is  neither  proper
nor  convenient  that  a  Chapter  should  be
held  in  a  Lodge ;  and  it  is  equally  expedi¬
ent  that  the  Asylum  of  a  Commandery
should  be  kept  separate  from  both.

All  of  these  rooms  should  be  oblong  in
form,  lofty  in  height,  with  an  elevated
dais  or  platform  in  the  east,  and  two  doors
in  the  west,  the  one  in  the  north-west
corner  leading  into  the  preparation  room,
and  the  other  communicating  with  the
Tiler’s  apartment.  But  in  other  respects
they  differ.  First,  as  to  the  color  pf  the
decorations.  In  a  Lodge  room  the  pre¬
dominating  color  should  be  blue,  in  a
Chapter  red,  and  in  a  Council  and  Com¬
mandery  black.

In  a  Lodge  room  the  dais  should  be  ele¬
vated  on  three  steps,  and  provided  with  a
pedestal  for  the  Master,  while  on  each  side
are  seats  for  the  Past  Masters,  and  digni¬
taries  who  may  visit  the  Lodge.  The  ped¬
estal  of  the  Senior  Warden  in  the  west
should  be  elevated  on  two  steps,  and  that
of  the  Junior  Warden  in  the  south  on  one.

A  similar  arrangement,  either  perma¬
nent  or  temporary,  should  be  provided  in
the  Chapter  room  for  working  the  interme¬
diate  degrees ;  but  the  eastern  dais  should
be  supplied  with  three  pedestals  instead  of
one,  for  the  reception  of  the  Grand  Coun¬
cil.  The  tabernacle  also  forms  an  essential
part  of  the  Chapter  room.  This  is  some¬
times  erected  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  al¬
though  the  consistency  of  the  symbolism
would  require  that  the  whole  room,  during
the  working  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree,
should  be  deemed  a  tabernacle,  and  then
the  veils  would,  with  propriety,  extend


330


HALL


HAND


from  the  ceiling  to  the  floor,  and  from  one
side  of  the  room  to  the  other.  There  are
some  other  arrangements  required  in  the
construction  of  a  Chapter  room,  of  which
it  is  unnecessary  to  speak.

Councils  of  lloyal  and  Select  Masters  are
usually  held  in  Chapter  rooms,  with  an  en¬
tire  disregard  of  the  historical  teachings
of  the  degrees.  In  a  properly-constructed
Council  chamber,  which,  of  course,  would
be  in  a  distinct  apartment,  there  should  he
no  veils,  but  nine  curtains  of  a  stone  color ;
and  these,  except  the  last,  starting  from  one
side  of  the  room,  should  stop  short  of  the
other,  so  as  to  form  a  narrow  passage  be¬
tween  the  wall  and  the  extremities  of  the
curtains,  reaching  from  the  door  to  the
ninth  curtain,  which  alone  should  reach
across  the  eutire  extent  of  the  room.  These
are  used  only  in  the  Select  degree,  and  can
be  removed  when  the  Royal  Master  is  to
be  conferred.  Unlike  a  Lodge  and  Chapter,
in  a  Council  there  is  no  dais  or  raised  plat¬
form  ;  but  three  tables,  of  a  triangular
form,  are  placed  upon  the  level  of  the  floor
in  the  east.  It  is,  however,  very  seldom
that  the  funds  of  a  Council  will  permit  of
the  indulgence  in  a  separate  room,  and
those  bodies  are  content  to  work,  although
at  a  disadvantage,  in  a  Chapter  room.

It  is  impossible,  with  any  convenience,
to  work  a  Commandery  in  a  Lodge,  or  even
a  Chapter  room.  The  officers  and  their
stations  are  so  different,  that  what  is  suit¬
able  for  one  is  unsuitable  for  the  other.
The  dais,  which  has  but  one  station  in  a
Lodge  and  three  in  a  Chapter,  requires  four
in  a  Commandery,  the  Frelate  taking  his
proper  place  on  the  right  of  the  Generalis¬
simo.  But  there  are  other  more  important
differences.  The  pri  ncipal  apartment  should
be  capable  of  a  division  by  a  curtain,
which  should  separate  the  Asylum  proper
from  the  rest  of  the  room,  as  the  mystical
veil  in  the  ancient  Church  shut  off  the
prospect  of  the  altar,  during  the  eucha-
ristic  sacrifice,  from  the  view  of  the  catechu¬
mens.  There  are  several  other  rooms  re¬
quired  in  the  Templar  ritual  which  are  not
used  by  a  Lodge,  a  Chapter,  or  a  Council,
and  which  makes  it  necessary  that  the
apartments  of  a  Commandery  should  be
distinct.  A  banquet-room  in  close  prox¬
imity  to  the  Asylum  is  essential ;  and  con¬
venience  requires  that  there  should  be  an
armory  for  the  deposit  of  the  arms  and
costume  of  the  Knights.  But  it  is  unneces¬
sary  to  speak  of  reflection  rooms,  and  other
places  well  known  to  those  who  are  familiar
with  the  ritual,  and  which  cannot  be  dis¬
pensed  with.

Malliwell  Manuscript.  The  ear¬
liest  of  the  old  Constitutions.  It  is  in
poetic  form,  and  was  probably  transcribed


in  1390  from  an  earlier  copy.  The  manu¬
script  is  in  the  King’s  Library  of  the
British  Museum.  It  was  published  in
1840  by  James  0.  Halliwell,  and  again  in
1844.

Hamburg.  By  a  deputation  of  the
Earl  of  Strathmore,  granted  in  1733  to
eleven  German  Masons,  a  Lodge  was  estab¬
lished  in  Hamburg,  (Preston,  p.  202,)  from
which  we  date  the  introduction  of  Free¬
masonry  into  Germany.  Of  the  proceed¬
ings  of  this  Lodge  we  have  no  further  in¬
formation.  In  1740  Brother  Luettman
brought  from  England  a  Warrant  for  the
establishment  of  a  Lodge,  and  a  patent  for
himself,  as  Provincial  Grand  Master  of
Hamburg  and  Lower  Saxony,  (Lenn.)  In
October,  1741,  it  assumed  the  name  of  Ab¬
salom,  and  in  the  same  year  the  Provincial
Grand  Lodge  of  Hamburg  and  Saxony  was
!  opened,  a  body  which,  Findel  says,  (p.  239,)
was  the  oldest  Mother  Lodge  in  Germany.
About  the  year  1787  the  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  adopted  the  newly-invented  Rite  of
Frederick  L.  Schroder,  consisting  of  only
three  degrees.  In  1801  it  declared  itself  an
independent  Grand  Lodge,  and  has  so  con¬
tinued.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Hamburg
practises  Schroder’s  Rite.  See  Schroder.
There  is  also  in  Hamburg  a  sort  of  Chapter,
which  was  formed  by  Schroder,  under  the
title  of  Geschichtliche  Engbund,  or  Histo¬
rical  Select  Union.  It  was  intended  as  a
substitute  for  Fessler’s  Degrees  of  Knowl¬
edge,  the  members  of  which  employ  their
time  in  studying  the  various  systems  of
Masonry.  The  Mutter-Bund  of  the  Con¬
federacy  of  Hamburg  Lodges,  which  make
up  this  system,  is  independent  of  the  Grand
Lodge.  The  two  authorities  are  entirely
distinct,  and  bear  much  the  same  relation
to  each  other  as  the  Grand  Lodges  and
Grand  Chapters  of  the  United  States.

Hand.  In  Freemasonry,  the  hand  as
a  symbol  holds  a  high  place,  because  it  is
the  principal  seat  of  the  sense  of  feeling  so
necessary  to  and  so  highly  revered  by  5la-
sons.  The  same  symbol  is  found  in  the
most  ancient  religions,  and  some  of  their
analogies  to  Masonic  symbolism  are  pe¬
culiar.  Thus,  Horapollo  says  that  among
the  Egyptians  the  hand  was  the  symbol  of
a  builder,  or  one  fond  of  building,  because  all
labor  proceeds  from  the  hand.  In  many  of
the  Ancient  Mysteries  the  hand,  especially
the  left,  was  deemed  the  symbol  of  equity.
In  Christian  art  a  hand  is  the  indication
of  a  holy  person  or  thing.  In  early  Medi¬
aeval  art,  the  Supreme  Being  was  always
represented  by  a  hand  extended  from  a
cloud,  and  generally  in  the  act  of  benedic¬
tion.  The  form  of  this  act  of  benediction,
as  adopted  by  the  Roman  Church,  which
seems  to  have  been  borrowed  from  the  sym-


HAND


HARLEIAN


331


bols  of  the  Phrygian  and  Eleusinian  priests
or  hierophants,  who  used  it  in  their  mystical
processions,  presents  a  singular  analogy,
which  will  be  interesting  to  Mark  Mas¬
ter  Masons,  who  will  recognize  in  it  a  sym¬
bol  of  their  own  ritual.  In  the  benediction
referred  to,  as  given  in  the  Latin
Church,  the  thumb,  index,  and
middle  fingers  are  extended,  and
the  two  others  bent  agaiust  the
palm.  The  church  explains  this
position  of  the  extended  thumb
and  two  fingers  as  representing
the  Trinity ;  but  the  older  symbol  of  the
Pagan  priests,  which  was  precisely  of  the
same  form,  must  have  had  a  different  mean¬
ing.  A  writer  in  the  British  Magazine  (vol.
i.,  p.  565,)  thinks  that  the  hand,  which  was
used  in  the  Mitliraic  mysteries  in  this  posi-
tion, was  symbolic  of  theLight  emanating  not
from  the  sun,  but  from  the  Creator,  directly
as  a  special  manifestation ;  and  he  remarks
that  chiromancy  or  divination  by  the  hand
is  an  art  founded  upon  the  notion  that  the
human  hand  has  some  reference  to  the  de¬
crees  of  the  supreme  power  peculiar  to  it
above  all  other  parts  of  the  microcosmus —
man.  Certainly,  to  the  Mason,  the  hand
is  most  important  as  the  symbol  of  that
mystical  intelligence  by  which  one  Mason
knows  another  “  in  the  dark  as  well  as  in
the  light.”

Hand,  Lefl.  See  Left  Hand.

Hand,  Right.  See  Right  Hand.

Hand  to  Hack.  See  Points  of  Fel¬
lowship.

Hand  to  Hand.  See  Points  of  Fel¬
lowship.

Hanover.  Freemasonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  Hanover,  in  the  year  1744,  by
the  organization  of  the  Lodge  “  Frederick
which  did  not,  however,  get  into  active
operation,  in  consequence  of  the  opposi¬
tion  of  the  priests,  until  two  years  after.
A  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  was  established
in  1755,  which  in  1828  became  an  inde¬
pendent  Grand  Lodge.  In  1866,  in  conse¬
quence  of  the  war  between  Austria  and
Prussia,  Hanover  was  annexed  to  the  latter
country.  There  being  three  Grand  Lodges
at  that  time  in  Prussia,  the  King  deemed  it
inexpedient  to  add  a  fourth,  and,  by  a  cabi¬
net  order  of  February  17,  1867,  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Hanover  was  dissolved.  Most  of
the  Hanoverian  Lodges  united  with  the
Grand  Lodge  Royal  York  at  Berlin,  and  a
few  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Three
Globes.

Haram,  Grand.  The  seventy-third
degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Hardic,  Janies.  A  Mason  of  New
York,  who  published,  in  1818,  a  work  en¬
titled  The  New  Freemason's  Monitor  and
Masonic  Guide.  It  evinces  considerable


ability,  is  more  valuable  than  the  Monitors
of  Webb  and  Cross,  and  deserved  a  greater
popularity  than  it  seems  to  have  received.

Harleian  Manuscript.  An  old
record  of  the  Constitutions  of  Freemasonry,
so  called  because  it  forms  No.  2,054  of  the
collection  of  manuscripts  in  the  British  Mu¬
seum,  which  were  originally  collected  by
Robert  Harley,  Earl  of  Oxford,  the  celebrat¬
ed  prime  minister  of  Queen  Anne,  and  known
as  the  “  Bibliotheca  Harleian,”  or  Harleian
Library.  The  MS.  consists  of  four  leaves,
containing  six  and  a  half  pages  of  close
writing  in  a  cramped  hand,  said  to  be  that
of  Randle  Holmes,  Chester  Herald ,  who
died  in  1659.  The  MS.  was  first  published
by  Bro.  William  James  Hughan,  in  his
Unpublished  Records  of  the  Craft.  The
Manuscript  was  carefully  transcribed  for
Bro.  Hughan  by  a  faithful  copyist,  and  its
correctness  was  verified  by  Mr.  Sims,  of  the
MS.  department  of  the  British  Museum.
Bro.  Hughan  places  the  date  of  the  record
in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,
and  in  this  he  is  probably  correct.

“The  two  following  folios,”  says  the  Rev.
Mr.  Woodford,  “in  the  volume  (viz.,  33  and
34)  are  of  a  very  important  character,  inas¬
much  as  the  secrets  of  Freemasonry  are
referred  to  in  the  ‘  obligation  ’  taken  by
Initiates,  and  the  sums  are  recorded  which
‘William  Wade  give  to  be  a  Freemason,’
and  others  who  were  admitted  members  of
the  Lodge.  The  amounts  varied  from  five
shillings  to  a  pound,  the  majority  being
ten  shillings  and  upwards.  The  fragment
on  folio  33  is  as  follows,  and  was  written
about  the  same  time  as  the  MS.  Constitu¬
tions  :

“  ‘  There  is  severall  words  &  signes  of  a
free  mason  to  be  reveiled  to  y“  wch  as  y”  will
answ'  before  God  at  the  Great  &  terrible
day  of  Judgmt  y"  keep  secret  &  not  to  re-
vaile  the  same  in  the  heares  of  any  person
or  to  any  but  to  the  M"  &  fellows  of  the
said  society  of  free  masons  so  helpe  me
God,  etc.’  ”

There  is  another  MS.  in  the  same  collec¬
tion  marked  No.  1492,  the  date  of  which
is  conjectured  to  be  about  1670.  It  was
copied  by  Bro.  Henry  Phillips,  and  first
published  in  the  Freemason’s  Quarterly  Re¬
view  in  1836,  pp.  228-295.  The  copy,  how¬
ever,  unfortunately,  is  not  an  exact  one,  as
Mr.  E.  A.  Bond,  of  the  Museum,  who  com¬
pared  a  part  of  the  transcript  with  the
original,  says  that  “  the  copyist  has  over¬
looked  peculiarities  in  many  instances.”
It  is  important  in  containing  the  “  Oath
of  Secrecy,”  which  is  in  the  following
words :

“  I,  A.  B.  Doe,  in  the  presence  of  Al¬
mighty  God,  and  my  fellows  and  Brethren
here  present,  promise  and  declare  that  I


332


HARMONY


HARODIM


will  not  at  any  time  hereafter,  bv  any  Act,
or  Circumstance  whatsoever,  directly  or
indirectly  publish,  discover,  reveall,  or
make  knowne  any  of  the  Secrets,  privi-
ledges,  or  Counsels  of  the  Fraternity  or  fel¬
lowship  of  Freemasonry,  which  at  this
time,  or  any  time  hereafter  shall  be  made
kuown  unto  me;  soe  helpe  mee  God  and
the  holy  contents  of  this  book.”

Harmony.  It  is  a  duty  especially  in¬
trusted  to  the  Senior  Warden  of  a  Lodge,
who  is  figuratively  supposed  to  preside  over
the  Craft  duriug  the  hours  of  labor,  so  to
act  that  none  shall  depart  from  the  Lodge
dissatisfied  or  discontented,  that  harmony
may  be  thus  preserved,  because,  as  the
ritual  expresses  it,  harmony  is  the  strength
and  support  of  all  well-regulated  institu¬
tions.

Harmony,  Universal.  See  Mes¬
meric  Masonry.

Harnouestcr.  More  properly  Ham-
wester.  The  Earl  of  Harmvester  was  elect¬
ed  by  the  four  Lodges  of  Paris,  as  the  sec¬
ond  Grand  Master  of  France,  in  1732,  suc¬
ceeding  the  Earl  of  Derwentwater.  He
left  France  in  1734,  and  having  resigned
his  office  was  succeeded  by  the  Duke  d’
Antin.  I  have  sought  in  vain  to  find  some
account  of  this  nobleman  in  contemporary
history.  Burke  makes  no  allusion  to  him
in  his  Extinct  Peerages,  and  I  am  inclined
to  thiuk  that  the  word  has  undergone  one
of  those  indecipherable  mutations  to  which
French  writers  are  accustomed  to  subject
all  foreign  names.

Harodim.  We  owe  the  Masonic
use  of  this  word  to  Anderson,  who  first
employed  it  in  the  Book  of  Constitutions,
where  he  tells  us  that  “  there  were  employed
about  the  Temple  no  less  than  three  thou¬
sand  and  six  hundred  Princes  or  Master
Masons  to  conduct  the  work,”  and  in  a  note
he  says  that  “  in  1  Kings  v.  16  they  are
called  Harodim,  Rulers  or  Provosts.”  The
passage  here  alluded  to  may  be  translated
somewhat  more  literally  than  in  the  author¬
ized  version,  thus :  “  Besides  from  the  chiefs
or  princes  appointed  by  Solomon  who  were
over  the  work,  there  were  three  thousand
and  three  hundred  harodim  over  the  people
who  labored  at  the  work.”  Harodim,  in
Hebrew  □'Tin,  is  a  grammatically  com¬
pounded  word  of  the  plural  form,  and  is
composed  of  the  definite  article  ,“f,  hah,
the  or  those,  and  a  participle  of  the  verb
rrn,  radah,  to  rule  over,  and  means,  there¬
fore,  those  who  rule  over,  or  overseers.  In
the  parallel  passage  of  2  Chronicles  ii.  IS,
the  word  used  is  Menatzchim ,  which  has  a
similar  meaning.  But  from  the  use  of  this
word  Harodim  in  1  Kings,  and  the  com¬
mentary  on  it  by  Anderson,  it  has  come  to
pass  that  Harodim  is  now  technically  used


to  signify  “Princes  in  Masonry.”  They
were  really  overseers  of  the  work,  and  hence
the  Masonic  use  of  the  term  is  not  al¬
together  inappropriate.  Whoever  inspects
the  two  parallel  passages  in  1  Kings  v.  16
and  2  Chron.  ii.  18,  will  notice  an  apparent
discrepancy.  In  the  former  it  is  said  that
there  were  three  thousand  and  three  hun¬
dred  of  these  overseers,  and  in  the  latter
the  number  is  increased  to  three  thousand
and  six  hundred.  The  commentators  have
noted  but  not  explained  the  incongruity.
Lee,  in  his  Temple  of  Solomon,  attempts  to
solve  it  by  supposing  that  “  possibly  three
hundred  at  a  second  review  might  be  added
to  the  number  of  officers  for  the  greater
care  of  the  business.”  This  is  not  satisfac¬
tory  ;  not  more  so  is  the  explanation  offer¬
ed  by  myself,  many  years  ago,  in  the  Lexi¬
con  of  Freemasonry.  It  is  much  more  rea¬
sonable  to  suspect  a  clerical  error  of  some
old  copyist  which  has  been  perpetuated.
There  is  room  for  such  an  inadvertence,  for
there  is  no  very  great  difference  between
B'bty,  the  Hebrew  for  three,  and  pp,  which
is  six.  The  omission  of  the  central  letter
would  create  the  mistake.  Masonic  writers
have  adhered  to  the  three  thousand  and
six  hundred,  which  is  the  enumeration  in
Chronicles.

Harodim,  Grand  Chapter  of.

An  institution  under  the  title  of  the  “  Grand
Chapter  of  the  Ancient  and  Venerable  Or¬
der  of  Harodim  ”  was  established  in  Lon¬
don,  in  the  year  1787,  by  the  celebrated
Masonic  lecturer,  William  Preston.  He
thus  defines,  in  his  Plustrations,  its  nature
and  objects :

“  The  mysteries  of  this  Order  are  peculiar
to  the  institution  itself ;  while  the  lectures
of  the  Chapter  include  every  branch  of  the
Masonic  system,  and  represent  the  art  of
Masonry  in  a  finished  and  complete  form.

“  Different  classes  are  established,  and
particular  lectures  restricted  to  each  class.
The  lectures  are  divided  into  sections,  and
the  sections  into  clauses.  The  sections  are
annually  assigned  by  the  Chief  Harod  to  a
certain  number  of  skilful  Companions  in
each  class,  who  are  denominated  Section-
ists ;  and  they  are  empowered  to  distribute
the  clauses  of  their  respective  sections,  with
the  approbation  of  the  Chief  Harod  and
General  Director,  among  the  private  com¬
panions  of  the  Chapter,  who  are  denomi¬
nated  Clauseholders.  Such  Companions
as  by  assiduity  become  possessed  of  all  the
sections  in  the  lecture  are  called  Lecturers ;
and  out  of  these  the  General  Director  i3
always  chosen.

“Every  Clauseholder,  on  his  appointment,
is  presented  with  a  ticket,  signed  by  the
Chief  Harod,  specifying  the  clause  allotted
to  him.  This  ticket  entitles  him  to  enjoy


HARODIM


HAUTES


333


the  rank  and  privileges  of  a  Clauseholder
in  the  Chapter ;  and  no  Clauseholder  can
transfer  his  ticket  to  another  Companion,
unless  the  consent  of  the  Council  has  been
obtained  for  that  purpose,  and  the  General
Director  has  approved  the  Companion  to
whom  it  is  to  be  transferred  as  qualified  to
hold  it.  In  case  of  the  death,  sickness,  or
non-residence  in  London  of  any  Lecturer,
Sectionist,  or  Clauseholder,  another  Com¬
panion  is  appointed  to  fill  up  the  vacancy
for  the  time  being,  that  the  lectures  may  be
always  complete;  and  during  the  session
a  public  lecture  is  usually  delivered  at
stated  times.

“  The  Grand  Chapter  is  governed  by  a
Grand  Patron,  two  Vice  Patrons,  a  chief
Euler,  and  two  Assistants,  with  a  Council
of  twelve  respectable  Companions,  who  are
chosen  annually  at  the  Chapter  nearest  to
the  festival  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist.”

The  whole  system  was  admirably  adapted
to  the  purposes  of  Masonic  instruction,  and
was  intended  for  the  propagation  of  the
Prestonian  system  of  lectures.  The  body
no  longer  exists,  but  the  Prestonian  lectures
are  still  delivered  in  London  at  stated
times  by  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

Harodim,  Prince  of.  In  the  old
lectures  of  the  Ineffable  degrees,  it  is  said
that  Tito,  the  oldest  of  the  Provosts  and
Judges,  was  the  Prince  of  Harodim,  that  is,
chief  of  the  three  hundred  architects  who
were  the  Harodim,  or  additional  three  hun¬
dred  added  to  the  thirty-three  thousand
Menatzchim  mentioned  in  Chronicles,  and
who  thus  make  up  the  number  of  three
thousand  six  hundred  recorded  in  the  first
Book  of  Kings,  and  who  in  the  old  lecture
of  the  degree  of  Provost  and  Judge  are
supposed  to  have  been  the  Harodim  or
Rulers  in  Masonry.  The  statement  is  a
myth  ;  but  it  thus  attempts  to  explain  the
discrepancy  alluded  to  in  the  article  Haro¬
dim.

Harpocrates.  The  Greek  god  of
silence  and  secrecy.  He  was,  however,  a
divinity  of  the  Egyptian  mythology;  his
true  name  being,  according  to  Bunsen  and
Lepsius,  Har-pi-chrati,  that  is,  Horus  the
child;  and  he  is  supposed  to  have  been  the
son  of  Osiris  and  Isis.  He  is  represented
as  a  nude  figure,  sitting  sometimes  on  a
lotus  flower,  either  bareheaded  or  covered
by  an  Egyptian  mitre,  but  always  with  his
finger  pressed  upon  his  lips.  Plutarch
thinks  that  this  gesture  was  an  indication
of  his  childlike  and  helpless  nature;  but  the
Greeks,  and  after  them  the  Romans,  sup-

osed  it  to  be  a  symbol  of  silence ;  and

ence,  while  he  is  sometimes  described  as
the  god  of  the  renewed  year,  whence  peach
blossoms  were  consecrated  to  him  because
of  their  early  appearance  in  spring,  he  is


more  commonly  represented  as  the  god  of
silence  and  secrecy.  Thus,  Ovid  says  of
him :

“  Quique  premit  vocem  digitoque  silentia
suadet.”

He  who  controls  the  voice  and  persuades  to
silence  with  his  finger.

In  this  capacity,  his  statue  was  often
placed  at  the  entrance  of  temples  and  places
where  the  mysteries  were  celebrated,  as  an
indication  of  the  silence  and  secrecy  that
should  there  be  observed.  Hence  the  finger
on  the  lips  is  a  symbol  of  secrecy,  and  has
so  been  adopted  in  Masonic  symbolism.

Harris,  Tliaddeus  Mason.  The
Rev.  Thaddeus  Mason  Harris,  D.D.,  an
American  Masonic  writer  of  some  reputa¬
tion,  was  born  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  July  7,
1767,  and  graduated  at  Harvard  University
in  1787.  He  was  ordained  as  minister  of  a
church  in  Dorchester  in  1793,  and  died  at
Boston,  April  3, 1842.  He  held  at  different
times  the  offices  of  Deputy  Grand  Master,
Grand  Chaplain,  and  Corresponding  Grand
Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massa¬
chusetts.  “  His  first  great  Masonic  work,”
says  Huntoon,  [Eulogy,)  “  was  the  editing  of
a  collation,  revision,  and  publication  of  the
‘  Constitutions  of  the  Ancient  and  Honor¬
able  Fraternity  of  Free  and  Accepted  Ma¬
sons,’  a  quarto  volume,  printed  at  Wor¬
cester,  Mass.,  1792;  a  work  which  he  ac¬
complished  with  the  accustomed  diligence
and  fidelity  with  which  he  performed  every
enterprise  confided  to  his  care.  His  vari¬
ous  occasional  addresses  while  Grand
Chaplain  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  Masonic
defences,  and  his  volume  of  Masonic  Dis¬
courses,  published  in  1801,  constitute  a  large
and  valuable  portion  of  the  Masonic  classic
literature  of  America.”

Hasidim,  Sovereign  Prince.
The  seventy-fifth  and  seventy-sixth  degrees
of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.  It  should  be
Chasidim,  which  see.

Hat.  To  uncover  the  head  in  the  pres¬
ence  of  superiors  has  been,  among  all
Christian  nations,  held  as  a  mark  of  respect
and  reverence.  The  Eastern  nations  un¬
cover  the  feet  when  they  enter  a  place  of
worship;  the  Western  uncover  the  head.
The  converse  of  this  is  also  true ;  and  to
keep  the  head  covered  while  all  around  are
uncovered  is  a  token  of  superiority  of  rank
or  office.  The  king  remains  covered,  the
courtiers  standing  around  him  take  off  their
hats.

Ilaupt-Huttc.  Among  the  German
Stone  -  masons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  the
original  Lodge  at  Strasburg  was  considered
as  the  head  of  the  Craft,  under  the  title  of
the  Haupt-Hutte,  or  Grand  Lodge.

Hautes  Grades.  French.  High
Degrees,  which  see.


334


HEAL


HELMET


Heal.  A  technical  Masonic  term
which  signifies  to  make  valid  or  legal.
Hence  one  who  has  received  a  degree  in  an
irregular  manner  or  from  incompetent  au¬
thority  is  not  recognized  until  he  has  been
healed.  The  precise  mode  of  healing  de¬
pends  on  circumstances.  If  the  Lodge
which  conferred  the  degree  was  clandestine,
the  whole  ceremony  of  initiation  would
have  to  be  repeated.  If  the  authority  which
conferred  the  degree  was  only  irregular,
and  the  question  was  merely  a  technical  one
of  legal  competence,  it  has  been  supposed
that  it  was  only  necessary  to  exact  an  obli¬
gation  of  allegiance,  or  in  other  words  to
renew  the  covenant.

Hearing.  One  of  the  five  senses,  and
an  important  symbol  in  Masonry,  because
it  is  through  it  that  we  receive  instruction
when  ignorant,  admonition  when  in  dan¬
ger,  reproof  when  in  error,  and  the  claim
of  a  brother  who  is  in  distress.  Without
this  sense,  the  Mason  would  be  crippled  in
the  performance  of  all  his  duties ;  and  hence
deafness  is  deemed  a  disqualification  for  ini¬
tiation.

Heart.  Notwithstanding  that  all  the
modern  American  Masonic  Manuals  and
Master’s  Carpets  from  the  time  of  Jeremy
L.  Cross  exhibit  the  picture  of  a  heart
among  the  emblems  of  the  third  degree,
there  is  no  such  symbol  in  the  ritual.  But
the  theory  that  every  man  who  becomes  a
Mason  must  first  be  prepared  in  his  heart
was  advanced  among  the  earliest  lectures
of  the  last  century,  and  demonstrates,  as
Krause  properly  remarks,  in  Speculative
Masonry,  an  internal  principle  which  ad¬
dresses  itself  not  simply  to  the  outward
conduct,  but  to  the  inner  spirit  and  con¬
science  of  all  men  who  seek  its  instruc¬
tions.

Heart  of  Hiram  Abif.  There  is  a
legend  in  some  of  the  high  degrees  and  in
continental  Masonry,  that  the  heart  of
Hiram  Abif  was  deposited  in  an  urn  and
laced  upon  a  monument  near  the  holy  of
olies ;  and  in  some  of  the  tracing  boards  it
is  represented  as  a  symbol.  The  myth,  for
such  it  is,  was  probably  derived  from  the
very  common  custom  in  the  Middle  Ages
of  persons  causing  their  bodies  to  be  dis¬
membered  after  death  for  the  purpose  of
having  parts  of  them  buried  in  a  churcb,  or
some  place  which  had  been  dear  to  them  in
life.  Thus  Hardynge,  in  his  Metrical  Chron¬
icle  of  England ,  "tells  us  of  Richard  I.  that

“  He  queathed  his  corpse  then  to  be  buried
At  Fount  Everard,  there  at  his  father’s  feete;
********

His  herte  invyncyble  to  Rome  he  sent  full
mete

For  their  great  truth  and  stedfast  great  con-
stance.”


The  Mediaeval  idea  has  descended  to  mod¬
ern  times  ;  for  our  present  lectures  say  that
the  ashes  of  Hiram  were  deposited  in  an  urn.

Heeart,  Gabriel  Antoine  Jo¬
seph.  A  French  Masonic  writer,  who  was
born  at  Valenciennes  in  1755,  and  died  in
1838.  He  made  a  curious  collection  of
degrees,  and  invented  a  system  of  five,
namely:  1.  Knight  of  the  Prussian  Eagle;
2.  Knight  of  the  Comet ;  3.  The  Scottish
Purifier;  4.  Victorious  Knight;  5. Scottish
Trinitarian,  or  Grand  Master  Commander
of  the  Temple.  This  cannot  be  called  a
Rite,  because  it  was  never  accepted  and
practised  by  any  Masonic  authority.  It  is
known  in  nomenclatures  as  H6cart’s  system.
He  was  the  author  of  many  dissertations
and  didactic  essays  on  Masonic  subjects.
He  at  one  time  proposed  to  publish  his
collection  of  degrees  with  a  full  explanation
of  each,  but  did  not  carry  his  design  into
execution.  Many  of  them  are  cited  in  this
work.

Height  of  the  Lodge.  From  the

earth  to  the  highest  heavens.  A  symbolic
expression.  See  Form  of  the  Lodge.

Heldmami,  Hr.  Friedrieh.  He
was  a  professor  of  political  science  in  the
Academy  of  Bern,  in  Switzerland,  and  was
born  at  Margetshochheim,  in  Franconia,
November  24,  1770.  He  was  one  of  the
most  profound  of  the  German  investigators
into  the  history  and  philosophy  of  Masonry.
He  was  initiated  into  the  Order  at  Frei¬
burg,  in  1S09,  and,  devoting  himself  to  the
study  of  the  works  of  Fessler  and  other
eminent  scholars,  he  resolved  to  establish  a
system  founded  on  a  collation  of  all  the
rituals,  and  which  should  be  more  in  ac¬
cordance  with  the  true  design  of  the  Insti¬
tution.  For  this  purpose,  in  181G,  he  or¬
ganized  the  Lodge  zur  Brudertreue  at
Aarau,  in  Switzerland,  where  he  then  re¬
sided  as  a  professor.  For  this  Lodge  he
prepared  a  Manual,  which  he  proposed  to
publish.  But  the  Helvetian  Directory  de¬
manded  that  the  manuscript  should  be
given  to  that  body  for  inspection  and  cor¬
rection,  which  the  Lodge,  unwilling  to  sub¬
mit  to  such  a  censorship,  refused  to  do.
Heldmann,  being  reluctant  to  involve  the
Lodge  in  a  controversy  with  its  superiors,
withdrew  from  it.  He  subsequently  pub¬
lished  a  valuable  work  entitled  Die  drei  ate»-
ten  geschichf  lichen  Den /.male  der  deuischen
Freimaurerbruderschaft ;  i.  e.,  The  three
oldest  Memorials  of  the  German  Masonic
Brotherhood,  which  appeared  at  Aarau  in
1819.  In  this  work,  which  is  chiefly  founded
on  the  learned  researches  of  Krause,  the  Con¬
stitutions  of  the  Stone-masons  of  Strasburg
were  published  for  the  first  time.

Helmet.  A  defensive  weapon  where¬
with  the  head  and  neck  are  covered.  In


HELMETS


HEREDOM


335


heraldry,  it  is  a  mark  of  chivalry  and  no¬
bility.  It  was,  of  course,  a  part  of  the  ar¬
mor  of  a  knight,  and  therefore,  whatever
may  he  the  head  covering  adopted  by  mod¬
ern  Knights  Templars,  it  is  in  the  ritual
called  a  helmet.

Helmets,  To  Deposit.  In  Tem¬
plar  ritualism,  to  lay  aside  the  covering  of
the  head.

Helmets,  To  Recover.  In  Tem¬
plar  ritualism,  to  resume  the  covering  of
the  head.

Help.  See  Aid  and  Assistance.

Hemming,  Samuel,  D.  D.  Pre¬
vious  to  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges
of  England  in  1813,  the  Prestonian  system
of  lectures  was  practised  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Modern  Masons,  while  the  Athol
Masons  recognized  higher  degrees,  and  va¬
ried  somewhat  in  their  ritual  of  the  lower.
"When  the  union  was  consummated,  and
the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  England  wras
organized,  a  compromise  was  effected,  and
Dr.  Hemming,  who  was  the  Senior  Grand
Warden,  and  had  been  distinguished  for
his  skill  as  the  Master  of  a  Lodge  and  his
acquaintance  with  the  ritual,  was  appointed
to  frame  anew  system  of  lectures.  The  Pres¬
tonian  system  was  abandoned,  and  the  Hem¬
ming  lectures  adopted  in  its  place,  not  with¬
out  the  regret  of  many  distinguished  Masons,
among  whom  was  Dr.  Oliver.  The  Hem¬
ming  lectures  are  now  the  authorized  sys¬
tem  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  Some
of  the  country  Lodges,  however,  still  ad¬
here  to  the  system  of  Preston,  and  the  Pres¬
tonian  lectures  are  annually  delivered  in
London.  Among  the  innovations  of  Dr.
Hemming,  which  are  to  be  regretted,  are
the  abolition  of  the  dedication  to  the  two
Saints  John,  and  the  substitution  for  it  of  a
dedication  to  Solomon.  Some  other  changes
that  were  made  were  certainly  no  improve¬
ments.

Henrietta  Marla.  The  widow  of
Charles  I.,  of  England.  It  is  asserted,  by
those  who  support  the  theory  that  the  Mas¬
ter’s  degree  was  invented  by  the  adherents
of  the  exiled  house  of  Stuart,  and  that  its
legend  refers  to  the  death  of  Charles  I.  and
the  restoration  of  his  son,  that  in  the  tech¬
nical  Masonic  expression  of  the  “  widow’s
son,”  the  allusion  is  to  the  widow  of  the
decapitated  monarch.  Those  who  look
farther  for  the  foundation  of  the  legend
give,  of  course,  no  credence  to  a  statement
whose  plausibility  depends  only  on  a  coin¬
cidence.

Henry  VI.  King  of  England  from
1422  to  1401.  This  monarch  is  closely  con¬
nected  with  the  history  of  Masonry  because,
in  the  beginning  of  his  reign  and  during  his
minority,  the  celebrated  “Statute  of  La¬
borers,”  which  prohibited  the  congregations


of  the  Masons,  was  passed  by  an  intolerant
Parliament,  and  because  of  the  questions
said  to  have  been  proposed  to  the  Masons
by  the  king,  and  their  answers,  which  are
contained  in  what  is  called  the  “  Leland
Manuscript,”  a  document  which,  if  authen¬
tic,  is  highly  important;  but  of  whose  au¬
thenticity  there  are  as  many  oppugners  as
there  are  defenders.

Heredom.  In  what  are  called  the
“high  degrees”  of  the  continental  Rites,
there  is  nothing  more  puzzling  than  the
etymology  of  this  word.  We  have  the
Royal  Order  of  Heredom,  given  as  the  ne
plus  ultra  of  Masonry  in  Scotland,  and  in
almost  all  the  Rites  the  Rose  Croix  of  Here¬
dom,  but  the  true  meaning  of  the  word  is
apparently  unknown.  Ragon,  in  his  Ortho-
doxie  Maqonnique,  (p.  91,)  asserts  that  it
has  a  political  signification,  and  that  it  was
invented  between  the  years  1740  and  1745,
by  the  adherents  of  Charles  Edward  the
Pretender,  at  the  Court  of  St.  Germain,
which  was  the  residence,  during  that  period,
of  the  unfortunate  prince,  and  that  in  their
letters  to  England,  dated  from  Heredom.,  they
mean  to  denote  St.  Germain.  He  supposes
it  to  be  derived  from  the  Mediaeval  Latin
word  “  hoeredum,”  signifying  “  a  heritage,”
and  that  it  alludes  to  the  Castle  of  St.
Germain,  the  only  heritage  left  to  the  de¬
throned  sovereign.  But  as  Ragon’s  favor¬
ite  notion  was  that  the  hautes  grades  were
originally  instituted  for  the  purpose  of  aid¬
ing  the  house  of  Stuart  in  its  restoration  to
the  throne,  a  theory  not  now  generally  ac¬
cepted,  at  least  without  modification,  this
etymology  must  be  taken  with  some  grains
of  allowance.  The  suggestion  is,  however,
an  ingenious  one.

In  some  of  the  old  manuscripts  the  word
Heroden  is  found  as  the  name  of  a  mountain
in  Scotland;  and  we  sometimes  find  in  the
French  Cahiers  the  title  of  “  Rose  Croix  de
Heroden.”  There  is  not  a  very  great  dif¬
ference  in  the  French  pronunciation  of
Heredom  and  Heroden,  and  one  might  be  a
corruption  of  the  other.  I  was  once  in¬
clined  to  this  theory ;  but  even  if  it  were  the
correct  one  we  should  gain  nothing,  for  the
same  difficulty  would  recur  in  tracing  the
root  and  meaning  of  Heroden.

The  most  plausible  derivation  is  one  given
in  1858,  by  a  writer  in  the  London  Free¬
mason’s  Magazine.  He  thinks  it  should  be
spelled  “  Heredom,”  and  traces  it  to  the  two
Greek  words,  upoc,  hieros,  holy,  and  66goq,
domos,  house.  It  would  thus  refer  to  Ma¬
sonry  as  symbolically  the  Holy  House  or
Temple.  In  this  way  the  title  of  Rose
Croix  of  Heredom  would  signify  the  Rosy
Cross  of  the  Holy  House  of  Masonry.  This
derivation  is  now  very  generally  recognized
as  the  true  one.


336


HERMAIMES


HEROINE


Hermaimes.  A  corruption  of  Her¬
mes,  fouud  in  some  of  the  old  Constitutions.

Hermaphrodite.  The  merest  igno¬
rance  has,  in  a  few  instances,  permitted  the
introduction  of  this  word  into  the  ritual
as  one  of  the  classes  which  the  Masons
promise  not  to  initiate.  The  word  is  not
mentioned  in  the  old  Constitutions  nor  in
any  of  the  rituals ;  but  if  such  monsters  did
actually  exist,  which  naturalists  deny,  their
exclusion  would  be  founded  on  the  general
law  which  prohibits  the  initiation  of  those
who  have  any  physical  defect  or  maim.

Hermes.  In  all  the  old  manuscript
records  which  contain  the  Legend  of  the
Craft,  mention  is  made  of  Hermes  as  one
of  the  founders  of  Masonry.  Thus,  in  the
“Grand  Lodge  MS.,”  whose  date  is  1632,  it
is  said  —  and  the  statement  is  substantially
and  almost  verbally  the  same  in  all  the
others  —  that  “The  great  Hermarines  that
was  Cubys  sonne,  the  which  Cubye  was
Semmes  sonne,  that  was  Noes  sonne.  This
same  Hermarines  was  afterwards  called
Hermes  the  father  of  Wisdome ;  he  found
one  of  the  two  pillars  of  stone,  and  found
the  science  written  thereon,  and  he  taught
it  to  other  men.”

There  are  two  persons  of  the  name  of
Hermes  mentioned  in  sacred  history.  The
first  is  the  divine  Hermes,  called  by  the
Romans  Mercury.  Among  the  Egyptians
he  was  known  as  Thoth.  Diodorus  Siculus
describes  him  as  the  secretary  of  Osiris  ;  he
is  commonly  supposed  to  have  been  the  son
of  Mizraim,  and  Cumberland  says  that  he
was  the  same  as  Osiris.  There  is,  however,
much  confusion  among  the  mythologists
concerning  his  attributes.

The  second  was  Hermes  Trismegistus  or
the  Thrice  Great,  who  was  a  celebrated
Egyptian  legislator,  priest,  and  philosopher,
who  lived  in  the  reign  of  Ninus,  about  the
year  of  the  world  2670.  He  is  said  to  have
written  thirty-six  books  on  theology  and  phi¬
losophy,  and  six  upon  medicine,  all  which  are
lost.  There  are  many  traditions  of  him ;  one
of  which,  related  by  Eusebius,  is  that  he  in¬
troduced  hieroglyphics  into  Egypt.  This
Hermes  Trismegistus,  although  the  reality
of  his  existence  is  doubtful,  was  claimed  by
the  alchemists  as  the  founder  of  their  art,
whence  it  is  called  the  Hermetic  science,
and  whence  we  get  in  Masonry,  Hermetic
Rites  and  Hermetic  degrees.  It  is  to  him
that  the  Legend  of  the  Craft  refers ;  and,  in¬
deed,  the  York  Constitutions,  which  are  of
importance,  though  not  probably  of  the
date  of  926,  assigned  to  them  by  Krause,
give  him  that  title,  and  say  that  he  brought
the  custom  of  making  himself  understood
by  signs  with  him  to  Egypt.  In  the  first
asres  of  the  Christian  church,  this  mythical
Egyptian  philosopher  was  in  fact  con¬


sidered  as  the  inventor  of  everyth  i  ng  known
to  the  human  intellect.  It  was  fabled  that
Pythagoras  and  Plato  had  derived  their
knowledge  from  him,  and  that  he  had  re¬
corded  his  inventions  on  pillars.  The
Operative  Masons,  who  wrote  the  old  Con¬
stitutions,  obtained  their  acquaintance  with
him  from  the  Polycronycon  of  the  monk
Ranulf  Higdeu,  which  was  translated  from
the  Latin  by  Trevisa,  and  printed  by  Wil¬
liam  Caxton  in  1482.  It  is  repeatedly
quoted  in  the  Cooke  MS.,  whose  probable
date  is  the  latter  part  of  the  fifteenth  cen¬
tury,  and  was  undoubtedly  familiar  to  the
writers  of  the  other  Constitutions.

Hermetic  Art.  The  art  or  science
of  Alchemy,  so  termed  from  Hermes  Tris¬
megistus,  who  was  looked  up  to  by  the
alchemists  as  the  founder  of  their  art.  The
Hermetic  philosophers  say  that  all  the
sages  of  antiquity,  such  as  Plato,  Socrates,
Aristotle,  and  Pythagoras,  were  initiated
into  the  secrets  of  their  science;  and  that
the  hieroglyphics  of  Egypt  and  all  the  fables
of  mythology  were  invented  to  teach  the  dog¬
mas  of  Hermetic  philosophy.  See  Alchemy.

Hermetic  Rite.  A  Rite  established
by  Pernetty  at  Avignon,  in  France,  and
more  commonly  called  the  Illuminati  of
Avignon.  See  Avignon.

Herodem.  See  Heredom.

Herod em.  Royal  Order  of.  See
Royal  Order  of  Scotland.

Heroden.  “Heroden,”  says  a  MS.
of  the  Ancient  Scottish  Rite  in  my  posses¬
sion,  “  is  a  mountain  situated  in  the  north¬
west  of  Scotland,  where  the  first  or  metro¬
politan  Lodge  of  Europe  was  held.”  The
word  is  not  now  used  by  Masonic  writers,
and  was,  undoubtedly,  a  corruption  of
Heredom.

Heroine  of  Jericho.  An  androgy¬
nous  degree  conferred,  in  America,  on  Royal
Arch  Masons,  their  wives,  and  daughters.
It  is  intended  to  instruct  its  fenjale  recipi¬
ents  in  the  claims  which  they  have  upon
the  protection  of  their  husbands’  and  fathers’
companions,  and  to  communicate  to  them
an  effectual  method  of  proving  those  claims.
An  instance  of  friendship  extended  to  the
whole  family  of  a  benefactress  by  those
whom  she  had  benefited,  and  of  the  influ¬
ence  of  a  solemn  contract  in  averting  dan¬
ger,  is  referred  to  in  the  case  of  Rahab,  the
woman  of  Jericho,  from  whom  the  degree
derives  its  name ;  and  for  this  purpose  the
second  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Joshua  is
read  to  the  candidate.  When  the  degree  is
received  by  a  male,  he  is  called  a  Knight
of  Jericho,  and  when  by  a  female,  she  is
termed  a  Heroine.  It  is  a  side  or  honorary
degree,  and  may  be  conferred  by  any  Royal
Arch  Mason  on  a  candidate  qualified  to
receive  it.


HESED


HIGHEST


337


Hescd.  A  corruption  of  Chesed,  which

see.

Hexagon.  A  figure  of  six  equal  sides
constitutes  a  part  of  the  camp  in  the  Scot¬
tish  degree  of  Sublime  Princes  of  the  Royal
Secret.  Stieglitz,  in  an  essay  on  the  sym¬
bols  of  Freemasonry,  published  in  1825,  in
the  Altenburg  Zeitschrift,  says  that  the  hex¬
agon,  formed  by  six  triangles,  whose  apices
converge  to  a  point,  making  the  following
figure,

*

*  *

*

*  *

*

is  a  symbol  of  the  universal  creation,  the
six  points  crossing  the  central  point;  thus
assimilating  the  hexagon  to  the  older  sym¬
bol  of  the  point  within  a  circle.

Hieroglyphics.  From  two  Greek
words  which  signify  the  engraving  of  sa¬
cred  things.  Hieroglyphics  are  properly
the  expressions  of  ideas  by  representations
of  visible  objects,  and  the  word  is  more
peculiarly  applied  to  that  species  of  pic¬
ture-writing  which  was  in  use  among  the
ancient  Egyptians,  whose  priests  by  this
means  concealed  from  the  profane  that
knowledge  which  they  communicated  only
to  their  initiates.  Browne  says  ( Master  Key,
p.  87),  “The  usages  amongst  Masons  have
ever  corresponded  with  those  of  the  ancient
Egyptians.  Their  Philosophers,  unwilling
to  expose  their  Mysteries  to  vulgar  Curios¬
ity,  couched  the  Principles  of  their  Learn¬
ing  and  Philosophy  under  Hieroglyphical
Figures  and  Allegorical  Emblems,  and  ex¬
pressed  their  notions  of  Government  by
Signs  and  Symbols,  which  they  communi¬
cated  to  the  Magi ,  or  wise  Men  only,  who  were
solemnly  obligated  never  to  reveal  them.”

Hierogrammatists.  The  title  of
those  priests  in  the  Egyptian  mysteries  to
whom  were  confided  the  keeping  of  the  sa¬
cred  records.  Their  duty  was  also  to  in¬
struct  the  neophytes  in  the  ritual  of  initia¬
tion,  and  to  secure  its  accurate  observance.

Hierophant.  From  the  Greek,
'tepoipavTcc,  which  signifies  one  who  explains
the  sacred  things.  The  Hierophant  was,  in
the  Ancient  Mysteries,  what  the  Master  is
in  a  Masonic  Lodge  —  he  who  instructed
the  neophyte  in  the  doctrines  which  it  was
the  object  of  the  mysteries  to  inculcate.

High  Degrees.  Not  long  after  the
introduction  of  Freemasonry  on  the  Conti¬
nent,  in  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth
century,  the  Chevalier  Ramsay  invented
three  new  degrees,  which  he  called  Ecos-
2  S  22


sais,  Novice,  and  Knight  Templar.  These
gave  the  impulse  to  the  invention  of  many
other  degrees,  all  above  the  Master’s  degree.
To  these  the  name  of  hautes  grades  or  high  de¬
crees  was  given.  Their  number  is  very  great.
Many  of  them  now  remain  only  in  the  cata¬
logues  of  Masonic  collectors,  or  are  known
merely  by  their  titles ;  while  others  still  exist,
and  constitute  the  body  of  the  different
Rites.  The  word  is  not  properly  applicable
to  the  Royal  Arch  or  degrees  of  the  Eng¬
lish  and  American  systems,  which  are  in¬
timately  connected  with  the  Master’s  de¬
gree,  but  is  confined  to  the  additions  made
to  Ancient  Craft  Masonry  by  continental
ritualists.  These  degrees  have,  from  time
to  time,  met  with  great  opposition  as  inno¬
vations  on  Ancient  Masonry,  and  some  of
the  Grand  Lodges  have  not  only  rejected
them,  but  forbidden  their  cultivation  by
those  who  are  under  their  obedience.  But
on  the  other  hand,  they  have  been  strenu¬
ously  supported  by  many  who  have  believed
the  Ancient  Craft  degrees  do  not  afford  a
sufficient  field  for  the  expansion  of  Masonic
thought.  A  writer  in  the  London  Freema¬
son's  Magazine  (1858,  i.  1167,)  has,  I  think,
expressed  the  true  theory  on  this  subject  in
the  following  language :

“It  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  an
exclusive  addiction  to  Craft  Masonry  that
the  intellectual  and  artistic  development
of  the  minds  of  the  members  must  suffer,
the  ritual  sink  to  formalism,  and  the  ad¬
ministration  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  lower
members  of  the  Order,  by  a  diminution  in
the  initiations  of  men  of  high  intellectual
calibre,  and  by  the  inactivity,  or  practical
secession,  of  those  within  the  Order.  The
suppression  of  the  higher  degrees,  that  is,
of  the  higher  Masonry,  may  be  agreeable  to
those  who  are  content  to  possess  the  admin¬
istrative  functions  of  the  Order  without  gen¬
uine  qualifications  for  their  exercise,  but  it
is  a  policy  most  fatal  to  the  true  progress
of  the  Order.  When  Masonry  has  so  fallen,
to  restore  the  higher  degrees  to  their  full
activity  is  the  measure  essential  for  re¬
storing  the  efficacy  of  Masonry  within  and
without.  Thus,  in  the  last  century,  when
Craft  Masonry  had  spread  rapidly  over  the
whole  of  Europe,  a  reaction  set  in,  till  the
heads  of  the  Order  brought  the  high  degrees
into  vigor,  and  they  continued  to  exercise
the  most  powerful  influence.”

Highest  of  Hills.  In  the  Old  York
Lectures  was  the  following  passage :  “  Be¬
fore  we  had  the  convenience  of  such  well-
formed  Lodges,  the  Brethren  used  to  meet
on  the  highest  of  hills  and  in  the  lowest  of
valleys.  And  if  they  were  asked  why  they
met  so  high,  so  low,  and  so  very  secret,
they  replied  —  the  better  to  see  and  observe
all  that  might  ascend  or  descend ;  and  in


338


HIGH


HIGH


case  a  cowan  should  appear,  the  Tiler
might  give  timely  notice  to  the  Worshipful
Master,  by  which  means  the  Lodge  might  be
closed,  the  jewels  put  by,  thereby  prevent¬
ing  any  unlawful  intrusion.”  Comment-
ingon  this,  Ur. Oliver  [Landm.,\. 319,) says:
“  Among  other  observances  which  were
common  to  both  the  true  and-  spurious
Freemasonry,  we  find  the  practice  of  per¬
forming  commemorative  rites  on  the  highest
of  hills  and  in  the  lowest  of  vallegs.  This
practice  was  in  high  esteem  amongst  all  the
inhabitants  of  the  ancient  world,  from  a
fixed  persuasion  that  the  summit  of  moun¬
tains  made  a  nearer  approach  to  the  celes¬
tial  deities,  and  the  valley  or  holy  cavern
to  the  infernal  and  submarine  gods  than
the  level  country  ;  and  that,  therefore,  the
prayers  of  mortals  were  more  likely  to  be
heard  in  such  situations.”  Hutchinson
also  says:  “The  highest  hills  and  the  low¬
est  valleys  were  from  the  earliest  times  es¬
teemed  sacred,  and  it  was  supposed  that  the
Spirit  of  God  was  peculiarly  diffusive  in
those  places.”  The  sentiment  was  expressed
in  the  language  of  the  earliest  lectures  of
the  eighteenth  century,  and  is  still  re¬
tained,  without  change  of  words,  in  the
lectures  of  the  present  day.  But  intro¬
duced,  at  first,  undoubtedly  with  special
reference  to  the  ancient  worship  on  “  high
places,”  and  the  celebration  of  the  myste¬
ries  in  the  caverns  of  initiation,  it  is  now
retained  for  the  purpose  of  giving  warning
and  instruction  as  to  the  necessity  of  secu¬
rity  and  secrecy  in  the  performance  of  our
mystical  rites,  and  this  is  the  reason  as¬
signed  in  the  modern  lectures.  And,  in¬
deed,  the  notion  of  thus  expressing  the  ne¬
cessity  of  secrecy  seems  to  have  been  early
adopted,  while  that  of  the  sacredness  of
these  places  was  beginning  to  be  lost  sight
of ;  for  in  a  lecture  of  the  middle  of  the  last
century,  or  perhaps  earlier,  it  was  said  that
“  the  Lodge  stands  upon  holy  ground,  or
the  highest  hill  or  lowest  vale,  or  in  the
Vale  of  Jehosophat,  or  any  other  secret
place.”  The  sacredness  of  the  spot  is,  it  is
true,  here  adverted  to,  but  there  is  an  em¬
phasis  given  to  its  secrecy.

High  Ursidcs.  Sometimes  used  for
High  Degrees,  which  see.

ISigli  I’riest.  The  presiding  officer
of  a  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  accord¬
ing  to  the  American  system.  His  title
is  “Most  Excellent,”  and  he  represents
Joshua,  or  Jeshua,  who  was  the  son  of
Joscdech,  and  the  High  Priest  of  the  Jews
when  they  returned  from  the  Babylonian
exile.  He  is  seated  in  the  east,  and  clothed
in  tiie  apparel  of  the  ancient  High  Priest  of
the  Jews.  He  wears  a  robe  of  blue,  purple,
6carlet,  and  white  linen,  and  is  decorated
•  with  a  breastplate  and  mitre.  On  the


front  of  the  mitre  is  inscribed  the  words,
“  Holiness  to  the  Lord.”  His  jewel  is
a  mitre.

Iligli  Priesthood,  Order  of.

This  older  is  an  honorarium,  to  be  bestowed
upon  the  High  Priest  of  a  Royal  Arch  Chap¬
ter  in  the  United  States,  and  consequently  no
one  is  legally  entitled  to  receive  it  until  he
has  been  duly  elected  to  preside  as  High
Priest  in  a  regular  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch
Masons.  It  should  not  be  conferred  when
a  less  number  than  three  duly  qualified
High  Priests  are  present.  Whenever  the
ceremony  is  performed  in  ample  form,  the
assistance  of  at  least  nine  High  Priests,
who  have  received  it,  is  requisite.  The
General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United
States  has  decided  that  although  it  is
highly  expedient  that  every  High  Priest
should  receive  the  order,  yet  its  posses¬
sion  is  not  essentially  necessary  as  a  qual¬
ification  for  the  discharge  of  his  official
duties.


The  jewel  of  the  degree  consists  of  a  plate
of  gold  in  the  form  of  a  triple  triangle,  a
breastplate  being  placed  over  the  point  of
union.  In  front,  the  face  of  each  triangle
is  inscribed  with  the  Tetragrammaton,
mn»;  on  the  other  side,  the  upper  tri-
anarle  has  the  following  mystical  notation,

;  the  two  lower  triangles  have
0000  000*0'  ,  °  .

the  Hebrew’  letters  Q  and  p  inserted  upon
them.  Each  side  of  each  triangle  should
be  one  inch  in  length,  and  may  be  orna¬
mented  at  the  fancy'  of  the  wearer.  The
breastplate  may  be  plainly  engraved  or  set
with  stones.  It  was  adopted  in  185G,  on  the
suggestion  of  the  author  of  this  work,  at  a
very  general  but  informal  meeting  of  Grand


HIGH


HIGH


339


*/

and  Past  Grand  High  Priests  during  the
session  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  held
at  Hartford.  It  is  now  in  general  use.

It  is  impossible,  from  the  want  of  au¬
thentic  documents,  to  throw  much  light
upon  the  historical  origin  of  this  degree.
No  allusion  to  it  can  be  found  in  any  ritual
works  out  of  America,  nor  even  here  an¬
terior  to  about  the  end  of  the  last  and  be¬
ginning  of  this  century.  Webb  is  the  first
who  mentions  it,  and  gives  it  a  place  in  the
series  of  capitular  degrees.  The  question
has,  however,  been  exhaustively  examined
by  Brother  William  Hacker,  Past  Grand
High  Priest  of  Indiana,  who  has  paid  much
attention  to  the  subjectof  American  Masonic
archaeology.  In  a  letter  to  the  author  in  Au¬
gust,  1878,  he  has  sought  to  investigate  the
origin  of  this  Order,  and  I  gladly  avail  my¬
self  of  the  result  of  his  inquiries.

“Thomas  Smith  Webb,”  says  Brother
Hacker,  “  in  the  first  edition  of  his  Monitor,

Sablished  in  1797,  makes  no  mention  of  it.

ut  in  the  second  edition,  published  in
1802,  he  gives  a  monitorial  ritual  for  the
Order;  or,  as  he  terms  it,  Observations  on
the  Order  of  High  Priests.

“Now,  I  infer,  as  we  find  no  mention
of  the  Order  in  the  edition  of  1797,  and  a
monitorial  ritual  appearing  in  the  edition
of  1802,  that  at  some  time  between  those
dates  we  must  look  for  the  true  origin  of
the  Order.

“Turning  then  to  the  proceedings  of  the
General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States,
we  find  that  at  the  Communication  held  in
the  city  of  Providence,  in  the  State  of
Rhode  Island,  on  the  9th  day  of  January,
1799,  Benjamin  Hurd,  Jr.,  Thomas  S.  Webb,
and  James  Harrison  were  appointed  ‘a
committee  to  revise  the  Constitution,  and
report  such  alterations  and  amendments
thereto  as  they  shall  find  necessary  to  be
made.’

“  The  next  day,  January  10, 1799,  Webb,
as  chairman  of  the  committee,  submitted
their  report,  which  was  adopted  as  reported.
In  Article  IV.  of  that  Constitution,  we  find
the  forms  for  constituting  new  Chapters
and  installing  High  Priests  fully  laid  down
and  provided  for.  In  those  forms,  after
certain  ceremonies  had  been  gone  through
with,  ‘All  the  Companions,  except  High
Priests  and  Past  High  Priests,  are  requested
to  withdraw,  while  the  new  High  Priest  is
solemnly  bound  to  the  performance  of  his
duties;  and  after  the  performance  of  other
necessary  ceremonies,  not  proper  to  be
written,  they  are  permitted  to  return.’

“  Now,  right  here  the  question  naturally
arises,  What  were  those  ‘  other  necessary
ceremonies  not  proper  to  be  written  ’  ?  A
few  lines  farther  on  we  find  this  language
laid  down ;  ‘  In  consequence  of  your  cheer¬


ful  acquiescence  with  the  charges  and  reg¬
ulations  just  recited,  I  now  declare  you  duly
installed  and  anointed  High  Priest  of  this
new  Chapter.’  Now  do  not  the  words
‘  and  anointed ,’  as  here  used,  fully  answer
the  question  as  to  what  those  ‘other  ne¬
cessary  ceremonies’  were?  It  seems  so  to
me.

“  Upon  this  theory,  then,  we  have  Thomas
Smith  Webb  and  his  associates  on  the  com¬
mittee,  Benjamin  Hurd,  Jr.,  and  James
Harrison,  as  the  authors  of  the  Order.  It
was  adopted  by  the  General  Grand  Chapter
on  the  10th  day  of  January,  1799,  when  it
became  a  part  of  the  constitutional  re¬
quirements  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry,  so  far,
at  least,  as  the  authority  of  the  General
Grand  Chapter  extended.

“  Following  this  matter  out,  we  find  that
this  provision  of  the  Constitution  was  re¬
tained  until  the  Triennial  Communication
held  in  the  city  of  Lexington,  Kentucky,
on  the  19th  day  of  September,  1853,  when,
on  motion  of  Companion  Gould,  the  sec¬
tion  was  repealed ;  thus  leaving  the  Order
of  High  Priesthood  the  exclusive  property
of  those  who  were  in  possession  of  it.

“  Where  these  Excellent  Companions  got
the  original  thought  or  germ  out  of  which
the  Order  was  formed  will  have,  perhaps,  to
be  left  to  conjecture ;  yet  even  here  I  think
we  may  find  some  data  upon  which  to  found
a  conclusion.

“In  setting  about  the  formation  of  an
order  suitable  for  the  office  of  High  Priest,
what  could  be  more  natural  or  appropriate
than  to  take  the  scriptural  history  of  the
meeting  of  Abraham  with  Melchizedek,
Priest  of  the  Most  High  God ;  the  circum¬
stances  which  brought  that  meeting  about;
the  bringing  forth  the  bread  and  wine;  the
blessing,  etc. ;  and  the  anointing  of  Aaron
and  his  sons  to  the  Priesthood  under  the
Mosaic  dispensations.  It  does  seem  to  me
that  these  would  be  the  most  natural  sources
for  any  one  to  go  to  for  facts  and  circum¬
stances  to  work  into  an  order  of  this  kind.

“We  can  illustrate  this  point  farther  by
reference  to  a  note  found  in  an  old  ritual
of  the  ‘  Mediterranean  Pass,’  as  then  —
and  perhaps  it  may  be  so  now  —  conferred
under  the  Grand  Priory  of  England  and
Wales,  preparatory  to  the  Order  of  Malta.
That  note  read  as  follows :

“  ‘  In  some  Priories  the  candidate  partakes
of  bread  from  the  point  of  a  sword,  and
wine  from  a  chalice  placed  upon  the  blade,
handed  to  him  by  the  Prelate.’

“  Again,  in  an  old  manuscript  of  the  ritual
of  the  Royal  Grand  Conclave  of  Scotland,
now  also  lying  before  me,  I  find  similar
language  used  in  the  ritual  of  the  Templars’
Order.  How  well  the  thoughts  contained
in  these  extracts  have  been  worked  into


340


HIGH


HIGH


the  order  of  High  Priest,  every  well-in¬
formed  High  Priest  must  very  well  under¬
stand.

“  But  the  question  now  comes  up :  were
Webb  and  his  associates  in  possession  of
these  rituals  at  the  time  they  originated  the
order  of  High  Priesthood?  I  think  they
were,  and  for  these  reasons:  In  these  rituals
to  which  I  have  referred  I  find  these  ex¬
pressions  used :  ‘  That  I  will  not  shed  the
blood  of  a  K.  T.  unlawfully;’  ‘the  skull
to  be  laid  open,  and  all  the  brains  to  be  ex¬
posed  to  the  scorching  rays  of  the  sun ;  ’
with  several  other  familiar  expressions,
which  every  Royal  Arch  Mason  will  read-
ilv  recognize  as  appropriately  wrought  into
Webb’s  Royal  Arch  degree.

“From  the  foregoing  facts,  as  well  as
others  not  stated,  I  infer  that  Thomas
Smith  Webb,  with  bis  co-advisers,  Benja¬
min  Hurd,  Jr.,  and  James  Harrison,  were
the  true  authors  of  the  Order  ;  that  it  dates
from  the  10th  day  of  January,  1799,  at
which  time  it  was  adopted  by  the  General
Grand  Chapter,  and  became  a  part  of  the
constitutional  regulations  and  requirements
of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  so  far  as  the  au¬
thority  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  ex¬
tended,  and  that  it  continued  as  such  until
the  19th  day  of  September,  1853,  when  it
was  repealed,  as  before  stated.

“  A  thought  or  two  further,  and  I  will
have  done.  Webb,  in  arranging  the  Order,
evidently  intended  that  it  should  be  con¬
ferred  as  a  part  of  the  installation  ceremo¬
nies  of  a  High  Priest ;  and  whether  he  ever
conferred  it  at  any  other  time  or  in  any
other  manner  I  have  been  unable  to  learn,
as  I  have  never  met  with  any  one  who
claimed  to  have  received  the  Order  from
him.  At  what  time  and  by  whom  it  was
first  conferred  as  a  separate  ceremonial  is
equally  unknown  to  me.  All  I  have  yet
been  able  to  find  upon  this  point  is  in
Cross’s  Chart,  where,  in  the  edition  of  1826,
and  it  may  also  be  in  the  earlier  editions,

I  find  it  arranged  as  a  separate  ceremonial,
and  disconnected  with  the  ceremonies  of
installation.

“  The  earliest  authentic  record  of  the  or¬
ganization  of  a  Council  of  High  Priests  I
have  yet  found  is  in  the  proceedings  of  the
Grand  Chapter  of  Ohio  in  1828,  where  it
appears  that  a  Council  was  duly  formed,
rules  adopted  for  its  government,  and  a  full
list  of  officers  elected,  with  Companion
John  Snow  as  President.

“It  is  more  than  probable  that  the  Order
has  always  been  conferred,  west  of  the
mountains,  as  a  separate  ceremonial,  and
never  as  a  part  of  the  installation  ceremo¬
nies.  It  is  well  known  that  John  Snow,  !
who  no  doubt  brought  it  with  him  when  he  ,
came  to  the  West,  always  so  conferred  it,  |


and  not  then  until  the  applicant  had  been
regularly  elected  and  installed  as  High
Priest  of  his  Chapter.  I  have  also  met
with  those  who  claimed  to  have  received  it
from  the  celebrated  Lorenzo  Dow,  of  whom
it  is  further  alleged  that  he  always  required
an  election  and  installation  as  a  prerequisite
to  the  Order.  With  these  facts  before  us,
and  I  have  no  doubt  of  the  truth  of  every
word  of  them,  I  would  ask  of  those  who
have  attempted  to  heap  such  obloquy  and
derision  upon  the  Order,  as  Dr.  Mitchell
and  others  who  have  followed  him,  to
point  us  to  any  other  single  order  or  degree
of  Masonry  that  can  be  traced  so  success¬
fully  to  the  source  from  whence  it  came ;
that  has  in  it  more  of  the  elements  of  sub¬
limity  and  impressiveness,  and  that  is  more
scripturally  and  Masonically  appropriate
for  that  for  which  it  was  intended,  than  has
this  much-maligned  Order  of  High  Priest¬
hood  ;  remembering  also  that  it  was  estab¬
lished  upon  the  constitutional  authority  of
the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United
States,  which  is,  and  ever  has  been,  the
highest  authority  in  Royal  Arch  Masonry
in  the  United  States.  And  again,  among
the  names  of  those  zealous  companions  who
participated  in  its  adoption  stands  that
of  the  Honorable  De  Witt  Clinton,  for
so  many  years  the  zealous  and  efficient
General  Grand  High  Priest.  Then  I  say,
when  we  take  all  these  facts  together,  as
they  stand  recorded  before  us,  I  think  the
question  as  to  the  origin  and  authenticity
may  be  considered  as  fully  settled.”

iligli  Priest  of  the  Jews.  The
important  office  of  the  High  Priesthood
was  instituted  by  Moses  after  the  comple¬
tion  of  the  directions  for  erecting  the  taber¬
nacle,  and  was  restricted  to  Aaron  and  his
descendants,  and  was  so  confined  until
the  time  of  the  Asmonean  dynasty,  when  it
passed  into  the  family  of  Judas  Maccabaeus.
The  High  Priest  was  at  the  head  not  only
of  ecclesiastical  but  of  civil  affairs,  presiding
in  the  Sanhedrim  and  judging  the  people.
He  superintended  the  Temple,  directing  the
mode  of  worship,  and  preserving  the  build¬
ing  from  profanation.  He  was  inducted
into  his  office  by  anointment  and  sacrifices,
and  was  invested  with  a  peculiar  dress.
This  dress,  as  the  Rabbins  describe  it,  con¬
sisted  of  eight  parts,  namely,  the  breast¬
plate,  the  ephod,  with  its  curious  girdle,
the  robe  of  the  ephod,  the  mitre,  the  broid-
ered  coat,  and  the  girdle.  The  materials
of  which  these  were  composed  were  gold,
blue,  red,  purple,  and  fine  white  linen.  As
these  garments  are  to  a  certain  extent  rep¬
resented  in  the  vestment  of  a  High  Priest
;  of  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  a  brief  descrip-
|  tion  of  them  may  be  expedient:

The  High  Priest  was  first  clothed  in  a


HIGH


HINDUSTAN


341


pair  of  linen  drawers.  Over  this  was  a  coat
or  shirt  of  fine  linen  reaching  to  his  feet,
and  with  sleeves  extending  to  his  wrists.
Over  this  again  was  a  robe  of  blue,  called
the  coat  of  ephod.  It  was  without  sleeves,
but  consisted  of  two  pieces,  one  before  and
another  behind,  having  a  large  opening  in
the  top  for  the  passage  of  the  head,  and  an¬
other  on  each  side  to  admit  the  arms.  It
extended  only  to  the  middle  of  the  legs,
and  its  skirt  was  adorned  with  little  golden
bells  and  pomegranates.  Above  all  these
vestments  was  placed  the  ephod,  which  has
already  been  described  as  a  short  garment
coming  down  only  to  the  breast  before,  but
somewhat  longer  behind,  without  sleeves,
and  artificially  wrought  with  gold,  and
blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  in  embroidery
of  various  figures.  It  was  looped  on  the
shoulders  with  two  onyx  stones,  on  each  of
which  was  inscribed  the  names  of  six  of  the
tribes.  On  the  front  of  the  ephod  he  wore
the  breastplate;  at  solemn  ministrations  a
mitre  of  fine  linen  of  a  blue  color.  This  was
wrapped  in  several  folds,  and  worn  about
his  head  in  the  manner  of  a  Turkish  turban,
except  that  it  was  without  a  crown,  being
open  on  top,  and  sitting  on  his  head  like  a
garland.  In  front  of  it  there  hung  down
upon  his  forehead  a  square  plate  of  gold,
called  the  plate  of  the  golden  crown,  upon
which  were  inscribed  the  words  Holiness
to  the  Lord,  which  were  engraved  in  the
ancient  Hebrew  or  Samaritan  characters.
The  vestments  of  a  High  Priest  of  a  Royal
Arch  Chapter  are  intended  to  represent —
though  the  representation  is  imperfect —
the  gorgeous  apparel  of  the  Jewish  Pontiff.
They  area  mitre,  breastplate,  and  a  robe  of
four  colors.  To  these  the  Masonic  ritual¬
ists  have  ascribed  a  symbolic  signification.
The  mitre  teaches  the  High  Priest  the
dignity  of  his  office;  the  breastplate,  his
responsibility  to  the  laws  and  ordinances
of  the  Institution,  and  that  the  honor  and
interest  of  the  Chapter  should  be  always
near  his  heart ;  and  the  robe,  the  different
races  and  virtues  which  are  symbolized
y  the  various  colors  of  which  it  is  com¬
posed.

Higli  Twelve.  The  hour  of  noon  or
twelve  o’clock  in  the  day,  when  the  sun  is
high  in  the  heavens,  in  contradistinction
to  low  twelve,  or  midnight,  when  the  sun  is
low  down  beneath  the  earth.  The  expres¬
sion  is  always  used,  in  Masonic  language,
to  indicate  the  hour  of  noon,  at  which  time,
as  the  tradition  tells  us,  the  Craft  in  the
Temple  were  called  from  labor  to  refresh¬
ment.  The  phrase  was  used  in  the  earliest
rituals  of  the  last  century.  The  answer  in
the  old  catechisms  to  the  question,  “  What’s
a  clock  ?  ”  was  always,  “  High  Twelve.”

Hindustan,  Mysteries  of.  Of  all


the  ethnic  religions,  that  of  Hindustan  is
admitted  to  be  the  oldest,  for  its  Vedas  or
sacred  books  claim  an  antiquity  of  nearly
forty  centuries.  However  Brahmanism
may  have  been  corrupted  in  more  modern
times,  in  its  earliest  state  it  consisted  of  a
series  of  doctrines  which  embraced  a  belief
in  a  Supreme  Being  and  in  the  immortality
of  the  soul.  All  primitive  religions  were
more  or  less  mystical,  and  that  of  India
formed  no  exception  to  the  rule.  Oliver,
in  his  History  of  Initiation,  has  given  a
very  succinct  account  of  the  Brahmanical
mysteries,  collected  from  the  most  authen¬
tic  sources,  such  as  Maurice,  Colebrook,
Jones,  and  Faber.  His  description  refers
almost  exclusively  to  the  reception  and
advancement  of  a  Brahman  in  his  sacred
profession;  for  the  initiations  of  India,  like
those  of  Egypt,  were  confined  to  the  priest¬
hood.  All  Brahmans,  it  is  true,  do  not
necessarily  belong  to  the  sacerdotal  order,
but  every  Brahman  who  has  been  initiated,
and  thus  been  made  acquainted  with  the
formulas  of  worship,  may  at  any  time  be¬
come  an  officiating  priest.  The  ceremonies
of  initiation,  as  they  have  been  described
by  Oliver,  were  celebrated  in  spacious  cav¬
erns,  the  principal  of  which  were  Elephanta
and  Salsette,  both  situated  near  Bombay.
The  mysteries  were  divided  into  four  de¬
grees,  and  the  candidate  was  permitted  to
perform  the  probation  of  the  first  at  the
early  age  of  eight  years.  It  consisted  sim¬
ply  in  the  investiture  with  the  linen  gar¬
ment  and  Zennar  or  sacred  cord;  of  sacri¬
fices  accompanied  by  ablutions ;  and  of  an
explanatory  lecture.  The  aspirant  was  now
delivered  into  the  care  of  a  Brahman,  who
thenceforth  became  his  spiritual  guide,  and
prepared  him  by  repeated  instructions  and
a  life  of  austerity  for  admission  into  the
second  degree.  To  this,  if  found  qualified,
he  was  admitted  at  the  requisite  age.  The
probationary  ceremonies  of  this  degree  con¬
sisted  in  an  incessant  occupation  in  pray¬
ers,  fastings,  ablutions,  and  the  study  of
astronomy.  Having  undergone  these  aus¬
terities  for  a  sufficient  period,  he  was  led  at
night  to  the  gloomy  caverns  of  initiation,
which  had  been  duly  prepared  for  his  re¬
ception.

The  interior  of  this  cavern  was  brilliantly
illuminated,  and  there  sat  the  three  chief
hierophants,  in  the  east,  west,  and  south,
representing  the  gods  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and
Siva,  surrounded  by  the  attendant  mysta-
gogues,  dressed  in  appropriate  vestments.
After  an  invocation  to  the  sun,  the  aspi¬
rant  was  called  upon  to  promise  that  he
would  be  obedient  to  his  superiors,  keep
his  body  pure,  and  preserve  inviolable
secrecy  on  the  subject  of  the  mysteries.  He
was  then  sprinkled  with  water,  an  iuvoca-


342


HINDUSTAN


HIRAM


tion  of  the  deity  was  whispered  in  his  ear ;
he  was  divested  of  his  shoes,  and  made  to
circumambulate  the  cavern  three  times,  in
imitation  of  the  course  of  the  sun,  whose
rising  was  personated  by  the  hierophant
representing  Brahma,  stationed  in  the
east,  whose  meridian  height  by  the  repre¬
sentative  of  Siva  in  the  south,  and  whose
setting  by  the  representative  of  Vishnu
in  the  west.  He  was  then  conducted
through  seven  ranges  of  dark  and  gloomy
caverns,  during  which  period  the  wail¬
ing  of  Mahadeva  for  the  loss  of  Siva
was  represented  by  dismal  bowlings.  The
usual  paraphernalia  of  flashes  of  light,  of
dismal  sounds  and  horrid  phantoms,  was
practised  to  intimidate  or  confuse  the  aspi¬
rant.  After  the  performance  of  a  variety
of  other  ceremonies,  many  of  which  we  can
only  conjecture,  the  candidate  reached  the
extremity  of  the  seven  caverns;  he  was
now  prepared  for  enlightenment  by  requi¬
site  instruction  and  the  administration  of  a
solemn  oath.

This  part  of  the  ceremonies  being  con¬
cluded,  the  sacred  conch  was  blown,  the
folding-doors  were  suddenly  thrown  open,
and  the  aspirant  was  admitted  into  a  spa¬
cious  apartment  filled  with  dazzling  light,
ornamented  with  statues  and  emblematical
figures,  richly  decorated  with  gems,  and
scented  with  the  most  fragrant  perfumes.
This  was  a  representation  of  Paradise.

The  candidate  was  now  supposed  to  be
regenerated,  and  he  was  invested  by  the
chief  Brahman  with  the  white  robe  and
tiara;  a  cross  was  marked  upon  his  fore¬
head,  and  a  tau  upon  his  breast,  and  he
was  instructed  in  the  signs,  tokens,  and
lectures  of  the  Order.  He  was  presented
with  the  sacred  belt,  the  magical  black
stone,  the  talismanic  jewel  to  be  worn  upon
his  breast,  and  the  serpent  stone,  which,  as
its  name  imported,  was  an  antidote  against
the  bite  of  serpents.  And,  lastly,  he  was
intrusted  with  the  sacred  name,  known
only  to  the  initiated.  This  ineffable  name
was  AUM,  which,  in  its  triliteral  form,  was
significant  of  the  creative,  preservative,
and  destroying  power,  that  is,  of  Brahma,
Vishnu,  and  Siva.  It  could  not  be  pro¬
nounced,  but  was  to  be  the  subject  of  in¬
cessant  silent  contemplation.  The  symbols
and  the  aporrheta,  or  secret  things  of  the
mysteries,  were  now  explained.

Here  ended  the  second  degree.  The  third
took  place  when  the  candidate  had  grown
old,  and  his  children  had  all  been  provided
for.  This  consisted  in  a  total  exclusion  in
the  forest,  where,  as  an  anchorite,  he  occu¬
pied  himself  in  ablutions,  prayers,  and  sac¬
rifices.

In  the  fourth  degree  he  underwent  still
greater  austerities,  the  object  of  which  was
to  impart  to  the  happy  sage  who  observed


them  a  portion  of  the  divine  nature,  and
to  secure  him  a  residence  among  the  im¬
mortal  gods.

The  object  of  the  Indian  mysteries  ap¬
pears,  says  Oliver,  to  have  been  to  teach
the  unity  of  God  and  the  necessity  of  virtue.
The  happiness  of  our  first  parents,  the  sub¬
sequent  depravity  of  the  human  race,  and
the  universal  deluge  were  described  in  a
manner  which  showed  that  their  knowledge
mast  have  been  derived  from  an  authentic
source.  What  was  the  instruction  intended
to  be  conveyed  by  these  mystical  initiations
will  be  best  learned  from  the  Vedas,  in
which  the  true  dogma  of  the  ancient  Brah-
manical  faith  is  fully  developed.

Iliram.  The  gavel,  when  wielded  by
the  Master  of  the  Lodge,  is  sometimes
called  the  Hiram ,  because  as  the  workmen
at  the  Temple  were  controlled  and  directed
by  Hiram,  the  chief  builder,  so  the  Master
preserves  order  in  the  Lodge  by  the  proper
use  of  the  gavel.

Iliram  or  Huram.  In  Hebrew,

□th  orcmri,  meaning  noble-bom.  The
more  correct  pronunciation,  according  to
the  true  value  of  the  Hebrew  letters,  is
Kliuram  or  Khurum;  but  universal  Masonic
usage  renders  it  now  impossible,  or,  at  least,
inexpedient,  to  make  the  change.  The  name
of  the  king  of  Tyre  is  spelled  Hiram  every¬
where  in  Scripture  except  in  1  Chronicles
xiv.  1,  where  it  occurs  as  Huram.  In  1
Chron.  xiv.  1,  the  original  Hebrew  text  has
Hiram ,  but  the  Masorites  in  the  margin
direct  it  to  be  read  Huram.  In  our  author¬
ized  version,  the  name  is  spelled  Hiram,
which  is  also  the  form  used  in  the  \  uigate
and  in  the  Targums;  the  Septuagiut  has
Xeipa/t,  or  Cheiram.  The  same  changes
occur  in  Chronicles.

Iliram  Abif.  There  L  no  character
in  the  annals  of  Freemasonry  whose  life  is
so  dependent  on  tradition  as  the  celebrated
architect  of  King  Solomon’s  Temple.  Pro¬
fane  history  is  entirely  silent  in  respect  to
his  career,  and  the  sacred  records  supply  us
with  only  very  unimportant  items.  To  fill
up  the  space  between  his  life  and  his  death,
we. are  necessarily  compelled  to  resort  to
those  oral  legends  which  have  been  handed
down  from  the  ancient  Masons  to  their  suc¬
cessors.  Yet,  looking  to  their  character,  I
should  be  unwilling  to  vouch  for  the  au¬
thenticity  of  all ;  most  of  them  were  prob¬
ably  at  first  symbolical  in  their  character;
the  symbol  in  "the  lapse  of  time  having  been
converted  into  a  myth,  and  the  myth,  by  con¬
stant  repetition,  having  assumed  the  formal
appearance  of  a  truthful  narrative.  Such
has  been  the  case  in  the  history  of  all  nations.
But  whatever  may  have  been  their  true
character,  to  the  Mason,  at  least,  they  are
interesting,  and  cannot  be  altogether  void
of  instruction.


HIE  AM


HIRAM


343


When  King  Solomon  was  about  to  build
a  temple  to  Jehovah,  the  difficulty  of  ob¬
taining  skilful  workmen  to  superintend  and
to  execute  the  architectural  part  of  the  un¬
dertaking  was  such,  that  he  found  it  neces¬
sary  to  request  of  his  friend  and  ally,  Hiram,
King  of  Tyre,  ^ie  use  °*  some  of  his  most
able  builders;  for  the  Tyrians  and  Sidonians
were  celebrated  artists,  and  at  that  time
were  admitted  to  be  the  best  mechanics  in
the  world.  Hiram  willingly  complied  with
his  request,  and  despatched  to  his  assistance
an  abundance  of  men  and  materials,  to  be
employed  in  the  construction  of  the  Temple,
and  among  the  former,  a  distinguished
artist,  to  whom  was  given  the  superinten¬
dence  of  all  the  workmen,  both  Jews  and
Tyrians,  and  who  was  in  possession  of  all
the  skill  and  learning  that  were  required  to
carry  out,  in  the  most  efficient  manner,  all
the  plans  and  designs  of  the  king  of  Israel.

Of  this  artist,  whom  Freemasons  recog¬
nize  sometimes  as  Hiram  the  Builder,  some¬
times  as  the  Widow’s  Son,  but  more  com¬
monly  as  Hiram  Abif,  the  earliest  account
is  found  in  the  first  Book  of  Kings  (vii.  13,
14,)  where  the  passage  reads  as  follows:

“And  King  Solomon  sent  and  fetched
Hiram  out  of  Tyre.  He  was  a  widow’s
son  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali,  and  his  father
was  a  man  of  Tyre,  a  worker  in  brass,  and
he  was  filled  with  wisdom  and  understand¬
ing,  and  cunning  to  work  all  works  in  brass.
And  he  came  to  King  Solomon  and  wrought
all  his  work.”

He  is  next  mentioned  in  the  second  Book
of  Chronicles,  (ch.  ii.  13, 14,)  in  the  fol¬
lowing  letter  from  Hiram  of  Tyre  to  King
Solomon.

“And  now  I  have  sent  a  cunning  man,
endued  with  understanding,  of  Huram  my
father’s.  The  son  of  a  woman  of  the
daughters  of  Dan,  and  his  father  was  a  man
of  Tyre,  skilful  to  work  in  gold  and  in  sil¬
ver,  in  brass,  in  iron,  in  stone  and  in  tim¬
ber,  in  purple,  in  blue  and  in  fine  linen  and
in  crimson ;  also  to  grave  any  manner  of
graving,  and  to  find  out  every  device  which
shall  be  put  to  him,  with  thy  cunning  men,
and  with  the  cunning  men  of  my  lord
David,  thy  father.”

In  reading  these  two  descriptions,  every
one  will  be  at  once  struck  with  an  apparent
contradiction  in  them  in  relation  to  the
parentage  of  their  subject.  There  is  no
doubt  —  for  in  this  both  passages  agree  —
that  his  father  was  a  man  of  Tyre;  but  the
discrepancy  is  in  reference  to  the  birth¬
place  of  his  mother,  who  in  one  passage  is
said  to  have  been  “of  the  tribe  of  Naph¬
tali,”  and  in  the  other,  “of  the  daughters
of  Dan.”  Commentators  have,  however,
met  with  no  difficulty  in  reconciling  the
contradiction,  and  the  suggestion  of  Bishop


Patrick  is  now  generally  adopted  on  this
subject.  He  supposes  that  she  herself  was
of  the  tribe  of  Dan,  but  that  her  first  hus¬
band  was  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali,  by  whom
she  had  this  son ;  and  that  when  she  was  a
widow,  she  married  a  man  of  Tyre,  who  is
called  Hiram’s  father  because  he  bred  him
up  and  was  the  husband  of  his  mother.

Hiram  Abif  undoubtedly  derived  much
of  his  knowledge  in  mechanical  arts  from
that  man  of  Tyre  who  had  married  his
mother,  and  we  may  justly  conclude  that
he  increased  that  knowledge  by  assiduous
study  and  constant  intercourse  with  the
artisans  of  Tyre,  who  were  greatly  distin¬
guished  for  their  attainments  in  architec¬
ture.  Tyre  was  one  of  the  principal  seats
of  the  Dio.nysiac  fraternity  of  artificers,  a
society  engaged  exclusively  in  the  construc¬
tion  of  edifices,  and  living  under  a  secret
organization,  which  was  subsequently  imi¬
tated  by  the  Operative  Freemasons.  Of  this
association,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  sup¬
pose  that  Hiram  Abif  was  a  member,  and
that  on  arriving  at  Jerusalem  he  intro¬
duced  among  the  Jewish  workmen  the  same
exact  system  of  discipline  which  he  had
found  of  so  much  advantage  in  the  Diony-
siac  associations  at  home,  and  thus  gave,
under  the  sanction  of  King  Solomon,  a  pe¬
culiar  organization  to  the  Masons  who  were
engaged  in  building  the  Temple.

Upon  the  arrival  of  this  celebrated  artist
at  Jerusalem,  which  was  in  the  year  b.  c.
1012,  he  was  at  once  received  into  the  inti¬
mate  confidence  of  Solomon,  and  intrusted
with  the  superintendence  of  all  the  work¬
men,  both  Tyrians  and  Jews,  who  were  en¬
gaged  in  the  construction  of  the  building.
He  received  the  title  of  “Principal  Con¬
ductor  of  the  Works,”  an  office  which,  pre¬
vious  to  his  arrival,  had  been  filled  by  Adoni-
ram,  and,  according  to  Masonic  tradition,
formed  with  Solomon  and  King  Hiram  of
Tyre,  his  ancient  patron,  the  Supreme
Council  of  Grand  Masters,  in  which  every
thing  was  determined  in  relation  to  the
construction  of  the  edifice  and  the  govern¬
ment  of  the  workmen.

The  Book  of  Constitutions,  as  it  was  edited
by  Entick,  (p.  19,)  speaks  of  him  in  tho
following  language:  “  This  inspired  master
was,  without  question,  the  most  cunning,
skilful,  and  curious  workman  that  ever
lived;  whose  abilities  were  not  confined  to
building  only,  but  extended  to  all  kinds  of
work,  whether  in  gold,  silver,  brass  or  iron  ;
whether  in  linen,  tapestry  or  embroidery;
whether  considered  as  architect,  statuary,
founder  or  designer,  separately  or  together
he  equally  excelled.  From  his  designs  and
under  his  direction,  all  the  rich  and  splen¬
did  furniture  of  the  Temple  and  its  several
appendages  were  begun,  carried  on,  and


344


HIRAM


HIRAM


finished.  Solomon  appointed  him,  in  his
absence,  to  fill  the  Chair  as  Deputy  Grand
Master,  and  in  his  presence,  Senior  Grand
Warden,  Master  of  Work,  and  general  over¬
seer  of  all  artists,  as  well  those  whom
David  had  formerly  procured  from  Tyre
and  Sidon,  as  those  Hiram  should  now
send.”

This  statement  requires  some  correction.
According  to  the  most  consistent  systems
and  the  general  course  of  the  traditions,
there  were  three  Grand  Masters  at  the  build¬
ing  of  the  Temple,  of  whom  Hiram  Abif
was  one,  and  hence  in  our  Lodges  he  al¬
ways  receives  the  title  of  a  Grand  Master.
We  may,  however,  reconcile  the  assertion  of
Anderson,  that  he  wa3  sometimes  a  Deputy
Grand  Master,  and  sometimes  a  Senior
Grand  Warden,  by  supposing  that  the  three
Grand  Masters  were,  among  the  Craft,  pos¬
sessed  of  equal  authority,  and  held  in  equal
reverence,  while  among  themselves  there
was  an  acknowledged  subordination  of  sta¬
tion  and  power.  But  in  no  way  can  the  as¬
sertion  be  explained  that  he  was  at  any  time
a  Senior  Grand  Warden,  which  would  be
wholly  irreconcilable  with  the  symbolism
of  the  Temple.  In  the  mythical  Master’s
Lodge,  supposed  to  have  been  held  in  the
Temple,  and  the  only  one  ever  held  before
its  completion,  at  which  the  three  Grand
Masters  alone  were  present,  the  office  of
Junior  Warden  is  assigned  to  Hiram  Abif.

According  to  Masonic  tradition,  which  is
in  part  supported  by  scriptural  authority,
Hiram  was  charged  with  all  the  architec¬
tural  decorations  and  interior  embellish¬
ments  of  the  building.  He  cast  the  vari¬
ous  vessels  and  implements  that  were  to  be
used  in  the  religious  service  of  the  Temple,
as  well  as  the  pillars  that  adorned  the  porch,
selecting  as  the  most  convenient  and  ap¬
propriate  place  for  the  scene  of  his  oper¬
ations,  the  clay  grounds  which  extend  be¬
tween  Succoth  and  Zaredatha ;  and  the  old
lectures  state  that  the  whole  interior  of  the
house,  its  posts  and  doors,  its  very  floors
and  ceilings,  which  were  made  of  the  most
expensive  timber,  and  overlaid  with  plates
of  burnished  gold,  were,  by  his  exquisite
taste,  enchased  with  magnificent  designs
and  adorned  with  the  most  precious  gems.
Even  the  abundance  of  these  precious
jewels,  in  the  decorations  of  the  Temple,
is  attributed  to  the  foresight  and  prudence
of  Hiram  Abif;  since  a  Masonic  tradition,
quoted  by  Dr.  Oliver,  informs  us,  that  about
four  years  before  the  Temple  was  begun,  he,
as  the  agent  of  the  Tyrian  king,  purchased
some  curious  stones  from  an  Arabian  mer¬
chant,  who  told  him,  upon  inquiry,  that
they  had  been  found  by  accident  on  an
island  in  the  Red  Sea.  By  the  permission
of  King  Hiram,  he  investigated  the  truth


of  this  report,  and  had  the  good  fortune  to
discover  many  precious  gems,  and  among
the  rest  an  abundance  of  the  topaz.  They
were  subsequently  imported  by  the  ships  of
Tyre  for  the  service  of  King  Solomon.

In  allusion  to  these  labors  of  taste  and
skill  displayed  by  the  widow’s  son,  our
lectures  say,  that  while  the  wisdom  of
Solomon  contrived  the  fabric,  and  the
strength  of  King  Hiram’s  wealth  and  power
supported  the  undertaking,  it  was  adorned
by  the  beauty  of  Hiram  Abif’s  curious  and
cunning  workmanship.

In  the  character  of  the  chief  architect  of
the  Temple,  one  of  the  peculiarities  which
most  strongly  attract  attention,  was  the
systematic  manner  in  which  he  conducted
all  the  extensive  operations  which  were
placed  under  his  charge.  In  the  classifica¬
tion  of  the  workmen,  such  arrangements
were  made,  by  his  advice,  as  to  avoid  any
discord  or  confusion;  and  although  about
two  hundred  thousand  craftsmen  and  labor¬
ers  were  employed,  so  complete  were  his
arrangements,  that  the  general  harmony
was  never  once  disturbed.  In  the  payment
of  wages,  such  means  were,  at  his  suggestion,
adopted,  that  every  one’s  labor  was  readily
distinguished,  and  his  defects  ascertained,
every  attempt  at  imposition  detected,  and
the  particular  amount  of  money  due  to
each  workman  accurately  determined  and
easily  paid,  so  that,  as  Webb  remarks,  ‘‘the
disorder  and  confusion  that  might  other¬
wise  have  attended  so  immense  an  under¬
taking  was  completely  prevented.”  It  was
his  custom  never  to  put  off  until  to-morrow
the  work  that  might  have  been  accomplished
to-day,  for  he  was  as  remarkable  for  his
punctuality  in  the  discharge  of  the  most
trifling  duties,  as  he  was  lor  his  skill  in
performing  the  most  important.  It  was  his
constant  habit  to  furnish  the  craftsmen
every  morning  with  a  copy  of  the  plans
which  he  had,  on  the  previous  afternoon,
designed  for  their  labor  in  the  course  of  the
ensuing  day.  As  new  designs  were  thus  fur¬
nished  by  him  from  day  to  day,  any  neglect
to  provide  the  workmen  with  them  on  each
successive  morning  would  necessarily  have
stopped  the  labors  of  the  whole  body  of  the
workmen  for  that  day  ;  a  circumstance  that
in  so  large  a  number  must  have  produced
the  greatest  disorder  and  confusion.  Hence
the  practice  of  punctuality  was  in  him  a
duty  of  the  highest  obligation,  and  one
which  could  never  for  a  moment  have  been
neglected  without  leading  to  immediate  ob¬
servation.  Such  is  the  character  of  this
distinguished  personage,  whether  mythical
or  not,  that  has  been  transmitted  by  the
uninterrupted  stream  of  Masonic  tradition.

The  trestle-board  used  by  him  in  drawing
his  designs  is  said  to  have  been  made,  as


HIRAM


HIRAM


345


the  ancient  tablets  were,  of  wood,  and
covered  with  a  coating  of  wax.  On  this
coating  he  inscribed  his  plans  with  a  pen
or  stylus  of  steel,  which  an  old  tradition,
reserved  by  Oliver,  says  was  found  upon
ini  when  he  was  raised,  and  ordered  by
King  Solomon  to  be  deposited  in  the  centre
of  his  monument.  The  same  tradition  in¬
forms  us  that  the  first  time  he  used  this
stylus  for  any  of  the  purposes  of  the  Tem¬
ple  wa3  on  the  morning  that  the  foundation-
stone  of  the  building  was  laid,  when  he
drew  the  celebrated  diagram  known  as  the
forty-seventh  problem  of  Euclid,  and  which
gained  a  prize  that  Solomon  had  offered  on
that  occasion.  But  this  is  so  evidently  a
mere  myth,  invented  by  some  myth-maker
of  the  last  century,  without  even  the  excuse
of  a  symbolic  meaning,  that  it  has  been
rejected  or,  at  least,  forgotten  by  the  Craft.

Another  and  more  interesting  legend  has
been  preserved  by  Oliver,  which  may  be
received  as  a  mythical  symbol  of  the  faith¬
ful  performance  of  duty.  It  runs  thus :

“  It  was  the  duty  of  Hiram  Abif  to  su-
erintend  the  workmen,  and  the  reports  of
is  officers  were  always  examined  with  the
most  scrupulous  exactness.  At  the  open¬
ing  of  the  day,  when  the  sun  was  rising  in
the  east,  it  was  his  constant  custom,  before
the  commencement  of  labor,  to  go  into  the
Temple,  and  offer  up  his  prayers  to  Jeho¬
vah  for  a  blessing  on  the  work;  and  in  like
manner  when  the  sun  was  setting  in  the
west.  And  after  the  labors  of  the  day  were
closed,  and  the  workmen  had  left  the  Tem¬
ple,  he  returned  his  thanks  to  the  Great
Architect  of  the  Universe  for  the  harmo¬
nious  protection  of  the  day.  Not  content
with  this  devout  expression  of  his  feelings,
he  always  went  into  the  Temple  at  the
hour  of  high  twelve,  when  the  men  were
called  off  from  labor  to  refreshment,  to
inspect  the  work,  to  draw  fresh  designs
upon  the  trestle-board,  if  such  were  neces¬
sary,  and  to  perform  other  scientific  labors,
—  never  forgetting  to  consecrate  the  duties
by  solemn  prayer.  These  religious  customs
were  faithfully  performed  for  the  first  six
years  in  the  secret  recesses  of  his  Lodge,
and  for  the  last  year  in  the  precincts  of  the
most  holy  place.”

hile  assiduously  engaged  in  the  dis¬
charge  of  these  arduous  duties,  seven  years
passed  rapidly  away,  and  the  magnificent
temple  at  Jerusalem  was  nearly  completed,
fhe  Fraternity  were  about  to  celebrate  the
cope-stone  with  the  greatest  demonstrations
of  joy;  but,  in  the  language  of  the  vener¬
able  Book  of  Constitutions,  “  their  joy  was
soon  interrupted  by  the  sudden  death  of
their  dear  and  worthy  master,  Hiram  Abif.”
On  the  very  day  appointed  for  celebrating
the  cope-stone  of  the  building,  says  one
2  T


tradition,  he  repaired  to  his  usual  place  of
retirement  at  the  meridian  hour,  and  did
not  return  alive.  On  this  subject  we  can
say  no  more.  This  is  neither  the  time  nor
the  place  to  detail  the  particulars  of  his
death.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  the  circum¬
stance  filled  the  Craft  with  the  most  pro¬
found  grief,  which  was  deeply  shared  by
his  friend  and  patron,  King  Solomon,  who,
according  to  the  Book  of  Constitutions,
“after  some  time  allowed  to  the  Craft  to
vent  their  sorrow,  ordered  his  obsequies  to
be  performed  with  great  solemnity  and  de¬
cency,  and  buried  him  in  the  Lodge  near
the  Temple,  — according  to  the  ancient
usages  among  Masons,— and  long  mourned
his  loss.”

HiramMes.  In  the  degree  of  Patri¬
arch  Noachites,  the  legend  is,  that  the  Ma¬
sons  of  that  degree  are  descended  from  Noah
through  Peleg.  Distinguishing  themselves,
therefore,  as  Noachites,  they  call  the  Masons
of  the  other  degrees  Hiramites,  as  being
descended  from  Hiram  Abif.  The  word  is
not  elsewhere  used.

Hiram,  King  of  Tyre.  He  was

the  son  of  Abibal,  and  the  contemporary  of
both  David  and  Solomon.  In  the  begin¬
ning  of  the  former’s  reign,  he  sent  messen¬
gers  to  him,  and  Hiram  supplied  the
Israelitish  king  with  “  cedar-trees,  and  car¬
penters,  and  masons :  and  they  built  David
a  house.”  (2  Sam.  v.  11.)  Nearly  forty
years  afterwards,  when  Solomon  ascended
the  throne  and  began  to  prepare  for  build¬
ing  the  Temple,  he  sent  to  the  old  friend
of  his  father  for  the  same  kind  of  assist¬
ance.  The  king  of  Tyre  gave  a  favorable
response,  and  sent  workmen  and  materials
to  Jerusalem,  by  the  aid  of  which  Solomon
was  enabled  to  carry  out  his  great  design.
Historians  celebrate  the  friendly  intercourse
of  these  monarchs,  and  Josephus  says  that
the  correspondence  between  them  in  respect
to  the  building  of  the  Temple  was,  in  his
days,  preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  king¬
dom  of  Tyre.  The  answer  of  Hiram  to  the
application  of  Solomon  is  given  in  the  first
Book  of  Kings  (v.  8,  9,)  in  the  following
language:  “I  will  do  all  thy  desire  con¬
cerning  timber  of  cedar  and  timber  of  fir.
My  servants  shall  bring  them  down  from
Lebanon  unto  the  sea;  and  I  will  convey
them  by  sea  in  floats  unto  the  place  that
thou  shaft  appoint  me,  and  will  cause  them
to  be  discharged  there,  and  thou  shaft  re¬
ceive  them  ;  and  thou  shalt  accomplish  my
desire  in  giving  food  for  mv  household.”
In  return  for  this  kindness,  Solomon  gave
Hiram  20,000  measures,  or  corim,  of  wheat
and  the  same  quantity  of  oil,  which  was
nearly  200,000  bushels  of  one  and  1,500,000
gallons  of  the  other;  an  almost  incredible
amount,  but  not  disproportioncd  to  tho


346


HIRAM


HO-III


magnificent  expenditure  of  the  Temple  in
other  respects.  After  Solomon  had  finished
his  work,  he  presented  the  king  of  Tyre
with  twenty  towns  in  Galilee;  but  when
Hiram  viewed  these  places,  he  was  so  dis¬
satisfied  with  their  appearance  that  he  called
them  the  land  of  L'abul,  —  which  signifies
barren,  desolate,  —  saying  reproachfully  to
Solomon,  “Are  these,  my  brother,  the
towns  which  you  have  given  me?”  On
this  incident  the  Scottish  Rite  Masons  have
founded  their  sixth  degree,  or  Intimate  Sec-
retar)’.

lliram  appears,  like  Solomon,  to  have
been  disposed  to  mysticism,  for  Dius  and
Menander,  two  Greek  historians,  tell  us
that  the  two  kings  proposed  enigmas  to
each  other  for  solution.  Dius  says  that
Solomon  first  sent  some  to  Hiram  ;  and  that
the  latter  king,  being  unable  to  solve  them,
paid  a  large  sum  of  money  as  a  forfeit,  but
that  afterwards  he  explained  them  with  the
assistance  of  one  Abdemon;  and  that  he  in
turn  proposed  some  to  Solomon,  who,  not
being  able  to  solve  them,  paid  a  much
greater  sum  to  Hiram  than  he  had  himself
received  on  the  like  occasion.

The  connection  of  the  king  of  Tyre  with
king  Solomon  in  the  construction  of  the
Temple  has  given  him  a  great  importance
in  the  legendary  history  of  Masonry.  An¬
derson  says,  “The  tradition  is  that  King
Hiram  had  been  Grand  Master  of  all  Ma¬
sons  ;  but  when  the  Temple  was  finished,
Hiram  came  tp  survey  it  before  its  conse¬
cration,  and  to  commune  with  Solomon
about  wisdom  and  art ;  and  finding  that
the  Great  Architect  of  the  Universe  had
inspired  Solomon  above  all  mortal  men,
Hiram  very  readily  yielded  the  pre-emi¬
nence  to  Solomon  Jedediah,  the  beloved  of
God.”  He  is  called  in  the  rituals  one  of
our  “Ancient  Grand  Masters,”  and  when
the  mythical  Master’s  Lodge  was  held  in
the  Temple  is  supposed  to  have  acted  as
the  Senior  Warden.  It  is  said,  too,  that
in  the  symbolic  supports  of  Masonry  he
represented  the  pillar  of  strength,  because
“by  his  power  and  wealth  he  assisted  the
great  undertaking  ”  of  constructing  the
Temple.  He  is  reported,  also,  to  have
visited  Jerusalem  several  times  (a  fact  on
which  profane  history  is  silent)  for  the
jurpose  of  consultation  with  Solomon  and
lis  great  architect  on  the  symbolism  of  the
Word,  and  to  have  been  present  at  the
time  of  the  death  of  the  latter.  Many
other  legends  are  related  of  him  in  the
Master’s  degree  and  those  connected  with
it,  but  he  is  lost  sight  of  after  the  comple¬
tion  of  the  first  Temple,  and  is  seldom  heard
of  in  the  high  degrees.

Hiram  tlie  Uaildcr.  See  Hiram
Abif.


Hirsclian,  Wilhelm  von.  The

Abbot  Wilhelm  von  Hirschau,  Count  Pal¬
atine  of  Scheuren,  is  said  to  have  been  the
founder,  at  the  close  of  the  eleventh  centu¬
ry,  of  the  German  Bauhutten.  Having  been
previously  the  Master  of  the  Iiauhutte,  or
Lodge  of  St.  Emmerau,  in  Ratisbon,  when
he  became  Abbot  of  Hirschau,  ho  col¬
lected  together  in  1080— J 01)1  the  Masons
for  the  purpose  of  enlarging  the  convent.
He  incorporated  the  workmen,  says  Findel,
( Hist p.  54,)  with  the  monastery,  as  lay
brethren,  and  greatly  promoted  their  in¬
struction  and  general  improvement.  Their
social  life  was  regulated  by  special  laws;
and  the  one  most  frequently  inculcated  by
him  was  that  brotherly  concord  should  pre¬
vail,  because  only  by  working  together  and
lovingly  uniting  all  their  strength  would
it  be  possible  to  accomplish  such  great
works  as  were  these  undertakings  for  the
public  benefit.

II.*.  K.*.  T.*.  The  abbreviation  of

Hiram,  King  of  Tyre.

Ilo-lii.  A  combination  of  the  two  He¬
brew  pronouns  h”t,  Ao,  meaning  “he,”  and
♦  It,  hi,  meaning  “she;”  thus  mystically
representing  the  twofold  sex  of  the  Creator,
and  obtained  by  a  Kabbalistic  transposition
or  inversion  of  the  letters  of  the  Tetragram-
maton,  niiT  or  IHOH.  110-HI,  therefore,
thus  Kabbalistically  obtained,  denotes  the
male  and  female  principle,  the  visgenitrix,
thephallusand  lingam,  the  point  within  the
circle;  the  notion  of  which,  in  some  one
form  or  another  of  this  double  gender,  per¬
vades  all  the  ancient  systems  as  the  repre¬
sentative  of  the  creative  power.

Thus,  one  of  the  names  given  by  the  my¬
thological  writers  to  the  Supreme  Jupiter
was  appevoOT/T-vc,  the  man-woman.  In  one
of  the  Orphic  hymns  we  find  the  following
line :

Zcvs  n[>ar)V,  ycvcro,  Zcvi  apfipoTus  Izltro  ivfi '  *1.

Jove  is  a  male,  Jove  is  an  immortal  virgin.

And  Plutarch,  in  his  Isis  and  Osiris,  says,
“God,  who  is  a  male  and  female  intelli¬
gence,  beiug  both  life  and  light,  brought
forth  another  intelligence,  the  Creator  of
the  world.”  All  the  Pagan  gods  and  god¬
desses,  however  various  their  appellation,
were  but  different  expressions  for  the  male
and  female  principle.  “  In  fact,”  says
Russel,  “they  may  all  be  included  in  the,
one  great  Hermaphrodite,  the  appevoth/'/vc,
who  combines  in  his  nature  all  the  ele¬
ments  of  production,  and  who  continues  to
support  the  vast  creation  which  originally
proceeded  from  his  will.”  And  thus,  too,
may  we  learn  something  of  the  true  mean¬
ing  of  the  passage  in  Genesis,  (i.  27,)  where
it  is  said,  “  So  God  created  man  in  his  own


HOLINESS


HOLY


347


image,  in  the  image  of  God  created  he  him ;
male,  and  female  created  he  them.”

For  the  suggestion  of  this  working  of
Ho-hi  out  of  Ih-ho,  I  was  many  years
ago  indebted  to  m}  learned  and  lamented
friend,  George  R.  Gliddon,  the  great  Egyp¬
tologist,  who  had  obtained  it  from  the  writ¬
ings  of  Lanzi,  the  Italian  antiquary.

Holiness  to  the  Lord.  In  Hebrew,
run'1?  t£Hp,  KODESH  LAYEHOYAH.  It
was  the  inscription  on  the  plate  of  gold
that  was  placed  in  front  of  the  high  priest’s
mitre.  The  letters  were  in  the  ancient  Sa¬
maritan  character.

Holland.  See  Netherlands.

Holy  Ghost,  Knight  of  the.  See
Knight  of  the  Holy  Ghost.

Holy  Ground.  A  Masonic  Lodge  is
said  to  be  held  on  holy  ground,  according
to  the  Prestonian  lecture,  because  the  first
regularly  constituted  Lodge  was  held  on
that  holy,  consecrated  ground  wherein  the
first  three  grand  offerings  were  made,  which
afterwards  met  with  Divine  approbation.
See  Ground-Floor  of  the  Lodge.

Holy  Lodge.  The  oid  lectures  of
the  last  century  taught  symbolically  that
there  were  three  Lodges  opened  at  three
different  periods  in  Masonic  history  ;  these
were  the  Holy  Lodge,  the  Sacred  Lodge,
and  the  Royal  Lodge.  The  Holy  Lodge
was  opened  in  the  tabernacle  in  the  wil¬
derness,  and  over  it  presided  Moses,  Aho-
liab,  and  Bezaleel ;  the  Sacred  Lodge  was
opened  on  Mount  Moriah  during  the  build¬
ing  of  the  first  Temple,  and  was  presided
over  by  Solomon,  King  of  Israel,  Hiram,
King  of  Tyre,  and  Hiram  the  Builder;  the
Royal  Lodge  was  opened  among  the  ruins
of  the  first  Temple,  at  the  building  of  the
second,  and  was  presided  over  by  Joshua,
Zerubbabel,  and  Haggai.  Though  pre¬
sented  a3  a  tradition,  it  is  really  only  a
symbol  intended  to  illustrate  three  impor¬
tant  events  in  the  progress  of  Masonic
science.

Holy  Name.  Freemasonry  teaches,
in  all  its  symbols  and  rituals,  a  reverence
for  the  name  of  God,  which  is  emphatically
called  the  “  Holy  Name.”  In  the  prayer
“  Ahabath  Olam,”  first  introduced  by  Der-
mott,  it  is  said,  “  because  we  trusted  in  thy
holy,  great,  mighty,  and  terrible  Name;”
and  in  the  introductory  prayer  of  the  Royal
Arch,  according  to  the  American  system,
similar  phraseology  is  employed:  “Teach
us,  we  pray  thee,  the  true  reverence  of  thy
great,  mighty,  and  terrible  Name.”  The
expression,  if  not  the  sentiment,  is  bor¬
rowed  from  the  Hebrew  mysteries.

Holy  of  Holies.  Every  student  of
Jewish  antiquities  knows,  and  every  Mason
who  has  taken  the  third  degree  ought  to
know,  what  was  the  peculiar  construction,


character,  and  uses  of  the  Sanctum  Sanc¬
torum  or  Holy  of  Holies  in  King  Solomon’s
Temple.  Situated  in  the  western  end  of
the  Temple,  separated  from  the  rest  of  the
building  by  a  heavy  curtain,  and  enclosed
on  three  sides  by  dead  walls  without  any
aperture  or  window,  it  contained  the  sacred
ark  of  the  covenant,  and  was  secluded  and
set  apart  from  all  intrusion  save  of  the
high  priest,  who  only  entered  it  on  certain
solemn  occasions.  As  it  was  the  most
sacred  of  the  three  parts  of  the  Temple,  so
has  it  been  made  symbolic  of  a  Master’s
Lodge,  in  which  are  performed  the  most
sacred  rites  of  initiation  in  Ancient  Craft
Masonry.

But  as  modern  hierologists  have  found  in
all  the  Hebrew  rites  and  ceremonies  the
traces  of  more  ancient  mysteries,  from
which  they  seem  to  have  been  derived,  or
on  which  they  have  been  modified,  whence
we  trace  also  to  the  same  mysteries  most  of
the  Masonic  forms  which,  of  course,  are
more  immediately  founded  on  the  Jewish
Scriptures,  so  w?e  shall  find  in  the  ancient
Gentile  temples  the  type  of  this  same. Sanc¬
tum  Sanctorum  or  Holy  of  Holies,  under
the  name  of  Adyton  or  Adytum.  And  what
is  more  singular,  we  shall  find  a  greater  re¬
semblance  between  this  Adytum  of  the
Pagan  temples  and  the  Lodge  of  Master
Masons,  than  we  will  discover  between  the
latter  and  the  Sanctum  Sanctorum  of  the
Solomonic  Temple.  It  will  be  curious  and
interesting  to  trace  this  resemblance,  and  to
follow  up  the  suggestions  that  it  offers  in
reference  to  the  antiquity  of  Masonic  rites.

The  Adytum  was  the  most  retired  and
secret  part  of  the  ancient  Gentile  temple,
into  which,  as  into  the  Holy  of  Holies  of
the  Jewish  Temple,  the  people  were  not
permitted  to  enter,  but  which  was  acces¬
sible  only  to  the  priesthood.  And  hence  the
derivation  of  the  word  from  the  Greek
Adoein,  “not  to  enter,”  “that  which  it  i3
not  permitted  to  enter.”  Seclusion  and
mystery  were  always  characteristic  of  the
Adytum,  and  therefore,  like  the  Holy  of
Holies,  it  never  admitted  of  windows.

In  the  Adytum  was  to  be  found  a  taphos
or  tomb,  and  some  relic  or  image  or  statue
of  the  god  to  whom  the  temple  was  dedicated.
The  tomb  reminds  us  of  the  characteristic
feature  of  the  third  degree  of  Masonry ;  the
image  or  statue  of  the  god  finds  its  analogue
in  the  ark  of  the  covenant  and  the  over¬
shadowing  cherubim.

It  being  supposed  that  temples  owed  their
first  origin  to  the  reverence  paid  by  the
ancients  to  their  deceased  friends,  and  as  it
was  an  accepted  theory  that  the  gods  were
once  men  who  had  been  deified  on  account
of  their  heroic  virtues,  temples  were,  per¬
haps,  in  the  beginning  only  stately  inouu-


348


HOLY


HONORARY


merits  erected  in  honor  of  the  dead.  Hence
the  interior  of  the  temple  was  originally
nothing  more  than  a  cell  or  cavity,  that  is
to  say,  a  grave  regarded  as  a  place  of  de¬
posit  for  the  reception  of  a  person  interred,
and,  therefore,  in  it  was  to  be  found  the
soros  or  coffin,  and  the  taphos  or  tomb,  or,
among  the  Scandinavians,  the  barrow  or
mound  grave.  In  time  the  statue  or  image
of  a  god  took  the  place  of  the  coffin ;  but
the  reverence  for  the  spot,  as  one  of  peculiar
sanctity,  remained,  and  this  interior  part
of  the  temple  became  among  the  Greeks
the  se/cos  or  chapel,  among  the  Romans
the  Adytum  or  forbidden  place,  and  among
the  Jews  the  kodesh  kodasliim,  or  Holy  of
Holies.

“  The  sanctity  thus  acquired,”  says  Dud¬
ley  in  his  Naology,  (p.  393,)  “by  the  cell
of  interment  might  readily  and  with  pro¬
priety  be  assigned  to  any  fabric  capable  of
containing  the  body  of  the  departed  friend,
or  relic,  or  even  the  symbol  of  the  presence
or  existence,  of  a  divine  personage.”  And
thus  it  happened  that  there  was  in  every
ancient  temple  an  Adytum  or  most  holy
place.

There  was  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  of  the
Jewish  Temple,  it  is  true,  no  tomb  nor  coffin
containing  the  relics  of  the  dead.  But  there
was  an  ark  of  the  covenant  which  was  the
recipient  of  the  rod  of  Aaron,  and  the  pot
of  manna,  which  might  well  be  considered
the  relics  of  the  past  life  of  the  Jewish
nation  in  the  wilderness.  There  was  an
analogy  easily  understood  according  to  the
principles  of  the  science  of  symbolism.
There  was  no  statue  or  image  of  a  god,  but
there  were  the  sacred  cherubim,  and,  above
all,  the  Shekinah  or  Divine  Presence,  and
the  bathkol  or  voice  of  God.

But  when  Masonry  established  its  system
partly  on  the  ancient  rites  and  partly  on
the  Jewish  ceremonies,  it  founded  its  third
degree  as  the  Adytum  or  holy  of  holies  of
all  its  mysteries,  the  exclusive  place  into
which  none  but  the  most  worthy  —  the
priesthood  of  Masonry  —  the  Masters  in
Israel  —  were  permitted  to  enter;  and  then
going  back  to  the  mortuary  idea  of  the  an¬
cient  temple,  it  recognized  the  reverence  for
the  dead  which  constitutes  the  peculiar
characteristic  of  that  degree.  And,  there¬
fore,  in  every  Lodge  of  Master  Masons  there
should  be  found,  either  actually  or  alle¬
gorically,  a  grave,  or  tomb,  and  coffin,  be¬
cause  the  third  degree  is  the  inmost  sanc¬
tuary,  the  kodesh  kodashim,  the  Holy  of
Holies  of  the  Masonic  temple.

Holy  Place.  Called  also  the  sanc¬
tuary'.  It  was  that  part  of  the  Temple  of
Solomon  which  was  situated  between  the
Porch  and  the  Holy  of  Holies.  It  was  ap¬
propriated  to  the  purposes  of  daily  worship,


and  contained  the  altars  and  utensils  used
in  that  service.  It  has  no  symbolic  mean¬
ing  in  Masonry;  although  really,  as  it
occupied  the  ground-floor  of  the  Temple,
it  might  be  properly  considered  as  repre¬
sented  by  an  Entered  Apprentice’s  Lodge,
that  is  to  say,  by  the  Lodge  when  occupied
in  the  ceremonies  of  the  first  degree.

Holy  Sepulchre,  Kniglit  of  the.
See  Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.

Honorable.  This  was  the  title  for¬
merly  given  to  the  degree  of  Fellow  Craft.

Honorarium.  When  a  degree  of
Masonry  is  conferred  honoris  causa,  that  is,
as  a  mark  of  respect,  and  without  the  pay¬
ment  of  a  fee,  it  is  said  to  he  conferred  as  an
honorarium.  This  is  seldom  done  in  An¬
cient  Craft  Masonry ;  but  it  is  not  unusual
in  the  high  degrees  of  the  Scottish  Rite,
which  are  sometimes  bestowed  by  Inspect¬
ors  on  distinguished  Masons  as  an  honora¬
rium.

Honorary  Degrees.  1.  The  Mark

Master’s  degree  in  the  American  system  is
called  the  “  Honorary  degree  of  Mark  Mas¬
ter,”  because  it  is  traditionally  supposed  to
have  been  conferred  in  the  Temple  upon
a  portion  of  the  Fellow  Crafts  as  a  mark
of  honor  and  of  trust.  The  degrees  of  Past
Master  and  of  High  Priesthood  are  also
styled  honorary,  because  each  is  conferred
as  an  honorarium  or  reward  attendant  upon
certain  offices ;  that  of  Past  Master  upon
the  elected  Master  of  a  symbolic  Lodge,
and  that  of  High  Priesthood  upon  the
elected  High  Priest  of  a  Chapter  of  Royal
Arch  Masons.

2.  Those  degrees  which  are  outside  of
the  regular  series,  and  which  are  more  com¬
monly  known  by  the  epithet  “  side  degrees,”
are  also  sometimes  called  honorary  degrees,
because  no  fee  is  usually  exacted  for  them.

Honorary  Masons.  A  schismatic
body  which  arose  soon  after  the  revival  in
the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,
the  members  of  which  rejected  the  estab¬
lished  formula  of  an  obligation,  and  bound
themselves  to  secrecy  and  obedience  by  a
pledge  of  honor  only.  Like  the  Gregorians
and  the  Gormogons,  who  arose  about  the
same  time,  they  soon  died  a  natural  death.
A  song  of  theirs,  preserved  in  Carey’s  Mu¬
sical  Century,  is  almost  the  only  record  left
of  their  existence.

Honorary  Members.  It  is  a  cus¬
tom  in  some  Lodges  to  invest  distinguished
Masons  with  the  rank  and  title  of  honorary
membership.  This  confers  upon  them,  as
the  by-laws  may  prescribe,  sometimes  all
the  rights  of  active  membership  and  some¬
times  only  the  right  of  speaking,  but  al¬
ways  without  the  exaction  of  annual  dues.
Nor  does  honorary  membership  subject  the
person  receiving  it  to  the  discipline  of  the


HONORARY


HONORS


349


Lodge  farther  than  to  a  revocation  of  the
honor  bestowed.  The  custom  of  electing
honorary  members  is  a  usage  of  very  mod¬
ern  date,  and  has  not  the  sanction  of  the
old  Constitutions.  It  is  common  in  France;
less  so,  but  not  altogether  unknown,  in
America  and  England.  Oliver,  in  the  title
of  one  of  his  works,  claimed  honorary  mem¬
bership  in  more  than  nine  Lodges.  It  may
be  considered  unobjectionable  as  a  method
of  paying  respect  to  distinguished  merit  and
Masonic  services,  when  it  is  viewed  only
as  a  local  regulation,  and  does  not  attempt
to  interfere  with  Masonic  discipline.  A
Mason  who  is  expelled  forfeits,  of  course,
with  his  active  membership  in  his  own
Lodge,  his  honorary  membership  in  other
Lodges.

Honorary  Thirty -Thirds.  The

Supreme  Councils  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite  in  this  country  have,
within  a  few  years  past,  adopted  the  cus¬
tom  of  electing  honorary  members,  who
are  sometimes  called  “  Honorary  Thirty-
Thirds.”  They  possess  none  of  the  rights
of  Inspectors  General  or  Active  Members,
except  that  of  being  present  at  the  meet¬
ings  of  the  Council,  and  taking  part  to  a
limited  extent  in  its  deliberations.

Honors, Grand.  TheGrand  Honors
of  Masonry  are  those  peculiar  acts  and  ges¬
tures  by  which  the  Craft  have  always  been
accustomed  to  express  their  homage,  their
joy,  or  their  grief  on  memorable  occasions.
In  the  Symbolic  degrees  of  the  American
Rite,  they  are  of  two  kinds,  the  private  and
public,  which  are  used  on  different  occa¬
sions  and  for  different  purposes.

The  private  Grand  Honors  of  Masonry
are  performed  in  a  manner  known  only  to
Master  Masons,  since  they  can  only  be  used
iu  a  Master’s  Lodge.*  They  are  practised
by  the  Craft  only  on  four  occasions:  when
a  Masonic  hall  is  to  be  consecrated,  a  new
Lodge  to  be  constituted,  a  Master  elect  to
be  installed,  or  a  Grand  Master,  or  his
Deputy,  to  be  received  on  an  official  visita¬
tion  to  a  Lodge.  They  are  used  at  all  these
ceremonies  as  tokens  of  congratulation  and
homage.  And  as  they  can  only  be  given
by  Master  Masons,  it  is  evident  that  every
consecration  of  a  hall,  or  constitution  of  a
new  Lodge,  every  installation  of  a  Wor¬
shipful  Master,  and  every  reception  of  a
Grand  Master,  must  be  done  in  the  third
degree.  It  is  also  evident,  from  what  has
been  said,  that  the  mode  and  manner  of
giving  the  private  Grand  Honors  can  only
be  personally  communicated  to  Master  Ma¬
sons.  They  are  among  the  aporrheta  —  the
things  forbidden  to  be  divulged.

The  public  Grand  Honors,  as  their  name
imports,  do  not  partake  of  this  secret  char¬
acter.  They  are  given  ou  all  public  occa¬


sions,  in  the  presence  of  the  profane  as  well
as  the  initiated.  They  are  used  at  the  lay¬
ing  of  corner-stones  of  public  buildings,  or
in  other  services  in  which  the  ministra¬
tions  of  the  Fraternity  are  required,  and
especially  in  funerals.  They  are  given  in
the  following  manner:  Both  arms  are
crossed  on  the  breast,  the  left  uppermost,
and  the  open  palms  of  the  hands  sharply
striking  the  shoulders;  they  are  then  raised
above  the  head,  the  palms  striking  each
other,  and  then  made  to  fall  smartly  upon
the  thighs.  This  is  repeated  three  times,
and  as  there  are  three  blows  given  each
time,  namely,  on  the  breast,  on  the  palms
of  the  hands,  and  on  the  thighs,  making
nine  concussions  in  all,  the  Grand  Honors
are  technically  said  to  be  given  “  by  three
times  three.”  On  the  occasion  of  funerals,
each  one  of  these  honors  is  accompanied
by  the  words,  “  the  will  of  God  is  accom¬
plished  ;  so  mote  it  be ,”  audibly  pronounced
by  the  brethren.

These  Grand  Honors  of  Masonry  have
undoubtedly  a  classical  origin,  and  are  but
an  imitation  of  the  plaudits  and  acclama¬
tions  practised  by  the  ancient  Greeks  and
Romans  in  their  theatres,  their  senates,
and  their  public  games.  There  is  abun¬
dant  evidence  in  the  writings  of  the  an¬
cients,  that  in  the  days  of  the  empire,  the
Romans  had  circumscribed  the  mode  of
doing  homage  to  their  emperors  and  great
men  when  they  made  their  appearance  in
public,  and  of  expressing  their  approbation
of  actors  at  the  theatre,  within  as  explicit
rules  and  regulations  as  those  that  govern
the  system  of  giving  the  Grand  Honors  in
Freemasonry.  This  was  not  the  case  in  the
earlier  ages  of  Rome,  for  Ovid,  speaking  of
the  Sabines,  says  that  when  they  applauded,
they  did  so  without  any  rules  of  art :

“  In  medio  plausu,  plausus  tunc  arte  carebat.”

And  Propertius  speaks,  at  a  later  day,  of
the  ignorance  of  the  country  people,  who,
at  the  theatres,  destroyed  the  general  har¬
mony  by  their  awkward  attempts  to  joiu
in  the  modulated  applauses  of  the  more
skilful  citizens.

The  ancient  Romans  had  carried  their
science  on  this  subject  to  such  an  extent  as
to  have  divided  these  honors  into  three
kinds,  differing  from  each  other  in  the
mode  in  which  the  hands  were  struck
against  each  other,  and  in  the  sound  that
thence  resulted.  Suetonius,  in  his  life  of
Nero,  (cap.  xx.,)  gives  the  names  of  these
various  kinds  of  applause,  which  he  says
were  called  bombi,  imbrices,  testae  ;  and  Sen¬
eca,  in  his  Naturales  Quccstiones,  gives  a  de¬
scription  of  the  manner  in  which  they  were
executed.  The  “bombi,”  or  hums,  were
produced  by  striking  the  palms  of  the


350


HOODWINK


HOSPITALLER


hands  together,  while  they  were  in  a  hol¬
low  or  concave  position,  and  doing  this  at
frequent  intervals,  hut  with  little  force,  so
as  to  imitate  the  humming  sound  of  a  swarm
of  bees.  The  “  imbrices,”  or  tiles,  were
made  by  briskly  striking  the  flattened  and
extended  palms  of  the  bands  against  each
other,  so  as  to  resemble  the  sound  of  hail
pattering  upon  the  tiles  of  a  roof.  The
“  testa;,”  or  earthen  vases,  were  executed  by
striking  the  palm  of  the  left  hand,  with  the
fingers  of  the  right  collected  into  one  point.
By  this  blow  a  sound  was  elicited  which
imitated  that  given  out  by  an  earthen  vase
when  struck  by  a  stick.

The  Romans,  and  other  ancient  nations,
having  invested  this  system  of  applauding
with  all  the  accuracy  of  a  science,  used  it
in  its  various  forms,  not  only  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  testifying  their  approbation  of  act¬
ors  in  the  theatre,  but  also  bestowed  it,  as
a  mark  of  respect  or  a  token  of  adulation,
on  their  emperors,  and  other  great  men,  on
the  occasion  of  their  making  their  appear¬
ance  in  public.  Huzzas  and  cheers  have,
in  this  latter  case,  been  generally  adopted
by  the  moderns,  while  the  manual'  applause
is  only  appropriated  to  successful  public
speakers  and  declaimers.  The  Freemasons,
however,  have  altogether  preserved  the
ancient  custom  of  applause,  guarding  and
regulating  its  use  by  as  strict,  though  dif¬
ferent  rules  as  did  the  Romans;  and  thus
showing,  as  another  evidence  of  the  anti¬
quity  of  their  Institution,  that  the  “Grand
Honors”  of  Freemasonry  are  legitimately
derived  from  the  “plausus,”  or  applaud-
ings,  practised  by  the  ancients  on  public
occasions.

In  the  higher  degrees,  and  in  other  Rites,
the  Grand  Honors  are  different  from  those
of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry  in  the  American
Rite.

Hoodwink.  A  symbol  of  the  secrecy,
silence,  and  darkness  in  which  the  myste¬
ries  of  our  art  should  be  preserved  from  the
unhallowed  gaze  of  the  profane.  It  has
been  supposed  to  have  a  symbolic  reference
to  the  passage  in  St.  John’s  Gospel,  (i.  5,)
“And  the  light  shineth  in  darkness;  and
the  darkness  comprehended  it  not.”  But
it  is  more  certain  that  there  is  in  the  hood¬
wink  a  representation  of  the  mystical  dark¬
ness  which  always  preceded  the  rites  of  the
ancient  initiations.

Hope.  Hie  second  round  in  the  theo¬
logical  and  Masonic  ladder,  and  symbolic
of  a  hope  in  immortality.  It  is  appropri¬
ately  placed  there,  for,  having  attained  the  '
first,  or  faith  in  God,  we  are  led  by  a  belief
in  his  wisdom  and  goodness  to  the  hope  of
immortality.  This  is  but  a  reasonable  ex¬
pectation  ;  without  it,  virtue  would  lose  its
necessary  stimulus  and  vice  its  salutary


fear;  life  would  be  devoid  of  joy,  and  the
grave  but  a  scene  of  desolation.  The  an¬
cients  represented  Hope  by  a  nymph  hold¬
ing  in  her  hand  a  bouquet  of  opening  flowers,
indicative  of  the  coming  fruit ;  but  in  mod¬
ern  and  Masonic  iconology  it  is  represent¬
ed  by  a  virgin  leaning  on  an  anchor,  the
anchor  itself  being  a  symbol  of  hope.

Hope  Jlnnuscript.  A  manuscript
copy  of  the  old  Constitutions,  which  is  in
the  possession  of  the  Lodge  of  Hope  at
Bradford,  in  England.  The  parchment
roll  on  which  this  Constitution  is  written  is
six  feet  long  and  six  inches  wide,  and  is
defaced  and  worn  away  at  the  lower  edge.
It  is  considered  a  very  important  manu¬
script.  Its  date  is  supposed  to  be  about
1680.  From  a  transcript  in  the  possession
of  Bro.  A.  F.  A.  Woodlord,  whose  correct¬
ness  is  certified  to  by  the  Master  of  the
Lodge,  Bro.  Hughan  first  published  it  in
his  Old  Charges  of  the  British  Freemasons.

Horn  of  Plenty.  The  jewel  of  the
Steward  of  a  Lodge.  See  Cornucopia.

Horns  of  tlic  Altar.  In  the  Jewish
Temple,  the  altars  of
burnt-offering  and  of
incense  had  each  at
the  four  corners  four
horns  of  shittim  wood.
Among  the  Jews,  as
well  as  all  other  an¬
cient  peoples,  the  al¬
tar  was  considered
peculiarly  holy  and
privileged ;  and  hence,
when  a  criminal,  flee¬
ing,  took  hold  of  these  horns,  he  found  an
asylum  and  safety.  As  the  Masonic  altar
is  a  representation  of  the  altar  of  the  Solo¬
monic  member,  it  should  be  constructed
with  these  horns;  and  Cross  has  very  prop¬
erly  so  represented  it  in  his  Hieroglyphic
Chart.

Hosehea.  The  word  of  acclamation
used  by  the  French  Masons  of  the  Scottish
Rite.  In  some  of  the  Cahiers  it  is  spelled
Ozee.  It  is,  I  think,  a  corruption  of  the
word  huzza,  which  is  used  by  the  English
and  American  Masons  of  the  same  Rite.

Hospitality.  This  virtue  has  always
been  highly  esteemed  among  Masons.
Nothing  is  more  usual  in  diplomas  or  cer¬
tificates  than  to  recommend  the  bearer  “to
the  hospitality  of  all  the  brethren  where¬
soever  dispersed  over  the  globe;  ”  a  recom¬
mendation  that  is  seldom  disregarded.  All
of  the  old  Constitutions  detail  the  practice
of  hospitality,  as  one  of  the  duties  of  the
Craft,  in  language  like  this:  “Every  Mason
shall  receive  and  cherish  strange  fellowes
when  they  come  over  the  countreye.”

Hospitaller,  Ivniglit.  See  Knight
Hospitaller.


HOSPITALLERS


HU


351


Hospitallers  of  Jerusalem.  In

the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century,  some
merchants  of  Amalfi,  a  rich  city  of  the
kingdom  of  Naples,  while  trading  in  Egypt,
obtained  from  the  Caliph  Monstaser  Billali
permission  to  establish  hospitals  in  the  city
of  Jerusalem  for  the  use  of  poor  and  sick
Catholic  pilgrims.  A  site  was  assigned  to
them  close  to  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  on  which
they  erected  a  chapel  dedicated  to  the  Vir¬
gin,  giving  it  the  name  of  St.  Mary  ad  Lat¬
inos,  to  distinguish  it  from  those  churches
where  the  service  was  performed  according
to  the  Greek  ritual.  The  building  was
completed  in  the  year  1018;  and  at  the
same  time  two  hospitals,  one  for  either  sex,
were  erected  in  the  vicinity  of  the  chapel
for  the  reception  of  pilgrims.  Subsequently
each  of  these  hospitals  had  a  separate
chapel  annexed  to  it ;  that  for  the  men  be¬
ing  dedicated  to  St.  John  the  Almoner,  and
that  for  the  women  to  St.  Mary  Magdalen.
Many  of  the  pilgrims,  who  had  experienced
the  kindness  so  liberally  bestowed  upon  all
wayfarers,  abandoned  all  idea  of  returning
to  Europe,  and  formed  themselves  into  a
band  of  charitable  assistants,  and,  without
assuming  any  regular,  religious  profession,
devoted  themselves  to  the  service  of  the
hospital  and  the  care  of  its  sick  inmates.
The  chief  cities  of  the  south  of  Europe
subscribed  liberally  for  the  support  of  this
institution ;  and  the  merchants  of  Amalfi
who  were  its  original  founders  acted  as  the
stewards  of  their  bounty,  which  was  greatly
augmented  from  the  favorable  reports  of
grateful  pilgrims  who  had  returned  home,
and  the  revenues  of  the  hospital  were  thus
much  increased.  The  associates  assumed
the  name  of  Hospitallers  of  Jerusalem.
Afterwards,  taking  up  arms  for  the  protec¬
tion  of  the  holy  places  against  the  Saracens,
they  called  themselves  Knights  Hospital¬
lers,  a  title  which  they  subsequently  changed
to  that  of  Knights  of  Rhodes,  and  finally
to  that  of  Knights  of  Malta.

Host,  Captain  of  the.  See  Captain
of  the  Host.

Hour-Glass.  An  emblem  used  in  the
third  degree,  according  to  the  Webb  lec¬
tures,  to  remind  us  by  the  quick  passage  of
its  sands  of  the  transitory  nature  of  human
life.  As  a  Masonic  symbol  it  is  of  com¬
paratively  modern  date,  but  the  use  of  the
hour-glass  as  an  emblem  of  the  passage
of  time  i3  older  than  our  oldest  rituals.
Thus,  in  a  speech  before  Parliament,  in
1627,  it  is  said:  “  We  may  dandle  and  play
with  the  hour-glass  that  is  in  our  power,  but
the  hour  will  not  stay  for  us;  and  an  op¬
portunity  once  lost  cannot  be  regained.”
We  are  told  in  Notes  and  Queries,  (1st  Ser.,
v.  223,)  that  in  the  early  part  of  the  last  cen¬
tury  it  was  a  custom  to  inter  an  hour-glass


with  the  dead,  as  an  emblem  of  the  sand  of
life  being  run  out.

Hours,  Masonic.  The  language  of
Masonry,  in  reference  to  the  hours  of  labor
and  refreshment,  is  altogether  symbolical.
The  old  lectures  contained  a  tradition  that
our  ancient  brethren  wrought  six  days  in
the  week  and  twelve  hours  in  the  day,
being  called  off  regularly  at  the  hour  of
high  twelve  from  labor  to  refreshment.  In
the  French  and  German  systems,  the  Craft
were  said  to  be  called  from  labor  at  low
twelve,  or  midnight,  which  is  therefore  the
supposed  or  fictitious  time  at  which  a
French  or  German  Lodge  is  closed.  But
in  the  English  and  American  systems  the
Craft  are  supposed  to  be  called  off  at  high
twelve,  and  when  called  on  again  the  time
for  recommencing  labor  is  said  to  be  “  one
hour  past  high  twelve:”  all  this  refers  to
Ancient  Craft  Masonry.  In  some  of  the
high  degrees  the  hours  designated  for  labor
or  rest  are  different.  So,  too,  in  the  different
Rites:  thus,  in  the  system  of  Zinnendorf,  it
is  said  that  there  are  in  a  Mason’s  Lodge
five  hours,  namely,  twelve  struck,  noon,
high  noon,  midnight  and  high  midnight;
which  are  thus  explained.  Twelve  struck,
is  before  the  Lodge  is  opened  and  after  it  is
closed;  noon  is  when  the  Master  is  about  to
open  the  Lodge;  high  noon,  when  it  is
duly  open;  midnight,  when  the  Master  is
about  to  close  it;  and  high  midnight,  when
it  is  closed  and  the  uninitiated  are  permit¬
ted  to  draw  near.

Hours  of  Initiation.  In  Masonic
Lodges,  as  they  were  in  the  Ancient  Mys¬
teries,  initiations  are  always  at  night.
No  Lodges  ever  meet  in  the  daytime  for
that  purpose,  if  it  can  be  avoided.  See
Night.

How  go  Squares?  The  question  was
one  of  the  earliest  of  the  tests  which  were
common  in  the  eighteenth  century.  In  the
Grand  Mystery,  published  in  1724,  we  find
it  in  the  following  form  :

Q .  How  go  squares?

“A.  Straight.”

It  is  noteworthy,  that  this  phrase  has  an
earlier  date  than  the  eighteenth  century,
and  did  not  belong  exclusively  to  the  Ma¬
sons.  In  Thomas  May’s  comedy  of  Hie
Old  Couple,  published  in  1658,  (Act.  iv.,  sc.
i.,)  will  be  found  the  following  passage:

“  Sir  Argent  Scrape.  Ha!  Mr.  Frightful,
welcome.  How  go  squares?  What  do  you
think  of  me  to  make  a  bridegroom?  I)o  I
look  young  enough?”  See  it  in  Dodsley’s
Collection  of  Old  Plays,  Vol.  10.

M.*.  R.*.  I>.*.  M.*.  An  abbreviation


of  Heredom  or  Herodem.

H  u.  The  name  of  the  chief  god  among
the  Druids,  commonly  called  Hu  Gadarn,
or  Hu  the  Mighty.  He  is  thus  described


352


HUMILITY


HUND


by  one  of  the  Welsh  bards :  “  The  smallest
of  the  small,  Hu  is  the  mighty  in  the  world’s
judgment;  yet  he  is  the  greatest  and  Lord
over  us  and  our  God  of  mystery.  His
course  is  light  and  swift,  his  car  is  a  parti¬
cle  of  bright  sunshine.  He  is  great  on
land  and  sea,  the  greatest  whom  I  shall  be¬
hold,  greater  than  the  worlds.  Offer  not
indignity  to  him,  the  Great  and  Beautiful.”
Bryant  and  Davies,  in  accordance  with
their  arkite  theory,  think  that  he  was  Noah
deified ;  but  the  Masonic  scholar  will  be  re¬
minded  of  the  Hi-hu  eliminated  by  the
Kabbalists  out  of  the  name  of  Jehovah.

Humility.  The  Divine  Master  has
said,  “  He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be
exalted,”  (Luke  xiv.  2,)  and  the  lesson  is
emphatically  taught  by  a  portion  of  the
ritual  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree.  Indeed,
the  first  step  towards  the  acquisition  of
truth  is  a  humility  of  mind  which  teaches
us  our  own  ignorance  and  our  necessity  for
knowledge,  so  that  thus  we  may  be  prepared
for  its  reception.  Dr.  Oliver  has  greatly
erred  in  saying  ( Landmarks ,  ii.  471,)  that
bare  feet  are  a  Masonic  symbol  of  humility.
They  are  properly  a  symbol  of  reverence.
The  true  Masonic  symbol  of  humility  is
bodily  prostration,  and  it  is  so  exemplified
in  the  Royal  Arch  degree.

Hund,  Baron  Von.  Carl  Gotthhelf,
Baron  Von  Hand,  was  born  in  O’oerlausitz,
in  Germany,  on  the  11th  of  September,  1722.
He  was  a  nobleman  and  hereditary  landed
proprietor  in  the  Lausitz.  He  is  said  to
have  been  upright  iiVhis  conduct,  although
beset  by  vanity  and  a  love  of  adventure.
But  Findel  is  scarcely  correct  in  character¬
izing  him  as  a  man  of  moderate  understand¬
ing,  since  the  position  which  he  took  among
his  Masonic  contemporaries  —  many  of
whom  were  of  acknowledged  talent  —  and
the  ability  with  which  he  defended  and
maintained  his  opinions,  would  indicate  the

fossession  of  very  respectable  intelligence.

n  religious  faith  he  was  a  Protestant.
That  rare  work,  the  Anti-Saint- Nicaise,
contains  in  its  first  volume  a  brief  biogra¬
phy  of  Von  Hund,  from  which  some  de¬
tails  of  his  personal  appearance  and  char¬
acter  may  be  obtained.  He  was  of  middling
stature,  but  well  formed;  never  dressed
sumptuously,  but  always  with  taste  and
neatness;  and  although  himself  a  moderate
liver,  was  distinguished  for  his  hospitality,
and  his  table  was  always  well  supplied  for
the  entertainment  of  friends  and  visitors.
The  record  that  his  servants  were  never
changed,  but  that  those  wrho  were  employed
in  his  domestic  service  constantly  remained
with  him,  is  a  simple  but  conclusive  testi¬
mony  to  the  amiability  of  his  character.

The  scanty  details  of  the  life  of  Hund,
which  are  supplied  by  Clavel  in  his  His-


toire  Pittoresquc ;  by  Thory,  in  the  Acta
Latamorum ;  by  Ragon,  in  his  Orthodoxic
Mayonnique ;  by  Robison,  in  his  Proofs  of
a  Conspiracy ;  by  Lenning  and  Giidicke,  in
the  Encyclopadie  of  each ;  by  Oliver,  in
his  Historical  Landmarks ;  and  by  Findel,
in  his  History,  vary  so  much  in  dates  and
in  the  record  of  events,  that  he  who  should
depend  on  their  conflicting  authority  for
information  would  be  involved  in  almost
inextricable  confusion  in  attempting  to
follow  any  connected  thread  of  a  narrative.
As  Thory,  however,  writes  as  an  annalist,
in  chronological  order,  it  may  be  presumed
that  his  dates  are  more  to  be  depended  on
than  those  of  the  looser  compilers  of  his¬
torical  essays.  He,  therefore,  will  furnish
us  with  at  least  an  outline  of  the  principal
Masonic  events  in  the  life  of  Hund,  while
from  other  writers  we  may  derive  the  ma¬
terial  facts  which  the  brevity  of  Thory
does  not  provide.  But  even  Thory  must
sometimes  be  abandoned,  where  he  has
evidently  neglected  to  note  a  particular
circumstance,  and  his  omission  must  be
supplied  from  some  other  source.

On  the  20th  of  March,  1742,  when  still
lacking  some  months  of  being  twenty  years
of  age,  he  was  initiated  into  the  mysteries
of  Freemasonry  in  the  Lodge  of  the  Three
Thistles  at  Frankfort-on-the-Main.  Fin¬
del  places  the  date  of  his  initiation  in  the
year  1741 ;  but,  for  the  reason  already  as¬
signed,  I  prefer  the  authority  of  Thory,
with  whom  Lenning  concurs.  The  first
and  second  degrees  were  conferred  on  the
same  day,  and  in  due  time  his  initiation
into  the  symbolic  degrees  was  completed.

Soon  after  his  initiation,  the  Baron  Von
Hund  travelled  through  England  and  Hol¬
land,  and  paid  a  visit  to  Paris.  Robison,
who  speaks  of  the  Baron  as  “a  gentleman
of  honorable  character,”  and  whose  own
reputation  secures  him  from  the  imputation
of  wilful  falsehood,  although  it  could  not
preserve  him  from  the  effects  of  prejudice,
says  that  Hund,  while  in  Paris,  became
acquainted  with  the  Earl  of  Kilmarnock
and  some  other  gentlemen,  who  were  ad¬
herents  of  the  Pretender,  and  received  from
them  the  new  degrees,  which  had  been  in¬
vented,  it  is  said,  for  political  purposes  by
the  followers  of  the  exiled  house  of  Stuart.
Giidicke  states  that  while  there  he  also
received  the  Order  of  the  Mopses,  which
he  afterwards  attempted,  but  without  suc¬
cess,  to  introduce  into  Germany.  This
must,  however,  be  an  error;  for  the  Order
of  the  Mopses,  an  androgynous  institution,
which  subsequently  gave  birth  to  the  French
Lodges  of  Adoption,  was  not  established
until  1776,  long  after  the  return  of  Hund  to
his  native  country.

While  he  resided  in  Paris  he  received,


HUND


HUND


353


says  Findel,  some  intimations  of  the  exist¬
ence  of  the  Order  of  Knights  Templars  in
Scotland.  The  legend,  which  it  is  necessary
to  say  has  been  deemed  fabulous,  is  given
to  us  by  Clavel,  {Hist.  Pittor.,  184,)  who
tells  us  that,  after  the  execution  of  Jacques
de  Molay,  Pierre  d’Aumont,  the  Provincial
Grand  Master  of  Auvergne,  accompanied
by  two  Commanders  and  five  Knights,  es¬
caped  to  Scotland,  assuming  during  their
journey,  for  the  purpose  of  concealment,
the  costume  of  Operative  Masons.  Having
landed  on  one  of  the  Scottish  Islands,  they
met  several  other  companions,  Scottish
Knights,  with  whom  they  resolved  to  con¬
tinue  their  existence  of  the  Order,  whose
abolition  had  been  determined  by  the  Pope
and  the  King  of  France.  At  a  Chapter
held  on  St.  John’s  day,  1313,  Aumont  was
elected  Grand  Master,  and  the  Knights,  to
avoid  in  future  the  persecutions  to  which
they  had  been  subjected,  professed  to  be
Freemasons,  and  adopted  the  symbols  of
that  Order.  In  1361  the  Grand  Master
transported  his  see  to  the  city  of  Aberdeen,
and  from  that  time  the  Order  of  the  Temple
spread,  under  the  guise  of  Freemasonry,
throughout  the  British  Islands  and  the
Continent.

The  question  is  not  now  as  to  the  truth
or  even  the  probability  of  this  legend.  It
is  sufficient  for  our  present  purpose  to  say,
that  the  Baron  Von  Hund  accepted  it  as  a
veritable  historical  fact.  He  was  admitted,
at  Paris,  to  the  Order  of  Knights  Templars,
Clavel  says,  by  the  Pretender,  Charles
Edward,  who  was  the  Grand  Master  of  the
Order.  Of  this  we  have  no  other  evidence
than  the  rather  doubtful  authority  of  Cla¬
vel.  Robison  intimates  that  he  was  in¬
ducted  by  the  Earl  of  Kilmarnock,  whose
signature  was  attached  to  his  diploma.  Ga-
dicke  says  that  he  travelled  over  Brabant
to  the  French  army,  and  was  there  made  a
Templar  by  high  chiefs  of  the  Order.  And
this  statement  might  be  reconciled  with
that  of  Robison,  for  the  high  chiefs  (kohe
Obere )  of  Gadicke  were  possibly  the  fol¬
lowers  of  the  Pretender,  some  of  whom
were  likely  to  have  been  with  the  French
army.  The  point  is  not,  however,  worth
the  trouble  of  an  investigation.  Two  things
have  been  well  settled,  namely :  That  in
1743  Von  Hund  was  initiated  as  a  Knight
Templar,  and  that  at  the  same  time  he  re¬
ceived  the  appointment  of  a  Provincial
Grand  Master,  with  ample  powers  to  pro¬
pagate  the  Order  in  Germany.  He  re¬
turned  to  his  native  country,  but  does  not
appear  to  have  been  very  active  at  first  as
a  missionary  of  Templarism,  although  he
continued  to  exhibit  his  strong  attachment
to  Ancient  Craft  Masonry.  In  the  year
1749  he  erected,  at  his  own  expense,  a  Lodge
2  U  23


on  his  estates  at  Kittlitz,  near  Loban,  to
which  he  gave  the  name  of  the  “  Lodge  of
the  Three  Pillars.”  At  the  same  time  he
built  there  a  Protestant  church,  the  corner¬
stone  of  which  was  laid  by  the  brethren,
with  the  usual  Masonic  ceremonies.

I  am  compelled  to  suppose,  from  inci¬
dents  in  his  life  which  subsequently  oc¬
curred,  that  Hund  must  have  visited  Paris
a  second  time,  and  that  he  was  there  in  the
year  1754.  On  the  24th  of  November  in
that  year,  the  Chevalier  de  Bonneville,
supported  by  some  of  the  most  distinguished
Masons  of  Paris,  instituted  a  Chapter  of
the  High  Degrees,  which  received  the  name
of  the  “Chapter  of  Clermont,”  and  into
which  he  introduced  the  Templar  system,
that  is,  the  system  which  finds  the  origin
of  Freemasonry  in  Templarism.  In  this
Chapter  Baron  Von  Hund,  who  was  then
in  Paris,  received  the  degrees  of  the  Cler¬
mont  system,  and  there,  says  Thory,  he
learned  the  doctrine  upon  which  he  subse¬
quently  founded  his  new  Rite  of  Strict  Ob¬
servance.  This  doctrine  was,  that  Free¬
masonry  owes  its  existence  to  Knight  Tem¬
plarism,  of  which  it  is  the  natural  successor;
and,  therefore,  that  every  Mason  is  a  Tem¬
plar,  although  not  entitled  to  all  the  privi¬
leges  of  the  Order  until  he  has  attained  the
highest  degree.

Von  Hund  returned  to  Germany  pos¬
sessed  of  powers,  or  a  deputation  granted
to  him  in  Paris  by  which  he  was  author¬
ized  to  disseminate  the  high  degrees  in  that
country.  He  was  not  slow  to  exhibit  these
documents,  and  soon  collected  around  him
a  band  of  adherents.  He  then  attempted
what  he  termed  a  reform  in  primitive  Ma¬
sonry  or  the  simple  English  system  of  the
three  symbolic  degrees,  which  alone  most
of  the  German  Lodges  recognized.  The
result  was  the  establishment  of  a  new  sys¬
tem,  well  known  as  the  Rite  of  Strict  Ob¬
servance.

But  here  we  again  encounter  the  em¬
barrassments  of  conflicting  authorities.
The  distinctive  feature  of  the  Rite  of  Strict
Observance  was,  that  Freemasonry  is  the
successor  of  Templarism;  the  legend  of  Au¬
mont  being  unhesitatingly  accepted  as  au¬
thentic.  The  author  of  Anti- Saint- Nicaise,
the  book  already  referred  to,  asserted  that
between  the  years  1730  and  1740  there  was
already  in  Lusatia  a  Chapter  of  Templars ;
that  he  knew  one,  at  least,  who  had  been
there  initiated  before  the  innovation  of  the
Baron  Von  Hund  ;  and  that  the  dignities
of  Prior,  Sub-prior,  Prefect,  and  Com¬
mander,  which  he  professed  to  introduce
into  Germany  for  the  first  time,  had  been
known  there  at  a  long  antecedent  period.

Ragon  also  asserts  that  the  Templar  svs-
tem  of  Ramsay  was  known  in  Germany  be-


354


HUND


HUND


fore  the  foundation  of  the  Chapter  of  Cler¬
mont,  whence  Von  Hund  derived  his  infor¬
mation  and  his  powers;  that  it  consisted
of  six  degrees,  to  which  Hund  added  a
seventh;  and  that  at  the  time  of  Von
Hund’s  arrival  in  Germany  this  regime
had  Baron  Von  Marshall  as  its  head,  to
whom  Huud’s  superiors  in  Paris  had  re¬
ferred  him.

This  seems  to  he  the  correct  version  of
the  affair  ;  and  so  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observ¬
ance  was  not  actually  established,  but  only
reformed  and  put  into  more  active  opera¬
tion,  by  Von  Hund.

One  of  the  peculiarities  of  this  Rite  was,
that  every  member  was  called  a  Knight,  or
Eques ;  the  classical  Latin  for  a  Roman
knight  being,  by  a  strange  inconsistency,
adopted  by  these  professed  Templars,  in¬
stead  of  the  Mediaeval  word  Miles,  which
had  been  always  appropriated  to  the  mili¬
tary  knights  of  chivalry.  To  this  word  was
appended  another,  and  the  title  thus  formed
was  called  the  “  characteristic  name.”  Lists
of  these  characteristic  names,  and  of  the
persons  whom  they  represented,  are  given
in  all  the  registers  and  lists  of  the  Rite.
Von  Hund  selected  for  himself  the  title  of
Eques  ab  Ense,  or  Knight  of  the  Sword ;
and,  to  show  the  mixed  military  and  Ma¬
sonic  character  of  his  regime,  chose  for  his
seal  a  square  and  sword  crossed,  or,  in
heraldic  language,  saltierwise.

Von  Hund  divided  Europe  into  nine
provinces,  and  called  himself  the  Grand
Master  of  the  seventh  province,  which  em¬
braced  Lower  Saxony,  Prussian  Poland,
Livonia,  and  Courland.  He  succeeded  in
getting  the  Duke  Ferdinand  of  Brunswick
to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Rite,
and  secured  its  adoption  by  most  of  the
Lodges  of  Berlin  and  of  other  parts  of
Prussia.  After  this  he  retired  into  com-
arative  inactivity,  and  left  the  Lodges  of
is  Rite  to  take  care  of  themselves.

But  in  1763  he  was  aroused  by  the  ap¬
pearance  of  one  Johnson  on  the  Masonic
stage.  This  man,  whose  real  name  was
Leucht,  was  a  Jew,  and  had  formerly  been
the  secretary  of  the  Prince  of  Anhalt-
Bernburg,  under  the  assumed  name  of
Becker.  But,  changing  his  name  again  to
that  of  Johnson,  he  visited  the  city  of  Jena,
and  proclaimed  himself  to  the  Masons
there  as  possessed  of  powers  far  more  ex¬
tensive  than  those  of  Von  Hund,  which
he  pretended  to  have  received  from  “  un¬
known  Superiors  ”  at  Aberdeen,  Scotland,
the  supposed  seat  of  the  Templar  Order,
which  had  been  revived  by  Aurnont.  Von
Hund  at  first  admitted  the  claims  of  John¬
son,  and  recognized  him  as  the  Grand  Prior
of  the  Order.  Ragon  says  that  this  recog¬
nition  was  a  fraud  on  the  part  of  Von


Hund,  who  had  really  selected  Johnson  as
his  agent,  to  give  greater  strength  to  his
Rite.  I  am  reluctant  to  admit  the  truth
of  this  charge,  and  am  rather  disposed  to
believe  that  the  enthusiasm  and  credulity
of  Von  Hund  had  made  him  for  a  time  the
victim  of  Johnson's  ostentatious  preten¬
sions.  If  this  be  so,  he  was  soon  unde¬
ceived,  and,  discovering  the  true  character
as  well  as  the  dangerous  designs  of  John¬
son,  he  proclaimed  him  to  be  an  adven¬
turer.  He  denied  that  Johnson  had  been
sent  as  a  delegate  from  Scotland,  and  as¬
serted  anew  that  he  alone  was  the  Grand
Master  of  the  Order  in  Germany,  with  the
power  to  confer  the  high  degrees.  Johnson,
accused  of  abstracting  the  papers  of  a  Lord
of  Courland,  in  whose  service  he  had  been,
and  of  the  forgery'  of  documents,  was  ar¬
rested  at  Magdeburg  through  the  influence
of  Von  Hund,  on  the  further  charges  of
larceny  and  counterfeiting  money,  and  died
in  1775  in  prison.

Von  Hund  now  renewed  his  activity  as  a
Mason,  and  assembled  a  Congress  of  the
Rite  at  Altenberg,  where  he  was  recognized
as  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars,  and  aug¬
mented  his  strength  by  numerous  impor¬
tant  initiations.  His  reappearance  among
the  brethren  exerted  as  much  surprise  as
joy,  and  its  good  effects  were  speedily  seen
in  a  large  increase  of  Chapters;  and  the
Rite  of  Strict  Observance  soon  became  the
predominating  system  in  Germany.

But  dissatisfaction  began  to  appear  as  a
consequence  of  the  high  claims  of  the  mem¬
bers  of  the  Rite  to  the  possession  of  supe¬
rior  knowledge.  The  Knights  looked  haugh¬
tily  upon  the  Masons  who  had  been  invested
only  with  the  primitive  degrees,  and  these
were  offended  at  the  superciliousness  with
which  they  were  treated.  A  Mother  Lodge
was  established  at  Frankfort,  which  recog¬
nized  and  worked  only  the  three  degrees.
Other  systems  of  high  degrees  also  arose
as  rivals  of  the  Rite,  and  Von  Hund’s
regime  began  to  feel  sensibly  the  effects  of
tins  compound  antagonism.

Hitherto  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance
had  been  cosmopolitan  in  its  constitution,
admitting  the  believers  in  all  creeds  to  its
bosom,  and  professing  to  revive  only  the
military  and  chivalric  character  of  the  an¬
cient  Templars,  without  any  reference  to
their  religious  condition.  But  in  1767,  Von
Starck,  the  rector  at  Wismar,  proposed  to
engraft  upon  the  Rite  a  new  branch,  to  be
called  the  clerical  system  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars.  This  was  to  be  nominally  spiritual
in  character;  and,  while  announcing  that
it  was  in  possession  of  secrets  not  known  to
the  chivalric  branch  of  the  Order,  demand-
j  ed,  as  preliminary  to  admission,  that  every
candidate  should  be  a  Roman  Catholic,  and


HUND


HUTCHINSON


355


have  previously  received  the  degrees  of  the
Strict  Observance.

Starck  wrote  to  Von  Hund,  proposing  a
fusion  of  the  two  branches ;  and  he,  “  be¬
cause,”  to  borrow  the  language  of  Findel,
“  himself  helpless  and  lacking  expedients,
eagerly  stretched  out  his  hand  to  grasp  the
offered  assistance,  and  entered  into  connec¬
tion  with  the  so-called  clergy.”  He  even,
it  is  said,  renounced  Protestantism  and  be¬
came  a  Catholic,  so  as  to  qualify  himself
for  admission.

In  1774,  a  Congress  assembled  at  Kohlo,
the  object  of  which  was  to  reconcile  the
difference  between  these  two  branches  of
the  Rite.  Here  Von  Hund  appears  to  have
been  divested  of  some  portion  of  his  dig¬
nities,  for  he  was  appointed  only  Provin¬
cial  Superior  of  Upper  and  Lower  Alsace,
of  Denmark  and  of  Courland,  while  the
Grand  Mastership  of  the  Rite  was  con¬
ferred  on  Frederick,  Duke  of  Brunswick.

Another  Congress  was  held  in  1775,  at
Brunswick,  where  Hund  again  appeared.
Here  Findel,  who  seems  to  have  no  friendly
disposition  towards  Von  Hund,  charges  him
with  “indulgence  in  his  love  of  outward
pomp  and  show,”  a  charge  that  is  not  con¬
sistent  with  the  character  given  him  by
other  writers,  who  speak  of  his  modesty  of
demeanor.  The  question  of  the  Superiores
Incogniti,  or  U nknown  Superiors,  from  whom
Von  Hund  professed  to  derive  his  powers,
came  under  consideration.  His  replies
were  not  satisfactory.  He  denied  that  he
was  bound  to  give  any  explanations  at  all,
and  asserted  that  his  oath  precluded  him
from  saying  anything  more.  Confidence
in  him  now  declined,  and  the  Rite  to  which
he  was  so  much  attached,  and  of  which  he
had  been  the  founder  and  the  chief  sup¬
porter,  began  to  lose  its  influence.  The
clerical  branch  of  the  Rite  seceded,  and
formed  an  independent  Order,  and  the
Lodges  of  Strict  Observance  thenceforward
called  themselves  the  “  United  German
Lodges.”

With  his  failure  at  Brunswick,  the  func¬
tions  of  Von  Hund  ceased.  He  retired
altogether  from  the  field  of  Masonic  labor,
and  died,  in  the  fifty-fifth  year  of  his  age,  on
the  8th  of  November,  1776,  at  Meiningen,
in  Prussia.  The  members  of  the  Lodge
Minerva,  at  Leinsic,  struck  a  medal  in  com¬
memoration  of  him,  which  contains  on  the
obverse  an  urn  encircled  by  a  serpent,  the
symbol  of  immortality,  and  on  the  reverse
a  likeness  of  him,  which  is  said  to  be  ex¬
ceedingly  accurate.  A  copy  of  it  may  be
found  in  the  Taschenbuche  der  Freimaurerei,
and  in  the  American  Quarterly  Review  of
Freemasonry.

For  this  amiable  enthusiast,  as  he  cer¬
tainly  was  —  credulous  but  untiring  in  his


devotion  to  Masonry ;  deceived  but  enthu¬
siastic  ;  generous  and  kind  in  his  disposi¬
tion  ;  whose  heart  was  better  than  his  head
—  we  may  not  entertain  the  profoundest
veneration ;  but  we  cannot  but  feel  an  emo¬
tion  of  sympathy.  We  know  not  how
much  the  antagonism  and  contests  of  years,
and  final  defeat  and  failure,  may  have  em¬
bittered  his  days  or  destroyed  his  energy ;
but  we  do  know  that  he  ceased  the  warfare
of  life  while  still  there  ought  to  have  been
the  promise  of  many  years  of  strength  and
vigor.

Hungary.  Masonry  was  introduced
into  Hungary  about  the  middle  of  the
eighteenth  century.  In  1760,  a  Lodge,  ac¬
cording  to  Hund’s  Templar  system,  was
instituted  at  Presburg.  Smith  says  ( Use
and  Abuse,  p.  219,)  that  there  were  several
Lodges  there  in  1783,  but  none  working
under  the  English  Constitution.  Most
probably  they  received  their  Warrants  from
Germany.  In  1870,  there  were  seven
Lodges  in  Hungary.  On  the  30th  of  Jan¬
uary  in  that  year  these  Lodges  met  in  con¬
vention  at  Pesth,  and  organized  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Hungary.

Hutchinson,  William.  Of  all  the

Masonic  writers  of  the  last  century  there
was  no  one  who  did  more  to  elevate  the
spirit  and  character  of  the  Institution  than
William  Hutchinson  of  Barnard  Castle,  in
the  county  of  Durham,  England.  To  him
are  we  indebted  for  the  first  philosophical
explanation  of  the  symbolism  of  the  Order,
and  his  Spirit  of  Masonry  still  remains  a
priceless  boon  to  the  Masonic  student.

Hutchinson  was  born  in  1732,  and  died
April  7,  1814,  at  the  ripe  age  of  eighty-two
years.  He  was  by  profession  a  solicitor;
but  such  was  his  literary  industry,  that  a
very  extensive  practice  did  not  preclude
his  devotion  to  more  liberal  studies.  He
published  several  works  of  fiction,  which,
at  the  time,  were  favorably  received.  His
first  contribution  to  literature  was  The
Hermitage,  a  British  Story,  which  was  pub¬
lished  in  1772.  This  was  followed,  in  1773,
by  a  descriptive  work,  entitled  An  Excur¬
sion  to  the  Lakes  of  Westmoreland  and  Cum¬
berland.  In  1775,  he  published  The  Doubt¬
ful  Marriage,  and  in  1776  A  Week  in  a  Cot¬
tage,  and  A  Romance  after  the  Fashion  of
the  Castle  of  Otranto.  In  1778,  he  com¬
menced  as  a  dramatic  writer,  and  besides
two  tragedies,  Pygmalion,  King  of  Tyre  and
The  Tyrant  of  Onia,  which  were  never  acted,
he  also  wrote  The  Princess  of  Zanfara,  which
was  successfully  performed  at  several  of  the
provincial  theatres.

Hutchinson  subsequently  devoted  him¬
self  to  archaeological  studies,  and  became  a
prominent  member  of  the  Royal  Society  of
Antiquaries.  His  labors  in  this  direction


356


HUTCHINSON


HUTCHINSON


were  such  as  to  win  for  him  from  Nichols
the  title  of  “an  industrious  antiquary.”
He  published  in  1776  A  View  of  Northum¬
berland,  in  two  volumes;  in  1785, 1787,  and
1794,  three  consecutive  quarto  volumes  of
The  History  and  Antiquities  of  the  County
Palatinate  of  Durham  -,  and  in  1794,  in  two
quarto  volumes,  A  History  of  Cumberland,

—  works  which  are  still  referred  to  by  schol¬
ars  as  containing  valuable  information  on
the  subjects  of  which  they  treat,  and  are
an  evidence  of  the  learning  and  industry
of  the  author.

But  it  is  as  a  Masonic  writer  that  Hutch¬
inson  has  acquired  the  most  lasting  reputa¬
tion,  and  his  labors  as  such  have  made  his
name  a  household  word  in  the  Order.  He
was  for  some  years  the  Master  of  Barnard
Castle  Lodge,  where  he  sought  to  instruct
the  members  by  the  composition  and  deliv¬
ery  of  a  series  of  Lectures  and  Charges,
which  were  so  far  superior  to  those  then  in
use  as  to  attract  crowds  of  visitors  from
neighboring  Lodges  to  hear  him  and  to
profit  by  his  instructions.  Some  of  these
were  from  time  to  time  printed,  and  won  so
much  admiration  from  the  Craft  that  he  was
requested  to  make  a  selection,  and  publish
them  in  a  permanent  form.

Accordingly,  he  applied  in  1774,  for  per¬
mission  to  publish,  to  the  Grand  Lodge, —
which  then  assumed  to  be  a  rigid  censor  of
the  Masonic  press,  —  and,  having  obtained
it,  he  gave  to  the  Masonic  world  the  first
edition  of  his  now  celebrated  treatise  en¬
titled,  The  Spirit  of  Masonry,  in  Moral  and
Elucidatory  Lectures;  but  the  latter  part  of
the  title  was  omitted  in  all  the  subsequent
editions.  The  sanction  for  its  publication,
prefixed  to  the  first  edition,  has  an  almost
supercilious  sound,  when  we  compare  the
reputation  of  the  work  —  which  at  once
created  a  revolution  in  Masonic  literature

—  with  that  of  those  who  gave  the  sanction,
and  whose  names  are  preserved  only  by  the
official  titles  which  were  affixed  to  them.
The  sanction  is  in  these  words :

“  Whereas,  Brother  William  Hutchinson
has  compiled  a  book,  entitled  The  Spirit  of
Masonry,  and  has  requested  our  sanction
for  the  publication  thereof ;  we,  having
perused  the  said  book  and  finding  it  will  be
of  use  to  this  Society,  do  recommend  the
same.”  This  is  signed  by  the  Grand  Mas¬
ter  and  his  Deputy,  by  the  Grand  Wardens,
and  the  Grand  Treasurer  and  Secretary.
But  tbeir  judgment,  though  tamely  ex¬
pressed,  was  not  amiss.  A  century  has
since  shown  that  the  book  of  Hutchinson
has  really  been  “  of  use  to  the  Society.”  It
opened  new  thoughts  on  the  symbolism
and  philosophy  of  Masonry,  which,  worked
out  by  subsequent  writers,  have  given  to
Masonry  the  nigh  rank  it  now  holds,  and


has  elevated  it  from  a  convivial  association,
such  as  it  was  in  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century,  to  that  school  of  reli¬
gious  philosophy  which  it  now  is.  To  the
suggestions  of  Hutchinson,  HemmiDg  un¬
doubtedly  owed  that  noble  definition,  that
“Freemasonry  was  a  science  of  morality
veiled  in  allegory,  aud  illustrated  by  sym¬
bols.”

The  first  edition  of  The  Spirit  of  Mason¬
ry  was  published  in  1775,  the  second  in
1795,  the  third  in  1802,  the  fourth  in  1813,
the  fifth  in  1814,  and  the  sixth  in  1815,  all
except  the  last  in  the  lifetime  of  the  au¬
thor.  Several  subsequent  editions  have
been  published  both  in  this  country  and  in
Great  Britain.  In  1780  it  was  translated
into  German,  and  published  at  Berlin  un¬
der  the  title  of  Der  Geist  der  Freimaurerei,
in  moralischen  und  erldutemden  Vortragen.

Of  this  great  work  the  Craft  never  appear
to  have  had  but  one  opinion.  It  was  re¬
ceived  on  its  first  appearance  with  enthu¬
siasm,  and  its  popularity  among  Masonic
scholars  has  never  decreased.  Dr.  Oliver
says  of  it:  “  It  was  the  first  efficient  attempt
to  explain,  in  a  rational  and  scientific  man¬
ner,  the  true  philosophy  of  the  Order.  Dr.
Anderson  and  the  -writer  of  the  Gloucester
sermon  indicated  the  mine,  Calcott  opened
it,  and  Hutchinson  worked  it.  In  this
book  he  gives  to  the  science  its  proper  value.
After  explaining  his  design,  he  enters  copi¬
ously  on  the  rites,  ceremonies,  and  institu¬
tions  of  ancient  nations.  Then  he  dilates
on  the  Lodge,  with  its  ornaments,  furniture,
and  jewels;  the  building  of  the  Temple;
geometry  ;  and  after  explaining  the  third
degree  with  a  minuteness  which  is  highly
gratifying,  he  expatiates  on  secrecy,  char¬
ity,  and  brotherly  love;  and  sets  at  rest  all
the  vague  conjectures  of  cowans  and  unbe¬
lievers,  by  a  description  of  the  occupations
of  Masons  and  a  masterly  defence  of  our
peculiar  rites  and  ceremonies.”

The  peculiar  theory  of  Hutchinson  in
reference  to  the  symbolic  design  of  Mason-
ryis  set  forth  more  particularly  in  his  ninth
lecture,  entitled  “The  Master  Mason’s  Or¬
der.”  His  doctrine  was  that  the  lost  word
was  typical  of  the  lost  religious  purity,
which  had  been  occasioned  by  the  corrup¬
tions  of  the  Jewish  faith.  The  piety  which
had  planted  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem  had
been  expunged,  and  the  reverence  and
adoration  due  to  God  had  been  buried  in
the  filth  and  rubbish  of  the  world,  so  that
it  might  well  be  said  “  that  the  guide  to
heaven  was  lost,  and  the  master  of  the
works  of  righteousness  was  smitten.”  In
the  same  way  he  extends  the  symbolism.
“  True  religion,”  he  says,  “  was  fled.  Those
who  sought  her  through  the  wisdom  of
the  ancients  were  not  able  to  raise  her,


HUTCHINSON


IATRIC


357


She  eluded  the  grasp,  and  their  polluted
hands  were  stretched  forth  in  vain  for  her
restoration.  Those  who  sought  her  by  the
old  law  were  frustrated,  for  death  had  step¬
ped  between,  and  corruption  defiled  the
embrace.”

Hence  the  Hutchinsonian  theory  is,  that
the  third  degree  of  Masonry  symbolizes  the
new  law  of  Christ,  taking  the  place  of
the  old  law  of  Judaism,  which  had  become
dead  and  corrupt.  With  him,  Hiram  or
Huram  is  only  the  Greek  huramen,  “we
have  found  it,”  and  Acacia,  from  the  same
Greek,  signifies  freedom  from  sin;  and
“thus  the  Master  Mason  represents  a  man,
under  the  Christian  doctrine,  saved  from
the  grave  of  iniquity  and  raised  to  the  faith
of  salvation.”

Some  of  Hutchinson’s  etymologies  are
unquestionably  inadmissible;  as,  when  he
derives  Tubal  Cain  from  a  corruption  of  the
Greek,  tumbon  choeo,  “  I  prepare  my  sepul¬
chre,”  and  when  he  translates  the  substitute
word  as  meaning  “  I  ardently  wish  for  life.”
But  fanciful  etymologies  are  the  besetting
sin  of  all  antiquaries.  So  his  theory  of
the  exclusive  Christian  application  of  the
third  degree  will  not  be  received  as  the
dogma  of  the  present  day.  But  such  was
the  universally  recognized  theory  of  all  his


contemporaries.  Still,  in  his  enlarged  and
elevated,  views  of  the  symbolism  and  philo¬
sophy  of  Masonry  as  a  great  moral  and
religious  science,  he  was  immeasurably  in
advance  of  his  age.

In  his  private  life,  Hutchinson  was  greatly
respected  for  his  cultivated  mind  and  exten¬
sive  literary  acquirements,  while  the  suavity
of  his  manners  and  the  generosity  of  bis
disposition  secured  the  admiration  of  all
who  knew  him.  He  had  been  long  married
to  an  estimable  woman,  whose  death  was
followed  in  only  two  days  by  his  own,
and  they  were  both  interred  in  the  same
grave.

Ilutte.  A  word  equivalent  among  the
Stone-masons  of  Germany,  in  the  Middle
Ages,  to  the  English  word  Lodge.  Findel
defines  it  as  “a  booth  made  of  boards,
erected  near  the  edifice  that  was  being
built,  where  the  stone-cutters  kept  their
tools,  carried  on  their  work,  assembled,  and
most  probably  occasionally  eat  and  slept.”
These  hutten  accord  exactly  with  the
Lodges  which  Wren  describes  as  having
been  erected  by  the  English  Masons  around
the  edifice  they  were  constructing.

Huzza.  The  acclamation  in  the  Scot¬
tish  Rite.  In  the  old  French  rituals  it  is
generally  written  Iloschea.


I.


I.  A.  A.  T.  Reghellini  (i.  29,)  says
that  the  Rose  Croix  Masons  of  Germany
and  Italy  always  wear  a  ring  of  gold  or
silver,  on  which  are  engraved  these  letters,
the  initials  of  Lgnis,  Aer,  Aqua,  Terra,  in
allusion  to  the  Egyptian  mystical  doctrine
of  the  generation,  destruction,  and  regen¬
eration  of  all  things  by  the  four  elements,
fire,  air,  water,  and  earth  ;  which  doctrine
passed  over  from  the  Egyptians  to  the
Greeks,  and  was  taught  in  the  philosophy
of  Empedocles.  But  these  Rose  Croix
Masons,  I  think,  must  have  borrowed  their
doctrine  from  the  Gnostics.

I  Am  (hat  I  Am.  The  name  which
the  Grand  Architect  directed  Moses  to  use,
(Exod.  iii.  14,)  that  he  might  identify
himself  to  the  Israelites  as  the  messenger
sent  to  them  by  God.  It  is  one  of  the
modifications  of  the  Tetragrammaton,  and
as  such,  in  its  Hebrew  form  of  rvnx

rmN,  eheyeh  asher  eheyeh,  (the  e  pro¬
nounced  like  a  in  fate,)  has  been  adopted
as  a  significant  word  in  the  high  degrees  of


the  York,  American,  and  several  other
Rites.  The  original  Hebrew  words  are  act¬
ually  in  the  future  tense,  and  grammati¬
cally  mean  I  will  be  what  1  will  be;  but  all
the  versions  give  a  present  signification.
Thus,  the  Vulgate  has  it,  I  am  who  am;  the
Septuagint,  I  am  he  who  exists;  and  the
Arabic  paraphrase,  L  am  the  Eternal  who
passes  not  away.  The  expression  seems  in¬
tended  to  point  out  the  eternity  and  self¬
existence  of  God,  and  such  is  the  sense  in
which  it  is  used  in  Masonry.  See  Eheyeh
asher  ehejfeh.

lalrtc  Masonry.  From  ’carpis?),  the
art  of  medicine.  Ragon,  in  his  Orthodoxie
Maqonnique,  (p.  450,)  says  that  this  system
was  instituted  in  the  eighteenth  century,
and  that  its  adepts  were  occupied  in  the
search  for  the  universal  medicine.  It  must
therefore  have  been  a  Hermetic  Rite.  Ra¬
gon  knew  very  little  of  it,  and  mentions
only  one  degree,  called  the  “Oracle  of  Cos.”
The  island  of  Cos  was  the  birthplace  of
Hippocrates,  the  father  of  medicine,  and


358


IDIOT


ILLINOIS


to  him  the  degree  is  dedicated.  The  Order
or  Rite  has,  I  suppose,  no  longer  an  exist¬
ence.

Idiot.  Idiocy  is  one  of  the  mental  dis¬
qualifications  for  initiation.  This  doe3  not,
however,  include  a  mere  dulness  of  intel¬
lect  and  indocility  of  apprehension.  These
amount  only  to  stupidity,  and  “the  judg¬
ment  of  the  heavy  or  stupid  man,”  as  Dr.
Good  has  correctly  remarked,  “  is  often  as
sound  in  itself  as  that  of  the  man  of  more
capacious  comprehension.”  The  idiot  is
defined  by  Blackstone  as  “one  that  hath
had  no  understanding  from  his  nativity;
and  therefore  is  by  law  presumed  never
likely  to  attain  any.”  A  being  thus  men¬
tally  imperfect  is  incompetent  to  observe
the  obligations  or  to  appreciate  the  instruc¬
tions  of  Freemasonry.  It  is  true  that  the
word  does  not  occur  in  any  of  the  old  Con¬
stitutions,  but  from  their  general  tenor  it  is
evident  that  idiots  were  excluded,  because
“  cunning,”  or  knowledge  and  skill,  are
everywhere  deemed  essential  qualifications
of  a  Mason.  But  the  ritual  law  is  explicit
on  the  subject.

Idolatry.  The  worship  paid  to  any
created  object.  It  was  in  some  one  of  its
forms  the  religion  of  the  entire  ancient
world  except  the  Jews.  The  forms  of  idol¬
atry  are  generally  reckoned  as  four  in  num¬
ber.  1.  Fetichism,  the  lowest  form,  con¬
sisting  in  the  worship  of  animals,  trees,
rivers,  mountains,  and  stones.  2.  Sabian-
ism  or  Sabaism,  the  worship  of  the  sun,
moon,  and  stars.  3.  Sintooism,  or  the  wor¬
ship  of  deceased  ancestors  or  the  leaders
of  a  nation.  4.  Idealism,  or  the  worship
of  abstractions  or  mental  qualities.  Oli¬
ver  and  his  school  have  propounded  the
theory  that  among  the  idolatrous  nations
of  antiquity,  who  were,  of  course,  the  de¬
scendants,  in  common  with  the  monotheis¬
tic  Jews,  of  Noah,  there  were  the  remains
of  certain  legends  and  religious  truths
which  they  had  received  from  their  com¬
mon  ancestor,  but  which  had  been  greatly
distorted  and  perverted  in  the  system  which
they  practised.  This  system,  taught  in  the
Ancient  Mysteries,  he  called  “  the  Spurious
Freemasonry”  of  antiquity.

Iconology.  The  science  which  teaches
the  doctrine  of  images  and  symbolic  repre¬
sentations.  It  is  a  science  collateral  with
Masonry,  and  is  of  great  importance  to  the
Masonic  student,  because  it  is  engaged  in
the  consideration  of  the  meaning  and  his¬
tory  of  the  symbols  which  constitute  so
material  a  part  of  the  Masonic  system.

Idaho.  One  of  the  United  States  very
recently  settled.  In  1867  there  were  four
Lodges  in  what  was  then  the  Territory,
three  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ore¬
gon,  and  one  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Wash¬
ington  Territory.  In  that  year  these


Lodges  met  in  convention  and  organized
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Idaho.  The  Grand
Lodge  is  migratory,  holding  its  sessions  on
the  first  Monday  in  October,  at  such  place
as  may  be  determined  at  the  previous  ses¬
sion.

Ignc  Xatnra  Renoratnr  Inte¬
gra.  Bv  fire,  nature  is  perfectly  renewed.
See  I:.  N.\  R;.  Is.

Ignorance.  The  ignorant  Freema¬
son  is  a  drone  and  an  incumbrance  in  the
Order.  He  who  does  not  study  the  nature,
the  design,  the  history,  and  character  of  the
Institution,  but  from  the  hour  of  his  initia¬
tion  neither  gives  nor  receives  any  ideas
that  could  not  be  shared  by  a  profane,  is  of
no  more  advantage  to  Masonry  than  Ma¬
sonry  is  to  him.  The  true  Mason  seeks
light  that  darkness  may  be  dispelled,  and
knowledge  that  ignorance  may  be  removed.
The  ignorant  aspirant,  no  matter  how
loudly  he  may  have  asked  for  light,  is  still
a  blind  groper  in  the  dark.

Ili-IIo.  The  Kabbalistic  mode  of  read¬
ing  Ilo-hi,  one  of  the  forms  of  the  Tetra-
grammaton.  See  Ho-Hi.

I.  II.  S.  A  monogram,  to  which  va¬
rious  meanings  have  been  attached.  Thus,
these  letters  have  been  supposed  to  be  the
initials  of  In  hoc  signo ,  words  which  sur¬
rounded  the  cross  seen  by  Constantine.
But  that  inscription  was  in  Greek  ;  and  be¬
sides,  even  in  a  Latin  translation,  the  letter
V,  for  vinces,  would  be  required  to  complete
it.  The  Church  has  generally  accepted  the
monogram  as  containing  the  initials  of
Jesus  Hominum  Salvator,  Jesus  the  Saviour
of  Men;  a  sense  in  which  it  has  been
adopted  by  the  Jesuits,  who  have  taken  it

in  this  form,  I.  IT.  S.,  as  the  badge  of  their
society.  So,  too,  it  is  interpreted  by  the
Masonic  Templars,  on  whose  banners  it
often  appears.  A  later  interpretation  is  ad¬
vocated  by  the  Cambridge  Camden  So¬
ciety  in  a  work  published  by  them  on  the
subject.  In  this  work  they  contend  that
the  monogram  is  of  Greek  origin,  and  is
the  first  three  letters  of  the  Greek  name,
IH20Y2,  Jesus.  But  the  second  of  these
interpretations  is  the  one  most  generally
received.

Ijar.  The  eighth  month  of

the  Hebrew  civil  year.  It  corresponds  to
a  part  of  the  months  of  April  and  May.

Illinois.  The  first  Grand  Lodge  es¬
tablished  in  this  State  was  in  the  year  1822 ;
but  this  body  yielded  in  a  few  years  to  the
storm  of  an'ti-Masonry  which  swept  over
the  country,  and  ceased  to  exist.  Subse-

?uentlv,  Lodges  were  chartered  by  the
Irand  Lodges  of  Kentucky  and  other  juris¬
dictions,  and  on  the  20th  January,  1840,  a
convention  of  six  Lodges  was  heid  in  the
city  of  Jackson,  which  organized  the  Grand


ILLITERACY


ILLUMINATI


359


Lodge  of  Illinois.  The  seat  of  the  Grand
Lodge  is  Springfield.  A  Grand  Chapter,
Grand  Council,  and  Grand  Commandery
were  subsequently  established.

Illiteracy.  The  word  illiteracy,  as
signifying  an  ignorance  of  letters,  an  inca¬
pability  to  read  and  write,  suggests  the  in¬
quiry  whether  illiterate  persons  are  quali¬
fied  to  be  made  Masons.  There  can  be  no
doubt,  from  historic  evidence,  that  at  the
period  when  the  Institution  was  operative
in  its  character,  the  members  for  the  most
part  —  that  is,  the  great  mass  of  the  Fra¬
ternity —  were  unable  to  read  or  write.  At
a  time  when  even  kings  made  at  the  foot
of  documents  the  sign  of  the  cross,  “ pro
ignorantia  lilerarum,”  because  they  could
not  write  their  names,  it  could  hardly  be
expected  that  an  Operative  Mason  should
be  gifted  with  a  greater  share  of  education
than  his  sovereign.  But  the  change  of  the
society  from  Operative  to  Speculative  gave
to  it  an  intellectual  elevation,  and  the  phi¬
losophy  and  science  of  symbolism  which
was  then  introduced  could  hardly  be  under¬
stood  by  one  who  had  no  preliminary  edu¬
cation.  Accordingly,  the  provision  in  all
Lodges,  that  initiation  must  be  preceded
by  a  written  petition,  would  seem  to  indi¬
cate  that  no  one  is  expected  or  desired  to
apply  for  initiation  unless  he  can  comply
with  that  regulation,  by  writing,  or  at
least  signing,  such  a  petition.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  England  does  not  leave  this  prin¬
ciple  to  be  settled  by  implication,  but  in
express  words  requires  that'  a  candidate
shall  know  how  to  write,  by  inserting  in  its
Constitution  the  provision  that  a  candidate,
“previous  to  his  initiation,  must  subscribe
his  name  at  full  length  to  a  declaration.”
The  official  commentary  on  this,  in  an  ac¬
companying  note,  is,  that  “any  individual
who  cannot  write  is  consequently  ineligible
to  be  initiated  into  the  Order,”  and  this  is
now  the  very  generally  accepted  law.  The
ne  varietur  in  Masonic  diplomas,  which  fol¬
lows  the  signature  in  the  margin,  indicates
that  the  holder  is  required  to  know  how  to
sign  his  name.

Illuminated  Theosopliists.  A

modification  of  the  system  of  Pernetty  in¬
stituted  at  Paris  by  Benedict  Chastanier,
‘  who  subsequently  succeeded  in  introducing
it  into  London.  It  consisted  of  nine  de¬
grees,  for  an  account  of  which  see  Chastanier.

.  Illuminati.  This  is  a  Latin  word,
signifying  the.  enlightened,  and  hence  often
applied  in  Latin  diplomas  as  an  epithet  of
Freemasons.

Illuminati  of  Bavaria.  A  secret
society,  founded  on  May  1,  1776,  by  Adam
Weishaupt,  who  was  professor  of  canon  law
at  the  University  of  Ingoldstadt.  Its  found¬
er  at  first  called  it  the  Order  of  the  Per-


fectibilists ;  but  he  subsequently  gave  it  the
name  by  which  it  is  now  universally  known.
Its  professed  object  was,  by  the  mutual  assist¬
ance  of  its  members,  to  attain  the  highest
possible  degree  of  morality  and  virtue,  and
to  lay  the  foundation  for  the  reformation
of  the  world  by  the  association  of  good  men
to  oppose  the  progress  of  moral  evil.  To
give  to  the  Order  a  higher  influence,  Weis¬
haupt  connected  it  with  the  Masonic  insti¬
tution,  after  whose  system  of  degrees,  of
esoteric  instruction,  and  of  secret  modes  of
recognition,  it  was  organized.  It  has  thus
become  confounded  by  superficial  writers
with  Freemasonry,  although  it  never  could
be  considered  as  properly  a  Masonic  Rite.
Weishaupt,  though  a  reformer  in  religion
and  a  liberal  in  politics,  had  originally
been  a  Jesuit;  and  he  employed,  therefore,
in  the  construction  of  his  association,  the
shrewdness  and  subtlety  which  distinguish¬
ed  the  disciples  of  Loyola ;  and  having  been
initiated  in  1777  in  a  Lodge  at  Munich,  he
also  borrowed  for  its  use  the  mystical  or¬
ganization  which  was  peculiar  to  Freema¬
sonry.  In  this  latter  task  he  was  greatly
assisted  by  the  Baron  Von  Knigge,  a  zeal¬
ous  and  well-instructed  Mason,  who  joined
the  Illuminati  in  1780,  and  soon  became  a
leader,  dividing  with  Weishaupt  the  con¬
trol  and  direction  of  the  Order.

In  its  internal  organization  the  Order  of
Illuminati  was  divided  into  three  great
classes,  namely,  1.  The  Nursery ;  2.  Sym¬
bolic  Freemasonry;  and  3.  The  Mysteries  ;
each  of  which  was  subdivided  into  several
degrees,  making  ten  in  all,  as  in  the  follow¬
ing  table :

I.  Nursery.

After  a  ceremony  of  preparation  it  began :

1.  Novice.

2.  Minerval.

3.  Illuminatus  Minor.

II.  Symbolic  Freemasonry.

The  first  three  degrees  were  communi¬
cated  without  any  exact  respect  to  the  di¬
visions,  and  then  the  candidate  proceeded :

4.  Illuminatus  Major,  or  Scottish  Nov¬

ice.

5.  Illuminatus  Dirigens,  or  Scottish

Knight.

III.  The  Mysteries.

This  class  was  subdivided  into  the  Lea¬
ser  and  the  Greater  Mysteries.

The  Lesser  Mysteries  were:

6.  Presbyter,  Priest,  or  Epopt.

7.  Prince,  or  Regent.

The  Greater  Mysteries  were :

8.  Magus.

9.  Rex,  or  King.


360


ILLUMINATI


IMMANUEL


Any  one  otherwise  qualified  could  be
received  into  the  degree  of  Novice  at  the
age  of  eighteen ;  and  after  a  probation  of
not  less  than  a  year  he  was  admitted  to  the
second  and  third  degrees,  and  so  on  to  the
higher  degrees ;  though  but  few  reached  the
ninth  and  tenth  degrees,  in  which  the  in¬
most  secret  designs  of  the  Order  were  con¬
tained,  and,  in  fact,  it  is  said  that  these
last  degrees  were  never  thoroughly  worked
up.

The  Illuminati  selected  for  themselves
Order  names,  which  were  always  of  a  classi¬
cal  character.  Thus,  Weishaupt  called  him¬
self  Spartacus,  Knigge  was  Philo,  and
Zwack,  another  leader,  was  known  as  Cato.
They  gave  also  fictitious  names  to  coun¬
tries.  Ingoldstadt,  where  the  Order  origi¬
nated,  was  called  Eleusis;  Austria  was
Egypt,  in  reference  to  the  Egyptian  darkness
of  that  kingdom,  which  excluded  all  Ma¬
sonry  from  its  territories;  Munich  was
called  Athens,  and  Vienna  was  Rome.  The
Order  had  also  its  calendar,  and  the  months
were  designated  by  peculiar  names;  as,
Dimeli  for  January,  and  Bemeh  for  Feb¬
ruary.  They  had  also  a  cipher,  in  which
the  official  correspondence  of  the  members
was  conducted.  The  character  CD,  now  so
much  used  by  Masons  to  represent  a  Lodge,
was  invented  and  first  used  by  the  Illumi¬
nati.

The  Order  was  at  first  very  popular,  and
enrolled  no  less  than  two  thousand  names
upon  its  registers,  among  whom  were  some
of  the  most  distinguished  men  of  Germany.
It  extended  rapidly  into  other  countries,
and  its  Lodges  were  to  be  found  in  France,
Belgium,  Holland,  Denmark,  Sweden,  Po¬
land,  Hungary,  and  Italy.

The  original  design  of  Illuminism  was
undoubtedly  the  elevation  of  the  human
race.  Knigge,  who  was  one  of  its  most
prominent  working  members,  and  the  au¬
thor  of  several  of  its  degrees,  was  a  religious
man,  and  would  never  have  united  with  it
had  its  object  been,  as  has  been  charged,  to
abolish  Christianity.  But  it  cannot  be  de¬
nied,  that  in  process  of  time  abuses  had
crept  into  the  Institution,  and  that  by  the
influence  of  unworthy  men  the  system  be¬
came  corrupted ;  yet  the  coarse  accusations
of  such  writers  as  Barruel  and  Robison
are  known  to  be  exaggerated,  and  some  of
them  altogether  false.  The  Conversations-
Lexicon,  for  instance,  declares  that  the
society  had  no  influence  whatever  on  the
French  Revolution,  which  is  charged  upon
it  by  these  as  well  as  other  writers.

But  Illuminism  came  directly  and  pro¬
fessedly  in  conflict  with  the  Jesuits  and
with  the  Roman  Church,  whose  tendencies
were  to  repress  the  freedom  of  thought.
The  priests  became,  therefore,  its  active


enemies,  and  waged  war  so  successfully
against  it,  that  on  June  22,  1784,  the  Elec¬
tor  of  Bavaria  issued  an  edict  for  its  sup¬
pression.  Many  of  its  members  were  fined
or  imprisoned,  and  some,  among  whom
was  Weishaupt,  were  compelled  to  flee  the
country.  The  edicts  of  the  Elector  of  Ba¬
varia  were  repeated  in  March  and  August,
1785,  and  the  Order  began  to  decline,  so
that  by  the  end  of  the  last  century  it  had
ceased  to  exist.  Adopting  Masonry  only
as  a  means  of  its  own  more  successful
propagation,  and  using  it  only  as  inci¬
dental  to  its  own  organization,  it  exercised
tvhile  in  prosperity  no  favorable  influence
on  the  Masonic  institution,  nor  any  un¬
favorable  effect  on  it  by  its  dissolution.

Illuminati  of  Avignon.  See  Avig¬
non.

Illuminati  of  Stockholm.  An

Order  but  little  known ;  mentioned  by  Ra-
gon  in  his  Catalogue  as  having  been  insti¬
tuted  for  the  propagation  of  Martinism.

Illuminism.  The  system  or  Rite
practised  by  the  German  Illuminati  is  so
called.

Illustrious.  A  title  given  in  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  to  all
those  who  possess  the  thirty-second  or
thirty-third  degree.

Illustrious  Elect  of  tlic  Fifteen.

The  title  now  generally  given  to  the  Elect
of  Fifteen,  which  see.

Imitative  Societies.  A  title  some¬
times  given  to  those  secret  societies  which,
imitating  the  general  organization  of  Free¬
masonry,  differ  from  it  entirely  in  their
character  and  object.  Such,  in  the  last
century,  when  at  one  time  they  abounded,
were  the  Bucks,  the  Sawyers,  the  Gormo-
gons,  and  the  Gregorians ;  and,  in  the  pres¬
ent  century,  the  Odd  Fellows,  the  Good
Templars,  and  the  Knights  of  Pythias.
Most  of  them  imitate  the  Masons  in  their
external  appearance,  such  as  the  wearing
of  aprons,  collars,  and  jewels,  and  in  calling
their  places  of  meeting,  by  a  strange  mis¬
nomer,  Lodges.  But  in  these  points  is  their
only  resemblance  to  the  original  Institu¬
tion.

Immanuel.  A  Hebrew  word  signi¬
fying  “  God  with  us,”  from  immanu,

“  with  us,”  and  bx,  el,  “  God.”  It  was  the
symbolical  name  given  by  the  prophet  Isa¬
iah  to  the  child  who  was  announced  to
Ahaz  and  the  people  of  Judah  as  the  sign
which  God  would  give  of  their  deliverance
from  their  enemies,  and  afterwards  applied
by  the  Apostle  Matthew  to  the  Messiah
born  of  the  Virgin.  As  one  of  the  appel¬
lations  of  Christ,  it  has  been  adopted  as  a
significant  word  in  modern  Templarism,
where,  however,  the  form  of  Emanuel  is
most  usually  employed.


IMMORTALITY


IMPOSTORS


361


Immortality  of  the  Soul.  Very
wisely  has  Max  Muller  said,  ( Chips,  i.  45,)
that  “  without  a  belief  in  personal  immor¬
tality,  religion  is  surely  like  an  arch  resting
on  one  pillar,  like  a  bridge  ending  in  an
abyss;”  and  he  cites  passages  from  the
Vedas  to  show  that  to  the  ancient  Brah¬
mans  the  idea  was  a  familiar  one.  Indeed,
almost  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  with
whose  religious  faith  we  are  acquainted
recognize  the  dogma,  although  sometimes
in  vague  and,  perhaps,  materialistic  forms.

It  was  the  professed  teaching  of  the  An¬
cient  Mysteries,  where,  in  the  concluding
rites  of  their  initiation,  the  restoration  of
the  hero  of  their  legend  was  a  symbol  of
the  immortal  life.  So,  too,  the  same  doc¬
trine  is  taught  by  a  similar  legendary  and
symbolic  method  in  the  third  degree  of
Masonry.

Archdeacon  Mant  thus  describes  the  dif¬
ferences,  in  the  teaching  of  this  doctrine  of
immortality,  between  what  he  calls,  after
the  school  of  Oliver,  the  spurious  and  the
true  Freemasonry:

“  Whereas  the  heathens  had  taught  this
doctrine  only  by  the  application  of  a  fable
to  their  purpose,  the  wisdom  of  the  pious
Grand  Master  of  the  Israelitish  Masons
took  advantage  of  a  real  circumstance,
which  would  more  forcibly  impress  the
sublime  truths  he  intended  to  inculcate
upon  the  minds  of  all  brethren.”

It  will  be  doubted  by  some  of  our  modern
sceptics  whether  the  Hiramic  myth  is  enti¬
tled  to  more  authenticity  as  an  historic
narrative  than  the  Osiric  or  the  Diony¬
sian;  but  it  will  not  be  denied  that,  while
they  all  taught  the  same  dogma  of  immor¬
tality,  the  method  of  teaching  by  symbolism
was  in  all  the  same.

Immovable  Jewels.  See  Jewels  of
a  Lodge.

Implements.  The  Operative  Free¬
masons  of  the  Middle  Ages  gave  to  certain
of  their  implements  —  the  most  important
of  which  were  the  square,  the  compasses,
the  stone-hammer,  or  gavel,  and  the  foot-
rule —  a  special  symbolic  meaning.  When
the  Operative  Institution  was  merged  in  the
Speculative,  the  custom  of  thus  spiritual¬
izing,  as  it  was  called,  these  implements
was  continued;  but  the  system  of  symbolic
instruction  has  been  so  greatly  enlarged
and  improved  as  to  constitute,  in  fact,  the
characteristic  feature  of  modern  Freema¬
sonry, — a  feature  which  widely  distinguishes
it  from  all  other  societies,  whether  secret  or
open.  Thus,  the  twenty-four  inch  gauge
and  gavel  are  bestowed  upon  the  Entered
Apprentice  because  these  are  the  imple¬
ments  used  in  the  quarries  in  hewing  the
stones  and  fitting  them  for  the  builder’s  use,
an  occupation  which,  for  its  simplicity,  is
2  V


properly  suited  to  the  unskilled  apprentice.
The  square,  level,  and  plumb  are  employed
in  the  still  further  preparation  of  these
stones  and  in  adjusting  them  to  their  proper
positions.  This  is  the  labor  of  the  crafts¬
men,  and  hence  to  the  Fellow  Craft  are
they  presented.  But  the  work  is  not  com-
leted  until  the  stones  thus  adjusted  have
een  accurately  examined  by  the  master
workman,  and  permanently  secured  in  their
places  by  cement.  This  is  accomplished
by  the  trowel,  and  hence  this  implement  is
intrusted  to  the  Master  Mason.  Thus,  the
tools  attached  to  each  degree  admonish  the
Mason,  as  an  Apprentice,  to  prepare  his
mind  for  the  reception  of  the  great  truths
which  are  hereafter  to  be  unfolded  to  him ;
as  a  Fellow  Craft,  to  mark  their  importance
and  adapt  them  to  their  proper  uses ;  and
as  a  Master,  to  adorn  their  beauty  by  the
practice  of  brotherly  love  and  kindness,  the
cement  that  binds  all  Masons  in  one  com¬
mon  fraternity.

There  is  no  doubt,  as  Findel  says,  (Hist.,
68,)  that  the  stone-masons  were  not  the
first  who  symbolized  the  implements  of
their  craft.  But  they  had  reason,  above  all
other  gilds,  for  investing  them  with  a  far
higher  worth,  and  associating  them  with  a
spiritual  meaning,  on  account  of  the  sacred
calling  to  which  they  were  devoted.  By
the  erection  of  churches,  the  Master  Mason
not  only  perpetuated  his  own  name,  but  as¬
sisted  in  giving  glory  to  God,  in  spreading
the  knowledge  of  Christianity,  and  in
stimulating  to  the  practice  of  the  Christian
virtues.  And  hence  the  church-building
Masons  naturally  gave  a  more  sacred  sig¬
nification  in  their  symbolism  to  the  imple¬
ments  employed  in  such  holy  purposes.
And  thus  it  was  that  they  transmitted  to
their  successors,  the  Speculative  Masons,
the  same  sacred  interpretation  of  their
symbols.  Modern  Freemasonry  has  been
derived  from  an  association  of  church
architects,  and  this  accounts  for  the  reli¬
gious  character  of  its  symbolism.  Had  it
been  the  offspring  of  the  Templars,  as
Ramsay  contends,  its  symbolism  would
have  been  undoubtedly  military,  somewhat
like  that  employed  by  St.  Paul  in  his
epistle  to  the  Ephesians.

Impostors.  Impostors  in  Masonry
may  be  either  profanes  who,  never  having
been  initiated,  yet  endeavor  to  pass  them¬
selves  for  regular  Freemasons,  or  Masons
who,  having  been  expelled  or  suspended
from  the  Order,  seek  to  conceal  the  fact  and
still  claim  the  privileges  of  members  in
good  standing.  The  false  pretensions  of
the  former  class  are  easily  detected,  be¬
cause  their  real  ignorance  must  after  a
proper  trial  become  apparent.  The  latter
class,  having  once  been  invested  with  the


362


m


INCORPORATION


proper  instructions,  can  stand  the  test  of  an
examination ;  and  their  true  position  must
be  discovered  only  by  information  derived
from  the  Lodges  which  have  suspended  or
expelled  them.  The  Tiler’s  oath  is  in¬
tended  to  meet  each  of  these  cases,  because
it  requires  every  strange  visitor  to  declare
that  he  has  been  lawfully  initiated,  and
that  he  is  in  good  standing.  But  perjury
added  to  imposture  will  easily  escape  this
test.  Hence  the  necessity  for  the  utmost
caution,  and  therefore  the  Charges  of  1722
say,  “  You  are  cautiously  to  examine  a
strange  brother  in  such  a  method  as  pru¬
dence  shall  direct  you,  that  you  may
not  be  imposed  on  by  an  ignorant,  false,
pretender,  whom  you  are  to  reject  with  con¬
tempt  and  derision,  and  beware  of  giving
him  any  hints  of  knowledge.”  The  Ma¬
sonic  rule  is,  that  it  is  better  that  ninety
and  nine  true  brethren  be  rejected  than
that  one  impostor  be  admitted.

In  Activity.  When  a  Lodge  is  per¬
forming  all  its  duties  and  functions,  and  is
regularly  represented  in  the  Grand  Lodge,
it  is  said  to  be  in  activity,  in  contradistinc¬
tion  to  a  Lodge  which  has  ceased  to  work
or  hold  communications,  which  is  said  to
be  dormant.

Inauguration.  A  word  applied  by
the  ancient  Romans  to  the  ceremony  by
which,  after  the  augurs  had  been  consulted,
some  thing  or  person  was  solemnly  conse¬
crated.  The  consecration  of  a  Master  of  a
Lodge  to  his  office,  which  is  equivalent  to
the  ancient  inauguration  of  a  priest  or
king,  is  in  Masonic  language  called  an  In¬
stallation,  which  see.

Incense.  The  use  of  incense  as  a
part  of  the  divine  worship  was  common  to
all  the  nations  of  antiquity.  Among  the
Hebrews,  the  Egyptians,  and  the  Hindus  it
seems  to  have  been  used  for  no  other  pur¬
poses  ;  but  the  Persians  burnt  it  also  before
the  king.  The  Roman  Catholic  Church  has
borrowed  the  usage  from  the  ancients  ;  and
the  burning  of  incense  in  certain  sacred
rites  is  also  practised  in  Masonry,  especially
in  the  high  degrees.  In  Scripture,  incense
is  continually  spoken  of,  both  in  the  Old
and  the  New  Testaments,  as  a  symbol  of
prayer.  Thus  the  Psalmist  says,  (cxli.  2,)
“  Let  my  prayer  be  set  before  thee  as  in¬
cense.1’  It  has  in  Masonry  a  similar  signi¬
fication  ;  and  hence  the  pot  of  incense  has
been  adopted  as  a  symbol  in  the  third  de¬
gree,  typifying  the  pure  heart  from  which
prayers  and  aspirations  arise,  as  incense
does  from  the  pot  or  incensorium,  as  an
acceptable  sacrifice  to  the  Deity.

Inchoate  Lodges.  From  the  Latin,
inchoatus,  unfinished,  incomplete.  Lodges
working  under  the  dispensation  of  the
Grand  Master  are  said  to  be  “  inchoate  ”  or


incomplete,  because  they  do  not  possess  all
the  rights  and  prerogatives  that  belong  to
a  Lodge  working  under  the  Warrant  of
constitution  of  a  Grand  Lodge.  The  same
term  is  applied  to  Chapters  which  work
under  the  dispensation  of  a  Grand  High
Priest.  See  Lodges  under  Dispensation.

Incommunicable.  The  Tetra-
grammaton,  so  called  because  it  was  not
common  to,  and  could  not  be  bestowed
upon,  nor  shared  by,  any  other  being.  It
was  proper  to  the  true  God  alone.  Thus
Drusius  ( Tetragrammaton ,  sire  de  Nomine
Dei  proprio,  p.  108,)  says,  “  Nomen  quatuor
literarum  proprie  et  absolute  non  tribui
nisi  Deo  vero.  Unde  doctores  catholici  di-
cunt  incommunicable  [not  common]  esse
creaturae.”

That  is:  “The  name  of  four  letters,
which  is  not  to  be  attributed,  properly  and
absolutely,  except  to  the  true  God.  Whence
the  Catholic  doctors  say  that  it  is  incom¬
municable,  not  common  to  or  to  be  shared
by  any  creature.”  Oliver,  in  his  Symbolic
Dictionary,  commits  a  curious  blunder  in
supposing  that  the  Incommunicable  Name
is  the  Name  not  to  be  communicated  to  or
pronounced  by  any  one;  thus  incorrectly
confounding  the  words  incommunicable  and
ineffable.  Although  the  two  epithets  are
applied  to  the  same  name,  yet  the  qualities
of  incommunicability  and  ineffability  are
very  different.

Incorporation.  By  an  act  of  in¬
corporation,  the  supreme  legislature  of  a
country  creates  a  corporation  or  body  poli¬
tic,  which  is  defined  by  Mr.  Kyd  (  Corp.,  i.
13,)  to  be  “  a  collection  of  many  individuals
united  in  one  body,  under  a  special  denomi¬
nation,  having  perpetual  succession  under
an  artificial  form,  and  vested  by  the  policy
of  the  law  with  a  capacity  of  acting  in  several
respects  as  an  individual,  particularly  of
taking  and  granting  property,  contracting
obligations,  and  of  suing  and  being  sued ;
of  enjoying  privileges  and  immunities  in
common,  and  of  exercising  a  variety  of  po¬
litical  rights.”  Some  Grand  Lodges  in  this
country  are  incorporated  by  act  of  the  Gen¬
eral  Assembly  of  their  respective  States;
others  are  not,  and  these  generally  hold
their  property  through  Trustees.  In  1768,
an  effort  was  made  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  to  petition  Parliament  for  incor¬
poration,  and  after  many  discussions  the
question  was  submitted  to  the  Lodges;  a
large  majority  of  whom  having  agreed  to
the  measure,  a  bill  was  introduced  in  Par¬
liament  by  the  Deputy  Grand  Master,  but,
being  approved  on  its  second  reading,  at
the  request  of  several  of  the  Fraternity,
who  had  petitioned  the  House  against  it,
it  was  withdrawn  by  the  mover,  and  thus
the  design  of  an  incorporation  fell  to  the


INDEFEASIBLE


INDUCTOR


3G3


ground.  Perhaps  the  best  system  of  Ma¬
sonic  incorporation  in  existence  is  that  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina.  There
the  act,  by  which  the  Grand  Lodge  was  in¬
corporated,  in  1817,  delegates  to  that  body
the  power  of  incorporating  its  subordi¬
nates  ;  so  that  a  Lodge,  whenever  it  receives
from  the  Grand  Lodge  a  Warrant  of  con¬
stitution,  acquires  thereby  at  once  all  the
rights  of  a  corporate  body,  which  it  ceases
to  exercise  whenever  the  said  Warrant  is
revoked  by  the  Grand  Lodge.

Objections  have  been  made  to  the  incor¬
poration  of  Lodges  in  consequence  of  some
of  the  legal  results  which  would  follow.
An  incorporated  Lodge  becomes  subject  to
the  surveillance  of  the  courts  of  law,  from
which  an  unincorporated  Lodge  is  exempt.
Thus,  a  Mason  expelled  by  an  unincorpo¬
rated  Lodge  must  look  for  his  redress  to  the
Grand  lodge  alone.  But  if  the  Lodge  be
incorporated,  he  may  apply  to  the  courts
for  a  restoration  of  his  franchise  as  a  mem¬
ber.  Masonic  discipline  would  thus  be
seriously  affected.  The  objection  to  incor¬
poration  is,  I  think,  founded  on  good  rea¬
sons.

Indefeasible.  Unavoidable,  that
which  cannot  be  voided  or  taken  away.
The  word  is  thus  used  in  the  second  of
the  Charges  of  1722,  where,  speaking  of  a
brother  who  has  been  guilty  of  treason  or
rebellion,  it  is  said  that  he  cannot  for  this
cause  be  expelled  from  the  Lodge,  and  that
“his  relation  to  it  remains  indefeasible .”  It
is  a  law  term,  which  is  usually  applied  to
an  estate  or  right  which  cannot  be  defeated.

Indelibility.  The  indelibility  of  the
Masonic  character,  as  expressed  in  the
often  repeated  maxim,  “once  a  Mason,
always  a  Mason,”  is  universally  admitted.
That  is  to  say.  no  voluntary  or  even  forced
withdrawal  from  the  Order  can  cancel  cer¬
tain  obligations  which  have  been  contracted,
and  place  the  person  withdrawing  in  pre¬
cisely  the  sam»  relative  position  towards
the  Institution  that  he  had  occupied  before
his  initiation.

Indented  Tarsel.  In  the  old  rituals
these  words  were  used  for  what  is  now  called
the  tessellated  border.  See  Tarsel.

Indented  Tessel.  The  ornamented
border  which  surrounds  the  Mosaic  pave¬
ment.  See  Tessellated  Border.

India.  In  1728,  Lord  Kingston, Grand
Master  of  England,  granted  a  Deputation
to  George  Pomfret,  Esq.,  for  Bengal,  in  the
East  Indies,  but  no  action  seems  to  have
been  taken,  under  that  authority,  until
1740,  in  which  year  the  Lodge  Star  in  the
East,  No.  70  on  the  English  Register,  was
established  at  Calcutta;  and  this  may  there¬
fore  be  considered  as  the  era  of  the  intro¬
duction  of  Freemasonry  into  India.  In


Hutchinson’s  List  of  Lodges  we  find  the
next  established  at  Madras  in  1752 ;  a  third
at  Bombay  in  1757 ;  and  a  fourth  at  Cal¬
cutta  in  1761.  From  that  time  Masonry
made  rapid  progress  in  India,  and  in  1779
there  was  scarcely  a  town  of  importance
in  Hindustan  in  which  there  was  not  a
Lodge.  The  dissensions  of  the  Ancients
and  the  Moderns,  which  commenced  in
England  in  1738,  unhappily  spread  to  In¬
dia,  and  an  Ancient  York  Lodge  was  estab¬
lished  on  the  coast  of  Coromandel.  This
subsequently  voluntarily  surrendered  its
Warrant,  and  all  differences  were  reconciled
in  1787,  by  the  establishment  of  a  Provin¬
cial  Grand  Lodge,  of  which  Brigadier-Gen¬
eral  Horne  was  appointed  Provincial  Grand
Master  by  the  Duke  of  Cumberland.  Tem-
plarism  and  Royal  Arch  Masonry  were  sub¬
sequently  introduced,  and  Lodges,  Chap¬
ters,  and  Commanderies  are  now  in  success¬
ful  operation.

Indiana.  Freemasonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  the  State  of  Indiana  in  1807,
by  the  establishment  of  Vincennes  Lodge,
No.  15,  at  Vincennes,  under  a  Warrant
granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Kentucky.
Five  other  Lodges  were  subsequently  char¬
tered  by  the  same  authority.  On  Dec.  3,

1817,  a  convention  assembled  at  Corydon,
at  which  were  present  the  representatives
of  six  chartered  Lodges,  and  two  under  dis¬
pensation  from  Kentucky,  and  one  under
dispensation  from  Ohio.  The  convention,
having  taken  the  preliminary  steps,  ad¬
journed  to  meet  at  Madison  on  Jan.  12,

1818,  on  which  day  the  Grand  Lodge  was
organized.

The  Grand  Chapter  was  established  in
1845;  the  Grand  Commandery  on  May  16,
1854,  and  the  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and
Select  Masters  on  Dec.  11,  1855.

Indiflfcrcnts.  A  secret  society  of
men  and  women  established  in  Paris,  in
1738,  in  imitation  of  Freemasonry.  The
object  of  the  society  was  to  protect  its
members  from  the  influence  of  love,  and
hence  it  wore,  as  an  appropriate  device,  a
jewel  representing  an  icicle.

Induction.  1.  The  Master  of  a
Lodge,  when  installed  into  office,  is  said  to
be  inducted  into  the  Oriental  Chair  of  King
Solomon.  The  same  term  is  applied  to
the  reception  of  a  candidate  into  the  Past
Master's  degree.  The  word  is  derived  from
the  language  of  the  law,  where  the  giving  a
clerk  or  parson  possession  of  his  benefice  is
called  his  induction.  2.  Induction  is  also
used  to  signify  initiation  into  the  degree
called  Thrice  Illustrious  Order  of  the
Cross.

Inductor.  The  Senior  and  Junior
Inductors  are  officers  in  a  Council  of  the
Thrice  Illustrious  Order  of  the  Cross,  cor-


3G4


INDUSTRY


INHERENT


responding  to  the  Senior  and  Junior  Dea¬
cons.

Industry.  A  virtue  inculcated
amongst  Masons,  because  by  it  they  are
enabled  not  only  to  support  themselves
and  families,  but  to  contribute  to  the  re¬
lief  of  worthy  distressed  brethren.  “All
Masons,”  say  the  Charges  of  1722,  “shall
work  honestly  on  working  days  that  they
may  live  creditably  on  holy  days.”  The
Masonic  symbol  of  industry  is  the  beehive,
which  is  used  in  the  third  degree.

Ineffable  Degrees.  From  the  Latin
word,  ineffabilis,  that  which  cannot  or  ought
not  to  be  spoken  or  expressed.  The  de¬
grees  from  the  fourth  to  the  fourteenth
inclusive  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  and  are  so  called  because  they
are  principally  engaged  in  the  investigation
and  contemplation  of  the  Ineffable  name.

Ineffable  Name.  It  was  forbidden
to  the  Jews  to  pronounce  the  Tetragramma-
ton  or  sacred  name  of  God;  a  reverential
usage  which  is  also  observed  in  Masonry.
Hence  the  Tetragrammaton  is  called  the
Ineffable  Name.  As  in  Masonry,  so  in  all
the  secret  societies  of  antiquity,  much  mys¬
tery  has  been  attached  to  the  Divine  Name,
which  it  was  considered  unlawful  to  pro¬
nounce,  and  for  which  some  other  word
was  substituted.  Adonai  wras  among  the
Hebrews  the  substitute  for  the  Tetragram¬
maton.

Ineligible.  Who  are  and  who  are  not
ineligible  for  initiation  into  the  mysteries
of  Freemasonry  is  treated  of  under  the
Lead  of  Qualifications,  which  see. .

Information,  Lawful.  One  of  the
modes  of  recognizing  a  stranger  as  a  true
brother,  is  from  the  “lawful  information”
of  a  third  party.  No  Mason  can  lawfully
give  information  of  another’s  qualifications
unless  he  has  actually  tested  him  by  the
strictest  trial  and  examination,  or  knows
that  it  has  been  done  by  another.  But  it
is  not  every  Mason  who  is  competent  to  give
“  lawful  information.”  Ignorant  and  un¬
skilful  brethren  cannot  do  so,  because  they
are  incapable  of  discovering  truth  or  of  de¬
tecting  error.  A  “  rusty  Mason  ”  should
never  attempt  to  examine  a  stranger,  and
certainly,  if  he  does,  his  opinion  as  to  the
result  is  worth  nothing.  If  the  informa¬
tion  given  is  on  the  ground  that  the  party
who  is  vouched  for  has  been  seen  sitting
in  a  Lodge,  care  must  be  taken  to  inquire
if  it  was  a  “just  and  legally  constituted
Lodge  of  Master  Masons.”  A  person  may
forget  from  the  lapse  of  time,  and  vouch
for  a  stranger  as  a  Master  Mason,  when  the
Lodge  in  which  he  saw  him  was  only
opened  in  the  first  or  second  degree.  In¬
formation  given  by  letter,  or  through  a
third  party,  is  irregular.  The  person  giving


the  information,  the  one  receiving  it,  and
the  one  of  whom  it  is  given,  should  all  be
present  at  the  same  time,  for  otherwise
there  would  be  no  certainty  of  identity.
The  information  must  be  positive,  not
founded  on  belief  or  opinion,  but  derived
from  a  legitimate  source.  And,  lastly,  it
must  not  have  been  received  casually,  but
for  the  very  purpose  of  being  used  for
Masonic  purposes.  For  one  to  say  to  an¬
other,  in  the  course  of  a  desultory  conver¬
sation,  “  A.  B.  is  a  Mason,”  is  not  sufficient.
He  may  not  be  speaking  with  due  caution,
under  the  expectation  that  his  words  will
be  considered  of  weight.  He  must  say
something  to  this  effect:  “I  know  this  man
to  be  a  Master  Mason,  for  such  or  such
reasons,  and  you  may  safely  recognize  him
as  such.”  This  alone  will  ensure  the  neces¬
sary  care  and  proper  observance  of  pru¬
dence.  .

Inherent  Rights  of  a  Grand

Master.  This  has  been  a  subject  of  fer¬
tile  discussion  among  Masonic  jurists,  al¬
though  only  a  few  have  thought  proper  to
deny  the  existence  of  such  rights.  Upon
the  theory  which,  however  recently  con¬
troverted,  has  very  generally  been  recog¬
nized,  that  Grand  Masters  existed  before
Grand  Lodges  were  organized,  it  must  be
evident  that  the  rights  of  a  Grand  Master
are  of  two  kinds  —  those,  namely,  which
he  derives  from  the  Constitution  of  a  Grand
Lodge  of  which  he  has  been  made  the  pre¬
siding  officer,  and  those  which  exist  in  the
office  independent  of  any  Constitution,  be¬
cause  they  are  derived  from  the  landmarks
and  ancient  usages  of  the  Craft.  The  rights
and  prerogatives  which  depend  on  and  arc
prescribed  by  the  Constitution  may  be
modified  or  rescinded  by  that  instrument.
They  differ  in  different  jurisdictions,  be¬
cause  one  Grand  Lodge  may  confer  more
or  less  power  upon  its  presiding  officer  than
another;  and  they  differ  at  different  times,
because  the  Constitution  *f  every  Grand
Lodge  is  subject,  in  regard  to  its  internal
regulations,  to  repeated  alteration  and
amendment.  These  may  be  called  the  acci-
den  tal  rights  ofa  Grand  Master,  because  they
are  derived  from  the  accidental  provisions
of  a  Grand  Lodge,  and  have  in  them  noth¬
ing  essential  to  the  integrity  of  the  office.
It  is  unnecessary  to  enumerate  them,  be¬
cause  they  may  be  found  in  varied  modifi¬
cations  in  the  Constitutions  of  all  Grand
Lodges.  But  the  rights  and  prerogatives
which  Grand  Masters  are  supposed  to  have
possessed,  not  as  the  presiding  officers  of
an  artificial  body,  but  as  the  rulers  of  the
Craft  in  general,  before  Grand  Lodges  came
into  existence,  and  which  are  dependent,
not  on  any  prescribed  rules  which  may  be
enacted  to-day  and  repealed  to-morrow.


IN


INNOVATIONS


3  Go


but  on  the  long-continued  usages  of  the
Order  and  the  concessions  of  the  Craft  from
time  out  of  mind,  inhere  in  the  office,  and
cannot  be  augmented  or  diminished  by
the  action  of  any  authority,  because  they
are  landmarks,  and  therefore  unchangeable.
These  are  called  the  inherent  rights  of  a
Grand  Master.  They  comprise  the  right
to  preside  over  the  Craft  whenever  assem¬
bled,  to  grant  dispensations,  and,  as  a  part
of  that  power,  to  make  Masons  at  sight.

In  Hoc  Signo  Vinces.  On  the
Grand  Standard  of  a  Commandery  of
Knights  Templars  these  words  are  inscribed
over  “  a  blood-red  Passion  Cross,”  and  they
constitute  in  part  the  motto  of  the  Ameri¬
can  branch  of  the  Order.  Their  meaning,
“  by  this  sign  thou  shalt  conquer,”  is  a  sub¬
stantial,  but  not  literal,  translation  of  the
original  Greek,  ev  tcvtu  visa.  For  the  ori¬
gin  of  the  motto,  we  must  go  back  to  a
well-known  legend  of  the  church,  which
has,  however,  found  more  doubters  than
believers  among  the  learned.  Eusebius,
who  wrote  a  life  of  Constantine,  says  that
while  the  emperor  was  in  Gaul,  in  the  year
312,  preparing  for  war  with  his  rival,  Max-
entius,  about  the  middle  hours  of  the  day,
as  the  sun  began  to  verge  towards  its  set¬
ting,  he  saw  in  the  heavens,  with  his  own
eyes,  the  sun  surmounted  with  the  trophy
of  the  cross,  which  wTas  composed  of  light,
and  a  legend  annexed,  which  said  “  by  this
conquer.”  This  account  Eusebius  affirms  to
be  in  the  words  of  Constantine.  Lactan-
tius,  who  places  the  occurrence  at  a  later
date  and  on  the  eve  of  a  battle  with  Max-
entius,  in  which  the  latter  was  defeated,
relates  it  not  as  an  actual  occurrence,  but
as  a  dream  or  vision ;  and  this  is  now  the
generally  received  opinion  of  those  who  do
not  deem  the  whole  legend  a  fabrication.
On  the  next  day  Constantine  had  an  image
of  this  cross  made  into  a  banner,  called  the
labarum,  which  he  ever  afterwards  used  as
the  imperial  standard.  Eusebius  describes
it  very  fully.  It  was  not  a  Passion  Cross,
such  as  is  now  used  on  the  modern  Tem¬
plar  standard,  but  the  monogram  of  Christ.
The  shaft  was  a  very  long  spear.  On  the
top  was  a  crown  composed  of  gold  and  pre¬
cious  stones,  and  containing  the  sacred
symbol,  namely,  the  Greek  letter  rho  or  P,
intersected  by  the  chi  or  X,  which  two  let¬
ters  are  the  first  and  second  of  the  name
XPI2T02,  or  CHRIST.  If,  then,  the  Tem¬
plars  retain  the  motto  on  their  banner,  they
should,  for  the  sake  of  historical  accuracy,
discard  the  Passion  Cross,  and  replace  it
with  the  Constantinian  Chronogram,  or
Cross  of  the  Labarum.  But  the  truth  is,
that  the  ancient  Templars  used  neither  the
Passion  Cross,  nor  that  of  Constantine,  nor
yet  the  motto  in  hoc  signo  vinccs  on  their


standard.  Their  only  banner  was  the  black
and  white  Beauseant,  and  at  the  bottom  of
it  was  inscribed  their  motto,  “Non  nobis
Domine,  non  nobis,  sed  nomini  tuo  da  glo-
riam,”  —  not  unto  us,  0  Lord,  not  unto  us,
but  unto  thee  give  the  glory.  This  was  the
song  or  shout  of  victory  sung  by  the  Tem¬
plars  when  triumphant  in  battle.

In  Mcmoriam.  Lat.  As  a  memo¬
rial.  Words  frequently  placed  at  the  heads
of  pages  in  the  transactions  of  Grand
Lodges  on  which  are  inscribed  the  names
of  brethren  who  have  died  during  the  past
year.  The  fuller  phrase,  of  which  they  are
an  abbreviated  form,  is  “  In  perpetuam  rei
memoriam,”  As  a  'perpetual  memorial  of  the
event.  Words  often  inscribed  on  pillars
erected  in  commemoration  of  some  person
or  thing.

Initiate.  ( Initiatus .)  1.  The  fifth  and
last  degree  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple  ;  2.
The  eleventh  degree  of  the  Rite  ofPhilale-
thes ;  3.  The  candidate  in  any  of  the  de¬
grees  of  Masonry  is  called  an  Initiate.

Initiated  Knight  and  Brother
of  Asia.  The  thirty-second  degree  of  the
Order  of  Initiated  Brothers  of  Asia.  See
Asia,  Brothers  of.

Initiate  in  the  Egyptian  Se¬
crets.  The  second  degree  in  the  Rite  of
African  Architects.

Initiate  in  the  Mysteries.  The

twenty-first  degree  in  the  Metropolitan
Chapter  of  France.

Initiate  in  the  Profound  Mys¬
teries.  The  sixty-second  degree  of  the
collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France.

Initiation.  A  term  used  by  the  Ro¬
mans  to  designate  admission  into  the  mys¬
teries  qf  their  sacred  and  secret  rites.  It
is  derived  from  the  word  initia,  which  sig¬
nifies  the  first  principles  of  a  science.  Thus
Justin  {Lib.  xi.,c.  7,)  says  ofMida,  king  of
Phrygia,  that  he  was  initiated  into  the
mysteries  by  Orpheus.  “  Ah  Orpheo  sacro-
rum  solemnibus  initiatus.”  The  Greeks
used  the  term  M vcraytoyia,  from  fiwrr/piov,  a
mystery.  From  the  Latin,  the  Masons
have  adopted  the  word  to  signify  a  recep¬
tion  into  their  Order.  It  is  sometimes  spe¬
cially  applied  to  a  reception  into  the  first
degree,  hut  he  who  has  been  made  an  En¬
tered  Apprentice  is  more  correctly  said  to
be  Entered.  See  Mysteries.

Inner  Guard.  An  officer  of  a  Lodge,
according  to  the  English  system,  whose
functions  correspond  in  some  particulars
with  those  of  tne  Junior  Deacon  in  the
American  Rite.  His  duties  are  to  admit
visitors,  to  receive  candidates,  and  to  obey
the  commands  of  the  Junior  Warden.  This
officer  is  unknown  in  the  American  system.

Innovations.  There  is  a  well-known


3G6


INNOVATIONS


I.*.  N.\  R.\  L*.


maxim  of  the  law  which  says  Omnis  inno-
vatio  plus  novilate  perturbed  quara  ulililate
prodest,  that  is,  every  innovation  occasions
more  harm  and  disarrangement  by  its  nov¬
elty  than  benefit  by  its  actual  utility.  This
maxim  is  peculiarly  applicable  to  Freema¬
sonry,  whose  system  is  opposed  to  all  in¬
novations.  Thus  Dr.  Dalcho  says,  in  his
Ahiman  Rezon,  (p.  191,)  “Antiquity  is
dear  to  a  Mason’s  heart;  innovation  is
treason,  and  saps  the  venerable  fabric  of
the  Order.”  In  accordance  with  this  sen¬
timent,  we  find  the  installation  charges  of
the  Master  of  a  Lodge  affirming  that  “it  is
not  in  the  power  of  any  man  or  body  of
men  to  make  innovations  in  the  body  of
Masonry.”

By  the  “  body  of  Masonry  ”  is  here  meant,
undoubtedly,  the  landmarks,  which  have
always  been  declared  to  be  unchangeable.
The  non-essentials,  such  as  the  local  and
general  regulations  and  the  lectures,  are
not  included  in  this  term.  The  former  are
changing  every  day,  accordingly  as  experi¬
ence  or  caprice  suggests  improvement  or
alteration.  The  most  important  of  these
changes  in  this  country  has  been  the  aboli¬
tion  of  the  Quarterly  Communications  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  and  the  substitution  for
them,  except,  perhaps,  in  a  single  State,  of
an  Annual  Communication.  But,  after  all,
this  is,  perhaps,  only  a  recurrence  to  first
usages;  for,  although  Anderson  says  that  in
1717  the  Quarterly  Communications  “  were
revived,”  there  is  no  evidence  extant  that
before  that  period  the  Masons  ever  met
except  once  a  year  in  their  “  General  As¬
sembly.”  If  so,  the  change  in  1717  was  an
innovation,  and  not  that  which  has  almost
universally  prevailed  in  America.

The  lectures,  which  are  but  the  commen¬
taries  on  the  ritual  and  the  interpretation
of  the  symbolism,  have  been  subjected,  from
the  time  of  Anderson  to  the  present  day,  to
repeated  modifications.

But  notwithstanding  the  repugnance  of
Masons  to  innovations,  a  few  have  occurred
in  the  Order.  Thus,  in  the  schism  which
took  place  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
century,  and  which  resulted  in  the  forma¬
tion  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients,  as
they  called  themselves  in  contradistinction
to  the  regular  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
which  was  styled  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Moderns,  the  former  body,  to  prevent  the
intrusion  of  the  latter  upon  their  meetings,
made  changes  in  some  of  the  modes  of  re¬
cognition, —  changes  which,  although  Dal¬
cho  has  said  that  they  amounted  to  no
more  than  a  dispute  “  whether  the  glove
should  be  placed  first  upon  the  right  hand
or  on  the  left,”  (Ahim.  Rez.,  193,)  were
among  the  causes  of  continuous  acrimony
among  the  two  bodies,  which  was  only


healed,  in  1813,  by  a  partial  sacrifice  of
principle  on  the  part  of  the  legitimate
Grand  Lodge,  and  have  perpetuated  differ¬
ences  which  still  exist  among  the  English
and  American  and  the  continental  Freema¬
sons.

But  the  most  important  innovation  which
sprang  out  of  this  unfortunate  schism  is
that  which  is  connected  with  the  Royal
Arch  degree.  On  this  subject  there  have
been  two  theories:  One,  that  the  Royal
Arch  degree  originally  constituted  a  part
of  the  Master’s  degree,  and  that  it  was  dis¬
severed  from  it  by  the  Ancients ;  the  other,
that  it  never  had  any  existence  until  it  was
invented  by  Ramsay,  and  adopted  by  Der-
mott  for  his  Ancient  Grand  Lodge.  If  the
first,  which  is  the  most  probable  and  the
most  generally  received  opinion,  be  true,
then  the  regular  or  Modern  Grand  Lodge
committed  an  innovation  in  continuing  the
disseverance  at  the  union  in  1813.  If  the
second  be  the  true  theory,  then  the  Grand
Lodge  equally  perpetuated  an  innovation
in  recognizing  it  as  legal,  and  declaring,  as
it  did,  that  “Ancient  Craft  Masonry  con¬
sists  of  three  degrees,  including  the  Holy
Royal  Arch.”  But  however  the  innovation
may  have  been  introduced,  the  Royal  Arch
degree  has  now  become,  so  far  as  the  York
and  American  Rites  are  concerned,  well
settled  and  recognized  as  an  integral  part
of  the  Masonic  system.

About  the  same  time  there  was  another
innovation  attempted  in  France.  The  ad¬
herents  of  the  Pretender,  Charles  Edward,
sought  to  give  to  Masonry  a  political  bias
in  favor  of  . the  exiled  house  of  Stuarts,
and,  for  this  purpose,  altered  the  interpre¬
tation  of  the  great  legend  of  the  third  de¬
gree,  so  as  to  make  it  applicable  to  the  exe¬
cution  or,  as  they  called  it,  the  martyrdom
of  Charles  the  First.  But  this  attempted
innovation  was  not  successful,  and  the  sys¬
tem  in  which  this  lesson  was  practised  has
ceased  to  exist,  although  its  workings  are
now  and  then  seen  in  some  of  the  high  de¬
grees,  without,  however,  any  manifest  evil
effect.

On  the  whole,  the  spirit  of  Freemasonry,
so  antagonistic  to  innovation,  has  been  suc¬
cessfully  maintained;  and  an  investigator
of  the  system  as  it  prevailed  in  the  year
1717,  and  as  it  is  maintained  at  the  present
day,  will  not  refrain  from  wonder  at  the
little  change  which  has  been  brought  about
by  the  long  cycle  of  one  hundred  and  fifty
years.

I.*.  N.*.  R.*.  I.*.  The  initials  of  the
Latin  sentence  which  was  placed  upon  the
cross :  Jesus  Nazarenus  Rex  Judceorum.  The
Rosicrucians  used  them  as  the  initials  of
one  of  their  hermetic  secrets :  Igne  Natura
Renovalur  Integra,  “By  fire,  nature  is  per-


INSIGNIA


INTEGRITY


367


fectly  renewed.”  They  also  adopted  them
to  express  the  names  of  their  three  ele¬
mentary  principles — salt,  sulphur,  and  mer¬
cury —  by  making  them  the  initials  of  the
sentence,  Igne  Nitrum  Eoris  Invenitur.  Ra-
gon  finds  in  the  equivalent  Hebrew  letters
the  initials  of  the  Hebrew  names  of
the  ancient  elements:  laminim,  water;
Nour,  fire ;  Ruach,  air ;  and  Iebschah ,  earth.

Insignia.  See  Jewels  of  Office.

Inspector.  See  Sovereign  Grand  In¬
spector  General.

Installation.  The  act  by  which  an
officer  is  put  in  possession  of  the  place  he
is  to  fill.  In  Masonry  it  is,  therefore,  ap¬
plied  to  the  induction  of  one  who  has  been
elected  into  his  office.  The  officers  of  a
Lodge,  before  they  can  proceed  to  discharge
their  functions,  must  be  installed.  The
officers  of  a  new  Lodge  are  installed  by  the
Grand  Master,  or  by  some  Past  Master
deputed  by  him  to  perform  the  ceremony.
Formerly,  the  Master  was  installed  by  the
Grand  Master,  the  Wardens  by  the  Grand
Wardens,  and  the  Secretary  and  Treasurer
by  the  Grand  Secretary  and  Treasurer ;  but
now  this  custom  is  not  continued.  At  the
election  of  the  officers  of  an  old  Lodge,  the
Master  is  installed  by  his  predecessor  or
some  Past  Master  present,  and  the  Master
elect  then  installs  his  subordinate  officers.
No  officer  after  his  installation  can  resign.
At  his  installation,  the  Master  receives  the
degree  of  Past  Master.  It  is  a  law  of  Ma¬
sonry  that  all  officers  hold  on  to  their  re¬
spective  offices  until  their  successors  are
installed.  It  is  installation  only  that  gives
the  right  to  exercise  the  franchises  of  an
office.

The  ceremony  is  an  old  one,  and  does  not
pertain  exclusively  to  Masonry.  The  an¬
cient  Romans  installed  their  priests,  their
kings,  and  their  magistrates;  but  the  cere¬
mony  was  called  inauguration,  because  per¬
formed  generally  by  the  augurs.  The  word
installation  is  of  comparatively  modern  ori¬
gin,  being  Mediaes-al  Latin,  and  is  com¬
pounded  of  in  and  stallum,  a  seat.  Priests,
after  ordination  or  reception  into  the  sacer¬
dotal  order,  were  installed  into  the  churches
or  parishes  to  which  they  were  appointed.
The  term  as  well  as  the  custom  is  still  in
use.

Installation  as  a  Masonic  ceremony  was
early  used.  We  find  in  the  first  edition  of
Anderson’s  Constitutions,  a  form  of  “  Con¬
stituting  a  New  Lodge,”  which  was  practised
by  the  Duke  of  Wharton,  who  was  Grand
Master  in  1723.  It  was  probably  prepared
by  Desaguliers,  who  was  Deputy,  or  by  An¬
derson,  who  was  one  of  the  Wardens,  and
perhaps  by  both.  It  included  the  cere¬
mony  of  installing  the  new  Master  and
Wardens.  The  words  “  Shall,  in  due  form,


install  them”  are  found  in  this  document.
The  usage  then  was  for  the  Grand  Master,
or  some  brother  for  him,  to  install  the  Mas¬
ter,  and  for  the  Master  to  install  his  War¬
dens  ;  a  usage  which  still  exists.

Installed  Masters,  Board  of.
An  expression  used  in  England  to  desig¬
nate  a  committee  of  Masters  to  whom  “the
Master  elect  is  presented  that  he  may  re¬
ceive  from  his  predecessor  the  benefit  of
installation.”  It  is  the  same  as  the  emer¬
gent  Lodge  of  Past  Masters  assembled  in
this  country  for  the  same  purpose.

Installing  Oflicer.  The  person  who
performs  the  ceremony  of  installation  is
thus  called.  He  should  be  of  the  same
official  dignity  at  least;  although  necessity
has  sometimes  permitted  a  Grand  Master
to  be  installed  by  a  Past  Deputy,  who  in
such  case  acts  as  locum  tenens  of  a  Grand
Master.  The  Masonic  rule  is  that  any  one
who  has  been  installed  into  an  office  may
install  others  into  similar  or  inferior  offices.
In  this  it  agrees  with  the  old  Rabbinical
law  as  described  by  Maimonides,  (Stat.  de
Sanhed.,  c.  4,)  who  says:  “Formerly,  all
Rabbis  who  had  been  installed,  hasmocha-
chim,  could  install  others;  but  since  the
time  of  Hillel  the  faculty  can  be  exercised
only  by  those  who  have  been  invested  with
it  by  the  Prince  of  the  Grand  Sanhedrim;
nor  then,  unless  there  be  two  witnesses
present,  for  an  installation  cannot  be  per¬
formed  by  less  than  three.”  So  the  strict
Masonic  rule  requires  the  presence  of  three
Past  Masters  in  the  complete  installation
of  a  Master  and  his  investiture  with  the
Past  Master’s  degree.

The  first  Master  of  a  new  Lodge  can  be
installed  only  by  the  Grand  Master,  or  by  a
Past  Master  especially  appointed  by  him
and  acting  as  his  proxy.

Instruction.  It  is  the  duty  of  the
Master  of  the  Lodge  to  give  the  necessary
instruction  to  the  candidate  on  his  initia¬
tion.  In  some  of  the  higher  and  in  the
continental  Rites  these  instructions  are
imparted  by  an  officer  called  the  Orator;
but  the  office  is  unknown  in  the  English
and  American  systems  of  Ancient  Craft
Masonry.

Instruction,  Lodge  of.  See  Ledge
of  Instruction.

Instructive  Tongue.  Sec  Tongue,
the  Instructive.

Instrumental  Masonry.  Oliver
by  this  term  defines  a  species  of  Masonry
which  is  engaged  in  the  study  of  mechani¬
cal  instruments.  But  I  find  no  authority  in
any  other  writer  for  the  use  of  the  term,  nor
can  I  perceive  its  necessity  or  relevancy.

Integrity.  Integrity  of  purpose  and
conduct  is  symbolized  by  the  plumb,  which
see.


3G8


INTEMPERANCE


IONIC


Intemperance.  This  is  a  vice  which
is  wholly  incompatible  with  the  Masonic
character,  and  the  habitual  indulgence  in
which  subjects  the  offender  to  the  penalty  of
expulsion  from  the  Order.  See  Temperance.

Intciidniit  of  the  Building.  [In-
tendant  du  Butiment.)  This  degree  is  some¬
times  called  “  Master  in  Israel.”  It  is  the
eighth  in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite.  Its  emblematic  color  is  red;  and
its  principal  officers,  according  to  the  old
rituals,  are  a  Thrice  Puissant,  representing
Solomon ;  a  Senior  Warden,  representing
the  illustrious  Tito,  one  of  the  Harodim  ;
and  a  Junior  Warden,  representing  Adoni-
ram  the  son  of  Abda.  But  in  the  present
rituals  of  the  two  Supreme  Councils  of  the
United  States  the  three  chief  officers  repre¬
sent  Adoniram,  Joabert,  and  Stolkin;  but
in  the  working  of  the  degree  the  past  officer
assumes  the  character  of  Solomon.  The
legend  of  the  degree  is,  that  it  was  insti¬
tuted  to  supply  the  place  of  the  chief  archi¬
tect  of  the  Temple.

Intention.  The  obligations  of  Ma¬
sonry  are  required  to  be  taken  with  an
honest  determination  to  observe  them;  and
hence  the  Mason  solemnly  affirms  that  in
assuming  those  responsibilities  he  does  so
without  equivocation,  secret  evasion,  or
mental  reservation.

Internal  Preparation.  See  Pre¬
paration  of  Candidates.

Internal  Qualifications.  Those
qualifications  of  a  candidate  which  refer
to  a  condition  known  only  to  himself,  and
which  are  not  patent  to  the  world,  are  called
internal  qualifications.  They  are:  1st.  That
he  comes  forward  of  his  own  free-will  and
accord,  and  unbiassed  by  the  solicitations
of  others.  2d.  That  he  is  not  influenced
by  mercenary  motives;  and,  3d,  That  he
has  a  disposition  to  conform  to  the  usages
of  the  Order.  The  knowledge  of  these  can
only  be  obtained  from  his  own  statements,
and  hence  they  are  included  in  the  pre¬
liminary  questions  which  are  proposed  be¬
fore  initiation.  See  Questions  to  Candidates.

Intimate  Initiate.  ( Intimus  Initia-
tus.)  Lat.  The  fourth  degree  of  the  Order
of  the  Temple.  •

Intimate  Secretary.  [Secretaire  in¬
time.)  The  sixth  degree  in  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  Its  emblem¬
atic  color  is  black,  strewed  with  tears;  and
its  collar  and  the  lining  of  the  apron  are
red.  Its  officers  are  only  three:  Solomon,
King  of  Israel ;  Hiram,  King  of  Tyre;  and
a  Captain  of  the  Guards.  Its  history  records
an  instance  of  unlawful  curiosity,  the  pun¬
ishment  of  which  was  only  averted  by  the
previous  fidelity  of  the  offender.  The  legend
in  this  degree  refers  to  the  cities  in  Galilee
which  were  presented  by  Solomon  to  Hiram,


King  of  Tyre;  and  with  whose  character
the  latter  was  so  displeased  that  he  called
them  the  land  of  Cabul.

I  ii  trod  net  or  and  Introduc-

tress.  Officers  in  a  Lodge  of  Adoption,
whose  functions  resemble  those  of  a  Master
of  Ceremonies.

Intrusting.  That  portion  of  the  cere¬
mony  of  initiation  which  consists  in  com¬
municating  to  the  candidate  the  modes  of
recognition.

Investiture.  The  presentation  of  the
apron  to  a  candidate  in  the  ceremony  of
initiation.

Invineible.  The  degree  of  Knights
of  the  Christian  Mark,  formerly  conferred
in  this  country,  was  called  the  Invincible
Order,  and  the  title  of  the  presiding  officer
was  Invincible  Knight.

Inwood,  Jethro.  The  Rev.  Jethro
Inwood  was  curate  of  St.  Paul’s  at  Dept¬
ford,  in  England.  He  was  born  about  the
year  1767,  and  initiated  into  Masonry  in
1785  as  a  lewis,  according  to  Oliver.  He
was  soon  after  appointed  Chaplain  of  the
Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Kent,  an  office
which  he  held  for  more  than  twenty  years,
during  which  time  he  delivered  a  great
number  of  sermons  on  festival  and  other
occasions.  A  volume  of  these  sermons  was
published  in  1799,  with  a  portrait  of  the
author,  under  the  title  of  Sermons,  in  which
are  explained  and  enforced  the  religious,
moral,  and  political  virtues  of  Freemasonry,
preached  upon  several  occasions  before  the
Provincial  Grand  Officers  and  Brethren  in
the  Counties  of  Kent  and  Essex.  An  edition
of  these  sermons  was  published  by  Oliver,
in  1849,  in  the  fourth  volume  of  his  Golden
Ecmains.  These  sermons  are  written,  to
use  the  author’s  own  expression,  “  in  a  lan¬
guage  that  is  plain,  homely,  and  search¬
ing;”  but,  in  Masonic  character,  surpass
the  generality  of  sermons  called  Masonic,
simply  because  they  have  been  preached
before  the  Craft.  Dr.  Oliver  describes  him
as  “  an  assiduous  Mason,  who  permitted  no
opportunity  to  pass  unimproved  of  storing
his  mind  with  useful  knowledge,  or  of  im¬
parting  instruction  to  those  who  needed  it.”

Ionic  Order.  One  of  the  three  Gre¬
cian  orders,  and  the  one  that  takes  the
highest  place  in  Masonic  symbolism.  Its
distinguishing  characteristic  is  the  volute
of  its'"  capital,  and  the  shaft  is  cut  into
twenty  flutes  separated  by  fillets.  It  is
more  delicate  and  graceful  than  the  Doric,
and  more  simply  majestic  than  the  Corin¬
thian.  The  judgment  and  skill  displayed
in  its  construction,  as  combining  the
strength  of  the  former  with  the  beauty  of
the  latter,  has  caused  it  to  be  adopted  in
Masonry  as  the  symbol  of  Wisdom,  and
being  placed  in  the  east  of  the  Lodge  it  is


IOWA


IRELAND


369


referred  to  as  represented  by  the  Worship¬
ful  Master.

Iowa.  Freemasonry  was  introduced
into  Iowa  on  Nov.  20,  1840,  by  the  forma¬
tion  of  a  Lodge  at  Burlington,  under  a
Warrantfrom  theGrand  Lodge  ofMissouri.
Of  this  Lodge,  Bro.  Theodore  S.  Parvin,
since  a  Past  Grand  Master  of  the  State,  was
one  of  the  founders,  and  James  R.  Hart-
sock,  another  Past  Grand  Master,  was  the
first  initiate.  A  second  Lodge  was  formed
at  Bloomington,  now  Muscatine,  Feb.  4,
1841;  a  third  at  Dubuque,  Oct.  20,  1811;
and  a  fourth  in  Iowa  City,  Oct.  10,  1842.
A  convention  was  held  on  Jan.  2,  1844,
and  a  Grand  Lodge  organized ;  Oliver  Cock
being  elected  Grand  Master.

The  Grand  Chapter  was  organized  June
8,  1854;  the  Grand  Council  in  1857,  and
the  Grand  Commandery,  June  6,  1864.
The  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
has  also  been  introduced  into  the  State,  and
there  is  a  Grand  Consistory  and  several
subordinate  bodies.

Ireland.  The  early  history  of  Free¬
masonry  in  Ireland  is  involved  in  the  deep¬
est  obscurity.  It  is  vain  to  look  in  Ander¬
son,  in  Preston,  Smith,  or  any  other  Eng¬
lish  writer  of  the  last  century,  for  any  ac¬
count  of  the  organization  of  Lodges  in  that
kingdom  anterior  to  the  establishment  of
a  Grand  Lodge.  In  none  of  the  published
registers  is  there  any  reference  to  an  Irish
Lodge.  The  late  Bro.  Michael  Furnel,  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Master  of  Munster,  says,  in
a  Calendar  published  by  him  in  1850,  that
there  are  irrefutable  records  and  data  which
show  the  existence  of  several  self-designated
Grand  Lodges  in  past  centuries,  and  that
Lodge  No.  1,  on  the  present  registry,  claims
an  uninterrupted  descent  from  an  indepen¬
dent  Lodge  which  existed  from  time  im¬
memorial,  and  retains  many  quaint  docu¬
ments  in  her  archives.  But  I  fear  that  the
evidence  intended  to  support  these  asser¬
tions  is  not  such  as  would  now  satisfy  any
student  of  Masonic  history.  The  statement
in  the  Irish  Book  of  Constitutions,  (first
edition,  Anno  1730,)  that  “about  three
hundred  and  seventy  years  before  the  birth
of  Christ,  the  four  sons  of  Milesius  the
Spaniard,  subdued  the  kingdom,  settled
themselves  in  several  parts  of  it,  planted
colonies  and  erected  Lodges,”  is,  of  course,
utterly  fabulous  and  mythical.  The  list  of
“ curious  and  stately  buildings”  erected  by
Masons  at  various  periods  only  proves  the
existence  of  Operative  Masons  there  as  in
other  countries  of  Europe.

Furnel  says  that  the  books  of  the  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Munster  show  that
that  body  was  in  existence  in  1726,  and
that  the  Hon.  Col.  James  O’Brien  was
Grand  Master.  I  should  be  inclined,  had
2  W  24


I  no  other  authority  than  conjecture,  to
place  credence  in  this  statement,  notwith¬
standing  the  doubt  of  Findel,  “  because  we
find  no  official  documents  to  confirm  the
report.”  This  might  be  properly  attributed
to  the  well-known  scantiness  and  inaccu¬
racy  of  the  records  of  that  period.  And,
indeed,  in  1869,  Bro.  W.  J.  Hughan,  in  a
communication  to  the  London  Freemason,
says :  “  Bro.  J.  G.  Findel  wrote  me  some¬
time  since  respecting  the  ‘  Grand  Lodge  of
Munster,’  and  stated  there  were  some  val¬
uable  papers,  consisting  of  records  of  its
transactions,  in  the  possession  of  a  brother
in  Ireland,  of  about  1726  to  1729.”  So  that
the  German  historian  may  have  seen  cause
to  modify  to  some  extent  his  opinion  ex¬
pressed  in  1865.  This  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  is  the  only  organized  body  of  Masons
in  Ireland  of  which  we  hear  until  1730,  and
its  existence  has  now  been  clearly  estab¬
lished  as  an  historical  fact  by  the  testimony
of  that  distinguished  Irish  Mason,  Dr.  J.
F.  Townsend,  who,  in  a  letter  to  Bro.  Al¬
bert  Pike,  writes  as  follows :

“  The  earliest  records  (written)  that  I  am
aware  of,  are  the  transactions  of  what  ap¬
peared  to  be  then  the  head  or  governing
body  in  Ireland,  called  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Munster,  as  it  is  on  the  old  seal.  This
body  was  established  in  Cork.  The  date
of  the  earliest  entry  is  1721.  It  is  a  record
of  a  Lodge  meeting,  and  is  signed  by  the
Earl  of  Kingston,  G.  M.,  and,  what  may  be
interesting  to  you,  by  Springett  Penn,  as
Deputy  Grand  Master.  This  Penn  was  the
eldest  son  of  the  celebrated  William  Penn.  I
find  that  William  Penn  married  the  daugh¬
ter  of  Sir  Wm.  Springett,  an  English  baro¬
net,  hence  the  name  of  his  son.  Penn  got
grants  of  considerable  property  in  lands  in
the  county  of  Cork,  which  are  now  vested
in  his  descendant,  a  young  man,  Penn
Gaskell.  He  is  a  member  of  No.  1  Lodge,
Cork ;  and  was  much  gratified  when  I
showed  him  Springett  Penn’s  signature,
and  told  him  what  I  now  write.  In  a  few
years  after,  this  Lodge  or  Grand  Lodge  was,
as  was  natural,  transferred  to  Dublin,  the
metropolis,  and  then  commenced  the  issuing
of  Warrants  according  to  the  Grand  Lodge
system  established  in  or  about  1717.  No.  1
Warrant  was  granted  to  Cork ;  and  it  is  still
there,  a  flourishing  Blue  Lodge,  very  proud
of  its  ancient  charter.  I  have  been  always
a  member  of  it,  and  am  still,  as  many  of
my  family  had  been  for  a  century  back.
No.  2  granted  to  Dublin,  No.  3  to  Cork,
No.  4  to  Dublin,  and  so  on.  The  Provin¬
cial  Grand  Lodge  of  Munster  seems  to  bo
the  successor  of  that  old  body.  I  was  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Master  for  many  years  be¬
fore  I  came  to  reside  in  Dublin.  It  holds
the  ancient  records  still.”


370


IRELAND


IRISH


In  the  year  1730,  a  Grand  Lodge  was  or¬
ganized,  by  whom  it  is  not  staled,  at  Dub¬
lin.  The  brief  account  of  this  event  in  the
Irish  Book  of  Constitutions  is  in  these
words:  “At  last  the  ancient  Fraternity  of
the  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  in  Ireland,
being  duly  assembled  in  their  Grand  Lodge
at  Dublin,  chose  a  Noble  Grand  Master,  in
imitation  of  their  brethren.”  The  Grand
Master  so  chosen  was  Lord  Viscount  King¬
ston,  who  the  year  preceding  had  been
Grand  Master  of  England.  He  introduced
the  English  Constitutions  and  usages,  and
in  the  same  year  “The  Constitutions  of
the  Freemasons,  containing  the  History,
Charges,  Regulations,  etc.,  of  that  most
Ancient  and  Right  Worshipful  Fraternity.
For  the  use  of  the  Lodges,”  was  published
at  Dublin.  A  second  edition  was  published
in  1744,  and  a  third,  in  1751.

In  1749,  the  “Grand  Master’s  Lodge”
was  instituted,  which  still  exists;  a  singular
institution,  possessing  several  unusual  privi¬
leges,  among  which  are  that  its  members
are  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge  without
the  payment  of  dues,  that  the  Lodge  takes
precedence  of  all  other  Lodges,  and  that
any  candidates  nominated  by  the  Grand
Master  are  to  be  initiated  without  ballot.

In  1772,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  re¬
cognized  the  schismatic  Grand  Lodge  of
Ancient  Masons,  and  entered  into  an  alli¬
ance  with  it,  which  was  also  done  in  the
same  year  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.
This  does  not  appear  to  have  given  any  of¬
fence  to  the  regular  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land;  for  when  that  body,  in  1777,  passed  a
vote  of  censure  on  the  Lodges  of  Ancient
Masons,  it  specially  excepted  from  the  cen¬
sure  the  Lodges  of  Ireland  and  Scotland.

In  1779,  an  application  was  made  to  the
Mother  Kilwinning  Lodge  of  Scotland,  by
certain  brethren  in  Dublin,  for  a  charter
empowering  them  to  form  a  Lodge  to  be
called  the  “High  Knights  Templars,”  that
they  might  confer  the  Templar  degree.  The
Kilwinning  Lodge  granted  the  petition  for
the  three  Craft  degrees  only,  but  at  a  later
period  this  Lodge  became,  says  Findel,  the
source  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  Ire¬
land.

To  Bro.  Townsend’s  interesting  letter  am
1  indebted  for  an  account  of  the  working
system  in  Ireland.  The  Grand  Lodge  holds
jurisdiction  over  all  the  Blue  Lodges.  The
Duke  of  Leinster,  who  has  been  Grand  Mas¬
ter  for  sixty  years,  having  been  elected  in
1813,  is  also  head  of  all  the  degrees  worked
in  Ireland.  The  Mark  degree  is  worked
under  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter.
Next  comes  the  Royal  Arch,  which  formerly
consisted  of  three  degrees,  the  Excellent,
Super- Excellent,  and  Royal  Arch — the  first
two  being  nothing  more  than  passing  the


first  two  veils  with  each  a  separate  obliga¬
tion.  But  that  system  was  abolished  some
years  ago,  and  a  new  ritual  framed  some¬
thing  like  the  American,  except  that  the
King  and  not  the  High  Priest  is  made  the
Presiding  Officer.  The  next  degrees  are
the  fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  seventeenth,
which  are  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Templar  Grand  Conclave,  and  are  given  to
the  candidate  previous  to  his  being  created
a  Knight  Templar.  Some  change  will  here
have  now  to  be  made  in  consequence  of  the
recent  alliance  of  the  Templars  of  England
and  Ireland,  and  their  abolition  of  connec¬
tion  with  all  Masonry  except  the  Craft  de¬
grees.  Next  to  the  Templar  degree  in  the
Irish  system  comes  the  eighteenth  or  Rose
Croix,  which  is  under  the  jurisdiction  of
the  Grand  Chapter  of  Prince  Masons  or
Council  of  Rites,  composed  of  the  first
three  officers  of  all  the  Rose  Croix  Chap¬
ters,  the  Supreme  Council  having  some
years  ago  surrendered  its  authority  over
the  degree.  The  twenty-eighth  degree  or
Knight  of  the  Sun  is  the  next  conferred,
and  then  the  thirtieth  or  Kadosh  in  a  body
over  which  the  Supreme  Council  has  no
control  except  to  grant  certificates  to  its
members.  The  Supreme  Council  confers
the  thirty-first,  thirty-second,  and  thirty-
third  degrees,  there  being  no  Grand  Con¬
sistory.

The  Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite  for  Ireland  was
established  by  a  Patent  from  the  Supreme
Council  of  the  United  States,  at  Charles¬
ton,  dated  Aug.  13,  1824,  by  which  the
Duke  of  Leinster,  John  Fowler,  and  Thomas
McGill  were  constituted  a  Supreme  Council
for  Ireland,  and  under  that  authority  it
continues  to  work.

Whence  the  high  degrees  came  into  Ire¬
land  is  not  clearly  known.  Bro.  Townsend
says  they  came  “  by  piecemeal,  in  a  dis¬
jointed,  irregular  way.”  The  Rose  Croix
and  Kadosh  degrees  existed  in  Ireland  long
before  the  establishment  of  the  Supreme
Council.  I  have  in  my  library  a  copy  of
Dalcho’s  Orations,  republished  at  Dublin,
in  1808,  by  “  the  Illustrious  College  of
Knights  of  K.  H.,  and  the  Original  Chapter
of  Rrince  Masons.”  It  is  probable  that
these  degrees  were  received  from  Bristol,
England,  where  are  preserved  the  earliest
English  records  of  the  Rose  Croix.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  practises
the  simplest  form  of  Masonry,  that  of  the
York  Rite,  which  with  its  Constitutions  it
received  in  1730  from  England.

Irish  Chapters.  "These  Chapters
existed  in  Paris  about  the  year  1730  to
1740,  and  were  thence  disseminated  through
France.  They  consisted  of  degrees,  such
as  Irish  Master,  Perfect  Irish  Master,  and


IRISH


ITALY


371


Sublime  Irish  Master,  which,  it  is  said,
were  invented  by  the  adherents  of  the
house  of  Stuart  when  they  sought  to  make
Freemasonry  a  political  means  of  restoring
the  exiled  family  to  the  throne  of  England.
Ramsay,  when  he  assumed  his  theory  of
the  establishment  of  Freemasonry  in  Scot¬
land  by  the  Templars,  who  had  fled  thither
under  d’Aumont,  took  possession  of  these
degrees,  (if  he  did  not,  as  some  suppose,  in¬
vent  them  himself,)  and  changed  their  name,
in  deference  to  his  theory,  from  Irish  to
Scottish,  calling,  for  instance,  the  degree
of  Maitre  Irlandais  or  Irish  Master,  the
Maitre  Ecossais  or  Scottish  Master.

Irish  Colleges.  The  Irish  Chapters
are  also  called  by  some  writers  Irish  Col¬
leges.

Irish  Degrees.  See  Irish  Chapters.

Iron  Tools.  The  lectures  teach  us
that  at  the  building  of  King  Solomon’s
Temple  there  was  not  heard  the  sound  of
axe,  hammer,  or  other  metallic  tool.  But
all  the  stones  were  hewn,  squared,  and
numbered  in  the  quarries ;  and  the  timbers
felled  and  prepared  in  the  forest  of  Leb¬
anon,  whence  they  were  brought  on  floats
by  sea  to  Joppa,  and  thence  carried  by
land  to  Jerusalem,  where,  on  being  put  up,
each  part  was  found  to  fit  with  such  exact
nicety  that  the  whole,  when  completed,
seemed  rather  the  handiwork  of  the  Grand
Architect  of  the  Universe  than  of  mere  hu¬
man  hands.  This  can  hardly  be  called  a
legend,  because  the  same  facts  are  substan¬
tially  related  in  the  first  Book  of  Kings;
but  the  circumstance  has  been  appropri¬
ated  in  Masonry  to  symbolize  the  entire
peace  and  harmony  which  should  prevail
among  Masons  when  laboring  on  that
spiritual  temple  of  which  the  Solomonic
Temple  was  the  archetype.

Isaac  ami  Islunael.  The  sons  of
Abraham  by  Sarah  and  Hagar.  They  are
recognized,  from  the  conditions  of  their
mothers,  as  the  free  born  and  the  bondman.
According  to  Oliver,  the  fact  that  the  in¬
heritance  which  was  bestowed  upon  Isaac,
the  son  of  his  free-born  wife,  was  refused
to  Ishmael,  the  son  of  a  slave  woman,  gave
rise  to  the  Masonic  theory  which  constitutes
a  landmark  that  none  but  the  free  born  are
entitled  to  initiation.

Ish  Chotzeb.  3yn  u'N-  Liter¬
ally,  “  men  of  hewing,”  t.  e.,  “  hewers.”
The  phrase  was  first  used  by  Anderson  in
the  first  edition  of  the  “  Constitutions,”  but
is  not  found  in  the  original  Hebrew,  1
Kings  v.  18,  to  which  he  refers,  where  it
is  said  that  Solomon  had  fourscore  “  hewers
in  the  mountains,”  chotzeb  bahar.  But  ish
chotzeb  is  properly  constructed  according
to  the  Hebrew  idiom,  and  is  employed  by
Anderson  to  designate  the  hewers  who,  with


the  “Giblim,”  or  stone-cutters,  and  the
“Bonai,”  or  builders,  amounted  to  eighty
thousand,  all  of  whom  he  calls,  in  his  sec¬
ond  edition,  “  bright  Fellow  Crafts.”  But
he  distinguishes  them  from  the  thirty  thou¬
sand  who  cut  wood  on  Mount  Lebanon
under  Adoniram.t

Ish  Salmi.  73D  Men  of  bur¬

den.  Anderson  thus  designates  the  70,000
laborers  who,  in  the  original  Hebrew,  are
(1  Kings  v.  18,)  called  noshe  sabal,  bear¬
ers  of  burdens.  Anderson  says  “  they  were
of  the  remains  of  the  old  Canaanites,  and,
being  bondmen,  are  not  to  be  reckoned
among  Masons.”  But  in  Webb’s  system
they  constitute  the  Apprentices  at  the  build¬
ing  of  the  Temple.

Ish  Sodi.  Corruptly,  Ish  Soudy.  This
expression  is  composed  of  the  two  Hebrew
words,  JJM,  ISH,  and  “Up,  SOD.  The  first
of  these  words,  ISH,  means  a  man ,  and  SOD
signifies  primarily  a  couch  on  which  one
reclines.  Hence  ISH  SODI  would  mean,
first,  a  man  of  my  couch,  one  who  reclines
with  me  on  the  same  seat,  an  indication
of  great  familiarity  and  confidence.  Thence
followed  the  secondary  meaning  given  to
SOD,  of  familiar  intercourse,  consultation,
or  intimacy.  Job  (xix.  19)  applies  it  in
this  sense,  when,  using  MATI,  a  word  sy¬
nonymous  with  ISH,  he  speaks  of  MATI
SODI  in  the  passage  which  the  common
version  has  translated  thus :  “  all  my  in¬
ward  friends  abhorred  me,”  but  which  the
marginal  interpretation  has  more  correctly
rendered,  “  all  the  men  of  my  secret.”  Ish
Sodi,  therefore,  in  this  degree,  very  clearly
means  a  man  of  my  intimate  counsel,  a  man
of  my  choice,  one  selected  to  share  with  me
a  secret  task  or  labor.  Such  was  the  posi¬
tion  of  every  Select  Master  to  King  Solo¬
mon,  and  in  this  view  those  are  not  wrong
who  have  interpreted  Ish  Sodi  as  meaning
a  Select  Master.

Isis.  The  sister  and  the  wife  of  Osiris,
and  worshipped  by  the  Egyptians  as  the
great  goddess  of  nature.  Her  mysteries
constituted  one  of  the  degrees  of  the  ancient
Egyptian  initiation.  See  Egyptian  Mysteries
and  Osiris.

Italy.  In  the  year  1733,  Freemasonry
was  introduced  into  Italy,  by  the  establish¬
ment  of  a  Lodge  at  Florence,  by  Charles
Sackville,  Dukeof  Dorset.  Thory,  and  after
him  Findel,  calls  him  Duke  of  Middlesex ;
but  there  was  at  that  time  no  such  title  in
the  peerage  of  England.  A  medal  was
struck  on  this  occasion.  It  is  not  known
under  what  authority  the  Duke  of  Dorset
established  this  Lodge,  but  most  probably
under  that  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.
The  initiation  of  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tus¬
cany  had  a  favorable  influence  on  the  pros¬
pects  of  the  Order,  and  in  1735  Lodges  were


372


ITALY


JACOBINS


established  at  Milan,  Verona,  Padua,  Vin-
cenza,  Venice,  and  Naples.  In  1737,  John
Gaston,  the  last  duke  of  the  house  of  the
Medicis,  prohibited  Freemasonry,  but  dy¬
ing  soon  after,  the  Lodges  continued  to
meet.  His  successor,  the  Grand  Duke  of
Lorraine,  declared  himself  the  protector  of
the  Order,  and  many  new  Lodges  were
established  under  his  auspices.  In  1738,
Pope  Clement  XIV.  issued  his  bill  forbid¬
ding  all  congregations  of  Freemasons,  which
was  followed  in  January,  1739,  by  the  edict
of  Cardinal  Firrao,  which  inflicted  the  pen¬
alty  of  death  and  confiscation  of  goods  on
all  who  should  contravene  the  Papal  order.
Several  arrests  were  made  at  Florence  by
the  Inquisition,  but,  through  the  interces¬
sion  of  the  Grand  Duke,  the  persons  who
had  been  arrested  were  set  at  liberty.

For  many  years  Freemasonry  held  but  a
precarious  existence  in  Italy,  the  persecu¬
tions  of  the  church  preventing  any  healthy
growth.  The  Masons  continued  to  meet,
although  generally  in  secret.  The  Masons
of  Rome  struck  a  medal,  in  1746,  in  honor
of  Martin  Folkes;  and  the  author  of  Anti-
Saint-Nicaise  says  that  there  was  a  Grand
Lodge  at  Naples  in  1756,  which  was  in
correspondence  with  the  Lodges  of  Ger¬
many.  Naples,  indeed,  seems  to  have  been
for  a  long  time  the  only  place  where  the
Lodges  were  in  any  kind  of  activity.  In
1776,  Queen  Caroline  exerted  her  interest
in  behalf  of  the  Order.  Smith,  writing  in
1783,  ( Use  and  Abuse,  p.  211,)  says,  “At
present  most  of  the  Italian  nobles  and  dig¬
nified  ecclesiastics  are  Freemasons,  who
hold  their  meetings  generally  in  private
houses,  though  they  have  established
Lodges  at  Naples,  Leghorn,  Venice,  Vero¬


na,  Turin,  Messina,  in  the  island  of  Sicily,
Genoa,  and  Modena.”

In  1805  a  Supreme  Council  of  the  An¬
cient  and  Accepted  Rite  was  established  at
Milan  by  Count  deGrasse-Tillv,  and  Prince
Eugene  accepted  the  offices  of  Grand  Com¬
mander  of  the  Council  and  Grand  Master
of  the  Grand  Orient.

When,  by  the  defeat  of  Napoleon  in
1814,  the  liberal  policy  of  F ranee  was  with¬
drawn  from  Italy,  to  be  again  substituted
by  the  ignorance  of  the  Bourbon  dynasty
and  the  bigotry  of  the  Roman  Church,
Italian  Masonry  ceased  any  longer  to  have
an  existence,  nor  did  it  revive  until  1860.
But  the  centralization  of  Italy,  and  the
political  movements  that  led  to  it,  restored
Italy  to  freedom  and  intelligence,  and  Free¬
masonry  has  again  found,  even  beneath  the
shadow  of  the  Vatican,  a  congenial  soil.

A  Lodge  was  established  at  Turin  in
1859,  and  a  Grand  Lodge  in  1861.  A  Grand
Orient  was  subsequently  established  by
Garibaldi,  who  adopted  the  system  of  the
Scottish  Rite.  A  Supreme  Council  was  also
formed  at  Naples.  Internal  dissensions,
however,  unfortunately  took  place.  The
Grand  Orient  was  removed  from  Turin  to
Florence,  when  many  resignations  took
place,  and  a  recusant  body  was  formed.  But
peace  at  length  prevails,  and  at  a  Constit¬
uent  Assembly  held  at  Rome  on  April  28,
1873,  “  the  fundamental  bases  of  Italian  Ma¬
sonic  Fraternity”  were  adopted;  and  “the
Grand  Lodge  of  Freemasons  of  Italy  and
its  Masonic.  Colonies  ”  is  now  in  success¬
ful  operation.  There  is  also  a  Supreme
Council  of  the  Scottish  Rite.

Izabud.  A  corruption  of  Zabud ,
which  see.


J.


Jachin.  f'3\  Hence  called  by  Dud¬
ley  and  some  other  writers,  who  reject  the
oints,  ichin.  It  is  the  name  of  the  right-
and  pillar  that  stood  at  the  porch  of  King
Solomon’s  Temple.  It  is  derived  from  two
Hebrew  words,  ST,  jah,  “God,”  and  JO',
iachin,  “will  establish.”  It  signifies,  there¬
fore,  “God  will  establish,”  and  is  often
called  “  the  pillar  of  establishment.”

Jachinai.  A  Gallic  corruption  of
Shekinah,  to  be  found  only  in  the  French
Cahiers  of  the  high  degrees.

Jacobins.  A  political  sect  that  sprang
up  in  the  beginning  of  the  French  Revolu¬
tion,  and  which  gave  origin  to  the  Jacobin
clubs,  so  well  known  as  having  been  the


places  where  the  leaders  of  the  Revolution
concocted  their  plans  for  the  abolition  of
the  monarchy  and  the  aristocracy.  Lieber
says  that  it  is  a  most  surprising  phenome¬
non,  that  “  so  large  a  body  of  men  could  be
found  uniting  rare  energy  with  execrable
vice,  political  madness,  and  outrageous  cru¬
elty,  committed  always  in  the  name  of  vir¬
tue.”  Barruel,  in  his  Hisloire  de  Jacobinisme,
and  Robison,  in  his  Proofs  of  a  Conspiracy ,
both  endeavor  to  prove  that  there  was  a
coalition  of  the  revolutionary  conspirators
with  the  Illuminati  and  the  Freemasons
which  formed  the  Jacobin  clubs,  those  bod¬
ies  being,  as  they  contend,  only  Masonic
Lodges  in  disguise.  The  falsity  of  these


JACOB’S


JACOB’S


373


charges  will  be  evident  to  any  one  who
reads  the  history  of  French  Masonry  dur¬
ing  the  Revolution,  and  more  especially
during  that  part  of  the  period  known  as
the  “Reign  of  Terror,”  when  the  Jacobin
clubs  were  in  most  vigor.  The  Grand
Orient,  in  1788,  declared  that  a  politico-
Masonic  work,  entitled  Les  Jesuit  es  chassis
de  la  Magonnerie  et  leur  Poignard  brise  par
les  Magons,  was  the  production  of  a  perverse
mind,  prepared  as  a  poison  for  the  destruc¬
tion  of  Masonry,  and  ordered  it  to  be
burned.  During  the  Revolution,  the  Grand
Orient  suspended  its  labors,  and  the  Lodges
in  France  were  dissolved;  and  in  1793,  the
Duke  of  Orleans,  the  head  of  the  Jacobins,
who  was  also,  unfortunately,  Grand  Master
of  the  French  Masons,  resigned  the  latter
position,  assigning  as  a  reason  that  he  did
not  believe  that  there  snould  be  any  mys¬
tery  nor  any  secret  society  in  a  republic.
It  is  evident  that  the  Freemasons,  as  an
Order,  held  themselves  aloof  from  the  po¬
litical  contests  of  that  period.

Jacob’s  Ladder.  The  introduction
of  Jacob’s  ladder  into  the  symbolism  of
Speculative  Masonry  is  to  be  traced  to  the
vision  of  Jacob,  which  is  thus  substantially
recorded  in  the  twenty-eighth  chapter  of
the  Book  of  Genesis:  When  Jacob,  by  the
command  of  his  father  Isaac,  was  jour¬
neying  towards  Padan-aram,  while  sleeping
one  night  with  the  bare  earth  for  his  couch
and  a  stone  for  his  pillow,  he  beheld  the
vision  of  a  ladder,  whose  foot  rested  on  the
earth  and  whose  top  reached  to  heaven.
Angels  were  continually  ascending  and  de¬
scending  upon  it,  and  promised  him  the
blessing  of  a  numerous  and  happy  posterity.
When  Jacob  awoke,  he  was  filled  with  pious
gratitude,  and  consecrated  the  spot  as  the
house  of  God.

This  ladder,  so  remarkable  in  the  history
of  the  Jewish  people,  finds  its  analogue  in
all  the  ancient  initiations.  Whether  this
is  to  be  attributed  simply  to  a  coincidence —
a  theory  which  but  few  scholars  would  be
willing  to  accept  —  or  to  the  fact  that  these
analogues  were  all  derived  from  a  common
fountain  of  symbolism,  or  whether,  as  sug¬
gested  by  Oliver,  the  origin  of  the  symbol
was  lost  among  the  practices  of  the  Pagan
rites,  while  the  symbol  itself  was  retained,
it  is,  perhaps,  impossible  authoritatively  to
determine.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  the
ladder  as  a  symbol  of  moral  and  intellec¬
tual  progress  existed  almost  universally  in
antiquity,  presenting  itself  either  as  a  suc¬
cession  of  steps,  of  gates,  of  degrees,  or  in
some  other  modified  form.  The  number  of
the  steps  varied;  although  the  favorite  one
appears  to  have  been  seven,  in  reference,
apparently,  to  the  mystical  character  almost
everywhere  given  to  that  number.  .


Thus,  in  the  Persian  mysteries  of  Mi¬
thras,  there  was  a  ladder  of  seven  rounds,
the  passage  through  them  being  symbolical
of  the  soul’s  approach  to  perfection.  These
rounds  were  called  gates,  and,  in  allusion
to  them,  the  candidate  was  made  to  pass
through  seven  dark  and  winding  caverns,
which  process  was  called  the  ascent  of  the
ladder  of  perfection.  Each  of  these  cav¬
erns  was  the  representative  of  a  world,  or
state  of  existence  through  which  the  soul
was  supposed  to  pass  in  its  progress  from
the  first  world  to  the  last,  or  the  world  of
truth.  Each  round  of  the  ladder  was  said
to  be  of  metal  of  increasing  purity,  and
was  dignified  also  with  the  name  of  its  pro¬
tecting  planet.  Some  idea  of  the  con¬
struction  of  this  symbolic  ladder  may  be
obtained  from  the  following  table :


7  Gold,  Sun,

6  Silver,  Moon,

5  Iron,  Mars,

4  Tin,  Jupiter,

3  Copper,  Venus,

2  Quicksilver,  Mercury,
1  Lead,  Saturn,


Truth.  [Blessed.

Mansion  of  the
World  of  Births.
Middle  World.
Heaven.  [ence.

World  of  Pre-exist-
First  World.


In  the  mysteries  of  Brahma  we  find  the
same  reference  to  the  ladder  of  seven  steps.
The  names  of  these  were  not  different,  and
there  was  the  same  allusion  to  the  symbol
of  the  universe.  The  seven  steps  were  em¬
blematical  of  the  seven  worlds  which  con¬
stituted  the  Indian  universe.  The  lowest
was  the  Earth;  the  second,  the  World
of  Pre-existence;  the  third,  Heaven;  the
fourth,  the  Middle  World,  or  interme¬
diate  region  between  the  lower  and  upper
worlds;  the  fifth,  the  World  of  Births,  in
which  souls  are  again  born  ;  the  sixth,  the
Mansion  of  the  Blessed ;  and  the  seventh,
or  topmost  round,  the  Sphere  of  Truth,  and
the  abode  of  Brahma.  Dr.  Oliver  thinks
that  in  the  Scandinavian  mysteries  the  tree
Yggrasil  was  the  representative  of  the  mys¬
tical  ladder.  But  although  the  ascent  of
the  tree,  like  the  ascent  of  the  ladder,  was
a  change  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  sphere —
from  time  to  eternity,  and  from  death  to
life — yet  the  unimaginative  genius  of  the
North  seems  to  have  shorn  the  symbolism
of  many  of  its  more  salient  features.

Among  the  Kabbalists,  the  ladder  was
represented  by  the  ten  Sephiroths,  which,
commencing  from  the  bottom,  were  the
Kingdom,  Foundation,  Splendor,  Firmness,
Beauty,  Justice,  Mercy,  Intelligence,  Wis¬
dom,  and  the  Crown,  by  which  we  arrive
at  the  En  Soph,  or  the  Infinite.

In  the  higher  Masonry  we  find  the  ladder
of  Ivadosh,  which  consists  of  seven  steps,
thus  commencing  from  the  bottom  :  Justice,
Equity,  Kindness,  Good  Faith,  Labor,
Patience,  and  Intelligence.  The  arrange-


374


JACOB’S


JACOB’S


ment  of  these  steps,  for  which  we  are  in¬
debted  to  modern  ritualism,  does  not  seem
to  be  perfect;  but  yet  the  idea  of  intellec¬
tual  progress  to  perfection  is  carried  out  by
making  the  topmost  round  represent  Wis¬
dom  or  Understanding.

The  Masonic  ladder  which  is  presented
in  the  symbolism  of  the  first  degree  ought  !
really  to  consist  of  seven  steps,  which  thus
ascend  :  Temperance,  Fortitude,  Prudence,
Justice,  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity;  but  the
earliest  examples  of  it  present  it  only  with
three,  referring  to  the  three  theological
virtues,  whence  it  is  called  the  theological
ladder.  It  seems,  therefore,  to  have  been
settled  by  general  usage  that  the  Masonic
ladder  has  but  three  steps.

As  a  symbol  of  progress,  Jacob’s  ladder
was  early  recognized.  Picus  of  Mirandola,
who  wrote  in  the  sixteenth  century,  in  his
oration,  “De  Hominis  Dignitate,”  says  that
Jacob’s  ladder  is  a  symbol  of  the  progressive
scale  of  intellectual  communication  betwixt
earth  and  heaven ;  and  upon  the  ladder,  as
it  were,  step  by  step,  man  is  permitted  with
the  angels  to  ascend  and  descend  until  the
mind  finds  blissful  and  complete  repose  in
the  bosom  of  divinity.  The  highest  step
he  defines  to  be  theology,  or  the  study  and
contemplation  of  the  Deity  in  his  own  ab¬
stract  and  exalted  nature.  .

Other  interpretations  have,  however,  been
given  to  it.  The  Jewish  writers  differ  very
much  in  their  expositions  of  it.  Thus,  a
writer  of  one  of  the  Midrashes  or  Com¬
mentaries,  finding  that  the  Hebrew  words
for  Ladder  and  Sinai  have  each  the  same
numerical  value  of  letters,  expounds  the
ladder  as  typifying  the  giving  of  the  law
on  that  mount.  Aben  Ezra  thought  that
it  was  a  symbol  of  the  human  mind,  and
that  the  angels  represented  the  sublime
meditations  of  man.  Maimonides  supposed
the  ladder  to  symbolize  nature  in  its  oper¬
ations  ;  and,  citing  the  authority  of  a  Mi¬
drash  which  gives  to  it  four  steps,  says  that
they  represent  the  four  elements;  the  two
heavier,  earth  and  water,  descending  by
their  specific  gravity,  and  the  two  lighter,
fire  and  air,  ascending  from  the  same  cause.
Abarbanel,  assuming  the  Talmudic  theory
that  Luz,  where  Jacob  slept,  was  Mount
Moriah,  supposes  that  the  ladder,  resting  on
the  spot  which  afterwards  became  the  holy
of  holies,  was  a  prophetic  symbol  of  the
building  of  the  Temple.  And,  lastly,  Ra¬
phael  interprets  the  ladder,  and  the  ascent
and  the  descent  of  the  angels,  as  the  prayers
of  man  and  the  answering  inspiration  of
God.  Fludd,  the  hermetic  philosopher,  in
his  Philosophia  Mosaica,  (1638,)  calls  the
ladder  the  symbol  of  the  triple  world,  moral,
physical,  and  intellectual ;  and  Nicolai  says
that  the  ladder  with  three  steps  was,  among


the  Rosicrucian  Freemasons  in  the  seven¬
teenth  century,  a  symbol  of  the  knowledge
of  nature.  Finally,  Krause  says  in  his
drei  allestenten  Kunsturkunden,  (ii.  481,)
that  a  Brother  Keher  of  Edinburgh,  whom
he  describes  as  a  skilful  and  truthful  Ma¬
son,  had  in  1802  assured  the  members  of  a
Lodge  at  Altenberg  that  originally  only  one
Scottish  degree  existed,  whose  object  was
the  restoration  of  James  II.  to  the  throne
of  England,  and  that  of  that  restoration
Jacob’s  ladder  had  been  adopted  by  them
as  a  symbol.  Of  this  fact  he  further  said
that  an  authentic  narrative  was  contained
in  the  archives  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot¬
land.  Notwithstanding  Lawrie’s  silence
on  the  subject,  Krause  is  inclined  to  believe
the  story,  nor  is  it  in  all  its  parts  alto¬
gether  without  probability.  It  is  more  than
likely  that  the  Chevalier  Ramsay,  who
was  a  warm  adherent  of  the  Stuarts,  trans¬
ferred  the  symbol  of  the  mystical  ladder
from  the  Mithraic  mysteries,  with  which  he
was  very  familiar,  into  his  Scottish  degrees,
and  that  thus  it  became  a  part  of  the  sym¬
bolism  of  the  Kadosh  system.  In  some  of
the  political  Lodges  instituted  under  the
influence  of  the  Stuarts  to  assist  in  the  res¬
toration  of  their  house,  the  philosophical
interpretation  of  the  symbol  may  have  been
perverted  to  a  political  meaning,  and  to
these  Lodges  it  is  to  be  supposed  that  Ke¬
her  alluded;  but  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland  had  made  any  official  recognition
of  the  fact  is  not  to  be  believed.  Lawrie’s
silence  seems  to  be  conclusive.

In  the  Ancient  Craft  degrees  of  the  York
Rite,  Jacob’s  ladder  was  not  an  original
symbol.  It  is  said  to  have  been  introduced
by  Dunckerley  when  he  reformed  the  lec¬
tures.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that
it  is  not  mentioned  in  any  of  the  early  rit¬
uals  of  the  last  century,  nor  even  by
Hutchinson,  who  had  an  excellent  oppor¬
tunity  of  doing  so  in  his  lecture  on  the
Nature  of  the  "Lodge ,  where  he  speaks  of
the  covering  of  the  Lodge,  but  says  nothing
of  the  means  of  reaching  it,  which  he  would
have  done,  had  he  been  acquainted  with
the  ladder  as  a  symbol.  Its  first  appear¬
ance  is  in  a  Tracing  Board,  on  which  the
date  of  1776  is  inscribed,  which  very  well
agrees  with  the  date  of  Dunckerley’s  im¬
provements.  In  this  Tracing  Board,  the
ladder  has  but  three  rounds;  a  change  from
the  old  seven-stepped  ladder  of  the  mys¬
teries;  which,  however,  Preston  corrected
when  he  described  it  as  having  many
rounds,  but  three  principal  ones.  Dunc¬
kerley,  I  think,  was  indebted  for  this  sym¬
bol  to  Ramsay,  from  whom  he  liberally
borrowed  on  several  other  occasions,  taking
from  him  his  Royal  Arch,  and  learning  from
him  to  eliminate  the  Master’s  W ord  from  the


JACQUES


JAMBLICHUS


375


third  degree,  where  it  had  been  placed  by
his  predecessors.

As  to  the  modern  Masonic  symbolism  of
the  ladder,  it  is,  as  I  have  already  said,  a
symbol  of  progress,  such  as  it  is  in  all  the
old  initiations.  Its  three  principal  rounds,
representing  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,
present  us  with  the  means  of  advancing
from  earth  to  heaven,  from  death  to  life  —
from  the  mortal  to  immortality.  Hence
its  foot  is  placed  on  the  ground-floor  of  the
Lodge,  which  is  typical  of  the  world,  and
its  top  rests  on  the  covering  of  the  Lodge,
which  is  symbolic  of  heaven.

In  the  Prestonian  lecture,  which  was
elaborated  out  of  Dunckerley’s  system,  the
ladder  is  said  to  rest  on  the  Holy  Bible,
and  to  reach  to  the  heavens.  This  sym¬
bolism  is  thus  explained.

“  By  the  doctrines  contained  in  the  Holy
Bible  we  are  taught  to  believe  in  the  divine
dispensation  of  Providence,  which  belief
strengthens  our  Faith,  and  enables  us  to  as¬
cend  the  first  step.

“That  Faith  naturally  creates  in  us  a
Hope  of  becoming  partakers  of  some  of  the
blessed  promises  therein  recorded,  which
Hope  enables  us  to  ascend  the  second  step.

“  But  the  third  and  last  being  Charity
comprehends  the  whole,  and  he  who  is
possessed  of  this  virtue  in  its  ample  sense,
is  said  to  have  arrived  to  the  summit  of  his
profession,  or,  more  metaphorically,  into  an
ethereal  mansion  veiled  from  the  mortal
eye  by  the  starry  firmament.”

In  the  modern  lectures,  the  language  i3
materially  changed,  but  the  idea  and  the
symbolism  are  retained  unaltered.

The  delineation  of  the  ladder  with  three
steps  only  on  the  Tracing  Board  of  1776,
which  is  a  small  one,  may  be  attributed  to
notions  of  convenience.  But  the  fact  that
Dunckerley  derived  his  symbol  from  Ram¬
say  ;  that  Ramsay’s  ladder  had  seven  steps,
being  the  same  as  the  Kadosh  symbol ;  that
in  all  the  old  initiations  the  number  seven
was  preserved;  and  lastly,  that  Preston  de¬
scribes  it  as  having  “many  rounds  or
staves,  which  point  out  as  many  moral  vir¬
tues,  but  three  principal  ones,  namely,
Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,”  irresistibly  lead
us  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Masonic  lad¬
der  should  properly  have  seven  steps,  which
represent  the  four  cardinal  and  the  three
theological  virtues.

Jacques  <le  Molay.  See  Molay.

Jail.  In  Hebrew,  J-p.  Maimonides
calls  it  the  “  two-lettered  name,”  and  de¬
rives  it  from  the  Tetragrammaton,  of  which
he  says  it  is  an  abbreviation.  Others  have
denied  this,  and  assert  that  Jah  is  a  name
independent  of  Jehovah,  but  expressing
the  same  idea  of  the  Divine  Essence.  It
is  uniformly  translated  in  the  author¬


ized  version  of  the  Bible  by  the  word
Lord,  being  thus  considered  as  synony¬
mous  with  Jehovah,  except  in  Psalm  lxviii.
4,  where  the  original  word  is  preserved :
“  Extol  him  that  rideth  upon  the  heavens
by  his  name  JAH,”  upon  which  the  Tar-
gum  comment  is  :  “Extol  him  who  sitteth
on  the  throne  of  glory  in  the  ninth  heaven ;
YAH  is  his  name.”  It  seems,  also,  to  have
been  well  known  to  the  Gentile  nations  as
the  triliteral  name  of  God;  for,  although
biliteral  among  the  Hebrews,  it  assumed
among  the  Greeks  the  triliteral  form,  as
IAS2.  Macrobius,  in  his  Saturnalia,  says
that  this  was  the  sacred  name  of  the  Su¬
preme  Deity ;  and  the  Clarian  Oracle  being
asked  which  of  the  gods  was  Jao,  replied,
“The  initiated  are  bound  to  conceal  the
mysterious  secrets.  Learn  thou  that  IAI2
is  the  Great  God  Supreme  who  ruleth  over
all.”  See  Jehovah.

Jilinbliclius.  It  is  strange  that  the
old  Masons,  when  inventing  their  legend,
which  gave  so  prominent  a  place  to  Pythag¬
oras  as  “  an  ancient  friend  and  brother,”
should  have  entirely  forgotten  his  biogra¬
pher,  Jamblichus,  whose  claims  to  their  es¬
teem  and  veneration  are  much  greater  than
those  of  the  Samian  sage.  Jamblichus  was
a  Neoplatonic  philosopher,  who  was  born
at  Chalcis,  in  Calo,  Syria,  and  flourished
in  the  fourth  century.  He  was  a  pupil  of
Porphyry,  and  was  deeply  versed  in  the
philosophic  systems  of  Plato  and  Pythag¬
oras,  and,  like  the  latter,  had  studied  the
mystical  theology  of  the  Egyptians  and
Chaldeans,  whose  divine  origin  and  truth
he  attempts  to  vindicate.  He  maintained
that  man,  through  theurgic  rites  and  cere¬
monies,  might  commune  with  the  Deity;
and  hence  he  attached  great  importance  to
initiation  as  the  means  of  inculcating  truth.
He  carried  his  superstitious  veneration  for
numbers  and  numerical  formula  to  a  far
greater  extent  than  did  the  school  of  Py¬
thagoras;  so  that  all  the  principles  of  his
philosophy  can  be  represented  by  numbers.

Thus,  he  taught  that  one,  or  the  monad,
was  the  principle  of  all  unity  as  well  as  di¬
versity  ;  the  duad,  or  two,  was  the  intellect;
three,  the  soul ;  four,  the  principle  of  uni¬
versal  harmony ;  eight,  the  source  of  mo¬
tion  ;  nine,  perfection  ;  and  ten,  the  result
of  all  the  emanations  of  the  to  en.  It  will
thus  be  seen  that  Jamblichus,  while  adopt¬
ing  the  general  theory  of  numbers  that
distinguished  the  Pythagorean  school,  dif¬
fered  very  materially  in  his  explanations.
He  wrote  many  philosophical  works  on  the
basis  of  these  principles,  and  was  the  au¬
thor  of  a  Life  of  Pythagoras,  and  a  Treatise
of  the  Mysteries.  Of  all  the  ancient  phil¬
osophers,  his  system  assimilates  him  most
—  if  not  in  its  details,  at  least  in  its  spirit


376


JANITOR


JEHOVAH


—  to  the  mystical  and  symbolic  character
of  the  Masonic  philosophy.

Janitor.  A  door-keeper.  The  word
Sentinel,  which  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter  is
the  proper  equivalent  of  the  Tiler  in  a
Lodge,  is  in  some  jurisdictions  replaced  by
the  word  Janitor.  There  is  no  good  author¬
ity  for  the  usage.

J apan .  F reemasonry  was  introduced  in
Japan  by  the  establishment  at  Yokohama,
in  1868,  of  a  Lodge  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England.  A  Masonic  hall  was  built  at
Yokohama,  in  1869.

Japliet.  Heb.,  ns\  The  eldest  son
of  Noah.  It  is  said  that  the  first  ark  —  the
ark  of  safety,  the  archetype  of  the  taberna¬
cle —  was  constructed  by  Shem,  Ham,  and
Japhet  under  the  superintendence  of  Noah.
Hence  these  are  significant  words  in  the
Royal  Arch  degree.

jasper.  Heb.,  A  precious

stone  of  a  dullish  green  color,  which  was
the  last  of  the  twelve  inserted  in  the  high
priest’s  breastplate,  according  to  the  au¬
thorized  version;  but  the  Vulgate  trans¬
lation  more  correctly  makes  it  the  third
stone  of  the  second  row.  It  represented
the  tribe  of  Zebulun.

Jebusite.  See  Oman.

Jcdadiah.  A  special  name  given  to
King  Solomon  at  his  birth.  It  signifies
“  beloved  of  God.”

Jehoshaphat.  East  of  Jerusalem,  be¬
tween  Mount  Zion  and  the  Mount  of  Olives,
lies  the  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  In  the  most
recent  rituals  this  word  has  lost  its  signifi¬
cance,  but  in  the  older  ones  it  played  an
important  part.  There  was  in  reality  no
such  valley  in  ancient  Judea,  nor  is  there
any  mention  of  it  in  Scripture,  except  once
by  the  prophet  Joel.  The  name  is  alto¬
gether  modern.  But,  as  the  Hebrew  means
the  judgment  of  God,  and  as  the  prophecy
of  Joel  declared  that  God  would  there  judge
the  heathen  for  their  deeds  against  the
Israelites,  it  came  at  last  to  be  believed  by
the  Jews,  which  belief  is  shared  by  the
Mohammedans,  that  the  Valley  of  Jehosha¬
phat  is  to  be  the  place  of  the  last  judgment.
Hence  it  was  invested  with  a  peculiar  de¬
gree  of  sanctity  as  a  holy  place.  The  idea
was  borrowed  by  the  Masons  of  the  last
century,  who  considered  it  as  the  symbol
of  holy  ground.  Thus,  in  the  earliest  rit¬
uals  we  find  this  language:

“  Where  does  the  Lodge  stand?

“  Upon  holy  ground,  or  the  highest  hill
or  lowest  vale,  or  in  the  Valley  of  Jehosha¬
phat,  or  any  other  secret  place.”

This  reference  to  the  Valley  of  Jehosha¬
phat  as  the  symbol  of  the  ground-floor  of
the  Lodge  was  in  this  country  retained
until  a  very  recent  period ;  and  the  expres¬
sion  which  alludes  to  it  in  the  ritual  of  the


second  degree  has  only  within  a  few  years
past  been  abandoned.  H utchinson  referred
to  this  symbolism,  when  he  said  that  the
Spiritual  Lodge  was  placed  in  the  Valley
of  Jehoshaphat  to  imply  that  the  principles
of  Masonry  are  derived  from  the  knowl¬
edge  of  God,  and  are  established  in  the
judgments  of  the  Lord.

Jehovali.  Jehovah  is,  of  all  the  sig¬
nificant  words  of  Masonry,  by  far  the  most
important.  Reghellini  very  properly  calls
it  “  the  basis  of  our  dogma  and  of  our  mys¬
teries.”  In  Hebrew  it  consists  of  four  let¬
ters,  mrr,  and  hence  is  called  the  Telra-
grammaton,  or  four-lettered  name ;  and  be¬
cause  it  was  forbidden  to  a  Jew,  as  it  is  to
a  Mason,  to  pronounce  it,  it  is  also  called
the  Ineffable  or  Unpronounceable  name.
For  its  history  we  must  refer  to  the  sixth
chapter  of  Exodus,  (verses  2,  3.)  When
Moses  returned  discouraged  from  his  first
visit  to  Pharaoh,  and  complained  to  the
Lord  that  the  only  result  of  his  mission
had  been  to  incense  the  Egyptian  king,  and
to  excite  him  to  the  exaction  of  greater
burdens  from  the  oppressed  Israelites,  God
encouraged  the  patriarch  by  the  promise
of  the  great  wonders  which  he  would  per¬
form  in  behalf  of  his  people,  and  confirmed
the  promise  by  imparting  to  him  that  sub¬
lime  name  by  which  he  had  not  hitherto
been  known  :  “And  God,”  says  the  sacred
writer,  “spake  unto  Moses,  and  said  unto
him,  I  am  Jehovah  :  and  I  appeared  unto
Abraham,  unto  Isaac,  and  unto  Jacob  as
El  Shaddai,  but  by  my  name  Jehovah
was  I  not  known  unto  them.”

This  Ineffable  name  is  derived  from  the
substantive  verb  n*iT.  hayah,  to  be ;  and
combining,  as  it  does,  in  its  formation  the
present,  past,  and  future  significations  of
the  verb,  it  is  considered  as  designating
God  in  his  immutable  and  eternal  exist¬
ence.  This  idea  is  carried  by  the  Rabbins
to  such  an  extent,  that  Menasseh  Ben
Israel  says  that  its  four  letters  may  be  so  ar¬
ranged  by  permutations  as  to  form  twelve
words,  every  one  of  which  is  a  modification
of  the  verb  to  be,  and  hence  it  is  called  the
nomen  substantia;  vel  essentiee,  the  name  of
his  substance  or  existence.

The  first  thing  that  attracts  our  atten¬
tion  in  the  investigation  of  this  name  is
the  ancient  regulation,  still  existing,  by
which  it  was  made  unlawful  to  pronounce
it.  This,  perhaps,  originally  arose  from  a
wish  to  conceal  it  from  the  surrounding
heathen  nations,  so  that  they  might  not
desecrate  it  by  applying  it  to  their  idols.
Whatever  may  have  been  the  reason,  the
rule  was  imperative  among  the  Jews.  The
Talmud,  in  one  of  its  treatises,  the  “  San¬
hedrim,”  which  treats  of  the  question,  Who
of  the  Israelites  shall  Lave  future  life  and


JEHOVAH


JEHOVAH


377


who  shall  not?  says:  “Even  he  who  thinks
the  name  of  God  with  its  true  letters  for¬
feits  his  future  life.”  Abraham  Ben  David
Halevi,  when  discussing  the  names  of  God,
says:  “But  the  name  HIPP  we  are  not
allowed  to  pronounce.  In  its  original  mean¬
ing  it  is  conferred  upon  no  other  being,  and
therefore  we  abstain  from  giving  any  ex¬
planation  of  it.”  We  learn  from  Jerome,
Origen,  and  Eusebius  that  in  their  time
the  Jews  wrote  the  name  in  their  copies  of
the  Bible  in  Samaritan  instead  of  Hebrew
letters,  in  order  to  veil  it  from  the  inspec¬
tion  of  the  profane.  Capellus  says  that  the
rule  that  the  holy  name  was  not  to  be  pro¬
nounced  was  derived  from  a  tradition,
based  on  a  passage  in  Leviticus,  (xxiv.
16,)  which  says  that  he  who  blasphemeth
the  name  of  Jehovah  shall  be  put  to  death ;
and  he  translates  this  passage,  “  whosoever
shall  pronounce  the  name  Jehovah  shall
suffer  death,”  because  the  word  nokeb,  here
translated  “to  blaspheme,”  means  also  “to
pronounce  distinctly,  to  call  by  name.”
Another  reason  for  the  rule  is  to  be  found
in  a  rabbinical  misinterpretation  of  a  pas¬
sage  in  Exodus.

In  the  third  chapter  of  that  book,  when
Moses  asks  of  God  what  is  his  name,  he  re-

?lies  “I  Am  that  I  Am;  and  he  said,
hus  shalt  thou  say  unto  the  children  of
Israel,  I  AM  hath  sent  me  unto  you,”  and
he  adds,  “  this  is  my  name  forever.”  Now,
the  Hebrew  word  I  AM  is  H  Ehyeh.
But  as  Mendelsohn  has  correctly  observed,
there  is  no  essential  difference  between
nVW,  >n  the  sixth  chapter  and  niH’ in  the
third,  the  former  being  the  first  person  sin¬
gular,  and  the  latter  the  third  person  of  the
same  verb,  (the  future  used  in  the  present
sense  of  the  verb  to  be;)  and  hence  what
was  said  of  the  name  Ehyeh  was  applied
by  the  Rabbins  to  the  name  Jehovah.  But
of  Ehyeh  God  had  said,  “  this  is  my  name
forever."  Now  the  word  forever  is  repre¬
sented  in  the  original  by  dSj?1?,  Colam;
but  the  Rabbins,  says  Capellus,  by  the
change  of  a  single  letter,  made  I’olam,  for¬
ever,  read  as  if  it  had  been  written  I'alam ,
which  means  “to  be  concealed,”  and  hence
the  passage  was  translated  “  this  is  my
name  to  be  concealed,”  instead  of  “  this  is
my  name  forever.”  And  thus  Josephus,  in
writing  upon  this  subject,  uses  the  follow¬
ing  expressions:  “Whereupon  God  de¬
clared  to  Moses  his  holy  name,  which  had
never  been  discovered  to  men  before ;  con¬
cerning  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  me  to  say
any  more.”  In  obedience  to  this  law,  when¬
ever  the  word  Jehovah  occurs  to  a  Jew  in
reading,  he  abstains  from  pronouncing  it,
und  substitutes  in  its  place  the  word  ’31X-
Adonui.  Thus,  instead  of  saying  “holi¬
ness  to  Jehovah,”  as  it  is  in  the  original,
2  X


he  would  say  “  holiness  to  Adonai.”  And
this  same  reverential  redcence  has  been
preserved  by  our  translators  in  the  author¬
ized  version,  who,  wherever  Jehovah  oc¬
curs,  have,  with  a  few  exceptions,  trans¬
lated  it  by  the  word  “  Lord,”  the  very  pas¬
sage  just  quoted,  being  rendered  “  holiness
to  the  Lord.”

Maimonides  tells  us  that  the  knowledge
of  this  word  was  confined  to  the  hachamin
or  wise  men,  who  communicated  its  true
pronunciation  and  the  mysteries  connected
with  it  only  on  the  Sabbath  day,  to  such
of  their  disciples  as  were  found  worthy ;
but  how  it  was  to  be  sounded,  or  with  what
vocal  sounds  its  four  letters  were  to  be
uttered,  was  utterly  unknown  to  the  people.
Once  a  year,  namely,  on  the  day  of  atone¬
ment,  the  holy  name  was  pronounced  with
the  sound  of  its  letters  and  with  the  utmost
veneration  by  the  high  priest  in  the  Sanc¬
tuary.  The  last  priest  who  pronounced  it,
says  Rabbi  Bechai,  was  Simeon  the  Just,
and  his  successors  used  in  blessing  only  the
twelve- lettered  name.  After  the  destruc¬
tion  of  the  city  and  Temple  by  Vespasian,
the  pronunciation  of  it  ceased,  for  it  was
not  lawful  to  pronounce  it  anywhere  except
in  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  thus  the
true  and  genuine  pronunciation  of  the
name  was  entirely  lost  to  the  Jewish  people.
Nor  is  it  now  known  how  it  was  originally
pronounced.  The  Greeks  called  it  Jao  ;
the  Romans,  Jova  ;  the  Samaritans  always
pronounced  it  Jahve.

The  task  is  difficult  to  make  one  unac¬
quainted  with  the  peculiarities  of  the  He¬
brew  language  comprehend  how  the  pro¬
nunciation  of  a  word  whose  letters  are  pre¬
served  can  be  wholly  lost.  It  may,  how¬
ever,  be  attempted.  The  Hebrew  alphabet
consists  entirely  of  consonants.  The  vowel
sounds  were  originally  supplied  by  the
reader  while  reading,  he  being  previously
made  acquainted  with  the  correct  pronun¬
ciation  of  each  word ;  and  if  he  did  not
possess  this  knowledge,  the  letters  before
him  could  not  supply  it,  and  he  was,  of
course,  unable  to  pronounce  the  word.
Every  Hebrew,  however,  knew  from  prac¬
tice  the  vocal  sounds  with  which  the  con¬
sonants  were  pronounced  in  the  different
words,  in  the  same  manner  as  every  Eng¬
lish  reader  knows  the  different  sounds  of
a  in  hat,  hate,  far,  was,  and  that  knt  is  pro¬
nounced  knight.  The  words  “  God  save  the
republic,”  written  in  the  Hebrew  method,
would  appear  thus :  “  Gd  sv  th  rpblc.”
Now,  this  incommunicable  name  of  God
consists  of  four  letters,  Yod,  He,  Vau,
and  He,  equivalent  in  English  to  the  com¬
bination  JIIVH.  It  is  evident  that  these
four  letters  cannot,  in  our  language,  be
pronounced,  unless  at  least  two  vowels  be


378


JEHOVAH


JEHOVAH


supplied.  Neither  can  they  in  Hebrew.
In  other  words,  the  vowels  were  known  to
the  Jew,  because  he  heard  the  words  con¬
tinually  pronounced,  just  as  we  know  that
Mr.  stands  for  Mister,  because  we  contin¬
ually  hear  this  combination  so  pronounced.
But  the  name  of  God,  of  which  these  four
letters  are  symbols,  was  never  pronounced,
but  another  word,  Adonai,  substituted  for
it;  and  hence,  as  the  letters  themselves
have  no  vocal  power,  the  Jew,  not  knowing
the  implied  vowels,  was  unable  to  supply
them,  and  thus  the  pronunciation  of  the
word  was  in  time  entirely  lost.

Hence  some  of  the  most  learned  of  the
Jewish  writers  even  doubt  whether  Jehovah
is  the  true  pronunciation,  and  say  that  the
recovery  of  the  name  is  one  of  the  mys¬
teries  that  will  be  revealed  only  at  the
coming  of  the  Messiah.  They  attribute
the  loss  to  the  fact  that  the  Masoretic  or
vowel  points  belongingto  another  word  were
applied  to  the  sacred  name,  whereby  in  time
a  confusion  occurred  in  its  vocalization.

In  the  ineffable  degrees  of  the  Scottish
Eite,  there  is  a  tradition  that  the  pronun¬
ciation  varied  among  the  patriarchs  in
different  age3.  Methuselah,  Lamech,  and
Noah  pronounced  it  Juha;  Shem,  Arphaxad,
Selah,  Ileber,  and  Peleg  pronounced  it
Jeva;  Eeu,  Serug,  Nahor,  Terah,  Abraham,
Isaac,  and  Judah,  called  it  Java;  by  Hez-
rom  and  Earn  it  was  pronounced  Jevo;  by
Aminadab  and  Nasshon,  Jevah;  by  Salmon,
Boaz,  and  Obed,  Jo  he;  by  Jesse  and  David,
Jehovah.  And  they  imply  that  none  of
these  was  the  right  pronunciation,  which
was  only  in  the  possession  of  Enoch,  Jacob,
and  Moses,  whose  names  are,  therefore,  not
mentioned  in  this  list.  In  all  these  words
it  must  be  noticed  that  the  J  is  to  be  pro¬
nounced  as  Y,  the  a  as  in  father,  and  the
e  as  a  in  fate.  Thus,  Je-ho-vah  would  be
pronounced  Yay-ho-vah.

The  Jews  believed  that  this  holy  name,
which  they  held  in  the  highest  veneration,
was  possessed  of  unbounded  powers.  “  He
who  pronounces  it,”  said  they,  “  shakes
heaven  and  earth,  and  inspires  the  very
angels  with  astonishment  and  terror.  There
is  a  sovereign  authority  in  this  name:  it
governs  the  world  by  its  power.  The  other
names  and  surnames  of  the  Deity  are
ranged  about  it  like  officers  and  soldiers
about  their  sovereigns  and  generals:  from
this  king-name  they  receive  their  orders,
and  obey.”

It  was  called  the  Shem  hamphorash,  the
explanatory  or  declaratory  name,  because  it
alone,  of  all  the  divine  names,  distinctly
explains  or  declares  what  is  the  true  essence
of  the  Deity.

Among  the  Essenes,  this  sacred  name,
which  was  never  uttered  aloud,  but  always
in  a  whisper,  was  one  of  the  mysteries  of


their  initiation,  which  candidates  were
bound  by  a  solemn  oath  never  to  divulge.

It  is  reported  to  have  been,  under  a  modi¬
fied  form,  a  password  in  the  Egyptian  mys¬
teries,  and  none,  says  Schiller,  dare  enter
the  temple  of  Serapis  who  did  not  bear  on
his  breast  or  forehead  the  name  Jao  or  Je-
ha-ho  ;  a  name  almost  equivalent  in  sound
to  that  of  Jehovah,  and  probably  of  iden¬
tical  import ;  and  no  name  was  uttered  in
Egypt  with  more  reverence.

The  Babbins  asserted  that  it  was  engraved
on  the  rod  of  Moses,  and  enabled  him  to
perform  all  his  miracles.  Indeed,  the  Tal¬
mud  says  that  it  was  by  the  utterance  of
this  awful  name,  and  not  by  a  club,  that  he
slew  the  Egyptian  ;  although  it  fails  to  tell
us  how  he  got  at  that  time  his  knowledge
of  it.

That  scurrilous  book  of  the  Jews  of  the
Middle  Ages,  called  the  Toldoth  Jeshu,  at¬
tributes  all  the  wonderful  works  of  Jesus
Christ  to  the  potency  of  this  incommunica¬
ble  name,  which  he  is  said  to  have  abstract¬
ed  from  the  Temple,  and  worn  about  him.
But  it  would  be  tedious  and  unprofitable  to
relate  all  the  superstitious  myths  that  have
been  invented  about  this  name.

And  now  as  to  the  grammatical  signifi¬
cation  of  this  important  word.  Gesenius
(  Thesaur.,  ii.  577,)  thinks — and  many  mod¬
ern  scholars  agree  with  him  —  that  the
word  is  the  future  form  of  the  Hiphil  con¬
jugation  of  the  verb  to  be,  pronounced  I  a-
vah,  and  therefore  that  it  denotes  “He  who
made  to  exist,  called  into  existence,”  that

is,  the  Creator.  The  more  generally  ac¬
cepted  definition  of  the  name  is,  that  it  ex¬
presses  the  eternal  and  unchangeable  exist¬
ence  of  God  in  respect  to  the  past,  the  pre¬
sent,  and  the  future.  The  word  n'lT  >3
derived  from  the  substantive  verb  n\“7>
hayah,  to  be,  and  in  its  four  letters  combines
those  of  the  past,  present,  and  future  of  the
verb.  The  letter  *  in  the  beginning,  says
Buxtorf,  (de  Nomine,  v,)  is  a  characteristic
of  the  future ;  the  T  in  the  middle,  of  the
participle  or  present  time;  and  the  J7  at
the  end,  of  the  past.  Thus,  out  of  rtin’  we
get  pm.  he  was;  {Tin,  he  is;  and  n\H\
he  will  be.  Hence,  among  other  titles  it  re¬
ceived  that  of  nomen  essential,  because  it  shows
the  essential  nature  of  God’s  eternal  exists
ence.  The  other  names  of  God  define  his
power,  wisdom,  goodness,  and  other  quali¬
ties;  but  this  alone  defines  his  existence.

It  has  been  a  controverted  point  whether
this  name  was  made  known  for  the  first
time  to  Moses,  or  whether  the  patriarchs  had
been  previously  acquainted  with  it.  The
generally  recognized  opinion  now  is,  and
the  records  of  Genesis  and  Exodus  sustain

it,  that  the  name  was  known  to  the  patri¬
archs,  but  not  in  its  essential  meaning,  into
which  Moses  was  the  first  to  be  initiated.


JEHOVAH


JEHOVAH


379


In  the  language  of  Aben  Ezra,  “  Certainly
the  name  was  already  known  to  the  patri¬
archs,  but  only  as  an  uncomprehended  and
unmeaning  noun,  not  as  a  descriptive,  ap¬
pellative  one,  indicative  of  the  attributes
and  qualities  of  the  Deity.”  “  It  is  mani¬
fest,”  says  Kallisch,  (Comm,  on  Ex.,)  “that
Moses,  in  being  initiated  into  the  holy  and
comprehensive  name  of  the  Deity,  obtains
a  superiority  over  the  patriarchs,  who,  al¬
though  perhaps  from  the  beginning  more
believing  than  the  long- wavering  Moses,
lived  more  in  the  sphere  of  innocent,  child¬
like  obedience  than  of  manly,  spiritual  en¬
lightenment.”  This,  too,  is  the  Masonic
doctrine.  In  Freemasonry  the  Holy  Name
is  the  representative  of  the  Word,  which  is
itself  the  symbol  of  the  nature  of  God.  To
know  the  Word  is  to  know  the  true  nature
and  essence  of  the  Grand  Architect.

When  the  pronunciation  of  the  name
was  first  interdicted  to  the  people  is  not
certainly  known.  Leusden  says  it  was  a
rabbinical  prohibition,  and  was  probably
made  at  the  second  Temple.  The  state¬
ment  of  the  Rabbi  Bechai,  already  cited,
that  the  word  was  pronounced  for  the  last
time  by  Simeon,  before  the  spoliation  by
the  Roman  emperor  Vespasian,  would
seem  to  indicate  that  it  was  known  at  the
second  Temple,  although  its  utterance  was
forbidden,  which  would  coincide  with  the
Masonic  tradition  that  it  was  discovered
while  the  foundations  of  the  second  Tem¬
ple  were  being  laid.  But  the  general  opin¬
ion  is,  that  the  prohibition  commenced  in
the  time  of  Moses,  the  rabbinical  writers
tracing  it  to  the  law  of  Leviticus,  already
cited.  This,  too,  is  the  theory  of  Masonry,
which  also  preserves  a  tradition  that  the
prohibition  would  have  been  removed  at
the  first  Temple,  had  not  a  well-known  oc¬
currence  prevented  it.  But  this  is  not  to
be  viewed  as  an  historic  statement,  but  only
as  a  medium  of  creating  a  symbol.

The  Jews  had  four  symbols  by  which
they  expressed  this  Ineffable  name  of  God:
the  first  and  most  common  was  two  Yods,
with  a  Sheva  and  the  point  Kametz  under¬
neath,  thus,  »T»;  the  second  was  three

points  in  a  radiated  form  like  a  diadem,
thus,  \j /,  to  represent,  in  all  probability,  the
sovereignty  of  God ;  the  third  was  a"  Yod
within  an  equilateral  triangle,  which  the
Kabbalists  explained  as  a  ray  of  light,
whose  lustre  was  too  transcendent  to  be
contemplated  by  human  eyes;  and  the
fourth  was  the  letter  cr,  which  is  the  ini¬
tial  letter  of  S/iadai,  “  the  Almighty,”  and
was  the  symbol  usually  placed  upon  their
phylacteries.  Buxtorf  mentions  a  fifth
method,  which  was  by  three  Yods,  with  a
Kametz  underneath  ’  ’  inclosed  in  a  circle.


In  Freemasonry,  the  equilateral  triangle,
called  the  delta,  with  or  without  a  Yod  in
the  centre,  the  Yod  alone,  and  the  letter  G,
are  recognized  as  symbols  of  the  sacred  and
Ineffable  name.

The  history  of  the  introduction  of  this
word  into  the  ritualism  of  Freemasonry
would  be  highly  interesting,  were  it  not  so
obscure.  Being  in  almost  all  respects  an
esoteric  symbol,  nearly  all  that  we  know
of  its  Masonic  relations  is  derived  from
tradition;  and  as  to  written  records  on  the
subject,  we  are  compelled,  in  general,  to
depend  on  mere  intimations  or  allusions,
which  are  not  always  distinct  in  their  mean¬
ing.  In  Masonry,  as  in  the  Hebrew  mys¬
teries,  it  was  under  the  different  appellations
of  the  Word,  the  True  Word,  or  the  Lost
Word,  the  symbol  of  the  knowledge  of  Di¬
vine  Truth,  or  the  true  nature  of  God.

That  this  name,  in  its  mystical  use,  was
not  unknown  to  the  Mediaeval  Freemasons
there  can  be  no  doubt.  Many  of  their  ar¬
chitectural  emblems  show  that  they  pos¬
sessed  this  knowledge.  Nor  can  there  be
any  more  doubt  that  through  them  it
came  to  their  successors,  the  Freemasons
of  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury.  No  one  can  read  Dr.  Anderson’s
Defence  of  Masonry,  written  in  1730,  with¬
out  being  convinced  that  this  prominent
actor  in  the  revival  was  well  acquainted
with  this  name;  although  he  is,  of  course,
careful  to  make  no  very  distinct  reference
to  it,  except  in  one  instance.  “  The  occa¬
sion,”  he  says,  “of  the  brethren  searching
so  diligently  for  their  Master  was,  it  seems,
to  receive  from  him  the  secret  Word  of  Ma¬
sonry,  which  should  be  delivered  down  to
their  posterity  in  after  ages.”

It  is  now  conceded,  from  indisputable
evidence,  that  the  holy  name  was,  in  the
earlier  years,  and,  indeed,  up  to  the  middle
of  the  last  century,  attached  to  the  third
degree,  and  then  called  the  Master’s  Word.
I  have  now  lying  before  me  two  tracing-
boards  of  that  degree,  one  an  Irish  one  of
the  date  of  1769,  the  other  a  continental
one  of  1778 ;  but  both,  apparently,  copies
of  some  earlier  one.  Among  the  emblems
displayed  is  a  coffin,  on  which  is  inscribed,
in  capital  letters,  the  word  JEHOVAH.
Hutchinson,  who  wrote  in  1774,  makes  no
reference  whatever  to  the  Royal  Arch,  al¬
though  that  system  had,  by  that  time,  been
partially  established  in  England;  but  in  his
lectures  to  Master  Masons  and  on  the  third
degree  refers  to  “  the  mystic  word,  the  Tet-
ragrammaton.”  Oliver  tells  us  distinctly
that  it  was  the  Master’s  Word  until  Dunck-
erley  took  it  out  of  the  degree  and  trans¬
ferred  it  to  the  Royal  Arch.  That  it  was
so  on  the  Continent,  we  have  the  unmis¬
takable  testimony  of  Guilleinain  de  St.


380


JEIIOVAH


JEHOVAH


Victor,  who  says,  in  his  Adonhiramite  Ma¬
sonry,  that  Solomon  placed  a  medal  on  the
tomb  of  Hiram,  “on  which  was  engraved
Jehova,  the  old  Master’s  Word,  and  which
signifies  the  Supreme  Being.”

So  far,  then,  these  facts  appear  to  be  es¬
tablished:  that  this  Ineffable  name  was
known  to  the  Operative  Freemasons  of  the
Middle  Ages;  that  it  was  derived  from
them  by  the  Speculative  Masons,  who,  in
1717,  revived  the  Order  in  England;  that
they  knew  it  as  Master  Masons ;  and  that
it  continued  to  be  the  Master’s  Word  until
late  in  that  century,  when  it  was  removed
by  Dunckerley  into  the  Royal  Arch.

Although  there  is,  perhaps,  no  point  in
the  esoteric  system  of  Masonry  more  clearly
established  than  that  the  Tetragrammaton
is  the  true  omnific  word,  yet  innovations
have  been  admitted,  by  which,  in  some
jurisdictions  in  this  country,  that  word  has
been  changed  into  three  others,  which  sim¬
ply  signify  Divine  names  in  other  lan¬
guages,  but  have  none  of  the  sublime  sym¬
bolism  that  belongs  to  the  true  name  of
God.  It  is  true  that  the  General  Grand
Chapter  of  the  United  States  adopted  a
regulation  disapproving  of  the  innovation
of  these  explanatory  words,  and  restoring
the  Tetragrammaton  ;  but  this  declaration
of  what  might  almost  be  considered  a  tru¬
ism  in  Masonry  has  been  met  with  open
opposition  or  reluctant  obedience  in  some
places.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  England  has  fallen
into  the  same  error,  and  abandoned  the
teachings  of  Dunckerley,  the  founder  of
the  Royal  Arch  in  that  country,  as  some
of  the  Grand  Chapters  in  America  did  those
of  Webb,  who  was  the  founder  of  the  sys¬
tem  here.  It  is  well,  therefore,  to  inquire
what  was  the  omnific  word  when  the  Royal
Arch  system  was  first  invented.

We  have  the  authority  of  Oliver,  who
had  the  best  opportunity  of  any  man  in
England  of  knowing  the  facts,  for  saying
that  Dunckerley  established  the  Royal
Arch  for  the  modern  Grand  Lodge ;  that
he  wisely  borrowed  many  things  from  Ram¬
say  and  Dermott;  and  that  he  boldly  trans-
lanted  the  word  Jehovah  from  the  Master’s
egree  and  placed  it  in  his  new  system.

Now,  what  was  “  The  Word  ”  of  the
Royal  Arch,  as  understood  by  Dunckerley?
We  have  no  difficulty  here,  "for  he  himself
answers  the  question.  To  the  first  edition
of  the  Laws  and  Regulations  of  the  Royal
Arch,  published  in  1782,  there  is  prefixed
an  essay  on  Freemasonry,  which  is  attrib¬
uted  to  Dunckerley.  In  this  he  makes  the
following  remarks:

“  It  must  be  observed  that  the  expression
The  Word  is  not  to  be  understood  as  a
watchword  only,  after  the  manner  of  those


annexed  to  the  several  degrees  of  the  Craft;
but  also  theologically,  as  a  term,  thereby  to
convey  to  the  mind  some  idea  of  that  Grand
Being  who  is  the  sole  author  of  our  exist¬
ence;  and  to  carry  along  with  it  the  most
solemn  veneration  for  his  sacred  Name  and
Word,  as  well  as  the  most  clear  and  perfect
elucidation  of  his  power  and  attributes
that  the  human  mind  is  capable  of  receiv¬
ing.  And  this  is  the  light  in  which  the
Name  and  Word  hath  always  been  con¬
sidered,  from  the  remotest  ages,  amongst  us
Christians  and  the  Jews.”

And  then,  after  giving  the  well-known
history  from  Josephus  of  the  word,  which,
to  remove  all  doubt  of  what  it  is,  he  says
is  the  “  Shem  Hamphorash,  or  the  Unutter¬
able  Name,”  he  adds:  “Philo,  the  learned
Jew,  tells  us  not  only  that  the  word  was  lost,
but  also  the  time  when,  and  the  reason  why.
But,  to  make  an  end  of  these  unprofitable
disputes  among  the  learned,  be  it  remem¬
bered  that  they  all  concur  with  the  Royal
Arch  Masons  in  others  much  more  essen¬
tial  :  first,  that  the  Name  or  Word  is  ex¬
pressive  of  Self-Existence  and  Eter¬
nity  ;  and,  secondly,  that  it  can  be  appli¬
cable  only  to  that  Great  Being  who  was
and  is  and  will  be.”

Notwithstanding  this  explicit  and  un¬
mistakable  declaration  of  the  founder  of
the  English  Royal  Arch,  that  the  Tetra¬
grammaton  is  the  omnific  word,  the  pres¬
ent  system  in  England  has  rejected  it,  and
substituted  in  its  place  three  other  words,
the  second  of  which  is  wholy  unmeaning.”

In  the  American  system,  as  revised  by
Thomas  Smith  Webb,  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  Tetragrammaton  was  recog¬
nized  as  the  omnific  word.  In  the  Free¬
mason’s  Monitor,  prepared  by  him  for  mon¬
itorial  instruction,  he  has  inserted,  among
the  passages  of  Scripture  to  be  read  during
an  exaltation,  the  following  from  Exodus,
which  is  the  last  in  order,  and  which  any
one  at  all  acquainted  with  the  ritual  will
at  once  see  is  appropriated  to  the  time  of
the  euresis  or  discovery  of  the  Word.

“And  God  spake  unto  Moses,  and  said
unto  him,  I  am  the  Lord,  and  I  appeared
unto  Abraham,  and  unto  Isaac,  and  unto
Jacob  by  the  name  of  God  Amighty,  but
by  my  name  JEHOVAH  was  I  not  known
to  them.”

From  this  it  will  be  evident  that  Webb
recognized  the  word  Jehovah,  and  not  the
three  other  words  that  have  since  been  sub¬
stituted  for  them  by  some  Grand  Chapters
in  this  country,  and  which  it  is  probable
were  originally  used  by  Webb  as  merely
explanatory  or  declaratory  of  the  Divine
nature  of  the  other  and  principal  word.
And  this  is  in  accordance  with  one  of  the
traditions  of  the  degree,  that  they  were


JEPHTHAH


JERUSALEM


381


placed  on  the  substitute  ark  around  the
real  word,  as  a  key  to  explain  its  significa¬
tion.

To  call  anything  else  but  this  four-
lettered  name  an  omnific  word  —  an  all-
creating  and  all -performing  word  —  either
in  Masonry  or  in  Hebrew  symbolism,  whence
Masonry  derived  it,  is  to  oppose  all  the
doctrines  of  the  Talmudists,  the  Kabbalists,
and  the  Gnostics,  and  to  repudiate  the
teachings  of  every  Hebrew  scholar  from
Buxtorf  to  Gesenius.  To  fight  the  battle
against  such  odds  is  to  secure  defeat.  It
shows  more  of  boldness  than  of  discretion.
And  hence  the  General  Grand  Chapter  of
the  United  States  has  very  wisely  restored
the  word  Jehovah  to  its  proper  place.  It
is  only  in  the  York  and  in  the  American
Rites  that  this  error  has  ever  existed.  In
every  other  Rite  the  Tetragrammaton  is
recognized  as  the  true  word.

Jeplitliali.  A  Judge  of  Israel,  and  the
leader  of  the  Gileadites  in  their  war  against
the  Ephraimites,  which  terminated  in  the
slaughter  of  so  many  of  the  latter  at  the
passes  of  the  river  Jordan.  See  Ephraim¬
ites.

Jericho,  Heroine  of.  See  Heroine
of  Jericho.

Jericho,  Knight  of.  See  Knight
of  Jericho.

Jcrniyn,  Henry.  Preston  says
[Illustrations,  p.  161.  ol.  ed.,)  that  Henry
Jermyn,  Earl  of  St.  Albans,  was  elected
Grand  Master  at  a  General  Assembly  held
on  the  27th  of  December,  1663,  and  that  at
this  Assembly  “  several  useful  regulations
were  made,”  some  of  which  he  gives  in  a
note.  Roberts,  in  his  edition  of  the  “Old
Constitutions  ”  printed  in  1722,  the  earli¬
est  printed  Masonic  book  that  we  have,  re¬
fers  also  to  this  General  Assembly ;  the  date
of  which  he,  however,  makes  the  8th  of
December.  Roberts  gives  what  he  calls
the  Additional  Orders  and  Constitutions.
The  Harleian  MS.,  in  the  British  Museum,
numbered  1942,  which  Huglian  supposes  to
have  the  date  of  1670,  and  which  he  has
published  in  his  Old  Charges  of  the  Brit¬
ish  Freemasons,  (p.  52,}  contains  also  three
“  new  articles.”  The  articles  in  Roberts’
and  the  Harleian  MS.  are  identical.  In
Preston,  they  are  modified  in  language,
as  they  are  also  in  the  1738  edition  of  An¬
derson.  But  neither  of  these  writers  is  trust¬
worthy  in  relation  to  citations  from  old
documents.  Of  these  new  articles,  one  of
the  most  important  is  that  which  prescribes
that  the  society  of  Freemasons  shall  there¬
after  be  governed  by  a  Master  and  War¬
dens.  Bro.  Hughan  thinks  that  there  is  no
evidence  of  the  statement  that  a  General  As¬
sembly  was  held  in  1663.  But  I  think  that
the  concurring  testimony  of  Roberts  in


1722,  and  of  Anderson  in  1738,  with  the
significant  fact  that  the  charges  are  found
in  a  manuscript  written  seven  years  after,
give  some  plausibility  to  the  statement  that
a  General  Assembly  was  held  at  that  time.

Jekson.  This  word  is  found  in  the
French  Cahiers  of  the  high  degrees.  It  is
undoubtedly  a  corruption  of  Jacquesson,
and  this  a  mongrel  word  compounded  of
the  French  Jacques  and  the  English  son,
and  means  the  son  of  James,  that  is,  James
II.  It  refers  to  Charles  Edward  the  Pre¬
tender,  who  was  the  son  of  that  abdicated
and  exiled  monarch.  It  is  a  significant
relic  of  the  system  attempted  to  be  intro¬
duced  by  the  adherents  of  the  house  of
Stuart,  and  by  which  they  expected  to  enlist
Masonry  as  an  instrument  to  effect  the  res¬
toration  of  the  Pretender  to  the  throne  of
England.  For  this  purpose  they  had  altered
the  legend  of  the  third  degree,  making  it
applicable  to  James  II.,  who,  being  the  son
of  Henrietta  Maria,  the  widow  of  Charles
I.,  was  designated  as  “  the  widow’s  son.”

Jena,  Congress  of.  Jena  is  a  city
of  Saxe-Weimar,  in  Thuringia.  A  Ma¬
sonic  Congress  was  convoked  there  in  1763,
by  the  Lodge  of  Strict  Observance,  under
the  presidency  of  Johnson,  a  Masonic  char¬
latan,  but  whose  real  name  was  Becker.  In
this  Congress  the  doctrine  was  announced
that  the  Freemasons  were  the  successors  of
the  Knights  Templars,  a  dogma  peculiarly
characteristic  of  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observ¬
ance.  In  the  year  1764,  a  second  Congress
was  convoked  by  Johnson  or  Leucht  with
the  desire  of  authoritatively  establishing  his
doctrine  of  the  connection  between  Tem-
plarism  and  Masonry.  The  empirical  char¬
acter  of  Johnson  was  here  discovered  by  the
Baron  Hund,  and  he  was  denounced,  and
subsequently  punished  at  Magdeburg  by
the  public  authorities.

Jerusalem.  The  capital  of  Judea,
and  memorable  in  Masonic  history  as  the
place  where  was  erected  the  Temple  of  Sol¬
omon.  It  is  early  mentioned  in  Scripture,
and  is  supposed  to  be  the  Salem  of  which
Melchizedek  was  king.  At  the  time  that
the  Israelites  entered  the  Promised  Land,
the  city  was  in  possession  of  the  Jebusites,
from  whom,  after  the  death  of  Joshua,  it
was  conquered,  and  afterwards  inhabited
by  the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin.  The
Jebusites  were  not,  however,  driven  out;
and  we  learn  that  David  purchased  Mount
Moriah  from  Oman  or  Araunah  the  Jebu-
site  as  a  site  for  the  Temple.  It  is  only  in
reference  to  this  Temple  that  Jerusalem  is
connected  with  the  legends  of  Ancient
Craft  Masonry.  In  the  degrees  of  chivalry
it  is  also  important,  because  it  was  the
city  where  the  holy  places  were  situated,
and  for  the  possession  of  which  the  Cru*


382


JERUSALEM


JEWELS


sadcrs  so  long  and  so  bravely  contested.  It
was  there,  too,  that  the  Templars  and  the
Hospitallers  were  established  as  Orders  of
religious  and  military  knighthood.

Modern  Speculative  Masonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  Jerusalem  by  the  establish¬
ment  of  a  Lodge  in  1872.  The  warrant  for
which,  on  the  application  of  Robert  Morris
and  others,  was  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Canada.

Jerusalem,  Knight  of.  See  Knight
of  Jerusalem.

Jerusalem,  IVcw.  The  symbolic
name  of  the  Christian  Church  (Rev.  xxi.
2-21 ;  iii.  12).  The  Apostle  John,  (Rev.
xxi.,)  from  the  summit  of  a  high  mountain,
beheld,  in  a  pictorial  symbol  or  scenic  rep¬
resentation,  a  city  resplendent  with  celes¬
tial  brightness,  which  seemed  to  descend
from  the  heavens  to  the  earth.  It  was
stated  to  be  a  square  of  about  400  miles,
or  12,000  stadia,  equal  to  about  10,000
miles  in  circumference  —  of  course,  a  mys¬
tical  number,  denoting  that  the  city  was
capable  of  holding  almost  countless  myriads
of  inhabitants.  The  New  Jerusalem  was
beheld,  like  Jacob’s  ladder,  extending  from
earth  to  heaven.  It  plays  an  important
part  in  the  ritual  of  the  nineteenth  degree,
or  Grand  Pontiff  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite,  where  the  descent  of
the  New  Jerusalem  is  a  symbol  of  the  de¬
scent  of  the  empire  of  Light  and  Truth
upon  the  earth.

Jerusalem,  Prince  of.  See  Prince

of  Jerusalem.

Jerusalem  Word.  In  the  cate¬
chism  of  1724  occurs  the  following  ques¬
tion  and  answer.

“  Q.  Give  me  the  Jerusalem  Word.

“  A.  Giblin.”

The  origin  of  this  phrase  may  perhaps  be
thus  traced.  The  theory  that  after  the  com¬
pletion  of  the  Temple  a  portion  of  the  work¬
men  travelled  abroad  to  seek  employment,
while  another  portion  remained  at  Jerusa¬
lem,  was  well  known  to  the  Fraternity  at
the  beginning  of  the  last  century.  It  is
amply  detailed  in  that  old  manuscript
known  as  the  York  MS.,  which  is  now  lost,
but  was  translated  by  Krause,  and  inserted
in  his  Kunsturkunden.  It  may  be  sup¬
posed  that  this  “  Jerusalem  Word  ”  was  the
word  which  the  Masons  used  at  Jerusalem,
while  the  “LTniversal  Word,”  which  is
given  in  the  next  question  and  answer,  was
the  word  common  to  the  Craft  everywhere.
The  Jerusalem  Word,  as  such,  is  no  longer
in  use,  but  the  Universal  Word  is  still
found  in  the  first  degree.

Jesuits.  In  the  last  century  the  Jesuits
were  charged  with  having  an  intimate  con¬
nection  with  Freemasonry,  and  the  inven¬
tion  of  the  degree  of  Kadosh  was  even  at¬


tributed  to  those  members  of  the  Society
who  constituted  the  College  of  Clermont.
This  theory  of  a  Jesuitical  Masonry  seems
to  have  originated  with  the  Illuminati,  who
were  probably  governed  in  its  promulgation
by  a  desire  to  depreciate  the  character  of
all  other  Masonic  systems  in  comparison
with  their  own,  where  no  such  priestly  in¬
terference  was  permitted.  Barrutl  scoffs
at  the  idea  of  such  a  connection,  and  calls
it  (Hist.  ( le  Ja.,  iv.  287,)  “la  fable  de  la
Franc-Maqonnerie  Je'suitdque.”  For  once
he  is  right.  Like  oil  and  water,  the  toler¬
ance  of  Freemasonry  and  the  intolerance
of  the  “Society  of  Jesus”  cannot  com¬
mingle.

Yet  it  cannot  be  denied  that,  while  the
Jesuits  have  had  no  part  in  the  construc¬
tion  of  pure  Freemasonry,  there  are  reasons
for  believing  that  they  took  an  interest  in
the  invention  of  some  degrees  and  sys¬
tems  which  wrere  intended  to  advance  their
own  interests.  But  wherever  they  touched
the  Institution  they  left  the  trail  of  the  ser¬
pent.  They  sought  to  convert  its  pure
philanthropy  and  toleration  into  political
intrigue  and  religious  bigotry.  Hence  it  is
believed  that  they  had  something  to  do
with  the  invention  of  those  degrees,  which
wrere  intended  to  aid  the  exiled  house  of
Stuart  in  its  efforts  to  regain  the  English
throne,  because  they  believed  that  would
secure  the  restoration  in  England  of  the
Roman  Catholic  religion.  Almost  a  library
of  books  has  been  written  on  both  sides  of
this  subject  in  Germany  and  in  France.

Jewel  of  an  Ancient  Grand
Master.  A  Masonic  tradition  informs  us
that  the  jewel  of  an  ancient  Grand  Master
at  the  Temple  was  the  square  and  compass
with  the  letter  G  between.  This  was  the
jewel  worn  by  Hiram  Abif  on  the  day
which  deprived  the  Craft  of  his  invaluable
sendees,  and  which  was  subsequently  found
upon  him.

Jewel,  Member's.  In  many  Lodges,
especially  among  the  Germans,  where  it  is
called  “  Mitgleider  Zeichen,”  a  jewel  is
provided  for  every  member,  and  presented
to  him  on  his  initiation  or  affiliation.  It
is  to  be  worn  from  the  button-hole,  and
generally  contains  the  name  of  the  Lodge
and  some  Masonic  device.

Jewels,  Immovable.  See  Jewels
of  a  Lodge.

Jewels,  Movable.  See  Jewels  of  a
Lodge.

Jewels  of  a  L.odge.  Every  Lodge
is  furnished  with  six  jewels,  three  of  which
are  movable  and  three  immovable.  They
are  termed  jewels,  says  Oliver,  because  they
have  a  moral  tendency  which  renders  them
jewels  of  inestimable  value.  The  movable
jewels,  so  called  because  they  are  not  con-


JEWELS


JEWS


383


fined  to  any  particular  part  of  the  Lodge,
are  the  rough  ashlar,  the  perfect  ashlar,
and  the  trestle-board.  The  immovable  jew¬
els  are  the  square,  the  level,  and  the  plumb.
They  are  termed  immovable,  because  they
are  appropriated  to  particular  parts  of  the
Lodge,  where  alone  they  should  be  found,
namely,  the  square  to  the  east,  the  level  to
the  west,  and  the  plumb  to  the  south.  In
the  English  system  the  division  is  the  re¬
verse  of  this.  There,  the  square,  level,  and
plumb  are  called  movable  jewels,  because
they  pass  from  the  three  officers  who  wear
them  to  their  successors.

Jewels,  Official.  Jewels  are  the
names  applied  to  the  emblems  worn  by  the
officers  of  Masonic  bodies  as  distinctive
badges  of  their  offices.  For  the  purpose
of  reference,  the  jewels  worn  in  symbolic
Lodges,  in  Chapters,  Councils,  and  Encamp¬
ments  are  here  appended.


1.  In  Symbolic  Lodges.


W.\  Master  wears

Senior  Warden  “

Junior  Warden  “

Treasurer  “

Secretary  “

Senior  Deacon  “

Junior  Deacon  “

Steward  “

Tiler  “


a  square,
a  level,
a  plumb,
cross  keys,
cross  pens,
square  and  compass,
sun  in  the  centre,
square  and  compass,
moon  in  the  centre,
a  cornucopia,
cross  swords.


The  jewels  are  of  silver  in  a  subordinate
Lodge,  and  of  gold  in  a  Grand  Lodge.  In
English  Lodges,  the  jewel  of  the  Deacon  is
a  dove.


2.  In  Royal  Arch  Chapters.
High  Priest  wears  a  mitre.


King

Scribe  “

Captain  of  the  Host  “

Principal  Sojourner  “

Royal  Arch  Captain  “
Grand  Master  of
the  Veils.  “


a  level  surmounted
by  a  crown,
a  plumb- rule  sur¬
mounted  by  a
turban.

a  triangular  plate
inscribed  with  a
soldier.

a  triangular  plate
inscribed  with  a
pilgrim,
a  sword.

a  sword.


The  other  officers  as  in  a  symbolic  Lodge.
All  the  jewels  are  of  gold,  and  suspended
within  an  equilateral  triangle.


3.  In  Royal  and  Select  Councils.

T.  I.  Grand  Master  wears  a  trowel  and

square.


I.  Hiram  of  Tyre  wears

a  trowel  and

Principal  Conductor

((

level.

a  trowel  and

of  the  works

plumb.

Treasurer

it

a  trowel  and

Recorder

<e

cross  keys,
a  trowel  and

Captain  of  the  Guards

u

cross  pens,
a  trowel  and

Steward

n

sword.

a  trowel  and

Marshal

ft

cross  swords,
a  trowel  and

baton.

If  a  Conductor  of  the  Council  is  used,
he  wears  a  trowel  and  baton,  and  then  a
scroll  is  added  to  the  Marshal’s  baton  to
distinguish  the  two  officers.

All  the  jewels  are  of  silver,  and  are  en¬
closed  within  an  equilateral  triangle.

4.  In  Commanderies  of  Knights  Templars.
Em’t  Commander  wears  a  cross  surmounted

by  rays  of  light.


Generalissimo

U

a  square  sur¬
mounted  by  a
paschal  lamb.

Captain  General

€(

a  level  sur¬

mounted  by  a
cock.

Prelate

ft

a  triple  triangle.

Senior  Warden

U

a  hollow  square
and  sword  of
justice.

Junior  Warden

a

eagle  and  flaming
sword.

Treasurer

ft

cross  keys.

Recorder

n

cross  pens.

Standard  Bearer

a

a  plumb  sur¬
mounted  by  a
banner.

Warder

tt

a  square  plate
inscribed  with  a
trumpet  and

cross  swords.

Three  Guards

ft

a  square  plate  in¬
scribed  with  a
battle-axe.

The  jewels  are

of  silver.

Jewels.  I’reeious

.  In  the  lectures

of  the  second  and  third  degrees,  allusion  is
made  to  certain  moral  qualities,  which,  as
they  are  intended  to  elucidate  and  impress
the  most  important  moral  principles  of  the
degree,  are  for  their  great  value  called  the
Precious  Jewels  of  a  Fellow  Craft  and  the
Precious  Jewels  of  a  Master  Mason.  There
are  three  in  each  degree,  and  they  are  re¬
ferred  to  by  the  Alarm.  Their  explanation
is  esoteric.

Jews,  Disqualification  of.  The

great  principles  of  religious  and  political
toleration  which  peculiarly  characterize
Freemasonry  would  legitimately  make  no


384


JEZIRAH


JOHNSON


religious  faith  which  recognized  a  Supreme
Being  a  disqualification  for  initiation.  But,
unfortunately,  these  principles  have  not
always  been  regarded,  and  from  an  early
period  the  German  Lodges,  and  especially
the  Prussian,  were  reluctant  to  accord  ad¬
mission  to  Jews.  This  action  has  given
great  offence  to  the  Grand  Lodges  of  other
countries  which  were  more  liberal  in  their
views,  and  were  more  in  accord  with  the
Masonic  spirit,  and  was  productive  of  dis¬
sensions  among  the  Masons  of  Germany,
many  of  whom  were  opposed  to  this  intol¬
erant  policy.  But  a  better  spirit  now  pre¬
vails  ;  and  very  recently  the  Grand  Lodge
of  the  Three  Globes  at  Berlin,  the  leading
Masonic  body  of  Prussia,  has  removed  the
interdict,  and  Judaism  is  there  no  longer  a
disqualification  for  initiation.

Jczirali,  or  Jetzirah,  Book  of.
m’X*  “1QD>  *■  e ;  Book  of  the  Creation.
A  Kabbalistic  work,  which  is  claimed  by
the  Kabbalists  as  their  first  and  oldest  code
of  doctrines,  although  it  has  no  real  affinity
with  the  tenets  of  the  Kabbala.  The  au¬
thorship  of  it  is  attributed  to  the  patriarch
Abraham;  but  the  actual  date  of  its  first
appearance  is  supposed  to  be  about  the
ninth  century.  Steinschneider  says  that  it
opens  the  literature  of  the  Secret  Doctrine.
Its  fundamental  idea  is,  that  in  the  ten
digits  and  the  twenty  letters  of  the  Hebrew
alphabet  we  are  to  find  the  origin  of  all
things.  Landauer,  a  German  Hebraist,
thinks  that  the  author  of  the  Jetzirah  bor¬
rowed  his  doctrine  of  numbers  from  the
School  of  Pythagoras,  which  is  very  prob¬
able.  The  old  Masons,  it  is  probable,  de¬
rived  some  of  their  mystical  ideas  of  sacred
numbers  from  this  work.

Joabert.  This,  according  to  the  le¬
gends  of  the  high  degrees,  was  the  name
of  the  chief  favorite  of  Solomon,  who  in¬
curred  the  displeasure  of  Hiram  of  Tyre
on  a  certain  occasion,  but  was  subsequently
pardoned,  and,  on  account  of  the  great  at¬
tachment  he  had  shown  to  the  person  of
his  master,  was  appointed  the  Secretary'  of
Solomon  and  Hiram  in  their  most  intimate
relations.  He  was  afterwards  still  further
promoted  by  Solomon,  and  appointed  with
Tito  and  Adoniram  a  Provost  and  Judge.
He  distinguished  himself  in  his  successful
efforts  to  bring  certain  traitors  to  condign
punishment,  and  although  by  his  rashness
he  at  first  excited  the  anger  of  the  king,  he
was  subsequently  forgiven,  and  eventually
received  the  highest  reward  that  Solomon
could  bestow,  by  being  made  an  Elect,  Per¬
fect,  and  Sublime  Mason.  The  name  is  evi¬
dently  not  Hebrew,  or  must  at  least  have
undergone  much  corruption,  for  in  its  pres¬
ent  form  it  cannot  be  traced  to  a  Hebrew
root.  Lenning  says  ( Encyclopadie )  that  it


is  Johaben,  or,  more  properly,  Ihaoben,
which  he  interprets  the  Son  of  God ;  but  it
would  be  difficult  to  find  any  such  meaning
according  to  the  recognized  rules  of  the
Hebrew  etymology.

Joachim,  Order  of.  A  secret  asso¬
ciation  instituted  in  Germany  towards  the
end  of  the  last  century.  Its  recipients  swore
that  they  believed  in  the  Trinity,  and
would  never  waltz.  None  but  nobles,  their
wives  and  children,  were  admitted.  It  had
no  connection  with  Masonry.

Joliuiiiiite  .HaM>nry.  A  term  in¬
troduced  by  Dr.  Oliver  to  designate  the  sys¬
tem  of  Masonry,  of  which  the  two  Sts.  John
are  recognized  as  the  patrons,  and  to  whom
the  Lodges  are  dedicated,  in  contradistinc¬
tion  to  the  more  recent  system  of  Dr.  Hem¬
ming,  in  which  the  dedication  is  to  Moses
and  Solomon.  Oliver  was  much  opposed
to  the  change,  and  wrote  an  interesting
work  on  the  subject,  entitled  A  Mirror  for
the  Johannite  Maxons,  which  was  published
in  1848.  According  to  his  definition,  the
system  practised  in  the  United  States  is
Johannite  Masonry.

Jobannites.  A  Masonico -religious
sect  established  in  Paris,  in  1814,  by  Fabr£-
Paliprat,  and  attached  to  the  Order  of  the
Temple,  of  which  he  was  the  Grand  Mas¬
ter.  See  Leviticon,  and  Temple,  Order  of  the.

John’s  Brothers.  In  the  charter
of  Cologne,  it  is  said  that  before  the  year
1440  the  society  of  Freemasons  was  known
by  no  other  name  than  that  of  “John’s
Brothers,”  Joannaeorum  fratrum ;  that
they  then  began  to  be  called  at  Valenci¬
ennes,  Free  and  Accepted  Masons;  and
that  at  that  time,  in  some  parts  of  Flanders,
by  the  assistance  and  riches  of  the  brother¬
hood,  the  first  hospitals  were  erected  for
the  relief  of  such  as  were  afflicted  with  St.
Anthony’s  fire.  In  another  part  of  the
charter  it  is  said  that  the  authors  of  the-
associations  were  called  “Brothers  conse¬
crated  to  John,”  — fraires  Joanni  Sacros, —
because  “  they  followed  the  example  and
imitation  of  John  the  Baptist.”

Johnson.  Sometimes  spelled  John¬
stone.  An  adventurer,  and  Masonic  char¬
latan,  whose  real  name  was  Leucht.  He
assumed  Masonry  as  a  disguise  under  which
he  could  carry  on  his  impositions.  He  ap¬
peared  first  at  Jena,  in  the  beginning  of
the  year  1763,  and  proclaimed  that  he  had
been  deputed  by  the  chiefs  of  Templar
Masonry  in  Scotland  to  introduce  a  reform
into  the  German  Lodges.  He  established  a
Chapter  of  Strict  Observance,  (the  Rite  then
dominating  in  Germany,)  and  assumed  the
dignity  of  Grand  Prior.  He  made  war  upon
Rosa,  the  founder  of  the  Rosaic  Rite,  and
upon  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Three  Globes,
which  then  sustained  that  enthusiast.  Many


JOHN


JONES


385


of  the  German  Lodges  succumbed  to  his  pre¬
tensions,  and,  surrendering  their  Warrants,
gave  in  their  adhesion  to  Johnson.  Von
Hund  himself  was  at  first  deceived  by  him  ;
but  in  1764,  at  Altenberg,  having  dis¬
covered  that  Johnson  had  been  formerly,
under  the  name  of  Becker,  the  secretary
of  the  Prince  of  Bernberg, whose  confidence
he  had  betrayed ;  that  during  the  seven  years’
war  he  had  been  wandering  about,  becom¬
ing,  finally,  the  servant  of  a  Mason,  whose
papers  he  had  stolen,  and  that  by  means  of
these  papers  he  had  been  passing  himself
as  that  individual,  B.Von  Hund  denounced
him  as  an  impostor.  Johnson  fled,  but
was  subsequently  arrested  at  Magdeburg,
and  imprisoned  in  the  fortress  of  Wartz-
berg,  where  in  1773  he  died  suddenly.

John  the  Baptist.  See  Saint  John
the  Baptist.

John  the  Evangelist.  See  Saint
John  the  Evangelist.

Jones,  Inigo.  One  of  the  most  cele¬
brated  of  English  architects,  and  hence
called  the  Vitruvius  of  England.  He  was
born  at  London  on  July  15,  1573,  and  died
June  21, 1652,  in  the  seventy-ninth  year  of
his  age.  He  was  successively  the  archi¬
tect  of  three  kings,  —  James  I.,  Charles
I.,  and  Charles  II.,  —  and  during  his  long
career  superintended  the  erection  of  many
of  the  most  magnificent  public  and  private
edifices  in  England,  among  which  were  the
Banqueting-House  of  Whitehall,  and  the
old  church  of  St.  Paul’s.  Jones’s  official
position  placed  him,  of  course,  in  close  con¬
nection  with  the  Operative  Masons.  An¬
derson,  seizing  on  this  circumstance,  says
that  James  I.  “approved  of  his  being
chosen  Grand  Master  of  England,  to  pre¬
side  over  the  Lodges;”  but  the  Earl  of
Pembroke  being  afterwards  chosen  Grand
Master,  he  appointed  Jones  his  Deputy.
These  statements  are  copied  by  Entick  and
Noorthouck  in  their  respective  editions  of
the  Book  of  Constitutions;  but  it  is  hardly
necessary  to  say  that  they  need  historical
confirmation.  Preston  says:

“During  his  administration,  several
learned  men  were  initiated  into  the  Order,
and  the  society  considerably  increased  in
consequence  and  reputation.  Ingenious
artists  daily  resorted  to  England,  where
they  met  with  great  encouragement ;
Lodges  were  instituted  as  seminaries  of
instruction  in  the  sciences  and  polite  arts,
after  the  model  of  the  Italian  schools;  the
communications  of  the  Fraternity  were  es¬
tablished,  and  the  annual  festivals  regu¬
larly  observed.”

There  may  be  exaggeration  or  assump¬
tion  in  much  of  this,  but  it  cannot  be  de¬
nied  that  the  office  of  Jones  as  “  King’s
Architect,”  and  his  labors  as  the  most  ex-
2  Y  25


tensive  builder  of  his  time,  must  have
brought  him  into  close  intimacy  with  the
associations  of  Operative  Masons,  which
were  being  rapidly  influenced  by  a  specu¬
lative  character.  It  will  be  remembered
that  five  years  before  Jones’s  death,  Elias
Ash  mole  was,  by  his  own  account,  made  a
Freemason  at  Warrington,  and  Jones  the
architect  and  builder  could  hardly  have
taken  less  interest  in  the  society  than  Ash-
mole  the  astrologer  and  antiquary.  We
have,  I  think,  a  right  to  believe  that  Jones
was  a  Freemason.

Jones,  Stephen.  A  miscellaneous
writer  and  Masonic  author  of  some  celeb¬
rity.  He  was  born  at  London  in  1764,  and
educated  at  St.  Paul’s  school.  He  was,  on
leaving  school,  placed  under  an  eminent
sculptor,  but,  on  account  of  some  difference,
was  removed  and  apprenticed  to  a  printer.
On  the  expiration  of  his  articles,  he  was  en¬
gaged  as  corrector  of  the  press,  by  Mr.  Stra-
han,  the  king’s  printer.  Four  years  after¬
wards,  he  removed  to  the  office  of  Mr.
Thomas  Wright,  where  he  remained  until
1797,  when  the  death  of  his  employer  dis¬
solved  his  immediate  connection  with  the
printing  business.  He  then  became  the
editor  of  the  Whitehall  Evening  Post,  and,
on  the  decline  of  that  paper,  of  the  General
Evening  Post,  and  afterwards  of  the  Euro-
pean  Magazine.  His  contributions  to  liter¬
ature  were  very  various.  He  supervised
an  edition  of  Reed’s  Biographia  Dramati-
ca,  an  abridgment  of  Burke's  Reflections  on
the  French  Revolution,  and  also  abridgments
of  many  other  popular  works.  But  he  is
best  known  in  general  literature  by  his
Pronouncing  and  Explanatory  Dictionary
of  the  Enqlish  Language,  published  in  1798.
This  production,  although  following  Walk¬
er’s  far  superior  work,  was  very  favorably
received  by  the  public.

In  Masonry,  Stephen  Jones  occupied  a
very  high  position.  He  was  a  Past  Master
of  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity,  of  which  Wil¬
liam  Preston  was  a  member,  and  of  whom
Jones  was  an  intimate  friend,  and  one  of
his  executors.  Preston  had  thoroughly
instructed  him  in  Iris  system,  and  after  the
death  of  that  distinguished  Mason,  he  was
the  first  to  fill  the  appointment  of  Presto-
nian  lecturer.  In  1797  he  published  Ma¬
sonic  Miscellanies  in  Prose  and  Poetry,  which
went  through  many  editions,  the  last  being
that  of  1811.  In  a  graceful  dedication  to
Preston,  lie  acknowledges  his  indebtedness
to  him  for  any  insight  that  he  may  have
acquired  into  the  nature  and  design  of  Ma¬
sonry.  In  1816,  he  contributed  the  article
“  Masonry  or  Freemasonry”  to  the  Ency¬
clopaedia-  Londinensis.  In  1821,  after  the
death  of  Preston,  he  published  an  edition
of  the  Rlustrations,  with  Additions  and  Cor »


386


JOPPA


JOSHUA


rections.  Bro.  Matthew  Cooke  (London
Freemason' a  Magazine,  Sept.,  1859,)  says  of
him:  “In  the  Masonic  Craft,  Bro.  Jones
was  very  deeply  versed.  He  was  a  man  of
genial  sympathies,  and  a  great  promoter
of  social  gatherings.”  John  Britton  the
architect,  who  knew  him  well,  says  of  him,
( Autobiog .,  p.  302,)  that  “  he  was  a  man  of
mild  disposition,  strict  honesty,  great  in¬
dustry,  and  unblemished  character.”  In*his
latter  days  he  was  in  embarrassed  circum¬
stances,  and  derived  pecuniary  aid  from
the  Literary  Fund.  He  died,  on  Dec.
20,  1828,  of  dropsy,  in  King  St.,  Holborn,
London.

Joppa.  A  town  of  Palestine  and  the
seaport  of  Jerusalem,  from  which  it  is  dis¬
tant  about  forty  miles  in  a  westerly  direc¬
tion.  It  was  here  that  the  King  of  Tyre
sent  .ships  laden  with  timber  and  marble  to
be  forwarded  overland  to  Solomon  for  the
construction  of  the  Temple.  Its  shore  is
exceedingly  rough,  and  much  dreaded  by
navigators,  who,  on  account  of  its  exposure,
and  the  perpendicularity  of  its  banks,  are
compelled  to  be  perpetually  on  their  guard.
The  following  extract  from  the  narrative
of  the  Baron  Geramb,  a  Trappist,  who
visited  the  Holy  Land  in  1842,  will  be  in¬
teresting  to  Mark  Masters.  “Yesterday
morning  at  daybreak,  boats  put  off  and
surrounded  the  vessel  to  take  us  to  the
town  (of  Joppa),  the  access  to  which  is  diffi¬
cult  on  account  of  the  numerous  rocks  that
present  to  view  their  bare  flanks.  The  walls
were  covered  with  spectators,  attracted  by
curiosity.  The  boats  being  much  low’er
than  the  bridge,  upon  which  one  is  obliged
to  climb,  and  having  no  ladder,  the  landing
is  not  effected  without  danger.  More  than
once  it  has  happened  that  passengers,  in
springing  out,  have  broken  their  limbs;  and
we  might  have  met  with  the  like  accident,
if  several  persons  had  not  hastened  to  our
assistance.”  [Pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem  and
Mount  Sinai,  vol.  i.,  p.  27.)  The  place  is
now  called  Jaffa.

Jordan.  A  river  of  Judea,  on  the
banks  of  which  occurred  the  slaughter  of
the  Ephraimites,  which  is  alluded  to  in  the
second  degree.

Jordan.  Charles  Stephen.  Se¬
cret  counsellor  of  the  King  of  Prussia,
and  Vice  President  of  the  Academy  of
Sciences  in  Berlin,  was  born  in  the  year
1700,  and  died  in  the  year  1745.  In  the
year  1740,  he  founded,  with  the  Baron  von
Bielfeld,  the  Lodge  of  Three  Globes  at
Berlin,  of  which  he  was  Secretary  until  the
time  of  his  death.

Jordan.  Fords  of  the.  The  exact
locality  of  these  fords  (or  “passages,”  as
the  Bible  terms  them,)  cannot  now  be  des¬
ignated,  but  most  likely  they  were  those
nearly  due  cast  of  Seikoot,  and  opposite


Mizpah.  At  these  fords,  in  summer  time,
the  water  is  not  more  than  three  or  four
feet  deep,  the  bottom  being  composed  of  a
hard  limestone  rock.  If,  as  some  think,
the  fords  thirty  miles  higher  up  are  those
referred  to,  the  same  description  will  apply.
At  either  place,  the  Jordan  is  about  eighty
feet  wide;  its  banks  encumbered  by  a  dense
growth  of  tamarisks,  cane,  willows,  thorn-
bushes,  and  other  low  vegetation  of  the
shrubby  and  thorny  sorts,  which  make  it
difficult  even  to  approach  the  margin  of  the
stream.  The  Arabs  cross  the  river  at  the
present  day,  at  stages  of  low  water,  at  a
number  of  fords,  from  the  one  near  the
point  where  the  Jordan  leaves  the  sea  of
Galilee,  down  to  the  Pilgrims’  Ford,  six
miles  above  the  Dead  Sea.  Morris:  Free¬
masonry  in  the  Holy  Land,  p.  31(i.

Joseph  II.  This  emperor  of  Ger¬
many,  who  succeeded  his  mother  Maria
Theresa,  at  one  time  encouraged  the  Masons
in  his  dominions,  and,  notwithstanding  the
efforts  of  the  priests  to  prevent  it,  issued  a
decree  in  1785,  written,  says  Penning,  by
his  own  hand,  which  permitted  the  meet¬
ings  of  Lodges  under  certain  restrictions  as
to  number.  In  this  decree  he  says:

“  In  return  for  their  compliance  with  this
ordinance,  the  government  accords  to  the
Freemasons  welcome,  protection,  and  lib¬
erty ;  leaving  entirely  to  their  own  direc¬
tion  the  control  of  their  members  and  their
constitutions.  The  government  will  not  at¬
tempt  to  penetrate  into  their  mysteries.

“Following  these  directions,  the  Order  of
Freemasons,  in  which  body  are  comprised  a
great  number  of  worthy  men  who  are  well-
known  to  me,  may  become  useful  to  the
state.”

But  the  Austrian  Masons  did  not  enjoy
this  tolerance  long;  the  Emperor  at  length
yielded  to  the  counsels  and  the  influence  of
the  bigoted  priesthood,  and  in  1789  the  or¬
dinance  was  rescinded,  and  the  Lodges  were
forbidden  to  congregate  under  the  severest
penalties.

Josephus,  Flavius.  A  Jewish  au¬
thor  who  lived  in  the  first  century,  and
wrote  in  Greek,  among  other  works,  a  His¬
tory  of  the  Jews,  to  which  recourse  has  been
had  in  some  of  the  high  degrees,  such  as
the  Prince  of  Jerusalem,  and  Knight  of  the
Red  Cross,  or  Red  Cross  of  Babylon,  for  de¬
tails  in  framing  their  rituals.

Joshua.  The  high  priest  who,  with
Zerubbabel  the  Prince  of  Judah,  superin¬
tended  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  after
the  Babylonian  captivity.  He  was  the  high
priest  by  lineal  descent  from  the  pontifical
family,  for  he  was  the  son  of  Josadek,  who
was  the  son  of  Seraiah,  who  was  the  high
priest  when  the  Temple  was  destroyed  by
the  Chaldeans.  He  was  distinguished  for
the  zeal  with  which  he  prosecuted  the  work


JOURNEY


JURISDICTION


387


of  rebuilding,  and  opposed  the  interference
of  the  Samaritans.  He  is  represented  by
the  High  Priest  in  the  Royal  Arch  degree
according  to  the  York  and  American  Rites.

Journey.  Journeywork,  or  work  by
the  day,  in  contradistinction  to  task ,  or
work  by  the  piece,  and  so  used  in  all  the
old  Constitutions.  Thus,  in  the  Dowland
MS.,  there  is  the  charge  “  that  noe  maister
nor  fellowe,  put  no  lord’s  work  to  taske
that  was  want  to  goe  to  jornaye.”  It  was
fairer  to  the  lord  and  to  the  craftsman  to
work  by  the  day  than  by  the  piece.

Journeyman.  When  the  Lodges
were  altogether  operative  in  their  charac¬
ter,  a  Mason,  having  served  his  apprentice¬
ship,  began  to  work  for  himself,  and  he  was
then  called  a  journeyman ;  but  he  was  re¬
quired,  within  a  reasonable  period,  (in
Scotland  it  was  two  years,)  to  obtain  ad¬
mission  into  a  Lodge,  when  he  was  said  to
have  passed  a  Fellow  Craft.  Hence  the
distinction  between  Fellow  Crafts  and  jour¬
neymen  was  that  the  former  were  and  the
latter  were  not  members  of  Lodges.  Thus,
in  the  minutes  of  St.  Mary’s  Chapel  Lodge
of  Edinburgh,  on  the  27th  of  December,
1689,  it  was  declared  that  “No  Master  shall
employ  a  person  who  has  not  been  passed
a  Fellow  Craft  in  two  years  after  the  expir¬
ing  of  his  apprenticeship;”  and  the  names
of  several  journeymen  are  given  who  had
not  complied  with  the  law.  A  similar  reg¬
ulation  was  repeated  by  the  same  Lodge  in
1703,  complaint  having  been  made  “  that
there  are  several  Masteris  of  this  house
that  tolerate  jurnimen  to  work  up  and  down
this  cilie  contrary  to  their  oath  of  admis¬
sion  ;  ”  and  such  journeymen  were  forbidden
to  seek  employment.  The  patronage  of
the  Craft  of  Freemasons  was  bestowed  only
on  those  who  had  become  “  free  of  the  gild.”

Jova.  A  significant  word  in  the  high
degrees.  It  is  a  corrupted  form  of  the  Tet-
ragrammaton.

Jua.  A  corrupted  form  of  the  Tetra-
rammaton,  and  a  significant  word  in  the
igh  degrees.

J  ml  all.  The  whole  of  Palestine  was
sometimes  called  the  land  of  Judah,  be¬
cause  Judah  was  a  distinguished  tribe  in
obtaining  possession  of  the  country.  The
tribe  of  Judah  bore  a  lion  in  its  standard,
and  hence  the  Masonic  allusion  to  the  Lion
of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  See  also  Genesis
xlix.  9,  “Judah  is  a  lion’s  whelp.”

Judali  ami  IScnjaiuin.  Of  the
twelve  tribes  of  Israel  who  were,  at  various
times,  carried  into  captivity,  only  two,  those
of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  returned  under
Zerubbabel  to  rebuild  the  second  Temple.
Hence,  in  the  high  degrees,  which  are
founded  on  events  that  occurred  at  and
after  the  building  of  the  second  Temple,


the  allusions  are  made  only  to  the  tribes  of
Judah  and  Benjamin.

Jug  Lodges.  An  opprobrious  epithet
bestowed,  during  the  anti-Masonic  excite¬
ment,  upon  certain  assemblages  of  worthless
men  who  pretended  to  confer  the  degrees
upon  candidates  weak  enough  to  confide  in
them.  They  derived  their  instructions
from  the  so-called  expositions  of  Morgan,
and  exacted  a  trifling  fee  for  initiation,
which  was  generally  a  jug  of  whiskey,  or
money  enough  to  buy  one.  They  were
found  in  the  mountain  regions  of  North
and  South  Carolina  and  Georgia.

Junior  Adept.  (Junior  Adeptus.)  One
of  the  degrees  of  the  German  Rose  Croix.

Junior  Entered  Apprentice.
According  to  the  rituals  of  the  early  part
of  the  last  century,  the  Junior  Entered
Apprentice  was  placed  in  the  North,  and
his  duty  was  to  keep  out  all  cowans  and
eavesdroppers.  There  was  also  a  Senior
Entered  Apprentice,  and  the  two  seem  to
have  occupied,  in  some  manner,  the  posi¬
tions  now  occupied  by  the  Senior  and
Junior  Deacons.  See  Senior  Entered  Ap¬
prentice.

Junior  Overseer.  The  lowest  offi¬
cer  in  a  Mark  Lodge.  When  Royal  Arch
Chapters  are  opened  in  the  Mark  degree,
the  duties  of  the  Junior  Overseer  are  per¬
formed  by  the  Grand  Master  of  the  first
Veil.

Junior  Warden.  The  third  officer
in  a  symbolic  Lodge.  He  presides  over
the  Craft  during  the  hours  of  refreshment,
and,  in  the  absence  of  the  Master  and  Se¬
nior  Warden,  he  performs  the  duty  of  pre¬
siding  officer.  Hence,  if  the  Master  and
Senior  Warden  were  to  die  or  remove  from
the  jurisdiction,  the  Junior  Warden  would
assume  the  chair  for  the  remainder  of  the
term.  The  jewel  of  the  Junior  Warden  is
a  plumb,  emblematic  of  the  rectitude  of
conduct  which  should  distinguish  the
brethren  when,  during  the  hours  of  re¬
freshment,  they  are  beyond  the  precincts
of  the  Lodge.  His  seat  is  in  the  South,
and  he  represents  the  Pillar  of  Beauty.
He  has  placed  before  him,  and  carries  in
procession,  a  column,  which  is  the  repre¬
sentative  of  the  left-hand  pillar  which  stood
at  the  porch  of  the  Temple.  See  Wardens.

The  sixth  officer  in  a  Commandery  of
Knights  Templars  is  also  styled  Junior
Warden.  His  duties,  especially  in  the  re¬
ception  of  candidates,  are  very  important.
His  jewel  of  office  is  an  Eagle  holding  a
Flaming  Sword.

Jupiter,  Knight  of.  See  Knight
of  Jupiter.

Jurisdiction  of ;» Grand  Hodge.

The  jurisdiction  of  a  Grand  I^odge  extends
over  every  Ledge  working  within  its  terri-


388


JURISDICTION


JUST


torial  limits,  and  over  all  places  not  already
occupied  by  a  Grand  Lodge.  The  territo¬
rial  limits  of  a  Grand  Lodge  are  deter¬
mined  in  general  by  the  political  bounda¬
ries  of  the  country  in  which  it  is  placed.
Thus  the  territorial  limits  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  New  York  are  circumscribed
within  the  settled  boundaries  of  that  State.
Nor  can  its  jurisdiction  extend  beyond
these  limits  into  any  of  the  neighboring
States.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York
could  not,  therefore,  without  an  infringe¬
ment  of  Masonic  usage,  grant  a  Warrant
of  Constitution  to  any  Lodge  located  in
any  State  where  there  was  already  a  Grand
Lodge.  It  might,  however,  charter  a  Lodge
in  a  Territory  where  there  is  not  in  exist¬
ence  a  Grand  Lodge  of  that  Territory.
Thus  the  Lodges  of  France  held  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  until  the  forma¬
tion  of  a  Grand  Lodge  of  France,  and  the
Grand  Lodges  of  both  England,  Scotland,
and  France  granted  Warrants  to  various
Lodges  in  America  until  after  the  Revolu¬
tion,  when  the  States  began  to  organize
Grand  Lodges  for  themselves.  For  the  pur¬
pose  of  avoiding  collision  and  unfriendly
reeling,  it  has  become  the  settled  usage,
that  when  a  Grand  Lodge  has  been  legally
organized  in  a  State,  all  the  Lodges  within
its  limits  must  surrender  the  charters  which
they  have  received  from  foreign  bodies,  and
accept  new  ones  from  the  newly  estab¬
lished  Grand  Lodge.  This  is  the  settled
and  well-recognized  law  of  American  and
English  Masonry.  But  the  continental
Masons,  and  especially  the  Germans,  have
not  so  rigidly  interpreted  this  law  of  un¬
occupied  territory ;  and  there  have  been  in
France,  and  still  are  in  Germany,  several
Grand  Lodges  in  the  same  kingdom  exer¬
cising  co-ordinate  powers.

Jurisdiction  of  a  L.odge.  The
jurisdiction  of  a  Lodge  is  geographical  or
personal.  The  geographical  jurisdiction  of
a  Lodge  is  that  which  it  exercises  over  the
territory  within  which  it  is  situated,  and
extends  to  all  the  Masons,  affiliated  and
unaffiliated,  who  live  within  that  territory.
This  jurisdiction  extends  to  a  point  equally
distant  from  the  adjacent  Lodge.  Thus,
if  two  Lodges  are  situated  within  twenty
miles  of  each  other,  the  geographical  juris¬
diction  of  each  will  extend  ten  miles  from
its  seat  in  the  direction  of  the  other  Lodge.
But  in  this  case  both  Lodges  must  be  situ¬
ated  in  the  same  State,  and  hold  their  War¬
rants  from  the  same  Grand  Lodge;  for  it
is  a  settled  point  of  Masonic  law  that  no


Lodge  can  extend  its  geographical  juris¬
diction  beyond  the  territorial  limits  of  its
own  Grand  Lodge.

The  personal  jurisdiction  of  a  Lodge  is
that  penal  jurisdiction  which  it  exercises
over  its  own  members  wherever  they  may
be  situated.  No  matter  how  far  a  Mason
may  remove  from  the  Lodge  of  which  he
is  a  member,  his  allegiance  to  that  Lodge
is  indefeasible  so  long  as  he  continues  a
member,  and  it  may  exercise  penal  juris¬
diction  over  him.

Jurisdiction  of  a  Supremo
Council.  The  Masonic  jurisdiction  of
the  whole  territory  of  the  United  States
for  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
was  divided  between  the  Southern  and
Northern  Supreme  Councils  in  accordance
with  a  special  concession  made  by  the  for¬
mer  body  in  1813,  when  the  latter  was  or-
anized.  By  this  concession  the  Northern
upreme  Council  has  jurisdiction  over  the
States  of  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  Ver¬
mont,  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  Con¬
necticut,  New  York,  New  Jersey,  Delaware,
Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  Illinois,  and  Indiana;
all  the  other  States  and  Territories  are  un¬
der  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Southern  Su¬
preme  Council.

Justice.  One  of  the  four  cardinal  vir¬
tues,  the  practice  of  which  is  inculcated  in
the  first  degree.  The  Mason  who  remembers
how  emphatically  he  has  been  charged  to
preserve  an  upright  position  in  all  his  deal¬
ings  with  mankind,  should  never  fail  to  act
justly  to  himself,  to  his  brethren,  and  to
the  w'orld.  This  is  the  corner-stone  on
which  alone  he  can  expect  “  to  erect  a  su¬
perstructure  alike  honorable  to  himself  and
to  the  Fraternity.”  In  iconology,  Justice
is  usually  represented  as  a  matron  with
bandaged  eyes,  holding  in  one  hand  a
sword  and  in  the  other  a  pair  of  scales  at
equipoise.  But  in  Masonry  the  true  sym¬
bol  of  Justice,  as  illustrated  in  the  first  de¬
gree,  is  the  feet  firmly  planted  on  the  ground,
and  the  body  upright.

Justification.  The  fifth  degree  in
the  Rite  of  Fessler.

Just  JiOdge.  A  Lodge  is  said  to  be
Just,  Perfect,  and  Regular  under  the  fol¬
lowing  circumstances :  Just,  when  it  is  fur¬
nished  with  the  three  Great  Lights ;  Per¬
fect,  when  it  contains  the  constitutional
number  of  members  ;  and  Regular,  when  it
is  working  under  a  Charter  of  Warrant
of  Constitution  emauating  from  the  legal
authority.


KAABA


KABBALA


389


K.


Kaaba.  The  name  of  the  holy  tem¬
ple  of  Mecca,  which  is  to  the  Mohamme¬
dans  what  the  Temple  of  Solomon  was  to
the  Jews.  It  is  certainly  older,  as  Gibbon
admits,  than  the  Christian  era,  and  is  sup-
osed,  by  the  tradition  of  the  Arabians,  to
ave  been  erected  in  the  nineteenth  cen¬
tury  B.  c.,  by  Abraham,  who  was  assisted
by  his  son  Ishmael.  It  derives  its  name
of  Kaaba  from  its  cubical  form,  it  being
fifteen  feet  long,  wide,  and  high.  It  has
but  one  aperture  for  light,  which  is  a  door
in  the  cast  end.  In  the  north-cast  corner  is
a  black  stone,  religiously  venerated  by  the
Mussulmans,  called  “  the  black  stone  of  the
Kaaba,”  around  which  cluster  many  tra¬
ditions.  One  of  these  is  that  it  came  down
from  Paradise,  and  was  originally  as  white
as  milk,  but  that  the  sins  of  mankind  turned
it  black ;  another  is,  that  it  is  a  ruby  which
was  originally  one  of  the  precious  stones
of  heaven,  but  that  God  deprived  it  of  its
brilliancy,  which  would  have  illuminated
the  world  from  one  end  to  the  other.  Syed
Ahmed,  who,  fora  Mussulman,  has  written
a  very  rational  History  of  the  Holy  Mecca ,
(London,  1870,)  says  that  the  black  stone
is  really  a  piece  of  rock  from  the  moun¬
tains  in  the  vicinity  of  Mecca;  that  it  owes
its  black  color  to  the  effects  of  fire;  and  that
before  the  erection  of  the  temple  of  the
Kaaba,  it  was  no  other  than  one  of  the
numerous  altars  erected  for  the  worship  of
God,  and  was,  together  with  other  stones,
laid  up  in  one  of  the  corners  of  the  tem¬
ple  at  the  time  of  its  construction.  It  is,
in  fact,  one  of  the  relics  of  the  ancient
stone  worship ;  yet  it  reminds  us  of  the
foundation-stone  of  the  Solomonic  Temple,
to  which  building  the  temple  of  the  Kaaba
has  other  resemblances.  Thus,  Syed  Ah¬
med,  who,  in  opposition  to  most  Christian
writers,  devoutly  believes  in  its  Abrahamic
origin,  says  that  (p.  G,)  “  the  temple  of  the
Kaaba  was  built  by  Abraham  in  conformity
with  those  religious  practices  according  to
which,  after  a  lapse  of  time,  the  descend¬
ants  of  his  second  son  built  the  Temple  of
Jerusalem.”

liahhala.  The  mystical  philosophy
or  theosophy  of  the  Jews  is  called  the
Kabbala.  The  word  is  derived  from  the
Hebrew  Sip,  Kabal,  signifying  to  receive,
because  it1  is  the  doctrine  received  from
the  elders.  It  has  sometimes  been  used  in
an  enlarged  sense,  as  comprehending  all
the  explanations,  maxims,  and  ceremonies
whicli  have  been  traditionally  handed  down
to  the  Jews;  but  in  that  more  limited  ac¬
ceptation,  in  which  it  is  intimately  con¬
nected  with  the  symbolic  science  of  Free¬


masonry,  the  Kabbala  may  be  defined  to  be  a
system  of  philosophy  which  embraces  cer¬
tain  mystical  interpretations  of  Scripture,
and  metaphysical  speculations  concerning
the  Deity,  man,  and  spiritual  beings.  In
these  interpretations  and  speculations,  ac¬
cording  to  the  Jewish  doctors,  were  envel¬
oped  the  most  profound  truths  of  religion,
which,  to  be  comprehended  by  finite  beings,
are  obliged  to  be  revealed  through  the  me¬
dium  of  symbols  and  allegories.  Buxtorf
[Lex.  Talm.,)  defines  the  Kabbala  to  be  a
secret  science,  which  treats  in  a  mystical
and  enigmatical  manner  of  things  divine,
angelical,  theological,  celestial,  and  meta¬
physical  ;  the  subjects  being  enveloped  in
striking  symbols  and  secret  modes  of  teach¬
ing.  Much  use  is  made  of  it  in  the  high,
degrees,  and  entire  Rites  have  been  con¬
structed  on  its  principles.  Hence  it  de¬
mands  a  place  in  any  general  work  on  Ma¬
sonry.

In  what  estimation  the  Kabbala  is  held
by  Jewish  scholars,  we  may  learn  from  the
traditions  which  they  teach,  and  which  Dr.
Ginsburg  has  given  in  his  exhaustive  work,

(. Kabbalah ,  p.  84,)  in  the  following  words:

“  The  Kabbalah  was  first  taught  by  God
himself  to  a  select  company  of  angels,  who
formed  a  theosophic  school  in  Paradise.
After  the  fall,  the  angels  most  graciously
communicated  this  heavenly  doctrine  to
the  disobedient  child  of  earth,  to  furnish
the  protoplasts  with  the  means  of  return¬
ing  to  their  pristine  nobility  and  felicity.
From  Adam  it  passed  over  to  Noah,  and
then  to  Abraham,  the  friend  of  God,  who
emigrated  with  it  to  Egypt,  where  the
patriarch  allowed  a  portion  of  this  mysteri¬
ous  doctrine  to  ooze  out.  It  was  in  this
way  that  the  Egyptians  obtained  some
knowledge  of  it,  and  the  other  Eastern  na¬
tions  could  introduce  it  into  their  philo¬
sophical  systems.  Moses,  who  was  learned  in
all  the  wisdom  of  Egypt,  was  first  initiated
into  it  in  the  land  ot  his  birth,  but  became
most  proficient  in  it  during  his  wanderings
in  the  wilderness,  when  he  not  only  devoted
to  it  the  leisure  hours  of  the  whole  forty
years,  but  received  lessons  in  it  from  one  of  1
the  angels.  By  the  aid  of  this  mysterious
science,  the  lawgiver  was  enabled  to  solve
the  difficulties  which  arose  during  his  man¬
agement  of  the  Israelites,  in  spite  of  the
pilgrimages,  wars,  and  the  frequent  miseries
of  the  nation.  He  covertly  laid  down  the
principles  of  this  secret  doctrine  in  the  first
four  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  but  withheld
them  from  Deuteronomy.  This  constitutes
the  former  the  man,  and  the  latter  the
woman.  Moses  also  initiated  the  seventy


390


KABBALA


KABBALA


elders  into  tlie  secrets  of  this  doctrine,  and
they  again  transmitted  them  from  hand  to
hand.  Of  all  who  formed  the  unbroken
line  of  tradition,  David  and  Solomon  were
first  initiated  into  the  Kabbalah.  No  one,
however,  dared  to  write  it  down  till  Simon
ben  Jochai,  who  lived  at  the  time  of  the
destruction  of  the  second  Temple.  Having
been  condemned  to  death  by  Titus,  Rabbi
Simon  managed  to  escape  with  his  son,  and
concealed  himself  in  a  cavern,  where  he  re¬
mained  for  twelve  years.  Here  in  this  sub¬
terranean  abode,  he  occupied  himself  en¬
tirely  with  the  contemplation  of  the  sub¬
lime  Kabbalah,  and  was  constantly  visited
by  the  prophet  Elias,  who  disclosed  to  him
some  of  its  secrets,  which  were  still  con¬
cealed  from  the  theosophical  Rabbi.  Here,
too,  his  disciples  resorted  to  be  initiated  by
their  master  into  these  divine  mysteries;
and  here  Simon  ben  Jochai  expired  with
this  heavenly  doctrine  in  his  mouth,  whilst
discoursing  on  it  to  his  disciples.  Scarcely
had  his  spirit  departed,  when  a  dazzling  light
filled  the  cavern,  so  that  no  one  could  look
at  the  Rabbi;  whilst  a  burning  fire  ap¬
peared  outside,  forming  as  it  were  a  senti¬
nel  at  the  entrance  of  the  cave,  and  denying
admittance  to  the  neighbors.  It  was  not
till  the  light  inside,  and  the  fire  outside,
had  disappeared,  that  the  disciples  per¬
ceived  that  the  lamp  of  Israel  was  extin¬
guished.  As  they  were  preparing  for  his
obsequies,  a  voice  was  heard  from  heaven,
saying,  ‘Come  ye  to  the  marriage  of  Simon
b.  Jochai ;  he  is  entering  into  peace,  and
shall  rest  in  his  chamber!’  Aflame  pre¬
ceded  the  coffin,  which  seemed  enveloped
by  and  burning  like  fire.  And  when  the
remains  were  deposited  in  the  tomb,  another
voice  was  heard  from  heaven,  saying,  ‘This
is  he  who  caused  the  earth  to  quake  and
the  kingdoms  to  shake !  ’  His  son,  R.
Eliezer,  and  his  secretary,  R.  Abba,  as
well  as  his  disciples,  then  collated  R.  Simon
b.  Jochai’s  treatises,  and  out  of  these  com¬
posed  the  celebrated  work  called  Sohar,
nnD.)  i.  e.,  Splendor,  which  is  the  grand
storehouse  of  Kabbalism.”

The  Kabbala  is  divided  into  two  kinds,
the  Practical  and  the  Theoretical.  The
Practical  Kabbala  is  occupied  in  instruc¬
tions  for  the  construction  of  talismans  and
amulets,  and  has  no  connection  with  Ma¬
sonic  science.  The  Theoretical  Kabbala
is  again  divided  into  the  Dogmatic  and
the  Literal.  The  Dogmatic  Kabbala  is  the
summary  of  the  rabbinical  theosophy  and
philosophy.  The  Literal  Kabbala  is  the
science  which  teaches  a  mystical  mode  of
explaining  sacred  things  by  a  peculiar  use
of  the  letters  of  words,  and  a  reference  to
their  value.  Each  of  these  divisions  de¬
mands  a  separate  attention.

I.  The  Dogmatic  Kabbala.  The


origin  of  the  Kabbala  has  been  placed  by
some  scholars  at  a  period  posterior  to  the
advent  of  Christianity,  but  it  is  evident,
from  the  traces  of  it  which  are  found  in  the
Book  of  Daniel,  that  it  arose  at  a  much
earlier  day.  It  has  been  supposed  to  be
derived  originally  from  the  system  of  Zoro¬
aster,  but  whether  its  inventore  were  the
contemporaries  or  the  successors  of  that
philosopher  and  reformer  it  is  impossible
to  say.  The  doctrine  of  emanation  is,
says  King,  ( Gnostics ,  p.  10,)  “  the  soul,  the
essential  clement  of  the  Kabbala ;  it  is  like¬
wise  the  essential  element  of  Zoroastrism.”
But  as  we  advance  in  the  study  of  each  we
will  find  important  differences,  showing
that,  while  the  idea  of  the  Kabbalistic  the¬
osophy  was  borrowed  from  the  Zendavesta,
the  sacred  book  of  the  Persian  sage,  it  was
not  a  copy,  but  a  development  of  it.

The  Kabbalistic  teaching  of  emanation
is  best  understood  by  an  examination  of
the  doctrine  of  the  Sephiroth.

The  Supreme  Being,  say  the  Kabbalists,
is  an  absolute  and  inscrutable  unity,  hav¬
ing  nothing  without  him  and  everything
within  him.  He  is  called  91D  J'N,  EN
SOPH,  “The  Infinite  One.”  In  this  in¬
finitude  he  cannot  be  comprehended  by  the
intellect,  nor  described  in  words  intelligible
by  human  minds,  so  as  to  make  his  exist¬
ence  perceptible.  It  was  necessary,  there¬
fore,  that,  to  render  himself  comprehensible,
the  En  Soph  should  make  himself  active
and  creative.  But  he  could  not  become  the
direct  creator;  because,  being  infinite,  he  is
without  will,  intention,  thought,  desire,  or
action,  all  of  which  are  qualities  of  a  finite
being  only.  The  En  Soph,  therefore,  was
compelled  to  create  the  world  in  an  indirect
manner,  by  ten  emanations  from  the  infin¬
ite  light  which  he  was  and  in  which  he
dwelt.  These  ten  emanations  are  the  ten
Sephiroth,  or  Splendors  of  the  Infinite  One,
and  the  way  in  which  they  were  produced
was  thus :  At  first  the  En  Soph  sent  forth
into  space  one  spiritual  emanation.  This
first  Sephira  is  called  ”lj“0,  Bet  her,  “the
Crown,”  because  it  occupies  the  highest
position.  This  first  Sephira  contained
within  it  the  other  nine,  which  sprang  forth
in  the  following  order:  At  first  a  male,  or
active  potency,  proceeded  from  it,  and  this,
the  second  Sephira,  is  called  JTDiDrh
Chocmah  or  “Wisdom.”  This  sent  forth
an  opposite,  female  or  passive  potency,
named  nm,  Binah  or  “Intelligence.”
These  three  Sephiroth  constitute  the  first
triad,  and  out  of  them  proceeded  the  other
seven.  From  the  junction  of  Wisdom  and
Intelligence  came  the  fourth  Sephirah,
called  *lDn»  Chesed  or  “  Mercy.”  This
was  a  male  potency,  and  from  it  emanated
the  fifth  Sephira,  named  n“113J>  Giburah
or  “Justice.”  The  union  of  Mercy  and


KABBALA


KABBALA


391


Justice  produced  the  sixth  Sephira,
JTIfrJflrh  Tiphereth  or  “Beauty;”  and
these  three  constitute  the  second  triad.
From  the  sixth  Sephira  came  forth  the
seventh  Sephira,  fTiJ-  Nitzach  or  “Firm¬
ness.”  This  was  a  male  potency,  and  pro¬
duced  the  female  potency  named  *Vb“f>  Bod
or  “Splendor.”  From  these  two  proceeded
TID*,  Isod  or  “Foundation;”  and  these
three  constituted  the  third  triad  of  the
Sephiroth.  Lastly,  from  the  Foundation
came  the  tenth  Sephira,  called  noSra,
Malcuth  or  “Kingdom,”  which  was  at  the
foot  of  all,  as  the  Crown  was  at  the  top.

This  division  of  the  ten  Sephiroth  into
three  triads  was  arranged  into  a  form
called  by  the  Kabbalists  the  Kabbalistic
Tree,  or  the  Tree  of  Life,  as  shown  in  the
following  diagram :


In  this  diagram  the  vertical  arrangement
of  the  Sephiroth  is  called  “  Pillars.”  Thus
the  four  Sephiroth  in  the  centre  are  called
the  “  Middle  Pillar ;  ”  the  three  on  the  right,


the  “Pillar  of  Mercy;”  and  the  three  on
the  left,  the  “  Pillar  of  Justice.”  They  al¬
lude  to  these  two  qualities  of  God,  of  which
the  benignity  of  the  one  modifies  the  rigor
of  the  other,  so  that  the  Divine  Justice  is
always  tempered  by  the  Divine  Mercy.  C.
W.  King,  in  his  Gnostics,  (p.  12,)  refers  the
right-hand  pillar  to  the  Pillar  Jachin,  and
the  left-hand  pillar  to  the  Pillar  Boaz,
which  stood  at  the  porch  of  the  Temple;
and  “  these  two  pillars,”  he  says,  “  figure
largely  amongst  all  the  secret  societies  of
modern  times,  and  naturally  so ;  l'or  these
illuminati  have  borrowed,  without  under¬
standing  it,  the  phraseology  of  the  Kabba¬
lists  and  the  Valentinians.”  But  an  in¬
spection  of  the  arrangement  of  the  Sephi¬
roth  will  show,  if  he  is  correct  in  his  gene¬
ral  reference,  that  he  has  transposed  the
pillars.  Firmness  would  more  naturally
symbolize  Boaz  or  Strength,  as  Splendor
would  Jachin  or  Establishment.

These  ten  Sephiroth  are  collectively  de¬
nominated  the  archetypal  man,  the  Micro¬
cosm,  as  the  Greek  philosophers  called  it,
and  each  of  them  refers  to  a  particular  part
of  the  body.  Thus  the  Crown  is  th ehead;
Wisdom,  the  brain;  and  Intelligence,  the
heart,  which  was  deemed  the  seat  of  under¬
standing.  These  three  represent  the  intel¬
lectual  ;  and  the  first  triad  is  therefore
called  the  Intellectual  World.  Mercy  is  the
right  arm,  and  Justice  the  left  arm,  and
Beauty  is  the  chest.  These  three  represent
moral  qualities;  and  hence  the  second  triad
is  called  the  Moral  World.  Firmness  is  the
right  leg.  Splendor  the  left  leg,  and  Founda¬
tion  the  privates.  These  three  represent
power  and  stability;  and  hence  the  third
triad  is  called  the  Material  World.  Lastly,
Kingdom  is  the  feet,  the  basis  on  which  all
stand,  and  represents  the  harmony  of  the
whole  archetypal  man.

Again,  each  of  these  Sephiroth  was  rep¬
resented  by  a  Divine  name  and  by  an  An¬
gelic  name,  which  may  be  thus  tabulated :


Sephiroth.

Crown,

Wisdom,

Intelligence,

Mercy,

Justice,

Beauty,

Firmness,

Splendor,

Foundation,

Kingdom.


Divine  Names.
Elieyeh,

Jah,

Jehovah,

El,

F.loha,

Elohim,

Jehovah  Sabaoth,
Elohim  Sabaoth,
El  Cliai,

Adonai.


Angelic  Names.

Chajoth,

Ophanim,

Arelim,

Cashmalim,

Seraphim,

Shinanim,

Tarsh  ishim,

Beni  Elohim,

Ishim,

Cherubim.


These  ten  Sephiroth  constitute  in  their
totality  the  Atzilatic  world  or  the  world
of  emanations,  and  from  it  proceeded  three
other  worlds,  each  having  also  its  ten  Sephi¬
roth,  namely,  the  Briatic  world  or  the  world
of  creation;  the  Jetziratic  world  or  tho


392


KABBALA


KADOSH


world  of  formation ;  and  the  Ashiatic
world  or  the  world  of  action :  each  inhab¬
ited  by  a  different  order  of  beings.  But  to
enter  "fully  upon  tbe  nature  of  these  worlds
would  carry  us  too  far  into  the  obscure
mysticism  of  the  Kabbala.

These  ten  Sephirotb,  represented  in  their
order  of  ascent  from  the  lowest  to  the
highest,  from  the  Foundation  to  the  Crown,
forcibly  remind  us  of  the  system  of  Mysti¬
cal  Ladders  which  pervaded  all  the  ancient
as  well  as  the  modern  initiations;  the
Brahmanical  Ladder  of  the  Indian  myste¬
ries;  the  Ladder  of  Mithras,  used  in  the
Persian  mysteries;  the  Scandinavian  Lad¬
der  of  the  Gothic  mysteries,  and  in  the  Ma¬
sonic  mysteries  the  Ladder  of  Kadosh  ;  and
lastly,  the  Theological  Ladder  of  the  Sym¬
bolical  degrees.

II.  The  Literal  Kabbala.  This  divi¬
sion  of  the  Kabbala,  being,  as  has  already
been  said,  occupied  in  the  explanation  of
sacred  words  by  the  value  of  the  letters  of
which  they  are  composed,  has  been  exten¬
sively  used  by  the  inventors  of  the  high
degrees  in  the  symbolism  of  their  signifi¬
cant  words.  It  is  divided  into  three  spe¬
cies  :  Gematria,  Notaricon,  and  Temura.

1.  Gematria.  This  word,  which  is  evi¬
dently  a  rabbinical  corruption  of  the
Greek  geometria,  is  defined  by  Buxtorf  to
be  “a  species  of  the  Kabbala  which  col¬
lects  the  same  sense  of  different  words  from
their  equal  numerical  value.”  The  He¬
brews,  like  other  ancient  nations,  having
no  figures  in  their  language,  made  use  of
the  letters  of  their  alphabet  instead  of
numbers,  each  having  a  numerical  value.
Gematria  is,  therefore,  a  mode  of  contem¬
plating  words  according  to  the  numerical
value  of  their  letters.

Any  two  words,  the  letters  of  which  have
the  same  numerical  value,  are  mutually
convertible,  and  each  is  supposed  to  con¬
tain  the  latent  signification  of  the  other.
Thus  the  words  in  Genesis  xlix.  10,  “Shiloh
shall  come,”  are  supposed  to  contain  a
prophecy  of  the  Messiah,  because  the  letters
of  “Shiloh  shall  come,”  nS'tfiO',  and  of
“Messiah,”  both  have  the  numer¬

ical  value  of  358,  according  to  the  above
table.  By  Gematria,  applied  to  the  Greek
language,  we  find  the  identity  of  Abraxas
and  Mithras.  The  letters  of  each  word
having  in  the  Greek  alphabet  the  equal
value  of  365.  This  is  by  far  the  most
common  mode  of  applying  the  literal  Kab¬
bala.

2.  Notaricon  is  derived  from  the  Latin
notarius,  a  short-hand  writer  or  writer  in
cipher.  The  Roman  Notarii  were  accus¬
tomed  to  use  single  letters,  to  signify  whole
wrords  with  other  methods  of  abbreviation,
by  marks  called  “  notae.”  Hence,  among


the  Kabbalists,  notaricon  is  a  mode  of  con¬
structing  one  word  out  of  the  initials  or
finals  of  many,  or  a  sentence  out  of  the
letters  of  a  word,  each  letter  being  used
as  the  initial  of  another  word.  Thus  of
the  sentence  in  Deuteronomy  xxx.  12,
“  Who  shall  go  up  for  us  to  heaven?”  in
Hebrew  uS  nSy  \o,the  initial  letters

of  each  word  are  taken  to  form  the  word
nS'D,  “  circumcision,”  and  the  finals  to  form
rniT  “Jehovah;”  hence  it  is  concluded
that  Jehovah  hath  shown  circumcision  to
be  the  way  to  heaven.  Again:  the  six
letters  of  the  first  word  in  Genesis,
JTC\S‘"G  “  in  the  beginning,”  are  made
use  of  to  form  the  initials  of  six  words
which  constitute  a  sentence  signifying  that
“In  the  beginning  God  saw  that  Israel
would  accept  the  law,”  mm  Sxii'?'  tSjp'P

O'nSx  nsn  mrioa.  _  '

3.  Temura  is  a  rabbinical  word  which
signifies  permutation.  Hence  temura  is  a
Kabbalistic  result  produced  by  a  change
or  permutation  of  the  letters  of  a  word.
Sometimes  the  letters  are  transposed  to
form  another  word,  as  in  the  modern  ana¬
gram;  and  sometimes  the  letters  are
changed  for  others,  according  to  certain
fixed  rules  of  alphabetical  permutation,
the  1st  letter  being  placed  for  the  22d,  the
2d  for  the  21st,  the  3d  for  the  20th,  and  so
on.  It  is  in  this  way  that  Babel,  *732,  is
made  out  of  Sheshach,  "pPIP,  and  hence  the
Kabbalists  say  that  when  Jeremiah  used
the  word  Sheshach  (xxv.  26 J  he  referred  to
Babel.

Kadiri,  Order  of.  A  secret  society
existing  in  Arabia,  which  so  much  resem¬
bles  Freemasonry  in  its  object  and  forms,
that  Lieut.  Burton,  who  succeeded  in  ob¬
taining  initiation  into  it,  calls  the  members
“Oriental  Freemasons.”  Burton  gives  a
very  interesting  account  of  the  Order  in  his
Pilgrimage  to  El  Medinah  and  Mecca.

Kadosh.  The  name  of  a  very  im¬
portant  degree  in  many  of  the  Masonic
Rites.  The  word  BHp  is  Hebrew,  and  sig¬
nifies  holy  or  consecrated ,  and  is  thus  in¬
tended  to  denote  the  elevated  character  of
the  degree  and  the  sublimity  of  the  truths
which  distinguish  it  and  its  possessors  from
the  other  degrees.  Pluche  says  that  in  the
East,  a  person  preferred  to  honors  bore  a
sceptre,  and  sometimes  a  plate  of  gold  on
the  forehead,  called  a  Kadosh,  to  apprise
tbe  people  that  the  bearer  of  this  mark  or
rod  was  a  public  person,  who  possessed  the
privilege  of  entering  into  hostile  camps
without  the  fear  of  losing  his  personal
liberty.

The  degree  of  Kadosh,  though  found  in
many  of  the  Rites  and  in  various  countries,
seems,  in  all  of  them,  to  have  been  more
or  less  connected  with  the  Knights  Tern-


KADOSH


KELLY


393


plars.  In  some  of  the  Rites  it  was  placed
at  the  head  of  the  list,  and  was  then  digni¬
fied  as  the  “ne  plus  ultra  ”  of  Masonry.

It  was  sometimes  given  as  a  separate
order  or  Rite  within  itself,  and  then  it  was
divided  into  the  three  degrees  of  Illus¬
trious  Knight  of  the  Temple,  Knight  of
the  Black  Eagle,  and  Grand  Elect.

Oliver  enumerates  six  degrees  ol'Kadosh  :
the  Knight  Kadosh  ;  Kadosh  of  the  Chap¬
ter  of  Clermont;  Philosophical  Kadosh;
Kadosh  Prince  of  Death ;  and  Kadosh  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.

The  French  rituals  speak  of  seven  :  Ka¬
dosh  of  the  Hebrews ;  Kadosh  of  the  first
Christians ;  Kadosh  of  the  Crusades  ;  Ka¬
dosh  of  the  Templars ;  Kadosh  of  Crom¬
well  or  the  Puritans;  Kadosh  of  the  Jes¬
uits;  and  the  True  Kadosh.  But  I  doubt
the  correctness  of  this  enumeration,  which
cannot  be  sustained  by  documentary  evi¬
dence.  In  all  of  these  Kadoshes  the  doc¬
trine  and  the  modes  of  recognition  are
substantially  the  same,  though  in  most  of
them  the  ceremonies  of  initiation  differ.

Ragon  mentions  a  Kadosh  which  is  said
to  have  been  established  at  Jerusalem  in
1118;  but  here  he  undoubtedly  refers  to  the
Order  of  Knights  Templars.  He  gives  also
in  his  Tuileur  General  the  nomenclature  of
no  less  than  fourteen  Kadosh  degrees.

The  doctrine  of  the  Kadosh  system  is
that  the  persecutions  of  the  Knights  Tem¬
plars  by  Philip  the  Fair  of  France,  and
Pope  Clement  V.,  however  cruel  and  san¬
guinary  in  its  results,  did  not  extinguish  the
Order,  but  it  continued  to  exist  under  the
forms  of  Freemasonry.  That  the  ancient
Templars  are  the  modern  Kadoshes,  and
that  the  builder  at  the  Temple  of  Solomon
is  now  replaced  by  James  de  Molay,  the
martyred  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars,
the  assassins  being  represented  by  the  king
of  France,  the  Pope,  and  NalFodei  the  in¬
former  against  the  Order;  or,  it  is  some¬
times  said,  by  the  three  informers,  Squin
de  Florian,  Naffodei,»and  the-Prior  of  Mont-
fauqon.

As  to  the  history  of  the  Kadosh  degree,  it
is  said  to  have  been  first  invented  at  Lyons,
in  France,  in  1743,  where  it  appeared  under
the  name  of  the  Petit  Elu.  This  degree,
which  is  said  to  have  been  based  upon  the
Templar  doctrine  heretofore  referred  to,
was  afterwards  developed  into  the  Kadosh,
which  we  find  in  1758  incorporated  as  the
Grand  Elect  jfadosh  into  the  system  of  the
Council  of  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West,
which  was  that  year  formed  at  Paris,  whence
it  descended  to  the  Scottish  Rite  Masons.

Of  all  the  Kadoshes,  two  only  are  now
important,  viz. :  the  Philosophic  Kadosh.
which  has  been  adopted  by  the  Granu
Orient  of  France,  and  the  Knight  Kadosh,
2  Z


which  constitutes  the  thirtieth  degree  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,
this  latter  being  the  most  generally  diffused
of  the  Kadoshes.

Kadosh,  called  also  the  Holy  Man.
(Kadosch  ou  l’ Homme  Saint.)  The  tenth  and
last  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Martinism.

Kadosh,  Grand,  Elect  Knight.

The  sixty-fifth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Min-
raim.

Kadosh,  Knight.  The  thirtieth
degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite.  See  Knight
Kadosh.

Kadosh  of  the  Jesuits.  Accord¬
ing  to  Thory,  [Act.  Lat.,  i.  320,)  this  degree
is  said  to  have  been  invented  by  the  Jesuits
of  the  College  of  Clermont.  The  state¬
ment  is  not  well  supported.  De  Bonno-
ville’s  Masonic  Chapter  of  Clermont  was
probably,  either  with  or  without  design,
confounded  with  the  Jesuitical  College  of
Clermont.  See  Jesuits.

Kadosh,  Philosophic.  A  modifi¬
cation  of  the  original  Kadosh,  for  which  it
has  been  substituted  and  adopted  by  the
Grand  Orient  of  France.  The  military
character  of  the  Order  is  abandoned,  and
the  Philosophic  Kadosh  wear  no  swords.
Their  only  weapon  is  the  Word.

Kadosh,  Prince.  A  degree  of  the
collection  of  Pyron.

Kadosh  Prince  of  Death.  The

twenty-seventh  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Miz-
raim.

Kamea.  Hebrew,  T'Op,  an  amulet.
More  particularly  applied  by  the  Kab-
balists  to  magic  squares  inscribed  on  paper
or  parchment,  and  tied  around  the  neck  as
a  safeguard  against  evil.  See  Magic  Squares.

Kasidcans.  A  Latinized  spelling  of
Chasidim,  which  see.

Katharsis.  Greek,  _  KaOapmQ.  The
ceremony  of  purification  in  the  Ancient
Mysteries.  Muller  says  ( Dorians ,  i.  384,)
that  “one  of  the  important  parts  of  the
Pythagorean  worship  was  the  paean,  which
was  sung  to  the  lyre  in  spring-time  by  a
person  sitting  in  the  midst  of  a  circle  of
isteners:  this  was  called  the  hatharsis  or
purification.”

Keeper  of  the  Seals.  An  officer
called  Garde  dies  Sceaux  in  Lodges  of  the
French  Rite.  It  is  also  the  title  of  an
officer  in  Consistories  of  the  Scottish  Rite.
The  title  sufficiently  indicates  the  functions
of  the  office.

Kelly,  Christopher.  A  Masonic
plagiarist,  who  stole  bodily  the  whole  of
the  typical  part  of  the  celebrated  work  of
Samuel  Lee  entitled  Orbis  Miruculum,  or
The  Temple  of  Solomon  pourtrayed  by  Scrip-
ture  Light,  and  published  it  as  his  own  under
the  title  of  Solomon's  Temple  spiritualized  ;
setting  forth  the  Divine  Mysteries  of  the  Tem-


304


KEY


KEYSTONE


pie,  with  an  account  of  its  Destruction.  ITc
prefaced  the  book  with  An  Address  to  all
Free  and  Accepted  Masons.  The  first  edi¬
tion  was  published  at  Dublin  in  1803,  and
on  his  removal  to  America  he  published  a
second  in  1820,  at  Philadelphia.  Kelly
was,  unfortunately,  a  Freemason,  but  not  an
honest  one.

Key.  “The  key,”  says  Dr.  Oliver,

( Landin .,  i.  180,)  “is  one  of  the  most  iin-^
portant  symbols  of  Freemasonry.  It  bears
the  appearance  of  a  commoft  metal  instru¬
ment,  confined  to  the  performance  of  one
simple  act.  But  the  well-instructed  brother
beholds  in  it  the  symbol  which  teaches  him
to  keep  a  tongue  of  good  report,  and  to  ab¬
stain  from  the  debasing  vices  of  slander
and  defamation.”  Among  the  ancients  the
key  was  a  symbol  of  silence  and  circum¬
spection  ;  and  thus  Sophocles  alludes  to  it
in  the  CEdipus  Coloneus,  (1051)  where  he
makes  the  chorus  speak  of-  “  the  golden
key  which  had  come  upon  the  tongue  of
the  ministering  hierophant  in  the  mysteries
of  Eleusis  —  uv  Kal  xpvc jea  k\tj-  i~i  yXuocq.
pifiane  Tzpoa-oAuv  evyo?.~A av.”  Callimachus
says  that  the  priestess  of  Ceres  bore  a  key
as  the  ensign  of  her  mystic  office.  The  key
was  in  the  mysteries  of  Isis  a  hieroglyphic
of  the  opening  or  disclosing  of  the  heart
and  conscience,  in  the  kingdom  of  death,
for  trial  and  judgment.

In  the  old  rituals  of  Masonry  the  key
was  an  important  symbol,  and  Dr.  Oliver
regrets  that  it  has  been  abandoned  in  the
modern  system.  In  the  rituals  of  the  first
degree,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  allusion
is  made  to  a  key  by  whose  help  the  secrets
of  Masonry  are  to  be  obtained,  which  key
“is  said  to  hang  and  not  to  lie,  because  it
is  always  to  hang  in  a  brother’s  defence
and  not  to  lie  to  his  prejudice.”  It  was  said,
too,  to  hang  “by  the  thread  of  life  at  the
entrance,”  and  was  closely  connected  with
the  heart,  because  the  tongue  “ought  to
utter  nothing  but  what  the  heart  dictates.”
And,  finally,  this  key  is  described  as  being
“  composed  ofno  metal,  but  a  tongue  of  good
report.”  In  the  ritual  of  the  Master’s  de¬
gree  in  the  Adonhiramite  Rite,  we  find  this
catechism :

“  Q.  What  do  you  conceal?

“  A.  All  the  secrets  which  have  been  in¬
trusted  to  me.

“  Q.  Where  do  you  conceal  them  ?

“A.  In  the  heart.

“  Q.  Have  you  a  key  to  gain  entrance
there  ?

“A.  Yes,  Right  Worshipful.

“  Q.  Where  do  you  keep  it?

“A.  In  a  box  of  coral  which  opens  and
shuts  only  with  ivory  keys.

“  Q.  Of  what  metal  is  it  composed  ?

“A.  Of  none.  It  is  a  tongue  obedient


to  reason,  which  knows  only  how  to  speak
well  of  those  of  whom  it  speaks  in  their
absence  as  in  their  presence.

All  of  this  siiows  that  the  key  as  a  sym¬
bol  was  formerly  equivalent  to  the  modern
symbol  of  the  “  instructive  tongue,”  which,
however,  with  almost  the  same  interpreta¬
tion,  has  now  been  transformed  to  the  sec¬
ond  or  Fellow  Craft’s  degree.  The  key,
however,  is  still  preserved  as  a  symbol  of
secrecy  in  the  Royal  Arch  degree;  and  it  is
also  presented  to  us  in  the  same  sense  in
the  ivory  key  of  the  Secret  Master,  or
fourth  degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite.  In
many  of  the  German  Lodges  an  ivory  key
is  made  a  part  of  the  Masonic  clothing  of
each  brother,  to  remind  him  that  he  should
lock  up  or  conceal  the  secrets  of  Freema¬
sonry  in  his  heart.

But  among  the  ancients  the  key  was  also
a  symbol  of  power;  and  thus  among  the
Greeks  the  title  of  k7*i6ovxoc,  or  key-bearer ,
was  bestowed  upon  one  holding  high  office ;
and  with  the  Romans,  the  keys  are  given
to  the  bride  on  the  day  of  marriage,  as  a
token  that  the  author!  ly  of  the  house  was
bestowed  upon  her;  and  if  afterwards  di¬
vorced,  they  were  taken  from  her,  as  a
symbol  of  the  deprivation  of  her  office.
Among  the  Hebrews  the  key  was  used  in
the  same  sense.  “As  the  robe  and  the
baldric,”  says  Lowth,  (Is.,  p.  2,  s.  4,)  “  were
the  ensigns  of  power  and  authority,  so  like¬
wise  was  the  key  the  mark  of  office,  either
sacred  or  civil.”  Thus  in  Isaiah  it  is  said:
“  The  key  of  the  house  of  David  will  I  lay
upon  his  shoulders;  so  he  shall  open,  and
none  shall  shut;  and  he  shall  shut,  and
none  shall  open,”  (xxii.  22.)  Cur  Saviour
expressed  a  similar  idea  when  he  said  to  St.
Peter,  “  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of
the  kingdom  of  heaven.”  It  is  in  reference
to  this  interpretation  of  the  symbol,  and
not  that  of  secrecy,  that  the  key  has  been
adopted  as  the  official  jewel  of  the  treas¬
urer  of  a  Lodge,  because  he  has  the  purse,
the  source  of  power,  under  his  command.

Key  of  Masonry.  See  Knight  of
the  Sun.

Key-Stone.  The  stone  placed  in  the
centre  of  an  arch  which  preserves  the
others  in  their  places,  and  secures  firmness
and  stability  to  the  arch.  As  it  was  for¬
merly  the  custom  of  Operative  Masons  to
place  a  peculiar  mark  on  each  stone  of  a
building  to  designate  the  workman  by
whom  it  had  been  adjusted^so  the  Key-
Stone  was  most  likely  to  receive  the  most
prominent  mark,  that  of  the  superintend¬
ent  of  the  structure.  Such  is  related  to
have  occurred  to  that  Key -Stone  which
plays  so  important  a  part  in  the  legend  of
the  Royal  Arcli  degree.

The  objection  has  sometimes  been  made,


KILWINNING


KILWINNING


395


that  the  arch  was  unknown  in  the  time  of
Solomon.  But  this  objection  has  been  com¬
pletely  laid  at  rest  by  the  researches  of  an¬
tiquaries  and  travellers  within  a  few  years
past.  Wilkinson  discovered  arches  with
regular  key-stones  in  the  doorways  of  the
tombs  of  Thebes,  the  construction  of  which
he  traced  to  the  year  1540  B.  c.,  or  460
years  before  the  building  of  the  Temple  of
Solomon.  And  Dr.  Clark  asserts  that  the
Cycoplean  gallery  of  Tyrius  exhibits  lancet-
shaped  arches  almost  as  old  as  the  time  of
Abraham.  In  fact,  at  the  Solomonic  era,
the  construction  of  the  arch  must  have
been  known  to  the  Dionysian  artificers,  of
whom,  it  is  the  received  theory,  many  were
present  at  the  building  of  the  Temple.

Kilwinning.  As  the  city  of  York
claims  to  be  the  birthplace  of  Masonry  in
England,  the  obscure  little  village  of  Kil¬
winning  i3  entitled  to  the  same  honor  with
respect  to  the  origin  of  the  Order  in  the
sister  kingdom  of  Scotland.  The  claim  to
the  honor,  however,  in  each  case,  depends
on  the  bare  authority  of  a  legend,  the  au¬
thenticity  of  which  is  now  doubted  by  many
Masonic  historians.  A  place,  which,  in  it¬
self  small  and  wholly  undistinguishable
in  the  political,  the  literary,  or  the  com¬
mercial  annals  of  its  country,  has  become
of  great  importance  in  the  estimation  of
the  Masonic  antiquary  from  its  intimate
connection  with  the  history  of  the  Institu¬
tion.

The  abbey  of  Kilwinning  is  situated  in
the  bailiwick  of  Cunningham,  about  three
miles  north  of  the  royal  burgh  of  Irving,
near  the  Irish  Sea.  The  abbey  was  founded
in  the  year  1140,  by  Hugh  Morville,  Con¬
stable  of  Scotland,  and  dedicated  to  St.
Winning,  being  intended  for  a  company  of
monks  of  the  Tyronesian  Order,  who  had
been  brought  from  Kelso.  The  edifice
must  have  been  constructed  at  great  ex¬
pense,  and  with  much  magnificence,  since
it  is  said  to  have  occupied  several  acres  of
ground  in  its  whole  extent.

Lawrie  (Hist.  of  Freemasonry)  says  that,
by  authentic  documents  as  well  as  by  other
collateral  arguments  which  amount  almost
to  a  demonstration,  the  existence  of  the
Kilwinning  Lodge  has  been  traced  back  as
far  as  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century.  But
we  know  that  the  body  of  architects  who
perambulated  the  continent  of  Europe
under  the  name  of  “Travelling  Free¬
masons,”  flourished  at  a  much  earlier
eriod ;  and  we  learn,  also,  from  Lawrie
imself,  that  several  of  these  Masons
travelled  into  Scotland,  about  the  beginning
of  the  twelfth  century.  Hence,  we  have
every  reason  to  suppose  that  these  men
were  the  architects  who  constructed  the
abbey  at  Kilwinning,  and  who  first  estab¬


lished  the  institution  of  Freemasonry  in
Scotland.  If  such  be  the  fact,  we  must
place  the  origin  of  the  first  Lodge  in  that
kingdom  at  an  earlier  date,  by  three  cen¬
turies,  than  that  claimed  for  it  by  Lawrie,
which  would  bring  it  much  nearer,  in  point
of  time,  to  the  great  Masonic  Assembly,
which  is  traditionally  said  to  have  been
convened  in  the  year  'J26,  by  Prince  Edwin,
at  York,  in  England.

There  is  some  collateral  evidence  to  sus¬
tain  the  probability  of  this  early  commence¬
ment  of  Masonry  in  Scotland.  It  is  very
generally  admitted  that  the  Royal  Order  of
Herodem  was  founded  by  King  Robert
Bruce,  at  Kilwinning.  Tliory,  in  the  Acta
Latamorum,  gives  the  following  chronicle:
“Robert  Bruce,  King  of  Scotland,  under
the  title  of  Robert  I.,  created  the  Order  of
St.  Andrew  of  Chardon,  after  the  battle  of
Bannockburn,  which  w'as  fought  on  the  24th
of  June,  1314.  To  this  Order  was  after¬
wards  united  that  of  Herodem,  for  the  sake
of  the  Scotch  Masons,  who  formed  a  part
of  the  thirty  thousand  troops  with  whom
he  had  fought  an  army  of  one  hundred
thousand  Englishmen.  King  Robert  re¬
served  the  title  of  Grand  Master  to  himself
and  his  successors  forever,  and  founded  the
Royal  Grand  Lodge  of  Herodem  at  Kil¬
winning.”

Dr.  Oliver  says  that  “the  Royal  Order
of  Herodem  had  formerly  its  chief  seat  at
Kilwinning;  and  there  is  every  reason  to
think  that  it  and  St.  John’s  Masonry  were
then  governed  by  the  same  Grand  Lodge.”

In  1820,  there  was  published  at  Paris  a
record  which  states  that  in  1286,  James,
Lord  Stewart,  received  the  Earls  of  Glou¬
cester  and  Ulster  into  his  Lodge  at  Kil¬
winning;  which  goes  to  prove  that  a  Lodge
was  then  existing  and  in  active  operation
at  that  place.

The  modern  iconoclasts,  however,  who
are  levelling  these  old  legends  with  un¬
sparing  hands,  have  here  been  at  work.
Brother  D.  Murray  Lyon  has  attacked  the
Bruce  legend,  and  in  the  London  Free¬
mason's  Magazine,  (1808,  p.  141,)  says:
“Seeing  that  the  fraternity  of  Kilwinning
never  at  any  period  practised  or  acknowl¬
edged  other  than  Craft  degrees,  and  have
not  preserved  even  a  shadow  of  a  tradition
that  can  in  the  remotest  degree  be  held  to
identify  Robert  Bruce  with  the  holding  of
Masonic  Courts,  or  the  Institution  of  a
Secret  Order  at  Kilwinning,  the  fraternity
of  the  ‘  Herodim  ’  must  be  attributed  to
another  than  the  hero  of  Bannockburn,  and
a  birthplace  must  be  sought  for  it  in  a  soil
still  more  favorable  to  the  growth  of  the
high  grades  than  Scotland  has  hitherto
proved.”  He  intimates  that  the  legend
was  the  invention  of  the  Chevalier  Ramsay,


396


KILWINNING


KILWINNING


whose  birthplace  was  in  the  vicinity  of
Kilwinning.

I  confess  that  I  look  upon  the  legend  and
the  documents  that  contain  it  with  some
favor,  as  at  least  furnishing  the  evidence
that  there  has  been  among  the  Fraternity  a
general  belief  of  the  antiquity  of  the  Kil¬
winning  Lodge.  Those,  however,  whose
faith  is  of  a  more  hesitating  character,  will
find  the  most  satisfactory  testimonies  of  the
existence  of  that  Lodge  in  the  beginning
of  the  fifteenth  century.  At  that  period,
when  James  II.  was  on  the  throne,  the
Barons  of  Roslin,  as  hereditary  Patrons  of
Scotch  Masonry,  held  their  annual  meet¬
ings  at  Kilwinning,  and  the  Lodge  at  that
place  granted  Warrants  of  Constitution  for
the  formation  of  subordinate  Lodges  in
other  parts  of  the  kingdom.  The  Lodges
thus  formed,  in  token  of  their  respect  for,
and  submission  to,  the  mother  Lodge
whence  they  derived  their  existence,  affixed
the  word  Kilwinning  to  their  own  dis¬
tinctive  name;  many  instances  of  which
are  still  to  be  found  on  the  register  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  — such  as  Cannon-
gate  Kilwinning,  Greenock  Kilwinning,
Cumberland  Kilwinning,  etc.

But,  in  process  of  time,  this  Grand  Lodge
at  Kilwinning  ceased  to  retain  its  suprem¬
acy,  and  finally  its  very  existence.  As
in  the  case  of  the  sister  kingdom,  where
the  Grand  Lodge  was  removed  from  York,
the  birthplace  of  English  Masonry,  to
London,  so  in  Scotland,  the  supreme  seat
of  the  Order  was  at  length  transferred  from
Kilwinning  to  the  metropolis;  and  hence,
in  the  doubtful  document  entitled  the
“  Charter  of  Cologne,”  which  purports  to
have  been  written  in  1542,  we  find,  in  a
list  of  nineteen  Grand  Lodges  in  Europe,
that  that  of  Scotland  is  mentioned  as  sit¬
ting  at  Edinburgh,  under  the  Grand  Mas¬
tership  of  John  Bruce.  In  1736,  when  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  was  organized,
the  Kilwinning  Lodge  was  one  of  its  con¬
stituent  bodies,  and  continued  in  its  obedi¬
ence  until  1743.  In  that  year  petitioned
to  be  recognized  as  the  oldest  Lodge  in  Scot¬
land;  but  as  the  records  of  the  original
Lodge  had  been  lost,  the  present  Lodge
could  not  prove,  says  Lawrie,  that  it  was
the  identical  Lodge  which  had  first  prac¬
tised  Freemasonry  in  Scotland.  The  peti¬
tion  was  therefore  rejected,  and,  in  con¬
sequence,  the  Kilwinning  Lodge  seceded
from  the  Grand  Lodge  and  established  it¬
self  as  an  independent  body.  It  organized
Lodges  in  Scotland ;  and  several  instances
are  on  record  of  its  issuing  charters  as
Mother  Kilwinning  Lodge  to  Lodges  in
foreign  countries.  Thus,  it  granted  one  to
a  Lodge  in  Virginia  in  1758,  and  another
in  1779  to  some  brethren  in  Ireland  calling


themselves  the  Lodge  of  High  Knights
Templars.  But  in  1807  the  Mother  Lodge
of  Kilwinning  renounced  all  right  of  grant¬
ing  charters,  and  came  once  more  into  the
bosom  of  the  Grand  i^odge,  bringing  with
her  all  her  daughter  Lodges.

Here  terminates  the  connection  of  Kil¬
winning  as  a  place  of  any  special  import¬
ance  with  the  Masonry  of  Scotland.  As
for  the  abbey,  the  stupendous  fabric  which
was  executed  by  the  Freemasons  who  firtt
migrated  into  Scotland,  its  history,  like  that
of  the  Lodge  which  they  founded,  is  one
of  decline  and  decay.  In  1560,  it  was  in  a
great  measure  demolished  by  Alexander,
Earl  of  Glencairne,  in  obedience  to  an
Order  from  the  States  of  Scotland,  in  the
exercise  of  their  usurped  authority  during
the  imprisonment  of  Mary  Stuart.  A  few
years  afterwards,  a  part  of  the  abbey  chapel
was  repaired  and  converted  into  the  parish
church,  and  was  used  as  such  until  about
the  year  1775,  when,  in  consequence  of  its
ruinous  and  dangerous  state,  it  was  pulled
down  and  an  elegant  church  erected  in  the
modern  style.  In  1789,  so  much  of  the
ancient  abbey  remained  as  to  enable  Grose,
the  antiquary,  to  take  a  sketch  of  the  ruins;
but  now  not  a  vestige  of  the  building  is  to
be  found,  nor  can  its  exact  site  be  ascer¬
tained  w  ith  any  precision.

Kilwinning  Manuscript.  Also
called  the  Edinburgh  Kilwinning.  This
manuscript  derives  its  name  from  its  being
written  in  a  small  quarto  book,  belonging
to  the  celebrated  ‘‘Mother  Kilwinning
Lodge”  of  Scotland.  For  its  publication,
the  Masonic  Fraternity  is  indebted  to  Bro.
William  James  Hughan,  who  has  inserted
it  in  his  Unpublished  Records  of  the  Craft,
from  a  copy  made  for  him  from  the  original
by  Bro.  D.  Murray  Lyon,  of  Ayr,  Scotland.
Bro.  Lyon,  “whilst  glancing  at  the  min¬
utes  of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh  from  Decem¬
ber  27,  1675,  till  March  12, 1678,  was  struck
with  the  similarity  which  the  handwriting
bore  to  that  in  which  the  Kilwinning  copy
of  the  Narrative  of  the  Founding  of  the  Craft
is  written,  and  upon  closer  examination  he
was  convinced  that  in  both  cases  the  calli¬
graphy  is  the  same.”  I  agree  with  him  in
believing  that  this  proves  the  date  as  well
as  the  source  of  the  manuscript,  which,
says  Bro.  Hughan,  “was  probably  written
earlier  than  A.  D.  1670.”  The  Anglican
phraseology,  and  the  fact  that  one  of  the
charges  requires  that  Masons  should  be
“lieagemen  to  the  King  of  England,”  con¬
clusively  show  thatthe  manuscript  was  writ¬
ten  in  England  and  introduced  into  Scot¬
land.  It  is  so  much  like  the  text  of  the  Grand
Lodge  MS.,  published  by  Bro.  Hughanjn
his  Old  Charges  of  British  Freemasons,  that,
to  use  the  language  of  Bro.  W oodford,  “  it


KILWINNING


KNIGGE


397


would  pass  as  an  indifferent  copy  of  that
document.”

Kilwinning,  Mother  Lodge.  F or

an  account  of  this  body,  which  was  for
some  time  the  rival  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland,  see  Kilwinning.

Kilwinning  System.  The  Masonry
practised  in  Scotland,  so  called  because  it
is  supposed  to  have  been  instituted  at  the
Abbey  of  Kilwinning.  Oliver  uses  the
term  in  his  Mirror  for  the  Johannite  Masons,
(p.  120.)  See  Saint  John’s  Masonry.

King.  The  second  officer  in  a  Royal
Arch  Chapter.  He  is  the  representative  of
Zerubbabel,  prince  or  governor  of  Judah.
When  the  Chapter  meets  as  a  Lodge  of
Mark,  Past,  or  Most  Excellent  Masters,  the
King  acts  as  Senior  Warden.

After  the  rebuilding  of  the  second  Tem¬
ple,  the  government  of  the  Jews  was  ad¬
ministered  by  the  high  priests  as  the  vice¬
gerents  of  the  kings  of  Persia,  to  whom
they  paid  tribute.  This  is  the  reason  that
the  High  Priest  is  the  presiding  officer  in  a
Chapter,  and  the  King  only  a  subordinate.
But  in  the  Chapters  of  England  and  Ire¬
land,  the  King  is  made  the  presiding  officer.
The  jewel  of  the  King  is  a  level  surmounted
by  a  crown  suspended  within  a  triangle.

Kiss,  Fraternal.  The  Germans  call
it  der  bruder  ltuss;  the  French,  le  baiser  fra¬
ternal.  It  is  the  kiss  given  in  the  French
and  German  Lodges  by  each  brother  to  his
right  and  left  hand  neighbor  when  the
labors  of  the  Lodge  are  closed.  It  is  not
adopted  in  the  English  or  American  sys¬
tems  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  although
practised  in  some  of  the  high  degrees.

Kiss  of  Peace.  In  the  reception
of  an  Ancient  Knight  Templar,  it  was  the
practice  for  the  one  who  received  him  to
greet  him  with  a  kiss  upon  the  mouth.
This,  which  was  called  the  osculum  pads  or
kiss  of  peace,  was  borrowed  by  the  Tem¬
plars  from  the  religious  orders,  in  all  of
which  it  was  observed.  It  is  not  practised
in  the  receptions  of  Masonic  Templarism.

Kloss,  Georg  Kurkh.  Franz.  A
celebrated  German  Mason  and  Doctor  of
Medicine,  who  was  born  in  1788.  Dr.
Kloss  was  initiated  into  Masonry  early  in
life.  He  reorganized  the  Eclectic  Grand
Lodge,  of  which  he  was  several  times  Grand
Master.  He  resided  at  Frankfort-on-the-
Main,  where  he  enjoyed  a  high  reputation
as  a  physician.  He  was  the  possessor  of
an  extensive  Masonic  library,  and  devoted
himself  to  the  study  of  the  antiquities  and
true  character  of  the  Masonic  institution,
insomuch  that  he  was  styled  the  “  teacher
of  the  German  Freemasons.”  Kloss’s  the¬
ory  was  that  the  present  Order  of  Freema¬
sons  found  its  origin  in  the  stone-cutters
aud  building  corporations  of  the  Middle


Ages.  He  delivered,  in  the  course  of  his
life,  many  valuable  historical  discourses
before  the  Lodge  Zur  Einigheit,  several
of  which  were  printed  and  published.  An¬
nals  of  the  Lodge  Zur  Einigheit ,  Frankfort,
1840 ;  Freemasonry  in  its  true  meaning,  from
the  ancient  and  genuine  documents  of  the
Stonemasons,  Leipsic,  1846 ;  A  History  of
Freemasonry  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ire¬
land,  Leipsic,  1848;  A  History  of  the  Free¬
masons  of  France,  from  genuine  documents,
Darmstadt,  1852;  and  a  Bibliography  of
Freemasonry,  Frankfort,  1844.  This  last  is  a
most  valuable  contribution  to  Masonic  lit¬
erature.  It  contains  a  list  of  more  than
six  thousand  Masonic  works  in  all  lan¬
guages,  with  critical  remarks  on  many  of
them.  Dr.  Kloss  died  at  Frankfort,  Febru¬
ary  10, 1854.  Bro.  Meisinger,  who  delivered
his  funeral  eulogy,  says  of  him :  “  He  had
a  rare  amount  of  learning,  and  was  a  dis¬
tinguished  linguist;  his  reputation  asaphy-
sician  was  deservedly  great;  and  he  added
to  these  a  friendly,  tender,  amiable  dispo¬
sition,  with  great  simplicity  and  upright¬
ness  of  character.”

Kneeling.  Bending  the  knees  has,  in
all  ages  of  the  world,  been  considered  as  an
act  of  reverence  and  humility,  and  hence
Pliny,  the  Roman  naturalist,  observes,  that
“a certain  degree  of  religious  reverence  is
attributed  to  the  knees  of  man.”  Solomon
placed  himself  in  this  position  when  he
prayed  at  the  consecration  of  the  Temple;
and  Masons  use  the  same  posture  in  some
portions  of  their  ceremonies,  as  a  token  of
solemn  reverence.  In  the  act  of  prayer,
Masons  in  the  lower  degrees  adopt  the
standing  posture,  which  was  the  usage  of
the  primitive  Church,  where  it  was  sym¬
bolic  of  the  resurrection ;  but  Masons  in
the  higher  degrees  generally  kneel  on  one
knee.

Knee  to  Knee.  When,  in  his
devotions  to  the  G.  A.  0.  T.  U.,  he  seeks
forgiveness  for  the  past  and  strength  for
the  future,  the  Mason  is  taught  that  he
should,  in  these  offices  of  devotion,  join  his
brother’s  name  with  his  own.  The  pre¬
rogative  that  Job,  in  his  blindness,  thought
was  denied  to  him,  when  he  exclaimed,
“  Oh  that  one  might  plead  for  a  man  with
God,  as  a  man  pleadeth  for  his  neighbor! ”
is  here  not  only  taught  as  a  right,  but  in¬
culcated  as  a  duty ;  and  the  knee  is  directed
to  be  bent  in  intercession,  not  for  ourselves
alone,  but  for  the  whole  household  of  our
brethren.

Kniggc,  Adolpli  Franz  Friecle-
rich  Ludwig,  Karon  Von.  He  was

at  one  time  among  the  most  distinguished
Masons  of  Germuny ;  for  while  Weishaupt
was  the  ostensible  inventor  and  leader  of
the  system  of  Bavarian  Illuminism,  it  wag


398


KNIGGE


KNIGHTHOOD


indebted  for  its  real  form  and  organiza¬
tion  to  the  inventive  genius  of  Knigge.
lie  was  born  at  Brendenbeck,  near  Hano¬
ver,  October  16,  1752.  He  was  initiated,
January  20,  1772,  in  a  Lodge  of  Strict  Ob¬
servance  at  Cassel,  but  does  not  appear  at
first  to  have  been  much  impressed  with
the  Institution,  for,  in  a  letter  to  Prince
Charles  of  Hesse,  he  calls  its  ceremonies
“absurd,  juggling  tricks.”  Subsequently
his  views  became  changed,  at  least  for  a
time.  When,  in  1780,  the  Marquis  deCos-
tanzo  was  despatched  by  Weishaupt  to
Northern  Germany  to  propagate  the  Order
of  the  Illuminati,  he  made  the  acquaint¬
ance  of  Knigge,  and  succeeded  in  gaining
him  as  a  disciple.  Knigge  afterwards  en¬
tered  into  a  correspondence  with  Weis¬
haupt,  in  consequence  of  which  his  enthu¬
siasm  was  greatly  increased.  After  some
time,  in  reply  to  the  urgent  entreaties  of
Knigge  for  more  light,  Weishaupt  confessed
that  the  Order  was  as  yet  in  an  unfinished
6tate,  and  actually  existed  only  in  his  own
brain ;  the  lower  classes  alone  having  been
organized.  Recognizing  Knigge’s  abilities,
he  invited  him  to  Bavaria,  and  promised  to
surrender  to  him  all  the  manuscript  mate¬
rials  in  his  possession,  that  Knigge  might
out  of  them,  assisted  by  his  own  invention,
construct  the  high  degrees  of  the  Rite.

Knigge  accordingly  repaired  to  Bavaria
in  1781,  and  when  he  met  Weishaupt',  the
latter  consented  that  Knigge  should  elabo¬
rate  the  whole  system  up  to  the  highest
mysteries.

This  task  Knigge  accomplished,  and  en¬
tered  into  correspondence  with  the  Lodges,
exerting  all  his  talents,  which  were  of  no
mean  order,  for  the  advancement  of  the  Rite.
He  brought  to  its  aid  the  invaluable  labors
of  Bode,  whom  he  prevailed  upon  to  receive
the  degrees.

After  Knigge  had  fully  elaborated  the
system,  and  secured  for  it  the  approval  of  the
Areopagites,  he  introduced  it  into  his  dis¬
trict,  and  began  to  labor  with  every  prospect
of  success.  But  Weishaupt  now  interfered ;
and,  notwithstanding  his  compact  with
Knigge,  he  made  many  alterations  and  ad¬
ditions,  which  he  imperiously  ordered  the
Provincial  Directors  to  insert  in  the  ritual.
Knigge,  becoming  disgusted  with  this  pro¬
ceeding,  withdrew  from  the  Order  and  soon
afterwards  entirely  from  Freemasonry,  de¬
voting  the  rest  of  his  life  to  general  litera¬
ture.  He  died  at  Bremen,  May  6,  1796.

Knigge  was  a  man  of  considerable  talents,
and  the  author  of  many  books,  both  Ma¬
sonic  and  non-Masonic.  Of  these  the
following  are  the  most  important.  A  work
published  anonymously  in  1781,  entitled
Ueber  Jesuiten,  Freimaurercn  und  deutsche
Rosenkreuzer,  i.  e.,  “On  the  Jesuits,  Free¬


masons  and  Rosicrucians ;  ”  Versuch  iiber  die
Freimaurerci,  i.  e.,  “  Essay  on  Freemasonry,”
in  1784;  Beytrag  zur  neuesten  C'eschichte
des  Freimaurerordens,  i.  e.,  “  Contribution
towards  the  latest  History  of  the  Order  of
Freemasons,”  in  1786;  and,  after  he  had
retired  from  the  Illuminati,  a  work  en¬
titled  Philo’ 8  endliche  Erkldrung,  or  “  Phi¬
lo’s  final  Declaration,”  1788,  which  pro¬
fessed  to  be  his  answer  to  the  numerous
inquiries  made  of  him  in  reference  to  his
connection  with  the  Order.

Among  his  most  popular  non-Masonic
works  was  a  treatise  on  Social  Philosophy,
with  the  title  of  Ueber  den  Umgang  mil
Menschen,  or,  “On  Conversation  with
Men.”  This  work,  which  was  written
towards  the  close  of  his  life,  was  very  fa¬
vorably  received  throughout  Germanv,  and
translated  into  many  languages.  Although
abounding  in  many  admirable  remarks  on
the  various  relations  and  duties  of  life,  to
the  Mason  it  will  be  particularly  interest¬
ing  as  furnishing  a  proof  of  the  instability
of  the  author’s  opinions,  for,  with  all  his
abilities,  Knigge  evidently  wanted  a  well-
balanced  judgment.  Commencing  life  with
an  enthusiastic  admiration  for  Freema¬
sonry,  in  a  few  years  he  became  disgusted
with  it;  no  long  time  elapsed  before  he  was
found  one  of  its  most  zealous  apostles ;  and
again  retiring  from  the  Order,  he  spent  his
last  days  in  writing  against  it.  In  his  Con¬
versation  vnlh  Men,  is  a  long  chapter  on
Secret  Societies,  in  which  he  is  scarcely
less  denunciatory  of  them  than  Barruel  or
Robison.

Kniglitliood.  The  Saxon  word  cnecht,
from  which  we  get  the  English  knight,  sig¬
nified  at  first  a  youth,  and  then  a  servant,
or  one  who  did  domestic  service,  or  a  sol¬
dier  who  did  military  service,  which  might
either  be  on  foot  or  on  horseback ;  but  the
French  word  chevalier  and  the  German  ritter
both  refer  to  his  equestrian  character.  Al¬
though  Tacitus  says  that  the  German  kings
and  chiefs  were  attended  in  war  and  peace
by  a  select  body  of  faithful  servants,  and
although  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings  and  thanes
had  their  military  attendants,  who  served
them  with  a  personal  fealty,  the  knight,  in
the  modern  acceptation  of  the  word,  did
not  appear  until  the  establishment  in
France  of  the  order  of  chivalry.  Thence
knighthood  rapidly  passed  into  the  other
countries  of  Christendom  ;  for  it  always  was
a  Christian  institution.

The  stages  through  which  a  candidate
passed  until  his  full  investiture  with  the
rank  of  knighthood  were  three:  the  Page,
the  Squire  or  Esquire,  and  the  Knight.

1.  'Hie  Page.  The  child  who  was  des¬
tined  to  knighthood  continued  until  he
was  seven  years  old  in  the  charge  of  women,


KNIGHTHOOD


KNIGHTHOOD


399


who  gave  him  that  care  which  his  tender
age  required.  He  was  then  taken  from
them  and  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  governor,
who  prepared  him  by  a  robust  and  manly
education  for  the  labors  and  dangers  of
war.  He  was  afterwards  put  into  the
household  of  some  noble,  where  he  first  as¬
sumed  the  title  of  a  Page.  His  employ¬
ments  were  to  perform  the  service  of  a  do¬
mestic  about  the  person  of  his  master  and
mistress;  to  attend  them  in  the  chase,
on  their  journeys,  their  visits,  and  their
walks ;  to  carry  their  messages,  or  even  to
wait  on  them  at  table.  The  first  lessons
given  to  him  were  in  the  love  of  God  and
attachment  and  respect  to  females.  His
religious  education  was  not  neglected,  and
he  was  taught  a  veneration  for  all  sacred
things.  His  instructions  in  respect  to
manners,  conversation,  and  virtuous  habits
were  all  intended  to  prepare  him  for  his
future  condition  as  a  knight.

2.  The  Squire.  The  youth,  on  emerging
from  the  employment  of  a  Page,  took  on
him  that  of  Squire,  called  in  French  ecuyer.
This  promotion  was  not  unaccompanied  by
an  appropriate  ceremony.  The  Page  who
was  to  be  made  a  Squire  was  presented  to
the  altar  by  his  father  and  mother,  or  by
those  who  represented  them,  each  holding
a  lighted  taper  in  his  hand.  The  officiating
priest  took  from  the  altar  a  sword  and  belt,
on  which  he  bestowed  several  benedictions,
and  then  placed  them  on  the  youth,  who
from  that  time  constantly  wore  them.  The
Squires  were  divided  into  various  classes,
each  of  whose  employment  was  different.
To  some,  as  to  the  chamberlains,  was  com¬
mitted  the  care  of  the  gold  and  silver  of
the  household;  others,  as  the  constable,
had  the  charge  of  the  table  utensils  ;  others
were  carvers,  and  others  butlers.  But  the
most  honorable  and  the  only  one  connected
immediately  with  chivalry  was  the  Squire
of  Honor  or  the  Body  Squire.  He  was
immediately  attached  to  some  knight,
whose  standard  he  carried.  He  helped  to
dress  and  undress  him,  and  attended  him
morning  and  evening  in  his  apartment.
On  a  march,  he  led  the  war-horse  of  his
master  and  carried  his  sword,  his  helmet,
and  his  shield.  In  the  hour  of  battle,  the
Squire,  although  he  did  not  actually  take  a
part  in  the  combat,  was  not  altogether  an
idle  spectator  of  the  contest.  In  the  shock
of  battle,  the  two  lines  of  knights,  with
their  lances  in  rest,  fell  impetuously  on
each  other;  some,  who  were  thrown  from
their  horses,  drew  their  swords  or  battle-
axes  to  defend  themselves  and  to  make  new
attacks,  while  advantage  was  sought  by  their
enemies  over  those  who  had  been  thrown.
During  all  this  time,  the  Squire  was  atten¬
tive  to  every  motion  of  his  master.  In  the


one  case,  to  give  him  new  arms,  or  to  sup¬
ply  him  with  another  horse ;  to  raise  him
up  when  he  fell,  and  to  ward  off' the  strokes
aimed  at  him ;  while  in  the  other  case,  he
seconded  the  knight  by  every  means  that
his  skill,  his  valor,  and  his  zeal  could  sug¬
gest,  always,  however,  within  the  strict
bounds  of  the  defensive,  for  the  Squire  was
not  permitted  by  the  laws  of  chivalry  to
engage  in  offensive  combat  with  a  knight.

3.  The  Knight.  These  services  merited
and  generally  received  from  the  knight  the
most  grateful  acknowledgment,  and  in  time
the  high  honor  of  the  badge  of  knighthood
bestowed  by  his  own  hand,  for  every  knight
possessed  the  prerogative  of  making  other
knights.

The  age  of  twenty-one  was  that  in  which
the  youthful  Squire,  after  so  many  proofs
of  zeal,  fidelity,  and  valor,  might  be  ad¬
mitted  to  the  honor  of  knighthood.  The
rule  as  to  age  was  not,  however,  always  ob¬
served.  Sometimes  the  Squire  was  not
knighted  until  he  was  further  advanced  in
years,  and  in  the  case  of  princes  the  time
was  often  anticipated.  There  are  instances
of  infants,  the  sons  of  kings,  receiving  the
dignity  of  knighthood.

The  creation  of  a  knight  was  accompanied
by  solemn  ceremonies,  which  some  writers
have  been  pleased  to  compare  to  those  of
the  Church  in  the  administration  of  its
sacraments,  and  there  was,  if  not  a  close
resemblance,  a  manifest  allusion  in  the  one
to  the  other.  The  white  habit  and  the  bath
of  the  knight  corresponded  to  the  form  of
baptism ;  the  stroke  on  the  neck  and  the  em¬
brace  given  to  the  new  knight  were  compared
to  the  ceremony  of  confirmation ;  and  as  the
godfather  made  a  present  to  the  child  whom
he  held  at  the  font,  so  the  lord  who  con¬
ferred  knighthood  was  expected  to  make  a
gift  or  grant  some  peculiar  favor  to  the
knight  whom  he  had  dubbed.

The  preliminary  ceremonies  which  pre¬
pared  the  neophyte  for  the  sword  of  chiv¬
alry  were  as  follows:  austere  fasts;  whole
nights  passed  in  prayers  in  a  church  or
chapel ;  the  sacraments  of  confession,  pen¬
ance,  and  the  eucharist;  bathings,  which
prefigured  purity  of  manners  and  life;  a
white  habit  as  a  symbol  of  the  same  purity,
and  in  imitation  of  the  custom  with  new
converts  on  their  admission  into  theChurch ;
and  a  serious  attention  to  sermons,  were  all
duties  of  preparation  to  be  devoutly  per¬
formed  by  the  Squire  previous  to  his  being
armed  with  the  weapons  and  decorated  with
the  honors  of  knighthood.

An  old  French  chronicler  thus  succinctly
details  the  ceremony  of  creation  and  inves¬
titure.  The  neophyte  bathes;  after  which,
clothed  in  white  apparel,  he  is  to  watch  all
night  in  the  church,  and  remain  there  in


400


KNIGHTHOOD


KNIGHTHOOD


prayer  until  after  the  celebration  of  high
mass.  The  communion  being  then  re¬
ceived,  the  youth  solemnly  raises  his  joined
hands  and  his  eyes  to  heaven,  when  the
priest  who  had  administered  the  sacrament
passes  the  sword  over  the  neck  of  the  youth
and  blesses  it.  The  candidate  then  kneels
at  the  feet  of  the  lord  or  knight  who  is  to
arm  him.  The  lord  asks  him  with  what
intent  he  desires  to  enter  into  that  sacred
Order,  and  if  his  views  tend  only  to  the
maintenance  and  honor  of  religion  and  of
knighthood.  The  lord,  having  received
from  the  candidate  a  satisfactory  reply  to
these  questions,  administers  the  oath  of
reception,  and  gives  him  three  strokes  on
the  neck  with  the  flat  end  of  the  sword,
which  he  then  girds  upon  him.  This  scene
passes  sometimes  in  a  hall  or  in  the  court  of
a  palace,  or,  in  time  of  war,  in  the  open  field.

The  girding  on  of  the  sword  was  accom¬
panied  with  these  or  similar  words :  “  In
the  name  of  God,  of  St.  Michael,  and  of
St.  George,  I  make  thee  a  knight:  be  brave,
be  hardy,  and  be  loyal.”  And  then  the
kneeling  candidate  is  struck  upon  the
shoulder  or  back  of  the  neck,  by  him  who
confers  the  dignity,  with  the  flat  of  the
sword,  and  directed  to  rise  in  words  like
these  :  “  Arise,  Sir  Damian ;  ”  a  formula
still  followed  by  the  sovereigns  of  England
when  they  confer  the  honor  of  knighthood.
And  hence  the  word  “Sir,”  which  is  equiv¬
alent  to  the  old  French  “Sire,”  is  ac¬
counted,  says  Ashmole,  “parcel  of  their
style.”

Sir  William  Segar,  in  his  treatise  on
Civil  and  Military  Honor,  gives  the  follow¬
ing  account  of  the  ceremonies  used  in  Eng¬
land  in  the  sixth  century :

“  A  stage  was  erected  in  some  cathedral,
or  spacious  place  near  it,  to  which  the  gen¬
tleman  was  conducted  to  receive  the  honor
of  knighthood.  Being  seated  on  a  chair
decorated  with  green  silk,  it  was  demanded
of  him  if  he  were  of  a  good  constitution,
and  able  to  undergo  the  fatigue  required  in
a  soldier ;  also  whether  he  were  a  man  of
ood  morals,  and  what  credible  witnesses
e  could  produce  to  affirm  the  same.

“  Then  the  Bishop  or  Chief  Prelate  of  the
Church  administered  the  following  oath:
‘Sir,  you  that  desire  to  receive  the  honor  of
knighthood,  swear  before  God  and  this  holy
book  that  you  will  not  fight  against  his  Ma¬
jesty,  that  now  bestoweth  the  order  of  knight¬
hood  upon  you.  You  shall  also  swear  to
maintain  and  defend  all  Ladies,  Gentlemen,
1  Vidows  and  Orphans;  and  you  shall  shun
no  adventure  of  your  person  in  any  war
wherein  you  shall  happen  to  be.’

“The  oath  being  taken,  two  Lords  led
him  to  the  King,  who  drew  his  sword,  and
laid  it  upon  his  head,  saying,  God  and  St.


George  (or  what  other  saint  the  King
pleased  to  name,)  make  thee  a  good  knight ;
after  which  seven  Ladies  dressed  in  white
came  and  girt  a  sword  to  his  side  and  four
knights  put  on  his  spurs.

“These  ceremonies  being  over,  the  Queen
took  him  by  the  right  hand,  and  a  Duchess
by  the  left,  and  leading  him  to  a  rich  seat,
placed  him  on  an  ascent,  where  they  seated
him,  the  King  sitting  on  his  right  hand,
and  the  Queen  on  his  left.

“Then  the  Lords  and  Ladies  also  sat
down  upon  other  seats,  three  descents
under  the  King;  and  being  all  thus  seated,
they  were  entertained  with  a  delicate  colla¬
tion  ;  and  so  the  ceremony  ended.”

The  manner  of  arming  a  newly-made
knight  was  first  to  put  on  the  spurs,  then
the  coat-of-mail,  the  cuirass,  the  brasset  or
casque,  and  the  gauntlets.  The  lord  or
knight  conferring  the  honor  then  girded
on  the  sword,  which  last  was  considered  as
the  most  honorable  badge  of  chivalry,  and
a  symbol  of  the  labor  that  the  knight  was
in  future  to  encounter.  It  was  in  fact
deemed  the  real  and  essential  part  of  the
ceremony,  and  that  which  actually  consti¬
tuted  the  knight.  Du  Cange,  in  his  Glos-
sariurn ,  defines  the  Latin  word  mililare,  in
its  mediaeval  sense,  as  signifying  “to  make
a  knight,”  which  was,  he  says,  “balteo
militari  accingere,”  i.  e.,  to  gird  on  him  the
knightly  belt ;  and  it  is  worthy  of  remark,
that  cingulus,  which  in  pure  Latin  signifies
a  belt,  came  in  the  later  Latin  of  Justinian
to  denote  the  military  profession.  I  need
not  refer  to  the  common  expression,  “a
belted  knight,”  as  indicating  the  close  con¬
nection  between  knighthood  and  the  gird¬
ing  of  the  belt.  It  was  indeed  the  belt  and
sword  that  made  the  knight.

The  oath  taken  by  the  knight  at  his  re¬
ception  devoted  him  to  the  defence  of  re¬
ligion  and  the  Church,  and  to  the  protection
of  widows,  orphans,  and  all  of  either  sex
who  were  powerless,  unhappy,  or  suffering
under  injustice  and  oppression ;  and  to
shrink  from  the  performance  of  these  du¬
ties  whenever  called  upon,  even  at  the
sacrifice  of  his  life,  was  to  incur  dishonor
for  the  rest  of  his  days.

Of  all  the  laws  of  chivalry,  none  was
maintained  with  more  rigor  than  that  which
secured  respect  for  the  female  sex.  “  If  an
honest  and  virtuous  lady,”  says  Brantome,
“will  maintain  her  firmness  and  constancy,
her  servant,  that  is  to  say  the  knight  who
had  devoted  himself  to  her  service,  must
not  even  spare  his  life  to  protect  and  de¬
fend  her,  if  she  runs  the  least  risk  either
of  her  fortune,  or  her  honor,  or  of  any  cen¬
sorious  word,  for  wre  are  bound  by  the  laws
of  Chivalry  to  be  the  champions  of  women’s
afflictions.”


KNIGHTHOOD


KNIGHTHOOD


401


Nor  did  any  human  law  insist  with  so
much  force  as  that  of  chivalry  upon  the
necessity  of  an  inviolable  attachment  to
truth.  Adherence  to  his  word  was  esteemed
the  most  honorable  part  of  a  knight's
character.  Hence  to  give  the  lie  was  con¬
sidered  the  most  mortal  and  irreparable
affront,  to  be  expiated  only  by  blood.

An  oath  or  solemn  promise  given  in  the
name  of  a  knight  was  of  all  oaths  the  most
inviolable.  Knights  taken  in  battle  en¬
gaged  to  come  of  their  own  accord  to  prison
whenever  it  was  required  by  their  captors,
and  on  their  word  of  honor  they  were  read¬
ily  allowed  liberty  for  the  time  for  which
they  asked  it;  for  no  one  ever  doubted  that
they  would  fulfil  their  engagements.  Sov¬
ereigns  considered  their  oath  of  knight¬
hood  as  the  most  solemn  that  they  could
give,  and  hence  the  Duke  of  Bretagne,
having  made  a  treaty  of  peace  with  Charles
the  Sixth  of  France,  swore  to  its  observ¬
ance  “  by  the  faith  of  his  body  and  the  loy¬
alty  of  his  knighthood.”

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  gen¬
erous  courage  was  an  indispensable  quality
of  a  knight.  An  act  of  cowardice,  of  cru¬
elty,  or  of  dishonorable  warfare  in  battle,
would  overwhelm  the  doer  with  deserved
infamy.  In  one  of  the  tenzones,  or  poetical
contests  of  the  Troubadours,  it  is  said  that
to  form  a  perfect  knight  all  the  tender
offices  of  humanity  should  be  united  to  the
greatest  valor,  and  pity  and  generosity  to
the  conquered  associated  with  the  strictest
justice  and  integrity.  Whatever  was  con¬
trary  to  the  laws  of  war  was  inconsistent
with  the  laws  of  chivalry.

The  laws  of  chivalry  also  enforced  with
peculiar  impressiveness  sweetness  and  mod¬
esty  of  temper,  with  that  politeness  of  de¬
meanor  which  the  word  courtesy  was  meant
perfectly  to  express.  An  uncourteous  knight
would  have  been  an  anomaly.

Almost  all  of  these  knightly  qualities  are
well  expressed  by  Chaucer  in  the  Prologue
to  his  Kni'jht'a  tale :

“  A  knight  there  was,  and  that  a  worthy  man,
That  from  the  time  that  he  first  began
To  riden  out  he  loved  chivalry,

Truth  and  honor,  freedom  and  courtesy.

Full  worthy  was  he  in  his  lord’s  war
And  thereto  had  he  ridden,  no  man  farre;

As  well  in  Christendom  ns  in  Heatheness,

And  ever  honored  for  his  worthiness.

“  And  ever  more  he  hud  a  sovereign  price,

And  though  that  he  was  worthy,  he  was  wise
And  of  his  port  as  meek  as  was  a  maid.

He  never  yet  no  villainy  he  said
In  all  his  life  unto  no  manner  wight,

He  was  a  very  perfect,  gentle  knight.”

t  The  most  common  and  frequent  occa¬
sions  on  which  knights  were  created,  inde-
3  A  26


I  pendent  of  those  which  happened  in  war,
were  at  the  great  feasts  of  the  Church,  and
especially  at  the  feast  of  Pentecost ;  also  at
the  publications  of  peace  or  a  truce,  the
coronations  of  kings,  the  birth  or  baptism
of  princes,  and  the  days  on  which  those
princes  had  themselves  received  knight¬
hood.  But  a  knight  could  at  any  time  con¬
fer  the  distinction  on  one  whom  he  deemed
deserving  of  it.

There  was  a  distinction  between  the  titles
as  well  as  the  dress  of  a  knight  and  a
squire.  The  knight  was  called  Don,  Sire,
Messire,  or,  in  English,  Sir  —  a  title  not  be¬
stowed  upon  a  squire :  and  while  the  wife
of  the  former  was  called  a  Lady,  that  of
the  latter  was  only  a  Gentlewoman.  The
wife  of  a  knight  was  sometimes  called
Militissa,  or  female  knight.

In  their  dresses  and  their  harness,
knights  were  entitled  to  wear  gold  and
golden  decorations,  while  the  squires  were
confined  to  the  use  of  silver.  Knights
alone  had  a  right  to  wear,  for  the  lining  of
their  cloaks  and  mantles,  ermine,  sable,
and  meniver,  which  were  the  most  valua¬
ble  furs  ;  while  those  of  a  less  costly  kind
were  for  the  squires.  The  long  and  train¬
ing  mantle,  of  a  scarlet  color,  and  lined
with  ermine  or  other  precious  furs,  which
was  called  the  Mantle  of  Honor,  was  espe¬
cially  reserved  for  the  knight.  Such  a
mantle  was  always  presented  by  the  kings
of  France  to  knights  whom  they  created.
The  mantle  was  considered  the  most  august
and  noble  decoration  that  a  knight  could
wear,  when  he  was  not  dressed  in  his  armor.
The  official  robes  still  worn  by  many  mag¬
istrates  in  Europe  are  derived  from  the
knightly  Mantle  of  Honor.

It  should  be  remarked  that  the  order
of  knighthood,  and  the  ceremonies  accom¬
panying  the  investiture  of  a  knight,  were
of  a  symbolic  character,  and  are  well  cal¬
culated  to  remind  the  Freemason  of  the
symbolic  character  of  his  own  Institution.

The  sword  which  the  knight  received
was  called  “  the  arms  of  mercy.”  and  he
was  told  to  conquer  his  enemies  by  mercy
rather  than  by  force  of  arms.  Its  blade
was  two-edged,  to  remind  him  that  he  must
maintain  chivalry  and  justice,  and  contend
only  for  the  support  of  these  two  chief  pil¬
lars  of  the  temple  of  honor.  The  lance  rep¬
resented  Truth,  because  truth,  like  the
lance,  is  straight.  The  coat  of  mail  was
the  symbol  of  a  fortress  erected  against
vice;  for,  as  castles  are  surrounded  by  walls
and  ditches,  the  coat  of  mail  is  closed  in  all
its  parts,  and  defends  the  knight  against
treason,  disloyalty,  pride,  and  every  other
evil  passion.  The  rowels  of  the  spur  were
given  to  urge  the  possessor  on  to  deeds  of
honor  and  virtue.  The  shield,  which  he


402


KNIGHTHOOD


KNIGHTHOOD


places  betwixt  himself  and  his  enemy,  was
to  remind  him  that  the  knight  is  a  shield
interposed  between  the  prince  and  the  peo¬
ple,  to  preserve  peace  and  tranquillity.

In  a  Latin  manuscript  of  the  thirteenth
century,  copied  by  Anstis,  (App.,p.  95,)  will
be  fouud  the  following  symbolical  expla¬
nation  of  the  ceremonial  of  knighthood.
The  bath  was  a  symbol  of  the  washing
away  of  sin  by  the  sacrament  of  baptism.
The  bed  into  which  the  novice  entered  and
reposed  after  the  bath,  was  a  symbol  of  the
peace  of  mind  which  would  be  acquired  by
the  virtue  of  chivalry.  The  white  gar¬
ments  with  which  he  tvas  afterwards
clothed,  were  a  symbol  of  the  purity  which
a  knight  should  maintain.  The  scarlet
robe  put  on  the  newly-made  knight  was
symbolic  of  the  blood  which  he  should  be
ready  to  shed  for  Christ  and  the  Church.
The  dark  boots  are  a  sign  of  the  earth,
whence  we  all  came,  and  to  which  we  are
all  to  return.  The  white  belt  is  a  symbol
of  chastity.  The  golden  spur  symbolizes
promptitude  of  action.  The  sword  is  a
symbol  of  severity  against  the  attacks  of
Satan ;  its  two  edges  are  to  teach  the
knight  that  he  is  to  defend  the  poor
against  the  rich,  and  the  weak  against  the
powerful.  The  white  fillet  around  the  head
is  a  symbol  of  good  works.  The  alapa  or
blow  was  in  memorial  of  him  who  made  him
a  knight.

There  wras  one  usage  of  knighthood
which  is  peculiarly  worthy  of  attention.
The  love  of  glory,  which  was  so  inspiring
to  the  knights  of  chivalry,  is  apt  to  pro¬
duce  a  spirit  of  rivalry  and  emulation  that
might  elsewhere  prove  the  fruitful  source
of  division  and  discord.  But  this  was  pre¬
vented  by  the  fraternities  of  arms  so  com¬
mon  among  the  knights.  Two  knights  who
had,  perhaps,  been  engaged  in  the  same  ex¬
peditions,  and  had  conceived  for  each  other
a  mutual  esteem  and  confidence,  would  en¬
ter  into  a  solemn  compact  by  which  they
became  and  were  called  “  Brothers  in
arms.”  Under  this  compact,  they  swore  to
share  equally  the  labors  and  the  glory,  the
dangers  and  the  profits  of  all  enterprises,
and  never,  under  any  circumstances,  to
abandon  each  other.  The  brother  in  arms
was  to  be  the  enemy  of  those  who  were  the
enemies  of  his  brother,  and  the  friend  of
those  who  were  his  friends  ;  both  of  them
were  to  divide  their  present  and  future
wealth,  and  to  employ  that  and  their  lives
for  the  deliverance  of  each  other  if  taken
prisoner.  The  claims  of  a  brother  in  arms
were  paramount  to  all  others,  except  those
of  the  sovereign.  If  the  services  of  a
knight  were  demanded  at  the  same  time  by
a  lady  and  by  a  brother  in  arms,  the  claim
of  the  former  gave  way  to  that  of  the  latter.


But  the  duty  which  was  owing  to  the  prince
or  to  the  country  was  preferred  to  all  others,
and  hence  brothers  in  arms  of  different  na¬
tions  were  only  united  together  so  long  as
their  respective  sovereigns  were  at  peace,
and  a  declaration  of  war  between  two
princes  dissolved  all  such  confraternities
between  the  subjects  of  each.  But  except
in  this  particular  case,  the  bond  of  brother¬
hood  was  indissoluble,  and  a  violation  of
the  oath  which  bound  two  brothers  to¬
gether  was  deemed  an  act  of  the  greatest
infamy.  They  could  not  challenge  each
other.  They  even  wore  in  battle  the  same
habits  and  armor,  as  if  they  desired  that
the  enemy  should  mistake  one  for  the
other,  and  thus  that  both  might  incur  an
equal  risk  of  the  dangers  with  which  each
was  threatened.

Knights  were  divided  into  two  ranks,
namely,  Knights  Bachelors  and  Knights
Bannerets.

The  Knight  Bachelor  was  of  the  lower
rank,  and  derived  his  title  most  prob¬
ably  from  the  French  bas  chevalier.  In  the
days  of  chivalry,  as  well  as  in  later  times,
this  dignity  was  conferred  without  any  refer¬
ence  to  a  qualification  of  property.  Many
Knights  Bachelors  were  in  fact  mere  ad¬
venturers,  unconnected  by  feudal  ties  of
any  sort,  who  offered  their  services  in  war
to  any  successful  leader,  and  found  in  their
sword  a  means  of  subsistence,  not  only  by
pay  and  plunder,  but  in  the  regularly  es¬
tablished  system  of  ransom,  which  every
knight  taken  in  action  paid  for  his  liberty.
The  Knight  Bachelor  bore  instead  of  a
square  banner  a  pointed  or  triangular  en¬
sign,  which  was  forked  by  being  extended
in  two  cornets  or  points,  and  which  was
called  a  pennon.  The  triangular  banner,
not  forked,  was  called  a  pennoncel,  and  was
carried  by  a  squire.

The  Knight  Banneret,  a  name  derived
from  banneret,  a  little  banner,  was  one  who
possessed  many  fiefs,  and  who  was  obliged
to  serve  in  war  with  a  large  attendance  of
followers.

If  a  knight  was  rich  and  powerful  enough
to  furnish  the  state  or  his  sovereign  with  a
certain  number  of  armed  men,  and  to  enter¬
tain  them  at  his  own  expense,  permission
was  accorded  to  him  to  add  to  his  simple
designation  of  Knight  or  Knight  Bachelor,
the  more  noble  and  exalted  title  of  Knight
Banneret.  This  gave  him  the  right  to
carry  a  square  banner  on  the  top  of  his
lance.  Knights  Bachelors  were  sometimes
made  Bannerets  on  the  field  of  battle,  and
as  a  reward  of  their  prowess,  by  the  simple
ceremony  of  the  sovereign  cutting  off  with
his  sword  the  cornets  or  points  of  their
pennons,  thus  transforming  them  into
square  banners.  Clark,  in  his  History  of


I


KNIGHTHOOD

Knighthood,  (vol.  i.,  p.  73,)  thus  describes
this  ceremony  in  detail:

“  The  king  or  his  general,  at  the  head
of  his  army  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle
after  a  victory,  under  the  royal  standard
displayed,  attended  by  all  the  officers  and
nobility  present,  receives  the  knight  led  be¬
tween  two  knights  carrying  his  pennon  of
arms  in  his  hand,  the  heralds  walking  be¬
fore  him,  who  proclaim  his  valiant  achieve¬
ments  for  which  he  has  deserved  to  be
made  a  Knight  Banneret,  and  to  display
his  banner  in  the  field ;  then  the  king  or
general  says  to  him,  Advances  toy  banneret,
and  causes  the  point  of  his  pennon  to  be
rent  off ;  then  the  new  knight,  having  the
trumpets  before  him  sounding,  the  nobility
and  officers  bearing  him  company,  is  sent
back  to  his  tent,  where  they  are  all  enter¬
tained.”

But  generally  the  same  ceremonial  was
used  in  times  of  peace  at  the  making  of  a
Knight  Banneret  as  at  the  institution  of
barons,  viscounts,  earls,  and  the  other  or¬
ders  of  nobility,  with  whom  they  claimed
an  almost  equality  of  rank.

Not  long  after  the  institution  of  knight¬
hood  as  an  offshot  of  chivalry,  we  find,  be¬
sides  the  individual  Knights  Bachelors
and  Knights  Bannerets,  associations  of
knights  banded  together  for  some  common
purpose,  of  which  there  were  two  classes.
First:  Fraternities  possessing  property
and  rights  of  their  own  as  independent
bodies  into  which  knights  were  admitted  as
monks  were  into  religious  foundations.  Of
this  class  may  be  mentioned,  as  examples,
the  three  great  religious  Orders —  the  Tem¬
plars,  the  Hospitallers,  and  the  Teutonic
Knights.

The  second  class  consisted  of  honorary
associations  established  by  sovereigns  with¬
in  their  respective  dominions,  consisting
of  members  whose  only  common  tie  is  the

ossession  of  the  same  titular  distinction.

uch  are  most  of  the  European  orders  of
knighthood  now  existing,  as  the  Knights
of  the  Garter  in  England,  the  Knights  of
St.  Andrew  in  Russia,  and  the  Knights  of
the  Golden  Fleece  in  Spain.  The  institu¬
tion  of  these  titular  orders  of  knighthood
dates  at  a  much  more  recent  period  than
that  of  the  Fraternities  who  constitute  the
first  class,  for  not  one  of  them  can  trace
its  birth  to  the  time  of  the  Crusades,  at
which  time  the  Templars  and  similar  or¬
ders  sprang  into  existence.

Ragon,  in  his  Cours  Philoeophigue,  at¬
tempts  to  draw  a  parallel  between  the  in¬
stitution  of  knighthood  and  that  of  Free¬
masonry,  such  as  that  there  were  three  de¬
grees  in  one  as  there  are  in  the  other,  and
that  there  was  a  close  resemblance  in  the
ceremonies  of  initiation  into  both  orders.


KNIGHTHOOD  403

He  thus  intimates  for  them  a  common  ori¬
gin  ;  but  these  parallels  should  rather  be
considered  simply  as  coincidences.  The
theory  first  advanced  by  the  Chevalier
Ramsay,  and  adopted  by  Hund  and  the  dis¬
ciples  of  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance,
that  all  Freemasons  are  Templars,  and  that
Freemasonry  is  a  lineal  successor  of  ancient
knighthood,  is  now  rejected  as  wholly  un¬
tenable  and  unsupported  by  any  authentic
history.  The  only  connection  between
knighthood  and  Freemasonry  is  that  which
was  instituted  after  the  martyrdom  of  James ,
de  Molay,  when  the  Knights  Templars .
sought  concealment  and  security  in  the
bosom  of  the  Masonic  fraternity.

When  one  was  made  a  knight,  he  was
said  to  be  dubbed.  This  is  a  word  in  con¬
stant  use  in  the  Mediaeval  manuscripts.  In
the  old  Patavian  statutes,  “  Miles  adobatus,”
a  dubbed  knight,  is  defined  to  be  “one  who,
by  the  usual  ceremonies,  acquires  the  dig¬
nity  and  profession  of  chivalry.”  The
Provencal  writers  constantly  employ  the
term  to  dub,  “  adouber,”  and  designate  a
knight  who  has  gone  through  the  ceremony
of  investiture  as  “  un  chevalier  adoube,”  a
dubbed  knight.  Thus,  in  the  JRomaunt
d’Auberi,  the  Lady  d’Auberi  says  to  the
King,—

“  Sire,  dit  elle,  par  Deu  de  Paradis
Soit  adouber  mes  freres  auberis.”

That  is,  “Sire,  for  the  love  of  the  God  of
Paradise,  let  my  brothers  be  dubbed.”

The  meaning  of  the  word  then  is  plain :
to  dub,  is  to  make  or  create  a  knight.  But
its  derivation  is  not  so  easily  settled  amid
the  conflicting  views  of  writers  on  the  sub¬
ject.  The  derivation  by  Menage  from  du¬
plex  is  not  worth  consideration.  Hen-
sch ell’s,  from  a  Provencal  word  adobare,
“to  equip,”  although  better,  is  scarcely
tenable.  The  derivation  from  the  Anglo-
Saxon  dubban,  “to  strike  or  give  a  blow,”
would  be  reasonable,  were  it  not  presuma¬
ble  that  the  Anglo-Saxons  borrowed  their
word  from  the  French  and  from  the  usages
of  chivalry.  It  is  more  likely  that  dubban
came  from  adouber,  than  that  adouber  came
from  dubban.  The  Anglo-Saxons  took  their
forms  and  technicalities  of  chivalry  from
the  French.  After  all,  the  derivation  pro¬
posed  by  Du  Cange  is  the  most  plausible
and  the  one  most  generally  adopted,  be¬
cause  it  is  supported  by  the  best  author¬
ities.  He  says  that  it  is  derived  from  the
Latin  adoptare,  to  adopt,  “quod  qui  ali-
quem  armis  instruit  ac  Militein  facit,  eitm
quodammodo  adoptat  in  filium,”  i.  e.,  “He
who  equips  any  one  with  arms,  and  makes
him  a  knight,  adopts  him,  as  it  were,  as  a
son.”  To  dub  one  as  a  knight  is,  then,  to


404


KNIGHTHOOD


KNIGHTHOOD


adopt  him  into  the  order  of  chivalry.  The
idea  was  evidently  taken  from  the  Roman
law  of  acloptatio,  or  adoption,  where,  as  in
conferring  knighthood,  a  blow  on  the  cheek
was  given.

The  word  accolade  is  another  term  of
chivalry  about  which  there  is  much  mis¬
understanding.  It  is  now  supposed  to
mean  the  blow  of  the  sword,  given  by  the
knight  conferring  the  dignity,  on  the  neck
or  shoulder  of  him  who  received  it.  But
this  is  most  probably  an  error.  The  word
is  derived,  says  Brewer,  (Diet.  Phr.  and
Fab.,)  from  the  Latin  ad  collum,  “around
the  neck,”  and  signifies  the  embrace  “given
by  the  Grand  Master  when  he  receives  a
neophyte  or  new  convert.”  It  was  an  early
custom  to  confer  an  embrace  and  the  kiss
of  peace  upon  the  newly-made  knight,
which  ceremony,  Ashmole  thinks,  was
called  the  accolade.  Thus,  in  his  History
of  the  Order  of  the  Garter,  (p.  15,)  he  says:
“The  first  Christian  kings,  at  giving  the
belt,  kissed  the  new  knight  on  the  left
cheek,  saying :  In  the  honor  of  the  Father
and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  I  make  yon
a  knight.  It  was  called  the  osculum  pacis,
the  kiss  of  favor  or  of  brotherhood,  [more
correctly  the  kiss  of  peace,]  and  is  pre¬
sumed  to  be  the  accolade  or  ceremony  of
embracing,  which  Charles  the  Great  used
when  he  knighted  his  son  Louis  the  D6-
bonnair.”  In  the  book  of  Johan  de  Yignay,
which  was  written  in  the  fourteenth  cen¬
tury,  this  kiss  of  peace  is  mentioned  to¬
gether  with  the  accolade :  “  Et  le  Seigneur
leur  doit  donner  une  colee  en  signe  de  pro-
este  et  de  hardement,  et  que  il  leur  souveigne
de  celui  noble  homme  qui  la  fait  chevalier.
Et  done  les  doit  le  Seigneur  baisier  en  la
bouche  en  signe  de  paix  et  d’amour ;  ”  i.  e.,
“And  the  lord  ought  to  give  him  [the
newly- made  knightj  an  accolade  as  a
symbol  of  readiness  and  boldness,  and  in
memory  of  the  nobleman  who  has  made
him  a  knight;  and  then  the  lord  ought  to
kiss  him  on  the  mouth  as  a  sign  of  peace
and  love.”

In  an  old  manuscript  in  the  Cottonian  Li¬
brary,  entitled  “  The  manner  of  makynge
Knyghtes  after  the  customeof  Engelande,”
a  copy  of  wrhich  is  inserted  in  Anstis’s
Historical  Essay  on  the  Knighthood  of  the
Path,  (Append.,  p.  99,)  is  this  account  of
the  embrace  and  kiss,  accompanied  with
a  blow  on  the  neck :  “  Thanne  shall  the
Squyere  lift  up  his  armes  on  high,  and  the
Kvnge  shall  put  bis  armes  about  thenekke
of  the  Squyer,  and  lyftynge  up  his  right
hande  he  shall  smyte  the  Squyer  in  the
nekke,  seyeng  thus:  Be  ye  a  good  Knyhte;
kissing  him.”  Anstis  himself  is  quite  con¬
fused  in  his  description  of  the  ceremonial,
and  enumerates  “the  blow  upon  the  neck,


the  accolade,  with  the  embracing  and  kiss
of  peace,”  as  if  they  were  distinct  and  sepa¬
rate  ceremonies ;  but  in  another  part  of  Lis
book  he  calls  the  accolade  “  the  laying
hands  upon  the  shoulders.”  I  am  inclined
to  believe,  after  much  research,  that  both
the  blow  on  the  neck  and  the  embrace  con¬
stituted  properly  the  accolade.  This  blow
was  sometimes  given  with  the  hand,  but
sometimes  with  the  sword.  Anstis  says  that
“  the  action  which  fully  and  finally  im¬
presses  the  character  of  knighthood  is  the
blow  given  with  the  hand  upon  the  neck
or  shoulder.”  But  he  admits  that  there
has  been  a  controversy  among  writers
whether  the  blow  was  heretofore  given
with  a  sword  or  by  the  bare  hand  upon  the
neck,  (p.  73.)

The  mystical  signification  which  Case-
neuve  gives  in  his  Etymologies  (voc.Accoll6e)
is  ingenious  and  appropriate,  namely,  that
the  blow  was  given  on  the  neck  to  remind
him  who  received  it  that  he  ought  never,
by  flight  from  battle,  to  give  an  enemy  the
opportunity  of  striking  him  on  the  same
place.

But  there  was  another  blow,  which  was
given  in  the  earliest  times  of  chivalry,  and
which  has  by  some  writers  been  confounded
with  the  accolade,  which  at  length  came  to
be  substituted  for  it.  This  was  the  blow  on
the  cheek,  or.  in  common  language,  the  box
on  the  ear,  which  was  given  to  a  knight  at
his  investiture.  This  blow  is  never  called
the  accolade  by  the  old  writers,  but  gen¬
erally  the  alapa,  rarely  the  gautada.  Du
Cange  says  that  this  blow  was  sometimes
given  on  the  neck,  and  that  then  it  was
called  the  colaphus,  or  by  the  French  colee,
from  col,  the  neck.  Duchesne  says  the
blow  was  always  given  with  the  hand,  and
not  with  the  sword.

Ashmole  says :  “  It  was  in  the  time  of
Charles  the  Great  the  way  of  knighting  by
the  colaphum,  or  blow  on  the  ear,  used  in
sign  of  sustaining  future  hardships,  .  .  .  .
a  custom  long  after  retained  in  Germany
and  France.  Thus  William,  Earl  of  Hol¬
land,  who  was  to  be  knighted  before  he
could  be  emperor,  at  his  being  elected  king
of  the  Romans,  received  knighthood  by  the
box  of  the  ear,  etc.,  from  John,  king  of  Bo¬
hemia,  a.  D.  1247.”

Both  the  word  alapa  and  the  ceremony
which  it  indicated  were  derived  from  the
form  of  manumission  among  the  Romans,
where  the  slave  on  being  freed  received  a
blow  called  alapa  on  the  cheek,  character¬
ized  by  Claudian  as  “felix  injuria,"  a  happy
injury,  to  remind  him  that  it  was  the  last
blow  he  was  compelled  to  submit  to:  for
thenceforth  he  was  to  be  a  freeman,  capable
of  vindicating  his  honor  from  insult.  The
alapa,  in  conferring  knighthood,  was  em-


KNIGHTHOOD


KNIGHT


405


ployed  with  a  similar  symbolism.  Thus  in
an  old  register  of  1260,  which  gives  an  ac¬
count  of  the  knighting  of  Hildebrand  by
the  Lord  Ridolfonus,  we  find  this  passage,
which  I  give  in  the  original,  for  the  sake
of  the  one  word  gautata,  which  is  unusual :
“  Postea  Ridolfonus  de  more  dedit  illi  gau-
tatam  et  dixit  illi.  Tu  es  miles  nobilis  mili-
ti;e  equestris,  et  hsec  gautata  est  in  recorda-
tionein,  illius  qui  te  armavit  militem,  et  hcec
gautata  debet  esse  ultima  injuria,  quam
patienter  acceperis.”  That  is:  “After¬
wards  Ridolfonus  gave  him  in  the  custom¬
ary  way  the  blow,  and  said  to  him :  Thou
art  a  noble  Knight  of  the  Equestrian  Order
of  Chivalry,  and  this  blow  is  given  in  mem¬
ory  of  him  who  hath  armed  thee  as  a  knight,
and  it  must  be  the  last  injury  which  thou
shalt  patiently  endure.”  The  first  reason
assigned  for  the  blow  refers  to  an  old  cus¬
tom  of  cuffing  the  witnesses  to  a  transac¬
tion,  to  impress  it  on  their  memory.  Thus,
by  the  riparian  law,  when  there  was  a  sale
of  land,  some  twelve  witnesses  were  col¬
lected  to  see  the  transfer  of  property  and
the  payment  of  the  price,  and  each  received
a  box  on  the  ear,  that  he  might  thus  the
better  remember  the  occurrence.  So  the
knight  received  the  blow  to  make  him  re¬
member  the  time  of  his  receiving  his  knight¬
hood  and  the  person  who  conferred  it.

For  the  commission  of  crime,  more  es¬
pecially  for  disloyalty  to  his  sovereign,  a
knight  might  be  degraded  from  the  Order ;
and  this  act  of  degradation  was  accom¬
panied  with  many  ceremonies,  the  chief  of
which  was  the  hacking  off  his  spurs.  This
was  to  be  done  for  greater  infamy,  not  by
a  knight,  but  by  the  master  cook.  Thus
Stow  says  that,  at  the  making  of  Knights  of
the  Bath,  the  king’s  master  cook  stood  at
the  door  of  the  chapel,  and  said  to  each
knight  as  he  entered,  “Sir  Knight,  look
that  you  be  true  and  loyal  to  the  king  my
master,  or  else  I  must  hew  these  spurs  from
your  heels.”  His  shield  too  was  reversed,
and  the  heralds  had  certain  marks  called
abatements,  which  they  placed  on  it  to  in¬
dicate  his  dishonor.

M.  de  St.  Palaye  concludes  his  learned
and  exhaustive  Memoires  sur  Cancienne
Chevalerie  with  this  truthful  tribute  to
that  spirit  of  chivalry  in  which  ancient
knighthood  found  its  birth,  and  with  it  I
may  appropriately  close  this  article :

“  It  is  certain  that  chivalry,  in  its  earliest
period,  tended  to  promote  order  and  good
morals ;  and  although  i t  was  i n  some  respects
imperfect,  yet  it  produced  the  most  accom¬
plished  models  of  public  valor  and  of  those
pacific  and  gentle  virtues  that  are  the  orna¬
ments  of  domestic  life;  and  it  is  worthy  of
consideration,  that  in  an  age  of  darkness,
most  rude  and  unpolished,  such  examples


were  to  be  found  as  the  results  of  an  in¬
stitution  founded  solely  for  the  public  wel¬
fare,  as  in  the  most  enlightened  times
have  never  been  surpassed  and  very  seldom
equalled.”

Kniglit.  1.  An  order  of  chivalry.  See
Knighthood  and  Knight  Masonic.

2.  The  eleventh  and  last  degree  of  the
Order  of  African  Architects.

Knight,  Black.  See  Black  Brothers.

Knight  Commander.  ( Chevalier
Commandeur.)  1.  The  ninth  degree  of  the
Rite  of  Elect  Cohens.  2.  A  distinction
conferred  by  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  for
the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United
States  on  deserving  Honorary  Thirty-Thirds
and  Sublime  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret.
It  is  conferred  by  a  vote  of  the  Supreme
Council,  and  is  unattended  with  any  other
ceremony  than  the  presentation  of  a  dec¬
oration  and  a  patent.

Knight  Commander  of  the
Temple.  See  Sovereign  Commander  of
the  Temple.

Knight  Commander  of  the
White  and  Black  Eagle.  (Cheva¬
lier  Commandeur  de  I’Aigle  blanc  et  noir. )  The
eightieth  degree  of  the  collection  of  the
Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Knight,  Crusader.  ( Chevalier
Croise.)  Thory  says  (Act.  Lat.,  i.  303,)  that
this  is  a  chivalric  degree,  which  was  com¬
municated  to  him  by  a  member  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Copenhagen.  He  gives
no  further  account  of  its  character.

Knight  Elect  of  Fifteen.  1.  The
sixteenth  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Rite,  more  commonly  called  Illus¬
trious  Elect  of  the  Fifteen.  See  Elect  of
the  Fifteen.

2.  The  tenth  degree  of  the  Chapter  of
Emperors  of  the  East  and  West.

3.  The  eleventh  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Mizraim.

Knight  Elect  of  Twelve,  Sub¬
lime.  The  eleventh  degree  of  the  An¬
cient  and  Accepted  Rite,  sometimes  called
“  Twelve  Illustrious  Knights.”  After  ven¬
geance  had  been  taken  upon  the  traitors
mentioned  in  the  degrees  of  Elected
Knights  of  Nine  and  Illustrious  Elected
of  Fifteen,  Solomon,  to  reward  those  who
had  exhibited  their  seal  and  fidelity  in  in¬
flicting  the  required  punishment,  as  well  as
to  make  room  for  the  exaltation  of  others
to  the  degree  of  Illustrious  Elected  of
Fifteen,  appointed  twelve  of  these  latter,
chosen  by  ballot,  to  constitute  a  new  de¬
gree,  on  which  he  bestowed  the  name  of
Sublime  Knights  Elected,  and  gave  them
the  command  over  the  twelve  tribes  of  Is-
real.  The  Sublime  Knights  rendered  an
account  each  day  to  Solomon  of  the  work


406


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


that  was  done  in  the  Temple  by  their  re¬
spective  tribes,  and  received  their  pay.
The  Lodge  is  called  a  Chapter.  In  the  old
rituals  Solomon  presides,  with  the  title  of
Thrice  Puissant,  and  instead  of  Wardens,
there  are  a  Grand  Inspector  and  a  Master
of  Ceremonies.  In  the  modern  ritual  of
the  Southern  Jurisdiction,  the  Master
and  Wardens  represent  Solomon,  Hiram
of  Tyre,  and  Adoniram,  and  the  style  of
the  Master  and  Senior  Warden  is  Thrice
Illustrious.  The  room  is  hung  with  black,
sprinkled  with  white  and  red  tears.

The  apron  is  white,  lined  and  bordered
with  black,  with  black  strings ;  on  the  flap,
a  flaming  heart.

The  sash  is  black,  with  a  flaming  heart
on  the  breast,  suspended  from  the  right
shoulder  to  the  left  hip.

The  jewel  is  a  sword  of  justice.

This  is  the  last  of  the  three  Elus  which
are  found  in  the  Ancient  Scottish  Rite.  In
the  French  Rite  they  have  been  condensed
into  one,  and  make  the  fourth  degree  of
that  ritual,  but  not,  as  Ragon  admits,  with
the  happiest  effect.

Knight  Hospitaller.  See  Knight
of  Malta.

Knight,  Illustrious  or  Illustri¬
ous  Elect.  ( Chevalier  111  autre  or  Ela  II-
lastre.)  The  thirteenth  degree  of  the  Rite
of  Mizraim.

li  11  ight  Jupiter.  [Le  Chevalier
Jupiter.)  The  seventy-eighth  degree  of  the
collection  of  Peuvret.

Knight  Kadosh,  formerly  called
Grand  Elect  Knight  Kadosh.  ( Grand  Elu
du  Chevalier  Kadosch.)  The  Knight  Ka¬
dosh  is  the  thirtieth  degree  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  called  also
Knight  ot  the  White  and  Black  Eagle.
While  retaining  the  general  Templar  doc¬
trine  of  the  Kadosh  system,  it  symbolizes
and  humanizes  the  old  lesson  of  vengeance.
It  is  the  most  popular  of  all  the  Kadoshes.

In  the  Knight  Kadosh  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  the  meetings
are  called  Councils.  The  principal  officers
are,  according  to  the  recent  rituals,  a  Com¬
mander,  two  Lieutenant  Commanders,  called
also  Prior  and  Preceptor;  a  Chancellor,
Orator,  Almoner,  Recorder,  and  Treasurer.
The  jewel,  as  described  in  the  ritual  of  the
Southern  Supreme  Council,  is  a  double¬
headed  eagle,  displayed  resting  on  a  teu¬
tonic  cross,  the  eagle  silver,  the  cross  gold
enamelled  red.  The  Northern  Council  uses
instead  of  the  eagle  the  letters  J.  B.  M.
The  Kadoshes,  as  representatives  of  the
Templars,  adopt  the  Beauseant  as  their
standard.  In  this  degree,  as  in  all  the  other
Kadoshes,  we  find  the  mystical  ladder  of
seven  steps.

Knight  Kadosh  of  Cromwell.


Ragon  says  of  this  ( Tuileur ,  171,)  that  it  is
a  pretended  degree,  of  which  he  has  four
copies,  and  that  it  appears  to  be  a  mon¬
strosity  invented  by  an  enemy  of  the  Order
for  the  purposes  of  calumniation.  The
ritual  says  that  the  degree  is  conferred  only
in  England  and  Prussia,  which  is  un¬
doubtedly  untrue.

Knight  Hasonic.  The  word  knight,
prefixed  to  so  many  of  the  high  degrees  as
a  part  of  the  title,  has  no  reference  what¬
ever  to  the  orders  of  chivalry,  except  in
the  case  of  Knights  Templars  and  Knights
of  Malta.  The  word,  in  such  titles  as
Knight  of  the  Ninth  Arch,  Knight  of  the
Brazen  Serpent,  etc.,  has  a  meaning  totally
unconnected  with  Mediaeval  knighthood.
In  fact,  although  the  English,  German,  and
French  words  Knight,  Ritter,  and  Cheva¬
lier,  are  applied  to  both,  the  Latin  word
for  each  is  different.  A  Masonic  knight
is,  in  Latin,  eques;  while  the  Mediaeval
writers  always  called  a  knight  of  chivalry
miles.  So  constant  is  this  distinction,  that
in  the  two  instances  of  Masonic  knight¬
hood  derived  from  the  chivalric  orders,  the
Knight  Templar  and  the  Knight  of  Malta,
this  word  miles  is  used,  instead  oT  eques,  to
indicate  that  they  are  not  really  degrees  of
Masonic  knighthood.  Thus  we  say  Miles
Templarius  and  Miles  Melitae.  If  they  bad
been  inventions  of  a  Masonic  ritualist,  the
titles  would  have  been  Eques  Templanus
and  Eques  Melitae.

The  eques,  or  Masonic  knight,  is  there¬
fore  not,  in  the  heraldic  sense,  a  knight  at
all.  The  word  is  used  simply  to  denote  a
position  higher  than  that  of  a  mere  Master;
a  position  calling,  like  the  “devoir”  of
knighthood,  for  the  performance  of  especial
duties.  As  the  word  “  prince,”  in  Masonic
language,  denotes  not  one  of  princely  rank,
but  one  invested  with  a  share  of  Masonic
.sovereignty  and  command,  so  “  knight  ”
denotes  one  who  is  expected  to  be  distin¬
guished  with  peculiar  fidelity  to  the  cause
in  which  he  has  enlisted.  It  is  simply,  as  I
have  said,  a  point  of  rank  above  that  of  the
Master  Mason.  It  is,  therefore,  confined  to
the  high  degrees.

Kniglit  Jlaliadon.  ( Chevalier  Mae
hadon.)  A  degree  in  the  Archives  of  the
Lodge  of  Saint  Louis  des  Amis  Reunis  at
Calais.

Knight  of  Asia,  Initiated.  See

Asia,  Initiated  Knights  of.

Knight  of  Athens.  (Chevalier  cT
Ath&nes.)  1.  The  fifty -second  degree  of
the  Rite  of  Mizraim.  2.  A  degree  in  the
nomenclature  of  Fustier.  3.  A  degree  in
the  Archives  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the
Philosophic  Rite  in  France.

Knight  of  Anrora.  ( Chevalier  de
FAurore.)  A  degree  belonging  to  the  Rite


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


407


of  Palestine.  It  is  a  modification  of  the
Kadosh,  and  is  cited  in  the  collection  of
Fustier.  In  the  collection  of  M.  Viany,  it
is  also  called  Knight  of  Palestine.

Knight  of  Beneficence.  ( Cheva¬
lier  de  la  Bienfaisance.)  The  forty-ninth
degree  of  the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan
Chapter  of  F ranee.  It  is  also  called  Knight
of  Perfect  Silence.

Knight  of  Brightness.  ( Chevalier
de  la  Clarte. )  The  seventh  and  last  degree
of  the  system  of  the  Clerks  of  Strict  Obser¬
vance,  called  also  Magus.

Knight  of  Christ.  After  the  disso¬
lution  of  the  Templars  in  the  fourteenth
century,  those  knights  who  resided  in  Por¬
tugal  retained  the  possessions  of  the  Order
in  that  country,  and  perpetuated  it  under
the  name  of  the  Knights  of  Christ.  Their
badge  is  a  red  cross  patte'e,  charged  with  a
plain  white  cross.  See  Christ ,  Order  of.

Knight  of  Constantinople.  A
side  degree;  instituted,  doubtless,  by  some
lecturer;  teaching,  however,  an  excellent
moral  lesson  of  humility.  Its  history  has
no  connection  whatever  with  Masonry.
The  degree  is  not  very  extensively  diffused ;
but  several  Masons,  especially  in  the  West¬
ern  States,  are  in  possession  of  it.  It  may
be  conferred  by  any  Master  Mason  on
another;  although  the  proper  performance
of  the  ceremonies  requires  the  assistance  of
several.  When  the  degree  is  formally  con¬
ferred,  the  body  is  called  p.  Council,  and
consists  of  the  following  officers:  Illustri¬
ous  Sovereign,  Chief'  of  the  Artisans,
Seneschal,  Conductor,  Prefect  of  the  Pal¬
ace,  and  Captain  of  the  Guards.

Knight  of  Hope.  1.  A  species  of
androgynous  Masonry,  formerly  practised
in  France.  The  female  members  were
called  Dames  or  Ladies  of  Hope.  2.  A
synonym  of  Knight  of  the  Morning  Star ,
which  see.

Knight  of  Iris.  ( Chevalier  de  1' Iris.)
The  fourth  degree  of  the  Hermetic  Kite  of
Montpellier.

Kniglit  of  Jerusalem.  ( Chevalier
de  Jerusalem.)  The  sixty-fifth  degree  of
the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter
of  France.

Knight  of  Justice.  Knights  Hos¬
pitallers  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem  or  Knights
of  Malta  were  called,  in  the  technical  lan¬
guage  of  the  Order,  Knights  of  Justice.

Knights  of  Malta.  This  Order,  which
at  various  times  in  the  progress  of  its  his¬
tory  received  the  names  of  Knights  Hos¬
pitallers,  Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jeru¬
salem,  Knights  of  Rhodes,  and,  lastly,
Knights  of  Malta,  was  one  of  the  most  im¬
portant  of  the  religious  and  military  orders
of  knighthood  which  sprang  into  exist¬
ence  during  the  Crusades  which  were  insti¬


tuted  for  the  recovery  of  the  Holy  Land.
It  owes  its  origin  to  the  Hospitallers  of  Je¬
rusalem,  that  wholly  religious  and  charita¬
ble  Order  which  was  established  at  Jerusa¬
lem,  in  1048,  by  pious  merchants  of  Amalfi
for  the  succor  of  poor  and  distressed  Latin
pilgrims.  (See  Hospitallers  of  Jenisalem.)
This  society,  established  when  Jerusalem
was  in  possession  of  the  Mohammedans,
passed  through  many  vicissitudes,  but  lived
to  see  the  Holy  City  conquered  by  the
Christian  knights.  It  then  received  many
accessions  from  the  Crusaders,  who,  laying
aside  their  arms,  devoted  themselves  to  the
pious  avocation  of  attending  the  sick.  It
was  then  that  Gerard,  the  Rector  of  the
Hospital,  induced  the  brethren  to  take  upon
themselves  the  vows  of  poverty,  obedience,
and  chastity,  which  they  did  at  the  hands
of  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  who  clothed
them  in  the  habit  selected  for  the  Order,
which  was  a  plain,  black  robe  bearing  a
white  cross  of  eight  points  on  the  left
breast.  This  was  in  the  year  1099,  and
some  writers  here  date  the  beginning  of  the
Order  of  Knights  of  Malta.  But  this  is  an
error.  It  was  not  until  after  the  death  of
Gerard  that  the  Order  assumed  that  mili¬
tary  character  which  it  ever  afterwards
maintained,  or,  in  other  words,  that  the
peaceful  Hospitallers  of  Jerusalem  became
the  warlike  Knights  of  St.  John.

In  1118,  Gerard,  the  Rector  of  the  Hospi¬
tal,  died,  and  was  succeeded  by  Raymond
du  Puy,  whom  Marulli,  the  old  chronicler
of  the  Order,  in  his  Vile  de’  Gran  Maestri,
(Napoli,  1636,)  calls  “secondo  Rettore  e
primo  Maestro.”

The  peaceful  habits  and  monastic  seclu¬
sion  of  the  Brethren  of  the  Hospital,  which
had  been  fostered  by  Gerard,  no  longer
suited  the  warlike  genius  of  his  successor.
He  therefore  proposed  a  change  in  the
character  of  the  society,  by  which  it  should
become  a  military  Order,  devoted  to  active
labors  in  the  field  and  the  protection  of
Palestine  from  the  encroachments  of  the
infidels.  This  proposition  was  warmly  ap¬
proved  by  Baldwyn  II.,  king  of  Jerusalem,
who,  harassed  by  a  continual  warfare,  gladly
accepted  this  addition  to  his  forces.  The
Order  having  thus  been  organized  on  a  mili¬
tary  basis,  the  members  took  a  new  oath,
at  the  hands  of  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,
by  which  they  bound  themselves  to  defend
the  cause  of  Christianity  against  the  infi¬
dels  in  the  Holy  Land  to  the  last  drop  of
their  blood,  but  on  no  account  to  bear  arms
for  any  other  purpose.

This  act,  done  in  1118,  is  considered  as
the  beginning  of  the  establishment  of  the
Order  of  Knights  Hospitallers  of  St.  John,
of  which  Raymond  du  Puy  is,  by  all  his¬
torians,  deemed  the  first  Grand  Master.


408


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


By  the  rule  established  by  Du  Puy  for
the  government  of  the  Order,  it  was
divided  into  three  classes,  namely,  1.
Knights,  who  were  called  Knights  of  Jus¬
tice;  2.  Chaplains;  and  3.  Serving  Bro¬
thers  ;  all  of  whom  took  the  three  vows  of
chastity,  obedience,  and  poverty.  There
was  also  attached  to  the  institution  a  body
of  men  called  Donats,  who,  without  assum¬
ing  the  vows  of  the  Order,  were  employed
in  the  different  offices  of  the  hospital,  and
who  wore  what  was  called  the  demi-cross,
as  a  badge  of  their  connection.

The  history  of  the  Knights  from  this
time  until  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  cen¬
tury  is  but  a  chronicle  of  continued  war¬
fare  with  the  enemies  of  the  Christian  faith.
When  Jerusalem  was  captured  by  Saladin,
in  1187,  the  Hospitallers  retired  to  Margat,
a  town  and  fortress  of  Palestine  which  still
acknowledged  the  Christian  sway.  In  1191,
they  made  Acre,  which  in  that  year  had
been  recaptured  by  the  Christians,  their
principal  place  of  residence.  For  just  one
hundred  years  the  knights  were  engaged,
with  varying  success,  in  sanguinary  contests
with  the  Saracens  and  other  infidel  hordes,
until  Acre,  the  last  stronghold  of  the  Chris¬
tians  in  the  Holy  Land,  having  fallen  be¬
neath  the  blows  of  the  victorious  Moslems,
Syria  was  abandoned  by  the  Latin  race,  and
the  Hospitallers  found  refuge  in  the  island
of  Cyprus,  where  they  established  their  con¬
vent.

The  Order  had  been  much  attenuated  by
its  frequent  losses  in  the  field,  and  its  treas¬
ury  had  been  impoverished.  But  commands
were  at  once  issued  by  John  de  Villiers,  the
Grand  Master,  to  the  different  Grand  Prio¬
ries  in  Europe,  and  large  reinforcements  in
men  and  money  were  soon  received,  so  that
the  Fraternity  were  enabled  again  to  open
their  hospital  and  to  recommence  the  prac¬
tice  of  their  religious  duties.  No  longer
able  to  continue  their  military  exploits  on
land,  the  knights  betook  themselves  to  their
galleys,  and,  while  they  protected  the  pil¬
grims  who  still  flocked  in  vast  numbers  to
Palestine,  gave  security  to  the  Christian
commerce  of  the  Mediterranean.  On  sea,
as  on  land,  the  Hospitallers  still  showed
that  they  were  the  inexorable  and  terrible
foes  of  the  infidels,  whose  captured  vessels
soon  filled  the  harbor  of  Cyprus.

But  in  time  a  residence  in  Cyprus  became
unpleasant.  The  king,  by  heavy  taxes  and
other  rigorous  exactions,  had  so  disgusted
them,  that  they  determined  to  seek  some
other  residence.  The  neighboring  island
of  .Rhodes  had  long,  under  its  independent
princes,  been  the  refuge  of  Turkish  corsairs;
a  name  equivalent  to  the  more  modern  one
of  pirates.  Fulk  de  Villaret,  the  Grand
Master  of  the  Hospital,  having  obtained  the


approval  of  Pope  Clement  and  the  assist¬
ance  of  several  of  the  European  States,
made  a  descent  upon  the  island,  and,  after
months  of  hard  fighting,  on  the  15th  of
August,  1310,  planted  the  standard  of  the
Order  on  the  walls  of  the  city  of  Rhodes ;
and  the  island  thenceforth  became  the  home
of  the  Hospitallers,  whence  they  were  often
called  the  Knights  of  Rhodes.

The  Fraternity  continued  to  reside  at
Rhodes  for  two  hundred  years,  acting  as
the  outpost  and  defence  of  Christendom
from  the  encroachments  of  the  Ottoman
power.  Of  this  long  period,  but  few  years
were  passed  in  peace,  and  the  military  repu¬
tation  of  the  Order  was  still  more  firmly
established  by  the  prowess  of  the  knights.
These  two  centuries  were  marked  by  other
events  which  had  an  important  bearing  on
the  fortunes  of  the  institution.  The  rival
brotherhood  of  the  Templars  was  abolished
by  the  machinations  of  a  pope  and  a  king
of  France,  and  what  of  its  revenues  and
possessions  was  saved  from  the  spoliation
of  its  enemies  was  transferred  to  the  Hospi¬
tallers.

There  had  always  existed  a  bitter  rivalry
between  tbe  two  Orders,  marked  by  un¬
happy  contentions,  which  on  some  occa¬
sions,  while  both  were  in  Palestine,
amounted  to  actual  strife.  Towards  the
Knights  of  St.  John  the  Templars  had
never  felt  nor  expressed  a  very  kindly  feel¬
ing;  and  now  this  acceptance  of  an  unjust
appropriation  of  their  goods  in  the  hour  of
their  disaster,  keenly  added  to  the  sentiment
of  ill-will,  and  the  unhappy  children  of  De
Molay,  as  they  passed  away  from  the  thea¬
tre  of  knighthood,  left  behind  them  the
bitterest  imprecations  on  the  disciples  of
the  Hospital.

The  Order,  during  its  residence  at  Rhodes,
also  underwent  several  changes  in  its  or¬
ganization,  by  which  the  simpler  system
observed  during  its  infancy  in  the  Holy
Land  was  rendered  more  perfect  and  more
complicated.  The  greatest  of  all  these
changes  was  in  the  character  of  the  Eu¬
ropean  Commanderies.  During  the  period
that  the  Order  was  occupied  in  the  defence
of  the  holy  places,  and  losing  large  num¬
bers  of  its  warriors  in  its  almost  continual
battles,  these  Commanderies  served  as  nur¬
series  for  the  preparation  and  education  of
young  knights  who  might  be  sent  to  Pales¬
tine  to  reinforce  the  exhausted  ranks  of
their  brethren.  But  now,  secured  in  their
island  home,  Jerusalem  permanently  in
possession  of  the  infidel,  and  the  enthusi¬
asm  once  inspired  by  Peter  the  Hermit
forever  dead,  there  was  no  longer  need  for
new  Crusaders.  But  the  knights,  engaged
in  strengthening  and  decorating  their  in¬
sular  possession  by  erecting  fortifications


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


409


for  defence,  and  palaces  and  convents  for
residence,  now  required  large  additions  to
their  revenue  to  defray  the  expenses  thus
incurred.  Hence  the  Commanderies  were
the  sources  whence  this  revenue  was  to
be  derived;  and  the  Commanders, once  the
Principals,  as  it  were,  of  military  schools,
became  lords  of  the  manor  in  their  respec¬
tive  provinces.  There,  by  a  judicious  and
economical  administration  of  the  property
which  had  been  intrusted  to  them,  by  the
cultivation  of  gardens  and  orchards,  by  the
rent  received  from  arable  and  meadow-
lands,  of  mills  and  fisheries  appertaining
to  their  estates,  and  even  by  the  voluntary
contributions  of  their  neighbors,  and  by  the
raising  of  stock,  they  were  enabled  to  add
greatly  to  their  income.  Of  this  one-fifth
was  claimed,  under  the  name  of  respon¬
sions,  as  a  tribute  to  be  sent  annually  to
Rhodes  for  the  recuperation  of  the  always
diminishing  revenue  of  the  Order.

Another  important  change  in  the  organi¬
zation  of  the  Order  was  made  at  a  General
Chapter  held  about  1320  at  Montpellier,
under  the  Grand  Mastership  of  Villanova.
The  Order  was  there  divided  into  languages,
a  division  unknown  during  its  existence  in
Palestine.  These  languages  were  at  first
seven  in  number,  butafterwards  increased  to
eight,  by  the  subdivision  of  that  of  Aragon.
The  principal  dignities  of  the  Order  were
at  the  same  time  divided  among  these
languages,  so  that  a  particular  dignity
should  be  always  enjoyed  by  the  same
language.  These  languages,  and  the  digni¬
ties  respectively  attached  to  them,  were  as
follows :

1.  Provence :  Grand  Commander.

2.  Auvergne:  Grand  Marshal.

3.  France:  Grand  Hospitaller.

4.  Italy :  Grand  Admiral.

5.  Aragon :  Grand  Conservator.

6.  Germany  :  Grand  Bailiff.

7.  Castile:  Grand  Chancellor.

8.  England:  Grand  Turcopolier.

But  perhaps  the  greatest  of  all  changes
was  that  which  took  place  in  the  personal
character  of  the  Knights.  “  The  Order,”
says  Taafe,  (/ list.,  iv.  234,)  “  had  been  above
two  hundred  years  old  before  it  managed  a
boat,  but  was  altogether  equestrian  during
its  two  first,  and  perhaps  most  glorious,  cen¬
turies.”  But  on  settling  at  Rhodes,  the
knights  began  to  attack  their  old  enemies
by  sea  with  the  same  prowess  with  which
they  had  formerly  met  them  on  land,  and
the  victorious  contests  of  the  galleys  of  St.
John  with  the  Turkish  corsairs,  who  were
infesting  the  Mediterranean,  proved  them
well  entitled  to  the  epithet  of  naval  war¬
riors.”

In  the  year  1480,  Rhodes  was  unsuccess¬
fully  besieged  by  the  Ottoman  army  of
3  B


Mahomet  II.,  under  the  command  of  Pale-
ologus  Pasha.  After  many  contests,  the
Turks  were  repulsed  with  great  slaughter.
But  the  attack  of  the  Sultan  Sol  vman,  forty-
four  years  afterwards,  was  attended  with  a
different  result,  and  Rhodes  was  surren¬
dered  to  the  Turkish  forces  on  the  20th  De¬
cember,  1522.  The  terms  of  the  capitula¬
tion  were  liberal  to  the  knights,  who  were
permitted  to  retire  with  all  their  personal
property ;  and  thus,  in  the  Grand  Master¬
ship  of  L’lsle  Adam,  Rhodes  ceased  forever
to  be  the  home  of  the  Order,  and  six  days
afterwards,  on  New  Year’s  day,  1523,  the
fleet,  containing  the  knights  and  four  thou¬
sand  of  the  inhabitants,  sailed  for  the  island
of  Candia.

From  Candia,  where  the  Grand  Master
remained  but  a  short  time,  he  proceeded
with  his  knights  to  Italy.  Seven  long
years  were  passed  in  negotiations  with  the
inonarchs  of  Europe,  and  in  the  search  for
a  home.  At  length,  the  Emperor  Charles
V.,  of  Germany,  vested  in  the  Order  the
complete  and  perpetual  sovereignty  of  the
islands  of  Malta  and  Gozo,  and  the  city  of
Tripoli;  and  in  1530,  the  knights  took
formal  possession  of  Malta,  where,  to  borrow
the  language  of  Porter,  {Hist.,  ii.  33,)  “for
upwards  of  two  centuries  and  a  half,  waved
the  banner  of  St.  John,  an  honor  to  Christi¬
anity  and  a  terror  to  the  infidel  of  the  East.”
From  this  time  the  Order  received  the  des¬
ignation  of  “  Knights  of  Malta,”  a  title
often  bestowed  upon  it,  even  in  official  docu¬
ments,  in  the  place  of  the  original  one  of
“Knights  Hospitallers  of  St.  John  of  Jeru¬
salem.”

For  268  years  the  Order  retained  pos¬
session  of  the  island  of  Malta.  But  in
1798  it  was  surrendered  without  a  strug¬
gle  by  Louis  de  Hompesch,  the  imbecile
and  pusillanimous  Grand  Master,  to  the
French  army  and  fleet  under  Bonaparte;
and  this  event  may  be  considered  as  the
commencement  of  the  suppression  of  the
Order  as  an  active  power.

Hompesch,  accompanied  by  a  few  knights,
embarked  in  a  few  days  for  Trieste,  and
subsequently  retired  to  Montpellier,  where
he  resided  in  the  strictest  seclusion  and
poverty  until  May  12,  1805,  when  he  died,
leaving  behind  him  not  enough  to  remuner¬
ate  the  physicians  who  had  attended  him.

The  great  body  of  the  knights  proceeded
to  Russia,  where  the  Emperor  Paul  had  a  few
years  before  been  proclaimed  the  protector
of  the  Order.  On  the  27th  October,  1798,
a  Chapter  of  such  of  the  knights  as  were
in  St.  Petersburg  was  held,  and  the  Em¬
peror  Paul  I.  was  elected  Grand  Master.
This  election  was  made  valid,  so  far  as  its
irregularities  would  permit,  bv  the  abdica¬
tion  of  Hompesch  in  July,  1799.


410


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


At  the  death  of  Paul  in  1801,  his  suc¬
cessor  on  the  throne,  Alexander,  appointed
Count  Soltikoff  as  Lieutenant  of  the
Mastery,  and  directed  him  to  convene  a
Council  at  St.  Petersburg  to  deliberate  on
future  action.  This  assembly  adopted  a
new  statute  for  the  election  of  the  Grand
Master,  which  provided  that  each  Grand
Priory  should  in  a  Provincial  Chapter
nominate  a  candidate,  and  that  out  of  the
persons  so  nominated  the  Pope  should
make  a  selection.  Accordingly^  in  1802,  the
Pope  appointed  John  de  Toinmasi,  who
was  the  last  knight  that  bore  the  title  of
Grand  Master.

On  the  death  of  Tommasi,  the  Pope  de¬
clined  to  assume  any  longer  the  responsi¬
bility  of  nominating  a  Grand  Master,  and
appointed  the  Bailiff  Guevarr  Luardo
simply  as  Lieutenant  of  the  Mastery,  a
title  afterwards  held  by  his  successors  Cen-
telles,  Busca.  De  Candida  and  Collavedo.
In  1826  and  1827,  the  first  steps  were  taken
for  the  revival  of  the  English  language,  and
Sir  Joshua  Meredith,  Bart.,  who  had  been
made  a  knight  in  1798  by  Hompesch,
being  appointed  Lieutenant  Prior  of  Eng¬
land,  admitted  many  English  gentlemen
into  the  Order.

But  the  real  history  of  the  Order  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem  ends  with  the  disgrace¬
ful  capitulation  of  Malta  in  1798.  All
that  has  since  remained  of  it ;  all  that  now
remains, —  however  imposing  may  be  the
titles  assumed, —  is  but  the  diluted  shadow
of  its  former  existence.

The  organization  of  the  Order  in  its
days  of  prosperity  was  very  complicated,
partaking  both  of  a  monarchial  and  a  re¬
publican  character.  Over  all  presided  a
Grand  Master,  who,  although  invested  with
extensive  powers,  was  still  controlled  by  the
legislative  action  of  the  General  Chapter.

The  Order  was  divided  into  eight  lan¬
guages,  over  each  of  which  presided  one  of
the  Grand  dignitaries  with  the  title  of  Con¬
ventual  Bailiff.  These  dignitaries  were  the
Grand  Commander,  the  Grand  Marshal,  the
Grand  Hospitaller,  the  Grand  Conservator,
the  Grand  Turcopolier,  the  Grand  Bailiff,
and  the  Grand  Chancellor.  Each  of  these
dignitaries  resided  in  the  palace  or  inn  at
Malta  which  was  appropriated  to  his  lan¬
guage.  In  every  province  there  were  one
or  more  Grand  Priories  presided  over  by
Grand  Priors,  and  beneath  these  were  the
Commanderies,  over  each  of  which  was  a
Commander.  There  were  scattered  through
the  different  countries  of  Europe  22  Grand
Priories  and  596  Commanderies.

Those  who  desired  admission  into  the
Order  as  members  of  the  first  class,  or
Knights  of  Justice,  were  required  to  pro¬
duce  proofs  of  noble  descent.  The  cere¬


monies  of  initiation  were  public  and  exceed¬
ingly  simple,  consisting  of  little  more  than
the  taking  of  the  necessary  vow.  In  this
the  Hospitallers  differed  from  the  Templars,
whose  formula  of  admission  was  veiled  in
secrecy.  Indeed,  Porter  ( Hist .,  i.  203,)  at¬
tributes  the  escape  of  the  former  Order
from  the  accusations  that  were  heaped  upon
the  latter,  and  which  led  to  its  dissolution,
to  the  fact  that  the  Knights  “abjured  all
secrecy  in  their  forms  and  ceremonies.”

The  Order  was  dissolved  in  England  by
Henry  VIII.,  and,  although  temporarily
restored  by  Mary,  was  finally  abolished  in
England.  A  decree  of  the  Constituent
Assembly  abolished  it  in  France  in  1792.
By  a  decree  of  Charles  IV.,  of  Spain,  in
1802,  the  two  languages  of  Aragon  and
Castile  became  the  Royal  Spanish  Order  of
St.  John,  of  which  he  declared  himself  the
Grand  Master.

Now,  only  the  languages  of  Germany  and
Italy  remain.  The  Order  is,  therefore,  at
this  day  in  a  state  of  abeyance,  if  not  of
disintegration,  although  it  still  maintains
its  vitality,  and  the  functions  of  Grand
Master  are  exercised  by  a  Lieutenant  of  the
Magistery,  who  resides  at  Rome.  Attempts
have  also  been  made,  from  time  to  time,  to
revive  the  Order  in  different  places,  some¬
times  with  and  sometimes  without  the  legal
sanction  of  the  recognized  head  of  the  Or¬
der.  For  instance,  there  are  now  in  Eng¬
land  two  bodies,  —  one  Catholic,  under  Sir
George  Bowyer,  and  the  other  Protestant,
at  the  head  of  which  is  the  Duke  of  Man¬
chester;  but  each  repudiates  the  other.
But  the  relic  of  the  old  and  valiant  Order
of  Knights  Hospitallers  claims  no  connec¬
tion  with  the  branch  of  Masonry  which
bears  the  title  of  Knights  of  Malta,  and
hence  the  investigation  of  its  present  con¬
dition  is  no  part  of  the  province  of  this
work.

Knight  of  Malta,  Masonic.  The

degree  of  Knight  of  Malta  is  conferred  in
the  United  States  as  “an  appendant  Order”
in  a  Commandery  of  Knights  Templars.
There  is  a  ritual  attached  to  the  degree,  but
very  few  are  in  possession  of  it,  and  it  i3
generally  communicated  after  the  candidate
lias  been  created  a  Knight  Templar;  the
ceremony  consisting  generally  only  in  the
reading  of  the  passage  of  Scripture  pre¬
scribed  in  the  Monitors,  and  the  communi¬
cation  ®f  the  modes  of  recognition.

How  anything  so  anomalous  in  history
as  the  commingling  in  one  body  of  Knights
Templars  and  Knights  of  Malta,  and  making
the  same  person  a  representative  of  both
Orders,  first  arose,  it  is  now  difficult  to  de¬
termine.  It  was,  most  probably,  a  device
of  Thomas  S.  Webb,  and  was,  it  may  be
supposed,  one  of  the  results  of  a  too  great


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


411


fondness  for  the  accumulation  of  degrees.
Mitchell,  in  his  History  of  Freemasonry,
(ii.  83,)  says:  “The  degree,  so  called,  of
Malta,  or  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  crept  in,
we  suppose,  by  means  of  a  bungler,  who,
not  knowing  enough  of  the  ritual  to  confer
it  properly,  satisfied  himself  by  simply
adding  a  few  words  in  the  ceremony  of
dubbing;  and  thus,  by  the  addition  of  a  few
signs  and  words  but  imperfectly  understood,
constituted  a  Knight  Templar  also  a  Knight
of  Malta,  aud  so  the  matter  stands  to  this
day.”  I  am  not  generally  inclined  to  place
much  confidence  in  Mitchell  as  an  historian ;
yet  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  in  this  in¬
stance  his  guess  is  not  very  far  from  the
truth,  although,  as  usual  with  him,  there
is  a  tinge  of  exaggeration  in  his  statement.

There  is  evidence  that  the  degree  was
introduced  at  a  very  early  period  into  the
Masonry  of  this  country.  In  the  Constitu¬
tion  of  the  “  United  States  Grand  Encamp¬
ment,”  adopted  in  1805,  one  section  enu¬
merates  “  Encampments  of  Knights  of
Malta,  Knights  Templars,  and  Councils  of
Knights  of  the  Red  Cross.”  It  will  be
observed  that  the  Knight  of  Malta  precedes
the  Knight  Templar;  whereas,  in  the  pres¬
ent  system,  the  former  is  made  the  ultimate
degree  of  the  series.  Yet,  in  this  Consti¬
tution,  no  further  notice  is  taken  of  the
degree ;  for  while  the  fees  for  the  Red  Cross
and  the  Templar  degrees  are  prescribed,
there  is  no  reference  to  any  to  be  paid  for
that  of  Malta.  In  the  revised  Constitution
of  1816,  the  order  of  the  series  was  changed
to  Red  Cross,  Templar,  and  Malta,  which
arrangement  has  ever  since  been  main¬
tained.  The  Knights  of  Malta  are  desig¬
nated  as  one  of  the  “  Appendant  Orders,”
a  title  and  a  subordinate  position  which
the  pride  of  the  old  Knights  of  Malta  would
hardly  have  permitted  them  to  accept.

In  1856,  the  Knights  Templars  of  the
United  States  had  become  convinced  that
the  incorporation  of  the  Order  of  Malta
with  the  Knights  Templars,  and  making
the  same  person  the  possessor  of  botli
Orders,  was  so  absurd  a  violation  of  all  his¬
toric  truth,  that  at  the  session  of  the  Gen¬
eral  Grand  Encampment  in  that  year,  at
»l  Hartford,  Connecticut,  on  the  suggestion
<  of  the  author,  the  degree  was  unanimously
stricken  from  the  Constitution  ;  but  at  the
session  of  1862,  in  Columbus,  Ohio,  it  was,
I  think,  without  due  consideration,  restored,
and  is  now  communicated  in  the  Com-
manderies  of  Knights  Templars.

There  is  no  fact  in  history  better  known
than  that  there  existed  from  their  very
birth  a  rivalry  between  the  two  Orders  of
the  Temple  and  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,
which  sometimes  burst  forth  into  open  hos¬
tility.  Porter  says,  {Hist.  K.  of  Malta,  i.


107,)  speaking  of  the  dissensions  of  the  two
Orders,  “instead  of  confining  their  rivalry
to  a  friendly  emulation,  whilst  combating
against  their  common  foe,  they  appeared
more  intent  upon  thwarting  and  frustrating
each  other,  than  in  opposing  the  Saracen.”

To  such  an  extent  had  the  quarrels  of  the
two  Orders  proceeded,  that  Pope  Alexan¬
der  III.  found  it  necessary  to  interfere;  and
in  1179  a  hollow  truce  was  signed  by  the
rival  houses  of  the  Temple  and  the  Hospi¬
tal  ;  the  terms  of  which  were,  however,
never  strictly  observed  by  either  side.  On
the  dissolution  of  the  Templars  so  much
of  their  possessions  as  were  not  confiscated
to  public  use  were  given  by  the  sovereigns
of  Europe  to  the  Knights  of  Malta,  who
accepted  the  gift  without  compunction.
And  there  is  a  tradition  that  the  surviving
Templars,  indignant  at  the.  spoliation  and
at  the  mercenary  act  of  their  old  rivals  in
willingly  becoming  a  party  to  the  robbery,
solemnly  registered  a  vow  never  thereafter
to  recognize  them  as  friends.

The  attempt  at  this  day  to  make  a  mod¬
ern  Knight  Templar  accept  initiation  into
a  hated  and  antagonistic  Order  is  to  dis¬
play  a  lamentable  ignorance  of  the  facts  of
history.

Another  reason  why  the  degree  of
Knight  of  Malta  should  be  rejected  from
the  Masonic  system  is  that  the  ancient
Order  never  was  a  secret  association.  Its
rites  of  reception  were  open  and  public,
wholly  unlike  anything  in  Masonry.  In
fact,  historians  have  believed  that  the  favor
shown  to  the  Hospitallers,  and  the  persecu¬
tions  waged  against  the  Templars,  are  to  be
attributed  to  the  fact  that  the  latter  Order
had  a  secret  system  of  initiation  which  did
not  exist  in  the  former.  The  ritual  of  re¬
ception,  the  signs  and  words  as  modes  of
recognition  now  practised  in  the  modern
Masonic  ceremonial,  are  all  a  mere  inven¬
tion  of  a  very  recent  date.  The  old  Knights
knew  nothing  of  such  a  system.

A  third,  and  perhaps  the  best,  reason  for
rejecting  the  Knights  of  Malta  as  a  Masonic
degree  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the
Order  still  exists,  although  in  a  somewhat
decayed  condition ;  and  that  its  members,
claiming  an  uninterrupted  descent  from  the
Knights  who,  with  Hompesch,  left  the
island  of  Malta  in  1797,  and  threw  them¬
selves  under  the  protection  of  Paul  of  Rus¬
sia,  utterly  disclaim  any  connection  with
the  Freemasons,  and  almost  contemptu¬
ously  repudiate  the  so-called  Masonic
branch  of  the  Order.  In  1858,  a  manifesto
was  issued  by  the  supreme  authority  of
the  Order,  dated  from  “the  Magisterial
Palace  of  the  Sacred  Order”  at  Rome,
which,  after  stating  that  the  Order,  as  it
then  existed,  consisted  only  of  the  Grand


412


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


Priories  in  the  Langues  of  Italy  and  Ger¬
many,  the  knights  in  Prussia,  who  trace
descent  from  the  Grand  Bailiwick  of  Bran¬
denburg,  and  a  few  other  knights  who  had
been  legally  received  by  the  Mastership
and  Council,  declares  that:

“  Beyond  and  out  of  the  above-men¬
tioned  Langues  and  Priories,  and  except¬
ing  the  knights  created  and  constituted  as
aforesaid,  all  those  who  may  so  call  or  enti¬
tle  themselves  are  legally  ignored  by  our
Sacred  Order.”

There  is  no  room  there  provided  for  the
so-called  Masonic  Knights  of  Malta.  But
a  writer  in  Notes  and  Queries,  (3d  Ser.,  iii.
413,)  who  professes  to  be  in  possession  of
the  degree,  says,  in  reply  to  an  inquiry,  that
the  Masonic  degree  “  has  nothing  whatever
to  do  with  the  Knights  Hospitallers  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem.”  This  is  most  un¬
doubtedly  true  in  reference  to  the  American
degree.  Neither  in  its  form,  its  ritual,  the
objects  it  professes,  its  tradition,  nor  its
historical  relations,  is  it  in  the  slightest  de¬
gree  assimilated  to  the  ancient  Order  of
Hospitallers,  afterwards  called  Knights  of
Rhodes,  and,  finally,  Knights  of  Malta.
To  claim,  therefore,  to  be  the  modern  repre¬
sentatives  of  that  Order,  to  wear  its  dress,
to  adopt  its  insignia,  to  flaunt  its  banners,
and  to  leave  the  world  to  believe  that  the
one  is  but  the  uninterrupted  continuation
of  the  other,  are  acts  which  must  be  regarded
as  a  very  ridiculous  assumption,  if  not  actu¬
ally  entitled  to  a  less  courteous  appellation.

For  all  these  reasons,  I  think  that  it  is
much  to  be  regretted  that  the  action  of  the
Grand  Encampment  in  repudiating  the  de-
ree  in  1856  was  reversed  in  1862,  The
egree  has  no  historical  or  traditional  con¬
nection  with  Masonry;  holds  no  proper
place  in  a  Commanderv  of  Templars,  and
ought  to  be  wiped  out  of  the  catalogue  of
Masonic  degrees.

Knight  of  Masonry,  Terrible.

(  Chevalier  Terrible  de  la  Magonnerie. )  A  de¬
gree  contained  in  the  collection  of  Le  Page.

Knight  of  Palestine.  ( Chevalier
de  la  Palestine.)  1.  The  sixty-third  degree
of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.  2.  The  ninth  de¬
gree  of  the  Reform  of  St.  Martin.  3.  One
of  the  series  of  degrees  formerly  given  in
the  Baldwyn  Encampment  of  England,  and
said  to  have  been  introduced  into  Bristol,  in
1800,  by  some  French  refugees  under  the
authority  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.

Knight  of  Patnios.  An  apocalyptic
degree  mentioned  by  Oliver  in  his  Land¬
marks.  It  refers,  he  says,  to  the  banish¬
ment  of  St.  John.

Knight  of  Perfumes.  ( Chevalier
des  Parfums.)  The  eighth  degree  of  the
Rite  of  the  East  (Rite  d’Orient)  according
to  the  nomenclature  of  F ustier.


Knight  of  Pure  Truth.  (Chevalier
de  la  Pure  Verite.)  Thorv  mentions  this  as
a  secret  society  instituted  by  the  scholars
of  the  Jesuitical  college  at  Tulle.  It  could
scarcely  have  been  Masonic.

Knight  of  Purity  and  Tight.
( Ritter  aer  Klarheit  und  des  Lichts.)  The
seventh  and  last  degree  of  the  Rite  of  the
Clerks  of  Strict  Observance,  which  see.

Knight  of  Rhodes.  1.  One  of  the
titles  given  to  the  Knights  Hospitallers  in
consequence  of  their  long  residence  on  the
island  of  Rhodes.  2.  A  degree  formerly
conferred  in  the  Baldwyn  Encampment  at
Bristol,  England.  It  seems  in  some  way  to
have  been  confounded  with  the  Mediterra¬
nean  Pass.

Knight  of  Rose  Croix.  See  Pose

Croix.

Knight  of  St.  Andrew,  Grand
Scottish.  (Grand  Ecossais  de  Saint  An¬
dre.)  Sometimes  called  ‘‘Patriarch  of  the
Crusades.”  The  twentv-ninth  degree  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  Its
ritual  is  founded  on  a  legend,  first  promul¬
gated  by  the  Chevalier  Ramsay,  to  this
effect:  that  the  Freemasons  were  originally
a  society  of  knights  founded  in  Palestine  lor
the  purpose  of  building  Christian  churches;
that  the  Saracens,  to  prevent  the  execution
of  this  design,  sent  emissaries  among  them,
who  disguised  themselves  as  Christians,
and  were  continually  throwing  obstacles  in
their  way ;  that  on  discovering  the  exist¬
ence  of  these  spies,  the  knights  instituted
certain  modes  of  recognition  to  serve  as  the
means  of  detection ;  that  they  also  adopted
symbolic  ceremonies  for  the  purpose  of  in¬
structing  the  proselytes  who  had  entered
the  society  in  the  forms  and  principles  of
their  new  religion ;  and  finally,  that  the
Saracens,  having  become  too  powerful  for
the  knights  any  longer  to  contend  with
them,  they  had  accepted  the  invitation  of
a  king  of  England,  and  had  removed  into
his  dominions,  where  they  thenceforth  de¬
voted  themselves  to  the  cultivation  of  arch¬
itecture  and  the  fine  arts.  On  this  mythicm
legend,  which  in  reality  was  only  an  appli¬
cation  of  Ramsay’s  theory  of  the  origin  of
Freemasonry,  the  Baron  de  Tsehoudy  is
said,  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  to
have  formed  this  degree,  which  Ragon  says
(Orthod.  Magon.,  p.  138,)  at  his  death,  in
1769,  he  bequeathed  in  manuscript  to  the
Council  of  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West.
On  the  subsequent  extension  of  the  twenty-
five  degrees  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection,  in¬
stituted  by  that  body,  to  the  thirty-three  de¬
grees  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,
this  degree  was  adopted  as  the  twenty-ninth,
and  as  an  appropriate  introduction  to  the
Knights  of  Kadosh,  which  it  immediate¬
ly  precedes.  Hence  the  jewel,  a  St.  An-


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


413


drew’s  cross,  is  said,  by  Ragon,  to  be  only
a  concealed  form  of  the  Templar  Cross.  In
allusion  to  the  time  of  its  supposed  inven¬
tion,  it  has  been  called  “  Patriarch  of  the
Crusades.”  On  account  of  the  Masonic  in¬
struction  which  it  contains,  it  also  some¬
times  receives  the  title  of  “  Grand  Master
of  Light.”

The  Lodge  is  decorated  with  red  hang¬
ings  supported  by  white  columns.  There
are  eighty-one  lights,  arranged  as  follows :
four  in  each  corner  before  a  St.  Andrew’s
cross,  two  before  the  altar,  and  sixty-three
arranged  by  nines  in  seven  different  parts
of  the  room.  There  are  three  officers,  a
Venerable  Grand  Master  and  two  Wardens.
The  jewel  is  a  St.  Andrew’s  cross,  appropri¬
ately  decorated,  and  suspended  from  a  green
collar  bordered  with  red.

In  the  ritual  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction,
the  leading  idea  of  a  communication  be¬
tween  the  Christian  knights  and  the  Sara¬
cens  has  been  preserved;  but  the  ceremonies
and  the  legend  have  been  altered.  The  lesson
intended  to  be  taught  is  toleration  of  religion.

This  degree  also  constitutes  the  sixty-
third  of  the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan
Chapter  of  France;  the  fifth  of  the  Rite
of  Clerks  of  Strict  Observance ;  and  the
twenty-first  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.  It  is
also  to  be  found  in  many  other  systems.

Knight  of  St.  Andrew,  Free.
( Chevalier  libre  de  Saint- Andrd. )  A  degree
found  in  the  collection  of  Pyron.

Knight  of  St.  Andrew  of  the
Thistle.  ( Chevalier  Ecossais  de  S.  Andre
du,  Chardon.)  The  seventy-fifth  degree  of
the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter
of  France.

Knight  of  St.  John  of  Jerusa¬
lem.  1.  The  original  title  of  the  Knights
of  Malta,  and  derived  from  the  church  and
monastery  built  at  Jerusalem  in  1048  by
the  founders  of  the  Order,  and  dedicated  to
St.  John  the  Baptist.  See  Knight  of  Malta.

2.  A  mystical  degree  divided  into  three
sections,  which  is  found  in  the  collection  of
Lemanceau.

Knight  ofSt.  John  of  Palestine.

( Chevalier  de  Sainte  Jean  de  la  Palestine.)
The  forty-eighth  degree  of  the  Metropol¬
itan  Chapter  of  France.

Knight  of  the  Altar.  ( Chevalier
de  I’Autcl. )  The  twelfth  degree  of  the  Rite
of  the  East  according  to  the  nomenclature
of  Fustier.

Knight  of  the  American  Ea¬
gle.  An  honorary  degree  invented  many
years  ago  in  Texas  or  some  of  the  Western
States.  It  was  founded  on  incidents  of  the
American  Revolution,  and  gave  an  absurd
legion  of  Hiram  Abif’s  boyhood.  It  is
now,  I  believe,  obsolete.

Knight  of  the  Anchor.  ( Cheva¬


lier  de  I'Ancre.)  1.  An  androgynous  de¬
gree.  See  Anchor ,  Order  of.  2.  The  twenty-
first  degree  of  the  collection  of  the  Metro¬
politan  Chapter  of  France.

Knight  of  the  Ape  and  Eton.
Gadicke  says  [Freimaurer-Lex . )  that  this
Order  appeared  about  the  year  1780,  but
that  its  existence  was  only  made  known  by
its  extinction.  It  adopted  the  lion  sleep¬
ing  with  open  eyes  as  a  symbol  of  watch¬
fulness,  and  the  ape  as  a  symbol  of  those
who  imitate  without  due  penetration.  The
members  boasted  that  they  possessed  all
the  secrets  of  the  Ancient  Templars,  on
which  account  they  were  persecuted  by  the
modern  Order.  The  lion  and  ape,  as  sym¬
bols  of  courage  and  address,  are  found  in
one  of  the  degrees  described  in  the  Franc-
Masons  Ecrasses.

Knight  of  the  Arch.  ( Chevalier  de
V Arche.)  A  degree  found  in  the  nomen¬
clature  of  Fustier.

Knight  of  the  Argonauts.  ( Cheva¬
lier  des  Argonautes.)  The  first  point  of
the  sixth  degree,  or  Knight  of  the  Golden
Fleece  of  the  Hermetic  Rite  of  Montpellier.

Knight  of  the  Banqueting
Table  of  the  Seven  Sages.  ( Cheva¬
lier  de  la  Table  da  Banquet  des  Sept  Sages.)
A  degree  in  the  Archives  of  the  Mother
Lodge  of  the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

Knight  of  the  Black  Eagle.
( Chevalier  de  I’Aigle  noir.)  1.  The  seventy-
sixth  degree  of  the  collection  of  the  Met¬
ropolitan  Chapter  of  France;  called  also
Grand  Inquisitor,  Grand  Inspector,  Grand
Elu  or  Elect,  in  the  collection  of  Le
Rouge.  2.  The  thirty-eighth  degree  of  the
Rite  of  Mizraim.

Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent.

( Chevalier  da  Serpent  d’Airain.)  The  twen¬
ty-fifth  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite.  The  history  of  this  degree
is  founded  upon  the  circumstances  related
in  Numbers,  ch.  xxi.,  ver.  6-9:  “And  the
Lord  sent  fiery  serpents  among  the  people,
and  they  bit  the  people ;  and  much  people
of  Israel  died.  Therefore  the  people  came
to  Moses,  and  said,  We  have  sinned;  for
we  have  spoken  against  the  Lord,  and
against  thee :  pray  unto  the  Lord  that  he
take  away  the  serpents  from  us.  And  Moses
prayed  for  the  people.  And  the  Lord  said
unto  Moses,  Make  thee  a  fiery  serpent,  and
set  it  upon  a  pole:  and  it  shall  come  to
pass,  that  every  one  that  is  bitten,  when  he
looketh  upon  it  shall  live.  And  Moses
made  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  put  it  upon  a
pole ;  and  it  came  to  pass,  that  if  a  serpent
had  bitten  any  man,  when  he  beheld  the
serpent  of  brass,  he  lived.”  In  the  old
rituals  the  Lodge  was  called  the  Court  of
Sinai ;  the  presiding  officer  was  styled  Most
Puissant  Grand  Master,  and  represented


414


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


Moses;  while  the  two  Wardens,  or  Minis¬
ters,  represented  Aaron  and  Joshua.  The
Orator  was  called  Pontiff;  the  Secretary,
Grand  Graver ;  and  the  candidate,  a  Travel¬
ler.  In  the  modern  ritual  adopted  in  this
country,  the  Council  represents  the  camp  of
the  Israelites.  The  first  three  officers  repre¬
sent  Moses,  Joshua,  and  Caleb,  and  are
respectively  styled  Most  Puissant  Leader,
Valiant  Captain  of  the  Host,  and  Illus¬
trious  Chief  of  the  Ten  Tribes.  The  Ora¬
tor  represents  Eleazar;  the  Secretary,
Ithamar;  the  Treasurer,  Phinehas;  and  the
candidate  an  intercessor  for  the  people.
The  jewel  is  a  crux  ansata,  with  a  serpent
entwined  around  it.  On  the  upright  of  the
cross  is  engraved  TlSn,  khalati,  I  have  suf¬
fered,  and  on  the  arms  jHil’inJ,  nakhushtan,
a  serpent.  The  French  ritualists  would
have  done  better  to  have  substituted  for  the
first  word  TXDn,  khatati,  I  have  sinned ;
the  original  in  Numbers  being  UXOn,
Kathanu,  we  have  sinned.  The  apron  is
white,  lined  with  black,  and  symbolically
decorated.

There  is  an  old  legend  which  says  that
this  degree  was  founded  in  the  time  of  the
Crusades,  by  John  Ralph,  who  established
the  Order  in  the  Holy  Land  as  a  military
and  monastic  society,  and  gave  it  the  name
of  the  Brazen  Serpent,  because  it  was  a
part  of  their  obligation  to  receive  and  gra¬
tuitously  nurse  sick  travellers,  to  protect
them  against  the  attacks  of  the  Saraoens,
and  escort  them  safely  to  Palestine ;  thus
alluding  to  the  healing  and  saving  virtues
of  the  Brazen  Serpent  among  the  Israelites
in  the  wilderness.

Knight  of  the  Burning  Bnsh.

( Chevalier  du  Buisson  ardent.)  A  theo-
sophic  degree  of  the  collection  of  the
Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philosophic  Scottish
Rite.

Knight  of  the  Channen.  ( Cheva¬
lier  de  la  Kanuka.)  The  sixty-ninth  degree
of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.  The  HDIjn,  or
Chanuca,  is  the  feast  of  the  dedication  cele¬
brated  by  the  Jews  in  commemoration  of
the  dedication  of  the  Temple  by  Judas  Mac¬
cabeus  after  its  pollution  by  the  Syrians.
In  the  ritual  of  the  degree,  the  Jewish  light¬
ing  of  seven  lamps,  one  on  each  day,  is  i  mi-
tated,  and  therefore  the  ceremony  of  initia¬
tion  lasts  for  seven  days.

Knight  of  the  Christian  Mark.
Called  also  Guard  of  the  Conclave.  A  de-
ree  formerly  conferred  in  the  United
fates  on  Knights  Templars  in  a  body
called  a  Council  of  the  Trinity.  The  legend
of  the  Order  is  that  it  was  organized  by
Pope  Alexander  for  the  defence  of  his  per¬
son,  and  that  its  members  were  selected
from  the  Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem.
In  the  ceremonies  there  is  a  reference  to  '


the  tau  cross  or  mark  on  the  forehead
spoken  of  by  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  and
hence  the  name  of  tne  degree.  The  motto
of  the  Order  is,  “Christus  regnat,  vincit,
triumphat.  Rex  regnantium,  Dominus
dominantium.”  Christ  reigns,  conquers,
and  triumphs.  King  of  kings  and  Lord
of  lords.

Kniglit  of  the  Columns.  ( Cheva¬
lier  des  Colonnes. )  The  seventh  degree  of
the  Rite  of  the  East  according  to  the  no¬
menclature  of  Fustier.

Knight  of  the  Comet.  ( Chevalier
de  la  Combte.)  A  degree  found  in  the  col¬
lection  of  H6cart.

Knight  of  the  Cork.  ( Chevalier  du  •
Bouchon.)  An  androgynous  secret  society
established  in  Italy  after  the  Papal  bull
excommunicating  the  Freemasons,  and  in¬
tended  by  its  founders  to  take  the  place  of
the  Masonic  institution.

Knight  of  the  Courts.  ( Chevalier
des  Parvis.)  The  third  degree  of  the  Rite
of  the  East  according  to  the  nomenclature
of  Fustier.

Knight  of  the  Crown.  ( Chevalier
de  la  Couronne.)  A  degree  in  the  collec¬
tion  of  Pyron.

Knight  of  the  Door.  ( Chevalier  de
la  Porte.)  The  fourth  degree  of  the  Rite
of  the  East  according  to  the  nomenclature
of  Fustier.

Knight  of  the  Dove.  See  Dove,

Knights  of  the.  The  Knights  and  Ladies
of  the  Dove  ( Chevaliers  et  Chevalieres  de  la
Colombe)  was  an  androgynous  secret  society
framed  on  the  model  of  Freemasonry,  and
instituted  at  Versailles  in  1784.  It  had  but
an  ephemeral  existence.

Knight  of  the  Eagle.  {Chevalier
de  VAiglc. )  1.  The  first  degree  of  the  Chap¬
ter  of  Clermont.  2.  The  third  degree  of
the  Clerks  of  Strict  Observance.  $.  The
fifty-fifth  degree  of  the  collection  of  the
Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.  4.  It
was  also  one  of  the  degrees  of  the  Chapter
of  the  Grand  Lodge  Royal  York  of  Berlin.

5.  The  thirty-seventh  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Mizraim.  Thory  says  it  was  also  one  of
the  appellations  of  the  degree  more  com¬
monly  called  Perfect  Master  in  Architecture,
which  is  the  fourteenth  of  the  Primitive
Scottish  Rite,  and  is  found  also  in  some
other  svstems.

Knight  of  the  Eagle  and  Peli-
ean.  One  of  the  appellations  of  the  degree
of  Rose  Croix,  because  the  jewel  has  on
one  side  an  eagle  and  on  the  other  a  peli¬
can,  both  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  in  allu¬
sion  to  the  symbolism  of  the  degree.  See
Rose  Croix.

Knight  of  the  Eagle  reversed.

( Chevalier  de  V Aigle  renverse.)  Thory  re¬
cords  this  as  a  degree  to  be  found  in  the


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


415


Archives  of  the  Scottish  Lodge  Saint  Louis
des  Amis  Reunis  at  Calais.  In  heraldic
phrase,  an  eagle  reversed  is  an  eagle  with
the  wings  drooping.

Knight  of  the  Hast.  ( Chevalier
d’  Orient. )  This  is  a  degree  which  has  been
extensively  diffused  through  the  most  im¬
portant  Rites,  and  it  owes  its  popularity  to
the  fact  that  it  commemorates  in  its  legend
and  its  ceremonies  the  labors  of  the  Masons
in  the  construction  of  the  second  Temple.

1.  It  is  the  fifteenth  degree  of  the  An¬
cient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  the  de¬
scription  of  which  will  apply  with  slight
modifications  to  the  same  degree  in  all  the
other  Rites.  It  is  founded  upon  the  history
of  the  assistance  rendered  by  Cyrus  to  the
Jews,  who  permitted  them  to  return  to  Jeru¬
salem,  and  to  commence  the  rebuilding  of
the  house  of  the  Lord.  Zerubbabel,  there¬
fore,  as  the  Prince  of  the  Jews,  and  Cyrus
the  King  of  Persia,  as  his  patron,  are  im¬
portant  personages  in  the  drama  of  recep¬
tion  ;  which  is  conducted  with  great  impres¬
siveness  even  in  the  old  and  somewhat  im-

erfect  ritual  of  the  last  century,  but  which
as  been  greatly  improved,  I  think,  in  the
modern  rituals  adopted  by  the  Supreme
Councils  of  the  United  States.

The  cordon  of  a  Knight  of  the  East  is  a
broad  green  watered  ribbon,  worn  as  a
baldric  from  left  to  right.  The  sash  or
girdle  is  of  white  watered  silk,  edged  above,
and  fringed  below  with  gold.  On  it  is  em¬
broidered  a  bridge,  with  the  letters  L.  D.
P.  on  the  arch,  and  also  on  other  parts
of  the  girdle  human  heads,  and  mutilated
limbs,  and  crowns,  and  swords.  The  apron
is  crimson,  edged  with  green,  a  bleeding
head  and  two  swords  crossed  on  the  flap,
and  on  the  apron  three  triangles  interlaced
formed  of  triangular  links  of  chains.  The
jewel  is  three  triangles  interlaced  enclosing
two  naked  swords.

Scripture  and  the  traditions  of  the  Order
furnish  us  with  many  interesting  facts  in
relation  to  this  degree.  The  Knights  of
the  East  are  said  to  derive  their  origin  from
the  captivity  of  the  Israelites  in  Babylon.
After  seventy-two  years  of  servitude,  they
were  restored  to  liberty  by  Cyrus,  King  of
Persia,  through  the  intercession  of  Zerub¬
babel,  a  prince  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and
Nehemias,  a  holy  man  of  a  distinguished
family,  and  permitted  to  return  to  Jeru¬
salem  and  rebuild  the  Temple.

2.  It  is  the  sixth  degree  of  the  French
Rite.  It  is  substantially  the  same  as  the
preceding  degree.

3.  The  sixth  degree  of  the  old  system  of
the  Royal  York  Lodge  of  Berlin.

4.  The  fifteenth  degree  of  the  Chapter  of
the  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West,  and
this  was  most  probably  the  original  degree.


5.  The  fifty -second  degree  of  the  col¬
lection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France.

6.  The  forty-first  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Mizraim.

7.  The  sixth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Phila-
lethes.

8.  The  eleventh  degree  of  the  Adonhi-
ramite  Rite.

9.  It  is  also  substantially  the  tenth  de¬
gree,  or  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  of  the
American  Rite.  Indeed,  it  is  found  in  all
the  Rites  and  systems  which  refer  to  the
second  Temple.

Knight  of  the  East  and  West.

{Chevalier  d’  Orient  et  d’  Occident.)  1.  The
seventeenth  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite.  The  oldest  rituals
of  the  degree  were  very  imperfect,  and  did
not  connect  it  with  Freemasonry.  They
contained  a  legend  that  upon  the  return  of
the  knights  from  the  Holy  Land,  in  the
time  of  the  Crusaders,  they  organized  the
Order,  and  that  in  the  year  1118  the  first
knights,  to  the  number  of  eleven,  took  their
vows  between  the  hands  of  Garinus,  patri¬
arch.  The  allusion,  here,  is  evidently  to  the
Knights  Templars;  and  this  legend  would
most  probably  indicate  that  the  degree
Originated  with  the  Templar  system  of
Ramsay.  This  theory  is  further  strength¬
ened  by  the  other  legend,  that  the  Knights
of  the  East  represented  the  Masons  who
remained  in  the  East  after  the  building  of
the  first  Temple,  while  the  Knights  of  the
East  and  West  represented  those  who  trav¬
elled  West  and  disseminated  the  Order
over  Europe,  but  who  returned  during  the
Crusades  and  reunited  with  their  ancient
brethren,  whence  we  get  the  name.

The  modern  ritual  as  used  in  the  United
States  has  been  greatly  enlarged.  It  still
retains  the  apocalyptic  character  of  the  de¬
gree  which  always  attached  to  it,  as  is  evi¬
dent  from  the  old  tracing-board,  which  is
the  figure  described  in  the  first  chapter  of
the  Revelation  of  St.  John.  The  jewel  is
a  heptagon  inscribed  with  symbols  derived
from  the  Apocalypse,  among  which  are  the
lamb  and  the  book  with  seven  seals.  The
apron  is  yellow,  lined  and  edged  with  crim¬
son.  In  the  old  ritual  its  device  was  a  two-
edged  sword.  In  the  new  one  is  a  tetractys
of  ten  dots.  This  is  the  first  of  the  philo¬
sophical  degrees  of  the  Scottish  Rite.  2.
The  seventeenth  degree  of  the  Chapter  of
Emperors  of  the  East  and  West.

Knight  of  (lio  Eastern  Star.
{Chevalier  de  T Etoile  d' Orient.)  The  fifty-
seventh  degree  of  the  collection  of  the  Met¬
ropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Knight  of  the  East,  Yietorion*.
( Chevalier  victorieux  de  l’  Orient. )  A  de¬
gree  found  in  the  collection  of  U6cart.


416


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


Kniglit  of  the  East,  White.

( Chevalier  cT Orient.)  The  fortieth  degree
of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Knight  of  the  Election.  (  Cheva¬
lier  du  Choix. )  The  thirty-third  degree  of
the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Knight  of  the  Election,  Sub¬
lime.  ( Chevalier  sublime  du  Choix.)  The
thirty-fourth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Knight  of  the  Golden  Eagle.
( Chevalier  de  V Aigle  d'or .)  A  degree  in
the  collection  of  Pyron.

Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece.
( Chevalier  de  la  Toisson  d’or.)  The  sixth
degree  of  the  Hermetic  Rite  of  Montpellier.

Knight  of  the  Golden  Key.

( Chevalier  de  la  Clef  d’or.)  The  third  de¬
gree  of  the  Hermetic  Rite  of  Montpellier.

Knight  of  the  Golden  Star.

( Chevalier  de  I’Eloile  d’or.)  A  degree  con¬
tained  in  the  collection  of  Peuvret.

Knight  of  the  Grand  Arch.

[Chevalier  de  la  Orande  Arche.)  A  degree

which  Thory  says  is  contained  in  the  Ar¬
chives  of  the  Lodge  of  Saint  Louis  des
Amis  Reunis  at  Calais.

Knight  of  the  Holy  City,  Be¬
neficent.  ( Chevalier  bienfaisant  de  la  Cite
Sainte. )  The  Order  of  Beneficent  Knights
of  the  Holy  City  of  Jerusalem  was  created,
according  to  Ragon,  at  Lyons,  in  France,  in
1782,  by  the  brethren  of  the  Lodge  of  Chev¬
aliers  Bienfaisants.  But  Thory  says  it  was
instituted  at  the  Congress  of  Wilhelmsbad.
Both  are  perhaps  right.  It  was  probably
first  invented  at  Lyons,  at  one  time  a  pro¬
lific  field  for  the  hautes  grades,  and  after¬
wards  adopted  at  Wilhelinsbad,  whence  it
began  to  exercise  a  great  influence  over  the
Lodges  of  Strict  Observance.  The  Order
professed  the  Rite  of  Martinism ;  but  the
members  attempted  to  convert  Freemasonry
into  Templarism,  and  transferred  all  the
symbols  of  the  former  to  the  latter  system.
Thus,  they  interpreted  the  two  pillars  of  the
orch  and  their  names  as  alluding  to  Jaco-
us  Bnrgundus  or  James  the  Burgundian,
meaning  James  de  Molay,  the  last  Grand
Master  of  the  Templars;  the  three  gates  of
the  Temple  siguified  the  three  vows  of  the
Knights  Templars,  obedience,  poverty,  and
chastity  ;  and  the  sprig  of  acacia  referred
to  that  which  was  planted  over  the  ashes
of  De  Molay  when  they  were  transferred
to  Heredom  in  Scotland.  The  Order  and
the  doctrine  sprang  from  the  Templar  sys¬
tem  of  Ramsay.  The  theory  of  its  Jesuitic
origin  can  scarcely  be  admitted.

Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.
1.  As  a  Masonic  degree,  this  was  formerly
given  in  what  were  called  Councils  of  the
Trinity,  next  after  the  Knight  of  the  Chris¬
tian  Mark;  but  it  is  no  longer  conferred  in
this  country,  and  may  now  be  considered


as  obsolete.  The  Masonic  legend  that  It
was  instituted  by  St.  Helena,  the  mother
of  Constantine,  in  302,  after  she  had  visited
Jerusalem  and  discovered  the  cross,  and
that,  in  304,  it  was  confirmed  by  Pope
Marcellinus,  is  altogether  apocryphal.  Tne
military  Order  of  Knights  of  the  Holy*
Sepulchre  still  exists;  and  Mr.  Curzon,  in
his  Visits  to  the  Monasteries  in  the  Levant,
states  that  the  Order  is  still  conferred  in
Jerusalem,  but  only  on  Roman  Catholics
of  noble  birth,  by  the  Reverendissimo  or
Superior  of  the  Franciscans,  and  that  the
accolade,  or  blow  of  knighthood,  is  bestowed
with  the  sword  of  Godfrey  de  Bouillon,
which  is  preserved,  with  his  spurs,  in  the
sacristy  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Sepul¬
chre.  Madame  Pfeiffer,  in  her  Travels  in
the  Holy  Land,  confirms  this  account.  Dr.
Heyliu  says  that  the  Order  was  instituted
in  1099,  when  Jerusalem  was  regained  from
the  Saracens  by  Philip  of  France.  Faryn,
in  his  Theatre  d’Honneur,  gives  a  different
account  of  the  institution.  He  says  that
while  the  Saracens  possessed  the  city  they
permitted  certain  canons  regular  of  St.
Augustine  to  have  the  custody  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre.  Afterwards  Baldwvn,  King  of
Jerusalem,  made  them  Men-of-Arins  and
Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  and  or¬
dained  that  they  should  continue  to  wear
their  white  habits,  and  on  the  breast  his
own  arms,  which  were  a  red  cross  potent
between  four  Jerusalem  crosses.  Their
rule  was  confirmed  by  Pope  Innocent  III.
The  Grand  Master  was  the  Patriarch  of
Jerusalem.  They  engaged  to  fight  against
infidels,  to  protect  pilgrims,  to  redeem
Christian  captives,  hear  Mass  even’  day,  re¬
cite  the  hours  of  the  cross,  and  bear  the  five
red  crosses  in  memory  of  our  Saviour’s
wounds.  On  the  loss  of  the  Holy  Land,
they  retired  to  Perugia,  in  Italy,  where
they  retained  their  white  habit,  but  assumed
a  double  red  cross.  In  1484,  they  were  in¬
corporated  with  the  Knights  Hospitallers,
who  were  then  at  Rhodes,  but  in  1496,
Alexander  VI.  assumed,  for  himself  and  the
Popes  his  successors,  the  Grand  Mastership,
and  empowered  the  Guardian  of  the  Holy
Sepulclire  to  bestow  Knighthood  of  the
Order  upon  pilgrims.  Unsuccessful  at¬
tempts  were  made  by  Philip  II.,  of  Spain,
in  1558,  and  the  Duke  of  Nevers,  in  1625,
to  restore  the  Order.  It  is  now  found  only
in  Jerusalem,  where  it  is  conferred,  as  has
been  already  said,  by  the  Superior  of  the
Franciscans.

2.  It  is  also  the  fiftieth  degree  of  the
Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Knight  of  the  Interior.  ( Cheva¬
lier  de  l’ Interieur.)  The  fifth  degree  of  the
Rite  of  the  East  according  to  the  nomen¬
clature  of  Fustier.


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


417


Knight  of  the  Kabbala.  ( Cheva¬
lier  de  la  Cabale.)  The  eighth  degree  of
the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter
of  France.

Knight  of  the  Ulies  of  the  Val¬
ley.  This  was  a  degree  conferred  by  the
Grand  Orient  of  France  as  an  appendage
to  Templarism.  The  Knights  Templars
who  received  it  were  constituted  Knights
Commanders.

Knight  of  the  Iiion.  ( Chevalier
du  Lion.)  The  twentieth  degree  of  the
Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Knight  of  the  Mediterranean
Pass.  An  honorary  degree  that  was
formerly  conferred  in  Encampments  of
Knights  Templars,  but  is  now  disused.
Its  meetings  were  called  Councils;  and  its
ritual,  which  was  very  impressive,  supplies
the  tradition  that  it  was  founded  about  the
year  1367,  in  consequence  of  certain  events
which  occurred  to  the  Knights  of  Malta.
In  an  excursion  made  by  a  party  of  these
knights  in  search  of  forage  and  provisions,
they  were  attacked  while  crossing  the  river
Offanto,  (the  ancient  Aufidio,)  by  a  large
body  of  Saracens,  under  the  command  of
the  renowned  Amurath  I.  The  Saracens
had  concealed  themselves  in  ambush,  and
when  the  knights  were  on  the  middle  of
the  bridge  which  spanned  the  river,  they
were  attacked  by  a  sudden  charge  of  their
enemies  upon  both  extremities  of  the  bridge.
A  long  and  sanguinary  contest  ensued ;  the
knights  fought  with  their  usual  valor,  and
were  at  length  victorious.  The  Saracens
were  defeated  with  such  immense  slaugh¬
ter,  that  fifteen  hundred  of  their  dead  bod¬
ies  encumbered  the  bridge,  and  the  river
was  literally  stained  with  their  blood.  In
commemoration  of  this  event,  and  as  a  re¬
ward  for  their  valor,  the  victorious  knights
had  free  permission  to  pass  and  repass  in
all  the  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea
without  danger  of  molestation,  whence  the
name  of  the  degree  is  derived.  As  the  lat¬
ter  part  of  this  legend  has  not  been  veri¬
fied  by  voyagers  in  the  Mediterranean,  the
degree  has  long  been  disused.  I  had  a
ritual  of  it,  which  was  in  the  handwriting
of  Dr.  Moses  Holbrook,  the  Grand  Com¬
mander  of  the  Southern  Supreme  Council
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.

Knight  of  the  Moon.  A  mock
Masonic  society,  established  in  the  last
century  in  London.  It  ceased  to  exist  in
the  year  1810.

Knight  of  the  Morning  Star.

Called  also,  Knight  of  Hope.  A  degree
in  the  Archives  of  the  Motner  Lodge  of
the  Philosophical  Rite,  which  is  said  to  be  a
modification  of  the  Kadosh.

Knight  of  the  Ninili  Areh.  The

thirteenth  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac-
3  C  27


cepted  Scottish  Rite,  called  also  the  “  Royal
Arch  of  Solomon,”  and  sometimes  the
“  Royal  Arch  of  Enoch.”  It  is  one  of  the
most  interesting  and  impressive  of  what
are  called  the  Ineffable  degrees.  Its  legend
refers  to  Enoch  and  to  the  method  by  which,
notwithstanding  the  destructive  influence
of  the  deluge  and  the  lapse  of  time,  he  was
enabled  to  preserve  important  secrets  to  be
afterwards  communicated  to  the  Craft.  Ac¬
cording  to  the  present  ritual,  its  principal
officers  are  a  Thrice  Puissant  Grand  Master,
representing  King  Solomon,  and  two  War¬
dens,  representing  the  King  of  Tyre  and  the
Inspector  Adoniram.  Bodies  of  this  degree
are  called  Chapters.  The  color  is  black
strewed  with  tears.  The  jewel  is  a  circular
medal  of  gold,  around  which  is  inscribed
the  following  letters :  R.  S.  R.  S.  T.  P.  S.
R.  I.  A.  Y.  E.  S.,  with  the  date  Anno  Eno-
chi  2995.  On  the  reverse  is  a  blazing  tri¬
angle  with  theTetragrammaton  in  the  centre
in  Samaritan  letters.

This  degree  claims  great  importance  in
the  history  of  Masonic  ritualism.  It  is
found,  under  various  modifications,  in  al¬
most  all  the  Rites;  and,  indeed,  without  it,
or  something  like  it,  the  symbolism  of  Free¬
masonry  cannot  be  considered  as  complete.
Indebted  for  its  origin  to  the  inventive
genius  of  the  Chevalier  Ramsay,  it  was
adopted  by  the  Council  of  the  Emperors  of
the  East  and  West,  whence  it  passed  into
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.  Brought
by  Ramsay  into  England, — where,  however,
he  failed  to  secure  its  adoption,  —  it  subse¬
quently  gave  rise'  to  the  Royal  Arch  of  Der-
mott  and  that  of  Dunckerley.  Though
entirely  different  in  its  legend  from  the
Royal  Arch  of  the  York  and  American
Rites,  its  symbolic  design  is  the  same,  for
one  common  thought  of  a  treasure  lost  and
found  pervades  them  all.  Vassal,  who  is
exceedingly  flippant  in  much  that  he  has
written  of  Ecossism,  says  of  this  degree,
that,  “considered  under  its  moral  and  reli¬
gious  aspects,  it  offers  nothing  either  in¬
structive  or  useful.”  It  is  evident  that  he
understood  nothing  of  its  true  symbolism.

Knight  of  tlic  North.  ( Chevalier
du  Nord. )  A  degree  in  the  Archives  of  the
Lodge  of  Saint  Louis  des  Amis  R6unis  at
Calais.  Thory  mentions  another  degree
called  Sublime  Knight  of  the  North,  which
he  says  is  the  same  as  one  in  the  collection
of  Peuvret,  which  has  the  singular  title  of
Daybreak  of  the  Rough  Ashlar,  Point  du
Jour  de  la  Pierre  Brute.

Knight  of  the  Phoenix.  ( Cheva¬
lier  du  Phenix.)  The  fourth  degree  of  the
Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

Knight  of  the  Prussian  Kagle.
( Chevalier  de  V A  igle  Prussien. )  A  degree  in
the  collection  of  H6cart.


418


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


Knight  of  the  Purificatory*

( Chevalier  du  Purificatoire.)  The  sixteenth
degree  of  the  Rite  of  the  East  according  to
the  nomenclature  of  Fustier.

Knight  of  the  Pyramid.  ( Cheva¬
lier  de  la  Pyramide.)  The  seventh  degree
of  the  Kabbalistic  Rite.

Knight  of  the  Rainbow.  (Cheva¬
lier  de  C Arc-en-ciel.)  The  sixty-eighth  de¬
gree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Knight  of  the  Red  Cross.  This
degree,  whose  legend  dates  it  far  anterior
to  the  Christian  era,  and  in  the  reign  of
Darius,  has  no  analogy  with  the  chivalric
orders  of  knighthood.  It  is  purely  Ma¬
sonic,  and  intimately  connected  with  the
Royal  Arch  degree,  of  which,  in  fact,  it
ought  rightly  to  be  considered  as  an  ap¬
pendage.  It  is,  however,  now  always  con¬
ferred  in  a  Commandery  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars  in  this  country,  and  is  given  as  a  pre¬
liminary  to  reception  in  that  degree.  For¬
merly,  the  degree  was  sometimes  conferred
in  an  independent  council,  which  Webb
(edit.  1812,  p.  123,)  defines  to  be  “  a  coun¬
cil  that  derives  its  authority  immediately
from  the  Grand  Encampment  unconnected
with  an  Encampment  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars.”  The  embassy  of  Zerubbabel  and
four  other  Jewish  chiefs  to  the  court  of
Darius  to  obtain  the  protection  of  that
monarch  from  the  encroachments  of  the
Samaritans,  who  interrupted  the  labors  in
the  reconstruction  of  the  Temple,  consti¬
tutes  the  legend  of  the  Red  Cross  degree.
The  history  of  this  embassy  is  found  in  the
eleventh  book  of  the  Antiquities  of  Jose¬
phus,  whence  the  Masonic  ritualists  have
undoubtedly  taken  it.  The  only  authority
of  Josephus  is  the  apocryphal  record  of
Esdras,  and  the  authenticity  of  the  whole
transaction  is  doubted  or  denied  by  modern
historians.  The  legend  is  as  follows :  After
the  death  of  Cyrus,  the  Jews,  who  had  been
released  by  him  from  their  captivity,  and
permitted  to  return  to  Jerusalem,  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  rebuilding  the  Temple,  found  them¬
selves  obstructed  in  the  undertaking  by  the
neighboring  nations,  and  especially  by  the
Samaritans.  Hereupon  they  sent  an  em¬
bassy,  at  the  head  of  which  was  their
prince,  Zerubbabel,  to  Darius,  the  successor
of  Cyrus,  to  crave  his  interposition  and
protection.  Zerubbabel,  awaiting  a  favor¬
able  opportunity,  succeeded  not  only  in
obtaining  his  request,  but  also  in  renewing
the  friendship  which  formerly  existed  be¬
tween  the  king  and  himself.  In  commemo¬
ration  of  these  events,  Darius  is  said  to
have  instituted  a  new  order,  and  called  it
the  Knights  of  the  East.  They  afterwards
assumed  their  present  name  from  the  red
cross  borne  in  their  banners.  Webb,  or  j
whoever  else  introduced  it  into  the  Ameri-  j


can  Templar  system,  undoubtedly  took  it
from  the  sixteenth  degree,  or  Prince  of
Jerusalem  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite.  It  has,  within  a  few  years,  been  car¬
ried  into  England,  under  the  title  of  the
“  Red  Cross  of  Babylon.”  In  New  Bruns¬
wick,  it  has  been  connected  with  Cryptic
Masonry.  It  is  there  as  much  out  of  place
as  it  is  in  a  Commandery  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars.  Its  only  true  connection  is  with  the
Royal  Arch  degree.

Knight  of  the  Red  Ragle.  (Chev¬
alier  de  I’Aigle  rouge.)  The  thirty-ninth
degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.  The  red
eagle  forms  a  part  of  the  arms  of  the  House
of  Brandenburg,  and  the  Order  of  Knights
of  the  Red  Eagle  was  instituted,  in  1705,
by  George  William,  hereditary  Prince  of
Bayreuth.  In  1792,  it  was  placed  among
the  Prussian  orders.  The  Masonic  degree
has  no  connection  with  the  political  order.
The  Mizraimites  appropriated  all  titles  that
they  fancied.

Knight  of  the  Rose.  ( Chevalier  de
la  Pose.)  The  Order  of  the  Knights  and
Ladies  of  the  Rose  (Chevaliers  et  Chevalieres
de  la  Pose)  was  an  order  of  adoptive  or
androgynous  Masonry,  invented  in  France
towards  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century.
M.  de  Chaumont,  the  Masonic  secretary
of  the  Due  de  Chartres,  was  its  author.
The  principal  seat  of  the  order  was  at
Paris.  The  hall  of  meeting  was  called  the
Temple  of  Love.  It  was  ornamented  with
garlands  of  flowers,  and  hung  round  with
escutcheons  on  which  were  painted  various
devices  and  emblems  of  gallantry.  There
were  two  presiding  officers,  a  male  and  fe¬
male,  who  were  styled  the  Hierophant  and
the  High  Priestess.  The  former  initiated
men,  and  the  latter,  women.  In  the  initia¬
tions,  the  Hierophant  was  assisted  by  a
conductor  or  deacon  called  Sentiment,  and
the  High  Priestess  by  a  conductress  or  dea¬
coness  called  Discretion.  The  members
received  the  title  of  Knights  and  Nymphs.
The  Knights  wore  a  crown  of  myrtle,  the
Nymphs,  a  crown  of  roses.  The  Hierophant
and  High  Priestess  wore,  in  addition,  a  rose-
colored  scarf,  on  which  were  embroidered
two  doves  within  a  wreath  of  myrtle.  Dur¬
ing  the  time  of  initiation,  the  hall  was  lit
with  a  single  dull  taper,  but  afterwards  it
was  brilliantly  illuminated  by  numerous
wax  candles.

When  a  candidate  was  to  be  initiated,  he
or  she  was  taken  in  charge,  according  to
the  sex,  by  the  conductor  or  conductress,
divested  of  all  weapons,  jewels,  or  money,
hoodwinked,  loaded  with  chains,  and  in  this
condition  conducted  to  the  door  of  the  Tem-

Eleof  Love,  where  admission  was  demanded
y  two  knocks.  Brother  Sentiment  then
j  introduced  the  candidate  by  order  of  the


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


419


Hierophant  or  High  Priestess,  and  he  or  she
was  asked  his  or  her  name,  country,  condi¬
tion  of  life,  and,  lastly,  what  he  or  she  was
seeking.  To  this  the  answer  was,  “  Happi¬
ness.”

The  next  question  proposed  was,  “  What
is  your  age?”  The  candidate,  if  a  male,
replied,  “The  age  to  love;”  if  a  female,
“  The  age  to  please  and  to  be  loved.”

The  candidates  were  then  interrogated
concerning  their  private  opinions  and  con¬
duct  in  relation  to  matters  of  gallantry.
The  chains  were  then  taken  from  them,  and
they  were  invested  with  garlands  of  flowers
which  were  called  “the  chains  of  love.”
In  this  condition  they  were  made  to  trav¬
erse  the  apartment  from  one  extremity  to
another,  and  then  back  in  a  contrary  direc¬
tion,  over  a  path  inscribed  with  love-knots.
The  following  obligation  was  then  adminis¬
tered  :

“  I  promise  and  swear  by  the  Grand  Mas¬
ter  of  the  Universe  never  to  reveal  the  se¬
crets  of  the  Order  of  the  Rose ;  and  should  I
fail  in  this  my  vow,  may  the  mysteries  I
shall  receive  add  nothing  to  my  pleasures,
and  instead  of  the  roses  of  happiness  may
I  find  nothing  but  the  thorns  of  repent¬
ance.”

The  candidates  were  then  conducted  to
the  mysterious  groves  in  the  neighborhood
of  the  Temple  of  Love,  where  the  Knights
received  a  crown  of  myrtle,  and  the  Nymphs
a  simple  rose.  During  this  time  a  soft,
melodious  march  was  played  by  the  orches¬
tra.  After  this,  the  candidates  were  con¬
ducted  to  the  altar  of  mystery,  placed  at  the
foot  of  the  Hierophant’s  throne,  and  there
incense  was  offered  up  to  Venus  and  her
son.  If  it  was  a  Knight  who  had  been  ini¬
tiated,  he  now  exchanged  his  crown  of  myr¬
tle  for  the  rose  of  the  last  initiated  Nymph  ;
and  if  a  Nymph,  she  exchanged  her  rose
for  the  myrtle  crown  of  Brother  Sentiment.
The  Hierophant  now  read  a  copy  of  verses
in  honor  of  the  god  of  Mystery,  and  the
bandage  was  at  length  taken  from  the  eyes
of  the  candidate.  Delicious  music  and
brilliant  lights  now  added  to  the  charms
of  this  enchanting  scene,  in  the  midst  of
which  the  Hierophant  communicated  to  the
candidate  the  modes  of  recognition  pecu-
lier  to  the  Order.

The  Order  had  but  a  brief  existence.
In  1784,  F.  B.  von  Grossing  invented,  in
Germany,  an  Order  bearing  a  similar  name,
but  its  duration  was  as  ephemeral  as  that
of  the  French  one.

Knight  of  the  Rosy  ami  Triple
Cross.  ( Chevalier  de  la  Rose  et  Triple
Croix.)  A  degree  in  the  Archives  of  the
Lodge  of  St.  Louis  des  Amis  Il6unis  at  Calais.

Knight  of  the  Rosy  Cross.  See

Rosy  Cross.


Knight  of  the  Round-Table.

( Chevalier  de  la  Table  ronde .)  A  degree  in
the  Archives  of  the  Lodge  of  Saint  Louis
des  Amis  R6unis  at  Calais.

Knight  of  the  Round-Table  of
King  Arthur.  ( Chevalier  de  la  Table
ronde  du  Roi  Arthur.)  1.  Thory  says  that
this  is  a  degree  of  the  Primitive  Rite ;  but
I  can  find  no  such  degree  in  the  nomencla¬
ture  of  the  Rite.

2.  I  have  seen  the  manuscript  of  a  de¬
gree  of  this  name  written  many  years  ago,
which  was  in  the  possession  of  Brother  C.W.
Moore,  of  Boston.  It  was  an  honorary  de¬
gree,  and  referred,  if  I  recollect  aright,  to
the  poetic  legend  of  King  Arthur  and  his
knights.

Knight  of  the  Royal  Axe.  ( Cheva¬
lier  de  la  royale  Hache. )  The  twenty-second
degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  called  also  Prince  of  Libanus,  or
Lebanon.  It  was  instituted  to  record  the
memorable  services  rendered  to  Masonry
by  the  “  mighty  cedars  of  Lebanon.”  The
legend  of  the  degree  informs  us  that  the
Sidonians  were  employed  in  cutting  cedars
on  Mount  Libanus  or  Lebanon  for  the
construction  of  Noah’s  ark.  Their  descend¬
ants  subsequently  cut  cedars  from  the  same
place  for  the  ark  of  the  covenant;  and  the
descendants  of  these  were  again  employed
in  the  same  offices,  and  in  the  same  place,
in  obtaining  materials  for  building  Solo¬
mon’s  Temple.  Lastly,  Zerubbabel  em¬
ployed  them  in  cutting  the  cedars  of  Leb¬
anon  for  the  use  of  the  second  Temple.
This  celebrated  nation  formed  colleges  on
Mount  Lebanon,  and  in  their  labors  always
adored  the  Great  Architect  of  the  Universe.
I  have  no  doubt  that  this  last  sentence  re¬
fers  to  the  Druses,  that  secret  sect  of  Theists
who  still  reside  upon  Mount  Lebanon  and
in  the  adjacent  parts  of  Syria  and  Pales¬
tine,  and  whose  mysterious  ceremonies  have
attracted  so  much  of  the  curiosity  of  East¬
ern  travellers.

The  apron  of  the  Knights  of  the  Royal
Axe  is  white,  lined  and  bordered  with  pur¬
ple.  On  it  is  painted  a  round-table,  on
which  are  laid  several  architectural  plans.
On  the  flap  is  a  three-headed  serpent.  The
jewel  is  a  golden  axe,  having  on  the  han¬
dle  and  blade  the  initials  of  several  per¬
sonages  illustrious  in  the  history  of  Ma¬
sonry.  The  places  of  meeting  in  this  degree
are  called  “  Colleges.”  This  degree  is  espe¬
cially  interesting  to  the  Masonic  scholar  in
consequence  of  its  evident  reference  to  the
mystical  association  of  the  Druses,  whose
connection  with  the  Templars  at  the  time
of  the  Crusades  forms  a  yet  to  be  investi¬
gated  episode  in  the  history  of  Freema¬
sonry.

Knight  of  the  Sacred  Mouu-


420


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


tain.  ( Chevalier  de  la  Montague  Sacree.)
A  degree  in  the  Archives  of  the  Lodge  of
Saint  Louis  des  Amis  Reunis  at  Calais.

Knight  of  the  Sanctuary.
( Chevalier  du  Sanduaire.)  The  eleventh
degree  of  the  Rite  of  the  East  according
to  the  collection  of  Fustier.

Knight  of  the  Sepulchre.  The
sixth  degree  of  the  system  of  the  Grand
Lodge  Royal  York  at  Berlin.

Knight  of  the  South.  ( Chevalier
du  Sud.)  The  eighth  degree  of  the  Swedish
Rite,  better  known  as  the  Favorite  of  St.
John.

Knight  of  the  Star.  ( Chevalier  de
V Etoile.)  A  degree  in  the  collection  of
Pyron.

Knight  of  the  Sun.  ( Chevalier  du
Soleil.)  The  twenty-eighth  degree  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  called
also  Prince  of  the  Sun,  Prince  Adept,  and
Key  of  Masonry,  or  Chaos  Disentangled.
It  is  a  Kabbalistic  and  Hermetic  degree,  and
its  instructions  and  symbols  are  full  of  the
Kabbala  and  Alchemy.  Thus,  one  of  its
favorite  words  is  Stibium,  which,  with  the
Hermetic  Philosophers,  meant  the  primal
matter  of  all  things.  The  principal  officers
are  Father  Adam  and  Brother  Truth,  alle¬
gorizing  in  the  old  rituals  the  search  of
Man  after  Truth.  The  other  officers  are
named  after  the  seven  chief  angels,  and  the
brethren  are  called  Sylphs,  or,  in  the  Amer-
can  ritual,  Aralim  or  Heroes.  The  jewel  is
a  golden  sun,  having  on  its  reverse  a  hem¬
isphere  with  the  six  northern  signs  of  the
zodiac.  There  is  but  one  light  in  the
Lodge,  which  shines  through  a  globe  of
glass.

This  degree  is  not  confined  to  the  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  but  is  found  sometimes  with  a
different  name,  but  with  the  same  Hermetic
design,  more  or  less  developed  in  other
Rites.  Ragon,  with  whom  Delaunay  and
Chemin-Dupontfcs  concur,  says  that  it  is
not,  like  many  of  the  high  degrees,  a  mere
modern  invention,  but  that  it  is  of  the
highest  antiquity;  and  was,  in  fact,  the  last
degree  of  the  ancient  initiations  teaching,
under  an  Hermetic  appearance,  the  doc¬
trines  of  natural  religion,  which  formed  an
essential  part  of  the  Mysteries.  But  Ra¬
gon  must  here  evidently  refer  to  the  gen¬
eral,  philosophic  design  rather  than  to  the
particular  organization  of  the  degree.
Thory,  with  more  plausibility,  ascribes  its
invention  as  a  Masonic  degree  to  Pernetty,
the  founder  of  the  Hermetic  Rite.  Of  all
the  high  degrees,  it  is,  perhaps,  the  most
important  and  the  most  interesting  to  the
scholar  who  desires  to  investigate  the  true
secret  of  the  Order.  Its  olH  catechisms,
now  unfortunately  too  much  neglected,  are
full  of  suggestive  thoughts,  and  in  its  mod¬


ern  ritual,  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  the
inventive  genius  of  Brother  Albert  Pike,  it
is  by  far  the  most  learned  and  philosophi¬
cal  of  the  Scottish  degrees.

Knight  of  the  Sword.  ( Chevalier
de  C Epee.)  One  of  the  titles  of  the  Scot¬
tish  Rite  degree  of  Knight  of  the  East.  So
called  in  allusion  to  the  legend  that  the
Masons  at  the  second  Temple  worked  with
the  trowel  in  one  hand  and  the  sword  in
the  other.  Du  Cange,  on  the  authority  of
Arnoldus  Lubeckius,  describes  an  Order,  in
the  Middle  Ages,  of  Knights  of  the  Sword,
(Milifes  Gladii,)  who,  having  vowed  to  wield
the  sword  for  God’s  service,  wore  a  sword
embroidered  on  their  mantles  as  a  sign  of
their  profession,  whence  they  took  their
name.  But  it  was  not  connected  with  the
Masonic  degree.

Kniglit  of  the  Tabernacle.  In

the  Minute  Book  of  the  “Grand  Lodge  of
all  England,”  extracts  from  which  are
given  by  Bro.  Hughan  in  his  Unpublished
Records,  we  find  the  expression  Knight  of
the  Tabernacle,  used  in  the  year  1780,  as
synonymous  with  Knight  Templar.

Knight  of  the  Tabernaele  of
the  Divine  Truths.  ( Chevalier  du
Tabernacle  des  Verites  divines.)  A  degree
cited  in  the  nomenclature  of  Fustier.

Knight  of  the  Temple.  ( Chevalier
du  Temple.)  This  degree  is  common  to  all
the  systems  of  Masonry  founded  on  the
Templar  doctrine.

1.  It  is  a  synonym  of  Knight  Templar.

2.  The  eighth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  the
Philalethes.

3.  The  sixty-ninth  degree  of  the  collec¬
tion  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

4.  The  sixth  degree  of  the  Clerks  of  Strict
Observance.

5.  The  ninth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  the
East  according  to  the  nomenclature  of
Fustier.

6.  The  thirty-sixth  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Mizraim.

Knight  of  the  Three  Kings.  An

American  side  degree  of  but  little  impor¬
tance.  Its  history  connects  it  with  the  dedi¬
cation  of  the  first  Temple,  the  conferrer  of
the  degree  representing  King  Solomon.  Its
moral  tendency  appears  to  be  the  inculca¬
tion  of  reconciliation  of  grievances  among
Masons  by  friendly  conference.  It  may  be
conferred  by  any  Slaster  Mason  on  another.

Knight  of  the  Throne.  ( Chevalier
du  Trbne.)  The  second  degree  of  the  Rite
of  the  East  according  to  the  nomenclature
of  F  ustier.

Knight  of  the  Triple  Cross.

( Chevalier  de  la  Triple  Croix.)  The  sixty-
sixth  degree  of  the  collection  of  the  Metro¬
politan  Chapter  of  F-ance.

Knight  of  the  Triple  Period.


f


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


421


( Chevalier  de  la  Triple  Periode.)  A  degree
in  the  Archives  of  the  Lodge  of  Saint
Louis  des  Amis  R6unis  at  Calais.

Knight  of  the  Triple  Sword.
( Chevalier  de  la  Triple  Epee.)  A  degree  in
the  collection  of  Pyron.

Knight  of  the  Two  Crowned
Eagles.  ( Chevalier  des  teux  Aigles  Cou-
ronn'ees.)  The  twenty-second  degree  of  the
collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France.

Knight  of  the  West.  ( Chevalier  d’
Occident.)  1.  The  sixty-fourth  degree  of
the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter
of  France.  2.  The  forty -seventh  degree  of
the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Knight  of  the  White  and  Blaek
Eagle.  ( Chevalier  de  UAigle  blanc  et  noir.)
One  of  the  titles  of  the  thirtieth  degree  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  or
Knight  Kadosh.  In  the  Rite  of  Perfection
of  the  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West,  it
constituted  the  twenty-fourth  degree,  under
the  title  of  Knight  Commander  of  the
White  and  Black  Eagle.  The  white  eagle
was  the  emblem  of  the  eastern  empire,  and
the  black  of  the  western.  Hence  we  have
the  Knights  of  the  White  Eagle  in  Russia,
and  the  Knights  of  the  Black  Eagle  in
Prussia,  as  orders  of  chivalry.  The  two
combined  were,  therefore,  appropriately
(so  far  as  the  title  is  concerned)  adopted
by  the  Council  which  assumed  Masonic
jurisdiction  over  both  empires.

Knight  of  the  White  Eagle.
The  sixty-fourth  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Mizraim.  As  a  political  order,  that  of  the
Knights  of  the  White  Eagle  were  instituted
by  Wladistas,  King  of  Poland,  in  1325.
It  is  still  conferred  by  the  Czar  of  Russia.

Knight  of  llnction.  (Chevalier  d’
Onction.)  The  fifty-first  degree  of  the  col¬
lection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France.

Knight,  Perfect.  ( Chevalier  Par-
fait.)  A  degree  of  the  Ancient  Chapter  of
Clermont,  found  in  the  Archives  of  the
Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philosophic  Rite.

Knight,  Professed.  See  Eques
Professus.

Knight,  Prussian.  See  Nnachite.
Also  the  thirty-fifth  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Mizraim.

Knight  Rower.  ( Chevalier  Rameur.)
The  Order  of  the  Knights  and  Ladies
Rowers  ( Ordre  des  Chevaliers  Rameurs  et
Chevaliere s  Rameures)  was  an  androgynous
and  adoptive  Rite,  founded  at  the  city  of
Rouen,  in  France,  in  1738,  and  was  there¬
fore  one  of  the  earliest  instances  of  the
adoptive  system.  It  met  with  very  little
success.

Knight,  Royal  Victorious.

( Chevalier  royal  Vietorieux.)  A  degree


formerly  conferred  in  the  Chapter  attached
to  the  Grand  Orient  of  Bologne.

Knight,  Sacrificing.  ( Chevalier
Sacrifiant.)  A  degree  found  in  the  Archives
of  the  Lodge  of  Saint  Louis  des  Amis
RSunis  at  Calais.

Knights  of  the  East,  Council  of.

( Cornell  des  Chevaliers  d?  Orient.)  A  Chap¬
ter  of  High  Degrees,  under  this  name,  was
established  at  Paris,  on  July  22,  1762,  by
one  Pirlet,  a  tailor,  as  the  rival  of  the
Council  of  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West.
Baron  de  Tschoudy  became  one  of  its
members.

Knight  Templar.  The  piety  or
the  superstition  of  the  age  had  induced
multitudes  of  pilgrims  in  the  eleventh  and
twelfth  centuries  to  visit  Jerusalem  for  the
purpose  of  offering  their  devotions  at  the
sepulchre  of  the  Lord  and  the  other  holy
places  in  that  city.  Many  of  these  religious
wanderers  were  weak  or  aged,  almost  all
of  them  unarmed,  and  thousands  of  them
were  subjected  to  insult,  to  pillage,  and
often  to  death,  inflicted  by  the  hordes  of
Arabs  who,  even  after  the  capture  of  Jeru¬
salem  by  the  Christians,  continued  to  in¬
fest  the  sea-coast  of  Palestine  and  the  roads
to  the  capital.

To  protect  the  pious  pilgrims  thus  ex¬
posed  to  plunder  and  bodily  outrage,  nine
French  knights,  the  followers  of  Baldwyn,
united,  in  the  year  1118,  in  a  military  con¬
fraternity  or  brotherhood  in  arms,  and  en¬
tered  into  a  solemn  compact  to  aid  each
other  in  clearing  the  roads,  and  in  defend¬
ing  the  pilgrims  in  their  passage  to  the
holy  city.

Two  of  these  knights  were  Hugh  de
Payens  and  Godfrey  de  St.  Aldemar.  Ray-
nouard  (Les  Templiers)  says  that  the  names
of  the  other  seven  have  not  been  preserved
in  history,  but  Wilke  ( Geschichte  des  T.  H.
Ordens)  gives  them  as  Roral,  Gundemar,
Godfrey  Bisol,  Payens  de  Montidier,  Arch¬
ibald  de  St.  Aman,  Andr6  de  Montbar,  and
the  Count  of  Provence.

Uniting  the  monastic  with  the  military
character,  they  took,  in  the  presence  of  the
Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  the  usual  vows  of
poverty,  chastity,  and  obedience,  and  with
great  humility  assumed  the  title  of  “Poor
Fellow  Soldiers  of  Christ.”  Baldwyn,  the
King  of  Jerusalem,  assigned  for  their  resi¬
dence  a  part  of  his  palace  which  stood  near
the  former  site  at  the  Temple;  and  the
Abbot  and  Canons  of  the  Temple  gave
them,  as  a  place  in  which  to  store  their
arms  and  magazines,  the  street  between  the
palace  and  the  Temple,  whence  they  de¬
rived  the  name  of  Templars;  a  title  which
they  ever  afterwards  retained.

Raynouard  says  that  Baldwyn  sent  Hugh
de  Payens  to  Europe  to  solicit  a  new  cru-


422


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


sade,  and  that  while  there  he  presented  his
companions  to  Pope  Honorius  II.,  from
whom  he  craved  permission  to  form  a  reli¬
gious  military  order  in  imitation  of  that
of  the  Hospitallers.  The  pontiff  referred
them  to  the  ecclesiastical  council  which
was  then  in  session  at  Troyes,  in  Cham¬
pagne.  Thither  De  Payens  repaired,  and
represented  to  the  fathers  the  vocation  of
himself  and  his  companions  as  defenders
of  the  pilgrim ;  the  enterprise  was  approved,
and  St.  Bernard  was  directed  to  prescribe  a
rule  for  the  infant  Order.

This  rule,  in  which  the  knights  of  the
Order  are  called  Pauperes  commilitis  Christi
et  Templi  Salomonis,  or  “The  Poor  Fellow
Soldiers  of  Christ  and  of  the  Temple  of
Solomon,”  is  still  extant.  It  consists  of
seventy-two  chapters,  the  details  of  which
are  remarkable  for  their  ascetic  character.
It  enjoined  severe  devotional  exercises,  self-
mortification,  fasting,  and  prayer.  It  pre¬
scribed  for  the  professed  knights  white  gar¬
ments  4s  a  symbol  of  a  pure  life;  esquires
and  retainers  were  to  be  clothed  in  black.
To  the  white  dress,  Pope  Eugenius  II.  sub¬
sequently  added  a  red  cross,  to  be  worn  on
the  left  breast  as  a  symbol  of  martyrdom.

Hugh  de  Payens,  thus  provided  with  a
rule  that  gave  permanence  to  his  Order, and
encouraged  by  the  approval  of  the  Church,
returned  to  Jerusalem,  carrying  with  him
many  recruits  from  among  the  noblest  fam¬
ilies  of  Europe.

The  Templars  soon  became  pre-eminently
distinguished  as  warriors  of  the  cross.  St.
Bernard,  who  visited  them  in  their  Tem¬
ple  retreat,  speaks  in  the  warmest  terms  of
their  self-denial,  their  frugality,  their  mod¬
esty,  their  piety,  and  their  bravery.  “  Their
arms,”  he  says,  “are  their  only  finery,  and
they  use  them  with  courage,  without  dread¬
ing  either  the  number  or  the  strength  of
the  barbarians.  All  their  confidence  is  in
the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and  in  fighting  for  his
cause  they  seek  a  sure  victory  or  a  Chris¬
tian  and  honorable  death.’’

Their  banner  wa3  the  Beauseant,  of  di¬
vided  white  and  black,  indicative  of  peace
to  their  friends,  but  destruction  to  their
foes.  At  their  reception  each  Templar  swore
never  to  turn  his  back  on  three  enemies,  but
should  he  be  alone,  to  fight  them  if  they
were  infidels.  It  was  their  wont  to  say
that  a  Templar  ought  either  to  vanquish  or
die,  since  he  had  nothing  to  give  for  his
ransom  but  his  girdle  and  his  knife.

The  Order  of  the  Temple,  at  first  ex¬
ceedingly  simple  in  its  organization,  became
in  a  short  time  very  complicated.  In  the
twelfth  century  it  was  divided  into  three
classes,  which  were  Knights,  Chaplains,
and  Serving  Brethren.

1.  The  Knights.  It  was  required  that


whoever  presented  himself  for  admission
into  the  Order  must  prove  that  he  was
sprung  from  a  knightly  family,  and  was
born  in  lawful  wedlock;  that  he  was  free
from  all  previous  obligations  ;  that  he  was
neither  married  nor  betrothed ;  that  he  had
not  made  any  vows  of  reception  in  another
Order;  that  he  was  not  involved  in  debt;
and  finally,  that  he  was  of  a  sound  and
healthy  constitution  of  body.

2.  The  Chaplains.  The  Order  of  the
Temple,  unlike  that  of  the  Hospitallers,
consisted  at  first  only  of  laymen.  But  the
bull  of  Pope  Alexander  III.,  issued  in
1162,  gave  the  Templars  permission  to  re¬
ceive  into  their  houses  spiritual  persons
who  were  not  bound  by  previous  vows,
the  technical  name  of  whom  was  chap¬
lains.  They  were  required  to  serve  a  novi¬
tiate  of  a  year.  The  reception  was,  except

I  in  a  few  points  not  applicable  to  the  clergy,
the  same  as  that  of  the  knights,  and  they
were  required  to  take  only  the  three  vows
of  poverty,  chastity,  and  obedience.  Their
duties  were  to  perform  all  religious  offices,
and  to  officiate  at  all  the  ceremonies  of  the
Order,  such  as  the  admission  of  members
at  installations,  etc.  Their  privileges  were,
however,  unimportant,  and  consisted  prin¬
cipally  in  sitting  next  to  the  Master,  and
being  first  served  at  table.

3.  The  Serving  Brethren.  The  only  qual¬
ification  required  of  the  serving  brethren,
was,  that  they  should  be  free  bom  and  not
slaves ;  yet  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  all
the  persons  of  this  class  were  of  mean  con¬
dition.  Many  men,  not  of  noble  birth,  but
of  wealth  and  high  position,  were  found
among  the  serving  brethren.  They  fought
in  the  field  under  the  knights,  and  per¬
formed  at  home  the  menial  offices  of  the
household.  At  first  there  was  but  one  class
of  them,  but  afterwards  they  were  divided
into  two  —  the  Brethren-at-Arms,  and  the
Handicraft  Brethren.  The  former  were  the
soldiers  of  the  Order.  The  latter,  who  were
the  most  esteemed,  remained  in  the  Precep-
tories,  and  exercised  their  various  trades,
such  as  those  of  farriers,  armorers,  etc.
The  reception  of  the  serving  brethren  did
not  differ,  except  in  some  necessary  par¬
ticulars,  from  that  of  the  knights.  They
were,  however,  by  the  accident  of  their
birth,  precluded  from  promotion  out  of
their  class.

Besides  these  three  classes  there  was  a
fourth,  —  not,  however,  living  in  the  bosom
of  the  'Order,  —  who  were  called  Affiliati
or  the  Affiliated.  These  were  persons  of
various  ranks  and  of  both  sexes,  who  were
recognized  by  the  Order,  though  not  openly
connected  with  it,  as  entitled  to  its  pro¬
tection,  and  admitted  to  a  participation  in
some  of  its  privileges,  such  as  protection


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


423


from  the  interdicts  of  the  Church,  which
did  not  apply  to  the  members  of  the  Order.

There  was  also  a  class  called  Donates  or
Donats.  These  were  either  youths  whom
their  parents  destined  for  the  service  of  the
Order  when  they  had  attained  the  proper
age,  or  adults  who  had  bound  themselves  to
aid  and  assist  the  Order  so  long  as  they
lived,  solely  from  their  admiration  of  it,
and  a  desire  to  share  its  honors.

Over  these  presided  the  Grand  Master,
more  usually  styled,  in  the  early  days  of
the  Order,  simply  the  Master  of  the  Temple.
In  the  treaty  of  peace  executed  in  1178,
between  the  Templars  and  the  Hospitallers,
Odo  de  St.  Armand  calls  himself  “  Humble
Master  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple.”  But
in  after  times  this  spirit  of  humility  was
lost  sight  of,  and  the  title  of  Grand  Master
was  generally  accorded  to  him.  His  allow¬
ances  were  suitable  to  the  distinguished
rank  he  held,  for  in  the  best  days  of  the
Order  the  Grand  Master  was  considered  as
the  equal  of  a  sovereign.

The  Grand  Master  resided  originally  at
Jerusalem;  afterwards,  when  that  city  was
lost,  at  Acre,  and  finally  at  Cyprus.  His
duty  always  required  him  to  be  in  the  Holy
Land;  he  consequently  never  resided  in
Europe.  He  was  elected  for  life  from
among  the  knights  in  the  following  man¬
ner.  On  the  death  of  the  Grand  Master,  a
Grand  Prior  was  chosen  to  administer  the
affairs  of  the  Order  until  a  successor  could
be  elected.  When  the  day  which  had  been
appointed  for  the  election  arrived,  the
Chapter  usually  assembled  at  the  chief  seat
of  the  Order;  three  or  more  of  the  most
esteemed  knights  were  then  proposed;  the
Grand  Prior  collected  the  votes,  and  he  who
had  received  the  greatest  number  was  nom¬
inated  to  be  the  electing  Prior.  An  Assist¬
ant  was  then  associated  with  him,  in  the
person  of  another  knight.  These  two  re¬
mained  all  night  in  the  chapel,  engaged  in
prayer.  In  the  morning,  they  chose  two
others,  and  these  four,  two  more,  and  so  on
until  the  number  of  twelve  (that  of  the
apostles)  had  been  selected.  The  twelve
then  selected  a  Chaplain.  The  thirteen
then  proceeded  to  vote  for  a  Grand  Master,
who  was  elected  by  a  majority  of  the  votes.
When  the  election  was  completed,  it  was
announced  to  the  assembled  brethren;  and
when  all  had  promised  obedience,  the  Prior,
if  the  person  was  present,  said  to  him,  “  In
the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and
the  Holy  Ghost,  we  have  chosen,  and  do
choose  thee,  Brother  N.,  to  be  our  Master.”
Then,  turning  to  the  brethren,  he  said,
“  Beloved  Sirs  and  Brethren,  give  thanks
unto  God;  behold  here  our  Master.”  The
Chaplains  then  chanted  the  Te  Denm ;  and
the  brethren,  taking  their  new  Master  in


their  arms,  carried  him  into  the  chapel
and  placed  him  before  the  altar,  where  he
continued  kneeling,  while  the  brethren
prayed,  and  the  Chaplains  repeated  the
Kyrie  Eleison,  the  Pater  Noster,  and  other
devotional  exercises.

Next  in  rank  to  the  Grand  Master  was
the  Seneschal,  who  was  his  representative
and  lieutenant.  Then  came  the  Marshal,
who  was  the  General  of  the  Order.  Next
was  the  Treasurer,  an  office  that  was  always
united  with  that  of  Grand  Preceptor  of  Jeru¬
salem.  He  was  the  Admiral  of  the  Order.
The  Draper,  the  next  officer  in  rank,  had
charge  of  the  clothing  of  the  Order.  He
was  a  kind  of  Commissary  General.  The
Turcopolier  was  the  Commander  of  the
light-horse.  There  was  also  a  class  of  offi¬
cers  called  Visitors,  whose  duties,  as  their
name  imports,  was  to  visit  the  different
Provinces,  and  correct  abuses.  There  were
also  some  subordinate  offices  appropriated
to  the  Serving  Brethren,  such  as  Sub-Mar¬
shal,  Standard-Bearer,  Farrier,  etc.

These  officers,  with  the  Grand  Preceptors
of  the  Provinces  and  the  most  distinguished
knights  who  could  attend,  constituted  the
General  Chapter  or  great  legislative  assem¬
bly  of  the  Order,  where  all  laws  and  regula¬
tions  wrere  made  and  great  officers  elected.
This  assembly  was  not  often  convened,  and
in  the  intervals  its  powers  were  exercised
by  the  Chapter  of  Jerusalem.

The  Order  thus  organized,  as  it  increased
in  prosperity  and  augmented  its  possessions
in  the  East  and  in  Europe,  was  divided  in¬
to  Provinces,  each  of  which  was  governed
by  a  Grand  Preceptor  or  Grand  Prior ;  for
the  titles  were  indiscriminately  used.  That,
however,  of  Preceptor  was  peculiar  to  the
Templars,  while  that  of  Prior  wras  common
both  to  them  and  to  the  Knights  Hospital¬
lers  of  St.  John.  These  Provinces  w'ere
fifteen  in  number,  and  were  as  follows :
Jerusalem,  Tripolis,  Antioch,  Cyprus,  Por¬
tugal,  Castile  and  Leon,  Aragon,  France
and  Auvergne,  Normandy,  Aquitaine,  Pro¬
vence,  England,  including  Scotland  and  Ire¬
land  ;  Germany,  Upper  and  Central  Italy,
and  Apulia  and  Sicily.  Hence  it  will  be
seen  that  there  was  no  part  of  Europe,  ex¬
cept  the  impoverished  kingdoms  of  Den¬
mark,  Sweden,  and  Norway,  where  the
Templars  had  not  extended  their  posses¬
sions  and  their  influence.

In  all  the  Provinces  there  were  numerous
temple-houses  called  Preceptories,  presided
over  by  a  Preceptor.  In  each  of  the  larger
Preceptories  there  was  a  Chapter,  in  which
local  regulations  were  made  and  members
were  received  into  the  Order.

The  reception  of  a  knight  into  the  Order
was  a  very  solemn  ceremonial.  It  was  se¬
cret,  none  but  members  of  the  Order  being


424


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


permitted  to  be  present.  In  this  it  differed
from  that  of  the  Knights  of  Malta,  whose
form  of  reception  was  open  and  public;  and
it  is  to  this  difference,  between  a  public  re¬
ception  and  a  secret  initiation,  that  may,
perhaps,  be  attributed  a  portion  of  the  spirit
of  persecution  exhibited  by  the  Church  to
the  Order  in  its  latter  days.

Of  this  reception,  the  best  and  most  au¬
thentic  account  is  given  by  Miinter  in  his
Statutenbueh,  des  Ordens  der  Tempelherren,
(pp.  29-42,)  and  on  that  I  shall  principally
rely.

On  the  day  of  the  reception,  the  Master
and  the  knights  being  in  the  Chapter,  the
Master  said :

“  Beloved  Knights  and  Brethren,  ye  see
that  the  majority  are  willing  that  this  man
shall  be  received  as  a  brother.  If  there  be
among  you  any  one  who  knows  anything
concerning  him,  wherefor  he  cannot  right¬
fully  become  a  brother,  let  him  say  so.
For  it  is  better  that  this  should  be  made
known  beforehand  than  after  he  has  been
brought  before  us.”  All  being  silent,  the
candidate  is  conducted  into  an  adjoining
chamber.  Two  or  three  of  the  oldest
knights  are  sent  to  him  to  warn  him  of  the
difficulties  and  hardships  that  he  will  have
to  encounter;  or,  as  the  Benedictine  rule
says,  all  the  hard  and  rough  ways  that  lead
to  God  —  “  omnia  dura  et  aspera,  per  quae
itur  ad  Deum.”

They  commenced  by  saying :  “  Brother,  do
you  seek  the  fellowship  of  the  Order?  ”  If
he  replied  affirmatively,  they  warned  him
of  the  rigorous  services  which  would  be  de¬
manded  of  him.  Should  he  reply  that  he
was  willing  to  endure  all  for  the  sake  of
God  and  to  become  the  slave  of  the  Order,
they  further  asked  him  if  he  were  married
or  betrothed ;  if  he  had  ever  entered  any
other  Order ;  if  he  owed  more  than  he  could
pay ;  if  he  was  of  sound  body ;  and  if  he
was  of  free  condition?  If  his  replies  were
satisfactory,  his  examiners  returned  to  the
Chapter  room  and  made  report;  whereupon
the  Master  again  inquired  if  any  one  pres¬
ent  knew  anything  against  the  candidate.
All  being  silent,  he  asked:  “  Are  you  will¬
ing  that  he  should  be  received  in  God’s
name;”  and  all  the  knights  answered:
“Let  him  be  received  in  God’s  name.”  His
examiners  then  returned  to  him  and  asked
him  if  he  still  persisted  in  his  intention.
If  he  replied  that  he  did,  they  gave  him  the
necessary  instructions  how  he  should  act,
and  led  him  to  the  door  of  the  Chapter
room.  There  entering  he  cast  himself  on
his  knees  before  the  Master,  with  folded
hands,  and  said :  “  Sir,  I  am  come  before  God,
before  you  and  the  brethren,  and  pray  and
beseech  you,  for  God  and  our  dear  Lady’s
Bake,  to  admit  me  into  your  fellowship  and


to  the  good  deeds  of  the  Order,  as  one  who
will  for  all  his  life  long  be  the  servant  and
slave  of  the  Order.”

The  Master  replied :  “  Beloved  Brother,
you  are  desirous  of  a  great  matter,  for  you
see  nothing  but  the  outward  shell  of  our
Order.  It  is  only  the  outward  shell  when
you  see  that  we  have  fine  horses  and  rich
caparisons,  that  we  eat  and  drink  well,  and
are  splendidly  clothed.  From  this  you
conclude  that  you  will  be  well  off  with  us.
But  you  know  not  the  rigorous  maxims
which  are  in  our  interior.  For  it  is  a  hard
matter  for  you,  who  are  your  own  master,
to  become  the  servant  of  another.  You
will  hardly  be  able  to  perform,  in  future,
what  you  wish  yourself.  For  when  you
wish  to  be  on  this  side  of  the  sea,  you  will
be  sent  to  the  other  side;  when  you  will
wish  to  be  in  Acre,  you  will  be  sent  to  the
district  of  Antioch,  to  Tripolis,  or  to  Ar¬
menia;  or  you  will  be  sent  to  Apulia,  to
Sicily,  or  to  Lombardy,  or  to  Burgundy,
France,  England,  or  any  other  country
where  we  have  houses  and  possessions.
When  you  will  wish  to  sleep,  you  will  be
ordered  to  watch ;  when  you  will  wish  to
watch,  then  you  will  be  ordered  to  go  to
bed ;  when  you  will  wish  to  eat,  then  you
will  be  ordered  to  do  something  else.  And
as  both  we  and  you  might  suffer  great  in¬
convenience  from  what  you  have,  mayhap,
concealed  from  us,  look  here  on  the  holy
Evangelists  and  the  word  of  God,  and  an¬
swer  the  truth  to  the  questions  which  we
shall  put  to  you ;  for  if  you  lie,  you  will  be
perjured,  and  may  be  expelled  the  Order,
from  which  God  keep  you !  ”

The  questions  which  had  been  before
asked  him  by  his  examiners  were  then  re¬
peated  more  at  large,  with  the  additional
one  whether  he  had  made  any  contract  with
a  Templar  or  any  other  person  to  secure  his
admission.

His  answers  being  satisfactory,  the  Mas¬
ter  proceeded :  “  Beloved  Brother,  take

good  heed  that  you  have  spoken  truth  to
us,  for  should  you  in  any  one  point  have
spoken  falsely,  you  would  be  put  out  of  the
Order,  from  which  God  preserve  you.  Now,
beloved  Brother,  heed  well  what  we  shall
say  to  you.  Do  you  promise  God  and  Mary,
our  dear  Lady,  that  your  life  long  you  will
be  obedient  to  the  Master  of  the  Temple
and  the  Prior  who  is  set  over  you?”

“Yes,  Sir,  God  willing.”

“  Do  you  promise  God  and  Mary,  our
dear  Lady,  all  your  life  long  to  live  chaste
in  your  body  ?  ”

“  Yes,  Sir,  God  willing.”

“  Do  you  promise  God  and  Mary,  our
dear  Lady,  your  life  long  to  observe  the
laudable  manners  and  customs  of  our  Or¬
der,  those  which  now  are  and  those  which


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


425


the  Master  and  knights  may  hereafter
ordain  ?  ”

“  Yes,  Sir,  God  willing.”

“Do  you  promise  God  and  Mary,  our
dear  Lady,  that  your  life  long  you  will,
with  the  power  and  strength  that  God  gives
you,  help  to  conquer  the  holy  land  of  Jeru¬
salem,  and  with  your  best  power  you  will
help  to  keep  and  guard  that  which  the
Christians  possess?”

“  Yes,  Sir,  God  willing.”

“  Do  you  promise  God  and  Mary,  our
dear  Lady,  never  to  hold  this  Order  for
stronger  or  weaker,  for  worse  or  for  better,
but  with  the  permission  of  the  Master  or
the  convent  which  has  the  authority  ?  ”

“  Yes,  Sir,  God  willing.”

“  Finally,  do  you  promise  God  and  Mary,
our  dear  Lady,  that  you  will  never  be  pres¬
ent  when  a  Christian  shall  be  unjustly  and
unlawfully  despoiled  of  his  heritage,  and
that  you  will  never  by  counsel  or  act  take
part  therein  ?  ”

“  Yes,  Sir,  God  willing.”

Then  the  Master  said:  “Thus,  in  the
name  of  God  and  Mary  our  dear  Lady,
and  in  the  name  of  St.  Peter  of  Rome,  and
our  Father  the  Pope,  and  in  the  name  of
all  the  Brethren  of  the  Temple,  we  receive
you  to  all  the  good  works  of  the  Order
which  have  been  done  from  the  beginning,
and  shall  be  done  to  the  end,  you,  your
father,  your  mother,  and  all  your  lineage,
who  you  are  willing  shall  have  a  share
therein.  In  like  manner  do  you  receive  us
into  all  the  good  works  which  you  have
done  or  shall  do.  We  assure  you  bread
and  water,  and  the  poor  clothing  of  the  Or¬
der,  and  toil  and  labor  in  abundance.”

The  Chaplain  then  read  the  133d  Psalm
and  the  prayer  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Deus
qui  corda  fidelium,  and  the  brethren  repeated
the  Lord’s  prayer.  The  Prior  and  the
Chaplain  gave  the  recipient  the  fraternal
kiss.  He  was  then  seated  before  the  Mas¬
ter,  who  delivered  to  him  a  discourse  on
his  duties  and  obligations  as  a  member  of
the  Order.

These  duties  may  he  thus  summed  up.
He  was  never  to  assault  a  Christian,  nor
swear,  nor  receive  any  attendance  from  a
woman  without  the  permission  of  his  su¬
periors;  not  to  kiss  a  woman,  even  his
mother  or  sister;  to  hold  no  child  to  the
baptismal  font ;  and  to  abuse  no  man,  but
to  be  courteous  to  all.  He  was  to  sleep  in
a  linen  shirt,  drawers  and  hose,  and  girded
with  a  small  girdle;  to  attend  divine  ser¬
vice  punctually,  and  to  begin  and  end  his
meals  with  a  prayer.

Such  is  the  formula  of  reception,  which
has  been  collected  by  Mlinter  from  the
most  authentic  sources.  It  is  evident,  how¬
ever,  that  it  is  not  complete.  The  secret
3  D


parts  of  the  ritual  are  omitted,  so  that  the
formula  is  here  something  like  what  a
Freemason  would  call  the  monitorial  part
of  the  instruction.  Mlinter  does  not  even
give  the  form  of  the  oath  taken  by  the  can¬
didate  ;  although  Raynouard  says  that  it  is
preserved  in  the  Archives  of  the  Abbey  of
Alcobaza,  in  Aragon,  and  gives  it  in  the
following  words,  on  the  authority  of  Hen-
riguez  in  his  Regula,  etc.,  Ordinis Cistern iensis.

“  I  swear  to  consecrate  my  discourse,  my
arms,  my  faculties,  and  my  life,  to  the  de¬
fence  of  the  sacred  mysteries  of  the  faith,
and  to  that  of  the  unity  of  God.  I  also
promise  to  be  submissive  and  obedient  to

the  Grand  Master  of  the  Order . At

all  times  that  it  may  be  necessary,  I  will
cross  the  seas  to  go  to  battle;  I  will  con¬
tribute  succor  against  infidel  kings  and
princes ;  I  will  not  turn  my  back  on  three
foes ;  and  even  if  I  be  alone,  I  will  fight
them  if  they  are  infidels.”

The  fact  that  the  Templars  had  a  secret
initiation  is  now  generally  conceded,  al¬
though  a  few  writers  have  denied  it.  But
the  circumstantial  evidence  in  its  favor  is
too  great  to  be  overcome  by  anything  ex¬
cept  positive  proof  to  the  contrary,  which
has  never  been  adduced.  It  is  known  that
at  these  receptions  none  but  members  of  the
Order  were  admitted ;  a  prohibition  which
would  have  been  unnecessary  if  the  cere¬
monies  had  not  been  secret.  In  the  meet¬
ings  of  the  General  Chapter  of  the  Order,
even  the  Pope’s  Legate  was  refused  admis¬
sion.

It  would  not  be  fair  to  quote  the  one
hundred  and  twenty  accusations  preferred
against  the  Templars  by  Clement,  because
they  were  undoubtedly  malicious  falsehoods
invented  by  an  unprincipled  Pontiff  pan¬
dering  to  the  cupidity  of  an  avaricious
monarch ;  but  yet  some  of  them  are  of  such
a  nature  as  to  indicate  what  was  the  gen¬
eral  belief  of  men  at  the  time.  Thus,  Art.
32  says :  “  Quod  receptiones  istius  clandes¬
tine  faciebaut ;  ”  i.  e.  that  they  were  wont  to
have  their  receptions  in  secret.  The  100th  is
in  these  words :  “  Quod  sic  se  includunt  ad
tenenda  capitula  ut  omnes  januas  domus  et
ecclesiae  in  quibus  tenent  capitula  ferment
adeo  firmiter  quod  nullus  sit  nec  esse  pos-
sit  accessus  ad  eos  nec  juxta:  ut  possit
quicunque  videre  vel  audire  de  factis  vel
uictis  eorum ;  ”  i.  e.,  that  when  they  held
their  Chapters,  they  shut  all  the  doors  of  the
house  or  church  in  which  they  met  so  closely
that  no  one  could  approach  near  enough  to
see  or  hear  vthat  they  were  doing  and  saying.
And  the  next  article  is  more  particular,  for
it  states  that,  to  secure  themselves  against
eavesdroppers, they  were  accustomed  to  place
a  watch,  as  we  should  now  say  a  tiler,  upon
the  roof  of  the  house,  “  cxcubicum  super


426


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


tectum,”  who  could  give  the  necessary
warning.

Of  course  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  an
accurate  knowledge  of  all  the  details  of  this
secret  reception  of  the  ancient  Templars,
since  it  must  have  been  generally  oral ;  but
I  have  always  been  inclined  to  think,  from
allusions  here  and  there  scattered  through
the  history  of  their  customs,  that  many  of
its  features  have  descended  to  us,  and  are
to  be  found  in  the  ritual  of  initiation  prac¬
tised  by  the  Masonic  Knights  Templars.

The  dress  of  the  Templars  was  prescribed
for  them  by  St.  Bernard,  in  the  rule  which
he  composed  for  the  government  of  the
Order,  and  is  thus  described  in  chapter  xx.

“  To  all  the  professed  knights,  both  in
winter  and  summer,  we  give,  if  they  can  be

Erocured,  while  garments,  that  those  who
ave  cast  behind  them  a  dark  life,  may
know  that  they  are  to  commend  themselves
to  their  Creator  by  a  pure  and  white  life.”

The  white  mantle  was
therefore  the  peculiar
vestment  of  the  Tem¬
plars,  as  the  black  was
of  the  Hospitallers.
Subsequently,  for  at
first  they  wore  no
cross,  Pope  Euge-
nius  III.  gave  them  a
red  cross  pattee  as  a
symbol  of  martyrdom,  which  they  were  di¬
rected  to  wear  on  the  left  breast,  just  over
the  heart.

The  general  direction  of  St.  Bernard  as
to  clothing  was  afterwards  expanded,  so  that
the  dress  of  a  Templar  consisted  of  a  long,
white  tunic,  nearly  resembling  that  of  a
priest’s  in  shape,  with  a  red  cross  on  the
front  and  back ;  under  this  was  his  linen
shirt  clasped  by  a  girdle.  Over  all  was  the
white  mantle  with  the  red  cross  pattee.
The  head  was  covered  by  a  cap  or  hood  at¬
tached  to  the  mantle.  The  arms  were  a
sword,  lance,  mace,  and  shield.  Although
at  first  the  Order  adopted  as  a  seal  the  rep¬
resentation  of  two  knights  riding  on  one
horse,  as  a  mark  of  their  poverty,  subse¬
quently  each  knight  was  provided  with
three  horses,  and  an  esquire  selected  usu¬
ally  from  the  class  of  Serving  Brethren.

To  write  the  history  of  the  Templar
Order  for  the  two  centuries  of  its  existence
would,  says  Addison,  be  to  write  the  Latin
history  of  Palestine,  and  would  occupy  a
volume.  Its  details  would  be  accounts  of
glorious  struggles  with  the  infidel  in  de¬
fence  of  the  holy  land,  and  of  Christian
pilgrimage,  sometimes  successful  and  often
disastrous ;  of  arid  sands  well  moistened
with  the  blood  of  Christian  and  Saracen
warriors ;  of  disreputable  contests  with  its
rival  of  St.  John ;  of  final  forced  departure


from  the  places  which  its  prowess  had
conquered,  but  which  it  had  not  strength
to  hold,  and  of  a  few  years  of  luxurious,
and  it  may  be  of  licentious  indolence,  ter¬
minated  by  a  cruel  martyrdom  and  dissolu¬
tion.

The  fall  of  Acre  in  1292,  under  the  vigor¬
ous  assault  of  the  Sultan  Mansour,  led  at
once  to  the  evacuation  of  Palestine  by  the
Christians.  The  Knights  Hospitallers  of  "
St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  afterwards  called
Knights  of  Rhodes,  and  then  of  Malta,  be¬
took  themselves  to  Rhodes,  where  the
former,  assuming  a  naval  character,  resumed
the  warfare  in  their  galleys  against  the
Mohammedans.  The  Templars,  after  a
brief  stay  in  the  island  of  Cyprus,  retired
to  their  different  Preceptories  in  Europe.

Porter  (Hist.  K.  of  Malta,  i.  174,)  has  no
panegyric  for  these  recreant  knights.  After
eulogizing  the  Hospitallers  for  the  persever¬
ing  energy  with  which,  from  their  island
home  of  Rhodes,  they  continued  the  war
with  the  infidels,  he  says:

“The  Templar,  on  the  other  hand,  after
a  brief  sojourn  in  Cyprus,  instead  of  ren¬
dering  the  smallest  assistance  to  his  chival¬
rous  and  knightly  brethren  in  their  new
undertaking,  hurried  with  unseemly  haste
to  his  numerous  wealthy  European  Pre¬
ceptories,  where  the  grossness  of  his  licen¬
tiousness,  the  height  of  his  luxury,  and
the  arrogance  of  his  pride,  soon  rendered
him  an  object  of  the  most  invincible  hatred
among  those  who  possessed  ample  power  to
accomplish  his  overthrow.  During  these
last  years  of  their  existence  little  can  be
said  in  defence  of  the  Order;  and  although
the  barbarous  cruelty  with  which  their  ex¬
tinction  was  accomplished  has  raised  a
feeling  of  compassion  in  their  behalf,
which  bids  fair  to  efface  the  memory  of
their  crimes,  still  it  cannot  be  denied  that
they  had  of  late  years  so  far  deviated  from
the  original  purposes  of  their  Institution
as  to  render  them  highly  unfit  depositaries
of  that  wealth  which  had  been  bequeathed
to  them  for  purposes  so  widely  different
from  those  to  which  they  had  appropriated
it.”

The  act  of  cruelty  and  of  injustice  by
which  the  Templar  Order  was  dissolved  in
the  fourteenth  century,  has  bequeathed  an
inglorious  memory  on  the  names  of  the  in¬
famous  king,  and  no  less  infamous  pope
who  accomplished  it.  In  the  beginning  of
the  fourteenth  century,  thethroneof  France
was  filled  by  Philip  the  Fair,  an  ambitious,
a  vindictive,  and  an  avaricious  prince.  In
his  celebrated  controversy  with  Pope  Bon¬
iface, 'the  Templars  had,  as  was  usual  with
them,  sided  with  the  pontiff  and  opposed
the  king;  this  act  excited  his  hatred:  the
Order  was  enormously  wealthy ;  this  aroused


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


427


his  avarice :  their  power  interfered  with  his
designs  of  political  aggrandizement ;  and  this
alarmed  his  ambition.  He,  therefore,  secretly
concerted  with  Pope  Clement  V.  a  plan  for
their  destruction,  and  the  appropriation  of
their  revenues.  Clement,  by  his  direction,
wrote  in  Juue,  1306,  to  De  Molav,  the
Grand  Master,  who  was  then  at  Cyprus,  in¬
viting  him  to  come  and  consult  with  him
on  some  matters  of  great  importance  to  the
Order.  De  Molay  obeyed  the  summons,
and  arrived  in  the  beginning  of  1307  at
Paris,  with  sixty  knights  and  a  large
amount  of  treasure.  He  was  immediately
imprisoned,  and,  on  the  thirteenth  of  Oc¬
tober  following,  every  knight  in  France
was,  in  consequence  of  the  secret  orders  of
the  king,  arrested  on  the  pretended  charge
of  idolatry,  and  other  enormous  crimes,  of
which  Squin  de  Flexian,  a  renegade  and
expel1  ed  Prior  of  the  Order,  was  said  to
have  confessed  that  the  knights  were  guilty
in  their  secret  Chapters.

What  these  charges  were  has  not  been
left  to  conjecture.  Pope  Clement  sent  a
list  of  the  articles  of  accusation,  amounting
to  one  hundred  and  twenty  in  number,  to  all
the  archbishops,  bishops,  and  Papal  commis¬
saries  upon  which  to  examine  the  knights
who  should  be  brought  before  them.  This
list  is  still  in  existence,  and  in  it  we  find
such  charges  as  these.  1.  That  they  re¬
quired  those  who  were  received  into  the
Order  to  abjure  Christ,  the  Blessed  Virgin,
and  all  the  saints.  7.  That  they  denied
that  Christ  had  suffered  for  man’s  redemp¬
tion.  9.  That  they  made  their  recipient  spit
upon  the  cross  or  the  crucifix.  14.  That
they  worshipped  a  cat  in  their  assemblies.
16.  That  they  did  not  believe  in  the  eucha-
ristic  sacrifice.  20.  That  they  said  that  the
Grand  Master  had  the  power  of  absolution.
26.  That  they  practised  obscene  ceremonies
in  their  receptions.  32.  That  their  recep¬
tions  were  secret;  a  charge  repeated  in  arti¬
cles  97,  98,  99,  100,  and  101,  in  different
forms.  42.  That  they  had  an  idol,  which
was  a  head  with  one  or  with  three  faces,  and
sometimes  a  human  skull.  52,  53.  That
they  exercised  magic  arts.

On  such  preposterous  charges  as  these
the  knights  were  tried,  and  of  course,  as  a
foregone  conclusion  condemned.  On  the
12th  of  May,  1310,  fifty-four  of  the  knights
were  publicly  burnt,  and  on  the  18th  of
March,  1313,  De  Molay,  the  Grand  Master,
and  the  three  principal  dignitaries  of  the
order,  suffered  the  same  fate.  They  died
faithfully  asserting  their  innocence  of  all
the  crimes  imputed  to  them.  The  Order  was
now,  by  the  energy  of  the  king  of  France,
assisted  by  the  spiritual  authority  of  the
pope,  suppressed  throughout  Europe.  So
much  of  its  vast  possessions  as  were  not


appropriated  by  the  different  sovereigns  to
their  own  use,  or  to  that  of  their  favorites,
was  bestowed  upon  the  Order  of  the  Knights
of  Malta,  whose  acceptance  of  the  donation
did  not  tend  to  diminish  the  ill  feeling  which
had  always  existed  between  the  members
of  the  two  Orders.

As  to  the  story  of  the  continuation  of  the
Order,  after  the  death  of  James  de  Molay,
by  Johannes  Larmenius,  under  the  au¬
thority  of  a  charter  of  transmission  given
to  him  by  De  Molay  a  few  days  before  his
death,  that  subject  is  more  appropriately
treated  in  the  history  of  the  Order  of  the
Temple,  which  claims,  by  virtue  of  this
charter,  to  be  the  regular  successor  of  the
ancient  Order.

From  the  establishment  of  the  Order  by
Hugh  de  Payens,  until  its  dissolution
during  the  Mastership  ofDe  Molay,  twenty-
two  Grand  Masters  presided  over  the  Order,
of  whom  the  following  is  an  accurate  list,
compiled  on  the  authority  of  Addison.  The
roll  of  Grand  Masters  in  the  Kite  of  Strict
Observance,  and  that  in  the  Order  of  the
Templar,  differ  in  several  names;  but  these
rolls  are  destitute  of  authenticity.

1.  Hugh  de  Payens,  elected  in  1118.


2.  Robert  of  Burgundy,  “  1136.

3.  Everard  de  Barri,  “  1146.

4.  Bernard  de  Treinellay,  “  1151.

5.  Bertrand  de  Blanquefort,  “  1154.

6.  Philip  of  Naplous,  “  1167.

7.  Odo  de  St.  Amand,  “  1170.

8.  Arnold  de  Troye,  “  1180.

9.  Gerard  de  Ridefort,  “  1185.

10.  Brother  Walter,  “  1189.

11.  Robert  de  Sable,  “  1191.

12.  Gilbert  Horal,  “  1195.

13.  Philip  de  Plessis,  “  1201.

14.  William  de  Chartres,  “  1217.

15.  Peter  de  Montaigu,  “  1218.

16.  Hermann  de  Perigord,  “  1236.

17.  William  de  Sonnac,  “  1245.

18.  Reginald  de  Vichier,  “  1252.

19.  Thomas  Berard,  “  1256.

20.  William  de  Beaujeu,  “  1273.

21.  Theobald  de  Gaudini,  “  1291.

22.  James  de  Molay,  “  1297.


Knight  Templar,  Masonic.

The  connection  of  the  Knights  Templars
with  the  Freemasons  may  much  more
plausibly  be  traced  than  that  of  the  Knights
of  Malta.  Yet,  unfortunately,  the  sources
from  which  information  is  to  be  derived
are  for  the  most  part  traditionary ;  authen¬
tic  dates  and  documents  are  wanting.
Tradition  has  always  been  inclined  to  trace
the  connection  to  an  early  period,  and  to
give  to  the  Templar  system  of  secret  recep¬
tion  a  Masonic  character,  derived  from
their  association  during  the  Crusades  with
the  mystical  Society  of  the  Assassins  in
Syria.  Lawrie,  [Hist.,  p.  87,)  or  Brewster,


428


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


who  is  said  by  some  to  have  written  the
work  which  bears  Lawrie’s  name,  embodies
the  tradition  in  this  form :

“  Almost  all  the  secret  associations  of  the
ancients  either  flourished  or  originated  in
Syria  and  the  adjacent  countries.  It  was
here  that  the  Dionysian  artists,  the  Essenes
and  the  Kassideans,  arose.  From  this
country  also  came  several  members  of  that
trading  association  of  Masons  which  ap¬
peared  in  Europe  during  the  dark  ages;
and  we  are  assured,  that,  notwithstanding
the  unfavorable  condition  of  that  province,
there  exists  at  this  day,  on  Mount  Libanus,
one  of  these  Syriac  fraternities.  As  the
Order  of  the  Templars,  therefore,  was
originally  formed  in  Syria,  and  existed
there  for  a  considerable  time,  it  would  be
no  improbable  supposition  that  they  re¬
ceived  their  Masonic  knowledge  from  the
Lodges  in  that  quarter.  But  we  are  fortu¬
nately,  in  this  case,  not  left  to  conjecture,
for  we  are  expressly  informed  by  a  foreign
author  [Adler,  de  Drusis ],  who  was  well
acquainted  with  the  history  and  customs
of  Syria,  that  the  Knights  Templars  were
actually  members  of  the  Syriac  fraterni¬
ties.”

Even  if  this  hypothesis  were  true,  al¬
though  it  might  probably  suggest  the  origin
of  the  secret  reception  of  the  Templars,  it
would  not  explain  the  connection  of  the
modern  Templars  with  the  Freemasons,
because  there  is  no  evidence  that  these
Syriac  fraternities  were  Masonic.

There  are  four  sources  from  which  the
Masonic  Templars  are  said  to  have  derived
their  existence;  making, therefore,  as  many
different  divisions  of  the  Order.

1.  The  Templars  who  claim  John  Mark
Larmenius  as  the  successor  of  James  de
Molay.

2.  Those  who  recognize  Peter  d’Aumont
as  the  successor  of  Molay.

3.  Those  who  derive  their  Templarism
from  the  Count  Beaujeu,  the  nephew  of
Molay.

4.  Those  who  claim  an  independent
origin,  and  repudiate  alike  the  authority
of  Larmenius,  of  Aurnont,  and  of  Beaujeu.

From  the  first  class  spring  the  Templars
of  France,  who  professed  to  have  continued
the  Order  by  authority  of  a  charter  given
by  Molay  to  Larmenius.  This  body  of
Templars  designate  themselves  as  the
“  Order  of  the  Temple.”  Its  seat  is  in
Paris.  The  Duke  of  Sussex  received  from
it  the  degree  and  the  authority  to  establish
a  Grand  Conclave  in  England.  He  did  so;
and  convened  that  body  once,  but  only
once.  During  the  remaining  years  of  his
life,  Templarism  had  no  activity  in  England,
as  he  discountenanced  all  Christian  and
chivalric  Masonry.  See  Temple ,  Order  of  the.


The  second  division  of  Templars  is  that
which  is  founded  on  the  theory  that  Peter
d’Aumont  fled  with  several  knights  into
Scotland, and  there  united  with  the  Freema¬
sons.  This  legend  is  intimately  connected
with  Ramsay’s  tradition — that  Freemasonry
sprang  from  Templarism,  and  that  all  Free¬
masons  are  Knignts  Templars.  The  Chap¬
ter  of  Clermont  adopted  this  theory;  and
in  establishing  their  high  degrees  asserted
that  they  were  derived  from  these  Tem¬
plars  of  Scotland.  The  Baron  Hund  car¬
ried  the  theory  into  Germany,  and  on  it
established  his  Rite  of  Strict  Observance,
which  was  a  Templar  system.  Hence  the
Templars  of  Germany  must  be  classed  un¬
der  the  head  of  the  followers  of  Aurnont.
See  Strict  Observance.

The  third  division  is  that  which  asserts
that  the  Count  Beaujeu,  a  nephew  of  the
last  Grand  Master,  Molay,  and  a  member
of  the  Order  of  Knights  of  Christ,  —  the
name  assumed  by  the  Templars  of  Portu¬
gal, —  had  received  authority  from  that
Order  to  disseminate  the  degree.  He
is  said  to  have  carried  the  degree  and  its
ritual  into  Sweden,  where  he  incorporated
it  with  Freemasonry.  The  story  is,  too,
that  Beaujeu  collected  his  uncle’s  ashes  and
interred  them  in  Stockholm,  where  a
monument  was  erected  to  his  memory.
Hence  the  Swedish  Templar  Masons  claim
their  descent  from  Beaujeu,  and  the  Swed¬
ish  Rite  is  through  this  source  a  Templar
system.

Of  the  last  class,  or  the  Templars  who
recognized  the  authority  of  neither  of  the
leaders  who  have  been  mentioned,  there
were  two  subdivisions,  the  Scotch  and  the
English;  for  it  is  only  in  Scotland  and
England  that  this  independent  Templarism
found  a  foothold.

It  was  only  in  Scotland  that  the  Tem¬
plars  endured  no  persecution.  Long  after
the  dissolution  of  the  Order  in  every  other
country  of  Europe,  the  Scottish  Preceptories
continued  to  exist,  and  the  knights  lived
undisturbed.  One  portion  of  the  Scottish
Templars  entered  the  army  of  Robert
Bruce,  and,  after  the  battle  of  Bannock¬
burn,  were  merged  in  the  “  Royal  Order
of  Scotland,”  then  established  by  him.  See
Royal  Order  of  Scotland.

Another  portion  of  the  Scottish  Tem-

f liars  united  with  the  Knights  Hospital¬
ers  of  St.  John.  They  lived  amicably  in
the  same  houses,  and  continued  to  do  so
until  the  Reformation.  At  this  time  many
of  them  embraced  Protestantism.  Some
of  them  united  with  the  Freemasons,  and
established  “  the  Ancient  Lodge  ”  at  Stir¬
ling,  where  they  conferred  the  degrees  of
Knight  of  the  Sepulchre,  Knight  of  Malta,
and  Knight  Templar.  It  is  to  this  division


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


429


that  we  are  to  trace  the  Masonic  Templars
of  Scotland.

The  Roman  Catholic  knights  remain¬
ing  in  the  Order,  placed  themselves  under
David  Seaton.  Lord  Dundee  afterwards
became  their  Grand  Master.  Charles
Edward,  the  “  Young  Pretender,”  was  ad¬
mitted  into  the  Order  at  Holyrood  House,
Edinburgh,  on  September  24,  1745,  and
made  the  Grand  Master.  He  carried  the
degree  with  him,  of  course,  into  France,
after  the  downfall  of  his  enterprise,  and
established  the  Chapter  of  Arras  and  the
high  degrees.  To  this  branch,  I  think,
there  can  be  but  little  doubt  that  we  are
to  attribute  the  Templar  system  of  the  An¬
cient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  as  devel¬
oped  in  its  degree  of  Kadosh.

The  English  Masonic  Templars  are  most
probably  derived  from  that  body  called  the
“  Baldwyn  Encampment,”  or  from  some
one  of  the  four  co-ordinate  Encampments
of  London,  Bath,  York,  and  Salisbury,
which  it  is  claimed  were  formed  by  the
members  of  the  Preceptory  which  had  long
existed  at  Bristol,  and  who,  on  the  dissolu¬
tion  of  their  Order,  are  supposed  to  have
united  with  the  Masonic  fraternity.  The
Baldwyn  Encampment  claims  to  have  ex¬
isted  from  “time  immemorial,”  —  an  in¬
definite  period, —  but  we  can  trace  it  back
far  enough  to  give  it  a  priority  over  all
other  English  Encampments.  From  this
division  of  the  Templars,  repudiating  all
connection  with  Larmenius,  with  Aumont,
or  any  other  of  the  self-constituted  leaders,
but  tracing  its  origin  to  the  independent
action  of  knights  who  fled  for  security  and
for  perpetuity  into  the  body  of  Masonry,
are  we,  1  think,  justly  entitled  to  derive
the  Templars  of  the  United  States.

Of  this  brief  statement,  we  may  make  the
following  summary:

1.  From  Larmenius  came  the  French
Templars.

2.  From  Aumont,  the  German  Templars
of  Strict  Observance.

3.  From  Beaujeu,  the  Swedish  Templars
of  the  Rite  of  Zinnendorf.

4.  From  the  Protestant  Templars  of
Scotland  and  the  Ancient  Lodge  of  Stir¬
ling,  the  Scotch  Templars.

5.  From  Prince  Charles  Edward  and  his
adherents,  the  Templars  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.

6.  From  the  Baldwyn  Encampment  and
its  co-ordinates,  the  old  English  and  the
American  Templars.

The  Government  of  Masonic  Knights
Templars  in  the  United  States  is  vested,
first,  in  Commanderies,  which  confer  the
Red  Cross  and  Templar  degrees  and  instruct
in  the  secrets  of  Malta.  The  usual  expres¬
sion,  that  a  candidate  after  being  made  a


Knight  Templar  is  also  created  a  Knight
of  Malta,  involves  an  absurdity.  No  man
being  a  Knight  Templar  could,  by  the
original  statutes,  be  a  member  of  any  other
Order;  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  the
wise  provision  of  the  Grand  Encampment
in  1856,  which  struck  the  degree  of  Malta
from  the  ritual  of  the  Commanderies,  should
have  been  in  1862  unwisely  repealed.  The
secrets  in  which  the  candidate  is  instructed
are  the  modern  inventions  of  the  Masonic
Knights  of  Malta.  The  original  Order  had
no  secrets.

Commanderies  are  under  the  control  of
Grand  Commanderies  in  States  in  which
those  bodies  exist.  Where  they  do  not,  the
Warrants  are  derived  directly  from  the
Grand  Encampment.

The  supreme  authority  of  the  Order  is
exercised  by  the  Grand  Encampment  of
the  United  States,  which  meets  triennially.
The  presiding  officer  is  a  Grand  Master.

The  Costume  of  the  Knights  Templars
of  the  United  States  is  of  two  kinds.  First,
the  original  uniform,  which  was  in  general
use  until  the  year  1859,  and  is  still  used
by  Commanderies  which  were  in  existence
before  that  time.  It  is  thus  described :

The  suit  is  black,  with  black  gloves.  A
black  velvet  sash,  trimmed  with  silver  lace,
crosses  the  body  from  the  left  shoulder  to
right  hip,  having  at  its  end  a  cross-hilted
dagger,  a  black  rose  on  the  left  shoulder,
and  a  Maltese  cross  at  the  end.  Where  the
sash  crosses  the  left  breast,  is  a  nine-point¬
ed  star  in  silver,  with  a  cross  and  serpent
of  gold  in  the  centre,  within  a  circle,  around
which  are  the  words,  “  in  hoc  signo  vinces.”
The  apron  is  of  black  velvet,  in  triangular
form,  to  represent  the  delta,  and  edged  with
silver  lace.  On  its  flap  is  placed  a  triangle
of  silver,  perforated  with  twelve  holes,  with
a  cross  and  serpent  in  the  centre ;  on  the
centre  of  the  apron  are  a  skull  and  cross-
bones,  between  three  stars  of  seven  points,
having  a  red  cross  in  the  centre  of  each.
The  belt  is  black,  to  which  is  attached  a
cross-hilted  sword.  The  caps  vary  in  form
and  decoration  in  different  Encampments.
The  standard  is  black,  bearing  a  nine-point¬
ed  cross  of  silver,  having  in  its  centre  a
circle  of  green,  with  the  cross  and  serpent
in  gold,  and  the  motto  around  “  in  hoc  signo
vinces.”

In  1859  the  Grand  Encampment  enacted
a  statute  providing  that  all  Commanderies
which  might  be  thereafter  chartered  should
provide  a  new  costume  of  an  entirely  differ¬
ent  kind,  which  should  also  be  adopted  by
the  old  Commanderies  wlieneverthey  should
change  their  uniform.  This  new  costume
was  further  altered  in  1862,  and  is  now  of
the  following  description,  as  detailed  in  the
statute :


430


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


Full  Dress.  —  Black  frock  coat,  black
pantaloons,  scarf,  sword,  belt,  shoulder
straps,  gauntlets,  and  chapeau,  with  appro¬
priate  trimmings.

Fatigue  Dress. — Same  as  full  dress,  ex¬
cept  for  chapeau  a  black  cloth  cap,  navy
form,  with  appropriate  cross  in  front,  and
for  gauntlets,  white  gloves.

Scarf.  —  Five  inches  wide  in  the  whole,
of  white,  bordered  with  black  one  inch  on
either  side,  a  strip  of  navy  lace  one-fourth
of  an  inch  wide,  at  the  inner  edge  of  the
black.  On  the  front  centre  of  the  scarf  a
metal  star  of  nine  points,  in  allusion  to  the
nine  founders  of  tne  Temple  Order,  inclo¬
sing  the  Passion  Cross,  surrounded  by  the
Latin  motto,  “In  hoc  signo  vinces the
star  to  be  three  and  three-quarter  inches  in
diameter.  The  scarf  to  be  worn  from  the
right  shoulder  to  the  left  hip,  with  the  ends
extending  six  inches  below  the  point  of
intersection.

Chapeau.  —  The  military  chapeau,  trim¬
med  with  black  binding,  one  white  and  two
black  plumes,  and  appropriate  cross  on  the
left  side.

Gauntlets.  —  Of  buff  leather,  the  flap  to
extend  four  inches  upwards  from  the  wrist,
and  to  have  the  appropriate  cross  embroid¬
ered  in  gold,  on  the  proper  colored  velvet,
two  inches  in  length.

Sword. — Thirty-four  to  forty  inches,  in¬
clusive  of  scabbard ;  helmet  head,  cross  han¬
dle,  and  metal  scabbard.

Belt.  —  Red  enamelled  or  patent  leather,
two  inches  wide,  fastened  round  the  body
with  buckle  or  clasp.

From  what  has  been  said,  it  will  appear
that  there  are  two  modes  of  dress  or  costume
in  use  among  the  Templars  of  the  United
States — one,  the  old  or  “black  uniform,”
which  was  adopted  at  the  first  organization
of  the  Order  in  this  country,  and  which  is
still  used  by  the  old  Commanderies  which
were  in  existence  previous  to  the  year  1859;
and  the  new  or  “  black  uniform,”  which  was
adopted  by  the  Grand  Encampment  in
that  year,  and  which  has  been  prescribed
for  all  Commanderies  chartered  since  that
year.

This  difference  of  costume  has  recently
been  the  occasion  of  much  discussion  in
the  Order.  In  1872,  Sir  J.  Q.  A.  Fellows,
the  Grand  Master,  thinking  that  it  was  his
duty  to  enforce  a  uniform  dress  in  the
Order,  issued  his  decree  requiring  all  the
Commanderies  in  the  United  States  which
were  then  using  “  the  black  uniform,”  to
abandon  it,  and  to  adopt  “  the  white  uni¬
form,”  which  had  been  originally  ordered
in  1859,  and  subsequently  amended  in  1862.
Much  opposition  has  been  manifested  to  this
order  in  the  Commanderies  and  Grand  Com¬
manderies  where  the  black  costume  was  in


use.  The  Grand  Master’s  interpretation  of
the  statute  of  the  Grand  Encampment  has
been  doubted  or  denied,  and  the  order  has
been  virtually  disobeyed  by  most,  if  not  by  all
of  them.  The  question  has  assumed  great  im¬
portance  in  consequence  of  the  feeling  that
has  been  created,  and  is  therefore  worthy  of
discussion.  The  author’s  views  were  against
the  correctness  of  the  Grand  Master’s  inter¬
pretation  of  the  law,  and  so  were  those  of
the  living  Past  Grand  Masters  of  the  Order.
It  is,  however,  but  fair  to  say  that  some
distinguished  Templars  have  been  of  a
different  opinion.  The  following  views  ad¬
vanced  by  me  in  the  National  Freemason  in
December,  1872,  express  what  I  am  com¬
pelled  to  think  is  the  true  condition  of  the
question.

Previous  to  the  year  1859  the  costume  of
the  Knights  Templars  of  this  country  was
determined  only  bv  a  traditional  rule,  and
consisted  of  a  black  dress,  with  the  richly
decorated  baldric  and  apron ;  the  latter  in¬
tended  to  show  the  connection  which  ex¬
isted  between  the  Order  and  Ancient  Craft
Masonry.

In  1856,  at  Hartford,  a  new  Constitution
was  proposed  and  adopted,  with  the  excep¬
tion  of  the  part  that  referred  to  costume.
Sir  Knight  Mackey,  from  the  committee  on
the  Constitution,  made  a  report  on  the  sub¬
ject  of  dress,  as  a  part  of  the  Constitution ;
but  the  consideration  of  this  report  was
postponed  until  the  next  triennial  meeting.
The  changes  in  costume  proposed  by  the
committee  were  not  very  great ;  the  baldric
and  the  essential  apron  were  preserved,  and
a  white  tunic,  not  hitherto  used,  was  re¬
commended.

At  the  session  of  1859,  at  Chicago,  the
subject  of  dress  was  alluded  to  by  the
Grand  Master  in  his  address ;  and  his  re¬
marks,  together  with  the  report  of  the
committee  made  in  1856,  were  referred  to  a
special  committee  of  seven,  of  which  the
Grand  Master  was  chairman,  and  Sir
Knights  Doyle,  Pike,  Simons,  Mackey,
Morris,  and  French  were  the  members.

This  committee  reported  a  uniform  which
made  material  differences  in  the  dress  there¬
tofore  worn,  and  especially  by  the  rejection
of  the  apron  and  the  introduction  of  a
white  tunic  and  a  white  cloak.  These  last
were  favorite  notions  of  Grand  Master
Hubbard,  and  they  were,  I  think,  adopted
by  the  committee  mainly  in  deference  to
his  high  authority.

The  proposed  measure  met  at  first  with
serious  opposition,  partly  on  account  of  the
rejection  of  the  apron,  which  many  Tem¬
plars  then  held,  as  they  do  now,  to  be  an
essential  feature  of  Masonic  Templarism,
and  a  tangible  record  of  the  union  at  a
specific  period  in  history  of  the  two  Orders ;


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


431


but  mainly,  perhaps,  on  account  of  the
very  heavy  expense  and  inconvenience
which  would  devolve  on  the  old  Command-
eries,  if  they  were  required  at  once  to  throw
aside  their  old  dress  and  provide  a  new
one.

I  have  a  distinct  recollection  that  this
opposition  was  only  quelled  by  the  agree¬
ment  on  a  compromise,  by  which  the  old
Commanderies  were  to  be  exempted  from  the
operation  of  the  law.  The  regulations  for
the  new  costume  were  then  passed,  and  the
compromise  immediately  after  adopted  in
the  words  of  the  following  resolution,  which
was  proposed  by  Sir  Knight  Doyle,  who
was  one  of  the  committee :

II  Resolved,  That  the  costume  this  day
adopted  by  the  Grand  Encampment  be,
and  the  same  is  hereby,  ordered  to  be  worn
by  all  Commanderies  chartered  at  this
Communication,  or  that  shall  hereafter  be
established  in  this  jurisdiction,  and  by  all
Commanderies  heretofore  existing,  when¬
ever  they  shall  procure  a  new  costume;”
and  all  State  Grand  Commanderies  were
directed  to  enforce  it  in  all  subordinates
that  may  hereafter  be  chartered  in  their  re¬
spective  jurisdictions.

I  say  that  this  was  a  compromise,  noth¬
ing  more  or  less,  and  so  understood  at  the
time.  The  old  Commanderies  were  then  in
the  majority,  and  would  not,  I  think,  have
consented  to  any  change  involving  so  much
expenditure,  unless  they  had  been  relieved
from  the  burden  themselves.

But  the  white  tunic  and  cloak  were  never
popular  with  the  knights,  who  had  been
required  by  the  regulations  of  1859  to  wear
them.  In  consequence  of  this,  at  the  ses¬
sion  in  1862,  on  motion  of  Sir  Knight
Bailey,  “  the  subject-matter  of  costume  and
the  resolution  relating  thereto  were  referred
to  a  Select  Committee  of  Five.”

This  committee  made  a  report,  in  which
they  “proposed”  a  uniform.  The  record
says  that  “the  report  was  agreed  to,  and
the  uniform  was  adopted.”  But  there  are
some  points  in  this  report  that  are  worthy
of  notice.  In  the  first  place,  not  a  word  is
said  about  the  compromise  resolution  adopt¬
ed  in  1859,  although  it  was  referred  to  the
committee.  That  resolution  was  not  re¬
pealed  by  any  action  taken  at  the  session
of  1862,  and  still  must  remain  in  force.  It
secured  to  the  old  Commanderies  the  right
to  wear  the  old  black  costume;  a  right
which  could  not  be  taken  from  them,  ex¬
cept  by  a  repeal  of  the  resolution  confer¬
ring  the  right.  I  say  nothing  of  the  mani¬
fest  injustice  of  repealing  a  resolution
granted  by  the  friends  of  a  measure  to  its
opponents  to  remove  their  opposition.  In
1859,  the  promise  was  made  to  the  old
Commanderies,  that  if  they  would  agree  to


a  certain  uniform,  to  be  prescribed  for  new
Commanderies,  their  own  old,  traditional
costume  should  never  be  interfered  with.
Might  could,  it  is  true,  repeal  this  com¬
promise  ;  but  Right  would,  for  that  pur¬
pose,  have  to  be  sacrificed.  But  the  fact  is,
that  the  sense  of  right  in  the  Grand  En¬
campment  prevented  such  an  act  of  dis¬
courtesy,  “  not  to  put  too  fine  a  point  upon
it,”  and  no  one  can  find  in  the  proceedings
of  the  Grand  Encampment  any  act  which
repeals  the  compromise  resolution  of  1859 ;
and  this  has  been  the  opinion  and  the  de¬
cision  of  all  the  Grand  Masters  who  have
wielded  the  baculus  of  office,  except  the
present  one.

But,  in  the  second  place,  the  report  of
1862  shows  clearly  that  the  object  of  the
committee  was  to  recommend  a  change  in
the  uniform  that  had  been  adopted  for  new
Commanderies  in  1859,  and  which  had  be¬
come  objectionable  on  account  of  the  tunic
and  cloak,  and  that  they  did  not  intend  to
refer  at  all  to  the  old  dress  of  the  old  Com¬
manderies.

In  the  report  the  committee  say :  “  The
objections  advanced  to  the  costume  adopted
at  the  last  Triennial  Conclave  of  this  Grand
Body  are  want  of  adaptation  to  the  require¬
ments  of  our  modern  Templars,  its  liability
to  injury,  and  its  expensiveness.”  Now,
who  advanced  these  objections?  Clearly,
not  the  old  Commanderies.  They  were
well  satisfied  with  the  mode  of  dress  which
they  had  received  from  their  fathers ;  and
which  was  dear  to  them  for  its  solemn
beauty  and  its  traditional  associations ;  and
the  right  to  wear  which  had  been  secured
to  them  in  1859,  with  the  understanding
that  if  they  ever  desired,  of  their  own  ac¬
cord,  to  lay  it  aside,  they  would  then  adopt,
in  its  stead,  the  regulation  dress  of  the
Grand  Encampment.  But  this  was  to  be
for  their  own  free  action.

It  was  very  evident  that  the  old  Com¬
manderies  had  never  complained  that  the
tunics  and  cloaks  were  from  their  material
expensive,  and  from  their  color  liable  to
injury.  The  old  Commanderies  did  not
use  these  expensive  and  easily  -  soiled
garments.  It  was  the  new  Commanderies
that  had  made  the  objection,  and  for  them
the  legislation  of  1862  was  undertaken.

I  hold,  therefore,  that  the  compromise
resolution  of  1859  still  remains  in  force ;
that  even  if  the  Grand  Encampment  had
the  right  to  repeal  it,  which  I  do  not  believe
it  has,  it  never  has  enacted  any  such  repeal ;
that  the  old  Commanderies  have  the  right
to  wear  the  old  black  uniform,  and  that  the
legislation  of  1862  was  intended  only  to
affect  the  new  Commanderies  which  had
been  established  since  the  year  1859,  when
the  first  dress  regulation  was  adopted.


432


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


It  would  scarcely  be  proper  to  close  this
article  on  Masonic  Templarism  without
some  reference  to  a  philological  controversy
which  has  recently  arisen  among  the  mem¬
bers  of  the  Order  in  the  United  States  in
reference  to  the  question  whether  the  proper
title  in  the  plural  is  “  Knights  Templars  ”  or
“  Knights  Templar.”  This  subject  was  first
brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Order  by
the  introduction,  in  the  session  of  the  Grand
Encampment  in  1871,  of  the  following  reso¬
lutions  by  Sir  Knight  Charles  F.  Stansbury,
of  Washington  city.

“  Resolved,  That  the  proper  title  of  the
Templar  Order  is  ‘  Knights  Templars/  and
not  ‘  Knights  Templar/  as  now  commonly
used  under  the  sanction  of  the  example  of
this  Grand  Encampment.

“  Resolved,  That  the  use  of  the  term
‘Knights  Templar’  is  an  innovation,  in
violation  of  historic  truth,  literary  usage,
and  the  philology  and  grammar  of  the
English  language.”

This  report  was  referred  to  a  committee,
who  reported  “  that  this  Grand  Encamp¬
ment  has  no  authority  to  determine  ques¬
tions  of  1  historic  truth,  literary  usage,  and
the  philology  and  grammar  of  the  English
language ;  ’  ”  and  they  asked  to  be  dis¬
charged  from  the  further  consideration  of
the  subject.  This  report  is  not  very  credit¬
able  to  the  committee,  and  puts  a  very  low
estimate  on  the  character  of  the  Grand
Encampment.  Certainly,  it  is  the  duty  of
every  body  of  men  to  inquire  whether  the
documents  issued  under  their  name  are  in
violation  of  these  principles,  and  if  so  to
correct  the  error.  If  a  private  man  habit¬
ually  writes  bad  English,  it  shows  that  he
is  illiterate;  and  the  committee  should  have
sought  to  preserve  the  Grand  Encampment
from  a  similar  charge.  It  should  have  in¬
vestigated  the  subject,  which  to  scholars  is
of  more  importance  than  they  seemed  to
consider  it;  they  should  have  defended  the
Grand  Encampment  in  the  use  of  the  term,
or  have  recommended  its  abandonment.
Moreover,  the  Grand  Recorder  reports  that
on  examination  he  finds  that  the  title
Knights  Templars  was  always  used  until
1856,  when  it  was  changed  to  Knights  Tem¬
plar;  and  the  committee  should  have  in¬
quired  by  whose  authority  the  change  was
made.  But  having  failed  to  grapple  with
the  question  of  good  English,  the  Craft
afterwards  took  the  subject  up,  and  a  long
discussion  ensued  in  the  different  Masonic
journals,  resulting  at  last  in  the  expression,
by  the  best  scholars  of  the  Order,  of  the
opinion  that  Knights  Templars  was  correct,
because  it  was  in  accordance  with  the  rules
of  good  English,  and  in  unexceptional
agreement  with  the  usage  of  all  literary
men  who  have  written  on  the  subject.


Brother  Stansbury,  in  an  article  on  this

Question  which  he  published  in  Mackey’s
National  Freemason,  (i.  191,)  has  almost
exhausted  the  subject  of  authority  and
grammatical  usage.  He  says :  “  That  it
is  an  innovation  in  violation  of  historic
truth  is  proved  by  reference  to  all  histori¬
cal  authorities.  1  have  made  diligent  re¬
searches  in  the  Congressional  Library,  and
have  invoked  the  aid  of  all  my  friends  who
were  likely  to  be  able  to  assist  me  in  such
an  investigation,  and  so  far  from  finding
any  conflict  of  authority  on  the  question,
I  have  never  been  able  to  discover  a  single
historical  authority  in  favor  of  any  other
title  than  ‘  Knights  Templars.’

“  I  refer  to  the  following  list  of  authorities :
Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Encyclopedia
Americana,  Chambers’  Encyclopedia,  Lon¬
don  Encyclopedia,  Encyclopedia  Metro-
politana,  Penny  Cyclopedia.  Cottage  Cyclo¬
pedia,  Rees’  Cyclopedia,  Wade’s  British
Chronology,  Blair’s  Chronological  Tables,
Chambers’  Miscellany  (Crusades),  Cham¬
bers’  Book  of  Days,  Addison’s  Knights
Templars,  Pantalogia,  Boutelle’s  Heraldry,
Hallam’s  Middle  Ages,  Lingard’s  History
of  England;  Glossographia  Anglicana
Nova,  1707 ;  Blackstone’s  Commentaries,
vol.  i.,  p.  406 ;  Appleton’s  Cyclopedia  of
Biography,  (Molai;)  Townsend’s  Calendar
of  Kuights,  London,  1828 ;  Mosheim’s  Ec¬
clesiastical  History,  (ed.  1832,)  vol.  ii.,  p.
481 ;  Dugdale’s  Monasticon  Anglicanum,
vol.  vi.,  p.  813;  Hayden’s  Dictionary  of
Dates;  Beeton’s  Dictionary  of  Universal
Information ;  Burne’s  Sketch  of  the  History
of  the  Knights  Templars  ;  Laurie’s  History
of  Freemasonry;  Taffe’s  History  of  Knights
of  Malta;  London  Freemasons’  Magazine;
Sutherland’s  Achievements  of  Knights  of
Malta ;  Clark’s  History  of  Knighthood ;
Ashmole’s  History  of  the  Order  of  the
Garter;  Turner’s  England  in  the  Middle
Ages;  Brande’s  Encyclopedia;  Tanner’s
Notitia  Monastica,  1744,  pp.  307-310.

“These  will,  perhaps,  suffice  to  show
what,  in  the  opinion  of  historical  authori¬
ties,  is  the  proper  title  of  the  Order.  In
all  of  them,  the  term  ‘  Knights  Templars  ’
is  the  only  one  employed.

“  They  might,  perhaps,  be  sufficient  also
on  the  question  of  literary  usage;  but  on
that  point  I  refer,  in  addition,  to  the  follow¬
ing  :

“  London  Quarterly  Review,  1829,  p.  608.
Article :  ‘  History  of  the  Knights  Tem¬
plars.’

“  Edinburgh  Review,  October,  1806,  p.
196.  Review  of  M.  Renouard’s  work,

‘  Les  Templiers.’

“Eclectic  Review,  1842,  p.  189.  Review
of  the  ‘  History  of  the  Knights  Templars,
the  Temple  Church,  and  the  Temple/  by


KNIGHT


KNIGHT


433


Chas.  G.  Addison.  The  running  title  i9
‘  History  of  the  Knights  Templars.’

“  Retrospective  Review,  1821,  vol.  iv.,  p.
250.  Review  of  the  ‘  History  of  the
Templars,’  by  Nicholas  Gaulterius,  Am¬
sterdam,  1703.  The  running  title  is  ‘  His¬
tory  of  the  Knights  Templars.’

“  In  Dr.  Mackey’s  various  Masonic  works
both  titles  are  occasionally  used ;  but  that
fact  is  fully  explained  in  the  letter  from
that  distinguished  Masonic  authority,  with
which  I  shall  conclude  this  article.”

On  the  philological  and  grammatical
question,  I  would  observe  that  it  mainly
turns  on  the  inquiry  whether  the  word
Templar  is  a  noun  or  an  adjective.  I  think
it  may  be  safely  asserted  that  every
dictionary  of  the  English  language  in
which  the  word  occurs,  gives  it  as  a  noun,
and  as  a  noun  only.  This  is  certainly  the
fact  as  tc  Johnson’s  Dictionary,  Webster’s
Dictionary,  Cole’s  Dictionary,  Crabb’s
Dictionary  (Technological),  Imperial  Dic¬
tionary,  Craig’s  Dictionary  (Universal),  and
Worcester’s  Dictionary.

If,  then,  the  word  “Templar”  is  a  noun,
we  have  in  the  combination  —  “Knights
Templar”  —  two  nouns,  referring  to  the
same  person,  one  of  which  is  in  the  plural,
and  the  other  in  the  singular.  The  well-
known  rule  of  apposition,  which  prevails
in  all  the  languages  with  which  I  am  ac¬
quainted,  requires  nouns  under  these  cir¬
cumstances  to  agree  in  number  and  case.
This  is,  in  fact,  a  principle  of  general
grammar,  founded  in  common  sense.  The
combination  “Knights  Templar”  is  there¬
fore  false  in  grammar,  if  the  word  “  Tem¬
plar”  is  a  noun.  But  some  may  say  that
it  is  a  noun  used  as  an  adjective  —  a  quali¬
fying  noun  — a  very  common  usage  in  the
English  tongue.  If  this  were  so,  the  com¬
bination  “Knights  Templar”  would  still
be  entirely  out  of  harmony  with  the  usage
of  the  language  in  regard  to  qualifying
nouns,  the  invariable  practice  being  to
place  the  adjective  noun  before  the  noun
which  it  qualifies.  A  few  familiar  ex¬
amples  will  show  this.  Take  the  following :
mansion  house,  bird  cage,  sea  fog,  dog  days,
mouse  trap,  devil  fish,  ink  stand,  and  beer
cask.  In  every  case  the  generic  word
follows  the  qualifying  noun.

But  i  f  we  even  went  to  the  length  of  admit¬
ting  the  word  “Templar”  to  be  an  adjective,
the  combination  “  Knights  Templar”  would
still  be  contrary  to  tbegenius  ofthe  language,
which,  except  in  rare  cases,  places  the  ad¬
jective  before  the  noun  which  it  qualifies.
In  poetry,  and  in  some  technical  terms  of
foreign  origin,  the  opposite  practice  prevails.

The  analogy  of  the  usage,  in  reference  to
the  designations  of  other  Orders  of  knight¬
hood,  is  also  against  the  use  of  “  Knights
3E  28


Templar.”  We  have  Knights  Commanders,
Knights  Bachelors,  Knights  Bannerets,
Knights  Baronets,  and  Knights  Hospi¬
tallers.

Against  all  this,  the  only  thing  that  can  be
pleaded  is  the  present  usage  of  the  Grand
Encampment  of  the  United  States,  and  of
some  Commanderies  which  have  followed
in  its  wake.  The  propriety  of  this  usage
is  the  very  question  at  issue ;  and  it  would
be  curious  reasoning,  indeed,  that  would
cite  the  fact  of  the  usage  in  proof  of  its
propriety.  If  the  Templars  of  to-day  are
the  successors  of  De  Molay  and  Hugh  de
Payens,  the  preservation  and  restoration  of
the  correct  title  of  the  Order  cannot  be  a
matter  of  indifference  to  them.

In  reference  to  the  varying  use  of  the  two
expressions  in  the  author’s  Lexicon  of  Free¬
masonry,  I  find,  on  reference  to  that  work,
that  in  the  first  part  I  used  the  phrase
“  Knights  Templars,”  and  that  in  the  latter
part  I  made  a  change  of  the  expression  to
“  Knights  Templar.”  I  am  unable  now  to
say  from  memory  what  led  me  to  make  the
change ;  but  I  suppose  that  I  must  have
used  the  first  form  in  compliance  with  the
general  usage  of  writers,  and  that  I  subse¬
quently  made  the  alteration  in  deference  to
the  action  of  the  Grand  Encampment  ofthe
United  States,  which  body  about  that  time
adopted  the  expression  “Knights  Templar;”
and  I  must  have  made  this  alteration  with¬
out  any  reference  to  the  philological  merits
of  the  question.

In  coming  to  the  consideration  of  the
question,  it  appears  to  me  that  it  must  be
examined  in  two  ways,  grammatically  and
traditionally :  in  other  words,  we  must  in¬
quire,  first,  which  of  these  two  expressions
better  accords  with  the  rules  of  English
grammar ;  and,  secondly,  which  of  them
has  the  support  and  authority  of  the  best
English  writers.

1.  If  we  examine  the  subject  grammati¬
cally,  we  shall  find  that  its  proper  decision
depends  simply  on  the  question:  Is  “Tem¬
plar  ”  a  noun  or  an  adjective?  If  it  is  an
adjective,  then  “Knights  Templar”  is
correct,  because  adjectives  in  English  have
no  plural  form.  It  would,  however,  be  an
awkward  and  unusual  phraseology,  because
it  is  the  almost  invariable  rule  ofthe  Eng¬
lish  language  that  the  adjective  should  pre¬
cede  and  not  follow  the  substantive  which
it  qualifies.

But  if  “Templar”  is  a  substantive  or
noun,  then,  clearly,  “Knights  Templar”
is  an  ungrammatical  phrase,  because  “  Tem¬
plar"  would  then  be  in  apposition  with
“  Knights,"  and  should  be  in  the  same  regi¬
men;  that  is  to  say,  two  nouns  coming  to¬
gether,  and  referring  to  the  same  person  or
thing,  being  thus  said  to  be  in  apposition,


434


KNIGHT


KONX


must  agree  in  number  and  case.  Thus  we
say  King  George  or  Duke  William ,  wheu
King  and  George,  and  Duke  and  William
are  in  apposition  and  in  the  singular;  but
speaking  of  Thackeray’s  “Four  Georges,”
and  intending  to  designate  who  they  were
by  an  explanatory  noun  in  apposition,  we
should  put  both  nouns  in  the  plural,  and
say  “  the  four  Georges,  Kings  of  England.”
So  when  we  wish  to  designate  a  simple
Knight,  who  is  not  only'  a  Knight,  but  al¬
so  belongs  to  that  branch  of  the  Order
which  is  known  as  Templars,  we  should
call  him  a  “  Knight  Templar  ;  ”  and  if  there
be  two  or  more  of  these  Templars,  we
should  call  them  “  Knights  Templars,”
just  as  we  say  “  Knight  Hospitaller”  and
“  Knights  Hospitallers.”

Now  there  is  abundant  evidence,  in  the
best  works  on  the  subject,  of  the  use  of  the
word  “Templar”  as  a  substantive,  and
none  of  its  use  as  an  adjective.

It  would  be  tedious  to  cite  authorities,
but  a  reference  to  our  best  Euglish  writers
will  show  the  constant  employment  of
“Templar”  as  a  substantive  only.  The
analogy  of  the  Latin  and  French  languages
supports  this  view,  for  “Templarius”  is  a
noun  in  Latin,  as  “  Tempiier  ”  is  in  French.

2.  As  to  traditional  authority,  the  usage
of  good  writers,  which  is  the  “  jus  et  norma
loquendi,”  is  altogether  in  favor  of  “  Knights
Templars,”  and  not  “  Knights  Templar.”

In  addition  to  the  very  numerous  au¬
thorities  collected  by  Brother  Stansbury
from  the  shelves  of  the  Congressional  Li¬
brary,  I  have  collated  all  the  authorities  in
my  own  library.

All  the  English  and  American  writers,
Masonic  and  unmasonic,  except  some  recent
American  ones,  use  the  plural  of  Templar
to  designate  more  than  one  Knight.  I  have
in  a  few  instances  found  “Knight  Tem¬
plars,”  but  never  “  Knights  Templar.”
The  very  recent  American  use  of  this  lat¬
ter  phrase  is  derived  from  the  authority  of
the  present  Constitution  of  the  Grand  En¬
campment  of  the  United  States,  and  is
therefore  the  very  point  in  controversy.
The  former  Constitution  used  the  phrase
“  Knights  Templars.”  On  the  whole,  I  am
satisfied  that  the  expression  “  Knights  Tem¬
plar  ”  is  a  violation  both  of  the  grammat¬
ical  laws  of  our  language  and  of  the  usage
of  our  best  writers  on  both  sides  of  the  At¬
lantic,  and  it  should  therefore,  I  thiuk,  be
abandoned.

Kniglit,  Victorious.  ( Chevalier
Yiclorienx.)  A  degree  contained  in  the  col¬
lection  of  H6cart.

Knowledge.  In  the  dualism  of  Ma¬
sonry,  knowledge  is  symbolized  by  light,  as
ignorance  is  by  darkness.  To  be  initiated,
to  receive  light  is  to  acquire  knowledge ;


and  the  cry  of  the  neophyte  for  light  is  the
natural  aspiration  of  the  soul  for  knowledge.

Knowledge,  I>egrees  of.  See
Degrees  of  Knowledge.

Koiix  Ompax.  There  is  hardly  any¬
thing  that  has  been  more  puzzling  to  the
learned  than  the  meaning  and  use  of  these
two  apparently  barbarous  words.  Bishop
Warburton  says,  ( Div .  Leg.,  I.,  ii.  4,)  but
without  giving  his  authority,  that  in  the
celebration  of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,
“the  assembly  was  dismissed  with  these
two  barbarous  words,  KOrH  OMIIAH;”
and  he  thinks  that  this  “shows  the  Mys¬
teries  not  to  have  been  originally  Greek.”
Le  Clerc  [Bib.  Univ.,  vi.  86,)  thinks  that
the  words  seem  to  be  only  an  incorrect  pro¬
nunciation  of  hots  and  omphets,  which,  he
says,  signify  in  the  Phoenician  language,
“  watch,  and  abstain  from  evil.”  Potter
also  [Gr.  Ant.,  346,)  says  that  the  words
were  used  in  the  Eleusinian  mysteries.

The  words  occur  in  none  of  the  old
Greek  lexicons,  except  that  of  Hesychius,
where  they  are  thus  defined :

“  Kdyf  o//iraf.  An  acclamation  used  hy
those  who  have  finished  anything.  It  is
also  the  sound  of  the  judge’s  ballots  and
of  the  clepsydra.  The  Athenians  used  the
word  blops.”

The  words  were  always  deemed  inexpli¬
cable  until  1797,  when  Captain  Wilford
offered,  in  the  Asiatic  Besearches,  (vol.  v.,
p.  300,)  the  following  explanation.  He
there  says  that  the  real  words  are  Candsha
Om  Pacsha ;  that  they  are  pure  Sanscrit ;
and  are  used  to  this  day  by  the  Brahmans
at  the  conclusion  of  their  religious  rites.
Candsha  signifies  the  object  of  our  most
ardent  wishes.  Om  is  the  famous  monosyl¬
lable  used  both  at  the  beginning  and  con¬
clusion  of  a  prayer  or  religious  rite,  like  our
word  Amen.  Pacsha  exactly’  answers  to
the  obsolete  Latin  word  vix ;  it  signifies
change,  course,  stead,  place,  turn  of  work,
duty,  fortune,  etc.,  and  is  particularly  used
in  pouring  water  in  honor  of  the  gods.

Uwaroff  (Ess.  sur  les  Myst.  <T Elens. )  calls
this  “the  most  important  of  modern  dis¬
coveries.”  Creuzer,  Schelling,  and  Miinter
also  approve  of  it.

Not  so  with  Loheck, who,  in  his  Aglaopha-
mus,  (p.  775,)  denies  not  only  that  such
words  were  used  in  the  Eleusinian  myste¬
ries,  but  the  very  existence  of  the  words
themselves.  He  say’s  that  in  the  title  of
the  article  in  Hesychius  there  is  a  mis¬
print.  Instead  of  'ou-a%,  it  should  be
s6yi  6p.  ?rdf,  where  op  is  the  usual  abbrevi¬
ation  of  bpoius,  like  or  similar  to;  so  that
the  true  reading  would  be  koj !■  opoiuc  ira!-,  or
honx,  like  pax ;  and  he  confirms  this  by  re¬
ferring  to  -a%,  to  which  Hesychius  gives  the
same  meaning  as  he  does  to  Koyf.  This  is


KORAN


KRAUSE


435


too  simple  for  Godfrey  Higgins,  who  calls
it  ( Anacal i.  253,)  “a  pretended  emenda¬
tion.”  It  is  nevertheless  very  ingenious,
and  is  calculated  to  shake  our  belief  that
these  words  were  ever  used  in  the  Eleusin-
ian  rites,  notwithstanding  the  learned  au¬
thority  of  Meursius,  Warburton,  Lempriere,
Creuzer,  Uwaroff,  and  others.

Koran.  The  sacred  book  of  the  Mo¬
hammedans,  and  believed  by  them  to  con¬
tain  a  record  of  the  revelations  made  by
God  to  Mohammed,  and  afterwards  dic¬
tated  by  him  to  an  amanuensis,  since  the
prophet  could  neither  read  nor  write.  In
a  Lodge  consisting  wholly  of  Mohamme¬
dans,  the  Koran  would  be  esteemed  as  the
Book  of  the  Law,  and  take  the  place  on  the
altar  which  is  occupied  in  Christian  Lodges
by  the  Bible.  It  would  thus  become  the
symbol  to  them  of  the  Tracing-Board  of
the  Divine  Architect.  But,  unlike  the  Old
and  New  Testaments,  the  Koran  has  no
connection  with,  and  gives  no  support  to,
any  of  the  Masonic  legends  or  symbols,  ex¬
cept  in  those  parts  which  were  plagiarized
by  the  prophet  from  the  Jewish  and  Chris¬
tian  Scriptures.  Finch,  however,  in  one  of
his  apocryphal  works,  produced  a  system
of  Mohammedan  Masonry,  consisting  of
twelve  degrees,  founded  on  the  teachings
of  the  Korau,  and  the  Hadeescs  or  tradi¬
tions  of  the  prophet.  This  system  was  a
pure  invention  of  Finch.

Krause.  Carl  Christian  Frie-
dcricli.  One  of  the  most  learned  and
laborious  Masons  of  Germany,  and  one  who
received  the  smallest  reward  and  the  largest
persecution  for  his  learning  and  his  labors.
The  record  of  his  life  reflects  but  little
credit  on  his  contemporaries  who  were
high  in  office,  but  it  would  seem  low  in  in¬
tellect.  Findel  calls  them  “the  antiquated
German  Masonic  world.”  Dr.  Krause
was  born  at  Eisenberg,  a  small  city  of  Al-
tenberg,  May  6, 1781.  He  was  educated  at
Jena,  where  he  enjoyed  the  instructions  of
Reinhold,  Fichte,  and  Schelling.  While
making  theology  his  chief  study,  he  de¬
voted  his  attention  at  the  same  time  to
philosophy  and  mathematics.  In  1801,  he
obtained  his  degree  as  Doctor  of  Philos¬
ophy,  and  established  himself  at  the  Uni¬
versity  of  Jena  as  an  extraordinary  professor.
There  he  remained  until  1805,  marrying  in
the  meantime  a  lady  of  the  name  of  Fuchs,
with  whom  he  passed  thirty  years,  leaving
as  the  fruit  of  his  union  eight  sons  and
five  daughters.

In  1805,  Krause  removed  to  Dresden,  and
remained  there  until  1813.  In  April,  1805,
he  was  initiated  into  Freemasonry  in  the
Lodge  “  Archimides.”  As  soon  as  he  had
been  initiated,  lie  commenced  the  study  of
the  Institution  by  the  reading  of  every  Ma¬


sonic  work  that  was  accessible.  It  was  at
this  time  that  Krause  adopted  his  peculiar
system  of  philosophy,  which  was  founded
on  the  theory  that  the  collective  life  of
man — that  is  to  say,  of  humanity — was  an
organic  and  harmonious  unity;  aud  he  con¬
ceived  the  scheme  of  h  formal  union  of  the
whole  race  of  mankind  into  one  confed¬
eracy,  embracing  all  partial  unions  of
church  organizations,  of  State  government,
and  of  private,  social  aggregations,  into  one
general  confederation,  which  should  labor,
irrespective  of  political,  ecclesiastical,  or
personal  influences,  for  the  universal  and
uniform  culture  of  mankind.  Of  such  a
confederation  he  supposed  that  he  could
see  the  germ  in  the  Order  of  Freemasonry,
which,  therefore,  it  was  his  object  to  ele¬
vate  to  that  position.

He  first  submitted  these  views  in  a  series
of  lectures  delivered  before  the  Lodge  “Zu
den  drei  Schwertern”  in  Dresden,  of
which  he  had  been  appointed  the  Orator.
They  were  received  with  much  approba¬
tion,  and  were  published  in  1811  under  the
title  of  the  Spiritualization  of  the  Genuine
Symbols  of  Freemasonry.  In  these  lectures,
Krause  has  not  confined  himself  to  the  re¬
ceived  rituals  and  accustomed  interpreta¬
tions,  but  has  adopted  a  system  of  his  own.
This  is  the  course  that  was  pursued  by
him  in  his  greater  work,  the  Kunsturkun-
den  ;  and  it  was  this  which  partly  gave  so
much  offence  to  his  Masonic,  but  not  his
intellectual,  superiors.  In  1810,  he  pub¬
lished,  as  the  result  of  all  his  labors  and  re¬
searches,  his  greatest  work,  the  one  on
which  his  reputation  principally  depends,
and  which,  notwithstanding  its  errors,  is
perhaps  one  of  the  most  learned  works  that
ever  issued  from  the  Masonic  press.  Thi3
is  Die  drei  altesten  Kunsturkunden  der  Frei-
maurerbrudcrschaft,  or  “  The  Three  Oldest
Professional  Documents  of  the  Brotherhood
of  Freemasons.”

The  announcement  that  this  work  was
shortly  to  appear,  produced  the  greatest  ex¬
citement  in  the  Masonic  circles  of  Germany.
The  progressive  members  of  the  Craft
looked  with  anxious  expectation  for  the
new  discoveries  which  must  result  from  the
investigations  of  an  enlightened  mind.
The  antiquated  and  unprogressive  Masons,
who  were  opposed  to  all  discussion  of  what
they  deemed  esoteric  subjects,  dreaded  the
effects  of  such  a  work  on  the  exclusiveness
of  the  Order.  Hence  attempts  were  made
by  these  latter  to  suppress  the  publication.
So  far  were  these  efforts  carried,  that  one
of  the  German  Grand  Lodges  offered  the
author  a  large  amount  of  money  for  his
book,  which  proposal  was  of  course  re¬
jected.  After  the  publication,  the  Grand
Master  of  the  three  Grand  Lodges  sought


436


KRAUSE


KUM


every  means  of  excommunicating  Krause
and  Mossdorf,  who  had  sustained  him  in
his  views.  After  much  angry  discussion,
the  Dresden  Lodge,  “  Zu  den  drei  Schwer-
tern,”  was  prevailed  upon  to  act  as  execu¬
tioner  of  this  ignorant  spirit  of  fanaticism,
and  Krause  and  Mossdorf,  two  of  the
rcatest  lights  that  ever  burst  upon  the
orizon  of  Masonic  literature,  were  excom¬
municated.  Nor  did  the  persecution  here
cease.  Krause  experienced  its  effects
through  all  the  remaining  years  of  his  life.
He  was  prevented  on  frequent  occasions,  by
the  machinations  of  his  Masonic  enemies,
from  advancement  in  his  literary  and  pro¬
fessional  pursuits,  and  failed  through  their
influence  to  obtain  professorships  to  which,
from  his  learning  and  services,  he  was
justly  entitled.  Findel  has  approvingly
uoted  Dr.  Schauberg  as  calling  this  “  the
arkest  page  in  the  history  of  German
Freemasonry.”

In  1814,  Krause  removed  to  Berlin.  In
1821  he  travelled  through  Germany,  Italy,
and  France,  and  in  1823  established  him¬
self  at  Gottingen,  where  he  gave  lectures  on
philosophy  until  1830.  He  then  removed
to  Munich,  where  he  died  September  27,
1832.  Besides  his  contributions  to  Free¬
masonry,  Krause  was  an  extensive  writer
on  philosophical  subjects.  His  most  im¬
portant  works  are  his  Lectures  on  the  System
of  Philosophy,  1828,  and  his  Lectures  on  the
Fundamental  Truths  of  Science,  1829;  both
published  at  Gottingen.

His  great  work,  however,  to  which  he
owes  his  Masonic  fame,  is  his  Kunsturkun-
den.  He  commences  this  work  by  a  decla¬
ration  of  his  design  in  writing  it,  which  was
twofold :  first,  to  enlighten  the  brotherhood
in  reference  to  the  three  oldest  documents
in  possession  of  the  Craft,  by  a  philological
and  philosophical  examination  of  these
records;  and  secondly,  and  with  a  higher
purpose,  to  call  their  attention  to  a  clear
perception  of  the  fundamental  idea  of  a
general  union  of  mankind,  to  be  accom¬
plished  by  a  reorganization  of  their  own  bro-


!  therhood.  To  the  rituals  of  the  present  day
'  he  objected  as  wanting  in  scientific  formula,
and  he  thought  that  out  of  these  old  records
they  might  well  construct  a  better  and  more
practical  system.

But  with  all  his  learning,  while  his  ideas
of  reform,  if  properly  carried  out,  would
undoubtedly  advance  and  elevate  the  Ma¬
sonic  institution,  he  committed  grave  errors
in  his  estimation  of  the  documents  that  he
has  made  the  groundwork  of  his  system.

The  three  documents  which  he  has  pre¬
sented  as  the  oldest  and  most  authentic  rec¬
ords  of  the  Fraternity  are:  1.  The  well-
known  Leland  Manuscript,  a  document  of
whose  authenticity  there  are  the  gravest
doubts ;  2.  The  Entered  Apprentice's  Lecture,
a  document  published  early  in  the  eigh¬
teenth  century,  to  which,  in  his  second  edi¬
tion,  he  has  added  what  he  calls  the  New
English  Lecture;  but  it  is  now  known  that
Krause’s  Lecture  is  by  no  means  the  oldest
catechism  extant ;  and  3.  The  York  Con¬
stitution,  which,  claiming  the  date  of  926,
has  been  recently  suspected  to  be  not  older
than  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury.

Notwithstanding  these  assumptions  of
authenticity  for  documents  not  really  au¬
thentic,  the  vast  learning  of  the  author  is
worthy  of  all  admiration.  His  pages  are
filled  with  important  facts  and  suggestive
thoughts  that  cannot  fail  to  exert  an  influ¬
ence  on  all  Masonic  investigations.  Krause
cannot  but  be  considered  as  one  of  the
founders  of  a  new  Masonic  literature,  not
for  Germany  alone,  but  for  the  whole  world
of  Masonic  students.

Kuin.  Kiri.  These  two  words,  pro¬
nounced  koom  and  keevy,  are  found  as  cere¬
monial  words  in  one  of  the  high  degrees.
They  are  from  the  Hebrew,  and  are  inter¬
preted  as  meaning  arise  !  and  kneel!  They
are  not  significant  words,  having  no  sym¬
bolic  allusion,  and  seem  to  have  been  intro¬
duced  merely  to  mark  the  Jewish  origin  of
the  degree  in  which  they  are  employed.  In
the  modern  rituals  they  are  disused.


LAB ARUM


LABORERS


437


L.


Labarnm.  The  monogram  of  the
name  of  Christ,  formed  by  the  first  two  let¬
ters  of  that  name,  XPI2T0Z,  in  Greek.  It
is  the  celebrated  sign  which  the
legend  says  appeared  in  the  sky  at
noonday  to  the  Emperor  Constan¬
tine,  and  which  was  afterwards
placed  by  him  upon  his  standard.

Hence  it  is  sometimes  called  the
Cross  of  Constantine.  It  was  adopted  as  a
symbol  by  the  early  Christians,  and  frequent
instances  of  it  are  to  be  found  in  the  cata¬
combs.  According  to  Eusebius,  the  Laba-
rum  was  surrounded  by  the  motto  EN  T0YTS2
NIKA,  or  “conquer  by  this,”  which  has
been  Latinized  into  In  hoc  signo  vinces,  the
motto  assumed  by  the  Masonic  Knights
Templars.  The  derivation  of  the  word
Labarum  is  uncertain.  See  In  hoc  signo
vinces.

Labor.  It  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful
features  of  the  Masonic  institution,  that  it
teaches  not  only  the  necessity,  but  the  no¬
bility  of  labor.  From  the  time  of  opening
to  that  of  closing,  a  Lodge  is  said  to  be  at
labor.  This  is  but  one  of  the  numerous  in¬
stances  in  which  the  terms  of  Operative
Masonry  are  symbolically  applied  to  Spec¬
ulative  ;  for,  as  the  Operative  Masons  were
engaged  in  the  building  of  material  edifices,
so  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  are  supposed
to  be  employed  in  the  erection  of  a  super¬
structure  of  virtue  and  morality  upon  the
foundation  of  the  Masonic  principles  which
they  were  taught  at  their  admission  into  the
Order.  When  the  Lodge  is  engaged  in  read¬
ing  petitions,  hearing  reports,  debating
financial  matters,  etc.,  it  is  said  to  be  occu¬
pied  in  business ;  but  when  it  is  engaged  in
the  form  and  ceremony  of  initiation  into
any  of  the  degrees,  it  is  said  to  be  at  work.
Initiation  is  Masonic  labor.  This  phrase¬
ology  at  once  suggests  the  connection  of  our
speculative  system  with  an  operative  art  that
preceded  it,  and  upon  which  it  has  been
founded.

“  Labor,”  says Gadicke,  “  is  an  important
word  in  Masonry;  indeed,  we  might  say
the  most  important.  For  this,  and  this
alone,  does  a  man  become  a  Freemason.
Every  other  object  is  secondary  or  inciden¬
tal.  Labor  is  the  accustomed  design  of
every  Lodge  meeting.  But  does  such  meet¬
ings  always  furnish  evidence  of  industry?
The  labor  of  an  Operative  Mason  will  be
visible,  and  he  will  receive  his  reward  fqr
it,  even  though  the  building  he  has  con¬
structed  may,  in  the  next  hour,  be  over¬
thrown  by  a  tempest.  He  knows  that  he
has  done  his  labor.  And  so  must  the  Free¬
mason  labor.  His  labor  must  be  visible  to


himself  and  to  his  brethren,  or,  at  least,  it
must  conduce  to  his  own  internal  satisfac¬
tion.  As  we  build  neither  a  visible  Solo¬
monic  Temple  nor  an  Egyptian  pyramid,
our  industry  must  become  visible  in  works
that  are  imperishable,  so  that  when  we
vanish  from  the  eyes  of  mortals  it  may  be
said  of  us  that  our  labor  was  well  done.”
As  Masons,  we  labor  in  our  Lodge  to  make
ourselves  a  perfect  building,  without  blem¬
ish,  working  hopefully  for  the  consumma¬
tion,  when  the  house  of  our  earthly  taber¬
nacle  shall  be  finished,  when  the  lost
word  of  divine  truth  shall  at  last  be  dis¬
covered,  and  when  we  shall  be  found  by
our  own  efforts  at  perfection  to  have  done
God  service.

Laborare  est  orare.  To  labor  is  to
pray ;  or,  in  other  words,  labor  is  worship.
This  was  a  saying  of  the  Mediaeval  monks,
which  is  well  worth  meditation.  This  doc¬
trine,  that  labor  is  worship,  has  been  ad¬
vanced  and  maintained,  from  time  im¬
memorial,  as  a  leading  dogma  of  the  Order
of  Freemasonry.  There  is  no  other  human
institution  under  the  sun  which  has  set
forth  this  great  principle  in  such  bold  re¬
lief.  We  hear  constantly  of  Freemasonry
as  an  institution  that  inculcates  morality,
that  fosters  the  social  feeling,  that  teaches
brotherly  love  ;  and  all  this  is  well,  because
it  is  true ;  but  we  must  never  forget  that
from  its  foundation-stone  to  its  pinnacle,
all  over  its  vast  temple,  is  inscribed,  in
symbols  of  living  light,  the  great  truth  that
labor  is  worship.

Laborers,  Statutes  of.  Towards  the
middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  a  plague
of  excessive  virulence,  known  in  history
as  the  Black  Death,  invaded  Europe,  and
swept  off  fully  one-half  of  the  inhabitants.
The  death  of  so  many  workmen  had  the
effect  of  advancing  the  price  of  all  kinds
of  labor  to  double  the  former  rate.  In
England,  the  Parliament,  in  1350,  enacted
a  statute,  which  was  soon  followed  by
others,  the  object  of  which  was  to  regulate
the  rate  of  wages  and  the  price  of  the  neces¬
saries  of  life.  Against  these  enactments,
which  were  called  the  Statutes  of  Laborers,  1
the  artisans  of  all  kinds  rebelled ;  but  the
most  active  opposition  was  found  among
the  Masons,  whose  organization,  being
better  regulated,  was  more  effective.  In
1360,  statutes  were  passed  forbidding  their
“congregations,  chapters,  regulations,  and
oaths,”  which  were  from  time  to  time  re¬
peated,  until  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of
Henry  VI.,  A.  n.  1425,  when  the  celebrated
statute  entitled  “Masons  shall  not  confed¬
erate  themselves  in  chapters  and  congre-


438


LABORERS


LADDER


gations,”  was  enacted  in  the  following
words :

“  Whereas,  by  yearly  congregations  and
confederacies,  made  by  the  Masons  in  their
General  Assemblies,  the  good  course  and
effect  of  the  Statutes  for  Laborers  be  openly
violated  and  broken,  in  subversion  of  the
law,  and  to  the  great  damage  of  all  the
Commons,  our  said  sovereign  lord  the
king,  willing  in  this  case  to  provide  a
remedy,  by  the  advice  and  assent  aforesaid,
and  at  the  special  request  of  the  Commons,
hath  ordained  and  established  that  such
chapters  and  congregations  shall  not  be
hereafter  holden ;  and  if  any  such  be  made,
they  that  cause  such  chapters  and  congre¬
gations  to  be  assembled  and  holden,  if  they
thereof  be  convict,  shall  be  judged  for
felons,  and  that  the  other  Masons  that
come  to  such  chapters  and  congregations
be  punished  by  imprisonment  of  their
bodies,  and  make  fine  and  ransom  at  the
king’s  will.”

Fiudel  [HiM.,  p.  94,)  thus  explains  the
causes  which  led  to  the  enactment  of  this
law.  Henry  VI.  being  then  but  four  years
old,  Gloucester  and  the  Bishop  of  Winches¬
ter  were  both  contending  for  the  possession
of  the  government;  the  former  was  a  great
patron  and  encourager  of  the  Masons,  who
naturally,  therefore,  took  part  with  him  in
the  political  contest,  and  opposed,  with
actual  violence,  the  entrance  of  the  Bishop
into  the  city  of  London.  On  the  arrival  of
,  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  who  was  the  Regent
of  France,  and  to  whom  the  dispute  had
been  referred,  a  Parliament  was  convened,
and  which,  for  the  reason  already  assigned,
(see  Bat  Parliament,)  has  been  known  in
history  as  the  “  Bat  Parliament.”  The
Bishop,  not  forgetting  the  assistance  given
by  the  Masons  to  his  opponent,  succeeded
in  obtaining  the  passage  of  this  law,
which  was  to  restrain  the  meetings  of  his
old  enemies.  But  the  influence  of  the
Duke  of  Gloucester  prevented  its  enforce¬
ment  during  the  king’s  minority  ;  and  An¬
derson  tells  us  that  the  king,  when  he  ar¬
rived  to  man’s  estate,  became  the  encourager
and  patron  of  the  Masons.  So  that,  accord¬
ing  to  the  same  authority,  the  law  has
always  existed  as  a  dead  letter  on  the
statute-book,  and  the  Freemasons  have
never  considered  it  worth  while  to  use  their
influence  for  its  repeal.

All  the  Statutes  of  Laborers  were  repealed
in  the  fifth  year  of  Elizabeth ;  and  Lord
Coke  gave  the  opinion  that  this  act  of
Henry  VI.  became,  in  consequence,  “  of  no
force  or  effect;  ”  a  decision  which  led  An¬
derson,  very  absurdly,  to  suppose  that
“  this  most  learned  judge  really  belonged
to  the  ancient  Lodge,  and  was  a  faithful
brother ;  ”  as  if  it  required  a  judge  to  be  a


Mason  to  give  a  just  judgment  concerning
the  interests  of  Masonry.

Laconic.  The  Count  of  Clermont,
who  was  Grand  Master  of  France,  having
abandoned  all  care  of  the  French  Lodges,
left  them  to  the  direction  of  his  Deputies.
In  1761,  he  appointed  one  Lacorne,  a  danc¬
ing  -  master,  his  Deputy ;  but  the  Grand
Lodge,  indignant  at  the  appointment,  re¬
fused  to  sanction  it  or  to  recognize  Lacorne
as  a  presiding  officer.  He  accordingly  con¬
stituted  another  Grand  Lodge,  and  was  sup¬
ported  by  adherents  of  his  own  character,
who  were  designated  by  the  more  respecta¬
ble  Masons  as  the  “  Lacorne  faction.”  In
1762,  the  Count  of  Clermont,  influenced  by
the  representations  that  were  made  to  him,
revoked  the  commission  of  Lacorne,  and
appointed  M.  Chailous  de  Joinvillehis  Sub¬
stitute  General.  In  consequence  of  this,
the  two  rival  Grand  Lodges  became  recon¬
ciled,  and  a  union  was  effected  on  the  24th
of  June,  1762.  But  the  reconciliation  did
not  prove  altogether  satisfactory.  In  1765,
at  the  annual  election,  neither  Lacorne  nor
any  of  his  associates  were  chosen  to  office.
They  became  disgusted,  and,  retiring  from
the  Grand  Lodge,  issued  a  scandalous  pro¬
test,  for  which  they  were  expelled ;  and  sub¬
sequently  they  organized  a  spurious  Grand
Lodge  and  chartered  several  Lodges.  But
from  this  time  Lacorne  ceased  to  have  a
place  in  regular  Masonry,  although  the
dissensions  first  begun  by  him  ultimately
gave  rise  to  the  Grand  Orient  as  the  suc¬
cessor  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

Ladder.  A  symbol  of  progressive  ad¬
vancement  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  sphere,
w'hich  is  common  to  Masonry  and  to  many,
if  not  all,  of  the  Ancient  Mysteries.  In
each,  generally,  as  in  Masonry,  the  number
of  steps  was  seven.  See  Jacob’s  Ladder.

Ladder,  Bralnnanieal.  The  sym¬
bolic  ladder  used  in  the  mysteries  of  Brah¬
ma.  It  had  seven  steps,  symbolic  of  the
seven  worlds  of  the  Indian  universe.  The
lowest  was  the  Earth;  the  second,  the
World  of  Re-existence ;  the  third,  Heaven  ;
the  fourth,  the  Middle  World,  or  interme¬
diate  region  between  the  lower  and  the
upper  worlds;  the  fifth,  the  World  of  Births,
in  which  souls  are  born  again ;  the  sixth,
the  Mansion  of  the  Blessed;  and  the
seventh,  or  topmost  round,  the  Sphere  of
Truth,  the  abode  of  Brahma,  who  was  him¬
self  a  symbol  of  the  sun.

Ladder,  Jacob's.  See  Jacob’s  Lad¬
der.

Ladder,  Itabbalistic.  The  ladder

(tf  the  Kabbalists  consisted  of  the  ten  Se-
phiroths  or  emanations  of  Deity.  The
steps  were  in  an  ascending  series,  —  the
Kingdom,  Foundation.  Splendor,  Firm¬
ness,  Beauty,  Justice,  Mercy,  Intelligence,


LADDER


LANDMARKS


439


Wisdom,  and  the  Crown.  This  ladder
formed  the  exception  to  the  usual  number
of  seven  steps  or  rounds.

Ladder,  Mithraitic.  The  symbolic
ladder  used  in  the  Persian  mysteries  of
Mithras.  It  had  seven  steps,  symbolic  of
the  seven  planets  and  the  seven  metals.
Thus,  beginning  at  the  bottom,  we  have  Sat¬
urn  represented  by  lead,  Venus  by  tin,  Ju¬
piter  by  brass,  Mercury  by  iron,  Mars  by  a
mixed  metal,  the  Moon  by  silver,  and  the
Sun  by  gold  ;  the  whole  being  a  symbol  of
the  sidereal  progress  of  the  sun  through  the
universe.

Ladder  of  K.adosli.  This  ladder,
belonging  to  the  high  degrees  of  Masonry,
consists  of  the  seven  following  steps,  be¬
ginning  at  the  bottom:  Justice,  Equity,
Kindliness,  Good  Faith,  Labor,  Patience,
and  Intelligence  or  Wisdom.  Its  supports
are  love  of  God  and  love  of  our  neighbor,
and  their  totality  constitute  a  symbolism
of  the  devoir  of  Knighthood  and  Masonry,
the  fulfilment  of  which  is  necessary  to
make  a  Perfect  Knight  and  Perfect  Mason.

Ladder,  Rosierucian.  Among
the  symbols  of  the  Rosicrucians  is  a  ladder
of  seven  steps  standing  on  a  globe  of  the
earth,  with  an  open  Bible,  square,  and  com¬
passes  resting  on  the  top.  Between  each
of  the  steps  is  one  of  the  following  letters,
beginning  from  the  bottom :  I.  N.  R.  I.  F.
S.  C.,  beinsr  the  initials  of  Iesus,  Nazarenus,
Rex,  Iudseorum,  Fides,  Spes,  Caritas.  But
a  more  recondite  meaning  is  sometimes
given  to  the  first  four  letters.

Ladder,  Scandinavian.  The  sym¬
bolic  ladder  used  in  the  Gothic  mysteries.
Dr.  Oliver  refers  it  to  the  Yggrasil,  or
sacred  ash -tree.  But  the  symbolism  is
either  very  abstruse  or  very  doubtful.  It
retains,  however,  the  idea  of  an  ascent  from
a  lower  to  a  higher  sphere,  which  was  com¬
mon  to  all  the  mystical  ladder  systems.
At  its  root  lies  the  dragon  of  death ;  at  its
top  are  the  eagle  and  hawk,  the  symbols
of  life.

Ladder,  Theological.  The  sym¬
bolic  ladder  of  the  Masonic  mysteries.  It
refers  to  the  ladder  seen  by  Jacob  in  his
vision,  and  consists,  like  all  symbolical
ladders,  of  seven  rounds,  alluding  to  the
four  cardinal  and  the  three  theological
virtues.  See  Jacob's  Ladder.

Ladrian.  A  corruption  of  Edwin.
It  occurs  in  the  Sloane  MS.,  “  hee  [  Athel-
stane]  had  a  sonne  y'  was  named  Ladrian.”

Lady.  In  the  androgynous  Lodges  of
Adoption,  where  the  male  members  are
called  Knights,  the  female  members  are
called  Ladies ;  as,  the  Knights  and  Ladies  of
the  Rose.  The  French  use  the  word  Dame.

Lalamle.  See  De  la  Lande.

Lamb.  In  ancient  Craft  Masonry  the


lamb  is  the  symbol  of  innocence ;  thus  in
the  ritual  of  the  first  degree:  “  In  all  ages
the  lamb  has  been  deemed  an  emblem  of
innocence.”  Hence  it  is  required  that  a
Mason’s  apron  should  be  made  of  lamb¬
skin.  In  the  high  degrees,  and  in  the  de¬
grees  of  chivalry,  as  in  Christian  iconog¬
raphy,  the  lamb  is  a  symbol  of  Jesus
Christ.  The  introduction  of  this  Christian
symbolism  of  the  lamb  comes  from  the  ex¬
pression  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  who  ex¬
claimed,  on  seeing  Jesus,  “  Behold  the
Lamb  of  God ;  ”  which  was  undoubtedly
derived  from  the  prophetic  writers,  who
compare  the  Messiah  suffering  on  the  cross
to  a  lamb  under  the  knife  of  a  butcher.
In  the  vision  of  St.  John,  in  the  Apocalypse,
Christ  is  seen,  under  the  form  of  a  lamb,
wounded  in  the  throat,  and  opening  the
book  with  the  seven  seals.  Hence,  in  one
of  the  degrees  of  the  Scottish  Rite,  the
seventeenth,  or  Knight  of  the  East  and
West,  the  lamb  lying  on  the  book  with  the
seven  seals  is  a  part  of  the  jewel.

Lamb  of  God.  See  Lamb,  Paschal.

Lamb,  Paschal.  The  paschal  lamb
sometimes  called  the  Holy  Lamb,  was  thh
lamb  offered  up  by  the  Jews  at  the  paschal
feast.  This  has  been  transferred  to  Chris¬
tian  symbolism,  and  naturally  to  chivalrie
Masonry;  and  hence  we  find  it  among  the
symbols  of  modern  Templarism.  The  pas¬
chal  lamb,  as  a  Christian  and  Masonic
symbol,  called  also  the  Agnus  Dei,  or  the
Lamb  of  God,  first  appeared  in  Christian
art  after  the  sixth  century.  It  is  depicted
as  a  lamb  standing  on  the  ground,  holding
by  the  left  forefoot  a  banner,  on  which  a
Cross  is  inscribed.  This  paschal  lamb,  or
Lamb  of  God,  has  been  adopted  as  a  symbol
by  the  Knights  Templars,  being  borne  in
one  of  the  banners  of  the  Order,  and  con¬
stituting,  with  the  square  which  it  sur¬
mounts,  the  jewel  of  the  Generalissimo  of
a  Commandery.  The  lamb  is  a  symbol  of
Christ;  the  cross,  of  his  passion;  and  the
banner,  of  his  victory  over  death  and  hell.
Mr.  Barrington  states  (Archceologia,  ix.  134,)
that  in  a  deed  of  the  English  Knights  Tem¬
plars,  granting  lands  in  Cambridgeshire,
the  seal  is  a  Holy  Lamb,  and  the  arms  of
the  Master  of  the  Temple  at  London  were
argent,  a  cross  gules,  and  on  the  nombril
point  thereof  a  Holy  Lamb,  that  is,  a  pas¬
chal  or  Holy  Lamb  on  the  centre  of  a  red
cross  in  a  white  field.

Lambskin  Apron.  See  Apron.

Landmarks.  In  ancient  times,  it
was  the  custom  to  mark  the  boundaries  of
lands  by  means  of  stone  pillars,  the  re¬
moval  of  which,  by  malicious  persons,
would  be  the  occasion  of  much  confusion,
men  having  no  other  guide  than  these  pil¬
lars  by  which  to  distinguish  the  limits  of


440


LANDMARKS


LANDMARKS


their  property.  To  remove  them,  there¬
fore,  was  considered  a  heinous  crime.
“Thou  shalt  not,”  says  the  Jewish  law,
“remove  thy  neighbor’s  landmark,  which
they  of  old  time  have  set  in  thine  inher¬
itance.”  Hence  those  peculiar  marks  of
distinction  by  which  we  are  separated
from  the  profane  world,  and  by  which  we
are  enabled  to  designate  our  inheritance  as
the  “sons  of  light,”  are  called  the  land¬
marks  of  the  Order.  The  universal  language
and  the  universal  laws  of  Masonry  are  land¬
marks,  but  not  so  are  the  local  ceremonies,
laws,  and  usages,  which  vary  in  different
countries.  To  attempt  to  alter  or  remove
these  sacred  landmarks,  by  which  we  ex¬
amine  and  prove  a  brother’s  claims  to  share
in  our  privileges,  is  one  of  the  most  heinous
offences  that  a  Mason  can  commit.

In  the  decision  of  the  question  what  are
and  what  are  not  the  landmarks  of  Masonry,
there  has  been  much  diversity  of  opinion
among  writers.  Dr.  Oliver  says,  [Diet.
Sgrnb.  Mas.,)  that  “some  restrict  them  to
the  O.  B.  signs,  tokens,  and  words.  Others
include  theceremonies  of  initiation,  passing,
and  raising;  and  the  form,  dimensions,  and
support ;  the  ground,  situation,  and  cover¬
ing;  the  ornaments,  furniture,  and  jewels
of  a  Lodge,  or  their  characteristic  symbols.
Some  think  that  the  Order  has  no  land¬
marks  beyond  its  peculiar  secrets.”  But
all  of  these  are  loose  and  unsatisfactory
definitions,  excluding  things  that  are  es¬
sential,  and  admitting  others  that  are  un¬
essential.

Perhaps  the  safest  method  is  to  restrict
them  to  those  ancient,  and  therefore  uni¬
versal,  customs  of  the  Order,  which  either
gradually  grew  into  operation  as  rules  of
action,  or,  if  at  once  enacted  by  any  compe¬
tent  authority,  were  enacted  at  a  period  so
remote,  that  no  account  of  their  origin  is
to  be  found  in  the  records  of  history.  Both
the  enactors  and  the  time  of  the  enactment
have  passed  away  from  the  record,  and  the
landmarks  are  therefore  “  of  higher  anti¬
quity  than  memory  or  history  can  reach.”

The  first  requisite,  therefore,  of  a  custom
or  rule  of  action  to  constitute  it  a  landmark,
is,  that  it  must  have  existed  from  “  time
w'hereof  the  memory  of  man  runneth  not
to  the  contrary.”  Its  antiquity  is  its  essen¬
tial  element.  Were  it  possible  for  all  the
Masonic  authorities  at  the  present  day  to
unite  in  a  universal  congress,  and  with  the
most  perfect  unanimity  to  adopt  any  new
regulation,  although  such  regulation  would,
so  long  as  it  remained  unrepealed,  be -ob¬
ligatory  on  the  whole  Craft,  yet  it  would
not  be  a  landmark.  It  would  have  the
character  of  universality,  it  is  true,  but  it  ,
would  be  wanting  in  that  of  antiquity.

Another  peculiarity  of  these  landmarks  i


of  Masonry  is,  that  they  are  uurepealable.
As  the  congress  to  which  I  have  just  alluded
would  not  Lave  the  power  to  enact  a  land¬
mark,  so  neither  would  it  have  the  pre¬
rogative  of  abolishing  one.  The  landmarks
of  the  Order,  like  the  laws  of  the  Medes
and  the  Persians,  can  suffer  no  change.
What  they  were  centuries  ago,  they  still
remain,  and  must  so  continue  in  force  until
Masonry  itself  shall  cease  to  exist.

Until  the  year  1858,  no  attempt  had  been
made  by  any  Masonic  writer  to  distinctly
enumerate  the  landmarks  of  Freemasonry,
and  to  give  to  them  a  comprehensible  form.
In  October  of  that  year,  the  author  of  this
work  published  in  the  American  Quarterly
Review  of  Freemasonry  (vol.  ii.,  p.  230,)  an
article  on  “  The  Foundations  of  Masonic
Law,”  which  contained  a  distinct  enumera¬
tion  of  the  landmarks,  which  was  the  first
time  that  such  a  list  had  been  presented  to
the  Fraternity.  This  enumeration  was  sub¬
sequently  incorporated  bv  the  author  in  his
Text  Book  of  Masonic  Jurisprudence.  It  h  as
since  been  very  generally  adopted  by  the
F raternity,  and  republished  by  many  writers
on  Masonic  law;  sometimes  without  any
acknowledgment  of  the  source  whence  they
derived  their  information.  According  to
this  recapitulation,  the  result  of  much  labor
and  research,  the  landmarks  are  twenty-five
in  number,  and  are  as  follows :

1.  The  modes  of  recognition  are,  of  all
the  landmarks,  the  most  legitimate  and
unquestioned.  They  admit  of  no  variation ;
and  if  ever  they  have  suffered  alteration  or
addition,  the  evil  of  such  a  violation  of  the
ancient  law  has  always  made  itself  subse¬
quently  manifest.

2.  The  division  of  symbolic  Masonry
into  three  degrees  is  a  landmark  that  has
been  better  preserved  than  almost  any  other ;
although  even  here  the  mischievous  spirit
of  innovation  has  left  its  traces,  and,  by  the
disruption  of  its  concluding  portion  from
the  third  degree,  a  want  of  uniformity  has
been  created  in  respect  to  the  final  teaching
of  the  Master’s  Order;  and  the  Royal  Arch
of  England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  Amer¬
ica,  and  the  “high  degrees”  of  France  and
Germany,  are  all  made  to  differ  in  the
mode  in  which  they  lead  the  neophyte  to
the  great  consummation  of  all  symbolic
Masonry.  In  1813,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  vindicated  the  ancient  landmark,
by  solemnly  enacting  that  ancient  Craft
Masonry  consisted  of  the  three  degrees  of
Entered  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,  and
Master  Mason,  including  the  Holy  Royal
Arch.  But  the  disruption  has  never  been
healed,  and  the  landmark,  although  ac¬
knowledged  in  its  integrity  by  all,  still  con¬
tinues  to  be  violated.

3.  The  legend  of  the  third  degree  is  an


LANDMARKS


LANDMARKS


441


important  landmark,  the  integrity  of
which  has  been  well  preserved.  There  is
no  rite  of  Masonry,  practised  in  any  coun¬
try  or  language,  in  which  the  essential  ele¬
ments  of  this  legend  are  not  taught.  The
lectures  may  vary,  and  indeed  are  constantly
changing,  but  the  legend  has  ever  remained
substantially  the  same.  And  it  is  necessary
that  it  should  be  so,  for  the  legend  of  the
Temple  Builder  constitutes  the  very  essence
and  identity  of  Masonry.  Any  rite  which
should  exclude  it,  or  materially  alter  it,
would  at  once,  by  that  exclusion  or  alter¬
ation,  cease  to  be  a  Masonic  rite.

4.  The  government  of  the  Fraternity  by
a  presiding  officer  called  a  Grand  Master,
who  is  elected  from  the  body  of  the  Craft,
is  a  fourth  landmark  of  the  Order.  Many
persons  suppose  that  the  election  of  the
Grand  Master  is  held  in  consequence  of  a
law  or  regulation  of  the  Grand  Lodge.
Such,  however,  is  not  the  case.  The  office
is  indebted  for  its  existence  to  a  landmark
of  the  Order.  Grand  Masters,  or  persons
performing  the  functions  under  a  different
but  equivalent  title,  are  to  be  found  in  the
records  of  the  Institution  long  before  Grand
Lodges  were  established ;  and  if  the  present
system  of  legislative  government  by  Grand
Lodges  were  to  be  abolished,  a  Grand
Master  would  still  be  necessary.

5.  The  prerogative  of  the  Grand  Master
to  preside  over  every  assembly  of  the  Craft,
wheresoever  and  whensoever  held,  is  a  fifth
landmark.  It  is  in  consequence  of  this
law,  derived  from  ancient  usage,  and  not
from  any  special  enactment,  that  the  Grand
Master  assumes  the  chair,  or  as  it  is  called
in  England,  “  the  throne,”  at  every  com¬
munication  of  the  Grand  Lodge;  and  that
he  is  also  entitled  to  preside  at  the  commu¬
nication  of  every  subordinate  Lodge,  where
he  may  happen  to  be  present.

6.  The  prerogative  of  the  Grand  Master
to  grant  dispensations  for  conferring  de¬
grees  at  irregular  times,  is  another  and  a
very  important  landmark.  The  statutory
law  of  Masonry  requires  a  month,  or  other
determinate  period,  to  elapse  between  the
presentation  of  a  petition  and  the  election
of  a  candidate.  But  the  Grand  Master  has
the  power  to  set  aside  or  dispense  with  this

Crobation,  and  to  allow  a  candidate  to
e  initiated  at  once.  This  prerogative  he
possessed  before  the  enactment  of  the  law
requiring  a  probation,  and  as  no  statute  can
impair  his  prerogative,  he  still  retains  the
power.

7.  The  prerogative  of  the  Grand  Master
to  give  dispensations  for  opening  and  hold¬
ing  Lodges  is  another  lanamark.  He  may
grant,  in  virtue  of  this,  to  a  sufficient  num¬
ber  of  Masons,  the  privilege  of  meeting  to¬
gether  and  conferring  degrees.  The  Lodges


thus  established  are  called  “  Lodges  under
dispensation.”  See  Lodges  under  Dispensa¬
tion.

8.  The  prerogative  of  the  Grand  Master
to  make  Masons  at  sight  is  a  landmark
which  is  closely  connected  with  the  pre¬
ceding  one.  There  has  been  much  misap¬
prehension  in  relation  to  this  landmark,
which  misapprehension  has  sometimes  led
to  a  denial  of  its  existence  in  jurisdictions
where  the  Grand  Master  was,  perhaps,  at
the  very  time  substantially  exercising  the
prerogative,  without  the  slightest  remark
or  opposition.  See  Sight,  Making  Masons  at.

9.  The  necessity  for  Masons  to  congre¬
gate  in  Lodges  is  another  laudmark.  It
is  not  to  be  understood  by  this  that  any
ancient  landmark  has  directed  that  perma¬
nent  organization  of  subordinate  Lodges
which  constitutes  one  of  the  features  of
the  Masonic  system  as  it  now  prevails.
But  the  landmarks  of  the  Order  always
prescribed  that  Masons  should,  from  time
to  time,  congregate  together  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  either  Operative  or  Speculative
labor,  and  that  these  congregations  should
be  called  Lodges.  Formerly,  these  were  ex¬
temporary  meetings  called  together  for
special  purposes,  and  then  dissolved,  the
brethren  departing  to  meet  again  at  other
times  and  other  places,  according  to  the
necessity  of  circumstances.  But  Warrants
of  constitution,  by-laws,  permanent  officers,
and  annual  arrears  are  modern  innovations
wholly  outside  the  landmarks,  and  depen¬
dent  entirely  on  the  special  enactments  of
a  comparatively  recent  period.

10.  The  government  of  the  Craft,  when
so  congregated  in  a  Lodge,  by  a  Master  and
two  Wardens,  is  also  a  landmark.  A  con¬
gregation  of  Masons  meeting  together
under  any  other  government,  as  that,  for  in¬
stance,  of  a  president  and  vice-president,
or  a  chairman  and  sub-chairman,  would
not  be  recognized  as  a  Lodge.  The  pres¬
ence  of  a  Master  and  two  Wardens  is  as
essential  to  the  valid  organization  of  a
Lodge  as  a  Warrant  of  constitution  is  at
the  present  day.  The  names,  of  course,
vary  in  different  languages;  but  the  officers,
their  number,  prerogatives,  and  duties  are
everywhere  identical.

11.  The  necessity  that  every'  Lodge,  when
congregated,  should  be  duly  tiled,  is  an  im¬
portant  landmark  of  the  Institution  which
is  never  neglected.  The  necessity  of  this
law  arises  from  the  esoteric  character  of
Masonry.  The  duty  of  guarding  the  door,
and  keeping  off  cowans  and  eavesdroppers,
is  an  ancient  one,  which  therefore  consti¬
tutes  a  landmark.

12.  The  right  of  every  Mason  to  be  rep¬
resented  in  all  general  meetings  of  the
Craft,  and  to  instruct  his  representatives,


442


LANDMARKS


LANDMARKS


is  a  twelfth  landmark.  Formerly,  these
general  meetings,  which  were  usually  held
once  a  year,  were  called  “  General  Assem¬
blies,”  and  all  the  Fraternity,  even  to  the
youngest  Entered  Apprentice,  were  per¬
mitted  to  be  present.  Now  they  are  called
“  Grand  Lodges,”  and  only  the  Masters  and
Wardens  of  the  subordinate  Lodges  are
summoned.  But  this  is  simply  as  the  rep¬
resentatives  of  their  members.  Originally,
each  Mason  represented  himself;  now  he
is  represented  by  his  officers.  See  Repre¬
sentatives  of  Lodges.

13.  The  right  of  every  Mason  to  appeal
from  the  decision  of  his  brethren,  in  Lodge
convened,  to  the  Grand  Lodge  or  General
Assembly  of  Masons,  is  a  landmark  highly
essential  to  the  preservation  of  justice,  and
the  prevention  of  oppression.  A  few  mod¬
ern  Grand  Lodges,  in  adopting  a  regula¬
tion  that  the  decision  of  subordinate
Lodges,  in  cases  of  expulsion,  cannot  be
wholly  set  aside  upon  an  appeal,  have  vio¬
lated  this  unquestioned  landmark,  as  well
as  the  principles  of  just  government.

14.  The  right  of  every  Mason  to  visit  and
sit  in  every  regular  Lodge  is  an  unques¬
tionable  landmark  of  the  Order.  This
is  called  “  the  right  of  visitation.”  This
right  of  visitation  has  always  been  recog¬
nized  as  an  inherent  right  which  inures  to
every  Mason  as  he  travels  through  the
world.  And  this  is  because  Lodges  are
justly  considered  as  only  divisions  for  con¬
venience  of  the  universal  Masonic  family.
This  right  may,  of  course,  be  impaired  or
forfeited  on  special  occasions  by  various
circumstances ;  but  when  admission  is  re¬
fused  to  a  Mason  in  good  standing,  who
knocks  at  the  door  of  a  Lodge  as  a  visitor,
it  is  to  be  expected  that  some  good  and  suffi¬
cient  reason  shall  be  furnished  for  this  vio¬
lation  of  what  is,  in  general,  a  Masonic
right,  founded  on  the  landmarks  of  the
Order.

15.  It  is  a  landmark  of  the  Order,  that
no  visitor  unknown  to  the  brethren  present,
or  to  some  one  of  them  as  a  Mason,  can
enter  a  Lodge  without  first  passing  an  ex¬
amination  according  to  ancient  usage.  Of
course,  if  the  visitor  is  known  to  any
brother  present  to  be  a  Mason  in  good
standing,  and  if  that  brother  will  vouch  for
his  qualifications,  the  examination  may  be
dispensed  with,  as  the  landmark  refers
only  to  the  cases  of  strangers,  who  are  not
to  be  recognized  unless  after  strict  trial,
due  examination,  or  lawful  information.

16.  No  Lodge  can  interfere  in  the  busi¬
ness  of  another  Lodge,  nor  give  degrees  to
brethren  who  are  members  of  other  Lodges.
This  is  undoubtedly  an  ancient  landmark,
founded  on  the  great  principles  of  courtesy
and  fraternal  kindness,  which  are  at  the


very  foundation  of  our  Institution.  Ithaa
been  repeatedly  recognized  by  subsequent
statutory  enactments  of  all  Grand  Lodges.

17.  It  is  a  landmark  that  every  Free¬
mason  is  amenable  to  the  laws  and  regula¬
tions  of  the  Masonic  jurisdiction  in  which
he  resides,  and  this  although  he  may  not
be  a  member  of  any  Lodge.  Non-affilia¬
tion,  which  is,  in  fact,  in  itself  a  Masonic
offence,  does  not  exempt  a  Mason  from
Masonic  jurisdiction.

18.  Certain  qualifications  of  candidates
for  initiation  are  derived  from  a  landmark
of  the  Order.  These  qualifications  are
that  he  shall  be  a  man  —  unmutilated,  free
born,  and  of  mature  age.  That  is  to  say,
a  woman,  a  cripple,  or  a  slave,  or  one  born
in  slavery,  is  disqualified  for  initiation  into
the  rites  of  Masonry.  Statutes,  it  is  true,
have  from  time  to  time  been  enacted,  en¬
forcing  or  explaining  these  principles;  but
the  qualifications  really  arise  from  the  very
nature  of  the  Masonic  institution,  and  from
its  symbolic  teachings,  and  have  always  ex¬
isted  as  landmarks.

19.  A  belief  in  the  existence  of  God  as
the  Grand  Architect  of  the  Universe,  is  one
of  the  most  important  landmarks  of  the
Order.  It  has  been  always  admitted  that
a  denial  of  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  and
Superintending  Power  is  an  absolute  dis¬
qualification  for  initiation.  The  annal3  of
the  Order  never  yet  have  furnished  or
could  furnish  an  instance  in  which  an
avowed  Atheist  was  ever  made  a  Mason.
The  very  initiatory  ceremonies  of  the  first
degree  forbid  and  prevent  the  possibility
of  such  an  occurrence.

20.  Subsidiary  to  this  belief  in  God,  as  a
landmark  of  the  Order,  is  the  belief  in  a
resurrection  to  a  future  life.  This  land¬
mark  is  not  so  positively  impressed  on  the
candidate  by  exact  words  as  the  preceding;
but  the  doctrine  is  taught  by  very  plain
implication,  and  runs  through  the  whole
symbolism  of  the  Order.  To  believe  in
Masonry,  and  not  to  believe  in  a  resurrec¬
tion,  would  be  an  absurd  anomaly,  which
could  only  be  excused  by  the  reflection,
that  he  who  thus  confounded  his  belief  and
his  skepticism  was  so  ignorant  of  the  mean¬
ing  of  both  theories  as  to  have  no  rational
foundation  for  his  knowledge  of  either.

21.  It  is  a  landmark  that  a  “Book  of
the  Law  ”  shall  constitute  an  indispensable
part  of  the  furniture  of  every  Lodge.  I
say,  advisedly,  Book  of  the  Law,  because  it
is  not  absolutely  required  that  everywhere
the  Old  and  New  Testaments  shall  be  used.
The  “  Book  of  the  Law  ”  is  that  volume
wdiich,  by  the  religion  of  the  country,  is
believed  to  contain  the  revealed  will  of  the
Grand  Architect  of  the  Universe.  Hence,
in  all  Lodges  in  Christian  countries,  the

t


LANDMARKS


LANGUAGE


443


*  Book  of  the  Law  ”  is  composed  of  the  Old
and  New  Testaments;  in  a  country  where
Judaism  was  the  prevailing  faith,  the  Old
Testament  alone  would  be  sufficient;  and
in  Mohammedan  countries,  and  among
Mohammedan  Masons,  the  Koran  might  be
substituted.  Masonry  does  not  attempt  to
interfere  with  the  peculiar  religious  faith
of  its  disciples,  except  so  far  as  relates  to
the  belief  in  the  existence  of  God,  and  what
necessarily  results  from  that  belief.  The
“  Book  of  the  Law  ”  is  to  the  Speculative
Mason  his  spiritual  trestle-board ;  without
this  he  cannot  labor ;  whatever  he  believes
to  be  the  revealed  will  of  the  Grand  Arch¬
itect  constitutes  for  him  this  spiritual
trestle-board,  and  must  ever  be  before  him
in  his  hours  of  speculative  labor,  to  be  the
rule  and  guide  of  his  conduct.  The  land¬
mark,  therefore,  requires  that  a  “Book  of  the
Law,”  a  religious  code  of  some  kind,  pur¬
porting  to  be  an  exemplar  of  the  revealed
will  of  God,  shall  form  an  essential  part  of
the  furniture  of  every  Lodge.

22.  The  equality  of  all  Masons  is  another
landmark  of  the  Order.  This  equality
has  no  reference  to  any  subversion  of  those
gradations  of  rank  which  have  been  insti¬
tuted  by  the  usages  of  society.  The  mon¬
arch,  the  nobleman,  or  the  gentleman  is
entitled  to  all  the  influence,  and  receives  all
the  respect,  which  rightly  belong  to  his
position.  But  the  doctrine  of  Masonic
equality  implies  that,  as  children  of  one
great  Father,  we  meet  in  the  Lodge  upon
the  level  —  that  on  that  level  we  are  all
travelling  to  one  predestined  goal  —  that
in  the  Lodge  genuine  merit  shall  receive
more  respect  than  boundless  wealth,  and
that  virtue  and  knowledge  alone  should  be
the  basis  of  all  Masonic  honors,  and  be  re¬
warded  with  preferment.  When  the  labors
of  the  Lodge  are  over,  and  the  brethren
have  retired  from  their  peaceful  retreat,  to
mingle  once  more  with  the  world,  each  will
then  again  resume  that  social  position,  and
exercise  the  privileges  of  that  rank,  to
which  the  customs  of  society  entitle  him.

23.  The  secrecy  of  the  Institution  is
another  and  most  important  landmark.
The  form  of  secrecy  is  a  form  inherent  in
it,  existing  with  it  from  its  very  founda¬
tion,  and  secured  to  it  by  its  ancient  land¬
marks.  If  divested  of  its  secret  character,
it  would  lose  its  identity,  and  would  cease
to  be  Freemasonry.  Whatever  objections
may,  therefore,  be  made  to  the  Institution
on  account  of  its  secrecy,  and  however
much  some  unskilful  brethren  have  been
unwilling  in  times  of  trial,  for  the  sake  of
expediency,  to  divest  it  of  its  secret  char¬
acter,  it  will  be  ever  impossible  to  do  so,
even  were  the  landmark  not  standing  be¬
fore  us  as  an  insurmountable  obstacle;  be¬


cause  such  change  of  its  character  would
be  social  suicide,  and  the  death  of  the
Order  would  follow  its  legalized  exposure.
Freemasonry,  as  a  secret  association,  has
lived  unchanged  for  centuries ;  as  an  open
society,  it  would  not  last  for  as  many  years.

24.  The  foundation  of  a  speculative
science  upon  an  operative  art,  and  the
symbolic  use  and  explanation  of  the  terms
of  that  art,  for  the  purposes  of  religious  or
moral  teaching,  constitute  another  land¬
mark  of  the  Order.  The  Temple  of  Solo¬
mon  was  the  symbolic  cradle  of  the  Insti¬
tution,  and,  therefore,  the  reference  to  the
Operative  Masonry  which  constructed  that
magnificent  edifice,  to  the  materials  and
implements  which  were  employed  in  its
construction,  and  to  the  artists  who  were
engaged  in  the  building,  are  all  component
and  essential  parts  of  the  body  of  Free¬
masonry,  which  could  not  be  subtracted
from  it  without  an  entire  destruction  of
the  whole  identity  of  the  Order.  Hence,
all  the  comparatively  modern  rites  of  Ma¬
sonry,  however  they  may  differ  in  other
respects,  religiously  preserve  this  Temple
history  and  these  operative  elements,  as
the  substratum  of  all  their  modifications
of  the  Masonic  system.

25.  The  last  and  crowning  landmark  of
all  is,  that  these  landmarks  can  never  be
changed.  Nothing  can  be  subtracted  from
them  —  nothing  can  be  added  to  them  —  not
the  slightest  modification  can  be  made  in
them.  As  they  were  received  from  our
predecessors,  we  are  bound  by  the  most
solemn  obligations  of  duty  to  transmit
them  to  our  successors.

Landsdowne  Manuscript.  An
old  Constitution,  preserved  in  the  British
Museum.  The  date  is  supposed  to  be  about
1600.  It  was  first  published  in  the  Free¬
mason's  Magazine  for  February  24,  1858.

Language,  Universal.  The  in¬
vention  of  a  universal  language,  which
men  of  all  nations  could  understand  and
through  which  they  could  communicate
their  thoughts,  has  always  been  one  of  the
Utopian  dreams  of  certain  philologists.
In  the  seventeenth  century,  Dalgarno  had
written  his  Ars  Signorurn  to  prove  the  pos¬
sibility  of  a  universal  character  and  a
philosophical  language.  About  the  same
time  Bishop  Wilkins  published  his  Essay
towards  a  Real  Character  and  a  Philosophi¬
cal  Language ;  and  even  the  mathematical
Leibnitz  entertained  the  project  of  a  uni¬
versal  language  for  all  the  world.  It  is
not,  therefore,  surprising,  that  when  the  so-
called  Leland  Manuscript  stated  that  the
Masons  concealed  a  “  universelle  Ion  gage,’'
Mr.  Locke,  or  whoever  was  the  commenta¬
tor  on  that  document,  should  have  been
attracted  by  the  statement.  “  A  universal


4  44


LAPICIDA


LATOMIA


language,”  he  says,  “has  been  much  de¬
sired  by  the  learned  of  many  ages.  It  is  a
thing  rather  to  be  wished  than  hoped  for.
But  it  seems  the  Masons  pretend  to  have
such  a  thing  among  them.  If  it  be  true,
I  guess  it  must  be  something  like  the  lan¬
guage  of  the  Pantomimes  among  the  an¬
cient  Romans,  who  are  said  to  be  able,
by  signs  only,  to  express  and  deliver  any
oration  intelligibly  to  men  of  all  nations
and  languages.”

The  “guess”  of  the  commentator  was
near  the  truth.  A  universal  language
founded  on  words  is  utterly  impracticable.
Even  if  once  inaugurated  by  common  con¬
sent,  a  thing  itself  impossible,  the  lapse  of
but  a  few  years,  and  the  continual  innova¬
tion  of  new  phrases,  would  soon  destroy  its
universality.  But  there  are  signs  and  sym¬
bols  which,  by  tacit  consent,  have  always
been  recognized  as  the  exponents  of  cer¬
tain  ideas,  and  these  are  everywhere  under¬
stood.  It  is  well  known  that  such  a  sys¬
tem  exists  over  the  vast  territory  occupied
by  the  North  American  savages,  and  that
the  Indians  of  two  tribes,  which  totally
differ  in  language,  meeting  on  the  prairie
or  in  the  forest,  are  enabled,  by  conventual
signs  of  universal  agreement,  to  hold  long
and  intelligible  intercourse.  On  such  a  basis
the  “universal  language”  of  Freemasonry  is
founded.  It  is  not  universal  to  the  world,
but  it  is  to  the  Craft ;  and  a  Mason  of  one
country  and  language  meeting  a  Mason  of
another  can  make  himself  understood  for
all  practical  purposes  of  the  Craft,  simply
because  the  system  of  signs  and  symbols
has  been  so  perfected  that  in  every  lan¬
guage  they  convey  the  same  meaning  and
make  the  same  impression.  This,  and  this
only,  is  the  extent  to  which  the  universal
language  of  Masonry  reaches.  It  would  be
an  error  to  suppose  that  it  meets  the  ex¬
pectations  of  Dalgarno  or  Wilkins,  or  any
other  dreamer,  and  that  it  is  so  perfect  as
to  supersede  the  necessity  of  any  other
method  of  intercommunication.

Lapicida.  A  word  sometimes  used  in
Masonic  documents  to  denote  a  Freemason.
It  is  derived  from  lapis ,  a  stone,  and  caclo,
to  cut,  and  is  employed  by  Varro  and  Livy
to  signify  “a  stone-cutter.”  But  in  the
low  Latin  of  the  Mediaeval  age  it  took
another  meaning ;  and  Du  Cange  defines  it
in  his  Glossariurn  as  “JEdeficiorum  structor.
Gall.  Maqon,”  i.  e.,  “A  builder  of  edifices;
in  French,  a  Mason;”  and  he  quotes  two
authorities  of  1304  and  1392,  where  lapicida
evidently  means  builders.  In  the  Vocabu-
larium  of  Ugutio,  Anno  1592,  Lapieedius  is
defined  “  a  cutter  of  stones.”  The  Latin
word  now  more  commonly  used  by  Masonic
writers  for  Freemason  is  Latomus ;  but  I  think
that  Lapicida  is  purer  Latin.  See  Latomus.


LarmeniiiH,  Johannes  Marens.

According  to  the  tradition  of  the  Order  of
the  Temple,  —  the  credibility  of  which  is,
however,  denied  by  most  Masonic  scholars,
—  John  Mark  Larmenius  was  in  1314  ap¬
pointed  by  James  de  Molay  his  successor
as  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars,  which
power  was  transmitted  by  Larmenius  to  his
successors,  in  a  document  known  as  the
“  Charter  of  Transmission.”  See  Temple ,
Order  of  the.

Larudan,  Abl»<f.  The  author  of  a

work  entitled  Les  Franc  -  Masons  ecrase's.
Suite  du  livre  intitule  iOrdre  des  Franc-
Masons  ira/ii,  traduit  du  Latin.  The  first
edition  was  published  at  Amsterdam  in
1746.  In  calling  it  the  sequel  of  L’ Ordre
des  Franc-Masons  traki,  by  the  Abbe  Perau,
Larudan  has  sought  to  attribute  the  author¬
ship  of  his  own  libellous  work  to  Perau,
but  without  success,  as  the  internal  evi¬
dence  of  style  and  of  tone  sufficiently  dis¬
tinguishes  the  two  works.  KIoss  says
(Bibliog.,  No.  1874,)  that  this  work  is  the
armory  from  which  all  subsequent  enemies
of  Masonry  have  derived  their  weapons.
Larudan  was  the  first  to  broach  the  theory
that  Oliver  Cromwell  was  the  inventor  of
Freemasonry'.

Latin  Lodge.  In  the  year  1784,  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  granted  a  War¬
rant  for  the  establishment  of  Roman  Eagle
Lodge  at  Edinburgh ;  the  whole  of  whose
work  was  conducted  in  the  Latin  language.
Of  this  Lodge,  the  celebrated  and  learned
Dr.  John  Brown  was  the  founder  and
Master.  He  had  himself  translated  the
ritual  into  the  classical  language  of  Rome;
but  it  required  his  abilities  as  a  linguist  to
keep  the  Lodge  alive,  which  became  ex¬
tinct  on  his  removal  to  London.

L<atoiiiia.  This  word  has  sometimes
been  used  in  modern  Masonic  documents
as  the  Latin  translation  of  the  word  Lodge,
with  what  correctness  we  will  see.  The
Greek  "Xaropelov,  latomeion,  from  the  roots
laas,  a  stone,  and  temno,  to  cut,  meant  a
place  where  stones  were  cut,  a  quarry.
From  this  the  Romans  got  their  latomia,
more  usually  spelled  lautomia,  which  also,
in  pure  Latinity,  meant  a  stone-quarry.
But  as  slaves  were  confined  and  made  to
work  in  the  quarries  by  way  of  punish¬
ment,  the  name  was  given  to  any  prison
excavated  out  of  the  living  rock  and  below
the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  was  especially
so  applied  to  the  prison  excavated  by  Ser-
vius  Tullius  under  the  Capitoline  hill  at
Rome,  and  to  the  state  prison  at  Syracuse.
Du  Cange  gives  the  same  meaning  to  the
word  lauturnia  in  his  Glossariurn,  and  refers
for  an  example  to  the  Syracusan  prison.
Lathomia,  he  defines  a  cutting  of  stone.  It
seems  to  have  lost  and  never  recovered  its


LATOMUS


LAWRIE


445


primitive  meaning  as  a  stone-quarry,  and
is,  therefore,  inappropriately  applied  to  a
Masonic  Lodge.

Latomus.  By  Masonic  writers  used
as  a  translation  of  Freemason  into  Latin ;
thus,  Thory  entitles  his  valuable  work,
Acta  Latomorum,  i.  e.,  “  Transactions  of  the
Freemasons.”  This  word  was  not  used  in
classical  Latinity.  In  the  low  Latin  of  the
Middle  Ages  it  was  used  as  equivalent  to
lapicida.  Du  Cange  defines  it,  in  the  form
of  lathomus,  as  a  cutter  of  stones,  “  Csesor
lapidum.”  He  gives  an  example  from  one
of  the  ecclesiastical  Constitutions,  where
we  find  the  expression  “  carpentarii  ac
Latomi,”  which  may  mean  Carpenters  and
Masons  or  Carpenters  and  Stone-cutters.  Du
Cange  also  gives  Latomus  as  one  of  the  defi¬
nitions  of  Magonetus,  which  he  derives  from
the  French  Magon.  But  Maqonetus  and
Latomus  could  not  have  had  precisely  the
same  meaning,  for  in  one  of  the  examples
cited  by  Du  Cange,  we  have  “  Joanne  de
Bareno,  Maqoneto,  Latonio  de  Gratiano-
olis,”  i.  e.,  “John  de  Bareno,  Mason  and
tone-cutter  (?)  of  Grenoble.”  Latomus  is
here  evidently  an  addition  to  Maqonetus,
showing  two  different  kinds  of  occupation.
We  have  abundant  evidence  in  Mediaeval
documents  that  a  Maqonetus  was  a  builder,
and  a  Latomus  was  most  probably  an  in¬
ferior  order,  what  the  Masonic  Constitutions
call  a  “  rough  Mason.”  I  doubt  the  pro¬
priety  of  applying  it  to  a  Freemason.  The
word  is  sometimes  found  as  Lathomus  and
Latonius.  •

Latres.  This  word  has  given  much
unnecessary  trouble  to  the  commentators
on  the  old  Records  of  Masonry.  In  the
legend  of  the  Craft  contained  in  all  the
old  Constitutions,  we  are  informed  that  the
children  of  Lamech  “  knew  well  that  God
would  take  vengeance  for  sinne,  either  by
fire  or  water,  wherefore  they  did  write  these
sciences  that  they  found  in  twoe  pillars  of
stone,  that  they  might  be  found  after  that
God  had  taken  vengeance ;  the  one  was  of
marble  and  would  not  burne,  the  other  was
Latres  and  could  not  drowne  in  water.”
(Harleian  MS.)  It  is  the  Latin  word  later ,
a  brick.  The  legend  is  derived  from
Josephus,  ( Antiq .,  I.,  ii.,)  where  the  same
story  is  told.  Whiston  properly  translates
the  passage,  “  they  made  two  pillars ;  the
one  of  brick,  the  other  of  stone.”  The
original  Greek  is  irMvdof,  which  has  the
same  meaning.  The  word  is  variously  cor¬
rupted  in  the  manuscript.  Thus  the  Har¬
leian  MS.  has  laters,  wnich  comes  nearest
to  the  correct  Latin  plural  lateres ;  the
Cooke  MS.  has  laterus;  the  Dowland,  laterns;
the  Landsdowne,  lot  heme  ;  and  the  Sloane,
getting  furthest  from  the  truth,  has  letera.
It  is  strange  that  Halliwell  should  have


been  ignorant  of  the  true  meaning,  and
that  Phillips,  in  commenting  on  the  Har¬
leian  MS.,  should  have  supposed  that  it
alluded  “  to  some  floating  substance.”  The
Latin  word  later  and  the  phssage  in  Jose¬
phus  ought  readily  to  have  led  to  an  expli¬
cation.

Laurel  Crown.  A  decoration  used
in  some  of  the  higher  degrees  of  the  An¬
cient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  The
laurel  is  an  emblem  of  victory;  and  the
corona  triumphalis  of  the  Romans,  which
was  given  to  generals  who  had  gained  a
triumph  by  their  conquests,  was  made  of
laurel  leaves.  The  laurel  crown  in  Ma¬
sonry  is  given  to  him  who  has  made  a  con¬
quest  over  his  passions.

Laurens,  J.  L.  A  French  Masonic
writer,  and  the  author  of  an  Essai  historique
et  antique  sur  la  Franche-Magonnerie,  pub¬
lished  at  Paris  in  1805.  In  this  work  he
gives  a  critical  examination  of  the  princi¬
pal  works  that  have  treated  of  the  Institu¬
tion.  It  contains  also  a  refutation  of  the
imputations  of  anti-Masonic  writers.  In
1808  he  edited  an  edition  of  the  Vocabu-
laire  des  Franc-Magons,  the  first  edition  of
which  had  been  issued  in  1805.  In  1825
he  published  a  Histoire  des  Initiations  de
Vancicnne  Egypt.  Of  the  authorship  of
this  last  work  I  have  only  the  statement
of  Kloss.who  attributes  it  to  J.  L.  Laurens.

Laurie.  See  Lawrie,  Alexander.

Lawful  Information.  See  Infor¬
mation,  Lawful.

Law,  moral.  See  Moral  Law.

Law,  Oral.  See  Oral  Law.

Law,  Parliamentary.  See  Par¬
liamentary  Law.

Lawrie,  Alexander.  He  was  ori¬
ginally  a  stocking-weaver,  and  afterwards
became  a  bookseller  and  stationer  in  Par¬
liament  Square,  Edinburgh,  and  printer  of
the  Edinburgh  Gazette.  He  was  appointed
bookseller  and  stationer  to  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland,  and  afterwards  Grand  Sec¬
retary.  In  1804  he  published  a  book  en¬
titled  “  The  History  of  Freemasonry,  drawn
from  authentic  sources  of  information ;
with  an  Account  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland,  from  its  Institution  in  1736  to
the  present  time,  compiled  from  the  Rec¬
ords;  and  an  Appendix  of  Original  Pa¬
pers.”  Of  this  valuable  and  interesting
work,  Lawrie  has  always  been  deemed  the
author,  notwithstanding  that  the  learning
exhibited  in  the  first  part,  and  the  numer¬
ous  references  to  Greek  and  Latin  author¬
ities,  furnished  abundant  internal  evidence
of  his  incapacity,  from  previous  education,
to  have  written  it.  The  doubt  which  natu¬
rally  arises, whether  he  was  really  the  author,
derives  great  support  from  the  testimony  of
the  late  Dr.  David  Irving,  Librarian  to  the


446


LAW


LAX


Faculty  of  Advocates,  Edinburgh.  A  writer
in  the  Notes  and  Queries ,  (3d  Ser.,  iii.  366,)
on  May  9,  1863,  stated  that  at  the  sale
of  the  library  of  Dr.  Irving,  on  Saturday,
March  28, 1862,  a  copy  of  Lawrie’s  History
of  Freemasonry  was  sold  for  £1.  In  that
copy  there  was  the  following  memorandum
in  the  handwriting  of  Dr.  Irving:

“  The  history  of  this  book  is  somewhat
curious,  and  perhaps  there  are  only  two  in¬
dividuals  now  living  by  whom  it  could  be
divulged.  The  late  Alexander  Lawrie,
‘  Grand  Stationer,’  wished  to  recommend
himself  to  the  Fraternity  by  the  publication
of  such  a  work.  Through  Dr.  Anderson,
he  requested  me  to  undertake  its  compila¬
tion,  and  offered  a  suitable  remuneration.
As  I  did  not  relish  the  task,  he  made  a
similar  offer  to  my  old  acquaintance  David
Brewster,  by  whom  it  was  readily  under¬
taken,  and  I  can  say  was  executed  to  the
entire  satisfaction  of  his  employers.  The
title-page  does  not  exhibit  the  name  of  the
author,  but  the  dedication  bears  the  signa¬
ture  oi  Alexander  Lawrie,  and  the  volume
is  commonly  described  as  Lawrie’s  History
of  Freemasonry.'”

There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  truth  of
this  statement.  It  has  never  been  unusual
for  publishers  to  avail  themselves  of  the
labors  of  literary  men  and  affix  their  own
names  to  books  which  they  have  written  by
proxy.  Besides,  the  familiarity  with  ab¬
struse  learning  that  this  work  exhibits,
although  totally  irreconcilable  with  the
attainments  of  the  stocking- weaver,  can
readily  be  assigned  to  Sir  David  Brewster
the  philosopher.

Lawrie  had  a  son,  William  Alexander
Laurie,  (he  had  thus,  for  some  unknown
reason,  changed  the  spelling  of  his  name,)
who  was  for  very  many  years  the  Grand
Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,
and  died  in  office  in  1870,  highly  esteemed.
In  1859  he  published  a  new  edition  of  the
History ,  with  many  additions,  under  the  title
of  “The  History  of  Freemasonry  and  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  with  chapters
on  the  Knights  Templar,  Knights  of  St.
John,  Mark  Masonry,  and  the  R.  A.  De¬
gree.”

Law,  Sacred.  See  Soared  Law,  A  dd.

Laws,  General.  See  Laws  of  Ma¬
sonry.

Laws,  Local.  See  Laws  of  Masonry.

Laws  of  Masonry.  The  laws  of
Masonry,  or  those  rules  of  action  by  which
the  Institution  is  governed,  are  very  prop¬
erly  divided  into  three  classes :  1.  Land¬
marks.  2.  General  Laws  or  Regulations.
3.  Local  Laws  or  Regulations.

1.  Landmarks.  These  are  the  unwritten
laws  of  the  Order,  derived  from  those  an¬
cient  and  universal  customs  which  date  at


so  remote  a  period  that  we  have  no  record
of  their  origin.

2.  General  I,aws.  These  are  all  those
Regulations  that  have  been  enacted  by
such  bodies  as  had  at  the  time  universal
jurisdiction.  They  operate,  therefore,  over
the  Craft  wheresoever  dispersed;  and
as  the  paramount  bodies  which  enacted
them  have  long  ceased  to  exist,  it  would
seem  that  they  are  unrepealable.  It
is  generally  agreed  that  these  General  or
Universal  Laws  are  to  be  found  in  the  old
Constitutions  and  Charges,  so  far  as  they
were  recognized  and  accepted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  at  the  revival  in  1717,
and  adopted  previous  to  the  year  1721.

3.  Local  Laws.  These  are  the  Regula¬
tions  which,  since  1721,  have  been  and
continue  to  be  enacted  by  Grand  Lodges.
They  are  of  force  only  in  those  jurisdic¬
tions  which  have  adopted  them,  and  are  re-
pealable  by  the  bodies  which  have  enacted
them.  They  must,  to  be  valid,  be  not  re¬
pugnant  to  the  Landmarks  or  the  General
Laws,  which  are  of  paramount  authority.

Lawsuits.  In  the  Old  Charges  which
were  approved  in  1722,  and  published  in
1723,  by  Anderson,  in  the  Book  of  Consti¬
tutions,  the  regulations  as  to  lawsuits  are
thus  laid  down :  “  And  if  any  of  them  do
you  injury,  you  must  apply  to  your  own  or
his  Lodge,  and  from  thence  you  may  appeal
to  the  Grand  Lodge,  at  the  Quarterly  Com¬
munication,  and  from  thence  to  the  Annual
Grand  Lodge,  as  has  been  the  ancient  laud¬
able  conduct  of  our  fdVefathers  in  every*
nation ;  never  taking  a  legal  course  but
when  the  case  cannot  be  otherwise  decided,
and  patiently  listening  to  the  honest  and
friendly  advice  of  Master  and  Fellows,
when  they  would  prevent  you  going  to  law
with  strangers,  or  would  excite  you  to  put
a  speedy  period  to  all  lawsuits,  that  so  you
may  mind  the  affair  of  Masonry  with  the
more  alacrity  and  success;  but  with  respect
to  Brothers  or  Fellows  at  law,  the  Master
and  Brethren  should  kindly  offer  their  me¬
diation,  which  ought  to  be  thankfully  sub¬
mitted  to  by  the  contending  brethren;  and
if  that  submission  is  impracticable,  they
must,  however,  carry  on  their  process  or
lawsuit  without  wrath  and  rancor,  (not  in
the  common  way,)  saying  or  doing  nothing
which  may  hinder  brotherly  love  and  good
offices  to  be  renewed  and  continued ;  that
all  may  see  the  benign  influence  of  Masonry*,
as  all  true  Masons  have  done  from  the  be¬
ginning  of  the  world,  and  will  do  to  the
end  of  time.”

Lax  Observance.  ( Observantia
Lata.)  When  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observ¬
ance  was  instituted  in  Germany  by  Von
Hund,  its  disciples  gave  to  all  the  other
German  Lodges  which  refused  to  submit  to


LAYER


LECTURE


447


its  obedience  and  adopt  its  innovations,  but
preferred  to  remain  faithful  to  the  English
Kite,  the  title  of  “  Lodges  of  Lax  Observ¬
ance.”  Ragon.  in  his  Orthodoxie  Maqon-
nique,  (p.  236,)  has  committed  the  unac¬
countable  error  of  calling  it  a  schism,
established  at  Vienna  in  1767;  thus  evi¬
dently  confounding  it  with  Starck’s  Rite
of  the  Clerks  of  Strict  Observance.

Layer.  A  term  used  in  the  old
Records  to  designate  a  workman  inferior
to  an  Operative  Freemason.  Thus :  “  Alsoe
that  no  Mason  set  noe  layer  within  a  Lodge
or  without  to  have  mould  stones  with  one
mould  of  his  workeing.”  In  the  Harleian
and  Kilwinning  MSS.,  it  is  layer ;  in  the
Sloane,  Iyer;  and  i n  the  Alnwick,  rough  layer.
In  the  contract  for  Fotheringay  Church,
we  find  the  word  under  the  form  of  leye.
The  word,  I  think,  means  one  who  builds
in  brick,  and  is  familiar  to  us  in  the  com¬
pound  term  bricklayer;  a  word  not  unknown
at  the  time  of  the  writing  of  those  manu¬
scripts.  Thus  in  77ie  Booke  for  a  Justice  of
Peace,  (fol.  17,)  published  in  1559,  we  find
this  passage:  “None  artificer  nor  labourer
hereafter  named,  take  no  more  nor  greater
wages  than  hereafter  is  limited  ....  that
is  to  say,  a  free  mason,  master  carpenter,
rough  mason,  bricke  layer,"  etc.

Lebanon.  A  mountain,  or  rather  a
range  of  mountains  in  Syria,  extending
from  beyond  Sidon  to  Tyre,  and  forming
the  northern  boundary  of  Palestine.  Leb¬
anon  is  celebrated  for  the  cedars  which  it
produces,  many  of  which  are  from  fifty  to
eighty  feet  in  height,  and  cover  with  their
branches  a  space  of  ground  the  diameter
of  which  is  still  greater.  Hiram,  King  of
Tyre,  in  whose  dominions  Mount  Lebanon
was  situated,  furnished  these  trees  for  the
building  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon.  In
relation  to  Lebanon,  Kitto,  in  his  Biblical
Cyclopedia,  has  these  remarks:  “The  for¬
ests  of  the  Lebanon  mountains  only  could
supply  the  timber  for  the  Temple.  Such
of  these  forests  as  lay  nearest  the  sea  were
in  the  possession  of  the  Phoenicians,  among
whom  timber  was  in  such  constant  demand,
that  they  had  acquired  great  and  ac¬
knowledged  skill  in  the  felling  and  trans¬
portation  thereof;  and  hence  it  was  of  such
importance  that  Hiram  consented  to  em¬
ploy  large  bodies  of  men  in  Lebanon  to
new  timber,  as  well  as  others  to  perform
the  service  of  bringing  it  down  to  the  sea¬
side,  whence  it  was  to  be  taken  along  the
coasts  in  floats  to  the  port  of  Joppa,  from
which  place  it  could  be  easily  taken  across
the  country  to  Jerusalem.”

The  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
has  dedicated  to  this  mountain  its  twenty-
second  degree,  or  Prince  of  Lebanon.  The
Druses  now  inhabit  Mount  Lebanon,  and


still  preserve  there  a  secret  organization.
See  Druses.

Lebanon,  Prince  of.  See  Prince
of  Lebanon.

Le  Bauld  de  Nans,  Claude
[Etienne.  A  distinguished  Masonic
writer,  born  at  Besan<;on  in  1736.  He  was
by  profession  a  highly  respected  actor,  and
a  man  of  much  learning,  which  he  devoted
to  the  cultivation  of  Freemasonry.  He
was  for  seven  years  Master  of  the  Lodge
St.  Charles  de  l’Union,  in  Mannheim;  and
on  his  removal  to  Berlin,  in  1771,  became
the  Orator  of  the  Lodge  Roy  ale  York  de
l’Amitie',  and  editor  of  a  Masonic  journal.
He  delivered,  while  Orator  of  the  Lodge,
—  a  position  which  he  resigned  in  1778, —
a  large  number  of  discourses,  a  collection
of  which  was  published  at  Berlin  in  1788.
He  also  composed  many  Masonic  odes  and
songs,  and  published,  in  1781,  a  collection
of  his  songs  for  the  use  of  the  Lodge  Royale
York,  and  in  1786,  his  Lyre  Maqonnique.
He  is  described  by  his  contemporaries  as  a
man  of  great  knowledge  and  talents,  and
Fessler  has  paid  a  warm  tribute  to  his
learning  and  to  his  labors  in  behalf  of
Masonry.  He  died  at  Berlin  in  1789.

Lechangcur.  An  officer  of  one  of
the  Lodges  of  Milan,  Italy,  of  whom  Re¬
bold  (Hist,  des  Trois  G.  Loges,  p.  573,)  gives
the  following  account.  When,  in  1805,  a
Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite  was  established  at
Milan,  Lechangeur  became  a  candidate  for
membership.  He  received  some  of  the  de¬
grees;  but  subsequently  the  founders  of  the
Council,  for  satisfactory  reasons,  declined
to  confer  upon  him  the  superior  grades.
Incensed  at  this,  Lechangeur  announced  to
them  that  he  would  elevate  himself  above
them  by  creating  a  Rite  of  ninety  degrees,
into  which  they  should  not  be  admitted.
He  carried  this  project  into  effect,  and  the
result  was  the  Rite  of  Mizraim,  of  which
he  declared  himself  to  be  the  Superior
Grand  Conservator.  His  energies  seem  to
have  been  exhausted  in  the  creation  of  his
unwieldy  Rite,  for  no  Chapters  were  estab¬
lished  except  in  the  city  of  Naples.  But
in  1810  a  patent  was  granted  by  him  to
Michel  Bedarride,  by  wdiom  the  Rite  wTas
propagated  in  France.  Lechangeur’s  fame,
as  the  founder  of  the  Rite,  was  overshad¬
owed  by  the  greater  zeal  and  impetuosity
of  Bedarride,  by  whom  his  self-assumed
prerogatives  were  usurped.  He  died  in
1812.

Leelurc.  Each  degree  of  Masonry
contains  a  course  of  instruction,  in  which
the  ceremonies,  traditions,  and  moral  in¬
struction  appertaining  to  the  degree  are
set  forth.  This  arrangement  is  called  a
lecture.  Each  lecture,  for  the  sake  of  con-


448


LECTURE


LECTURES


venience,  and  for  the  purpose  of  conform¬
ing  to  certain  divisions  in  the  ceremonies,
is  divided  into  sections,  the  number  of
which  have  varied  at  different  periods,
although  the  substance  remains  the  same.
According  to  Preston,  the  lecture  of  the
first  degree  contains  six  sections ;  that  of
the  second,  four ;  and  that  of  the  third,
twelve.  But  according  to  the  arrangement
adopted  in  this  country,  commonly  known
as  the  “  Webb  lectures,”  there  are  three
sections  in  the  first  degree,  two  in  the
second,  and  three  in  the  third.

In  the  Entered  Apprentices’,  the  first  sec¬
tion  is  almost  entirely  devoted  to  a  reca¬
pitulation  of  the  ceremonies  of  initiation.
The  initiatory  portion,  however,  supplies
certain  modes  of  recognition.  The  second
section  is  occupied  with  an  explanation  of
the  ceremonies  that  had  been  detailed  in
the  first, —  the  two  together  furnishing  the
interpretation  of  ritualistic  symbolism.
The  third  is  exclusively  occupied  in  ex¬
plaining  the  signification  of  the  symbols
peculiar  to  the  degree.

In  the  Fellow  Craft’s  degree,  the  first
section,  like  the  first  section  of  the  Entered
Apprentice,  is  merely  a  recapitulation  of
ceremonies,  with  a  passing  commentary  on
some  of  them.  The  second  section  intro¬
duces  the  neophyte  for  the  first  time  to  the
differences  between  Operative  and  Specu¬
lative  Masonry  and  to  the  Temple  of  King
Solomon  as  a  Masonic  symbol,  while  the  can¬
didate  is  ingeniously  deputed  as  a  seeker
after  knowledge.

In  the  Master’s  degree  the  first  section
is  again  only  a  detail  of  ceremonies.  The
second  section  is  the  most  important  and
impressive  portion  of  all  the  lectures,  for  it
contains  the  legend  on  which  the  whole
symbolic  character  of  the  Institution  is
founded.  The  third  section  is  an  interpre¬
tation  of  the  symbols  of  the  degree,  and  is,
of  all  the  sections,  the  one  least  creditable
to  the  composer.

In  fact,  it  must  be  confessed  that  many
of  the  interpretations  given  in  these  lec¬
tures  are  unsatisfactory  to  the  cultivated
mind,  and  seem  to  have  been  adopted  on
the  principle  of  the  old  Egyptians,  who
made  use  of  symbols  to  conceal  rather  than
to  express  their  thoughts.  Learned  Ma¬
sons  have  been,  therefore,  always  disposed
to  go  beyond  the  mere  technicalities  and
stereotyped  phrases  of  the  lectures,  and  to
look  in  the  history  and  the  philosophy  of
the  ancient  religions,  aud  the  organization
of  the  ancient  mysteries,  for  a  true  expla¬
nation  of  most  of  the  symbols  of  Masonry,
and  there  they  have  always  been  enabled
to  find  this  true  interpretation.  The  lec¬
tures,  however,  serve  as  an  introduction  or
preliminary  essay,  enabling  the  .student,  as  1


he  advances  in  his  initiation,  to  become
acquainted  with  the  symbolic  character  of
the  Institution.  But  if  he  ever  expects  to
become  a  learned  Mason,  he  must  seek  in
other  sources  for  the  true  development  of
Masonic  symbolism.  The  lectures  alone
are  but  the  primer  of  the  science.

Lecturer,  Grand.  An  officer  known
only  in  the  United  States.  He  is  ap¬
pointed  by  the  Grand  Master  or  the  Grand
Lodge.  His  duty  is  to  visit  the  subordi¬
nate  Lodges,  and  instruct  them  in  the  ritual
of  the  Order  as  practised  in  his  jurisdic¬
tion,  for  which  he  receives  compensation
partly  from  the  Grand  Lodge  and  partly
from  the  Lodges  which  he  visits.

Lectures,  History  of  the.  To
each  of  the  degrees  of  Symbolic  Masonry
a  catechetical  instruction  is  appended,  in
which  the  ceremonies,  traditions,  and  other
esoteric  instructions  of  the  degree  are  con¬
tained.  A  knowledge  of  these  lectures —
which  must,  of  course,  be  communicated
by  oral  teaching — constitutes  a  very  impor¬
tant  part  of  a  Masonic  education ;  and,
until  the  great  progress  made  within  the
present  century  in  Masonic  literature,
many  “  bright  Masons,”  as  they  are  tech¬
nically  styled,  could  claim  no  other  founda¬
tion  than  such  a  knowledge  for  their  high
Masonic  reputation.  But  some  share  of
learning  more  difficult  to  attain,  and  more
sublime  in  its  character  than  anything  to
be  found  in  these  oral  catechisms,  is  now
considered  necessary  to  form  a  Masonic
scholar.  Still,  as  the  best  commentary'  on
the  ritual  observances  is  to  be  found  in  the
lectures,  and  as  they  also  furnish  a  large
portion  of  that  secret  mode  of  recognition,
or  that  universal  language,  which  has  al¬
ways  been  the  boast  of  the  Institution,  not
only  is  a  knowledgeofthem  absolutely  neces¬
sary  to  every  practical  Freemason,  but  a
history  of  the  changes  which  they  have  from
time  to  time  undergone  constitutes  an  in¬
teresting  part  of  the  literature  of  the  Order.

Comparatively  speaking,  (comparatively
in  respect  to  the  age  of  the  Masonic  insti¬
tution,)  the  system  of  Lodge  lectures  is  un¬
doubtedly  a  modern  invention.  That  is  to
say,  we  can  find  no  traces  of  anv  forms  of
lectures  like  the  present  before  tlie  middle,
or  perhaps  the  close,  of  the  seventeenth  cen¬
tury.  Examinations,  however,  of  a  techni¬
cal  nature,  intended  to  test  the  claims  of  *
the  person  examined  to  the  privileges  of
the  Order,  appear  to  have  existed  at  an
early  period.  They  were  used  until  at
least  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,
but  were  perpetually  changing,  so  that  the
tests  of  one  generation  of  Masons  consti¬
tuted  no  tests  for  the  succeeding  one.  Oli¬
ver  very  properly  describes  them  as  being
“something  like  the  conundrums  of  the


LECTURES


LECTURES


449


present  day — difficult  of  comprehension  —
admitting  only  of  one  answer,  which  ap¬
peared  to  have  no  direct  correspondence
with  the  question,  and  applicable  only  in
consonance  with  the  mysteries  and  sym¬
bols  of  the  Institution.”  ( On  the  Masonic
Tests  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.  Golden  Re¬
mains,  vol.  iv.,  p.  16.)  These  tests  were
sometimes,  at  first,  distinct  from  the  lec¬
tures,  and  sometimes,  at  a  later  period,  in¬
corporated  with  them.  A  specimen  is  the
answer  to  the  question,  “How  blows  the
wind?”  which  was,  “  Due  east  and  west.”

The  “  Examination  of  a  German  Stone¬
mason,”  which  is  given  by  Findel  in  the
appendix  to  his  History,  was  most  probably
in  use  in  the  fourteenth  century.  Dr.
Oliver  was  in  possession  of  what  purports
to  be  a  formula,  which  he  supposes  to  have
been  used  during  the  Grand  Mastership  of
Archbishop  Chichely,  in  the  reign  of  Henry
VI.,  and  from  which  [Rev.  of  a  Sq.,  p.  11,)
he  makes  the  following  extracts:

“  Q.  Peace  be  here?  A.  I  hope  there  is.
Q.  What  o’clock  is  it?  A.  It  is  going  to
six,  or  going  to  twelve.  Q.  Are  you  very
busy?  A.  No.  Q.  Will  you  give  or  take?
A.  Both ;  or  which  you  please.  Q.  How  go
squares?  A.  Straight.  Q.  Are  you  rich  or
poor?  A.  Neither.  Q.  Change  me  that?
A.  I  will.  Q.  In  the  name  of  the  King  and
the  Holy  Church,  are  you  a  Mason  ?  A.  I
am  so  taken  to  be.  Q.  What  is  a  Mason  ?
A.  A  man  begot  by  a  man,  born  of  a  wo¬
man,  brother  to  a  king.  Q.  What  is  a  fel¬
low?  A.  A  companion  of  a  prince,  etc.”

There  are  other  questions  and  answers  of
a  similar  nature,  conveying  no  instruction,
and  intended  apparently  to  be  used  only  as
tests.  Dr.  Oliver  attributes,  it  will  be  seen,
the  date  of  these  questions  to  the  beginning  of
the  fifteenth  century ;  but  I  doubt  the  correct¬
ness  of  this  assumption.  They  have  no  inter¬
nal  evidence  in  style  of  having  been  the  inven¬
tion  ofso  early  a  period  of  the  English  tongue.

The  earliest  form  of  catechism  that  we
have  on  record  is  that  contained  in  the
Sloane  MS.,  No.  3329,  contained  in  the
British  Museum,  and  for  the  publication
of  which  we  are  indebted  to  that  laborious
exhumer  of  old  documents,  W.  J.  Hughan.
One  familiar  with  the  catechisms  of  the
eighteenth  century  will  detect  the  origin  of
much  that  they  contain  in  this  early  speci¬
men.  It  is  termed  in  the  manuscript  the
Mason’s  “private  discourse  by  way  of  ques¬
tion  and  answer,”  and  is  in  these  words:

“  Q.  Are  you  a  mason?  A.  Yes,  I  am  a
Freemason.  Q.  How  shall  I  know  that?  A.
By  perfect  signes  and  tokens  and  the  first
poynts  of  my  Ent’rance.  Q.  Which  is  the
first  signe  or  token,  shew  me  the  first  and  I
will  shew  you  the  second?  A.  The  first  is
heal  and  conceal  or  conceal  and  keep  se-
3  Q  29


crett  by  no  less  paine  than  cutting  my  tongue
from  my  throat.  Q.  Where  were  you  made
a  mason?  A.  In  a  just  and  perfect  or  just
arid  lawfull  lodge.  Q.  What  is  a  just  and
perfect  or  just  and  lawfull  lodge?  A.  A  just
and  perfect  lodge  is  two  Interprintices  two
fellow  craftes  and  two  Mast’rs,  more  or  fewer
the  more  the  merrier  the  fewer  the  better
chear  but  if  need  require  five  will  serve  that
is,  two  Interprintices,  two  fellow  craftes  and
one  Mast’r  on  the  highest  hill  or  lowest  valley
of  the  world  without  the  crow  of  a  cock  or
the  bark  of  a  dogg.  Q.  From  whom  do
you  derive  your  principalis?  A.  From  a
great’r  than  you.  Q.  Who  is  that  on  earth
that  is  great’r  than  a  freemason?  A.  He
y’t  was  caryed  to  y’e  highest  pinnicall  of
the  temple  of  Jerusalem.  Q.  Whith’r  is
your  lodge  shut  or  open?  A.  It  is  shut.
Q.  Where  lyes  the  keys  of  the  lodge  doore?
A.  They  ley  in  a  bound  case  or  under  a
three  cornered  pavem’t  about  a  foot  and
halfe  from  the  lodge  door.  Q.  What  is
the  key  of  your  lodge  doore  made  of?  A.
It  is  not  made  of  wood  stone  iron  or  steel
or  any  sort  of  mettle  but  the  tongue  of
good  report  behind  a  Broth’rs  back  as  well
as  before  his  face.  Q.  How  many  jewels
belong  to  your  lodge?  A.  There  are  three
the  square  pavem’t  the  blazing  star  and  the
Danty  tassley.  Q.  How  long  is  the  cable
rope  of  your  lodge?  A.  As  long  as  from
the  top  of  the  liver  to  the  root  of  the  tongue.
Q.  How  many  lights  are  in  your  lodge?
A.  Three  the  sun  the  mast’r  and  the  square.
Q.  How  high  is  your  lodge?  A.  Without
foots  yards  or  Inches,  it  reaches  to  heaven.
Q.  How  stood  your  lodge?  A.  East  and
west  as  all  holly  Temples  stand.  Q.  W’ch
is  the  mast’rs  place  in  the  lodge?  A.  The
east  place  is  the  mast’rs  place  in  the  lodge
andthejewell  resteth  on  him  first  and  he
sitteth  men  to  worke  w’t  the  m’rs  have  in
the  forenoon  the  wardens  reap  in  the
afternoon.  Q.  Where  was  the  word  first
given?  A.  At  the  tower  of  Babylon.
Q.  Where  did  they  first  call  their  lodge?
A.  At  the  holy  chapell  of  St.  John.  Q.
How  stood  your  lodge?  A.  As  the  said
holy  chapell  and  all  other  holy  Temples
stand  (viz.)  east  and  west.  Q.  How  many
lights  are  in  your  lodge?  A.  Two  one  to
see  to  go  in  and  another  to  see  to  work.
Q.  What  were  you  sworne  by  ?  A.  By  God
and  the  square.  Q.  Whither  above  the
cloathes  or  und’r  the  cloathes?  A.  Und’r  the
cloathes.  Q.  Und’r  what  arme?  A.  Und’r
the  right  arme.  God  is  gratfull  to  all  Wor-
shipfull  Mast’rs  and  fellows  in  that  worship-
full  lodge  from  whence  me  last  came  and  to
you  good  fellow  w’t  is  your  name.  A.  I  or
B  then  giving  the  grip  of  the  hand  he  will
say  Broth’r  John  greet  you  well  you.  A.
Goes  good  greeting  to  you  dear  Broth’r.”


450


LECTURES


LECTURES


But  when  we  speak  of  the  lectures,  in  the
modern  sense,  as  containing  an  exposition
of  the  symbolism  of  the  Order,  we  may  con¬
sider  it  as  an  established  historical  fact,  that
the  Fraternity  were  without  any  such  sys¬
tem  until  after  the  revival  in  1717.  Pre¬
vious  to  that  time,  brief  extemporary  ad¬
dresses  and  charges  in  addition  to  these
test  catechisms  were  used  by  the  Masters
of  Lodges,  which,  of  course,  varied  in  ex¬
cellence  with  the  varied  attainments  and
talents  of  the  presiding  officer.  We  know,
however,  that  a  series  of  charges  were  in
use  about  the  middle  and  end  of  the  seven¬
teenth  century,  which  were  ordered  “to
be  read  at  the  making  of  a  Freemason.”
These  “  Charges  and  Covenants,”  as  they
were  called,  contained  no  instructions  on
the  symbolism  and  ceremonies  of  the  Order,
but  were  confined  to  an  explanation  of  the
duties  of  Masons  to  each  other.  They  were
altogether  exoteric  in  their  character,  and
have  accordingly  been  repeatedly  printed
in  the  authorized  publications  of  the  Fra¬
ternity.

Dr.  Oliver,  who  had  ampler  opportuni¬
ties  than  any  other  Masonic  writer  of  in¬
vestigating  this  subject,  says  that  the  ear¬
liest  authorized  lectures  with  which  he  has
met  were  those  of  1720.  They  were  ar¬
ranged  by  Drs.  Anderson  and  Desaguliers,
perhaps,  at  the  same  time  that  they  were
compiling  the  Charges  and  Regulations
from  the  ancient  Constitutions.  They
were  written  in  a  catechetical  form,  which
form  has  ever  since  been  retained  in  all
subsequent  Masonic  lectures.  Oliver  says
that  “  the  questions  and  answers  are  short
and  comprehensive,  and  contain  a  brief  di¬
gest  of  the  general  principles  of  the  Craft
as  it  was  understood  at  that  period.”  The
“digest”  must,  indeed,  have  been  brief,
since  the  lecture  of  the  third  degree,  or
what  was  called  “the  Master’s  Part,”  con¬
tained  only  thirty-one  questions,  many  of
which  are  simply  tests  of  recognition.  Dr.
Oliver  says  the  number  of  questions  was
only  seven ;  but  I  have  very  carefully  col¬
lated  what  purports  to  be  a  copy  of  them,
and  can  only  explain  his  statement  by  the
probable  supposition  that  he  refers  to  the
seven  tests  which  conclude  the  lecture.
There  are,  however,  twenty-four  other  ques¬
tions  that  precede  these.

A  comparison  of  these  —  the  primitive
lectures,  as  they  may  be  called  —  with  those
in  use  in  America  at  the  present  day,  de¬
monstrate  that  a  great  many  changes  have
taken  place.  There  are  not  only  omissions
of  some  things,  and  additions  of  others,
but  sometimes  the  explanations  of  the  same
points  are  entirely  different  in  the  two  sys¬
tems.  Thus  the  Anderson  ian  lectures  de¬
scribe  the  “  furniture  ”  of  a  Lodge  as  being


the  “  Mosaic  pavement,  blazing  star,  and
indented  tassel,”  emblems  which  are  now
more  properly,  I  think,  designated  as
“  ornaments.”  But  the  present  furniture
of  a  Lodge  is  also  added  to  the  pavement,
star,  and  tassel,  under  the  name  of  “other
furniture.”  The  “greater  lights”  of  Ma¬
sonry  are  entirely  omitted,  or,  if  we  are  to
suppose  them  to  be  meant  by  the  expres¬
sion  “  fixed  lights,”  then  these  are  referred,
differently  from  our  system,  to  the  three
windows  of  the  Lodge.

In  the  first  degree  I  notice,  among  others,
the  following  points  in  the  Andersonian
lectures  which  are  omitted  in  the  Ameri¬
can  system :  the  place  and  duty  of  the
Senior  and  Junior  Entered  Apprentices,
the  punishment  of  cowans,  the  bone  bone-
box,  and  all  that  refers  to  it;  the  clothing
of  the  Master,  the  age  of  an  Apprentice,
the  uses  of  the  day  and  night,  and  the  direc¬
tion  of  the  wind.  These  latter,  however,
are,  strictly  speaking,  what  the  Masons  of
that  time  denominated  “  tests.”  In  the
same  degree,  the  following,  besides  many
other  important  points  in  the  present  sys¬
tem,  are  altogether  omitted  in  the  old  lec¬
tures  of  Anderson :  the  place  where  Masons
anciently  met,  the  theological  ladder,  and
the  lines  parallel.  Important  changes
have  been  made  in  several  particulars;  as,
for  instance,  in  the  “points  of  entrance,”
the  ancient  lecture  giving  an  entirely  dif¬
ferent  interpretation  of  the  expression,  and
designating  what  are  now  called  “points
of  entrance”  by  the  term  “principal  signs;”
the  distinctions  between  Operative  and
Speculative  Masonry,  which  are  now  re¬
ferred  to  the  second  degree,  are  there  given
in  the  first ;  and  the  dedication  of  the  Bible,
compass,  and  square  is  differently  explained.

In  the  second  degree,  the  variations  of
the  old  from  the  modern  lectures  are  still
greater.  The  old  lecture  is,  in  the  first  place,
very  brief,  and  much  instruction  deemed
important  at  the  present  day  was  then  al¬
together  omitted.  There  is  no  reference  to
the  distinctions  between  Operative  and
Speculative  Masonry,  (but,  as  I  have  al¬
ready  observed,  this  topic  is  adverted  to  in
the  former  lecture  ;)  the  approaches  to  the
middle  chamber  are  very  differently  ar¬
ranged  ;  and  not  a  single  word  is  said  of  the
fords  of  the  river  Jordan.  It  must  be  con¬
fessed  that  the  ancient  lecture  of  the  Fel¬
low-Craft  is  immeasurably  inferior  to  that
contained  in  the  modern  system,  and  espe¬
cially  in  that  of  Webb.

The  Andersonian  lecture  of  the  third
degree  is  brief,  and  therefore  imperfect.
The  legend  is,  of  course,  referred  to.  and  its
explanation  occupies  nearly  the  whole  of
the  lecture ;  but  the  details  are  meagre,  and
many  important  facts  are  omitted,  while


LECTURES


LECTURES


451


there  are  in  other  points  striking  differences
between  the  ancient  and  the  present  system.

But,  after  all,  there  is  a  general  feature  of
similarity  —  a  substratum  of  identity  —  per¬
vading  the  two  systems  of  lectures  —  the  an¬
cient  and  the  modern  —  which  shows  that
the  one  derives  its  parentage  from  the  other.
In  fact,  some  of  the  answers  given  in  the  year
1730  are,  word  for  word,  the  same  as  those
used  in  America  at  the  present  time.

Yet  it  was  not  long  before  the  develop¬
ments  of  Masonic  science,  and  the  increas¬
ing  intelligence  of  its  disciples,  made  it
necessary  to  prepare  an  improved  system.
The  lectures  of  Anderson  and  Desaguliers
were  the  production  of  the  infantile  age  of
lecture-making.  They  were  imperfect  and
unsatisfactory ;  and  it  was  determined  that
a  new  course  should  be  arranged.  Accord¬
ingly,  in  1732,  Martin  Clare,  A.  M.,  was
commissioned  by  the  Grand  Lodge  to  pre¬
pare  »  system  of  lectures,  which  should  be
“  adapted  to  the  existing  state  of  the  Order,
without  infringing  on  the  ancient  land¬
marks.”

Martin  Clare,  to  whom  this  important
trust  was  confided,  appears  to  have  been  a
man  of  learning,  or  at  least  of  literary
habits,  as  he  is  recorded  as  a  Master  of
Arts,  and  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society.
He  is  first  mentioned  in  Masonic  history  as
one  of  the  Grand  Stewards,  in  1735.  In
the  same  year  he  was  appointed  Junior
Grand  Warden,  and  delivered  an  address
before  the  Quarterly  Communication  of  the
Grand  Lodge.  In  1741,  he  received  from
the  Earl  of  Morton  the  appointment  of
Deputy  Grand  Master.  Oliver  says,  that
his  version  of  the  lectures  was  so  judiciously
drawn  up,  that  its  practice  was  enjoined  on
all  the  Lodges.

The  Clare  lectures  were,  of  course,  (for
that  was  the  object  of  their  compilation,)
an  amplification  and  improvement  of
those  of  Anderson.  In  them  the  symbol
of  the  point  within  the  circle  was  for  the
first  time  mentioned,  and  the  numbers
Three,  Five,  and  Seven  were  introduced,  and
referred  to  the  Christian  Trinity,  the  hu¬
man  senses,  and  the  institution  of  the  Sab¬
bath.  Subsequently,  but  at  what  period
we  are  not  informed,  these  references  were
changed  to  the  three  divisions  of  the  Tem¬
ple,  the  five  most  sacred  treasures  of  the
Sanctum  Sanctorum,  and  the  seven  years
occupied  in  the  construction  of  the  Temple.
Dr.  Oliver  says  that  this  change  was  made
by  the  Jewish  Masons.  I  doubt  it,  for  the
Jewish  Masons  were  never  in  sufficient
preponderance  in  the  Order  in  England  to
effect  so  important  an  alteration.  It  was
made,  I  rather  apprehend,  by  those  sensible
brethren  who  were  unwilling  to  see  the  cos¬
mopolitan  character  of  the  Institution  im¬


paired  by  any  sectarian  references  in  reli¬
gion.  But  it  must  be  confessed  that,  from
the  time  of  these  lectures  to  the  last  ar¬
rangement  by  Hemming,  there  has  always
been  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  a
disposition  to  Christianize  Masonry.  The
system  completed  by  Anderson  was  com¬
paratively  free  from  this  defect;  and  we
will  find  in  the  lectures  in  use  in  1730
very  few  allusions  that  can  be  tortured  into
a  religious  meaning  beyond  the  universal
religion  recognized  in  the  charges  of  1722.
Anderson,  in  speaking  of  the  winding  stairs,
had  mentioned,  as  I  have  already  said,  only
the  number  seven,  which  he  explained  by
referring  to  the  fact  that  “  seven  or  more
made  a  just  and  perfect  Lodge.”  As  to  the
point  within  the  circle,  now  one  of  the
most  important  symbols,  he  had  only  al¬
luded  to  it,  almost  parenthetically,  when,  in
describing  the  Point ,  Line,  Superficies,  and
Solid  as  the  “  four  principles  of  Masonry,”
he  explains  the  point  as  being  “the  centre
round  which  the  Master  cannot  err.”  It
will  be  readily  seen  how,  since  his  day,  this
slight  idea  has  been  amplified  by  modern
lecture- makers,  beginning  with  Martin
Clare  and  ending  with  Thomas  Smith
Webb.

But  lecture-making  seems  to  have  been
a  popular  fancy  at  that  early  period  of  what
may  be  called  the  Masonic  renaissance.
The  Clare  lectures  did  not  very  long  occupy
their  authoritative  position  in  the  Order.
Though  longer  and  more  elevated  than
those  of  Anderson,  they  were,  in  the  course
of  a  few  years,  found  to  be  neither  long
enough,  nor  sufficiently  elevated,  for  the  in¬
creasing  demands  of  Masonic  progress.

Accordingly,  some  time  about  the  year
1770,  (I  am  unable  precisely  to  fix  the  date,)
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  authorized
Thomas  Dunckerley,  Esq.,  to  prepare  a  new
course  of  lectures,  which  were  to  take  the
place  of  those  of  Martin  Clare.

Dunckerley  was  a  brother  of  much  dis¬
tinction  in  those  days.  Preston  calls  him
“  that  truly  Masonic  luminary ;  ”  and  Oliver
says  that  “  he  was  the  oracle  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  the  accredited  interpreter  of  its
Constitutions.”  He  held  the  position  of  a
Provincial  Grand  Master,  and,  for  his  emi¬
nent  services  to  the  Craft,  had  been  honored
by  the  Grand  Lodge  with  the  titular  rank
of  a  Past  Senior  Grand  Warden.

Dunckerley’s  lectures  are  said  to  have
been  a  very  considerable  amplification  of
those  of  Clare.  To  him  is  ascribed  the
adoption  of  the  “  lines  parallel,”  as  sym¬
bolic  of  the  two  Saints  John  ;  and  he  also
introduced  the  theological  ladder,  with  its
three  principal  rounds, — a  beautiful  and
instructive  symbol,  that  has  been  retained
to  the  present  day,  but  imperfectly  ex-


452


LECTURES


LECTURES


plained.  Webb,  it  is  true,  referred  to  its
“  three  principal  rounds,”  leaving  room,  by
implication,  for  the  addition  of  others.
But  Cross,  who  was  wholly  unacquainted
with  ancient  symbolism,  drew  a  picture,
(for  which,  by  the  by,  he  takes  great  credit,)
in  which  he  absolutely  made  the  rounds
three  in  number,  and  no  more;  thus  fix¬
ing  an  incorrect  theory  on  the  Masonic
mind.  The  Masonic  ladder,  like  its  pro¬
totype  in  all  the  mysteries,  consists  of
seven  rounds.

But  by  far  the  most  important  change
made  by  Dunckerley  was  in  respect  to  the
Master’s  word.  It  is  known  that,  in  the
pursuit  of  his  Masonic  studies,  he  at  one
time  frequented  the  Ancient  or  Athol
Lodges,  whose  greatest  point  of  difference
from  the  Moderns  was,  that  they  had  dis¬
severed  the  third  degree,  and  established  a
portion  of  it  as  their  fourth,  or  Royal  Arch.
Dunckerley  was  pleased  with  this  arrange¬
ment,  and,  in  imitation  of  it,  reconstructed
Dermott’s  Royal  Arch,  and  introduced  it
into  the  legal  Grand  Lodge.  This  of  course
led  to  the  necessity  of  transferring  the
word  formerly  used  in  the  third  to  the
fourth  degree,  and  confining  the  former  to
the  substitute.  This  was  undoubtedly  an
innovation,  and  was  at  first  received  with
disapprobation  by  many  brethren  ;  but  in
time  they  became  reconciled  to  the  change,
which  perhaps  no  one  with  less  influence
than  Dunckerley  could  have  ventured  to
propose.

But  even  Dunckerley,  with  all  the  influ¬
ence  of  his  talents,  and  his  virtues,  and  his
social  position,  was  at  length  forced  to  suc¬
cumb  at  the  approach  of  greater  lights  in
Masonry.  At  the  very  time  that  Duncker¬
ley  was  establishing  his  course  of  lectures
in  the  London  and  adjacent  Lodges,
William  Hutchinson,  as  the  Master  of
Bernard  Castle  Lodge,  in  the  county  of
Durham,  in  the  north  of  England,  was
preparing  and  using  a  system  of  his  own,
which,  on  account  of  its  excellence,  was
readily  adopted  by  many  Lodges  in  his
vicinity.  What  was  the  precise  form  of
the  Hutchinsonian  lectures  I  am  unable  to
say,  as  no  ritual  of  his  is  perhaps  existing;
but  their  general  spirit  may  well  be  con¬
jectured  from  the  admirable  treatise  which
he  published  in  1775,  and  which  was  the
most,  if  not  the  first,  scientific  work  on
Masonry  that  up  to  that  period  had  ap¬
peared  in  England.  From  the  contents  of
this  book  we  may  collect  the  ideas  which
were  entertained  by  the  author  on  the  sub¬
ject  of  the  Institution,  and  which  we  have
every  reason  to  believe  he  incorporated
into  the  lectures  with  which  he  instructed
the  Lodge  over  which  he  presided.  The
treatise  on  the  Spirit  of  Masonry  we  may


therefore  suppose  to  be  a  commentary  on
his  lectures.  If  so,  they  introduced  for  the
first  time  a  scientific  element  into  Masonic
lectures — an  element  unknown  to  those
compiled  by  Anderson  and  Clare  and
Dunckerley.  Above  all,  we  are  indebted
to  Hutchinson  for  restoring  the  ancient
symbolism  of  the  third  degree,  and  for
showing  that,  in  all  past  times,  its  legend
was  but  typical  of  a  resurrection  from  the
grave;  a  "thought  that  does  not  seem  to
have  attracted  the  early  lecturers,  although
always  existing  in  the  Masonic  system.
Even  Webb,  twenty-five  years  after  Hutch¬
inson’s  book  appeared,  could  only  find  in
the  legend  of  the  third  degree  “  an  instance
of  virtue,  fortitude,  and  integrity  seldom
equalled  and  never  excelled  in  the  history
of  man.”  And  to  teach  this  lesson  only
was  the  Institution  preserved  for  centuries.

Alas!  for  such  lectures.

Eminently  philosophical  must  have  been
the  lectures  of  Hutchinson,  and  far  su¬
perior  to  the  meagre  details  with  which  the
Craft  had  been  previously  content.  Their
influence  i3  undoubtedly  still  felt  in  the  In¬
stitution  ;  if  not  in  its  catechetical  lec¬
tures,  at  all  events  in  the  general  notions
of  symbolism  which  are  now  entertained
by  the  Craft.

But  while  Hutchinson  was  laboring  in
the  north  of  England,  another  light,  of  al¬
most  equal  splendor,  appeared  in  the  south ;
and  a  system  of  lectures  was  prepared  by
William  Preston,  which  soon  superseded
all  those  that  had  previously  been  in  use.
It  is  supposed  that  Hutchinson  and  Preston
at  length  united  in  this  undertaking,  and
that  the  Prestonian  lectures,  which  were
afterwards  universally  adopted,  were  the
result  of  the  combined  labors  of  the  two.
If  such  was  the  case —  and  Oliver  suggests
it,  though  I  know  not  on  what  authority —
it  will  rationally  account  for  the  fact  that
the  lectures  of  Hutchinson  no  longer  exist.
They  were  merged  in  those  of  Preston.

The  Prestonian  lectures,  which  were  ar¬
ranged  by  that  distinguished  writer  in
the  last  quarter  of  the  last  century,  con¬
tinued  to  be  used  authoritatively  in  Eng¬
land  until  the  union  of  the  two  Grand
Lodges  in  1813,  nor  are  they  yet  entirely
abandoned  in  that  country.  Though  not
generally  accessible  to  the  Craft,  they  have,
it  is  said,  been  preserved  in  their  integrity,
and  the  “  Prestonian  lectures  ”  are  annually
delivered  in  London,  although  now  more
as  a  matter  of  curiosity  than  of  instruction,
by  a  competent  brother,  who  is  appointed
for  that  purpose  by  the  Grand  Master  of
England.

Preston  divided  the  lecture  on  the  first
degree  into  six  sections,  the  second  into
four,  and  the  third  into  twelve.  But  of  the


LECTURES


LECTURES


453


twelve  sections  of  the  third  lecture,  seven
only  strictly  appertain  to  the  Master’s  de¬
gree,  the  remaining  five  referring  to  the
ceremonies  of  the  Order,  which,  in  the
American  system,  are  contained  in  the  Past
Master’s  lecture.  Preston  has  recapitulated
the  subjects  of  these  several  lectures  in  his
Illustrations  of  Masonry;  and  if  the  book
were  not  now  so  readily  accessible,  it  would
be  worth  while  to  copy  his  remarks.  It  is
sufficient,  however,  to  say  that  he  has  pre¬
sented  us  with  a  philosophical  system  of
Masonry,  which,  coming  immediately  after
the  unscientific  and  scanty  details  which
up  to  his  time  had  been  the  subjects  of
Lodge  instructions,  must  have  been  like
the  bursting  forth  of  a  sun  from  the  midst
of  midnight  darkness.  There  was  no  twi¬
light  or  dawn  to  warn  the  unexpectant  Fra¬
ternity  of  the  light  that  was  about  to  shine
upon  them.  But  at  once,  without  prepara¬
tion —  without  any  gradual  progress  or
growth  from  almost  nothing  to  superfluity
—  the  Prestonian  lectures  were  given  to
the  Order  in  all  their  fulness  of  illustra¬
tion  and  richness  of  symbolism  and  science,
as  a  substitute  for  the  plain  and  almost  un¬
meaning  systems  that  had  previously  pre¬
vailed.  Byron  I  think  it  was  who  said  that
he  awoke  one  morning  and  found  himself
famous.  Personifying  Freemasonry,  she
too  might  have  said,  on  the  day  that  Pres¬
ton  propounded  his  system,  that  she  had
been  awakened  from  the  sleep  of  half  a  cen¬
tury  to  find  herself  a  science.  Not  that
Freemasonry  had  not  always  been  a  science,
but  that  for  all  that  time,  and  longer,  her
science  had  been  dormant  —  had  been  in
abeyance.  From  1717  the  Craft  had  been
engaged  in  something  less  profitable,  but
more  congenial  than  the  cultivation  of
Masonic  science.  The  pleasant  suppers,
the  modicums  of  punch,  the  harmony  of
song,  the  miserable  puns,  which  would  have
provoked  the  ire  of  Johnson  beyond  any¬
thing  that  Boswell  has  recorded,  left  no
time  for  inquiry  into  abstruser  matters.
The  revelations  of  Dr.  Oliver’s  square  fur¬
nish  us  abundant  positive  evidence  of  the
low  state  of  Masonic  literature  in  those
days;  and  if  we  need  negative  proof,  we
will  find  it  in  the  entire  absence  of  any
readable  book  on  Scientific  Masonry,  until
the  appearance  of  Hutchinson’s  and  Pres¬
ton’s  works.  Preston’s  lectures  were,  there¬
fore,  undoubtedly  the  inauguration  of  a
new  era  in  the  esoteric  system  of  Freema¬
sonry.

These  lectures  continued  for  nearly  half
a  century  to  be  the  authoritative  text  of  the
Order  in  England.  But  in  1813  the  two
Grand  Lodges  —  the  “Moderns”  and  the
“Ancients,”  as  they  were  called  —  after
years  of  antagonism,  were  happily  united,


and  then,  as  the  first  exercise  of  this  newly-
combined  authority,  it  was  determined  “  to
revise  ”  the  system  of  lectures.

This  duty  was  intrusted  to  the  Rev.  Dr.
Hemming,  the  Senior  Grand  Warden,  and
the  result  was  the  Union  or  Hemming  lec¬
tures,  which  are  now  the  authoritative
standard  of  English  Masonry.  In  these
lectures  many  alterations  of  the  Prestonian
system  were  made,  and  some  of  the  most
cherished  symbols  of  the  Fraternity  were
abandoned,  as,  for  instance,  the  twelve  grand
points,  the  initiation  of  the  free  horn,  and  the
lines  parallel.  Preston’s  lectures  were  re¬
jected  in  consequence,  it  is  said,  of  their
Christian  references;  and  Dr.  Hemming,
in  attempting  to  avoid  this  error,  fell  into
a  greater  one,  of  omitting  in  his  new  course
some  of  the  important  ritualistic  landmarks
of  the  Order.  Hence  it  is  that  many
Lodges  still  prefer  the  Prestonian  to  the
Hemming  lectures,  and  that  the  Grand
Master  still  appoints  annually  a  skilful
brother  to  deliver  the  Prestonian  lectures,
although  the  Lodges  no  longer  work  under
their  directions.

I  have  thus  rapidly  run  through  the  his¬
tory  of  the  changes  in  the  lectures  in  Eng¬
land  from  1717  to  1813.  But  all  this  time
there  wras  an  undercurrent  working  with
silent  influence,  of  which  it  is  necessary  to
take  some  notice.  In  1739  a  schism  oc¬
curred  in  England,  and  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Ancient  York  Masons  was  established  in
opposition  to  the  old  Grand  Lodge.  The
latter  was  reproachfully  denominated  the
“  Moderns,”  while  the  former  assumed  the
name  of  the  “  Ancients.”  The  assump¬
tion  made  by  the  latter  body  (whether  cor¬
rectly  or  not,  this  is  not  the  place  to  inquire)
was,  that  the  Moderns  had  lost,  changed,  or
never  knew  the  true  work,  especially  in  the
third  degree.  Of  course,  under  this  con¬
viction,  the  “  Ancients  ”  were  compelled,
for  the  sake  of  consistency  at  least,  to  ar¬
range  a  set  of  lectures  peculiar  to  them¬
selves.  Of  the  history  of  lecture  making
in  the  schismatic  body  we  have  no  partic¬
ulars,  as  the  records  of  that  body  were  not
published,  as  were  those  of  the  Moderns  by
Preston,  Smith,  Anderson,  and  his  succes¬
sors.  But  we  know  that  Laurence  Dermott
was  the  Coryphaeus  of  that  band  of  schis¬
matics,  and  to  him,  as  a  man  of  talents
and  Masonic  intelligence,  —  a  man,  too,  of
great  zeal  and  energy,  (for,  say  what  we  will
of  him,  we  cannot  deny  him  that  praise,)
—  it  is  almost  certain  that  the  task  of
preparing  the  Ancient  lectures  must  have
been  intrusted.  So,  then,  while  the
“  Moderns  ”  were  practising  the  systems  of
Anderson  and  Clare  and  Dunckerlev,  the
“Ancients”  were  contenting  themselves
with  that  of  Dermott,  and  did  so  content


454


LECTURES


LECTURES


themselves,  as  we  have  every  reason  to  be¬
lieve,  until  the  union  in  1813,  when,  per¬
haps,  we  are  truly  to  look  for  the  origin  of
the  Hemming  lectures  in  the  fact  that  they
were  a  compromise  between  the  two  sys¬
tems  of  the  Ancients  and  the  Moderns.

But  there  is  something  more  that
“hangs”  upon  this  history,  which  it  is
important  for  us  to  know.  It  has  already
been  seen  that  Dunckerley  visited  the
Ancient  Lodges,  and  that  he  derived  from
them  the  idea  of  dissevering  the  Royal
Arch  from  the  Master’s  degree  —  an  inno¬
vation  which  he  successfully  introduced
into  the  Modern  Grand  Lodge.  Now,  to
enable  him  to  do  this,  it  was  necessary  that
he  should  incorporate  something  of  the
Ancient  lectures  into  his  own.  We  know
this  only  from  logical  deduction  —  our
proof  is  ex  necessitate  rei  —  he  could  not
have  done  otherwise.  Adopting  Dermott’s
Royal  Arch,  he  must  have  adopted  Der¬
mott’s  illustrations  of  it,  if  not  in  exact
words,  at  least  substantially  and  in  spirit.
Here  was  the  first  influence  exerted  on  the
lectures  of  the  Modern  Grand  Lodge  by
the  system  of  the  Ancients.

But  again :  we  know  that  Preston  was
initiated  in  a  Dermott  or  Ancient  Lodge,
and  was  afterwards  induced  to  withdraw
from  that  body  and  unite  with  the  Moderns.
But  we  have  every  reason  to  suppose  that
the  influences  of  his  early  Masonic  educa¬
tion  were  not  altogether  forgotten,  and  that,
like  a  wise  man,  as  he  was,  in  arranging
his  new  system,  he  “  borrowed  sweets  from
every  flower,”  and  incorporated  the  best

(>arts  of  the  Ancient  system,  so  far  a3  he
egally  could,  into  his  own.  Here,  then,  was
a  second  instance  of  the  influence  exerted
by  the  one  society  upon  the  other,  all  of
which  must  have  rendered  the  compromise
in  1813  a  matter  of  still  easier  accomplish¬
ment.

This  episode  in  the  history  of  the  lec¬
tures  of  the  regular  system  was  necessary
to  enable  us  to  lay  a  conjectural  foundation
for  the  same  history  in  America.  I  say  a
“  conjectural  foundation ;  ”  for  in  the  treat¬
ment  of  an  esoteric  subject  like  this,  where
the  greatest  pains  have  necessarily  been
taken  to  preserve  secrecy,  and  where  there
are  no  books  of  authority,  and  few  manu¬
scripts  to  reward  our  researches,  it  is  abso¬
lutely  necessary  that  much  must  be  left  to
conjecture.  But  this  conjecture  must  be
within  the  bounds  of  analogical  reason.
When  we  conjecture  a  fact,  and  assign  a
reason  for  the  conjecture,  we  are  to  be
governed  by  the  rules  of  circumstantial
evidence.  The  reason  we  assign  must  not
only  account  in  every  way  for  the  fact,  but
it  must  be  the  only  reason  that  will.

I  am  unable  to  say  definitely  what  lec¬


tures  were  generally  used  in  the  United
States  during  the  last  century ;  but  there  is
every  reason  for  believing  that  the  full
Prestonian  lecture  was  not  adopted.  In
fact,  a  number  of  the  Lodges  in  America
derived  their  charters  from  the  Athol
Grand  Lodge,  or  from  Grand  Lodges  in
correspondence  and  union  with  it.  Der¬
mott’s  Ahiman  Rezon  was  a  more  popular
work  among  the  American  Masons  than
Anderson’s  Constitutions.  The  Royal
Arch  was  dissevered  from  the  Master,  and
given  as  a  distinct  degree.  And  hence  we
may  well  suppose  that  the  Dermott  lectures
were  more  in  use  than  the  Prestonian.
This  is,  however,  mere  conjecture;  for
manuscripts  anterior  to  1800  are  rare  —
perhaps  do  not  exist;  and  we  have  no
Prichards,  or  Finches,  or  Brownes  to  give
us  an  inkling  of  the  Lodge  work  in  those
days.  Neither  had  we  any  lecture  makers
among  us;  and  whatever  was  first  received
was  retained  without  other  change  than
that  which  might  have  resulted  from  the
infirmity  of  memory  in  Masters  and  lec¬
turers.

But  in  the  last  decennium  of  the  eigh¬
teenth  century,  a  lecture  maker  did  arise
among  the  American  Masons;  and  to
Thomas  Smith  Webb  we  are  indebted  for
our  present  system  of  Lodge  lectures.

Webb  was  a  man  of  some  talent — not
equal,  it  is  true,  to  Hutchinson  or  Preston  ;
but  one  who  had  paid  more  attention  to
Masonry,  and  knew  more  about  it,  than  any
man  of  his  times  in  this  country.  It  is
said,  upon  what  authority  I  know  not,  but
I  think  the  fact  is  credible,  that  he  visited
England,  and  obtained  instructions  from
Preston  himself.  At  the  same  time,  such
a  man  would  not  have  undertaken  such  a
voyage  without  making  himself  acquainted
wdth  the  other  systems  prevailing  in  Eng¬
land,  and  his  subsequent  course  shows  that
he  extended  his  investigations  to  the  con¬
tinental  science  of  Masonry  as  developed
in  the  “  hautes  grades.”  On  his  return
home,  he  availed  himself  of  all  these  va¬
ried  advantages  to  compile  and  arrange
that  system,  not  only  of  lectures,  but  of
degrees,  which  has  ever  since  been  prac¬
tised  in  this  country.

The  lectures  of  Webb  contained  much  that
was  almost  a  verbal  copy  of  parts  of  Preston  ;
but  the  whole  system  was  briefer,  and  the
paragraphs  were  framed  with  an  evident
view  to  facility  in  committing  them  to
memory.  It  is  an  herculean  task  to  ac¬
quire  the  whole  system  of  Prestonian  lec¬
tures,  while  that  of  Webb  may  be  mastered
in  a  comparatively  short  time,  and  by  much
inferior  intellects.  There  have,  in  conse¬
quence,  in  former  years,  been  many  “  bright
Masons  ”  and  “  skilful  lecturers  ”  whose


LEFRANC


LEGATE


455


brightness  and  skill  consisted  only  in  the
easy  repetition  from  memory  of  the  set
form  of  phrases  established  by  Webb,  and
who  were  otherwise  ignorant  of  all  the
science,  the  philosophy,  and  the  history  of
Masonry.  But  in  the  later  years,  a  perfect
verbal  knowledge  of  the  lectures  has  not
been  esteemed  so  highly  in  this  country  as
in  England,  and  our  most  erudite  Masons
have  devoted  themselves  to  the  study  of
those  illustrations  and  that  symbolism  of
the  Order  which  lie  outside  of  the  lectures.
Book  Masonry — that  is,  the  study  of  the
principles  of  the  Institution  as  any  other
science  is  studied,  by  means  of  the  various
treatises  which  have  been  written  on  these
subjects  —  has  been,  from  year  to  year,  get¬
ting  more  popular  with  us  ;  and  the  Ameri¬
can  Masonic  public  is  becoming  emphati¬
cally  a  reading  people.

This  is  not  in  any  way  to  be  regretted.
Nay,  it  is  something  upon  which  we  may
congratulate  ourselves,  that  a  library  is  be¬
coming  as  indispensable  to  a  Masonic  stu¬
dent  as  a  tool-chest  to  a  mechanic.  But,
at  the  same  time,  it  is  desirable  that  the
lectures,  too,  which  contain,  or  ought  to
contain,  the  elements  of  the  science,  should
be  made  the  subject  of  special  study.  And
it  is,  above  all,  to  be  wished  that  our  lec¬
tures  were  more  scientific  —  that  Webb  had
made  them  a  little  more  Prestonian  in  their
character,  and  that  they  contained  some¬
thing  elevated  enough  to  entice  and  gratify
intellectual  Masons.

The  lecture  on  the  third  degree  is,  it  is
true,  less  objectional  on  this  ground  than
the  others.  It  is  eminently  Ilutcliinsonian
in  its  character,  and  contains  the  bud
from  which,  by  a  little  cultivation,  we
might  bring  forth  a  gorgeous  blossom  of
symbolism.  Hence,  the  third  degree  has
always  been  the  favorite  of  American  Ma¬
sons.  But  the  lectures  of  the  first  and
second  degrees,  the  latter  particularly,  are
meagre  and  unsatisfactory.  The  explana¬
tions,  for  instance,  of  the  form  and  extent
of  the  Lodge,  of  its  covering,  of  the  theo¬
logical  ladder,  and  especially  of  the  point
within  the  circle,  will  disappoint  any  intel¬
lectual  student  who  is  seeking,  in  a  sym¬
bolical  science,  for  some  rational  explana¬
tion  of  its  symbols  that  promises  to  be
worthy  of  his  investigations.

Lefranc.  The  Abb6  Lefranc,  Su¬
perior  of  the  House  of  the  Eudistes  at  Caen,
was  a  very  bitter  enemy  of  Freemasonry,
and  the  author  of  two  libellous  works
against  Freemasonry,  both  published  in
Paris;  the  first  and  best  known,  entitled
“  Le  Voile  lev6  pour  les  curieux,  ou  le
secret  des  resolutions,  r6v616  it  l’aide  de  la
Franc-Maqonnerie,”  1791,  (republished  at
Liege  in  1827,)  and  the  other,  “  Conjura¬


tion  contre  la  religion  Catholique  ct  les
souverains,  dont  le  projet,  conqu  eu  France,
doit  s’^xecuter  dans  l’univers  entier,”  1792.
In  these  scandalous  books,  and  especially
in  the  former,  Lefranc  has,  to  use  the  lan¬
guage  of  Thory,  “  vomited  the  most  unde¬
served  abuse  of  the  Order.”  Of  the  Veil
Lifted,  the  two  great  detractors  of  Masonry,
Robison  and  Barruel,  entertained  different
opinions.  Robison  made  great  use  of  it  in
his  Proofs  of  a  Conspiracy ;  but  Barruel,
while  speaking  highly  of  the  Abbe’s  vir¬
tues,  doubts  his  accuracy  and  declines  to
trust  to  his  authority.  Lefranc  was  slain
in  the  massacre  of  September  2,  at  the
Convent  of  the  Carmelites,  in  Paris,  with
one  hundred  and  ninety-one  other  priests.
Thory  ( Act .  Lat.,  i.  192,")  says  that  M.  Led-
hui,  a  Freemason,  who  was  present  at  the
sanguinary  scene,  attempted  to  save  the  life
of  Lefranc,  and  lost  his  own  in  the  effort.
The  Abb6  says  that,  on  the  death  of  a
friend,  who  was  a  zealous  Mason  and  Mas¬
ter  of  a  Lodge,  he  found  among  his  papers
a  collection  of  Masonic  writings  contain¬
ing  the  rituals  of  a  great  many  degrees,
and  from  these  he  obtained  the  information
on  which  he  has  based  his  attacks  upon  the
Order.  Some  idea  may  be  formed  of  his
accuracy  and  credibility,  from  the  fact  that
he  asserts  that  Faustus  Socinus,  the  Father
of  Modern  Unitarianism,  was  the  contriver
and  inventor  of  the  Masonic  system  —  a
theory  so  absurd  that  even  Robison  and
Barruel  both  reject  it.

Left  Hand.  Among  the  ancients  the
left  hand  was  a  symbol  of  equity  and  jus¬
tice.  Thus,  Apuleius,  (Met.,  1.  xi.,)  when
describing  the  procession  in  honor  of  Isis,
says  one  of  the  ministers  of  the  sacred  rites
“  bore  the  symbol  of  equity,  a  left  hand,
fashioned  with  the  palm  extended ;  which
seems  to  be  more  adapted  to  administering
equity  than  the  right,  from  its  natural  in¬
ertness,  and  its  being  endowed  with  no
craft  and  no  subtlety.”

Left  Side.  In  the  symbolism  of  Ma¬
sonry,  the  first  degree  is  represented  by  the
left  side,  which  is  to  indicate  that  as  the
left  is  the  weaker  part  of  the  body,  so  is
the  Entered  Apprentice’s  degree  the  weak¬
est  part  of  Masonry.  This  doctrine,  that
the  left  is  the  weaker  side  of  the  body,  is
very  ancient.  Plato  says  it  arises  from  the
fact  that  the  right  is  more  used ;  but  Aris¬
totle  contends  that  the  organs  of  the  right
side  are  by  nature  more  powerful  than
those  of  the  left.

Legally  Constituted.  See  Con¬
stituted,  Legally.

Legate.  In  the  Middle  Ages,  a  legate,
or  legatus,  was  one  who  was,  says  Du
Cange,  (Glossar.,)  “in  nrovincias  it  Prin¬
cipe  ad  exercendas  juuicias  mittebalur,”


4.56


LEGEND


LEGEND


sent  by  a  prince  into  the  provinces  to  ex¬
ercise  judicial  functions.  The  word  is  now
applied  by  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  to
designate  certain  persons  who  are  sent
into  unoccupied  territory  to  propagate
the  Rite.  The  word  is,  however,  of  recent
origin,  not  having  been  used  before  1866.
A  legate  should  be  in  possession  of  at  least
the  thirty-second  degree.

Legend.  Strictly  speaking,  a  legend,
from  the  Latin,  legendus,  “  to  be  read,”
should  be  restricted  to  a  story  that  has
been  committed  to  writing;  but  by  good
usage  the  word  has  been  applied  more
extensively,  and  now  properly  means  a
narrative,  whether  true  or  false,  that  has
been  traditionally  preserved  from  the  time
of  its  first  oral  communication.  Such  is
the  definition  of  a  Masonic  legend.  The
authors  of  the  Conversations- Lexicon,  refer¬
ring  to  the  monkish  lives  of  the  saints
which  originated  in  the  twelfth  and  thir¬
teenth  centuries,  say  that  the  title  legend
was  given  to  all  fictions  which  made  pre¬
tensions  to  truth.  Such  a  remark,  however
correct  it  may  be  in  reference  to  these
monkish  narratives,  which  were  often  in¬
vented  as  ecclesiastical  exercises,  is  by  no
means  applicable  to  the  legends  of  Free¬
masonry.  These  are  not  necessarily  fic¬
titious,  but  are  either  based  on  actual  and
historical  facts  which  have  been  but  slightly
modified,  or  they  are  the  offspring  and  ex¬
pansion  of  some  symbolic  idea  ;  in  which
latter  respect  they  differ  entirely  from  the
monastic  legends,  which  often  have  only
the  fertile  imagination  of  some  studious
monk  for  the  basis  of  their  construction.

The  instructions  of  Freemasonry  are
given  to  us  in  two  modes:  by  the  symbol
and  by  the  legend.  The  symbol  is  a  mate¬
rial,  and  the  legend  a  mental,  representa¬
tion  of  a  truth.  The  sources  of  neither  can
be  in  every  case  authentically  traced.
Many  of  them  come  to  us,  undoubtedly,
from  the  old  Operative  Masons  of  the  medi¬
aeval  gilds.  But  whence  they  got  them  is
a  question  that  naturally  arises,  and  which
still  remains  unanswered.  Others  have
sprung  from  a  far  earlier  source ;  perhaps,
as  Creuzer  has  suggested  in  his  Symbotik,
from  an  effort  to  engraft  higher  and  purer
knowledge  on  an  imperfect  religious  idea.
If  so,  then  the  myths  of  the  Ancient  Mys¬
teries,  and  the  legends  or  traditions  of
Freemasonry,  would  have  the  same  remote
and  the  same  final  cause.  They  would  dif¬
fer  ki  construction,  but  they  would  agree  in
design.  For  instance,  the  myth  of  Adonis  in
the  Syrian  mysteries,  and’  the  legend  of
Hiram  Abif  in  the  third  degree,  would  dif¬
fer  very  widely  in  their  details ;  but  the  ob¬
ject  of  each  would  be  the  same,  namely,  to


teach  the  doctrine  of  the  restoration  from
death  to  eternal  life.

The  legends  of  Freemasonry  constitute
a  considerable  and  a  very  important  part
of  its  ritual.  Without  them,  its  most  valu¬
able  portions  as  a  scientific  system  would
cease  to  exist.  It  is,  in  fact,  in  the  tradi¬
tions  and  legends  of  Freemasonry,  more,
even,  than  in  its  material  symbols,  that  we
are  to  find  the  deep  religious  instructions
which  the  Institution  is  intended  to  incul¬
cate.  It  must  be  remembered  that  Free¬
masonry  has  been  defined  to  be  “  a  system
of  morality,  veiled  in  allegory  and  illus¬
trated  by  symbols.”  Symbols,  then,  alone,
do  not  constitute  the  whole  of  the  system  :
allegory  comes  in  for  its  share;  and  this
allegory,  which  veils  the  divine  truths  of
Masonry,  is  presented  to  the  neophyte  in
the  various  legends  which  have  been  tradi¬
tionally  preserved  in  the  Order.

They  may  be  divided  into  three  classes:

1.  The  Mythical  legend.  2.  The  Philo¬
sophical  legend.  3.  The  Historical  legend.
And  these  three  classes  may  be  defined  as
follows :

1.  The  myth  may  be  engaged  in  the  trans¬
mission  of  a  narrative  of  early  deeds  and
events  having  a  foundation  in  truth,  which
truth,  however,  has  been  greatly  distorted
and  perverted  by  the  omission  or  introduc¬
tion  of  circumstances  and  personages,  and
then  it  constitutes  the  mythical  legend.

2.  Or  it  may  have  been  invented  and
adopted  as  the  medium  of  enunciating  a
particular  thought,  or  of  inculcating  a  cer¬
tain  doctrine,  when  it  becomes  &  philosophic
cal  legend.

3.  Or,  lastly,  the  truthful  elements  of  act¬
ual  history  may  greatly  predominate  over
the  fictitious  and  invented  materials  of  the
myth;  and  the  narrative  may  be,  in  the
main,  made  up  of  facts,  with  a  slight  color¬
ing  of  imagination,  when  it  forms  a  histori¬
cal  legend.

Legend  of  Enoch.  See  Enoch.

Legend  of  Euclid.  See  Euclid.

Legend  of  the  Craft.  The  Old

Records  of  the  Fraternity  of  Operative
Freemasons,  under  the  general  name  of
“  Old  Constitutions”  or  “  Constitutions  of
Masonry,”  were  written  in  the  fourteenth,
fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  seventeenth  cen¬
turies.  The  loss  of  many  of  these  by  the
indiscretion  of  over-zealous  brethren  was
deplored  by  Anderson  ;  but  a  few  of  them
have  been  long  known  to  us,  and  many
more  have  been  recently  recovered,  by  the
labors  of  such  men  as  Huglian,  from  the
archives  of  old  Lodges  and  from  manu¬
script  collections  in  the  British  Museum.
In  these  is  to  be  found  a  history  of  Free¬
masonry  ;  full,  it  is  true,  of  absurdities  and
anachronisms,  and  yet  exceedingly  inter-


LEGEND


LEGEND


457


esting,  as  giving  us  the  belief  of  our  an¬
cient  brethren  on  the  subject  of  the  origin
of  the  Order.  This  history  has  been  called
by  Masonic  writers  the  “  Legend  of  the
Craft,”  because  it  is  really  a  legendary
narrative,  having  little  or  no  historic  au¬
thenticity.  In  all  these  “Old  Constitu¬
tions,”  the  legend  is  substantially  the  same ;
showing,  evidently,  a  common  origin ;  most
probably  an  oral  teaching  which  prevailed
in  the  earliest  ages  of  the  confraternity.  In
giving  it,  I  have  selected  that  contained  in
what  is  called  the  Dowland  Manuscript,  be¬
cause  it  is  believed  to  be  a  copy  of  an  older
one  of  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  cen¬
tury,  and  because  its  rather  modernized
spelling  makes  it  more  intelligible  to  the
general  reader.

THE  LEGEND  OF  THE  CRAFT.

“  Before  Noyes  floode  there  was  a  man
called  Lameche  as  it  is  written  in  the  Byble,
in  the  iiijIb  chapter  of  Genesis;  and  this
Lameche  had  two  wives,  and  the  one  height
Ada  and  the  other  height  Sella ;  by  his  first
wife  Ada  he  gott  two  sonns,  and  that  one
Jabell,  and  thother  Tuball.  And  by  that
other  wife  Sella  he  gott  a  son  and  a  daugh¬
ter.  All  these  four  children  founden  the
begining  of  all  the  sciences  in  the  world.
And  this  elder  son  Jabell  found  the  science
of  GeQmetrie,  and  he  departed  flocks  of
sheepe  and  lambs  in  the  field,  and  first
wrought  house  of  stone  and  tree,  as  is
noted  in  the  chapter  above  said.  And  his
brother  Tuball  found  the  science  of  Mu-
sicke,  songe  of  tonge,  harpe,  and  orgaine.
And  the  third  brother  Tuball  Cain  found
Smithcraft  of  gold,  silver,  copper,  iron,  and
steele ;  and  the  daughter  found  the  craft  of
Weavinge.  And  these  children  knew  well
that  God  would  take  vengeance  for  synn,
either  by  fire  or  by  water;  wherefore  they
writt  their  science  that  they  had  found  in
two  pillars  of  stone,  that  they  might  be
found  after  Noyes  flood.  And  that  one
stone  was  marble ,  for  that  would  not  bren
with  fire.  And  that  other  stone  was  clep-
ped  laterns,  and  would  not  drown  in  noe
water.

“  Our  intent  is  to  tell  you  trulie  how  and
in  what  manner  these  stones  were  found,
that  thise  science  were  written  in.  The
great  Herraarynes  that  was  Cubys  son,  the
which  Cub  was  Sem’s  sonn,  that  was  Noy’s
son.  This  Hermarynes,  afterwards  was
called  Harmes  the  father  of  wise  men :  he
found  one  of  the  two  pillars  of  stone,  and
found  the  science  written  there,  and  he
taught  it  to  other  men.  And  at  the  making
of  tne  Tower  of  Babylon  there  was  Ma-
sonrye  first  made  much  of.  And  the  Kinge
of  Babylon  that  height  Nemrothe,  was  a
mason  himselfe;  and  loved  well  the  science,
3  H


and  it  is  said  with  masters  of  histories.
And  when  the  City  of  Nyneve,  and  other
cities  of  the  East  should  be  made,  Nem¬
rothe,  the  King  of  Babylon,  sent  thither
threescore  Masons  at  the  rogation  of  the
King  of  Nyneve  his  cosen.  And  when  he
sent  them  forth,  he  gave  them  a  charge  on
this  manner:  That  they  should  be  true
each  of  them  to  other,  and  that  they  should
love  truly  together,  and  that  they  should
serve  their  lord  truly  for  their  pay ;  soe
that  the  master  may  have  worshipp,  and
that  long  to  him.  And  other  moe  charges
he  gave  them.  And  this  was  the  first  tyme
that  ever  Mason  had  any  charge  of  his
science.

“  Moreover,  when  Abraham  and  Sara  his
wife  went  into  Egipt,  there  he  taught  the
Seaven  Sciences  to  the  Egiptians ;  and  he
had  a  worthy  Scoller  that  height  Ewclyde,
and  he  learned  right  well,  and  was  a  master
of  all  the  vij  Sciences  liberall.  And  in  his
dayes  it  befell  that  the  lord  and  the  estates
of  the  realme  had  soe  many  sonns  that
they  had  gotten  some  by  their  wifes  and
some  by  other  laydes  of  the  realme;  for
that  land  is  a  hott  land  and  a  plentious  of
generacion.  And  they  had  not  competent
livehode  to  find  with  their  children;  where-
for  they  made  much  care.  And  then  the
King  of  the  land  made  a  great  counsell  and
a  parliament,  to  witt,  how  they  might  find
their  children  honestly  as  gentlemen.  And
they  could  find  no  manner  of  good  way.  And
then  they  did  crye  through  all  the  realme,
if  there  were  any  man  that  could  enforme
them,  that  he  should  come  to  them,  and
he  should  be  soe  rewarded  for  his  travail,
that  he  should  hold  him  pleased.

“  After  that  this  cry  wTas  made,  then  came
this  worthy  clarke  Ewclyde,  and  said  to  the
King  and  to  all  his  great  lords :  ‘  If  yee
will,  take  me  your  children  to  governe,
and  to  teache  them  one  of  the  Seaven  Sci¬
ences,  wherewith  they  may  live  honestly  as
gentlemen  should,  under  a  condicion  that
yee  will  grant  me  and  them  a  commission
that  I  may  have  power  to  rule  them  after
the  manner  that  the  science  ought  to  be
ruled.’  And  that  the  King  and  all  his
counsell  granted  to  him  anone,  and  sealed
their  commission.  And  then  this  worthy
tooke  to  him  these  lords’  sonns,  and  taught
them  the  science  of  Geometrie  in  practice,
for  to  work  in  stones  all  manner  of  worthy
worke  that  belongeth  to  buildinge  churches,
temples,  castells,  towres,  and  mannors,  and
all  other  manner  of  buildings ;  and  he  gave
them  a  charge  on  this  manner:

“  The  first  was,  that  they  should  be  true
to  the  Kinge,  and  to  the  lord  that  they  owe.
And  that  they  should  love  well  together,
and  be  true  each  one  to  other.  And  that
they  should  call  each  other  his  felloe,  or


458


LEGEND


LEGEND


else  brother,  and  not  by  servant,  nor  his
knave,  nor  none  other  foule  name.  And
that  truly  they  should  deserve  their  paie  of
the  lord,  or  of  the  master  that  they  serve.
And  that  they  should  ordaine  the  wisest  of
them  to  be  master  of  the  worke ;  and
neither  for  love  nor  great  lynneadge,  ne
riches  ne  for  no  favour  to  lett  another  that
hath  little  conning  for  to  be  master  of  the
lord’s  worke,  wherethrough  the  lord  should
be  evill  served  and  they  ashamed.  And
also  that  they  should  call  the  governors  of
the  worke,  Master,  in  the  time  that  they
worke  with  him.  And  other  many  moe
charges  that  longeto  tell.  And  to  all  these
charges  he  made  them  to  sweare  a  great  oath
that  men  used  in  that  time;  and  ordayned
them  for  reasonable  wages,  that  they  might
live  honestly  by.  And  also  that  they  should
come  and  semble  together  every  yeare  once,
how  they  might  worke  best  to  serve  the
lord  for  his  profitt,  and  to  their  owne  wor-
shipp ;  and  to  correct  within  themselves
him  that  had  trespassed  against  the  sci¬
ence.  And  thus  was  the  science  grounded
there;  and  that  worthy  Master  Ewclyde
gave  it  the  name  of  Geometrie.  And  now
it  is  called  through  all  this  land  Masonrye.

“Sythen  longe  after,  when  the  Children
of  Israeli  were  coming  into  the  Land  of
Beheast,  that  is  now  called  amongst  us  the
Country  of  Jhrlm,  Kinge  David  began  the
Temple  that  they  called  Templum  D’ni  and
it  is  named  with  us  the  Temple  of  Jerusa¬
lem.  And  the  same  King  David  loved
Masons  well  and  cherished  them  much,  and
gave  them  good  paie.  And  he  gave  the
charges  and  the  manners  he  had  learned  of
Egipt  given  by  Ewclyde,  and  other  moe
charges,  that  ye  shall  heare  afterward.
And  after  the  decease  of  Kinge  David,  Sal-
amon,  that  was  David’s  sonn,  performed
out  the  Temple  that  his  father  begonne;
and  sent  after  Masons  into  divers  coun¬
tries  and  of  divers  lands ;  and  gathered
them  together,  so  that  he  had  fourscore
thousand  workers  of  stone,  and  were  all
named  Masons.  And  he  chose  out  of  them
three  thousand  that  were  ordayned  to  be
Maisters  and  governors  of  his  worke.  And
furthermore,  there  was  a  Kinge  of  another
region  that  men  called  Iram,  and  he  loved
well  Kinge  Solomon,  and  he  gave  him
tymber  to  his  worke.  And  he  had  a  son
that  height  Anyon,  and  he  wras  a  Master
of  Geometrie,  and  was  chief  Master  of  all
his  Masons,  and  was  Master  of  all  his
graviugs  and  carvinge,  and  of  all  other
manner  of  Masonrye  that  longed  to  the
Temple;  and  this  is  witnessed  by  the
Bible,  in  libro  Regum  the  third  chapter.
And  this  Solomon  confirmed  both  charges
and  the  manners  that  his  father  had  given
to  Masons.  And  thus  was  that  worthy  sci¬


ence  of  Masonrye  confirmed  in  the  country
of  Jerusalem,  and  in  many  other  kingdomes.

“  Curious  craftsmen  walked  about  full
wide  into  divers  countryes,  some  because
of  learning  more  craft  and  cunninge,  and
some  to  teach  them  that  had  but  little
cunynge.  And  soe  it  befell  that  there  was
one  curious  Mason  that  height  Maymus
Grecus,  that  had  beene  at  the  making  of
Solomon’s  Temple,  and  he  came  into
Fraunce,  and  there  he  taught  the  science
of  Masonrye  to  men  of  Fraunce.  And
there  was  one  of  the  Regal  ly'ne  of  Fraunce,
that  height  Charles  Martell ;  and  he  was  a
man  that  loved  well  such  a  science,  and
drew  to  this  Maymus  Grecus  that  is  above-
said,  and  learned  of  him  the  science,  and
tooke  upon  him  the  charges  and  manners;
and  afterwards,  by  the  grace  of  God,  he
was  elect  to  be  Kinge  of  Fraunce.  And
when  he  was  in  his  estate  he  tooke  Ma¬
sons,  and  did  helpe  to  make  men  Masons
that  were  none;  and  set  them  to  worke,
and  gave  them  both  the  charge  and  the
manners  and  good  paie,  as  he  had  learned
of  other  Masons;  and  confirmed  them  a
Charter  from  yeare  to  yeare,  to  hold  their
cemble  wher  they  would;  and  cherished
them  right  much ;  And  thus  came  the
science  into  Fraunce.

“  England  in  all  this  season  stood  voyd  as
for  any  charge  of  Masonrye  unto  St.  Al-
bones  tyme.  And  in  his  days  the  Kiug  of
England  that  was  a  Pagan,  he  did  wall  the
towne  about  that  is  called  Sainct  Albones.
And  Sainct  Albones  was  a  worthy  knight,
and  steward  with  the  Kinge  of  his  House¬
hold,  and  had  governance  of  the  realme,
and  also  of  the  making  of  the  town  walls;
and  loved  well  Masons  and  cherished  them
much.  And  he  made  their  paie  right  good,
standinge  as  the  realm  did,  for  he  gave
them  ij*.  yj d.  a  weeke,  and  iijd.  to  their
nonesynches.  And  before  that  time,
through  all  this  land,  a  Mason  took  but
a  penny  a  day  and  his  meate,  till  Sainct
Albones  amanded  it,  and  gave  them  a
chartour  of  the  Kinge  and  his  counsell  for
to  hold  a  general  councell,  and  gave  it  the
name  of  Assemble;  and  thereat  he  was
himselfe,  and  helped  to  make  Masons,  and
gave  them  charges  as  yee  shall  heare  after¬
ward.

“  Right  soone  after  the  decease  of  Sainct
Albone,  there  came  divers  wars  into  the
realme  of  England  of  divers  Nations,  soe
that  the  good  rule  of  Masonrye  was  de¬
stroyed  unto  the  tyme  of  Kinge  Athel-
stone’s  days  that  was  a  worthy  Kinge  of
England  and  brought  this  land  into  good
rest  and  peace;  and  builded  many  great
works  of  Abbves  and  Towres,  and  other
many  divers  buildings;  and  loved  well
Masons.  And  he  had  a  son  that  height


LEGEND


LEGEND


459


Edwinne,  and  he  loved  Masons  much  more
than  his  father  did.  And  he  was  a  great
practiser  in  Geometry ;  and  he  drew  much
to  talke  and  to  commune  with  Masons,
and  to  learn  of  them  science ;  and  after¬
wards,  for  love  that  he  had  to  Masons,  and
to  the  science,  he  was  made  a  Mason,  and
he  gatt  of  the  Kinge  his  father  a  chartour
and  commission  to  hold  every  yeare  once
an  Assemble,  wher  they  ever  would  within
the  realme  of  England;  and  to  correct
within  themselves  defaults  and  trespasses
that  were  done  within  the  science.  And  he
held  himself  an  Assemble  at  Yorke,  and
there  he  made  Masons,  and  gave  them
charges,  and  taught  them  the  manners,
and  commanded  that  rule  to  be  kept
ever  after,  and  tooke  then  the  chartour  and
commission  to  keepe,  and  made  ordinance
that  it  should  be  renewed  from  kinge  to
kinge.

“  And  when  the  assemble  was  gathered
he  made  a  cry  that  all  old  Masons  and
young  that  had  any  writeinge  or  under¬
standing  of  the  charges  and  the  manners
that  were  made  before  in  this  land  or  in
any  other,  that  they  should  show  them
forth.  And  when  it  was  proved,  there  were
founden  some  in  Frenche,  and  some  in
Greek,  and  some  in  English,  and  some  in
other  languages;  and  the  intent  of  them
all  was  founden  all  one.  And  he  did  make
a  booke  thereof,  and  how  the  science  was
founded.  And  he  himselfe  had  and  com¬
manded  that  it  should  be  readd  or  tould,
when  that  any  Mason  should  be  made,  for
to  give  him  his  charge.  And  fro  that  day
unto  this  tyme  manners  of  Masons  have
been  kept  in  that  form  as  well  as  men
might  governe  it.  And  furthermore  divers
Assembles  have  beene  put  and  ordayned
certaine  charges  by  the  best  advice  of  Mas¬
ters  and  fellowes.”

If  any  one  carefully  examines  this  le¬
gend,  he  will  find  that  it  is  really  a  history
of  the  rise  and  progress  of  architecture,  with
which  is  mixed  allusions  to  the  ancient
gilds  of  the  Operative  Masons.  Geometry
also,  as  a  science  essentially  necessary  to
the  proper  cultivation  of  architecture,  re¬
ceives  a  due  share  of  attention.  In  thus
confounding  architecture,  geometry,  and
Freemasonry,  the  workmen  of  the  Middle
Ages  were  but  obeying  a  natural  instinct
which  leads  every  man  to  seek  to  elevate
the  character  of  his  profession,  and  to  give
to  it  an  authentic  claim  to  antiquity.  It  is
this  instinct  which  has  given  rise  to  so
much  of  the  mythical  element  in  the  mod¬
ern  history  of  Masonry.  Anderson  has
thus  written  his  records  in  the  very  spirit
of  the  legend  of  the  Craft,  and  Preston  and
Oliver  have  followed  his  example.  Hence
this  legend  derives  its  great  importance


from  the  fact  that  it  has  given  a  complexion
to  all  subsequent  Masonic  history.  In  dis¬
secting  it  with  critical  hands,  we  shall  be
enabled  to  dissever  its  historical  from  its
mythical  portions,  and  assign  to  it  its  true
value  as  an  exponent  of  the  Masonic  senti¬
ment  of  the  Middle  Ages.

Legend  of  the  Gild.  A  title  by
which  the  Legend  of  the  Craft  is  some¬
times  designated  in  reference  to  the  Gild
of  Operative  Masons.

Legend  of  the  Royal  Arch  De¬
gree.  Much  of  this  legend  is  a  myth,
having  very  little  foundation,  and  some  of
it  none,  in  historical  accuracy.  But  under¬
neath  it  all  there  lies  a  profound  stratum  of
philosophical  symbolism.  The  destruction
and  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  by  the
efforts  of  Zerubbabel  and  his  compatriots,
the  captivity  and  the  return  of  the  captives,
are  matters  of  sacred  history ;  but  many  of
the  details  have  been  invented  and  intro¬
duced  for  the  purpose  of  giving  form  to  a
symbolic  idea.  And  this  idea,  expressed
in  the  symbolism  of  the  Royal  Arch,  is  the
very  highest  form  of  that  which  the  ancient
Mystagogues  called  the  euresis,  or  the  dis¬
covery.  There  are  some  portions  of  the
legend  which  do  not  bear  directly  on
the  symbolism  of  the  second  Temple  as
a  type  of  the  second  life,  but  which  still
have  an  indirect  bearing  on  the  general
idea.  Thus  the  particular  legend  of  the
three  weary  sojourners  is  undoubtedly  a  mere
myth,  there  being  no  known  historical  tes¬
timony  for  its  support;  but  it  is  evidently
the  enunciation  symbolically  of  the  reli¬
gious  and  philosophical  idea  that  divine
truth  may  be  sought  and  won  only  by  suc¬
cessful  perseverance  through  all  the  dan¬
gers,  trials,  and  tribulatious  of  life,  and  that
it  is  not  in  this,  but  in  the  next  life,  that  it
is  fully  attained.

The  legend  of  the  English  and  the
American  systems  is  identical ;  that  of  the
Irish  is  very  different  as  to  the  time  and
events;  and  the  legend  of  the  Royal  Arch
of  the  Scottish  Rite  is  more  usually  called
the  legend  of  Enoch.

Legoitcl  of  the  Third  Degree.

The  most  important  and  significant  of  the
legendary  symbols  of  Freemasonry  is,  un¬
doubtedly,  that  which  relates  to  the  fate  of
Hiram  Abif,  commonly  called,  “by  way  of
excellence,”  the  Legend  of  the  Third  De¬
gree.

The  first  written  record  that  I  have  been
able  to  find  of  this  legend  is  contained  in
the  second  edition  of  Anderson’s  Constitu¬
tions,  published  in  1738,  and  is  in  these
words :

“  It  (the  Temple)  was  finished  in  the
short  space  of  seven  years  and  six  months,
to  the  amazement  of  all  the  world ;  when


460


LEGEND


LEGEND


Ihe  capestone  was  celebrated  by  tbe  Fra¬
ternity  with  great  joy.  But  their  joy  was
soon  interrupted  by  the  sudden  death  of
their  dear  master,  Hiram  Abif,  whom  they
decently  interred  in  the  Lodge  near  the
Temple,  according  to  ancient  usage.”

In  the  next  edition  of  the  same  work,
published  in  1754,  a  few  additional  circum¬
stances  are  related,  such  as  the  participa¬
tion  of  King  Solomon  in  the  general  grief,
and  the  fact  that  the  King  of  Israel  “  or¬
dered  his  obsequies  to  be  conducted  with
great  solemnity  and  decency.”  With  these
exceptions,  and  the  citations  of  the  same
passages,  made  by  subsequent  authors,  the
narrative  has  always  remained  unwritten,
and  descended,  from  age  to  age,  through
the  means  of  oral  tradition.

The  legend  has  been  considered  of  so
much  importance  that  it  has  been  preserved
in  the  symbolism  of  every  Masonic  rite.  No
matter  what  modifications  or  alterations
the  general  system  may  have  undergone  —
no  matter  how  much  the  ingenuity  or  the
imagination  of  the  founders  of  rites  may
have  perverted  or  corrupted  other  symbols,
abolishing  the  old  and  substituting  new
ones  —  the  legend  of  the  Temple  Builder
has  ever  been  left  untouched,  to  present
itself  in  all  the  integrity  of  its  ancient
mythical  form.

What,  then,  is  the  signification  of  this
symbol  so  important  and  so  extensively
diffused?  What  interpretation  can  we  give
to  it  that  will  account  for  its  universal
adoption  ?  How  is  it  that  it  has  thus  be¬
come  so  intimately  interwoven  with  Free¬
masonry  as  to  make,  to  all  appearances,  a
part  of  its  very  essence,  and  to  have  been
always  deemed  inseparable  from  it?

To  answer  these  questions  satisfactorily,
it  is  necessary  to  trace,  in  a  brief  investiga¬
tion,  the  remote  origin  of  the  institution  of
Freemasonry  and  its  connection  with  tbe
ancient  systems  of  initiation.

It  was,  then,  the  object  of  all  the  rites
and  mysteries  of  antiquity  to  teach  the  doc¬
trine  of^the  immortality  of  the  soul.  This
dogma,  shining  as  an  almost  solitary  beacon-
light  in  the  surrounding  gloom  of  Pagan
darkness,  had  undoubtedly  been  received
from  that  ancient  people  or  priesthood,
among  whom  it  probably  existed  only  in
the  form  of  an  abstract  proposition  or  a
simple  and  unembellishea  tradition.  But
in  the  more  sensual  minds  of  the  Pagan
philosophers  and  mystics,  the  idea,  when
presented  to  the  initiates  in  their  mysteries,
was  always  conveyed  in  the  form  of  a  scenic
representation.  The  influence,  too,  of  the
early  Sabian  worship  of  the  sun  and  heav¬
enly  bodies,  in  which  the  solar  orb  was
adored  on  its  resurrection,  each  morning,
from  the  apparent  death  of  its  evening  set¬


ting,  caused  this  rising  sun  to  be  adopted
in  the  more  ancient  mysteries  as  a  symbol
of  the  regeneration  of  the  soul.

Thus,  in  the  Egyptian  mysteries  we  find
a  representation  of  the  death  and  subse¬
quent  regeneration  of  Osiris;  in  the  Phoe¬
nician,  of  Adonis ;  in  the  Syrian,  of  Dio¬
nysus  ;  in  all  of  which  the  scenic  apparatus
of  initiation  was  intended  to  indoctrinate
the  candidate  into  the  dogma  of  a  future  life.

It  will  be  sufficient  here  to  refer  to  the
theory  of  Oliver,  that  through  the  instru¬
mentality  of  the  Tyrian  workmen  at  the
Temple  of  King  Solomon,  what  he  calls  the
spurious  and  pure  branches  of  the  Masonic
system  were  united  at  Jerusalem,  and  that
the  same  method  of  scenic  representation
was  adopted  by  the  latter  from  the  former,
and  the  narrative  of  the  Temple  Builder
substituted  for  that  of  Dionysus,  which
was  the  myth  peculiar  to  the  mysteries
practised  by  the  Tyrian  workmen.

The  idea,  therefore,  proposed  to  be  com¬
municated  in  the  myth  of  the  ancient  mys¬
teries  was  the  same  as  that  which  is  now
conveyed  in  the  Masonic  legend  of  the
third  degree.

Hence,  then,  Hiram  Abif  is,  in  tbe  Ma¬
sonic  system,  the  symbol  of  human  nature,
as  developed  in  the  life  here  and  the  life  to
come;  and  so,  while  the  Temple  was  the
Visible  symbol  of  the  world,  its  builder  be¬
came  the  mythical  symbol  of  man,  the
dweller  and  worker  in  that  world.

Man,  setting  forth  on  the  voyage  of  life,
with  faculties  and  powers  fitting  him  for
the  due  exercise  of  the  high  duties  to
whose  performance  he  has  been  called,
holds,  if  he  be  “a  curious  and  cunning
workman,”  skilled  in  all  moral  and  in¬
tellectual  purposes,  (and  it  is  only  of  such
men  that  the  Temple  Builder  can  be  the
symbol,)  within  the  grasp  of  his  attainment,
the  knowledge  of  all  that  divine  truth  im¬
parted  to  him  as  the  heir-loom  of  his  race  —
that  race  to  whom  it  has  been  granted  to  look,
with  exalted  countenance,  on  high  ;  which
divine  truth  is  symbolized  by  the  WORD.

Thus  provided  with  the  word  of  life,  he
occupies  his  time  in  the  construction  of  a
spiritual  temple,  and  travels  onward  in  the
faithful  discharge  of  all  his  duties,  laying
down  his  designs  upon  the  trestle- board  of
the  future,  and  invoking  the  assistance  and
direction  of  God.

But  is  his  path  always  over  flowery
meads  and  through  pleasant  groves?  Is
there  no  hidden  foe  to  obstruct  his  progress?
Is  all  before  him  clear  and  calm,  with  joy¬
ous  sunshine  and  refreshing  zephyrs?  Alas !
not  so.  “  Man  is  born  to  trouble,  as  the
sparks  fly  upward.”  At  every  “gate  of
life” — as’ the  Orientalists  have  beautifully
called  the  different  ages  —  he  is  beset  by


LEGEND


LEGEND


461


peril.  Temptations  allure  his  youth ;  mis¬
fortunes  darken  the  pathway  of  his  man¬
hood,  and  his  old  age  is  encumbered  with
infirmity  and  disease.  But  clothed  in  the
armor  of  virtue  he  may  resist  the  tempta¬
tion;  he  may  cast  misfortunes  aside  and
rise  triumphantly  above  them ;  but  to  the
last  —  the  direst,  the  most  inexorable  foe
of  his  race  —  he  must  eventually  yield,  and,
stricken  down  by  death,  he  sinks  prostrate
into  the  grave,  and  is  buried  in  the  rubbish
of  his  sin  and  human  frailty.

Here  then,  in  Masonry,  is  what  was
called  the  aphanism,  concealment  or  disap-
earance  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries.  The
itter.  but  necessary  lesson  of  death  has
been  imparted.  The  living  soul,  with  the
lifeless  body  which  encased  it,  has  disap¬
peared,  and  can  nowhere  be  found.  All  is
darkness  —  confusion  —  despair.  Divine
truth  —  the  word  —  for  a  time  is  lost,  and
the  Master  Mason  may  now  say,  in  the
language  of  Hutchinson  “  I  prepare  my
sepulchre.  I  make  my  grave  in  the  pollu¬
tion  of  the  earth.  I  am  under  the  shadow
of  death.”

But  if  the  mythic  symbolism  ended  here,
with  this  lesson  of  death,  then  were  the
lesson  incomplete.  That  teaching  would
he  vain  and  idle  —  nay  more,  it  would  be
corrupt  and  pernicious  —  which  should
stop  short  of  the  conscious  and  innate  in¬
stinct  for  another  existence.  And  hence
the  succeeding  portions  of  the  legend  are
intended  to  convey  the  sublime  symbolism
of  a  resurrection  from  the  grave  and  a  new
birth  into  a  future  life.  The  discovery  of
the  body,  which,  in  the  initiations  of  the
ancient  mysteries,  was  called  the  euresis ;
and  its  removal,  from  the  polluted  grave
into  which  it  had  been  cast,  to  an  honored
and  sacred  place  within  the  precincts  of  the
temple,  are  all  profoundly  and  beautifully
symbolic  of  that  great  truth,  the  discovery
of  which  was  the  object  of  all  the  ancient
initiations,  as  it  is  almost  the  whole  design
of  Freemasonry,  namely,  that  when  man
shall  have  passed  the  gates  of  life  and  have
yielded  to  the  inexorable  fiat  of  death,  he
shall  then  (not  in  the  pictured  ritual  of
an  earthly  Lodge,  but  in  the  realities  of
that  eternal  one,  of  which  the  former  is
but  an  antitype,)  be  raised,  at  the  omnific
word  of  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Universe,
from  time  to  eternity  —  from  the  tomb  of
corruption  to  the  chambers  of  hope  —  from
the  darkness  of  death  to  the  celestial  beams
of  life  —  and  that  his  disembodied  spirit
shall  be  conveyed  as  near  to  the  holy  of
holies  of  the  divine  presence  as  humanity
can  ever  approach  to  deity.

Such  I  conceive  to  be  the  true  interpre¬
tation  of  the  symbolism  of  the  legend  of
the  third  degree.


I  have  said  that  this  mythical  history  of  the
Temple  Builder  was  universal  in  all  nations
and  all  rites,  and  that  in  no  place  and  at
no  time  had  it,  by  alteration,  diminution,
or  addition,  acquired  any  essentially  new  or
different  form:  the  myth  has  always  re¬
mained  the  same.

But  it  is  not  so  with  its  interpretation.
That  which  I  have  just  given,  and  which  I
conceive  to  be  the  correct  one,  has  been
very  generally  adopted  by  the  Masons  of
this  country.  But  elsewhere,  and  by  va¬
rious  writers,  other  interpretations  have
been  made,  very  different  in  their  charac¬
ter,  although  always  agreeing  in  retaining
the  general  idea  of  a  resurrection  or  regen¬
eration,  or  a  restoration  of  something  from
an  inferior  to  a  higher  sphere  or  function.

Thus,  some  of  the  earlier  continental
writers  have  supposed  the  myth  to  have
been  a  symbol  of  the  destruction  of  the
Order  of  the  Templars,  looking  upon  its
restoration  to  its  original  wealth  and  dig¬
nities  as  being  prophetically  symbolized.

In  some  of  the  high  philosophical  de¬
grees  it  is  taught  that  the  whole  legend  re¬
fers  to  the  sufferings  and  death,  with  the
subsequent  resurrection  of  Christ.

Hutchinson,  who  has  the  honor  of  being
the  earliest  philosophical  writer  pn  Free¬
masonry  in  England,  supposes  it  to  have
been  intended  to  embody  the  idea  of  the
decadence  of  the  Jewish  religion  and  the
substitution  of  the  Christian  in  its  place
and  on  its  ruins.

Dr.  Oliver  thinks  that  it  is  typical  of  the
murder  of  Abel  and  Cain,  and  that  it  sym¬
bolically  refers  to  the  universal  death  of
our  race  through  A  flam  and  its  restoration
to  life  in  the  Redeemer,  according  to  the
expression  of  the  Apostle,  “  as  in  Adam  we
all  died,  so  in  Christ  we  all  live.”

Ragon  makes  Hiram  a  symbol  of  the  sun
shorn  of  its  vivifying  rays  and  fructifying
power  by  the  three  wdnter  months,  and  its
restoration  to  prolific  heat  by  the  season  of
spring.

And,  finally,  Des  Etangs,  adopting,  in
part,  the  interpretation  of  Ragon,  adds  to
it  another  w’hich  he  calls  the  moral  sym¬
bolism  of  the  legend,  and  supposes  that
Hiram  is  no  other  than  eternal  reason,
whose  enemies  are  the  vices  that  deprave
and  destroy  humanity.

To  each  of  these  interpretations  it  seems
to  me  that  there  are  important  objections,
though  perhaps  to  some  less  so  than  to
others.

As  to  those  who  seek  for  an  astronomical
interpretation  of  the  legend,  in  which  the
annual  changes  of  the  sun  are  symbolized,
while  the  ingenuity  with  which  they  press
their  argument  cannot  but  be  admired,  it
is  evident  that,  by  such  an  interpretation,


462


LEGISLATION


LELAND


they  yield  all  that  Masonry  has  gained  of
religious  development  in  past  ages,  and  fall
back  upon  that  corruption  and  perversion
of  Sabaism  from  which  it  was  the  object,
even  of  the  Spurious  Freemasonry  of  anti¬
quity,  to  rescue  its  disciples.

The  Templar  interpretation  of  the  myth
must  at  once  be  discarded  if  we  would
avoid  the  difficulties  of  anachronism,  unless
we  deny  that  the  legend  existed  before  the
abolition  of  the  Order  of  Knights  Templars,
and  such  denial  would  be  fatal  to  the  anti¬
quity  of  Freemasonry.

And  as  to  the  adoption  of  the  Christian
reference,  Hutchinson  and,  after  him,  Oli¬
ver,  profoundly  philosophical  as  are  the  Ma¬
sonic  speculations  of  both,  have,  I  am  con¬
strained  to  believe,  fallen  into  a  great  error
in  calling  the  Master  Mason’s  degree  a
Christian  institution.  It  is  true  that  it
embraces  within  its  scheme  the  great
truths  of  Christianity  upon  the  subject  of
the  immortality  of  the  soul  and  the  resur¬
rection  of  the  body ;  but  this  was  to  be  pre¬
sumed,  because  Freemasonry  is  truth,  and
Christianity  is  truth,  and  all  truth  must  be
identical.  But  the  origin  of  each  is  differ¬
ent;  their  histories  are  dissimilar.  The
creed  of  Freemasonry  is  the  primitive  one
of  Noah,  and  his  immediate  descendants.
If  Masonry  were  simply  a  Christian  insti¬
tution,  the  Jew  and  the  Moslem,  the  Brah¬
man  and  the  Buddhist,  could  not  conscien¬
tiously  partake  of  its  illumination;  but  its
universality  is  its  boast.  In  its  language,
citizens  of  every  nation  may  converse ;  at
its  altar  men  of  all  religions  may  kneel ;
to  its  creed,  disciples  of  every  faith  may
subscribe.  •

But  the  true  ancient  interpretation  of
the  legend  —  the  universal,  Masonic  one  —
for  all  countries  and  all  ages  undoubtedly
was  that  the  fate  of  the  Temple  Builder  is
but  figurative  of  the  pilgrimage  of  man
on  earth,  through  trials  and  temptations,
through  sin  and  sorrow,  until  his  eventual
fall  beneath  the  blow  of  death  and  his  final
and  glorious  resurrection  to  another  and
an  eternal  life.

And  now,  in  conclusion,  a  word  of  histor¬
ical  criticism  may  not  be  misplaced.  It  is
not  at  all  essential  to  the  value  of  the  sym¬
bolism  that  the  legend  shall  be  proved  to  be
historical.  Whether  considered  as  a  truth¬
ful  narrative  of  an  event  that  actually
transpired  during  the  building  of  the  Tem¬
ple,  or  simply  as  a  myth  embodying  the
utterance  of  a  religious  sentiment,  the
symbolic  lesson  of  life  and  death  and  im¬
mortality  is  still  contained  in  its  teachings,
and  commands  our  earnest  attention.

Legislation.  On  the  subject  of  that
crying  sin  of  the  Order, —  over-legislation
by  Grand  Lodges,  —  Gov.  Thomas  Brown,


formerly  Grand  Master  of  Florida,  has
wisely  said :  “  Too  much  legislation  is  the
vice  of  the  present  day,  as  well  in  Masonic
as  in  civil  government.  The  same  thirst
for  change  and  innovation  which  has
prompted  tyros  and  demagogues  to  legislate
upon  constitutional  law,  and  write  exposi¬
tions  of  the  common  law,  has  prompted  un¬
informed  and  unscrupulous  Masons  to  leg¬
islate  upon  the  landmarks  of  Masonry.”

Lchrling.  German  for  an  Entered
Apprentice.

Leland,  John.  An  eminent  Eng¬
lish  antiquary,  the  chaplain  of  King
Henry  VIII.,  who  appointed  him  “King’s
Antiquary,”  a  title  which  he  was  the  first
and  last  to  bear.  The  king  also  directed
him  to  search  after  the  antiquities  of  Eng¬
land,  “  and  peruse  the  libraries  of  all  cathe¬
drals,  abbies,  priories,  colleges,  etc.,  as  also
all  places  wherein  records,  writings,  and
secrets  of  antiquity  were  deposited.”  Le-
land,  accordingly,  travelled  over  England
for  several  years,  and  made  many  collections
of  manuscripts,  which  were  afterwards  de¬
posited  in  the  Bodleian  Library.  He  was  a
man  of  great  learning  and  industry.  He
wras  born  in  London  in  the  beginning  of
the  sixteenth  century,  (the  exact  year  is
uncertain,)  and  died  on  the  18th  of  April,
1552.  Anthony  Wood  says  that  he  was
by  far  the  most  eminent  historian  and  anti¬
quary  ever  horn  in  England.  His  connec¬
tion  with  Freemasonry  arises  from  the
manuscript  containing  the  questions  of
King  Henry  VI.,  which  he  is  said  to  have
copied  from  the  original.  See  Leland  Man¬
uscript.

Leland  Manuscript.  There  is  no

one  of  the  old  Records  of  Freemasonry,  ex¬
cept,  perhaps,  the  Charter  of  Cologne,  that
has  given  rise  to  more  controversy  among
the  critics  than  the  one  generally  known  as
the  “  Leland  Manuscript.”  It  derives  this
name  from  the  statement  made  in  its  title,
which  is:  “Certayne  questyons  with  an-
sweres  to  the  same,  concernynge  the  mys¬
tery  of  maconrve;  wryttene  by  the  hande
of  Kynge  Henry  the  Sixthe  of  the  name,
and  faythfullye  copied  by  me,  Johan  Ley-
lande  Antiquarius,  by  the  commaunde  of
His  Highnesse.”  It  first  appeared  in  the
Gentleman's  Magazine  for  1753,  (p.  417,)
where  it  purports  to  be  a  reprint  of  a  pam¬
phlet  published  five  years  before  at  Frank¬
fort.  The  title  of  the  paper  in  the  Gentle¬
man's  Magazine  is :  “  Copy  of  a  small  pam¬
phlet,  consisting  of  twelve  pages  in  8vo,
printed  in  Germany  in  1748,  entitled  ‘  Ein
Brief  von  dem  beriihmten  Heren  Heren
Johann  Locke  betreffend  die  Frey-Maure-
rein.  So  auf  einem  Schreib-Tisch  eines
verstorbnen  Bruders  ist  gefunden  worden.’  ”
That  is,  “  A  Letter  of  the  famous  Mr.  John


LELAND


LELAND


463


Locke  relating  to  Freemasonry.  As  found
in  the  writing-desk  of  a  deceased  brother.”
Hearne  copied  it  in  his  Life  of  Leland,  (p.
67,)  prefacing  it  with  the  remark  that  “  it
also  appears  that  an  ancient  manuscript  of
Leland’s  has  long  remained  in  the  Bod¬
leian  Library,  unnoticed  in  any  account  of
our  author  yet  published.”  Hearne  speaks
of  it  thus :

“The  original  is  said  to  be  in  the  hand¬
writing  of  King  Henry  VI.,  and  copied  by
Leland  by  order  of  His  Highness  (King
Henry  VIII.).  If  the  authenticity  of  this
ancient  monument  of  literature  remains
unquestioned,  it  demands  particular  notice
in  the  present  publication,  on  account  of
the  singularity  of  the  subject,  and  no  less
from  a  due  regard  to  the  royal  writer,  and
our  author,  his  transcriber,  indefatigable
in  every  part  of  literature :  it  will  also  be
admitted  acknowledgment  is  due  to  the
learned  Mr.  Locke,  who,  amidst  the  closest
studies  and  the  most  strict  attention  to  hu¬
man  understanding,  could  unbend  his  mind
in  search  of  this  ancient  treatise,  which  he
first  brought  from  obscurity  in  the  year
1696.”

The  Manuscript  purports  to  be  a  series  of
questions  proposed  by  Henry  VI.  and  an¬
swers  given  by  the  Masons.  It  is  accom¬
panied  by  an  introductory  letter  and  a
commentary  by  Mr.  Locke,  together  with
a  glossary  of  the  archaic  words.  The  best
account  of  the  Manuscript  is  contained  in
the  letter  of  Locke  to  a  nobleman,  said  to
be  the  Earl  of  Pembroke,  dated  May  6th,
1696,  in  which,  after  stating  that  he  had

Procured  a  copy  of  it  from  the  Bodleian
library,  he  adds :

“The  Manuscript  of  which  this  is  a  copy
appears  to  be  about  one  hundred  and  sixty
years  old;  yet  (as  your  Lordship  will  ob¬
serve  by  the  title)  it  is  itself  a  copy  of  one
yet  more  ancient  by  about  one  "hundred
ears.  For  the  original  is  said  to  have
een  in  the  handwriting  of  King  Henry
the  VI.  Where  that  prince  had  it  is  an
uncertainty;  but  it  seems  to  me  to  be  an
examination  (taken,  perhaps,  before  the
King)  of  some  one  of  the  Brotherhood  of
Masons,  among  whom  he  entered  himself,
as  ’tis  said,  when  he  came  out  of  his  mi¬
nority,  and  thenceforth  put  a  stop  to  a  per¬
secution  that  had  been  raised  against
them?”

After  its  appearance  in  the  Gentleman’s
Magazine ,  whicli  first  introduced  the  knowl¬
edge  of  it  to  the  world,  and  in  Huddesford’s
L.  of  Leland,  who  evidently  copied  it  from
the  Magazine,  it  next  appeared,  in  1764,  in
the  Pocket  Companion,  and  in  1769  in  Ual-
cott’s  Candid  Disquisition.  In  1775,  Hutch¬
inson  introduced  it  into  his  Spirit  of  Ma¬
sonry.  Dermott  published  it  in  his  Ahiman


Rezon ,  and  Preston  in  his  Illustrations.
Noorthouck,  in  1784,  embodied  it  in  his
edition  of  the  Constitutions;  and  it  has
since  been  repeatedly  published  in  England
and  America,  so  that  the  Craft  have  had
every  opportunity  of  becoming  familiar
with  its  contents.  Translations  of  it  have
also  been  given  in  French  by  Thory,  in  his
Acta  Latomorum ;  in  German  by  Lenning,
in  his  Encyclopddie ;  by  Krause,  in  his
Kunsturkunden,  and  also  by  Fessler  and
several  other  French  and  German  writers.

This  document — so  important,  if  true,  as
a  record  of  the  condition  of  Freemasonry
in  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century  —
has  been  from  an  early  period  attacked
and  defended  with  equal  vehemence  by
those  who  have  denied  and  those  who  have
maintained  its  authenticity.  As  early  as
1787,  the  Baron  de  Chefdebien,  in  a  dis¬
course  entitled  Recherches  Magonniques  d
V usage  des  Fr'eres  de  Regime  primif  de  Nar-
bonne,  read  before  the  Congress  of  the
Philalethans,  attacked  the  authenticity  of
the  document.  Thory  also,  although  ac¬
knowledging  that  he  wished  that  the  Man¬
uscript  was  true,  presented  his  objections
Jo  its  authenticity  in  a  memoir  read  in
1806  before  the  Tribunal  of  the  Philo¬
sophic  Rite.  His  objections  are  eight  in
number,  and  are  to  this  effect.  1.  That  it
was  not  published  in  any  of  the  early  edi¬
tions  of  the  works  of  Locke.  2.  That  it  was
printed  for  the  first  time  at  Frankfort,  in
1748.  3.  That  it  was  not  known  in  Eng¬
land  until  1753.  4.  That  Anderson  makes
no  mention  of  it.  5.  That  it  is  not  in  any
of  the  editions  of  Leland’s  works  printed
before  1772.  6.  That  Dr.  Plot  contends

that  Henry  VI.  was  never  made  a  Mason.

7.  That  the  Manuscript  says  that  Masonry
was  brought  from  the  East  by  the  Venetians.

8.  That  the  troubles  in  the  reign  of  Henry
VI.,  and  his  incapacity,  render  it  improba¬
ble  that  he  would  have  occupied  his  mind
with  the  subject  of  Freemasonry.  The
sixth  and  eighth  of  these  objections  merely
beg  the  question ;  and  the  seventh  is  pue¬
rile,  founded  on  ignorance  of  the  meaning
of  the  word  “Venetian.”  But  the  other
objections  have  much  weight.  Soane,  in
his  New  Curiosities  of  Literature,  (1849,  vol.
ii.,  p.  80,)  attacks  the  document  with  the
bitterness  which  he  usually  displays  wher¬
ever  Freemasonry  is  concerned.

Halliwell,  in  his  Early  History  of  Free¬
masonry  in  England,  (p.  40,)  has  advanced
the  following  arguments  against  its  authen¬
ticity  :

“  It  is  singular  that  the  circumstances  at¬
tending  its  publication  should  have  led  no
one  to  suspect  its  authenticity.  I  was  at
the  pains  of  making  a  long  search  in  the
Bodleian  Library  last  summer,  in  the  hopes


464


LELAND


LENOIR


of  finding  the  original,  but  without  success.
In  fact,  there  can  be  but  little  doubt  that
this  celebrated  and  well-known  document
is  a  forgery !

“  In  the  first  place,  why  should  such
a  document  have  been  printed  abroad?
Was  it  likely  that  it  should  have  found  its
way  to  Frankfort,  nearly  half  a  century
afterwards,  and  been  published  without
any  explanation  of  the  source  whence  it
was  obtained?  Again,  the  orthography  is
most  grotesque,  and  too  gross  ever  to  have
been  penned  either  by  Henry  VI.  or  Le-
land,  or  both  combined.  For  instance,  we
have  Peter  Gower,  a  Grecian,  explained
in  a  note  by  the  fabricator  —  for  who  else
could  have  solved  it?  —  to  be  Pythagoras!
As  a  whole,  it  is  but  a  clumsy  attempt  at
deception,  and  is  quite  a  parallel  to  the  re¬
cently  discovered  one  of  the  first  Englishe
Mer curie.”

Among  the  German  opponents  of  the
Manuscript  are  Lessing,  Keller,  and  Fin-
del  ;  and  more  recently,  the  iconoclasts  of
England,  who  have  been  attacking  so  many
of  the  ancient  records  of  the  Craft,  have
not  left  this  one  unspared.

On  the  other  hand,  it  has  ranked  among
its  advocates  some  of  the  most  learned
Masons  of  England,  Germany,  and  France,
of  whom  may  be  named  Krause,  Fessler,
Lenning,  Reghellini,  Preston,  Hutchin¬
son,  Calcott,  (these  three,  perhaps,  without
critical  examination,)  and  Oliver.  Of  these
the  language  of  the  last  may  be  cited  as  a
specimen  of  the  arguments  adduced  in  its
favor.

“  This  famous  Manuscript,”  says  Dr.  Oli¬
ver,  ( Freemason’s  Quart.  Rev.,  1840,  p.  10,)
“  possesses  the  reputation  of  having  con¬
verted  the  learned  Locke,  who  was  initi¬
ated  after  carefully  perusing  and  analyzing
It.  Before  any  faith  can  be  placed  on  this
invaluable  document,  it  will  be  necessary
to  say  a  word  respecting  its  authenticity.  I
admit  that  there  is  some  degree  of  mystery
about  it,  and  doubts  have  been  entertained
whether  it  be  not  a  forgery.  We  have  the
strongest  presumptive  proofs  that  it  was
in  existence  about  the  middle  of  the  last
century,  because  the  utmost  publicity  was
given  to  it;  and  as  at  that  time  Freema¬
sonry  was  beginning  to  excite  a  considera¬
ble  share  of  public  attention,  the  deception,
had  it  been  such,  would  have  been  publicly
exposed  by  its  opponents,  who  appear  to
have  used  the  lash  of  ridicule  very  freely,
as  witness  Hogarth's  picture  of  Night,
where  the  principal  figures  represent  some
brethren,  decorated  with  aprons  and  jewels,
returning  from  the  Lodge  in  a  state  of  in¬
toxication  ;  the  broad  sheet  of  the  Scald
Miserables,  and  other  prints  and  publica¬
tions  in  which  Freemasonry  is  burlesqued.


But  no  attempt  was  ever  made  to  invalidate
its  claim  to  be  a  genuine  document.”

After  enumerating  the  several  books  in
which  it  had  been  published,  he  resumes
his  argument,  as  follows :

“  Being  thus  universally  diffused,  had  it
been  a  suspected  document,  its  exposure
would  certainly  have  been  attempted;  par¬
ticularly  about  the  close  of  the  last  century,
when  the  progress  of  Masonry  was  sensibly
checked  by  the  publication  of  works  which
charged  it  with  being  the  depository  of
principles  fatal  equally  to  the  peace  and
religion  of  civil  society  ;  and  if  a  forgery,
it  would  have  been  unable  to  have  endured
the  test  of  a  critical  examination.  But  no
such  attempt  was  made ;  and  the  presump¬
tion  therefore  is  that  the  document  is  au¬
thentic.

“  I  should  be  inclined  to  pronounce,  from
internal  evidence  only,  that  the  ‘  Letter
and  Annotations  ’  were  written  by  Locke ;
but  there  are  corroborating  facts  which
appear  conclusive;  for  this  great  philoso¬
pher  was  actually  residing  at  Oates,  the
country-seat  of  Sir  Francis  Masbam,  at  the
time  when  the  paper  is  dated ;  and  shortly
afterwards  he  went  up  to  town,  where  he
was  initiated  into  Masonry.  These  facts
are  fully  proved  by  Locke’s  Letters  to  Mr.
Molyneaux,  dated  March  30  and  July  2,
1696.  For  these  reasons  I  entertain  no
doubt  of  the  genuineness  and  authenticity
of  this  valuable  Manuscript.”

If  my  own  opinion  is  worth  giving  on  this
subject,  I  should  say  with  much  reluctance,
and  against  my  own  wishes,  that  there  is
neither  internal  nor  external  evidence  of
the  authenticity  of  this  document  to  make
it  a  sufficient  foundation  for  historical  evi¬
dence.

Lemancean.  A  zealous  French  Ma¬
son,  and  the  possessor  of  a  fine  collection
of  degrees,  the  nomenclature  of  which  is
preserved  by  Thory  in  his  Ada  Latomomm.
The  most  important  are  referred  to  in  the
present  work.

Length  of  the  Lodge.  See  Extent

of  the  Lodge.

Lenoir,  Alexandre.  A  celebrated

archselogist,  who  was  born  at  Paris  in  1761.
Having  studied  at  the  Mazarin  College,  he
entered  the  studio  of  Doyeu,  and  successfully
cultivated  painting.  In  1790,  the  National
Assembly  having  decreed  that  the  treas¬
ures  of  art  in  the  suppressed  churches
and  convents  should  be  collected  at  the
Petits-Augustins,  he  was  appointed  the
Conservator  of  the  depot,  which  was  sub¬
sequently  called  the  Museum,  of  which  he
was  then  made  the  Director.  He  there  col¬
lected  more  than  five  hundred  monuments
rescued  from  destruction  and  classified  them
with  great  care.  On  the  conversion  of  the


LEPAGE


LESSONS


465


garden  of  Moasseaux  into  a  Museum  of
Monuments,  he  was  appointed  one  of  the
administrators,  and  subsequently  the  ad¬
ministrator  of  the  monuments  of  the  Church
of  St.  Denis.  In  all  these  appointments,
Lenoir  exhibited  his  taste  and  judgment  as
an  archaeologist.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Society  of  Antiquaries  of  France,  to  whose
Transactions  he  contributed  several  memoirs.

The  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France
had,  from  the  year  1777,  annually  held
philosophical  conventions,  at  which  lec¬
tures  on  Masonic  subjects  were  delivered
by  such  men  as  Court  de  Gebelin.  In
1789  these  conventions  were  discontinued
in  consequence  of  the  political  troubles  of
the  times,  but  they  were  renewed  in  1812
by  M.  Lenoir,  who  delivered  before  the
Chapter  a  course  of  eight  lectures  on  the
relations  which  exist  between  the  ancient
mysteries  of  the  Egyptians  and  the  Greeks
and  those  of  Freemasonry.  In  1814,  he
published  the  substance  of  these  lectures  in
a  work  entitled  La  Franche-Magonnerie  ven¬
due  a  sa  veritable  origine,  ou  V Antiquite  de  la
Franche-  Magonnerie  prouvde  par  l' Explica¬
tion  des  My  stores  Anciens  et  Modernes,  (Paris,
4to,  pp.  804.)  The  theory  of  the  author
being  that  the  mysteries  of  Freemasonry
are  only  a  repetition  of  those  of  antiquity,
he  attempts  to  support  it  by  investigations
into  the  ancient  initiations  that  are  marked
with  profound  learning,  although  the  work
was  severely  criticised  in  the  Journal  de
Ddbats.  He  had  previously  published,  in
1809,  a  work  in  three  volumes,  entitled
Nouvelle  Explication  des  Hierog/yphes  ou
Anciens  Allegories  sacrees  des  Egiptiennes.
He  died  at  Paris,  June  12,  1839.

Lepage.  One  of  those  French  Ma¬
sons  who  in  the  latter  part  of  the  last  cen¬
tury  occupied  themselves  in  the  accumula¬
tion  of  cahiers  or  rituals  of  Masonic  de¬
grees.  Most  of  the  degrees  in  his  collec¬
tion,  which  is  said  to  have  been  a  valuable
one,  are  referred  to  by  Thory  in  the  no¬
menclature  contained  in  his  Acta  Lato-
morum.

Lerouge,  Andre  Joseph  Eti¬
enne.  A  man  of  letters  and  zealous  Ma¬
son  of  Paris,  born  at  Commercv,  April  25,
1766.  He  made  a  large  and  valuable  col¬
lection  of  manuscript  and  printed  degrees.
He  died  in  1834,  and  on  the  7th  of  January,
1835,  his  collection  was  sold  at  public  auc¬
tion.  Thory  has  made  use  of  it  in  his
Nomenclature  des  Grades.  Lerouge  was
the  author  of  several  didactic  writings  on
Masonic  subjects,  all  of  w'hich,  however,
have  had  but  an  ephemeral  existence.  He
was  one  of  the  editors  of  the  French  Ma-
sonicjournal  Hermes,  published  in  1819,  and
of  the  Melanges  de  Philosophic ,  d'Histoire
et  de  Literature  Magonnique.  He  was  a  man
81  80


of  much  learning,  and  is  said  to  have  sup¬
plied  several  of  his  Masonic  contemporaries
with  assistance  in  the  preparation  of  their
works.

Lesser  Eights.  In  the  lecture  of  the
first  degree  we  are  told  that  a  Lodge  has
three  symbolic  lesser  lights;  one  of  these  is
in  the  East,  one  in  the  West,  and  one  in  the
South.  There  is  no  light  in  the  North,  be¬
cause  King  Solomon’s  Temple,  of  which
every  Lodge  is  a  representation,  was  placed
so  far  north  of  the  ecliptic  that  the  sun
and  moon,  at  their  meridian  height,  could
dart  no  rays  into  the  northern  part  thereof.
The  north  we  therefore  Masonically  call  a
place  of  darkness.

This  symbolic  use  of  the  three  lesser
lights  is  very  old,  being  found  in  the  earli¬
est  lectures  of  the  last  century.

The  three  lights,  like  the  three  principal
officers  and  the  three  principal  supports,  re¬
fer,  undoubtedly,  to  the  three  stations  of
the  sun  —  its  rising  in  the  east,  its  meridian
in  the  south,  and  its  setting  in  the  west ;
and  thus  the  symbolism  of  the  Lodge,  as
typical  of  the  world,  continues  to  be  pre¬
served.

The  use  of  lights  in  all  religious  ceremo¬
nies  is  an  ancient  custom.  There  was  a
seven-branched  candlestick  in  the  taber¬
nacle,  and  in  the  Temple  “  were  the  golden
candlesticks,  five  on  the  right  hand  and
five  on  the  left.”  They  were  always  typical
of  moral,  spiritual,  or  intellectual  light.

Lessing,  Gottfried  Ephraim.  A
learned  litterateur  of  Germany,  who  was
born  at  Kaumitz,  in  the  Neiderlausetz,  22d
January,  1729,  and  died  on  the  15th  Feb¬
ruary,  i781,  at  Woefenbutal,  where  he  was
librarian  to  the  Duke  of  Brunswick.  Les¬
sing  was  initiated  in  a  Lodge  at  Hamburg,
and  took  great  interest  in  the  Institution.
His  theory,  that  it  sprang  out  of  a  secret  as¬
sociation  of  Templars  who  had  long  existed
in  London,  and  was  modified  in  form  by  Sir
Christopher  Wren,  has  long  been  rejected,  if
it  was  ever  admitted  by  any;  but  in  his  two
works  Ernst  und  Falk  and  Nathan  der  Weise,
he  has  given  profound  and  comprehensive
views  on  the  genius  and  spirit  of  Free¬
masonry.  Lessing  was  the  most  eminent
litterateur  of  his  age,  and  has  been  styled
“  the  man  who  was  the  forerunner  of  the
philosophers,  and  tvhose  criticisms  supplied
the  place  of  poetry.”  See  Ernest  and  Falk.

Lessons.  The  passages  of  Scripture
recited  by  the  Prelate  in  the  ceremony  of
inducting  a  candidate  into  the  Masonic
Order  of  Knights  Templars.  It  is  an  eccle¬
siastical  term,  and  is  used  by  the  Templars
because  these  passages  are  intended  to  in¬
struct  the  candidate  in  reference  to  the  in¬
cidents  of  our  Saviour’s  life  which  are  re¬
ferred  to  in  the  ritual.


466


LETTER


LEWIS


letter  of  Application.  More

properly  called  a  Petition,  which  see.
Letters  Patent.  See  Patents.
Lettuce.  A  sacred  plant  used  in  the
mysteries  of  Adonis,  and  therefore  the
analogue  of  the  Acacia  in  the  mysteries  of
Freemasonry.

Leucht.  A  Masonic  charlatan  of  the
eighteenth  century,  better  known  by  his
assumed  name  of  Johnson,  which  see.

Level.  In  Freemasonry,  the  level  is
a  symbol  of  equality ;  not  of  that  social
equality  which  would  destroy  all  distinc¬
tions  of  rank  and  position,  and  beget  con¬
fusion,  insubordination,  and  anarchy ;  but
of  that  fraternal  equality  which,  recog¬
nizing  the  fatherhood  of  God,  admits  as  a
necessary  corollary  the  brotherhood  of
man.  It,  therefore,  teaches  us  that,  in  the
sight  of  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  Uni¬
verse,  his  creatures,  who  are  at  an  im¬
measurable  distance  from  him,  move  upon
the  same  plane  ;  as  the  far- moving  stars,
which  though  millions  of  miles  apart,  yet
seem  to  shine  upon  the  same  canopy  of  the
sky.  In  this  view,  the  level  teaches  us
that  all  men  are  equal,  subject  to  the  same
infirmities,  hastening  to  the  same  goal,
and  preparing  to  be  judged  by  the  same
immutable  law.

The  level  is  deemed,  like  the  square  and
the  plumb,  of  so  much  importance  as  a
symbol,  that  it  is  repeated  in  many  dif¬
ferent  relations.  First,  it  is  one  of  the
jewels  of  the  Lodge;  in  the  English  system
a  movable,  in  the  American  an  immovable
one.  This  leads  to  its  being  adopted  as  the
roper  official  ensign  of  the  Senior  Warden,
ecause  the  Craft  when  at  labor,  at  which
time  he  presides  over  them,  are  on  a
common  level  of  subordination.  And  then
it  is  one  of  the.  working-tools  of  a  Fellow
Craft,  still  retaining  its  symbolism  of
equality.

Levi,  Eliplias.  The  pseudonym  of
Louis  Alphonse  Constance,  a  prolific  writer
on  Magical  Masonry,  or  of  works  in  which
he  seeks  to  connect  the  symbols  of  Masonry
with  the  dogmas  of  the  High  Magic.  His
principal  works,  which  abound  in  dreamy
speculations,  are  Dogme  et  Rituel  de  la  Haute
.  Magie,  Paris,  1S60 ;  Histoire  de  la  Afagie,
same  place  and  year;  and  Le  Clef  des  Grand.
My  stives,  published  a  year  afterwards.

Levite,  Knight.  The  Knight  Le-
vite  was  the  fourth  section  of  the  seventh
degree  of  the  Rite  of  Clerks  of  Strict  Ob¬
servance.

Levite  of  the  External  Guard.

The  lowest  of  the  nine  Orders  of  the
Priesthood,  or  highest  of  the  Masonic  de¬
grees  in  the  Order  of  the  Temple  as  modi¬
fied  by  Fabre-Palaprat.  It  was  equivalent
to  Kadosh.


Levites.  Those  descendants  of  Levi
who  were  employed  in  the  lowest  minis¬
terial  duties  of  the  Temple,  and  were  thus
subordinate  to  the  priests,  who  were  the
lineal  descendants  of  Aaron.  They  are
represented  in  some  of  the  high  degrees.

Levite,  Saeriflcer.  A  degree  in  the
collection  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the
Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

Levitikon.  There  is  a  spurious  Gos¬
pel  of  St.  John,  supposed  to  have  been
forged  in  the  fifteenth  century,  which
contradicts  the  genuine  Gospel  in  many
particulars.  It  contains  an  introduction
and  a  commentary,  said  to  have  been
written  by  Nicephorus,  a  Greek  monk  of
Athens.  This  commentary  is  called  the
“  Levitikon.”  Out  of  this  gospel  and  its
commentary,  Fabrd-Palaprat,  about  the
year  1814,  composed  a  liturgy  for  the  sect
of  Johannites,  which  he  had  established  and
attached  to  the  Order  of  the  Temple  at  Paris.

Levy.  A  collection  of  men  raised  for
a  particular  purpose.  The  lectures  tell  us
that  the  timbers  for  building  the  Temple
at  Jerusalem  were  felled  in  the  forests  of
Lebanon,  where  a  levy  of  thirty  thousand
men  of  Jerusalem  were  employed  by
monthly  courses  of  ten  thousand.  Adoni-
ram  was  placed  over  this  levy.  'The  facts
are  derived  from  the  statement  in  1  Kings
v.  13,  14 :  “  And  King  Solomon  raised  a
levy  out  of  all  Israel;  and  the  levy  was
thirty  thousand  men.  And  he  sent  them
to  Lebanon  ten  thousand  a  month  by
courses;  a  month  they  were  in  Lebanon
and  two  months  at  home:  and  Adoniram
was  over  the  levy.”  These  wood-cutters
were  not  Tyrians,  but  all  Israelites.

Lewis.  1.  An  instrument  in  Opera¬
tive  Masonry.  It  is  an  iron  cramp  which
is  inserted  in  a  cavity  prepared  for  that
purpose  in  any  large  stone,  so  as  to  give
attachment  to  a  pulley  and  hook  whereby
the  stone  may  be  conveniently  raised  to
any  height  and  deposited  in  its  proper
position.  It  is  well  described  by  Mr.  Gib¬
son,  in  the  British  Archceologia,  (voL  x.,  p.
127 ;)  but  he  is  in  error  in  attributing  its
invention  to  a  French  architect  in  the
time  of  Louis  XIV.,  and  its  name  to  that
monarch.  The  contrivance  was  known  to
the  Romans,  and  several  taken  from  old
ruins  are  now  in  the  Vatican.  In  the
ruins  of  Whitby  Abbey,  in  England,  which
was  founded  by  Oswy,  king  of  Northum¬
berland,  in  658,  large  stones  were  dis¬
covered,  with  the  necessary  excavation  for
the  insertion  of  a  lewis.  The  word  is  most
probably  derived  from  the  old  French  lev  is,
any  contrivance  for  lifting.  The  modern
French  call  the  instrument  a  louve.

2.  In  the  English  system,  the  lewis  is
found  on  the  tracing-board  of  the  Entered


LEWIS


LIBAVIUS


467


Apprentice,  where  it  is  used  as  a  symbol
of  strength,  because,  by  its  assistance,  the
Operative  Mason  is  enabled  to  lift  the
heaviest  stones  with  a  comparatively  tri¬
fling  exertion  of  physical  power.  It  has
not  been  adopted  as  a  symbol  by  the
American  Masons,  except  in  Pennsylvania,
where,  of  course,  it  receives  the  English
interpretation.

3.  The  son  of  a  Mason  is,  in  England,
called  a  lewis,  because  it  is  his  duty  to  sup¬
port  the  sinking  powers  and  aid  the  failing
strength  of  his  father;  or,  as  Oliver  has  ex¬
pressed  it,  “  to  bear  the  burden  and  heat
of  the  day,  that  his  parents  may  rest  in
their  old  age ;  thus  rendering  the  evening
of  their  lives  peaceful  and  happy.”  In  the
rituals  of  the  middle  of  the  last  century
he  was  called  a  louffton.  From  this  the
French  derived  their  word  lufton,  which
they  apply  in  the  same  way.  They  also
employ  the  word  l ouvcteau ,  and  call  the
daughter  of  a  Mason  louvetine.  Louveteau
is  probably  derived  directly  from  the  louve,
the  French  name  of  the  implement;  but  it
is  a  singular  coincidence  that  louveteau
also  means  a  young  wolf,  and  that  in  the
Egyptian  mysteries  of  Isis  the  candidate
was  made  to  wear  the  mask  of  a  wolfs
head.  Hence,  a  wolf  and  a  candidate  in
these  mysteries  were  often  used  as  sy¬
nonymous  terms.  Macrobius,  in  his  Sat¬
urnalia,  says,  in  reference  to  this  custom,
that  the  ancients  perceived  a  relationship
between  the  sun,  the  great  symbol  in  these
mysteries,  and  a  wolf,  which  the  candidate
represented  at  his  initiation.  For,  he  re¬
marks,  as  the  flocks  of  sheep  and  cattle  fly
and  disperse  at  the  sight  of  the  wolf,  so  the
flocks  of  stars  disappear  at  the  approach
of  the  sun’s  light.  The  learned  reader  will
also  recollect  that  in  the  Greek  language
lukos  signifies  both  the  sun  and  a  wolf.
Hence  some  etymologists  have  sought  to
derive  louveteau,  the  son  of  a  Mason,  from
louveteau,  a  young  wolf.  But  I  prefer  the
more  direct  derivation  from  louve,  the
operative  instrument.

In  Browne’s  Master  Key,  which  is  sup¬
posed  to  represent  the  Prestonian  lecture,
we  find  the  following  definition :

“  What  do  we  call  the  son  of  a  Freema¬
son  ?

“  A  lewis.

“  What  does  that  denote?

“  Strength.

“  How  is  a  lewis  depicted  in  a  Mason’s
Lodge?

“  As  a  cramp  of  metal,  by  which,  when
fixed  into  a  stone,  great  and  ponderous
weights  are  raised  to  a  certain  height  and
fixed  upon  their  proper  basis,  without
which  Operative  Masons  could  not  so  con¬
veniently  do.


“  What  is  the  duty  of  a  lewis,  the  son
of  a  Mason,  to  his  aged  parents  ?

“  To  bear  the  heavy  burden  in  the  heat
of  the  day  and  help  them  in  time  of  need,
which,  by  reason  of  their  great  age,  they
ought  to  be  exempted  from,  so  as  to  render
the  close  of  their  days  happy  and  comfort¬
able.

“  His  privilege  for  so  doing?

“  To  be  made  a  Mason  before  any  other
person,  however  dignified  by  birth,  rank,
or  riches,  unless  he,  through  complaisance,
waves  this  privilege.”

The  lecture  does  not  state,  in  exact
terms,  the  whole  nature  of  the  privileges
of  a  lewis.  Not  only  has  he,  in  an  initia¬
tion,  the  precedence  of  all  other  candidates,
but  in  England  and  France  the  right  to  be
initiated  at  an  earlier  age.  For  while  the
general  law  in  both  these  countries  requires
a  candidate  to  have  reached  the  age  of
twenty-one,  a  lewis  can  be  received  when
only  eighteen.  No  such  regulation  is,  it  ia
true,  to  be  found  in  the  English  Constitution ;
but,  as  Oliver  says,  it  is  “  a  traditional  cus¬
tom  ;  ”  and  a  provision  seems  to  have  been
made  for  it  by  allowing  the  prerogative  of
dispensing  with  the  usual  requirement  of
age  in  certain  cases.  In  this  country,
where  the  symbolism  of  the  lewis  is  un¬
known,  no  such  right  is  now  recognized.
It  is,  however,  probable  that  the  custom
formerly  existed,  derived  from  England;
and  it  has  been  thus  attempted,  I  think
reasonably  enough,  to  explain  the  fact  that
Washington  was  initiated  when  he  was  only
twenty  years  and  eight  months  old.

Lexington,  Congress  of.  This
Congress  was  convoked  in  1853,  at  Lexing¬
ton,  Kentucky,  for  the  purpose  of  attempt¬
ing  to  form  a  General  Grand  Lodge.  A
plan  of  constitution  was  proposed,  but  a
sutficient  number  of  Grand  Lodges  did  not
accede  to  the  proposition  to  give  it  efficacy.

Libanns.  The  Latin  name  of  Leb¬
anon,  which  see.

Libation.  Among  the  Greeks  and
Romans  the  libation  was  a  religious  cere¬
mony,  consisting  of  the  pouring  of  wine  or
other  liquid  upon  the  ground,  or,  in  a  sacri¬
fice,  upon  the  head  of  the  victim  after  it
had  been  first  tasted  by  the  priest  and  by
those  who  stood  next  to  him.  The  liba¬
tions  were  usually  of  unmixed  wine,  but
were  sometimes  of  mingled  wine  and  water.
Libations  are  used  in  some  of  the  chivalric
and  the  high  degrees  of  Masonry.

Libavius,  Andreas.  A  learned
German  physician,  who  was  born  at  Halle,
in  Saxony,  and  died  at  Coburg,  where  he
was  rector  of  the  Gymnasium  in  1616.  He
was  a  vehement  opponent  of  Paracelsus  and
of  the  Rosicrucians.  In  1613  he  published
at  Frankfort  hia  Syntagma  seketorum  at-


4G8


LIBERAL


LIBERTINE


chimia  arcanorum,  in  two  folio  volumes,  and
two  years  after,  an  Appendix,  in  which  he
attacks  the  Society  of  the  Rosicrucians,  and
analyzes  the  Con/essio  of  Valentine  Andrea.”
De  Quincey  has  used  the  works  of  Libavius
in  his  article  on  Secret  Societies.

Liberal  Arts  and  Sciences.  We
are  indebted  to  the  Scholastic  philoso¬
phers  of  the  Middle  Ages  for  the  nomen¬
clature  by  which  they  distinguished  the
seven  sciences  then  best  known  to  them.
With  the  metaphorical  spirit  of  the  age  in
which  they  lived,  they  called  the  two  classes
into  which  they  divided  them,  the  trivium,  or
meeting  of  three  roads,  and  the  quadrivium,
or  meeting  of  four  roads ;  calling  grammar,
logic,  and  rhetoric  the  trivium,  and  arith¬
metic,  geometry,  music,  and  astronomy  the
quadrivium.  These  they  styled  the  seven
liberal  arts  and  sciences,  to  separate  them
from  the  mechanical  arts  which  were  prac¬
tised  by  the  handicraftsmen.  The  liberal
man,  Iberalis  homo,  meant,  in  the  Middle
Ages,  the  man  who  was  his  own  master  —
free,  independent,  and  often  a  nobleman.

Mosheim,  speaking  of  the  state  of  litera¬
ture  in  the  eleventh  century,  uses  the  fol¬
lowing  language:  “The  seven  liberal  arts,
as  they  were  now  styled,  were  taught  in
the  greatest  part  of  the  schools  that  were
erected  in  this  century  for  the  education
of  youth.  The  first  stage  of  these  sciences
was  grammar,  which  was  followed  succes¬
sively  by  rhetoric  and  logic.  When  the
disciple,  having  learned  these  branches,
which  were  generally  known  by  the
name  of  trivium,  extended  his  ambition
further,  and  was  desirous  of  new  improve¬
ment  in  the  sciences,  he  was  conducted
slowly  through  the  quadrivium  (arithmetic,
music,  geometry,  and  astronomy)  to  the
very  summit  of  literary  fame.”

The  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  al¬
ways  anxious  to  elevate  their  profession
above  the  position  of  a  mere  operative  art,
readily  assumed  these  liberal  arts  and  sci¬
ences  as  a  part  of  their  course  of  knowledge,
thus  seeking  to  assimilate  themselves  rather
to  the  scholars  who  were  above  them  than  to
the  workmen  who  were  below  them.  Hence
in  all  the  Old  Constitutions  we  find  these
liberal  arts  and  sciences  introduced  at  the
beginning  as  forming  an  essential  part  of
the  body  of  Masonry.  Thus,  in  the  Lands-
downe  MS.,  whose  date  is  about  1560,  (and
it  may  be  taken  as  a  fair  specimen  of  all
the  others,)  these  sciences  are  thus  referred
to:

“  We  minde  to  shew  you  the  charge  that
belongs  to  every  treu  Mason  to  keep,  for  in
good  Faith  if  you  take  good  heed  it  is  well
worthy  to  be  kept  for  A  worthy  Craft  and
curious  science,  —  Sirs,  there  be  Seaven
Liberall  Sciences  of  the  which  the  Noble


Craft  of  Masonry  is  one.”  And  then  the
writer  proceeds  to  define  them  in  the  order
which  they  still  retain.  It  is  noteworthy,
however,  that  that  order  must  have  been
changed;  for  in  what  is  probably  the  earliest
of  the  manuscripts — the  one  edited  by  Mr.
Halliwell  —  geometry  appears  as  the  last,
instead  of  the  fifth  of  the  sciences,  and
arithmetic  as  the  sixth.

It  is  not  therefore  surprising  that,  on  the
revival  of  Masonry  in  1717,  these  seven
liberal  arts  and  sciences  were  made  a  part
of  the  system  of  instruction.  At  first,  of
course,  they  were  placed  in  the  Entered
Apprentice’s  degree,  that  being  the  most
important  degree  of  the  period,  and  they
were  made  to  refer  to  the  seven  Masons  who
composed  a  Lodge.  Afterwards,  on  the
more  methodical  division  of  the  degrees,
they  were  transferred  to  the  Fellow  Craft,
because  that  was  the  degree  symbolic  of
science,  and  were  made  to  refer  to  seven  of
the  steps  of  the  winding  stairs,  that  being
itself,  when  properly  interpreted,  a  symbol
of  the  progress  of  knowledge.  And  there
they  still  remain.

Liber  tas.  Latin.  Liberty.  A  signifi¬
cant  word  in  the  Red  Cross  degree.  It
refers  to  the  “  liberty  of  passage”  gained  by
the  returning  Jews  over  their  opponents  at
the  river  Euphrates,  as  described  in  the
Scottish  Rite  degree  of  Knight  of  the  East,
where  the  old  French  rituals  have  “liberty
du  passer.”

Libertine.  The  Charges  of  1722  com¬
mence  by  saying  that  “  a  Mason  is  obliged
by  his  tenure  to  obey  the  moral  law ;  and
if  he  rightly  understands  the  art,  he  will
never  be  a  stupid  Atheist,  nor  an  irreli¬
gious  libertine.”  The  word  “  libertine  ”  there
used  conveyed  a  meaning  different  from
that  which  it  now  bears.  In  the  present
usage  of  language  it  signifies  a  profligate
and  licentious  person,  but  originally  it
meant  a  freethinker,  or  Deist.  Derived
from  the  Latin  “  libertinus,”  a  man  that
was  once  a  bondsman  but  who  has  been
made  free,  it  was  metaphorically  used  to
designate  one  who  had  been  released,  or
who  had  released  himself  from  the  bonds
of  religious  belief,  and  become  in  matters
of  faith  a  doubter  or  denier.  Hence  “  a
stupid  Atheist”  denoted,  to  use  the  lan¬
guage  of  the  Psalmist,  “  the  fool  who  has
said  in  his  heart  there  is  no  God,”  while  an
“irreligious  libertine”  designated  the  man
who,  with  a  degree  less  of  unbelief,  denies
the  distinctive  doctrines  of  revealed  religion.
And  this  meaning  of  the  expression  con¬
nects  itself  very  appropriately  with  the
succeeding  paragraph  of  the  Charge.  “  But
though  in  ancient  times,  Masons  were
charged  in  every  country  to  be  of  the  reli¬
gion  of  that  country  or  nation,  whatever  it


LIBERTY


LIGHT


469


was,  yet  it  is  now  thought  more  expe¬
dient  only  to  oblige  them  to  that  religion
in  which  all  men  agree,  leaving  their  par¬
ticular  opinions  to  themselves.”

The  expression  “irreligious  libertine,”
alluding,  as  it  does,  to  a  scoffer  at  religious
truths,  is  eminently  suggestive  of  the  reli¬
gious  character  of  our  Institution,  which,
founded  as  it  is  on  the  great  doctrines  of
religion,  cannot  be  properly  appreciated  by
any  one  who  doubts  or  denies  their  truth.

Liberty  of  Passage.  A  significant
phrase  in  the  high  degrees.  See  Libertas.
The  French  rituals  designate  it  by  the  letters
L.\  D.\  P.\  as  the  initials  of  liberte  de
passer,  or  liberty  of  passage.  But  Brother
Pike  proposes  to  interpret  these  letters  as
liberty  de  penser,  liberty  of  thought ;  the  pre¬
rogative  of  a  freeman  and  a  Freemason.

Library.  It  is  the  duty  as  well  as  the
interest  of  Lodges  to  facilitate  the  efforts  of
the  members  in  the  acquisition  of  Masonic
knowledge,  and  I  know  of  no  method  more
appropriate  than  the  formation  of  Masonic
libraries.  The  establishment  of  a  Grand
Lodge  library  is  of  course  not  objection¬
able,  but  it  is  of  far  less  value  and  impor¬
tance  than  a  Lodge  library.  The  original
outlay  of  a  few  dollars  in  the  beginning  for
its  establishment,  and  of  a  few  more  an¬
nually  for  its  maintenance  and  increase,
would  secure  to  every  Lodge  in  the  land  a
rich  treasury  of  Masonic  reading  for  the  in¬
formation  and  improvement  of  its  mem¬
bers.  The  very  fact  that  Masonic  books
were  within  their  reach,  showing  them¬
selves  on  the  well-filled  shelves  at  every
meeting,  and  ready  at  their  hands  for  the
mere  asking  or  the  trouble  of  taking  them
down,  would  induce  many  brethren  to  read
who  never  yet  have  read  a  page  or  even  a
line  upon  the  subject  of  Masonic  history
and  science.

Considering  the  immense  number  of
books  that  have  been  published  on  the
subject  of  Speculative  Masonry,  many  of
which  would  be  rendered  accessible  to
every  one  by  the  establishment  of  Lodge
libraries,  the  Mason  who  would  then  be
ignorant  of  the  true  genius  of  his  art
would  be  worthy  of  all  shame  and  reproach.

As  thoughtful  municipalities  place  pub¬
lic  fountains  in  their  parks  and  at  the  cor¬
ners  of  streets,  that  the  famished  wayfarer
may  allay  his  thirst  and  receive  physical
refreshment,  so  should  Masonic  Lodges
place  such  intellectual  fountains  in  reach
of  their  members,  that  they  might  enjoy
mental  refreshment.  Such  fountains  are
libraries ;  and  the  Lodge  which  spends  fifty
dollars,  more  or  less,  upon  a  banquet,  and
yet  does  without  a  library,  commits  a  grave
Masonic  offence  ;  for  it  refuses,  or  at  least
neglects,  to  diffuse  that  light  among  its


children  which  its  obligation  requires  it
to  do.

Of  two  Lodges  —  the  one  without  and
the  other  with  a  library  —  the  difference  is
this,  that  the  one  will  have  more  igno¬
rance  in  it  than  the  other.  If  a  Lodge
takes  delight  in  an  ignorant  membership,
let  it  forego  a  library.  If  it  thinks  there
is  honor  and  reputation  and  pleasure  in
having  its  members  well  informed,  it  will
give  them  means  of  instruction.

Lieutenant  Grand  Com¬
mander.  The  title  of  the  second  and
third  officers  of  a  Grand  Consistory  in  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  and
the  second  officer  in  a  Supreme  Council.

Life.  The  three  stages  of  human  life
are  said  in  the  lectures  to  be  symbolized
by  the  three  degrees  of  Ancient  Craft  Ma¬
sonry,  and  the  doctrine  is  illustrated  in  the
third  degree  by  the  emblem  of  the  Three
Steps  on  the  Master’s  Carpet,  which  see.

Life,  Eternal.  See  Eternal  Life.

Life  Member.  It  is  the  custom  in
some  Lodges  to  permit  a  member  to  become
a  life  member  by  the  immediate  payment
of  a  sum  of  money,  after  which  he  is  released
from  any  subsequent  payment  of  quarterly
dues.  Such  a  system  is  of  advantage  in  a
pecuniary  sense  to  the  Lodge,  if  the  money
paid  for  life  membership  is  invested  in
profitable  stock,  because  the  interest  con¬
tinues  to  accrue  to  the  Lodge  even  after
the  death  of  a  member.  A  Lodge  consist¬
ing  entirely  of  life  members  would  be  a
Lodge  the  number  of  whose  members
might  increase,  but  could  never  decrease.
Life  members  are  subject  to  all  the  disci¬
pline  of  the  Lodge,  such  as  suspension  or
expulsion,  just  as  the  other  members.

Light.  Light  is  an  important  word  in
the  Masonic  system.  It  conveys  a  far  more
recondite  meaning  than  it  is  believed  to
possess  by  the  generality  of  readers.  It  is
in  fact  the  first  of  all  the  symbols  presented
to  the  neophyte,  and  continues  to  be  pre¬
sented  to  him  in  various  modifications
throughout  all  his  future  progress  in  his
Masonic  career.  It  does  not  simply  mean,
as  might  be  supposed,  truth  or  wisdom,  but
it  contains  within  itself  a  far  more  ab¬
struse  allusion  to  the  very  essence  of  Spec¬
ulative  Masonry,  and  embraces  within  its
capacious  signification  all  the  other  sym¬
bols  of  the  Order.  Freemasons  are  em¬
phatically  called  the  “sons  of  light,”  be¬
cause  they  are,  or  at  least  are  entitled  to
be,  in  possession  of  the  true  meaning  of
thesymbol ;  while  the  profane  or  uninitiated
who  have  not  received  this  knowledge  are,
by  a  parity  of  expression,  said  to  be  in
darkness.

The  connection  of  material  light  with
this  emblematic  and  mental  illumination,


470


LIGHT


LIGHT


was  prominently  exhibited  in  all  the  an¬
cient  systems  of  religion  and  esoteric  mys¬
teries.

Among  the  Egyptians,  the  hare  was  the
hieroglyphic  of  eyes  that  are  open,  because
that  animal  was  supposed  to  have  his  eyes
always  open.  The  priests  afterwards  adopt¬
ed  the  hare  as  the  symbol  of  the  moral  illu¬
mination  revealed  to  the  neophytes  in  the
contemplation  of  the  divine  truth,  and
hence,  according  to  Champollion,  it  was
also  the  symbol  of  Osiris,  their  principal
divinity,  and  the  chief  object  of  their  mys¬
tic  rites,  — thus  showing  the  intimate  con¬
nection  that  they  maintained  in  their  sym¬
bolic  language  between  the  process  of  ini¬
tiation  and  the  contemplation  of  divinity.
On  this  subject  a  remarkable  coincidence
has  been  pointed  out  by  M.  Portal  (Symb.
des  Egypt,  69,)  in  the  Hebrew  language.
There  the  word  for  “hare”  is  arnebet,  which
seems  to  be  compounded  of  aur,  “  light,”
and  nabat,  “  to  see;  ”  so  that  the  word  which
among  the  Egyptians  was  used  to  designate
an  initiation,  among  the  Hebrews  meant
to  see  the  light.

If  we  proceed  to  an  examination  of  the
other  systems  of  religion  which  were  prac¬
tised  by  the  nations  of  antiquity,  we  shall
find  that  light  always  constituted  a  princi¬
pal  object  of  adoration,  as  the  primordial
source  of  knowledge  and  goodness,  and  that
darkness  was  with  them  synonymous  with
ignorance  and  evil.  Dr.  Beard  ( Encyc .
Bib.  Lit.)  attributes  this  view  of  the  divine
origin  of  light  among  the  Eastern  nations,
to  the  fact  that  “  light  in  the  East  has  a
clearness  and  brilliancy,  is  accompanied  by
an  intensity  of  heat,  and  is  followed  in  its
influence  by  a  largeness  of  good,  of  which
the  inhabitants  of  less  genial  climates  have
no  conception.  Light  easily  and  naturally
became,  in  consequence,  with  Orientals,  a
representative  of  tin  highest  human  good.
All  the  more  joyous  emotions  of  the  mind,
all  the  pleasing  sensations  of  the  frame,  all
the  happy  hours  of  domestic  intercourse,
were  described  under  imagery  derived  from
light.  The  transition  was  natural,  —  from
earthly  to  heavenly,  from  corporeal  to
spiritual  things;  and  so  light  came  to
typify  true  religion  and  the  felicity  which
it  imparts.  But  as  light  not  only  came
from  God,  but  also  makes  man’s  way  clear
before  him,  so  it  was  employed  to  signify
moral  truth,  and  pre-eminently  that  divine
system  of  truth  which  is  set  forth  in  the
Bible,  from  its  earliest  gleamings  onward  to
the  perfect  day  of  the  Great  Sun  of  Right¬
eousness.”

As  light  was  thus  adored  as  the  source
of  goodness,  darkness,  which  is  the  nega¬
tion  of  light,  was  abhorred  as  the  cause  of
evil,  and  hence  arose  that  doctrine  which


prevailed  among  the  ancients,  that  there
were  two  antagonistic  principles  continu¬
ally  contending  for  the  government  of  the
world.

“Light,”  says  Duncan,  ( Relig .  of  Prof.
Ant.,  187,)  “isasourceof  positive  happiness :
without  it  man  could  barely  exist.  And
since  all  religious  opinion  is  based  on  the
ideas  of  pleasure  and  pain,  and  the  corre¬
sponding  sensations  of  hope  and  fear,  it  is
not  to  be  wondered  if  the  heathen  rever¬
enced  light.  Darkness,  on  the  contrary',  by
replunging  nature,  as  it  were,  into  a  state
of  nothingness,  and  depriving  man  of  the
pleasurable  emotions  conveyed  through  the
organ  of  sight,  was  ever  held  in  abhor¬
rence,  as  a  source  of  misery  and  fear.  The
two  opposite  conditions  in  which  man  thus
found  himself  placed,  occasioned  by  the  en¬
joyment  or  the  banishment  of  light,  in¬
duced  him  to  imagine  the  existence  of  two
antagonistic  principles  in  nature,  to  whose
dominion  he  was  alternately  subjected.”

Such  was  the  dogma  of  Zoroaster,  the
great  Persian  philosopher,  who,  under  the
names  of  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman,  symbol¬
ized  these  two  principles  of  light  and  dark¬
ness.

Such  was  also  the  doctrine,  though  some¬
what  modified,  of  Manes,  the  founder  of
the  sect  of  Manichees,  who  describes  God
the  Father  as  ruling  over  the  kingdom  of
light  and  contending  with  the  powers  of
darkness.

Pythagoras  also  maintained  this  doctrine
of  two  antagonistic  principles.  He  called
the  one,  unity,  light,  the  right  hand,  equal¬
ity,  stability,  and  a  straight  line ;  the  other
he  named  binary,  darkness,  the  left  hand,
inequality,  instability,  and  a  curved  line.
Of  the  colors,  he  attributed  white  to  the
good  principle,  and  black  to  the  evil  one.

The  Jewish  Kabbalists  believed  that,  be¬
fore  the  creation  of  the  world,  all  space
was  filled  with  the  Infinite  Intellectual
Light,  which  afterwards  withdrew  itself  to
an  equal  distance  from  a  central  point  iu
space,  and  afterwards  by  its  emanation  pro¬
duced  future  worlds.  The  first  emanation
of  this  surrounding  light  into  the  abyss
of  darkness  produced  what  they  called  the
“  Adam  Kadmon,”  the  first  man,  or  the
first  production  of  the  divine  energy.

In  the  Bhagvat  Geeta,  (one  of  the  reli¬
gious  books  of  the  Brahmans,)  it  is  said:
“  Light  and  darkness  are  esteemed  the
world’s  eternal  ways ;  he  who  walketh  in
the  former  path  returneth  not, — that  is,  he
goeth  immediately  to  bliss;  whilst  he  who
walketh  in  the  latter  cometh  back  again
upon  the  earth.”

In  fact,  in  all  the  ancient  systems,  this
reverence  for  light,  as  an  emblematic  rep¬
resentation  of  the  Eternal  Principle  of


LIGHTS


LING  AM


471


Good,  is  predominant.  In  the  mysteries,
the  candidate  passed,  during  his  initiation,
through  scenes  of  utter  darkness,  and  at
length  terminated  his  trials  by  an  admis¬
sion  to  the  splendidly  illuminated  sacel-
lum,  where  he  was  said  to  have  attained
pure  and  perfect  light,  and  where  he  re¬
ceived  the  necessary  instructions  which
were  to  invest  him  with  that  knowledge  of
the  divine  truth  which  had  been  the  ob¬
ject  of  all  his  labors.

Lights,  Fixed.  According  to  the  old
rituals  of  the  last  century,  every  Lodge
room  was  furnished,  or  supposed  to  be  fur¬
nished,  with  three  windows,  situated  in  the
east,  west,  and  south.  They  were  called  the
Fixed,  Lights ,  and  their  uses  were  said  to
be  “  to  light  the  men  to,  at,  and  from  their
work.”  The  symbolic  lights  of  modern
Masonry  were  not  substituted  for  them,  be¬
cause  both  were  used  at  the  same  time;  but
the  explanation  now  given  as  to  the  absence-
of  a  light  in  the  north,  which  is  now  applied
to  the  symbolic  lights,  was  formerly  referred
to  the  fixed  lights.

Light,  to  Bring  to.  A  technical
expression  in  Masonry  meaning  to  initiate  ;
as,  “He  was  brought  to  light  in  such  a
Lodge,”  that  is,  he  was  initiated  in  it.

Ligure.  Dtt'1?-  The  first  stone  in  the
third  row  of  the  high  priest’s  breastplate.
Commentators  have  been  divided  in  opinion
as  to  the  nature  of  this  stone;  but  it  is  now
supposed  by  the  best  authorities  to  have
been  the  rubellite,  which  is  a  red  variety  of
the  tourmaline.  The  ligure  in  the  breast¬
plate  was  referred  to  the  tribe  of  Dan.

Lily.  The  plant  so  frequently  men¬
tioned  in  the  Old  Testament  under  the
name  of  lily,  as  an  emblem  of  purity  and
eace,  was  the  lotus  lily  of  Egypt  and  India,
t  occupied  a  conspicuous  place  among  the
ornaments  of  the  Temple  furniture.  The
brim  of  the  molten  sea  was  wrought  with
flowers  of  the  lotus ;  the  chapiters  on  the
tops  of  the  pillars  at  the  porch,  and  the
tops  of  the  pillars  themselves,  were  adorned
with  the  same  plant.  Sir  Robert  Ker
Porter,  describing  a  piece  of  sculpture
which  he  found  at  Persepolis,  says,  “  Al¬
most  every  one  in  this  procession  holds  in
t  his  hand  a  figure  like  the  lotus.  This
flower  was  full  of  meaning  among  the
ancients,  and  occurs  all  over  the  East.
Egypt,  Persia,  Palestine,  and  India  pre¬
sent  it  everywhere  over  their  architecture,
in  the  hands  and  on  the  heads  of  their
sculptured  figures,  whether  in  statue  or  in
bass-relief.  We  also  find  it  in  the  sacred
vestments  and  architecture  of  the  taber¬
nacle  and  Temple  of  the  Israelites.  The
lily  which  is  mentioned  by  our  Saviour,  as
an  image  of  peculiar  beauty  and  glory,
when  comparing  the  works  of  nature  with


the  decorations  of  art,  was  a  different  flower ;
probably  a  species  of  lilium.  This  is  also
represented  in  all  pictures  of  the  salutation
of  Gabriel  to  the  Virgin  Mary;  and,  in
fact,  has  been  held  in  mysterious  venera¬
tion  by  people  of  all  nations  and  times.
‘It  is  the  symbol  of  divinity,  of  purity,
and  abundance,  and  of  a  love  most  com¬
plete  in  perfection,  charity,  and  benediction ;
as  in  Holy  Scripture,  that  mirror  of  purity,
Susanna  is  defined  Susa,  which  signified
the  lily  flower,  the  chief  city  of  the  Per¬
sians,  bearing  that  name  for  excellency.
Hence,  the  lily’s  three  leaves  in  the  arms
of  France  meaneth  Piety,  Justice,  and
Charity.’  So  far,  the  general  impression
of  a  peculiar  regard  to  this  beautiful  and
flagrant  flower ;  but  the  early  Persians  at¬
tached  to  it  a  peculiar  sanctity.”  We  must
not,  however,  forget  the  difference  between
the  lotus  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  lily
of  the  New.  The  former  is  a  Masonic  plant  ;
the  latter  is  scarcely  referred  to.  Never¬
theless,  through  the  ignorance  of  the  early
translators  as  to  sacred  plants,  the  lotus  is
constantly  used  for  the  lily;  and  hence  the
same  error  has  crept  into  the  Masonic
rituals.  See  Lotus.

Lily  Work..  The  lily  work  which  is
described  as  a  part  of  the  ornamentation
of  the  two  pillars  in  the  porch  of  Solomon’s
Temple  is  said  to  be,  from  the  whiteness  of
the  plant,  symbolic  of  purity  and  peace.
Properly,  it  is  lotus  work.  See  Lily,  Lotus,
and  Pillars  of  the  Porch.

Limbs.  See  Qualifications,  Physical.
Lindner,  FriedericHi  Wilhelm.
A  professor  of  philosophy  in  Leipsic,  who
published  in  1818-1819  an  attack  on  Free¬
masonry  under  the  title  of  Mac  Benac;  Er
lebet  im  Sohne ;  oder  das  Positive  der  Frei-
maurerei.  This  work  contains  some  good
ideas,  although  taken  from  an  adverse
point  of  view ;  but,  as  Lenning  has  observed,
these  bear  little  fruit  because  of  the  fanati¬
cal  spirit  of  knight  errantry  with  which  he
attacks  the  Institution.

Line.  One  of  the  working-tools  of  a
Past  Master,  and  presented  to  the  Master
of  a  Lodge  at  his  installation.  See  Plumb
Line.

Linear  Triad.  Oliver  says  that  the
Linear  Triad  is  a  figure  which  appears  in
some  old  Royal  Arch  floor-cloths.  It  bore
a  reference  to  the  sojourners,  who  repre¬
sented  the  three  stones  on  which  prayers
and  thanksgivings  were  offered  on  the  dis¬
covery  of  the  lost  Word;  thereby  affording
an  example  that  it  is  our  duty  in  every
undertaking  to  offer  up  our  prayers  and
thanksgivings  to  the  God  of  our  salvation.

Lines,  Parallel.  See  Parallel  Lines.

Lin^am.  The  lingam  and  the  youi
of  the  Indian  mysteries  were  the  same  as


472


LINK


LODGE


the  phallus  and  cteis  of  the  Grecian.  See
Phallus.

Link.  A  degree  formerly  conferred  in
England,  in  connection  with  the  Mark  de¬
gree,  under  the  title  of  the  “  Mark  and  Link
or  Wrestle.”  It  is  now  obsolete.

Liiinccar,  Rieliurd.  The  author
of  the  celebrated  Masonic  anthem  beginning

“  Let  there  be  Light !  th’  Almighty  spoke  ;

Refulgent  beams  from  chaos  broke,

T’  illume  the  rising  earth.”

Little  is  known  of  his  personal  history  ex¬
cept  that  he  was  the  Coroner  of  Wakefield,
England,  and  for  many  years  the  Master
of  the  Lodge  of  Unanimity,  No.  238,  in  that
town.  He  was  a  zealous  and  studious  Ma¬
son.  In  1789  he  published,  at  Leeds,  a
volume  of  plays,  poems,  and  miscellaneous
writings,  among  which  was  an  essay  enti¬
tled  Strictures  on  Freemasonry,  and  the  an¬
them  already  referred  to.  He  appears  to
have  been  a  man  of  respectable  abilities.

Lion’s  Paw.  A  mode  of  recognition
so  called  because  of  the  rude  resemblance
made  by  the  hand  and  fingers  to  a  lion’s

Saw.  It  refers  to  the  “  Lion  of  the  tribe  of
udah.”

Literature  of  Masonry .  Freema¬
sonry  has  its  literature,  which  has  been
rapidly  developed  in  the  last  few  decades
of  the  present  century,  far  more  than  in
any  preceding  ones.  This  literature  is
not  to  be  found  in  the  working  of  its  de¬
grees,  in  the  institution  of  its  Lodges,  in
the  diffusion  of  its  charities,  or  in  the  ex¬
tension  of  its  fraternal  ties.  Of  all  these,
although  necessary  and  important  ingre¬
dients  of  the  Order,  its  literature  is  wholly
independent.  This  is  connected  with  its
ethics  as  a  science  of  moral,  social,  and  re¬
ligious  philosophy ;  with  its  history  and
archaeology,  as  springing  up  out  of  the  past
times;  with  its  biography  as  the  field  in
which  men  of  intellect  have  delighted  to
labor;  and  with  its  bibliography  as  the
record  of  the  results  of  that  labor.  It  is
connected,  too,  incidentally,  with  many
other  arts  and  sciences.  Mythology  affords
an  ample  field  for  discussion  in  the  effort
to  collate  the  analogies  of  classic  myths
and  symbols  with  its  own.  Philology  sub¬
mits  its  laws  for  application  to  the  origin
of  its  mystic  words,  all  of  which  are  con¬
nected  with  its  history.  It  has,  in  fine,  its
science  and  its  philosophy,  its  poetry  and
romance.  No  one  who  has  not  studied  the
literature  of  Masonry  can  even  dream  of
its  beauty  and  extent  ;  no  one  who  has
studied  it  can  have  failed  to  receive  the  re¬
ward  that  it  bestows.

Litigation.  See  Lawsuits.

Livery.  The  word  livery  is  supposed
to  be  derived  from  the  clothing  delivered


by  masters  to  their  servants.  The  trading
companies  or  gilds  of  England  began  about
the  time  ofEd  ward  I.  to  wear  a  suit  of  cloth¬
ing  of  a  form,  color,  and  material  peculiar
to  each  company,  which  was  called  its
livery,  and  also  its  clothing.  To  be  ad¬
mitted  into  the  membership  and  privileges
of  the  company  was  called  “to  have  the
clothing.”  The  Grocers’  Company,  for  in¬
stance,  were  ordered  “  to  be  clothed  once  a
year  in  a  suit  of  livery;”  and  there  is  an
order  in  the  reign  of  Henry  V.  to  purchase
cloth  “  for  the  clothing  of  the  brethren  of
the  brewers’  craft.”  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  usage  of  speaking  of  a  Mason’s
clothing,  or  of  his  being  clothed,  is  de¬
rived  from  the  custom  of  the  gilds.  A
Mason’s  clothing,  “black  dress  and  white
loves  and  apron,”  is,  in  fact,  his  livery,
ee  Clothing.

Livre  d’Or.  French.  The  Book  of
Gold,  which  see.

Local  Laws.  See  Laws  of  Masonry.

Locke’s  Letter.  The  letter  of  John
Locke  which  is  said  to  have  accompanied
the  Leland  MS.,  and  which  contains  his
comments  on  it.  See  Leland  Manusciipt.

Lodge.  There  are  three  definitions
which,  in  the  technical  language  of  Ma¬
sonry,  apply  to  the  word  Lodge.

1 .  It  is  a  place  in  which  F reemasons  meet.
In  this  sense  the  words  more  generally  used
are  Lodge  Room,  which  see.

2.  It  is  the  assembly  or  organized  body
of  Freemasons  duly  congregated  for  labor
or  for  business.  These  two  distinctions  are
precisely  the  same  as  those  to  be  found  in
the  word  “church,”  which  is  expressive
both  of  the  building  in  which  a  congrega¬
tion  meets  to  worship  and  the  congregation
of  worshippers  themselves.  This  second
definition  is  what  distinguishes  a  meeting
of  symbolic  Masons,  who  constitute  a  Lodge,
from  one  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  whose
meeting  would  be  called  a  Chapter,  or  of
Cryptic  Masons,  whose  assembly  would  be
a  Council.

The  word  appears  in  French  as  loge ;
German,  loge  ;  Spanish,  login  ;  Portuguese,
loja ;  and  Italian,  loggia.  This  is  irrefra-
gible  evidence  that  the  word  was,  with  the
institution,  derived  by  the  continent  of
Europe  from  England.

The  derivation  of  the  word  is,  I  think,
plain.  Ragon  says  that  it  comes  from  the
Sanscrit  loga,  signifying  the  world.  There
would,  at  first  sight,  seem  to  be  a  connec¬
tion  between  this  etymology  and  the  sym¬
bolic  meaning  of  a  Lodge,  which  repre¬
sents  the  world ;  but  yet  it  is  evidently
far-fetched,  since  we  have  a  much  simpler
root  immediately  at  hand.  Mr.  Hope  says,
speaking  of  the  Freemasons  of  the  Middle
Ages,  (and  Wren  had  previously  said  the


LODGE


LODGE


473


same  thing,)  that  wherever  they  were  en¬
gaged  to  work,  they  “set  themselves  to
building  temporary  huts,  for  their  habita¬
tion,  around  the  spot  where  the  work  was  to
be  carried  on.”  These  huts  the  German
Masons  called  hutten ;  the  English,  lodges,
which  is  from  the  Anglo-Saxon,  logian,  to
dwell.  Lodge,  therefore,  meant  the  dwell¬
ing-place  or  lodging  of  the  Masons;  and
this  is  undoubtedly  the  origin  of  the  mod¬
ern  use  of  the  word.  To  corroborate  this,
we  find  Du  Cange  (Gloss.)  defining  the
Mediaeval  Latin,  logia  or  logium,  as  “a
house  or  habitation.”  He  refers  to  the
Italian,  loggia,  and  quotes  Lambertus  Ar-
densis  as  saying  that  “  logia  is  a  place  next
to  the  house,  where  persons  were  accustomed
to  hold  pleasant  conversation.”  Hence
Lambertus  thinks  that  it  comes  from  the
Greek,  logos,  a  discourse.  Du  Cange  asserts
that  there  is  no  doubt  that  in  the  Middle
Ages  logia  or  logium  was  commonly  used
for  an  apartment  or  dwelling  connected
with  the  main  building.  Thus,  the  small¬
est  apartments  occupied  by  the  cardinals
when  meeting  in  conclave  were  called  logics
or  Lodges.  All  of  which  sustains  the  idea
that  the  Lodges  of  the  old  Operative  Ma¬
sons  were  small  dwellings  attached,  or  at
least  contiguous,  to  the  main  edifice  on
which  they  were  at  work.

In  the  Old  Constitutions,  the  word  is  not
generally  met  with.  The  meeting  of  the
Craft  is  there  usually  called  the  Assembly.
But  there  are  instances  of  its  employment
in  those  documents.  Thus  in  the  Lodge  of
Antiquity  MS.  whose  date  is  1786,  and  still
earlier  in  the  York  MS.  No.  1,  dated  about
1600,  it  is  said,  “no  Fellow  within  the
Lodge  or  without  shall  misanswer,”  etc.
There  is  also  abundant  documentary  evi¬
dence  to  show  that  the  word  Lodge  was,
long  before  the  eighteenth  century,  applied
to  their  meeting  by  the  Freemasons  of
England  and  Scotland.

Before  the  restoration  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  in  1717,  Preston  tells
us  that  any  number  of  brethren  might  as¬
semble  at  any  place  for  the  performance
of  work,  and,  when  so  assembled,  were  au¬
thorized  to  receive  into  the  Order  brothers
and  fellows,  and  to  practise  the  rites  of
Masonry.  The  ancient  charges  were  the
only  standard  for  the  regulation  of  their
conduct.  The  Master  of  the  Lodge  was
elected  pro  tempore,  and  his  authority  ter¬
minated  with  the  dissolution  of  the  meet¬
ing  over  which  he  had  presided,  unless  the
Lodge  was  permanently  established  at  any
particular  place.  To  the  general  assembly
of  the  Crart,  held  once  or  twice  a  year,  all
the  brethren  indiscriminately  were  amen¬
able,  and  to  that  power  alone.  But  on  the
formation  of  Grand  Lodges,  this  inherent
3  K


right  of  assembling  was  voluntarily  sur¬
rendered  by  the  brethren  and  the  Lodges,
and  vested  in  the  Grand  Lodge.  And  from
this  time  Warrants  of  Constitution  date
their  existence.  The  first  Warrant  granted
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  after  its
reorganization,  is  dated  1718.

The  mode  of  bringing  a  Lodge  into  ex¬
istence  under  the  present  system  in  Amer¬
ica  is  as  follows:  Seven  Master  Masons,
being  desirous  of  establishing  a  Lodge,
apply  by  petition  to  the  Grand  Master,
who  will,  if  he  thinks  proper,  issue  his  dis¬
pensation  authorizing  them  to  congregate
as  Masons  in  a  Lodge,  and  therein  to  con¬
fer  the  three  degrees  of  Ancient  Craft
Masonry.  This  instrument  is  of  force  dur¬
ing  the  pleasure  of  the  Grand  Master.  At
the  next  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge  it  ex¬
pires,  and  is  surrendered  to  the  Grand  Lodge,
which,  if  there  be  no  objection,  will  issue
a  Charter,  technically  called  a  Warrant  of
Constitution,  whereby  the  body  is  perma¬
nently  established  as  a  Lodge,  and  as  one
of  the  constituents  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

The  power  of  granting  Warrants  of  Con¬
stitution  is  vested  in  the  Grand  Lodges  of
Scotland,  Ireland,  Germany,  and  France,
as  it  is  in  America ;  but  in  England  the
rule  is  different,  and  there  the  prerogative
is  vested  in  the  Grand  Master.

A  Lodge  thus  constituted  consists,  in  the
American  system,  of  the  following  officers.
Worshipful  Master,  Senior  and  Junior
Wardens,  Treasurer,  Secretary,  Senior  and
Junior  Deacons,  two  Stewards,  and  a  Tiler.

In  the  York  Rite,  as  practised  in  Eng¬
land,  the  officers  are,  in  addition  to  these,  a
Director  of  Ceremonies,  a  Chaplain,  and  an
Inner  Guard.

In  a  Lodge  of  the  French  Rite,  the
officers  are  still  more  numerous.  They  are
Le  Venerable  or  Worshipful  Master,  Pre¬
mier  and  Second  Surveillants  or  Senior
and  Junior  Wardens,  Orator,  Treasurer,
Secretary,  Hospitaller  or  collector  of  alms,
the  Expert,  combining  the  duties  of  the
Senior  Deacon  and  an  examining  com¬
mittee,  Master  of  Ceremonies,  Architecte,
who  attends  to  the  decoration  of  the  Lodge,
and  superintends  the  financial  department,
Archiviste  or  Librarian,  Keeper  of  the
Seal,  Master  of  the  Banquets  or  Steward,
and  Guardian  of  the  Temple  or  Tiler.

The  officers  in  a  Lodge  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  are  a  Master,
two  Wardens,  Orator,  Treasurer,  Secretary,
Almoner,  Expert,  Assistant  Expert,  Master
of  Ceremonies,  Almoner  Steward,  Tiler,
and  sometimes  a  few  others  as  Pursuivant,
and  Keeper  of  the  Seals.

In  other  Rites  and  countries  the  officers
vary  to  a  slight  extent,  but  everywhere
there  are  four  officers  who  always  are


474


LODGE


LODGE


found,  and  who  may  therefore  he  considered
as  indispensable,  namely,  the  Master,  two
Wardens,  and  Tiler.

A  Lodge  thus  constituted  is  a  Lodge  of
Master  Masons.  Strictly  and  legally  speak¬
ing,  such  a  body  as  a  Lodge  of  Entered
Apprentices  or  of  Fellow  Crafts  is  not
known  under  the  present  Masonic  system.
No  Warrant  is  ever  granted  for  an  Appren¬
tices’  or  Fellow  Crafts’  Lodge,  and  with¬
out  a  Warrant  a  Lodge  cannot  exist.  The
Warrant  granted  is  always  for  a  Masters’
Lodge,  and  the  members  composing  it  are
all  Master  Masons.  The  Lodges  mentioned
by  Wren  and  Hope,  to  which  allusion
has  been  made,  and  which  were  congre-
ated,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  around  the  edi-
ces  which  the  Masons  were  constructing,
were  properly  Fellow  Crafts’  Lodge,  be¬
cause  all  the  members  were  Fellow  Crafts;
even  the  Master  being  merely  a  gradation  of
rank,  not  a  degree  of  knowledge.  So  at  the
revival  of  Masonry  in  1717,  the  Lodges  were
Entered  Apprentices’  Lodges,  because  in
them  nothing  but  the  first  degree  was  con¬
ferred,  and  nearly  all  the  members  were
Entered  Apprentices.  But  when  the  Grand
Lodge,  where  only  at  first  the  Fellow  Craft
and  Master’s  degree  were  conferred,  per¬
mitted  them  to  be  conferred  in  the  subor¬
dinate  Lodges,  then  the  degree  of  Master
Mason  was  sought  for  by  all  the  Craft,  and
became  the  object  of  every  Mason’s  ambi¬
tion.  From  that  time  the  Craft  became
Master  Masons,  and  the  first  and  second
degrees  were  considered  only  as  preliminary
steps.  So  it  has  remained  to  this  day ;  and
all  modern  Lodges,' wherever  Masonry  has
extended,  are  Masters’  Lodge,  and  nothing
less.

Sometimes  secretaries,  ignorant  of  these
facts,  will  record  in  their  minutes  that  “the
Lodge  of  Master  Masons  was  closed  and  a
Lodge  of  Entered  Apprentices  was  opened.”
Neither  written  nor  unwritten  law  sanc¬
tions  any  such  phraseology.  If  the  Lodge
of  Master  Masons  is  closed,  there  is  an  end
of  the  Masonic  congregation.  Where  is
the  Warrant  under  which  a  Lodge  of  En¬
tered  Apprentices  is  opened,  and  how  can
a  Lodge,  in  which  there  is  not,  probably,  a
single  Apprentice,  but  where  all  the  officers
and  all  the  members  are  Master  Masons,  be
called  a  Lodge  of  Apprentices?  The  ritual
has  wisely  provided  for  the  avoidance  of
such  an  anomaly,  and,  seeing  that  the  War¬
rant  says  that  the  Lodge  of  Master  Masons
is  empowered  to  make  Apprentices  and
Fellow  Crafts,  it  says  “the  Lodge  was
opened  on  the  first  degree.”  That  is  to  say,
the  Lodge  of  Masters  still  retaining  its
character  as  a  Masters’  Lodge,  without
which  it  would  lose  its  legality,  and  not
venturing  to  open  a  kind  of  Lodge  for


which  its  members  had  no  Warrant  nor
authority,  simply  placed  itself  on  the
points  of  a  degree  in  which  it  was  about  to
give  instruction.

Some  of  the  rituals  speak,  it  is  true,  of
Lodges  composed  in  ancient  times  of  Mas¬
ters  and  Fellow  Crafts  or  Masters  and  Ap¬
prentices;  and  the  Webb  lectures  tell  us
that  at  the  Temple  of  Solomon  the  Lodges
of  Entered  Apprentices  consisted  of  one
Master  and  six  Apprentices,  and  the
Lodges  of  Fellow  Crafts  of  two  Masters
and  three  Fellow  Crafts.  But  all  this  is
purely  symbolic,  and  has  no  real  existence
in  the  practical  working  of  the  Order.  No
one  in  these  days  has  seen  a  Lodge  of  one
Master  Mason  and  six  Apprentices.  The
Masons  working  in  the  first  degree  are  as
much  Master  Masons  as  the  same  Masons
are  when  they  are  working  in  the  third.
The  Lodge  legally  is  the  same,  though  it
may  vary  the  subjects  of  its  instruction  so
as  to  have  them  in  the  first,  second,  or  third
degree.

So  important  a  feature  in  Masonry  as  a
Lodge,  the  congregations  of  Masons  for
work  or  worship,  cannot  be  without  its  ap¬
propriate  symbolism.  Hence  a  Lodge
when  duly  opened  becomes  a  symbol  of
the  world.  Its  covering  is  like  the  world’s,
a  sky  or  clouded  canopy,  to  reach  which,  as
the  abode  of  those  who  do  the  will  of  the
Grand  Architect,  it  is  furnished  with  the
theological  ladder,  which  reaches  from
earth  to  heaven ;  and  it  is  illuminated  as  is
the  world,  by  the  refulgent  rays  of  the  sun,
symbolically  represented  in  his  rising  in
the  east,  his  meridian  height  in  the  south,
and  his  setting  in  the  west ;  and  lastly,  its
very  form,  a  long  quadrangle  or  oblong
square,  is  in  reference  to  the  early  tradition
that  such  was  the  shape  of  the  inhabited
world.

3.  The  Lodge,  technically  speaking,  is  a
piece  of  furniture  made  in  imitation  of  the
Ark  of  the  Covenant,  which  was  constructed
by  Bazaleel,  according  to  the  form  pre¬
scribed  by  God  himself,  and  which,  after
the  erection  of  the  Temple,  was  kept  in  the
Holy  of  Holies.  As  that  contained  the  ta¬
ble  of  the  laws,  the  Lodge  contains  the
Book  of  Constitutions  and  the  Warrant  of
Constitution  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge.
It  is  used  only  in  certain  ceremonies,  such
as  the  constitution  and  consecration  of  new
Lodges.

Lodge,  Chartered.  See  Chartered,

Lodge.

Lodge,  Clandestine.  See  Clandes¬
tine  Lodge.

Lodge,  Constituted.  See  Constituted

Legally.

Lodge,  Dormant.  See  Dormant

Lodge.


LODGE


LODGE


475


Lodge,  Emergent.  See  Emergent
Lodge.

Lodge,  Extinct.  See  Extinct  Lodge.

Lodge,  Holy.  See  Holy  Lodge.

Lodge  Hours.  Dermottsays  (Ahim.
Rez.,  p.  xxiii.,)  “  that  Lodge  hours,  that  is,
the  time  in  which  it  is  lawful  for  a  Lodge
to  work  or  do  business,  are  from  March
25th  to  September  25th,  between  the  hours
of  seven  and  ten ;  and  from  September  25th
to  March  25th,  between  the  hours  of  six
and  nine.”  I  know  not  whence  he  derived
the  law ;  but  it  is  certain  that  it  has  never
been  rigidly  observed  even  by  the  “  ancient
Lodges,”  for  whom  his  Ahiman  Rezon  was
written.

Lodge,  Just.  See  Just  Lodge.

Lodge  Master,  English.  (Maitre
de  Lodge  Anglais.)  A  degree  in  the  nomen¬
clature  of  Thory,  inserted  on  the  authority
of  Lemanceau.

Lodge  Master,  French.  (Maitre
de  Loge  Frangais.)  The  twenty-sixth  de¬
gree  of  the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan
Chapter  of  France.

Lodge,  Occasional.  See  Occasional
Lodge.

Lodge  of  Instruction.  These  are
assemblies  of  brethren  congregated  with¬
out  a  Warrant  of  Constitution,  under  the
direction  of  a  lecturer  or  skilful  brother,  for
the  purpose  of  improvement  in  Masonry,
which  is  accomplished  by  the  frequent  re¬
hearsal  of  the  work  and  lectures  of  each
degree.  These  bodies  should  consist  exclu¬
sively  of  Master  Masons ;  and  though  they
possess  no  Masonic  power,  it  is  evident  to
every  Mason  that  they  are  extremely  use¬
ful  as  schools  of  preparation  for  the  duties
that  are  afterwards  to  be  performed  in  the
regular  Lodge.  In  England,  these  Lodges
of  Instruction  are  attached  to  regularly
Warranted  Lodges,  or  are  specially  licensed
by  the  Grand  Master.  But  they  have  an
independent  set  of  officers,  who  are  elected
at  no  stated  periods — sometimes  for  a  year,
sometimes  for  six  or  three  months,  and
sometimes  changed  at  every  night  of  meet¬
ing.  They  of  course  have  no  power  of
initiation,  but  simply  meet  for  purposes  of
practice  in  the  ritual.  They  are,  however,
»iDound  to  keep  a  record  of  their  transac¬
tions,  subject  to  the  inspection  of  the  su¬
perior  powers.

Lodge  of  St.  Jolin.  The  Masonic
tradition  is  that  the  primitive  or  mother
Lodge  was  held  at  Jerusalem,  and  dedi¬
cated  to  St.  John,  first  the  Baptist,  then
the  Evangelist,  and  finally  to  both.  Hence
this  Lodge  was  called  “  The  Lodge  of  the
Holy  St.  John  of  Jerusalem.”  From  this
Lodge  all  other  Lodges  are  supposed  figura¬
tively  to  descend,  and  they  therefore  receive
the  same  general  name,  accompanied  by


another  local  and  distinctive  one.  In  all
Masonic  documents  the  words  ran  formerly
as  follows:  “From  the  Lodge  of  the  holy
St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  under  the  distinct¬
ive  appellation  of  Solomon’s  Lodge,  No.  1,”
or  whatever  might  be  the  local  name.
In  this  style  foreign  documents  still  ran ;
and  it  is  but  a  few  years  since  it  has  been
at  all  disused  in  this  country.  Hence  we
say  that  every  Mason  hails  from  such  a
Lodge,  that  is  to  say,  from  a  just  and  le¬
gally  constituted  Lodge.  In  the  earliest
catechisms  of  the  eighteenth  century  we
find  this  formula.  “Q.  What  Lodge  are
you  of?  A.  The  Lodge  of  St.  John.”  And
another  question  is,  “How  many  angles  in
St.  John’s  Lodge?”  In  one  of  the  high
degrees  it  is  stated  that  Lodges  receive  this
title  “  because,  in  the  time  of  the  Crusades,
the  Perfect  Masons  communicated  a  knowl¬
edge  of  their  Mysteries  to  the  Knights  of
St.  John  of  Jerusalem,”  and  as  both  were
thus  under  the  same  law,  the  Lodges  were
called  St.  John’s  Lodges.  But  this  was
only  one  of  the  attempts  to  connect  Free¬
masonry  with  the  Templar  system.

Lodge,  Perfect.  See  Perfect  Lodge.

Lodge,  Regular.  See  Regular
Lodge.

Lodge  Room.  The  Masons  on  the
continent  of  Europe  have  a  prescribed  form
or  ritual  of  building,  according  to  whose
directions  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that
every  hall  for  Masonic  purposes  shall  be
erected.  No  such  regulation  exists  among
the  Fraternity  of  this  country  or  Great
Britain.  Still,  the  usages  of  the  Craft,  and
the  objects  of  convenience  in  the  adminis¬
tration  of  our  rites,  require  that  certain
general  rules  should  be  followed  in  the
construction  of  a  Lodge  room.  These  rules,
as  generally  observed  in  this  country,  are  as
follows :

A  Lodge  room  should  always,  if  possible,
be  situated  due  east  and  west.  This  posi¬
tion  is  not  absolutely  necessary  ;  and  yet  it
is  so  far  so  as  to  demand  that  some  sacri¬
fices  should  be  made,  if  possible,  to  obtain
so  desirable  a  position.  It  should  also  be
isolated,  where  it  is  practicable,  from  all
surrounding  buildings,  and  should  always
be  placed  in  an  upper  story.  No  Lodge
should  ever  be  held  on  the  ground
floor.

The  form  of  a  Lodge  room  should  be
that  of  a  parallelogram  or  oblong  square,
at  least  one-third  larger  from  east  to  west
than  it  is  from  north  to  south.  The  ceiling
should  be  lofty,  to  give  dignity  to  the  ap¬
pearance  of  the  hall,  as  well  as  for  the  pur¬
poses  of  health,  by  compensating,  in  some
degree,  for  the  inconvenience  of  closed
windows,  which  necessarily  will  deteriorate
the  quality  of  the  air  in  a  very  short  time


476


LODGE


LOST


in  a  low  room.  The  approaches  to  the
Lodge  room  from  without  should  be  angu¬
lar,  for,  as  Oliver  says,  “  A  straight  en¬
trance  is  unmasonic,  and  cannot  be  toler¬
ated.”  There  should  be  two  entrances  to
the  room,  which  should  be  situated  in  the
west,  and  on  each  side  of  the  Senior  War¬
den’s  station.  The  one  on  his  right  hand
is  for  the  introduction  of  visitors  and  mem¬
bers,  and  leading  from  the  Tiler’s  room,  is
called  the  Tiler’s,  or  the  outer  door;  the
other,  on  his  left,  leading  from  the  prepa¬
ration  room,  is  known  as  the  “inner  door,”
and  sometimes  called  the  “  north-west  door.”
The  situation  of  these  two  doors,  as  well  as
the  rooms  with  which  they  are  connected,
and  which  are  essentially  necessary  in  a
well-constructed  Lodge  room,  may  be  seen
from  the  diagram  annexed  to  this  article,
which  also  exhibits  the  seats  of  the  officers
and  the  arrangement  of  the  altar  and  lights.
For  further  observations,  see  Halls,  Ma¬
sonic.

East.


Platform

for

*  Master.

or  Dais

Past  Masters.

*

Senior  Deacon.

s  Treasurer.  Secretary.  *

Light.

Altar.

*  Light.

Light  *

Steward.  *

Junior  Warden.  *
Steward.  *

Inner

*  Senior  Warden.

*  Junior  Deacon.

Outer

door.

1

door.

Preparation

.Room.

Door.

j

Tiler’s

Room.

1

Lodge,  Royal.  See  Royal  Lodge.

Lodge,  Sacred.  See  Sacred  Lodge.

Lodge,  Symbol  of  the.  The  mod¬
ern  symbol  or  hieroglyphic  of  the  word
Lodge  is  the  figure  CD,  which  undoubtedly
refers  to  the  form  of  the  Lodge  as  an  “  ob¬
long  square.”  But  in  the  old  rituals  of
the  early  part  of  the  last  century  we
find  this  symbol :  The  cross  here,
as  Krause  ( Kunsturk ,  i.  37,)  sug¬
gests,  refers  to  the  “ four  angles”  of
the  Lodge,  as  in  the  question:
“  How  many  angles  in  St.  John’s
Lodge?  A.  Four,  bordering  on  squares;”
and  the  delta  is  the  Pythagorean  symbol
of  Divine  Providence  watching  over  the
Lodge.  This  symbol  has  long  since  be¬
come  obsolete.

Loge.  The  French  word  for  Lodge.

Logic.  The  art  of  reasoning,  and  one
of  the  seven  liberal  arts  and  sciences,
whose  uses  are  inculcated  in  the  second  de¬
gree.  The  power  of  right  reasoning,  which
distinguishes  the  man  of  sane  mind  from
the  madman  and  the  idiot,  is  deemed  essen¬
tial  to  the  Mason,  that  he  may  comprehend
both  his  rights  and  his  duties.  And  hence
the  unfortunate  beings  just  named,  who  are
without  this  necessary  mental  quality,  are
denied  admission  into'  the  Order.  The  Old
Constitutions  define  logic  to  be  the  art
“  that  teacheth  to  discern  truth  from  false¬
hood.”

Lombardy.  At  the  close  of  the  dark
ages,  Lombardy  and  the  adjacent  Italian
states  were  the  first  which  awakened  to  in¬
dustry.  New  cities  arose,  and  the  kings,
lords,  and  municipalities  began  to  encour¬
age  the  artificers  of  different  professions.
Among  the  arts  exercised  and  improved  in
Lombardy,  the  art  of  building  held  a  pre¬
eminent  rank,  and  from  that  kingdom,  as
from  a  centre,  Masons  were  dispersed  over
all  Europe.  See  Travelling  Freemasons.

London.  With  the  city  of  London,
the  modern  history  of  Freemasonry  is  in¬
timately  connected.  A  congress  of  Masons,
as  it  may  properly  be  called,  was  convened
there  by  the  four  old  Lodges,  at  the  Apple-
Tree  Tavern,  in  February,  1717.  Its  results
were  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  and  a  modification  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  system,  whence  the  Freemasonry  of
the  present  day  has  descended.  Anderson,
in  his  second  edition  of  the  Book  of  Con¬
stitutions,  (1738,)  gives  the  account  of  this,
as  it  is  now  called,  Revival  of  Masonry,
which  see.

Lost  Word.  The  mythical  history  of
Freemasonry  informs  us  that  there  once
existed  a  WORD  of  surpassing  value,  and
claiming  a  profound  veneration;  that  this
Word  was  known  to  but  few ;  that  it  was
at  length  lost ;  and  that  a  temporary  sub-


Wjest.


LOTUS


LOWEN


477


stitute  for  it  was  adopted.  But  as  the  very
philosophy  of  Masonry  teaches  us  that
there  can  be  no  death  without  a  resurrec¬
tion,  —  no  decay  without  a  subsequent  res¬
toration,  —  on  the  same  principle  it  follows
that  the  loss  of  the  Word  must  suppose  its
eventual  recovery.

Now,  this  it  is,  precisely,  that  constitutes
the  myth  of  the  Lost  Word  and  the  search
for  it.  No  matter  what  was  the  word,  no
matter  how  it  was  lost,  nor  why  a  substi¬
tute  was  provided,  nor  when  nor  where  it
was  recovered.  These  are  all  points  of  sub¬
sidiary  importance,  necessary,  it  is  true,  for
knowing  the  legendary  history,  but  not
necessary  for  understanding  the  symbolism.
The  only  term  of  the  myth  that  is  to  be
regarded  in  the  study  of  its  interpretation,
is  the  abstract  idea  of  a  word  lost  and  after¬
wards  recovered.

The  WORD,  therefore,  I  conceive  to  be
the  symbol  of  Divine  Truth;  and  all  its
modifications  —  the  loss,  the  substitution,
and  the  recovery  —  are  but  component
parts  of  the  mythical  symbol  which  repre¬
sents  a  search  after  truth.  In  a  general
sense,  the  Word  itself  being  then  the  sym¬
bol  of  Divine  Truth,  the  narrative  of  its
loss  and  the  search  for  its  recovery  becomes
a  mythical  symbol  of  the  decay  and  loss  of
the  true  religion  among  the  ancient  nations,
at  and  after  the  dispersion  on  the  plains  of
Shinar,  and  of  the  attempts  of  the  wise
men,  the  philosophers,  and  priests,  to  find
and  retain  it  in  their  secret  mysteries  and
initiations,  which  have  hence  been  desig¬
nated  as  the  Spurious  Freemasonry  of
Antiquity.

But  there  is  a  special  or  individual,  as
well  as  a  general  interpretation,  and  in  this
special  or  individual  interpretation  the
Word,  with  its  accompanying  myth  of  a
loss,  a  substitute,  and  a  recovery,  becomes
a  symbol  of  the  personal  progress  of  a  can¬
didate  from  his  first  initiation  to  the  com-

?iletion  of  his  course,  when  he  receives  a
ull  development  of  the  mysteries.

Lotus.  The  lotus  plant,  so  celebrated
in  the  religions  of  Egypt  and  Asia,  is  a  spe¬
cies  of  Nympliaea,  or  water-lily,  which  grows
abundantly  on  the  banks  of  streams  in  warm
climates.  Although  more  familiarly  known
as  the  lotus  of  the  Nile,  it  was  not  indigenous
to  Egypt,  but  was  probably  introduced  into
that  country  from  the  East,  among  whose
people  it  was  everywhere  consecrated  as  a
sacred  symbol.  The  Brahmanical  deities
were  almost  always  represented  as  either
decorated  with  its  flowers,  or  holding  it  as  a
sceptre,  or  seated  on  it  as  a  throne.  Coleman
says,  ( Mythol .  Hindus ,  p.  388,)  that  to  the
Hindu  poets  the  lotus  was  what  the  rose  was
to  the  Persians.  Floating  on  the  water  it  is
the  emblem  of  the  world,  and  the  type  also


of  the  mountain  Meru,  the  residence  of  the
gods.  Among  the  Egyptians,  the  lotus  was
the  symbol  of  Osiris  and  Isis.  It  was
esteemed  a  sacred  ornament  by  the  priests,
and  was  placed  as  a  coronet  upon  the  heads
of  many  of  the  gods.  It  was  also  much
used  in  the  sacred  architecture  of  the  Egyp¬
tians,  being  placed  as  an  er  ablature  upon
the  columns  of  their  tempi  s.  Thence  it
was  introduced  by  Solomon  into  Jewish
architecture,  being  found,  under  the  name
of  “  lily  work,”  as  a  part  of  the  ornaments
of  the  two  pillars  at  the  porch  of  the  Tem¬
ple.  See  Lily  and  Pillars  of  the  Porch.

Louisiana.  Masonry  was  introduced
into  Louisiana  in  1793  by  the  organization
of  Perfect  Union  Lodge,  under  a  Charter
issued  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Caro¬
lina.  A  second  Lodge  was  established  by
the  Mother  Lodge  of  Marseilles,  in  France;
and  three  others  were  subsequently  char¬
tered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania.
These  five  Lodges  instituted  a  Grand  Lodge
on  July  11,  1812,  and  Francis  du  Bourg
was  elected  the  first  Grand  Master.  A  dif¬
ference  of  nationality  and  of  Masonic  rites
have  been  a  fertile  source  of  controversy  in
Louisiana,  the  results  of  which  it  would  be
tedious  to  follow  in  detail.  In  1848,  there
were  two  Grand  Lodges,  which  were  united
in  1850  to  constitute  the  present  Grand
Lodge.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Louisiana  was  in¬
stituted  on  5th  March,  1813 ;  a  Grand  Coun¬
cil  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  on  16th
February,  1856;  and  a  Grand  Commandery
of  Knights  Templars  on  4th  February,  1864.
The  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
has  always  held  a  prominent  position  in
the  Masonry  of  Louisiana,  and  it  has  a
Grand  Consistory  and  many  subordinate
bodies  of  the  Rite  in  active  and  successful
operation.  The  obedience  of  the  Grand
Consistory  is  to  the  Supreme  Council  for
the  Southern  Jurisdiction.

Louveteau.  See  Lewis.

Lowcn.  In  the  Landsdowne  Manu¬
script  we  meet  with  this  charge :  “  that  a
Master  or  Fellow  make  not  a  mouldstone
square,  nor  rule  to  no  Lowen,  nor  sett  no
Lowen  worke  within  the  Lodge.”  The  Lon¬
don  Freemason’s  Magazine,  and  Brother
Huglian,  also,  say,  “  this  no  doubt  is  a  mis¬
take  for  ‘Cowan.’”  I  was  at  one  time  in¬
clined  to  think  so  myself.  But  subsequent
investigations  have  led  me  to  change  my
opinion.  I  can  find  Cowan  only  in  one
manuscript,  namely,  the  Scottish  one  of
William  Schaw.  In  the  MS.  Constitutions
from  the  York  Archives,  first  published  by
Brother  Hughan,  we  have  in  the  parallel
passage  “ Rough  Mason.”  This  gives  us  the
idea  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the  word,
whatever  it  was.  It  pointed  to  a  liaudi-


478


LOW


LUX


craftsman  of  an  inferior  character  and
standing.  For  “  Rough  Mason,”  we  have
in  the  Alnwick  MS.  “  Lager"  and  “  Rough
Layer."  In  the  Harleian  and  Edinburgh-
Kilwinning  MSS.  we  find  “  Layer  ;  ”  in  the
Sloane  MS.  it  is  “  Lyer  ;  ”  and  in  the  Dow-
land  MS.,  which  I  have  already  said  seems
almost  identical  in  origin  with  the  Lands-
downe,  in  the  exactly  parallel  passage  we
have  "Layer”  twice,  justas  “Lowen”  is  twice
used  here.  Layer  is  as  easily  corrupted
into  Lowen  as  Cowan  would  be,  in  copying
the  abbreviated  writing  of  these  Old  Rec¬
ords,  and  indeed  more  easily,  since  it  is
more  likely  that  small  letters  should  be
mistaken  and  changed  than  capitals.

Low  Twelve.  In  Masonic  language
midnight  is  so  called.  The  reference  is  to
the  sun,  which  is  then  below  the  earth.
Low  twelve  in  Masonic  symbolism  is  an
unpropitious  hour.

Loyalty.  Notwithstanding  the  calum¬
nies  of  Barruel,  Robison,  and  a  host  of  other
anti-Masonic  writers  who  assert  that  Ma¬
sonry  is  ever  engaged  in  efforts  to  uproot
the  governments  within  which  it  may
exist,  there  is  nothing  more  evident  than
that  Freemasonry  is  a  loyal  institution,
and  that  it  inculcates,  in  all  its  public  in¬
structions,  obedience  to  government.  Thus,
in  the  Prestonian  charge  given  in  the  last
century  to  the  Entered  Apprentice,  and
continued  to  this  day  in  the  same  words  in
English  Lodges,  we  find  the  following
words :

“  In  the  State,  you  are  to  be  a  quiet  and
peaceable  subject,  true  to  your  sovereign,
and  just  to  your  country;  you  are  not
to  countenance  disloyalty  or  rebellion,  but
patiently  submit  to  legal  authority,  and
conform  with  cheerfulness  to  the  govern¬
ment  under  which  you  live,  yielding  obe¬
dience  to  the  laws  which  afford  you  protec¬
tion,  but  never  forgetting  the  attachment
you  owe  to  the  place  of  your  nativity,  or
the  allegiance  due  to  the  sovereign  or  pro¬
tectors  of  that  spot.”

The  charge  given  in  American  Lodges  is
of  the  same  import,  and  varies  but  slightly
in  its  language.

“  In  the  State,  you  are  to  be  a  quiet  and
peaceful  subject,  true  to  your  government,
and  just  to  your  country;  you  are  not  to
countenance  disloyalty  or  rebellion,  but  pa¬
tiently  submit  to  legal  authority,  and  con¬
form  with  cheerfulness  to  the  government
of  the  country  in  which  you  live.”

The  charge  given  in  French  Lodges,
though  somewhat  differing  in  form  from
both  of  these,  is  couched  in  the  same  spirit
and  teaches  the  same  lesson.  It  is  to  this
effect :

“Obedience  to  the  laws  and  submission
to  the  authorities  are  among  the  most  im-


Eerious  duties  of  the  Mason,  and  he  is  for-
idden  at  all  times  from  engaging  in  plots
and  conspiracies.”

Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  true  Mason
must  be  a  true  patriot.

Luchet,  Jean  Pierre  Loui*,
Marquis  tie.  A  French  historical
writer,  born  at  Saintes  in  1740,  and  died  in
1791.  He  was  the  writer  of  many  works
of  but  little  reputation,  but  is  principally
distinguished  in  Masonic  literature  as  the
author  of  an  attack  upon  Illuminism  under
the  title  of  Emii  sur  la  Secte  des  Illumints.
It  first  appeared  anonymously  in  1789.
Four  editions  of  it  were  published.  The
third  and  fourth  with  augmentations  and
revisions,  which  were  attributed  to  Mira-
beau,  were  printed  with  the  outer  title  of
Histoire  secret  de  la  Courde  Berlin  (par  Mira-
beau.)  This  work  was  published,  it  is
known,  without  his  consent,  and  was
burned  by  the  common  executioner  in  con¬
sequence  of  its  libellous  character.  Lu-
chet’s  essay  has  become  very  scarce,  and  is
now  valued  rather  on  account  of  its  rarity
than  for  its  intrinsic  excellence.

Luminaries.  The  first  five  officers
in  a  French  Lodge,  namely,  the  Master,  two
Wardens,  Orator,  and  Secretary,  are  called
luminaires  or  luminaries,  because  it  is  by
them  that  light  is  dispensed  to  the  Lodge.

Lustration.  A  religious  rite  prac¬
tised  by  the  ancients,  and  which  was  per¬
formed  before  any  act  of  devotion.  It  con¬
sisted  in  washing  the  hands,  and  sometimes
the  whole  body,  in  lustral  or  consecrated
water.  It  was  intended  as  a  symbol  of  the
internal  purification  of  the  heart.  It  was
a  ceremony  preparatory  to  initiation  in  all
the  Ancient  Mysteries.  The  ceremony  is
practised  with  the  same  symbolic  import  in
some  of  the  high  degrees  of  Masonry.  So
strong  was  the  idea  of  a  connection  between
lustration  and  initiation,  that  in  the  low
Latin  of  the  Middle  Ages  lustrare  meant  to
initiate.  Thus  Du  Cange  ( Glossarium )  cites
the  expression  “lustrare  religione  Christi-
anorum  ”  as  signifying  “  to  initiate  into  the
Christian  religion.”

Lux.  Latin  for  light,  which  see.  Free¬
masonry  anciently  received,  among  other
names,  that  of  “Lux,”  because  it  is  that
sublime  doctrine  of  truth  by  which  the
pathway  of  him  who  has  attained  it  is  to
be  illumined  in  the  pilgrimage  of  life.
Among  the  Rosicrucians,  light  was  the
knowledge  of  the  philosopher's  stone ;  and
Mosheint  says  that  in  chemical  language
the  cross  was  an  emblem  of  light,  because
it  contains  within  its  figure  the  forms  of
the  three  figures  of  which  LYX,  or  light,
is  composed.

Lux  e  tenebris.  Light  out  of  dark¬
ness.  A  motto  very  commonly  used  in  the


LUX


MAC


479


caption  of  Masonic  documents  as  expres¬
sive  of  the  object  of  Masonry,  and  of  what
the  true  Mason  supposes  himself  to  have
attained.  It  has  a  recondite  meaning.
In  the  primeval  ages  and  in  the  early  my¬
thology,  darkness  preceded  light.  “  In  the
thought,”  says  Cox,  “  of  these  early  ages,
the  sun  was  the  child  of  night  or  dark¬
ness,”  ( Aryan  Myth.,  i.  43.)  So  lux  being
truth  or  Masonry,  and  tenebrce,  or  darkness,
the  symbol  of  initiation,  lux  e  tenebris  is
Masonic  truth  proceeding  from  initiation.

Lux  Fiat  et  Lux  Fit.  Latin.  “  Let
there  be  light,  and  there  was  light.”  A  motto
sometimes  prefixed  to  Masonic  documents.

L.  V.  C.  Letters  inscribed  on  the  rings
of  profession,  worn  by  the  Knights  of  Ba¬
ron  von  Hund’s  Templar  system.  They
are  the  initials  of  the  sentence  Labor  Viris
Convenit.  Labor  is  suitable  j or  men.  It
was  also  engraved  on  their  seals.


Lyons,  Congress  of.  A  Masonic
congress  was  convoked  in  1778,  at  the  city
of  Lyons,  France,  by  the  Lodge  of  Chev¬
aliers  Bienfaisants.  It  was  opened  on  the
26th  November,  and  continued  in  session  un¬
til  the  27th  December,  under  the  presidency
of  M.  Villermoz.  Its  ostensible  object  was
to  procure  a  reformation  in  Masonry  by
the  abjuration  of  the  Templar  theory;  but
it  wasted  its  time  in  the  correction  of  rituals
and  in  Masonic  intrigues,  and  does  not  ap¬
pear  to  have  been  either  sagacious  in  its
methods,  or  successful  in  its  results.  Even
its  abjuration  of  the  Strict  Observance  doc¬
trine  that  Templarism  was  the  true  origin
of  Freemasonry,  is  said  to  have  been  in¬
sincere,  and  forced  upon  it  by  the  injunc¬
tions  of  the  political  authorities,  who  were
opposed  to  the  propagation  of  any  system
which  might  tend  to  restore  the  Order  of
Knights  Templars.


M.


Maacha.  In  the  tenth  degree  of  the
Scottish  Rite  we  are  informed  that  certain
traitors  fled  to  “Maacha  king  of  Cheth,”
by  whom  they  were  delivered  up  to  King
Solomon  on  his  sending  for  them.  In  1
Kings  ii.  39,  we  find  it  recorded  that  two
of  the  servants  of  Shimei  fled  from  Jeru¬
salem  to  “  Achish,  son  of  Maacha  king  of
Gath.”  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the
carelessness  of  the  early  copyists  of  the
ritual  led  to  the  double  error  of  putting
Cheth  for  Gath  and  of  supposing  that  Ma¬
acha  was  its  king  instead  of  its  king’s
father.  The  manuscripts  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  too  often
copied  by  unlearned  persons,  show  many
such  corruptions  of  Hebrew  names,  which
modern  researches  must  eventually  correct.
Delaunay,  in  his  Thuileur,  makes  him  King
of  Tyre,  and  calls  him  Mahakah.

Mae.  Masonic  writers  have  generally
given  to  this  word  the  meaning  of  “  is
smitten,”  deriving  it  probably  from  the
Hebrew  verb  HDJ,  nacha,  to  smite.  Others,
again,  think  it  is  the  word  pD,  male,  rotten¬
ness,  and  suppose  that  it 1  means  “  he  is
rotten .”  Both  derivations  are,  I  think,  in¬
correct.

Mac  is  a  constituent  part  of  the  word
macbenac,  which  is  the  substitute  Master’s
word  in  the  French  Rite,  and  which  is  in¬
terpreted  by  the  French  ritualists  sis  mean¬
ing  “he  lives  in  the  son.”  But  such  a


derivation  can  find  no  support  in  any
known  Hebrew  root.  Another  interpreta¬
tion  must  be  sought.  I  think  there  is
evidence,  circumstantial  at  least,  to  show
that  the  word  was,  if  not  an  invention  of
the  Ancient  or  Dermott  Masons,  at  least
adopted  by  them  in  distinction  from  the
one  used  by  the  Moderns,  and  which  latter
is  the  word  now  in  use  in  this  country.  I
am  disposed  to  attribute  the  introduction
of  the  word  into  Masonry  to  the  adherents
of  the  house  of  Stuart,  who  sought  in
every  way  to  make  the  institution  of  Free¬
masonry  a  political  instrument  in  their
schemes  for  the  restoration  of  their  exiled
monarch.  Thus  the  old  phrase,  “the
widow’s  son,”  was  applied  by  them  to
James  the  Second,  who  was  the  son  of
Henrietta  Maria,  the  widow  of  Oharles  the
First.  So,  instead  of  the  old  Master’s  word
which  had  hitherto  been  used,  they  in¬
vented  macbenac  out  of  the  Gaelic,  which
to  them  was,  on  account  of  their  Highland
supporters,  almost  a  sacred  language  in  the
place  of  Hebrew.  Now,  in  Gaelic,  Mac  isjson,
and  benach  is  blessed,  from  the  active  verb
beannaich,  to  bless.  The  latest  dictionary
published  by  the  Highland  Society  gives
this  example:  “Benach  De  Righ  Albane,
Alexander,  Mac  Alexander,”  etc  ,  i.  e.,  Bless
the  King  of  Scotland,  Alexander,  son  of
Alexander,  etc.  Therefore  we  find,  with¬
out  any  of  those  distortions  to  which  ety-


480


MACBENAC


MAGIC


mologists  so  often  recur,  that  macbenac
means  in  Gaelic  “the  blessed  son:’  This
word  the  Stuart  Masons  applied  to  their
idol,  the  Pretender,  the  son  of  Charles  I.

Macbenac.  1.  A  significant  word  in
the  third  degree  according  to  the  French
Kite  and  some  other  rituals.  See  Mac.

2.  In  the  Order  of  Beneficent  Knights
of  the  Holy  City,  the  recipiendary,  or  nov¬
ice,  is  called  Macbenac.

Maccabees.  A  heroic  family,  whose
patriotism  and  valor  form  bright  pictures
in  the  Jewish  annals.  The  name  is  gen¬
erally  supposed  to  be  derived  from  the  let¬
ters  V  3-  D-  M.  C.  B.  I.,  —  which  were
inscribed  upon  their  banners,  —  being  the
initials  of  the  Hebrew  sentence,  “  Mi  Ca-
moclia,  Baalim,  Iehovah,”  Who  is  like  unto
thee  among  the  gods,  0  Jehovah.  The  He¬
brew  sentence  has  been  appropriated  in
some  of  the  high  Scottish  degrees  as  a  sig¬
nificant  word.

Macerio.  Du  Cange  gives  this  as  one
of  the  Middle  Age  Latin  words  for  mason,
deriving  it  from  maceria,  a  wall ;  but  ma-
ceria  wTas  a  corruption  of  materia,  materials
for  building.  The  word  is  now  never  em¬
ployed.

Macio.  Du  Cange  (Gloss.)  defines  Ma-
cio,  Mattio,  or  Machio,  on  the  authority  of
Isidore,  as  Maijon,  latomus,  a  mason,  a  con¬
structor  of  walls,  from  machinis,  the  ma¬
chines  on  which  they  stood  to  work  on
account  of  the  height  of  the  walls.  He
gives  Mago  also.

Matron.  The  French  for  Mason,  sup¬
posed  to  be  derived  from  maison,  a  house.

Ma^onetus.  Low  Latin,  signifying  a
mason,  and  found  in  documents  of  the
fourteenth  century.

Ma^onne.  A  French  word  signifying
a  female  Mason,  that  is  to  say,  the  degrees
of  the  Rite  of  Adoption.  It  is  a  very  con¬
venient  word.  The  formation  of  the  Eng¬
lish  language  would  permit  the  use  of  the
equivalent  word  Masoness,  if  custom  would
sanction  it.

Ma^onne  Egyptienne.  The  third

degree  in  Cagliostro’s  Rite  of  Adoption.

Ma^onner.  Du  Cange  gives  citations
from  documents  of  the  fourteenth  century,
where  this  word  is  used  as  signifying  to
build.

Maozo.  Latin  of  the  Middle  Ages  for
a  mason.  Du  Cange  quotes  a  Computum
of  the  year  1324,  in  which  it  is  said  that
the  work  was  done  “per  manum  Petri,
maczonis  de  Lagnicio.”

Made.  A  technical  word  signifying
initiated  into  Masonry.  See  Make.

Madman.  Madmen  are  specially  des¬
ignated  in  the  oral  law  as  disqualified  for
initiation.  See  Qualifications.

Magazine.  The  earliest  Masonic  mag¬
azine  was  published  in  Germany.  It  was  ,


the  Freimaurerzeitung,  issued  for  a  short
time  at  Berlin,  in  1783.  But  the  Journal
fur  Freimaurcr,  which  appeared  the  next
year  at  Vienna,  had  a  more  protracted  ex¬
istence.  In  England,  the  first  work  of  this
kind  was  The  Freemason' s  Magazine  or  Gen¬
eral  and  Complete  Library,  begun  in  1793,
and  continued  for  several  years.  In  France,
the  earliest  Masonic  magazine  of  which  I
can  find  any  notice  was  Hermes,  the  first
number  of  which  appeared  in  1808.  Of
American  Masonic  magazines  the  earliest
is  the  Freemason’s  Magazine  and  General
Miscellany,  published  at  Philadelphia  in
1811.  Since  then  more  than  sixty  Masonic
journals  have  been  established  in  the  United
States,  of  which  about  twenty  still  exist.
The  oldest  living  periodical  devoted  to  Ma¬
sonry  is  the  Freemason’s  Monthly  Magazine,
published  by  Charles  W.  Moore,  at  Boston.
It  was  established  in  the  year  1842.

Magi.  The  ancient  Greek  historians
so  term  the  hereditary  priests  among  the
Persians  and  Medians.  The  word  is  de¬
rived  from  mog  or  mag,  signifying  priest  in
the  Pehlevi  language.  The  Illuminati  first
introduced  the  word  into  Masonry,  and  em¬
ployed  it  in  the  nomenclature  of  their  de¬
grees  to  signify  men  of  superior  wisdom.

Magic.  The  idea  that  any  connection
exists  between  Freemasonry  and  magic  is
to  be  attributed  to  the  French  writers,  es¬
pecially  to  Ragon,  who  gives  many  pages
of  his  Masonic  Orthodoxy  to  the  subject
of  Masonic  magic;  and  still  more  to  Louis
Constance,  who  has  written  three  large  vol¬
umes  on  the  History  of  Magic,  on  the
Ritual  and  Dogma  of  the  Higher  Magic ,
and  on  the  Key  of  the  Grand  Mysteries,  in
all  of  which  he  seeks  to  trace  an  intimate
connection  between  the  Masonic  mysteries
and  the  science  of  magic.  Ragon  desig¬
nates  this  sort  of  Masonry  by  the  name  of
“  Occult  Masonry.”  But  lie  loosely  con¬
founds  magic  with  the  magism  of  the  an¬
cient  Persians,  the  mediaeval  philosophy
and  modern  magnetism,  all  of  which,  as
identical  sciences,  were  engaged  in  the  in¬
vestigation  of  the  nature  of  man,  the  mech¬
anism  of  his  thoughts,  the  faculties  of
his  soul,  his  power  over  nature,  and  the  es¬
sence  of  the  occult  virtues  of  all  things.
Magism,  he  says,  is  to  be  found  in  the  sen¬
tences  of  Zoroaster,  in  the  hymns  of  Or¬
pheus,  in  the  invocations  of  the  Hiero¬
phants,  and  in  the  symbols  of  Pythagoras ;
and  it  is  reproduced'  in  the  philosophy  of
Agrippa  and  of  Cardan,  and  is  recognized
under  the  name  of  Magic  in  the  marvellous
results  of  magnetism.  Cagliostro,  it  is
well  known,  mingled  with  his  Spurious
Freemasonry  the  Superstitions  of  Magic
and  the  Operations  of  Animal  Magnetism.
But  the  writers  who  have  sought  to  estab-
|  lish  a  scheme  of  Magical  Masonry  refer


MAGICIANS


MAGNANIMOUS


481


almost  altogether  to  the  supposed  power  of
mystical  names  or  words,  which  they  say  is
common  to  both  Masonry  and  magic.  It
is  certain  that  onomatology,  or  the  science
of  names,  forms  a  very  interesting  part  of
the  investigations  of  the  higher  Masonry,
and  it  is  only  in  this  way  that  any  connec¬
tion  can  be  created  between  the  two  sciences.
Much  light,  it  must  be  confessed,  is  thrown
on  many  of  the  mystical  names  in  the
higher  degrees  by  the  dogmas  of  magic;
and  hence  magic  furnishes  a  curious  and
interesting  study  for  the  Freemason.

Magicians,  Society  of  the.  A
society  founded  at  Florence,  which  became
a  division  of  the  Brothers  of  Rose  Croix.
They  wore  in  their  Chapters  the  habit  of
members  of  the  Inquisition.

Magic  Squares.  A  magic  square  is
a  series  of  numbers  arranged  in  an  equal
number  of  cells  constituting  a  square  fig¬
ure,  the  enumeration  of  all  of  whose  col¬
umns,  vertically,  horizontally,  and  diagon¬
ally,  will  give  the  same  sum.  The  Oriental
philosophers,  and  especially  the  Jewish
Talmudists,  have  indulged  in  many  fanciful
speculations  in  reference  to  these  magic
squares,  many  of  which  were  considered
as  talismans.  The  following  figure  of  nine
squares,  containing  the  nine  digits  so  ar¬
ranged  as  to  make  fifteen  when  counted  in
every  way,  was  of  peculiar  import :


4

9

2

3

5

7

8

1

6

There  was  no  talisman  more  sacred  than
this  among  the  Orientalists,  when  arranged
in  the  following  figure :


Thus  arranged,  they  called  it  by  the
name  of  the  planet  Saturn,  ZaHaL,  because
the  sum  of  the  9  digits  in  the  square  was
equal  to  45,  (1+2+3+4-f  5+6+  7+8  +  9,)
which  is  the  numerical  value  of  the  letters
in  the  word  ZaHaL,  in  the  Arabic  alphabet.
The  Talmudists  also  esteemed  it  as  a  sacred
talisman,  because  15  is  the  numerical  value
of  the  letters  of  the  word  H’,  JaH,  which
is  one  of  the  forms  of  the  Tetragrammaton.

The  Hermetic  philosophers  called  these
magic  squares  “tables  of  the  planets,”
and  attributed  to  them  many  occult  vir¬
tues.  The  table  of  Saturn  consisted  of  9
squares,  and  has  just  been  given.  The
table  of  Jupiter  consisted  of  16  squares  of
numbers,  whose  total  value  is  136,  and  the
sum  of  them  added,  horizontally,  perpen¬
dicularly,  and  diagonally,  is  always  34;
thus :


4

14

15

1

9

7

6

12

5

11

10

8

16

2

3

13

So  the  table  of  Mars  consists  of  25
squares,  of  the  Sun  of  36,  of  Venus  of  49,
of  Mercury  of  64,  and  of  the  Moon  of  81.
These  magic  squares  and  their  values  have
been  used  in  the  symbolism  of  numbers  in
some  of  the  high  degrees  of  Masonry.

Magister  C'eementariorum.  A
title  applied  in  the  Middle  Ages  to  one  who
presided  over  the  building  of  edifices  =
Master  of  the  Masons.

Magister  Hospitalis.  See  Mastei'
of  the  Hospital.

Magister  Lapidum.  Du  Cange  de¬
fines  this  as  Master  Mason ;  and  he  cites-
the  statutes  of  Marseilles  as  saying :  “  Tres
Magistros  Lapidis  bonos  et  legales,”  i.  e.,
three  good  and  lawful  Master  Masons-
“shall  be  selected  to  decide  on  all  ques¬
tions  about  water  in  the  city.”

Magister  Militia;  CTiristi.  See
Master  of  the  Chivalry  of  Christ.

Magister  Perrerius.  A  name
given  m  the  Middle  Ages  to  a  Mason  ;  lit¬
erally,  a  Master  of  Stones,  from  the  French
pierre,  a  stone.

Magister  Tempi!.  See  Master  of
the  Temple.

Magistri  Comaeini.  See  Como.

Magnanimous.  The  title  applied
in  modern  usage  to  the  Order  of  Knight*
Templars.


482


MAGNETIC


MAJORITY


Magnetic  Masonry.  This  is  a  form
of  Freemasonry  which,  although  long  ago

f>ractised  by  Cagliostro  as  a  species  of  char-
atanism,  was  first  introduced  to  notice  as  a
philosophic  system  by  Ragon  in  his  treatise
on  Magonnerie  Occulte.  “  The  occult  sci¬
ences,”  says  this  writer,  “  reveal  to  man  the
mysteries  of  his  nature,  the  secrets  of  his
organization,  the  means  of  attaining  per¬
fection  and  happiness ;  and,  in  short,  the
decree  of  his  destiny.  Their  study  was
that  of  the  high  initiations  of  the  Egyp¬
tians;  it  is  time  that  they  should  become
the  study  of  modern  Masons.”  And  again
he  says :  “  A  Masonic  society  which  should
establish  in  its  bosom  a  magnetic  academy
would  so">n  find  the  reward  of  its  labors  in
the  good  that  it  would  do,  and  the  happi¬
ness  which  it  would  create.”  There  can  be
no  doubt  that  the  Masonic  investigator
has  a  right  to  search  everywhere  for  the
means  of  moral,  intellectual,  and  religious
perfection  ;  and  if  he  can  find  anything  in
magnetism  which  would  aid  him  iu  the
search,  it  is  his  duty  and  wisest  policy  to
avail  himself  of  it.  But,  nevertheless,  Mag¬
netic  Masonry ,  as  a  special  regime,  will  hardly
ever  be  adopted  by  the  Fraternity.

Magus.  1.  The  fourteenth  degree,  and
the  first  of  the  Greater  Mysteries  of  the
system  of  llluminism.  2.  The  ninth  and
last  degree  of  the  German  Rose  Croix.  It
is  the  singular  of  Magi,  which  see.

Mall.  The  Hebrew  interrogative  pro¬
noun  ri/t3,  signifying  what?  It  is  a  com¬
ponent  part  of  a  significant  word  in  Ma¬
sonry.  The  combination  mahhah,  literally
“what!  the,”  is  equivalent,  according  to
the  Hebrew  method  of  ellipsis,  to  the  ques¬
tion,  “  What !  is  this  the - ?  ”

Malier -  Shalal -Hash -  Baz.  He¬
brew.  fu  tyn  SViy  nno.  Four  Hebrew
words  which  the  prophet  Isaiah  was  or¬
dered  to  write  upon  a  tablet,  and  which
were  afterwards  to  be  the  name  of  his  son.
They  signify,  “  make  haste  to  the  prey,
fall  upon  the  spoil,”  and  were  prognostic
of  the  sudden  attack  of  the  Assyrians.
They  may  be  said,  in  their  Masonic  use,  to
be  symbolic  of  the  readiness  for  action
which  should  distinguish  a  warrior,  and
are  therefore  of  significant  use  in  the  sys¬
tem  of  Masonic  Templarism.

Maier,  Michael.  A  celebrated  Rosi-
cruciau  and  interpreter  and  defender  of
Rosicrucianism.  He  was  born  at  Resins-
burg,  in  Holstein,  in  1568,  and  died  at
Magdeburg  in  1620.  He  is  said  to  have
been  the  first  to  introduce  Rosicrucianism
into  England.  He  wrote  many  works  on
the  system,  among  which  the  most  noted
are  Atlanta  Fugiens,  1618  ;  Septimana  Phil-
osophic.a,  1620 ;  De  Fraternitate  Rosa  Cru¬
de,  1618;  and  Lueus  Serius,  1617.  Some


'  of  his  contemporaries  having  denied  the
existence  of  the  Rosicrucian  Order,  Maier
in  his  writings  has  refuted  the  calumny
and  warmly  defended  the  society,  of  which,
in  one  of  his  works,  he  speaks  thus :  “  Liko
the  Pythagoreans  and  Egyptians,  the  Rosi-
crucians  exact  vows  of  silence  and  se¬
crecy.  Ignorant  men  have  treated  the
whole  as  a  fiction ;  but  this  has  arisen
from  the  five  years’  probation  to  which
they  subject  even  well -qualified  novices
before  they  are  admitted  to  the  higher
mysteries,  and  within  this  period  they  are
to  learn  how  to  govern  their  own  tongues.”

Maine.  Until  the  year  1820,  the  Dis¬
trict  of  Maine  composed  a  part  of  the
political  territory  of  the  State  of  Massachu¬
setts,  and  its  Lodges  were  under  the  obedi¬
ence  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts.
In  that  year,  a  political  division  having
taken  place,  and  Maine  having  been
erected  into  an  independent  State,  the
Masons  of  Maine  took  the  preliminary
steps  towards  an  independent  Masonic  or¬
ganization,  in  obedience  to  the  universally
recognized  law  that  political  territory
makes  Masonic  territory,  and  that  changes
of  political  jurisdiction  are  followed  by
corresponding  changes  of  Masonic  jurisdic-
:  tion.  A  memorial  was  addressed  to  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts  praying  for
its  consent  to  the  organization  of  an  inde¬
pendent  Grand  Lodge  and  a  just  division
of  the  charity  and  other  funds.  A  favor¬
able  response  having  been  received,  a  con¬
vention  was  held  at  Portland  on  June  1,
1820,  consisting  of  delegates  from  twenty-
four  Lodges,  when  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Maine  was  organized,  and  William  King
elected  Grand  Master.

The  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  was  or¬
ganized  in  1821,  the  Grand  Council  of
Royal  Arch  Masons  in  1855,  and  the
Grand  Commandery  in  1852.

Maitre  Mafon.  The  name  of  the
third  degree  in  French.

Maitressc  Agissante.  Acting  Mis¬
tress.  The  title  of  the  presiding  officer  of
a  female  Lodge  in  the  Egyptian  Rite  of  Cag¬
liostro.

Maitresse  Macon.  The  third  de¬
gree  of  the  French  Rite  of  Adoption.  We
have  no  equivalent  word  in  English.  It
signifies  a  Mistress  in  Masonry.

Maitrise.  This  expressive  word  wants
an  equivalent  in  English.  The  French  use
la  Maitrise  to  designate  the  third  or  Mas¬
ter’s  degree.

Major.  The  sixth  degree  of  the  Ger¬
man  Rose  Croix.

Major  Illuminate.  (Ifluminatus Ma¬
jor.)  The  eighth  degree  of  the  Illuminati
|  of  Bavaria.

Majority.  Elections  in  Masonic


MAKE


MANNINGHAM


483


bodies  are  as  a  general  rule  decided  by  a
majority  of  the  votes  cast.  A  plurality
vote  is  not  admissible  unless  it  has  been
provided  for  by  a  special  by-law.

Make.  “To  make  Masons”  is  a  very
ancient  term ;  used  in  the  oldest  charges
extant  as  synonymous  with  the  verb  to  ini¬
tiate  or  receive  into  the  Fraternity.  It  is
found  in  the  Landsdowne  MS.,  whose  date
is  1560.  “  These  be  all  the  charges  ....
read  at  the  making  of  a  Mason.”

Malaeh.  jxbo.  An  angel.  A  signifi¬
cant  word  in  the  high  degrees.  Leaning
gives  it  improperly  as  Meleac.

Malachi  or  Malachias.  The  last  of
the  prophets.  A  significant  word  in  the
thirty-second  degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite.

Mallet.  One  of  the  working-tools  of
a  Mark  Master,  having  the  same  emblem¬
atic  meaning  as  the  common  gavel  in  the
Entered  Apprentice’s  degree.  It  teaches
us  to  correct  the  irregularities  of  temper,
and,  like  enlightened  reason,  to  curb  the
aspirations  of  unbridled  ambition,  to  depress
the  malignity  of  envy,  and  to  moderate  the
ebullition  of  anger.  It  removes  from  the
mind  all  the  excrescences  of  vice,  and  fits  it,
as  a  well-wrought  stone,  for  that  exalted
station  in  the  great  temple  of  nature  to
which,  as  an  emanation  of  the  Deity,  it  is
entitled.

The  mallet  or  setting  maul  is  also  an  em¬
blem  of  the  third  degree,  and  is  said  to  have
been  the  implement  by  which  the  stones
were  set  up  at  the  Temple.  It  is  often
improperly  confounded  with  the  common
gavel.

The  French  Masons,  to  whom  the  word
gavel  is  unknown,  uniformly  use  maillet,  or
mallet,  in  its  stead,  and  confound  its  sym¬
bolic  use,  as  the  implement  of  the  presiding
officer,  with  the  mallet  of  the  English  and
American  Mark  Master.

Malta.  Anciently,  Melita.  A  small
island  in  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  which,
although  occupying  only  about  170  sq.
miles,  possessed  for  several  centuries  a
greater  degree  of  celebrity  than  was  at¬
tached  to  any  other  territory  of  so  little  ex¬
tent.  It  is  now  a  possession  of  the  British
government,  but  was  occupied  from  1530
to  1798  by  the  Knights  Hospitallers,  then
called  Knights  of  Malta,  upon  whom  it  was
conferred  in  the  former  year  by  Charles  the
Fifth.

Malta,  Cross  of.  See  Cross  of  Malta.

Malta,  Kniglit  of.  See  Knight
of  Malta.

Maltose  Cross.  See  Cross  of  Malta.

Mail.  1.  Man  has  been  called  the
microcosm,  or  little  world,  in  contradistinc¬
tion  to  the  macrocosm,  or  great  world,  by
some  fanciful  writers  on  metaphysics,  by
reason  of  a  supposed  correspondence  be-


1  tween  the  different  parts  and  qualities  of
I  his  nature  and  those  of  the  universe.  But
in  Masonic  symbolism  the  idea  is  borrowed
from  Christ  and  the  Apostles,  who  repeat¬
edly  refer  to  man  as  a  symbol  of  the  Tem¬
ple.

2.  A  man  was  inscribed  on  the  standard
of  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  and  is  borne  on  the
Royal  Arch  banners  as  appropriate  to  the
Grand  Master  of  the  second  veil.  It  was
also  the  charge  in  the  third  quarter  of  the
arms  of  the  Athol  Grand  Lodge.

3.  Der  Mann,  or  the  man,  is  the  second
degree  of  the  German  Union.

4.  To  be  “  a  man,  not  a  woman,”  is  one
of  the  qualifications  for  Masonic  initiation. '
It  is  the  first,  and  therefore  the  most  im¬
portant,  qualification  mentioned  in  the
ritual.

Mandate.  That  which  is  commanded.
The  Benedictine  editors  of  Du  Cange  define
mandatum  as  “breve  aut  edictum  regium,”
i.  e.,  a  royal  brief  or  edict,  and  mandamentum
as  “  liter®  quibus  magistratus  aliquid  man¬
dat,”  i.  e.,  letters  in  which  a  magistrate
commands  anything.  Hence  the  orders
and  decrees  of  a  Grand  Master  or  a  Grand
Lodge  are  called  mandates,  and  implicit
obedience  to  them  is  of  Masonic  obligation.
There  is  an  appeal,  yet  not  a  suspensive
one,  from  the  mandate  of  a  Grand  Master
to  the  Grand  Lodge,  but  there  is  none  from
the  latter.

Mangourit,  Michel  Angc  Ber¬
nard  de.  A  distinguished  member  of
the  Grand  Orient  of  France.  He  founded
in  1776,  at  Rennes,  the  Rite  of  Sublimes  Elus
de  la  Ve'rite,  or  Sublime  Elects  of  Truth,
and  at  Paris  the  androgynous  society  of
Dames  of  Mount  Thabor.  He  also  created
the  Masonic  Literary  Society  of  Free
Thinkers,  which  existed  for  three  years.
He  delivered  lectures  which  were  subse¬
quently  published  under  the  title  of  Coursde
Philosophic  Maqonnique,  in  500  pp.,  4to.  He
also  delivered  a  great  many  lectures  and
discourses  before  different  Lodges,  several
of  which  were  published.  He  died,  after  a
long  and  severe  illness,  February  17,  1829.

Manna,  Pot  of.  Among  the  articles
laid  up  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant  by  Aaron
was  a  pot  of  manna.  In  the  substitute  ark,
commemorated  in  the  Royal  Arch  degree,
there  was,  of  course,  a  representation  of  it.
Manna  has  been  considered  as  a  symbol  of
life;  not  the  transitory,  but  the  enduring
one  of  a  future  world.  Hence  the  Pot  of
Manna,  Aaron’s  rod  that  budded  anew,  and
the  Book  of  the  Law,  which  teaches  Divine
Truth,  all  found  together,  are  appropriately
considered  as  the  symbols  of  that  eternal  life
which  it  is  the  design  of  the  Royal  Arch
degree  to  teach.

Manningham,  Thomas.  Dr.


484


MANTLE


MANUSCRIPTS


Thomas  Manningham  was  a  physician,
of  London,  of  much  repute  in  the  last  cen¬
tury.  He  took  an  active  interest  in  the
concerns  of  Freemasonry,  having  been  ap¬
pointed  Deputy  Grand  Master,  in  the  year
1752,  by  Lord  Carysfort.  He  was  the  au¬
thor  of  the  prayer  now  so  well  known  to
the  Fraternity,  which  was  presented  by  him
to  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  adopted  as  a  form
of  prayer  to  be  used  at  the  initiation  of  a  can¬
didate.  Before  that  period,  no  prayer  was
used  on  such  occasions,  and  the  one  com¬
posed  by  Manningham  (Oliver  says  with
the  assistance  of  Anderson,  which  I  doubt,
as  Anderson  died  in  1746,)  is  here  given  as
a  document  of  the  time.  It  will  be  seen
that  in  our  day  it  has  been  somewhat  modi¬
fied,  Preston  making  the  first  change ;  and
that,  originally  used  as  one  prayer,  it  has
since  been  divided,  in  this  country  at  least,
into  two,  the  first  part  being  used  as  a
prayer  at  the  opening  of  a  Lodge,  and  the
latter  at  the  initiation  of  a  candidate.

“Most  Holy  and  Glorious  Lord  God,
thou  Architect  of  heaven  and  earth,  who
art  the  giver  of  all  good  gifts  and  graces ;
and  hath  promised  that  where  two  or  three
are  gathered  together  in  thy  name,  thou
wilt  be  in  the  midst  of  them ;  in  thy  Name
we  assemble  and  meet  together,  most  hum¬
bly  beseeching  thee  to  bless  us  in  all  our
undertakings:  to  give  us  thy  Holy  Spirit,
to  enlighten  our  minds  with  wisdom  and
understanding;  that  we  may  know  and
serve  thee  aright,  that  all  our  doings  may
tend  to  thy  glory  and  the  salvation  of  our
souls.  And  we  beseech  thee,  0  Lord  God,
to  bless  this  our  present  undertaking,  and
to  grant  that  this  our  Brother  may  dedicate
his  life  to  thy  service,  and  be  a  true  and
faithful  Brother  amongst  us.  Endue  him
with  Divine  wisdom,  that  he  may,  with  the
secrets  of  Masonry,  be  able  to  unfold  the
mysteries  of  godliness  and  Christianity.
This  we  humbly  beg,  in  the  name  and  for
the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and
Saviour,  Amen.”

Dr.  Manningham  rendered  other  im¬
portant  services  to  Masonry  by  his  advo¬
cacy  of  healthy  reforms  and  his  determined
opposition  to  the  schismatic  efforts  of  the
“  Ancient  Masons.”  He  died  February  3,
1794.  The  fourth  edition  of  the  Book  of
Constitutions  speaks  of  him  in  exalted
terms  as  “  distinguished  for  his  affection
and  zeal  for  Masonry.”

Mantle.  A  dress  placed  over  all  the
others.  It  is  of  very  ancient  date,  being  a
part  of  the  costume  of  the  Hebrews,  Greeks,
and  Romans.  Among  the  Anglo-Saxons  it
was  the  decisive  mark  of  military  rank,
being  confined  to  the  cavalry.  In  the
Mediceval  ages,  and  on  the  institution  of
chivalry,  the  long,  trailing  mautle  was  espe¬


cially  reserved  as  an  insignia  of  knight*
hood,  and  was  worn  by  the  knight  as  the
most  august  and  noble  decoration  that  he
could  have,  when  he  was  not  dressed  in  his
armor.  The  general  color  of  the  mantle,
in  imitation  of  that  of  the  Roman  soldiers,
was  scarlet,  which  was  lined  with  ermine
or  other  precious  furs.  But  some  of  the
Orders  wore  mantles  of  other  colors.  Thus
the  Knights  Templars  were  clothed  with  a
white  mantle  having  a  red  cross  on  the
breast,  and  the  Knights  Hospitallers  a  black
mantle  with  a  white  cross.  The  mantle  is
still  worn  in  England  and  other  countries
of  Europe  as  a  mark  of  rank  on  state  oc¬
casions  by  peers,  and  by  some  magistrates
as  a  token  of  official  rank.

Mantle  of  II onor.  The  mantle  worn
by  a  knight  was  called  the  Mantle  of
Honor.  This  mantle  was  presented  to  a
knight  whenever  he  was  made  by  the  king.

Manual.  Relating  to  the  hand,  from
the  Latin  manm ,  a  hand.  See  the  Masonic
use  of  the  word  in  the  next  two  articles.

Manual  Point  of  Entrance.
Masons  are,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  re¬
minded,  by  the  hand,  of  the  necessity  of  a
prudent  and  careful  observance  of  all  their
pledges  and  duties,  and  hence  this  organ
suggests  certain  symbolic  instructions  in
relation  to  the  virtue  of  prudence.

Manual  Sign.  In  the  early  English
lectures  this  term  is  applied  to  what  is  now
called  the  Manual  Point  of  Entrance.

Manuscripts.  Anderson  tells  us,  in
the  second  edition  of  his  Constitutions,
that  in  the  year  1717  Grand  Master  Payne
“desired  any  brethren  to  bring  to  the
Grand  Lodge  any  old  writings  and  records
concerning  Masons  and  Masonry,  in  order
to  show  the  usages  of  ancient  times,  and
several  old  copies  of  the  Gothic  Constitu¬
tions  were  produced  and  collated;”  but
in  consequence  of  a  jealous  supposition
that  it  would  be  wrong  to  commit  anything
to  print  which  related  to  Masonry,  an  act
of  Masonic  vandalism  was  perpetrated.
For  Anderson  further  informs  us  that  in
1720,  “at  some  private  Lodges,  several
very  valuable  manuscripts  (for  they  had
nothing  yet  in  print),  concerning  the  Fra¬
ternity,  their  Lodges,  Regulations,  Charges,
Secrets,  and  Usages,  (particularly  one  writ¬
ten  by  Mr.  Nicholas  Stone,  the  Warden  of
Inigo  Jones,)  were  too  hastily  burnt  by
some  scrupulous  Brothers,  that  those  pa¬
pers  might  not  fall  into  strange  hands.”

The  recent  labors  of  Masonic  scholars
in  England,  among  whom  William  James
Hughan,  of  Truro,  Cornwall,  deserves  espe¬
cial  notice,  have  succeeded  in  rescuing
many  of  the  old  Masonic  manuscripts  from
oblivion,  and  we  are  now  actually  in  pos¬
session  of  more  of  these  heretofore  unpub-


MARCHESHVAN


MARK


485


lished  treasures  of  the  Craft  than  were
probably  accessible  to  Anderson  and  his
contemporaries.  See  Records,  Old.

Marclieshvan.  pBTVVD.  The  second
month  of  the  Jewish  civil  year.  It  begins
with  the  new  moon  in  November,  and  cor¬
responds,  therefore,  to  a  part  of  that  month
and  of  December.

Mark.  The  appropriate  jewel  of  a
Mark  Master.  It  is  made  of  gold  or  silver,
usually  of  the  former  metal,  and  must  be
in  the  form  of  a  keystone.  On  the  obverse
or  front  surface,  the  device  or  “  mark  ”  se¬
lected  by  the  owner  must  be  engraved
witnin  a  circle  composed  of  the  following
letters:  H.  T.  W.  S.  S.  T.  K.  S.  On  the
reverse  or  posterior  surface,  the  name  of
the  owner,  the  name  of  his  chapter,  and
the  date  of  his  advancement,  may  be  in¬
scribed,  although  this  is  not  absolutely
necessary.  The  “  mark  ”  consists  of  the
device  and  surrounding  inscription  on  the
obverse.  The  Mark  jewel,  as  prescribed  by
the  Supreme  Grand  Chapter  of  Scotland,
is  of  mother-of-pearl.  The  circle  on  one
side  is  inscribed  with  the  Hebrew  letters
E'DNtS'frOVn,  and  the  circle  on  the
other  side  with  letters  containing  the  same
meaning  in  the  vernacular  tongue  of  the
country  in  which  the  chapter  is  situated,
and  the  wearer’s  mark  in  the  centre.  The
Hebrew  letters  are  the  initials  of  a  Hebrew’
sentence  equivalent  to  the  English  one
familiar  to  Mark  Masons.  It  is  but  a
translation  into  Hebrew  of  the  English
mystical  sentence.

It  is  not  requisite  that  the  device  or
mark  should  be  of  a  strictly  Masonic  char¬
acter,  although  Masonic  emblems  are  fre¬
quently  selected  in  preference  to  other
subjects.  As  soon  as  adopted  it  should  be
drawn  or  described  in  a  book  kept  by  the
Chapter  for  that  purpose,  and  it  is  then
said  to  be  “recorded  in  the  Book  of
Marks,”  after  which  time  it  can  never  be
changed  by  the  possessor  for  any  other,  or
altered  in  the  slightest  degree,  but  remains
as  his  “  mark  ”  to  the  day  of  his  death.

This  mark  is  not  a  mere  ornamental  ap¬
pendage  of  the  degree,  but  is  a  sacred
token  of  the  rites  of  friendship  and
brotherly  love,  and  its  presentation  at  any
time  by  the  owner  to  another  Mark  Master,
would  claim,  from  the  latter,  certain  acts
of  friendship  which  are  of  solemn  obliga¬
tion  among  the  Fraternity.  A  mark  thus
presented,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a
favor,  is  said  to  be  pledged;  though  re¬
maining  in  the  possession  of  the  owner,  it
ceases,  for  any  actual  purposes  of  advan¬
tage,  to  be  his  property ;  nor  can  it  be
again  used  by  him  until,  either  by  the  re¬
turn  of  the  favor,  or  the  consent  of  the
benefactor,  it  has  been  redeemed ;  for  it  is


!  a  positive  law  of  the  Order,  that  no  Mark
Master  shall  “  pledge  his  mark  a  second
time  until  he  has  redeemed  it  from  its  pre¬
vious  pledge.”  By  this  wise  provision,  the
unworthy  are  prevented  from  making  an
improper  use  of  this  valuable  token,  or
from  levying  contributions  on  their  hospi¬
table  brethren.  Marks  or  pledges  of  this
kind  were  of  frequent  use  among  the  an¬
cients,  under  the  name  of  tessera  hospita/is
and  “arrhabo.”  The  nature  of  the  tes¬
sera  hospitalis,  or,  as  the  Greeks  called  it,
avp^oXov,  cannot  be  better  described  than
in  the  words  of  the  Scholiast  on  the  Media
of  Euripides,  v.  613,  where  Jason  promises
Medea,  on  her  parting  from  him,  to  send
her  the  symbols  of  hospitality  which  should
procure  her  a  kind  reception  in  foreign
countries.  It  was  the  custom,  says  the
Scholiast,  when  a  guest  had  been  enter¬
tained,  to  break  a  die  in  two  parts,  one  of
which  parts  was  retained  by  the  guest,  so
that  if,  at  any  future  period  he  required
assistance,  on  exhibiting  the  broken  pieces
of  the  die  to  each  other,  the  friendship  was
renewed.  Plautus,  in  one  of  his  comedies,
gives  us  an  exemplification  of  the  manner
in  which  these  tessera  or  pledges  of  friend¬
ship  were  used  at  Rome,  whence  it  appears
that  the  privileges  of  this  friendship  were
extended  to  the  descendants  of  the  con¬
tracting  parties.  Pcenulus  is  introduced,
inquiring  for  Agorastocles,  with  whose
family  he  had  formerly  exchanged  the
tessera.

Ag.  Siquidem  Antidimarchi  quseris  adopta-
titium.

Ego  sum  ipsus  quem  tu  quseris.

Pcen.  Hem  !  quid  ego  audio  ?

Ag.  Antidamse  me  gnatum  esse.

Pcen.  Si  ita  est,  tesseram
Conferre  si,  vis  hospitalem,  eccam,  attuli.

Ag.  Agedum  hue  ostende;  est  par  probe;
nam  habeo  domura.

Pcen.  O  mi  hospes,  salve  multum  ;  nam  mihi
tuus  pater,

Pater  tuus  ergo  hospes,  Antidamas  fuit :

Hsec  mihi  hospitalis  tessera  cum  illo  fuit.

Pcenul.,  act.  v.,  s.  c.  2,  ver.  86.

Ag.  Antidimarchus’  adopted  son,

If  you  do  seek,  I  am  the  very  man.

Pcen.  How !  do  I  hear  aright  ?

Ag.  I  am  the  son
Of  old  Antidamus.

Pcen.  If  so,  I  pray  you
Compare  with  me  the  hospitable  die
I’ ve  brought  this  with  me.

Ag.  Prithee,  let  me  see  it.

It  is,  indeed,  the  very  counterpart
Of  mine  at  home.

Pcen.  All  hail,  my  welcome  guest,

Your  father  was  my  guest,  Antidamus.

Your  father  was  my  honored  guest,  and  then
This  hospitable  die  with  me  he  parted.

These  tessera,  thus  used,  like  the  Mark
Master’s  mark,  for  the  purposes  of  perpetu¬
ating  friendship  and  rendering  its  union


486


MARK


MARK


more  sacred,  were  constructed  in  the  fol¬
lowing  manner:  they  took  a  small  piece  of
bone,  ivory,  or  stone,  generally  of  a  square
or  cubical  form,  and  dividing  it  into  equal
parts,  each  wrote  his  own  name,  or  some
other  inscription,  upon  one  of  the  pieces ;
they  then  made  a  mutual  exchange,  and,
lest  falling  into  other  hands  it  should  give
occasion  to  imposture,  the  pledge  was  pre¬
served  with  the  greatest  secrecy,  and  no
one  knew  the  name  inscribed  upon  it  ex¬
cept  the  possessor.

The  primitive  Christians  seem  to  have
adopted  a  similar  practice,  and  the  tessera
was  carried  by  them  in  their  travels,  as  a
means  of  introduction  to  their  fellow  Chris¬
tians.  A  favorite  inscription  with  them
were  the  letters  II.  T.  A.  II.,  being  the  ini¬
tials  of  II arr/p,  Ttof,  A yiov  Uvev/ia,  or  Father,
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  The  use  of  these
tesserae,  in  the  place  of  written  certificates,
continued,  says  Dr.  Harris,  ( Dies .  on  the
Tess.  Hosp.,)  until  the  eleventh  century,
at  which  time  they  are  mentioned  by  Bur-
chardus,  Archbishop  of  Worms,  in  a  visita¬
tion  charge.

The  “arrhabo”  was  a  similar  keepsake,
formed  by  breaking  a  piece  of  money  in
two.  The  etymology  of  this  word  shows
distinctly  that  the  Romans  borrowed  the
custom  of  these  pledges  from  the  ancient
Israelites.  For  it  is  derived  from  the  He¬
brew  arabon,  a  pledge.

With  this  detail  of  the  customs  of  the
ancients  before  us,  we  can  easily  explain
the  well-known  passage  in  Revelation  ii.
17.  “  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give

a  white  stone,  and  in  it  a  new  name  writ¬
ten,  which  no  man  knoweth  saving  he  that
receiveth  it.”  That  is,  to  borrow  the  inter¬
pretation  of  Harris,  “To  him  that  over-
cotneth  will  I  give  a  pledge  of  my*affection,
which  shall  constitute  him  my  friend,  and
entitle  him  to  privileges  and  honors  of
which  none  else  can  know  the  value  or  the
extent.”

Mark  Man.  According  to  Masonic
tradition,  the  Mark  Men  were  the  War¬
dens,  as  the  Mark  Masters  were  the  Mas¬
ters  of  the  Fellow  Craft  Lodges,  at  the
building  of  the  Temple.  They  distributed
the  marks  to  the  workmen,  and  made  the
first  inspection  of  the  work,  which  was
afterwards  to  be  approved  by  the  overseers.
As  a  degree,  the  Mark  Man  is  not  recog¬
nized  in  the  United  States.  In  England
it  is  sometimes,  but  not  generally,  worked
as  preparatory  to  the  degree  of  Mark  Master.
In  Scotland,  in  1778,  it  was  given  to  Fel¬
low  Crafts,  while  the  Mark  Master  was  re¬
stricted  to  Master  Masdns.  It  is  not  recog¬
nized  in  the  present  regulations  of  the  Su¬
preme  Grand  Chapter  of  Scotland.  Much
of  the  esoteric  ritual  of  the  Mark  Man  has


been  incorporated  into  the  Mark  Master  of
the  American  System.

Mark  Master.  The  fourth  degree
of  the  American  Rite.  The  traditions  of
the  degree  make  it  of  great  historical  im¬
portance,  since  by  them  we  are  informed
that  by  its  influence  each  Operative  Mason
at  the  building  of  the  Temple  was  known
and  distinguished,  and  the  disorder  and
confusion  which  might  otherwise  have  at¬
tended  so  immense  an  undertaking  was
completely  prevented.  Not  less  useful  is  it
in  its  symbolic  signification.  As  illustra¬
tive  of  the  Fellow  Craft,  the  fourth  degree
is  particularly  directed  to  the  inculcation
of  order,  regularity,  and  discipline.  It
teaches  us  that  we  should  discharge  all  the
duties  of  our  several  stations  with  preci¬
sion  and  punctuality  ;  that  the  work  of
our  hands  and  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts
should  be  good  and  true  —  not  unfinished
and  imperfect,  not  sinful  and  defective  —
but  such  as  the  Great  Overseer  and  Judge
of  heaven  and  earth,  will  see  fit  to  approve
as  a  worthy  oblation  from  his  creatures.
If  the  Fellow  Craft’s  degree  is  devoted  to
the  inculcation  of  learning,  that  of  the
Mark  Master  is  intended  to  instruct  us  how
that  learning  can  most  usefully  and  judi¬
ciously  be  employed  for  our  own  honor  and
the  profit  of  others.  And  it  holds  forth  to
the  desponding  the  encouraging  thought,
that  although  our  motives  may  sometimes
be  misinterpreted  by  our  erring  fellow  mor¬
tals,  our  attainments  be  underrated,  and
our  reputations  be  traduced  by  the  envious
and  malicious,  there  is  one,  at  least,  who
sees  not  with  the  eyes  of  man,  but  may  yet
make  that  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,
the  head  of  the  corner.  The  intimate  con¬
nection  then,  between  the  second  and  fourth
degrees  of  Masonry,  is  this,  that  while  one
inculcates  the  necessary  exercise  of  all  the
duties  of  life,  the  other  teaches  the  impor¬
tance  of  performing  them  with  systematic
regularity.  The  true  Mark  Master  is  a
type  of  that  man  mentioned  in  the  sacred
parable  who  received  from  his  master  this
approving  language  —  “Well  done,  good
and  faithful  servant;  thou  hast  been  faith¬
ful  over  a  few  things,  I  will  make  thee  ruler
over  many  things:  enter  thou  into  the  joys
of  thy  Lord.”

In  this  country,  the  Mark  Master’s  is  the
first  degree  given  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter.
Its  officers  are  a  Right  Worshipful  Master,
Senior  and  Junior  Wardens,  Secretary,
Treasurer,  Senior  and  Junior  Deacons,
Master,  Senior  and  Junior  Overseers.  The
degree  cannot  be  conferred  when  less  than
six  are  present,  who,  in  that  case,  must  be
the  first  and  last  three  officers  above  named.
The  working-tools  are  the  Mallet  and  In¬
denting  Chisel,  (which  see.)  The  symbolic


MARK


MARKS


487


color  is  purple.  The  Mark  Master’s  degree
is  now  given  in  England  under  the  author¬
ity  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Mark  Masters,
which  was  established  in  June,  1856,  and
is  a  jurisdiction  independent  of  the  Grand
Lodge.  The  officers  are  the  same  as  in
America,  with  the  addition  of  a  Chaplain,
Director  of  Ceremonies,  Assistant  Director,
Registrar  of  Marks,  Inner  Guard  or  Time
Keeper,  and  two  Stewards.  Master  Ma¬
sons  are  eligible  for  initiation.  Bro.  Hu-
ghan  says  that  the  degree  is  virtually  the
^ame  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland.
It  differs,  however,  in  some  respects  from
the  American  degree.

Mark  of  the  Craft,  Regular.  In
the  Mark  degree  there  is  a  certain  stone
which  is  said,  in  the  ritual,  not  to  have
upon  it  the  regular  mark  of  the  Craft.  This
expression  is  derived  from  the  following
tradition  of  the  degree.  At  the  building
of  the  Temple,  each  workman  placed  his
own  mark  upon  his  own  materials,  so  that
the  workmanship  of  every  mason  might  be
readily  distinguished,  and  praise  or  blame
be  justly  awarded.  These  marks,  accord¬
ing  to  the  lectures,  consisted  of  mathemati¬
cal  figures,  squares,  angles,  lines,  and  per¬
pendiculars,  and  hence  any  figure  of  a
different  kind,  such  as  a  circle,  would  not
be  deemed  “  the  regular  mark  of  the  Craft.”
Of  the  three  stones  used  in  the  Mark  de¬
gree,  one  is  inscribed  with  a  square  and
another  with  a  plumb  or  perpendicular,
because  these  were  marks  familiar  to  the
Craft;  but  the  third,  which  is  inscribed
with  a  circle  and  certain  hieroglyphics,  was
not  known,  and  was  not,  therefore,  called
“  regular.”

Marks  of  the  Craft.  In  former
times,  Operative  Masons,  the  “Steinmetzen”
of  Germany,  were  accustomed  to  place  some
mark  or  sign  of  their  own  invention,
which,  like  the  monogram  of  the  painters,
would  seem  to  identify  the  work  of  each.
They  are  to  be  found  upon  the  cathedrals,
churches,  castles,  and  other  stately  build¬
ings  erected  since  the  twelfth  century,  or  a
little  earlier,  in  Germany,  France,  Eng¬
land,  and  Scotland.  As  Mr.  Godwin  has
observed  in  his  History  in  Ruins,  it  is
curious  to  see  that  these  marks  are  of  the
same  character,  in  form,  in  all  these  dif¬
ferent  countries.  They  were  principally
crosses,  triangles,  and  other  mathematical
figures,  and  many  of  them  were  religious
symbols.  Specimens  taken  from  different
buildings  supply  such  forms  as  follow.

The  last  of  these  is  the  well-known
vesica  piscis,  the  symbol  of  Christ  among  the
primitive  Christians,  and  the  last  but  one
is  the  Pythagorean  pentalpha.  A  writer
in  the  London  Times  (August  13th,  1835,)
is  incorrect  in  stating  that  these  marks  are


confined  to  Germany,  and  are  to  he  found
only  since  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  cen¬
turies.  More  recent  researches  have  shown

V  A  X  +

+  EB  A  +

H  ik  x3

that  they  existed  in  many  other  countries,
especially  in  Scotland,  and  that  they  were
practised  by  the  builders  of  ancient  times.
Thus  Ainsworth,  in  his  Travels,  (ii.  167,)
tells  us,  in  his  description  of  the  ruins  of
Al-Hadhv  in  Mesopotamia,  that  “  every
stone,  not  only  in  the  chief  building,  but
in  the  walls  and  bastions  and  other  public
monuments,  when  not  defaced  by  time,  is
marked  with  a  character  which  is  for  the
most  part  either  a  Chaldean  letter  or  nu¬
meral.”  M.  Didron,  who  reported  a  series  ,
of  observations  on  the  subject  of  these  Ma¬
sons’  marks  to  the  Comite  Historique  des
Arts  et  Monumens,  of  Paris,  believes  that  he
can  discover  in  them  references  to  distinct
schools  or  Lodges  of  Masons.  He  divides
them  into  two  classes:  those  of  the  over¬
seers,  and  those  of  the  men  who  worked  the
stones.  The  marks  of  the  first  class  con¬
sist  of  monogrammatic  characters ;  those  of
the  second,  are  of  the  nature  of  symbols,
such  as  shoes,  trowels,  mallets,  etc.

A  correspondent  of  the  Freemason's
Quarterly  Review  states  that  similar  marks
are  to  be  found  on  the  stones  which  com¬
pose  the  walls  of  the  fortress  of  Allahabad,
which  was  erected  in  1542,  in  the  East  In¬
dies.  “The  walls,”  says  this  writer,  “ are
composed  of  large  oblong  blocks  of  red
granite,  and  are  almost  everywhere  covered
by  Masonic  emblems,  which  evince  some¬
thing  more  than  mere  ornament.  They
are  not  confined  to  one  particular  spot,  but
are  scattered  over  the  walls  of  the  fortress,
in  many  places  as  high  as  thirty  or  forty
feet  from  the  ground.  It  is  quite  certain
that  thousands  of  stones  on  the  walls,  bear¬
ing  these  Masonic  symbols,  were  carved,
marked,  and  numbered  in  the  quarry  pre¬
vious  to  the  erection  of  the  building.”

In  the  ancient  buildings  of  England  and
France,  these  marks  are  to  be  found  in
great  abundance.  In  a  communication,
on  this  subject,  to  the  London  Society  of


488


MARROW


MARYLAND


Antiquaries,  Mr.  Godwin  states,  “that,  in  his  |
opinion,  these  marks,  if  collected  and  com¬
pared,  might  assist  in  connecting  the  vari¬
ous  bands  of  operatives,  who,  under  the  pro-  ]
tection  of  the  Church  —  mystically  united
—  spread  themselves  over  Europe  during
the  Middle  Ages,  and  are  known  as  Free¬
masons.”  Mr.  Godwin  describes  these
marks  as  varying  in  length  from  two  to
seven  inches,  and  as  formed  by  a  single
line,  slightly  indented,  consisting  chiefly
of  crosses,  known  Masonic  symbols,  em¬
blems  of  the  Trinity  and  of  eternity,  the
double  triangle,  trowel,  square,  etc.

The  same  writer  observes  that,  in  a  con¬
versation,  in  September,  1844,  with  a  Ma¬
son  at  work  on  the  Canterbury  Cathedral,
he  “found  that  many  Masons  ( all  who
were  Freemasons)  had  their  mystic  marks
handed  down  from  generation  to  genera¬
tion  ;  this  man  had  his  mark  from  his
father,  and  he  received  it  from  his  grand¬
father.”

Marrow  in  the  Bone.  An  absurd
corruption  of  a  Jewish  word,  and  still  more
absurdly  said  to  be  its  translation.  It  has
no  appropriate  signification  in  the  place  to
which  it  is  applied,  but  was  once  religiously
believed  in  by  many  Masons,  who,  being  ig¬
norant  of  the  Hebrew  language,  accepted  it
,  as  a  true  interpretation.  It  is  now  univer¬
sally  rejected  by  the  intelligent  portion  of
the  Craft.

Marseilles,  Mother  Lodge  of.  A

Lodge  was  established  in  1748.  at  Marseilles,
in  France,  Thory  says,  by  a  travelling  Ma¬
son,  under  the  name  of  St.  Jean  d’Ecosse.
It  afterwards  assumed  the  name  of  Mother
Lodge  of  Marseilles,  and  still  later  the
name  of  Scottish  Mother  Lodge  of  France.
It  granted  Warrants  of  its  own  authority
for  Lodges  in  France  and  in  the  colonies  ;
among  others  for  one  at  New  Orleans,  in
Louisiana.

Marshal.  An  officer  common  to
several  Masonic  bodies,  whose  duty  is  to
regulate  processions  and  other  public  solem¬
nities.  In  Grand  bodies  he  is  called  a
Grand  Marshal.  In  the  American  Royal
Arch  System,  the  Captain  of  the  Host  acts
on  public  occasions  as  the  Marshal.  The
Marshal’s  ensign  of  office  is  a  baton  or
short  rod.  The  office  of  Marshal  in  State
affairs  is  very  ancient.  It  was  found  in  the
court  of  the  Byzantine  emperors,  and  was
introduced  into  England  from  France  at  the
period  of  the  conquest.  His  badge  of  office
was  at  first  a  rod  or  verge,  which  was  after¬
wards  abbreviated  to  the  baton,  for,  as  an
old  writer  has  observed,  (Thinne,)  “the
verge  or  rod  was  the  ensign  of  him  who
had  authority  to  reform  evil  in  warre  and  in
peace,  and  to  see  quiet  and  order  observed
among  the  people.”


Martel.  Charles  Martel,  who  died  in
741,  although  not  actually  king,  reigned
over  France  under  the  title  of  Mayor  of  the
Palace.  Rebold  (Hist.  Gen.,  p.  69,)  says
that  “at  the  request  of  the  Anglo-Saxon
kings,  he  sent  workmen  and  Masters  into
England.”  The  Operative  Masons  of  the
Middle  Ages  considered  him  as  one  of  their
patrons,  and  give  the  following  account  of
him  in  their  Legend  of  the  Craft.  “  There
was  one  of  the  Royal  line  of  France  called
Charles  Marshall,  and  he  was  a  man  that
loved  well  the  said  Craft  and  took  upon
him  the  Rules  and  Manners,  and  after  that
By  the  Grace  of  God  he  was  elect  to  be
the  King  of  France,  and  when  he  was  in  his
|  Estate,  he  helped  to  make  those  Masons
that  were  now,  and  sett  them  on  Work  and
gave  them  Charges  and  Manners  and  good
pay  as  he  had  learned  of  other  Masons,  and
confirmed  them  a  Charter  from  yeare  to
yeare  to  hold  their  Assembly  when  they
would,  and  Cherished  them  right  well,  and
thus  came  this  Noble  Craft  into  France.”

Martha.  The  fourth  degree  of  the
Eastern  Star;  a  Rite  of  American  Adop¬
tive  Masonry.

Martinism.  The  Rite  of  Martinism,
called  also  the  Rectified  Rite,  was  instituted
at  Lyons,  by  the  Marquis  de  St.  Martin,  a
disciple  of  Martinez  Paschalis.  of  whose  Rite
it  was  pretended  to  be  a  reform.  Martin-
ism  was  divided  into  two  classes,  called  Tem¬
ples,  in  which  were  the  following  degrees.

I.  Temple.  1.  Apprentice.  2.  Fellow
Craft.  3.  Master  Mason.  4.  Past  Master.
5.  Elect.  6.  Grand  Architect.  7.  Mason
of  the  Secret.

II.  Temple.  S.  Prince  of  Jerusalem.  9.
Knight  of  Palestine.  10.  Kadosh.

The  degrees  of  Martinism  abounded  in
the  reveries  of  the  Mystics.  See  Saint
Marlin.

Martin.  Louis  Claude  de  St.

See  Saint  Martin.

Martyr.  A  title  bestowed  by  the
Templars  on  their  last  Grand  Master,  James
de  Molay.  If,  as  Du  Cange  says,  the
Church  sometimes  gives  the  title  of  martyr
to  men  of  illustrious  sanctity,  who  have
suffered  death  not  for  the  confession  of  the
name  of  Christ,  but  for  some  other  cause,
being  slain  by  impious  men,  then  De  Molay,
as  the  innocent  victim  of  the  malignant
schemes  of  an  atrocious  pope  and  king,
was  clearly  entitled  to  the  appellation.

Martyrs.  Four  Crowned.  See
Four  Croicned  Martyrs.

Maryland.  Freemasonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  Maryland,  in  1750,  by  the  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,
which  issued  a  Charter  for  the  establish¬
ment  of  a  Lodge  at  Annapolis.  Five  other
Lodges  were  subsequently  chartered  by  the


MASON


MASON


489


Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,
and  one  in  1765,  at  Joppa,  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England.  On  the  31st  of  July,
1783,  these  five  Lodges  held  a  convention
at  Talbot  Court-House,  and  informally  or¬
ganized  a  Grand  Lodge.  But  as  the  Lodge
at  Annapolis  had  taken  no  part  in  this
movement,  another  convention  of  all  the
Lodges  was  held  at  Baltimore  on  the  17th
of  April,  1787,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Maryland  was  duly  organized,  John  Coates
being  elected  the  Grand  Master.  The
Grand  Chapter  was  established  in  1812.

Mason  Crowned.  ( Magon  Couronne.)
A  degree  in  the  nomenclature  of  Fus¬
tier.

Mason.  Derivation  of  tlie

Word.  The  search  for  the  etymology
or  derivation  of  the  word  Mason  has  given
rise  to  numerous  theories,  some  of  them
ingenious,  but  many  of  them  very  absurd.
Thus,  a  writer  in  the  European  Magazine,
for  February,  1792,  who  signs  his  name  as
“George  Drake,”  lieutenant  of  marines,
attempts  to  trace  the  Masons  to  the  Druids,
and  derives  Mason  from  May's  on,  May's
being  in  reference  to  May-day,  the  great  fes¬
tival  of  the  Druids,  and  on  meaning  men,  as
in  the  French  on  dit,  for  homme  dit.  Ac¬
cording  to  this,  May's  on  therefore  means
the  Men  of  May.  But  this  idea  is  not
original  with  Drake,  since  the  same  deriva¬
tion  was  urged  in  1766  by  Cleland,  in  his
essays  on  The  Way  to  Things  in  Words,  and
on  The  Real  Secret  of  Freemasons.

Hutchinson,  in  his  search  for  a  deriva¬
tion,  seems  to  have  been  perplexed  with
the  variety  of  roots  that  presented  them¬
selves,  and,  being  inclined  to  believe  that
the  name  of  Mason  “  has  its  derivation  from
a  language  in  which  it  implies  some  strong
indication  or  distinction  of  the  nature  of
the  society,  and  that  it  has  no  relation  to
architects,”  looks  for  the  root  in  the  Greek
tongue.  Thus  he  thinks  that  Mason  may
come  from  Mau  Xaov,  Mao  Soon,  “  I  seek
salvation,”  or  from  Mvart/g,  Mystes,  “  an  ini¬
tiate  ;  ”  and  that  Masonry  is  only  a  corrup¬
tion  of  Ueaovpaveu,  Mesouraneo,  “  I  am  in
the  midst  of  heaven;”  or  from  M a^opovO,
Mazourouth,  a  constellation  mentioned  by
Job,  or  from  Mi lOTTjpiov,  Mysterion,  “a  mys¬
tery.”

Lessing  says,  in  his  Ernst  und  Falk,  that
Masa  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  signifies  a  table,
and  that  Masonry,  consequently,  is  a  society
of  the  table.

Nicolai  thinks  he  finds  the  root  in  the
Low  Latin  word  of  the  Middle  Ages  Mas-
sonya,  or  Masonia,  which  signifies  an  ex¬
clusive  society  or  club,  such  as  that  of  the
round-table.

Coming  down  to  later  times,  we  find  Bro.
C.  W.  Moore,  in  his  Boston  Magazine,  of

8  M


May,  1844,  deriving  Mason  from  A ifloropos,
Lithotomos,  “  a  Stone-cutter.”  But  although
fully  aware  of  the  elasticity  of  etymologi¬
cal  rules,  it  surpasses  our  ingenuity  to  get
Mason  etymologically  out  of  Lithotomos.

Bro.  Giles  F.  Yates  sought  for  the  deri¬
vation  of  Mason  in  the  Greek  word  M amoves,
Mazones,  a  festival  of  Dionysus,  and  he
thought  that  this  was  another  proof  of  the
lineal  descent  of  the  Masonic  order  from
the  Dionysiac  Artificers.

The  late  William  S.  Rockwell,  who  was
accustomed  to  find  all  his  Masonry  in  the
Egyptian  mysteries,  and  who  was  a  thor¬
ough  student  of  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphic
system,  derives  the  word  Mason  from  a  com¬
bination  of  two  phonetic  signs,  the  one
being  MAI,  and  signifying  “  to  love,”  and
the  other  being  SON,  which  means  “a
brother.”  Hence,  he  says,  “  this  combina¬
tion,  MAISON,  expresses  exactly  in  sound
our  word  MASON,  and  signifies  literally
loving  brother ,  that  is,  philadelphus,  brother
of  an  association,  and  thus  corresponds  also
in  sense.”

But  all  of  these  fanciful  etymologies,
which  would  have  terrified  Bopp,  Grimm,
or  Muller,  or  any  other  student  of  linguis¬
tic  relations,  forcibly  remind  us  of  the
French  epigrammatist,  who  admitted  that
alphina  came  from  equus,  but  that,  in  so
coming,  it  had  very  considerably  changed
its  route.

What,  then,  is  the  true  derivation  of  the
word  Mason  ?  Let  us  see  what  the  orthce-
pists,  who  had  no  Masonic  theories,  have
said  upon  the  subject.

Webster,  seeing  that  in  Spanish  masa
means  mortar,  is  inclined  to  derive  Mason,
as  denoting  one  that  works  in  mortar,  from
the  root  of  mass,  which  of  course  gave
birth  to  the  Spanish  word.

In  Low  or  Mediaeval  Latin,  Mason  was
machio  or  macio,  and  this  Du  Cange  derives
from  the  Latin  maceria,  “a  long  wall.”
Others  find  a  derivation  in  machines,  be¬
cause  the  builders  stood  upon  machines  to
raise  their  walls.  But  Richardson  takes  a
common  sense  view  of  the  subject.  He
says,  “  It  appears  to  be  obviously  the  same
word  as  maison,  a  house  or  mansion,  ap¬
plied  to  the  person  who  builds,  instead  of
the  thing  built.  The  French  Maissoner  is
to  build  houses;  Masonner,  to  build  of
stone.  The  word  Mason  is  applied  by  usage
to  a  builder  in  stone,  and  Masonry  to  work
in  stone.”

Carpenter  gives  Massom,  used  in  1225,
for  a  building  of  stone,  and  Massonus,  used
in  1304,  for  a  Mason;  and  the  Benedictine
editors  of  Du  Cange  define  Massoneria  “  a
building,  the  French  Maqonnerie,  and  Mas-
sonerius,”  as  Latomus  or  a  Mason,  both
words  in  manuscripts  of  1385.


490


MASONEY


MASSACHUSETTS


As  a  practical  question,  we  are  com¬
pelled  to  reject  all  those  fanciful  deriva¬
tions  which  connect  the  Masons  etymologi¬
cally  and  historically  with  the  Greeks,  the
Egyptians,  or  the  Druids,  and  to  take  the
word  Menton  in  its  ordinary  signification  of  a
worker  in  stone,  and  thus  indicate  the  ori¬
gin  of  the  Order  from  a  society  or  associa¬
tion  of  practical  and  operative  builders.
We  need  no  better  root  than  the  Mediajval
Latin  Magonner,  to  build,  or  Magonetus,  a
^builder.

Masoney.  Lessing,  in  his  Ernst  und
Falk,  gives  this  word  as  signifying  in  Eng¬
lish  Masonry.  He  is  in  error.  There  is  no
such  English  word.

Mason  Hermetic.  ( Magon  Herme-
tique.)  A  degree  in  the  Archives  of  the
Mother  Lodge  of  the  Eclectic  Philosophic
Eite.

Masonic  Kail.  See  Hall,  Masonic.

Mason,  Illustrious  and  Sub¬
lime  Ora  nil  Master.  ( Magon  Illustre
et  Sublime  Grand  Maltre.)  A  degree  in  the
manuscript  collection  of  Peuvret.

Mason  of  the  Secret.  ( Magon  du
Secret.)  1.  The  sixth  degree  of  the  Eite  of
Tschoudy.  2.  The  seventh  degree  of  the
Eite  of  Saint  Martin.

Mason,  Operative.  See  Operative
Mason.

Mason,  Perfect.  ( Magon  Parfait.)
The  twenty-seventh  degree  of  the  collection
of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Mason  Philosopher.  (Magon  Phi-
losophe.)  A  degree  in  the  manuscript  col¬
lection  of  Peuvret.

Mason,  Practical.  The  French  so
call  an  Operative  Mason, Magon  de  Pratique.

Masonry.  Although  Masonry  is  of
two  kinds,  Operative  and  Speculative,  yet
Masonic  writers  frequently  employ  the  word
Masonry  as  synonymous  with  Freemasonry.

Masonry,  Operative.  See  Opera¬
tive  Masonry.

Masonry,  Origin  of.  See  Origin
of  Masonry.

Masonry,  Speculative.  See  Spec¬
ulative  Masonry.

Masons,  Company  of.  One  of  the

ninety-one  livery  companies  of  London,  but
not  one  of  the  twelve  greater  ones.  Their
arms  are  azure,  on  a  chevron,  between  three
castles  argent,  a  pair  of  compasses  some-
■  what  extended  of  the  1st ;  crest,  a  castle  of
the  2d;  and  motto,  “The  Lord  is  all  our
trust.”  These  were  granted  by  Clarencieux,
Kiug  of  arms,  in  1477,  but  they  were  not
incorporated  until  Charles  II.  gave  them  a
charter  in  1677.  They  are  not  to  be  con¬
founded  with  the  Fraternity  of  Freemasons,
but  originally  there  was  some  connection
between  the  two.  At  their  hall  in  Basing-
hall  Street,  Ashmole  says  that  in  1682  he


was  “admitted  into  the  fellowship  of  Free¬
masons.”

Mason,  Scottish  Master.  ( Magon
Ecossais  Maltre.)  Also  called  Perfect  Elect,
Elu parfait.  A  degree  in  the  Archives  of
the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philosophic  Scot¬
tish  Eite.

Masons,  Emperor  of  all  the.

(Magons,  Empereur  de  tous  les. )  A  degree
cited  in  the  nomenclature  of  Fustier.

Mason,  Speculative.  See  Specula¬
tive.  Mason.

Mason,  Stone.  See  Stonemasons.

Mason  Sublime.  (Magon  subHme.)
A  degree  in  the  manuscript  collection  of
Peuvret.

Mason,  Sublime  Operative.

(Magon  Sublime  Pratique.)  A  degree  in  the
manuscript  collection  of  Peuvret.

Mason’s  Mile  and  Daughter.
A  degree  frequently  conferred  in  the  United
States  on  the  wives,  daughters,  sisters,  and
mothers  of  Masons,  to  secure  to  them,  by
investing  them  with  a  peculiar  mode  of
recognition, the  aid  and  assistance  of  the  F ra-
ternity.  It  may  be  conferred  by  any  Master
Mason,  and  the  requirement  is  that  the  recip¬
ient  shall  be  the  wife,  unmarried  daughter,
unmarried  sister,  or  widowed  mother  of  a
Master  Mason.  It  is  sometimes  called  the
Holy  Virgin,  and  has  been  by  some  deemed
of  so  much  importance  that  a  Manual  of  it,
w'ith  the  title  of  The  Ladies'  Masonry,  or
Hieroglyphic  Monitor,  was  published  at
Louisville,  Kentucky,  in  1851,  by  Past
Grand  Master  William  Leigh,  of  Alabama.

Mason,  True.  (Magon  Vrai.)  A  de¬
gree  composed  by  Pernetty.  It  is  the  only
one  of  the  high  hermetic  degrees  of  the
Eite  of  Avignon,  and  it  became  the  first
degree  of  the  same  system  after  it  was
transplanted  to  Montpellier.  See  Academy
of  True  Masons.

Masoretic  Points.  The  Hebrew

alphabet  is  without  vowels,  which  were  tra¬
ditionally  supplied  by  the  reader  from  oral
instruction,  and  hence  the  true  ancient
sounds  ofthew'ordshavebeen lost.  Butabout
the  eighth  and  ninth  centuries  a  school  of
Eabbins,  called  Masorites,  invented  vowel
points,  to  be  placed  above  or  below  the  con¬
sonants,  so  as  to  give  them  a  determined
pronunciation.  These  Masoretic  points  are
never  used  by  the  Jews  in  their  rolls  of  the
law',  and  in  all  investigations  into  the  deri¬
vation  and  meaning  of  Hebrew'  names,
Masonic  scholars  and  other  etymologists
alw'avs  reject  them.

Massachusetts.  Freemasonry  was
introduced  into  Massachusetts,  in  1733,  by
a  Deputation  granted  to  Henry  Price  as
Grand  Master  of  North  America,  dated
April  30th,  1733.  Price,  on  July  30th  of
the  same  year,  organized  the  “St.  John’s


MASSONUS


MASTER


491


Grand  Lodge,”  which  immediately  granted
a  Warrant  to  “St.  John’s  Lodge”  in  Boston.
On  Nov.  30th,  1752,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland  granted  a  Warrant  to  “St.  An¬
drew’s  Lodge;”  and  thus  the  dissensions
of  the  Ancients  and  Moderns  began  in  Mas¬
sachusetts.  On  Dec.  27th,  17(39,  St.  An¬
drew’s  Lodge,  with  the  assistance  of  three
travelling  Lodges  in  the  British  army,  or¬
ganized  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,
and  elected  Joseph  Warren  Grand  Master.
In  1792,  the  two  Grand  Lodges  united  and
formed  the  “  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Most  An¬
cient  and  Honorable  Society  of  Free  and
Accepted  Masons  for  the  Commonwealth
of  Massachusetts,”  and  elected  John  Cutler
Grand  Master.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Massachusetts  was
organized  June  12th,  1798,  and  the  Grand
Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  in
1826.  The  Grand  Commandery,  which
exercises  jurisdiction  over  both  Massachu¬
setts  and  Rhode  Island,  was  established
May  6th,  1805.  In  1807  it  extended  its
jurisdiction,  and  called  itself  “The  United
States  Grand  Encampment.”  In  1816,  it
united  with  other  Encampments  at  a  con¬
vention  in  Philadelphia,  where  a  General
Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States
was  formed ;  and  in  1819,  at  the  meeting
of  that  body,  the  representatives  of  the
“Grand  Encampment  of  Massachusetts
and  Rhode  Island”  are  recorded  as  being
present.  And  from  that  time  it  has  re¬
tained  that  title,  only  changing  it,  in  1859,
to  “  Grand  Commandery,”  in  compliance
with  the  new  Constitution  of  the  Grand
Encampment  of  the  United  States.

Massonus.  Used  in  the  thirteenth
and  fourteenth  centuries,  according  to  Car¬
penter,  [Gloss.,)  for  Mason.

Master,  Absolute  Sovereign
Grand.  ( Souverain  Grand  Maitre  absolu.)
The  ninetieth  and  last  degree  of  the  Rite
of  Mizraim.

Master  ad  Vitam.  In  the  French
Masonry  of  the  earlier  part  of  the  last  cen¬
tury,  the  Masters  of  Lodges  were  not  elected
annually,  but  held  their  office  for  life.
Hence  they  were  called  Masters  ad  Vitam,
or  Masters  for  life.

Master,  Ancient.  ( Maitre  Ancien.)
The  fourth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Martinism.
This  would  more  properly  be  translated
Past  Master,  for  it  has  the  same  position  in
the  regime  of  St.  Martin  that  the  Past  Mas¬
ter  has  in  the  English  system.

Master  Architect,  Grand.  See
Grand  Master  Architect.

Master  Architect,  Perfect.  {Mai¬
tre  Architede  Parfait.)  A  degree  in  the
Archives  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Phil¬
osophic  Scottish  Rite,  and  in  some  other
collections.


Master  Architect,  Prnssian.

{Maitre  Architede  Prussien.)  A  degree  in
the  Archives  of  the  Moth*  Lodge  of  the
Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

Master,  Slue.  A  name  sometimes
given,  in  the  Scottish  Rite,  to  Master  Ma¬
sons  of  the  third  degree,  in  contradistinc¬
tion  to  some  of  the  higher  degrees,  and  in
reference  to  the  color  of  their  collar.

Master  Builder.  Taking  the  word
master  in  the  sense  of  one  possessed  of  the
highest  degree  of  skill  and  knowledge,  the
epithet  “  Master  Builder  ”  is  sometimes
used  by  Masons  as  an  epithet  of  the  Grand
Architect  of  the  Universe.  Urquhart  ( Pil¬
lars  of  Hercules ,  ii.  67,)  derives  it  from  the
ancient  Hebrews,  who,  he  says,  “used  alga-
bil,  the  Master  Builder,  as  an  epithet  of
God.”

Master,  Cohen.  ( Maitre  Coen.)  A
degree  in  the  collection  of  the  Mother
Lodge  of  the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

Master,  frowned.  ( Maitre  Cou-
ronne.)  A  degree  in  the  collection  of  the
Lodge  of  Saint  Louis  des  Amis-Reunis  at
Calais.

Master,  Egyptian.  ( Maitre  Egyp-
tien.)  A  degree  in  the  Archives  of  the
Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philosophic  Scottish
Rite.

Master,  Elect.  See  Elect  Master.

Master,  English.  {Maitre  Anglais.)
The  eighth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Master,  English  Perfect.  ( Maitre
Parfait  Anglais.)  A  degree  in  the  collec¬
tion  of  Le  Rouge.

Master,  Four  Times  Venerable.

{ Maitre  quatre  fois  Venerable.)  A  degree
introduced  into  Berlin  by  the  Marquis  de
Bernez.

Master,  Grand.  See  Grand  Master.

Master  llcriuct  ic.  ( Maitre  Herme-
tique.)  A  degree  in  the  collection  of  Le-
manceau.

Master,  Illustrious.  ( Maitre  Plus -
tre.)  A  degree  in  the  collection  of  Leman-
ceau.

Master,  Illustrious  Symbolic.

( Maitre  Symbolique  1/lustre.)  A  degree  in
the  nomenclature  of  Fustier.

Master  in  Israel.  See  Intendant  of
the  Building.

Master  in  Perfect  Architecture.

[Maitre  en  la  Parfaite  Architecture.)  A  de¬
gree  in  the  nomenclature  of  Fustier.

Master  in  the  Chair.  (Meislerim
Stuhl.)  The  name  given  in  Germany  to
the  presiding  officer  of  a  Lodge.  It  is  the
same  as  the  Worshipful  Master  in  Eng¬
lish.

Master,  Irish.  (Maitre  Irlandais.)
The  seventh  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Miz¬
raim.  Ramsay  gave  this  name  at  first  to
the  degree  which  he  subsequently  called


492


MASTER


MASTER


Maitre  Ecossais  or  Scottish  Master.  It  is  still
the  seventh  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Master,  Kubbalistic.  (Maitre
Cabalistique.)  A  degree  in  the  collection
of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philosophic
Scottish  Rite.

Master,  Little  Elect.  ( Petit  Maitre
€lu.)  A  degree  in  the  Archives  of  the
Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philosophic  Scottish
Rite.

Master  Mason.  In  all  the  Rites  of
Masonry,  no  matter  how  variant  may  be
their  organization  in  the  high  degrees,  the
Master  Mason  constitutes  the  third  degree.
In  form  this  degree  is  also  every  where  sub¬
stantially  the  same,  because  its  legend  is  an
essential  part  of  it ;  and,  as  on  that  legend
the  degree  must  be  founded,  there  can  no¬
where  be  any  important  variation,  because
the  tradition  has  at  all  times  been  the  same.

The  Master  Mason’s  degree  was  originally
called  the  summit  of  Ancient  Craft  Ma¬
sonry  ;  and  so  it  must  have  been  before  the
disseverance  from  it  of  the  Royal  Arch,  by
which  I  mean  not  the  ritual,  but  the  sym¬
bolism  of  Arch  Masonry.  But  under  its
present  organization  the  degree  is  actually
incomplete,  because  it  needs  a  complement
that  is  only  to  be  supplied  in  a  higher  one.
Hence  its  symbolism  is  necessarily  re¬
stricted,  in  its  mutilated  form,  to  the  first
Temple  and  the  present  life,  although  it
gives  the  assurance  of  a  future  one.

As  the  whole  system  of  Craft  Masonry  is
intended  to  present  the  symbolic  idea  of
man  passing  through  the  pilgrimage  of  life,
each  degree  is  appropriated  to  a  certain
portion  of  that  pilgrimage.  If,  then,  the
first  degree  is  a  representation  of  youth,  the
time  to  learn,  and  the  second  of  manhood
or  the  time  to  work,  the  third  is  symbolic
of  old  age,  with  its  trials,  its  sufferings,  and
its  final  termination  in  death.  The  time
for  toiling  is  now  over — the  opportunity
to  learn  has  passed  away  —  the  spiritual
temple  that  we  all  have  been  striving  to
erect  in  our  hearts,  is  now  nearly  completed,
and  the  wearied  workman  awaits  only  the
word  of  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Universe,
to  call  him  from  the  labors  of  earth  to  the
eternal  refreshments  of  heaven.  Hence,
this  is,  by  far,  the  most  solemn  and  sacred  of
the  degrees  of  Masonry ;  and  it  has,  in  con¬
sequence  of  the  profound  truths  which  it
inculcates,  been  distinguished  by  the  Craft
as  the  sublime  degree.  As  an  Entered  Ap¬
prentice,  the  Mason  was  taught  those  ele¬
mentary  instructions  which  were  to  fit  him
for  further  advancement  in  his  profession,
just  as  the  youth  is  supplied  with  that  ru¬
dimentary  education  which  is  to  prepare
him  for  entering  on  the  active  duties  of  life;
as  a  Fellow  Craft,  he  is  directed  to  continue
his  investigations  in  the  science  of  the  Insti¬


tution,  and  to  labor  diligently  in  the  tasks  it
prescribes,  just  as  the  man  is  required  to
enlarge  his  mind  by  the  acquisition  of  new
ideas,  and  to  extend  his  usefulness  to  his
fellow-creatures ;  but,  as  a  Master  Mason,
he  is  taught  the  last,  the  most  important,
and  the  most  necessary  of  truths,  that  hav¬
ing  been  faithful  to  all  his  trusts,  he  is  at
last  to  die,  and  to  receive  the  reward  of  his
fidelity.

It  was  the  single  object  of  all  the  ancient
rites  and  mysteries  practised  in  the  very
bosom  of  Pagan  darkness,  shining  as  a  soli¬
tary  beacon  in  all  that  surrounding  gloom,
and  cheering  the  philosopher  in  his  weary
pilgrimage  of  life,  to  teach  the  immortality
of  the  soul.  This  is  still  the  great  design  of
the  third  degree  of  Masonry.  This  is  the
scope  and  aim  of  its  ritual.  The  Master  Ma¬
son  represents  man,  when  youth,  manhood,
old  age,  and  life  itself,  have  passed  away  as
fleeting  shadows,  yet  raised  from  the  grave
of  iniquity,  and  quickened  into  another  and
a  better  existence.  By  its  legend  and  all  its
ritual,  it  is  implied  that  we  have  been  re¬
deemed  from  the  death  of  sin  and  the  sep¬
ulchre  of  pollution.  “  The  ceremonies  and
the  lecture,”  says  Dr.  Crucefix,  “beauti¬
fully  illustrate  this  all-engrossing  subject;
and  the  conclusion  we  arrive  at  is,  that
youth,  properly  directed,  leads  us  to  honor¬
able  and  virtuous  maturity,  and  that  the
life  of  man,  regulated  by  morality,  faith,
and  justice,  will  be  rewarded  at  its  closing
hour,  by  the  prospect  of  eternal  bliss.”

Masonic  historians  have  found  much  dif¬
ficulty  in  settling  the  question  as  to  the
time  of  the  invention  and  composition  of
the  degree.  The  theory  that  at  the  build¬
ing  of  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem  the  Craft
were  divided  into  three  or  even  more  de¬
grees,  being  only  a  symbolic  myth,  must  be
discarded  in  any  historical  discussion  of
the  subject.  The  real  question  at  issue  is
whether  the  Master  Mason’s  degree,  as  a
degree,  was  in  existence  among  the  Opera¬
tive  Freemasons  before  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury,  or  whether  we  owe  it  to  the  Revivalists
of  1717.  Bro.  Wm.  J.  Hughan,  in  a  very
able  article  on  this  subject,  published  in
1873,  in  the  Voice  of  Masonry,  says  that  “  so
far  the  evidence  respecting  its  history  goes
no  farther  back  than  the  early  part  of  the
last  century.”  The  evidence,  however,  is
all  of  a  negative  character.  There  is  none
that  the  degree  existed  in  the  seventeenth
century  or  earlier,  and  there  is  none  that
it  did  not.  All  the  old  manuscripts  speak
of  Masters  and  Fellows,  but  these  might
have  been  and  probably  were  only  titles  of
rank.  The  Sloane  MS.,  No.  3329,  speaks,
it  is  true,  of  modes  of  recognition  peculiar
to  Masters  and  Fellows,  and  also  of  a  Lodge
consisting  of  Masters,  Fellows,  and  Appren-


MASTER


MASTER


493


tices.  But  even  if  we  give  to  this  MS.  its
earliest  date,  that  which  is  assigned  to  it
by  Findel,  near  the  end  of  the  seventeenth
century,  it  will  not  necessarily  follow  that
these  Masters,  Fellows,  and  Apprentices
had  each  a  separate  and  distinct  degree.
Indeed,  it  refers  only  to  one  Lodge,  which
was,  however,  constituted  by  three  different
ranks;  and  it  records  but  one  oath,  so  that
it  is  possible  that  there  was  only  one  com¬
mon  form  of  initiation.

The  first  positive  historical  evidence  that
we  have  of  the  existence  of  a  Master’s  de¬
gree  is  to  be  found  in  the  General  Regula¬
tions  compiled  by  Payne  in  1720.  It  is
there  declared  that  Apprentices  must  be
admitted  Masters  and  Fellow  Crafts  only
in  the  Grand  Lodge.  The  degree  was  then
in  existence.  But  this  record  would  not
militate  against  the  theory  advanced  by
some  that  Desaguliers  was  its  author  in
1717.  Dermott  asserts  that  the  degree,  as
we  now  have  it,  was  the  work  of  Desaguliers
and  seven  others,  who,  being  Fellow  Crafts,
but  not  knowing  the  Master’s  part,  boldly
invented  it,  that  they  might  organize  a
Grand  Lodge.  He  intimates  that  the  true
Master’s  degree  existed  before  that  time,
and  was  in  possession  of  the  Ancients.  But
Dermott’s  testimony  is  absolutely  worth
nothing,  because  he  was  a  violent  partisan,
and  because  his  statements  are  irreconcila¬
ble  with  other  facts.  If  the  Ancients  were
in  possession  of  the  degree  which  had
existed  before  1717,  and  the  Moderns  were
not,  where  did  the  former  get  it,  since  they
sprang  out  of  the  latter  ?

Documentary  evidence  is  yet  wanting  to
settle  the  precise  time  of  the  composition  of
the  third  degree  as  we  now  have  it.  But  it
would  not  be  prudent  to  oppose  too  posi¬
tively  the  theory  that  it  must  be  traced  to
the  second  decade  of  the  eighteenth  century.
The  proofs,  as  they  arise  day  by  day,  from
the  resurrection  of  old  manuscripts,  seem
to  incline  that  way.

But  the  legend,  I  think,  is  of  much  older
date.  It  may  have  made  a  part  of  the
generalinitiation ;  but  I  have  no  doubt  that,
like  the  similar  one  of  the  Compagnons  de
la  Tour  in  France,  it  existed  among  the
Operative  Guilds  of  the  Middle  Ages  as  an
esoteric  narrative.  Such  a  legend  all  the
histories  of  the  Ancient  Mysteries  prove  to
us  belongs  to  the  spirit  of  initiation.
There  would  have  been  no  initiation  worth
preservation  without  it.

blaster,  Most  Higli  and  Puis¬
sant.  ( Maitre  trie  haut  et  tres  puissant.)
The  sixty-second  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Mizraim.

Master,  Most  Wise.  The  title  of
a  presiding  officer  of  a  Chapter  of  Rose
Croix,  usually  abbreviated  as  Most  Wise.


Master,  Mystic.  (. Maitre  Mystique.)
A  degree  in  the  collection  of  Pyron.

Master  of  all  Symbolic  Lodges,

Grand.  See  Grand  Master  of  all  Sym¬
bolic  Lodges.

Master  of  a  Dodge.  See  Worship¬
ful  Master.

Master  of  Cavalry.  An  officer  in
a  Council  of  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,
whose  duties  are,  in  some  respects,  similar
to  those  of  a  Junior  Deacon  in  a  symbolic
Lodge.  The  two  offices  of  Master  of  Cav¬
alry  and  Master  of  Infantry  were  first  ap¬
pointed  by  Constantine  the  Great.

Master  of  Ceremonies.  An  officer
found  in  many  of  the  Lodges  of  England
and  the  Continent.  In  English  Lodges  the
office  is  almost  a  nominal  one,  without  any
duties,  but  in  the  continental  Lodges  he
acts  as  the  conductor  of  the  candidate.
Oliver  says  that  the  title  should  be  proper¬
ly,  Director  of  Ceremonies,  and  he  objects
to  Master  of  Ceremonies  as  “  unmasonic.”

Master  of  Dispatches.  The  Sec¬
retary  of  a  Council  of  Knights  of  the  Red
Cross.  The  Magister  Epistolarum  was  the
officer  under  the  Empire  who  conducted  the
correspondence  of  the  Emperor.

Master  of  Finances.  The  Treas¬
urer  of  a  Council  of  Knights  of  the  Red
Cross.

Master  of  Hamburg,  Perfect.

[Maitre parfait  de  Hamburg.)  A  degree  in
the  nomenclature  of  Fustier.

Master  of  Infantry.  The  Treas¬
urer  of  a  Council  of  Knights  of  the  Red
Cross.  See  Master  of  Cavalry.

Master  of  Dodges.  ( Maitre  desLoges.)
The  sixty-first  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Miz¬
raim.

Master  of  Masters,  Grand.

( Grand  Maitre  des  Maitres.)  The  fifty -ninth
degree  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France.

Master  of  Paracelsns.  (Maitre
de  Paracelse.)  A  degree  in  the  collection
of  Pyron.

Master  of  Seerets,  Perfect.  (Mai¬
tre  parfait  des  Secrets.)  A  degree  in  the
manuscript  collection  of  Peuvret.

Master  of  St.  Andrew.  The  fifth
degree  of  the  Swedish  Rite;  the  same  as
the  Grand  Elu  Ecossais  of  the  Clermont
system.

Master  of  the  Chivalry  of
Christ.  So  St.  Bernard  addresses  Hugh
de  Payens,  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars.
“Hugoni  Militi  Christi  et  Magistro  Mili¬
tias  Cnristi,  Bernardus  Clercevallus,”  etc.

Master  of  the  Hermetic  Se¬
crets,  Grand.  (Maitre  des  Secrets  Hcr-
mdtique,  Grand.)  A  degree  in  the  manu¬
script  collection  of  Peuvret.

Master  of  the  Hospital.  “  Sacri


494


MASTER


MATERIALS


Domus  Hospitalis  Sancto  Joannis  Hieroso-
lymitani  Magister,”  or  Master  of  the  Sa¬
cred  House  of  the  Hospital  of  St.  John  of
Jerusalem,  was  the  official  title  of  the
chief  of  the  Order  of  Knights  of  Malta;
more  briefly,  “Magister  Hospitalis,”  or
Master  of  the  Hospital.  Late  in  their  his¬
tory,  the  more  imposing  title  of  “  Magnus
Magister,”  or  Grand  Master,  was  some¬
times  assumed;  but  the  humbler  designa¬
tion  was  still  maintained.  On  the  tomb
of  Zacosta,  who  died  in  1467,  we  find
“Magnus  Magister;”  but  twenty -three
years  after,  D’Aubusson  signs  himself
“Magister  Hospitalis  Hierosolymitani.”

Master  of  the  Key  to  Masonry,
Grand.  ( Grand,  Maltre  de  la  Clef  de  la
Ma$onnerie.)  The  twenty-first  degree  of
the  Chapter  of  the  Emperors  of  the  East
and  West.

Master  of  the  Legitimate  Lodges,

Grand.  ( Maltre  des  Loges  legitimes. )  A
degree  in  the  Archives  of  the  Mother  Lodge
of  the  Eclectic  Philosophic  Rite.

Master  of  the  Palace.  An  officer
in  a  Council  of  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,
whose  duties  are  peculiar  to  the  degree.

Master  of  the  Sages.  The  fourth
degree  of  the  Initiated  Knights  and  Brothers
of  Asia.

Master  of  the  Seven  Kabbalis-

tic  Secrets,  Illustrious.  ( Maltre  II-
lustre  des  sept  Secrets  Cabalistiques. )  A  degree
in  the  manuscript  collection  of  Peuvret.

Master  of  the  Temple.  Origi¬
nally  the  official  title  of  the  Grand  Master
of  the  Templars.  After  the  dissolution  of
the  Order  in  England,  the  same  title  was
incorrectly  given  to  the  custos  or  guardian
of  the  Temple  Church  at  London,  and  the
error  is  continued  to  the  present  day.

Master  of  the  Work.  The  chief
builder  or  architect  of  a  cathedral  or  other
important  edifice  in  the  Middle  Ages  was
called  the  Master  of  the  work;  thus,  Jost
Dotzinger  was,  in  the  fifteenth  century,
called  the  Master  of  the  work  at  the  cathe¬
dral  of  Strasburg.  In  the  Middle  Ages
the  “  Magister  operis  ”  was  one  to  whom
the  public  works  was  intrusted.  Such  an
officer  existed  in  the  monasteries.  He  was
also  called  operarius  and  magister  operarum.
Du  Cange  says  that  kings  had  their  operarii,
magistri  operarum  or  masters  of  the  works.
It  is  these  Masters  of  the  works  whom
Anderson  has  constantly  called  Grand
Masters.  Thus,  when  he  says  (second  edit.
69,)  that  “  King  John  made  Peter  de  Cole-
Church  Grand  Master  of  the  Masons  in  re¬
building  London  bridge,”  he  should  have
said  that  he  was  appointed  operarius  or
Master  of  the  works.  The  use  of  the  cor¬
rect  title  would  have  made  Anderson’s  his¬
tory  more  valuable.


Master,  Past.  See  Past  Master.

Master,  Perfect.  See  Perfect  Mas¬
ter.

Master,  Perfect  Architect.  The

twenty-seventh  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Miz-
raim.

Master,  Perfect  Irish.  See  Per¬
fect  Irish  Master.

Master  Philosopher  by  the
Number  3.  ( Maltre  philosophe  par  le

Nombre  3.)  A  degree  in  the  manuscript
collection  of  Peuvret.

Master  Philosopher  by  the
Number  9.  ( Maltre  philosophe  par  le

Nombre  9.)  A  degree  in  the  manuscript
collection  of  Peuvret.

Master  Philosopher  Hermetic.
( Maltre  philosophe  Hermetique.)  A  degree
iu  the  collection  of  Peuvret.

Master,  Private.  ( Maltre  Particu-
lier.)  The  nineteenth  degree  of  the  Metro¬
politan  Chapter  of  France.

Master  Provost  and  Judge.
( Maltre  Prevot  et  Juge.)  The  eighth  degree
of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Master,  P  uissant  Irish.  See
Puissant  Irish  Master.

Master,  Pythagorean.  (Maltre
Pgthagoricien.)-  Thory  says  that  this  is  the
third  and  last  degree  of  the  Masonic  system
instituted  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Py¬
thagoras.

Master,  Royal.  See  Poyal  Master.

Master,  Secret.  See  Secret  Master.

Master,  Seleet.  See  Select  Master.

Master,  Supreme  Elect.  [Maltre
supreme  Elu.)  A  degree  in  the  Archives  of
the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

Master  Theosophist.  ( Maltre  The-
osophie.)  The  third  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Swedenborg.

Master  through  Curiosity.  {Mal¬
tre  par  Curiosite.)  1.  The  sixth  degree  of
the  Rite  of  Mizraim  ;  2.  The  sixth  degree
of  the  collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Chap¬
ter  of  France.  It  is  a  modification  of  the
Intimate  Secretary  of  the  Scottish  Rite.

Master  to  the  Number  15.  ( Mal¬
tre  au  Nombre  15.)  A  degree  in  the  manu¬
script  collection  of  Peuvret.

Master,  True.  ( Vrai  Maltre.)  A
degree  of  the  Chapter  of  Clermont.

Master,  Worshipful.  See  Wor¬
shipful  Master.

Materials  of  the  Temple.  Ma¬
sonic  tradition  tells  us  that  the  trees  out  of
which  the  timbers  were  made  for  the  Tem¬
ple  were  felled  and  prepared  in  the  forest
of  Lebanon,  and  that  the  stones  were  hewn,
cut,  and  squared  in  the  quarries  of  Tyre.
But  both  the  Book  of  Kings  and  Josephus
concur  in  the  statement  that  Hiram  of  Tyre
furnished  only  cedar  and  fir-trees  for  the
Temple.  The  stones  were  most  probably


MATERS


MELCHIZEDEK


495


(and  the  explorations  of  modern  travellers
confirm  the  opinion)  taken  from  the  quar¬
ries  which  abound  in  and  around  Jerusa¬
lem.  The  tradition,  therefore,  which  de¬
rives  these  stones  from  the  quarries  of  Tyre,
is  incorrect.

Maters.  In  the  Cooke  MS.,  (line  825,)
—  and  it  is  the  only  Old  Constitution  in
which  it  occurs,  —  we  find  the  word  maters :
“Hit  is  seyd  in  y*  art  of  Masonry  y‘  no
man  scholde  make  ende  so  well  of  worke
begonne  bi  another  to  y*  profite  of  his  lorde
as  he  began  hit  for  to  end  hit  bi  his  maters
or  to  whom  he  scheweth  his  maters where,
evidently,  maters  is  a  corruption  of  the  Latin
matrix,  a  mould ;  this  latter  being  the  word
used  in  all  the  other  Old  Constitutions  in
the  same  connection.  See  Mould.

Matriculation  Book.  In  the  Rite
of  Strict  Observance,  the  register  which
coutained  the  lists  of  the  Provinces,  Lodges,
and  members  of  the  Rite  was  called  the
Matriculation  Book.  The  term  was  bor¬
rowed  from  the  usage  of  the  Middle  Ages,
where  matricula  meant  “a  catalogue.”  It
was  applied  by  the  ecclesiastical  writers  of
that  period  to  lists  of  the  clergy,  and  also
of  the  poor,  who  were  to  be  provided  for
by  the  churches,  whence  we  have  matricula
clericorum  and  matricula  pauperum.

Mature  Age.  The  Charges  of  1722
prescribe  that  a  candidate  for  initiation
must  be  of  “  mature  and  discreet  age;  ”  but
the  usage  of  the  Craft  has  differed  in  various
countries  as  to  the  time  when  maturity  of
age  is  supposed  to  have  arrived.  In  the  Reg¬
ulations  of  1663,  it  is  set  down  at  twenty-one
years ;  and  this  continues  to  be  the  construc¬
tion  of  maturity  in  all  English  Lodges  both
in  Great  Britain  and  this  country.  France
and  Switzerland  have  adopted  the  same
period.  At  Frankfort-on-the-Main  it  is
fixed  at  twenty,  and  in  Prussia  and  Hano¬
ver  at  twenty-five.  The  Grand  Lodge  of
Hamburg  has  decreed  that  the  age  of  Ma¬
sonic  maturity  shall  be  that  which  is  deter¬
mined  by  the  laws  of  the  land  to  be  the
age  of  legal  majority

Maul,  or  Setting  Maul.  See  Mallet.

Mc<lals.  A  medal  is  defined  to  be  a
piece  of  metal  in  the  shape  of  a  coin,  bear¬
ing  figures  or  devices  and  mottoes,  struck
and  distributed  in  memory  of  some  person
or  event.  When  Freemasonry  was  in  its
operative  stage,  no  medals  were  issued.
The  medals  of  the  Operative  Masons  were
the  monuments  which  they  erected  in  the
form  of  massive  buildings,  adorned  with
all  the  beauties  of  architectural  art.  But
it  was  not  long  after  its  transformation  into
a  Speculative  Order  before  it  began  to  issue
medals.  The  earliest  Masonic  medal  of
which  we  have  an  authentic  account  is
that  known  as  the  “Freemason’s  ducat,”


which  was  struck  at  Brunswick  in  1743.
The  number  have  since  so  greatly  increased,
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  give  even  a
catalogue  of  them.  They  are  struck  every
year  by  Lodges  to  commemorate  some  dis¬
tinguished  member  or  some  remarkable
event  in  the  annals  of  the  Lodge.  Many
Lodges  in  Europe  have  cabinets  of  medals,
of  which  the  Lodge  Minerva  of  the  Three
Palms  at  Leipsic  is  especially  valuable.
In  America  no  Lodge  has  made  such  a  col¬
lection,  except  Pythagoras  Lodge  at  New
York.

Mediterranean  Pass.  A  side  de¬
gree  sometimes  conferred  in  this  country
on  Royal  Arch  Masons.  It  has  no  lecture
or  legend,  and  should  not  be  confounded,
as  it  sometimes  is,  with  the  very  different
degree  of  Knight  of  the  Mediterranean
Pass.  It  is,  however,  now  nearly  obsolete.

Meeting  of  a  Chapter.  See  Con¬
vocation.

Meeting  of  a  Lodge.  See  Communi¬
cation.

Meet  on  the  Level.  In  the  Presto-
nian  lectures  as  practised  in  the  beginning
of  this  century,  it  was  said  that  Masons
met  on  the  square  and  hoped  to  part  on  the
level.  In  the  American  system  of  Webb
a  change  was  made,  and  we  were  instructed
that  they  meet  on  the  level  and  part  on  the
square.  And  in  1842  the  Baltimore  Con¬
vention  made  a  still  further  change,  by
adding  that  they  act  by  the  plumb;  and  this
formula  is  now,  although  quite  modern,
generally  adopted  by  the  Lodges  in  this
country.

Meister.  The  German  for  Master.

Meister  im  Stuhl.  ( Master  in  the
Chair.)  The  Germans  so  call  the  Master
of  a  Lodge.

Melanetlion,  Philip.  The  name
of  this  celebrated  reformer  is  signed  to  the
Charter  of  Cologne  as  the  representative
of  Dantzic.  The  evidence  of  his  connec¬
tion  with  Freemasonry  depends  entirely  on
the  authenticity  of  that  document.

Melchizedek.  King  of  Salem,  and
a  priest  of  the  Most  High  God,  of  whom
all  that  we  know  is  to  be  found  in  the  pas¬
sages  of  Scripture  read  at  the  conferring  of
the  degree  of  High  Priesthood.  Some  theo¬
logians  have  supposed  him  to  have  been
Shem,  the  son  of  Noah.  The  sacrifice  of
offering  bread  and  wine  is  first  attributed
to  Melchizedek;  and  hence,  looking  to  the
similar  Mithraic  sacrifice,  Pliggins  is  in¬
clined  to  believe  that  he  professed  the  re¬
ligion  of  Mithras.  He  abandoned  the
sacrifice  of  slaughtered  animals,  and,  to
quote  the  words  of  St.  Jerome,  “  offered
bread  and  wine  as  a  type  of  Christ.”
Hence,  in  the  New  Testament,  Christ  ia
represented  as  a  priest  after  the  order  of


496


MELCHIZEDEK


MEMPHIS


Melchizedek.  In  Masonry,  Melchizedek  is
connected  with  the  order  or  degree  of  High
Priesthood,  and  some  of  the  high  degrees.

Melchizedek,  Degree  of.  The
sixth  degree  of  the  Order  of  Brothers  of
Asia.

Moloch.  Properly,  Malach,  a  mes¬
senger,  and  hence  an  angel,  because  the
angels  were  supposed  to  be  the  messengers
of  God.  In  the  ritual  of  one  of  the  high
degrees  we  meet  with  the  sentence  hamelech
Gebalim,  which  has  been  variously  trans¬
lated.  The  French  ritualists  handle  He¬
brew  words  with  but  little  attention  to  He¬
brew  grammar,  and  hence  they  translate
this  sentence  as  “Jabulum  est  un  bon
Maqon.”  The  former  American  ritualists
gave  it  as  meaning  “  Guibulum  is  a  good
man.”  Guibulum  is  undoubtedly  used  as
a  proper  name,  and  is  a  corrupt  deriva¬
tion  from  the  Hebrew  Masonic  Giblim,
which  means  stone-squarers  or  masons,  and
melach  for  malach  means  a  messenger,  one
sent  to  accomplish  a  certain  task.  Bros.
Pike  and  Rockwell  make  the  first  word
hamalek,  the  king  or  chief.  If  the  words
were  reversed,  we  should  have  the  Hebrew
vocative,  “0!  Gibulum  the  messenger.”  As
it  is,  Bro.  Pike  makes  it  vocative,  and  inter-

rets  it,  “  Oh  !  thou  glory  of  the  Builders.”

am  inclined  to  think  that  the  inventor  of
the  degree  meant  simply  to  say  that  Gibu¬
lum  was  a  messenger,  or  one  who  had  been
sent  to  make  a  discovery,  but  that  he  did
not  perfectly  express  the  idea  according  to
the  Hebrew  idiom,  or  that  his  expression
has  since  been  corrupted  by  the  copyists.

Melesino,  Kite  of.  This  is  a  Rite
scarcely  known  out  of  Russia,  where  it  was
founded  about  the  year  1765,  by  Melesino,
a  very  learned  man  and  Mason,  a  Greek  by
birth,  but  high  in  the  military  service  of
Russia.  It  consisted  of  seven  degrees,  viz. :
1.  Apprentice.  2.  Fellow  Craft.  3.  Master
Mason.  4.  The  Mystic  Arch.  5.  Scottish
Master  and  Knight.  6.  The  Philosopher.
7.  The  Priest  or  High  Priest  of  the  Tem¬
plars.  The  four  higher  degrees  abounded
in  novel  traditions  and  myths  unknown  to
any  of  the  other  Rites,  and  undoubtedly  in¬
vented  by  the  founder.  The  whole  Rite  was
a  mixture  of  Kabbalism,  magic,  gnosticism,
and  the  hermetic  philosophy  mixed  in  al¬
most  inextricable  confusion.  The  seventh
or  final  degree  was  distinctly  Rosicrucian,
and  the  religion  of  the  Rite  was  Christian,
recognizing  and  teaching  the  belief  in  the
Messiah  and  the  dogma  of  the  Trinitv.

Mclita.  The  ancient  name  of  the
island  of  Malta.

Member,  Honorary.  See  Hono¬
rary  Member.

Member,  Life.  See  Life  Member.

Member  of  a  Lodge.  As  soon  as


permanent  Lodges  became  a  part  of  the
Masonic  organization,  it  seems  to  have  been
required  that  every  Mason  should  belong
to  one,  and  this  is  explicitly  stated  in  the
charges  approved  in  1722.  See  Affiliation.

Membership,  Kiglit  of.  The  first
right  which  a  Mason  acquires,  after  the  re¬
ception  of  the  third  degree,  is  that  of  claim¬
ing  membership  in  the  Lodge  in  which  he
has  been  initiated.  The  very  fact  of  his
having  received  that  degree  makes  him  at
once  an  inchoate  member  of  the  Lodge  —
that  is  to  say,  no  further  application  is  ne¬
cessary,  and  no  new  ballot  is  required ;  but
the  candidate,  having  now'  become  a  Master
Mason,  upon  signifying  his  submission  to
the  regulations  of  the  Society,  by  affixing
his  signature  to  the  book  of  by-laws,  is
constituted,  by  virtue  of  that  act,  a  full
member  of  the  Lodge,  and  entitled  to  all
the  rights  and  prerogatives  accruing  to  that
position.

Memphis,  Rite  of.  In  1839,  two
French  Masons,  named  respectively  Mar-
conis  and  Moullet,  but  of  whom  the  former
was  undoubtedly  the  leader,  instituted,  first
at  Paris,  then  at  Marseilles,  and  afterwards
at  Brussels,  a  new  Rite  which  they  called
the  “Rite  of  Memphis,”  and  which  con¬
sisted  of  ninety-one  degrees.  Subsequently,
another  degree  was  added  to  this  already
too  long  list.  The  Rite,  however,  has  re¬
peatedly  undergone  modifications.  The
Rite  of  Memphis  was  undoubtedly  founded
on  the  extinct  Rite  of  Mizraim ;  for,  as  Ra-
gon  says,  the  Egyptian  Rite  seems  to  have
inspired  Marconis  and  Moullet  in  the  or¬
ganization  of  their  new  Rite.  It  is  said  by’
Ragon,  who  has  written  copiously  on  the
Rite,  that  the  first  series  of  degrees,  extend¬
ing  to  the  thirty-fifth  degree,  is  an  assump¬
tion  of  the  thirty-three  degrees  of  the  An¬
cient  and  Accepted  Rite,  with  scarcely  a
change  of  name.  The  remaining  degrees
of  the  Rite  are  borrowed,  according  to  the
same  authority,  from  other  well-known
systems,  and  some,  perhaps,  the  invention
of  their  founders.

The  Rite  of  Memphis  was  not  at  first  re¬
cognized  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,
and  consequently  formed  no  part  of  legal
French  Masonry.  So  about  1852  its  Lodges
were  closed  byr  the  civil  authority,  and  the
Rite,  to  use  a  French  Masonic  phrase,
“  went  to  sleep.”

In  the  year  1862,  Marconis,  still  faithful
to  the  system  which  he  had  invented,  ap¬
plied  to  the  Grand  Master  of  France  to
give  to  it  a  new  life.  The  Grand  College
of  Rites  was  consulted  on  the  subject,  and
the  Council  of  the  Order  having  made  a
favorable  decree,  the  Rite  of  Memphis  was
admitted,  in  November,  1862,  among  those
Masonic  systems  which  acknowledge  obe-


MEMPHIS


MEMPHIS


497


dience  to  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  and
perform  their  functions  within  its  bosom.
To  obtain  this  position,  however,  the  only-
one  which,  in  France,  preserves  a  Masonic
system  from  the  reputation  of  being  clan¬
destine,  it  was  necessary  that  Marconis,
who  was  then  the  Grand  Hierophant,
should,  as  a  step  preliminary  to  any  favor¬
able  action  on  the  part  of  the  Grand  Orient,
take  an  obligation  by  which  he  forever
after  divested  himself  of  all  authority,  of
any  kind  whatsoever,  over  the  Rite.  It
passed  entirely  out  of  his  hands,  and,  go¬
ing  into  “obedience”  to  the  Grand  Orient,
that  body  has  taken  complete  and  undi¬
vided  possession  of  it,  and  laid  its  high  de¬
grees  upon  the  shelf,  as  Masonic  curiosities,
since  the  Grand  Orient  only  recognizes,  in
practice,  the  thirty-three  degrees  of  the  An¬
cient  and  Accepted  Rite.

This,  then,  is  the  present  position  of  the
Rite  of  Memphis  in  France.  Its  original
possessors  have  disclaimed  all  further  con¬
trol  or  direction  of  it.  It  has  been  ad¬
mitted  by  the  Grand  Orient  among  the
eight  systems  of  Rites  which  are  placed
“under  its  obedience;  ”  that  is  to  say,  it  ad¬
mits  its  existence,  but  it  does  not  suffer  it
to  be  worked.  Like  all  Masonic  Rites  that
have  ever  been  invented,  the  organization
of  the  Rite  of  Memphis  is  founded  on  the
first  three  degrees  of  Ancient  Craft  Ma¬
sonry.  These  three  degrees,  of  course,  are
given  in  symbolic  Lodges.  In  1862,  when
Marconis  surrendered  the  Rite  into  the
hands  of  the  ruling  powers  of  French  Ma¬
sonry,  many  of  these  Lodges  existed  in
various  parts  of  France,  although  in  a  dor¬
mant  condition,  because,  as  we  have  al¬
ready  seen,  ten  years  before  they  had  been
closed  by  the  civil  authority.  Had  they
been  in  active  operation,  they  would  not
have  been  recognized  by  the  French  Ma¬
sons  ;  they  would  have  been  looked  upon
as  clandestine,  and  there  would  have  been
no  affiliation  with  them,  because  the  Grand
Orient  recognizes  no  Masonic  bodies  as
legal  which  do  not  in  return  recognize  it  as
the  head  of  French  Masonry.

But  when  Marconis  surrendered  his
powers  as  Grand  Hierophant  of  the  Rite
of  Memphis  to  the  Grand  Orient,  that
body  permitted  these  Lodges  to  be  resusci¬
tated  and  reopened  only  on  the  conditions
that  they  would  acknowledge  their  subor¬
dination  to  the  Grand  Orient;  that  they
would  work  only  in  the  first  three  degrees
and  never  confer  any  degree  higher  than
that  of  Master  Mason ;  the  members  of
these  Lodges,  however  high  might  be  their
dignities  in  the  Rite  of  Memphis,  were  to
be  recognized  only  as  Master  Masons ;  every
Mason  of  the  Rite  of  Memphis  was  to  de¬
posit  his  Masonic  titles  with  the  Grand
3  N  32


Secretary  of  the  Grand  Orient;  these  titles
were  then  to  be  vise  or  approved  and  reg¬
ularized,  but  only  as  far  as  the  degree  of
Master  Mason ;  no  Mason  of  the  Rite  of
Memphis  was  to  be  permitted  to  claim  any
higher  degree,  and  if  he  attempted  to  as¬
sume  any  such  title  of  a  higher  degree
which  was  not  approved  by  the  Grand
Master,  he  was  to  be  considered  as  irregu¬
lar,  and  was  not  to  be  affiliated  with  by  the
members  of  any  of  the  regular  Lodges.

Such  is  now  the  condition  of  the  Rite
of  Memphis  in  France.  It  has  been  ab¬
sorbed  into  the  Grand  Orient;  Marconis,
its  founder  and  head,  has  surrendered  all
claim  to  any  jurisdiction  over  it;  there  are
Lodges  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand
Orient  which  originally  belonged  to  the
Rite  of  Memphis,  and  they  practise  its
ritual,  but  only  so  far  as  to  give  the  de¬
grees  of  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,  and
Master  Mason.  Its  “  Sages  of  the  Pyra¬
mids,”  its  “  Grand  Architects  of  the  Mys¬
terious  City,”  its  “Sovereign  Princes  of
the  Magi  of  the  Sanctuary  of  Memphis,”
with  its  “  Sanctuary,”  its  “  Mystical  Tem¬
ple,”  its  “  Liturgical  College,”  its  “  Grand
Consistory,”  and  its  “Supreme  Tribunal,”
exist  no  longer  except  in  the  diplomas  and
charters  which  have  been  quietly  laid  away
on  the  shelves  of  the  Secretariat  of  the
Grand  Orient.  To  attempt  to  propagate
the  Rite  is  now  in  France  a  high  Masonic
offence.  The  Grand  Orient  alone  has  the
power,  and  there  is  no  likelihood  that  it
will  ever  exercise  it.  Some  circumstances
which  have  recently  occurred  in  the  Grand
Orient  of  France  very  clearly  show  the
true  condition  of  the  Rite  of  Memphis.  A
meeting  was  holden  in  Paris  on  the  26th
of  August  last,  by  the  Council  of  the
Order,  a  body  which,  something  like  the
Committee  of  General  Purposes  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  does  all  the  pre¬
liminary  business  for  the  Grand  Orient,
but  which  is  possessed  of  rather  extensive
legislative  and  administrative  powers,  as  it
directs  the  Order  during  the  recess  of  the
Grand  Orient.  At  that  meeting,  a  com¬
munication  was  received  from  a  Lodge  in
Moldavia,  called  “The  Disciples  of  Truth,”
which  Lodge  is  under  the  jurisdiction  of
the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  having  been
chartered  by  that  body.  This  communica¬
tion  stated  that  certain  brethren  of  that
Lodge  had  been  invested  by  one  Carence
with  the  degree  of  Rose  Croix  in  the  Rite
of  Memphis,  and  that  the  diplomas  had
been  dated  at  the  “  Grand  Orient  of
Egypt,”  and  signed  bv  Bro.  Marconis  as
Grand  Hierophant.  The  commission  of
the  Council  of  the  Order,  to  whom  the  sub¬
ject  was  referred,  reported  that  the  con-
|  ferring  of  these  degrees  was  uull  aud  void ;


498


MEMPHIS


MEMPHIS


that  neither  Carence  nor  Marconis  had
any  commission,  authority,  or  power  to
confer  degrees  of  the  Memphis  Kite  or  to
organize  bodies;  and  that  Marconis  had,
by  oath,  solemnly  divested  himself  of  all
right  to  claim  the  title  of  Grand  Hiero¬
phant  of  the  Rite;  which  oath,  originally
taken  in  May,  1862,  had  at  several  subse-
uent  times,  namely,  in  September,  1863,
larch,  1864,  September,  1865,  and  March,
1866,  been  renewed.  As  a  matter  of  clem¬
ency,  the  Council  determined  not,  for  the
present  at  least,  to  prefer  charges  against
Marconis  and  Carence  before  the  Grand
Orient,  but  to  warn  them  of  the  error  they
committed  in  making  a  traffic  of  Masonic
degrees.  It  also  ordered  the  report  to  be
published  and  widely  diffused,  so  that  the
Fraternity  might  be  apprised  that  there
was  no  power  outside  of  the  Grand  Orient
which  could  confer  the  high  degrees  of  any
Kite.

An  attempt  having  been  made,  in  1872,
to  establish  the  Kite  in  England,  Bro.  Mon¬
tague,  the  Secretary  General  of  the  Supreme
Council,  wrote  to  Bro.  Thevenot,  the  Grand
Secretary  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,
for  information  as  to  its  validity.  From
him  he  received  a  letter  containing  the  fol¬
lowing  statements,  from  which  official  au¬
thority  we  gather  the  fact  that  the  Rite  of
Memphis  is  a  dead  Rite,  and  that  no  one
has  authority  in  any  country  to  propa¬
gate  it.

“Neither  in  1866,  nor  at  any  other  pe¬
riod,  has  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  recog¬
nized  ‘  the  Ancient  and  Primitive  Rite  of
Masonry,’  concerning  which  you  inquire,
and  which  has  been  recently  introduced  in
Lancashire.

“  At  a  particular  time,  and  with  the  in¬
tention  of  causing  the  plurality  of  Rites  to
disappear,  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  an¬
nexed  and  absorbed  the  Rite  of  Memphis,
under  the  express  condition  that  the  Lodges
of  that  Rite,  which  were  received  under  its
jurisdiction,  should  confer  only  the  three
symbolic  degrees  of  Apprentice,  Fellow
Craft,  and  Master,  according  to  its  special
rituals,  and  refused  to  recognize  any  other
degree,  or  any  other  title,  belonging  to  such
Rite.

“  At  the  period  when  this  treaty  was
negotiated  with  the  Supreme  Chief  of  this
Rite  by  Bro.  Marconis  de  Negre,  Bro.  H.  J.
Seymour  was  at  Paris,  and  seen  by  us,  but  no
power  was  conferred  on  him  by  the  Grand
Orient  of  France  concerning  this  Rite;  and,
what  is  more,  the  Grand  Orient  of  France
does  not  give,  and  has  never  given,  to  any
single  person  the  right  to  make  Masons  or
to  create  Lodges.

“  Afterwards,  and  in  consequence  of  the
bad  faith  of  Bro.  Marconis  de  Negre,  who


pretended  he  had  ceded  his  Rite  to  the
Grand  Orient  of  France  for  France  alone,
Bro.  Harry  J.  Seymour  assumed  the  title
of  Grand  Master  of  the  Rite  of  Memphis
in  America,  and  founded  in  New  York  a
Sovereign  Sanctuary  of  this  Rite.  A  cor¬
respondence  ensued  between  this  new  power
and  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  and  even
the  name  of  this  Sovereign  Sanctuary  ap¬
peared  in  our  Calendar  for  1867.  But  when
the  Grand  Orient  of  France  learned  that
this  power  went  beyond  the  three  symbolic
degrees,  and  that  its  confidence  had  been
deceived,  the  Grand  Orient  broke  off  all
connection  with  this  power,  and  personally
with  Bro.  Harry  J.  Seymour;  and,  in  fact,
since  that  period,  neither  the  name  of  Bro.
Harry  J.  Seymour,  as  Grand  Master,  nor
the  Masonic  power  which  he  founded,  have
any  longer  appeared  in  the  Masonic  Calen¬
dar  of  the  Grand  Orient.

“Your  letter  leads  me  to  believe  that
Bro.  Harry  J.  Seymour  is  endeavoring,  I
do  not  knowr  with  what  object,  to  introduce
a  new  Rite  into  England,  in  that  country
of  the  primitive  ana  only  true  Masonry,
one  of  the  most  respectable  that  I  know  of.
I  consider  this  event  as  a  misfortune.

“The  Grand  Orient  of  France  has  made
the  strongest  efforts  to  destroy  the  Rite  of
Memphis;  it  has  succeeded.  The  Lodges
of  the  Rite,  which  it  at  first  received
within  its  jurisdiction,  have  all  abandoned
the  Rite  of  Memphis  to  work  according  to
the  French  Rite.  I  sincerely  desire  that
it  may  be  the  same  in  the  United  Kingdom,
and  you  will  ever  find  me  ready  to  second
your  efforts.

“  Referring  to  this  letter,  I  have,  very
illustrious  brother,  but  one  word  to  add,
and  that  is,  that  the  Constitution  of  the
Grand  Orient  of  France  interdicts  its  found¬
ing  Lodges  in  countries  where  a  regular
Masonic  power  already  exists;  and  if  it
cannot  found  Lodges  a  fortiori,  it  cannot
grant  charters  to  establish  Grand  Masonic
Pow'ers :  in  other  terms,  the  Grand  Orient
of  France  never  has  given  to  Bro.  Harry
J.  Seymour,  nor  to  any  other  person,  pow¬
ers  to  constitute  a  Lodge,  or  to  create  a
Rite,  or  to  make  Masons.  Bro.  Harry  J.
Seymour  may  perfectly  well  have  the  sig¬
natures  of  the  Grand  Master  and  of  the
Chief  of  the  Secretary’s  office  of  the  Grand
Orient  of  France  on  a  diploma,  as  a  fra¬
ternal  vis/£;  but  certainly  he  has  neither  a
charter  nor  a  power.  I  also  beg  you  to  make
every  effort  to  obtain  the  textual  copy  of
the  documents  of  which  Bro.  Harry  J.  Sey¬
mour  takes  advantage.  It  is  by  the  inspec¬
tion  of  this  document  it  will  be  necessary
to  judge  the  question,  and  I  await  new
communications  on  this  subject  from  your
fraternal  kindness.”


MEN  ATZCHIM


METAL


499


Menatzchim.  In  2  Chron.  ii.  18,  it
Is  said  that  at  the  building  of  the  Temple
there  were  “  three  thousand  and  six  h undred
overseers  to  set  the  people  awork.”  The
word  translated  “overseers”  is,  in  the  ori¬
ginal,  □  ,nVJD>  MeNaTZCHIM.  Ander¬
son,  in  his  catalogue  of  workmen  at  the
Temple,  calls  these  Menatzchim  “expert
Master  Masons ;  ”  and  so  they  have  been
considered  in  all  subsequent  rituals.

Mental  Qualifications.  See  Qual¬
ifications.

Menu.  In  the  Indian  mythology,  Menu
is  the  son  of  Brahma,  and  the  founder  of
the  Hindu  religion.  Thirteen  other  Menus
are  said  to  exist,  seven  of  whom  have  al¬
ready  reigned  on  earth.  But  it  is  the  first
one  whose  instructions  constitute  the  whole
civil  and  religious  polity  of  the  Hindus.
The  code  attributed  to  him  by  the  Brah¬
mans  has  been  translated  by  Sir  William
Jones,  with  the  title  of  The  Institutes  of
Menu.

Mercy.  The  point  of  a  Knight  Tem¬
plar’s  sword  is  said  to  be  characterized  by
thequality  of  “  mercy  unrestrained which
reminds  us  of  the  Shakspearian  expression
— “  the  quality  of  mercy  is  not  strained.”
In  the  days  of  chivalry,  mercy  to  the  con¬
quered  foe  was  an  indispensable  quality  of
a  knight.  An  act  of  cruelty  in  battle  was
considered  infamous,  for  whatever  was  con¬
trary  to  the  laws  of  generous  warfare  was
also  contrary  to  the  laws  of  chivalry.

Mercy,  Prince  of.  See  Prince  of
Mercy.

Mercy-Seat.  The  lid  or  cover  of  the
ark  of  the  covenant  was  called  the  Mercy-
seat  or  the  Propitiatory,  because  on  the  day
of  the  atonement  the  High  Priest  poured
on  it  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  for  the  sins
of  the  people.

Meridian  Sun.  The  sun  in  the
south  is  represented  in  Masonry  by  the
Junior  Warden,  for  this  reason  ;  when  the
sun  has  arrived  at  the  zenith,  at  which
time  he  is  in  the  south,  the  splendor  of  his
beams  entitle  him  to  the  appellation  which
he  receives  in  the  ritual  as  “  the  beauty  and
glory  of  the  day.”  Hence,  as  the  Pillar  of
Beauty  which  supports  the  Lodge  is  re¬
ferred  to  the  Junior  Warden,  that  officer  is
said  to  represent  “  the  sun  in  the  south  at
High  Twelve,”  at  which  hour  the  Craft  are
called  by  him  to  refreshment,  and  therefore
is  he  also  placed  in  the  South  that  he  may
the  better  observe  the  time  and  mark  the
progress  of  the  shadow  over  the  dial-plate
as  it  crosses  the  meridian  line.

Merit.  The  Old  Charges  say,  “all
preferment  among  Masons  is  grounded
upon  real  worth  and  personal  merit  only ;
that  so  the  Lords  may  be  well  served,  the
Brethren  not  put  to  shame,  nor  the  Royal


Craft  despised.  Therefore  no  Master  or
Warden  is  chosen  by  seniority,  but  for  his
merit.”  See  Preferment.

Mesmer,  Friedrich  Anton.  A
German  physician  who  was  born  in  Suabia,
1734,  and,  after  a  life  a  part  of  which  was
passed  in  notoriety  and  the  closing  years  in
obscurity,  died  in  1815.  He  was  the  founder
of  the  doctrine  of  animal  magnetism,  called
after  him  Mesmerism.  He  visited  Paris,
and  became  there  in  some  degree  inter¬
mixed  with  the  Masonic  charlatanism  of
Cagliostro,  who  used  the  magnetic  opera¬
tions  of  Mesmer’s  new  science  in  his  initia¬
tions.  See  Mesmeric  Masonry.

Mesmeric  Masonry.  In  the  year
1782,  Mesmer  established  in  Paris  a  society
which  he  called  “  the  Order  of  Universal
Harmony.”  It  was  based  on  the  principles
of  animal  magnetism  or  mesmerism,  and
had  a  form  of  initiation  by  which  the
founder  claimed  that  its  adepts  were  puri¬
fied  and  rendered  more  fit  to  propagate  the
doctrines  of  his  science.  French  writers
have,  I  scarcely  known  why,  dignified  this
Order  by  the  title  of  “  Mesmeric  Masonry.”

Mcsopolyte.  The  fourth  degree  of
the  German  Union  of  XXII.

Mesonraneo.  A  Greek  word,  ye oov-
paveu,  signifying,  lam  in  the  centre  of  heaven.
Hutchinson  fancifully  derives  from  it  the
word  Masonry,  which  he  says  is  a  corrup¬
tion  of  the  Greek,  and  refers  to  the  constel¬
lation  Magaroth  mentioned  by  Job;  but  be
fails  to  give  a  satisfactory  reason  for  his
etymology.  Nevertheless,  Oliver  favors  it.

Metals.  In  the  divestiture  of  metals  as
a  preliminary  to  initiation,  we  are  symbol¬
ically  taught  that  Masonry  regards  no  man
on  account  of  his  wealth.  The  Talmudical
treatise  “  Beracoth,”  with  a  like  spirit  of
symbolism,  directs  in  the  Temple  service
that  no  man  shall  go  into  the  mountain  of
the  house,  that  is,  into  the  Holy  Temple,
“  with  money  tied  up  in  his  purse.”

Metal  Tools.  We  are  told  in  Scrip¬
ture  that  the  Temple  was  “  built  of  stone
made  ready  before  it  was  brought  thither :
so  that  there  was  neither  hammer,  nor  axe,
nor  any  tool  of  iron  heard  in  the  house
while  it  was  in  building.”  (1  Kings  vi.  7.)
Masonry  has  adopted  this  as  a  symbol  of
the  peace  and  harmony  which  should  reign
in  a  Lodge,  itself  a  type  of  the  world.  But
Clarke,  in  his  commentary  on  the  place,
suggests  that  it  was  intended  to  teach  us
that  the  Temple  was  a  type  of  the  kingdom
of  God,  and  that  the  souls  of  men  are  to
be  prepared  here  for  that  place  of  blessed¬
ness.  There  is  no  repentance,  tears,  nor
prayers :  the  stones  must  be  all  squared,  and
fitted  here  for  their  place  in  the  New  Jerusa¬
lem  ;  and,  being  living  stones,  must  be  built
up  a  holy  temple  for  the  habitation  of  God.


500


METROPOLITAN


MIDDLE


Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France.  Thereexisted  in  France,  towards
the  end  of  the  last  century,  a  body  calling  it¬
self  the  Grand  Chapter  General  of  France.
It  was  formed  out  of  the  debris  of  the
Council  of  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West,
and  the  Council  of  Knights  of  the  East,
which  had  been  founded  by  Pirlet.  In
1786,  it  united  with  the  schismatic  Grand
Orient,  and  then  received  the  title  of  the
Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.  It  pos¬
sessed  in  its  archives  a  large  collection  of
manuscript  cahiers  of  degrees,  most  of  them
being  mere  Masonic  curiosities.

Mexico.  The  precise  date  of  the  first
appearance  of  organized  Masonry  in  Mex¬
ico  is  unknown,  but  there  is  evidence  that
it  existed  there  prior  to  the  establishment
of  the  Republic  in  1824.  It  was  intro¬
duced  by  the  civil  and  military  officers  of
the  monarchy,  and  was  principally  confined
to  Europeans  and  their  immediate  descend¬
ants.  The  working  was  in  the  Scottish
Rite,  which  was  propagated  with  much  cir¬
cumspection  and  reserve.  In  1825,  Joel  R.
Poinsett,  who  had  been  sent  to  Mexico  as
resident  Minister  by  the  United  States,
disseminated  among  the  Mexicans  who  were
his  friends  an  attachment  for  York  Mason¬
ry  ;  so  that  in  the  same  year  authority  was
obtained  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New
York  for  the  establishment  of  three  Lodges
in  the  city  of  Mexico.  The  Grand  Lodge
was  organized,  and  Jose  Ignacio  Esteva
elected  the  first  Grand  Master.

Soon  afterwards  a  Grand  Chapter  was
established,  and  Masonry  extended  with
such  rapidity  that,  by  the  end  of  the  year
1826,  there  were  more  than  twenty-five
Lodges  in  the  country,  there  being  one  at
least  in  the  capital  of  each  of  the  States
which  composed  the  federation.  Politics
seem,  however,  from  the  first,  to  have  in¬
truded  into  the  Masonic  temples,  and  this
at  length  excited  the  suspicions  of  the
government,  by  whom  all  secret  societies
were  prescribed.  Masonry  continued  to
be  practised  for  a  few  years  in  secret,  but
gradually  disappeared.

But  Masonry  is  again  in  a  prosperous
condition,  and  between  twenty  and  thirty
Lodges  are  now  in  operation  under  the
obedience  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  Mex¬
ico,  which  was  established  in  1860,  by  au¬
thority  of  the  Supreme  Council  at  Charles¬
ton,  S.  C.

Michael.  SxD’D-  1  Vho  is  like  unto
God.  The  chief  of  the  seven  archangels.
He  is  the  leader  of  the  celestial  host,  as
Lucifer  is  of  the  infernal  spirits,  and  the
especial  protector  of  Israel.  He  is  promi¬
nently  referred  to  in  the  twenty-eighth  de¬
gree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite,  or  Knight  of  the  Sun.


Michigan.  On  September  7th,  1794,
Thomas  Ainslie,  Deputy  Grand  Master  of
the  Athol  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada,  granted
a  Warrant  for  the  organization  of  Zion
Lodge,  No.  10,  at  Detroit ;  and  this  appears
to  have  been  the  date  of  the  introduction
of  Masonry  into  that  province.  This
Lodge  probably  ceased  to  exist  about  1805,
and  a  dispensation  for  its  revival  was
issued  in  1807  by  De  Witt  Clinton,  Grand
Master  of  New  York.  Other  Lodges  were
subsequently  established,  and  on  July  31st,
1826,  a  Grand  Lodge  was  organized  hy
them  and  Lewis  Cass  elected  Grand  Master.
In  consequence  of  the  political  pressure  of
the  anti-Masonic  party  at  that  time,  the
Grand  Lodge  suspended  its  labors  in  1829,
and  remained  in  a  dormant  condition  until
1840,  when,  at  a  general  meeting  of  the
Masons  of  the  State,  it  was  resolved  that
the  old  Grand  officers  who  were  still  alive
should,  on  the  principle  that  their  preroga¬
tives  had  never  ceased  but  only  been  in
abeyance,  grant  dispensations  for  the  revi¬
val  of  the  Lodges  and  the  renewal  of  labor.
But  this  course  having  been  objected  to  as
irregular  by  most  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of
the  United  States,  a  constitutional  number
of  Lodges  met  iu  June,  1841,  and  organized
the  Grand  Lodge,  electing  Gen.  Lewis  Cass
Grand  Master.

The  Grand  Chapter  was  organized  in
1848,  the  Grand  Council  in  1858,  and  the
Grand  Commandery  in  1857.

Microcosm.  See  Man.

Middle  Ages.  These  are  supposed
by  the  best  historians  to  extend  from  the
year  400  B.  c.  to  the  end  of  the  fifteenth
century,  the  last  important  event  being  the
doubling  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  1497.
This  period  of  twelve  centuries  is  one  of
great  importance  to  the  Masonic  student,
because  it  embraces  within  its  scope  events
intimately  connected  with  the  history  of
the  Order,  such  as  the  diffusion  throughout
Europe  of  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers,
the  establishment  of  the  architectural
school  of  Como,  the  rise  of  the  gilds,  the
organizations  of  the  building  corporations
of  Germany,  and  the  company  of  Free¬
masons  of  England,  as  well  as  many  cus¬
toms  and  usages  which  have  descended
with  more  or  less  modification  to  the
modern  Institution.

Middle  Chamber.  There  were  three
stories  of  side  chambers  built  around  the
Temple  on  three  sides ;  what,  therefore,  is
called  in  the  authorized  version  a  middle
chamber  was  really  the  middle  story  of  those
three.  The  Hebrew  word  is  y  at  sang.

They  are  thus  described  in  1  Kings  vi.  5,
6,  8.  “  And  against  the  wall  of  the  house

he  built  chambers  round  about,  against  the
walls  of  the  house  round  about,  both  of  the


MILES


MINUTES


501


temple  and  of  the  oracle:  and  he  made
chambers  round  about.  The  nethermost
chamber  was  five  cubits  broad,  and  the
middle  was  six  cubits  broad,  and  the  third
was  seven  cubits  broad :  for  without  in  the
wall  of  the  house  he  made  narrowed  rests
round  about,  that  the  beams  should  not  be
fastened  in  the  walls  of  the  house.  The
door  for  the  middle  chamber  was  in  the  right
side  of  the  house :  and  they  went  up  with
winding  stairs  into  the  middle  chamber,  and
out  of  the  middle  into  the  third.”

These  chambers,  after  the  Temple  was
completed,  served  for  the  accommodation
of  the  priests  when  upon  duty;  in  them
they  deposited  their  vestments  and  the  sa¬
cred  vessels.  But  the  knowledge  of  the
purpose  to  which  the  middle  chamber  was
appropriated  while  the  Temple  was  in  the
course  of  construction,  is  only  preserved  in
Masonic  tradition.  This  tradition  is,  how¬
ever,  altogether  mythical  and  symbolical  in
its  character,  and  belongs  to  the  symbolism
of  the  Winding  Stairs,  which  see.

Miles.  1.  In  pure  Latin,  miles  means
a  soldier;  but  in  Mediaeval  Latin  the
word  was  used  to  designate  the  military
knights  whose  institution  began  at  that
period.  Thus  a  Knight  Templar  was  called
Miles  Templarius,  and  a  Knight  Banneret,
Miles  Bannerettus.  The  pure  Latin  word
eques,  which  signified  a  knight  in  Rome,  was
never  used  in  that  sense  in  the  Middle
Ages.  See  Knighthood.

2.  The  seventh  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Af¬
rican  Architects.

Military  Lodges.  Lodges  estab¬
lished  in  an  army.  They  are  of  an  early
date,  having  long  existed  in  the  British
army.  In  America,  the  first  Lodge  of  this
kind  of  which  we  have  any  record  was  one
the  Warrant  for  which  was  granted  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  in  1738,  to
Abraham  Savage,  to  be  used  in  the  expedi¬
tion  against  Canada.  A  similar  one  was
granted  by  the  same  authority,  in  1756,  to
Richard  Gridley,  for  the  expedition  against
Crown  Point,  in  both  of  these  instances
the  Warrants  were  of  a  general  character,
and  might  rather  be  considered  as  deputa¬
tions,  as  they  authorized  Savage  and  Grid-
ley  to  congregate  Masons  into  one  or  more
Lodges,  in  1779,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Pennsylvania  granted  a  Warrant  to  Col.
Proctor,  of  the  artillery,  to  open  a  Military
Lodge,  which  in  the  Warrant  is  called  a
“  Movable  Lodge.”  In  the  civil  war  in
the  United  States  between  1861  and  1865,
many  Military  Lodges  were  established  on
both  sides;  but  it  is  questionable  whether
they  had  a  good  effect.  They  met,  cer¬
tainly,  with  much  opposition  in  many  ju¬
risdictions.  In  England,  the  system  of  Mil¬
itary  Lodges  is  regulated  by  special  provi¬


sions  of  the  Grand  Lodge  Constitution.
They  are  strictly  limited  to  the  purposes  for
which  the  Warrants  were  granted,  and  no
new  Lodge  can  be  established  in  a  regiment
without  the  concurrence  of  the  command¬
ing  officer.  They  cannot  make  Masons  of
any  but  military  men  who  have  attained
some  rank  in  the  army  above  that  of  a  pri¬
vate  soldier,  although  the  latter  may  by
dispensation  be  admitted  as  Serving  Breth¬
ren;  and  they  are  strictly  enjoined  not  to
interfere  with  the  Masonic  jurisdiction  of
any  country  in  which  they  may  be  stationed.
Military  Lodges  also  exist  on  the  continent
of  Europe.  We  find  one  at  Berlin,  in
Prussia,  as  far  back  as  1775,  under  the
name  of  the  “  Military  Lodge  of  the  Blaz¬
ing  Star,”  of  which  Wadzeck,  the  Masonic
writer,  was  the  orator.

Militia.  In  Mediaeval  Latin,  this  word
signifies  chivalry  or  the  body  of  knight¬
hood.  Hence  Militia  Templi,  a  title  some¬
times  given  to  Knights  Templars,  does  not
signify,  as  it  has  sometimes  been  improperly
translated,  the  army  of  the  Temple,  but  the
chivalry  of  the  Temple.

Minerral.  The  third  degree  of  the
Illuminati  of  Bavaria.

Minister  of  State.  An  officer  in  the
Supreme  Councils,  Grand  Consistories,  and
some  of  the  high  degrees  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.

Minnesota.  Masonry  was  introduced
into  this  State  in  1849  by  the  constitution  in
the  city  of  St.  Paul  of  a  Lodge  under  a
Warrant  issued  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Ohio.  Two  other  Lodges  were  subse¬
quently  constituted  by  the  Grand  Lodges
of  Wisconsin  and  Illinois.  A  convention
of  delegates  from  these  Lodges  was  held  at
St.  Paul,  and  a  Grand  Lodge  organ¬
ized  on  Feb.  12,  1853.  A.  E.  Ames  was
elected  Grand  Master.  The  Grand  Chap¬
ter  was  organized  Dec.  17,  1859,  and  the
Grand  Commandery  was  organized  in
1866.

Minor.  The  fifth  degree  of  the  Ger¬
man  Rose  Croix.

Minor.  Illuminate.  ( Uluminatus
Minor.)  The  fourth  degree  of  the  Illumi¬
nati  of  Bavaria.

Minnie  Book.  The  records  of  a
Lodge  are  kept  by  the  Secretary  in  a
journal,  which  is  called  the  Minute  Book.
The  French  call  it  Planche  tracee,  and  the
Minutes  a  Morceau  d’ Architecture.

Minutes.  The  records  of  a  Lodge  are
called  its  minutes.  The  minutes  of  the  pro¬
ceedings  of  the  Lodge  should  always  be
read  just  before  closing,  that  any  altera¬
tions  or  amendments  may  be  proposed  by
the  brethren ;  and  again  immediately  after
opening  at  the  next  communication,  that
they  may  be  confirmed.  But  the  minutes


502


MISCONDUCT


MITHRAS


of  a  regular  communication  are  not  to  be  read
at  a  succeeding  extra  one.  because,  as  the
proceedings  of  a  regular  communication
cannot  be  discussed  at  an  extra,  it  would
be  unnecessary  to  read  them,  lor,  if  incor¬
rect,  they  could  not  be  amended  until  the
next  regular  communication.

misconduct.  The  Constitution  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  provides  that
“if  any  brother  behave  in  such  a  manner
as  to  disturb  the  harmony  of  the  Lodge,  he
shall  be  thrice  formally  admonished  by  the
Master;  and  if  he  persist  in  his  irregular
conduct,  he  shall  be  punished  according  to
the  by-laws  of  that  particular  Lodge,  or
the  case  may  be  reported  to  higher  Ma¬
sonic  authority.”  A  similar  rule  prevails
wherever  Masonry  exists.  Every  Lodge
may  exercise  instant  discipline  over  any
member  or  visitor  who  violates  the  rules
of  order  and  propriety,  or  disturbs  the
harmony  of  the  Lodge,  by  extrusion  from
the  room.

Miserable  Scald  Masons.  See

Scald  Miserables.

Mishna.  See  Talmud.

M  ississippi.  Masonry  w'as  intro¬
duced  into  this  State  at  least  as  far  back
as  1801,  in  w’hich  year  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Kentucky  chartered  a  Lodge  at  Natchez,
which  became  extinct  in  1814.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  Kentucky  subsequently  granted
charters  to  two  other  Lodges  in  1812  and
1815.  Two  Lodges  were  also  constituted
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee.  The
delegates  of  three  of  these  Lodges  met  in
convention  at  the  city  of  Natchez  in  July
and  August,  1818,  and  on  the  25th  of  the
latter  month  organized  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Mississippi,  Henry  Toolev  being  elected
Grand  Master.  The  Grand  Chapter  was
organized  at  Vicksburg,  May  18,  1846;  the
Grand  Council  of  R.  and  S.  Master  Jan.
19,  1856;  and  the  Grand  Commanderv  Jan.
22, 1857.  Scottish  Masonry  was  introduced
into  the  State  in  1815  by  the  establishment
of  a  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem
under  the  obedience  of  the  Southern  Su¬
preme  Council.

Missouri.  Masonry  was  introduced
into  this  State  in  1807  by  the  constitution
of  a  Lodge  in  the  town  of  St.  Genevieve,
under  a  charter  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Pennsylvania,  which  body  granted  a
charter  for  another  Lodge  in  1809.  Sev¬
eral  charters  were  subsequently  granted  by
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee.  In  1821
there  appear  to  have  been  but  three
Lodges  in  the  State.  Delegates  from  these
organized,  April  23,  1821,  a  Grand  Lodge
at  St.  Louis  and  elected  Thomas  F.  Rid¬
dick  Grand  Master.  The  Grand  Chapter
was  organized  May  18,  1846.  and  the
Grand  Commandery  May  22,  1860.


Mistletoe.  A  sacred  plant  among  the
Druids.  It  was  to  them  a  symbol  of  im¬
mortality,  and  hence  an  analogue  of  the
Masonic  Acacia.  “The  mistletoe,”  says
Vallancey,  in  his  Grammar  of  the  Irish
Language ,  “  was  sacred  to  the  Druids,  be¬
cause  not  only  its  berries  but  its  leaves  also
grow  in  clusters  of  three  united  to  one
stock.  The  Christian  Irish  hold  the  sham¬
rock  (clover,  trefoil)  sacred,  in  like  man¬
ner,  because  of  the  three  leaves  united  to
one  stalk.”

Mithras,  Mysteries  of.  There  are

none  of  the  Ancient  Mysteries  which  afford
a  more  interesting  subject  of  investigation
to  the  Masonic  scholar  than  those  of  the
Persian  god  Mithras.  Instituted,  as  it  is
supposed,  by  Zeradusht  or  Zoroaster,  as  an
initiation  into  the  principles  of  the  religion
which  he  had  founded  among  the  ancient
Persians,  they  in  time  extended  into
Europe,  and  lasted  so  long  that  traces  of
them  have  been  found  in  the  fourth  century.
“  With  their  penances,”  says  Mr.  King,
( Gnostics ,  p.  47,)  “and  tests  of  the  courage
of  the  candidate  for  admission,  they  have
been  maintained  by  a  constant  tradition
through  the  secret  societies  of  the  Middle
Ages  and  the  Rosicrucians  down  to  the
modern  faint  reflex  of  the  latter  —  the  Free¬
masons.”

Of  the  identity  of  Mithras  with  other
deities  there  have  been  various  opinions.
Herodotus  says  he  was  the  Assyrian  Venus
and  the  Arabian  Alitta ;  Porphyry  calls
him  the  Demiurgos,  and  Lord  of  Genera¬
tion;  the  Greeks  identified  him  with  Phoe¬
bus  ;  and  Higgins  supposed  that  he  was
generally  considered  the  same  as  Osiris.
But  to  the  Persians,  who  first  practised  his
mysteries,  he  was  a  sun  god,  and  worshipped
as  the  god  of  Light.  He  was  represented
as  a  young  man  covered  with  a  Phrygian
turban,  and  clothed  in  a  mantle  and  tunic.
He  presses  with  his  knee  upon  a  bull,  one
of  whose  horns  he  holds  in  his  right  hand,
while  with  the  right  he  plunges  a  dagger
into  his  neck,  while  a  dog  standing  near
laps  up  the  dripping  blood.

This  symbol  has  been  thus  interpreted.
His  piercing  the  throat  with  his  dagger
signifies  the  penetration  of  the  solar  rays
into  the  bosom  of  the  earth,  by  which
action  all  nature  is  nourished;  the  last  idea
being  expressed  by  the  dog  licking  up  the
blood  as  it  flows  from  the  wound.  But  it
will  be  seen  hereafter  that  this  last  symbol
admits  of  another  interpretation.

The  mysteries  of  Mithras  were  always
celebrated  in  caves.  They  were  divided
into  seven  stages  or  degrees,  (Suidas  says
twelve,)  and  consisted  of  the  most  rigorous
proofs  of  fortitude  and  courage.  Nonnus
the  Greek  poet  says,  in  liis  Dionysiaca,  that


MITHRAS


MITHRAS


503


these  proofs  were  eighty  in  number,  gradu¬
ally  increasing  in  severity.  No  one,  says
Gregory  Nazianzen,  could  be  initiated  into
the  mysteries  of  Mithras  unless  he  had
passed  through  all  the  trials,  and  proved
himself  passionless  and  pure.  The  aspi¬
rant  at  first  underwent  the  purifications  by
water,  by  fire,  and  by  fasting ;  after  which
he  was  introduced  into  a  cavern  represent¬
ing  the  world,  on  whose  walls  and  roof
were  inscribed  the  celestial  signs.  Here
he  submitted  to  a  species  of  baptism,  and
received  a  mark  on  his  forehead.  He  was
presented  with  a  crown  on  the  point  of  a
sword,  which  he  was  to  refuse,  declaring
at  the  same  time,  “Mithras  alone  is  my
crown.”  He  was  prepared,  by  anointing
him  with  oil,  crowning  him  with  olive,  and
clothing  him  in  enchanted  armor,  for  the
seven  stages  of  initiation  through  which
he  was  about  to  pass.  These  commenced
in  the  following  manner:  In  the  first  cavern
he  heard  the  howling  of  wild  beasts,  and
was  enveloped  in  total  darkness,  except
when  the  cave  was  illuminated  by  the  fitful
glare  of  terrific  flashes  of  lightning.  He
was  hurried  to  the  spot  whence  the  sounds
proceeded,  and  was  suddenly  thrust  by  his
silent  guide  through  a  door  into  a  den  of
wild  beasts,  where  he  was  attacked  by  the
initiated  in  the  disguise  of  lions,  tigers,
hyenas,  and  other  ravenous  beasts.  Hurried
through  this  apartment,  in  the  second
cavern  he  was  again  shrouded  in  darkness,
and  for  a  time  in  fearful  silence,  until  it
wa3  broken  by  awful  peals  of  thunder,
whose  repeated  reverberations  shook  the
very  walls  of  the  cavern,  and  could  not
fail  to  inspire  the  aspirant  with  terror.  He
was  conducted  through  four  other  caverns,
in  which  the  methods  of  exciting  astonish¬
ment  and  fear  were  ingeniously  varied.
He  was  made  to  swim  over  a  raging  flood  ;
was  subjected  to  a  rigorous  fast;  exposed
to  all  the  horrors  of  a  dreary  desert;  and
finally,  if  we  may  trust  the  authority  of
Nicsetas,  after  being  severely  beaten  with
rods,  was  buried  for  many  days  up  to  the
neck  in  snow.  In  the  seventh  cavern  or
Sacellum,  the  darkness  was  changed  to
light,  and  the  candidate  was  introduced
into  the  presence  of  the  Archimagus,  or
chief  priest,  seated  on  a  splendid  throne,
and  surrounded  by  the  assistant  dispensers
of  the  mysteries.  Here  the  obligation
of  secrecy  was  administered,  and  he  was
made  acquainted  with  the  sacred  words.
He  received  also  the  appropriate  investi¬
ture,  which,  says  Maurice,  (Ind.  Antiq.,  V.,
ch.  i.,)  consisted  of  the  Kara  or  conical  cap,
and  candys  or  loose  tunic  of  Mithras,  on
which  was  depicted  the  celestial  constella¬
tions,  the  zone,  or  belt,  containing  a  repre¬
sentation  of  the  figures  of  the  zodiac,  the


pastoral  staff  or  crozier,  alluding  to  the  in¬
fluence  of  the  sun  in  the  labors  of  agricul¬
ture,  and  the  golden  serpent,  which  was
placed  in  his  bosom  as  an  emblem  of  his
having  been  regenerated  and  made  a  dis¬
ciple  of  Mithras,  because  the  serpent,  by
casting  its  skin  annually,  was  considered  in
these  mysteries  as  a  symbol  of  regeneration.

He  was  instructed  in  the  secret  doctrines
of  the  rites  of  Mithras,  of  which  the  his¬
tory  of  the  creation,  already  recited,  formed
a  part.  The  mysteries  of  Mithras  passed
from  Persia  into  Europe,  and  were  intro¬
duced  into  Rome  in  the  time  of  Pompey.
Here  they  flourished,  with  various  success,
until  the  year  878,  when  they  were  pro¬
scribed  by  a  decree  of  the  Senate,  and  the
sacred  cave,  in  which  they  had  been  cele¬
brated,  was  destroyed  by  the  Praetorian
prefect.

The  Mithraic  monuments  that  are  still
extant  in  the  museums  of  Europe  evidently
show  that  the  immortality  of  the  soul  was
one  of  the  doctrines  taught  in  the  Mithraic
initiation.  The  candidate  was  at  one  time
made  to  personate  a  corpse,  whose  restora¬
tion  to  life  dramatically  represented  the
resurrection.  Figures  of  this  corpse  are
found  in  several  of  the  monuments  and
talismans.  There  is  circumstantial  evi¬
dence  that  there  was  a  Mithraic  death  in
the  initiation,  just  as  there  was  a  Carbiric
death  in  the  mysteries  of  Samothrace,  and
a  Dionysiac  in  those  of  Eleusis.  Commo-
dus,  the  Roman  emperor,  had  been  initiated
into  the  Mithraic  mysteries  at  Rome,  and
is  said  to  have  taken  great  pleasure  in  the
ceremonies.  Lampridius,  in  his  Lives  of
the  Emperors ,  records,  as  one  of  the  mad
freaks  of  Commodus,  that  during  the  Mi¬
thraic  ceremonies,  where  “  a  certain  thing
was  to  be  done  for  the  sake  of  inspiring
terror,  he  polluted  the  rites  by  a  real  mur¬
der:'’  an  expression  which  evidently  shows
that  a  scenic  representation  of  a  fictitious
murder  formed  a  part  of  the  ceremony  of
initiation.  The  dog  swallowing  the  blood
of  the  bull  was  also  considered  as  a  symbol
of  the  resurrection.

It  is  in  the  still  existing  talismans  and
gems  that  we  find  the  most  interesting  me¬
morials  of  the  old  Mithraic  initiation.  One
of  these  is  thus  described  by  Mr.  C.  W.
King,  in  his  valuable  work  on  the  Gnostics
and  their  Remains ,  (London,  1864:)

“  There  is  a  talisman  which,  from  its  fre¬
quent  repetition,  would  seem  to  be  a  badge
of  some  particular  degree  amongst  the  ini¬
tiated,  perhaps  of  the  first  admission.  A
man  blindfolded,  with  hands  tied  behind
his  back,  is  bound  to  a  pillar,  on  which
stands  a  gryphon  holding  a  wheel ;  the  lat¬
ter  a  most  ancient  emblem  of  the  sun.
Probably  it  was  in  this  manner  that  the


504


MITRE


MIZRAIM


candidate  was  tested  by  the  appearance  of  !
imminent  death  when  the  bandage  was  sud¬
denly  removed  from  his  eyes."

As  Mithras  was  considered  as  synony¬
mous  with  the  sun,  a  great  deal  of  solar
symbolism  clustered  around  his  name,
his  doctrines,  and  his  initiation.  Thus,
MEI0PA2  was  found,  by  the  numerical
value  of  the  letters  in  the  Greek  alphabet,
to  be  equal  to  365,  the  number  of  days  in  a
solar  year;  and  the  decrease  of  the  solar
influence  in  the  winter,  and  its  revivifica¬
tion  in  the  summer,  was  made  a  symbol  of
the  resurrection  from  death  to  life.

The  head  covering  of  the  high
priest  of  the  Jews  was  called
metznephet,  which,  coming  from  the  verb
NAPHAT,  to  roll  around,  signified  some¬
thing  rolled  around  the  head,  a  turban ;  and
this  was  really  the  form  of  the  Jewish  mi¬
tre.  It  is  described  by
Leusden,  in  his  Philolo-
gus  Hebrceo-Mixtus,  as  be-  j
ing  made  of  dark  linen
twisted  in  many  folds
around  the  head.  Many
writers  contend  that  the
mitre  was  peculiar  to  the  high  priest ;  but
Josephus  and  the  Mishna  assert  that  it  was
worn  by  all  the  priests,  that  of  the  high
pjriest  being  distinguished  from  the  rest  by
the  golden  band,  or  holy  crown,  which  was
attached  to  it3  lower  rim  and  fastened
around  the  forehead,  and  on  which  was
inscribed  the  words  mrrS  BHP,  KADOSH
L’YEHOVAH,  Holiness  to  Jehovah,  or,  as
it  is  commonly  translated,  Holiness  to  the
Lord.  The  mitre  is  worn  by  the  High
Priest  of  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  because  he
represents  the  Jewish  high  priest;  but  the
form  is  inaccurate.  The  vestment,  as  usu¬
ally  made,  is  a  representation  rather  of  the
modern  Episcopal  than  of  the  Jewish  mitre.

The  modern  mitre — which  is  but  an  imi¬
tation  of  the  Phrygian  cap,  and  peculiar  to
bishops  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  which
should  therefore  be  worn  by  the
Prelate  of  a  Commandery  of
Knights  Templars,  who  is  sup¬
posed  to  hold  Episcopal  rank —
differs  in  form  from  the  Jewish
vestment.  It  is  a  conical  cap,
divided  in  the  middle  so  as  to
come  to  two  points  or  horns,
one  in  front  and  one  behind,
which,  Durandus  says,  are  ■
symbolic  of  the  two  laws  of  the  Old  and
New  Testament.

Ilizraim.  Often  by  Masonic  writers
improperly  spelled  Misraim.  It  is  the  an¬
cient  Hebrew  name  of  Egypt,  and  was
adopted  as  the  name  of  a  Rite  to  indicate
the  hypothesis  that  it  was  derived  from
the  old  Egyptian  initiation.


Mizraim.  Kite  of.  This  Rite  origi¬
nated,  says  Clavel,  at  Milan,  in  the  year
1805,  in  consequence  of  several  brethren
having  been  refused  admission  into  the  Su¬
preme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite,  which  had  just  been  established  in
that  city.  One  Lechangeur  has  the  credit
of  organizing  the  Rite  and  selecting  the
statutes  by  which  it  was  to  be  governed.
It  consisted  at  first  of  only  eighty -seven  de¬
grees,  to  which  three  others  were  subse¬
quently  added.  Sixty-six  of  the  ninety  de¬
grees  thus  formed  are  said  to  have  been
taken  from  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,
while  the  remaining  twenty-four  were  either
borrowed  from  other  systems  or  were  the
invention  of  Lechangeur  and  his  colleagues,
Joly  and  Bedarride.  The  system  of  Miz-
raim  spread  over  Italy,  and  in  1814  was  in¬
troduced  into  France.  Dissensions  in  the
Rite  soon  took  place,  and  an  attempt  was
unsuccessfully  made  to  obtain  the  recogni¬
tion  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.  This
having  been  refused,  the  Supreme  Council
was  dissolved  in  1817  ;  but  the  Lodges  of  the
Rite  still  continued  to  confer  the  degrees,
although,  according  to  the  constitution  of
French  Masonry,  their  non-recognition  by
the  Grand  Orient  had  the  effect  of  making
them  illegal.  But  eventually  the  Rite
ceased  altogether  to  exist  as  an  active  and
independent  system,  and  its  place  in  Ma¬
sonic  history  seems  only  to  be  preserved  by
two  massive  volumes  on  the  subject,  writ¬
ten  by  Mark  Bedarride,  the  most  intelli¬
gent  and  indefatigable  of  its  founders,  who
published  at  Paris,  in  1835,  a  history  of  the
Rite,  under  the  title  of  “  De  l’Ordre  de
Misraim.”

The  Rite  of  Mizraim  consisted  of  90  de¬
grees,  divided  into  4  series  and  17  classes.
Some  of  these  degrees  are  entirely  original,
but  many  of  them  are  borrowed  from  the
Scottish  Rite.

For  the  gratification  of  the  curious  in¬
spector,  the  following  list  of  these  degrees
is  subjoined.  The  titles  are  translated  as
literally  as  possible  from  the  French.

I.  Series  —  Symbolic.

ls<  Class :  1,  Apprentice ;  2,  Fellow  Craft ;
3,  Master.  2d  Class:  4,  Secret  Master;  5,
Perfect  Master;  6,  Master  through  Curios¬
ity  ;  7,  Provost  and  Judge  or  Irish  Master ;
8,  English  Master.  3 d  Class:  9,  Elect  of
Nine;  10,  Elect  of  the  L’nknown  ;  11,  Elect
of  Fifteen  ;  12,  Perfect  Elect;  13,  Illustrious
Elect.  4th  Class:  14, Scottish  Trinitarian;
15,  Scottish  Fellow  Craft ;  16,  Scottish  Mas¬
ter;  17,  Scottish  panisifcre;  18,  Master
Ecossais;  19,  Ecossais  of  the  three  J.  J.  J. ;
20,  Ecossais  of  the  Sacred  Vault  of  James
VI. ;  21,  Ecossais  of  St.  Andrew.  5th  Class :
22,  Little  Architect;  23,  Grand  Architect;


MIZRAIM


MOLAET


505


24,  Architecture ;  25,  Apprentice  Perfect  I
Architect;  26,  Fellow  Craft  Perfect  Archi-  ,
tect ;  27,  Master  Perfect  Architect ;  28,  Per¬
fect  Architect;  29,  Sublime  Ecossais;  30,
Sublime  Ecossais  of  Heroden.  6th  Class:
31,  Grand  Royal  Arch  ;  32,  Grand  Axe ;  33,
Sublime  Knight  of  Election,  chief  of  the
first  symbolic  series.

II.  Series  — Philosophic.

1th  Class:  34,  Knight  of  the  Sublime
Election  ;  35,  Prussian  Knight ;  36,  Knight
of  the  Temple;  37,  Knight  of  the  Eagle;
38,  Knight  of  the  Black  Eagle;  39,  Knight
of  the  Red  Eagle ;  40,  White  Knight  of  the
East;  41,  Knight  of  the  East.  8th  Class:
42,  Commander  of  the  East;  43,  Grand
Commander  of  the  East ;  44,  Architecture
of  the  Sovereign  Commanders  of  the  Tem¬
ple ;  45,  Prince  of  Jerusalem.  9th  Class:
46,  Sovereign  Prince  Rose  Croix  of  Kilwin¬
ning  and  Heroden;  47,  Knight  of  the  West;
48,  Sublime  Philosopher;  49,  Chaos  the
first,  discreet ;  50,  Chaos  the  second,  wise ;
51,  Knight  of  the  Sun.  10  th  Class:  52,  Su¬
preme  Commander  of  the  Stars ;  53,  Sub¬
lime  Philosopher ;  54,  First  degree  of  the
Key  of  Masonry,  Minor  ;  55,  Second  degree,
Washer;  56,  Third  degree,  Bellows-blower ;
57,  Fourth  degree,  Caster;  58,  True  Mason
Adept ;  59,  Sovereign  Elect ;  60,  Sovereign
of  Sovereigns;  61,  Grand  Master  of  Sym¬
bolic  Lodges ;  62,  Most  High  and  Most
Powerful  Grand  Priest  Sacrificer;  63,
Knight  of  Palestine;  64,  Grand  Knight  of
the  White  and  Black  Eagle ;  65,  Grand
Elect  Knight  Kadosh  ;  66,  Grand  Inquiring
Commander,  Chief  of  the  Second  Series.

III.  Series  —  Mystical.

Ilf  A  Class:  67,  Benevolent  Knight;  68,
Knight  of  the  Rainbow ;  69,  Knight  Cha-
nuka,  called  Hynaroth  ;  70,  Most  Wise  Is-
raelitish  Prince.  12 th  Class :  71,  Sovereign
Princes  Tahnudim  ;  72,  Sovereign  Prince
Zadkim  ;  73,  Grand  Haram.  13/A  Class:
74,  Sovereign  Princes  Haram ;  75,  Sovereign
Princes  Hasidim  ;  77,  Grand  Inspector  In-
tendant,  Regulator  General  of  the  Order,
Chief  of  the  Third  Series.

IV.  Series  —  Kabbalistic.

15 th  and  \6th  Classes  :  78,  79,  80,  81,  82,
83,  84, 85,  86,  degrees  whose  names  are  con¬
cealed  from  all  but  the  possessors.  17 th
Class :  87,  Sovereign  Grand  Princes,  con¬
stituted  Grand  Masters,  and  legitimate
representatives  of  the  order  for  the  First
Series ;  88,  Ditto  for  the  Second  Series ;  89,
Ditto  for  the  Third  Series;  90,  Absolute
Sovereign  Grand  Master,  Supreme  Power
of  the  Order,  and  Chief  of  the  Fourth
Series.


The  chiefs  of  this  Rite  demanded  the
privilege — which,  of  course,  was  never  con¬
ceded  to  them — of  directing  and  controlling
all  the  other  Rites  of  Freemasonry,  as
their  common  source.  Its  friends  claimed
for  it  an  eminently  philosophical  character.
The  organization  of  the  Rite  is,  however,
too  complicated  and  diffuse  to  have  ever
been  practically  convenient.  Many  of  its
degrees  were  founded  upon,  or  borrowed
from,  the  Egyptian  rites,  and  its  ritual  is
a  very  close  imitation  of  the  ancient  system
of  initiation.

The  legend  of  the  third  degree  in  this
Rite  is  abolished.  HAB  is  said  to  have  re¬
turned  to  his  family,  after  the  completion
of  the  Temple,  and  to  have  passed  the  re¬
mainder  of  his  days  in  peace  and  opulence.
The  legend,  substituted  by  the  Rite  of  Miz-
raim  for  that  admitted  by  all  the  other
rites,  is  carried  back  to  the  days  of  La-
mech,  whose  son  Jubal,  under  the  name  of
Hario-Jubal-Abi,  is  reported  to  have  been
slain  by  three  traitors  Hagava,  Hakina,
and  Haremda.

Lenning  calls  the  Rite  of  Mizraim  “  one
of  the  latest  of  the  monstrous  visionary
schemes  introduced  into  Freemasonry ;  ”  and
Ragon  characterizes  it  as  a  “  fantastical  con¬
nection  of  various  rites  and  degrees.”

Moaboii.  This  word  is  found  in  some
of  the  high  degrees  according  to  the  French
ritual,  where  it  is  explained  as  expressing
“  the  satisfaction  we  feel  in  seeing  the  crime
and  the  criminal  punished.”  There  is  no
such  word  in  Hebrew,  and  the  explanation
is  a  fanciful  one.  The  word  is  undoubtedly
a  Gallic  corruption,  first  in  sound  and  then
in  letters,  of  the  Master’s  Word.

Mock  Masons.  A  name  given,  says
Noorthouck,  to  the  unfaithful  brethren  and
profanes  who,  in  1747,  got  up  a  procession
in  ridicule  of  that  made  at  the  Grand  Feast.
See  Scald  Miserable.

Modern  Rite.  (Site  Moderne.)  See
French  Rite.

Moderns.  The  Masons  who  seceded
in  1738  from  the  legal  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  which  had  been  organized  in
1717,  called  the  Masons  who  remained
faithful  in  their  allegiance  to  that  hody
Moderns,  while  for  themselves  they  assumed
the  title  of  Ancients.  See  Ancients.

Molart,  William.  In  Preston’s  Il¬
lustrations  (p.  151)  is  the  following  state¬
ment:  “The  Latin  Register  of  William
Molart,  prior  of  Canterbury,  in  manuscript,
p.  88,  entitled  Liberatio  generalis  Domini
Gnlielmi  Prioris  Ecclesicc  Christi  Cantu-
ariensis,  erga  Feslum  Natalis  Domini  1429,
informs  us  that  in  the  year  1429,  during
the  minority  of  this  prince,  [Henry  VI., J
a  respectable  Lodge  was  held  at  Canterbury,
under  the  patronage  of  Henry  Chicheley,


30


506


MOLAY


MONTANA


the  archbishop ;  at  which  were  present
Thomas  Stapylton,  the  Master;  John  Mor¬
ris,  with  fifteen  fellow-crafts,  and  three  en¬
tered  apprentices ;  all  of  whom  are  partic¬
ularly  named.”

The  fact  of  the  existence  of  such  a  Reg¬
ister  rests  entirely  upon  the  testimony  of
Preston.  If  authentic,  it  supplies  an  im¬
portant  point  of  Masonic  history  in  refer¬
ence  to  the  organization  of  the  Craft  at
that  period.

Mol  ay,  Janies  de.  The  twenty-sec-
ond  and  last  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars
at  the  destruction  of  the  Order  in  the  four¬
teenth  century.  He  was  born  about  the
year  1240,  at  Besanqon,  in  Burgundy,  being
descended  from  a  noble  family.  He  was
received  into  the  Order  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars  in  1265,  by  Imbert  de  Peraudo,  Pre¬
ceptor  of  France,  in  the  Chapel  of  the  Tem¬
ple  at  Beaune.  He  immediately  proceeded
to  Palestine,  and  greatly  distinguished  him¬
self  in  the  wars  against  the  infidels,  under
the  Grand  Mastership  of  William  de  Beau-
jeu.  In  1298,  while  absent  from  the  Holy
Land,  he  was  unanimously  elected  Grand
Master  upon  the  death  of  Theobald  Gaudi-
nius.  In  1305,  he  was  summoned  to  France
by  Pope  Clement  V.,  upon  the  pretence
of  a  desire,  on  the  part  of  the  Pontiff,  to
effect  a  coalition  between  the  Templars  and
the  Hospitallers.  He  was  received  by
Philip  the  Fair,  the  treacherous  King  of
France,  with  the  most  distinguished  honors,
and  even  selected  by  him  as  the  god-father
of  one  of  his  children.  In  April,  1307,  he
repaired,  accompanied  by  three  of  his
knights,  to  Poitiers,  where  the  Pope  was
then  residing,  and  as  he  supposed  satisfac¬
torily  exculpated  the  Order  from  the  charges
which  had  been  preferred  against  it.  But
both  pope  and  king  were  guilty  of  the  most
infamous  deceit.

On  the  12th  of  September,  1307,  the
order  was  issued  for  the  arrest  of  the  Tem¬
plars,  and  De  Molav  endured  an  imprison¬
ment  for  five  years  and  a  half,  during  which
period  he  was  subjected  to  the  utmost  in¬
dignities  and  sufferings  for  the  purpose  of
extorting  from  him  a  confession  of  the
guilt  of  his  Order.  But  he  was  firm  and
loyal,  and  on  the  11th  of  March,  1314,  he
was  publicly  burnt  in  front  of  the  Cathe¬
dral  of  Notre  Dame,  in  Paris.  When
about  to  die,  he  solemnly  affirmed  the  in¬
nocence  of  the  Order,  and,  it  is  said,  sum¬
moned  Pope  Clement  to  appear  before  the
judgment-seat  of  God  in  forty  days  and  !
the  King  of  France  within  a  year,  and
both,  it  is  well  known,  died  within  the
periods  specified.

Monad.  The  monad  in  the  Pythago¬
rean  system  of  numbers  was  unity  or  the
number  one.  See  Numbers  and  One.


Monitor.  Those  manuals  published
for  the  convenience  of  Lodges,  and  con¬
taining  the  charges,  general  regulations,
emblems,  and  account  of  the  public  cere¬
monies  of  the  Order,  are  called  Monitors.
The  amount  of  ritualistic  information  con¬
tained  in  these  works  has  gradually  in¬
creased:  thus  the  monitorial  instructions,
in  Preston’s  Illustrations,  the  earliest  Moni¬
tor  in  the  English  language,  are  far  more
scanty  than  those  contained  in  Monitors  of
the  present  day.  As  a  general  rule,  it  may
be  said  that  American  works  of  this  class
give  more  instruction  than  English  ones,
but  that  the  French  and  German  manuals
are  more  communicative  than  either.

Of  the  English  and  American  manuals
published  for  monitorial  instruction,  the
first  was  by  Preston,  in  1772.  This  has
been  succeeded  by  the  following  authors:
Webb,  1797;  Dalcho,  1807;  Cole,  1817;
Hardie,  1818;  Cross,  1819;  Tannebill,
1824;  Parmele,  1825;  Charles  W.  Moore,
1846;  Cornelius  Moore,  1846 ;  Dove,  1847 ;
Davis,  1849;  Stewart,  1851;  3Iackey,  1852;
Macoy,  1853 ;  Sickels,  1866.

Monitorial  Instruction.  The  in¬
struction  contained  in  Monitors  is  called
monitorial,  to  distinguish  it  from  esoteric
instruction,  which  is  not  permitted  to  be
w’ritten,  and  can  be  obtained  only  in  the
precincts  of  the  Lodge.

Monitorial  Sign.  A  sign  given  in
the  English  system,  but  not  recognized  in
this  country.  Oliver  says  of  it  that  it  “re¬
minds  us  of  the  weakness  of  human  nature,
unable  of  itself  to  resist  the  power  of  Dark¬
ness,  unless  aided  by  that  Light  which  is
from  above.”

Monitor.  Secret.  See  Secret  Monitor.

Monogram.  An  abbreviation  of  a
name  by  means  of  a  cipher  composed  of
two  or  more  letters  intertwined
with  each  other.  The  Constan-
tinian  monogram  of  Christ  is
often  used  by  Knights  Templars.
The  Triple  Tau,  or  Royal  Arch
badge,  is  also  a  monogram;  al¬
though  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion  a3
to  its  real  meaning,  some  suppos-
|  I  ■  ing  that  it  is  a  monogram  of
f  '  B  Templum  Hierosolymse  or  the
I  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  others  of
Hiram  of  Tyre,  and  others,  again,
bestowing  on  it  different  significations.

Montana.  April  27,  1863,  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Nebraska  granted  a  Warrant  for
1  a  Lodge  at  Bannack,  in  Montana;  but  in
consequence  of  the  removal  of  the  petition¬
ers,  the  Lodge  was  never  organized.  Three
other  Lodges  were  subsequently  established
by  Warrants  from  the  Grand  Lodges  of
Kansas  and  Colorado.  On  January  24,
1866,  three  Lodges  met  in  convention  at


MOON


MONTFAUgON


507


Virginia  City,  and  organized  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Montana,  John  J.  Hull  being
elected  Grand  Master.

Royal  Arch  Masonry  and  Templarism
were  introduced,  the  one  by  the  General
Grand  Chapter,  and  the  other  by  the  Grand
Encampment  of  the  United  States.

Montfau^on,  Prior  of.  One  of
the  two  traitors  on  whose  false  accusations
was  based  the  persecution  of  the  Templars.
See  Squin  de  Flexian.

Months,  Hebrew.  Masons  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  use  in
their  documents  the  Hebrew  months  of  the
civil  year.  Hebrew  months  commence  with
the  full  moon ;  and  as  the  civil  year  began
about  the  time  of  the  autumnal  equinox,
the  first  Hebrew  month  must  have  begun
with  the  new  moon  in  September,  which  is
also  used  by  Scottish  Masons  as  the  begin¬
ning  of  their  year.  Annexed  is  a  table  of
the  Hebrew  months,  and  their  correspond¬
ence  with  our  own  calendar.


ntrn  Tisri,  Sept,  and  Oct.
pen  Khesvan,  Oct.  and  Nov.


1703  Kislev,
/-Q  CD  Tebeth,
Schebet,
11X  Adar,
JD’J  Nisan,

Ijar,

p’D  Si  van,

non  Tamuz,
3N  Ab,
SiSn  Elul,


Nov.  and  Dec.
Dec.  and  Jan.
Jan.  and  Feb.
Feb.  and  March.
March  and  April.

April  and  May.
May  and  June.

June  and  July.
July  and  Aug.
August  and  Sept.


As  the  Jews  computed  time  by  the  ap¬
pearance  of  the  moon,  it  is  evident  that
there  soon  would  be  a  confusion  as  to  the
keeping  of  these  feasts,  if  some  method
had  not  been  taken  to  correct  it;  since  the
lunar  year  is  only  354  days,  8  hours,  and  48
minutes,  and  the  solar  year  is  3C5  days,  6
hours,  15  minutes,  and  20  seconds.  Ac¬
cordingly,  they  intercalated  a  month  after
their  12th  month,  Adar,  whenever  they
found  that  the  15th  day  of  the  following
month,  Abib,  would  fall  before  the  vernal
equinox.  This  intercalated  month  was
named  ”1“JXL  Ve-adar,  or  “the  second
Adar,”  and  was  inserted  every  second  or
third  year,  as  they  saw  occasion;  so  that
the  difference  between  the  lunar  and  solar
year  could  never,  in  this  way,  be  more
than  a  month.

Months,  Masonic.  In  the  French
Rite  the  old  calendar  is  retained,  and  the
year  begins  with  the  month  of  March,  the
months  being  designated  numerically  and
not  by  their  usual  names.  Thus  we  find  in


French  Masonic  documents  such  dates  as
this:  “Le  lOme  jour  du  3me  mois  Ma-
qonnique,”  that  is,  the  10th  day  of  the  3d
Masonic  month,  or  the  10th  of  May.

Montpellier,  Hermetic  Rite  of.
The  Hermetic  Rite  of  Pernetty,  which  had
been  established  at  Avignon  in  1770,  was
in  1778  transported  to  Montpellier,  in
France,  by  a  Past  Master,  and  some  of  the
members  of  the  Lodge  of  Persecuted  Virtue
in  the  former  place,  who  laid  the  founda¬
tions  of  the  Academy  of  True  Masons,
(which  see.)  Hence  the  degrees  given  in
that  Academy  constituted  what  is  known
as  the  Hermetic  Rite  of  Montpellier.

Monument.  It  is  impossible  to  say
exactly  at  what  period  the  idea  of  a  monu¬
ment  in  the  third  degree  was  first  intro¬
duced  into  the  symbolism  of  Freemasonry.
The  early  expositions  of  the  eighteenth
century,  although  they  refer  to  a  funeral,
make  no  allusion  to  a  monument.  The
monument  adopted  in  the  American  sys¬
tem,  and  for  which  we  are  indebted,  it  is
said,  to  the  inventive  genius  of  Cross,  con¬
sists  of  a  weeping  virgin,  holding  in  one
hand  a  sprig  of  acacia  and  in  the  other  an
urn;  before  her  is  a  broken  column,  on
which  rests  a  copy  of  the  Book  of  Consti¬
tutions,  while  Time  behind  her  is  attempt¬
ing  to  disentangle  the  ringlets  of  her  hair.
The  explanation  of  these  symbols  will  be
found  in  their  proper  places  in  this  work.
Oliver,  in  his  Landmarks,  (ii.  146,)  cites
this  monument  without  any  reference  to
its  American  origin.  Early  in  the  last
century  the  Master’s  monument  was  intro¬
duced  into  the  French  system,  but  its  form
was  entirely  different  from  the  one  adopted
in  this  country.  It  is  described  as  an  obelisk,
on  which  is  inscribed  a  golden  triangle,  in
the  centre  of  which  the  Tetragrammaton  is
engraved.  On  the  top  of  the  obelisk  is
sometimes  seen  an  urn  pierced  by  a  sword.
In  the  Scottish  Rite  an  entire  degree  has
been  consecrated  to  the  subject  of  the  Hi-
ramic  monument.  Altogether,  the  monu¬
ment  is  simply  the  symbolic  expression  of
the  idea  that  veneration  should  always  be
paid  to  the  memory  of  departed  worth.

Moon.  The  adoption  of  the  moon  in
the  Masonic  system  as  a  symbol  is  analo¬
gous  to,  but  could  hardly  be  derived  from,
the  employment  of  the  same  symbol  in  the
ancient  religions.  In  Egypt,  Osiris  was
the  sun,  and  Isis  the  moon ;  in  Syria,
Adonis  was  the  sun,  and  Ashtoroth  the
moon ;  the  Greeks  adored  her  as  Diana,
and  Hecate;  in  the  mysteries  of  Ceres,
while  the  hierophant  or  chief  priest  repre¬
sented  the  Creator,  and  the  torch-bearer
the  sun,  the  ho  epi  bomos,  or  officer  nearest
the  altar,  represented  the  moon.  In  short,
moon-worship  was  as  widely  disseminated


508


MOORE


MORIAH


as  sun-worship.  Masons  retain  her  image  1
in  their  Rites,  because  the  Lodge  is  a  !
representation  of  the  universe,  where,  as
the  sun  rules  over  the  day,  the  moon  pre-  \
sides  over  the  night;  as  the  one  regulates
the  year,  so  does  the  other  the  months,  and
as  the  former  is  the  king  of  the  starry  hosts
of  heaven,  so  is  the  latter  their  queen  ;  but
both  deriving  their  heat,  and  light,  and
power  from  him,  who,  as  the  third  and  the
greatest  light,  the  master  of  heaven  and
earth,  controls  them  both.

Moore,  James.  He  was,  in  1808,
the  Senior  Grand  Warden  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Kentucky,  and  in  conjunction
with  Carey  L.  Clarke  compiled,  by  order
of  that  body,  the  Masonic  Constitutions  or
Illustrations  of  Masonry,  Lexington,  1808,
pp.  191,  12mo.  This  was  the  first  Masonic
work  published  in  the  Western  States.
With  the  exception  of  the  Constitution  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  it  is  little  more  than  a
compilation  taken  from  Anderson,  Preston,
and  Webb.  It  was  adopted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Kentucky  as  its  official  Book  of
Constitutions.

Mopses.  In  1736  Pope  Clement  XII.
issued  a  bull,  condemning  and  forbidding
the  practice  of  the  rites  of  Freemasonry.
Several  brethren  in  the  Catholic  States  of
Germany,  unwilling  to  renounce  the  Or¬
der,  and  yet  fearful  of  offending  the  eccle¬
siastical  authority,  formed  at  Vienna,  Sep¬
tember  22,  1738,  under  the  name  of  Mopses,
what  was  pretended  to  be  a  new  associa¬
tion,  but  which  was  in  truth  nothing  else
than  an  imitation  of  Freemasonry  under  a
less  offensive  appellation.  It  was  patron¬
ized  by  the  most  illustrious  persons  of  Ger¬
many,  and  many  Princes  of  the  Empire
were  its  Grand  Masters ;  the  Duke  of  Bava¬
ria  especially  took  it  under  his  protection.
The  title  is  derived  from  the  German  word
mops,  signifying  a  young  mastiff,  and  was
indicative  of  the  mutual  fidelity  and  at¬
tachment  of  the  brethren,  these  virtues
being  characteristic  of  that  noble  animal.
The  alarm  made  for  entrance  was  to  imi¬
tate  the  barking  of  a  dog.

In  1776,  the  Mopses  became  an  andro¬
gynous  Order,  and  admitted  females  to  all
the  offices,  except  that  of  Grand  Master,
which  was  held  for  life.  There  was,  how¬
ever,  a  Grand  Mistress,  and  the  male  and
female  heads  of  the  Order  alternately  as¬
sumed,  for  six  months  each,  the  supreme
authority.  With  the  revival  of  the  spirit
of  Masonry,  which  had  been  in  some  de¬
gree  paralyzed  by  the  attacks  of  the  church,
the  society  of  Mopses  ceased  to  exist.

Morality.  In  the  American  system  it
is  one  of  the  three  precious  jewels  of  a
Master  Mason.

Morality  of  Freemasonry.  No


one  who  reads  our  ancient  Charges  can  fail
to  see  that  Freemasonry  is  a  strictly  moral
Institution,  and  that  the  principles  which
it  inculcates  inevitably  tend  to  make  the
brother  who  obeys  their  dictates  a  more
virtuous  man.  Hence  the  English  lectures
very  properly  define  Freemasonry  to  be  “a
science  of  morality.”

Moral  Law.  “A  Mason,”  say  the
old  Charges  of  1722,  “is  obliged  by  his
tenure  to  obey  the  moral  law.”  Now,  this
moral  law  is  not  to  be  considered  as  con¬
fined  to  the  decalogue  of  Moses,  within
which  narrow  limits  the  ecclesiastical
writers  technically  restrain  it,  but  rather  as
alluding  to  what  is  called  the  lex  naturae ,
or  the  law  of  nature.  This  law  of  nature
has  been  defined,  by  an  able  but  not  recent
writer  on  this  subject,  to  be  “the  will  of
God,  relating  to  human  actions,  grounded
on  the  moral  differences  of  things ;  and  be¬
cause  discoverable  by  natural  light,  obli¬
gatory  upon  all  mankind.”  (Grove :  Sys¬
tem  of  Moral  Philosophy,  vol.  ii.,  p.  122.
London,  1749.)  This  is  the  “moral  law,”
to  which  the  old  Charge  already  cited  refers,
and  which  it  declares  to  be  the  law  of
Masonry.  And  this  was  wisely  done,  for
it  is  evident  that  no  law  less  universal
could  have  been  appropriately  selected  for
the  government  of  an  Institution  whose
prominent  characteristic  is  its  universality.

Moravian  Brethren.  The  reli¬
gious  sect  of  Moravian  Brethren,  which  was
founded  in  Upper  Lusatia,  about  1722,  by
Count  Zinzendorf,  is  said  at  one  time  to
have  formed  a  society  of  religious  Free¬
masons.  For  an  account  of  which,  see
Mustard  Seed,  Order  of.

Morgan,  William.  Born  in  Cul¬
pepper  County,  in  Virginia,  in  1775.  He
published  in  i826  a  pretended  Exposition
of  Masonry,  which  attracted  at  the  time
more  attention  than  it  deserved.  Morgan
soon  after  disappeared,  and  the  Masons
were  charged  by  some  enemies  of  the  Order
with  having  removed  him  by  foul  means.
What  was  the  real  fate  of  Morgan  has
never  been  ascertained.  There  are  various
myths  of  his  disappearance,  and  subsequent
residence  in  other  countries.  They  may  or
may  not  be  true,  but  it  is  certain  that  there
is  no  evidence  of  his  death  that  would  be
admitted  in  a  Court  of  Probate.  He  was
a  man  of  questionable  character  and  disso¬
lute  habits,  and  his  enmity  to  Masonry  is
said  to  have  originated  from  the  refusal  of
the  Masons  of  Le  Roy  to  admit  him  to
membership  in  their  Lodge  and  Chapter.

Moriah,  Mount.  An  eminence  sit¬
uated  in  the  south-eastern  part  of  Jerusa¬
lem.  In  the  time  of  David  it  must  have
been  cultivated,  for  it  is  called  “  the  thresh¬
ing-floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite,”  from  whom


MORIN


MORTALITY


509


that  monarch  purchased  it  for  the  purpose
of  placing  there  an  altar.  Solomon  subse¬
quently  erected  there  his  magnificent  Tem¬
ple.  Mount  Moriah  was  always  profoundly
venerated  by  the  Jews,  among  whom  there
is  an  early  tradition  that  on  it  Abraham
was  directed  to  offer  up  his  son.  The  truth
of  this  tradition  has,  it  is  true,  been  recent¬
ly  denied  by  some  Biblical  writers,  but  it
has  been  as  strenuously  maintained  by
others.  The  Masons,  however,  have  always
accepted  it,  and  to  them,  as  the  site  of  the
Temple,  it  is  especially  sacred,  and,  com¬
bining  with  this  the  Abrabamic  legend,
they  have  given  to  Mount  Moriah  the  ap¬
pellation  of  the  grouud-floor  of  the  Lodge,
and  assign  it  as  the  place  where  what  are
called  “  the  three  grand  offerings  were
made.”

Morin,  Stephen.  The  founder  of
the  Scottish  Rite  in  America.  On  the  27th
of  August,  1761,  the  “  Deputies  General  of
the  Royal  Art,  Grand  Wardens,  and  officers
of  the  Grand  and  Sovereign  Lodge  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem  established  at  Paris,”
(so  reads  the  document  itself)  granted  a
Patent  to  Stephen  Morin,  by  which  he  was
empowered  “  to  multiply  the  sublime  de¬
grees  of  High  Perfection,  and  to  create  In¬
spectors  in  all  places  where  the  sublime
degrees  are  not  established.”  This  Patent
was  granted,  Thory,  Ragon,  Clavel,  and
Lenning  say,  by  the  Grand  Council  of  Em¬
perors  of  the  East  and  West.  Others  say  by
the  Grand  Lodge.  Dalcho  says  by  the
Grand  Consistory  of  Princes  of  the  Royal
Secret  at  Paris.  Brother  Albert  Pike,  who
has  very  elaborately  investigated  the  ques¬
tion  says  that  the  authority  of  Morin  was
“  a  joint  authority  ”  of  the  two  then  con¬
tending  Grand  Lodges  of  France  and  the
Grand  Council,  which  is,  I  suppose,  what
Dalcho  and  the  Supreme  Council  of  Charles¬
ton  call  the  Grand  Consistory.  From  the
Grand  Lodge  he  received  the  power  to
establish  a  symbolic  Lodge,  and  from  the
Grand  Council  or  Consistory  the  power  to
confer  the  higher  degrees.

Not  long  after  receiving  these  powers,
Morin  sailed  for  America,  and  established
Bodies  of  the  Scottish  Rite  in  St.  Do¬
mingo  and  Jamaica.  He  also  appointed
M.  M.  Hayes  a  Deputy  Inspector  General
for  North  America.  Hayes,  subsequently,
appointed  Isaac  da  Costa  a  Deputy  for
South  Carolina,  and  through  him  the  Sub¬
lime  degrees  were  disseminated  among  the
Masons  of  the  United  States.  (See  Scottish
Rite.)  After  appointing  several  Deputies
and  establishing  some  Bodies  in  the  West
Iudia  Islands,  Morin  is  lost  sight  of.  We
know  not  anything  of  his  subsequent  his¬
tory,  or  of  the  time  or  place  of  his  death.
Ragon,  Thory,  and  Clavel  say  that  Morin


was  a  Jew ;  but  as  these  writers  have  juda-
ized  all  the  founders  of  the  Scottish  Rite  in
America,  we  have  no  right  to  place  any
confidence  in  their  statements.  The  name
of  Morin  has  been  borne  by  many  French
Christians  of  literary  reputation,  from
Peter  Morin,  a  learned  ecclesiastical  writer
of  the  sixteenth  century,  to  Stephen  Morin,
an  antiquary  and  Protestant  clergyman,
who  died  in  1700,  and  his  son  Henry,  who
became  a  Catholic,  and  died  in  1728.

Moritz,  Carl  PMlipp.  A  Privy
Councillor,  Professor,  and  Member  of  the
Academy  of  Sciences  in  Berlin,  was  born
at  Hameln  on  the  15th  of  September,  1757,
and  died  26th  of  June,  1793.  Gadicke  says
that  he  was  one  of  the  most  celebrated  au¬
thors  of  his  age,  and  distinguished  by  his
works  on  the  German  language.  He  was
the  author  of  several  Masonic  works,  among
which  are  his  Contributions  to  the  Philosophy
of  Life  and  the  Diary  of  a  Freemason,  Berlin,
1793,  and  a  Book  of  Masonic  Songs.

Morpliey.  The  name  of  one  of  the
twelve  Inspectors  in  the  eleventh  degree  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.
This  name,  like  the  others  in  the  same  cata¬
logue,  bids  defiance  to  any  Hebraic  deriva¬
tion.  They  are  all  either  French  corrup¬
tions,  worse  even  than  Jakinai  for  Shekinah,
or  they  have  some  allusion  to  names  or
events  connected  with  the  political  intrigues
of  the  exiled  house  of  Stuart,  which  had,
it  is  known,  a  connection  with  some  of  the
higher  degrees  sprung  up  at  Arras,  and
other  places  where  Masonry  was  patron¬
ized  by  the  Pretender.  This  word  Mor-
phey  may,  for  instance,  be  a  corruption  of
Murray.  James  Murray,  the  second  son
of  Lord  Stormont,  escaped  to  the  court  of
the  Stuarts  in  1715.  He  was  a  devoted  ad¬
herent  of  the  exiled  family,  and  became  the
governor  of  the  young  prince  and  the  chief
minister  of  his  father,  who  conferred  upon
him  the  empty  title  of  Earl  of  Dunbar.
He  died  at  Avignon  in  1770.  But  almost
every  etymology  of  this  kind  must  be  en¬
tirely  conjectural.

Mortality,  Symbol  of.  The  ancient
Egyptians  introduced  a  skeleton  at  their
feasts,  to  impress  the  idea  of  the  evanes¬
cence  of  all  earthly  enjoyments;  but  the
skeletons  or  deaths’  heads  did  not  make
their  appearance  in  Grecian  art,  as  symbols
of  mortality,  until  later  times,  and  on
monuments  of  no  artistic  importance.  In
the  earliest  periods  of  ancient  art,  the
Greeks  and  Romans  employed  more  pleas¬
ing  representations,  such  as  the  flower
pluckea  from  its  stem,  or  the  inverted
torch.  The  moderns  have,  however,  had
recourse  to  more  offensive  symbolization.

!  In  their  hatchments  or  funeral  achieve-
I  ments  the  heralds  employ  a  death's  head  and


510


MORTAR


MOSAIC


crossed  bones,  to  denote  that  the  deceased
person  is  the  last  of  his  family.  The  Ma¬
sons  have  adopted  the  same  symbol,  and  in
all  the  degrees  where  it  is  necessary  to  im¬
press  the  idea  of  mortality,  a  skull,  or  a
skull  and  crossed  bones,  are  used  for  that
purpose.

Mortar,  Untempered.  See  Un¬
tempered  Mortar.

Mosaic  Pavement.  Mosaic  work
consists  properly  of  many  little  stones  of
different  colors  united  together  in  patterns
to  imitate  a  painting.  It  was  much  prac¬
tised  among  the  Romans,  who  called  it
musivum  opus,  whence  the  Italians  get  their
musaico,  the  French  their  mosaique,  and
we  our  mosaic.  The  idea  that  the  work  is
derived  from  the  fact  that  Moses  used  a
pavement  of  colored  stones  in  the  taber¬
nacle  has  been  long  since  exploded  by  ety¬
mologists.  The  Masonic  tradition  is  that
the  floor  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon  was
decorated  with  a  Mosaic  pavement  of
black  and  white  stones.  There  is  no  his¬
torical  evidence  to  substantiate  this  state¬
ment.  Samuel  Lee,  however,  in  his  dia¬
gram  of  the  Temple,  represents  not  only
the  floors  of  the  building,  but  of  all  the
outer  courts,  as  covered  with  such  a  pave¬
ment.  The  Masonic  idea  was  perhaps  first
suggested  by  this  passage  in  the  Gospel  of
St.  John,  (xix.  13,)  “when  Pilate,  there¬
fore,  heard  that  saying,  he  brought  Jesus
forth,  and  sat  him  down  in  the  judgment-
seat  in  a  place  that  is  called  the  Pavement,
but  in  the  Hebrew,  Gabbatha.”  The  word
here  translated  Pavement  is  in  the  original
Lithostroton,  the  very  word  used  by  Pliny
to  denote  a  Mosaic  pavement.  The  Greek
word,  as  well  as  its  Latin  equivalent,  is
used  to  denote  a  pavement  formed  of  orna¬
mental  stones  of  various  colors,  precisely
what  is  meant  by  a  Mosaic  pavement.

There  was,  therefore,  a  part  of  the  Tem¬
ple  which  was  decorated  with  a  Mosaic
pavement.  The  Talmud  informs  us  that
there  was  such  a  pavement  in  the  conclave
where  the  Grand  Sanhedri  m  held  its  sessions.

By  a  little  torsion  of  historical  accuracy,
the  Masons  have  asserted  that  the  ground-
floor  of  the  Temple  was  a  Mosaic  pavement,
and  hence,  as  the  Lodge  is  a  representation
of  the  Temple,  that  the  floor  of  the  Lodge
should  also  be  of  the  same  pattern.

The  Mosaic  pavement  is  an  old  symbol
of  the  Order.  It  is  met  with  in  the  earliest
rituals  of  the  last  century.  It  is  classed
among  the  ornaments  of  the  Lodge  in  com¬
bination  with  the  indented  tessel  and  the
blazing  star.  Its  party-colored  stones  of
black  and  white  have  been  readily  and  ap¬
propriately  interpreted  as  symbols  of  the
evil  and  good  of  human  life.

Mosaic  Symbolism.  In  the  reli¬


gion  of  Moses,  more  than  in  any  other
which  preceded  or  followed  it,  is  symbolism
the  predominating  idea.  From  the  taber¬
nacle,  which  may  be  considered  as  the  cen¬
tral  point  of  the  whole  system,  down  to  the
vestments  which  clothed  the  servants  at
the  altar,  there  will  be  found  an  underlying
principle  of  symbolism.  Long  before  the
days  of  Pythagoras  the  mystical  nature  of
numbers  had  been  inculcated  by  the  Jew¬
ish  lawgiver,  and  the  very  name  of  God
was  constructed  in  a  symbolical  form,  to
indicate  his  eternal  nature.  Much  of  the
Jewish  ritual  of  worship,  delineated  in  the
Pentateuch  with  so  much  precision  as  to
its  minutest  details,  would  almost  seem  •
puerile  were  it  not  for  the  symbolic  idea
that  is  conveyed.  So  the  fringes  of  the
garments  are  patiently  described,  not  as
decorations,  but  that  by  them  the  people,
in  looking  upon  the  fringe,  might  “  remem¬
ber  all  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  and
do  them.”  Well,  therefore,  has  a  modern
writer  remarked,  that  in  the  symbolism  of
the  Mosaic  worship  it  is  only  ignorance
that  can  find  the  details  trifling  or  the  pre¬
scriptions  minute;  for  if  we  recognize  the
worth  and  beauty  of  symbolism,  we  shall
in  vain  seek  in  the  Mosaic  symbols  for  one
superfluous  enactment  or  one  superstitious
idea.  To  the  Mason  the  Mosaic  symbolism
is  very  significant,  because  from  it  Freema¬
sonry  has  derived  and  transmitted  for  its
own  uses  many  of  the  most  precious  treas¬
ures  of  its  own  symbolical  art.  Indeed,
except  in  some  of  the  higher,  and  therefore
more  modern  degrees,  the  symbolism  of
Freemasonry  is  almost  entirely  deduced
from  the  symbolism  of  Mosaism.  Thus  the
symbol  of  the  Temple,  which  persistently
pervades  the  whole  of  the  ancient  Masonic
system,  comes  to  us  directly  from  the  sym¬
bolism  of  the  Jewish  tabernacle.  If  Solo¬
mon  is  revered  by  the  Masons  as  their  tra¬
ditional  Grand  Master,  it  is  because  the
Temple  constructed  by  him  was  the  symbol
of  the  divine  life  to  be  cultivated  in  every
heart.  And  this  symbol  was  borrowed  from
the  Mosaic  tabernacle ;  and  the  Jewish
thought,  that  every  Hebrew  was  to  be  a
tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  has  been  trans¬
mitted  to  the  Masonic  system,  which  teaches
that  every  Mason  is  to  be  a  temple  of  the
Grand  Architect.  The  Papal  Church,  from
which  we  get  all  ecclesiastical  symbolism,
borrowed  its  symbology  from  the  ancient
Romans.  Hence  most  of  the  high  degrees
of  Masonry  which  partake  of  a  Christian
character  are  marked  by  Roman  symbol¬
ism  transmuted  into  Christian.  But  Craft
Masonry,  more  ancient  and  more  universal,
finds  its  symbolic  teachings  almost  exclu¬
sively  in  the  Mosaic  svmbolism  instituted
in  the  wilderness.


MOSES


MOTHER


511


If  we  inquire  whence  the  Jewish  law¬
giver  derived  the  symbolic  system  which
he  introduced  into  his  religion,  the  history
of  his  life  will  readily  answer  the  question.
Philo- Judaeus  says  that  “Moses  was  in¬
structed  by  the  Egyptian  priests  in  the
philosophy  of  symbols  and  hieroglyphics
as  well  as  in  the  mysteries  of  the  sacred
animals.”  The  sacred  historian  tells  us
that  he  was  “  learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of
the  Egyptians;”  and  Manetho  and  other
traditionary  writers  tell  us  that  he  was
educated  at  Heliopolis  as  a  priest,  under
his  Egyptian  name  of  Osarsiph,  and  that
there  he  was  taught  the  whole  range  of
literature  and  science,  which  it  was  cus¬
tomary  to  impart  to  the  priesthood  of
Egypt.  When,  then,  at  the  head  of  his
people,  he  passed  away  from  the  servitude
of  Egyptian  taskmasters,  and  began  in  the
wilderness  to  establish  his  new  religion,  it
is  not  strange  that  he  should  have  given  a
holy  use  to  the  symbols  whose  meaning  he
had  learned  in  his  ecclesiastical  education
on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.

Thus  is  it  that  we  find  in  the  Mosaic
symbolism  so  many  identities  with  the
Egyptian  ritual.  Thus  the  Ark  of  the
Covenant,  the  Breast-plate  of  the  High
Priest,  the  Mitre,  and  many  other  of  the
Jewish  symbols,  will  find  their  analogies
in  the  ritualistic  ceremonies  of  the  Egyp¬
tians.  Reghellini,  who  has  written  an
elaborate  work  on  “  Masonry  considered  as
the  result  of  the  Egyptian,  Jewish,  and
Christian  Religions,”  says  on  the  subject :
“Moses,  in  his  mysteries,  and  after  him
Solomon,  adopted  a  great  part  of  the  Egyp¬
tian  symbols,  which,  after  them,  we  Ma¬
sons  have  preserved  in  our  own.”

Moses,  H  which  means  drawn
out;  but  the  true  derivation  is  from  two
Egyptian  words,  yo ,  mo,  and  ovue,  oushes,  sig¬
nifying  saved  from,  the  water.  The  lawgiver
of  the  Jews,  and  referred  to  in  some  of  the
higher  degrees,  especially  in  the  twenty-
fifth  degree,  or  Knight  of  the  Brazen  Ser¬
pent  in  the  Scottish  Rite,  where  he  is  repre¬
sented  as  the  presiding  officer.  He  plays
also  an  important  part  in  the  Royal  Arch
of  the  York  and  American  Rites,  all  of
whose  ritual  is  framed  on  the  Mosaic  sym¬
bolism.

Mossdorf,  Friedrich.  An  eminent
German  Mason,  who  was  born  March  2,
1757,  at  Eckartsberge,  and  died  about
1830.  He  resided  in  Dresden,  and  took
an  active  part  in  the  affairs  of  Masonry.
He  was  a  warm  supporter  of  Fessler’s  Ma¬
sonic  reforms,  and  made  several  contribu¬
tions  to  the  Freyberg  Freimaurerischen
Taschenbuche  in  defence  of  Fessler’s  sys¬
tem.  He  became  intimately  connected  with
the  learned  Krause,  the  author  of  The  j


Three  Most  Ancient  Records  of  the  Masonic
Fraternity,  and  wrote  and  published  in
1809  a  critical  review  of  the  work,  in  con¬
sequence  of  which  the  Grand  Lodge  com¬
manded  him  to  absent  himself  for  an  in¬
definite  period  from  the  Lodge.  Mossdorf
then  withdrew  from  any  further  connec¬
tion  with  the  Fraternity.  His  most  valua¬
ble  contributions  to  Masonic  literature  are
his  additions  and  emendations  to  Lenning’s
Encyclopadie  der  Freimaurerei.  He  is  the
author  also  of  several  other  works  of  great
value.

Most  Excellent.  The  title  given  to
a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  and  to  its  presiding
officer,  the  High  Priest;  also  to  the  presid¬
ing  officer  of  a  Lodge  of  Most  Excellent
Masters.

Most  Excellent  Master.  The

sixth  degree  in  the  York  Rite.  Its  history
refers  to  the  dedication  of  the  Temple  by
King  Solomon,  who  is  represented  by  its
presiding  officer  under  the  title  of  Most
Excellent.  Its  officers  are  the  same  as  those
in  a  symbolic  Lodge.  I  have,  however,
seen  some  rituals  in  which  the  Junior
Warden  is  omitted.  This  degree  is  pecu¬
liarly  American,  it  being  practised  in  no
other  country.  It  was  the  invention  of
Webb,  who  organized  the  capitular  system
of  Masonry  as  it  exists  in  this  country,  and
established  the  system  of  lectures  which
is  the  foundation  of  all  subsequent  sys¬
tems  taught  in  America.

Most  Puissant.  The  title  of  the
presiding  officer  of  a  Grand  Council  of
Royal  and  Select  Masters.

Most  Worshipful.  The  title  given
to  a  Grand  Lodge  and  to  its  presiding
officer  the  Grand  Master.

Mot  de  Stfiuestre.  Half  yearly
word.  Every  six  months  the  Grand  Orient
of  France  sends  to  each  of  the  Lodges  of
its  obedience  a  password,  to  be  used  by  its
members  as  an  additional  means  of  gain¬
ing  admission  into  a  Lodge.  Each  Mason
obtains  this  wrord  only  from  the  Venerable
of  his  own  Lodge.  It  was  instituted  Oc¬
tober  28th,  1773,  when  the  Duke  of  Char¬
tres  was  elected  Grand  Master.

Mother  Council.  The  Supreme
Council  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite  for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of
the  United  States  of  America,  which  was
organized  in  1801,  at  Charleston,  is  called
the  “Mother  Council  of  the  World,”  be¬
cause  from  it  have  issued  directly  or  in¬
directly  all  the  other  Supreme  Councils  of
the  Rite  which  are  now  in  existence,  or
have  existed  since  its  organization.

Mother  Codec.  In  the  last  century
certain  Lodges  in  France  and  Germany  as¬
sumed  an  independent  position,  and  issued
j  Charters  for  the  constitution  of  Daughter


512


MOTION


MUNKHOUSE


Lodges  claiming  the  prerogatives  of  Grand
Lodges.  Thus  we  find  the  Mother  Lodge
of  Marseilles,  in  France,  which  constituted
many  Lodges.  In  Scotland  the  Lodge  of
Kilwinning  took  the  title  of  Mother  Lodge,
and  issued  Charters  until  it  was  merged  in
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.  The  system
is  altogether  irregular,  and  has  no  sanction
in  the  present  laws  of  the  Fraternity.

Motion.  A  motion  when  made  by  a
member  cannot  be  brought  before  the
Lodge  for  deliberation  unless  it  is  seconded
by  another  member.  Motions  are  of  two
kinds,  principal  and  subsidiary;  a  principal
motion  is  one  that  presents  an  indepen¬
dent  proposition  for  discussion.  Subsidiary
motions  are  those  which  are  intended  to  af¬
fect  the  principal  motion — such  as  to  amend
it,  to  lay  it  on  the  table,  to  postpone  it  defi¬
nitely  or  indefinitely,  or  to  reconsider  it,  all
of  which  are  governed  by  the  parliament¬
ary  law  under  certain  modifications  to  suit
the  spirit  and  genius  of  the  Masonic  or¬
ganization.  See  the  author’s  Treatise  on
Parliamentary  Law  as  applied  to  Masonic
Bodies.

Motto.  In  imitation  of  the  sentences
appended  to  the  coats  of  arms  and  seals  of
the  gilds  and  other  societies,  the  Masons
have  for  the  different  branches  of  their
Order  mottoes,  which  are  placed  on  their
banners  or  put  at  the  head  of  their  docu¬
ments,  which  a  re  expressive  of  the  character
and  design,  either  of  the  whole  Order  or
of  the  particular  branch  to  which  the
motto  belongs.  Thus,  in  Ancient  Craft
Masonry  we  have  as  mottoes  the  sentences,
Ordo  ab  Chao,  and  Lux  e  tenebris ;  in  Capit¬
ular  Masonry,  Holiness  to  the  Lord;  in
Templar  Masonry,  In  hoc  signo  vinces ;  in
Scottish  Masonry,  Ne  plus  ultra  is  the
motto  of  the  thirtieth  degree,  and  Spes  meo
in  deo  est  of  the  thirty-second ;  while  the
thirty-third  has  for  its  motto  Deus  meum-
que  Jus.  All  of  these  will  be  found  with
their  signification  and  origin  in  their  ap¬
propriate  places.

Mould.  This  word  is  very  common  in
the  Old  Constitutions,  where  it  is  forbidden
that  a  Freemason  should  give  a  mould  to
a  rough  Mason,  whereby,  of  course,  he  would
be  imparting  to  him  the  secrets  of  the  Craft.
Thus,  in  the  Harleian  MS. :  “  Alsoe  that  no
Mason  shall  make  any  mould,  square,  or
rule  to  any  Rough  Mason;  alsoe  that  no
Mason,  within  the  Lodge  or  without,  sett
or  lay  any  mould  stones  without  moulds  of
his  own  making.”  "We  find  the  word  in
Piers  Ploughman's  Vision :

“  If  eny  Mason  there  do  makede  a  molde
With  alle  here  wyse  castes.”

Prrkor  {Gloss.  Architect.,  p.  313,)  thus  de¬
fines  it :  “  The  model  or  pattern  used  by


1  workmen,  especially  by  Masons,  as  a  guide
in  working  mouldings  and  ornaments.  It
consists  of  a  thin  board  or  plate  of  metal,
cut  to  represent  the  exact  section  of  the
mouldings  to  be  worked  from  it.”  In  the
Cooke  MS.  the  word  maters  is  used,  which
is  evidently  a  corruption  of  the  Latin  matrix.

Mould  Stone.  In  the  quotation  from
the  Harleian  MS.  in  the  pr^eding  article,
the  expression  mould  stones  occurs,  as  it
does  in  other  Constitutions  and  in  many
old  contracts.  It  means,  probably,  large
and  peaked  stones  for  those  parts  of  the
building  which  were  to  have  mouldings  cut
upon  them,  as  window  and  door-jambs.

Mount  Calvary.  See  Calvary.

Mount  Moriali.  See  Moriah.

Mount  Sinai.  See  Sinai.

Mourning.  The  mourning  color  has
been  various  in  different  tinfes  and  coun¬
tries.  Thus,  the  Chinese  mourn  in  white ;
the  Turks  in  blue  or  in  violet ;  the  Egyptians
in  yellow;  the  Ethiopians  in  gray.  In  all
the  degrees  and  rites  of  Masonry,  with  a
single  exception,  black  is  the  symbol  of
grief,  and  therefore  the  mourning  color.
But  in  the  highest  degrees  of  the  Scottish
Rite  the  mourning  color,  like  that  used  by
the  former  kings  of  France,  is  violet.

Mouth  to  Ear.  The  Mason  is  taught,
by  an  expressive  symbol,  to  whisper  good
counsel  in  his  brother’s  ear,  and  to  warn
him  of  approaching  danger.  “  It  is  a  rare
thing,”  says  Bacon,  “  except  it  be  from  a
perfect  and  entire  friend,  to  have  counsel
given  that  is  not  bowed  and  crooked  to
some  ends  which  he  hath  that  giveth  it.”
And  hence  it  is  an  admirable  lesson,  which
Masonry  here  teaches  us,  to  use  the  lips
and  the  tongue  only  in  the  service  of  a
brother.

Movable  Jewels.  See  Jewels  of  a
Lodge.

Muenter.  Friederieh.  Born  in

17(J1,  and  died  in  1830.  He  was  Professor
of  Theology  in  the  University  of  Copen¬
hagen,  and  afterwards  Bishop  of  Seeland.
He  was  the  author  of  a  treatise  On  the  Sym¬
bols  and  Art  Representations  of  the  Early
Christians.  In  1794  he  published  his  Stat¬
ute  Book  of  the  Order  of  Knights  Templars,
“Statutenbuch  des  Ordens  der  Temple-
herren  ;  ”  a  work  which  is  one  of  the  most
valuable  contributions  that  we  have  to  the
history  of  Templarism.

Munkliouse,  D.  D.,  Rev.  Rich¬
ard.  The  author  of  A  Discourse  in  Praise
of  Freemasonm/,  8vo,Lond.,  1805;  An  Exhor¬
tation  to  the  Practice  of  those  Specific  Virtues
which  ought  to  prevail  in  the  Masonic  Char¬
acter,  with  Historical  Notes,  8vo,  Lond.,  1805 ;
and  Occasional  Discourses  on  Various  Sub¬
jects,  with  Copious  Annotations,  3  vols.,  8vo,
Lond.,  1805.  This  last  work  contains  many


MURR


MYSTERIES


513


discourses  on  Masonic  subjects.  Dr.  Munk-
house  was  an  ardent  admirer  and  defender
of  Freemasonry,  into  which  he  was  initi¬
ated  in  the  Phoenix  Lodge  of  Sunderland.
On  his  removal  to  Wakefield,  where  he  was
rector  of  St.  John  the  Baptist’s  Church,  he
united  with  the  Lodge  of  Unanimity,  under
the  Mastership  of  Richard  Linnecar,  to
whose  virtues  and  Masonic  knowledge  he
has  paid  a  high  tribute.  Dr.  Munkhouse
died  in  the  early  part  of  this  century.

Murr,  Christoph  Gottlieb  Von.
A  distinguished  historical  and  archaeologi¬
cal  writer,  who  was  born  at  Nuremberg,  in
1733,  and  died  April  8,  1811.  In  1760  he
published  an  Essay  on  the  History  of  the
Greek  Tragic  Poets ;  in  1777-82,  six  volumes
of  Antiquities  of  Herculanceum,  and  several
other  historical  works.  In  1803  he  pub¬
lished  an  essay  On  the  True  Origin  of  the
Orders  of  Rosicrucianism  and  Freemasonry,
with  an  Appendix  on  the  History  of  the  Or¬
der  of  Templars.  In  this  work,  Murr  at¬
tempts  to  trace  Freemasonry  to  the  times
of  Oliver  Cromwell,  and  maintains  that  it
and  Rosicrucianism  had  an  identical  origin,
and  the  same  history  until  the  year  1633,
when  they  separated.

Muscus  Domus.  In  the  early  rit¬
uals  of  the  last  century,  the  tradition  is
given,  that  certain  Fellow  Crafts,  while
pursuing  their  search,  discovered  a  grave
covered  with  green  moss  and  turf,  when
they  exclaimed,  Muscus  Domus ,  Deo  gratias,
which  was  interpreted,  “  Thanks  be  to
God,  our  Master  has  a  mossy  house.”
Whence  a  Mason’s  grave  came  to  be  called
Muscus  Domus.  But  both  the  tradition
and  its  application  have  become  obsolete
in  the  modern  rituals.

Music.  One  of  the  seven  liberal  arts
and  sciences,  whose  beauties  are  inculcated
in  the  Fellow  Craft’s  degree.  Music  is
recommended  to  the  attention  of  Masons,
because  as  the  “  concord  of  sweet  sounds  ”
elevates  the  generous  sentiments  of  the
soul,  so  should  the  concord  of  good  feeling
reign  among  the  brethren,  tnat  by  the
union  of  friendship  and  brotherly  love  the
boisterous  passions  may  be  lulled,  and
harmony  exist  throughout  the  Craft.

Mustard  Seed,  Order  of.  (Der
Orden  vom  Senfkorn.)  This  association,
whose  members  also  called  themselves
“The  Fraternity  of  Moravian  Brothers  of
the  Order  of  Religious  Freemasons,”  was
one  of  the  first  innovations  introduced  into
German  Freemasonry.  It  was  instituted  in
the  year  1739.  Its  mysteries  were  founded
on  that  passage  in  tbe  fourth  chapter  of
St.  Mark’s  Gospel  in  which  Christ  com¬
pares  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  a  mustard
seed.  The  brethren  wore  a  ring,  on  which
was  inscribed  Keiner  von  uns  lebt  ihm  sel-
3  P  33


her,  i.  e.,  “No  one  of  us  lives  for  himself.”
The  jewel  of  the  Order  was  a  cross  of  gold
surmounted  by  a  mustard  plant  in  full
bloom,  with  the  motto,  Quod  fuit  ante
nihil,  i.  e.,  “What  was  before  nothing.”
It  was  suspended  from  a  green  ribbon.
The  professed  object  of  the  association
was,  through  the  instrumentality  of  Free¬
masonry,  to  extend  the  kingdom  of  Christ
over  the  world.  It  has  long  been  obsolete.

Myrtle.  The  sacred  plant  of  the  Eleu-
sinian  mysteries,  and  analogous  in  its  sym¬
bolism  to  the  acacia  of  the  Masons.

Mystagogue.  The  one  who  presided
at  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  and  explained
the  sacred  things  to  the  candidate.  He
was  also  called  the  hierophant.  The  word,
which  is  Greek,  signifies  literally  one  who
makes  or  conducts  an  initiate.

Mysteries,  Ancient.  Each  of  the
Pagan  gods,  says  Warburton,  (Div.  Leg.,
I.,  ii.  4,)  had,  besides  the  public  and  open,  a
secret  worship  paid  to  him,  to  which  none
were  admitted  but  those  who  had  been
selected  by  preparatory  ceremonies  called
Initiation.  This  secret  worship  was  termed
the  Mysteries.  And  this  is  supported  by
Strabo,  (lib.  x.,  cap.  3,)  who  says  that  it
was  common,  both  to  the  Greeks  and  the
Barbarians,  to  perform  their  religious  cere¬
monies  with  the  observance  of  a  festival,
and  that  they  are  sometimes  celebrated
publicly  and  sometimes  in  mysterious  pri¬
vacy.  Noel  {Did.  de  la  Fable)  thus  defines
them :  Secret  ceremonies  which  were  prac¬
tised  in  honor  of  certain  gods,  and  -whose
secret  was  known  to  the  initiates  alone,
who  were  admitted  only  after  long  and

}>ainful  trials,  which  it  was  more  than  their
ife  was  worth  to  reveal.

As  to  their  origin,  Warburton  is  proba¬
bly  not  wrong  in  his  statement  that  the
first  of  which  we  have  any  account  are
those  of  Isis  and  Osiris  in  Egypt;  for
although  those  of  Mithras  came  into  Eu¬
rope  from  Persia,  they  were,  it  is  supposed,
carried  from  Egypt  by  Zoroaster.

The  most  important  of  these  mysteries
were  the  Osiric  in  Egypt,  the  Mithraie  in
Persia,  the  Cabiric  in  Thrace,  the  Adoni-
sian  in  Syria,  the  Dionysiac  and  Eleu-
sinian  in  Greece,  the  Scandinavian  among
the  Gothic  nations,  and  the  Druidical
among  the  Celts.

In  all  these  mysteries  we  find  a  singular
unity  of  design,  clearly  indicating  a  com¬
mon  origin,  and  a  purity  of  doctrine  as
evidently  proving  that  this  common  origin
was  not  to  be  sought  for  in  the  popular
theology  of  the  Pagan  world.  The  cere¬
monies  of  initiation  were  all  funereal  in
their  character.  They  celebrated  the  death
|  and  the  resurrection  of  some  cherished  be-
|  ing,  either  the  object  of  esteem  as  a  hero,


514


MYSTERIES


MYSTERIES


or  of  devotion  as  a  god.  Subordination  of
degrees  was  instituted,  and  the  candidate
was  subjected  to  probations  varying  in
their  character  and  severity;  the  rites
were  practised  in  the  darkness  of  night,
and  often  amid  the  gloom  of  impenetrable
forests  or  subterranean  caverns;  and  the
full  fruition  of  knowledge,  for  which  so
much  labor  was  endured,  and  so  much
danger  incurred,  was  not  attained  until  the
aspirant,  well  tried  and  thoroughly  puri¬
fied,  had  reached  the  place  of  wisdom  and
of  light.

These  mysteries  undoubtedly  owed  their
origin  to  the  desire  to  establish  esoteric
philosophy,  in  which  should  be  withheld
from  popular  approach  those  sublime  truths
which  it  was  supposed  could  only  be  intrusted
to  those  who  had  been  previously  prepared
for  their  reception.  Whence  these  doc¬
trines  were  originally  derived  it  would  be
impossible  to  say ;  but  I  am  disposed  to  ac¬
cept  Creuzer’s  hypothesis  of  an  ancient  and
highly  instructed  body  of  priests,  having
their  origin  either  in  Egypt  or  in  the  East,
from  whom  was  derived  religious,  physical,
and  historical  knowledge,  under  the  veil  of
symbols.

By  this  confinement  of  these  doctrines  to
a  system  of  secret  knowledge,  guarded  by
the  most  rigid  rites,  could  they  only  expect
to  preserve  them  from  the  superstitions,  in¬
novations,  and  corruptions  of  the  world  as
it  then  existed.  “The  distinguished  few,”
says  Oliver,  (Hist.  Init p.  2,)  “who  re¬
tained  their  fidelity,  uncontaminated  by
the  contagion  of  evil  example,  would  soon
be  able  to  estimate  the  superior  benefits  of
an  isolated  institution,  which  afforded  the
advantage  of  a  select  society,  and  kept  at
an  unapproachable  distance  the  profane
scoffer,  whose  presence  might  pollute  their
pure  devotions  and  social  converse,  by  con¬
tumelious  language  or  unholy  mirtb.”  And
doubtless  the  prevention  of  this  intrusion,
and  the  preservation  of  these  sublime  truths,
was  the  original  object  of  the  institution
of  the  ceremonies  of  initiation,  and  the
adoption  of  other  means  by  which  the  ini¬
tiated  could  be  recognized,  and  the  unini¬
tiated  excluded.  Such  was  the  opinion  of
Warburton,  who  says  that  “the  mysteries
were  at  first  the  retreats  of  sense  and  virtue,
till  time  corrupted  them  in  most  of  the
gods.”

The  Abb6  Robin  in  a  learned  work  on
this  subject  entitled  Rtcherch.es  sur  les  Ini¬
tiations  Anciens  et  Modemes,  (Paris,  1870,)
places  the  origin  of  the  initiations  at  that
remote  period  when  crimes  first  began  to
appear  upon  earth.  The  vicious,  he  re¬
marks,  were  urged  by  the  terror  of  guilt  to
seek  among  the  virtuous  for  intercessors
with  the  deity.  The  latter,  retiring  into


solitude  to  avoid  the  contagion  of  growing
corruption,  devoted  themselves  to  a  lile
of  contemplation  and  the  cultivation  of
several  of  the  useful  sciences.  The  period¬
ical  return  of  the  seasons,  the  revolution
of  the  stars,  the  productions  of  the  earth,
and  the  various  phenomena  of  nature,
studied  with  attention,  rendered  them  use¬
ful  guides  to  men,  both  in  their  pursuits  of
industry  and  in  tbeir  social  duties.  These
recluse  students  invented  certain  signs  to
recall  to  the  remembrance  of  the  people
the  times  of  their  festivals  and  of  their
rural  labors,  and  hence  the  origin  of  the
symbols  and  hieroglyphics  that  were  in  use
among  the  priests  of  all  nations.  Having
now  become  guides  and  leaders  of  the  peo¬
ple,  these  sages,  in  order  to  select  as  asso¬
ciates  of  their  learned  labors  and  sacred
functions  only  such  as  had  sufficient  merit
and  capacity,  appointed  strict  courses  of
trial  and  examination,  and  this,  our  author
thinks,  must  have  been  the  source  of  the
initiations  of  antiquity.  The  Magi,  Brah¬
mans,  Gymnosophists,  Druids,  and  priests
of  Egypt,  lived  thus  in  sequestered  habita¬
tions  and  subterranean  caves,  and  obtained
great  reputation  by  their  discoveries  in  as¬
tronomy,  chemistry,  and  mechanics,  by
their  purity  of  morals,  and  by  their  knowl¬
edge  of  the  science  of  legislation.  It  was
in  these  schools,  says  M.  Robin,  that  the
first  sages  and  legislators  of  antiquity  were
formed,  and  in  them  he  supposes  the  doc¬
trines  taught  to  have  been  the  unity  of  God
and  the  immortality  of  the  soul ;  and  it
was  from  these  mysteries,  and  their  symbols
and  hieroglyphics,  that  the  exuberant  fancy
of  the  Greeks  drew  much  of  their  my¬
thology.

Warburton  deduces  from  the  ancient
writers  —  from  Cicero  and  Porphyry,  from
Origen  and  Celsus,  and  from  others —  what
was  the  true  object  of  the  mysteries.  They
taught  the  dogma  of  the  unity  of  God  in
opposition  to  the  polytheistic  notions  of  the
people,  and  in  connection  with  this  the
doctrine  of  a  future  life,  and  that  the  ini¬
tiated  should  be  happier  in  that  state  than
all  other  mortals;  that  while  the  souls  of
the  profane,  at  their  leaving  the  body,
stuck  fast  in  mire  and  filth  and  remained
in  darkness,  the  souls  of  the  initiated  winged
their  flight  directly  to  the  happy  islands
and  the  habitations  of  the  gods.  “Thrice
happy  they,”  says  Sophocles,  “who  de¬
scended  to  the  shades  below  after  having
beheld  these  rites ;  for  they  alone  have  life
in  Hades,  while  all  others  suffer  there  every
kind  of  evil.”  And  Isocrates  declares  that
“  those  who  have  been  initiated  in  the  mys¬
teries,  entertain  better  hopes  both  as  to  the
end  of  life  and  the  whole  of  futurity.”

Others  of  the  ancients  have  given  us  the


MYSTERIES


MYSTERIES


515


same  testimony  as  to  their  esoteric  char¬
acter.”  “  All  the  mysteries,”  says  Plu¬
tarch,  “refer  to  a  future  life  and  to  the
state  of  the  soul  after  death.”  In  another
lace,  addressing  his  wife,  he  says,  “We
ave  been  instructed,  in  the  religious  rites
of  Dionysus,  that  the  soul  is  immortal,  and
that  there  is  a  future  state  of  existence.”
Cicero  tells  us  that,  in  the  mysteries  of
Ceres  at  Eleusis,  the  initiated  were  taught
to  live  happily  and  to  die  in  the  hope  of  a
blessed  futurity.  And,  finally,  Plato  in¬
forms  us  that  the  hymns  of  Musseus,  which
were  sung  in  the  mysteries,  celebrated  the
rewards  and  pleasures  of  the  virtuous  in
another  life,  and  the  punishments  which
awaited  the  wicked.

These  sentiments,  so  different  from  the
debased  polytheism  which  prevailed  among
the  uninitiated,  are  the  most  certain  evi¬
dence  that  the  mysteries  arose  from  a  purer
source  than  that  which  gave  birth  to  the
religion  of  the  vulgar.

I  must  not  pass  unnoticed  Faber’s  notion
of  their  arkite  origin.  Finding,  as  he  did,
a  prototype  for  every  ancient  cultus  in  the
ark  of  Noah,  it  is  not  surprising  that  he
should  apply  his  theory  to  the  mysteries.
“The  initiations,”  he  says,  ( Orig .  Pag.
Idol.,  II.,  iv.  5,)  “into  the  mysteries  sceni-
cally  represented  the  mythic  descent  into
Hades  and  the  return  from  thence  to  the
light  of  day,  by  which  was  meant  the  en¬
trance  into  the  ark  and  the  subsequent  lib¬
eration  from  its  dark  enclosure.  They  all
equally  related  to  the  allegorical  disappear¬
ance,  or  death,  or  descent  of  the  great
father,  at  their  commencement ;  and  his
invention,  or  revival,  or  return  from  Hades,
at  their  conclusion.”

Dollinger  [Gent,  and  Jew.,  i.  126,)  says,
speaking  of  the  mysteries,  “the  whole  was
a  drama,  the  prelude  to  which  consisted  in
purifications,  sacrifices,  and  injunctions
with  regard  to  the  behavior  to  be  observed.
The  adventures  of  certain  deities,  their
sufferings  and  joys,  their  appearance  on
earth,  and  relations  to  mankind,  their
death,  or  descent  to  the  nether  world,  their
return,  or  their  rising  again  —  all  these,  as
symbolizing  the  life  of  nature,  were  repre¬
sented  in  a  connected  series  of  theatrical
scenes.  These  representations,  tacked  on
to  a  nocturnal  solemnity,  brilliantly  got  up,
particularly  at  Athens,  with  all  the  re¬
sources  of  art  and  sensual  beauty,  and  ac¬
companied  with  dancing  and  song,  were
eminently  calculated  to  take  a  powerful
hold  on  the  imagination  and  the  heart,
and  to  excite  in  the  spectators  alter¬
nately  conflicting  sentiments  of  terror,
and  calm,  sorrow,  and  fear,  and  hope.
They  worked  upon  them,  now  by  agitating,
now  by  soothing,  and  meanwhile  had  a


strong  bearing  upon  susceptibilities  and
capacities  of  individuals,  according  as  their
several  dispositions  inclined  them  more  to
reflection  and  observation,  or  to  a  resigned
credulity.”

Bunsen  ( God  in  History,  II.,  B.  iv.,  ch.  6,)
gives  the  most  recent  and  the  most  philo¬
sophic  idea  of  the  character  of  the  mysteries.
They  did,  he  says,  “  indeed  exhibit  to  the  ini¬
tiated  coarse  physical  symbols  of  the  gene¬
rative  powers  of  Nature,  and  of  the  univer¬
sal  Nature  herself,  eternally,  self-sustaining
through  all  transformations;  but  the  reli¬
gious  element  of  the  mysteries  consisted  in
the  relations  of  the  universe  to  the  soul,
more  especially  after  death.  Thus,  even
without  philosophic  proof,  we  are  justified
in  assuming  that  the  Nature  symbolism  re¬
ferring  to  the  Zodiac  formed  a  mere  frame¬
work  for  the  doctrines  relating  to  the  soul
and  to  the  ethical  theory  of  the  universe.
So,  likewise,  in  the  Samothracian  worship
of  the  Kabiri,  the  contest  waged  by  the
orb  of  day  was  represented  by  the  story
of  the  three  brothers  (the  seasons  of  the
year),  one  of  whom  is  continually  slain  by
the  other  two,  but  ever  and  anon  arises  to
life  again.  But  here,  too,  the  beginning
and  end  of  the  worship  were  ethical.  A
sort  of  confession  was  demanded  of  the
candidates  before  admission,  and  at  the
close  of  the  service  the  victorious  God
(Dionysus)  was  displayed  as  the  Lord  of
the  spirit.  Still  less,  however,  did  theo¬
rems  of  natural  philosophy  form  the  sub¬
ject-matter  of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  of
which,  on  the  contrary,  psychical  concep¬
tions  were  the  beginning  and  the  end.  The
predominating  idea  of  these  conceptions
was  that  of  the  soul  as  a  divine,  vital  force,
held  captive  here  on  earth  and  sorely  tired;
but  the  initiated  were  further  taught  to
look  forward  to  a  final  redemption  and
blessedness  for  the  good  and  pious,  and
eternal  torments  after  death  for  the  wicked
and  unjust.”

The  esoteric  character  of  the  mysteries  was
preserved  by  the  most  powerful  sanctions.
An  oath  of  secrecy  was  administered  in  the
most  solemn  form  to  the  initiate,  and  to
violate  it  was  considered  a  sacrilegious
crime,  the  prescribed  punishment  for  which
was  immediate  death,  and  we  have  at  least
one  instance  in  Livy  of  the  infliction  of
the  penalty.  The  ancient  writers  were  there¬
fore  extremely  reluctant  to  approach  the
subject,  and  Lobeck  gives  in  hisAglaophamus
(vol.  i.,  app.  131,  l.r>l ;  ii.  12,  87,)  several
examples  of  the  cautious  manner  in  which
they  shrunk  from  divulging  or  discussing
any  explanation  of  a  symbol  which  had
been  interpreted  to  them  in  the  course  of
initiation.  I  would  forbid,  says  Horace,
(L.  iii.,  Od.  2,)  that  man  who  would  divulge


516


MYSTERIES


MYSTERIES


the  sacred  rites  of  mysterious  Ceres  from
being  under  the  same  roof  with  me,  or
from  setting  sail  with  me  in  the  same  pre¬
carious  bark.

On  the  subject  of  their  relation  to  the
rite3  of  Freemasonry,  to  which  they  bear
in  many  respects  so  remarkable  a  resem¬
blance,  that  some  connection  seems  neces¬
sarily  implied,  there  are  five  principal  the¬
ories.  The  first  is  that  embraced  and
taught  by  Dr.  Oliver,  namely,  that  they  are
but  deviations  from  that  common  source,
both  of  them  and  of  Freemasonry,  the
atriarchal  mode  of  worship  established
y  God  himself.  With  this  pure  system  of
truth,  he  supposes  the  science  of  Freema¬
sonry  to  have  been  coeval  and  identified.
But  the  truths  thus  revealed  by  divinity
came  at  length  to  be  doubted  or  rejected
through  the  imperfection  of  human  reason,
and  though  the  visible  symbols  were  re¬
tained  in  the  mysteries  of  the  Pagan  world,
their  true  interpretation  was  lost.

There  is  a  second  theory  which,  leaving
the  origin  of  the  mysteries  to  be  sought  in
the  patriarchal  doctrines,  where  Oliver  ha3
placed  it,  finds  the  connection  between
them  and  Freemasonry  commencing  at  the
building  of  King  Solomon’s  Temple.  Over
the  construction  of  this  building,  Hiram,
the  Architect  of  Tyre,  presided.  At  Tyre
the  mysteries  of  Bacchus  had  been  intro¬
duced  by  the  Dionysian  Artificers,  and  into
their  fraternity  Hiram,  in  all  probability,
had,  it  is  necessarily  suggested,  been  ad¬
mitted.  Freemasonry,  whose  tenets  had
always  existed  in  purity  among  the  imme¬
diate  descendants  of  the  patriarchs,  added
now  to  its  doctrines  the  guard  of  secrecy,
which,  as  Dr.  Oliver  himself  remarks,  wras
necessary  to  preserve  them  from  perversion
or  pollution.

A  third  theory  has  been  advanced  by  the
Abb6  Robin,  in  which  he  connects  Free¬
masonry  indirectly  with  the  mysteries,
through  the  intervention  of  the  Crusaders.
In  the  work  already  cited,  he  attempts  to
deduce,  from  the  ancient  initiations,  the
orders  of  chivalry,  whose  branches,  he
says,  produced  the  institution  of  Freema¬
sonry.

A  fourth  theory,  and  this  has  been  re¬
cently  advanced  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  King  in
his  treatise  On  the  Gnostics,  is  that  as  some
of  them,  especially  those  of  Mithras,  were
extended  beyond  the  advent  of  Christianity,
and  even  to  the  very  commencement  of  the
Middle  Ages,  they  were  seized  upon  by  the
secret  societies  of  that  period  as  a  model
for  their  organization,  and  that  through
these  latter  they  are  to  be  traced  to  Free¬
masonry.

But  perhaps,  after  all,  the  truest  theory
is  that  which  would  discard  all  successive


links  in  a  supposed  chain  of  descent  from
the  mysteries  to  Freemasonry,  and  would
attribute  their  close  resemblance  to  a  nat¬
ural  coincidence  of  human  thought.  The
legend  of  the  third  degree,  and  the  legends
of  the  Eleusinian,  the  Cabiric,  the  Diony¬
sian,  the  Adonic,  and  all  the  other  mys¬
teries,  are  identical  in  their  object  to  teach
the  reality  of  a  future  life;  and  this  lesson
is  taught  in  all  by  the  use  of  the  same  sym¬
bolism,  and,  substantially,  the  same  scenic
representation.  And  this  is  not  because
the  Masonic  rites  are  a  lineal  succession
from  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  but  because
there  has  been  at  all  times  a  proneness  of
the  human  heart  to  nourish  this  belief  in  a
future  life,  and  the  proneness  of  the  human
mind  to  clothe  this  belief  in  a  symbolic
dress.  And  if  there  is  any  other  more
direct  connection  between  them  it  must  be
sought  for  in  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Artifi¬
cers,  who  did,  most  probably,  exercise  some
influence  over  the  rising  Freemasons  of
the  early  ages,  and  who,  as  the  contempo¬
raries  of  the  mysteries,  were,  we  may  well
suppose,  imbued  with  something  of  their
organization.

I  conclude  with  a  notice  of  their  ultimate
fate.  They  continued  to  flourish  until  long
after  the  Christian  era  ;  but  they  at  length
degenerated.  In  the  fourth  century,  Chris¬
tianity  had  begun  to  triumph.  The  Pagans,
desirous  of  making  converts,  threw  open
the  hitherto  inaccessible  portals  of  their
mysterious  rites.  The  strict  scrutiny  of
the  candidate’s  past  life,  and  the  demand
for  proofs  of  irreproachable  conduct,  were
no  longer  deemed  indispensable.  The  vile
and  the  vicious  were  indiscriminately,  and
even  with  avidity,  admitted  to  participate
in  privileges  which  were  once  granted  only
to  the  noble  and  the  virtuous.  The  sun  of
Paganism  was  setting,  and  its  rites  had  be¬
come  contemptible  and  corrupt.  Their
character  was  entirely  changed,  and  the
initiations  were  indiscriminately  6old  by
peddling  priests,  who  wandered  through
the  country,  to  every  applicant  who  was
willing  to  pay  a  trifling  fee  for  that  which
had  once  been  refused  to  the  entreaties  of
a  monarch.  At  length  these  abominations
attracted  the  attention  of  the  emperors,  and
Constantine  and  Gratian  forbade  their  cel¬
ebration  by  night,  excepting,  however,  from
these  edicts,  the  initiations  at  Eleusis.  But
finally  Theodosius,  by  a  general  edict  of
proscription,  ordered  the  whole  of  the  Pagan
mysteries  to  be  abolished,  in  the  four  hun¬
dred  and  thirty-eighth  year  of  the  Chris¬
tian  era,  and  eighteen  hundred  years  after
their  first  establishment  in  Greece.

Clavel,  however,  says  that  they  did  not
entirely  cease  until  the  era  of  the  restora¬
tion  of  learning,  and  that  during  a  part  of


MYSTEKY


MYTH


517


the  Middle  Ages  the  mysteries  of  Diana,
under  the  name  of  the  “  Courses  of  Diana,”
and  those  of  Pan,  under  that  of  the  “  Sab-
bats,”  were  practised  in  country  places.
But  these  were  really  only  certain  super¬
stitious  rites  connected  with  the  belief  in
witchcraft.  The  mysteries  of  Mithras,
which,  continually  attacked  by  the  Fathers
of  the  Church,  live,d  until  the  beginning  of
the  fifth  century,  were,  I  think,  the  last  of
the  old  mysteries  which  had  once  exercised
so  much  influence  over  the  Pagan  world
and  the  Pagan  religions.

Mystery.  From  the  Greek  yvorripiov ,
a  secret,  something  to  be  concealed.  The
gilds  or  companies  of  the  Middle  Ages,  out
of  which  we  trace  the  Masonic  organiza¬
tion,  were  called  mysteries,  because  they  had
trade-secrets,  the  preservation  of  which  was
a  primary  ordination  of  these  fraternities.
“Mystery”  and  “Craft”  came  thus  to  be
synonymous  words.  In  this  secondary  sense
we  speak  of  the  “  Mystery  of  the  Stonema¬
sons”  as  equivalent  to  the  “Craft  of  the
Stonemasons.”  But  the  Mystery  of  Free¬
masonry  refers  rather  to  the  primary  mean¬
ing  of  the  word  as  immediately  derived
from  the  Greek.

Mystes.  (From  the  Greek  yvu,  to  shut
the  eyes.)  One  who  had  been  initiated  into
the  Lesser  Mysteries  of  Paganism.  He  was
now  blind;  but  when  he  was  initiated  into
the  Greater  Mysteries,  he  was  called  an
Epopt,  or  one  who  saw.

The  Mystes  was  permitted  to  proceed  no
farther  than  the  vestibule  or  porch  of  the
temple.  To  the  Epopts  only  was  accorded
the  privilege  of  admission  to  the  adytum  or
sanctuary.  A  female  initiate  was  called  a
Mystis.

Mystical.  A  word  applied  to  any  lan¬
guage,  symbol,  or  ritual  which  is  under¬
stood  only  by  the  initiated.  The  word  was
first  used  by  the  priests  to  describe  their
mysterious  rites,  and  then  borrowed  by  the
philosophers  to  be  applied  to  the  inner,
esoteric  doctrines  of  their  schools.  In  this
sense  we  speak  of  the  mystical  doctrines
of  Speculative  Masonry.  Suidas  derives
the  word  from  the  G  reek  pvu,  to  close,  and
especially  to  close  the  lips.  Hence  the  mys¬
tical  is  that  about  which  the  mouth  should
be  closed.

Mysticism.  A  word  applied  in  reli¬
gious  phraseology  to  any  views  or  tenden¬
cies  which  aspire  to  more  direct  communi¬
cation  between  God  and  man  by  the  in¬
ward  perception  of  the  mind  than  can  be
obtained  through  revelation.  “  Mysticism,”
says  Vaughan,  (Hours  with  the  Mystics,  i.
19,)  “presents  itself  in  all  its  phases  as
more  or  less  the  religion  of  internal  as  op¬
posed  to  external  revelation  —  of  heated
feeling,  sickly  sentiment,  or  lawless  imagi¬


nation,  as  opposed  to  that  reasonable  belief
in  which  the  intellect  and  the  heart,  the
inward  witness  and  the  outward,  are  alike
engaged.”  The  Pantheism  of  some  of  the
ancient  philosophers  and  of  the  modern
Spinozaists,  the  Speculations  of  the  Neo-
platonists,  the  Anabaptism  of  Munster,  the
system  of  Jacob  Behmen,  the  Quietism  of
Madame  Guyon,  the  doctrines  of  the  Ba¬
varian  Illuminati,  and  the  reveries  of  Swe¬
denborg,  all  partake  more  or  less  of  the
spirit  of  mysticism.  The  Germans  have
two  words,  mystik  and  mysticismus,  —  the
former  of  which  they  use  in  a  favorable,  the
latter  in  an  unfavorable  sense.  Mysticism
is  with  them  only  another  word  for  Pan¬
theism,  between  which  and  Atheism  there
is  but  little  difference.  Hence  a  belief  in
mysticism  is  with  the  German  Freemasons
a  disqualification  for  initiation  into  the
Masonic  rites.  Thus  the  second  article  of
the  Statutes  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Hano¬
ver  prescribes  that  “ein  Freimaurer  muss
vom  Mysticismus  und  Atheismus  gleich
weit  entfernt  stehen,”  i.  e.,  “a  Freemason
must  be  equally  distant  from  Mysticism
and  Atheism.”  Gadicke  (Freimaurer- Lexi¬
con)  thus  expresses  the  German  sentiment :
“  Etwas  mystisch  sollte  wohl  jeder  Mensch
seyn,  aber  man  h'ute  sich  vor  grobem  Mys¬
ticismus,”  i.  e.,  “  Every  man  ought  to  be
somewhat  mystical,  but  should  guard  against
coarse  mysticism .”

Mystic  Tie.  That  sacred  and  invio¬
lable  bond  which  unites  men  of  the  most
discordant  opinions  into  one  band  of
brothers,  which  gives  but  one  language  to
men  of  all  nations  and  one  altar  to  men
of  all  religions,  is  properly,  from  the  mys¬
terious  influence  it  exerts,  denominated  the
mystic  tie  ;  and  Freemasons,  because  they
alone  are  under  its  influence,  or  enjoy  its
benefits,  are  called  “  Brethren  of  the  mystic
tie.”

Myth.  The  word  myth,  from  the  Greek
l uidoc,  a  story,  in  its  original  acceptation,
signified  simply  a  statement  or  narrative
of  an  event,  without  any  necessary  implica¬
tion  of  truth  or  falsehood ;  but,  as  the  word
is  now  used,  it  conveys  the  idea  of  a  per¬
sonal  narrative  of  remote  date,  which,  al¬
though  not  necessarily  untrue,  is  certified
only  by  the  internal  evidence  of  the  tradi¬
tion  itself.  This  definition,  which  is  sub¬
stantially  derived  from  Mr.  Grote,  (Hist,  of
Greece,  vol.  i.,  ch.  xvi.,  p.  479,)  may  be  ap¬
plied  without  modification  to  the  myths  of
Freemasonry,  although  intended  by  the
author  only  for  the  myths  of  the  ancient
Greek  religion.

The  myth,  then,  is  a  narrative  of  remote
date,  not  necessarily  true  or  false,  but  whose
truth  can  only  be  certified  by  internal  evi¬
dence.  The  word  was  first  applied  to  those


518


MYTH


MYTH


fables  of  the  Pagan  gods  which  have  de¬
scended  from  the  remotest  antiquity,  and
in  all  of  which  there  prevails  a  symbolic
idea,  not  always,  however,  capable  of  a
positive  interpretation.  As  applied  to  Free¬
masonry,  the  words  myth  and  legend  are
synonymous.

From  this  definition  it  will  appear  that
the  myth  is  really  only  the  interpretation
of  an  idea.  But  how  we  are  to  read  these
myths  will  best  appear  from  these  noble
words  of  Max  Muller,  [Science  of  Lang.,  2d
Ser.,  p.578:)  “Everything  is  true,  natural,
significant,  if  we  enter  with  a  reverent
spirit  into  the  meaning  of  ancient  art  and
ancient  language.  Everything  becomes
false,  miraculous,  and  unmeaning,  if  we
interpret  the  deep  and  mighty  words  of
the  seers  of  old  in  the  shallow  and  feeble
sense  of  modern  chroniclers."

A  fertile  source  of  instruction  in  Masonry
is  to  be  found  in  its  traditions  and  mythi¬
cal  legends;  not  only  those  which  are  in¬
corporated  into  its  ritual  and  are  exempli¬
fied  in  its  ceremonies,  but  those  also  which,
although  forming  no  part  of  the  Lodge  lec¬
tures,  have  been  orally  transmitted  as  por¬
tions  of  its  history,  and  which,  only  within
a  comparatively  recent  period,  have  been
committed  to  writing.  But  for  the  proper
appreciation  of  these  traditions  some  pre¬
paratory  knowledge  of  the  general  charac¬
ter  of  Masonic  myths  is  necessary.  If  all
the  details  of  these  traditions  be  considered
as  asserted  historical  facts,  seeking  to  con¬
vey  nothing  more  nor  less  than  historical
information,  then  the  improbabilities  and
anachronisms,  and  other  violations  of  his¬
torical  truth  which  distinguish  many  of
them,  must  cause  them  to  be  rejected  by
the  scholar  as  absurd  impostures.  But
there  is  another  and  a  more  advantageous
view  in  which  these  traditions  are  to  be
considered.  Freemasonry  is  a  symbolic  in¬
stitution —  everything  in  and  about  it  is
symbolic  —  and  nothing  more  eminently  so
than  its  traditions.  Although  some  of
them  —  as,  for  instance,  the  legend  of  the
third  degree  —  have  in  all  probability  a
deep  substratum  of  truth  lying  beneath,
over  this  there  is  superposed  a  beautiful
structure  of  symbolism.  History  has,  per¬
haps,  first  suggested  the  tradition  ;  but  then


the  legend,  like  the  myths  of  the  ancient
poets,  becomes  a  symbol,  which  is  to  enun¬
ciate  some  sublime  philosophical  or  reli¬
gious  truth.  Read  in  this  way,  and  in  this
way  only,  the  myths  or  legends  and  tradi¬
tions  of  Freemasonry  will  become  interest¬
ing  and  instructive.  See  Legend.

Myth,  Historical.  A  historical
myth  is  a  myth  that  has  a  known  and  re¬
cognized  foundation  in  historical  truth,  but
with  the  admixture  of  a  preponderating
amount  of  fiction  in  the  introduction  of
personages  and  circumstances.  Between
the  historical  myth  and  the  mythical  his¬
tory,  the  distinction  cannot  always  be  pre¬
served,  because  we  are  not  always  able  to
determine  whether  there  is  a  preponderance
of  truth  or  of  fiction  in  the  legend  or  nar¬
rative  under  examination.

Mythical  History.  A  myth  or  le¬
gend,  in  which  the  historical  and  truthful
greatly  preponderate  over  the  inventions
of  fiction,  may  be  called  a  mythical  history.
Certain  portions  of  the  legend  of  the  third
degree  have  such  a  foundation  in  fact  that
they  constitute  a  mythical  history,  while
other  portions,  added  evidently  for  the  pur¬
poses  of  symbolism,  are  simply  a  historical
myth.

Mythology.  Literally,  the  science  of
myths ;  and  this  is  a  very  appropriate  defi¬
nition,  for  mythology  is  the  science  which
treats  of  the  religion  of  the  ancient  Pagans,
which  was  almost  altogether  founded  on
myths,  or  popular  traditions  and  legendary
tales;  and  hence  Keightly  ( Mythol .  of  An¬
cient  Greece  and  Italy,  p.  2,)  says  that  “my¬
thology  may  be  regarded  as  the  repository
of  the  early  religion  of  the  people.”  Its
interest  to  a  Masonic  student  arises  from
the  constant  antagonism  that  existed  be¬
tween  its  doctrines  and  those  of  the  Primi¬
tive  Freemasonry  of  antiquity  and  the  light
that  the  mythological  mysteries  throw  upon
the  ancient  organization  of  Speculative
Masonry.

Myth  Philosophical.  This  is  a
myth  or  legend  that  is  almost  wholly  un-
historical,  and  which  has  been  invented
only  for  the  purpose  of  enunciating  and  il¬
lustrating  a  particular  thought  or  dogma.
The  legend  of  Euclid  is  clearly  a  philo¬
sophical  myth.


NAAMAH


NAME


519


N.


Naamah.  The  daughter  of  Lamech.
To  her  the  “  Legend  of  the  Craft  ”  attri¬
butes  the  invention  of  the  art  of  weaving,
and  she  is  united  with  her  three  brothers,
by  the  same  legend,  in  the  task  of  inscrib¬
ing  the  several  sciences  on  two  pillars,  that
the  knowledge  of  them  might  be  preserved
after  the  flood.

Nabaim.  See  Schools  of  the  Prophets.

Naked.  In  Scriptural  symbology,
nakedness  denoted  sin,  and  clothing ,  protec¬
tion.  But  the  symbolism  of  Masonry  on
this  subject  is  different.  There,  to  be
“  neither  naked  nor  clothed  ”  is  to  make  no
claim  through  worldly  wealth  or  honors  to
preferment  in  Masonry,  where  nothing  but
internal  merit,  which  is  unaffected  by  the
outward  appearance  of  the  body,  is  received
as  a  recommendation  for  admission.

Name  of  God.  A  reverential  allu¬
sion  to  the  name  of  God,  in  some  especial
and  peculiar  form,  is  to  be  found  in  the
doctrines  and  ceremonies  of  almost  all  na¬
tions.  This  unutterable  name  was  respected
by  the  Jews  under  the  sacred  form  of  the  word
Jehovah.  Among  the  Druids,  the  three  let¬
ters  I.  O.  W.  constituted  the  name  of  Deity.
They  we  re  never  pronounced,  says  Giraldus
Cambrensis,  but  another  and  less  sacred
name  was  substituted  for  them.  Each
letter  was  a  name  in  itself.  The  first  is
the  Word,  at  the  utterance  of  which  in  the
beginning  the  world  burst  into  existence;
the  second  is  the  Word,  whose  sound  still
continues,  and  by  which  all  things  remain
in  existence;  the  third  is  the  Word,  by  the
utterance  of  which  all  things  will  be  con¬
summated  in  happiness,  forever  approach¬
ing  to  the  immediate  presence  of  the
Deity.  The  analogy  between  this  and  the
past,  present,  and  future  significations  con¬
tained  in  the  Jewish  Tetragrammaton,  will
be  evident.

Among  the  Mohammedans  there  is  a
science  called  ISM  ALLAH,  or  the  science
of  the  name  of  God.  “  They  pretend,”
says  Niebuhr,  “  that  God  is  the  lock  of  this
science,  and  Mohammed  the  key;  that,
consequently,  none  but  Mohammedans  can
attain  it;  that  it  discovers  what  passes  in
different  countries;  that  it  familiarizes  the
possessors  with  the  genii,  who  are  at  the
command  of  the  initiated,  and  who  in¬
struct  them  ;  that  it  places  the  winds  and
the  seasons  at  their  disposal,  and  heals  the
bites  of  serpents,  the  lame,  the  maimed,
and  the  blind.”

In  the  chapter  of  the  Koran  entitled
Araaf  it  is  written:  “God  has  many  ex¬
cellent  names.  Invoke  him  by  these  names,
and  separate  yourselves  from  them  who


give  him  false  names.”  The  Mohamme¬
dans  believe  that  God  has  ninety  -  nine
names,  which,  with  that  of  Allah,  make
one  hundred ;  and,  therefore,  their  chaplets
or  rosaries  are  composed  of  one  hundred
beads,  at  each  of  which  they  invoke  one  of
these  names ;  and  there  is  a  tradition,  that
whoever  frequently  makes  this  invocation
will  find  the  gates  of  Paradise  open  to
him.  With  them  ALLAH  is  the  Ism  al
adhem ,  the  Great  Name,  and  they  bestow
upon  it  all  the  miraculous  virtues  which
the  Jews  give  to  the  Tetragrammaton.
This,  they  say,  is  the  name  that  was  en¬
graven  on  the  stone  which  Japheth  gave  to
his  children  to  bring  down  rain  from
heaven ;  and  it  was  by  virtue  of  this  name
that  Noah  made  the  ark  float  on  the  waters,
and  governed  it  at  will,  without  the  aid  of
oars  or  rudder.

Among  the  Hindus  there  was  the  same
veneration  of  the  name  of  God,  as  is  evinced
in  their  treatment  of  the  mystical  name
AUM.  The  “  Institutes  of  Menu  ”  con¬
tinually  refer  to  the  peculiar  efficacy  of
this  word,  of  which  it  is  said,  “All  rites
ordained  in  the  Yeda,  oblations  to  fire,  and
solemn  sacrifices  pass  away;  but  that  which
passes  not  away  is  the  syllable  AUM,  thence
called  aishara,  since  it  is  a  symbol  of  God,
the  Lord  of  created  beings.”

There  was  in  every  ancient  nation  a
sacred  name  given  to  the  highest  god  of  its
religious  faith,  besides  the  epithets  of  the
other  and  subordinate  deities.  The  old
Aryans,  the  founders  of  our  race,  called
their  chief  god  DYAUS,  and  in  the  Vedas
we  have  the  invocation  to  Dyaus  Pitar ,
which  is  the  same  as  the  Greek  Z ev  kuttip,
and  the  Latin,  Jupiter,  all  meaning  the
Heaven-Father,  and  at  once  reminding  us
of  the  Christian  invocation  to  “Our  Fa¬
ther  which  art  in  heaven.”

There  is  one  incident  in  the  Hindu  my¬
thology  which  shows  how  much  the  old
Indian  heart  yearned  after  this  expression
of  the  nature  of  Deity  by  a  name.  There
was  a  nameless  god,  to  whom,  as  the  “source
of  golden  light,”  there  was  a  worship.
This  is  expressed  in  one  of  the  Veda
hymns,  where  the  invocation  in  every
stanza  closes  with  the  exclamation,  “  Who
is  the  god  to  whom  we  shall  offer  our  sac¬
rifice?”  Now,  says  Bunsen,  (God  in  His¬
tory,  i.  302,)  “the  Brahmanic  expositors
must  needs  find  in  every  hymn  the  name
of  a  god  who  is  invoked  in  it,  and  so,  in  this
case,  they  have  actually  invented  a  gram¬
matical  divinity,  the  god  Who.”  What
more  pregnant  testimony  could  we  have  of
|  the  tendency  of  man  to  seek  a  knowledge


520


NAME


NAME


of  the  Divine  nature  in  the  expression  of  a
name?

The  Assyrians  worshipped  Amir,  or  Asa-
rac,  as  their  chief  god.  On  an  obelisk,
taken  from  the  palace  of  Nimrod,  we  find
the  inscription,  “to  Asarac,  the  Great
Lord,  the  King  of  all  the  great  gods.”

Of  the  veneration  of  the  Egyptians  for
the  name  of  their  supreme  god,  we  have  a
striking  evidence  in  the  writings  of  Herod¬
otus,  the  Father  of  History,  as  he  has
been  called,  who  during  a  visit  to  Egypt
was  initiated  into  the  Osirian  mysteries.
Speaking  of  these  initiations,  he  says,  (B.
ii.,  c.  171,)  “the  Egyptians  represent  by
night  his  sufferings,  whose  name  I  refrain
from  mentioning It  was  no  more  lawful
among  the  Egyptians  than  it  was  among
the  Jews,  to  give  utterance  aloud  to  that
Holy  Name.

At  Byblos  the  Phoenicians  worshipped
Eliun,  the  Most  High  God.  From  him
was  descended  El,  whom  Philo  identifies
with  Saturn,  and  to  whom  he  traces  the
Hebrew  Elohim.  Of  this  EL,  Max  Muller
says  that  there  was  undeniably  a  primitive
religion  of  the  whole  Semitic  race,  and  that
the  Strong  One  in  Heaven  was  invoked
under  this  name  by  the  ancestors  of  the
Semitic  races,  before  there  were  Babyloni¬
ans  in  Babylonia,  Phoenicians  in  Sidon  and
Tyre,  or  Jews  in  Mesopotamia  and  Jeru¬
salem.  If  so,  then  the  Mosaic  adoption
of  Jehovah,  with  its  more  precise  teaching
of  the  Divine  essence,  was  a  step  in  the
progress  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine
Truth.

In  China  there  is  an  infinite  variety  of
names  of  elemental  powers,  and  even  of
ancestral  spirits,  who  are  worshipped  as
subordinate  deities;  but  the  ineffable  name
is  TIEN,  compounded  of  the  two  signs  for
great  and  one,  and  which  the  Imperial  Dic¬
tionary  tells  us  signifies  “  the  Great  One  —
He  that  dwells  on  high,  and  regulates  all
below.”

Drummond  ( Origines )  says  that  ABAUR
was  the  name  of  the  Supreme  Deity  among
the  ancient  Chaldeans.  It  is  evidently
the  Hebrew  -TIN  DN,  and  signifies  “The
Father  of  Light.”

The  Scandinavians  had  twelve  subordin¬
ate  gods,  but  their  chief  or  supreme  deity
was  Al-Fathr,  or  the  All  Father.

Even  among  the  red  men  of  America
we  find  the  idea  of  an  invisible  deity,
whose  name  was  to  be  venerated.  Garcil-
asso  de  la  Vega  tells  us  that  while  the
Peruvians  paid  public  worship  to  the  sun,
it  was  but  as  a  symbol  of  the  Supreme
Being,  whom  they  called  Pachacamac,  a
word  meaning  “  the  soul  of  the  world,”  and
which  was  so  sacred  that  it  was  spoken
only  with  extreme  dread.


The  Jews  had,  besides  the  Tetragramma-
ton  or  four-lettered  name,  two  others :  oue
consisting  of  twelve  and  the  other  of  forty-
two  letters.  But  Maimonides,  in  his  More
Nevochim,  (p.  i.,  clxii.,)  remarks  that  it  is
impossible  to  suppose  that  either  of  these
constituted  a  single  name,  but  that  each
must  have  been  composed  of  several  words,
which  must,  however,  have  been  significant
in  making  man  approximate  to  a  knowl¬
edge  of  the  true  essence  of  God.  The  Kab-
balistical  book  called  the  Sohar  confirms
this  when  it  tells  us  that  there  are  ten
names  of  God  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  and
that  when  these  ten  names  are  combined
into  one  word,  the  number  of  the  letters
amounts  to  forty- two.  But  the  Talmudists,
although  they  did  not  throw  around  the
forty-two-lettered  name  the  sanctity  of  the
Tetragrammaton,  prescribed  that  it  should
be  communicated  only  to  men  of  middle
age  and  of  virtuous  habits,  and  that  its
knowledge  would  confirm  them  as  heirs  of
the  future  as  well  as  the  present  life.  The
twelve-lettered  name,  although  once  com¬
mon,  became  afterwards  occult;  and  when,
on  the  death  of  Simon  the  First,  the  priests
ceased  to  use  the  Tetragrammaton,  they
were  accustomed  to  bless  the  people  with
the  name  of  twelve  letters.  Maimonides
very  wisely  rejects  the  idea,  that  any  power
was  derived  from  these  letters  or  their  pro¬
nunciation,  and  claims  that  the  only  virtue
of  the  names  consisted  in  the  holy  ideas
expressed  by  the  words  of  which  they  were
composed.

The  following  are  the  ten  Kabbalistic
names  of  God,  corresponding  to  the  ten
Sephiroth :  1.  Eheyeh ;  2.  Jah  ;  3.  Jeho¬
vah  ;  4.  El;  5.  Eloah ;  6.  Elohim;  7.  Je¬
hovah  Sabaoth ;  8.  Elohim  Sabaoth ;  9.
Elhi ;  10.  Adonai.

Lanzi  extends  his  list  of  divine  names  to
twenty-six,  which,  with  their  signification,
are  as  follows :

1.  At.  The  Aleph  and  Tau,  that  is,
Alpha  and  Omega.  A  name  figurative  of
the  Tetragrammaton.

2.  Ihoh.  The  eternal,  absolute  principle
of  creation,  and

3.  Hohi,  destruction,  the  male  and  fe¬
male  principle,  the  author  and  regulator
of  time  and  motion.

4.  Jah.  The  Lord  and  Remunerator.

5.  Oh.  The  severe  and  punisher.

6.  Jao.  The  author  of  life.

7.  Azazel.  The  author  of  death.

8.  Jao-Sabaoth.  God  of  the  co-ordina¬
tions  of  loves  and  hatreds.  Lord  of  the
solstices  and  the  equinoxes.

9.  Ehie.  The  Being;  the  Ens.

10.  El.  The  first  cause.  The  principle
or  beginning  of  all  things.

11.  Elo-hi.  The  good  principle.


NAMES


NAMES


521


12.  Elo-ho.  The  evil  principle.

13.  El-raccum.  The  succoring  principle.

14.  El-cannum.  The  abhorring  principle.

15.  Ell.  The  nofost  luminous.

16.  11.  The  omnipotent.

17.  Ellohim.  The  omnipotent  and  benefi¬
cent.

18.  Elohim.  The  most  beneficent.

19.  Elo.  The  Sovereign,  the  Excelsus.

20.  Adon.  The  Lord,  the  dominator.

21.  Eloi.  The  illuminator,  the  most  ef¬
fulgent.

22.  Adonai.  The  most  firm,  the  strongest.

23.  Elion.  The  most  high.

24.  Shaddai.  The  most  victorious.

25.  Yeshurun.  The  most  generous.

26.  Noil.  The  most  sublime.

Like  the  Mohammedan  Ism  Allah,  Free¬
masonry  presents  us  as  its  most  important
feature  with  this  science  of  the  names  of
God.  But  here  it  elevates  itself  above  Tal-
mudical  and  Rabbinical  reveries,  and  be¬
comes  a  symbol  of  Divine  Truth.  The
names  of  God  were  undoubtedly  intended
originally  to  be  a  means  of  communicating
the  knowledge  of  God  himself.  The  name
was,  from  its  construction  and  its  literal
powers,  used  to  give  some  idea,  however
scanty,  in  early  times,  of  the  true  nature
and  essence  of  the  Deity.  The  ineffable
name  was  the  symbol  of  the  unutterable
sublimity  and  perfection  of  truth  which
emanate  from  the  Supreme  God,  while  the
subordinate  names  were  symbols  of  the
subordinate  manifestations  of  truth.  Free¬
masonry  has  availed  itself  of  this  system,
and,  in  its  reverence  for  the  Divine  Name,
indicates  its  desire  to  attain  to  that  truth
as  the  ultimate  object  of  all  its  labor.  The
significant  words  of  the  Masonic  system,
which  describe  the  names  of  God  wherever
they  are  found,  are  not  intended  merely  as
words  of  recognition,  but  as  indices,  point¬
ing —  like  the  symbolic  ladder  of  Jacob  of
the  first  degree,  or  the  winding  stairs  of
the  second,  or  the  three  gates  of  the  third
—  the  way  of  progress  from  darkness  to
light,  from  ignorance  to  knowledge,  from
the  lowest  to  the  highest  conceptions  of  Di¬
vine  Truth.  And  this  is,  after  all,  the  real
object  of  all  Masonic  science.

Names  of  ^Lodges.  The  precedency
of  Lodges  does  not  depend  on  their  names,
but  on  their  numbers.  The  rule  declaring
that  “  the  precedency  of  Lodges  is  grounded
on  the  seniority  of  their  Constitution  ”  was
adopted  on  the  27th  of  December,  1727.
The  number  of  the  Lodge,  therefore,  by
which  its  precedency  is  established,  is  al¬
ways  to  be  given  by  "the  Grand  Lodge.

in  England,  Lodges  do  not  appear  tohave
received  distinctive  names  before  the  latter
part  of  the  last  century.  Up  to  that  period
the  Lodges  were  distinguished  simply  by
3  Q


their  numbers.  Thus,  in  the  first  edition
of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  published  in
1723,  we  find  a  list  of  twenty  Lodges,  reg¬
istered  by  their  numbers,  from  “  No.  1  ”  to
“  No.  20,”  inclusive.  Subsequently,  they
were  further  designated  by  the  name
of  the  tavern  at  which  they  held  their
meetings.  Thus,  in  the  second  edition  of
the  same  work,  published  in  1738,  we  meet
with  a  list  of  one  hundred  and  six  Lodges,
designated  sometimes,  singularly  enough,
as  Lodge  No.  6,  at  the  Hummer  Tavern,  in
Queen  Street ;  No.  84,  at  the  Black  Dog,  in
Castle  Street;  or  No.  98,  at  the  Bacchus
Tavern,  in  Little  Bush  Lane.  With  such
names  and  localities,  we  are  not  to  wonder
that  the  “  three  small  glasses  of  punch,”  of
which  Dr.  Oliver  so  feelingly  speaks  in  his
Book  of  the  Lodge,  were  duly  appreciated ;
nor,  as  he  admits,  that  “there  were  some
brethren  who  displayed  an  anxiety  to  have
the  allowance  increased.”

In  1766  we  read  of  four  Lodges  that  were
erased  from  the  Register,  under  the  similar
designations  of  the  Globe,  Fleet  Street;
the  Red  Cross  Inn,  Southwark ;  No.  85,  at
the  George,  Ironmongers’  Lane;  and  the
Mercers’  Arms,  Mercers’  Street.  To  only
one  of  these,  it  will  be  perceived,  was  a
number  annexed.  The  name  and  locality
of  the  tavern  was  presumed  to  be  a  suffi¬
cient  distinction.  It  was  not  until  about
the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century,  as  has
been  already  observed,  that  we  find  dis¬
tinctive  names  beginning  to  be  given  to  the
Lodges;  for  in  1793  we  hear  of  the  Shak-
speare  Lodge,  at  Stratford-on-Avon ;  the
Royal  Brunswick,  at  Sheffield ;  and  the
Lodge  of  Apollo,  at  Alcester.  From  that
time  it  became  a  usage  among  our  English
brethren,  from  which  they  have  never  since
departed.

But  a  better  taste  began  to  prevail  at  a
much  earlier  period  in  Scotland,  as  well  as
in  the  continental  and  colonial  Lodges.  In
Scotland,  especially,  distinctive  names  ap¬
pear  to  have  been  used  from  a  very  early
period,  for  in  the  very  old  charter  granting
the  office  of  Hereditary  Grand  Masters  to
the  Barons  of  Rosslyn,  and  whose  date  can¬
not  be  more  recent  than  1600,  we  find
among  the  signatures  the  names  of  the
officers  of  the  Lodge  of  Dunfermline  and  the
Lodge  of  St.  Andrew’s.  Among  the  names
in  the  list  of  the  Scotch  Lodges  in  1736
are  those  of  St.  Mary’s  Chapel,  Kilwinning,
Aberdeen,  etc.  These  names  were  undoubt¬
edly  borrowed  from  localities;  but  in  1763,
while  the  English  Lodges  were  still  content
with  their  numerical  arrangement  only,
we  find  in  Edinburgh  such  designations
as  St.  Luke's,  Saint  Giles’s,  and  St.  David’s
Lodges.

The  Lodges  on  the  continent,  it  is  true.


522


NAMES


NAMES


at  first  adopted  the  English  method  of
borrowing  a  tavern  sign  for  their  appella¬
tion  ;  whence  we  find  the  Lodge  at  the
Golden  Lion,  in  Holland,  in  1734,  and  be¬
fore  that  the  Lodge  at  Hure’s  Tavern,  in
Paris,  in  1725.  But  they  soon  abandoned
this  inefficient  and  inelegant  mode  of  no¬
menclature;  and  accordingly,  in  1739,  a
Lodge  was  organized  in  Switzerland  under
the  appropriate  name  of  Stranger's  IJerfect
Union.  Tasteful  names,  more  or  less  sig¬
nificant,  began  thenceforth  to  be  adopted
by  the  continental  Lodges.  Among  them
we  may  meet  with  the  Lodge  of  the  Three
Globes,  at  Berlin,  in  1740 ;  the  Minerva
Lodge,  at  Leipsic,  in  1741 ;  Absalom  Lodge,
at  Hamburg,  in  1742 ;  St.  George’s  Lodge,
at  the  same  place,  in  1743 ;  the  Lodge  of
the  Crowned  Column,  at  Brunswick,  in
1745  ;  and  an  abundance  of  others,  all  with
distinctive  names,  selected  sometimes  with
much  and  sometimes  with  but  little  taste.
But  the  worst  of  them  was  undoubtedly
better  than  the  Lodge  at  the  Goose  and  Grid¬
iron,  which  met  in  London  in  1717.

In  America,  from  the  very  introduction
of  Masonry  into  the  continent,  significant
names  were  selected  for  the  Lodges ;  and
hence  we  have,  in  1734,  St.  John’s  Lodge,  at
Boston ;  a  Solomon’s  Lodge,  in  1735,  at  both
Charleston  and  Savannah ;  and  a  Union  Kil¬
winning,  in  1754,  at  the  former  place.

This  brief  historical  digression  will  serve
as  an  examination  of  the  rules  which  should
govern  all  founders  in  the  choice  of  Lodge
names.  The  first  and  most  important  rule
is  that  the  name  of  a  Lodge  should  be
technically  significant ;  that  is,  it  must  al¬
lude  to  some  Masonic  fact  or  characteristic ;
in  other  words,  there  must  be  something
Masonic  about  it.  Under  this  rule,  all
names  derived  from  obscure  or  unmasonic
localities  should  be  rejected  as  unmeaning
and  inappropriate.  Dr.  Oliver,  it  is  true,
thinks  otherwise,  and  says  that  “  the  name
of  a  hundred,  or  wahpentake,  in  which  the
Lodge  is  situated,  or  of  a  navigable  river,
which  confers  wealth  and  dignity  on  the
town,  are  proper  titles  for  a  Lodge.”  But
a  name  should  always  convey  an  idea,  and
there  can  be  conceived  no  idea  worth  treas¬
uring  in  a  Mason’s  mind  to  be  deduced
from  bestowing  such  names  as  New  York,
Philadelphia,  or  Baltimore,  on  a  Lodge.
The  selection  of  such  a  name  shows  but
little  originality  in  the  chooser;  and,  be¬
sides,  if  there  be  two  Lodges  in  a  town,
each  is  equally  entitled  to  the  appellation  ;
and  if  there  be  but  one,  the  appropriation
of  it  would  seem  to  indicate  an  intention
to  have  no  competition  in  the  future.

Yet,  barren  of  Masonic  meaning  as  are
such  geographical  names,  the  adoption  of
them  is  one  of  the  most  common  faults  in


American  Masonic  nomenclature.  The  ex¬
amination  of  a  very  few  Registers,  taken  at
random,  will  readily  evince  this  fact.  Thus,
eighty-eight,  out  of  one  hundred  and  sixty
Lodges  in  Wisconsin,  are  named  after  towns
or  counties;  of  four  hundred  and  thirty-
seven  Lodges  in  Indiana,  two  hundred  and
fifty-one  nave  names  derived  from  the
same  source ;  geographical  names  are  found
in  one  hundred  and  eighty-one  out  of  four
hundred  and  three  Lodges  in  Ohio,  and  in
twenty  out  of  thirty-eight  in  Oregon.  But,
to  compensate  for  this,  we  have  seventy-one
Lodges  in  New  Hampshire,  and  only  two
local  geographical  appellations  in  the  list.

There  are,  however,  some  geographical
names  which  are  admissible,  and,  indeed,
highly  appropriate.  These  are  the  names
of  places  celebrated  in  Masonic  history
Such  titles  for  Lodges  as  Jerusalem,  Tyre,
Lebanon,  and  Joppa  are  unexceptionable.
Patmos,  which  is  the  name  of  a  Lodge  in
Maryland,  seems,  as  the  long  residence  of
one  of  the  patrons  of  the  Order,  to  be  un¬
objectionable.  So,  too,  Bethel,  because  it
signifies  “  the  house  of  God ;  ”  Mount  Mo¬
riah,  the  site  of  the  ancient  Temple;  Cal¬
vary,  the  small  hill  on  which  the  sprig  of
acacia  was  found ;  Mount  Ararat,  where  the
ark  of  our  father  Noah  rested ;  Ophir,
whence  Solomon  brought  the  gold  and  pre¬
cious  stones  with  which  he  adorned  the
Temple;  Tadmor,  because  it  was  a  city
built  by  King  Solomon;  and  Salem  anil
Jebus,  because  they  are  synonyms  of  Jeru¬
salem,  and  because  the  latter  is  especially
concerned  with  Oman  the  Jebusite,  on
whose  “threshing-floor”  the  Temple  was
subsequently  built,  —  are  all  excellent  and
appropriate  names  for  Lodges.  But  all
Scriptural  names  are  not  equally  admissi¬
ble.  Cabul,  for  instance,  must  be  rejected,
because  it  was  the  subject  of  contention
between  Solomon  and  Hiram  of  Tyre;  and
Babylon,  because  it  was  the  place  where
“  language  was  confounded  and  Masonry
lost,”  and  the  scene  of  the  subsequent  cap¬
tivity  of  our  ancient  brethren ;  Jericho,  be¬
cause  it  was  under  a  curse;  and  Misgab  and
Tophet,  because  they  were  places  of  idol
worship.  In  short,  it  may  be  adopted  as  a
rule,  that  no  name  should  be  adopted  whose
antecedents  are  in  opposition  to  the  prin¬
ciples  of  Masonry.

The  ancient  patrons  and  worthies  of
Freemasonry  furnish  a  very  fertile  source
of  Masonic  nomenclature,  and  have  been
very  liberally  used  in  the  selection  of
names  of  Lodges.  Among  the  most  im¬
portant  may  be  mentioned  St.  John,  Solo¬
mon,  Hiram,  King  David,  Adoniram,  Knock,
Archimedes,  and  Pythagoras.  The  Widow’s
Son  Lodge,  of  which  there  are  several  in¬
stances  in  the  United  States,  is  an  affecting


NAMES


NAMES


523


and  significant  title,  which  can  hardly  be
too  often  used.

Recourse  is  also  to  be  had  to  the  names
of  modern  distinguished  men  who  have
honored  the  Institution  by  their  adherence
to  it,  or  who,  by  their  learning  in  Masonry,
and  by  their  services  to  the  Order,  have
merited  some  marks  of  approbation.  And
hence  we  meet,  in  England,  as  the  names
of  Lodges,  with  Sussex,  Moira,  Frederick,
Zetland,  and  Robert  Burns;  and  in  this
country  with  Washington,  Lafayette,  Clin¬
ton,  Franklin,  and  Clay.  Care  must,  how¬
ever,  be  taken  that  no  name  be  selected
except  of  one  who  was  both  a  Mason  and
had  distinguished  himself,  either  by  ser¬
vices  to  his  country,  to  the  world,  or  to  the
Order.  Oliver  says  that  “  the  most  appro¬
priate  titles  are  those  which  are  assumed
from  the  name  of  some  ancient  benefactor
or  meritorious  individual  who  was  a  native
of  the  place  where  the  Lodge  is  held ;  as,  in
a  city,  the  builder  of  the  cathedral  church.”
In  this  country  we  are,  it  is  true,  precluded
from  a  selection  from  such  a  source ;  but
there  are  to  be  found  some  of  those  old  ben¬
efactors  of  Freemasonry,  wTho,  like  Shak-
speare  and  Milton,  or  Homer  and  Virgil,
have  ceased  to  belong  to  any  particular
country,  and  have  now  become  the  common
property  of  the  world-wide  Craft.  There
are,  for  instance,  Carausius,  the  first  royal
patron  of  Masonry  in  England ;  and  St.
Alban,  the  first  Grand  Master;  and  Athel-
stan  and  Prince  Edwin,  both  active  encour-
agers  of  the  art  in  the  same  kingdom.
There  are  Wykeham,  Gundulph,  Giffard,
Langham,  Yevele,  (called,  in  the  old  records,
the  King’s  Freemason,)  and  Chicheley,  Jer-
myn,  and  Wren,  all  illustrious  Grand  Mas¬
ters  of  England,  each  of  whom  would  be
well  entitled  to  the  honor  of  giving  name
to  a  Lodge,  and  any  one  of  whom  would  be
better,  more  euphonious,  and  more  spirit-
stirring  than  the  unmeaning,  and  often¬
times  crabbed,  name  of  some  obscure  vil¬
lage  or  post-office,  from  which  too  many
of  our  Lodges  derive  their  titles.

And  then,  again,  among  the  great  bene¬
factors  to  Masonic  literature  and  laborers
in  Masonic  science  there  are  such  names  as
Anderson,  Dunckerley,  Preston,  Hutchinson,
Town,  Webb ,  and  a  host  of  others,  who,
though  dead,  still  live  by  their  writings  in
our  memories.

The  virtues  and  tenets  —  the  inculcation
and  practice  of  which  constitute  an  import¬
ant  part  of  the  Masonic  system  —  form
very  excellent  aud  appropriate  names  for
Lodges,  and  have  always  been  popular
among  correct  Masonic  nomenclators.
Thus  we  everywhere  find  such  names  as
Charity  Concord,  Equality,  Faith,  Fellow¬
ship,  Harmony,  Hope,  Humility,  Mystic  Tie,


Relief,  Truth,  Union,  and  Virtue.  Fre¬
quently,  by  a  transposition  of  the  word
“Lodge”  and  the  distinctive  appellation,
with  the  interposition  of  the  preposition
“of,”  a  more  sonorous  and  emphatic  name
is  given  by  our  English  and  European
brethren,  although  the  custom  is  but  rarely
followed  in  this  country.  Thus  we  have
by  this  method  the  Lodge  of  Regularity,  the
Lodge  of  Fidelity,  the  Lodge  of  Industry,  and
the  Lodge  of  Prudent  Brethren,  in  England ;
and  in  France,  the  Lodge  of  Benevolent
Friends,  the  Lodge  of  Perfect  Union,  the
Lodge  of  the  Friends  of  Peace,  and  the  cele¬
brated  Lodge  of  the  Nine  Sisters.

As  the  names  of  illustrious  men  will
sometimes  stimulate  the  members  of  the
Lodges  which  bear  them  to  an  emulation
of  their  characters,  so  the  names  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  virtues  may  serve  to  incite  the  breth¬
ren  to  their  practice,  lest  the  inconsistency
of  their  names  and  their  conduct  should
excite  the  ridicule  of  the  world.

Another  fertile  and  appropriate  source
of  names  for  Lodges  is  to  be  found  in  the
symbols  and  implements  of  the  Order.
Hence,  we  frequently  meet  with  such  titles
as  Level,  Trowel,  Rising  Star,  Rising  Sun,
Olive  Branch,  Evergreen,  Doric,  Corinthian,
Delta,  and  Corner-Stone  Lodges.  Acacia  is
one  of  the  most  common,  and  at  the  same
time  one  of  the  most  beautiful,  of  these  sym¬
bolic  names;  but,  unfortunately,  through
gross  ignorance,  it  is  often  corrupted  into
Cassia  —  an  insignificant  plant,  which  has
no  Masonic  or  symbolic  meaning.

An  important  rule  in  the  nomenclature
of  Lodges,  and  one  which  must  at  once
recommend  itself  to  every  person  of  taste,
is  that  the  name  should  be  euphonious.
This  principle  of  euphony  has  been  too  lit¬
tle  attended  to  in  the  selection  of  even  geo¬
graphical  names  in  this  country,  where
names  with  impracticable  sounds,  or  with
ludicrous  associations,  are  often  affixed  to
our  towns  and  rivers.  Speaking  of  a  cer¬
tain  island,  with  the  unpronounceable  name
of  “Srh,”  Lieber  says,  “  If  Homer  himself
were  born  on  such  an  island,  it  could  not
become  immortal,  for  the  best- disposed
scholar  would  be  unable  to  remember  the
name;”  and  he  thinks  that  it  was  no  tri¬
fling  obstacle  to  the  fame  of  many  Polish
heroes  in  the  revolution  of  that  country,
that  they  had  names  which  left  upon  the
mind  of  foreigners  no  effect  but  that  of  ut¬
ter  confusion.  An  error  like  this  must  al¬
ways  be  avoided  in  bestowing  a  name  upon
a  Lodge.  The  word  selected  should  be  soft,
vocal  —  not  too  long  nor  too  short  —  and,
above  all,  be  accompanied  in  its  sound  or
meaning  by  no  low,  indecorous,  or  ludi¬
crous  association.  For  this  reason  such
names  of  Lodges  should  be  rejected  as  She-


524


NAMES


NAMES


botjgan  and  Oconomowoc  from  the  registry
of  Wisconsin,  because  of  the  uncouthness
of  the  sound ;  and  Rough  and  Ready  and
Indian  Diggings  from  that  of  California,  on
account  of  the  ludicrous  associations  which
these  names  convey.  Again,  Pythagoras
Lodge  is  preferable  to  Pythagorean,  and
Archimedes  is  better  than  Archimedean,  be¬
cause  the  noun  is  more  euphonious  and
more  easily  pronounced  than  the  adjective.
But  this  rule  is  difficult  to  illustrate  or  en¬
force;  for,  after  all,  this  thing  of  euphony
is  a  mere  matter  of  taste,  and  we  all  know
the  adage,  “  de  gustibus.”

A  few  negative  rules,  which  are,  however,
easily  deduced  from  the  affirmative  ones
already  given,  will  complete  the  topic.

No  name  of  a  Lodge  should  be  adopted
which  is  not,  in  some  reputable  way,  con¬
nected  with  Masonry.  Everybody  will  ac¬
knowledge  that  Morgan  Lodge  would  be  an
anomaly,  and  that  Cowan  Lodge  would,  if
possible,  be  worse.  But  there  are  some
names  which,  although  not  quite  as  bad  as
these,  are  on  principle  equally  as  objection¬
able.  Why  should  any  of  our  Lodges,  for
instance,  assume,  as  many  of  them  have,
the  names  of  Madison,  Jefferson,  or  Taylor,
since  none  of  these  distinguished  men  were
Masons  or  patrons  of  the  Craft?

The  indiscriminate  use  of  the  names  of
saints  unconnected  with  Masonry  is  for  a
similar  reason  objectionable.  Besides  our
patrons  St.  John  the  Baptist  and  St.  John
the  Evangelist,  but  three  other  saints  can
lay  any  claims  to  Masonic  honors,  and  these
are  St.  Alban,  who  introduced,  or  is  said  to
have  introduced,  the  Order  into  England,
and  has  been  liberally  complimented  in  the
nomenclature  of  Lodges  ;  and  St.  Swithin,
who  was  at  the  head  of  the  Craft  in  the
reign  of  Ethelwolf;  and  St.  Benedict,  who
was  the  founder  of  the  Masonic  fraternity
of  Bridge  Builders.  But  St.  Mark,  St.
Luke,  St.  Andrew,  all  of  whom  have  given
names  to  numerous  Lodges,  can  have  no
pretensions  to  assist  as  sponsors  in  these
Masonic  baptisms,  since  they  were  not  at
all  connected  with  the  Craft.

To  the  Iudian  names  of  Lodges  there  is
a  radical  objection.  It  is  true  that  their
names  are  often  very  euphonious  and  al¬
ways  significant,  for  the  red  men  of  our
continent  are  tasteful  and  ingenious  in  their
selection  of  names  —  much  more  so,  indeed,
than  the  whites,  who  borrow  from  them ;
but  their  significance  has  nothing  to  do
with  Masonry.  “The  Father  of  the
Waters”  is  a  profoundly  poetic  name  in
the  original  Indian  tongue,  now  represented
by  the  word  “  Mississippi,”  and  beautifully
expresses  the  name  of  that  majestic  river,
which  pursues  its  long  course  of  three
thousand  miles  from  beyond  the  lakes  to


!  the  Gulf,  receiving  in  its  stately  progress,
all  its  mighty  children  to  its  bosom ;  but
the  same  name  has  no  significance  what¬
ever  when  applied  to  a  Lodge.  Mississippi,
as  the  name  of  a  river,  has  a  meaning, and
an  appropriate  one,  too ;  as  the  name  of  a
Lodge  it  has  none,  or  a  wholly  inappropri¬
ate  one.  Such  names,  therefore,  as  Tula-
homa,  Tohepeka,  Tuscarawas,  or  Keozanqua,
mellifluous  as  some  of  them  are  in  sound,
should  be  rejected,  because,  if  they  have  an
appropriate  meaning,  scarcely  any  one
knows  what  it  is;  and  it  is  much  more
probable  that  they  have  no  appropriate
meaning  at  all.  The  Indian  names  of
rivers,  mountains,  and  towns  should  be
preserved,  because  they  are  the  memorials
of  the  original  owners  of  the  soil ;  but  the
Indians  have  no  such  claims  upon  Masonry.

There  is,  in  the  jurisdiction  of  New  York,
a  Manhattan  Lodge;  now  it  is  said  that,
in  the  aboriginal  language,  Manhattan
means  “  the  place  where  we  all  got  drunk,”
and  the  island  was  so  called  because  it  was
there  that  the  savages  first  met  the  white
men,  and  tasted  to  excess  their  “  fire  water.”
It  is  not  difficult  to  decide  whether  a  name
with  such  a  meaning  is  appropriate  for  a
Lodge,  one  of  whose  cardinal  principles  is
temperance  —  a  principle  which  I  have  not
the  least  doubt  that  the  worthy  members
of  Manhattan  Lodge  duly  observe.  There
is,  besides  all  this,  an  incongruity  in  borrow¬
ing  the  appellations  of  a  great  religious
and  scientific  association  from  the  language
of  savage  and  idolatrous  tribes.

The  same  incongruity  forbids  the  name
of  the  heathen  deities.  The  authors  of  the
“Helvetian  Code”  condemn  the  use  of
such  names  as  the  Apollo,  the  Minerva,  or
the  Vesta,  “  as  being  heathen,  and  furnish¬
ing  ideas  of  idolatry  and  superstition.”
From  this  rule  should,  however,  be  excepted
a  few  names  of  Pagan  divinities,  which
have  in  philosophical  language  become  the
symbols  of  ideas  appropriate  to  the  Ma¬
sonic  system.  Thus  Hermes,  as  the  symbol
of  science,  or  Vesta,  as  denoting  the  fire  of
Masonry,  which  burns  undimmed  upon  its
altars,  may  be  tolerated ;  but  such  titles  as
Venus  and  Mars,  both  of  which  are  to  be
found  in  old  lists  of  Bussian  Lodges,  are
clearly  inadmissible.

These  rules  and  the  principles  on  which
they  are  founded  are  by  no  means  unim¬
portant.  If  the  old  Latin  adage  be  true  —
“bonum  nomen,  bonum  omen”  —  if,  in
every  circumstance  of  life,  a  good  name  is
found  to  be  more  propitious  than  a  bad
one,  then  it  is  essential  that  a  new  Lodge,
making  choice  of  a  name  by  which  it  shall
forever  thereafter  be  known,  should  rather
select  one  that  is  appropriate,  euphonious,
and  expressive,  than  one  that  is  unfitting,


NAMUR


NAYMUS


525


uncouth,  and  meaningless.  And  it  is  use¬
ful  that  some  rules  should  be  established
by  which  the  members  may  be  enabled
without  difficulty  to  make  this  selection.
It  is  not  meant  to  exaggerate  the  impor¬
tance  of  names ;  but,  while  it  is  admitted
that  a  good  Lodge  with  a  bad  name  is
better  than  a  bad  Lodge  with  a  good  one,
it  is  certain  that  a  good  Lodge  with  a  good
name  is  better  than  either.

What  has  been  said  of  Lodges  may  with
equal  propriety  be  said,  mutatis  mutandis,
of  Chapters,  Councils,  and  Commanderies.

Namur.  A  city  of  Belgium,  where  the
Primi  ti ve  Scottish  Rite  was  first  establ ished ;
hence  sometimes  called  the  Rite  of  Namur.

Naphtali.  The  territory  of  the  tribe
of  Naphtali  adjoined,  on  its  western  border,
to  Phoenicia,  and  there  must,  therefore,
have  been  frequent  and  easy  communication
between  the  Phoenicians  and  the  Naphtal-
ites,  resulting  sometimes  in  intermarriage.
This  will  explain  the  fact  that  Hiram  the
Builder  was  the  sou  of  a  widow  of  Naphtali
and  a  man  of  Tyre.

Naples.  Freemasonry  must  have  been
practised  in  Naples  before  1751,  for  in  that
year  King  Charles  issued  an  edict  forbid¬
ding  it  in  his  dominions.  The  author  of
Anti-Saint  Nicaise  says  that  there  was  a
Grand  Lodge  at  Naples,  in  1756,  which  was
in  correspondence  with  the  Lodges  of  Ger¬
many.  But  its  meetings  were  suspended
by  a  royal  edict  in  Sept.,  1775.  In  1777
this  edict  was  repealed  at  the  instigation
of  the  Queen,  and  Masonry  was  again  toler¬
ated.  This  toleration  lasted,  however,  only
for  a  brief  period.  In  1781  Ferdinand  IV.
renewed  the  edict  of  suppression,  and  from
that  time  until  the  end  of  the  century
Freemasonry  was  subjected  in  Italy  to  the
combined  persecutions  of  the  Church  and
State,  and  the  Masons  of  Naples  met  only
in  secret.  In  1793,  after  the  French  Revo¬
lution,  many  Lodges  were  openly  organized.
A  Supreme  Council  of  the  Scottish  Rite
was  established  on  the  11th  of  June,  1809,
of  which  King  Joachim  was  elected  Grand
Master,  and  the  Grand  Orient  of  Naples  on
the  24th  of  the  same  month.  The  fact  that
the  Grand  Orient  worked  according  to  the
French  Rite,  and  the  Supreme  Council  ac¬
cording  to  the  Scottish,  caused  dissensions
between  the  two  bodies,  which,  however,
were  finally  healed.  And  on  the  23d  of
May,  1811;  a  Concordat  was  established
between  the  Supreme  Council  and  the
Grand  Orient,  by  which  the  latter  took  the
supervision  of  the  degrees  up  to  the  eigh¬
teenth,  and  the  former  of  those  from  the
eighteenth  to  the  thirty-third.  In  October,
1812,  King  Joachim  accepted  the  presi¬
dency  of  the  Supreme  Council  as  its  Grand
Commander.  Both  bodies  became  extinct


in  18x5.  on  the  accession  of  the  Bour¬
bons.

Napoleonic  Masonry.  An  Order
under  this  name,  called  also  the  French
Order  of  Noachites,  was  established  at
Paris,  in  1816,  by  some  of  the  Adherents  of
the  Emperor  Napoleon.  It  was  divided
into  three  degrees:  1.  Knight;  2.  Com¬
mander;  3.  Grand  Elect.  The  last  degree
was  subdivided  into  three  points  :  i.  Secret
Judge;  ii.  Perfect  Initiate;  iii.  Knight  of
the  Crown  of  Oak.  The  mystical  ladder
in  this  Rite  consisted  of  eight  steps  or
stages,  whose  names  were  Adam,  Eve,
Noah,  Lamech,  Naamah,  Peleg,  Oubal,
and  Orient.  The  initials  of  these  words,
properly  transposed,  compose  the  word  Na¬
poleon,  and  this  is  enough  to  show  the
character  of  the  system.  General  Ber¬
trand  was  elected  Grand  Master,  but,  as  he
was  then  in  the  island  of  St.  Helena,  the
Order  was  directed  by  a  Supreme  Com¬
mander  and  two  Lieutenants.  It  was  Ma¬
sonic  in  form  only,  and  lasted  but  for  a  few
years.

National  Grand  Lodge  of  Ger¬
many.  The  Royal  Mother  Lodge  of  the
Three  Globes,  which  had  been  established
at  Berlin  in  1740,  and  recognized  as  a
Grand  Lodge  by  Frederick  the  Great  in
1744,  renounced  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observ¬
ance  in  1771,  and,  declaring  itself  free  and
independent,  assumed  the  title  of  “The
Grand  National  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Three
Globes,”  by  which  appellation  it  is  still
known.

The  Grand  Orient  of  France,  among  its
first  acts,  established,  as  an  integral  part
of  itself,  a  National  Grand  Lodge  of  France,
which  was  to  take  the  place  of  the  old  Grand
Lodge,  which,  it  declared,  had  ceased  to
exist.  But  the  year  after,  in  1773,  the  Na¬
tional  Grand  Lodge  was  suppressed  by  the
power  which  had  given  it  birth  ;  and  no  such
power  is  now  recognized  in  French  Masonry.

Naymus  Grecus.  The  Sloane  MS.
contains  the  following  passage:  “  Y‘  befell
that  their  was  a  curious  Masson  that  height
[was  called]  Naymus  Grecus  that  had  byn
at  the  making  of  Sallomon’s  Temple,  and
he  came  into  France,  and  there  he  taught
the  science  of  Massonrey  to  men  of  France.”
Who  was  this  “Naymus  Grecus”?  The
writers  of  these  old  records  of  Masonry  are
notorious  for  the  way  in  which  they  mangle
all  names  and  words  that  are  in  a  foreign
tongue.  Hence  it  is  impossible  to  say  who
or  what  is  meant  by  this  word.  It  is  dif¬
ferently  spelled  in  the  various  manuscripts:
Namas  Grecious  in  the  Landsdowne,  Naymus
Grcecus  in  the  Sloane,  Grecus  alone  in  the
Edinburgh-Kilwinning,  and  Maynus  Grecus
j  in  the  Dowland.  Anderson,  in  the  second
j  edition  of  liis  Constitutions,  (1738,)  calls


526


NAZARETH


NEGRO


him  Manus  Grccus.  Now,  it  would  not  be
an  altogether  wild  conjecture  to  suppose
that  some  confused  idea  of  Magna  Gracia
was  floating  in  the  minds  of  these  unlettered
Masons,  especially  since  the  Leland  Manu¬
script  records  that  in  Magna  Gracia  Pythag¬
oras  established  his  school,  and  then  sent
Masons  into  France.  Between  Magna  Gra¬
cia  and  Maynus  Grecus  the  bridge  is  a  short
one,  not  greater  than  between  Tubal-cat/i
and  Wackan,  which  we  find  in  a  German
Middle  Age  document.  The  one  being  the
name  of  a  place  and  the  other  of  a  person
would  be  no  obstacle  to  these  accommodat¬
ing  record  writers;  nor  must  we  flinch
at  the  anachronism  of  placing  one  of  the
disciples  of  Pythagoras  at  the  building  of
the  Solomonic  Temple,  when  we  remember
that  the  same  writers  make  Euclid  and
Abraham  contemporaries.

Nazareth.  A  city  of  Galilee,  in  which
our  Saviour  spent  his  childhood  and  much
of  his  life,  and  whence  he  is  often  called,
in  the  New  Testament,  the  Nazarene,  or
Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Jesus  Nazarenus  was  a
portion  of  the  inscription  on  the  cross.
(See  I.  N.  R.  I.)  In  the  Rose  Croix,  Naz¬
areth  is  a  significant  word,  and  Jesus  is
designated  as  “our  Master  of  Nazareth,”
to  indicate  the  origin  and  nature  of  the  new
dogmas  on  which  the  Order  of  the  Rosy
Cross  was  instituted.

Nebraska.  Masonry  was  introduced
into  Nebraska  in  Oct.,  1855,  by  a  Charter
from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Illinois  to  Ne¬
braska  Lodge.  Two  other  Lodges  were  sub¬
sequently  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodges
of  Missouri  and  Iowa.  In  Sept.,  1857,  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Nebraska  was  organized
by  a  convention  of  delegates  from  these
three  Lodges,  and  R.  C.  Jordan  was  elected
Grand  Master.  The  Grand  Chapter  was
organized  March  19,  1867.  The  Grand
Commandery  of  Nebraska  was  instituted
at  Omaha,  December  28,  1871.

Nebuchadnezzar.  About  630  years
B.  c.  the  empire  and  city  of  Babylon  were
conquered  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  king  of
the  Chaldeans,  a  nomadic  race,  who,  de¬
scending  from  their  homes  in  the  Cauca¬
sian  mountains,  had  overwhelmed  the
countries  of  Southern  Asia.  Nebuchad¬
nezzar  was  engaged  during  his  whole  reign
in  wars  of  conquest.  Among  other  nations
who  fell  beneath  his  victorious  arms  was
Judea,  whose  king,  Jehoiakim,  was  slain
by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  his  son,  Jehoia-
chin,  ascended  the  Jewish  throne.  After
a  reign  of  three  years,  he  was  deposed  by
Nebuchadnezzar,  and  his  kingdom  given
to  his  uncle,  Zedekiah,  a  monarch  distin¬
guished  for  his  vices.  Having  repeatedly
rebelled  against  the  Babylonian  king,  Nebu¬
chadnezzar  repaired  to  Jerusalem,  and,  after


a  siege  of  eighteen  months,  reduced  it.
The  city  was  levelled  with  the  ground,  the
Temple  pillaged  and  burned,  and  the  in¬
habitants  carried  captive  to  Babylon.  These
events  are  com  memorated  in  the  first  section
of  the  English  and  American  Royal  Arch
system.

Ncbuzaradan.  A  captain,  or,  as  we
would  now  call  him,  a  general  of  Nebu¬
chadnezzar,  who  commanded  the  Chaldean
army  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  and  who
executed  the  orders  of  his  sovereign  by
the  destruction  of  the  city  and  Temple,  and
by  carrying  the  inhabitants,  except  a  few
husbandmen,  as  captives  to  Babylon.

Negro  Lodges.  The  subject  of  *
Lodges  of  colored  persons,  commonly  called
“Negro  Lodges,”  was  for  many  years  a
source  of  agitation  in  the  United  States,
not  on  account,  generally,  of  the  color  of
the  members  of  these  Lodges,  but  on  ac¬
count  of  the  supposed  illegality  of  their
charters.  The  history  of  their  organization
was  thoroughly  investigated,  many  years
ago,  by  Bro.  Philip  S.  Tucker,  of  Vermont,
and  Charles  W.  Moore,  of  Massachusetts,
and  the  result  is  here  given,  with  the  addi¬
tion  of  certain  facts  derived  from  a  state¬
ment  made  by  the  officers  of  the  Lodge  in
1827.

On  the  20th  of  Sept.,  1784,  a  Charter  for
a  Master’s  Lodge  was  granted,  although  not
received  until  1787,  to  Prince  Hall  and
others,  all  colored  men,  under  the  authority
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  The
Lodge  bore  the  name  of  “African  Lodge,
No.  429,”  and  was  situated  in  the  city  of
Boston.  This  Lodge  ceased  its  connection
with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  for  many
years,  and  about  the  beginning  of  the  pres¬
ent  century  its  registration  was  stricken
from  the  rolls  of  that  Grand  Lodge,  its  legal
existence,  in  the  meantime,  never  having
been  recognized  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Massachusetts,  to  which  body  it  had  always
refused  to  acknowledge  allegiance.

After  the  death  of  Hall  and  his  col¬
leagues,  to  whom  the  Charter  had  been
granted,  the  Lodge,  for  want  of  some  one
to  conduct  its  affairs,  fell  into  abeyance,  or,
to  use  the  technical  phrase,  became  dor¬
mant.  After  some  years  it  was  revived,  but
by  whom,  or  under  what  process  of  Ma¬
sonic  law,  is  not  stated,  and  information  of
the  revival  given  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  but  no  reply  or  recognition  was
received  from  that  body.  After  some  hesi¬
tation  as  to  what  would  be  the  proper
course  to  pursue,  they  came  to  the  conclu¬
sion,  as  they  have  themselves  stated,  “  that,
with  what  knowledge  they  possessed  of  Ma¬
sonry,  and  as  people  of  color  by  themselves,
they  were,  and  ought  by  rights  to  be,  free
and  independent  of  other  Lodges.”  Ac-


NEIGHBOR


NETHERLANDS


527


cordingly,  on  the  18th  of  June,  1827,  they
issued  a  protocol,  in  which  they  said :  “We
publicly  declare  ourselves  free  and  inde¬
pendent  of  any  Lodge  from  this  day,  and
we  will  not  be  tributary  or  governed  by  any
Lodge  but  that  of  our  own.”  They  soon
after  assumed  the  name  of  the  “Prince
Hall  Grand  Lodge,”  and  issued  charters
for  the  constitution  of  subordinates,  and
from  it  have  proceeded  all  the  Lodges  of
colored  persons  now  existing  in  the  United
States.

Admitting  even  the  legality  of  the  Eng¬
lish  charter  of  1784, — which,  however,  is
questionable,  as  there  was  already  a  Ma¬
sonic  authority  in  Massachusetts  upon
whose  prerogatives  of  jurisdiction  such
charter  was  an  invasion, — it  cannot  be  de¬
nied  that  the  unrecognized  self-revival  of
1827,  and  the  subsequent  assumption  of
Grand  Lodge  powers,  were  illegal,  and  ren¬
dered  both  the  Prince  Hall  Grand  Lodge
and  all  the  Lodges  which  emanated  from
it  clandestine.  And  this  has  been  the
unanimous  opinion  of  all  Masonic  jurists  in
this  country.

Neighbor.  All  the  Old  Constitutions
have  the  charge  that  “every  Mason  shall
keep  true  counsel  of  Lodge  and  Chamber,”
(Sloane  MS.)  This  is  enlarged  in  the  An-
dersonian  Charges  of  1722  thus:  “You  are
not  to  let  your  family,  friends,  and  neighbors
know  the  concerns  of  the  Lodge.”  How¬
ever  loquacious  a  Mason  may  be  in  the
natural  confidence  of  neighborhood  inter¬
course,  he  must  be  reserved  in  all  that  re¬
lates  to  the  esoteric  concerns  of  Masonry.

Nekaiii.  Dpi.  But  properly,  accord¬
ing  to  the  Masoretic  pointing,  NAKAM.  A
Hebrew  word  signifying  Vengeance,  and  a
significant  word  in  the  high  degrees.  See
Vengeance.

Nckuinali.  DOpJ.  Hebrew,  signify¬
ing  Vengeance,  and,  like  Nakam,  a  signifi¬
cant  word  in  the  high  degrees.

Nembrotli.  A  corruption  of  Nimrod,
frequently  used  in  the  Old  Records.

Neophyte.  Greek,  veo<pvrog,  newly
planted.  In  the  primitive  church,  it  signi¬
fied  one  who  had  recently  abandoned  Juda¬
ism  or  Paganism  and  embraced  Christian¬
ity;  and  in  the  Roman  Church  those  re¬
cently  admitted  into  its  communion  are
still  so  called.  Hence  it  has  also  been  ap¬
plied  to  the  young  disciple  of  any  art  or
science.  Thus  Ben  Jonson  calls  a  young
actor,  at  his  first  entrance  “  on  the  boards,”
a  neophyte  player.  In  Freemasonry  the
newly  initiated  and  uninstructed  candidate
is  sometimes  so  designated.

Neoplatonism.  A  philosophical
school,  founded  at  Alexandria  in  Egypt,
which  added  to  the  theosophic  theories  of
Plato  many  mystical  doctrines  borrowed


from  the  East.  The  principal  disciples  of
this  school  were  Philo,  Judaeus,  Plotinus,
Porphyry,  Jamblichus,  Proclus,  and  Julian
the  Apostate.  Much  of  the  symbolic  teach¬
ing  of  the  higher  degrees  of  Masonry  has
been  derived  from  the  school  of  the  Neo-
platonists,  especially  from  the  writings  of
Jamblichus  and  Philo  Judaeus.

Ne  plus  ultra.  Latin.  Nothing  more
beyond.  The  motto  adopted  for  the  degree
of  Kadosh  by  its  founders,  when  it  was
supposed  to  be  the  summit  of  Masonry,  be¬
yond  which  there  was  nothing  more  to  be
sought.  And,  although  higher  degrees
have  been  since  added,  the  motto  is  still
retained.

Netherlands.  Speculative  Masonry
was  first  introduced  in  the  Netherlands  by
theopening  at  the  Hague,  in  1731,  of  an  occa¬
sional  Lodge  under  a  Deputation  granted  by
Lord  Lovel,  G.  M.  of  England,  of  which  Dr.
Desaguliers  was  Master,  for  the  purpose  of
conferring  the  first  and  second  degrees  on  the
Duke  of  Lorraine,  afterwards  the  Emperor
Francis  I.  He  received  the  third  degree
subsequently  in  England.  But  it  was  not
until  September  30th,  1734,  that  a  regular
Lodge  was  opened  by  Brother  Vincent  de
la  Chapelle,  as  Grand  Master  of  the  United
Provinces,  who  may  therefore  be  regarded
as  the  originator  of  Masonry  in  the  Nether¬
lands.  In  1735,  this  Lodge  received  a
Patent  or  Deputation  from  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  John  Cornelius  Rademaker,
being  appointed  Provincial  Grand  Master,
and  several  daughter  Lodges  were  es¬
tablished  by  it.  In  the  same  year  the
States  General  prohibited  all  Masonic
meetings  by  an  edict  issued  Nov.  30th,  1735.
The  Roman  clergy  actively  persecuted  the
Masons,  which  seems  to  have  produced  a  re¬
action,  for  in  1737  the  magistrates  repealed
the  edict  of  suppression,  and  forbade  the
clergy  from  any  interference  with  the
Order,  after  which  Masonry  flourished  in
the  United  Provinces.  The  Masonic  inno¬
vations  and  controversies  that  had  affected
the  rest  of  the  continent  never  successfully
obtruded  on  the  Dutch  Masons,  who  prac¬
tised  with  great  fidelity  the  simple  rite  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  although
an  attempt  had  been  made  in  1757  to  in¬
troduce  them.  In  1798,  the  Grand  Lodge
adopted  a  Book  of  Statutes,  by  which  it  ac¬
cepted  the  three  symbolic  degrees,  and  re¬
ferred  the  four  high  degrees  of  the  French
Rite  to  a  Grand  Chapter.  In  1816,  Prince
Frederick  attempted  a  reform  in  the  de¬
grees,  which  was,  however,  only  partially
successful.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  the
Netherlands,  whose  Orient  is  at  the  Hague,
tolerates  the  high  degrees  without  actually
recognizing  them.  Most  of  the  Lodges
1  confine  themselves  to  the  symbolic  degrees


528


NET-WORK


NICOLAI


of  St.  John’s  Masonry,  while  a  few  prac¬
tise  the  reformed  system  of  Prince  Fred¬
erick.

Net-Work.  One  of  the  decorations
of  the  pillars  at  the  porch  of  the  Temple.
See  Pillars  of  the  Porch.

Nevada.  Nevada  was  originally  a
part  of  California,  and  when  separated
from  it  in  1865,  there  were  eight  Lodges
in  it  working  under  Charters  from  the
Grand  Lodge  of  California.  These  Lodges
in  that  year  held  a  convention  at  Virginia,
and  organized  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Nevada.

Ne  Varietur.  Latin.  Lest  it  should
be  changed.  These  words  refer  to  the  Ma¬
sonic  usage  of  requiring  a  brother,  when  he
receives  a  certificate  from  a  Lodge,  to  affix
his  name,  in  his  own  handwriting,  in  the
margin,  as  a  precautionary  measure,  which
enables  distant  brethren,  by  a  comparison
of  the  handwriting,  to  recognize  the  true
and  original  owner  of  the  certificate,  and
to  detect  any  impostor  who  may  surrepti¬
tiously  have  obtained  one.

New  Brunsw  ick.  Freemasonry  was
introduced  into  this  province  about  the
middle  of  the  last  century  by  both  the
Grand  Lodges  of  Scotland  and  England,
and  afterwards  by  that  of  Ireland.  The
former  two  bodies  appointed,  at  a  later
period,  Provincial  Grand  Masters,  and  in
1844  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Nova
Scotia  and  New  Brunswick  was  organized
on  the  registry  of  Scotland.  The  province
of  New  Brunswick  becoming  an  indepen¬
dent  portion  of  the  Dominion  of  Canada,  a
Grand  Lodge  was  established  in  Septem¬
ber,  1867,  by  a  majority  of  the  Lodges  of
the  territory,  and  B.  Lester  Peters  was
elected  Grand  Master.  Capitular,  Cryptic,
and  Templar  Masonry  each  hawe  bodies  in
the  province.

New  Hampshire.  Freemasonry
was  introduced  into  New  Hampshire  in
June,  1734,  by  the  constitution  of  St.
John’s  Lodge  at  Portsmouth,  under  a
Charter  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massa¬
chusetts.  Several  other  Lodges  were  sub¬
sequently  constituted  by  the  same  au¬
thority.  In  1789  a  convention  of  these
Lodges  was  held  at  Dartmouth,  and  the
Grand  Lodge  of  New  Hampshire  organ¬
ized,  and  John  Sullivan,  the  President  of
the  State,  was  elected  Grand  Master.  A
Grand  Chapter  was  organized  in  1819,  and  a
Grand  Commandery  in  1860.

New  Jersey.  We  do  not  know  at
what  precise  period  Freemasonry  was  in¬
troduced  into  New  Jersey.  Preston  says
that  in  1729,  during  the  6rand  Mastership
of  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  Mr.  Daniel  Coxe
was  appointed  Provincial  Grand  Master
for  New  Jersey.  I  have  not  been  able  to
obtain  any  evidence  that  he  exercised  his


prerogative  by  the  establishment  of  Lodges
in  that  province,  but  presume  that  he  did.
On  Dec.  18,  1786,  a  convention  was  held
at  New  Brunswick,  and  a  Grand  Lodge  or-
anized,  the  Hon.  David  Brearley,  Chief
ustice  of  the  State,  being  elected  Grand
Master.  The  Grand  Chapter  was  organ¬
ized  at  Burlington,  Dec.  30,  1856 ;  the
Grand  Council,  Nov.  26,  1860 ;  and  the
Grand  Commandery,  Feb.  14,  1860.

New  York.  If  we  exclude  the  Depu¬
tation  of  David  Coxe  for  New  Jersey,
which  included  New  York  and  several
other  provinces,  the  first  Deputation  for
New  York  was  that  granted  in  1737,  dur¬
ing  the  Grand  Mastership  of  the  Earl  of
Darnlev,  to  Richard  Riggs  as  Provincial
Grand  Master;  but  there  is  no  record  of
his  having  established  any  Lodges.  In
1747  another  Deputation  was  issued,  during
the  Grand  Mastership  of  Lord  Byron,  to
Francis  Goulet.  In  1753,  Lord  Carysl'ort
being  Grand  Master  of  England,  a  Deputa¬
tion  was  issued  to  George  Harrison.  As
Provincial  Grand  Master,  he  organized
several  Lodges.  In  1760,  Sir  John  John¬
son  was  appointed  Provincial  Grand  Mas¬
ter,  and  he  held  the  office  until  the  com¬
mencement  of  the  Revolutionary  War.
During  that  war  most,  if  not  all,  of  the
Lodges  suspended  labor.  On  Sept.  5, 1781,
a  Warrant  was  obtained  from  the  Athol
Grand  Lodge,  and  a  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  was  opened  in  the  city  of  New
York,  After  the  close  of  the  war,  this
body  abandoned  its  provincial  character,  and
assumed  the  title  of  the  “  Grand  Lodge  of
Free  and  Accepted  Masons  of  the  State  of
New  York,”  and  under  that  title  it  con¬
tinues  to  exist.  Dissensions  and  schisms
have,  from  time  to  time,  arisen,  but  for
many  years  past  there  has  been  uninter¬
rupted  harmony  and  union.  The  Grand
Chapter  was  organized  March  4, 1798;  the
Grand  Council  of  Roval  and  Select  Mas¬
ters  in  1807 ,  and  the  Clrand  Commandery,
June  18,  1814.  The  Scottish  Rite  was  first
legally  introduced  as  a  governing  body  in
1813,  by  the  formation,  in  the  city  of  New
York,  of  a  Supreme  Council  for  the  North¬
ern  Jurisdiction  by  the  Mother  Council  at
Charleston.  A  Lodge  of  Perfection  bad,
however,  long  before  existed  at  Albany.

Nicolai,  Christoph  Friedrich.
Christopher  Frederick  Nicolai,  author  of
a  very  interesting  essay  on  the  origin  of
the  Society  of  Freemasons,  was  a  book¬
seller  of  Berlin,  and  one  of  the  most  dis¬
tinguished  of  the  German  savans  of  that
Augustan  age  of  German  literature  in  which
he  lived.  He  was  born  at  Berlin  on  the
18th  of  March,  1733,  and  died  in  the  same
city  on  the  8th  of  January,  1811.  He  was  the
editor  of,  and  an  industrious  contributor  to,


NICOLAI


NIGHT


529


two  German  periodicals  of  high  literary  char¬
acter,  a  learned  writer  on  various  subjects
of  science  and  philosophy,  and  the  intimate
friend  of  Lessing,  whose  works  he  edited,
and  of  the  illustrious  Mendelssohn.

In  1782-3,  he  published  a  work  with  the
following  title:  Versuch  uber  die  Besschuldi-
gungen  welche  dem  Tempelherrnorden  gemacht
worden  und  uber  dessert  Geheimniss ;  nebst
einem  Anhange  uber  das  Enstehen  der  Frei-
maurergesellschaft ;  i.  e.,  “An  Essay  on  the
accusations  made  against  the  Order  of
Knights  Templars  and  their  mystery;  with
an  Appendix  on  the  origin  of  the  Frater¬
nity  of  Freemasons.”  In  this  work  Nicolai
advanced  his  peculiar  theory  on  the  origin
of  Freemasonry,  which  is  substantially  as
follows :

Lord  Bacon,  taking  certain  hints  from
the  writings  of  Andrea,  the  founder  of
Rosicrucianism  and  his  English  disciple,
Fludd,  on  the  subject  of  the  regeneration
of  the  world,  proposed  to  accomplish  the
same  object,  but  by  a  different  and  entirely
opposite  method.  For,  whereas,  they  ex¬
plained  everything  esoterically,  Bacon’s
plan  was  to  abolish  all  distinction  between
the  esoteric  and  the  exoteric,  and  to  de¬
monstrate  everything  by  proofs  from  na¬
ture.  This  idea  he  first  promulgated  in  his
Instauratio  Magna,  but  afterwards  more
fully  developed  in  his  New  Atlantis.  In
this  latter  work,  he  introduced  his  beauti¬
ful  apologue,  abounding  in  Masonic  ideas,
in  which  he  described  the  unknown  island
of  Bensalem,  where  a  king  had  built  a
large  edifice,  called  after  himself,  Solomon’s
House.  Charles  I.,  it  is  said,  had  been
much  attracted  by  this  idea,  and  had  in¬
tended  to  found  something  of  the  kind
upon  the  plan  of  Solomon’s  Temple,  but
the  occurrence  of  the  civil  war  prevented
the  execution  of  the  project.

The  idea  lay  for  some  time  dormant,  but
was  subsequently  revived,  in  1646,  by  Wal¬
lis,  Wilkins,  and  several  other  learned  men,
who  established  the  Royal  Society  for  the
purpose  of  carrying  out  Bacon’s  plan  of
communicating  to  the  world  scientific  and
philosophical  truths.  About  the  same  time
another  society  was  formed  by  other  learned
men,  who  sought  to  arrive  at  truth  by  the  in¬
vestigations  of  alchemy  and  astrology.  To
this  society  such  men  as  Ashmole  and
Lily  were  attached,  and  they  resolved  to
construct  a  House  of  Solomon  in  the  island
of  Bensalem,  where  they  might  communi¬
cate  their  instructions  by  means  of  secret
symbols.  To  cover  their  mysterious  de¬
signs,  they  got  themselves  admitted  into
the  Mason’s  Company,  and  held  their  meet¬
ings  at  Masons’  Hall,  in  Masons’  Alley,
Basinghall  Street.  As  freemen  of  London,
they  took  the  name  of  Freemasons,  and
3  R  34


naturally  adopted  the  Masonic  implements
as  symbols.  Although  this  association,  like
the  Royal  Society,  sought,  but  by  a  different
method,  to  inculcate  the  principles  of  natu¬
ral  science  and  philosophy,  it  subsequently
took  a  political  direction.  Most  of  its
members  were  strongly  opposed  to  the
puritanism  of  the  dominant  party  and  were
in  favor  of  the  royal  cause,  and  hence  their
meetings,  ostensibly  held  for  the  purpose
of  scientific  investigation,  were  really  used
to  conceal  their  secret  political  efforts  to
restore  the  exiled  house  of  Stuart.  From
this  society,  which  subsequently  underwent
a  decadence,  sprang  out  the  revival  in
1717,  which  culminated  in  the  establish¬
ment  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.

Such  was  the  theory  of  Nicolai.  Few
will  be  found  at  the  present  day  to  concur
in  all  his  views,  yet  none  can  refuse  to
award  to  him  the  praise  of  independence  of
opinion,  originality  of  thofight,  and  an  en¬
tire  avoidance  of  the  beaten  paths  of  hear¬
say  testimony  and  unsupported  tradition.
His  results  may  be  rejected,  but  his  method
of  attaining  them  must  be  commended.

Night.  Lodges,  all  over  the  world,
meet,  except  on  special  occasions,  at  night.
In  this  selection  of  the  hours  of  night  and
darkness  for  initiation,  the  usual  coinci¬
dence  will  be  found  between  the  ceremonies
of  Freemasonry  and  those  of  the  Ancient
Mysteries,  showing  their  evident  derivation
from  a  common  origin.  Justin  says  that?
at  Eleusis,  Triptolemus  invented  the  art  of
sowing  corn,  and  that,  in  honor  of  this  in¬
vention,  the  nights  were  consecrated  to
initiation.  The  application  is,  however,
rather  abstruse.

In  the  Bacchce  of  Euripides,  that  au¬
thor  introduces  the  god  Bacchus,  the  sup¬
posed  inventor  of  the  Dionysian  mysteries,
as  replying  to  the  question  of  King  Pen-
theus  in  the  following  words :

nEN.  T a  S’lcpa  viKriop,  rj  pt9’  pptpav  reacts;

AOI.  Nv/cru/p  ra  rro>>3  tjtpvorrtr  iSxrt  okoto$.

Eurip.  Bacch.  Act  II.,  1.  485.

“  Pentheus. — By  night  or  day,  these  sacred  rites
perform’st  thou?

Bacchus. — Mostly  by  night,  for  venerable  is
darkness ;  ”

and  in  all  the  other  mysteries  the  same  reason
was  assigned  for  nocturnal  celebrations,  since
night  and  darkness  have  something  solemn
and  august  in  them  which  is  disposed  to  fill
the  mind  with  sacred  awe.  And  hence
black,  as  an  emblem  of  darkness  and  night,
was  considered  as  the  color  appropriate  to
the  mysteries.

In  the  mysteries  of  Hindustan,  the  can¬
didate  for  initiation,  having  been  dulv  pre¬
pared  by  previous  purifications,  was  lea  at


530


NILE


NINE


the  dead  of  night  to  the  gloomy  cavern,  in
which  the  mystic  rites  were  performed.

The  same  period  of  darkness  was  adopted
for  the  celebration  of  the  mysteries  of  Mi¬
thras,  in  Persia.  Among  the  Druids  of
Britain  and  Gaul,  the  principal  annual  ini¬
tiation  commenced  at  “  low  twelve,”  or
midnight  of  the  eve  of  May-day.  In  short,
it  is  indisputable  that  the  initiations  in  all
the  Ancient  Mysteries  were  nocturnal  in
their  character.

The  reason  given  by  the  ancients  for  this
selection  of  night  as  the  time  for  initiation,
is  equally  applicable  to  the  system  of  Free¬
masonry.  “Darkness,”  says  Oliver,  “was
an  emblem  of  death,  and  death  was  a  pre¬
lude  to  resurrection.  It  will  be  at  once
seen,  therefore,  in  what  manner  the  doctrine
of  the  resurrection  wits  inculcated  and  ex¬
emplified  in  these  remarkable  institutions.”

Death  and  the  resurrection  were  the  doc¬
trines  taught  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries;  and
night  and  darkness  were  necessary  to  add  to
the  sacred  awe  and  reverence  which  these
doctrines  ought  always  to  inspire  in  the  ra¬
tional  and  contemplative  mind.  The  same
doctrines  form  the  very  groundwork  of
Freemasonry ;  and  as  the  Master  Mason,  to
use  the  language  of  Hutchinson,  “  repre¬
sents  a  man  saved  from  the  grave  of  iniquity
and  raised  to  the  faith  of  salvation,”  dark¬
ness  and  night  are  the  appropriate  accom¬
paniments  to  the  solemn  ceremonies  which
demonstrate  this  profession.

Nile.  There  is  a  tradition  in  the  old
Masonic  Records  that  the  inundations  of
the  river  Nile,  in  Egypt,  continually  destroy¬
ing  the  perishable  landmarks  by  which  one
man  could  distinguish  his  possessions  from
those  of  another,  Euclid  instructed  the
people  in  the  art  of  geometry,  by  which
they  might  measure  their  lands ;  and  then
taught  them  to  bound  them  with  walls  and
ditches,  so  that  after  an  inundation  each
man  could  identify  his  own  boundaries.

The  tradition  is  given  in  the  Cooke  MS.
thus :  “  Euclyde  was  one  of  the  first  founders
of  Geometry,  and  he  gave  hit  name,  for  in
his  tyme  there  was  a  water  in  that  lond  of
Egypt  that  is  called  Nilo,  and  hit  flowid  so
ferre  into  the  londe  that  men  myght  not
dwelle  therein.  Then  this  worthi  clerke
Enclide  taught  hem  to  make  grete  wallys
and  diches  to  holde  owt  the  watyr,  and  he
by  Gemetria  mesured  the  londe  and  de¬
parted  hit  in  divers  partys,  and  made  every
man  to  close  his  owne  parte  with  walles
and  diches.”  This  legend  of  the  origin  of
the  art  of  geometry  was  borrowed  by  the
old  Operative  Masons  from  the  Origines  of
St.  Isidore  of  Seville,  where  a  similar  story
is  told.

Nil  nisi  Claris.  Latin.  Nothing
but  the  key  is  wanting.  A  motto  or  device


often  attached  to  the  double  triangle  of
Royal  Arch  Masonry.  It  is  inscribed  on
the  Royal  Arch  badge  or  jewel  of  the
Grand  Chapter  of  Scotland,  the  other  de¬
vices  being  a  double  triangle  and  a  triple
tau.

Nimrod.  The  legend  of  the  Craft  in
the  Old  Constitutions  refers  to  Nimrod  as
one  of  the  founders  of  Masonry.  Thus  in
the  York  Manuscript  we  read:  “At  y*
makeing  of  y*  Toure  of  Babell  there  was
Masonrie  first  much  esteemed  of,  and  the
King  of  Babilon  y*  was  called  Nimrod  was
A  mason  himselfe  and  loved  well  Masons.”
And  the  Cooke  Manuscript  thus  repeats  the
story:  “And  this  same  Nembroth  began
the  towre  of  babilon  and  he  taught  to  his
werkemen  the  craft  of  Masonrie,  and  he
had  with  him  many  Masons  more  than
forty  thousand.  And  he  loved  and  cherished
them  well.”  The  idea  no  doubt  sprang  out
of  the  Scriptural  teaching  that  Nimrod
was  the  architect  of  many  cities;  a  state¬
ment  not  so  well  expressed  in  the  author¬
ized  version,  as  it  is  in  the  improved  one
of  Bochart,  which  says:  “From  that  land
Nimrod  went  forth  to  Asshur,  and  builded
Nineveh,  and  Rehoboth  city,  and  Calah,
and  Resen  between  Nineveh  and  Calah,  that
is  the  great  city.”

Nine.  If  the  number  three  was  cele¬
brated  among  the  ancient  sages,  that  of
three  times  three  had  no  less  celebrity;  be¬
cause,  according  to  them,  each  of  the  three
elements  which  constitute  our  bodies  is
ternary :  the  water  containing  earth  and
fire ;  the  earth  containing  igneous  and  aque¬
ous  particles ;  and  the  fire  being  tempered
by  globules  of  water  and  terrestrial  corpus¬
cles  which  serve  to  feed  it.  No  one  of  the
three  elements  being  entirely  separated
from  the  others,  all  material  beings  com¬
posed  of  these  three  elements,  whereof  each
is  triple,  may  be  designated  by  the  figura¬
tive  number  of  three  times  three,  which  has
become  the  symbol  of  all  formations  of
bodies.  Hence  the  name  of  ninth  envelop
given  to  matter.  Every  material  extension,
every  circular  line,  has  for  its  representative
sign  the  number  nine  among  the  Pythag¬
oreans,  who  had  observed  the  property
which  this  number  possesses  of  reproducing
itself  incessantly  and  entire  in  every  mul¬
tiplication  ;  thus  offering  to  the  mind  a  very
striking  emblem  of  matter,  which  is  inces¬
santly  composed  before  our  eyes,  after  hav¬
ing  undergone  a  thousand  decompositions.

The  number  nine  was  consecrated  to  the
Spheres  and  the  Muses.  It  is  the  sign  of
every  circumference;  because  a  circle  or
360  degrees  is  equal  to  9,  that  is  to  say,  3  +
6  +  0  =  9.  Nevertheless,  the  ancients  re¬
garded  this  number  with  a  sort  of  terror  :
they  considered  it  a  bad  presage ;  as  the


NINEVEH


NOACHITE


531


symbol  of  versatility,  of  change,  and  the
emblem  of  the  frailty  of  human  affairs.
Wherefore  they  avoided  all  numbers  where
nine  appears,  and  chiefly  81,  the  produce
of  9  multiplied  by  itself,  and  the  addition
whereof,  8+1,  again  presents  the  number  9.

As  the  figure  of  the  number  6  was  the
symbol  of  the  terrestrial  globe,  animated
by  a  divine  spirit,  the  figure  of  the  number
9  symbolized  the  earth,  under  the  influence
of  the  Evil  Principle;  and  thence  the
terror  it  inspired.  Nevertheless,  according
to  the  Kabbalists,  the  cipher  9  symbolizes
the  generative  egg,  or  the  image  of  a  little
globular  being,  from  whose  lower  side  seems
to  flow  its  spirit  of  life.

The  Ennead,  signifying  an  aggregate  of
nine  things  or  persons,  is  the  first  square  of
unequal  numbers.

Every  one  is  aware  of  the  singular  prop¬
erties  of  the  number  9,  which,  multiplied
by  itself  or  any  other  number  whatever,
gives  a  result  whose  final  sum  is  always  9,
or  always  divisible  by  9.

9,  multiplied  by  each  of  the  ordinary
numbers,  produces  an  arithmetical  pro¬
gression,  each  member  whereof,  composed
of  two  figures,  preseuts  a  remarkable  fact;
for  example:

1.  2.  3.  4.  5.  6.  7.8.  9.  10
9  .  18  .  27  .  36 . 45  .  54 . 63  .  72  .  81  .  90

The  first  line  of  figures  gives  the  regular
series,  from  1  to  10.

The  second  reproduces  this  line  doubly;
first  ascending  from  the  first  figure  of  18,
and  then  returning  from  the  second  figure
of  81.

In  Freemasonry,  9  derives  its  value  from
its  being  the  product  of  3  multiplied  into
itself,  and  consequently  in  Masonic  lan¬
guage  the  number  9  is  always  denoted  by
the  expression  3  times  3.  For  a  similar
reason,  27,  which  is  3  times  9,  and  81,  which
is  9  times  9,  are  esteemed  as  sacred  numbers
in  the  higher  degrees.

Ninevoli.  The  capital  of  the  ancient
kingdom  of  Assyria,  and  built  by  Nimrod.
The  traditions  of  its  greatness  and  the  mag¬
nificence  of  its  buildings  were  familiar  to
the  Arabs,  the  Greeks,  and  the  Romans.
The  modern  discoveries  of  Rich,  of  Botta,
and  other  explorers,  have  thrown  much
light  upon  its  ancient  condition,  and  have
shown  that  it  was  the  seat  of  much  archi¬
tectural  splendor  and  of  a  profoundly  sym¬
bolical  religion,  which  had  something  of
the  characteristics  of  the  Mithraic  worship.
In  the  mythical  relations  of  the  Old  Con¬
stitutions,  which  make  up  the  legend  of
the  Craft,  it  is  spoken  of  as  the  ancient
birthplace  of  Masonry,  where  Nimrod,  who
was  its  builder,  and  “  was  a  Mason  and


loved  well  the  Craft,”  employed  60,000  Ma¬
sons  to  build  it,  and  gave  them  a  charge
“that  they  should  be  true,”  and  this,  says
the  Harleian  Manuscript,  was  the  first  time
that  any  Mason  had  any  charge  of  Craft.

Nisan.  JD’J.  The  seventh  month  of
the  Hebrew  civil  year,  and  corresponding
to  the  months  of  March  and  April,  com¬
mencing  with  the  new  moon  of  the  former.

NoadiitSse.  The  descendants  of  Noah.
A  term  applied  to  Freemasons  on  the  the¬
ory,  derived  from  the  “  legend  of  the  Craft,”
that  Noah  was  the  father  and  founder  of
the  Masonic  system  of  theology.  And
hence  the  Freemasons  claim  to  be  his  de¬
scendants,  because  in  times  past  they  pre¬
served  the  pure  principles  of  his  religion
amid  the  corruptions  of  surrounding  faiths.

Dr.  Anderson  first  used  the  word  in  this
sense  in  the  second  edition  of  the  Book  of
Constitutions:  “A  Mason  is  obliged  by  his
tenure  to  observe  the  moral  law  as  a  true
Noachida,”  But  he  was  not  the  inventor
of  the  term,  which,  as  indicating  a  Mason,
was  derived  by  Anderson,  most  probably,
from  the  Chevalier  Ramsay.

Noaoliite,  or  Prussian  Knight.
[Noachite  ou  Chevalier  Prussien. )  1.  The

twenty-first  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite.  The  history  as  well
as  the  character  of  this  degree  is  a  very  sin¬
gular  one.  It  is  totally  unconnected  with
the  series  of  Masonic  degrees  which  are
founded  upon  the  Temple  of  Solom'on,  and
is  traced  to  the  tower  of  Babel.  Hence  the
PrussianKn  ights  call  them  sel  ves  N  oach  ites,
or  Disciples  of  Noah,  while  they  designate
all  other  Masons  as  Hiramites,  or  Disciples
of  Hiram.  The  early  French  rituals  state
that  the  degree  was  translated  in  1757  from
the  German  by  M.  de  Beraye,  Knight  of
Eloquence  in  the  Lodge  of  the  Count  St.
Gelaire,  Inspector  General  of  Prussian
Lodges  in  France.  Lenning  gives  no  credit
to  this  statement,  but  admits  that  the  ori¬
gin  of  the  degree  must  be  attributed  to  the
year  above  named.  The  destruction  of  the
tower  of  Babel  constitutes  the  legend  of  the
degree,  whose  mythical  founder  is  said  to
have  been  Peleg,  the  chief  builder  of  that
edifice.  A  singular  regulation  is  that  there
shall  be  no  artificial  light  in  the  Lodge
room,  and  that  the  meetings  shall  be  held
on  the  night  of  the  full  moon  of  each  month.

The  degree  was  adopted  by  the  Council
of  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West,  and  in
that  way  became  subsequently  a  part  of  the
system  of  the  Scottish  Rite.  But  it  is  mis¬
placed  in  any  series  of  degrees  supposed  to
emanate  from  the  Solomonic  Temple.  It
is,  as  an  unfitting  link,  an  unsightly  inter¬
ruption  of  the  chain  of  legendary  symbol¬
ism  substituting  Noah  for  Solomon,  and
Peleg  for  Hiram  Abif.  The  Supreme


632


NOACHITES


NO  All


Council  for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  has
abandoned  the  original  ritual  and  made
the  degree  a  representation  of  the  Vehmge-
richt  or  Westphalian  Franc  Judges.  But
this  by  no  means  relieves  the  degree  of  the
objection  of  Masonic  incompatibility.  That
it  was  ever  adopted  into  the  Masonic  sys¬
tem  is  only  to  be  attributed  to  the  passion
for  high  degrees  which  prevailed  in  France
in  the  middle  of  the  last  century.

In  the  modern  ritual  the  meetings  are
called  Grand  Chapters.  The  officers  are  a
Lieutenant  Commander,  two  Wardens,  an
Orator,  Treasurer,  Secretary,  Master  of
Ceremonies,  Warder,  and  Standard  Bearer.
The  apron  is  yellow,  inscribed  with  an  arm
holding  a  sword  and  the  Egyptian  figure
of  silence.  The  order  is  black,  and  the
jewel  a  full  moon  or  a  triangle  traversed
by  an  arrow.  In  the  original  ritual  there
is  a  coat  of  arms  belonging  to  the  degree,
which  is  thus  emblazoned:  Party  per  less ;
in  chief,  azure ,  sem6  of  stars,  or  a  full  moon,
argent;  in  base,  sable,  an  equilateral  trian¬
gle,  having  an  arrow  suspended  from  its
upper  point,  barb  downwards,  or.

The  legend  of  the  degree  describes  the
travels  of  Peleg  from  Babel  to  the  'north
of  Europe,  and  ends  with  the  following
narrative:  “  In  trenching  the  rubbish  of  the
salt-mines  of  Prussia  was  found  in  A.  D.
553,  at  a  depth  of  fifteen  cubits,  the  appear¬
ance  of  a  triangular  building  in  which  was
a  column  of  white  marble,  on  which  was
written  in  Hebrew  the  whole  history  of
the  Noachites.  At  the  side  of  this  column
was  a  tomb  of  freestone  on  which  was  a
piece  of  agate  inscribed  with  the  following
epitaph :  Here  rest  the  ashes  of  Peleg,  our
Grand  Architect  of  the  tower  of  Babel.
The  Almighty  had  pity  on  him  because  he
became  humble.”

This  legend,  although  wholly  untenable
on  historic  grounds,  is  not  absolutely  pue¬
rile.  The  dispersion  of  the  human  race
in  the  time  of  Peleg  had  always  been  a
topic  of  discussion  among  the  learned.
Long  dissertations  had  been  written  to
show  that  all  the  nations  of  the  world,
even  America,  had  been  peopled  by  the
three  sons  of  Noah  and  their  descendants.
The  object  of  the  legend  seems,  then,  to  have
been  to  impress  the  idea  of  the  thorough
dispersion.  The  fundamental  idea  of  the
degree  is,  under  the  symbol  of  Peleg,  to
teach  the  crime  of  assumption  and  the  vir¬
tue  of  humility.

2.  The  degree  was  also  adopted  into  the
Rite  of  Mizraim,  where  it  is  the  thirty-fifth.

Xoacliites.  The  same  as  Noachidce,
which  see.

Xoaoliite,  Sovereign.  ( Noachite
Souverain.)  A  degree  contained  in  the  no¬
menclature  of  Fustier.


lYoali.  In  all  the  old  Masonic  manu.
script  Constitutions  that  are  extant,  hioah
and  the  flood  play  an  important  part  of
the  “  Legend  of  the  Craft.”  Hence,  as  the
Masonic  system  became  developed,  the
Patriarch  was  looked  upon  as  what  was
called  a  patron  of  Masonry.  And  this  con¬
nection  of  Noah  with  the  mythic  history
of  the  Order  was  rendered  still  closer  by
the  influence  of  many  symbols  borrowed
from  the  Arkite  worship,  one  of  the  most
predominant  of  the  ancient  faiths.  So  in¬
timately  were  incorporated  the  legends  of
Noah  with  the  legends  of  Masonry  that
Freemasons  began,  at  length,  to  be  called,
and  are  still  called,  “Noachidae,”  or  the
descendants  of  Noah,  a  term  first  applied
by  Anderson,  and  very  frequently  used  at
the  present  day.

It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  every
scholar  who  desires  to  investigate  the  le¬
gendary  symbolism  of  Freemasonry  should
make  himself  acquainted  with  the  Noachic
myths  upon  which  much  of  it  is  founded.
Dr.  Oliver,  it  is  true,  accepted  them  all  with
a  child-like  faith;  but  it  is  not  likely  that
the  sceptical  inquirers  of  the  present  day
will  attribute  to  them  any  character  of  au¬
thenticity.  Yet  they  are  interesting,  be¬
cause  they  show  us  the  growth  of  legends
out  of  symbols,  and  they  are  instructive
because  they  are  for  the  most  part  sym¬
bolic.

The  “  Legend  of  the  Craft  ’’  tells  us  that
the  three  sons  of  Lamech  and  his  daughter,
Naamah,  “did  know  that  God  would  take
vengeance  for  sin,  either  by  fire  or  water  ;
wherefore  they  wrote  these  sciences  which
they  had  found  in  two  pillars  of  stone,  that
they  might  be  found  after  the  flood.”  Sub¬
sequently,  this  legend  took  a  different  form,
and  to  Enoch  was  attributed  the  precaution
of  burying  the  stone  of  foundation  in  the
bosom  of  Mount  Moriah,  and  of  erecting
the  two  pillars  above  it.

The  first  Masonic  myth  referring  to  Noah
that  presents  itself  is  one  which  tells  us
that,  while  he  wras  piously  engaged  in  the
task  of  exhorting  his  contemporaries  to
repentance,  his  attention  had  often  been
directed  to  the  pillars  which  Enoch  had
erected  on  Mount  Moriah.  By  diligent
search  he  at  length  detected  the  entrance
to  the  subterranean  vault,  and,  on  pursuing
his  inquiries,  discovered  the  stone  of  foun¬
dation,  although  he  was  unable  to  compre¬
hend  the  mystical  characters  there  depos¬
ited,  Leaving  these,  therefore,  where  he
had  found  them,  he  simply  took  away  the
stone  of  foundation  on  which  they  had
been  deposited,  and  placed  it  in  the  ark  as
a  convenient  altar.

Another  myth,  preserved  in  one  of  the
ineffable  degrees,  informs  us  that  the  ark


NOAH


NOAH


533


was  built  of  cedars  which  grew  upon
Mount  Lebanon,  and  that  Noah  employed
the  Sidonians  to  cut  them  down,  under  the
superintendence  of  Japheth.  The  succes¬
sors  of  these  Sidonians,  in  after  times,
according  to  the  same  tradition,  were  em¬
ployed  by  King  Solomon  to  fell  and  pre¬
pare  cedars  on  the  same  mountain  for  his
stupendous  Temple.

The  record  of  Genesis  lays  the  founda¬
tion  for  another  series  of  symbolic  myths
connected  with  the  dove,  which  has  thus
been  introduced  into  Masonry.

After  forty  days,  when  Noah  opened  the
window  of  the  ark  that  he  might  learn  if
the  waters  had  subsided,  he  despatched  a
raven,  which,  returning,  gave  him  no  sat¬
isfactory  information.  He  then  sent  forth
a  dove  three  several  times,  at  an  interval
of  seven  days  between  each  excursion.  The
first  time  the  dove,  finding  no  resting-place,
quickly  returned;  the  second  time  she  came
back  in  the  evening,  bringing  in  her  mouth
an  olive-leaf,  which  showed  that  the  waters
must  have  sufficiently  abated  to  have  ex¬
posed  the  tops  of  the  trees;  but  on  the
third  departure,  the  dry  land  being  entirely
uncovered,  she  returned  no  more.

In  the  Arkite  rites,  which  arose  after
the  dispersion  of  Babel,  the  dove  was  al¬
ways  considered  as  a  sacred  bird,  in  com¬
memoration  of  its  having  been  the  first
discoverer  of  land.  Its  name,  which  in
Hebrew  is  ionah,  was  given  to  one  of  the
earliest  nations  of  the  earfli ;  and,  as  the
emblem  of  peace  and  good  fortune,  it  be¬
came  the  bird  of  Venus.  Modern  Masons
have  commemorated  the  messenger  of
Noah  in  the  honorary  degree  of  “  Ark  and
Dove,”  which  is  sometimes  conferred  on
Royal  Arch  Masons.

On  the  27th  day  of  the  second  month,
equivalent  to  the  12th  of  November,  in  the
year  of  the  world  1657,  Noah,  with  his
family,  left  the  ark.  It  was  exactly  one
year  of  365  days,  or  just  one  revolution  of
the  sun,  that  the  patriarch  was  enclosed  in
the  ark.  This  was  not  unobserved  by  the
descendants  of  Noah,  and  hence,  in  conse¬
quence  of  Enoch’s  life  of  365  days,  and
Noah’s  residence  in  the  ark  for  the  same
apparently  mystic  period,  the  Noachites
confounded  the  worship  of  the  solar  orb
with  the  idolatrous  adoration  which  they
paid  to  the  patriarchs  who  were  saved
from  the  deluge.  They  were  led  to  this,
too,  from  an  additional  reason,  that  Noah,
as  the  restorer  of  the  human  race,  seemed,
in  some  sort,  to  be  a  type  of  the  regenerat¬
ing  powers  of  the  sun.

So  important  an  event  as  the  deluge,
must  have  produced  a  most  impressive
effect  upon  tne  religious  dogmas  and  rites
of  the  nations  which  succeeded  it.  Conse¬


quently,  we  shall  find  some  allusion  to  it
in  the  annals  of  every  people  and  some
memorial  of  the  principal  circumstances
connected  with  it,  in  their  religious  observ¬
ances.  At  first,  it  is  to  be  supposed  that  a
veneration  for  the  character  of  the  second
parent  of  the  human  race  must  have  been
long  preserved  by  his  descendants.  Nor
would  they  have  been  unmindful  of  the
proper  reverence  due  to  that  sacred  vessel
— sacred  in  their  eyes  —  which  had  pre¬
served  their  great  progenitor  from  the  fury
of  the  waters.  “They  would  long  cher¬
ish,”  says  Alwood,  {Lit.  Antiq.  of  Greece,  p.
182,)  “  the  memory  of  those  worthies  who
were  rescued  from  the  common  lot  of  utter
ruin;  they  would  call  to  mind,  with  an
extravagance  of  admiration,  the  means
adopted  for  their  preservation ;  they  would
adore  the  wisdom  which  contrived,  and  the
goodness  which  prompted  to,  the  execution
of  such  a  plan.”  So  pious  a  feeling  would
exist,  and  be  circumscribed  within  its
proper  limits  of  reverential  gratitude,  while
the  legends  of  the  deluge  continued  to  be
preserved  in  their  purity,  and  while  the
divine  preserver  of  Noah  was  remembered
as  the  one  god  of  his  posterity.  But  when,
by  the  confusion  and  dispersion  at  Babel,
the  true  teachings  of  Enoch  and  Noah
were  lost,  and  idolatry  or  polytheism  was
substituted  for  the  ancient  faith,  then
Noah  became  a  god,  worshipped  under
different  names  in  different  countries,  and
the  ark  was  transformed  into  the  temple
of  the  Deity.  Hence  arose  those  peculiar
systems  of  initiations  which,  known  under
the  name  of  the  “  Arkite  rites,”  formed  a
part  of  the  worship  of  the  ancient  world,
and  traces  of  which  are  to  be  found  in
almost  all  the  old  systems  of  religion.

It  was  in  the  six  hundredth  year  of  his
age,  that  Noah,  with  his  family,  was  re¬
leased  from  the  ark.  Grateful  for  his
preservation,  he  erected  an  altar  and  pre¬
pared  a  sacrifice  of  thank-offerings  to  the
Deity.  A  Masonic  tradition  says,  that  for
this  purpose  he  made  use  of  that  stone  of
foundation  which  he  had  discovered  in  the
subterranean  vault  of  Enoch,  and  which
he  had  carried  with  him  into  the  ark.  It
was  at  this  time  that  God  made  his  cove¬
nant  with  Noah,  and  promised  him  that
the  earth  should  never  again  be  destroyed
by  a  flood.  Here,  too,  he  received  those
commandments  for  the  government  of
himself  and  his  posterity  which  have
been  called  “the  seven  precepts  of  the
Noachidse.”

It  is  to  be  supposed  that  Noah  and  his
immediate  descendants  continued  to  live
for  many  years  in  the  neighborhood  of  the
mountain  upon  which  the  ark  had  been
thrown  by  the  subsidence  of  the  waters.


534


NOAH


NOMINATION


There  is  indeed  no  evidence  that  the  patri¬
arch  ever  removed  from  it.  In  the  nine
hundred  and  fiftieth  year  of  his  age  he
died,  and,  according  to  the  tradition  of  the
Orientalists,  was  buried  in  the  land  of
Mesopotamia.  During  that  period  of  his
life  which  was  subsequent  to  the  deluge,
he  continued  to  instruct  his  children  in  the
great  truths  of  religion.  Hence,  Masons
are  sometimes  called  Noachidse,  or  the  sons
of  Noah,  to  designate  them,  in  a  peculiar
manner,  as  the  preservers  of  the  sacred
deposit  of  Masonic  truth  bequeathed  to
them  by  their  great  ancestor;  and  cir¬
cumstances  intimately  connected  with  the
transactions  of  the  immediate  descendants
of  the  patriarch  are  recorded  in  a  degree
which  has  been  adopted  by  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  under  the
name  of  “  Patriarch  Noachite.”

The  primitive  teachings  of  the  patriarch,
which  were  simple  but  comprehensive,  con¬
tinued  to  be  preserved  in  the  line  of  the
patriarchs  and  the*prophets  to  the  days  of
Solomon,  but  were  soon  lost  to  the  other
descendants  of  Noah,  by  a  circumstance  to
which  we  must  now  refer.  After  the  death  of
Noah,  his  sons  removed  from  the  region  of
Mount  Ararat,  where,  until  then,  they  had
resided,  and  “travelling  from  the  East,
found  a  plain  in  the  land  of  Shinar,  and
dwelt  there.”  Here  they  commenced  the
building  of  a  lofty  tower.  This  act  seems
to  have  been  displeasing  to  God,  for  in
consequence  of  it,  he  confounded  their
language,  so  that  one  could  not  understand
what  another  said ;  the  result  of  which  was
that  they  separated  and  dispersed  over  the
face  of  the  earth  in  search  of  different
dwelling-places.  With  the  loss  of  the
original  language,  the  great  truths  which
that  language  had  conveyed,  disappeared
from  their  minds.  The  worship  of  the  one
true  God  was  abandoned.  A  multitude  of
deities  began  to  be  adored.  Idolatry  took
the  place  of  pure  theism.  And  then  arose
the  Arkite  rites,  or  the  worship  of  Noah
and  the  Ark,  Sabaism,  or  the  adoration  of
the  stars,  and  other  superstitious  observ¬
ances,  in  all  of  which,  however,  the  priest¬
hood,  by  their  mysteries  or  initiations  into
a  kind  of  Spurious  Freemasonry,  preserved,
among  a  multitude  of  errors,  some  faint
allusions  to  the  truth,  and  retained  just  so
much  light  as  to  make  their  “darkness
visible.”

Such  are  the  Noachic  traditions  of  Ma¬
sonry,  which,  though  if  considered  as  ma¬
terials  of  history,  would  be  worth  but  little,
yet  have  furnished  valuable  sources  of  sym¬
bolism,  and  in  that  way  are  full  of  wise
instruction.

Noah,  Precepts  of.  The  precepts
of  the  patriarch  Noah,  which  were  pre¬


served  as  the  Constitutions  of  our  ancient
brethren,  are  seven  in  number,  and  are  as
fol  low’s :

1.  Renounce  all  idols.

2.  Worship  the  only  true  God.

3.  Commit  no  murder.

4.  Be  not  defiled  by  incest.

5.  Do  not  steal.

6.  Be  just

7.  Eat  no  flesh  with  blood  in  it.

The  “proselytes  of  the  gate,”  as  the
Jews  termed  those  who  lived  among  them
without  undergoing  circumcision  or  ob¬
serving  the  ceremonial  law,  were  bound  to
obey  the  seven  precepts  of  Noah.  The
Talmud  says  that  the  first  six  of  these  pre¬
cepts  were  given  originally  by  God  to
Adam,  and  the  seventh  afterwards  to  Noah.
These  precepts  were  designed  to  be  obliga¬
tory  on  all  the  Noachidse,  or  descendants  of
Noah,  and  consequently,  from  the  time  of
Moses,  the  Jews  would  not  suffer  a  stranger
to  live  among  them  unless  he  observed
these  precepts,  and  never  gave  quarter  in
battle  to  an  enemy  w  ho  was  ignorant  of
them.

Noffodei.  The  name  of  this  person  is
differently  spelled  by  different  writers.  Vil-
lani,  and  after  him  Burnes,  call  him  Foffo
Dei,  Reghellini  Neffodei,  and  Addison  Xosso
de  Florentin;  but  the  more  usual  spelling  is
Noffodei.  He  and  Squin  de  Flexian  were
the  first  to  make  those  false  accusations
against  the  Knjghts  Templars  which  led  to
the  dow’nfall  of  the  Order.  Naffodei,  who
was  a  Florentine,  is  asserted  by  some  writers
to  have  been  an  apostate  Templar,  who
had  been  condemned  by  the  Preceptor  and
Chapter  of  France  to  perpetual  imprison¬
ment  for  impiety  and  crime.  But  Dupui
denies  this,  and  says  that  he  never  was  a
Templar,  but  that,  having  been  banished
from  his  native  country,  he  had  been  con¬
demned  to  rigorous  penalties  by  the  Pre-
vost  of  Paris  for  his  crimes.  For  a  history
of  his  treachery  to  the  Templars,  see  Squin
de  Flexian.

Nomenclature.  There  are  several
Masonic  works,  printed  or  in  manuscript,
which  contain  lists  of  the  names  of  degrees
in  Masonry.  Such  a  list  is  called  by  the
French  writers  a  nomenclature.  The  most
important  of  these  nomenclatures  are  those
of  Peuvret,  Fustier,  Pyron,  and  Lemanceau.
Ragon  has  a  nomenclature  of  degrees  in  his
Tuileur  Generate.  And  Thory  has  an  ex¬
haustive  and  descriptive  one  in  his  Acta
Latomorum.  Oliver  also  gives  a  nomencla¬
ture,  but  an  imperfect  one,  of  one  hundred
and  fifty  degrees  in  his  Historical  Land¬
marks.

Nomination.  It  is  the  custom  in
some  Grand  Lodges  and  Lodges  to  nomi¬
nate  candidates  for  election  to  office,  and  in


NON-AFFILIATION


NORTH


535


others  this  custom  is  not  adopted.  But  the
practice  of  nomination  has  the  sanction  of
ancient  usage.  Thus  the  records  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  under  date  of
June  24,  1717,  tell  us  that  “before  dinner
the  oldest  Master  Mason  ...  in  the  chair
proposed  a  list  of  candidates,  and  the  breth¬
ren,  by  a  majority  of  hands,  elected  Mr.
Anthony  Sayre,  Gent.,  Grand  Master  of
Masons.”  And  the  present  Constitution
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  requires
that  the  Grand  Master  shall  be  nominated
in  December,  but  that  the  election  shall  not
take  place  until  the  following  March.
Nominations  appear,  therefore,  to  be  the
correct  Masonic  practice;  yet,  if  a  member
be  elected  to  any  office  to  which  he  had  not
previously  been  nominated,  the  election  will
be  valid,  for  a  nomination  is  not  essential.

Non-Affiliation.  The  state  of  being
unconnected  by  membership  with  a  Lodge.
See  Unaffiliated  Masons.

Nonesynches.  In  the  Old  Constitu¬
tions  known  as  the  Dowland  MS.  is  found
the  following  passage:  “St.  Albann  loved
well  Masons  and  cherished  them  much.
And  he  made  their  paie  right  good,  ....
for  he  gave  them  ijs.  a  weeke,  and  iijd.  to
their  nonesynches.”  This  word,  which  can¬
not,  in  this  precise  form,  be  found  in  any
archaic  dictionary,  evidently  means  food  or
refreshment,  for  in  the  parallel  passage  iu
other  Constitutions  the  word  used  is  cheer,
which  has  the  same  meaning.  The  old
English  word  from  which  we  get  our
luncheon  is  noonshun,  which  is  defined  to  be
the  refreshment  taken  at  noon,  when  labor¬
ers  desist  from  work  to  shun  the  heat.  Of
this  nonesynches  is  a  corrupt  form.

Nonis.  A  word  in  the  high  degrees,
for  which  see  Salix  and  Tengu.

Non  nobis.  It  is  prescribed  that  the
motto  beneath  the  Passion  Cross  on  the
Grand  Standard  of  a  Commandery  of
Knights  Templars  shall  be  “Non  nobis
Domine!  non  nobis,  sed  nomini  tuo  da
Gloriam.”  That  is,  Not  unto  us,  0  Lord!
not  unto  us,  but  unto  Thy  name  give  Glory.
It  is  the  commencement  of  the  1 15th  Psalm,
which  is  sung  in  the  Christian  Church  on
occasions  of  thanksgiving.  It  was  the  an¬
cient  Templar’s  shout  of  victory.

Non-resident.  The  members  of  a
Lodge  who  do  not  reside  in  the  locality  of
a  Lodge,  but  live  at  a  great  distance  from
it  in  another  State,  or,  perhaps,  country,
but  still  continue  members  of  it,  and  con¬
tribute  to  its  support  by  the  payment  of
Lodge  dues,  are  called  “  non-resident  mem¬
bers.”  Many  Lodges,  in  view  of  the  fact
that  such  members  enjoy  none  of  the  local
privileges  of  their  Lodges,  require  from
them  a  less  amount  of  annual  arrears  than
they  do  from  their  resident  members.


Noorthouck,  John.  The  editor  of
the  fifth,  and  by  far  the  best,  edition  of
the  Book  of  Constitutions,  which  was  pub¬
lished  in  1784.  He  was  the  son  of  Her¬
man  Noorthouck,  a  bookseller,  and  was
born  in  London  in  1745.  Oliver  describes
him  as  “  a  clever  and  intelligent  man,  and
an  expert  Mason.”  His  literary  pretensions
were,  however,  greater  than  this  modest
encomium  would  indicate.  He  was  pat¬
ronized  by  the  celebrated  printer,  W m.
Strahan,  and  passed  nearly  the  whole  of
his  life  in  the  occupations  of  an  author,
an  index  maker,  and  a  corrector  of  the
press.  He  was,  besides  his  edition  of  the
Book  of  Constitutions,  the  writer  of  a  His¬
tory  of  London,  4to,  published  in  1775,  and
a  Historical  and  Classical  Dictionary,  2  vols.,
8vo,  published  in  1776.  To  him  also,  as
well  as  to  some  others,  has  been  attributed
the  authorship  of  a  once  popular  book  en¬
titled,  The  Man  after  God’s  own  Heart.  In
1852,  J.  R.  Smith,  a  bookseller  of  London,
advertised  for  sale  “  the  original  autograph
manuscript  of  thelifeof  John  Noorthouck.”
He  calls  this  “  a  very  interesting  piece  of
autobiography,  containing  many  curious
literary  anecdotes  of  the  last  century,  and
deserving  to  be  printed.”  I  think  it  never
has  been.  Noorthouck  died  in  1816,  aged
70  years.

North.  The  north  is  Masonically
called  a  place  of  darkness.  The  sun  in  his
progress  through  the  ecliptic  never  reaches
farther  than  23°  28'  north  of  the  equator.  A
wall  being  erected  on  any  part  of  the  earth
farther  north  than  that,  will  therefore,  at
meridian,  receive  the  rays  of  the  sun  only
on  its  south  side,  while  the  north  will  be
entirely  in  shadow  at  the  hour  of  meridian.
The  use  of  the  north  as  a  symbol  of  dark¬
ness  is  found,  with  the  present  interpreta¬
tion,  in  the  early  rituals  of  the  last  century.
It  is  a  portion  of  the  old  sun  worship,  of
which  we  find  so  many  relics  in  Gnosti¬
cism,  in  Hermetic  philosophy,  and  in  Free¬
masonry.  The  east  was  the  place  of  the
sun’s  daily  birth,  and  hence  highly  revered ;
the  north  the  place  of  his  annual  death,  to
which  he  approached  only  to  lose  his  vivi-
fic  heat,  and  to  clothe  the  earth  in  the
darkness  of  long  nights  and  the  dreariness
of  winter.

North  Carolina.  The  early  history
of  Masonry  in  no  State  is  more  uncertain
than  in  that  of  North  Carolina,  in  conse¬
quence  of  the  carelessness  of  the  authorities
who  have  attempted  to  write  its  early  an¬
nals.  Thus,  Robert  Williams,  the  Grand
Secretary,  in  a  letter  written  to  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Kentucky  in  1808,  said  that  “the
Grand  Lodge  of  North  Carolina  was  con¬
stituted  by  Charter  issued  from  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland  in  the  year  1761,  signed


536


NORTH


NOVA


by  Henrv  Somerset,  Duke  of  Beaufort .  .  .  I
as  Grand  Master  ;  and  attested  by  George
John  Spencer,  Earl  of  Spencer  .  .  .  as  Grand
Secretary.”  Now  this  statement  contains
on  its  face  the  evidences  of  flagrant  error.
1.  The  Duke  of  Beaufort  never  was  Grand
Master  of  Scotland.  2.  The  Grand  Master
of  Scotland  in  1761  was  the  Earl  of  Elgin.
3.  The  Earl  of  Spencer  never  was  Grand
Secretary  either  of  England  or  Scotland,
but  Samuel  Spencer  was  Grand  Secretary  1
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  from  1757
to  1767,  and  died  in  1763.  4.  The  Duke  of
Beaufort  was  not  Grand  Master  of  England
in  1761,  but  held  that  office  from  1767  to
1771.  There  is  no  mention  in  the  printed
records  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  of
a  Charter  at  any  time  granted  for  a  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Lodge  in  North  Carolina.
But  in  two  lists  of  Lodges  chartered  bv
that  body,  I  find  that  on  August  21st,  1767,
a  Warrant  was  granted  for  the  establish¬
ment  of  “Royal  White  Hart  Lodge,”  at
Halifax  in  North  Carolina.  I  am  inclined
to  believe  that  this  is  the  true  date  of  the
introduction  of  Masonry  into  that  State.
A  record  in  the  transactions  of  the  St.
John's  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts  says
that  on  October  2d,  1767,  that  body  grant¬
ed  a  deputation  to  Thomas  Cooper,  Master
of  Pitt  County  Lodge,  as  Deputy  Grand
Master  of  the  province ;  but  there  is  no  evi¬
dence  that  he  ever  exercised  the  preroga¬
tives  of  the  office.  Judge  Martin,  in  a  dis¬
course  delivered  on  June  24th,  1789,  says
that  Joseph  Montford  was  appointed,  to¬
wards  the  year  1769,  as  Provincial  Grand
Master  by  the  Duke  of  Beaufort,  and  that
in  1771  he  constituted  St.  John’s  Lodge  at
Newbern.  This  was  probably  the  true  date
of  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  North
Carolina,  for  in  1787  we  find  nine  Lodges
in  the  territory,  five  of  which,  at  least,
had  the  provincial  numbers  2,  3,  4,  5,  and
8,  while  the  Royal  Hart  Lodge  retained  its
number  on  the  English  Register  as  403,  a
number  which  agrees  with  that  of  the  Eng¬
lish  lists  in  my  possession.  On  December
9th,  1787,  a  convention  of  Lodges  met  at
Tarborough  and  organized  the  “  Grand
Lodge  of  the  State  of  North  Carolina,”  elect¬
ing  Hon.  Samuel  Johnston  Grand  Master.

There  was  a  Grand  Chapter  in  North
Carolina  at  an  early  period  in  the  present
century,  which  ceased  to  exist  about  the
year  1827 ;  but  Royal  Arch  Masonry  was
cultivated  by  four  Chapters  instituted  by
the  General  Grand  Chapter.  On  June  28,
1847,  the  Grand  Chapter  was  reorganized.

The  Grand  Council  was  organized  in
June,  1860,  by  Councils  which  had  been  es¬
tablished  by  the  author  of  this  work,  under
the  authority  of  the  Supreme  Council  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.


Xortli-ea.st  Corner.  In  the  “Insti¬
tutes  of  Menu,”  the  sacred  book  of  the
Brahmans,  it  is  said :  “  If  any  one  has  an
incurable  disease,  let  him  advance  in  a
straight  path  towards  the  invincible  north¬
east  point,  feeding  on  water  and  air  till  his
mortal  frame  totally  decays,  and  his  soul
becomes  united  with  the  supreme.”

It  is  at  the  same  north-east  point  that
those  first  instructions  begin  in  Masonry
which  enable  the  true  Mason  to  commence
the  erection  of  that  spiritual  temple  in
which,  after  the  decay  of  his  mortal  frame,
“  his  soul  becomes  united  with  the  su¬
preme.”

In  the  important  ceremony  which  refers
to  the  north-east  corner  of  the  Lodge,  the
candidate  becomes  as  one  who  is,  to  all
outward  appearance,  a  perfect  and  upright
man  and  Mason,  the  representative  of  a
spiritual  corner-stone,  on  which  he  is  to
erect  his  future  moral  and  Masonic  edifice.

This  symbolic  reference  of  the  corner¬
stone  of  a  material  edifice  to  a  Mason
when,  at  his  first  initiation,  he  commences
the  moral  and  intellectual  task  of  erecting
a  spiritual  temple  in  his  heart,  is  beauti¬
fully  sustained  when  we  look  at  all  the
qualities  that  are  required  to  constitute  a
“  well-tried,  true,  and  trusty  ”  corner-stone.
The  squareness  of  its  surtace,  emblematic
of  morality  — its  cubical  form,  emblematic
of  firmness  and  stability  of  character — and
the  peculiar  finish  and  fineness  of  the  ma¬
terial,  emblematic  of  virtue  and  holiness  —
show  that  the  ceremony  of  the  north-east
corner  of  the  Lodge  was  undoubtedly  in¬
tended  to  portray,  in  the  consecrated  lan¬
guage  of  symbolism,  the  necessity  of  integ¬
rity  and  stability  of  conduct,  of  truthfulness
and  uprightness  of  character,  and  of  purity
and  holiness  of  life,  which,  just  at  that
time  and  in  that  place,  the  candidate  is
most  impressively  charged  to  mAntain.

Not uma.  A  significant  word  in  some
of  the  high  degrees  of  the  Templar  system.
It  is  the  anagram  of  Atmont,  who  is  said
to  have  been  the  first  Grand  Master  of  the
Templars  in  Scotland,  and  the  restorer  of
the  Order  after  the  death  of  De  Molay.

Nova  Scotia.  Freemasonry  was  in¬
troduced  into  Nova  Scotia,  at  the  middle
of  the  last  century,  by  the  constitution  of  a
Lodge  at  Halifax,  in  1749,  under  the  regis¬
try  of  England.  For  the  next  hundred
years,  Lodges  were  instituted  and  Provin¬
cial  Masters  appointed  by  England  and
Scotland,  and  Lodges  alone  without  su¬
perior  provincial  authority  by  Ireland.  In
June,  1866,  an  independent  Grand  Lodge
was  instituted  and  recognized  by  most  of
the  Masonic  powers  of  the  United  States.
But  as  none  of  the  Lodges  holding  M*ar-
j  rants  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland


NOVICE


NUMBERS


537


would  recognize  it,  a  subsequent  and  more
satisfactory  arrangement  took  place,  and
June  24,  1869,  a  Grand  Lodge  was  organ¬
ized  by  the  union  of  all  the  subordinate
Lodges,  and  Alexander  Keith  was  elected
Grand  Master.

Novice.  1.  The  second  degree  of  the
Illuminati  of  Bavaria.  2.  The  fifth  degree
of  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance.

Novice  Ma^onne.  That  is  to  say,
a  female  Mason  who  is  a  Novice.  It  is
the  first  degree  of  the  Moral  Order  of  the
Dames  of  Mount  Tabor.

Novice,  Mythological.  ( Novice
Mythologique.)  The  first  degree  of  the
Historical  Order  of  the  Dames  of  Mount
Tabor.

Novice,  Scottish.  [Novice  Ecos-
saise.)  The  first  degree  of  initiation  in  the
Order  of  Mount  Tabor.

Numbers.  The  symbolism  which  is
derived  from  numbers  was  common  to  the
Pythagoreans,  the  Kabbalists,  the  Gnostics,
and  all  mystical  associations.  Of  all  su¬
perstitions,  it  is  the  oldest  and  the  most
generally  diffused.  Allusions  are  to  be
found  to  it  in  all  systems  of  religion ;  the
Jewish  Scriptures,  for  instance,  abound  in
it,  and  the  Christian  show  a  share  of  its
influence.  It  is  not,  therefore,  surprising
that  the  most  predominant  of  all  symbol¬
ism  in  Freemasonry  is  that  of  numbers.

The  doctrine  of  numbers  as  symbols  is
most  familiar  to  us  because  it  formed  the
fundamental  idea  of  the  philosophy  of
Pythagoras.  Yet  it  was  not  original  with
him,  since  he  brought  his  theories  from
Egypt  and  the  East,  where  this  numerical
symbolism  had  always  prevailed.  Jambli-
c'hus  tells  us  (  Vit.  Pyth.,  c.  28,)  that  Pythag¬
oras  himself  admitted  that  he  had  received
the  doctrine  of  numbers  from  Orpheus,
who  taught  that  numbers  were  the  most
provident  beginning  of  all  things  in  heav¬
en,  earth,  and  the  intermediate  space,  and
the  root  of  the  perpetuity  of  divine  beings,
of  the  gods  and  of  demons.  From  the
disciples  of  Pythagoras  we  learn  (for  he
himself  taught  only  orally,  and  left  no
writings,)  that  his  theory  was  that  num¬
bers  contain  the  elements  of  all  things,  and
even  of  the  sciences.  Numbers  are  the  in¬
visible  covering  of  beings  as  the  body  is  the
visible  one.  They  are  the  primary  causes
upon  which  the  whole  system  of  the  uni¬
verse  rests ;  and  he  who  knows  these  num¬
bers  knows  at  the  same  time  the  laws
through  which  nature  exists.  The  Pythag¬
oreans,  said  Aristotle,  ( Metaph .,  xii.  8,)
make  all  things  proceed  from  numbers.
Dacier,  (  Vie  de  Pyth.,)  it  is  true,  denies  that
this  was  the  doctrine  of  Pythagoras,  and
contends  that  it  was  only  a  corruption  of
his  disciples.  It  is  an  immaterial  point.

3  S


We  know  that  the  symbolism  of  numbers
was  the  basis  of  what  is  called  the  Pythag¬
orean  philosophy.  But  it  would  be  wrong
to  suppose  that  from  it  the  Masons  derived
their  system,  since  the  two  are  in  some
points  antagonistic;  the  Masons,  for  in¬
stance,  revere  the  nine  as  a  sacred  number
of  peculiar  significance,  while  the  Pythago¬
reans  looked  upon  it  with  detestation.  In
the  system  of  the  Pythagoreans,  ten  was,  of
all  numbers,  the  most  perfect,  because  it
symbolizes  the  completion  of  things ;  but  in
Masonic  symbolism  the  number  ten  is  un¬
known.  Four  is  not,  in  Masonry,  a  num¬
ber  of  much  representative  importance;  but
it  was  sacredly  revered  by  the  Pythago¬
reans  as  the  tetractys,  or  figure  derived
from  the  Jewish  Tetragrammaton,  by  which
they  swore.

Plato  also  indulged  in  a  theory  of  sym¬
bolic  numbers,  and  calls  him  happy  who
understands  spiritual  numbers  and  per¬
ceives  their  mighty  influences.  Numbers,
according  to  him,  are  the  cause  of  univer¬
sal  harmony,  and  of  the  production  of  all
things.  The  Neoplatonists  extended  and
developed  this  theory,  and  from  them  it
passed  over  to  the  Gnostics;  from  them
probably  to  the  Rosicrucians,  to  the  Her¬
metic  philosophers,  and  to  the  Freemasons.

Cornelius  Agrippa  has  descanted  at  great
length,  in  his  Occult  Philosophy,  on  the  sub¬
ject  of  numbers.  “That  there  lies,”  he
says,  “wonderful  efficacy  and  virtue  iu
numbers,  as  well  for  good  as  for  evil,  not
only  the  flnost  eminent  philosophers  teach,
but  also  the  Catholic  Doctors.”  And  he
quotes  St.  Hilary  as  saying  that  the  seventy
Elders  brought  the  Psalms  into  order  by  the
efficacy  of  numbers.

Of  the  prevalence  of  what  are  called
representative  numbers  in  the  Old  and
New  Testament,  there  is  abundant  evi¬
dence.  “  However  we  may  explain  it,”  says
Dr.  Mahan,  (Palmoni,  p.  67,)  “  certain  nu¬
merals  in  the  Scriptures  occur  so  often  in
connection  with  certain  classes  of  ideas,  that
we  are  naturally  led  to  associate  the  one
with  the  other.  This  is  more  or  less  ad¬
mitted  with  regard  to  the  numbers  Seven,
Twelve,  Forty,  Seventy,  and  it  may  be  a  few
more.  The  Fathers  were  disposed  to  admit
it  with  regard  to  many  others,  and  to  see  in
it  the  marks  of  a  supernatural  design.”

Among  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans  there
was  a  superstitious  veneration  for  certain
numbers.  The  same  practice  is  foundamong
all  the  Eastern  nations ;  it  entered  more  or
less  into  all  the  ancient  systems  of  philoso¬
phy;  constituted  a  part  of  all  the  old  reli¬
gions  ;  was  accepted  to  a  great  extent  by
the  early  Christian  Fathers ;  constituted  an
important  part  of  the  Kabbala ;  was  adopted
by  the  Gnostics,  the  Rosicrucians,  and  all


538


NUMERATION


OATH


the  mystical  societies  of  the  Middle  Ages ;  '
and  finally  has  carried  its  influence  into
Freemasonry.

The  respect  paid  by  Freemasons  to  certain
numbers,  all  of  which  are  odd,  is  founded
not  on  the  belief  of  any  magical  virtue,
but  because  they  are  assumed  to  be  the
types  or  representatives  of  certain  ideas.
That  is  to  say,  a  number  is  in  Masonry  a
symbol,  and  no  more.  It  is  venerated,  not
because  it  has  any  supernatural  efficacy,  as
thought  the  Pythagoreans  and  others,  but
because  it  has  concealed  within  some  allu¬
sion  to  a  sacred  object  or  holy  thought,
which  it  symbolizes.  The  number  three,
for  instance,  like  the  triangle,  is  a  symbol;
the  number  nine,  like  the  triple  triangle,
another.  The  Masonic  doctrine  of  sacred
numbers  must  not,  therefore,  be  confounded
with  the  doctrine  of  numbers  which  pre¬
vailed  in  other  systems.

The  most  important  symbolic  or  sacred
numbers  in  Msisonry  are  three,  five,  seven,

.  twenty-seven,  and  eighty-one.  Their
interpretation  will  be  found  under  their
respective  titles.

Numeration  by  tetters.  There

is  a  Kabbalistical  process  especially  used  in
the  Hebrew  language,  but  sometimes  ap¬
plied  to  other  languages,  for  instance,  to  the
Greek,  by  which  a  mystical  meaning  of  a
word  is  deduced  from  the  numerical  value
of  the  words  of  which  it  is  composed,  each
letter  of  the  alphabet  being  equivalent  to  a
number.  Thus  in  Hebrew  the  name  of
God,  i"T’,  JAH,  is  equivalent  to  1®,  because
’  =  10  and  H  =  5,  and  15  thus  becomes  a
sacred  number.  In  Greek,  the  Kabbalistic
word  Abraxas,  or  is  made  to  sym-  1


bolize  the  solar  year  of  365  days,  because  th«
sum  of  the  value  of  the  letters  of  the  word
is  365 ;  thus,  a  =  1,  0=2.  p  =  100,  a  =  1 ,
f=60,  a=l,  and  f  =  200.  To  facilitate  these
Kabbalistic  operations,  which  are  sometimes
used  in  the  high  and  especially  the  hermet-
ical  Masonry,  the  numerical  value  of  the
Hebrew  and  Greek  letters  is  here  given.


Hebej:w.


Glzik.


N*

3

y

”i

n

r

n

□


3


P

“I

n


1

A,  a

1

2

B,0

'  2

3

r  ,y

3

4

A,  <5

4

5

E,e

5

6

Z,  C

6

7

H,«?

8

8

e,o

9

9

i,  <

10

10

K,  K

20

20

A,  7.

30

30

M,  u

40

40

N,  v

50

50

H,  S

60

60

O,  o

70

70

11,  it

80

80

P  ,P

100

90

2>

200

100

T,r

300

200

T,  v

400

300

4,  4

500

400

X,  X

600

700

£2,  o

800

Nursery.  The  first  of  the  three  classes
into  which  Weishaupt  divided  his  Order
of  Illuminati,  comprising  three  degrees.
See  Illuminati.


0.


Oath,  In  the  year  1738,  Clement  XII.,
at  that  time  Pope  of  Rome,  issued  a  bull
of  excommunication  against  the  Free¬
masons,  and  assigned,  as  the  reason  of  his
condemnation,  that  the  Institution  confed¬
erated  persons  of  all  religions  and  sects  in
a  mysterious  bond  of  union,  and  compelled
them  to  secrecy  by  an  oath  taken  on  the
Bible,  accompanied  by  certain  ceremonies,
and  the  imprecation  of  heavy  punishments.

This  persecution  of  the  Freemasons,  on
account  of  their  having  an  obligatory
promise  of  secrecy  among  their  ceremo¬
nies,  has  not  been  confined  to  the  Papal  see.
We  shall  find  it  existing  in  a  sect  which  j


we  should  suppose,  of  all  others,  the  least
likely  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  a  Ro¬
man  pontiff.  In  1757,  the  Associate  Synod
of  Seceders  of  Scotland  adopted  an  act,
concerning  what  they  called  “  the  Mason
oath,”  in  which  it  is  declared  that  all
persons  who  shall  refuse  to  make  such  rev¬
elations  as  the  Kirk  Sessions  may  require,
and  to  promise  to  abstain  from  all  future
connection  with  the  Order,  “shall  be  re¬
puted  under  scandal  and  incapable  of  ad¬
mission  to  sealing  ordinances,”  or.  as  Pope
Clement  expressed  it,  be  “  ipso  facto  ex¬
communicated.”

In  the  preamble  to  the  act,  the  Synod


OATH


OATH


5G9


assign  the  reasons  for  their  objections  to
this  oath,  and  for  their  ecclesiastical  censure
of  all  who  contract  it.  These  reasons  are :
“  That  there  were  very  strong  presumptions,
that,  among  Masons,  an  oath  of  secrecy
is  administered  to  entrants  into  their  so¬
ciety,  even  under  a  capital  penalty,  and
before  any  of  those  things,  which  they
swear  to  keep  secret,  be  revealed  to  them  ;
and  that  they  pretend  to  take  some  of  these
secrets  from  the  Bible;  besides  other  things
which  are  ground  of  scruple  iu  the  manner
>f  swearing  the  said  oath.”

These  have,  from  that  day  to  this,  consti¬
tuted  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  objec¬
tions  to  the  obligation  of  Masonic  secrecy,
and,  for  the  purpose  of  brief  examination,
they  may  be  classed  under  the  following
heads :  *

First.  It  is  an  oath.

Secondly.  It  is  administered  before  the
secrets  are  communicated.

Thirdly.  It  is  accompanied  by  certain
superstitious  ceremonies.

Fourthly.  It  is  attended  by  a  penalty.

Fifthly.  It  is  considered,  by  Masons,  as
paramount  to  the  obligations  of  the  laws
of  the  land.

In  replying  to  these  statements,  it  is  evi¬
dent  that  the  conscientious  Freemason
labors  under  great  disadvantage.  He  is  at
every  step  restrained  by  his  honor  from
either  the  denial  or  admission  of  his  adver¬
saries  in  relation  to  the  mysteries  of  the
Craft.  But  it  may  be  granted,  for  the  sake
of  argument,  that  every  one  of  the  first
four  charges  is  true,  and  then  the  inquiry
will  be  in  what  respect  they  are  offensive  or
immoral.

First.  The  oath  or  promise  cannot,  in
itself,  be  sinful,  unless  there  is  something
immoral  in  the  obligation  it  imposes.  Sim¬
ply  to  promise  secrecy,  or  the  performance
of  any  good  action,  and  to  strengthen  this
promise  by  the  solemnity  of  an  oath,  is
not,  in  itself,  forbidden  by  any  divine  or
human  law.  Indeed,  the  infirmity  of  hu¬
man  nature  demands,  in  many  instances,
the  sacred  sanction  of  such  an  attestation  ;
and  it  is  continually  exacted  in  the  transac¬
tions  of  man  with  man,  without  any  notion
of  sinfulness.  Where  the  time,  and  place,
and  circumstances  are  unconnected  with
levity,  or  profanity,  or  crime,  the  adminis¬
tration  of  an  obligation  binding  to  secrecy,
or  obedience,  or  veracity,  or  any  other  vir¬
tue,  and  the  invocation  of  Deity  to  wit¬
ness,  and  to  strengthen  that  obligation,  or
to  punish  its  violation,  is  incapable,  by  any
perversion  of  Scripture,  of  being  considered
a  criminal  act.

Secondly.  The  objection  that  the  oath
is  administered  before  the  secrets  are  made
known,  is  sufficiently  absurd  to  provoke  a


smile.  The  purposes  of  such  an  oath  would
be  completely  frustrated,  by  revealing  the
thing  to  be  concealed  before  the  promise
of  concealment  was  made.  In  that  case,  it
would  be  optional  with  the  candidate  to
give  the  obligation,  or  to  withhold  it,  as
best  suited  his  inclinations.  If  it  be  con¬
ceded  that  the  exaction  of  a  solemn  promise
of  secrecy  is  not,  in  itself,  improper,  then
certainly  the  time  of  exacting  it  is  before
and  not  after  the  revelation.

Dr.  Harris  ( Masonic  Discourses,  Disc.
IX.,  p.  184,)  has  met  this  objection  in  the
following  language :

“What  the  ignorant  call  ‘the  oath,’ is
simply  an  obligation,  covenant,  and  prom¬
ise,  exacted  previously  to  the  divulging  of
the  specialties  of  the  Order,  and  our  means
of  recognizing  each  other ;  that  they  shall
be  kept  from  the  knowledge  of  the  world,
lest  their  original  intent  should  be  thwarted,
and  their  benevolent  purport  prevented.
Now,  pray,  what  harm  is  there  in  this  ?  Do
you  not  all,  when  you  have  anything  of  a
private  nature  which  you  are  willing  to
confide  in  a  particular  friend,  before  you  tell
him  what  it  is,  demand  a  solemn  promise  of
secrecy.  And  is  there  not  the  utmost  pro¬
priety  in  knowing  whether  your  friend  is  de¬
termined  to  conceal  your  secret,  before  you
presume  to  reveal  it?  Your  answer  con¬
futes  your  cavil.”

Thirdly.  The  objection  that  the  oath  is
accompanied  by  certain  superstitious  cere¬
monies  does  not  seem  to  be  entitled  to  much
weight.  Oaths,  in  all  countries  and  at  all
times,  have  been  accompanied  by  peculiar
rites,  intended  to  increase  the  solemnity
and  reverence  of  the  act.  The  ancient
Hebrews,  when  they  took  an  oath,  placed
the  hand  beneath  the  thigh  of  the  person
to  whom  they  swore.  Sometimes  the  an¬
cients  took  hold  of  the  horns  of  the  altar,
and  touched  the  sacrificial  fire,  as  in  the
league  between  Latinus  and  iEneas,  where
the  ceremony  is  thus  described  by  Virgil :

“  Tango  aras ;  mediosque  ignes,  et  numina,
testor.”

Sometimes  they  extended  the  right  hand  to
heaven,  and  swore  by  earth,  sea,  and  stars.
Sometimes,  as  among  the  Romans  in  pri¬
vate  contracts,  the  person  swearing  laid  his
hand  upon  the  hand  of  the  party  to  whom
he  swore.  In  all  solemn  covenants  the  oath
was  accompanied  by  a  sacrifice;  and  some
of  the  hair  being  cut  from  the  victim’3
head,  a  part  of  it  was  given  to  all  present,
that  each  one  might  take  a  share  in  the
oath,  and  be  subject  to  the  imputation.
Other  ceremonies  were  practised  at  various
times  and  in  different  countries,  for  the
purpose  of  throwing  around  the  act  of  at¬
testation  an  increased  amount  of  awe  and


540


OATH


OATH


respect.  The  oath  is  equally  obligatory
without  them ;  but  they  have  their  signifi¬
cance,  and  there  can  be  no  reason  why  the
Freemasons  should  not  be  allowed  to  adopt
the  mode  most  pleasing  to  themselves  of
exacting  their  promises  or  confirming  their
covenants.

Fourthly.  It  is  objected  that  the  oath  is
attended  with  a  penalty  of  a  serious  or
capital  nature.  If  this  be  the  case,  it  does
not  appear  that  the  expression  of  a  penalty
of  any  nature  whatever  can  affect  the  pur¬
port  or  augment  the  solemnity  of  an  oath,
which  is,  in  fact,  an  attestation  of  God  to
the  truth  of  a  declaration,  as  a  witness  and
avenger ;  and  hence  every  oath  includes  in
itself,  and  as  its  very  essence,  the  covenant
of  God’s  wrath,  the  heaviest  of  all  penal¬
ties,  as  the  necessary  consequence  of  its  vio¬
lation.  A  writer,  in  reply  to  the  Synod  of
Scotland,  (Scot? s  Mag.,  Oct.  1757,)  quotes  the
opinion  of  an  eminent  jurist  to  this  effect:

“  It  seems  to  be  certain  that  every  prom¬
issory  oath,  in  whatever  form  it  may  be
conceived,  whether  explicitly  or  implicitly,
virtually  contains  both  an  attestation  and
an  obsecration;  for  in  an  oath  the  execra¬
tion  supposes  an  attestation  as  a  precedent,
and  the  attestation  infers  an  execration  as
a  necessary  consequence.

“  Hence,  then,  to  the  believer  in  a  super¬
intending  Providence,  every  oath  is  an
affirmation,  negation,  or  promise,  corrobo¬
rated  by  the  attestation  of  the  Divine  Be¬
ing.”  This  attestation  includes  an  obse¬
cration  of  divine  punishment  in  case  of  a
violation,  and  it  is,  therefore,  a  matter  of
no  moment  whether  this  obsecration  or
penalty  be  expressed  in  words  or  only  im¬
plied;  its  presence  or  absence  does  not,  in
any  degree,  alter  the  nature  of  the  obliga¬
tion.  If  in  any  promise  or  vow  made  by
Masons,  such  a  penalty  is  inserted,  it  may
probably  be  supposed  that  it  is  used  only
with  a  metaphorical  and  paraphrastical
signification,  and  for  the  purpose  of  sym¬
bolic  or  historical  allusion.  Any  other  in¬
terpretation  but  this  would  be  entirely  at
variance  with  the  opinions  of  the  most  in¬
telligent  Masons,  who,  it  is  to  be  presumed,
best  know  the  intent  and  meaning  of  their
own  ceremonies.

Fifthly.  The  last,  and,  indeed,  the  most
important  *  objection  urged  is,  that  these
oaths  are  construed  by  Masons  as  being  of
higher  obligation  than  the  law  of  the  land.
It  is  vain  that  this  charge  has  been  repeat¬
edly  and  indignantly  denied;  it  is  in  vain
that  Masons  point  to  the  integrity  of  char¬
acter  of  thousands  of  eminent  men  who
have  been  members  of  the  Fraternity;  it
is  in  vain  that  they  recapitulate  the  order-
loving  and  law-fearing  regulations  of  the
Institution;  the  charge  is  renewed  with


'  untiring  pertinacity,  and  believed  with  a
credulity  that  owes  its  birth  to  rancorous
prejudice  alone.  To  repeat  the  denial  is
but  to  provoke  a  repetition  of  the  charge.
The  answer  is,  however,  made  by  one  who,
once  a  Mason,  was  afterwards  an  opponent
and  an  avowed  enemy  of  the  Institution,
W.  L.  Stone  {Letters  on  Masonry  and  Anti-
Masonry,  Let.  VII.,  p.  69,)  uses  the  follow¬
ing  language :

“  Is  it,  then,  to  be  believed  that  men  of
acknowledged  talents  and  worth  in  public
stations,  and  of  virtuous  and,  frequently,
religious  habits,  in  the  walks  of  private
life,  with  the  Holy  Bible  in  their  hands,  —
which  they  are  solemnly  pledged  to  re¬
ceive  as  the  rule  and  guide  of  their  faith
and  practice,  —  and  under  the  grave  and
positive  charge  from  the  officer  administer¬
ing  the  obligation,  that  it  is  to  be  taken  in
strict  subordination  to  the  civil  laws,  —  can
understand  that  obligation,  whatever  may
be  the  peculiarities  of  its  phraseology,  as
requiring  them  to  countenance  vice  and
criminality  even  by  silence?  Can  it  for  a
moment  be  supposed  that  the  hundreds  of
eminent  men,  whose  patriotism  is  unques¬
tioned,  and  the  exercise  of  whose  talents
and  virtues  has  shed  a  lustre  upon  the
church  history  of  our  country,  and  who,  by
their  walk  and  conversation,  have,  in  their
own  lives,  illustrated  the  beauty  of  holi¬
ness?  Is  it  to  be  credited  that  the  tens  of
thousands  of  those  persons,  ranking  among
the  most  intelligent  and  virtuous  citizens
of  the  most  moral  and  enlightened  people
on  earth,  —  is  it,  I  ask,  possible  that  any
portion  of  this  community  can,  on  calm
reflection,  believe  that  such  men  have  oaths
upon  their  consciences  binding  them  to
eternal  silence  in  regard  to  the  guilt  of  any
man  because  he  happens  to  be  a  Freema¬
son,  no  matter  what  be  the  grade  of  offence,
whether  it  be  the  picking  of  a  pocket  or
the  shedding  of  blood?  It  does  really  seem
to  me  impossible  that  such  an  opinion
could,  at  any  moment,  have  prevailed,  to
any  considerable  extent,  amongst  reflecting
and  intelligent  citizens.”

Oath,  Corporal.  The  modern  form
of  taking  an  oath  is  by  placing  the  hands
on  the  Gospels  or  on  the  Bible.  The  cor¬
porate,  or  corporal  cloth,  is  the  name  of  the
linen  cloth  on  which,  in  the  Boman  Cath¬
olic  Church,  the  sacred  elements  conse¬
crated  as  “the  body  of  our  Lord”  are
placed.  Hence  the  expression  corporal  oath
originated  in  the  ancient  custom  of  swear¬
ing  while  touching  the  corporal  cloth.
Belies  were  sometimes  made  use  of.  The
laws  of  the  Allemanni  (cap.  657)  direct
that  he  who  swears  shall  place  his  hand
upon  the  coffer  containing  the  relics.  The
idea  being  that  something  sacred  must  be


OATH


OBEDIENCE


541


touched  by  the  hand  of  the  jurator  to  give
validity  to  the  oath,  in  time  the  custom  was
adopted  of  substituting  the  holy  Gospels  for
the  corporal  cloth  or  the  relics,  though  the
same  title  was  retained.  Haydn  {Diet,  of
Dates)  says  that  the  practice  of  swearing
on  the  Gospels  prevailed  in  England  so
early  as  A.  D.  528.  The  laws  of  the  Lom¬
bards  repeatedly  mention  the  custom  of
swearing  on  the  Gospels.  The  sanction  of
the  church  was  given  at  an  early  period  to
the  usage.  Thus,  in  the  history  of  the
Council  of  Constantinople,  (Anno  381,)  it
is  stated  that  “  George,  the  well-beloved
of  God,  a  deacon  and  keeper  of  the  records,
having  touched  the  Holy  Gospels  of  God,
swore  in  this  manner,”  etc.  And  a  similar
practice  was  adopted  at  the  Council  of
Nice,  fifty-six  years  before.  The'^custom
of  swearing  on  the  book,  thereby  meaning
the  Gospels,  was  adopted  by  the  mediaeval
gild  of  Freemasons,  and  allusions  to  it  are
found  in  all  the  Old  Constitutions.  Thus
in  the  York  Manuscript,  about  the  year
1600,  it  is  said,  “These  charges  .  .  .  you
shall  well  and  truly  keep  to  your  power ;  so
help  you  God  and  the  contents  of  that
book.”  And  in  the  Grand  Lodge  Manu¬
script  in  1632  we  find  this :  “  These  charges
ye  shall  keepe,  so  healpe  you  God,  and  your
haly  dome  and  by  this  booke  in  your  hands.”
The  form  of  the  ceremony  required  that  the
corporal  oath  should  be  taken  with  both
hands  on  the  book,  or  with  one  hand,  and
then  always  the  right  hand.

Oath  of  the  Gild.  The  oath  that  was
administered  in  the  English  Freemasons’
gild  of  the  Middle  Ages  is  first  met  with
in  the  Harleian  Manuscript,  written  about
the  year  1676.  The  31st  article  prescribes :
“  That  noe  person  shall  bee  accepted  a  Free
Mason,  or  know  the  secrets  of  the  said
Society,  until  hee  hath  first  taken  the  oath
of  secrecy  hereafter  following :

“  I,  A.  B.  Doe,  in  the  presence  of  Al¬
mighty  God  and  my  Fellowes  and  Brethren
here  present,  promise  and  declare  that  I
will  not  at  any  time  hereafter,  by  any  act
or  circumstance  whatsoever,  directly  or  in¬
directly,  publish,  discover,  reveale,  or  make
knowne  any  of  the  secrets,  priviledges  or
counsells  of  the  Fraternity  or  fellowship  of
Free  Masonry,  which  at  this  time,  or  any
time  hereafter,  shall  be  made  knowne  unto
mee;  soe  helpe  mee  God  and  the  holy  con¬
tents  of  this  booke.”  In  the  Roberts’  Con¬
stitutions,  published  in  1722,  this  oath,
substantially  in  the  same  words,  is  for  the
first  time  printed  with  the  amendment  of
“  privities  ”  for  “  priviledges.”

Oath,  Tiler's.  Before  any  strange
and  unknown  visitor  can  gain  admission
into  a  Masonic  Lodge,  he  is  required  to
take  the  following  oath :


“I,  A.  B.,  do  hereby  and  heteon  solemn¬
ly  and  sincerely  swear  that  I  have  been
regularly  initiated,  passed,  and  raised  to
the  sublime  degree  of  a  Master  Mason  in
a  just  and  legally  constituted  Lodge  of  such ;
that  I  do  not  now  stand  suspended  or  ex¬
pelled;  and  know  of  no  reason  why  I
should  not  hold  Masonic  communication
with  my  brethren.”

It  is  called  the  “  Tiler’s  oath,”  because  it
is  usually  taken  in  the  Tiler’s  room,  and
was  formerly  administered  by  that  offi¬
cer,  whose  duty  it  is  to  protect  the  Lodge
from  the  approach  of  unauthorized  visitors.
It  is  now  administered  by  the  committee
of  examination,  and  not  only  he  to  whom
it  is  administered,  but  he  who  administers
it,  and  all  who  are  present,  must  take  it  at
the  same  time.  It  is  a  process  of  purga¬
tion,  and  each  one  present,  the  visitor  as
well  as  the  members  of  the  Lodge,  is  enti¬
tled  to  know  that  all  the  others  are  legally
qualified  to  be  present  at  the  esoteric  ex¬
amination  which  is  about  to  take  place.

OB.  A  Masonic  abbreviation  of  the
word  Obligation,  sometimes  written  O.  B.

Obedience.  The  doctrine  of  obe¬
dience  to  constituted  authority  is  strongly
inculcated  in  all  the  Old  Constitutions  as
necessary  to  the  preservation  of  the  associ¬
ation.  In  them  it  is  directed  that  “  every
Mason  shall  prefer  his  elder  and  put  him
to  worship.”  Thus  the  Master  Mason  obeys
the  order  of  his  Lodge,  the  Lodge  obeys
the  mandates  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  the
Grand  Lodge  submits  to  the  landmarks  and
the  old  regulations.  The  doctrine  of  pas¬
sive  obedience  and  non-resistance  in  poli¬
tics,  however  much  it  may  be  supposed  to
be  inimical  to  the  progress  of  free  institu¬
tions,  constitutes  undoubtedly  the  great
principle  of  Masonic  government.  Such  a
rinciple  would  undoubtedly  lead  to  an  un-
earable  despotism,  were  it  not  admirably
modified  and  controlled  by  the  compensa¬
ting  principle  of  appeal.  The  first  duty  of
every  Mason  is  to  obey  the  mandate  of  the
Master.  But  if  that  mandate  should  have
been  unlawful  or  oppressive,  he  will  find
his  redress  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  which  will
review  the  case  and  render  justice.  This
spirit  of  instant  obedience  and  submission
to  authority  constitutes  the  great  safe¬
guard  of  the  Institution.  Freemasonry
more  resembles  a  military  than  a  political
organization.  The  order  must  at  once  be
obeyed;  its  character  and  its  consequences
may  be  matters  of  subsequent  inquiry.  The
Masonic  rule  of  obedience  is  like  the  nau¬
tical,  imperative:  “Obey  orders,  even  if
you  break  owners.”

Obedience  of  a  Grand  Body.

Obedience,  used  in  the  sense  of  being  under
the  jurisdiction,  is  a  technicality  borrowed


542


OBELISK


OBVERSE


only  recently  by  Masonic  authorities  from
the  French,  where  it  has  always  been
regularly  used.  Thus  “the  Grand  Lodge
has  addressed  a  letter  to  all  the  Lodges  of
its  obedience ”  means  “to  all  the  Lodges
under  its  jurisdiction.”  In  French,  “  b.
toutes  les  Loges  de  sou  obedience.”  It
comes  originally  from  the  usa^e  of  the  Mid¬
dle  Ages,  in  the  low  Latin  of  which  obedi-
entia  meant  the  homage  which  a  vassal
owed  to  his  lord.  In  the  ecclesiastical  lan¬
guage  of  the  same  period,  the  word  signi¬
fied  the  duty  or  office  of  a  monk  towards
his  superior.

Obelisk.  The  obelisk  is  a  quadrangu¬
lar,  monolithic  column,  diminishing  up¬
wards,  with  the  sides  gently  inclined,  but
not  so  as  to  terminate  in  a  pointed  apex,
but  to  form  at  the  top  a  flattish,  pyramidal
figure,  by  which  the  whole  is  finished  off
and  brought  to  a  point.  It  was  the  most  com¬
mon  species  of  monument  in  ancient  Egypt,
where  they  are  still  to  be  found  in  great
numbers,  the  sides  being  covered  with  hiero¬
glyphic  inscriptions.  Obelisks  were,  it  is
supposed,  originally  erected  in  honor  of  the
sun  god.  Plinv  says  (Holland’s  trans.),
“The  kings  of  Egypt  in  times  past  made
of  this  stone  certain  long  beams,  which  they
called  obelisks,  and  consecrated  them  unto
the  sun,  whom  they  honored  as  a  god ;  and,
indeed,  some  resemblance  they  carry  of  sun¬
beams.”  In  continental  Masonry  the  mon¬
ument  in  the  Master's  degree  is  often  made
in  the  form  of  an  obelisk,  with  the  letters
M.  B.  inscribed  upon  it.  And  this  form
is  appropriate,  because  in  Masonic,  as  in
Christian,  iconography  the  obelisk  is  a
symbol  of  the  resurrection.

Objections  to  Freemasonry.  The
principal  objections  that  have  been  urged
by  its  opponents  to  the  institution  of  Free¬
masonry  may  be  arranged  under  six  heads.
1.  Its  secrecy;  2.  The  exclusiveness  of  its  char¬
ity;  3.  Its  admission  of  unworthy  members  ;
4.  Its  claim  to  be  a  religion  ;  5.  Its  admin¬
istration  of  unlawful  oaths;  and  6.  Its
puerility  as  a  system  of  instruction.  Each
of  these  objections  is  replied  to  in  this
work  under  the  respective  heads  of  the
words  which  are  italicized  above.

Obligated.  To  be  obligated,  in  Ma¬
sonic  language,  is  to  be  admitted  into  the
covenant  of  Masonry.  “  An  obligated  Ma¬
son  ”  is  tautological,  because  there  can  be
no  Mason  who  is  not  an  obligated  one.

Obligation.  The  solemn  promise
made  by  a  Mason  on  his  admission  into
any  degree  is  technically  called  his  obliga¬
tion.  In  a  legal  sense,  obligation  is  sy¬
nonymous  with  duty.  Its  derivation  shows
its  true  meaning,  for  the  Latin  word  obli-
gatio  literally  signifies  a  tying  or  binding.
The  obligation  is  that  which  binds  a  man


to  do  some  act,  the  doing  of  which  thus
becomes  his  duty.  By  his  obligation,  a
Mason  is  bound  or  tied  to  his  Order.
Hence  the  Romans  called  the  military
oath  which  was  taken  by  the  soldier  his
obligation,  and  hence,  too,  it  is  said  that  it  is
the  obligation  that  makes  the  Mason.  Be¬
fore  that  ceremony,  there  is  no  tie  that
binds  the  candidate  to  the  Order  so  as  to
make  him  a  part  of  it;  after  the  ceremony,
the  tie  has  been  completed,  and  the  candi¬
date  becomes  at  once  a  Mason,  entitled  to
all  the  rights  and  privileges  and  subject  to
all  the  duties  and  responsibilities  that  en¬
ure  in  that  character.  The  jurists  have
divided  obligations  into  imperfect  and  per¬
fect,  or  natural  and  civil.  In  Masonry
there  is  no  such  distinction.  The  Ma¬
sonic  obligation  is  that  moral  one  which,
although  it  cannot  be  enforced  by  the
courts  of  law,  is  binding  on  the  party  who
makes  it,  in  conscience  and  according  to
moral  justice.  It  varies  in  each  degree,
but  in  each  is  perfect.  Its  different  clauses,
in  which  different  duties  are  prescribed,
are  called  its  points,  which  are  either  af¬
firmative  or  negative,  a  division  like  that
of  the  precepts  of  the  Jewish  law.  The
affirmative  points  are  those  which  require
certain  acts  to  be  performed ;  the  negative
points  are  those  which  forbid  certain  other
acts  to  be  done.  The  whole  of  them  is
preceded  by  a  general  point  of  secrecy,
common  to  all  the  degrees,  and  this  point
is  called  the  tie.

Oblong  Square.  A  parallelogram,
or  four-sided  figure,  all  of  whose  angles  are
equal,  but  two  of  whose  sides  are  longer
than  the  others.

This  is  the  symbolic  form  of  a  Masonic
Lodge,  and  it  finds  its  prototype  in  many
of  the  structures  of  our  ancient  brethren.
The  ark  of  Noah,  the  camp  of  the  Israel¬
ites,  the  ark  of  the  Covenant,  the  Taber¬
nacle,  and,  lastly,  the  Temple  of  Solomon,
were  all  oblong  squares.  See  Ground-
Floor  of  the  Lodge.

Observance,  Clerks  of  Strict.

See  Clerics  of  Strict  Observance.

Observance,  Lax.  See  Lax  Observ¬
ance.

Observance.  Relaxed.  ( Observ¬
ance  Belachte.)  This  is  the  term  by  which
Ragon  translates  the  lata  observantia  or
lax  observance  applied  by  the  disciples
of  Von  Hund  to  the  other  Lodges  of  Ger¬
many.  Ragon  (  Orth.  Magon.,  p.  236,J  calls
it  incorrectly  a  Rite,  and  confounds  it  with
the  Clerks  of  Strict  Observance.  See  Lax
Observance.

Observance,  Strict.  See  Strict  Ob¬
servance.

Obverse.  In  numismatics  that  side
of  a  coin  or  medal  which  contains  the


OCCASIONAL


OHIO


543


principal  figure,  generally  a  face  in  profile
or  a  full  or  half-length  figure,  is  called  the
obverse.

Occasional  Todge.  A  temporary
Lodge  convoked  by  a  Grand  Master  for
the  purpose  of  making  Masons,  after  which
the  Lodge  is  dissolved.  The  phrase  was
first  used  by  Anderson  in  the  second  edition
of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  and  is  repeated
by  subsequent  editors.  To  make  a  Mason
in  an  Occasional  Lodge  is  equivalent  to
making  him  “at  sight.”  But  any  Lodge,
called  temporarily  by  the  Grand  Master
for  a  specific  purpose  and  immediately  after¬
wards  dissolved,  is  an  Occasional  Lodge.
Its  organization  as  to  officers,  and  its  regu¬
lations  as  to  ritual,  must  be  the  same  as  in
a  permanent  and  properly  warranted  Lodge.
See  Sight,  Making  Masons  at.

Occult  Masonry.  Ragon,  in  his  Or-
thodoxie  Magonnique,  proposes  the  estab¬
lishment  of  a  Masonic  system,  which  he
calls  “  Occult  Masonry.”  It  consists  of
three  degrees,  which  are  the  same  as  those
of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  only  that  all  the
symbols  are  interpreted  after  alchemical
principles.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  application
of  Masonic  symbolism  to  hermetic  symbol¬
ism — two  things  that  never  did,  according
to  Hitchcock,  materially  differ.

Occult  Sciences.  This  name  is  given
to  the  sciences  of  alchemy,  magic,  and  as¬
trology,  which  existed  in  the  Middle  Ages.
Many  of  the  speculations  of  these  so-called
sciences  were  in  the  eighteenth  century
made  use  of  in  the  construction  of  the  high
degrees.  We  have  even  a  “  Hermetic  Rite”
which  is  based  on  the  dogmas  of  alchemy.

Occupied  Territory.  A  state  or
kingdom  where  there  is  a  Grand  Lodge  or¬
ganization  and  subordinate  Lodges  work¬
ing  under  it  is  said  to  be  occupied  territory,
and,  by  the  American  and  English  law,  all
other  Grand  Lodges  are  precluded  from  en¬
tering  in  it  and  exercising  jurisdiction.
See  Jurisdiction  of  a  Grand  Lodge.

Octagon.  The  regular  octagon  is  a
geometrical  figure  of  eight  equal  sides  and
angles.  It  is  a  favorite  form  in  Christian
ecclesiology,  and  most  of  the  Chapter-
Houses  of  the  cathedrals  in  England  are
eight  sided.  It  is  sometimes  used  in  rituals
of  Knights  of  Malta,  and  then,  like  the
eight-pointed  cross  of  the  same  Order,  is
referred  symbolically  to  the  eight  beatitudes
of  our  Saviour.

Odd  Numbers.  In  the  numerical
philosophy  of  the  Pythagoreans,  odd  num¬
bers  were  male  and  even  numbers  .female.
It  is  wrong,  however,  to  say,  as  Oliver  and
some  others  after  him  have,  that  odd  num¬
bers  were  perfect  and  even  numbers  imper¬
fect.  The  combination  of  two  odd  num¬
bers  would  make  an  even  number,  which


was  the  most  perfect.  Hence,  in  the  Py¬
thagorean  system,  4,  made  by  the  combina¬
tion  of  1  and  3,  and  10,  by  the  combination
of  3  and  7,  are  the  most  perfect  of  all
numbers.  Herein  the  Pythagorean  differs
from  the  Masonic  system  of  numerals.  In
this  latter  all  the  sacred  numbers  are  odd,
such  as  3,  5,  7,  9,  27,  and  81.  Thus  it  is
evident  that  the  Masonic  theory  of  sacred
numbers  was  derived,  not,  as  it  has  been
supposed,  from  the  school  of  Pythagoras,
but  from  a  much  older  system.

Offences,  Masonic.  See  Crimes,
Masonic.

Offerings,  The  Three  Grand.

See  Ground-Floor  of  the  Lodge.

Officers.  The  officers  of  a  Grand
Lodge,  Grand  Chapter,  or  other  Supreme
body  in  Masonry,  are  divided  into  Grand
and  Subordinate ;  the  former,  who  are  the
Grand  and  Deputy  Grand  Master,  the
Grand  Wardens  and  Grand  Treasurer,  Sec¬
retary,  and  Chaplain,  are  also  sometimes
called  the  Dignitaries.  The  officers  of  a
Lodge  or  Chapter  are  divided  into  the
Elected  and  the  Appointed,  the  former  in
this  country  being  the  Master,  Wardens,
Treasurer,  and  Secretary.

Officers’  Jewels.  See  Jewels,  Offi¬
cial.

Office,  Tenure  of.  In  Masonry  the
tenure  of  every  office  is  not  only  for  the
time  for  which  the  incumbent  was  elected
or  appointed,  but  extends  to  the  day  on
which  his  successor  is  installed.  During
the  period  which  elapses  from  the  election
of  that  successor  until  his  installation,  the
old  officer  is  technically  said  to  “  hold
over.”

Oheb  Eloah.  mSx  Love  of  God.
This  and  Oheb  Karobo,  Love  of  our
Neighbor,  are  the  names  of  the  two  supports
of  the  Ladder  of  Kadosh.  Collectively,  they
allude  to  that  divine  passage,  “Thou  shalt
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,
and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy
mind.  This  is  the  first  and  great  com¬
mandment.  And  the  second  is  like  unto
it,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself.
On  these  two  commandments  hang  all  the
law  and  the  prophets.”  Hence  the  Ladder
of  Kadosh  is  supported  by  these  two  Chris¬
tian  commandments.

Olieb  Karobo.  See  Oheb  Eloah.

Ohio.  Freemasonry  was  introduced
into  Ohio  early  in  the  present  century.
On  January  4,  1808,  a  convention  of  dele¬
gates  from  the  five  Lodges  then  in  the
State  met  at  Chillicothe,  and  on  January
7  organized  a  Grand  Lodge,  electing  Ru¬
fus  Putnam  first  Grand  Master.  The
Grand  Chapter  of  Ohio  was  organized  in
1810,  the  Grand  Council  in  1829,  and  the
Grand  Commandery  in  1843.


544


OIL


OLIVER


Oil.  The  Hebrews  anointed  their  kings,
prophets,  and  high  priests  with  oil  mingled
with  the  richest  spices.  They  also  anointed
themselves  with  oil  on  all  festive  occasions,
whence  the  expression  in  Psalm  xlv.  7,
“God  hath  anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of
gladness.”  See  Corn.

Old  Man.  Old  men  in  their  dotage
are  by  the  laws  of  Masonry  disqualified  for
initiation.  For  the  reason  of  this  law,  see
Dotage.

Old  Regulations.  The  regulations
for  the  government  of  the  Craft,  which  were
first  compiled  by  Grand  Master  Payne  in

1720,  and  approved  by  the  Grand  Lodge  in

1721,  were  published  by  Anderson  in  1723,
in  the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitu¬
tions,  under  the  name  of  General  Regula¬
tions.  In  1738  Anderson  published  a  second
edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  and
inserted  these  regulations  under  the  name
of  Old  Regulations,  placing  in  an  opposite
column  the  alterations  which  had  been  made
in  them  by  the  Grand  Lodge  at  different
times  between  1723  and  1737,  and  called
these  New  Regulations.  When  Dermottpub-
lished  his  Ahiman  Rezon,  or  Book  of  Con¬
stitutions  of  the  schismatic  Grand  Lodge,
he  adopted  Anderson’s  plan,  publishing  in
two  columns  the  Old  and  the  New  Regula¬
tions.  But  he  madesome  important  changes
in  the  latter  to  accommodate  the  policy  of
his  own  Grand  Lodge.  The  Old  Regula¬
tions,  more  properly  known  as  the  “  General
Regulations  of  1722,”  are  recognized  as  the
better  authority  in  questions  of  Masonic
law.

Olive.  In  a  secondary  sense,  the  olive
plant  is  a  symbol  of  peace  and  victory ;  but
in  its  primary  sense,  like  all  the  other  sa¬
cred  plants  of  antiquity,  it  was  a  symbol  of
resurrection  and  immortality.  Hence  in
the  Ancient  Mysteries  it  was  the  analogue
of  the  Acacia  of  Freemasonry.

Olive-Branch  in  the  Bast,  Bro¬
therhood  of  the.  A  new  Order,  which
was  proposed  at  Bombay,  in  1845,  by  Dr.
James  Burnes,  the  author  of  a  History  of  the
Knights  Templars ,  who  was  then  the  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Master  of  England  for  Scot¬
land.  It  was  intended  to  provide  a  sub¬
stitute  to  native  Masons  for  the  chivalric
degrees,  from  which,  on  account  of  their
religious  faith,  they  were  excluded.  It
consisted  of  three  classes,  Novice,  Com¬
panion,  and  Officer.  For  the  first,  it  was
requisite  that  the  candidate  should  have
been  initiated  into  Masonry ;  for  the  second,
that  he  should  be  a  Master  Mason  ;  and  for
the  third  it  was  recommended,  but  not  im¬
peratively  required,  that  he  should  have
attained  the  Royal  Arch  degree.  The
badge  of  the  Order  was  a  dove  descending
with  a  green  olive-branch  in  its  mouth.


The  new  Order  was  received  with  much
enthusiasm  by  the  most  distinguished  Ma¬
sons  of  India,  but  it  did  not  secure  a  per¬
manent  existence.

Oliver,  George.  The  Rev.  George
Oliver,  D.D.,  one  of  the  most  distinguished
and  learned  of  English  Masons,  was  de¬
scended  from  an  ancient  Scottish  family  of
that  name,  some  of  whom  came  into  Eng¬
land  in  the  time  of  James  I.,  and  settled
at  Clipstone  Park,  Nottinghamshire.  He
was  the  eldest  son  of  the  Rev.  Samuel
Oliver,  rector  of  Lambley,  Nottingham¬
shire,  and  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  George
Whitehead,  Esq.  He  was  born  at  Pepple-
wick,  November  5th,  1782,  and  received  a
liberal  education  at  Nottingham.  In  1803,
wThen  but  twenty-one  years  of  age,  he  was
elected  second  master  of  the  grammar-
school  at  Caiston,  Lincoln.  In  1809  he
was  appointed  to  the  head-mastership  of
King  Edward’s  Grammar-School  at  Great
Grimsby.  In  1813  he  entered  holy  orders
in  the  Church  of  England,  and  was  ordained
a  deacon.  The  subsequent  year  he  was
made  a  priest.  In  the  spring  of  1815,
Bishop  Tomline  collated  him  to  the  living
of  Clee,  his  name  being  at  the  time  placed
on  the  boards  of  Trinity  College,  Cam¬
bridge,  as  a  ten-year  man  by  Dr.  Bayley,
Sub-dean  of  Lincoln  and  examining  Chap¬
lain  to  the  Bishop.  In  the  same  year  be
was  admitted  as  Surrogate  and  a  Steward
of  the  Clerical  Fund.  In  1831,  Bishop
Kaye  gave  him  the  living  of  Scopwick,
which  he  held  to  the  time  of  his  death.
He  graduated  as  Doctor  of  Divinity  in
1836,  being  then  rector  of  Wolverhampton,
and  a  prebendary  of  the  collegiate  church
at  that  place,  both  of  which  positions  had
been  presented  to  him  by  Dr.  Hobart,  Dean
of  Westminster.  In  1846,  the  Lord  Chan¬
cellor  conferred  on  him  the  rectory  of
South  Hykeham,  which  vacated  the  incum¬
bency  of  Wolverhampton.  At  the  age  of
seventy- two  Dr.  Oliver’s  physical  powers
began  to  fail,  and  he  was  obliged  to  confine
the  charge  of  his  parishes  to  the  care  of
curates,  and  he  passed  the  remaining  years
of  his  life  in  retirement  at  Lincoln.  In
1805  he  had  married  Mary  Ann,  the
youngest  daughter  of  Thomas  Beverley,
Esq.,  by  whom  he  left  five  children.  He
died  March  3d,  1867,  at  Eastgate.  Lincoln.

To  the  literary  world  Dr.  Oliver  was
well  known  as  a  laborious  antiquary,  and
his  works  on  ecclesiastical  antiquities  dur¬
ing  fifty.years  of  his  life,  from  1811  to  1866,
earned  for  him  a  high  reputation.  Of
these  works  the  most  important  were,
“  History  and  Antiquities  of  the  Collegiate
Church  of  Beverley,”  “History  and  An¬
tiquities  of  the  Collegiate  Church  of  Wol¬
verhampton,”  “  History  of  the  Conventual


OLIVER


OLIVER


545


Church  of  Grimsby,”  “  Monumental  Anti¬
quities  of  Grimsby,”  “  History  of  the  Gild
of  the  Holy  Trinity,  Sleaford,”  “  Letters
on  the  Druidical  Remains  near  Lincoln,”
“Guide  to  the  Druidical  Temple  at  Not¬
tingham,”  and  “  Remains  of  Ancient  Brit¬
ons  between  Lincoln  and  Sleaford.”

But  it  is  as  the  most  learned  Mason  and
the  most  indefatigable  and  copious  Masonic
author  of  his  age  that  Dr.  Oliver  princi¬
pally  claims  our  attention.  He  had  in¬
herited  a  love  of  Freemasonry  from  his
father,  the  Rev.  Samuel  Oliver,  who  was  an
expert  Master  of  the  work,  the  Chaplain  of
his  Lodge,  and  contributed  during  a  whole
year,  from  1797  to  1798,  an  original  Masonic
song  to  be  sung  on  every  Lodge  night.  His
son  has  repeatedly  acknowledged  his  in¬
debtedness  to  him  for  valuable  information
in  relation  to  Masonic  usages.

Dr.  01i\  er  was  initiated  by  his  father,  in
the  year  1801,  in  St.  Peter’s  Lodge,  in  the
city  of  Peterborough.  He  was  at  that  time
but  nineteen  years  of  age,  and  was  admitted
by  dispensation  during  his  minority,  ac¬
cording  to  the  practice  then  prevailing,  as
a  lewis,  or  the  son  of  a  Mason.

Under  the  tuition  of  his  father,  he  made
much  progress  in  the  rites  and  ceremonies
then  in  use  among  the  Lodges.  He  read
with  great  attention  every  Masonic  book
within  his  reach,  and  began  to  collect  that
store  of  knowledge  which  he  afterwards
used  with  so  much  advantage  to  the  Craft.

Soon  after  his  appointment  as  head  mas¬
ter  of  King  Edward’s  Grammar-School  at
Grimsby,  he  established  a  Lodge  in  the
borough,  the  chair  of  which  he  occupied
for  fourteen  years.  So  strenuous  were  his
exertions  for  the  advancement  of  Masonry,
that  in  1812  he  was  enabled  to  lay  the  first
stone  of  a  Masonic  hall  in  the  town,  where,
three  years  before,  there  had  been  scarcely
a  Mason  residing.

About  this  time  he  was  exalted  as  a
Royal  Arch  Mason  in  the  Chapter  attached
to  the  Rodney  Lodge  at  Kingstou-on-Hull.
In  Chapters  and  Consistories  connected
with  the  same  Lodge  he  also  received  the
high  degrees  and  those  of  Masonic  Knight¬
hood.  In  1813,  he  was  appointed  a
Provincial  Grand  Steward ;  in  1816,  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Chaplain ;  and  in  1832,
Provincial  Deputy  Grand  Master  of  the
Province  of  Lincolnshire.  These  are  all
the  official  honors  that  he  received,  except
that  of  Past  Deputy  Grand  Master,  con¬
ferred,  as  an  honorary  title,  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Massachusetts.  In  the  year  1840,
Dr.  Crucefix  had  undeservedly  incurred
the  displeasure  of  the  Grand  Master,  the
Duke  of  Sussex.  Dr.  Oliver,  between  whom
and  Dr.  Crucefix  there  had  always  been  a
warm  personal  friendship,  assisted  in  a  pub-
3  T  35


lie  demonstration  of  the  Fraternity  in  honor
of  his  friend  and  brother.  This  involved
him  in  the  odium,  and  caused  the  Provin¬
cial  Grand  Master  of  Lincolnshire,  Brother
Charles  Tennyson  D’Eyncourt,  to  request
the  resignation  of  Dr.  Oliver  as  his  Deputy.
He  complied  with  the  resignation,  and
after  that  time  withdrew  from  all  active
participation  in  the  labors  of  the  Lodge.
The  transaction  was  not  considered  by  any
means  as  creditable  to  the  independence
of  character  or  sense  of  justice  of  the  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Master,  and  the  Craft  very
generally  expressed  their  indignation  of
the  course  which  he  had  pursued,  and  their
warm  appreciation  of  the  Masonic  services
of  Dr.  Oliver.  In  1844,  this  appreciation
was  marked  by  the  presentation  of  an  offer¬
ing  of  plate,  which  had  been  very  generally
subscribed  for  by  the  Craft  throughout  the
kingdom.

Dr.  Oliver’s  first  contribution  to  the  lit¬
erature  of  Freemasonry,  except  a  few  Ma¬
sonic  sermons,  was  a  work  entitled  “  The
Antiquities  of  Freemasonry,  comprising
illustrations  of  the  five  Grand  Periods  of
Masonry,  from  the  Creation  of  the  World
to  the  Dedication  of  King  Solomon’s  Tem¬
ple,”  which  was  published  in  1823.  His
next  production  was  a  little  work  entitled
“  The  Star  in  the  East,”  intended  to  show,
from  the  testimony  of  Masonic  writers,  the
connection  between  Freemasonry  and  reli¬
gion.  In  1841  he  published  twelve  lectures
on  the  “Signs  ana  Symbols”  of  Freema¬
sonry,  in  which  he  went  into  a  learned  detail
of  the  history  and  signification  of  all  the
recognized  symbols  of  the  Order.  His  next
important  contribution  to  Freemasonry  was
“  The  History  of  Initiation,  in  twelve  lec¬
tures  ;  comprising  a  detailed  account  of
the  Rites  and  Ceremonies,  Doctrines  and
Discipline,  of  all  the  Secret  and  Mysterious
Institutions  of  the  Ancient  World,”  pub¬
lished  in  1840.  The  professed  object  of  the
author  was  to  show  the  resemblances  be¬
tween  these  ancient  systems  of  initiation
and  the  Masonic,  and  to  trace  them  to  a
common  origin ;  a  theory  which,  under
some  modification,  has  been  very  generally
accepted  by  Masonic  scholars.

F ollowing  this  was  “  The  Theocratic  Phil¬
osophy  of  Freemasonry,”  a  highly  interest¬
ing  work,  in  which  he  discusses  the  spccula-
tive  character  of  the  Institution.  “A  History
of  Freemasonry  from  1829  to  1840”  has
proved  a  valuable  appendix  to  the  work  of
Preston,  an  edition  of  which  he  had  edited
in  the  former  year.  His  next  and  his
most  important,  most  interesting,  and  most
learned  production  was  his  “Historical
Landmarks  and  other  Evidences  of  Freema¬
sonry  Explained.”  No  work  with  such  an
amount  of  facts  in  reference  to  the  Masonic


546


OLIVER


ON


system  had  ever  before  been  published  by
auy  author.  It  will  forever  remain  as  a
monument  of  his  vast  research  and  his  ex¬
tensive  reading.  But  it  would  be  no  brief
task  to  enumerate  merely  the  titles  of  the
many  works  which  he  produced  for  the  in¬
struction  of  the  Craft.  A  few  of  them  must
suffice.  These  are  the  “Revelations  of  a
Square,”  a  sort  of  Masonic  romance,  detail¬
ing,  in  a  fictitious  form,  many  of  the  usages
of  the  last  centuries,  with  anecdotes  of  the
principal  Masons  of  that  period ;  “  The
Golden  Remains  of  the  Early  Masonic
Writers,”  in  5  volumes,  each  of  which  con¬
tains  an  interesting  introduction  by  the
editor;  “The  Book  of  the  Lodge,”  a  useful
manual,  intended  as  a  guide  to  the  ceremo¬
nies  of  the  Order ;  “  The  Symbol  of  Glory,”
intended  to  show  the  object  and  end  of
Freemasonry;  “A  Mirror  for  the  Johannite
Masons,”  in  which  he  discusses  the  ques¬
tion  of  the  dedication  of  Lodges  to  the
two  Saints  John ;  “  The  Origin  and  Insig¬
nia  of  the  Royal  Arch  Degree,”  a  title
which  explains  itself;  “A  Dictionary  of
Symbolic  Masonry,”  by  no  means  the  best
of  his  works.  Almost  his  last  contribution
to  Masonry  was  his  “  Institutes  of  Masonic
Jurisprudence,”  a  book  in  which  he  ex¬
pressed  views  of  law  that  did  not  meet  with
the  universal  concurrence  of  his  English
readers.  Besides  these  elaborate  works,  Dr.
Oliver  was  a  constant  contributor  to  the
early  volumes  of  the  London  Freemasons’
Quarterly  Review,  and  published  a  valu¬
able  article,  “On  the  Gothic  Constitutions,”
in  the  American  Quarterly  Review  of  Free¬
masonry.

The  great  error  of  Dr.  Oliver,  as  a  Ma¬
sonic  teacher,  was  a  too  easy  credulity  or  a
too  great  warmth  of  imagination,  which
led  him  to  accept  without  hesitation  the
crude  theories  of  previous  writers,  and  to
recognize  documents  and  legends  as  un¬
questionably  authentic  whose  truthfulness
subsequent  researches  have  led  most  Ma¬
sonic  scholars  to  doubt  or  to  deny.  His
statements,  therefore,  as  to  the  origin  or
the  history  of  the  Order,  have  to  be  received
with  many  grains  of  allowance.  Yet  it  must
be  acknowledged  that  no  writer  in  the  Eng¬
lish  language  has  ever  done  so  much  to  ele¬
vate  the  scientific  character  of  Freemasonry.

Dr.  Oliver  was  in  fact  the  founder  of
what  may  be  called  the  literary  school  of
Masonry.  Bringing  to  the  study  of  the
Institution  an  amount  of  archaeological
learning  but  seldom  surpassed,  an  inex¬
haustible  fund  of  multifarious  reading,
and  all  the  laborious  researches  of  a  genu¬
ine  scholar,  he  gave  to  Freemasonry  a  lit¬
erary  and  philosophic  character  which  has
induced  many  succeeding  scholars  to  de¬
vote  themselves  to  those  studies  which  he


had  made  so  attractive.  While  his  errone¬
ous  theories  and  his  fanciful  speculations
will  be  rejected,  the  form  and  direction  that
he  has  given  to  Masonic  speculations  will
remain,  and  to  him  must  be  accredited  the
enviable  title  of  the  Father  of  Any  to- Faxon
Masonic  literature.

In  reference  to  the  personal  character
of  Dr.  Oliver,  a  contemporary  journalist
[Stanford  Mercury )  has  said  that  he  was
of  a  kind  and  genial  disposition,  charita¬
ble  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word,  cour¬
teous,  affable,  self-denying,  and  beneficent;
humble,  unassuming,  and  unaffected;  ever
ready  to  oblige,  easy  of  approach,  and
amiable,  yet  firm  in  the  right.

Dr.  Oliver’s  theory  of  the  system  of
Freemasonry  may  be  briefly  stated  in  these
words.  He  believed  that  the  Order  was  to
be  found  in  the  earliest  periods  of  recorded
history.  It  was  taught  by  Seth  to  his  de¬
scendants,  and  practised  by  them  under  the
name  of  Primitive  or  Pure  Freemasonry.
It  passed  over  to  Noah,  and  at  the  disper¬
sion  of  mankind  suffered  a  division  into
Pure  and  Spurious.  Pure  Freemasonry
descended  through  the  Patriarchs  to  Sol¬
omon,  and  thence  on  to  the  present  day.
The  Pagans,  although  they  had  slight
glimmerings  of  the  Masonic  truths  which
had  been  taught  by  Noah,  greatly  corrupted
them,  and  presented  in  their  mysteries  a
system  of  initiation  to  which  he  gave  the
name  of  the  Spurious  Freemasonry  of  An¬
tiquity.  These  views  he  had  developed
and  enlarged  and  adorned  out  of  the  simi¬
lar  but  less  definitely  expressed  teachings
of  Hutchinson.  Like  that  writer  also,
while  freely  admitting  the  principle  of  reli¬
gious  tolerance,  he  contended  for  the  strictly
Christian  character  of  the  Institution,  and
that,  too,  in  the  narrowest  sectarian  view,
since  he  believed  that  the  earliest  symbols
taught  the  dogma  of  the  Trinity,  and  that
Christ  was  meant  by  the  Masonic  refer¬
ence  to  the  Deity  under  the  title  of  Grand
Architect  of  the  Universe.

Omega.  See  Alpha  and  Omega.

Omnific  "Word.  The  Tetragramma-
ton  is  so  called  because  of  the  omnific
powers  attributed  by  the  Kabbalists  to  its
possession  and  true  pronunciation.  (See
Tetragrammaton.)  The  term  is  also  applied
to  the  most  significant  word  in  the  Royal
Arch  system.

On.  This  is  a  significant  word  in
Royal  Arch  Masonry,  and  has  been  gener¬
ally  explained  as  being  the  name  by  which
Jehovah  was  worshipped  among  the  Egyp¬
tians.  As  this  has  been  recently  denied,
and  the  word  asserted  to  be  only  the  name
of  a  city  in  Egypt,  it  is  proper  that  some
inquiry  should  be  made  into  the  authorities
on  the  subject.  The  first  mention  of  On  in


ON


OPENING


547


the  Bible  is  in  the  history  of  Joseph,  to
whom  Pharaoh  gave  “  to  wife  Asenath,  the
daughter  of  Poti-pherah,  priest  of  On.”
The  city  of  On  was  in  Lower  Egypt,  be¬
tween  the  Nile  and  the  Red  Sea,  and
“  adorned,”  says  Philippson,  “  by  a  gorgeous
temple  of  the  sun,  in  which  a  numerous
priesthood  officiated.”

The  investigations  of  modern  Egyptolo¬
gists  have  shown  that  this  is  an  error.  On
was  the  name  of  a  city  where  the  sun-god
was  worshipped,  but  On  was  not  the  name
of  that  god.

Champollion,  in  his  Didionnaire  Egyp-
tien,  gives  the  phonetic  char¬
ade  rs,  w  ith  the  ngu  rati  ve  sy  m-
bols  of  a  serpent  and  disk,  and
a  seated  figure,  as  the  name  of  the  sun-god.
Now,  of  these  two  characters,  the  upper  one
has  the  power  of  R,  and  the  lower  of  A,
and  hence  the  name  of  the  god  is  Ba.  And
this  is  the  concurrent  testimony  of  Bunsen,
Lepsius,  Gliddon,  and  all  recent  authorities.

But  although  On  was  really  the  name  of
a  city,  the  founders  of  the  Royal  Arch  had,
with  the  lights  then  before  them,  assumed
that  it  was  the  name  of  a  god,  and  had  so
incorporated  it  with  their  system.  With
better  light  than  theirs,  we  can  no  longer
accept  their  definition ;  yet  the  word  may
still  be  retained  as  a  symbol  of  the  Egyp¬
tian  god.  I  know  not  who  has  power  to
reject  it;  and  if  scholars  preserve,  outside
of  the  symbolism,  the  true  interpretation,
no  harm  will  be  done.  It  is  not  the  only
significant  word  in  Masonry  whose  old
and  received  meaning  has  been  shown  to
be  incorrect,  and  sometimes  even  absurd.
And  yet  the  word  is  still  retained  as  the
expression  of  an  old  idea.

Wilkinson  says  of  it:  “This  city  was  in
all  ages  a  sort  of  ecclesiastical  metropolis
of  Lower  Egypt  —  the  prime  seat  of  the
sacred  mysteries  and  higher  science  of  the
country,  and  was,  as  such,  the  fountain
from  which  the  Greek  philosophers  and
historians  were  allowed  to  draw  the  scanty
information  which  they  have  transmitted
to  us.”  The  sun,  which  was  there  wor¬
shipped,  was  in  the  Egyptian,  as  in  other
idolatrous  systems,  one  of  the  chief  deities.
In  another  place  in  the  Bible,  (Jer.  xliii.
13,)  the  city  of  On  is  called  Bethshemesh,
the  city  of  the  sun ;  and  the  Greeks  called
it  Heliopolis,  which  had  precisely  the  same
meaning.  Now,  what  was  actually  the
signification  of  the  word  ON  ?  In  the  lan¬
guage  of  the  hieroglyphics,  the  sun,  it  is
true,  is  called  RA ;  but  St.  Cyril,  who,  as
Bishop  of  Alexandria,  should  have  known
something  of  this  subject,  says  that  On  sig¬
nified,  among  the  Egyptians,  the  sun,  (’£2v  fit
lent  Kar"  aiirolc  i  TjXior. )  Higgins  {Celt.
Druids,  171,)  quotes  an  Irish  commentator


as  showing  that  the  name  AIN  or  ON  was
the  name  of  a  triad  of  gods  in  the  Irish
language.  “  All  etymologists,”  Higgins
continues,  “have  supposed  the  word  On  to
mean  the  sun ;  but  how  the  name  arose  has
not  before  been  explained.”  In  another
work,  ( Anaealypsis ,  vol.  i.,  p.  109,)  Higgins
makes  the  following  important  remarks:
“Various  definitions  are  given  of  the  word
ON  ;  but  they  are  all  unsatisfactory.  It  is
written  in  the  Old  Testament  in  two  ways,
m  aun,  and  :n,  an.  It  is  usually
rendered  in  English  by  the  word  On.  This
word  is  supposed  to  mean  the  sun,  and  the
Greeks  translated  it  by  the  word  j?/Uoc,  or
Sol.  But  I  think  it  only  stood  for  the  sun,
as  the  emblem  of  the  procreative  power  of
nature.”  Bryan  says,  (Ant.  Mythol.,  i.  19,)
when  speaking  of  this  word :  “  On,  Eon  or
Aon,  was  another  title  of  the  sun  among
the  Amonians.  The  Seventy,  where  the
word  occurs  in  theScriptures,  interpret  it  the
sun,  and  call  the  city  of  On,  Heliopolis ;  and
the  Coptic  Pentateuch  renders  the  city  On
by  the  city  of  the  sun.”  Plato,  in  his
Timczus,  says :  “  Tell  me  of  the  god  ON,
which  is,  and  never  knew  beginning.”
And  although  Plato  may  have  been  here
thinking  of  the  Greek  word  ON,  which
means  Being ,  it  is  not  improbable  that  he
may  have  referred  to  the  god  worshipped
at  On,  or  Heliopolis,  as  it  was  thence  that
the  Greeks  derived  so  much  of  their  learn¬
ing.  It  would  be  vain  to  attempt  to  make
an  analogy  between  the  Hindu  sacred  word
AUM  and  the  Egyptian  ON.  The  fact
that  the  M  in  the  former  word  is  the  initial
of  some  secret  word,  renders  the  conver¬
sion  of  it  into  N  impossible,  because  it
would  thereby  lose  its  signification.

The  old  Masons,  misled  by  the  authority
of  St.  Cyril,  and  by  the  translation  of  the
name  of  the  city  into  “  City  of  the  Sun  ”
by  the  Hebrews  and  the  Greeks,  very
naturally  supposed  that  On  was  the  Egyp¬
tian  sun-god,  their  supreme  deity,  as  the
sun  always  was,  wherever  he  was  wor¬
shipped.  Hence,  they  appropriated  that
name  as  a  sacred  word  explanatory  of  the
Jewish  Tetragrammaton.

Onyx,  cnCL  ( Shohem .)  The  second
stone  in  the  fourth  row  of  the  high  priest’s
breastplate.  It  is  of  a  bluish-black  color,
and  represented  the  tribe  of  Joseph.

Opening  of  the  Lodge.  The  ne¬
cessity  of  some  preparatory  ceremonies,  of
a  more  or  less  formal  character,  before  pro¬
ceeding  to  the  despatch  of  the  ordinary
business  of  any  association,  has  always
been  recognized.  Decorum  and  the  dig¬
nity  of  the  meeting  alike  suggest,  even  in
popular  assemblies  called  only  for  a  tem¬
porary  purpose,  that  a  presiding  officer
shall,  with  some  formality,  be  inducted


548


OPENING


OPENING


into  the  chair,  and  he  then,  to  use  the  or¬
dinary  phrase,  “  opens  ”  the  meeting  with
the  appointment  of  his  necessary  assistants,
and  with  the  announcement,  in  an  address
to  the  audience,  explanatory  of  the  objects
that  have  called  them  together.

If  secular  associations  have  found  it  ex¬
pedient,  by  the  adoption  of  some  prepara¬
tory  forms,  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  an
unseeming  abruptness  in  proceeding  to
business,  it  may  well  be  supposed  that  re¬
ligious  societies  have  been  still  more  ob¬
servant  of  the  custom,  and  that,  as  their
pursuits  are  more  elevated,  the  ceremonies
of  their  preparation  for  the  object  of  their
meeting  should  be  still  more  impressive.

In  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  (those  sacred
rites  which  have  furnished  so  many  models
for  Masonic  symbolism,)  the  opening  cere¬
monies  were  of  the  most  solemn  character.
The  sacred  herald  commenced  the  cere¬
monies  of  opening  the  greater  initiations
by  the  solemn  formula  of  “  Depart  hence,
ye  profane!”  to  which  was  added  a  proc¬
lamation  which  forbade  the  use  of  any
language  which  might  be  deemed  of  un¬
favorable  augury  to  the  approaching  rites.

In  like  manner  a  Lodge  of  Masons  is
opened  with  the  employment  of  certain
ceremonies  in  which,  that  attention  may
be  given  to  their  symbolic  as  well  as  prac¬
tical  importance,  every  member  present  is
expected  to  take  a  part.

These  ceremonies,  which  slightly  differ
in  each  of  the  degrees  —  but  differ  so
slightly  as  not  to  affect  their  general  char¬
acter —  may  be  considered,  in  reference  to
the  several  purposes  which  they  are  de¬
signed  to  effect,  to  be  divided  into  eight
successive  steps  or  parts.

1.  The  Master  having  signified  his  in¬
tention  to  proceed  to  the  labors  of  the
Lodge,  every  brother  is  expected  to  assume
his  necessary  Masonic  clothing  and,  if  an
officer,  the  insignia  of  his  office,  and  si¬
lently  and  decorously  to  repair  to  hi3  ap¬
propriate  station.

2.  The  next  step  in  the  ceremony  is,
with  the  usual  precautions,  to  ascertain
the  right  of  each  one  to  be  present.  It  is
scarcely  necessary  to  say  that,  in  the  per¬
formance  of  this  duty,  the  officers  who  are
charged  with  it  should  allow  no  one  to
remain  who  is  not  either  well  known  to
themselves  or  properly  vouched  for  by
some  discreet  and  experienced  brother.

3.  Attention  is  next  directed  to  the  ex¬
ternal  avenues  of  the  Lodge,  and  the  officers
within  and  without  who  are  intrusted  with
the  performance  of  this  important  duty,  are
expected  to  execute  it  with  care  and  fidel¬
ity-

4.  By  a  wise  provision,  it  is  no  sooner  in¬
timated  to  the  Master  that  he  may  safely


proceed,  than  he  directs  his  attention  to  an
inquiry  into  the  knowledge  possessed  by
his  officers  of  the  duties  that  they  will  be
respectively  called  upon  to  perform.

5.  Satisfied  upon  this  point,  the  Master
then  announces,  by  formal  proclamation,
his  intention  to  proceed  to  business;  and,
mindful  of  the  peaceful  character  of  our
Institution,  he  strictly  forbids  all  immoral
or  unmasonic  conduct  whereby  the  har¬
mony  of  the  Lodge  may  be  impeded,
under  no  less  a  penalty  than  the  by-laws
may  impose,  or  a  majority  of  the  brethren
present  may  see  fit  to  inflict.  Nor,  after
this,  is  any  brother  permitted  to  leave  the
Lodge  during  Lodge  hours  (that  is,  from
the  time  of  opening  to  that  of  closing,)
without  having  first  obtained  the  Worship¬
ful  Master’s  permission.

6.  Certain  mystic  rites,  which  can  here
be  only  alluded  to,  arc  then  employed,  by
which  each  brother  present  signifies  his
concurrence  in  the  ceremonies  which  have
been  performed,  and  his  knowledge  of  the
degree  in  which  the  Lodge  is  about  to  be
opened.

7.  It  is  a  lesson  which  every  Mason  is
taught,  as  one  of  the  earliest  points  of  his
initiation,  that  he  should  commence  no  im¬
portant  undertaking  without  first  invoking
the  blessing  of  Deity.  Hence  the  next  step
in  the  progress  of  the  opening  ceremonies
is  to  address  a  prayer  to  the  Supreme  Ar¬
chitect  of  the  Universe.  This  prayer,  al¬
though  offered  by  the  Master,  is  to  be  par¬
ticipated  in  by  every  brother,  and,  at  its
conclusion,  the  audible  response  of  ‘‘So
mote  it  be :  Amen,”  should  be  made  by  all
present.

8.  The  Lodge  is  then  declared,  in  the
name  of  God  and  the  Holy  Saints  John,  to
be  opened  in  due  form  on  the  first,  second,
or  third  degree  of  Masonry,  as  the  case
may  be.

A  Lodge  is  said  to  be  opened  in  the  name
of  God  and  the  Holy  Saints  John,  as  a  dec¬
laration  of  the  sacred  and  religious  pur¬
poses  of  the  meeting,  of  profound  reverence
for  that  Divine  Being  whose  name  and
attributes  should  be  the  constant  themes
of  contemplation,  and  of  respect  for  those
ancient  patrons  whom  the  traditions  of
Masonry  have  so  intimately  connected  with
the  history  of  the  Institution.

It  is  said  to  be  opened  in  due  form,  to  in¬
timate  that  all  that  is  necessary,  appropri¬
ate,  and  usual  in  the  ceremonies,  all  th|t
the  law  requires  or  ancient  usage  renders
indispensable,  have  been  observed.

And  it  is  said  to  be  opened  on,  and  not  in,
a  certain  degree  (which  latter  expression  is
often  incorrectly  used),  in  reference  rather
to  the  speculative  than  to  the  legal  char¬
acter  of  the  meeting,  to  indicate,  not  that


OPERATIVE


ORAL


549


the  members  are  to  be  circumscribed  in  the
limits  of  a  particular  degree,  but  that  they
are  met  together  to  unite  iu  contemplation
on  the  symbolic  teachings  and  divine  les¬
sons,  to  inculcate  which  is  the  peculiar  ob¬
ject  of  that  degree.

The  manner  of  opening  in  each  degree
slightly  varies.  In  the  English  system,  the
Lodge  is  opened  in  the  first  degree  “  in  the
name  of  God  and  Universal  Benevolence;”
in  the  second,  “on  the  square,  in  the  name
of  the  Great  Geometrician  of  the  Universe ;  ”
and  in  the  third,  “on  the  centre,  in  the
name  of  the  Most  High.”

It  is  prescribed  as  a  ritual  regulation  that
the  Master  shall  never  open  or  close  his
Lodge  without  a  lecture  or  part  of  a
lecture.  Hence,  in  each  of  the  degrees  a
portion  of  a  part  of  the  lecture  of  that  de¬
gree  is  incorporated  into  the  opening  and
closing  ceremonies.

There  is  in  every  degree  of  Masonry,
from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  an  opening
ceremony  peculiar  to  the  degree.  This
ceremony  has  always  more  or  less  reference
to  the  symbolic  lesson  which  it  is  the
design  of  the  degree  to  teach,  and  hence
the  varieties  of  openings  are  as  many  as  the
degrees  themselves.

Operative  Art.  Masonry  is  divided
by  Masonic  writers  into  two  branches,  an
operative  art  and  a  speculative  science.
The  operative  art  is  that  which  was  prac¬
tised  by  the  Free  Stonemasons  of  the  Mid¬
dle  Ages.  The  speculative  science  is  that
which  is  practised  by  the  Freemasons  of
the  present  day.  The  technicalities  and
usages  of  the  former  have  been  incorpo¬
rated  into  and  modified  by  the  latter.
Hence,  Freemasonry  is  sometimes  defined
as  a  speculative  science  founded  on  an
operative  art.

Operative  Masonry.  Freemason¬
ry,  in  its  character  as  an  operative  art,  is
familiar  to  every  one.  As  such,  it  is  en¬
gaged  in  the  application  of  the  rules  and
principles  of  architecture  to  the  construc¬
tion  of  edifices  for  private  and  public  use,
houses  for  the  dwelling-place  of  man,  and
temples  for  the  worship  of  the  Deity.  It
abounds,  like  every  other  art,  in  the  use  of
technical  terms,  and  employs,  in  practice,
an  abundance  of  implements  and  materials
which  are  peculiar  to  itself.

This  operative  art  has  been  the  founda¬
tion  on  which  has  been  built  the  specula¬
tive  science  of  Freemasonry.  See  Specu¬
lative  Masonry.

Operative  Masons.  Workers  in
stone,  who  construct  material  edifices,  in
contradistinction  to  Speculative  Masons,
who  construct  only  spiritual  edifices.

Option.  When  a  Masonic  obligation
leaves  to  the  person  who  assumes  it  the


option  to  perform  or  omit  any  part  of  it,  it  is
not  to  be  supposed  that  such  option  is  to
be  only  his  arbitrary  will  or  unreasonable
choice.  On  the  contrary,  in  exercising  it,
he  must  be  governed  and  restrained  by  the
principles  of  right  and  duty,  and  be  con¬
trolled  by  the  circumstances  which  sur¬
round  the  case,  so  that  this  option,  which
at  first  would  seem  to  be  a  favor,  really  in¬
volves  a  great  and  responsible  duty,  that
of  exercising  a  just  judgment  in  the  prem¬
ises.  That  which  at  one  time  would  be
proper  to  perform,  at  another  time  and  in
different  circumstances  it  would  be  equally
proper  to  omit.

Oral  Instruction.  Much  of  the
instruction  which  is  communicated  in
Freemasonry,  and,  indeed,  all  that  is  eso¬
teric,  is  given  orally ;  and  there  is  a  law  of
the  Institution  that  forbids  such  instruction
to  be  written.  There  is  in  this  usage  and
regulation  a  striking  analogy  to  what  pre¬
vailed  on  the  same  subject  in  all  the  secret
institutions  of  antiquity.

In  all  the  ancient  mysteries,  the  same
reluctance  to  commit  the  esoteric  instruc¬
tions  of  the  hierophants  to  writing  is  appa¬
rent;  and  hence  the  secret  knowledge
taught  in  their  initiations  was  preserved  in
symbols,  the  true  meaning  of  which  was
closely  concealed  from  the  profane.

The  Druids  had  a  similar  regulation ;
and  Caesar  informs  us  that,  although  they
made  use  of  the  letters  of  the  Greek  alpha¬
bet  to  record  their  ordinary  or  public  trans¬
actions,  yet  it  was  not  considered  lawful  to
intrust  their  sacred  verses  to  writing,  but
these  were  always  committed  to  memory  by
their  disciples.

The  secret  doctrine  of  the  Kabbala,  or
the  mystical  philosophy  of  the  Hebrews,
was  also  communicated  in  an  oral  form,
and  could  he  revealed  only  through  the
medium  of  allegory  and  similitude.  The
Kabbalistic  knowledge,  traditionally  re¬
ceived,  was,  says  Maurice,  ( Ind .  Antiq.,  iv.
548,)  “transmitted  verbally  down  to  all  the
great  characters  celebrated  in  Jewish  an¬
tiquity,  among  whom  both  David  and  Sol¬
omon  were  deeply  conversant  in  its  most
hidden  mysteries.  Nobody,  however,  had
ventured  to  commit  anything  of  this  kind
to  paper.”

The  Christian  Church  also,  iu  the  age
immediately  succeeding  the  apostolic,  ob¬
served  the  same  custom  of  oral  instruction.
The  early  Fathers  were  eminently  cautious
not  to  commit  certain  of  the  mysterious
dogmas  of  their  religion  to  writing,  lest
the  surrounding  Pagans  should  be  made
acquainted  with  what  they  could  neither
understand  nor  appreciate.  St.  Basil,  (De
Spirilu  Sancto,)  treating  of  this  subject  iu
the  fourth  century,  says:  “We  receive  the


550


ORAL


ORAL


dogmas  transmitted  to  us  by  writing,  and
those  which  have  descended  to  us  from  the
apostles,  beneath  the  mystery  of  oral  tra¬
dition  ;  for  several  things  have  been  handed
to  us  without  writing,  lest  the  vulgar,  too
familiar  with  our  dogmas,  should  lose  a
due  respect  for  them.”  And  he  further
asks,  “  How  should  it  ever  be  becoming  to
write  and  circulate  among  the  people  an
account  of  those  things  which  the  uniniti¬
ated  are  not  permitted  to  contemplate?”

A  custom,  so  ancient  as  this,  of  keeping
the  landmarks  unwritten,  and  one  so  in¬
variably  observed  by  the  Masonic  fraternity,
it  may  very  naturally  be  presumed,  must
have  been  originally  established  with  the
wisest  intentions;  and,  as  the  usage  was
adopted  by  many  other  institutions  whose
organization  was  similar  to  that  of  Free¬
masonry,  it  may  also  be  supposed  that  it
was  connected,  in  some  way,  with  the  char¬
acter  of  an  esoteric  instruction.

Two  reasons,  it  seems  to  me,  may  be  as¬
signed  for  the  adoption  of  the  usage  among
Freemasons.

In  the  first  place,  by  confining  our  secret
doctrines  and  landmarks  to  the  care  of
tradition,  all  danger  of  controversies  and
schisms  among  Masons  and  in  Lodges  is
effectually  avoided.  Of  these  traditions,
the  Grand  Lodge  in  each  jurisdiction  is  the
interpreter,  and  to  its  authoritative  inter¬
pretation  every  Mason  and  every  Lodge  in
the  jurisdiction  is  bound  to  submit.  There
is  no  book,  to  which  every  brother  may
refer,  whose  language  each  one  may  inter-*
pret  according  to  his  own  views,  and  whose
expressions  —  sometimes,  perhaps,  equivo¬
cal,  and  sometimes  obscure  —  might  afford
ample  sources  of  wordy  contest  and  verbal
criticism.  The  doctrines  themselves,  as
well  as  their  interpretation,  are  contained
in  the  memories  of  the  Craft;  and  the
Grand  Lodges,  as  the  lawful  representatives
of  the  Fraternity,  are  alone  competent  to
decide  whether  the  tradition  has  been  cor¬
rectly  preserved,  and  what  is  its  true  inter¬
pretation.  And  hence  it  is  that  there  is  no
institution  in  which  there  have  been  so  few
and  such  unimportant  controversies  with  re¬
spect  to  essential  and  fundam  ental  doctrines.

In  illustration  of  this  argument,  Dr.  Oli¬
ver,  while  speaking  of  what  he  calls  the
antediluvian  system  of  Freemasonry,  —  a
part  of  which  must  necessarily  have  been
traditional,  and  transmitted  from  father  to
son,  and  a  part  intrusted  to  symbols,  —
makes  the  following  observations :

“  Such  of  the  legends  as  were  communi¬
cated  orally  would  be  entitled  to  the  great¬
est  degree  of  credence,  while  those  that
were  committed  to  the  custody  of  symbols,
which,  it  is  probable,  many  of  the  collat¬
eral  legends  would  be,  were  in  great  danger


of  perversion,  because  the  truth  could  only
be  ascertained  by  those  persons  who  were
intrusted  with  the  secret  of  their  interpre¬
tation.  And  if  the  symbols  were  of  doubt¬
ful  character,  and  carried  a  double  mean¬
ing,  as  many  of  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphics
of  a  subsequent  age  actually  did,  the  legends
which  they  embodied  might  sustain  very
considerable  alteration  in  sixteen  or  sev¬
enteen  hundred  years,  although  passing
through  very  few  hands.”

Maimonides  ( More  Nevochim  c.  Ixxi.)  as¬
signs  a  similar  reason  for  the  unwritten
preservation  of  the  Oral  Law.  “This,”  he
says,  “was  the  perfection  of  wisdom  in  our
law,  that  by  this  means  those  evils  were
avoided  into  which  it  fell  in  succeeding
times,  namely,  the  variety  and  perplexity
of  sentiments  and  opinions,  and  the  doubts
which  so  commonly  arise  from  written  doc¬
trines  contained  in  books,  besides  the  errors
which  are  easily  committed  by  writers  and
copyists,  whence,  afterwards,  spring  up  con¬
troversies,  schisms,  and  confusion  of  par¬
ties.”

A  second  reason  that  may  be  assigned  for
the  unwritten  ritual  of  Masonry  is,  that  by
compelling  the  craftsman  who  desires  to
make  any  progress  in  his  profession,  to
commit  its  doctrines  to  memory,  there  is  a
greater  probability  of  their  being  thoroughly
studied  and  understood.  In  confirmation
of  this  opinion,  it  will,  I  think,  be  readily
acknowledged  by  any  one  whose  experi¬
ence  is  at  all  extensive,  that,  as  a  general
rule,  those  skilful  brethren  who  are  techni¬
cally  called  “bright  Masons,”  are  better
acquainted  with  the  esoteric  and  unwritten
portion  of  the  lectures,  which  they  were
compelled  to  acquire  under  a  competent
instructor,  and  by  oral  information,  than
with  that  which  is  published  in  the  Moui-
tors,  and,  therefore,  always  at  hand  to  be  read.

Caesar  (Bell.  Gall.,  vi.  14,)  thought  that
this  was  the  cause  of  the  custom  among
the  Druids,  for,  after  mentioning  that  they
did  not  suffer  their  doctrines  to  be  com¬
mitted  to  writing,  he  adds :  “  They  seem  to
me  to  have  adopted  this  method  for  two
reasons:  that  their  mysteries  might  be
hidden  from  the  common  people,  and  to
exercise  the  memory  of  their  disciples,
which  would  be  neglected  if  they  had
books  on  which  they  might  rely,  as,  we
find,  is  often  the  case.”

A  third  reason  for  this  unwritten  doc¬
trine  of  Masonry,  and  one,  perhaps,  most
familiar  to  the  Craft,  is  also  alluded  to  by
Caesar  in  the  case  of  the  Druids,  “  because
they  did  not  wish  their  doctrines  to  be  di¬
vulged  to  the  common  people.”  Maimo¬
nides,  in  the  conclusion  of  the  passage
which  we  have  already  quoted,  makes  a
similar  remark  with  respect  to  the  oral  law


ORAL


ORDER


551


of  the  Jews.  “  But  if,”  says  he,  “  so  much
care  was  exercised  that  the  oral  law  should
not  be  written  in  a  book  and  laid  open  to
all  persons,  lest,  peradventure,  it  should
become  corrupted  and  depraved,  how  much
more  caution  was  required  that  the  secret
interpretations  of  that  law  should  not  be
divulged  to  every  person,  and  pearls  be
thus  thrown  to  swine.”  “  Wherefore,”  he
adds,  “  they  were  intrusted  to  certain  pri¬
vate  persons,  and  by  them  were  transmitted
to  other  educated  men  of  excellent  and  ex¬
traordinary  gifts.”  And  for  this  regula¬
tion  he  quotes  the  Rabbins,  who  say  that
the  secrets  of  the  law  are  not  delivered  to
any  person  except  a  man  of  prudence  and
wisdom.

It  is,  then,  for  these  excellent  reasons, —
to  avoid  idle  controversies  and  endless  dis¬
putes;  to  preserve  the  secrets  of  our  Order
from  decay ;  and,  by  increasing  the  diffi¬
culties  by  which  they  are  to  be  obtained,
to  diminish  the  probability  of  their  being
forgotten ;  and,  finally,  to  secure  them  from
the  unhallowed  gaze  of  the  profane,  —  that
the  oral  instruction  of  Masonry  was  first
instituted,  and  still  continues  to  be  reli¬
giously  observed.  Its  secret  doctrines  are
the  precious  jewels  of  the  Order,  and  the
memories  of  Masons  are  the  well-guarded
caskets  in  which  those  jewels  are  to  be  pre¬
served  with  unsullied  purity.  And  hence
it  is  appropriately  said  in  our  ritual,  that
“  the  attentive  ear  receives  the  sound  from
the  instructive  tongue,  and  the  secrets  of
Freemasonry  are  safely  lodged  in  the  de-,
positary  of  faithful  breasts.”

Oral  Law.  The  Oral  Law  is  the  name
given  by  the  Jews  to  the  interpretation  of
the  written  code,  and  which  is  said  to  have
been  delivered  to  Moses  at  the  same  time,
accompanied  by  the  Divine  command:
“Thou  shalt  not  divulge  the  words  which
I  have  said  to  thee  out  of  mv  mouth.”  The
Oral  Law  was,  therefore,  never  intrusted  to
books;  but,  being  preserved  in  the  memo¬
ries  of  the  judges,  prophets,  priests,  and
other  wise  men,  was  handed  down,  from
one  to  the  other,  through  a  long  succession
of  ages.

Maimonides  has  described,  according  to
the  Rabbinical  traditions,  the  mode  adopted
by  Moses  to  impress  the  principles  of  this
Oral  Law  upon  the  people.  As  an  example
of  perseverance  in  the  acquirement  of  in¬
formation  by  oral  instruction,  it  may  be
worthy  of  the  consideration  and  imitation
of  all  those  Masons  who  wish  to  perfect
themselves  in  the  esoteric  lessons  of  their
Institution.

When  Moses  had  descended  from  Mount
Sinai,  and  had  spoken  to  the  people,  he  re¬
tired  to  his  tent.  Here  he  was  visited  by
Aaron,  to  whom,  sitting  at  his  feet,  he  re¬


cited  the  law  and  its  explanation,  as  he
had  received  it  from  God.  Aaron  then
rose  and  seated  himself  on  the  right  hand
of  Moses.  Eleazar  and  Ithamar,  the  sons
of  Aaron,  now  entered  the  tent,  and  Moses
repeated  to  them  all  that  he  had  communi¬
cated  to  their  father ;  after  which,  they
seated  themselves,  one  on  the  left  hand  of
Moses  and  the  other  on  the  right  hand  of
Aaron.  Then  went  in  the  seventy  elders,
and  Moses  taught  them,  in  the  same
manner  as  he  had  taught  Aaron  and  his
sons.  Afterwards,  all  of  the  congregation
who  desired  to  know  the  Divine  will  came
in;  and  to  them,  also,  Moses  recited  the
law  and  its  interpretation,  in  the  same
manner  as  before.  The  law,  thus  orally
delivered  by  Moses,  had  now  been  heard
four  times  by  Aaron,  three  times  by  his
sons,  twice  by  the  seventy  elders,  and  once
by  the  rest  of  the  people.  After  this,
Moses  withdrawing,  Aaron  repeated  all
that  he  had  heard  from  Moses,  and  retired;
then  Eleazar  and  Ithamar  repeated  it,  and
also  withdrew  ;  and,  finally,  the  same  thing
was  done  by  the  seventy  elders ;  so  that  each
of  them  having  heard  the  law  repeated
four  times,  it  was  thus,  finally,  fixed  in
their  memories.

The  written  law,  divided  by  the  Jewish
lawgivers  into  613  precepts,  is  contained  in
the  Pentateuch.  But  the  Oral  law,  trans¬
mitted  by  Moses  to  Joshua,  by  him  to  the
elders,  and  from  them  conveyed  by  tradi¬
tionary  relation  to  the  time  of  Judah  the
Holy,  was  by  him,  to  preserve  it  from  being
forgotten  and  lost,  committed  to  writing
in  the  work  known  as  the  Mishna.  And
now,  no  longer  an  Oral  Law,  its  pre¬
cepts  are  to  be  found  in  that  book,  with
the  subsidiary  aid  of  the  Constitutions  of
the  prophets  and  wise  men,  the  Decrees  of
the  Sanhedrim,  the  decisions  of  the  Judges,
and  the  Expositions  of  the  Doctors.

Orator.  An  officer  in  a  Lodge  whose
duty  it  is  to  explain  to  a  candidate  after
his  initiation  the  mysteries  of  the  degree
into  which  he  has  just  been  admitted.  The
office  is  therefore,  in  many  respects,  simi¬
lar  to  that  of  a  lecturer.  The  office  was
created  in  the  French  Lodges  early  in  the
eighteenth  century,  soon  after  the  intro¬
duction  of  Masonry  into  France.  A  writer
in  the  London  Freemasons'  Magazine  for
1859  attributes  its  origin  to  the  constitu¬
tional  deficiency  of  the  French  in  readi¬
ness  of  public  speaking.  From  the  French
it  passed  to  the  other  continental  Lodges,
and  was  adopted  by  the  Scottish  Rite.  The
office  is  not  recognized  in  the  English  and
American  system,  where  its  duties  are  per¬
formed  by  the  Worshipful  Master.

Order.  An  Order  may  be  defined  to
be  a  brotherhood,  fellowship,  or  associa-


652


ORDER


ORDER


tion  of  certain  persons,  united  by  laws  and  |
statutes  peculiar  to  the  society,  engaged  in  a  i
common  object  or  design,  and  distinguished
by  particular  habits,  ensigns,  badges  or
symbols.

Johnson’s  definition  is  that  an  Order  is
“  a  regular  government,  a  society  of  digni¬
fied  persons  distinguished  by  marks  of
honor,  and  a  religious  fraternity.”  In  all
of  these  senses  Freemasonry  may  be  styled
an  Order.  Its  government  is  of  the  most
regular  and  systematic  character  ;  men  the
most  eminent  for  dignity  and  reputation
have  been  its  members;  and  if  it  does  not
constitute  a  religion  in  itself,  it  is  at  least
religion’s  handmaid.

The  ecclesiastical  writers  define  an  Order
to  he  a  congregation  or  society  of  religious
persons,  governed  by  particular  rules,  liv¬
ing  under  the  same  superior,  in  the  same
manner,  and  wearing  the  same  habit;  a
definition  equally  applicable  to  the  society
of  Freemasons.  These  ecclesiastical  Orders  i
are  divided  into  three  classes :  1.  Monastic,
such  as  the  Benedictines  and  the  Augus-
tinians.  2.  The  Mendicant,  as  the  Domin¬
icans  and  the  Franciscans.  3.  The  Mil¬
itary,  as  the  Hospitallers,  the  Templars,
and  the  Teutonic  Knights.  Only  the  first
and  the  third  have  any  connection  with  Free¬
mason  ry  ;  the  first  because  it  was  by  them
that  architecture  was  fostered,  and  the  Ma¬
sonic  gilds  patronized  in  the  Middle  Ages;
and  the  third  because  it  was  in  the  bosom
of  Freemasonry  that  the  Templars  found  a
refuge  after  the  dissolution  of  their  Order.

Order  Xante.  The  name  or  designa¬
tion  assumed  by  the  Illuminati,  the  mem¬
bers  of  the  Bite  of  Strict  Observance,  and
of  the  Royal  Order  of  Scotland,  was  called
the  Order  Name,  or  the  Characteristic
Name.  See  Eqves.

The  Illuminati  selected  classical  names,
of  which  the  following  are  specimens :


Weishaupt

Knigge

Bode

Nicolai

Westenreider

Constanza

Zwack

Count  Savioli

Busche

Ecker


was  Spartacus.

“  Philo.

“  Amelius.

“  Lucian.

“  Pythagoras.
“  Diomedes.

“  Cato.

“  Brutus.

“  Bayard.

“  Saladin.


The  members  of  the  Strict  Observance
formed  their  Order  Names  in  a  different
way.  Following  the  custom  of  the  com¬
batants  in  the  old  tournaments,  each  called
himself  an  eques,  or  knight  of  some  particu¬
lar  object;  as,  Knight  of  the  Sword,  Knight
of  the  Star,  etc.  Where  one  belonged  both
to  this  Rite  and  to  that  of  Illuminism,  his


Order  Name  in  each  was  different.  Thus
Bode,  as  an  Illuminatus,  was,  we  have  seen,
called  “  Amelius,”  but  as  a  Strict  Observ¬
ant,  he  was  known  as  “  Eques  k  lilio  con-
vallium,”  or  Knight  of  the  Lily  of  the
Valleys.  The  following  examples  may
suffice.  A  full  list  will  be  found  in  Thory’s
Acta  Latomorum.

Hund  was  Eques  ab  ense  =  Knight  of  the
Sword.

Jacobi  was  Eques  k  stellSl= Knight  of  the
Star.

Count  Bruhl  was  Eques  igladio  ancipiti  =
Knight  of  the  Double-edged  Sword.
Bode  was  Eques  k  lilio  convallium  =  Knight
of  the  Lily  of  the  Valleys.

Beyerle  was  Eques  i  fascia  =  Knight  of  the
Girdle.

Berend  was  Eques  &  septem  stellis  =  Knight
of  the  Seven  Stars.

Decker  was  Eques  si  plagula  =  Knight  of
the  Curtain.

Lavater  was  Eques  ab  iEsculapio  =  Knight
of  Esculapius.

Seckendorf  was  Eques  it  capricorno  =
Knight  of  Capricorn.

Prince  Charles  Edward  was  Eques  k  sole
aureo  =  Knight  of  the  Golden  Sun.
Zinnendorf  was  Eques  k  lapide  nigro  =
Knight  of  the  Black  Stone.

Order  of  Business.  In  every  Ma¬
sonic  body,  the  by-laws  should  prescribe
an  “  Order  of  Business,”  and  in  proportion
as  that  order  is  rigorously  observed  will  be
the  harmony  and  celerity  with  which  the
( business  of  the  Lodge  will  be  despatched.

In  Lodges  whose  by-laws  have  prescribed
no  settled  order,  the  arrangement  of  business
is  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  presiding
officer,  who,  however,  must  be  governed,
to  some  extent,  by  certain  general  rules
founded  on  the  principles  of  parliamentary
law,  or  on  the  suggestions  of  common  sense.

The  order  of  business  may,  for  conven¬
ience  of  reference,  be  placed  in  the  following
tabular  form :

1.  Opening  of  the  Lodge.

2.  Reading  and  confirmation  of  the
minutes.

3.  Reports  on  petitions.

4.  Balloting  for  candidates.

5.  Reports  of  special  committees.

6.  Reports  of  standing  committees.

7.  Consideration  of  motions  made  at  a
former  meeting,  if  called  up  by  a  member.

8.  New  business.

9.  Initiations.

10.  Reading  of  the  minutes  for  informa¬
tion  and  correction.

11.  Closing  of  the  Lodge.

Order  of  Christ.  See  Christ,  Order

of.

Order  of  the  Temple.  See  Tem¬
ple,  Order  of  the.


ORDER


ORDERS


553


Order,  Rules  of.  Every  permanent
deliberative  body  adopts  a  code  of  rules  of
order  to  suit  itself;  but  there  are  certain
rules  derived  from  what  may  be  called  the
common  law  of  Parliament,  the  wisdom  of
which  having  been  proven  by  long  experi¬
ence,  that  have  been  deemed  of  force  at  all
times  and  places,  and  are,  with  a  few  neces¬
sary  exceptions,  as  applicable  to  Lodges  as
to  other  societies.

The  rules  of  order,  sanctioned  by  unin¬
terrupted  usage  and  approved  by  all  au¬
thorities,  may  be  enumerated  under  the
following  distinct  heads,  as  applied  to  a
Masonic  body:

1.  Two  independent  original  propositions
cannot  be  presented  at  the  same  time  to
the  meeting.

2.  A  subsidiary  motion  cannot  be  offered
out  of  its  rank  of  precedence.

3.  When  a  brother  intends  to  speak,  he
is  requiied  to  stand  up  in  his  place,  and
to  address  himself  always  to  the  presiding
officer.

4.  When  two  or  more  brethren  rise
nearly  at  the  same  time,  the  presiding
officer  will  indicate,  by  mentioning  his
name,  the  one  who,  in  his  opinion,  is  en¬
titled  to  the  floor.

5.  A  brother  is  not  to  be  interrupted  by
any  other  member,  except  for  the  purpose
of  calling  him  to  order.

6.  No  brother  can  speak  oftener  than  the
rules  permit;  but  this  rule  may  be  dis¬
pensed  with  by  the  Master.

7.  No  one  is  to  disturb  the  speaker  by
hissing,  unnecessary  coughing,  loud  whis-

ering,  or  other  unseemly  noise,  nor  should
e  pass  between  the  speaker  and  the  pre¬
siding  officer.

8.  No  personality,  abusive  remarks,  or
other  improper  language  should  be  used  by
any  brother  in  debate.

9.  If  the  presiding  officer  rises  to  speak
while  a  brother  is  on  the  floor,  that  brother
should  immediately  sit  down,  that  the  pre¬
siding  officer  may  be  heard.

10.  Every  one  who  speaks  should  speak
to  the  question.

11.  As  a  sequence  to  this,  it  follows  that
there  can  be  no  speaking  unless  there  be
a  question  before  the  Lodge.  There  must
always  be  a  motion  of  some  kind  to  au¬
thorize  a  debate.

Orders  of  Architecture.  An  order
in  architecture  is  a  system  or  assemblage
of  parts  subject  to  certain  uniform  estab¬
lished  proportions  regulated  by  the  office
which  such  part  has  to  perform,  so  that  the
disposition,  in  a  peculiar  form,  of  the  mem¬
bers  and  ornaments,  and  the  proportion  of
the  columns  and  pilasters,  is  called  an  order.
There  are  five  orders  of  architecture,  the
Doric,  Ionic,  Corinthian,  Tuscan,  and  Com-
3  U


posite —  the  first  three  being  of  Greek  and
the  last  two  of  Italian  origin.  See  each
under  its  respective  title.

Considering  that  the  orders  of  architec¬
ture  must  have  constituted  one  of  the  most
important  subjects  of  contemplation  to  the
Operative  Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and
that  they  afforded  a  fertile  source  for  their
symbolism,  it  is  strange  that  so  little  allu¬
sion  is  made  to  them  in  the  primitive  lec¬
tures  and  in  the  earliest  catechisms  of  the
last  century.  In  the  earliest  catechism  ex¬
tant,  they  are  simply  enumerated,  and  said
to  answer  “  to  the  base,  perpendicular,  di¬
ameter,  circumference,  and  square;”  but  no
explanation  is  given  of  this  reference.  Nor
are  they  referred  to  in  the  “  Legend  of  the
Craft,”  or  in  any  of  the  Old  Constitutions.
Preston,  however,  introduced  them  into  his
system  of  lectures,  and  designated  the  three
most  ancient  orders  —  the  Ionic,  Doric,  and
Corinthian — as  symbols  of  wisdom,  strength,
and  beauty,  and  referred  them  to  the  three
original  Grand  Masters.  This  symbolism
has  ever  since  been  retained;  and,  notwith¬
standing  the  reticence  of  the  earlier  ritual¬
ists,  there  is  abundant  evidence,  in  the
architectural  remains  of  the  Middle  Ages,
that  it  was  known  to  the  old  Operative  Free¬
masons.

Orders  of  Architecture,  Egyp¬
tian.  The  Egyptians  had  a  system  of
architecture  peculiar  to  themselves,  which,
says  Barlow,  (Essays  on  Symbolism,  p.  30,)
“would  indicate  a  people  of  grand  ideas,
and  of  confirmed  religious  convictions.”  It
was  massive,  and  without  the  airy  propor¬
tions  of  the  Greek  orders.  It  was,  too,  emi¬
nently  symbolic,  and  among  its  ornaments
the  lotus  leaf  and  plant  predominated  as  a
symbol  of  regeneration.  Among  the  pecu¬
liar  forms  of  the  Egyptian  architecture
were  the  fluted  column,  which  suggested  the
Ionic  order  to  the  Greeks,  and  the  basket
capital  adorned  with  the  lotus,  which  after¬
wards  became  the  Corinthian.  To  the  Ma¬
sonic  student,  the  Egyptian  style  of  archi¬
tecture  becomes  interesting,  because  it  was
undoubtedly  followed  by  King  Solomon  in
his  construction  of  the  Temple.  The  great
similarity  between  the  pillars  of  the  porch
and  the  columns  in  front  of  Egyptian
temples  is  very  apparent.  Our  translators
have,  however,  unfortunately  substituted
the  lily  for  the  lotus  in  their  version.

Orders  of  Knighthood.  An  order
of  knighthood  is  a  confraternity  of  knights
bound  by  the  same  rules.  Of  these  there
are  many  in  every  kingdom  of  Europe,  be¬
stowed  by  sovereigns  on  their  subjects  as
marks  of  honor  and  rewards  of  merit.  Such,
for  instance,  are  in  England  the  Knights
of  the  Garter;  in  Scotland  the  Knights  of
Saint  Andrew ;  and  in  Ireland  the  Knights


554


ORDERS


ORIENT


of  Saint  Patrick.  But  the  only  Orders  of
Knighthood  that  have  had  any  historical
relation  to  Masonry,  except  the  Order  of
Charles  XII.  in  Sweden,  are  the  three  great
religious  and  military  Orders  which  were
established  in  the  Middle  Ages.  These  are
the  Knights  Templars,  the  Knights  Hospi¬
tallers  or  Knights  of  Malta,  and  the  Teu¬
tonic  Knights,  each  of  which  may  be  seen
under  its  respective  title.  Of  these  three,
the  Masons  can  really  claim  a  connection
only  with  the  Templars.  They  alone
had  a  secret  initiation,  and  with  them
there  is  at  least  traditional  evidence  of  a
fusion.  The  Knights  of  Malta  and  the
Teutonic  Knights  have  always  held  them¬
selves  aloof  from  the  Masonic  Order.
They  never  had  a  secret  form  of  initiation ;
their  reception  was  open  and  public;  and
the  former  Order,  indeed,  during  the  latter
part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  became  the
willing  instruments  of  the  Church  in  the
persecution  of  the  Masons  who  were  at
that  time  in  the  island  of  Malta.  There
is,  indeed,  a  Masonic  degree  called  Knight
of  Malta,  but  the  existing  remnant  of  the
historical  order  has  always  repudiated  it.
With  the  Teutonic  Knights,  the  Free¬
masons  have  no  other  connection  than  this,
that  in  some  of  the  high  degrees  their
peculiar  cross  has  been  adopted.  An  at¬
tempt  has  been  made,  but  I  think  without
reason,  to  identify  the  Teutonic  Knights
with  the  Prussian  Knights,  or  Noachites.

Orders  of  tlie  Day.  In  parliamen¬
tary  law,  propositions  which  are  appointed
for  consideration  at  a  particular  hour  and
day  are  called  the  orders  of  the  day.
When  the  day  arrives  for  their  discussion,
they  take  precedence  of  all  other  matters,
unless  passed  over  by  mutual  consent  or
postponed  to  another  day.  The  same  rules
in  reference  to  these  orders  prevail  in  Ma¬
sonic  as  in  other  assemblies.  The  parlia¬
mentary  law  is  here  applicable  without
modification  to  Masonic  bodies.

Ordinacio.  The  Old  Constitutions
known  as  the  Halliwell  MS.  (14th  cent.)
speak  of  an  ordinacio  in  the  sense  of  a  law.
“  Alia  ordinacio  artes  geometrice.”  It  is  bor¬
rowed  from  the  Roman  law,  where  ordinatio
signified  an  imperial  edict.  In  the  Middle
Ages,  the  word  was  used  in  the  sense  of  a
statute,  or  the  decision  of  a  judge.

Ordination.  At  the  close  of  the  re¬
ception  of  a  neophyte  into  the  order  of
Elect  Cohens,  the  Master,  wdiile  communi¬
cating  to  him  the  mysterious  words,  touched
him  with  the  thumb,  index,  and  middle
fingers  (the  other  two  being  closed)  on  the
forehead,  heart,  and  side  of  the  head,  thus
making  the  figure  of  a  triangle.  This
ceremony  was  called  the  ordination.

Ordo  ab  Chao.  Order  out  of  Chaos.  \


A  motto  of  the  33d  degree,  and  having  the
same  allusion  as  lux  e  tenebris,  which  see.
The  invention  of  this  motto  is  to  be  at¬
tributed  to  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  at
Charleston,  and  it  is  first  met  with  in  the
Patent  of  Count  de  Grasse,  dated  February
1, 1802.  When  De  Grasse  afterwards  carried
the  Rite  over  to  France  and  established  a
Supreme  Council  there,  he  changed  the
motto,  and,  according  to  Lenning,  Ordo  ab
hoc  was  used  by  him  and  his  Council  in  all
the  documents  issued  by  them.  If  so,  it
was  simply  a  blunder.

Oregon.  The  first  Lodges  instituted
in  Oregon  were  under  Warrants  from  the
Grand  Lodge  of  California,  in  the  year
1849.  On  August  16th,  1851,  a  convention
of  three  Lodges  was  held  in  Oregon  City,
and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon  was  there
organized,  Berryman  Jennings  being  elected
Grand  Master.  The  Grand  Chapter  was
organized  at  Salem,  September  18th,  1860.
Templarism  was  introduced  by  the  organ¬
ization  of  Oregon  Commandery,  No.  1,  at
Oregon  City,  on  July  24th,  I860.

Organist.  Grand.  An  officer  in  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  Scotland,  and
Ireland  whose  duty  it  is  to  superintend  the
musical  exercises  on  private  and  public
occasions.  He  must  be  a  Master  Mason,
and  is  required  to  attend  the  Quarterly
and  other  communications  of  the  Grand
Lodge.  His  jewel  is  an  antique  lyre.
Grand  Lodges  in  this  country  do  not  recog¬
nize  such  an  officer.  But  an  organist  has
been  recently  employed  since  the  introduc¬
tion  of  musical  services  into  Lodge  cere¬
monies  by  some  Lodges.

Organization  oi'Grand  Lodges.
See  Grand  Lodge.

Orient.  The  East.  The  place  where
a  Lodge  is  situated  is  sometimes  called  its
“  Orient,”  but  more  properly  its  “  East.”
The  seat  of  a  Grand  Lodge  has  also  some¬
times  been  called  its  “Grand  Orient;”  but
here  “Grand  East”  would,  I  think,  be
better.  The  term  “  Grand  Orient”  has  been
used  to  designate  certain  of  the  Supreme
Bodies  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  and
also  in  South  America ;  as,  the  Grand  Orient
of  France,  the  Grand  Orient  of  Portugal,
the  Grand  Orient  of  Brazil,  the  Grand
Orient  of  New  Grenada,  etc.  The  title
always  has  reference  to  the  East  as  the
place  of  honor  in  Masonry.  See  East,
Grand.

Orient.  Grand.  See  Grand  Orient.

Orient.  Grand  Commander  of
tlie.  ( Grand  Commandeur  d’ Orient.)
The  forty-third  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Mizraim.

Orient.  Interior.  A  name  some¬
times  used  in  Germany  to  designate  a


ORIENT


ORIGINAL


555


Grand  Chapter  or  superintending  body  of
the  higher  degrees.

Orient  of  France,  Grand.  See

France.

Orient,  Order  of  the.  (Ordre
d’  Orient.)  An  Order  founded,  says  Thory,
[Act.  Lat.,  i.  330,)  at  Paris,  in  1806,  on  the
system  of  the  Templars,  to  whom  it  traced
its  origin.

Oriental  Chair  of  Solomon.  The

seat  of  the  Master  in  a  symbolic  Lodge,
tand  so  called  because  the  Master  is  sup¬
posed  symbolically  to  fill  the  place  over  the
Craft  once  occupied  by  King  Solomon.  For
the  same  reason,  the  seat  of  the  Grand
Master  in  the  Grand  Lodge  receives  the
same  appellation.  In  England  it  is  called
the  throne.

Oriental  Philosophy.  A  peculiar
system  of  doctrines  concerning  the  Divine
Nature  which  is  said  to  have  originated  in
Persia,  its  founder  being  Zoroaster,  whence
it  passed  through  Syria,  Asia  Minor,  and
Egypt,  and  was  finally  introduced  among
the  Greeks,  whose  philosophical  systems
it  at  times  modified.  Pliny  calls  it  “  a
magical  philosophy,”  and  says  that  Democ¬
ritus,  having  travelled  into  the  East  for
the  purpose  of  learning  it,  and  returning
home,  taught  it  in  his  mysteries.  It  gave
birth  to  the  sect  of  Gnostics,  and  most  of
it  being  adopted  by  the  school  of  Alexan¬
dria,  it  was  taught  by  Philo,  Jamblichus,
and  other  disciples  of  that  school.  Its  es¬
sential  feature  was  the  theory  of  emana¬
tions,  (which  see.)  It  is  evident  from  his
Travels  of  Cyrus,  that  the  Chevalier  Ram¬
say  was  not  only  well  acquainted  with
this  philosophy,  but  held  it  in  high  esteem ;
and  it  is  not  wonderful,  therefore,  that  it
influenced  him  in  the  high  degrees  of  Ma¬
sonry  which  he  established,  and  from  which
all  the  other  higher  Masonry  has  been  di¬
rectly  or  indirectly  derived.  And  so  it
happens  that  the  Oriental  Philosophy  per¬
meates,  sometimes  to  a  very  palpable  ex¬
tent,  Ineffable,  Philosophic,  and  Hermetic
Masonry,  being  mixed  up  and  intertwined
with  the  Jewish  and  Kabbalistic  Philoso¬
phy.  A  knowledge  of  the  Oriental  Philos¬
ophy  is  therefore  essential  to  the  proper
understanding  of  these  high  degrees.

Oriental  Rite.  The  title  first  as¬
sumed  by  the  Rite  of  Memphis.

Orientation.  The  orientation  of  a
Lodge  is  its  situation  due  east  and  west.
The  word  is  derived  from  the  technical
language  of  architecture,  where  it  is  ap¬
plied,  in  the  expression  “orientation  of
churches,”  to  designate  a  similar  direction
in  building.  Although  Masonic  Lodges
are  still,  when  circumstances  will  permit,
built  in  an  east  and  west  direction,  the  ex¬
planation  of  the  usage,  contained  in  the


old  lectures  of  the  last  century,  that  it
was  “  because  all  chapels  and  churches  are,
or  ought  to  be  so,”  has  become  obsolete,
and  other  symbolic  reasons  are  assigned.
Yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  was
really  the  origin  of  the  usage.  The  orien¬
tation  of  churches  was  a  principle  of  ec¬
clesiastical  architecture  very  generally  ob¬
served  by  builders,  in  accordance  with
ecclesiastical  law  from  the  earliest  times
after  the  apostolic  age.  Thus  in  the  Apos¬
tolic  Constitutions,  which,  although  falsely
attributed  to  St.  Clement,  are  yet  of  great
antiquity,  we  find  the  express  direction,
“  sit  aedes  oblonga  ad  orientem  versus,” —
let  the  church  be  of  an  oblong  form,  directed
to  the  east,  —  a  direction  which  would  be
strictly  applicable  in  the  building  of  a
Lodge  room.  St.  Charles  Borromeo,  in  his
Instructiones  Fabricce  Ecclesiasticce,  is  still
more  precise,  and  directs  that  the  rear  or
altar  part  of  the  church  shall  look  directly
to  the  east,  “  in  orientem  versus  recta  spec-
tat,”  and  that  it  shall  be  not  “  ad  solstiti-
alem  sed  ad  sequinoctialem  orientem,” —
not  to  the  solstitial  east,  which  varies  by
the  deflection  of  the  sun’s  rising,  but  to  the
equinoctial  east,  where  the  sun  rises  at  the
equinoxes,  that  is  to  say,  due  oast.  But,  as
Bingham  (Antiq.,  B.  viii.,  c.  iii.,)  admits,
although  the  usage  was  very  general  to
erect  churches  towards  the  east,  yet  “  it
admitted  of  exceptions,  as  necessity  or  ex¬
pediency;”  and  the  same  exception  pre¬
vails  in  the  construction  of  Lodges,  which,
although  always  erected  due  east  and  w7est,
where  circumstances  will  permit,  are  some¬
times  from  necessity  built  in  a  different
direction.  But  whatever  may  be  externally
the  situation  of  the  Lodge  with  reference
to  the  points  of  the  compass,  it  is  always
considered  internally  that  the  Master’s
seat  is  in  the  east,  and  therefore  that  the
Lodge  is  “situated  due  east  and  west.”

As  to  the  original  interpretation  of  the
usage,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  Masonic
was  derived  from  the  ecclesiastical,  that  is,
that  Lodges  were  at  first  built  east  and
west  because  churches  were;  nor  can  we
help  believing  that  the  church  borrowed
and  Christianized  its  symbol  from  the  Pa¬
gan  reverence  for  the  place  of  sunrising.
The  admitted  reverence  in  Masonry  for  the
east  as  the  place  of  light,  gives  to  the  usage
the  modern  Masonic  interpretation  of  the
symbol  of  orientation.

Original  Points.  The  old  lectures
of  the  last  century,  which  are  now  obsolete,
contained  the  following  instruction :  “  There
are  in  Freemasonry  twelve  original  points,
which  form  the  basis  of  the  system  and
comprehend  the  w'hole  ceremony  of  initia¬
tion.  Without  the  existence  of  these  points,
no  man  ever  was,  or  can  be,  legally  and


556


ORIGIN


ORPHAN


essentially  received  into  the  Order.  Every
person  who  is  made  a  Mason  must  go
through  all  these  twelve  forms  and  cere¬
monies,  not  only  in  the  first  degree,  but  in
every  subsequent  one.”

Origin  of  Freemasonry.  The
origin  and  source  whence  first  sprang  the
institution  of  Freemasonry,  such  as  we
now  have  it,  has  given  rise  to  more  differ¬
ence  of  opinion  and  discussion  among  Ma¬
sonic  scholars  than  any  other  topic  in  the
literature  of  the  Institution.  Writers  on
the  history  of  Freemasonry  have,  at  differ¬
ent  times,  attributed  its  origin  to  the  fol¬
lowing  sources.  1.  To  the  Patriarchal
religion.  2.  To  the  Ancient  Pagan  Mys¬
teries.  3.  To  the  Temple  of  King  Solo¬
mon.  4.  To  the  Crusaders.  5.  To  the
Knights  Templars.  6.  To  the  Roman  Col¬
leges  of  Artificers.  7.  To  the  Operative
Masons  of  the  Middle  Ages.  8.  To  the
Rosicrucians  of  the  sixteenth  century.  9.
To  Oliver  Cromwell,  for  the  advancement
of  his  political  schemes.  10.  To  the  Pre¬
tender,  for  the  restoration  of  the  House  of
Stuart  to  the  British  throne.  11.  To  Sir
Christopher  Wren  at  the  building  of  St.
Paul’s  Cathedral.  12.  To  Dr.  Desaguliers
and  his  associates  in  the  year  1717.  Each
of  these  twelve  theories  has  been  from
time  to  time,  and  the  twelfth  within  a  re¬
cent  period,  sustained  with  much  zeal,  if
not  always  with  much  judgment,  by  their
advocates.  A  few  of  them,  however2  have
long  since  been  abandoned,  but  the  others
still  attract  attention  and  find  defenders.
My  own  views  on  the  subject  are  expressed
in  the  article  Antiquity  of  Freemasonry,  to
which  the  reader  is  referred.

Orleans.  Duke  of.  Louis  Philippe
Joseph,  Duke  of  Orleans,  better  known  in
history  by  his  revolutionary  name  of  Ega-
lit§,  was  the  fifth  Grand  Master  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  Order  in  France.  As  Duke  of  Char¬
tres,  the  title  which  he  held  during  the  life
of  his  father,  he  was  elected  Grand  Master
in  the  year  1771,  upon  the  death  of  the
Count  de  Clermont.  Having  appointed
the  Duke  of  Luxemburg  his  Substitute,
he  did  not  attend  a  meeting  of  the  Grand
Lodge  until  1777,  but  had  in  the  meantime
paid  much  attention  to  the  interests  of  Ma¬
sonry,  visiting  many  of  the  Lodges,  and
laying  the  foundation-stone  of  a  Masonic
Hall  at  Bordeaux.

His  abandonment  of  his  family  and  his
adhesion  to  the  Jacobins  during  the  revo¬
lution,  when  he  repudiated  his  hereditary
title  of  Duke  of  Orleans  and  assumed  the
republican  one  of  Egalit£,  forms  a  part  of
the  history  of  the  times.  On  the  22d  Feb¬
ruary,  1793,  he  wrote  a  letter  to  Milsent,
the  editor,  over  the  signature  of  “  Citoyen
Egalit6,”  which  was  published  in  the  Jour¬


nal  de  Paris,  and  which  contains  the  fol¬
lowing  passages;

“This  is  my  Masonic  history.  At  one
time,  when  certainly  no  one  could  have
foreseen  our  revolution,  I  was  in  favor  of
Freemasonry,  which  presented  to  me  a  sort
of  image  of  equality,  as  I  was  in  favor  of
the  parliament,  which  presented  a  sort  of
image  of  liberty.  I  have  since  quitted  the  phan¬
tom  for  the  reality.  In  the  month  of  De¬
cember  last,  the  secretary  of  the  Grand
Orient  having  addressed  himself  to  the
person  who  discharged  the  functions,  near
me,  of  secretary  of  the  Grand  Master,  to
obtain  my  opinion  on  a  question  re¬
lating  to  the  affairs  of  that  society,  I  re¬
plied  to  him  on  the  5th  of  January  as
follows:  ‘As  I  do  not  know  how  the
Grand  Orient  is  composed,  and  as,  besides,
I  think  that  there  should  be  no  mystery
nor  secret  assembly  in  a  republic,  especially
at  the  commencement  of  its  establishment,
I  desire  no  longer  to  mingle  in  the  affairs
of  the  Grand  Orient,  nor  in  the  meetings
of  the  Freemasons.’”

In  consequence  of  the  publication  of
this  letter,  the  Grand  Orient  on  May  13th,
1793,  declared  the  Grand  Mastership  va¬
cant,  thus  virtually  deposing  their  recreant
chief.  He  soon  reaped  the  reward  of  his
treachery  and  political  debasement.  On
the  6th  of  November  in  the  same  year  he
suffered  death  on  the  guillotine.

Ormus  or  Ormesius.  See  Pose
Croix,  Golden.

Ormuzd  and  Ahriman.  Ormuzd

was  the  principle  of  good  and  the  symbol
of  light,  and  Ahriman  the  principle  of  evil
and  the  symbol  of  darkness,  in  the  old  Per¬
sian  religion.  See  Zoroaster.

Ornaments  of  a  Lodge.  The  lec¬
tures  describe  the  ornaments  of  a  Lodge  as
consisting  of  the  Mosaic  Pavement,  the  In¬
dented  Tessel,  and  the  Blazing  Star.  They
are  called  ornaments  because  they  are  really
the  decorations  with  which  a  properly  fur¬
nished  Lodge  is  adorned.  See  these  re¬
spective  words.

Oman  the  Jebnsite.  He  was  an  in¬
habitant  of  Jerusalem,  at  the  time  that  that
city  was  called  Jebus,  from  the  son  of  Ca¬
naan,  whose  descendants  peopled  it.  He
was  the  owner  of  the  threshing-floor  situ¬
ated  on  Mount  Moriah,  in  the  same  spot
on  which  the  Temple  was  afterwards  built.
This  threshing-floor  David  bought  to  erect
on  it  an  altar  to  God.  (2  Chron.  xxi.  18-
25.)  On  the  same  spot  Solomon  afterwards
built  the  Temple.  Hence,  in  Masonic  lan¬
guage,  the  Temple  of  Solomon  is  sometimes
spoken  of  as  “the  threshing-floor  of  Oman
the  Jebusite.”  See  Threshing-Floor.

Orphan.  The  obligation  that  Masons
should  care  for  the  children  of  their  de-


ORPHEUS


OSIRIS


557


ceased  brethren  has  been  well  observed  in
the  Institution  by  many  Grand  Lodges,
independent  associations  of  Masons,  and
of  asylums  for  the  support  and  educa¬
tion  of  Masonic  orphans.  Among  these,
perhaps  one  of  the  most  noteworthy,  is
the  orphan  asylum  founded  at  Stock¬
holm,  in  1753,  by  the  contributions  of
the  Swedish  Masons,  and  which,  by  subse¬
quent  bequests  and  endowments,  has  be¬
come  one  of  the  richest  private  institutions
of  the  kind  in  the  world.

Orpheus.  There  are  no  less  than  four
persons  to  whom  the  ancients  gave  the
name  of  Orpheus,  but  of  these  only  one  is
worthy  of  notice  as  the  inventor  of  the
mysteries,  or,  at  least,  as  the  introducer  of
them  into  Greece.  The  genuine  Orpheus
is  said  to  have  been  a  Thracian,  and  a  dis¬
ciple  of  Linus,  who  flourished  when  the
kingdom  of  the  Athenians  was  dissolved.
From  him  the  Thracian  or  Orphic  myste¬
ries  derived  their  name,  because  he  first  in¬
troduced  the  sacred  rites  of  initiation  and
mystical  doctrines  into  Greece.  He  was,
according  to  fabulous  tradition,  torn  to
pieces  by  Ciconian  women,  and  after  his
death  he  was  deified  by  the  Greeks.  The
story,  that  by  the  power  of  his  harmony  he
drew  wild  beasts  and  trees  to  lflm,  has
been  symbolically  interpreted,  that  by  his
sacred  doctrines  he  tamed  men  of  rustic  and
savage  disposition.  An  abundance  of  fa¬
bles  has  clustered  around  the  name  of  Or-
heus ;  but  it  is  at  least  generally  admitted
y  the  learned,  that  he  was  the  founder  of
the  system  of  initiation  into  the  sacred
mysteries  as  practised  in  Greece.  The
Grecian  theology,  says  Thomas  Taylor,  —
himself  the  most  Grecian  of  all  moderns,  —
originated  from  Orpheus,  and  was  promul¬
gated  by  him,  by  Pythagoras,  and  by  Plato ;
by  the  first,  mystically  and  symbolically ;
by  the  second,  enigmatically  and  through
images;  and  by  the  last,  scientifically.  The
mysticism  of  Orpheus  should  certainly  have
given  him  as  high  a  place  in  the  esteem  of
the  founders  of  the  present  system  of  Spec¬
ulative  Masonry  as  has  been  bestowed  upon
Pythagoras.  But  it  is  strange  that,  while
they  delighted  to  call  Pythagoras  an  “  an¬
cient  friend  and  brother,”  they  have  been
utterly  silent  as  to  Orpheus.

Orphic  stories.  These  rites
were  practised  in  Greece,  and  were  a  modi¬
fication  of  the  mysteries  of  Bacchus  or
Dionysus,  and  they  were  so  called  because
their  institution  was  falsely  attributed  to
Orpheus.  They  were,  however,  established
at  a  much  later  period  than  his  era.  In¬
deed,  M.  Freret,  who  has  investigated  this
subject  with  much  learning  in  the  Memoir
de  i’Acadcmie  dcs  Inscriptions,  (tom.  xxiii.,)
regards  the  Orphics  as  a  degenerate  branch


of  the  school  of  Pythagoras,  formed,  after
the  destruction  of  that  school,  by  some  of
its  disciples,  who,  seeking  to  establish  a  re¬
ligious  association,  devoted  themselves  to
the  worship  of  Bacchus,  with  which  they
mingled  certain  Egyptian  practices,  and
out  of  this  mixture  made  up  a  species  of
life  which  they  called  the  Orphic  life,  and
the  origin  of  which,  to  secure  greater  con¬
sideration,  they  attributed  to  Orpheus,  pub¬
lishing  under  his  name  many  apocryphal
works.

The  Orphic  rites  differed  from  the  other
Pagan  rites,  in  not  being  connected  with
the  priesthood,  but  in  being  practised  by  a
fraternity  who  did  not  possess  the  sacer¬
dotal  functions.  The  initiated  commemo¬
rated  in  their  ceremonies,  which  were  per¬
formed  at  night,  the  murder  of  Bacchus  by
the  Titans,  and  his  final  restoration  to  the
supreme  government  of  the  universe,  under
the  name  of  Phanes.

Demosthenes,  while  reproaching  Eschi-
nes  for  having  engaged  with  his  mother
in  these  mysteries,  gives  us  some  notion  of
their  nature.

In  the  day,  the  initiates  were  crowned
with  fennel  and  poplar,  and  carried  ser¬
pents  in  their  hands,  or  twined  them
around  their  heads,  crying  with  a  loud
voice,  enos,  sabos,  and  danced  to  the  sound
of  the  mystic  words,  hyes,  attes,  attes,  hyes.
At  night  the  mystes  was  bathed  in  the  lus-
tral  water,  and  having  been  rubbed  over
with  clay  and  bran,  he  was  clothed  in  the
skin  of  a  fawn,  and  having  risen  from  the
bath,  he  exclaimed,  “  I  have  departed  from
evil  and  have  found  the  good.”

The  Orphic  poems  made  Bacchus  identi¬
cal  with  Osiris,  and  celebrated  the  mutila¬
tion  and  palingenesis  of  that  deity  as  a
symbol  teaching  the  resurrection  to  eternal
life,  so  that  their  design  was  similar  to  that
of  the  other  Pagan  mysteries.

The  Orphic  initiation,  because  it  was  net
sacerdotal  in  its  character,  was  not  so  cele¬
brated  among  the  ancients  as  the  other
mysteries.  Plato,  even,  calls  its  disciples
charlatans.  It  nevertheless  existed  until
the  first  ages  of  the  Christian  religion,  be¬
ing  at  that  time  adopted  by  the  philoso¬
phers  as  a  means  of  opposing  the  progress
of  the  new  revelation.  It  fell,  however,  at
last,  with  the  other  rites  of  paganism,  a
victim  to  the  rapid  and  triumphant  pro¬
gress  of  the  gospel.

Osiris.  lie  was  the  chief  god  of  the
old  Egyptian  mythology,  the  husband  of
Isis,  and  the  father  of  Horus.  Jabloniski
says  that  Osiris  represented  the  sun  only;
but  riutarch,  whose  opportunity  of  know¬
ing  was  better,  asserts  that,  while  generally
considered  as  a  symbol  of  the  solar  orb,

|  some  of  the  Egyptian  philosophers  regarded


558


OSIRLS


OZEE


him  as  a  river  god,  and  called  him  Nilus.
But  the  truth  is,  that  Osiris  represented  the
male,  active  or  generative,  powers  of  nature ;
while  Isis  represented  its  female,  passive
or  prolific,  powers.  Thus,  when  Osiris  was
the  sun,  Isis  was  the  earth,  to  be  vivified
by  his  rays ;  when  he  was  the  Nile,  Isis  was
the  land  of  Egypt,  fertilized  by  his  over¬
flow.  Such  is  the  mythological  or  mystical
sense  in  which  Osiris  was  received.

Historically,  he  is  said  to  have  been  a
great  and  powerful  king,  who,  leaving
Egypt,  traversed  the  world,  leading  a  host
of  fauns  or  satyrs,  and  other  fabulous  be¬
ings  in  his  train,  actually  an  army  of  fol¬
lowers.  He  civilized  the  whole  earth,  and
taught  mankind  to  fertilize  the  soil  and  to
erform  the  works  of  agriculture.  We  see
ere  the  idea  which  was  subsequently  ex-

Eressed  by  the  Greeks  in  their  travels  of
fionysus,  and  the  wanderings  of  Ceres;  and
it  is  not  improbable  that  the  old  Masons
had  some  dim  perception  of  this  story,
which  they  have  incorporated,  under  the
figure  of  Euclid,  in  their  “Legend  of  the
Craft.”

Osiris,  Mysteries  of.  The  Osirian
mysteries  consisted  in  a  scenic  representa¬
tion  of  the  murder  of  Osiris  by  Tvphon,
the  subsequent  recovery  of  his  mutilated
body  by  Isis,  and  his  deification,  or  resto¬
ration  to  immortal  life.  Julius  Firmicus,
in  his  treatise  On  the  Falsity  of  the  Pagan
Religions ,  thus  describes  the  object  of  the
Osirian  mysteries:  “But  in  those  funerals
and  lamentations  which  are  annually  cele¬
brated  in  honor  of  Osiris,  the  defenders
of  the  Pagan  rites  pretend  a  physical
reason.  They  call  the  seeds  of  fruit,  Osi¬
ris  ;  the  earth,  Isis ;  the  natural  heat,  Ty-
hon;  and  because  the  fruits  are  ripened
y  the  natural  heat  and  collected  for  the
life  of  man,  and  are  separated  from  their
natural  tie  to  the  earth,  and  are  sown  again
when  winter  approaches,  this  they  consider
is  the  death  of  Osiris;  but  when  the  fruits,
by  the  genial  fostering  of  the  earth,  be¬
gin  again  to  be  generated  by  a  new  procre¬
ation,  this  is  the  finding  of  Osiris.”  This
explanation  does  not  essentially  differ  from
that  already  given  in  the  article  Egyptian
Mysteries.  Thesv mbolism  is  indeed  precisely
the  same  —  that  of  a  restoration  or  resur¬
rection  from  death  to  life.  See  Egyptian
Mysteries.

Otcrfut.  The  name  of  the  assassin  at
the  west  gate  in  the  legend  of  the  third  de-
ree,  according  to  some  of  the  high  degrees,
have  vainly  sought  the  true  meaning  or


derivation  of  this  word,  which  is  most
probably  an  anagram  of  a  name.  It  was,
I  think,  invented  by  the  Stuart  Masons,  and
refers  to  some  person  who  was  inimical  to
that  party.

Otreli.  The  pseudonyme  of  the  cele¬
brated  Rosicrucian  Michel  Mayer,  under
which  he  wrote  his  book  on  Death  and  the
Resurrection.  See  Mayer.

Out  of  the  I,odge.  The  charges  of
a  Freemason,  compiled  by  Anderson  from
the  Ancient  Records,  contain  the  regula¬
tions  for  the  behavior  of  Masons  out  of  the
Lodge  under  several  heads;  as,  behavior
after  the  Lodge  is  over,  when  brethren
meet  without  strangers,  in  the  presence  of
strangers,  at  home,  and  towards  a  strange
brother.  Gadicke  gives  the  same  directions
in  the  following  words:

“A  brother  Freemason  shall  not  only
conduct  himself  in  the  Lodge,  but  also  out
of  the  Lodge,  as  a  brother  towards  his
brethren ;  and  happy  are  they  who  are
convinced  that  they  have  in  this  respect
ever  obeyed  the  laws  of  the  Order.”

Oval  Temples.  The  temple  in  the
Druidical  mysteries  was  often  of  an  oval
form.  As  the  oblong  temple  was  a  represen¬
tation  of  the  inhabited  world,  whence  is  de¬
rived  tlft  form  of  the  Lodge;  so  the  oval
temple  was  a  representation  of  the  mun¬
dane  egg,  which  was  also  a  symbol  of  the
world.  The  symbolic  idea  in  both  was  the
same.

Overseer.  The  title  of  three  officers
in  a  Mark  Lodge,  who  are  distinguished  as
the  Master,  Senior,  and  Junior  Overseer.
The  jewel  of  their  office  is  a  square.  In
Mark  Lodges  attached  to  Chapters,  the
duties  of  these  officers  are  performed  by
the  three  Grand  Masters  of  the  Veils.

Ox.  The  ox  was  the  device  on  the
banner  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim.  The  ox
on  a  scarlet  field  is  one  of  the  Royal  Arch
banners,  and  is  borne  by  the  Grand  Mas¬
ter  of  the  Third  Veil.

Oyres  do  Ornellas.  Pra^ao.  A
Portuguese  gentleman,  who  was  arrested
as  a  Freemason,  at  Lisbon,  in  1776,  and
thrown  into  a  dungeon,  where  he  remained
fourteen  months.  See  Alincourt.

Ozee.  Sometimes  Osee.  The  accla¬
mation  of  the  Scottish  Rite  is  so  spelled  in
many  French  Cahiers.  Properly  Hoschea,
which  Delaunay  (Thuileur,  p.  141,)  derives
from  the  Hebrew  IT  hossheah,  deliver¬
ance,  safety,  or,  as  he  says,  a  saviour.  But
see  Hoschea,  where  another  derivation  is
suggested.


PAGANIS


PALLADIUM


559


P.


Paganis,  Hugo  de.  The  Latinized
form  of  the  name  of  Hugh  de  Payens,  the
first  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars.  See
Payens.

Paganism.  A  general  appellation
for  the  religious  worship  of  the  whole
human  race,  except  of  that  portion  which
has  embraced  Christianity,  Judaism,  or
Mohammedanism.  Its  interest  to  the  Ma¬
sonic  student  arises  from  the  fact  that  its
principal  development  was  the  ancient  my¬
thology,  in  whose  traditions  and  mysteries
are  to  be  found  many  interesting  analogies
with  the  Masonic  system.  See  Dispensa¬
tions  of  Religion  and  Mythology.

Paine,  Thomas.  A  political  writer
of  eminence  during  the  Revolutionary
War  in  America.  He  greatly  injured  his
reputation  by  his  attacks  on  the  Christian
religion.  He  was  not  a  Mason,  but  wrote
An  Essay  on  the  Origin  of  Freemasonry,
with  no  other  knowledge  of  the  Institution
than  that  derived  from  the  writings  of  Smith
and  Dodd,  and  the  very  questionable  au¬
thority  of  Prichard’s  Masonry  Dissected.  He
sought  to  trace  Freemasonry  to  the  Celtic
Druids.  For  one  so  little  acquainted  with
his  subject,  he  has  treated  it  with  consider¬
able  ingenuity.  Paine  was  born  in  Eng¬
land,  1737,  and  died  in  New  York,  in  1809.

Palestine,  called  also  the  Holy
Land  on  account  of  the  sacred  character  of
the  events  that  have  occurred  there,  is  situ¬
ated  on  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,
stretching  from  Lebanon  south  to  the
borders  of  Egypt,  and  from  the  thirty-
fourth  to  the  thirty-ninth  degrees  of  lon¬
gitude.  It  was  conquered  from  the  Canaan-
ites  by  the  Hebrews  under  Joshua  1450
years  B.  c.  They  divided  it  into  twelve
confederate  states  according  to  the  tribes.
Saul  united  it  into  one  kingdom,  and
David  enlarged  its  territories.  Iu  975  B.  c.
it  was  divided  into  the  two  kingdoms
of  Israel  and  Judea,  the  latter  consisting
of  the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  and
the  former  of  the  rest  of  the  tribes.  About
740  B.  c.,  both  kingdoms  were  subdued  by
the  Persians  and  Babylonians,  and  after
the  captivity  only  the  two  tribes  of  Judah
and  Benjamin  returned  to  rebuild  the
Temple.  With  Palestine,  or  the  Holy
Lana,  the  mythical,  if  not  the  authentic,
history  of  Freemasonry  has  been  closely
connected.  There  stood,  at  one  time,  the
Temple  of  Solomon,  to  which  some  writers
have  traced  the  origin  of  the  Masonic
Order;  there  fought  the  Crusaders,  among
whom  other  writers  have  sought,  with
equal  boldness,  to  find  the  cradle  of  the
Fraternity;  there  certainly  the  Order  of


the  Templars  was  instituted,  whose  subse¬
quent  history  has  been  closely  mingled
with  that  of  Freemasonry ;  and  there  oc¬
curred  nearly  all  the  events  of  sacred  his¬
tory  that,  with  the  places  where  they  were
enacted,  have  been  adopted  as  important
Masonic  symbols.

Palestine,  Explorations  in.  The

desire  to  obtain  an  accurate  knowledge  of
the  archaeology  of  Palestine,  gave  rise  in

1866  to  an  association,  which  was  perma¬
nently  organized  in  Loudon,  as  the  “  Pales¬
tine  Exploration  Fund,”  with  the  Queen
as  the  chief  patron,  and  a  long  list  of  the
nobility  and  the  most  distinguished  gentle¬
men  in  the  kingdom,  added  to  which  fol¬
lowed  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  and
forty-two  subordinate  and  provincial  Grand
Lodges  and  Chapters.  Early  in  the  year

1867  the  committee  began  the  work  of  ex¬
amination,  by  mining  in  and  about  the  va¬
rious  points  which  had  been  determined
upon  by  a  former  survey  as  essential  to  a
proper  understanding  of  the  ancient  city,
which  had  been  covered  up  by  debris  from
age  to  age,  so  that  the  present  profiles  of
the  ground,  in  every  direction,  were  totally
different  from  what  they  were  in  the  days
of  David  and  Solomon,  or  even  the  time
of  Christ.

Lieutenant  Charles  Warren,  R.  E.,  was
sent  out  with  authority  to  act  as  circum¬
stances  might  demand,  and  as  the  delicacy
and  the  importance  of  the  enterprise  re¬
quired.  He  arrived  in  Jerusalem  February
17th,  1867,  and  continued  his  labors  in  ex¬
cavating  in  many  parts  of  the  city,  with
some  interruptions,  until  1871,  when  he  re¬
turned  to  England.  During  his  operations,
he  kept  the  society  in  London  constantly
informed  of  the  progress  of  the  work  in
which  he  and  his  associates  were  so  zealous¬
ly  engaged,  in  a  majority  of  cases  at  the
imminent  risk  of  their  lives  and  always
that  of  their  health.  The  result  of  these
labors  has  been  a  vast  accumulation  of  facts
in  relation  to  the  topography  of  the  holy
city  which  throw  much  light  on  its  archae¬
ology.  A  branch  of  the  society  has  been
established  in  this  country,  and  it  is  still
in  successful  operation.

Palestine,  Knight  of.  See  Knight
of  Palestine.

Palestine,  Knight  of  St.  John

of.  See  Knight  of  St.  John  of  Palestine.

Palladic  Masonry.  The  title  given
to  the  Order  of  the  Seven  Sages  and . the
Order  of  the  Palladium.  See  Palladium,
Order  of  the.

Palladium,  Order  of  the.  An

androgynous  society  of  Masonic  adoption,


560


PALMER


PARIS


established,  says  Ragon,  at  Paris  in  1737.
It  made  great  pretensions  to  high  antiquity,
claiming  that  it  had  its  origin  in  the  in¬
structions  brought  by  Pythagoras  from
Egypt  into  Greece,  and  having  fallen  into
decay  after  the  decline  of  the  Roman  Em¬
peror,  it  was  revived  in  1637  by  Fenelon,
Archbishop  of  Canbray;  all  of  which  is  al¬
together  mythical.  Fenelon  was  not  born
until  1651.  It  was  a  very  moral  society,
consisting  of  two  degrees  :  1.  Adelph;  2.
Companion  of  Ulysses.  When  a  female
took  the  second  degree,  she  was  called  a
Companion  of  Penelope.

Palmer.  From  the  Latin, palmifer,  a
palm-bearer.  A  name  given  in  the  time  of
the  Crusades  to  a  pilgrim,  who,  coming  back
from  the  holy  war  after  having  accom¬
plished  his  vow  of  pilgrimage,  exhibited
upon  his  return  home  a  branch  of  palm
bound  round  his  staff  in  token  of  it.

Pantaele.  The  pentalpha  of  Pythag¬
oras  is  so  called  in  the  symbolism  of  High
Magic  and  the  Hermetic  Philosophy.  See
Pentalpha.

Papworth  Manuscript.  A  man¬
uscript  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Wyatt
Papworth,  of  London,  who  purchased  it
from  a  bookseller  of  that  city  in  1860.  As
some  of  the  water-marks  of  the  paper  on
which  it  is  written  bear  the  initials  G.  R.,
with  a  crown  as  a  water-mark,  it  is  evident
that  the  manuscript  cannot  be  older  than
1714,  that  being  the  year  in  which  the  first
of  the  Georges  ascended  the  throne.  It  is
most  probably  of  a  still  more  recent  date,
perhaps  1715  or  1716.  The  Rev.  A.  F.  A.
Woodford  has  thus  described  its  appear¬
ance:  “The  scroll  was  written  originally
on  pages  of  foolscap  size,  which  were  then
joined  into  a  continuous  roll,  and  after¬
wards,  probably  for  greater  convenience,
the  pages  were  again  separated  by  cutting
them,  and  it  now  forms  a  book,  containing
twenty-four  folios,  sewed  together  in  a
light-brown  paper  cover.  The  text  is  of  a
bold  character,  but  written  so  irregularly
that  there  are  few  consecutive  pages  which
have  the  same  number  of  lines,  the  aver¬
age  being  about  seventeen  to  the  page.”
The  manuscript  is  not  complete,  three  or
four  of  the  concluding  charges  being  omit¬
ted,  although  some  one  has  written,  in  a
hand  different  from  that  of  the  text,  the
word  Finis  at  the  bottom  of  the  last  page.
The  manuscript  appears  to  have  been  simply
acopy,  in  a  little  less  antiquated  language,  of
some  older  Constitution.  It  has  been  pub¬
lished  by  Bro.  Hughan  in  his  Old  Charges
of  the  British  Freemasons.

Paracelsns.  Philippus  Aureolus
Theophrastus  Bombastus  Paracelsus  de
Hohenheim,  as  he  styled  himself,  was  born
in  Germany  in  1493,  and  died  in  1541.  He


devoted  his  youth  to  the  study  and  prac¬
tice  of  astrology,  alchemy,  and  magic,  and
passed  many  years  of  his  life  in  travelling
over  Europe  and  acquiring  information  in
medicine,  of  which  he  proclaimed  himself
to  be  the  monarch.  He  was,  perhaps,  the
most  distinguished  charlatan  whoever  made
a  figure  in  the  world.  The  followers  of  his
school  were  called  Paracelsists,  and  they
continued  for  more  than  a  century  after  the
death  of  their  master  to  influence  the
schools  of  Germany.  Much  of  the  Kabba-
listic  and  mystical  science  of  Paracelsus
was  incorporated  into  Hermetic  Masonry
by  the  founders  of  the  high  degrees.

Paracelsus,  Sublime.  A  degree  to
be  found  in  the  manuscript  collections  of
Peuvret.

Parallel  lanes.  In  every  well-
regulated  Lodge  there  is  found  a  point
within  a  circle,  which  circle  is  imbordered
by  two  perpendicular  parallel  lines.  These
lines  are  representatives  of  St.  John  the
Baptist  and  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  the
two  great  patrons  of  Masonry  to  whom  our
Lodges  are  dedicated,  and  who  are  said  to
have  been  “perfect  parallels  in  Christianity
as  well  as  Masonry.”  In  those  English
Lodges  which  have  adopted  the  “Union
System  ”  established  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  in  1813,  and  where  the  dedication
is  “  to  God  and  his  sendee,”  the  lines
parallel  represent  Moses  and  Solomon.  As
a  symbol,  the  parallel  lines  are  not  to  be
found  in  the  earlier  rituals  of  Masonry.
Although  Oliver  defines  the  symbol  on  the
authority  of  what  he  calls  the  “  Old  Lec¬
tures,”  I  have  been  unable  to  find  it  in  any
anterior  to  Preston,  and  even  he  only  re¬
fers  to  the  parallelism  of  the  two  Sts.  John.
The  fact  is,  that  the  symbol  of  the  parallel
lines,  with  that  of  the  point  within  a  circle,
was  first  introduced  by  Dunckerley  in  the
last  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century.  See
Dedication.

Paris.  Congresses  of.  Three  im¬
portant  Masonic  Congresses  have  been  held
in  the  city  of  Paris.  The  first  was  con¬
vened  by  the  Rite  of  Philalethes  in  1785,
that  by  a  concourse  of  intelligent  Masons
of  all  rites  and  countries,  and  by  a  com¬
parison  of  oral  and  written  traditions,  light
might  be  educed  on  the  most  essential  sub¬
jects  of  Masonic  science,  and  on  the  nature,
origin,  and  historic  application  as  well  as
the  actual  state  of  the  Institution.  Sava-
lette  de  Lauges  was  elected  President.  It
closed  after  a  protracted  session  of  three
months,  without  producing  any  practical
result.  The  second  was  called  in  1787,  as
a  continuation  of  the  former,  and  closed
with  precisely  the  same  negative  result.
The  third  was  assembled  in  1855,  by  Prince
Murat,  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  various


PARLIAMENTARY


PASCHALIS


561


reforms  in  the  Masonic  system.  At  this
Congress,  ten  propositions,  some  of  them
highly  important,  were  introduced,  and
their  adoption  recommended  to  the  Grand
Lodges  of  the  world.  But  the  influence  of
this  Congress  has  not  been  more  successful
than  that  of  its  predecessors.

Parliamentary  Law.  Parliamen¬
tary  Law,  or  the  Lex  Parliamentary,  is  that
code  originally  framed  for  the  government
of  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain  in  the
transaction  of  its  business,  and  subse¬
quently  adopted,  with  necessary  modifica¬
tions,  by  the  Congress  of  the  United  States.

But  what  was  found  requisite  for  the
regulation  of  public  bodies,  that  order
might  be  secured  and  the  rights  of  all  be
respected,  has  been  found  equally  necessary
in  private  societies.  Indeed,  no  associa¬
tion  of  men  could  meet  together  for  the
discussion  of  any  subject,  with  the  slightest
probability  of  ever  coming  to  a  conclusion,
unless  its  debates  were  regulated  by  certain
and  acknowledged  rules.

The  rules  thus  adopted  for  its  govern¬
ment  are  called  its  parliamentary  law,
and  they  are  selected  from  the  parliamen¬
tary  law  of  the  national  assembly,  because
that  code  has  been  instituted  by  the  wis¬
dom  of  past  ages,  and  modified  and  per¬
fected  by  the  experience  of  subsequent
ones,  so  that  it  is  now  universally  acknowl¬
edged  that  there  is  no  better  system  of
government  for  deliberative  societies  than
the  code  which  has  so  long  been  in  opera¬
tion  under  the  name  of  parliamentary  law.

Not  only,  then,  is  a  thorough  knowledge
of  parliamentary  law  necessary  for  the
presiding  officer  of  a  Masonic  body,  if  he
would  discharge  the  duties  of  the  chair
with  credit  to  himself  and  comfort  to  the
members,  but  he  must  be  possessed  of  the
additional  information  as  to  what  parts  of
that  law  are  applicable  to  Masonry,  and
what  parts  are  not ;  as  to  where  and  when
he  must  refer  to  it  for  the  decision  of  a
question,  and  where  and  when  he  must  lay
it  aside,  and  rely  for  his  government  upon
the  organic  law  and  the  ancient  usages  of
the  Institution.

Parrot  Masons.  One  who  commits
to  memory  the  questions  and  answers  of
the  catechetical  lectures,  and  the  formulas
of  the  ritual,  but  pays  no  attention  to  the
history  and  philosophy  of  the  Institution,
is  commonly  called  a  Parrot  Mason,  be¬
cause  he  is  supposed  to  repeat  what  he  has
learned  without  any  conception  of  its  true
meaning.  In  former  times,  such  super¬
ficial  Masons  were  held  by  many  in  high
repute,  because  of  the  facility  with  which
they  passed  through  the  ceremonies  of  a
reception,  and  thev  were  generally  desig¬
nated  as  “  Bright  Masons.”  But  the  pro-
3  V  36


gress  of  Masonry  as  a  science  now  requires
something  more  than  a  mere  knowledge
of  the  lectures  to  constitute  a  Masonie
scholar.

Parsees.  The  descendants  of  the  ori¬
ginal  fire-worshippers  of  Persia,  or  the  dis¬
ciples  of  Zoroaster,  who  emigrated  to  India
about  the  end  of  the  eighth  century.  There
they  now  constitute  a  body  very  little  short
of  a  million  of  industrious  and  moral  citi¬
zens,  adhering  with  great  tenacity  to  the
principles  and  practices  of  their  ancient  re¬
ligion.  Many  of  the  higher  classes  have
become  worthy  members  of  the  Masonic
fraternity,  and  it  was  for  their  sake  prin¬
cipally  that  Dr.  Burnes  attempted  some
years  ago  to  institute  his  new  Order,  enti¬
tled  the  Brotherhood  of  the  Olive-Branch,
as  a  substitute  for  the  Christian  degrees  of
Knighthood,  from  which,  by  reason  of  their
religion,  they  were  excluded.

Particular  Lodges.  In  the  Regu¬
lations  of  1721,  it  is  said  that  the  Grand
Lodge  consists  of  the  representatives  of  all
the  particular  Lodges  on  record.  In  the
modern  Constitutions  of  England,  the  term
used  is  private  Lodges.  In  America,  they
are  called  subordinate  Lodges.

Parts.  In  the  old  obligations,  which
may  be  still  used  in  some  portions  of  the
country,  there  was  a  provision  which  for¬
bade  the  revelation  of  any  of  the  arts, parts,
or  points  of  Masonry.  Oliver  explains  the
meaning  of  the  word  parts  by  telling  us
that  it  was  “  an  old  word  for  degrees  or
lectures.”  See  Points.

Parvis.  In  the  French  system,  the
room  immediately  preceding  a  Masonic
Lodge  is  so  called.  It  is  equivalent  to  the
Preparation  Room  of  the  American  and
English  systems.

Paschal  Feast.  Celebrated  by  the
Jews  in  commemoration  of  the  Passover,
by  the  Christians  in  commemoration  of  the
resurrection  of  our  Lord.  The  Paschal
Feast,  called  also  the  Mystic  Banquet,  is  kept
by  all  Princes  of  the  Rose  Croix.  Where
two  are  together  on  Maundy  Thursday,  it  is
of  obligation  that  they  should  partake  of  a
portion  of  roasted  lamb.  This  banquet  is
symbolic  of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.

Pasclialis, Martinez.  Thefounder
of  a  new  Rite  or  modification  of  Masonry,
called  by  him  the  Rite  of  Elected  Cohens  or
Priests.  It  was  divided  into  two  classes,  in
the  first  of  which  was  represented  the  fall
of  man  from  virtue  and  happiness,  and  in
the  second,  his  final  restoration.  It  con¬
sisted  of  nine  degrees,  namely :  1.  Appren¬
tice;  2. Fellow  Craft ;  3.  Master;  4. Grand
Elect;  5.  Apprentice  Cohen;  6.  Fellow
Craft  Cohen ;  7.  Master  Cohen ;  8.  Grand
Architect;  9.  Knight  Commander.  Pas-
chalis  first  introduced  this  Rite  into  some


5G2


PASCHAL


PAST


of  the  Lodges  of  Marseilles.  Toulouse,  and
Bordeaux,  and  afterwards,  in  1767,  he  ex¬
tended  it  to  Paris,  where,  for  a  short  time,
it  was  rather  popular,  ranking  some  of  the
Parisian  literati  among  its  disciples.  It
has  now  ceased  to  exist.

Paschalis  was  a  German,  born  about  the
year  1700,  of  poorbut  respectable  parentage.
At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  acquired  a  knowl¬
edge  of  Greek  and  Latin.  He  then  trav¬
elled  through  Turkey,  Arabia, and  Palestine,
where  he  made  himself  acquainted  with  the
Kabbalistic  learning  of  the  Jews.  He  sub¬
sequently  repaired  to  Paris,  where  he  es¬
tablished  his  Rite.

Paschalis  was  the  Master  of  St.  Martin,
who  afterwards  reformed  his  Rite.  After
living  for  some  years  at  Paris,  he  went  to
St.  Domingo,  where  he  died  in  1779.
Thory,  in  his  Histoire  de  la  Fondation  du
Grand  Orient  de  France,  (pp.  239-253,)  has
given  very  full  details  of  this  Rite  and  of
its  receptions.

Paschal  Lamb.  See  Lamb,  Paschal.

Pas  perdus.  The  French  call  the
room  appropriated  to  visitors  the  Salle  des
pas  perdus.  It  is  the  same  as  the  Tiler’s
Room  in  the  English  and  American  Lodges.

Passages  of  the  Jordan.  See
Fords  of  the  Jordan.

Passed.  A  candidate,  on  receiving
the  second  degree,  is  said  to  be  “  passed  as
a  Fellow  Craft.”  It  alludes  to  his  having
passed  through  the  porch  to  the  middle
chamber  of  the  Temple,  the  place  in  which
Fellow  Crafts  received  their  wages.  In
this  country  “  crafted”  is  often  improperly
used  in  its  stead.

Passing  of  Conyng.  That  is,  sur¬
passing  in  shill.  The  expression  occurs  in
the  Cooke  MS.,  (line  676,)  “The  forsayde
Maister  Euglet  ordeynet  thei  were  passing
of  conyng  schold  be  passing  honoured;”
i.  e.,  The  aforesaid  Master,  Euclid,  ordained
that  they  that  were  surpassing  in  skill
should  be  exceedingly  honored.  It  is  a
fundamental  principle  of  Masonry  to  pay
all  honor  to  knowledge.

Password.  A  word  intended,  like
the  military  countersign,  to  prove  the
friendly  nature  of  him  who  gives  it,  and  is
a  test  of  his  right  to  pass  or  be  admitted
into  a  certain  place.  Between  a  Word  and
a  Password  there  seems  to  me  to  be  this
difference :  the  former  is  given  for  instruc¬
tion,  as  it  always  contains  a  symbolic
meaning;  the  latter,  for  recognition  only.
Thus,  the  author  of  the  life  of  the  celebrat¬
ed  Elias  Ashmole  says,  “Freemasons  are
known  to  one  another  all  over  the  world  by
certain  passwords  known  to  them  alone ;
they  have  Lodges  in  different  countries,
where  they  are  relieved  by  the  brotherhood
if  they  are  in  distress.”  See  Sign.


Past.  An  epithet  applied  in  Masonry
to  an  officer  who  has  held  an  office  for  the
prescribed  period  for  which  he  was  elected,
and  has  then  retired.  Thus,  a  Past  Master
is  one  who  has  presided  lor  twelve  months
over  a  Lodge,  and  the  Past  High  Priest
one  who,  for  the  same  period,  has  presided
over  a  Chapter.  The  French  use  the  word
passe  in  the  same  sense,  but  they  have  also
the  word  ancien,  with  a  similar  meaning.
Thus,  while  they  would  employ  Maitre
pass6  to  designate  the  degree  of  Past  Mas¬
ter,  they  would  call  the  official  Past  Master,
who  had  retired  from  the  chair  at  the  ex¬
piration  of  his  term  of  service,  an  Ancien
Venerable,  or  Ancien  Maitre.

Past  Master.  An  honorary  degree
conferred  on  the  Master  of  a  Lodge  at  bis
installation  into  office.  In  this  degree  the
necessary  instructions  are  conferred  re¬
specting  the  various  ceremonies  of  the
Order,  such  as  installations,  processions,
the  laying  of  corner-stones,  etc.

When  a  brother,  who  has  never  before
presided,  has  been  elected  the  Master  of
a  Lodge,  an  emergent  Lodge  of  Past  Mas¬
ters,  consisting  of  not  less  than  three,  is
convened,  and  all  but  Past  Masters  retir¬
ing,  the  degree  is  conferred  upon  the  newly
elected  officer.

Some  form  of  ceremony  at  the  installa¬
tion  of  a  newr  Master  seems  to  have  been
adopted  at  an  early  period  after  the  re¬
vival.  In  the  “  manner  of  constituting  a
new  Lodge,”  as  practised  by  the  Duke  of
Wharton,  who  was  Grand  Master  in  1723,
the  language  used  by  the  Grand  Master
when  placing  the  candidate  in  the  chair  is
given,  and  he  is  said  to  use  “some  other
expressions  that  are  proper  and  usual  on
that  occasion,  but  not  proper  to  be  written.”
Whence  we  conclude  that  there  was  an  eso¬
teric  ceremony.  Often  the  rituals  tell  us
that  this  ceremony  consisted  only  in  the
outgoing  Master  communicating  certain
modes  of  recognition  to  his  successor.  And
this  actually,  even  at  this  day,  constitutes
the  essential  ingredient  of  the  Past  Mas¬
ter’s  degree.

The  degree  is  also  conferred  in  Royal
Arch  Chapters,  wherg  it  succeeds  the  Mark
Master’s  degree.  The  conferring  of  this
degree,  which  has  no  historical  connection
with  the  rest  of  the  degrees,  in  a  Chapter,
arises  from  the  following  circumstance.
Originally,  when  Chapters  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry  Were  under  the  government  of
Lodges  "in  which  the  degree  was  then  al¬
ways  conferred,  it  was  a  part  of  the  regula¬
tions  that  no  one  could  receive  the  Royal
Arch  degree  unless  he  had  previously  pre¬
sided  in  the  Lodge  as  Master.  When  the
Chapters  became  independent,  the  regula¬
tion  could  not  be  abolished,  for  that  would


PASTOPHORI


PATRIARCHAL


563


have  been  an  innovation ;  the  difficulty
has,  therefore,  been  obviated,  by  making
every  candidate  for  the  degree  of  Royal
Arch  a  Past  Master  before  his  exaltation.

Some  extraneous  ceremonies,  by  no
means  creditable  to  their  inventor,  were
at  an  early  period  introduced  into  this
country.  In  1856,  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  by  a  unanimous  vote,  ordered  these
ceremonies  to  be  discontinued,  and  the
simpler  mode  of  investiture  to  be  used  ;  but
the  order  has  only  been  partially  obeyed,
and  many  Chapters  still  continue  what  one
can  scarcely  help  calling  the  indecorous
form  of  initiation  into  the  degree.

For  several  years  past  the  question  has
been  agitated  in  some  of  the  Grand  Lodges
of  the  United  States,  whether  this  degree
is  within  the  jurisdiction  of  Symbolic  or  of
Royal  Arch  Masonry.  The  explanation  of
its  introduction  into  Chapters,  just  given,
manifestly  demonstrates  that  the  jurisdic¬
tion  over  it  by  Chapters  is  altogether  an
assumed  one.  The  Past  Master  of  a  Chap¬
ter  is  only  a  quasi  Past  Master ;  the  true
and  legitimate  Past  Master  is  the  one  who
has  presided  over  a  symbolic  Lodge.

Past  Masters  are  admitted  to  membership
in  many  Grand  Lodges,  and  by  some  the
inherent  right  has  been  claimed  to  sit  in
those  bodies.  But  the  most  eminent  Ma¬
sonic  authorities  have  made  a  contrary  de¬
cision,  and  the  general,  and,  indeed,  almost
universal  opinion  now  is  that  Past  Masters
obtain  their  seats  in  Grand  Lodges  by
courtesy,  and  in  consequence  of  local  regu¬
lations,  and  not  by  inherent  right.

The  jewel  of  a  Past  Master  in  the  United
States  is  a  pair  of  compasses  extended  to
sixty  degrees  on  the  fourth  part  of  a  circle,
with  a  sun  in  the  centre.  In  England  it
was  formerly  the  square  on  a  quadrant,  but
is  at  present  the  square  with  the  forty-
seventh  problem  of  Euclid  engraved  on
a  silver  plate  suspended  within  it.

The  French  have  two  titles  to  express
this  degree.  They  apply  Maitre  passe  to
the  Past  Master  of  the  English  and  Amer¬
ican  system,  and  they  call  in  their  own
system  one  who  has  formerly  presided  over
a  Lodge  an  Ancien  Maitre.  The  indiscrim¬
inate  use  of  these  titles  sometimes  leads  to
confusion  in  the  translation  of  their  rituals
and  treatises.

Pa*topliori.  Couch  or  shrine  bear¬
ers.  The  company  of  Pastophori  consti¬
tuted  a  sacred  college  of  priests  in  Egypt,
whose  duty  it  was  to  carry  in  processions
the  image  of  the  god.  Their  chief,  accord¬
ing  to  Apuleius,  {Met.  xi.,)  was  called  a
Scribe.  Besides  acting  as  mendicants  in
soliciting  charitable  donations  from  the
populace,  they  took  an  important  part  in
the  mysteries.


Pastos.  (Greek,  iraarog,  a  couch.)  The
pastos  was  a  chest  or  close  cell,  in  the
Pagan  mysteries,  (among  tne  Druids,  an
excavated  stone,)  in  which  the  aspirant
was  for  some  time  placed,  to  commemorate
the  mystical  death  of  the  god.  This  con¬
stituted  the  symbolic  death  which  was
common  to  all  the  mysteries.  In  the  Ark-
ite  rites,  the  pastos  represented  the  ark  in
which  Noah  was  confined.  It  is  represented
among  Masonic  symbols  by  the  coffin.

Patents.  Diplomas  or  certificates  of
the  higher  degrees  in  the  Scottish  Rite  are
called  Patents.  The  term  is  also  sometimes
applied  to  commissions  granted  for  the  ex¬
ercise  of  high  Masonic  authority.  Litercepat-
entes  or  apertce,  that  is,  letters  patent  or  open
letters,  was  a  term  used  in  the  Middle  Ages
in  contradistinction  to  literce  clauses,  or  closed
letters,  to  designate  those  documents  which
were  spread  out  on  the  whole  length  of  the
parchment,  and  sealed  with  the  public  seal
of  the  sovereign ;  while  the  secret  or  pri¬
vate  seal  only  was  attached  to  the  closed
patents.  The  former  were  sealed  with  green
wax,  the  latter  with  white.  There  was  also
a  difference  in  their  heading;  letters  patent
were  directed  “  universis  turn  prsesentibus
quam  futuris,”  i.  e.,  to  all  present  or  to  come;
while  closed  letters  were  directed  “univer¬
sis  prsesentibus  literas  inspecturis,”  i.  e.,  to
all  present  who  shall  inspect  these  letters.
Masonic  diplomas  are  therefore  properly
called  letters  patent,  or,  more  briefly,  patents.

Patience.  In  the  ritual  of  the  third
degree  according  to  the  American  Rite,  it
is  said  that  “  time,  patience,  and  persever¬
ance  will  enable  us  to  accomplish  all  things,
and  perhaps  at  last  to  find  the  true  Master’s
Word.”  The  idea  is  similar  to  one  express¬
ed  by  the  Hermetic  philosophers.  Thus
Pernetty  tells  us  ( Diet.  Mythol.  Herm.)  that
the  alchemists  said :  “  The  work  of  the  phi¬
losopher’s  stone  is  a  work  of  patience,  on
account  of  the  length  of  time  and  of  labor
that  is  required  to  conduct  it  to  perfection  ;
and  Geber  says  that  many  adepts  have
abandoned  it  in  weariness,  and  others,  wish¬
ing  to  precipitate  it,  have  never  succeeded.”
With  the  alchemists,  in  their  esoteric  teach¬
ing,  the  philosopher’s  stone  had  the  same
symbolism  as  the  WORD  has  in  Free¬
masonry.

Patriarchal  Masonry.  The  the¬
ory  of  Dr.  Oliver  on  this  subject  has,  I
think,  been  misinterpreted.  He  does  not
maintain,  as  has  been  falsely  supposed,  that
the  Freemasonry  of  the  present  day  is  but
a  continuation  of  that  which  was  practised
by  the  patriarchs,  but  simply  that,  in  the
simplicity  of  the  patriarchal  worship,  un¬
incumbered  as  it  was  with  dogmatic  creeds,
we  may  find  the  true  model  after  which  the
religious  system  of  Speculative  Masonry


564


PATRIARCH


PEACE


has  been  constructed.  Thus  he  says:
“Nor  does  it  (Freemasonry)  exclude  a  sur¬
vey  of  the  patriarchal  mode  of  devotion,
which  indeed  forms  the  primitive  model
of  Freemasonry.  The  events  that  occurred
in  these  ages  of  simplicity  of  manners  and
purity  of  faith,  when  it  pleased  God  to
communicate  with  his  favored  creatures,
necessarily,  therefore,  form  subjects  of  in¬
teresting  illustration  in  our  Lodges,  and
constitute  legitimate  topics  on  which  the
Master  in  the  chair  may  expatiate  and  ex¬
emplify,  for  the  edification  of  the  brethren
and  their  improvement  in  morality  and  the
love  and  fear  of  God.”  [Hist.  Landrn.,  i.
207.)  I  see  here  no  attempt  to  trace  a  his¬
torical  connection,  but  simply  to  claim  an
identity  of  purpose  and  character  in  the
two  religious  systems,  the  Patriarchal  and
the  Masonic.

Patriarch,  Grand.  The  twentieth
degree  of  the  Council  of  Emperors  of  the
East  and  West.  The  same  as  the  twentieth
degree,  or  Noachite,  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Rite.

Patriarch  of  the  Crusades.  One

of  the  names  formerly  given  to  the  de¬
gree  of  Grand  Scottish  Knight  of  St.  An¬
drew,  the  twenty-ninth  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  The  legend  of
that  degree  connects  it  with  the  Crusades,
and  hence  the  name;  which,  however,  is
never  used  officially,  and  is  retained  by  reg¬
ular  Supreme  Councils  only  as  a  synonym.

Patriarch  of  the  Grand  Y.u mi¬
ll  ary.  A  degree  contained  in  the  nomen¬
clature  of  Le  Page.

Patron.  In" the  year  1812,  the  Prince
of  Wales,  becoming  Regent  of  the  king¬
dom,  was  constrained  by  reasons  of  state
to  resign  the  Grand  Mastership  of  Eng¬
land,  but  immediately  afterwards  accepted
the  title  of  Grand  Patron  of  the  Order  in
England,  and  this  was  the  first  time  that
the  title  was  officially  recognized.  George
IV.  held  it  during  his  life,  and  on  his
death,  William  IV.,  in  1830,  officially  ac¬
cepted  the  title  of  “Patron  of  the  United
Grand  Lodge.”  On  the  accession  of  Vic¬
toria,  the  title  fell  into  abeyance,  because  it
was  understood  that  it  could  only  be  as¬
sumed  by  a  sovereign  who  was  a  member
of  the  Craft.  The  office  is  not  known  in
other  countries.

Patrons  of  Masonry.  St.  John
the  Baptist  and  St.  John  the  Evangelist.
At  an  early  period  we  find  that  the  Chris¬
tian  church  adopted  the  usage  of  selecting
for  every  trade  and  occupation  its  own
patron  saint,  who  is  supposed  to  have  taken
it  under  his  especial  charge.  And  the  se¬
lection  was  generally  made  in  reference  to
some  circumstance  in  the  life  of  the  saint,
which  traditionally  connected  him  with  the


profession  of  which  he  was  appointed  the
patron.  Thus  St.  Crispin,  because  he  was
a  shoemaker,  is  the  patron  saint  of  the
“gentle  craft,”  and  St.  Dunstan,  who  was
a  blacksmith,  is  the  patron  of  blacksmiths.
The  reason  why  the  two  Saints  John  were
selected  as  the  patron  saints  of  Freema¬
sonry  will  be  seen  under  the  head  of  Dedi¬
cation  of  Lodges.

Paul,  Con  fraternity  of  Saint.

In  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Charles  V.
there  was  a  secret  community  at  Trapani,
in  Sicily,  which  called  itself  La  Confrater-
nitd  di  San  Paolo.  These  people,  when
assembled,  passed  sentence  on  their  fellow-
citizens;  and  if  any  one  was  condemned,
the  waylaying  and  putting  him  to  death
was  aliotted  to  one  of  the  members,  which
office  he  was  obliged,  without  murmuring,
to  execute,  ( Stolberg’s  Travels,  vol.  iii.,  p.
472.)  In  the  travels  of  Brocquire  to  and
from  Palestine  in  1432,  (p.  328,)  an  in¬
stance  is  given  of  the  power  of  the  associa¬
tion  over  its  members.  In  the  German
romance  of  Hermann  of  Unna,  of  which
there  are  an  English  and  French  transla¬
tion,  this  tribunal  plays  an  important  part.

Paul  I.  This  emperor  of  Russia  was
induced  by  the  machinations  of  the  Jesuits,
whom  he  had  recalled  from  banishment,  to
prohibit  in  his  domains  all  secret  socie¬
ties,  and  especially  the  Freemasons.  This
prohibition  lasted  from  1797  to  1803,  when
it  was  repealed  by  his  successor.  Paul  had
always  expressed  himself  an  enthusiastic
admirer  of  the  Knights  of  Malta;  in  1797,
had  assumed  the  title  of  Protector  of  the
Order,  and  in  1798  accepted  the  Grand
Mastership.  This  is  another  evidence,  if
one  was  needed,  that  there  was  no  sympa¬
thy  between  the  Order  of  Malta  and  the
Freemasons.

Pavement,  Mosaic.  See  Mosaic

Pavement.

Payens,  Hugh  de.  In  Latin,

Hugo  de  Paganis.  The  founder  and  the
first  Grand  Master  of  the  Order  of  Knights
Templars.  He  was  born  at  Troyes,  in  the
kingdom  of  Naples.  Having,  with  eight
others,  established  the  Order  at  Jerusalem,
in  1118  he  visited  Europe,  where,  through  his
representations,  its  reputation  and  wealth
and  the  number  of  its  followers  were  greatly
increased.  In  1129  he  returned  to  Jerusa¬
lem,  where  he  was  received  with  great  dis¬
tinction,  but  shortly  afterwards  died,  and
was  succeeded  in  the  Grand  Mastership  by
Robert  de  Craon.surnamed  the  Burgundian.

P.  I>.  E.  P.  Letters  placed  on  the
ring  of  profession  of  the  Order  of  the  Tem¬
ple,  being  the  initials  of  the  Latin  sen¬
tence,  Pro  Deo  et  Patria,  i.  e.,  For  God  and
my  country.

Peace.  The  spirit  of  Freemasonry  is


PECTORAL


PELICAN


565


antagonistic  to  war.  Its  tendency  is  to
unite  all  men  in  one  brotherhood,  whose
ties  must  necessarily  be  weakened  by  all
dissension.  Hence,  as  Brother  Albert  Pike
says,  “  Masonry  is  the  great  peace  society
of  the  world.  Wherever  it  exists,  it  strug¬
gles  to  prevent  international  difficulties
and  disputes,  and  to  bind  republics,  king¬
doms,  and  empires  together  in  one  great
band  of  peace  and  amity.”

Pectoral.  Belonging  to  the  breast;
from  the  Latin  pectus,  the  breast.  The
heart  has  always  been  considered  the  seat
of  fortitude  and  courage,  and  hence  by  this
word  is  suggested  to  the  Mason  certain
symbolic  instructions  in  relation  to  the
virtue  of  fortitude.  In  the  earliest  lectures
of  the  last  century  it  was  called  one  of  the
“principal  gigns,”  and  had  this  hiero¬
glyphic,  X ;  but  in  the  modern  rituals  the
hieroglyphic  has  become  obsolete,  and  the
word  is  appropriated  to  one  of  the  perfect
points  of  entrance.

Pectoral  of  the  High  Priest.

The  breastplate  worn  by  the  high  priest  of
the  Jews  was  so  called  from  pectus,  the  breast,
upon  which  it  rested.  See  Breastplate.

Pedal.  Belonging  to  the  feet,  from
the  Latin  pedes,  the  feet.  The  just  man  is
he  who,  firmly  planting  his  feet  on  the
principles  of  right,  is  as  immovable  as  a
rock,  and  can  be  thrust  from  his  upright
position  neither  by  the  allurements  of
flattery,  nor  the  frowns  of  arbitrary  power.
And  hence  by  this  word  is  suggested  to  the
Mason  certain  symbolic  instructions  in  re¬
lation  to  the  virtue  of  justice.  Like  “  Pec¬
toral,”  this  word  was  assigned,  in  the  oldest
rituals,  to  the  principal  signs  of  a  Mason,
having  <  for  its  hieroglyphic;  but  in  the
modern  lectures  it  is  one  of  the  perfect
points  of  entrance,  and  the  hieroglyphic  is
no  longer  used.

Pedestal.  The  pedestal  is  the  lowest
part  or  base  of  a  column  on  which  the
shaft  is  placed.  In  a  Lodge,  there  are  sup¬
posed  to  be  three  columns,  the  column  of
Wisdom  in  the  east,  the  column  of  Strength
in  the  west,  and  the  column  of  Beauty
in  the  south.  These  columns  are  not  gen¬
erally  erected  in  the  Lodge,  but  their  ped¬
estals  always  are,  and  at  each  pedestal  sits
one  of  the  three  superior  officers  of  the
Lodge.  Hence  we  often  hear  such  expres¬
sions  as  these,  advancing  to  the  pedestal,  or
standing  before  the  pedestal,  to  signify  ad¬
vancing  to  or  standing  before  the  seat  of
the  Worshipful  Master.  The  custom  in
6ome  Lodges  of  placing  tables  or  desks  be¬
fore  the  three  principal  officers  is,  of  course,
incorrect.  They  should,  for  the  reason
above  assigned,  be  representations  of  the
pedestals  of  columns,  and  should  be  painted
to  represent  marble  or  stone.


Pedum.  Literally,  a  shepherd’s  crook,
and  hence  sometimes  used  in  ecclesiology
for  the  bishop’s  crozier.  In  the  statutes  of  the
Order  of  the  Temple  at  Paris,  it  is  prescribed
that  the  Grand  Master  shall  carry  a  “pedum
magistrale  seu  patriarchale.”  But  the  better
word  for  the  staff  of  the  Grand  Master  of
the  Templars  is  baculus,  which  see.

Pela&gian  Religion.  The  Pelas-
gians  were  the  oldest,  if  not  the  aboriginal,
inhabitants  of  Greece.  Their  religion  dif¬
fered  from  that  of  the  Hellenes,  who  suc¬
ceeded  them,  in  being  less  poetical,  less
mythical,  and  more  abstract.  We  know
little  of  their  religious  worship  except  by
conjecture ;  but  we  may  suppose  it  re¬
sembled  in  some  respects  the  doctrines  of
what  Dr.  Oliver  calls  the  Primitive  Free¬
masonry.  Creuzer  thinks  that  the  Pelas-
gians  were  either  a  nation  of  priests  or  a
nation  ruled  by  priests.

Peleg.  jSi) ,  Division.  A  son  of  Eber.
In  his  day  the  world  was  divided.  A  sig¬
nificant  word  in  the  high  degrees.  In  the
Noachite,  or  twentieth  degree  of  the  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  there  is  a  singular  legend  of  Peleg,
which  of  course  is  altogether  mythical,  in
which  he  is  represented  as  the  architect  of
the  Tower  of  Babel.

Pelican.  The  pelican  feeding  her
young  with  her  blood  is  a  prominent  symbol
of  the  eighteenth  or  Rose  Croix  degree  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,
and  was  adopted  as  such  from  the  fact  that
the  pelican,  in  ancient  Christian  art,  was
considered  as  an  emblem  of  the  Saviour.
Now  this  symbolism  of  the  pelican,  as  a
representative  of  the  Saviour,  is  almost
universally  supposed  to  be  derived  from  the
common  belief  that  the  pelican  feeds  her
young  with  her  blood,  as  the  Saviour  shed
his  blood  for  mankind ;  and  hence  the  bird
is  always  represented  as  sitting  on  her  nest,
and  surrounded  by  her  brood  of  young  ones,
who  are  dipping  their  bills  into  a  wound  in
their  mother’s  breast.  But  this  is  not  the
exact  idea  of  the  symbolism,  which  really
refers  to  the  resurrection,  and  is,  in  this
point  of  view,  more  applicable  to  our  Lord,
as  well  as  to  the  Masonic  degree  of  which
the  resurrection  is  a  doctrine.

In  an  ancient  Bestiarium,  or  Natural
History,  in  the  Royal  Library  at  Brussels,
cited  by  Larwood  and  Hotten  in  a  recent
work  on  The  History  of  Sign-Boards,  this
statement  is  made:  “The  pelican  is  very
fond  of  his  young  ones,  and  when  they  are
born  and  begin  to  grow,  they  rebel  in  their
nest  against  their  parent,  and  strike  him
with  their  wings,  flying  about  him,  and
beat  him  so  much  till  they  wound  him  in
his  eyes.  Then  the  father  strikes  and  kills
them.  And  the  mother  is  of  such  a  nature
that  she  comes  back  to  the  nest  on  the  third


566


PELICAN


PENALTY


day,  and  sits  down  upon  her  dead  young
ones,  and  opens  her  side  with  her  bill  and
pours  her  blood  over  them,  and  so  resusci¬
tates  them  from  death  ;  for  the  young  ones,
by  their  instinct,  receive  the  blood  as  soon
as  it  comes  out  of  the  mother,  and  drink  it.”

The  Ortus  Vocabulorum,  compiled  early
in  the  fifteenth  century,  gives  the  fable
more  briefly:  “It  is  said,  if  it  be  true,  that
the  pelican  kills  its  young,  and  grieves  for
them  for  three  days.  Then  she  wounds
herself,  and  with  the  aspersione  of  her  blood
resuscitates  her  children.”  And  the  writer
cites,  in  explanation,  the  verses,

“Ut  pelicanus  fit  matris  sanguine  sanus,

Sic  Sancti  sumus  nos  oinnes  sanguine  nati.”

i.  e.,  “  As  the  Pelican  is  restored  by  the  blood
of  its  mother,  so  are  we  all  born  by  the  blood  of
the  Holy  One,”  that  is,  of  Christ.

St.  Jerome  gives  the  same  story,  a3  an
illustration  of  the  destruction  of  man  by  the
old  serpent,  and  his  salvation  by  the  blood
of  Christ.  And  Shelton,  in  an  old  work  en¬
titled  the  Armorie  of  Birth,  expresses  the
same  sentiment  in  the  following  words :

“Then  said  the  pelican,

When  my  birds  be  slain,

With  my  blood  I  them  revive;

Scripture  doth  record
The  same  did  our  Lord,

And  rose  from  death  to  life.”

This  romantic  story  was  religiously  be¬
lieved  as  a  fact  of  natural  history  in  the
earliest  ages  of  the  church.  Hence  the
pelican  was  very  naturally  adopted  as  a
symbol  of  the  resurrection  and,  by  conse¬
quence,  of  him  whose  resurrection  is,  as
Cruden  terms  it,  “  the  cause,  pattern,  and
argument  of  ours.”

But  in  the  course  of  time  the  original
legend  was,  to  some  extent,  corrupted,  and
a  simpler  one  was  adopted,  namely,  that
the  pelican  fed  her  young  with  her  own
blood  merely  as  a  means  of  sustenance,  and
tbe  act  of  maternal  love  was  then  referred
to  Christ  as  shedding  his  blood  for  the  sins
of  the  world.  In  this  view  of  the  symbol¬
ism,  Pugin  has  said  that  the  pelican  is
“an  emblem  of  our  Blessed  Lord  shedding
his  blood  for  mankind,  and  therefore  a
most  appropriate  symbol  to  be  introduced
on  all  vessels  or  ornaments  connected  with
the  Blessed  Sacrament.”  And  in  the  An¬
tiquities  of  Durham  Abbey,  we  learn  that
“over  the  high  altar  of  Durham  Abbey
hung  a  rich  and  most  sumptuous  canopy
for  the  Blessed  Sacrament  to  hang  within
it,  whereon  stood  a  pelican,  all  of  silvej,
upon  the  height  of  the  said  canopy,  very
finely  gilt,  giving  her  blood  to  her  young
ones,  in  token  that  Christ  gave  his  blood
for  the  sins  of  the  world.”


But  I  think  the  true  theory  of  the  peli¬
can  is,  that  by  restoring  her  young  ones  to
life  by  her  blood,  she  symbolizes  the  resur¬
rection.  The  old  symbologists  said,  after
Jerome,  that  the  male  pelican,  who  de-
j  stroyed  bis  young,  represents  tbe  serpent,  or
evil  principle,  which  brought  death  into
the  world;  while  the  mother,  who  resusci¬
tates  them,  is  the  representative  of  that
Son  of  Man  of  wdiom  it  is  declared,  “ex¬
cept  ye  drink  of  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life
in  you.”

And  hence  the  pelican  is  very  appropri¬
ately  assumed  as  a  symbol  in  Masonry,
whose  great  object  is  to  teach  by  symbol¬
ism  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection,  and
especially  in  that  sublime  degree  of  tbe
Scottish  Bite  wherein,  the  old  Temple  be¬
ing  destroyed  and  the  old  Word  being  lost,
a  new  temple  and  a  new  word  spring  forth
—  all  of  which  is  but  the  great  allegory  of
the  destruction  by  death  and  the  resurrec¬
tion  to  eternal  life.

Pellegrini,  Marquis  of.  One  of

the  pseudonyms  assumed  by  Joseph  Bal-
samo,  better  known  as  Count  Cagliostro.

Penal  Sign.  That  which  refers  to  a
penalty.

Penally.  The  adversaries  of  Free¬
masonry  have  found,  or  rather  invented,
abundant  reasons  for  denouncing  the  Insti¬
tution  ;  but  on  nothing  have  they  more
strenuously  and  fondly  lingered  than  on
the  accusation  that  it  makes,  by  horrid  and
impious  ceremonies,  all  its  members  tbe
willing  or  unwilling  executioners  of  those
who  prove  recreant  to  their  vows  and  vio¬
late  the  laws  which  they  are  stringently
bound  to  observe.  Even  a  few  timid  and
uninstructed  Masons  have  been  found  w  ho
were  disposed  to  believe  that  there  was
some  weight  in  this  ol  jection.  The  late  of
Morgan,  apocryphal  as  it  undoubtedly  was,
lias  been  quoted  as  an  instance  of  Masonic
punishment  inflicted  by  the  regulations  of
the  Order;  and,  notwithstanding  the  solemn
asseverations  of  the  most  intelligent  Ma¬
sons  to  the  contrary,  men  have  been  found,
and  still  are  to  be  found,  who  seriously  en¬
tertain  the  opinion  that  every  member  of
the  Fraternity  becomes,  by  the  ceremonies
of  his  initiation  and  by  the  nature  of  the
vows  which  he  has  taken,  an  active  Neme¬
sis  of  the  Order,  bound  by  some  unholy
promise  to  avenge  the  Institution  upon
any  treacherous  or  unfaithful  brother.  All
of  this  arises  from  a  total  misapprehension,
in  the  minds  of  those  who  are  thus  led
astray,  of  the  true  character  and  design  of
vows  or  oaths  which  are  accompanied  by
an  imprecation.  It  is  well,  therefore,  for
the  information  both  of  our  adversaries  —
who  may  thus  he  deprived  of  any  further
excuse  for  slander,  and  of  our  friends —  w  ho


PENALTY


PENALTY


567


will  be  relieved  of  any  continued  burden
on  their  consciences,  that  we  should  show
that,  however  solemn  may  be  the  promises
of  secrecy,  of  obedience,  and  of  charity
which  arc  required  from  our  initiates,  and
however  they  may  be  guarded  by  the  sanc¬
tions  of  punishment  upon  their  offenders,
they  never  were  intended  to  impose  upon
any  brother  the  painful  and  —  so  far  as  the
laws  of  the  country  are  concerned  —  the
illegal  task  of  vindicating  the  outrage  com¬
mitted  by  the  violator.  The  only  Masonic
penalty  inflicted  by  the  Order  upon  a
traitor,  is  the  scorn  and  detestation  of  the
Craft  whom  he  has  sought  to  betray.

But  that  this  subject  may  be  thoroughly
understood,  it  is  necessary  that  some  con¬
sideration  should  be  given  to  oaths  gener¬
ally,  and  to  the  character  of  the  impreca¬
tions  by  which  they  are  accompanied.

The  obsecration,  or  imprecation,  is  that
part  of  every  oath  which  constitutes  its
sanction,  and  which  consists  in  calling
some  superior  power  to  witness  the  decla¬
ration  or  promise  made,  and  invoking  his
protection  for  or  anger  against  the  person
making  it,  according  as  the  said  declaration
or  promise  is  observed  or  violated.  This
obsecration  has,  from  the  earliest  times,
constituted  a  part  of  the  oath  —  and  an
important  part,  too  —  among  every  people,
varying,  of  course,  according  to  the  varie¬
ties  of  religious  beliefs  and  modes  of  adora¬
tion.  Thus,  among  the  Jews,  we  find  such
obsecrations  as  these :  Co  yagnasheh  li  Elo-
him,  “So  may  God  do  to  me.”  A  very
common  obsecration  among  the  Greeks
was,  isto  Zeus  or  theon  marturomai,  “  May
Jove  stand  by  me,”  or  “  I  call  God  to  wit¬
ness.”  And  the  Romans,  among  an  abun¬
dance  of  other  obsecrations,  often  said,  dii
me  perdant,  “  May  the  gods  destroy  me,”  or
ne  vivam,  “  May  I  die.”

These  modes  of  obsecration  were  ac¬
companied,  to  make  them  more  solemn  and
sacred,  by  certain  symbolic  forms.  Thus  the
Jews  caused  the  person  who  swore  to  hold
up  his  right  hand  towards  heaven,  by  which
action  lit? was  supposed  to  signify  that  he
appealed  to  God  to  witness  the  truth  of
what  he  had  averred  or  the  sincerity  of  his
intention  to  fulfil  the  promise  that  he  had
made.  So  Abraham  said  to  the  king  of
Sodom,  “  I  have  lift  up  my  hand  unto  the
Lord,  .  .  .  that  I  will  not  take  anything
that  is  thine.”  Sometimes,  in  taking  an
oath  of  fealty,  the  inferior  placed  his  hand
under  the  thigh  of  his  lord,  as  in  the  case
of  Eliezer  and  Abraham,  related  in  the
24th  chapter  of  Genesis.  Among  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  the  person  swearing
placed  his  hands,  or  sometimes  only  the
right  hand,  upon  the  altar,  or  upon  the
victims  when,  as  was  not  unusual,  the  oath


was  accompanied  by  a  sacrifice,  or  upon
some  other  sacred  thing.  In  the  military
oath,  for  instance,  the  soldiers  placed  their
hands  upon  the  signa,  or  standards.

The  obsecration,  with  an  accompanying
form  of  solemnity,  was  indeed  essential  to
the  oath  among  the  ancients,  because  the
crime  of  perjury  was  not  generally  looked
upon  by  them  in  the  same  light  in  which  it
is  viewed  by  the  moderns.  It  was,  it  is
true,  considered  as  a  heinous  crime,  but  a
crime  not  so  much  against  society  as  against
the  gods,  and  its  punishment  was  supposed
to  be  left  to  the  deity  whose  sanctity  had
been  violated  by  the  adjuration  of  his  name
to  a  false  oath  or  broken  vow.  Hence,
Cicero  says  that  “death  was  the  divine
punishment  of  perjury,  but  only  dishonor
was  its  human  penalty.”  And  therefore
the  crime  of  giving  false  testimony  under
oath  was  not  punished  in  any  higher  de¬
gree  than  it  would  have  been  had  it  been
given  without  the  solemnity  of  an  oath.
Swearing  was  entirely  a  matter  of  con¬
science,  and  the  person  who  was  guilty  of
false  swearing,  where  his  testimony  did  not
affect  the  rights  or  interests  of  others,  was
considered  as  responsible  to  the  deity  alone
for  his  perjury.

The  explicit  invocation  of  God  as  a  wit¬
ness  to  the  truth  of  the  thing  said,  or,  in
promissory  oaths,  to  the  faithful  observance
of  the  act  promised,  the  obsecration  of  di¬
vine  punishment  upon  the  jurator  if  what
he  swore  to  be  true  should  prove  to  be  false,
or  if  the  vow  made  should  be  thereafter
violated,  and  the  solemn  form  of  lifting  up
the  hand  to  heaven  or  placing  it  upon  the
altar  or  the  sacred  victims,  must  necessarily
have  giveu  confidence  to  the  truth  of  the
attestation,  and  must  have  been  required
by  the  hearers  as  some  sort  of  safeguard
or  security  for  the  confidence  they  were
called  upon  to  exercise.  This  seems  to
have  been  the  true  reason  for  the  ancient
practice  of  solemn  obsecration  in  the  ad¬
ministration  of  oaths.

Among  modern  nations,  the  practice  has
been  continued,  and  from  the  ancient  usage
of  invoking  the  names  of  the  gods  and  of
placing  the  hands  of  the  person  swearing
upon  their  altars,  we  derive  the  present
method  of  sanctifying  every  oath  by  the
attestation  contained  in  the  phrase  “  So
help  me  God,”  and  the  concluding  form  of
kissing  the  Holy  Scriptures.

And  now  the  question  naturally  occurs
as  to  what  is  the  true  intent  of  this  obse¬
cration,  and  what  practical  operation  is  ex¬
pected  to  result  from  it.  In  other  words,
what  is  the  nature  of  a  penalty  attached  to
an  oath,  and  how  is  it  to  be  enforced  ?
When  the  ancient  Roman,  in  attesting  with
the  solemnity  of  an  oath  to  the  truth  of


568


PENCIL


PENNSYLVANIA


what  he  had  just  said  or  was  about  to  say,
concluded  with  the  formula,  “May  the
gods  destroy  me,”  it  is  evident  that  he
simply  meant  to  say  that  he  was  so  con¬
vinced  of  the  truth  of  what  he  had  said
that  he  was  entirely  willing  that  his  de¬
struction  by  the  gods  whom  lie  had  invoked
should  be  the  condition  consequent  upon
his  falsehood.  He  had  no  notion  that  he
was  to  become  outlawed  among  his  fellow-
creatures,  and  that  it  should  be  not  only  the
right,  but  the  duty,  of  any  man  to  destroy
him.  His  crime  would  have  been  one
against  the  divine  law,  and  subject  only  to
a  divine  punishment.

In  modern  times,  perjury  is  made  a  pe¬
nal  offence  against  human  laws,  and  its
punishment  is  inflicted  by  human  tribunals.
But  here  the  punishment  of  the  crime  is
entirely  different  from  that  inferred  by  the
obsecration  which  terminates  the  oath.
The  words  “  So  help  me  God,”  refer  ex¬
clusively  to  the  withdrawal  of  divine  aid
and  assistance  from  the  jurator  in  the  case
of  his  proving  false,  and  not  to  the  human
punishment  which  society  would  inflict.

In  like  manner,  we  may  say  of  what  are
called  Masonic  penalties,  that  they  refer  in
no  case  to  any  kind  of  human  punishment;
that  is  to  say,  to  any  kind  of  punishment
which  is  to  be  inflicted  by  human  hand  or
instrumentality.  The  true  punishments  of
Masonry  affect  neither  life  nor  limb.  They
are  expulsion  and  suspension  only.  But
those  persons  are  wrong,  be  they  mistaken
friends  or  malignant  enemies,  who  suppose
or  assert  that  there  is  any  other  sort  of
penalty  which  a  Mason  recreant  to  his
vows  is  subjected  to  by  the  laws  of  the
Order,  or  that  it  is  either  the  right  or  duty
of  any  Mason  to  inflict  such  penalty  on  an
offending  brother.  The  obsecration  of  a
Mason  simply  means  that  if  he  violates  his
vows  or  betrays  his  trust  he  is  worthy  of
such  penalty,  and  that  if  such  penalty  were
inflicted  on  him  it  would  be  but  just  and
proper.  “  May  I  die,”  said  the  ancient,
“if  this  be  not  true,  or  if  I  keep  not  this
vow.”  Not  may  any  man  put  me  to  death,
nor  is  any  mal  required  to  put  me  to  death,
but* only,  if  I  so  act,  then  would  I  be
worthy  of  death.  The  ritual  penalties  of
Masonry,  supposing  such  to  be,  are  in  the
hands  not  of  man,  but  of  God,  and  are  to
be  inflicted  by  God,  and  not  by  man.

Pencil.  In  the  English  system  this  is
one  of  the  working-tools  of  a  Master  Ma¬
son,  and  is  intended  symbolically  to  re¬
mind  us  that  our  words  and  actions  are
observed  and  recorded  by  the  Almighty
Architect,  to  whom  we  must  give  an  ac¬
count  of  our  conduct  through  life.  In  the
American  system  the  pencil  is  not  specifi¬
cally  recognized.  The  other  English  work¬


ing-tools  of  a  Master  Mason  are  the  skirrit
and  compasses.

In  the  French  Rite  “  to  hold  the  pencil,”
tener  le  crayon,  is  to  discharge  the  functions
of  a  secretary  during  the  communication
of  a  Lodge.

Penitential  Sign.  Called  also  the
Supplicatory  Sign.  It  is  the  third  sign  in
the  English  Royal  Arch  system.  It  de¬
notes  that  frame  of  heart  anil  mind  without
which  our  prayers  and  oblations  will  not
obtain  acceptance;  in  other  words,  it  is  a
symbol  of  humility.

Pennsylvania.  The  first  Lodge  in
Pennsylvania  was  established  in  Philadel¬
phia  in  1734,  by  a  Warrant  from  the  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  and
of  this  Lodge  Benjamin  Franklin  was  the
first  Master.  A  second  was  established  in
1758,  by  the  Athol  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land,  which  also  granted  a  Warrant  for  a
Provincial  Grand  Lodge  in  1766,  under  the
Provincial  Grand  Mastership  of  William
Ball.  This  Grand  Lodge  continued  in
operation  until  the  commencement  of  the
Revolutionary  War,  when  it  was  temporarily
suspended,  but  was  revived  in  1779.  On
September  26,  1786,  the  Provincial  Grand
Lodge  was  abolished,  and  the  present
Grand  Lodge  organized  by  the  delegates
of  thirteen  Lodges  in  a  Convention  held  at
Philadelphia.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Pennsylvania  was
established  in  1795,  being  the  first  Grand
Chapter  instituted  in  the  United  States,
and  two  years  before  the  organization  of
the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  six  New  England
States,  which  afterwards  became  the  Gen¬
eral  Grand  Chapter.  The  Grand  Chapter
was  at  first  only  an  integral  part  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  but  in  1824  it  became  an
independent  body,  except  so  far  as  that
members  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  who  were
Royal  Arch  Masons,  were  declared  to  be
members  of  the  Grand  Chapter.

The  Royal  and  Select  degrees  were  for¬
merly  conferred  in  Pennsylvania  by  the
Chapters,  but  on  October  16, 1847,  a  Grand
I  Council  was  organized.

A  Grand  Encampment,  independent  of
the  General  Grand  Encampment  of  the
United  States,  was  organized  on  February
16,  1814.  On  April  14,  1854,  a  Grand
Commandery  was  organized  under  the  au¬
thority  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the
United  States,  and  in  February,  1857,  both
of  these  bodies  united  to  form  the  present
Grand  Commandery  of  Pennsylvania.

Pennsylvania  lVork.  The  method
of  Entering,  Passing,  and  Raising  candi¬
dates  in  the  Lodges  of  Pennsylvania  dif¬
fers  so  materially  from  that  practised  in  the
other  States  of  the  Union,  that  it  cannot  be
considered  as  a  part  of  the  American  Rite


PENNY


PENTALPHA


569


as  first  taught  by  Webb,  but  rather  as  an
independent,  Pennsylvania  modification  of
the  York  Rite  of  England.  Indeed,  the
Pennsylvania  system  of  work  much  more
resembles  the  English  than  the  American.
Its  ritual  is  simple  and  didactic,  like  the
former,  and  is  almost  entirely  without  the
impressive  dramatization  of  the  latter.  Bro.
Vaux,  a  Past  Grand  Master  of  Pennsylva¬
nia,  thus  speaks  of  the  Masonic  work  of
his  State  with  pardonable,  although  not
with  impartial,  commendations:  “The
Pennsylvania  work  is  sublime  from  its  sim-
licity.  That  it  is  the  ancient  work  is
est  shown  conclusively,  however,  from
this  single  fact,  it  is  so  simple,  so  free  from
those  displays  of  modern  inventions  to  at¬
tract  the  attention,  without  enlightening,
improving,  or  cultivating  the  mind.  In
thi3  work  every  word  has  its  significance.
Its  types  and  symbols  are  but  the  language
in  which  truth  is  conveyed.  These  are  to
be  studied  to  be  understood.  In  the  spoken
language  no  synonyms  are  permitted.  In
the  ceremonial  no  innovations  are  toler¬
ated.  In  the  ritual  no  modern  verbiage
is  allowed.  ”

Penny.  In  the  parable  read  in  the
Mark  degree  a  penny  is  the  amount  given
to  each  of  the  laborers  in  t^ie  vineyard  for
his  day’s  labor.  Hence,  in  the  ritual,  a

Senny  a  day  is  said  to  be  the  wages  of  a
lark  Master.  In  several  passages  of  the
authorized  version  of  the  New  Testament,
penny  occurs  as  a  translation  of  the  Greek,
ir/vapiov,  which  was  intended  as  the  equiva¬
lent  of  the  Roman  denarius.  This  was  the
chief  silver  coin  of  the  Romans  from  the
beginning  of  the  coinage  of  the  city  to  the
early  part  of  the  third  century.  Indeed,
the  name  continued  to  be  employed  in  the
coinage  of  the  continental  States,  who
imitated  that  of  the  Byzantine  empire,  and
was  adopted  by  the  Anglo-Saxons.  The
specific  value  of  each  of  so  many  coins,
going  under  the  same  name,  cannot  be  as¬
certained  with  any  precision.  In  its  Ma¬
sonic  use,  the  penny  is  simply  a  symbol  of
the  reward  of  faithful  labor.  The  small¬
ness  of  the  sura,  whatever  may  have  been
its  exact  value,  to  our  modern  impressions
is  apt  to  give  a  false  idea  of  the  liberality
of  the  owner.  Dr.  Lightfoot,  in  his  essay
on  a  Fresh  Revision  of  the  Nev)  Testament,
remarks :  “  It  is  unnecessary  to  ask  what
impression  the  mention  of  this  sum  will
leave  on  the  minds  of  an  uneducated  peas¬
ant  or  shopkeeper  of  the  present  day.
Even  at  the  time  when  our  version  was
made,  and  when  wages  were  lower,  it  must
have  seemed  wholly  inadequate.”  How¬
ever  improper  the  translation  is,  it  can
have  no  importance  in  the  Masonic  appli-
3  W


cation  of  the  parable,  where  the  “penny”
is,  as  has  already  been  said,  only  a  symbol,
meaning  any  reward  or  compensation.

Pentagon.  A  geometrical  figure  of
five  sides  and  five  angles.  It  is  the  third
figure  from  the  exterior,  in  the  camp  of  the
Sublime  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,  or
thirty-second  degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite.
In  the  Egyptian  Rite  of  Cagliostro,  he
constructed,  with  much  formality,  an  im¬
plement  called  the  “  sacred  pentagon,”  and
which,  being  distributed  to  his  disciples,
gave,  as  he  affirmed,  to  each  one  the  power
of  holding  spiritual  intercourse.

Pentagram.  From  the  Greek  penle,
five,  and  gramma,  a  letter.  In  the  science
of  magic  the  pentalpha  is  called  the  holy
and  mysterious  pentagram.  Eliphas  Levi
says  [Dog.  et  Rituel  de  la  Haute  Magie,  ii.
55,)  that  the  pentagram  is  the  star  of  the
Magians ;  it  is  the  sign  of  the  word  made
flesh ;  and  according  to  the  direction  of  its
rays,  that  is,  as  it  points  upwards  with  one
point  or  with  two,  it  represents  the  good  or
the  evil  principle,  order  or  disorder;  the
blessed  lamb  of  Ormuzd  and  of  St.  John,
or  the  accursed  god  of  Mendes  ;  initiation
or  profanation;  Lucifer  or  Vesper;  the
morning  or  the  evening  star;  Mary  or
Lilith ;  victory  or  death ;  light  or  darkness.
See  Pentalpha.

Pentalpha.  The  triple  triangle,  or
the  pentalpha  of  Pythagoras,  is  so  called
from  the  Greek  irevTe,pente,  five,  and  a'/pa,
alpha,  the  letter  A,  because  in  its  con¬
figuration  it  presents  the  form
of  that  letter  in  five  different
positions.  It  was  a  doctrine  of
Pythagoras,  that  all  things  pro¬
ceeded  from  numbers,  and  the
number  five,  as  being  formed  by  the  union
of  the  first  odd  and  the  first  even,  was  deemed
of  peculiar  value;  and  hence  Cornelius
Agrippa  says  ( Philos .  Occult.)  of  this  figure,
that,  “by  virtue  of  the  number  five,  it  has
great  command  over  evil  spirits  because  of
its  five  double  triangles  and  its  five  acute
angles  within  and  its  five  obtuse  angles
without,  so  that  this  interior  pentangle
contains  in  it  many  great  mysteries.”  The
disciples  of  Pythagoras,  who  were  indeed
its  real  inventors,  placed  within  each  of  its
interior  angles  one  of  the  letters  of  the
Greek  word  YrEIA,  or  the  Latin  one
SALUS,  both  of  which  signify  health ;  and
thus  it  was  made  the  talisman  of  health.
They  placed  it  at  the  beginning  of  their
epistles  as  a  greeting  to  invoke  a  secure
health  to  their  correspondent.  But  its  use
was  not  confined  to  the  disciples  of  Pythag¬
oras.  As  a  talisman,  it  was  employed  all
over  the  East  as  a  charm  to  resist  evil
spirits.  Mon6  says  that  it  has  been  found


570


PERAU


PERFECTION


in  Egypt  on  the  statue  of  the  god  Anubis.
Lord  Brougham  says,  in  his  Italy,  that  it
was  used  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  and  a
writer  in  Notes  and  Queries  (3  Ser.,  ix.,511,)
says  that  he  has  found  it  on  the  coins  of
Lysimmachus.  On  old  British  and  Gaul¬
ish  coins  it  is  often  seen  beneath  the  feet
of  the  sacred  and  mythical  horse,  which
was  the  ensign  of  the  ancient  Saxons.  The
Druids  wore  it  on  their  sandals  as  a  sym¬
bol  of  Deity,  and  hence  the  Germans  call
the  figure  “  Druttenfuss,”  a  word  originally
signifying  Druid's  foot,  but  which,  in  the
gradual  corruptions  of  language,  is  now
made  to  mean  Wife  he’s  foot.  Even  at  the
present  day  it  retains  its  hold  upon  the
minds  of  the  common  people  of  Germany,
and  is  drawn  on  or  affixed  to  cradles,
thresholds  of  houses,  and  stable-doors,  to
keep  off  witches  and  elves.

The  early  Christians  referred  it  to  the
five  wounds  of  the  Saviour,  because,  when
properly  inscribed  upon  the  representation
of  a  human  body,  the  five  points  will  re¬
spectively  extend  to  and  touch  the  side,
the  two  hands,  and  the  two  feet.

The  Mediseval  Masons  considered  it  a
symbol  of  deep  wisdom,  and  it  is  found
among  the  architectural  ornaments  of  most
of  the  ecclesiastical  edifices  of  the  Middle
Ages.

But  as  a  Masonic  symbol  it  peculiarly
claims  attention  from  the  fact  that  it  forms
the  outlines  of  the  five-pointed  star,  which
is  typical  of  the  bond  of  brotherly  love
that  unites  the  whole  Fraternity.  It  is  in
this  view  that  the  pentalpha  or  triple  tri¬
angle  is  referred  to  in  Masonic  symbolism
as  representing  the  intimate  union  which
existed  between  our  three  ancient  Grand
Masters,  and  which  is  commemorated  by
the  living  pentalpha  at  the  closing  of  every
Royal  Arch  Chapter.

Many  writers  have  confounded  the  pen¬
talpha  with  the  seal  of  Solomon,  or  shield
of  David.  This  error  is  almost  inexcusa¬
ble  in  Oliver,  who  constantly  commits  it,
because  his  Masonic  and  archceological  re¬
searches  should  have  taught  him  the  differ¬
ence,  Solomon’s  seal  being  a  double,  inter¬
laced  triangle,  whose  form  gives  the  outline
of  a  star  of  six  points.

Porau.  Gabriel  Louis  Calabre.
A  man  of  letters,  an  Abbe,  and  a  member
of  the  Society  of  the  Sorbonne.  He  was
born  at  Semur,  in  Auxois,  in  1700,  and  died
at  Paris,  March  31st,  1767.  De  Feller
(Biog.  Univ.)  speaks  of  his  uprightness
and  probity,  his  frankness,  and  sweetness
of  disposition  which  endeared  many  friends
to  him.  Certainly,  the  only  work  which
gives  him  a  place  in  Masonic  history  in¬
dicates  a  gentleness  and  moderation  of
character  with  which  we  can  find  no  fault.


In  general  literature,  he  was  distinguished
as  the  continuator  of  d’Avrigny’s  Vies  des
Jlornmes  illustres  de  la  France;  which,  how¬
ever,  a  loss  of  sight  prevented  him  from
completing.  In  1742,  he  published  at  Gen¬
eva  a  work  entitled  Les  Secret  des  Franc-
Masons.  This  work  at  its  first  appearance
attracted  much  attention  and  went  through
many  editions,  the  title  being  sometimes
changed  to  a  more  attractive  one  by  book¬
sellers.  The  Abb6  Larudan  attempted  to
palm  off  his  libellous  and  malignant  work
on  the  Abb6  Perau,  but  without  success;
for  while  the  work  of  Larudan  is  marked
with  the  bitterest  malignity  to  the  Order
of  Freemasonry,  that  of  Perau  is  simply  a
detail  of  the  ceremonies  and  ritual  of  Ma¬
sonry  as  then  practised,  under  the  guise,
which,  I  think,  was  not  simulated,  of  friend¬
ship.

Perfect  Ashlar.  See  Ashlar.

Perfect  Initiates,  Rite  of.  A

name  given  to  the  Egyptian  Rite  when
first  established  at  Lyons  by  Cagliostro.

Perfection.  The  ninth  and  last  de¬
gree  of  Fessler’s  Rite.  See  Fessler's  Rite.

Perfectionists.  The  name  by  which
Weishaupt  first  designated  the  Order  which
he  founded  in  Bavaria,  and  which  he  sub¬
sequently  changed  for  that  of  the  Illumi¬
nati.

Perfection,  Lodge  of.  The  Lodge
in  which  the  fourteenth  degree  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  is  con¬
ferred.  In  England  and  America  this  de¬
gree  is  called  Grand  Elect  Perfect  and  Sub¬
lime  Mason,  but  the  French  designate  it
Grand  Scottish  Mason  of  the  Sacred  Vault
of  James  VI.,  or  Grand  ecossais  de  la  Voute
Sacree  du  Jacques  VI.  This  is  one  of  the
evidences —  and  a  very  pregnant  one — of
the  influence  exercised  by  the  exiled  Stuarts
and  their  adherents  on  the  Masonry  of  that
time  in  making  it  an  instrument  for  the
restoration  of  James  II.,  and  then  of  his
son,  to  the  throne  of  England.

This  degree,  as  concluding  all  reference
to  the  first  Temple,  has  been  called  the  ul¬
timate  degree  of  ancient  Masonry.  It  is
the  last  of  what  is  technically  styled  the  In¬
effable  degrees,  because  their  instructions
relate  to  the  Ineffable  word.

Its  place  of  meeting  is  called  the  Sacred
Vault.  Its  principal  officers  are  a  Thrice
Puissant  Grand  Master,  two  Grand  War¬
dens,  a  Grand  Treasurer,  and  Grand  Secre¬
tary.  In  the  first  organization  of  the  Rite
in  this  country,  the  Lodges  of  Perfection
were  called  “Sublime  Grand  Lodges,”  and,
hence,  the  word  “  Grand  ”  is  still  affixed  to
the  title  of  the  officers.

The  following  mythical  history  is  con¬
nected  with  and  related  in  this  degree.

When  the  Temple  was  finished,  the  Masons


PERFECTION


PERFECTION


571


who  had  been  employed  in  constructing  it
acquired  immortal  honor.  Their  Order  be¬
came  more  uniformly  established  and  regu¬
lated  than  it  had  been  before.  Their  cau¬
tion  and  reserve  in  admitting  new  members
produced  respect,  and  merit  alone  was  re¬
quired  of  the  candidate.  With  these
principles  instilled  into  their  minds,  many
of  the  Grand  Elect  left  the  Temple  after
its  dedication,  and,  dispersing  themselves
among  the  neighboring  nations,  instructed
all  who  applied  and  were  found  worthy  in
the  sublime  degrees  of  Ancient  Craft  Ma¬
sonry.

The  Temple  was  completed  in  the  year
of  the  world  3000.  Thus  far,  the  wise
King  of  Israel  had  behaved  worthy  of  him¬
self,  and  gained  universal  admiration;  but
in  process  of  time,  when  he  had  advanced
in  years,  his  understanding  became  im¬
paired;  he  grew  deaf  to  the  voice  of  the
Lord,  and  was  strangely  irregular  in  his
conduct.  Proud  of  having  erected  an  edi¬
fice  to  his  Maker,  and  intoxicated  with  his
great  power,  he  plunged  into  all  manner
of  licentiousness  and  debauchery,  and  pro¬
faned  the  Temple,  by  offering  to  the  idol
Moloch  that  incense  which  should  have
been  offered  only  to  the  living  God.

The  Grand  Elect  and  Perfect  Masons
saw  this,  and  were  sorely  grieved,  afraid
that  his  apostasy  would  end  in  some  dread¬
ful  consequences,  and  bring  upon  them
those  enemies  whom  Solomon  had  vain-
gloriously  and  wantonly  defied.  The  people,
copying  the  vices  and  follies  of  their  king,
became  proud  and  idolatrous,  and  neglected
the  worship  of  the  true  God  for  that  of
idols.

As  an  adequate  punishment  for  this  de¬
fection,  God  inspired  the  heart  of  Nebu¬
chadnezzar,  King  of  Babylon,  to  take  ven¬
geance  on  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  This
prince  sent  an  army  with  Nebuzaradan,
Captain  of  the  Guards,  who  entered  Judah
with  fire  and  sword,  took  and  sacked  the
city  of  Jerusalem,  razed  its  walls,  and  de¬
stroyed  the  Temple.  The  people  were  car¬
ried  captive  to  Babylon,  and  the  conquerors
took  with  them  all  the  vessels  of  silver  and
gold.  This  happened  four  hundred  and
seventy  years,  six  months,  and  ten  days
after  its  dedication.

When,  in  after  times,  the  princes  of
Christendom  entered  into  a  league  to  free
the  Holy  Land  from  the  oppression  of  the
infidels,  the  good  and  virtuous  Masons,
anxious  for  the  success  of  so  pious  an  un¬
dertaking,  voluntarily  offered  their  services
to  the  confederates,  on  condition  that  they
should  be  permitted  a  chief  of  their  own
election,  which  was  granted;  they  accord¬
ingly  rallied  under  their  standard  and  de¬
parted.


The  valor  and  fortitude  of  these  elected
knights  was  such,  that  they  were  admired  by,
and  took  the  lead  of,  all  the  princes  of  Jeru¬
salem,  who,  believing  that  their  mysteries
inspired  them  with  courage  and  fidelity  in
the  cause  of  virtue  and  religion,  became
desirous  of  being  initiated.  Upon  being
found  worthy,  their  desires  were  compiled
with ;  and  thus  the  royal  art,  meeting  the
approbation  of  great  and  good  men,  be¬
came  popular  and  honorable,  was  diffused
through  their  various  dominions,  and  has
continued  to  spread  through  a  succession
of  ages  to  the  present  day.

The  symbolic  color  of  this  degree  is  red
— emblematic  of  fervor,  constancy,  and  assi¬
duity.  Hence,  the  Masonry  of  this  degree
was  formerly  called  red  Masonry  on  the
continent  of  Europe.

The  jewel  of  the  degree  is  a  pair  of  com¬
passes  extended  on  an  arc  of  ninety  degrees,
surmounted  by  a  crown,  and  with  a  sun  in
the  centre.  In  the  Southern  Jurisdiction
the  sun  is  on  one  side  and  a  five-pointed
star  on  the  other.

The  apron  is  white  with  red  flames,
bordered  with  blue,  and  having  the  jewel
painted  on  the  centre  and  the  stone  of
foundation  on  the  flap.

Perfection,  Kite  of.  In  1754,  the
Chevalier  de  Bonneville  established  a  Chap¬
ter  of  the  high  degrees  at  Paris,  in  the  Col¬
lege  of  Jesuits  of  Clermont,  hence  called
the  Chapter  of  Clermont.  The  system  of
Masonry  he  there  practised  received  the
name  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection,  or  Rite  of
Heredom.  The  College  of  Clermont  was,
says  Rebold,  (ffist.  de  3  G.  L.,  46,)  the
asylum  of  the  adherents  of  the  house  of
Stuart,  and  hence  the  Rite  is  to  some  ex¬
tent  tinctured  with  Stuart  Masonry.  It
consisted  of  twenty-five  degrees,  as  follows :
1.  Apprentice;  2.  Fellow  Craft;  3.  Master;
4.  Secret  Master;  5.  Perfect  Master;  6.  In¬
timate  Secretary;  7.  Intendant  of  the
Building;  8.  Provost  and  Judge;  9.  Elect
of  nine;  10.  Elect  of  fifteen  ;  11.  Illustrious
elect,  Chief  of  the  twelve  tribes ;  12.  Grand
Master  Architect ;  13.  Royal  Arch ;  14.
Grand,  Elect,  Ancient,  Perfect  Master;  15.
Knight  of  the  Sword;  16.  Prince  of  Jeru¬
salem  ;  17.  Knight  of  the  East  and  West;
18.  Rose  Croix  Knight;  19.  Grand  Pontiff';
20.  Grand  Patriarch  ;  21.  Grand  Master  of
the  Key  of  Masonry  ;  22.  Prince  of  Liba-
nus;  23.  Sovereign  Prince  Adept  Chief
of  the  Grand  Consistory;  24.  Illustrious
Knight,  Commander  of  the  Black  and
White  Eagle ;  25.  Most  Illustrious  Sover¬
eign  Prince  of  Masonry,  Grand  Knight,
Sublime  Commander  of  the  Royal  Secret.
It  will  be  seen  that  the  degrees  of  this  Rite
are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Council  of
Emperors  of  the  East  and  West,  which  was


572


PERFECT


PERJURY


established  four  years  later,  and  to  which
the  Chapter  of  Clermont  gave  way.  Of
course,  they  are  therefore  the  same,  so  far
as  they  go,  as  those  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite,  which  succeeded  the
Council  of  Emperors.

The  distinguishing  principle  of  this  Rite
is,  that  Freemasonry  was  derived  from
Templarism,  and  that  consequently  every
Freemason  was  a  Knight  Templar.  It  was
there  that  the  Baron  Von  Hund  was  ini¬
tiated,  and  from  it,  through  him,  proceeded
the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance;  although  he
discarded  the  degrees  and  retained  only  the
Templar  theory.

Perfect  Irish  Master.  ( Parfait
Maltre  Irlandais.)  One  of  the  degrees  given
in  the  Irish  Colleges  instituted  by  Ramsay.

Perfect  Uorige.  See  Just  Lodge.

Perfect  Master.  {Maltre  Parfait.)
The  fifth  degree  in  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite.  The  ceremonies  of
this  degree  were  originally  established  as
a  grateful  tribute  of  respect  to  a  worthy
departed  brother.  The  officers  of  the  Lodge
are  a  Master,  who  represents  Adoniram,
the  Inspector  of  the  w-orks  at  Mount  Leba¬
non,  and  one  Warden.  The  symbolic  color
of  the  degree  is  green,  to  remind  the
Perfect  Master  that,  being  dead  in  vice,  he
must  hope  to  revive  in  virtue.  His  jewel
is  a  compass  extended  sixty  degrees,  to
teach  him  that  he  should  act  within  meas¬
ure,  and  ever  pay  due  regard  to  justice  and
equity.

The  apron  is  white,  with  a  green  flap ;
and  in  the  middle  of  the  apron  must  be  em¬
broidered  or  painted,  within  three  circles,  a
cubical  stone,  in  the  centre  of  which  the
letter  J  is  inscribed,  according  to  the  old
rituals ;  but  the  Samaritan  yod  and  he,
according  to  the  ritual  of  the  Southern
Jurisdiction.

Delaunay,  in  his  Thuileur  de  V Ecossisme,
gives  the  Tetragrammaton  in  this  degree,
and  says  the  degree  should  more  properly
be  called  Past  Master,  Ancien  Maltre,  be¬
cause  the  Tetragrammaton  makes  it  in  some
sort  the  complement  of  the  Master’s  degree.
i  But  the  Tetragrammaton  is  not  found  in
any  of  the  approved  rituals,  and  Delaunay’s
theory  falls  therefore  to  the  ground.  But
besides,  to  complete  the  Master’s  with  this
degree  would  be  to  confuse  all  the  symbol¬
ism  of  the  Ineffable  degrees,  which  really
conclude  with  the  fourteenth.

Perfect  Prussian.  (Parfait  Prus-
sien.)  A  degree  invented  at  Geneva,  in  1770,
as  a  second  part  of  the  Order  of  Noachites.

Perfect  Union,  Lodge  of.  A
Lodge  at  Rennes, in  France,  where  the  Rite
of  Elect  of  Truth  was  instituted.  See
Elect  of  Truth.

Perignan.  When  the  Elu  degrees


were  first  invented,  the  legend  referred  to
an  unknown  person,  a  tiller  of  the  soil,  to
whom  King  Solomon  was  indebted  for  the
information  which  led  to  the  discover)-  of
the  craftsmen  who  had  committed  the
crime  recorded  in  the  third  degree.  This
unknown  person,  at  first  designated  as
“  l’inconnu,”  afterwards  received  the  name
of  Perignan,  and  a  degree  between  the  elu
of  nine  and  the  elu  of  fifteen  was  instituted,
which  was  called  the  “Elu  of  Perignan,”
and  which  became  the  sixth  degree  of  the
Adonhiramite  Rite.  I  am  utterly  at  a  loss
as  to  the  derivation  or  radical  meaning
of  the  word,  but  am  inclined  to  the  theory
which  gives  to  this,  as  well  as  to  many
other  words  in  the  high  degrees,  a  refer¬
ence  to  the  adherents,  or  to  the  enemies,  of
the  exiled  house  of  Stuart,  for  whose  sake
several  of  these  degrees  were  established.
See  Elect  of  Perignan.

Periods  of  the  Grand  Archi¬
tect.  See  Six  Periods.

Perjury.  In  the  municipal  law  per¬
jury  is  defined  to  be  a  wilful  false  swear¬
ing  to  a  material  matter,  when  an  oath  has
been  administered  by  lawful  authority.
The  violation  of  vows  or  promissory  oaths
taken  before  one  who  is  not  legally  author¬
ized  to  administer  them,  that  is  to  say,  one
who  is  not  a  magistrate,  does  not  in  law
involve  the  crime  of  peijury.  Such  is  the
technical  definition  of  the  law;  but  the
moral  sense  of  mankind  does  not  assent  to
such  a  doctrine,  and  considers  peijury,  as
the  root  of  the  word  indicates,  the  doing
of  that  which  one  has  sworn  not  to  do,  or
the  omitting  to  do  that  which  he  has  sworn
to  do.  The  old  Romans  seem  to  have
taken  a  sensible  viewT  of  the  crime  of  per¬
jury.  Among  them  oaths  were  not  often
administered,  and,  in  general,  a  promise
made  under  oath  had  no  more  binding
power  in  a  court  of  justice  than  it  would
have  had  without  the  oath.  False  swear¬
ing  was  with  them  a  matter  of  conscience,
and  the  person  who  was  guilty  of  it  was
responsible  to  the  Deity  alone.  The  viola¬
tion  of  a  promise  under  oath  and  of  one
not  under  such  a  form  was  considered
alike,  and  neither  was  more  liable  to  hu¬
man  punishment  than  the  other.  But
peijury  was  not  deemed  to  be  without  any
kind  of  punishment.  Cicero  expressed  the
Roman  sentiment  when  he  said  “  perjurii
poena  divina  exitium  ;  humana  dedecus  —
the  divine  punishment  of  perjury  is  destruc¬
tion ;  the  human,  infamy.”  Hence  every
oath  was  accompanied  by  an  execration,  or
an  appeal  to  God  to  punish  the  swearer
should  he  falsify  his  oath.  “  In  the  case
of  other  sins,”  says  Archbishop  Sharp,
“  there  may  be  an  appeal  made  to  God’s
mercy,  yet  in  the  case  of  peijury  there  ia


PERNETTY


PERSECUTIONS


573


none;  for  he  that  is  perjured  hath  pre¬
cluded  himself  of  this  benefit,  because  he
hath  braved  God  Almighty,  and  hath  in
effect  told  him  to  his  face  that  if  he  was
foresworn  he  should  desire  no  mercy.”

It  is  not  right  thus  to  seek  to  restrict
God’s  mercy,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  settlement  of  the  crime  lies  more
with  him  than  with  man.  Freemasons
look  in  this  light  on  what, is  called  the
penalty ;  it  is  an  invocation  of  God’s  ven¬
geance  on  him  who  takes  the  vow,  should
he  ever  violate  it ;  men’s  vengeance  is  con¬
fined  to  the  contempt  and  infamy  which
the  foreswearer  incurs.

Pernetty,  Antoine  Joseph.  Born
at  Roanne,  in  France,  in  1716.  At  an  early
age  he  joined  the  Benedictines,  but  in  1765
applied,  with  twenty-eight  others,  for  a
dispensation  of  his  vows.  A  short  time
after,  becoming  disgusted  with  the  Order,
he  repaired  to  Berlin,  where  Frederick  the
Great  made  him  his  librarian.  In  a  short
time  he  returned  to  Paris,  where  the  arch¬
bishop  strove  in  vain  to  induce  him  to  re¬
enter  his  monastery.  The  parliament  sup¬
ported  him  in  his  refusal,  and  Pernetty
continued  in  the  world.  Not  long  after,  Per¬
netty  became  infected  with  the  mystical
theories  of  Swedenborg,  and  published  a
translation  of  his  Wonders  of  Heaven  and
Hell.  He  then  repaired  to  Avignon,  where,
under  the  influence  of  his  Swedenborgian
views,  he  established  an  academy  of  Illu¬
minati,  based  on  the  three  primitive  grades
of  Masonry,  to  which  he  added  a  mystical
one,  which  he  called  the  True  Mason.  This
Rite  was  subsequently  transferred  to  Mont¬
pellier  by  some  of  his  disciples,  and  modi¬
fied  in  form  under  the  name  of  the  “  Acad¬
emy  of  True  Masons.”  Pernetty,  besides
his  Masonic  labors  at  Avignon,  invented
several  other  Masonic  degrees,  and  to  him
is  attributed  the  authorship  of  the  degree
of  Knight  of  the  Sun,  now  occupying  the
twenty-eighth  place  in  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite.  He  was  a  very  learned
man  and  a  voluminous  writer  of  versatile
talents,  and  published  numerous  works  on
mythology,  the  fine  arts,  theology,  geogra¬
phy,  philosophy,  and  the  mathematical  sci¬
ences,  besides  some  translations  from  the
Latin.  He  died  at  Valence,  in  Dauphiny,
in  the  year  1800.

Perpendicular.  In  a  geometrical
sense,  that  which  is  upright  and  erect,
leaning  neither  one  way  nor  another.  In
a  figurative  and  symbolic  sense,  it  conveys
the  signification  of  Justice,  Fortitude,
Prudence,  and  Temperance.  Justice,  that
leans  to  no  side  but  that  of  Truth  ;  Forti¬
tude,  that  yields  to  no  adverse  attack;
Prudence,  tnat  ever  pursues  the  straight
path  of  integrity;  and  Temperance,  that
swerves  not  for  appetite  nor  passion.


Persecutions.  Freemasonry,  like
every  other  good  and  true  thing,  has  been
subjected  at  times  to  suspicion,  to  mis¬
interpretation,  and  to  actual  persecution.
Like  the  church,  it  has  had  its  martyrs,
who,  by  their  devotion  and  their  suffer¬
ings,  have  vindicated  its  truth  and  its
purity.

With  the  exception  of  the  United  States,
where  the  attacks  on  the  Institution  can
hardly  be  called  persecutions,  —  not  because
there  was  not  the  will,  but  because  the
power  to  persecute  was  wanting,  —  all  the
persecutions  of  Freemasonry  have,  for  the
most  part,  originated  with  the  Roman
Church.  “Notwithstanding,”  says  a  writer
in  the  Freemasons’  Quarterly  Magazine,
(1851,  p.  141,)  “the  greatest  architectural
monuments  of  antiquity  were  reared  by  the
labors  of  Masonic  gilds,  and  the  Church  of
Rome  owes  the  structure  of  her  magnificent
cathedrals,  her  exquisite  shrines,  and  her
most  splendid  palaces,  to  the  skill  of  the
wise  master-builders  of  former  ages,  she
has  been  for  four  centuries  in  antago¬
nism  to  the  principles  inculcated  by  the
Craft.”

Leaving  unnoticed  the  struggles  of  the
corporations  of  Freemasons  in  the  fifteenth,
sixteenth,  and  seventeenth  centuries,  we
may  begin  the  record  with  the  persecutions
to  which  the  Order  has  been  subjected  since
the  revival  in  1717. .

One  of  the  first  persecutions  to  which
Masonry,  in  its  present  organization,  was
subjected,  occurred  in  the  year  1735,  in
Holland.  On  the  16th  of  October  of  that
year,  a  crowd  of  ignorant  fanatics,  -whose
zeal  had  been  enkindled  by  the  denuncia¬
tions  of  some  of  the  clergy,  broke  into  a
house  in  Amsterdam,  where  a  Lodge  was
accustomed  to  be  held,  and  destroyed  all
the  furniture  and  ornaments  of  the  Lodge.
The  States  General,  yielding  to  the  popular
excitement,  or  rather  desirous  of  giving  no
occasion  for  its  action,  prohibited  the  future
meetings  of  the  Lodges.  One,  how'ever,
continuing,  regardless  of  the  edict,  to  meet
at  a  private  house,  the  members  were  ar¬
rested  and  brought  before  the  Court  of  Jus¬
tice.  Here,  in  the  presence  of  the  whole
city,  the  Masters  and  Wardens  defended
themselves  with  great  dexterity ;  and  while
acknowledging  their  inability  to  prove  the
innocence  of  their  Institution  by  a  public
exposure  of  their  secret  doctrines,  they
freely  offered  to  receive  and  initiate  any
person  in  the  confidence  of  the  magistrates,
and  who  could  then  give  them  information
upon  which  they  might  depend,  relative  to
the  true  designs  of  the  Institution.  The
proposal  was  acceded  to,  and  the  town
clerk  was  chosen.  He  was  immediately  ini¬
tiated,  and  his  report  so  pleased  his  supe¬
riors,  that  all  the  magistrates  and  principal


574


PERSECUTIONS


PERSECUTIONS


persons  of  the  city  became  members  and
zealous  patrons  of  the  Order.

In  France,  the  fear  of  the  authorities
that  the  Freemasons  concealed,  within  the
recesses  of  their  Lodges,  designs  hostile  to
the  government,  gave  occasion  to  an  attempt,
in  1737,  on  the  part  of  the  police,  to  pro¬
hibit  the  meeting  of  the  Lodges.  But  this
unfavorable  disposition  did  not  long  con¬
tinue,  and  the  last  instance  of  the  inter¬
ference  of  the  government  with  the  pro¬
ceedings  of  the  Masonic  body  was  in  June,
1745,  when  the  members  of  a  Lodge,  meet¬
ing  at  the  Hotel  de  Soissons,  were  dispersed,
their  furniture  and  jewels  seized,  and  the
landlord  amerced  in  a  penalty  of  three  thou¬
sand  livres.

The  persecutions  in  Germany  were  owing
to  a  singular  cause.  The  malice  of  a  few
females  had  been  excited  by  their  disap¬
pointed  curiosity.  A  portion  of  this  dis¬
position  they  succeeded  in  communicating
to  the  Empress,  Maria  Theresa,  who  issued
an  order  for  apprehending  all  the  Masons
in  Vienna,  when  assembled  in  their  Lodges.
The  measure  was,  however,  frustrated  by
the  good  sense  of  the  Emperor,  Joseph  I.,
who  was  himself  a  Mason,  and  exerted  his
power  in  protecting  his  brethren.

The  persecutions  of  the  church  in  Italy,
and  other  Catholic  countries,  have  been
the  most  extensive  and  most  permanent.
On  the  28th  of  April,  1738,  Pope  Clement
XII.  issued  the  famous  bull  against  Free¬
masons  whose  authority  is  still  in  exist¬
ence.  In  this  bull,  the  Roman  Pontiff  says,
“  We  have  learned,  and  public  rumor  does
not  permit  us  to  doubt  the  truth  of  the  re¬
port,  that  a  certain  society  has  been  formed,
under  the  name  of  Freemasons,  into  which
persons  of  all  religions  and  all  sects  are  in¬
discriminately  admitted,  and  whose  mem¬
bers  have  established  certain  laws  which
bind  themselves  to  each  other,  and  which,
in  particular,  compel  their  members,  under
the  severest  penalties,  by  virtue  of  an  oath
taken  on  the  Holy  Scriptures,  to  preserve
an  inviolable  secrecy  in  relation  to  every
thing  that  passes  in  their  meetings.”  The
bull  goes  on  to  declare,  that  these  societies
have  become  suspected  by  the  faithful,  and
that  they  are  hurtful  to  the  tranquillity  of
the  state  and  to  the  safety  of  the  soul ;  and
after  making  use  of  the  uow  threadbare
argument,  that  if  the  actions  of  Free¬
masons  were  irreproachable,  they  would
not  so  carefully  conceal  them  from  the
light,  it  proceeds  to  enjoin  all  bishops,  su¬
periors,  and  ordinaries  to  punish  the  Free¬
masons  “  with  the  penalties  wdiich  they  de¬
serve,  as  people  greatly  suspected  of  heresy,
having  recourse,  if  necessary,  to  the  secular
arm.”

What  this  delivery  to  the  secular  arm


means,  we  are  at  no  loss  to  discover,  from
the  interpretation  given  to  the  bull  by  Car¬
dinal  Firrao  in  his  edict  of  publication  in
the  beginning  of  the  following  year,  name¬
ly,  “  that  no  person  shall  dare  to  assemble
at  any  Lodge  of  the  said  society,  nor  be
present  at  any  of  their  meetings,  under  pain
of  death  and  confiscation  of  goods,  the  said
penalty  to  be  without  hope  of  pardon.”

The  bull  of  Clement  met  in  France  with
no  congenial  spirits  to  obey  it.  On  the
contrary,  it  was  the  subject  of  universal
condemnation  as  arbitrary  and  unjust,  and
the  parliament  of  Paris  positively  refused
to  enroll  it.  But  in  other  Catholic  coun¬
tries  it  was  better  respected.  In  Tuscany
the  persecutions  were  unremitting.  A  man
named  Crudeli  was  arrested  at  Florence,
thrown  into  the  dungeons  of  the  Inquisi¬
tion,  subjected  to  torture,  and  finally  sen¬
tenced  to  a  long  imprisonment,  on  the
charge  of  having  furnished  an  asylum  to  a
Masonic  Lodge.  The  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  upon  learning  the  circumstances,
obtained  his  enlargement,  and  sent  him  pe¬
cuniary  assistance.  Francis  de  Lorraine,
who  had  been  initiated  at  the  Hague  in
1731,  soon  after  ascended  the  grand  ducal
throne,  and  one  of  the  first  acts  of  his
reign  was  to  liberate  all  the  Masons  who
had  been  incarcerated  by  the  Inquisition ;
and  still  further  to  evince  his  respect  for
the  Order,  he  personally  assisted  in  the  con¬
stitution  of  several  Lodges  at  Florence,  and
in  other  cities  of  his  dominions.

The  other  sovereigns  of  Italy  were,  how¬
ever,  more  obedient  to  the  behests  of  the
holy  father,  and  persecutions  continued  to
rage  throughout  the  peninsula.  Neverthe¬
less,  Masonry  continued  to  flourish,  and  in
1751,  thirteen  years  after  the  emission  of
the  bull  of  prohibition,  Lodges  were  open¬
ly  in  existence  in  Tuscany,  at  Naples,  and
even  in  the  “  eternal  city  ”  itself.

The  priesthood,  whose  vigilance  had
abated  under  the  influence  of  time,  became
once  more  alarmed,  and  an  edict  was  issued
in  1751  by  Benedict  XIV.,  who  then  occu¬
pied  the  papal  chair,  renewing  and  enforc¬
ing  the  bull  which  had  been  fulminated  by
Clement.

This,  of  course,  renewed  the  spirit  of
persecution.  In  Spain,  one  Tournon,  a
Frenchman,  was  convicted  of  practising
the  rites  of  Masonry,  and  after  a  tedious
confinement  in  the  dungeons  of  the  Inqui¬
sition,  he  was  finally  banished  from  the
kingdom.

In  Portugal,  at  Lisbon,  John  Coustos,
a  native  of  Switzerland,  was  still  more
severely  treated.  He  was  subjected  to  the
torture,  and  suffered  so  much  that  he  was
unable  to  move  his  limbs  for  three  months.
Coustos,  with  two  companions  of  his  re-


PERSEVERANCE


PERSIA


575


uted  crime,  was  sentenced  to  the  galleys,
ut  was  finally  released  by  the  interposi¬
tion  of  the  English  ambassador.

In  1745,  the  Council  of  Berne,  in  Swit¬
zerland,  issued  a  decree  prohibiting,  under
the  severest  penalties,  the  assemblages  of
Freemasons.  In  1757,  in  Scotland,  the
Synod  of  Sterling  adopted  a  resolution  de¬
barring  all  adhering  Freemasons  from  the
ordinances  of  religion.  And,  as  if  to  prove
that  fanaticism  is  everywhere  the  same,  in
1748  the  Divan  at  Constantinople  caused  a
Masonic  Lodge  to  be  demolished,  its  jewels
and  furniture  seized,  and  its  members  ar¬
rested.  They  were  discharged  upon  the
interposition  of  the  English  minister;  but
the  government  prohibited  the  introduction
of  the  Order  into  Turkey.

Our  own  country  has  not  been  free  from
the  blighting  influence  of  this  demon  of
fanaticism.  But  the  exciting  scenes  of
anti-Masonry  are  too  recent  to  be  treated
by  the  historian  with  coolness  or  imparti¬
ality.  The  political  party  to  which  this
spirit  of  persecution  gave  birth  was  the
most  abject  in  its  principles,  and  the  most
unsuccessful  in  its  efforts,  of  any  that  our
times  have  seen.  It  has  passed  away ;  the
clouds  of  anti-Masonry  have  been,  we  trust,
forever  dispersed,  and  the  bright  sun  of
Masonry,  once  more  emerging  from  its
temporary  eclipse,  is  beginning  to  bless
our  land  with  the  invigorating  heat  and
light  of  its  meridian  rays.

Perseverance.  A  virtue  inculcated,
by  a  peculiar  symbol  in  the  third  degree,
in  reference  to  the  acquisition  of  knowledge,
and  especially  the  knowledge  of  the  True
Word.  See  Patience.

Perseverance,  Order  of.  An
Adoptive  Order  established  at  Paris,  in
1771,  by  several  nobles  and  ladies.  It  had
but  little  of  the  Masonic  character  about  it;
and,  although  at  the  time  of  its  creation  it
excited  considerable  sensation,  it  existed
but  for  a  brief  period.  It  was  instituted
for  the  purpose  of  rendering  services  to
humanity.  Ragon  says  ( Tuileur  Gen.,  p.
92,)  that  there  was  kept  in  the  archives  of
the  Order  a  quarto  volume  of  four  hundred
leaves,  in  which  was  registered  all  the  good
deeds  of  the  brethren  and  sisters.  This
volume  is  entitled  Livred' Honneur  del'  Ordre
de  la  Perseverance.  Ragon  intimates  that
this  document  is  still  in  existence.  Thory
(Fondation  G.  0.,  p.  383,)  says  that  there
was  much  mystification  about  the  establish¬
ment  of  the  Order  in  Paris.  Its  institutors
contended  that  it  originated  from  time  im¬
memorial  in  Poland,  a  pretension  to  which
the  King  of  Poland  lent  his  sanction.
Many  persons  of  distinction,  and  among
them  Madame  de  Genlis,  were  deceived  and
became  its  members.


Persia.  Neither  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  nor  any  other  of  the  European
Powers,  seem  ever  to  have  organized
Lodges  in  the  kingdom  of  Persia;  yet  very
strange  and  somewhat  incomprehensible
stories  are  told  by  credible  authorities  of
the  existence  either  of  the  Masonic  insti¬
tution,  or  something  very  much  like  it,  in
that  country.  In  1808,  on  November  24,
Askeri  Khan,  the  Ambassador  of  Persia
near  the  court  of  France,  was  received  into
the  Order  at  Paris  by  the  Mother  Lodge  of
the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite,  on  which
occasion  the  distinguished  neophyte  pre¬
sented  his  sword,  a  pure  Damascus  blade,
to  the  Lodge,  with  these  remarks:  “I
promise  you,  gentlemen,  friendship,  fidel¬
ity,  and  esteem.  I  have  been  told,  and  I
cannot  doubt  it,  that  Freemasons  were  vir¬
tuous,  charitable,  and  full  of  love  and  at¬
tachment  for  their  sovereigns.  Permit  me
to  make  you  a  present  worthy  of  true
Frenchmen.  Receive  this  sabre,  which  has
served  me  in  twenty-seven  battles.  May
this  act  of  homage  convince  you  of  the  sen¬
timents  with  which  you  have  inspired  me,
and  of  the  gratification  that  I  feel  in  be¬
longing  to  your  Order.”  The  Ambassador
subsequently  seems  to  have  taken  a  great
interest  in  Freemasonry  while  he  remained
in  France,  and  consulted  with  the  Venera¬
ble  of  the  Lodge  on  the  subject  of  estab¬
lishing  a  Lodge  at  Ispahan.  This  is  the
first  account  that  we  have  of  the  connection
of  any  inhabitant  of  Persia  with  the  Order.
Thory,  who  gives  this  account,  [Act.  Lat.,
i.  237,)  does  not  tell  us  whether  the  project
of  an  Ispahan  Lodge  was  ever  executed.
But  it  is  probable  that  on  his  return  home
the  Ambassador  introduced  among  his
friends  some  knowledge  of  the  Institution,
and  impressed  them  with  a  favorable  opin¬
ion  of  it.  At  all  events,  the  Persians  in
later  times  do  not  seem  to  have  been  igno¬
rant  of  its  existence.

Mr.  Holmes,  in  his  Sketches  on  the  Shores
of  the  Caspian,  gives  the  following  as  the
Persian  idea  of  Freemasonry :

“  In  the  morning  we  received  a  visit
from  the  Governor,  who  seemed  rather  a
dull  person,  though  very  polite  and  civil.
He  asked  a  great  many  questions  regarding
the  Feramoosh  Khoneh ,  as  they  called  the
Freemasons’  Hall  in  London ;  which  is  a
complete  mystery  to  all  the  Persians  who
have  heard  of  it.  Very  often,  the  first
question  we  have  been  asked  is,  *  What  do
tney  do  at  the  Feramoosh  Khoneh  ?  What
is  it?’  They  generally  believe  it  to  be  a
most  wonderful  place,  where  a  man  may
acquire  in  one  day  the  wisdom  of  a  thousand
years  of  study  ;  but  every  one  has  his  own
peculiar  conjectures  concerning  it.  Some
of  the  Persians  who  went  to  England  be-


576


PERSIAN


PETITION


came  Freemasons;  and  their  friends  com¬
plain  that  they  will  not  tell  what  they  saw
at  the  Hall,  and  cannot  conceive  why  they
should  all  be  so  uncommunicative.”

And  now  we  have,  from  the  London  Free¬
mason,  (June  28, 1873,)  this  further  account ;
but  the  conjecture  as  to  the  time  of  the  in¬
troduction  of  the  Order  unfortunately  wants
confirmation  :

“  Of  the  Persian  officers  who  are  present
in  Berlin  pursuing  military  studies  and
making  themselves  acquainted  with  Prus¬
sian  military  organization  and  arrange¬
ments,  one  belongs  to  the  Masonic  Order.
He  is  a  Mussulman.  He  seems  to  have
spontaneously  sought  recognition  as  a
member  of  the  Craft  at  a  Berlin  Lodge,  and
his  claim  was  allowed  only  after  such  an
examination  as  satisfied  the  brethren  that
he  was  one  of  the  brethren.  From  the
statement  of  this  Persian  Mason  it  appears
that  nearly  all  the  members  of  the  Persian
Court  belong  to  the  mystic  Order,  even  as
German  Masonry  enjoys  the  honor  of
counting  the  emperor  and  crown  prince
among  its  adherents.  The  appearance  of
this  Mohammedan  Mason  in  Berlin  seems
to  have  excited  a  little  surprise  among
some  of  the  brethren  there,  and  the  sur¬
prise  would  be  natural  enough  to  persons
not  aware  of  the  extent  to  which  Masonry
has  been  diffused  over  the  earth.  Account
for  it  as  one  may,  the  truth  is  certain  that
the  mysterious  Order  was  established  in
the  Orient  many  ages  ago.  Nearly  all  of
the  old  Mohammedan  buildings  in  India,
such  as  tombs,  mosques,  etc.,  are  marked
with  the  Masonic  symbols,  and  many  of
these  structures,  still  perfect,  were  built  in
the  time  of  the  Mogul  Emperor  Akbar,
who  died  in  1605.  Thus  Masonry  must
have  been  introduced  into  India  from  Mid¬
dle  Asia  by  the  Mohammedans  hundreds
of  years  ago.”

Since  then  there  was  an  initiation  of  a
Persian  in  the  Lodge  Clemente  AmitiS  at
Paris.  There  is  a  Lodge  at  Teheran,  of
which  many  native  Persians  are  members.

Persian  Philosophical  Rite.
A  Rite  which  its  founders  asserted  was
established  in  1818,  at  Erzerum,  in  Persia,
and  which  was  introduced  into  France  in
the  year  1819.  It  consisted  of  seven  de¬
grees,  as  follows:  1.  Listening  Apprentice;
2.  Fellow  Craft,  Adept,  Esquire  of  Benevo¬
lence;  3.  Master,  Knight  of  the  Sun;  4.
Architect  of  all  Rites,  Knight  of  the  Phil¬
osophy  of  the  Heart ;  5.  Knight  of  Eclecti¬
cism  and  of  Truth;  6.  Master  Good  Shep¬
herd  ;  7.  Venerable  Grand  Elect.  This
Rite  never  contained  many  members,  and
has  been  long  extinct.

Personal  Merit.  All  preferment
among  Masons  is  grounded  upon  real


worth  and  personal  merit  only,  that  so  the
Lords  maybe  well  served,  the  Brethren  not
put  to  shame,  nor  the  Royal  Craft  despised.
Therefore  no  Master  or  Warden  is  chosen
by  seniority,  but  for  his  merit.  Charges  of
1723.

Peru.  Freemasonry  was  first  intro¬
duced  into  Peru  about  the  year  1807,  dur¬
ing  the  French  invasion,  and  several
Lodges  worked  until  the  resumption  of  the
Spanish  authority  and  the  Papal  influence,
in  1813,  when  their  existence  terminated.
In  1825,  when  the  independence  of  the  re¬
public,  declared  some  years  before,  was
completely  achieved,  several  Scottish  Rite
Lodges  were  established,  first  at  Lima  and
then  at  other  points,  by  the  Grand  Orient
of  Colombia.  A  Supreme  Council  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite  was  instituted
in  1830.  In  1831  an  independent  Grand
Lodge,  afterwards  styled  the  Grand  Orient
of  Peru,  was  organized  by  the  symbolic
Lodges  in  the  republic.  Political  agita¬
tions  have,  from  time  to  time,  occasioned
a  cessation  of  Masonic  labor,  but  both  the
Supreme  Council  and  the  Grand  Orient  are
now  in  successful  operation.  The  Royal
Arch  degree  was  introduced  in  1852  by  the
establishment  of  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter  at
Callao,  under  a  Warrant  granted  by  the
Supreme  Chapter  of  Scotland.

Petition  for  a  Charter.  The  next
step  in  the  process  of  organizing  a  Lodge,
after  the  Dispensation  has  been  granted  by
the  Grand  Master,  is  an  application  for  a
Charter  or  Warrant  of  Constitution.  The
application  may  be,  but  not  necessarily,
in  the  form  of  a  petition.  On  the  report
of  the  Grand  Master,  that  he  had  granted
a  Dispensation,  the  Grand  Lodge,  if  the
new  Lodge  is  recommended  by  some  otber,
generally  tbe  nearest  Lodge,  will  confirm
the  Grand  Master’s  action  and  grant  a
Charter;  although  it  may  refuse  to  do  so,
and  then  the  Lodge  will  cease  to  exist.
Charters  or  Warrants  for  Lodges  are
granted  only  by  the  Grand  Lodge  in
America,  Ireland,  and  Scotland.  In  Eng¬
land  this  great  power  is  vested  in  the
Grand  Master.  The  Constitutions  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  say  that  “  every
application  for  a  Warrant  to  hold  a  new
Lodge  must  be,  by  petition  to  the  Grand
Master,  signed  by  at  least  seven  regularly
registered  Masons.”  Although,  in  the
United  States,  it  is  the  general  usage  that
a  Warrant  must  be  preceded  by  a  Dispen¬
sation.  I  know  of  no  general  law  which
would  forbid  the  Grand  Lodge  to  issue  a
Charter  in  the  first  place,  no  Dispensation
having  been  previously  granted.

The  rule  for  issuing  Charters  to  Lodges
prevails,  with  no  modification  in  relation  to
granting  them  by  Grand  Chapters,  Grand


PETITION


PHALLIC


577


Councils,  or  Grand  Commanderics  for  the
bodies  subordinate  to  them.

Petition  for  a  Dispensation.

When  it  is  desired  to  establish  a  new
Lodge,  application  by  petition  must  be
made  to  the  Grand  Master.  This  petition
ought  to  be  signed  by  at  least  seven  Master
Masons,  and  be  recommended  by  the  near¬
est  Lodge;  and  it  should  contain  the  pro¬
posed  name  of  the  Lodge  and  the  names  of
the  three  principal  officers.  This  is  the
usage  of  this  country ;  but  it  must  be  re¬
membered  that  the  Grand  Master’s  pre¬
rogative  of  granting  Dispensations  cannot
be  rightfully  restricted  by  any  law.  Only,
should  the  Grand  Master  grant  a  Dispen¬
sation  for  a  Lodge  which,  in  its  petition,
had  not  complied  with  these  prerequisites,
it  is  not  probable  that,  on  subsequent  appli¬
cation  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  a  Warrant  of
Constitution  would  be  issued.

Petition  for  Initiation.  Any  per¬
son  who  is  desirous  of  initiation  into  the
mysteries  of  Masonry  must  apply  to  the
Lodge  nearest  to  his  place  of  residence,  by
means  of  a  petition  signed  by  himself,  and
recommended  by  at  least  two  members  of
the  Lodge  to  which  he  applies.  The  ap¬
plication  of  a  Mason  to  a  Chapter,  Council,
or  Commandery  tor  advancement  to  higher
degrees,  or  of  an  unaffiliated  Mason  for
membership  in  a  Lodge,  is  also  called  a  pe¬
tition.  For  the  rules  that  govern  the  dis¬
position  of  these  petitions,  see  the  author’s
Text  Book  of  Masonic  Jurisprudence ,  Book
I.,  ch.  ii.

Peuvret,  Jean  Eustaelie.  An

usher  of  the  parliament  of  Paris,  and  Past
Master  of  the  Lodge  of  St.  Pierre  in  Mar-
tinico,  and  afterwards  a  dignitary  of  the
Grand  Orient  at  France.  Peuvret  was  de¬
voted  to  Hermetic  Masonry,  and  acquired
some  reputation  by  numerous  compila¬
tions  on  Masonic  subjects.  During  his  life
he  amassed  a  valuable  library  of  mystical,
alchemical,  and  Masonic  books,  and  a  man¬
uscript  collection  of  eighty-one  degrees  of
Hermetic  Masonry  in  six  quarto  volumes.
He  asserts  in  this  work  that  the  degrees
were  brought  from  England  and  Scotland;
but  this  Thory  ( Act.  Lot.,  i.  205,)  denies,  and
says  that  they  were  manufactured  in  Paris.
Peuvret’s  exceeding  zeal  without  knowl¬
edge  made  him  the  victim  of  every  char¬
latan  who  approached  him.  He  died  at
Paris  in  1800.

Pliuinotclctinn  Society.  [Soci-
ete  Phainotelite.)  A  society  founded  at
Paris,  in  1840,  by  LouisTheodore  Jugc,  the
editor  of  the  Globe ,  composed  of  members
of  all  rites  and  degrees,  for  the  investiga¬
tion  of  all  non-poiitical  secret  associations
of  ancient  and  modern  times.  The  title  is
taken  from  the  Greek,  and  signifies  literally
3  X  37


the  society  of  the  explainers  of  the  mys¬
teries  of  initiation.

Phallic  Worship.  The  Phallus  wa3
a  sculptured  representation  of  the  mem-
brum  virile ,  or  male  organ  of  generation  ;
and  the  worship  of  it  is  said  to  have  origi¬
nated  in  Egypt,  where,  after  the  murder  of
Osiris  by  Typlion,  which  is  symbolically  to
be  explained  as  the  destruction  or  depriva¬
tion  of  the  sun’s  light  by  night,  Isis,  his
wife,  or  the  symbol  of  nature,  in  the  search
for  his  mutilated  body,  is  said  to  have  found
all  the  parts  except  the  organs  of  genera¬
tion,  which  myth  is  simply  symbolic  of  the
fact  that  the  sun  having  set,  its  fecunda¬
ting  and  invigorating  power  had  ceased.
The  Phallus,  therefore,  as  the  symbol  of
the  male  generative  principle,  was  very
universally  venerated  among  the  ancients,
and  that  too  as  a  religious  rite,  without  the
slightest  reference  to  any  impure  or  lasciv¬
ious  application.

As  a  symbol  of  the  generative  principle
of  nature,  the  worship  of  the  Phallus  ap¬
pears  to  have  been  very  nearly  universal.
In  the  mysteries  it  was  carried  in  solemn
procession.  The  Jews,  in  their  numerous
deflections  into  idolatry,  fell  readily  into
that  of  this  symbol.  And  they  did  this  at
a  very  early  period  of  their  history,  for  we
are  told  that  even  in  the  time  of  the  Judges
( Jud .  iii.  7,)  they  “served  Baalim  and  the
groves.”  Now  the  word  translated,  here
and  elsewhere,  as  groves,  is  in  the  original
Asherah,  and  is  by  all  modern  interpreters
supposed  to  mean  a  species  of  Phallus.
Thus  Movers  ( Phdniz .,  p.  56,)  says  that
Asherah  is  a  sort  of  Phallus  erected  to  the
telluric  goddess  Baaltes,  and  the  learned
Holloway  (Originals,  i.  18,)  had  long  be¬
fore  come  to  the  same  conclusion.

But  the  Phallus,  or,  as  it  was  called
among  the  Orientalists,  the  Lingam,  was  a
representation  of  the  male  principle  only.
To  perfect  the  circle  of  generation,  it  is  nec¬
essary  to  advance  one  step  farther.  Ac¬
cordingly  we  find  in  the  Cteis  of  the  Greeks,
and  the  Yoni  of  the  Indians,  a  symbol  of
the  female  generative  principle  of  co-ex-
tensive  prevalence  with  the  Phallus.  The
Cteis  was  a  circular  and  concave  pedestal,
or  receptacle,  on  which  the  Phallus  or  col¬
umn  rested,  and  from  the  centre  of  which
it  sprang.

The  union  of  these  two,  as  the  generative
and  the  producing  principles  of  nature,  in
one  compound  figure,  was  the  most  usual
mode  of  representation.  And  here,  I  think,
we  undoubtedly  find  the  remote  origin  of
the  point  within  a  circle,  an  ancient  symbol
which  was  first  adopted  by  the  old  sun
worshippers,  and  then  by  the  ancient  as¬
tronomers,  as  a  symbol  of  the  sun  sur¬
rounded  by  the  earth  or  the  universe,— the


578


PHALLUS


PHILALETHES


sun  as  the  generator  and  the  earth  as  the
producer, — and  afterwards  modified  in  its
signification  and  incorporated  into  the  sym¬
bolism  of  Freemasonry.  See  Point  within
a  Circle.

Phallus.  Donegan  says  from  an  Egyp¬
tian  or  Indian  root.  See  Phallic  Worship.

Pharaxal.  A  significant  word  in  the
high  degrees,  and  there  said,  in  the  old
rituals,  to  signify  “  we  shall  all  be  united.”
Delaunay  gives  it  as  pharos  kol,  and  says
it  means  “all  is  explained.”  If  it  is  de¬
rived  from  and  the  adverbial  Sp,  kol,

“altogether,”  it  certainly  means  not  to  be.
united,  but  to  be  separated,  and  has  the
same  meaning  as  its  cognate  polkal.  This
incongruity  in  the  words  and  their  accepted
explanation  has  led  Bro.  Pike  to  reject
them  both  from  the  degree  in  which  they
are  originally  found.  And  it  is  certain
that  the  radical  pal  and  phar  both  have
everywhere  in  Hebrew  the  idea  of  separa¬
tion.  But  my  reading  of  the  old  rituals
compels  me  to  believe  that  the  degree  in
which  these  words  are  found  always  con¬
tained  an  idea  of  separation  and  subsequent
reunion.  It  is  evident  that  there  was  either
a  blunder  in  the  original  adoption  of  the
word  pharaxal,  or  more  probably  a  corrup¬
tion  by  subsequent  copyists.  I  am  satis¬
fied  that  the  ideas  of  division,  disunion,  or
separation,  and  of  subsequent  reunion,  are
correct ;  but  I  am  equally  satisfied  that  the
Hebrew  form  of  this  word  is  wrong.

Pharisees.  A  school  among  the
Jews  at  the  time  of  Christ,  so  called  from
the  Aramaic  Perushim,  Separated,  because
they  held  themselves  apart  from  the  rest  of
the  nation.  They  claimed  to  have  a  mys¬
terious  knowledge  unknown  to  the  mass  of
the  people,  and  pretended  to  the  exclusive
possession  of  the  true  meaning  of  the
Scriptures,  by  virtue  of  the  oral  law  and
the  secret  traditions  which,  having  been
received  by  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai,  had
been  transmitted  to  successive  generations
of  initiates.  They  are  supposed  to  have
been  essentially  the  same  as  the  Assideans
or  Chasidim.  The  character  of  their  organ¬
ization  is  interesting  to  the  Masonic  stu¬
dent.  They  held  a  secret  doctrine,  of
which  the  dogma  of  the  resurrection  was
an  important  feature;  they  met  in  sodali¬
ties  or  societies,  the  members  of  which
called  themselves  chabirim,  fellows  or  asso-
iates ;  and  they  styled  all  who  were  out¬
side  of  their  mystical  association,  yom  ha-
haretz,  or  people  of  the  land.

Phenicia.  The  Latinized  form  of  the
Greek  Phoinikia,  from  6oivi^,  a  palm,  be¬
cause  of  the  number  of  palms  anciently,
but  not  now,  found  in  the  country.  A
tract  of  country  on  the  north  of  Palestine,
along  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  of


which  Tyre  and  Sidon  were  the  principal
cities.  The  researches  of  Gesenius  and
other  modern  philologers  have  confirmed
the  assertions  of  Jerome  and  Augustine,
that  the  language  spoken  by  the  Jews  and
the  Phenicians  was  almost  identical;  a
statement  interesting  to  the  Masonic  stu¬
dent  as  giving  another  reason  for  the  bond
which  existed  between  Solomon  and  Hi¬
ram,  and  between  the  Jewish  workmen  and
their  fellow-laborers  of  Tyre,  in  the  con¬
struction  of  the  Temple.  See  Tyre.

Philadelphia.  Placed  on  the  im¬
print  of  some  Masonic  works  of  the  last
century  as  a  pseudonym  of  Paris.

Philadelphians,  Rite  of  the.
See  Primitive  liite.

PliiladelpheSjIiOdgcof the.  The

name  of  a  Lodge  at  Karbonne,  in  France,
in  which  the  Primitive  Rite  was  first  insti¬
tuted  ;  whence  it  is  sometimes  called  the
“  Rite  of  the  Philadelphians.”  See  Primi¬
tive  Rite.

Philalethcs,  Rite  of  the.  Called

also  the  Seekers  of  Truth,  although  the
word  literally  means  Friends  of  Truth.  It
was  a  Rite  founded  in  1773  at  Paris,  in  the
Lodge  of  Amis  R6unis,  by  Savalette  de
Langes,  keeper  of  the  Royal  Treasury,
with  whom  were  associated  the  Yicomte
de  Tavannes,  Court  de  Gebelin,  M.  de
Sainte-Jamos,  the  President  d’  Hericourt,
and  the  Prince  of  Hesse.  The  Rite,  which
was  principally  founded  on  the  system  of
Martinism,  did  not  confine  itself  to  any
particular  mode  of  instruction,  but  in  its  re¬
unions,  called  “  convents,”  the  members  de¬
voted  themselves  to  the  study  of  all  kinds
of  knowledge  that  were  connected  with  the
occult  sciences,  and  thus  they  welcomed  to
their  association  all  who  had  made  them¬
selves  remarkable  by  tbe  singularity  or  the
novelty  of  their  opinions,  such  as  Caglios-
tro,  Mesmer,  and  Saint  Martin.  It  was
divided  into  twelve  classes  or  chambers  of
instruction.  The  names  of  these  classes  or
degrees  were  as  follows:  1.  Apprentice;
2.  Fellow  Craft;  3.  Master;  4.  Elect;  5.
Scottish  Master ;  6.  Knight  of  the  East ;  7.
Rose  Croix;  8.  Knight  of  the  Temple;  9.
Unknown  Philosopher;  10.  Sublime  Phil¬
osopher;  11.  Initiate;  12.  Philaletlies,  or
Searcher  after  Truth.  The  first  six  de¬
grees  were  called  Petty,  and  the  last  six
High  Masonry.  The  Rite  did  not  in¬
crease  very  rapidly ;  nine  years  after  its
institution,  it  counted  only  twenty  Lodges
in  France  and  in  foreign  countries  which
were  of  its  obedience.  In  1785  it  attempted
a  radical  reform  in  Masonry,  and  for  this
purpose  invited  the  most  distinguished
Masons  of  all  countries  to  a  congress  at
Paris.  But  the  project  failed,  and  Savalette
,  de  Langes  dying  in  1788,  the  Rite,  of  which


PHILIP


PHILOSOPHIC


579


he  alone  was  the  soul,  ceased  to  exist,  and
the  Lodge  of  Amis  Reunis  was  dissolved.

Philip  IV.  Suraamed  “  le  Bel,”  or
“the  Fair,”  who  ascended  the  throne  of
France  in  1285.  He  is  principally  dis¬
tinguished  in  history  on  account  of  his
persecution  of  the  Knights  Templars.  With
the  aid  of  his  willing  instrument,  Pope
Clement  V.,  he  succeeded  in  accomplishing
the  overthrow  of  the  Order.  He  died  in
1314,  execrated  by  his  subjects,  whose
hearts  he  had  alienated  by  the  cruelty,
avarice,  and  despotism  of  his  administra¬
tion.

Philippian  Order.  Finch  gives
this  as  the  name  of  a  secret  Order  insti¬
tuted  by  King  Philip  “  for  the  use  only  of
his  first  nobility  and  principal  officers,  who
thus  formed  a  select  and  secret  council  in
which  he  could  implicitly  confide.”  It  has
attracted  che  attention  of  no  other  Masonic
writer,  and  was  probably  no  more  than  a
coinage  of  a  charlatan’s  brain.

Philocoreites,  Order  of.  An  an¬
drogynous  secret  society  established  in  the
French  army  in  Spain,  in  1808.  The  mem¬
bers  were  called  Knights  and  Ladies  Philo¬
coreites,  or  Lovers  of  Pleasure.  It  was  not
Masonic  in  character.  But  Thory  has  thought
it  worth  a  long  description  in  his  History  of
the  Foundation  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.

Philo  Judams.  A  Jewish  pliiloso-
her  of  the  school  of  Alexandria,  who  was
orn  about  thirty  years  before  Christ.
Philo  adopted  to  their  full  extent  the  mys¬
tical  doctrines  of  his  school,  and  taught
that  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  contained,  in  a
system  of  allegories,  the  real  source  of  all
religious  and  philosophical  knowledge,  the
true  meaning  of  which  was  to  be  excluded
from  the  vulgar,  to  whom  the  literal  signifi¬
cation  alone  was  to  be  made  known.  Who¬
ever,  says  he,  has  meditated  on  philosophy,
has  purified  himself  by  virtue,  and  elevated
himself  by  a  contemplative  life  to  God  and
the  intellectual  world,  receiving  their  in¬
spiration,  thus  pierces  the  gross  envelop
of  the  letter,  and  is  initiated  into  mysteries
of  which  the  literal  instruction  is  but  a
faint  image.  A  fact,  a  figure,  a  word,  a
rite  or  custom,  veils  the  profoundest  truths,
to  be  interpreted  only  by  him  who  has  the
true  key  of  science.  Such  symbolic  views
were  eagerly  seized  by  the  early  inventors
of  the  high,  philosophical  degrees  of  Ma¬
sonry,  who  have  made  frequent  use  of  the
esoteric  philosophy  of  Philo  in  the  con¬
struction  of  their  Masonic  system.

Philosopher.  Christian.  (Phi-
losophe  Chretien.)  The  fourth  degree  of  the
Order  of  African  Architects.

Philosopher,  Grand  and  Sub¬
lime  Ilejrinetie.  ( Grand  et  Sublime
Philosophe  Hermetique.)  A  degree  in  the


manuscript  collection  of  Peuvret.  Twelve
other  degrees  of  Philosopher  were  con¬
tained  in  the  same  collection,  namely,  Grand
Neapolitan  Philosopher,  Grand  Practical
Philosopher,  Kabbalistic  Philosopher,  Kab-
balistic  Philosopher  to  the  Number  5,  Per¬
fect  Mason  Philosopher,  Perfect  Master
Philosopher,  Petty  Neapolitan  Philoso¬
pher,  Petty  Practical  Philosopher,  Sub¬
lime  Philosopher,  Sublime  Philosopher  to
the  Number  9,  and  Sublime  Practical  Phil¬
osopher.  They  are  probably  all  Kabba¬
listic  or  Hermetic  degrees.

Philosopher  of  Hermes.  (Phi¬
losophe  d’ Hermes.)  A  degree  contained  in
the  Archives  of  the  Lodge  of  Saint  Louis
des  Amis  R6unis  at  Calais.

Philosopher,  Sublime.  ( Sublime
Philosophe.)  1.  The  fifty-third  degree  of
the  Rite  of  Mizraim.  2.  The  tenth  class
of  the  Rite  of  the  Philalethes.

Philosopher,  Sublime  Un¬
known.  ( Sublime  Philosophe  Inconnu.)
The  seventy-ninth  degree  of  the  Metropol¬
itan  Chapter  of  France.

Philosopher,  the  Uittle.  ( Le  pe¬
tit  Philosophe.)  A  degree  in  the  collection
of  Pyron.

Philosopher,  Unknown.  ( Philo¬
sophe  Inconnu.)  The  ninth  class  of  the  Rite
of  the  Philalethes.  It  was  so  called  in
reference  to  St.  Martin,  who  had  adopted
that  title  as  his  pseudonym,  and  was  uni¬
versally  known  by  it  among  his  disciples.

Philosopher's  Slone.  It  was  the
doctrine  of  the  alchemists,  that  there  was  a
certain  mineral,  the  discovery  of  which  was
the  object  of  their  art,  because,  being  mixed
with  the  baser  metals,  it  would  transmute
these  into  gold.  This  mineral,  known  only
to  the  adepts,  they  called  lapis philo sop horum,
or  the  philosopher’s  stone.  Hitchcock,  who
wrote  a  book  in  1857,  ( Alchemy  and  the  Al¬
chemists,)  to  maintain  the  proposition  that
alchemy  was  a  symbolic  science,  that  its
subject  was  Man,  aud  its  object  the  per¬
fection  of  men,  asserts  that  the  philos¬
opher’s  stone  was  a  symbol  of  man.  He
quotes  the  old  Hermetic  philosopher,  Isaac
Holland,  as  saying  that  “  though  a  man  be
poor,  yet  may  he  very  well  attain  unto  it
[the  work  of  perfection,]  and  may  be  em¬
ployed  in  making  the  philosopher’s  stone.”
And  Hitchcock,  (p.  76,)  in  commenting  on
this,  says :  “  That  is,  every  man,  no  matter
how  humble  his  vocation,  may  do  the  best
he  can  in  his  place  —  may  ‘  love  mercy,  do
justly,  and  walk  humbly  with  God ;  ’  and
what  more  doth  God  require  of  any  man?”

If  this  interpretation  be  correct,  then  the
philosopher’s  stone  of  the  alchemists,  and
the  spiritual  temple  of  the  Freemasons  are
identical  symbols.

Philosophic  Degrees.  All  the  de-


580


PHILOSOPHIC


PHYSICAL


grees  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Kite  above  the  eighteenth  and  below  the
thirty-third,  are  called  philosophical  de¬
grees,  because,  abandoning  the  symbolism
based  on  the  Temple,  they  seek  to  develop  a
system  of  pure  theosophy.  Some  writers
have  contended  that  the  seventeenth  and
eighteenth  degrees  should  be  classed  with
the  philosophic  degrees.  But  I  cannot  agree
with  them,  since  both  of  those  degrees  have
preserved  the  idea  of  the  Temple  system.
They  ought  rather  to  be  called  apocalyptic
degrees,  the  seventeenth  especially,  because
they  do  not  teach  the  ancient  philosophies,
but  are  connected  in  their  symbolism  with
the  spiritual  temple  of  the  New  Jerusalem.

Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.  This
Rite  consists  of  twelve  degrees,  as  follows :
1.  2.  3.  Knight  of  the  Black  Eagle  or
Rose  Croix  of  Heredom,  divided  into  three
parts;  4.  Knight  of  the  Phoenix  ;  5.  Knight
of  the  Sun ;  6.  Knight  of  the  Rainbow ;
7.  True  Mason;  8.  Knight  of  the  Argo¬
naut  ;  9.  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece ;  10.
Perfectly  Initiated  Grand  Inspector;  11.
Grand  Scottish  Inspector;  12.  Sublime
Master  of  the  Luminous  Ring.

The  three  degrees  of  Ancient  Craft  Ma¬
sonry  form  the  necessary  basis  of  this  sys¬
tem,  although  they  do  not  constitute  a  part
of  the  Rite.  In  its  formation  it  expressly
renounced  the  power  to  constitute  symbolic
Lodges,  but  reserved  the  faculty  of  affi hat¬
ing  regularly  constituted  Lodges  into  its
high  degrees.  Tliory  {Fond,  du  G.  0.,  p.
162,)  seems  desirous  of  tracing  the  origin
of  the  Rite  to  the  Rosicrucians  of  the
fourteenth  century.  But  the  reasons  which
he  assigns  for  this  belief  are  by  no  means
satisfactory.  The  truth  is,  that  the  Rite  was
founded  in  1775,  in  the  celebrated  Lodge
of  the  Social  Contract,  ( Contrat  Social,)  and
that  its  principal  founder  was  M.  Boileau,
a  physician  of  Paris,  and  who  had  been
a  disciple  of  Pernetty,  the  originator  of  the
Hermetic  Rite  at  Avignon,  whose  Hermetic
principles  he  introduced  into  the  Philo¬
sophic  Scottish  Rite.  Some  notion  may  be
formed  of  the  nature  of  the  system  which
was  taught  in  this  Rite,  from  the  name  of
the  degree  which  is  at  its  summit.  The
Luminous  Ring  is  a  Pythagorean  degree.
In  1780,  an  Academy  of  the  Sublime  Mas¬
ters  of  the  Luminous  Ring  was  established
in  France,  in  which  the  doctrine  was
taught  that  Freemasonry  was  originally
founded  by  Pythagoras,  and  in  which  the
most  important  portion  of  the  lectures  was
engaged  in  an  explanation  of  the  peculiar
dogmas  of  the  sage  of  Samos.

The  chief  seat  of  the  Rite  had  always
been  in  the  Lodge  of  Social  Contract  until
1792,  when,  in  common  with  all  the  other
Masonic  bodies  of  France,  it  suspended  its


labors.  It  was  resuscitated  at  the  termi¬
nation  of  the  Revolution,  and  in  1805  the
Lodge  of  the  Social  Contract,  and  that  of
St.  Alexander  of  Scotland,  assumed  the
title  of  the  “  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Phil¬
osophic  Scottish  Rite  in  France.”  This
body  was  eminently  literary  in  its  char¬
acter,  and  in  1811  and  1812  possessed  a
mass  of  valuable  archives,  among  which
were  a  number  of  old  charters,  manuscript
rituals,  and  Masonic  works  of  great  interest,
in  all  languages.

Philosophy  Sublime.  [Pkiloso-
pkie  Sublime. )  The  forty-eighth  degree  of
the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Plicenix.  The  old  mythological  le¬
gend  of  the  phoenix  is  a  familiar  one.  The
bird  was  described  as  of  the  size  of  an  eagle,
with  a  head  finely  crested,  a  body  covered
with  beautiful  plumage,  and  eyes  sparkling
like  stars.  She  was  said  to  livesix  hundred
years  in  the  wilderness,  when  she  built  for
herself  a  funereal  pile  of  aromatic  woods,
which  she  ignited  with  the  fanning  of  her
wings,  and  emerged  from  the  flames  with  a
new  life.  Hence  the  phoenix  has  been
adopted  universally  as  a  symbol  of  im¬
mortality.  Higgins  (Anacalypsis,  ii.  441,)
says  that  the  phoenix  is  the  symbol  of  an
ever-revolving  solar  cycle  of  six  hundred
and  eight  years,  and  refers  to  the  Pbeni-
cian  word  phen,  which  signifies  a  cycle.
Aumont,  the  first  Grand  Master  of  the
Templars  after  the  martyrdom  of  De  Mo-
lay,  and  called  the  “  Restorer  of  the  Order,”
took,  it  is  said,  for  his  seal,  a  phoenix  brood¬
ing  on  the  flames,  with  the  motto,  “  Ardet
ut  vivat” — She  burns  that  she  may  live.
The  phoenix  was  adopted  at  a  very  early
period  as  a  Christian  symbol,  and  several
representations  of  it  have  been  found  in  the
catacombs.  Its  ancient  legend,  doubtless,
caused  it  to  be  accepted  as  a  symbol  of  the
resurrection.

Physical  Qualifications.  The

physical  qualifications  of  a  candidate  for
initiation  into  Masonry  may  be  considered
under  the  three  heads  of  Sex,  Age,  and
Bodily  Conformation.  1.  As  to  Sex.  It
is  a  landmark  that  the  candidate  shall  be
a  man.  This,  of  course,  prohibits  the  ini¬
tiation  of  a  woman.  2.  As  to  Age.  The
candidate  must,  say  the  Old  Regulations,  be
of  “mature  and  discreet  age.”  The  ritual
forbids  the  initiation  of  an  “  old  man  in  his
dotage,  or  a  young  man  under  age.”  The
man  who  has  lost  his  faculties  by  an  accu¬
mulation  of  years,  or  not  yet  acquired  them
in  their  full  extent  by  immaturity  of  age,
is  equally  incapable  of  initiation.  (See
Dotage  and  Mature  Age.)  3.  As  to  Bodily
Conformation.  The  Gothic  Constitutions
of  926,  or  what  is  accepted  as  that  docu¬
ment,  prescribe  that  the  candidate  “  must


PICART’S


PILGRIM


581


be  without  blemish,  and  have  the  full  and
proper  use  of  his  limbs and  the  Charges
of  1722  say  “that  he  must  have  no  maim
or  defect  in  his  body  that  may  render  him
incapable  of  learning  the  art,  of  serving  his
Master’s  lord,  and  being  made  a  brother.”
And  although  a  few  jurists  have  been  dis¬
posed  to  interpret  this  law  with  unauthor¬
ized  laxity,  the  general  spirit  of  the  Insti¬
tution,  and  of  all  its  authorities,  is  to  ob¬
serve  it  rigidly.  See  the  subject  fully  dis¬
cussed  in  the  author’s  Text  Book  of  Ma¬
sonic  Jurisprudence,  pp.  100-113.

Picart’s  Ceremonies.  Bernard
Picart  was  a  celebrated  engraver  of  Am¬
sterdam,  and  the  author  of  a  voluminous
work,  which  was  begun  in  1723,  and  con¬
tinued  after  his  death,  until  1737,  by  J.  F.
Bernard,  entitled  Ceremonies  Religieuses  de
tons  les  peuple  du  monde.  A  second  edition
was  published  at  Paris,  in  1741,  by  the
Abbes  Banier  and  Le  Mascrier,  who  entire¬
ly  remodelled  the  work;  and  a  third  in
1783  by  a  set  of  free-thinkers,  who  dis¬
figured,  and  still  further  altered  the  text
to  suit  their  own  views.  Editions,  profess¬
ing  to  be  reprints  of  the  original  one,  have
been  subsequently  published  in  1807-9  and
1816.  The  book  has  been  recently  deemed
of  some  importance  by  the  investigators
of  the  Masonic  history  of  the  last  century,
because  it  contains  an  engraved  list  in  two
pages  of  the  English  Lodges  which  were  in
existence  in  1735.  The  plate  is,  however,
of  no  value  as  an  original  authority,  since
it  is  merely  a  copy  of  the  Engraved  List  of
Lodges,  published  by  J.  Pine  in  1735.

Pickaxe.  Ail  instrument  used  to
loosen  the  soil  and  prepare  it  for  digging.
It  is  one  of  the  working-tools  of  a  Royal
Arch  Mason,  and  symbolically  teaches  him
to  loosen  from  his  heart  the  hold  of  evil
habits.

Piece  of  Architecture.  (Morgeau
d’ Architecture.)  The  French  so  call  a  dis¬
course,  poem,  or  other  production  on  the
subject  of  Freemasonry.  The  definition
previously  given  in  this  work  under  the
title  Architecture,  in  being  confined  to  the
minutes  of  the  Lodge,  is  not  sufficiently
comprehensive.

Pilgrim.  A  pilgrim  (from  the  Italian
pelegrino,  and  that  from  the  Latin  peregri-
nus,  signifying  a  traveller,)  denotes  one
who  visits  holy  places  from  a  principle
of  devotion.  Dante  (  Vita  Nuova )  distin¬
guishes  pilgrims  from  palmers  thus:  palm¬
ers  were  those  who  went  beyond  the  sea  to
the  East,  and  often  brought  back  staves  of
palm-wood ;  while  pilgrims  went  only  to
the  shrine  of  St.  Jago,  in  Spain.  But  Sir
Walter  Scott  says  that  the  palmers  were
in  the  habit  of  passing  from  shrine  to
shrine,  living  on  charity;  but  pilgrims


made  the  journey  to  any  shrine  only  once;
and  this  is  the  more  usually  accepted  dis¬
tinction  of  the  two  classes.

In  the  Middle  Ages,  Europe  was  filled
with  pilgrims  repairing  to  Palestine  to  pay
their  veneration  to  the  numerous  spots  con¬
secrated  in  the  annals  of  Holy  Writ,  more
especially  to  the  sepulchre  of  our  Lord.

“It  is  natural,”  says  Robertson,  {Hist.
ch.  v.,  i.  19,)  “  to  the  human  mind,  to  view
those  places  which  have  been  distinguished
by  being  the  residence  of  any  illustrious
personage,  or  the  scene  of  any  great  trans¬
action,  with  some  degree  of  delight  and
veneration.  From  this  principle  flowed  the
superstitious  devotion  with  which  Chris¬
tians,  from  the  earliest  ages  of  the  church,
were  accustomed  to  visit  that  country
which  the  Almighty  had  selected  as  the  in¬
heritance  of  his  favorite  people,  and  in
which  the  Son  of  God  had  accomplished
the  redemption  of  mankind.  As  this  dis¬
tant  pilgrimage  could  not  be  performed
without  considerable  expense,  fatigue,  and
danger,  it  appeared  the  more  meritorious,
and  came  to  be  considered  as  an  expiation
for  almost  every  crime.”

Hence,  by  a  pilgrimage  to  the  Holy
Land  or  to  the  shrine  of  some  blessed
martyr,  the  thunders  of  the  church,  and
the  more  quiet,  but  not  less  alarming,  re¬
proaches  or  conscience  were  often  averted.
And  as  this  was  an  act  of  penance,  some¬
times  voluntarily  assumed,  but  oftener  im¬
posed  by  the  command  of  a  religious  su¬
perior,  the  person  performing  it  was  called  a
“  Pilgrim  Penitent.”

While  the  Caliphs  of  the  East,  a  race  of
monarchs  equally  tolerant  and  sagacious,
retained  the  sovereignty  of  Palestine,  the
penitents  were  undisturbed  in  the  perform¬
ance  of  their  pious  pilgrimages.  In  fact,
their  visits  to  Jerusalem  were  rather  en¬
couraged  by  these  sovereigns  as  a  commerce
which,  in  the  language  of  the  author  al¬
ready  quoted,  “  brought  into  their  domin¬
ions  gold  and  silver,  and  carried  nothing
out  of  them  but  relics  and  consecrated  trin¬
kets.”

But  in  the  eleventh  century,  the  Turks,
whose  bigoted  devotion  to  their  own  creed
was  only  equalled  by  their  hatred  of  every
other  form  of  faith,  but  more  especially  of
Christianity,  having  obtained  possession  of
Syria,  the  pilgrim  no  longer  found  safety
or  protection  in  his  pious  journey.  He
who  would  then  visit  the  sepulchre  of  his
Lord  must  be  prepared  to  encounter  the
hostile  attacks  of  ferocious  Saracens,  and
the  “  Pilgrim  Penitent,”  laying  aside  his
peaceful  garb,  his  staff  and  russet  cloak,
was  compelled  to  assume  the  sword  and
coat  of  mail  and  become  a  “  Pilgrim  War¬
rior.”


582


PILGRIM


PILLAR


Having  at  length,  through  all  the  perils
of  a  distant  journey,  accomplished  the
reat  object  of  his  pilgrimage,  and  partly
egged  his  way  amid  poor  or  inhospitable
regions,  where  a  crust  of  breadand  a  draught
of  water  were  often  the  only  alms  that  he
received,  and  partly  fought  it  amid  the
gleaming  scimitars  of  warlike  Turks,  the
Pilgrim  Penitent  and  Pilgrim  Warrior
was  enabled  to  kneel  at  the  sepulchre  of
Christ,  and  offer  up  his  devotions  on  that
sacred  spot  consecrated  in  his  pious  mind
by  so  many  religious  associations.

But  the  experience  which  he  had  so
dearly  bought  was  productive  of  a  noble
and  a  generous  result.  The  Order  of  Knights
Templars  was  established  by  some  of  those
devoted  heroes,  who  were  determined  to
protect  the  pilgrims  who  followed  them
from  the  dangers  and  difficulties  through
which  they  themselves  had  passed,  at  times
with  such  remote  prospects  of  success.
Many  of  the  pilgrims  having  performed
their  vow  of  visiting  the  holy  shrine,  re¬
turned  home,  to  live  upon  the  capital  of
iety  which  their  penitential  pilgrimage
ad  gained  for  them  ;  but  others,  imitating
the  example  of  the  defenders  of  the  sepul¬
chre,  doffed  their  pilgrim’s  garb  and  united
themselves  with  the  knights  who  were
contending  with  their  infidel  foes,  and  thus
the  Pilgrim  Penitent,  having  by  force  of
necessity  become  a  Pilgrim  Warrior,  ended
his  warlike  pilgrimage  by  assuming  the
vows  of  a  Knight  Templar.

In  this  brief  synopsis,  the  modern  and
Masonic  Knight  Templar  will  find  a
rational  explanation  of  the  ceremonies  of
that  degree.

Pilgrim  Penitent.  A  term  in  the
ritual  of  Masonic  Templarism.  It  refers  to
the  pilgrimage,  made  as  a  penance  for  sin,
to  the  sepulchre  of  the  Lord ;  for  the  church
promised  the  remission  of  sins  and  various
spiritual  advantages  as  the  reward  of  the
pious  and  faithful  pilgrim.  See  Pilgrim.

Pilgrim’s  Shell.  See  Scallop  Shell.

Pilgrim’s  Weeds.  The  costume  of
a  pilgrim  was  thus  called.  It  may  be  de¬
scribed  as  follows :  In  the  first  place,  he
wore  a  sclavina,  or  long  gown,  made  of  the
darkest  colors  and  the  coarsest  materials,
bound  by  a  leathern  girdle,  as  an  emblem
of  his  humility  and  an  evidence  of  his
poverty;  a  bourdon,  or  staff,  in  the  form  of
a  long  walking  stick,  with  two  knobs  at  the
top,  supported  his  weary  steps  ;  the  rosary
and  cross,  suspended  from  his  neck,  denoted
the  religious  character  he  had  assumed ;  a
scrip,  or  bag,  held  his  scanty  supply  of  pro¬
visions  ;  a  pair  of  sandals  on  his  feet,  and
a  coarse  round  hat  turned  before,  in  the
front  of  which  was  fastened  a  scallop  shell,
completed  the  rude  toilet  of  the  pilgrim  of


the  Middle  Ages.  Spenser’s  description,
in  the  Fairie  Queen,  (B.  I.,  c.  vi.,  at.  35,)  of  a
pilgrim’s  weeds,  does  not  much  differ  from
this :

“  A  silly  man  in  simple  weeds  forewom,

Ana  soiled  with  dust  of  the  long  dried  way ;

His  sandals  were  with  toilsome  travel  torne,
And  face  all  tann’d  with  scorching  sunny
ray;

As  he  had  travell’d  many  a  summer’s  day,
Through  boiling  sands  of  Arabv  and  lude;

And  in  his  hand  a  Jacob’s  staff  to  stay
His  weary  limbs  upon  ;  and  eke  behind
His  scrip  did  hang,  in  which  his  needments
he  did  bind.”

Pilgrim  Templar.  The  part  of  the
pilgrim  represented^  in  the  ritual  of  the
Masonic  Knights  Templars’  degree  is  a
symbolic  reference  to  the  career  of  the  pil¬
grim  of  the  Middle  Ages  in  his  journey  to
the  sepulchre  in  the  Holy  Land.  See  Pil¬
grim.

Pilgrim  Warrior.  A  term  in  the

ritual  of  Masonic  Templarism.  It  refers
to  the  pilgrimage  of  the  knights  to  secure
possession  of  the  holy  places.  This  was
considered  a  pious  duty.  “  Whoever  goes
to  Jerusalem,”  says  one  of  the  canons  of
the  Council  of  Clermont,  “  for  the  libera¬
tion  of  the  Church  of  God,  in  a  spirit  of
devotion  only,  and  not  for  the  sake  of  glory
or  of  gain,  that  journey  shall  be  esteemed
a  substitute  for  every  kind  of  penance.”
The  difference  between  the  pilgrim  peni¬
tent  and  the  pilgrim  warrior  was  this:
that  the  former  bore  only  his  stafl)  but  the
latter  tvi  elded  his  sword.

Piliea\  The  title  given  to  each  of  the
conventual  bailiffs  or  heads  of  the  eight
languages  of  the  Order  of  Malta,  and  by
which  they  were  designated  in  all  official
records.  It  signifies  a  pillar  or  support  of
an  edifice,  and  was  metaphorically  applied
to  these  dignitaries  as  if  they  were  the
supports  of  the  Order.

Pillar.  In  the  earliesttimes  it  was  cus¬
tomary  to  perpetuate  remarkable  events,  or
exhibit  gratitude  for  providential  favors,
by  the  erection  of  pillars,  which  by  the
idolatrous  races  were  dedicated  to  their
spurious  gods.  Thus  Sanconiatho  tells  us
that  Hypsourianos  and  Ousous,  who  lived
before  the  flood,  dedicated  two  pillars  to
the  elements  fire  and  air.  Among  the
Egyptians  the  pillars  were,  in  general,  in
the  form  of  obelisks  from  fifty  to  one  hun¬
dred  feet  high,  and  exceedingly  slender  in
proportion.  Upon  their  four  sides  hiero¬
glyphics  were  often  engraved.  According
to  Herodotus,  they  were  first  raised  in
honor  of  the  sun,  and  their  pointed  form
was  intended  to  represent  his  rays.  Many
of  these  monuments  still  remain.

In  the  antediluvian  ages,  the  posterity  of


PILLAR


PILLARS


583


Seth  erected  pillars ;  “  for,”  says  the  Jewish
historian,  “  that  their  inventions  might  not
be  lost  before  they  were  sufficiently  known,
upon  Adam’s  prediction,  that  the  world
was  to  be  destroyed  at  one  time  by  the  force
of  fire,  and  at  another  time  by  the  violence
of  water,  they  made  two  pillars,  the  one  of
brick,  the  other  of  stone ;  they  inscribed
their  discoveries  on  them  both,  that  in  case
the  pillar  of  brick  should  be  destroyed  by
the  flood,  the  pillar  of  stone  might  remain,
and  exhibit  those  discoveries  to  mankind,
and  also  inform  them  that  there  was  another
pillar  of  brick  erected  by  them.”  Jacob
erected  a  pillar  at  Bethel,  to  commemorate
his  remarkable  vision  of  the  ladder,  and
afterwards  another  one  at  Galeed  as  a  me¬
morial  of  his  alliance  with  Laban.  Joshua
erected  one  at  Gilgal  to  perpetuate  the  re¬
membrance  of  his  miraculous  crossing  of
the  Jordan.  Samuel  set  up  a  pillar  be¬
tween  Mizpeh  and  Shen,  on  account  of  a
defeat  of  the  Philistines,  and  Absalom
erected  another  in  honor  of  himself.

The  doctrine  of  gravitation  was  unknown
to  the  people  of  the  primitive  ages,  and
they  were  unable  to  refer  the  support  of
the  earth  in  its  place  to  this  principle.
Hence  they  looked  to  some  other  cause,
and  none  appeared  to  their  simple  and  un-
philosophic  minds  more  plausible  than  that
it  was  sustained  by  pillars.  The  Old  Tes¬
tament  abounds  with  reference  to  this  idea.
Hannah,  in  her  song  of  thanksgiving,  ex¬
claims  :  “  The  pillars  of  the  earth  are  the
Lord’s,  and  he  hath  set  the  world  upon
them.”  (1  Sam.  ii.  8.)  The  Psalmist  sig¬
nifies  the  same  doctrine  in  the  following
text:  “The  earth  and  all  the  inhabitants
thereof  are  dissolved ;  I  bear  up  the
pillars  of  it.”  (Ps.  lxxv.  3.)  And  Job
says :  “  He  shaketh  the  earth  out  of  her
places,  and  the  pillars  thereof  tremble.”
(xxvi.  7.)  All  the  old  religions  taught  the
same  doctrine ;  and  hence  pillars  being  re¬
garded  as  the  supporters  of  the  earth,  they
were  adopted  as  the  symbol  of  strength  and
firmness.  To  this,  Dudl.ey  ( Naoloyj ,  123,)
attributes  the  origin  of  pillar  worship,
which  prevailed  so  extensively  among  the
idolatrous  nations  of  antiquity.  “  The  rev¬
erence,”  says  he,  “shown  to  columns,  as
symbols  of  the  power  of  the  Deity,  was
readily  converted  into  worship  paid  to
them  as  idols  of  the  real  presence.”  But
here  I  think  he  has  fallen  into  a  mistake.
The  double  pillars  or  columns,  acting  as
an  architectural  support,  were,  it  is  true,
symbols  derived  from  a  natural  cause  of
strength  and  permanent  firmness.  But
there  was  another  more  prevailing  sym¬
bology.  The  monolith,  or  circular  piilar,
standing  alone,  was,  to  the  ancient  mind,  a
representation  of  the  Phallus,  the  symbol


of  the  creative  and  generative  energy  of
Deity,  and  it  is  in  these  Phallic  pillars
that  we  are  to  find  the  true  origin  of  pillar
worship,  which  was  only  one  form  of
Phallic  worship,  the  most  predominant  of
all  the  cults  to  which  the  ancients  were
addicted.

Pillars  of  Cloud  and  Fire.  The

pillar  of  cloud  that  went  before  the  Israel¬
ites  by  day,  and  the  pillar  of  fire  that  pre¬
ceded  them  by  night,  in  their  journey
through  the  wilderness,  are  supposed  to  be
alluded  to  by  the  pillars  of  Jachin  and
Boaz  at  the  porch  of  Solomon’s  Temple.
We  find  this  symbolism  at  a  very  early
period  in  the  last  century,  having  been  in¬
corporated  into  the  lecture  of  the  second
degree,  where  it  still  remains.  “  The  pillar
on  the  right  hand,”  says  Calcott.  ( Cand .
Disq.,  66,)  “represented  the  pillar  of  the
cloud,  and  that  on  the  left  the  pillar  of  fire.”
If  this  symbolism  be  correct,  the  pillars
of  the  porch,  like  those  of  the  wilderness,
would  refer  to  the  superintending  and  pro¬
tecting  power  of  Deity.

Pillars  of  Enoch.  Two  pillars
erected  by  Enoch,  for  the  preservation  of
the  antediluvian  inventions,  and  which  are
repeatedly  referred  to  in  the  “Legend  of  the
Craft,”  contained  in  the  Old  Constitutions,
and  in  the  high  degrees  of  modern  times.
See  Enoch.

Pillars  of  the  Porch.  The  pillars
most  remarkable  in  Scripture  history  were
the  two  erected  by  Solomon  at  the  porch  of
the  Temple,  and  which  Josephus  ( Antiq .,
lib.  i.,  cap.  ii.,)  thus  describes :  “Moreover,
this  Hiram  made  two  hollow  pillars,  wrhose
outsides  were  of  brass,  and  the  thickness
of  the  brass  was  four  fingers’  breadth,  and
the  height  of  the  pillars  wras  eighteen
cubits,  (27  feet,)  and  the  circumference
twelve  cubits,  (18  feet;)  but  there  was  cast
with  each  of  their  chapiters  lily-work,  that
stood  upon  the  pillar,  and  it  wras  elevated
five  cubits,  (7£  feet,)  round  about  which
there  was  net-work  interwoven  with  small
palms  made  of  brass,  and  covered  the  lily-
work.  To  this  also  were  hung  twro  hundred
pomegranates,  in  two  rows.  The  one  of
these  pillars  he  set  at  the  entrance  of  the
porch  on  the  right  hand,  (or  south,)  and
called  it  Jachin,  and  the  other  at  the  left
hand,  [or  north,)  and  called  it  Boaz.”

It  has  been  supposed*  that  Solomon,  in
erecting  these  pillars,  had  reference  to  the
pillar  of  cloud  and  the  pillar  of  fire  which
went  before  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness,
and  that  the  right  hand  or  south  pillar  rep¬
resented  the  pillar  of  cloud,  and  the  left
hand  or  north  pillar  represented  that  of
fire.  Solomon  did  not  simply  erect  them
as  ornaments  to  the  Temple,  but  as  me¬
morials  of  God’s  repeated  promises  of  sup-


584


PILLARS


PILLARS


port  to  his  people  of  Israel.  For  the  pillar
JO’  {Jackin),  derived  from  the  words  |“p
{Jak),  “Jehovah,”  and  j'3D  (achin),  “to  es¬
tablish,”  signifies  that  “God  will  establish
his  house  of  Israel ;  ”  while  the  pillar  m
( Boaz ),  compounded  of  ^  (b),  in  and
w  (oaz),  “strength,”  signifies  that  “in
strength  shall  it  he  established.”  And  thus
were  the  Jews,  in  passing  through  the
porch  to  the  Temple,  daily  reminded  of
the  abundant  promises  of  God,  and  in¬
spired  with  confidence  in  his  protection
and  gratitude  for  his  many  acts  of  kind¬
ness  to  his  chosen  people.

Tke  construction  of  these  pillars. — There
is  no  part  of  the  architecture  of  the  ancient
Temple  which  is  so  difficult  to  be  under¬
stood  in  its  details  as  the  scriptural  ac¬
count  of  these  memorable  pillars.  Free¬
masons,  in  general,  intimately  as  their
symbolical  signification  is  connected  with
some  of  the  most  beautiful  portions  of  their
ritual,  appear  to  have  but  a  confused  no¬
tion  of  their  construction  and  of  the  true
disposition  of  the  various  parts  of  which
they  are  composed.  Mr.  Ferguson  says
{Smith,  Diet.  Bib.,)  that  there  are  no  fea¬
tures  connected  with  the  Temple  which
have  given  rise  to  so  much  controversy,  or
been  so  difficult  to  explain,  as  the  form  of
these  two  pillars.

Tlieir  situation,  according  to  Lightfoot,
was  within  the  porch,  at  its  very  entrance,
and  on  each  side  of  the  gate.  They  were
therefore  seen,  one  on  the  right  and  the
other  on  the  left,  as  soon  as  the  visitor
stepped  within  the  porch.  And  this,  it
will  be  remembered,  in  confirmation,  is  the
very  spot  in  which  Ezekiel  (xi.  49,)  places
the  pillars  that  he  saw  in  his  vision  of  the
Temple.  “  The  length  of  the  porch  was
twenty  cubits,  and  the  breadth  eleven  cubits ;
and  lie  brought  me  by  the  steps  whereby
they  went  up  to  it,  and  there  were  pillars
by  the  posts,  one  on  this  side,  and  another
on  that  side.”  The  assertion  made  by
some  writers,  that  they  were  not  columns
intended  to  support  the  roof,  but  simply
obelisks  for  ornament,  is  not  sustained  by
sufficient  authority;  and  as  Ferguson  very
justly  says,  not  only  would  the  high  roof
look  painfully  weak,  but  it  would  have
been  impossible  to  construct  it,  with  the
imperfect  science  of  those  days,  without
some  such  support.

These  pillars,  we  are  told,  were  of  brass,
as  well  as  the  chapiters  that  surmounted
them,  and  were  cast  hollow.  The  thickness
of  the  brass  of  each  pillar  was  “  four  fingers,
or  a  hand’s  breadth,”  which  is  equal  to
three  inches.  According  to  the  accounts
in  1  Kings  viii.  15,  and  in  Jeremiah  lii.  21,
the  circumference  of  each  pillar  was  twelve
cubits.  Now,  according  to  the  Jewish


computation,  the  cubit  used  in  the  meas¬
urement  of  the  Temple  buildings  was  six
hands’  breadth,  or  eighteen  inches.  Accord¬
ing  to  the  tables  of  Bishop  Cumberland,
the  cubit  was  rather  more,  he  making  it
about  twenty-two  inches  ;  but  I  adhere  to
the  measure  laid  down  by  the  Jewish  wri¬
ters  as  probably  more  correct,  and  certain¬
ly  more  simple  for  calculation.  The  cir¬
cumference  of  each  pillar,  reduced  by  this
scale  to  English  measure,  would  be  eighteen
feet,  and  its  diameter  about  six.

The  reader  of  the  scriptural  accounts  of
these  pillars  will  be  not  a  little  puzzled
with  the  apparent  discrepancies  that  are
found  in  the  estimates  of  their  height  as
given  in  the  Books  of  Kings  and  Chron¬
icles.  In  the  former  book,  it  is  said  that
their  height  was  eighteen  cubits,  and  in
the  latter  it  was  thirty-five,  which  latter
height  Whiston  observes  would  be  contrary
to  all  the  rules  of  architecture.  But  the
discrepancy  is  easily  reconciled  by  suppos¬
ing — which,  indeed,  must  have  been  the
case — that  in  the  Book  of  Kings  the  pillars
are  spoken  of  separately,  and  that  in
Chronicles  their  aggregate  height  is  cal¬
culated  ;  and  the  reason  why,  in  this  latter
book,  their  united  height  is  placed  at  thirty-
five  cubits  instead  of  thirty-six,  which
would  be  the  double  of  eighteen,  is  because
they  are  there  measured  as  they  appeared
with  the  chapiters  upon  them.  Now  half
a  cubit  of  each  pillar  was  concealed  in
what  Lightfoot  calls  “the  whole  of  the
chapiter,”  that  is,  half  a  cubit’s  depth  of
the  lower  edge  of  the  chapiter  covered  the
top  of  the  pillar,  making  each  pillar,  ap¬
parently,  only  seventeen  and  a  half  cubits’
high,  or  the  two  thirty-five  cubits  as  laid
down  in  the  Book  of  Chronicles.

This  is  a  much  better  method  of  recon¬
ciling  the  discrepancy  than  that  adopted
by  Calcott,  who  supposes  that  the  pedestals
of  the  pillars  were  seventeen  cubits  high  —
a  violation  of  every  rule  of  architectural
proportion  with  which  we  would  be  reluc¬
tant  to  charge  the  memory  of  so  “cunning
a  workman  ”  as  Hiram  the  Builder.  The
account  in  Jeremiah  agrees  with  that  in  the
Book  of  Kings.  The  height,  therefore,  of
each  of  these  pillars  was,  in  English  meas¬
ure,  twenty-seven  feet.  The  chapiter  or
pomel  was  five  cubits,  or  seven  and  a  half
feet  more;  but  as  half  a  cubit,  or  nine
inches,  was  common  to  both  pillar  and
chapiter,  the  whole  height  from  the  ground
to  the  top  of  the  chapiter  was  twenty-two
cubits  aud  a  half,  or  thirty-three  feet  and
nine  inches.

Mr.  Ferguson  has  come  to  a  different
conclusion.  He  says  in  the  article  Temple,
in  Smith’s  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  that  “ac¬
cording  to  1  Kings  vii.  15,  the  pillars  were


PILLARS


PILLARS


585


eighteen  cubits  high  and  twelve  in  circum¬
ference,  with  capitals  five  cubits  in  height.
Above  this  was  (ver.  19)  another  member,
called  also  chapiter  of  lily-work,  four  cubits
in  height,  but  which,  from  the  second  men¬
tion  of  it  in  ver.  22,  seems  more  probably
to  have  been  an  entablature,  which  is  ne¬
cessary  to  complete  the  order.  As  these
members  make  out  twenty-seven  cubits,
leaving  three  cubits,  or  41  feet,  for  the  slope
of  the  roof,  the  whole  design  seems  reason¬
able  and  proper.”  He  calculates,  of  course,
on  the  authority  of  the  Book  of  Kings,
that  the  height  of  the  roof  of  the  porch
was  thirty  cubits,  and  assumes  that  these
pillars  were  columns  by  which  it  was  sup¬
ported,  and  connected  with  it  by  an  entab¬
lature.

Each  of  these  pillars  was  surmounted  by
a  chapiter,  which  was  five  cubits,  or  seven
and  a  half  feet  in  height.  The  shape  and
construction  of  this  chapiter  require  some
consideration.  The  Hebrew  word  which
is  used  in  this  place  is  niillD,  ( koteret .)
Its  root  is  to  be  found  in  the  word  “iro,
(keter,)  which  signified  “  a  crown,”  and  is
so  used  in  Esther  vi.  8,  to  designate  the
royal  diadem  of  the  king  of  Persia.  The
Chaldaic  version  expressly  calls  the  chapi¬
ter  “a  crown  but  Rabbi  Solomon,  in  his
commentary,  uses  the  word  S'D13,  (pomel,)
signifying  “a  globe  or  spherical  body,”
and  Itabbi  Gershom  describes  it  as  “like
two  crowns  joined  together.”  Lightfoot
says,  “it  was  a  huge,  great  oval,  five  cubits
high,  and  did  not  only  sit  upon  the  head
of  the  pillars,  but  also  flowered  or  spread
them,  being  larger  about,  a  great  deal,  than
the  pillars  themselves.”  The  Jewish  com¬
mentators  say  that  the  two  lower  cubits  of
its  surface  were  entirely  plain,  but  that
the  three  upper  were  richly  ornamented.
To  this  ornamental  part  we  now  come.

In  the  First  Book  of  Kings,  ch.  vii.,  verses
17,  20,  22,  the  ornaments  of  the  chapiters
are  thus  described :

“And  nets  of  checker-work  and  wreaths
of  chain-work,  for  the  chapiters  which
were  upon  the  tops  of  the  pillars ;  seven
for  the  one  chapiter,  and  seven  for  the
other  chapiter.

“And  he  made  *he  pillars,  and  two  row9
round  about  upon  the  one  net-work,  to
cover  the  chapiters  that  were  upon  the  top,
with  pomegranates ;  and  so  did  he  for  the
other  chapiter.

“And  the  chapiters  that  were  upon  the
top  of  the  pillars  were  of  lily-work  in  the
porch,  four  cubits.

“And  the  chapiters  upon  the  two  pillars
had  pomegranates  also  above,  over  against
the  belly,  which  was  by  the  net-work ;  and
the  pomegranates  were  two  hundred  in
rows,  round  about  upon  the  other  chapiter.

8  Y


“  And  upon  the  top  of  the  pillars  was
lily-work ;  so  was  the  work  of  the  pillars
finished.”

Let  us  endeavor  to  render  this  descrip¬
tion,  which  appears  somewhat  confused
and  unintelligible,  plainer  and  more  com¬
prehensible.

The  “  nets  of  checker-work”  is  the  first
ornament  mentioned.  The  words  thus
translated  are  in  the  original  □ozuy
ro:itr  ntrys,  which  Lightfoot  prefers
rendering  “  thickets  of  branch  work ;  ”  and
he  thinks  that  the  true  meaning  of  the
passage  is,  that  “  the  chapiters  were  curi¬
ously  wrought  with  branch  work,  seven
goodly  branches  standing  up  from  the
belly  of  the  oval,  and  their  boughs  and
leaves  curiously  and  lovelily  intermingled
and  interwoven  one  with  another.”  He
derives  his  reason  for  this  version  from
the  fact  that  the  same  word,  rori?,  is
translated,  “thicket”  in  the  passage  in
Genesis  (xxii.  13,)  where  the  ram  is  de¬
scribed  as  being  “caught  in  a  thicket  by
his  horns ;”  and  in  various  other  passages
the  word  is  to  be  similarly  translated.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  it  used  in
the  Book  'of  Job,  where  it  evidently  signi¬
fies  a  net  made  of  meshes:  “For  he  is  cast
into  a  net  by  his  own  feet  and  he  walketh
upon  a  snare.”  (Job  xvii.  8.)  In  2  Kings
i.  2,  the  same  word  is  used,  where  our
translators  have  rendered  it  a  lattice;
“  Ahaziah  fell  down  through  a  lattice  in
his  upper  chamber.”  I  am,  therefore,  not
inclined  to  adopt  the  emendation  of  Light¬
foot,  but  rather  coincide  with  the  received
version,  as  well  as  the  Masonic  tradition,
that  this  ornament  was  a  simple  net-work
or  fabric  consisting  of  reticulated  lines  —
in  other  words,  a  lattice-work.

The  “wreaths  of  chain-work”  that  are
next  spoken  of  are  less  difficult  to  be
understood.  The  word  here  translated
“  wreath  ”  is  O'Sll,  and  is  to  be  found  in
Deuteronomy  xxii.  12,  where  it  distinctly
means  fringes :  “  Thou  shalt  make  thee
fringes  upon  the  four  quarters  of  thy  ves¬
ture.”  Fringes  it  should  also  be  translated
here.  “The  fringes  of  chain-work,”  I  sup¬
pose,  were  therefore  attached  to,  and  hung
down  from,  the  net-work  spoken  of  above,
and  were  probably  in  this  case,  as  when
used  upon  the  garments  of  the  Jewish  high
priest,  intended  as  a  “memorial  of  the
law.”

The  “lily-work”  is  the  last  ornament
that  demands  our  attention.  And  here  the
description  of  Lightfoot  is  so  clear  and  evi¬
dently  correct,  that  I  shall  not  hesitate  to
quote  it  at  length.  “  At  the  head  of  the
pillar,  even  at  the  setting  on  of  the  chani-
ter,  there  was  a  curious  and  a  large  border
or  circle  of  lily-work,  which  stood  out  four


586


PILLARS


PILLARS


cubits  under  the  chapiter,  and  then  turned
down,  every  lily  or  long  tongue  of  brass,
with  a  neat  bending,  and  so  seemed  as  a
flowered  crown  to  the  head  of  the  pillar,
and  as  a  curious  garland  whereon  the
chapiter  had  its  seat.”

There  is  a  very  common  error  among
Masons,  which  has  been  fostered  by  the
plates  in  our  Monitors,  that  there  were
on  the  pillars  chapiters,  and  that  these
chapiters  were  again  surmounted  by  globes.
The  truth,  however,  is  that  the  chapiters
themselves  were  “  the  pomels  or  globes,”
to  which  our  lecture,  in  the  Fellow  Craft’s
degree,  alludes.  This  is  evident  from  what
has  already  been  said  in  the  first  part  of
the  preceding  description.  The  lily  here
spoken  of  is  not  at  all  related,  as  might  be
supposed,  to  the  common  lily — that  one
spoken  of  in  the  New  Testament.  It  was
a  species  of  the  lotus,  the  Nymphaea  lotos,
or  lotus  of  the  Nile.  This  was  among  the
Egyptians  a  sacred  plant,  found  every¬
where  on  their  monuments,  and  used  in
their  architectural  decorations.  It  is  evi¬
dent,  from  their  description  in  Kings,  that
the  pillars  of  the  porch  of  King  Solomon’s
Temple  were  copied  from  the  pillars  of  the
Egyptian  temples.  The  maps  of  the  earth
and  the  charts  of  the  celestial  constella¬
tions  which  are  sometimes  said  to  have
been  engraved  upon  these  globes,  must  be
referred  to  the  pillars,  where,  according  to
Oliver,  a  Masonic  tradition  places  them  —
an  ancient  custom,  instances  of  which  we
find  in  profane  history.  This  is,  however,
by  no  means  of  any  importance,  as  the
symbolic  allusion  is  perfectly  well  pre¬
served  in  the  shapes  of  the  chapiters,  with¬
out  the  necessity  of  any  such  geographical
or  astronomical  engraving  upon  them.
For  being  globular,  or  nearly  so,  they  may
be  justly  said  to  have  represented  the  celes¬
tial  aud  terrestrial  spheres.

The  true  description,  then,  of  these
memorable  pillars,  is  simply  this.  Imme¬
diately  within  the  porch  of  the  Temple,
and  on  each  side  of  the  door,  were  placed
two  hollow  brazen  pillars.  The  height  of
each  was  twenty-seven  feet,  the  diameter
about  six  feet,  and  the  thickness  of  the
brass  three  inches.  Above  the  pillar,  and
covering  its  upper  part  to  the  depth  of
nine  inches,  was  an  oval  body  or  chapiter
seven  feet  and  a  half  in  height.  Springing
out  from  the  pillar,  at  the  junction  of  the
chapiter  with  it,  was  a  row  of  lotus  petals,
which,  first  spreading  around  the  chapiter,
afterwards  gently  curved  downwards  to¬
wards  the  pillar,  something  like  the  Acan¬
thus  leaves  on  the  capital  of  a  Corinthian
column.  About  two-fifths  of  the  distance
from  the  bottom  of  the  chapiter,  or  just
below  its  most  bulging  part,  a  tissue  of


net-work  was  carved,  which  extended  over
its  whole  upper  surface.  To  the  bottom  of
this  net-work  was  suspended  a  series  of
fringes,  and  on  these  again  were  carved  two
rows  of  pomegranates,  one  hundred  being
in  each  row.

This  description,  it  seems  to  me,  is  the
only  one  that  can  be  reconciled  with  the
various  passages  in  the  Books  of  Kings,
Chronicles,  and  Josephus,  which  relate  to
these  pillars,  and  the  only  one  that  can
give  the  Masonic  student  a  correct  concep¬
tion  of  the  architecture  of  these  important
symbols.

And  now  as  to  the  Masonic  symbolism
of  these  two  pillars.  As  symbols  they
have  been  very  universally  diffused  and  are
to  be  found  in  all  rites.  Nor  are  they  of  a
very  recent  date,  for  they  are  depicted  on
the  earliest  tracing-boards,  and  are  alluded
to  in  the  catechisms  before  the  middle  of
the  last  century.  Nor  is  this  surprising;
for  as  the  symbolism  of  Freemasonry  is
founded  on  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  it  was
to  be  expected  that  these  important  parts
of  the  Temple  would  be  naturally  included
in  the  system.  But  at  first  the  pillars  ap¬
pear  to  have  been  introduced  into  the  lec¬
tures  rather  as  parts  of  a  historical  detail
than  as  significant  symbols  —  an  idea  which
seems  gradually  to  have  grown  up.  The
catechism  of  1731  describes  their  name,
their  size,  and  their  material,  but  says
nothing  of  their  symbolic  import.  Yet
this  had  been  alluded  to  in  the  scriptural
account  of  them,  which  says  that  the  names
bestowed  upon  them  were  significant.

What  was  the  original  or  scriptural  sym¬
bolism  of  the  pillars  has  been  very  well  ex¬
plained  by  Dudley,  in  his  Naology.  He
says,  (p.  121,)  that  “  the  pillars  represented
the  sustaining  power  of  the  great  God.
The  flower  of  the  lotus  or  water-lily  rises
from  a  root  growing  at  the  bottom  of  the
water,  and  maintains  its  position  on  the
surface  by  its  columnar  stalk,  which  be¬
comes  more  or  less  straight  as  occasion  re¬
quires  ;  it  is  therefore  aptly  symbolical  of
the  power  of  the  Almighty  constantly  em¬
ployed  to  secure  the  safety  of  all  the  world.
The  chapiter  is  the  body  or  mass  of  the
earth ;  the  pomegranates,  fruits  remark¬
able  for  tbe  number  of  their  seeds,  are
symbols  of  fertility ;  the  wreaths,  drawn
variously  over  the  surface  of  the  chapiter
or  globe,  indicate  the  courses  of  the  heav¬
enly  bodies  in  the  heavens  around  the
earth,  and  the  variety  of  the  seasons.  The
pillars  were  properly  placed  in  the  porch
or  portico  of  the  Temple,  for  they  suggested
just  ideas  of  the  power  of  the  Almighty,  of
the  entire  dependence  of  man  upon  him,
the  Creator;  and  doing  this,  they  exhorted
all  to  fear,  to  love,  and  obey  him.”


PINCEAU


PLOT


587


It  was,  however,  Hutchinson  who  first
Introduced  the  symbolic  idea  of  the  pillars
into  the  Masonic  system.  He  says :  “  The
pillars  erected  at  the  porch  of  the  Temple
were  not  only  ornamental,  but  also  carried
with  them  an  emblematical  import  in  their
names :  Boaz  being,  in  its  literal  translation,
in  thee  is  strength  ;  and  Jachin,  it  shall  be  es¬
tablished,  which,  by  a  very  natural  transpo¬
sition,  may  be  put  thus :  O  Lord,  thou  art
mighty,  and  thy  power  is  established  from
everlasting  to  everlasting.”

Preston  subsequently  introduced  the
symbolism,  considerably  enlarged,  into  his
system  of  lectures.  He  adopted  the  refer¬
ence  to  the  pillars  of  fire  and  cloud,  which
is  still  retained.

The  Masonic  symbolism  of  the  two  pil¬
lars  may  be  considered,  without  going  into
minute  details,  as  being  twofold.  First,
in  reference  to  the  names  of  the  pillars,
they  are  symbols  of  the  strength  and  sta¬
bility  of  the  Institution  ;  and  then  in  refer¬
ence  to  the  ancient  pillars  of  fire  and  cloud,
they  are  symbolic  of  our  dependence  on  the
superintending  guidance  of  the  Grand
Architect  of  the  Universe,  by  which  alone
that  strength  and  stability  are  secured.

Pineeau.  French,  a  ■pencil ;  but  in
the  technical  language  of  French  Masonry
it  is  a  pen.  Hence,  in  the  minutes  of
French  Lodges,  tenir  le  pineeau  means  to  act
as  Secretary.

Pine  Cone.  The  tops  or  points  of  the
rods  of  deacons  are  often  surmounted  by  a
pine  cone  or  pineapple.  This  is  in  imita¬
tion  of  the  Thyrsus,  or  sacred  staff  of  Bac¬
chus,  which  was  a  lance  or  rod  enveloped
in  leaves  of  ivy,  and  having  on  the  top
a  cone  or  apple  of  the  pine.  To  it  sur¬
prising  virtues  were  attributed,  and  it  was
introduced  into  the  Dionysiac  mysteries  as
a  sacred  symbol.

Pirlet.  The  name  of  a  tailor  of  Paris,
who,  in  1762,  organized  a  body  called
“Council  of  Knights  of  the  East,”  in  op¬
position  to  the  Council  of  Emperors  of  the
East  and  West.

Pins  VII.  On  the  13th  August,  1814,
Pope  Pius  VII.  issued  an  edict  forbidding
the  meetings  of  all  secret  societies,  and  es¬
pecially  the  Freemasons  and  Carbonari,
under  heavy  corporal  penalties,  to  which
were  to  be  added,  according  to  the  malig¬
nity  of  the  cases,  partial  or  entire  confisca¬
tion  of  goods,  or  a  pecuniary  fine.  The
edict  also  renewed  the  bull  of  Clement  XII.,
by  which  the  punishment  of  death  was
incurred  by  those  who  obstinately  per¬
sisted  in  attending  the  meetings  of  Free¬
masons.

Place.  In  strict  Masonic  ritualism
the  positions  occupied  by  the  Master  and
Wardens  are  called  stations;  those  of  the


other  officers,  places.  This  distinction  is
not  observed  in  the  higher  degrees.  See
Stations.

Plancbe  Traeee.  The  name  by
which  the  minutes  are  designated  in  French
Lodges.  Literally,  planche  is  a  board,  and
traceef  delineated.  The  planche  traeee  is
therefore  the  board  on  which  the  plans  of
the  Lodge  have  been  delineated.

Plans  and  Designs.  The  plans
and  designs  on  the  Trestle-Board  of  the
Master,  by  which  the  building  is  erected,
are,  in  Speculative  Masonry,  symbolically
referred  to  the  moral  plans  and  designs  of
life  by  which  we  are  to  construct  our  spirit¬
ual  temple,  and  in  the  direction  of  w  hich
we  are  to  be  instructed  by  some  recognized
Divine  authority.  See  Trestle-Board.

Platonic  Academy.  See  Academy,
Platonic.

Plenty.  The  ear  of  corn,  or  sheaf  of
wheat,  is,  in  the  Masonic  system,  the  sym¬
bol  of  plenty.  In  ancient  iconography,
the  goddess  Plenty  was  represented  by  a
young  nymph  crow'ned  writh  flowers,  and
holding  in  the  right  hand  the  horn  of
Amalthea,  the  goat  that  suckled  Jupiter,
and  in  her  left  a  bundle  of  sheaves  of
wheat,  from  which  the  ripe  grain  is  falling
profusely  to  the  ground.  There  have  been
some  differences  in  the  representation  of
the  goddess  on  various  medals ;  but,  as
Montfaucon  shows,  the  ears  of  corn  are  an
indispensable  part  of  the  symbolism.  See
Shibboleth.

Plot  Manuscript.  Dr.  Plot,  in  his
History  of  Staffordshire,  speaks  of  “  a  scrole
or  parchment  volume,”  in  the  possession
of  the  Masons  of  the  seventeenth  century,
in  which  it  is  stated  that  the  “charges  and
manners  were  after  perused  and  approved
by  King  Henry  VI.”  Dr.  Oliver  ( Golden
Remains,  iii.  35,)  thinks  that  Plot  here  re¬
ferred  to  wTiat  is  known  as  the  Leland  MS.,
which,  if  true,  would  be  a  proof  of  the  au¬
thenticity  of  that  document.  But  Oliver
gives  no  evidence  of  the  correctness  of  his
assumption.  It  is  more  probable  that  the
manuscript  which  Dr.  Plot  loosely  quotes
has  not  yet  been  recovered.

Plot.  M.D.,  Robert.  Born  in  1651,
and  died  in  1696.  He  was  a  Professor  »f
Chemistry  at  Oxford,  and  Keeper  of  the
Ashmolean  Museum,  to  which  position  he
had  been  appointed  by  Elias  Ashmole,  to
whom,  however,  he  showed  but  little  grat¬
itude.  Dr.  Plot  published,  in  1686,  The
Natural  History  of  Staffordshire,  a  work
in  which  he  went  out  of  his  way  to  attack
the  Masonic  institution.  An  able  defence
against  this  attack  will  be  found  in  the
third  volume  of  Oliver’s  Golden  Remains
of  the  Early  Masonic  Writers.  The  work
of  Dr.  Plot  is  both  interesting  and  valu-


588


PLOT


PLUMB


able  to  the  Masonic  student,  as  it  exhibits
the  condition  of  Freemasonry  in  the  latter
part  of  the  seventeenth  century,  certainly,
if  not  at  a  somewhat  earlier  period,  and
is  an  anticipated  answer  to  the  assertions
of  the  iconoclasts  who  would  give  Freema¬
sonry  its  birth  in  1717.  For  this  purpose,
I  insert  so  much  of  his  account  as  refers  to
the  customs  of  the  society  in  1686.

“  They  have  a  custom  in  Staffordshire,
of  admitting  men  into  the  Society  of  Free¬
masons,  that  in  the  Morelands  of  this
country  seems  to  be  of  greater  request
than  anywhere  else,  though  I  find  that  the
custom  spread  more  or  less  all  over  the
nation ;  for  here  I  found  persons  of  the
most  eminent  quality  that  did  not  disdain
to  be  of  this  fellowship ;  nor,  indeed,  need
they,  were  it  of  that  antiquity  and  honor,
that  is  pretended  in  a  large  parchment
volume  they  have  amongst  them,  contain¬
ing  the  history  and  rules  of  the  Craft  of
Masonry,  which  is  there  deduced  not  only
from  sacred  writ,  but  profane  storv ;  par¬
ticularly  that  it  was  brought  into  England
by  St.  Amphibalus,  and  first  communi¬
cated  to  St.  Alban,  who  set  down  the
charges  of  Masonry,  and  was  made  pay¬
master  and  governor  of  the  king’s  works,
and  gave  them  charges  and  manners  as  St.
Amphibalus  had  taught  him,  which  were
after  confirmed  by  King  Athelstan,  whose
youngest  son  Edwyn  loved  wrell  Masonry,
took  upon  him  the  charges,  and  learned  the
manners,  and  obtained  for  them  of  his
father  a  free  charter.  Whereupon  he
caused  them  to  assemble  at  York,  and  to
bring  all  the  old  books  of  their  Craft,  and
out  of  them  ordaiued  such  charges  and
manners  as  they  then  thought  fit;  which
charges  in  the  said  scrole,  or  parchment
volume,  are  in  part  declared  ;  and  thus  was
the  Craft  of  Masonry  grounded  and  con¬
firmed  in  England.  It  is  also  there  de¬
clared  that  these  charges  and  manners
were  after  perused  and  approved  by  King
Henry  VI.  and  his  council,  both  as  to
Masters  and  fellows  of  this  Eight  Wor¬
shipful  Craft.

“  Into  which  Society,  when  they  are  ad¬
mitted,  they  call  a  meeting  (or  Lodge,  as
they  term  it  in  some  places),  which  must
consist  at  least  of  five  or  six  of  the  ancients
of  the  Order,  whom  the  candidates  present
with  gloves,  and  so  likewise  to  their  wives,
and  entertain  with  a  collation,  according
to  the  custom  of  the  place :  this  ended,  they
proceed  to  the  admission  of  them,  which
chiefly  consists  in  the  communication  of
certain  secret  signs,  whereby  they  are
known  to  one  another  all  over  the  nation,
by  which  means  they  have  maintenance
whither  ever  they  travel,  for  if  any  man
appear,  though  altogether  unknown,  that


can  show  any  of  these  signs  to  a  fellow  of
the  Society,  whom  they  otherwise  call  an
Accepted  Mason,  he  is  obliged  presently  to
come  to  him,  from  what  company  or  place
soever  he  be  in ;  nay,  though  from  the  top
of  a  steeple,  what  hazard  or  inconvenience
soever  he  run,  to  know  his  pleasure  and
assist  him ;  viz.,  if  he  want  work,  he  is
bound  to  find  him  some;  or  if  he  cannot
do  that,  to  give  him  money,  or  otherwise
support  him  till  work  can  be  had,  which  is
one  of  their  articles;  and  it  is  another,  that
they  advise  the  masters  they  wmrk  for  ac¬
cording  to  the  best  of  their  skill,  acquaint¬
ing  them  with  the  goodness  or  badness  of
their  materials,  and  if  they  be  any  way
out  in  the  contrivance  of  the  buildings,
modestly  rectify  them  in  it,  that  Masonry
be  not  dishonored;  and  many  such  like
that  are  commonly  known  ;  but  some  others
they  have  (to  which  they  are  sworn  after
their  fashion)  that  none  know  but  them¬
selves.”  {Nat.  Hist,  of  Staffordshire,  ch.  viii.,
p.  316.)

Plumb.  An  instrument  used  by  Oper¬
ative  Masons  to  erect  perpendicular  lines,
and  adopted  in  Speculative  Masonry  as
one  of  the  working-tools  of  a  Fellow  Craft.
It  is  a  symbol  of  rectitude  of  conduct,  and
inculcates  that  integrity  of  life  and  unde¬
viating  course  of  moral  uprightness  which
can  alone  distinguish  the  good  and  just
man.  As  the  operative  workman  erects  his
temporal  building  with  strict  observance
of  that  plumb-line,  which  will  not  permit
him  to  deviate  a  hair’s  breadth  to  the  right
or  to  the  left,  so  the  speculative  Mason,
guided  by  the  unerring  principles  of  right
and  truth  inculcated  in  the  symbolic  teach¬
ings  of  the  same  implement,  is  steadfast  in
the  pursuit  of  truth,  neither  bending  be¬
neath  the  frowns  of  adversity  nor  yielding
to  the  seductions  of  prosperity.

To  the  man  thus  just  and  upright,  the
Scriptures  attribute,  as  necessary  parts  of
his  character,  kindness  and  liberality,  tem¬
perance  and  moderation, truth  and  wisdom;
and  the  Pagan  poet  Horace  (lib.  iii.,  od.  3.)
pays,  in  one  of  his  most  admired  odes,  an
eloquent  tribute  to  the  stern  immutability
of  the  man  who  is  upright ’and  tenacious
of  purpose.

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that,  in  most  lan¬
guages,  the  word  which  is  used  in  a  direct
sense  to  indicate  straightness  of  course  or
perpendicularity  of  position,  is  also  em¬
ployed  in  a  figurative  sense  to  express  up¬
rightness  of  conduct.  Such  are  the  Latin
“rectum,”  which  signifies  at  the  same  time
a  right  line  and  honesty  or  integrity ;  the
Greek  opddg,  which  means  straight,  standing
upright,  and  also  equitable,  just,  true ;  and
the  Hebrew  tsedek,  which  in  a  physical
sense  denotes  rightness,  straightness,  and  in


PLUMB-LINE


POINTS


589


a  moral,  what  is  right  and  just.  Our  own
word  RIGHT  partakes  of  this  peculiar¬
ity,  right  being  not  wrong ,  as  well  as  not
crooked.

As  to  the  name,  it  may  be  remarked  that

Slumb  is  the  word  used  in  Speculative
'asonry.  Webster  says  that  as  a  noun
the  word  is  seldom  used  except  in  compo¬
sition.  Its  constant  use,  therefore,  in  Ma¬
sonry,  is  a  peculiarity.

Plumb-Line.  A  line  to  which  a
piece  of  lead  is  attached  so  as  to  make
it  hang  perpendicularly.  The  plumb-line,
sometimes  called  simply  the  line,  is  one  of
the  working-tools  of  the  Past  Mas-
ter.  According  to  Preston,  it  was,
one  of  the  instruments  of  Masonry
which  was  presented  to  the  Master
of  a  Lodge  at  his  installation,  and
he  defines  its  symbolism  as  follows:

“The  line  teaches  the  criterion  of
rectitude,  to  avoid  dissimulation  in
conversation  and  action,  and  to  di¬
rect  our  steps  in  the  path  which
leads  to  immortality.”  This  idea
of  the  immortal  life  was  always  ®
connected  in  symbology  with  that  of  the
perpendicular  —  something  that  rose  di¬
rectly  upwards.  Thus  in  the  primitive
church,  theworshipping  Christians  stood  up
at  prayer  on  Sunday,  as  a  reference  to  the
Lord’s  resurrection  on  that  day.  This  sym¬
bolism  is  not,  however,  preserved  in  the
verse  of  the  prophet  Amos,  (vii.  7,)  which
is  read  in  this  country  as  the  Scripture
passage  of  the  second  degree,  where  it
seems  rather  to  refer  to  the  strict  justice
which  God  will  apply  to  the  people  of  Is¬
rael.  It  there  coincides  with  the  first
Masonic  definition  that  the  line
teaches  the  criterion  of  moral  recti¬
tude.

PI«mb-ISnIc.  A  narrow  board,
having  a  plumb-line  suspended  from
its  top  and  a  perpendicular  mark
through  its  middle.  It  is  one  of  the
working-tools  of  a  Fellow  Craft,  but
in  Masonic  language  is  called  the
Plumb,  which  see.

Plurality  of  Votes.  See  Majority.
Poetry  of  Masonry.  Although
Freemasonry  has  been  distinguished  more
than  any  other  single  institution  for  the
number  of  verses  to  which  it  has  given
birth,  it  has  not  produced  any  poetry  of  a
very  high  order,  except  a  few  lyrical  effu¬
sions.  Rhyme,  although  not  always  of
transcendent  merit,  has  been  a  favorite
form  of  conveying  its  instructions.  The
oldest  of  the  Constitutions,  that  known
as  the  Halliwell  MS.,  is  written  in  verse;
and  almost  all  the  early  catechisms  of  the
degrees  were  in  the  form  of  rhyme,  which,
although  often  doggerel  in  character,  served


as  a  convenient  method  of  assisting  the
memory.  But  the  imagination,  which  might
have  been  occupied  in  the  higher  walks  of
poetry,  seems  in  Freemasonry  to  have  been
expended  in  the  construction  of  its  sym¬
bolism,  which  may,  however,  be  considered
often  as  the  results  of  true  poetic  genius.
There  are,  besides  the  songs,  of  which  the
number  in  all  languages  is  very  great,  an
abundance  of  prologues  and  epilogues,
of  odes  and  anthems,  some  of  which  are  not
discreditable  to  their  authors  or  to  the  In¬
stitution.  But  I  know  of  very  few  poems
on  Masonic  subjects  of  any  length.  The
French  have  indulged  more  than  any  other
nation  in  this  sort  of  composition,  and  the
earliest  Masonic  poem  with  which  I  am  ac¬
quainted  is  one  published  at  Frankfort,
1756,  with  the  title  of  Noblesse  des  Franc-
Masons  ou  Institution  de  leur  Soeiele  avant  le
deluge  universel  et  de  son  renouvellement  apres
le  Deluge.

It  was  printed  anonymously,  but  the  au¬
thorship  of  it  is  attributed  to  M.  Jartigue.
It  is  a  transfer  to  verse  of  all  the  Masonic
myths  contained  in  the  “  Legend  of  the
Craft”  and  the  traditional  history  of  Ander¬
son.  Neither  the  material  nor  the  execution
exempt  the  author  from  Horace’s  denuncia¬
tion  of  poetic  mediocrity.

Points.  In  the  Old  Constitutions
known  as  the  Halliwell  MS.,  there  are  fif¬
teen  regulations  which  are  called  points.
The  fifteen  articles  which  precede  are  said
to  have  been  in  existence  before  the  meet¬
ing  at  York,  and  then  only  collected  after
search,  while  the  fifteen  points  were  then
enacted.  Thus  we  are  told  —

Fifteen  artvculus  they  there  soujrton,  ( sought ,

found  out,)

And  fifteen  poyntys  there  they  wrogton,

( wrought ,  enacted.)

The  points  referred  to  in  the  ritualistic
phrase,  “arts,  parts,  and  points  of  the  hid¬
den  mysteries  of  Masonry,”  are  the  rules
and  regulations  of  the  Institution.  Phillips’
New  World  of  Words  (edit.  1706)  defines
point  as  “  an  head  or  chief  matter.”  It  is
in  this  sense  that  we  speak  of  the  “points
of  Masonry.”

Points  of  F.nlranec,  Perfect.

In  the  earliest  lectures  of  the  last  century
these  were  called  “Principal  Points.”  The
designation  of  them  as  “Perfect  Points  of
Entrance”  was  of  a  later  date.  They  are
described  both  in  the  English  and  the
American  systems.  Their  specific  names,
and  their  allusion  to  the  four  cardinal  vir¬
tues,  are  the  same  in  both  ;  but  the  verbal
explanations  differ,  although  not  substan¬
tially.  They  are  so  called  because  they  refer
to  four  important  points  of  the  initiation.

I  The  Guttural  refers  to  the  entrance  upon


590


POINTS


POINT


the  penal  responsibilities ;  the  Pectoral,  to
the  entrance  into  the  Lodge;  the  Manual,
to  the  entrance  on  the  covenant ;  and  the
Pedal,  to  the  entrance  on  the  instructions
in  the  north-east.

Points  of  Fellowship.  Five.

There  are  duties  owing  by  even'  Mason  to
his  brethren,  and  which,  from  their  sym¬
bolic  allusion  to  certain  points  of  the  body,
and  from  the  lesson  of  brotherly  love  which
they  teach,  are  called  the  “  Five  Points  of
Fellowship.”  They  are  symbolically  illus¬
trated  in  the  third  degree,  and  have  been
summed  up  by  Oliver  as  “assisting  a
brother  in  his  distress,  supporting  him  in
bis  virtuous  undertakings,  praying  for  his
welfare,  keeping  inviolate  his  secrets,  and
vindicating  his  reputation  as  well  in  his  ab¬
sence  as  in  his  presence.”  (Landin.,  i.  185.)

Cole,  in  the  Freemasons’  Library ,  (p.
190,)  gives  the  same  ideas  in  diffuser  lan¬
guage,  as  follows :

“  First.  When  the  necessities  of  a
brother  call  for  my  aid  and  support,  I  will
be  ever  ready  to  lend  him  such  assistance,
to  save  him  from  sinking,  as  may  not  be
detrimental  to  myself  or  connections,  if  I
find  him  worthy  thereof.

“  Second.  Indolence  shall  not  cause  my
footsteps  to  halt,  nor  wrath  turn  them  aside ;
but  forgetting  every  selfish  consideration,  I
will  be  ever  swift  of  foot  to  serve,  help,  and
execute  benevolence  to  a  fellow-creature  in
distress,  and  more  particularly  to  a  brother
Mason.

“  Third.  When  I  offer  up  my  ejaculations
to  Almighty  God,  a  brother’s  welfare  I  will
remember  as  my  own ;  for  as  the  voices  of  ,
babes  and  sucklings  ascend  to  the  Throne  of
Grace,  so  most  assuredly  will  the  breath¬
ings  of  a  fervent  heart  arise  to  the  man¬
sions  of  bliss,  as  our  prayers  are  certainly
required  of  each  other.

“Fourth.  A  brother’s  secrets,  delivered
to  me  as  such,  I  will  keep  as  I  would  my
own ;  as  betraying  that  trust  might  be
doing  him  the  greatest  injury  he  could  sus¬
tain  in  this  mortal  life ;  nay,  it  would  be
like  the  villany  of  an  assassin,  who  lurks
in  darkness  to  stab  his  adversary,  when
unarmed  and  least  prepared  to  meet  an
enemy.

“  Fifth.  A  brother’s  character  I  will  sup¬
port  in  his  absence  as  I  would  in  his  pres¬
ence  :  I  will  not  wrongfully  revile  him
myself,  nor  will  I  suffer  it  to  be  done  by
others,  if  in  my  power  to  prevent  it.”

The  enumeration  of  these  Points  by  some
other  more  recent  authorities  differs  from
Cole’s,  apparently,  only  in  the  order  in
which  the  Points  are  placed.  The  latter
order  is  given  as  follows  in  Mackey’s  Lexi¬
con  of  Freemasonry  :

“  First.  Indolence  should  not  cause  our  ,


footsteps  to  halt,  or  wrath  turn  them  aside;
but  with  eager  alacrity  and  swiftness  of
foot,  we  should  press  forward  in  the  exer¬
cise  of  charity  and  kindness  to  a  distressed
fellow-creature.

“  Secondly.  In  our  devotions  to  Almighty
God,  we  should  remember  a  brother’s  wel¬
fare  as  our  own ;  for  the  prayers  of  a  fer¬
vent  and  sincere  heart  will  find  no  less
favor  in  the  sight  of  Heaven,  because  the
petition  for  self  is  mingled  with  aspirations
of  benevolence  for  a  friend.

“Thirdly.  When  a  brother  intrusts  to
our  keeping  the  secret  thoughts  of  his
bosom,  prudence  and  fidelity  should  place
a  sacred  seal  upon  our  lips,  lest,  in  an  un¬
guarded  moment,  we  betray  the  solemn
trust  confided  to  our  honor.

“Fourthly.  When  adversity  has  visited
our  brother,  and  his  calamities  call  for  our
aid,  we  should  cheerfully  and  liberally
stretch  forth  the  hand  of  kindness,  to  save
him  from  sinking,  and  to  relieve  his  neces¬
sities.

“  Fifthly.  While  with  candor  and  kind¬
ness  we  should  admonish  a  brother  of  his
faults,  we  should  never  revile  his  character
behind  his  back,  but  rather,  when  attacked
by  others,  support  and  defend  it.”

’  I  have  said  that  the  difference  here  is  ap¬
parently  only  in  the  order  of  enumeration,
but  really  there  is  an  important  difference
in  the  symbols  on  which  the  instructions
are  founded.  In  the  old  system,  the  sym¬
bols  are  the  hand,  the  foot,  the  knee,  the
breast,  and  the  back.  In  the  new  system,
the  first  symbol  or  the  hand  is  omitted,  and
the  mouth  and  the  ear  substituted.  I  have
no  doubt  that  this  omission  of  the  first  and
insertion  of  the  last  are  innovations,  which
sprung  up  in  1842  at  the  Baltimore  Con¬
vention,  and  the  enumeration  given  by
Cole  is  the  old  and  genuine  one,  which  was
originally  taught  in  England  by  Preston,
and  in  this  country  by  Webb.

Points.  Twelve  Grand.  See  Twelve
Grand  Points.

Point  within  a  Circle.  This  is  a

symbol  of  great  interest  and  importance,
and  brings  us  into  close  connection  with
the  early  symbolism  of  the  solar  orb  and
the  universe,  which  was  predominant  in
the  ancient  sun-worship.  The  lectures  of
Freemasonry  give  what  modern  Monitors
have  made  an  exoteric  explanation  of  the
symbol,  in  telling  us  that  the  point  repre¬
sents  an  individual  brother,  the  circle  the
boundary  line  of  his  duty  to  God  and  man,
and  the  two  perpendicular  parallel  lines
the  patron  saints  of  the  Order  —  St.  John
the  Baptist  and  St.  John  the  Evangelist.

But  that  this  was  not  always  its  symbolic
signification,  we  may  collect  from  the  true
history  of  its  connection  with  the  phallus


POINT


POLAND


591


of  the  Ancient  Mysteries.  The  phallus,  as
I  have  already  shown  under  the  word,  was
among  the  Egyptians  the  symbol  of  fecun¬
dity,  expressed  by  the  male  generative
principle.  It  was  communicated  from  the
rites  of  Osiris  to  the  religious  festivals
of  Greece.  Among  the  Asiatics  the  same
emblem,  under  the  name  of  lingam,  was,  in
connection  with  the  female  principle,  wor¬
shipped  as  the  symbols  of  the  Great  Father
and  Mother,  or  producing  causes  of  the  hu¬
man  race,  after  their  destruction  by  the
deluge.  On  this  subject,  Captain  Wilford
{Asiat.  Bes.,)  remarks  “  that  it  was  believed
in  India,  that,  at  the  general  deluge,  every¬
thing  was  involved  in  the  common  destruc¬
tion  except  the  male  and  female  principles,
or  organs  of  generation,  which  were  des¬
tined  to  produce  a  new  race,  and  to  repeo¬
ple  the  earth  when  the  waters  had  subsided
from  its  surface.  The  female  principle,
symbolized  by  the  moon,  assumed  the  form
of  a  lunette  or  crescent;  while  the  male
principle,  symbolized  by  the  sun,  assuming
the  form  of  the  lingam,  placed  himself  erect
in  the  centre  of  the  lunette,  like  the  mast
of  a  ship.  The  two  principles,  in  this
united  form,  floated  on  the  surface  of  the
waters  during  the  period  of  their  prevalence
on  the  earth ;  and  thus  became  the  pro¬
genitors  of  a  new  race  of  men.”  Here,  then,
was  the  first  outline  of  the  point  within  a
circle,  representing  the  principle  of  fecun¬
dity,  and  doubtless  the  symbol,  connected
with  a  different  history,  that,  namely,  of
Osiris,  was  transmitted  by  the  Indian  phil¬
osophers  to  Egypt,  and  to  the  other  na¬
tions,  who  derived,  as  I  have  elsewhere
shown,  all  their  rites  from  the  East.

It  was  in  deference  to  this  symbolism
that,  as  Higgins  remarks  ( Anacal .,  ii.  306,)
circular  temples  were  in  the  very  earliest
ages  universally  erected  in  cyclar  numbers
to  do  honor  to  the  Deity.

In  India,  stone  circles,  or  rather  their
ruins,  are  everywhere  found;  among  the
oldest  of  which,  according  to  Moore,  (Panth.
242,)  is  that  of  Dipaldiana,  and  whose  exe¬
cution  will  compete  with  that  of  the  Greeks.
In  the  oldest  monuments  of  the  Druids  we
find,  as  at  Stonehenge  and  Abury,  the  cir¬
cle  of  stones.  In  fact,  all  the  temples  of
the  Druids  wrere  circular,  with  a  single
stone  erected  in  the  centre.  A  Druidical
monument  in  Pembrokeshire,  called  Y
Cromlech,  is  described  as  consisting  of
several  rude  stones  pitched  on  end  in  a  cir¬
cular  order,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  circle  a
vast  stone  placed  on  several  pillars.  Near
Keswick,  in  Cumberland, says  Oliver,  ( Sifjns
and  Symbols,  174,)  is  another  specimen  of
this  Druidical  symbol.  On  a  hill  stands  a
circle  of  forty  stones  placed  perpendicularly,
of  about  five  feet  and  a  half  in  height,  and


one  stone  in  the  centre  of  greater  alti¬
tude.

Among  the  Scandinavians,  the  hall  of
Odin  contained  twelve  seats,  disposed  in
the  form  of  a  circle,  for  the  principal  gods,
with  an  elevated  seat  in  the  centre  tor  Odin.
Scandinavian  monuments  of  this  form  are
still  to  be  found  in  Scania,  Zealand,  and
Jutland.

But  it  is  useless  to  multiply  examples  of
the  prevalence  of  this  symbol  among  the
ancients.  And  now  let  us  apply  this  knowl¬
edge  to  the  Masonic  symbol.

We  have  seen  that  the  phallus  and  the
point  within  a  circle  come  from  the  same
source,  and  must  have  been  identical  in
signification.  But  the  phallus  was  the
symbol  of  fecundity,  or  the  male  generative
principle,  which  by  the  ancients  was  sup¬
posed  to  be  the  sun,  (they  looking  to  the
creature  and  not  to  the  Creator,)  because  by
the  sun’s  heat  and  light  the  earth  is  made
prolific,  and  its  productions  are  brought  to
maturity.  The  point  within  the  circle  was
then  originally  the  symbol  of  the  sun;  and
as  the  lingam  of  India  stood  in  the  centre
of  the  lunette,  so  it  stands  within  the  centre
of  the  Universe,  typified  by  the  circle,  im¬
pregnating  and  vivifying  it  wdth  its  heat.
And  thus  the  astronomers  have  been  led  to
adopt  the  same  figure  O  as  their  symbol
of  the  sun.

Now  it  is  admitted  that  the  Lodge  repre¬
sents  the  world  or  the  universe,  and  the
Master  and  Wardens  within  it  represent
the  sun  in  three  positions.  Thus  we  arrive
at  the  true  interpretation  of  the  Masonic
symbolism  of  the  point  within  the  circle.
It  is  the  same  thing,  but  under  a  different
form,  as  the  Master  and  Wardens  of  a
Lodge.  The  Master  and  Wardens  are  sym¬
bols  of  the  sun,  the  Lodge  of  the  universe,
or  world,  just  as  the  point  is  the  symbol  of
the  same  sun,  and  the  surrounding  circle
of  the  universe.

Poland.  Freemasonry  was  introduced
into  Poland,  in  1736,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England;  but  in  1739  the  Lodges  were  closed
in  consequence  of  the  edict  of  King  Augus¬
tus  II.,  who  enforced  the  bull  of  Pope
Clement  XII.  From  1742  to  1749  Masonry
w'as  revived  and  several  Lodges  erected,
w’hich  flourished  for  a  time,  but  afterwards
fell  into  decay.  In  1766  Count  Mosrynski
sought  to  put  it  on  a  better  footing,  and  in
1769  a  Grand  Lodge  was  formed,  of  which
he  was  chosen  Grand  Master.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  England  recognized  this  body  as
a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge.  On  the  first
division  of  Poland,  the  labors  of  the  Grand
Lodge  were  suspended ;  but  they  were  re¬
vived  in  1773  by  Count  Bruhl,  who  intro¬
duced  the  ritual  of  the  Strict  Observance,
established  several  new  Lodges,  and  ac-


592


POLITICS


POMEGRANATE


knowledged  the  supremacy  of  the  United
Lodges  of  Germany.  There  was  a  Lodge
in  Warsaw,  working  in  the  French  Rite,
under  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Orient
of  France,  and  another  under  the  English
system.  These  differences  of  Rites  created
many  dissensions,  but  in  August,  1781,  the
Lodge  Catherine  of  the  North  Star  received
a  Warrant  as  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,
and  on  December  27  of  the  same  year  the
body  was  organized,  and  Ignatius  Pococki
elected  Grand  Master  of  all  Polish  and
Lithuanian  Lodges,  the  English  system
bein<r  provisionally  adopted.  In  1794,  with
the  dissolution  of  the  kingdom,  the  Lodges
in  the  Russian  and  Austrian  portions  of
the  partition  were  suppressed,  and  those
only  in  Prussian  Poland  continued  their
existence.  Upon  the  creation,  by  Napoleon,
of  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  a  Grand
Orient  of  Poland  was  immediately  estab¬
lished.  This  body  continued  in  operation
until  1823,  with  more  than  forty  Lodges
under  its  obedience.  In  November  of  that
year  the  Order  was  interdicted  in  conse¬
quence  of  the  ukase  of  the  Emperor  Alex¬
ander  prohibiting  all  secret  societies,  and
all  the  Lodges  were  thereon  closed.  Dur¬
ing  the  revolt  of  1830  a  few  Lodges  arose,
but  they  lasted  only  until  the  insurrection
was  suppressed.

Polities.  There  is  no  charge  more
frequently  made  against  Freemasonry  than
that  of  its  tendency  to  revolution,  and
conspiracy,  and  to  political  organizations
which  may  affect  the  peace  of  society  or
interfere  with  the  rights  of  governments.
It  was  the  substance  of  all  Barruel’s  and
Robison’s  accusations,  that  the  Jacobinism
of  France  and  Germany  was  nurtured  in
the  Lodges  of  those  countries;  it  was  the
theme  of  all  the  denunciations  of  the  anti-
Masons  of  our  own  land,  that  the  Order
was  seeking  a  political  ascendancy  and  an
undue  influence  over  the  government;  it
has  been  the  unjust  accusation  of  every
enemy  of  the  Institution  in  all  times  past,
that  its  object  and  aim  is  the  possession  of

fower  and  control  in  the  affairs  of  state.

t  is  in  vain  that  history  records  no  in¬
stance  of  this  unlawful  connection  between
Freemasonry  and  politics;  it  is  in  vain
that  the  libeller  is  directed  to  the  Ancient
Constitutions  of  the  Order,  which  expressly
forbid  such  connection;  the  libel  is  still
written,  and  Masonry  is  again  and  again
condemned  as  a  political  club.

Polka I.  A  significant  word  in  the
high  degrees,  which  means  altogether  sepa¬
rated,  in  allusion  to  the  disunited  condition
of  the  Masonic  Order  at  the  time,  divided
as  it  was  into  various  and  conflicting  rites.
The  word  is  corrupted  from  paleol,  and  is
derived  from  the  radical  bs,pa!,  which,  as


Gesenius  says,  everywhere  implies  separa¬
tion,  and  the  adverbial  Sj,  hot,  wholly,
altogether.

Poly  cron  icon.  Ranulf  Higden,  a

monk  of  Chester,  who  died  in  1500,  wrote
under  this  title  a  Latin  chronicle,  which
was  afterwards  translated  into  English  by
John  Trevisa,  and  published  by  William
Caxton,  in  1482,  as  The  Polycroriicon ;
“  conteynyng  the  Berynges  and  Dedes  of
many  Tymes.”  Another  edition  was  pub¬
lished  (though,  perhaps,  it  was  the  same
book  with  a  new  title)  by  Wynkyn  de
Woorde,  in  1485,  as  Policronicon,  in  which
booke  ben  comprysed  bryejty  many  wonderful
hystoryes,  Englished  by  one  Trevisa,  vicarye
of  Barkley,  etc.,  a  copy  of  which  sold  in
1857  for  £37.  There  was  another  trans¬
lation  in  the  same  century  by  an  unknown
author.  The  two  translations  made  the
book  familiar  to  the  English  public,  w  ith
whom  it  was  at  one  time  a  favorite  work.
It  was  much  used  by  the  compiler  or  com¬
pilers  of  the  Old  Constitutions  now  known
as  the  Cooke  Manuscript.  Indeed,  I  have
very  little  doubt  that  the  writers  of  the  old
Masonic  records  borrowed  from  the  Poly-
cronicon  many  of  their  early  legends  of
Masonry.  In  1865  there  was  published  at
London,  under  the  authority  of  the  Master
of  the  Rolls,  an  edition  of  the  original  Latin
chronicle,  with  both  the  English  transla¬
tions,  that  of  Trevisa  and  that  of  the  un¬
known  writer.

Pomegranate.  The  pomegranate,
as  a  symbol,  was  known  to  and  higLly  es¬
teemed  by  the  nations  of  antiquity.  In
the  description  of  the  pillars  which  stood
at  the  porch  of  the  Temple,  (see  1  Kings
vii.  15,)  it  is  said  that  the  artificer  “made
two  chapiters  of  molten  brass  to  set  upon
the  tops  of  the  pillars.”  Now  the  Hebrew
word  caphiorim,  which  has  been  translated
“  chapiters,”  and  for  which,  in  Amos  ix.  1,
the  w  ord  “  lintel  ”  has  been  incorrectly  sub¬
stituted,  (though  the  marginal  reading  cor¬
rects  the  error,)  signifies  an  artificial  large
pomegranate,  or  globe.  The  original  mean¬
ing  is  not  preserved  in  the  Septuagint,
which  has  ogcupuriip,  nor  in  the  Vulgate,
which  uses  “sphserula,”  both  meaning
simply  “  a  round  ball.”  But  Josephus,  in
his  Antiquities,  has  kept  to  the  literal  He¬
brew.  It  was  customary  to  place  such
ornaments  upon  the  tops  or  heads  of
columns,  ana  in  other  situations.  The
skirt  of  Aaron’s  robe  was  ordered  to  be
decorated  with  golden  bells  and  pome¬
granates.  and  they  were  among  the  orna¬
ments  fixed  upon  the  golden  candelabra.
There  seems,  therefore,  to  have  been  at¬
tached  to  this  fruit  some  mystic  signifiea-
|  tion,  to  which  it  is  indebted  for  the  venera-
!  tion  thus  paid  to  it.  If  so,  this  mystic


POMEGRANATE


PONTIFF


593


meaning  should  be  traced  into  spurious
Freemasonry ;  for  there,  after  all,  if  there
be  any  antiquity  in  our  Order,  we  shall  find
the  parallel  of  all  its  rites  and  ceremonies.

The  Syrians  at  Damascus  worshipped  an
idol  which  they  called  Rimmon.  This  was
the  same  idol  that  was  worshipped  by  Naa-
man  before  his  conversion,  as  recorded  in
the  Second  Book  of  Kings.  The  learned
have  not  been  able  to  agree  as  to  the  nature
of  this  idol,  whether  he  was  a  representa¬
tion  of  Helios  or  the  Sun,  the  god  of  the
Phenicians,  or  of  Venus,  or  according  to
Grotius,  in  his  commentary  on  the  passage
in  Kings,  of  Saturn,  or  what,  according  to
Statius,  seems  more  probable,  of  Jupiter
Cassius.  But  it  is  sufficient  for  the  present
urpose  to  know  that  Rimmon  is  the  He-
rew  and  Syriac  for  pomegranate.

Cumberland,  the  learned  Bishop  of
Peterborough,  ( Orig .  Gent.  Ant.,  p.  60,)
quotes  Achilles  Statius,  a  converted  Pagan,
and  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  as  saying  that
on  Mount  Cassius  (which  Bochart  places
between  Canaan  and  Egypt)  there  was  a
temple  wherein  Jupiter’s  image  held  a
pomegranate  in  his  hand,  which  Statius
goes  on  to  say,  “had  a  mystical  meaning.”
Sanconiathon  thinks  this  temple  was  built
by  the  descendants  of  the  Cabiri.  Cum¬
berland  attempts  to  explain  this  mystery
thus :  “  Agreeably  hereunto  I  guess  that
the  pomegranate  in  the  hand  of  Jupiter  or
Juno,  (because,  when  it  is  opened,  it  dis¬
closes  a  great  number  of  seeds,)  signified
only,  that  those  deities  were,  being  long-
lived,  the  parents  of  a  great  many  children,
and  families  that  soon  grew  into  nations,
which  they^  planted  in  large  possessions,
when  the  world  was  newly  begun  to  be
peopled,  by  giving  them  laws  and  other  use¬
ful  inventions  to  make  their  lives  com¬
fortable.”

Pausanias  ( Corinthiaca,  p.  59,)  says  he
saw,  not  far  from  the  ruins  of  Mycense,  an
image  of  Juno  holding  in  one  hand  a  scep¬
tre,  and  in  the  other  a  pomegranate;  but
he  likewise  declines  assigning  any  explana¬
tion  of  the  emblem,  merely  declaring  that
it  was  cnroppTjTOTEpoc;  loyoq  —  “a  forbidden
mystery.”  That  is,  one  which  was  forbid¬
den  by  the  Cabiri  to.be  divulged.

In  the  festival  of  the  Thesmophoria,  ob¬
served  in  honor  of  the  goddess  Ceres,  it  was
held  unlawful  for  the  celebrants  (who  were
women)  to  eat  the  pomegranate.  Clemens
Alexandrinus  assigns  as  a  reason,  that  it
was  supposed  that  this  fruit  sprang  from
the  blood  of  Bacchus.

Bryant  (Anc.  Myth.,  iii.  237,)  says  that
the  Ark  was  looked  upon  as  the  mother
of  mankind,  and  on  this  account  it  was
figured  under  the  semblance  of  a  pome¬
granate  ;  for  as  this  fruit  abounds  with  seeds,
3  Z  88


it  was  thought  no  improper  emblem  of  the
Ark,  which  contained  the  rudiments  of  the
future  world.  In  fact,  few  plants  had  among
the  ancients  a  more  mythical  history  than
the  pomegranate.

From  the  Hebrews,  who  used  it  mysti¬
cally  at  the  Temple,  it  passed  over  to  the
Masons,  who  adopted  it  as  the  symbol  of
plenty,  for  which  it  is  well  adapted  by  its
swelling  and  seed-abounding  fruit.

Pommel.  A  round  knob ;  a  term  ap¬
plied  to  the  globes  or  balls  on  the  top  of
the  pillars  which  stood  at  the  porch  of  Solo¬
mon’s  Temple.  It  was  introduced  into  the
Masonic  lectures  from  scriptural  language.
The  two  pommels  of  the  chapiters  is  in  2
Chron.  iv.  13.  It  is,  however,  an  architec¬
tural  term,  thus  defined  by  Parker,  [Gloss.
Arch.,  p.  365  :)  “  Pommel  denotes  gener¬

ally  any  ornament  of  a  globular  form.”

Ponlifes  Freres.  See  Bridge  Build¬
ers.

Pontifex.  See  Bridge  Builders.

Pontiff.  In  addition  to  what  has  been
said  of  this  word  in  the  article  on  the
“  Bridge  Builders  of  the  Middle  Ages,”  the
following  from  Athanase  Coquerel,  fils,  in
a  recent  essay  entitled  The  Rise  and  Decline
of  the  Romish  Church,  will  be  interest¬
ing.

“What  is  the  meaning  of  ‘pontiff’?
‘  Pontiff’  means  bridge  maker,  bridge
builder.  Why  are  they  called  in  that  way  ?
Here  is  the  explanation  of  the  fact :  In  the
very  first  years  of  the  existence  of  Rome,
at  a  time  of  which  we  have  a  very  fabulous
history  and  but  few  existing  monuments,
the  little  town  of  Rome,  not  built  on  seven
hills,  as  is  generally  supposed  —  there  are
eleven  of  them  now  ;  then  there  were  with¬
in  the  town  less  than  seven,  even  —  that
little  town  had  a  great  deal  to  fear  from  an
enemy  which  should  take  one  of  the  hills
that  were  out  of  town  —  the  Janiculum  —
because  the  Janiculum  is  higher  than  the
others,  and  from  that  hill  an  enemy  could
very  easily  throw  stones,  fire,  or  any  means
of  destruction  into  the  town.  The  Janic¬
ulum  was  separated  from  the  town  by  the
Tiber.  Then  the  first  necessity  for  the  de¬
fence  of  that  little  town  of  Rome  was  to
have  a  bridge.  They  had  built  a  wooden
bridge  over  the  Tiber,  and  a  great  point  of
interest  to  the  town  was,  that  this  bridge
should  be  kept  always  in  good  order,  so
that  at  any  moment  troops  could  pass  over.
Then,  with  the  special  genius  of  the  Ro¬
mans,  of  which  we  have  other  instances,
they  ordained,  curiously  enough,  that  the
men,  who  were  a  corporation,  to  take  care
of  that  bridge  should  be  sacred  ;  that  their
function,  necessary  to  the  defence  of  the
j  town,  should  be  considered  holy ;  that  they
|  should  be  priests  ;  and  the  highest  of  them


594


PONTIFF


PRAYER


was  called  1  the  high  bridge  maker.’  So
it  happened  that  there  was  in  lioine  a  cor¬
poration  of  bridge  makers  —  ponlifices —
of  whom  the  head  was  the  most  sacred  of
all  Romans ;  because  in  those  days  his  life
and  the  life  of  his  companions  was  deemed
necessary  to  the  safety  of  the  town.”

And  thus  it  is  that  the  title  of  Pontifex
Maximus,  assumed  by  the  Pope  of  Rome,
literally  means  the  Grand  Bridge  Builder.

Pontilf.  Grand.  See  Grand  Pontiff.

Poor  Fellow-Soldiers  of  Jesus
Christ.  (Pauper  es  commilitones  Jem
Christi.)  This  was  the  title  first  assumed
by  the  Knights  Templars.

Poppy.  In  the  mysteries  of  the  an¬
cients,  the  poppy  was  the  symbol  of  regen¬
eration.  The  somniferous  qualities  of  the
plant  expressed  the  idea  of  quiescence;
but  the  seeds  of  a  new  existence  which  it
contained  were  thought  to  show  that  nature,
though  her  powers  were  suspended,  yet
possessed  the  capability  of  being  called
into  a  renewed  existence.  Thus  the  poppy
planted  near  a  grave  symbolized  the  idea
of  a  resurrection.  Hence,  it  conveyed  the
same  symbolism  as  the  evergreen  or  sprig
of  acacia  does  in  the  Masonic  mysteries.

Porch  of  tlie  Temple.  See  Temple
of  Solomon.

Porta,  Gambattista.  A  physicist
of  Naples,  who  was  born  in  1545  and  died
in  1615.  He  was  the  founder  of  the  Se-
greti,  or  “  Academy  of  Secrets,”  (which
see.)  He  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of
the  occult  sciences,  was  the  inventor  of  the
camera  obscura,  and  the  author  of  several
treatises  on  Magic,  Physiognomy,  and
Secret  Writing.  De  Feller  ( Biog .  Univ.)
k  classes  him  with  Cornelius  Agrippa,  Car¬
dan,  Paracelsus,  and  other  disciples  of  oc¬
cult  philosophy.

Portugal.  Freemasonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  Portugal  in  1736,  when  a  Lodge
was  instituted  at  Lisbon,  under  a  Deputa¬
tion  to  George  Gordon  from  Lord  Wey¬
mouth,  Grand  Master  of  England.  An  at¬
tempt  was  made  by  John  Coustos  to  estab¬
lish  a  second  in  1743,  but  he  and  his  com¬
panions  were  arrested  by  the  Inquisition,
and  the  Lodge  suppressed.  Freemasonry
must,  however,  have  continued  to  exist,
although  secretly  practised,  for  in  1776
other  arrests  of  Freemasons  were  made  by
the  Holy  Office.  But  through  the  whole
of  the  eighteenth  century  the  history  of
Masonry  in  Portugal  was  the  history  of  an
uninterrupted  persecution  by  the  Church
and  the  State.  In  1805  a  Grand  Lodge
was  established  at  Lisbon,  and  Egaz-Moritz
was  elected  Grand  Master.  John  VI.,
during  his  exile,  issued  from  Santa  Cruz,
in  1818,  a  decree  against  the  Masons,  which
declared  that  every  Mason  who  should  be


arrested  should  suffer  death,  and  his  prop¬
erty  be  confiscated  to  the  State ;  and  this  law
was  extended  to  foreigners  residing  in  Por¬
tugal,  as  well  as  to  natives.  This  bigoted
sovereign,  on  his  restoration  to  the  throne,
promulgated  in  1823  another  decree  against
the  Order,  and  Freemasonry  fell  into  abey¬
ance;  but  in  1834  the  Lodges  were  again
revived.  But  dissensions  in  reference  to
Masonic  authority  unfortunately  arose
among  the  Fraternity  of  Portugal,  which
involved  the  history  of  the  Order  in  that
country  in  much  confusion.  There  were
in  a  few  years  no  less  than  four  bodies
claiming  Masonic  jurisdictiryi,  namely,  a
Grande  Oriente  Lusitano,  which  had  existed
for  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century,  and
which,  in  1846,  received  Letters-Patent
from  the  Supreme  Council  of  Brazil  for
the  establishment  of  a  Supreme  Council;  a
Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  under  the  juris¬
diction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland,
with  a  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix  working
under  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Council
of  Rites  of  Ireland;  and  two  Grand  Orients
working  under  contending  Grand  Masters.
Many  attempts  were  made  to  reconcile  these
opposing  bodies,  but  without  success;  and,
to  add  to  the  difficulty,  we  find,  about  1862,
another  body  calling  itself  the  Orient  of
the  Masonic  Confederation.  But  all  em¬
barrassments  were  at  length  removed  by
the  alliance,  in  1871,  of  the  United  Grand
Orient  with  the  Supreme  Council,  and  the
Masonic  interests  of  Portugal  are  now  pros¬
perously  conducted  by  the  “Grande  Oriente
Lusitano  Unido,  Supremo  Conselho  de
Maqonaria  Portugueza.”

Postulant.  The  title  given  to  the
candidate  in  the  degree  of  Knight  Kadosh.
From  the  Latin  postulans,  asking  for,  wish¬
ing  to  have.

Pot  of  Incense.  As  a  symbol  of
the  sacrifice  which  should  be  offered  up  to
Deity,  it  has  been  adopted  in  the  third
degree.  See  Incense.

Pot  of  Hanna.  See  Manna,  Pot  of.

Poursuivant.  More  correctly,  Pur-
mivant,  which  see.

Practieus.  The  third  degree  of  the
German  Rose  Croix.

Prayer.  Freemasonry  is  a  religious
institution,  and  hence  its  regulations  incul¬
cate  the  use  of  prayer  “as  a  proper  tribute
of  gratitude,”  to  borrow  the  language  of
Preston,  “  to  the  beneficent  Author  of  Life.”
Hence  it  is  of  indispensable  obligation
that  a  Lodge,  a  Chapter,  or  any  other  Ma¬
sonic  body,  should  be  both  opened  and
closed  with  prayer;  and  in  the  Lodges
working  in  the  English  and  American  sys¬
tems  the  obligation  is  strictly  observed.
The  prayers  used  at  opening  and  closing
in  this  country  differ  in  language  from  the


PRAYER


PREFERMENT


595


early  formulas  found  in  the  second  edition
of  Preston,  and  for  the  alterations  we  are
probably  indebted  to  Webb.  The  prayers
used  in  the  middle  and  perhaps  the  begin-
ing  of  the  eighteenth  century  are  to  be
found  in  Preston  (ed.  1775,)  and  are  as
follows :

At  Opening.  —  “  May  the  favor  of
Heaven  be  upon  this  our  happy  meeting ;
may  it  be  begun,  carried  on,  and  ended  in
order,  harmony,  and  brotherly  love:  Amen.”

At  Closing.  —  “  May  the  blessing  of
Heaven  be  with  us  and  all  regular  Masons,
to  beautify  and  cement  us  with  every
moral  and  social  virtue :  Amen.”

There  is  also  a  prayer  at  the  initiation  of
a  candidate,  which  has,  at  the  present  day,
been  very  slightly  varied  from  the  original
form.  This  prayer,  but  in  a  very  different
form,  is  much  older  than  Preston,  who
changed  and  altered  the  much  longer  for¬
mula  which  had  been  used  previous  to  his
day.  It  was  asserted  by  Dermott  that  the
prayer  at  initiation  was  a  ceremony  only
in  use  among  the  “Ancients”  or  Athol
Masons,  and  that  it  was  omitted  by  the
“  Moderns.”  But  this  cannot  be  so,  as  is
proved  by  the  insertion  of  it  in  the  earliest
editions  of  Preston.  We  have  moreover  a
form  of  prayer  “  to  be  used  at  the  admis¬
sion  of  a  brother,”  contained  in  the
Pocket  Companion,  published  in  1754,  by
John  Scott,  an  adherent  of  the  “  Mod¬
erns,”  which  proves  that  they  as  well  as
the  “Ancients”  observed  the  usage  of
prayer  at  an  initiation.  There  is  a  still
more  ancient  formula  of  “  Prayer  to  be
used  of  Christian  Masons  at  the  empoint-
ing  of  a  brother,”  said  to  have  been  used
in  the  reign  of  Edward  IV.,  from  1461  to
1483,  and  which  is  as  follows:

“The  might  of  God,  the  Father  of
Heaven,  with  the  wisdom  of  his  glorious
Son  through  the  goodness  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  that  hath  been  three  persons  in  one
Godhead,  be  with  us  at  our  beginning,  give
us  grace  to  govern  in  our  living  here,  that
we  may  only  come  to  his  bliss  that  shall
never  have  an  end.”

The  custom  of  commencing  and  ending
labor  with  prayer  was  adopted  at  an  early
period  by  the  Operative  F reemasons  of  Eng¬
land.  Findel  says  [Hist.,  p.  78,)  that  “their
Lodges  were  opened  at  sunrise,  the  Master
taking  his  station  in  the  East  and  the
brethren  forming  a  half  circle  around  him.
After  prayer,  each  craftsman  had  his  daily
work  pointed  out  to  him,  and  received  his
instructions.  At  sunset  they  again  as¬
sembled  after  labor,  prayer  was  offered,  and
their  wages  paid  to  them.”  We  cannot
doubt  that  the  German  Stonemasons,  who
were  even  more  religiously  demonstrative


than  their  English  brethren,  must  have  ob¬
served  the  same  custom.

As  to  the  posture  to  be  observed  in  Ma¬
sonic  prayer,  it  may  be  remarked  that  in
the  lower  degrees  the  usual  posture  is
standing.  At  an  initiation  the  candidate
kneels,  but  the  brethren  stand.  In  the
higher  degrees  the  usual  posture  is  to  kneel
on  the  right  knee.  These  are  at  least  the
usages  which  are  generally  practised  in
this  country.

Preadamite.  A  degree  contained
in  the  Archives  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of
the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

Precaution.  In  opening  and  closing
the  Lodge,  in  the  admission  of  visitors,  in
conversation  with  or  in  the  presence  of
strangers,  the  Mason  is  charged  to  use  the
necessary  precaution,  lest  that  should  be
communicated  to  the  profane  which  should
only  be  known  to  the  initiated.

Precedency  of  Lodges.  The  pre¬
cedency  of  Lodges  is  always  derived  from
the  date  of  their  Warrants  of  Constitution,
the  oldest  Lodge  ranking  as  No.  1.  As
this  precedency  confers  certain  privileges,
the  number  of  the  Lodge  is  always  deter¬
mined  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  while  the  name
is  left  to  the  selection  of  the  members.

Preceptor.  Grand  Preceptor,  or
Grand  Prior,  or  Preceptor,  or  Prior,  was
the  title  indifferently  given  by  the  Knights
Templars  to  the  officer  who  presided  over
a  province  or  kingdom,  as  the  Grand  Prior
or  Grand  Preceptor  of  England,  who  was
called  in  the  East  the  Prior  or  Preceptor
of  England.  The  principal  of  these  Grand
Preceptors  were  those  of  Jerusalem,  Tripo-
lis,  and  Antioch.

Preceptory.  The  houses  or  resi¬
dences  of  the  Knights  Templars  were  called
Preceptories,  and  the  superior  of  such  a
residence  was  called  the  Preceptor.  Some
of  the  residences  were  also  called  Command-
eries.  The  latter  name  has  been  adopted
by  the  Masonic  Templars  of  this  country-.
An  attempt  was  made  in  1856,  at  the  adop¬
tion  of  a  new  Constitution  by  the  Grand
Encampment  of  the  United  States,  which
met  at  Hartford,  to  abolish  the  title  “  Com-
manderies,”  and  adopt  that  of  “  Precepto¬
ries,”  for  the  Templar  organizations;  a
change  which  would  undoubtedly  have
been  more  in  accordance  with  history,  but
unfortunately  the  effort  to  effect  the  change
was  not  successful.

Precious  Jewels.  See  Jewels,  Pre-
cions.

Preferment.  In  all  the  Old  Consti¬
tutions  we  find  a  reference  made  to  ability
and  skill  as  the  only  claims  for  preferment
or  promotion.  Thus  in  one  of  them,  the
Laudsdowne  Manuscript,  whose  date  is


596


PRELATE


PREPARING


about  1560,  it  is  said  that  Nimrod  gave  a
charge  to  the  Masons  that  “  they  should
ordaine  the  most  wise  and  cunninge  man
to  be  Master  of  the  King  or  Lord’s  worke
that  was  amongs  them,  and  neither  for  love,
riches,  nor  favor,  to  sett  another  that  had
little  cunninge  to  be  Master  of  that  worke,
whereby  the  Lord  should  bee  ill  served  and
the  science  ill  defamed.”  And  again,  in
another  part  of  the  same  Manuscript,  it  is
ordered,  “  that  noe  Mason  take  on  him  noe
Lord’s  worke  nor  other  man’s  but  if  he
know  himselfe  well  able  to  performe  the
worke,  so  that  the  Craft  have  noe  slander.”
Charges  to  the  same  effect,  almost,  indeed,
in  the  same  words,  are  to  be  found  in  all
the  Old  Constitutions.  So  Anderson,  when
he  compiled  The  Charges  of  a  Freemason,
which  lie  says  were  “  extracted  from  the
ancient  records,”  and  which  he  published
in  1723,  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of
Constitutions,  lays  down  the  rule  of  prefer¬
ment  in  the  same  spirit,  and  in  these
words :

“All  preferment  among  Masons  is
grounded  upon  real  worth  and  personal
merit  only;  that  so  the  Lords  may  be  well
served,  the  brethren  not  put  to  shame,  nor
the  royal  Craft  despised ;  therefore  no  Mas¬
ter  or  Warden  is  chosen  by  seniority,  but
for  his  merit.”

And  then  he  goes  on  to  show  how  the
skilful  and  qualified  Apprentice  may  in  due
time  become  a  Fellow  Craft,  and,  “when
otherwise  qualified,  arrive  to  the  honor  of
being  the  Warden,  and  then  the  Master  of
the  Lodge,  the  Grand  Warden,  and  at  length
the  Grand  Master  of  all  the  Lodges,  according
to  his  merit.”  This  ought  to  be  now,  as  it
has  always  been,  the  true  law  of  Masonry ;
and  when  ambitious  men  are  seen  grasping
for  offices,  and  seeking  for  positions  whose
duties  they  are  not  qualified  to  discharge,
one  is  inclined  to  regret  that  the  Old
Charges  are  not  more  strictly  obeyed.

Prelate.  The  fourth  officer  in  a  Com-
mandery  of  Knights  Templars  and  in  a
Council  of  Red  Cross  Knights.  His  duties
are  to  conduct  the  religious  ceremonies  of
the  organization.  His  jewel  is  a  triple  tri¬
angle,  the  symbol  of  Deity,  and  within  each
of  the  triangles  is  suspended  a  cross,  in  allu¬
sion  to  the  Christian  character  of  the  cliiv-
alric  institution  of  which  he  is  an  officer.
The  corresponding  officer  in  a  Grand  Com-
mandery  and  in  the  Grand  Encampment
is  called  a  Grand  Prelate.

Prelate  of  Lebanon.  (Prelat  du
Liban .)  A  mystical  degree  in  the  collection
of  Pyron.

Prentice.  An  archaism,  or  rather  a
vulgarism  for  Apprentice,  constantly  found
in  tne  Old  Records.  It  is  now  never  used.

Prentice  Pillar.  In  the  southeast


part  of  the  chapel  of  Roslyn  Castle,  in
Scotland,  is  the  celebrated  column  which
goes  by  this  name,  and  with  which  a  Ma¬
sonic  legend  is  connected.  The  pillar  is  a
plain  fluted  shaft,  having  a  floral  garland
twined  around  it,  all  carved  out  of  the
solid  stone.  The  legend  is,  that  when  the
plans  of  the  chapel  were  sent  from  Rome,
the  master  builder  did  not  clearly  under¬
stand  about  this  pillar,  or,  as  another  ac¬
count  states,  had  lost  this  particular  portion
of  the  plans,  and,  in  consequence,  had  to  go
to  Rome  for  further  instructions  or  to  procure
a  fresh  copy.  During  his  absence,  a  clever
apprentice,  the  only  son  of  a  widow,  either
from  memory  or  from  his  own  invention,
carved  and  completed  the  beautiful  pillar.
When  the  master  returned  and  found  the
work  completed,  furious  with  jealous  rage,
he  killed  the  apprentice,  by  striking  him  a
frightful  blow  on  the  forehead  with  a
heavy  setting-maul.  In  testimony  of  the
truth  of  the  legend,  the  visitor  is  shown
three  heads  in  the  west  part  of  the  chapel  —
the  master’s,  the  apprentice’s,  (with  the
gash  on  his  forehead,)  and  the  widow’s.
There  can  be  but  little  doubt  that  this  le¬
gend  referred  to  that  of  the  third  degree,
which  is  thus  shown  to  have  existed,  at
least  substantially,  at  that  early  period.

Preparation  of  the  Candidate.
Great  care  was  taken  of  the  personal  con¬
dition  of  every  Israelite  who  entered  the
Temple  for  divine  worship.  The  Talmudic
treatise  entitled  Baracoth,  which  contains
instructions  as  to  the  ritual  worship  among
the  Jews,  lays  down  the  following  rules  for
the  preparation  of  all  who  visit  the  Tem¬
ple  :  “No  man  shall  go  into  the  Temple
with  his  staff,  nor  with  shoes  on  his  feet,
nor  with  his  outer  garment,  nor  with
money  tied  up  in  his  purse.”  There  are
certain  ceremonial  usages  in  Freemasonry
which  furnish  what  may  be  called  at  least
very'  remarkable  coincidences  with  this  old
Jewish  custom.

The  preparation  of  the  candidate  for  in¬
itiation  in  Masonry  is  entirely  symbolic.
It  varies  in  the  different  degrees,  and  there¬
fore  the  symbolism  varies  with  it.  Not
being  arbitrary  and  unmeaning,  but,  on  the
contrary,  conventional  and  full  of  significa¬
tion,  it  cannot  be  altered,  abridged,  or
added  to  in  any  of  its  details,  without  af¬
fecting  its  esoteric  design.  To  it,  in  its
fullest  extent,  every  candidate  must,  with¬
out  exception,  submit.

Preparing  Brother.  The  brother
who  prepares  the  candidate  for  initiation.
In  English,  be  has  no  distinctive  title.  In
French  Lodges  he  is  called  “Fr&re  terrible,”
and  in  German  he  is  called  “  Vorbereiten-
der  Bruder,”  or  “  Fitrchterlicher  Bruder.”
His  duties  require  him  to  have  a  compe-


PRESIDENT


PRESTON


597


tent  knowledge  of  the  ritual  of  reception,
and  therefore  an  experienced  member  of
the  Lodge  is  generally  selected  to  discharge
the  functions  of  this  office.

President.  The  presiding  officer  in
a  convention  of  High  Priests,  according  to
the  American  system,  is  so  called.  The
second  officer  is  styled  Vice  President.  On
September  6th,  1871,  the  Grand  Orient
of  France,  in  violation  of  the  landmarks,
abolished  the  office  of  Grand  Master,  and
conferred  his  powers  on  a  Council  of  the
Order.  The  President  of  the  Council  is
now  the  official  representative  of  the  Grand
Orient  and  the  Craft,  and  exercises  several
of  the  prerogatives  hitherto  administered
by  the  Grand  Master.

Presiding  Officer.  Whoever  acts,
although  temporarily  and  pro  hoc  vice ,  as
the  presiding  officer  of  a  Masonic  body,  as¬
sumes  for  the  time  all  the  powers  and  func¬
tions  of  the  officer  whom  he  represents.
Thus,  in  the  absence  of  the  Worshipful
Master,  the  Senior  Warden  presides  over
the  Lodge,  and  for  the  time  is  invested  with
all  the  prerogatives  that  pertain  to  the
Master  of  a  Lodge,  and  can,  while  he  is
in  the  chair,  perform  any  act  that  it  would
be  competent  for  the  Master  to  perform
were  he  present.

Prestonian  ^Lecture.  In  1819,
Bro.  Preston,  the  author  of  the  Illustrations
of  Masonry,  bequeathed  £300  in  the  con¬
sols,  the  interest  of  which  was  to  provide
for  the  annual  delivery  of  a  lecture  accord¬
ing  to  the  system  which  he  had  elaborated.
The  appointment  of  the  Lecturer  was  left
to  the  Grand  Master  for  the  time  being.
Stephen  Jones,  a  Past  Master  of  the  Lodge
of  Antiquity,  and  an  intimate  friend  of
Preston,  received  the  first  appointment ;
and  it  wras  subsequently  given  to  Bro.  Lau¬
rence  Thompson,  the  only  surviving  pupil
of  Preston.  He  held  it  until  his  death,
after  which  no  appointment  of  a  Lecturer
was  made  until  1857.  Since  that  time  the
lecture  has  been  regularly  delivered  in
London  before  some  one  of  the  Lodges.
In  the  delivery  of  this  lecture,  which  is  in¬
tended  to  keep  in  remembrance  the  sys¬
tem  which  was  taught  by  Preston,  great
care  has  been  taken  to  observe  not  only
the  Prestonian  arrangement,  but  the  very
words,  so  far  as  they  can  be  ascertained.
The  original  form  of  question  and  answer
is  not,  however,  maintained;  but  the  lecture
being  uninterrupted  by  interrogations,  the
prescribed  answers  are  turned  into  a  con¬
tinuous  course.

Prctttoniiin  Lectures.  About  the
vear  1772,  Preston  submitted  his  course  of
lectures  on  the  first  three  degrees  to  the
Craft  of  England.  These  lectures  were  a
revision  of  those  which  had  been  practised,


with  various  modifications,  since  the  re¬
vival  of  1717,  and  were  intended  to  confer
a  higher  literary  character  on  the  Masonic
ritual.  Preston  had  devoted  much  time
and  labor  to  the  compilation  of  these  lec¬
tures,  a  syllabus  of  which  will  be  found  in
his  Illustrations.  They  were  adopted  eagerly
by  the  English  Fraternity,  and  continued  to
be  the  authoritative  system  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  until  the  union  in  1813,
w'hen,  for  the  sake  of  securing  uniformity,
the  new  and  inferior  system  of  Dr.  Hem¬
ming  was  adopted.  But  the  Prestonian
lectures  and  ritual  are  still  used  by  many
Lodges  in  England.  In  America  they
were  greatly  altered  by  Webb,  and  are  no
longer  practised  here.

Preston,  William.  This  distin¬
guished  Mason  was  born  at  Edinburgh  on
the  7th  August,  1742.  The  usual  state¬
ment,  that  he  was  born  on  the  28th  July,
refers  to  Old  Style,  and  requires  therefore  to
be  amended.  He  was  the  son  of  William
Preston,  Esq.,  a  writer  of  the  Signet,  and
Helena  Cumming.  The  elder  Preston  was
a  man  of  much  intellectual  culture  and
abilities,  and  in  easy  circumstances,  and
took  therefore  pains  to  bestow  upon  his  son
an  adequate  education.  He  was  sent  to
school  at  a  very  early  age,  and  having
completed  his  preliminary  education  in
English  under  the  tuition  of  Mr.  Stirling,
a  celebrated  teacher  in  Edinburgh,  he  en¬
tered  the  High  School  before  he  wras  six
years  old,  and  made  considerable  progress
in  the  Latin  tongue.  From  the  High
School  he  went  to  college,  where  he  ac¬
quired  a  knowledge  of  the  rudiments  of
Greek.

After  the  death  of  his  father  he  retired
from  college,  and  became  the  amanuensis
of  that  celebrated  linguist,  Thomas  Ruddi-
man,  to  wThose  friendship  his  father  had
consigned  him.  Mr.  Ruddiman  having
greatly  impaired  and  finally  lost  his  sight
by  his  intense  application  to  his  classical
studies,  Preston  remained  with  him  as  his
secretary  until  his  decease.  His  patron
had,  how'ever,  previously  bound  young
Preston  to  his  brother,  Walter  Ruddiman,
a  printer,  but  on  the  increasing  failure  of
his  sight,  Mr.  Thomas  Ruddiman  withdrew
Preston  from  the  printing-office,  and  occu¬
pied  him  in  reading  to  him  and  translating
such  of  his  works  as  wrere  not  completed,
and  in  correcting  the  proofs  of  those  that
wTere  in  the  press.  Subsequently  Preston
compiled  a  catalogue  of Ruddiman’s  books,
under  the  title  of  Bibliotheca  Bnddimana ,
which  is  said  to  have  exhibited  much  lite¬
rary  ability.

After  the  death  of  Mr.  Ruddiman,  Pres¬
ton  returned  to  the  printing-office,  where  he
remained  for  about  a  year;  but  his  inclina-


598


PRESTON


PRESTON


tiong  leading  liim  to  literary  pursuits,  he,
with  the  consent  of  his  master,  repaired  to
London  in  1760,  having  been  furnished  with
several  letters  of  introduction  by  his  friends
in  Scotland.  Among  them  was  one  to  Wil¬
liam  Strahan,  the  king’s  printer,  in  whose
service,  and  that  of  his  son  and  successor,
he  remained  for  the  best  years  of  his  life
as  a  corrector  of  the  press,  devoting  him¬
self,  at  the  same  time,  to  other  literary
vocations,  editing  for  many  years  the  Lon¬
don  Chronicle,  and  furnishing  materials  for
various  periodical  publications.

Mr.  Preston’s  critical  skill  as  a  corrector
of  the  press  led  the  literary  men  of  that
day  to  submit  to  his  suggestions  as  to  style
and  language;  and  many  of  the  most  dis¬
tinguished  authors  who  were  contemporary
with  him  honored  him  with  their  friend¬
ship.  As  an  evidence  of  this,  there  were
found  in  his  library,  at  his  death,  presenta¬
tion  copies  of  their  works,  with  their  auto¬
graphs,  from  Gibbon,  Hume,  Robertson,
Blair,  and  many  others.

It  is,  however,  as  a  distinguished  teacher
of  the  Masonic  ritual,  and  as  the  founder
of  a  system  of  lectures  which  still  retain
their  influence,  that  William  Preston  more
especially  claims  our  attention.

Stephen  Jones,  the  disciple  and  intimate
friend  of  Preston,  published  in  1795,  in  the
Freemason s’  Magazine,  a  sketch  of  Pres¬
ton’s  life  and  labors ;  and  as  there  can  be
no  doubt,  from  the  relations  of  the  author
and  the  subject,  of  the  authenticity  of  the
facts  related,  I  shall  not  hesitate  to  use  the
language  of  this  contemporary  sketch,  in¬
terpolating  such  explanatory  remarks  as  I
may  deem  necessary.

Soon  after  Preston’s  arrival  in  London,
a  number  of  brethren  from  Edinburgh  re¬
solved  to  institute  a  Freemason’s  Lodge  in
that  city,  under  the  sanction  of  a  Constitu¬
tion  from  Scotland;  but  not  having  suc¬
ceeded  in  their  application,  they  wTere  re¬
commended  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot¬
land  to  the  ancient  Lodge  in  London,  who
immediately  granted  them  a  Dispensation
to  form  a  Lodge  and  to  make  Masons.
They  accordingly  met  at  the  White  Hart  in
the  Strand,  and  Mr.  Preston  was  the  second
person  initiated  under  that  Dispensation.
This  was  in  1762.  Lawrie  records  the  ap¬
plication  as  having  been  in  that  year  to  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.  It  thus  appears
that  Preston  was  made  a  Mason  under  the
Dermott  system.  It  will  be  seen,  however,
that  he  subsequently  went  over  to  the  legiti¬
mate  Grand  Lodge.

The  Lodge  was  soon  after  regularly  con¬
stituted  by  the  officers  of  the  ancient  Grand
Lodge  in  person.  Having  increased  con¬
siderably  in  numbers,  it  was  found  neces¬
sary  to  remove  to  the  Horn  Tavern  in  Fleet


Street,  where  it  continued  some  time,  till,
that  house  being  unable  to  furnish  proper
accommodations,  it  was  removed  to  Scots’
Hall,  Blackfriars.  Here  it  continued  to
flourish  about  two  years,  when  the  decayed
state  of  that  building  obliged  it  to  remove
to  the  Half  Moon  Tavern,  Cheapside,
where  it  continued  to  meet  for  a  consider¬
able  time.

At  length  Mr.  Preston  and  some  others
of  the  members  having  joined  the  Lodge,
under  the  regular  English  Constitution,  at
the  Talbot  inn,  in  the  Strand,  they  pre¬
vailed  on  the  rest  of  the  Lodge  at  the  Half
Moon  Tavern  to  petition  for  a  Constitution.
Lord  Blaney,  at  that  time  Grand  Master,
readily  acquiesced  with  the  desire  of  the
brethren,  and  the  Lodge  was  soon  after
constituted  a  second  time,  in  ample  form,
by  the  name  of  “  The  Caledonian  Lodge.”
The  ceremonies  observed,  and  the  numer¬
ous  assembly  of  respectable  brethren  who
attended  the  Grand  officers  on  that  occa¬
sion,  were  long  remembered  to  the  honor
of  the  Lodge.

This  circumstance,  added  to  the  absence
of  a  very  skilful  Mason,  to  whom  Mr.  Pres¬
ton  was  attached,  and  who  had  departed  for
Scotland  on  account  of  his  health,  induced
him  to  turn  his  attention  to  the  Masonic
lectures ;  and  to  arrive  at  the  depths  of  the
science,  short  of  which  he  did  not  mean  to
stop,  he  spared  neither  pains  nor  expense.

Preston’s  own  remarks  on  this  subject,  in
the  introduction  to  his  Illustrations  of  Ma¬
sonry,  are  well  worth  the  perusal  of  every
brother  who  intends  to  take  office.  “When,”
says  he,  “I  first  had  the  honor  to  be  elected
Master  of  a  Lodge,  I  thought  it  proper  to
inform  myself  fully  of  the  general  rules  of
the  society,  that  I  might  be  able  to  fulfil
my  own  duty,  and  officially  enforce  obedi¬
ence  in  others.  The  methods  which  I
adopted,  with  this  view,  excited  in  some  of
superficial  knowledge  an  absolute  dislike
of  what  they  considered  as  innovations ;
and  in  others,  who  were  better  informed,  a
jealousy  of  pre-eminence,  which  the  prin¬
ciples  of  Masonry  ought  to  have  checked.
Notwithstanding  these  discouragements,
however,  I  persevered  in  my  intention  of
supporting  the  dignity  of  the  society,  and
of  discharging  with  fidelity  the  trust  re¬
posed  in  me.”  Masonry  has  not  changed.
We  still  too  often  find  the  same  mistaking
of  research  for  innovation,  and  the  same
ungenerous  jealousy  of  pre-eminence  of
which  Preston  complains.

Wherever  instruction  could  be  acquired,
thither  Preston  directed  his  course ;  and
with  the  advantage  of  a  retentive  memory,
and  an  extensive  Masonic  connection,  added
to  a  diligent  literary  research,  he  so  far  suc¬
ceeded  in  his  purpose  as  to  become  a  com-


PRESTON


PRESTON


599


petent  master  of  the  subject.  To  increase
the  knowledge  he  had  acquired,  he  solicited
the  company  and  conversation  of  the  most
experienced  Masons  from  foreign  countries ;
and,  in  the  course  of  a  literary  correspond¬
ence  with  the  Fraternity  at  liomeandabroad,
made  such  progress  in  the  mysteries  of  the
art  as  to  become  very  useful  in  the  connec¬
tions  he  had  formed.  He  was  frequently
heard  to  say,  that  in  the  ardor  of  his
inquiries  he  had  explored  the  abodes  of
poverty  and  wretchedness,  and,  where  it
might  have  been  least  expected,  acquired
very  valuable  scraps  of  information.  The
poor  brother  in  return,  we  are  assured,  had
no  cause  to  think  his  time  or  talents  ill  be¬
stowed.  He  was  also  accustomed  to  con¬
vene  his  friends  once  or  twice  a  week,  in
order  to  illustrate  the  lectures ;  on  which
occasion  objections  were  started,  and  ex¬
planations  given,  for  the  purpose  of  mutual
improvement.  At  last,  with  the  assistance
of  some  zealous  friends,  he  was  enabled  to
arrange  and  digest  the  whole  of  the  first
lecture.  To  establish  its  validity,  he  re¬
solved  to  submit  to  the  society  at  large  the
progress  he  had  made ;  and  for  that  pur¬
pose  he  instituted,  at  a  very  considerable  ex¬
pense,  a  grand  gala  at  the  Crown  and  An¬
chor  Tavern,  in  the  Strand,  on  Thursday,
May  21,  1772,  which  was  honored  with  the
presence  of  the  then  Grand  officers,  and
many  other  eminent  and  respectable  breth¬
ren.  On  this  occasion  he  delivered  an  ora¬
tion  on  the  Institution,  which,  having  met
with  general  approbation,  was  afterwards
printed  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Illustra¬
tions  of  Masonry,  published  by  him  the
same  year.

Having  thus  far  succeeded  in  his  design,
Mr.  Preston  determined  to  prosecute  the
plan  he  had  formed,  and  to  complete  the
lectures.  He  employed,  therefore,  a  num¬
ber  of  skilful  brethren,  at  his  own  expense,
to  visit  different  town  and  country  Lodges,
for  the  purpose  of  gaining  information;
and  these  brethren  communicated  the  re¬
sult  of  their  visits  at  a  weekly  meeting.

When  by  study  and  application  he  had
arranged  his  system,  he  issued  proposals
for  a  regular  course  of  lectures  on  all  the
degrees  of  Masonry,  and  these  were  publicly
delivered  by  him  at  the  Mitre  Tavern,  in
Fleet  Street,  in  1774.

For  some  years  afterwards,  Mr.  Preston
indulged  his  friends  by  attending  several
schools  of  instruction,  and  other  stated
meetings,  to  propagate  the  knowledge  of
the  science,  which  had  spread  far  beyond
his  expectations,  and  considerably  enhanced
the  reputation  of  the  society.  Having  ob¬
tained  the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
he  continued  to  be  a  zealous  encourager
and  supporter  of  all  the  measures  of  that


assembly  which  tended  to  add  dignity  to
the  Craft,  and  in  all  the  Lodges  in  which
his  name  was  enrolled,  which  were  very
numerous,  he  enforced  a  due  obedience  to
the  laws  and  regulations  of  that  body.  By
these  means  the  subscriptions  to  the  charity
became  much  more  considerable;  and  daily
acquisitions  to  the  society  were  made  of
some  of  the  most  eminent  and  distinguished
characters.  At  last  he  was  invited  by  his
friends  to  visit  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity,
No.  1,  then  held  at  the  Mitre  Tavern,  in
Fleet  Street,  when  the  brethren  of  that
Lodge  were  pleased  to  admit  him  a  mem¬
ber,  and,  what  was  very  unusual,  elected
him  at  the  same  meeting.

He  had  been  Master  of  the  Philanthropic
Lodge  at  the  Queen’s  Head,  Gray’s-inn-
gate,  Holborn,  above  six  years,  and  of
several  other  Lodges  before  that  time.  But
he  was  now  taught  to  consider  the  impor¬
tance  of  the  first  Master  under  the  English
Constitution  ;  and  he  seemed  to  regret  that
some  eminent  character  in  the  walks  of
life  had  not  been  selected  to  support  so
distinguished  a  station.  Indeed,  this  too
small  consideration  of  his  own  importance
pervaded  his  conduct  on  all  occasions ;
and  he  was  frequently  seen  voluntarily
to  assume  the  subordinate  offices  of  an  as¬
sembly,  over  ■which  he  had  long  presided,
on  occasions  where,  from  the  absence  of  the
proper  persons,  he  had  conceived  that  his
services  would  promote  the  purposes  of  the
meeting.

To  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity  he  now  began
chiefly  to  confine  his  attention,  and  during
his  Mastership,  which  continued  for  some
years,  the  Lodge  increased  in  numbers  and
improved  in  its  finances.

That  he  might  obtain  a  complete  knowl¬
edge  of  the  state  of  the  society  under  the
English  Constitution,  he  became  an  active
member  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  was  admit¬
ted  a  member  of  the  hall  committee,  and
during  the  secretaryship  of  Mr.  Thomas
French,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Duke  of
Beaufort,  then  Grand  Master,  had  become
a  useful  assistant  in  arranging  the  general
regulations  of  the  society,  and  reviving  the
foreign  and  country  correspondence.  Hav¬
ing  been  appointed  to  the  office  of  Deputy
Grand  Secretary  under  James  Heseltine,
Esq.,  he  compiled,  for  the  benefit  of  the
charity,  the  History  of  Remarkable  Occur¬
rences,  inserted  in  the  first  two  publications
of  the  Freemasons'  Calendar;  prepared  for
the  press  an  Appendix  to  the  Book  of  Con¬
stitutions,  and  attended  so  much  to  the  cor¬
respondence  with  the  different  Lodges  as  to
merit  the  approbation  of  his  patron.  This
enabled  him,  from  the  various  memoranda
he  had  made,  to  form  the  History  of  Ma¬
sonry,  which  was  afterwards  printed  in  his


600


PRESTON


PRESTON


Illustrations.  The  office  of  Deputy  Grand
Secretary  he  afterwards  resigned.

An  unfortunate  dispute  having  arisen  in
the  society  in  1779,  between  the  Grand
Lodge  and  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity,  in  which
Mr.  Preston  took  the  part  of  the  Lodge  and
his  private  friends,  his  name  was  ordered
to  be  erased  from  the  hall  committee;  and
he  was  afterwards,  with  a  number  of  gen¬
tlemen,  members  of  that  Lodge,  expelled.

The  treatment  he  and  his  friends  received
at  that  time  was  circumstantially  narrated
in  a  well-written  pamphlet,  printed  by
Mr.  Preston  at  his  own  expense,  and  cir¬
culated  among  his  friends,  but  never  pub¬
lished,  and  the  leading  circumstances  were
recorded  in  some  of  the  later  editions  of
the  Illustrations  of  Masonry.  Ten  years
afterwards,  however,  on  a  reinvestigation
of  the  subject  in  dispute,  the  Grand  Lodge
was  pleased  to  reinstate  Mr.  Preston,  with
all  the  other  members  of  the  Lodge  of  An¬
tiquity,  and  that  in  the  most  handsome
manner,  at  the  grand  feast  in  1790,  to  the
general  satisfaction  of  the  Fraternity.

During  Mr.  Preston’s  exclusion,  he  sel¬
dom  or  never  attended  any  of  the  Lodges,
though  he  was  actually  an  enrolled  mem¬
ber  of  a  great  many  Lodges  at  home  and
abroad,  all  of  which  he  politely  resigned
at  the  time  of  his  suspension,  and  di¬
rected  his  attention  to  his  other  literary
ursuits,  which  may  fairly  be  supposed  to
ave  contributed  more  to  the  advantage  of
his  fortune.

So  much  of  the  life  of  Preston  we  get
from  the  interesting  sketch  of  Stephen
Jones.  To  other  sources  we  must  look  for
a  further  elucidation  of  some  of  the  circum¬
stances  which  he  has  so  concisely  related.

The  expulsion  of  such  a  man  as  Preston
from  the  Order  was  a  disgrace  to  the  Grand
Lodge  which  inflicted  it.  It  was,  to  use
the  language  of  Oliver,  wTho  himself,  in
aftertimes,  had  undergone  a  similar  act
of  injustice,  “  a  very  ungrateful  and  inade¬
quate  return  for  his  services.”

The  story  was  briefly  this :  It  had  been
determined  by  the  brethren  of  the  Lodge  of
Antiquity,  held  on  December  17, 1777,  that
at  the  annual  festival  on  St.  John’s  day,  a
procession  should  be  formed  to  St.  Dun-
stan’s  Church,  a  few  steps  only  from  the
tavern  where  the  Lodge  was  held ;  a  protest
of  a  few  of  the  members  was  entered  against
it  on  the  day  of  the  festival.  In  conse¬
quence  of  this  only  ten  members  attended,
who,  having  clothed  themselves  as  Masons
in  the  vestry  room,  sat  in  the  same  pew  and
heard  a  sermon,  after  which  they  crossed
the  street  in  their  gloves  and  aprons  to  re¬
turn  to  the  Lodge  room.  At  the  next  meet¬
ing  of  the  Lodge,  a  motion  was  made  to  re¬
pudiate  this  act;  and  while  speaking  against


it,  Mr.  Preston  asserted  the  inherent  privi¬
leges  of  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity,  which,  not
working  under  a  Warrant  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  was,  in  his  opinion,  not  subject  in
the  matter  of  processions  to  the  regulations
of  the  Grand  Lodge.  It  was  for  maintain¬
ing  this  opinion,  which,  whether  right  or
w'rong,  was  after  all  only  an  opinion,  Pres¬
ton  was,  under  circumstances  which  exhib¬
ited  neither  magnanimity  nor  dignity  on
the  part  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  expelled  from
the  Order.  One  of  the  unhappy  results  of
this  act  of  oppression  was  that  the  Lodge
of  Antiquity  severed  itself  lrom  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  united  with  the  Grand  Lodge
at  York,  and  Preston  withdrew  from  all
share  in  the  concerns  of  Masonry.

But  ten  years  afterwards,  in  1787,  the
Grand  Lodge  saw  the  error  it  had  com¬
mitted,  and  Preston  was  restored  with  all
his  honors  and  dignities.  And  now,  while
the  name  of  Preston  is  known  and  revered
by  all  who  value  Masonic  learning,  the
names  of  all  his  bitter  enemies,  with  the
exception  of  Noorthouck,  have  sunk  into  a
well-deserved  oblivion.

Preston  had  no  sooner  been  restored  to
his  Masonic  rights  than  he  resumed  his  la¬
bors  for  the  advancement  of  the  Order.  In
1787  he  organized  the  Order  of  Harodim,  a
society  in  which  it  was  intended  to  thor¬
oughly  teach  the  lectures  which  he  had  pre¬
pared.  Of  this  Order  some  of  the  most  dis¬
tinguished  Masons  of  the  day  became  mem¬
bers,  and  it  is  said  to  have  produced  great
benefits  by  its  well-devised  plan  of  Masonic
instruction.

But  William  Preston  is  best  known  to
us  by  his  invaluable  work  entitled  Illustra¬
tions  of  Masonry.  The  first  edition  of  this
work  was  published  in  1772.  Although  it
is  spoken  of  in  some  resolutions  of  a  Lodge,
published  in  the  second  edition,  as  “a  very
ingenious  and  elegant  pamphlet,”  it  was
really  a  work  of  some  size,  consisting,  in  its
introduction  and  text,  of  288  pages.  It  con¬
tained  an  account  of  the  “  grand  gala,”  or
banquet,  given  by  the  author  to  the  Frater¬
nity  iu  May,  1772,  when  he  first  proposed
his  system  of  lectures.  This  account  was
omitted  in  the  second  and  all  subsequent
editions  “to  make  room  for  more  useful
matter.”  The  second  edition,  enlarged  to
324  pages,  was  published  in  1775,  and  this
was  followed  by  others  1776, 1781, 1788, 1792,
1799, 1801,  and  1812.  There  must  have  been
three  other  editions,  of  which  I  can  find  no
account  in  the  bibliographies,  for  Wilkie
calls  his  1801  edition  the  tenth,  and  the
edition  of  1812,  the  last  published  by  the
author,  is  called  the  twelfth.  The  thirteenth
and  fourteenth  editions  were  published  after
the  author’s  death,  with  additions — the
former  by  Stephen  Jones  in  1821,  and  the


PRETENDER


PRICE


601


latter  by  Dr.  Oliver  in  1829.  Other  Eng¬
lish  editions  have  been  subsequently  pub¬
lished.  The  work  was  translated  into  Ger¬
man,  and  two  editions  published,  one  in
1776  and  the  other  in  1780.  In  America,
two  editions  were  published  in  1804,  one  at
Alexandria,  in  Virginia,  and  the  other,
with  numerous  important  additions,  by
George  Richards,  at  Portsmouth,  New
Hampshire.  Both  claim,  on  the  title-page,
to  be  the  “  first  American  edition and  it
is  probable  that  both  works  were  pub¬
lished  by  their  respective  editors  about
the  same  time,  and  while  neither  had  any
knowledge  of  the  existence  of  a  rival  copy.

Preston  died,  after  a  long  illness,  in  Dean
Street,  Fetter  Lane,  London,  on  April  1st,
1818,  at  the  age  of  seventy-six,  and  was
buried  in  St.  Paul’s  Cathedral.  In  the
latter  years  of  his  life  he  seems  to  have  taken
no  active  public  part  in  Masonry,  for  in
the  very  full  account  of  the  proceedings  at
the  union  in  1813  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges,
his  name  does  not  appear  as  one  of  the
actors,  and  his  system  was  then  ruthlessly
surrendered  to  the  newer  but  not  better
one  of  Dr.  Hemming.  But  he  had  not  lost
his  interest  in  the  Institution  which  he  had
served  so  well  and  so  long,  and  by  which
he  had  been  so  illy  requited.  For  he  be¬
queathed  at  his  death  £300  in  the  consols,
the  interest  of  which  was  to  provide  for
the  annual  delivery  of  a  lecture  according
to  his  system.  He  also  left  £500  to  the
Royal  Freemasons’  Charity,  for  female
children,  and  a  like  sum  to  the  General
Charity  Fund  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  He
was  never  married,  and  left  behind  him
only  his  name  as  a  great  Masonic  teacher
and  the  memory  of  his  services  to  the
Craft.  Jones’  edition  of  his  Illustrations
contains  an  excellently  engraved  likeness
of  him  by  Ridley,  from  an  original  portrait
said  to  be  by  S.  Drummond,  Royal  Acade¬
mician.  There  is  an  earlier  engraved  like¬
ness  of  him  in  the  Freemasons'  Magazine
for  1795,  from  a  painting  known  to  be  by
Drummond,  and  taken  in  1794.  They  pre¬
sent  the  differences  of  features  which  may
naturally  be  ascribed  to  a  lapse  of  twenty-
six  years.  The  latter  print  is  said,  by
those  who  personally  knew  him,  to  be  an
excellent  likeness.

Pretender.  James  Stuart,  the  son
of  James  II.,  who  abdicated  the  throne  of
Great  Britain,  and  Charles  Edward,  his
son,  are  known  in  history  as  the  Old  and  the
Young  Pretender.  Their  intrigues  with
Masonry,  which  they  are  accused  of  at¬
tempting  to  use  as  an  instrument  to  aid  in
a  restoration  to  the  throne,  constitute  a
very  interesting  episode  in  the  history  of
the  Order.  See  Stuart  Masonry.

Previous  Question.  A  parliamen-
4  A


tary  motion  intended  to  suppress  debate.
It  is  utterly  unknown  in  the  parliamentary
law  of  Masonry,  and  it  would  be  always
out  of  order  to  move  it  in  a  Masonic  body.

Prichard,  Samuel.  “An  unprin¬
cipled  and  needy  brother,”  as  Oliver  calls
him,  who  published  at  London,  in  1730,  a
book  with  the  folllowing  title  :  “  Masonry
Dissected;  being  a  Universal  and  Genuine
Description  of  all  its  Branches,  from  the
Original  to  this  Present  Time :  as  it  is  deliv¬
ered  in  the  constituted,  regular  Lodges,
both  in  City  and  Country,  according  to  the
several  Degrees  of  Admission ;  giving  an
impartial  account  of  their  regular  Proceed¬
ings  in  initiating  their  New  Members  in
the  whole  Three  Degrees  of  Masonry,  viz.,
I.  Entered  Prentice;  II.  Fellow  Craft;  III.
Master.  To  which  is  added,  The  Author’s
Vindication  ofHimself,  by  Samuel  Prichard,
Late  Member  of  a  constituted  Lodge.”  This
work,  which  contained  a  great  deal  of  plau¬
sible  matter,  mingled  with  some  truth  as
well  as  falsehood,  passed  through  a  great
many  editions,  was  translated  into  the
French,  German,  and  Dutch  languages,  and
became  the  basis  or  model  on  which  all  the
subsequent  so-called  expositions,  such  as
Tubal-Cain,  Jachin  and  Boaz,  etc.,  were
framed.  In  the  same  year  of  the  appear¬
ance  of  Prichard’s  book,  Dr.  Anderson  pub¬
lished  a  Defence  of  Masonry ,  as  a  reply
to  the  Masonry  Dissected.  This  pamphlet
was  the  first  work  of  any  value  that  had  ap¬
peared  from  the  Masonic  press,  and  does
infinitely  more  credit  to  Anderson’s  genius
and  learning  than  the  Constitutions,  which
he  had  published  seven  years  before.  It
is  not,  however,  a  reply  to  Prichard,  but
rather  an  attempt  to  interpret  the  ceremo¬
nies  which  are  described  in  the  Masonry  Dis¬
sected  in  their  symbolic  import,  and  this  it
is  that  gives  to  the  Defence  a  value  which
ought  to  have  made  it  a  more  popular  work
among  the  Fraternity  than  it  is.  Prichard
died,  as  I  suppose  he  had  lived,  in  ob¬
scurity  ;  but  the  Abb6  Larudan,  in  his  Franc-
Maqons  ecrases,  (p.  135),  has  manufactured
a  wild  tale  about  his  death  ;  stating  that  he
was  carried  by  force  at  night  into  the
Grand  Lodge  at  London,  put  to  death,  his
body  burned  to  ashes,  and  all  the  Lodges
in  the  world  informed  of  the  execution.
The  Abb6  is  satisfied  of  the  truth  of  this
wondrous  narrative  because  he  had  heard
it  told  in  Holland  and  in  Germany,  all  of
which  only  proves  that  the  French  calum¬
niator  of  Masonry  abounded  either  in  an
inventive  faculty  or  in  a  trusting  faith.

Price,  Henry.  He  received  a  Depu¬
tation  as  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  New
England,  which  was  issued  on  April  30,
1733,  by  Viscount  Montague,  Grand  Master
of  England.  On  the  30th  of  the  following


602


PRIEST


PRIMITIVE


July,  Price  organized  a  Provincial  Grand
Lodge ;  and  he  may  thus  be  considered  as
the  founder  of  Masonry  in  New  England.
He  was  born  in  England  about  the  year
1697,  and  died  in  Alassachusetts  in  1780.
A  very  able  memoir  of  Price,  by  Bro.  Wil¬
liam  Sewell  Gardner,  will  be  found  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Alassa¬
chusetts  for  the  year  1871.

l*riest.  In  the  primitive  ages  of  the
world  every  father  was  the  priest  of  his
family,  and  offered  prayer  and  sacrifice  for
his  household.  So,  too,  the  patriarchs  ex¬
ercised  the  same  function.  Alelchizedek
is  called  “the  priest  of  the  most  high
God and  everywhere  in  Scripture  we  find
the  patriarchs  performing  the  duties  of
prayer  and  sacrifice.  But  when  political
society  was  organized,  a  necessity  was
found,  in  the  religious  wants  of  the  people,
for  a  separate  class,  who  should  become,  as
they  have  been  described,  the  mediators
between  men  and  God,  and  the  interpreters
of  the  will  of  the  gods  to  men.  Hence
arose  the  sacerdotal  class — the  cohen  among
the  Hebrews,  the  hiereus  among  the  Greeks,
and  the  sacerdos  among  the  Romans.  There¬
after  prayer  and  sacrifice  were  intrusted  to
these,  and  the  people  paid  them  reverence
for  the  sake  of  the  deities  whom  they
served.  Ever  since,  in  all  countries,  the
distinction  has  existed  between  the  priest
and  the  layman,  as  representatives  of  two
distinct  classes.

But  Alasonry  has  preserved  in  its  reli¬
gious  ceremonies,  as  in  many  of  its  other
usages,  the  patriarchal  spirit.  Hence  the
Alaster  of  the  Lodge,  like  the  father  of  a
primitive  family,  on  all  occasions  offers
up  prayer  and  serves  at  the  altar.  A  chap¬
lain  is  sometimes,  through  courtesy,  invited
to  perform  the  former  duty,  but  the  Alaster
is  really  the  priest  of  the  Lodge.

Having  then  such  solemn  duties  to  dis¬
charge,  and  sometimes,  as  on  funereal  occa¬
sions,  in  public,  it  becomes  every  Alaster
so  to  conduct  his  life  and  conversation  as
not,  by  contrast,  to  make  his  ministration
of  a  sacred  office  repulsive  to  those  who  see
and  hear  him,  and  especially  to  profanes.
It  is  not  absolutely  required  that  he  should
be  a  religious  man,  resembling  the  clergy¬
man  in  seriousness  of  deportment ;  but  in
his  behavior  he  should  be  an  example  of
respect  for  religion.  He  who  at  one  time
drinks  to  intoxication,  or  indulges  in  pro¬
fane  swearing,  or  obscene  and  vulgar  lan¬
guage,  is  unfit  at  any  other  time  to  conduct
the  religious  services  of  a  society.  Such  a
Alaster  could  inspire  the  members  of  his
Lodge  with  no  respect  for  the  ceremonies
he  was  conducting;  and  if  the  occasion
was  a  public  one,  as  at  the  burial  of  a
brother,  the  circumstance  would  subject  the


Order  which  could  tolerate  such  an  incon¬
gruous  exhibition  to  contempt  and  ridi¬
cule.

Priest,  Grand  High.  See  Grand

High  Priest.

Priest,  High.  See  High  Priest.

Priesthood,  Order  of  High.  See

High  Priesthood,  Order  of.

Priestly  Order.  A  Rite  which  Bro.
John  Yarker,  of  Alanchester,  says  ( Myst .  of
Antiq.,  p.  126,)  was  formerly  practised  in
Ireland,  and  formed  the  system  of  the  York
Grand  Lodge.  It  consisted  of  seven  de¬
grees,  as  follows  :  1.  2.  3.  Symbolic  degrees ;
4.  Past  Alaster;  5.  Royal  Arch ;  6.  Knight
Templar;  7.  Knight  Templar  Priest,  or
Holy  Wisdom.  The  last  degree  was  called
a  Tabernacle,  and  was  governed  by  seven
“Pillars.”  Bro.  Hughan  (Hist,  of  Freem.
in  York,  p.  32,)  doubts  the  York  origin  of
the  Priestly  Order,  as  well  as  the  claim  it
made  to  have  been  revived  in  1786.  It  is
now  obsolete.

Priest,  Royal.  The  fifth  degree  of
the  Initiated  Brothers  of  Asia.

Priest  Theosopliist.  Thory  says
that  it  is  the  sixth  degree  of  the  Kabbalistic
Rite.

Primitive  Freemasonry.  The

Primitive  Freemasonry  of  the  antedilu¬
vians  is  a  term  for  which  we  are  indebted
to  Oliver,  although  the  theory  was  breached
by  earlier  writers,  and  among  them  by  the
Chevalier  Ramsay'.  The  theory  is,  that
the  principles  and  doctrines  of  Freema¬
sonry'  existed  in  the  earliest  ages  of  the
world,  and  were  believed  and  practised  by
a  primitive  people,  or  priesthood,  under
the  name  of  Pure  or  Primitive  Freema¬
sonry;  and  that  this  Freemasonry,  that  is  to
say,  the  religious  doctrine  inculcated  by  it,
was,  after  the  flood,  corrupted  by  the  Pagan
philosophers  and  priests,  and,  receiving  the
title  of  Spurious  Freemasonry,  was  exhibited
in  the  Ancient  Alysteries.  The  Noachid®,
however,  preserved  the  principles  of  the
Primitive  Freemasonry,  and  transmitted
them  to  succeeding  ages,  when  at  length
they  assumed  the  name  of  Speculative  Ma¬
sonry.  The  Primitive  Freemasonry  was
probably  without  ritual  or  symbolism,  and
consisted  only'  of  a  series  of  abstract  proposi¬
tions  derived  from  antediluvian  traditions.
Its  dogmas  were  the  unity  of  God  and  the
immortality  of  the  soul.  Dr.  Oliver,  who
gave  this  system  its  name,  describes  it
(Hist.  Landm.,  i.,  p.  61,)  in  the  following
language.  “  It  included  a  code  of  simple
morals.  It  assured  men  that  they  who
did  well  would  be  approved  of  God ;  and
if  they  followed  evil  courses,  sin  would  be
imputed  to  them,  and  they  would  thus  be¬
come  subject  to  punishment.  It  detailed
the  reasons  why  the  seventh  day  was  con-


PRIMITIVE


PRIMITIVE


603


secrated  and  set  apart  as  a  Sabbath,  or  day
of  rest ;  and  showed  why  the  bitter  conse¬
quences  of  sin  were  visited  upon  our  first
parents,  as  a  practical  lesson  that  it  ought
to  be  avoided.  But  the  great  object  of  this
Primitive  Freemasonry  was  to  preserve
and  cherish  the  promise  of  a  Redeemer,
who  should  provide  a  remedy  for  the  evil
that  their  transgression  had  introduced
into  the  world,  when  the  appointed  time
should  come.”

In  his  History  of  Initiation  he  makes  the
supposition  that  the  ceremonies  of  this
Primitive  Freemasonry  would  be  few  and
unostentatious,  and  consist,  perhaps,  like
that  of  admission  into  Christianity,  of  a
simple  lustration,  conferred  alike  on  all,  in
the  hope  that  they  would  practise  the
social  duties  of  benevolence  and  good-will
to  man,  and  unsophisticated  devotion  to
God.

He  does  not,  however,  admit  that  the
system  of  Primitive  Freemasonry  consisted
only  of  those  tenets  which  are  to  be  found
in  the  first  chapters  of  Genesis,  or  that  he
intends,  in  his  definition  of  this  science,  to
embrace  so  general  and  indefinite  a  scope
of  all  the  principles  of  truth  and  light,  as
Preston  has  done  in  his  declaration,  that
“  from  the  commencement  of  the  world,  we
may  trace  the  foundation  of  Masonry.”
On  the  contrary,  Oliver  supposes  that  this
Primitive  Freemasonry  included  a  partic¬
ular  and  definite  system,  made  up  of  le¬
gends  and  symbols,  and  confined  to  those
who  were  initiated  into  its  mysteries.  The
knowledge  of  these  mysteries  was  of  course
communicated  by  God  himself  to  Adam,
and  from  him  traditionally  received  by  his
descendants,  throughout  the  patriarchal  line.

This  view  of  Oliver  is  substantiated  by
the  remarks  of  Rosenberg,  a  learned  French
Mason,  in  an  article  in  the  Freemasons’
Quarterly  Review,  on  the  Book  of  Raziel,  an
ancient  Kabbalistic  work,  whose  subject  is
these  divine  mysteries.  “  This  book,”  says
Rosenberg,  “  informs  us  that  Adam  was  the
first  to  receive  these  mysteries.  Afterwards,
when  driven  out  of  Paradise,  he  communi¬
cated  them  to  his  son  Seth  ;  Seth  communi¬
cated  them  to  Enoch ;  Enoch  to  Methuselah ;
Methuselah  to  Lamech  ;  Lamech  to  Noah;
Noah  to  Shem ;  Shem  to  Abraham ;  Abra¬
ham  to  Isaac ;  Isaac  to  Jacob ;  Jacob  to
Levi ;  Levi  to  Kelhoth ;  Kelhoth  to  Amram  ;
Amram  to  Moses ;  Moses  to  Joshua ;  Joshua
to  the  Elders;  the  Elders  to  the  Prophets;
the  Prophets  to  the  Wise  Men ;  and  then
from  one  to  another  down  to  Solomon.”

Such,  then,  was  the  Pure  or  Primitive
Freemasonry,  the  first  system  of  mysteries
which,  according  to  modern  Masonic  writ¬
ers  of  the  school  of  Oliver,  has  descended,
of  course  with  various  modifications,  from


age  to  age,  in  a  direct  and  uninterrupted
line,  to  the  Freemasons  of  the  present  day.

The  theory  is  an  attractive  one,  and  may
be  qualifiedly  adopted,  if  we  may  accept
what  appears  to  have  been  the  doctrine  of
Anderson,  of  Hutchinson,  of  Preston,  and
of  Oliver,  that  the  purer  theosophic  tenets
of  “the  chosen  people  of  God”  were  simi¬
lar  to  those  subsequently  inculcated  in  Ma¬
sonry,  and  distinguished  from  the  corrupted
teaching  of  the  Pagan  religions  as  devel¬
oped  in  the  mysteries.  But  if  we  attempt
to  contend  that  there  was  among  the  Pa¬
triarchs  any  esoteric  organization  at  all  re¬
sembling  the  modern  system  of  Freema¬
sonry,  we  shall  find  no  historical  data  on
which  we  may  rely  for  support.

Primitive  Rite.  This  Rite  was
founded  at  Narbonne,  in  France,  on  April
19,  1780,  by  the  pretended  “  Superiors  of
the  Order  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.”
It  was  attached  to  the  Lodge  of  the  Phila-
delphes,  under  the  title  of  the  “  First  Lodge
of  St.  John  united  to  the  Primitive  Rite
for  the  country  of  France.”  Hence  it  is
sometimes  called  the  Primitive  Rite  of  Nar¬
bonne,  and  sometimes  the  Rite  of  the  Phila-
delphes.  It  was  divided  into  three  classes,
which  comprised  ten  degrees  of  instruction.
These  were  not,  in  the  usual  sense,  degrees,
but  rather  collections  of  grades,  out  of
which  it  was  sought  to  develop  all  the  in¬
structions  of  which  they  were  capable.
These  classes  and  degrees  were  as  follows  :

First  Class.  1.  Apprentice.  2.  Fellow
Craft.  3.  Master  Mason.  These  were  con¬
formable  to  the  same  degrees  in  all  the
other  Rites.

Second  Class.  4th  degree,  comprising
Perfect  Master,  Elu,  and  Architect.  5tli
degree,  comprising  the  Sublime  Ecossais.
6th  degree,  comprising  the  Knight  of  the
Sword,  Knight  of  the  East,  and  Prince  of
Jerusalem.

Third  Class.  7.  The  First  Chapter  of
Rose  Croix,  comprising  ritual  instructions.
8.  The  Second  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix.  It
is  the  depository  of  historical  documents
of  rare  value.  9.  The  Third  Chapter  of
Rose  Croix,  comprising  physical  and  philo¬
sophical  instructions.  10.  The  Fourth  and
last  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  or  Rose  Croix
Brethren  of  the  Grand  Rosary,  engaged  in
researches  into  the  occult  sciences,  the  ob¬
ject  being  the  rehabilitation  and  reintegra¬
tion  of  man  in  his  primitive  rank  and  pre¬
rogatives.  The  Primitive  Rite  was  united
to  the  Grand  Orient  in  1786,  although  some
of  its  Lodges,  objecting  to  the  union,  main¬
tained  their  independence.  It  secured,  at
one  time,  a  high  consideration  among
French  Masons,  not  only  on  account  of  the
objects  in  which  it  was  engaged,  but  on  ac¬
count  also  of  the  talents  and  position  of


604


PRIMITIVE


PRINCE


many  of  its  members.  But  it  is  no  longer
practised.

Primitive  Scottish  Rite.  This
Rite  claims  to  have  been  established  in
1770,  at  Namur,  in  Belgium,  by  a  body
called  the  Metropolitan  Grand  Lodge  of
Edinburgh.  But  the  truth,  according  to
Clavel,  (Hist.  Pitt.,  p.  220,)  is  that  it  was
the  invention  of  one  Marchot,  an  advocate
of  Nivelles,  who  organized  it  in  1818,  at
Namur,  beyond  which  city,  and  the  Lodge
of  “  Bonne  Amiti6,”  it  scarcely  ever  ex¬
tended.  It  consists  of  thirty-three  degrees,
as  follows:  1.  Apprentice;  2.  Fellow  Craft;
3.  Master ;  4.  Perfect  Master ;  5.  Irish  Mas¬
ter;  6.  Elect  of  Nine;  7.  Elect  of  the  Un¬
known;  8.  Elect  of  Fifteen;  9.  Illustrious
Master;  10.  Perfect  Elect;  11.  Minor  Archi¬
tect;  12.  Grand  Architect;  13.  Sublime
Architect  ;  14.  Master  in  Perfect  Architec¬
ture  ;  15.  Royal  Arch ;  16.  Prussian  Knight ;
17.  Knight  of  the  East;  18.  Prince  of  Jeru¬
salem  ;  19.  Master  of  All  Lodges ;  20.  Knight
of  the  West;  21.  Knight  of  Palestine  ;  22.
Sovereign  Prince  of  Rose  Croix;  23.  Sub¬
lime  Scottish  Mason;  24.  Knight  of  the
Sun ;  25.  Grand  Scottish  Mason  of  St.  An¬
drew  ;  26.  Master  of  the  Secret ;  27.  Knight

of  the  Black  Eagle;  28.  Knight  of  K - H ;

29.  Grand  Elect  of  Truth ;  30.  Novice  of  the
Interior ;  31.  Knight  of  the  Interior ;  32.
Prefect  of  the  Interior;  33.  Commander  of
the  Interior.  The  Primitive  Scottish  Rite
appears  to  have  been  founded  upon  the
Rite  of  Perfection,  with  an  intermixture
of  the  Strict  Observance  of  Hund,  the
Adonhiramite,  and  some  other  Rites.

Prince.  The  word  Prince  is  not  at¬
tached  as  a  title  to  any  Masonic  office,  but
is  prefixed  as  a  part  of  the  name  to  several
degrees,  as  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret,
Prince  of  Rose  Croix,  and  Prince  of  Jeru¬
salem.  In  all  of  these  instances  it  seems
to  convey  some  idea  of  sovereignty  inher¬
ent  in  the  character  of  the  degree.  Thus
the  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret  was  the  ul¬
timate,  and,  of  course,  controlling  degree
of  the  Rite  of  Perfection,  whence,  shorn,
however,  of  its  sovereignty,  it  has  been
transferred  to  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite.  The  Prince  of  Rose  Croix,  al¬
though  holding  in  some  Rites  a  subordinate
position,  was  originally  an  independent  de¬
gree,  and  the  representative  of  Rosicrucian
Masonry.  It  is  still  at  the  head  of  the
French  Rite.  The  Princes  of  Jerusalem,
according  to  the  Old  Constitutions  of  the
Rite  of  Perfection,  were  invested  with
power  of  jurisdiction  over  all  degrees  below
the  sixteenth,  a  prerogative  which  they  ex¬
ercised  long  after  the  promulgation  of  the
Constitutions  of  1786  ;  and  even  now  they
are  called,  in  the  ritual  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Rite,  “  Chiefs  in  Masonry,”  a


term  borrowed  from  the  Constitutions  of
1762.  But  there  are  several  other  Prince
degrees  which  do  not  seem,  at  least  now,  to
claim  any  character  of  sovereignty  —  such
are  the  Prince  of  Lebanon,  Prince  of  the
Tabernacle,  and  Prince  of  Mercy,  all  of
which  are  now  subordinate  degrees  in  the
Scottish  Rite.

Prince  Adept.  See  Adept,  Prince.

Prince  Depositor,  Grand.

( Grand  Prince  Deposilaire.)  A  degree  in
the  collection  of  Pyron.

Prince  Rason.  A  term  applied  in
the  Old  Scottish  Rite  Constitutions  to  the
possessors  of  the  high  degrees  above  the
fourteenth.  It  was  first  assumed  by  the
Council  of  the  Emperors  of  the  East  and
West.

Prince  of  Jerusalem.  ( Prince  de
Jerusalem.)  This  was  the  sixteenth  degree
of  the  Rite  of  Perfection,  whence  it  was
transferred  to  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite,  where  it  occupies  the  same
numerical  position.  Its  legend  is  founded
on  certain  incidents  which  took  place  dur¬
ing  the  rebuilding  of  the  second  Temple,
when  the  Jews  were  so  much  incommoded
by  the  attacks  of  the  Samaritans  and  other
neighboring  nations,  that  an  embassy  was
sent  to  King  Darius  to  implore  his  favor
and  protection,  which  was  accordingly  ob¬
tained.  This  legend,  as  developed  in  the
degree,  is  contained  neither  in  Ezra  nor  in
the  apocryphal  books  of  Esdras.  It  is
found  only  in  the  Antiquities  of  Josephus,
(lib.  xi.,  cap.  iv.,  sec.  9,)  and  thence  there
is  the  strongest  internal  evidence  to  show
that  it  was  derived  by  the  inventor  of  the
degree.  Who  that  inventor  was  we  can
only  conjecture.  But  as  we  have  the  state¬
ments  of  both  Ragon  and  Kloss  that  the
Baron  de  Tschoudy  composed  the  degree
of  Knight  of  the  East,  and  as  that  degree
is  the  first  section  of  the  system  of  which
the  Prince  of  Jerusalem  is  the  second,  we
may  reasonably  suppose  that  the  latter  was
also  composed  by  him.  The  degree  being
one  of  those  adopted  by  the  Emperors  of
the  East  and  West  in  their  system,  which
Stephen  Morin  was  authorized  to  propa¬
gate  in  America,  it  was  introduced  into
America  long  before  the  establishment  of
the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Scottish  Rite.
A  Council  was  established  by  Henry  A.
Francken,  about  1767,  at  Albany,  in  the
State  of  New  York,  and  a  Grand  Council
organized  by  Myers,  in  1788,  in  Charleston,
South  Carolina.’  This  body  exercised  sov¬
ereign  powers  even  after  the  establishment
of  the  Supreme  Council,  which  was  May
31,  1801,  for,  in  1802,  it  granted  a  Warrant
for  the  establishment  of  a  Mark  Lodge  in
Charleston,  and  another  in  the  same  year,
for  a  Lodge  of  Perfection,  in  Savannah,


PRINCE


PRINCE


605


Georgia.  But  under  the  present  regula¬
tions  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite,  this  prerogative  has  been  abolished,
and  Grand  Councils  of  Princes  of  Jerusa¬
lem  no  longer  exist.  The  old  regulation,
that  the  Master  of  a  Lodge  of  Perfection
must  be  at  least  a  Prince  of  Jerusalem,
which  was  contained  in  the  Constitution
of  the  Grand  Council,  has  also  been  re¬
pealed,  together  with  most  of  the  privileges
which  formerly  appertained  to  the  degree.
A  decision  of  the  Supreme  Council,  in  1870,
has  even  obliterated  Councils  of  the  Princes
of  Jerusalem  as  a  separate  organization,
authorized  to  confer  the  preliminary  degree
of  Knights  of  the  East,  and  placed  such
Councils  within  the  bosom  of  Rose  Croix
Chapters,  a  provision  of  which,  as  a  mani¬
fest  innovation  on  the  ancient  system,  the
expediency,  or  at  least  the  propriety,  may
be  greatly  doubted.

Bodies  of  this  degree  are  called  Councils.
According  to  the  old  rituals,  the  officers
were  a  Most  Equitable,  a  Senior  and  Junior
Most  Enlightened,  a  Grand  Treasurer,  and
Grand  Secretary.  The  more  recent  ritual
of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United
States  has  substituted  for  these  a  Most
Illustrious  Tarshatha,  a  Most  Venerable
High  Priest,  a  Most  Excellent  Scribe,  two
Most  Enlightened  Wardens,  and  other
officers.  Yellow  is  the  symbolic  color  of
the  degree,  and  the  apron  is  crimson,  (for¬
merly  white,)  lined  and  bordered  with  yel¬
low.  The  jewel  is  a  medal  of  gold,  on  one
side  of  which  is  inscribed  a  hand  holding
an  equally  poised  balance,  and  on  the  other
a  double-edged,  cross-hilted  sword  erect,
between  three  stars  around  the  point,  and
the  letters  D  and  Z  on  each  side.

The  Prince  of  Jerusalem  is  also  the  fifty-
third  degree  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter
of  France,  and  the  forty-fifth  of  the  Rite
of  Mizraim.

Prince  of  Lebanon.  See  Knight
of  the  Royal  Axe.

Prince  of  Libanus.  Another  title
for  Prince  of  Lebanon.

Prince  of  Mercy.  ( Prince  du  Merci.)
The  twenty-sixth  degree  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  called  also
Scottish  Trinitarian  or  Ecossais  Trinitaire.  It
is  one  of  the  eight  degrees  which  were
added  on  the  organization  of  the  Scottish
Rite  to  the  original  twenty-five  of  the  Rite
of  Perfection.

It  is  a  Christian  degree  in  its  construc¬
tion,  and  treats  of  the  triple  covenant  of
mercy  which  God  made  with  man;  first
with  Abraham  by  circumcision ;  next,
with  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness,  by
the  intermediation  of  Moses ;  and  lastly,
with  all  mankind,  by  the  death  and  suffer¬
ings  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  in  allusion  to


these  three  acts  of  mercy,  that  the  degree  de¬
rives  its  two  names  of  Scottish  Trinitarian
and  Prince  of  Mercy,  and  not,  as  Ragon
supposes,  from  any  reference  to  the  Fathers
of  Mercy,  a  religious  society  formerly  en¬
gaged  in  the  ransoming  of  Christian  cap¬
tives  at  Algiers.  Chemin  Dupontfes  (Mem.
Sur  I’Ecoss,  p.  373,)  says  that  the  Scottish
rituals  of  the  degree  are  too  full  of  the
Hermetic  philosophy,  an  error  from  which
the  French  Cahiers  are  exempt;  and  he  con¬
demns  much  of  its  doctrines  as  “  hyper-
bolique  plaisanterie.”  But  the  modern
rituals  as  now  practised  are  obnoxious  to
no  such  objection.  The  symbolic  develop¬
ment  of  the  number  three  of  course  consti¬
tutes  a  large  part  of  its  lecture;  but  the  real
dogma  of  the  degree  is  the  importance  of
Truth,  and  to  this  all  its  ceremonies  are
directed.

Bodies  of  the  degree  are  called  Chapters.
The  presiding  officer  is  called  Most  Excel¬
lent  Chief  Prince,  the  Wardens  are  styled
Excellent.  In  the  old  rituals  these  officers
represented  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Eleazar;
but  the  abandonment  of  these  personations
in  the  modern  rituals  is,  I  think,  an  im¬
provement.  The  apron  is  red  bordered
with  white,  and  the  jewel,  an  equilateral
triangle,  within  which  is  a  heart.  This
was  formerly  inscribed  with  the  Hebrew
letter  tau,  now  with  the  letters  I.  H.  S. ;
and,  to  add  to  the  Christianization  which
these  letters  give  to  the  degree,  the  Ameri¬
can  Councils  have  adopted  a  tessera  in  the
form  of  a  small  fish  of  ivory  or  mother  of
pearl,  in  allusion  to  the  well-known  usage
of  the  primitive  Christians.

Prince  of  Bose  Croix.  See  Rose
Croix,  Prince  of.

Prince  of  the  Captivity.  Ac¬
cording  to  the  Talmudists,  the  Jews,  while
in  captivity  at  Babylon,  kept  a  genealogi¬
cal  table  of  the  line  of  their  kings,  and  he
who  was  the  rightful  heir  of  the  throne  of
Israel  was  called  the  Head  or  Prince  of  the
Captivity.  At  the  time  of  the  restoration,
Zerubbabel,  being  the  lineal  descendant  of
Solomon,  was  the  Prince  of  the  Captivity.

Prince  of  the  Past,  Grand.
( Grand  Prince  d’ Orient.)  A  degree  in  the
collection  of  Le  Page.

Prince  of  tlie  Lcvitcs.  ( Prince
des  Levites.)  A  degree  in  the  collection  of
the  Lodge  of  Saint  Louis  des  Amis  R§unis
at  Calais.

Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret.

See  Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret.

Prince  of  the  Seven  Planets,
Illustrious  Grand.  (I/lustre  Grand
Prince  des  sept  Planhtes.)  A  degree  in  the
manuscript  collection  of  Peuvret.

Prince  of  tlie  Tabernacle.

(Prince  du  Tabernacle.)  The  twenty-fourth


606


PRINCESS


PRINTED


degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite.  In  the  old  rituals  the  degree
was  intended  to  illustrate  the  directions
given  for  the  building  of  the  tabernacle,
the  particulars  of  which  are  recorded  in
the  twenty-fifth  chapter  of  Exodus.  The
Lodge  is  called  a  Hierarchy,  and  its  officers
are  a  Most  Powerful  Chief  Prince,  repre¬
senting  Moses,  and  three  Wardens,  whose
style  is  Powerful,  and  who  respectively  rep¬
resent  Aaron,  Bezaleel,  and  Aholiab.  In
the  modern  rituals  of  the  United  States,
the  three  principal  officers  are  called  the
Leader,  the  High  Priest,  and  the  Priest,
and  respectively  represent  Moses,  Aaron,
and  Ithamar,  his  son.  The  ritual  is  greatly
enlarged ;  and  while  the  main  idea  of  the
degree  is  retained,  the  ceremonies  represent
the  initiation  into  the  mysteries  of  the
Mosaic  tabernacle.

The  jewel  is  the  letter  A,  in  gold,  sus¬
pended  from  a  broad  crimson  ribbon.  The
apron  is  white,  lined  with  scarlet  and  bor¬
dered  with  green.  The  flap  is  sky-blue.
On  the  apron  is  depicted  a  representation
of  the  tabernacle.

This  degree  appears  to  be  peculiar  to  the
Scottish  Rite  and  its  modifications.  I
have  not  met  with  it  in  any  of  the  other
Rites.

Princess  of  the  Crown.  ( Prin -
cesse  de  la  Couronne.)  The  tenth  and  last
degree  of  the  Masonry  of  Adoption  accord¬
ing  to  the  French  regime.  The  degree,
which  is  said  to  have  been  composed  in
Saxony,  in  1770,  represents  the  reception
of  the  Queen  of  Sheba  by  King  Solomon.
The  Grand  Master  and  Grand  Mistress  per¬
sonate  Solomon  and  his  wife,  (which  one,
the  Cahier  does  not  say,)  and  the  recipien-
dary  plays  the  part  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba.
The  degree,  says  Ragon,  ( Tuil.  Gen.,  p.  78,)
is  not  initiatory,  but  simply'  honorary.

Principal  Officers.  The  number
three,  as  a  sacred  number  in  the  Masonic
system,  is,  among  many  other  ways,  devel¬
oped  in  the  fact  that  in  all  Masonic  bodies
there  are  three  principal  officers.

Principals.  The  three  presiding  offi¬
cers  in  a  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,
according  to  the  system  practised  in  Eng¬
land,  are  called  the  Three  Principals,  or
King,  Prophet,  and  Priest,  and,  under  the
titles  of  Z.,  H.,  and  J.,  represent  Zerubba-
bel,  Haggai,  and  Joshua.  No  person  is
eligible  to  the  First  Principal’s  chair  unless
he  has  served  twelve  months  in  each  of
the  others;  and  he  must  also  be  the  Master
or  Past  Master  of  a  Lodge,  and  have  served
in  the  Chapter  the  office  of  Scribe,  So¬
journer,  or  Assistant  Sojourner.  At  his
installation,  each  of  the  Principals  receives
an  installing  degree  like  that  of  the  Master
of  a  Blue  Lodge.  There  is,  however,  no


resemblance  between  any  of  these  degrees
and  the  order  of  High  Priesthood  which
is  conferred  in  this  country.

The  presiding  officers  of  the  Grand  Chap¬
ter  are  called  Grand  Principals,  and  repre¬
sent  the  same  personages.

The  official  jewel  of  Z  is  a  crown ;  of  H,
an  All-seeing  eye ;  and  of  J,  a  book,  each
surrounded  by  a  nimbus,  or  rays  of  glory,
and  placed  within  an  equilateral  triangle.

Principal  Sojourner.  The  He¬
brew  word  -a  ger,  which  we  translate  “  a
sojourner,”  signifies  a  man  living  out  of  his
own  country',  and  is  used  in  this  sense
throughout  the  Old  Testament.  The  chil¬
dren  of  Israel  were,  therefore,  during  the
captivity,  sojourners  in  Babylon,  and  the
person  who  is  represented  by  this  officer,
performed,  as  the  incidents  of  the  degree
relate,  an  important  part  in  the  restoration
of  the  Israelites  to  Jerusalem.  He  was
the  spokesman  and  leader  of  a  party  of
three  sojourners,  and  is,  therefore,  emphat¬
ically  called  the  chief,  or  principal  so¬
journer.

In  the  English  Royal  Arch  system  there
are  three  officers  called  Sojourners.  But  in
the  American  system  the  three  historical
sojourners  are  represented  by  the  candi¬
dates,  while  only  the  supposed  chief  of
them  is  represented  by  an  officer  called  the
Principal  Sojourner.  His  duties  are  those
of  a  conductor,  and  resemble,  in  some  re¬
spects,  those  of  a  Senior  Deacon  in  a  Sym¬
bolic  Lodge ;  which  office,  indeed,  he  occu¬
pies  when  the  Chapter  is  open  on  any  of
the  preliminary  degrees.

Printed  Proceedings.  In  1741,
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  adopted  a
regulation,  which  Entick  (Const.,  p.  236, J
is  careful  to  tell  us,  “was  unanimously
agreed  to,”  forbidding  any  brother  “  to
print,  or  cause  to  be  printed,  the  proceed¬
ings  of  any  Lodge  or  any  part  thereof,  or
the  names  of  the  persons  present  at  such
Lodge,  but  byr  the  direction  of  the  Grand
Master  or  his* deputy,  under  pain  of  being
disowned  for  a  brother,  and  not  to  be  ad¬
mitted  into  any  Quarterly  Communication
or  Grand  Lodge,  or  any  Lodge  whatsoever,
and  of  being  rendered  incapable  of  bearing
any  office  in  the  Craft.”  The  law  has
never  been  repealed,  but,  on  the  contrary,
its  unfortunate  spirit  of  unnecessary  reti¬
cence  has  been  extended,  so  that  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  never  publishes  any  rec¬
ord  of  its  transactions ;  and  the  Craft  would
be  left  in  ignorance  of  everything  in  which
it  is  so  much  interested,  as  the  legislation
of  the  Order,  and  the  discussions  in  its
parliament,  were  it  not  for  the  enterprise
of  unofficial  reporters.  The  Grand  Lodges
of  Scotland  and  Ireland  have  followed  the
same  course.  A  different  one  is  pursued


PRIOR


PROCESSIONS


607


by  most  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  the  world.
Bulletins  are  published  at  stated  intervals
by  the  Grand  Orients  of  France,  Italy,  and
Portugal,  and  by  nearly  all  those  of  South
America.  In  the  United  States,  every
Grand  Lodge  publishes  annually  the  jour¬
nal  of  its  proceedings,  and  many  subordi¬
nate  Lodges  print  the  account  of  any
special  meeting  held  on  an  important  or
interesting  occasion.

Prior.  1.  The  superiors  of  the  differ¬
ent  nations  or  provinces  into  which  the
Order  of  the  Templar  was  divided,  were
at  first  called  Priors  or  Grand  Priors,  and
afterwards  Preceptors  or  Grand  Preceptors.

2.  Each  of  the  languages  of  the  Order
of  Malta  was  divided  into  Grand  Priories,
of  which  there  were  twenty-six,  over  which
a  Grand  Prior  presided.  Under  him  were
several  Commanderies.

3.  The  second  officer  in  a  Council  of  Ka-
dosh,  under  the  Supreme  Council  for  the
Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States.

4.  The  Grand  Prior  is  the  third  officer
in  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite  for  the  Southern
Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States.

Prior,  Grand.  See  Grand  Prior.

Priory.  The  jurisdiction  of  a  Grand
Prior  in  the  Order  of  Malta  or  St.  John  of
Jerusalem.

Prison.  A  Lodge  having  been  held
in  1782,  in  the  King’s  Bench  prison,  Lon¬
don,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  passed
a  resolution  declaring  that  “  it  is  incon¬
sistent  with  the  principles  of  Masonry
for  any  Freemason’s  Lodge  to  be  held  for
the  purposes  of  making,  passing,  or  raising
Masons  in  any  prison  or  place  of  confine¬
ment.”  The  resolution  is  founded  on  the
principle  that  there  must  be  perfect  freedom
of  action  in  all  that  relates  to  the  admis¬
sion  of  candidates,  and  that  this  freedom
is  not  consistent  with  the  necessary  re¬
straints  of  a  prison.

Private  Committee.  See  Commit¬
tee,  Private.

Privileged  Questions.  In  parlia¬
mentary  law,  privileged  questions  are  de¬
fined  to  be  those  to  which  precedence  is
given  over  all  other  questions.  They  are
of  four  kinds:  1.  Those  which  relate  to  the
rights  and  privileges  of  the  assembly  or  any
of  its  members.  2.  Motions  for  adjourn¬
ment.  3.  Motions  for  reconsideration.  4.
Special  orders  of  the  day.  The  first,  third,
and  fourth  only  are  applicable  to  Masonic
parliamentary  law.

Privilege,  Questions  of.  In  all

parliamentary  or  legislative  bodies,  there
occur  certain  questions  which  relate  to
matters  affecting  the  dignity  of  the  assem¬
bly  or  the  rights  and  privileges  of  some  of
its  members,  and  these  are  hence  called


“  questions  of  privilege;  ”  such,  for  instance,
are  motions  arising  out  of  or  having  rela¬
tion  to  a  quarrel  between  two  of  the  mem¬
bers,  an  assault  upon  any  member,  charges
affecting  the  integrity  of  the  assembly  or
any  of  its  members,  or  any  other  matters
of  a  similar  character.  Questions  referring
to  any  of  these  matters  take  precedence  of
all  other  business,  and  hence  are  always  in
order.  These  questions  of  privilege  are
not  to  be  confounded  with  privileged  ques¬
tions  ;  for,  although  all  questions  of  privi¬
lege  are  privileged  questions,  all  privileged
questions  are  not  questions  of  privilege.
Strictly  speaking,  questions  of  privilege  re¬
late  to  the  house  or  its  members,  and
privileged  questions  relate  to  matters  of
business.  See  the  author’s  Parliamentary
Law,  as  applied  to  the  Government  of  Ma¬
sonic  Bodies,  ch.  xxiv.,  xxv.

Probation.  The  interval  between  the
reception  of  one  degree  and  the  succeed¬
ing  one  is  called  the  probation  of  the  can¬
didate,  because  it  is  during  this  period  that
he  is  to  prove  his  qualification  for  advance¬
ment.  In  England  and  in  this  country  the
time  of  probation  between  the  reception  of
degrees  is  four  weeks,  to  which  is  generally
added  the  further  safeguard  of  an  open
examination  in  the  preceding  degree.  In
France  and  Germany  the  probation  is  ex¬
tended  to  one  year.  The  time  is  greatly
extended  in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite.  The  statutes  of  the  Southern
Supreme  Council  require  an  interval  of  two
years  to  be  passed  between  the  reception  of
the  fourteenth  and  the  thirty-second  de¬
grees.  An  extraordinary  rule  prevailed
in  the  Constitutions  of  1762,  by  which  the
Rite  of  Perfection  was  governed.  Accord¬
ing  to  this  rule,  a  candidate  was  required
to  pass  a  probation,  from  the  time  of  his
application  as  an  Entered  Apprentice  until
his  reception  of  the  twenty-fifth  or  ulti¬
mate  degree  of  the  Rite,  of  no  less  than  six
years  and  nine  months.  But  as  all  the
separate  times  of  probation  depended  on
symbolic  numbers,  it  is  not  to  be  presumed
that  this  regulation  was  ever  practically
enforced.

Problem,  Forty  -  Seventh.  See

Forty-Seventh  Problem.

Processions.  Public  processions  of
the  Order,  although  not  as  popular  as  they
were  some  years  ago,  still  have  the  warrant
of  early  and  long  usage.  The  first  proces¬
sion,  after  the  revival,  of  which  we  have  a
record,  took  place  June  24,  1721,  when,  as
Anderson  tells  us,  (2d  ed.,  p.  112,)  “Payne,
the  Grand  Master,  with  his  Wardens,  the
former  Grand  officers,  and  the  Masters  and
Wardens  of  twelve  Lodges,  met  the  Grand
Master  elect  in  a  Grand  Lodge  at  the
King’s  Arms  Tavern,  St.  Paul’s  Church-


608


PROCESSIONS


PROCLAMATION


yard,  in  the  morning,  ....  and  from
thence  they  marched  on  foot  to  the  Hall  in
proper  clothing  and  due  form.”  Anderson
and  Entick  continue  to  record  the  annual
processions  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  the
Craft  on  the  feast  day,  with  a  few  excep¬
tions,  for  the  next  twenty-five  years ;  but
after  this  first  pedestrian  procession  ail  the
subsequent  ones  were  made  in  carriages,  the
unvaried  record  being,  “  a  procession  of
march  was  made  in  coaches  and  carriages.”
But  ridicule  being  thrown  by  the  enemies
of  the  Order  upon  these  processions,  by  a
mock  one  in  1747,  (see  Scald  Miserable,)
in  that  year  the  Grand  Lodge  unanimously
resolved  to  discontinue  them,  nor  have  they
since  been  renewed.

In  this  country,  public  processions  of  the
Craft  were  some  years  ago  very  common,
nor  have  they  yet  been  altogether  aban¬
doned;  although  now  practised  with  greater
discretion  and  less  frequently,  being  in
general  restricted  to  special  occasions  of
importance,  such  as  funerals,  the  laying  of
corner-stones,  or  the  dedication  of  public
edifices.

The  question  has  been  often  mooted,
whether  public  processions,  with  the  open
exhibition  of  its  regalia  and  furniture,  are
or  are  not  of  advantage  to  the  Order.  In
1747  it  was  thought  not  to  be  so,  at  least  in
London,  but  the  custom  was  continued,  to
a  great  extent,  in  the  provinces.  Dr.  Oli¬
ver  was  in  favor  of  what  he  calls  ( Symb .  of
Glory,)  “the  good  old  custom,  so  strongly
recommended  and  assiduously  practised  by
the  Masonic  worthies  of  the  last  century,
and  imitated  by  many  other  public  bodies
of  men,  of  assembling  the  brethren  of  a
province  annually  under  their  own  banner,
and  marching  in  solemn  procession  to  the
house  of  God,  to  offer  up  their  thanksgiving
in  the  public  congregation  for  the  blessings
of  the  preceding  year ;  to  pray  for  mercies
in  prospect,  and  to  hear  from  the  pulpit  a
disquisition  on  the  moral  and  religiouspur-
poses  of  the  Order.”

I  confess  that  I  should  share  the  regrets
of  the  venerated  Oliver,  were  public  pro¬
cessions  of  the  Order  in  this  country  to  be
discontinued.  I  have  heard  no  arguments
against  them  which  outweigh  the  advan¬
tages  to  be  derived  from  the  impression
made  on  the  minds  of  the  spectators,  and  the
wholesome  influence  exerted  on  the  mem¬
bers  of  the  brotherhood  who  thus  assemble
to  pay  honor  to  their  Order.

Processions  are  not  peculiar  to  the  Ma¬
sonic  fraternity.  The  custom  comes  to  us
from  remote  antiquity.  In  the  initiations
at  Eleusis,  the  celebration  of  the  Mysteries  1
was  accompanied  each  day  by  a  solemn
procession  of  the  initiates  from  Athens  to
the  temple  of  initiation.  Apuleius  describes  |


the  same  custom  as  prevailing  in  the  cele¬
bration  of  the  Mysteries  of  Isis.  Among
the  early  Romans,  it  was  the  custom,  in
times  of  public  triumph  or  distress,  to  have
solemn  processions  to  the  temples,  either  to
thank  the  gods  for  their  favor  or  to  invoke
their  protection.  The  Jews  also  went  in
procession  to  the  Temple  to  offer  up  their
prayers.  So,  too,  the  primitive  Christians
walked  in  procession  to  the  tombs  of  the
martyrs.  Ecclesiastical  processions  were
first  introduced  in  the  fourth  century.
They  are  now  used  in  the  Catholic  Church
on  various  occasions,  and  the  Pontificate
Romanum  supplies  the  necessary  ritual  for
their  observance.  In  the  Middle  Ages
these  processions  were  often  carried  to  an
absurd  extent.  Polydore  describes  them  as
consisting  of  “  ridiculous  contrivances,  of  a
figure  with  a  great  gaping  mouth,  and  other
pieces  of  merriment.”  But  these  displays
were  abandoned  with  the  increasing  refine¬
ment  of  the  age.  At  this  day,  processions
are  common  in  all  countries,  not  only  of
religious  confraternities,  but  of  political
and  social  societies.

There  are  processions  also  in  Masonry
which  are  confined  to  the  internal  concerns
of  the  Order,  and  are  not  therefore  of  a
public  nature.  The  procession  “  round  the
Hall,”  at  the  installation  of  the  Grand
Master,  is  first  mentioned  in  1721.  Pre¬
vious  to  that  year  there  is  no  allusion  to
any  such  ceremony.  From  1717  to  1720
we  are  simply  told  that  the  new  Grand
Master  “  was  saluted,”  and  that  he  was
“  homaged,”  or  that  “  his  health  was  drunk
in  due  form.”  But  in  1721  a  processional
ceremony  seems  to  have  been  composed,  for
in  that  year  we  are  informed  ( Conet.  1738,
p.  113,)  that  “Brother  Payne,  the  old
Grand  Master,  made  the  first  procession
round  the  Hall,  and  when  returned,  he  pro¬
claimed  aloud  the  most  noble  prince  and
our  brother.”  This  procession  was  not
abolished  with  the  public  processions  in
1747,  but  continued  for  many  years  after¬
wards;  although  I  think  not  now  used  in
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  In  this
country  it  gave  rise  to  the  procession  at  the
installation  of  Masters,  which,  although
provided  for  by  the  ritual,  and  practised  by
most  Lodges  until  very  recently,  has  been
too  often  neglected  by  many.  The  form
of  the  procession,  as  adopted  in  1724,  is
given  by  Anderson,  (second  edition,  p.
117,)  and  is  almost  precisely  the  same  as
that  used  in  all  Masonic  processions  at  the
present  day,  except  funeral  ones.  The  rule
was  then  adopted,  which  has  ever  since  pre¬
vailed,  that  in  all  processions  the  juniors
in  degree  and  in  office  shall  go  first,  so  that
the  place  of  honor  shall  be  the  rear.

Proclamation.  At  the  installation


PROCLAMATION


PROFICIENCY


609


of  the  officers  of  a  Lodge,  or  any  other  Ma¬
sonic  body,  and  especially  a  Grand  Lodge
or  Grand  Chapter,  proclamation  is  made  in
a  Lodge  or  Chapter  by  the  installing  officer,
and  in  a  Grand  Lodge  or  Grand  Chapter
by  the  Grand  Marshal.  Proclamation  is
also  made  on  some  other  occasions,  and  on
such  occasions  the  Grand  Marshal  per¬
forms  the  duty.

Proclamation  of  Cyrus.  A  cere¬
mony  in  the  American  Royal  Arch.  We
learn  from  Scripture  that  in  the  first  year
of  Cyrus,  the  king  of  Persia,  the  captivity
of  the  Jews  was  terminated.  Cyrus,  from
his  conversations  with  Daniel  and  the
other  Jewish  captives  of  learning  and  piety,
as  well  as  from  his  perusal  of  their  sacred
books,  more  especially  the  prophecies  of
Isaiah,  had  become  imbued  with  a  knowl¬
edge  of  true  religion,  and  hence  had  even
publicly  announced  to  his  subjects  his  be¬
lief  in  the  God  “  which  the  nation  of  the
Israelites  worshipped.”  He  was  conse¬
quently  impressed  with  an  earnest  desire
to  fulfil  the  prophetic  declarations  of
which  he  was  the  subject,  and  to  rebuild
the  Temple  of  Jerusalem.  Accordingly,  he
issued  a  proclamation,  which  we  find  in
Ezra,  as  follows :

“Thus  saith  Cyrus,  King  of  Persia,  The
Lord  God  of  heaven  hath  given  me  all  the
kingdoms  of  the  earth ;  and  he  hath  charged
me  to  build  him  a  house  at  Jerusalem,
which  is  in  Judea.  Who  is  there  among
you  of  all  his  people?  his  God  be  with  him,
and  let  him  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  which  is
in  Judea,  and  build  the  house  of  the  Lord
God  of  Israel,  (he  is  the  God,)  which  is  in
Jerusalem.”

With  the  publication  of  this  proclama¬
tion  of  Cyrus  commences  what  may  be
called  the  second  part  of  the  Royal  Arch
degree.

Profane.  There  is  no  word  whose
technical  and  proper  meaning  differs  more
than  this.  In  its  ordinary  use  profane  sig¬
nifies  one  who  is  irreligious  and  irreverent,
but  in  its  technical  adaptation  it  is  applied
to  one  who  is  ignorant  of  sacred  rites.  The
word  is  compounded  of  the  two  Latin  words
pro  and  fanum,  and  literally  means  before
or  outside  of  the  temple ;  and  hence  a  pro-
fanus  among  the  ancients  was  one  who  was
not  allowed  to  enter  the  temple  and  be¬
hold  the  mysteries.  “  Those,”  says  Vos-
sius,  “  were  called  profane  who  were  not
initiated  in  the  sacred  rites,  but  to  whom
it  was  allowed  only  to  stand  before  the
temple — profano —  not  to  enter  it  and
take  part  in  the  solemnities.”  The  Greek
equivalent,  had  a  similar  reference;

for  its  root  is  found  in  B^Aor,  a  threshold,
as  if  it  denoted  one  who  was  not  permitted
to  pass  the  threshold  of  the  temple.  In
4  B  39


the  celebrated  hymn  of  Orpheus,  which  it
is  said  was  sung  at  the  Mysteries  of  Eleusis,
we  meet  with  this  phrase,  ^dey^oyai  oig  Qipi(
ion  Ob  par  S’tiu  QeoOe  lirfirj/.oif;,  “  I  speak  to
those  to  whom  it  is  lawful,  but  let  the  doors
be  closed  against  the  profane.”  When  the
mysteries  were  about  to  begin,  the  Greeks
used  the  solemn  formula,  e/ca?,  e/cdf,  ion  Be-
/fr/Aoi ;  and  the  Romans,  “  Procul,  G  procul
este  profani,”  both  meaning,  “  Depart,  de¬
part,  ye  profane  1  ”  Hence  the  original
and  inoffensive  signification  of  profane  is
that  of  being  uninitiated ;  and  it  is  in  this
sense  that  it  is  used  iu  Masonry,  simply  to
designate  one  who  has  not  been  initiated
as  a  Mason.  The  word  profane  is  not  re¬
cognized  as  a  noun  substantive  in  the  gen¬
eral  usage  of  the  language,  but  it  has  been
adopted  as  a  technical  term  in  the  dialect
of  Freemasonry,  in  the  same  relative  sense
in  which  the  word  layman  is  used  in  the
professions  of  law  and  divinity.

Proficiency.  The  necessity  that  any
one  who  devotes  himself  to  the  acquisition
of  a  science  should  become  a  proficient  in
its  elementary  instructions  before  he  can
expect  to  grasp  and  comprehend  its  higher
branches,  is  so  almost  self-evident  as  to
need  no  argument.  But  as  Speculative
Masonry  is  a  science,  it  is  equally  necessary
that  a  requisite  qualification  for  admission
to  a  higher  degree  should  be  a  suitable  pro¬
ficiency  in  the  preceding  one.  It  is  true,
that  we  do  not  find  in  express  words  in  the
Old  Constitutions  any  regulations  requir¬
ing  proficiency  as  preliminary  to  advance¬
ment,  but  their  whole  spirit  is  evidently  to
that  effect;  and  hence  we  find  it  prescribed
in  the  Old  Constitutions,  that  no  Master
shall  take  an  apprentice  for  less  than  seven
years,  because  it  was  expected  that  he
should  acquire  a  competent  knowledge  of
the  mystery  before  he  could  be  admitted  as
a  Fellow.  The  modern  Constitution  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  provides' that  no
Lodge  shall  confer  a  higher  degree  on  any
brother  until  he  has  passed  an  examination
in  open  Lodge  on  the  preceding  degrees,
and  many,  perhaps  most,  of  the  Grand
Lodges  of  this  country  have  adopted  a  sim¬
ilar  regulation.  The  ritual  of  all  the  sym¬
bolic  degrees,  and,  indeed,  of  the  higher
degrees,  and  that  too  in  all  rites,  makes
the  imperative  demand  of  every  candidate
whether  he  has  made  suitable  proficiency
in  the  preceding  degree,  an  affirmative  an¬
swer  to  which  is  required  before  the  rites
of  initiation  can  be  proceeded  with.  This
answer  is,  according  to  the  ritual,  that  “  he
has ;  ”  but  some  Masons  have  sought  to
evade  the  consequence  of  an  acknowledg¬
ment  of  ignorance  and  want  of  proficiency
by  a  change  of  the  language  of  the  ritual
into  “such  as  time  and  circumstances


610


PRO


PROGRESSIVE


would  permit.”  But  this  is  an  innovation,
unsanctioned  by  any  authority,  and  should
be  repudiated.  If  the  candidate  has  not
made  proper  proficiency,  the  ritual,  outside
of  all  statutory  regulations,  refuses  him
advancement.

Anderson,  in  the  second  edition  of  his
Constitutions,  (p.  71,)  cites  what  he  calls
“an  old  record,”  which  says  that  in  the
reign  of  Edward  the  Third  of  England  it
was  ordained  “  that  such  as  were  to  be  ad¬
mitted  Master  Masons,  or  Masters  of  work,
should  be  examined  whether  they  be  able
of  cunning  to  serve  their  respective  Lords,
as  well  the  lowest  as  the  highest,  to  the
honor  and  worship  of  the  aforesaid  art,  and
to  the  profit  of  their  Lords.”

Here,  then,  we  may  see  the  origin  of  that
usage,  which  is  still  practised  in  every  well
governed  Lodge,  not  only  of  demanding  a
proper  degree  of  proficiency  in  the  candi¬
date,  but  also  of  testing  that  proficiency  by
an  examination.

This  cautious  and  honest  fear  of  the  Fra¬
ternity  lest  any  brother  should  assume  the
duties  of  a  position  which  he  could  not
faithfully  discharge,  and  which  is,  in  our
time,  tantamount  to  a  candidate’s  advanc¬
ing  to  a  degree  for  which  he  is  not  pre¬
pared,  is  again  exhibited  in  all  the  Old
Constitutions.  Thus  in  the  Landsdowne
Manuscript,  whose  date  is  referred  to  the
middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  it  is
charged  “that  no  Mason  take  on  him  no
Lord’s  work,  nor  other  man’s,  but  if  [un¬
less]  he  know  himself  well  able  to  perform
the  work,  so  that  the  Craft  have  no  slander.”
The  same  regulation,  and  almost  in  the
same  language,  is  to  be  found  in  all  the
subsequent  manuscripts.

In  the  Charges  of  1722,  it  is  directed
that  “  a  younger  brother  shall  be  instructed
in  working,  to  prevent  spoiling  the  mate¬
rials  for  want  of  judgment,  and  for  improv¬
ing  and  continuing  of  brotherly  love.”  It
was,  with  the  same  view,  that  all  of  the
Old  Constitutions  made  it  imperative  that
no  Master  should  take  an  apprentice  for
less  than  seven  years,  because  it  was  ex-
ected  that  he  should  acquire  a  competent
nowledge  of  the  mystery  of  the  Craft  be¬
fore  he  could  be  admitted  as  a  Fellow.

Notwithstanding  these  charges  had  a
more  particular  reference  to  the  operative
part  of  the  art,  they  clearly  show  the  great
stress  that  was  placed  by  our  ancient  breth¬
ren  upon  the  necessity  of  skill  and  pro¬
ficiency  ;  and  they  have  furnished  the  pre¬
cedents  upon  which  are  based  all  the  simi¬
lar  regulations  that  have  been  subsequently
applied  to  Speculative  Masonry.

Pro  Grand  Master.  Au  officer
known  only  to  the  English  system,  and
adopted  for  the  first  time  in  1782,  when,  on


the  election  of  the  Duke  of  Cambridge  to
the  office  of  Grand  Master,  a  regulation
was  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land,  that  whenever  a  prince  of  the  blood
accepted  the  office  of  Grand  Master,  he
should  be  at  liberty  to  nominate  any  peer
of  the  realm  to  be  the  Acting  Grand  Mas¬
ter,  and  to  this  officer  is  given  the  title  of
Pro  Grand  Master.  He  must  be  a  noble¬
man  and  a  Past  Master.  His  collar,  jewel,
and  authority  are  the  same  as  those  of  a
Grand  Master,  and  in  the  case  of  a  vacancy
he  actually  assumes  the  office  until  the
next  annual  election.  There  has  been  no
Pro  Grand  Master  in  England  since  the
death  of  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  in  1843,  when
the  Earl  of  Zetland,  who  was  then  the
Pro  Grand  Master,  assumed  the  chair,  and
at  the  next  annual  election  was  chosen
Grand  Master.

Progressive  Masonry.  Freema¬
sonry  is  undoubtedly  a  progressive  science,
and  yet  the  fundamental  principles  of  Free¬
masonry  are  the  same  now  as  they  were  at
the  very  beginning  of  the  Institution.  Its
landmarks  are  unchangeable.  In  these
there  can  be  no  alteration,  no  diminution,
nor  addition.  When,  therefore,  we  say
that  Freemasonry  is  progressive  in  its
character,  we  of  course  do  not  mean  to
allude  to  this  unalterable  part  of  its  con¬
stitution.  But  there  is  a  progress  which
every  science  must  undergo,  and  which
many  of  them  have  already  undergone,  to
which  the  science  of  Freemasonry  is  sub¬
ject.  Thus  we  say  of  chemistry  that  it  i3
a  progressive  science.  Two  hundred  years
ago,  all  its  principles,  so  far  as  they  were
known,  were  directed  to  such  futile  in¬
quiries  as  the  philosopher’s  stone  and  the
elixir  of  immortality.  Now  these  princi¬
ples  have  become  more  thoroughly  under¬
stood,  and  more  definitely  established,  and
the  object  of  tbeir  application  is  more
noble  aud  philosophic.  The  writings
of  the  chemists  of  the  former  and  the
present  period  sufficiently  indicate  this
progress  of  the  science.  And  yet  the  ele¬
mentary  principles  of  chemistry  are  un¬
changeable.  Its  truths  were  the  same  then
as  they  are  now.  Some  of  them  were  at
that  time  unknown,  because  no  mind  of
sufficient  research  had  discovered  them ;
but  they  existed  as  truths,  from  the  very
creation  of  matter ;  and  now  they  have
only  been  developed,  not  invented.

So  it  is  with  Freemasonry.  It  too  has
had  its  progress.  Masons  are  now  expected
to  be  more  learned  than  formerly  in  all
that  relates  to  the  science  of  the  Order.
Its  origin,  its  history,  its  objects,  are  now
considered  worthy  of  the  attentive  con¬
sideration  of  its  disciples.  The  rational
explanation  of  its  ceremonies  and  symbols,


PROMISE


PROOFS


611


and  their  connection  with  ancient  systems
of  religion  and  philosophy,  are  now  con¬
sidered  as  necessary  topics  of  inquiry  for  all
who  desire  to  distinguish  themselves  as  pro¬
ficients  in  Masonic  science.

In  all  these  things  we  see  a  great  differ¬
ence  between  the  Masons  of  the  present
and  of  former  days.  In  Europe,  a  century
ago,  such  inquiries  were  considered  as
legitimate  subjects  of  Masonic  study.
Hutchinson  published  in  1760,  in  England,
his  admirable  work  entitled  The  Spirit  of
Freemasonry,  in  which  the  deep  philosophy
of  the  Institution  was  fairly  developed  with
much  learning  and  ingenuity.  Preston’s
Illustrations  of  Masonry,  printed  at  a  not
much  later  period,  also  exhibit  the  system
treated,  in  many  places,  in  a  philosophical
manner.  Lawrie’s  History  of  Freemasonry,
published  in  Scotland  about  the  end  of
the  last  century,  is  a  work  containing  much
profound  historical  and  antiquarian  re¬
search.  And  in  the  present  century,  the
works  of  Oliver  alone  would  be  sufficient
to  demonstrate  to  the  most  cursory  ob¬
server  that  Freemasonry  has  a  claim  to  be
ranked  among  the  learned  institutions  of
the  day.  In  Germany  and  France,  the
press  has  been  borne  down  with  the  weight
of  abstruse  works  on  our  Order,  written  by
men  of  the  highest  literary  pretensions.

In  this  country,  notwithstanding  the
really  excellent  work  of  Salem  Town  on
Speculative  Masonry,  published  in  1818,
and  the  learned  Discourses  of  Dr.  T.  M.
Harris,  published  in  1801,  it  is  only  within
a  few  years  that  Masonry  has  begun  to  as¬
sume  the  exalted  position  of  a  literary  in¬
stitution,  in  which  the  labors  of  our  trans¬
atlantic  brethren  had  long  ago  placed  it.

Promise.  In  entering  into  the  cov¬
enant  of  Masonry,  the  candidate  makes  a
promise  to  the  Order ;  for  his  covenant  is
simply  a  promise  where  he  voluntarily
places  himself  under  a  moral  obligation  to
act  within  certain  conditions  in  a  particu¬
lar  way.  The  law  of  promise  is,  therefore,
strictly  applicable  to  this  covenant,  and  by
that  law  the  validity  and  obligation  of  the
promises  of  every  candidate  must  be  deter¬
mined.  In  every  promise  there  are  two
things  to  be  considered:  the  intention  and
the  obligation.  As  to  the  intention:  of  all
casuists,  the  Jesuits  alone  have  contended
that  the  intention  may  be  concealed  within
the  bosom  of  the  promiser.  Every  Chris¬
tian  and  Pagan  writer  agree  on  the  prin¬
ciple  that  the  words  expressed  must  convey
their  ordinary  meaning  to  the  promisee.
If  I  promise  to  do  a  certain  thing  to-mor¬
row,  I  cannot,  when  the  morrow  comes,
refuse  to  do  it  on  the  ground  that  I  only
promised  to  do  it  if  it  suited  me  when  the
time  of  performance  had  arrived.  The


obligation  of  every  promiser  is,  then,  to
fulfil  the  promise  that  he  has  made,  not  in
any  way  that  he  may  have  secretly  in¬
tended,  but  in  the  way  in  which  he  sup¬
poses  that  the  one  to  whom  he  made  it
understood  it  at  the  time  that  it  was  made.
Hence  all  Masonic  promises  are  accompa¬
nied  by  the  declaration  that  they  are  given
without  equivocation  or  mental  reservation
of  any  kind  whatsoever.

All  voluntary  promises  are  binding,  un¬
less  there  be  some  paramount  consideration
which  will  release  the  obligation  of  per¬
formance.  It  is  worth  while,  then,  to  in¬
quire  if  there  be  any  such  considerations
which  can  impair  the  validity  of  Masonic
promises.  Dr.  Way  laud  ( Elem .  of  Mor.  Sci¬
ence,  p.  285,)  lays  down  five  conditions  in
which  promises  are  not  binding:  1.  Where
the  performance  is  impossible;  2.  Where
the  promise  is  unlawful ;  3.  Where  no  ex¬
pectation  is  voluntarily  excited  by  the
promiser;  4.  Where  they  proceed  upon  a
condition  which  the  promiser  subsequently
finds  does  not  exist;  and,  5.  Where  either
of  the  parties  is  not  a  moral  agent.

It  is  evident  that  no  one  of  these  condi¬
tions  will  apply  to  Masonic  promises,  for,
1.  Every  promise  made  at  the  altar  of
Masonry  is  possible  to  be  performed ;  2.
No  promise  is  exacted  that  is  unlawful  in
its  nature;  for  the  candidate  is  expressly
told  that  no  promise  exacted  from  him  will
interfere  with  the  duty  which  he  owes  to
God  and  to  his  country  ;  3.  An  expectation
is  voluntarily  excited  by  the  promiser,  and
that  expectation  is  that  he  will  faithfully
fulfil  his  part  of  the  covenant;  4.  No  false
condition  of  things  is  placed  before  the
candidate,  either  as  to  the  character  of  the
Institution  or  the  nature  of  the  duties
which  would  be  required  of  him;  and,  5.
Both  parties  to  the  promise,  the  candidate
who  makes  it  and  the  Craft  to  whom  it  is
made,  are  moral  agents,  fully  capable  of
entering  into  a  contract  or  covenant.

This,  then,  is  the  proper  answer  to  those
adversaries  of  Freemasonry  who  contend
for  the  invalidity  of  Masonic  promises  on
the  very  grounds  of  Wayland  and  other
moralists.  Their  conclusions  would  be  cor¬
rect,  were  it  not  that  every  one  of  their
premises  is  false.

Promotion.  Promotion  in  Masonry
should  not  be  governed,  as  in  other  socie¬
ties,  by  succession  of  office.  The  fact  that
one  has  filled  a  lower  office  gives  him  no
claim  to  a  higher,  unless  he  is  fitted,  by
skill  and  capacity,  to  discharge  its  duties
faithfully.  This  alone  should  be  the  true
basis  of  promotion.  See  Preferment.

Proofs.  What  the  German  Masons  call
“proben  und  nriifungen,”  trials  and  proofs,
and  the  French,  “6preuves  M aqonniques,”


612


PROPERTY


PROSELYTISM


or  Masonic  proofs,  are  defined  by  Bazot
[Manuel,  p.  141,)  to  be  “mysterious  methods
of  discovering  the  character  and  disposi¬
tion  of  a  recipiendary.”  They  are,  in  fact,
those  ritualistic  ceremonies  of  initiation
which  are  intended  to  test  the  fortitude  and
fidelity  of  the  candidate.  They  seem  to  be
confined  to  continental  Masonry,  for  they
are  not  known  to  any  extent  in  the  English
or  American  systems,  where  all  the  ceremo¬
nies  are  purely  symbolic.  Krause  [Kunst-
uvkund.,  i.  152,  n.  37,)  admits  that  no  trace
of  them,  at  least  in  the  perilous  and  fearful
forms  which  they  assume  in  the  continen¬
tal  rituals,  are  to  be  found  in  the  oldest
English  catechisms ;  and  he  admits  that,  as
appealing  to  the  sentiments  of  fear  and
hope,  and  adopting  a  dramatic  form,  they
are  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  Masonry,  and
greatly  interfere  with  its  symbolism  and
with  the  pure  and  peacefiil  sentiments
which  it  is  intended  to  impress  upon  the
mind  of  the  neophyte.

Property  of  a  Lodge.  As  a  Lodge
owes  its  existence,  and  all  the  rights  and

Ererogatives  that  it  exercises,  to  the  Grand
lodge  from  which  it  derives  its  Charter  or
Warrant  of  Constitution,  it  has  been  de¬
cided,  as  a  principle  of  Masonic  law,  that
when  such  Lodge  ceases  to  exist,  either  by
a  withdrawal  or  a  surrender  of  its  Warrant,
all  the  property  which  it  possessed  at  the
time  of  its  dissolution  reverts  to  the  Grand
Lodge.  But  should  the  Lodge  be  restored
by  a  revival  of  its  Warrant,  its  property
should  be  restored,  because  the  Grand
Lodge  held  it  only  as  the  general  trustee
or  guardian  of  the  Craft.

Prophet.  Haggai,  who  in  the  Amer¬
ican  system  of  the  Royal  Arch  is  called
the  scribe,  in  the  English  system  receives
the  title  of  prophet,  and  hence  in  the  order
of  precedence  he  is  placed  above  the  high
priest.

Prophets,  Schools  of  the.  See

Schools  of  the  Prophets.

Proponenda.  The  matters  contained
in  the  “notices  of  motions,”  which  are  re¬
quired  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  to
be  submitted  to  the  members  previous  to
the  Quarterly  Communication  when  they
are  to  be  discussed,  are  sometimes  called
the  proponenda,  or  subjects  to  be  proposed.

Proposing  Candidates.  The  only
method  recognized  in  this  country  of  pro¬
posing  candidates  for  initiation  or  member¬
ship  is  by  the  written  petition  of  the  ap¬
plicant,  who  must  at  the  same  time  be  re¬
commended  by  two  members  of  the  Lodge.
In  England,  the  applicant  for  initiation
must  previously  sign  the  declaration,  which
in  America  is  only  made  after  his  election.
He  is  then  proposed  by  one  brother,  and,
the  proposition  being  seconded  by  another,


he  is  ballotted  for  at  the  next  regular
Lodge.  Applicants  for  membership  are
also  proposed  without  petition,  but  the  cer¬
tificate  of  the  former  Lodge  must  be  pro¬
duced,  as  in  the  United  States  the  demit
is  required.  Nor  can  any  candidate  for
affiliation  be  ballotted  for  unless  previous
notice  of  the  application  be  given  to  all
the  members  of  the  Lodge.

Proscription.  The  German  Masons
employ  this  word  in  the  same  sense  in
which  we  do  expulsion,  as  the  highest  Ma¬
sonic  punishment  that  can  be  inflicted.
They  also  use  the  word  verbannung,  banish¬
ment,  for  the  same  purpose.

Proselyte  of  Jerusalem.  ( Prose¬
lyte  de  Jerusalem.)  The  sixty-eighth  de¬
gree  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.

Proselytism.  Brahmanism  is,  per¬
haps,  the  only  religion  which  is  opposed  to
proselytism.  The  Brahman  seeks  no  con¬
vert  to  his  faith,  but  is  content  with  that
extension  of  his  worship  which  is  derived
from  the  natural  increase  only  of  its  mem¬
bers.  The  Jewish  Church,  perhaps  one  of
the  most  exclusive,  and  which  has  always
seemed  indifferent  to  progress,  yet  provided
a  special  form  of  baptism  for  the  initiation
of  its  proselytes  into  the  Mosaic  rites.

Buddhism,  the  great  religion  of  the  East¬
ern  world,  which,  notwithstanding  the  op¬
position  of  the  leading  Brahmans,  spread
with  amazing  rapidity  over  the  Oriental
nations,  so  that  now  it  seems  the  most
popular  religion  of  the  world,  owes  its  ex¬
traordinary  growth  to  the  energetic  prop-
agandism  of  Sakya-muni,  its  founder,  and
to  the  same  proselyting  spirit  which  he  in¬
culcated  upon  his  disciples.

The  Christian  Church,  mindful  of  the
precepts  of  its  divine  founder,  “Go  ye  into
all  the  world,  and  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature,”  has  always  considered  the
work  of  missions  as  one  of  the  most  im¬
portant  duties  of  the  Church,  and  owes  its
rapid  increase,  in  its  earlier  years,  to  the
proselyting  spirit  of  Paul,  and  Thomas,
and  the  other  apostles.

Mohammedanism,  springing  up  and  lin¬
gering  for  a  long  time  in  a  single  family,
at  length  acquired  rapid  growth  among  the
Oriental  nations,  through  the  energetic
proselytism  of  the  Prophet  and  his  adhe¬
rents.  But  the  proselytism  of  the  religion
of  the  New  Testament  and  that  of  the  Ko¬
ran  differed  much  in  character.  The  Chris¬
tian  made  his  converts  by  persuasive  accents
and  eloquent  appeals  ;  the  Mussulman  con¬
verted  his  penitents  by  the  sharp  power  of
the  sword.  Christianity  was  a  religion  of
peace,  Mohammedanism  of  war;  yet  each,
though  pursuing  a  different  method,  was
equally  energetic  in  securing  converts.

In  respect  to  this  doctrine  of  proselytism,


PROSELYTISM


PROSELYTISM


613


Freemasonry  resembles  more  the  exclusive
faith  of  Brahma  than  the  inviting  one  of
Moses,  of  Buddha,  of  Christ,  or  of  Mo¬
hammed.

In  plain  words,  Freemasonry  is  rigor¬
ously  opposed  to  all  proselytism.  While
its  members  do  not  hesitate,  at  all  proper
times  and  on  all  fitting  occasions,  to  defend
the  Institution  from  all  attacks  of  its  en¬
emies,  it  never  seeks,  by  voluntary  lauda¬
tion  of  its  virtues,  to  make  new  accessions
of  friends,  or  to  add  to  the  number  of  its
disciples.

Nay,  it  boasts,  as  a  peculiar  beauty  of  its
system,  that  it  is  a  voluntary  Institution.
Not  only  does  it  forbid  its  members  to  use
any  efforts  to  obtain  initiates,  but  actually
requires  every  candidate  for  admission  into
its  sacred  rites  to  seriously  declare,  as  a  pre¬
paratory  step,  that  in  this  voluntary  offer  of
himself  he  has  been  unbiased  by  the  improper
solicitations  of  friends.  Without  this  decla¬
ration,  the  candidate  would  be  unsuccessful
in  his  application.  Although  it  is  required
that  he  should  be  prompted  to  solicit  the
rivilege  by  the  favorable  opinion  which
e  had  conceived  of  the  Institution,  yet  no
provision  is  made  by  which  that  opinion
can  be  inculcated  in  the  minds  of  the  pro¬
fane;  for  were  a  Mason,  by  any  praises  of
the  Order,  or  any  exhibitions  of  its  advan¬
tages,  to  induce  any  one  under  such  repre¬
sentations  to  seek  admission,  he  would  not
only  himself  commit  a  grievous  fault,  but
would  subject  the  candidate  to  serious  em¬
barrassment  at  the  very  entrance  of  the
Lodge.

This  Brahmanical  spirit  of  anti-prosely-
tism,  in  which  Masonry  differs  from  every
other  association,  has  imprinted  upon  the
Institution  certain  peculiar  features.  In
the  first  place,  Freemasonry  thus  becomes,
in  the  most  positive  form,  a  voluntary  as¬
sociation.  Whoever  comes  within  its  mys¬
tic  circle,  comes  there  of  his  “  own  free  will
and  accord,  and  unbiased  by  the  influence
of  friends.”  These  are  the  terms  on  which
he  is  received,  and  to  all  the  legitimate
consequences  of  this  voluntary  connection
he  must  submit.  Hence  comes  the  axiom,
“once  a  Mason,  always  a  Mason that  is
to  say,  no  man,  having  once  been  initiated
into  its  sacred  rites,  can,  at  his  own  pleas¬
ure  or  caprice,  divest  himself  of  the  obli¬
gations  and  duties  which,  as  a  Mason,  he
has  assumed.  Coming  to  us  freely  and  wil¬
lingly,  he  can  urge  no  claim  for  retirement
on  the  plea  that  ne  was  unduly  persuaded,
or  that  the  character  of  the  Institution  had
been  falsely  represented.  To  do  so,  would
be  to  convict  himself  of  fraud  and  false¬
hood,  in  the  declarations  made  by  him
preliminary  to  his  admission.  And  if  these
declarations  were  indeed  false,  he  at  least
cannot,  under  the  legal  maxim,  take  ad¬


vantage  of  his  own  wrong.  The  knot
which  binds  him  to  the  Fraternity  has
been  tied  by  himself,  and  is  indissoluble.
The  renouncing  Mason  may,  indeed,  with¬
draw  from  his  connection  with  a  Lodge,
but  he  cannot  release  himself  from  his  ob¬
ligations  to  the  regulation,  which  requires
every  Mason  to  be  a  member  of  one.  He
may  abstain  from  all  communication  with
his  brethren,  and  cease  to  take  any  interest
in  the  concerns  of  the  Fraternity;  but  he
is  not  thus  absolved  from  the  performance
of  any  of  the  duties  imposed  upon  him  by
his  original  admission  into  the  brother¬
hood.  A  proselyte,  persuaded  against  his
will,  might  claim  his  right  to  withdraw;
but  the  voluntary  seeker  must  take  and
hold  what  he  finds.

Another  result  of  this  anti-proselyting
spirit  of  the  Institution  is,  to  relieve  its
members  from  all  undue  anxiety  to  in¬
crease  its  members.  It  is  not  to  be  sup¬
posed  that  Masons  have  not  the  very
natural  desire  to  see  the  growth  of  their
Order.  Towards  this  end,  they  are  ever
ready  to  defend  its  character  when  at¬
tacked,  to  extol  its  virtues,  and  to  main¬
tain  its  claims  to  the  confidence  and  ap¬
proval  of  the  wise  and  good.  But  the
growth  they  wish  is  not  that  abnormal  one,
derived  from  sudden  revivals  or  ephemeral
enthusiasm,  where  passion  too  often  takes
the  place  of  judgment ;  but  that  slow  and
steady,  and  therefore  healthy,  growth
which  comes  from  the  adhesion  of  wise
and  virtuous  and  thoughtful  men,  who  are
willing  to  join  the  brotherhood,  that  they
may  the  better  labor  for  the  good  of  their
fellow-men.

Thus  it  is  that  we  find  the  addresses  of
our  Grand  Masters,  the  reports  of  our  com¬
mittees  on  foreign  correspondence,  and  the
speeches  of  our  anniversary  orators,  annu¬
ally  denouncing  the  too  rapid  increase  of
the  Order,  as  something  calculated  to  affect
its  stability  and  usefulness.

And  hence,  too,  the  black  ball,  that  an¬
tagonist  of  proselytism,  has  been  long  and
familiarly  called  the  bulwark  of  Masonry.
Its  faithful  use  is  ever  being  inculcated  by
the  fathers  of  the  Order  upon  its  younger
members;  and  the  unanimous  ballot  is
universally  admitted  to  be  the  most  effect¬
ual  means  of  preserving  the  purity  of  the
Institution.

And  so,  this  spirit  of  anti-proselytism,
impressed  upon  every  Mason  from  his
earliest  initiation,  although  not  itself  a
landmark,  has  come  to  be  invested  with  all
the  sacredness  of  such  a  law,  and  Freema¬
sonry  stands  out  alone,  distinct  from  every
other  human  association,  and  proudly  pro¬
claims,  “  Our  portals  are  open  to  all  the
good  and  true,  but  we  ask  no  man  to
enter.”


614


PROTECTOR


PRUDENCE


Protector  of  Innocence.  (Pro-

tecteur  de  l' Innocence.)  A  degree  in  the
nomenclature  of  Fustier,  cited  by  him  from
the  collection  of  Viany.

Protocol.  In  French,  the  formulae
or  technical  words  of  legal  instruments  ;  in
Germany,  the  rough  draught  of  an  instru¬
ment  or  transaction ;  in  diplomacy,  the
original  copy  of  a  treaty.  Gadicke  says
that,  in  Masonic  language,  the  protocol  is
the  rough  minutes  of  a  Lodge.  The  word
is  used  in  this  sense  in  Germany  only.

Prototype.  The  same  as  archetype,
which  see.

Provincial  Grand  L,odge.  In

each  of  the  counties  of  England  is  a  Grand
Lodge  composed  of  the  various  Lodges
within  that  district,  with  the  Provincial
Grand  Master  at  their  head,  and  this  body
is  called  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge.  It
derives  its  existence,  not  from  a  Warrant,
but  from  the  Patent  granted  to  the  Provin¬
cial  Grand  Master  by  the  Grand  Master,
and  at  his  death,  resignation,  or  removal,  it
becomes  extinct,  unless  the  Provincial
Grand  Registrar  keeps  up  its  existence  by
presiding  over  the  province  until  the  ap¬
pointment  of  another  Provincial  Grand
Master.  Its  authority  is  confined  to  the
framing  of  by-laws,  making  regulations,
hearing  disputes,  etc.,  but  no  absolute  sen¬
tence  can  be  promulgated  by  its  authority
without  a  reference  to  the  Grand  Lodge.
Hence  Oliver  (Jurisprud.,  272,)  says  that  a
Provincial  Grand  Lodge  “  has  a  shadow  of
power,  but  very  little  substance.  It  may
talk,  but  it  cannot  act.”  The  system  does
not  exist  in  the  United  States.  In  Eng¬
land  and  Ireland  the  Provincial  Grand
Master  is  appointed  by  the  Grand  Master,
but  in  Scotland  his  commission  emanates
from  the  Grand  Lodge.

Provincial  Grand  Master.  The
presiding  officer  of  a  Provincial  Grand
Lodge.  He  is  appointed  by  the  Grand
Master,  during  whose  pleasure  he  holds  his
office.  An  appeal  lies  from  his  decisions  to
the  Grand  Lodge.

Provincial  Grand  Officers.  The

officers  of  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  cor¬
respond  in  title  to  those  of  the  Grand
Lodge.  The  Provincial  Grand  Treasurer  is
elected,  but  the  other  officers  are  nominated
by  the  Provincial  Grand  Master.  They
are  not  by  such  appointment  members  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  nor  do  they  take  any  rank
out  of  their  province.  They  must  all  be
residents  of  the  province  and  subscribing
members  to  some  Lodge  therein.  Provin¬
cial  Grand  Wardens  must  be  Masters  or
Past  Masters  of  a  Lodge*  and  Provincial
Grand  Deacons,  Wardens,  or  Past  Wardens.

Provincial  Master  of  tlic  Red
Cross.  The  sixth  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Clerks  of  Strict  Observance.


Provost  and  Judge.  ( Pr'evot  et
Juye.\  The  seventh  degree  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  The  history
of  the  degree  relates  that  it  was  founded
by  Solomon,  King  of  Israel,  for  the  purpose
of  strengthening  his  means  of  preserving
order  among  the  vast  number  of  craftsmen
engaged  in  the  construction  of  the  Temple.
Tito,  Prince  Harodim,  Adoniram,  and  A bda
his  father,  were  first  created  Provosts  and
Judges,  who  were  afterwards  directed  by
Solomon  to  initiate  his  favorite  and  inti¬
mate  secretary,  Joabert,  and  to  give  him
the  keys  of  all  the  building.  In  the  old
rituals,  the  Master  of  a  Lodge  of  Provosts
and  Judges  represents  Tito,  Prince  Haro¬
dim,  the  first  Grand  Warden  and  Inspector
of  the  three  hundred  architects.  The  num¬
ber  of  lights  is  six,  and  the  symbolic  color
is  red.  In  the  more  recent  ritual  of  the
Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States
there  has  been  a  slight  change.  The  legend
is  substantially  preserved,  but  the  presiding
officer  represents  Azarias,  the  son  of  Na¬
than.

The  jewel  is  a  golden  key,  having  the
letter  A  within  a  triangle  engraved  on  the
ward.  The  collar  is  red.  The  apron  is
white,  lined  with  red,  and  is  furnished  with
a  pocket.

This  was  one  of  Ramsay’s  degrees,  and
was  originally  called  Maltre  Irian  dais,  or
Irish  Master.

Proxy  Installation.  The  Regula¬
tions  of  1721  provide  that,  if  the  new  Grand
Master  be  absent  from  the  Grand  Feast,  he
may  be  proclaimed  if  proper  assurance  be
given  that  he  will  serve,  in  which  case  the
old  Grand  Master  shall  act  as  his  proxy
and  receive  the  usual  homage.  This  has
led  to  a  custom,  once  very  common  in  this
country,  but  now  getting  into  disuse,  of
installing  an  absent  officer  by  proxy.  Such
installations  are  called  proxy  installations.
Their  propriety  is  very  questionable.

Proxy  Master.  In  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland,  a  Lodge  is  permitted  to  elect
any  Master  Mason  who  holds  a  diploma  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  although  he  may  not  be
a  member  of  the  Lodge,  as  its  Proxy  Mas¬
ter.  He  nominates  two  Proxy  Wardens,
and  the  three  then  become  members  of  the
Grand  Lodge  and  representatives  of  the
Lodge.  Great  opposition  has  recently  been
made  to  this  system,  because  by  it  a  Lodge
is  often  represented  by  brethren  who  are  in
no  way  connected  with  it,  who  never  were
present  at  any  of  its  meetings,  and  who  are
personally  nnknown  to  any  of  its  members.
A  similar  system  prevailed  in  the  Grand
Lodge  of  South  Carolina,  but  was,  after  a
hard  struggle,  abolished  in  1860,  at  the
adoption  of  a  new  Constitution.

Prudence.  This  is  one  of  the  four
cardinal  virtues,  the  practice  of  which  is


PRUSSIA


PUBLICATIONS


615


inculcated  upon  the  Entered  Apprentice.
Preston  first  introduced  it  into  the  degree
a3  referring  to  what  was  then,  and  long  be¬
fore  had  been  called  the  four  principal
signs,  but  which  are  now  known  as  the  per¬
fect  points  of  entrance.  Preston’s  eulo-
gium  on  prudence  differs  from  that  used  in
the  lectures  of  this  country,  which  was  com¬
posed  by  Webb.  It  is  in  these  words:
“  Prudence  is  the  true  guide  to  human  un¬
derstanding,  and  consists  in  judging  and
determining  with  propriety  what  is  to  be
said  or  done  upon  all  our  occasions,  what
dangers  we  should  endeavor  to  avoid,  and
how  to  act  in  all  pur  difficulties.”  Webb’s
definition,  which  is  much  better,  may  be
found  in  all  the  Monitors.  The  Masonic
reference  of  prudence  to  the  manual  point
reminds  us  of  the  classic  method  of  repre¬
senting  her  statues  with  a  rule  or  measure
in  her  hand.

Prussia.  Frederick  William  I.  of
Prussia  was  so  great  an  enemy  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  institution,  that  until  hi3  death  it  was
scarcely  known  in  his  dominions,  and  the
initiation,  in  1738,  of  his  son,  the  Crown
Prince,  was  necessarily  kept  a  secret  from  his
father.  But  in  1740  Frederick  II.  ascended
the  throne,  and  Masonry  soon  felt  the  ad¬
vantages  of  a  royal  patron.  The  Baron  de
Bielefeld  says  ( Lettres ,  i.  157,)  that  in  that
year  the  king  himself  opened  a  Lodge  at
Charlottenburg,  and  initiated  his  brother,
Prince  William,  the  Margrave  of  Branden¬
burg,  and  the  Duke  of  IIolstein-Beck.
Bielefeld  and  the  Counsellor  Jordan,  in
1740,  established  the  Lodge  of  the  Three
Globes  at  Berlin,  which  soon  afterwards
assumed  the  rank  of  a  Grand  Lodge.
There  are  now  in  Prussia  three  Grand
Lodges,  the  seats  of  all  of  them  being  at
Berlin.  These  are  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
Three  Globes,  established  in  1740;  the
Grand  Lodge  Royal  York  of  Friendship,
estabiished  in  1752 ;  and  the  National
Grand  Lodge  of  Germany,  established  in
1770.  There  is  no  country  in  the  world
where  Freemasonry  is  more  profoundly
studied  as  a  science  than  in  Prussia,  and
much  of  the  abstruse  learning  of  the  Order,
for  which  Germany  has  been  distinguished,
is  to  be  found  among  the  members  of  the
Prussian  Lodges.  Unfortunately,  they  have,
for  a  long  time,  been  marked  with  an  in¬
tolerant  spirit  towards  the  Jews,  whose  ini¬
tiation  was  strictly  forbidden  until  very  re¬
cently,  when  that  stain  was  removed,  and
the  tolerant  principles  of  the  Order  were
recognized  by  the  abrogation  of  the  offen¬
sive  laws.

Prussian  li night.  See  Noachite.

Pseudonym.  A  false  or  fictitious
name.  Continental  writers  on  Freema¬
sonry  in  the  last  century  often  assumed

4  C


fictitious  names,  sometimes  from  affectation,
and  sometimes  because  the  subjects  they
treated  were  unpopular  with  the  govern¬
ment  or  the  church.  Thus,  Carl  Bossier
wrote  under  the  pseudonym  of  Acerrellas,
Arthuseus  under  that  of  Irenaeus  Agnos-
tus,  Guillemain  de  St.  Victor  under  that
of  De  Gaminville  or  Querard,  Louis  Tra-
venol  under  that  of  Leonard  Gabanon,  etc.

The  Illuminati  also  introduced  the  cus¬
tom  of  giving  pseudonyms  to  the  kingdoms
and  cities  of  Europe ;  thus,  with  them,  Aus¬
tria  was  Achaia ;  Munich,  Athens;  Vienna,
Rome;  Ingolstadt,  Eleusis,  etc.  But  this
practice  was  not  confined  to  the  Illuminati,
for  we  find  many  books  published  at  Paris,
Berlin,  etc.,  with  the  fictitious  imprint  of
Jerusalem,  Cosmopolis,  Latomopolis,  Phila¬
delphia,  Edessa,  etc.  This  practice  has
long  since  been  abandoned.

Publications,  Masonic.  The  fact
that,  within  the  past  few  years,  Freema¬
sonry  has  taken  its  place — and  an  imposing
one,  too  — in  the  literature  of  the  times;
that  men  of  genius  and  learning  have  de¬
voted  themselves  to  its  investigation ;  that
its  principles  and  its  system  have  become
matters  of  study  and  research ;  and  that  the
results  of  this  labor  of  inquiry  have  been
given,  and  still  continue  to  be  given,  to  the
world  at  large,  in  the  form  of  treatises  on
Masonic  science,  have  at  length  introduced
the  new  question  among  the  Fraternity,
whether  Masonic  books  are  of  good  or  of
evil  tendency  to  the  Institution.  Many
well-meaning  but  timid  members  of  the
Fraternity  object  to  the  freedom  with  which
Masonic  topics  are  discussed  in  printed
works.  They  think  that  the  veil  is  too
much  withdrawn  by  modern  Masonic
writers,  and  that  all  doctrine  and  instruc¬
tion  should  be  confined  to  oral  teaching,
within  the  limits  of  the  Lodge  room.
Hence,  to  them,  the  art  of  printing  be¬
comes  useless  for  the  diffusion  of  Masonic
knowledge ;  and  thus,  whatever  may  be  the
attainments  of  a  Masonic  scholar,  the  fruits
of  his  study  and  experience  would  be  con¬
fined  to  the  narrow  limits  of  his  personal
presence.  Such  objectors  draw  no  distinc¬
tion  between  the  ritual  and  the  philosophy
of  Masonry.  Like  the  old  priests  of
Egypt,  they  would  have  everything  con¬
cealed  under  hieroglyphics,  and  would  as
soon  think  of  opening  a  Lodge  in  public  as
they  would  of  discussing,  in  a  printed  book,
the  principles  and  design  of  the  Institution.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  some
years  ago,  adopted  a  regulation  which  de¬
clared  it  penal  to  print  or  publish  any  part
of  the  proceedings  of  a  Lodge,  or  the  names
of  the  persons  present  at  such  a  Lodge,
without  the  permission  of  the  Grand  Mas¬
ter.  The  rule,  however,  evidently  referred


616


PUBLICATIONS


PUBLICATIONS


to  local  proceedings  only,  and  had  no  rela-  i
tion  whatever  to  the  publication  of  Masonic
authors  and  editors;  for  the  English  Ma¬
sonic  press,  since  the  days  of  Hutchinson,
in  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  has  been
distinguished  for  the  freedom,  as  well  as
learning,  with  which  the  most  abstruse
principles  of  our  Order  have  been  dis¬
cussed.

Fourteen  years  ago  the  Committee  of
Foreign  Correspondence  of  a  prominent
Grand  Lodge  affirmed  that  Masonic  litera¬
ture  was  doing  more  “  harm  than  good  to
the  Institution.”  About  the  same  time  the
committee  of  another  equally  prominent
Grand  Lodge  were  not  ashamed  to  express
their  regret  that  so  much  prominence  of
notice  is,  “  in  several  Grand  Lodge  proceed¬
ings,  given  to  Masonic  publications.  Ma¬
sonry  existed  and  flourished,  was  harmo¬
nious  and  happy,  in  their  absence.”

When  one  reads  such  diatribes  against
Masonic  literature  and  Masonic  progress-
such  blind  efforts  to  hide  under  the  bushel
the  light  that  should  be  on  the  hill-top  —
he  is  incontinently  reminded  of  a  similar
iconoclast,  who,  more  than  four  centuries
age,  made  a  like  onslaught  on  the  perni¬
cious  effects  of  learning.

The  immortal  Jack  Cade,  in  condemning
Lord  Say  to  death  as  a  patron  of  learning,
gave  vent  to  words  of  which  the  language
of  these  enemies  of  Masonic  literature
seems  to  be  but  the  echo  :

“  Thou  hast  most  traitorously  corrupted
the  youth  of  the  realm,  in  erecting  a  gram¬
mar-school  ;  and  whereas,  before,  our  fore¬
fathers  had  no  other  books  but  the  score
and  the  tally,  thou  hast  caused  printing  to
be  used ;  and  contrary  to  the  king,  his
crown,  and  dignity,  thou  hast  built  a  paper-
mill.  It  will  be  proved  to  thy  face  that
thou  hast  men  about  thee  that  usually  talk
of  a  noun  and  a  verb,  and  such  abominable
words  as  no  Christian  ear  can  endure  to
hear.”

I  belong  to  no  such  school.  On  the
contrary,  I  believe  that  too  much  cannot
be  written  and  printed  and  read  about  the
philosophy  and  history,  the  science  and
symbolism,  of  Freemasonry;  provided  al¬
ways  the  writing  is  confided  to  those  who
rightly  understand  their  art.  In  Masonry,
as  in  astronomy,  in  geology,  or  in  any  other
of  the  arts  and  sciences,  a  new  book  by  an
expert  must  always  be  esteemed  a  valuable
contribution.  The  productions  of  silly  and
untutored  minds  will  fall  of  themselves
into  oblivion  without  the  aid  of  official
persecution ;  but  that  which  is  really  valu¬
able —  which  presents  new  facts,  or  fur¬
nishes  suggestive  thoughts  — will,  in  spite
of  the  denunciations  of  the  Jack  Cades  of


Masonry,  live  to  instruct  the  brethren,  and
to  elevate  the  tone  and  standing  of  the  In¬
stitution.

Dr.  Oliver,  who  has  written  more  on  Ma¬
sonry  than  any  other  author,  says  on  this
subject:  “I  conceive  it  to  bean  error  in
judgment  to  discountenance  the  publica¬
tion  of  philosophical  disquisitions  on  the
subject  of  Freemasonry,  because  such  a
proceeding  would  not  only  induce  the
world  to  think  that  our  pretensions  are  in¬
capable  of  enduring  the  test  of  inquiry,  but
would  also  have  a  tendency  to  restore  the
dark  ages  of  superstition,  when  even  the
sacred  writings  were  prohibited,  under  an
apprehension  that  their  contents  might
be  misunderstood  or  perverted  to  the  prop¬
agation  of  unsound  doctrines  and  per¬
nicious  practices ;  and  thus  would  igno¬
rance  be  transmitted,  as  a  legacy,  from  one
generation  to  another.”

Still  further  pursuing  this  theme,  and
passing  from  the  unfavorable  influence
which  must  be  exerted  upon  the  world  by
our  silence,  to  the  injury  that  must  accrue
to  the  Craft,  the  same  learned  writer  goes
on  to  say,  that  “  no  hypothesis  can  be  more
untenable  than  that  which  forebodes  evil  to
the  Masonic  institution  from  the  publica¬
tion  of  Masonic  treatises  illustrative  of  its
philosophical  and  moral  tendency.”  And
in  view  of  the  meagre  and  unsatisfactory
nature  of  the  lectures,  in  the  form  in  which
they  are  delivered  in  the  Lodges,  he  wisely
suggests  that  “  if  strictures  on  the  science
and  philosophy  of  the  Order  were  placed
within  every  brother’s  reach,  a  system  of
examination  and  research  would  soon  be
substituted  for  the  dull  aud  uninteresting
routine  which,  in  so  many  instances,  char¬
acterizes  our  private  meetings.  The  breth¬
ren  would  become  excited  by  the  inquiry,
and  a  rich  series  of  new  beauties  and  ex¬
cellences  would  be  their  reward.”

Of  such  a  result  I  have  no  doubt.  In
consequence  of  the  increase  of  Masonic
publications  in  this  country  within  a  few
years,  Masonry  has  already  been  elevated
to  a  high  position.  If  there  be  any  who
still  deem  it  a  merely  social  institution,
without  a  philosophy  or  literature ;  if  there
be  any  who  speak  of  it  with  less  admira¬
tion  than  it  justly  deserves,  we  may  be  as¬
sured  that  such  men  have  read  as  little  as
they  have  thought  on  the  subject  of  its
science  and  its  history.  A  few  moments  of
conversation  with  a  Mason  will  show
whether  he  is  one  of  those  contracted  crafts¬
men  who  suppose  that  Masonic  “  brightness"
consists  merely  in  a  knowledge  of  the  cor¬
rect  mode  of  working  one’s  way  into  a
Lodge,  or  wffiether  he  is  one  who  has  read
and  properly  appreciated  the  various  trea-


PUBLICATIONS


PUBLIC


617


tises  on  the  “royal  art,”  in  which  men  of
genius  and  learning  have  developed  the
true  spirit  and  design  of  the  Order.

Such  is  the  effect  of  Masonic  publications
upon  the  Fraternity ;  and  the  result  of  all  my
experience  is,  that  enough  has  not  been  pub¬
lished.  Cheap  books  on  all  Masonic  sub¬
jects,  easily  accessible  to  the  masses  of  the
Order,  are  necessaries  essential  to  the  ele¬
vation  and  extension  of  the  Institution.
Too  many  of  them  confine  their  acquire¬
ments  to  a  knowledge  of  the  signs  and  the
ceremonies  of  initiation.  There  they  cease
their  researches.  They  make  no  study  of
the  philosophy  and  the  antiquities  of  the
Order.  They  do  not  seem  to  know  that
the  modes  of  recognition  are  simply  in¬
tended  as  means  of  security  against  imposi¬
tion,  and  that  the  ceremonial  rites  are
worth  nothing  without  the  symbolism  of
which  they  are  only  the  external  expo¬
nents.  Masonry  for  them  is  nerveless  —
senseless — lifeless;  it  is  an  empty  voice
without  meaning  —  a  tree  of  splendid  foli¬
age,  but  without  a  single  fruit.

The  monitorial  instructions  of  the  Order,
as  they  are  technically  called,  contain
many  things  which  probably,  at  one  time,
it  would  have  been  deemed  improper  to
print ;  and  there  are  some  Masons,  even  at
this  day,  who  think  that  Webb  and  Cross
were  too  free  in  their  publications.  And
yet  we  have  never  heard  of  any  evil  effects
arising  from  the  reading  of  our  Monitors,
even  upon  those  who  have  not  been  initi¬
ated.  On  the  contrary,  meagre  as  are  the
explanations  given  in  those  works,  and  un¬
satisfactory  as  they  must  be  to  one  seeking
for  the  full  light  of  Masonry,  they  have
been  the  means,  in  many  instances,  of  in¬
ducing  the  profane,  who  have  read  them,
to  admire  our  Institution,  and  to  knock  at
the  “door  of  Masonry  ”  for  admission  —
while  we  regret  to  say  that  they  sometimes
comprise  the  whole  instruction  that  a  can¬
didate  gets  from  an  ignorant  Master.
Without  these  published  Monitors,  even
that  little  beam  of  light  would  be  wanting
to  illuminate  his  path.

But  if  the  publication  and  general  dif¬
fusion  of  our  elementary  text-books  have
been  of  acknowledged  advantage  to  the
character  of  the  Institution,  and  have,  by
the  information,  little  as  it  is,  which  they
communicate,  been  of  essential  benefit  to
the  Fraternity,  we  cannot  see  why  a  more
extensive  system  of  instruction  on  the
legends,  traditions,  and  symbols  of  the
Order  should  not  be  productive  of  still
greater  good.

Years  ago,  we  uttered  on  this  subject
sentiments  which  we  now  take  occasion  to
repeat.

Without  an  adequate  course  of  reading,


no  Mason  can  now  take  a  position  of  any
distinction  in  the  ranks  of  the  Fraternity.
Without  extending  his  studies  beyond
what  is  taught  in  the  brief  lectures  of  the
Lodge,  he  can  never  properly  appreciate
the  end  and  nature  of  Freemasonry  as  a
speculative  science.  The  lectures  consti¬
tute  but  the  skeleton  of  Masonic  science.
The  muscles  and  nerves  and  blood-vessels,
which  are  to  give  vitality,  and  beauty,  and
health,  and  vigor  to  that  lifeless  skeleton,
must  be  found  in  the  commentaries  on
them  which  the  learning  and  research  of
Masonic  writers  have  given  to  the  Masonic
student.

The  objections  to  treatises  and  disquisi¬
tions  on  Masonic  subjects,  that  there  is
danger,  through  them,  of  giving  too  much
light  to  the  world  without,  has  not  the
slightest  support  from  experience.  In
England,  in  France,  and  in  Germany,
scarcely  any  restriction  has  been  observed
by  Masonic  writers,  except  as  to  what  is
emphatically  esoteric;  and  yet  we  do  not
believe  that  the  profane  world  is  wiser  in
those  countries  than  in  our  own  in  respect
to  the  secrets  of  Freemasonry.  In  the  face
of  these  publications,  the  world  without
has  remained  as  ignorant  of  the  aporrheta
of  our  art,  as  if  no  work  had  ever  been
written  on  the  subject;  while  the  world
within  —  the  Craft  themselves  —  have  been
enlightened  and  instructed,  and  their  views
of  Masonry  (not  as  a  social  or  charitable
society,  but  as  a  philosophy,  a  science,  a
religion)  have  been  elevated  and  enlarged.

The  truth  is,  that  men  who  are  not  Masons
never  read  authentic  Masonic  works.  They
have  no  interest  in  the  topics  discussed,
and  could  not  understand  them,  from  a
want  of  the  preparatory  education  which
the  Lodge  alone  can  supply.  Therefore,
were  a  writer  even  to  trench  a  little  on
what  may  be  considered  as  being  really  the
arcana  of  Masonry,  there  is  no  danger  of
his  thus  making  an  improper  revelation  to
improper  persons.

Public  Ceremonies.  Most  of  the
ceremonies  of  Masonry  are  strictly  private,
and  can  be  conducted  only  in  the  presence
of  the  initiated.  But  some  of  them,  from
their  nature,  are  necessarily  performed  in
public.  Such  are  the  burials  of  deceased
brethren,  the  laying  of  corner-stones  of
public  edifices,  and  the  dedications  of  Ma¬
sonic  halls.  The  installation  of  the  officers
of  a  Lodge,  or  Grand  Lodge,  are  also  some¬
times  conducted  in  public  in  this  country.
But  the  ceremonies  in  this  case  differ
i  slightly  from  those  of  a  private  installation
|  in  the  Lodge  room,  portions  of  the  cere¬
mony  having  to  be  omitted.  The  reputa¬
tion  of  the  Order  requires  that  these  cere¬
monies  should  be  conducted  with  the  ut-


618


PUERILITY


PUERILITY


most  propriety,  and  the  Manuals  and  Moni¬
tors  furnish  the  fullest  details  of  the  order
of  exercises.  Preston,  in  his  Illustrations,
was  the  first  writer  who  gave  a  printed  ac¬
count  of  the  inode  of  conducting  these  pub¬
lic  ceremonies,  and  to  him  we  are  most
probably  indebted  for  their  ritual.  Ander¬
son,  however,  gave  in  the  first  edition  of
the  Constitutions  the  prescribed  form  for
constituting  new  Lodges,  and  installing
their  officers,  which  is  the  model  upon
which  Preston,  and  other  writers,  have
subsequently  framed  their  more  enlarged
formulte.

Puerility  of  Freemasonry.  “  The

absurdities  and  puerilities  of  Freemasonry
are  fit  only  for  children,  and  are  unworthy
of  the  time  or  attention  of  wise  men.”
Such  is  the  language  of  its  adversaries,  and
the  apothegm  is  delivered  with  all  that  self-
sufficiency  which  shows  that  the  speaker  is
well  satisfied  with  his  own  wisdom,  and  is
very  ready  to  place  himself  in  the  category
of  those  wise  men  whose  opinion  he  invokes.
This  charge  of  a  puerility  of  design  and
object  of  Freemasonry  is  worth  examina¬
tion.

Is  it  then  possible,  that  those  scholars  of
unquestioned  strength  of  intellect  and  depth
of  science,  who  have  devoted  themselves  to
the  study  of  Masonry,  and  who  have  in
thousands  of  volumes  given  the  result  of
their  researches,  have  been  altogether  mis¬
taken  in  the  direction  of  their  labors,  and
have  been  seeking  to  develop,  not  the  prin¬
ciples  of  a  philosophy,  but  the  mechanism
of  a  toy?  Or  is  the  assertion  that  such  is
the  fact  a  mere  sophism,  such  as  ignorance
is  every  day  uttering,  and  a  conclusion  to
which  men  are  most  likely  to  arrive  when
they  talk  of  that  of  which  they  know  noth¬
ing,  like  the  critic  who  reviews  a  book  that
he  has  never  read,  or  the  sceptic  who  at¬
tacks  a  creed  that  he  does  not  comprehend?
Such  claims  to  an  inspired  infallibility  are
not  uncommon  among  men  of  unsound
judgment.  Thus,  when  Gall  and  Spurz-
heim  first  gave  to  the  world  their  wonder¬
ful  discoveries  in  reference  to  the  organiza¬
tion  and  the  functions  of  the  brain  —  dis¬
coveries  which  have  since  wrought  a  ;
marked  revolution  in  the  sciences  of  anat¬
omy,  physiology,  and  ethics  —  the  Edin¬
burgh  reviewers  attempted  to  demolish  these
philosophers  and  their  new  system,  but  suc¬
ceeded  only  in  exposing  their  own  igno¬
rance  of  the  science  they  were  discussing.
Time,  which  is  continually  evolving  truth
out  of  every  intellectual  conflict,  has  long
since  shown  that  the  German  philosophers
were  right  and  that  their  Scottish  critics  1
were  wrong.  How  common  is  it,  even  at
this  day,  to  hear  men  deriding  Alchemy  as
a  system  of  folly  and  imposture,  cultivated  j


only  by  madmen  and  knaves,  when  the  re¬
searches  of  those  who  have  investigated  the
subject  without  prejudice,  but  with  patient
learning,  have  shown,  without  any  possibil¬
ity  of  doubt,  that  these  old  alchemists,  so
long  the  objects  of  derision  to  the  ignorant,
were  religious  philosophers,  and  that  their
science  had  really  nothing  to  do  with  the
discovery  of  an  elixir  of  life  or  the  trans¬
mutation  of  the  baser  metals  into  gold,  but
that  they,  like  the  Freemasons,  with  whom
they  have  a  strong  affinity,  concealed  under
profound  symbols,  intelligible  only  to  them¬
selves,  the  search  after  Divine  Truth  and
the  doctrine  of  immortal  life.  Truth  was
the  gold  which  they  eliminated  from  all
mundane  things,  and  the  immortality  of  the
soul  was  the  elixir  of  everlasting  life  which
perpetually  renewed  youth,  and  took  away
the  power  of  death.

So  it  is  with  Freemasonry.  Those  who
abuse  it  know  nothing  of  its  inner  spirit,
of  its  profound  philosophy,  of  the  pure  re¬
ligious  life  that  it  inculcates.

To  one  who  is  at  all  acquainted  with  its
organization,  Freemasonry  presents  itself
under  two  different  aspects.

First,  as  a  secret  society  distinguished  by
a  peculiar  ritual :

And  secondly,  as  a  society  having  a  phi¬
losophy  on  which  it  is  founded,  and  which
it  proposes  to  teach  to  its  disciples.

These  by  way  of  distinction  may  be  called
the  rihuilistic  and  the  philosophical  elements
of  Freemasonry.

The  ritualistic  dement  of  Freemasonry  is
that  which  relates  to  the  due  performance
of  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Order.
Like  the  rubrics  of  the  church,  which  indi¬
cate  when  the  priest  and  congregation  shall
kneel  and  when  they  shall  stand,  it  refers
to  questions  such  as  these:  What  words
shall  be  used  in  such  a  place,  and  what
ceremony  shall  be  observed  on  such  an  oc¬
casion?  It  belongs  entirely  to  the  inner
organization  of  the  Institution,  or  to  the
manner  in  which  its  services  shall  be  con¬
ducted,  and  is  interesting  or  important  only
to  its  own  members.  The  language  of  its
ritual  or  the  form  of  its  ceremonies  has
;  nothing  more  to  do  with  the  philosophic
designs  of  Freemasonry  than  the  rubrics  of
a  church  have  to  do  with  the  religious
creed  professed  by  that  church.  It  might
at  any  time  be  changed  in  its  most  material
points,  without  in  the  slightest  degree  af¬
fecting  the  essential  character  of  the  Insti¬
tution.

Of  course,  this  ritualistic  element  is  in
one  sense  important  to  the  members  of  the
1  society,  because,  by  a  due  observance  of  the
ritual,  a  general  uniformity  is  preserved.
But  beyond  this,  the  Masonic  ritual  makes
I  no  claim  to  the  consideration  of  scholar^


PUERILITY


PUERILITY


619


and  never  has  been  made,  and,  indeed,
from  the  very  nature  of  its  secret  character,
never  can  be  made,  a  topic  of  discussion
with  those  who  are  outside  of  the  Frater¬
nity.

But  the  other,  the  philosophical  element
of  Freemasonry,  is  one  of  much  importance.
For  it,  and  through  it,  I  do  make  the
plea  that  the  Institution  is  entitled  to  the
respect,  and  even  veneration,  of  all  good
men,  and  is  well  worth  the  careful  consid¬
eration  of  scholars.

A  great  many  theories  have  been  ad¬
vanced  by  Masonic  writers  as  to  the  real
origin  of  the  Institution,  as  to  the  time
when  and  the  place  where  it  first  took  its
birth.  It  has  been  traced  to  the  mysteries
of  the  ancient  Pagan  world,  to  the  Temple
of  King  Solomon,  to  the  Roman  Colleges  of
Artificers,  to  the  Crusades  for  the  recovery
of  the  Holy  Land,  to  the  Gilds  of  the  Mid¬
dle  Ages,  to  the  Stonemasons  of  Strasburg
and  Cologne,  and  even  to  the  revolutionary
struggle  in  England  in  the  time  of  the
commonwealth,  and  to  the  secret  efforts  of
the  adherents  of  the  house  of  Stuart  to  re¬
cover  the  throne.  But  whatever  theory
may  be  selected,  and  wheresoever  and
whensoever  it  may  be  supposed  to  have
received  its  birth,  one  thing  is  certain,
namely,  that  for  generations  past,  and  yet
within  the  records  of  history,  it  has,  unlike
other  mundane  things,  presented  to  the
world  an  unchanged  organization.  Take,
for  instance,  the  theory  which  traces  it
back  to  one  of  the  most  recent  periods,
that,  namely,  which  places  the  organiza¬
tion  of  the  Order  of  Freemasons  at  the
building  of  the  Cathedral  of  Strasburg,  in
the  year  1275.  During  all  the  time  that
has  since  elapsed,  full  six  hundred  years,  how
has  Freemasonry  presented  itself?  Why,
as  a  brotherhood  organized  and  controlled
by  a  secret  discipline,  engaged  in  impor¬
tant  architectural  labors,  and  combining
with  its  operative  tasks  speculations  of
greatreligiousimport.  If  wesee  any  change,
it  is  simply  this,  that  when  the  necessity
no  longer  existed,  the  operative  element
was  laid  aside,  and  the  speculative  only
was  retained,  but  with  a  scrupulous  pre¬
servation  (as  if  it  were  for  purposes  of  iden-
tification)  of  the  technical  language,  the
rules  and  regulations,  the  working-tools,
and  the  discipline  of  the  operative  art.  The
material  only  on  which  they  wrought  was
changed.  The  disciples  and  followers  of
Erwin  of  Steinbach,  the  Master  Builder  of
Strasburg,  were  engaged,  under  the  influ¬
ence  of  a  profoundly  religious  sentiment,
in  the  construction  of  a  material  edifice  to
the  glory  of  God.  The  more  modern  work¬
ers  in  Freemasonry  are  under  the  same  re¬
ligious  influence,  engaged  in  the  construc¬


tion  of  a  spiritual  temple.  Does  not  this
long  continuance  of  a  brotherhood  em¬
ployed  in  the  same  pursuit,  or  changing
it  only  from  a  material  to  a  spiritual  char¬
acter,  but  retaining  its  identity  of  organiza¬
tion,  demand  for  itself  some  respect,  and,
if  for  nothing  else,  at  least  for  its  antiquity,
some  share  of  veneration  ?

But  this  is  not  all.  This  society  or
brotherhood,  or  confraternity  as  it  might
more  appropriately  be  called,  is  distin¬
guished  from  all  other  associations  by  the
possession  of  certain  symbols,  myths,  and,
above  all  else,  a  Golden  Legend,  all  of
which  are  directed  to  the  purification  of
the  heart,  to  the  elevation  of  the  mind,  to
the  development  of  the  great  doctrine  of
immortality.

Now  the  question  where  and  when  these
symbols,  myths,  and  legends  arose  is  one
that  is  well  worth  the  investigation  of
scholars,  because  it  is  intimately  connected
with  the  history  of  the  human  intellect.
Did  the  Stonemasons  and  building  cor¬
porations  of  the  Middle  Ages  invent  them?
Certainly  not,  for  they  are  found  in  organ¬
izations  that  existed  ages  previously.  The
Greeks  at  Eleusis  taught  the  same  dogma
of  immortal  life  in  the  same  symbolic
mode,  and  their  legend,  if  it  differed  from
the  Masonic  in  its  accidents,  was  precisely
identical  in  its  substance.  For  Hiram
there  was  Dionysus,  for  the  acacia  the
myrtle,  but  there  were  the  same  mourning,
the  same  discovery,  the  same  rejoicing,  be¬
cause  what  had  been  lost  was  found,  and
then  the  same  ineffable  light,  and  the  same
sacred  teaching  of  the  name  of  God  and
the  soul’s  immortality.  And  so  an  ancient
orator,  who  had  passed  through  one  of
these  old  Greek  Lodges,  —  for  such,  without
much  violence  of  language,  they  may  well
be  called, — declared  that  those  who  have  en¬
dured  the  initiation  into  the  mysteries  en¬
tertain  better  hopes  both  of  the  end  of  life
and  of  the  eternal  future.  Is  not  this  the
very  object  and  design  of  the  legend  of  the
Master’s  degree  ?  And  this  same  peculiar
form  of  symbolic  initiation  is  to  be  found
among  the  old  Egyptians  and  in  the  island
of  Samothracia,  thousands  of  years  before
the  light  of  Christianity  dawned  upon  the
world  to  give  the  seal  of  its  Master  and
Founder  to  the  divine  truth  of  the  resur¬
rection.

This  will  not,  it  is  true,  prove  the  de¬
scent  of  Freemasonry,  as  now  organized,
from  the  religious  mysteries  of  antiquity;
although  this  is  one  of  the  theories  of  its
origin  entertained  and  defended  by  scholars
of  no  mean  pretension.  But  it  will  prove
an  identity  of  design  in  the  moral  and  in¬
tellectual  organization  of  all  these  institu¬
tions,  and  it  will  give  the  Masonic  student


620


PUERILITY


PURCHASE


subjects  for  profound  study  when  he  asks
the  interesting  questions — Whence  came
these  symbols,  myths,  and  legends?  Who
invented  them?  How  and  why  have  they
been  preserved?  Looking  back  into  the
remotest  days  of  recorded  history,  we  find  a
priesthood  in  an  island  of  Greece  and  an¬
other  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  teaching
the  existence  in  a  future  life  by  symbols
and  legends,  which  convey  the  lesson  in  a
peculiar  mode.  And  now,  after  thousands
of  years  have  elapsed,  we  find  the  same
symbolic  and  legendary  method  of  instruc¬
tion,  for  the  same  purpose,  preserved  in
the  depository  of  what  is  comparatively  a
modern  institution.  And  between  these
two  extremes  of  the  long  past  and  the
present  now,  we  find  the  intervening  period
occupied  by  similar  associations,  succeeding
each  other  from  time  to  time,  and  spreading
over  different  countries,  but  all  engaged  in
the  same  symbolic  instruction,  with  sub¬
stantially  the  same  symbols  and  the  same
mythical  history.

Does  not  all  this  present  a  problem  in
moral  and  intellectual  philosophy,  and  in
the  archaeology  of  ethics,  which  is  well
worthy  of  an  attempted  solution?  How
unutterably  puerile  seem  the  objections  and
the  objurgations  of  a  few  contracted  minds,
guided  only  by  prejudice,  when  we  con¬
sider  the  vast  questions  of  deep  interest
that  are  connected  with  Freemasonry  as  a
part  of  those  great  brotherhoods  that  have
filled  the  world  for  so  many  ages,  so  far
back,  indeed,  that  some  philosophic  his¬
torians  have  supposed  that  they  must
have  derived  their  knowledge  of  the  doc¬
trines  which  they  taught  in  their  mystic
assemblies  from  "direct  revelation  through
an  ancient  priesthood  that  gives  no  other
evidence  of  its  former  existence  but  the  re¬
sults  which  it  produced.

Man  needs  something  more  than  the
gratification  of  his  animal  wants.  The
mind  requires  food  as  well  as  the  body,
and  nothing  can  better  give  that  mental
nutriment  than  the  investigation  of  sub¬
jects  which  relate  to  the  progress  of  the
intellect  and  the  growth  of  the  religious
sentiment.

Again,  man  was  not  made  for  himself
alone.  The  old  Stoic  lived  only  for  and
within  himself.  But  modern  philosophy
and  modern  religion  teach  no  such  selfish
doctrine.  Man  is  but  part  of  the  great
brotherhood  of  man,  and  each  one  must  be
ready  to  exclaim  with  the  old  poet,  “  Homo
sum;  humani  nihil  me  alienum  puto,”
I  am  a  man,  and  I  deem  nothing  relating  to
mankind  to  be  foreign  to  my  feelings.  Men
study  ancient  history  simply  that  they  may
learn  what  their  brother  men  have  done  in
former  times,  and  they  read  the  philoso¬


phers  and  poets  of  Greece  and  Rome  that
they  may  know  what  were  the  speculations
of  those  old  thinkers,  and  they  strive  to  meas¬
ure  the  intellect  of  man  as  it  was  then  and
as  it  is  now,  because  the  study  of  the
growth  of  intellectual  philosophy  and  the
investigation  of  the  mental  and  moral
powers  come  home  to  us  all  as  subjects  of
common  interest.

Looking,  then,  upon  Freemasonry  as  one
of  those  associations  which  furnish  "the  evi¬
dence  and  the  example  of  the  progress  of
man  in  intellectual,  moral,  and  religious
development,  it  may  be  well  claimed  for  it
that  its  design,  its  history,  and  its  philoso¬
phy,  so  far  from  being  puerile,  are  well  en¬
titled  to  the  respect  of  the  world,  and  are
worth  the  careful  research  of  scholars.

Puissant.  A  title  given  to  the  presid¬
ing  officer  in  several  of  the  high  degrees.

Puissant  Irish  Master.  The
eighth  degree  of  Ramsay’s  Irish  Colleges.

Pulsanti  Operietur.  Latin.  To
him  who  knocks  it  shall  be  opened.  An
inscription  sometimes  placed  over  the
front  door  of  Masonic  temples  or  Lodge
rooms.

Punishments,  Masonic.  Punish¬
ment  in  Masonry  is  inflicted  that  the  char¬
acter  of  the  Institution  may  remain  unsul¬
lied,  and  that  the  unpunished  crimes  of  its
members  may  not  injuriously  reflect  upon
the  reputation  of  the  whole  society.  The
nature  of  the  punishment  to  be  inflicted  is
restricted  by  the  peculiar  character  of  the
Institution,  which  is  averse  to  some  forms
of  penalty,  and  by  the  laws  of  the  land,
which  do  not  give  to  private  corporations
the  right  to  impose  certain  species  of  pun¬
ishment.

The  infliction  of  fines  or  pecuniary  pen¬
alties  has,  in  modern  times  at  least,  been
considered  as  contrary  to  the  genius  of  Ma¬
sonry,  because  the  sanctions  of  Masonic
law  are  of  a  higher  nature  than  any  that
could  be  furnished  by  a  pecuniary  penalty.

Imprisonment  and  corporal  punishment
are  equally  adverse  to  the  spirit  of  the  In¬
stitution,  and  are  also  prohibited  by  the
laws  of  the  land,  which  reserve  the  inflic¬
tion  of  such  penalties  for  their  own  tribu¬
nals.

Masonic  punishments  are  therefore  re¬
stricted  to  an  expression  of  disapprobation
or  the  deprivation  of  Masonic  rights,  and  are
1.  Censure;  2.  Reprimand;  3.  Exclusion;

4.  Suspension,  Definite  or  Indefinite;  and

5.  Expulsion  —  all  of  which  see  under  their
respective  titles.

Purchase.  In  the  Cooke  MS.  (line
630)  it  is  said  that  the  son  of  AtheLstan
“purchased  a  free  patent  of  the  kyng  that
they  [the  Masons]  shulde  make  a  sembly.”
This  does  not  mean  that  he  bought  the  pat-


PURE


PYRON


621


ent,  but  that  he  obtained  or  procured  it.
Such  was  the  use  of  purchase  in  old  Eng¬
lish.  The  booty  of  a  thief  was  called  his
purchase,  because  he  had  acquired  it.
Colloquially,  the  word  is  still  used  to  desig¬
nate  the  getting  a  hold  on  anything.

Pure  Freemasonry.  See  Primitive
Freemasonry.

Purification.  As  the  aspirant  in
the  Ancient  Mysteries  was  not  permitted  to
pass  through  any  of  the  forms  of  initiation,
or  to  enter  the  sacred  vestibule  of  the  tem¬
ple,  until,  by  water  or  fire,  he  had  been
symbolically  purified  from  the  corruptions
of  the  world  which  he  was  about  to  leave
behind,  so  in  Masonry  there  is  in  the
first  degree  a  symbolical  purification  by  the
presentation  to  the  candidate  of  the  com¬
mon  gavel,  an  implement  whose  emblema¬
tic  use  teaches  a  purification  of  the  heart.
See  Lastration.

Purity.  In  the  Ancient  Mysteries
purity  of  heart  ^nd  life  was  an  essential
prerequisite  to  initiation,  because  by  initia¬
tion  the  aspirant  was  brought  to  a  knowl¬
edge  of  God,  to  know  whom  was  not  per¬
mitted  to  the  impure.  For,  says  Origen,
( Cont .  Cel.,  vi.,)  “a  defiled  heart  cannot  see
God,  but  he  must  be  pure  who  desires  to
obtain  a  proper  view  of  a  pure  Being.”
And  in  the  same  spirit  the  Divine  Master
says :  “  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for
they  shall  see  God.”  But  “  to  see  God”  is
a  Hebraism,  signifying  to  possess  him,  to  be
spiritually  in  communion  with  him,  to
know  his  true  character.  Now  to  acquire
this  knowledge  of  God,  symbolized  by  the
knowledge  of  his  Name,  is  the  great  object
of  Masonic,  as  it  was  of  all  ancient  initia¬
tion  ;  and  hence  the  candidate  in  Masonry
is  required  to  be  pure,  for  “  he  only  can
stand  in  the  holy  place  who  hath  clean
hands  and  a  pure  heart.”  See  White.

Purity,  Brothers  of.  An  associa¬
tion  of  Arabic  philosophers,  founded  at
Bosra,  in  Syria,  in  the  tenth  century.  Many
of  their  writings,  which  were  much  studied
by  the  Jews  of  Spain  in  the  twelfth  cen¬
tury,  were  mystical.  Steinschneider  [Jew.
Lit..  174,  295,)  calls  them  “  the  Freemasons
of  Bosra,”  and  says  that  they  were  “a  cele¬
brated  society  of  a  kind  of  Freemasons.”

Purple.  Purple  is  the  appropriate
color  of  those  degrees  which,  in  the  Ameri¬
can  Rite,  have  been  interpolated  between
the  Royal  Arch  and  Ancient  Craft  Ma¬
sonry,  namely,  the  Mark,  Past,  and  Most
Excellent  Masters.  It  is  in  Masonry  a
symbol  of  fraternal  union,  because,  being
compounded  of  blue,  the  color  of  the  An¬
cient  Craft,  and  red,  which  is  that  of  the
Royal  Arch,  it  is  intended  to  signify  the
close  connection  and  harmony  which
should  ever  exist  between  those  two  por¬


tions  of  the  Masonic  system.  It  may  be
observed  that  this  allusion  to  the  union  and
harmony  between  blue  and  red  Masonry  is
singularly  carried  out  in  the  Hebrew  word
which  signifies  purple.  This  word,  which
is  JD11X,  argaman,  is  derived  from
ragam  or  regem,  one  of  whose  significations
is  “a  friend.”  But  Portal  ( Coul .  Syvib.,
230,)  says  that  purple,  in  the  profane  lan¬
guage  of  colors,  signifies  constancy  in  spirit¬
ual  combats,  because  blue  denotes  fidelity,
and  red,  war.

In  the  religious  services  of  the  Jews  we
find  purple  employed  on  various  occasions.
It  was  one  of  the  colors  of  the  curtains  of
the  tabernacle,  where,  Josephus  says,  it  was
symbolic  of  the  element  of  water,  of  the
veils,  and  of  the  curtain  over  the  great  en¬
trance  ;  it  was  also  used  in  the  construction
of  the  ephod  and  girdle  of  the  high  priest,
and  the  cloths  for  divine  service.

Among  the  Gentile  nations  of  antiquity
purple  was  considered  rather  as  a  color  of
dignity  than  of  veneration,  and  was  deemed
an  emblem  of  exalted  office.  Hence  Homer
mentions  it  as  peculiarly  appropriated  to
royalty,  and  Virgil  speaks  of  purpura  re¬
gum,  or  “the  purple  of  kings.”  Pliny  says
it  was  the  color  of  the  vestments  worn  by
the  early  kings  of  Rome;  and  it  has  ever
since,  even  to  the  present  time,  been  con¬
sidered  as  the  becoming  insignia  of  regal
or  supreme  authority.

In  American  Masonry,  the  purple  color
seems  to  be  confined  to  the  intermediate
degrees  between  the  Master  and  the  Royal
Arch,  except  that  it  is  sometimes  employed
in  the  vestments  of  officers  representing
either  kings  or  men  of  eminent  authority,
—  such,  for  instance,  as  the  Scribe  in  a
Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons.

In  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  Grand
Officers  and  Provincial  Grand  Officers  wear
purple  collars  and  aprons.  As  the  symbolic
color  of  the  Past  Master’s  degree,  to  which
all  Grand  Officers  should  have  attained,  it
is  also  considered  in  this  country  as  the
appropriate  color  for  the  collars  of  officers
of  a  Grand  Lodge.

Purple  Brethren.  In  English  Ma¬
sonry,  the  Grand  Officers  of  the  Grand
Lodge  and  the  Past  Grand  and  Deputy
Grand  Masters  and  Past  and  Present  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Masters  are  called  “purple
brethren,”  because  of  the  color  of  their
decorations,  and  at  meetings  of  the  Grand
Lodge  are  privileged  to  sit  on  the  dais.

Purple  Lotl^cs.  Grand  and  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Lodges  are  thus  designated
by  Dr.  Oliver  in  his  Institutes  of  Slasonic
Jurisprudence.  The  term  is  not  used  in  this
country.

Pyron,  Joan  Baptiste  Pierre
J  ii lieu.  A  distinguished  French  Mason


622


PYTHAGORAS


PYTHAGORAS


of  the  latter  part  of  the  last  and  beginning
of  the  present  century,  who  died  at  Paris
in  September,  1821.  He  was  the  author
of  many  Masonic  discourses,  but  his  most
important  work  was  a  profound  and  ex¬
haustive  History  of  the  Organization  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite  in  France ,  pub¬
lished  in  1814.  He  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Grand  Orient,  and  having  received
the  thirty-third  degree  from  the  Count  de
Grasse  Tilly,  he  afterwards  assisted  in  the
organization  of  the  Supreme  Council  of
Italy,  at  Milan,  and  the  Supreme  Council
of  France.  In  1805,  his  name  was  struck
from  the  register  of  the  Grand  Orient  in
consequence  of  his  opposition  to  that  body,
but  he  remained  the  Secretary-General  of
the  Supreme  Council  until  his  death.  Ra-
gon  calls  him  an  intriguer  and  bold  inno¬
vator,  but  Thory  speaks  more  highly  of  his
Masonic  character.  He  was  undoubtedly
a  man  of  talent,  learning,  and  Masonic  re¬
search.  He  made  a  manuscript  collection
of  many  curious  degrees,  which  Thory  has
liberally  used  in  his  Nomenclature  of  Rites
and  Degrees.

Pythagoras.  One  of  the  most  cele¬
brated  of  the  Grecian  philosophers,  and  the
founder  of  what  has  been  called  tbe  Italic
school,  was  born  at  Samos  about  586  years
B.  c.  Educated  as  an  athlete,  he  subse¬
quently  abandoned  that  profession  apd  de¬
voted  himself  to  the  study  of  philosophy.
He  travelled  through  Egypt,  Chaldea,  and
Asia  Minor,  and  is  said  to  have  submitted
to  the  initiations  in  those  countries  for  the
purpose  of  acquiring  knowledge.  On  his
return  to  Europe,  he  established  his  cele¬
brated  school  at  Crotona,  much  resembling
that  subsequently  adopted  by  the  Freema¬
sons.  His  school  soon  acquired  such  a  repu¬
tation  that  disciples  flocked  to  him  from  all
parts  of  Greece  and  Italy.  Pythagoras  taught
as  the  principal  dogma  of  his  philosophy  the
system  of  metempsychosis,  or  the  transmi¬
gration  of  souls.  He  taught  the  mystical
power  of  numbers,  and  much  of  the  symbol¬
ism  on  that  subject  which  we  now  possess
is  derived  from  what  has  been  left  to  us  by
his  disciples ;  for  of  his  own  writings  there
is  nothing  extant.  He  was  also  a  geome¬
trician,  and  is  regarded  as  having  been  the
inventor  of  several  problems,  the  most  im¬
portant  of  which  is  that  now  known  as  the
forty-seventh  problem  of  Euclid.  He  was
also  a  proficient  in  music,  and  is  said  to
have  demonstrated  the  mathematical  rela¬
tions  of  musical  intervals,  and  to  have  in¬
vented  a  number  of  musical  instruments.
Disdaining  the  vanity  and  dogmatism  of
the  ancient  sages,  he  contented  himself  with
proclaiming  that  he  was  simply  a  seeker
after  knowledge,  not  its  possessor,  and  to
him  is  attributed  the  introduction  of  the


word  philosopher,  or  lover  of  wisdom,  as  the
only  title  which  he  would  assume.  After
the  lawless  destruction  of  his  school  at  Cro¬
tona,  he  fled  to  the  Locrians,  who  refused  to
receive  him,  when  he  repaired  to  Metapon-
tum,and  soughtan  asylum  from  his  enemies
in  the  temple  of  the  Muses,  where  tradition
says  that  he  died  of  starvation  506  years
B.  c.,  when  eighty  years  old.

Pythagoras,  School  of.  The
schools  established  by  Pythagoras  at  Cro¬
tona,  and  other  cities,  have  been  considered
by  many  writers  as  the  models  after  which
Masonic  Lodges  were  subsequently  con¬
structed.  They  undoubtedly  served  the
Christian  ascetics  of  the  first  century  as  a
pattern  for  their  monastic  institutions,  with
which  institutions  the  Freemasonry  of  the
Middle  Ages,  in  its  operative  character,  was
intimately  connected.  A  brief  description
of  the  school  of  Crotona  will  not  therefore
be  inappropriate.  The  disciples  of  this
school  wore  the  simplest  kind  of  clothing,
and  having  on  their  entrance  surrendered
all  their  possessions  to  the  common  fund,
they  submitted  for  three  years  to  voluntary
poverty,  during  which  time  they  were  also
compelled  to  a  rigorous  silence.  The  doctrines
of  Pythagoras  were  always  delivered  as  in¬
fallible  propositions  which  admitted  of  no
argument,  and  hence  the  expression  aLdr
igv,  he  said  it,  was  considered  as  a  sufficient
answer  to  any  one  who  demanded  a  reason.
The  scholars  were  divided  into  Exoteric*
and  Esoterics.  This  distinction  was  bor¬
rowed  by  Pythagoras  from  the  Egyptian
priests,  who  practised  a  similar  mode  of
instruction.  The  exoteric  scholars  were
those  who  attended  the  public  assemblies,
where  general  ethical  instructions  were  de¬
livered  by  the  sage.  But  only  the  esoterics
constituted  the  true  school,  and  these  alone
Pythagoras  called,  says  Jamblichus,  his
companions  and  friends.  Before  admission
to  the  privileges  of  this  school,  the  previous
life  and  character  of  the  candidate  were
rigidly  scrutinized,  and  in  the  preparatory
initiation  secrecy  was  enjoined  by  an  oath,
and  he  was  made  to  submit  to  the  severest
trials  of  his  fortitude  and  self-command.
He  who  after  his  admission  was  alarmed
at  the  obstacles  he  had  to  encounter,  was
permitted  to  return  to  the  world,  and  the
disciples,  considering  him  as  dead,  per¬
formed  his  funeral  obsequies,  and  erected  a
monument  to  his  memory.

The  mode  of  living  in  the  school  of  Cro¬
tona  was  like  that  of  the  modern  commu¬
nists.  The  brethren,  about  six  hundred  in
number,  with  their  wives  and  children,  re¬
sided  in  one  large  building.  Every  morn¬
ing  the  business  and  duties  of  the  day  were
arranged,  and  at  night  an  account  was  ren¬
dered  of  the  day's  transactions.  They


PYTHAGORAS


QUALIFICATIONS  623


arose  before  day  to  pay  their  devotions  to
the  sun,  and  recited  verses  from  Homer,
Hesiod,  or  some  other  poet.  Several  hours
were  spent  in  study,  after  which  there  was
an  interval  before  dinner,  which  was  occu-

?ied  in  walking  and  in  gymnastic  exercises.

he  meals  consisted  principally  of  bread,
honey,  and  water,  for  though  the  table  was
often  covered  with  delicacies,  no  one  was
permitted  to  partake  of  them.  It  was  in
this  secret  school  that  Pythagoras  gave  his
instructions  on  his  interior  doctrine,  and
explained  the  hidden  meaning  of  his  sym¬
bols.  There  were  three  degrees  :  the  first,
or  Mathematici,  being  engaged  in  the  study
of  the  exact  sciences;  and  the  second,  or
Theoretici,  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and
the  future  state  of  man  ;  but  the  third,  or
highest  degree,  was  communicated  only  to
a  few  whose  intellects  were  capable  of
grasping  the  full  fruition  of  the  Pythago¬
rean  philosophy.  This  school,  after  exist¬
ing  for  thirty  years,  was  finally  dissolved
through  the  machinations  of  Kylo,  a
wealthy  inhabitant  ofCrotona,  who,  having
been  refused  admission,  in  revenge  excited
the  citizens  against  it,  when  a  lawless  mob
attacked  the  scholars  while  assembled  in
the  house  of  Milo,  set  fire  to  the  building
and  dispersed  the  disciples,  forty  of  them
being  burned  to  death.  The  school  was
never  resumed,  but  after  the  death  of  the
philosopher  summaries  of  his  doctrines
were  made  by  some  of  his  disciples.  Still
many  of  his  symbols  and  his  esoteric  teach¬
ings  have  to  this  day  remained  uninter¬
preted  and  unexplained.

After  this  account  of  the  Pythagorean


school,  the  Mason  will  find  no  difficulty  in
understanding  that  part  of  the  so-called
Leland  Manuscript  which  is  said  so  much
to  have  puzzled  the  great  metaphysician
John  Locke.

This  manuscript  —  the  question  of  its
authenticity  is  not  here  entered  upon  —
has  the  following  paragraphs  :

“  How  comede  ytt  [Freemasonry]  yn
Engelonde  ?

“  Peter  Gower,  a  Grecian,  journeyeded
for  kunnynge  yn  Egypte  and  in  Syria,  and
yn  every che  londe  whereat  the  Venetians
hadde  plauntedde  Maconrye,  and  wyn-
nynge  entraunce  yn  al  Lodges  of  Ma-
connes,  he  lerned  muche,  and  retournedde
and  worked  yn  Grecia  Magna  w'achsynge
and  becommynge  a  myghtye  wysacre  and
gratelyche  renowned,  and  here  he  framed
a  grate  Lodge  at  Groton,  and  maked  many
Maconnes,  some  whereoffe  dyd  journeye  yn
Fraunce,  and  maked  manye  Maconnes
wherefromme,  yn  process  of  tyme,  the  arte
passed  yn  Engelonde.”

Locke  confesses  that  he  wras  at  first  puz¬
zled  with  those  strange  names,  Peter  Gower,
Groton,  and  the  Venetians;  but  a  little
thinking  taught  him  that  they  wrere  only
corruptions  of  Pythagoras,  Crotona,  and  the
Phoenicians.

It  is  not  singular  that  the  old  Masons
should  have  called  Pythagoras  their  “  an¬
cient  friend  and  brother,”  and  should  have
dedicated  to  him  one  of  their  geometrical
symbols,  the  forty-seventh  problem  of  Eu¬
clid  ;  an  epithet  and  a  custom  that  have,
by  the  force  of  habit,  been  retained  in  all
the  modern  rituals.


Q.


Qualifications  of  Candidates.

Every  candidate  for  initiation  into  the
mysteries  of  Freemasonry  must  be  qualified
by  certain  essential  conditions.  These

3ualifications  are  of  two  kinds.  Internal  and
External.  The  internal  qualifications  are
those  which  lie  within  his  own  bosom,  the
external  are  those  which  refer  to  his  out¬
ward  and  apparent  fitness.  The  external
qualifications  are  again  divided  into  Moral,
Religious,  Physical,  Mental,  and  Political.

I.  The  Internal  Qualifications  are:

1.  That  the  applicant  must  come  of  his
own  free  will  and  accord.  His  application
must  be  purely  voluntary,  to  whicn  he  has
not  been  induced  by  persuasion  of  friends.


2.  That  he  must  not  be  influenced  by
mercenary  motives.

3.  That  he  must  be  prompted  to  make
the  application  in  consequence  of  a  favora¬
ble  opinion  that  he  entertains  of  the  In¬
stitution.

4.  That  he  must  be  resolved  to  conform
with  cheerfulness  to  the  established  usages
and  customs  of  the  Fraternity.

II. The  Extf.rnal  Qualifications  are,
as  has  already  been  said,  divided  into  four
kinds.

1.  The  Moral.  That  candidate  only  is
qualified  for  initiation  who  faithfully  ob¬
serves  the  precepts  of  the  moral  law,  and
leads  a  virtuous  life,  so  conducting  himself


624


QUADRIVIUM


QUARRIES


aa  to  receive  the  reward  of  his  own  con¬
science  as  well  as  the  respect  and  approba¬
tion  of  the  wTorld.

2.  The  Religious.  Freemasonry  is  ex¬
ceedingly  tolerant  in  respect  to  creeds,  but
it  does  require  that  every  candidate  for  ini¬
tiation  shall  believe  in  the  existence  of  God  as
a  superintending  and  protecting  power,  and
in  a  future  life.  No  inouiry  will  be  made
into  modifications  of  religious  belief,  pro¬
vided  it  includes  these  two  tenets.

3.  The  Physical.  These  refer  to  sex,
age,  and  bodily  conformation.  The  candi¬
date  must  be  a  man,  not  a  woman  ;  of  ma¬
ture  age,  that  is,  having  arrived  at  his
majority,  and  not  so  old  as  to  have  sunk
into  dotage ;  and  he  must  be  in  possession
of  all  his  limbs,  not  maimed  or  dismem¬
bered,  but,  to  use  the  language  of  one  of
the  old  Charges,  “  have  his  right  limbs  as  a
man  ought  to  have.”

4.  The  Menial.  This  division  excludes
all  men  wTho  are  not  intellectually  qualified
to  comprehend  the  character  of  the  Insti¬
tution,  and  to  partake  of  its  responsibili¬
ties.  Hence  fools  or  idiots  and  madmen
are  excluded.  Although  the  landmarks  do
not  make  illiteracy  a  disqualification,  and
although  it  is  undeniable  that  a  large  por¬
tion  of  the  Craft  in  olden  time  was  unedu¬
cated  ;  yet  there  seems  to  be  a  general  opin¬
ion  that  an  incapacity  to  read  and  write
will,  in  this  day,  disqualify  a  candidate.

5.  The  Political.  These  relate  to  the
condition  of  the  candidate  in  society.  The
old  rule  required  that  none  but  those  who
were  free  born  could  be  initiated,  which,
of  course,  excluded  slaves  and  those  born
in  servitude ;  and  although  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  substituted  free  man  for
free  born ,  it  is  undeniable  that  that  action
was  a  violation  of  a  landmark;  and  the  old
rule  still  exists,  at  least  in  this  country.

Quadrivium.  In  classical  Latin  the
word  quadrivium  meant  a  place  where  four
roads  met,  and  trivium ,  a  place  where  three
roads  met.  The  scholastics  of  the  Middle
Ages,  looking  to  the  metaphorical  meauing
of  the  phrase,  the  paths  of  learning,  di¬
vided  what  were  called  the  seven  liberal
arts  and  sciences,  but  which  comprised  the
whole  cycle  of  instruction  in  those  days,
into  two  classes,  calling  grammar,  rhetoric,
and  logic  the  trivium,  and  arithmetic,  ge¬
ometry,  music,  and  astronomy  the  quadri¬
vium.  These  two  roads  to  the  temple  of
wisdom,  including  seven  distinct  sciences,
were,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  supposed  to  in¬
clude  universal  knowledge.  See  Liberal
Arts  and  Sciences.

Quakers.  The  question  of  the  admis¬
sibility  of  a  Quaker’s  affirmation  in  Masonry
is  discussed  under  the  word  Affirmation,
which  see.


Quarrels.  Contention  or  quarrelling
in  the  Lodge,  as  well  as  without,  is  dis¬
countenanced  by  the  spirit  of  all  the  Old
Constitutions  of  Masonry.  In  the  Charges
compiled  from  them,  approved  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1722,  and  pub¬
lished  by  Dr.  Anderson,  it  is  said,  “No
private  piques  or  quarrels  must  be  brought
within  the  door  of  the  Lodge,  far  less  any
quarrels  about  religion,  or  nations,  or  State
j  policy.”  (vi.  2.)

Quarries.  It  is  an  error  to  speak,  aa
Oliver  does,  misguided  by  some  Masonic
traditions,  of  the  quarries  of  Tyre  in  con¬
nection  with  the  Temple  of  Solomon.
Modern  researches  have  shown  without
question  that  the  stones  used  in  the  con¬
struction  of  the  Temple  were  taken  out  of
queries  in  the  immediate  vicinity ;  and  the
best  traditions,  as  wrell  a3  Scripture,  claim
only  that  the  wood  from  the  forests  of
Lebanon  was  supplied  by  King  Hiram.
The  great  quarries  of  Jerusalem  are  situ¬
ated  in  the  north-east  portion  of  the  city,
near  the  Damascus  gate.  The  entrance  to
them  was  first  discovered  by  Barclay.  A
writer,  quoted  by  Barclay,  thus  describes
them,  ( City  of  the  Great  King,  p.  466:)
“  Here  were  blocks  of  stones  but  half  quar¬
ried,  and  still  attached  by  one  side  to  the
rock.  The  w’ork  of  quarrying  was  appa¬
rently  effected  by  an  instrument  resembling
a  pickaxe,  with  a  broad  chisel-shaped  end,
as  the  spaces  between  the  blocks  were  not
more  than  four  inches  wide,  in  which  it
would  be  impossible  for  a  man  to  work
with  a  chisel  and  mallet.  The  spaces  were,
many  of  them,  four  feet  deep  and  ten  feet  in
height,  and  the  distance  between  them  was
about  four  feet.  After  being  cut  away  at
each  side  and  at  the  bottom,  a  lever  was  in¬
serted,  and  the  combined  force  of  three  or
four  men  could  easily  pry  the  block  away
from  the  rock  behind.  The  stone  was  ex¬
tremely  soft  and  friable,  nearly  white,  and
very  easily  worked,  but,  like  the  stone  of
Malta  and  Paris,  hardening  by  exposure.
The' marks  of  the  cutting  instrument  were
as  plain  and  well-defined  as  if  the  workman
had  just  ceased  from  his  labor.  The  heaps
of  chippings  which  were  found  in  these
uarries  showed  that  the  stone  bad  been
ressed  there,  and  confirm  the  Bible  state¬
ment  that  the  stone  of  which  the  Tem¬
ple  was  built  was  made  ready  before  it
was  brought  thither.”  Barclay  remarks,
[lb.,  p.  118,)  that  “those  extra  cyclopean
stones  in  the  south-east  and  south-west
corners  of  the  Temple  wall  were  doubtless
taken  from  this  great  quarry,  and  carried
to  their  present  position  down  the  gently
inclined  plain  on  rollers  —  a  conjecture
which  at  once  solves  the  mystery  that  has
greatly  puzzled  travellers  in  relation  to  the


QUARTERLY


QUORUM


625


difficulty  of  transporting  and  handling  such
immense  masses  of  rock,  and  enables  us  to
understand  why  they  were  called  ‘stones
of  rolling’  by  Ezra.”  Mr.  Prime  also
visited  these  quarries,  and  in  his  Tent  Life
in  the  Holy  Land,  (p.  114,)  speaks  of  them
thus  :  “  One  thing  to  me  is  very  manifest :
there  has  been  solid  stone  taken  from  the
excavation  sufficient  to  build  the  walls  of
Jerusalem  and  the  Temple  of  Solomon.
The  size  of  many  of  the  stones  taken  from
here  appears  to  be  very  great.  I  know  of
no  place  to  which  the  stone  can  have  been
carried  but  to  these  works,  and  I  know  no
other  quarries  in  the  neighborhood  from
which  the  great  stone  of  the  walls  would
seem  to  have  come.  These  two  connected
ideas  compelled  me  strongly  toward  the  be¬
lief  that  this  was  the  ancient  quarry  whence
the  city  was  built ;  and  when  the  magnitude
of  the  excavation  between  the  two  oppos¬
ing  hills  and  of  this  cavern  is  considered,
it  is,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  a  difficult  ques¬
tion  to  answer,  what  has  become  of  the
stone  once  here,  on  any  other  theory  than
that  I  have  suggested.”  And  he  adds:
“  Who  can  say  that  the  cavern  which  we
explored  was  not  the  place  where  the  ham¬
mers  rang  on  the  stone  which  were  forbid¬
den  to  sound  in  the  silent  growth  of  the
great  Temple  of  Solomon?”

The  researches  of  subsequent  travellers,
and  especially  the  labors  of  the  “Palestine
Exploration  Fund,”  have  substantiated
these  statements,  and  confirmed  the  fact  that
the  quarries  where  the  workmen  labored  at
the  building  of  the  Solomonic  Temple  were
not  in  the  dominions  of  the  Ki  ng  ofTyre,  but
in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  Temple.
In  1868,  Rob.  Morris  held  what  he  calls  a
“Moot  Lodge”  in  these  quarries,  which
event  he  describes  in  his  Freemasonry  in
the  Holy  Land,  a  work  of  great  interest  to
Masonic  scholars.

Quarterly  Communication.  The

Old  Records  of  the  Institution  state  that  the
Fraternity  met  annually  in  their  General
Assembly.  The  Halliwell  Manuscript,
commonly  known  as  the  York  Constitu¬
tions,  says  it  is  true  that  the  Assembly  may
be  held  triennially,  “  Eche  year  or  third
year  it  should  be  hold ;  ”  but  wherever
spoken  of  in  subsequent  records,  it  is  al¬
ways  as  an  Annual  Meeting.  It  is  not  until
1717  that  we  find  anything  said  of  quar¬
terly  communications ;  and  the  first  allu¬
sion  to  these  subordinate  meetings  in  any
printed  work  to  which  we  now  have  access
is  in  1738,  in  the  edition  of  the  Constitu¬
tions  published  in  that  year.  The  expres¬
sion  there  used  is  that  the  quarterly  com¬
munications  were  “  forthwith  revived.”
This  of  course  implies  that  they  had  pre-
4  D  40


viously  existed  ;  but  as  no  mention  is  made
of  them  in  the  Regulations  of  1663,  which,
on  the  contrary,  speak  expressly  only  of  an
“Annual  General  Assembly,”  I  feel  author¬
ized  to  infer  that  quarterly  communications
must  have  been  first  introduced  into  the
Masonic  system  after  the  middle  of  the  sev¬
enteenth  century.  They  have  not  the  au¬
thority  of  antiquity,  and  have  been  very
wisely  discarded  by  nearly  all  the  Grand
Lodges  in  this  country.  They  are  still  re¬
tained  by  the  Grand  Lodges  of  England  and
Scotland,  but  in  the  United  States  only  by
those  of  Massachusetts  and  Pennsylvania.

Quai ern ion.  From  the  Latin  quater,
the  number  Four,  which  see.  Oliver  calls
it  the  quaternary,  but  quaternion  is  the  bet¬
ter  usage.

Qteebec.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Quebec
was  established  in  1869,  by  a  withdrawal  of
most  of  the  Lodges  of  the  Province  from
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada,  on  the  Ameri¬
can  principle  of  Masonic  law,  that  the
jurisdiction  of  a  Grand  Lodge  was  cotermi¬
nous  with  the  geographical  limits  of  the
political  State.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Can¬
ada  has  opposed  the  act  as  infringing  on  its
territorial  rights ;  but  the  validity  and  legal¬
ity  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Quebec  have  been  recognized  by  nearly
all  the  Grand  Lodges  of  America.

Questions  of  Henry  VI.  Ques¬
tions  said  to  have  been  proposed  by  King
Henry  VI.  of  England  to  the  Masons  of
the  kingdom,  which,  with  their  answers,
are  contained  in  the  manuscript  known  as
the  Leland  Manuscript,  which  see.

Quorum.  The  parliamentary  law  pro¬
vides  that  a  deliberative  body  shall  not  pro¬
ceed  to  business  until  a  quorum  of  its  mem¬
bers  is  present.  And  this  law  is  applicable
to  Masonry,  except  that,  in  constituting  a
quorum  for  opening  and  working  a  Lodge,
it  is  not  necessary  that  the  quorum  shall  be
made  up  of  actual  members  of  the  Lodge ;
for  the  proper  officers  of  the  Lodge  being
present,  the  quorum  may  be  completed  by
any  brethren  of  the  Craft.  As  to  the  num¬
ber  of  brethren  necessary  to  make  a  quo¬
rum  for  the  transaction  of  business,  the  Old
Constitutions  and  Regulations  are  silent,
and  the  authorities  consequently  differ.  In
reply  to  an  inquiry  directed  to  him  in  1857,
the  editor  of  the  London  Freemasons'  Maga¬
zine  affirmed  that  five  Masons  are  sufficient
to  open  a  Lodge  and  carry  on  business  other
than  initiation ;  for  which  latter  purpose
seven  are  necessary.  This  opinion  appears
be  the  general  English  one,  and  is  acqui¬
esced  in  by  Dr.  Oliver ;  hut  there  is  no  au¬
thority  of  law  for  it.  And  when,  in  the
year  1818,  the  suggestion  was  made  that
some  regulation  was  necessary  relative  to


626


QUORUM


RAGON


the  number  of  brethren  requisite  to  consti¬
tute  a  legal  Lodge,  with  competent  powers
to  perform  the  rite  of  initiation,  ana  trans¬
act  all  other  business,  the  Board  of  General
Purposes  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
to  whom  the  suggestion  had  been  referred,
replied,  with  something  like  Dogberrian
astuteness,  “  that  it  is  a  matter  of  so  much
delicacy  and  difficulty,  that  it  is  thought
advisable  not  to  depart  from  the  silence  on
the  subject  which  had  been  observed  in  all
the  Books  of  Constitutions.”

In  the  absence,  then,  of  all  written  laws
upon  the  subject,  and  without  any  constitu-  '
tional  provision  to  guide  us,  we  are  com¬
pelled  to  recur  to  the  ritual  for  authority.
There  the  answer  to  the  question  in  each
degree,  “How  many  compose  a  Lodge?”
will  supply  us  with  the  rule  by  which  we
are  to  establish  the  quorum  in  that  degree.
For  whatever  number  composes  a  Lodge,
that  is  the  number  which  will  authorize


the  Lodge  to  proceed  to  business.  The
ritual  has  thus  established  the  number
which  constitutes  a  “perfect  Lodge,”  and
without  which  number  a  Lodge  could  not
be  legally  opened,  and  therefore,  neces¬
sarily,  could  not  proceed  to  work  or  busi¬
ness;  for  there  is  no  distinction,  in  respect
to  a  quorum,  between  a  Lodge  when  at
work  or  when  engaged  in  business.

According  to  the  ritualistic  rule  referred
to,  seven  constitute  a  quorum,  for  work  or
business,  in  an  Entered  Apprentice’s  Lodge,
five  in  a  Fellow  Craft’s,  and  three  in  a  Mas¬
ter  Mason’s.  Without  this  requisite  num¬
ber  no  Lodge  can  be  opened  in  either  of
these  degrees.  In  a  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch
Masons  nine  Companions  constitute  a
quorum,  and  in  a  Commanderv  of  Knights
Templars  eleven  Knights ;  although,  under
certain  circumstances  well  known  to  the
Order,  three  Knights  are  competent  to
transact  business.


R


Rabbanaim.  Rabbini¬

cal  Hebrew,  and  signifying  “  the  chief  of
the  architects.”  A  significant  word  in  the
high  degrees.

Rabbinism.  The  system  of  philos¬
ophy  taught  by  the  Jewish  Rabbis  subse¬
quent  to  the  dispersion,  and  which  is  en¬
gaged  in  mystical  explanations  of  the  oral
law.  With  the  reveries  of  the  Jewish
teachers  was  mingled  the  Egyptian,  the
Arabic,  and  the  Grecian  doctrines.  From
the  Egyptians,  especially,  Rabbinism  de¬
rived  its  allegorical  and  symbolic  mode  of
instruction.  Out  of  it  sprung  the  Thera¬
peutists  and  the  Essenians;  and  it  gave  rise
to  the  composition  of  the  Talmud,  many
of  whose  legends  have  been  incorporated
into  the  mythical  philosophy  ofiSpeculative
Masonry.  And  this  it  is  that  makes  Rab¬
binism  an  interesting  subject  of  research  to
the  Masonic  student

Rabboni.  ’j'QT  Literally,  my  Master,
equivalent  to  the  pure  Hebrew,  Adoni.  As
a  significant  word  in  the  higher  degrees,  it
has  been  translated  “  a  most  excellent  Sluter,”
and  its  usage  by  the  later  Jews  will  justify
that  interpretation.  Buxtorf  Lex.  Talmud.)
tells  us  that  about  the  time  of  Christ  this
title  arose  in  the  school  of  Hillel,  and  was
given  to  only  seven  of  their  wise  men  who
were  pre-eminent  for  their  learning.  Jahn
[Arch.  Bib.,  \  106,)  says  that  Gamaliel,  the


'  preceptor  of  St.  Paul,  was  one  of  these.  They
styled  themselves  the  children  of  wisdom,
which  is  an  expression  very  nearly  corres¬
ponding  to  the  Greek  ouoao^oi.  The  word
occurs  once,  as  applied  to  Christ,  in  the  Xew
Testament,  (Johnxx.  16.)  “Jesus  said  unto
her,  Mary.  She  turned  herself,  and  saith
unto  him,  Rabboni,  which  is  to  say,  Master.”
The  Masonic  myth  in  the  “  Most  Excellent
Master’s  degree,”  that  it  was  the  title  ad¬
dressed  by  the  Queen  of  Sheba  to  King
Solomon  on  beholding  the  magnificence
and  splendor  of  the  Temple,  wants  the
element  of  plausibility,  inasmuch  as  the
word  was  not  in  use  in  the  time  of  Solomon.

Ragon.  J.  >1.  One  of  the  most  dis;
tinguished  Masonic  writers  of  France.  His
contemporaries  did  not  hesitate  to  call  him
“  the  most  learned  Mason  of  the  nineteenth
century.”  He  was  born  in  the  last  quarter
of  the  eighteenth  century,  most  probably
at  Bruges,  in  Belgium,  where  in  1S03  he
was  initiated  in  the  Loge  Reunion  des
Amis  du  Nord,  and  subsequently  assisted
in  the  foundation  of  the  Lodge  and  Chapter
of  Vrais  Amis  in  the  same  city.  On  his
removal  to  Paris  he  continued  his  devotion
to  Freemasonry,  and  was  the  founder  in
1S05  of  the  celebrated  Lodge  of  Les  Trino-
sophes.  In  that  Lodge  he  delivered,  in
1818,  a  course  of  lectures  on  ancient  and
modern  initiations,  which  twenty  years


RAGOTZIvY


RAMSAY


627


afterwards  were  repeated  at  the  request  of
the  Lodge,  and  published  in  1841,  under
the  title  of  Cours  Philosophique  et  Inter-
pratif  des  Initiations  Anciennes  et  Modernes.
This  work  was  printed  with  the  express  per¬
mission  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  but
three  years  after  that  body  denounced  its
second  edition  for  containing  some  ad¬
ditional  matter.  Rebold  charges  this  act  to
the  petty  passions  of  the  day,  and  twenty-
five  years  after  the  Grand  Orient  made
ample  reparation  in  the  honor  that  it  paid
to  the  memory  of  Ragon.  In  1818  and
1819,  he  was  editor  in  chief  of  the  period¬
ical  published  during  those  years  under  the
title  of  Hermes,  ou  Archives  Magonnigues.
In  1853,  he  published  Orthodoxie  Maqon-
nique,  a  work  abounding  in  historical  infor¬
mation,  although  some  of  his  statements
are  inaccurate.  In  1861,  he  published  the
Tuileur  General  de  la  Franc- Magonnerie,  ou
Manuel  de  Vlnitie;  a  book  not  merely  con¬
fined  to  the  details  of  degrees,  but  which
is  enriched  with  many  valuable  and  inter¬
esting  notes.  Ragon  died  at  Paris  about
the  year  1866.  In  the  preface  to  his  Ortho¬
doxie,  he  had  announced  his  intention  to
crown  his  Masonic  labors  by  writing  a
work  to  be  entitled  Les  Fastes  Initiatigues,
in  which  he  proposed  to  give  an  exhaustive
view  of  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  of  the  Ro¬
man  Colleges  of  Architects  and  their  suc¬
cessors,  the  building  corporations  of  the
Middle  Ages,  and  of  the  institution  of
Modern  or  Philosophic  Masonry  at  the  be¬
ginning  of  the  eighteenth  century.  This
was  to  constitute  the  first  volume.  The
three  following  volumes  were  to  embrace  a
history  of  the  Order  and  of  all  its  Rites  in
every  country.  The  fifth  volume  was  to  be
appropriated  to  the  investigation  of  other
secret  associations,  more  or  less  connected
with  Freemasonry;  and  the  sixth  and  last
volume  was  to  contain  a  General  Tiler  or
manual  of  all  the  known  rites  and  degrees.
Such  a  work  would  have  been  an  inesti¬
mable  boon  to  the  Masonic  student,  but
Ragon  unfortunately  began  it  too  late  in
life.'  He  did  not  live  to  complete  it,  and
in  1868  the  unfinished  manuscript  was  pur¬
chased,  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,
from  his  heirs  for  a  thousand  francs.  It
was  destined  to  be  quietly  deposited  in  the
archives  of  that  body,  because,  as  it  was
confessed,  no  Mason  could  be  found  in
France  who  had  ability  enough  to  supply
its  lacunae  and  prepare  it  for  the  press.

Ragon’s  theory  of  the  origin  of  Masonry
was  that  its  primitive  idea  is  to  be  found
in  the  initiations  of  the  Ancient  Mysteries,
but  that  for  its  present  form  it  is  indebted
to  Elias  Ashmole,  who  fabricated  it  in  the
seventeenth  century.

Itiigotzky,  Carl  August.  A  Ger¬


man  who  was  distinguished  for  his  labors
in  Masonry,  and  for  the  production  of  seve¬
ral  works  of  high  character,  the  principal
of  which  were  Der  Freidenker  in  der  Mau-
rerei  oder  Freimuthige  Briefe  uber  wichtige
Gegenstande  in  der  Frei-  Maurerei,  i.  e.,
The  Freethinker  in  Masonry,  or  Candid
Letters  on  important  subjects  in  Free¬
masonry,  published  at  Berlin,  in  1793,  in
an  octavo  volume  of  three  hundred  and
eleven  pages,  of  which  a  second  edition  ap¬
peared  in  1811 ;  and  a  smaller  work  en¬
titled  Ueber  Maurerische  Freiheit,fur  eingei-
veihte  und  uncingeweihte,  i.  e.,  An  Essay  on
Masonic  Liberty,  for  initiated  and  unini¬
tiated  readers,  published  in  1792.  He  died
Jan.  5,  1823.

Rains.  It  was  a  custom  among  the
English  Masons  of  the  middle  of  the  last
century,  when  conversing  together  on  Ma¬
sonry,  to  announce  the  appearance  of  a
profane  by  the  warning  expression  “  it
rains.”  The  custom  was  adopted  by  the
German  and  French  Masons,  with  the
equivalent  expression,  es  regnet  and  ilpluie.
Baron  Tschoudy,  who  condemns  the  usage,
says  that  the  latter  refined  upon  it  by  de¬
signating  the  approach  of  a  female  "by  il
neige,  it  snows.  Dr.  Oliver  says  (.Rev.  Sg.,
97,)  that  the  phrase  “it  rains,”  to  indicate
that  a  cowan  is  present  and  the  proceed¬
ings  must  be  suspended,  is  derived  from  the
ancient  punishment  of  an  eavesdropper,
which  was  to  place  him  under  the  eaves  of  a
house  in  rainy  weather,  and  to  retain  him
there  till  the  droppings  of  water  ran  in  at
the  collar  of  his  coat  and  out  at  his  shoes.

Raised.  When  a  candidate  has  re¬
ceived  the  third  degree,  he  is  said  to  have
been  “  raised  ”  to  the  sublime  degree  of  a
Master  Mason.  The  expression  refers,
materially,  to  a  portion  of  the  ceremony  of
initiation,  but  symbolically,  to  the  resurrec¬
tion,  which  it  is  the  object  of  the  degree  to
Exemplify.

Ramsay,  Andrew  Mioliael.

Commonly  called  the  Chevalier  Ramsay.
He  was  born  at  Ayr,  in  Scotland,  June  9,
1668.  His  father  was  a  baker,  but  being  a
possessor  of  considerable  property  was  en¬
abled  to  give  his  son  a  liDeral  education.
He  was  accordingly  sent  to  school  in  his
native  burgh,  and  afterwards  to  the  Uni¬
versity  of  Edinburgh,  where  he  wras  distin¬
guished  for  his  abilities  and  diligence.  In
1709  he  was  intrusted  with  the  education
of  the  two  sons  of  the  Earl  of  Wemyss.
Subsequently,  becoming  unsettled  in  his
religious  opinions,  he  resigned  that  em¬
ployment  and  went  to  Holland,  residing  for
some  time  at  Leyden.  There  he  became
acquainted  with  Pierre  Poiret,  one  of  the
most  celebrated  teachers  of  the  mystic
theology  which  then  prevailed  on  the  con-


628


RAMSAY


RAMSAY


tinent.  From  him  Ramsay  learned  the  '
principal  tenets  of  that  system  ;  and  it  is  j
not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  he  was  !
thus  indoctrinated  with  that  love  of  mysti¬
cal  speculation  which  he  subsequently  de-  !
veloped  as  the  inventor  of  Masonic  degrees,
and  as  the  founder  of  a  Masonic  Rite.  In
1710  he  visited  the  celebrated  Fenelon,
Archbishop  of  Cambray,  of  whose  mystical
tendencies  he  had  heard,  and  met  with  a
cordial  reception.  The  archbishop  invited
Ramsay  to  become  his  guest,  and  in  six
months  he  was  converted  to  the  Catholic
faith.  Fenelon  procured  for  him  the  pre-
ceptorship  of  the  Due  de  Chateau-Thierry
and  the  Prince  de  Turenne.  As  a  reward
for  his  services  in  that  capacity,  he  was
made  a  knight  of  the  Order  of  St.  Lazarus,
whence  he  received  the  title  of  “  Chevalier  ”
by  which  he  was  usually  known.  He  was
subsequently  selected  by  James  III.,  the
Pretender,  as  the  tutor  of  his  two  sons,
Charles  Edward  and  Henry,  the  former  of
whom  became  afterwards  the  Young  Pre¬
tender,  and  the  latter  the  Cardinal  York.
For  this  purpose  he  repaired,  in  1724,  to
Rome.  But  the  political  and  religious  in¬
trigues  of  that  court  became  distasteful  to
him,  and  in  a  short  time  he  obtained  per¬
mission  to  return  to  France.  In  1728  he
visited  England,  and  became  an  inmate  of
the  family  of  the  Duke  of  Argyle.  Cham-  '
hers  says  ( Bioy .  Did.)  that  while  there  he
wrote  his  Principles  of  Natural  and  Revealed
Rdigion,  and  his  Travels  of  Cyrus.  This  j
statement  is  evidently  incorrect.  The  for¬
mer  did  not  appear  until  after  his  death,
and  was  probably  one  of  the  last  produc¬
tions  of  his  pen.  The  latter  had  already
been  published  at  Paris  in  1727.  But  he  1
had  already  acquired  so  great  a  literary
reputation,  that  the  University  of  Oxford
conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  Doctor  of
Laws.  He  then  returned  to  France,  and
resided  for  many  years  at  Pointoise,  a  seat
of  the  Prince  of  Turenne,  where  he  wrote
his  Life  of  Fenelon ,  and  a  History  of  the
Viscount  Turenne.  During  the  remainder
of  his  life  he  resided  as  Inteudant  in  the
Prince’s  family,  and  died  May  6,  1743,  in
the  fifty-seventh  year  of  his  age.

No  one  played  a  more  important  part  in
the  history  of  Freemasonry  in  the  eigh¬
teenth  century  than  the  Chevalier  Ramsay,
and  the  influence  of  his  opinions  and  teach¬
ings  is  still  felt  in  the  high  degrees  which
have  been  adopted  by  the  various  Rites
into  which  Masonry  is  now  divided.

Ramsay,  although  born  of  humble  pa¬
rentage,  was  by  subsequent  association  an
aristocrat  in  disposition.  Hence,  in  pro¬
posing  his  theory  of  the  origin  of  Freema-
sonrv,  he  repudiated  its  connection  with  an
operative  art,  and  sought  to  find  its  birth¬


place  in  Palestine,  among  those  kings  and
knights  who  had  gone  forth  to  battle  as
Crusaders  for  the  conquest  of  Jerusalem.
In  1740,  Ramsay,  as  Grand  Orator,  pro¬
nounced  a  discourse  before  the  Grand
Lodge  of  France,  in  which  he  set  forth  his
theory  in  explicit  terms.  That  the  reader
may  be  put  in  possession  of  that  theory  in
Ramsay’s  own  words,  I  have  translated
from  the  discourse  the  following  passage:

“  During  the  time  of  the  holy  wars  in
Palestine,  several  principal  lords  and  citi¬
zens  associated  themselves  together,  and
entered  into  a  vow  to  re-establish  the  tem¬
ples  of  the  Christians  in  the  Holy  Land;  and
engaged  themselves  by  an  oath  to  employ
their  talents  and  their  fortunes  in  restoring
architecture  to  its  primitive  institution.
They  adopted  several  ancient  signs  and
symbolic  words  drawn  from  religion,  by
which  they  might  distinguish  themselves
from  the  infidels  and  recognize  each  other
in  the  midst  of  the  Saracens.  They  com¬
municated  these  signs  and  words  only  to
those  who  had  solemnly  sworn,  often  at
the  foot  of  the  altar,  never  to  reveal  them.
This  was  not  an  oath  of  execration,  but  a
bond  uniting  men  of  all  nations  into  the
same  confraternity.  Some  time  after  our
Order  was  united  with  the  Knights  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem.  Hence  our  Lodges
are  in  all  countries  called  Lodges  of  St.
John.  This  union  was  made  in  imitation
of  the  Israelites  when  they  rebuilt  the  sec¬
ond  Temple,  during  which  time  with  one
hand  they  managed  the  trowel  and  mor¬
tar,  and  in  the  other  held  the  sword  and
buckler.

“Our  Order  must  not,  therefore, be  re¬
garded  as  a  renewal  of  the  Bacchanals  and
a  source  of  senseless  dissipation,  of  un¬
bridled  libertinism  and  of  scandalous  in¬
temperance,  but  as  a  moral  Order,  insti¬
tuted  by  our  ancestors  in  the  Holy  Land
to  recall  the  recollection  of  the  most  sub¬
lime  truths  in  the  midst  of  the  innocent
pleasures  of  society.

“  The  kings,  princes,  and  nobles,  when
they  returned  from  Palestine  into  their
native  dominions,  established  Lodges  there.
At  the  time  of  the  last  Crusade  several
Lodges  had  already  been  erected  in  Ger¬
many,  Italy,  Spain,  France,  and,  from  the
last, ’in  Scotland,  on  account  of  the  intimate
alliance  which  then  existed  between  those
two  nations.

“James,  Lord  Steward  of  Scotland,  was
the  Grand  Master  of  a  Lodge  established
at  Kilwinning,  in  the  west  of  Scotland,  in
the  year  1238,  a  short  time  after  the  death
of  Alexander  HI.,  king  of  Scotland,  and
a  year  before  John  Baliol  ascended  the
throne.  This  Scottish  lord  received  the
Earls  of  Gloucester  and  Ulster,  English


RAMSAY


RAMSAY


629


and  Irish  noblemen,  as  Masons  in  his
Lodge.

“  By  degrees  our  Lodges,  our  festivals,
and  our  solemnities  were  neglected  in  most
of  the  countries  where  they  had  been  estab¬
lished.  Hence  the  silence  of  the  historians
of  all  nations,  except  Great  Britain,  on  the
subject  of  the  Order.  It  was  preserved,
however,  in  all  its  splendor  by  the  Scotch,
to  whom  for  several  centuries  the  kings  of
France  had  intrusted  the  guardianship  of
their  sacred  persons.

“  After  the  lamentable  reverses  of  the
Crusades,  the  destruction  of  the  Christian
armies,  and  the  triumph  of  Bendocdar,
Sultan  of  Egypt,  in  1263,  during  the  eighth
and  ninth  Crusades,  the  great  Prince  Ed¬
ward,  son  of  Henry  III.,  King  of  England,
seeing  that  there  would  be  no  security  for
the  brethren  in  the  Holy  Land  when  the
Christian  troops  should  retire,  led  them
away,  and  thus  this  colony  of  the  Frater¬
nity  was  established  in  England.  As  this
prince  was  endowed  with  all  the  qualities
of  mind  and  heart  which  constitute  the
hero,  he  loved  the  fine  arts,  and  declared
himself  the  protector  of  our  Order.  He
granted  it  several  privileges  and  franchises,
and  ever  since  the  members  of  the  con¬
fraternity  have  assumed  the  name  of  Free¬
masons.  From  this  time  Great  Britain
became  the  seat  of  our  sciences,  the  con-
servatrix  of  our  laws,  and  the  depository
of  our  secrets.  The  religious  dissensions
which  so  fatally  pervaded  and  rent  all  Eu¬
rope  during  the  sixteenth  century,  caused
our  Order  to  degenerate  from  the  grandeur
and  nobility  of  its  origin.  Several  of  our
rites  and  usages,  which  were  opposed  to  the
prejudices  of  the  times,  were  changed,  dis¬
guised,  or  retrenched.  Thus  it  is  that  sev¬
eral  of  our  brethren  have,  like  the  ancient
Jews,  forgotten  the  spirit  of  our  laws,  and
preserved  only  the  letter  and  the  outer  cov¬
ering.  But  from  the  British  isles  the  an¬
cient  science  is  now  beginning  to  pass  again
into  France.”

Such  was  the  peculiar  theory  of  Eamsay,
which,  long  before  the  delivery  of  this  dis¬
course,  he  had  developed  in  his  Bite  of  six
degrees.  Rejecting  all  reference  to  the
Travelling  Architects  from  Como,  to  the
Stonemasons  of  Germany,  and  the  Opera¬
tive  Freemasons  of  England,  he  had
sought  a  noble  and  chivalric  origin  for
Freemasonry,  which  with  him  was  not  a
confraternity  founded  on  a  system  of  archi¬
tecture,  but  solely  on  the  military  prowess
and  religious  enthusiasm  of  knighthood.
The  theory  was  as  clearly  the  result  of  his
own  inventive  genius  as  was  his  fable  of
the  travels  of  Cyrus.  He  offered  no  docu¬
mentary  or  historical  authority  to  support
his  assertions,  but  gave  them  as  if  they  were


already  admitted  facts.  The  theory  was,
however,  readily  accepted  by  the  rich,  the
fashionable,'  and  the  noble,  because  it  ele¬
vated  the  origin  and  the  social  position  of
the  Order,  and  to  it  we  are  to  attribute  the
sudden  rise  of  so  many  high  degrees,  which
speedily  overshadowed  the  humbler  pre¬
tensions  of  primitive  Craft  Masonry.  The
Kadosh,  one  of  the  most  important  and
most  extensively  diffused  of  all  the  high
degrees,  owes  its  invention  or  its  composi¬
tion  to  Ramsay.

But  this  was  not  the  only  influence  that
he  exerted  on  the  Masonic  system.  Ar¬
dently  attached  to  the  exiled  house  of
Stuart,  of  two  of  whose  princes  he  had  been
the  tutor,  he  eagerly  met  the  advances  of
those  who  had  already  begun  to  give  a
political  importance  to  the  Order  and  to
enlist  it  in  the  Pretender’s  cause,  making  it
an  instrument  for  effecting  his  restoration
to  the  throne  of  England.  (See  Stuart  Ma¬
sonry.)  Ramsay  incorporated  these  views
into  his  system,  and  hence,  in  many  of  the
high  degrees  which  remain  at  this  day,  al¬
though  all  that  political  feeling  has  long
been  dead,  we  still  find  traces  of  a  Stuart
Masonry.

To  Ramsay  is  also  attributed  the  inven¬
tion  of  that  system  now  known  as  the  Royal
Arch.  This,  too,  exerted  its  influence,  for
from  the  degree  of  Ramsay  both  Dermott
and  Dunckerley  derived  many  of  their  ideas
used  in  constructing  the  two  Royal  Arch
systems  which  were  respectively  adopted
by  the  Ancient  and  the  Modern  Masons.
Oliver,  although  in  his  essay  on  the  Origin
of  the  English  Eoyal  Arch  (p.  24)  he  ad¬
mits  the  influence  of  Ramsay’s  degree,
speaks  in  his  Historical  Landmarks  (p.  34,
note,)  in  more  doubtful  language.  “It  is
said  that  Ramsay  invented  the  Royal  Arch  ”
is  the  equivocal  phrase  that  he  uses.  He
adds  that  “  it  cannot  have  been  any  of  the
three  which  are  usually  so  styled,  viz.,  the
R.  A.  of  Enoch,  of  Josiah,  or  of  Zerubbabel.
Whatever  it  might  be,  it  is  now  obsolete.”
But  this  is  an  error*  the  Royal  Arch  of
Enoch  is  precisely  the  degree  which  was  in¬
vented  by  Ramsay;  and  it  is  not  obsolete,
for  it  is  found  in  almost  all  the  continental
Rites  under  various  names.  It  was  adopted
from  Ramsay  by  the  Council  of  Emperors
of  the  East  and  West,  when  that  body  was
organized  in  1754,  and  subsequently  passed
over  to  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite,  where  it  still  remains  as  the  thirteenth
degree.  That  it  was  a  Stuart  degree  is  evi¬
dent,  among  other  reasons,  from  the  fact
that  the  fourteenth  degree,  which  is  its
complement,  and  without  which  it  is  in¬
complete,  originally  received  the  title  of
“  Grand  Scottish  Knight  of  the  Sacred
Vault  of  James  VI.”


630


RAMSAY


RAWLTNSON


When  the  Chevalier  Ramsay  went  to  Eng-  |
land  in  1728,  he  carried  with  him  his  Ma¬
sonic  system,  and  sought  to  secure  its  adop¬
tion  by  the  English  Lodges.  But  in  this
he  was  altogether  unsuccessful.  Yet  he  left
a  latent  influence  behind  him  when  he  re¬
turned  to  the  continent,  which  was  subse¬
quently  felt  by  those  who  organized  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Ancients.  To  that  influ¬
ence,  presented  in  the  example  of  his  high
degrees,  are  we,  I  think,  to  attribute  the
disseverance  of  the  Master’s  Word  from
the  third  degree,  and  the  consequent  inven¬
tion  of  the  Royal  Arch.  Both  Dermott  and
Dunekerley,  as  I  have  already  said,  derived
some  fruit  from  Ramsay’s  superior  intellect.

All  writers  concur  in  giving  the  most
favorable  opinions  of  Ramsay’s  character.
Chambers  asserts  that  he  was  generous  and
kind  to  his  relatives,  and  that  on  his  tem¬
porary  return  to  Great  Britain,  although  he
did  not  visit  them  in  Scotland,  he  sent  them
liberal  offers  of  money,  which,  however,  in¬
censed  at  his  apostasy  from  the  national
religion,  they  indignantly  refused  to  accept.
Clavel  [Hist.  Pitt  or.,  p.  165,,  describes  him
as  “a  man  endowed  with  an  ardent  imagi¬
nation,  and  a  large  amount  of  learning,  wit,
and  urbanity.”  And  Robison  ( Proofs  of  a
Comp.,  p.  39,)  says  he  was  “  as  eminent  for
his  piety  as  he  was  for  his  enthusiasm,”  and
speaks  of  his  “  eminent  learning,  his  elegant
talents,  and  his  amiable  character.”

His  general  literary  reputation  is  secured
by  his  Life  of  Fenelon,  his  Travels  of  Cyrus,  \
and  the  elaborate  work,  published  after  his
death,  entitled  The  Philosophical  Principles
of  Xatural  and  Revealed  Religion,  Unfolded
in  a  Geometrical  Order.  In  Masonry  he
wrote  but  little  save  the  rituals  of  the
degrees  which  he  had  invented.  He  was,
however,  the  author  of  an  Apologetic  and
Historical  Relation  of  the  Society  of  Freema¬
sonry,  which  was  published  in  1738,  and
had  the  honor  to  be  burnt  the  next  year
at  Rome  by  the  public  executioner,  on  the
sentence  of  the  Sacred  Congregation  of  the
Inquisition.

As  to  the  effect  of  Ramsay’s  labors  on
Freemasonry,  I  think  there  can  hardly  be
two  opinions  in  candid  minds.  He  came
to  the  study  of  the  Masonic  science  with  all
the  advantages  of  a  thoroughly  classical
education.  He  was  indeed  by  far  the  most
learned  man  who,  up  to  that  time,  had
taken  any  interest  in  the  Order.  Thus  his
influence  was  directed  to  elevate  the  tone  of
the  Institution,  and  to  show  to  the  world
that  it  was  worthy  of  the  investigation  of
cultivated  minds.  With  Ancient  Craft  Ma¬
sonry  he  scarcely  interfered,  save  to  assign
to  it  an  origin  and  a  history  different  from
those  which  had  been  commonly  received.
But  on  that  fundamental  system,  as  his


basis,  he  erected  a  superstructure  of  high
degrees,  in  which  he  sought  to  develop  a
system  of  mystical  philosophy  which  has
added  much  to  the  attractions  of  Masonic
study.  That  his  high  degrees  were  after¬
wards  expanded  to  a  disproportionate  ex¬
tent,  and  often  by  inferior  minds,  was  not
his  fault.  And  although,  if  we  look  at  his
system  in  a  historical  point  of  view,  we
may  feel  bound  to  reject  it  as  the  mere  re¬
sult  of  a  fertile  invention,  yet,  viewed  sym¬
bolically,  it  becomes  of  vast  importance.
For  in  that  system  he  had  planted  the
germ3  of  a  science  of  Masonic  symbolism
which  had  been  previously  unknown,  but
which  has  grown,  and  budded,  and  blos-
\  somed,  and  given  the  ripeness  of  its  fruit
to  succeeding  generations.  The  mine  of
symbolism  which  he  first  opened  has  been
effectively  worked  by  those  who  have  suc-
j  ceeded  him.

Ramsay,  Rite  of.  This  Rite,  long

since  exploded,  was  attempted  to  be  intro¬
duced  in  London,  in  1728,  by  the  Cheva¬
lier  Ramsay,  who  sought  to  found  it  on  his
peculiar  system  of  the  Templar  origin  of
Freemasonry.  It  consisted  of  six  degrees,
as  follows:  1.  Apprentice;  2.  Fellow  Craft;
3.  Master;  4.  Scottish  Master;  5.  Novice;
6.  Knight  of  the  Temple,  or  Templar.  It
was  rejected  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land,  but  was  received  in  France,  where  its
degrees  were  afterwards  incorporated  into
other  Rites.  See  Ramsay.

Ratisbon.  A  city  of  Bavaria,  in
which  two  Masonic  Congresses  have  been
held.  The  first  was  convoked  in  1459,  by
Jost  Dotzinger,  the  master  of  the  works  of
the  Strasburg  cathedral.  It  established
some  new  laws  for  the  government  of  the
Fraternity  in  Germany.  The  second  was
called  in  1464,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Strasburg,  principally  to  define  the  relative
rights  of,  and  to  settle  existing  difficulties
between,  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Strasburg,
Cologne,  Vienna,  and  Bern.

Rawlinson  llamiscript.  In  1853,
!  the  Rev.  J.  S.  Sidebotham,  of  >ew  Col-
'  lege,  Oxford,  published  in  the  Freemason s’
Monthly  Magazine  a  series  of  interesting
1  extracts  from  a  manuscript  volume  which
he  stated  was  in  the  Bodleian  Library,  and
which  he  described  as  seeming  “  to  be  a
kind  of  Masonic  album,  or  commonplace
■  book,  belonging  to  Brother  Richard  Raw-
I  linson,  LL.D.  and  F.  R.  S.,  of  the  follow¬
ing  Lodges :  Sash  and  Cocoa-tree,  Moor-
'  fields,  37 ;  St.  Paul’s  Head,  Ludgate  Street,
j  40;  Rose  Tavern,  Cheapside  and  Oxford
Arms,  Ludgate  Street,  94;  in  which  he  in¬
serted  anything  that  struck  him  either  a3
useful  or  particularly  amusing.  It  is  partly
in  manuscript,  partly  in  print,  and  com¬
prises  some  ancient  Masonic  Charges,  Con-


RECEIVED


RECOGNITION


631


stitutions,  forms  of  summons,  a  list  of  all
the  Lodges  of  his  time  under  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  whether  in  London,  the
country,  or  abroad ;  together  with  some  ex¬
tracts  from  the  Grab  Street  Journal ,  the
General  Evening  Post,  and  other  journals
of  the  day.  The  date  ranges  from  1724  to
1740.”

Among  the  materials  thus  collected  is
one  which  bears  the  following  title:  The
Freemasons'  Constitutions,  Copied  from  an
Old  MS.  in  the  possession  of  Dr.  Rawlin-
son.  This  copy  of  the  Old  Constitutions
does  not  differ  materially  in  its  contents
from  the  other  old  manuscripts,  but  its
more  modern  spelling  and  phraseology
would  seem  to  give  it  a  later  date,  which
Hughan  thinks  is  about  1700.  In  a  note
to  the  statement  that  King  Athelstan
“  caused  a  roll  or  book  to  be  made,  which
declared  how  this  science  was  first  invented,
afterwards  preserved  and  augmented,  with
the  utility  and  true  intent  thereof,  which
roll  or  book  he  commanded  to  be  read  and
plainly  recited  when  a  man  was  to  be  made
d  Freemason,”  Dr.  Rawlinson  says :  “  One
of  these  rolls  I  have  seen  in  the  possession
of  Mr.  Baker,  a  carpenter  in  Moorfields.”
The  title  of  the  manuscript  in  the  scrap¬
book  of  Rawlinson  is  The  Freemasons’  Con¬
stitution,  Copied  from  an  Old  MS.  in  the  pos¬
session  of  Dr.  Rawlinson.  Recent  researches
in  the  Bodleian  Library  have  not,  however,
discovered  the  original  manuscript  from
which  the  copy  was  made.  It  has  most
probably  been  mislaid,  for  its  existence
cannot  be  doubted.

Richard  Rawlinson,  LL.D.,  was  a  cele¬
brated  antiquary,  who  was  born  in  London
about  1690,  and  died  April  6,  1755.  He
was  the  author  of  a  Life  of  Anthony  Wood,
published  in  1711,  and  of  The  English  To¬
pographer,  published  in  1720.  Dr.  Raw-
liuson  was  consecrated  a  bishop  of  the
non-juring  communion  of  the  Church  of
England,  March  25, 1728.  He  was  an  as¬
siduous  collector  of  old  manuscripts,  inva¬
riably  purchasing,  sometimes  at  high  prices,
all  that  were  offered  him  for  sale.  In  his
will,  dated  June  2,  1752,  he  bequeathed  the
whole  collection  to  the  University  of  Ox¬
ford.  The  manuscripts  were  placed  in  the
Bodleian  Library,  and  still  remain  there;
but  unfortunately  no  adequate  catalogue
of  them  has  ever  been  made.

Received  and  Acknowledged.
A  term  applied  to  the  initiation  of  a  candi¬
date  into  the  sixth  or  Most  Excellent  Mas¬
ter’s  degree  of  the  American  Rite.  See
Acknowledged.

Reception.  The  ceremony  of  initia¬
tion  into  a  degree  of  Masonry  is  called  a
reception.

Recipient.  The  French  call  the


candidate  in  any  degree  of  Masonry  the
Recipiendaire,  or  Recipient.

Recognition,  Modes  of.  Smith
says  ( Use  and  Abuse ,  p.  46,)  that  at  the  in¬
stitution  of  the  Order,  in  each  of  the  de¬
grees,  “  a  particular  distinguishing  test  was
adopted,  which  test,  together  with  the  ex¬
plication,  was  accordingly  settled  and  com¬
municated  to  the  Fraternity  previous  to
their  dispersion,  under  a  necessary  and
solemn  injunction  to  secrecy;  and  they
have  been  most  cautiously  preserved  and
transmitted  down  to  posterity  by  faithful
brethren  ever  since  their  emigration.”

Hence,  of  all  the  landmarks,  the  modes
of  recognition  are  the  most  legitimate  and
unquestioned.  They  should  admit  of  no
variation,  for  in  their  universality  consist
their  excellence  and  advantage.  And  yet
such  variations  have  unfortunately  been
admitted,  the  principal  of  which  origi¬
nated  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,
and  were  intimately  connected  with  the
schism  which  at  that  time  took  place  in
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  which
divided  the  Fraternity  in  that  country  into
the  two  conflicting  societies  of  the  “  An¬
cients”  and  the  “Moderns;”  and  although
by  the  reconciliation  in  1813  uniformity
was  restored  in  the  United  Grand  Lodge
which  was  then  formed,  that  uniformity  did
not  extend  to  the  subordinate  bodies  in
other  countries  which  had  derived  their
existence  and  their  different  modes  of
recognition  from  the  two  separated  Grand
Lodges;  and  this  was,  of  course,  equally
applicable  to  the  high  degrees  which
sprang  out  of  them.  Thus,  while  the
modes  of  recognition  in  the  York  and
Scottish  Rites  are  substantially  the  same,
those  of  the  French  or  Modern  Rite  differ
in  almost  everything.  In  this  there  is  a
P.  W.  in  the  first  degree  unrecognized  by
the  two  other  Rites,  and  all  afterwards  are
different.

Again,  there  are  important  differences  in
the  York  and  American  Rites,  although
there  is  sufficient  similarity  to  relieve
American  and  English  Masons  from  any
embarrassment  in  mutual  recognition.  Al¬
though  nearly  all  the  Lodges  in  the  United
States,  before  the  Revolution  of  1776,
derived  their  existence  from  the  Grand
Lodges  of  England,  the  American  Masons
do  not  use  the  multitude  of  signs  that  pre¬
vail  in  the  English  system,  while  they
have  introduced,  I  think,  through  the
teachings  of  Webb,  the  D.  G.,  which  is
totally  unknown  to  English  Masonry.
Looking  to  these  differences,  the  Masonic
Congress  of  Paris,  held  in  1856,  recom¬
mended,  in  the  seventh  proposition,  that
“  Masters  of  Lodges,  in  conferring  the  de¬
gree  of  Master  Mason,  should  invest  tho


632


RECOGNITION


RECOMMENDATION


candidate  'with  the  words,  signs,  and  grips
of  the  Scottish  and  Modern  Rites.”  This
proposition,  if  it  had  been  adopted,  would
have  mitigated,  if  it  did  not  abolish,  the
evil ;  but,  unfortunately,  it  did  not  receive
the  general  concurrence  of  the  Craft.

As  to  the  antiquity  of  modes  of  recogni¬
tion  in  general,  it  may  be  said  that,  from
the  very  nature  of  things,  there  was  always
a  necessity  for  the  members  of  every  secret
society  to  have  some  means  for  recognizing
a  brother  that  should  escape  the  detec¬
tion  of  the  uninitiated.  We  find  evidence
in  several  of  the  classic  writings  showing
that  such  a  custom  prevailed  among  the
initiated  in  the  Pagan  mysteries.  Livy
tells  us  (xxxi.  14)  of  two  Acarnanian
youths  who  accidentally  entered  the  tem¬
ple  of  Ceres  during  the  celebration  of  the
mysteries,  and,  not  having  been  initiated,
were  speedily  detected  as  intruders,  and
put  to  death  by  the  managers  of  the  tem¬
ple.  They  must,  of  course,  have  owed
their  detection  to  the  fact  that  they  were
not  in  possession  of  those  modes  of  recog¬
nition  which  were  known  only  to  the  initi¬
ated.

That  they  existed  in  the  Dionysiac  rites
of  Bacchus  we  learn  from  Plautus,  who,  in
his  Miles  Gloria  sun,  (Act  IV.,  Sc.  ii.,)  makes
Misphidippa  say  to  Pyrgopolonices,  “  Cedo
signum  si  harunc  Baccharum  es,”  Give
the  sign,  if  you  are  one  of  these  Bacchce.

Jamblichus  (  Vit.  Pyth.)  tells  the  story
of  a  disciple  of  Pythagoras,  who,  having
been  taken  sick,  on  a  long  journey,  at  an
inn,  and  having  exhausted  his  funds,  gave,
before  he  died,  to  the  landlord,  who  had
been  very  kind  to  him,  a  paper,  on  which
he  had  written  the  account  of  liis  distress,
and  signed  it  with  a  symbol  of  Pythagoras.
This  the  landlord  affixed  to  the  gate  of  a
neighboring  temple.  Months  afterwards
another  Pythagorean,  passing  that  way,
recognized  the  secret  symbol,  and,  inquir¬
ing  into  the  tale,  reimbursed  the  landlord
for  all  his  trouble  and  expenses.

Apuleius,  who  was  initiated  into  the
Osirian  and  Islac  mysteries,  says,  in  his
Defensio,  “if  any  one  is  present  who  has
been  initiated  into  the  same  secret  rites  as
myself,  if  he  will  give  me  the  sign,  he
shall  then  be  at  liberty  to  hear  what  it  is
that  I  keep  with  such  care.”  But  in  an¬
other  place  he  is  less  cautious,  and  even
gives  an  inkling  of  what  was  one  of  the
signs  of  the  Osirian  initiation.  For  in  his
Golden  Ass  (lib.  xi.)  he  says  that  in  a  dream
he  beheld  one  of  the  disciples  of  Osiris,
“who  walked  gently,  with  a  hesitating
step,  the  ankle  of  his  left  foot  being
slightly  bent,  in  order,  no  doubt,  that  he
might  afford  me  some  sign  by  which  I
could  recognize  him.”  The  Osirian  initi¬


ates  had  then,  it  seems,  like  the  Freema¬
sons,  mystical  steps.

That  the  Gnostics  had  modes  of  recogni¬
tion  we  learn  from  St.  Epiphanius,  himself
at  one  time  in  early  life  a  Gnostic,  who
says  in  his  Panarium,  written  against  the
Gnostics  and  other  heretics,  that  “  on  the
arrival  of  any  stranger  belonging  to  the
same  belief,  they  have  a  sign  given  by  one
to  another.  In  holding  out  the  hand,
under  pretence  of  saluting  each  other,  they
feel  and  tickle  it  in  a  peculiar  manner
underneath  the  palm,  ana  so  discover  if
the  new-comer  belongs  to  the  same  sect.
Thereupon,  however  poor  they  may  be,
they  serve  up  to  him  a  sumptuous  feast,
with  abundance  of  meats  and  wine.”

I  do  not  refer  to  the  fanciful  theories  of
Dr.  Oliver, — the  first  one  most  probably  a
joke,  and  therefore  out  of  place  in  his  Sym¬
bolical  Dictionary,  —  founded  on  passages
of  Homer  and  Quintus  Curtius,  that  Achil¬
les  and  Alexander  of  Macedon  recognized
the  one  Priam  and  the  other  the  High
Priest  by  a  sign.  But  there  are  abundant
evidences  of  an  authentic  nature  that  a  sys¬
tem  of  recognition  by  signs,  and  words,
and  grips  has  existed  in  the  earliest  times,
and,  therefore,  that  they  were  not  invented
by  the  Masons,  who  borrowed  them,  as
they  did  much  more  of  their  mystical  sys¬
tem,  from  antiquity.

Recommendation.  The  petition
of  a  candidate  for  initiation  must  be  recom¬
mended  by  at  least  two  members  of  the
Lodge.  Preston  requires  the  signature  to
be  witnessed  by  one  person,  (he  does  not
say  whether  he  must  be  a  member  of  the
Lodge  or  not,)  and  that  the  candidate  must
be  proposed  in  open  Lodge  by  a  member.
Weob  says  that  “  the  candidate  must  be
proposed  in  form,  by  a  member  of  the
Lodge,  and  the  proposition  seconded  by
another  member.”  Cross  says  that  the
recommendation  “  is  to  be  signed  by  two
members  of  the  Lodge,”  and  he  dispenses
with  the  formal  proposition.  These  grad¬
ual  changes,  none  of  them,  however,  sub¬
stantially  affecting  the  principle,  have  at
last  resulted  in  the  present  simpler  usage,
which  is,  for  two  members  of  the  Lodge  to
affix  their  names  to  the  petition,  as  reeom-
menders  of  the  applicant.

The  petition  for  a  Dispensation  for  a  new
Lodge,  as  preliminary  to  the  application  for
a  Warrant  of  Constitution,  must  be  recom¬
mended  by  the  nearest  Lodge.  Preston
says  that  it  must  be  recommended  “  by  the
Masters  of  three  regular  Lodges  adjacent  to
the  place  where  the  new  Lodge  is  to  be
held.”  This  is  also  the  language  of  the
Constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ire¬
land.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  re¬
quires  the  recommendation  to  be  signed


RECONCILIATION


RECORDS


633


“by  the  Masters  and  officers  of  two  of  the
nearest  Lodges.”  The  modern  Constitu¬
tion  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  re¬
quires  a  recommendation  “  by  the  officers
of  some  regular  Lodge,”  without  saying
anything  of  its  vicinity  to  the  new  Lodge.
The  rule  now  universally  adopted  is,  that
it  must  be  recommended  by  the  nearest
Lodge.

Reconciliation,  Lodge  of.  When
the  two  contending  Grand  Lodges  of  Eng¬
land,  known  as  the  “  Ancients  ”  and  the
“  Moderns,”  resolved,  in  1813,  under  the
respective  Grand  Masterships  of  the  Dukes
of  Kent  and  Sussex,  to  put  an  end  to  all
differences,  and  to  form  a  United  Grand
Lodge,  it  was  provided,  in  the  fifth  article
of  union,  that  each  of  the  two  Grand
Masters  should  appoint  nine  Master  Ma¬
sons  to  meet  at  some  convenient  place ;  and
each  party  having  opened  a  just  and  per¬
fect  Lodge  in  a  separate  apartment,  they
should  give  and  receive  mutually  and  re¬
ciprocally  the  obligations  of  both  Fraterni¬
ties;  and  being  thus  duly  and  equally  en¬
lightened  in  both  forms,  they  should  be
empowered  and  directed  to  hold  a  Lodge,
under  the  Warrant  or  Dispensation  to  be
intrusted  to  them,  and  to  be  entitled  “The
Lodge  of  Reconciliation.”  The  duty  of
this  Lodge  was  to  visit  the  several  Lodges
under  both  Grand  Lodges,  and  to  instruct
the  officers  and  members  of  the  same  in
the  forms  of  initiation,  obligation,  etc.,  in
both,  so  that  uniformity  of  working  might
be  established.  The  Lodge  of  Reconciliation
was  constituted  on  the  27th  December,
1813,  the  day  on  which  the  union  was  per¬
fected.  This  Lodge  was  only  a  temporary
one,  and  the  duties  for  which  it  had  been
organized  having  been  performed,  it  eeased
to  exist  by  its  own  limitation.

Reconsideration,  Motion  for.
A  motion  for  reconsideration  can  only  be
made  in  a  Grand  Lodge,  Grand  Chapter,  or
other  Grand  Body,  on  the  same  day  or  the
day  after  the  adoption  of  the  motion  which
it  is  proposed  to  reconsider.  In  a  Lodge
or  other  subordinate  body,  it  can  only  be
made  at  the  same  meeting.  It  cannot  be
moved  by  one  who  has  voted  in  the  minor¬
ity.  It  cannot  be  made  when  the  matter
to  be  reconsidered  has  passed  out  of  the
control  of  the  body,  as  when  the  original
motion  was  for  an  appropriation  which
has  been  expended  since  the  motion  for  it
was  passed.  A  motion  for  reconsideration
is  not  debatable  if  the  question  proposed
to  be  reconsidered  is  not.  It  cannot  always
be  adopted  by  a  simple  majority  vote.  It
may  be  postponed  or  laid  upon  the  table.
If  postponed  to  a  time  definite,  and  when
that  time  arrives  is  not  acted  upon,  it  can¬
not  be  renewed.  If  laid  upon  the  table,  it
4  E


cannot  be  taken  up  out  of  its  order,  and  no
second  motion  for  reconsideration  can  be
offered  while  it  lies  upon  the  table,  hence
to  lay  a  motion  for  reconsideration  on  the
table  is  considered  as  equivalent  to  reject¬
ing  it.  When  a  motion  for  reconsideration
is  adopted,  the  original  motion  comes  up
immediately  for  consideration,  as  if  it  had
been  for  the  first  time  brought  before  the
body,  in  the  form  which  it  presented  when
it  was  adopted.

Reconsideration  of  the  Ballot.

When  the  petition  of  a  candidate  for  ini¬
tiation  has  been  rejected,  it  is  not  permis¬
sible  for  any  member  to  move  for  a  recon¬
sideration  of  the  ballot.  The  following
four  principles  set  forth  in  a  summary  way
the  doctrine  of  Masonic  parliamentary  law
on  this  subject :

1.  It  is  never  in  order  for  a  member  to
move  for  the  reconsideration  of  a  ballot  on
the  petition  of  a  candidate,  nor  for  a  pre¬
siding  officer  to  entertain  such  a  motion.  2.
The  Master  or  presiding  officer  alone  can,
for  reasons  satisfactory  to  himself,  order
such  a  reconsideration.  3.  The  presiding
officer  cannot  order  a  reconsideration  on
any  subsequent  night,  nor  on  the  same
night,  after  any  member  who  was  present
and  voted  has  departed.  4.  The  Grand
Master  cannot  grant  a  Dispensation  for  a
reconsideration,  nor  in  any  other  way  in¬
terfere  with  the  ballot.  The  same  restric¬
tion  applies  to  the  Grand  Lodge.

Recorder.  In  some  of  the  high  de¬
grees,  as  in  a  Council  of  Select  Masters  and
a  Commandery  of  Knights  Templars,  the
title  of  Recorder  is  given  to  the  Secretary.
The  recording  officer  of  the  Grand  Encamp¬
ment  of  Knights  Templars  of  the  United
States,  of  State  Grand  Commanderies,  and
of  Grand  Councils  of  Royal  and  Select  Mas¬
ters,  is  styled  a  Grand  Recorder.

Records,  Old.  The  early  history  of
Masonry,  as  written  by  Anderson,  Preston,
Smith,  Calcott,  and  writers  of  that  genera¬
tion,  was  little  more  than  a  collection  of
fables,  so  absurd  as  to  excite  the  smile  of
every  reader,  or  bare  statements  of  inci¬
dents,  without  any  authority  to  substantiate
their  genuineness.

The  recent  writers  on  the  same  subject
have  treated  it  in  a  very  different  manner,
and  one  that  gives  to  the  investigation  of
the  early  annals  of  Freemasonry  a  respecta¬
ble  position  in  the  circle  of  historic  studies.
Much  of  the  increased  value  that  is  given
in  the  present  day  to  Masonic  history  is
derivable  from  the  fact  that,  ceasing  to  re¬
peat  the  gratuitous  statements  of  the  older
writers,  some  of  whom  have  not  hesitated
to  make  Adam  a  Grand  Master,  and  Eden
the  sjte  of  a  Lodge,  our  students  of  this  day
are  drawing  their  conclusions  from,  and  es-


634


RECORDS


RED


tablishing  their  theories  on,  the  old  records,
which  Masonic  archaeology  is  in  this  gen¬
eration  bringing  to  light.  Hence,  one  of
these  students  (Bro.  Woodford,  of  England,)
has  said  that,  when  we  begin  to  investigate
the  real  facts  of  Masonic  history,  “  not  only
have  we  to  discard  at  once  much  that  we
have  held  tenaciously  and  taught  habit¬
ually,  simply  resting  on  the  reiterated  as¬
sertions  of  others,  hut  we  shall  also  find
that  we  have  to  get  rid  of  what,  1  fear,  we
must  call  ‘  accumulated  rubbish,’  before  we
can  see  clearly  how  the  great  edifice  of  Ma¬
sonic  history,  raised  at  last  on  sure  and
good  foundations,  stands  out  clearer  to  the
sight,  and  even  more  honorable  to  the
builders,  from  those  needful,  if  preparatory,
labors.”

Anderson  tells  us  that  in  the  year  1719,
at  some  of  the  private  Lodges,  “several
very  valuable  manuscripts  concerning  the
Fraternity,  their  Lodges,  Regulations,
Charges,  Secrets,  and  Usages,  were  too
hastily  burnt  by  some  scrupulous  brothers,
that  those  papers  might  not  fall  into  strange
hands.”

In  the  last  quarter  of  a  century  the  ar¬
cheologists  of  Masonry  have  labored  very
diligently  and  successfully  to  disinter  from
the  old  Lodges,  libraries,  and  museums
many  of  these  ancient  manuscripts,  and
much  light  has  thus  been  thrown  upon  the
early  history  of  Freemasonry.

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  most  im¬
portant  of  these  old  records  which  the
industry  of  Masonic  antiquaries  has  brought
to  light.  They  are  generally  called  “  Manu¬
scripts,”  because  their  originals,  for  the
most  part,  exist  in  manuscript  rolls,  or
there  is  competent  evidence  that  the  origi¬
nal  manuscripts,  although  now  lost,  once
existed.  There  are,  however,  a  few  in¬
stances  in  which  this  evidence  is  wanting,
and  the  authenticity  of  the  manuscript  rests
only  on  probability.  Each  of  them  is  noted
in  this  work  under  its  respective  title.

1.  Halliwell  Manuscript.  Add.

2.  Book  of  the  Fraternity  of  Stonema¬
sons.

3.  Paris  Regulations.

4.  Strasburg  Constitutions.  .

5.  Cooke’s  Manuscript.

6.  Landsdowne  Manuscript.

7.  Schaw  Manuscript.

8.  St.  Clair  Charters.

9.  Eglinton  Manuscript.

10.  York  Manuscripts,  (six  in  number.)

11.  Grand  Lodge  Manuscript.

12.  Sloane  Manuscripts,  (two  in  number.)

13.  Aitcheson-Haven  Manuscript.

14.  Kilwinning  Manuscript.

15.  Harleian  Manuscript.

16.  Hope  Manuscript.

17.  Alnwick  Manuscript.


18.  Papworth  Manuscript.

19.  Roberts’  Manuscript.

20.  Edward  III.  Manuscript.

21.  St.  Albans’  Regulations.

22.  Anderson  Manuscript.

23.  Stone  Manuscripts.

24.  Constitutions  of  Strasburg.

25.  Constitutions  of  Torgan.

26.  Dowland  Manuscript.

27.  Wilson  Manuscript.

28.  Spencer  Manuscript.

29.  Cole  Manuscript.

30.  Plott  Manuscript.

31.  Inigo  Jones  Manuscript.  Add.

32.  Rawlinson  Manuscript.

33.  Woodford  Manuscript.

34.  Krause  Manuscript.

35.  Antiquity  Manuscript.

36.  Leland  Manuscript,  sometimes  called
the  Locke  Manuscript.

37.  Charter  of  Cologne.

There  may  be  some  other  manuscript
records,  especially  in  France  and  Germany,
not  here  noticed,  but  the  list  above  contains
the  most  important  of  those  now  known  to
the  Fraternity.  Many  of  them  have  never
yet  been  published,  and  the  collection
forms  a  mass  of  material  absolutely  neces¬
sary  for  the  proper  investigation  of  Masonic
history.  Every  Mason  who  desires  to
know  the  true  condition  of  the  Fraternity
during  the  last  three  or  four  centuries,  and
who  would  learn  the  connection  between
the  Stonemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages  and
the  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  of  the  pres¬
ent  day,  so  as  perfectly  to  understand  the
process  by  which  the  Institution  became
changed  from  an  operative  art  to  a  specu¬
lative  science,  should  attentively  read  and
thoroughly  digest  these  ancient  records  of
the  Brotherhood.

Rectification.  The  German  Masons
use  this  word  to  designate  that  process
of  removing  an  irregularity  of  initiation
which,  in  English  Masonry,  is  called  heal¬
ing,  which  see.

Rectified  Rite.  [Rite  Rectifie.)  See

Martin  ism.

Rectified  Rose  Croix,  Rite  of.

See  Rose  Croix ,  Rectified.

Reeusant.  A  term  applied  in  Eng¬
lish  history  to  one  who  refused  to  acknowl¬
edge  the  supremacy  of  the  king  as  head  of
the  church.  In  Masonic  law,  the  word  is
sometimes  used  to  designate  a  Lodge  or
a  Mason  that  refuses  to  obey  an  edict  of  the
Grand  Lodge.  The  arrest  of  the  Charter,
or  the  suspension  or  expulsion  of  the  of¬
fender,  would  be  the  necessary  punishment
of  such  an  offence.

Red.  Red,  scarlet,  or  crimson,  for  it  is
indifferently  called  by  each  of  these  names,
is  the  appropriate  color  of  the  Royal  Arch
degree,  and  is  said  symbolically  to  repre-


RED


RED


635


sent  the  ardor  and  zeal  which  should  actu¬
ate  all  who  are  in  possession  of  that  sub¬
lime  portion  of  Masonry.  Portal  ( Couleurs
Symb.,  p.  116,)  refers  the  color  red  to  tire,
which  was  the  symbol  of  the  regeneration
and  purification  of  souls.  Hence  there
seems  to  be  a  congruity  in  adopting  it  as
the  color  of  the  Royal  Arch,  which  refers
historically  to  the  regeneration  or  rebuild¬
ing  of  the  Temple,  and  symbolically  to  the
regeneration  of  life.

In  the  religious  services  of  the  Hebrews,
red,  or  scarlet,  was  used  as  one  of  the  colors
of  the  veils  of  the  tabernacle,  in  which,  ac¬
cording  to  Josephus,  it  was  an  emblem  of
the  element  of  fire;  it  was  also  used  in  the
ephod  of  the  high  priest,  in  the  girdle,  and
in  the  breastplate.  Red  was,  among  the
Jews,  a  color  of  dignity,  appropriated  to  the
most  opulent  or  honorable,  and  hence  the
prophet  Jeremiah,  in  describing  the  rich
men  of  his  country,  speaks  of  them  as  those
who  “  were  brought  up  in  scarlet.”

In  the  Middle  Ages,  those  knights  who
engaged  in  the  wars  of  the  Crusades,  and
especially  the  Templars,  wore  a  red  cross,
as  a  symbol  of  their  willingness  to  undergo
martyrdom  for  the  sake  of  religion  ;  and  the
priests  of  the  Roman  Church  still  wear  red
vestments  when  they  officiate  on  the  festi¬
vals  of  those  saints  who  were  martyred.

Red  is  in  the  higher  degrees  of  Masonry
as  predominating  a  color  as  blue  is  in  the
lower.  Its  symbolic  significations  differ,
but  they  may  generally  be  considered  as
alluding  either  to  the  virtue  of  fervency
when  the  symbolism  is  moral,  or  to  the
shedding  of  blood  when  it  is  historical.
Thus  in  the  degree  of  Provost  and  Judge,
it  is  historically  emblematic  of  the  violent
death  of  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Institu¬
tion;  while  in  the  degree  of  Perfection  it  is
said  to  be  a  moral  symbol  of  zeal  for  the
glory  of  God,  and  for  our  own  advancement
towards  perfection  in  Masonry  and  virtue.

In  the  degree  of  Rose  Croix,  red  is  the
predominating  color,  and  symbolizes  the
ardent  zeal  which  should  inspire  all  who
are  in  search  of  that  which  is  lost.

Where  red  is  not  used  historically,  and
adopted  as  a  memento  of  certain  tragical
circumstances  in  the  history  of  Masonry,
it  is  always,  under  some  modification,  a
symbol  of  zeal  and  fervency.

These  three  colors,  blue,  purple,  and  red,
were  called  in  the  former  English  lectures
“  the  old  colors  of  Masonry,”  and  were  said
to  have  been  selected  “  because  they  are
royal,  and  such  ns  the  ancient  kings  and
princes  used  to  wear;  and  sacred  history
informs  us  that  the  veil  of  the  Temple  was
composed  of  these  colors.”

Red  Cross  Knight.  When,  in  the
tenth  century,  Pope  Urban  II.,  won  by  the


enthusiasm  of  Peter  the  Hermit,  addressed
the  people  who  had  assembled  at  the  city
of  Clermont  during  the  sitting  of  the
Council,  and  exhorted  them  to  join  in  the
expedition  to  conquer  the  Holy  Land,  he
said,  in  reply  to  their  cry  that  God  wills  it,
Dieux  el  volt ,  “  it  is  indeed  the  will  of  God ;
let  this  memorable  word,  the  inspiration,
surely,  of  our  Holy  Spirit,  be  forever  adopt¬
ed  as  your  cry  of  battle,  to  animate  the  de¬
votion  and  courage  of  the  champions  of
Christ.  His  cross  is  the  symbol  of  your
salvation ;  wear  it,  a  red,  a  bloody  cross,  as
an  external  mark  on  your  breasts  or  shoul¬
ders,  as  a  pledge  of  your  sacred  and  irrevo¬
cable  engagement.”  The  proposal  was
eagerly  accepted,  and  the  Bishop  of  Puy
was  the  first  who  solicited  the  Pope  to  affix
the  cross  in  red  cloth  on  his  shoulder.  The
example  was  at  once  followed,  and  thence¬
forth  the  red  cross  on  the  breast  was  recog¬
nized  as  the  sign  of  him  who  was  engaged
in  the  Holy  Wars,  and  Crusader  and  Red
Cross  Knight  became  convertible  terms.
Spenser,  in  the Fairie  Queen,  (Cant.  I.,)  thus
describes  one  of  these  knights :

“  And  on  his  breast  a  bloody  cross  he  bore,

The  dear  remembrance  of  his  dying  Lord,
For  whose  sweet  sake  that  glorious  badge  he
wore,

And  dead,  as  living,  ever  him  ador’d  :

Upon  his  shield  the  like  was  also  scor’d,”

The  application  of  this  title,  as  is  some¬
times  done  in  the  ritual  of  the  degree,  to  a
Masonic  degree  of  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross,
is  altogether  wrong.  A  Red  Cross  Knight
and  a  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  are  two  en¬
tirely  different  things.

Red  Cross.  Kniglit  of  the.  See
Knight  of  the  Bed,  Cross.

Red  Cross  ^Legend.  The  embassy
of  Zerubbabel  to  the  court  of  Darius  con¬
stitutes  what  has  been  called  the  Legend  of
the  Red  Cross  degree.  See  Embassy.

Red  Cross  of  Babylon.  See  Baby¬
lonish  Pass.

Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Con¬
stantine.  A  degree  founded  on  the  cir¬
cumstance  of  the  vision  of  a  cross,  wfith  the
inscription  EN  Tfl  NIKA,  which  appeared
in  the  heavens  to  the  Emperor  Constantine.
It  formed  originally  a  part  of  the  Rosaic
Rite,  and  is  now  practised  in  England,
Ireland,  Scotland,  and  some  of  the  English
colonies,  as  a  distinct  Order;  the  meetings
being  called  “  Conclaves,”  and  the  presiding
officer  of  the  Grand  Imperial  Council  of
the  whole  Order,  “Grand  Sovereign.”  Its
existence  in  England  as  a  Masonic  degree
has  been  traced,  according  to  Bro.  R.  W.
Little,  ( Freemas .  Mag.,)  to  the  year  1780,
w’hen  it  was  given  by  Bro.  Charles  Shirreff.
It  was  reorganized  in  1804  by  Walter  Rod-


636


RED


REFRESHMENT


•well  Wright,  who  supplied  its  present
ritual.  The  ritual  of  the  Order  contains
the  following  legend:

“  After  the  memorable  battle  fought  at
Saxa  Rubra,  on  the  28th  October,  A.  D.
312,  the  emperor  sent  for  the  chiefs  of  the
Christian  legion,  and  —  we  now  quote  the
words  of  an  old  ritual  —  ‘  in  presence  of  his
other  officers  constituted  them  into  an
Order  of  Knighthood,  and  appointed  them
to  wear  the  form  of  the  Cross  he  had  seen
in  the  heavens  upon  their  shields,  with
the  motto  In  hoc  signo  vinces  round  it,  sur¬
rounded  with  clouds ;  and  peace  being  soon
after  made,  he  became  the  Sovereign  Patron
of  the  Christian  Order  of  the  Red  Cross.’

It  is  also  said  that  this  Cross,  together  with
a  device  called  the  Labarum,  was  ordered
to  be  embroidered  upon  all  the  imperial
standards.  The  Christian  warriors  were
selected  to  compose  the  body-guard  of  Con¬
stantine,  and  the  command  of  these  privi¬
leged  soldiers  was  confided  to  Eusebius,
Bishop  of  Nicomedia,  who  was  thus  con¬
sidered  the  second  officer  of  the  Order.”

Red  Cross  Sword  of  Babylon.

A  degree  worked  in  the  Royal  Arch  Chap¬
ters  of  Scotland,  and  also  in  some  parts  of
England.  It  is  very  similar  to  the  Knight
of  the  Red  Cross  conferred  in  the  United
States.

Red  Betters.  In  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  edicts,  summonses
or  other  documents,  written  or  printed  in
red  letters,  are  supposed  to  be  of  more  j
binding  obligation,  and  to  require  more  '
implicit  obedience,  than  any  others.  Hence,
in  the  same  Rite,  to  publish  the  name  of
one  who  has  been  expelled  in  red  letters  is
considered  an  especial  mark  of  disgrace.
It  is  derived  from  the  custom  of  the  Mid¬
dle  Ages,  when,  as  Muratori  shows,  (Antiq.
Ital.  Mecl.,)  red  letters  were  used  to  give
greater  weight  to  documents;  and  he  quotes
an  old  Charter  of  1020,  which  is  said  to  be
confirmed  “  per  literas  rubeas,”  or  by  red
letters.

Reflection,  Chamber  of.  See

Chamber  of  Reflection.

Reformed  Helvetic  Rite.  The

Reformed  Rite  of  Wilhelmsbad  was  intro¬
duced  into  Poland,  in  1784,  by  Brother
Glayre,  of  Lausanne,  the  minister  of  King
Stanislaus,  and  who  was  also  the  Provin¬
cial  Grand  Master  of  this  Rite  in  the  '
French  part  of  Switzerland.  But,  in  intro¬
ducing  it  into  Poland,  he  subjected  it  to  t
several  modifications,  and  called  it  the  Re-  l
formed  Helvetic  Rite.  The  system  was
adopted  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  Poland.

Reformed  Rite.  This  Rite  was
established,  in  1872,  by  a  Congress  of  Free¬
masons  assembled  at  Wilhelmsbad,  in  Ger¬
many,  over  whose  deliberations  Ferdinand,  ]


Dukeof  Brunswick, presided  as  Grand  Mas¬
ter.  It  was  at  this  Convention  that  the
Reformed  Rite  was  first  established,  its
members  assuming  the  title  of  the  “Benefi¬
cent  Knights  of  the  Holy  City,”  because
they  derived  their  system  from  the  French
Rite  of  that  name.  It  was  called  the  Re¬
formed  Rite,  because  it  professed  to  be  a
reformation  of  a  Rite  which  had  been  es¬
tablished  in  Germany  about  a  quarter  of
a  century  before  under  the  name  of  the
“  Rite  of  Strict  Observance.”  This  latter
Rite  had  advanced  an  hypothesis  in  rela¬
tion  to  the  connection  between  F reemasonry
and  the  Order  of  Knights  Templars,  tracing
the  origin  of  our  Institution  to  those
Knights  at  the  Crusades.  This  hypothesis
the  Convention  at  Wilhelmsbad  rejected
as  unfounded  in  history  or  correct  tradi¬
tion.  By  the  adoption  of  this  Rite,  the
Congress  gave  a  death-blow  to  the  Rite  of
Strict  Observance.

The  Reformed  Rite  is  exceedingly  sim¬
ple  in  its  organization,  consisting  only  of
five  degrees,  namely:

1.  Entered  Apprentice ;  2.  Fellow  Craft;
3.  Master  Mason;  4.  Scottish  Master;  5.
Knight  of  the  Holy  City.

The  last  degree  is,  however,  divided  into
three  sections,  those  of  Novice,  Professed
Brother,  and  Knight,  which  really  gives
seven  degrees  to  the  Rite

Refreshment.  In  Masonic  language,
refreshment  is  opposed  in  a  peculiar  sense
to  labor.  While  a  Lodge  is  in  activity  it
must  be  either  at  labor  or  at  refreshment.
If  a  Lodge  is  permanently  closed  until  its
next  communication,  the  intervening  pe¬
riod  is  one  of  abeyance,  its  activity  for  Ma¬
sonic  duty  having  for  the  time  been  sus¬
pended  ;  although  its  powers  and  privileges
as  a  Lodge  still  exist,  and  may  be  at  any
time  resumed.  But  where  it  is  only  tem¬
porarily  closed,  with  the  intention  of  soon
again  resuming  labor,  the  intermediate
period  is  called  a  time  of  refreshment,  and
the  Lodge  is  said  not  to  be  closed,  but  to
be  called  from  labor  to  refreshment.  The
phrase  is  an  old  one,  and  is  found  in  the
earliest  rituals  of  the  last  century.  Calling
frryta  labor  to  refreshment  differs  from
closing  in  this,  that  the  ceremony  is  a  very
brief  one,  and  that  the  Junior  Warden
then  assumes  the  control  of  the  Craft,  in
token  of  which  he  erects  his  column  on  his
stand  or  pedestal,  while  the  Senior  War¬
den  lays  his  down.  This  is  reversed  in
calling' on,  in  which  the  ceremony  is  equally
briefi

The  word  refreshment  no  longer  bears  the
meaning  among  Masons  that  it  formerly
did.  It  signifies  not  necessarily  eating  and
drinking,  but  simply  cessation  from  labor.
A  Lodge  at  refreshment  may  thus  be  com-


REGALIA


REGHELLINI


637


pared  to  any  other  society  when  in  a  re¬
cess.  During  the  whole  of  the  last  century,
and  a  part  of  the  present,  a  different  mean¬
ing  was  given  to  the  word,  arising  from  a
now  obsolete  usage,  which  Dr.  Oliver
(Mas.  Juris.,  p.  210,)  thus  describes:

“  The  Lodges  iu  ancient  times  were  not
arranged  according  to  the  practice  in  use
amongst  ourselves  at  the  present  day.  The
Worshipful  Master,  indeed,  stood  in  the
east,  but  both  the  Wardens  were  placed  in
the  west.  The  south  was  occupied  by  the
senior  Entered  Apprentice,  whose  business
it  was  to  obey  the  instructions  of  the  Mas¬
ter,  and  to  welcome  the  visiting  brethren,
after  having  duly  ascertained  that  they
were  Masons.  The  junior  Entered  Ap¬
prentice  was  placed  in  the  north,  to  pre¬
vent  the  intrusion  of  cowans  and  eaves¬
droppers  ;  and  a  long  table,  and  sometimes
two,  where  the  Lodge  was  numerous,  were
extended  in  parallel  lines  from  the  pedes¬
tal  to  the  place  where  the  Wardens  sat,  on
which  appeared  not  only  the  emblems  of
Masonry,  but  also  materials  for  refresh¬
ment  ;  —  for  in  those  days  every  section  of
the  lecture  had  its  peculiar  toast  or  senti¬
ment; — and  at  its  conclusion  the  Lodge  was
called  from  labor  to  refreshment  by  certain
ceremonies,  and  a  toast,  technically  called
‘  the  charge,’  was  drunk  in  a  bumper,  with
the  honors,  and  not  unfrequently  accom¬
panied  by  an  appropriate  song.  After
which  the  Lodge  was  called  from  refresh¬
ment  to  labor,  and  another  section  was  de¬
livered  with  the  like  result.”

At  the  present  day,  the  banquets  of
Lodges,  when  they  take  place,  are  always
held  after  the  Lodge  is  closed;  although
they  are  still  supposed  to  be  under  the
charge  of  the  Junior  Warden.  When
modern  Lodges  are  called  to  refreshment,
it  is  either  as  a  part  of  the  ceremony  of
the  third  degree,  or  fora  brief  period;  some¬
times  extending  to  more  than  a  day,  when
labor,  which  had  not  been  finished,  is  to  be
resumed  and  concluded.

The  mythical  history  of  Masonry  tells  us
that  high  twelve  or  noon  was  the  hour  at
Solomon’s  Temple  when  the  Craft  were
permitted  to  suspend  their  labor,  which
was  resumed  an  hour  after.  In  reference
to  this  myth,  a  Lodge  is  at  all  times  sup¬
posed  to  be  called  from  labor  to  refresh¬
ment  at  “  high  twelve,”  and  to  he  called  on
again  “one  hour  after  high  twelve.”

Regalia.  Strictly  speaking,  the  word
regalia,  from  the  Latin,  regalia,  royal
things,  signifies  the  ornaments  of  a  king  or
queen,  and  is  applied  to  the  apparatus  used
at  a  coronation,  such  as  the  crown,  scep¬
tre,  cross,  mound,  etc.  But  it  has  in
modern  times  been  loosely  employed  to  sig¬
nify  almost  any  kind  of  ornaments.  Hence  I


the  collar  and  jewel,  and  sometimes  even
the  apron,  are  called  by  many  Masons  the
regalia.  The  word  has  the  early  authority
of  Preston.  In  the  second  edition  of  his
Illustrations,  (1775,)  when  on  the  subject
of  funerals,  he  uses  the  expression,  “the
body,  with  the  regalia  placed  thereon,  and
two  swords  crossed.”  And  at  the  end  of
the  service  he  directs  that  “the  regalia
and  ornaments  of  the  deceased,  if  an  officer
of  a  Lodge,  are  returned  to  the  Master  in
due  form,  and  with  the  usual  ceremonies.”
Regalia  cannot  here  mean  the  Bible  and
Book  of  Constitutions,  for  there  is  a  place
in  another  part  of  the  procession  appro¬
priated  to  them.  I  should  have  supposed
that,  by  regalia,  Preston  referred  to  some
particular  decorations  of  the  Lodge,  had
not  his  subsequent  editors,  Jones  and  Oliver,
both  interpolated  the  word  “  other  ”  before
ornaments,  so  as  to  make  the  sentence
read  “  regalia  and  other  ornaments,”  thus
clearly  indicating  that  they  deemed  the
regalia  a  part  of  the  ornaments  of  the  de¬
ceased.  The  word  is  thus  used  in  one  of
the  chapters  of  the  modern  Constitutions
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  But  in
the  text  the  more  correct  words  “  clothing
and  jewels  ”  are  employed.  There  is,  how¬
ever,  so  great  an  error  in  the  use  of  the
word  regalia  to  denote  Masonic  clothing,
that  it  would  be  better  to  avoid  it.

Regeneration.  In  the  Ancient  Mys¬
teries  the  doctrine  of  regeneration  was
taught  by  symbols :  not  the  theological
dogma  of  regeneration  peculiar  to  the
Christian  church,  but  the  philosophical
dogma  as  a  change  from  death  to  life  —  a
new  birth  to  immortal  existence.  Hence
the  last  day  of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,
when  the  initiation  was  completed,  was
called,  says  Court  de  Gebelin,  (M.  P.,  iv.
322,)  the  day  of  regeneration.  This  is  the
doctrine  in  the  Masonic  mysteries,  and
more  especially  in  the  symbolism  of  the
third  degree.  We  must  not  say  that  the
Mason  is  regenerated  when  he  is  initiated,
but  that  he  has  been  indoctrinated  into  the
philosophy  of  the  regeneration,  or  the  new
birth  of  all  things  —  of  light  out  of  dark¬
ness,  or  life  out  of  death,  of  eternal  life  out
of  temporal  death.

Regent.  The  fourth  degree  of  the
Lesser  Mysteries  of  the  Illuminati.

Regliellini,  M.  A  learned  Masonic
writer,  who  was  born  of  Venetian  parents
on  the  island  of  Scio,  whence  he  was  usually
styled  Regliellini  de  Scio.  The  date  of
1750,  at  which  his  birth  has  been  placed,  is
certainly  an  error.  Michaud  supposes  that  it
is  twenty  or  thirty  years  too  soon.  The  date  of
the  publication  of  his  earliest  works  would
indicate  that  he  could  not  have  been  born
much  before  1780.  After  receiving  a  good


638


REGIMENTAL


REGULAR


education,  and  becoming  especially  a  profi¬
cient  in  mathematics  and  chemistry,  he  set¬
tled  at  Brussels,  where  he  appears  to  have
spent  the  remaining  years  of  his  life,  and
wrote  various  works,  which  indicate  exten¬
sive  research  and  a  lively  and,  perhaps,  a
rather  ill-directed  imagination.  In  1834  he
published  a  work  entitled  Examen  du  Mosa-
isme  et  du  Christianisme,  whose  bold  opin¬
ions  were  not  considered  as  very  orthodox.
He  had  previously  become  attached  to  the
study  of  Masonic  antiquities,  and  in  1826
published  a  work  in  one  volume,  entitled
Esprit  du  dog  me  de  la  Franc-  Maqonnerie  :
reckerches  sur  son  origine  et  exile  de  ses  differ¬
ent s  rites.  He  subsequently  still  further  de¬
veloped  his  ideas  on  this  subject,  and  pub¬
lished  at  Paris,  in  1833,  a  much  larger
work,  in  three  volumes,  entitled,  La  Maqon¬
nerie,  consideree  comme  le  resultat  des  Reli¬
gions  Egyptienne,  Juive  et  Chretienne.  In
this  work  he  seeks  to  trace  both  Freema¬
sonry  and  the  Mosaic  religion  to  the  worship
that  was  practised  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile
in  the  time  of  the  Pharaohs.  Whatever
may  be  thought  of  his  theory,  it  must  be
confessed  that  he  has  collected  a  mass  of
learned  and  interesting  facts  that  must  be
attractive  to  the  Masonic  scholar.  From
1822  to  1829  Reghellini  devoted  his  labors
to  editing  the  Annales  Chronologiques,  Lit-
teraires  et  Historiques  de  la  Maqonnerie  des
Pays-Bas,  a  work  that  contains  much  valu¬
able  information.

Outside  of  Masonry,  the  life  of  Reghel¬
lini  is  not  well  known.  It  is  said  that  in
1848  he  became  complicated  with  the  polit¬
ical  troubles  which  broke  out  that  year  in
Vienna,  and,  in  consequence,  experienced
some  trouble.  His  great  age  at  the  time
precluded  the  likelihood  that  the  statement
is  true.  In  his  latter  days  he  was  reduced
to  great  penury,  and  in  August,  1855,  was
compelled  to  take  refuge  in  the  House  of
Mendicity  at  Brussels,  where  he  shortly
afterwards  died.

Regimental  Lodge.  An  expres¬
sion  used  by  Dr.  Oliver,  in  his  Jurispru¬
dence,  to  designate  a  Lodge  attached  to
a  regiment  in  the  British  army.  The  title
is  not  recognized  in  the  English  Constitu¬
tions,  where  such  a  Lodge  is  always  styled
a  Military  Lodge,  which  see.

Register.  A  list  of  the  officers  and
members  of  a  Grand  or  subordinate
Lodge.  The  registers  of  Grand  Lodges
are  generally  published  in  this  country  an¬
nually  attached  to  their  Proceedings.  The
custom  of  publishing  annual  registers  of
subordinate  Lodges  is  almost  exclusively
confined  to  the  Masonry  of  tbe  continent
of  Europe.  Sometimes  it  is  called  a  Regis¬
try.

Registrar,  Grand.  1.  An  officer  of


the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  whose  prin¬
cipal  duty  it  is  to  take  charge  of  the  seal,
and  attach  it,  or  cause  it  to  be  attached  by
the  Grand  Secretary,  to  documents  issued
by  the  Grand  Lodge  or  Grand  Master.  2.
An  officer  in  a  Grand  Consistory  of  the
Scottish  Rite,  whose  duties  are  those  of
Grand  Secretary.

Registration.  The  modern  Consti¬
tutions  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  re¬
quire  that  every  Lodge  must  be  particu¬
larly  careful  in  registering  the  names  of
the  brethren  initiated  therein,  and  also  in
making  the  returns  of  its  members;  as  no
person  is  entitled  to  partake  of  the  general
charity,  unless  his  name  be  duly  registered,
and  he  shall  have  been  at  least  two  years  a
contributing  member  of  a  Lodge,  except
in  tbe  following  cases,  to  which  the  limita¬
tion  of  two  years  is  not  meant  to  extend,
viz.,  shipwreck,  or  capture  at  sea,  loss  by
fire,  or  breaking  or  dislocating  a  limb,  fully
attested  and  proved.  To  prevent  injury  to
individuals,  by  their  being  excluded  the
privileges  of  Masonry  through  the  neglect
of  their  Lodges  in  not  registering  their
names,  any  brother  so  circumstanced,  on
producing  sufficient  proof  that  he  has  paid
the  full  fees  to  his  Lodge,  including  the
register  fee,  shall  be  capable  of  enjoying
the  privileges  of  the  Craft.  But  the  offend¬
ing  Lodge  shall  be  reported  to  the  Board
of  General  Purposes,  and  rigorously  pro¬
ceeded  against  for  detaining  moneys  which
are  the  property  of  the  Grand  Lodge.

An  unregistered  member  in  England  is
therefore  equivalent,  so  far  as  the  exercise
of  his  rights  is  concerned,  to  an  unaffiliated
Mason.  In  this  country  the  same  rule  ex¬
ists  of  registration  in  the  Lodge  books  and
an  annual  return  of  the  same  to  the  Grand
Lodge,  but  the  penalties  for  neglect  or  dis¬
obedience  are  neither  so  severe  nor  so  well
defined.

Registry.  The  roll  or  list  of  Lodges
and  their  members  under  the  obedience  of
a  Grand  Lodge.  Such  registries  are  in
general  published  annually  by  the  Grand
Lodges  of  the  United  States  at  the  end  of
their  printed  Proceedings.

Regular.  A  Lodge  working  under
the  legal  authority  of  a  Warrant  of  Consti¬
tution  is  said  to  be  regular.  The  word  was
first  used  in  1723,  in  the  first  edition  of
Anderson’s  Constitutions.  In  the  eighth
General  Regulation  published  in  that  work
it  is  said:  “If  any  set  or  number  of  Ma¬
sons  shall  take  upon  themselves  to  form  a
Lodge  without  the  Grand  Master’s  War¬
rant,  the  regular  Lodges  are  not  to  counte¬
nance  them.”  Ragon  says  ( Orthod .  Mag.,
72,)  that  the  word  was  first  heard  of  in
French  Masonry  in  1773,  when  an  edict
of  the  Grand  Orient  thus  defined  it:  “A


REGULATIONS


RELIGION


639


regular  Lodge  is  a  Lodge  attached  to  the
Grand  Orient,  and  a  regular  Mason  is  a
member  of  a  regular  Lodge.”

Regulations.  See  Old  Regulations.

Rclium.  Called  by  Ezra  the  chan¬
cellor.  He  was  probably  a  lieutenant-gov¬
ernor  of  the  province  of  Judea,  who,  with
Shimshai  the  scribe,  wrote  to  Artaxerxes
to  prevail  upon  him  to  stop  the  building
of  the  second  Temple.  His  name  is  intro¬
duced  into  some  of  the  high  degrees  that
are  connected  in  their  ritual  with  the  sec¬
ond  Temple.

Reinliold,  Karl  Leonhard.  A

German  philosopher,  who  was  born  at  Vi¬
enna  in  1758,  and  died  in  1823.  He  was
associated  with  Wieland,  whose  daughter
he  married,  in  the  editorship  of  the  Deutch-
schen  Mercur.  He  afterwards  became  a

firofessor  of  philosophy  at  Kiel,  and  pub-
ished  Letters  on  the  Philosophy  of  Kant.
He  was  much  interested  in  the  study  of
Freemasonry,  and  published,  under  the
pseudonym  of  Decius,  at  Leipsic,  in  1788,
two  lectures  entitled  Die  Hebraischen
Mysterien  oder  die  diteste  religiose  Freimau-
rerei,  i.  e.,  The  Hebrew  Mysteries,  or  the
Oldest  religious  Freemasonry.  The  funda¬
mental  idea  of  this  work  is,  that  Moses  de¬
rived  his  system  from  the  Egyptian  priest¬
hood.  Eichhorn  attacked  his  theory  in  his
Universal  Repository  of  Biblical  Literature.
Reinhold  delivered  and  published,  in  1809,
An  Address  on  the  Design  of  Freemasonry,
and  another  in  1820,  on  the  occasion  of  the
reopening  of  a  Lodge  at  Kiel.  This  was
probably  his  last  Masonic  labor,  as  he  died
in  1823,  at  the  age  of  sixty-five  years.  In
1828  a  Life  of  him  was  published  by  his
son,  a  professor  of  philosophy  at  Jena.
Reinstatement.  See  Restoration.
Rejeetion.  One  black  ball  will  re¬
ject  a  candidate  for  initiation.  If  a  candi¬
date  be  rejected,  he  can  apply  in  no  other
Lodge  for  admission,  if  admitted  at  all,  it
must  be  in  the  Lodge  where  he  first  ap¬
plied.  But  the  time  when  a  new  applica¬
tion  may  be  made  never  having  been  de¬
termined  by  the  general  or  common  law  of
Masonry,  the  rule  has  been  left  to  the  spe¬
cial  enactment  of  Grand  Lodges,  some  of
which  have  placed  it  at  six  months,  and
some  at  from  one  to  two  years.  Where  the
Constitution  of  a  Grand  Lodge  is  silent  on
the  subject,  it  is  held  that  a  new  applica¬
tion  has  never  been  specified,  so  that  it  is
held  that  a  rejected  candidate  may  apply
for  a  reconsideration  of  his  case  at  any
time.  The  unfavorable  report  of  the  com¬
mittee  to  whom  the  letter  was  referred,  or
the  withdrawal  of  the  letter  by  the  candi¬
date  or  his  friends,  is  considered  equivalent
to  a  rejection.  See  Unanimity.
Rejoicing.  The  initiation  of  the  An¬


cient  Mysteries,  like  that  of  the  third  de¬
gree  of  Masonry,  began  in  sorrow  and  ter¬
minated  in  rejoicing.  The  sorrow  was  for
the  death  of  the  hero-god,  which  was  repre¬
sented  in  the  sacred  rites,  and  the  rejoicing
was  for  his  resuscitation  to  eternal  life.
“Thrice  happy,”  says  Sophocles,  “are
those  who  descend  to  the  shades  below
when  they  have  beheld  these  rites  of  initia¬
tion.”  The  lesson  there  taught  was,  says
Pindar,  the  divine  origin  of  life,  and  hence
the  rejoicing  at  the  discovery  of  this  eternal
truth.

Relief.  One  of  the  three  principal
tenets  of  a  Mason’s  profession,  and  thus
defined  in  the  lecture  of  the  first  degree.

To  relieve  the  distressed  is  a  duty  incum¬
bent  on  all  men,  but  particularly  on  Ma¬
sons,  who  are  linked  together  by  an  indis¬
soluble  chain  of  sincere  affection.  To
soothe  the  unhappy,  to  sympathize  with
their  misfortunes,  to  compassionate  their
miseries,  and  to  restore  peace  to  their
troubled  minds,  is  the  great  aim  we  have
in  view.  On  this  basis  we  form  our  friend¬
ships  and  establish  our  connections.

Of  the  three  tenets  of  a  Mason’s  profes¬
sion,  which  are  Brotherly  Love,  Relief,  and
Truth,  it  may  be  said  that  Truth  is  the  column
of  wisdom,  whose  rays  penetrate  and  en¬
lighten  the  inmost  recesses  of  our  Lodge;
Brotherly  Love,  the  column  of  strength,
which  binds  us  as  one  family  in  the  indis¬
soluble  bond  of  fraternal  affection ;  and
Relief,  the  column  of  beauty,  whose  orna¬
ments,  more  precious  than  the  lilies  and
pomegranates  that  adorned  the  pillars  of
the  porch,  are  the  widow’s  tear  of  joy  and
the  orphan’s  prayer  of  gratitude.

Relief.  Board  of.  The  liability  to
imposition  on  the  charity  of  the  Order,  by
the  applications  of  impostors,  has  led  to  the
establishment  in  our  larger  cities  of  Boards
of  Relief.  These  consist  of  representatives
of  all  the  Lodges,  to  whom  all  applications
for  temporary  relief  are  referred.  The
members  of  the  Board,  bv  frequent  consul¬
tations,  are  better  enabled  to  distinguish  the
worthy  from  the  unworthy,  and  to  detect
attempts  at  imposition.  A  similar  organ¬
ization,  but  under  a  different  name,  was
long  ago  established  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  for  the  distribution  of  the  fund
of  benevolence.  (See  Fund  of  Benevolence.)
In  New  Orleans,  Louisiana,  the  Board  of
Relief,  after  twenty-five  years  of  successful
operation,  was  chartered  in  July,  1854,  by
the  Grand  Lodge  as  “  Relief  Lodge  No.  1,”
to  be  composed  of  the  Masters  and  Wardens
of  all  tho  Lodges  who  were  united  in  the
objects  of  the  Board.

Religion  of  Rasonry.  There  has
been  a  needless  expenditure  of  ingenuity
and  talent,  by  a  large  number  of  Masonic


640


RELIGION


RELIGION


oratora  and  essayists,  in  the  endeavor  to

!>rove  that  Masonry  is  not  religion.  This
las  undoubtedly  arisen  from  a  well  in¬
tended  but  erroneous  view  that  has  been
taken  of  the  connection  between  religion
and  Masonry,  and  from  a  fear  that  if
the  complete  disseverance  of  the  two  was
not  made  manifest,  the  opponents  of  Ma¬
sonry  would  be  enabled  successfully  to  es¬
tablish  a  theory  which  they  have  been  fond
of  advancing,  that  the  Masons  were  dis¬
posed  to  substitute  the  teachings  of  their
Order  for  the  truths  of  Christianity.  Now
I  have  never  for  a  moment  believed  that
any  such  unwarrantable  assumption,  as
that  Masonry  is  intended  to  be  a  substitute
for  Christianity,  could  ever  obtain  admis¬
sion  into  any  well  regulated  mind,  and,
therefore,  I  am  not  disposed  to  yield,  on
the  subject  of  the  religious  character  of
Masonry,  quite  so  much  as  has  been  yielded
by  more  timid  brethren.  On  the  contrary,
I  contend,  without  any  sort  of  hesitation,
that  Masonry  is,  in  every  sense  of  the  word,
except  one,  and  that  its  least  philosophical,
an  eminently  religious  institution  —  that  it
is  indebted  solely  to  the  religious  element
wdiieh  it  contains  for  its  origin  and  for  its
continued  existence,  and  that  without  this
religious  element  it  would  scarcely  be
worthy  of  cultivation  by  the  wise  and  good.
But,  that  I  may  be  truly  understood,  it
will  be  well  first  to  agree  upon  the  true  def¬
inition  of  religion.  There  is  nothing  more
illogical  than  to  reason  upon  undefined
terms.  Webster  has  given  four  distinct
definitions  of  religion :

1.  Religion,  in  a  comprehensive  sense,
includes,  lie  says,  a  belief  in  the  being  and
perfections  of  God  —  in  the  revelation  of
his  will  to  man  —  in  man’s  obligation  to
obey  his  commands  —  in  a  state  of  reward
and  punishment,  and  in  man’s  accountable¬
ness  to  God ;  and  also  true  godliness  or  piety
of  life,  with  the  practice  of  all  moral  duties.

2.  His  second  definition  is,  that  religion,
as  distinct  from  theology,  is  godliness  or
real  piety  in  practice,  consisting  in  the  per¬
formance  of  all  known  duties  to  God  and
our  fellow-men,  in  obedience  to  divine  com¬
mand,  or  from  love  to  God  and  his  law.

3.  Again,  he  says  that  religion,  as  dis¬
tinct  from  virtue  or  morality,  consists  in
the  performance  of  the  duties  we  owe  di¬
rectly  to  God,  from  a  principle  of  obedi¬
ence  to  his  will.

4.  And  lastly,  he  defines  religion  to  be
any  system  of  faith  or  worship;  and  in  this
sense,  he  says,  religion  comprehends  the
belief  and  worship  of  Pagans  and  Moham¬
medans  as  well  as  of  Christians  —  any  re¬
ligion  consisting  in  the  belief  of  a  superior
power,  or  powers,  governing  the  world,  and
m  the  worship  of  such  power  or  powers.


And  it  is  in  this  sense  that  we  speak  of  the
Turkish  religion,  or  the  Jewish  religion,  as
well  as  of  the  Christian.

Now,  it  is  plain  that,  in  either  of  the  first
three  senses  iu  which  we  may  take  the  word
religion  (and  they  do  not  very  materially
differ  from  each  other),  Masonry  may  right¬
fully  claim  to  be  called  a  religious  institu¬
tion.  Closely  and  accurately  examined,  it
will  be  found  to  answer  to  any  one  of  the
requirements  of  either  of  these  three  defi¬
nitions.  So  much  does  it  “  include  a  belief
in  the  being  and  perfections  of  God,”  that
the  public  profession  of  such  a  faith  is  es¬
sentially  necessary  to  gain  admission  into
the  Order.  No  disbeliever  in  the  existence
of  a  God  can  be  made  a  Mason.  The  “  reve¬
lation  of  his  will  to  man”  is  technically
called  the  “spiritual,  moral,  and  Masonic
trestle-board  ”  of  every  Mason,  according
to  the  rules  and  designs  of  which  he  is  to
erect  the  spiritual  edifice  of  his  eternal  life.
A  “  state  of  reward  and  punishment  ”  is
necessarily  included  in  the  very  idea  of  an
obligation,  which,  without  the  belief  in
such  a  state,  could  be  of  no  binding  force
or  efficacy.  And  “  true  godliness  or  piety  of
life”  is  inculcated  as  the  invariable  duty
of  every  Mason,  from  the  inception  of  the
first  to  the  end  of  the  very  last  degree  that
he  takes.  So,  again,  in  reference  to  the
second  and  third  definitions,  all  this  prac¬
tical  piety  and  performance  of  the  duties
we  owe  to  God  and  to  our  fellow-men  arise
from  and  are  founded  on  a  principle  of
obedience  to  the  divine  will.  Whence  else,
or  from  what  other  will,  could  they  have
arisen  ?  It  is  the  voice  of  the  G.  A.  O.  T.
U.  symbolized  to  us  in  every  ceremony  of
our  ritual  and  from  every  portion  of  the
furniture  of  our  Lodge,  that  speaks  to  the
true  Mason,  commanding  him  to  fear  God
and  to  love  the  brethren.  It  is  idle  to  say
that  the  Mason  does  good  simply  in  obedi¬
ence  to  the  statutes  of  the  Order.  These
very  statutes  owe  their  sanction  to  the  Ma¬
sonic  idea  of  the  nature  and  perfections  of
God,  which  idea  has  come  down  to  us
from  the  earliest  history  of  the  Institution,
and  the  promulgation  of  which  idea  was
the  very  object  and  design  of  its  origin.

But  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  fourth
definition  does  not  appear  to  be  strictly  ap¬
plicable  to  Masonry.  It  has  no  pretension
to  assume  a  place  among  the  religions  of
the  world  as  a  sectarian  “  system  of  faith
and  worship,”  in  the  sense  in  which  we  dis¬
tinguish  Christianity  from  Judaism,  or  Ju¬
daism  from  Mohammedanism.  In  this
meaning  of  the  word  we  do  not  and  can¬
not  speak  of  the  Masonic  religion,  nor  say
of  a  man  that  he  is  not  a  Christian,  but
a  Mason.  Here  it  is  that  the  opponents
of  Freemasonry  have  assumed  mistaken


RELIGIOUS


RENOUNCING


641


ground,  in  confounding  the  idea  of  a  re¬
ligious  institution  with  that  of  the  Christian
religion  as  a  peculiar  form  of  worship,  and
in  supposing,  because  Masonry  teaches  re¬
ligious  truth,  that  it  is  offered  as  a  substi¬
tute  for  Christian  truth  and  Christian  obli¬
gation.  Its  warmest  and  most  enlightened
friends  have  never  advanced  nor  supported
such  a  claim.  Freemasonry  is  not  Christi¬
anity,  nor  a  substitute  for  it.  It  is  not  in¬
tended  to  supersede  it  nor  any  other  form
of  worship  or  system  of  faith.  It  does  not
meddle  with  sectarian  creeds  or  doctrines,
but  teaches  fundamental  religious  truth  —
not  enough  to  do  away  with  the  necessity
of  the  Christian  scheme  of  salvation,  but
more  than  enough  to  show,  to  demonstra¬
tion,  that  it  is,  in  every  philosophical  sense
of  the  word,  a  religious  institution,  and
one,  too,  in  which  the  true  Christian  Mason
will  find,  if  he  earnestly  seeks  for  them,
abundant  types  and  shadows  of  his  own
exalted  and  divinely  inspired  faith.

The  tendency  of  all  true  Masonry  is  to¬
wards  religion.  If  it  make  any  progress,  its
progress  is  to  that  holy  end.  Look  at  its
ancient  landmarks,  its  sublime  ceremonies,
its  profound  symbols  and  allegories,  —  all
inculcating  religious  doctrine,  commanding
religious  observance,  and  teaching  religious
truth,  and  who  can  deny  that  it  is  emi¬
nently  a  religious  institution?

But,  besides,  Masonry  is,  in  all  its  forms,
thoroughly  tinctured  with  a  true  devotional
spirit.  We  open  and  close  our  Lodges  with

Erayer ;  we  invoke  the  blessing  of  the  Most
[igh  upon  all  our  labors ;  we  demand  of
our  neophytes  a  profession  of  trusting  be¬
lief  in  the  existence  and  the  superintending
care  of  God ;  and  we  teach  them  to  bow
with  humility  and  reverence  at  his  awful
name,  while  his  holy  law  is  widely  opened
upon  our  altars.  Freemasonry  is  thus  iden¬
tified  with  religion ;  and  although  a  man
may  be  eminently  religious  without  being
a  Mason,  it  is  impossible  that  a  Mason  can
be  “  true  and  trusty  ”  to  his  Order  unless
he  is  a  respecter  of  religion  and  an  ob¬
server  of  religious  principle.

But  the  religion  of  Masonry  is  not  sec¬
tarian.  It  admits  men  of  every  creed  within
its  hospitable  bosom,  rejecting  none  and
approving  none  for  his  peculiar  faith.  It
is  not  Judaism,  though  there  is  nothing  in
it  to  offend  a  Jew;  it  is  not  Christianity,
but  there  is  nothing  in  it  repugnant  to  the
faith  of  a  Christian.  Its  religion  is  that
general  one  of  nature  and  primitive  reve¬
lation, —  handed  down  to  us  from  some
ancient  and  patriarchal  priesthood,  —  in
which  all  men  may  agree  and  in  which  no
men  can  differ.  It  inculcates  the  practice
of  virtue,  but  it  supplies  no  scheme  of  re¬
demption  for  sin.  It  points  its  disciples  to
4  F  41


the  path  of  righteousness,  but  it  does  not
claim  to  he  “  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the
life.”  In  so  far,  therefore,  it  cannot  become
a  substitute  for  Christianity,  but  its  ten¬
dency  is  thitherward;  and,  as  the  hand¬
maid  of  religion,  it  may,  and  often  does,
act  as  the  porch  that  introduces  its  votaries
into  the  temple  of  divine  truth.

Masonry,  then,  is,  indeed,  a  religious
institution  ;  and  on  this  ground  mainly,  if
not  alone,  should  the  religious  Mason  de¬
fend  it.

Religions  Qualifications.  See

Qualifications.

Removal  of  liodges.  On  Janu¬
ary,  25,  1738,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
adopted  a  regulation  that  no  Lodge  should
be  removed  without  the  Master’s  knowl¬
edge;  that  no  motion  for  removing  it  should
be  made  in  his  absence ;  and  that  if  he  was
opposed  to  the  removal,  it  should  not  be
removed  unless  two-thirds  of  the  members
present  voted  in  the  affirmative.  But  as
this  rule  was  adopted  subsequent  to  the
General  Regulations  of  1722,  it  is  not  ob¬
ligatory  as  a  law  of  Masonry  at  present.
The  Grand  Lodges  of  England  and  of  New
York  have  substantially  the  same  rule.
But  unless  there  be  a  local  regulation  in
the  Constitution  of  any  particular  Grand
Lodge  to  that  effect,  I  know  of  no  princi¬
ple  of  Masonic  law  set  forth  in  the  Ancient
Landmarks  or  Regulations  which  forbids  a
Lodge,  upon  the  mere  vote  of  the  majority,
from  removing  from  one  house  to  another
in  the  same  town  or  city ;  and  unless  the
Grand  Lodge  of  any  particular  jurisdiction
has  adopted  a  regulation  forbidding  the
removal  of  a  Lodge  from  one  house  to  an¬
other  without  its  consent,  I  know  of  no  law
in  Masonry  of  universal  force  which  would
prohibit  such  a  removal  at  the  mere  option
of  the  Lodge.

This  refers,  of  course,  only  to  the  removal
from  one  house  to  another;  but  as  the  town
or  village  in  which  the  Lodge  is  situated  is
designated  in  its  Warrant  of  Constitution,
no  such  removal  can  be  made  except  with
the  consent  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  or,  during
the  recess  of  that  body,  by  the  Dispensation
of  the  Grand  Master,  to  be  subsequently
confirmed  by  the  Grand  Lodge.

Renouncing  Mnsons.  During  the
anti-Masonic  excitement  in  the  United
States,  which  began  in  1828,  and  lasted  for
a  few  years,  many  Masons  left  the  Order,
actuated  by  various  motives,  (seldom  gooa
ones,)  and  attached  themselves  to  the  anti-
Masonic  party.  It  is  not  singular  that  these
deserters,  who  called  themselves  “  Renounc¬
ing  Masons,”  were  the  bitterest  in  their
hatred  and  the  loudest  in  their  vitupera¬
tions  of  the  Order.  But,  as  may  be  seen
in  the  article  Indelibility,  a  renunciation  of


642


REPEAL


REPRIMAND


the  name  cannot  absolve  any  one  from  the
obligations  of  a  Mason.

Repeal.  As  a  Lodge  cannot  enact  a
new  by-law  without  the  consent  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  neither  can  it  repeal  an  old
one  without  the  same  consent;  nor  can  any¬
thing  done  at  a  stated  meeting  be  repealed
at  a  subsequent  extra  or  emergent  one.

Report  of  a  Committee.  When
a  committee,  to  which  a  subject  had  been
referred,  has  completed  its  investigation
and  come  to  an  opinion,  it  directs  its  chair¬
man,  or  some  other  member,  to  prepare  an
expression  of  its  views,  to  be  submitted  to
the  Lodge.  The  paper  containing  this  ex¬
pression  of  views  is  called  its  report,  which
may  be  framed  in  three  different  forms:  It
may  contain  only  an  expression  of  opinion
on  the  subject  which  had  been  referred;  or
it  may  contain,  in  addition  to  this,  an  ex¬
press  resolution  or  series  of  resolutions,  the
adoption  of  which  by  the  assembly  is  re¬
commended  ;  or,  lastly,  it  may  contain  one
or  more  resolutions,  without  any  prelimi¬
nary  expression  of  opinion.

The  report,  when  prepared,  is  read  to
the  members  of  the  committee,  and,  if  it
meets  with  their  final  sanction,  the  chair¬
man,  or  one  of  the  members,  is  directed  to
present  it  to  the  Lodge.

The  reading  of  the  report  is  its  recep¬
tion,  and  the  next  question  will  be  on  its
adoption.  If  it  contains  a  recommenda¬
tion  of  resolutions,  the  adoption  of  the  re¬
port  will  be  equivalent  to  an  adoption  of
the  resolutions,  but  the  report  may,  on  the
question  of  adoption,  be  otherwise  disposed
of  by  being  laid  on  the  table,  postponed,  or
recommitted.  See  the  subject  fully  dis¬
cussed  in  the  author’s  treatise  on  Parlia¬
mentary  Law  as  applied  to  the  Government  of
Masonic  Bodies,  ch.  xxxi.

Reportorial  Corps.  A  name  re¬
cently  given  in  the  United  States  to  that
useful  and  intelligent  body  of  Masons  who
write,  in  their  respective  Grand  Lodges,
the  reports  on  Foreign  Correspondence.
Through  the  exertions  of  Dr.  Corson,  the
chairman  of  the  Committee  of  Foreign  Cor¬
respondence  of  New  Jersey,  a  convention
of  this  body  was  held  at  Baltimore  in  187L,
during  the  session  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  and  measures  were  then  taken  to
establish  a  triennial  convention.  Such  a
convention  would  assume  no  legislative
powers,  but  would  simply  meet  for  the  in¬
tercommunication  of  ideas  and  the  inter¬
change  of  fraternal  greetings.

Representative  of  a  Grand
Lodge.  A  brother  appointed  by  one
Grand  Lodge  to  represent  its  interests  in
another.  The  representative  is  generally,  '
although  not  necessarily,  a  member  of  the
Grand  Lodge  to  whom  he  is  accredited,  |


and  receives  his  appointment  on  its  nomi¬
nation,  but  he  wears  the  clothing  of  the
Grand  Lodge  which  he  represents.  He
is  required  to  attend  the  meetings  of  the
Grand  Lodge  to  which  he  is  accredited,
and  to  communicate  to  his  constituents  an
abstract  of  the  proceedings,  and  other  mat¬
ters  of  Masonic  interest.  But  it  is  doubt¬
ful  whether  these  duties  are  generally  per¬
formed.  The  office  of  representative  ap¬
pears  to  be  rather  one  of  honor  than  of
service.  In  the  French  system,  a  repre¬
sentative  is  called  a  “gage  d’amiti6.”

Representatives  of  Lodges.  The
twelfth  landmark  prescribes  that  every
Mason  has  a  right  to  be  present  at  the
General  Assembly  of  the  Craft,  which  was
annually  held.  And  even  as  late  as  1717,
on  the  reorganization  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  we  are  informed  by  Preston
that  the  Grand  Master  summoned  all  the
brethren  to  meet  him  and  his  Wardens  in
the  quarterly  communications.  But  soon
after,  it  being  found,  I  presume,  that  a
continuance  of  such  attendance  would  ren¬
der  the  Grand  Lodge  an  unwieldy  body ;
and  the  rights  of  the  Fraternity  having
been  securely  guarded  by  the  adoption  of
the  thirty-nine  Regulations,  it  was  deter¬
mined  to  limit  the  appearance  of  the  breth¬
ren  of  each  Lodge,  at  the  quarterly  com¬
munications,  to  its  Master  and  Wardens;
so  that  the  Grand  Lodge  became  thence¬
forth  a  strictly  representative  body,  com¬
posed  of  the  first  three  officers  of  the
subordinate  Lodges.  The  inherent  right
and  the  positive  duty  of  every  Mason  to  be
present  at  the  General  Assembly  or  Grand
Lodge  was  relinquished,  and  a  representa¬
tion  by  Masters  and  Wardens  was  substi¬
tuted  in  its  place.  A  few  modern  Grand
Lodges  have  disfranchised  the  Wardens
also,  and  confined  the  representation  to  the
Masters  only.  But  this  is  evidently  an  in¬
novation.  having  no  color  of  authority  in
the  Old  Regulations.

Representative  System.  The
system  of  appointing  representatives  of
Grand  Lodges  originated  some  years  ago
with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York.  It  at
first  met  with  much  opposition, but  has  grad¬
ually  gained  favor,  and  there  are  now  but
few  Grand  Lodges  in  Europe  or  America
that  have  not  adopted  it.  Although  the  orig¬
inal  plan  intended  by  the  founders  of  the
system  does  not  appear  to  have  been  effect¬
ually  carried  out  in  all  its  details,  it  has  at
least  been  successful  as  a  means  of  more
closely  cementing  the  bonds  of  union  be¬
tween  the  bodies  mutually  represented.

Reprimand.  A  reproof  formally
communicated  to  the  offender  for  some  fault
committed,  and  the  lowest  grade,  above
censure,  of  Masonic  punishment.  It  can  be


REPUTATION


RESTORATION


643


inflicted  only  on  charges  made,  and  by  a
majority  vote  of  the  Lodge.  It  may  be
private  or  public.  Private  reprimand  is
generally  communicated  to  the  offender
by  a  letter  from  the  Master.  Public  repri¬
mand  is  given  orally  in  the  Lodge  and  in
the  presence  of  the  brethren.  A  reprimand
does  not  affect  the  Masonic  standing  of  the
person  reprimanded.

Reputation.  In  the  technical  lan¬
guage  of  Masonry,  a  man  of  good  reputation
is  said  to  be  one  who  is  “  under  the  tongue
of  good  report ;  ”  and  this  constitutes  one  of
the  indispensable  qualifications  of  a  candi¬
date  for  initiation.

Residence.  It  is  the  general  usage
in  this  country,  and  may  be  considered  as
the  Masonic  law  of  custom,  that  the  appli¬
cation  of  a  candidate  for  initiation  must  be
made  to  the  Lodge  nearest  his  place  of
residence.  There  is,  however,  no  express
law  upon  this  subject  either  in  the  ancient
landmarks  or  the  Old  Constitutions,  and
its  positive  sanction  as  a  law  in  any  juris¬
diction  must  be  found  in  the  local  enact¬
ments  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  that  jurisdic¬
tion.  Still  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  ex¬
pediency  and  justice  to  the  Order  make
such  a  regulation  necessary,  and  accordingly
many  Grand  Lodges  have  incorporated
such  a  regulation  in  their  Constitutions ;
and  of  course,  whenever  this  has  been  done,
it  becomes  a  positive  law  in  that  jurisdic¬
tion.

It  has  also  been  contended  by  some
American  Masonic  jurists  that  a  non-resi¬
dent  of  a  State  is  not  entitled,  on  a  tempo¬
rary  visit  to  that  State,  to  apply  for  initia¬
tion.  There  is,  however,  no  landmark  nor
written  law  in  the  ancient  Constitutions
which  forbids  the  initiation  of  non-resi¬
dents.  Still,  as  there  can  be  no  question
that  the  conferring  of  the  degrees  of  Ma¬
sonry  on  a  stranger  is  always  inexpedient,
and  frequently  productive  of  injury  and  in¬
justice,  by  foisting  on  the  Lodges  near  the
candidate’s  residence  unworthy  and  unac¬
ceptable  persons,  there  has  been  a  very

feueral  disposition  among  the  Grand
<odges  of  this  country  to  discountenance
the  initiation  of  non-residents.  Many  of
them  have  adopted  a  specific  regulation  to
this  effect,  and  in  all  jurisdictions  where
this  has  been  done,  the  law  becomes  im¬
perative;  for,  as  the  landmarks  are  entirely
silent  on  the  subject,  the  local  regulation  is
left  to  the  discretion  of  each  jurisdiction.
But  no  such  rule  has  ever  existed  among
European  Lodges.

Resignation  or  Membership.

The  spirit  of  the  law  of  Masonry  does  not
recognize  the  right  of  any  member  of  a
Lodge  to  resign  his  membership,  unless  it
be  for  the  purpose  of  uniting  with  another


Lodge.  This  mode  of  resignation  is  called
a  demission.  See  Demit.

Resignation  of  Office.  Every  of¬
ficer  of  a  Lodge,  or  rather  Masonic  organi¬
zation,  being  required  at  the  time  of  his  in¬
stallation  into  office  to  enter  into  an  obliga¬
tion  that  he  will  perform  the  duties  of  that
office  for  a  specified  time  and  until  his  suc¬
cessor  is  installed,  it  has  been  repeatedly
held  by  the  Masonic  jurists  of  this  country
that  an  officer  once  elected  and  installed
cannot  resign  his  office ;  and  this  may  he
considered  as  a  well-established  law  of
American  Masonry.

Resolution.  In  parliamentary  law,
a  proposition,  when  first  presented,  is  called
a  motion ;  if  adopted,  it  becomes  a  resolu¬
tion.  Many  Grand  Lodges  adopt,  from
time  to  time,  in  addition  to  the  provisions
of  their  Constitution,  certain  resolutions  on
important  subjects,  which,  giving  them  an
apparently  greater  weight  of  authority
than  ordinary  enactments,  are  frequently
appended  to  their  Constitution,  or  their
transaction,  under  the  imposing  title  of
“Standing  Regulations.”  But  this  weight
of  authority  is  only  apparent.  These  stand¬
ing  resolutions  having  been  adopted,  like
all  other  resolutions,  by  a  mere  majority
vote,  are  subject,  like  them,  to  be  repealed
or  rescinded  by  the  same  vote.

Respectable.  A  title  given  by  the
French,  as  Worshipful  is  by  the  English,  to
a  Lodge.  Thus,  La  Respectable  Loge  de  la
Candeur  is  equivalent  to  “The  Worship¬
ful  Lodge  of  Candor.”  It  is  generally  ab¬
breviated  as  R.\  L.\  or  R.\  1  ].•.

Response.  In  the  liturgical  services
of  the  church  an  answer  made  by  the  peo¬
ple  speaking  alternately  with  the  clergy¬
man.  In  the  ceremonial  observances  of
Freemasonry  there  are  many  responses,
the  Master  and  the  brethren  taking  alter¬
nate  parts,  especially  in  the  funeral  service
as  laid  down  first  by  Preston,  and  now  very
generally  adopted.  In  all  Masonic  prayers
the  proper  response,  never  to  be  omitted,  is,
“  So  mote  it  be.”

Restoration.  The  restoration,  or,  as
it  is  also  called,  the  reinstatement  of  a  Ma¬
son  who  had  been  excluded,  suspended,  or
expelled,  may  be  the  voluntary  act  of  the
Lodge,  or  that  of  the  Grand  Lodge  on  ap¬
peal,  when  the  sentence  of  the  Lodge  has
been  reversed  on  account  of  illegality  in  the
trial,  or  injustice,  or  undue  severity  in  the
sentence.  It  may  also,  as  in  the  instance
of  definite  suspension,  be  the  result  of  the
termination  of  the  period  of  suspension,
when  the  suspended  member  is,  ipso  facto,
restored  without  any  further  action  of  the
Lodge.

The  restoration  from  indefinite  suspen¬
sion  must  be  equivalent  to  a  reinstatement


644


RESURRECTION


REVEREND


in  membership,  because  the  suspension  be¬
ing  removed,  the  offender  is  at  once  in¬
vested  with  the  rights  and  privileges  of
which  he  had  never  been  divested,  but  only
temporarily  deprived.

But  restoration  from  expulsion  may  be
either  to  membership  in  the  Lodge  or  sim¬
ply  to  the  privileges  of  the  Order.

It  may  also  be  ex  gratia,  or  an  act  of
mercy,  the  past  offence  being  condoned ;  or
ex  debito  justitioe,  by  a  reversal  of  the  sen¬
tence  for  illegality  of  trial  or  injustice  in
the  verdict.

The  restoration  ex  gratia  may  be  either
by  the  Lodge  or  the  Grand  Lodge  on  ap¬
peal.  If  by  the  Lodge,  it  may  be  to  mem¬
bership,  or  only  to  good  standing  in  the
Order.  But  if  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  the
restoration  can  only  be  to  the  rights  and
privileges  of  the  Order.  The  Mason  hav¬
ing  been  justly  and  legally  expelled  from
the  Lodge,  the  Grand  Lodge  possesses  no
prerogative  by  which  it  could  enforce  a
Lodge  to  admit  one  legally  expelled  any
more  than  it  could  a  profane  who  had
never  been  initiated.

But  if  the  restoration  be  ex  debito  just itice,
as  an  act  of  justice,  because  the  trial  or
verdict  had  been  illegal,  then  the  brother,
never  having  been  lawfully  expelled  from
the  Lodge  or  the  Order,  but  being  at  the
very  time  of  his  appeal  a  member  of  the
Lodge,  unjustly  or  illegally  deprived  of  his
rights,  the  restoration  in  this  case  by  the
Grand  Lodge  must  be  to  membership  in  the
Lodge.  Any  other  course,  such  as  to  restore
him  to  the  Order  but  not  to  membership,
would  be  manifestly  unjust.  The  Grand
Lodge  having  reversed  the  trial  and  sen¬
tence  of  the  subordinate  Lodge,  that  trial
and  sentence  become  null  and  void,  and  the
Mason  who  had  been  unjustly  expelled  is
at  once  restored  to  his  original  status.  See
this  subject  fully  discussed  in  the  author’s
Text  Book  of  Masonic  Jurisprudence,  Book
VL,  chap.  iii.

Resurrection.  The  doctrine  of  a
resurrection  to  a  future  and  eternal  life
constitutes  an  indispensable  portion  of  the
religious  faith  of  Masonry.  It  is  not  au¬
thoritatively  inculcated  as  a  point  of  dog¬
matic  creed,  but  is  impressively  taught  by
the  symbolism  of  the  third  degree.  This
dogma  has  existed  among  almost  all  na¬
tions  from  a  very  early  period.  The  Egyp¬
tians,  in  their  mysteries,  taught  a  final  ,
resurrection  of  the  soul.  Although  the  !
Jews,  in  escaping  from  their  Egyptian
thraldom,  did  not  carry  this  doctrine  with
them  into  the  desert, —  for  it  formed  no  part
of  the  Mosaic  theology, —  yet  they  subse¬
quently.  after  the  captivity,  borrowed  it
from  the  Zoroastrians.  The  Brahmans  and
Buddhists  of  the  East,  the  Etruscans  of  the  ,


South,  and  the  Druids  andthe  Scandinavian
Skalds  of  the  West,  nursed  the  faith  of  a
resurrection  to  future  life.  The  Greeks  and
the  Romans  subscribed  to  it;  and  it  was
one  of  the  great  objects  of  their  mysteries
to  teach  it.  It  is,  as  we  all  know,  an  es¬
sential  part  of  the  Christian  faith,  and  was
exemplified,  in  his  own  resurrection,  by
Christ  to  his  followers.  In  Freemasonry,  a
particular  degree,  the  Master’s,  has  been
appropriated  to  teach  it  by  an  impressive
symbolism.  “Thus,”  says  Hutchinson,
(p.  101,)  “our  Order  is  a  positive  contra¬
diction  to  Judaic  blindness  and  infidelity,
and  testifies  our  faith  concerning  the  resur¬
rection  of  the  body.”

We  may  deny  that  there  has  been  a  regu¬
lar  descent  of  Freemasonry,  as  a  secret  or¬
ganization,  from  the  mystical  association  of
the  Eleusinians,  the  Samothracians,  or  the
Dionysians.  No  one,  however,  who  care¬
fully  examines  the  mode  in  which  the
resurrection  or  restoration  to  life  was
taught  by  a  symbol  and  a  ceremony  in  the
Ancient  Mysteries,  and  how  the  same
dogma  is  now  taught  in  the  Masonic  initia¬
tion,  can,  without  absolutely  rejecting  the
evident  concatenation  of  circumstances
which  lies  patent  before  him,  refuse  his  as¬
sent  to  the  proposition  that  the  latter  was
derived  from  the  former.  The  resemblance
between  the  Dionysiac  legend,  for  instance,
and  the  Hiramic,  cannot  have  been  purely
accidental.  The  chain  that  connects  them
is  easily  found  in  the  fact  that  the  Pagan
mysteries  lasted  until  the  fourth  century  of
the  Christian  era.  and,  as  the  fathers  of  the
church  lamented,  exercised  an  influence
over  the  secret  societies  of  the  Middle  Ages.

Returns  of  Lodges.  Every  sub¬
ordinate  Lodge  is  required  to  make  an¬
nually  to  the  Grand  Lodge  a  statement  of
the  names  of  its  members,  and  the  number
of  admissions,  demissions,  and  expulsions
or  rejections  that  have  taken  place  within
the  year.  This  statement  is  called  a  return.
A  neglect  to  make  the  annual  return
cruses  a  forfeiture  of  the  right  of  repre¬
sentation  in  the  Grand  Lodge.  The  sum
due  by  the  Lodge  is  based  on  the  return,
as  a  tax  is  levied  for  each  member  and  each
initiation.  The  Grand  Lodge  is  also,  by
this  means,  made  acquainted  with  thestate
of  its  subordinates  andthe  condition  of  the
Order  in  its  jurisdiction.

Reuben.  The  eldest  son  of  Jacob.
Among  the  Royal  Arch  bannere,  that  of
Reuben  is  purple,  and  bears  a  man  as  the
device.  It  is  appropriated  to  the  Grand
Master  of  the  Second  Veil.

Revelations  of  3Iasonry.  See

Expositions.

Reverend.  A  title  sometimes  given
to  the  chaplain  of  a  Masonic  body.


REVERENTIAL


REVIVAL


645


%


Reverential  Sign.  The  second  sign
in  the  English  Royal  Arch  system,  and
thus  explained.  We  are  taught  by  the
reverential  sign  to  bend  with  submission
and  resignation  beneath  the  chastening
hand  of  the  Almighty,  and  at  the  same
time  to  engraft  his  law  in  our  hearts.  This
expressive  form,  in  which  the  Father  of
the  human  race  first  presented  himself  be¬
fore  the  face  of  the  Most  High,  to  receive
the  denunciation  and  terrible  judgment,
was  adopted  by  our  Grand  Master  Moses,
who,  when  the  Lord  appeared  to  him  in
the  burning  bush  on  Mount  Horeb,  covered
his  face  from  the  brightness  of  the  divine
presence.

Revival.  The  occurrences  which  took
place  in  the  city  of  London,  in  the  year
1717,  when  that  important  body,  which
has  since  been  known  as  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  was  organized,  have  been  al¬
ways  known  in  Masonic  history  as  the
“Revival  of  Masonry.”  Anderson,  in  the
first  edition  of  the  “  Constitutions,”  pub¬
lished  in  1723,  speaks  of  the  brethren  hav¬
ing  revived  the  drooping  Lodges  of  Lon¬
don  ;  but  he  makes  no  other  reference  to
the  transaction.  In  his  second  edition,
published  in  1738,  he  is  more  diffuse,  and
the  account  there  given  is  the  only  au¬
thority  we  possess  of  the  organization  made
in  1717  :  Preston  and  all  subsequent  writers
have  of  course  derived  their  authority
from  Anderson.  The  transactions  are  thus
detailed  by  Preston,  (Must.,  p.  191,)  whose
account  is  preferred,  as  containing  in  a
more  succinct  form  all  that  Anderson  has
more  profusely  detailed.

“  On  the  accession  of  George  I.,  the  Ma¬
sons  in  London  and  its  environs,  finding
themselves  deprived  of  Sir  Christopher
Wren  and  their  annual  meetings  discon¬
tinued,  resolved  to  cement  themselves
under  a  new  Grand  Master,  and  to  revive
the  communications  and  annual  festivals
of  the  Society.  With  this  view,  the  Lodges
at  the  Goose  and  Gridiron,  in  St.  Paul’s
Church-Yard ;  the  Crown,  in  Parker’s  Lane,
near  Drury  Lane;  the  Apple-Tree  Tavern,
in  Charles  Street,  Covcnt  Garden  ;  and  the
Rummer  and  Grapes  Tavern,  in  Channel
Row,  Westminster,  the  only  four  Lodges
in  being  in  the  South  of  England  at  that
time,  with  some  other  old  brethren,  met
at  the  Apple-Tree  Tavern,  above  mentioned,
in  February,  1717 ;  and,  having  voted  the
oldest  Master  Mason  then  present  into
the  chair,  constituted  themselves  a  Grand
Lodge,  pro  tempore,  in  due  form.  At  this
meeting  it  was  resolved  to  hold  Quarterly
Communications  of  the  Fraternity,  and  to
hold  the  next  annual  assembly  and  feast  on
the  24th  of  June  at  the  Goose  and  Gridiron,
in  St.  Paul’s  Church-Yard,  (in  compliment
to  the  oldest  Lodge,  which  then  met  there,)


for  the  purpose  of  electing  a  Grand  Master
among  themselves,  till  they  should  have  the
honor  of  a  noble  brother  at  their  head.  Ac¬
cordingly,  on  St.  John  the  Baptist’s  day,
1717,  in  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  King
George  I.,  the  assembly  and  feast  were  held
at  the  said  house ;  when  the  oldest  Master
Mason  and  the  Master  of  a  Lodge  having
taken  the  chair,  a  list  of  proper  candidates
for  the  office  of  Grand  Master  was  pro¬
duced;  and  the  names  being  separately
proposed,  the  brethren,  by  a  great  majority
of  hands,  elected  Mr.  Anthony  Sayer
Grand  Master  of  Masons  for  the  ensuing
year ;  who  was  forthwith  invested  by  the
said  oldest  Master,  installed  by  the  Master
of  the  oldest  Lodge,  and  duly  congratulated
by  the  assembly,  who  paid  him  homage.
The  Grand  Master  then  entered  on  the  du¬
ties  of  his  office,  appointed  his  Wardens,  and
commanded  the  brethren  of  the  four  Lodges
to  meet  him  and  his  Wardens  quarterly  in
communication;  enjoining  them  at  the  same
time  to  recommend  to  all  the  Fraternity  a
punctual  attendance  on  the  next  annual
assembly  and  feast.”

Recently,  this  claim,  that  Masonry  was
not  for  the  first  time  organized,  but  only
revived  in  1717,  has  been  attacked  by  some
of  those  modern  iconoclasts  who  refuse
credence  to  anything  traditional,  or  even
to  any  record  which  is  not  supported  by
other  contem  porary  authority.  Chief  among
these  is  Bro.  W.  P.  Buchan,  of  England,
who,  in  his  numerous  articles  in  the  Lon¬
don  Freemason,  (1871  and  1872,)  has  at¬
tacked  the  antiquity  of  Freemasonry,  and
refuses  to  give  it  an  existence  anterior  to
the  year  1717.  His  exact  theory  is  that
“  our  system  of  degrees,  words,  grips,  signs,
etc.,  was  not  in  existence  until  about  A.  d.
1717.”  He  admits,  however,  that  certain
of  the  “  elements  or  groundwork  ”  of  the
degrees  existed  before  that  year,  but  not
confined  to  the  Masons,  being  common  to
all  the  gilds.  He  thinks  that  the  pres¬
ent  system  was  indebted  to  the  inventive
genius  of  Anderson  and  Desaguliers.  And
he  supposes  that  it  was  simply  “  a  recon¬
struction  of  an  ancient  society,  viz.,  of  some
form  of  old  Pagan  philosophy.”  Hence,  he
contends  that  it  was  not  a  “  revival,”  but
only  a  “  renaissance,”  and  he  explains  his
meaning  in  the  following  language:

“  Before  the  eighteenth  century  we  had
a  renaissance  of  Pagan  architecture ;  then,
to  follow  suit,  in  the  eighteenth  century  we
had  a  renaissance  in  a  new  dress  of  Pagan
mysticism  ;  but  for  neither  are  we  indebted
to  the  Operative  Masons,  although  the
Operative  Masons  were  made  use  of  in
both  cases.”  ( London  Freemason,  Septem¬
ber  23,  1871.)

Buchan’s  theory  has  been  attacked  by
Bros.  William  J.  Hughan  and  Chalmers  I.


646


REVOKE


RIGHT


Patton.  That  lie  is  right  in  his  theory,
that  the  three  degrees  of  Master,  Fellow
Craft,  and  Apprentice  were  unknown  to
the  Masons  of  the  seventeenth  centnry,  and
that  these  classes  existed  only  as  grada¬
tions  of  rank,  will  be  very  generally  ad¬
mitted.  But  there  is  unquestionable  evi¬
dence  that  the  modes  of  recognition,  the
method  of  government,  the  legends,  and
much  of  the  ceremonial  of  initiation,  were
in  existence  among  the  Operative  Masons
of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  were  transmitted
to  the  Speculative  Masons  of  the  eigh¬
teenth  century.  The  work  of  Anderson,
of  Desaguliers,  and  their  contemporaries,
was  to  improve  and  to  enlarge,  but  not  to
invent.  The  Masonic  system  of  the  pres¬
ent  day  has  been  the  result  of  a  slow  but
steady  growth.  Just  as  the  lectures  of
Anderson,  known  to  us  from  their  publica¬
tion  in  1725,  were  subsequently  modified
and  enlarged  by  the  successive  labors  of
Clare,  of  Dunckerley,  of  Preston,  and  of
Hemming,  did  he  and  Desaguliers  submit
the  simple  ceremonial,  which  they  found
at  the  reorganization  of  the  Grand  Lodge
in  1717,  to  a  similar  modification  and  en¬
largement.

Revoke.  When  a  Dispensation  is  is¬
sued  by  a  Grand  Master  for  the  organiza¬
tion  of  a  Lodge,  it  is  granted  “to  continue
of  force  until  the  Grand  Lodge  shall  grant
a  Warrant,  or  until  the  Dispensation  is  re¬
voked  by  the  Grand  Master  or  the  Grand
Lodge.”  A  Dispensation  may  therefore
be  revoked  at  any  time  by  the  authority
which  issued  it,  or  by  a  higher  authority.
Charters  are  arrested,  forfeited,  or  declared
null  and  void;  Dispensations  are  revoked.

Rhetoric.  The  art  of  embellishing
language  with  the  ornaments  of  construc¬
tion,  so  as  to  enable  the  speaker  to  persuade
or  affect  his  hearers.  It  supposes  and  re¬
quires  a  proper  acquaintance  with  the  rest
of  the  liberal  arts ;  for  the  first  step  towards
adorning  a  discourse  is  for  the  speaker  to
become  thoroughly  acquainted  with  its  sub¬
ject,  and  hence  the  ancient  rule  that  the
orator  should  be  acquainted  with  all  the
arts  and  sciences.  Its  importance  as  a
branch  of  liberal  education  is  recommended
to  the  Mason  in  the  Fellow  Craft’s  degree.
It  is  one  of  the  seven  liberal  arts  and  sci¬
ences,  the  second  in  order,  and  is  described
in  the  ancient  Constitutions  as  “retoricke
that  teacheth  a  man  to  speake  fine  and  in
subtill  terme.”  —  Harleian  MS.

Rhode  Island.  Masonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  Rhode  Island  in  1750  by  the
establishment  of  a  Lodge  at  Newport,  the
Charter  for  which  had  been  granted  by  the
St.  John’s  Grand  Lodge  of  Boston  on  Dec.
27,  1749.  The  same  Grand  Lodge  estab¬
lished  a  second  Lodge  at  Providence  on


Jan.  18, 1757.  On  April  6, 1791,  these  two
Lodges  organized  a  Grand  Lodge  at  Prov¬
idence,  Christopher  Champlin  being  elected
the  first  Grand  Master.  This  is  the  first
instance  known  in  Masonic  history  of  the
organization  of  a  Grand  Lodge  by  only  two
subordinates.  The  act  was  irregular,  and
the  precedent  has  never  subsequently  been
followed.  It  was  not  until  1799  that  the
new  Grand  Lodge  granted  its  first  Charter
for  the  establishment  of  a  third  Lodge  at
Warren.  The  Grand  Chapter  was  organ¬
ized  in  March,  1798,  and  the  Grand  Coun¬
cil  in  Oct.,  1860.  The  Grand  Commandery
forms  a  part  of  a  common  body  known  as
the  Grand  Commandery  of  Massachusetts
and  Rhode  Island.  It  was  formed  in  1805,
and  the  celebrated  Thomas  Smith  Webb
was  its  first  presiding  officer.

Rhodes.  An  island  in  the  Mediter¬
ranean  Sea,  which,  although,  nominally
under  the  government  of  the  Emperor  of
Constantinople,  wras  in  1308  in  the  pos¬
session  of  Saracen  pirates.  In  that  year,
Fulke  de  Villaret,  Grand  Master  of  the
Knights  Hospitallers,  having  landed  with
a  large  force,  drove  out  the  Saracens  and
took  possession  of  the  island,  which  became
the  seat  of  the  Order,  who  removed  to  it
from  Cyprus  and  continued  to  occupy  it
until  it  was  retaken  by  the  Saracens  in  1522,
when  the  knights  were  transferred  to  the
island  of  Malta.  Their  residence  for  over
two  hundred  years  at  Rhodes  caused  them
sometimes  to  receive  the  title  of  the  Knights
of  Rhodes.

Rhodes,  Knight  of.  See  Knight

of  Rhodes.

Ribhon.  The  use  of  a  ribbon,  -with
the  official  jewel  suspended  and  attached  to
a  button-hole  instead  of  the  collar,  recently
adopted  by  a  few  American  Lodges,  is  a
violation  of  the  ancient  customs  of  the
Order.  The  collar  cut  in  a  triangular  shape,
with  the  jewel  suspended  from  the  apex,
dates  from  the  earliest  time  of  the  revival,
and  is  perhaps  as  old  as  the  apron  itself.
See  Collar.

Ridel,  Cornelius  Johann  Ru¬
dolph.  Born  at  Hamburg,  May  25, 1759,
and  died  at  Weimar,  January  16, 1821.  He
was  an  active  and  learned  Mason,  and  for
many  years  the  Master  of  the  Lodge  Ama¬
lia  at  Weimar.  In  1817,  he  published  in
four  volumes  an  elaborate  and  valuable
work  entitled  Versvch  eines  Alphabetischen
Verzeichnisses,  u.  s.  w.,  i.  e.,  “An  essay  to¬
wards  an  Alphabetical  Catalogue  of  im¬
portant  events,  for  the  knowledge  and  his¬
tory  of  Freemasonry,  and  especially  for  a
critical  examination  of  the  origin  and
growth  of  the  various  rituals  and  systems
from  1717  to  1817.”

Right  Angle.  A  right  angle  is  the


RIGHT


RIGHT


647


meeting  of  two  lines  in  an  angle  of  ninety-
degrees,  or  the  fourth  part  of  a  circle.
Each  of  its  lines  is  perpendicular  to  the
other ;  and  as  the  perpendicular  line  is
a  symbol  of  uprightness  of  conduct,  the
right  angle  has  been  adopted  by  Masons  as
an  emblem  of  virtue.  Such  was  also  its
signification  among  the  Pythagoreans.  The
right  angle  is  represented  in  the  Lodges  by
the  square,  as  the  horizontal  is  by  the  level,
and  the  perpendicular  by  the  plumb.

Right  Imminent.  An  epithet  pre¬
fixed  to  the  title  of  the  Deputy  Grand
Master  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of
Knights  Templars  of  the  United  States,
and  to  that  of  the  Grand  Commander  of  a
State  Grand  Commandery.

Right  Excellent.  The  epithet  pre¬
fixed  to  the  title  of  all  superior  officers
of  a  Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
sonry  below  the  dignity  of  a  Grand  High
Priest.

Right  Hand.  The  right  hand  has
in  all  ages  been  deemed  an  important  sym¬
bol  to  represent  the  virtue  of  fidelity.
Among  the  ancients,  the  right  hand  and
fidelity  to  an  obligation  were  al  most  deemed
synonymous  terms.  Thus,  among  the  Ro¬
mans,  the  expression  “  fallere  dextram,”
to  betray  the  right  hand,  also  signified  to  vio¬
late  faith ;  and  “jungere  dextras,”  to  join
right  hands,  meant  to  give  a  mutual  pledge.
Among  the  Hebrews,  {’O’,  iamin,  the  right
hand,  was  derived  from  TON,  aman,  to  be
faithful.

The  practice  of  the  ancients  was  con¬
formable  to  these  peculiarities  of  idiom.
Among  the  Jews,  to  give  the  right  hand
was  considered  as  a  mark  of  friendship  and
fidelity.  Thus  St.  Paul  says,  “  when  James,
Cephas,  and  John,  who  seemed  to  be  pillars,
perceived  the  grace  that  was  given  unto
me,  they  gave  to  me  and  Barnabas  the  right
hand  of  fellowship,  that  we  should  go  unto
the  heathen,  and  they  unto  the  circum¬
cision.”  (Gal.  ii.  6.)  The  same  expression,
also,  occurs  in  Maccabees.  We  meet,  in¬
deed,  continually  in  the  Scriptures  with
allusions  to  the  right  hand  as  an  emblem  of
truth  and  fidelity.  Thus  in  Psalm  cxliv.
it  is  said,  “  their  right  hand  is  a  right  hand
of  falsehood,”  that  is  to  say,  they  lift  up
their  right  hand  to  swear  to  what  is  not
true.  This  lifting  up  of  the  right  hand
was,  in  fact,  the  universal  mode  adopted
among  both  Jews  and  Pagans  in  taking  an
oath.  The  custom  is  certainly  as  old  as  the
days  of  Abraham,  who  said  to  the  King  of
Salem,  “  I  have  lifted  up  my  hand  unto
the  Lord,  the  most  high  God,  the  possessor
of  heaven  and  earth,  that  I  will  not  take
any  thing  that  is  thine.”  Sometimes
among  the  Gentile  nations,  the  right  hand,
in  taking  an  oath,  was  laid  upon  the  horns


of  the  altar,  and  sometimes  upon  the  hand
of  the  person  administering  the  obligation.
But  in  all  cases  it  was  deemed  necessary,  to
the  validity  and  solemnity  of  the  attesta¬
tion,  that  the  right  hand  should  be  em¬
ployed.

Since  the  introduction  of  Christianity,
the  use  of  the  right  hand  in  contracting
an  oath  has  been  continued,  but  instead  of
extending  it  to  heaven,  or  seizing  with  it  a
horn  of  the  altar,  it  is  now  directed  to  be
placed  upon  the  Ploly  Scriptures,  which  is
the  universal  mode  at  this  day  in  all  Chris¬
tian  countries.  The  antiquity  of  this  usage
may  be  learned  from  the  fact,  that  in  the
code  of  the  Emperor  Theodosius,  adopted
about  the  year  438,  the  placing  of  the  right
hand  on  the  Gospels  is  alluded  to;  and  in
the  code  of  Justinian,  (lib.  ii.,  tit.  53,  lex.
i.,)  whose  date  is  the  year  529,  the  cere¬
mony  is  distinctly  laid  down  as  a  necessary
part  of  the  formality  of  the  oath,  in  the
words  “  taetis  sacrosanctis  Evangeliis,”  —
the  Holy  Gospels  being  touched.

This  constant  use  of  the  right  hand  in
the  most  sacred  attestations  and  solemn
compacts,  was  either  the  cause  or  the  con¬
sequence  of  its  being  deemed  an  emblem
of  fidelity.  Dr.  Potter  [Arch.  Grcec.,  p.
229,)  thinks  it  was  the  cause,  and  he  sup¬
poses  that  the  right  hand  was  naturally
used  instead  of  the  left,  because  it  was
more  honorable,  as  being  the  instrument
by  which  superiors  give  commands  to  those
below  them.  Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  well
known  that  the  custom  existed  universally,
and  that  there  are  abundant  allusions  in
the  most  ancient  writers  to  the  junction  of
right  hands  in  making  compacts.

The  Romans  had  a  goddess  whose  name
was  Fides,  or  Fidelity,  whose  temple  was
first  consecrated  by  Nnma.  Her  symbol
was  two  right  hands  joined,  or  sometimes
two  human  figures  holding  each  other
by  the  right  hands,  whence,  in  all  agree¬
ments  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  it
was  usual  for  the  parties  to  take  each  other
by  the  right  hand,  in  token  of  their  inten¬
tion  to  adhere  to  the  compact.

By  a  strange  error  for  so  learned  a  man,
Oliver  mistakes  the  name  of  this  goddess,
and  calls  her  Faith.  “  The  spurious  Free¬
masonry,”  he  remarks,  “  had  a  goddess
called  Faith.”  No  such  thing.  Fides,  or,
as  Horace  calls  her,  “  incorrupta  Fides,”
incorruptible  Fidelity,  is  very  different
from  the  theological  virtue  of  faith.

The  joining  of  the  right  hands  was  es¬
teemed  among  the  Persians  and  Parthians
as  conveying  a  molt  inviolable  obligation
of  fidelity.  Hence,  when  King  Artabanus
desired  to  hold  a  conference  with  his  re¬
volted  subject,  Asineus,  who  was  in  arms
against  him,  he  despatched  a  messenger  to


648


RIGHT


RING


him  with  the  request,  who  said  to  Asineus,
“the  king  hath  sent  me  to  gjve  you  his
right  hand  and  security,”  that  is,  a  prom¬
ise  of  safety  in  going  and  coming.  And
when  Asineus  sent  his  brother  Asileus  fo
the  proposed  conference,  the  king  met  him
and  gave  him  his  right  hand,  upon  which
Josephus  [Ant.  Jud.,  lib.  xviii.,  cap.  ix.,)
remarks :  “  This  is  of  the  greatest  force  there
with  all  these  barbarians,  and  affords  a  firm
security  to  those  who  hold  intercourse  with
them;  for  none  of  them  will  deceive,  when
once  they  have  given  you  their  right  hands,
nor  will  any  one  doubt  of  their  fidelity,
when  that  is  once  given,  even  though  they
were  before  suspected  of  injustice.”

Stephens  (Travels  in  Yucatan,  vol.  ii.,  p.
474,)  gives  the  following  account  of  the  use
of  the  right  hand  as  a  symbol  among  the
Indian  tribes.

“  In  the  course  of  many  years’  residence
on  the  frontiers,  including  various  journey  -
ings  among  the  tribes,  I  have  had  frequent
occasion  to  remark  the  use  of  the  right
hand  as  a  symbol ;  and  it  is  frequently  ap¬
plied  to  the  naked  body  after  its  prepara¬
tion  and  decoration  for  sacred  or  festive
dances.  And  the  fact  deserves  further  con¬
sideration  from  these  preparations  being
generally  made  in  the  arcanum  of  the  se¬
cret  Lodge,  or  some  other  private  place,  and
with  all  the  skill  of  the  adept’s  art.  The
mode  of  applying  it  in  these  cases  is  by
smearing  the  hand  of  the  operator  with
white  or  colored  clay,  and  impressing  it  on
the  breast,  the  shoulder,  or  other  part  of  the
body.  The  idea  is  thus  conveyed  that  a
secret  influence,  a  charm,  a  mystical  power
is  given,  arising  from  his  sanctity,  or  his
proficiency  in  the  occult  arts.  This  use  of
the  hand  is  not  confined  to  a  single  tribe  or
people.  I  have  noticed  it  alike  among  the
Dacotahs,  the  Winnebagoes,  and  other
Western  tribes,  as  among  the  numerous
branches  of  the  red  race  still  located  east
of  the  Mississippi  River,  above  the  latitude
of  42  degrees,  who  speak  dialects  of  the  Al¬
gonquin  language.”

It  is  thus  apparent  that  the  use  of  the
right  hand  as  a  token  of  sincerity  and  a
pledge  of  fidelity,  is  as  ancient  as  it  is  uni¬
versal  ;  a  fact  which  will  account  for  the  im¬
portant  station  which  it  occupies  among
the  symbols  of  Freemasonry.

Right  Side.  Among  the  Hebrews,
as  well  as  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  the
right  side  was  considered  superior  to  the
left;  and  as  the  right  was  the  side  of  good,
so  was  the  left  of  bad  omen.  Dexter,  or
right,  signified  also  propitious,  and  sinister,
or  leff,  unlucky.  In  the  Scriptures  we  find
frequent  allusions  to  this  superiority  of  the
right.  Jacob,  for  instance,  called  his  young¬
est  and  favorite  child,  Ben-jamin,  the  son


of  his  right  hand,  and  Eathsheba,  as  the
king’s  mother,  was  placed  at  the  right  hand
of  Solomon.  See  Left  Side.

Right  'Worshipful.  An  epithet  ap¬
plied  in  most  jurisdictions  of  the  United
States  to  all  Grand  officers  below  the  dig¬
nity  of  a  Grand  Master.

Ring.  Luminous.  See  Academy  of
Sublime  Masters  of  the  Luminous  Ring.

Ring,  Masonic.  The  ring,  as  a  sym¬
bol  of  the  covenant  entered  into  with  the
Order,  as  the  wedding  ring  is  the  symbol
of  the  covenant  of  marriage,  is  worn  in
some  of  the  high  degrees  of  Masonry.  It  is
not  used  in  Ancient  Craft  Masonry.  In
the  Order  of  the  Temple  the  “  ring  of  pro¬
fession,”  as  it  is  called,  is  of  gold,  having  on
it  the  cross  of  the  Order  and  the  letters  P.
D.  E.  P.,  being  the  initials  of  “  Pro  Deo  et
Patna."  It  is  worn  on  the  index  finger
of  the  right  hand.  The  Inspectors-General
of  the  thirty-third  degree  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Rite  wear  a  ring  on  the  little
finger  of  the  right  hand.  Inside  is  the
motto  of  the  Order,  “Deus  mecm  que
JUS.”  In  the  fourteenth  degree  of  the
same  Rite  a  ring  is  worn,  which  is  de¬
scribed  as  “  a  plain  gold  ring,”  having  in¬
side  the  motto,  “  Virtus  junxit,  mors  non  se-
parabit.”  It  is  worn  in  the  Northern  Juris¬
diction  on  the  fourth  or  ring  finger  of  the
left  hand.  In  the  Southern  Jurisdiction
it  is  worn  on  the  same  finger  of  the  right
hand.

The  use  of  the  ring  as  a  symbol  of  a  cov¬
enant  may  be  traced  very  far  back  into  an¬
tiquity.  The  Romans  had  a  marriage  ring,
but  according  to  Swinburne,  the  great  can¬
onist,  it  was  of  iron,  with  a  jewel  of  ada¬
mant,  “  to  signify  the  durance  and  perpetu¬
ity  of  the  contract.”

In  reference  to  the  rings  worn  in  the  high
degrees  of  Masonry,  it  may  be  said  that
they  partake  of  the  double  symbolism  of
power  and  affection.  The  ring,  as  a  sym¬
bol  of  power  and  dignity,  was  worn  in  an¬
cient  times  by  kings  and  men  of  elevated
rank  and  office.  Thus  Pharaoh  bestowed
a  ring  upon  Joseph  as  a  mark  or  token  of
the  power  he  had  conferred  upon  him,  for
which  reason  the  people  bowed  the  knee  to
him.  It  is  in  this  light  that  the  ring  is
worn  by  the  Inspectors  of  Scottish  Ma¬
sonry  as  representing  the  sovereigns  of  the
Rite.  But  those  who  receive  only  the  four¬
teenth  degree,  in  the  same  Rite,  wear  the
ring  as  a  symbol  of  the  covenant  of  affec¬
tion  and  fidelity  into  which  they  have  en¬
tered.

While  on  the  subject  of  the  ring  as  a  sym¬
bol  of  Masonic  meaning,  it  will  not  be  ir¬
relevant  to  refer  to  the  magic  ring  of  King
Solomon,  of  which  both  the  Jews  and  the
Mohammedans  have  abundant  traditions.


RISING


RITE


649


The  latter,  indeed,  have  a  book  on  magic
rings,  entitled  Scalcuthal,  in  which  they
trace  the  ring  of  Solomon  from  Jared,  the
father  of  Enoch.  It  was  by  means  of  this
ring,  as  a  talisman  of  wisdom  and  power,
that  Solomon  was,  they  say,  enabled  to  per¬
form  those  wonderful  acts  and  accomplish
those  vast  enterprises  that  have  made  his
name  so  celebrated  as  the  wisest  monarch
of  the  earth.

Rising  Sun.  The  rising  sun  is  repre¬
sented  by  the  Master,  because  as  the  sun
by  his  rising  opens  and  governs  the  day,  so
the  Master  is  taught  to  open  and  govern
his  Lodge  with  equal  regularity  and  pre¬
cision.

Rite.  The  Latin  word  ritus,  whence  we
get  the  English  rife,  signifies  an  approved
usage  or  custom,  or  an  external  observance.
Vossius  derives  it  by  metathesis  from  the
Greek  rpiBetv,  whence  literally  it  signifies  a
trodden  path,  and,  metaphorically,  a  long-
followed  custom.  As  a  Masonic  term  its
application  is  therefore  apparent.  It  signi¬
fies  a  method  of  conferring  Masonic  light
by  a  collection  and  distribution  of  degrees.
It  is,  in  other  words,  the  method  and  order
observed  in  the  government  of  a  Masonic
system.

The  original  system  of  Speculative  Ma¬
sonry  consisted  of  only  the  three  symbolic
degrees,  called,  therefore,  Ancient  Craft
Masonry.  Such  was  the  condition  of  Free¬
masonry  at  the  time  of  what  is  called  the
revival  in  1717.  Hence,  this  was  the  origi¬
nal  Rite  or  approved  usage,  and  so  it  con¬
tinued  in  England  until  the  year  1813,  when
at  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  the
“  Holy  Royal  Arch  ”  was  declared  to  be  a
part  of  the  system;  and  thus  the  English,
or,  as  it  is  more  commonly  called,  the  York
Rite  was  made  legitimately  to  consist  of
four  degrees.

But  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  the
organization  of  new  systems  began  at  a
much  earlier  period,  and  by  the  invention
of  what  are  known  as  the  high  degrees  a
multitude  of  Rites  was  established.  All  of
these  agreed  in  one  important  essential.
They  were  built  upon  the  three  symbolic
degrees,  which,  in  every  instance,  consti¬
tuted  the  fundamental  basis  upon  which
they  were  erected.  They  were  intended  as
an  expansion  and  development  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  ideas  contained  in  these  degrees.
The  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,  and  Master’s
degrees  were  the  porch  through  which
every  initiate  was  required  to  pass  before
he  could  gain  entrance  into  the  inner  tem¬
ple  which  had  been  erected  by  the  founders
of  the  Rite.  They  were  the  text,  and  the
high  degrees  the  commentary.

Hence  arises  the  law,  that  whatever  may
be  the  constitution  and 'teachings  of  any
4  G


Rite  as  to  the  higher  degrees  peculiar  to  it.
the  three  symbolic  degrees  bein^  common
to  all  the  Rites,  a  Master  Mason,  in  any
one  of  the  Rites,  may  visit  and  labor  in  a
Master’s  Lodge  of  every  other  Rite.  It  is
only  after  that  degree  is  passed  that  the
exclusiveness  of  each  Rhe  begins  to  ope¬
rate.  ™

■  I  have  said  that  there  has  been  a  multi¬
tude  of  these  Rites.  Some  of  them  have
lived  only  with  their  authors,  and  died
when  their  parental  energy  in  fostering
them  ceased  to  exert  itself-  Others  have
had  a  more  permanent  existence,  and  still
continue  to  divide  the  Masonic  family,
furnishing,  however,  only  diverse  methods
of  attaining  to  the  same  great  end,  the  ac¬
quisition  of  Divine  Truth  by  Masonic  light.
Ragon,  in  his  Tuilier  General,  supplies  us
with  the  names  of  a  hundred  and  eight,
under  the  different  titles  of  Rites,  Orders,
and  Academies.  But  many  of  these  are
unmasonic,  being  merely  of  a  political,  so¬
cial,  or  literary  character.  The  following
catalogue  embraces  the  most  important  of
those  which  have  hitherto  or  still  continue
to  arrest  the  attention  of  the  Masonic  stu¬
dent.

1.  York  Rite.

2.  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.

3.  French  or  Modern  Rite.

4.  American  Rite.

5.  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

6.  Primitive  Scottish  Rite.

7.  Reformed  Rite.

8.  Reformed  Helvetic  Rite.

9.  Fessler’s  Rite.

10.  Schroder’s  Rite.

11.  Rite  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Three
Globes.

12.  Rite  of  the  Elect  of  Truth.

13.  Rite  of  the  Vielle  Bru.

14.  Rite  of  the  Chapter  of  Clermont.

15.  Pernetty’s  Rite.

16.  Rite  of  the  Blazing  Star.

17.  Chastanier’s  Rite.

18.  Rite  of  the  Philalethes.

19.  Primitive  Rite  of  the  Philadelphians.

20.  Rite  of  Martinism.

21.  Rite  of  Brother  Henoch.

22.  Rite  of  Mizraim.

23.  Rite  of  Memphis.

24.  Rite  of  Strict  Observance.

25.  Rite  of  Lax  Observance.

26.  Rite  of  African  Architects.

27.  Rite  of  Brothers  of  Asia.

28.  Rite  of  Perfection.

29.  Rite  of  Elected  Cohens.

30.  Rite  of  the  Emperors  of  the  East  and
West.

31.  Primitive  Rite  of  Narbonne.

32.  Rite  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple.

33.  Swedish  Rite.

34.  Rite  of  Swedenborg.


650


RITTER


ROBERTS


35.  Rite  of  Zinnendorf.

36.  Egyptian  Rite  of  Cagliostro.

37.  Rite  of  the  Beneficent  Knights  of  the
Holy  City.

These  Rites  are  not  here  given  in  either
the  order  of  date  or  of  importance.  The
distinct  history  of  each  will  be  found  under
its  appropriate  tilfc.

Bitter.  German  for  knight,  as  “  Der
Preussische  Ritter,”  the  Prussian  Knight.
The  word  is  not,  however,  applied  to  a
Knight  Templar,  who  is  more  usually
called  “  Tempelherr;”  although,  when
spoken  of  as  a  Knight  of  the  Temple,  he
would  be  styled  Putter  vom  Tempel.

Ritual.  The  mode  of  opening  and
closing  a  Lodge,  of  conferring  the  degrees,
of  installation,  and  other  duties,  constitute
a  system  of  ceremonies  which  are  called
the  Ritual.  Much  of  this  ritual  is  eso¬
teric,  and,  not  being  permitted  to  be  com¬
mitted  to  writing,  is  communicated  only
by  oral  instruction.  In  each  Masonic  juris¬
diction  it  is  required,  by  the  superintending
authority,  that  the  ritual  shall  be  the  same ;
but  it  more  or  less  differs  in  the  different
Rites  and  jurisdictions.  But  this  does  not
affect  the  universality  of  Masonry.  The
ritual  is  only  the  external  and  extrinsic
form.  The  doctrine  of  Freemasonry  is
everywhere  the  same.  It  is  the  body
which  is  unchangeable — remaining  always
and  everywhere  the  same.  The  ritual  is
but  the  outer  garment  which  covers  this
body,  which  is  subject  to  continual  varia¬
tion.  It  is  right  and  desirable  that  the
ritual  should  be  made  perfect,  and  every¬
where  alike.  But  if  this  be  impossible,  as
it  is,  this  at  least  will  console  us,  that
while  the  ceremonies,  or  ritual,  have  varied
at  different  periods,  and  still  vary  in  differ¬
ent  countries,  the  science  and  philosophy,
the  symbolism  and  the  religion,  of  Freema¬
sonry  continue,  and  will  continue,  to  be  the
same  wherever  true  Masonry  is  practised.

Robelot.  Formerly  an  advocate  of
the  parliament  of  Dijon,  a  distinguished
French  Mason,  and  the  author  of  several
Masonic  discourses,  especially  of  one  de¬
livered  before  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the
Philosophic  Scottish  Rite,  of  which  he  was
Grand  Orator,  December  8,  1808,  at  the  re¬
ception  of  Askeri  Khan,  the  Persian  Am¬
bassador,  as  a  Master  Mason.  This  address
gave  so  much  satisfaction  to  the  Lodge,
that  it  decreed  a  medal  to  M.  Robelot,  on
one  side  of  which  was  a  bust  of  the  Grand
Master,  and  on  the  other  an  inscription
which  recounted  the  valuable  services  ren¬
dered  to  the  society  by  M.  Robelot  as  its
Orator,  and  as  a  Masonic  author.  Robelot
held  the  theory  that  Freemasonry  owed  its
origin  to  the  East,  and  was  the  invention  of
Zoroaster.


Robert  I.  Commonly  called  Robert
Bruce.  He  was  crowned  King  of  Scotland
in  1306,  and  died  in  1329.  After  the  tur¬
bulence  of  the  early  years  of  his  reign  had
ceased,  and  peace  had  been  restored,  he  de¬
voted  himself  to  the  encouragement  of
architecture  in  his  kingdom.  His  con¬
nection  with  Masonry,  and  especially
with  the  high  degrees,  is  thus  given  by
Dr.  Oliver,  [Lanam.,  ii.  12.)  “The  only
high  degree  to  which  an  early  date  can  be
safely  assigned  is  the  Royal  Order  of  H.  R.
D.  M.,  founded  by  Robert  Bruce  in  1314.
Its  history  in  brief  refers  to  the  dissolution
of  the  Order  of  the  Temple.  Some  of  those
persecuted  individuals  took  refuge  in  Scot¬
land,  and  placed  themselves  under  the  pro¬
tection  of  Robert  Bruce,  and  assisted  him
at  the  battle  of  Bannockburn,  which  was
fought  on  St.  John’s  day,  1314.  After
this  battle  the  Royal  Order  was  founded ;
and  from  the  fact  of  the  Templars  having
contributed  to  the  victor}’,  and  the  subse¬
quent  grants  to  their  Order  by  King  Robert,
for  which  they  were  formally  excommuni¬
cated  by  the  church,  it  has,  by  some  persons,
been  identified  with  that  ancient  military
Order.  But  there  are  sound  reasons  for
believing  that  the  two  systems  were  uncon¬
nected  with  each  other.”  Thor}',  (Act.  Lot.,
i.  6,)  quoting  from  a  manuscript  ritual  in
the  library  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philo¬
sophic  Rite,  gives  the  following  statement :
“Robert  Bruce,  King  of  Scotland,  under
the  name  of  Robert  L,  created  on  the  24th
June,  after  the  battle  of  Bannockburn,  the
Order  of  St.  Andrew  of  the  Thistle,  to
which  he  afterwards  united  that  of  H.  R.
D.,  for  the  sake  of  the  Scottish  Masons  who
made  a  part  of  the  thirty  thousand  men
with  whom  he  had  fought  an  army  of  one
hundred  thousand  English.  He  reserved'
forever  to  himself  and  his  successors  the
title  of  Grand  Master.  He  founded  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  Royal  Order  of  H.  R.
D.  at  Kilwinning,  and  died,  covered  with
glory  and  honor,  on  the  9th  July,  1329.”
Both  of  these  statements  or  legends  require
for  all  their  details  authentication.  See
Royal  Order  of  Scotland.

Roberts  Manuscript.  This  is  the
first  of  those  manuscripts  the  originals  of
which  have  not  yet  been  recovered,  and
which  are  known  to  us  only  in  a  printed
copy.  The  Roberts  Manuscript, so  called  from
the  name  of  the  printer,  J.  Roberts,  was  pub¬
lished  by  him  at  London,  in  1722,  under
the  title  of  “  The  Old  Constitutions  belong¬
ing  to  the  Ancient  and  Honorable  Society
of  F ree  and  Accepted  Masons.  Taken  from
a  Manuscript  wrote  above  five  hundred
years  since.”  Of  this  work,  which  had
passed  out  of  the  notice  and  knowledge  of
the  Masonic  world,  Richard  Spencer,  of


ROBES


ROBISON


651


London,  being  in  possession  of  a  copy,  pub¬
lished  a  second  edition  in  1870.  On  a  col¬
lation  of  this  work  with  the  Harleian  MS.,
it  is  evident  that  either  both  were  derived
from  one  and  the  same  older  manuscript,
or  that  one  of  them  has  been  copied  from
the  other;  although,  if  this  be  the  case,  there
has  been  much  carelessness  on  the  part  of
the  transcriber.  If  the  one  was  transcribed
from  the  other,  there  is  internal  evidence
that  the  Harleian  is  the  older  examplar.
The  statement  on  the  title-page  of  Roberts’
book,  that  it  was  “taken  from  a  manuscript
wrote  over  five  hundred  years  since,”  is
contradicted  by  the  simple  fact  that,  like
the  Harleian  MS.,  it  contains  the  regula¬
tions  adopted  at  the  General  Assembly  held
in  1663.

Robes.  A  proposition  was  made  in
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  on  April  8,
1778,  that  the  Grand  Master  and  his  offi¬
cers  should  be  distinguished  in  future  at
all  public  meetings  by  robes.  This  meas¬
ure,  Preston  says,  was  at  first  favorably
received ;  but  it  was,  on  investigation,  found
to  be  so  diametrically  opposed  to  the  orig¬
inal  plan  of  the  Institution,  that  it  was  very
properly  laid  aside.  In  no  jurisdiction  are
robes  used  in  Symbolic  Masonry.  In  many
of  the  high  degrees,  however,  they  are  em¬
ployed.  In  the  United  States  they  consti¬
tute  an  important  part  of  the  paraphernalia
of  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter.  See  Royal  Arch
Robes.

Robin,  Abbe  Claude.  A  French
litterateur,  and  curate  of  St.  Pierre  d’  Angers.
In  1776  he  advanced  his  views  on  the  ori¬
gin  of  Freemasonry  in  a  lecture  before  the
Lodge  of  Nine  Sisters  at  Paris.  This  he
subsequently  enlarged,  and  his  interesting
work  was  published  at  Paris  and  Amster¬
dam,  in  1779,  under  the  title  of  Recherches
snr  les  Initiations  Anciennes  et  Modernes.  A
German  translation  of  it  appeared  in  1782,
and  an  exhaustive  review,  or,  rather,  an
extensive  synopsis  of  it,  was  made  by  Che-
min  des  Pontfes  in  tbe  first  volume  of  his
Encyclopedic  Martinique.  In  this  work  the
Abbd  deduces  from  the  ancient  initiations
in  the  Pagan  Mysteries  the  orders  of
chivalry,  whose  branches,  he  says,  pro¬
duced  the  initiation  of  Freemasonry.

Robison.  John.  He  was  Professor
of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  University
of  Edinburgh,  and  Secretary  of  the  Royal
Society  in  that  city.  He  was  born  at  Bog-
hall,  in  Scotland,  in  1739,  and  died  in  1805.
He  was  the  author  of  a  Treatise  on  Me¬
chanical  Philosophy,  which  possessed  some
merit;  but  he  is  better  known  in  Masonic
literature  by  his  anti-Masonic  labors.  He
published  in  1797,  at  Edinburgh  and  Lon¬
don,  a  work  entitled  Proofs  of  a  Conspiracy
against  all  the  Religions  and  Governments  of


Europe,  carried  on  in  the  Secret  Meetings  of
the  Freemasons,  Illuminati,  and  Reading
Societies,  collected  from  Good  Authorities.
In  consequence  of  the  anti-Jacobin  senti¬
ment  of  the  people  of  Great  Britain  at  that
time,  the  work  on  its  first  appearance  pro¬
duced  a  great  sensation.  It  was  not,  how¬
ever,  popular  with  all  readers.  A  contem¬
porary  critic  [Month.  Rev.,  xxv.  315,)  said
of  it,  in  a  very  unfavorable  review:  “On
the  present  occasion,  we  acknowledge  that
we  have  felt  something  like  regret  that  a
lecturer  on  natural  philosophy,  of  whom
his  country  is  so  justly  proud,  should  pro¬
duce  any  work  of  literature  by  which  his
high  character  for  knowledge  and  for  judg¬
ment  is  liable  to  be  at  all  depreciated.”  It
was  intended  for  a  heavy  blow  against  Ma¬
sonry  ;  the  more  heavy  because  the  author
himself  was  a  Mason,  having  been  initiated
at  Liege  in  early  life,  and  for  some  time  a
working  Mason.  The  work  is  chiefly  de¬
voted  to  a  history  of  the  introduction  of
Masonry  on  the  continent,  and  of  its  cor¬
ruptions,  and  chiefly  to  a  violent  attack  on
the  Illuminati.  ButVhile  recommending
that  the  Lodges  in  England  should  be  sus¬
pended,  he  makes  no  charge  of  corruption
against  them,  but  admits  the  charities  of  the
Order,  and  its  respectability  of  character.
There  is  much  in  the  work  on  the  history  of
Masonry  on  the  continent  that  is  interest¬
ing,  but  many  of  his  statements  are  untrue
and  his  arguments  illogical,  nor  was  his
crusade  against  the  Institution  followed  by
any  practical  results.  The  Encyclopccdia
Britannica,  to  which  Robison  had  contrib¬
uted  many  valuable  articles  on  science,
says  of  his  Proofs  of  a  Conspiracy  that  “  it
betrays  a  degree  of  credulity  extremely  re¬
markable  in  a  person  used  to  calm  reason¬
ing  and  philosophical  demonstration,”  giv¬
ing  as  an  example  his  belief  in  the  story
of  an  anonymous  German  writer,  that  the
minister  Turgot  was  the  protector  of  a  so¬
ciety  that  met  at  Baron  d’Holbach’s  for  the
purpose  of  examining  living  children  in
order  to  discover  the  principle  of  vitality.
What  Robison  has  said  of  Masonry  in  the
531  pages  of  his  book  may  be  summed  up  in
the  following  lines  (p.  522)  near  its  close.
“While  the  Freemasonry  of  the  continent
was  tricked  up  with  all  the  frippery  of  stars
and  ribands,  or  was  perverted  to  the  most
profligate  and  impious  purposes,  and  the
Lodges  became  seminaries  of  foppery,  of  se¬
dition,  and  impiety,  it  has  retained  in  Britain
its  original  form,  simple  and  unadorned,  and
the  Lodges  have  remained  the  scenes  of  in¬
nocent  merriment  or  meetings  of  charity
and  beneficence.”  So  that,  after  all,  his
charges  are  not  against  Freemasonry  in  its
original  constitution,  but  against  its  corrup¬
tion  in  a  time  of  great  political  excitement.


652


ROCKWELL


ROD


Rockwell,  William  Spencer.  A

distinguished  Mason  of  the  United  States,
who  was  born  at  Albany,  in  New  York,  in
1804,  and  died  in  Maryland  in  1865.  He
had  been  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Georgia,  and  at  the  time  of  his
death  was  Lieutenant  Grand  Commander
of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Hite  for  the  Southern  Jurisdic¬
tion  of  the  United  States.  He  was  a  man
of  great  learning,  having  a  familiar  ac¬
quaintance  with  many  languages,  both  an¬
cient  and  modern,  and  was  well  versed  in
the  sciences.  He  was  an  able  lawyer,  and
occupied  a  high  position  at  the  bar  of
Georgia,  his  adopted  State.  Archaeology
wras  his  favorite  study.  In  1848  he  was  in¬
duced  by  the  great  Egyptologist,  George  R.
Gliddon,  to  direct  his  attention  particularly
to  the  study  of  Egyptian  antiquities.  Al¬
ready  well  acquainted  with  the  philosophy
and  science  of  Masonry,  he  applied  his
Egyptian  studies  to  the  interpretation  of
the  Masonic  symbols  to  an  extent  that  led
him  to  the  formation  of  erroneous  views.
His  investigations,  however,  and  their  re¬
sults,  were  often  interesting,  if  not  always
correct.  Mr.  Rockwell  was  the  author  of
an  A/iiman  Rezon  for  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Georgia,  published  in  1859,  which  displays
abundant  evidences  of  his  learning  and
research.  He  also  contributed  many  valu¬
able  articles  to  various  Masonic  periodicals,
and  was  one  of  the  colaboratorsof  Mackey’s
Quarterly  Review  of  Freemasonry.  Before  his
death  he  had  translated  Portal’s  Treatise  on
Hebrew  and.  Egyptian  Symbols,  and  had  writ¬
ten  an  Exposition  of  the  Pillars  of  the  Porch,
and  an  Essay  on  the  Fellow  Craft's  Degree.
The  manuscripts  of  these  works,  in  a  com¬
pleted  form,  are  in  the  hands  of  liis  friends,
but  have  never  been  published.

Rod.  The  rod  or  staff  is  an  emblem  of
power  either  inherent,  as  with  a  king,  where
it  is  called  a  sceptre,  or  with  an  inferior
officer,  where  it  becomes  a  rod,  verge,  or
staff.  The  Deacons,  Stewards,  and  Mar¬
shal  of  a  Lodge  carry  rods.  The  rods  of
the  Deacons,  who  are  the  messengers  of  the
Master  and  Wardens,  as  Mercury  was  of
the  gods,  may  be  supposed  to  be  derived
from  the  caduceus,  which  was  the  insignia
of  that  deity,  and  hence  the  Deacon’s  rod
is  often  surmounted  by  a  pine  cone.  The
Steward’s  rod  is  in  imitation  of  the  white
staff  borne  by  the  Lord  High  Steward  of
the  king’s  household.  The  Grand  Treas¬
urer  also  formerly  bore  a  white  staff  like
that  of  the  Lord  High  Treasurer.  The
Marshal’s  baton  is  only  an  abbreviated  or
short  rod.  It  is  in  matters  of  state  the  en¬
sign  of  a  Marshal  of  the  army.  The  Duke
of  Norfolk,  as  hereditary  Earl  Marshal  of
England,  bears  two  batons  crossed  in  his
arms.  Mr.  Thynne,  the  antiquary,  says


( Antiq .  Disc.,  ii.  113,)  that  the  rod  “did  in
all  ages,  and  yet  doth  amongst  all  nations
and  amongst  all  officers,  signify  correction
and  peace ;  for  by  correction  follows  peace,
wherefore  the  verge  or  rod  was  the  ensign
of  him  which  had  authority  to  reform  evil
in  war  and  in  peace,  and  to  see  quiet  and
order  observed  amongst  the  people;  for
therefore  beareth  the  king  his  sceptre.
The  church  hath  her  pastoral  staff;  and
other  magistrates  which  have  the  adminis¬
tration  of  justice  or  correction,  as  have  the
judges  of  the  law  and  the  great  officers  of
the  prince’s  house,  have  also  a  verge  or
staff  assigned  to  them.”  We  thus  feadily
see  the  origin  of  the  official  rods  or  staves
used  in  Masonry.

Rod,  Deacon's.  The  proper  badge
or  ensign  of  office  of  a  Deacon,  which  he
should  always  carry  when  in  the  discharge
of  the  duties  of  his  office,  is  a  blue  rod
surmounted  by  a  pine  cone,  in  imitation
of  the  caduceus,  or  rod  of  Mercury,  who
was  the  messenger  of  the  gods  as  is  the
Deacon  of  the  superior  officers  of  the  Lodge.
In  the  beginning  of  this  century  columns
were  prescribed  as  the  proper  badges  of
these  officers,  and  we  find  the  fact  so  stated
in  Webb’s  Monitor,  which  was  published
in  1797,  and  in  an  edition  of  Preston’s  Il¬
lustrations,  published  at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,
in  the  year  1804.  In  the  installation  of
the  Deacons,  it  is  said  “  these  columns,  as
badges  of  your  office,  I  intrust  to  your  care.”
A  short  time  afterwards,  however,  the  col¬
umns  were  transferred  to  the  Wardens  as
their  appropriate  badges,  and  then  we  find
that  in  the  hands  of  the  Deacon  they  were
replaced  by  the  rods.  Thus  in  Dalcho’s
Ahiman  Rezon,  the  first  edition  of  which
was  printed  in  1807,  the  words  of  the
charge  are  altered  to  “those  staves  the
badges  of  your  office.”  In  the  J lason’s
Manual,  published  in  1822,  by  ihe  Lodge
at  Easton,  Pennsylvania,  the  badges  are
said  to  be  “  wands,”  and  in  Cole’s  Library
they  are  said  to  carry  “rods.”  All  the
subsequent  Monitors  agree  in  assigning  the
rods  to  the  Deacons  as  insignia  of  their
office,  while  the  columns  are  appropriated
to  the  Wardens.

In  Pennsylvania,  however,  as  far  back
as  1778,  “  the  proper  pillars  ”  were  carried
in  procession  by  the  Wardens,  and  “  wands
tipped  with  gold  ”  were  borne  by  the  Dea¬
cons.  This  appears  from  the  account  of  a
procession  in  that  year,  which  is  appended
to  Smith’s  edition  of  the  Ahiman  Rezon  of
Pennsylvania.  The  rod  is  now  universally
recognized  in  this  country  as  the  Deacon’s
badge  of  office.  It  does  not  appear  to  have
been  adopted  in  the  English  system.

Rod,  Marshal's.  See  Baton.

Rod  of  Iron.  The  Master  is  charged
in  the  ritual  not  to  rule  his  Lodge  with  “  a


ROD


ROMAN


653


rod  of  iron,”  that  is  to  say,  not  with  cruelty
or  oppression.  The  expression  is  scriptural.
Thus  in  Psalm  ii.  9,  “Thou  shalt  break
them  with  a  rod  of  iron,”  and  in  Revela¬
tion  ii.  27,  “  He  shall  rule  them  with  a
rod  of  iron.”

Rod,  Steward’s.  The  badge  or  en¬
sign  of  office  of  the  Stewards  of  a  Lodge,  or
of  the  Grand  Stewards  of  a  Grand  Lodge,
is  a  white  rod  or  staff.  It  is  an  old  custom.
In  the  first  formal  account  of  a  procession
in  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  on  June  24,
1724,  the  Stewards  are  described  as  walking
“  two  and  two  abreast  with  white  rods.”
This  use  of  a  white  rod  comes  from  the  po¬
litical  usages  of  England,  where  the  Stew¬
ard  of  the  king’s  household  was  appointed
by  the  delivery  of  a  staff,  the  breaking  of
which  dissolved  the  office.  Thus  an  old
book  quoted  by  Thynne  says  that  in  the
reign  of  Edward  IV.,  the  creation  of  the
Steward  of  the  household  “  only  consisteth
by  the  king’s  delivering  to  him  the  house¬
hold  staffe,  with  these  words,  Seneschall,  tenez
le  bastone  de  notre  Maison.”  When  the
Lord  High  Steward  presides  over  the
House  of  Lords  at  the  trial  of  a  Peer,  at
the  conclusion  of  the  trial  he  breaks  the
white  staff,  which  thus  terminates  his
office.

Rod,  Treasurer’s.  See  Staff,  Treas¬
urer’s.

Roessler,  Carl.  A  German  Masonic
writer,  who  translated  from  French  into
German  the  work  of  Reghellini  on  Ma¬
sonry  in  its  relations  to  the  Egyptian,  Jew¬
ish,  and  Christian  religions,  and  published
it  at  Leipsic  in  1834  and  1835,  under  the
assumed  name  of  R.  S.  Acerrolles.  He
was  the  author  of  some  other  less  impor¬
tant  Masonic  works.

Roll.  In  the  Prestonian  ritual  of
the  fuueral  service,  it  is  directed  that  the
Master,  while  the  brethren  are  standing
around  the  coffin,  shall  take  “the  sacred
roll  ”  in  his  hand,  and,  after  an  invocation,
shall  “put  the  roll  into  the  coffin.”  In
the  subsequent  part  of  the  ceremony,  a
procession  being  formed,  consisting  of  the
members  of  visiting  Lodges  and  of  the
Lodge  to  which  the  deceased  belonged,  it
is  stated  that  all  the  Secretaries  of  the
former  Lodges  carry  rolls,  while  the  Secre¬
tary  of  the  latter  has  none,  because,  of
course,  it  had  been  deposited  by  the  Master
in  the  coffin.  From  the  use  of  the  words
“sacred  roll,”  we  presume  that  the  rolls
borne  by  the  Secretaries  in  funeral  proces¬
sions  are  intended  to  represent  the  roll  of
the  law,  that  being  the  form  still  used  by  the
Jews  for  inscribing  the  Sacred  Books.

Roman  Colleges  of  Artilieers.
It  was  the  German  writers  on  the  history
of  the  Institution,  such  as  Krause,  Held-


mann,  and  some  others  of  less  repute,  who
first  discovered,  or  at  least  first  announced
to  the  world,  the  connection  that  existed
between  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Architects
and  the  Society  of  Freemasons.

The  theory  of  Krause  on  this  subject  is
to  be  found  principally  in  his  well-known
work  entitled  Die  drei  altesten  Kunsterkun-
den.  He  there  advances  the  doctrine  that
Freemasonry  as  it  now  exists  is  indebted
for  all  its  characteristics,  religious  and
social,  political  and  professional,  its  interior
organization,  its  modes  of  thought  and
action,  and  its  very  design  and  object,  to
the  Collegia  Artificum  of  the  Romans,  pass¬
ing  with  but  little  characteristic  changes
through  the  Corporationen  von  Baukunstlern,
or  “  Architectural  Gilds,”  of  the  Middle
Ages  up  to  the  English  organization  of  the
year  1717;  so  that  he  claims  an  almost  ab¬
solute  identity  between  the  Roman  Colleges
of  Numa,  seven  hundred  years  before  Christ,
and  the  Lodges  of  the  nineteenth  century.
We  need  not,  according  to  his  view,  go
any  farther  back  in  history,  nor  look  to
any  other  series  of  events,  nor  trouble  our¬
selves  with  any  other  influences  for  the
origin  and  the  character  of  Freemasonry.

This  theory,  which  is  perhaps  the  most
popular  one  on  the  subject,  requires  careful
examination;  and  in  the  prosecution  of
such  an  inquiry  the  first  thing  to  be  done
will  be  to  investigate,  so  far  as  authentic
history  affords  us  the  means,  the  true  char¬
acter  and  condition  of  these  Roman  Col¬
leges.

It  is  to  Numa,  the  second  king  of  Rome,
that  historians,  following  after  Plutarch,
ascribe  the  first  organization  of  the  Roman
Colleges;  although,  as  Newman  reasonably
conjectures,  it  is  probable  that  similar  or¬
ganizations  previously  existed  among  the
Alban  population,  and  embraced  the  resi¬
dent  Tuscan  artificers.  But  it  is  admitted
that  Numa  gave  to  them  that  form  which
they  always  subsequently  maintained.

Numa,  on  ascending  the  throne,  found
the  citizens  divided  into  various  nationali¬
ties,  derived  from  the  Romans,  the  Sabines
and  the  inhabitants  of  neighboring  smaller
and  weaker  towms,  who,  by  choice  or  by
compulsion,  had  removed  their  residence  to
the  banks  of  the  Tiber.  Hence  resulted  a
disseverance  of  sentiment  and  feeling,  and
a  constant  tendency  to  disunion.  Now  the
object  of  Numa  was  to  obliterate  these
contending  elements  and  to  establish  a  per¬
fect  identity  of  national  feeling,  so  that,  to
use  the  language  of  Plutarch,  “  the  distri¬
bution  of  the  people  might  become  a  har¬
monious  mingling  of  all  with  all.”

For  this  purpose  he  established  one
common  religion,  and  divided  the  citizens
into  curias  and  tribes,  each  curia  and  tribe


654


ROMAN


ROMAN


being  composed  of  an  admixture  indiffer¬
ently  of  Romans,  Sabines,  and  tbe  other
denizens  of  Rome.

Directed  by  the  same  political  sagacity,
he  distributed  the  artisans  into  various
gilds  or  corporations,  under  the  name  of
Collegia,  or  “  Colleges.”  To  each  collegium
was  assigned  the  artisans  of  a  particular
profession,  and  each  had  its  own  regula¬
tions,  both  secular  and  religious.  These
colleges  grew  with  the  growth  of  the  re¬
public;  and  although  Numa  had  originally
established  but  nine,  namely,  the  College
of  Musicians,  of  Goldsmiths,  of  Carpenters,
of  Dyers,  of  Shoemakers,  of  Tanners,  of
Smiths,  of  Potters,  and  a  ninth  composed
of  all  artisans  not  embraced  under  either
of  the  preceding  heads,  they  were  subse¬
quently  greatly  increased  in  number.
Eighty  years  before  the  Christian  era  they
■were,  it  is  true,  abolished,  or  sought  to  be
abolished,  by  a  decree  of  the  Senate,  who
looked  with  jealousy  on  their  political  in¬
fluence,  but  twenty  years  afterwards  they
were  revived,  and  new  ones  established  by  a
law  of  the  tribune  Clodius,  which  repealed
the  Senatus  Consultum.  They  continued
to  exist  under  the  empire,  were  extended
into  the  provinces,  and  even  outlasted  the
decline  and  fall  of  the  Roman  power.

And  now  let  us  inquire  into  the  form
1  and  organization  of  these  Colleges,  and,  in
so  doing,  trace  the  analogy  between  them
and  the  Masonic  Lodges,  if  any  such  anal¬
ogy  exists.

The  first  regulation,  which  was  an  indis¬
pensable  one,  was  that  no  College  could
consist  of  less  than  three  members.  So  in¬
dispensable  was  this  rule  that  the  expres¬
sion  ires  faciunt  collegium ,  “  three  make  a
college,”  became  a  maxim  of  the  civil  law.
So  rigid  too  was  the  application  of  this
rule,  that  the  body  of  Consuls,  although
calling  each  other  “  colleagues,”  and  pos¬
sessing  and  exercising  all  collegiate  rights,
were,  because  they  consisted  only  of  two
members,  never  legally  recognized  as  a  Col¬
lege.  The  reader  will  very  readily  be
struck  with  the  identity  of  this  regulation
of  the  Colleges  and  that  of  Freemasonry,
which  with  equal  rigor  requires  three
Masons  to  constitute  a  Lodge.  The  College
and  the  Lodge  each  demanded  three  mem¬
bers  to  make  it  legal.  A  greater  number
might  give  it  more  efficiency,  but  it  could
not  render  it  more  legitimate.  This,  then,
is  the  first  analogy  between  the  Lodges  of
Freemasons  and  the  Roman  Colleges.

These  Colleges  had  their  appropriate
officers,  who  very  singularly  were  assimi¬
lated  in  stations  and  duties  to  the  officers
of  a  Masonic  Lodge.  Each  College  was
presided  over  by  a  chief  or  president,
whose  title  of  Magister  is  exactly  translated


by  the  English  word  “  Master.”  The  next
officers  were  the  Decurioties.  They  were
analogous  to  the  Masonic  “  Wardens,”  for
each  Decurio  presided  over  a  section  or  di¬
vision  of  the  College,  just  as  in  the  most
ancient  English  and  in  the  present  conti¬
nental  ritual  we  find  the  Lodge  divided
into  two  sections  or  “columns,”  over  each
of  which  one  of  the  Wardens  presided,
through  whom  the  commands  of  the  Master
were  extended  to  “  the  brethren  of  his  col¬
umn.”  There  was  also  in  the  Colleges
a  Scriba,  or  “secretary,”  who  recorded  its
proceedings ;  a  Thesaurensis,  or  “  treasurer,”
who  had  charge  of  the  common  chest;  a
Tabularius,  or  keeper  of  the  archives,  equiv¬
alent  to  the  modern  “Archivist;”  and
lastly,  as  these  Colleges  combined  a  peculiar
religious  worship  with  their  operative  la¬
bors,  there  was  in  each  of  them  a  sacerdos,
or  priest,  who  conducted  the  religious  cere¬
monies,  and  was  thus  exactly  equivalent  to
the  “chaplain”  of  a  Masonic  Lodge.  In
all  this  we  find  another  analogy  between
these  ancient  institutions  and  our  Masonic
bodies.

Another  analogy  will  be  found  in  the
distribution  or  division  of  classes  in  the
Roman  Colleges.  As  the  Masonic  Lodges
have  their  Master  Masons,  their  Fellow
Crafts,  ar.d  their  Apprentices,  so  the  Col¬
leges  had  their  Seniores,  “  Elders,”  or  chief
men  of  the  trade,  and  their  journeymen
and  apprentices.  The  members  did  not,  it
is  true,  like  the  Freemasons,  call  themselves
“Brothers,”  because  this  term,  first  adopted
in  the  gilds  or  corporations  of  the  Middle
Ages,  is  the  offspring  of  a  Christian  senti¬
ment;  but,  as  Krause  remarks,  these  Col¬
leges  were,  in  general,  conducted  after  the
pattern  or  model  of  a  family ;  and  hence
the  appellation  of  brother  would  now  and
then  be  found  among  the  family  appella¬
tions.

'  The  partly  religious  character  of  the
Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers  constitutes  a
very  peculiar  analogy  between  them  and
the  Masonic  Lodges.  The  history  of  these
Colleges  shows  that  an  ecclesiastical  char¬
acter  was  bestowed  upon  them  at  the  very
time  of  their  organization  by  Numa.  Many
of  the  workshops  of  these  artificers  were
erected  in  the  vicinity"  of  temples,  and  their
curia,  or  place  of  meeting,  was  generally
in  some  way  connected  with  a  temple.  The
deity  to  whom  such  temple  was  consecrated
was  peculiarly  worshipped  by  the  members
of  the  adjacent  College,  and  became  the
patron  god  of  their  trade  or  art.  In  time,
when  the  Pagan  religion  was  abolished  and
the  religious  character  of  these  Colleges
was  changed,  the  Pagan  gods  gave  way,
through  the  influences  of  the  new  religion,
to  Christian  saints,  one  of  whom  was  always


ROMAN


ROMAN


655


adopted  as  the  patron  of  the  modern  gilds,
which,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  took  the  place
of  the  Roman  Colleges;  and  hence  the
Freemasons  derive  the  dedication  of  their
Lodges  to  Saint  John  from  a  similar  custom
among  the  Corporations  of  Builders.

These  Colleges  held  secret  meetings,  in
which  the  business  transacted  consisted  of
the  initiations  of  neophytes  into  their  fra¬
ternity,  and  of  mystical  and  esoteric  in¬
structions  to  their  apprentices  and  journey¬
men.  They  were,  in  this  respect,  secret
societies  like  the  Masonic  Lodges.

There  were  monthly  or  other  periodical
contributions  by  the  members  for  the  sup¬
port  of  the  College,  by  which  means  a
common  fund  was  accumulated  for  the
maintenance  of  indigent  members  or  the
relief  of  destitute  strangers  belonging  to
the  same  society.

They  were  permitted  by  the  government
to  frame  a  constitution  and  to  enact  laws
and  regulations  for  their  own  government.
These  privileges  were  gradually  enlarged
and  their  provisions  extended,  so  that  in
the  latter  days  of  the  empire  the  Colleges
of  Architects  especially  were  Invested  with
extraordinary  powers  in  reference  to  the
control  of  builders.  Even  the  distinction
so  well  known  in  Masonic  jurisprudence
between  “  legally  constituted  ”  and  “clan¬
destine  Lodges,”  seems  to  find  a  similitude
or  analogy  here;  for  the  Colleges  which
had  been  established  by  lawful  authority,
and  were,  therefore,  entitled  to  the  enjoy¬
ment  of  the  privileges  accorded  to  those
institutions,  were  said  to  be  collegia  licita,
or  “lawful  colleges,”  while  those  which
were  voluntary  associations,  not  authorized
by  the  express  decree  of  the  senate  or  the
emperor,  were  called  collegia  illicita,  or  “un¬
lawful  colleges.”  The  terms  licita  and
illicita  were  exactly  equivalent  in  their
import  to  the  legally  constituted  and  the
clandestine  Lodges  of  Freemasonry.

In  the  Colleges  the  candidates  for  admis¬
sion  were  elected,  as  in  the  Masonic  Lodges,
by  the  voice  of  the  members.  In  connection
with  this  subject,  the  Latin  word  which
was  used  to  express  the  art  of  admission
or  reception  is  worthy  of  consideration.
When  a  person  was  admitted  into  the  fra¬
ternity  of  a  College,  he  was  said  to  be
cooptatus  in  collegium.  Now,  the  verb  coop-
tare,  almost  exclusively  employed  by  the
Romans  to  signify  an  election  into  a  Col¬
lege,  comes  from  the  Greek  optomai,  “to
see,  to  behold.”  This  same  word  gives
origin,  in  Greek,  to  epoptes,  a  spectator  or
beholder,  one  who  has  attained  to  the  last
degree  in  the  Eleusinian  mysteries;  in  other
words,  an  initiate.  So  that,  without  much
stretch  of  etymological  ingenuity,  we  might
6ay  that  cooptatus  in  collegium  meant  “  to  be


initiated  into  a  College.”  This  is,  at  least,
singular.  But  the  more  general  interpre¬
tation  of  cooptatus  is  “  admitted  or  accepted
in  a  fraternity,”  and  so  “  made  free  of  all
the  privileges  of  the  gild  or  corporation.”
And  hence  the  idea  is  the  same  as  that
conveyed  among  the  Masons  by  the  title
“Free  and  Accepted.”

Finally,  it  is  said  by  Krause  that  these
Colleges  of  workmen  made  a  symbolic  use
of  the  implements  of  their  art  or  profes¬
sion,  in  other  words,  that  they  cultivated
the  science  of  symbolism ;  and  in  this  re¬
spect,  therefore,  more  than  in  any  other,
is  there  a  striking  analogy  between  the
Collegiate  and  the  Masonic  institutions.
The  statement  cannot  be  doubted ;  for  as
the  organization  of  the  Colleges  partook,
as  has  already  been  shown,  of  a  religious
character,  and,  as  it  is  admitted,  that  all
the  religion  of  Paganism  was  eminently
and  almost  entirely  symbolic,  it  must  fol¬
low  that  any  association  which  was  based
upon  or  cultivated  the  religious  or  mytho¬
logical  sentiment,  must  cultivate  also  the
principle  of  symbolism.

I  have  thus  briefly  but  succinctly  shown
that  in  the  form,  the  organization,  the  mode
of  government,  and  the  usages  of  the  Ro¬
man  Colleges,  there  is  an  analogy  between
them  and  the  modern  Masonic  Lodges
■which  is  evidently  more  than  accidental.
It  may  be  that  long  after  the  dissolution
of  the  Colleges,  Freemasonry,  in  the  estab¬
lishment  of  its  Lodges,  designedly  adopted
the  collegiate  organization  as  a  model  after
which  to  frame  its  own  system,  or  it  may  be
that  the  resemblance  has  been  the  result  of  a
slow  but  inevitable  growth  of  a  succession  of
associations  arising  out  of  each  other,  at
the  head  of  w  hich  stands  the  Roman  Col¬
leges.

This  problem  can  only  be  determined  by
an  investigation  of  the  history  of  these
Colleges,  and  of  the  other  similar  institu¬
tions  w’hich  finally  succeeded  them  in  the
progress  of  architecture  in  Europe.  We
shall  then  be  prepared  to  investigate  wfith
understanding  the  theory  of  Krause,  and
to  determine  whether  the  Lodges  are  in¬
debted  to  the  Colleges  for  their  form  alone,
or  for  both  form  and  substance.

We  have  already  seen  that  in  the  time
of  Numa  the  Roman  Colleges  amounted  to
only  nine.  In  the  subsequent  years  of  the
Republic  the  number  was  gradually  aug¬
mented,  so  that  almost  every  trade  or  pro¬
fession  had  its  peculiar  College.  With  the
advance  of  the  empire,  their  numbers  were
still  further  increased  and  their  privileges
greatly  extended,  so  that  they  became  an
important  element  in  the  body  politic.
Leaving  untouched  the  other  Colleges,  I
shall  confine  myself  to  the  Collegii  Artifi-


656


ROMAN


ROMAN


cum,  “  the  Colleges  of  Architects,”  as  the
only  one  whose  condition  and  history  are
relevant  to  the  subject  under  considera¬
tion.

The  Romans  were  early  distinguished
for  a  spirit  of  colonization.  Their  victo¬
rious  arms  had  scarcely  subdued  a  peo¬
ple,  before  a  portion  of  the  army  was  de¬
puted  to  form  a  colony.  Here  the  bar¬
barism  and  ignorance  of  the  native  popu¬
lation  were  replaced  by  the  civilization
and  the  refinement  of  their  Roman  con¬
querors.

The  Colleges  of  Architects,  occupied  in
the  construction  of  secular  and  religious
edifices,  spread  from  the  great  city  to  mu¬
nicipalities  and  the  provinces.  Whenever
a  new  city,  a  temple,  or  a  palace  was  to  be
built,  the  members  of  these  corporations
were  convoked  by  the  Emperor  from  the
most  distant  points,  that  with  a  community
of  labor  they  might  engage  in  the  construc¬
tion.  Laborers  might  be  employed,  like
the  “bearers  of  burdens”  of  the  Jewish
Temple,  in  the  humbler  and  coarser  tasks,
but  the  conduct  and  the  direction  of  the
works  were  intrusted  only  to  the  “  accept¬
ed  members”  —  the  cooptati — of  the  Col¬
leges.

The  colonizations  of  the  Roman  Empire
wTere  conducted  through  the  legionary
soldiers  of  the  army.  Nowt,  to  each  le¬
gion  there  was  attached  a  College  or  cor¬
poration  of  artificers,  which  was  organized
with  the  legion  at  Rome,  and  passed  with
it  through  all  its  campaigns,  encamped
with  it  where  it  encamped,  marched  with
it  where  it  marched,  and  when  it  coloniz¬
ed,  remained  in  the  colony  to  plant  the
seeds  of  Roman  civilization,  and  to  teach
the  principles  of  Roman  art.  The  mem¬
bers  of  the  College  erected  fortifications
for  the  legion  in  times  of  war,  and  in  times
of  peace,  or  when  the  legion  became  sta¬
tionary,  constructed  temples  and  dwelling-
houses.

When  England  was  subdued  by  the  Ro¬
man  arms,  the  legions  which  went  there  to
secure  and  to  extend  the  conquest,  carried
wTith  them,  of  course,  their  Colleges  of
Architects.  One  of  these  legions,  for  in¬
stance,  under  Julius  Caesar,  advancing  into
the  northern  limits  of  the  country,  estab¬
lished  a  colony,  which,  under  the  name  of
Eboracum,  gave  birth  to  the  city  of  York,
afterwards  so  celebrated  in  the  history  of
Masonry.  Existing  inscriptions  and  archi¬
tectural  remains  attest  how  much  was  done
in  the  island  of  Britain  by  these  associa¬
tions  of  builders.

Druidism  was  at  that  time  the  prevailing
religion  of  the  ancient  Britons.  But  the
toleration  of  Paganism  soon  led  to  an  har¬


monious  admixture  of  the  religious  ideas
of  the  Roman  builders  with  those  of  the
Druid  priests.  Long  anterior  to  this
Christianity  had  dawned  upon  the  British
islands ;  for,  to  use  the  emphatic  language
of  Tertullian,  “  Britain,  inaccessible  to  the
Romans,  was  subdued  by  Christ.”  The
influences  of  the  new  faith  were  not  long
in  being  felt  by  the  Colleges,  and  the  next
phase  in  their  history  is  the  record  of  their
assumption  of  the  Christian  life  and  doc¬
trine.

But  the  incursions  of  the  northern  bar¬
barians  into  Italy  demanded  the  entire  force
of  the  Roman  armies  to  defgnd  the  integ¬
rity  of  the  Empire  at  home.  Britain  was
abandoned,  and  the  natives,  with  the  Ro¬
man  colonists  who  had  settled  among  them,
were  left  to  defend  themselves.  These
w’ere  soon  driven,  first  by  the  Piets,  their
savage  neighbors,  and  then  by  the  Saxon
sea  robbers,  whom  the  English  had  incau¬
tiously  summoned  to  their  aid,  into  the
mountains  of  Wales  and  the  islands  of  the
Irish  Sea.  The  architects  who  were  con¬
verted  to  Christianity,  and  who  had  re¬
mained  when  the  legions  left  the  country,
went  with  them,  and  having  lost  their  con¬
nection  with  the  mother  institution,  they
became  thenceforth  simply  corporations  or
societies  of  builders,  the  organization  which
had  always  worked  so  well  being  still  re¬
tained.

Subsequently,  when  the  whole  of  Eng¬
land  was  taken  possession  of  by  the  Saxon
invaders,  the  Britons,  headed  by  the  monks
and  priests,  and  accompanied  by  their  archi¬
tects,  fled  into  Ireland  and  Scotland,  which
countries  they  civilized  and  converted,  and
whose  inhabitants  were  instructed  in  the
art  of  building  by  the  corporations  of  archi¬
tects.

Whenever  we  read  of  the  extension  in
barbarous  or  Pagan  countries  of  Chris¬
tianity,  and  the  conversion  of  their  inhabi¬
tants  to  the  true  faith,  we  also  hear  of  the
propagation  of  the  art  of  building  in  the
same  places  by  the  corporatious  of  archi¬
tects,  the  immediate  successors  of  the
legionary  Colleges,  for  the  new  religion  re¬
quired  churches,  and  in  time  cathedrals  and
monasteries,  and  the  ecclesiastical  archi¬
tecture  speedily  suggested  improvements  in
the  civil.

In  time  all  the  religious  knowledge  and
all  the  architectural  skill  of  the  northern
part  of  Europe  were  concentrated  in  the
remote  regions  of  Ireland  and  Scotland,
whence  missionaries  were  sent  back  to
England  to  convert  the  Pagan  Saxons.
Thus  the  venerable  Bede  tells  us  (Eccl.
Hist.,  lib.  iii.,  cap.  4,  7,)  that  West  Saxony
was  converted  by  Agilbert,  an  Irish


ROMAN


ROMAN


657


bishop,  and  East  Anglia,  by  Fursey,  a
Scotch  missionary.  From  England  these
energetic  missionaries,  accompanied  by  their
pious  architects,  passed  over  into  Europe,
and  effectually  labored  for  the  conversion
of  the  Scandinavian  nations,  introducing
into  Germany,  Sweden,  Norway,  and  even
Ireland,  the  blessings  of  Christianity  and
the  refinements  of  civilized  life.

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  in  all  the  early
records  the  word  Scotland  is  very  gener¬
ally  used  as  a  generic  term  to  indicate  both
Scotland  and  Ireland.  This  error  arose
most  probably  from  the  very  intimate  geo¬
graphical  and  social  connections  of  the
Scotch  and  the  northern  Irish,  and  per¬
haps,  also,  from  the  general  inaccuracy  of
the  historians  of  that  period.  Thus  has
arisen  the  very  common  opinion,  that  Scot¬
land  was  the  germ  whence  sprang  all  the
Christianity  of  the  northern  nations,  and
that  the  same  country  was  the  cradle  of
ecclesiastical  architecture  and  Operative
Masonry.

This  historical  error,  by  which  the  glory
of  Ireland  has  been  merged  in  that  of  her
sister  country,  Scotland,  has  been  preserved
in  much  of  the  language  and  many  of  the
traditions  of  modern  Freemasonry.  Hence
the  story  of  the  Abbey  of  Kilwinning  as
the  birthplace  of  Masonry,  a  story  which  is
still  the  favorite  of  the  Freemasons  of  Scot¬
land.  Hence  the  tradition  of  the  apocry¬
phal  mountain  of  Heroden,  situated  in  the
north-west  of  Scotland,  where  the  first  or
metropolitan  Lodge  of  Europe  was  held ;
hence  the  high  degrees  of  Ecossais,  or  Scot¬
tish  Master,  which  play  so  important  a  part
in  modern  philosophical  Masonry ;  and
hence  the  title  of  “  Scottish  Masonry,”  ap¬
plied  to  one  of  the  leading  Rites  of  Freema¬
sonry,  which  has,  however,  no  other  con¬
nection  with  Scotland  than  that  historical
one,  through  the  corporations  of  builders,
which  is  common  to  the  whole  Institution.

It  is  not  worth  while  to  trace  the  reli¬
gious  contests  between  the  original  Chris¬
tians  of  Britain  and  the  Papal  power,
which  after  years  of  controversy  terminated
in  the  submission  of  the  British  Bishops  to
the  Pope.  As  soon  as  the  Papal  authority
was  firmly  established  over  Europe,  the  Ro¬
man  Catholic  hierarchy  secured  the  ser¬
vices  of  the  builders’  corporations,  and
these,  under  the  patronage  of  the  Pope  and
the  Bishops,  were  everywhere  engaged  as
“travelling  freemasons,”  in  the  construc¬
tion  of  ecclesiastical  and  regal  edifices.

Henceforth  we  find  these  corporations  of
builders  exercising  their  art  in  all  coun¬
tries,  everywhere  proving,  as  Mr.  Hope
says,  by  the  identity  of  their  designs,  that
they  were  controlled  by  universally  ac¬
cepted  principles,  and  showing  in  every
4  U  4 2


other  way  the  characteristics  of  a  corpora¬
tion  or  gild.  So  far  the  chain  of  con¬
nection  between  them  and  the  Collegia  Ar-
tificum  at  Rome  has  not  been  broken.

In  the  year  926  a  general  assembly  of
these  builders  was  held  at  the  city  of  York,
in  England.

Four  years  after,  in  930,  according  to  Re¬
bold,  Henry  the  Fowler  broughtthese  build¬
ers,  now  called  Masons,  from  England  into
Germany,  and  employed  them  in  the  con¬
struction  of  various  edifices,  such  as  the
cathedrals  of  Magdeburg,  Meissen,  and
Merseburg.  But  Krause,  who  is  better
and  more  accurate  as  a  historian  than  Re¬
bold,  says  that,  as  respects  Germany,  the
first  account  that  we  find  of  these  corpora¬
tions  of  builders  is  at  the  epoch  when,
under  the  direction  of  Edwin  of  Steinbach,
the  most  distinguished  architects  had  con¬
gregated  from  all  parts  at  Strasburg  for  the
construction  of  the  cathedral  of  that  city.
There  they  held  their  general  assembly,
like  that  of  their  English  brethren  at  York,
enacted  Constitutions,  and  established,  at
length,  a  Grand  Lodge,  to  whose  decisions
numerous  Lodges  or  hutten,  subsequently
organized  in  Germany,  Bohemia,  Hungary,
France,  and  other  countries,  yielded  obedi¬
ence.  George  Kloss,  in  his  exhaustive
work  entitled  Die  Freimaurerei  in  ihrer
wahren  Bedeutung,  has  supplied  us  with  a
full  collation  of  the  statutes  and  regula¬
tions  adopted  by  these  Strasburg  Masons.

We  have  now  reached  recent  historical
ground,  and  can  readily  trace  these  asso¬
ciations  of  builders  to  the  establishment  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  at  London,
in  1717,  when  the  Lodges  abandoned  their
operative  charters  and  became  exclusively
speculative.  The  record  of  the  continued
existence  of  Lodges  of  Free  and  Accepted
Masons  from  that  day  to  this,  in  every
civilized  country  of  the  world,  is  in  the
hands  of  every  Masonic  student.  To  repeat
it  would  be  a  tedious  work  of  supereroga¬
tion.

Such  is  the  history,  and  now  what  is
the  necessary  deduction.  It  cannot  be
doubted  that  Krause  is  correct  in  his
theory  that  the  incunabula  —  the  cradle
or  birthplace  —  of  the  modern  Masonic
Lodges  is  to  be  found  in  the  Roman  Col¬
leges  of  Architects.  That  theory  is  cor¬
rect,  if  we  look  only  to  the  outward  form
and  mode  of  working  of  the  Lodges.  To
the  Colleges  are  they  indebted  for  every¬
thing  that  distinguished  them  as  a  gild  or
corporation,  and  especially  are  they  in¬
debted  to  the  architectural  character  of
these  Colleges  for  the  fact,  so  singular  in
Freemasonry,  that  its  religious  symbolism
—  that  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from
all  other  institutions  —  is  founded  on  the


658


ROMVEL


ROSE


elements,  the  working-tools,  and  the  tech¬
nical  language  of  the  stonemasons’  art.

But  when  we  view  Freemasonry  in  a
higher  aspect,  when  we  look  at  it  as  a
science  of  symbolism,  the  whole  of  which
symbolism  is  directed  to  but  one  point,
namely,  the  elucidation  of  the  great  doc¬
trine  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and
the  teaching  of  the  two  lives,  the  present
and  the  future,  we  must  go  beyond  the
Colleges  of  Rome,  which  were  only  opera¬
tive  associations,  to  that  older  type  to  be
found  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  wrhere  pre¬
cisely  the  same  doctrine  was  taught  pre¬
cisely  in  the  same  manner.  Krause  does
not,  it  is  true,  altogether  omit  a  reference  to
the  priests  of  Greece,  who,  he  thinks,  were
in  some  way  the  original  whence  the  Ro¬
man  Colleges  derived  their  existence;  but
he  has  not  pressed  the  point  with  the  per¬
tinacity  which  its  importance  requires.
He  gives  in  his  theory  a  pre-eminence  to
the.  Colleges  to  which  they  are  not  in  truth
entitled.

Romrel.  In  the  Hiramic  legend  of
some  of  the  high  degrees,  this  is  the  name
given  to  one  of  the  assassins  of  the  third
degree.  This  is,  I  think,  clearly  an  in¬
stance  of  the  working  of  Stuart  Masonry,
in  giving  names  of  infamy  in  the  legends
of  the  Order  to  the  enemies  of  the  house
of  Stuart.  For  I  cannot  doubt  the  correct¬
ness  of  Bro.  Albert  Pike’s  suggestion,  that
this  is  a  manifest  corruption  of  Cromwell.
If  with  them  Hiram  was  but  a  symbol  of
Charles  I.,  then  the  assassin  of  Hiram  was
properly  symbolized  by  Cromwell.

Romaic  System.  The  system  of  Ma¬
sonry  taught  by  Rosa  in  the  Lodges  which
he  established  in  Germany  and  Holland,
and  which  were  hence  sometimes  called
“  Rosaic  Lodges.”  Although  he  professed
that  it  was  the  system  of  the  Clermont
Chapter,  for  the  propagation  of  which  he  had
been  appointed  by  the  Baron  Yon  Printzen,
he  had  mixed  with  that  system  many  al¬
chemical  and  theosophic  notions  of  his
own.  The  system  was  at  first  popular,  but
it  finally  succumbed  to  the  greater  attrac¬
tions  of  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance,
which  had  been  introduced  into  Germany
by  the  Baron  Von  Hund.

Rosa,  Pliilipp  Samnel.  Born  at
Ysenberg;  at  one  time  a  Lutheran  clergy¬
man,  and  in  1757  rector  of  the  Cathedral
of  St.  James  at  Berlin.  He  was  initiated
into  Masonry  in  the  Lodge  of  the  Three
Globes,  and  Von  Printzen  having  estab¬
lished  a  Chapter  of  the  high  degrees  at
Berlin  on  the  system  of  the  French  Chap¬
ter  of  Clermont,  Rosa  was  appointed  his
deputy,  aud  sent  by  him  to  propagate  the
system.  He  visited  various  places  in  Ger¬
many,  Holland,  Denmark,  and  Sweden.


In  Denmark  and  Sweden,  although  well
received  personally  on  account  of  his  pleas¬
ing  manners,  he  made  no  progress  in  the
establishment  of  the  Rite;  but  his  success
was  far  better  in  Germany  and  Holland,
where  he  organized  many  Lodges  of  the
high  degrees,  engrafting  them  on  the  Eng¬
lish  system,  which  alone  had  been  there¬
tofore  known  in  those  countries.  Rosa  was
a  mystic  and  a  pretended  alchemist,  and  as
a  Masonic  charlatan  accumulated  large
sums  of  money  by  the  sale  of  degrees  and
decorations.  Lenning  does  not  speak  well
of  his  moral  conduct,  but  some  contempo¬
rary  writers  describe  him  as  a  man  of  very
attractive  manners,  to  which  indeed  may
be  ascribed  his  popularity  as  a  Masonic
leader.  While  residing  at  Halle,  he,  in
1765,  issued  a  protestation  against  the  pro¬
ceedings  of  the  Congress  of  Jena,  which
had  been  convoked  in  that  year  by  the  im¬
postor  Johnson.  But  it  met  with  no  suc¬
cess,  and  thenceforth  Rosa  faded  away  from
the  knowledge  of  the  Masonic  world.  We
can  learn  nothing  of  his  subsequent  life,
nor  of  the  time  or  place  of  his  death.

Rose.  The  symbolism  of  the  rose
among  the  ancients  was  twofold.  First,  as
it  was  dedicated  to  Venus  as  the  goddess
of  love,  it  became  the  symbol  of  secrecy,
and  hence  came  the  expression  “  under  the
rose,”  to  indicate  that  which  was  spoken  in
confidence.  Again,  as  it  was  dedicated  to
Venus  as  the  personification  of  the  genera¬
tive  energy  of  nature,  it  became  the  symbol
of  immortality.  In  this  latter  and  more
recondite  sense  it  was,  in  Christian  sym¬
bology,  transferred  to  Christ,  through  whom
“life  and  immortality  were  brought  to
light.”  The  “rose  of  Sharon”  of  the
Book  of  Canticles  is  always  applied  to
Christ,  and  hence  Fuller  (Pisgah  Sight  of
Palestine )  calls  him  “  that  prime  rose  and
lily.”  Thus  we  see  the  significance  of  the
rose  on  the  cross  as  a  part  of  the  jewel  of
the  Rose  Croix  degree.  Reghellini,  (vol.  i.,
p.  358,)  after  showing  that  anciently  the
rose  was  the  symbol  of  secrecy,  and  the
cross  of  immortality,  says  that  the  two
united  symbols  of  a  rose  resting  on  a  cross
always  indicate  the  secret  of  immortality.
Ragon  agrees  with  him  in  opinion,  and  says
that  it  is  the  simplest  mode  of  writing  that
dogma.  But  he  subsequently  gives  a  dif¬
ferent  explanation,  namely,  that  as  the
rose  was  the  emblem  of  the  female  princi¬
ple,  and  the  cross  or  triple  phallus  of  the
male,  the  two  together,  like  the  Indian
lingam,  symbolized  universal  generation.
But  Ragon,  who  has  adopted  the  theory
of  the  astronomical  origin  of  Freemasonry,
like  all  theorists,  often  carries  his  specula¬
tions  on  this  subject  to  an  extreme  point.
A  simpler  allusion  will  better  suit  the


ROSE


ROSE


659


character  and  teachings  of  the  degree  in
its  modem  organization.  The  rose  is  the
symbol  of  Christ,  and  the  cross,  the  symbol
of  his  death,  —  the  two  united,  the  rose  sus¬
pended  on  the  cross, — signify  his  death  on
the  cross,  whereby  the  secret  of  immortality
was  taught  to  the  world.  In  a  word,  the
rose  on  the  cross  is  Christ  crucified.

Rose  and  Triple  Cross.  A  de¬
gree  contained  in  the  Archives  of  the  Lodge
of  Saint  Louis  des  Amis  Reunis  at  Calais.

Rose  Croix.  French.  Literally,
Rose  Cross.  1.  The  seventh  degree  of  the
French  Rite;  2.  The  seventh  degree  of
the  Philalethes ;  3.  The  eighth  degree  of
the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Philosophic  Scot¬
tish  Rite;  4.  The  twelfth  degree  of  the
Elect  of  Truth ;  5.  The  eighteenth  degree
of  the  Mother  Scottish  Lodge  of  Marseilles;
6.  The  eighteenth  degree  of  the  Rite  of
Heredom,  or  of  Perfection.

Rose  Croix,  Brethren  of  the.
Thory  says  ( Fondat .  du  G.  Or.,  p.  163,)
that  the  Archives  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of
the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite  at  Paris  con¬
tain  the  manuscripts  and  books  of  a  secret
society  which  existed  at  the  Hague  in  1622,
where  it  was  known  under  the  title  of  the
Frlres  de  la  Rose  Croix,  which  pretended
to  have  emanated  from  the  original  Rosi-
crucian  organization  of  Christian  Rosen-
kruz.  Hence  Thory  thinks  that  the  Philo¬
sophic  Rite  was  only  a  continuation  of
this  society  of  the  Brethren  of  the  Rose
Croix.

Rose  Croix,  Jacobite.  The  origi¬
nal  Rose  Croix  conferred  in  the  Chapter
of  Arras,  whose  Charter  was  granted  by
the  Pretender,  was  so  called  with  a  politi¬
cal  allusion  to  King  James  III.,  whose  ad¬
herents  were  known  as  Jacobites.

Rose  Croix,  Knight.  ( Chevalier
Rose  Croix.)  The  eighteenth  degree  of  the
Rite  of  Perfection.  It  is  the  same  as  the
Prince  of  Rose  Croix  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Rite.

Rose  Croix,  Magnetic.  The

thirty-eighth  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.

Rose  Croix  of  Germany.  A

hermetic  degree,  which  Ragon  says  belongs
rather  to  the  class  of  Elus  than  to  that  of
Rose  Croix.

Rose  Croix  of  Gold.  Brethren
of  the.  (Fr&res  de  la  Rose  Croix  d’  Or.)  An
alchemical  and  hermetic  society,  which  was
founded  in  Germany  in  1777.  It  promised
to  its  disciples  the  secret  of  the  transmuta¬
tion  of  metals,  and  the  panacea  or  art  of
prolonging  life.  The  Baron  Gleichen,  who
was  Secretary  for  the  German  language  of
the  Philalethan  Congress  at  Paris  in  1785,
gives  the  following  history  of  the  organiza¬
tion  of  this  society :

“  The  members  of  the  Rose  Croix  affirm


that  they  are  the  legitimate  authors  and
superiors  of  Freemasonry,  to  all  of  whose
symbols  they  give  a  hermetical  interpreta¬
tion.  The  Masons,  they  say,.  came  into
England  under  King  Arthur.  Raymond
Lully  initiated  Henry  IV.  The  Grand
Masters  were  formerly  designated,  as  now,
by  the  titles  of  John  I.,  II.,  III.,  IV.,  etc.

“  Their  jewel  is  a  golden  compass  at¬
tached  to  a  blue  ribbon,  the  symbol  of
purity  and  w'isdom.  The  principal  em¬
blems  on  the  ancient  tracing-board  were
the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  double  triangle,
having  in  its  centre  the  first  letter  of  the
Hebrew  alphabet.  The  brethren  wore  a
silver  ring,  on  which  were  the  letters  I.  A.
A.  T.,  the  initials  of  Ignis,  Aer,  Aqua,  Terra.

“The  Ancient  Rose  Croix  recognized
only  three  degrees ;  the  third  degree,  as  we
now  know  it,  has  been  substituted  for
another  more  significant  one.”

The  Baron  de  Westerode,  in  a  letter
dated  1784,  and  .quoted  by  Thory,  (Act.
Lat.,  i.  336,)  gives  another  mythical  ac¬
count.  He  says :

“  The  disciples  of  the  Rose  Croix  came,
in  1188,  from  the  East  into  Europe,  for
the  propagation  of  Christianity  after  the
troubles  in  Palestine.  Three  of  them
founded  in  Scotland  the  Order  of  the
Masons  of  the  East,  (Knights  of  the  East,)
to  serve  as  a  seminary  for  instruction  in
the  most  sublime  sciences.  This  Order  was
in  existence  in  1196.  Edward,  the  son  of
Henry  III.,  was  received  into  the  society
of  the  Rose  Croix  by  Raymond  Lully.  At
that  time  only  learned  men  and  persons  of
high  rank  were  admitted.

“  Their  founder  was  a  seraphic  priest  of
Alexandria,  a  magus  of  Egypt  named  Or-
mesius,  or  Ormus,  who  with  six  of  his  com¬
panions  was  converted  in  the  year  96  by  St.
Mark.  He  purified  the  doctrine  of  the
Egyptians  according  to  the  precepts  of
Christianity,  and  founded  the  society  of
Ormus,  that  is  to  say,  the  Sages  of  Light,
to  the  members  of  which  he  gave  a  red
cross  as  a  decoration.  About  the  same
time  the  Essenes  and  other  Jews  founded  a
school  of  Solomonic  wisdom,  to  which  the
disciples  of  Ormus  united  themselves.
Then  the  society  was  divided  into  various
Orders  known  as  the  Conservators  of  Mo¬
saic  Secrets,  of  Hermetic  Secrets,  etc.

“  Several  members  of  the  association
having  yielded  to  the  temptations  of  pride,
seven  Masters  united,  effected  a  reform,
adopted  a  modern  constitution,  and  col¬
lected  together  on  their  tracing-board  all
the  allegories  of  the  hermetic  work.”

In  this  almost  altogether  fabulous  narra¬
tive  we  find  an  inextricable  confusion  of
the  Rose  Croix  Masons  and  the  Rosicru-
cian  philosophers.


660


ROSE


ROSE


Rose  Croix  of  Ileredom.  The

first  degree  of  the  Royal  Order  of  Scotland,
the  eighteenth  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite,  the  eighteenth  of  the  Rite  of  Perfec¬
tion,  the  ninetieth  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim,
and  some  others  affix  to  the  title  of  Rose
Croix  that  of  Heredom,  for  the  signification
of  which  see  the  word.

Rose  Croix  of  the  Dames.  ( Rose
Croix  des  Dames.)  This  degree,  called  also
the  Ladies  of  Beneficence,  ( Chevalieres  de  la
Bienfaisance,)  is  the  sixth  capitular  or  ninth
degree  of  the  French  Rite  of  Adoption.  It
is  not  only  Christian,  but  Roman  Catholic
in  its  character,  and  is  derived  from  the
ancient  Jesuitical  system  as  first  promul¬
gated  in  the  Rose  Croix  Chapter  of  Arras.

Rose  Croix  of  the  Grand  Ro¬
sary.  [Rose  Croix  du  Grand  Rosaire.)  The
fourth  and  highest  Rose  Croix  Chapter  of
the  Primitive  Rite.

Rose  Croix,  Philosophic.  A  Ger¬
man  hermetic  degree  found  in  the  collec¬
tion  of  M.  Pyron,  and  in  the  Archives  of
the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.  It  is  prob¬
ably  the  same  as  the  Brethren  of  the  Rose
Croix,  of  whom  Thory  thinks  that  that  Rite
is  only  a  continuation.

Rose  Croix,  Prince  of.  French,
Souverain  Prince  Rose  Croix.  German,
Prim  vom  Rosenkruz.  This  important  de¬
gree  is,  of  all  the  high  grades,  the  most
widely  diffused,  being  found  in  numerous
Rites.  It  is  the  eighteenth  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  the  seventh
of  the  French  or  Modern,  the  eighteenth
of  the  Council  of  Emperors  of  the  East
and  West,  the  third  of  the  Royal  Order  of
Scotland,  the  twelfth  of  the  Elect  of  Truth,
and  the  seventh  of  the  Philalethes.  It  was
also  given,  formerly,  in  some  Encampments
of  Knights  Templars,  and  was  the  sixth  of
the  degrees  conferred  by  the  Encampment
of  Baldwyn  at  Bristol,  in  England.  It
must  not,  however,  be  confounded  with  the
Rosicrucians,  who,  however,  similar  in
name,  were  only  a  hermetic  and  mystical
Order.

The  degree  is  known  by  various  names  :
sometimes  its  possessors  are  called  “  Sov¬
ereign  Princes  of  Rose  Croix,”  sometimes
“  Princes  of  Rose  Croix  de  Heroden,”  and
sometimes  “  Knights  of  the  Eagle  and  Pel¬
ican.”  In  relation  to  its  origin,  Masonic
writers  have  made  many  conflicting  state¬
ments,  some  giving  it  a  much  higher  an¬
tiquity  than  others ;  but  all  agreeing  in
supposing  it  to  be  one  of  the  earliest  of  the
higher  degrees.  The  name  has,  undoubt¬
edly,  been  the  cause  of  much  of  this  confu¬
sion  in  relation  to  its  history ;  and  the
Masonic  degree  of  Rose  Croix  has,  perhaps,
often  been  confounded  with  the  kabbalistical
and  alchemical  sect  of  “  Rosicrucians,”  or


“  Brothers  of  the  Rosy  Cross,”  among  whose
adepts  the  names  of  such  men  as  Roger
Bacon,  Paracelsus,  and  Elias  Ashmole  the
celebrated  antiquary,  are  to  be  found.  Not¬
withstanding  the  invidious  attempts  of
Barruel  and  other  foes  of  Masonry  to  con¬
found  the  two  Orders,  there  is  a  great  dis¬
tinction  between  them.  Even  their  names,
although  somewhat  similar  in  sound,  are
totally  different  in  signification.  The  Rosi-
cruciaus,  who  were  alchemists,  did  not
derive  their  name,  like  the  Rose  Croix
Masons,  from  the  emblems  of  the  rose  and
cross,  —  for  they  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
rose, — but  from  the  Latin  ros,  signifying
dew,  which  was  supposed  to  be  of  all  natu¬
ral  bodies  the  most  powerful  solvent  of
gold,  and  crux,  the  cross,  a  chemical  hiero¬
glyphic  of  light.

Baron  Westerode,  who  wrote  in  1784,  in
the  Acta  Lo.tomorum  gives  the  earliest  ori¬
gin  of  any  Masonic  writer  to  the  degree  of
Rose  Croix.  He  supposes  that  it  was  insti¬
tuted  among  the  Knights  Templars  in  Pal¬
estine,  in  the  year  1188,  and  he  adds  that
Prince  Edward,  the  son  of  Henry  III.  of
England,  was  admitted  into  the  Order  by
Raymond  Lully  in  1196.  Westerode  names
Ormesius,  an  Egyptian  priest,  who  had  been
converted  to  Christianity,  as  its  founder.

Some  have  sought  to  find  its  origin  in
the  labors  of  Valentine  Andrea,  the  reputed
founder  of  the  Rosicrucian  fraternity.  But
the  Rose  Croix  of  Masonry  and  the  her¬
metic  Rosicrucianism  of  Andrea  were  two
entirely  different  things;  and  it  would  be
difficult  to  trace  any  connection  between
them,  at  least  any  such  connection  as  would
make  one  the  legitimate  successor  of  the
other.  J.  G.  Bulile,  in  a  work,  published
in  Gottingen  in  1804,  under  the  title  of
Ueber  den  Ursprung  und  die  vomehmsten
Schicksale  der  Orden  der  Rosenkreulzer  und
Freimaurer ,  reverses  this  theory,  and  sup¬
poses  the  Rosicrucians  to  be  a  branch  of
the  Freemasons;  and  Higgins,  in  his  Ana-
calypsis,  (ii.  388,)  thinks  that  the  “modern
Templars,  the  Rosicrucians,  and  the  Masons
are  little  more  than  different  Lodges  of  one
Order,”  all  of  which  is  only  a  confusion  of
history  in  consequence  of  a  confounding
of  names.  It  is  thus  that  Inge  has  written
an  elaborate  essay  on  the  Origins  de  la  Rose
Croix;  ( Globe,  vol.  iii., )  but  as  he  has,  with
true  Gallic  insousiance  of  names,  spoken
indifferently  of  the  Rose  Croix  Masons  and
the  Rosicrucians  Adepts,  his  statements
supply  no  facts  available  for  history.

The  Baron  de  Gleichen,  who  was,  in
1785,  the  German  secretary  of  the  Philale-
than  Congress  at  Paris,  says  that  the  Rose
Croix  and  the  Masons  were  united  in  Eng¬
land  under  King  Arthur.  But  he  has,  un¬
doubtedly,  mixed  up  Rosicrucianism  with


ROSE


ROSE


661


the  Masonic  legends  of  the  Knights  of  the
Round  Table,  and  his  assertions  must  go
for  nothing.

Others,  again,  have  looked  for  the  origin
of  the  Rose  Croix  degree,  or,  at  least,  of
its  emblems,  in  the  Symbola  divina  et  Hu¬
mana  pontijicum,  imperatorum,  regum  of
James  Typot,  or  Typotius,  the  historiogra¬
pher  of  the  Emperor  Rudolph  II.,  a  work
which  was  published  in  1601 ;  and  it  is
particularly  in  that  part  of  it  which  is  de¬
voted  to  the  “  symbol  of  the  holy  cross  ”
that  the  allusions  are  supposed  to  be  found
which  would  seem  to  indicate  the  author’s
knowledge  of  this  degree.  But  Ragon  re¬
futes  the  idea  of  any  connection  between
the  symbols  of  Typotius  and  those  of  the
Rose  Croix.  Robison  ( Proofs ,  p.  72,)  also
charges  Von  Hund  with  borrowing  his
symbols  from  the  same  work,  in  which,
howeve-,  he  declares  “  there  is  not  the  least
trace  of  Masonry  or  Templars.”

Clavel,  with  his  usual  boldness  of  asser¬
tion,  which  is  too  often  independent  of
facts,  declares  that  the  degree  was  invented
by  the  Jesuits  for  the  purpose  of  counter¬
mining  the  insidious  attacks  of  the  free¬
thinkers  upon  the  Roman  Catholic  religion,
but  that  the  philosophers  parried  the  at¬
tempt  by  seizing  upon  the  degree  and  giving
to  all  its  symbols  an  astronomical  significa¬
tion.  Clavel’s  opinion  is  probably  derived
from  one  of  those  sweeping  charges  of  Pro¬
fessor  Robison,  in  which  that  systematic
enemy  of  our  Institution  declares  that,
about  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury,  the  Jesuits  interfered  considerably
with  Masonry,  “insinuating  themselves
into  the  Lodges,  and  contributing  to  in¬
crease  that  religious  mysticism  that  is  to  be
observed  in  all  the  ceremonies  of  the  Order.”
But  there  is  no  better  evidence  than  these
mere  vague  assertions  of  the  connection
of  the  Jesuits  with  the  Rose  Croix  degree.

Oliver  ( Landm .,  ii.  81,)  says  that  the  ear¬
liest  notice  that  he  finds  of  this  degree  is
in  a  publication  of  1613,  entitled  La  Re¬
formation  universelle  du  monde  entier  avec  la
fama  fraternitatis  de  V  Ordre  respectable  de
la  Rose  Croix.  But  he  adds,  that  “  it  was
known  much  sooner,  although  not  probably
as  a  degree  in  Masonry ;  for  it  existed  as  a
kabbalistic  science  from  the  earliest  times
in  Egypt,  Greece,  and  Rome,  as  well  as
amongst  the  Jews  and  Moors  in  times  more
recent.”

Oliver,  however,  undoubtedly,  in  the  lat¬
ter  part  of  this  paragraph,  confounds  the
Masonic  Rose  Croix  with  the  alchemical
Rosicrucians ;  and  the  former  is  singularly
inconsistent  with  the  details  that  he  gives
in  reference  to  the  Rosy  Cross  of  the  Royal
Order  of  Scotland.

There  is  a  tradition,  into  whose  authen¬


ticity  I  shall  not  stop  to  inquire,  that  after
the  dissolution  of  the  Order,  many  of  the
knights  repaired  to  Scotland  and  placed
themselves  under  the  protection  of  Robert
Bruce ;  and  that  after  the  battle  of  Bannock¬
burn,  which  took  place  on  St.  John  the
Baptist’s  day,  in  the  year  1314,  this  mon¬
arch  instituted  the  Royal  Order  of  Here-
dom  and  Knight  of  the  Rosy  Cross,  and
established  the  chief  seat  of  the  Order  at
Kilwinning.  From  that  Order,  it  seems  to
us  by  no  means  improbable  that  the  pres¬
ent  degree  of  Rose  Croix  de  Heroden  may
have  taken  its  origin.  In  two  respects,  at
least,  there  seems  to  be  a  very  close  con¬
nection  between  the  two  systems:  they
both  claim  the  kingdom  of  Scotland  and
the  Abbey  of  Kilwinning  as  having  been
at  one  time  their  chief  seat  of  government,
and  they  both  seem  to  have  been  instituted
to  give  a  Christian  explanation  to  Ancient
Craft  Masonry.  There  is,  besides,  a  simi¬
larity  in  the  names  of  the  degrees  of  “Rose
Croix  de  Heroden,”  and  “  Heredom  and
Rosy  Cross,”  amounting  almost  to  an  iden¬
tity,  which  appears  to  indicate  a  very  inti¬
mate  relation  of  one  to  the  other.

The  subject,  however,  is  in  a  state  of  in¬
extricable  confusion,  and  I  confess  that,
after  all  my  researches,  I  am  still  unable
distinctly  to  point  to  the  period  when,  and
to  the  place  where,  the  present  degree  of
Rose  Croix  received  its  organization  as  a
Masonic  grade.

We  have  this  much  of  history  to  guide
us.  In  the  year  1747,  the  Pretender,
Prince  Charles  Edward,  established  a  Chap¬
ter  in  the  town  of  Arras,  in  France,  with
the  title  of  the  “  Chapitre  Primordial  de
Rose  Croix.”  The  Charter  of  this  body  is
now  extant  in  an  authenticated  copy  de¬
posited  in  the  departmental  archives  of
Arras.  In  it  the  Pretender  styles  himself
“King  of  England,  France,  Scotland,  and
Ireland,  and,  by  virtue  of  this,  Sovereign
Grand  Master  of  the  Chapter  of  H.  known
under  the  title  of  the  Eagle  and  Pelican,
and,  since  our  sorrows  and  misfortunes,
under  that  of  Rose  Croix.”  From  this  we
may  infer  that  the  titleof“  Rose  Croix”  was
first  known  in  1747 ;  that  the  degree  had
been  formerly  known  as  “  Knight  of  the
Eagle  and  Pelican,”  a  title  which  it  still
retains;  that  it  was  at  that  date  introduced
into  France  by  the  Pretender,  who  bor¬
rowed  it  from  the  Rosy  Cross  of  the  Royal
Order  of  Scotland,  of  which,  because  as
the  King  of  Scotland  is  the  Hereditary
Grand  Master,  he,  by  virtue  of  his  claim  to
the  throne,  assumed  the  Grand  Mastership.
Hence  it  is  probable  that  the  Rose  Croix
degree  has  been  borrowed  from  the  Rosy
Cross  of  the  Scottish  Royal  Order  of  Here¬
dom,  but  in  passing  from  Scotland  to


662


ROSE


ROSE


France  it  greatly  changed  its  form  and
organization,  as  it  resembles  in  no  respect
its  archetype,  except  that  both  are  eminent¬
ly  Christian  in  their  design.  But  in  its
adoption  by  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite,  its  organization  has  been  so  changed
that,  by  a  more  liberal  interpretation  of  its
symbolism,  it  has  been  rendered  less  sec¬
tarian  and  more  tolerant  in  its  design.
For  while  the  Christian  reference  is  pre¬
served,  no  peculiar  theological  dogma  is
retained,  and  the  degree  is  made  cosmopolite
in  its  character.

It  was,  indeed,  on  its  first  inception,  an
attempt  to  Christianize  Freemasonry;  to
apply  the  rites,  and  symbols,  and  traditions
of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry  to  the  last  and
greatest  dispensation;  to  add  to  the  first
Temple  of  Solomon  and  the  second  of  Ze-
rubbabel  a  third,  that  to  which  Christ  al¬
luded  when  he  said,  “  Destroy  this  temple,
and  in  three  days  will  I  raise  it  up.”  The
great  discovery  which  was  made  in  the
Royal  Arch  ceases  to  be  of  value  in  this
degree;  for  it  another  is  substituted  of
more  Christian  application ;  the  Wisdom,
Strength,  and  Beauty  which  supported  the
ancient  Temple  are  replaced  by  the  Chris¬
tian  pillars  of  Faith,  Hope  and  Charity ;
the  great  lights,  of  course,  remain,  because
they  are  of  the  very  essence  of  Masonry  ;
but  the  three  lesser  give  way  to  the  thirty-
three,  which  allude  to  the  years  of  the
Messiah’s  sojourning  on  earth.  Everything,
in  short,  about  the  degree,  is  Christian ;  but,
as  I  have  already  said,  the  Christian  teach¬
ings  of  the  degree  have  been  applied  to  the
sublime  principles  of  a  universal  system,
and  an  interpretation  and  illustration  of
the  doctrines  of  the  “Master  of  Nazareth,”
so  adapted  to  the  Masonic  dogma  of  toler¬
ance,  that  men  of  every  faith  may  embrace
and  respect  them.  It  thus  performs  a
noble  mission.  It  obliterates,  alike,  the
intolerance  of  those  Christians  who  sought
to  erect  an  impassable  barrier  around  the
sheepfold,  and  the  equal  intolerance  of
those  of  other  religions  who  would  be
ready  to  exclaim  “Can  any  good  thing
come  out  of  Nazareth?  ”

In  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite,  whence  the  Rose  Croix  Masons  of  the
United  States  have  received  the  degree,  it  is
placed  as  the  eighteenth  on  the  list.  It  is
conferred  in  a  body  called  a  “Chapter,”
which  derives  its  authority  immediately
from  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Thirty-
third,  and  which  confers  with  it  only  one
other  and  inferior  degree,  that  of  “  Knights
of  the  East  and  West.”  Its  principal  offi¬
cers  are  a  Most  Wise  Master  and  two
Wardens.  Maundy  Thursday  and  Easter
Sunday  are  two  obligatory  days  of  meeting.

The  aspirant  for  the  degree  makes  the


usual  application  duly  recommended ;  and
if  accepted,  is  required,  before  initiation,  to
make  certain  declarations  which  shall  show
his  competency  for  the  honor  which  he
seeks,  and  at  the  same  time  prove  the  high
estimation  entertained  of  the  degree  by
those  who  already  possess  it.

The  jewel  of  the  Rose  Croix  is  a  golden
compass,  extended  on  an  arc  to  the  six¬
teenth  part  of  a  circle,  or  twenty-two  and  a
half  degrees.  The  head  of  the  compass  is
surmounted  by  a  triple  crown,  consisting
of  three  series  of  points  arranged  by  three,
five,  and  seven.  Between  the  legs  of  the
compass  is  a  cross  resting  on  the  arc;  its
centre  is  occupied  by  a  full- blown  rose,
whose  stem  twines  around  the  lower  limb
of  the  cross ;  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  on
the  same  side  on  which  the  rose  is  exhib¬
ited,  is  the  figure  of  a  pelican  wounding  its
breast  to  feed  its  young  which  are  in  a  nest
surrounding  it,  while  on  the  other  side  of
the  jewel  is  the  figure  of  an  eagle  with
wings  displayed.  On  the  arc  of  the  circle,
the  P.\  W.\  of  the  degree  is  engraved  in
the  cipher  of  the  Order.

In  this  jewel  are  included  the  most  im¬
portant  symbols  of  the  degree.  The  Cross,
the  Rose,  the  Pelican,  and  the  Eagle  are  all
important  symbols,  the  explanations  of
which  will  go  far  to  a  comprehension  of
what  is  the  true  design  of  the  Rose  Croix
Order.  They  may  be  seen  in  this  work
under  their  respective  titles.

Rose  Croix,  Rectified.  The  name
given  by  F.  J.  W.  Schroder  to  his  Rite  of
seven  magical,  theosophical,  and  alchemi¬
cal  degrees.  See  Schroeder,  Friederich  Joseph
I Vilhelm .

Rose  Croix,  Sovereign  Prince

of.  Because  of  its  great  importance  in  the
Masonic  system,  and  of  the  many  privileges
possessed  by  its  possessors,  the  epithet  of
“Sovereign”  has  been  almost  universally
bestowed  upon  the  degree  of  Prince  of  Rose
Croix.  Recently,  however,  the  Mother
Council  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite  at  Charleston  has  discarded  this
title,  and  directed  that  the  word  “Sovereign”
shall  only  be  applied  to  the  thirty-third
degree  of  the  Rite;  and  this  is  now  the
usage  in  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the
United  States.

Rose,  Knights  and  ILadies  of
the.  See  Knight  of  the  Rose.

Rose,  Order  of  the.  A  Masonic
adventurer,  Franz  Rudolph  Van  Grossing,
but  whose  proper  name,  Wadzeck  says,
was  Franz  Matthaus  Grossinger,  estab¬
lished,  as  a  financial  speculation,  at  Berlin,
in  1778,  an  androgynous  society,  which  he
called  Rosen- Order,  or  the  Order  of  the
Rose.  It  consisted  of  two  degrees:  1.  Fe¬
male  Friends,  and  2.  Confidants ;  and  the


ROSENKREUZ


ROSICRU  Cl  ANISM


663


meetings  of  the  society  were  designated  as
“  holding  the  rose.”  The  society  had  but
a  brief  duration,  and  the  life  and  adven¬
tures  of  the  founder  and  the  secrets  of  the
Order  were  published  in  1789,  by  Friederich
Wadzeck,  in  a  work  entitled  Leben  und
Schicksale  des  beriichtigten  F.  R.  Von  Gross¬
ing.

Rosenkreuz,  Christian.  An  as¬
sumed  name,  invented,  it  is  supposed,  by
John  Valentine  Andrea,  and  by  which  he
designated  a  fictitious  person,  to  whom  he
has  attributed  the  invention  of  Rosieru-
cianism.  See  this  word.

Rosierueianism.  Many  writers
have  sought  to  discover  a  close  connection
between  the  Rosicrucians  and  the  Freema¬
sons,  and  some,  indeed,  have  advanced  the
theory  that  the  latter  are  only  the  succes¬
sors  of  the  former.  Whether  this  opinion
be  correct  or  not,  there  are  sufficient  coin¬
cidences  of  character  between  the  two  to
render  the  history  of  Rosicrucianism  highly
interesting  to  the  Masonic  student.

There  appeared  at  Cassel,  in  the  year
1614,  a  work  bearing  the  title  of  Allge-
meine  und  General-  Ref ormation  der  ganzen
weiten  Welt.  Beneben  der  Fama  Fraternita-
tis  des  Lobliehen  Ordens  des  Rosencreuzes  an
alle  Gelchrte  und  Ha  i/pter  Europa  geschr  ieben.
A  second  edition  appeared  in  1615,  and
several  subsequent  ones ;  and  in  1652  it  was
introduced  to  the  English  public  in  a  trans¬
lation  by  the  celebrated  adept,  Thomas
Vaughan,  under  the  title  of  Fame  and  Con¬
fession  of  Rosie-  Cross.

This  work  has  been  attributed,  although
not  without  question,  to  the  philosopher
and  theologian,  John  Valentine  Andrea,
who  is  reported,  on  the  authority  of  the
preacher,  M.  C.  Hirschen,  to  have  confessed
that  he,  with  thirty  others  in  Wurtemberg,
had  sent  forth  the  Fama  Fraternitatis  ;  that
under  this  veil  they  might  discover  who
were  the  true  lovers  of  wisdom,  and  induce
them  to  come  forward.

In  this  work  Andrea  gives  an  account  of
the  life  and  adventures  of  Christian  Rosen¬
kreuz,  a  fictitious  personage,  whom  he
makes  the  founder  of  the  pretended  Society
of  Rosicrucians.

According  to  Andrea’s  tale,  Rosenkreuz
was  of  good  birth,  but,  being  poor,  was
compelled  to  enter  a  monastery  at  a  very
early  period  of  his  life.  At  the  age  of  106
years,  he  started  with  one  of  the  m  onks  on  a
pilgrimage  to  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  On
their  arrival  at  the  island  of  Cyprus,  the
monk  was  taken  sick  and  died,  but  Rosen¬
kreuz  proceeded  on  his  journey.  At  Da¬
mascus  he  remained  for  three  years,  de¬
voting  himself  to  the  study  of  the  occult
sciences,  taught  by  the  sages  of  that  city.
He  then  sailed  for  Egypt,  where  he  con¬


tinued  his  studies;  and,  having  traversed
the  Mediterranean,  he  at  length  arrived  at
Fez,  in  Morocco,  as  he  had  been  directed
by  his  masters  of  Damascus.  He  passed
two  years  in  acquiring  further  information
from  the  philosophers  of  Africa,  and  then
crossed  over  into  Spain.  There,  however,
he  met  with  an  unfavorable  reception,  and
then  determined  to  return  to  Germany,  and
give  to  his  own  countrymen  the  benefit  of
his  studies  and  researches,  and  to  establish
there  a  society  for  the  cultivation  of  the
sciences  which  he  had  acquired  during  his
travels.  Accordingly,  he  selected  three  of
the  monks  of  the  old  convent  in  which  he
was  educated.  To  them  he  imparted  his
knowledge,  under  a  solemn  vow  of  secrecy.
He  imposed  on  them  the  duty  of  commit¬
ting  his  instructions  to  writing,  and  form¬
ing  a  magic  vocabulary  for  the  benefit  of
future  students.  They  were  also  taught
the  science  of  medicine,  and  prescribed
gratuitously  for  all  the  sick  who  applied  to
them.  But  the  number  of  their  patients
soon  materially  interfering  with  their
other  labors,  and  the  new  edifice,  the
House  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  being  now
finished,  Father  Christian,  as  he  was  called,
resolved  to  enlarge  his  society  by  the  ini¬
tiation  of  four  new  members.

The  eight  brethren  being  now  thoroughly
instructed  in  the  mysteries,  they  agreed  to
separate  —  two  to  remain  with  Father
Christian,  and  the  others  to  travel,  but  to
return  at  the  end  of  each  year,  and  mu¬
tually  to  communicate  the  results  of  their
experience.  The  two  who  had  remained
at  home  were  then  relieved  by  two  of  the
others,  and  they  again  separated  for  another
year.

The  society  thus  formed  was  governed
by  a  code  of  laws,  by  which  they  agreed
that  they  would  devote  themselves  to  no
occupation  except  that  of  physic,  which
they  were  to  practise  without  pecuniary
reward;  that  they  would  not  distinguish
themselves  from  the  rest  of  the  world  by
any  peculiar  costume ;  that  each  one  should
annually  present  himself  at  the  House  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  or  send  an  excuse  for  his
absence;  that  each  one  should,  during  his
life,  appoint  somebody  to  succeed  him  at
his  death ;  that  the  letters  R.  C.  were  to  be
their  title  and  watchword ;  and  that  the
brotherhood  should  be  kept  a  secret  for  one
hundred  years.

At  the  age  of  one  hundred  years  Father
Christian  Rosenkreuz  died,  and  was  buried
by  the  two  brethren  who  had  remained
with  him;  but  the  place  of  bis  burial  re¬
mained  a  secret  to  all  of  the  rest — the  two
carrying  the  mystery  with  them  to  the
grave.  The  society,  however,  continued,
notwithstanding  the  death  of  the  founder,


664


ROSICRUCIAN  ISM


ROSICRUCIANLSM


to  exist,  but  unknown  to  the  world,  always  '
consisting  of  eight  members.  There  was  a
tradition  among  them,  that  at  the  end  of
one  hundred  and  twenty  years  the  grave  of
Father  Rosenkreuz  was  to  be  discovered,
and  the  brotherhood  no  longer  remain  a
secret.  About  that  time  the  brethren  began  J
to  make  some  alterations  in  their  building,
and  attempted  to  remove  to  a  more  fitting
situation  the  memorial  table  on  which
was  inscribed  the  names  of  those  who  had
been  members  of  the  fraternity.  The  plate
was  of  brass,  and  was  affixed  to  the  wall
by  a  nail  driven  through  its  centre ;  but  so
firmly  was  it  attached,  that  in  tearing  it
away,  a  portion  of  the  plaster  came  off  and
exposed  asecretdoor.  Upon  removingthe
incrustation  on  the  door,  there  appeared
written  in  large  letters,  “  Post  cxx,  Ax-
nos  Patebo  ” — after  one  hundred  and  twenty
years  I  will  appear.  Returning  the  next
morning  to  renew  their  researches,  they
opened  the  door  and  discovered  a  heptag-
onal  vault,  each  of  its  seven  sides  being
five  feet  wide,  and  in  height  eight  feet.
The  light  was  received  from  an  artificial
sun  in  the  roof,  and  in  the  middle  of  the
floor  there  stood,  instead  of  a  tomb,  a  circu¬
lar  altar,  on  which  was  an  inscription,  im¬
porting  that  this  apartment,  as  a  compen¬
dium  of  the  universe,  had  been  erected  by
Christian  Rosenkreuz.  Other  later  in¬
scriptions  about  the  apartment  —  such  as
Jesus  mihi  omnia ;  Leyis  jug  urn  ;  Libertas
Evangelii :  Jesus  is  my  all ;  the  yoke  of  the
law  ;  the  liberty  of  the  Gospel  —  indicated
the  Christian  character  of  the  builder.  In
each  of  the  sides  was  a  door  opening  into
a  closet,  and  in  these  closets  they  found
many  rare  and  valuable  articles,  such  as
the  life  of  the  founder,  the  vocabulary  of
Paracelsus,  and  the  secrets  of  the  Order,
together  with  bells,  mirrors,  burning  lamps,
and  other  curious  articles.  On  removing
the  altar  and  a  brass  plate  beneath  it,  they
came  upon  the  body  of  Rosenkreuz  in  a
perfect  state  of  preservation.

Such  is  the  sketch  of  the  history  of  the
Rosicrucians  given  by  Andrea  in  his  Fama
Fraternitatis.  It  is  evidently  a  romance;
and  scholars  now  generally  assent  to  the
theory  advanced  by  Nicolai,  that  Andreli,
who,  at  the  time  of  the  appearance  of  his
book,  was  a  young  man  full  of  excitement,
seeing  the  defects  of  the  sciences,  the  the¬
ology,  and  the  manners  of  his  time,  sought
to  purify  them ;  and,  to  accomplish  this
design,  imagined  the  union  into  one  body
of  all  those  who,  like  himself,  were  the
admirers  of  true  virtue;  in  other  words,
that  he  wrote  this  account  of  the  rise  and
progress  of  Rosicrucianism  for  the  purpose
of  advancing,  by  a  poetical  fiction,  his  pecu¬
liar  views  of  morals  and  religion.


But  the  fiction  was  readily  accepted  as  a
truth  by  most  people,  and  the  invisible
society  of  Rosenkreuz  was  sought  for  with
avidity  by  many  who  wished  to  unite  with
it.  The  sensation  produced  in  Germany
by  the  appearance  of  Andrea’s  book  was
great ;  letters  poured  in  on  all  sides  from  those
who  desired  to  become  members  of  the
Order,  and  who,  as  proofs  of  their  qualifi¬
cations,  presented  tneir  claims  to  skill  in
Alchemy  and  Kabbalism.  No  answers,  of
course,  having  been  received  to  these  peti¬
tions  for  initiation,  most  of  the  applicants
were  discouraged  and  retired;  but  some
were  bold,  became  impostors,  and  pro¬
claimed  that  they  had  been  admitted  into
the  society,  and  exercised  their  fraud  upon
those  who  were  credulous  enough  to  be¬
lieve  them.  There  are  records  that  some
of  these  charlatans,  who  extorted  money
from  their  dupes,  were  punished  for  their
offence  by  the  magistrates  of  Nuremberg,
Augsburg,  and  some  other  German  cities.
There  was,  too,  in  Holland,  in  the  year
1722,  a  Society  of  Alchemists,  who  called
themselves  Rosicrucians,  and  who  claimed
that  Christian  Rosenkreuz  was  their
founder,  and  that  they  had  affiliated  soci¬
eties  in  many  of  the  German  cities.  But
it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  this  was  a  self-
created  society,  and  that  it  had  nothing  in
common,  except  the  name,  with  the  imag¬
inary  brotherhood  invented  by  Andrea.
Des  Cartes,  indeed,  says  that  he  sought  in
vain  for  a  Rosicrucian  Lodge  in  Germany.

But  although  the  brotherhood  of  Rosen¬
kreuz,  as  described  by  Andrea  in  his  Fama
Fraternitatis,  his  Chemical  Nuptuals,  and
other  works,  never  had  a  real  tangible  ex¬
istence  as  an  organized  society,  the  opinions
advanced  by  Andrea  took  root,  and  gave
rise  to  the  philosophic  sect  of  the  Rosicru¬
cians,  many  of  whom  were  to  be  found,
during  the  seventeenth  century,  in  Ger¬
many,  in  France,  and  in  England.  Among
these  were  such  men  as  Michael  Maier,
Richard  Fludd,  and  Elias  Ash  mole.  Nico¬
lai  even  thinks  that  he  has  found  some
evidence  that  the  Fama  Fraternitatis  sug¬
gested  to  Lord  Bacon  the  notion  of  his
Instaurafio  Magna.  But,  as  Vaughan  says,

■  Hours  with  the  Mystics,  ii.  104,)  the  name
Rosicrucian  became  by  degrees  a  generic
term,  embracing  every  species  of  doubt,
pretension,  arcana,  elixers,  the  philoso¬
pher’s  stone,  theurgic  ritual,  symbols,  or
initiations.

Higgins,  Sloane,  Vaughan,  and  several
other  writers  have  asserted  that  Freema¬
sonry  sprang  out  of  Rosicrucianism  But
this  is  a  great  error.  Between  the  two
there  is  no  similarity  of  origin,  of  design,
or  of  organization.  The  symbolism  of
Rosicrucianism  is  derived  from  a  hermetic


ROSICRUCIANISM


R03ICRUCI  AN  ISM


665


philosophy;  that  of  Freemasonry  from  an
operative  art.  The  latter  had  its  cradle  in
the  Stonemasons  of  Strasburg  and  the
Masters  of  Como  long  before  the  former
had  its  birth  in  the  inventive  brain  of  John
Valentine  Andreii.

It  is  true,  that  about  the  middle  of  the
eighteenth  century,  a  period  fertile  in  the
invention  of  high  degrees,  a  Masonic  Rite
was  established  which  assumed  the  name
of  Rose  Croix  Masonry,  and  adopted  the
symbol  of  the  Rose  and  Cross.  But  this
was  a  coincidence,  and  not  a  consequence.
There  was  nothing  in  common  between
them  and  the  Rosicrucians,  except  the
name,  the  symbol,  and  the  Christian  char¬
acter.  Doubtless  the  symbol  was  suggested
to  the  Masonic  Order  from  the  use  of  it  by
the  philosophic  sect;  but  the  Masons  modi¬
fied  the  interpretation,  and  the  symbol,  of
course,  gave  rise  to  the  name.  But  here
the  connection  ends.  A  Rose  Croix  Ma¬
son  and  a  Rosicrucian  are  two  entirely  dif¬
ferent  persons.

The  Rosicrucians  had  a  large  number  of
symbols,  some  of  which  were  in  common
with  those  of  ihe  Freemasons,  and  some
peculiar  to  themselves.  The  principal  of
these  were  the  globe,  the  circle,  the  com¬
passes,  the  square,  (both  the  working-tool
and  the  geometrical  figure,)  the  triangle,
the  level,  and  the  plummet.  These  are,
however,  interpreted,  not  like  the  Masonic,
as  symbols  of  the  moral  virtues,  but  of
the  properties  of  the  philosopher’s  stone.
Thus,  the  twenty -first  emblem  of  Michael
Maier’s  Atlanta  Fugiens  gives  the  fol¬
lowing  collection  of  the  most  important
symbols:  A  philosopher  is  measuring  with
a  pair  of  compasses  a  circle  which  sur¬
mounts  a  triangle.  The  triangle  encloses
a  square,  within  which  is  another  circle,  and
inside  of  the  circle  a  nude  man  and  woman,
representing,  it  may  be  supposed,  the  first
step  of  the  experiment.  Over  all  is  this  epi¬
graph  :  “  Fac  ex  mare  et  femina  circulum,
indequadrangulum,hinctriangulum,faccir-
culum  et  habebis  lapidem  Philosophorum.”
That  is,  “  Make  of  man  and  woman  a  cir¬
cle;  thence  a  square;  thence  a  triangle;
form  a  circle,  and  you  will  have  the  Phil¬
osopher’s  stone.”  But  it  must  be  remem¬
bered  that  Hitchcock,  and  some  other
recent  writers,  have  very  satisfactorily
proved  that  the  labors  of  the  real  hermetic
philosophers  (outside  of  the  charlatans)
were  rather  of  a  spiritual  than  a  material
character;  and  that  their  “great  work”
symbolized  not  the  acquisition  of  inex¬
haustible  wealth  and  the  infinite  prolonga¬
tion  of  life,  but  the  regeneration  of  man
and  the  immortality  of  the  soul.

As  to  the  etymology  of  the  word  Rosicru-
cian,  several  derivations  have  been  given.

4  I


Peter  Gassendi  {Exam.  Phil.  Fludd,  sect.
15,)  first,  and  then  Mosheim,  [Hist.  Eccles.,
iv.,  i.,)  deduce  it  from  the  two  words  ros,
dew,  and  crux,  a  cross,  and  thus  define  it :
Dew,  according  to  the  Alchemists,  was  the
most  powerful  of  all  substances  to  dissolve
gold;  and  the  cross,  in  the  language  of  the
same  philosophers,  was  identical  with  light,
or  LVX,  because  the  figure  of  a  cross  ex¬
hibits  the  three  letters  of  that  word.  But
the  word  lux  was  referred  to  the  seed  or
menstruum  of  the  Red  Dragon,  which  was
that  crude  and  material  light  which,  being
properly  concocted  and  digested,  produces
gold.  Hence,  says  Mosheim,  a  Rosicru¬
cian  is  a  philosopher,  who  by  means  of  dew
seeks  for  light,  that  is,  for  the  substance
of  the  philosopher’s  stone.  But  notwith¬
standing  the  high  authority  for  this  ety¬
mology,  I  think  it  untenable,  and  alto¬
gether  at  variance  with  the  history  of  the
origin  of  the  Order,  as  will  be  presently
seen.

Another  and  more  reasonable  derivation
is  from  rose  and  cross.  This  was  undoubt¬
edly  in  accordance  with  the  notions  of  An¬
drea,  who  was  the  founder  of  the  Order,
and  gave  it  its  name,  for  in  his  writings
he  constantly  calls  it  the  “Fraternitas
Rose®  Crucis,”  or  “the  Fraternity  of  the
Rosy  Cross.”  If  the  idea  of  dew  had  been
in  the  mind  of  Andrea  in  giving  a  name  to
the  society,  he  would  have  called  it  the
“Fraternity  of  the  Dewy  Cross,”  not  that
of  the  “  Rosy  Cross.”  “Fraternitas  Roscid®
Crucis,”  not  “  Rose®  Crucis.”  This  ought
to  settle  the  question.  The  man  who  in¬
vents  a  thing  has  the  best  right  to  give  it  a
name.

The  origin  and  interpretation  of  the  sym¬
bol  have  been  variously  given.  Some  have
supposed  that  it  was  derived  from  the
Christian  symbolism  of  the  rose  and  the
cross.  This  is  the  interpretation  that  has
been  assumed  by  the  Rose  Croix  Order  of
the  Masonic  system  ;  but  it  does  not  thence
follow  that  the  same  interpretation  was
adopted  by  the  Rosicrucians.  Others  say
that  the  rose  meant  the  generative  princi¬
ple  of  nature,  a  symbolism  borrowed  from
the  Pagan  mythologers,  and  not  likely  to
have  been  appropriated  by  Andreii.  Others,
again,  contend  that  he  derived  the  symbol
from  his  own  arms,  which  were  a  St.  An¬
drew’s  cross  between  four  roses,  and  that  he
alluded  to  Luther’s  well-known  lines :

“Pes  Christen  Ilerz  auf  Rosen  geht,
AVenn’s  mitten  unter’n  Krcutze  steht,”

i.  e.,  “  The  heart  of  the  Christian  goes  upon
roses  when  it  stands  close  beneath  the
cross.”  But  whatever  may  have  been  the
effect  of  Luther’s  lines  in  begetting  an  idea,


6G6


ROSICRUCIAN


ROYAL


the  suggestion  of  Andrea’s  arms  must  be
rejected.  The  symbol  of  the  Rosicrucians
was  a  single  rose  upon  a  passion  cross,  very
different  from  four  roses  surrounding  a  St.
Andrew’s  cross.

Another  derivation  may  be  suggested,
namely:  That,  the  rose  being  a  symbol  of
secrecy,  and  the  cross  of  light,  the  rose  and
cross  were  intended  to  symbolize  the  secret
of  the  true  light,  or  the  true  knowledge,
which  the  Rosicrucian  brotherhood  were  to
give  to  the  world  at  the  end  of  the  hundred
years  of  their  silence,  and  for  which  pur»
pose  of  moral  and  religious  reform  Andrea
wrote  his  books  and  sought  to  establish  his
sect.  But  the  whole  subject  of  Rosicrucian
etymology  is  involved  in  confusion.

Rosicrucian  Society  of  Eng¬
land.  A  society  whose  objects  are  of  a
purely  literary  character,  and  connected
with  the  sect  of  the  Rosicrucians  of  the
Middle  Ages.  It  is  secret,  but  not  Masonic,
in  its  organization;  although  many  of  the
most  distinguished  Masons  of  England  take
great  interest  in  it,  and  are  active  members
of  the  society.

Rosy  Cross.  One  of  the  degrees  con¬
ferred  in  the  Royal  Order  of  Scotland,  which
see.

Rough  Ashlar.  See  Ashlar.

Round  Table,  King  Arthur’s.

The  old  English  legends,  derived  from  the
celebrated  chronicle  of  the  twelfth  century
known  as  the  Brut  of  England,  say  that  the
mythical  King  Arthur,  who  died  in  542,  of
a  wound  received  in  battle,  instituted  a
company  of  twenty-four  (or,  according  to
some,  twelve,)  of  his  principal  knights,
bound  to  appear  at  his  court  on  certain  sol¬
emn  days,  and  meet  around  a  circular  ta¬
ble,  whence  they  were  called  “Knights  of
the  Round  Table.”  Arthur  is  said  to  have
been  the  institutor  of  those  military  and  re¬
ligious  orders  of  chivalry  which  afterwards
became  so  common  in  the  Middle  Ages.
Into  the  Order  which  he  established  none
were  admitted  but  those  wTho  had  given
proofs  of  their  valor;  and  the  knights  were
bound  to  defend  widows,  maidens,  and
children ;  to  relieve  the  distressed,  maintain
the  Christian  religion,  contribute  to  the
support  of  the  church,  protect  pilgrims,
advance  honor,  and  suppress  vice.  They
were  to  administer  to  the  care  of  soldiers
wounded  in  the  service  of  their  country,
and  bury  those  who  died,  to  ransom  cap¬
tives,  deliver  prisoners,  and  record  all  no¬
ble  enterprises  for  the  honor  and  renown
of  the  noble  Order.  King  Arthur  and  his
knights  have  been  very  generally  consid¬
ered  by  scholars  as  mythical ;  notwithstand¬
ing  that,  many  years  ago  Whittaker,  in  his
History  of  Manchester,  attempted  to  estab-


j  lish  the  fact  of  his  existence,  and  to  sepa¬
rate  the  true  from  the  fabulous  in  his  his¬
tory.  The  legend  has  been  used  by  some
of  the  fabricators  of  irregular  degrees  in
Masonry.

Round  Towers  of  Ireland.  Edi¬
fices,  sixty-two  in  number,  varying  in
height  from  80  to  120  feet,  which  are  found
in  various  parts  of  Ireland.  They  are
cylindrical  in  shape,  with  a  single  door
eight  or  ten  feet  from  the  ground,  and  a
small  aperture  near  the  top.  The  question
of  their  origin  and  design  has  been  a  source
of  much  perplexity  to  antiquaries.  They
have  been  supposed  by  Montmorency  to
have  been  intended  as  beacons;  by  Val-
lancev,  as  receptacles  of  the  sacred  fire;
by  O'Brien,  as  temples  for  the  worship  of
the  sun  and  moon ;  and  more  recently,  by
Petrie,  simply  as  hell-towers,  and  of  very
modern  date.  This  last  theory  has  been
adopted  by  many;  while  the  more  probable
supposition  is  still  maintained  by  others,
that,  whatever  was  their  later  appropria¬
tion,  they  -were,  in  their  origin,  of  a  phallic
character,  in  common  with  the  towers  of
similar  construction  in  the  East.  O’Brien’s
work  On  the  Round  Towers  of  Ireland,  which
was  somewhat  extravagant  in  its  arguments
and  hypotheses,  led  some  Masons  to  adopt,
forty  years  ago,  the  opinion  that  they  were
originally  the  places  of  a  primitive  Ma¬
sonic  initiation.  But  this  theory  is  no
longer  maintained  as  tenable.

Rowers.  See  Knight  Rower.

Royal  anti  Select  Masters.  See
Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters.

Royal  Arch,  Ancient.  See  Knight
of  the  Ninth  Arch.

Royal  Arch  Apron.  At  the  trien¬
nial  meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chap¬
ter  of  the  United  States  at  Chicago,  in
1859,  a  Royal  Arch  apron  wras  prescribed,
consisting  of  a  lamb-skin,  (silk  or  satin
being  strictly  prohibited,)  to  be  lined  and
bound  with  scarlet,  on  the  flap  of  which
should  be  placed  a  triple  tau  cross  within  a
triangle,  and  all  within  a  circle.


Royal  Arch  Radge.  The  triple

tau,  consisting  of  three  tau  crosses  con¬
joined  at  their  feet,  constitutes  the  Royal
Arch  badge.  The  English  Masons  call  it


ROYAL


ROYAL


667


the  “emblem  of  all  emblems,”  and  the
“  grand  emblem  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry.”
The  English  Royal  Arch  lecture
thus  delines  it :  “  The  triple  tau
forms  two  right  angles  on  each
of  the  exterior  lines,  and  another
at  the  centre,  by  their  union  ;  for
the  three  angles  of  each  triangle  are  equal
to  two  right  angles.  This,  being  triplified,
illustrates  the  jewel  worn  by  the  compan¬
ions  of  the  Royal  Arch,  which,  by  its  inter¬
section,  forms  a  given  number  of  angles
that  may  be  taken  in  five  several  combina¬
tions.”  It  is  used  in  the  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
sonry  of  Scotland,  and  has,  for  the  last  ten
or  fifteen  years,  been  adopted  officially  in
the  United  States.

Royal  Arch  Banners.  See  Ban¬
ners,  Royal  Arch.

Royal  Arcli  Captain.  The  sixth
officer  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter  according
to  the  American  system.  He  represents
the  sar  hatabahim,  or  Captain  of  the  King’s
Guards.  He  sits  in  front  of  the  Council
and  at  the  entrance  to  the  fourth  veil,  to
guard  the  approaches  to  which  is  his  duty.
He  wears  a  white  robe  and  cap,  is  armed
with  a  sword,  and  bears  a  white  banner  on
which  is  inscribed  a  lion,  the  emblem  of
the  tribe  of  Judah.  His  jewel  is  a  triangu¬
lar  plate  of  gold  inscribed  with  a  sword.
In  the  preliminary  Lodges  of  the  Chapter
he  acts  as  Junior  Deacon.

Royal  Arcli  Clothing.  The  cloth¬
ing  or  regalia  of  a  Royal  Arch  Mason  in
the  American  system  consists  of  an  apron,
(already  described,)  a  scarf  of  scarlet  vel¬
vet  or  silk,  on  which  is  embroidered  or
painted,  on  a  blue  ground,  the  words,
“  Holiness  to  the  Lord;”  and  if  an  officer,
a  scarlet  collar,  to  which  is  attached  the
jewel  of  his  office.  The  scarf,  once  uni¬
versally  used,  has,  within  a  few  years  past,
been  very  much  abandoned.  Every  Royal
Arch  Mason  should  also  wear  at  his  button¬
hole,  attached  by  a  scarlet  ribbon,  the  jewel
of  the  Order.

Royal  Arch  Colors.  The  peculiar
color  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  is  red  or
scarlet,  which  is  symbolic  of  fervency  and
zeal,  the  characteristics  of  the  degree.  The
colors  also  used  symbolically  in  the  deco¬
rations  of  a  Chapter  are  blue,  purple,  scar¬
let,  and  white,  each  of  which  has  a  symbolic
meaning.  See  Veils  of  the  Tabernacle.

Royal  Arch  Degree.  If  we  except
the  Master’s,  there  is  no  other  degree  in
Masonry  that  has  been  so  extensively  dif¬
fused,  or  is  as  important  in  its  historical
and  symbolical  import,  as  the  Royal  Arch,
or,  as  it  has  been  called,  on  account  of  its
sublime  significance,  the  “  Holy  Royal
Arch.”  Dermott  calls  it  “the  root,  heart,
and  marrow  of  Masonry,”  and  Oliver  says


that  it  is  “indescribably  more  august,
sublime,  and  important  than  any  which
precede  it,  and  is,  in  fact,  the  summit  and
perfection  of  ancient  Masonry.”  It  is
found,  in  fact,  in  every  Rite,  in  some  modi¬
fied  form,  and  sometimes  under  a  different
name,  but  always  preserving  those  same
symbolic  relations  to  the  Lost  Word  which
constitute  its  essential  character.

Whoever  carefully  studies  the  Master’s
degree  in  its  symbolic  signification  will  be
convinced  that  it  is  in  a  mutilated  condi¬
tion,  that  is,  that  it  is  imperfect  and  unfin¬
ished  in  its  history,  and  that,  terminating
abruptly  in  its  symbolism,  it  leaves  the
mind  still  waiting  for  something  that  is
necessary  to  its  completeness.  This  defi¬
ciency  is  supplied  by  the  Royal  Arch  de¬
gree.  Hence,  when  the  union  took  place
in  England,  in  1813,  between  the  two  rival
Grand  Lodges,  while  there  was  a  strong
and  hereditary  disposition  on  the  part  of
the  English  Masons  to  preserve  the  sim¬
plicity  of  the  Old  York  Rite  by  confining
Freemasonry  to  the  three  symbolical  de¬
grees,  it  was  found  necessary  to  define  An¬
cient  Craft  Masonry  as  consisting  of  three
degrees,  “  including  the  Holy  Royal  Arch.”

There  was  a  time,  undoubtedly,  when  the
Royal  Arch  did  not  exist  as  an  independent
degree,  but  was  a  complementary  part  of
the  Master’s  degree,  to  which  it  gave  a
necessary  completion.  Ramsay  introduced
it  into  the  high  degrees  on  the  continent;
Dermott  fabricated  it  for  the  use  of  his
Grand  Lodge;  and  Dunckerley  is  said  to
have  dissevered  it  from  the  third  degree  in
the  legal  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  The
precise  method  and  time  of  its  disseverance
from  the  third  establishment,  as  an  inde¬
pendent  degree  in  England  and  America,
constitutes  an  important  and  interesting
part  of  the  history  of  Masonry.

It  is  evident  that  the  existence  of  the
Royal  Arch  as  an  independent  and  distinct
degree  dates  at  a  comparatively  modern
period.  In  none  of  the  old  manuscript
records  of  Masonry  is  there  the  slightest
allusion  to  it,  and  Anderson  does  not  make
any  reference  to  it  in  his  history  of  the
Order.  The  true  word,  which  constitutes
the  essential  character  of  the  Royal  Arch
degree,  was  found  by  Dr.  Oliver  in  an  old
Master  Mason’s  tracing-board  of  the  date
of  about  1725;  and  hence  he  concludes
(Or.  of  the  Eng.  R.  A.,  p.  20,)  “that  the
word,  at  that  time,  had  not  been  severed
from  the  third  degree  and  transferred  to
another,”  —  in  other  words,  that  the  Royal
Arch  degree  had  not  then  been  fabricated.
The  earliest  mention  of  it  in  England  that
he  could  find  was  in  the  year  1740,  just  two
years  after  the  schism  which  separated  tho
Ancient  from  the  Modern  Grand  Lodge,  —


668


ROYAL


ROYAL


I  use  the  usually  accepted  titles,  without
any  reference  to  their  propriety,  —  and  he
attributes  its  fabrication  to  the  former
body.  Stone,  ( Letters  on  Masonry ,  p.  50,)
with  a  very  imperfect  knowledge  of  Ma¬
sonic  history,  attributes  its  origin  to  the
Primordial  Chapter  of  Arras.  Butthat  body
was  established  by  the  young  Pretender
in  1747,  and  Oliver,  as  is  seen,  recognized
the  existence  of  the  degree  in  England
seven  years  before.  The  truth,  however,
is,  that  Ramsay  had  long  before  incorpo¬
rated  a  Royal  Arch  degree  under  a  different
title  in  his  high  degrees,  and  there  is  no
doubt  that  Dermott,  who  was  really  the
inventor  of  the  English  system,  was  in¬
debted  to  him  for  many  of  his  ideas,  as
Dunckerley  subsequently  was  when  he
composed  the  Royal  Arch  for  the  legal
Grand  Lodge ;  but  the  system  of  Ramsay
was  very  different  in  its  main  details  from
that  of  either.  Ramsay,  about  the  time  of
Dermott’s  innovation,  had  visited  England,
and  attempted  to  introduce  his  high  de¬
grees,  which  were  rejected  by  the  legal
Grand  Lodge;  and  there  is  every  reason  to
believe  that  he  communicated  to  seceding
Masons  a  portion  of  the  inventions  which
he  had  engrafted  upon  the  Masonry  of  the
continent.

Oliver  says  of  the  Royal  Arch  that  was
invented  by  the  seceders  that,  “  although  it
contained  elements  of  the  greatest  sublim¬
ity,  it  was  imperfect  in  its  construction
and  unsatisfactory  in  its  result;  which  will
tend  to  show,  from  the  crude  and  imperfect
state  in  which  it  then  appeared,  that  the
degree  was  in  its  infancy.  The  anachro¬
nisms  with  which  it  abounded,  and  the
loose  manner  in  which  its  parts  were  fitted
into  each  other,  betrayed  its  recent  origin.
In  fact,  it  was  evidently  an  attempt  to  com¬
bine  several  of  the  continental  degrees  of
sublime  Masonry  into  one,  without  regard
to  the  order  of  time,  propriety  of  arrange¬
ment,  or  any  other  consistent  principle;
and  therefore  wre  find  in  the  degree,  as  it
was  origi  nally  constructed,  j  u  m  bled  together
in  a  state  of  inextricable  confusion,  the
events  commemorated  in  Ramsay’s  Royal
Arch,  the  Knights  of  the  Ninth  Arch,  of
the  Burning  Bush,  of  the  East  or  Sword,
of  the  Red  Cross,  the  Scotch  Fellow  Craft,
the  Select  Master,  the  Red  Cross  Sword  of
Babylon,  the  Rose  Croix,  etc.”

As  late  as  the  year  1758,  the  Constitu¬
tional  Grand  Lodge  had  no  Royal  Arch
degree,  for  in  that  year  the  Grand  Secretary
declared  that  “  our  society  is  neither  Arch,
Royal  Arch,  norAncient ;  ”  and  in  the  lecture
of  the  third  degree  prepared  by  Anderson  and
Desaguliers  it  is  said  “  that  which  was  lost
is  now  found,”  meaning,  says  Oliver,  that
the  Master  Mason’s  word  was  delivered  to


the  newly  raised  Master  in  the  latter  cere¬
monies  of  the  third  degree,  which  would
preclude  the  necessity  for  a  Royal  Arch
degree.

But  about  the  year  17G6,  Thomas  Dunck-
erley,  who  had  been  authorized  by  the  Con¬
stitutional  Grand  Lodge,  or  the  “  Moderns,”
to  inaugurate  a  new  system  of  lectures,
commenced  his  modifications  of  the  old
system,  which  had  been  hitherto  practised
by  dissevering  the  Master’s  word  from  the
third  degree.  This  involved  the  necessity
ofanew  degree;  and  Dunckerley,  borrowing
from  Ramsay,  from  Dermott,  and  from  his
own  invention,  fabricated  the  degree  of
Royal  Arch  for  the  Modern  Masons  ;  a  vio¬
lent  innovation,  for  the  success  of  which  he
was  indebted  only  to  his  own  great  popu¬
larity  among  the  Craft  and  the  influence  of
the  Grand  Master.  Oliver  thinks,  for  good
reasons,  that  the  introduction  of  the  Royal
Arch  degree  into  the  Modern  system  could
not  have  been  earlier  than  the  dedication
of  Freemasons’  Hall  in  1776.  Ten  years
after  the  regulations  of  the  degree  were  first
established,  and  at  the  union  of  the  two
Grand  Lodges  in  1813,  the  Holy  Royal
Arch  was  formally  and  officially  recognized
as  a  part  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  and
so  it  has  ever  since  remained.

The  result  of  our  investigations,  in  which
we  have  mainly  relied  on  the  authority  of
the  learned  Oliver,  is  that,  until  the  year
1740,  the  essential  element  of  the  Royal
Arch  constituted  a  component  part  of  the
Master’s  degree,  and  was  of  course  its  con¬
cluding  portion ;  that  as  a  degree  it  was
not  at  all  recognized,  being  but  the  com¬
plement  of  one ;  that  about  that  time  it
was  dissevered  from  its  original  connection
and  elevated  to  the  position  and  invested
with  the  form  of  a  distinct  degree  by  the
body  which  called  itself  “  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England  according  to  the  Old  Constitu¬
tions,”  but  which  is  more  familiarly  known
as  the  Dermott  or  the  Athol  Grand  Lodge,
and  frequently  as  “the  Ancients  ;”  that  in
1776  a  similar  degree,  fabricated  by  Dunck¬
erley,  was  adopted  by  the  Constitutional
Grand  Lodge,  or  the  “  Moderns,”  and
that  in  1813  it  was  formally  recognized  as
a  part  of  the  York  Rite  by  the  United
Grand  Lodge  of  England.

In  America,  the  history  of  the  degree
followed  that  of  the  English  system.  As
most  of  the  American  Lodges  derived  their
Warrants  from  the  Athol  Grand  Lodge,
the  Royal  Arch  must  have  been  introduced
at  the  time  of  their  constitution.  The
government  of  the  degree  was  for  a  long
time  under  the  Master’s  Lodges,  and  many
years  elapsed  before  it  was  taken  thence
and  placed  under  the  control  of  distinct
bodies  called  Grand  Chapters.  In  America,


ROYAL


ROYAL


669


it  was  not  until  1798  that  a  Grand  Chapter
was  formed,  and  many  Lodges  persisted  for
some  years  after  in  conferring  the  Royal
Arch  degree  under  the  authority  of  their
Warrants  from  Grand  Lodges.

Maintaining  everywhere  an  identity  in
its  symbolic  signification,  the  Royal  Arch
varies  in  different  countries  in  its  historical
details.

Ramsay’s  degree,  from  which  all  the  con¬
tinental  systems  originated,  is  entirely  dif¬
ferent  from  that  practised  in  Great  Britain,
in  Ireland,  and  in  the  United  States.  Its
type  may  be  found  in  the  thirteenth  degree,
or  Knight  of  the  Ninth  Arch  of  the  An¬
cient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.

In  England,  Scotland,  and  the  United
States,  the  circumstance  on  which  the  de¬
gree  is  founded,  or,  in  technical  language,
the  legend,  is  the  same;  but  the  preliminary
organization  is  different  in  each  country.

In  England,  in  1834,  considerable  changes
were  made  in  the  ceremonies  of  exaltation,
but  the  general  outline  of  the  system  was
preserved.  The  degree  is  the  fourth  in  the
Masonic  series,  and  a  Master  Mason  who
has  been  so  for  twelve  months  is  eligible
for  exaltation.  The  principal  officers  of
an  English  Chapter  are:  three  Principals,
Zerubbabel,  Haggai,  and  Joshua;  three
Sojourners  and  two  Scribes,  Ezra  and  Ne-
hemiah ;  a  Treasurer  and  a  Janitor.

In  Scotland,  the  preliminary  degrees  are:
Mark,  Past,  Excellent,  and  Super-Excel¬
lent  Master,  and  the  principal  officers  are
the  same  as  in  England.

In  Ireland,  the  legend  was  formerly  dif¬
ferent  from  that  of  England,  and  founded
on  events  recorded  in  the  Second  Book  of
Chronicles,  (xxxiv.  14,)  where  Hilkiah  is
said  to  have  “  found  a  book  of  the  law  of
the  Lord  given  by  Moses.”  The  date  of
this  degree  was,  therefore,  624  B.  c.,  or  ninety
years  after  ours.  The  preliminary  or  qual¬
ifying  degrees  were:  Past,  Excellent,  and
Super-Excellent.  But  the  Irish  system  was
changed  some  years  ago,  and  a  new  ritual,
somewhat  resembling  the  American,  was
adopted.  The  officers  do  not  materially
differ  from  those  of  English  and  Scottish
Chapters.

In  America,  the  legend  is  the  sapje  as  the
English,  but  varying  in  some  of  its  details.
The  preliminary  degrees  are:  Mark,  Past,
and  Most  Excellent  Master;  and  the  prin¬
cipal  officers  are:  High  Priest,  King,  Scribe,
Captain  of  the  Host,  Principal  Sojourner,
Royal  Arch  Captain,  and  three  Grand
Masters  of  the  Veils.

I  have  said  that,  however  the  legend  or
historical  basis  might  vary  in  the  different
Rites,  in  all  of  them  the  symbolical  signifi¬
cation  of  the  Royal  Arch  was  identical.
Hence,  the  building  of  a  second  Temple,  so


prominent  a  symbol  in  the  English  and
American  systems,  and  so  entirely  unknown
in  the  continental,  cannot  be  considered  as
an  essential  point  in  the  symbolism  of  the
degree.  It  is  important  in  the  systems  in
which  it  occurs,  but  it  is  not  essential.
The  true  symbolism  of  the  Royal  Arch
system  is  founded  on  the  discovery  of  the
Lost  Word.

It  can  never  be  too  often  repeated  that
the  WORD  is,  in  Masonry,  the  symbol  of
TRUTH.  This  truth  is  the  great  object
of  pursuit  in  Masonry —  the  scope  and  ten¬
dency  of  all  its  investigations  —  the  prom¬
ised  reward  of  all  Masonic  labor.  Sought
for  diligently  in  every  degree,  and  con¬
stantly  approached,  but  never  thoroughly
and  intimately  embraced,  at  length,  in  the
Royal  Arch,  the  veils  which  concealed  the
object  of  search  from  our  view  are  with¬
drawn,  and  the  inestimable  prize  is  re¬
vealed.

This  truth,  which  Masonry  makes  the
great  object  of  its  investigations,  is  not  the
mere  truth  of  science,  or  the  truth  of  his¬
tory,  but  is  the  more  important  truth  which
is  synonymous  with  the  knowledge  of  the
nature  of  God,  —  that  truth  which  is  em¬
braced  in  the  sacred  Tetragrammaton,  or
omnific  name,  including  in  its  signification
his  eternal,  present,  past,  and  future  exist¬
ence,  and  to  which  he  himself  alluded  when
he  declared  to  Moses,  “  I  appeared  unto
Abraham,  unto  Isaac,  and  unto  Jacob  by
the  name  of  God  Almighty;  but  by  my
name  Jehovah  was  I  not  known  unto
them.”

The  discovery  of  this  truth  is,  then,  the
essential  symbolism  of  the  Royal  Arch
degree.  Wherever  it  is  practised,  —  and
under  some  peculiar  name  the  degree  is
found  in  every  Rite  of  Masonry,  —  this
symbolism  is  preserved.  However  the  le¬
gend  may  vary,  however  the  ceremonies
of  reception  and  the  preliminary  steps  of
initiation  may  differ,  the  consummation
is  always  the  same  —  the  great  discovery
which  represents  the  attainment  of  Truth.

Royal  Arch,  Grand.  The  thirty-
first  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.  it
is  nearly  the  same  as  the  thirteenth  de¬
gree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite.

Royal  Arch  Jewel.  The  jewel
which  every  Royal  Arch  Mason  is  per¬
mitted  to  wear  as  a  token  of  his  connection
with  the  Order.  It  is  usually  suspended
by  a  scarlet  ribbon  to  the  button.  It  is  of
gold,  and  consists  of  a  triple  tau  cross
within  a  triangle,  the  whole  circumscribed
by  a  circle.  This  jewel  is  eminently  sym¬
bolic.  The  tau  being  the  mark  mentioned
by  Ezekiel  (ix.  4,)  by  which  those  were  dis¬
tinguished  who  were  to  be  saved  from  the


G70


ROYAL


ROYAL


wicked  who  were  to  be  slain ;  the  triple  tau
is  symbolic  of  the  peculiar  and  more  emi¬
nent  separation  of  Royal  Arch  Masons
from  the  profane  ;  the  triangle ,  or  delta ,  is  a
symbol  of  the  sacred  name  of  God,  known


only  to  those  who  are  thus  separated ;  and
the  circle  is  a  symbol  of  the  eternal  life,
which  is  the  great  dogma  taught  by  Royal
Arch  Masonry.  Hence,  by  this  jewel,  the
Royal  Arch  Mason  makes  the  profession
of  his  separation  from  the  unholy  and  pro¬
fane,  his  reverence  for  God,  and  his  belief
in  the  future  and  eternal  life.

Royal  Arch  Masonry.  That  di¬
vision  of  Speculative  Masonry  which  is  en¬
gaged  in  the  investigation  of  the  mysteries
connected  with  the  Royal  Arch,  no  matter
under  what  name  or  in  what  Rite.  Thus
the  mysteries  of  the  Knight  of  the  Nintfc
Arch  constitute  the  Royal  A  rch  Masonry
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
just  as  much  as  those  of  the  Royal  Arch  of
Zerubbabel  do  the  Royal  Arch  of  the  York
and  American  Rites.

Royal  Arch  of  Enoch.  The  Royal
Arch  system  which  is  founded  upon  the  le¬
gend  of  Enoch.  It  is  said  to  have  been
the  basis  of  Ramsay’s  Royal  Arch.  See
Enoch.

Royal  Arch  of  Ramsay.  The

system  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  invented
early  in  the  last  century  by  the  Chevalier
Ramsay.  It  was  the  first  fabrication  of  the
Royal  Arch  degree  in  an  independent  form,
and,  although  rejected  by  the  English  Ma¬
sons,  has  been  adopted  as  the  basis  of  the
system  in  many  of  the  continental  Rites.
The  thirteenth  degree  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite  is  probably  a  very
fair  representation  of  it,  at  least  substanti¬
ally.  It  exercised  some  influence  also
upon  Dermott  and  Dunckerley  in  their
composition  of  their  Royal  Arch  systems.

Royal  Arch  of  Solomon.  One  of
the  names  of  the  degree  of  Knight  of  the
Ninth  Arch,  or  thirteenth  degree  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.

Royal  Arch  of  Zerubbabel.  The
Royal  Arch  degree  of  the  York  and  Ameri¬


can  Rites  is  so  called  to  distinguish  it  from
the  Royal  Arch  of  Solomon  in  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.

Royal  Arch  Robe**.  In  the  work¬
ing  of  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter  in  the  United
States  great  attention  is  paid  to  the  robes
of  the  several  officers.  The  High  Priest
wears,  in  imitation  of  the  high  priest  of
the  Jews,  a  robe  of  blue,  purple,  scarlet,
and  white  linen,  and  is  decorated  with  the
breastplate  and  mitre.  The  King  wears  a
scarlet  robe,  and  has  a  crown  and  sceptre.
The  Scribe  wears  a  purple  robe  and  turban.
The  Captain  of  the  Host  wears  a  white
robe  and  cap,  and  is  armed  with  a  sword.
The  Principal  Sojourner  wears  a  dark  robe,
with  tessellated  border,  a  slouched  hat,  and
pilgrim’s  staff.  The  Royal  Arch  Captain
wears  a  white  robe  and  cap,  and  is  armed
with  a  sword.  The  three  Grand  Masters
of  the  Veils  wear,  respectively,  the  Grand
Master  of  the  third  veil  a  scarlet  robe  and
cap,  of  the  second  veil  a  purple  robe  and
cap,  of  the  first  veil  a  blue  robe  and  cap.
Each  is  armed  with  a  sword.  The  Treas¬
urer,  Secretary,  and  Sentinel  wear  no  robes
nor  peculiar  dress.  All  of  these  robes
have  either  a  historical  or  symbolical  allu¬
sion.

Royal  Arch  Tracing-Board.

The  oldest  Royal  Arch  tracing-board  ex¬
tant  is  one  which  was  formerly  the  prop¬
erty  of  a  Chapter  in  the  city  of  Chester,  and
which  Dr.  Oliver  thinks  was  “used  only  a
very  few  years  after  the  degree  was  admit¬
ted  into  the  system  of  constitutional  Ma¬
sonry.”  He  has  given  a  copy  of  it  in  his
work  On  the  Origin  of  the  English  Royal
Arch.  The  symbols  which  it  displays  are,
in  the  centre  of  the  top  an  arch  scroll,  with
the  words  in  Greek,  EN  APXH  HN  0  A0r02,
i.  e.,  In  thebeginning  was  the  Word;  beneath,
the  word  JEHOVAH  written  in  kabbalis-
tic  letters ;  on  the  right  side  an  arch  and
keystone,  a  rope  falling  in  it,  and  a  sun
darting  its  rays  obliquely ;  on  the  left  a
pot  of  incense  beneath  a  rainbow ;  in  the
centre  of  the  tracing-board,  two  interlaced
triangles  and  a  sun  in  the  centre,  all  sur¬
rounded  by  a  circle;  on  the  right  and  left
of  this  the  seven-branched  candlestick  and
the  table  of  show- bread.  Beneath  all,  on
three  scrolls,  are  the  words,  “Solomon,
King  of  Israel;  Hiram,  King  of  Tyre;
Hiram,  the  Widow’s  Son,”  in  Hebrew  and
Latin.  Dr.  Oliver  finds  in  these  emblems
a  proof  that  the  Royal  Arch  was  originally
taken  from  the  Master’s  degree,  because
they  properly  belong  to  that  degree,  accord¬
ing  to  the  English  lecture,  and  were  after¬
wards  restored  to  it.  But  the  American
Mason  will  find  in  this  board  bow  little  his
system  has  varied  from  the  primitive  one
practised  at  Chester,  since  all  the  emblems,


ROYAL


ROYAL


671


with  the  exception  of  the  last  three,  are
still  recognized  as  Royal  Arch  symbols  ac¬
cording  to  the  American  system.

Royal  Arch  Word.  See  Tetragrarn-
maton.

Royal  Arch  Working-Tools.

See  Working- Tools.

Royal  Ark  Mariners.  A  side  de¬
gree  in  England  and  Scotland  which  is
conferred  on  Royal  Arch  Masons,  and
worked  under  the  authority  of  the  Supreme
Grand  Chapter  of  Scotland,  which  body
recognizes  its  Lodges  in  its  General  Regula¬
tions,  (p.  20.)  The  language  of  the  Order
is  peculiar.  The  Supreme  body  is  called  a
“Grand  Ark;”  subordinate  Lodges  are
“vessels;”  organizing  a  Lodge  is  “launch¬
ing  a  vessel ;”  to  open  a  Lodge  is  “  to  float
an  ark ;  ”  to  close  the  Lodge  is  “  to  moor.”
All  its  references  are  nautical,  and  allude
to  the  deluge  and  the  ark  of  Noah.  The
degree  is  useless  for  any  light  that  it  sheds  on
Masonry.  The  degree  seems  to  have  been
invented  in  England  about  the  end  of  the
last  century.  A  correspondent  of  the  Lon¬
don  Monthly  Magazine  for  December,  1798,
(vol.  vi.,  p.  424,)  calls  it  “one  of  the  new
degrees  in  Freemasonry,”  and  thus  de¬
scribes  the  organization :

“  They  profess  to  be  followers  of  Noah,
and  therefore  calls  themselves  Noachidse,  or
Sons  of  Noah.  Hence  their  President,
who  at  present  is  Thomas  Boothby  Par¬
kins,  Lord  Rancliffe,  is  dignified  with  the
venerable  title  of  Grand  Noah,  and  the
Lodge  where  they  assemble  is  called  the
Royal  Ark  Vessel.

“These  brother  mariners  wear  in  Lodge
time  a  broad  sash  ribbon,  representing  a
rainbow,  with  an  apron  fancifully  embel¬
lished  with  an  ark,  dove,  etc.

“  Among  other  rules  of  this  society  is
one  that  no  brother  shall  be  permitted  to
enter  as  a  mariner  on  board  a  Royal  Ark
vessel  for  any  less  sum  than  ten  shillings
and  sixpence,  of  which  sum  sixpence  shall
be  paid  to  the  Grand  and  Royal  Ark  vessel
for  his  registry,  and  the  residue  be  disposed  of
at  the  discretion  of  the  officers  of  the  vessel.”

Their  principal  place  of  meeting  in  Lon¬
don  was  at  the  Surry  Tavern,  Surry  Street,
in  the  Strand.

The  writer  gives  the  following  verse  from
one  of  their  songs  written  by  Dr.  Ebenezer
Sibley,  which  does  not  speak  much  for
the  poetical  taste  of  the  Mariners  or  their
laureate :

“  They  entered  safe  —  lo !  the  deluge  came
And  none  were  protected  but  Masons  and
wives  ;

The  crafty  and  knavish  came  floating  along,
The  rich  and  the  beggar  of  profligate  lives :
It  was  now  in  woe,

For  mercy  they  call
To  old  Father  Noah,

And  loudly  did  bawl,


But  Heaven  shut  the  door  and  the  ark  was
afloat,

To  perish  they  must,  for  they  were  found  out.”

Royal  Art.  The  earliest  writers  speak
of  Freemasonry  as  a  “Royal  Art.”  An¬
derson  used  the  expression  in  1723,  and  in
such  a  way  as  to  show  that  it  was  even
then  no  new  epithet.  The  term  has  be¬
come  common  in  all  languages  as  an  ap¬
pellative  of  the  Institution,  and  yet  but
few  perhaps  have  taken  occasion  to  ex¬
amine  into  its  real  signification  or  have
asked  what  would  seem  to  be  questions
readily  suggested,  “Why  is  Freemasonry
called  an  art?”  and  next,  “  Why  is  it  said
to  be  a  Royal  Art?”

The  answer  which  is  generally  supposed
to  be  a  sufficient  one  for  the  latter  inquiry,
is  that  it  is  so  called  because  many  mon-
arclis  have  been  its  disciples  and  its  pa¬
trons,  and  some  writers  have  gone  so  far
as  to  particularize,  and  to  say  that  Freema¬
sonry  was  first  called  a  “  Royal  Art”  in
1693,  when  William  III.,  of  England,  was
initiated  into  its  rites;  and  Gadicke,  in  his
Freimaurer  Lexicon ,  states  that  some  have
derived  the  title  from  the  fact  that  in  the
times  of  the  English  Commonwealth,  the
members  of  the  English  Lodges  had  joined
the  party  of  the  exiled  Stuarts,  and  labored
for  the  restoration  of  Charles  II.  to  the
throne.  He  himself,  however,  seems  to
think  that  Freemasonry  is  called  a  Royal
Art  because  its  object  is  to  erect  stately
edifices,  and  especially  palaces,  the  resi¬
dences  of  kings.

Such  an  answer  may  serve  for  the  pro¬
fane,  who  can  have  no  appreciation  of  a
better  reason,  but  it  will  hardly  meet  the
demands  of  the  intelligent  initiate,  who
wants  some  more  philosophic  explanation
—  something  more  consistent  with  the
moral  and  intellectual  character  of  the  In¬
stitution.

Let  us  endeavor  to  solve  the  problem,
and  to  determine  why  Freemasonry  is
called  an  art  at  all ;  and  why,  above  all
others,  it  is  dignified  with  the  appellation
of  a  Royal  Art.  Our  first  business  will.be
to  find  a  reply  to  the  former  question.

An  art  is  distinguished  from  a  handi¬
craft  in  this,  that  the  former  consists  of
and  supplies  the  principles  which  govern
and  direct  the  latter.  The  stonemason,
for  instance,  is  guided  in  his  construction
of  the  building  on  which  he  is  engaged  by
the  principles  which  are  furnished  to  him
by  the  architect.  Hence  stonemasonry  is
a  trade,  a  handicraft,  or,  as  the  German
significantly  expresses  it,  a  handwerk,  some¬
thing  which  only  requires  the  skill  and
labor  of  the  hands  to  accomplish.  But
architecture  is  an  art,  because  it  is  engaged
in  the  establishment  of  principles  and
scientific  tenets  which  the  “  haudwork  ”


672


ROYAL


ROYAL


of  the  Mason  is  to  carry  into  practical
effect.

The  handicraftsman,  the  handworker,  of
course  is  employed  in  manual  labor.  It
is  the  work  of  his  hands  that  accomplishes
the  purpose  of  his  trade.  But  the  artist
uses  no  such  means.  He  deals  only  in
principles,  and  his  work  is  of  the  head.  He
prepares  his  designs  according  to  the  prin¬
ciples  of  his  art,  and  the  workman  obeys
and  executes  them,  often  without  under¬
standing  their  ulterior  object.

Now,  let  us  apply  this  distinction  to  Free¬
masonry.  Eighteen  hundred  years  ago
many  thousand  men  were  engaged  in  the
construction  of  a  Temple  in  the  city  of
Jerusalem.  They  felled  and  prepared  the
timbers  in  the  forests  of  Lebanon,  and  they
hewred  and  cut  and  squared  the  stones  in
the  quarries  of  Judea;  and  then  they  put
them  together  under  the  direction  of  a
skilful  architect,  and  formed  a  goodly  edi¬
fice,  worthy  to  be  called,  as  the  Rabbins
named  it,  “  the  chosen  house  of  the  Lord.”
For  there,  according  to  the  Jewish  ritual,
in  preference  to  all  other  places,  was  the
God  of  Hosts  to  be  worshipped  in  oriental
splendor.  Something  like  this  has  been
done  thousands  of  times  since.  But  the
men  who  wrought  with  the  stone-hammer
and  trowel  at  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  and
the  men  who  afterwards  wrought  at  the
temples  and  cathedrals  of  Europe  and
Asia,  were  no  artists.  They  were  simply
handicraftsmen,  —  men  raising  an  edifice
by  the  labor  of  their  hands.  —  men  who,  in
doing  their  work,  wrere  instructed  by  others
skilful  in  art,  but  which  art  looked  only
to  the  totality,  and  had  nothing  to  do  with
the  operative  details.  The  Giblemites,  or
stone-squarers,  gave  form  to  the  stones  and
laid  them  in  their  proper  places.  But  in
what  form  they  should  be  cut,  and  in  what
spots  they  should  be  laid  so  that  the  build¬
ing  might  assume  a  proposed  appearance,
wrere  matters  left  entirely  to  the  superin¬
tending  architect,  the  artist,  who,  in  giving
his  instructions,  was  guided  by  the  princi¬
ples  of  his  art.

Hence  Operative  Masonry  is  not  an  art.
But  after  these  handicraftsmen  came  other
men,  who,  simulating,  or,  rather,  symbol¬
izing,  their  labors,  converted  the  operative
pursuit  into  a  speculative  system,  and  thus
made  of  a  handicraft  an  art.  And  it  was
in  this  wise  that  the  change  was  accom¬
plished.

The  building  of  a  temple  is  the  result  of
a  religious  sentiment.  Now,  the  Freema¬
sons  intended  to  organize  a  religious  insti¬
tution.  I  am  not  going  into  any  discus¬
sion,  at  this  time,  of  its  history.  When
Freemasonry  was  founded  is  immaterial  to
the  theory,  provided  that  the  foundation  is


made  posterior  to  the  time  of  the  building
of  King  Solomon’s  Temple.  It  is  sufficient
that  it  be  admitted  that  in  its  foundation
as  an  esoteric  institution  the  religious  idea
prevailed,  and  that  the  development  of  this
idea  was  the  predominating  object  of  its
first  organizers.

Borrowing,  then,  the  name  of  their  Insti¬
tution  from  the  operative  masons  who  con¬
structed  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  by  a  very
natural  process  they  borrowed  also  the
technical  language  and  implements  of  the
same  handicraftsmen.  But  these  they  did
not  use  for  any  manual  purpose.  They
did  not  erect  with  them  temples  of  stone,
but  were  occupied  solely  in  developing  the
religious  idea  which  the  construction  of
the  material  temple  had  first  suggested ;
they  symbolized  this  language  and  these
implements,  and  thus  established  an  art
whose  province  and  object  it  was  to  elicit
religious  thought,  and  to  teach  religious
truth  by  a  system  of  symbolism.  And  this
symbolism  — just  as  peculiar  to  Freema¬
sonry  as  the  doctrine  of  lines  and  surfaces
is  to  geometry,  or  of  numbers  is  to  arith¬
metic  —  constitutes  the  art  of  Freemasonry.

If  I  were  to  define  Freemasonry  as  an
art,  I  should  say  that  it  was  an  art  which
taught  the  construction  of  a  spiritual  tem¬
ple,  just  as  the  art  of  architecture  teaches
the  construction  of  a  material  temple.  And
I  should  illustrate  the  train  of  ideas  by
which  the  Freemasons  were  led  to  symbol¬
ize  the  Temple  of  Solomon  as  a  spiritual
temple  of  man’s  nature,  by  borrowing  the
language  of  St.  Peter,  who  says  to  his
Christian  initiates:  “Ye  also,  as  lively
stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house.”
And  with  greater  emphasis,  and  as  still
more  illustrative,  would  I  cite  the  language
of  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  —  that  Apos¬
tle  who,  of  all  others,  most  delighted  in
symbolism,  and  who  says:  “Know  ye  not
that'  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that
the  spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you  ?  ”

And  this  is  the  reason  why  Freemasonry
is  called  an  art.

Having  thus  determined  the  conditions
under  which  Freemasonry  becomes  an  art,
the  next  inquiry  will  be  why  it  has  been
distinguished  from  all  other  arts  in  being
designated,  par  excellence,  the  Royal  Art.
And  here  we  must  abandon  all  thought
that  this  title  comes  in  any  way  from  the
connection  of  Freemasonry  with  earthly
monarchs  —  from  the  patronage  or  the
membership  of  kings.  Freemasonry  ob¬
tains  no  addition  to  its  intrinsic  value  from
a  connection  with  the  political  heads  of
states.  Kings,  when  they  enter  within  its
sacred  portals,  are  no  longer  kings,  but
brethren.  In  the  Lodge  all  men  are  on  an
j  equality,  and  there  can  be  no  distinction


ROYAL


ROYAL


673


or  preference,  except  that  which  is  derived
from  virtue  and  intelligence.  Although  a
great  king  once  said  that  Freemasons  made
the  best  and  truest  subjects,  yet  in  the
Lodge  is  there  no  subjection  save  to  the
law  of  love,  —  that  law  which,  for  its  excel¬
lence  above  all  other  laws,  has  been  called
by  an  Apostle  the  “royal  law,”  just  as
Freemasonry,  for  its  excellence  above  all
other  arts,  has  been  called  the  “Royal
Art.”

St.  James  says,  in  his  general  Epistle:
“  If  ye  fulfil  the  royal  law  according  to  the
Scripture,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as
thyself,  ye  do  well.”  Dr.  Adam  Clarke,
inhis  commentary  on  this  passage,  —  which
is  so  appropriate  to  the  subject  we  are  in¬
vestigating,  and  so  thoroughly  explanatory
of  this  expression  in  its  application  to
Freemasonry,  that  it  is  well  worth  a  cita¬
tion, —  uses  the  following  language:

Speaking  of  the  expression  of  St.  James,
nomon  basilicon,  “  the  royal  law,”  he  says :
“This  epithet,  of  all  the  New  Testament
writers,  is  peculiar  to  James;  but  it  is  fre¬
quent  among  the  Greek  writers  in  the  sense
in  which  it  appears  St.  James  uses  it.  Basili-
kos,  royal,  is  used  to  signify  anything  that
is  of  general  concern,  is  suitable  to  all,  and
necessary  for  all,  as  brotherly  love  is.  This
commandment,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor
as  thyself,  is  a  royal  law ;  not  only  because
it  is  ordained  of  God,  proceeds  from  his
kingly  authority  over  men,  but  because  it  is
so  useful,  suitable,  and  necessary  to  the
present  state  of  man ;  and  as  it  was  given
us  particularly  by  Christ  himself,  who  is
our  king,  as  well  as  prophet  and  priest,  it
should  ever  put  us  in  mind  of  his  authority
over  us,  and  oursubjection  to  him.  As  there-
gal  state  is  the  most  excellent  for  secular
dignity  and  civil  utility  that  exists  among
men,  hence  we  give  the  epithet  royal  to
whatever  is  excellent,  noble,  grand,  or
useful.”

How  beautifully  and  appropriately  does
all  this  definition  apply  to  Freemasonry  as
a  Royal  Art.  It  has  already  been  shown
how  the  art  of  Freemasonry  consisted  in
a  symbolization  of  the  technical  language
and  implements  and  labors  of  an  operative
society  to  a  moral  and  spiritual  purpose.
The  Temple  which  was  constructed  by  the
builders  at  Jerusalem  was  taken  as  the

roundwork.  Out  of  this  the  Freemasons

ave  developed  an  admirable  science  of
symbolism,  which  on  account  of  its  design,
and  on  account  of  the  means  by  which  that
design  is  accomplished,  is  well  entitled,  for
its  “excellence,  nobility,  grandeur,  and  util¬
ity,”  to  be  called  the  “  Royal  Art.”

The  stonemasons  at  Jerusalem  were  en¬
gaged  in  the  construction  of  a  material
temple.  Cut  the  Freemasons  who  succeed-
4  K  43


ed  them  are  occupied  in  the  construction
of  a  moral  and  spiritual  temple,  man  being
considered,  through  the  process  of  the  act
of  symbolism,  that  holy  house.  And  in
this  symbolism  the  Freemasons  have  only
developed  the  same  idea  that  was  present
to  St.  Paul  when  he  said  to  the  Corinthians
that  they  were  “God’s  building,”  of  which
building  he,  “  as  a  wise  master-builder,  had
laid  the  foundation ;  ”  and  when,  still  fur¬
ther  extending  the  metaphor,  he  told  the
Ephesians  that  they  were  “  built  upon  the
foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,
Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  corner¬
stone,  in  whom  all  the  building  fitly  framed
together,  groweth  unto  a  holy  temple  in
the  Lord ;  in  whom  also  ye  are  budded
together  for  a  habitation  of  God  through
the  spirit.”

This,  then,  is  the  true  art  of  Freemason¬
ry.  It  is  an  art  which  teaches  the  right
method  of  symbolizing  the  technical  lan¬
guage  and  the  material  labors  of  a  handi¬
craft,  so  as  to  build  up  in  man  a  holy  house
for  the  habitation  of  God’s  spirit ;  to  give
perfection  to  man’s  nature;  to  give  purity
to  humanity,  and  to  unite  mankind  in  one
common  bond.

It  is  singular,  and  well  worthy  of  notice,
how  this  symbolism  of  building  up  man’s
body  into  a  h-oly  temple,  so  common  with
the  New  Testament  writers,  and  even  with
Christ  himself,  —  for  he  speaks  of  man  as  a
temple  which,  being  destroyed,  he  could
raise  up  in  three  days;  in  which,  as  St.
John  says,  “he  spake  of  the  temple  of  his
body,” — gave  rise  to  a  new  word  or  to  a  word
with  a  new  meaning  in  all  the  languages
over  which  Christianity  exercises  any  influ¬
ence.  The  old  Greeks  had  from  the  two
words  oikos,  “  a  house,”  and  domain,  “  to,
build,”  constructed  the  word  oikodomein,
which  of  course  signified  “to  build  a
house.”  In  this  plain  and  exclusive  sense
it  is  used  by  the  Attic  writers.  In  like  man¬
ner,  the  Romans,  out  of  the  two  words
cedes,  “a  house,”  and  facere,  “to  make,”
constructed  their  word  cedificare,  which  al¬
ways  meant  simply  “  to  build  a  house,”
and  in  this  plain  sense  it  is  used  by  Horace,
cero,  and  all  the  old  writers.  But  when
e  New  Testament  writers  began  to  sym¬
bolize  man  as  a  temple  or  holy  house  for
the  habitation  of  the  Lord,  and  when  they
spoke  of  building  up  this  symbolic  house,
although  it  was  a  moral  and  spiritual
growth  to  which  they  alluded,  they  used
the  Greek  word  oikodomein,  and  their  first
translators,  the  Latin  word  cedificare  in  a
new  sense,  meaning  “to  build  up  morally,”
that  is,  to  educate,  to  instruct.  And  as
modern  nations  learned  the  faith  of  Chris¬
tianity,  they  imbibed  this  symbolic  idea  of
i  a  moral  building,  and  adapted  for  its  ex-


674


ROYAL


ROYAL


pression  a  new  word  or  gave  to  an  old  word
a  new  meaning,  so  that  it  has  come  to  pass
that  in  French  edifier,  in  Italian  edificare ,
in  Spanish  edificar,  in  German  erbauen,  and
in  English  edify,  each  of  which  literally
and  etymologically  means  “to  huild  a
house,”  has  also  the  other  signification,  “  to
instruct,  to  improve,  to  educate.”  And
thus  we  speak  of  a  marble  building  as  a
magnificent  edifice,  and  of  a  wholesome
doctrine  as  something  that  will  edify  its
hearers.  But  there  are  but  few  who,  when
using  the  word  in  this  latter  sense,  think
of  that  grand  science  of  symbolism  which
gave  birth  to  this  new  meaning,  and  which
constitutes  the  very  essence  of  the  Royal
Art  of  Freemasonry.

For  when  this  temple  is  built  up,  it  is  to
be  held  together  only  by  the  cement  of  love.
Brotherly  love,  the  love  of  our  neighbor  as
ourself — that  love  which  suffereth  long  and
is  kind,  which  is  not  easily  provoked,  and
thinketh  no  evil  —  that  love  pervades  the
whole  system  of  Freemasonry,  not  only
binding  all  the  moral  parts  of  man’s  na¬
ture  into  one  harmonious  whole,  the  build¬
ing  being  thus,  in  the  language  of  St.  Paul,
“  fitly  framed  together,”  but  binding  man
to  man,  and  man  to  God.

And  hence  Freemasonry  is  called  a
“  Royal  Art,”  because  it  is  of  all  arts  the
most  noble ;  the  art  which  teaches  man  how
to  perfect  his  temple  of  virtue  by  pursuing
the  “  royal  law  ”  of  universal  love,  and  not
because  kings  have  been  its  patrons  and
encouragers.

A  similar  idea  is  advanced  in  a  Catechism
published  by  the  celebrated  Lodge  “  Wah-
reit  und  Einigkeit,”  at  Prague,  in  the  year
1800,  where  the  following  questions  and
answers  occur :

Q.  “  What  do  Freemasons  build?

A.  “An  invisible  temple,  of  which  King
Solomon’s  Temple  is  the  symbol.

Q.  “By  what  name  is  the  instruction
how  to  erect  this  mystic  building  called  ?

A.  “  The  Royal  Art;  because  it  teaches
man  how  to  govern  himself.”

Appositely  may  these  thoughts  be  closed
with  a  fine  expression  of  Ludwig  Bech-
stein,  a  German  writer,  in  the  Astroea.  _

“Every  king  will  be  a  Freemason,  even
though  he  wears  no  Mason’s  apron,  if  he
shall  be  God-fearing,  sincere,  good,  and
kind ;  if  he  shall  be  true  and  fearless,  obe¬
dient  to  the  law,  his  heart  abounding  in
reverence  for  religion  and  full  of  love  for
mankind  ;  if  he  shall  be  a  ruler  of  himself,
and  if  his  kingdom  be  founded  on  justice.
And  even'  Freemason  is  a  king,  in  whatso¬
ever  condition  God  may  have  placed  him
here,  with  rank  equal  to  that  of  a  king  and
with  sentiments  that  become  a  king,  for  his
kingdom  is  love,  the  love  of  his  fellow-


man,  a  love  which  is  long-suffering  and
kind,  which  beareth  all  things,  beheveth
all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all
things.”

And  this  is  why  Freemasonry  is  an  art,
and  of  all  arts,  being  the  most  noble,  is  well
called  the  “Royal  Art.”

Royal  Axe.  See  Knight  of  the  Royal
Axe.

Royal  Lodge.  The  Royal  Arch  lec¬
tures  in  the  English  system  say  that  the
Royal  Lodge  was  held  in  the  city  of  Jeru¬
salem,  on  the  return  of  the  Babylonish
captives,  in  the  first  year  in  the  reign  of
Cyrus ;  over  it  presided  Zerubbabel  the
prince  of  the  Jews,  Hiram  the  prophet,
and  Joshua  the  high  priest.

Royal  Master.  The  eighth  degree
of  the  American  Rite,  and  the  first  of  the
degrees  conferred  in  a  Council  of  Royal
and  Select  Masters.  Its  officers  are  a
Thrice  Illustrious  Grand  Master,  represent¬
ing  King  Solomon  ;  Illustrious  Hiram  of
Tyre,  Principal  Conductor  of  the  Works,
representing  Hiram  Abif;  Master  of  the
Exchequer,  Master  of  Finances,  Captain
of  the  Guards,  Conductor  of  the  Council
and  Steward.  The  place  of  meeting  is  called
the  “  Council  Chamber,”  and  represents
the  private  apartment  of  King  Solomon,
in  which  he  is  said  to  have  met  for  consul¬
tation  with  his  two  colleagues  during  the
construction  of  the  Temple.  Candidates
who  receive  this  degree  are  said  to  be
“  honored  with  the  degree  of  Royal  Master.”
Its  symbolic  colors  are  black  and  red  —  the
former  significant  of  grief,  and  the  latter
of  martyrdom,  and  both  referring  to  the
chief  builder  of  the  Temple.

The  events  recorded  in  this  degree,  look¬
ing  at  them  in  a  legendary  point  of  view,
must  have  occurred  at  the  building  of  the
first  Temple,  and  during  that  brief  period
of  time  after  the  death  of  the  builder  which
is  embraced  between  the  discovery  of  his
body  and  its  “  Masonic  interment.”  In  all
the  initiations  into  the  mysteries  of  the
ancient  world,  there  was,  as  it  is  well  known
to  scholars,  a  legend  of  the  violent  death
of  some  distinguished  personage,  to  whose
memory  the  particular  mystery  was  conse¬
crated,  of  the  concealment  of  the  body,  and
of  its  subsequent  discovery.  That  part  of
the  initiation  which  referred  to  the  con¬
cealment  of  the  body  was  called  the  Apha-
nism,  from  a  Greek  verb  which  signifies  “  to
conceal,”  and  that  part  which  referred  to
the  subsequent  finding  was  called  the  eure-
sis,  from  another  Greek  verb  which  signi¬
fies  “  to  discover.”  It  is  impossible  to  avoid
seeing  the  coincidences  between  the  system
of  initiation  and  that  practised  in  the  Ma¬
sonry  of  the  third  degree.  But  the  ancient
initiation  was  not  terminated  by  the  euresia


ROYAL


ROYAL


675


or  discovery.  Up  to  that  point,  the  cere¬
monies  had  been  funereal  and  lugubrious
in  their  character.  But  now  they  were
changed  from  wailing  to  rejoicing.  Other
ceremonies  were  performed  by  which  the
restoration  of  the  personage  to  life,  or  his
apotheosis  or  change  to  immortality,  was
represented,  and  then  came  the  autopsy  or
illumination  of  the  neophyte,  when  he  was
invested  with  a  full  knowledge  of  all  the
religious  doctrines  which  it  was  the  object
of  the  ancient  mysteries  to  teach  —  when,
in  a  word,  he  was  instructed  in  divine
truth.

Now,  a  similar  course  is  pursued  in  Ma¬
sonry.  Here  also  there  is  an  illumination,
a  symbolic  teaching,  or,  as  we  call  it,  an  in¬
vestiture  with  that  which  is  the  representa¬
tive  of  divine  truth.  The  communication
to  the  candidate,  in  the  Master’s  degree,  of
that  which  is  admitted  to  be  merely  a  rep¬
resentation  of  ora  substitution  for  that  sym¬
bol  of  divine  truth,  (the  search  for  which,
under  the  name  of  the  true  word ,  makes
so  important  a  part  of  the  degree,)  how  im¬
perfect  it  may  be  in  comparison  with  that
more  thorough  knowledge  which  only  future
researches  can  enable  the  Master  Mason  to
attain,  constitutes  the  autopsy  of  the  third
degree.  Now,  the  principal  event  recorded
in  the  legend  of  the  Royal  Master,  the  in¬
terview  between  Adoniram  and  his  two
Royal  Masters,  is  to  be  placed  precisely  at
that  juncture  of  time  which  is  between  the
euresis  or  discovery  in  the  Master  Mason’s
degree  and  the  autopsy,  or  investiture  with
the  great  secret.  It  occurred  between  the
discovery  by  means  of  the  sprig  of  acacia
and  the  final  interment.  It  was  at  the
time  when  Solomon  and  his  colleague,  Hi¬
ram  of  Tyre,  were  in  profound  consultation
as  to  the  mode  of  repairing  the  loss  which
they  then  supposed  had  befallen  them.

We  must  come  to  this  conclusion,  be¬
cause  there  is  abundant  reference,  both  in
the  organized  form  of  the  Council  and  in
the  ritual  of  the  degree,  to  the  death  as
an  event  that  had  already  occurred  ;  and,
on  the  other  hand,  while  it  is  evident  that
Solomon  had  been  made  acquainted  with
the  failure  to  recover,  on  the  person  of  the
builder,  that  which  had  been  lost,  there  is
no  reference  whatever  to  the  well-known
substitution  which  was  made  at  the  time  of
the  interment.

If,  therefore,  as  is  admitted  by  all  Ma¬
sonic  ritualists,  the  substitution  was  prece¬
dent  and  preliminary  to  the  establishment
of  the  Master  Mason’s  degree,  it  is  evident
that  at  the  time  that  the  degree  of  Royal
Master  is  said  to  have  been  founded  in  the
ancient  Temple,  by  our  “first  Most  Excel¬
lent  Grand  Master,”  all  persons  present,
except  the  first  and  second  officers,  must


have  been  merely  Fellow  Craft  Masons.
In  compliance  with  this  tradition,  therefore,
a  Royal  Master  is,  at  this  day,  supposed  to
represent  a  Fellow  Craft  in  the  search,  and
making  his  demand  for  that  reward  which
was  to  elevate  him  to  the  rank  of  a  Master
Mason.

If  from  the  legendary  history  we  pro¬
ceed  to  the  symbolism  of  the  degree,  we
shall  find  that,  brief  and  simple  as  are  the
ceremonies,  they  present  the  great  Masonic
idea  of  the  laborer  seeking  for  his  reward.
Throughout  all  the  symbolism  of  Masonry,
from  the  first  to  the  last  degree,  the  search
for  the  WORD  has  been  considered  but  as
a  symbolic  expression  for  the  search  after  i
TRUTH.  The  attainment  of  this  truth
has  always  been  acknowledged  to  be  the
great  object  and  design  of  all  Masonic  labor.
Divine  truth  —  the  knowledge  of  God  —
concealed  in  the  old  Kabbalistic  doctrine,
under  the  symbol  of  his  ineffable  name  —
and  typified  in  the  Masonic  system  under
the  mystical  expression  of  the  True  Word,
is  the  reward  proposed  to  every  Mason  who
has  faithfully  wrought  his  task.  It  is,  in
short,  the  “  Master’s  wages.”

Now,  all  this  is  beautifully  symbolized
in  the  degree  of  Royal  Master.  The  re¬
ward  had  been  promised,  and  the  time  had
now  come,  as  Adoniram  thought,  when  the
promise  was  to  be  redeemed,  and  the  true
word — divine  truth  —  was  to  be  imparted.
Hence,  in  the  person  of  Adoniram,  or  the
Royal  Master,  we  see  symbolized  the  Specu¬
lative  Mason,  who,  having  labored  to  com¬
plete  his  spiritual  temple,  comes  to  the
Divine  Master  that  he  may  receive  his  re¬
ward,  and  that  his  labor  may  be  consum¬
mated  by  the  acquisition  of  truth.  But  the
temple  that  he  had  been  building  is  the  tem¬
ple  of  this  life;  that  first  temple  which  must
be  destroyed  by  death  that  the  second  tem¬
ple  of  the  future  life  may  be  built  on  its
foundations.  And  in  this  first  temple  the
truth  cannot  be  found.  We  must  be  con¬
tented  with  its  substitute.

Royal  Order  of  Scotland.  This
is  an  Order  of  Freemasonry  confined  ex¬
clusively  to  the  kingdom  of  Scotland,  and
which,  formerly  conferred  on  Master  Ma¬
sons,  is  now  restricted  to  those  who  have
been  exalted  to  the  Royal  Arch  de¬
gree.  It  consists  of  two  degrees,  namely,
that  of  H.  R.  D.  M.  and  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  or,
in  full,  Heredom  and  Rosy  Cross.  The  first
may  be  briefly  described  as  a  Christianized
form  of  the  third  degree,  purified  from
the  dross  of  Paganism,  and  even  of  Ju¬
daism,  by  the  Culdees,  who  introduced
Christianity  into  Scotland  in  the  early  cen¬
turies  of  the  church.  The  second  degree
is  an  Order  of  civil  knighthood,  supposed
to  have  been  founded  by  Robert  Bruce


676


ROYAL


ROYAL


after  the  battle  of  Bannockburn,  and  con¬
ferred  by  him  upon  certain  Masons  who  had
assisted  him  on  that  memorable  occasion.
He,  so  the  tradition  goes,  gave  power  to
the  Grand  Master  of  the  Order  for  the
time  being  to  confer  this  honor,  which  is
not  inherent  in  the  general  body  itself,  but
is  specially  given  by  the  Grand  Master  and
his  Deputy,  and  can  be  conferred  only  by
them,  or  Provincial  Grand  Masters  ap¬
pointed  by  them.  The  number  of  knights
is  limited,  and  formerly  only  sixty-three
could  be  appointed,  and  they  Scotchmen ;
now,  however,  that  number  has  been  much
increased,  and  distinguished  Masons  of
all  countries  are  admitted  to  its  ranks.  In
1747  Prince  Charles  Edward  Stuart,  in  his
celebrated  Charter  to  Arras,  claimed  to  be
the  Sovereign  Grand  Master  of  the  Royal
Order,  “Nous  Charles  Edouard  Stewart,
Roi  d’Angleterre,  de  France,  de  l’Ecosse,
et  d’lrlande,  et  en  cette  quality,  S.  G.  M.
du  Chapitre  de  H.”  Prince  Charles  goes
on  to  say  that  H.  0.  or  H.  R.  M.  is  known
as  the  “Pelican  and  Eagle.”  “Connu
sous  le  titre  de  Chevalier  de  l’Aigle  et  de
Pelican,  et  depuis  nos  malheurs  et  nos  in¬
fortunes,  sous  celui  de  Rose  Croix.”  Now',
there  is  not  the  shadow  of  a  proof  that  the
Rose  Croix,  says  Bro.  Reitam,  was  ever
known  in  England  till  twenty  years  after
1747 ;  and  in  Ireland  it  was  introduced  by
a  French  chevalier,  M.  L’Aurent,  about
1782  or  1783.  The  Chapter  at  Arras  was
the  first  constituted  in  France — “  Chapitre
primordial  de  Rose  Croix ;  ”  and  from
other  circumstances  (the  very  name  Rose
Croix  being  a  translation  of  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.)
some  writers  have  been  led  to  the  conclu¬
sion  that  the  degree  chartered  by  Prince
Charles  Edward  Stuart  was,  if  not  the  ac¬
tual  Royal  Order  in  both  points,  a  Masonic
ceremony  founded  on  and  pirated  from  that
most  ancient  and  venerable  Order.

This,  however,  is  an  error ;  because,  ex¬
cept  in  name,  there  does  not  appear  to  be
the  slightest  connection  between  the  Rose
Croix  and  the  Royal  Order  of  Scotland.  In
the  first  place,  the  whole  ceremonial  is  dif¬
ferent,  and  different  in  essentials.  Most
of  the  language  used  in  the  Royal  Order
is  couched  in  quaint  old  rhyme,  modernized,
no  doubt,  to  make  it  “  un'derstanded  of  the
vulgar,”  but  still  retaining  sufficient  about
it  to  stamp  its  genuine  antiquity.  The
Rose  Croix  degree  is  most  probably  the
genuine  descendant  of  the  old  Rosicru-
cians,  and  no  doubt  it  has  always  had  a
more  or  less  close  connection  with  the
Templars.

Clavel  says  that  the  Royal  Order  of
Heredom  of  Kilwinning  is  a  Rosicrucian
degree,  having  many  different  gradations
in  the  ceremony  of  consecration.  The


|  kings  of  England  are  de  jure,  ifnot  de  facto,
;  Grand  Masters;  each  member  has  a  name
j  given  him,  denoting  some  moral  attribute.
In  the  initiation  the  sacrifice  of  the  Messiah
is  had  in  remembrance,  who  shed  his  blood
for  the  sins  of  the  world,  and  the  neo¬
phyte  is  in  a  figure  sent  forth  to  seek  the
lost  word.  The  ritual  states  that  the
Order  was  first  established  at  Icomkill,  and
afterwards  at  Kilwinning,  where  the  King
of  Scotland,  Robert  Bruce,  took  the  chair
in  person  ;  and  oral  tradition  affirms  that,
in  1314,  this  monarch  again  reinstated  the
Order,  admitting  into  it  the  Knights  Tem¬
plars  who  were  still  left.  The  Royal
Order,  according  to  this  ritual,  which  is
written  in  Anglo-Saxoq  verse,  boasts  of
great  antiquity.

Findel  disbelieves  in  the  Royal  Order,
as  he  does  in  all  the  Christian  degrees.  He
remarks  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot¬
land  formerly  knew  nothing  at  all  about
the  existence  of  this  Order  of  Heredom,  as
a  proof  of  which  he  adduces  the  fact  that
Laurie,  in  the  first  edition  of  his  History
of  the  Grand  Ijodye  of  Scotland,  has  not
mentioned  it.  Oliver,  however,  as  it  will
be  seen,  had  a  high  opinion  of  the  Order,
and  expressed  no  doubt  of  its  antiquity.

As  to  the  origin  of  the  Order,  we  have
abundant  authority  both  mythical  and  his¬
torical.

Thorv  (Act.  Lat.)  thus  traces  its  estab¬
lishment.

“  On  the  24th  of  June,  1314,  Robert
Bruce,  king  of  Scotland,  instituted,  after
the  battle  of  Bannockburn,  the  Order  of
St.  Andrew  of  the  Thistle,  to  w’hich  was
afterward  united  that  of  H.  D.  M.,  for  the
sake  of  the  Scottish  Masons  who  had  com¬
posed  a  part  of  the  thirty  thousand  men
with  whom  he  had  fought  the  English
army,  consisting  of  one  hundred  thousand.
He  formed  the  Royal  Grand  Lodge  of  the
Order  of  H.  D.  M.  at  Kilwinning,  reserv¬
ing  to  himself  and  his  successors  forever
the  title  of  Grand  Masters.”

Oliver,  in  his  Historical  Landmarks,  de¬
fines  the  Order  more  preciselv,  thus :

“The  Royal  Order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.  had
formerly  its  chief  seat  at  Kilwinning,  and
there  is  every  reason  to  think  that  it  and
St.  John’s  Mason ry  were  then  governed  by
the  same  Grand  Lodge.  But  during  the
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  Ma¬
sonry  was  at  a  very  low  ebb  in  Scotland,
and  it  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that
St.  John’s  Masonry  was  preserved.  The
Grand  Chapter  of  H.  R.  D.  M.  resumed  its
functions  about  the  middle  of  the  last  cen¬
tury  at  Edinburgh ;  and,  in  order  to  pre¬
serve  a  marked  distinction  between  the
Roval  Order  and  Craft  Masonry,  —  which
had  formed  a  Grand  Lodge  there  in  1736,


ROYAL


ROYAL


677


—  the  former  confined  itself  solely  to  the
two  degrees  of  H.  R.  D.  M.  and  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S  ”

Again,  in  the  history  of  the  Royal  Order,
officially  printed  in  Scotland,  the  following
details  are  found :

“  It  is  composed  of  two  parts,  H.  R.  M.
and  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.  The  former  took  its
rise  in  the  reign  of  David  I.,  king  of  Scot¬
land,  and  the  latter  in  that  of  King  Robert
Jthe  Bruce.  The  last  is  believed  to  have
been  originally  the  same  as  the  most  an¬
cient  Order  of  the  Thistle,  and  to  contain
the  ceremonial  of  admission  formerly  prac¬
tised  in  it.

“  The  Order  of  H.  R.  M.  had  formerly
its  seat  at  Kilwinning,  and  there  is  reason
to  suppose  that  it  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of
St.  John’s  Masonry  were  governed  by  the
same  Grand  Master.  The  introduction  of
this  Order  into  Kilwinning  appears  to  have
taken  place  about  the  same  time,  or  nearly
the  same  period,  as  the  introduction  of
Freemasonry  into  Scotland.  The  Chal¬
dees,  as  is  well  known,  introduced  Chris¬
tianity  into  Scotland ;  and,  from  their
known  habits,  there  are  good  grounds  for
believing  that  they  preserved  among  them
a  knowledge  of  the  ceremonies  and  precau¬
tions  adopted  for  their  protection  in  Judea.
In  establishing  the  degree  in  Scotland,  it
is  more  than  probable  that  it  was  done  with
the  view  to  explain,  in  a  correct  Christian
manner,  the  symbols  and  rites  employed  by
the  Christian  architects  and  builders;  and
this  will  also  explain  how  the  Royal  Order
is  purely  catholic,  —  not  Roman  Catholic, —
but  adapted  to  all  who  acknowledge  the
great  truths  of  Christianity,  in  the  same
way  that  Craft  or  Symbolic  Masonry  is
intended  for  all,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,
who  acknowledge  a  supreme  God.  The
second  part,  or  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  is  an  Order
of  Knighthood,  and,  perhaps,  the  only  gen¬
uine  one  in  connection  with  Masonry,  there
being  in  it  an  intimate  connection  between
the  trowel  and  the  sword,  which  others  try
to  show.  The  lecture  consists  of  a  figura¬
tive  description  of  the  ceremonial,  both  of
H.  R.  M.  and  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  in  simple
rhyme,  modernized,  of  course,  by  oral  tra¬
dition,  and  breathing  the  purest  spirit  of
Christianity.  Those  two  degrees  consti¬
tute,  as  has  already  been  said,  the  Royal
Order  of  Scotland,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland.  Lodges  or  Chapters  cannot  le¬
gally  meet  elsewhere,  unless  possessed  of  a
Charter  from  it  or  the  Grand  Master,  or  his
deputy.  The  office  of  Grand  Master  is
vested  in  the  person  of  the  king  of  Scot¬
land,  (now  of  Great  Britain,)  and  one  seat
is  invariably  kept  vacant  for  him  in  what¬
ever  country  a  Chapter  is  opened,  and  can¬
not  be  occupied  by  any  other  member.
Those  who  are  in  possession  of  this  degfee,


and  the  so-called  higher  degrees,  cannot
fail  to  perceive  that  the  greater  part  of
them  have  been  concocted  from  the  Royal
Order,  to  satisfy  the  morbid  craving  for
distinction  which  was  so  characteristic  of
the  continent  during  the  latter  half  of  the
last  century.

“  There  is  a  tradition  among  the  Masons
of  Scotland  that,  after  the  dissolution  of
the  Templars,  many  of  the  Knights  re¬
paired  to  Scotland  and  placed  themselves
under  the  protection  of  Robert  Bruce,  and
that,  after  the  battle  of  Bannockburn,
which  took  place  on  St.  John  the  Baptist’s
day,  1314,  this  monarch  instituted  the
Royal  Order  of  H.  R.  M.  and  Knights  of
the  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  and  established  the
chief  seat  at  Kilwinning.  From  that  Or¬
der  it  seems  by  no  means  improbable  that
the  present  degree  of  Rose  Croix  de  Here-
dom  may  have  taken  its  origin.  Iu  two
respects,  at  least,  there  seems  to  be  a  very
close  connection  between  the  two  systems.
They  both  claim  the  kingdom  of  Scotland
and  the  Abbey  of  Kilwinning  as  having
been  at  one  time  the  chief  seat  of  govern¬
ment,  and  they  both  seem  to  have  been  in¬
stituted  to  give  a  Christian  explanation  to
Ancient  Craft  Masonry.  There  is,  besides,
a  similarity  in  the  name  of  the  degrees  of
Rose  Croix  de  Heredom  and  H.  R.  M.  and
R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.  amounting  almost  to  an
identity,  which  appears  to  indicate  a  very
intimate  relation  of  one  to  the  other.”

And  now  recently  there  comes  Bro.  Ran¬
dolph  Hay,  of  Glasgow,  who,  in  a  late
number  of  the  London  Freemason,  gives  us
this  legend,  which  he  is  pleased  to  call  “  the
real  history  of  the  Royal  Order,”  and  which
he,  at  least,  religiously  believes  to  be  true :

“  Among  the  many  precious  things  which
were  carefully  preserved  in  a  sacred  vault
of  King  Solomon’s  Temple  was  a  portrait
of  the  monarch,  painted  by  Adoniram,  the
son  of  Elkanah,  priest  of  the  second  court.
This  vault  remained  undiscovered  till  the
time  of  Herod,  although  the  secret  of  its
existence  and  a  description  of  its  locality
were  retained  by  the  descendants  of  El¬
kanah.  During  the  war  of  the  Maccabees,
certain  Jews,  fleeing  from  their  native
country,  took  refuge,  first  iu  Spain  and
afterwards  in  Britain,  and  amongst  them
was  one  Aholiab,  the  then  possessor  of  the
document  necessary  to  find  the  hidden
treasure.  As  is  well  known,  buildings
were  then  in  progress  in  Edinburgh,  or
Dun  Edwin,  as  the  city  was  then  called,
and  thither  Aholiab  wended  his  way  to
find  employment.  His  skill  in  architec¬
ture  speedily  raised  him  to  a  prominent
position  in  the  Craft,  but  his  premature
death  prevented  his  realizing  the  dream  of
his  life,  which  was  to  fetch  the  portrait


678


ROYAL


RUFFIANS


from  Jerusalem  and  bestow  it  in  the  cus¬
tody  of  the  Craft.  However,  prior  to  his
dissolution,  he  confided  the  secret  to  cer¬
tain  of  the  Fraternity  under  the  bond  of
secrecy,  and  these  formed  a  class  known  as
‘The  Order  of  the  King,’  or  ‘The  Royal
Order.’  Time  sped  on;  the  Romans  in¬
vaded  Britain ;  and,  previous  to  the  cruci¬
fixion,  certain  members  of  the  old  town
guard  of  Edinburgh,  among  whom  were
several  of  the  Royal  Order,  proceeded  to
Rome  to  enter  into  negotiations  with  the
sovereign.  From  thence  they  proceeded  to
Jerusalem,  and  were  present  at  the  dread¬
ful  scene  of  the  crucifixion.  They  suc¬
ceeded  in  obtaining  the  portrait,  and  also
the  blue  veil  of  the  Temple  rent  upon  the
terrible  occasion.  I  may  dismiss  these  two
venerable  relics  in  a  few  words.  Wilson,
in  his  Memorials  of  Edinburgh,  (2  vols.,
published  by  Hugh  Patton,)  in  a  note  to
Masonic  Lodges,  writes  that  this  portrait
was  then  in  the  possession  of  the  brethren
of  the  Lodge  St.  David.  This  is  an  error,
and  arose  from  the  fact  of  the  Royal  Order
then  meeting  in  the  Lodge  St.  David’s
room  in  Hindford’s  Close.  The  blue  veil
was  converted  into  a  standard  for  the
trades  of  Edinburgh,  and  became  cele¬
brated  on  many  a  battle-field,  notably  in
the  First  Crusade  as ‘The  Blue  Blanket.’
From  the  presence  of  certain  of  their  num¬
ber  in  Jerusalem  on  the  occasion  in  ques¬
tion,  the  Edinburgh  City  Guard  were  often
called  Pontius  Pilate’s  Praetorians.  Now,
these  are  facts  well  known  to  many  Edin-
burgners  still  alive.  Let'X.  Y.  Z.’  go  to
Edinburgh  and  inquire  for  himself.

“  The  brethren,  in  addition,  brought  with
them  the  teachings  of  the  Christians,  and
in  their  meetings  they  celebrated  the  death
of  the  Captain  and  Builder  of  our  Salva¬
tion.  The  oath  of  the  Order  seals  my  lips
further  as  to  the  peculiar  mysteries  of  the
brethren.  I  may,  however,  state  that  the
Ritual,  in  verse,  as  in  present  use,  was
composed  by  the  venerable  Abbot  of  In-
chaffray,  the  same  who,  with  a  crucifix  in
his  hand,  passed  along  the  Scots’  line,  bless¬
ing  the  soldiers  and  the  cause  in  which
they  were  engaged,  previous  to  the  battle
of  Bannockburn.  Thus  the  Order  states
justly  that  it  was  revived,  that  is,  a  pro¬
founder  spirit  of  devotion  infused  into  it,
by  King  Robert,  by  whose  directions  the
Abbot  reorganized  it.”

In  this  account,  it  is  scarcely  necessary
to  say  that  there  is  far  more  of  myth  than
of  legitimate  history.

The  King  of  Scotland  is  hereditary  Grand
Master  of  the  Order,  and  at  all  assemblies
a  chair  is  kept  vacant  for  him.

Provincial  Grand  Lodges  are  held  at
Glasgow,  Rouen  in  France,  in  Sardinia,


Spain,  the  Netherlands,  Calcutta,  Bombay,
China,  and  New  Brunswick.  The  provin¬
cial  Grand  Lodge  of  London  was  estab¬
lished  in  July,  1872,  and  there  the  mem¬
bership  is  confined  to  those  who  have  pre¬
viously  taken  the  Rose  Croix,  or  eighteenth
degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite.

Royal  Priest.  The  fifth  degree  of
the  Initiated  Brothers  of  Asia,  also  called
the  True  Rose  Croix.

Royal  Secret,  Sublime  Prince
of  the.  See  Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal
Secret.

R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.  An  abbreviation  of
Rosy  Cross  in  the  Royal  Order  of  Scotland.

Ruffians.  The  traitors  of  the  third
degree  are  called  Assassins  in  continental
Masonry  and  in  the  high  degrees.  The
English  and  American  Masons  have  adopt¬
ed  in  their  ritual  the  more  homely  appel¬
lation  of  Ruffians.  The  fabricators  of  the
high  degrees  adopted  a  variety  of  names  for
these  Assassins,  (see  Assassins  of  the  Third
Degree,')  but  the  original  names  are  pre¬
served  in  the  rituals  of  the  York  and  Amer¬
ican  Rites.  There  is  no  question  that  has
so  much  perplexed  Masonic  antiquaries  as
the  true  derivation  and  meaning  of  these
three  names.  In  their  present  form,  they
are  confessedly  uncouth  and  without  appa¬
rent  signification.  Yet  it  i3  certain  that
we  can  trace  them  in  that  form  to  the  ear¬
liest  appearance  of  the  legend  of  the  third
degree,  and  it  is  equally  certain  that  at  the
time  of  their  adoption  some  meaning  must
have  been  attached  to  them.  I  am  con¬
vinced  that  this  must  have  been  a  very
simple  one,  and  one  that  would  have  been
easily  comprehended  by  the  whole  of  the
Craft,  who  were  in  the  constant  use  of  them.
Attempts,  it  is  true,  have  been  made  to  find
the  root  of  these  three  names  in  some  recon¬
dite  reference  to  the  Hebrew  names  of  God.
But  there  is,  I  think,  no  valid  authority  for
any  such  derivation.  In  the  first  place,  the
character  and  conduct  of  the  supposed  pos¬
sessors  of  these  names  preclude  the  idea  of
any  congruity  and  appropriateness  between
them  and  any  of  the  divine  names.  And
again,  the  literary  condition  of  the  Craft  at
the  time  of  the  invention  of  the  names
equally  preclude  the  probability  that  any
names  would  have  been  fabricated  of  a  re¬
condite  signification,  and  which  could  not
have  been  readily  understood  and  appre¬
ciated  by  the  ordinary  class  of  Masons  who
were  to  use  them.  The  names  must  natu¬
rally  have  been  of  a  construction  that  would
convey  a  familiar  idea,  wrnuld  be  suitable
to  the  incidents  in  which  they  were  to  be
employed,  and  would  be  congruous  wTith
the  character  of  the  individuals  upon  whom  '
they  were  to  be  bestowed.  Nowr  all  these


RUFFIANS


RULE


679


requisites  meet  in  a  word  which  was  entirely
familiar  to  the  Craft  at  the  time  when
these  names  were  probably  invented.  The
Ghiblim  are  spoken  of  by  Anderson,  mean¬
ing  Giblim,  as  stone-cutters  or  Masons ;  and
the  early  rituals  show  us  very  clearly  that
the  Fraternity  in  that  day  considered  Gib¬
lim  as  the  name  of  a  Mason ;  not  only  of  a
Mason  generally,  but  especially  of  that
class  of  Masons  who,  as  Drummond  says,
“  put  the  finishing  hand  to  King  Solo¬
mon’s  Temple,”  —  that  is  to  say,  the  Fellow
Crafts.  Anderson  also  places  the  Ghiblim
among  the  Fellow  Crafts;  and  so,  very  natu¬
rally,  the  early  Freemasons,  not  imbued
with  any  amount  of  Hebrew  learning,  and
not  making  a  distinction  between  the  sin¬
gular  and  plural  forms  of  that  language,
soon  got  to  calling  a  Fellow  Craft  a  Giblim.
The  steps  of  corruption  between  Giblim  and
Jubelum  were  not  very  gradual ;  nor  can  any
one  doubt  that  such  corruptions  of  spelling
and  pronunciations  were  common  among
these  illiterate  Masons,  when  he  reads  the
Old  Manuscripts,  and  finds  such  verbal  dis¬
tortions  as  Ne.mbroch  for  Nimrod,  Euglet  for
Euclid,  and  Aymon  for  Hiram.  Thus,  the
first  corruption  was  from  Giblim  to  Gibalim,
which  brought  the  word  to  three  syllables,
making  it  thus  nearer  to  its  eventual
change.  Then  we  find  in  the  early  rituals
another  transformation  into  Chibbe/um.
The  French  Masons  also  took  the  work  of
corruption  in  hand,  and  from  Giblim  they
manufactured  Jiblime  and  Jibulum  and
Jabulum.  Some  of  these  French  corrup¬
tions  came  back  to  English  Masonry  about
the  time  of  the  fabrication  of  the  high  de¬
grees,  and  even  the  French  words  were  dis¬
torted.  Thus  in  the  Leland  Manuscript,
the  English  Masons  made  out  of  Pytagore,
the  French  for  Pythagoras,  the  unknown
name  Peter  Gower,  which  is  said  so  much
to  have  puzzled  Mr.  Locke.  And  so  we
may  through  these  mingled  English  and
French  corruptions  trace  the  genealogy  of
the  word  Jubelum;  thus,  Ghiblim,  Gib¬
lim,  Gibalim,  Chibbelum,  Jiblime,  Jibe-
lum,  Jabelum,  and,  finally,  Jubelum.  It
meant  simply  a  Fellow  Craft,  and  was  ap¬
propriately  given  as  a  common  name  to
a  particular  Fellow  Craft  who  was  distin¬
guished  for  his  treachery.  In  other  words,
he  was  designated,  not  by  a  special  and  dis¬
tinctive  name,  but  by  the  title  of  his  condi¬
tion  and  rank  at  the  Temple.  He  was  the
Fellow  Craft,  who  was  at  the  head  of  a  con¬
spiracy.  As  for  the  names  of  the  other  two
Ruffians,  they  were  readily  constructed  out
of  that  of  the  greatest  one  by  a  simple
change  of  the  termination  of  the  word  from
um  to  a  in  one,  and  from  um  to  o  in  the
other,  thus  preserving,  by  a  similarity  of
names,  the  idea  of  their  relationship,  for


the  old  rituals  said  that  they  were  brothers
who  had  come  together  out  of  Tyre.  This
derivation  seems  to  me  to  be  easy,  natural,
and  comprehensible.  The  change  from
Giblim,  or  rather  from  Gibalim  to  Jubelum,
is  one  that  is  far  less  extraordinary  than
that  which  one-half  of  the  Masonic  words
have  undergone  in  their  transformation
from  their  original  to  their  present  form.

Buie.  An  instrument  with  which
straight  lines  are  drawn,  and  therefore  used
in  the  Past  Master’s  degree  as  an  em¬
blem  admonishing  the  Master  punctually
to  observe  his  duty,  to  press  forward  in  the
path  of  virtue,  and,  neither  inclining  to  the
right  nor  the  left,  in  all  his  actions  to  have
eternity  in  view.  The  twenty-four  inch
gauge  is  often  used  in  giving  the  instruc¬
tion  as  a  substitute  for  this  working-tool.
But  they  are  entirely  different ;  the  twenty-
four  inch  gauge  is  one  of  the  working-tools
of  an  Entered  Apprentice,  and  requires  to
have  the  twenty-four  inches  marked  upon
its  surface;  the  rule  is  one  of  the  working-
tools  of  a  Past  Master,  and  is  without  the
twenty-four  divisions.  The  rule  is  appro¬
priated  to  the  Past  or  Present  Master,  be¬
cause,  by  its  assistance,  he  is  enabled  to  lay
down  on  the  trestle-board  the  designs  for
the  Craft  to  work  by.

Rule  of  the  Templars.  The  code
of  regulations  for  the  government  of  the
Knights  Templars,  called  their  “Rule,”
was  drawn  up  by  St.  Bernard,  and  by  him
submitted  to  Pope  Honorius  II.  and  the
Council  of  Troyes,  by  both  of  whom  it  was
approved.  It  is  still  in  existence,  and  con¬
sists  of  seventy-two  articles,  partly  monas¬
tic  and  partly  military  in  character,  the
former  being  formed  upon  the  Rule  of  the
Benedictines.  The  first  articles  of  the  Rule
are  ecclesiastical  in  design,  and  require
from  the  Knights  a  strict  adherence  to  their
religious  duties.  Article  twenty  defines  the
costume  to  be  worn  by  the  brotherhood.
The  professed  soldiers  were  to  wear  a  white
costume,  and  the  serving  brethren  were
prohibited  from  wearing  anything  but  a
black  or  brown  cassock.  The  Rule  is  very
particular  in  reference  to  the  fit  and  shape
of  the  dress  of  the  Knights,  so  as  to  secure
uniformity.  The  brethren  are  forbidden  to
receive  and  open  letters  from  their  friends
without  first  submitting  them  to  the  in¬
spection  of  their  superiors.  The  pastime
of  hawking  is  prohibited,  but  the  nobler
sport  of  lion-hunting  is  permitted,  because
the  lion,  like  the  devil,  goes  about  contin¬
ually  roaring,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.
Article  fifty-five  relates  to  the  reception  of
married  members,  who  are  required  to  be¬
queath  the  greater  portion  of  their  property
to  the  Order.  The  fifty-eighth  article  regu¬
lates  the  reception  of  aspirants,  or  secular


680


RULERS


SABBATH


persons,  who  are  not  to  be  received  imme-  1
diately  on  their  application  into  the  society,
but  are  required  first  to  submit  to  an  ex¬
amination  as  to  sincerity  and  fitness.  The
seventy-second  and  concluding  article  re¬
fers  to  the  intercourse  of  the  Knights  with
females.  No  brother  was  allowed  to  kiss
a  woman,  though  she  were  his  mother  or
sister.  “  Let  the  soldier  of  the  cross,”  says
St.  Bernard,  “shun  all  ladies’  lips.”  At
first  this  rule  was  rigidly  enforced,  but  in
time  it  was  greatly  relaxed,  and  the  picture
of  the  interior  of  a  house  of  the  Temple,  as
portrayed  by  the  Abbot  of  Clairvaulx,  would
scarcely  have  been  appropriate  a  century
or  two  later.

Rulers.  Obedience  to  constituted  au¬
thority  has  always  been  inculcated  by  the
laws  of  Masonry.  Thus,  in  the  installa¬
tion  charges  as  printed  by  Preston,  the
incoming  Slaster  is  required  to  promise  “  to
hold  in  veneration  the  original  rulers  and
patrons  of  the  Order  of  Masonry,  and  their
regular  .successors,  supreme  and  subordi¬
nate.”

Russia.  Freemasonry  was  introduced
into  Russia,  in  1731,  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  Lord  Lovel  having  appointed
Captain  John  Philips  Provincial  Grand
Master  of  Russia.  It  is  said  that  there
was  a  Lodge  in  St.  Petersburg  as  early  as
1732;  but  its  meetings  must  have  been
private,  as  the  first  notice  that  we  have  of
a  Lodge  openly  assembling  in  the  empire
is  that  of  “  Silence,”  established  at  St.  Pe¬
tersburg,  and  the  “North  Star”  at  Riga,
both  in  the  year  1750.  Thory  says  that
Masonry  made  but  little  progress  in  Rus¬
sia  until  1763,  when  the  Empress  Cather¬
ine  II.  declared  herself  the  Protectress  of
the  Order.

In  1765  the  Rite  of  Melesino,  a  Rite  un¬
known  in  any  other  country,  was  intro¬
duced  by  a  Greek  of  that  name;  and  there
were  at  the  same  time  the  York,  Swedish,
and  Strict  Observance  Rites  practised  by  ,


other  Lodges.  In  1783  twelve  of  these
Lodges  united  and  formed  the  National
Grand  Lodge,  which,  rejecting  the  other
Rites,  adopted  the  Swedish  system.  For  a
time  Masonry  flourished  with  unalloyed
prosperity  and  popularity.  But  about  the
year  1794,  the  Empress,  becoming  alarmed
at  the  political  condition  of  France,  and
being  persuaded  that  the  members  of  some
of  the  Lodges  were  in  opposition  to  the
government,  withdrew  her  protection  from
the  Order.  She  did  not,  however,  direct
the  Lodges  to  be  closed,  but  most  of  them,
in  deference  to  the  wishes  of  the  sovereign,
ceased  to  meet.  The  few  that  continued  to
work  were  placed  under  the  surveillance
of  the  police,  and  soon  languished,  holding
their  communications  only  at  distant  inter¬
vals.  In  1797,  Paul  I.,  instigated  by  the
Jesuits,  whom  he  had  recalled,  interdicted
the  meetings  of  all  secret  societies,  and  es¬
pecially  the  Masonic  Lodges.  Alexander
succeeded  Paul  in  1801,  and  renewed  the
interdict  of  his  predecessor.  In  1803,  M.
Boeber,  counsellor  of  state  and  director
of  the  school  of  cadets  at  St.  Petersburg,
obtained  an  audience  of  the  Emperor,
and  succeeded  in  removing  his  prejudices
against  Freemasonry.  In  that  year  the
edict  was  revoked,  the  Emperor  himself  was
initiated  in  one  of  the  revived  Lodges,  and
the  Grand  Orient  of  all  the  Russias  was
established,  of  which  M.  Boeber  was  de¬
servedly  elected  Grand  Master.  Freema¬
sonry  now  again  flourished,  although  in
1817  there  were  two  Grand  Lodges,  that  of
Astrea,  which  worked  on  the  system  of
tolerating  all  Rites,  and  a  Provincial  Lodge,
which  practised  the  Swedish  system.

But  suddenly,  on  the  12th  August,  1822,
the  Emperor  Alexander,  instigated,  it  is
said,  by  the  political  condition  of  Poland,
issued  a  decree  ordering  all  the  Lodges  to
be  closed,  and  forbidding  the  erection  of
any  new  ones.  The  order  was  quietly
obeyed  by  the  Freemasons  of  Russia.


s.


Sabaism.  The  worship  of  the  sun,
moon,  and  stars,  the
Tsaba  Hashmaim,  “  the  host  of  heaven.”
It  was  practised  in  Persia,  Chaldea,  India,
and  other  Oriental  countries,  at  an  early
period  of  the  world’s  history,  See  Blazing
Star  and  Sun  Worship.

Sabaoth.  HVTj  Jehovah


Tsabaoth,  Jehovah  of  Hosts,  a  very  usual
appellation  for  the  Most  High  in  the  pro¬
phetical  books,  especially  in  Isaiah,  Jere¬
miah,  Zechariah,  and  Malachi,  but  not
found  in  the  Pentateuch.

Sabbath.  In  the  lecture  of  the  second
or  Fellow  Craft’s  degree,  it  is  said,  In  six
days  God  created  the  heavens  and  the


SABIANISM


SAINT


681


earth,  and  rested  upon  the  seventh  day;
the  seventh,  therefore,  our  ancient  brethren
consecrated  as  a  day  of  rest  from  their
labors,  thereby  enjoying  frequent  opportu¬
nities  to  contemplate  the  glorious  works  of
creation,  and  to  adore  their  great  Creator.

Sabianism.  See  Sabaism.

Sackcloth.  In  the  Rose  Croix  ritual,
sackcloth  is  a  symbol  of  grief  and  humilia¬
tion  for  the  loss  of  that  which  it  is  the  ob¬
ject  of  the  degree  to  recover.

Sacred  Asylum  of  High  Ma¬
sonry.  In  the  Institutes,  Statutes,  and
Regulations ,  signed  by  Adington,  Chancel¬
lor,  and  which  are  given  in  the  Recueil  des
Actes  du  Supreme  Conseil  du  France,  as  a
sequence  to  the  Constitutions  of  1762,  this
title  is  given  to  any  subordinate  body  of
the  Scottish  Rite.  Thus  in  Article  XVI.:
“At  the  time  of  the  installation  of  a  Sa¬
cred  Asylum  of  High  Masonry,  the  mem¬
bers  composing  it  shall  all  make  and  sign
their  pledge  of  obedience  to  the  Institutes,
Statutes,  and  General  Regulations  of  High
Masonry.”  In  this  document  the  Rite  is
always  called  “  High  Masonry,”  and  any
body,  whether  a  Lodge  of  Perfection,  a
Chapter  of  Rose  Croix,  or  a  Council  of
Kadosh,  is  styled  a  “Sacred  Asylum.”

Sacred  Aodge.  In  the  lectures  ac¬
cording  to  the  English  system,  we  find  this
definition  of  the  “Sacred  Lodge.”  The
symbol  has  not  been  preserved  in  the
American  ritual.  Over  the  Sacred  Lodge
presided  Solomon,  the  greatest  of  kings,
and  the  wisest  of  men;  Hiram,  the  great
and  learned  king  of  Tyre;  and  Hiram
Abif,  the  widow’s  son,  of  the  tribe  of  Naph-
tali.  It  was  held  in  the  bowels  of  the
sacred  Mount  Moriah,  under  the  part
whereon  was  erected  the  Holy  of  Holies.
On  this  mount  it  was  where  Abraham  con¬
firmed  his  faith  by  his  readiness  to  offer  up
his  only  son,  Isaac.  Here  it  was  where
David  offered  that  acceptable  sacrifice  on
the  threshing-floor  of  Araunah  by  which
the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  appeased,  and
the  plague  stayed  from  his  people.  Here
it  was  where  the  Lord  delivered  to  David,
in  a  dream,  the  plan  of  the  glorious  Tem¬
ple,  afterwards  erected  by  our  noble  Grand
Master,  King  Solomon.  And  lastly,  here
it  was  where  he  declared  he  would  establish
his  sacred  name  and  word,  which  should
never  pass  away ;  and  for  these  reasons
this  was  justly  styled  the  Sacred  Lodge.

Kacrificant.  ( Sacrifiant .)  A  degree
in  the  Archives  of  the  Lodge  of  Saint  Louis
des  Amis  R6unis  at  Calais.

Sacrifice,  Altar  of.  See  Altar.

Sacrificcr.  (Sacrificateur.)  1.  A  de¬
gree  in  the  Archives  of  the  Lodge  of  Saint
Louis  des  Amis  Reunis  at  Calais.  2.  A  de¬
gree  in  the  collection  of  Pyron.

4  L


Saint  Adhabell.  Introduced  into
the  Cooke  MS.,  where  the  allusion  evi¬
dently  is  to  St.  Amphibalus,  which  see.

Saint  Alban.  St.  Alban,  or  Albanus,
the  proto-martyr  of  England,  was  born  in
the  third  century,  at  Verulam,  now  St.
Albans,  in  Hertfordshire.  In  his  youth  he
visited  Rome,  and  served  seven  years  as  a
soldier  under  the  Emperor  Diocletian.
On  his  return  to  Britain  he  embraced
Christianity,  and  was  the  first  who  suffered
martyrdom  in  the  great  persecution  which
raged  during  the  reign  of  that  emperor.
The  Freemasons  of  England  have  claimed
St.  Alban  as  being  intimately  connected
with  the  early  history  of  the  Fraternity  in
that  island.  Preston,  in  his  Illustrations,
quotes  the  following  statement  from  an  old
manuscript  which,  he  says,  had  been  in
the  possession  of  Nicholas  Stone,  a  curious
sculptor  under  the  celebrated  architect,
Inigo  Jones :

“  St.  Alban  loved  Masons  well  and  cher¬
ished  them  much,  and  made  their  pay
right  good;  for  he  gave  them  two  shillings
per  week  and  four  pence  to  their  cheer;
whereas  before  that  time,  in  all  the  land,  a
Mason  had  but  a  penny  a  day  and  his
meat,  until  St.  Alban  mended  it.  And  he
got  them  a  charter  from  the  king  and  his
council  for  to  hold  a  general  council,  and
gave  it  to  name  Assembly.  Thereat  he
was  himself,  and  did  help  to  make  Masons
and  gave  them  good  charges.”

We  have  another  tradition  on  the  same
subject;  for  in  a  little  work  published  in
1760-5,  at  London,  under  the  title  o i  Multa
Paucis  for  the  Lovers  of  Secrets,  we  find  the
following  statement  in  reference  to  the
Masonic  character  and  position  of  St.  Al¬
ban  :

“In  the  following  (the  third)  century,
Gordian  sent  many  architects  over  [into
England],  who  constituted  themselves  into
Lodges,  and  instructed  the  Craftsmen  in
the  true  principles  of  Freemasonry  ;  and  a
few  years  later,  Carausius  was  made  empe¬
ror  of  the  British  Isles,  and,  being  a  great
lover  of  art  and  science,  appointed  Albanus
Grand  Master  of  Masons,  who  employed
the  Fraternity  in  building  the  palace  of
Verulam,  or  St.  Albans.”

Both  of  these  statements  are  simply
legends,  or  traditions  of  the  not  unusual
character,  in  which  historical  facts  are
destroyed  by  legendary  additions.  The
fact  that  St.  Alban  lived  at  Verulam  may
be  true — most  probably  is  so.  It  is  another
fact  that  a  splendid  Episcopal  palace  was
built  there,  whether  in  the  time  of  St.  Al¬
ban  or  not  is  not  so  certain  ;  but  the  affirm¬
ative  has  been  assumed ;  and  hence  it  easily
followed  that,  if  built  in  his  time,  he  must
have  superintended  the  building  of  the


682


SAINT


SAINT


edifice.  He  would,  of  course,  employ  the
workmen,  give  them  his  patronage,  and,  to
some  extent,  by  his  superior  abilities,  direct
their  labors.  Nothing  was  easier,  then,
than  to  make  him,  after  all  this,  a  Grand
Master.  The  assumption  that  St.  Alban
built  the  palace  at  Verulam  was  very  nat¬
ural,  because  when  the  true  builder’s  name
was  lost,  —  supposing  it  to  have  been  so, —
St.  Alban  was  there  ready  to  take  his  place,
Verulam  having  been  his  birthplace.

The  increase  of  pay  for  labor,  and  the
annual  congregation  of  the  Masons  in  a
General  Assembly,  having  been  subsequent
events,  the  exact  date  of  whose  first  occur¬
rence  had  been  lost,  by  a  process  common
in  the  development  of  traditions,  they  were
readily  transferred  to  the  same  era  as  the
building  of  the  palace  at  Verulam.  It  is
not  even  necessary  to  suppose,  by  way  of
explanation,  as  Preston  does,  that  St.  Alban
was  a  celebrated  architect,  and  a  real  encour-
ager  of  able  workmen.  The  whole  of  the
tradition  is  worked  out  of  these  simple
facts :  that  architecture  began  to  be  encour¬
aged  in  England  about  the  third  century  ;
that  St.  Alban  lived  at  that  time  at  Veru¬
lam  ;  that  a  palace  was  erected  then,  or  at
some  subsequent  period,  in  the  same  place ;
and  in  the  lapse  of  time,  Verulam,  St.
Alban,  and  the  Freemasons  became  min¬
gled  together  in  one  tradition.  The  in¬
quiring  student  of  history  will  neither  assert
nor  deny  that  St.  Alban  built  the  palace  of
Verulam.  He  will  be  content  with  taking
him  as  the  representative  of  that  builder,
if  he  was  not  the  builder  himself;  and  he
will  thus  recognize  the  proto-martyr  as  the
type  of  what  is  supposed  to  have  been  the
Masonry  of  his  age,  or,  perhaps,  only  of
the  age  in  which  the  tradition  received  its
form.

Saint  Albans,  Earl  of.  Anderson
(2d  edition,  101,)  says,  and,  after  him,
Pre3ton,  that  a  General  Assembly  of  the
Craft  was  held  on  Dec.  27,  1663,  at  which
Henry  Jermyn,  Earl  of  St.  Albans,  was
elected  Grand  Master,  who  appointed  Sir
John  Denham  his  Deputy,  and  Christopher
Wren  and  John  Webb  his  Wardens.  Sev¬
eral  useful  regulations  were  made  at  this
assembly,  known  as  the  “  Regulations  of
1663.”  These  regulations  are  given  by
Anderson  and  by  Preston,  and  also  in  the
Roberts  MS.,  with  the  addition  of  the  oath
of  secrecy.  The  Roberts  MS.  says  that  the
assembly  was  held  on  the  8th  of  December.

Saint  Amphibalus.  The  ecclesias¬
tical  legend  is  that  St.  Amphibalus  came
to  England,  and  converted  St.  Alban,  who
was  the  great  patron  of  Masonry.  The
Old  Constitutions  do  not  speak  of  him,  ex¬
cept  the  Cooke  MS.,  which  has  the  follow¬
ing  passage:  “And  sone  after  that  came  j


Seynt  Adhabell  into  Englond,  and  he  con-
vertyd  Seynt  Albon  to  C’ristendome ;  ”
where,  evidently,  St.  Adhabell  is  meant
for  St.  Amphibalus.  But  amphibolus  is  the
Latin  name  of  a  cloak  worn  by  priests  over
their  other  garments;  and  Higgins  ( Celtic
Druids,  p.  201,)  has  shown  that  there  was
no  such  saint,  but  that  the  “Sanctus  Am¬
phibolus”  was  merely  the  holy  cloak
brought  by  St.  Augustine  to  England.
His  connection  with  the  history  of  the
origin  of  Masonry  in  England  is,  there¬
fore,  altogether  apocryphal.

Saint  Andrew,  Knight  of.  See
Knight  of  St.  Andrew.

Saint  Andrew’s  Day.  The  30th
of  November,  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland  as  the  day  of  its  Annual  Com¬
munication.

Saint  Augustine.  St.  Augustine,  or
St.  Austin,  was  sent  with  forty  monks  into
England,  about  the  end  of  the  sixth  cen¬
tury,  to  evangelize  the  country.  Lenning
says  that,  according  to  a  tradition,  he  placed
himself  at  the  head  of  the  corporations  of
builders,  and  was  recognized  as  their  Grand
Master.  I  can  find  no  such  tradition,  nor,
indeed,  even  the  name  of  St.  Augustine,  in
any  of  the  Old  Constitutions  which  con¬
tain  the  “Legend  of  the  Craft.”

Saint  Bernard.  Saint  Bernard  of
Clairvaulx  was  one  of  the  most  eminent
names  of  the  church  in  the  Middle  Ages.
In  1128,  he  was  present  at  the  Council  of
Troyes,  where,  through  his  influence,  the
Order  of  Knights  Templars  was  confirmed  ;
and  he  himself  is  said  to  have  composed
the  Rule  or  constitution  by  which  they
were  afterwards  governed.  Throughout
his  life  he  was  distinguished  for  his  warm
attachment  to  the  Templars,  and  “rarely,”
says  Burnes,  ( Sketch  of  K.  T.,  p.  12),  “  wrote
a  letter  to  the  Holy  Land,  in  which  he  did
not  praise  them,  and  recommend  them  to
the  favor  and  protection  of  the  great.”  To
his  influence,  untiringly  exerted  in  their
behalf,  has  always  been  attributed  the  rapid
increase  of  the  Order  in  wealth  and  popu¬
larity.

Saint  Domingo.  One  of  the  prin¬
cipal  islands  of  the  West  Indies.  Free¬
masonry  was  introduced  there  at  an  early
period  in  the  last  century.  Rebold  says  in
1746.  It  must  certainly  have  been  in  an
active  condition  there  at  a  time  not  long
after,  for  in  1761  Stephen  Morin,  who  had
been  deputed  by  the  Council  of  Emperors
of  the  East  and  West  to  propagate  the
high  degrees,  selected  St.  Domingo  for  the
seat  of  his  Grand  East,  and  thence  dissem¬
inated  the  system,  which  resulted  in  the  es¬
tablishment  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  at
|  Charleston,  South  Carolina.  The  French


SAINTE


SAINT


683


revolution,  and  the  insurrection  of  the  slaves
at  about  the  same  period,  was  for  a  time
fatal  to  the  progress  of  Masonry  in  St.  Do¬
mingo.  Subsequently,  the  island  was  di¬
vided  into  two  independent  governments
—  that  of  Dominica,  inhabited  by  whites,
and  that  of  Hayti,  inhabited  by  blacks.  In
each  of  these  a  Masonic  obedience  has  been
organized.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Hayti  has
been  charged  with  irregularity  in  its  for¬
mation,  and  has  not  been  recognized  by  the
Grand  Lodges  of  the  United  States.  It  has
been,  however,  by  those  of  Europe  generally,
and  a  representative  from  it  was  accredited
at  the  Congress  of  Paris,  held  in  1855.
Masonry  was  revived  in  Dominica,  Rebold
says,  in  1822 ;  other  authorities  say  in  1855.
A  Grand  Lodge  was  organized  at  the  city
of  St.  Domingo,  December  11,  1858.  At
the  present  time  Dominican  Masonry  is
established  under  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite,  and  the  National  Grand
Orient  of  the  Dominican  Republic  is  di¬
vided  into  four  sections,  namely,  a  Grand
Lodge,  Grand  Chapter  General,  Grand
Consistory  General  and  Supreme  Council.
The  last  body  has  not  been  recognized  by
the  Mother  Council  at  Charleston,  since  its
establishment  is  in  violation  of  the  Scot¬
tish  Constitutions,  which  prescribe  one  Su¬
preme  Council  only  for  all  the  West  India
Islands.

Sainte  Croix,  Emanuel  Joseph
Guilliem  de  Clermont  -  ILodeve

de.  A  French  antiquary,  and  member  of
the  Institute, -who  was  born  at  Mormoiron,
in  1746,  and  died  in  1809.  His  work  pub¬
lished  in  two  volumes  in  1784,  and  entitled,
Recherche*  Historiques  et  Critiques  sur  les
Mysteres  du  Paganisms,  is  one  of  the  most
valuable  and  instructive  essays  that  we
have  in  any  language  on  the  ancient  mys¬
teries, —  those  religious  associations  whose
history  and  design  so  closely  connect  them
with  Freemasonry.  The  later  editions  were
enriched  by  the  valuable  notes  of  Silvestre
de  Tracy.

Saint  George’s  Day.  The  twenty-
third  of  April.  Being  the  patron  saint  of
England,  his  festival  is  celebrated  by  the
Grand  Lodge.  The  Constitution  requires
that  “  there  shall  be  a  Masonic  festival  next
following  St.  George’s  Day,  which  shall  be
dedicated  to  brotherly  love  and  refresh¬
ment.”  It  is  the  occasion  of  the  “  Grand
Feast.”

Saint  Germain.  A  town  in  France,
about  ten  miles  from  Paris,  where  James
II.  established  his  court  after  his  expulsion
from  England,  and  where  he  died.  Oliver
says,  ( Landm .,  ii.  28,)  and  the  statement  lias
been  repeatedly  made  by  others,  that  the
followers  of  the  dethroned  monarch  who
accompanied  him  in  his  exile,  carried  Free¬


masonry  into  France,  and  laid  the  founda¬
tion  of  that  system  of  innovation  which
subsequently  threw  the  Order  into  confu¬
sion  by  the  establishment  of  a  new  degree,
which  they  called  the  Chevalier  Maqon
Ecossais,  and  which  they  worked  in  the
Lodge  of  St.  Germain.  But  Oliver  has
here  antedated  history.  James  II.  died  in
1701,  and  Freemasonry  was  not  introduced
into  France  from  England  until  1725.  The
exiled  house  of  Stuart  undoubtedly  made
use  of  Masonry  as  an  instrument  to  aid  in
their  attempted  restoration  ;  but  their  con¬
nection  with  the  Institution  must  have  been
after  the  time  of  James  II.,  and  most  proba¬
bly  under  the  auspices  of  his  grandson,  the
Young  Pretender,  Charles  Edward.

Saint  John,  Favorite  Iiroflier
of.  The  eighth  degree  of  the  Swedish
Rite.

Saint  John,  Fodge  of.  See  Lodge

of  St.  John.

St.  John  of  Jerusalem.  Knight

of.  See  K  night  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem.

Saint  John’s  Masonry.  The  Con¬
stitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland
(chap,  ii.)  declares  that  that  body  “prac¬
tises  and  recognizes  no  degrees  of  Masonry
but  those  of  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,  and
Master  Mason,  denominated  St.  John’s  Ma¬
sonry."

Saint  John’s  Order.  In  a  system
of  Masonry  which  Oliver  says  ( Mirror  for
the  Johannites,  p.  58,)  was  “  used,  as  it  is
confidently  affirmed,  in  the  fourteenth  cen¬
tury,”  (but  I  doubt  if  it  could  be  traced
farther  back  than  the  early  part  of  the
seventeenth,)  this  appellation  occurs  in  the
obligation :

“  That  you  will  always  keep,  guard,  and  conceal.

And  from  this  time  you  never  will  reveal,

Either  to  M.  M.,  F.  C.,  or  Apprentice,

Of  St.  John’s  Order,  what  our  grand  intent  is.”

The  same  title  of  “Joannis  Ordo”  is
given  in  the  document  of  uncertain  date
known  as  the  “  Charter  of  Cologne.”

St.  John  the  Almoner.  The  son  of
the  King  of  Cyprus,  and  born  in  that  island
in  the  sixth  century.  He  was  elected  Pa¬
triarch  of  Alexandria,  and  has  been  can¬
onized  by  both  the  Greek  and  Roman
Churches,  his  festival  among  the  former
occurring  on  the  11th  of  November,  and
among  the  latter  on  the  23d  of  January.
Bazot  (Man.du Franc-Magon.,]).  144,)thinks
that  it  is  this  saint,  and  not  St.  John  the
Evangelist  or  St.  John  the  Baptist,  who  is
meant  as  the  true  patron  of  our  Order.
“  He  quitted  his  country  and  the  hope  of  a
throne,”  says  this  author,  “to  go  to  Jeru¬
salem,  that  he  might  generously  aid  and
assist  the  knights  and  pilgrims.  He
founded  a  hospital,  and  organized  a  frater-


684


SAINT


SAINT


nity  to  attend  upon  sick  and  wounded
Christians,  and  to  bestow  pecuniary  aid
upon  the  pilgrims  who  visited  the  Holy
Sepulchre.  St.  John,  who  was  worthy  to
become  the  patron  of  a  society  whose  only
object  is  charity,  exposed  his  life  a  thou¬
sand  times  in  the  cause  of  virtue.  Neither
war,  nor  pestilence,  nor  the  fury  of  the  in¬
fidels,  could  deter  him  from  pursuits  of
benevolence.  But  death,  at  length,  arrested
him  in  the  midst  of  his  labors.  Yet  he  left
the  example  of  his  virtues  to  the  brethren,
who  have  made  it  their  duty  to  endeavor
to  imitate  them.  Rome  canonized  him  un¬
der  the  name  of  St.  John  the  Almoner,
or  St.  John  of  Jerusalem ;  and  the  Masons
—  whose  temples,  overthrown  by  the  barba¬
rians,  he  had  caused  to  be  rebuilt  —  selected
him  with  one  accord  as  their  patron.”  Oli¬
ver,  however,  (. Mirror  for  the  Johannile  Ma¬
sons,  p.  39,)  very  properly  shows  the  error
of  appropriating  the  patronage  of  Masonry
to  this  saint,  since  the  festivals  of  the  Order
are  June  24  and  December  27,  while  those
of  St.  John  the  Almoner  are  January  23
and  November  11.  He  has,  however,  been
selected  as  the  patron  of  the  Masonic  Order
of  the  Templars,  and  their  Commanderies
are  dedicated  to  his  honor  on  account  of
his  charity  to  the  poor,  whom  he  called  his
“  Masters,”  because  he  owed  them  all  ser¬
vice,  and  on  account  of  his  establishment
of  hospitals  for  the  succor  of  pilgrims  in
the  East.

Saint  John  the  Baptist.  One  of

the  patron  saints  of  Freemasonry,  and  at
one  time,  indeed,  the  only  one,  the  name
of  St.  John  the  Evangelist  having  been  in¬
troduced  subsequent  to  the  sixteenth  cen¬
tury.  His  festival  occurs  on  the  24th  of
June,  and  is  very  generally  celebrated  by  the
Masonic  fraternity.  Dalcho  (jihim  Rez.,
p.  150,)  says  that  “the  stern  integrity  of
St.  John  the  Baptist,  which  induced  him
to  forego  every  minor  consideration  in  dis¬
charging  the  obligations  he  owed  to  God  ;
the  unshaken  firmness  with  which  he  met
martyrdom  rather  than  betray  his  duty  to

•  his  Master ;  his  steady  reproval  of  vice,  and

j  continued  preaching  of  repentance  and

•  virtue,  make  him  a  fit  patron  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  institution.”

The  Charter  of  Cologne  says  :  “We  cel-

'  ebrate,  annually,  the  memory  of  St.  John,
the  Forerunner  of  Christ  and  the  Patron
of  our  Community.”  The  Knights  Hos¬
pitallers  also  dedicated  their  Order  to  him  ;
and  the  ancient  expression  of  our  ritual,
which  speaks  of  a  “  Lodge  of  the  Holy  St.
John  of  Jerusalem,”  probably  refers  to  the
same  saint.

Krause,  in  his  Kunsturkunden,  (p.  295-
305,)  gives  abundant  historical  proofs  that
the  earliest  Masons  adopted  St.  John  the


Baptist,  and  not  St.  John  the  Evangelist,
as  their  patron.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  was  revived
on  St.  John  the  Baptist’s  day,  1717,  and
that  the  annual  feast  was  kept  on  that  day
until  1727,  when  it  was  held  for  the  first
time  on  the  festival  of  the  Evangelist.
Lawrie  says  that  the  Scottish  Masons  al¬
ways  kept  the  festival  of  the  Baptist  until
1737,  when  the  Grand  Lodge  changed  the
time  of  the  annual  election  to  St.  Andrew’s
day.

'  Saint  Jolin  the  Evangelist.  One

of  the  patron  saints  of  Freemasonry,  whose
festival  is  celebrated  on  the  27th  of  Decem¬
ber.  His  constant  admonition,  in  his  Epis¬
tles,  to  the  cultivation  of  brotherly  love,
and  the  mystical  nature  of  his  Apocalyptic
visions',  have  been,  perhaps,  the  principal
reasons  for  the  veneration  paid  to  him  by
the  Craft.  Notwithstanding  a  well-known
tradition,  all  documentary  evidence  shows
that  the  connection  of  the  name  of  the
Evangelist  with  the  Masonic  Order  is  to  be
dated  long  after  the  sixteenth  century,  be¬
fore  which  time  St  John  the  Baptist  was
exclusively  the  patron  saint  of  Masonry.
The  two  are,  however,  now  always  united,
for  reasons  set  forth  in  the  article  on  the
Dedication  of  Lodges,  which  see.

Saint  L,oger.  See  Aldu-orth,  Mrs.

Saint  Martin.  Louis  Claude.  A
mystical  writer  and  Masonic  leader  of  con¬
siderable  reputation  in  the  last  century,
and  the  founder  of  the  Rite  of  Martinism.
He  was  born  at  Amboise,  In  France,  on
January  18,  1743,  being  descended  from  a
family  distinguished  in  the  military  ser¬
vice  of  the  kingdom.  Saint  Martin  when
a  youth  made  great  progress  in  his  studies,
and  became  the  master  of  several  ancient
and  modern  languages.  After  leaving
school,  he  entered  the  army,  in  accordance
with  the  custom  of  his  family,  becoming  a
member  of  the  regiment  of  Foix.  But  after
six  years  of  service,  he  retired  from  a  pro¬
fession  which  he  found  uncongenial  with
his  fondness  for  metaphysical  pursuits.
He  then  travelled  in  Switzerland,  Germany,
England,  and  Italy,  and  finally  retired  to
Lyons,  where  he  remained  for  three  years
in  a  state  of  almost  absolute  seclusion,
known  to  but  few  persons,  and  pursuing
his  philosophic  studies.  He  then  repaired
to  Paris,  where,  notwithstanding  the  tu¬
multuous  scenes  of  the  revolution  which
was  working  around,  he  remained  unmoved
by  the  terrible  events  of  the  day,  and  intent
only  on  the  prosecution  of  his  theosophic
studies.  Attracted  by  the  mystical  systems
of  Boehme  and  Swedenborg,  he  became
himself  a  mystic  of  no  mean  pretensions,
and  attracted  around  him  a  crowd  of  dis¬
ciples,  who  were  content,  as  they  said,  to


SAINT


SAINTS


685


hear,  without  understanding,  the  teachings
of  their  leader.  In  1775  appeared  his  first
and  most  important  work,  entitled  Des
Erreurs  et  de  la  Verite,  ou  les  Hommes  rap-
peUs  au  principe  universal  de  la  Science.
This  work,  which  contained  an  exposition  of
the  ideology  ofSaint  Martin,  acquired  for  its
author,  by  its  unintelligible  transcendental¬
ism,  the  title  of  the  “  Kant  of  Germany.”
SaintMartin  had  published  this  work  under
the  pseudonym  of  the  “Unknown  Philoso¬
pher,”  (le  Philosophe  inconnu;)  whence  he
was  subsequently  known  by  this  name, which
was  also  assumed  by  some  of  his  Masonic
adherents;  and  even  a  degree  bearing  that
title  was  invented  and  inserted  in  the  Rite
of  Philalethes.  The  treatise  Des  Erreurs
et  de  la  Verite  was  in  fact  made  a  sort  of
text-book  by  the  Philalethans,  and  highly
recommended  by  the  Order  of  the  Initiated
Knighti  and  Brothers  of  Asia,  whose  sys¬
tem  was  in  fact  a  compound  of  theosophy
and  mysticism.  It  was  so  popular,  that
between  1775  and  1784  it  had  been  through
five  editions.

Saint  Martin,  in  the  commencement  of
his  Masonic  career,  attached  himself  to
Martinez  Paschalis,  of  whom  he  was  one
of  the  most  prominent  disciples.  But  he
subsequently  attempted  a  reform  of  the  sys¬
tem  of  Paschalis,  and  established  what  he
called  a  Rectified  Rite,  but  which  is  better
known  as  the  Rite  or  system  of  Martinism,
which  consisted  of  ten  degrees.  It  was  itself
subsequently  reformed,  and,  being  reduced
to  seven  degrees,  was  introduced  into  some
of  the  Lodges  of  Germany  under  the  name
of  the  Reformed  Eccossism  of  Saint  Martin.

The  theosophic  doctrines  ofSaint  Martin
were  introduced  into  the  Masonic  Lodges
of  Russia  by  Count  Gabrianko  and  Admi¬
ral  PleshcheyefF,  and  soon  became  popular.
Under  them  the  Martinist  Lodges  of  Rus¬
sia  became  distinguished  not  only  for  their
Masonic  and  religious  spirit, — although  too
much  tinged  with  the  mysticism  of  Jacob
Boehme  and  their  founder,  —  but  for  an
active  zeal  in  practical  works  of  charity  of
both  a  private  and  public  character.

The  character  of  Saint  Martin  has,  I
think,  been  much  mistaken,  especially  by
Masonic  writers.  Those  who,  like  Voltaire,
have  derided  his  metaphysical  theories,
seem  to  have  forgotten  the  excellence  of
his  private  character,  his  kindness  of  heart,
his  amiable  manners,  and  his  varied  and
extensive  erudition.  Nor  should  it  be  for¬
gotten  that  the  true  object  of  all  his  Ma¬
sonic  labors  was  to  introduce  into  the
Lodges  of  Franco  a  spirit  of  pure  religion.
His  theory  of  the  origin  of  Freemasonry
was  not,  however,  based  on  any  historical
research,  and  is  of  no  value,  for  he  believed
that  it  was  an  emanation  of  the  Divinity,


and  was  to  be  traced  to  the  very  beginning
of  the  world.

Saint  \icaise,  A  considerable  sen¬
sation  was  produced  in  Masonic  circles  by
the  appearance  at  Frankfort,  in  1755,  of  a
work  entitled  Saint  Nicaise,  odereine  Samm-
lung  merkwurdiger  MaUrerischer  Brief e,  fur
Freimaiirer  unci  die  es  nicht.  A  second
edition  was  issued  in  1786.  Its  title-page
asserts  it  to  be  a  translation  from  the
French,  but  it  was  really  written  by  Dr.
Starck.  It  professes  to  contain  the  letters
of  a  French  Freemason  who  was  travelling
on  account  of  Freemasonry,  and  having
learned  the  mode  of  work  in  England  and
Germany,  had  become  dissatisfied  with
both,  and  had  retired  into  a  cloister  in
France.  It  was  really  intended,  although
Starck  had  abandoned  Masonry,  to  defend
his  system  of  Spiritual  Templarism,  in
opposition  to  that  of  the  Baron  Von
Hund.  Accordingly,  it  was  answered  in
1786  by  Von  Sprengseisen,  who  was  an
ardent  friend  and  admirer  of  Von  Hund,  in
a  work  entitled  Anti  Saint  Nicaise,  which  was
immediately  followed  by  two  other  essays
by  the  same  author,  entitled  Archimedes,
and  Scala  Algtbraica  (Economica.  These
three  works  have  become  exceedingly  rare.

Saint  Paul’s  Church.  As  St.
Paul’s,  the  Cathedral  Church  of  London,
was  rebuilt  by  Sir  Christopher  Wren, — who
is  called,  in  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  the
Grand  Master  of  Masons,  —  some  writers
have  advanced  the  theory  that  Freema-'
sonry  took  its  origin  at  the  construction  of
that  edifice.  In  the  fourth  degree  of  Fess- '
ler’s  Rite,  —  which  is  occupied  in  the  crit¬
ical  examination  of  the  various  theories  on
the  origin  of  Freemasonry,  —  among  the
seven  sources  that  are  considered,  the  build¬
ing  of  St.  Paul’s  Church  is  one.  Nicolai
does  not  positively  assert  the  theory;  but’
he  thinks  it  not  an  improbable  one,  and
believes  that  a  new  system  of  symbols  was’
at  that  time  invented.  It  is  said  that  there
was,  before  the  revival  in  1717,  an  old
Lodge  of  St.  Paul’s ;  and  it  is  reasonable
to  suppose  that  the  Operative  Masons  en¬
gaged  upon  the  building  were  united  with
the  architects  and  men  of  other  professions
in  the  formation  of  a  Lodge,  under  the
regulation  which  no  longer  restricted  the
Institution  to  Operative  Masonry.  But
there  is  no  authentic  historical  evidence
that  Freemasonry  first  took  its  rise  at  the
building  of  St.  Paul’s  Church.

Saints  John.  The  “Holy  Saints
John,”  so  frequently  mentioned  in  the
ritual  of  Symbolic  Masonry,  are  St.  John
the  Baptist  and  St.  John  the  Evangelist,
(which  see.)  The  original  dedication  of
Lodges  was  to  the  “  Holy  St.  John,”  mean¬
ing  the  Baptist.


686


SAINTS


SALUTE


Saints  John,  Festivals  of.  Sec

Festivals.

Saint  Victor.  Louis  Guillcmain

de.  A  French  Masonic  writer,  who  pub¬
lished,  in  1781,  a  work  in  Adonhiramite
Masonry,  entitled  Receuil  Precieux  de  la
Ma<}onnerie  Adonhiramite.  This  volume
contained  the  ritual  of  the  first  four  de¬
grees,  and  was  followed,  in  1787,  by  an¬
other,  which  contained  the  higher  degrees
of  the  Rite.  If  St.  Victor  was  not  the
inventor  of  this  Rite,  he  at  least  modified
and  established  it  as  a  working  system,
and,  by  his  writings  and  his  labors,  gave  to
it  whatever  popularity  it  at  one  time  pos¬
sessed.  Subsequent  to  the  publication  of
his  Receuil  Precieux,  he  wrote  his  Origins
de  la  Magonnerie  Adonhiramite,  a  learned
and  interesting  work,  in  which  he  seeks  to
trace  the  source  of  the  Masonic  initiation
to  the  mysteries  of  the  Egyptian  priest¬
hood.

Said,  Francesco.  An  Italian  phil¬
osopher  and  litterateur,  who  was  born  at
Cozenza,  in  Calabria,  Jan.  1,  1759,  and
died  at  Passy,  near  Paris,  Sept.  1832.  He
was  at  one  time  professor  of  history  and
philosophy  at  Milan.  He  was  a  prolific
writer,  and  the  author  of  many  works  on
history  and  political  economy.  He  pub¬
lished,  also,  several  poems  and  dramas,  and
received,  in  1811,  the  prize  given  by  the
Lodge  at  Leghorn  for  a  Masonic  essay,  en¬
titled,  Della  utilfd  della  Franca-  Massoneria
sotfo  il  rapporto  filantropico  &  morale.

Salix.  A  significant  word  in  the  high
degrees,  invented,  most  probably,  at  first
for  the  system  of  the  Council  of  Emperors
of  the  East  and  West,  and  transferred  to
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite.
It  is  derived,  say  the  old  French  rituals,
from  the  initials  of  a  part  of  a  sentence,
and  has,  therefore,  no  other  meaning.

Salle  des  Fas  Perdus.  {The  Hall
of  the  Lost  Steps.)  The  French  thus  call
the  anteroom  in  which  visitors  are  placed
before  their  admission  into  the  Lodge.
The  Germans  call  it  the  fore-court  ( 1  or-
hof),  and  sometimes,  like  the  French,  der
Saal  der  vcrlornen  Schritte.  Leaning  says
that  it  derives  its  name  from  the  fact  that
every  step  taken  before  entrance  into  the
Fraternity,  or  not  made  in  accordance  with
the  precepts  of  the  Order,  is  considered  as
lost.

Salomonis  Sanctilicatus  Illumi-
nalus,  Magnus  Jehova.  The  title
of  the  reigning  Master  or  third  class  of  the
Illuminated  Chapter  according  to  the  Swed¬
ish  system.

Salsettc.  An  island  in  the  Bay  of  Bom¬
bay,  celebrated  for  stupendous  caverns  exca¬
vated  artificially  out  of  the  solid  rock,  with
a  labor  which  must,  says  Mr.  Grose,  have


been  equal  to  that  of  erecting  the  Pyramids,
and  which  were  appropriated  to  the  initia¬
tions  in  the  Ancient  Mysteries  of  India.

Malt.  In  the  Helvetian  ritual  salt  is
added  to  corn,  wine,  and  oil  as  one  of  the
elements  of  consecration,  because  it  is  a
symbol  of  the  wisdom  and  learning  which
should  characterize  a  Mason’s  Lodge.  When
the  foundation-stone  of  a  Lodge  is  laid,  the
Helvetian  ritual  directs  that  it  shall  be
sprinkled  with  salt,  and  this  formula  be
used:  “May  this  undertaking,  contrived
by  wisdom,  be  executed  in  strength  and
adorned  with  beauty,  so  that  it  may  be  a
house  where  peace,  harmony,  and  broth¬
erly  love  shall  perpetually  reign.”

Salutation.  Lenning  says,  that  in
accordance  with  the  usage  of  the  Operative
Masons,  it  was  formerlv  the  custom  for  a
strange  brother,  when  he  visited  a  Lodge,
to  bring  to  it  such  a  salutation  as  this:
“From  the  Right  Worshipful  Brethren
and  Fellows  of  a  Right  Worshipful  and
Holy  Lodge  of  St.  John.”  The  English
salutation,  at  the  middle  of  the  last  cen¬
tury,  was:  “From  the  Right  Worshipful
Brothers  and  Fellows  of  the  Right  Wor¬
shipful  and  Holy  Lodge  of  St.  John,  from
whence  I  come  and  greet  you  thrice  heartily
well.”  The  custom  has  become  obsolete,
although  there  is  an  allusion  to  it  in  the  an¬
swer  to  the  question,  “Whence  come  you?”
in  the  modern  catechism  of  the  Entered
Apprentice’s  degree.  But  Lenning  is  incor¬
rect  in  saying  that  the  salutation  went  out
of  use  after  the  introduction  of  certificates.
The  salutation  was,  as  has  been  seen,  in  use
in  the  eighteenth  century,  and  certificates
were  required  as  far  back  at  least  as  the
year  1683.

Salutem.  (Lat.  Health.)  When  the
Romans  wrote  friendly  letters,  they  pre¬
fixed  the  letter  S  as  the  initial  of  Salutem,
or  health,  and  thus  the  writer  expressed  a
wish  for  the  health  of  his  correspondent.
At  the  head  of  Masonic  documents  we
often  find  this  initial  letter  thrice  repeated,
thus:  S.\  S.\  S.\,  with  the  same  significa¬
tion  of  Health,  Health,  Health.  It  is
equivalent  to  the  English  expression,
“  Thrice  Greeting.”

Salute  Mason.  Among  the  Stone¬
masons  of  German}’,  in  the  Middle  Ages,
and  most  probably  introduced  by  them  into
England,  a  distinction  was  made  between
the  Grussmaurer  or  Wortmaurer,  the  Salute
Mason  or  Word  Mason,  and  the  Schrift-
maurer  or  Letter  Mason.  The  Salute  Ma¬
sons  had  signs,  words,  and  other  modes  of
recognition  by  which  they  could  make
themselves  known  to  each  other ;  while  the
Letter  Masons,  who  were  also  called  Brief -
trager  or  Letter  Bearers,  had  no  mode,
when  they  visited  strange  Lodges,  of  prov-


SAMARIA


SAN


687


ing  themselves,  except  by  the  certificates
or  written  testimonials  which  they  brought
with  them.  Thus,  in  the  “  examination  of
a  German  Stonemason,”  which  has  been
published  in  Fallow’s  Mysterien  der  Frei-
maurerei,  (p.  25,)  and  copied  thence  by
Findel,  we  find  these  questions  proposed  to
a  visiting  brother,  and  the  answers  thereto :

“  Warden.  Stranger,  are  you  a  Letter
Mason  or  a  Salute  Mason  ?

“  Stranger.  I  am  a  Salute  Mason.

“  Warden.  How  shall  I  know  you  to  be
such?

“  Stranger.  By  my  salute  and  words  of
my  mouth.”

Samaria.  A  city  situated  near  the
centre  of  Palestine,  and  built  by  Omri,
king  of  Israel,  about  925  B.  c.  It  was  the
metropolis  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  or  of
the  ten  tribes,  and  was,  during  the  exile,
peopled  by  many  Pagan  foreigners  sent  to
supply  the  place  of  the  deportated  inhabi¬
tants.  Hence  it  became  a  seat  of  idolatry,
and  was  frequently  denounced  by  the
prophets.  See  Samaritans.

Samaritan,  Good.  See  Good  Sama¬
ritan.

Samaritans.  The  Samaritans  were
originally  the  descendants  of  the  ten  revolt¬
ed  tribes  who  had  chosen  Samaria  for  their
metropolis.  Subsequently,  the  Samaritans
were  conquered  by  the  Assyrians  under  Shal¬
maneser,  who  carried  the  greater  part  of
the  inhabitants  into  captivity,  and  intro¬
duced  colonies  in  their  place  from  Babylon,
Cultah,  Ava,  Hamath,  and  Sepharvaim.
These  colonists,  who  assumed  the  name  of
Samaritans,  brought  with  them  of  course
the  idolatrous  creed  and  practices  of  the  re¬
gion  from  which  they  emigrated.  The  Sa¬
maritans,  therefore,  at  the  time  of  the  re¬
building  of  the  second  Temple,  were  an
Idolatrous  race,  and  as  such  abhorrent  to
the  Jews.  Hence,  when  they  asked  per¬
mission  to  assist  in  the  pious  work  of  re¬
building  the  Temple,  Zerubbabel,  with  the
restofthe  leaders,  replied,  “  Ye  have  nothing
to  do  with  us  to  build  a  house  unto  our
God;  but  we  ourselves  together  will  build
unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  as  King  Cy¬
rus,  the  king  of  Persia,  has  commanded  us.”

Hence  it  was  that,  to  avoid  the  possi¬
bility  of  these  idolatrous  Samaritans  pol¬
luting  the  holy  work  by  their  co-operation,
Zerubbabel  found  it  necessary  to  demand  of
every  one  who  offered  himself  as  an  assistant
in  the  undertaking  that  he  should  give  an
accurate  account  of  his  lineage,  and  prove
himself  to  have  been  a  descendant  (which
no  Samaritan  could  be)  of  those  faithful
Giblemites  who  worked  at  the  building  of
the  first  Temple.

There  were  many  points  of  religious  dif¬
ference  between  the  Jew's  and  the  Samari¬


tans.  One  was,  that  they  denied  the  au¬
thority  of  any  of  the  Scriptures  except  the
Pentateuch ;  auother  was  that  they  asserted
that  it  was  on  Mount  Gerizim,  and  not
on  Mount  Moriah,  that  Melchizedek  met
Abraham  when  returning  from  the  slaugh¬
ter  of  the  kings,  and  that  here  also  he  came
to  sacrifice  Isaac,  whence  they  paid  no
reverence  to  Moriah  as  the  site  of  the
“  Holy  House  of  the  Lord.”  A  few  of  the
sect  still  remain  at  Nabulus.  They  do  not
exceed  one  hundred  and  fifty.  They  have
a  high  priest,  and  observe  all  the  feasts  of
the  ancient  Jews,  and  especially  that  of  the
Passover,  which  they  keep  on  Mount  Geri-
zim  with  all  the  formalities  of  the  ancient
rites.

Samotliracian  Mysteries.  The

Mysteries  of  the  Cabiri  are  sometimes  so
called  because  the  principal  seat  of  their
celebration  was  in  the  island  of  Satnothrace.
“I  ask,”  says  Voltaire,  {Diet.  Phil.,)  “who
were  these  Hierophants,  these  sacred  Free¬
masons,  who  celebrated  their  Ancient  Mys¬
teries  of  Samothracia,  and  whence  came
they  and  their  gods  Cabiri?”  See  Cabiri,
Mysteries  of.

Sanctuary.  The  Holy  of  Holies  in
the  Temple  of  Solomon.  See  Holy  of  Holies.

Sanctum  Sanctorum.  Latin  for
Holy  of  Holies,  which  see.

Sandwich  Islands.  Freemasonry
was  first  introduced  into  those  far  islands
of  the  Pacific  by  the  Grand  Orient  of
France,  which  issued  a  Dispensation  for  the
establishment  of  a  Lodge  about  1848,  or
perhaps  earlier ;  but  it  was  not  prosperous,
and  soon  became  dormant.  In  1852,  the
Grand  Lodge  of  California  granted  a  War¬
rant  to  Hawaiian  Lodge,  No.  21,  on  its
register  at  Honolulu.  Royal  Arch  and
Templar  Masonry  have  both  been  since  in¬
troduced.  Honolulu  Chapter  was  estab¬
lished  in  1859,  and  Honolulu  Commandery
in  1871.

San  Graal.  Derived,  probably,  from
the  old  French,  sang  real,  the  true  blood;
although  other  etymologies  have  been  pro¬
posed.  The  San  Graal  is  represented,  in  le¬
gendary  history,  as  being  an  emerald  dish
in  which  our  Lord  had  partaken  of  the  last
supper.  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  having  fur¬
ther  sanctified  it  by  receiving  into  it  the
blood  issuing  from  the  five  wounds,  after¬
wards  carried  it  to  England.  Subsequently
it  disappeared  in  consequence  of  the  sins  of
the  land,  and  was  long  lost  sight  of.  When
Merlin  established  the  Knightsof  the  Round
Table,  he  told  them  that  the  San  Graal
should  be  discovered  by  one  of  them,  but
that  lie  only  could  see  it  who  was  without
sin.  One  day,  when  Arthur  was  holding  a
high  feast  with  his  Knights  of  the  Round
Table,  the  San  Graal  suddenly  appeared  to


688


SANHEDRIM


SASH


him  and  to  all  his  chivalry,  and  then  as
suddenly  disappeared.  The  consequence
was  that  all  the  knights  took  upon  them
a  solemn  vow  to  seek  the  Holy  Dish.  “  The
quest  of  the  San  Graal  ”  became  one  of  the
most  prominent  myths  of  what  has  been
called  the  Arthuric  cycle.  The  old  French
romance  of  the  Morte  d’ Arthur,  which  was
published  by  Caxton  in  1485,  contains  the
adventures  of  Sir  Galahad  in  search  of  the
San  Graal.  There  are  several  other  ro¬
mances  of  which  this  wonderful  vessel,  in¬
vested  with  the  most  marvellous  properties,
is  the  subject.  The  quest  of  the  San  Graal
very  forcibly  reminds  us  of  the  search  for
the  Lost  Word.  The  symbolism  is  precisely
the  same,  —  the  loss  and  the  recovery  being
but  the  lesson  of  death  and  eternal  life,  —
so  that  the  San  Graal  in  the  Arthurian
myth,  and  the  Lost  Word  in  the  Masonic
legend,  seem  to  be  identical  in  object  and
design.  Hence  it  is  not  surprising  that  a
French  writer,  M.  de  Caumont,  should  have
said  ( Bulletin  Monument.,  p.  129,)  that  “  the
poets  of  the  twelfth  and  fourteenth  centu¬
ries,  who  composed  the  romances  of  the
Round  Table,  made  Joseph  of  Arimathea
the  chief  of  a  military  and  religious  Free¬
mason  ry.”

Sanhedrini.  The  highest  judicial
tribunal  among  the  Jews.  It  consisted  of
seventy-two  persons  beside  the  high  priest.
It  is  supposed  to  have  originated  with  Mo¬
ses,  who  instituted  a  council  of  seventy  on
the  occasion  of  a  rebellion  of  the  Israelites
in  the  wilderness.  The  room  in  which  the
Sanhedrim  met  was  a  rotunda,  half  of  which
was  built  without  the  Temple  and  half
within,  the  latter  part  being  that  in  which
the  judges  sat.  The  Nasi,  or  prince,  who
was  generally  the  high  priest,  sat  on  a
throne  at  the  end  of  the  hall ;  his  deputy,
called  Ab-beth-din,  at  his  right  hand ;  and
the  sub-deputy,  or  Chacan,  at  his  left ;
the  other  senators  being  ranged  in  order  on
each  side.  Most  of  the  members  of  this
council  were  priests  or  Levites,  though  men
in  private  stations  of  life  were  not  excluded.

According  to  the  English  system  of  the
Royal  Arch,  a  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
sons  represents  the  Sanhedrim,  and  there¬
fore  it  is  a  rule  that  it  shall  never  consist
of  more  than  seventy-two  members,  al¬
though  a  smaller  number  is  competent  to
transact  any  business.  This  theory  is  an
erroneous  one,  for  in  the  time  of  Zerub-
babel  there  was  no  Sanhedrim,  that  tribu¬
nal  having  been  first  established  after  the
Macedonian  conquest.  The  place  in  the
Temple  where  the  Sanhedrim  met  was
called  “  Gabbatha,”  or  the  “  Pavement ;  ”  it
was  a  room  whose  floor  was  formed  of
ornamental  square  stones,  and  it  is  from
this  that  the  Masonic  idea  has  probably  !


arisen  that  the  floor  of  the  Lodge  is  a  tes¬
sellated  or  Mosaic  pavement.

Sapicolc,  The.  Thory  says  that  a
degree  by  this  name  is  cited  in  the  nomen¬
clature  of  Fustier,  and  is  also  found  in  the
collection  of  Viany.

Sapphire.  Hebrew,  The  sec¬

ond  stone  in  the  second  row  of  the  high
priest’s  breastplate,  and  was  appropriated
to  the  tribe  of  Naplitali.  The  chief  priest
of  the  Egyptians  wore  round  his  neck  an
image  of  truth  and  justice  made  of  sapphire.

Saracens.  Although  originally  only
an  Arab  tribe,  the  word  Saracens  was  after¬
wards  applied  to  all  the  Arabs  who  em¬
braced  the  tenets  of  Mohammed.  The
Crusaders  especially  designated  as  Sara¬
cens  those  Mohammedans  who  had  in¬
vaded  Europe,  and  whose  possession  of  the
Holy  Land  gave  rise  not  only  to  the  Cru¬
sades,  but  to  the  organization  of  the  mili¬
tary  and  religious  orders  of  Templars  and
Hospitallers,  whose  continual  wars  with  the
Saracens  constitute  the  most  important
chapters  of  the  history  of  those  times.

Sardius.  Hebrew,  Odem.  The

first  stone  in  the  first  row  of  the  high
priest’s  breastplate.  It  is  a  species  of  cor¬
nelian  of  a  blood-red  color,  and  was  appro¬
priated  to  the  tribe  of  Reuben.

Sarsena.  A  pretended  exposition  of
Freemasonry,  published  at  Baumberg,  Ger¬
many,  in  1816,  under  the  title  of  “  Sarsena,
or  the  Perfect  Architect,”  created  a  great
sensation  at  the  time  among  the  initiated
and  the  profane.  It  professed  to  contain
the  history  of  the  origin  of  the  Order,  and
the  various  opinions  upon  what  it  should
be,  “faithfully  described  by  a  true  and  per¬
fect  brother,  and  extracted  from  the  papers
which  he  left  behind  him.”  Like  all  other
expositions,  it  contained,  as  Gadicke  re¬
marks,  very  little  that  was  true,  and  of  that
which  was  true  nothing  that  had  not  been
said  before.

Sasli.  The  old  regulation  on  the  sub¬
ject  of  wearing  sashes  in  a  procession  is  in
the  following  words:  “None  but  officers,
who  must  always  be  Master  Masons,  are
permitted  to  wear  sashes ;  and  this  decora¬
tion  is  only  for  particular  officers.”  In
this  country  the  wearing  of  the  sash  ap¬
pears,  very  properly,  to  be  confined  to  the
W.\  Master,  as  a  distinctive  badge  of  his
office.

The  sash  is  worn  by  all  the  companions
of  the  Royal  Arch  degree,  and  is  of  a  scarlet
color,  with  the  words  “Holiness  to  the  Lord  ”
inscribed  upon  it.  These  were  the  words
placed  upon  the  mitre  of  the  high  priest
of  the  Jews.

In  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite,  the  white  sash  is  a  decoration  of  the
thirty-third  degree.  A  recent  decree  of  the


SATRAP


SCALD


689


Supreme  Council  of  the  Southern  Juris¬
diction  confines  its  use  to  honorary  mem¬
bers,  while  active  members  only  wear  the
collar.

The  sash,  or  scarf,  is  analogous  to  the
Zennar,  or  sacred  cord,  placed  upon  the
candidate  in  the  initiation  into  the  mys¬
teries  of  India,  and  which  every  Brahman
was  compelled  to  wear.  This  cord  was
woven  with  great  solemnity,  and  being  put
upon  the  left  shoulder,  passed  over  to  the
right  side  and  hung  down  as  low  as  the
fingers  could  reach.

Satrap.  The  title  given  by  the  Greek
writers  to  the  Persian  governors  of  prov¬
inces  before  Alexander’s  conquest.  It  is
from  the  Persian  word  satrab.  The  author¬
ized  version  calls  them  the  “  king’s  lieu¬
tenants  ;  ”  the  Hebrew,  achashdarpenim,
which  is  doubtless  a  Persian  word  Hebra¬
ized.  It  was  these  satraps  who  gave  the
Jews  so  much  trouble  in  the  rebuilding  of
the  Temple.  They  are  alluded  to  in  the
congeneric  degrees  of  Knight  of  the  Red
Cross  and  Prince  of  Jerusalem.

Savalette  «le  Langes.  Founder  of
the  Rite  of  Philalethes  at  Paris,  in  1773.
He  was  also  the  President  and  moving
spirit  of  the  Masonic  Congress  at  Paris,
which  met  in  1785  and  1787  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  discussing  many  important  points
in  reference  to  Freemasonry.  Thezealand
energy  of  Savalette  de  Langes  had  suc¬
ceeded  in  collecting  for  the  Lodge  of  the
Philalethes  a  valuable  cabinet  of  natural
history  and  a  library  containing  many
manuscripts  and  documents  of  great  im¬
portance.  His  death,  which  occurred  soon
after  the  beginning  of  the  French  revolu¬
tion,  and  the  political  troubles  that  ensued,
caused  the  dispersion  of  the  members  and
thelossof  a  great  part  of  the  collection.  The
remnant  subsequently  came  into  the  pos¬
session  of  the  Lodges  of  St.  Alexander  of
Scotland,  and  of  the  Social  Contrat,  which
constituted  the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

Sayers,  Anthony.  At  the  revival
in  1717,  “  Mr.  Anthony  Sayers,  gentle¬
man,”  was  elected  Grand  Master.  He  was
succeeded  in  the  next  year  byGeorge  Payne,
Esq.  In  1719,  he  was  appointed  Senior
Grand  Warden  by  Grand  Master  Desagu-
liers.  He  is  last  mentioned  as  being  pres¬
ent  in  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1730,  when  he
appeared  in  the  procession  as  the  oldest
Past  Grand  Master.  It  is  to  be  regretted
that  no  records  of  this  proto-Grand  Master
of  the  revived  Grand  Lodge  of  England
have  been  preserved.  A  portrait  of  him  by
Highmore,  the  celebrated  painter,  is  in
existence,  mezzotinto  copies  of  which  are
not  uncommon.

Scald  Miserable*.  A  name  given
to  a  set  of  persons  who,  in  1741,  formed  a
4  M  44


mock  procession  in  derision  of  the  Freema¬
sons.  Sir  John  Hawkins,  speaking,  in  his
Life  of  Johnson ,  (p.  336,)  of  Paul  White-
head,  says:  “  In  concert  with  one  Carey,  a
surgeon,  he  planned  and  exhibited  a  pro¬
cession  along  the  Strand  of  persons  on  foot
and  on  horseback,  dressed  for  the  occasion,
carrying  mock  ensigns  and  the  symbols  of
Freemasonry ;  the  design  of  which  was  to
expose  to  laughter  the  insignia  and  cere¬
monies  of  that  mysterious  institution  ;  and
it  was  not  until  thirty  years  afterwards  that
the  Fraternity  recovered  from  the  disgrace
which  so  ludicrous  a  representation  had
brought  on  it.”  The  incorrectness  of  this
last  statement  will  be  evident  to  all  who
are  acquainted  with  the  successful  progress
made  by  Freemasonry  between  the  years
1741  and  1771,  during  which  time  Sir  John
Hawkins  thinks  that  it  was  languishing
under  the  blow  dealt  by  the  mock  proces¬
sion  of  the  Scald  Miserables.

A  better  and  fuller  account  is  contained
in  the  London  Daily  Post  of  March  20,
1741.  “Yesterday,  some  mock  Freemasons
marched  through  Pall  Mall  and  the  Strand
as  far  as  Temple  Bar  in  procession  ;  first
went  fellows  on  jackasses,  with  cows’  horns
in  their  hands ;  then  a  kettle-drummer  on
a  jackass,  having  two  butter  firkins  for
kettle-drums;  then  followed  two  carts
drawn  by  jackasses,  having  in  them  the
stewards  with  several  badges  of  their
order ;  then  came  a  mourning-coach  drawn
by  six  horses,  each  of  a  different  color  and
size,  in  which  were  the  Grand  Master  and
Wardens;  the  whole  attended  by  a  vast
mob.  They  stayed  without  Temple  Bar
till  the  Masons  came  by,  and  paid  their
compliments  to  them,  who  returned  the
same  with  an  agreeable  humor  that  possi¬
bly  disappointed  the  witty  contriver  of
this  mock  scene,  whose  misfortune  is  that,
though  he  has  some  wit,  his  subjects  are  gen¬
erally  so  ill  chosen  that  he  loses  by  it  as
many  friends  as  other  people  of  more
judgment  gain.”

April  27th,  being  the  day  of  the  annual
feast,  “a  number  of  sboe-cleaners,  chim¬
ney-sweepers,  etc.,  on  foot  and  in  carts,
with  ridiculous  pageants  carried  before
them,  went  in  procession  to  Temple  Bar,  by
way  of  jest  on  the  Freemasons.”  A  few
days  afterwards,  says  the  same  journal,
“  several  of  the  Mock  Masons  were  taken
up  by  the  constable  empowered  to  impress
men  for  his  Majesty’s  service,  and  con¬
fined  until  they  can  be  examined  by  the
justices.”

It  was,  as  Hone  remarks,  (Anc.  Myst p.
242,)  very  common  to  indulge  in  satirical
pageants,  which  were  accommodated  to  the
amusement  of  the  vulgar,  and  he  mentions
this  procession  as  one  of  the  kind.  A  plate


690


SCALD


SCALLOP-SHELL


of  the  mock  procession  was  engraved  by
A.  Benoist,  a  drawing-master,  under  the
title  of  “  A  Geometrical  View  of  the  Grand
Procession  of  the  Scald  Miserable  Masons,
designed  as  they  were  drawn  up  over
against  Somerset  House  in  the  Strand,  on
the  27th  day  of  April,  Anno  1742.”  Of
this  plate  there  is  a  copy  in  Clavel’s  His-
toire  Pittoresque.  With  the  original  plate
Benoist  published  a  key,  as  follows,  which
perfectly  agrees  with  the  copy  of  the  plate
in  Clavel:

“No.  1.  The  grand  Sword- Bearer,  or  Ty¬
ler,  carrying  the  Swoard  of  State,  (a  pres¬
ent  of  Ishmael  Abilf  to  old  Hyram,  King
of  the  Saracens,)  to  his  Grace  of  Wattin,
Grand  Master  of  the  Holy  Lodge  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem  in  Clerk enwell.  2.
Tylers  or  Guarders.  3.  Grand  Chorus  of
Instruments.  4.  The  Stewards,  in  three
Gutt-carts  drawn  by  Asses.  5.  Two  famous
Pillars.  6.  Three  great  Lights:  the  Sun,
Hieroglyphical,  to  rule  the  Day  ;  the  Moon,
Emblematical,  to  rule  the  Night;  a  Master
Mason,  Political,  to  rule  his  Lodge.  7.
The  Entered  Prentice’s  Token.  8.  The  let¬
ter  G,  famous  in  Masonry  for  differencing
the  Fellow  Craft’s  Lodge  from  that  of
Prentices.  9.  The  Funeral  of  a  Grand  Mas¬
ter  according  to  the  Rites  of  the  Order,  with
the  Fifteen  loving  Brethren.  10.  A  Master
Mason’s  Lodge.  11.  Grand  Band  of  Mu-
sick.  12.  Two  Trophies ;  one  being  that  of
a  Black-shoe  Boy  and  a  Sink  Boy,  the
other  that  of  a  Chimney-Sweeper.  13.  The
Equipage  of  the  Grand  Master,  all  the  At¬
tendants  wearing  Mystical  Jewells.”

The  historical  mock  procession  of  the
Scald  Miserables  was,  it  thus  appears,  that
which  occurred  on  April  27,  and  not  the
preceding  one  of  March  20,  which  may  have
been  only  a  feeler,  and  having  been  well  re¬
ceived  by  the  populace  there  might  have
been  an  encouragement  for  its  repetition.
But  it  was  not  so  popular  with  the  higher
classes,  who  felt  a  respect  for  Freemasonry,
and  were  unwilling  to  see  an  indignity  put
upon  it.  A  writer  in  the  London  Freema¬
sons’  Magazine  (1858,  I.,  875,)  says:  “The
contrivers  of  the  mock  procession  were  at
that  time  said  to  be  Paul  Whitehead,  Esq.,
and  his  intimate  friend  (whose  real  Chris¬
tian  name  was  Esquire )  Carey,  of  Pall
Mall,  surgeon  to  Frederick,  Prince  of
Wales.  The  city  officers  did  not  suffer  this
procession  to  go  through  Temple  Bar,  the
common  report  then  being  that  its  real
interest  was  to  affront  the  annual  proces¬
sion  of  the  Freemasons.  The  Prince  was
so  much  offended  at  this  piece  of  ridicule,
that  he  immediately  removed  Carey  from
the  office  he  held  under  him.”

Smith  (  Use  and  Abuse  of  Freemas.,  p.  78,)
says  that  “about  this  time  (1742)  an  order  i


was  issued  to  discontinue  all  public  proces¬
sions  on  feast  days,  on  account  of  a  mock
procession  which  had  been  planned,  at  a
considerable  expense,  by  some  prejudiced
persons,  with  a  view  to  ridicule  these  pub¬
lic  cavalcades.”  Smith  is  not  altogether
accurate.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  ulti¬
mate  effect  of  the  mock  procession  was  to
put  an  end  to  what  was  called  “  the  march
of  procession  ”  on  the  feast  day,  but  that
effect  did  not  show  itself  until  1757,  in
which  year  it  was  resolved  that  it  should  in
future  be  discontinued.

Scales,  Pair  of.  “  Let  me  be  weighed
in  an  even  balance,”  said  Job,  “that
God  may  know  mine  integrity;”  and  Solo¬
mon  says  that  “  a  false  balance  is  abomina¬
tion  to  the  Lord,  but  a  just  weight  is  his
delight.”  So  we  find  that  among  the  an¬
cients  a  balance,  or  pair  of  scales,  was  a
well-known  recognized  symbol  of  a  strict
observation  of  justice  and  fair  dealing.
This  symbolism  is  also  recognized  in  Ma¬
sonry,  and  hence  in  the  degree  of  Princes
of  Jerusalem,  the  duty  of  which  is  to  ad¬
minister  justice  in  the  inferior  degrees,  a
pair  of  scales  is  the  most  important  symbol.

Scallop  -  Shell.  The  scallop  -  shell,
the  staff,  and  sandals  form  a  part  of  the  cos¬
tume  of  a  Masonic  Knight  Templar  in  bis
character  as  a  Pilgrim  Penitent.  Shake¬
speare  makes  Ophelia  sing,  —

“And  how  shall  I  my  true  love  know
From  any  other  one?

O,  by  his  scallop-shell  and  staff,

And  by  his  sandal  shoon  !  ”

The  scallop-shell  was  in  the  Middle
Ages  the  recognized  badge  of  a  pilgrim  ;  so
much  so,  that  Dr.  Clarke  ( Travels ,  ii.  538,)
has  been  led  to  say :  “  It  is  not  easy  to  ac¬
count  for  the  origin  of  the  shell  as  a  badge
worn  by  the  pilgrims,  but  it  decidedly  re¬
fers  to  much  earlier  Oriental  customs  than
the  journeys  of  Christians  to  the  Holy
Land,  and  its  history  will  probably  be
found  in  the  mythology  of  eastern  na¬
tions.”  He  is  right  as  to  the  question  of
antiquity,  for  the  shell  was  an  ancient  sym¬
bol  of  the  Syrian  goddess  Astarte,  Venus
Pelagia,  or  Venus  rising  from  the  sea.  But
it  is  doubtful  whether  its  use  by  pilgrims  is
to  be  traced  to  so  old  or  so  Pagan  an  au¬
thority.  Strictly,  the  scallop-shell  was  the
badge  of  pilgrims  visiting  the  shrine  of  St.
James  of  Compostella,  and  hence  it  is  called
by  naturalists  the  pecten  Jacobaus  —  the
comb  shell  of  St.  James.  Fuller  ( Ch .  Hist.,
ii.,  228,)  says:  “All  pilgrims  that  visit  St.
James  of  Compostella  in  Spain  returned
thence  obsiti  conchis,  ‘  all  besbelled  about  ’
on  their  clothes,  as  a  religious  donative
there  bestowed  upon  them.”  Pilgrims  were,
in  fact,  in  mediaeval  times  distinguished  by


SCANDINAVIAN


SCHAW


691


the  peculiar  badge  which  they  wore,  as
designating  the  shrine  which  they  had
visited.  Thus  pilgrims  from  Rome  wore
the  keys,  those  from  St.  James  the  scallop-
shell,  and  those  from  the  Holy  Land  palm
branches,  whence  such  a  pilgrim  was  some¬
times  called  a  palmer.  But  this  distinction
was  not  always  rigidly  adhered  to,  and  pil¬
grims  from  Palestine  frequently  wore  the
shell.  At  first  the  shell  was  sewn  on  the
cloak,  but  afterwards  transferred  to  the
hat;  and  while,  in  the  beginning,  the  badge
was  not  assumed  until  the  pilgrimage  was
accomplished,  eventually  pilgrims  began  to
wear  it  as  soon  as  they  had  taken  their  vow
of  pilgrimage,  and  before  they  had  com¬
menced  their  journey.

Both  of  these  changes  have  been  adopt¬
ed  in  the  Templar  ritual.  The  pilgrim,
although  symbolically  making  his  pil¬
grimage  to  the  Holy  Sepulchre  in  Pales¬
tine,  adopts  the  shell  more  properly  belong¬
ing  to  the  pilgrimage  to  Compostella;  and
adopts  it,  too,  not  after  his  visit  to  the
shrine,  but  as  soon  as  he  has  assumed  the
character  of  a  pilgrim,  which,  it  will  be  seen
from  what  has  been  said,  is  historically  cor¬
rect,  and  in  accordance  with  the  later  prac¬
tice  of  mediaeval  pilgrims.

Scandinavian  Mysteries.  See
Gothic  Mysteries.

Scarlet.  See  Red.

Scenic  Representations.  In  the
Ancient  Mysteries  scenic  representations
were  employed  to  illustrate  the  doctrines  of
the  resurrection,  which  it  was  their  object
to  inculcate.  Thus  the  allegory  of  the  ini¬
tiation  was  more  deeply  impressed,  by  be¬
ing  brought  vividly  to  the  sight  as  well  as
to  the  mind  of  the  aspirant.  Thus,  too,  in
the  religious  mysteries  of  the  Middle  Ages,
the  moral  lessons  of  Scripture  were  drama¬
tized  for  the  benefit  of  the  people  who  be¬
held  them.  The  Christian  virtues  and
graces  often  assumed  the  form  of  personages
in  these  religious  plays,  and  fortitude,  pru¬
dence,  temperance,  and  justice  appeared
before  the  spectators  as  living  and  acting
beings,  inculcating  by  their  actions  and  by
the  plot  of  the  drama  those  lessons  which
would  not  have  been  so  well  received  or
so  thoroughly  understood,  if  given  merely
in  a  didactic  form.  The  advantage  of  these
scenic  representations,  consecrated  by  an¬
tiquity  and  tested  by  long  experience,  is
well  exemplified  in  the  ritual  of  the  third
degree  of  Masonry,  where  the  dramatiza¬
tion  of  the  great  legend  gives  to  the  initia¬
tion  a  singular  force  and  beauty.  It  is  sur¬
prising,  therefore,  that  the  English  system
never  adopted,  or,  if  adopted,  speedily  dis¬
carded,  the  drama  of  the  third  degree,  but
gives  only  in  the  form  of  a  narrative  what
the  American  system  more  wisely  and  more


usefully  presents  by  living  action.  Through¬
out  America,  in  every  State  excepting
Pennsylvania,  the  initiation  into  the  third
degree  constitutes  a  scenic  representation.
The  latter  State  alone  preserves  the  less
impressive  didactic  method  of  the  English
system.  'The  rituals  of  the  continent  of
Europe  pursue  the  same  scenic  form  of  ini¬
tiation,  and  it  is  therefore  most  probable
that  this  was  the  ancient  usage,  and  that
the  present  English  ritual  is  of  compara¬
tively  recent  date..

Sceptre.  All  ensign  of  sovereign  au¬
thority,  and  hence  carried  in  several  of  the
high  degrees  by  ofiieers  who  represent
kings.

Schaw  Manuscript.  This  is  a  code
of  laws  for  the  government  of  the  Oper¬
ative  Masons  of  Scotland,  drawn  up  by
William  Schaw,  the  Master  of  the  Work
to  James  VI.  It  bears  the  following  title :
“  The  Statutis  and  Ordinanceis  to  be  ob-
seruit  be  all  the  Maister-Maissounis  within
this  realme  sett  down  be  Williame  Schaw,
Maister  of  Wark  to  his  Maieste  and  gen-
erall  Wardene  of  the  said  Craft,  with  the
consent  of  the  Maisteris  efter  specifeit.”
As  will  be  perceived  by  this  title,  it  is  in
the  Scottish  dialect.  It  is  written  on  pa¬
per,  and  dated  XXVIII  December,  1598.
Although  containing  substantially  the  gen¬
eral  regulations  which  are  to  be  found  in
the  English  manuscripts,  it  differs  mate¬
rially  from  them  in  many  particulars.
Masters,  Fellow  Crafts,  and  Apprentices
are  spoken  of,  but  simply  as  gradations  of
rank,  not  as  degrees,  and  the  word  “  Ludge  ”
or  Lodge  is  constantly  used  to  define  the
place  of  meeting.  The  government  of  the
Lodge  was  vested  in  the  Warden,  Deacons,
and  Masters,  and  these  the  Fellow  Crafts
and  Apprentices  were  to  obey.  The  high¬
est  officer  of  the  Craft  is  called  the  General
Warden.  The  Manuscript  is  in  possession
of  the  Lodge  of  Edinburgh,  but  has  sev¬
eral  times  been  published  —  first  in  the
Laws  and  Constitutions  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland,  in  1848;  then  in  the  American
edition  of  that  work,  published  by  Dr.
Robert  Morris,  in  the  ninth  volume  of  the
Universal  Masonic  Library ;  afterwards  by
W.  A.  Laurie,  in  1859,  in  his  History  of
Freemasonry  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot¬
land  ;  and  iastly,  by  W.  J.  Hughan,  in  his
Unpublished  Records  of  the  Orajt.

Scliuw,  William.  A  name  which  is
intimately  connected  with  the  history  of
Freemasonry  in  Scotland.  For  the  partic¬
ulars  of  his  life,  I  am  principally  indebted
to  the  writer  of  “  Appendix  Q.  2,”  in  the
Constitutions  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.

William  Schaw  was  born  in  the  year
1550,  and  was  probably  a  son  of  Schaw  of
Sauchie,  in  the  shire  of  Clackmanuon.  He


692


SCHAW


SCHISMS


appears  from  an  early  period  of  life  to
have  been  connected  with  the  royal  house¬
hold.  In  proof  of  this  we  may  refer  to  his
signature  attached  to  the  original  parch¬
ment  deed  of  the  National  Covenant,  which
was  signed  by  King  James  VI.  and  his
household  at  the  Palace  of  Holyrood,  28th
January,  1580-1.  In  1584,  Schaw  became
successor  to  Sir  Robert  Drummond,  of  Car-
nock,  as  Master  of  Works.  This  high  offi¬
cial  appointment  placed  under  his  superin¬
tendence  all  the  royal  buildings  and  palaces
iu  Scotland;  and  in  the  Treasurer’s  ac¬
counts  of  a  subsequent  period  various  sums
are  entered  as  having  been  paid  to  him  in
connection  with  these  buildings  for  im¬
provements,  repairs,  and  additions.  Thus,
in  September,  1585,  the  sum  of  £315  was
paid  “  to  William  Schaw,  his  Majestie' s
Maister  of  Wark,  for  the  reparation  and
mending  of  the  Castell  of  Striueling,”  and
in  May,  1590,  £400,  by  his  Majesty’s
precept,  was  “  delyverit  to  William  Schaw,
the  Maister  of  Wark,  for  reparation  of  the
hous  of  Dumfermling,  befoir  the  Queen’s
Majestie  passing  thairto.”

Sir  James  Melville,  in  his  Memoirs,  men¬
tions  that,  being  appointed  to  receive  the
three  Danish  Ambassadors  who  came  to
Scotland  in  1585,  (with  overtures  for  an
alliance  with  one  of  the  daughters  of  Fred¬
erick  II.,)  he  requested  the  king  that  two
other  persons  might  be  joined  with  him,
and  for  this  purpose  he  named  Schaw  and
James  Meldrum,  of  Seggie,  one  of  the  Lords
of  Session.  It  further  appears  that  Schaw
had  been  employed  in  various  missions  to
France.  He  accompanied  James  VI.  to
Denmark  in  the  winter  of  1589,  previous
to  the  king’s  marriage  with  the  Princess
Anna  of  Denmark,  which  was  celebrated  at
Upslo,  in  Norway,  on  the  23d  of  November.
The  king  and  his  attendants  remained  dur¬
ing  the  winter  season  in  Denmark,  butSchaw
returned  to  Scotland  on  the  16th  of  March,
1589-90,  for  the  purpose  of  making  the
necessary  arrangements  for  the  reception
of  the  wedding  party.  Schaw  brought
with  him  a  paper  subscribed  by  the  king,
containing  the  “  Ordour  set  down  be  his
Majestie  to  be  effectuate  be  his  Heines
Secreit  Counsall,  and  preparit  agane  his
Majestie’s  returne  in  Scotland,”  dated  in
February,  1589-90.  The  king  and  his
royal  bride  arrived  in  Leith  on  the  1st  of
May,  and  remained  there  six  days,  in  a
building  called  '“The  King’s  Work,”  until
the  Palace  of  Holyrood  was  prepared  for
their  reception.  Extensive  alterations  had
evidently  been  made  at  this  time  at  Holy-
rood,  as  a  warrant  was  issued  by  the  Pro¬
vost  and  Council  of  Edinburgh  to  deliver
to  William  Schaw,  Maister  of  Wark,  the
sum  of  £1000,  “  restand  of  the  last  taxa¬


tion  of  £20,000”  granted  by  the  Royal
Buroughs  in  Scotland,  the  sum  to  be  ex¬
pended  “in  biggin  and  repairing  of  his
Hienes  Palice  of  Halyrud-house,”  14th
March,  1589-90.  Subsequent  payments  to
Schaw  occur  in  the  Treasurer’s  accounts  for
broad  scarlet  cloth  and  other  stuff  for
“  burde  claythes  and  coverings  to  forms  and
windows  bayth  in  the  Kirk  and  Palace  of
Halyrud-house.”  On  this  occasion  various
sums  were  also  paid  by  a  precept  from  the
king  for  dresses,  etc.,  to  the  ministers  and
others  connected  with  the  royal  household.
On  this  occasion  William  Schaw,  Maister
of  Wark,  received  £133  6s.  8c?.  The  queen
was  crowned  on  the  17th  May,  and  two
days  following  she  made  her  first  public
entrance  into  Edinburgh.  The  inscription
on  Schaw’s  monument  states  that  he  was,
in  addition  to  his  office  of  Master  of  the
Works,  “Sacris  ceremoniis  praepositus”
and  “Reginae  Quaestor,”  which  Monteith
has  translated  “Sacrist  and  Queen’s  Cham¬
berlain.”  This  appointment  of  Chamber-
lain  evinces  the  high  regard  in  which  the
queen  held  him  ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  former  words  relate  to  his  hold¬
ing  the  office  of  General  Warden  of  the  cere¬
monies  of  the  Masonic  Craft,  an  office
analogous  to  that  of  Substitute  Grand  Mas¬
ter  as  now  existing  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland.

William  Schaw  died  April  18,  1602,  and
was  buried  in  the  Abbey  Church  of  Dun¬
fermline,  where  a  monument  was  erected
to  his  memory  by  his  grateful  mistress,  the
Queen.  On  this  monument  is  his  name
and  monogram  cut  in  a  marble  slab,  which,
tradition  says,  was  executed  by  his  own
hand,  and  containing  his  Mason’s  mark,
and  an  inscription  in  Latin,  in  which  he  is
described  as  one  imbued  with  every  liberal
art  and  science,  most  skilful  in  architec¬
ture,  and  in  labors  and  business  not  only
unwearied  and  indefatigable,  but  ever  as¬
siduous  and  energetic.  No  man  appears,
from  the  records,  to  have  lived  with  more
of  the  commendation,  or  died  with  more  of
the  regret  of  others,  than  this  old  Scottish
Mason.

Schismatic.  Thory  (Hist,  de  la  Fond,
du  G.  O.)  thus  calls  the  brethren  who,  ex¬
pelled  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France,  had
formed,  in  the  year  1772,  a  rival  body  un¬
der  the  name  of  the  National  Assembly.
Any  body  of  Masons  separating  from  the
legal  obedience,  and  establishing  a  new-
one  not  authorized  by  the  laws  of  Ma¬
sonry, —  such,  for  instance,  as  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Ancients  in  England,  or  the
Saint  John’s  Grand  Lodge  in  New  York, —
is  properly  schismatic.

Schisms.  This,  which  was  originally
an  ecclesiastical  term,  and  signifies,  as  Mil-


SCHISMS


SCHNEIDER


693


ton  defines  it,  “a  rent  or  division  in  the
church  when  it  comes  to  the  separating  of
congregations,”  is  unfortunately  not  un¬
known  in  Masonic  history.  It  is  in  Ma¬
sonic,  as  in  canon  law,  a  withdrawing  from
recognized  authority,  and  setting  up  some
other  authority  in  its  place.  The  first
schism  recorded  after  the  revival  of  1717,
was  that  of  the  Duke  of  Wharton,  who,  in
1722,  caused  himself  to  be  irregularly  nomi¬
nated  and  elected  Grand  Master.  His  am¬
bition  is  assigned  in  the  Book  of  Constitu¬
tions  as  the  cause,  and  his  authority  was
disowned  “by  all  those,”  says  Anderson,
“who  would  not  countenance  irregulari¬
ties.”  But  the  breach  was  healed  by
Grand  Master  Montague,  who,  resigning
his  claim  to  the  chair,  caused  Wharton  to
be  regularly  elected  and  installed.  The
second  schism  in  England  was  of  longer
duration.  It  commenced  with  the  with¬
drawal  of  several  dissatisfied  brethren  from
the  legitimate  Grand  Lodge  in  1738,  and
the  subsequent  organization  of  a  schis¬
matic  body  known  as  the  Grand  Lodge  of
the  Ancients.  This  schism  lasted  until
1813,  when  it  was  healed  by  the  reconcilia¬
tion  and  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges ;
but  the  effects  of  so  great  a  separation,  both
as  to  the  time  of  its  continuance  and  the  ex¬
tent  of  country  over  which  it  spread,  are
still  felt  by  the  Institution.  In  France,
although  irregular  Lodges  began  to  be  insti¬
tuted  as  early  as  1756,  the  first  active
schism  is  to  be  dated  from  1761,  when  the
dancing- master  Lacorne,  whom  the  re¬
spectable  Masons  refused  to  recognize  as
the  substitute  of  De  Clermont  the  Grand
Master,  formed,  with  his  adherents,  an  in¬
dependent  and  rival  Grand  Lodge ;  the
members  of  which,  however,  became  recon¬
ciled  to  the  legal  Grand  Lodge  the  next
ear,  and  again  became  schismatic  in  1765.
n  fact,  from  1761  until  the  organization
of  the  Grand  Orient  in  1772,  the  history
of  Masonry  in  France  is  but  a  history  of
schisms.

In  Germany,  in  consequence  of  the  Ger¬
manic  principle  of  Masonic  law  that  two
or  more  controlling  bodies  may  exist  at  the
same  time  and  in  the  same  place  with  con¬
current  and  coextensive  jurisdiction,  it  is
legally  impossible  that  there  ever  should
be  a  schism.  A  Lodge  or  any  number  of
Lodges  may  withdraw  from  the  parent
stock  and  assume  the  standing  and  pre¬
rogatives  of  a  mother  Lodge  with  powers
of  constitution  or  an  independent  Grand
Lodge,  and  its  regularity  would  be  indispu¬
table,  according  to  the  German  interpreta¬
tion  of  the  law  of  territorial  jurisdiction.
Such  an  act  of  withdrawal  would  be  a  se¬
cession,  but  not  a  schism.

In  this  country  there  have  been  several


instances  of  Masonic  schism.  Thus,  in
Massachusetts,  by  the  establishment  in
1752  of  the  St.  Andrew’s  Grand  Lodge ;  in
South  Carolina,  by  the  formation  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  York  Masons  in  1787 ;  in
Louisiana,  in  1848,  by  the  institution  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  York  Masons;
and  in  New  York,  by  the  establishment
in  1823  of  the  St.  John’s  Grand  Lodge ;
and  in  1849  by  the  formation  of  the  body
known  as  the  Philip’s  Grand  Lodge.  In
all  of  these  instances  a  reconciliation
eventually  took  place ;  nor  is  it  probable
that  schisms  will  often  occur,  because  the
principle  of  exclusive  territorial  jurisdic¬
tion  has  been  now  so  well  settled  and  so
universally  recognized,  that  no  seceding  or
schismatic  body  can  expect  to  receive  the
countenance  or  support  of  any  of  the
Grand  Lodges  of  the  Union.

There  are  these  essential  points  of  differ¬
ence  between  ecclesiastical  and  Masonic
schism ;  the  former,  once  occurring,  most
generally  remains  perpetual.  Reconcilia¬
tion  with  a  parent  church  is  seldom  ef¬
fected.  The  schisms  of  Calvin  and  Luther
at  the  time  of  the  Reformation  led  to  the
formation  of  the  Protestant  Churches,  who
can  never  be  expected  to  unite  with  the
Roman  Church,  from  which  they  separated.
The  Quakers,  the  Baptists,  the  Methodists,
and  other  sects  which  seceded  from  the
Church  of  England,  have  formed  perma¬
nent  religious  organizations,  between  whom
and  the  parent  body  from  which  they
separated  there  is  a  breach  which  will
probably  never  be  healed.  But  all  Ma¬
sonic  schisms,  as  experience  has  shown,
have  been  temporary  in  their  duration,
and  sometimes  very  short  lived.  The
spirit  of  Masonic  brotherhood  which  con¬
tinues  to  pervade  both  parties,  always
leads,  sooner  or  later,  to  a  reconciliation
and  a  reunion  ;  concessions  are  mutually
made,  and  compromises  effected,  by  which
the  schismatic  body  is  again  merged  in  the
parent  association  from  which  it  had  se¬
ceded.  Another  difference  is  this,  a  reli¬
gious  schismatic  body  is  not  necessarily  an
illegal  one,  nor  does  it  always  profess  a
system  of  false  doctrine.  “A  schism,”  says
Milton,  “may  happen  to  a  true  church,  as
well  as  to  a  false.”  But  a  Masonic  schism
is  always  illegal :  it  violates  the  law  of  ex¬
clusive  jurisdiction;  and  a  schismatic  body
cannot  be  recognized  as  possessing  any  of
the  rights  or  prerogatives  which  belong
alone  to  the  supreme  dogmatic  Masonic
power  of  the  State.

Schneider,  Joliann  August.  A

zealous  and  learned  Mason  of  Altenburg,
in  Germany,  where  he  was  born  May  22,
1755,  and  died  August  13,  1816.  Besides
contributing  many  valuable  articles  to  va-


694


SCHOOLS


SCHROEDER


rious  Masonic  journals,  he  was  the  com-

Eiler  of  the  “  Constitutions-Buch”  of  the
udge  “  Archimedes  zu  den  drei  Reissbret-
ten”  at  Altenburg,  in  which  he  had  been
initiated,  and  of  which  he  was  a  member;
an  important  but  scarce  work,  containing
a  history  of  Masonry,  and  other  valuable
essays.

Schools.  None  of  the  charities  of
Freemasonry  have  been  more  important
or  more  worthy  of  approbation  than  those
which  have  been  directed  to  the  establish¬
ment  of  schools  for  the  education  of  the
orphan  children  of  Masons;  and  it  is  a
very  proud  feature  of  the  Order,  that  insti¬
tutions  of  this  kind  are  to  be  found  in
every  country  where  Freemasonry  has
made  a  lodgment  as  an  organized  society.
In  England,  the  Royal  Freemasons’  Girls’
School  was  established  in  1789.  In  1798,  a
similar  one  for  boys  was  founded.  At  a  very
early  period  charity  schools  were  erected
by  the  Lodges  in  Germany,  Denmark,  and
Sweden.  The  Masons  of  Holland  insti¬
tuted  a  school  for  the  blind  in  1S08.  In
the  United  States  much  attention  has  been
paid  to  this  subject.  In  1842,  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Missouri  instituted  a  Masonic
college,  and  the  example  was  followed  by
several  other  Grand  Lodges.  But  colleges
have  been  found  too  unwieldy  and  compli¬
cated  in  their  management  for  a  successful
experiment,  and  the  scheme  has  generally
been  abandoned-  But  there  are  numerous
schools  in  the  United  States  which  are
supported  in  whole  or  in  part  by  Masonic
Lodges.

Schools  of  the  Prophets.  Oliver

(Landm.,  ii.  374,)  speaks  of  “the  secret  in¬
stitution  of  the  Nabiim  ”  as  existing  in  the
time  of  Solomon,  and  which,  he  says,  were
established  by  Samuel  “to  counteract  the
progress  of  the  Spurious  Freemasonry
which  was  introduced  into  Palestine  before
his  time.”  This  claim  of  a  Masonic  char¬
acter  for  these  institutions  has  been  gratui¬
tously  assumed  by  the  venerable  author.
He  referred  to  the  well-known  schools  of
the  Prophets,  which  were  first  organized
by  Samuel,  which  lasted  from  his  time  to
the  closing  of  the  canon  of  the  Old  Testa¬
ment.  They  were  scattered  all  over  Pales¬
tine,  and  consisted  of  scholars  who  devoted
themselves  to  the  study  of  both  the  written
and  the  oral  law,  to  the  religious  rites,  and
to  the  interpretation  of  Scripture.  Their
teaching  of  what  they  had  learned  was
public,  not  secret,  nor  did  they  in  any  way
resemble,  as  Oliver  suggests,  the  Masonic
Lodges  of  the  present  day.  They  were,  in
their  organization,  rather  like  our  modern
theological  colleges,  though  their  range
of  studies  was  very  different.

Schrepfer,  Johann  Georg.  The


keeper  of  a  coffee-house  in  Leipsic,  where,
having  obtained  a  quantity  of  Masonic,
Rosicrucian,  and  magical  books,  he  opened,
in  1768,  what  he  called  a  Scottish  Lodge,
and  pretended  that  he  had  been  commis¬
sioned  by  Masonic  superiors  to  destroy  the
system  of  Strict  Observance,  whose  adher¬
ents  he  abused  and  openly  insulted.  He
boasted  that  he  alone  possessed  the  great
secret  of  Freemasonry,  and  that  nearly  all
the  German  Masons  were  utterly  ignorant
of  anything  about  it  except  its  external
forms.  He  declared  that  he  was  an
anointed  priest,  having  power  over  spirits,
who  were  compelled  to  appear  at  his  will
and  obey  his  commands,  by  which  means
he  became  acquainted  not  only  with  the
past  and  the  present,  but  even  with  the  fu¬
ture.  It  was  in  thus  pretending  to  evoke
spirits  that  his  Masonry  principally  con¬
sisted.  Many  persons  became  his  dupes ;
and  although  they  soon  discovered  the  im¬
posture,  shame  at  being  themselves  de¬
ceived  prevented  them  from  revealing  the
truth  to  others,  and  thus  his  initiations
continued  for  a  considerable  period,  and  he
was  enabled  to  make  some  money,  the  only
real  object  of  his  system.  He  has  himself
asserted,  in  a  letter  to  a  Prussian  clergy¬
man,  that  he  was  an  emissary  of  the  Jesu¬
its  ;  but  of  the  truth  of  this  we  have  only
his  own  unreliable  testimony.  He  left
Leipsic  at  one  time  and  travelled  abroad,
leaving  his  Deputy  to  act  for  him  during
his  absence.  On  his  return  he  asserted
that  he  was  the  natural  son  of  one  of  the
French  princes,  and  assumed  the  title  of
Baron  Von  Steinbach.  But  at  length  there
was  an  end  to  his  practices  of  jugglery.
Seeing  that  he  was  beginning  to  be  detected,
fearing  exposure,  and  embarrassed  by  debt,
he  invited  some  of  his  disciples  to  accom¬
pany  him  to  a  wood  near  Leipsic  called
the  Rosenthal,  where,  on  the  morning  of
Octobers,  1774,  having  retired  to  a  little  dis¬
tance  from  the  crowd,  he  blew  out  his
brains  with  a  pistol.  Clavel  has  thought  it
worth  while  to  preserve  the  memory  of  this
incident  by  inserting  an  engraving  repre¬
senting  the  scene  in  his  Histone  Pitto-
re.ique  de  la  Fra n c- Moron n erie.  Schepfer  had
much  low  cunning,  but  was  devoid  of  edu¬
cation.  Lenning  sums  up  his  character  in
saying  that  he  was  one  of  the  coarsest  and
most  impudent  swindlers  who  ever  chose
the  Masonic  brotherhood  for  his  stage  of
action.

Schroeder,  Friederieh  Joseph
Wilhelm.  A  doctor  and  professor  of
pharmacology  in  Marburg;  was  born  at
Bielefeld,  in  Prussia,  March  19,  1733,  and
died  October  27,  1778.  Of  an  infirm  con¬
stitution  from  his  youth,  he  still  further
impaired  his  bodily  health  and  his  mental


SCHROEDER


SCIENTIFIC


695


faculties  by  his  devotion  to  chemical,  al¬
chemical,  and  theosophic  pursuits.  He
established  at  Marburg,  in  1766,  a  Chapter
of  True  and  Ancient  Rose  Croix  Masons,
and  in  1779  he  organized  in  a  Lodge  of
Sarreburg  a  school  or  Rite,  founded  on
magic,  theosophy,  and  alchemy,  which  con¬
sisted  of  seven  degrees,  four  high  degrees
founded  on  these  occult  sciences  being  su-
peradded  to  the  original  three  symbolic  de¬
grees.  This  Rite,  called  the  “Rectified
Rose  Croix,”  was  only  practised  by  two
Lodges  under  the  Constitution  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Hamburg.  Clavel  calls  him
the  Cagliostro  of  Germany,  because  it  was
in  his  school  that  the  Italian  charlatan
learned  his  first  lessons  of  magic  and  the¬
osophy.  Oliver,  misunderstanding  Clavel,
styles  him  an  adventurer.  But  it  is  perhaps
more  just  that  we  should  attribute  to  him
a  diseased  imagination  and  misdirected
studies  than  a  bad  heart  or  impure  prac¬
tices.  He  must  not  be  confounded  with
Fried.  Ludwig  Schroeder,  who  was  a  man
of  a  very  different  character.

Schroeder,  Friedrich  Ludwig.
An  actor  and  a  dramatic  and  Masonic  writ¬
er,  born  at  Schwerin,  Nov.  3, 1744,  and  died
near  Hamburg,  Sept.  3,  1816.  He  com¬
menced  life  as  an  actor  at  Vienna,  and  was
so  distinguished  in  his  profession  that  Hoff¬
mann  says  “  he  was  incontestably  the  great¬
est  actor  that  Germany  ever  had,  and  equal¬
ly  eminent  in  tragedy  and  comedy.”  As  an
active,  zealous  Mason,  he  acquired  a  high
character.  Bode  himself,  a  well-known
Mason,  was  his  intimate  friend.  Through
his  influence,  he  was  initiated  into  Free¬
masonry,  in  1774,  in  the  Lodge  Emanuel
zur  Maienblume.  He  soon  after  himself
established  a  new  Lodge  working  in  the
system  of  Zinnendorf,  but  which  did  not
long  remain  in  existence.  Schroeder  then
went  to  Vienna,  where  he  remained  until
1785,  when  he  returned  to  Hamburg.  On
his  return,  he  was  elected  by  his  old  friends
the  Master  of  the  Lodge  Emanuel,  which
office  he  retained  until  1799.  In  1794
he  was  elected  Deputy  Grand  Master
of  the  English  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of
Lower  Saxony,  and  in  1814,  in  the  seven¬
tieth  year  of  his  life,  he  was  induced  to  ac¬
cept  the  Grand  Mastership.  It  was  after
his  election,  in  1787,  as  Master  of  the  Lodge
Emanuel  at  Hamburg,  that  he  first  resolved
to  devote  himself  to  a  thorough  reformation
of  the  Masonic  system,  which  had  been
much  corrupted  on  the  continent  by  the  in¬
vention  of  almost  innumerable  high  degrees,
many  of  which  found  their  origin  in  the
fantasies  of  Alchemy,  Rosicrucianism,  and
Hermetic  Philosophy.  It  is  to  this  resolu¬
tion,  thoroughly  executed,  that  we  owe  the
Masonic  scheme  known  as  Schroeder’s  Rite,


which,  whatever  may  be  its  defects  in  the
estimation  of  others,  has  become  very  pop¬
ular  among  many  German  Masons.  He
started  out  with  the  theory  that,  as  Free¬
masonry  had  proceeded  from  England  to
the  continent,  in  the  English  Book  of  Con¬
stitutions  and  the  Primitive  English  Ritual
we  must  look  for  the  pure  unadulterated
fountain  of  Freemasonry.

He  accordingly  selected  the  well-known
English  Exposition  entitled  “Jachin  and
Boaz  ”  as  presenting,  in  his  opinion,  the
best  formula  of  the  old  initiation.  He
therefore  translated  it  into  the  German  lan¬
guage,  and,  remodelling  it,  presented  it
to  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  in  1801,  by
whom  it  was  accepted  and  established.  It
was  soon  after  accepted  by  many  other  Ger¬
man  Lodges  on  account  of  its  simplicity.
The  system  of  Schroeder  thus  adopted  con¬
sisted  of  the  three  degrees  of  Ancient  Craft
Masonry,  all  the  higher  degrees  being  re¬
jected.  But  Schroeder  found  it  necessary
to  enlarge  his  system,  so  as  to  give  to  breth¬
ren  who  desired  it  an  opportunity  of  far¬
ther  investigation  into  the  philosophy  of
Masonry.  He,  therefore,  established  an
Engbund,  or  Select  Historical  Union,  which
should  be  composed  entirely  of  Master  Ma¬
sons,  who  were  to  be  engaged  in  the  study
of  the  different  systems  and  degrees  of  Free¬
masonry.  The  Hamburg  Lodges  consti¬
tuted  the  Mutterbund,  or  central  body,  to
which  all  the  other  Lodges  were  to  be
united  by  correspondence.

Of  this  system,  the  error,  I  think,  is  that,
by  going  back  to  a  primitive  ritual  which
recognizes  nothing  higher  than  the  Master’s
degree,  it  rejects  all  the  developments  that
have  resulted  from  the  labors  of  the  philo¬
sophic  minds  of  a  century.  Doubtless  in
the  high  degrees  of  the  eighteenth  century
there  was  an  abundance  of  chaff,  but  there
was  also  much  nourishing  wheat.  Schroe¬
der,  with  the  former,  has  thrown  away  the
latter.  He  has  committed  the  logical  blun¬
der  of  arguing  from  the  abuse  against  the
use.  His  system,  however,  has  some  merit,
and  is  still  practised  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Hamburg.

Scliroeder’s  Kite.  See  Schroeder ,
Friederich  Joseph  Wilhelm.

Sehroeder’s  System.  See  Schroe¬
der ,  Friedrich  Ludwig.

Sciences,  [Liberal.  See  Liberal  Arts
and  Sciences.

Scientific  Masonic  Association.

( Scientifischer  Freimaurer  Bund.)  A  society
founded  in  1803  by  Fessler,  Mossdorf,
Fischer,  and  other  distinguished  Masons,
the  object  being,  by  the  united  efforts  of  its
members,  to  draw  up,  with  the  greatest  ac¬
curacy  and  care,  and  from  the  most  authen¬
tic  sources,  a  full  and  complete  history  of


696


SCOTLAND


SCOTTISH


Freemasonry,  of  its  origin  and  objects,  from
its  first  formation  to  the  present  day,  and
also  of  the  various  systems  or  methods  of
working  that  have  been  introduced  into
the  Craft;  such  history,  together  with  the
evidence  upon  which  it  was  founded,  was
to  be  communicated  to  worthy  and  zealous
brethren.  The  members  had  no  peculiar
ritual,  clothing,  or  ceremonies;  neither
were  they  subjected  to  any  fresh  obligation ;
every  just  and  upright  Freemason  who  had
received  a  liberal  education,  who  was  capa¬
ble  of  feeling  the  truth,  and  desirous  of
investigating  the  mysteries  of  the  Order,
could  become  a  member  of  this  society,
rovided  the  ballot  was  unanimous,  let
im  belong  to  what  Grand  Lodge  he  might.
But  those  whose  education  had  not  been
sufficiently  liberal  to  enable  them  to  assist
in  those  researches  were  only  permitted  to
attend  the  meetings  as  trusty  brethren  to
receive  instruction.

Scotland.  The  tradition  of  the
Scotch  Masons  is  that  Freemasonry  was
introduced  into  Scotland  by  the  architects
who  built  the  Abbey  of  Kilwinning;  and
the  village  of  that  name  bears,  therefore,
the  same  relation  to  Scotch  Masonry  that
the  city  of  York  does  to  English.  “That
Freemasonry  was  introduced  into  Scot¬
land,”  says  Laurie,  (Hi.it.,  p.  89,)  “by  those
architects  who  built  the  Abbey  of  Kilwin¬
ning,  is  manifest  not  only  from  those  au¬
thentic  documents  by  which  the  Kilwin¬
ning  Lodge  has  been  traced  back  as  far  as
the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  but  by
other  collateral  arguments  which  amount
almost  to  a  demonstration.”  In  Sir  John
Sinclair’s  Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,
the  same  statement  is  made  in  the  follow¬
ing  words:  “A  number  of  Freemasons
came  from  the  continent  to  build  a  monas¬
tery  there,  and  with  them  an  architect  or
Master  Mason  to  superintend  and  carry  on
the  work.  This  architect  resided  at  Kil¬
winning,  and  being  a  good  and  true  Mason,
intimately  acquainted  with  all  the  arts  and
parts  of  Masonry  known  on  the  continent,
was  chosen  Master  of  the  meetings  of  the
brethren  all  over  Scotland.  He  gave  rules
for  the  conduct  of  the  brethren  at  these
meetings,  and  decided  finally  in  appeals
from  all  the  other  meetings  or  Lodges  in
Scotland.”  Which  statement  amounts  to
about  this:  that  the  brethren  assembled  at
Kilwinning  elected  a  Grand  Master  (as  we
should  now  call  him)  for  Scotland,  and
that  the  Lodge  of  Kilwinning  became  the
Mother  Lodge,  a  title  which  it  has  always
assumed.  Manuscripts  preserved  in  the
Advocates’  Library  of  Edinburgh,  which
were  first  published  by  Laurie,  furnish
further  records  of  the  early  progress  of
Masonry  in  Scotland.


In  the  reign  of  James  II.,  the  office  of
Grand  Patron  of  Scotland  was  granted  to
William  St.  Clair,  Earl  of  Orkney  and
Caithness  and  Baron  of  Roslin,  “  his  heirs
and  successors,”  by  the  king’s  charter.  But,
in  1736,  the  St.  Clair  who  then  exercised
the  Grand  Mastership,  “  taking  into  con¬
sideration  that  his'  holding  or  claiming  any
such  jurisdiction,  right,  or  privilege  might
be  prejudicial  to  the  Craft  and  vocation  of
Masonry,”  renounced  his  claims,  and  em¬
powered  the  Freemasons  to  choose  their
Grand  Master.  The  consequence  of  this
act  of  resignation  was  the  immediate  or¬
ganization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot¬
land,  over  whom,  for  obvious  reasons,  the
late  hereditary  Grand  Master  or  Patron
was  unanimously  called  to  preside.

Scotland,  Royal  Order  of.  See

Royal  Order  of  Scotland.

Scott,  Charles.  A  distinguished
Masonic  writer  of  the  United  States,  who
was  born  at  Knoxville,  Tennessee,  Nov.  12,
1811,  and  died  at  Jackson,  Mississippi,
June  5,  1861.  Bro.  Scott  was  a  man  of
more  than  ordinary  abilities.  In  the  pro¬
fession  of  the  law  he  had  a  high  reputation,
and  was  for  a  long  period  Chancellor  of  the
State  of  Mississippi.  He  was  initiated  into
Freemasonry  in  Silas  Brown  Lodge  of
Jackson,  in  1842,  and  afterwards  presided
over  the  Lodge  for  many  years.  He  was
Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Mis¬
sissippi  in  1849  and  in  1850,  and  in  1851
he  was  elected  Grand  High  Priest  of  the
Grand  Chapter.  He  entered  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  at  New  Or¬
leans  in  1857,  and  two  years  afterwards  was
elevated  to  the  thirty-third  degree  and  to
active  membership  in  the  Supreme  Council
for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  United
States.  As  a  Masonic  writer,  Bro.  Scott  did
good  service  to  the  Craft.  Besides  numer¬
ous  valuable  essays  published  in  various
Masonic  journals,  he  was  the  author  of  two
works  of  great  interest.  In  1850  appeared
The  Analogy  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry  to
Natural  and  Revealed  Religion,  and  in  1856,
The  Keystone  of  the  Masonic  Arch,  a  Com¬
mentary  on  the  Universal  Laws  and  Princi¬
ples  of  Ancient  Freemasonry.  The  emi¬
nently  religious  spirit  which  imbued  the
whole  life  and  character  of  Bro.  Scott  has
led  him  to  indulge,  like  the  venerable  Oli¬
ver,  in  the  Christianization  of  Masonry  to
an  extent  that  has  been  deemed  objection¬
able  by  some.  But  there  are  in  both  of  these
works  many  passages  suggestive  of  valua¬
ble  Masonic  thought.

Scottish.  We  use  indiscriminately
the  word  Scotch  or  Scottish  to  signify  some¬
thing  relating  to  Scotland.  Thus  we  say
the  Scotch  Rite  or  the  Scottish  Rite ;  the
latter  is,  however,  more  frequently  used  by


SCOTTISH


SCOTTISH


697


Masonic  writers.  This  has  been  objected
to  by  some  purists  because  the  final  syl¬
lable  ish  has  in  general  the  signification  of
diminution  or  approximation,  as  in  brack¬
ish,  saltish,  and  similar  words.  But  ish  in
Scottish  is  not  a  sign  of  diminution,  but  is
derived,  as  in  English,  Danish,  Swedish,  etc.,
from  the  German  termination  ische.  The
word  is  used  by  the  best  writers.

Scottish  liegrecs.  The  high  degrees
invented  or  adopted  by  Ramsay,  under
the  name  of  Irish  degrees,  were  subse¬
quently  called  by  him  Scottish  degrees  in
reference  to  his  theory  of  the  promulga¬
tion  of  Masonry  from  Scotland.  See  Irish
Chapters.

Scottish  Master.  See  Ecossais.

Scottish  Rite.  French  writers  call  this
the  “  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,”  but  as
the  Latin  Constitutions  of  the  Order  des¬
ignate  it  as  the  “Antiquus  Scoticus  Ritus
Acceptus,”  or  the  “  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite,”  that  title  has  now  been  very
generally  adopted  as  the  correct  name  of
the  Rite.  Although  one  of  the  youngest
of  the  Masonic  Rites,  having  been  estab¬
lished  not  earlier  than  the  year  1801,  it  is
at  this  day  the  most  popular  and  the  most
extensively  diffused.  Supreme  Councils  or
governing  bodies  of  the  Rite  are  to  be
found  in  almost  every  civilized  country  of
the  world,  and  in  many  of  them  it  is  the
only  Masonic  obedience.  The  history  of
its  organization  is  briefly  this.  In  1758,  a
body  was  organized  at  Paris  called  the
“  Council  of  Emperors  of  the  East  and
West.”  This  Council  organized  a  Rite
called  the  “  Rite  of  Perfection,”  which
consisted  of  twenty-five  degrees,  the  highest
of  which  was  “Sublime  Prince  of  the
Royal  Secret.”  In  1761,  this  Council
granted  a  Patent  or  Deputation  to  Stephen
Morin,  authorizing  him  to  propagate  the
Rite  in  the  Western  continent,  whither  he
was  about  to  repair.  In  the  same  year,
Morin  arrived  at  the  city  of  St.  Domingo,
where  he  commenced  the  dissemination  of
the  Rite,  and  appointed  many  Inspectors,
both  for  the  West  Indies  and  for  the  United
States.  Among  others,  he  conferred  the
degrees  on  M.  Hayes,  with  a  power  of  ap¬
pointing  others  when  necessary.  Hayes
accordingly  appointed  Isaac  Da  Costa  Dep¬
uty  Inspector-General  for  South  Carolina,
who  in  1783  introduced  the  Rite  into  that
State  by  the  establishment  of  a  Grand
Lodge  of  Perfection  in  Charleston.  Other
Inspectors  were  subsequently  appointed,
and  in  1801  a  Supreme  Council  was  opened
in  Charleston  by  John  Mitchell  and  Fred¬
erick  Dalcho.  There  is  abundant  evidence
in  the  Archives  of  the  Supreme  Council
that  up  to  that  time  the  twenty-five
degrees  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection  were
4  N


alone  recognized.  But  suddenly,  with  the
organization  of  the  Supreme  Council,
there  arose  a  new  Rite,  fabricated  by
the  adoption  of  eight  more  of  the  conti¬
nental  high  degrees,  so  as  to  make  the
thirty-third  and  not  the  twenty-fifth  degree
the  summit  of  the  Rite.

The  Rite  consists  of  thirty-three  degrees,
which  are  divided  into  seven  sections,  each
section  being  under  an  appropriate  juris¬
diction,  and  are  as  follows :

I.

Symbolic  Lodge.

1.  Entered  Apprentice.

2.  Fellow  Craft.

3.  Master  Mason.

These  are  called  blue  or  symbolic  de¬
grees.  They  are  not  conferred  in  England,
Scotland,  Ireland,  or  in  the  United  States,
because  the  Supreme  Councils  of  the  Rite
have  refrained  from  exercising  jurisdiction
through  respect  to  the  older  authority  in
those  countries  of  the  York  and  American
Rite.

II.

Lodge  of  Perfection.

4.  Secret  Master.

5.  Perfect  Master.

6.  Intimate  Secretary.

7.  Provost  and  Judge.

8.  Intendant  of  the  Building.

9.  Elected  Knight  of  the  Nine.

10.  Illustrious  Elect  of  the  Fifteen.

11.  Sublime  Knights  Electof  the  Twelve.

12.  Grand  Master  Architect.

13.  Knight  of  the  Ninth  Arch,  or  Royal
Arch  of  Solomon.

14.  Grand  Elect,  Perfect  and  Sublime
Mason.

III.

Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem.

15.  Knight  of  the  East.

16  Prince  of  Jerusalem.

IV.

Chapter  of  Rose  Croix.

17.  Knight  of  the  East  and  West.

18.  Prince  Rose  Croix.

V.

Council  of  Kadosh.

19.  Grand  Pontiff.

20.  Grand  Master  of  Symbolic  Lodges.

21.  Noachite,  or  Prussian  Knight.

22.  Knight  of  the  Royal  Axe,  or  Prince

of  Libauus.  •


698


SCOTTISH


SCRIPTURES


23.  Chief  of  the  Tabernacle.

24.  Prince  of  the  Tabernacle.

25.  Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent.

26.  Prince  of  Mercy.

27.  Knight  Commander  of  the  Temple.

28.  Knight  of  the  Sun,  or  Prince
Adept.

29.  Grand  Scottish  Knight  of  St.  An¬
drew.

30.  Knight  Kadosh.

VI.

Consistory  of  Sublime  Princes  of
the  Royal  Secret.

31.  Inspector  Inquisitor  Commander.

32.  Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret.

VII.

Supreme  Council.

33.  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector-General.

Scottish  Templars.  See  Templars
of  Scotland.

Scottish  Trinitarians.  S qq  Prince
of  Mercy.

Scribe.  The  Scribe  is  the  third  officer
in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  according  to  the
American  ritual,  and  is  the  representative
of  Haggai.  The  Sofer,  or  Scribe  in  the
earlier  Scriptures,  was  a  kind  of  military
secretary ;  but  in  the  latter  he  was  a  learned
man,  and  doctor  of  the  laws,  who  ex¬
pounded  them  to  the  people.  Thus  Ar-
taxerxes  calls  Ezra  the  priest,  “  a  Scribe
of  the  law  of  the  God  of  heaven.”  Horne
says  that  the  Scribe  was  the  King’s  Secre¬
tary  of  State,  who  registered  all  acts  and
decrees.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  Haggai  is
called  the  Scribe  in  Royal  Arch  Masonry.
In  the  English  system  of  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
sonry  there  are  two  Scribes,  who  represent
Ezra  and  Neliemiah,  and  whose  position
and  duties  are  those  of  Secretaries.  The
American  Scribe  is  the  Third  Principal.
The  Scribes,  according  to  the  English  sys¬
tem,  appear  to  be  analogous  to  the  Soferim
or  Scribes  of  the  later  Hebrews  from  the
time  of  Ezra.  These  were  members  of  the
Great  Synod,  and  were  literary  men,  who
occupied  themselves  in  the  preservation  of
the  letter  of  the  Scriptures  and  the  devel¬
opment  of  its  spirit.

Scriptures,  Belief  in  tlie.  In

1820,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio  resolved
that  “  in  the  first  degrees  of  Masonry  reli¬
gious  tests  shall  not  be  a  barrier  to  the  ad¬
mission  or  advancement  of  applicants,  pro¬
vided  they  profess  a  belief  in  God  and  his
holy  word and  in  1854  the  same  body
adopted  a  resolution  declaring  that  “Ma¬
sonry,  as  we  have  received  it  from  our


fathers,  teaches  the  divine  authenticity  of
the  Holy  Scriptures.”  In  1845,  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Illinois  declared  a  belief  in  the
authenticity  of  the  Scriptures  a  necessary
qualification  for  initiation.  Although  in
Christendom  very  few  Masons  deny  the
divine  authority  of  the  Scriptures  of  the
Old  and  New  Testaments ;  yet  to  require,
as  a  preliminary  to  initiation,  the  declara¬
tion  of  such  a  belief,  is  directly  in  opposi¬
tion  to  the  express  regulations  of  the  Order,
which  demand  a  belief  in  God  and,  by  im¬
plication,  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  as
the  only  religious  tests.

Scriptures,  Residing  of  the.  By
an  ancient  usage  of  the  Craft,  the  Book  of
the  Law  is  always  spread  open  in  the
Lodge.  There  is  in  this,  as  in  everything
else  that  is  Masonic,  an  appropriate  sym¬
bolism.  The  Book  of  the  Law  is  the  Great
Light  of  Masonry.  To  close  it  would  be
to  intercept  the  rays  of  divine  light  which
emanate  from  it,  and  hence  it  is  spread
open,  to  indicate  that  the  Lodge  is  not  in
darkness,  but  under  the  influence  of  its
illuminating  power.  Masons  in  this  re¬
spect  obey  the  suggestion  of  the  Divine
Founder  of  the  Christian  religion,  “Nei¬
ther  do  men  light  a  candle  and  put  it
under  a  bushel,  but  on  a  candlestick ;  and
it  giveth  light  unto  all  that  are  in  the
house.”  A  closed  book,  a  sealed  book,  in¬
dicates  that  its  contents  are  secret ;  and  a
book  or  roll  folded  up  was  the  symbol,  says
Wemyss,  of  a  law  abrogated,  or  of  a  thing
of  no  further  use.  Hence,  as  the  reverse
of  all  this,  the  Book  of  the  Law  is  opened
in  our  Lodges,  to  teach  us  that  its  contents
are  to  be  studied,  that  the  law  which  it  in¬
culcates  is  still  in  force,  and  is  to  be  “  the
rule  and  guide  of  our  conduct.”

But  the  Book  of  the  Law  is  not  opened
at  random.  In  each  degree  there  are  ap¬
propriate  passages,  whose  allusion  to  the
design  of  the  degree,  or  to  some  part  of  its
ritual,  makes  it  expedient  that  the  book
should  be  opened  upon  those  passages.

Masonic  usage  has  not  always  been  con¬
stant,  nor  is  it  now  universal  in  relation  to
what  particular  passages  shall  be  unfolded
in  each  degree.  The  custom  in  this  country,
at  least  since  the  publication  of  Webb’s
Monitor,  has  been  very  uniform,  and  is  as
follows :

In  the  first  degree  the  Bible  is  opened  at
Psalm  cxxxiii.,  an  eloquent  description  of
the  beauty  of  brotherly  love,  and  hence
most  appropriate  as  the  illustration  of  a
society  whose  existence  is  dependent  on
that  noble  principle.  In  the  second  degree
the  passage  adopted  is  Amos  vii.  7,  8,  in
which  the  allusion  is  evidently  to  the
plumb-line,  an  important  emblem  of  that
degree.  In  the  third  degree  the  Bible  is


SCRIPTURES


SCRIPTURES


699


opened  at  Ecclesiastes  xii.  1-7,  in  which  ]
the  description  of  old  age  and  death  is  ap¬
propriately  applied  to  the  sacred  object  of
this  degree.

But,  as  has  been  said,  the  choice  of  these
passages  has  not  always  been  the  same.
At  different  periods  various  passages  have
been  selected,  but  always  with  great  appro¬
priateness,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  follow¬
ing  brief  sketch.

Formerly,  the  Book  of  the  Law  was
opened  in  the  first  degree  at  the  22d  chap¬
ter  of  Genesis,  which  gives  an  account  of
Abraham’s  intended  sacrifice  of  Isaac.  As
this  event  constituted  the  first  grand  offer¬
ing,  commemorated  by  our  ancient  breth¬
ren,  by  which  the  ground-floor  of  the  Ap¬
prentice’s  Lodge  was  consecrated,  it  seems
to  have  been  very  appropriately  selected  as
the  passage  for  this  degree.  That  part  of
the  28th  chapter  of  Genesis  which  records
the  vision  of  Jacob’s  ladder  was  also,  with
equal  appositeness,  selected  as  the  passage
for  the  first  degree.

The  following  passage  from  1  Kings  vi.
8,  was,  during  one  part  of  the  last  century,
used  in  the  second  degree :

“  The  door  of  the  middle  chamber  was  in
the  right  side  of  the  house,  and  they  went
up  with  winding  stairs  into  the  middle
chamber,  and  out  of  the  middle  into  the
third.”

The  appositeness  of  this  passage  to  the
Fellow  Craft’s  degree  will  hardly  be  dis¬
puted.

At  another  time  the  following  passage
from  2  Chronicles  iii.  17,  was  selected  for
the  second  degree ;  its  appropriateness  will
be  equally  evident :

“  And  he  reared  up  the  pillars  before  the
temple,  one  on  the  right  hand,  and  the
other  on  the  left;  and  he  called  the  name
of  that  on  the  right  hand  Jachin,  and  the
name  of  that  on  the  left  Boaz.”

The  words  of  Amos  v.  25,  26,  were  some¬
times  adopted  as  the  passage  for  the  third
degree :

“  Have  ye  offered  unto  me  sacrifices  and
offerings  in  the  wilderness  forty  years,  O
house  of  Israel?  But  ye  have  borne  the
tabernacle  of  your  Moloch  and  Chiun  your
images,  the  star  of  your  god,  which  ye
made  to  yourselves.”

The  allusions  in  this  paragraph  are  not
so  evident  as  the  others.  They  refer  to
historical  matters,  which  were  once  em¬
bodied  in  the  ancient  lectures  of  Freema¬
sonry.  In  them  the  sacrifices  of  the  Israel¬
ites  to  Moloch  were  fully  described,  and  a
tradition,  belonging  to  the  third  degree,  in¬
forms  us  that  Hiram  Abif  did  much  to
extirpate  this  idolatrous  worship  from  the
religious  system  of  Tyre.

The  6th  chapter  of  2  Chronicles,  which


contains  the  prayer  of  King  Solomon  at
the  dedication  of  the  Temple,  was  also  used
at  one  time  for  the  third  degree.  Perhaps,
however,  this  was  with  less  fitness  than
any  other  of  the  passages  quoted,  since  the
events  commemorated  in  the  third  degree
took  place  at  a  somewhat  earlier  period
than  the  dedication.  Such  a  passage  might
more  appropriately  be  annexed  to  the  cere¬
monies  of  the  Most  Excellent  Master  as
practised  in  this  country.

At  present  the  usage  in  England  differs
in  respect  to  the  choice  of  passages  from
that  adopted  in  this  country.

There  the  Bible  is  opened,  in  the  first
degree,  at  Ruth  iv.  7 :

“  Now  this  was  the  manner  in  former  time
in  Israel  concerning  redeeming  and  con¬
cerning  changing,  for  to  confirm  all  things;
a  man  plucked  off  his  shoe,  and  gave  it  to
his  neighbor:  and  this  was  a  testimony  in
Israel.”

In  the  second  degree  the  passage  is
opened  at  Judges  xii.  6 :

“Then  said  they  unto  him,  Say  now
Shibboleth :  and  he  said  Sibboleth  ;  for  he
could  not  frame  to  pronounce  it  right.
Then  they  took  him,  and  slew  him  at  the
passages  of  Jordan.  And  there  fell  at  that
time  of  the  Ephraimites  forty  and  two
thousand.”

In  the  third  degree  the  passage  is  opened
at  1  Kings  vii.  13,  14:

“And  king  Solomon  sent  and  fetched
Hiram  out  of  Tyre.  He  was  a  widow’s  son
of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali,  and  his  father  was
a  man  of  Tyre,  a  worker  in  brass :  and  he
was  filled  with  wisdom,  and  understanding,
and  cunning  to  work  all  works  in  brass.
And  he  came  to  king  Solomon,  and
wrought  all  his  work.”

While  from  the  force  of  habit,  as  well
as  from  the  extrinsic  excellence  of  the  pas¬
sages  themselves,  the  American  Mason
will,  perhaps,  prefer  the  selections  made  in
our  own  Lodges,  especially  for  the  first  and
third  degrees,  he  at  the  same  time  will  not
fail  to  admire  the  taste  and  ingenuity  of
our  English  brethren  in  the  selections  that
they  have  made.  In  the  second  degree  the
passage  from  Judges  is  undoubtedly  prefer¬
able  to  our  own.

In  conclusion  it  may  be  observed,  that  to
give  these  passages  their  due  Masonic  im¬
portance  it  is  essential  that  they  should  be
covered  by  the  square  and  compasses.  The
Bible,  square,  and  compasses  are  significant
symbols  of  Freemasonry.  They  are  said  to
allude  to  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  our
ancient  Grand  Masters.  The  Bible  is  em¬
blematic  of  the  wisdom  of  King  Solomon  ;
the  square,  of  the  power  of  Hiram  ;  and  the
compasses,  of  the  skill  of  the  Chief  Builder.
Some  Masonic  writers  have  still  further


700


SCYTHE


SEAL


spiritualized  these  symbols  by  supposing
them  to  symbolize  the  wisdom,  truth,  and
justice  of  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  Uni¬
verse.  In  any  view  they  become  instruc¬
tive  and  inseparably  connected  portions  of
the  true  Masonic  ritual,  which,  to  be  under¬
stood,  must  be  studied  together.

Scythe.  In  the  classic  mythology,  the
scythe  was  one  of  the  attributes  of  Saturn,
the  god  of  time,  because  that  deity  is  said
to  have  taught  men  the  use  of  the  imple¬
ment  in  agriculture.  But  Saturn  was  also
the  god  of  time;  and  in  modern  icono¬
graphy  Time  is  allegorized  under  the  fig¬
ure  of  an  old  man,  with  white  hair  and
beard,  two  large  wings  at  his  back,  an  hour¬
glass  in  one  hand  and  a  scythe  in  the  other.
It  is  in  its  cutting  and  destructive  quality
that  the  scythe  is  here  referred  to.  Time
is  thus  the  great  mower  who  reaps  his  har¬
vest  of  men.  Masonry  has  adopted  this
symbolism,  and  in  the  third  degree  the
scythe  is  described  as  an  emblem  of  time,
which  cuts  the  brittle  thread  of  life  and
makes  havoc  among  the  human  race.

Seal.  A  stamp  on  which  letters  and  a
device  are  carved  for  the  purpose  of  making
an  impression,  and  also  the  wax  or  paper
on  which  the  impression  is  made.  Lord
Coke  defines  a  seal  to  be  an  impression  on
wax,  “sigillum  est  cera  impressa,”  and  wax
was  originally  the  legal  material  of  a  seal.
Many  old  Masonic  diplomas  and  charters
are  still  in  existence,  where  the  seal  con¬
sists  of  a  circular  tin  box  filled  with  wax,
on  which  the  seal  is  impressed,  the  box  be¬
ing  attached  by  a  ribbon  to  the  parchment.
But  now  the  seal  is  placed  generally  on  a
piece  of  circular  paper.  The  form  of  a  seal
is  circular ;  oval  seals  were  formerly  appro-

{>riated  to  ecclesiastical  dignitaries  and  re-
igious  houses,  and  the  shape  alluded  to
the  old  Christian  symbol  of  the  Vesica
Piscis.

No  Masonic  document  is  valid  unless  it
has  appended  to  it  the  seal  of  the  Lodge
or  Grand  Lodge.  Foreign  Grand  Lodges
never  recognize  the  transactions  of  subor¬
dinate  Lodges  out  of  their  jurisdictions,  if
the  standing  of  the  Lodges  is  not  guaran¬
teed  by  the  seal  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and
the  signatures  of  the  proper  officers.

Seal  of  Solomon.  The  Seal  of  Solo¬
mon  or  the  Shield  of  David,  for  under  both
names  the  same  thing  was  denoted,  is  a
hexagonal  figure  consist¬
ing  of  two  interlaced  tri¬
angles,  thus  forming  the
outlines  of  a  six-pointed
star.  Upon  it  was  in¬
scribed  one  of  the  sacred
names  of  God,  from  which
inscription  it  was  sup¬
posed  principally  to  derive  its  talismanic
powers.  These  powers  were  very  extensive,


for  it  was  believed  that  it  would  extinguish
fire,  prevent  wounds  in  a  conflict,  and  per¬
form  many  other  wonders.  The  Jews  called
it  the  Shield  of  David  in  reference  to  the
protection  which  it  gave  to  its  possessors.
But  to  the  other  Orientalists  it  was  more
familiarly  known  as  the  Seal  of  Solomon.
Among  these  imaginative  people,  there  was
a  very  prevalent  belief  in  the  magical  char¬
acter  of  the  King  of  Israel.  He  was  es¬
teemed  rather  as  a  great  magician  than  as
a  great  monarch,  and  by  the  signet  which
he  wore,  on  which  this  talismanic  seal  was
engraved,  he  is  supposed  to  have  accom¬
plished  the  most  extraordinary  actions,  and
by  it  to  have  enlisted  in  his  service  the  la¬
bors  of  the  genii  for  the  construction  of  his
celebrated  Temple.

Robinson  Crusoe  and  the  Thousand  and
One  Nights  are  two  books  which  every
child  has  read,  and  which  no  man  or  wo¬
man  ever  forgets.  In  the  latter  are  many
allusions  to  Solomon’s  seal.  Especially  is
there  a  story  of  an  unlucky  fisherman  who
fished  up  in  his  net  a  bottle  secured  by  a
leaden  stopper,  on  which  this  seal  was  im¬
pressed.  On  opening  it,  a  fierce  Afrite,  or
evil  genius,  came  forth,  who  gave  this  ac¬
count  of  the  cause  of  his  imprisonment.
“Solomon,”  said  he,  “the  son  of  David,
exhorted  me  to  embrace  the  faith  and  sub¬
mit  to  his  authority ;  but  I  refused ;  upon
which  he  called  for  this  bottle,  and  confined
me  in  it,  and  closed  it  upon  me  with  the
leaden  stopper  and  stamped  upon  it  his
seal,  with  the  great  name  of  Goa  engraved
upon  it.  Then  he  gave  the  vessel  to  one
of  the  genii,  who  submitted  to  him,  with
orders  to  cast  me  into  the  sea.”

Of  all  talismans,  I  know  of  none,  ex¬
cept,  perhaps,  the  cross,  which  was  so  gen¬
erally  prevalent  among  the  ancients  as  this
Seal  of  Solomon  or  Shield  of  David.  It
has  been  found  in  the  cave  of  Elephanta,
in  India,  accompanying  the  image  of  the
Deity,  and  many  other  places  celebrated  in
the  Brahmanical  and  the  Buddhist  religions.
Mr.  Hay,  in  an  exploration  into  western
Barbary,  found  it  in  the  harem  of  a  Moor,
and  in  a  Jewish  synagogue,  where  it  was
suspended  in  front  of  the  recess  in  which
the  sacred  rolls  were  deposited.  In  fact,
the  interlaced  triangles  or  Seal  of  Solomon
may  be  considered  as  par  excellence  the
great  Oriental  talisman.

In  time,  with  the  progress  of  the  new  re¬
ligion,  it  ceased  to  be  invested  with  a  mag¬
ical  reputation,  although  the  hermetic  phi¬
losophers  of  the  Middle  Ages  did  employ
it  as  one  of  their  mystical  symbols;  but
true  to  the  theory  that  superstitions  may
be  repudiated,  but  never  will  be  forgotten,
it  was  adopted  by  the  Christians  as  one  of
the  emblems  of  their  faith,  but  with  vary¬
ing  interpretations.  The  two  triangles


SEALS


SECRECY


701


were  said  sometimes  to  be  symbols  of  fire
and  water,  sometimes  of  prayer  and  remis¬
sion,  sometimes  of  creation  and  redemption,
or  of  life  and  death,  or  of  resurrection  and
judgment.  But  at  length  the  ecclesiologists
seem  to  have  settled  on  the  idea  that  the
figure  should  be  considered  as  representing
the  two  natures  of  our  Lord  —  his  divine
and  his  human.  And  thus  we  find  it  dis¬
persed  all  over  Europe,  in  medallions,  made
at  a  very  early  period,  on  the  breasts  of  the
recumbent  effigies  of  the  dead  as  they  lie
in  their  tombs,  and  more  especially  in
churches,  where  it  is  presented  to  us  either
carved  on  the  walls  or  painted  in  the
windows.  Everywhere  in  Europe,  and
now  in  this  country,  where  ecclesiastical
architecture  is  beginning  at  length  to  find
a  development  of  taste,  is  this  old  Eastern
talisman  to  be  found  doing  its  work  as  a
Christian  emblem.  The  spirit  of  the  old
talismanic  faith  is  gone,  but  the  form  re¬
mains,  to  be  nourished  by  us  as  the  natural
homage  of  the  present  to  the  past.

Among  the  old  Kabbalistic  Hebrews,  the
Seal  of  Solomon  was,  as  a  talisman,  of  course
deemed  to  be  a  sure  preventive  against  the
danger  of  fire.  The  more  modern  Jews,
still  believing  in  its  talismanic  virtues,
placed  it  as  a  safeguard  on  their  houses  and
on  their  breweries,  because  they  were  es¬
pecially  liable  to  the  danger  of  fire.  The
common  people,  seeing  this  figure  affixed
always  to  Jewish  brew-houses,  mistook  it
for  a  sign,  and  in  time,  in  Upper  Germany,
the  hexagon,  or  Seal  of  Solomon,  was
adopted  by  German  innkeepers  as  the  sign
of  a  beer-house,  just  as  the  chequers  has
been  adopted  in  England,  though  with  a
different  history,  as  the  sign  of  a  tavern.

Seals,  Book  of  the  Seven.  “And
I  saw,”  says  St.  John  in  the  Apocalypse,
(v.  1,)  “in  the  right  hand  of  him  that  sat
on  the  throne  a  book  written  within  and
on  the  back  side,  sealed  with  seven  seals.”
The  seal  denotes  that  which  is  secret,  and
seven  is  the  number  of  perfection ;  hence
the  Book  of  the  Seven  Seals  is  a  symbol  of
that  knowledge  which  is  profoundly  se¬
cured  from  all  unhallowed  search.  In  ref¬
erence  to  the  passage  quoted,  the  Book
of  the  Seven  Seals  is  adopted  as  a  symbol
in  the  Apocalyptic  degree  of  the  Knights
of  the  East  and  West,  the  seventeenth  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.

Seals,  Keeper  of  tlie.  An  officer
who  has  charge  of  the  seal  or  seals  of  the
Lodge.  It  is  found  in  some  of  the  high
degrees  and  in  continental  Lodges,  but  not
recognized  in  the  York  or  American  Rites.
In  German  Lodges  he  is  called  Siegelbe-
wahrer ,  and  in  French,  Garde  des  Sceaux.

Search  for  Truth.  This  is  the  ob¬
ject  of  all  Freemasonry,  and  it  is  pursued


from  the  first  to  the  last  step  of  initiation.
The  Apprentice  begins  it  seeking  for  the
light  which  is  symbolized  by  the  Word,
itself  only  a  symbol  of  Truth.  As  a  Fel¬
low  Craft  he  continues  the  search,  still  ask¬
ing  for  more  light.  And  the  Master  Mason,
thinking  that  he  has  reached  it,  obtains
only  its  substitute ;  for  the  True  Word,
Divine  Truth,  dwells  not  in  the  first  tem¬
ple  of  our  earthly  life,  but  can  be  found
only  in  the  second  temple  of  the  eternal
life.

There  is  a  beautiful  allegory  of  the  great
Milton,  who  thus  describes  the  search  after
truth :  “  Truth  came  into  the  world  with
her  Divine  Master,  and  was  a  perfect  shape
and  glorious  to  look  upon.  But  when  he
ascended,  and  his  apostles  after  him  were
laid  asleep,  there  straight  arose  a  wicked
race  of  deceivers,  who,  as  the  story  goes  of
the  Egyptian  Typhon,  with  his  conspira¬
tors,  how  they  dealt  with  the  good  Osiris,
took  the  virgin  Truth,  hewed  her  lovely
frame  into  a  thousand  pieces,  and  scattered
them  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  Ever
since  that  time  the  friends  of  Truth,  such
as  durst  appear,  imitating  the  careful  search
that  Isis  made  for  the  mangled  body  of
Osiris,  went  up  and  down,  gathering  up
limb  by  limb  still  as  they  could  find  them.”

Seceders.  During  the  anti-Masonic
excitement  in  this  country,  which  gave  rise
to  the  anti-Masonic  party,  many  Masons,
fearing  the  loss  of  popularity,  or  governed
by  an  erroneous  view  of  the  character  of
Freemasonry,  withdrew  from  the  Order,
and  took  a  part  in  the  political  and  reli¬
gious  opposition  to  it.  These  men  called
themselves,  and  w7ere  recognized  by  the
title  of,  “seceders”  or  “seceding  Masons.”

Second  Temple.  See  Temple  of
Zerubbabel.

Secrecy  and  Silence.  These  vir¬
tues  constitute  the  very  essence  of  all  Ma¬
sonic  character ;  they  are  the  safeguard  of
the  Institution,  giving  to  it  all  its  security
and  perpetuity,  and  are  enforced  by  fre¬
quent  admonitions  in  all  the  degrees,  from
the  lowest  to  the  highest.  The  Entered  Ap¬
prentice  begins  his  Masonic  career  by  learn¬
ing  the  duty  of  secrecy  and  silence.  Hence
it  is  appropriate  that  in  that  degree  which
is  the  consummation  of  initiation,  in  which
the  whole  cycle  of  Masonic  science  is  com¬
pleted,  the  abstruse  machinery  of  symbol¬
ism  should  be  employed  to  impress  the  same
important  virtues  on  the  mind  of  the  neo¬
phyte.

The  same  principles  of  secrecy  and  si¬
lence  existed  in  all  the  ancient  mysteries
and  systems  of  w'orship.  When  Aristotle
w'as  asked  what  thing  appeared  to  him  to
be  most  difficult  of  performance,  he  replied,
“  To  be  secret  and  silent.”


702


SECRETARY


SECRET


“  If  we  turn  our  eyes  back  to  antiquity,”
says  Calcott,  “  we  shall  find  that  the  old
Egyptians  had  so  great  a  regard  for  silence
and  secrecy  in  the  mysteries  of  their  reli¬
gion,  that  they  set  up  the  god  Harpocrates,
to  whom  they  paid  peculiar  honor  and  ven¬
eration,  who  was  represented  with  the  right
hand  placed  near  the  heart,  and  the  left
down  by  his  side,  covered  with  a  skin  before,
full  of  eyes.”

Apuleius,  who  was  an  initiate  in  the
mysteries  of  Isis,  says :  “  By  no  peril  will  I
ever  be  compelled  to  disclose  to  the  unini¬
tiated  the  things  that  I  have  had  intrusted
to  me  on  condition  of  silence.”

Lobeck,  in  his  Aglaophamus,  has  col¬
lected  several  examples  of  the  reluctance
with  which  the  ancients  approached  a  mys¬
tical  subject,  and  the  manner  in  which  they
shrank  from  divulging  any  explanation  or
fable  which  had  been  related  to  them  at
the  mysteries,  under  the  seal  of  secrecy  and
silence.

And,  lastly,  in  the  school  of  Pythagoras,
these  lessons  were  taught  by  the  sage  to  his
disciples.  A  novitiate  of  five  years  was
imposed  upon  each  pupil,  which  period  was
to  be  passed  in  total  silence,  and  in  reli¬
gious  and  philosophical  contemplation.
And  at  length,  when  he  was  admitted  to
full  fellowship  in  the  society,  an  oath  of
secrecy  was  administered  to  him  on  the  sa¬
cred  tetractys,  which  was  equivalent  to  the
Jewish  Tetragrammaton.

Silence  and  secrecy  are  called  “  the  car¬
dinal  virtues  of  a  Select  Master,”  in  the
ninth  or  Select  Master’s  degree  of  the
American  Bite.

Among  the  Egyptians  the  sign  of  silence
was  made  by  pressing  the  index  finger  of
the  right  hand  on  the  lips.  It  was  thus
that  they  represented  Harpocrates,  the  god
of  silence,  whose  statue  was  placed  at  the
entrance  of  all  temples  of  Isis  and  Serapis,
to  indicate  that  silence  and  secrecy  were  to
be  preserved  as  to  all  that  occurred  within.

Secretary.  The  recording  and  corre¬
sponding  officer  of  a  Lodge.  It  is  his  duty
to  keep  a  just  and  true  record  of  all  things
proper  to  be  written,  to  receive  all  moneys
that  are  due  the  Lodge,  and  to  pay  them
over  to  the  Treasurer.  The  jewel  of  his
office  is  a  pen,  and  his  position  in  the
Lodge  is  on  the  left  of  the  Worshipful
Master  in  front.

Secretary-General  of  the  Roly
Empire.  The  title  given  to  the  Secre¬
tary  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  An¬
cient  and  Accepted  Bite.

Secretary,  Grand.  See  Grand  Sec¬
retary.

Secret  Doctrine.  The  secret  doctrine
of  the  Jews  was,  according  to  Steinschnei-
der,  nothing  else  than  a  system  of  meta¬


physics  founded  on  the  commentaries  on
the  law  and  the  legends  of  the  Talmudists.
Of  this  secret  doctrine,  Maimonides  says:
“  Beware  that  you  take  not  these  words  of
the  wise  men  in  their  literal  signification,
for  this  would  be  to  degrade  and  sometimes
to  contradict  the  sacred  doctrine.  Search
rather  for  the  hidden  sense ;  and  if  you  can¬
not  find  the  kernel,  let  the  shell  alone,  and
confess  that  you  cannot  understand  it.”
All  mystical  societies,  and  even  liberal
philosophers,  were,  to  a  comparatively  re¬
cent  period,  accustomed  to  veil  the  true
meaning  of  their  instructions  in  inten¬
tional  obscurity,  lest  the  unlearned  and
uninitiated  should  be  offended.  The  An¬
cient  Mysteries  had  their  secret  doctrine ;
so  had  the  school  of  Pythagoras,  and  the
sect  of  the  Gnostics.  The  Alchemists,  as
Hitchcock  has  clearly  shown,  gave  a  secret
and  spiritual  meaning  to  their  jargon
about  the  transmutation  of  metals,  the
elixir  of  life,  and  the  philosopher’s  stone.
Freemasonry  alone  has  no  secret  doctrine.
Its  philosophy  is  open  to  the  world.  Its
modes  of  recognition  by  which  it  secures
identification,  and  its  rites  and  ceremonies
which  are  its  method  of  instruction,  alone
are  secret.  All  men  may  know  the  tenets
of  the  Masonic  creed.

Secret  Raster.  The  fourth  degree
in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Bite,
and  the  first  of  what  are  called  the  “In¬
effable  Degrees.”  It  refers  to  those  cir¬
cumstances  which  occurred  at  the  Temple
when  Solomon  repaired  to  the  building
for  the  purpose  of  supplying  the  loss  of  its
illustrious  builder  by  the  appointment  of
seven  experts,  among  whom  were  to  be
divided  the  labors  which  heretofore  had
been  intrusted  to  one  gigantic  mind.  The
lecture  elaborately  explains  the  mystic
meaning  of  the  sacred  things  which  were
contained  in  the  Sanctum  Sanctorum,  or
Holy  of  Holies.

The  Lodge  is  hung  with  black  curtains
strewed  with  tears,  symbolic  of  grief.
There  should  be  eighty-one  lights,  dis¬
tributed  by  nine  times  nine;  but  this  num¬
ber  is  often  dispensed  with,  and  three  times
three  substituted.  Later  rituals  reduce
them  to  eight.

There  are  but  two  presiding  officers  —
a  Master,  styled  “  Puissant,”  and  repre¬
senting  King  Solomon,  and  an  Inspector,
representing  Adoniram,  the  son  of  Abda,
who  had  the  inspection  of  the  workmen  on
Mount  Lebanon,  and  who  is  said  to  have
been  the  first  Secret  Master.

Solomon  is  seated  in  the  east,  clothed  in
mourning  robes  lined  with  ermine,  hold¬
ing  a  sceptre  in  his  hand,  and  decorated
with  a  blue  sash  from  the  right  shoulder  to
the  left  hip,  from  which  is  suspended  a


SECRET


SECRET


703


triangle  of  gold.  Before  him  is  placed  a
triangular  altar,  on  which  is  deposited  a
wreath  of  laurel  and  olive  leaves.

Adoniram,  called  “  V  enerable  Inspector,”
is  seated  in  the  west,  but  without  any  im¬
plement  of  office,  in  commemoration  of
the  fact  that  the  works  were  suspended
at  the  time  of  the  institution  of  this  de¬
gree.  He  is  decorated  with  a  triangular
white  collar,  bordered  with  black,  from
which  is  suspended  an  ivory  key,  with  the
letter  Z  engraved  thereon,  which  constitute
the  collar,  and  jewel  of  the  degree.  These
decorations  are  worn  by  all  the  brethren.

The  apron  is  white  edged  with  black  and
with  black  strings ;  the  flap  blue,  with  an
open  eye  thereon  embroidered  in  gold.  The
modern  ritual  prescribes  that  two  branches
of  olive  and  laurel  crossing  each  other
shall  be  on  the  middle  of  the  apron.

Secret  Monitor.  An  honorary  or
side  degree  very  commonly  conferred  in
the  United  States.  The  communication  of
it  is  not  accompanied,  it  is  true,  with  any
impressive  ceremonies,  but  it  inculcates  a
lesson  of  unfaltering  friendship  which  the
prospect  of  danger  could  not  appall,  and
the  hour  of  adversity  could  not  betray.
It  is,  in  fact,  devoted  to  the  practical  eluci¬
dation  of  the  Masonic  virtue  of  Brotherly
Love.  In  conferring  it,  those  passages  of
Scripture  which  are  contained  in  the  twen¬
tieth  chapter  of  the  First  Book  of  Samuel,
from  the  sixteenth  to  the  twenty-third,  and
from  the  thirty-fifth  to  the  forty-second
verses  inclusive,  are  ifsually  considered  as  ap¬
propriate.  It  may  be  conferred  on  a  worthy
Master  Mason  by  any  brother  who  is  in

{»ossession  of  its  ritual.  There  was  in  Hol-
and,  in  1778,  a  secret  Masonic  society
called  the  Order  of  Jonathan  and  David,
which  was  probably  much  the  same  as  this
American  degreee.  Kloss  in  his  Catalogue
(lfllO")  gives  the  title  of  a  book  published
in  that  year  at  Amsterdam  which  gives  its
statutes  and  formulary  of  reception.

Secret  of  the  Secrets,  The.  A
degree  cited  in  the  nomenclature  of  Fustier.

Secret  Societies.  Secret  societies
may  be  divided  into  two  classes :  First,
those  whose  secrecy  consists  in  nothing
more  than  methods  by  which  the  members
are  enabled  to  recognize  each  other ;  and
in  certain  doctrines,  symbols,  or  instructions
which  can  be  obtained  only  after  a  process
of  initiation,  and  under  the  promise  that
they  shall  be  made  known  to  none  who
have  not  submitted  to  the  same  initiation  ;
but  which,  with  the  exception  of  these
particulars,  have  no  reservations  from  the
public.  And  secondly,  of  those  societies
which,  in  addition  to  their  secret  modes  of
recognition  and .  secret  doctrine,  add  an
entire  secrecy  as  to  the  object  of  their  asso¬


ciation,  the  times  and  places  of  their  meet¬
ing,  and  even  the  very  names  of  their
members.  To  the  first  of  these  classes  be¬
long  all  those  moral  or  religious  secret  associ¬
ations  which  have  existed  from  the  earliest
times.  Such  were  the  Ancient  Mysteries,
whose  object  was,  by  their  initiations,  to
cultivate  a  purer  worship  than  the  popular
one ;  such,  too,  the  schools  of  the  old  phi¬
losophers,  like  Pythagoras  and  Plato,  who
in  their  esoteric  instructions  taught  a
higher  doctrine  than  that  which  they  com¬
municated  to  their  exoteric  scholars.  Such,
too,  are  the  modern  secret  societies  which
have  adopted  an  exclusive  form  only  that
they  may  restrict  the  social  enjoyment
which  it  is  their  object  to  cultivate,  or  the
system  of  benevolence  for  which  they  are
organized,  to  the  persons  who  are  united
with  them  by  the  tie  of  a  common  covenant,
and  the  possession  of  a  common  knowledge;
such,  lastly,  is  Freemasonry,  which  is  a
secret  society  only  as  respects  its  signs,  a
few  of  its  legends  and  traditions,  and  its
method  of  inculcating  its  mystical  philos¬
ophy,  but  which,  as  to  everything  else  —  its
design,  its  object,  its  moral  and  religious
tenets,  and  the  great  doctrine  which  it
teaches  —  is  as  open  a  society  as  if  it  met  on
the  highways  beneath  the  sun  of  day,  and
not  within  the  well-guarded  portals  of  a
Lodge.  To  the  second  class  of  secret  so¬
cieties  belong  those  which  sprung  up  first
in  the  Middle  Ages,  like  the  Vehm  Gericht
of  Westphalia,  formed  for  the  secret  but
certain  punishment  of  criminals;  and  in  the
eighteenth  century  those  political  societies
like  the  Carbonari,  which  have  been  or¬
ganized  at  revolutionary  periods  to  resist
the  oppression  or  overthrow  the  despo¬
tism  of  tyrannical  governments.  It  is  evi¬
dent  that  these  two  classes  of  secret  socie¬
ties  are  entirely  different  in  character;  but
it  has  been  the  great  error  of  writers  like
Barruel  and  Bobison,  who  have  attacked
Freemasonry  on  the  ground  of  its  being  a
secret  association,  that  they  utterly  con¬
founded  the  two  classes.

An  interesting  discussion  on  this  subject
took  place  in  1848,  in  the  National  Assem¬
bly  of  France,  during  the  consideration  of
those  articles  of  the  law  by  which  secret
societies  were  prohibited.  A  part  of  this
discussion  is  worth  preserving,  and  is  in
the  following  words :

M.  Volette :  I  should  like  to  have  one  de¬
fine  what  is  meant  by  a  secret  society  ?

M.  Coquerel :  Those  are  secret  societies
which  have  made  none  of  the  declarations
prescribed  by  law.

M.  Paulin  Gillon:  I  would  ask  if  Free¬
masonry  is  also  to  be  suppressed?

M.  Floqon :  I  begin  by  declaring  that,
under  a  republican  government,  every  se-


704


SECRET


SELECT


cret  society  having  for  its  object  a  change
of  the  form  of  such  government  ought  to
be  severely  dealt  with.  Secret  societies
may  be  directed  against  the  sovereignty  of
the  people;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  I
ask  for  their  suppression ;  but,  from  the
want  of  a  precise  definition,  I  would  not  de¬
sire  to  strike,  as  secret-societies,  assemblies  that
are  perfectly  innocent.  All  my  life,  until
the  24th  of  February,  have  I  lived  in  se¬
cret  societies.  Now  I  desire  them  no
more.  Yes,  we  have  spent  our  life  in  con¬
spiracies,  and  we  had  the  right  to  do  so ;
for  we  lived  under  a  government  which  did
not  derive  its  sanctions  from  the  people.
To-day  I  declare  that  under  a  republican
government,  and  with  universal  suffrage,
it  is  a  crime  to  belong  to  such  an  associa¬
tion.

M.  Coquerel:  As  to  Freemasonry,  your
committee  has  decided  that  it  is  not  a  secret
society.  A  society  may  have  a  secret,  and
yet  not  be  a  secret  society.  I  have  not  the
honor  of  being  a  Freemason.

The  President:  The  thirteenth  article  has
been  amended,  and  decided  that  a  secret  so¬
ciety  is  one  which  seeks  to  conceal  its  existence
and  its  objects.

Secret  Vault.  See  Vault,  Secret.

Sectarianism.  Masonry  repudiates
all  sectarianism,  and  recognizes  the  tenets
of  no  sect  as  preferable  to  those  of  any
other,  requiring  in  its  followers  assent  only
to  those  dogmas  of  a  universal  religion
which  teach  the  existence  of  God  and  the
resurrection  to  eternal  life.  See  Toleration.

Secular  Lodges.  The  epithet  secu¬
lar  Has  sometimes,  but  very  incorrectly,
been  applied  to  subordinate  Lodges  to  dis¬
tinguish  them  from  Grand  Lodges.  In
such  a  connection  the  word  is  unmeaning,
or,  what  is  worse,  is  a  term  bearing  a  mean¬
ing  entirely  different  from  that  which  was
intended  by  the  writer.  “Secular,”  says
Richardson,  “  is  used  as  distinguished  from
eternal,  and  equivalent  to  temporal ;  per¬
taining  to  temporal  things,  things  of  this
world;  worldly;  also  opposed  to  spiritual,
to  holy.”  And  every  other  orthoepist
gives  substantially  the  same  definition.  It
is  then  evident,  from  this  definition,  that
the  word  secular  may  be  applied  to  all  Ma¬
sonic  bodies,  but  not  to  one  class  of  them
in  contradistinction  to  another.  All  Ma¬
sonic  Lodges  are  secular,  because  they  are
worldly,  and  not  spiritual  or  holy  institu¬
tions.  But  a  subordinate  Lodge  is  no  more
secular  than  a  Grand  Lodge.

Sedition  Act.  On  July  12,  1798,  the
British  Parliament,  alarmed  at  the  progress
of  revolutionary  principles,  enacted  a  law,
commonly  known  as  the  Sedition  Act,  for
the  suppression  of  secret  societies;  but  the
true  principles  of  Freemasonry  were  so  \


well  understood  by  the  legislators  of  Great
Britain,  many  of  whom  were  members  of
the  Order,  that  the  following  clause  was  in¬
serted  in  the  Act :

“  And  whereas,  certain  societies  have
been  long  accustomed  to  be  holden  in  this
kingdom,  under  the  denomination  of  Lodges
of  Freemasons,  the  meetings  whereof  have
been  in  a  great  measure  directed  to  chari¬
table  purposes,  be  it  therefore  enacted,  that
nothing  in  this  Act  shall  extend  to  the
meetings  of  any  such  society  or  Lodge
which  shall,  before  the  passing  of  this  Act,
have  been  usually  holden  under  the  said
denomination,  and  in  conformity  to  the
rules  prevailing  among  the  said  societies
of  Freemasons.”

Seeing.  One  of  the  five  human  senses,
whose  importance  is  treated  of  in  the  Fel¬
low  Craft’s  degree.  By  sight,  things  at  a
distance  are,  as  it  were,  brought  near,  and
obstacles  of  space  overcome.  So  in  Free¬
masonry,  by  a  judicious  use  of  this  sense,
in  modes  which  none  but  Masons  compre¬
hend,  men  distant  from  each  other  in  lan¬
guage,  in  religion,  and  in  politics,  are
brought  near,  and  the  impediments  of
birth  and  prejudice  are  overthrown.  But,
in  the  natural  world,  sight  cannot  be  exer¬
cised  without  the  necessary  assistance  of
light,  for  in  darkness  we  are  unable  to  see.
So  in  Masonry,  the  peculiar  advantages
of  Masonic  sight  require,  for  their  enjoy¬
ment,  the  blessing  of  Masonic  light.  Illu¬
minated  by  its  divine  rays,  the  Mason  sees
where  others  are  blind  ;  and  that  which  to
the  profane  is  but  the  darkness  of  igno¬
rance,  is  to  the  initiated  filled  with  the
light  of  knowledge  and  understanding.

Seekers.  (Chercheurs.)  The  first  de¬
gree  of  the  Order  of  Initiated  Knights  and
Brothers  of  Asia.

Select  Master.  The  ninth  degree  in
the  American  Rite,  and  the  last  of  the  two
conferred  in  a  Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters.  Its  officers  are  a  Thrice  Illus¬
trious  Grand  Master,  Illustrious  Hiram  of
Tyre,  Principal  Conductor  of  the  Works,
Treasurer,  Recorder,  Captain  of  the  Guards,
Couductor  of  the  Council,  and  Steward.
The  first  three  represent  the  three  Grand
Masters  at  the  building  of  Solomon’s  Tem¬
ple.  The  symbolic  colors  are  black  and
red,  the  former  significant  of  secrecy,  si¬
lence,  and  darkness  ;  the  latter  of  fervency
and  zeal.  A  Council  is  supposed  to  consist
of  neither  more  nor  less  than  twenty-seven  ;
but  a  smaller  number,  if  not  less  than  nine,
is  competent  to  proceed  to  work  or  busi¬
ness.  The  candidate,  when  initiated,  is
said  to  be  “  chosen  as  a  Select  Master.”  The
historical  object  of  the  degree  is  to  com¬
memorate  the  deposit  of  an  important  se-
|  cret  or  treasure  which,  after  the  prelimi-


SELECT


SENESCHAL


705


nary  preparations,  is  said  to  have  been
made  by  Hiram  Abif.  The  place  of  meet¬
ing  represents  a  secret  vault  beneath  the
Temple.

A  controversy  has  sometimes  arisen
among  ritualists  as  to  whether  the  degree
of  Select  Master  should  precede  or  follow
that  of  Royal  Master  in  the  order  of  con¬
ferring.  But  the  arrangement  now  exist¬
ing,  by  which  the  Royal  Master  is  made
the  first  and  the  Select  Master  the  second
degree  of  Cryptic  Masonry,  has  been  very
generally  accepted,  and  this  for  the  best  of
reasons.  It  is  true  that  the  circumstances
referred  to  in  the  degree  of  Royal  Master
occurred  during  a  period  of  time  which  lies
between  the  death  of  the  Chief  Builder  of
the  Temple  and  the  completion  of  the  edi¬
fice,  while  those  referred  to  in  the  degree
of  Select  Master  occurred  anterior  to  the
builder  s  death.  Hence,  in  the  order  of
time,  the  events  commemorated  in  the  Se¬
lect  Master’s  degree  took  place  anterior  to
those  which  are  related  in  the  degree  of
Royal  Master;  although  in  Masonic  se¬
quence  the  latter  degree  is  conferred  before
the  former.  This  apparent  anachronism
is,  however,  reconciled  by  the  explanation
that  the  secrets  of  the  Select  Master’s  de¬
gree  were  not  brought  to  light  until  long
after  the  existence  of  the  Royal  Master’s
degree  had  been  known  and  recognized.

In  other  words,  to  speak  only  from  the
traditional  point  of  view,  Select  Masters
had  been  designated,  had  performed  the
task  for  which  they  had  been  selected,  and
had  closed  their  labors,  without  ever  being
openly  recognized  as  a  class  in  the  Temple
of  Solomon.  The  business  in  which  they
were  engaged  was  a  secret  one.  Their  oc¬
cupation  and  their  very  existence,  accord¬
ing  to  the  legend,  were  unknown  to  the
great  body  of  the  Craft  in  the  first  Temple.
The  Royal  Master’s  degree,  on  the  contrary,
as  there  was  no  reason  for  concealment,  was
publicly  conferred  and  acknowledged  dur¬
ing  the  latter  part  of  the  construction  of
the  Temple  of  Solomon;  whereas  the  degree
of  Select  Master,  and  the  important  inci¬
dents  on  w'hich  it  was  founded,  are  not  sup¬
posed  to  have  been  revealed  to  the  Craft
until  the  building  of  the  temple  of  Zerub-
babel.  Hence  the  Royal  Master’s  degree
should  always  be  conferred  anterior  to  that
of  the  Select  Master.

The  proper  jurisdiction  under  which
these  degrees  should  be  placed,  whether
under  Chapters  and  to  be  conferred  pre¬
paratory  to  the  Royal  Arch  degree,  or
under  Councils  and  to  be  conferred  after  it,
has  excited  discussion.  The  former  usage

firevails  in  Maryland  and  Virginia,  but  the
atter  in  all  the  other  States.  There  is  no
doubt  that  these  degrees  belonged  origi-
4  0  46


nally  to  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,
and  were  conferred  as  honorary  degrees  by
the  Inspectors  of  that  Rite.  This  authority
and  jurisdiction  the  Supreme  Council  for
the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  the  Rite  con¬
tinued  to  claim  until  the  year  1870;  al¬
though,  through  negligence,  the  Councils
of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  in  some  of
the  States  had  been  placed  under  the  con¬
trol  of  independent  jurisdictions  called
Grand  Councils.  Like  all  usurped  author¬
ity,  however,  this  claim  of  the  State  Grand
Councils  does  not  seem  to  have  ever  been
universally  admitted  or  to  have  been  very
firmly  established.  Repeated  attempts  have
been  made  to  take  the  degrees  out  of  the
hands  of  the  Councils  and  to  place  them
in  the  Chapters,  there  to  be  conferred  as
preparatory  to  the  Royal  Arch.  The  Gen¬
eral  Grand  Chapter,  in  the  triennial  ses¬
sion  of  1847,  adopted  a  resolution  granting
this  permission  to  all  Chapters  in  States
where  no  Grand  Councils  exist.  But,  see¬
ing  the  manifest  injustice  and  inexpediency
of  such  a  measure,  at  the  following  session
of  1850  it  refused  to  take  any  action  on
the  subject  of  these  degrees.  In  1858  it
disclaimed  all  control  over  them,  and  for¬
bade  the  Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction  to
confer  them.  As  far  as  regards  the  inter¬
ference  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  that  question  was  set  at  rest  in
1870  by  the  Mother  Council,  which,  at  its
session  at  Baltimore,  formally  relinquished
all  further  control  over  them.

Semestre.  The  mot  de  semestre,  or
semi-annual  word,  is  used  only  in  France.
Every  six  months  a  secret  word  is  commu¬
nicated  by  the  Grand  Orient  to  all  the
Lodges  under  its  jurisdiction.  This  cus¬
tom  was  introduced  October  28,  1773,  dur¬
ing  the  Grand  Mastership  of  the  Duke  of
Chartres,  to  enable  him  the  better  to  con¬
trol  the  Lodges,  and  to  afford  the  members
a  means  whereby  they  could  recognize  the
members  who  were  not  constant  in  their
attendance,  and  also  those  Masons  who
either  belonged  to  an  unrecognized  Rite,
or  who  were  not  affiliated  with  any  Lodge.
The  Chapters  of  the  higher  degrees  receive
a  word  annually  from  the  Grand  Orient
for  the  same  purpose.  This,  with  the  pass¬
word,  is  given  to  the  Tiler  on  entering  the
Temple.

Senatorial  Chamber.  When  the
Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Rite  meets  in  the  thirty-third  degree,
it  is  said  to  meet  in  its  senatorial  chamber.

Senesehal.  An  officer  found  in  some
of  the  high  degrees,  as  in  the  thirty-second
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,  where
his  duties  are  similar  to  those  of  a  Warden
of  a  Lodge,  he  acting  as  the  deputy  of  the
presiding  officer.  The  title  is  derived  from


706


SENIOR


SERMONS


the  old  German  senne,  house,  and  schalk,
servant.  The  seneschals  in  the  Middle
Ages  were  the  lieutenants  of  the  dukes
and  other  great  feudatories,  and  took  charge
of  the  castles  of  their  masters  during  their
absence.

Senior  Deacon.  See  Deacons.

Senior  Entered  Apprentice.  In

the  ritual  of  the  early  part  of  the  last  cen¬
tury  the  Senior  and  Junior  Entered  Ap¬
prentices  acted  in  the  place  of  the  Deacons,
which  offices  were  then  unknown.  The
Senior  Entered  Apprentice  was  placed  in
the  south,  and  his  duty  was  “  to  hear  and
receive  instructions,  and  to  welcome  strange
Brethren.”  See  Junior  Entered.  Apprentice.

Senior  Warden.  The  second  officer
in  a  Symbolic  Lodge.  He  presides  over
the  Craft  during  the  hours  of  labor,  as  the
Junior  does  during  the  hours  of  refresh¬
ment,  and  in  the  absence  of  the  Master  he
performs  his  duty.  See  Wardens.

Senses,  Five.  See  Five  Senses.

Sentinel.  An  officer  in  a  Royal  Arch
Chapter,  in  a  Council  of  Knights  of  the
Red  Cross,  and  in  a  Commandery  of
Knights  Templars,  whose  duties  are  simi¬
lar  to  those  of  a  Tiler  in  a  Symbolic  Lodge.
In  some  bodies  the  word  Janitor  has  been
substituted  for  Sentinel,  but  the  change  is
hardly  a  good  one.  Janitor  has  been  more
generally  appropriated  to  the  porter  of  a
collegiate  institution,  and  has  no  old  Ma¬
sonic  authority  for  its  use.

Sephiroth.  (Hebrew,  HTT^D-)  I1
is  a  plural  noun,  the  singular  being  Se-
phira.  Buxtorf  [Lex.  Talm.)  says  the  word
means  numerations,  from  SAPHAR,  to
number ;  but  the  Kabbalistic  writers  gen¬
erally  give  it  the  signification  of  splendors,
from  SAPHIRI,  splendid.  The  account  of
the  creation  and  arrangement  of  the  Sephi-
roth  forms  the  most  important  portion  of
the  secret  doctrine  of  the  Kabbalists,  and
has  been  adopted  and  referred  to  in  many
of  the  high  philosophic  degrees  of  Masonry.
Some  acquaintance  with  it,  therefore,
seems  to  be  necessary  to  the  Mason  who
desires  to  penetrate  into  the  more  abstruse
arcana  of  his  Order.  See  Kabbala.

Septenary.  The  number  seven,  which
see.

Sepulchre.  The  spirit  of«  gratitude
has  from  the  earliest  period  led  men  to
venerate  the  tombs  in  which  have  been  de-

fosited  the  remains  of  their  benefactors,
n  all  of  the  ancient  religions  there  were
sacred  tombs  to  which  worship  was  paid.
The  tombs  of  the  prophets,  preserved  by
the  Israelites,  gave  testimony  to  their  rever¬
ence  for  the  memory  of  these  holy  person¬
ages.  After  the  advent  of  Christianity,  the
same  sentiment  of  devotion  led  the  pil¬
grims  to  visit  the  Holy  Land,  that  they


might  kneel  at  what  was  believed  to  be  the
sepulchre  of  their  Lord.  In  many  of  the
churches  of  the  Middle  Ages  there  was  a
particular  place  near  the  altar  called  the
sepulchre,  which  was  used  at  Easter  for  the
performance  of  solemn  rites  commemora¬
tive  of  the  Saviour’s  resurrection.  This
custom  still  prevails  in  some  of  the
churches  on  the  continent.  In  Templar
Masonry,  which  is  professedly  a  Christian
system,  the  sepulchre  forms  a  part  of  the
arrangements  of  a  Commandery.  In  Eng¬
land,  the  sepulchre  is  within  the  Asylum,
and  in  front  of  the  Eminent  Commander.
In  this  country  it  is  placed  without;  and
the  scenic  representation  observed  in  every
well-regulated  and  properly  arranged  Com¬
mandery  furnishes  a  most  impressive  and
pathetic  ceremony.

Sepulchre.  Knight  of  the  Holy.

See  Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.

Serapis,  Mysteries  of.  See  Egyp¬
tian  Mysteries.

Sermons,  Masonic.  Sermons  on

Masonic  subjects,  and  delivered  in  churches
before  Masonic  bodies  or  on  Masonic  festi¬
vals,  are  peculiar  to  the  British  and  Amer¬
ican  Freemasons.  Neither  the  French  nor
German,  nor,  indeed,  any  continental  lit¬
erature  of  Masonry,  supplies  us  with  any
examples.  The  first  Masonic  sermon  of
which  we  have  any  knowledge,  from  its
publication,  was  “  A  General  Charge  to
Masons,  delivered  at  Christ  Church,  in
Boston,  [Massachusetts,]  on  the  27th  of
December,  1749,  by  the  Rev.  Charles  Brock-
well,  A.  M.,  published  at  the  request  of  the
Grand  Officers  and  Brethren  there.”  It
was,  however,  not  printed  at  Boston,  but
was  first  published  in  the  Freemasons'
Pocket  Companion  for  1754.  Brockwell  was
chaplain  of  the  English  troops  stationed
at  Boston.  But  in  America,  at  least,  the
custom  of  delivering  sermons  on  St.  John’s
day  prevailed  many  years  before.  In  the
author’s  History  of  Freemasonry  in  South
Carolina,  (pp.  15-20,)  will  be  found  the
authentic  evidence  that  the  Lodges  in
Charleston  attended  divine  service  on  De¬
cember  27, 1738,  and  for  several  years  after,
on  each  of  which  occasions  it  is  to  be  pre¬
sumed  that  a  sermon  was  preached.  In
1742  it  is  distinctly  stated,  from  a  contem¬
porary  gazette,  that  “  both  Lodges  pro¬
ceeded  regularly,  with  the  ensigns  of  their
Order  and  music  before  them,  to  church,
where  they  heard  a  very  learned  sermon
from  their  brother,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Durand.”
Brockwell’s,  however,  is  the  first  of  these
early  sermons  which  has  had  the  good  for¬
tune  to  be  embalmed  in  type.  But  though
first  delivered,  it  was  not  the  first  printed.
In  1750,  John  Entick,  afterwards  the  editor
of  an  edition  of  Anderson's  “  Constitutions,”


SERPENT


SERPENT


707


delivered  a  sermon  at  Welbrook,  England,
entitled,  “The  Free  and  Accepted  Mason
Described.”  The  text  on  this  occasion  was
from  Acts  xxviii.  22,  and  had  some  signifi¬
cance  in  reference  to  the  popular  character  of
the  Order.  “  But  we  desire  to  hear  of  thee
what  thou  thinkest;  for  as  concerning  this
sect,  we  know  that  everywhere  it  is  spoken
against.”  Entick  preached  several  other
sermons,  which  were  printed.  From  that
time,  both  in  England  and  America,  the
sermon  became  a  very  usual  part  of  the
public  celebration  of  a  Masonic  festival.
One  preached  at  Newcastle-upon-Tyne,  in
1775,  is  in  its  very  title  a  sermon  of  itself:
“The  Basis  of  Freemasonry  displayed  ;  or,
an  Attempt  to  show  that  the  general  Prin¬
ciples  of  true  Religion,  genuine  Virtue,
and  sound  Morality  are  the  noble  Founda¬
tions  on  which  this  renowned  Society  is
established:  Being  a  Sermon  preached  in
Newcastle,  on  the  Festival  of  St.  John  the
Evangelist,  1775,  by  Bro.  Robert  Green.”

In  1799,  the  Rev.  Jethro  In  wood  pub¬
lished  a  volume  of  “Sermons,  in  which  are
expressed  and  enforced  the  religious,  moral,
and  political  virtues  of  Freemasonry,
preached  upon  several  occasions  before
the  Provincial  Grand  Officers  and  other
Brethren  in  the  Counties  of  Kent,  Essex,
etc.”  In  1849  Spencer  published  an  edi¬
tion  of  this  work,  enriched  by  the  valuable
notes  of  Dr.  Oliver.  In  1801  the  Rev.
Thaddeus  Mason  Harris,  Grand  Chaplain
of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  Grand  Chapter  of
Massachusetts,  published  at  Charlestown,
Massachusetts,  a  volume  of  “  Discourses
delivered  on  Public  Occasions,  illustrating
the  Principles,  displaying  the  Tendency,
and  vindicating  the  Design  of  Freema¬
sonry.”  This  work  has  also  been  anno¬
tated  in  a  new  edition  by  Dr.  Oliver,  and
republished  in  his  Oolden  Remains  of  Early
Masonic  Writers.  During  this  century  there
has  been  an  abundance  of  single  sermons

{•reached  and  published,  but  no  other  col-
ected  volume  of  any  by  one  and  the  same
author  has  been  given  to  the  public  since
those  of  Dr.  Harris.  Yet  the  fact  that
annually  in  Great  Britain  and  America
hundreds  of  sermons  in  praise  or  in  de¬
fence  of  Freemasonry  are  delivered  from
Christian  pulpits,  is  a  valuable  testimony
iven  by  the  clergy  to  the  purity  of  the
nstitution.

Serpent.  As  a  symbol,  the  serpent
obtained  a  prominent  place  in  all  the  an¬
cient  initiations  and  religions.  Among  the
Egyptians  it  was  the  symbol  of  Divine
Wisdom  when  extended  at  length,  and  the
serpent  with  his  tail  in  his  mouth  was  an
emblem  of  eternity.  The  winged  globe  and
serpent  symbolized  their  triune  deity.  In
the  ritual  of  Zoroaster,  the  serpent  was  a


symbol  of  the  universe.  In  China,  the
ring  between  two  serpents  was  the  symbol
of  the  world  governed  by  tbe  power  and
wisdom  of  the  Creator.  The  same  device
is  several  times  repeated  on  the  Isiac  table.
Higgins  ( Anacol .,  i.  521,)  says  that,  from
the  faculty  which  the  serpent  possessed  of
renewing  itself,  without  the  process  of  gen¬
eration  as  to  outward  appearance,  by  an¬
nually  casting  its  skin,  it  became,  like  the
Phoenix,  the  emblem  of  eternity ;  but  he
denies  that  it  ever  represented,  even  in
Genesis,  the  evil  principle.  Faber’s  the¬
ory  of  the  symbolism  of  the  serpent,  as  set
forth  in  his  work  on  the  Origin  of  Pagan
Idolatry,  is  ingenious.  He  says  that  the
ancients  in  part  derived  their  idea  of  the
serpent  from  the  first  tempter,  and  hence
it  was  a  hieroglyphic  of  the  evil  principle.
But  as  the  deluge  was  thought  to  have
emanated  from  the  evil  principle,  the  ser¬
pent  became  a  symbol  of  the  deluge.  He
also  represented  the  good  principle;  the
idea  being  borrowed  from  the  winged  sera-
him  which  was  blended  with  the  cheru-
im  who  guarded  the  tree  of  life,  —  the
seraphim  and  cherubim  being  sometimes
considered  as  identical ;  and  besides,  in
Hebrew,  means  both  a  seraph  and  a
serpent.  But  as  the  good  principle  was
always  male  and  female,  the  male  serpent
represented  the  Great  Father,  Adam  or
Noah,  and  the  female  serpent  represented
the  ark  or  world,  the  microcosm  and  the
macrocosm.  Hence  the  serpent  represented
the  perpetually  renovated  world,  and  as
such  was  used  in  all  the  mysteries.  Dr.
Oliver  brings  his  peculiar  views  to  the  in¬
terpretation,  and  says  that  in  Christian
Masonry  the  serpent  is  an  emblem  of  the
fall  and  the  subsequent  redemption  of  man.
In  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  however,  the
serpent  does  not  occur  as  a  symbol.  In
the  Templar  and  in  the  Philosophic  de¬
grees, —  such  as  the  Knight  of  the  Brazen
Serpent,  where  the  serpent  is  combined
with  the  cross,  —  it  is  evidently  a  symbol
of  Christ;  and  thus  the  symbolism  of  these
degrees  is  closely  connected  with  that  of  the
Rose  Croix.

Serpent  and  Cross.  A  symbol  used
in  the  degrees  of  Knight  Templar  and
Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent.  The  cross
is  a  tau  cross  T,  and  the  serpent  is  twined
around.  Its  origin  is  found  in  Numbers
xxi.  9,  where  it  is  said,  “  Moses  made  a
serpent  of  brass,  and  put  it  upon  a  pole.”
The  word  JD,  Nes,  here  translated  “a  pole,”
literally  means  a  standard,  or  something
elevated  on  high  as  a  signal,  and  may  be
represented  by  a  cross  as  well  as  by  a  pole.
Indeed,  Justin  Martyr  calls  it  a  cross.

Serpent.  Kniglit  oftlie  Itrazen.
I  See  Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent.


708


SERPENT


SEVEN


Serpent  Worship.  In  ancient  times,
the  serpent  was  an  object  of  adoration  in
almost  all  nations.  It  was,  in  fact,  one  of
the  earliest  deviations  from  the  true  system,
and  in  almost  all  the  ancient  rites  we  find
some  allusion  to  the  serpent.  It  was  wor¬
shipped  in  India,  Egypt,  Phoenicia,  Babylo¬
nia,  Greece,  and  Italy.  Indeed, so  widely  was
this  worship  distributed,  presenting  every¬
where  so  many  similar  features,  that  it  is
not  surprising  "that  it  has  been  regarded  by
some  writers  as  the  primitive  religion  of
man.  And  so  long  did  it  continue,  that
in  the  sect  of  Ophites  it  became  one  of  the
earliest  heresies  of  the  church.  In  some
nations,  as  the  Egyptians,  the  serpent  was
the  representative  of  the  good  principle ;
but  in  most  of  them  it  wras  the  emblem  of
the  evil  principle.

Serving  Brethren.  Masons  whose
duty  it  is  to  serve  the  Lodge  as  Tilers,
waiters  at  the  Lodge  table,  and  to  perform
other  menial  services,  are  called  in  Euro¬
pean  Lodges  “serving  brethren.”  They
are  not  known  in  this  country,  but  were
long  recognized  as  a  distinct  class  in  Eng¬
land  and  on  the  continent.  In  1753  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  adopted  a  regu¬
lation  for  their  initiation,  which,  slightly
modified,  is  still  in  force.  By  it  ever}'
Lodge  is  empowered  to  initiate  without
charge  “serving  brethren,”  who  cannot,
however,  become  members  of  the  Lodge,
although  they  may  join  another.  In  mili¬
tary  Lodges  private  soldiers  may  be  re¬
ceived  as  serving  brethren.  On  the  conti¬
nent,  at  one  time,  a  separate  and  prelimi¬
nary  form  of  reception,  with  peculiar  signs,
etc.,  was  appropriated  to  those  who  were
initiated  as  serving  brethren,  and  they
were  not  permitted  to  advance  beyond  the
first  degree;  which,  however,  worked  no
inconvenience,  as  all  the  business  and
refreshment  of  the  Lodges  were  done  at
that  time  in  the  Entered  Apprentice’s
degree.  The  regulation  for  admitting  serv¬
ing  brethren  arose  from  the  custom  of
Lodges  meeting  at  taverns ;  and  as  at  that
period  labor  and  refreshment  were  inter¬
mixed,  the  waiters  for  the  tavern  were
sometimes  required  to  enter  the  room  while
the  Lodge  was  in  session,  and  hence  it
became  necessary  to  qualify  them  for  such
service  by  making  them  Masons.  In
France  they  are  called  Frlres  Servants;  in
Germany,  Dienenden  Briider.

The  Knights  Templars  had  a  class  called
serving  brothers,  who  were  not,  however,
introduced  into  the  Order  until  it  had
greatly  increased  in  wealth  and  numbers.
The  form  of  their  reception  varied  very
slightly  from  that  of  the  Knights ;  but  their
habit  was  different,  being  black.  They
were  designated  for  the  performance  of


various  services  inside  or  outside  of  the
Order.  Many  rich  and  well-born  men
belonged  to  this  class.  They  were  permit¬
ted  to  take  part  in  the  election  of  a  Grand
Master.  The  treasurer  of  the  Order  was
always  a  serving  brother.  Of  these  serving
brothers  there  were  two  kinds :  servants  at
arms  and  artificers.  The  former  were  the
most  highly  esteemed ;  the  latter  being  con¬
sidered  a  very  inferior  class,  except  the
armorers,  who  were  held,  on  account  of  the
importance  of  their  occupation,  in  higher
estimation.

Seth.  It  is  a  theory  of  some  Masonic
writers  that  the  principles  of  the  Pure  or
Primitive  Freemasonry  were  preserved  in
the  race  of  Seth,  which  had  always  kept
separate  from  that  of  Cain,  but  that  after
the  flood  they  became  corrupted  by  a  se¬
cession  of  a  portion  of  the  Sethi  tes,  who
established  the  Spurious  Freemasonry  of
the  Gentiles.  This  theory  has  been  very
extensively  advanced  by  Dr.  Oliver  in  all
his  works.  The  pillars  erected  by  Seth  to
preserve  the  principles  of  the  arts  and
sciences  are  mentioned  by  Josephus.  But
although  the  Old  Constitutions  speak  of
Seth,  they  ascribe  the  erection  of  these
pillars  to  the  children  of  Lamech.  But  in
the  high  degrees  of  Masonry  the  erection
is  attributed  to  Enoch.  See  Enoch.

Sethos.  In  1731,  the  Abbe  Terrasson
published  at  Paris  a  work  entitled  Sethos
histoire  ou  vie  tiree  des  monumens  anecdotes
de  Tancienne  Eyypte.  It  h  as  passed  th  rough
a  great  many  editions  and  been  translated
into  German  and  English.  Under  the
form  of  fiction  it  contains  an  admirable
description  of  the  initiation  into  the  ancient
Egyptian  mysteries.  The  labors  and  re¬
searches  of  Terrasson  have  been  very  freely
used  by  Lenoir,  Clavel,  Oliver,  and  other
writers  on  the  ancient  initiations.

Setting  Sun.  It  was  the  duty  of  the
Senior  Warden  to  pay  and  dismiss  the
Craft  at  the  close  of  day,  when  the  sun
sinks  in  the  West;  so  now  the  Senior  War¬
den  is  said  in  the  Lodge  to  represent  the
setting  sun.

Seven.  In  every  system  of  antiquity
there  is  a  frequent  reference  to  this  num¬
ber,  showing  that  the  veneration  for  it  pro¬
ceeded  from  some  common  cause.  It  is
equally  a  sacred  number  in  the  Gentile  as
in  the  Christian  religiou.  Oliver  says  that
this  can  scarcely  be  ascribed  to  any  event,
except  it  be  the  institution  of  the  Sabbath.
Higgins  thinks  that  the  peculiar  circum¬
stance,  perhaps  accidental,  of  the  number
of  the  days  of  the  week  coinciding  exactly
with  the  number  of  the  planetary  bodies
probably  procured  for  it  its  character  of
sanctity.  The  Pythagoreans  called  it  a
perfect  number,  because  it  was  made  up  of


SEVEN


SHAMIR


709


S  and  4,  the  triangle  and  the  square,  which
are  the  two  perfect  figures.  They  called  it
also  a  virgin  number,  and  without  mother,
comparing  it  to  Minerva,  who  was  a  moth¬
erless  virgin,  because  it  cannot  by  multi¬
plication  produce  any  number  within  teu,
as  twice  two  does  four,  and  three  times
three  does  nine ;  nor  can  any  two  numbers,
by  their  multiplication,  produce  it.

It  is  singular  to  observe  the  important
part  occupied  by  the  number  seven  in  all
the  ancient  systems.  There  were,  for  in¬
stance,  seven  ancient  planets,  seven  Pleiades,
and  seven  Hyades  ;  seven  altars  burned  con¬
tinually  before  the  god  Mithras;  the  Ara¬
bians  had  seven  holy  temples;  the  Hindus
supposed  the  world  to  be  enclosed  within
the  compass  of  seven  peninsulas ;  the  Goths
had  seven  deities,  viz.,  the  Sun,  the  Moon,
Tuisco,  Woden,  Thor,  Friga,  and  Seatur,
from  whose  names  are  derived  our  days  of
the  week ;  in  the  Persian  mysteries  were
seven  spacious  caverns,  through  which  the
aspirant  had  to  pass ;  in  the  Gothic  myste¬
ries,  the  candidate  met  with  seven  obstruc¬
tions,  which  were  called  the  “  road  of  the
seven  stages;”  and,  finally,  sacrifices  were
always  considered  as  most  efficacious  when
the  victims  were  seven  in  number.

Much  of  the  Jewish  ritual  was  governed
by  this  number,  and  the  etymology  of  the
word  shows  its  sacred  import,  for  the  radical
meaning  of  shabang,  is,  says  Park-

hurst,  sufficiency  or  fulness.  The  Hebrew
idea,  therefore,  like  the  Pythagorean,  is  that
of  perfection.  To  both  the  seven  was  a  per¬
fect  number.  Again :  ^3^,  means  to  swear,
because  oaths  were  confirmed  either  by
seven  witnesses,  or  by  seven  victims  offered
in  sacrifice,  as  we  read  in  the  covenant  of
Abraham  and  Abimelech.  (Gen.  xxi.  28.)
Hence,  there  is  a  frequent  recurrence  to  this
number  in  the  scriptural  history.  The  Sab¬
bath  was  the  seventh  day;  Noah  received
seven  days’  notice  of  the  commencement  of
the  deluge,  and  was  commanded  to  select
clean  beasts  and  fowls  by  sevens  ;  seven  per¬
sons  accompanied  him  into  the  ark;  the
ark  rested  on  Mount  Ararat  in  the  seventh
month ;  the  intervals  between  despatching
the  dove  were,  each  time,  seven  days ;  the
walls  of  Jericho  were  encompassed  seven
days  by  seven  priests,  bearing  seven  rams’
horns ;  Solomon  was  seven  years  building
the  Temple,  which  was  dedicated  in  the
seventh  month,  aud  the  festival  lasted  seven
days;  the  candlestick  in  the  tabernacle
consisted  of  seven  branches;  and,  finally,  the
tower  of  Babel  was  said  to  have  been  ele¬
vated  seven  stories  before  the  dispersion.

Seven  is  a  sacred  number  in  Masonic
symbolism.  It  has  always  been  so.  In  the
earliest  rituals  of  the  last  century  it  was
said  that  a  Lodge  required  seveu  to  make


it  perfect;  but  the  only  explanation  that  I
can  find  in  any  of  those  rituals  of  the  sa¬
credness  of  the  number  is  the  seven  liberal
arts  and  sciences,  which,  according  to  the
old  “Legend  of  the  Craft,”  were  the  founda¬
tion  of  Masonry.  In  modern  ritualism  the
symbolism  of  seven  has  been  transferred
from  the  first  to  the  second  degree,  and
there  it  is  made  to  refer  only  to  the  seven
steps  of  the  Winding  Stairs  ;  but  the  sym¬
bolic  seven  is  to  be  found  diffused  in  a
hundred  ways  over  the  whole  Masonic  sys¬
tem.

Seven  Stars.  In  the  Tracing-Board
of  the  seventeenth  degree,  or  Knight  of  the
East  and  West,  is  the  representation  of  a
man  clothed  in  a  white  robe,  with  a  golden
girdle  round  his  waist,  his  right  hand  ex¬
tended,  and  surrounded  with  seven  stars.
The  seventeenth  is  an  apocalyptic  degree,
and  this  symbol  is  taken  from  the  passage  in
Revelation  i.  16,  “  and  he  had  in  his  right
hand  seven  stars.”  It  is  a  symbol  of  the
seven  churches  of  Asia.

Seventy  Years  of  Captivity.
This  period  must  be  computed  from  the
defeat  of  the  Egyptians  at  Carchemish,  in
the  same  year  that  the  prophecy  was  given,
when  Nebuchadnezzar  reduced  the  neigh¬
boring  nations  of  Syria  and  Palestine,  as
well  as  Jerusalem,  under  his  subjection.
At  the  end  of  seventy  years,  on  the  acces¬
sion  of  Cyrus,  an  end  was  put  to  the  Baby¬
lonish  monarchy.

Sliaddai.  One  of  the  names  of  God.
In  Exodus  vi.  13,  the  word  translated
God  Almighty  is,  in  the  original,  Shaddai,
n&;  it  is  therefore  the  name  by  which  he
was  known  to  the  Israelites  before  he  com¬
municated  to  Moses  the  Tetragrammaton.
The  word  is  a  pluralis  majcstatis,  and  signi¬
fies  all-powerful,  omnipotent.

Shamir.  King  Solomon  is  said,  in  a
rabbinical  legend,  to  have  used  the  worm
Shamir  as  an  instrument  for  building  the
Temple.  The  legend  is  that  Moses  en¬
graved  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  on
the  stones  of  the  breastplate  by  means  of
the  blood  of  the  worm  shamir,  whose  sol¬
vent  power  was  so  great  that  it  could  cor¬
rode  the  hardest  substances.  When  Solo¬
mon  was  about  to  build  the  Temple  of
stones  without  the  use  of  any  metallic  im¬
plement,  he  was  desirous  of  obtaining  this
potent  blood  ;  but  the  knowledge  of  the
source  whence  Moses  had  derived  it  had
been  lost  by  the  lapse  of  time.  Solomon
enclosed  the  chick  of  a  bird,  either  an  os¬
trich  or  a  hoopoe,  in  a  crystal  vessel,  and
placed  a  sentinel  to  watch  it.  The  parent
bird,  finding  it  impossible  to  break  the
vessel  with  Tier  bill  so  as  to  gain  access  to
the  young  one,  flew  to  the  desert,  and  re¬
turned  with  the  miraculous  worm,  which,


710


SHARP


SHEM


by  means  of  its  blood,  soon  penetrated  the
prison  of  glass,  and  liberated  the  chick.
By  a  repetition  of  the  process,  the  King  of
Israel  at  length  acquired  a  sufficiency  of
the  dissolving  blood  to  enable  him  to  work
upon  the  stones  of  the  Temple.

It  is  supposed  that  the  legend  is  based  on
a  corruption  of  the  word  Smiris,  the  Greek
for  emery,  which  was  used  by  the  antique
engravers  in  their  works  and  medallions,
and  that  the  name  Shamir  is  merely  the
Hebrew  form  of  the  Greek  word.

Sharp  Instrument.  The  emblem¬
atic  use  of  a  “  sharp  instrument,”  as  indi¬
cated  in  the  ritual  of  the  first  degree,  is  in¬
tended  to  be  represented  by  a  warlike
weapon,  (the  old  rituals  call  it  “a  warlike
instrument,”)  such  as  a  dagger  or  sword.
The  use  of  the  point  of  a  pair  of  compasses,
as  is  sometimes  improperly  done,  is  an  er¬
roneous  application  of  the  symbol,  which
should  not  be  tolerated  in  a  properly  con¬
ducted  Lodge.  The  compasses  are,  besides,
a  symbol  peculiar  to  the  third  degree.

Skastras.  The  sacred  book  of  the
Hindus,  which  contains  the  dogmas  of  their
religion  and  the  ceremonies  of  their  wor¬
ship.  It  is  a  commentary  on  the  Vedas,
and  consists  of  three  parts :  the  moral  law,
the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  religion,  and
the  distribution  of  the  people  into  tribes.
To  the  Hindu  Mason  it  would  be  the
Greater  Light  and  his  Book  of  the  Law,  as
the  Bible  is  to  his  Christian  brother.

Sheba,  Queen  of.  In  the  Books  of
Kings  and  Chronicles  we  are  told  that
“  when  the  Queen  of  Sheba  heard  of  the
fame  of  Solomon  concerning  the  name  of
the  Lord,  she  came  to  prove  him  with  hard
questions.”  Sheba,  or  Saba,  is  supposed  to
have  been  a  province  of  Arabia  Felix,  sit¬
uated  to  the  south  of  Jerusalem.  The
queen,  whose  visit  is  thus  described,  is
spoken  of  nowhere  else  in  Scripture.  But
the  Jews  and  the  Arabs,  who  gave  her  the
name  of  Balkis,  recite  many  traditions  con¬
cerning  her.  The  Masonic  one  will  be
found  under  the  words  Admiration,  Sign  of,
which  see.

Shekel.  In  the  fourth  or  Mark  Mas¬
ter’s  degree,  it  is  said  that  the  value  of  a
mark  is  “a  Jewish  half-shekel  of  silver,  or
twenty-five  cents  in  the  currency  of  this
country.”  The  shekel  of  silver  was  a
weight  of  great  antiquity  among  the  Jews,
its  value  being  about  a  half-dollar.  In  the
time  of  Solomon,  as  well  as  long  before  and
long  after,  until  the  Babylonish  exile,  the
Hebrews  had  no  regularly  stamped  money,
but  generally  used  in  traffic  a  currency
which  consisted  of  uncoined  shekels,  which
they  weighed  out  to  one  another.  The
earliest  specimens  of  the  coined  shekel
which  we  know  are  of  the  coinage  of  Simon


Maccabeus,  issued  about  the  year  144  B.  c.
Of  these,  we  generally  find  on  the  obverse
the  sacred  pot  of  manna,  with  the  inscrip¬
tion,  “  Shekel  Israel,”  in  the  old  Samaritan
character ;  on  the  reverse,  the  rod  of  Aaron,


having  three  buds,  with  the  inscription,
“Ierushalem  Kadoshah,”  or  Jerusalem  the
Holy,  in  a  similar  character.

Siickinah.  Heb.,  derived

from  SHAKAN,  to  dwell.  A  term  applied
by  the  Jews,  especially  in  the  Targums,  to
the  divine  glory  which  dwelt  in  the  taber¬
nacle  and  the  Temple,  and  which  was
manifested  by  a  visible  cloud  resting  over
the  mercy-seat  in  the  Holy  of  Holies.  It
first  appeared  over  the  ark  when  Moses
consecrated  the  tabernacle  ;  and  was  after¬
wards,  upon  the  consecration  of  the  Tem¬
ple  by  Solomon,  translated  thither,  where
it  remained  until  the  destruction  of  that
building.

The  Shekinah  disappeared  after  the  de¬
struction  of  the  first  Temple,  and  was  not
present  in  the  second.  Mr.  Christie,  in  his
learned  treatise  on  the  Worship  of  the  Ele¬
ments,  says  that  “  the  loss  of  the  Shekinah,
that  visible  sign  of  the  presence  of  the
Deity,  induced  an  early  respect  for  solar
light  as  its  substitute.”  Now  there  is  much
that  is  significative  of  Masonic  history  in
this  brief  sentence.  The  sun  still  remains
as  a  prominent  symbol  in  the  Masonic
system.  It  has  been  derived  by  the  Masons
from  those  old  sun  worshippers.  But  the
idea  of  Masonic  light  is  very  different  from
their  idea  of  solar  light.  The  Shekinah
was  the  symbol  of  the  divine  glory ;  but
the  true  glory  of  divinity  is  Truth,  and
Divine  Truth  is  therefore  the  Shekinah  of
Masonry.  This  is  symbolized  by  light,
which  is  no  longer  used  by  us  as  a  “  substi¬
tute  ”  for  the  Shekinah,  or  the  divine  glory,
but  as  its  symbol  —  the  physical  expression
of  its  essence.

Shem.  The  Name.  The  Jews

in  their  sacred  rites  often  designated  God
by  the  word  Name,  but  they  applied  it  only
to  him  in  his  most  exalted  character  as  ex¬
pressed  by  the  Tetragrammaton,  JEHO¬
VAH.  To  none  of  the  other  titles  of  God,
such  as  El,  Eheyeh,  or  Adonai,  do  they  ap¬
ply  the  word.  Thus,  Shemchah  Kadosh,
Thy  name  is  holy,  means  Thy  name  Jeho¬
vah  is  holy.  To  the  Name  thus  exalted,  in


SHEM


4


SHIELD


711


its  reference  to  the  Tetragrammaton,  they
applied  many  epithets,  among  which  are
the  following  used  by  the  Talmudists,
W  DIP,  Shem  shal  arbang,  the  name  of
four,  i.  e.,  four  letters ;  “OPOn  DC',  Shem  ham-
jukad,  the  appropriated  name,  i.  e.,  appro¬
priately  solely  to  God.  SnJH  DIP,  Shem
haggadol,  the  great  name,  and  BTIpn  DU',
Shem  hakkadosh,  the  holy  name.  To  the  Jew,
as  to  the  Mason,  this  great  and  holy  name
was  the  symbol  of  all  divine  truth.  The
Name  was  the  true  name,  and  therefore  it
symbolized  and  represented  the  true  God.

Shem,  Ham,  Japhetli.  The  three
sons  of  Noah,  who  assisted  him  in  the  con¬
struction  of  the  ark  of  safety,  and  hence
they  became  significant  words  in  the  Royal
Arch  degree  according  to  the  American
system.  The  interpolation  of  Adoniram  in
the  place  of  one  of  these  names,  which  is
sometimes  met  with,  is  a  blunder  of  some
modern,  ignorant  ritual  maker.

Shem  I lainpliorascli .  emann  dip,
the  separated  name.  The  Tetragramma¬
ton  is  so  called  because,  as  Maimonides
[More  Nevoch.)  says,  all  the  names  of  God
are  derived  from  his  works  except  the
Tetragrammaton,  which  is  called  the  sepa¬
rated  name,  because  it  is  derived  from  the
substance  of  the  Creator,  in  which  there  is
no  participation  of  any  other  thing.  That
is  to  say,  this  name  indicates  the  self-exist¬
ent  essence  of  God,  which  is  something  al¬
together  within  himself,  and  separate  from
his  works.

Sheriff.  According  to  Preston,  the
sheriff  of  a  county  possessed,  before  the
revival  of  1717,  a  power  now  confined  to
Grand  Masters.  He  says  ( Must .,  p.  182,)
that  “A  sufficient  number  of  Masons  met
together  within  a  certain  district,  with  the
consent  of  the  Sheriff  or  chief  magistrate  of
the  place,  were  empowered,  at  this  time,  to
make  Masons,  and  practise  the  rites  of  Ma¬
sonry  without  a  Warrant  of  Constitution.”
This  is  confirmed  by  the  following  passage
in  the  Cooke  MS.,  (Lines 901-912:)  “  When
the  masters  and  fellows  be  forewarned,  and
are  come  to  such  congregations,  if  need  be,
the  Sheriff  of  the  Country,  or  the  Mayor  of
the  City,  or  Aldermen  of  the  Town  in  which
such  Congregation  is  holden,  shall  be  fellow
and  sociate  to  the  master  of  the  congrega¬
tion  in  help  of  him  against  rebels  and  [tor
the|  upbearing  the  right  of  the  realm.”

Slictliarhoznai.  See  Tatnai.

Shewbread.  The  twelve  loaves
which  were  placed  upon  a  table  in  the
sanctuary  of  the  Temple,  and  which  were
called  the  shewbread  or  bread  of  the  pres¬
ence,  are  represented  among  the  parapher¬
nalia  of  a  Lodge  of  Perfection  in  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.  Biihr  (Sym-
bolik)  says  that  the  shewbread  was  a


symbol  of  the  bread  of  life — of  the  eter¬
nal  life  by  which  we  are  brought  into  the
presence  of  God  and  know  him;  an  inter¬
pretation  that  is  equally  applicable  to  the
Masonic  symbolism.

Shibboleth.  (Heb.  nSm)  The  word
which  the  Gileadites  under  Jephthah  made
use  of  as  a  test  at  the  passages  of  the  river
Jordan  after  a  victory  over  the  Ephraimites.
The  word  has  two  meanings  in  Hebrew:
1st,  an  ear  of  corn ;  and,  2dly,  a  stream
of  water.  As  the  Ephraimites  were  desir¬
ous  of  crossing  the  river,  it  is  probable
that  this  second  meaning  suggested  it  to
the  Gileadites  as  an  appropriate  test  word
cn  the  occasion.  The  proper  sound  of  the
first  letter  of  this  word  is  sh,  a  harsh  breath¬
ing  which  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  be  pro¬
nounced  by  persons  whose  vocal  organs
have  not  been  accustomed  to  it.  Such  was
the  case  with  the  Ephraimites,  who  substi¬
tuted  for  the  aspiration  the  hissing  sound
of  s.  Their  organs  of  voice  were  incapa¬
ble  of  the  aspiration,  and  therefore,  as  the
record  has  it,  they  “could  not  frame  to
pronounce  it  right.”  The  learned  Burder
remarks  ( Orient .  Oust.,  ii.  782,)  that  in
Arabia  the  difference  of  pronunciation
among  persons  of  various  districts  is  much
greater  than  in  most  other  places,  and  such
as  easily  accounts  for  the  circumstance  men¬
tioned  in  the  passage  of  Judges.  Hutchin¬
son,  (*S)d.  of  Mas.,  p.  113,)  speaking  of  this
word,  rather  fancifully  derives  it  from  the
Greek  mfiu,  I  revere,  and  Xidoq,  a  stone,  and,
therefore,  he  says  “  Zflo/aflov,  Sibbolithon,
Colo  Lapidem,  implies  that  they  (the  Ma¬
sons)  retain  and  keep  inviolate  their  obli¬
gations,  as  the  Juramentum  per  Jovem  La¬
pidem,  the  most  obligatory  oath  held  among
the  heathen.”

It  may  be  remarked  that  in  the  ritual
of  the  Fellow  Craft’s  degree,  where  the
story  of  the  Ephraimites  is  introduced,  and
where  Shibboleth  is  symbolically  interpret¬
ed  as  meaning  plenty,  the  word  water  ford  is
sometimes  used  incorrectly,  instead  of  wa¬
terfall.  Shibboleth  means  a  flood  of  water,
a  rapid  stream,  not  a  ford.  In  Psalm  lxix.
3'  the  word  is  used  in  this  exact  sense.
\3n3Dt?  phl'iff.  Shibboleth  shetafatni,  the  Hood
has  overwhelmed  me.  And,  besides,  a  wa¬
terfall  is  an  emblem  of  plenty,  because  it
indicates  an  abundance  of  water;  while  a
water  ford,  for  the  converse  reason,  is,  if
anv  symbol  at  all,  a  symbol  of  scarcity.

Shield.  The  shape  of  the  shield  worn
by  the  knight  in  the  Middle  Ages  varied
according  to  the  caprice  of  the  wearer,  but
generally  it  was  large  at  the  top  and  grad¬
ually  diminished  to  a  point,  being  made  of
wood  and  covered  with  leather,  and  on  the
outside  was  seen  the  escutcheon  or  repre¬
sentation  of  the  armorial  bearings  of  the


712


SHIELD


SHOCK


owner.  The  shield,  with  all  the  other  parts
of  the  armor  worn  by  the  knights  except
the  gauntlets,  has  been  discontinued  by  the
modern  Masonic  knights.  Oliver  thinks
that  in  some  of  the  military  initiations,  as
in  those  of  the  Scandinavian  mysteries,
the  shield  was  substituted  for  the  apron.
An  old  heraldic  writer  quoted  by  Sloane-
Evans,  ( Gram.  Brit.  Her.,  153,)  thus  gives
the  symbolic  import  of  the  shield  :  “  Like
as  the  shield  served  in  the  battle  for  a
safeguard  of  the  body  of  soldiers  against
wounds,  even  so  in  time  of  peace,  the  same
being  hanged  up,  did  defend  the  owner
against  the  malevolent  detractions  of  the
envious.”

Shield  of  David.  Two  interlaced
triangles,  more  commonly  known  as  the
Seal  of  Solomon,  and  considered  by  the
ancient  Jews  as  a  talisman  of  great  effi¬
cacy.  (See  Seal  of  Solomon.)  Because  the
shield  was,  in  battle,  a  protection,  like  a
talisman,  to  the  person,  the  Hebrews  used
the  same  word,  jlO,  Magen,  to  signify  both
a  shield  and  a  talismen.  Gaffarel  says,  in
his  Curiositates  Inauditce  (Bond.  Trans.,
1650,  p.  133,)  “The  Hebrew  word  Maghen
signifies  a  scutcheon,  or  any  other  thing
noted  with  Hebrew  characters,  the  virtue
whereof  is  like  to  that  of  a  scutcheon.”
After  showing  that  the  shield  was  never  an
image,  because  the  Mosaic  law  forbade  the
making  of  graven  images,  he  adds :  “  Ma¬
ghen,  therefore,  signifies  properly  any  piece
of  paper  or  other  like  matter  marked  or
noted  with  certain  characters  drawn  from
the  Tetragrammaton,  or  Great  Name  of
four  letters,  or  from  any  other.”  The  most


usual  form  of  the  Shield  of  David  was  to
place  in  the  centre  of  the  two  triangles,  and
at  the  intersecting  points,  the  Hebrew  word


K7JX,  AglA,  which  was  compounded  of
the  initials  of  the  words  of  tne  sentence,
'JlX  *131  nnx,  Atah  Gibor  Lolam  Ado-
nai,  “Thou  are  strong  in  the  eternal  God.”
Thus  constructed,  the  shield  of  David  was
supposed  to  be  a  preservative  against  all
sorts  of  dangers.

Shook.  A  striking  of  hands  and  feet,
so  as  to  produce  a  sudden  noise.  There  is
a  ceremony  called  “  the  shock,”  which  was
in  use  in  the  reception  of  an  Apprentice  in
the  beginning  of  this  century,  and  is  still
used  by  some  Lodges  in  what  is  called
“the  Shock  of  Entrance,”  and  by  all  in
“the  Shock  of  Enlightenment.”  Of  the
first  shock  as  well  as  of  the  second,  I  have
found  evident  traces  in  some  of  the  earlier
rituals  of  the  last  century,  and  I  have  no
doubt  that  it  was  an  ancient  ceremony,  the
gradual  disuse  of  which  is  an  innovation.

Shock  of  Enlightenment.  A
ceremony  used  in  all  the  degrees  of  Sym¬
bolic  Masonry.  By  it  we  seek  to  sym¬
bolize  the  idea  of  the  birth  of  material
light,  by  the  representation  of  the  circum¬
stances  that  accompanied  it,  and  their
reference  to  the  birth  of  intellectual  or  Ma¬
sonic  light.  The  one  is  the  type  of  the
other;  and  hence  the  illumination  of  the
candidate  is  attended  with  a  ceremony
that  may  be  supposed  to  imitate  the  primal
illumination  of  the  universe  —  most  feebly,
it  is  true,  and  yet  not  altogether  without
impressiveness.

The  Shock  of  Enlightenment  is,  then,  a
symbol  of  the  change  which  is  now  taking
place  in  the  intellectual  condition  of  the
candidate.  It  is  the  symbol  of  the  birth  of
intellectual  light  and  the  dispersion  of  intel¬
lectual  darkness.

Shock  of  Entrance.  A  ceremony

formerly  used  on  the  admission  of  an  En¬
tered  Apprentice,  but  now  partly  becoming
obsolete.  In  the  old  initiations,  the  same
word  signified  to  die  and  to  be  initiated,  be¬
cause,  in  the  initiation,  the  lesson  of  death
and  the  resurrection  to  eternal  life  was  the
dogma  inculcated.  In  the  initiation  of  an
Apprentice  in  Masonry  the  same  lesson  is
begun  to  be  taught,  and  the  initiate,  enter¬
ing  upon  a  new  life  and  new  duties,  dis¬
rupting  old  ties  and  forming  new  ones,
passes  into  a  new  birth.  This  is,  or  ought
to  be,  necessarily  accompanied  by  some  cere¬
mony  which  should  symbolically  represent
this  great  moral  change.  Hence  the  impres¬
sion  of  this  idea  is  made  by  the  symbolism
of  the  shock  at  the  entrance  of  the  candidate.

The  shock  or  entrance  is  then  the  sym¬
bol  of  the  disruption  of  the  candidate  from
the  ties  of  the  world,  and  his  introduction
into  the  life  of  Masonry.  It  is  the  symbol
of  the  agonies  of  the  first  death  and  of  the
throes  of  the  new  birth.


SHOE


SIGHT


713


Shoe.  Among  the  ancient  Israelites,
the  shoe  was  made  use  of  in  several  sig¬
nificant  ways.  To  put  off  the  shoes,  imported
reverence,  and  was  done  in  the  presence  of
God,  or  on  entering  the  dwelling  of  a  su¬
perior.  To  unloose  one’s  shoe  and  give  it  to
another  was  the  way  of  confirming  a  con¬
tract.  Thus  we  read  in  the  book  of  Ruth,
that  Boaz  having  proposed  to  the  nearest
kinsman  of  Ruth  to  exercise  his  legal
right  by  redeeming  the  land  of  Naomi,
which  was  offered  for  sale,  and  marrying
her  daughter-in-law,  the  kinsman,  being  un¬
able  to  do  so,  resigned  his  right  of  purchase
to  Boaz ;  and  the  narrative  goes  on  to  say,
(Ruth  iv.  7,  8,)  “  Now  this  was  the  manner
in  former  time  in  Israel  concerning  redeem¬
ing  and  concerning  changing,  for  to  con¬
firm  all  things ;  a  man  plucked  off  his  shoe,
and  gave  it  to  his  neighbor :  and  this  was  a
testimony  in  Israel.  Therefore  the  kins¬
man  said  unto  Boaz,  Buy  it  for  thee.  So
he  drew  off  his  shoe.”  The  reference  to
the  shoe  in  the  first  degree  is  therefore
really  as  a  symbol  of  a  covenant  to  be  en¬
tered  into.  In  the  third  degree  the  sym¬
bolism  is  altogether  different.  For  an  ex¬
planation  of  it,  see  Discalceation.

Shovel.  An  instrument  used  to  re¬
move  rubbish.  It  is  one  of  the  working-
tools  of  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  and  symboli¬
cally  teaches  him  to  remove  the  rubbish
of  passions  and  prejudices,  that  he  may  be
fitted,  when  he  thus  escapes  from  the  cap¬
tivity  of  sin,  for  the  search  and  the  recep¬
tion  of  Eternal  Truth  and  Wisdom.

Shrine.  Oliver  says  that  the  shrine
is  the  place  where  the  secrets  of  the  Royal
Arch  are  deposited.  The  word  is  not  so
used  in  this  country,  nor  does  it  seem
properly  applicable  according  to  the  legend
of  the  degree.

Side  I>egrees.  There  are  certain
Masonic  degrees,  which,  not  being  placed
in  the  regular  routine  of  the  acknowledged
degrees,  are  not  recognized  as  a  part  of
Ancient  Masonry,  but  receive  the  name  of
“  Honorary  or  Side  Degrees.”  They  con¬
stitute  no  part  of  the  regular  ritual,  and  are
not  under  the  control  of  either  Grand
Lodges,  Grand  Chapters,  or  any  other  of
the  legal,  administrative  bodies  of  the  In¬
stitution.  Although  a  few  of  them  are
very  old,  the  greater  number  are  of  a
comparatively  modern  origin,  and  are  gen¬
erally  supposed  to  have  been  indebted  for
their  invention  to  the  ingenuity  of  either
Grand  Lecturers,  or  other  distinguished
Masons.  Their  history  and  ceremonies  are
often  interesting,  and  so  far  as  we  have
been  made  acquainted  with  them,  their
tendency,  when  they  are  properly  confer¬
red,  is  always  moral.  They  are  not  given
in  Lodges  or  Chapters,  but  at  private  meet-
4  P


ings  of  the  brethren  or  companions  posses¬
sing  them,  informally  and  temporarily  called
for  the  sole  purpose  of  conferring  them.
These  temporary  assemblies  owe  no  alle¬
giance  to  any  supreme,  controlling  body,
except  so  far  as  they  are  composed  of  Mas¬
ter  or  Royal  Arch  Masons,  and  when  the
business  of  conferring  the  degrees  is  ac¬
complished,  they  are  dissolved  at  once,  not
to  meet  again,  except  under  similar  cir¬
cumstances  and  for  a  similar  purpose.

Some  of  them  are  conferred  on  Master  Ma¬
sons,  some  on  Royal  Arch  Masons,  and  some
only  on  Knights  Templars.  There  is  an¬
other  class  which  females,  connected  by  cer¬
tain  ties  of  relationship  with  the  Frater¬
nity,  are  permitted  to  receive ;  and  this  fact,
in  some  measure,  assimilates  these  degrees
to  the  Masonry  of  Adoption,  or  Female
Masonry,  which  is  practised  in  France  and
some  other  European  countries,  although
there  are  important  points  of  difference  be¬
tween  them.  These  female  side  degrees
have  received  the  name  of  “  androgynous
degrees,”  from  two  Greek  words  signifying
man  and  woman,  and  are  thus  called  to  indi¬
cate  the  participation  in  them  by  both  sexes.

The  principal  side  degrees  practised  in
this  country  are  as  follows :

1.  Secret  Monitor.

2.  Knight  of  the  Three  Kings.

3.  Knight  of  Constantinople.

4.  Mason’s  Wife  and  Daughter.

5.  Ark  and  Dove.

6.  Mediterranean  Pass.

7.  Knight  and  Heroine  of  Jericho.

8.  Good  Samaritan.

9.  Knight  of  the  Mediterranean  Pass.

Sight,  Making  Masons  at.  The

prerogative  of  the  Grand  Master  to  make
Masons  at  sight  is  described  as  the  eighth
landmark  of  the  Order.  It  is  a  technical
term,  which  may  be  defined  to  be  the  power
to  initiate,  pass,  and  raise  candidates,  by  the
Grand  Master,  in  a  Lodge  of  emergency,
or,  as  it  is  called  in  the  Book  of  Consti¬
tutions,  “  an  occasional  Lodge,”  specially
convened  by  him,  and  consisting  of  such
Master  Masons  as  he  may  call  together  for
that  purpose  only;  the  Lodge  ceasing  to
exist  as  soon  as  the  initiation,  passing,  or
raising  has  been  accomplished,  and  the
brethren  have  been  dismissed  by  the  Grand
Master.

It  is  but  right  to  say  that  this  doctrine  is
not  universally  received  as  established  law
by  the  Craft.  I  do  not  think,  however,
that  it  was  ever  disputed  until  within  a
comparatively  recent  period.  It  is  true
that  Cole,  ( Freemas .,  lib.  51,)  as  far  back  as
1817,  remarked  that  it  was  “  a  great  stretch
of  power,  not  recognized,  or  at  least,  he  be¬
lieved,  not  practised  in  this  country.”  But
the  qualifying  phrases  iu  this  sentence.


714


SIGHT


SIGHT


clearly  show  that  he  was  by  no  means  cer¬
tain  that  he  was  correct  in  denying  the
recognition  of  the  right.  Cole,  however,
would  hardly  be  considered  as  competent
authority  on  a  question  of  Masonic  law,  as
he  was  evidently  unacquainted  with  the
Book  of  Constitutions,  and  does  not  quote  or
refer  to  it  throughout  his  voluminous  work.

In  that  Book  of  Constitutions,  however,
several  instances  are  furnished  of  the  exer¬
cise  of  this  right  by  various  Grand  Masters.

In  1731,  Lord  Lovell  being  Grand  Master,
he  “  formed  an  occasional  Lodge  at  Hough¬
ton  Hall,  Sir  Robert  Walpole’s  House  in
Norfolk,”  and  there  made  the  Duke  of
Lorraine,  afterwards  Emperor  of  Germany,
and  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  Master  Masons.

I  do  not  quote  the  case  of  the  initiation,
passing,  and  raising  of  Frederick,  Prince
of  Wales,  in  1737,  which  was  done  in  “an
occasional  Lodge,”  over  which  Dr.  Desag-
uliers  presided,  because,  as  Desaguliers-was
not  the  Grand  Master,  nor  even,  as  has  been
incprrectly  stated  by  the  New  York  Com¬
mittee  of  Correspondence,  Deputy  Grand
Master,  but  only  a  Past  Grand  Master,  it
cannot  be  called  a  making  at  sight.  He
most  probably  acted  under  the  Dispensation
of  the  Grand  Master,  who  at  that  time  was
the  Earl  of  Darnley.

But  in  1766,  Lord  Blaney,  who  was  then
Grand  Master,  convened  “  an  occasional
Lodge,”  and  initiated,  passed,  and  raised
the  Duke  of  Gloucester.

Again  in  1767,  John  Salter,  the  Deputy,
then  acting  as  Grand  Master,  convened
“an  occasional  Lodge,”  and  conferred  the
three  degrees  on  the  Duke  of  Cumberland.

In  1787,  the  Prince  of  Wales  was  made
a  Mason  “  at  an  occasional  Lodge  con¬
vened,”  says  Preston,  “  for  the  purpose  at
the  Star  and  Garter,  Pall  Mall,  over  which
the  Duke  of  Cumberland  (Grand  Master)
presided  in  person.”

It  has  been  said,  however,  by  those  who
deny  the  existence  of  this  prerogative,  that
these  “  occasional  Lodges  ”  were  only  spe¬
cial  communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
and  the  “makings”  are  thus  supposed  to
have  taken  place  under  the  authority  of
that  body,  and  not  of  the  Grand  Master.
The  facts,  however,  do  not  sustain  this
position.  Throughout  the  Book  of  Con¬
stitutions,  other  meetings,  whether  regular
or  special,  are  distinctly  recorded  as  meet¬
ings  of  the  Grand  Lodge;  while  these  “  oc¬
casional  Lodges  ”  appear  only  to  have  been
convened  by  the  Grand  Master  for  the
purpose  of  making  Masons.  Besides,  in
many  instances  the  Lodge  was  held  at  a
different  place  from  that  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  the  officers  were  not,  with  the
exception  of  the  Grand  Master,  the  officers
of  the  Grand  Lodge.  Thus  the  occasional


'  Lodge  which  initiated  the  Duke  of  Lor¬
raine  was  held  at  the  residence  of  Sir
Robert  Walpole,  in  Norfolk,  while  the
Grand  Lodge  always  met  in  London.  In
1766,  the  Grand  Lodge  held  its  communi¬
cations  at  the  Crown  and  Anchor,  but  the
occasional  Lodge,  which  in  the  same  year
conferred  the  degrees  on  the  Duke  of  Glou¬
cester,  was  convened  at  the  Horn  tavern.
In  the  following  year,  the  Lodge  which  in¬
itiated  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  was  con¬
vened  at  the  Thatched  House  tavern,  the
Grand  Lodge  continuing  to  meet  at  the
Crown  and  Anchor.

But  I  think  that  a  conclusive  argument
d  fortiori  may  be  drawn  from  the  dispen¬
sing  power  of  the  Grand  Master,  which  has
never  been  denied.  No  one  ever  has
doubted,  or  can  doubt,  the  inherent  right
of  the  Grand  Master  to  constitute  Lodges
by  Dispensation,  and  in  these  Lodges,  so
constituted,  Masons  may  be  legally  entered,
passed,  and  raised.  This  is  done  ever}’  day.
Seven  Master  Masons  applying  to  the
Grand  Master,  he  grants  them  a  Dispensa¬
tion,  under  authority  of  which  they  pro¬
ceed  to  open  and  hold  a  Lodge,  ana  to
make  Masons.  This  Lodge  is,  however,  ad¬
mitted  to  be  the  mere  creature  of  the
Grand  Master,  for  it  is  in  his  power  at  any
time  to  revoke  the  Dispensation  he  had
granted,  and  thus  to  dissolve  the  Lodge.

But  if  the  Grand  Master  has  the  power
thus  to  enable  others  to  confer  the  degrees
and  make  Masons,  by  his  individual  au¬
thority  out  of  his  presence,  are  we  not  per¬
mitted  to  argue  a  fortiori  that  he  has  also
the  right  of  congregating  seven  brethren
and  causing  a  Mason  to  be  made  in  his
sight?  Can  he  delegate  a  power  to  others
which  he  does  not  himself  possess?  And
is  his  calling  together  an  “occasional
Lodge,”  and  making,  with  the  assistance
of  the  brethren  thus  assembled,  a  Mason
“  at  sight,”  that  is  to  say,  in  his  presence,
any  thing  more  or  less  than  the  exercise
of  his  dispensing  power  for  the  establish¬
ment  of  a  Lodge  under  dispensation,  for  a
temporary  period  and  for  a  special  pur¬
pose.  The  purpose  having  been  effected,
and  the  Mason  having  been  made,  he  re¬
vokes  his  Dispensation,  and  the  Lodge  is
dismissed.  If  we  assumed  any  other
ground  than  this,  we  should  be  compelled
to  say  that  though  the  Grand  Master
might  authorize  others  to  make  Masons
when  he  was  absent,  he  could  not  do  it
himself  when  present.  The  form  of  the
expression  “making  Masons  at  sight”  i$
borrowed  from  Laurence  Dermott,  the
Grand  Secretary  of  the  Athol  or  Schismatic
Grand  Lodge;  “  making  Masons  in  an  oc¬
casional  Lodere  ”  is  the  phrase  used  by
Anderson  and  his  subsequent  editors.  Der-


SIGN


SIGN


715


mott,  ( TrueAhim.  Eez.,)  commenting  on  the
thirteenth  of  the  old  regulations,  which
prescribes  that  Fellow  Crafts  and  Master
Masons  cannot  be  made  in  a  private  Lodge
except  by  the  Dispensation  of  the  Grand
Master,  says:  “This  is  a  very  ancient
regulation,  but  seldom  put  in  practice,  new
Masons  being  generally  made  at  private
Lodges ;  however,  the  Right  Worshipful
Grand  Master  has  full  power  and  authority
to  make,  or  caused  to  be  made,  in  his
worship’s  presence,  Free  and  Accepted
Masons  at  sight,  and  such  making  is  good.
But  they  cannot  be  made  out  of  his  wor¬
ship’s  presence  without  a  written  Dispen¬
sation  for  that  purpose.  Nor  can  his
worship  oblige  any  warranted  Lodge  to  re¬
ceive  the  person  so  made,  if  the  members
should  declare  against  him  or  them ;  but
in  such  case  the  Right  Worshipful  Grand
Master  may  grant  them  a  Warrant  and
form  them  into  a  new  Lodge.”

But  the  fact  that  Dermottuses  the  phrase
does  not  militate  against  the  existence  of
the  prerogative,  nor  weaken  the  argument
in  its  favor.  For,  in  the  first  place,  he  is
not  quoted  as  authority ;  and  secondly,  it  is
very  possible  that  he  did  not  invent  the  ex¬
pression,  but  found  it  already  existing  as
a  technical  phrase  generally  used  by  the
Craft,  although  not  to  be  found  in  the
Book  of  Constitutions.  The  form  there
used  is  “  making  Masons  in  an  occasional
Lodge,”  which,  as  I  have  already  said,  is  of
the  same  signification.

The  mode  of  exercising  the  prerogative
is  this :  The  Grand  Master  summons  to
his  assistance  not  less  than  six  other
Masons,  convenes  a  Lodge,  and  without
any  previous  probation,  but  on  sight  of  the
candidate,  confers  the  degrees  upon  him,
after  which  he  dissolves  the  Lodge  and
dismisses  the  brethren.

Sign.  Signs  constitute  that  universal
language  of  which  the  commentator  on  the
Lelaud  MS.  says  that  “  it  is  a  thing  rather
to  be  wished  than  hoped  for.”  It  is  evi¬
dent,  however,  that  such  a  substitute  for  a
universal  language  has  always  existed
among  mankind.  There  are  certain  ex¬
pressions  of  ideas  which,  by  an  implied
common  consent,  are  familiar  even  to  the
most  barbarous  tribes.  An  extension  for¬
ward  of  the  open  hands  will  be  understood
at  once  by  an  Australian  savage  or  an
American  Indian  as  a  gesture  betokening
peace,  while  the  idea  of  war  or  dislike
would  be  as  readily  conveyed  to  either  of
them  by  a  repulsive  gesture  of  the  same
hands.  These  are  not,  however,  what  con¬
stitute  the  signs  of  Masonry.

It  is  evident  that  every  secret  society
must  have  some  conventional  mode  of  dis¬
tinguishing  strangers  from  those  who  are


its  members,  and  Masonry,  in  this  respect,
must  have  followed  the  universal  custom
of  adopting  such  modes  of  recognition.

The  Abbe'  Grandidier  ( Essais  Historiques
et  Topographiques,  p.  422,)  says  that  when
Josse  Dotziuger,  as  architect  of  the  Cathe¬
dral  of  Strasburg,  formed,  in  1452,  all  the
Master  Masons  in  Germany  into  one  body,
“he  gave  them  a  word  and  a  particular
sign  by  which  they  might  recognize  those
who  were  of  their  Confraternity.”  Mar-
tene,  who  wrote  a  treatise  on  the  ancient  rites
of  the  monks,  (De  Antiquis  Monachorum  rili-
bus,)  says  that,  at  the  Monastery  of  Hir-
schau,  where  many  Masons  were  incorpo¬
rated  as  lay  brethren,  one  of  the  officers  of
the  monastery  was  called  the  Master  of  the
Works;  and  the  Masons  under  him  had  a
sign  which  he  describes  as  “  pugnam  super
pugnam  pone  vicissim  quasi  simules  con-
structores  marum ;  ”  that  is,  they  placed
alternately  fist  upon  fist,  as  if  imitating  the
builders  of  walls.  He  also  says,  and  other
writers  confirm  the  statement,  that  in  the
Middle  Ages  the  monks  had  a  system  of
signs  by  which  they  were  enabled  to  recog¬
nize  the  members  of  their  different  orders.

Krause  ( Kunsturkunden ,  iv.  420,)  thinks
that  the  Masons  derived  their  custom  of
having  signs  of  recognition  from  this  rule
of  the  old  monks.  But  we  can  trace  the
existence  of  signs  to  remote  antiquity.  In
the  Ancient  Mysteries,  the  initiates  were  al¬
ways  instructed  in  a  sign.

Thus,  when  a  wreath  was  presented  to  an
initiate  of  the  mysteries  of  Mithras  by  an¬
other,  instead  of  receiving  it,  he  cast  it  upon
the  ground,  and  this  gesture  of  casting  down
was  accepted  as  a  sign  of  recognition.

So,  too,  A  pu  lei  us  ( Metamorph .)  describes
the  action  of  one  of  the  devotees  of  the  mys¬
teries  of  Isis,  and  says :  “  He  walked  gently,
with  a  hesitating  step,  the  ancle  of  the  left
foot  being  slightly  bent,  in  order,  no  doubt,
that  he  might  afford  me  some  sign  by  which
I  might  recognize  him.”  And  in  another
work  ( Apologia)  he  says  :  “  If  any  one  hap¬
pens  to  be  present  who  has  been  initiated
into  the  same  rites  as  myself,  if  he  will  give
me  the  sign,  be  shall  then  be  at  liberty  to  hear
what  it  is  that  I  keep  with  so  much  care.”

Plautus,  too,  alludes  to  this  custom  in
one  of  his  plays  (Miles  Gloriosus,  iv.  2,)
when  he  says :

“  Cedo  signum,  si  harunc  Baccharum  est,”

i.  e.,  “Give  me  the  sign,  if  you  are  one  of
these  Bacchantes.”

Signs,  in  fact,  belong  to  all  secret  asso¬
ciations,  and  are  no  more  peculiar  to  Ma¬
sonry  than  is  a  system  of  initiation.  The
forms  differ,  but  the  priuciple  has  always
existed.


710


SIGNATURE


SIGN


Signature.  Every  Mason  who  re¬
ceives  a  certificate  or  diploma  from  a  Grand
Lodge  is  required  to  affix  his  signature  in
the  margin,  for  a  reason  which  is  given  un¬
der  the  words  Ne  Varietur,  which  see.

Signet.  A  ring  on  which  there  is  an
impression  of  a  device  is  called  a  signet.
They  were  far  more  common  among  the
ancients  than  they  are  among  the  moderns,
although  they  are  still  used  by  many  per¬
sons.  Formerly,  as  is  the  custom  at  this
day  in  the  East,  letters  were  never  signed
by  the  persons  who  sent  them ;  and  their
authenticity  depended  solely  on  the  im¬
pression  of  the  signets  which  were  attached
to  them.  So  common  was  their  use  among
the  ancients,  that  Clement  of  Alexandria,
while  forbidding  the  Christians  of  the  sec¬
ond  century  to  deck  their  fingers  with  rings,
which  would  have  been  a  mark  of  vanity,
makes  an  exception  in  favor  of  signet
rings.  “  We  must  wear,”  he  says,  “  but  one
ring,  for  the  use  of  a  signet ;  all  other  rings
we  must  cast  aside.”  Signets  were  origin¬
ally  engraved  altogether  upon  stone;  and
Pliny  says  that  metal  ones  did  not  come
into  use  until  the  time  of  Claudius  Caesar.

Signets  are  constantly  alluded  to  in
Scripture.  The  Hebrews  called  them
myna  Sabaoth,  and  they  appear  to  have
been  used  among  them  from  an  early  period,
for  we  find  that  when  Judah  asks  Tamar
what  pledge  he  shall  give  her,  she  replies,
“Thy  signet,  and  thy  bracelets,  and  thy
staff  that  is  in  thine  hand.”  (Gen.  xxxviii.
18.)  They  were  worn  on  the  finger,  gen¬
erally  the  index  finger,  and  always  on  the
right  hand,  as  being  the  most  honorable ;
thus  in  Jeremiah  xxii.  24,  we  read:  “As  I
live,  saith  the  Lord,  though  Coniah,  the
son  of  Jehoiakim,  king  of  Judah,  were  the
signet  upon  my  right  hand,  yet  would  I
pluck  thee  thence.”  The  signets  of  the  an¬
cients  were  generally  sculptured  with  reli¬
gious  symbols  or  the  heads  of  their  deities.
The  spliinx  and  the  sacred  beetle  were  fa¬
vorite  signets  among  the  Egyptians.  The
former  was  adopted  from  that  people  by  the
Roman  Emperor  Augustus.  The  Babylo¬
nians  followed  the  same  custom,  and  many
of  their  signets,  remaining  to  this  day,  ex¬
hibit  beautifully  sculptured  images  of  Baal-
Berith  and  other  Chaldean  deities.

The  impression  from  the  signet-ring  of  a
king  gave  the  authority  of  a  royal  decree
to  any  document  to  which  it  was  affixed ;
and  hence  the  delivery  or  transfer  of  the
signet  to  any  one  made  him,  for  the  time,
the  representative  of  the  king,  and  gave
him  the  power  of  using  the  royal  name.

Signet  of  Truth.  The  signet  of
Zerubbabel,  used  in  the  ritual  of  the  Royral
Arch  degree,  is  also  there  called  the  Signet
of  Truth ,  to  indicate  that  the  neophyte  who


brings  it  to  the  Grand  Council  is  in  search
of  Divine  Truth,  and  to  give  to  him  the
promise  that  he  will  by  its  power  speedily
obtain  his  reward  in  the  possession  of  that
for  which  he  is  seeking.  The  Signet  of
Truth  is  presented  to  the  aspirant  to  assure
him  that  he  is  advancing  in  his  progress  to
the  attainment  of  truth,  and  that  he  is  thus
invested  with  the  power  to  pursue  the
search.

Signet  of  Zerubbabel.  This  is
used  in  the  American  ritual  of  the  Royal
Arch  degree.  It  refers  to  a  passage  of
Haggai,  (ii.  23,)  where  God  has  promised
that  he  will  make  Zerubbabel  his  signet.
It  has  the  same  symbolic  meaning  as  is
given  to  its  synonym  the  “Signet  of
Truth,”  because  Zerubbabel,  as  the  head  of
the  second  Temple,  was  the  symbol  of  the
searcher  after  truth.  But  something  may
be  said  of  the  incorrect  form  in  which  it
is  found  in  many  Chapters.  At  least  from
the  time  when  Cross  presented  an  engrav¬
ing  of  this  signet  in  his  Hieroglyphic
Chart,  and  perhaps  from  a  much  earlier
period,  for  he  may  possibly  have  only  per¬
petuated  the  blunder,  it  has  been  represent¬
ed  in  most  Chapters  byT  a  triangular  plate
of  metal.  Now.  an  unattached  plate  of
metal,  in  any  shape  whatsoever,  is  about
as  correct  a  representation  of  a  signet  as  a
walking-cane  is  of  a  piece  of  money.  The
signet  is  and  always  has  been  a  finger¬
ring,  and  so  it  should
be  represented  in  the
ceremonies  ofthe  Chap¬
ter.  What  the  peculiar
device  of  this  signet
was, —  for  every  signet
must  have  a  device, —
we  are  unable  to  show,  but  we  may  suppose
that  it  was  the  Tetragrammaton,  perhaps
in  its  well-known  abbreviated  form  of  a
yod  within  a  triangle.  Whether  this  was  so
or  not,  such  a  device  would  be  most  appro¬
priate  to  the  symbolism  of  the  Royal  Arch
ritual.

Significant  Word.  Significant  is
making  a  sign.  A  significant  word  is  a
sign-making  word,  or  a  word  that  is  equiv¬
alent  to  a  sign ;  so  the  secret  words  used  in
the  different  degrees  of  Masonry,  and  the
knowledge  of  which  becomes  a  sign  of  the
possession  of  the  degree,  are  called  signifi¬
cant  words.  Such  a  word  Lenning  calls
“  ein  bedeutendes  Wort,”  which  has  the
same  meaning.

Sign  of  Distress.  This  is  probably
one  of  the  original  modes  of  recognition
adopted  at  the  revival  period,  if  not  before.
It  is  to  be  found  in  the  earliest  rituals  ex¬
tant  of  the  last  century,  and  its  connection
with  the  legend  of  the  third  degree  makes
it  evident  that  it  probably  belongs  to  that


SILENCE


SIROC


717


degree.  The  Craft  in  the  last  century
called  it  sometimes  “the  Master’s  Clap,”
and  sometimes  “  the  Grand  Sign,”  which
latter  name  has  been  adopted  by  the  Ma¬
sons  of  the  present  century,  who  call  it  the
“  Grand  Hailing  Sign,”  to  indicate  its  use
in  hailing  or  calling  a  brother  whose  assist¬
ance  may  be  needed.  The  true  form  of
the  sign  has  unfortunately  been  changed
by  carelessness  or  ignorance  from  the  an¬
cient  one,  which  is  still  preserved  in  Great
Britain  and  on  the  continent  of  Europe.
It  is  impossible  to  be  explicit;  but  it  may
be  remarked,  that  looking  to  its  traditional
origin,  the  sign  is  a  defensive  one,  first
made  in  an  hour  of  attack,  to  give  protec¬
tion  to  the  person.  This  is  perfectly  repre¬
sented  by  the  European  and  English  form,
but  utterly  misrepresented  by  the  Ameri¬
can.  The  German  Rite  of  Schroeder  at¬
tempted  some  years  ago  to  induce  the  Craft
to  transfer  this  sign  from  the  third  to  the
first  degree.  As  this  would  have  been  an
evident  innovation,  and  would  have  con¬
tradicted  the  ritual  history  of  its  origin
and  meaning,  the  attempt  was  not  success¬
ful.

Silence.  See  Secrecy  and  Silence.

Silver  and  Gold.  When  St.  Peter
healed  the  lame  man  whom  he  met  at  the
gate  Beautiful  of  the  Temple,  he  said  to
him,  “Silver  and  gold  have  I  none;  but
such  as  I  have  give  I  thee ;  ”  and  he  be¬
stowed  on  him  the  gift  of  health.  When
the  pious  pilgrim  begged  his  way,  through
all  the  perils  of  a  distant  journey,  to  kneel
at  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  in  his  passage
through  poor  and  inhospitable  regions,  a
crust  of  bread  and  a  draught  of  water  were
often  the  only  alms  that  he  received.  This
has  been  symbolized  in  the  ritual  of  recep¬
tion  of  a  Knight  Templar,  and  in  it  the
words  of  St.  Peter  have  been  preserved,  to
be  applied  to  the  allegorical  pilgrimage
there  represented.

Silver  Cord.  In  the  beautiful  and
affecting  description  of  the  body  of  man
suffering  under  the  infirmities  of  old  age
given  in  the  twelfth  chapter  of  Ecclesiastes,
we  find  the  expression  “  or  ever  the  silver
cord  be  loosed,  or  the  golden  bowl  be  broken,
or  the  pitcher  be  broken  at  the  fountain,  or
the  wheel  broken  at  the  cistern :  then  shall
the  dust  return  to  the  earth  as  it  was,  and
the  spirit  shall  return  to  God  who  gave  it.”
Dr.  Clarke  thus  explains  these  beautiful
metaphors.  The  silver  cord  is  the  spinal
marrow;  its  loosening  is  the  cessation  of
all  nervous  sensibility;  the  golden  bowl  is
the  brain,  which  is  rendered  unfit  to  per¬
form  its  functions  by  the  approach  of  death ;
the  pitcher  means  the  great  vein  which
carries  the  blood  to  the  right  ventricle  of
the  heart,  here  called  the  fountain ;  by  the


wheel  is  meant  the  great  artery  which  re¬
ceives  the  blood  from  the  left  ventricle  of
the  heart,  here  designated  as  the  cistern.
This  collection  of  metaphors  is  a  part  of
the  Scripture  reading  in  the  third  degree,
and  forms  an  appropriate  introduction  to
those  sublime  ceremonies  whose  object  is
to  teach  symbolically  the  resurrection  and
life  eternal.

Sinai.  A  mountain  of  Arabia  between
the  horns  of  the  Red  Sea.  It  is  the  place
where  Moses  received  the  Law  from  Jeho¬
vah,  and  where  he  was  directed  to  construct
the  tabernacle.  Hence,  says  Lenuing,  the
Scottish  Masons  make  Mt.  Sinai  a  symbol
of  truth.  Of  the  high  degrees,  the  twenty-
third  and  twenty-fourth  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Rite,  or  the  Chief  and  the  Prince
of  the  Tabernacle,  refer  in  their  rituals
to  this  mountain  and  the  Tabernacle  there
constructed.

Sintooism.  The  ancient  religion  of
Japan,  and  founded  on  the  worship  of  an¬
cestors.  It  acknowledges  a  Supreme  Cre¬
ator  and  many  subordinate  gods  called
Kami,  many  of  whom  are  the  apotheoses
of  emperors  and  great  men.  It  believes  in
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  in  its  ritual
uses  symbols,  such  as  the  mirror,  — which  is
the  symbol  of  an  unsoiled  life,  —  and  lus¬
trations  symbolic  of  moral  purification.
Like  the  early  Grecian  mythology,  Sintoo-
ism  has  deified  natural  objects,  such  as  the
sun,  the  air,  earth,  fire,  water,  lightning,
thunder,  etc.  It  is  a  system  much  mixed
up  with  the  philosophy  of  Confucius  and
with  myths  and  legends.

Sir.  This  is  the  distinctive  title  given
to  the  possessors  of  the  degrees  of  Masonic
knighthood,  and  is  borrowed  from  the  her¬
aldic  usage.  The  word  “  knight  ”  is  some¬
times  interposed  between  the  title  and  the
personal  name, as,  for  example,  “Sir  Knight
John  Smith.”  English  knights  are  in  the
habit  of  using  the  word  /rater,  or  brother,
a  usage  which  to  some  extent  is  being
adopted  in  this  country.  English  Knights
Templars  have  been  led  to  the  abandon¬
ment  of  the  title  Sir  because  legal  enact¬
ments  made  the  use  of  titles  not  granted
by  the  crown  unlawful.  But  there  is  no
such  law  in  this  country.  The  addition  of
Sir  to  the  names  of  all  Knights  is  accounted,
says  Ashmole,  “  parcel  of  their  style.”  The
use  of  it  is  as  old,  certainly,  as  the  time  of
Edward  I.,  and  it  is  supposed  to  be  a  con¬
traction  of  the  old  French  Sire,  meaning
Seigneur,  or  Lord.

Siroc.  ■p'W’  A  significant  word,  for¬
merly  used  in  the  Order  of  High  Priest¬
hood  in  this  country.  It  signifies  a  shoe-
latchet,  and  refers  to  the  declaration  of
Abraham  to  Melchizedek,  that  of  the  goods
which  had  been  captured  he  would  “uc5


718


SISTER


SIX


take  from  a  thread  even  to  a  shoe-latchet,”
that  is,  nothing  even  of  the  slightest  value.
The  introduction  of  this  word  into  some  of
the  lower  capitular  degrees  is  a  recent  error
of  ignorant  ritualists.

Sister  Lodges.  Lodges  are  so  called
which  are  in  the  same  Masonic  jurisdic¬
tion,  and  owe  obedience  to  the  same  Grand
Lodge.

Sisters  by  Adoption.  In  the  Lodges
of  the  French  Adoptive  Rite  this  is  the
title  by  which  the  female  members  are
designated.  The  female  members  of  all
androgynous  degrees  are  sisters,  as  the  male
members  are  brethren.

Sisters  of*  the  Gild.  The  attempt
of  a  few  writers  to  maintain  that  women
were  admitted  into  the  mediaeval  confra¬
ternities  of  Masons  fails  to  be  substantiated
for  want  of  sufficient  proof.  The  entire
spirit  of  the  Old  Constitutions  indicates
that  none  but  men,  under  the  titles  of
“brethren”  and  “fellows,”  were  admitted
into  these  Masonic  gilds;  and  the  first
code  of  charges  adopted  at  the  revival  in
1717,  declares  that  “the  persons  admitted
members  of  a  Lodge  must  be  good  and  true
men.  ...  no  women,  etc.”  The  opinion
that  women  were  originally  admitted  into
the  Masonic  gild,  as  it  is  asserted  that
they  were  into  some  of  the  others,  is  based
upon  the  fact  that,  in  what  is  called  the
“  York  MS.,  No.  4,”  whose  date  as  affixed
to  the  roll  is  1693,  we  find  the  following
words :  “  Then  one  of  the  elders  takeing  the
Booke,  and  that  hee  or  shee  that  is  to  be
made  mason  shall  lay  their  hands  thereon,
and  the  charge  shall  be  given.”  But  in
the  “  Alnwick  MS.,”  which  is  inserted  as
a  Preface  to  the  Records  of  the  Lodge  at
Alnwick,  beginning  Sept.  29,  1701,  and
which  manuscript  was  therefore  probably
at  least  contemporary  with  that  of  York,  we
find  the  corresponding  passage  in  the  fol¬
lowing  words :  “  Then  shall  one  of  the  most
ancient  of  them  all  hold  a  book  that  he  or
they  may  lay  his  or  their  hands  upon  the
said  Book,”  etc.  Again,  in  the  “Harleian
MS.,”  whose  date  is  supposed  to  be  1650,
we  meet  with  the  regulation  in  Latin  thus:
“  Tunc  unus  ex  senioribus  teneat  librum  et
illi  vel  ille  teneat  librum.”  This  was  no
doubt  the  original  form  of  which  the  writer
of  the  York  MS.  gives  a  translation,  and
either  through  ignorance  or  clerical  care¬
lessness,  the  “illi  vel  ille,”  instead  of  they
or  he,  has  been  translated  he  or  she.  Be¬
sides,  the  whole  tenor  of  the  charges  in  the
York  MS.  clearly  shows  that  they  were  in¬
tended  for  men  only.  A  woman  could
scarcely  have  been  required  to  swear  that
she  “  would  not  take  her  fellow’s  wife  in
villainy,”  nor  make  any  one  a  Mason  un¬
less  “  lie  has  his  right  limbs  as  a  man  ought


to  have.”  I  cannot  for  a  moment  admit,
on  the  authority  of  a  mistranslation  of  a
single  letter,  by  which  an  a  was  taken  for
an  e,  thus  changing  ille  into  ilia,  or  he  into
she,  that  the  Masonic  gild  admitted  women
into  a  craft  whose  labors  were  to  hew  heavy
stones  and  to  ascend  tall  scaffolds.  Such
never  could  have  been  the  case  in  Opera¬
tive  Masonry.

There  is,  however,  abundant  evidence
that  in  the  other  gilds,  or  livery  companies
of  England,  women  or  sisters  were  admit¬
ted  to  the  freedom  of  the  company.  Her¬
bert  (Hist.  Liv.  Comp.,  xi.  83,)  thinks  that
the  custom  was  borrowed,  on  the  constitution
of  the  Companies,  by  Edward  111.  from  the
ecclesiastical  or  religious  gilds,  which  were
often  composed  of  both  sexes.  But  I  do
not  think  that  there  is  any  evidence  that
the  usage  was  extended  to  the  building
corporations  or  Freemasons’  gilds.  A  wo¬
man  might  be  a  female  grocer  or  haber¬
dasher,  but  she  could  hardly  perform  the
duties  of  a  female  builder.

Situation  of  the  Lodge.  A  Lodge
is,  or  ought  to  be,  always  situated  due  east
and  west,  for  reasons  which  are  detailed  in
the  articles  East  and  Orientation,  which  see.

Six  Lights.  The  six  lights  of  Sym¬
bolic  Masonry  are  divided  into  the  Greater
and  Lesser  Lights,  (which  see.)  In  the
American  system  of  the  Royal  Arch  there
is  no  symbol  of  the  kind,  but  in  the  Eng¬
lish  system  there  are  six  lights —  three  lesser
and  three  greater — placed  in  the  form  of
two  interlaced  triangles.  The  three  lesser
represent  the  Patriarchal,  Mosaic,  and
Christian  dispensations;  the  three  greater
the  Creative,  Preservative  and  Destructive
power  of  God.  The  four  lesser  triangles,
formed  by  the  intersection  of  the  two  great
triangles,  are  emblematic  of  the  four  degrees
of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry.

Six  Periods.  The  Grand  Architect’s
Six  Periods  constituted  a  part  of  the  old
Prestonian  lecture  in  the  Fellow'  Craft’s
degree.  It  referred  to  the  six  days  of  crea¬
tion,  the  six  periods  being  the  six  days.  It
no  longer  forms  a  part  of  the  lecture  as
modified  by  Hemming  in  England,  al¬
though  Oliver  devotes  a  chapter  in  his  His¬
torical  Landmarks  to  this  subject.  It  was
most  probably  at  one  time  taught  in  this
country  before  Webb  modified  and  abridged
the  Prestonian  lectures,  for  Hardie  gives
the  “Six  Periods”  in  full  in  his  Monitor,
which  w'as  published  in  1818.  The  Webb
lecture,  now' practised  in  this  country,  com¬
prehends  the  whole  subject  of  the  Six
Periods,  which  make  a  closely  printed  page
in  Brown’s  Master  Key,  in  these  few  words :
“  In  six  days  God  created  the  heavens  and
the  earth,  and  rested  upon  the  seventh  day ;
the  seventh,  therefore,  our  ancient  brethren


SKELETON


SLOANE


719


consecrated  as  a  day  of  rest  from  their  la¬
bors  ;  thereby  enjoying  frequent  opportuni¬
ties  to  contemplate  the  glorious  works  of
creation,  and  to  adore  their  great  Creator.”

Skeleton.  A  symbol  of  death.  The
ancient  Egyptians  often  introduced  a  skele¬
ton  in  their  feasts  to  remind  the  revellers  of
the  transitory  nature  of  their  enjoyments,
and  to  teach  them  that  in  the  midst  of  life  we
are  in  death.  As  such  an  admonitory  sym¬
bol,  it  is  used  in  some  of  the  high  degrees.

Skirrit.  In  the  English  system  the
skirrit  is  one  of  the  working-tools  of  a
Master  Mason.  It  is  an  implement  which
acts  on  a  centre-pin,  whence  a  line  is  drawn,
chalked,  and  struck  to  mark  out  the  ground
for  the  foundation  of  the  intended  struc¬
ture.  Symbolically,  it  points  to  us  that
straight  and  undeviating  line  of  conduct
laid  down  for  our  pursuits  in  the  volume
of  the  Sacred  Law.  The  skirrit  is  not  used
in  the  American  system.

Skull.  The  skull  as  a  symbol  is  not
used  in  Masonry  except  in  Masonic  Tein-
plarism,  where  it  is  a  symbol  of  mortality.
Among  the  articles  of  accusation  sent  by
the  Pope  to  the  bishops  and  papal  com¬
missaries  upon  which  to  examine  the
Knights  Templars,  those  from  the  forty-
second  to  the  fifty-seventh  refer  to  the  hu¬
man  skull,  “  cranium  humanum,”  which  the
Templars  were  accused  of  using  in  their
reception,  and  worshipping  as  an  idol.  It
is  possible  that  the  Old  Templars  made  use
of  the  skull  in  their  ceremony  of  recep¬
tion;  but  Modern  Templars  will  readily
acquit  their  predecessors  of  the  crime  of
idolatry,  and  find  in  their  use  of  a  skull  a
symbolic  design.  See  Bafomet.

Skull  and  Cross-bones.  They  are
a  symbol  of  mortality  and  death,  and  are
so  used  by  heralds  in  funeral  achievements.
As  the  means  of  inciting  the  mind  to  the
contemplation  of  the  most  solemn  subjects,
the  skull  and  cross-bones  are  used  in  the
Chamber  of  Reflection  in  the  French  and
Scottish  Rites, and  inallthosedegrees where
that  Chamber  constitutes  a  part  of  the  pre¬
liminary  ceremonies  of  initiation.

Slander.  Inwood,  in  his  sermon  on
“Union  Amongst  Masons,”  says:  “To  de¬
fame  our  brother,  or  suffer  him  to  be  de¬
famed,  without  interesting  ourselves  for  the
preservation  of  his  name  and  character,
there  is  scarcely  the  shadow  of  an  excuse  to
be  formed.  Defamation  is  always  wicked.
Slander  and  evil  speaking  are  the  pests  of
civil  society,  are  the  disgrace  of  every  de¬
gree  of  religious  profession,  are  the  poison¬
ous  bane  of  all  brotherly  love.”

Slave.  See  Free  Bom.

Slip.  This  technical  expression  in
American  Masonry,  but  mostly  confined  to
the  Western  States,  and  not  generally  used,
is  of  very  recent  origin ;  and  both  the  action


and  the  tvord  most  probably  sprang  up,
with  a  few  other  innovations  intended  as
especial  methods  of  precaution,  about  the
time  of  the  anti-Masonic  excitement.

Sloane  Manuscripts.  There  are
three  copies  of  the  Old  Constitutions  which
bear  this  name.  All  of  them  were  found  in
the  British  Museum  among  the  heteroge¬
neous  collection  of  papers  which  were  once
the  property  of  Sir  Hans  Sloane.  The  first,
which  is  known  in  the  Museum  as  No.
3848,  is  one  of  the  most  complete  of  the
copies  extant  of  the  Old  Constitutions.  At
the  end  of  it,  the  date  is  certified  by  the
following  subscription :  “  Finis  p.  me  Ed-
uardu  Sankey  decimo  sexto  die  Octobris
Anno  Domini  1646.”  It  was  published  for
the  first  time,  from  an  exact  transcript  of
the  original,  by  Bro.  Hughan  in  his  Old
Charges  of  the  British  Freemasons.  The  sec¬
ond  Sloane  MS.  is  known  in  the  British
Museum  as  No.  3323.  It  is  in  a  large  folio
volume  of- three  hundred  and  twenty-eight
leaves,  on  the  fly-leaf  of  which  Sir  Hans
Sloane  has  written,  “  Loose  papers  of  mine
Concerning  Curiosities.”  There  are  many
Manuscripts  by  different  hands.  The  Ma¬
sonic  one  is  subscribed  “  Hoc  scripta  fue-
runt  p.  me  Thomam  Martin,  1659,”  and
this  fixes  the  date.  It  consists  of  six  leaves
of  paper  five  inches  by  four,  is  written  in
a  small,  neat  hand,  and  endorsed  “  Free
Masonry.”  It  was  first  published,  in  1871,
by  Bro.  Hughan  in  his  Masonic  Sketches  and
Reprints.  The  Rev.  Bro.  A.  F.  A.  Wood¬
ford  thinks  this  an  “indifferent  copy  of
the  former  one.”  I  cannot  agree  with  him.
The  entire  omission  of  the  “  Legend  of  the
Craft”  from  the  time  of  Lamech  to  the
building  of  the  Temple,  including  the  im¬
portant  “Legend  of  Euclid,”  all  of  which  is
given  in  full  in  the  MS.  No.  3848,  together
with  a  great  many  verbal  discrepancies,
and  a  total  difference  in  the  eighteenth
charge,  lead  me  to  suppose  that  the  former
MS.  never  was  seen,  or  at  least  copied,  by
the  writer  of  the  latter.  On  the  whole,  it
is,  from  this  very  omission,  one  of  the  least
valuable  of  the  copies  of  the  Old  Constitu¬
tions.

The  third  Sloane  MS.  is  really  one  of  the
most  interesting  and  valuable  of  those  that
have  been  heretofore  discovered.  A  por¬
tion  of  it,  a  small  portion,  was  inserted  by
Findel  in  his  History  of  Freemasonry  ;  but
the  whole  has  been  since  published  in  the
Voice  of  Masonry ,  a  periodical  printed  at
Chicago  in  1872.  The  number  of  the  MS.
in  the  British  Museum  is  3329,  and  Mr.
Hughan  places  its  date  at  from  1640  to
1700  ;  bui  he  says  that  Messrs.  Bond  and
Sims,  of  the  British  Museum,  agree  in
stating  that  it  is  “  probably  of  the  begin¬
ning  of  the  eighteenth  century.”  But  the
Rev.  Mr.  Woodford  mentions  a  great  au-


720


SMITH


SMITH


thority  on  MSS.,  who  declares  it  to  be  “pre-  |
vious  to  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  cen¬
tury.”  Findel  thinks  it  originated  at  the
end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  “  that
it  was  found  among  the  papers  which  Dr.
Plot  left  behind  him  on  his  death,  and  was
one  of  the  sources  whence  his  communica¬
tions  on  Freemasonry  were  derived.”  It  is
not  a  copy  of  the  Old  Constitutions,  in
which  respect  it  differs  from  all  the  other
Manuscripts,  but  is  a  description  of  the
ritual  of  the  society  of  Free  Operative  Ma¬
sons  at  the  period  when  it  was  written.
This  it  is  that  makes  it  so  valuable  a  con¬
tribution  to  the  history  of  Freemasonry,
and  renders  it  so  important  that  its  precise
date  should  be  fixed.

Smith,  George.  Captain  George
Smith  was  a  Mason  of  some  distinction
during  the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth
century.  Although  born  in  England,  he
at  an  early  age  entered  the  military  ser¬
vice  of  Prussia,  being  connected  with  noble
families  of  that  kingdom.  During  his
residence  on  the  continent  it  appears  that
he  was  initiated  in  one  of  the  German
Lodges.  On  his  return  to  England  he  was
appointed  Inspector  of  the  Royal  Military
Academy  at  Woolwich,  and  published,  in
1779,  a  Universal  Military  Dictionary ,  and,
in  1783,  a  Bibliotheca  Militaris.

He  devoted  much  attention  to  Masonic
studies,  and  is  said  to  have  been  a  good
workman  in  the  Royal  Military  Lodge  at
Woolwich,  of  which  he  was  for  four
years  the  Master.  During  his  Mastership
the  Lodge  had,  on  one  occasion,  been
opened  in  the  King’s  Bench  prison,  and
some  persons  who  were  confined  there  were
initiated.  For  this  the  Master  and  breth¬
ren  were  censured,  and  the  Grand  Lodge
declared  that  “  it  is  inconsistent  with  the
principles  of  Masonry  for  any  Freemason’s
Lodge  to  be  held,  for  the  purpose  of  mak¬
ing,  passing,  or  raising  Masons,  in  any
prison  or  place  of  confinement.”  Smith
was  appointed  by  the  Duke  of  Manchester,
in  1778,  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  Kent,
and  on  that  occasion  delivered  his  Inaugu¬
ral  Charge  before  the  Lodge  of  Friendship
at  Dover.  He  also  drew  up  a  code  of  laws
for  the  government  of  the  province,  which
was  published  in  1781.  In  1780  he  was  ap-

Eointed  Junior  Grand  Warden  of  the  Grand
■odge;  but  objections  having  been  made  by
Heseltine,  the  Grand  Secretary,  between
whom  and  himself  there  was  no  very  kind
feeling,  on  the  ground  that  no  one  could
hold  two  offices  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  Smith
resigned  at  the  next  quarterly  communica¬
tion.  As  at  the  time  of  his  appointment
there  was  really  no  law  forbidding  the
holding  of  two  offices,  its  impropriety  was
so  manifest,  that  the  Grand  Lodge  adopted


a  regulation  that  "  it  was  incompatible
with  the  laws  of  the  society  for  any  brother
to  hold  more  than  one  office  at  the  same
time.”  In  1783,  Capt.  Smith  published  a
work  entitled  The  Use  and  Abuse  of  Freema¬
sonry  :  a  work  of  the  greatest  utility  to  the
Brethren  of  the  Society,  to  Mankind  in  gen¬
eral,  and  to  the  Ladies  in  particular.  The
interest  to  the  ladies  consists  in  some
twenty  pages,  in  which  he  gives  the  “  An¬
cient  and  Modern  reasons  why  the  ladies
have  never  been  admitted  into  the  Society
of  Freemasons,”  a  section  the  omission  of
which  would  scarcely  have  diminished  the
value  of  the  w’ork  or  the  reputation  of  the
author.

The  work  of  Smith  would  not  at  the
present  day,  in  the  advanced  progress  of
Masonic  knowledge,  enhance  the  reputa¬
tion  of  its  writer.  But  at  the  time  when  it
appeared,  there  was  a  great  dearth  of  Ma¬
sonic  literature — Anderson,  Calcott,  Hutch¬
inson,  and  Preston  being  the  only  authors
of  any  repute  that  had  as  yet  written  on  the
subject  of  Masonry.  There  was  much  his¬
torical  information  contained  within  its
pages,  and  some  few  suggestive  thoughts
on  the  symbolism  and  philosophy  of  the
Order.  To  the  Craft  of  that  day  the  book
was  therefore  necessary  and  useful.  Noth¬
ing,  indeed,  proves  the  necessity  of  such  a
work  more  than  the  fact  that  the  Grand
Lodge  refused  its  sanction  to  the  publica¬
tion  on  the  general  ground  of  opposition
to  Masonic  literature.  Noorthouck,  {Const.,
p.  347,)  in  commenting  on  the  refusal  of  a
sanction,  says :

“No  particular  objection  being  stated
against  the  above-mentioned  work,  the
natural  conclusion  is,  that  a  sanction  was
refused  on  the  general  principle  that,  con¬
sidering  the  flourishing  state  of  our  Lodges,
where  regular  instruction  and  suitable  ex¬
ercises  are  ever  ready  for  all  brethren  who
zealously  aspire  to  improve  in  masonical
knowledge,  new  publications  are  unneces¬
sary  on  a  subject  which  books  cannot  teach.
Indeed,  the  temptations  to  authorship  have
effected  a  strange  revolution  of  sentiments
since  the  year  1720,  when  even  ancient
manuscripts  were  destroyed,  to  prevent
their  appearance  in  sprinted  Book  of  Con¬
stitutions  !  for  the  principal  materials  in
this  very  work,  then  so  much  dreaded,
have  since  been  retailed  in  a  variety  of
forms,  to  give  consequence  to  fanciful  pro¬
ductions  that  might  have  been  safely  with¬
held,  without  sensible  injury,  either  to  the
Fraternity  or  to  the  literary  reputation  of
the  writers.”

To  dispel  such  darkness  almost  any  sort
of  book  should  have  been  acceptable.  The
work  was  published  without  the  sanction,
and  the  Craft  being  wiser  than  their  repre-


SMITTEN


SOFISM


721


sentatives  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  the  edition
was  speedily  exhausted.

Dr.  Oliver  {Rev.  of  a  Sq.,  146,)  describes
Captain  Smith  as  a  man  “  plain  in  speech
and  manners,  but  honorable  and  upright
in  his  dealings,  and  an  active  and  zealous
Mason.”  It  is  probable  that  he  died  about
the  end  of  the  last  or  the  beginning  of  the
present  century.

Smitten  Builder.  The  old  lectures
used  to  say:  “The  veil  of  the  Temple  is
rent,  the  builder  is  smitten,  and  we  are  raised
from  the  tomb  of  transgression.”  Hutchin¬
son,  and  after  him  Oliver,  apply  the  ex¬
pression,  “The  smitten  builder,”  to  the
crucified  Saviour,  and  define  it  as  a  symbol
of  his  divine  mediation ;  but  the  general
interpretation  of  the  symbol  is,  that  it  re¬
fers  to  death  as  the  necessary  precursor  of
immortality.  In  this  sense,  the  smitten
builder  presents,  like  every  other  part  of
the  third  degree,  the  symbolic  instruction
of  Eternal  Life.

Snow,  John.  A  distinguished  lec¬
turer  on  Masonry,  who  was  principally  in¬
strumental  in  introducing  the  system  of
Webb,  of  whom  he  was  a  pupil,  into  the
Lodges  of  the  Western  States.  He  was
also  a  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Ohio,  and  was  the  founder  and  first
Grand  Commander  of  the  first  Grand  En¬
campment  of  Knights  Templars  in  the
same  State.  He  was  born  in  Providence,
Rhode  Island,  February  25,  1780;  was  ini¬
tiated  into  Freemasonry  in  Mount  Vernon
Lodge,  of  Providence,  in  1809,  and  died
May  16,  1852,  at  Worthington,  Ohio.

Snows.  See  Rains.

Social  Character  of  Freema¬
sonry.  Freemasonry  attracts  our  atten¬
tion  as  a  great  social  institution.  Laying
aside  for  the  time  those  artificial  distinc¬
tions  of  rank  and  wealth,  which,  however,
are  necessary  in  the  world  to  the  regular
progression  of  society,  its  members  meet  in
their  Lodges  on  one  common  level  of
brotherhood  and  equality.  There  virtue
and  talent  alone  claim  and  receive  pre¬
eminence,  and  the  great  object  of  all  is  to
see  who  can  best  work  and  best  agree.
There  friendship  and  fraternal  affection  are
strenuously  inculcated  and  assiduously  cul¬
tivated,  and  that  great  mystic  tie  is  estab¬
lished  which  peculiarly  distinguishes  the
society.  Hence  is  it  that  Washington  has
declared  that  the  benevolent  purpose  of
the  Masonic  institution  is  to  enlarge  the
sphere  of  social  happiness,  and  its  grand
object  to  promote  the  happiness  of  the
human  race.

Socius.  The  sixth  degree  of  the  Order
of  Strict  Observance.

Sodalities.  Societies  or  companies
of  friends  or  companions  assembled  to-

4  Q  46


gether  for  a  special  purpose.  Such  con¬
fraternities,  under  the  name  of  Sodalitia,
were  established  in  Rome,  by  Cato  the  Cen¬
sor,  for  the  mutual  protection  of  the  mem¬
bers.  As  their  proceedings  were  secret,
they  gave  offence  to  the  government,  and
were  suppressed,  80  B.  c.,  by  a  decree  of  the
senate,  but  were  afterwards  restored  by  a
law  of  Clodius.

Sofism.  The  Sofis  were  a  mystical
sect  which  greatly  prevailed  in  Eastern
countries,  and  especially  in  Persia,  whose
religious  faith  was  supposed  by  most  writers
to  embody  the  secret  doctrine  of  Moham¬
medanism.  Sir  John  Malcolm  {Hist.  Pers.,
ch.  xx.,)  says  that  they  have  among  them
great  numbers  of  the  wisest  and  ablest  men
of  Persia  and  the  East,  and  since  his  time
the  sect  has  greatly  increased.

The  name  is  most  probably  derived  from
the  Greek  oo<pia,  wisdom;  and  Malcolm  states
that  they  also  bore  the  name  of  philosaufs,
in  which  we  may  readily  detect  the  word
philosophers.  He  says  also :  “  The  Mo¬
hammedan  Sofis  have  endeavored  to  con¬
nect  their  mystic  faith  with  the  doctrine  of
their  prophet,  who,  they  assert,  was  himself
an  accomplished  Sofi.”  The  principal  Sofi
writers  are  familiar  with  the  opinions  of
Aristotle  and  Plato,  and  their  most  impor¬
tant  works  abound  with  quotations  from
the  latter.  Sir  John  Malcolm  compares
the  school  of  Sofism  with  that  of  Pythag¬
oras.  It  is  evident  that  there  is  a  great
similarity  between  Sofism  and  Gnosti¬
cism,  and  all  the  features  of  the  Sofic
initiation  remind  us  very  forcibly  of  those
of  the  Masonic.  The  object  of  the  system
is  the  attainment  of  Truth,  and  the  novice
is  invited  “  to  embark  on  the  sea  of  doubt,”
that  is,  to  commence  his  investigations,
which  are  to  end  in  its  discovery.

There  are  four  stages  or  degrees  of  ini¬
tiation:  the  first  is  merely  preliminary,
and  the  initiate  is  required  to  observe  the
ordinary  rites  and  ceremonies  of  religion
for  the  sake  of  the  vulgar,  who  do  not  un¬
derstand  their  esoteric  meaning.  In  the
second  degree  he  is  said  to  enter  the  pale
of  Sofism,  and  exchanges  these  external
rites  for  a  spiritual  worship.  The  third
degree  is  that  of  Wisdom,  and  he  who
reaches  it  is  supposed  to  have  attained
supernatural  knowledge,  and  to  be  equal
to  the  angels.  The  fourth  and  last  degree
is  called  Truth,  for  he  has  now  reached  it,
and  has  become  completely  united  with
Deity.  They  have,  says  Malcolm,  secrets
and  mysteries  in  every  stage  or  degree
which  are  never  revealed  to  the  profane,
and  to  reveal  which  would  be  a  crime  of
the  deepest  turpitude.  The  tenets  of  the
sect,  so  far  as  they  are  made  known  to  the
world,  are,  according  to  Sir  William  Jones.


722


SOFISM


SOLOMON


{Asiai.  Researches,  ii.  62,)  “  that  nothing
exists  absolutely  but  God ;  that  the  human
soul  is  an  emanation  of  his  essence,  and,
though  divided  for  a  time  from  its  heavenly
source,  will  be  finally  reunited  with  it;
that  the  highest  possible  happiness  will
arise  from  its  reunion ;  and  that  the  chief
good  of  mankind  in  this  transitory  world
consists  in  as  perfect  a  union  with  the
Eternal  Spirit  as  the  incumbrances  of  a
mortal  frame  will  allow.”  It  is  evident
that  an  investigation  of  the  true  system  of
these  Eastern  mysteries  must  be  an  inter¬
esting  subject  of  inquiry  to  the  student  of
Freemasonry;  for  Higgins  is  hardly  too
enthusiastic  in  supposing  them  to  be  the
ancient  Freemasons  of  Mohammedanism.
His  views  are  thus  expressed  in  the  second
volume  of  his  Anacalypsis,  p.  301 :  a  won¬
derful  work  —  wonderful  for  the  vast  and
varied  learning  that  it  exhibits;  but  still
more  so  for  the  bold  and  strange  theories
which,  however  untenable,  are  defended
with  all  the  pow-ers  of  a  more  than  ordi¬
nary  intellect.

“The  circumstances,”  he  says,  “of  the
gradation  of  ranks,  the  initiation,  and  the
head  of  the  Order  in  Persia  being  called
Grand  Master,  raise  a  presumption  that  the
Sofis  were,  in  reality,  the  Order  of  Ma¬
sons.”

Without  subscribing  at  once  to  the  theory
of  Higgins,  we  may  well  be  surprised  at  the
coincidences  existing  between  the  customs
and  the  dogmas  of  the  Sofis  and  those  *of
the  Freemasons,  and  we  would  naturally
be  curious  to  investigate  the  causes  of  the
close  communication  which  existed  at  va¬
rious  times  during  the  Crusades  between
this  Mohammedan  sect  of  philosophers  and
the  Christian  Order  of  Templars.

Mr.  C.  W.  King,  in  his  learned  treatise
on  the  Gnostics,  seems  to  entertain  a  simi¬
lar  idea  of  this  connection  between  the
Templars  and  the  Sofis.  He  says  that,
“  inasmuch  as  these  Sofis  were  composed
exclusively  of  the  learned  amongst  the  Per¬
sians  and  Syrians,  and  learning  at  that
time  meant  little  more  than  a  proficiency
in  medicine  and  astrology,  the  two  points
that  brought  the  Eastern  sages  into  amica¬
ble  contact  with  their  barbarous  invaders
from  the  West,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  the
latter  may  have  imbibed  the  secret  doc¬
trines  simultaneously  with  the  science  of
those  who  were  their  instructors  in  all  mat¬
ters  pertaining  to  science  and  art.  The  Sofi
doctrine  involved  the  grand  idea  of  one
universal  creed,  which  could  be  secretly
held  under  any  profession  of  an  outward
faith :  and  in  fact  took  virtually  the  same
view  of  religious  systems  as  that  in  which
the  ancient  philosophers  had  regarded  such
matters.”  I


So  Help  Me  God.  The  usual  obse¬
cration  or  imprecation  affixed  in  modern
times  to  oaths,  and  meaning,  “  May  God  so
help  me  as  I  keep  this  vow.”

Sojourner.  See  Principal  Sojourner.

SoldierM  of  Christ.  Milites  C'hristi
is  the  title  by  which  St.  Bernard  addressed
his  exhortations  to  the  Knights  Templars.
They  are  also  called  in  some  of  the  old  doc¬
uments,  “ Militia  Templi  Salomonis,”  The
Chivalry  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon;  but
their  ancient  statutes  were  entitled  “Regula
pauperum  commilitonum  Templi  Salomonis,"
The  Rule  of  the  poor  fellow-soldiers  of  the
Temple  of  Solomon ;  and  this  is  the  title  by
which  they  are  now  most  generally  desig¬
nated.

Solomon.  In  writing  the  life  of  King
Solomon  from  a  Masonic  point  of  view,  it
is  impossible  to  omit  a  reference  to  the  le¬
gends  which  have  been  preserved  in  the
Masonic  system.  But  the  writer,  who,  with
this  preliminary  notice,  embodies  them  in
his  sketch  of  the  career  of  the  wise  king
of  Israel,  is  by  no  means  to  be  held  respon¬
sible  for  a  belief  in  their  authenticity.  It
is  the  business  of  the  Masonic  biographer
to  relate  all  that  has  been  handed  down  by
tradition  in  connection  with  the  life  of
Solomon ;  it  will  be  the  duty  of  the  severer
critic  to  seek  to  separate  out  of  all  these
materials  that  which  is  historical  from  that
which  is  merely  mythical,  and  to  assign  to
the  former  all  that  is  valuable  as  fact,  and
to  the  latter  all  that  is  equally  valuable  as
symbolism.

Solomon,  the  king  of  Israel,  the  son  of
David  and  Bathsheba,  ascended  the  throne
of  his  kingdom  3989  years  after  the  creation
of  the  world,  and  1015  years  before  the
Christian  era.  He  was  then  only  twenty
years  of  age,  but  the  youthful  monarch  is
said  to  have  commenced  his  reign  with  the
decision  of  a  legal  question  of  some  diffi¬
culty,  in  which  he  exhibited  the  first  prom¬
ise  of  that  wise  judgment  for  which  he  was
ever  afterwards  distinguished.

One  of  the  great  objects  of  Solomon’s  life,
and  the  one  which  most  intimately  connects
him  with  the  history  of  the  Masonic  insti¬
tution,  was  the  erection  of  a  temple  to  Je¬
hovah.  This,  too,  had  been  a  favorite  de¬
sign  of  his  father  David.  For  this  purpose,
that  monarch,  long  before  his  death,  had
numbered  the  workmen  whom  he  found  in
his  kingdom  ;  had  appointed  the  overseers
of  the  work,  the  hewers  of  stones,  and  the
bearers  of  burdens  ;  had  prepared  a  great
quantity  of  brass,  iron,  and  cedar;  and  had
amassed  an  immense  treasure  with  which
to  support  the  enterprise.  But  on  consult¬
ing  with  the  prophet  Nathan,  he  learned
from  that  holy  man,  that  although  the  pious
intention  was  pleasing  to  God,  yet  that  he


SOLOMON


SOLOMON


723


■would  not  be  permitted  to  carry  it  into  exe¬
cution,  and  the  Divine  prohibition  was  pro¬
claimed  in  these  emphatic  words :  “  Thou
hast  shed  blood  abundantly,  and  hast  made
great  wars;  thou  shalt  not  build  a  house
unto  my  name,  because  thou  hast  shed
much  blood  upon  the  earth  in  my  sight.”
The  task  was,  therefore,  reserved  for  the
more  peaceful  Solomon,  his  son  and  suc¬
cessor.

Hence,  when  David  was  about  to  die,  he
charged  Solomon  to  build  the  Temple  of
God  as  soon  as  he  should  have  received  the
kingdom.  He  also  gave  him  directions  in
relation  to  the  construction  of  the  edifice,
and  put  into  his  possession  the  money,
amounting  to  ten  thousand  talents  of  gold
and  ten  times  that  amount  of  silver,  which
he  had  collected  and  laid  aside  for  defray¬
ing  the  expense.

Solomon  had  scarcely  ascended  the
throne  of  Israel,  when  he  prepared  to
carry  into  execution  the  pious  designs  of
his  predecessor.  For  this  purpose,  how¬
ever,  he  found  it  necessary  to  seek  the  as¬
sistance  of  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  the  an¬
cient  friend  and  ally  of  his  father.  The
Tyrians  and  Sidonians,  the  subjects  of
Hiram,  had  long  been  distinguished  for
their  great  architectural  skill ;  and,  in  fact,
many  of  them,  as  the  members  of  a  mystic
operative  society,  the  fraternity  of  Diony¬
sian  artificers,  had  long  monopolized  the
profession  of  building  in  Asia  Minor.  The
Jews,  on  the  contrary,  were  rather  more
eminent  for  their  military  valor  than  for
their  knowledge  of  the  arts  of  peace,  and
hence  King  Solomon  at  once  conceived  the
necessity  of  invoking  the  aid  of  these
foreign  architects,  if  he  expected  to  com¬
plete  the  edifice  he  was  about  to  erect,
either  in  a  reasonable  time  or  with  the
splendour  and  magnificence  appropriate  to
the  sacred  object  for  which  it  was  intended.
For  this  purpose  he  addressed  the  follow¬
ing  letter  to  King  Hiram  :

“  Know  thou  that  my  father  would  have
built  a  temple  to  God,  but  was  hindered  by
wars  and  continual  expeditions,  for  he  did
not  leave  off  to  overthrow  his  enemies  till
he  made  them  all  subject  to  tribute.  But
I  give  thanks  to  God  for  the  peace  I,  at
present,  enjoy,  and  on  that  account  I  am
at  leisure,  and  design  to  build  a  house  to
God,  for  God  foretold  to  my  father,  that
such  a  house  should  be  built  by  me ;  where¬
fore  I  desire  thee  to  send  some  of  thy  sub¬
jects  with  mine  to  Mount  Lebanon,  to  cut
down  timber,  for  the  Sidonians  are  more
skilful  than  our  people  in  cutting  of  wood.
As  for  wages  to  the  hewers  of  wood,  I  will
pay  whatever  price  thou  shalt  determine.”

Hiram,  mindful  of  the  former  amity  and
alliance  that  had  existed  between  himself


and  David,  was  disposed  to  extend  the
friendship  he  had  felt  for  the  father  to  the
sou,  and  replied,  therefore,  to  the  letter  of
Solomon  in  the  following  epistle:

“  It  is  fit  to  bless  God  that  he  hath  com¬
mitted  thy  father’s  government  to  thee,
who  art  a  wise  man  endowed  with  all
virtues.  As  for  myself,  I  rejoice  at  the
condition  thou  art  in,  and  will  be  subser¬
vient  to  thee  in  all  that  thou  sendest  tome
about;  for  when,  by  my  subjects,  I  have
cut  down  many  and  large  trees  of  cedar  and
cypress  wood,  I  will  send  them  to  sea,  and
will  order  my  subjects  to  make  floats  of
them,  and  to  sail  to  what  places  soever  of
thy  country  thou  shalt  desire,  and  leave
them  there,  after  which  thy  subjects  may
carry  them  to  Jerusalem.  But  do  thou
take  care  to  procure  us  corn  for  this  timber,
which  we  stand  in  need  of,  because  we  in¬
habit  in  an  island.”

Hiram  lost  no  time  in  fulfilling  the
promise  of  assistance  which  he  had  thus
given ;  and  accordingly  we  are  informed
that  Solomon  received  thirty-three  thou¬
sand  six  hundred  workmen  from  Tyre,  be¬
sides  a  sufficient  quantity  of  timber  and
stone  to  construct  the  edifice  which  he  was
about  to  erect.  Hiram  sent  him,  also,  a
far  more  important  gift  than  either  men  or
materials,  in  the  person  of  an  able  archi¬
tect,  “a  curious  and  cunning  workman,”
whose  skill  and  experience  were  to  be  exer¬
cised  in  superintending  the  labors  of  the
craft,  and  in  adorning  and  beautifying  the
building.  Of  this  personage,  whose  name
was  also  Hiram,  and  who  plays  so  impor¬
tant  a  part  in  the  history  of  Freemasonry,
an  account  will  be  found  in  the  article
Hiram  Abif,  to  which  the  reader  is  referred.

King  Solomon  commenced  the  erection
of  the  Temple  on  Monday,  the  second  day
of  the  Hebrew  month  Zif,  which  answers
to  the  twenty-first  of  April,  in  the  year  of
the  world  2992,  and  1012  years  before  the
Christian  era.  Advised  in  all  the  details,
as  Masonic  tradition  informs  us,  by  the
wise  and  prudent  counsels  of  Hiram,  king
of  Tyre,  and  Hiram  Abif,  who,  with  him¬
self,  constituted  at  that  time  the  three
Grand  Masters  of  the  Craft,  Solomon  made
every  arrangement  in  the  disposition  and
government  of  the  workmen,  in  the  pay¬
ment  of  their  wages,  and  in  the  mainte¬
nance  of  concord  and  harmony  which
should  insure  dispatch  in  the  execution  and
success  in  the  result.

To  Hiram  Abif  was  intrusted  the  gen¬
eral  superintendence  of  the  building,  while
subordinate  stations  were  assigned  to  other
eminent  artists,  whose  names  and  offices
have  been  handed  down  in  the  traditions
of  the  Order.

In  short,  the  utmost  perfection  of  human.


724


SOLOMON


SOLSTICES


wisdom  was  displayed  by  this  enlightened
monarch  in  the  disposition  of  everything
that  related  to  the  construction  of  the  stu-
endous  edifice.  Men  of  the  most  eompre-
ensive  minds,  imbued  with  the  greatest
share  of  zeal  and  fervency,  and  inspired
with  the  strongest  fidelity  to  his  interests,
were  employed  as  masters  to  instruct  and
superintend  the  workmen  ;  while  those  who
labored  in  inferior  stations  were  excited  to
enthusiasm  by  the  promise  of  promotion
and  reward.

The  Temple  was  at  length  finished  in  the
month  Bui,  answering  to  our  November,  in
the  year  of  the  world  3000,  being  a  little  more
than  seven  years  from  its  commencement.

As  soon  as  the  magnificent  edifice  was
completed,  and  fit  for  the  sacred  purposes
for  which  it  was  intended,  King  Solomon
determined  to  celebrate  the  consummation
of  his  labors  in  the  most  solemn  manner.
For  this  purpose  he  directed  the  ark  to  be
brought  from  the  king’s  house,  where  it  had
been  placed  by  King  David,  and  to  be  de-
osited  with  impressive  ceremonies  in  the
oly  of  holies,  beneath  the  expanded  wings
of  the  cherubim.  This  important  event  is
commemorated  in  the  beautiful  ritual  of
the  Most  Excellent  Master’s  degree.

Our  traditions  inform  us,  that  when  the
Temple  was  completed,  Solomon  assembled
all  the  heads  of  the  tribes,  the  elders  and
chiefs  of  Israel  to  bring  the  ark  up  out  of
Zion,  where  King  David  had  deposited  it
in  a  tabernacle  until  a  more  fitting  place
should  have  been  built  for  its  reception.
This  duty,  therefore,  the  Levites  now  per¬
formed,  and  delivered  the  ark  of  the  cove¬
nant  into  the  hands  of  the  priests,  who
fixed  it  in  its  place  in  the  centre  of  the
holy  of  holies.

Here  the  immediate  and  personal  con¬
nection  of  King  Solomon  with  the  Craft
begins  to  draw  to  a  conclusion.  It  is
true,  that  he  subsequently  employed  those
worthy  Masons,  whom  the  traditions  say,
at  the  completion  and  dedication  of  the
Temple,  he  had  received  and  acknowledged
as  Most  Excellent  Masters,  in  the  erection
of  a  magnificent  palace  and  other  edifices,
but  in  process  of  time  he  fell  into  the  most
grievous  errors;  abandoned  the  path  of
truth;  encouraged  the  idolatrous  rites  of
spurious  Masonry ;  and,  induced  by  the
persuasions  of  those  foreign  wives  and  con¬
cubines  whom  he  had  espoused  in  his  later
days,  he  erected  a  fane  for  the  celebration
of  these  heathen  mysteries,  on  one  of  the
hills  that  overlooked  the  very  spot  where,
in  his  youth,  he  had  consecrated  a  temple
to  the  one  true  God.  It  is  however  believed
that  before  his  death  he  deeply  repented
of  this  temporary  aberration  from  virtue,
and  in  the  emphatic  expression,  “Vanity


of  vanities !  all  is  vanity,”  he  is  supposed
to  have  acknowledged  that  in  his  own  ex¬
perience  he  had  discovered  that  falsehood
and  sensuality,  however  they  may  give
pleasure  for  aseason,  will,  in  the  end,  produce
the  bitter  fruits  of  remorse  and  sorrow.

That  King  Solomon  was  the  wisest  mon¬
arch  that  swayed  the  sceptre  of  Israel,  has
been  the  unanimous  opinion  of  posterity.
So  much  was  he  beyond  the  age  in  which
he  flourished,  in  the  attainments  of  science,
that  the  Jewish  and  Arabic  writers  have
attributed  to  him  a  thorough  knowledge  of
the  secrets  of  magic,  by  whose  incantations
they  suppose  him  to  have  been  capable  of
calling  spirits  and  demons  to  his  assist¬
ance;  and  the  Talmudists  and  Mohamme¬
dan  doctors  record  many  fanciful  legends
of  his  exploits  in  controlling  these  minis¬
ters  of  darkness.  As  a  naturalist,  he  is
said  to  have  written  a  work  on  animals  of
no  ordinary  character,  which  has  however
perished  ;  while  his  qualifications  as  a  poet
were  demonstrated  by  more  than  a  thou¬
sand  poems  which  he  composed,  of  which
his  epithalamium  on  his  marriage  w  ith  an
Egyptian  princess  and  the  Book  of  Ecclesi¬
astes  alone  remain.  He  has  given  us  in  his
Proverbs  an  opportunity  of  forming  a  fa¬
vorable  opinion  of  his  pretensions  to  the
character  of  a  deep  and  right-thinking  phi¬
losopher;  while  the  long  peace  and  prosper¬
ous  condition  of  his  empire  for  the  greater
portion  of  his  reign,  the  increase  of  his
kingdom  in  wealth  and  refinement,  and  the
encouragement  which  he  gave  to  architec¬
ture,  the  mechanic  arts,  and  commerce,
testify  his  profound  abilities  as  a  sovereign
and  statesman.

After  a  reign  of  forty  years  be  died,  and
with  him  expired  forever  the  glory  and  the
power  of  the  Hebrew  empire.

Solomon,  Mouse  of.  Lord  Bacon
composed,  in  his  New  Atlantis,  an  apologue,
in  which  he  describes  the  island  of  Bensa-
lem,  —  that  is,  island  of  the  Sons  of  Peace, —
and  on  it  an  edifice  called  the  house  of  Sol¬
omon,  where  there  was  to  be  a  confraternity
of  philosophers  devoted  to  the  acquisition
of  knowledge.  Nicolai  thought  that  out
of  this  subsequently  arose  the  society  of
Freemasons,  which  was,  he  supposes,  estab¬
lished  by  Elias  Ashmole  and  his  friends.
See  Nicolai.

Solomon,  Temple  of.  See  Temple

of  Solomon.

Solstices.  The  days  on  which  the  sun
reaches  his  greatest  northern  and  southern
declination,  which  are  the  21st  of  June  and
the  22d  of  December.  Near  these  days
are  those  in  which  the  Christian  Church
commemorates  St.  John  the  Baptist  and
St.  John  the  Evangelist,  who  have  been
selected  as  the  patron  saints  of  Freema-


SONGS


SONGS


725


sonry  for  reasons  which  are  explained  in
the  article  on  the  Dedication  of  a  Lodge ,
which  see.

Songs  of  Masonry.  The  song
formed  in  early  times  a  very  striking  fea¬
ture  in  what  may  be  called  the  domestic
manners  of  the  Masonic  institution.  Nor
has  the  custom  of  festive  entertainments
been  yet  abandoned.  In  the  beginning  of
the  eighteenth  century  songs  were  deemed
of  so  much  importance  that  they  were
added  to  the  Books  of  Constitutions  in
Great  Britain  and  on  the  continent,  a  cus¬
tom  which  was  followed  in  America,  where
all  our  early  Monitors  contain  an  abundant
supply  of  lyrical  poetry.  In  the  Constitu¬
tions  published  in  1723  we  find  the  well-
known  Entered  Apprentice’s  song,  written
by  Matthew  Birkhead,  which  still  retains
its  popularity  among  Masons,  and  has  at¬
tained  an  elevation  to  which  its  intrinsic
merits  as  a  lyrical  composition  would
hardly  entitle  it.  Songs  appear  to  have
been  incorporated  into  the  ceremonies  of
the  Order  at  the  revival  of  Masonry  in
1717.  At  that  time,  to  use  the  language
of  the  venerable  Oliver,  “  Labor  and  re¬
freshment  relieved  each  other  like  two  lov¬
ing  brothers,  and  the  gravity  of  the  former
was  rendered  more  engaging  by  the  char¬
acteristic  cheerfulness  and  jocund  gayety
of  the  latter.”  In  those  days  the  word
“refreshment”  had  a  practical  meaning,
and  the  Lodge  was  often  called  from  labor
that  the  brethren  might  indulge  in  inno¬
cent  gayety,  of  which  the  song  formed  an
essential  part.  This  was  called  harmony,
and  the  brethren  who  were  blessed  with
talents  for  vocal  music  were  often  invit¬
ed  “  to  contribute  to  the  harmony  of  the
Lodge.”  Thus,  in  the  minute-book  of  a
Lodge  at  Lincoln,  in  England,  in  the  year
1732,  which  is  quoted  by  Dr.  Oliver,  the
records  show  that  the  Master  usually  “  gave
an  elegant  charge,  also  went  through  an
examination,  and  the  Lodge  was  closed
with  song  and  decent  merriment.”  In
this  custom  of  singing  there  was  an  estab¬
lished  system.  Each  officer  was  furnished
with  a  song  appropriate  to  his  office,  and
each  degree  had  a  song  for  itself.

Thus,  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Book
of  Constitutions,  we  have  the  “  Master’s
Song,”  which,  says  Dr.  Anderson,  the  au¬
thor,  is  “to  be  sung  with  a  chorus, — when
the  Master  shall  give  leave, — either  one
part  only  or  all  together,  as  he  pleases;
the  “Warden’s  song,”  which  was  “to  be
sung  and  played  at  the  Quarterly  Commu¬
nication  ;  ”  the  “  Fellow  Craft’s  song,”  which
was  to  be  sung  and  played  at  the  grand
feast;  and,  lastly,  the  “Entered  ’Prentiss’
song,”  which  was  “to  be  sung  when  all
grave  business  is  over,  and  with  the  Master’s


leave.”  In  the  second  edition  the  number
was  greatly  increased,  and  songs  were  ap¬
propriated  to  the  Deputy  Grand  Master,
the  Secretary,  the  Treasurer,  and  other  offi¬
cers.  For  all  this  provision  was  made  in
the  Old  Charges,  so  that  there  should  be  no
confusion  between  the  hours  of  labor  and
refreshment;  for  while  the  brethren  were
forbidden  to  behave  “ludicrously  or  jest¬
ingly  while  the  Lodge  is  engaged  in  what
is  serious  or  solemn,”  they  were  permitted,
when  work  was  over,  “  to  enjoy  themselves
with  innocent  mirth.”

The  custom  of  singing  songs  peculiarly
appropriate  to  the  Craft  at  their  Lodge
meetings,  when  the  grave  business  was
over,  was  speedily  introduced  into  France
and  Germany,  in  which  countries  a  large
number  of  Masonic  songs  were  written  and
adopted,  to  be  sung  by  the  German  and
French  Masons  at  their  “Table  Lodges,”
which  corresponded  to  the  “refreshment”
of  their  English  brethren.  The  lyrical  liter¬
ature  of  Masonry  has,  in  consequence  of
this  custom,  assumed  no  inconsiderable
magnitude ;  as  an  evidence  of  which  it  may
be  stated  that  Kloss,  in  his  Bibliography  of
Freemasonry,  gives  a  catalogue  —  by  no
means  a  perfect  one  —  of  two  hundred  and
thirteen  Masonic  song  books  published  be¬
tween  the  years  1734  and  1837,  in  the  Eng¬
lish,  German,  French,  Danish,  and  Polish
languages.

The  Masons  of  the  present  day  have  not
abandoned  the  usage  of  singing  at  their
festive  meetings  after  the  Lodge  is  closed ;
but  the  old  songs  of  Masonry  are  passing
into  oblivion,  and  we  seldom  hear  any  of
them,  except  sometimes  the  never-to-be-
forgotten  Apprentice’s  song  of  Matthew
Birkhead.  Modern  taste  and  culture  re¬
ject  the  rude  but  hearty  stanzas  of  the  old
song-makers,  and  the  more  artistic  and
pathetic  productions  of  Mackay,  and  Cooke,
and  Morris,  and  Dibdin,  and  Wesley,  and
other  writers  of  that  class,  are  taking  their
place.

Some  of  these  songs  cannot  be  strictly
called  Masonic,  yet  the  covert  allusions
here  and  there  of  their  authors,  whether
intentional  or  accidental,  have  caused  them
to  be  adopted  by  the  Craft  and  placed
among  their  minstrelsy.  Thus  the  well-
known  ballad  of  “Tubal  Cain,”  by  Charles
Mackay,  always  has  an  inspiring  effect
when  sung  at  a  Lodge  banquet,  because  of
the  reference  to  this  old  worker  in  metals,
whom  the  Masons  fondly  consider  as  one
of  the  mythical  founders  of  their  Order;
although  the  songjtself  has  in  its  words  or
its  ideas  no  connection  whatever  with  Free¬
masonry.  Burns’s  “Auld  Lang  Syne”  is
another  production  not  strictly  Masonic,
which  has  met  with  the  universal  favor  of


726


SON


SOUL


the  Craft,  because  the  warm  fraternal  spirit
that  it  breathes  is  in  every  way  Masonic,
and  hence  it  has  almost  become  a  rule  of
obligation  that  every  festive  party  of  Free¬
masons  should  close  with  the  great  Scotch¬
man’s  invocation  to  part  in  love  and  kind¬
ness.

But  Robert  Burns  has  also  supplied  the
Craft  with  several  purely  Masonic  songs,
and  his  farewell  to  the  brethren  of  Tarbol-
ton  Lodge,  beginning, —

“Adieu  !  a  heart-warm,  fond  adieu,

Dear  brothers  of  the  mystic  tie,”

is  often  sung  with  pathetic  effect  at  the
table  Lodges  of  the  Order.

As  already  observed,  we  have  many  pro¬
ductions  of  our  Masonic  poets  which  are
taking  the  place  of  the  older  and  coarser
songs  of  our  predecessors.  It  would  be
tedious  to  name  all  who  have  successfully
invoked  the  Masonic  muse.  Masonic  songs
—  that  is  to  say,  songs  whose  themes  are
Masonic  incidents,  whose  language  refers  to
the  technical  language  of  Freemasonry,
and  whose  spirit  breathes  its  spirit  and  its
teachings  —  are  now  a  well-settled  part  of
the  literary  curriculum  of  the  Institution.
At  first  they  were  all  festive  in  character
and  often  coarse  in  style,  with  little  or  no
pretension  to  poetic  excellence.  Now  they
are  festive,  but  refined  ;  or  sacred,  and  used
on  occasions  of  public  solemnity ;  or  mythi¬
cal,  and  constituting  a  part  of  the  cere¬
monies  of  the  different  degrees.  But  they
all  have  a  character  of  poetic  art  which  is
far  above  the  mediocrity  so  emphatically
condemned  by  Horace.

Son  of  a  Mason.  The  son  of  a  Ma¬
son  is  called  a  Louveteau,  and  is  entitled
to  certain  privileges,  for  which  see  Louve¬
teau.

Sons  of  Light.  The  science  of  Free¬
masonry  often  has  received  the  title  of
“  Lux,”  or  “  Light,”  to  indicate  that  men¬
tal  and  moral  illumination  is  the  object  of
the  Institution.  Hence  Freemasons  are
often  called  “  Sons  of  Light.”

Sons  of  the  Prophets.  We  re¬
peatedly  meet  in  the  Old  Testament  with
references  to  the  Beni  Hanabiim,  or  sons
of  the  prophets.  These  were  the  disciples
of  the  prophets,  or  wise  men  of  Israel,  who
underwent  a  course  of  esoteric  instruction
in  the  secret  institutions  of  the  Nabiim,  or
prophets,  just  as  the  disciples  of  the  Magi
did  in  Persia,  or  of  Pythagoras  in  Greece.
“  These  sons  of  the  prophets,”  says  Stehe-
lin,  ( Rabbinical  Literature,  i.  16,)  “  were
their  disciples,  brought  up  under  their
tuition  and  care,  and  therefore  their  mas¬
ters  or  instructors  were  called  their  fathers.”

Sons  of  the  Widow.  This  is  a  title
often  given  to  Freemasons  in  allusion  to


Hiram  the  Builder,  who  was  “  a  widow’s
son,  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali.”  By  the  ad¬
vocates  of  the  theory  that  Freemasonry
originated  with  the  exiled  house  of  Stuart,
and  was  organized  as  a  secret  institution
for  the  purpose  of  re-establishingthat  house
on  the  throne  of  Great  Britain,  the  phrase
has  been  applied  as  if  referring  to  the  ad¬
herents  of  Queen  Henrietta,  the  widow
of  Charles  the  First.

Sorbonne.  A  college  of  theological
professors  in  Paris,  who  exercised  a  great
influence  over  religious  opinion  in  France
during  the  sixteenth,  seventeenth,  and
greater  part  of  the  eighteenth  centuries.
The  bigotry  and  intolerance  for  which  they
were  remarkable  made  them  the  untiring
persecutors  of  Freemasonry.  In  the  year
1748  they  published  a  Letter  and  Consulta¬
tion  on  the  Society  of  Freemasons,  in  which
they  declared  that  it  was  an  illegal  associa¬
tion,  and  that  the  meetings  of  its  members
should  be  prohibited.  This  was  repub¬
lished  in  1764,  at  Paris,  by  the  Freemasons,
with  a  reply,  in  the  form  of  an  appendix,
by  De  la  Tierce,  and  again  in  1766,  at
Berlin,  with  another  reply  by  a  writer  un¬
der  the  assumed  name  of  Jarhetti.

Sorrow  Lodge.  It  is  the  custom
among  Masons  on  the  continent  of  Europe
to  hold  special  Lodges  at  stated  perioas,
for  the  purpose  of  commemorating  the  vir¬
tues  and  deploring  the  loss  of  their  departed
members,  and  other  distinguished  worthies
of  the  Fraternity  who  have  died.  These
are  called  Funeral  or  Sorrow  Lodges.  In
Germany  they  are  held  annually;  in
France  at  longer  intervals.  In  this  coun¬
try  the  custom  has  been  introduced  by  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,  whose  Sorrow-
Lodge  ritual  is  peculiarly  beautiful  and
impressive,  and  the  usage  has  been  adopted
by  many  Lodges  of  the  American  Rite.  On
these  occasions  the  Lodge  is  clothed  in  the
habiliments  of  mourning  and  decorated
w-ith  the  emblems  of  death,  solemn  music
is  played,  funereal  dirges  are  chanted,  and
eulogies  on  the  life,  character,  and  Masonic
virtues  of  the  dead  are  delivered.

Soul  of  Nature.  A  platonic  expres¬
sion,  more  properly  the  anima  mundi,  that
has  been  adopted  into  the  English  Royal
Arch  system  to  designate  the  Sacred  Delta,
or  Triangle,  which  Dunckerley,  in  his  lec¬
ture,  considered  as  the  symbol  of  the  Trinity.
“So  highly,”  says  the  modern  lecture,
“  indeed  did  the  ancients  esteem  the  figure,
that  it  became  among  them  an  object  of
worship  as  the  great  principle  of  animated
existence,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of
God  because  it  represented  the  animal,
mineral,  and  vegetable  creation.  They  also
distinguished  it  by  an  appellation  which,  in
the  Egyptian  language,  signifies  the  Soul


SOUTH


SOVEREIGN


727


of  Nature .”  Dr.  Oliver  (Juris.,  page  446,)
warmly  protests  against  the  introduction
of  this  expression  as  an  unwarrantable  in¬
novation,  borrowed  most  probably  from  the
Rite  of  the  Philalethes.  It  has  not  been
introduced  into  the  American  system.

South.  When  the  sun  is  at  his  me¬
ridian  height,  his  invigorating  rays  are
darted  from  the  south.  When  he  rises  in
the  east,  we  are  called  to  labor;  when  he
sets  in  the  west,  our  daily  toil  is  over ;  but
when  he  reaches  the  south,  the  hour  is  high
twelve,  and  we  are  summoned  to  refresh¬
ment.  In  Masonry,  the  south  is  represented
by  the  Junior  Warden  and  by  the  Corin¬
thian  column,  because  it  is  said  to  be  the
place  of  beauty.

South  Carolina.  Freemasonry  was
introduced  into  South  Carolina  by  the  or¬
ganization  of  Solomon’s  Lodge,  in  the  city
of  Charleston,  on  October  28,  1736,  the
Warrant  for  which  had  been  granted  in  the
previous  year  by  Lord  Weymouth,  Grand
Master  of  England.  John  Hammerton  was,
in  1736,  appointed  Provincial  Grand  Mas¬
ter  by  the  Earl  of  Loudoun.  In  1738  a
Lodge  was  established  in  Charleston  by  the
St.  John’s  Grand  Lodge  of  Boston ;  but  it
does  not  appear  to  have  long  existed.  The
Provincial  Lodge  appears  after  some  time
to  have  suspended,  for  a  second  Provincial
Grand  Lodge  was  established  by  the  Depu¬
tation  of  the  Marquis  of  Carnarvan  to  Chief
Justice  Leigh  in  1754.  In  1777  this  body
assumed  independence,  and  became  the
“Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted  Ma¬
sons,”  Barnard  Elliott  being  the  first
Grand  Master.  As  early  as  1783  the
Athol  or  Ancient  Masons  invaded  the  juris¬
diction  of  South  Carolina,  and  in  1787,
there  being  then  five  Lodges  of  the  An¬
cients  in  the  State,  they  held  a  Convention,
and  on  the  24th  of  March  organized  the
“  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  York  Masons.”
Between  the  Modern  and  the  Ancient
Grand  Lodge  there  was  always  a  very  hos¬
tile  feeling  until  the  year  i808,  when  a
union  was  effected;  which  was,  however,
but  temporary,  for  a  disruption  took  place
in  the  following  year.  However,  the  union
was  permanently  established  in  1817,  when
the  two  Grand  Lodges  were  merged  into
one,  under  the  name  of  the  “  Grand  Lodge
of  Ancient  Freemasons.”

The  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  was  or¬
ganized  on  May  29,  1812.

The  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters  was  established  February,  1860,  by
eight  Councils,  who  had  received  their
Charters  under  the  authority  of  the  Su¬
preme  Council  of  the  Scottish  Rite.

The  Grand  Encampment  of  Knights
Templars  was  instituted  in  1826  by  three
subordinate  Encampments,  but  it  enjoyed


only  an  ephemeral  existence,  and  is  not
heard  of  after  the  year  1830.  There  is  now
but  one  Commandery  in  the  State,  which
derives  its  Warrant  from  the  Grand  En¬
campment  of  the  United  States,  the  date
of  which  is  May  17,  1843.

The  Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Rite  was  opened  on  May  31, 1801.
This  body  is  now  recognized  as  the  Mother
Council  of  the  World.

Sovereign.  An  epithet  applied  to
certain  degrees  which  were  invested  with
supreme  power  over  inferior  ones ;  as,  Sov¬
ereign  Prince  of  Pose  Croix,  which  is  the
highest  degree  of  the  French  Rite  and  of
some  other  Rites,  and  Sovereign  Inspector-
General,  which  is  the  controlling  degree  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.  Some  de¬
grees,  originally  Sovereign  in  the  Rites  in
which  they  were  first  established,  in  being
transferred  to  other  Rites,  have  lost  their  sov¬
ereign  character,  but  still  improperly  retain
the  name.  Thus  the  Rose  Croix  degree  of
the  Scottish  Rite,  which  is  there  only  the
eighteenth,  and  subordinate  to  the  thirty-
third  or  Supreme  Council,  still  retains
everywhere,  except  in  the  Southern  Juris¬
diction  of  the  United  States,  the  title  of
Sovereign  Prince  of  Rose  Croix.

Sovereign  Commander  of  the
Temple.  (Souverain  Commandeur  du
Temple.)  Styled  in  the  more  recent  rituals
of  the  Southern  Supreme  Council  “Knight
Commander  of  the  Temple.”  This  is  the
twenty-seventh  degree  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  The  presiding
officer  is  styled  “Most  Illustrious  and  Most
Valiant, ”  the  Wardens  are  called  “Most
Sovereign  Commanders,”  and  the  Knights
“Sovereign  Commanders.”  The  place  of
meeting  is  called  a  “Court.”  The  apron
is  flesh  -  colored,  lined  and  edged  with
black,  with  a  Teutonic  cross  encircled  by  a
wreath  of  laurel  and  a  key  beneath,  all  in¬
scribed  in  black  upon  the  flap.  The  scarf
is  red  bordered  with  black,  hanging  from
the  right  shoulder  to  the  left  hip,  and  sus¬
pending  a  Teutonic  cross  in  enamelled
gold.  The  jewel  is  a  triangle  of  gold,  on
which  is  engraved  the  Ineffable  Name  in
Hebrew.  It  is  suspended  from  a  white
collar  bound  with  red  and  embroidered  with
four  Teutonic  crosses.

Vassal,  Ragon,  and  Clavel  are  all  wrong
in  connecting  this  degree  with  the  Knights
Templars,  with  which  Order  its  own  ritual
declares  that  it  is  not  to  be  confounded.  It
is  without  a  lecture.  Vassal  expresses  the
following  opinion  of  this  degree:

“  The  twenty-seventh  degree  does  not  de¬
serve  to  be  classed  in  the  Scottish  Rite  as
a  degree,  since  it  contains  neither  symbols
nor  allegories  that  connect  it  with  initiation.
It  deserves  still  less  to  be  ranked  among


728


SOVEREIGN


SOVEREIGN


the  philosophic  degrees.  I  imagine  that
it  has  been  intercalated  only  to  supply
an  hiatus,  and  as  a  memorial  of  an  Order
once  justly  celebrated.”

It  is  also  the  forty-fourth  degree  of  the
Rite  of  Mizraim.

Sovereign  Grand  Inspector
General.  The  thirty-third  and  last  de¬
gree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite.  The  Latin  Constitutions  of  1786  call
it  “Tertius  et  trigesiinus  et  subliinissimus
gradus,”  i.  e.,  “the  thirty-third  and  most
sublime  degree ;  ”  and  it  is  styled  “the  Pro¬
tector  and  Conservator  of  the  Order.”  The
same  Constitutions,  in  Articles  I.  and  II.,
say:

“  The  thirty-third  degree  confers  on  those
Masons  who  are  legitimately  invested  with
it,  the  quality,  title,  privilege,  and  author¬
ity  of  Sovereign  [Supremorum]  Grand  In¬
spectors  General  of  the  Order.

“  The  peculiar  duty  of  their  mission  is
to  teach  and  enlighten  the  brethren ;  to  pre¬
serve  charity,  union,  and  fraternal  love
among  them;  to  maintain  regularity  in  the
works  of  each  degree,  and  to  take  care  that
it  is  preserved  by  others;  to  cause  the  dog¬
mas,  doctrines,  institutes,  constitutions,
statutes,  and  regulations  of  the  Order  to  be
reverently  regarded,  and  to  preserve  and
defend  them  on  every  occasion  ;  and,  finally,
everywhere  to  occupy  themselves  in  works
of  peace  and  mercy.”

The  body  in  which  the  members  of  this
degree  assemble  is  called  a  Supreme  Coun¬
cil.

The  symbolic  color  of  the  degree  is  white,
denoting  purity.

The  distinctive  insignia  are  a  sash,  collar,
jewel,  Teutonic  cross,  decoration,  and  ring.

The  sash  is  a  broad,  white- watered  ribbon,
bordered  with  gold,  bearing  on  the  front  a
triangle  of  gold  glittering  with  rays  of
gold,  which  has  in  the  centre  the  numerals
33,  with  a  sword  of  silver,  directed  from
above,  on  each  side  of  the  triangle,  point¬
ing  to  its  centre.  The  sash,  worn  from  the
right  shoulder  to  the  left  hip,  ends  in  a
point,  aud  is  fringed  with  gold,  having  at
the  junction  a  circular  band  of  scarlet  and
green  containing  the  jgwel  of  the  Order.

The  collar  is  of  white-watered  ribbon
fringed  with  gold,  having  the  rayed  tri¬
angle  at  its  point  and  the  swords  at  the
sides.  By  a  regulation  of  the  Southern
Supreme  Council  of  the  United  States,  the
collar  is  worn  by  the  active,  and  the  sash
by  the  honorary,  members  of  the  Council.

The  jewel  is  a  black  double-headed  eagle,
with  golden  beaks  and  talons,  holding  in
the  latter  a  sword  of  gold,  and  crowned
with  the  golden  crown  of  Prussia.

The  red  Teutonic  cross  is  affixed  to  the
left  side  of  the  breast.


The  decoration  rests  upon  a  Teutonic
cross.  It  is  a  nine-pointed  star,  namely,
one  formed  by  three  triangles  of  gold  one
upon  the  other,  and  interlaced  from  the
lower  part  of  the  left  side  to  the  upper  part


of  the  right  a  sword  extends,  and  in  the
opposite  direction  is  a  hand  of  (as  it  i3
called)  Justice.  In  the  centre  is  the  shield
of  The  Order,  azure  charged  with  an
eagle  like  that  on  the  banner,  having  on
the  dexter  side  a  Balance  or,  and  on  the
sinister  side  a  Compass  of  the  second,
united  with  a  Square  of  the  second.  Around
the  whole  shield  runs  a  band  of  the  first,
with  the  Latin  inscription,  of  the  second,
Ordo  Ab  Chao,  which  band  is  enclosed  by
two  circles,  formed  by  two  Serpents  of  the
second,  each  biting  his  own  tail.  Of  the
smaller  triangles  that  are  formed  by  the  in¬
tersection  of  the  greater  ones,  those  nine
that  are  nearest  the  band  are  of  crimson
color,  and  each  of  them  has  one  of  the
letters  that  compose  the  word  S.  A.  P.  L
E.  N.  T.  I.  A.


The  ring  is  of  plain  gold  one-eighth  of
an  inch  wide,  and  having  on  the  inside
a  delta  surrounding  the  figures  33,  and  in¬
scribed  with  the  wearer’s  name,  the  letters
S.\  G.\  I.'.  G.\ ,  and  the  motto  of  the
Order,  “  Deus  meumque  Jus.”  It  is  worn
on  the  fourth  finger  of  the  left  hand.

Until  the  year  1801,  the  thirty-third  de¬
gree  was  unknown.  ,  Until  then  the  highest


SOVEREIGN


SPAIN


729


degree  of  the  Rite,  introduced  into  America
by  Stephen  Moriu,  was  the  Sublime  Prince
of  the  Royal  Secret,  or  the  twenty-fifth  of
the  Rite  established  by  the  Emperors  of  the
East  and  West.  The  administrative  heads
of  the  Order  were  styled  Grand  Inspectors
General  and  Deputy  Inspectors  General  ;
but  these  were  titles  of  official  rank  and
not  of  degree.  Even  as  late  as  May  24,
1801,  John  Mitchell  signs  himself  as  “  Ka-
dosh,  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret  and  Dep¬
uty  Inspector  General.”  The  document
thus  signed  is  a  Patent  which  certifies  that
Frederick  Dalcho  is  a  Kadosli,  and  Prince
of  the  Royal  Secret,  and  which  creates  him
a  Deputy  Inspector  General.  But  on  May
31,  1801,  the  Supreme  Council  was  created
at  Charleston,  and  from  that  time  we  hear
of  a  Rite  of  thirty-three  degrees,  eight
having  been  added  to  the  twenty-five  in¬
troduced  by  Morin,  and  the  last  being
called  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  General.
The  degree  being  thus  legitimately  estab¬
lished  by  a  body  which,  in  creating  a  Rite,
possessed  the  prerogative  of  establishing
its  classes,  its  degrees  and  its  nomenclature
were  accepted  unhesitatingly  by  all  subse¬
quently  created  Supreme  Councils ;  and  it
continues  to  be  recognized  as  the  adminis¬
trative  head  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite.

Sovereign  Master.  1.  The  presid¬
ing  officer  in  a  Council  of  Knights  of  the
Red  Cross.  He  represents  Darius,  king  of
Persia.  2.  The  sixtieth  degree  of  the  Rite
of  Mizraim.

Sovereign  Prince  Mason.  A  title
first  conferred  on  its  members  by  the  Coun¬
cil  of  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West.

Sovereign  Prince  of  Ilose
Croix.  See  Rose  Croix.

Spain.  Anderson  says  ( Constit.,  2d  ed.,  p.
194,)  that  a  Deputation  was  granted  by  Lord
Colerane,  Grand  Master,  in  1728,  for  consti¬
tuting  a  Lodge  at  Madrid ;  another  in  1731,
by  Lord  Lovell,  to  Capt.  James  Cummer-
ford,  to  be  Provincial  Grand  Master  of
Andalusia;  and  a  third  in  1732,  by  Lord
Montagu,  for  establishing  a  Lodge  at  Va¬
lenciennes.  Smith,  writing  in  1783,  says,
( Use  and  Abuse,  p.  203:)  “The  first,  and,  I
believe,  the  only  Lodge  established  in  Spain
was  by  a  Deputation  sent  to  Madrid  to  con¬
stitute  a  Lodge  in  that  city,  under  the  au¬
spices  of  Lord  Coleraine,  a.  d.  1727,  which
continued  under  English  jurisdiction  till
the  year  1776,  when  it  refused  that  subor¬
dination,  but  still  continues  to  meet  under
its  own  authority.”  From  these  two  differ¬
ing  authorities  we  derive  only  this  fact,  in
which  they  concur:  that  Masonry  was  in¬
troduced  into  Spain  in  1727,  more  probably
1728,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.
Smith’s  statement  that  there  never  was  a
4  It


second  Lodge  at  Madrid  is  opposed  by  that
of  Gadicke,  who  says  that  in  1751  there
were  two  Lodges  in  Madrid.

Llorente  says  {Hist.  Inquis.,  p.  525,)  that
in  1741  Philip  V.  issued  a  royal  ordinance
against  the  Masons,  and,  in  consequence,
many  were  arrested  and  sent  to  the  galleys.
The  members  of  the  Lodge  at  Madrid  were
especially  treated  by  the  Inquisition  with
great  severity.  All  the  members  were  ar¬
rested,  and  eight  of  them  sent  to  the  gal¬
leys.  In  1751,  Ferdinand  VI.,  instigated
by  the  Inquisitor  Joseph  Torrubia,  pub¬
lished  a  decree  forbidding  the  assemblies
of  Freemasons,  and  declaring  that  all  vio¬
lators  of  it  should  be  treated  as  persons
guilty  of  high  treason.  In  that  year,  Pope
Benedict  XIV.  had  renewed  the  bull  of
Clement  XII.  In  1793,  the  Cardinal  Vicar
caused  a  decree  of  death  to  be  promulgated
against  all  Freemasons.  Notwithstanding
these  persecutions  of  the  Church  and  the
State,  Freemasonry  continued  to  be  culti¬
vated  in  Spain;  but  the  meetings  of  the
Lodges  were  held  with  great  caution  and
secrecy.

On  the  accession  of  Joseph  Napoleon  to
the  throne  in  1807,  the  liberal  sentiments
that  characterized  the  Napoleonic  dynasty
prevailed,  and  all  restrictions  against  the
Freemasons  were  removed.  In  October,
1809,  a  National  Grand  Lodge  of  Spain
was  established,  and,  as  if  to  make  the
victory  of  tolerance  over  bigotry  complete,
its  meetings  were  held  in  the  edifice  for¬
merly  occupied  by  the  Inquisition,  which
body  had  been  recently  abolished  by  an
imperial  decree.

But  the  York  Rite,  which  had  been  for¬
merly  practised,  appears  now  to  have  been
abandoned,  and  the  National  Grand  Lodge
just  alluded  to  was  constituted  by  three
Lodges  of  the  Scottish  Rite  which,  during
that  year,  had  been  established  at  Madrid.
From  that  time  the  Masonry  of  Spain  has
been  that  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite.

Clavel  says  (Hist.  Pittoresque,  p.  252,)  that
“  in  1810,  the  Marquis  de  Clermont-Ton-
nere,  member  of  the  Supreme  Council  of
France,  created,  near  the  National  Grand
Lodge,  (of  the  Scottish  Rite  in  Spain,)  a
Grand  Consistory  of  the  thirty-second  de¬
gree;  and,  in  1811,  the  Count  de  Grasse
added  to  this  a  Supreme  Council  of  the
thirty-third  degree,  which  immediately  or¬
ganized  the  National  Grand  Lodge  under
the  title  of  Grand  Orient  of  Spain  and  the
Indies.  The  overthrow  of  French  domi¬
nation  dispersed,  in  1813,  most  of  the  Span¬
ish  Masons,  and  caused  the  suspension  of
Masonic  work  in  that  country.”

In  1814,  FerdinandVII.,  havingsucceeded
to  the  throne,  restored  the  Inquisition  with


730


SPARTACUS


SPECULATIVE


all  its  oppressive  prerogatives,  proscribed
Freemasonry,  and  forbade  the  meetings  of
the  Lodges.  It  was  not  until  1820  that
the  Grand  Orient  of  Spain  recovered  its
activity,  and  in  1821  we  find  a  Supreme
Council  in  actual  existence,  the  history  of
whose  organization  was  thus  given,  in  1870,
to  Bro.  A.  G.  Goodall,  the  Representative
of  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Northern
Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States:

“The  parties  now  claiming  to  be  a  Su¬
preme  Council  assert  that  the  Count  de
Tilly,  by  authority  from  his  cousin,  De
Grasse  Tilly,  constituted  a  Supreme  Coun¬
cil,  Ancient  Accepted  Rite,  at  Seville,  in
1807 ;  but  in  consequence  of  a  revolution,
in  which  Tilly  was  a  prominent  actor,  the
Grand  Body  was  removed  to  Aranjuez,
where,  on  the  21st  of  September,  1808,  the
officers  were  duly  installed;  Saavedra  as
Sov.\  Gr.\  Commander,  advitam;  Count
de  Tilly,  Lieutenant  Grand  Commander;
Carlos  de  Rosas,  Grand  Treasurer;  Jovel-
lanos,  Grand  Chancellor ;  Quintana,  Grand
Secretary ;  Pelajos,  Captain  of  Guard.
On  the  death  of  Tilly  and  Saavedra,  Ba-
dilla  became  Sovereign  Grand  Commander;
and  under  his  administration  the  Supreme
Council  was  united  with  the  Grand  Orient
of  Spain  at  Granada,  in  1817,  under  the
title  of  Supreme  Council,  Grand  Orient
National  of  Spain.”

On  the  death  of  Ferdinand  VII.  in  1853,
the  persecutions  against  the  Freemasons
ceased,  because,  in  the  civil  war  that  en¬
sued,  the  priests  lost  much  of  their  power.
Between  1845  and  1849,  according  to  Fin-
del,  (Hist.,  p.  584,)  several  Lodges  were
founded  and  a  Grand  Orient  established,
which  appears  to  have  exercised  powers  up
to  at  least  1848.  But  subsequently,  during
the  reign  of  Queen  Isabella,  Masonry  again
fell  into  decadence.  It  has  now,  however,
revived,  and  many  Lodges  are  in  existence
who,  three  years  ago,  were  under  the  juris¬
diction  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  Portugal.
There  is  at  present  a  Supreme  Council  of
Spain.

Spartacias.  The  characteristic  name
assumed  by  Weishaupt,  the  founder  of  the
Order  of  the  Illuminati.

Speculative  Masonry.  The  lec¬
tures  of  the  symbolic  degrees  instruct  the
neophyte  in  the  difference  between  the
Operative  and  the  Speculative  divisions  of
Masonry.  They  tell  him  that  “we  work
in  Speculative  Masonry,  but  our  ancient
brethren  wrought  in  both  Operative  and
Speculative;”  The  distinction  between  an
Operative  art  and  a  Speculative  science  is,
therefore,  familiar  to  all  Masons  from  their
early  instructions.

To  the  Freemason,  this  Operative  art  has
been  symbolized  in  that  intellectual  deduc¬


tion  from  it  which  has  been  correctly  called
Speculative  Masonry.  At  one  time  each  was
an  integral  part  of  one  undivided  system.
Not  that  the  period  ever  existed  when  every
Operative  Mason  was  acquainted  with,  or
initiated  into,  theSpeculative  science.  Even
now,  there  are  thousands  of  skilful  artisans
who  know  as  little  of  that  as  they  do  of  the
Hebrew  language  which  was  spoken  by  its
founder.  But  Operative  Masonry  was,  in
the  inception  of  our  history,  and  is,  in  some
measure,  even  now,  the  skeleton  upon
which  was  strung  the  living  muscles  and
tendons  and  nerves  of  the  Speculative  sys¬
tem.  It  was  the  block  of  marble,  rude  and
unpolished  it  may  have  been,  from  which
was  sculptured  the  life-breathing  statue.

Speculative  Masonry  (which  is  but  an¬
other  name  for  Freemasonry  in  its  modern
acceptation)  may  be  briefly  defined  as  the
scientific  application  and  the  religious
consecration  of  the  rules  and  principles,
the  language,  the  implements,  and  mate¬
rials  of  Operative  Masonry  to  the  venera¬
tion  of  God,  the  purification  of  the  heart,
and  the  inculcation  of  the  dogmas  of  a  re¬
ligious  philosophy.

Speculative  Masonry,  or  Freemasonry,  is
then  a  system  of  ethics,  and  must  there¬
fore,  like  all  other  ethical  systems,  have  its
distinctive  doctrines.  These  may  be  di¬
vided  into  three  classes,  viz.,  the  Moral,
the  Religious,  and  the  Philosophical.

1.  The  Moral  Doctrines.  These  are  de¬
pendent  on,  and  spring  out  of,  its  character
as  a  social  institution.  Hence  among  its
numerous  definitions  is  one  that  declares  it
to  be  “  a  science  of  morality,”  and  morality
is  said  to  be,  symbolically,  one  of  the  pre¬
cious  jewels  of  a  Master  Mason.  Freema¬
sonry  is,  in  its  most  patent  and  prominent
sense,  that  which  most  readily  and  forcibly
attracts  the  attention  of  the  uninitiated  ;  a
fraternity,  an  association  of  men  bound
together  by  a  peculiar  tie;  and  therefore
it  is  essential,  to  its  successful  existence,
that  it  should,  as  it  does,  inculcate,  at  the
very  threshold  of  its  teachings,  obligation
of  kindness,  man’s  duty  to  his  neighbor.
“  There  are  three  great  duties,”  says  the
Charge  given  to  an  Entered  Apprentice,
“  which,  as  a  Mason,  you  are  charged  to
inculcate  —  to  God,  your  neighbor,  and
yourself.”  And  the  duty  to  our  neighbor
is  said  to  be  that  we  should  act  upon  the
square,  and  do  unto  him  as  we  wish  that  he
should  do  unto  ourselves.

The  object,  then,  of  Freemasonry,  in  this
moral  point  of  view,  is  to  carry  out  to  their
fullest  practical  extent  those  lessons  of  mu¬
tual  love  and  mutual  aid  that  are  essential
to  the  very  idea  of  a  brotherhood.  There
is  a  socialism  in  Freemasonry  from  which
spring  all  Masonic  virtues, — not  that  mod-


SPECULATIVE


SPECULATIVE


731


ern  socialism  exhibited  in  a  community  of
goods,  which,  although  it  may  have  been
practised  by  the  primitive  Christians,  is
found  to  be  uncongenial  with  the  indepen¬
dent  spirit  of  the  present  age  —  but  a  com¬
munity  of  sentiment,  of  principle,  of  design,
which  gives  to  Masonry  all  its  social,  and
hence  its  moral,  character.  As  the  old  song
tells  us :

“  That  virtue  has  not  left  mankind,

Her  social  maxims  prove,

For  stamp’d  upon  the  Mason’s  mind
Are  unity  and  love.”

Thus  the  moral  design  of  Freemasonry,
based  upon  its  social  character,  is  to  make
men  better  to  each  other;  to  cultivate
brotherly  love,  and  to  inculcate  the  prac¬
tice  of  all  those  virtues  which  are  essential
to  the  perpetuation  of  a  brotherhood.  A
Mason  is  bound,  say  the  Old  Charges,  to
obey  the  moral  law,  and  of  this  law  the
very  keystone  is  the  divine  precept,  — the
“Golden  Rule”  of  our  Lord,  —  to  do  unto
others  as  we  would  that  they  should  do
unto  us.  To  relieve  the  distressed,  to  give
good  counsel  to  the  erring,  to  speak  well  of
the  absent,  to  observe  temperance  in  the  in¬
dulgence  of  appetite,  to  bear  evil  with  for¬
titude,  to  be  prudent  in  life  and  conversa¬
tion,  and  to  dispense  justice  to  all  men,  are
duties  that  are  inculcated  on  every  Mason
by  the  moral  doctrines  of  his  Order.

These  doctrines  of  morality  are  not  of
recent  origiu.  They  are  taught  in  all  the
Old  Constitutions  of  the  Craft,  as  the  parch¬
ment  records  of  the  fifteenth,  sixteenth,
and  seventeenth  centuries  show,  even  when
the  Institution  was  operative  in  its  organi¬
zation,  and  long  before  the  speculative  ele¬
ment  was  made  its  predominating  charac¬
teristic.  Thus  these  Old  Charges  tell  us,
almost  all  of  them  in  the  same  words,  that
Masons  “shal  be  true,  each  one  to  other,
(that  is  to  say,)  to  every  Mason  of  the
science  of  Masonrye  that  are  Masons  al¬
lowed,  ye  shal  doe  to  them  as  ye  would
that  they  should  doe  unto  you.”

2.  The  Religious  Doctrines  of  Freema¬
sonry  are  very  simple  and  self-evident.
They  are  darkened  by  no  perplexities  of
sectarian  theology,  but  stand  out  in  the
broad  light,  intelligible  and  acceptable  by
all  minds,  for  they  ask  only  for  a  belief  in
God  and  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul.
He  who  denies  these  tenets  can  be  no  Ma¬
son,  for  the  religious  doctrines  of  the  Insti¬
tution  significantly  impress  them  in  every
part  of  its  ritual.  The  neophyte  no  sooner
crosses  the  threshold  of  the  Lodge,  but  he
is  called  upon  to  recognize,  as  his  first  duty,
an  entire  trust  in  the  superintending  care
and  love  of  the  Supreme  Being,  and  the
series  of  initiations  into  Symbolic  Masonry


terminate  by  revealing  the  awful  symbol
of  a  life  after  death  and  an  entrance  upon
immortality.

Now  this  and  the  former  class  of  doc¬
trines  are  intimately  connected  and  mutu¬
ally  dependent.  For  we  must  first  know
and  feel  the  universal  fatherhood  of  God
before  we  can  rightly  appreciate  the  uni¬
versal  brotherhood  of  man.  Hence  the
Old  Records  already  alluded  to,  which
show  us  what  was  the  condition  of  the
Craft  in  the  Middle  Ages,  exhibit  an  emi¬
nently  religious  spirit.  These  ancient  Con¬
stitutions  always  begin  with  a  pious  invo¬
cation  to  the  Trinity,  and  sometimes  to  the
saints,  and  they  tell  us  that  “  the  first  charge
is  that  a  Mason  shall  be  true  to  God  and
holy  Church,  and  use  no  error  nor  heresy.”
And  the  Charges  published  in  1723,  which
professes  to  be  a  compilation  made  from
those  older  records,  prescribe  that  a  Mason,
while  left  to  his  particular  opinions,  must
be  of  that  “  religion  in  which  all  men
agree,”  that  is  to  say,  the  religion  which
teaches  the  existence  of  God  and  an  eternal
life.

3.  The  Philosophical  Doctrines  of  Free¬
masonry  are  scarcely  less  important,  al¬
though  they  are  less  generally  understood
than  either  of  the  preceding  classes.  The
object  of  these  philosophical  doctrines  is
very  different  from  that  of  either  the  moral
or  the  religious.  For  the  moral  and  reli¬
gious  doctrines  of  the  Order  are  intended
to  make  men  virtuous,  while  its  philosoph¬
ical  doctrines  are  designed  to  make  them
zealous  Masons.  He  who  knows  nothing
of  the  philosophy  of  Freemasonry  will  be
apt  to  become  in  time  lukewarm  and  indif¬
ferent,  but  he  who  devotes  himself  to  its
contemplation  will  feel  an  ever-increasing
ardor  in  the  study.  Now  these  philosophi¬
cal  doctrines  are  developed  in  that  symbol¬
ism  which  is  the  especial  characteristic  of
Masonic  teaching,  and  relate  altogether  to
the  lost  and  recovered  word,  the  search
after  divine  truth,  the  manner  and  time  of
its  discovery,  and  the  reward  that  awaits
the  faithful  and  successful  searcher.  Such
a  philosophy  far  surpasses  the  abstract
quiddities  of  metaphysicians.  It  brings  us
into  close  relation  to  the  profound  thought
of  the  ancient  world,  and  makes  us  familiar
with  every  subject  of  mental  science  that
lies  within  the  grasp  of  the  human  intellect.
So  that,  in  conclusion,  we  find  that  the
moral,  religious,  and  philosophical  doc¬
trines  of  Freemasonry  respectively  relate
to  the  social,  the  eternal,  and  the  intellec¬
tual  progress  of  man.

Finally,  it  must  be  observed  that  while
the  old  Operative  institution,  which  was  the
cradle  and  forerunner  of  the  Speculative,
as  we  now  have  it,  abundantly  taught  in  its


732


SPES


SPIRITUAL


Constitutions  the  moral  and  religious  doc¬
trines  of  which  we  have  been  treating,  it
makes  no  reference  to  the  philosophical
doctrines.  That  our  Operative  predeces¬
sors  were  well  acquainted  with  the  science
of  symbolism  is  evident  from  the  architec¬
tural  ornaments  of  the  buildings  which  they
erected  ;  but  they  do  not  seem  to  have  ap¬
plied  its  principles  to  any  great  extent  to
the  elucidation  of  their  moral  and  religious
teachings;  at  least,  we  find  nothing  said
of  this  symbolic  philosophy  in  the  Old  Re¬
cords  that  are  extant.  And  whether  the
Operative  Masons  were  reticent  on  this
subject  from  choice  or  from  ignorance,  we
may  lay  it  down  as  an  axiom,  not  easily
to  be  controverted,  that  the  philosophic
doctrines  of  the  Order  are  altogether  a  de¬
velopment  of  the  system  for  which  wTe  are
indebted  solely  to  Speculative  Freema¬
sonry.

Spes  mea  in  Deo  est.  [My  hope  is
in  God.)  The  motto  of  the  thirty-second
degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite.

Sphinx.  The  Sphinx  was  a  fabled
monster,  wiiich  was  represented  by  the  re¬
cumbent  body  of  a  lion  with  a  human
head.  There  were  two  Sphinxes  among
the  ancients,  the  Greek  and  the  Egyptian,
neither  of  which  appears  to  have  been
borrowed  from  the  other;  and  they  differed
in  form,  the  head  of  the  former  having  the
head  of  a  woman,  and  the  latter  that  of  a
man.  Modern  mythologists  have  sought
to  find  in  each  a  different  interpretation.
Thus,  Cox  ( Mythol .  of  the  Aryans,  ii.  344,)
derives  the  Greek  Sphinx  from  Sphingo,
to  bind  tightly,  and  says  she  represented
the  cloud  which  imprisoned  the  rain  in
hidden  dungeons.  This,  however,  is  a
modern  thought,  which  was  unknown  to
the  older  mythologists,  wTho  always  con¬
nected  the  Sphinx,  both  Grecian  and
Egyptian,  with  the  idea  of  mystery.  But
it  is  with  the  Egyptian  Sphinx  that  our
Masonic  symbolism  is  really  connected.
Among  the  Egyptians,  Sphinxes  were
placed  at  the  entrance  of  the  temples  to
guard  the  mysteries,  by  warning  those  who
penetrated  within,  that  they  should  conceal
a  knowledge  of  them  from  the  uninitiated;
and  hence  Portal  derives  the  word  from  the
Hebrew  TSaPHaN,  to  hide.  Champollion
6ays  that  the  Sphinx  became  successively
the  symbol  of  each  of  the  gods,  by  which
Portal  suggests  that  the  priests  intended  to
express  the  idea  that  all  the  gods  were  hid¬
den  from  the  people,  and  that  the  knowl¬
edge  of  them,  guarded  in  the  sanctuaries,
was  revealed  to  the  initiates  only.  As  a
Masonic  emblem,  the  Sphinx  has  been
adopted  in  its  Egyptian  character  as  a  sym¬
bol  of  mystery,  and  as  such  is  often  found


1  as  a  decoration  sculptured  in  front  of  Ma¬
sonic  temples,  or  engraved  at  the  head  of
Masonic  documents.  It  cannot,  however,
be  properly  called  an  ancient,  recognized
symbol  of  the  Order.  Its  introduction  has
been  of  comparatively  recent  date,  and
rather  as  a  symbolic  decoration  than  as  a
symbol  that  announces  any  dogma.

Spire,  Congress  of.  Spire  is  a  city
in  Bavaria,  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  and
the  seat  of  a  cathedral  which  was  erected
in  the  eleventh  century  A  Masonic  Con¬
gress  was  convoked  there  in  1469  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Strasburg,  principally  to
take  into  consideration  the  condition  of  the
Fraternity  and  of  the  edifices  in  the  course
of  construction  by  them,  as  well  as  to  dis¬
cuss  the  rights  of  "the  Craft.

Spiritualizing.  In  the  early  lec¬
tures  of  the  last  century,  this  word  was
used  to  express  the  method  of  symbolic  in¬
struction  applied  to  the  implements  of
Operative  Masonry.  In  a  ritual  of  1725,
it  is  said:  “As  we  are  not  all  working
Masons,  we  apply  the  working-tools  to  our
morals,  which  we  call  spiritualizing.”  Thus
too,  about  the  same  time,  Bunyan  wrote
his  symbolic  book  which  he  called  Solo -
mon’s  Temple  Spiritualized.  Phillips,  in  his
New  World  of  Words,  1706,  thus  defines  to
spiritualize:  “to  explain  a  passage  of  an
author  in  a  spiritual  manner,  to  give  it  a
godly  or  mystical  sense.”

Spiritual  Lodge.  Hutchinson  ( Sp .
of  Masonry,  p.  58,)  says :  “  We  place  the
spiritual  Lodge  in  the  vale  of  Jehoshaphat,
implying,  thereby,  that  the  principles  of
Masonry  are  derived  from  the  knowledge
of  God,  and  are  established  in  the  Judg¬
ment  of  the  Lord ;  the  literal  translation  of
the  word  Jehoshaphat,  from  the  Hebrew
tongue,  being  no  other  than  those  express
words.”  This  refers  to  the  Lodge,  which  is
thus  described  in  the  old  lectures  at  the
beginning  of  the  last  century,  and  which
were  in  vogue  at  the  time  of  Hutchinson.

“  Q.  Where  does  the  Lodge  stand  ?

“A.  Upon  the  Holy  ground,  on  the
highest  hill  or  lowest  vale,  or  in  the  vale
of  Jehoshaphat,  or  any  other  sacred  place.”

The  spiritual  Lodge  is  the  imaginary  or
symbolic  Lodge,  whose  form,  magnitude,
covering,  supports,  and  other  attributes  are
described  in  the  lectures.

Spiritual  Temple.  The  French
Masons  say:  “We  erect  temples  for  virtue
and  dungeons  for  vice ;  ”  thus  referring  to
the  great  Masonic  doctrine  of  a  spiritual
temple.  There  is  no  symbolism  of  the
Order  more  sublime  than  that  in  which  the
speculative  Mason  is  supposed  to  be  en¬
gaged  in  the  construction  of  a  spiritual
temple,  in  allusion  to  .hat  material  one
which  was  erected  by  his  operative  prede-


SPOULEE


SPURIOUS


733


cessors  at  Jerusalem.  Indeed,  the  differ¬
ence,  in  this  point  of  view,  between  Opera¬
tive  and  Speculative  Masonry  is  simply
this:  that  while  the  former  was  engaged  in
the  construction,  on  Mount  Moriah,  of  a
material  temple  of  stones  and  cedar,  and
gold  and  precious  stones,  the  latter  is  occu¬
pied,  from  his  first  to  his  last  initiation,  in
the  construction,  the  adornment,  and  the
completion  of  the  spiritual  temple  of  his
body.  The  idea  of  making  the  temple  a
symbol  of  the  body  is  not,  it  is  true,  ex¬
clusively  Masonic.  It  had  occurred  to  the
first  teachers  of  Christianity.  Christ  him¬
self  alluded  to  it  when  he  said,  “Destroy
this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will
raise  it  up ;  ”  and  St.  Paul  extends  the
idea,  in  one  of  his  Epistles,  to  the  Corin¬
thians,  in  the  following  language:  “  Know
ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and
that  the  spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you?”
And  again,  in  a  subsequent  passage  of  the
same  Epistle,  he  reiterates  the  idea  in  a
more  positive  form :  “  What,  know  ye  not
that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy
Ghost  which  is  in  you,  which  ye  have  of
God,  and  ye  are  not  your  own?”

But  the  mode  of  treating  this  symbolism
by  a  reference  to  the  particular  Temple  of
Solomon,  and  to  the  operative  art  engaged
in  its  construction,  is  an  application  of  the
idea  peculiar  to  Freemasonry.  Hitchcock,
in  his  Essay  on  Swedenborg,  thinks  that  the
same  idea  was  also  shared  by  the  Hermetic
philosophers.  He  says:  “With  perhaps
the  majority  oUreaders,  the  Temple  of
Solomon,  and  also  the  tabernacle,  were
mere  buildings  —  very  magnificent,  indeed,
but  still  mere  buildings  —  for  the  worship
of  God.  But  some  are  struck  with  many
portions  of  the  account  of  their  erection  ad¬
mitting  a  moral  interpretation  ;  and  while
the  buildings  are  allowed  to  stand  (or  to
have  stood,  once,)  visible  objects,  these  in¬
terpreters  are  delighted  to  meet  with  indi¬
cations  that  Moses  and  Solomon,  in  build¬
ing  the  Temples,  were  wise  in  the  knowledge
of  God  and  of  man;  from  which  point  it
is  not  difficult  to  pass  on  to  the  moral
meaning  altogether,  and  affirm  that  the
building,  which  was  erected  without  ‘the
noise  of  a  hammer,  or  axe,  or  any  tool  of
iron,’  (1  Kings  vi.  7,)  was  altogether  a
moral  building  —  a  building  of  God,  not
made  with  hands.  In  short,  many  see  in
the  story  of  Solomon’s  Temple  a  symboli¬
cal  representation  of  Man  as  the  temple
of  God,  with  its  Holy  of  Holies  deep
seated  in  the  centre  of  the  human  heart.”

Spoultfe,  Jolin  <le.  He  appears  to
have  presided  over  the  Masons  of  England
in  1350,  in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.  Ander¬
son  says  he  was  called  Master  of  the  “Ghib-
lim.”


Spreading  the  Ballot.  Taking  the
vote  on  the  application  of  a  candidate  for
initiation  or  admission.  It  is  an  Ameri¬
canism,  principally  used  in  the  Western
States.  Thus :  “  The  ballot  may  be  spread
a  second  time  in  almost  any  case  if  the  har¬
mony  of  the  Lodge  seems  to  require  it.”
—  Swigert,  G.\  M.‘.  of  Kentucky.  “It  is
legal  to  spread  the  ballot  the  third  time,  if
for  the  correction  of  mistakes,  not  other¬
wise.”  —  Rob.  Morris.  It  is  a  technicality,
and  scarcely  English.

Sprengseison,  Christian  Fried¬
rich  Kessler  Yon.  An  ardent  adherent
of  Von  Hund  and  admirer  of  his  Templar
system,  in  defence  of  which,  and  against
the  Spiritual  Templarism  of  Starck,  he
wrote,  in  1786,  the  book,  now  very  rare,
entitled  Anti  Saint  Nicaise,  and  other
works.  He  was  born  at  Saalsfield,  in  1731,
and  died  Jan.  11,  1809.  See  Saint  Nicaise.

Sprig  of  Aeaeia.  See  Acacia.

Spurious  Freemasonry.  For  this
term,  and  for  the  theory  connected  with  it,
we  are  indebted  to  Dr.  Oliver,  whose  spec¬
ulations  led  him  to  the  conclusion  that  in
the  earliest  ages  of  the  world  there  were
two  systems  of  Freemasonry,  the  one  of
which,  preserved  by  the  patriarchs  and  their
descendants,  he  called  Primitive  or  Pure
F reemasonry .  ( See  Primitive  Freemasonry. )
The  other,  which  was  a  schism  from  this
system,  he  designated  as  the  Spurious  Free¬
masonry  of  Antiquity.  To  comprehend
this  system  of  Oliver,  and  to  understand
his  doctrine  of  the  declension  of  the  Spu¬
rious  from  the  Primitive  Freemasonry,  we
must  remember  that  there  were  two  races
of  men  descended  from  the  loins  of  Adam,
whose  history  is  as  different  as  their  char¬
acters  were  dissimilar.  There  was  the  vir¬
tuous  race  of  Seth  and  his  descendants,  and
the  wicked  one  of  Cain.  Seth  and  his  chil¬
dren,  down  to  Noah,  preserved  the  dogmas
and  instructions,  the  legends  and  symbols,
which  had  been  received  from  their  com¬
mon  progenitor,  Adam ;  but  Cain  and  his
descendants,  whose  vices  at  length  brought
on  the  destruction  of  the  earth,  either  total¬
ly  forgot  or  greatly  corrupted  them.  Their
Freemasonry  was  not  the  same  as  that  of
the  Sethites.  They  distorted  the  truth,  and
varied  the  landmarks  to  suit  their  own  pro¬
fane  purposes.  At  length  the  two  races
became  blended  together.  The  descendants
of  Seth,  becoming  corrupted  by  their  fre¬
quent  communications  with  those  of  Cain,
adopted  their  manners,  and  soon  lost  the
principles  of  the  Primitive  Freemasonry,
which  at  length  were  confined  to  Noah  and
his  three  sons,  who  alone,  in  the  destruc¬
tion  of  a  wicked  world,  were  thought
worthy  of  receiving  mercy.

Noah  consequently  preserved  this  sys-


734


SPURIOUS


SPURS


tem,  and  was  the  medium  of  communica¬
ting  it  to  the  post-diluvian  world.  Hence,
immediately  after  the  deluge,  Primitive
Freemasonry  was  the  only  system  extant.

But  this  happy  state  of  affairs  was  not  to
last.  Ham,  the  son  of  Noah,  who  had  been
accursed  by  his  father  for  his  wickedness,
had  been  long  familiar  with  the  corruptions
of  the  system  of  Cain,  and  with  the  gradual
deviations  from  truth  which,  through  the
influence  of  evil  example,  had  crept  into
the  system  of  Seth.  After  the  deluge,  he
propagated  the  worst  features  of  both  sys¬
tems  among  his  immediate  descendants.
Two  sects  or  parties,  so  to  speak,  now  arose
in  the  world  —  one  which  preserved  the
great  truths  of  religion,  and  consequently
of  Masonry,  which  had  been  handed  down
from  Adam,  Enoch,  and  Noah  —  and  anoth¬
er  which  deviated  more  and  more  from  this
pure,  original  source.  On  the  dispersion  at
the  tower  of  Babel,  the  schism  became  still
wider  and  more  irreconcilable.  The  le¬
gends  of  Primitive  Freemasonry  were  al¬
tered,  and  its  symbols  perverted  to  a  false
worship ;  the  mysteries  were  dedicated  to
the  worship  of  false  gods  and  the  practice
of  idolatrous  rites,  and  in  the  place  of  the
Pure  or  Primitive  Freemasonry  which  con¬
tinued  to  be  cultivated  among  the  patri¬
archal  descendants  of  Noah,  was  established
those  mysteries  of  Paganism  to  which  Dr.
Oliver  has  given  the  name  of  the  “Spurious
Freemasonry.”

It  is  not  to  Dr.  Oliver,  nor  to  any  very
modern  writer,  that  we  are  indebted  for  the
idea  of  a  Masonic  schism  in  this  early  age
of  the  world.  The  doctrine  that  Masonry
was  lost,  that  is  to  say,  lost  in  its  purity,  to
the  larger  portion  of  mankind,  at  the  tower
of  Babel,  is  still  preserved  in  the  ritual  of
Ancient  Craft  Masonry.  And  in  the  de¬
gree  of  Noachites,  a  degree  which  is  at¬
tached  to  the  Scottish  Rite,  the  fact  is
plainly  adverted  to  as,  indeed,  the  very
foundation  of  the  degree.  Two  races  of
Masons  are  there  distinctly  named,  the
Noachites  and  the  Hiramites ;  the  former
were  the  conservators  of  the  Primitive
Freemasonry  as  the  descendants  of  Noah;
the  latter  were  the  descendants  of  Hiram,
who  was  himself  of  the  race  which  had  fallen
into  Spurious  Freemasonry,  but  had  re¬
united  himself  to  the  true  sect  at  the  build¬
ing  of  King  Solomon’s  Temple,  as  we  shall
hereafter  see.  But  the  inventors  of  the  de¬
gree  do  not  seem  to  have  had  any  very  pre¬
cise  notions  in  relation  to  this  latter  part  of
the  history.

The  mysteries,  which  constituted  what
has  been  thus  called  Spurious  Freemasonry,
were  all  more  or  less  identical  in  character.
Varying  in  a  few  unimportant  particulars,
attributable  to  the  influence  of  local  causes,


their  great  similarity  in  all  important  points
showed  their  derivation  from  a  common
origin.

In  the  first  place,  they  were  communi¬
cated  through  a  system  of  initiation,  by
which  the  aspirant  was  gradually  prepared
for  the  reception  of  their  final  doctrines;
the  rites  were  performed  at  night,  and  in
the  most  retired  situations,  in  caverns  or
amid  the  deep  recesses  of  groves  and  for¬
ests;  and  the  secrets  were  only  communi¬
cated  to  the  initiated  after  the  administra¬
tion  of  an  obligation.  Thus,  Firinicus  ( As¬
tro l.,  lib.  vii.,)  tells  us  that  “when  Orpheus
explained  the  ceremonies  of  his  mysteries
to  candidates,  he  demanded  of  them,  at  the
very  entrance,  an  oath,  under  the  solemn
sanction  of  religion,  that  they  would  not
betray  the  rites  to  profane  ears.”  And
hence,  as  Warburton  says  from  Horus
Apollo,  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphic  for  the
mysteries  was  a  grasshopper,  because  that
insect  was  supposed  to  have  no  mouth.

The  ceremonies  were  all  of  a  funereal
character.  Commencing  in  representations
of  a  lugubrious  description,  they  celebrated
the  legend  of  the  death  and  burial  of  some
mythical  being  who  was  the  especial  ob¬
ject  of  their  love  and  adoration.  But  these
rites,  thus  beginning  in  lamentation,  and
typical  of  death,  always  ended  in  joy.  The
object  of  their  sorrow  was  restored  to  life
and  immortality,  and  the  latter  part  of  the
ceremonial  was  descriptive  of  his  resurrec¬
tion.  Hence,  the  great  doctrines  of  the
mysteries  were  the  immortality  of  the  soul
and  the  existence  of  a  God.

Such,  then,  is  the  theory  on  the  subject
of  what  is  called  “Spurious  Freemasonry,”
as  taught  by  Oliver  and  the  disciples  of  his
school.  Primitive  Freemasonry  consisted
of  that  traditional  knowledge  and  symbolic
instruction  which  had  been  handed  down
from.  Adam,  through  Enoch,  Noah,  and  the
rest  of  the  patriarchs,  to  the  time  of  Solo¬
mon.  Spurious  Freemasonry  consisted  of
the  doctrines  and  initiations  practised  at
first  by  the  antediluvian  descendants  of
Cain,  and,  after  the  dispersion  at  Babel,  by
the  Pagan  priests  and  philosophers  in  their
“Mysteries.”

Spurs.  In  the  Orders  of  Chivalry,  the
spurs  had  a  symbolic  meaning  as  im¬
portant  as  their  practical  use  was  neces¬
sary.  “To  win  one’s  spurs”  was  a  phrase
which  meant  “  to  win  one’s  right  to  the
dignity  of  knighthood.”  Hence,  in  the  in¬
vestiture  of  a  knight,  he  was  told  that  the
spurs  were  a  symbol  of  promptitude  in
military  service ;  and  in  the  degradation  of
an  unfaithful  knight,  his  spurs  were  hacked
off  by  the  cook,  to  show  his  utter  unwor¬
thiness  to  wear  them.  Stowe  says,  (An¬
nals,  902,)  in  describing  the  ceremony  of


SQUARE


SQUARE


735


investing  knights :  “  Evening  prayer  being
ended,  there  stood  at  the  chapel-door  the
king’s  master-cook,  with  his  white  apron
and  sleeves,  and  chopping-knife  in  his  hand,
gilded  about  the  edge,  and  challenged  their
spurs,  which  they  redeemed  with  a  noble  a
piece;  and  he  said  to  every  knight,  as  they
assed  by  him :  ‘  Sir  Knight,  look  that  you
e  true  and  loyal  to  the  king,  my  master,
or  else  I  must  hew  these  spurs  from  your
heels.’  ”  In  the  Masonic  Orders  of  Chival¬
ry,  the  symbolism  of  the  spurs  has  unfortu¬
nately  been  omitted.

Square.  This  is  one  of  the  most  im¬
portant  and  significant  symbols  in  Free¬
masonry.  As  such,  it  is  proper  that  its  true
form  should  be  pre¬
served.  The  French
Masons  have  almost
universally  given  it
with  one  leg  longer
than  the  other,  thus
making  it  a  carpen¬
ter’s  square.  The
American  Masons,
following  the  incor¬
rect  delineations  of  Jeremy  L.  Cross,  have,
while  generally  preserving  the  equality  of
length  in  the  legs,  unnecessarily  marked  its
surface  with  inches  ;  thus  making  it  an  in¬
strument  for  measuring  length  and  breadth,
which  it  is  not.  It  is  simply  the  trying
square  of  a  stonemason,  and  has  a  plain
surface;  the  sides  or  legs  embracing  an  an¬
gle  of  ninety  degrees,  and  is  intended  only
to  test  the  accuracy  of  the  sides  of  a  stone,
and  to  see  that  its  edges  subtend  the  same
angle.

In  Freemasonry,  it  is  a  symbol  of  moral¬
ity.  This  is  its  general  signification,  and
is  applied  in  various  ways :  1.  It  presents
itself  to  the  neophyte  as  one  of  the  three
great  lights  ;  2.  To  the  Fellow  Craft  as  one
of  his  working-tools ;  3.  To  the  Master
Mason  as  the  official  emblem  of  the  Master
of  the  Lodge.  Everywhere,  however,  it
inculcates  the  same  lesson  of  morality,  of
truthfulness,  of  honesty.  So  universally
accepted  is  this  symbolism,  that  it  has
gone  outside  of  the  Order,  and  has  been
found  in  colloquial  language  communi¬
cating  the  same  idea.  Square,  says  Halli-
well,  (Diet.  Archaisms,)  means  honest,
equitable,  as  in  “square  dealing.”  To
play  upon  the  square  is  proverbial  for  to  play
honestly.  In  this  sense  the  word  is  found
in  the  old  writers.

As  a  Masonic  symbol,  it  is  of  very  an¬
cient  date,  and  was  familiar  to  the  Oper¬
ative  Masons.  In  the  year  1830,  the
architect,  in  rebuilding  a  very  ancient
bridge  called  Baal  bridge,  near  Limerick,
in  Ireland,  found  under  the  foundation-


stone  an  old  brass  square,  much  eaten  away,
containing  on  its  two  surfaces  the  following
inscription :  I.  WILL.  STRIUE.  TO.  LIUE.
—  WITH.  LOUE.  &  CARE.  — UPON.
THE.  LEUL. —  BY.  THE.  SQUARE.,  and
the  date  1517.  The  modern  Speculative
Mason  will  recognize  the  idea  of  living  on
the  level  and  by  the  square.  This  discovery
proves,  if  proof  were  necessary,  that  the
familiar  idea  was  borrowed  from  our  Oper¬
ative  brethren  of  former  days.

The  square,  as  a  symbol  in  Speculative
Masonry,  has  therefore  presented  itself
from  the  very  beginning  of  the  revival  pe¬
riod.  In  the  very  earliest  catechism  of  the
last  century,  of  the  date  of  1725,  we  find  the
answer  to  the  question,  “  How  many  make
a  Lodge?”  is  “God  and  the  Square,  with
five  or  seven  right  or  perfect  Masons.”
God  and  the  Square,  religion  and  moral¬
ity,  must  be  present  in  every  Lodge  as
governing  principles.  Signs  at  that  early
period  were  to  be  made  by  squares,  and  the
furniture  of  the  Lodge  was  declared  to  be
the  Bible,  Compass,  and  Square.

In  all  rites  and  in  all  languages  where
Masonry  has  penetrated,  the  square  has
preserved  its  primitive  signification  as  a
symbol  of  morality.

Square  ami  Compass.  These  two
symbols  have  been  so  long  and  so  universally
combined, —  to  teach
us,  as  says  an  early
ritual,  “  to  square  our
actions  and  to  keep
them  within  due
bounds,”  they  are  so
seldom  seen  apart,
but  are  so  kept  to¬
gether,  either  as  two  great  lights,  or  as  a
jewel  worn  once  by  the  Master  of  the
Lodge,  now  by  the  Past  Master,  —  that
they  have  come  at  last  to  be  recognized
as  the  proper  badge  of  a  Master  Mason,
just  as  the  triple  tau  is  of  a  Royal  Arch
Mason  or  the  passion  cross  of  a  Knight
Templar.

So  universally  has  this  symbol  been
recognized,  even  by  the  profane  world,  as
the  peculiar  characteristic  of  Freemasonry,
that  it  has  recently  been  made  in  the
United  States  the  subject  of  a  legal  deci¬
sion.  A  manufacturer  of  flour  having
made,  in  1873,  an  application  to  the  Patent-
Office  for  permission  to  adopt  the  square
and  compass  as  a  trade-mark,  the  Commis¬
sioner  of  Patents  refused  the  permission
on  the  ground  that  the  mark  was  a  Ma¬
sonic  symbol.

“  If  this  emblem,”  said  Mr.  J.  M.
Thacher,  the  Commissioner,  “  were  some¬
thing  other  than  precisely  what  it  is  —
either  less  known,  less  significant,  or  fully


736


SQUARE


8QTJIN


and  universally  understood  —  all  this  might
readily  be  admitted.  But,  considering  its  pe¬
culiar  character  and  relation  to  the  public,
an  anomalous  question  is  presented.  There
can  be  no  doubt  that  this  device,  so  com¬
monly  worn  and  employed  by  Masons,  has
an  established  mystic  significance,  univer¬
sally  recognized  as  existing  ;  whether  com¬
prehended  by  all  or  not,  is  not  material  to
this  issue.  In  view  of  the  magnitude  and
extent  of  the  Masonic  organization,  it  is
impossible  to  divest  its  symbols,  or  at  least
this  particular  symbol  —  perhaps  the  best
known  of  all  —  of  its  ordinary  significa¬
tion,  wherever  displayed,  either  as  an  arbi¬
trary  character  or  otherwise.  It  will  be
universally  understood,  or  misunderstood,
as  having  a  Masonic  significance;  and,
therefore,  as  a  trade-mark,  must  constantly
work  deception.  Nothing  could  be  more
mischievous  than  to  create  as  a  monopoly,
and  uphold  by  the  power  of  law,  anything
so  calculated,  as  applied  to  purposes  of
trade,  to  be  misinterpreted,  to  mislead  all
classes,  and  to  constantly  foster  sugges¬
tions  of  mystery  in  affairs  of  business.”

In  a  religious  work  by  John  Davies,  en¬
titled  Summa  Totalis,  or  All  in  All  and  the
Same  Forever,  printed  in  1607,  we  find  an
allusion  to  the  square  and  compass  by  a
prolane  in  a  really  Masonic  sense.  The
author,  who  proposes  to  describe  mystically
the  form  of  the  Deity,  says  in  his  dedica¬
tion  :

“Yet  I  this  forme  of  formelesse  Deity,

Drewe  by  the  Squire  and  Compasse  of  our
Creed.”

In  Masonic  symbolism  the  Square  and
Compass  refer  to  the  Mason’s  duty  to  the
Craft  and  to  himself;  hence  it  is  properly  a
symbol  of  brotherhood,  and  there  signifi¬
cantly  adopted  as  the  badge  or  token  of  the
Fraternity.

Berage,  in  his  work  on  the  high  degrees,
(Les plus  secrets  Mysttres  des  Hauts  Grades,)
gives  an  interpretation  to  the  symbol
which  I  have  nowhere  else  seen.  He  says :
“The  square  and  the  compass  represent
the  union  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.
None  of  the  high  degrees  recognize  this  in¬
terpretation.  although  their  symbolism  of
the  two  implements  differs  somewhat  from
that  of  symbolic  Masonry.  The  square  is
with  them  peculiarly  appropriated  to  the
lower  degrees,  as  founded  on  the  operative
art;  while  the  compass,  as  an  implement  of
higher  character  and  uses,  is  attributed  to
the  degrees,  which  claim  to  have  a  more
elevated  and  philosophical  foundation.
Thus  they  speak  of  the  initiate,  when  he
passes  from  the  blue  Lodge  to  the  Lodge
of  Perfection,  as  ‘passing  from  the  square
to  the  compass,’  to  indicate  a  progressive


elevation  in  his  studies.  Yet  even  in  the
high  degrees,  the  square  and  compass  com¬
bined  retain  their  primitive  signification
as  a  symbol  of  brotherhood  and  as  a  badge
of  the  Order.”

Squill  de  Flexian.  A  recreant

Templar,  to  whom,  with  Noffodei  and,  as
some  say,  another  unknown  person,  is  at¬
tributed  the  invention  of  the  false  accusa¬
tions  upon  which  were  based  the  persecu¬
tions  and  the  downfall  of  the  Order  of
Knights  Templars.  He  was  a  native  of
the  city  of  Beziers,  in  the  south  of  France,
and  having  been  received  as  a  Knight
Templar,  had  made  so  much  proficiency  in
the  Order  as  to  have  been  appointed  to  the
head  of  the  Priory  of  Montfaucon.  Reg-
hellini  states  that  both  Squin  de  Flexian
and  Noffodei  were  Templars,  and  held  the
rank  of  Commanders;  but  Dupuy  ( Con¬
demnation  des  Templiers )  denies  that  the
latter  was  a  Templar.  He  says :  “  All  his¬
torians  agree  that  the  origin  of  the  ruin  of
the  Templars  was  the  work  of  the  Prior  of
Montfaucon  and  of  Noffodei,  a  Florentine,
banished  from  his  country,  and  whom  no¬
body  believes  to  have  been  a  Templar.
This  Prior,  by  the  sentence  of  the  Grand
Master,  had  been  condemned,  for  heresy
and  for  having  led  an  infamous  life,  to  pass
the  remainder  of  his  days  in  a  prison.  The
other  is  reported  to  have  been  condemned
to  rigorous  penalties  by  the  provost  of
Paris.”

Reghellini’s  account  [La  Maqonnerie  con-
sideree,  etc.,  I.,  p.  451,)  is  more  circumstan¬
tial.  He  says:  “In  1506,  two  Knights
Templars,  Noffodei  and  Florian,  were  pun¬
ished  for  crimes,  and  lost  their  Comraan-
deries,  that  of  the  latter  being  Montfaucon.
They  petitioned  the  Provincial  Grand
Master  of  Mount  Carmel  for  a  restoration
to  their  offices,  but  met  with  a  refusal.
They  then  obtained  an  entrance  into  the
Provincial  Grand  Master’s  country-house,
near  Milan,  and  having  assassinated  him,
concealed  the  body  in  the  woods  under
some  thick  shrubbery ;  after  which  they
fled  to  Paris.  There  they  obtained  access
to  the  king,  and  thus  furnished  Philip  with
an  occasion  for  executing  his  projects,  by
denouncing  the  Order  and  exposing  to  him
the  immense  wealth  which  it  possessed.

“  They  proposed  the  abolition  of  the
Order,  and  promised  the  king,  for  a  reward,
to  be  its  denouncers.  The  king  accepted
their  proposition,  and,  assuring  them  of  his
protection,  pointed  out  to  them  the  course
which  they  were  to  pursue.

“  They  associated  with  themselves  a  third
individual,  called  by  historians  ‘the  Un¬
known,’  (P Inconnu ;)  and  Noffodei  and  Flo¬
rian  sent  a  memorial  to  Enguerand  de  Ma-
1  rigni,  Superintendent  of  the  Finances,  in


SQUIN

which  they  proposed,  if  he  would  guaran¬
tee  them  against  the  attacks  of  the  Order  of
Templars,  and  grant  them  civil  existence
and  rights,  to  discover  to  the  king  secrets
which  they  deemed  of  more  value  than  the
conquest  of  an  empire.

“As  a  sequel  to  this  first  declaration,
they  addressed  to  the  king  an  accusation,
which  was  the  same  as  he  had  himself  dic¬
tated  to  them  for  the  purpose  of  the  turn
which  he  desired  to  the  affair.  This  accusa¬
tion  contained  the  following  charges:

“1.  That  the  Order  of  Templars  was  the
foe  of  all  kings  and  all  sovereign  authority  ;
that  it  communicated  secrets  to  its  initiates
under  horrible  oaths,  with  the  criminal
condition  of  the  penalty  of  death  if  they
divulged  them;  and  that  the  secret  prac¬
tices  of  their  initiations  were  the  conse¬
quences  of  irreligion,  atheism,  and  rebel¬
lion.

“  2.  That  the  Order  had  betrayed  the  re¬
ligion  of  Christ,  by  communicating  to  the
Sultan  of  Babylon  all  the  plans  and  opera¬
tions  of  the  Emperor  Frederick  the  Second,
whereby  the  designs  of  the  Crusaders  for
the  recovery  of  the  Holy  Land  were  frus¬
trated.

“  3.  That  the  Order  prostituted  the  mys¬
teries  most  venerated  by  Christians,  by
making  a  Knight,  when  he  was  received,
trample  upon  the  Cross,  the  sign  of  redemp¬
tion;  and  abjured  the  Christian  religion  by
making  the  neophyte  declare  that  the  true
God  had  never  died,  and  never  could  die;
that  they  carried  about  them  and  wor¬
shipped  a  little  idol  called  Bafomet ;  and
that  after  his  initiation  the  neophyte  was
compelled  to  undergo  certain  obscene  prac¬
tices.

“4.  That  when  a  Knight  was  received,
the  Order  bound  him  by  an  oath  to  a  com-
lete  and  blind  obedience  to  the  Grand
faster,  which  was  a  proof  of  rebellion
against  the  legitimate  authority.

“5.  That  Good  Friday  was  the  day  se¬
lected  for  the  grand  orgies  of  the  Order.

“6.  That  they  were  guilty  of  unnatural
crimes.

“  7.  That  they  burned  the  children  of
their  concubines,  so  as  to  destroy  all  traces
of  their  debauchery.”

These  calumnies  formed  the  basis  of  the
longer  catalogue  of  accusations,  afterwards
presented  by  the  pope,  upon  which  the
Templars  were  finally  tried  and  condemned.

In  the  preliminary  examinations  of  the
accused,  Squin  de  Flexian  took  an  active
part  as  one  of  the  commissioners.  In  the
pleadings  for  their  defence  presented  by
the  Knights,  they  declare  that  “Knights
were  tortured  by  Flexian  de  Beziers,  prior
of  Montfaucon,  and  by  the  monk,  William
Robert,  and  that  already  thirty-six  had
4S  47


STAFF  737

died  of  the  tortures  inflicted  at  Paris,  and
several  others  in  other  places.”

Of  the  ultimate  fate  of  these  traitors
nothing  is  really  known.  When  the  in¬
famous  work  which  they  had  inaugurated
had  been  consummated  by  the  king  and
the  pope,  as  their  services  were  no  longer
needed,  they  sank  into  merited  oblivion.
The  author  of  the  Secret  Societies  of  the
Middle  Ages,  (p.  268,)  says:  “Squin  was
afterwards  hanged,  and  Noffodei  beheaded,
as  was  said,  with  little  probability,  by  the
Templars.”

Hardly  had  the  Templars,  in  their  pros¬
trate  condition,  the  power,  even  if  they  had
the  will,  to  inflict  such  punishment.  It
was  not  Squin,  but  Marigni,  his  abettor,
who  was  hanged  at  Montfaucon,  by  order
of  Louis  X.,  the  successor  of  Philip,  two
years  after  his  persecution  of  the  Templars,
The  revenge  they  took  was  of  a  symbolic
character.  In  the  change  of  the  legend  of
the  third  degree  into  that  of  the  Templar
system,  when  the  martyred  James  de  Molay
was  substituted  for  Hiram  Abif,  the  three  as¬
sassins  were  represented  by  Squin  de  Flex¬
ian,  Noffodei,  and  the  Unknown.  As  there
is  really  no  reference  in  the  historical  rec¬
ords  of  the  persecution  to  this  third  ac¬
cuser,  it  is  most  probable  that  he  is  alto¬
gether  a  mythical  personage,  invented
merely  to  complete  the  triad  of  assassins,
and  to  preserve  the  congruity  of  the  Templar
with  the  Masonic  legend.

The  name  of  Squin  de  Flexian,  as  well
as  that  of  Noffodei,  have  been  differently
spelled  by  various  writers,  to  say  nothing
of  the  incomprehensible  error  found  in
some  of  the  oldest  French  Cahiers  of  the
Kadosh,  such  as  that  of  De  la  Hogue,  where
the  two  traitors  are  named  Gerard  Tab6
and  Benoit  Mehui.  The  Processus  contra
Templarios  calls  him  Esquius  de  Flexian
de  Biteriis;  and  Raynouard  always  names
him  Squin  de  F/orian,  in  which  he  is
blindly  followed  by  Reghellini,  Ragon,  and
Thory.  But  the  weight  of  authority  is  in
favor  of  Squin  de  Flexian,  which  I  have  ac¬
cordingly  adopted  as  the  true  name  of  this
Judas  of  the  Templars.

StalF.  A  white  staff  is  the  proper  in¬
signia  of  a  Treasurer.  In  the  first  proces¬
sion  after  the  appointment  of  that  offi¬
cer  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  we
find  “the  Grand  Treasurer  with  the  Staff.”
In  this  country  the  use  of  the  staff  by  the
Treasurer  of  a  Lodge  has  been  discontinued.
It  was  derived  from  the  old  custom  for  the
treasurer  of  the  king’s  household  to  carry
a  staff  as  the  ensign  of  authority.  In  the
old  “Customary  Books”  we  are  told  that
the  Steward  or  Treasurer  of  the  household
—  for  the  offices  were  formerly  identical  —
received  the  office  from  the  king  himself  by


738


STAIRS


STARCK


the  presentation  of  a  staff  in  these  words :
Tennez  le  boston  de  nostre  maison,  “  Receive
the  staff  of  our  house.”  Hence  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  decreed,  June  24,  1741,
that  “in  the  procession  in  the  hall”  the
Grand  Treasurer  should  appear  “  with  the
staff.”

Stairs,  Winding.  See  Winding  Stairs.

Standard.  An  ensign  in  war,  being
that  under  which  the  soldiers  stand  or  to
which  they  rally  in  the  fight.  It  is  some¬
times  used  in  the  higher  degrees,  in  connec¬
tion  with  the  word  Bearer,  to  denote  a
particular  officer.  But  the  term  mostly
used  to  indicate  any  one  of  the  ensigns  of
the  different  degrees  of  Masonry  is  Banner.

The  Grand  Standard  of  the  Order  of
Knights  Templars  in  the  United  States  is
described  in  the  regulations  as  being  “  of
white  woollen  or  silk  stuff,  six  feet  in  height
and  five  feet  in  width,  made  tripartite  at  the
bottom,  fastened  at  the  top  to  the  cross-bar
by  nine  rings;  in  the  centre  of  the  field  a
blood-red  passion  cross,  over  which  the
motto,  In  hoc  Signo  Vinces,  and  under,  Non
Nobis,  Dornine!  non  Nobis  sed  Nomini  tuo.da
Oloriam  !  The  cross  to  be  four  feet  high,
and  the  upright  aud  bar  to  be  seven  inches
wide.  On  the  top  of  the  staff  a  gilded
globe  or  ball  four  inches  in  diameter,  sur¬
mounted  by  the  patriarchal  cross,  twelve
inches  in  height.  The  cross  to  be  crimson,
edged  with  gold.”

The  standard  of  the  Order  in  the  An¬
cient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  is  thus
described  in  the  Fundamental  Statutes.  It
is  white  with  a  gold  fringe,  bearing  in  the
centre  a  black  double-headed  eagle  wdth
wings  displayed ;  the  beaks  and  thighs  are
of  gold ;  it  holds  in  one  talon  the  golden
hilt  and  in  the  other  the  silver  blade  of  an
antique  sword,  placed  horizontally  from
right  to  left;  to  the  sword  is  suspended  the
Latin  device,  in  letters  of  gold,  Deus  me-
umque  Jus.  The  eagle  is  crowned  with  a
triangle  of  gold,  and  holds  a  purple  band
fringed  with  gold  and  strewn  with  golden
stars.

There  is  really  no  standard  of  the  Order
properly  belonging  to  Symbolic  or  Royal
Arch  Masonry.  Many  Grand  Chapters,
however,  and  some  Grand  Lodges  in  this
couutry,  have  adopted  for  a  standard  the
blazonment  of  the  arms  of  Masonry  first
made  by  Dermott  for  the  Athol  Grand
Lodge  of  Masons.  In  the  present  condi¬
tion  of  the  ritual,  occasioned  by  the  dissev¬
erance  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  from  the
Master’s,  and  its  organization  as  a  distinct
system,  this  standard,  if  adopted  at  all,
would  be  most  appropriate  to  the  Grand
Chapters,  since  its  charges  consist  of  sym¬
bols  no  longer  referred  to  in  the  ritual  of
Symbolic  Masonry.


Standard-Bearer.  An  officer  in  a

Commandery  of  Knights  Templars,  wdiose
duty  it  is  to  carry  and  protect  the  standard
of  the  Order.  A  similar  officer  exists  in
several  of  the  high  degrees.

Stand  to  and  Abide  by.  The  cov¬
enant  of  Masonry  requires  every  Mason
“  to  stand  to  and  abide  by  ”  the  laws  and
regulations  of  the  Order,  whether  expressed
in  the  edicts  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  the  by¬
laws  of  his  Lodge,  or  the  landmarks  of  the
Institution.  The  terms  are  not  precisely
synonymous,  although  generally  considered
to  be  so.  To  stand  to  has  a  somewhat  active
meaning,  and  signifies  to  maintain  and  de¬
fend  the  laws;  while  to  abide  by  is  more  pas¬
sive  in  meaning,  and  signifies  to  submit  to
the  award  made  by  such  laws.

Star.  In  the  French  and  Scottish
Rites  lighted  candles  or  torches  are  called
stars  when  used  in  some  of  the  ceremo¬
nies,  especially  in  the  reception  of  distin¬
guished  visitors,  where  the  number  of
lights  or  stars  with  which  the  visitor  is
received  is  proportioned  to  his  rank ;  but
the  number  is  always  odd,  being  3,  5,  7,  9,
or  11.

Star,  Blazing.  See  Blazing  Star.

Star,  Eastern.  See  Eastern  Star.

Star,  Five  -  Pointed.  See  Five-

Pointed  Star.

Star  in  the  East.  The  Blazing  Star
is  thus  called  by  those  who  entertain  the
theory  that  there  is  “an  intimate  and
necessary  connection  between  Masonry  and
Christianity.”  This  doctrine,  which  Dr.
Oliver  thinks  is  “  the  fairest  gem  that
Masonry  can  boast,”  is  defended  bv  him  in
his  early  work  entitled  The  Star  in  the  Fast.
The  whole  subject  is  discussed  in  the
article  Blazing  Star,  which  see.

Star  of  Jerusalem.  A  degree  cited
in  the  nomenclature  of  Fustier.

Star  of  the  Syrian  Knights.
( Etoile  des  Chevaliers  Syriens.)  The  Order
of  Syrian  Knights  of  the  Star  is  contained
in  the  collection  of  Pyron.  It  is  divided
into  three  degrees — Novice,  Professed,  and
Grand  Patriarch.

Starek,  Johann  Angust  Ton.

Von  Starek,  whose  life  is  closely  connected
with  the  history  of  German  Freemasonry,
and  especially  with  that  of  the  Rite  of
Strict  Observance,  wTas  born  at  Schwerin,
October  29,  1741.  He  studied  at  the  Uni¬
versity  of  Gottingen,  and  was  made  in  1761
a  Freemason  in  a  French  Military  Lodge.
In  1763  he  went  to  St.  Petersburg,  where
he  received  the  appointment  of  teacher  in
one  of  the  public  schools.  There,  too,  it
is  supposed  that  he  was  adopted  into  the
Rite  of  Melesino,  then  flourishing  in  the
Russian  capital,  and  became  first  acquainted
with  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance,  in  which


STARCK


STARCK


739


he  afterwards  played  so  important  a  part.
After  two  years’  residence  at  St.  Petersburg,
he  went  for  a  short  time  to  England,  and
was  in  August,  1766,  in  Paris.  In  1767  he
was  director  of  the  schools  at  Wismar,
where  he  was  Junior  Warden  of  the  Lodge
of  the  Three  Lions.  In  1770  he  was  called
to  Konigsberg,  to  occupy  the  chair  of  the¬
ology,  and  to  fill  the  post  of  court  chaplain.
The  following  year  he  resigned  both  offices,
and  retired  to  Mettau,  to  devote  himself
to  literary  and  philosophical  pursuits.  But
in  1781  the  court  at  Darmstadt  conferred
upon  him  the  posts  of  chief  preacher  and
the  first  place  in  the  consistory,  and  there
he  remained  until  his  death,  which  occurred
March  3,  1816.

The  knowledge  that  Starck  acquired  of
the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance  convinced
him  of  its  innate  weakness,  and  of  the  ne¬
cessity  of  some  reformation.  He  therefore
was  led  to  the  idea  of  reviving  the  spiritual
branch  of  the  Order,  a  project  which  he
sought  to  carry  into  effectt  at  first  quietly
and  secretly,  by  gaining  over  influential
Masous  to  his  views.  In  this  he  so  far  suc¬
ceeded  as  to  be  enabled  to  establish,  in  1767,
the  new  system  of  clerical  Knights  Tem¬
plars,  as  a  schism  from  the  Strict  Observ¬
ance,  and  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of
Clerks  of  Relaxed  Observance.  It  consisted
of  seven  degrees,  as  follows :  1.  Apprentice;
2.  Fellow;  3.  Master;  4.  Young  Scottish
Master;  5.  Old  Scottish  Master,  or  Knight
of  St.  Andrew;  6.  Provincial  Chapter  of
the  Red  Cross;  7.  Magus,  or  Knight  of
Brightness  and  Light ;  which  last  degree
was  divided  into  five  classes,  of  Novice,
Levite,  and  Priest  —  the  summit  of  the
Order  being  Knight  Priest.  Thus  he  em¬
bodied  the  idea  that  Templarism  was  a
hierarchy,  and  that  not  only  was  every  Ma¬
son  a  Templar,  but  every  true  Templar  was
both  a  Knight  and  a  Priest.  Starck,  who  was
originally  a  Protestant,  had  been  secretly
connected  with  Romanism  while  in  Paris  ;
and  he  attempted  surreptitiously  to  intro¬
duce  Roman  Catholicism  into  his  new  sys¬
tem.  He  professed  that  the  Rite  which  he
was  propagating  was  in  possession  of  secrets
not  known  to  the  chivalric  branch  of  the
Order;  and  he  demanded,  as  a  prerequisite
to  admission,  that  the  candidate  should  be
a  Roman  Catholic,  and  have  previously
received  the  degrees  of  Strict  Observance.

Starck  entered  into  a  correspondence  with
Yon  Hund,  the  head  of  the  Rite  of  Strict
Observance,  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  a
fusion  of  the  two  branches  —  the  chivalric
and  the  spiritual.  But,  notwithstanding
the  willingness  of  Von  Hund  to  accept  any
league  which  promised  to  give  renewed
strength  to  his  own  decaying  system,  the
fusion  was  never  effected.  It  is  true  that


in  1768  there  was  a  formal  union  of  the  two
branches  at  Wismar,  but  it  was  neither  sin¬
cere  nor  permanent.  At  the  Congress  of
Brunswick,  in  1775,  the  clerical  branch  se¬
ceded  and  formed  an  independent  Order;
and,  after  the  death  of  Von  Hund,  the
Lodges  of  the  Strict  Observance  abandoned
their  name,  and  called  themselves  the
United  German  Lodges.  The  spiritual
branch,  too,  soon  began  to  lose  favor  with
the  German  Freemasons,  partly  because
the  Swedish  system  was  getting  to  be  popu¬
lar  in  Germany,  and  partly  because  Starck
was  suspected  of  being  in  league  with  the
Catholics,  for  whose  sake  he  had  invented
his  system.  Documentary  evidence  has
since  proved  that  this  suspicion  was  well
founded.  Ragon  says  that  the  Order  con¬
tinued  in  successful  existence  until  the
year  1800 ;  but  I  doubt  if  it  lasted  so  long.

The  German  writers  have  not  hesitated
to  accuse  Starck  of  having  been  an  emissary
of  the  Jesuits,  and  of  having  instituted  his
Rite  in  the  interests  of  Jesuitism.  This,
of  course,  rendered  both  him  and  the  Rite
unpopular,  and  gave  an  impetus  to  its  de¬
cay  and  fall.  Starck  himself,  even  before
his  appointment  as  court  chaplain  at  Darm¬
stadt,  in  1781,  had,  by  his  own  confession,
not  only  abandoned  the  Rite,  but  all  inter¬
est  in  Freemasonry.  In  1785  he  wrote  his
Saint  Nicaise,  which  was  really  anti-Ma-
sonic  in  principle,  and  in  1787  he  published
his  work  Ueber  Kripto-Catholicesmus,  etc.,
or  A  Treatise  on  Secret  Catholicism,  on  Prose¬
lyte  Making,  on  Jesuitism,  and  on  Secret  So¬
cieties,  which  was  a  controversial  work  di¬
rected  against  Nicolai,  Gadicke,  and  Biester.
In  this  book  be  says:  “  It  is  true  that  in  my
youthful  days  I  was  a  Freemason.  It  is
also  true  that  when  the  so-called  Strict  Ob¬
servance  was  introduced  into  Masonry  I
belonged  to  it,  and  was,  like  others,  an
Eques,  Socius,  Armiger,  Commendator,  Pre¬
fect,  and  Sub-Prior;  and,  having  taken
some  formal  cloister-like  profession,  I  have
been  a  Clericus.  But  I  have  withdrawn
from  all  that,  and  all  that  is  called  Free¬
masonry,  for  more  than  nine  years.”

While  an  active  member  of  the  Masonic
Order,  whatever  may  have  been  his  secret
motives,  he  wrote  many  valuable  Masonic
works,  which  produced  at  the  time  of  their
appearance  a  great  sensation  in  Germany.
Such  were  his  Apology  for  the  Order  of
Freemasonry,  Berlin,  1778,  which  went
through  many  editions ;  On  the  Design  of
the  Order  of  Freemasonry,  Berlin,  1781 ;
and  On  the  Ancient  and  Modern  Mysteries,
1782.  He  was  distinguished  as  a  man  of
letters  and  as  a  learned  theologian,  and  has
left  numerous  works  on  general  literature
and  on  religion,  the  latter  class  showing  an
evident  leaning  towards  the  Roman  Catho-


740


STARE


STATISTICS


lie  faith,  of  which  he  was  evidently  a  par¬
tisan.  ‘‘There  is,”  says  Feller,  (Biog.
Univ.,)  “  in  the  life  of  Starck  something
singular,  that  has  never  been  made  public.”
I  think  the  verdict  is  now  well  established,
that  in  his  labors  for  the  apparent  reforma¬
tion  of  Freemasonry  there  was  a  deplorable
want  of  honesty  and  sincerity,  and  that  he
abandoned  the  Order  finally  because  his
schemes  of  ambition  failed,  and  the  Jesuiti¬
cal  designs  with  which  he  entered  it  were
frustrated.

Stare  Super  Vias  Antiquas.  (To

stand  on  the  old  paths.)  A  Latin  adage,  ap¬
propriately  applied  as  a  Masonic  motto  to
inculcate  the  duty  of  adhering  to  the  an¬
cient  landmarks.

State.  The  political  divisions  of  the
United  States  are  called  States  and  Terri¬
tories.  In  every  State  and  in  every  popu¬
lous  Territory  there  is  a  Grand  Lodge  and
a  Grand  Chapter,  each  of  which  exercises
exclusive  jurisdiction  over  all  the  Lodges
and  Chapters  within  its  political  bounda¬
ries  ;  nor  does  it  permit  the  introduction
of  any  other  Grand  Lodge  or  Grand  Chap¬
ter  within  its  limits;  so  that  there  is,  and
can  be,  but  one  Grand  Lodge  and  one
Grand  Chapter  in  each  State.  In  most  of
the  States  there  are  also  a  Grand  Council
of  Royal  and  Select  Masters,  and  a  Grand
Commandery  of  Knights  Templars,  which
claim  the  same  right  of  exclusive  jurisdic¬
tion.  See  Jurisdiction  of  a  Grand  Lodge.

Stations.  The  positions  occupied  by
the  subordinate  officers  of  a  Lodge  are
called  places ,  as  “the  Junior  Deacon’s
place  in  the  Lodge.”  But  the  positions  oc¬
cupied  by  the  Master  and  Wardens  are
called  stations,  as  “the  Senior  Warden’s
station  in  the  Lodge.”  This  is  because
these  three  officers,  representing  the  sun  in
his  three  prominent  points  of  rising,  cul¬
minating,  and  setting,  are  supposed  to  be
stationary,  and  therefore  remain  in  the  spot
appropriated  to  them  by  the  ritual,  while
the  Deacon  and  other  officers  are  required
to  move  about  from  place  to  place  in  the
Lodge.

Statistics  of  Freemasonry.  The

assertion  that  “  in  every  laud  a  Mason  may
find  a  home,  and  in  every  clime  a  brother,”
is  well  sustained  by  the  statistics  of  the
Order,  which  show  that,  wherever  civilized
men  have  left  their  footprints,  its  temples
have  been  established.  It  is  impossible  to
venture  on  anything  more  than  a  mere
approximation  to  the  number  of  Freema¬
sons  scattered  over  the  world ;  but  if  we
are  correct  in  believing  that  there  are  more
than  400,000  Masons  in  the  United  States
of  America,  any  estimate  that  would  place
the  whole  number  of  the  Fraternity  every¬
where  dispersed  at  less  than  a  million  and


a  half  would  be  a  very  low  estimate.  The
following  is  a  table  of  the  countries  in
which  Freemasonry  is  openly  practised
with  the  permission  of  the  public  authori¬
ties,  omitting  the  States,  now,  by  the
increasing  spirit  of  tolerance,  very  few,  in¬
deed,  where  the  suspicions  of  the  govern¬
ment  compel  the  Masons,  if  they  meet  at
all,  to  meet  in  private  :

I.  Ecbope.

Anhalt-Bernburg,  Netherlands,

Anhalt-Dessau,  Norway,

Bavaria,  Portugal,

Belgium,  Posen,  Duchy  of,

Bremen,  Prussia,

Brunswick,  Prussian  Poland,

Denmark,  Saxe,

England,  Saxe-Cohurg,

France,  Saxe-Gotha,

Germany,  Saxe-Hildburg-

Greece,  hausen,

Hamburg,  Saxe-Meiningen,

Hanover,  SaAe-Weimar,

Hesse-Darmstadt,  Saxony,

Holland,  Schwarzburg-

Holstein- Oldenburg,  Rudolstadt,
Hungary,  Scotland,

Ionian  Islands,  Spain,

Ireland,  Sweden,

Italy,  Switzerland,

Malta,  Wurtemberg.

Mecklenburg-
Schwerin,

II.  Asia.


Ceylon,

China,

India,

Japan,


Persia,

Pondicherry,

Turkey.


III.  Oceanica.


New  South  Wales,
Java,

New  Zealand,


Sumatra,

Sandwich  Islands.


TV.  Africa.

Algeria,  Guinea,

Bourbon,  Isle  of,  Mauritius,

Canary  Islands,  Mozambique,

Cape  of  Good  Hope  Senegambia,

Egypt,  St.  Helena.

Goa,

Y.  America.


Antigua,

Argentine  Republic,

Barbadoes,

Bermudas,

Brazil,

Canada,

Carthagena,

Chili,

Colombia,


Martinico,

Mexico,

New  Brunswick,
New  Grenada,
Nova  Scotia,
Panama,

Peru,

Rio  de  la  Plata,

St.  Bartholomew's,


STATUTE


ST.  CLAIR


741


St.  Croix,

St.  Eustatia,
St.  Martin,

St.  Thomas,
St.  Vincent,
Trinidad,
United  States,
Uruguay,
Venezuela.
Henry  VI.  See


St.  Christopher’s,

Curatjoa,

Dominica,

Dutch  Guiana,

English  Guiana,

French  Guiana,

Guadeloupe,

Hayti,

Jamaica,

Statute  of  Henry  VI.  See  La¬
borers,  Statute  of.

Statutes.  The  permanent  rules  by
which  a  subordinate  Lodge  is  governed  are
called  its  By-Laws;  the  regulations  of  a
Grand  Lodge  are  called  its  Constitution;
but  the  laws  enacted  for  the  government
of  a  Supreme  Council  of  the  Scottish  Rite
are  denominated  Statutes.

St.  Clair  Charters.  In  the  Advo¬
cates’  Library,  of  Edinburgh,  is  a  manu¬
script  entitled  “  Hay’s  MSS.,”  which  is,
says  Lawrie,  “a  collection  of  several  things
relating  to  the  historical  account  of  the


most  famed  families  of  Scotland.  Done  by
Richard  Augustine  Hay,  Canon  Regular
of  Sainte  Genevefs  of  Paris,  Prior  of  Sainte
Pierremonl,  etc.,  Anno  Domini  1706.”
Among  this  collection  are  two  manuscripts,
supposed  to  have  been  copied  from  the
originals  by  Canon  Hay,  and  which  are
known  to  Masonic  scholars  as  the  “St.
Clair  Charters.”  These  copies,  which  it
seems  were  alone  known  in  the  last  cen¬
tury,  were  first  published  by  Lawrie,  in  his
History  of  Freemasonry,  where  they  consti¬
tute  Appendixes  I.  and  II.  But  it  appears
that  the  originals  have  since  been  dis¬
covered,  and  they  have  been  republished
by  Bro.  W.  J.  Hughan,  in  his  Unpublished
Records  of  the  Craft,  with  the  following
introductory  account  of  them  by  Bro.  D.
Murray  Lyon :

“These  MSS.  were  several  years  ago
accidentally  discovered  by  David  Laing,
Esq.,  of  the  Signet  Library,  who  gave  them
to  tne  late  Bro.  Aytoun,  Professor  of  Belles-
Lettres  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  in
exchange  for  some  antique  documents  he
had.  The  Professor  presented  them  to  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  in  whose  reposi¬
tories  they  now  are.  There  can  be  no
doubt  of  their  identity  as  originals.  We
have  compared  several  of  the  signatures
with  autographs  in  other  MSS.  of  the  time.
The  charters  are  in  scrolls  of  paper, —  the
one  15  by  lli  inches,  the  other  26  by  lli
inches, —  and  for  their  better  preservation
have  been  affixed  to  cloth.  The  caligraphy
is  beautiful;  and  though  the  edges  of  the
paper  have  been  frayed,  and  holes  worn  in
one  or  two  places  where  the  sheets  had
been  folded,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  sup-

{ dying  the  few  words  that  have  been  ob-
iterated,  and  making  out  the  whole  of  the


text.  About  three  inches  in  depth  at  the
bottom  of  No.  1,  in  the  right  hand  corner,
is  entirely  wanting,  which  may  have  con¬
tained  some  signatures  in  addition  to  those
given.  The  left  hand  bottom  corner  of  No.
2  has  been  similarly  torn  away,  and  the
same  remark  with  regard  to  signatures  may
apply  to  it.  The  first  document  is  a  letter
of  jurisdiction,  granted  by  the  Freemen
Masons  of  Scotland  to  William  St.  Clair
of  Roslin,  (probable  date  1600-1.)  The
second  purports  to  have  been  granted  by
the  Freemen  Masons  and  Hammermen  of
Scotland  to  Sir  William  St.  Clair  of  Roslin,
(probable  date  May  1,  1628.)”

However  difficult  it  may  be  to  decide  as
to  the  precise  date  of  these  charters,  there
are  no  Masonic  manuscripts  whose  claim
to  authenticity  is  more  indisputable;  for
the  statements  which  they  contain  tally
not  only  with  the  uniformly  accepted  tra¬
ditions  of  Scotch  Masonry,  but  with  the
written  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland,  both  of  which  show  the  intimate
connection  that  existed  between  the  Free¬
masonry  of  that  kingdom  and  the  once
powerful  but  now  extinct  family  of  St.
Clair.

St.  Clair,  William.  The  St.  Clairs
of  Roslin,  or,  as  it  is  often  spelled,  of  Ross-
lyn,  held  for  more  than  three  hundred  years
an  intimate  connection  with  the  history  of
Masonry  in  Scotland.  William  St.  Clair,
Earl  of  Orkney  and  Caithness,  was,  in  1441,
appointed  by  King  James  IL  the  Patron
and  Protector  of  the  Masons  of  Scotland,
and  the  office  was  made  hereditary  in  his
family.  Charles  Mackie  says  of  him,  ( Lond .
Freem.,  May,  1851,  p.  166,)  that  “  he  was
considered  one  of  the  best  and  greatest
Masons  of  the  age.”  He  planned  the  con¬
struction  of  a  most  magnificent  collegiate
church  at  his  palace  of  Roslin,  of  which,
however,  only  the  chancel  and  part  of  the
transept  were  completed.  To  take  part  in
this  design,  he  invited  the  most  skilful
Masons  from  foreign  countries;  and  in  order
that  they  might  be  conveniently  lodged
and  carry  on  the  work  with  ease  and  dis¬
patch,  he  ordered  them  to  erect  the  neigh¬
boring  town  of  Roslin,  and  gave  to  each
of  the  most  worthy  a  house  and  lands.
After  his  death,  which  occurred  about
1480,  the  office  of  hereditary  Patron  was
transmitted  to  his  descendants,  who,  says
Lawrie,  [Hist.,  p.  100,)  “held  their  princi¬
pal  annual  meetings  at  Kilwinning.”

The  prerogative  of  nominating  the  office¬
bearers  of  the  Craft,  which  had  always
been  exercised  bv  the  kings  of  Scotland,
appears  to  have  "been  neglected  by  James
VI.  after  his  accession  to  the  throne  of
England.  Hence  the  Masons,  finding  them¬
selves  embarrassed  for  want  of  a  Protector,


742


ST.  CLAIR


ST.  CLAIR


about  the  year  1600,  (if  that  be  the  real
date  of  the  first  of  the  St.  Clair  Manu¬
scripts,)  appointed  William  St.  Clair  of
Roslin,  for  himself  and  his  heirs,  their
“patrons  and  judges.”  After  presiding
over  the  Order  for  many  years,  says  Law-
rie,  William  St.  Clair  went  to  Ireland,  and
in  1630  a  second  Charter  was  issued,  grant¬
ing  to  his  son,  Sir  William  St.  Clair,  the
same  power  with  which  his  father  had  been
invested.  This  Charter  having  been  signed
by  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  the  princi¬
pal  Lodges  of  Scotland,  Sir  William  St.
Clair  assumed  the  active  administration  of
the  affairs  of  the  Craft,  and  appointed  his
Deputies  and  Wardens,  as  had  been  cus¬
tomary  with  his  ancestors.  For  more  than
a  century  after  this  renewal  of  the  compact
between  the  Lairds  of  Roslin  and  the  Ma¬
sons  of  Scotland,  the  Craft  continued  to
flourish  under  the  successive  heads  of  the
family.

But  in  the  year  1736,  William  St.  Clair,
Esq.,  to  whom  the  Hereditary  Protectorship
had  descended  in  due  course  of  succession,
having  no  children  of  his  own,  became
anxious  that  the  office  of  Grand  Master
should  not  become  vacant  at  his  death.
Accordingly,  he  assembled  the  members  of
the  Lodges  of  Edinburgh  and  its  vicinity,
and  represented  to  them  the  good  effects
that  would  accrue  to  them  if  they  should
in  future  have  at  their  head  a  Grand  Master
of  their  own  choice,  and  declared  his  inten¬
tion  to  resign  into  the  hands  of  the  Craft
his  hereditary  right  to  the  office.  It  was
agreed  by  the  assembly  that  all  the  Lodges
of  Scotland  should  be  summoned  to  appear
by  themselves,  or  proxies,  on  the  approach¬
ing  St.  Andrew’s  day,  at  Edinburgh,  to
take  the  necessary  steps  for  the  election  of
a  Grand  Master.

In  compliance  with  the  call,  the  repre¬
sentatives  of  thirty-two  Lodges  met  at
Edinburgh  on  the  30th  of  November,  1736,
when  William  St.  Clair  tendered  the  fol¬
lowing  resignation  of  his  hereditary  office:

“  I,  William  St.  Clair,  Esq.,  of  Roslin,
taking  into  my  consideration  that  the  Ma¬
sons  in  Scotland  did,  by  several  deeds,  con¬
stitute  and  appoint  William  and  Sir  Wil¬
liam  St.  Clairs  of  Roslin,  my  ancestors  and
their  heirs,  to  be  their  patrons,  protectors,
judges,  or  masters ;  and  that  my  holding
or  claiming  any  such  jurisdiction,  right,  or
privilege  might  be  prejudicial  to  the  Craft
and  vocation  of  Masonry,  whereof  I  am  a
member;  and  I,  being  desirous  to  advance
and  promote  the  good  and  utility  of  the
said  Craft  of  Masonry  to  the  utmost  of  my
ower,  do  therefore  hereby,  for  me  and  my
eirs,  renounce,  quit-claim,  overgive,  and
discharge  all  right,  claim,  or  pretence  that
I,  or  my  heirs,  had,  have,  or  any  ways  may


have,  pretended  to,  or  claim  to  be,  patron,
protector,  judge,  or  master  of  the  Masons
in  Scotland,  in  virtue  of  any  deed  or  deeds
made  and  granted  by  the  said  Masons,  or
of  any  grant  or  charter  made  by  any  of  the
kings  of  Scotland  to  and  in  favor  of  the
said  William  and  Sir  William  St.  Claim  of
Roslin,  my  predecessors,  or  any  other  man¬
ner  or  way  whatsoever,  for  now  and  ever;
and  I  bind  and  oblige  me  and  my  heirs  to
warrant  this  present  renunciation  and  dis¬
charge  at  all  hands.  And  I  consent  to  the
registration  hereof  in  the  books  of  council
and  session,  or  any  other  judges’  books
competent  therein  to  remain  for  preserva¬
tion.”  And  then  follows  the  usual  formal
and  technical  termination  of  a  deed.

The  deed  of  resignation  having  been  ac¬
cepted,  the  Grand  Lodge  proceeded  to  the
election  of  its  office-bearers,  when  William
St.  Clair,  as  was  to  be  expected,  was  unan¬
imously  chosen  as  Grand  Master ;  an  office
which,  hotvever,  he  held  but  for  one  year,
being  succeeded  in  1737  by  the  Earl  of
Cromarty.  He  lived,  however,  more  than
half  a  century  afterwards,  and  died  in
January,  1778,  in  the  seventy-eighth  year
of  his  age.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  was  not
unmindful  of  his  services  to  the  Craft,  and
on  the  announcement  of  his  death  a  funeral
Lodge  was  convened,  when  four  hundred
brethren,  dressed  in  deep  mourning,  being
present,  Sir  William  Forbes,  who  was  then
the  Grand  Master,  delivered  an  impressive
address,  in  the  course  of  which  he  paid  the
following  tribute  to  the  character  of  St.
Clair.  After  alluding  to  his  voluntary  resig¬
nation  of  his  high  office  for  the  good  of
the  Order,  he  added:  “His  zeal,  however,
to  promote  the  welfare  of  our  society  was
not  confined  to  this  single  instance ;  for  he
continued  almost  to  the  very  close  of  life,
on  all  occasions  where  his  influence  or  his
example  could  prevail,  to  extend  the  spirit
of  Masonry  and  to  increase  the  number  of
the  brethren.  ...  To  these  more  conspicu¬
ous  and  public  parts  of  his  character  I  am
happy  to  be  able  to  add,  that  he  possessed
in  an  eminent  degree  the  virtues  of  a  benev¬
olent  and  good  heart  —  virtues  which  ought
ever  to  be  the  distinguishing  marks  of  a
true  brother.”

Bro.  Charles  Mackie,  in  the  London  Free¬
masons'  Quarterly  Review,  (1831,  p.  167,)
thus  describes  the  last  days  of  this  ven¬
erable  patron  of  the  Order.  “William  St.
Clair  of  Roslin,  the  last  of  that  noble
family,  was  one  of  the  most  remarkable
personages  of  his  time;  although  stripped
of  his  paternal  title  and  possessions,  he
walked  abroad  respected  and  reverenced.
He  moved  in  the  first  society;  and  if  he
did  not  carry  the  purse,  he  was  stamped


STEINBACH


STIRLING


743


with  the  impress  of  nobility.  He  did  not
require  a  cubit  to  be  added  to  his  stature,
for  he  was  considered  the  stateliest  man  of
his  age.”

Steinbaeli,  Erwin  of.  See  Erwin
of  Steinbach.

Steinmctz.  German.  A  stonemason.
For  an  account  of  the  German  fraternity  of
Steinmetzen,  see  Stonemasons  of  the  Middle
Ages.

Step.  The  step  can  hardly  be  called  a
mode  of  recognition,  although  Apuleius  in¬
forms  us  that  there  was  a  peculiar  step  in
the  Osiriac  initiation  which  was  deemed  a
sign.  It  is  in  Freemasonry  rather  an
esoteric  usage  of  the  ritual.  The  steps  can
be  traced  back  as  far  as  to  at  least  the
middle  of  the  last  century,  in  the  rituals  of
which  they  are  fully  described.  The  custom
of  advancing  in  a  peculiar  manner  and
form,  to  some  sacred  place  or  elevated  per¬
sonage,  has  been  preserved  in  the  customs
of  all  countries,  especially  among  the
Orientalists,  who  resort  even  to  prostrations
of  the  body  when  approaching  the  throne
of  the  sovereign  or  the  holy  part  of  a  reli¬
gious  edifice.  The  steps  of  Masonry  are
symbolic  of  respect  and  veneration  for  the
altar,  whence  Masonic  light  is  to  emanate.

In  former  times,  and  in  some  of  the  high
degrees,  a  bier  or  coffin  was  placed  in  front
of  the  altar,  as  a  well-known  symbol,  and
in  passing  over  this  to  reach
the  altar,  those  various  posi¬
tions  of  the  feet  were  neces¬
sarily  taken  which  constitute
the  proper  mode  of  advancing.

Respect  was  thus  necessarily
paid  to  the  memory  of  a
worthy  artist  as  well  as  to  the
holy  altar.  Lenning  says  of
the  steps  —  which  the  German
Masons  call  die  Schritte  der
Aufzunehmenden,  the  steps  of
the  recipients,  and  the  French,
les  pas  Mystdrieux,  the  mys¬
terious  steps  —  that  “  every  degree  has  a
different  number,  which  are  made  in  a  dif¬
ferent  way,  and  have  an  allegorical  mean¬
ing.”  Of  the  “allegorical  meaning”  of
those  in  the  third  degree,  I  have  spoken
above  as  explicitly  as  would  be  proper.
Gadicke  says:  “The  three  grand  steps
symbolically  lead  from  this  life  to  the
source  of  all  knowledge.”

It  must  be  evident  to  every  Master  Mason,
without  further  explanation,  that  the  three
steps  are  taken  from  the  place  of  darkness
to  the  place  of  light,  either  figuratively  or
really  over  a  coffin,  the  symbol  of  death,  to
teach  symbolically  that  the  passage  from
the  darkness  and  ignorance  of  this  life  is
through  death  to  the  light  and  knowledge
of  the  eternal  life.  And  this,  from  the


earliest  times,  was  the  true  symbolism  of
the  step.

Steps  on  the  Master’s  Carpet.

The  three  steps  delineated  on  the  Master’s
carpet,  as  one  of  the  symbols  of  the  third
degree,  refer  to  the  three  steps  or  stages  of
human  life  —  youth,  manhood,  and  old  age.
This  symbol  is  one  of  the  simplest  forms
or  modifications  of  the  mystical  ladder,
which  pervades  all  the  systems  of  initia¬
tion  ancient  and  modern.

Sterliin.  One  of  the  three  Assassins,
according  to  the  Hiramic  legend  of  some
of  the  high  degrees.  Lenning  says  the
word  means  vengeance:  I  know  not  on  what
authority.  STR  are  the  letters  of  the  Chal-
daic  verb  to  strike  a  blow,  and  it  may  be  that
the  root  of  the  name  will  be  there  found;
but  the  Masonic  corruptions  of  Hebrew
words  often  defy  the  rules  of  etymology.  I
am  much  inclined  to  believe  that  this  and
some  kindred  words  are  mere  anagrams,  or
corruptions  introduced  into  the  high  de¬
grees  by  the  adherents  of  the  Pretender,
who  sought  in  this  way  to  do  honor  to  the
friends  of  the  house  of  Stuart,  or  to  cast
infamy  on  its  enemies.  See  Romvel.

Stewards.  Officers  in  a  Symbolic
Lodge,  whose  appointment  is  generally
vested  in  the  Junior  Warden.  Their  duties
are,  to  assist  in  the  collection  of  dues  and
subscriptions ;  to  provide  the  necessary  re¬
freshments,  and  make  a  regular  report  to
the  Treasurer;  and  generally  to  aid  the
Deacons  and  other  officers  in  the  perform¬
ance  of  their  duties.  They  usually  carry
white  rods,  and  the  jewel  of  their  office  is  a
cornucopia,  which  is  a  symbol  of  plenty.

Stewards,  Grand.  See  Grand

Stewards.

Stewards’  Eodge.  See  Grand

Stewards'  Lodge.

Stirling.  A  city  in  Scotland  which
was  the  seat  of  a  Lodge  called  the  “Stirling
Ancient  Lodge,”  which  the  author  of  the
introduction  to  the  General  Regulations  of
the  Supreme  Grand  Chapter  of  Scotland  says
conferred  the  degrees  of  Royal  Arch,  Red
Cross  or  Ark,  the  Sepulchre,  Knight  of
Malta,  and  Knight  Templar  until  about  the
beginning  of  the  last  century,  when  two
Lodges  were  formed — one  for  the  cultiva¬
tion  of  St.  John’s  Masonry,  which  was  the
old  one,  and  a  new  one  called  the  “  Royal
Arch,”  for  the  high  degrees;  although  it,
too,  soon  began  to  confer  the  first  three
degrees.  The  “Ancient  Lodge”  joined
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  at  its  forma¬
tion  in  1736,  but  the  new  Lodge  remained
independent  until  1759.

The  same  authority  tells  us  that  “  in  the
Stirling  Ancient  Lodge  are  still  preserved
two  old,  rudely  -  engraved  brass  plates :
one  of  these  relates  to  the  first  two  degrees


744


ST.  LEGER


STONEMASONS


of  Masonry;  the  other  contains  on  the
one  side  certain  emblems  belonging  to  a
Master’s  Lodge,  and  on  the  reverse  five
figures;  the  one  at  the  top  is  called  the
*  Redd  Cross  or  Ark.’  At  the  bottom  is  a
series  of  concentric  arches,  which  might  be
mistaken  for  a  rainbow,  were  there  not  a
keystone  on  the  summit,  indicative  of  an
arch.  The  three  other  figures  are  inclosed
within  a  border;  the  upper  is  called  the
‘  Sepulchre ;’  the  second,  ‘  Knight  of  Malta;’
and  the  third,  ‘  Knight  Templar.’  The  age
of  these  plates  is  unknown,  but  they  can
scarcely  be  more  modern  than  the  begin¬
ning  or  middle  of  the  seventeenth  cen¬
tury.  ”

So  circumstantial  a  description,  inserted,
too,  in  a  book  of  official  authority,  would
naturally  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  these
plates  must  have  been  in  existence  in  1845,
when  the  description  was  written.  If  they
ever  existed,  they  have  now  disappeared,  nor
have  any  traces  of  them  been  discovered.
Bro.  W.  James  Hughan,  whose  indefatiga¬
ble  labors  have  been  rewarded  with  so
many  valuable  discoveries,  has  failed,  in  this
search,  to  find  success.  He  says,  ( Load .
Freemason,)  “I  spent  some  wTeeks,  in  odd
hours,  looking  up  the  question  a  few  years
ago,  and  wrote  officials  in  Edinburgh  and
at  Stirling,  and  also  made  special  inquiries
at  Stirling  by  kind  co-operation  of  Ma¬
sonic  students  who  also  investigated  the
matter;  but  all  our  many  attempts  only
resulted  in  confirming  what  I  was  told  at
the  outset,  viz.,  that  ‘  No  one  knows  aught
about  them,  either  in  Stirling  or  elsewhere.
The  friends  at  Stirling  say  the  plates  were
sent  to  Edinburgh,  and  never  returned,  and
the  Fraternity  at  Edinburgh  declared  they
were  returned,  and  have  since  been  lost.’”

St.  lieger.  See  Aldworth.

St.  Martin.  See  Saint  Martin.

Stockings.  In  the  last  century,  when
knee-breeches  constituted  a  portion  of  the
costume  of  gentlemen,  Masons  were  re¬
quired,  by  a  ritual  regulation,  to  wear  white
stockings.  The  fashion  having  expired,  the
regulation  is  no  longer  in  force.

Stolkin.  In  the  elu  degrees  this  is  the
name  of  one  of  those  appointed  to  search  for
the  criminals  commemorated  in  the  legend
of  the  third  degree.  It  is  impossible  to  trace
its  derivation  to  any  Hebrew  root.  It  may
be  an  anagram  of  a  name,  perhaps  that  of
one  of  the  friends  of  the  house  of  Stuart.

Stone.  The  stone,  on  account  of  its
hardness,  has  been  from  the  most  ancient
times  a  symbol  of  strength,  fortitude,
and  a  firm  foundation.  The  Hebrew  word
px,  EBEN,  which  signifies  a  stone,  is  de¬
rived,  by  Gesenius,  from  an  obsolete  root,
ABAN,  to  build,  whence  aban,  an  architect ;
and  he  refers  it  to  AM  AN  AH,  which  means


a  column,  a  covenant,  and  truth.  The  stone,
therefore,  says  Portal,  ( Symb.  des  Egypt.,)
may  be  considered  as  the  symbol  of  faith
and  truth:  whence  Christ  taught  the  very
principle  of  symbology,  when  he  called
Peter,  who  represented  faith,  the  rock  or
stone  on  which  he  would  build  his  Church.
But  in  Hebrew  as  well  as  in  Egyptian  sym¬
bology  the  stone  was  also  sometimes  the
symbol  of  falsehood.  Thus  the  name  of
Typhon,  the  principle  of  evil  in  the  Egyp¬
tian  theogony,  was  always  written  in  the
hieroglyphic  characters  with  the  determi¬
native  sign  for  a  stone.  But  the  stone  of
Typhon  was  a  hewn  stone,  which  had  the
same  evil  signification  in  Hebrew.  Hence
Jehovah  says  in  Exodus,  “Thou  shalt  not
build  me  an  altar  of  hewn  stone;”  and
Joshua  built,  in  Mount  Ebal,  “an  altar  of
whole  stones,  over  which  no  man  hath  lift
up  any  iron.”  The  hewn  stone  was  there¬
fore  a  symbol  of  evil  and  falsehood;  the
unhewn  stone  of  good  and  truth.  This  must
satisfy  us  that  the  Masonic  symbolism  of
the  stone,  which  is  the  converse  of  this,  has
not  been  derived  from  either  the  Hebrew
or  the  Egyptian  symbology,  but  sprang
from  the  architectural  ideas  of  the  Opera¬
tive  Masons;  for  in  Masonry  the  rough
ashlar,  or  unhewn  stone,  is  the  symbol  of
man’s  evil  and  corrupt  condition;  while  the
perfect  ashlar,  or  the  hewn  stone,  is  the  sym¬
bol  of  his  improved  and  perfected  nature.

Stone,  Corner.  See  Corner-Stone.

Stone,  Cubical.  See  Cubical  Stone.

Stone  Manuscript.  This  Manu¬
script  is  no  longer  in  existence,  having  been
one  of  those  which  was  destroyed,  in  1720,
by  some  too  scrupulous  brethren.  Preston
(ed.  1755,  p.  190,)  describes  it  as  “  an  old
manuscript,  which  was  destroyed  with
many  others  in  1720,  said  to  have  been  in
the  possession  of  Nicholas  Stone,  a  curious
sculptor  under  Inigo  Jones.”  Preston  gives,
however,  an  extract  from  it,  which  details
the  affection  borne  by  St.  Alban  for  the
Masons,  the  wages  he  gave  them,  and  the
charter  which  he  obtained  from  the  king
to  hold  a  general  assembly.  (See  Saint
Alban.)  Anderson,  (2d  ed.,  p.  99,)  whocalls
Stone  the  Warden  of  Inigo  Jones,  intimates
that  he  wrote  the  Manuscript,  and  gives  it
as  authority  for  a  statement  that  in  1607
Jones  held  the  Quarterly  Communications.
The  extract  made  by  Preston,  and  the  brief
reference  by  Anderson,  are  all  that  is  left
of  the  Stone  Manuscript.

Stonemasons  of  the  Middle
Ages.  The  history  of  the  origin  and  pro¬
gress  of  the  Brotherhood  of  Stonemasons
in  Europe,  during  the  Middle  Ages,  is  of
great  importance,  as  a  study,  to  the  Masonic
scholar,  because  of  the  intimate  connection
that  existed  between  that  Brotherhood  and


STONEMASONS


STONEMASONS


745


the  Fraternity  of  Freemasons.  Indeed,  the
history  of  the  one  is  but  the  introduction
to  the  history  of  the  other.  In  an  histor¬
ical  excursus,  we  are  compelled  to  take  up
the  speculative  science  where  we  find  it
left  by  the  operative  art.  Hence,  whoever
shall  undertake  to  write  a  history  of  Free¬
masonry,  must  give,  for  the  completion  of
his  labor,  a  very  full  consideration  to  the
Brotherhood  of  Stonemasons.

In  the  year  1820,  there  issued  from  the
press  of  Leipsic,  in  Germany,  a  work,  by
Dr.  Christian  Ludwig  Steiglitz,  under  the
title  of  Von  Altdeutsoher  Baukunst,  that  is,
“  An  Essay  on  the  Old  German  Architec¬
ture.”  In  this  work  the  author  traces,  with
great  exactness,  the  rise  and  the  progress
of  the  fraternities  of  Stonemasons  from
the  earliest  times,  through  the  Middle
Ages,  until  their  final  absorption  into  the
associations  of  Freemasons.  From  the
labors  of  Dr.  Steiglitz,  collated  with  some
other  authorities  in  respect  to  matters  upon
which  he  is  either  silent  or  erroneous,  I
have  compiled  the  following  sketch.

It  is  universally  admitted  that,  in  the
early  ages  of  Christianity,  the  clergy  alone
were  the  patrons  of  the  arts  and  sciences.
This  was  because  all  learning  was  then  al¬
most  exclusively  confined  to  ecclesiastics.
Very  few  of  the  laity  could  read  or  write,
and  even  kings  affixed  the  sign  of  the  cross,
in  the  place  of  their  signatures,  to  the
charters  and  other  documents  which  they
issued,  because,  as  they  frankly  confessed,
of  their  inability  to  write  their  names  ;  and
hence  comes  the  modern  expression  of  sign¬
ing  a  paper,  as  equivalent  to  subscribing
the  name.

From  the  time  of  Charlemagne,  in  the
eighth  century,  to  the  middle  of  the  twelfth,
all  knowledge  and  practice  of  architecture,
painting,  and  sculpture  were  exclusively
confined  to  the  monks ;  and  bishops  person¬
ally  superintended  the  erection  of  the
churches  and  cathedrals  in  their  dioceses,
because  not  only  the  principles,  but  the
practice  of  the  art  of  building  were  secrets
scrupulously  maintained  within  the  walls
of  cloisters,  and  utterly  unknown  to  lay¬
men.

Many  of  the  founders  of  the  Monastic
Orders,  and  especially  among  these  St.
Benedict,  made  it  a  peculiar  duty  for  the
brethren  to  devote  themselves  to  archi¬
tecture  and  church  building.  The  Eng¬
lish  monk  Winfrid,  better  known  in  ec¬
clesiastical  history  as  St.  Boniface,  and
who,  for  his  labors  in  Christianizing  that
country,  has  been  styled  the  Apostle
of  Germany,  followed  the  example  of  his
predecessors  in  the  erection  of  German
monasteries.  In  the  eighth  century  he
organized  an  especial  class  of  monks  for
4  T


the  practice  of  building,  under  the  name
of  Operarii,  or  Craftsmen,  and  Magistri
Operum,  or  Masters  of  the  Works.  The
labors  and  duties  of  these  monks  were  di¬
vided.  Some  of  them  designed  the  plan
of  the  building;  others  were  painters  and
sculptors;  others  were  occupied  in  working
in  gold  and  silver  and  embroidery;  and
others  again,  who  were  called  Ccemenfarii,
or  Stonemasons,  undertook  the  practical
labors  of  construction.  Sometimes,  espe¬
cially  in  extensive  buildings,  where  many
workmen  were  required,  laymen  were  also
employed,  under  the  direction  of  the
monks.  So  extensive  did  these  labors  be¬
come,  that  bishops  and  abbots  often  derived
a  large  portion  of  their  revenues  from  the
earnings  of  the  workmen  in  the  monas¬
teries.

Among  the  laymen  who  were  employed
in  the  monasteries  as  assistants  and  labor¬
ers,  many  were  of  course  possessed  of  su¬
perior  intelligence.  The  constant  and
intimate  association  of  these  with  the
monks  in  the  prosecution  of  the  same  de¬
sign  led  to  this  result,  that  in  process  of
time,  gradually  and  almost  unconsciously,
the  monks  imparted  to  them  their  art
secrets  and  the  esoteric  principles  of  archi¬
tecture.  Then,  by  degrees,  the  knowledge
of  the  arts  and  sciences  went  from  these
monkish  builders  out  into  the  world,  and
the  laymen  architects,  withdrawing  from
the  ecclesiastical  fraternities,  organized
brotherhoods  of  their  own.  Such  was  the
beginning  of  the  Masonic  fraternities  in
Germany,  and  the  same  thing  occurred  in
other  countries.  These  brotherhoods  of
Masons  now  began  to  be  called  upon,  as
the  monks  formerly  had  been,  when  an  im¬
portant  building,  and  especially  a  church
or  a  cathedral,  was  to  be  erected.  Event¬
ually  they  entirely  superseded  their  monk¬
ish  teachers  in  the  prosecution  of  the  art
of  building.  To  their  knowledge  of  archi¬
tecture  they  added  that  of  the  other  sciences,
which  they  had  learned  from  the  monks.
Like  these,  too,  they  devoted  themselves  to
the  higher  principles  of  the  art,  and  em¬
ployed  other  laymen  to  assist  their  labors
as  stone-masons.  And  thus  the  union  of
these  architects  and  stone-masons  presented,
in  the  midst  of  an  uneducated  people,  a  more
elevated  and  intelligent  class,  engaged  as
an  exclusive  association  in  building  im¬
portant  and  especially  religious  edifices.

But  now  a  new  classification  took  place.
As  formerly,  the  monks,  who  were  the  sole
depositaries  of  the  secrets  of  high  art,  sepa¬
rated  themselves  from  the  laymen,  who
were  intrusted  with  only  the  manual  labor
of  building;  so  now  the  more  intelligent
of  the  laymen,  who  had  received  these  se¬
crets  from  the  monks,  were  distinguished  as


746


STONEMASONS


STONEMASONS


architects  from  the  ordinary  laborers,  or
common  masons.  The  latter  knew  only
the  use  of  the  trowel  and  mortar,  while  the
former  were  occupied  in  devising  plans  for
building  and  the  construction  of  ornaments
by  sculpture  and  skilful  stone-cutting.

These  brotherhoods  of  high  artists  soon
won  great  esteem,  and  many  privileges  and
franchises  were  conceded  to  them  by  the
municipal  authorities  among  whom  they
practised  their  profession.  Their  places  of
assembly  were  called  Hutten,  Logen,  or
Lodges,  and  the  members  took  the  name  of
Freemasons.  Their  patron  saint  was  St.
John  the  Baptist,  who  was  honored  by  them
as  the  mediator  between  the  Old  and  the
New  Covenants,  and  the  first  martyr  of  the
Christian  religion.  To  what  condition  of
art  these  Freemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages
had  attained,  we  may  judge  from  what
Hallam  says  of  the  edifices  they  erected  —
that  they  “  united  sublimity  in  general  com¬
position  with  the  beauties  of  variety  and
form,  skilful  or  at  least  fortunate  effects  of
shadow  and  light,  and  in  some  instances
extraordinary  mechanical  science.”  (Mid.
Ages,  iv.  280.)  And  he  subsequently  adds,
as  an  involuntary  confirmation  of  the  truth
of  the  sketch  of  their  origin  just  given,  that
the  mechanical  execution  of  the  buildings
was  “  so  far  beyond  the  apparent  intellec¬
tual  powers  of  those  times,  that  some  have
ascribed  the  principal  ecclesiastical  struc¬
tures  to  the  Fraternity  of  Freemasons,  de¬
positaries  of  a  concealed  and  traditionary
science.  There  is  probably  some  ground
for  this  opinion,  and  the  earlier  archives
of  that  mysterious  association,  if  they
existed,  might  illustrate  the  progress  of
Gothic  architecture,  and  perhaps  reveal  its
origin.”  (Ib.,  284.)  These  archives  do
exist,  or  many  of  them ;  and  although  un¬
known  to  Mr.  Hallam,  because  they  were
out  of  the  course  of  his  usual  reading,  they
have  been  thoroughly  sifted  by  recent  Ma¬
sonic  scholars,  especially  by  our  German
and  English  brethren  ;  and  that  which  the
historian  of  the  Middle  Ages  had  only  as¬
sumed  as  a  plausible  conjecture  has,  by
their  researches,  been  proved  to  be  a  fact.

The  prevalence  of  Gnostic  symbols — such
as  lions,  serpents,  and  the  like  —  in  the
decorations  of  churches  of  the  Middle  Ages,
have  led  some  writers  to  conclude  that  the
Knights  Templars  exercised  an  influence
over  the  architects,  and  that  by  them  the
Gnostic  and  Ophite  symbols  were  intro¬
duced  into  Europe.  But  Dr.  Steiglitz  de¬
nies  the  correctness  of  this  conclusion.  He
ascribes  the  existence  of  Gnostic  symbols
in  the  church  architecture  to  the  fact  that,
at  an  early  period  in  ecclesiastical  history,
many  of  the  Gnostic  dogmas  passed  over
into  Christendom  with  the  Oriental  and


Platonic  philosophy,  and  he  attributes  their
adoption  in  architecture  to  the  natural
compliance  of  the  architects  or  Freemasons
with  the  predominant  taste  in  the  earlier
periods  of  the  Middle  Ages  for  mysticism,
and  the  favor  given  to  grotesque  decora¬
tions,  which  were  admired  without  any
knowledge  of  their  actual  import.

That  there  ever  was  any  association  of
the  Knights  Templars  with  the  Freemasons
is  still  an  uncertain  and  an  undetermined
point  of  history.  If  it  did  take  place,  it
must  have  been  at  a  very  late  period;  and
if  any  community  or  similarity  of  symbol¬
ism  is  to  be  detected  among  the  two  Orders,
it  is  more  reasonable  to  ascribe  it  to  the  cir¬
cumstance,  that  the  Templars  always  asso¬
ciated  a  body  of  architects  with  themselves
for  the  erection  of  their  own  churches  and
other  buildings,  and  that  these  architects
were  united  in  one  and  the  same  fraternity
with  the  Freemasons,  whose  secrets  they
possessed,  and  whose  architectural  opinions
they  shared.

Steiglitz  also  denies  any  deduction  of  the
Builders’  Fraternities,  or  Masonic  Lodges,
of  the  Middle  Ages  from  the  Mysteries  of
the  old  Indians,  Egyptians,  and  Greeks;
although  ho  acknowledges  that  there  is  a
resemblance  between  the  "organizations.
This,  however,  he  attributes  to  the  fact,  that
the  Indians  and  Egyptians  preserved  all
the  sciences,  as  well  as  the  principles  of
architecture,  among  their  secrets,  and  be¬
cause,  among  the  Greeks,  the  artists  were
initiated  into  their  mysteries,  so  that,  in  the
old  as  well  as  in  the  new  brotherhoods,
there  was  a  purer  knowledge  of  religious
truth,  which  elevated  them  as  distinct  asso¬
ciations  above  the  people.  In  like  manner,
he  denies  the  descent  of  the  Masonic  frater¬
nities  from  the  sect  of  Pythagoreans,  which
they  resembled  only  in  this:  that  the  Sa¬
mian  sage  established  schools  which  were
secret,  and  were  based  upon  the  principles
of  geometry.

But  he  thinks  that  those  are  not  mista¬
ken  who  trace  the  associations  of  Masons
of  the  Middle  Ages  to  the  Roman  Colleges,
the  Collegia  Ccernen tarioru m ,  because  these
colleges  appear  in  every  country  that  was
conquered  and  established  as  a  province  or
a  colony  by  the  Romans,  where  they  erected
temples  and  other  public  buildings,  and  pro¬
moted  the  civilization  of  the  inhabitants.
They  continued  until  a  late  period.  But
when  Rome  began  to  be  convulsed  by  the
wars  of  its  decline,  and  by  the  incursions
of  hordes  of  barbarians,  they  found  a  wel¬
come  reception  at  Byzantium,  or  Constan¬
tinople,  whence  they  subsequently  spread
into  the  west  of  Europe,  and  were  every¬
where  held  in  great  estimation  for  their
skill  in  the  construction  of  buildings.


STONEMASONS


STONEMASONS


747


In  Italy  the  associations  of  architects
never  entirely  ceased,  as  we  may  conclude
from  the  many  buildings  erected  there  dur¬
ing  the  domination  of  the  Ostrogoths  and
the  Longobards.  Subsequently,  when  civil
order  was  restored,  the  Masons  of  Italy
were  encouraged  and  supported  by  popes,
princes,  and  nobles.  And  Muratori  tells
us,  in  his  Historia  d’ Italia,  that  under  the
Lombard  kings  the  inhabitants  of  Como
were  so  superior  as  masons  and  bricklayers,
that  the  appellation  of  Magistri  Comacini,
or  Masters  from  Como,  became  generic  to
all  those  of  the  profession.

In  England,  when  the  Romans  took  pos¬
session  of  it,  the  corporations,  or  colleges
of  builders,  also  appeared,  who  were  subse¬
quently  continued  in  the  Fraternity  of  Free¬
masons,  probably  established,  as  Steiglitz
thinks,  about  the  middle  of  the  fifth  cen¬
tury,  r.fter  the  Romans  had  left  the  island.
The  English  Masons  were  subjected  to
many  adverse  difficulties,  from  the  repeated
incursions  of  Scots,  Piets,  Danes,  and  Sax¬
ons,  which  impeded  their  active  labors ;  yet
were  they  enabled  to  maintain  their  exist¬
ence,  until,  in  the  year  926,  they  held  that
General  Assembly  at  the  city  of  York
which  framed  the  Constitutions  that  gov¬
erned  the  English  Craft  for  eight  hundred
years,  and  which  is  claimed  to  be  the  oldest
Masonic  record  now  extant.  It  is  but  fair
to  say  that  the  recent  researches  of  Brother
Hughan  and  other  English  writers  have
thrown  a  doubt  upon  the  authenticity  of
these  Constitutions,  and  that  the  very  exist¬
ence  of  this  York  assembly  has  been  denied.
But  these  are  historical  problems,  the  true
solution  of  which  must  be  waited  for  until
the  further  researches  of  Masonic  archaeolo¬
gists  shall  present  us  with  the  necessary
data  for  determining  them.  Until  then  it
is  safer  to  adhere  to  the  traditional  theory
which  admits  the  genuineness  of  the  Con¬
stitutions  and  the  fact  of  the  assembly.

In  France,  as  in  Germany,  the  Fraterni¬
ties  of  Architects  originally  sprang  out  of
the  connection  of  lay  builders  with  the
monks  in  the  era  of  Charlemagne.  The
French  Masons  continued  their  fraternities
throughout  the  Middle  Ages,  and  erected
many  cathedrals  and  public  buildings.

We  have  now  arrived  at  the  middle  of  the
eleventh  century,  tracing  the  progress  of  the
fraternities  of  Stonemasons  from  the  time
of  Charlemagne  to  that  period.  At  that
time  all  the  architecture  of  Europe  was  in
their  hands.  Under  the  distinctive  name
of  Travelling  Freemasons  they  passed  from
nation  to  nation,  constructing  cnurches  and
cathedrals  wherever  they  were  needed.  Of
their  organization  and  customs,  Sir  Christo-

fiher  Wren,  in  his  Farentalia,  gives  the  fol-
owing  account :


“Their  government  was  regular,  and
where  they  fixed  near  the  building  in
hand,  they  made  a  camp  of  huts.  A  sur¬
veyor  governed  in  chief;  every  tenth  man
was  called  a  warden,  and  overlooked  each
nine.”

Mr.  Hope,  who,  from  his  peculiar  course
of  studies,  was  better  acquainted  than  Mr.
Hallam  with  the  history  of  these  Travelling
Freemasons,  thus  speaks,  in  his  Fssay  on
Architecture,  of  their  organization  at  this
time,  by  which  they  effected  an  identity  of
architectural  science  throughout  all  Eu¬
rope  :

“  The  architects  of  all  the  sacred  edifices
of  the  Latin  Church,  wherever  such  arose,
—  north,  south,  east,  or  west  —  thus  derived
their  science  from  the  same  central  school ;
obeyed  in  their  designs  the  dictates  of  the
same  hierarchy ;  wrere  directed  in  their  con¬
structions  by  the  same  principles  of  pro¬
priety  and  taste ;  kept  up  with  each  other,
in  the  most  distant  parts  to  which  they
might  be  sent,  the  most  constant  corre¬
spondence;  and  rendered  every  minute
improvement  the  property  of  the  whole
body,  and  a  new  conquest  of  the  art.”

Working  in  this  way,  the  Stonemasons,
as  corporations  of  builders,  daily  increased
in  numbers  and  in  power.  In  the  thir¬
teenth  century  they  assumed  a  new  organi¬
zation,  which  allied  them  more  closely  than
ever  with  that  Brotherhood  of  Speculative
Freemasons  into  which  they  were  finally
merged  in  the  eighteenth  century.

The  most  important  event  in  the  cultiva¬
tion  and  spread  of  Masonic  art  on  the  con¬
tinent  of  Europe  tvas  that  which  occurred
at  the  city  of  Strasburg,  in  Germany,  when
Erwin  of  Steinbach,  the  architect  of  the
cathedral,  summoned  a  great  number  of
master-builders  out  of  Germany,  England,
and  Italy,  and  in  the  year  1275  established
a  code  of  regulations  and  organized  the
Fraternity  of  Freemasons  after  the  mode
which  had  been  adopted,  as  is  maintained
by  many  writers,  three  hundred  and  fifty
years  before,  by  the  English  Masons  at  the
city  of  York.  Lodges  were  then  estab¬
lished  in  many  of  the  cities  of  Germany,
all  of  which  fraternized  with  each  other;
but  of  these  the  precedence  was  conceded
to  the  Lodge  at  Strasburg,  because  that
city  had  been,  as  it  were,  the  central  point
whence  German  Masonic  art  had  flowed.
Erwin  of  Steinbach  was  elected  their  pre¬
siding  officer,  or  Grand  Master.  Three
I  grades  of  workmen  were  recognized  —  Mas¬
ters,  Fellow  Crafts,  and  Apprentices;  and
words,  signs,  and  grips  were  created  as
modes  of  recognition  to  be  used  by  the
members  of  the  Fraternity,  a  part  of  which
was  borrowed  from  the  English  Masons.
Finally,  ceremonies  of  initiation  were  in-


748


STONEMASONS


STONEMASONS


Tented,  which  were  of  a  symbolical  charac¬
ter,  and  concealed,  under  their  symbolism,
profound  doctrines  of  philosophy,  religion,
and  architecture.

Of  these  ceremonies  of  initiation  used
by  the  old  German  Stonemasons  of  the
twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  Findel
gives  the  following  interesting  account:

“On  the  day  fixed,  the  candidate  went
into  the  house  where  the  assemblies  were
held,  where  the  master  of  the  chair  had
had  everything  prepared  in  due  order  in  the
hall  of  the  Craft.  The  brethren  were  then
summoned,  (of  course  bearing  no  weapon
of  any  kind,  it  being  a  place  dedicated  to
peace,)  and  the  assembly  was  opened  by  the
Master,  who  first  acquainted  them  with  the
proposed  inauguration  of  the  candidate,
dispatching  a  brother  to  prepare  him.  The
messenger,  in  imitation  of  an  ancient  hea¬
then  custom,  suggested  to  his  companion
that  he  should  assume  the  demeanor  of  a
supplicant.  He  was  then  stripped  of  all
weapons,  and  everything  of  metal  taken
from  him  ;  he  was  divested  of  half  his  gar¬
ments,  and,  with  his  eyes  bound  and  breast
and  left  foot  bare,  he  stood  at  the  door  of
the  hall,  which  was  opened  to  him  after
three  distinct  knocks.  The  Junior  Warden
conducted  him  to  the  Master,  who  made
him  kneel  and  repeat  a  prayer.  The  can¬
didate  was  then  led  three  times  around  the
hall  of  the  Gild,  halting  at  last  at  the  door,
and  putting  his  feet  together  in  the  form  of
a  right  angle,  that  he  might  in  three  up¬
right  square  steps  place  himself  in  front  of
the  Master.  Between  the  two,  lying  open
on  the  table,  was  a  New  Testament,  a  pair
of  compasses,  and  a  mason’s  square,  over
which,  in  pursuance  of  an  ancient  custom,
he  stretched  out  his  right  hand,  swearing
to  be  faithful  to  the  duties  to  which  he
pledged  himself,  and  to  keep  secret  what¬
ever  had  been,  or  might  be  thereafter,  made
knowm  to  him  in  that  place.  The  bandage
was  then  removed  from  his  eyes,  the  three
great  lights  were  shown  him,  a  new  apron
bound  round  him,  a  password  given  him,
and  his  place  in  the  hall  of  the  Gild  pointed
out  to  him.”  (Hist,  of  Freemasonry,  p.  65.)

These  fraternities  or  associations  became
at  once  very  popular.  Many  of  the  poten¬
tates  of  Europe,  and  among  them  the  Em¬
peror  Rudolf  I.,  conceded  to  them  consid¬
erable  powers  of  jurisdiction,  such  as  would
enable  them  to  preserve  the  most  rigid
system  in  matters  pertaining  to  building,
and  would  facilitate  them  in  bringing  mas¬
ter  builders  and  stone-masons  together  at
any  required  point.  Pope  Nicholas  III.
granted  the  Brotherhood,  in  1278,  letters
of  indulgence,  which  were  renewed  by  his
successors,  and  finally,  in  the  next  century,
by  Pope  Benedict  XII.


The  Stonemasons,  as  a  fraternity  of  Oper¬
ative  Freemasons,  distinguished  from  the
ordinary  masons  and  laborers  of  the  craft,
acquired  at  this  time  great  prominence,  and
were  firmly  established  as  an  association.
In  1452  a  general  assembly  was  convened
at  Strasburg,  and  a  new  constitution  framed,
which  embraced  many  improvements  and
modifications  of  the  former  one.  But  seven
years  afterwards,  in  1459,  Jost  Dotzinger,
then  holding  the  position  of  architect  of
the  Cathedral  of  Strasburg,  and,  by  virtue
of  his  office,  presiding  over  the  Craft  of
Germany,  convened  a  general  assembly  of
the  Masters  of  all  the  Lodges  at  the  city  of
Ratisbon.  There  the  code  of  laws  which
had  been  adopted  at  Strasburg  in  1452,
under  the  title  of  “Statutes  and  Regula¬
tions  of  the  Fraternity  of  Stonemasons  of
Strasburg,”  was  fully  discussed  and  sanc¬
tioned.  It  was  then  also  resolved  that
there  should  be  established  four  Grand
Lodges,  —  at  Strasburg,  at  Vienna,  at  Co¬
logne,  and  at  Zurich ;  and  they  also  deter¬
mined  that  the  master  workman,  for  the
time  being,  of  the  Cathedral  of  Strasburg
should  be  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Free¬
masons  of  Germany.  These  constitutions
or  statutes  are  still  extant,  and  are  older
than  any  other  existing  Masonic  record  of
undoubted  authenticity,  except  the  manu¬
script  of  Halliwell.  They  were  “  kindly
and  affably  agreed  upon,”  according  to  their
preamble,  “  for  the  benefit  and  require¬
ments  of  the  Masters  and  Fellows  of  the
whole  Craft  of  Masonry  and  Masons  in
Germany.”

General  assemblies,  at  which  important
business  was  transacted,  were  held  in  1464
at  Ratisbon,  and  in  1469  at  Spire,  while
provincial  assemblies  in  each  of  the  Grand
Lodge  jurisdictions  were  annually  con¬
vened.

In  consequence  of  a  deficiency  of  em¬
ployment,  from  political  disturbances  and
other  causes,  the  Fraternity  now  for  a  brief
period  declined  in  its  activity.  But  it  was
speedily  revived  when,  in  October,  1498,
the  Emperor  Maximilian  I.  confirmed  its
statutes,  as  they  had  been  adopted  at  Stras¬
burg,  and  recognized  its  former  rights  and
privileges.  This  act  of  confirmation  was
renewed  by  the  succeeding  emperors,
Charles  V.  and  Ferdinand  I.  In  1563  a
general  assembly  of  the  Masons  of  Ger¬
many  and  Switzerland  was  convened  at  the
city  of  Basle  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Stras¬
burg.  TKe  Strasburg  constitutions  were
again  renewed  with  amendments,  and  what
was  called  the  Stonemasons’  Law  ( das  Stein-
xcerkrecht)  was  established.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  Strasburg  continued  to  be  recog¬
nized  as  possessing  supreme  appellate  juris¬
diction  in  all  matters  relating  to  the  Craft.


STONEMASONS


STONEMASONS


749


Even  the  senate  of  that  city  had  acknowl¬
edged  its  prerogatives,  and  had  conceded
to  it  the  privilege  of  settling  all  controver¬
sies  in  relation  to  matters  connected  with
building;  a  concession  which  was,  however,
revoked  in  1620,  on  the  charge  that  the
privilege  had  been  misused.

Thus  the  Operative  Freemasons  of  Ger¬
many  continued  to  work  and  to  cultivate
the  high  principles  of  a  religious  architec¬
tural  art.  But  on  March  16,  1707,  up  to
which  time  the  Fraternity  had  uninter¬
ruptedly  existed,  a  decree  of  the  Imperial
Diet  at  Ratisbon  dissolved  the  connection
of  the  Lodges  of  Germany  with  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Strasburg,  because  that  city  had
passed  into  the  power  of  the  French.  The
head  being  now  lost,  the  subordinate  bodies
began  rapidly  to  decline.  In  several  of
the  German  cities  the  Lodges  undertook  to
assume  the  name  and  exercise  the  func¬
tions  of  Grand  Lodges ;  but  these  were  all
abolished  by  an  imperial  edict  in  1731,
which  at  the  same  time  forbade  the  admin¬
istration  of  any  oath  of  secrecy,  and  trans¬
ferred  to  the  government  alone  the  adjudi¬
cation  of  all  disputes  among  the  Craft.
From  this  time  we  lose  sight  of  any  na¬
tional  organization  of  the  Freemasons  in
Germany  until  the  restoration  of  the  Order,
in  the  eighteenth  century,  through  the
English  Fraternity.  But  in  many  cities  —
as  in  Basle,  Zurich,  Hamburg,  Dantzic,
and  Strasburg  —  they  preserved  an  inde¬
pendent  existence  under  the  statutes  of
1559,  although  they  lost  much  of  the  pro¬
found  symbolical  knowledge  of  architec¬
ture  which  had  been  possessed  by  their
predecessors.

Before  leaving  these  German  Stonema¬
sons,  it  is  worth  while  to  say  something  of
the  symbolism  which  they  preserved  in
their  secret  teachings.  They  made  much
use,  in  their  architectural  plans,  of  mysti¬
cal  numbers,  and  among  these  five,  seven,
and  nine  were  especially  prominent.  Among
colors,  gold  and  blue  and  white  possessed
symbolic  meanings.  The  foot-rule,  the
compasses,  the  square,  and  the  gavel,  with
some  other  implements  of  their  art,  were
consecrated  with  a  spiritual  signification.
The  east  was  considered  as  a  sacred  point ;
and  many  allusions  were  made  to  Solo¬
mon’s  Temple,  especially  to  the  pillars  of
the  porch,  representations  of  which  are  to
be  found  in  several  of  the  cathedrals.

In  France  the  history  of  the  Free  Stone¬
masons  was  similar  to  that  of  their  German
brethren.  Originating,  like  them,  from
the  cloisters,  and  from  the  employment  of
laymen  by  the  monkish  architects,  they
associated  themselves  together  as  a  brother¬
hood  superior  to  the  ordinary  stone-masons.
The  couuectiou  between  the  Masons  of


France  and  the  Roman  Colleges  of  Build¬
ers  was  more  intimate  and  direct  than  that
of  the  Germans,  because  of  the  early  and
very  general  occupation  of  Gaul  by  the
Roman  legions:  but  the  French  organiza¬
tion  did  not  materially  differ  from  the
German.  Protected  by  popes  and  princes,
the  Masons  were  engaged,  under  ecclesias¬
tical  patronage,  in  the  construction  of  reli¬
gious  edifices.  In  France  there  was  also  a
peculiar  association,  the  Pontifices,  or  Bridge
Builders,  closely  connected  in  design  and
character  with  the  Masonic  fraternity,  and
the  memory  of  which  is  still  preserved  in
the  name  of  one  of  the  degrees  of  the
Scottish  Rite,  that  of  “  Grand  Pontiff.”
The  principal  seat  of  the  French  Stonema-
sonry  was  in  Lombardy,  whence  the  Lodges
were  disseminated  over  the  kingdom,  a  fact
which  is  thus  accounted  for  by  Mr.  Hope:
“Among  the  arts  exercised  and  improved
in  Lombardy,”  he  says,  “  that  of  building
held  a  pre-eminent  rank,  and  was  the  more
important  because  the  want  of  those  an¬
cient  edifices  to  which  they  might  recur
for  materials  already  wrought,  and  which
Rome  afforded  in  such  abundance,  made
the  architects  of  these  more  remote  regions
dependent  on  their  own  skill  and  free  to
follow  their  own  conceptions.”  But  in  the
beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the
necessity  for  their  employment  in  the  fur¬
ther  construction  of  religious  edifices  hav¬
ing  ceased,  the  Fraternity  began  to  decline,
and  the  Masonic  corporations  W'ere  all
finally  dissolved,  with  those  of  other  work¬
men,  by  Francis  I.,  1539.  Then  originated
that  system  which  the  French  call  Com-
pagnonnage,  a  system  of  independent  Gilds
or  brotherhoods,  retaining  a  principle  of
community  as  to  the  art  which  they  prac¬
tised,  and  with,  to  some  extent,  a  secret
bond,  but  without  elevated  notions  or  gen¬
eral  systematic  organizations.  The  socie¬
ties  of  Compagnons  were,  indeed,  but  the
debris  of  the  Masonic  Lodges.  Freema¬
sonry  ceased  to  exist  in  France  as  a  recog¬
nized  system  until  its  revival  in  the  eigh¬
teenth  century.

In  England,  we  have  already  seen  that
the  stone-masons,  under  the  distinctive  ap¬
pellation  of  Freemasons,  held  a  general  as¬
sembly  at  the  city  of  York,  in  the  year
926,  and  there  adopted  those  constitutions
which  have  always  been  looked  upon  as
the  fundamental  law  of  English  Masonry.
Of  course,  the  very  calling  of  this  assembly
proves  that  the  Freemasons  were  previously
in  activity  in  the  kingdom,  which  is,  in
fact,  otherwise  proved  by  the  records  of  the
building  at  an  earlier  period,  by  them,  of
cathedrals,  abbeys,  and  castles.  But  we
date  the  York  assembly  as  the  first  know  n
and  acknowledged  organization  of  the  GTalt


750


STONEMASONS


STONE


in  England  into  a  national  body,  or  Grand
Lodge.  Their  history  differs  but  little
from  that  which  has  already  been  detailed.
Stonemasons,  in  fact — but  in  the  possession
of  many  professional  secrets  originally  de¬
rived  from  their  monkish  teachers,  as  well
as  from  the  Roman  colleges,  with  which,
like  the  Masons  of  France,  they  had  an  in¬
timate  communication  through  the  legions
which  had  been  encamped  for  so  many
years  in  England  —  they  called  themselves
Freemasons,  to  be  distinguished  from  the
ordinary  laborers  and  common  stone-ma¬
sons,  who  were  generally  of  a  servile  con¬
dition,  and  had  neither  the  intellectual
elevation,  nor  the  devotion  to  high  religious
art,  which  belonged  exclusively  to  the
“  freeborn  ”  fraternity.

After  the  organization  at  York,  annual
assemblies,  it  is  said,  were  regularly  held,
and  the  transactions  of  several  of  them
have  been  transmitted  to  us  by  historical
records.  The  Fraternity  experienced,  as
in  other  countries,  its  alternate  periods  of
prosperity  and  of  decay.  Finally,  about
the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  it  had
so  far  declined,  that  only  seven  Lodges
were  to  be  found  in  the  whole  of  London
and  its  suburbs.  It  is  to  the  glory  of  the  Eng¬
lish  Masons  that  they  now  adopted  that
bold  and  wise  policy  which  alone  could
have  saved  the  Brotherhood  from  absolute
dissolution.  In  1703  a  statute  was  enacted,
which  entirely  changed  the  objects  of  the
institution.  From  an  operative  society,  it
became  wholly  speculative  in  its  character.
It  ceased  to  build  material  temples,  and
devoted  itself  to  the  erection  of  a  spiritual
one.  It  retained  the  working-tools  and  the
technical  terms  of  art  of  the  original  oper¬
ative  institution,  simply  because  of  the  re¬
ligious  symbolism  which  these  conveyed.
And  its  members  invited  to  their  assem¬
blies  men  of  learning  and  science,  who
might  find  in  their  discussions  topics  con¬
genial  with  their  intellectual  labors.

The  happiest  results  speedily  followed;
and  in  1717  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
was  organized,  or  rather  restored,  on  the
new  basis  of  a  speculative  society.  The
effect  was  soon  seen  in  other  countries ;  for,
through  the  instrumentality  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  which  became,  indeed,
the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  world,  Freema¬
sonry  was  everywhere  revived.  Lodges  on
the  English  model,  which  afterwards  gave
rise  to  the  establishment  of  Grand  Lodges
in  their  respective  countries,  were  organ¬
ized  in  France  in  1729,  in  Holland  in  1731,
in  Germany  in  1733,  and  in  Italy  in  1735.
It  spread  in  other  countries  with  more  or
less  activity,  and  was  established  in  1733  in
America.  From  that  time  to  the  present
day  the  history  of  Freemasonry  has  been


entirely  separated  from  that  of  Stonema-
sonry.

We  see,  then,  in  conclusion,  that  the
Stonemasons  —  coming  partly  from  the  Ro¬
man  Colleges  of  Architects,  as  in  England,
in  Italy,  and  in  France,  but  principally,  as
in  Germany,  from  the  cloistered  brother¬
hoods  of  monks  —  devoted  themselves  to
the  construction  of  religious  edifices.  They
consisted  mainly  of  architects  and  skilful
operatives;  but  —  as  they  were  controlled
by  the  highest  principles  of  their  art,  were
in  possession  of  important  professional  se¬
crets,  were  actuated  by  deep  sentiments  of
religious  devotion,  and  had  united  with
themselves  in  their  labors  men  of  learning,
wealth,  and  influence  —  they  assumed  from
the  very  beginning  the  title  of  Freemasons,
to  serve  as  a  proud  distinction  between
themselves  and  the  ordinary  laborers  and
uneducated  workmen,  many  of  whom  were
of  servile  condition.

Subsequently,  in  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century,  they  threw  off  the  oper¬
ative  element  of  their  institution,  and,
adopting  an  entirely  speculative  character,
they  became  the  Freemasons  of  the  present
day,  and  established  on  an  imperishable
foundation  that  sublime  Institution  which
presents  over  all  the  habitable  earth  the
most  wonderful  system  of  religious  and
moral  symbolism  that  the  world  ever  saw.

Stone,  Nicholas.  See  Stone  Manu¬
script.

Stone  of  Foundation.  The  Stone
of  Foundation  constitutes  one  of  the  most
important  and  abstruse  of  all  the  symbols
of  Freemasonry.  It  is  referred  to  in  nu¬
merous  legends  and  traditions  not  only  of
the  Freemasons,  but  also  of  the  Jewish
Rabbis,  the  Talmudic  writers,  and  even
the  Mussulman  doctors.  Many  of  these,  it
must  be  confessed,  are  apparently  puerile
and  absurd ;  but  most  of  them,  and  espe¬
cially  the  Masonic  ones,  are  deeply  interest¬
ing  in  their  allegorical  signification.

The  Stone  of  Foundation  is,  properly
speaking,  a  symbol  of  the  higher  degrees.
It  makes  its  first  appearance  in  the  Royal
Arch,  and  forms  indeed  the  most  impor¬
tant  symbol  of  that  degree.  But  it  is  so
intimately  connected,  in  its  legendary  his¬
tory,  with  the  construction  of  the  Solo¬
monic  Temple,  that  it  must  be  considered
as  a  part  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  al¬
though  he  who  confines  the  range  of  his
investigations  to  the  first  three  degrees
will  have  no  means,  within  that  narrow
limit,  of  properly  appreciating  the  symbol¬
ism  of  the  Stone  of  Foundation.

As  preliminary  to  the  inquiry,  it  is  neces¬
sary  to  distinguish  the  Stone  of  Founda¬
tion,  both  in  its  symbolism  and  its  legend¬
ary  history,  from  other  stones  which  play


STONE


STONE


751


an  important  part  in  the  Masonic  ritual,
but  which  are  entirely  distinct  from  it.
Such  are  the  corner-stone ,  which  was  always
placed  in  the  north-east  corner  of  the  build¬
ing  about  to  be  erected,  and  to  which  such
a  beautiful  reference  is  made  in  the  cere¬
monies  of  the  first  degree;  or  the  keystone ,
which  constitutes  an  interesting  part  of  the
Mark  Master’s  degree ;  or,  lastly,  the  cape-
stone,  upon  which  all  the  ritual  of  the
Most  Excellent  Master’s  degree  is  founded.
These  are  all,  in  their  proper  places,  highly
interesting  and  instructive  symbols,  but
have  no  connection  whatever  with  the
Stone  of  Foundation,  whose  symbolism  it
is  our  present  object  to  discuss.  Nor,  al¬
though  the  Stone  of  Foundation  is  said,
for  peculiar  reasons,  to  have  been  of  a  cubi¬
cal  form,  must  it  be  confounded  with  that
stone  called  by  the  continental  Masons  the
cubical  stone  —  the  pierre  cubique  of  the
French  and  the  cubik  stein  of  the  German
Masons,  but  which  in  the  English  system
is  known  as  the  perfect  ashlar.

The  Stone  of  Foundation  has  a  legend¬
ary  history  and  a  symbolic  signification
which  are  peculiar  to  itself,  and  which  dif¬
fer  from  the  history  and  meaning  which
belong  to  these  other  stones.  I  propose
first  to  define  this  Masonic  Stone  of
Foundation,  then  to  collate  the  legends
which  refer  to  it,  and  afterwards  to  inves¬
tigate  its  significance  as  a  symbol.  To  the
Mason  who  takes  a  pleasure  in  the  study
of  the  mysteries  of  his  Institution,  the  in¬
vestigation  cannot  fail  to  be  interesting,  if
it  is  conducted  with  any  ability.

But  in  the  very  beginning,  as  a  neces¬
sary  preliminary  to  any  investigation  of
this  kind,  it  must  be  distinctly  understood
that  all  that  is  said  of  this  Stone  of  Foun¬
dation  in  Masonry  is  to  be  strictly  taken
in  a  mythical  or  allegorical  sense.  Dr.
Oliver,  while  undoubtedly  himself  know¬
ing  that  it  was  simply  a  symbol,  has
written  loosely  of  it  as  though  it  were  a
substantial  reality ;  and  hence,  if  the  pas¬
sages  in  his  Historical  Landmarks,  and  in
his  other  works  which  refer  to  this  cele¬
brated  stone,  are  accepted  by  his  readers  in
a  literal  sense,  they  will  present  absurdities
and  puerilities  which  would  not  occur  if
the  Stone  of  Foundation  was  received,  as
it  really  is,  as  a  myth  conveying  a  most
profound  and  beautiful  symbolism.  It  is
as  such  that  it  is  to  be  treated  here;  and,
therefore,  if  a  legend  is  recited  or  a  tradi¬
tion  related,  the  reader  is  requested  on
every  occasion  to  suppose  that  such  legend
or  tradition  is  not  intended  as  the  recital
or  relation  of  what  is  deemed  a  fact  in  Ma¬
sonic  history,  but  to  wait  with  patience  for
the  development  of  the  symbolism  which
it  conveys.  Read  in  this  spirit,  as  all  the


legends  of  Masonry  should  be  read,  the
legend  of  the  Stone  of  Foundation  becomes
one  of  the  most  important  and  interesting
of  all  the  Masonic  symbols.

The  Stone  of  Foundation  is  supposed,
by  the  theory  which  establishes  it,  to  have
been  a  stone  placed  at  one  time  within  the
foundations  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon,
and  afterwards,  during  the  building  of  the
second  Temple,  transported  to  the  Holy  of
Holies.  It  was  in  form  a  perfect  cube,  and
had  inscribed  upon  its  upper  face,  within  a
delta  or  triangle,  the  sacred  Tetragramma-
ton,  or  ineffable  name  of  God.  Oliver,
speaking  with  the  solemnity  of  a  historian,
says  that  Solomon  thought  that  he  had
rendered  the  house  of  God  worthy,  so  far
as  human  adornment  could  effect,  for  the
dwelling  of  God,  “  when  he  had  placed  the
celebrated  Stone  of  Foundation,  on  which
the  sacred  name  was  mystically  engraven,
with  solemn  ceremonies,  in  that  sacred  de¬
pository  on  Mount  Moriah,  alone  with  the
foundations  of  Dan  and  Asher,  the  centre
of  the  Most  Holy  Place,  where  the  ark  was
overshadowed  by  the  shekinah  of  God.”
The  Hebrew  Talmudists,  who  thought  as
much  of  this  stone,  and  had  as  many  le¬
gends  concerning  it,  as  the  Masonic  Talmu¬
dists,  called  it  eben  shatijah,  or  “  Stone  of
Foundation,”  because,  as  they  said,  it  had
been  laid  by  Jehovah  as  the  foundation  of
the  world,  and  hence  the  apocryphal  book
of  Enoch  speaks  of  the  “  stone  which  sup¬
ports  the  corners  of  the  earth.”

This  idea  of  a  foundation-stone  of  the
world  was  most  probably  derived  from  that
magnificent  passage  of  the  book  of  Job
(ch.  xxxviii.)  in  which  the  Almighty  de¬
mands  of  Job, —

“  Where  wast  thou,  when  I  laid  the  foundation
of  the  earth  ?

Declare,  since  thou  hast  such  knowledge  !

Who  fixed  its  dimensions,  since  thou  kuowest !
Or  who  stretched  out  the  line  upon  it  ?

Upon  what  were  its  foundations  fixed?

And  who  laid  its  corner-stone,

When  the  morning  stars  sang  together,

And  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy  ?  ”

Noyes,  whose  translation  I  have  adopted
as  not  materially  differing  from  the  com¬
mon  version,  but  far  more  poetical  and
more  in  the  strain  of  the  original,  thus  ex¬
plains  the  allusions  to  the  foundation-
stone  :  “  It  was  the  custom  to  celebrate  the
laying  of  the  corner-stone  of  an  important
building  with  music,  songs,  shouting,  etc.
Hence  the  morning  stars  are  represented
as  celebrating  the  laying  of  the  corner¬
stone  of  the  earth.”

Upon  this  meagre  statement  lias  been
accumulated  more  traditions  than  apper¬
tain  to  any  other  Masonic  symbol.  The


752


STONE


STONE


Rabbins,  as  has  already  been  intimated,
divide  the  glory  of  these  apocryphal  his¬
tories  with  the  Masons ;  indeed,  there  is
good  reason  for  a  suspicion  that  nearly  all
the  Masonic  legends  owe  their  first  exist¬
ence  to  the  imaginative  genius  of  the
writers  of  the  Jewish  Talmud.  But  there
is  this  difference  between  the  Hebrew  and
the  Masonic  traditions:  that  the  Talmudic
scholar  recited  them  as  truthful  histories,
and  swallowed,  in  one  gulp  of  faith,  all
their  impossibilities  and  anachronisms;
while  the  Masonic  scholar  has  received
them  as  allegories,  whose  value  is  not  in
the  facts,  but  in  the  sentiments  which  they
convey.

With  this  understanding  of  their  mean¬
ing,  let  us  proceed  to  a  collation  of  these
legends.

In  that  blasphemous  work,  the  Toldoth
Jeshu,  or  Life  of  Jesus ,  written,  it  is  sup¬
posed,  in  the  thirteenth  or  fourteenth  cen¬
tury,  we  find  the  following  account  of  this
wonderful  stone :

“At  that  time  [the  time  of  Jesus]  there
was  in  the  House  of  the  Sanctuary  [that  is,
the  Temple]  a  stone  of  foundation,  which
is  the  very  stone  that  our  father  Jacob
anointed  with  oil,  as  it  is  described  in  the
twenty-eighth  chapter  of  the  book  of  Gene¬
sis.  On  that  stone  the  letters  of  the  Tetra-
grammaton  were  inscribed,  and  whosoever
of  the  Israelites  should  learn  that  name
would  be  able  to  master  the  world.  To
prevent,  therefore,  any  one  from  learning
these  letters,  two  iron  dogs  were  placed
upon  two  columns  in  front  of  the  Sanctu¬
ary.  If  any  person,  having  acquired  the
knowledge  of  these  letters,  desired  to  de¬
part  from  the  Sanctuary,  the  barking  of
the  dogs,  by  magical  power,  inspired  so
much  fear  that  he  suddenly  forgot  what  he
had  acquired.”

This  passage  is  cited  by  the  learued
Buxtorf  in  his  Lexicon.  Talmudicum  ;  but  in
my  copy  of  the  Toldoth  Jesku,  I  find  an¬
other  passage,  which  gives  some  additional
particulars,  in  the  following  words:

“  At  that  time  there  was  in  the  Temple
the  ineffable  name  of  God,  inscribed  upon
the  Stone  of  Foundation.  For  when  King
David  was  digging  the  foundation  for  the
Temple,  he  found  in  the  depths  of  the  exca¬
vation  a  certain  stone  on  which  the  name
of  God  was  inscribed.  This  stone  he  re¬
moved  and  deposited  it  in  the  Holv  of
Holies.”

The  same  puerile  story  of  the  barking
dogs  is  repeated  still  more  at  length.  It
is  not  pertinent  to  the  present  inquiry,  but
it  may  be  stated,  as  a  mere  matter  of  curious
information,  that  this  scandalous  book,
which  is  throughout  a  blasphemous  defa¬
mation  of  our  Saviour,  proceeds  to  say,  that


he  cunningly  obtained  a  knowledge  of  the
Tetragrammaton  from  the  Stone  of  Foun¬
dation,  and  by  its  mystical  influence  was
enabled  to  perform  his  miracles.

The  Masonic  legends  of  the  Stone  of
Foundation,  based  on  these  and  other  rab¬
binical  reveries,  are  of  the  most  extraor¬
dinary  character,  if  they  are  to  be  viewed
as  histories,  but  readily  reconcilable  with
sound  sense,  if  looked  at  only  in  the  light
of  allegories.  They  present  an  uninter¬
rupted  succession  of  events,  in  which  the
Stone  of  Foundation  takes  a  prominent
part,  from  Adam  to  Solomon,  and  from
Solomon  to  Zerubbabel.

Thus,  the  first  of  these  legends,  in  order
of  time,  relates  that  the  Stone  of  Founda¬
tion  was  possessed  by  Adam  while  in  the
Garden  of  Eden ;  that  he  used  it  as  an
altar,  and  so  reverenced  it  that,  on  his  ex-
ulsion  from  Paradise,  he  carried  it  with
im  into  the  world  in  which  he  and  his
descendants  were  afterwards  to  earn  their
bread  by  the  sweat  of  their  brow.

Another  legend  informs  us  that  from
Adam  the  Stone  of  Foundation  descended
to  Seth.  From  Seth  it  passed  by  regular
succession  to  Noah,  wTho  took  it  with  him
into  the  ark,  and  after  the  subsidence  of
the  deluge  made  on  it  his  first  thank-offer¬
ing.  Noah  left  it  on  Mount  Ararat,  where
it  was  subsequently  found  by  Abraham,
who  removed  it,  and  constantly  used  it  as
an  altar  of  sacrifice.  His  grandson  Jacob
took  it  with  him  when  he  fled  to  his  uncle
Laban  in  Mesopotamia,  and  used  it  as  a
pillow  when,  in  the  vicinity  of  Luz,  he  had
his  celebrated  vision.

Here  there  is  a  sudden  interruption  in  the
legendary  history  of  the  stone,  and  we  have
no  means  of  conjecturing  how  it  passed
from  the  possession  of  Jacob  into  that  of
Solomon.  Moses,  it  is  true,  is  said  to  have
taken  it  with  him  out  of  Egypt  at  the  time
of  the  exodus,  and  thus  it  may  have  finally
reached  Jerusalem.  Dr.  Adam  Clarke  re¬
peats,  what  he  very  properly  calls  “  a  fool¬
ish  tradition,”  that  the  stone  on  which  Ja¬
cob  rested  his  head  was  afterwards  brought
to  Jerusalem,  thence  carried  after  a  long
lapse  of  time  to  Spain,  from  Spain  to  Ire¬
land,  and  from  Ireland  to  Scotland,  where
it  was  used  as  a  seat  on  which  the  kings  of
Scotland  sat  to  be  crowned.  Edward  I.,
we  know,  brought  a  stone  to  which  thi3
legend  is  attached  from  Scotland  to  West¬
minster  Abbey,  where,  under  the  name  of
Jacob’s  Pillow,  it  still  remains,  and  is  al¬
ways  placed  under  the  chair  upon  which
the*  British  sovereign  sits  to  be  crowned ;
because  there  is  an  old  distich  which  de¬
clares  that  wherever  this  stone  is  found  the
Scottish  kings  shall  reign.

But  this  Scottish  tradition  would  take  the


STONE


STONE


753


Stone  of  Foundation  away  from  all  its  Ma¬
sonic  connections,  and  therefore  it  is  re¬
jected  as  a  Masonic  legend.

The  legends  just  related  are  in  many
respects  contradictory  and  unsatisfactory,
and  another  series,  equally  as  old,  is  now
very  generally  adopted  by  Masonic  scholars
as  much  better  suited  to  the  symbolism  by
which  all  these  legends  are  explained.

This  series  of  legends  commences  with
the  patriarch  Enoch,  who  is  supposed  to  have
been  the  first  consecrator  of  the  Stone  of
Foundation.  The  legend  of  Enoch  is  so
interesting  and  important  in  this  connec¬
tion  as  to  excuse  its  repetition  in  the  pres¬
ent  work.

The  legend  in  full  is  as  follows  :  Enoch,
under  the  inspiration  of  the  Most  High,  and
in  obedience  to  the  instructions  which  he
had  received  in  a  vision,  built  a  temple
underground  on  Mount  Moriah,  and  dedi¬
cated  it  to  God.  His  son,  Methuselah,  con¬
structed  the  building,  although  he  was  not
acquainted  with  his  father’s  motives  for  the
erection.  This  temple  consisted  of  nine
vaults,  situated  perpendicularly  beneath
each  other,  and  communicating  by  aper¬
tures  left  in  each  vault.

Enoch  then  caused  a  triangular  plate  of
gold  to  be  made,  each  side  of  which  was  a
cubit  long;  he  enriched  it  with  the  most
precious  stones,  and  encrusted  the  plate
upon  a  stone  of  agate  of  the  same  form.
On  the  plate  he  engraved  the  true  name  of
God,  or  the  Tetragrammaton,  and  placing
it  on  a  cubical  stone,  known  thereafter  as
the  Stone  of  Foundation,  he  deposited  the
whole  within  the  lowest  arch.

When  this  subterranean  building  was
completed,  he  made  a  door  of  stone,  and
attaching  to  it  a  ring  of  iron,  by  which  it
might  be  occasionally  raised,  he  placed  it
over  the  opening  of  the  uppermost  arch,
and  so  covered  it  that  the  aperture  could
not  be  discovered.  Enoch,  himself,  was
not  permitted  to  enter  it  but  once  a  year ;
and  on  the  deaths  of  Enoch,  Methuselah,
and  Lamech,  and  the  destruction  of  the
world  by  the  deluge,  all  knowledge  of  the
vault  or  subterranean  temple  and  of  the
Stone  of  Foundation,  with  the  sacred  and
ineffable  name  inscribed  upon  it,  was  lost
for  ages  to  the  world.

At  the  building  of  the  first  Temple  of
Jerusalem,  the  Stone  of  Foundation  again
makes  its  appearance.  Reference  has  al¬
ready  been  made  to  the  Jewish  tradition
that  David,  when  digging  the  foundations
of  the  Temple,  found  in  the  excavation
which  he  was  making  a  certain  stone,  on
which  the  ineffable  name  of  God  was  in¬
scribed,  and  which  stone  he  is  said  to  have
removed  and  deposited  in  the  Holy  of
Holies.  That  King  David  laid  the  founda-
4  U  48


tions  of  the  Temple  upon  which  the  super¬
structure  was  subsequently  erected  by  Sol¬
omon,  is  a  favorite  theory  of  the  legend-
mongers  of  the  Talmud.

The  Masonic  tradition  is  substantially
the  same  as  the  Jewish,  but  it  substitutes
Solomon  for  David,  thereby  giving  a  greater
air  of  probability  to  the  narrative,  and  it
supposes  that  the  stone  thus  discovered  by
Solomon  was  the  identical  one  that  had
been  deposited  in  his  secret  vault  by  Enoch.
This  Stone  of  Foundation,  the  tradition
states,  was  subsequently  removed  by  King
Solomon  and,  for  wise  purposes,  deposited
in  a  secret  and  safer  place.

In  this  the  Masonic  tradition  again  agrees
with  the  Jewish,  for  we  find  in  the  third
chapter  of  the  Treatise  on  the  Temple ,  the
following  narrative :

“There  was  a  stone  in  the  Holy  of  Holies,
on  its  west  side,  on  which  was  placed  the
ark  of  the  covenant,  and  before  the  pot  of
manna  find  Aaron’s  rod.  But  when  Solo¬
mon  had  built  the  Temple,  and  foresaw
that  it  was  at  some  future  time  to  be  de¬
stroyed,  he  constructed  a  deep  and  wind¬
ing  vault  under  ground,  for  the  purpose  of
concealing  the  ark,  wherein  Josiah  after¬
wards,  as  we  learn  in  the  Second  Book  of
Chronicles,  xxxv.  8,  deposited  it  with  the
pot  of  manna,  the  rod  of  Aaron,  and  the
oil  of  anointing.”

The  Talmudical  book  Yoma  gives  the
same  tradition,  and  says  that  “  the  ark  of
the  covenant  was  placed  in  the  centre  of
the  Holy  of  Holies,  upon  a  stone  rising
three  fingers’  breadth  above  the  floor,  to
be  as  it  were  a  pedestal  for  it.”  This  stone,
says  Prideaux,  in  his  Old  and  New  Testa¬
ment  Connected ,  (vol.  i.,  p.  148,)  “the  Rab¬
bins  call  the  Stone  of  Foundation,  and  give
us  a  great  deal  of  trash  about  it.”

There  is  much  controversy  as  to  the
question  of  the  existence  of  any  ark  in  the
second  Temple.  Some  of  the  Je  wish  writers
assert  that  a  new  one  was  made;  others
that  the  old  one  was  found  where  it  had
been  concealed  by  Solomon;  and  others
again  contend  that  there  was  no  ark  at  all
in  the  temple  of  Zerubbabel,  but  that  its
place  was  supplied  by  the  Stone  of  Foun¬
dation  on  which  it  had  originally  rested.

Royal  Arch  Masons  well  know  how  all
these  traditions  are  sought  to  be  reconciled
by  the  Masonic  legend,  in  which  the  sub¬
stitute  ark  and  the  Stone  of  Foundation
play  so  important  a  part.

In  the  thirteenth  degree  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Rite,  the  Stone  of  Founda¬
tion  is  conspicuous  as  the  resting-place  of
the  sacred  delta.

In  the  Royal  Arch  and  Select  Master’s
degrees  of  the  American  Rite,  the  Stone
of  Foundation  constitutes  the  most  iin-


754


STONE


STONE


portant  part  of  the  ritual.  In  both  of
these  it  is  the  receptacle  of  the  ark,  on
which  the  ineffable  name  is  inscribed.

Lee,  in  his  Temple  of  Solomon,  has  devoted
a  chapter  to  this  Stone  of  Foundation,  and
thus  recapitulates  the  Talmudic  and  Rab¬
binical  traditions  on  the  subject:

“  Vain  and  futilous  are  the  feverish
dreams  of  the  ancient  Rabbins  concerning
the  Foundation-Stone  of  the  Temple.  Some
assert  that  God  placed  this  stone  in  the
centre  of  the  world,  for  a  future  basis  and
settled  consistency  for  the  earth  to  rest
upon.  Others  held  this  stone  to  be  the
first  matter  out  of  which  all  the  beautiful
visible  beings  of  the  world  have  been  hewn
forth  and  produced  to  light.  Others  re¬
late  that  this  was  the  very  same  stone  laid
by  Jacob  for  a  pillow  under  his  head,  in
that  night  when  he  dreamed  of  an  angelic
vision  at  Bethel,  and  afterwards  anointed
and  consecrated  it  to  God.  Which  when
Solomon  had  found  (no  doubt  by  forged
revelation  or  some  tedious  search  like  an¬
other  Rabbi  Selemoh)  he  durst  not  but  lay
it  sure,  as  the  principal  Foundation-Stone
of  the  Temple.  Nay,  they  say  further,  he
caused  to  be  engraved  upon  it  the  Tetra-
grammaton,  or  the  ineffable  name  of  Je¬
hovah.”

It  will  be  seen  that  the  Masonic  tradi¬
tions  on  the  subject  of  the  Stone  of  Foun¬
dation  do  not  differ  very  materially  from
these  Rabbinical  ones,  although  they  add  a
few  additional  circumstances.

In  the  Masonic  legend,  the  Foundation-
Stone  first  makes  its  appearance,  as  we  have
already  said,  in  the  days  of  Enoch,  who
placed  it  in  the  bowels  of  Mount  Moriah.
There  it  was  subsequently  discovered  by
King  Solomon,  who  deposited  it  in  a  crypt
of  the  first  Temple,  where  it  remained  con¬
cealed  until  the  foundations  of  the  second
Temple  were  laid,  when  it  was  discovered
and  removed  to  the  Holy  of  Holies.  But
the  most  important  point  of  the  legend  of
the  Stone  of  Foundation  is  its  intimate
and  constant  connection  with  the  Tetra-
grammaton  or  ineffable  name.  It  is  this
name,  inscribed  upon  it  within  the  sacred
and  symbolic  delta,  that  gives  to  the  stone
all  its  Masonic  value  and  significance.  It
is  upon  this  fact,  that  it  was  so  inscribed,
that  its  whole  symbolism  depends.

Looking  at  these  traditions  in  anything
like  the  light  of  historical  narratives,  we
are  compelled  to  consider  them,  to  use  the
plain  language  of  Lee,  “  but  as  so  many
idle  and  absurd  conceits.”  We  must  go
behind  the  legend,  which  we  acknowledge
at  once  to  be  only  an  allegory,  and  study
its  symbolism.

The  following  facts  can,  I  think,  be  read¬
ily  established  from  history.  First,  that


there  was  a  very  general  prevalence  among
the  earliest  nations  of  antiquity  of  the  wor¬
ship  of  stones  as  the  representatives  of
Deity ;  secondly,  that  in  almost  every  an¬
cient  temple  there  was  a  legend  of  a  sacred
or  mystical  stone;  thirdly,  that  this  le¬
gend  is  found  in  the  Masonic  system ;  and
lastly,  that  the  mystical  stone  there  has
received  the  name  of  the  “  Stone  of  Foun¬
dation.”

Now,  as  in  all  the  other  systems  the
stone  is  admitted  to  be  symbolic,  and  the
traditions  connected  with  it  mystical,  we
are  compelled  to  assume  the  same  predi¬
cates  of  the  Masonic  stone.  It,  too,  i3
symbolic,  and  its  legend  a  myth  or  an
allegory.

Of  the  fable,  myth,  or  allegory,  Bailly
has  said  that,  “  subordinate  to  history  and
philosophy,  it  only  deceives  that  it  may  the
better  instruct  us.  Faithful  in  preserving
the  realities  which  are  confided  to  it,  it
covers  with  its  seductive  envelop  the  les¬
sons  of  the  one  and  the  truths  of  the  other.”
It  is  from  this  stand -point  that  we  are  to
view  the  allegory  of  the  Stone  of  Founda¬
tion,  as  developed  in  one  of  the  most  in¬
teresting  and  important  symbols  of  Ma¬
sonry.

The  fact  that  the  mystical  stone  in  all
the  ancient  religions  was  a  symbol  of  the
Deity,  leads  us  necessarily  to  the  conclu¬
sion  that  the  Stone  of  Foundation  was  also
a  symbol  of  Deity.  And  this  symbolic  idea
is  strengthened  by  the  Tetragrammaton,  or
sacred  name  of  God,  that  was  inscribed
upon  it.  This  ineffable  name  sanctifies  the
stone  upon  which  it  is  engraved  as  the  sym¬
bol  of  the  Grand  Architect.  It  takes  from
it  its  heathen  signification  as  an  idol,  and
consecrates  it  to  the  worship  of  the  true
God.

The  predominant  idea  of  the  Deity,  in
the  Masonic  system,  connects  him  with  his
creative  and  formative  power.  God  is  to
the  Freemason  Al  Gabil,  as  the  Arabians
called  him,  that  is,  The  Builder ;  or,  as  ex¬
pressed  in  his  Masonic  title,  the  Grand
Architect  of  the  Universe,  by  common  con¬
sent  abbreviated  in  the  formula  G  A  O  T  U.
Now,  it  is  evident  that  no  symbol  could  so
appropriately  suit  him  in  this  character  as
the  Stone  of  Foundation,  upon  which  he
is  allegorically  supposed  to  have  erected  his
world.  Such  a  symbol  closely  connects  the
creative  work  of  God,  as  a  pattern  and  ex¬
emplar,  with  the  workman’s  erection  of  his
temporal  building  on  a  similar  foundation-
stone.

But  this  Masonic  idea  is  still  further  to
be  extended.  The  great  object  of  all  Ma¬
sonic  labor  is  divine  truth.  The  search  for
the  lost  word  is  the  search  for  truth.  But
divine  truth  is  a  term  synonymous  with


STONE


STONE


755


God.  The  ineffable  name  is  a  symbol  of
truth,  because  God,  and  God  alone,  is  truth.
It  is  properly  a  scriptural  idea.  The  Book
of  Psalms  abounds  with  this  sentiment.
Thus  it  is  said  that  the  truth  of  the  Lord
“reacheth  unto  the  clouds,”  and  that  “his
truth  endureth  unto  all  generations.”  If,
then,  God  is  truth,  and  the  Stone  of  Foun¬
dation  is  the  Masonic  symbol  of  God,  it
follows  that  it  must  also  be  the  symbol  of
divine  truth.

When  we  have  arrived  at  this  point  in
our  speculations,  we  are  ready  to  show  how
all  the  myths  and  legends  of  the  Stone  of
Foundation  may  be  rationally  explained  as
parts  of  that  beautiful  “  science  of  moral¬
ity,  veiled  in  allegory  and  illustrated  by
symbols,”  which  is  the  acknowledged  defi¬
nition  of  Freemasonry.

In  the  Masonic  system  there  are  two  tem¬
ples  ;  the  first  temple,  in  which  the  degrees
of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry  are  concerned,
and  the  second  temple,  with  which  the
higher  degrees,  and  especially  the  Royal
Arch,  are  related.  The  first  temple  is  sym¬
bolic  of  the  present  life ;  the  second  temple
is  symbolic  of  the  life  to  come.  The  first
temple,  the  present  life,  must  be  destroyed ;
on  its  foundations  the  second  temple,  the
life  eternal,  must  be  built.

But  the  myfetical  stone  was  placed  by
King  Solomon  in  the  foundations  of  the
first  Temple.  That  is  to  say,  the  first  tem¬
ple  of  our  present  life  must  be  built  on  the
sure  foundation  of  divine  truth,  “  for  other
foundation  can  no  man  lay.”

But  although  the  present  life  is  necessa¬
rily  built  upon  the  foundation  of  truth,  yet
we  never  thoroughly  attain  it  in  this  sub¬
lunary  sphere.  The  Foundation-Stone  is
concealed  in  the  first  temple,  and  the  Mas¬
ter  Mason  knows  it  not.  He  has  not  the
true  word.  He  receives  only  a  substitute.

But  in  the  second  temple  of  the  future  life,
we  have  passed  from  the  grave  which  had
been  the  end  of  our  labors  in  the  first.  We
have  removed  the  rubbish,  and  have  found
that  Stone  of  Foundation  which  had  been
hitherto  concealed  from  our  eyes.  We  now
throw  aside  the  substitute  for  truth  which
had  contented  us  in  the  former  temple,  and
the  brilliant  effulgence  of  theTetragramma-
ton  and  the  Stone  of  Foundation  are  discov¬
ered,  and  thenceforth  we  are  the  possessors
of  the  true  word  —  of  divine  truth.  And  in
this  way,  theStoneof  Foundation,  or  divine
truth,  concealed  in  the  first  temple,  but  dis¬
covered  and  brought  to  light  in  the  second,
will  explain  that  passage  of  the  Apostle:
“  For  now  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly ;
but  then,  face  to  face:  now  I  know  in  part;
but  then  I  shall  know  face  to  face.”

And  so  the  result  of  this  inquiry  is,  that
the  Masonic  Stone  of  Foundation  is  a  sym¬


bol  of  divine  truth,  upon  which  all  specula¬
tive  Masonry  is  built,  and  the  legends  and
traditions  which  refer  to  it  are  intended  to
describe,  in  an  allegorical  way,  the  progress
of  truth  in  the  soul,  the  search  for  which  is
a  Mason’s  labor,  and  the  discovery  of  which
is  his  reward.

Stone  Pavement.  Oliver  says  that,
in  the  English  system,  “  the  stone  pavement
is  a  figurative  appendage  to  a  Master  Ma¬
sons’  Lodge,  and,  like  that  of  the  Most
Holy  Place  in  the  Temple,  is  for  the  High
Priest  to  walk  on.”  This  is  not  recognized
in  the  American  system,  where  the  stone
or  Mosaic  pavement  is  appropriated  to  the
Entered  Apprentice’s  degree.

Stone.  Rejected.  St.  Matthew  re¬
cords  (xxi.  42)  that  our  Lord  said  to  the
chief  priests  and  elders,  “  Did  ye  never
read  in  the  Scriptures,  The  stone  which  the
builders  rejected,  the  same  is  become  the
head  of  the  corner?”  Commenting  on
this,  Dr.  Adam  Clarke  says :  “  It  is  an  ex¬
pression  borrowed  from  masons,  who,  find¬
ing  a  stone  which,  being  tried  in  a  partic¬
ular  place,  and  appearing  improper  for  it,
is  thrown  aside  and  another  taken ;  how¬
ever,  at  last,  it  may  happen  that  the  very
stone  which  had  been  before  rejected  may  be
found  the  most  suitable  as  the  head  stone  of
the  corner."  This  is  precisely  the  symbolism
of  the  Mark  Master  or  fourth  degree  of  the
American  Rite,  where  the  rejected  stone  is
suggested  to  the  neophyte  “  as  a  consola¬
tion  under  all  the  frowns  of  fortune,  and  as
an  encouragement  to  hope  for  better  pros¬
pects.”  Bro.  G.  F.  Yates  says  that  the
symbolism  of  the  rejected  stone  in  the
present  Mark  degree  is  not  in  the  original
Master  Mark  Mason’s  degree,  out  of  which
Webb  manufactured  his  ritual,  but  was
introduced  by  him  from  some  other  un¬
known  source.

Stone-Squarers.  See  Giblim.

Stone,  White.  Among  the  ancient
Greeks  and  Romans,  sentence  was  given  in
courts  of  judicature  by  white  and  black
stones  or  pebbles.  Those  who  were  in  favor
of  acquittal  cast  a  white  stone,  and  those
who  were  for  condemning,  a  black  one.
So,  too,  in  popular  elections  a  white  stone
was  deposited  by  those  who  were  favorable
to  the  candidate,  and  a  black  one  by  those
who  wished  to  reject  him.  In  this  ancient
practice  we  find  the  origin  of  white  and
black  balls  in  the  Masonic  ballot.  Hence,
too,  the  white  stone  has  become  the  symbol
of  absolution  in  judgment,  and  of  the  con¬
ferring  of  honors  and  rewards.  The  white
stone  with  the  new  name,  mentioned  in  the
Mark  Master’s  degree,  refers  to  the  key¬
stone.

Stone,  W'illiam  liCOte.  An  Amer¬
ican  journalist  and  writer,  who  was  bom  in


756


STONE


STONE


the  State  of  New  York  in  1792,  and  died
in  1844.  He  was  the  author  of  several
literary  works,  generally  of  a  biographical
character.  But  his  largest  work  was  “  Let¬
ters  on  Masonry  and  anti-Masonry,  ad¬
dressed  to  the  Hon.  John  Quincy  Adams,”
New  York,  1832,  8vo,  pp.  566.  This  was
one  of  the  productions  which  were  in¬
debted  for  their  appearance  to  the  anti-
Masonic  excitement  that  prevailed  at  that
time  in  this  country.  Although  free  from
the  bitterness  of  tone  and  abusive  language
which  characterized  most  of  the  contem¬
poraneous  writings  of  the  anti-Masons,  it
is,  as  an  argumentative  work,  discreditable
to  the  critical  acumen  of  the  author.  It
abounds  in  statements  made  without  au¬
thority  and  unsustained  by  proofs,  while  its
premises  being  in  most  instances  false,  its
deductions  are  necessarily  illogical.

Stone  Worship.  This  was,  perhaps,
the  earliest  form  of  fetichism.  Before  the
discovery  of  metals,  men  were  accustomed
to  worship  unhewn  stones.  From  Clina,
whom  Sanchoniathan  calls  “the  first
Phoenician,”  the  Canaanites  learned  the
practice,  the  influence  of  which  we  may
trace  in  the  stone  pillar  erected  and  con¬
secrated  by  Jacob.  The  account  in  Gene¬
sis  xxviii.  18,  22,  is  that  “Jacob  took  the
stone  that  he  had  put  for  his  pillows  and
set  it  up  for  a  pillar,  and  poured  oil  upon
the  top  of  it;  and  he  called  the  name  of  the
place  Bethel,  saying,  This  stone  which  I  have
set  for  a  pillar  shall  be  God’s  house.”  The
Israelites  were  repeatedly  commanded  to
destroy  the  stone  idols  of  the  Canaanites,
and  Moses  corrects  his  own  people  when
falling  into  this  species  of  idolatry.

Various  theories  have  been  suggested  as
to  the  origin  of  stone  worship.  Lord
Kames  supposes  that  fact  by  supposing
that  stones  erected  as  monuments  of  the
dead  became  the  place  where  posterity  paid
their  veneration  to  the  memory  of  the  de¬
ceased,  and  that  at  length  the  people,  losing
sight  of  the  emblematical  signification,
which  was  not  readily  understood,  the
monumental  stones  at  length  became  ob¬
jects  of  worship.

Others  have  sought  to  find  the  origin  of
stone  worship  in  the  stone  that  was  set  up
and  anointed  by  Jacob  at  Bethel,  and  the
tradition  of  which  had  extended  into  the
heathen  nations  and  become  corrupted.  It
is  certain  that  the  Phoenicians  worshipped
sacred  stones  under  the  name  of  Bnetylia,
which  word  is  evidently  derived  from  the
Hebrew  Bethel,  and  this  undoubtedly  gives
some  appearance  of  probability  to  the
theory.

But  a  third  theory  supposes  that  the
worship  of  stones  was  derived  from  the
unskilfulness  of  the  primitive  sculptors.


who,  unable  to  frame,  by  their  meagre
principles  of  plastic  art,  a  true  image  of
the  God  whom  they  adored,  were  content
to  substitute  in  its  place  a  rude  or  scarcely
polished  stone.  Hence  the  Greeks,  accord¬
ing  to  Pausanias,  originally  used  unhewn
stones  to  represent  their  deities,  thirty  of
which,  that  historian  says,  he  saw  in  the
city  of  Pharce.  These  stones  were  of  a
cubical  form,  and,  as  the  greater  number
of  them  were  dedicated  to  the  god  Hermes,
or  Mercury,  they  received  the  generic  name
of  Hermue.  Subsequently,  with  the  improve¬
ment  of  the  plastic  art,  the  head  was  added.

So  difficult,  indeed,  was  it,  in  even  the
most  refined  era  of  Grecian  civilization,  for
the  people  to  divest  themselves  of  the  in¬
fluences  of  this  superstition,  that  Theo¬
phrastus  characterizes  “  the  superstitious
man  ”  as  one  who  could  not  resist  the  im¬
pulse  to  bow  to  those  mysterious  stones
which  served  to  mark  the  confluence  of  the
highways.

One  of  these  consecrated  stones  was
placed  before  the  door  of  almost  every
house  in  Athens.  They  were  also  placed
in  front  of  the  temples,  in  the  gymnasia  or
schools,  in  libraries,  and  at  the  corners  of
streets,  and  in  the  roads.  When  dedicated
to  the  god  Terminus  they  were  used  as
landmarks,  and  placed  as  such  upon  the
concurrent  lines  of  neighboring  possessions.

The  Thebans  worshipped  Bacchus  under
the  form  of  a  rude,  square  stone.

Arnobius  says  that  Cybele  was  repre¬
sented  by  a  small  stone  of  a  black  color.
Eusebius  cites  Porphyry  as  saying  that  the
ancients  represented  the  Deity  by  a  black
stone,  because  his  nature  is  obscure  and  in¬
scrutable.  The  reader  will  here  be  re¬
minded  of  the  black  stone,  Hadsjar  el  As -
wad,  placed  in  the  south-west  corner  of  the
Kaaba  at  Mecca,  which  was  worshipped  by
the  ancient  Arabians,  and  is  still  treated
with  religious  veneration  by  the  modern
Mohammedans.  The  Mussulman  priests,
however,  say  that  it  was  originally  white,
and  of  such  surprising  splendor  that  it  could
be  seen  at  the  distance  of  four  days’  jour¬
ney,  but  that  it  has  been  blackened  by  the
tears  of  pilgrims.

The  Druids,  it  is  well  known,  had  no
other  images  of  their  gods  but  cubical  or
sometimes  columnar  stones,  of  which  To-
land  gives  several  instances.

The  Chaldeans  had  a  sacred  stone,  which
they  held  in  great  veneration,  under  the
name  of  Mnizuris,  and  to  which  they  sacri¬
ficed  for  the  purpose  of  evoking  the  Good
Demon.

Stone  worship  existed  among  the  early
American  races.  Squier  quotes  Skinner  as
asserting  that  the  Peruvians  used  to  set  up
rough  stones  in  their  fields  and  plantations,


STONE


STONE


757


which  were  worshipped  as  protectors  of  their
crops.  And  Gama  says  that  in  Mexico  the
presiding  god  of  the  spring  was  often  repre¬
sented  without  a  human  body,  and  in  place
thereof  a  pilaster  or  square  column,  whose
pedestal  was  covered  with  various  sculp¬
tures.

Indeed,  so  universal  was  this  stone  wor¬
ship,  that  Higgins,  in  his  Celtic  Druids,
says  that  “  throughout  the  world  the  first
object  of  idolatry  seems  to  have  been  a
plain,  unwrought  stone,  placed  in  the
ground,  as  an  emblem  of  the  generative
or  procreative  powers  of  nature.”  And
Bryant,  in  his  Analysis  of  Ancient  Mythol¬
ogy,  asserts  that  “  there  is  in  every  oracular
temple  some  legend  about  a  stone.”

Without  further  citations  of  examples
from  the  religious  usages  of  antiquity,  it
will,  I  think,  be  conceded  that  the  cubical
stone  formed  an  important  part  of  the  re¬
ligious  worship  of  primitive  nations.  But
Cudworth,  Bryant,  Faber,  and  all  other
distinguished  writers  who  have  treated  the
subject,  have  long  since  established  the
theory  that  the  Pagan  religions  were  emi¬
nently  symbolic.  Thus,  to  use  the  lan¬
guage  of  Dudley,  the  pillar  or  stone  “  was
adopted  as  a  symbol  of  strength  and  firm¬
ness  —  a  symbol,  also,  of  the  divine  power,
and,  by  a  ready  inference,  a  symbol  or  idol
of  the  Deity  himself.”  And  this  symbol¬
ism  is  confirmed  by  Phurnutus,  whom  To-
land  quotes  as  saying  that  the  god  Hermes
was  represented  without  hands  or  feet,  be¬
ing  a  cubical  stone,  because  the  cubical
figure  betokened  his  solidity  and  stability.

The  influence  of  this  old  stone  worship,
but  of  course  divested  of  its  idolatrous
spirit,  and  developed  into  the  system  of
symbolic  instruction,  is  to  be  found  in  Ma¬
sonry,  where  the  reference  to  sacred  stones
is  made  in  the  Foundation-Stone,  the  Cu¬
bical  Stone,  the  Corner-Stone,  and  some
other  symbols  of  a  similar  character.  In¬
deed,  the  stone  supplies  Masonic  science
with  a  very  important  and  diversified  sym¬
bolism.

As  stone  worship  was  one  of  the  oldest
of  the  deflections  from  the  pure  religion,
so  it  was  one  of  the  last  to  be  abandoned.
A  decree  of  the  Council  of  Arles,  which  was
held  in  the  year  452,  declares  that  “  if,  in
any  diocese,  any  infidel  either  lighted
torches  or  worshipped  trees,  fountains,  or
stones,  or  neglected  to  destroy  them,  lie
should  be  found  guilty  of  sacrilege.”  A
similar  decree  was  subsequently  issued  by.
the  Council  of  Tours  in  567,  that  of  Nantes
in  658,  and  that  of  Toledo  in  681.  Char¬
lemagne,  of  France,  in  the  eighth  century,
and  Canute,  of  England,  in  the  eleventh,
found  it  necessary  to  execrate  and  forbid
the  worship  of  stones.


Even  in  the  present  day,  the  worship  has
not  been  altogether  abandoned,  but  still
exists  in  some  remote  districts  of  Christen¬
dom.  Scheffer,  in  his  Description  of  Lap-
land,  (cited  by  Mr.  Tennent,  in  Notes  and
Queries,  1st  Ser.,  v.  122,)  says,  that  in  1673
the  Laplanders  worshipped  an  unhewn
stone  found  upon  the  banks  of  lakes  and
rivers,  and  which  they  called  “  kied  kie
jubmal,  that  is,  the  stone  god.”  Martin,  in
his  Description  of  the  Western  Islands,  (p.
88,)  says:  “There  is  a  stone  set  up  near  a
mile  to  the  south  of  St.  Columbus’s  church,
about  eight  feet  high  and  two  broad.  It  is
called  by  the  natives  the  bowing  stone  ;  for
when  the  inhabitants  had  the  first  sight
of  the  church,  they  set  up  this,  and  then
bowed,  and  said  the  Lord’s  Prayer.”  He
also  describes  several  other  stones  in  differ¬
ent  parts  of  the  islands  which  were  objects
of  veneration.  Finally,  in  a  work  published
about  twenty  years  ago  by  the  Earl  of
Roden,  entitled  Progress  of  the  Reformation
in  Ireland,  he  says,  (p.  51,)  that  at  Innis-
kea,  an  island  off  the  coast  of  Mayo,  “a
stone  carefully  wrapped  up  in  flannel  is
brought  out  at  certain  periods  to  be  adored;
and  when  a  storm  arises,  this  god  is  suppli¬
cated  to  send  a  w'reck  on  their  coasts.”

Tennent,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for
these  citations,  adds  another  from  Borlase,
who,  in  his  Antiquities  of  Cornwall,  says
(b.  iii.,  c.  ii.,  p.  162,)  that  “after  Christi¬
anity  took  place,  many  [in  Cornwall]  con¬
tinued  to  worship  these  stones;  coming
thither  with  lighted  torches,  and  praying
for  safety  and  success.”

It  is  more  than  probable  that  in  many
remote  regions  of  Europe,  where  the  sun
of  Christianity  has  only  darted  its  dimmest
rays,  this  old  worship  of  sacred  stones  still
remains.

Strasburg,  Cathedral  of.  This
has  always  been  considered  as  one  of  the
finest  Gothic  buildings  in  Europe,  and  its
spire  is  the  highest  in  the  world,  being  466
feet.  The  original  cathedral  was  founded
in  504,  but  in  1007  it  was  almost  com¬
pletely  destroyed  by  lightning.  The  pres¬
ent  edifice  w’as  begun  in  1015  and  com¬
pleted  in  1439.  The  cathedral  of  Strasburg
is  very  closely  connected  with  the  history
of  Freemasonry.  The  most  important  as¬
sociation  of  master  builders,  says  Stieglitz,
(  Von  Altdeusch.  Bank.,)  for  the  culture  and
extension  of  German  art,  was  that  which
took  place  at  Strasburg  under  Erwin  von
Steinbach.  As  soon  as  this  architect  had
undertaken  the  direction  of  the  works  at
the  Strasburg  cathedral,  lie  summoned  ma¬
sons  out  of  Germany,  England,  and  Italy,
and  formed  with  them  a  brotherhood,
through  which,  in  1275,  a  Freemasonry
according  to  the  English  system  was  es-


758


STRASBURG


STUART


tablished.  Thence  hiitten,  or  Lodges,  were  I
scattered  over  Europe.  In  1459,  on  April  j
25,  says  Grandidier,  the  Masters  of  many
of  these  Lodges  assembled  at  Ratisbon  and
drew  up  an  Act  of  Fraternity,  which  made
the  master  of  the  works  at  Strasburg,  and
his  successors,  the  perpetual  Grand  Masters
of  the  Fraternity  of  German  Freemasons.
This  was  confirmed  by  the  Emperor  Maxi¬
milian  in  1498.  By  the  statutes  of  this  as¬
sociation,  the  Haupt-Hiitte,  Grand  or  Moth¬
er  Lodge  of  Strasburg,  was  invested  with
a  judicature,  without  appeal,  over  all  the
Lodges  of  Germany.  Strasburg  thus  takes
in  German  Masonry  a  position  equivalent
to  that  of  York  in  the  Masonry  of  England,
or  Kilwinning  in  that  of  Scotland.  And
although  the  Haupt-Hutte  of  Strasburg
with  all  other  Haupt-Hiitten  were  abol¬
ished  by  an  imperial  edict  on  August  16,
1731,  the  Mother  Lodge  never  lost  its  pres¬
tige.  “This,”  says  Findel,  {Hist.,  72,)  “is
the  case  even  now  in  many  places  in  Ger¬
many;  the  Saxon  Stonemasons  still  regard¬
ing  the  Strasburg  Lodge  as  their  chief
Lodge.”  See  Stonemasons.

Strasburg,  Congress  of.  Two  im¬
portant  Masonic  Congresses  have  been  hold-
en  at  Strasburg.

The  first  Congress  of  Strasburg.  This  was
convoked  in  1275  by  Erwin  von  Steinbach.
The  object  was  the  establishment  of  a
brotherhood  for  the  continuation  of  the  la¬
bors  on  the  cathedral.  It  was  attended  by
a  large  concourse  of  Masons  from  Germany,
England,  and  Italy.  It  was  at  this  Con¬
gress  that  the  German  builders  and  archi¬
tects,  in  imitation  of  their  English  breth¬
ren,  assumed  the  name  of  Freemasons,  and
established  a  system  of  regulations  for  the
government  of  the  Craft.

The  second  Congress  of  Strasburg.  This
was  convoked  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  or
Haupt-Hiitte  of  Strasburg,  in  1564,  as  a
continuation  of  one  which  had  been  held
in  the  same  year  at  Basle.  Here  several
statutes  were  adopted,  by  which  the  Stein-
werhsrecht,  or  Stonemasons’  law,  was
brought  into  a  better  condition.

Strength.  This  is  said  to  be  one  of
the  three  principal  supports  of  a  Lodge,  as
the  representative  of  the  whole  Institution,
because  it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be
Strength  to  support  and  maintain  every
great  and  important  undertaking,  not  less
than  there  should  be  Wisdom  to  contrive  it,
and  Beauty  to  adorn  it.  Hence,  Strength
is  symbolized  in  Masonry  by  the  Doric
column,  because,  of  all  the  orders  of  archi¬
tecture,  it  is  the  most  massive;  by  the
Senior  Warden,  because  it  is  his  duty  to
strengthen  and  support  the  authority  of  the
Master  ;  and  by  Hiram  of  Tyre,  because  of
the  material  assistance  that  he  gave  in  men


and  materials  for  the  construction  of  the
Temple.

Strict  Observance,  Rite  of.  The

Rite  of  Strict  Observance  was  a  modifica¬
tion  of  Masonry,  based  on  the  Order  of
Knights  Templars,  and  introduced  into  Ger¬
many  in  1754  by  its  founder,  the  Baron
Hund.  It  was  divided  into  the  following
seven  degrees:  1.  Apprentice;  2.  Fellow
Craft;  3.  Master;  4.  Scottish  Master;  5.
Novice;  6.  Templar;  7.  Professed  Knight.

According  to  the  system  of  the  founder
of  this  Rite,  upon  the  death  of  Jacques
Molay,  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars,
Pierre  d’Aumont,  the  Provincial  Grand
Master  of  Auvergne,  with  two  Commanders
and  five  Knights,  retired  for  purposes  of
safety  into  Scotland,  which  place  they
reached  disguised  as  Operative  Masons,
and  there  finding  the  Grand  Commander,
George  Harris,  and  several  Knights,  they
determined  to  continue  the  Order.  Aumont
was  nominated  Grand  Master,  at  a  Chapter
held  on  St.  John’s  day,  1313.  To  avoid
persecution,  the  Knights  became  Freema¬
sons.  In  1361,  the  Grand  Master  of  the
Temple  removed  his  seat  to  Old  Aberdeen,
and  from  that  time  the  Order,  under  the
veil  of  Masonry,  spread  rapidly  through
France,  Germany,  Spain,  Portugal,  and
elsewhere.  These  events  constituted  the
principal  subject  of  many  of  the  degrees  of
the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance.  The  others
were  connected  with  alchemy,  magic,  and
other  superstitious  practices.  The  great
doctrine  contended  for  by  the  followers  of
the  Rite  was,  “  that  every  true  Mason  is  a
Knight  Templar.”  For  an  account  of  the
rise,  the  progress,  the  decay,  and  the  final
extinction  of  this  once  important  Rite,
see  Hund,  Baron  Von.

Striking  Off.  Striking  off  a  Lodge
from  the  registry  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  a
phrase  of  English  Masonry,  equivalent  to
what  in  America  is  called  a  forfeiture  of
charter.  It  is  more  commonly  called
“erasing  from  the  list  of  Lodges.”

Stnart  Masonry.  This  title  is  given
by  Masonic  historians  to  that  system  of
Freemasonry  which  is  supposed  to  have
been  invented  by  the  adherents  of  the  ex¬
iled  house  of  Stuart  for  the  purpose  of
being  used  as  a  political  means  of  restoring,
first,  James  II.,  and  afterwards  his  son  and
grandson,  James  and  Charles  Edward,  re¬
spectively  known  in  history  as  the  Cheva¬
lier  St.  George  and  the  Young  Pretender.
Most  of  the  conclusions  to  which  Masonic
writers  have  arrived  on  the  subject  of  this
connection  of  the  Stuarts  with  the  high
degrees  of  Masonry  are  based  on  conjec¬
ture;  but  there  is  sufficient  internal  evi¬
dence  in  the  character  of  some  of  these
degrees,  as  well  as  in  the  known  history


STUART


STUART


759


of  their  organization,  to  establish  the  fact
that  such  a  connection  did  actually  exist.

The  first  efforts  to  create  a  Masonic  in¬
fluence  in  behalf  of  his  family  is  attributed
to  James  II.,  who  had  abdicated  the  throne
of  England  in  1688.  Of  him,  jNoorthouck
says,  (Const.,  192,)  that  he  was  not  “a
Brother  Mason,”  and  sneeringly  adds,  in
his  index,  that  “  he  might  have  been  a  bet¬
ter  king  had  he  been  a  Mason.”  But  Len-
ning  says  that  after  his  flight  to  France,
and  during  his  residence  at  the  Jesuit  Col¬
lege  of  Clermont,  where  he  remained  for
some  time,  his  adherents,  among  whom
were  the  Jesuits,  fabricated  certain  degrees
with  the  ulterior  design  of  carrying  out
their  political  views.  At  a  later  period
these  degrees  were,  he  says,  incorporated
into  French  Masonry  under  the  name  of
the  Clermont  system,  in  reference  to  their
original  construction  at  that  place.  Ga-
dicke  had  also  said  that  many  Scotchmen
followed  him,  and  thus  introduced  Free¬
masonry  into  France.  But  this  opinion
is  only  worthy  of  citation  because  it  proves
that  such  an  opinion  was  current  among
the  German  scholars  of  the  last  century.

On  his  death,  which  took  place  at  the
palace  of  St.  Germain  en  Laye  in  1701,  he
was  succeeded  in  his  claims  to  the  British
throne  by  his  son,  who  was  recognized  by
Louis  XIV.,  of  France,  under  the  title  of
James  III.,  but  who  is  better  known  as  the
Chevalier  St.  George,  or  the  Old  Pretender.
He  also  sought,  says  Lenning,  to  find  in
the  high  degrees  of  Masonry  a  support  for
his  political  views,  but,  as  he  remarks,  with
no  better  results  than  those  w  hich  had  at¬
tended  the  attempts  of  his  father.

His  son,  Prince  Charles  Edward,  who
was  commonly  called  by  the  English  the
Young  Pretender,  took  a  more  active  part
than  either  his  father  or  grandfather  in  the

tmrsuits  of  Masonry  ;  and  there  is  abundant
listorical  evidence  that  he  was  not  only  a
Mason,  but  that  he  held  high  office  in  the
Order,  and  was  for  a  time  zealously  engaged
in  its  propagation  ;  always,  however,  it  is
supposed,  with  political  views.

In  1745  he  invaded  Scotland,  with  a  view
to  regain  the  lost  throne  of  his  ancestors,
and  met  for  some  time  with  more  than  par¬
tial  success.  On  September  24,  1745,  he
was  admitted  into  the  Order  of  Knights
Templars,  and  was  elected  Grand  Master,  an
office  which  it  is  said  that  he  held  until  his
death.  On  his  return  to  France  after  his
ill-fated  expedition,  the  Prince  established
at  the  city  of  Arras,  on  April  15,  1747,  a
Rose  Croix  Chapter  under  the  title  of
Scottish  Jacobite  Chapter.  In  the  Patent
for  this  Chapter  he  styles  himself  “  King
of  England,  France,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,
and,  as  such,  Substitute  Grand  Master  of  the


Chapter  of  Herodem,  known  under  the  title
of  Knight  of  the  Eagle  and  Pelican,  and
since  our  misfortunes  and  disasters  under
that  of  Rose  Croix.”

In  1748,  the  Rite  of  the  Veille-Bru,  or
Faithful  Scottish  Masons,  was  created  at
Toulouse  in  grateful  remembrance  of  the
reception  given  by  the  Masons  of  that
Orient  to  Sir  Samuel  Lockhart,  the  aid-
de-camp  of  the  Pretender.  Ragon  says,
(Orth.  Maqon.,  122,)  in  a  note  to  this  state¬
ment,  the  “  favorites  who  accompanied  this
prince  into  France  were  in  the  habit  of
selling  to  speculators  Charters  for  Mother
Lodges,  Patents  for  Chapters,  etc.  These
titles  were  their  property,  and  they  did  not
fail  to  make  use  of  them  as  a  means  of
livelihood.”

It  is  admitted  that  the  Chevalier  Ramsay
fabricated  degrees  in  the  interest  of  the
Stuart  cause.  Ragon  says  ( Thuil.  Gen.,  367,)
that  the  degrees  of  Irish  Master,  Perfect  Irish
Master,  and  Puissant  Irish  Master  were
invented  in  France,  in  1747,  by  the  favorites
of  Charles  Edward  Stuart,  and  sold  to  the
partisans  of  that  prince.  One  degree  was
openly  called  the  ‘‘Scottish  Master  of  the
Sacred  Vault  of  James  VI.,”  as  if  to  indi¬
cate  its  Stuart  character.  The  degree  still
exists  as  the  thirteenth  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  but  it  has  been
shorn  of  its  political  pretensions  and  its
title  changed.  Ramsay’s  interest  in  be¬
half  of  the  cause  of  the  house  of  Stuart  is
to  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  he  was  at
one  time  the  tutor  of  the  two  princes,
Charles  Edward  afterwards  the  Young
Pretender,  and  Henry  afterwards  Cardinal
York.

Fin  del  has  given  in  his  History  of  Free¬
masonry,  (Lyon’s  trans.,  p.  209,)  a  very  calm
and  impartial  account  of  the  rise  of  this
Stuart  Masonry.  He  says:

“Ever  since  the  banishment  of  the
Stuarts  from  England  in  1688,  secret  alli¬
ances  had  been  kept  up  between  Rome  and
Scotland ;  for  to  the  former  place  the  Pre¬
tender  James  Stuart  had  retired  in  1719,
and  his  son  Charles  Edward  was  born  there
in  1720 ;  and  these  communications  became
the  more  intimate,  the  higher  the  hopes  of
the  Pretender  rose.  The  Jesuits  played  a
very  important  part  in  these  conferences.
Regarding  the  reinstatement  of  the  Stuarts
and  the  extension  of  the  power  of  the
Roman  church  as  identical,  they  sought  at
that  time  to  make  the  society  of  Free¬
masons  subservient  to  their  ends.  But  to
make  use  of  the  Fraternity  to  restore  the
exiled  family  to  the  throne  could  not  pos¬
sibly  have  been  contemplated,  as  Free¬
masonry  could  hardly  be  said  to  exist  in
Scotland  then.  Perhaps  in  1724,  when
Ramsay  was  a  year  in  Rome,  or  in  1728,


760


STUART


SUBLIME


when  the  Pretender  in  Parma  kept  up  an
intercourse  with  the  restless  Duke  of  Whar¬
ton,  a  Past  Grand  Master,  this  idea  was
first  entertained;  and  then,  wheu  it  was
apparent  how  difficult  it  would  be  to  cor¬
rupt  the  loyalty  and  fealty  of  Freemasonry
in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  founded
in  1736,  this  scheme  was  set  on  foot,  of
assembling  the  faithful  adherents  of  the
banished  royal  family  in  the  high  degrees!
The  soil  which  was  best  adapted  for  this
innovation  was  France,  where  the  low  ebb
to  which  Masonry  had  sunk  had  paved  the
way  for  all  kinds  of  new-fangled  notions,
and  where  the  Lodges  were  composed  of
Scotch  conspirators  and  accomplices  of  the
Jesuits.  When  the  path  had  thus  been
smoothed  by  the  agency  of  these  secret
propagandists,  Ramsay,  at  that  time  Grand
Orator  (an  office  unknown  in  England),  by
his  speech  completed  the  preliminaries
necessary  for  the  introduction  of  the  high
degrees ;  their  further  development  was  left
to  the  instrumentality  of  others,  whose  in¬
fluence  produced  a  result  somewhat  different
from  that  originally  intended.  Their  course
we  can  now  pursue,  assisted  by  authentic
historical  information.  In  1752,  Scottish
Masonry,  as  it  was  denominated,  penetrated
into  Germany,  (Berlin,)  prepared  from  a
ritual  very  similar  to  one  used  in  Lille  in
1749  and  i750.  In  1743,  Thory  tells  us,  the
Masons  in  Lyons,  under  the  name  of  the
“Petit  Elu,”  invented  the  degree  of  Ka-
dosh,  which  represents  the  revenge  of  the
Templars.  The  Order  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars  had  been  abolished  in  1311,  and  to
that  epoch  they  were  obliged  to  have  re¬
course  when,  after  the  banishment  of  several
Knights  from  Malta  in  1720  because  they
were  Freemasons,  it  was  not  longer  possible
to  keep  up  a  connection  with  the  Order  of
St.  John  or  Knights  of  Malta,  then  in  the
plenitude  of  their  power  under  the  sover¬
eignty  of  the  Pope.  A  pamphlet  entitled
Freemasonry  Divested  of  all  its  Secrets,  pub¬
lished  in  Strasburg  in  1745,  contains  the
first  glimpse  of  the  Strict  Observance,  and
demonstrates  how  much  they  expected  the
brotherhood  to  contribute  towards  the  ex¬
pedition  in  favor  of  the  Pretender.

From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident
that  the  exiled  house  of  Stuart  exercised
an  important  part  in  the  invention  and  ex¬
tension  of  what  has  been  called  the  High
Masonry.  The  traces  of  the  political  sys¬
tem  are  seen  at  the  present  day  in  the  inter¬
nal  organization  of  some  of  the  high  de¬
grees —  especially  in  the  derivation  and
meaning  of  certain  significant  words.
There  is,  indeed,  abundant  reason  for  be¬
lieving  that  the  substitute  word  of  the
third  degree  was  changed  by  Ramsay,  or
some  other  fabricator  of  degrees,  to  give  it


a  reference  to  James  II.  as  the  “son  of  the
widow,”  Queen  Henrietta  Maria.

Further  researches  are  needed  to  enable
any  author  to  satisfactorily  write  all  the  de¬
tails  of  this  interesting  episode  in  the  his¬
tory  of  continental  Masonry.  Documents
are  still  wanting  to  elucidate  certain  in¬
tricate  and,  at  present,  apparently  contra¬
dictory  points.

Sublime.  The  third  degree  is  called
“  the  Sublime  Degree  of  a  Master  Mason,”
in  reference  to  the  exalted  lessons  that  it
teaches  of  God  and  of  a  future  life.  The
epithet  is,  however,  comparatively  modern.
It  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  of  the  rituals
of  the  last  century.  Neither  Hutchinson,
nor  Smith,  nor  Preston  use  it;  and  it  was
not,  therefore,  I  presume,  in  the  original
Prestonian  lecture.  Hutchinson  speaks
of  “  the  most  sacred  and  solemn  Order  ”
and  of  “the  exalted,”  but  not  of  “  the  sub¬
lime”  degree.  Webb,  who  based  his  lec¬
tures  on  the  Prestonian  system,  applies  no
epithet  to  the  Master’s  degree.  In  an  edi¬
tion  of  the  Constitutions,  published  at  Dub¬
lin  in  1769,  the  Master’s  degree  is  spoken
of  as  “the  most  respectable;”  and  forty
years  ago  the  epithet  “  high  and  honora¬
ble”  was  used  in  some  of  the  rituals  of  this
country.  The  first  book  in  which  we  meet
with  the  adjective  “  sublime ”  applied  to  the
third  degree,  is  the  Masonic  Discourses  of
Dr.  T.  M.  Harris,  published  at  Boston  in
1801.  Cole  also  used  it  in  1817,  in  his
Freemasons’  Library ;  and  about  the  same
time  Jeremy  Cross,  the  well-known  lec¬
turer,  introduced  it  into  his  teachings,
and  used  it  in  his  Hieroglyphic  Chart ,
which  was,  for  many  years,  the  text¬
book  of  American  Lodges.  The  word  is
now,  however,  to  be  found  in  the  modern
English  lectures,  and  is  of  universal  use  in
the  rituals  of  the  United  States,  where  the
third  degree  is  always  called  “the  sublime
degree  of  a  Master  Mason.”

The  word  sublime  was  the  password  of  the
Master’s  degree  in  the  Adonhiramite  Rite,
because  it  was  said  to  have  been  the  sur¬
name  of  Hiram,  or  Adonhiram.  On  thi3
subject,  Guillemain,  in  his  Recueil  PreCieux,
(i.,  106,)  makes  the  following  singular  re¬
marks  :

“  For  a  long  time  a  great  number  of  Ma¬
sons  were  unacquainted  with  this  word,  and
they  erroneously  made  use  of  another  in  its
stead  which  they  did  not  understand,  and
to  which  they  gave  a  meaning  that  was
doubtful  and  improbable.  This  is  proved
by  the  fact  that  the  first  knights  adopted
for  the  Master’s  password  the  Latin  word
Sublimis,  which  the  French,  as  soon  as
they  received  Masonry,  pronounced  Sublime,
which  was  so  far  very  well.  But  some  pro¬
fanes,  who  were  desirous  of  divulging  our


SUBLIME


SUBLIME


761


secrets,  but  who  did  not  perfectly  under¬
stand  this  word,  wrote  it  Jiblime,  which  they
said  signified  excellence.  Others,  who  fol¬
lowed,  surpassed  the  error  of  the  first  by
printing  it  Giblos,  and  were  bold  enough  to
say  that  it  was  the  name  of  the  place  where
the  body  of  Adonhiram  wras  found.  As  in
those  days  the  number  of  uneducated  was
considerable,  these  ridiculous  assertions
were  readily  received,  and  the  truth  was
generally  forgotten.”

The  whole  of  this  narrative  is  a  mere  vis¬
ionary  invention  of  the  founder  of  the  Adon-
hiramite  system ;  but  it  is  barely  possible
that  there  is  some  remote  connection  be¬
tween  the  use  of  the  word  sublime  in  that
Rite,  as  a  significant  word  of  the  third  de¬
gree,  and  its  modern  employment  as  an
epithet  of  the  same  degree.  However,  the
ordinary  signification  of  the  word,  as  refer¬
ring  to  things  of  an  exalted  character,
would  alone  sufficiently  account  for  the  use
of  the  epithet.

Sublime  Degrees.  The  eleven  de¬
grees  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite,  from  the  fourth  to  the  fourteenth  in¬
clusive,  are  so  called.  Thus  Dalcho  ( Report
of  Com.,  1802,)  says:  “Although  many  of
the  Sublime  degrees  are  in  fact  a  continu¬
ation  of  the  Blue  degrees,  yet  there  is  no
interference  between  the  two  bodies.”

Sublime  Grand  Eoclge.  A  title
formerly  given  in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Rite  to  what  is  now  simply  called  a  Lodge
of  Perfection.  Thus,  in  1801,  Dr.  Dalcho
delivered  in  Charleston,  South  Carolina,  an
address  which  bears  the  title  of  “  An  ora¬
tion  delivered  in  the  Sublime  Grand  Lodge.”

Sublime  Knight  Elected.  ( Sub¬
lime  Chevalier  elu.)  Called  also  Sublime
Knight  Elected  of  the  Twelve.  The  elev¬
enth  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite.  Its  legend  is  that  it  was  in¬
stituted  by  King  Solomon  after  punishment
had  been  inflicted  on  certain  traitors  at  the
Temple,  both  as  a  recompense  for  the  zeal
and  constancy  of  the  Illustrious  Elect  of
Fifteen,  who  had  discovered  them,  and
also  to  enable  him  to  elevate  other  deserv¬
ing  brethren  from  the  lower  degrees  to  that
which  had  been  vacated  by  their  promotion.
Twelve  of  these  fifteen  he  elected  Sublime
Knights,  and  made  the  selection  by  ballot,
that  he  might  give  none  offence,  putting
the  names  of  the  whole  in  an  urn.  The
first  twelve  that  were  drawn  he  formed  into
a  Chapter,  and  gave  them  command  over
the  twelve  tribes,  bestowing  on  them  a
name  which  in  Hebrew  signifies  a  true
man.

The  meeting  of  a  body  of  Sublime
Knights  is  called  a  Chapter.

The  room  is  hung  with  black  strewed
with  tears.

4  V


The  presiding  officer  represents  King
Solomon,  and  in  the  old  rituals  is  styled
“ Most  Puissant,”  but  in  recent  ones  “  Thrice
Illustrious.”

The  apron  is  white,  lined  and  bordered
with  black,  with  black  strings ;  on  the  flap
a  flaming  heart.

The  sash  is  black,  with  a  flaming  heart
on  the  breast,  suspended  from  the  right
shoulder  to  the  left  hip.

The  jewel  is  a  sword  of  justice.

This  is  the  last  of  the  three  Elus  which
are  found  in  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite.  In  the  French  Rite  they
have  been  condensed  into  one,  and  make
the  fourth  degree  of  that  ritual,  but  not,  as
Ragon  admits,  with  the  happiest  effect.

The  names  of  the  Twelve  Illustrious
Knights  selected  to  preside  over  the  twelve
tribes,  as  they  have  been  transmitted  to  us
in  the  ritual  of  this  degree,  have  undoubt¬
edly  assumed  a  very  corrupted  form.  The
restoration  of  their  correct  orthography,
and  with  it  their  true  signification,  is
worthy  the  attention  of  the  Masonic  stu¬
dent.

Sublime  Masons.  The  initiates  into
the  fourteenth  degree  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Rite  are  so  called.  Thus  Dalcho
(Orat.  27)  says:  “The  Sublime  Masons  view
the  symbolic  system  with  reverence,  as
forming  a  test  of  the  character  and  capacity
of  the  initiated.”  This  abbreviated  form
is  now  seldom  used,  the  fuller  one  of
“Grand,  Elect,  Perfect,  and  Sublime  Ma¬
sons  ”  being  more  generally  employed.”

Sublime  Prince  of  (lie  Royal
Secret.  This  is  the  thirty-second  degree
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.  There
is  abundant  internal  evidence,  derived  from
the  ritual  and  from  some  historical  facts,
that  the  degree  of  Sublime  Prince  of
the  Royal  Secret  was  instituted  by  the
founders  of  the  Council  of  Emperors  of
the  East  and  West,  which  body  was  estab¬
lished  in  the  year  1758.  It  is  certain  that
before  that  period  we  hear  nothing  of  such
a  degree  in  any  of  the  Rites.  The  Rite
of  Heredom  or  of  Perfection,  wrhich  was
that  instituted  by  the  Council  of  Emperors,
consisted  of  twenty-five  degrees.  Ot  these
the  twenty-fifth,  and  highest,  was  the  Prince
of  the  Royal  Secret.  It  was  brought  to
America  by  Morin,  as  the  summit  of  the
High  Masonry  which  he  introduced,  and
for  the  propagation  of  which  he  had  re¬
ceived  his  Patent.  In  the  subsequent  ex¬
tension  of  the  Scottish  Rite  about  the
beginning  of  the  present  century,  by  the
addition  of  eight  new  degrees  to  the  orig¬
inal  twenty-five,  the  Sublime  Prince  of  the
Royal  Secret  became  the  thirty-second.

Bodies  of  the  thirty-second  degree  are
called  Consistories,  and  where  there  is  a


762


SUBLIME


SUBSTITUTE


superintending  body  erected  by  the  Su¬
preme  Council  for  the  government  of  the
inferior  degrees  in  a  State  or  Province,  it
is  called  a  Grand  Consistory.

The  clothing  of  a  Sublime  Prince  con¬
sists  of  a  collar,  jewel,  and  apron.  The
collar  is  black  edged  with  white.

The  jewel  is  a  Teutonic  cross  of  gold.

The  apron  is  white  edged  with  black.
On  the  flap  are  embroidered  six  flags,  three
on  each  side  the  staffs  in  saltier,  and  the
flags  blue,  red,  and  yellow.  On  the  centre
of  the  flap,  over  these,  is  a  Teutonic  cross
surmounted  by  an  All-seeing  Eye,  and  on  the
cross  a  double-headed  eagle  not  crowned.
On  the  body  of  the  apron  is  the  tracing-
board  of  the  degree.  The  most  important


part  of  the  symbolism  of  the  degree  is  the
tracing-board,  which  is  technically  called
“The  Camp.”  This  is  a  symbol  of  deep
import,  and  in  its  true  interpretation  is
found  that  “  royal  secret  ”  from  which  the
degree  derives  its  name.  This  Camp  con¬
stitutes  an  essential  part  of  the  furniture
of  a  Consistory  during  an  initiation,  but
its  explanations  are  altogether  esoteric.  It
is  a  singular  fact,  that  notwithstanding  the
changes  which  the  degree  must  have  under¬
gone  in  being  transferred  from  the  twenty-
fifth  of  one  Rite  to  the  thirty-second  of
another,  no  alteration  was  ever  made  in
the  Camp,  which  retains  at  the  present  day
the  same  form  and  signification  that  were
originally  given  to  it.

The  motto  of  the  degree  is  “Spes  mea  in
Deo  est,”  i.  e.,  My  hope  is  in  God.

Sublime  Solomon.  ( Salomon  Sub¬
lime.)  A  degree  in  the  manuscript  collec¬
tion  of  Peuvret.

Sublimes,  The.  (Les Sublimes.)  One
of  the  degrees  of  the  Ancient  Chapter  of
Clermont.

Submission.  Submission  to  the  me¬
diatorial  offices  of  his  brethren  in  the  case
of  a  dispute  is  a  virtue  recommended  to


the  Mason,  but  not  necessarily  to  be  en¬
forced.  In  the  “  Charges  of  a  Freemason,”
(Anderson,  1st  ed.,  56,)  it  is  said,  (vi.  6:)
“With  respect  to  Brothers  or  Fellows  at
law,  the  Master  and  Brethren  should  kindly
offer  their  mediation;  which  ought  to  be
thankfully  submitted  to  by  the  contending
Brethren;  and  if  that  submission  is  imprac¬
ticable,  they  must,  however,  carry  on  their
process  or  lawsuit  without  wrath  or  ran¬
cour.”

Subordinate  Lodge.  So  called  to
indicate  its  subordination  to  the  Grand
Lodge  as  a  supreme,  superintending  power.
See  Lodge.

Subordinate  Officers.  In  a  Grand

Lodge,  all  the  officers  below  the  Grand  Mas¬
ter,  and  in  a  Lodge,  all  those  below  the
Worshipful  Master,  are  styled  Subordinate
Officers.  So,  too,  in  all  the  other  branches
of  the  Order,  the  presiding  officer  is  su¬
preme,  the  rest  subordinate.

Subordination.  Although  it  is  the
theory  of  F reemasonry  that  all  the  brethren
are  on  a  level  of  equality ;  yet  in  the  practi¬
cal  working  of  the  Institution  a  subordina¬
tion  of  ranks  has  been  always  rigorously
observed.  So  the  Charges  approved  in  1722,
and  which  had  been  collected  by  Anderson
from  the  Old  Constitutions,  say:  “These
rulers  and  governors,  supreme  and  subor¬
dinate,  of  the  ancient  Lodge,  are  to  be
obeyed  in  their  respective  stations  by  all
the  Brethren,  according  to  the  Old  Charges
and  Regulations,  with  all  humility,  rever¬
ence,  love,  and  alacrity.”  C'h.  iv.

Substitute  Ark.  See  Arb,  Substitute.

Substitute  Candidate.  An  ar¬
rangement  resorted  to  in  the  Royal  Arch
degree  of  the  American  system,  so  as  to
comply  pro  forma  with  the  requisitions  of
the  ritual.  In  the  English,  Scotch,  and
Irish  systems,  there  is  no  regulation  requir¬
ing  the  presence  of  three  candidates,  and,
therefore,  the  practice  of  employing  substi¬
tutes  is  unknown  in  those  countries.  In
the  United  States  the  usage  has  prevailed
from  a  very  early  period,  although  opposed
at  various  times  by  conscientious  Compan¬
ions,  who  thought  that  it  was  an  improper
evasion  of  the  law.  Finally,  the  question
as  to  the  employment  of  substitutes  came
before  the  General  Grand  Chapter  in  Sep¬
tember,  1872,  when  it  was  decided,  by  a
vote  of  ninety-one  to  thirty,  that  the  use
of  substitutes  is  not  in  violation  of  the
ritual  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  or  the  in¬
stallation  charges  delivered  to  a  High
Priest.  The  use  of  them  was  therefore
authorized,  but  the  Chapters  were  exhorted
not  to  have  recourse  to  them  except  in
cases  of  emergency;  an  unnecessary  ex¬
hortation,  it  would  seem,  since  it  was  only
in  such  cases  that  they  had  been  employed.


SUBSTITUTE


SUCCESSION


763


Substitute  Grand  Master.  The

third  officer  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot¬
land.  He  presides  over  the  Craft  in  the
absence  of  the  Grand  and  Deputy  Grand
Masters.  The  office  was  created  in  the

iear  1738.  He  is  elected  by  the  Grand
,odge,  and  serves  for  one  year.
Substitute  Word.  This  is  an  ex¬
pression  of  very  significant  suggestion  to
the  thoughtful  Master  Mason.  If  the  Word
is,  in  Masonry,  a  symbol  of  Divine  Truth;
if  the  search  for  the  Word  is  a  symbol  of
the  search  for  that  Truth  ;  if  the  Lost  Word
symbolizes  the  idea  that  Divine  Truth  has
not  been  found,  then  the  Substitute  Word  is
a  symbol  of  the  unsuccessful  search  after
Divine  Truth  and  the  attainment  in  this
life,  of  which  the  first  Temple  is  a  type,  of
what  is  only  an  approximation  to  it.  The
idea  of  a  substitute  word  and  its  history  is  to
be  fcund  in  the  oldest  rituals  of  the  last  cen¬
tury  ;  but  the  phrase  itself  is  of  more  recent
date,  being  the  result  of  the  fuller  develop¬
ment  of  Masonic  science  and  philosophy.

The  history  of  the  substitute  word  has
been  an  unfortunate  one.  Subjected  from
a  very  early  period  to  a  mutilation  of  form,
it  underwent  an  entire  change  in  some
Rites,  after  the  introduction  of  the  high
degrees  ;  most  probably  through  the  influ¬
ence  of  the  Stuart  Masons,  who  sought  by  an
entirely  new  word  to  give  a  reference  to  the
unfortunate  representative  of  that  house  as
the  similitude  of  the  stricken  builder.  (See
Macbenac.)  And  so  it  has  come  to  pass
that  there  are  now  two  substitutes  in  use,
of  entirely  different  form  and  meaning;  one
used  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  and  one  in
England  and  this  country.

It  is  difficult  in  this  case,  w'here  almost
all  the  knowledge  that  we  can  have  of  the
subject  is  so  scanty,  to  determine  the  exact
time  when  or  the  way  in  which  the  new
word  was  introduced.  But  there  is,  I  think,
abundant  internal  evidence  in  the  words
themselves  as  to  their  appropriateness  and
the  languages  whence  they  came,  (the  one
being  pure  Hebrew,  and  the  other,  I  think,
Gaelic,)  as  well  as  from  the  testimony  of  old
rituals,  to  show  that  the  word  in  use  in  the
United  States  is  the  true  word,  and  was  the
one  in  use  before  the  revival.

Both  of  these  words  have,  however,  un¬
fortunately  been  translated  by  persons
ignorant  of  the  languages  whence  they  are
derived,  so  that  the  most  incorrect  and  even
absurd  interpretations  of  their  significations
have  been  given.  The  word  in  universal
use  in  this  country  has  been  translated  as
“rottenness  in  the  bone,”  or  “the  builder
is  dead,”  or  by  several  other  phrases  equally
as  far  from  the  true  meaning.

The  correct  word  has  been  mutilated.
Properly,  it  consists  of  four  syllables,  for  the


last  syllable,  as  it  is  now  pronounced,
should  properly  be  divided  into  two.  These
four  syllables  compose  three  Hebrew  words,
which  constitute  a  perfect  and  grammatical
phrase,  appropriate  to  the  occasion  of  their
utterance.  But  to  understand  them,  the
scholar  must  seek  the  meaning  in  each  syl¬
lable,  and  combine  the  whole.  In  the  lan¬
guage  of  Apuleius,  I  must  forbear  to  en¬
large  upon  these  holy  mysteries.

Succession  to  the  t'hair.  The
regulations  adopted  in  1721  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  have  been  generally  es¬
teemed  as  setting  forth  the  ancient  land¬
marks  of  the  Order.  But  certain  regula¬
tions,  which  were  adopted  on  the  25th  of
November,  1723,  as  amendments  to  or  ex¬
planatory  of  these,  being  enacted  under  the
same  authority,  and  almost  by  the  same
persons,  can  scarcely  be  less  binding  upon
the  Order  than  the  original  regulations.
Both  these  compilations  of  Masonic  law  re¬
fer  expressly  to  the  subject  of  the  succession
to  the  chair  on  the  death  or  removal  of  the
Master.

The  old  regulation  of  1721,  in  the  second
of  the  thirty-nine  articles  adopted  in  that
year,  is  in  the  following  words :

“  In  case  of  death  or  sickness,  or  neces¬
sary  absence  of  the  Master,  the  Senior
Warden  shall  act  as  Master  pro  tempore,  if
no  brother  is  present  who  has  been  Master
of  that  Lodge  before.  For  the  absent  Mas¬
ter’s  authority  reverts  to  the  last  Master
present,  though  he  cannot  act  till  the  Senior
Warden  has  congregated  the  Lodge.”

The  lines  in  italics  indicate  that  even  at
that  time  the  power  of  calling  the  brethren
together  and  “  setting  them  to  work,”  which
is  technically  called  “congregating  the
Lodge,”  was  supposed  to  be  vested  in  the
Senior  Warden  alone  during  the  absence
of  the  Master;  although,  perhaps,  from  a
supposition  that  he  had  greater  experience,
the  difficult  duty  of  presiding  over  the  com¬
munication  was  intrusted  to  a  Past  Master.
The  regulation  is,  however,  contradictory
in  its  provisions.  For  if  the  “last  Master
present”  could  not  act,  that  is,' could  not
exercise  the  authority  of  the  Master  until
the  Senior  Warden  had  congregated  the
Lodge,  then  it  is  evident  that  the  author¬
ity  of  the  Master  did  not  revert  to  him  in
an  unqualified  sense,  for  that  officer  required
no  such  concert  nor  consent  on  the  part
of  the  Warden,  but  could  congregate  the
Lodge  himself.

This  evident  contradiction  in  the  lan¬
guage  of  the  regulation  probably  caused,
in  a  brief  period,  a  further  examination  of
the  ancient  usage,  and  accordingly  on  the
25th  of  November,  1723,  a  very  little  more
than  two  years  after,  the  following  regu¬
lation  was  adopted:


764


SUCCESSION


SUCCESSION


“  If  a  Master  of  a  particular  Lodge  is  de¬
posed  or  demits,  the  Senior  Warden  shall
forthwith  fill  the  Master’s  chair  till  the
next  time  of  choosing;  and  ever  since,  in
the  Master’s  absence,  he  fills  the  chair,  even
though  a  former  Master  be  present.”

The  present  Constitution  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  appears,  however,  to
have  been  formed  rather  in  reference  to  the
regulation  of  1721  than  to  that  of  1723.  It
prescribes  that  on  the  death,  removal,  or
incapacity  of  the  Master,  the  Senior  War¬
den,  or  in  his  absence,  the  Junior  Warden,
or  in  his  absence,  the  immediate  Past  Mas¬
ter,  or  in  his  absence,  the  Senior  Past  Mas¬
ter,  “shall  act  as  Master  in  summoning  the
Lodge,  until  the  next  election  of  officers.”
But  the  English  Constitution  goes  on  to
direct  that,  “  in  the  Master’s  absence,  the
immediate  Past  Master,  or  if  he  be  absent,
the  Senior  Past  Master  of  the  Lodge  pres¬
ent  shall  take  the  chair.  And  if  no  Past
Master  of  the  Lodge  be  present,  then  the
Senior  Warden,  or  in  his  absence  the  Ju¬
nior  Warden,  shall  rule  the  Lodge.”

Here  again  we  find  ourselves  involved  in
the  intricacies  of  a  divided  sovereignty.
The  Senior  Warden  congregates  the  Lodge,
but  a  Past  Master  rules  it.  And  if  the
Warden  refuses  to  perform  his  part  of  the
duty,  then  the  Past  Master  will  have  no
Lodge  to  rule.  So  that,  after  all,  it  appears
that  of  the  two  the  authority  of  the  Senior
Warden  is  the  greater.

But  in  this  country  the  usage  has  always
conformed  to  the  regulation  of  1723,  as  is
apparent  from  a  glance  at  our  rituals  and
monitorial  works.

Webb,  in  his  Freemasons’  Monitor,  (edi¬
tion  of  18J8,)  lays  down  the  rule,  that  “  in
the  absence  of  the  Master,  the  Senior
Warden  is  to  govern  the  Lodge;”  and
that  officer  receives  annually,  in  every
Lodge  in  the  United  States,  on  the  night
of  his  installation,  a  charge  to  that  effect.
It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  we  are
not  indebted  to  Webb  himself  for  this
charge,  but  that  he  borrowed  it,  word  for
word,  from  Preston,  who  wrote  long  before,
and  who,  in  his  turn,  extracted  it  from  the
rituals  which  were  in  force  at  the  time  of
his  writing.

In  the  United  States,  accordingly,  it  has
been  held,  that  on  the  death  or  removal  of
the  Master,  his  authority  descends  to  the
Senior  Warden,  who  may,  however,  by
courtesy,  offer  the  chair  to  a  Past  Master
present,  after  the  Lodge  has  been  con¬
gregated.

There  is  some  confusion  in  relation  to
the  question  of  who  is  to  be  the  successor
of  the  Master,  which  arises  partly  from  the
contradiction  between  the  regulations  of
1721  and  1723,  and  partly  from  the  contra-


[  diction  in  different  clauses  of  the  regulation
of  1723  itself.  But  whether  the  Senior
Warden  or  a  Past  Master  is  to  succeed,  the
regulation  of  1721  makes  no  provision  for
an  election,  but  implies  that  the  vacancy
shall  be  temporarily  supplied  during  the
official  term,  while  that  of  1723  expressly
states  that  such  temporary  succession  shall
continue  “  till  the  next  time  of  choosing,”
or,  in  the  words  of  the  present  English  Con¬
stitution,  “  until  the  next  election  of  offi¬
cers.”

But,  in  addition  to  the  authority  of  the
ancient  regulation  and  general  and  uniform
usage,  reason  and  justice  seem  to  require
that  the  vacancy  shall  not  be  supplied  per¬
manently  until  the  regular  time  of  election.
By  holding  the  election  at  an  earlier  period,
the  Senior  Warden  is  deprived  of  his  right,
as  a  member,  to  become  a  candidate  for  the
vacant  office.  For  the  Senior  Warden  hav¬
ing  been  regularly  installed,  has  of  course
been  duly  obligated  to  serve  in  the  office  to
which  he  had  been  elected  during  the  full
terra.  If  then  an  election  takes  place  be¬
fore  the  expiration  of  that  term,  he  must
be  excluded  from  the  list  of  candidates,  be¬
cause,  if  elected,  he  could  not  vacate  his
present  office  without  a  violation  of  his
obligation.  The  same  disability  would
affect  the  Junior  Warden,  who  by  a  similar
obligation  is  bound  to  the  faithful  discharge
of  his  duties  in  the  South.  So  that  by  an¬
ticipating  the  election,  the  two  most  prom¬
inent  officers  of  the  Lodge,  and  the  two
most  likely  to  succeed  the  Master  in  due
course  of  rotation,  would  be  excluded  from
the  chance  of  promotion.  A  grievous
wrong  would  thus  be  done  to  these  officere,
which  no  Dispensation  of  a  Grand  Master
should  be  permitted  to  inflict.

But  even  if  the  Wardens  were  not  am¬
bitious  of  office,  or  were  not  likely,  under
any  circumstances,  to  be  elected  to  the
vacant  office,  another  objection  arises  to
the  anticipation  of  an  election  for  Master
which  is  worthy  of  consideration.

The  Wardens,  having  been  installed
under  the  solemnity  of  an  obligation  to
discharge  the  duties  of  their  respective
offices  to  the  best  of  their  ability,  and  the
Senior  Warden  having  been  expressly
charged  that  “in  the  absence  of  the  Master
he  is  to  rule  the  Lodge,”  a  conscientious
Senior  Warden  might  very  naturally  feel
that  he  was  neglecting  these  duties  and
violating  this  obligation,  by  permitting  the
office  which  he  has  sworn  to  temporarily
occupy  in  the  absence  of  his  Master  to  be
permanently  filled  by  any  other  person.

On  the  whole,  then,  the  old  regulations,
as  well  as  ancient,  uninterrupted,  and  uni¬
form  usage  and  the  principles  of  reason
and  justice,  seem  imperatively  to  require


SUCCOTH


SUN


765


that,  on  the  death  or  removal  of  the  Master,
the  chair  shall  be  occupied  temporarily
until  the  regular  time  of  election ;  and  al¬
though  the  law  is  not  equally  explicit  in
relation  to  the  person  who  shall  fill  that
temporary  position,  the  weight  of  law  and
precedent  seems  to  incline  towards  the
principle  that  the  authority  of  the  absent
Master  shall  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the
Senior  Warden.

Suceotli.  An  ancient  city  of  Palestine,
about  forty-five  miles  north-east  of  Jeru¬
salem,  and  the  site  of  which  is  now  occu¬
pied  bv  the  village  of  Seikoot.  It  is  the
place  near  which  Hiram  Abif  cast  the
sacred  vessels  for  the  Temple.  See  Clay
Grounds.

Sufferer.  ( Souffrant .)  The  second
degree  of  the  Order  of  Initiated  Knights
and  Brothers  of  Asia.

Summons.  A  warning  to  appear  at
the  meeting  of  a  Lodge  or  other  Masonic
body.  The  custom  of  summoning  the
members  of  a  Lodge  to  every  communica¬
tion,  although  now  often  neglected,  is  of
very  ancient  date,  and  was  generally  ob¬
served  up  to  a  very  recent  period.  In  the
Anderson  Charges  of  1722,  it  is  said:  “In
ancient  times,  no  Master  or  Fellow  could
be  absent  from  the  Lodge,  especially  when
warned  to  appear  at  it,  without  incurring
a  severe  censure.”  In  the  Constitutions
of  the  Cooke  MS.,  about  1490,  we  are  told
that  the  Masters  and  Fellows  were  to  be
forewarned  to  come  to  the  congregations.
All  the  old  records,  and  the  testimony  of
writers  since  the  revival,  show  that  it  was
always  the  usage  to  summon  the  members
to  attend  the  meetings  of  the  General  As¬
sembly  or  the  particular  Lodges.

Sun.  Hardly  any  of  the  symbols  of
Masonry  are  more  important  in  their  sig¬
nification  or  more  extensive  in  their  appli¬
cation  than  the  sun.  As  the  source  of
material  light,  it  reminds  the  Mason  of
that  intellectual  light  of  which  he  is  in
constant  search.  But  it  is  especially  as  the
ruler  of  the  day,  giving  to  it  a  beginning
and  end,  and  a  regular  course  of  hours,
that  the  sun  is  presented  as  a  Masonic
symbol.  Hence,  of  the  three  lesser  lights,
we  are  told  that  one  represents  or  sym¬
bolizes  the  sun,  one  the  moon,  and  one
the  Master  of  the  Lodge,  because,  as  the
sun  rules  the  day  and  the  moon  governs
the  night,  so  should  the  Worshipful  Master
rule  and  govern  his  Lodge  with  equal  reg¬
ularity  and  precision.  And  this  is  in  strict
analogy  with  other  Masonic  symbolisms.
For  if  the  Lodge  is  a  symbol  of  the  world,
which  is  thus  governed  in  its  changes  of
times  and  seasons  by  the  sun,  it  is  evident
that  the  Master  who  governs  the  Lodge,
controlling  its  time  of  opening  and  closing,


and  the  work  which  it  should  do,  must  be
symbolized  by  the  sun.  The  heraldic  defi¬
nition  of  the  sun  as  a  bearing  fits  most
appositely  to  the  symbolism  of  the  sover¬
eignty  of  the  Master.  Thus  Gwillim  says :
“  The  sun  is  the  symbol  of  sovereignty,  the
hieroglyphic  of  royalty ;  it  doth  signify
absolute  authority.”  This  representation
of  the  sun  as  a  symbol  of  authority,  while
it  explains  the  reference  to  the  Master,  en¬
ables  us  to  amplify  its  meaning,  and  apply
it  to  the  three  sources  of  authority  in  the
Lodge,  and  accounts  for  the  respective
positions  of  the  officers  wielding  this  au¬
thority.  The  Master,  therefore,  in  the  East
is  a  symbol  of  the  rising  sun  ;  the  Junior
Warden  in  the  South,  of  the  Meridian  Sun ;
and  the  Senior  Warden  in  the  West,  of  the
Setting  Sun.  So  in  the  mysteries  of  India,
the  chief  officers  were  placed  in  the  east,
the  west,  and  the  south,  respectively,  to
represent  Brahma,  or  the  rising;  Vishnu,
or  the  setting;  and  Siva,  or  the  meridian
sun.  And  in  the  Druidical  rites,  the  Arch¬
druid,  seated  in  the  east,  was  assisted  by
two  other  officers,  —  the  one  in  the  west
representing  the  moon,  and  the  other  in
the  south  representing  the  meridian  sun.

This  triple  division  of  the  government
of  a  Lodge  by  three  officers,  representatives
of  the  sun  in  his  three  manifestations  in
the  east,  south,  and  west,  will  remind  us
of  similar  ideas  in  the  symbolism  of  an¬
tiquity.  In  the  Orphic  mysteries,  it  was
taught  that  the  sun  generated  from  an  egg,
burst  forth  with  power  to  triplicate  himself
by  his  own  unassisted  energy.  Supreme
power  seems  always  to  have  been  associ¬
ated  in  the  ancient  mind  with  a  threefold
division.  Thus  the  sign  of  authority  was
indicated  by  the  three-forked  lightning  of
Jove,  the  trident  of  Neptune,  and  the  three-
lieaded  Cerberus  of  Pluto.  The  govern¬
ment  of  the  Universe  was  divided  between
these  three  sons  of  Saturn.  The  chaste
goddess  ruled  the  earth  as  Diana,  the
heavens  as  Luna,  and  the  infernal  regions
as  Hecate,  whence  her  rites  were  only  per¬
formed  in  a  place  where  three  roads  met.

The  sun  is  then  presented  to  us  in  Ma¬
sonry  first  as  a  symbol  of  light,  but  then
more  emphatically  as  a  symbol  of  sover¬
eign  authority.

But,  says  Wemyss,  (Symb.  Lang.,)  speak¬
ing  of  scriptural  symbolism,  “  the  sun  may
be  considered  to  be  an  emblem  of  Divine
Truth,”  because  the  sun  or  light,  of  which
it  is  the  source,  “is  not  only  manifest  in  it¬
self,  but  makes  other  things;  so  one  truth
detects,  reveals,  and  manifests  another,  as
all  truths  are  dependent  on,  and  connected
with,  each  other  more  or  less/’  And  this
again  is  applicable  to  the  Masonic  doctrine
which  makes  the  Master  the  symbol  of  the


766


SUN


SUPER


sun;  'for  as  the  sun  discloses  and  makes
manifest,  by  the  opening  of  day,  what  had
been  hidden  in  the  darkness  of  night,  so
the  Master  of  the  Lodge,  as  the  analogue
of  the  ancient  hierophant  or  explainer  of
the  mysteries,  makes  divine  truth  manifest
to  the  neophyte,  who  had  been  hitherto  in
intellectual  darkness,  and  reveals  the  hid¬
den  or  esoteric  lessons  of  initiation.

Sun,  Kniglit  of  the.  See  Knight
of  tlce  Hun.

Sun,  Moon,  and  Stars.  The  plates
prelixed  to  the  Hieroglyphic  Chart  of  Jeremy
Cross  contain  a  page  on  which  are  deline¬
ated  a  sun,  moon,  seven  stars,  and  a  comet,
which  has  been  copied  into  the  later  illus¬
trated  editions  of  Webb’s  Monitor,  and  is
now  to  be  found  in  all  the  modern  Masters’
carpets.  In  the  connection  in  which  they
are  there  placed  they  have  no  symbolic
meaning,  although  many  have  erroneously
considered  that  they  have.  The  sun  and
moon  are  not  symbols  in  the  third,  but  only
in  the  first  degree;  the  stars  are  a  symbol
in  the  high  degrees,  and  the  comet  is  no
symbol  at  all.  They  are  simply  mnemonic
in  character,  and  intended  to  impress  on  the
memory,  by  a  pictured  representation  of
the  object,  a  passage  in  the  Webb  lectures
taken  from  the  Prestonian,  which  is  in
these  words:  “The  All-seeing  Eye,  whom
the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  obey,  and  under
whose  watchful  care  even  comets  perform
their  stupendous  revolutions,  pervades  the
inmost  recesses  of  the  human  heart,  and
will  reward  us  according  to  our  merits.”
It  would  have  been  more  creditable  to
the  symbolic  learning  of  Cross,  if  he  had
omitted  these  plates  from  his  collection  of
Masonic  symbols.  At  least  the  too  common
error  of  mistaking  them  for  symbols  in  the
third  degree  would  have  been  avoided.

Sun  Worship.  Sir  William  Jones
has  remarked  that  two  of  the  principal
sources  of  mythology  were  a  wild  admira¬
tion  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  particularly
the  sun,  and  an  inordinate  respect  paid  to
the  memory  of  powerful,  wise,  and  virtuous
ancestors,  especially  the  founders  of  king¬
doms,  legislators,  and  warriors.  To  the
latter  cause  we  may  attribute  the  euhemer-
isin  of  the  Greeks  and  the  sintooism  of
the  Chinese.  But  in  the  former  we  shall
find  the  origin  of  sun  worship  the  oldest
and  by  far  the  most  prevalent  of  all  the
ancient  religions.

Eusebius  says  that  the  Phoenicians  and
the  Egyptians  were  the  first  who  ascribed
divinity  to  the  sun.  But  long  —  very  long
—  before  these  ancient  peoples  the  primeval
race  of  Aryans  worshipped  the  solar  orb  in
his  various  manifestations  as  the  producer
of  light.  “In  the  Veda,”  says  a  native
commentator,  “  there  are  only  three  deities:


Surya  in  heaven,  Indra  in  the  6ky,  and
Agni  on  the  earth.”  But  Surya,  ludra,
Agui  are  but  manifestations  of  God  in  the
sun,  the  bright  sky,  and  the  fire  derived
from  the  solar  light.  In  the  profoundly
poetic  ideas  of  the  Vedic  hymns  we  find
perpetual  allusion  to  the  sun  with  his  life-
bestowing  rays.  Everywhere  in  the  East,
amidst  its  brilliant  skies,  the  sun  claimed,
as  the  glorious  manifestation  of  Deity,  the
adoration  of  those  primitive  peoples.  The
Persians,  the  Assyrians,  the  Chaldeans, —
all  worshipped  the  sun.  The  Greeks,  a
more  intellectual  people,  gave  a  poetic
form  to  the  grosser  idea,  and  adored  Apollo
or  Dionysus  as  the  sun-god.

Sun  worship  was  introduced  into  the
mysteries  not  as  a  material  idolatry',  but  as
the  means  of  expressing  an  idea  of  restora¬
tion  to  life  from  death,  drawn  from  the
daily  reappearance  in  the  east  of  the  solar
orb  after  its  nightly  disappearance  in  the
west.  To  the  sun,  too,  as  the  regenerator
or  revivifier  of  all  things,  is  the  Phallic
worship,  which  made  a  prominent  part  of
the  mysteries,  to  be  attributed.  From  the
Mithraic  initiations,  in  which  sun  worship
played  so  important  a  part,  the  Gnostics
derived  many  of  their  symbols.  These,
again,  exercised  their  influence  upon  the
mediaeval  Freemasons.  Thus  it  is  that  the
sun  has  become  so  prominent  in  the  Ma¬
sonic  system  ;  not,  of  course,  as  an  object
of  worship,  but  purely  as  a  symbol,  the
interpretation  of  which  presents  itself  in
many  different  ways.  See  Sun.

Super  Excellent  Masons.  Dr.
Oliver  devotes  the  fifteenth  lecture  of his  His¬
torical  Landmarks  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  401-438,)  to
an  essay  “  On  the  number  ana  classification
of  the  "Workmen  at  the  building  of  King
Solomon’s  Temple.”  His  statement,  based
entirely'  on  old  lectures  and  legends,  is  that
there  were  nine  Masons  of  supereminent
ability  who  were  called  Super  Excellent
Masons,  and  who  presided  over  as  many
Lodges  of  Excellent  Masons,  while  the
nine  Super  Excellent  Masons  formed  also  a
Lodge  over  which  Tito  Zadok,  Prince  of
Harodim,  presided.  In  a  note  on  p.  423,  he
refers  to  these  Super  Excellent  Masons  as
being  the  same  as  the  Most  Excellent  Mas¬
ters  who  constitute  the  sixth  degree  of  the
American  Rite.  The  theory  advanced  by
Dr.  Oliver  is  not  only  entirely  unauthenti¬
cated  by  historical  evidence  of  any  kind,
but  also  inconsistent  with  the  ritual  of  that
degree.  It  is,  in  fact,  merely  a  myth,  and
not  a  well-constructed  one.

Super  Excellent  Master.  A  de¬
gree  which  was  originally'  an  honorary  or
side  degree  conferred  by  the  Inspectors
General  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite  at  Charleston.  It  has  since  been


SUPER


SUPPORTS


767


introduced  into  some  of  the  Royal  and  Se¬
lect  Councils  of  the  United  States,  and
there  conferred  as  an  additional  degree.
This  innovation  on  the  regular  series  of
Cryptic  degrees,  with  which  it  actually  has
no  historical  connection,  met  with  great
opposition ;  so  that  the  convention  of  Royal
and  Select  Masters,  which  met  at  New
York  in  June,  1873,  resolved  to  place  it  in
the  category  of  an  honorary  degree,  which
might  or  might  not  be  conferred  at  the  op¬
tion  of  a  Council,  but  not  as  an  integral
part  of  the  Rite.  Although  this  body  had
no  dogmatic  authority,  its  decision  will
doubtless  have  some  influence  in  settling
the  question.  The  degree  is  simply  an  en¬
largement  of  that  part  of  the  ceremonies  of
the  Royal  Arch  which  refer  to  the  Temple
destruction.  To  that  place  it  belongs,  if  it
belongs  anywhere,  but  has  no  more  to  do
with  the  ideas  inculcated  in  Cryptic  Ma¬
sonry  than  have  any  of  the  degrees  lately
invented  for  modern  secret  societies.

Whence  the  degree  originally  sprang,  it
is  impossible  to  tell.  It  could  hardly  have
had  its  birth  on  the  continent  of  Europe ;
at  least,  it  does  not  appear  to  have  been
known  to  European  writers.  Neither  G’a-
dicke  nor  Lenning  mention  it  in  their  En¬
cyclopaedias;  nor  is  it  found  in  the  catalogue
of  more  than  seven  hundred  degrees  given
by  Thory  in  his  Acta  Latomorurn;  nor  does
Ragon  allude  to  it  in  his  Tuileur  Gen&ral,
although  he  has  there  given  a  list  of  one
hundred  and  fifty-three  degrees  or  modifi¬
cations  of  the  Master .  Oliver,  it  is  true,
speaks  of  it,  but  he  evidently  derived  his
knowledge  from  an  American  source.  It
may  have  been  manufactured  in  America,
and  possibly  by  some  of  those  engaged  in
founding  the  Scottish  Rite.  The  only
Cahier  that  I  ever  saw  of  the  original  ritual,
which  is  still  in  my  possession,  is  in  the
handwriting  of  Alexander  McDonald,  a
very  intelligent  and  enthusiastic  Mason,
who  was  at  one  time  the  Grand  Comman¬
der  of  the  Supreme  Council  for  the  South¬
ern  Jurisdiction.

The  Masonic  legend  of  the  degree  of  Su¬
per  Excellent  Master  refers  to  circum¬
stances  which  occurred  on  the  last  day  of
the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuzaradan,
the  captain  of  the  Chaldean  army,  who  had
been  sent  by  Nebuchadnezzar  to  destroy
the  city  and  Temple,  as  a  just  punishment
of  the  Jewish  king  Zedekiah  for  his  per¬
fidy  and  rebellion.  It  occupies,  therefore,
recisely  that  point  of  time  which  is  em-
raced  in  that  part  of  the  Royal  Arch  de¬
gree  which  represents  the  destruction  of  the
Temple,  and  the  carrying  of  the  Jews  in
captivity  to  Babylon.  It  is,  in  fact,  an  ex¬
emplification  and  extension  of  that  part  of
the  Royal  Arch  degree.


As  to  the  symbolic  design  of  the  degree,
it  is  very  evident  that  its  legend  and  cere¬
monies  are  intended  to  inculcate  that  im¬
portant  Masonic  virtue  —  fidelity  to  vows.
Zedekiah,  the  wicked  king  of  Judah,  is,  by
the  modern  ritualists  who  have  symbolized
the  degree,  adopted  very  appropriately  as
the  symbol  of  perfidy;  and  the  severe  but
well-deserved  punishment  which  was  in¬
flicted  on  him  by  the  king  of  Babylon  is
set  forth  in  the  lecture  as  a  great  moral  les¬
son,  whose  object  is  to  warn  the  recipient
of  the  fatal  effects  that  will  ensue  from  a
violation  of  his  sacred  obligations.

Superintendent  of  the  Works,
(Grand.  An  officer  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  who  is  appointed  annually  by
the  Grand  Master.  He  should  be  well
skilled  in  geometry  and  architecture.  His
duty  is  to  advise  with  the  Board  of  General
Purposes  on  all  plans  of  building  or  edi¬
fices  undertaken  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  and
furnish  plans  and  estimates  for  the  same ;
to  superintend  their  construction,  and  see
that  they  are  conformable  to  the  plans  ap¬
proved  by  the  Grand  Master,  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  the  Board  of  General  Purposes ;
to  suggest  improvements,  and  make  an  an¬
nual  report  on  the  condition  of  all  the
Grand  Lodge  edifices.  The  office  is  not
known  in  the  Grand  Lodges  of  this  country,
but  where  there  is  a  temple  or  hall  belong¬
ing  to  a  Grand  Lodge,  the  duty  of  attend¬
ing  to  it  is  referred  to  a  hall  committee,
which,  when  necessary,  engages  the  services
of  a  professional  architect.

Superior.  The  sixth  and  last  de¬
gree  of  the  German  Union  of  the  Twenty-
two.

Superiors,  Unknown.  See  Un¬
known  Superiors.

Super  Masonic.  Ragon  ( Orth.  Ma-
gon.,  p.  73,)  calls  the  high  degrees,  as  being
beyond  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  “Grades
super  Maqonniques.”

Supplanting.  All  the  Old  Constitu¬
tions,  without  exception,  contain  a  charge
against  one  Fellow  supplanting  another  in
his  work.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  third
charge  in  the  Harleian  MS.  says  :  “  Alsoe
that  noe  maister  nor  fellowe  shall  subplant
others  of  their  worke,  that  is  to  say,  if  they
have  taken  a  worke  or  stand  maister  of  a
Lord’s  work,  y°  shall  not  put  him  out  of  it
if  he  be  able  of  cuninge  to  end  the  worke.”
From  this  we  derive  the  modern  doctrine
that  one  Lodge  cannot  interfere  with  the
work  of  another,  and  that  a  candidate  be¬
ginning  his  initiation  in  a  Lodge  must  finish
it  in  the  same  Lodge.

Supports  of  the  Uodge.  The  sym¬
bolism  connected  with  the  supports  of  the
Lodge  is  one  of  the  earliest  and  most  ex¬
tensively  prevalent  in  the  Order.  The  old-


768


SUPPORTS


SUPPORTS


est  Catechism  of  the  last  century  gives  it  in
these  words :

“  Q.  What  supports  your  Lodge?

“  A.  Three  great  Pillars.

“  Q.  What  are  their  names?

“  A.  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty.

“  Q.  Who  doth  the  Pillar  of  Wisdom
represent?

“  A.  The  Master  in  the  East.

“  Q.  Who  doth  the  Pillar  of  Strength
represent  ?

“  A.  The  Senior  Warden  in  the  West.

“  Q.  Who  doth  the  Pillar  of  Beauty  rep¬
resent?

“A.  The  Junior  Warden  in  the  South.

“  Q.  Why  should  the  Master  represent
the  Pillar  of  Wisdom  ?

“A.  Because  he  gives  instructions  to  the
Crafts  to  carry  on  their  work  in  a  proper
manner,  with  good  harmony.

“  Q.  Why  should  the  Senior  Warden
represent  the  Pillar  of  Strength?

“A.  As  the  Sun  sets  to  finish  the  day,
so  the  Senior  Warden  stands  in  the  West
to  pay  the  hirelings  their  wages,  which  is
the  strength  and  support  of  all  business.

“  Q.  Why  should  the  Junior  Warden
represent  the  Pillar  of  Beauty  ?

“A.  Because  he  stands  in  the  South  at
high  twelve  at  noon,  which  is  the  beauty
of  the  day,  to  call  the  men  off  from  work  to
refreshment,  and  to  see  that  they  come  on
again  in  due  time,  that  the  Master  may
have  pleasure  and  profit  therein.

“  Q.  Why  is  it  said  that  your  Lodge  is
supported  by  these  three  great  Pillars  —
Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty?

“A.  Because  Wisdom,  Strength,  and
Beauty  is  the  finisher  of  all  works,  and
nothing  can  be  carried  on  without  them.

“  Q.  Why  so,  Brother  ?

“A.  Because  there  is  Wisdom  to  con¬
trive,  Strength  to  support,  and  Beauty  to
adorn.”

Preston  repeats  substantially  (but,  of
course,  with  an  improvement  of  the  lan¬
guage,)  this  lecture;  and  he  adds  to  it  the
symbolism  of  the  three  orders  of  architec¬
ture  of  which  these  pillars  are  said  to  be
composed.  These,  he  says,  are  the  Tuscan,
Doric,  and  Corinthian.  The  mistake  of
enumerating  the  Tuscan  among  the  ancient
orders  was  corrected  by  subsequent  ritual¬
ists.  Preston  also  referred  the  supports
symbolically  to  the  three  Ancient  Grand
Masters.  This  symbolism  was  afterwards
transferred  by  Webb  from  the  first  to  the
third  degree.

Webb,  in  modifying  the  lecture  of  Pres¬
ton,  attributed  the  supports  not  to  the
Lodge,  but  to  the  Institution ;  an  unne¬
cessary  alteration,  since  the  Lodge  is  but
the  type  of  the  Institution.  His  language
is :  “  Our  Institution  is  said  to  be  supported


by  wisdom,  strength,  and  beauty;  because
it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  wisdom
to  contrive,  strength  to  support,  and  beauty
to  adorn  all  great  and  important  under¬
takings.”  He  follows  the  ancient  refer¬
ence  of  the  pillars  to  the  three  officers,  and
adopts  Preston’s  symbolism  of  the  three
orders  of  architecture,  but  he  very  wisely
substitutes  the  Ionic  for  the  Tuscan.  Hem¬
ming,  in  his  lectures  adopted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  in  1813,  retained  the
symbolism  of  the  pillars,  but  gave  a  change
in  the  language.  He  said:  “A  Mason’s
Lodge  is  supported  by  three  grand  pillars.
They  are  called  Wisdom,  Strength,  and
Beauty.  Wisdom  to  contrive,  Strength  to
support,  and  Beauty  to  adorn.  Wisdom
todirect  us  in  all  our  undertakings,  Strength
to  support  us  in  all  our  difficulties,  and
Beauty  to  adorn  the  inward  man.”

The  French  Masons  preserve  the  same
symbolism.  Bazot  ( Manuel ,  p.  225,)  says:
‘‘Three  great  pillars  sustain  the  Lodge.
The  first,  the  emblem  of  wisdom,  is  repre¬
sented  by  the  Master  who  sits  in  the  east,
whence  light  and  his  commands  emanate.
The  second,  the  emblem  of  strength,  is
represented  by  the  Senior  Warden,  who
sits  in  the  west,  where  the  workmen  are
paid,  whose  strength  and  existence  are  pre¬
served  by  the  wages  which  they  receive.
The  third  and  last  pillar  is  the  emblem  of
beauty;  it  is  represented  by  the  Junior
Warden,  who  sits  in  the  south,  because  that
part  typifies  the  middle  of  the  day,  whose
beauty  is  perfect ;  during  this  time  the
workmen  repose  from  work;  and  it  is  thence
that  the  Junior  Warden  sees  them  return
to  the  Lodge  and  resume  their  labors.”

The  German  Masons  have  also  main¬
tained  these  three  pillars  in  their  various
rituals.  Schroder,  the  author  of  the  most
philosophical  one,  says :  “  The  universal
Lodge,  as  well  as  every  particular  one,  is
supported  by  three  great  invisible  columns
—  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty;  for  as
every  building  is  planned  and  fashioned
by  Wisdom,  owes  its  durability  and  solidity
to  Strength,  and  is  made  symmetrical  and
harmonious  by  Beauty,  so  ought  our  spirit¬
ual  building  to  be  designed  by  Wisdom,
which  gives  it  the  firm  foundation  of  Truth,
on  which  the  Strength  of  conviction  may
build,  and  self-knowledge  complete  the
structure,  and  give  it  permanence  and  con¬
tinuance  by  means  of  right,  justice,  and
resolute  perseverance ;  and  Beauty  will
finally  adorn  the  edifice  with  all  the  social
virtues,  with  brotherly  love  and  union,
with  benevolence,  kindness,  and  a  com¬
prehensive  philanthropy.”

Steiglitz,  in  his  work  On  the  Old  German
Architecture,  (i.  239,)  after  complaining  that
the  building  principles  of  the  old  German


SUPPORTS


SUPREME


769


artists  were  lost  to  us,  because,  considering
them  as  secrets  of  the  brotherhood,  they
deemed  it  unlawful  to  commit  them  to
writing,  yet  thinks  that  enough  may  be
found  in  the  old  documents  of  the  Frater¬
nity  to  sustain  the  conjecture  that  these
three  supports  were  familiar  to  the  Oper¬
ative  Masons.  He  says :

“Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty  were  hon¬
ored  by  them  as  supporting  pillars  for  the
perfect  accomplishment  of  the  works;  and
thence  they  considered  them  symbolically
as  essential  pillars  for  the  support  of  the
Lodge.  Wisdom,  which,  established  on
science,  gives  invention  to  the  artist,  and
the  right  arrangement  and  appropriate  dis¬
position  of  the  whole  and  of  all  its  parts ;
Strength,  which,  proceeding  from  the  har¬
monious  balance  of  all  the  forces,  promotes
the  secure  erection  of  the  building;  and
Beauty,  which,  manifested  in  God’s  crea¬
tion  of  the  world,  adorns  the  work  and
makes  it  perfect.”

I  can  hardly  doubt,  from  the  early  ap¬
pearance  of  this  symbol  of  the  three  sup¬
ports,  and  from  its  unchanged  form  in  all
countries,  that  it  dates  its  origin  from  a
period  earlier  than  the  revival  in  1717,  and
that  it  may  be  traced  to  the  Operative  Ma¬
sons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  where  Stieglitz
says  it  existed.

One  thing  is  clear,  that  the  symbol  is
not  found  among  those  of  the  Gnostics,  and
was  not  familiar  to  the  Rosicrucians ;  and,
therefore,  out  of  the  three  sources  of  our
symbolism,  —  Gnosticism,  Rosicrucianism,
and  Operative  Masonry, — it  is  most  prob¬
able  that  it  has  been  derived  from  the  last.

When  the  high  degrees  were  fabricated,
and  Christianity  began  to  furnish  its  sym¬
bols  and  doctrine  to  the  new  Masonry,  the
old  Temple  of  Solomon  was  by  some  of
them  abandoned,  and  that  other  temple
adopted  to  which  Christ  had  referred  when
he  said,  “  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three
days  I  will  raise  it  up.”  The  old  supports
of  wisdom,  strength,  and  beauty,  which  had
sufficed  for  the  Gothic  builders,  and  which
they,  borrowing  them  from  the  results  of
their  labors  on  the  cathedrals,  had  applied
symbolically  to  their  Lodges,  were  discarded,
and  more  spiritual  supports  for  a  more  spir¬
itual  temple  were  to  be  selected.  There  had
been  a  new  dispensation,  and  there  was  to
be  a  new  temple.  The  great  doctrine  of
that  new  dispensation  was  to  furnish  the
supporting  pillars  for  the  new  temple.  In
these  high  Christianized  degrees  we  there¬
fore  no  longer  find  the  columns  of  Wisdom,
Strength,  and  Beauty,  but  the  spiritual  ones
of  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity.

But  the  form  of  the  symbolism  is  un¬
changed.  The  East,  the  West,  and  the
South  are  still  the  spots  where  we  find  the
4  W  49


new,  as  we  did  the  old,  pillars.  Thus  the
triangle  is  preserved;  for  the  triangle  is  the
Masonic  symbol  of  God,  who  is,  after  all,
the  true  support  of  the  Lodge.

Supreme  Authority.  The  supreme
authority  in  Masonry  is  that  dogmatic  power
from  whose  decisions  there  is  no  appeal.
At  the  head  of  every  Rite  there  is  a  su¬
preme  authority  which  controls  and  directs
the  acts  of  all  subordinate  bodies  of  the
Rite.  In  the  United  States,  and  in  the
American  Rite  which  is  there  practised,  it
would,  at  the  first  glance,  appear  that  the
supreme  authority  is  divided.  That  of
symbolic  Lodges  is  vested  in  Grand  Lodges,
of  Royal  Arch  Chapters  in  Grand  Chap¬
ters,  of  Royal  and  Select  Councils  in  Grand
Councils,  and  of  Commanderies  of  Knights
Templars  in  the  Grand  Encampment.  And
so  far  as  ritualistic  questions  and  matters
of  internal  arrangement  are  concerned,  the
supreme  authority  is  so  divided.  But  the
supreme  authority  of  Masonry  in  each
State  is  actually  vested  in  the  Grand  Lodge
of  that  State.  It  is  universally  recognized
as  Masonic  law  that  a  Mason  expelled  or
suspended  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  or  by  a
subordinate  Lodge  with  the  approval  and
confirmation  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  thereby
stands  expelled  or  suspended  from  Royal
Arch,  from  Cryptic,  and  from  Templar
Masonry.  Nor  can  he  be  permitted  to
visit  any  of  the  bodies  in  either  of  these
divisions  of  the  Rite  so  long  as  he  remains
under  the  ban  of  expulsion  of  the  Grand
Lodge.  So  the  status  or  condition  of  every
Mason  in  the  jurisdiction  is  controlled  by  the
Grand  Lodge,  from  whose  action  on  that
subject  there  is  no  appeal.  The  Masonic
life  and  death  of  every  member  of  the  Craft,
in  every  class  of  the  Order,  is  in  its  hands,
and  thus  the  Grand  Lodge  becomes  the  real
supreme  authority  of  the  jurisdiction.

Supreme  Commander  of  the
Stars.  (Supreme  Common deur  des  Astrea.)
A  degree  said  to  have  been  invented  at
Geneva  in  1779,  and  found  in  the  collection
of  M.  A.  Viany.

Supreme  Consistory.  ( Supreme
Comistoire.)  The  title  of  some  of  the
highest  bodies  in  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.
In  the  original  construction  of  the  Rite  at
Naples  the  members  of  the  ninetieth  de¬
gree  met  in  a  Supreme  Consistory.  When
the  Bederides  took  charge  of  the  Rite  they
changed  the  title  of  the  governing  body
to  Supreme  Council.

Supreme  Council.  The  Supreme
Masonic  authority  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite  is  called  a  Supreme
Council.  A  Supreme  Council  claims  to
derive  the  authority  for  its  existence  from
the  Constitutions  of  1786.  I  have  no  in¬
tention  here  of  entering  into  the  question


770


SUPREME


SUPREME


of  the  authenticity  of  that  document.  The
question  is  open  to  the  historian,  and  has
been  amply  discussed,  with  the  natural  re¬
sult  of  contradictory  conclusions.  But  he
who  accepts  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite  as  genuine  Freemasonry,  and
owes  his  obedience  as  a  Mason  to  its  con¬
stituted  authorities,  is  compelled  to  recog¬
nize  those  Constitutions  wherever  or  when¬
ever  they  may  have  been  enacted  as  the
fundamental  law  —  the  constitutional  rule
of  his  Rite.  To  their  authority  all  the
Supreme  Councils  owe  their  legitimate
existence.

Dr.  Frederick  Dalcho,  who,  I  think,  may
very  properly  be  considered  as  the  founder
in  the  United  States,  and  therefore  in  the
world,  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite  in  its  present  form  as  the  legiti¬
mate  successor  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection  or
of  Herodem,  has  given  in  the  Circular
written  by  him,  and  published  December  4,
1802,  by  the  Supreme  Council  at  Charles¬
ton,  the  following  account  of  the  establish¬
ment  of  Supreme  Councils.

“On  the  1st  of  May,  1786,  the  Grand
Constitution  of  the  thirty-third  degree,
called  the  Supreme  Council  of  Sovereign
Grand  Inspectors  General,  was  finally  rati¬
fied  by  his  Majesty  the  King  of  Prussia,
who,  as  Grand  Commander  of  the  Order  of
Priuce  of  the  Royal  Secret,  possessed  the
Sovereign  Masonic  power  over  all  the  Craft.
In  the  new  Constitution,  this  high  power
was  conferred  on  a  Supreme  Council  of
nine  brethren  in  each  nation,  who  possess
all  the  Masonic  prerogatives,  in  their  own
district,  that  his  Majesty  individually  pos¬
sessed,  and  are  Sovereigns  of  Masonry.”

The  law  for  the  establishment  of  a  Su¬
preme  Council  is  found  in  the  following
words  in  the  Latin  Constitutions  of  1786:
“  The  first  degree  will  be  subordinated  to
the  second,  that  to  the  third,  and  so  in
order  to  the  sublime,  thirty-third,  and  last,
which  will  watch  over  all  the  others,  will
correct  their  errors  and  will  govern  them,
and  whose  congregation  or  convention  will
be  a  dogmatic  Supreme  Grand  Council,  the
Defender  and  Conservator  of  the  Order,
>  which  it  will  govern  and  administer  accord¬
ing  to  the  present  Constitutions  and  those
which  may  hereafter  be  enacted.”

But  the  Supreme  Council  at  Charleston
derived  its  authority  and  its  information
from  what  are  called'  the  French  Constitu¬
tions;  and  it  is  in  them  that  we  find  the
statement  that  Frederick  invested  the  Su¬
preme  Council  with  the  same  prerogatives
that  he  himself  possessed,  a  provision  not
contained  in  the  Latin  Constitutions.  The
twelfth  article  says :  “  The  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  will  exercise  "all  the  Masonic  sovereign

Sowers  of  which  his  Majesty  Frederick  II.,
ang  of  Prussia,  was  possessed.”


These  Constitutions  further  declare,  (Art.
5,)  that  “every  Supreme  Council  is  com¬
posed  of  nine  Inspectors  General,  five  of
whom  should  profess  the  Christian  reli¬
gion.”  In  the  same  article  it  is  provided
that  “there  shall  be  only  one  Council  of
this  degree  in  each  nation  or  kingdom  in
Europe,  two  in  the  United  States  of
America  as  far  removed  as  possible  the
one  from  the  other,  one  in  the  English
islands  of  America,  and  one  likewise  in
the  French  islands.”

It  was  in  compliance  with  these  Constitu¬
tions  that  the  Supreme  Council  at  Charles¬
ton,  South  Carolina,  was  instituted.  In  the
Circular,  already  cited,  Dalcho  gives  this
account  of  its  establishment.

“On  the  31st  of  May,  1801,  the  Supreme
Council  of  the  thirty-third  degree  lor  the
United  States  of  America  was  opened,  with
the  high  honors  of  Masonry,  by  Brothers
John  Mitchell  and  Frederick  Dalcho,
Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors  General;  and
in  the  course  of  the  present  year,  [1802,]
the  whole  number  of  Grand  Inspectors
General  was  completed,  agreeably  to  the
Grand  Constitutions.”

This  was  the  first  Supreme  Council  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  ever
formed;  from  it  has  emanated  either  di¬
rectly  or  indirectly  all  the  other  Councils
which  have  been  since  established  in
America  or  Europe ;  and  although  it  now
exercises  jurisdiction  only  over  a  part  of
the  United  States  under  the  title  of  the
Supreme  Council  for  the  Southern  Juris¬
diction  of  the  United  States,  it  claims  to
be  and  is  recognized  as  “  the  Mother  Coun¬
cil  of  the  World.”

Under  its  authority  a  Supreme  Council,
the  second  in  date,  was  established  by  Count
de  Grasse  in  the  French  West  Indies,  in
1802;  a  third  in  France,  by  the  same  au¬
thority,  in  1804;  and  a  fourth  in  Italy  in
1S05.  In  1813  the  Masonic  jurisdiction
of  theUnited  States  was  divided ;  the  Mother
Council  establishing  at  the  city  of  New
York  a  Supreme  Council  for  the  Northern
Jurisdiction,  and  over  the  States  north  of
the  Ohio  and  east  of  the  Mississippi,  re¬
serving  to  itself  all  the  remainder  of  the
territory  of  the  United  States.  The  seat
of  the  Northern  Council  is  now  at  Boston  ;
and  although  the  offices  of  the  Grand
Commander  and  Secretary-General  of  the
Southern  Council  are  now  in  the  city  of
Washington,  whence  its  documents  emanate,
its  seat  is  still  constructively  at  Charleston.

On  their  first  organization,  the  Supreme
Councils  were  limited  to  nine  members  in
each.  That  rule  continued  to  be  enforced
in  the  Mother  Council  until  the  year  1859,
when  the  number  was  increased  to  thirty-
three.  Similar  enlargements  have  been
made  in  all  the  other  Supreme  Councils


SUSPENSION


SUSPENSION


771


except  that  of  Scotland,  which  still  retains
the  original  number.

The  officers  of  the  original  Supreme
Council  at  Charleston  were :  a  Most  Puis¬
sant  Sovereign  Grand  Commander,  Most
Illustrious  Lieutenant  Grand  Commander,
Illustrious  Treasurer-General  of  the  Holy
Empire,  Illustrious  Secretary-General  of
the  Holy  Empire,  Illustrious  Grand  Mas¬
ter  of  Ceremonies,  and  Illustrious  Captain
of  the  Guards.

In  1859,  with  the  change  of  numbers  in
the  membership,  there  was  also  made  a
change  in  the  number  and  titles  of  the  offi¬
cers.  These  now  in  the  Mother  Council,
according  to  its  present  Constitution,  are :

I.  Sovereign  Grand  Commander;  2.  Lieu¬
tenant  Grand  Commander;  3.  Secretary-
General  of  the  Holy  Empire;  4.  Grand
Prior;  5.  Grand  Chancellor;  6.  Grand
Minister  of  State;  7.  Treasurer-General
of  the  Holy  Empire;  8.  Grand  Auditor;
9.  Grand  Almoner;  10.  Grand  Constable;

II.  Grand  Chamberlain;  12.  First  Grand
Equerry;  13.  Second  Grand  Equerry;  14.
Grand  Standard-Bearer ;  15.  Grand  Sword-
Bearer  ;  16.  Grand  Herald.  The  Secretary-
General  is  properly  the  seventh  officer,  but
by  a  decree  of  the  Supreme  he  is  made  the
third  officer  in  rank  “  while  the  office  con¬
tinues  to  be  filled  by  Bro.  Albert  G.  Mackey,
the  present  incumbent,  wbo  is  the  Dean  of
the  Supreme  Council.”

The  officers  somewhat  vary  in  other  Su¬
preme  Councils,  but  the  presiding  and  re¬
cording  officers  are  everywhere  a  Sovereign
Grand  Commander  and  a  Secretary-General
of  the  Holy  Empire.

Suspension.  This  is  a  Masonic  pun¬
ishment,  which  consists  of  a  temporary
deprivation  of  the  rights  and  privileges  of
Masonry.  It  is  of  two  kinds,  definite  and
indefinite  ;  but  the  effect  of  the  penalty,  for
the  time  that  it  lasts,  is  the  same  in  both
kinds.  The  mode  in  which  restoration  is
effected  differs  in  each.

1.  Definite  Suspension. —  By  definite  sus¬
pension  is  meant  a  deprivation  of  the  rights
and  privileges  of  Masonry  for  a  fixed  period
of  time,  which  period  is  always  named  in
the  sentence.  By  the  operation  of  this
penalty,  a  Mason  is  for  the  time  prohibited
from  the  exercise  of  all  his  Masonic  privi¬
leges.  His  rights  are  placed  in  abeyance,
and  he  can  neither  visit  Lodges,  hold  Ma¬
sonic  communication,  nor  receive  Masonic
relief,  during  the  period  for  which  he  has
been  suspended.  Yet  his  Masonic  citizen¬
ship  is  not  lost.  In  this  respect  suspension
may  be  compared  to  the  Roman  punishment
of  “  rele^atio,”  or  banishment,  which  Ovid,
who  haa  endured  it,  describes,  ( Trislia,  v.
11,)  with  technical  correctness,  as  a  penalty
which  “  takes  away  neither  life  nor  prop¬


erty  nor  rights  of  citizens,  but  only  drives
away  from  the  country.”  So  by  suspension
the  rights  and  duties  of  the  Mason  are  not
obliterated,  but  their  exercise  only  inter¬
dicted  for  the  period  limited  by  the  sen¬
tence,  and  as  soon  as  this  has  terminated
he  at  once  resumes  his  former  position  in
the  Order,  and  is  reinvested  with  all  his
Masonic  rights,  whether  those  rights  be  of
a  private  or  of  an  official  nature.

Thus,  if  an  officer  of  a  Lodge  has  been
suspended  for  three  months  from  all  the
rights  and  privileges  of  Masonry,  a  suspen¬
sion  of  his  official  functions  also  takes
place.  But  a  suspension  from  the  discharge
of  the  functions  of  an  office  is  not  a  depri¬
vation  of  the  office ;  and  therefore,  as  soon
as  the  three  months  to  which  the  suspen¬
sion  had  been  limited  have  expired,  the
brother  resumes  all  his  rights  in  the  Order
and  the  Lodge,  and  with  them,  of  course,  the
office  which  he  had  held  at  the  time  that
the  sentence  of  suspension  had  been  inflicted.

2.  Indefinite  Suspension.  — This  is  a  sus¬
pension  for  a  period  not  determined  alnd
fixed  by  the  sentence,  but  to  continue  dur¬
ing  the  pleasure  of  the  Lodge.  In  this  re¬
spect  only  does  it  differ  from  the  preceding
punishment.  The  position  of  a  Mason,
under  definite  or  indefinite  suspension,  is
precisely  the  same  as  to  the  exercise  of  all
his  rights  and  privileges,  which  in  both
cases  remain  in  abeyance,  and  restoration
in  each  brings  with  it  a  resumption  of  all
the  rights  and  functions,  the  exercise  of
which  had  been  interrupted  by  the  sentence
of  suspension.

Neither  definite  nor  indefinite  suspension
can  be  inflicted  except  after  due  notifica¬
tion  and  trial,  and  then  only  by  a  vote  of
two-thirds  of  the  members  present.

Restoration  to  Masonic  rights  differs,  as
I  have  said,  in  these  two  kinds.  Restora¬
tion  from  definite  suspension  may  take
place  either  by  a  vote  of  the  Lodge  abridg¬
ing  the  time,  when  two-thirds  of  the  mem¬
bers  must  concur,  or  it  will  terminate  by
the  natural  expiration  of  the  period  fixed
by  the  sentence,  and  that  without  any
vote  of  the  Lodge.  Thus,  if  a  member  is
suspended  for  three  months,  at  the  end  of
the  third  month  his  suspension  terminates,
and  he  is  ipso  facto  restored  to  all  his  rights
and  privileges.

In  the  case  of  indefinite  suspension,  the
only  method  of  restoration  is  by  a  vote  of
the  Lodge  at  a  regular  meeting,  two-thirds
of  those  present  concurring.

Lastly,  it  may  be  observed  that,  as  the
suspension  of  a  member  suspends  his  pre¬
rogatives,  it  also  suspends  his  dues.  He
cannot  be  expected,  in  justice,  to  pay  for
that  which  he  does  not  receive,  and  Lodge
dues  are  simply  a  compensation  made  by  a


772


SUSSEX


SWEDEN


member  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  privileges
of  membership.

Sussex,  Duke  of.  The  Duke  of
Sussex  is  entitled  to  a  place  in  Masonic  bi¬
ography,  not  only  because,  of  all  the  Grand
Masters  on  record,  he  held  the  office  the
longest, — the  Duke  of  Leinster,  of  Ireland,
alone  excepted, — hut  also  because  of  his  de¬
votion  to  the  Institution,  and  the  zeal  with
which  he  cultivated  and  protected  its  in¬
terests.  Augustus  Frederick,  ninth  child
and  sixth  son  of  George  III.,  king  of  Eng¬
land,  was  horn  January  27,  1773.  He  was
initiated  in  1798  at  a  Lodge  in  Berlin.
In  1805,  the  honorary  rank  of  a  Past
Grand  Master  was  conferred  on  him  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England.  May  13,  1812,
he  was  appointed  Deputy  Grand  Master;
and  April  13,  1813,  the  Prince  Regent,
afterwards  George  IV.,  having  declined  a
re-election  as  Grand  Master,  the  Duke  of
Sussex  was  unanimously  elected;  and  in  the
same  year  the  two  rival  Grand  Lodges  of
England  were  united.  The  Duke  was  Most
Excellent  Zerubhabel  of  the  Grand  Chap¬
ter,  and  Grand  Superintendent  of  the  Grand
Conclave  of  Knights  Templars.  He  never,
however,  took  any  interest  in  the  orders  of
knighthood,  to  which,  indeed,  he  appears  to
have  had  some  antipathy.  During  his  long
career  the  Grand  Conclave  never  met  but
once.  By  annual  elections,  he  retained  the
office  of  Grand  Master  until  his  death,  which
took  place  April  21,  1843,  in  the  seventy-
first  year  of  his  age,  having  completed  a
Masonic  administration  as  head  of  the  Eng¬
lish  Craft  of  upwards  of  thirty  years.

During  that  long  period,  it  was  impos¬
sible  that  some  errors  should  not  have  been
committed.  The  Grand  Master’s  conduct
in  reference  to  two  distinguished  Masons,
Drs.  Crucefix  and  Oliver,  was  by  no  means
creditable  to  his  reputation  for  justice  or
forbearance.  But  the  general  tenor  of  his
life  as  an  upright  man  and  Mason,  and  his
great  attachment  to  the  Order,  tended  to
compensate  for  the  few  mistakes  of  his  ad¬
ministration.  One  who  had  been  most
bitterly  opposed  to  his  course  in  reference
to  Brothers  Crucefix  and  Oliver,  and  had
not  been  sparing  of  his  condemnation,  paid,
after  his  death,  this  tribute  to  his  Masonic
virtues  and  abilities.

“  As  a  Freemason,”  said  the  Freemasons’
Quarterly  Review,  (1843,  p.  120,)  “  the  Duke
of  Sussex  was  the  most  accomplished  crafts¬
man  of  his  day.  His  knowledge  of  the
mysteries  was,  as  it  were,  intuitive;  his
reading  on  the  subject  was  extensive;  his
correspondence  equally  so ;  and  his  desire
to  be  introduced  to  any  brother  from  whose
experience  he  could  derive  any  information
had  in  it  a  craving  that  marked  his  great
devotion  to  the  Order.”


On  the  occasion  of  the  presentation  of  an
offering  by  the  Fraternity  in  1838,  the  Duke

f;ave  the  following  account  of  his  Masonic
ife,  which  embodies  sentiments  that  are
highly  honorable  to  him.

“  My  duty  as  your  Grand  Master  is  to
take  care  that  no  political  or  religious  ques¬
tion  intrudes  itself;  and  had  I  thought
that,  in  presenting  this  tribute,  any  politi¬
cal  feeling  had  influenced  the  brethren,  I
can  only  say  that  then  the  Grand  Master
would  not  have  been  gratified.  Our  object
is  unanimity,  and  we  can  find  a  centre  of
unanimity  unknown  elsewhere.  I  recollect
twenty-five  years  ago,  at  a  meeting  in  many
respects  similar  to  the  present,  a  magnifi¬
cent  jewel  (by  voluntary  vote)  was  pre¬
sented  to  the  Earl  Moira  previous  to  his
journey  to  India.  I  had  the  honor  to  pre¬
side,  and  I  remember  the  powerful  and
beautiful  appeal  which  that  excellent
brother  made  on  the  occasion.  I  am  now
sixty-six  years  of  age  —  I  say  this  without
regret — the  true  Mason  ought  to  think  that
the  first  day  of  his  birth  is  but  a  step  on
his  way  to  the  final  close  of  life.  When  I
tell  you  that  I  have  completed  forty  years
of  a  Masonic  life  —  there  may  be  older  Ma¬
sons — but  that  is  a  pretty  good  specimen  of
my  attachment  to  the  Order.

“  In  1798,  I  entered  Masonry  in  a  Lodge
at  Berlin,  and  there  I  served  several  offices,
and  as  Warden  was  a  representative  of  the
Lodge  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  I
afterwards  was  acknowledged  and  received
with  the  usual  compliment  paid  to  a  mem¬
ber  of  the  Royal  Family,  by  being  ap¬
pointed  a  Past  Grand  Warden.  I  again
went  abroad  for  three  years,  and  on  my  re¬
turn  joined  various  Lodges,  and  upon  the
retirement  of  the  Prince  Regent,  who  be¬
came  Patron  of  the  Order,  I  was  elected
Grand  Master.  An  epoch  of  considerable
interest  intervened,  and  I  became  charged,
in  1813-14,  with  a  most  important  mission
—  the  union  of  the  two  London  societies.
My  most  excellent  brother,  the  Duke  of
Kent,  accepted  the  title  of  Grand  Master
of  the  Athol  Masons,  as  they  were  denomi¬
nated;  I  was  the  Grand  Master  of  those
called  the  Prince  of  Wales’s.  In  three
months  we  carried  the  union  of  the  two
societies,  and  I  had  the  happiness  of  pre¬
siding  over  the  united  Fraternity.  This  I
consider  to  have  been  the  happiest  event
of  my  life.  It  brought  all  Masons  upon
the  Level  and  the  Square,  and  showed  the
world  at  large  that  the  differences  of  com¬
mon  life  did  not  exist  in  Masonry,  and  it
showed  to  Masons  that  by  a  long  pull,  a
strong  pull,  and  a  pull  altogether,  what
great  good  might  be  effected.”

Sweden.  Freemasonry  was  introduced
into  Sweden  in  the  year  1735,  when  Count


SWEDEN


SWEDENBORG


773


Sparre,  who  had  been  initiated  in  Paris,
established  a  Lodge  at  Stockholm.  Of  this
Lodge  scarcely  anything  is  known,  and  it
probably  soon  fell  into  decay.  In  1738,
King  Frederick  I,  promulgated  a  decree
which  interdicted  all  Masonic  meetings
under  the  penalty  of  death.  At  the  end  of
seven  years  the  edict  was  removed,  and
Masonry  became  popular.  Lodges  were
publicly  recognized,  and  in  1746  the  Ma¬
sons  of  Stockholm  struck  a  medal  on  the
occasion  of  the  birth  of  the  Prince  Royal,
afterwards  Gustavus  III.  In  1753,  the
Swedish  Masons  laid  the  foundation  of
an  orphan  asylum  at  Stockholm,  which
was  built  by  the  voluntary  contributions
of  the  Fraternity,  without  any  assistance
from  the  State.  In  1762,  King  Adolphus
Frederick,  in  a  letter  to  the  Grand  Master,
declared  himself  the  Protector  of  the
Swedish  Lodges,  and  expressed  his  readi¬
ness  to  become  the  Chief  of  Freemasonry
in  his  dominions,  and  to  assist  in  defraying
the  expenses  of  the  Order.  In  1765,  Lord
Blayney,  Grand  Master  of  England,  granted
a  Deputation  to  Charles  Fullmann,  Secre¬
tary  of  the  English  embassy  at  Stockholm,
as  Provincial  Grand  Master,  with  the  au¬
thority  to  constitute  Lodges  in  Sweden.
At  the  same  time,  Schubarb,  a  member  of
the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance,  appeared  at
Stockholm,  and  endeavored  to  establish  that
Rite.  But  he  had  but  little  success,  as
the  high  degrees  had  been  previously  in¬
troduced  from  France.

But  this  admixture  of  English,  French,
and  German  Masonry  occasioned  great  dis¬
satisfaction,  and  gave  rise,  about  this  time,
to  the  establishment  of  an  independent  sys¬
tem  known  as  the  Swedish  Rite.  In  1770,
the  Illuminated  Grand  Chapter  was  estab¬
lished,  and  the  Duke  of  Sudermania  ap¬
pointed  the  Vicarius  Salomonis.  In  1780,
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Sweden,  which  for
some  years  had  been  in  abeyance,  was  re¬
vived,  and  the  same  Prince  elected  Grand
Master.  This  act  gave  an  independent  and
responsible  position  to  Swedish  Masonry,
and  the  progress  of  the  Institution  in  that
kingdom  has  been  ever  since  regular  and
uninterrupted.  On  March  22,  1793,  Gus¬
tavus  IV.,  the  king  of  Sweden,  was  initi¬
ated  into  Masonry  in  a  Lodge  at  Stock¬
holm,  the  Duke  of  Sudermania,  then  acting
as  Regent  of  the  kingdom,  presiding  as  the
Grand  Master  of  the  Order.

In  1799,  on  the  application  of  the  Duke
of  Sudermania,  a  fraternal  alliance  was
consummated  between  the  Grand  Lodges
of  England  and  Sweden,  and  mutual  rep¬
resentatives  appointed.

In  1809,  the  Duke  of  Sudermania  ascend¬
ed  the  throne  under  the  title  of  Charles
XIII.  He  continued  his  attachment  to  the


Order,  and  retained  the  Grand  Mastership.
As  a  singular  mark  of  his  esteem  for  Free¬
masonry,  the  King  instituted,  May  27, 1811,
a  new  order  of  knighthood,  known  as  the
Order  of  Charles  XIII.,  the  members  of
which  were  to  be  selected  from  Freemasons
only.  In  the  Patent  of  institution  the
King  declared  that,  in  founding  the  Order,
his  intention  “  was  not  only  to  excite  his
subjects  to  the  practice  of  charity,  and  to
perpetuate  the  memory  of  the  devotion  of
the  Masonic  Order  to  his  person  while  it
was  under  his  protection,  but  also  to  give
further  proofs  of  his  royal  benevolence  to
those  whom  he  had  so  long  embraced  and
cherished  under  the  name  of  Freemasons.”
The  Order,  besides  the  princes  of  the  royal
family,  was  to  consist  of  twenty-seven  lay,
and  three  ecclesiastical  knights,  all  of  whom,
were  to  hold  equal  rank.

The  Grand  Lodge  of  Sweden  practises
the  Swedish  Rite,  and  exercises  its  jurisdic¬
tion  under  the  title  of  the  National  Grand
Lodge  of  Sweden  and  Norway.

Swedenborg.  Emanuel  Swedenborg,
a  distinguished  theologian  of  his  age,  and
the  founder  of  a  sect  which  still  exists,
has  been  always  mythically  connected  with
Freemasonry.  The  eagerness  is  indeed  ex¬
traordinary  with  which  all  Masonic  writ¬
ers,  German,  French,  English,  and  Ameri¬
can,  have  sought  to  connect  the  name  and
labors  of  the  Swedish  sage  with  the  Ma¬
sonic  institution,  and  that,  too,  without  the
slightest  foundation  for  such  a  theory  either
in  his  writings,  or  in  any  credible  memo¬
rials  of  his  life.

Findel,  {Hist.,  Lyon’s  Trans.,  p.  529,)
speaking  of  the  reforms  in  Swedish  Ma¬
sonry,  says :  “  Most  likely  Swedenborg,  the
mystic  and  visionary,  used  his  influence  in
bringing  about  the  new  system ;  at  all
events,  he  smoothed  the  way  for  it.”  Len-
ning  speaks  of  the  influence  of  his  teach¬
ings  upon  the  Swedish  system  of  Freema¬
sonry,  although  he  does  not  absolutely
claim  him  as  a  Mason.

Reghellini,  in  his  Esprit  du  Dogme  de  la
Franche- Macfinnerie,  w'rites  thus :  “  Sweden¬
borg  made  many  very  learned  researches  on
the  subject  of  the  Masonic  mysteries.  He
thought  that  their  doctrines  were  of  the
highest  antiquity,  having  emanated  from
the  Egyptians,  the  Persians,  the  Magi,  the
Jews,  and  the  Greeks.  He  also  became  the
head  of  a  new  religion  in  his  effort  to  re¬
form  that  of  Rome.  For  this  purpose  he
wrote  his  Celestial  Jerusalem,  or  his  Spi¬
ritual  World  :  *  he  mingled  with  his  reform,

*  There  is  no  work  written  by  Swedenborg
which  bears  either  of  those  titles.  It  is  possible
that  Reghellini  alludes  either  to  the  Arcana
Calcutta,  published  in  1740-1753,  or  to  the  De
Nova  Hierosolyma,  published  in  1758.


774


SWEDENBORG


SWEDENBORG


ideas  which  were  purely  Masonic.  In  this  !
celestial  Jerusalem  the  Word  formerly  com¬
municated  by  God  to  Moses  is  found;  this  (
word  is  Jehovah,  lost  on  earth,  but  which  I
he  invites  us  to  find  in  Great  Tartary,  a
country  still  governed,  even  in  our  days,
by  the  patriarchs,  by  which  he  means  alle¬
gorically  to  say  that  this  people  most  nearly
approach  to  the  primitive  condition  of  the
perfection  of  innocence.”  The  same  writer,
in  his  Magonnerie  consideree  comine  le  resultat
des  religions  Egyptienne,  Jeuve  el  Chretienne,
(ii.  454,)  repeatedly  speaks  of  Swedenborg
as  a  Masonic  reformer,  and  sometimes  as  a
Masonic  impostor.  Ragon  also  cites  Reg-
hellini  in  hi3  Orthodoxie  Magonnique,  (p.
255,)  and  recognizes  Swedenborg  as  the
founder  of  a  Masonic  system.  Thory,  in
his  Acta  Latomorum,  cites  “  the  system  of
Swedenborg;”  and  in  fact  all  the  French
writers  on  Masonic  ritualism  appear  to  have
borrowed  their  idea  of  the  Swedish  theo-
sophist  from  the  statement  of  Reghellini,
and  have  not  hesitated  to  rank  him  among
the  principal  Masonic  teachers  of  his  time.

Oliver  is  the  earliest  of  the  English  Ma¬
sonic  writers  of  eminence  who  has  referred
to  Swedenborg.  He,  too  often  careless  of
the  weight  of  his  expressions  and  facile  in
the  acceptance  of  authority,  speaks  of  the
degrees,  the  system,  and  the  Masonry  of
Swedenborg  just  in  the  same  tone  as  he
would  of  those  of  Cagliostro,  of  Hund,  or
of  Tschoudy.

And,  lastly,  in  America  we  have  a  recent
writer,  Bro.  Samuel  Beswick,  who  is  evi¬
dently  a  man  of  ability  and  of  considerable
research.  He  has  culminated  to  the  zenith
in  his  assumptions  of  the  Masonic  character
of  Swedenborg.  He  published  at  New  York,
in  1870,  a  volume  entitled,  The  Swedenborg
Rite  and  the  Great  Masonic  Leaders  of  the
Eighteenth  Century.  In  this  work,  which,
outside  of  its  Swedenborgian  fancies,  con¬
tains  much  interesting  matter,  he  traces  the
Masonic  life  of  Swedenborg  from  his  ini¬
tiation,  the  time  and  place  of  which  he
makes  in  1706,  in  a  Scottish  Lodge  in  the
town  of  Lund,  in  Sweden,  which  is  a  fair
specimen  of  the  value  of  his  historical
statements.  But  after  treating  the  great
Swede  as  a  Masonic  reformer,  as  the  founder
of  a  Rite,  and  as  evincing  during  his  whole
life  a  deep  interest  in  Freemasonry,  he  ap¬
pears  to  me  to  surrender  the  whole  question
in  the  following  closing  words  of  his  work :

“From  the  very  moment  of  his  initia¬
tion,  Swedenborg  appears  to  have  resolved
never  to  allude  to  his  membership  or  to  his
knowledge  of  Freemasonry,  either  publicly
or  privately.  He  appears  to  have  made  up
his  mind  to  keep  it  a  profound  secret,  and
to  regard  it  as  something  which  had  no  re¬
lation  to  his  public  life.


“  We  have  searched  his  Itinerary,  which
contains  brief  references  to  everything  he
saw,  heard,  and  read  during  his  travels,  for
something  having  relation  to  his  Masonic
knowledge,  intercourse,  correspondence,
visits  to  Lodges,  places,  or  persons;  but
there  is  a  studied  silence,  a  systematic
avoidance  of  all  allusion  to  it.  In  his
theological  works,  his  Memorable  Relations
speak  of  almost  every  sect  in  Christendom,
and  ofall  sorts  of  organizations,  or  of  individ¬
uals  belonging  thereto.  But  Masonry  is  an
exception  :  there  is  a  systematic  silence  in
relation  to  it.”

It  is  true  that  he  finds  in  this  reticence
of  Swedenborg  the  evidence  that  he  was  a
Mason  and  interested  in  Masonry,  but  others
will  most  probably  form  a  different  conclu¬
sion.  The  fact  is  that  Swedenborg  never
was  a  Freemason.  The  reputation  of  being
one,  that  has  been  so  continuously  attribu¬
ted  to  him  by  Masonic  writers,  is  based  first
upon  the  assumptions  of  Reghellini,  whose
statements  in  his  Esprit  du  Eogrne  were
never  questioned  nor  their  truth  investi¬
gated,  as  they  should  have  been,  but  were
blindly  followed  by  succeeding  writers.
Neither  Wilkinson,  nor  Burk,  nor  White,
who  wrote  his  biography,  —  the  last  the
most  exhaustively,  —  nor  anything  in  his
own  voluminous  writings,  lead  us  to  any
such  conclusion.

But  the  second  and  more  important  basis
on  which  the  theory  of  a  Swedenborgian
Masonry  has  been  built  is  the  conduct  of
some  of  his  own  disciples,  who,  imbued
with  his  religious  views,  being  Masons,
carried  the  spirit  of  the  New  Jerusalem
doctrines  into  their  Masonic  speculations.
There  was,  it  is  true,  a  Masonic  Rite  or
System  of  Swedenborg,  but  its  true  history
is  this :

The  two  most  important  religious  works
of  Swedenborg,  the  Celestial  Arcana  and
the  New  Jerusalem,  appeared,  the  former
between  the  years  1749  and  1753,  and  the
latter  in  1758.  About  that  period  we  find
Pernetty  working  out  his  schemes  of  Ma¬
sonic  reform.  Pernetty  was  a  theosophist,
a  Hermetic  philosopher,  a  disciple,  to  some
extent,  of  Jacob  Bohme,  that  prince  of
mystics.  To  such  a  man,  the  reveries,  the
visions,  and  the  spiritual  speculations  of
Swedenborg  were  peculiarly  attractive.  He
accepted  them  as  an  addition  to  the  theo-
sophic  views  which  he  already  had  received.
About  the  year  1760  he  established  at  Avig¬
non  his  Rite  of  the  Illuminati,  in  which
the  reveries  of  both  Bohme  and  Sweden¬
borg  were  introduced.  In  1783  this  system
was  reformed  by  the  Marquis  de  Thom#,
another  Swedenborgian,  and  out  of  that
reform  arose  what  was  called  the  “  Rite  of
Swedenborg,”  not  because  Swedenborg  had


SWEDENBORG


SWEDENBORG


775


established  it,  or  had  anything  directly  to  do
with  its  establishment,  but  because  it  was
based  on  his  peculiar  theological  views,  and
because  its  symbolism  was  borrowed  from
the  ideas  he  had  advanced  in  the  highly
symbolical  works  that  he  had  written.  A
portion  of  these  degrees,  or  other  degrees
much  like  them,  have  been  called  apoca¬
lyptic;  not  because  St.  John  had,  any  more
than  Swedenborg,  a  connection  with  them,
but  because  their  system  of  initiation  is
based  on  the  mystical  teachings  of  the
Apocalypse;  a  work  which,  not  less  than
the  theories  of  the  Swede,  furnishes  abun¬
dant  food  for  a  system  of  Masonico-reli-
gious  symbolism.  Benedict  Chastanier,  also
another  disciple  of  Swedenborg,  and  who
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Avignon
Society,  carried  these  views  into  England,
and  founded  at  London  a  similar  Rite,
which  afterwards  was  changed  into  a  purely
religious  association  under  the  name  of
“The  Theosophical  Society,  instituted  for
the  purpose  of  promoting  the  Heavenly
Doctrines  of  the  New  Jerusalem.”

In  one  of  his  visions,  Swedenborg  thus
describes  a  palace  in  the  spiritual  world
which  he  had  visited.  From  passages  such
as  these  which  abound  in  his  various  trea¬
tises,  the  theosophic  Masons  concocted
those  degrees  which  have  been  called  the
Masonry  of  Swedenborg.  To  no  reader  of
the  passage  annexed  can  its  appropriateness
as  the  basis  of  a  system  of  symbolism  fail  to
be  apparent.

“  I  accordingly  entered  the  temple,  which
was  magnificent,  and  in  the  midst  of  which
a  woman  was  represented  clothed  in  pur¬
ple,  holding  in  her  right  hand  a  golden
crown  piece,  and  in  her  left  a  chain  of
pearls.  The  statue  and  the  representation
were  only  fantastic  representations  ;  for  these
infernal  spirits,  by  closing  the  interior  de¬
gree  and  opening  the  exterior  only,  are
able  at  the  pleasure  of  their  imagination  to
represent  magnificent  objects.  Perceiving
that  they  were  illusions,  I  prayed  to  the
Lord,  immediately  the  interior  of  my
spirit  was  opened,  and  I  saw,  instead  of  the
superb  temple,  a  tottering  house,  open  to
the  weather  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.
In  the  place  of  the  woman-statue,  an  image
was  suspended,  having  the  head  of  a  dra¬
gon,  the  body  of  a  leopard,  the  feet  of  a
bear,  and  the  mouth  of  a  lion:  in  short,  it
was  the  beast  rising  out  of  the  sea,  as  de¬
scribed  in  the  Apocalypse  xiii.  2.  In  the
place  of  a  park,  there  was  a  marsh  full  of
frogs,  and  I  was  informed  that  under  this
marsh  there  was  a  great  hewn  stone,  be¬
neath  which  the  WORD  was  entirely  hid¬
den.  Afterwards  I  said  to  the  prelate,  who
was  the  fabricator  of  these  illusions,  ‘  Is  that
your  temple?’  ‘  Yes,’ replied  he,  ‘it  is.’


Immediately  his  interior  sight  was  opened
like  mine,  and  he  saw  what  I  did.  ‘  How
now,  what  do  I  see?  ’  cried  he.  I  told  him
that  it  was  the  effect  of  the  celestial  light,
which  discovers  the  interior  quality  of  every¬
thing,  and  which  taught  him  at  that  very
moment  what  faith  separated  from  good
works  was.  While  I  was  speaking,  a  wind
blowing  from  the  east  destroyed  the  temple
and  the  image,  dried  up  the  marsh,  and
discovered  the  stone  under  which  the  Sacred
Word  was  concealed.  A  genial  warmth,  like
that  of  the  spring,  descended  from  heaven ;
and  in  the  place  of  that  temple  we  saw  a
tent,  the  exterior  of  which  was  very  plain.
I  looked  into  the  interior  of  it,  and  there  I
saw  the  foundation-stone  beneath  which  the
Sacred  Word  was  concealed,  ornamented
with  precious  stones,  the  splendor  of  which,
diffusing  itself  over  the  walls  of  the  temple,
diversified  the  colors  of  the  paintings,  which
represented  cherubims.  The  angels,  per¬
ceiving  me  to  be  filled  with  admiration,
told  me  that  I  should  see  still  greater  won¬
ders  than  these.  They  were  then  permitted
to  open  the  third  heaven,  inhabited  by  the
celestial  angels,  who  dwell  in  love.  All  on
a  sudden  the  splendor  of  a  light  of  fire
caused  the  temple  to  disappear,  and  left
nothing  to  be  seen  but  the  Lord  himself,
standing  upon  the  foundation-stone  —  the
Lord,  who  was  the  Word,  such  as  he  showed
Himself.  (Apocal.  i.  13-16.)  Holiness  im¬
mediately  filled  all  the  interior  of  the  spirit
of  the  angels,  upon  which  they  made  an
effort  to  prostrate  themselves,  but  the  Lord
shut  the  passage  to  the  light  from  the  third
heaven,  opening  the  passage  to  the  light  of
the  second,  which  caused  the  temple  to  re¬
appear,  with  the  tent  in  the  midst.”

Such  passages  as  these  might  lead  one
to  suppose  that  Swedenborg  was  familiar
with  the  system  of  Masonic  ritualism.  His
complete  reticence  upon  the  subject,  how¬
ever,  and  the  whole  tenor  of  his  life,  his
studies,  and  his  habits,  assure  us  that  such
was  not  the  case;  and  that  if  there  was
really  a  borrowing  of  one  from  the  other,
and  not  an  accidental  coincidence,  it  was
the  Freemasons  of  the  high  degrees  who
borrowed  from  Swedenborg,  and  not  Swe¬
denborg  from  them.  And  if  so,  we  cannot
deny  that  he  has  unwittingly  exercised  a
powerful  influence  on  Masonry.

Swedenborg,  Kite  of.  The  so-
called  Rite  of  Swedenborg,  the  history  of
whose  foundation  has  been  given  in  the
preceding  article,  consists  of  six  degrees :
1.  Apprentice.  2.  Fellow  Craft.  3.  Master
Neophyte.  4.  Illuminated  Theosophite.
5.  Blue  Brother.  6.  Red  Brother.  It  is  said
to  be  still  practised  by  some  of  the  Swedish
Lodges,  but  is  elsewhere  extinct.  Reghel-
lini,  in  his  Esprit  du  Dogme,  gives  it  as  con-


776


SWEDISH


SWITZERLAND


Bisting  of  eight  degrees ;  but  he  has  evidently
confounded  it  with  the  Rite  of  Martinisra,
also  a  theosophic  Rite,  and  the  ritualism  of
which  also  partakes  of  a  Swedenborgian
character.

Swedish  Rite.  The  Swedish  Rite
was  established  about  the  year  1777,  and  is
indebted  for  its  existence  to  the  exertions
and  influence  of  King  Gustavus  III.  It
is  a  mixture  of  the  pure  Rite  of  York,  the
high  degrees  of  the  French,  the  Templarism
of  the  former  Strict  Observance,  and  the
system  of  Rosicrucianism.  Zinnendorf  also
had  something  to  do  with  the  formation  of
the  Rite,  although  his  authority  was  sub¬
sequently  repudiated  by  the  Swedish  Ma¬
sons.  It  is  a  Rite  confined  exclusively
to  the  kingdom  of  Sweden,  and  was  really
established  as  a  reform  or  compromise  to
reconcile  the  conflicting  elements  of  Eng¬
lish,  German,  and  French  Masonry  that
about  the  middle  of  the  last  century  con¬
vulsed  the  Masonic  atmosphere  of  Sweden.
It  consists  of  twelve  degrees,  as  follows :

I,  2,  3.  The  three  Symbolic  degrees,  con¬
stituting  the  St.  John’s  Lodge.

4,  5.  The  Scottish  Fellow  Craft  and  the
Scottish  Master  of  St.  Andrew.  These
constitute  the  Scottish  Lodge.  The  fifth
degree  entitles  its  members  to  civil  rank  in
the  kingdom.

6.  Knight  of  the  East.  In  this  degree,
which  is  apocalyptic,  the  New  Jerusalem
and  its  twelve  gates  are  represented.

7.  Knight  of  the  West,  or  True  Templar,
Master  of  the  Key.  The  jewel  of  this  de¬
gree,  which  is  a  triangle  with  five  red
rosettes,  refers  to  the  five  wounds  of  the
Saviour.

8.  Knight  of  the  South,  or  Favorite
Brother  of  St.  John.  This  is  a  Rosicrucian
degree,  the  ceremony  of  initiation  being
derived  from  that  of  the  Mediaeval  Alche¬
mists.

9.  Favorite  Brother  of  St.  Andrew.  This
degree  is  evidently  derived  from  the  Ma¬
sonry  of  the  Scottish  Rite.

10.  Member  of  the  Chapter.

II.  Dignitary  of  the  Chapter.

12.  Vicar  of  Solomon.

The  first  nine  degrees  are  under  the  obe¬
dience  of  the  National  Grand  Lodge  of
Sweden  and  Norway,  and  essentially  com¬
pose  the  Rite.  The  members  of  the  last
three  are  called  “Brethren  of  the  Red
Cross,”  and  constitute  another  Masonic  au¬
thority,  styled  the  “Illuminated  Chapter.”
The  twelfth  degree  is  simply  one  of  office,
and  is  only  held  by  the  king,  who  is  per¬
petual  Grand  Master  of  the  Order.  No  one
is  admitted  to  the  eleventh  degree  unless  he
can  show  four  quarterings  of  nobility.

Switzerland.  In  1737  Lord  Darnley,
Grand  Master  of  England,  granted  a  Depu¬


tation  for  Geneva,  in  Switzerland,  to  George
Hamilton,  Esq.,  who,  in  the  same  year,  es¬
tablished  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  at
Geneva.  Warrants  were  granted  by  this
body  to  several  Lodges  in  and  around  the
city  of  Geneva.  Two  years  afterwards,  a
Lodge,  composed  principally  of  English¬
men,  was  established  at  Lausanne,  under
the  name  of  “  La  Parfaite  Union  des
Etrangers.”  Findel,  on  the  authority  of
Mossdorf’s  edition  of  Lenning,  says  that
the  Warrant  for  this  Lodge  was  granted  by
the  Duke  of  Montagu;  a  statement  also
made  by  Thory.  This  is  an  error.  The
Duke  of  Montagu  was  Grand  Master  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1721,  and  could
not,  therefore,  have  granted  a  Warrant  in
1739.  The  Warrant  must  have  been  issued
by  the  Marquis  of  Carnarvon,  who  was
Grand  Master  from  April,  1738,  to  May,
1739.  In  an  old  list  of  the  Regular  Lodges
on  the  registry  of  England,  this  Lodge  is
thus  described:  “Private  Room,  Lausanne,
in  the  Canton  of  Bern,  Switzerland,  Feb.
2,  1739.”  Soon  after,  this  Lodge  assumed
a  superintending  authority  with  the  title
of  “  Helvetic  Roman  Directory,”  and  insti¬
tuted  many  other  Lodges  in  the  Pays  de
Vaud.

But  in  Switzerland,  as  elsewhere,  Masonry
was  at  an  early  period  exposed  to  persecu¬
tion.  In  1738,  almost  immediately  after
their  institution,  the  Lodges  at  Geneva  were
suppressed  by  the  magistrates.  In  1740,  so
many  calumnies  had  been  circulated  in  the
Swiss  Cantons  against  the  Order,  that  the
Freemasons  published  an  Apoloyy  for  the
Order  in  Der  Brachmann,  a  Zurich  journal.
It  had,  however,  but  little  effect,  for  in
1743  the  magisfrates  of  Bern  ordered  the
closing  of  all  the  Lodges.  This  edict  was
not  obeyed;  and  therefore,  on  March  3,
1745,  another,  still  more  severe,  was  issued,
by  which  a  penalty  of  one  hundred  tha¬
lers,  and  forfeiture  of  his  situation,  was  to
be  inflicted  on  every  officer  of  the  govern¬
ment  who  should  continue  his  connec¬
tion  with  the  Freemasons.  To  this  the
Masons  replied  in  a  pamphlet  entitled  Le
Franc-Macon  dans  la  Republique,  published
simultaneously,  in  1746,  at  Frankfort  and
Leipsic.  In  this  work  they  ably  defended
themselves  from  all  the  unjust  charges  that
had  been  made  against  them.  Notwith¬
standing  that  the  result  of  this  defence  was
that  the  magistrates  pushed  their  opposi¬
tion  no  farther,  the  Lodges  in  the  Pays  de
Vaud  remained  suspended  for  nineteen
years.  But  in  1764  the  primitive  Lodge  at
Lausanne  was  revived,  and  the  revival  was
gradually  followed  by  the  other  Lodges.
This  resumption  of  labor  was,  however,  but
of  brief  duration.  In  1770  the  magistrates
again  interdicted  the  meetings.


SWITZERLAND


SWITZERLAND


Daring  all  this  period  the  Masons  of
Geneva,  under  a  more  liberal  government,
were  uninterrupted  in  their  labors,  and  ex¬
tended  their  operations  into  German  Swit¬
zerland.  In  1771  Lodges  had  been  erected
in  Vevay  and  Zurich,  which,  working  at
first  according  to  the  French  system,  soon
afterwards  adopted  the  German  ritual.

In  1775  the  Lodges  of  the  Pays  de  Vaud
were  permitted  to  resume  their  labors.
Formerly,  they  had  worked  according  to  the
system  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
whence  they  had  originally  derived  their
Masonry;  but  this  they  now  abandoned,
and  adopted  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance.
In  the  same  year  the  high  degrees  of  France
were  introduced  into  the  Lodge  at  Basle.
Both  it  and  the  Lodge  at  Lausanne  now
assumed  higher  rank,  and  took  the  title  of
Scottish  Directories.

In  1777  a  Congress  was  held  at  the  city
of  Basle,  in  which  there  were  representa¬
tives  from  the  Strict  Observance  Lodges
of  the  Pays  de  Vaud  and  the  English
Lodge  of  Zurich.  It  was  then  determined
that  the  Masonry  of  Switzerland  should  be
divided  under  two  distinct  authorities:  the
one  to  be  called  the  German  Helvetic  Di¬
rectory,  with  its  seat  at  Zurich ;  and  the
other  to  be  called  the  Scottish  Helvetic  Ro¬
man  Directory,  whose  seat  was  at  Lau¬
sanne.  This  word  Roman,  or  more  proper¬
ly  Romaush,  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  four
languages  spoken  in  Switzerland.  It  is  a
corruption  of  the  Latin,  and  supposed  to
have  been  the  colloquial  dialect  of  a  large
part  of  the  Grisons.

Still  there  were  great  dissensions  in  the
Masonry  of  Switzerland.  A  clandestine
Lodge  had  been  established  in  1777,  at
Lausanne,  by  one  Sidrac,  whose  influence
it  was  found  difficult  to  check.  The  Hel¬
vetic  Roman  Directory  found  it  necessary,
for  this  purpose,  to  enter,  in  1779,  into  a
treaty  of  alliance  with  the  Grand  Lodge  at
Geneva,  and  the  Lodge  of  Sidrac  was  then
at  length  dissolved  and  its  members  dis¬
persed.

In  1778,  the  Helvetic  Roman  Directory
published  its  Constitutions.  The  Rite  it
ractised  was  purely  philosophic,  every
ermetic  element  having  been  eliminated.
The  appointment  of  the  Masters  of  Lodges,
who  held  office  for  three  years,  was  vested  in
the  Directory,  and,  in  consequence,  men  of
ability  and  learning  were  chosen,  and  the
Craft  were  skilfully  governed.

In  November,  1782,  the  Council  of  Bern
interdicted  the  meetings  of  the  Lodges  and
the  exercise  of  Freemasonry.  The  Helvetic
Roman  Directory,  to  give  an  example  of
obedience  to  law,  however  unjust  and  op¬
pressive,  dissolved  its  Lodges  and  discon¬
tinued  its  own  meetings.  But  it  provided
4  X


i  1 7

for  a  maintenance  of  its  foreign  relations,
by  the  appointment  of  a  committee  invested
with  the  power  of  conducting  its  corres¬
pondence  and  of  controlling  the  foreign
Lodges  under  its  obedience.

In  the  year  1785  there  was  a  confer¬
ence  of  the  Swiss  Lodges  at  Zurich  to  take
into  consideration  certain  propositions
which  had  been  made  by  the  Congress  of
Paris,  held  by  the  Pliilalethes ;  but  the  de¬
sire  that  a  similar  Congress  should  be  con¬
vened  at  Lausanne  met  with  no  favor  from
the  Directorial  Committee.  The  Grand
Orient  of  France  began  to  exert  an  influ¬
ence,  and  many  Lodges  of  Switzerland,
among  others  ten  in  Geneva,  gave  their
adhesion  to  that  body.  The  seven  other
Genevan  Lodges  which  were  faithful  to  the
English  system  organized  a  Grand  Ori¬
ent  of  Geneva,  and  in  1789  formed  an  alli¬
ance  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.
About  the  same  time,  the  Lodges  of  the
Pays  de  Yaud,  which  had  been  suppressed
iu  1782  by  the  government  of  Bern,  re¬
sumed  their  vitality.

But  the  political  disturbances  consequent
on  the  French  revolution  began  to  exercise
their  influences  in  the  Cantons.  In  1792,
the  Helvetic  Roman  Directory  suspended
work ;  and  its  example  was  followed  in  1793
by  the  Scottish  Directory.  From  1793  to
1803,  Freemasonry  was  dead  in  Switzer¬
land,  although  a  few  Lodges  in  Geneva  and
a  German  one  in  Neuenburg  continued  a
sickly  existence.

In  1803  Masonry  revived,  with  the  res¬
toration  of  a  better  order  in  the  political
world.  A  Lodge,  Zur  Moffnung  or  Mope
Lodge ,  allusive  in  its  name  to  the  opening
prospect,  was  established  at  Bern  under  a
French  Constitution.

With  the  cession  of  the  Republic  of
Geneva  to  France,  the  Grand  Lodge  ceased
to  exist,  and  all  the  Lodges  wrere  united
w  ith  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.  Several
Lodges,  however,  in  thePays  de  Vaud, whose
Constitution  had  been  irregular,  united  to¬
gether  to  form  an  independent  body  under
the  title  of  the  “Grand  National  Helvetic
Orient.”  Peter  Maurice  Glaire  introduced
his  modified  Scottish  Rite  of  seven  degrees,
and  was  at  the  age  of  87  elected  its  Grand
Master  for  life.  Glaire  was  possessed  of
great  abilities,  and  had  been  the  friend  of
Stanislaus,  king  of  Poland,  in  whose  in¬
terests  he  had  performed  several  important
missions  to  Russia,  Prussia,  Austria,  and
France.  He  was  much  attached  to  Ma¬
sonry,  and  while  in  Poland  had  elaborated
on  the  Scottish  system  the  Rite  which  he
subsequently  bestowed  upon  the  Helvetic
Orient.

It  would  be  tedious  and  painful  to  recap¬
itulate  all  the  disseusions  and  schisms  with


778


SWORD


SWORD


which  the  Masonry  of  Switzerland  con¬
tinued  for  years  to  be  harassed.  In  1820
there  were  nineteen  Lodges,  which  worked
under  four  different  obediences,  the  Scottish
Directory,  the  Grand  Helvetic  Roman  Ori¬
ent,  the  English  Provincial  Grand  Lodge,
and  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.  Besides
there  were  two  Lodges  of  the  Rite  of  Miz-
raim,  which  had  been  introduced  by  the
Brothers  Bedarride.

The  Masons  of  Switzerland,  weary  of
these  divisions,  had  been  long  anxious  to
build  a  firm  foundation  of  Masonic  unity,
and  to  obliterate  forever  this  state  of  iso¬
lation,  where  Lodges  were  proximate  in
locality  but  widely  asunder  in  their  Ma¬
sonic  relations.

Many  attempts  were  made,  but  the  rival¬
ries  of  petty  authorities  and  the  intolerance
of  opinion  caused  them  always  to  be  fail¬
ures.  At  length  a  movement,  which  was
finally  crowned  with  success,  was  inaugu¬
rated  by  the  Lodge  Modestia  cum  Libertate,
of  Zurich.  Being  about  to  celebrate  the
twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  its  existence  in
1836,  it  invited  the  Swiss  Lodges  of  all
Rites  to  be  present  at  the  festival.  There
a  proposition  for  a  National  Masonic  union
was  made,  which  met  with  a  favorable  re¬
sponse  from  all  who  were  present.  The  re¬
union  at  this  festival  had  given  so  much
satisfaction  that  similar  meetings  were  held
in  1838  at  Bern,  in  1840  at  Basle,  and  in
1842  at  Locle.  The  preliminary  means  for
establishing  a  Confederacy  were  discussed
at  these  various  biennial  conventions,  and
progress  slowly  but  steadily  was  made  to¬
wards  the  accomplishment  of  that  object.
In  1842  the  task  of  preparing  a  draft  of  a
Constitution  for  a  United  Grand  Lodge
was  intrusted  to  Bro.  Gysi-Schinz,  of  Zu¬
rich,  who  so  successfully  completed  it  that
it  gave  almost  universal  satisfaction.  Final¬
ly,  on  June  22,  1844,  the  new  Grand  Lodge
was  inaugurated  with  the  title  of  the
“  Grand  Lodge  Alpina,”  and  Bro.  J.  J.
Hottinger  was  elected  the  Grand  Master.
Masonry  has  since  then  been  in  great  ac¬
tivity  in  Switzerland.  The  Grand  Lodge
administers  the  government  of  about  thirty
daughter  Lodges  and  nearly  two  thousand
constituent  members  with  such  satisfaction
that  uninterrupted  peace  reigns  within  its
borders.

Sword.  The  sword  is  in  chivalry  the
ensign  or  symbol  of  knighthood.  Thus
Monstrelet  says :  “  The  sons  of  the  kings  of
France  are  knights  at  the  font  of  baptism,
being  regarded  as  the  chiefs  of  knighthood,
and  they  receive,  from  the  cradle,  the
sword  which  is  the  sign  thereof.”  St.  Pal-
aye  calls  the  sword  “  the  most  honorable
badge  of  chivalry,  and  a  symbol  of  the  labor
the  knight  was  to  encounter.”  No  man


was  considered  a  knight  until  the  ceremony
of  presenting  him  the  sword  had  been  per¬
formed;  and  when  this  weapon  was  pre¬
sented,  it  was  accompanied  with  the  decla¬
ration  that  the  person  receiving  it  was
thereby  made  a  knight.  “The  lord  or
knight,”  says  St.  Palaye,  “on  the  girding
on  of  the  sword,  pronounced  these  or  simi¬
lar  words :  In  the  name  of  God,  of  St.  Mi¬
chael,  and  St.  George,  I  make  thee  a
knight.”

So  important  an  ensign  of  knighthood
as  the  sword  must  have  been  accompanied
with  some  symbolic  meaning,  for  in  the
Middle  Ages  symbolism  was  referred  to  on
all  occasions.

Francisco  Redi,  an  Italian  poet  of  the
seventeenth  century,  gives,  in  his  Bacco  in
Toscano,  an  account,  from  a  Latin  MS.,  of
an  investiture  with  knighthood  in  the  year
1260,  which  describes  the  symbolic  mean¬
ing  of  all  the  insignia  used  on  that  occasion.
Of  the  sword  it  says:  “  Let  him  be  girded
with  the  sword  as  a  sign  of  security  against
the  devil ;  and  the  two  edges  of  the  blade
signify  right  and  law,  that  the  poor  are  to
be  defended  from  the  rich  and  the  weak
from  the  strong.”

But  there  is  a  still  better  definition  of  the
symbolism  of  the  sword  of  knighthood  in
au  old  MS.  in  the  library  of  the  London
College  of  Arms  to  the  following  effect :

“Unto  a  knight^ which  is  the  most  hon¬
orable  office  above  all  other,  is  given  a
sword,  which  is  made  like  unto  a  crosse  for
the  redemption  of  mankynde  in  signifying
that  like  as  our  Lord  God  died  uppon  the
crosse  for  the  redemption  of  mankynde,
even  so  a  knight  ought  to  defend  the  crosse
and  to  overcome  and  destroie  the  enemies
of  the  same ;  and  it  hath  two  edges  in  token¬
ing  that  with  the  sword  he  ought  to  mayn-
tayne  knighthood  and  justice.”

Hence  in  Masonic  Templarism  we  find
that  this  symbolism  has  Deen  preserved,
and  that  the  sword  with  which  the  mod¬
ern  knight  is  created  is  said  to  be  endowed
with  the  qualities  of  justice,  fortitude,  and
mercy.

The  charge  to  a  Knight  Templar,  that  he
should  never  draw  his  sword  unless  con¬
vinced  of  the  justice  of  the  cause  in  which
he  is  engaged,  nor  to  sheath  it  until  his
enemies  were  subdued,  finds  also  its  origin
in  the  custom  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Swords
were  generally  manufactured  with  a  legend
on  the  blade.  Among  the  most  common
of  these  legends  was  that  used  on  swords
made  in  Spain,  many  examples  of  which
are  still  to  be  found  in  modern  collections.
That  legend  is:  “No  me  saques  sin  rason.
No  me  embaines  sin  honor;  i.  e.,  Bo  not
draw  me  without  justice.  Bo  not  sheathe  me
without  honor.


SWORD


SWORD


779


So  highly  was  the  sword  esteemed  in  the
Middle  Ages  as  a  part  of  a  knight’s  equip¬
ment,  that  special  names  were  given  to
those  of  the  most  celebrated  heroes,  which
have  been  transmitted  to  us  in  the  ballads
and  romances  of  that  period.  Thus  we
have  among  the  warriors  of  Scandinavia,
Foot-breaath,theswordofThoralfSkolinson
Qufern-biter,  “  King  Hako,
Balmung,  “  Siegfried,

Angurvardal,  “  Frithiof.

To  the  first  two,  Longfellow  alludes  in
the  following  lines :

“  Quem-biter  of  Hakom  the  Good,
Wherewith  at  a  stroke  he  hewed
The  millstone  through  and  through,

And  Foot-breaath  of  Thoralf  the  Strong,
Were  neither  so  broad  nor  so  long
Nor  so  true.”


And  among  the  knights  of  chivalry  we
have

Durandal,  the  sword  of  Orlando,
Balisardo,  “  Ruggiero,

Colado  “  the  Cid,

Aroun-dight,  “  Lancelot  du  Sac,

Joyeuse,  “  •  Charlemagne,

Excalibar,  “  King  Arthur.

Of  the  last  of  these,  the  well-known  le¬
gend  is,  that  it  was  found  imbedded  in  a
stone  as  its  sheath,  on  which  was  an  in¬
scription  that  it  could  be  drawn  only  by
him  who  was  the  rightful  heir  to  the  throne
of  Britain.  After  two  hundred  and  one  of
the  strongest  knights  had  assayed  in  vain,
it  was  at  once  drawn  forth  by  Arthur,  who
was  then  proclaimed  king  by  acclamation.
On  his  death-bed,  he  ordered  it  to  be  thrown
into  a  neighboring  lake ;  but  as  it  fell,  an
arm  issued  from  the  waters,  and,  seizing  it
by  the  hilt,  waved  it  thrice,  and  then  it
sank  never  again  to  appear.  There  are
many  other  famous  swords  in  these  old
romances,  for  the  knight  invariably  gave  to
his  sword,  as  he  did  to  his  horse,  a  name
expressive  of  its  qualities  or  of  the  deeds
which  he  expected  to  accomplish  with  it.

In  Masonry,  the  use  of  the  sword  as  a
part  of  the  Masonic  clothing  is  confined  to
the  high  degrees  and  the  degrees  of  chiv¬
alry,  when,  of  course,  it  is  worn  as  a  part
of  the  insignia  of  knighthood.  In  the
symbolic  degrees  its  appearance  in  the
Lodge,  except  as  a  symbol,  is  strictly  pro¬
hibited.  The  Masonic  prints  engraved  in
the  last  century,  when  the  sword,  at  least  as
late  as  1780,  constituted  a  part  of  the  dress
of  every  gentleman,  show  that  it  was  dis¬
carded  by  the  members  when  they  entered
the  Lodge.  The  official  swords  of  the  Tiler
and  the  Pursuivant  or  Sword-Bearer  are  the
only  exceptions.  This  rule  is  carried  so
far,  that  military  men,  when  visiting  a
Lodge,  are  required  to  divest  themselves  of


their  swords,  which  are  to  be  left  in  the
Tiler’s  room.

Sword  and  Trowel.  See  Trowel
and  Sword.

Sword  Bearer.  An  officer  in  a  Com-
mandery  of  Knights  Templars.  His  station
is  in  the  west,  on  the  right  of  the  Standard
Bearer,  and  when  the  knights  are  in  line,
on  the  right  of  the  second  division.  His
duty  is  to  receive  all  orders  and  signals
from  the  Eminent  Commander,  and  see
them  promptly  obeyed.  He  is,  also,  to  as¬
sist  in  the  protection  of  the  banners  of  the
order.  His  jewel  is  a  triangle  and  cross
swords.

Sword  Bearer,  Grand.  A  subor¬
dinate  officer,  who  is  found  in  most  Grand
Lodges.  Anderson  says,  in  the  second  edi¬
tion  of  the  Constitutions,  (p.  127,)  that  in
1731  the  Duke  of  N orfolk,  being  then  Grand
Master,  presented  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  “  the  old  trusty  sword  of  Gustavus
Adolphus,  king  of  Sweden,  that  was  worn
next  by  his  successor  in  war  the  brave  Ber¬
nard,  Duke  of  Saxe-Weimar,  with  both
their  names  on  the  blade,  which  the  Grand
Master  had  ordered  Brother  George  Moody
(the  king’s  sword  cutler)  to  adorn  richly
with  the  arms  of  Norfolk  in  silver  on  the
scabbard,  in  order  to  be  the  Grand  Master’s
sword  of  state  in  future.”  At  the  following
feast,  Bro.  Moody  was  appointed  Sword
Bearer ;  and  the  office  has  ever  since  existed,
and  is  to  be  found  in  almost  all  the  Grand
Lodges  of  this  country.  Anderson  further
says  that,  previous  to  this  donation,  the
Grand  Lodge  had  no  sword  of  state,  but
used  one  belonging  to  a  private  Lodge.  It
was  borne  before  the  Grand  Master  by  the
Master  of  the  Lodge  to  which  it  belonged,
as  appears  from  the  account  of  the  proces¬
sion  in  1730.

The  Grand  Sword  Bearer  should  be  ap¬
pointed  by  the  Grand  Master,  and  it  is  his
duty  to  carry  the  sword  of  state  immediate¬
ly  in  front  of  that  officer  in  all  processions
of  the  Grand  Lodge.  In  Grand  Lodges
which  have  not  provided  for  a  Grand
Sword  Bearer,  the  duties  of  the  office  are
usually  performed  by  the  Grand  Pursui¬
vant.

Sword  of  State.  Among  the  ancient
Romans,  on  all  public  occasions,  a  lictor
carried  a  bundle  of  rods,  sometimes  with
an  axe  inserted  among  them,  before  the
consul  or  other  magistrate  as  a  token  of  his
authority  and  his  power  to  punish  crimi¬
nals.  Hence,  most  probably,  arose  the  cus¬
tom  in  the  Middle  Ages  of  carrying  a
naked  sword  before  kings  or  chief  magis¬
trates.  Thus  at  the  election  of  the  Empe¬
ror  of  Germany,  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  as
Arch-Marshal  of  the  Empire,  carried  a  naked
sword  before  the  newly-elected  Emperor.


780


SWORD


SYMBOL


We  find  the  same  practice  prevailing  in
England  as  early  certainly  as  the  reign  of
Henry  III.,  at  whose  coronation,  in  1236,  a
sword  was  carried  by  the  Earl  of  Chester.
It  was  named  Curtana,  and,  being  without
a  point,  was  said  to  be  emblematic  of  the
spirit  of  mercy  that  should  actuate  a  sov¬
ereign.  This  sword  is  known  as  the  “  Sword
of  State,”  and  the  practice  prevailing  to  the

? resent  day,  it  has  always  been  borne  in
Ingland  in  public  processions  before  all
chief  magistrates,  from  the  monarch  of  the
realm  to  the  mayor  of  a  city.  The  custom
was  adopted  by  the  Masons;  and  we  learn
from  Anderson  that,  from  the  time  of  the
revival,  a  sword  of  state,  the  property  of  a
private  Lodge,  was  borne  by  the  .Master  of
that  Lodge  before  the  Grand  Master,  until
the  Grand  Lodge  acquired  one  by  the  liber¬
ality  of  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  which  has
ever  since  been  borne  by  the  Grand  Sword
Bearer.

Sword  Pointing  to  the  Xaked
Heart.  Webb  says  that  “the  sword
pointing  to  the  naked  heart  demonstrates
that  justice  will,  sooner  or  later,  overtake
us.”  The  symbol  is,  I  think,  a  modern
one;  but  its  adoption  was  probably  suggested
by  the  old  ceremony,  both  in  English  and
iu  continental  Lodges,  and  which  is  still
preserved  in  some  places,  in  which  the  can¬
didate  found  himself  surrounded  by  swords
pointing  at  his  heart,  to  indicate  that  pun¬
ishment  would  duly  follow  his  violation  of
his  obligations.

Sword,  Templar’s.  According  to
the  regulations  of  the  Grand  Encampment
of  the  United  States,  the  sword  to  be  worn
by  Knights  Templars  must  have  a  helmet
head  or  pommel,  a  cross  handle,  and  a
metal  scabbard.  The  length  from  the  top
of  the  hilt  to  the  end  of  the  scabbard  must
be  from  thirty-four  to  forty  inches.

Sword,  Tiler’s.  In  modern  times
the  implement  used  by  the  Tiler
is  a  sword  of  the  ordinary  form.
This  is  incorrect.  Formerly,  and
indeed  up  to  a  comparatively  recent
period,  the  Tiler’s  sword  was  wavy
in  shape,  and  so  made  in  allusion
to  the  “flaming  sword  which  was
placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden
of  Eden,  which  turned  every  way
to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life.”
It  was,  of  course,  without  a  scab-
£si  'J  bard,  because  the  Tiler’s  sword
P3  should  ever  be  drawn  and  ready
§5  for  the  defence  of  his  post.
Sworn  Brothers.  (Fratres  jurati.)
It  was  the  custom  in  the  Middle  Ages  for
soldiers,  and  especially  knights,  when  going
into  battle,  to  engage  each  other  by  recip¬
rocal  oaths  to  share  the  rewards  of  victory
and  to  defend  each  other  in  the  fight.  Thus


Kennet  tells  us  (Paroch.  Anita.)  that  in  the
commencement  of  the  expedition  of  Wil¬
liam  of  Normandy  into  England,  Robert
de  Oiley  and  Roger  de  Iverio,  “  fratres
jurati,  et  per  fidem  et  sacramentum  con-
federati,  venerunt  ad  conquestum  Angliae,”
i.  e.,  they  came  to  the  conquest  of  England ,
as  sworn  brothers ,  bound  by  their  faith  and  an
oath.  Consequently,  when  William  allotted
them  an  estate  as  the  reward  of  their  mili¬
tary  service,  they  divided  it  into  equal  por¬
tions,  each  taking  one.

Syllable.  To  pronounce  the  syllables,
or  only  one  of  the  syllables,  of  a  Sacred
Word,  such  as  a  name  of  God,  was  among
the  Orientalists  considered  far  more  rever¬
ent  than  to  give  to  it  in  all  its  syllables  a
full  and  continuous  utterance.  Thus  the
Hebrews  reduced  the  holy  name  Jehovah
to  the  syllable  JAjH;  and  the  Brahmans,
taking  the  initial  letters  of  the  three  words
which  expressed  the  three  attributes  of  the
Supreme  Brahma,  as  Creator,  Preserver,
and  Destroyer,  made  of  it  the  syllable
AUM,  which,  on  account  of  its  awful  and
sacred  meaning,  they  hesitated  to  pro¬
nounce  aloud.  To  divide  a  word  into  syl¬
lables,  and  thus  to  interrupt  the  sound,
either  by  pausing  or  by  the  alternate  pro¬
nunciation  by  two  persons,  was  deemed  a
mark  of  reverence.

Symbol.  A  symbol  is  defined  to  be  a
visible  sign  with  which  a  spiritual  feeling,
emotion,  or  idea  is  connected.  It  was  in
this  sense  that  the  early  Christians  gave
the  name  of  symbols  to  all  rites,  ceremo¬
nies,  and  outward  forms  which  bore  a  reli¬
gious  meaning;  such,  for  instance,  as  the
cross,  and  other  pictures  and  images,  and
even  the  sacraments  and  the  sacramental
elements.  At  a  still  earlier  period,  the
Egyptians  communicated  the  knowledge  of
their  esoteric  philosophy  in  mystic  symbols.
In  fact,  man’s  earliest  instruction  was  by
means  of  symbols.  “  The  first  learning  of
the  world,”  says  Stukely,  “consisted  chiefly
of  symbols.  The  wisdom  of  the  Chaldeans,
Phoenicians,  Egyptians,  Jews,  of  Zoroaster,
Sanchoniathon,  Pherecydes,  Svrus,  Pythag¬
oras,  Socrates,  Plato,  of  all  the  ancients  that
is  come  to  our  hand,  is  symbolic.”  And  the
learned  Faber  remarks  that  “allegory  and
personification  were  peculiarly  agreeable  to
the  genius  of  antiquity,  and  the  simplicity
of  truth  was  continually  sacrificed  at  the
shrine  of  poetical  decoration.”

The  word  “  symbol  ”  is  derived  from  a
Greek  verb  which  signifies  “  to  compare
one  thing  with  another;”  and  hence  a  sym¬
bol  or  emblem,  for  the  two  words  are  often
used  synonymously  in  Masonry,  is  the  ex¬
pression  of  an  idea  which  is  derived  from
the  comparison  or  contrast  of  some  object
with  a  moral  conception  or  attribute.  Thus


SYMBOL


SYMBOL


781


the  plumb  is  a  symbol  of  rectitude;  the
level,  of  equality;  the  beehive,  of  industry.
The  physical  qualities  of  the  plumb  are
compared  or  contrasted  with  the  moral  con¬
ception  of  virtue  or  rectitude  of  conduct.
The  plumb  becomes  to  the  Mason,  after  he
has  once  been  taught  its  symbolic  mean¬
ing,  forever  afterwards  the  visible  expres¬
sion  of  the  idea  of  rectitude,  or  upright¬
ness  of  conduct.  To  study  and  compare
these  visible  objects  —  to  elicit  from  them
the  moral  ideas  which  they  are  intended  to
express  —  is  to  make  one’s  self  acquainted
with  the  symbolism  of  Masonry.

The  objective  character  of  a  symbol,
which  presents  something  material  to  the
sight  and  touch,  as  explanatory  of  an  in¬
ternal  idea,  is  best  calculated  to  be  grasped
by  the  infant  mind,  whether  the  infancy  of
that  miud  be  considered  nationally  or  indi¬
vidually.  And  hence,  in  the  first  ages  of
the  world,  in  its  infancy,  all  propositions,
theological,  political,  or  scientific,  were  ex-
ressed  in  the  form  of  symbols.  Thus  the
rst  religions  were  eminently  symbolical,  be¬
cause,  as  that  great  philosophical  historian,
Grote,  has  remarked,  “At  a  time  when  lan¬
guage  was  yet  in  its  infancy,  visible  sym¬
bols  were  the  most  vivid  means  of  acting
upon  the  minds  of  ignorant  hearers.”

To  the  man  of  mature  intellect,  each
letter  of  the  alphabet  is  the  symbol  of  a
certain  sound.  When  we  instruct  the  child
in  the  form  and  value  of  these  letters,  we
make  the  picture  of  some  familiar  object
the  representation  of  the  letter  which  aids
the  infantile  memory.  Thus,  when  the
teacher  says,  “A  was  an  Archer,”  the
Archer  becomes  a  symbol  of  the  letter  A,
just  as  in  after-life  the  letter  becomes  the
symbol  of  a  sound.

“Symbolical  representations  of  things
sacred,”  says  Dr.  Barlow,  ( Essays  on  Sym¬
bolism,  I.,  p.  1,)  “  were  coeval  with  religion
itself  as  a  system  of  doctrine  appealing  to
sense,  and  have  accompanied  its  transmis¬
sion  to  ourselves  from  the  earliest  known
period  of  monumental  history.

“  Egyptian  tombs  and  stiles  exhibit  reli-
ious  symbols  still  in  use  among  Christians,
imilar  forms,  with  corresponding  mean¬
ings,  though  under  different  names,  are
found  among  the  Indians,  and  are  seen  on
the  monuments  of  the  Assyrians,  the  Etrus¬
cans.  and  the  Greeks.

“The  Hebrews  borrowed  much  of  their
early  religious  symbolism  from  the  Egyp¬
tians,  their  later  from  the  Babylonians,  and
through  them  this  symbolical  imagery,  both
verbal  and  objective,  has  descended  to  our¬
selves.

“  The  Egyptian  priests  were  great  pro¬
ficients  in  symbolism,  and  so  were  the
Chaldeans,  and  so  were  Moses  and  the


Prophets,  and  the  Jewish  doctors  generally,
—  and  so  were  many  of  the  early  fathers
of  the  Church,  especially  the  Greek  fa¬
thers.

“  Philo  of  Alexandria  was  very  learned
in  symbolism,  and  the  Evangelist  St.  John
has  made  much  use  of  it.

“The  early  Christian  architects,  sculp¬
tors,  and  painters  drank  deep  of  symboli¬
cal  iore,  and  reproduced  it  in  their  works.”

Squier  gives  in  his  Serpent  Symbolism
in  America  (p.  19)  a  similar  view  of  the  an¬
tiquity  and  the  subsequent  growth  of  the
use  of  symbols.  He  says:  “In  the  absence
of  a  written  language  or  forms  of  expres¬
sion  capable  of  conveying  abstract  ideas,
we  can  readily  comprehend  the  necessity,
among  a  primitive  people,  of  a  symbolic
system.  That  symbolism  in  a  great  degree
resulted  from  this  necessity  is  very  obvious;
and  that,  associated  with  man’s  primitive
religious  systems,  it  was  afterwards  con¬
tinued,  when  in  the  advanced  stage  of  the
human  mind  the  previous  necessity  no
longer  existed,  is  equally  undoubted.  It
thus  came  to  constitute  a  kind  of  sacred
language,  and  became  invested  with  an
esoteric  significance  understood  only  by  the
few.”

In  Freemasonry,  all  the  instructions  in
its  mysteries  are  communicated  in  the  form
of  symbols.  Founded,  as  a  speculative
science,  on  an  operative  art,  it  has  taken
the  working-tools  of  the  profession  which
it  spiritualizes,  the  terms  of  architecture,
the  Temple  of  Solomon,  and  everything
that  is  connected  with  its  traditional  his¬
tory,  and  adopting  them  as  symbols,  it
teaches  its  great  moral  and  philosophical
lessons  by  this  system  of  symbolism.  But
its  symbols  are  not  confined  to  material
objects  as  were  the  hieroglyphics  of  the
Egyptians.  Its  myths  ana  legends  are
also,  for  the  most  part,  symbolic.  Often
a  legend,  unauthenticated  by  history,  dis¬
torted  by  anachronisms,  and  possibly  ab¬
surd  in  its  pretensions  if  viewed  histori¬
cally  or  as  a  narrative  of  actual  occur¬
rences,  when  interpreted  as  a  symbol,  is
found  to  impress  the  mind  with  some  great
spiritual  and  philosophical  truth.  1'he
legends  of  Masonry  are  parables,  and  a
parable  is  only  a  spoken  symbol.  By  its
utterance,  says  Adam  Clarke,  “spiritual
things  are  better  understood,  and  make  a
deeper  impression  on  the  attentive  mind.”

Symbol,  Compound.  In  my  work
on  the  Symbolism  of  Freemasonry,  1  have
ventured  to  give  this  name  to  a  species  of
symbol  that  is  not  unusual  in  Freemasonry,
where  the  symbol  is  to  be  taken  in  a  double
sense,  meaning  in  its  general  application
one  thing,  and  then  in  a  special  application
another.  An  example  of  this  is  seen  in  the


782


SYMBOLIC


SYMBOLIC


symbolism  of  Solomon’s  Temple,  where,  in
a  general  sense,  the  Temple  is  viewed  as  a
symbol  of  that  spiritual  temple  formed  by
the  aggregation  of  the  whole  Order,  and  in
which  each  Mason  is  considered  as  a  stone;
and,  in  an  individual  or  special  sense,  the
same  Temple  is  considered  as  a  type  of  that
spiritual  temple  which  each  Mason  is  di¬
rected  to  erect  in  his  heart.

Symbolic  Degrees.  The  first  three
degrees  of  Free  Masonry,  namely,  those  of
Entered  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,  and
Master  Mason,  are  known,  by  way  of  dis¬
tinction,  as  the  “  symbolic  degrees.”  This
terra  is  never  applied  to  the  degrees  of
Mark,  Past,  and  Most  Excellent  Master,
and  the  Royal  Arch,  which,  as  being  con¬
ferred  in  a  body  called  a  Chapter,  are  gen¬
erally  designated  as  “  capitular  degrees ;  ”
nor  to  those  of  Royal  and  Select  Master,
which,  conferred  in  a  Council,  are,  by  an  ex¬
cellent  modern  usage,  styled  “  cryptic  de¬
grees,”  from  the  crypt  or  vault  which  plays
so  important  a  part  in  their  ritual.  But
the  term  “symbolic”  is  exclusively  con¬
fined  to  the  degrees  conferred  in  a  Lodge
of  the  three  primitive  degrees,  which  Lodge,
therefore,  whether  opened  on  the  first,  the
second,  or  the  third  degree,  is  always  re¬
ferred  to  as  a  “symbolic  Lodge.”  As  this
distinctive  term  is  of  constant  and  univer¬
sal  use,  it  may  be  considered  not  altogether
useless  to  inquire  into  its  origin  and  signi¬
fication.

The  germ  and  nucleus  of  all  Freemason¬
ry  is  to  be  found  in  the  three  primitive  de¬
grees, —  the  Apprentice,  the  Fellow  Craft,
and  the  Master  Mason.  They  were  at  one
time  (under  a  modification,  however,  which
included  the  Royal  Arch)  the  only  degrees
known  to  or  practised  by  the  Craft,  and
hence  they  are  often  called  “  Ancient  Craft
Masonry,”  to  distinguish  them  from  those
comparatively  modern  additions  which  con¬
stitute  what  are  designated  as  the  “  high
degrees,”  or,  by  the  French,  “  les  hautes
grades.”  The  striking  peculiarity  of  these
primitive  degrees  is  that  their  prominent
mode  of  instruction  is  by  symbols.  Not
that  they  are  without  legends.  On  the
contrary,  they  have  each  an  abundance  of
legends;  such,  for  instance,  as  the  details
of  the  building  of  the  Temple;  of  the  pay¬
ment  of  wages  in  the  middle  chamber,  or
of  the  construction  of  the  pillars  of  the
porch.  But  these  legends  do  not  perform
any  very  important  part  in  the  constitution
of  the  degree.  The  lessons  which  are  com¬
municated  to  the  candidate  in  these  primi¬
tive  degrees  are  conveyed,  principally,
through  the  medium  of  symbols,  while  there
is  (at  least  in  the  working  of  the  degrees)
but  little  traditional  or  legendary  teaching,
with  the  exception  of  the  great  legend  of


Masonry,  the  “golden  legend”  of  the
Order,  to  be  found  in  the  Master’s  degree,
and  which  is,  itself,  a  symbol  of  the  most
abstruse  and  solemn  signification.  But
even  in  this  instance,  interesting  as  are  the
details  of  the  legend,  they  are  only  subor¬
dinate  to  the  symbol.  Hiram  the  Builder
is  the  profound  symbol  of  manhood  labor¬
ing  for  immortality,  and  all  the  different
points  of  the  legend  are  simply  clustered
around  it,  only  to  throw  out  the  symbol  in
bolder  relief.  The  legend  is  of  itself  inert
—  it  is  the  symbol  of  the  Master  Workman
that  gives  it  life  and  true  meaning.

Symbolism  is,  therefore,  the  prevailing
characteristic  of  these  primitive  degrees;
and  it  is  because  all  the  science  and  philos¬
ophy  and  religion  of  Ancient  Craft  Mason¬
ry  is  thus  concealed  from  the  profane  but
unfolded  to  the  initiates  in  symbols,  that
the  first  three  degrees  which  comprise  it  are
said  to  be  symbolic.

Now,  nothing  of  this  kind  is  to  be  found
in  the  degrees  above  and  beyond  the  third,
if  we  except  the  Royal  Arch,  whfcb,  how¬
ever,  as  I  have  already  intimated,  was  orig¬
inally  a  part  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,  and
was  unnaturally  torn  from  the  Master’s  de¬
gree,  of  which  it,  as  every  Masonic  student
knows,  constituted  the  complement  and
consummation.  Take,  for  example,  the  in¬
termediate  degrees  of  the  American  Chap¬
ter,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  Mark  and
Most  Excellent  Master.  Here  we  find  the
symbolic  feature  ceasing  to  predominate,
and  the  traditional  or  legendary  taking  its
place.  It  is  true  that  in  these  capitular  de¬
grees  the  use  of  symbols  is  not  altogether
abandoned.  This  could  not  well  be,  .for  the
symbol  constitutes  the  very  essence  of  Free¬
masonry.  The  symbolic  element  is  still  to
be  discovered  in  these  degrees,  but  only  in
a  position  subordinate  to  legendary  instruc¬
tion.  As  an  illustration,  let  us  consider  the
keystone  in  the  Mark  Master’s  degree.
Now,  no  one  will  deny  that  this  is  strictly
speaking  a  symbol,  and  a  very  important
and  beautiful  one,  too.  It  is  a  symbol  of  a
fraternal  covenant  between  those  who  are
engaged  in  the  common  search  after  divine
truth.  But,  in  the  role  which  it  plays  in
the  ritual  of  this  degree,  the  symbol,  how¬
ever  beautiful  and  appropriate  it  may  be,
is  in  a  manner  lost  sight  of,  and  the  key¬
stone  derives  almost  all  its  importance  and
interest  from  the  traditional  history  of  its
construction,  its  architectural  design,  and
its  fate.  It  is  as  the  subject  of  a  legend,
and  not  as  a  symbol,  that  it  attracts  atten¬
tion.  Now,  in  the  third  or  Master’s  degree
we  find  the  trowel,  which  is  a  symbol  of
almost  precisely  the  same  import  as  the
keystone.  They  both  refer  to  a  Masonic
covenant.  But  no  legend,  no  tradition,  no


SYMBOLIC


SYNDICATION


783


history,  is  connected  with  the  trowel.  It
presents  itself  simply  and  exclusively  as  a
symbol.  Hence  we  learn  that  symbols  do
not  in  the  capitular,  as  in  the  primitive,  de¬
grees  of  Masonry  strike  the  eye,  and  inform
the  mind,  and  teach  the  heart,  in  every
part  of  the  Lodge,  and  in  every  part
of  the  ceremonial  initiation.  On  the  con¬
trary,  the  capitular  degrees  are  almost  al¬
together  founded  on  and  composed  of  a
series  of  events  in  Masonic  history.  Each
of  them  has  attached  to  it  some  tradition
or  legend  which  it  is  the  design  of  the  de¬
gree  to  illustrate,  and  the  memory  of  which
is  preserved  in  its  ceremonies  and  instruc¬
tions.  That  most  of  these  legends  are
themselves  of  symbolic  signification  is  not
denied.  But  this  is  their  interior  sense.
In  their  outward  and  ostensible  meaning,
they  appear  before  us  simply  as  legends.
To  retain  these  legends  in  the  memory  of
Masons  appears  to  have  been  the  primary
design  in  the  establishment  of  the  higher
degrees,  and  as  the  information  intended  to
be  communicated  in  these  degrees  is  of  a
historical  character,  there  can  of  course  be
but  little  room  for  symbols  or  for  symbolic
instruction,  the  profuse  use  of  which  would
rather  tend  to  an  injury  than  to  a  benefit,
by  complicating  the  purposes  of  the  ritual
and  confusing  the  mind  of  the  aspirant.

The  celebrated  French  writer,  Ragon,
objects  to  this  exclusive  application  of  the
term  “  symbolic  ”  to  the  first  three  degrees  as
a  sort  of  unfavorable  criticism  on  the  higher
degrees,  and  as  if  implying  that  the  latter
are  entirely  devoid  of  the  element  of  sym¬
bolism.  But  he  has  mistaken  the  true  im¬
port  and  meaning  of  the  application.  It  is
not  because  the  higher  or  capitular  and
cryptic  degrees  are  altogether  without  sym¬
bols —  for  such  is  not  the  case  —  that  the
term  symbolic  is  withheld  from  them,  but
because  symbolic  instruction  does  not  con¬
stitute  their  predominating  characteristic,
as  it  does  of  the  first  three  degrees.

And  hence  the  Masonry  taught  in  these
three  primitive  degrees  is  very  properly
called  Symbolic  Masonry,  and  the  Lodge  in
which  this  Masonry  is  taught  is  known  as
a  Symbolic  Lodge.

Symbolic  IiCCtnres.  The  lectures
appropriated  to  the  first,  second,  and  third
degrees  are  sometimes  called  Symbolic  lec¬
tures;  but  the  term  is  more  properly  applied
to  any  lecture  which  treats  of  the  meaning
of  Masonic  symbols,  in  contradistinction  to
one  which  discusses  only  the  history  of  the
Order,  and  which  would,  therefore,  be
called  a  Historical  Lecture.  But  the  Eng¬
lish  Masons  have  a  lecture  called  “the
symbolical  lecture,’’  in  which  is  explained
the  forms,  symbols,  and  ornaments  of  Royal
Arch  Masonry,  as  well  as  its  rites  and  cere¬
monies.


Symbolic  IiOdge.  A  Lodge  of  Master
Masons,  with  the  Fellow  Craft  and  Ap¬
prentice  Lodge  worked  under  its  Constitu¬
tion,  is  called  a  Symbolic  Lodge,  because  in
it  the  Symbolic  degrees  are  conferred.  See
Symbolic  Degrees.

Symbolic  Machinery.  Machinery
is  a  term  employed  in  epic  and  dramatic
poetry  to  denote  some  agency  introduced
by  the  poet  to  serve  some  purpose  or  accom¬
plish  some  event.  Faber,  in  treating  of  the
Apocalypse,  speaks  of  “  a  patriarchal  scheme
of  symbolical  machinery  derived  most
plainly  from  the  events  of  the  deluge,  and
borrowed,  with  the  usual  perverse  misappli¬
cation,  by  the  contrivers  of  paganism,  but
which  has  since  been  reclaimed  by  Christi¬
anity  to  its  proper  use.”  Dr.  Oliver  thinks
that  this  “scheme  of  symbolical  machinery”
was  “the  primitive  Freemasonry,  veiled  in
allegory  and  illustrated  by  symbols.”  With¬
out  adopting  this  questionable  hypothesis,
it  must  be  admitted  that  Freemasonry,  in
the  scenic  representations  sometimes  used
in  its  initiations,  has,  like  the  epic  poets,
and  dramatists,  and  the  old  hierophants,
availed  itself  of  the  use  of  symbolic  ma¬
chinery.

Symbolic  Masonry.  The  Masonry
that  is  concerned  with  the  first  three  de¬
grees  in  all  the  Rites.  This  is  the  techni¬
cal  meaning.  But  in  a  more  general  sense,
Symbolic  Masonry  is  that  Masonry,  wher¬
ever  it  may  be  found,  whether  in  the  pri¬
mary  or  in  the  high  degrees,  in  which  the
lessons  are  communicated  by  symbols.  See
Symbolic  Degrees.

Symbolism,  the  Science  of.  The

science  which  is  engaged  in  the  investiga¬
tion  of  the  meaning  of  symbols,  and  the
application  of  their  interpretation  to  moral,
religious,  and  philosophical  instruction.
In  this  sense,  Freemasonry  is  essentially  a
science  of  symbolism.  The  English  lec¬
tures  define  Freemasonry  to  be  “a  science
of  morality  veiled  in  allegory  and  illus¬
trated  by  symbols.”  The  definition  would
be  more  correct  were  it  in  these  words :
Freemasonry  is  a  system  of  morality  devel¬
oped  and  inculcated  by  the  science  of  sym¬
bolism.

Symbol  of  Glory.  In  the  old  lec¬
tures  of  the  last  century,  the  Blazing  Star
was  called  “the  glory  in  the  centre;”  be¬
cause  it  was  placed  in  the  centre  of  the
floor-cloth  or  tracing-board,  and  represented
hieroglyphically  the  glorious  name  of  God.
Hence  Dr.  Oliver  has  given  to  one  of  his
most  interesting  works,  which  treats  of  the
symbolism  of  the  Blazing  Star,  the  title  of
The  Symbol  of  Olory.

Syndication  of  I>o<lgcs.  A  term
1186a  in  France,  in  1773,  by  the  Schismatic
Grand  Orient  during  its  contests  with  the
Grand  Lodge,  to  denote  the  fusion  of  sev>


784


SYNOD


TABERNACLE


eral  Lodges  into  one.  The  word  was  never
introduced  into  English  Masonry,  and  has
become  obsolete  in  France.

Synod  of  Scotland.  In  1757,  the
Associate  Synod  of  Seceders  of  Scotland
adopted  an  act,  concerning  what  they  called
“the  Mason  oath,”  in  which  it  is  declared,
that  all  persons  who  shall  refuse  to  make
such  revelations  as  the  Kirk  Sessions  may
require,  and  to  promise  to  abstain  from  all
future  connection  with  the  Order,  “  shall  be
reputed  under  scandal,  and  incapable  of  ad¬
mission  to  sealing  ordinances.”  In  conse¬
quence  of  this  act,  passed  more  than  a  cen¬
tury  ago,  the  sect  of  Seceders,  of  which
there  are  a  few  in  this  country,  continue  to
he  at  the  present  day  inveterate  enemies  of
the  Masonic  institution.

Syria.  A  country  of  Asia  Minor  lying
on  the  western  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.
To  the  Freemason,  it  is  associated  with  the
legendary  history  of  his  Order  in  several
interesting  points,  especially  in  reference
to  Mount  Lebanon,  from  whose  forests  was
derived  the  timber  for  the  construction  of
the  Temple.  The  modern  Templar  will
view  it  as  the  scene  of  the  contests  waged
during  the  Crusades  by  the  Christian  knights
with  their  Saracen  adversaries.  In  modern
Syria,  Freemasonry  has  been  slow  to  find  a
home.  The  only  Lodges  existing  in  the
country  are  at  the  city  of  Beyrout,  which
contains  two  —  Palestine  Lodge,  No.  415,
which  was  instituted  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland,  March  4,  1861,  and  the  Lodge
Le  Liban,  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,
January  4, 1869.  Morris  says,  ( Freemasonry


in  the  Holy  Land ,  p.  216,)  that  “  the  Order
of  Freemasonry  is  not  in  a  condition  satis¬
factory  to  the  members  thereof,  nor  credit¬
able  to  the  great  cause  in  which  the  Fra¬
ternity  are  engaged.”

System.  Lenning  defines  a  system  of
Freemasonry  to  be  the  doctrine  of  Free¬
masonry  as  exhibited  in  the  Lodge  govern¬
ment  and  Lodge  work  or  ritual.  The  defi¬
nition  is  not,  I  think,  satisfactory.  In
Freemasonry,  a  system  is  a  plan  or  scheme
of  doctrines  intended  to  develop  a  partic¬
ular  view  as  to  the  origin,  the  design,  and
the  character  of  the  Institution.  The  word
is  oflen  used  as  synonymous  with  Rite,  but
the  tvyo  words  do  not  always  express  the
same  meaning.  A  system  is  not  always  de¬
veloped  into  a  Rite,  or  the  same  system  may
give  birth  to  two  or  more  differen  t  Rites.  Dr.
Oliver  established  a  system  foundpd  on  the
literal  acceptance  of  almost  all  the  legend¬
ary  traditions,  but  he  never  invented  a
Rite.  Ramsay  and  Hund  both  held  the
same  system  as  to  the  Templar  origin  of
Masonry;  but  the  Rite  of  Ramsay  and  the
Rite  of  Strict  Observance  are  very  differ¬
ent.  The  system  of  Schroder  and  that  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  do  not  es¬
sentially  vary,  but  there  is  no  similarity
between  the  York  Rite  and  the  Rite  of
Schroder.  Whoever  in  Masonry  sets  forth
a  connected  series  of  doctrines  peculiar  to
himself  invents  a  system.  He  may  or
he  may  not  afterwards  fabricate  a  Rite.
But  the  Rite  would  be  only  a  conse¬
quence,  and  not  a  necessary  one,  of  the
system.


T.


Tabernacle.  Many  Masonic  students
have  greatly  erred  in  the  way  in  which  they
have  referred  to  the  Sinaitic  tabernacle,  as
if  it  were  represented  by  the  tabernacle
said  in  the  legends  to  have  been  erected  by
Zembbabel  at  Jerusalem  at  the  time  of  the
building  of  the  second  Temple.  The  belief
that  the  tabernacle  of  Zerubbabel  was  an
exact  representation  of  that  erected  by
Moses,  arose  from  the  numerous  allusions
to  it  in  the  writings  of  Oliver,  but  in  this
country  principally  from  the  teachings  of
Webb  and  Cross.  It  is,  however,  true,  that
although  the  symbols  of  the  ark,  the  golden
candlestick,  the  altar  of  incense,  and  some
others  were  taken,  not  from  the  tabernacle,
but  from  the  Temple,  the  symbolism  of  the


veils  was  derived  from  the  latter,  but  in  a
form  by  no  means  similar  to  the  original
disposition.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that
some  notice  should  be  taken  of  the  real
tabernacle,  that  we  may  be  enabled  to  know
how  far  the  Masonic  is  connected  with  the
Sinaitic  edifice.

The  word  tabernacle  means  a  tent.  It  is
the  diminutive  of  tabema,  and  was  used  by
the  Romans  to  denote  a  soldier’s  tent.  It
was  constructed  of  planks  and  covered  with
skins,  and  its  outward  appearance  presented
the  precise  form  of  the  Jewish  tabernacle.
The  Jews  called  it  sometimes  miehcan,
which,  like  the  Latin  tabema,  meant  a
dwelling-place,  but  more  commonly  ohel,
which  meant,  like  tabemaculum,  a  tent.  In


TABERNACLE


TABERNACLE


785


shape  it  resembled  a  tent,  and  is  supposed  to
have  derived
its  form  from
the  tents  used
by  the  patri¬
archs  during
their  nomad¬
ic  life.

There  are
three  taberna¬
cles  mentioned
in  Scripture
history  —  the  Anti-Sinaitic,  the  Sinaitic,
and  the  Davidic.

1.  The  Anti-Sinaitic  tabernacle  was  the
tent  used,  perhaps  from  the  beginning  of
the  exodus,  for  the  transaction  of  business,
and  was  situated  at  some  distance  from  the
camp.  It  was  used  only  provisionally,  and
was  superseded  by  the  tabernacle  proper.

2.  The  Sinaitic  tabernacle.  This  was  con¬
structed  by  Aholiab  and  Bezaleel  under  the
immediate  direction  of  Moses.  The  costli¬
ness  and  splendor  of  this  edifice  exceeded,
says  Kitto,  in  proportion  to  the  means  of
the  people  who  constructed  it,  the  magnifi¬
cence  of  any  cathedral  of  the  present  day.
It  was  situated  in  the  very  centre  of  the
camp,  with  its  door  or  entrance  facing  the
east,  and  was  placed  towards  the  western
part  of  an  enclosure  or  outward  court,  which
was  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  long  and
fifty  feet  wide,  and  surrounded  by  canvas
screens  seven  and  a  half  feet  high,  so  as  to

E>revent  any  one  on  the  outside  from  over-
ooking  the  court.

The  tabernacle  itself  was,  according  to
Josephus,  fortv-tive  feet  long  by  fifteen
wide ;  its  greater  length  being  from  east  to
west.  The  sides  were  fifteen  feet  high,  and
there  was  a  sloping  roof.  There  was  no
aperture  or  place  of  entrance  except  at  the
eastern  end,  which  was  covered  by  curtains.
Internally,  the  tabernacle  was  divided  into
two  apartments  by  a  richly  decorated  cur¬
tain.  The  one  at  the  western  end  was  fif¬
teen  feet  long,  making,  therefore,  a  perfect
cube.  This  was  the  Holy  of  Holies,  into
which  no  one  entered,  not  even  the  high
riest,  except  on  extraordinary  occasions,
n  it  was  placed  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,
aorainst  the  western  wall.  The  Holy  of
Holies  was  separated  from  the  Sanctuary
by  a  curtain  embroidered  with  figures  of
cherubim,  and  supported  by  four  golden
pillars.  The  Sanctuary,  or  eastern  apart¬
ment,  was  in  the  form  of  a  double  cube,  be¬
ing  fifteen  feet  high,  fifteen  feet  wide,  and
thirty  feet  long.  In  it  were  placed  the  table
of  shewbread  on  the  northern  side,  the
golden  candlestick  on  the  southern,  and
the  altar  of  incense  between  them.  The
tabernacle  thus  constructed  was  decorated
with  rich  curtains.  These  were  of  four
4  Y  60


colors  —  white  or  fine-twined  linen,  blue,
purple,  and  red.  They  were  so  suspended
as  to  cover  the  sides  and  top  of  the  taberna¬
cle,  not  being  distributed  as  veils  separating
it  into  apartments,  as  in  the  Masonic  taber¬
nacle.  Josephus,  in  describing  the  sym¬
bolic  signification  of  the  tabernacle,  says
that  it  was  an  imitation  of  the  system  of
the  world ;  the  Holy  of  Holies,  into  which
not  even  the  priests  were  admitted,  was  as
it  were  a  heaven  peculiar  to  God;  but
the  Sanctuary,  where  the  people  were  al¬
lowed  to  assemble  for  worship,  represented
the  sea  and  land  on  which  men  live.  But
the  symbolism  of  the  tabernacle  was  far
more  complex  than  anything  that  Jose¬
phus  has  said  upon  the  subject  would  lead
us  to  suppose.  Its  connection  would,  how¬
ever,  lead  us  to  an  inquiry  into  the  religious
life  of  the  ancient  Hebrews,  and  into  an
investigation  of  the  question  how  much
Moses  was,  in  the  appointment  of  ceremo¬
nies,  influenced  by  his  previous  Egyptian
life;  topics  whose  consideration  would
throw  no  light  on  the  subject  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  symbolism  of  the  tabernacle.

3.  The  Davidic  tabernacle  in  time  took
the  place  of  that  which  had  been  construct¬
ed  by  Moses.  The  old  or  Sinaitic  taberna¬
cle  accompanied  the  Israelites  in  all  their
wanderings,  and  was  their  old  temple  until
David  obtained  possession  of  Jerusalem.
From  that  time  it  remained  at  Gibeon,  and
we  have  no  account  of  its  removal  thence.
But  when  David  removed  the  ark  to  Jeru¬
salem,  he  erected  a  tabernacle  for  its  recep¬
tion.  Here  the  priests  performed  their
daily  service,  until  Solomon  erected  the
Temple,  when  the  ark  was  deposited  in  the
Holy  of  Holies,  and  the  Davidic  tabernacle
put  away  as  a  relic.  At  the  subsequent
destruction  of  the  Temple  it  was  most  prob¬
ably  burned.  F rom  the  time  of  Solomon  we
altogether  lose  sight  of  the  Sinaitic  taberna¬
cle,  which  perhaps  became  a  victim  to  care¬
lessness  and  the  corroding  influence  of  time.

The  three  tabernacles  just  described
are  the  only  ones  mentioned  in  Scripture
or  in  Josephus.  Masonic  tradition,  how¬
ever,  enumerates  a  fourth,  —  the  tabernacle
erected  by  Zerubbabel  on  his  arrival  at  Je¬
rusalem  with  his  countrymen,  who  had
been  restored  from  captivity  by  Cyrus  for
the  purpose  of  rebuilding  the  Temple.
Ezra  tells  us  that  on  their  arrival  they
built  the  altar  of  burnt-offerings  and  offered
sacrifice.  This  would  not,  however,  ne¬
cessitate  the  building  of  a  house,  because
the  altar  of  sacrifices  had  always  been
erected  in  the  open  court,  both  of  the  old
tabernacle  and  Temple.  Yet  as  the  priests
and  Levites  were  there,  and  it  is  said  that
the  religious  ordinances  of  Moses  were  ob¬
served,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  some  sort  of


786


TABERNACLE


TABLE


temporary  shelter  was  erected  for  the  per¬
formance  of  divine  worship.  But  of  the
form  and  character  of  such  a  building  we
have  no  account.

A  Masonic  legend  has,  however,  for  sym¬
bolical  purposes,  supplied  the  deficiency.
This  legend  is,  however,  peculiar  to  the
American  modification  of  the  Royal  Arch
degree.  In  the  English  system  a  Royal
Arch  Chapter  represents  the  “  ancient
Sanhedrim,”  where  Zerubbabel,  Haggai,
and  Joshua  administer  the  law.  In  the
American  system  a  Chapter  is  said  to  repre¬
sent  “  the  tabernacle  erected  by  our  ancient
brethren  near  the  ruins  of  King  Solomon’s
Temple.”

Of  the  erection  of  this  tabernacle,  I  have
said  that  there  is  no  historical  evidence.

It  is  simply  a
myth,  but  a  myth
constructed,  of
course,  for  a  sym¬
bolical  purpose.
In  its  legendary
description,  it
bears  no  resem¬
blance  whatso¬
ever,  except  in  the
colors  of  its  cur¬
tains  or  veils,  to
the  Sinaitic  taber¬
nacle.  In  the  lat¬
ter  the  Holy  of
Holies  was  in  the


western  extremity,  in  the  former  it  is  in  the
eastern ;  in  that  was  contained  the  Ark  of  the
Covenant  with  the  overshadowing  cheru¬
bim  and  the  Shekinah  ;  in  this  there  are  no
such  articles ;  in  that  tbe  most  holy  was  in¬
accessible  to  all  persons,  even  to  the  priests ;
in  this  it  is  the  seat  of  the  three  presiding
officers,  and  is  readily  accessible  by  proper
means.  In  that  the  curtains  were  attached
to  the  sides  of  the  tent;  in  this  they  are
suspended  across,  dividing  it  into  four
apartments.  The  Masonic  tabernacle  used
in  the  American  Royal  Arch  degree  is  not,
therefore,  a  representation  of  the  ancient
tabernacle  erected  by  Moses  in  the  wilder¬
ness,  but  must  be  supposed  to  be  simply  a
temporary  construction  for  purposes  of
shelter,  of  consultation  and  of  worship.  It
was,  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word,  a
tabernacle,  a  tent.  As  a  myth,  with  no  his¬
torical  foundation,  it  would  be  valueless,
were  it  not  that  it  is  used,  and  was  undoubt¬
edly  fabricated,  for  the  purpose  of  develop¬
ing  a  symbolism.  And  this  symbolism  is
found  in  its  veils.  There  is  no  harm  in
calling  it  a  tabernacle  any  more  than  there
is  in  calling  it  a  sanhedrim,  provided  we
do  not  fall  into  the  error  of  supposing  that
either  was  actually  its  character.  As  a
myth,  and  only  as  a  myth,  must  it  be


viewed,  and  there  its  symbolic  meaning
presents,  as  in  all  other  Masonic  myths,  a
fund  of  useful  instruction.  For  an  inter¬
pretation  of  that  symbolism,  see  Veils,  Sym¬
bolism  of  the.

In  some  Chapters  a  part  of  the  furni¬
ture  is  called  the  tabernacle;  in  other
words,  a  piece  of  frame-work  is  erected  in¬
side  of  the  room,  and  is  called  the  taberna¬
cle.  This  is  incorrect.  According  to  the
ritual,  the  whole  Chapter  room  represents
the  tabernacle,  and  the  veils  should  be  sus¬
pended  from  wall  to  wall.  Indeed,  I  have
reasons  for  believing  that  this  interior  tab¬
ernacle  is  an  innovation  of  little  more  than
twenty  years’  standing.  The  oldest  Chap¬
ter  rooms  that  I  have  seen  are  constructed
on  the  correct  principle.

Tabernacle,  thief  of  the.  See
Chief  of  the  Tabernacle.

Tabernaele,  Prince  of  the.  See
Prince  of  the  Tabernacle.

Table  Lodge.  After  the  labors  of
the  Lodge  have  been  completed,  Masons
frequently  meet  at  tables  to  enjoy  a  repast
in  common.  In  England  and  America,
this  repast  is  generally  called  a  banquet,
and  the  Lodge  is  said  to  be,  during  its  con¬
tinuance,  at  refreshment.  The  Master,  of
course,  presides,  assisted  by  the  Wardens,
and  it  is  considered  most  proper  that  no
profanes  should  be  present.  But  with  these
exceptions,  there  are  no  rules  specially
laid  down  for  the  government  of  Masonic
banquets.  It  will  be  seen,  by  an  inspection
of  the  article  Refreshment  in  this  work,  that
during  the  last  century,  and  even  at  the
commencement  of  the  present,  refreshments
in  English  Lodges  were  taken  during  the  ses¬
sions  of  the  Lodge  and  in  the  Lodge-room,
and  then,  of  course,  rigid  rules  were  in  exist¬
ence  for  the  government  of  the  Fraternity,
and  for  the  regulation  of  the  forms  in  which
the  refreshments  should  be  partaken.  But
this  system  has  long  grown  obsolete,  and
the  Masonic  banquets  of  the  present  day
differ  very  little  from  those  of  other  socie¬
ties,  except,  perhaps,  in  a  more  strict  ob¬
servance  of  the  rules  of  order,  and  in  the
exclusion  of  all  non-Masonic  visitors.

But  French  Masons  have  prescribed  a
very  formal  system  of  rules  for  what  they
call  a  “Loge  de  Table,”  or  Table  Lodge.
The  room  in  which  the  banquet  takes  place
is  as  much  protected  by  its  insulation  from
observation  as  the  Lod'ge-room  itself.  Ta¬
ble  Lodges  are  always  held  in  the  Appren¬
tice’s  degree,  and  none  but  Masons  are  per¬
mitted  to  be  present.  Even  the  attendants
are  taken  from  the  class  known  as  “Serv¬
ing  Brethren,”  that  is  to  say,  waiters  who
have  received  the  first  degree  for  the  special
purpose  of  entitling  them  to  be  present  on
such  occasions.


TABLE


TACITURNITY


787


The  table  is  in  the  form  of  a  horseshoe
or  elongated  semi-
circle.  The  Master  VVJVL.

sits  at  the  head,
the  Senior  War¬
den  at  the  north¬
west  extremity,
and  the  Junior
Warden  at  the*
south-west.  The*

Deacons  or  equiv¬
alent  officers  sit
between  the  two  •

Wardens.  The
brethren  are '
placed  around  the  #
exterior  margin  of
the  table,  facing «
each  other ;  and
the  void  space  be-  •

tween  the  sides  is  _  DeacOHS

occu pied  by  the  cur  Tixr

serving  brethren  SW-
or  attendants.  It  is  probable  that  the  form
of  the  table  was  really  adopted  at  first  from
motives  of  convenience.  But  M.  Hermitte
[Bull.  G.  0.,  1869,  p.  83,)  assigns  for  it  a
symbolism.  He  says  that  as  the  entire  cir¬
cle  represents  the  year,  or  the  complete
revolution  of  the  earth  around  the  sun,  the
semicircle  represents  the  half  of  that  revo¬
lution,  or  a  period  of  six  months,  and
therefore  refers  to  each  the  two  solstitial
points  of  summer  and  winter,  or  the  two
great  festivals  of  the  Order  in  June  and
December,  when  the  most  important  Table
Lodges  are  held.

The  Table  Lodge  is  formally  opened  with
an  invocation  to  the  Grand  Architect.
During  the  banquet,  seven  toasts  are
given.  These  are  called  “sant6s  d’obliga-
tion,”  or  obligatory  toasts.  They  are  drunk
with  certain  ceremonies,  which  are  pre¬
scribed  by' the  ritual,  and  from  which  no
departure  is  permitted.  These  toasts  are :
1.  The  health  of  the  Sovereign  or  Chief
Magistrate  of  the  State.  2.  That  of  the
Grand  Master  and  the  Supreme  power  of
the  Order,  that  is,  the  Grand  Orient  or  the
Grand  Lodge.  3.  That  of  the  Master  of
the  Lodge;  this  is  offered  by  the  Senior
Warden.  4.  That  of  the  two  Wardens.
5.  That  of  the  Visiting  Brethren.  6.  That
of  the  other  officers  of  the  Lodge,  and  the
new  initiates  or  affiliates  if  there  be  any.
7.  That  of  all  Masons  wheresoever  spread
over  the  face  of  the  globe.  See  Toasts.

Ragon  (Tuill.  Gen.,  p.  17, )  refers  these
seven  toasts  of  obligation  to  the  seven  liba¬
tions  made  by  the  ancients  in  their  banquets
in  honor  of  the  seven  planets,  the  Sun,
Moon,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus,  and
Saturn,  and  the  seven  days  of  the  week
which  are  named  after  them;  and  he  as¬


signs  some  striking  reasons  for  the  refer¬
ence.  But  this  symbolism,  although  very
beautiful,  is  evidently  very  modern.

The  Table  Lodge  is  then  closed  with  the
fraternal  kiss,  which  is  passed  from  the
Master  around  the  table,  and  with  the
usual  forms.

One  of  the  most  curious  things  about
these  Table  Lodges  is  the  vocabulary  used.
The  instant  that  the  Lodge  is  opened,  a
change  takes  place  in  the  names  of  things,
and  no  person  is  permitted  to  call  a  plate
a  plate,  or  a  knife  a  knife,  or  anything  else
by  the  appellation  by  which  it  is  known  in
ordinary  conversation.  Such  a  custom  for¬
merly  prevailed  in  England,  if  we  may
judge  from  a  passage  in  Dr.  Oliver’s  Reve¬
lations  of  a  Square,  where  an  instance  is
given  of  its  use  in  1780,  when  the  French
vocabulary  was  employed.  I  am  inclined
to  believe,  from  the  same  authority,  that
the  custom  was  introduced  into  England
from  France  by  Capt.  George  Smith,  the
author  of  the  Use  and  Abuse  of  Freemasonry ,
who  was  initiated  in  a  continental  Lodge.

The  vocabulary  of  the  Table  Lodge  as
used  at  French  Masonic  banquets  is  as  fol¬
lows:


Table-cloth

Napkins

Table

Dishes

Plates

Spoons

Knives

Forks

Bottles

Glasses

Lights

Snuffers

Chairs

Meals

Bread

Red  wine

White  wine

Water

Beer

Brandy,  or  liqueurs

Coffee
Salt
Pepper
To  eat
To  drink
To  carve


flags.

tracing-board,
great  plates,
tiles,
trowels,
swords,
pickaxes,
casks,
cannons,
stars,
pincers,
stalls,
materials,
rough  ashlar,
strong  red  powder,
strong  white  pow¬
der.

weak  powder,
yellow  powder,
fulminating  pow¬
der.

black  powder,
white  sand,
cement,
to  masticate,
to  fire,
to  hew.


they  call  standard.


<<

«

M

U

U

a

a


a

a


Tablets  of  Hiram  Abif.  Among
the  traditions  of  the  Order  there  is  a  legend
referring  to  the  tablets  used  by  Hiram  Abif
as  a  Trestle-Board  on  which  to  lay  down
his  designs.  This  legend,  of  course,  can
lay  no  claim  to  authenticity,  but  is  intended
simply  as  a  symbol  inculcating  the  duty  of
every  man  to  work  in  the  daily  labor  of  life
after  a  design  that  will  construct  in  his
body  a  spiritual  temple.  See  Hiram  Abif.

Taciturnity.  In  the  earliest  cate-


788


TACTICS


TALISMAN


Chisms  of  the  last  century  it  is  said  that
“  the  three  particular  points  that  pertain  to
a  Mason  are  Fraternity,  Fidelity,  and  Taci¬
turnity,”  and  that  they  “represent  Love,
Relief,  and  Truth  among  all  Right  Ma¬
sons.”  The  symbol  is  now  obsolete.

Tactics.  The  importance  that  has  in
the  last  few  years  been  given  to  the  mili¬
tary  element  in  the  Order  of  Masonic
Knights  Templars  has  made  it  necessary
that  special  Manuals  should  be  prepared
for  the  instruction  of  Knights  in  the  ele¬
mentary  principles  of  military  movements.
The  most  popular  works  of  this  kind  are
1.  Knights  lemplars’  Tactics  and  Drill  for
the  use  of  Commanderies,  and  the  Burial  Ser¬
vice  of  the  Orders  of  Masonic  Knighthood.
Prepared  by  Sir  Orrin  Welsh,  Past  Grand
Commander ,  State  of  New  York  ;  2.  Knights
Templars?  Tactics  and  Drill,  with  the  Working,
Text,  and  Burial  Service  of  the  Orders  of
Knighthood,  as  adopted  by  the  Grand  Com-
mandery  of  the  State  of  Michigan.  By  Ellery
Irving  Garfield,  E.  G.  C.  G.  Grand  Com-
viandery  of  Michigan;  and  3.  Tactics  for
Knights  Templars,  and  Appendant  Orders.
Prepared  by  E.  Sir  Knight  George  Wingate
Chase,  of  Massachusetts.  These  works  con¬
tain  the  necessary  instructions  in  the
“school  of  the  knight,”  or  the  proper
method  of  marching,  halting,  saluting,
handling  the  sword,  etc.,  and  the  “  school
of  the  commandery,”  or  directions  for
properly  performing  the  evolutions  on  a
public  parade.  Books  of  this  kind  have
now  become  as  necessary  and  as  common
to  the  Knight  Templar  as  Monitors  are  to
the  Master  Mason.

Talisman.  From  the  Hebrew  tselem
and  the  Chaldaic  tsalma,  an  image  or  idol.
A  talisman  signifies  an  implement  or  in¬
strument,  either  of  wood,  or  metal,  or  some
precious  stone,  or  even  parchment,  of  various
forms,  such  as  a  triangle,  a  cross,  a  circle,
and  sometimes  a  human  head  or  human
figure,  generally  inscribed  with  characters
and  constructed  with  mystical  rites  and  cere¬
monies.  The  talisman  thus  constructed
was  supposed  by  the  ancients,  and  even
in  the  Middle  Ages,  to  be  invested  with
supernatural  powers  and  a  capacity  for  pro¬
tecting  its  wearer  or  possessor  from  evil  in¬
fluences,  and  for  securing  to  him  good  for¬
tune  and  success  in  his  undertakings.

The  word  amulet,  from  the  Latin  verb
amolior,  to  baffle  or  do  away  with,  though
sometimes  confounded  with  the  talisman,
has  a  less  general  signification.  For  while
the  talisman  served  both  to  procure  good
and  to  avert  evil,  the  powers  of  the  amulet
were  entirely  of  a  protective  nature.  Fre-

Siuently,  however,  the  two  words  are  indif-
erently  used.

v,  The  use  of  talismans  was  introduced  in


the  Middle  Ages  from  the  Gnostics.  Of
the  Gnostic  talismans  none  were  more  fre-
uent  than  those  which  were  inscribed  with
ivine  names.  Of  these  the  most  common
were  IAO  and  SABAO,  although  we  find
also  the  Tetragrammaton,  and  Elohim,
Elohi,  Adonai,  and  other  Hebrew  appella¬
tions  of  the  deity.  Sometimes  the  talis¬
man  contained,  not  one  of  the  names  of
God,  but  that  of  some  mystical  person,
or  the  expression  of  some  mystical  idea.
Thus,  on  some  of  the  Gnostic  talismanic
gems,  we  find  the  names  of  the  three  mythi¬
cal  kings  of  Cologne,  or  the  sacred  Abrax¬
as.  The  orthodox  Christians  of  the  early
days  of  the  church  were  necessarily  influ¬
enced,  by  the  popular  belief  in  talismans,  to
adopt  many  of  them  ;  although,  of  course,
they  sought  to  divest  them  of  their  magical
signification,  and  to  use  them  simply  as  sym¬
bols.  Hence  we  find  among  these  Chris¬
tians  the  Constantinian  monogram,  com¬
posed  of  the  letters  X  and  P,  or  the  vesica
piscis,  as  a  symbol  of  Christ,  and  the  image
of  a  little  fish  as  a  token  of  Christian  recog¬
nition,  and  the  anchor  as  a  mark  of  Chris¬
tian  hope.

Many  of  the  symbols  and  symbolic  ex¬
pressions  which  were  in  use  by  the  alche¬
mists,  the  astrologers,  and  by  the  Rosicru-
cians,  are  to  be  traced  to  the  Gnostic  talis¬
mans.  The  talisman  was,  it  is  true,  con¬
verted  from  an  instrument  of  incantation
into  a  symbol ;  but  the  symbol  was  accom¬
panied  with  a  mystical  signification  which
gave  it  a  sacred  character.

It  has  been  said  that  in  the  Gnostic  tal¬
ismans  the  most  important  element  wa3
some  one  or  more  of  the  sacred  names  of
God,  derived  either  from  the  Hebrews,  the
Arabians,  or  from  their  own  abstruse  phi¬
losophy  ;  sometimes  even  in  the  same  talis¬
man  from  all  these  sources  combined.  Thus
there  is  a  Gnostic  talisman,  said  by  Mr.
King  to  be  still  current  in  Germany  as  an
amulet  against  plague.  It  consists  of  a  silver
plate,  on  which  are  inscribed  various  names
of  God  surrounding  a  magic  square,  whose
figures  computed  every  way  make  the  num¬
ber  34.


*ELOHIM  *  ELOHI*


4  .  14  .  15  .  1  .  *


*

1— 1

c

'A

9  .

7  .

6  .

12

w

H

*  <

o

0

<

5  .

11  .

10  .

8

O

.  «
w

♦

16  .

2  .

3  .

13

.  *

*ROCYEL  *  10SIPHIEL*


TALISMAN


TALMUD


789


In  this  Gnostic  talisman,  we  will  observe
the  presence  not  only  of  sacred  names,  but
also  of  mystical.  And  it  is  to  the  influence
of  these  talismanic  forms,  developed  in  the
symbols  of  the  secret  societies  of  the  Mid¬
dle  Ages,  and  even  in  the  architectural  dec¬
orations  of  the  builders  of  the  same  period,
such  as  the  triangle,  the  pentalpha,  the
double  triangle,  etc.,  that  we  are  to  attri¬
bute  the  prevalence  of  sacred  names  and
sacred  numbers  in  the  symbolic  system  of
Freemasonry.

We  do  not  need  a  better  instance  of  this
transmutation  of  Gnostic  talismans  into
Masonic  symbols,  by  a  gradual  transmis¬
sion  through  alchemy,  Rosicrucianism,  and
mediaeval  architecture,  than  a  plate  to  be
found  in  the  Azoth  Philosophorum  of  Basil
Valentine,  the  Hermetic  philosopher,  who
flourished  in  the  seventeenth  century.


This  plate,  which  is  hermetic  in  its  de¬
sign,  but  is  full  of  Masonic  symbolism,
represents  a  winged  globe  inscribed  with  a
triangle  within  a  square,  and  on  it  reposes  a
dragon.  On  the  latter  stands  a  human  fig¬
ure  of  two  hands  and  two  heads,  surrounded
by  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  five  stars  repre¬
senting  the  seven  planets.  One  of  the
heads  is  that  of  a  male,  the  other  of  a  fe¬
male.  The  hand  attached  to  the  male  part
of  the  figure  holds  a  compass,  that  to  the
female,  a  square.  The  square  and  compass
thus  distributed  seem  to  me  to  indicate  that
originally  a  phallic  meaning  was  attached
to  these  symbols  as  there  was  to  the  point
within  the  circle,  which  in  this  plate  also
appears  in  the  centre  of  the  globe.  The
compass  held  by  the  male  figure  would


represent  the  male  generative  principle,  and
the  square  held  by  the  female,  the  female
productive  principle.  The  subsequent  in¬
terpretation  given  to  the  combined  square
and  compass  was  the  transmutation  from
the  hermetic  talisman  to  the  Masonic  sym¬
bol.

Talmud.  Hebrew,  noSn,  signifying
doctrine.  The  Jews  say  that  Moses  received
on  Mount  Sinai  not  only  the  written  law
which  is  contained  in  the  Pentateuch,  but
an  oral  law,  which  was  first  communicated
by  him  to  Aaron,  then  by  them  to  the  sev¬
enty  elders,  and  finally  by  these  to  the  peo¬
ple,  and  thus  transmitted,  by  memory,  from
generation  to  generation.  This  oral  law
was  never  committed  to  writing  until  about
the  beginning  of  the  third  century,  when
Rabbi  Jehuda  the  Holy,  finding  that  there
was  a  possibility  of  its  being  lost,  from  the
decrease  of  students  of  the  law,  collected  all
the  traditionary  laws  into  one  book,  which
is  called  the  Mishna,  a  word  signifying
repetition ,  because  it  is,  as  it  were,  a  repeti¬
tion  of  the  written  law.

The  Mishna  was  at  once  received  with
great  veneration,  and  many  wise  men
among  the  Jews  devoted  themselves  to  its
study.

Towards  the  end  of  the  fourth  century,
these  opinions  were  collected  into  a  book
of  commentaries,  called  the  Gemara,  by  the
school  at  Tiberias.  This  work  has  been
falsely  attributed  to  Rabbi  Jochanan  ;  but
he  died  in  279,  a  hundred  years  before  its
composition.  The  Mishna  and  its  com¬
mentary,  the  Gemara,  are,  in  their  collected
form,  called  the  Talmud.

The  Jews  in  Chaldea,  not  being  satisfied
with  the  interpretations  in  this  work,  com¬
posed  others,  which  were  collected  together
by  Rabbi  Ashe  into  another  Gemara.  The
former  work  has  since  been  known  as  the
Jerusalem  Talmud,  and  that  of  R.  Ashe  as
the  Babylonian  Talmud,  from  the  places  in
which  they  were  respectively  compiled.
In  both  works  the  Mishna  or  law  is  the
same;  it  is  only  the  Gemara  or  commen¬
tary  that  is  different.

The  Jewish  scholars  place  so  high  a
value  on  the  Talmud  as  to  compare  the
Bible  to  water,  the  Mishna  to  wine,  and  the
Gemara  to  spiced  wine ;  or  the  first  to  salt,  s
the  second  to  pepper,  and  third  to  spices.
For  a  long  time  after  its  composition  it
seemed  to  absorb  all  the  powers  of  the
Jewish  intellect,  and  the  labors  of  Hebrew
writers  were  confined  to  treatises  and  spec¬
ulations  on  Talmudical  opinions.

The  Mishna  is  divided  into  six  divisions
called  Sederim,  whose  subjects  are:  1.  The
productions  of  the  earth ;  2.  Festivals ;  3.
The  rights  and  duties  of  women ;  4.  Dam¬
ages  and  injuries;  5.  Sacrifices;  6.  Purifi-


790


TAMARISK


TATNAI


cations.  Each  of  these  Sederim  is  again
divided  into  Massicoth,  or  treatises,  of  which
there  are  altogether  sixty-three.

The  Gemara,  which  differs  in  the  Jerusa¬
lem  and  Babylonian  redactions,  consists  of
commentarieson  these  Massicoth,  ortreatises.

Of  the  Talmud,  Lightfoot  has  said  that
the  matters  it  contains  “  do  everywhere
abound  with  trifles  in  that  manner,  as
though  they  had  no  mind  to  be  read;  with
obscurities  and  difficulties,  as  though  they
had  no  mind  to  be  understood ;  so  that  the
reader  has  need  of  patience  all  along  to  en¬
able  him  to  bear  both  trifling  in  sense  and
roughness  in  expression.”  Stehelin  concurs
in  a  similar  opinion;  but  Steinschneider,  as
learned  a  Hebraist  as  either,  has  expressed
a  more  favorable  judgment.

Although  the  Talmud  does  indeed  con¬
tain  many  passages  whose  conceits  are  pue¬
rile,  it  is,  nevertheless,  extremely  service¬
able  as  an  elaborate  compendium  of  Jewish
customs,  and  has  therefore  been  much  used
in  the  criticism  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa¬
ments.  It  furnishes  also  many  curious  il¬
lustrations  of  the  Masonic  system ;  and
several  of  the  traditions  and  legends,  espe¬
cially  of  the  higher  degrees,  are  either  found
in  or  corroborated  by  the  Talmud.  The
treatise  entitled  Middoth,  for  instance,  gives
us  the  best  description  extant  of  the  Temple
of  Solomon.

Tamarisk.  The  sacred  tree  of  the
Osirian  mysteries,  classically  called  the
Erica,  which  see.

Tannehill,  Wilkins.  Born  in  Ten¬
nessee,  in  1787.  He  was  one  of  the  founders,
in  1813,  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee,
and  was  for  seven  years  Grand  Master  of
that  body.  He  was  also  a  contributor  to
the  literature  of  Masonry,  having  published
in  1845  a  Master  Mason’s  Manual;  which
was,  however,  little  more  than  a  compila¬
tion  from  the  preceding  labors  of  Preston
and  Webb.  In  1847,  he  commenced  the
publication  of  a  Masonic  periodical  under
the  title  of  the  Portfolio.  This  was  a  work
of  considerable  merit,  but  he  was  compelled
to  discontinue  it  in  1850,  in  consequence
of  an  attack  of  amaurosis.  One  who  knew
him  well,  has  paid  this  just  tribute  to  his
character:  “Simple  in  feeling  as  a  child,
with  a  heart  warm  and  tender  to  the  in¬
firmities  of  his  brethren,  generous  even  to
a  fault,  he  passed  through  the  temptations
and  trying  scenes  of  an  eventful  life  with¬
out  a  soil  upon  the  purity  of  his  garments.”
He  died  June  2,  1858,  aged  seventy-one
years.

Tapis.  The  name  given  in  German
Lodges  to  the  carpet  or  floor-cloth  on
which  formerly  the  emblems  of  Masonry
were  drawn  in  chalk.  It  is  also  sometimes
called  the  Teppich.


Tarsel.  In  the  earliest  catechisms  of
the  eighteenth  century,  it  is  said  that  the
furniture  of  a  Lodge  consists  of  a  “  Mosaic
Pavement,  Blazing  Star,  and  Indented
Tarsel.”  In  more  modern  catechisms,  the
expression  is  “  indented  tessel,”  which  is
incorrectly  defined  to  mean  a  “  tessellated
border.”  Indented  Tarsel  is  evidently  a  cor¬
ruption  of  indented  tassel ;  for  a  definition
of  which  see  Tessellated  Border.

Tarsel-Board.  We  meet  with  this
expression  in  some  of  the  old  catechisms  as
a  corruption  of  Trestle-Board.

Tarsliatlia.  Used  in  the  degree  of
Knight  of  the  East  in  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Kite,  according  to  the
modern  ritual  of  the  Southern  Jurisdiction
of  the  United  States,  for  Tirshatha,  and  ap¬
plied  to  the  presiding  officer  of  a  Council
of  Princes  of  Jerusalem.  See  Tirshatha.

Tassels.  In  the  English  and  French
tracing-boards  of  the  first  degree,  there  are
four  tassels,  one  at  each  angle,  which  are  at¬
tached  to  a  cord  that  surrounds  a  tracing-
board,  and  which  constitutes  the  true  tessella¬
ted  border.  These  four  cords  are  described  as
referring  to  the  four  principal  points,  the
guttural,  pectoral,  manual,  and  pedal,  and
through  them  to  the  four  cardinal  virtues,
temperance,  fortitude,  prudence,  and  jus¬
tice.  See  Tessellated  Border.

Tasting  and  Smelling.  Of  the
five  senses,  hearing,  seeing,  and  feeling
only  are  deemed  essential  to  Masons.  Tast¬
ing  and  smelling  are  therefore  not  referred
to  in  the  ritual,  except  as  making  up  the
sacred  number  five.  Preston  says:  “Smell¬
ing  and  Tasting  are  inseparably  connected  ;
and  it  is  by  the  unnatural  kind  of  life  which
men  commonly  lead  in  society  that  these
senses  are  rendered  less  fit  to  perform  their
natural  duties.”

Tatuai  and  Skethar-Boznai.

Tatnai  was  a  Persian  satrap  of  the  province
west  of  the  Euphrates  in  the  time  of  Da¬
rius  and  Zerubbabel;  Shethar-Boznai  was
an  officer  under  his  command.  The  two
united  wTith  the  Apharsachites  in  trying  to
obstruct  the  building  of  the  second  Temple,
and  in  writing  a  letter  to  Darius,  of  which
a  copy  is  preserved  in  Ezra,  (ch.  v.)  In
this  letter  they  reported  that  “  the  house
of  the  great  God  ”  in  Judea  was  being  builded
with  great  stones,  and  that  the  work  was
going  on  fast,  on  the  alleged  authority  of  a
decree  from  Cyrus.  They  requested  that
search  might  be  made  in  the  rolls’  court
whether  such  a  decree  was  ever  given,  and
asked  for  the  king’s  pleasure  in  the  matter.
The  decree  was  found  at  Ecbatana,  and  a
letter  was  sent  to  Tatnai  and  Shethar-
Boznai  from  Darius,  ordering  them  no
more  to  obstruct,  but  on  the  contrary,  to
aid  the  elders  of  the  Jews  in  rebuilding


TAU


TEARS


791


the  Temple  by  supplying  them  both  with
money  and  with  beasts,  corn,  salt,  wine,
and  oil  for  the  sacrifices.  Shethar-Boznai,
after  the  receipt  of  this  decree,  offered  no
further  obstruction  to  the  Jews.  Their
names  have  been  hence  introduced  into
some  of  the  high  degrees  in  Masonry.

Tau.  The  last  letter  of  the  Hebrew
alphabet  is  called  tau,  and  it  has  the  power
of  the  Roman  T.  In  its  present  form  J“|,
in  the  square  character  now  in  use,  it  has
no  resemblance  to  a  cross ;  but  in  the  an¬
cient  Hebrew  alphabet,  its  figure  X,  or  -f-,
was  that  of  a  cross.  Hence,  when  it  is
said,  in  the  vision  of  Ezekiel,  (ix.  4,)  “Go
through  the  midst  of  the  city,  and  set  a
mark  (in  the  original,  in,  tau ,)  upon  the
foreheads  of  the  men  that  sigh  and  that
cry  for  all  the  abominations  that  be  done
in  the  midst  thereof,” — which  mark  was  to
distinguish  them  as  persons  to  be  saved,  on
account  of  their  sorrow  for  sin,  from  those
who,  as  idolaters,  were  to  be  slain, — the  evi¬
dent  allusion  is  to  a  cross.  The  form  of
this  cross  was  X  or  +,  a  form  familiar  to
the  people  of  that  day.  But  as  the  Greek
letter  tau  subsequently  assumed  the  form
which  is  still  preserved  in  the  Roman  T,
the  tau  or  tau  cross  was  made  also  to  as¬
sume  the  same  form ;  so  that  the  mark  tau  is
now  universally  recognized  in  this  form,  T.
This  tau,  tau  cross,  or  tau  mark,  was  of  very
universal  use  as  a  sacred  symbol  among  the
ancients.  From  the  passage  of  Ezekiel  just
cited,  it  is  evident  that  the  Hebrews  recog¬
nized  it  as  a  sign  of  salvation ;  according  to
the  Talmudists,  the  symbol  was  much  older
than  the  time  of  Ezekiel,  for  they  say  that
when  Moses  anointed  Aaron  as  the  high
priest,  he  marked  his  forehead  with  this
sign.  Speaking  of  the  use  of  the  tau  cross
in  the  Old  Testament,  Didron  says  ( Christ .
Iconog.,  p.  370,)  that  “it  saved  the  youth¬
ful  Isaac  from  death,  redeemed  from  de¬
struction  an  entire  people  whose  houses
were  marked  with  that  symbol,  healed  the
envenomed  bites  of  those  who  looked  at
the  serpent  raised  in  the  form  of  a  ‘  tau  ’
upon  a  pole,  and  called  back  the  soul
into  the  dead  body  of  the  son  of  that
poor  widow  who  had  given  bread  to  the
prophet.”

Hence,  in  Christian  iconography,  the
tau  cross,  or  cross  of  the  Old  Testament,  is
called  the  anticipatory  cross,  because  it  an¬
ticipated  the  four-limbed  cross  of  the  pas¬
sion,  and  the  typical  cross  because  it  was
its  type.  It  is  also  called  the  cross  of  St.
Anthony,  because  on  it  that  saint  is  sup¬
posed  to  have  suffered  martyrdom.

Maurice,  in  his  Indian  Antiquities,  refers
to  it  the  tiluk,  or  mark  worn  by  the  dev¬
otees  of  Brahma.

Davies,  in  his  Celtic  Researches,  says  that


the  “  Gallicum  tau,”  or  the  tau  of  the  an¬
cient  Gauls,  was  among  the  Druids  a  sym¬
bol  of  their  supreme  god,  or  Jupiter.

Among  the  Egyptians,  the  tau,  with  an
oval  ring  or  handle,  became  the  crux  an-
sata,  and  was  used  by  them  as  the  con¬
stant  symbol  of  life.  Dr.  Clarke  says
( Travels ,  v.  311,)  that  the  tau  cross  was
a  monogram  of  Thoth,  “  the  symbolical  or
mystical  name  of  hidden  wisdom  among
the  ancient  Egyptians.”

Dupuy,  in  his  History  of  the  Templars,
says  that  the  tau  was  a  Templar  emblem.
Von  Hammer,  who  lets  no  opportunity  of
maligning  the  Order  escape  him,  adduces
this  as  a  proof  of  the  idolatrous  tendencies
of  the  Knights.  He  explains  the  tau,  which,
he  says,  was  inscribed  on  the  forehead  of
the  Baphomet  or  Templar  idol,  as  a  figure
of  the  phallus;  whence  he  comes  to  the  con¬
clusion  that  the  Knights  Templars  were
addicted  to  the  obscene  worship  of  that
symbol.  It  is,  however,  entirely  doubtful,
notwithstanding  the  authority  of  Dupuy,
whether  the  tau  was  a  symbol  of  the  Tem¬
plars.  But  if  it  was,  its  origin  is  rather  to
be  looked  for  in  the  supposed  Hebrew  idea
as  a  symbol  of  preservation.

It  is  in  this  sense,  as  a  symbol  of  salva¬
tion  from  death  and  of  eternal  life,  that  it
has  been  adopted  into  the  Masonic  system,
and  presents  itself,  especially  under  its  tri¬
ple  combination,  as  a  badge  of  Royal  Arch
Masonry.  See  Triple  Tau.

Tau  Cross.  A  cross  of  three  limbs,
so  called  because  it  presents  the  figure  of
the  Greek  letter  T-  See  Tau.

Team.  Royal  Arch  Masons  apply  this
word  rather  inelegantly  to  designate  the
three  candidates  upon  whom  the  degree  is
conferred  at  the  same  time.  The  phrase
is,  I  think,  exclusively  confined  to  this
country.

Tears.  In  the  Master’s  degree  in  some
of  the  continental  Rites,  and  in  all  the  high
degrees  where  the  legend  of  the
degree  and  the  ceremony  of  re¬
ception  are  intended  to  express
grief,  the  hangings  of  the  Lodge
are  black  strewn  with  tears.  The
figures  representing  tears  are  in
the  form  depicted  in  the  annexed
cut.  The  symbolism  is  borrowed
from  the  science  of  heraldry,
where  these  figures  are  called
guttes,  and  are  defined  to  be
“drops  of  anything  that  is  by  nature  liquid
or  liquefied  by  art.”  The  heralds  have
six  of  these  charges,  viz.,  yellow,  or  drops
of  liquid  gold ;  white,  or  drops  of  liquid
silver;  red,  or  drops  of  blood;  blue,  or
drops  of  tears ;  black,  or  drops  of  pitch ;
and  green,  or  drops  of  oil.  In  funeral
hatchments,  a  black  velvet  cloth,  sprinkled


792


TEMPELORDEN


TEMPLAR


with  these  “  drops  of  tears,”  is  placed  in
front  of  the  house  of  a  deceased  nobleman
and  thrown  over  his  bier;  but  there,  as  in
Masonry,  the  guttes  de  larmes ,  or  drops  of
tears,  are  not  painted  blue,  but  white.

Tempelorden  or  Tempelher-
renorden.  The  titleln  German  of  the
Order  of  Knights  Templars.

Temperance.  One  of  the  four  car¬
dinal  virtues,  the  practice  of  which  is  in¬
culcated  in  the  first  degree.  The  Mason
who  properly  appreciates  the  secrets  which
he  has  solemnly  promised  never  to  reveal,
will  not,  by  yielding  to  the  unrestrained
call  of  appetite,  permit  reason  and  judg¬
ment  to  lose  their  seats,  and  subject  him¬
self,  by  the  indulgence  in  habits  of  excess,
to  discover  that  which  should  be  concealed,
and  thus  merit  and  receive  the  scorn  and
detestation  of  his  brethren.  And  lest  any
brother  should  forget  the  danger  to  which
he  is  exposed  in  the  unguarded  hours  of
dissipation,  the  virtue  of  temperance  is
wdsely  impressed  upon  his  memory,  by  its
reference  to  one  of  the  most  solemn  por¬
tions  of  the  ceremony  of  initiation.  Some
Masons,  very  properly  condemning  the  vice
of  intemperance  and  abhorring  its  effects,
have  been  unwisely  led  to  confound  tem¬
perance  with  total  abstinence  in  a  Masonic
application,  and  resolutions  have  some¬
times  been  proposed  in  Grand  Lodges
which  declare  the  use  of  stimulating  liquors
in  any  quantity  a  Masonic  offence.  But
the  law  of  Masonry  authorizes  no  such
regulation.  It  leaves  to  every  man  the
indulgence  of  his  own  tastes  within  due
limits,  and  demands  not  abstinence,  but
only  moderation  and  temperance,  in  any¬
thing  not  actually  wrong.

Templar.  See  Knight  Templar.

Teanplarius.  The  Latin  title  of  a
Knight  Templar.  Constantly  used  in  the
Middle  Ages.

Templar  Land.  The  Order  of
Knights  Templars  was  dissolved  in  Eng¬
land,  by  an  act  of  Parliament,  in  the  seven¬
teenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Edward  II.,  and
their  possessions  transferred  to  the  Order
of  St,  John  of  Jerusalem,  or  Knights  Hos¬
pitallers.  Subsequently,  in  the  thirty-
second  year  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.,
their  possessions  were  transferred  to  the
king.  One  of  the  privileges  possessed  by
the  English  Templars  was  that  their  lands
should  be  free  of  tithes;  and  these  privi¬
leges  still  adhere  to  these  lands,  so  that  a
farm  being  what  is  termed  “Templar
land,”  is  still  exempt  from  the  imposition
of  tithes,  if  it  is  occupied  by  the  owner;
an  exemption  which  ceases  when  the  farm
is  worked  under  a  lease.

Templar  Origin  of  Masonry.

The  theory  that  Masonry  originated  in  the


Holy  Land  during  the  Crusades,  and  was
instituted  by  the  Knights  Templars,  was
first  advanced  by  the  Chevalier  Ramsay,
for  the  purpose,  it  is  supposed,  of  giving
an  aristocratic  character  to  the  association.
It  was  subsequently  adopted  by  the  College
of  Clermont,  and  was  accepted  by  the
Baron  von  Hund  as  the  basis  upon  which
he  erected  his  Rite  of  Strict  Observance.
The  legend  of  the  Clermont  College  is
thus  detailed  by  M.  Berage  in  his  work
entitled  Les  Plus  Secrets  Mysteres  des  Hauls
Grades,  (iii.  194.)  “  The  Order  of  Masonry

was  instituted,  by  Godfrey  de  Bouillon,  in
Palestine  in  1330,  after  the  defeat  of  the
Christian  armies,  and  was  communicated
only  to  a  few  of  the  French  Masons,  some¬
time  afterwards,  as  a  reward  for  the  services
wrhich  they  had  rendered  to  the  English
and  Scottish  Knights.  From  these  latter
true  Masonry  is  derived.  Their  Mother
Lodge  is  situated  on  the  mountain  of  Here-
dom,  where  the  first  Lodge  in  Europe  was
held,  which  still  exists  in  all  its  splendor.
The  Council  General  is  always  held  there,
and  it  is  the  seat  of  the  Sovereign  Grand
Master  for  the  time  being.  This  mountain
is  situated  between  the  west  and  the  north
of  Scotland,  sixty  miles  from  Edinburgh.

“  There  are  other  secrets  in  Masonry  which
were  never  known  among  the  French,  and
which  have  no  relation  to  the  Apprentice,
Fellow  Craft,  and  Master —  degrees  which
were  constructed  for  the  general  class
of  Masons.  The  high  degrees,  which  de¬
veloped  the  true  design  of  Masonry  and
its  true  secrets,  have  never  been  known  to
them.

“  The  Saracens  having  obtained  possession
of  the  holy  places  in  Palestine,  where  all
the  mysteries  of  the  Order  were  practised,
made  use  of  them  for  the  most  profane  pur¬
poses.  The  Christians 'then  leagued  to¬
gether  to  conquer  this  beautiful  country,
and  to  drive  these  barbarians  from  the  land.
They  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  footing  on
these  shores  under  the  protection  of  the
numerous  armies  of  Crusaders  which  had
been  sent  there  by  the  Christian  princes.
The  losses  which  they  subsequently  expe¬
rienced  put  an  end  to  the  Christian  power,
and  the  Crusaders  who  remained  were  sub¬
jected  to  the  persecutions  of  the  Saracens,
who  massacred  all  who  publicly  proclaimed
the  Christian  faith.  This  induced  Godfrey
de  Bouillon,  towards  the  end  of  the  third
century,  to  conceal  the  mysteries  of  religion
under  the  veil  of  figures,  emblems,  and
allegories.

“Hence  the  Christians  selected  the  Tem¬
ple  of  Solomon  because  it  has  so  close  a
relation  to  the  Christian  Church,  of  which
its  holiness  and  its  magnificence  make  it
the  true  symbol.  So  the  Christians  con-


TEMPLARS


TEMPLARS


793


cealed  the  mystery  of  the  building  up  of
the  Church  under  that  of  the  coustruction
of  the  Temple,  and  gave  themselves  the
name  of  Masons,  Architects  or  Builders,
because  they  were  occupied  in  building  the
faith.  They  assembled  under  the  pretext
of  making  plans  of  architecture  to  practise
the  rites  of  their  religion,  with  all  the  em¬
blems  and  allegories  that  Masonry  could
furnish,  and  thus  protect  themselves  from
the  cruelty  of  the  Saracens.

“As  the  mysteries  of  Masonry  were  in
their  principles,  and  still  are  only  those  of
the  Christian  religion,  they  were  extremely
scrupulous  to  confide  this  important  secret
only  to  those  whose  discretion  had  been
tried,  and  who  had  been  found  worthy.  For
this  purpose  they  fabricated  degrees  as  a
test  of  those  to  whom  they  wished  to  con¬
fide  it,  and  they  gave  them  at  first  only  the
symbolic  secret  of  Hiram,  on  which  all  the
mystery  of  Blue  Masonry  is  founded,  and
which  is,  in  fact,  the  only  secret  of  that
Order  which  has  no  relation  to  true  Ma¬
sonry.  They  explained  nothing  else  to
them  as  they  were  afraid  of  being  betrayed,
and  they  conferred  these  degrees  as  a  pro¬
per  means  of  recognizing  each  other,  sur¬
rounded  as  they  were  by  barbarians.  To
succeed  more  effectually  in  this,  they  made
use  of  different  signs  and  words  for  each
degree,  so  as  not  only  to  distinguish  them¬
selves  from  the  profane  Saracens,  but  to  des¬
ignate  the  different  degrees.  These  they
fixed  at  the  number  of  seven,  in  imitation
of  the  Grand  Architect,  who  built  the  Uni¬
verse  in  six  days  and  rested  on  the  seventh  ;
and  also  because  Solomon  was  seven  years
in  constructing  the  Temple,  which  they  had
selected  as  the  figurative  basis  of  Masonry.
Under  the  name  of  Hiram  they  gave  a
false  application  to  the  Masters,  and  devel¬
oped  the  true  secret  of  Masonry  only  to
the  higher  degrees.”

Such  is  the  theory  of  the  Templar  origin
of  Masonry,  which,  mythical  as  it  is,  and
wholly  unsupported  by  the  authority  of
history,  has  exercised  a  vast  influence  in
the  fabrication  of  high  degrees  and  the  in¬
vention  of  continental  Rites.  Indeed,  of
all  the  systems  propounded  during  the
eighteenth  century,  so  fertile  in  the  con¬
struction  of  extravagant  systems,  none  has
layed  so  important  a  part  as  this  in  the
istory  of  Masonry.  Although  the  theory
is  no  longer  maintained,  its  effects  are
everywhere  seen  and  felt.

Templars  of  England.  An  im¬
portant  change  in  the  organization  of  Tem-
plarism  in  England  and  Ireland  took  place
in  1873.  By  it  a  union  took  place  of  the
Grand  Conclave  of  Masonic  Knights  Tem¬
plars  of  England  and  the  Grand  Conclave
of  High  Knights  Templars  of  Ireland  into
4  Z


one  body,  under  the  title  of  the  “Convent
General  of  the  United  Religious  and
Military  Orders  of  the  Temple  and  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem,  Palestine,  Rhodes,  and
Malta.”  The  following  is  a  summary  of
the  statutes  by  which  the  new  Order  is  to
be  governed,  as  given  by  Sir  Knight  W.  J.
B.  McLeod  Moore,  Grand  Prior,  in  his
circular  to  the  Preceptors  of  Canada.

“  1.  The  existing  Grand  Masters  in  the
Empire  are  to  be  termed  Great  Priors,  and
Grand  Conclaves  or  Encampments,  Great
Priories,  under  and  subordinate  to  one
Grand  Master,  as  in  the  early  days  of  the
Order,  and  one  Supreme  Governing  Body,
the  Convent  General.

“  2.  The  term  Great  is  adopted  instead
of  Grand,  the  latter  being  a  French  word ;
and  grand  in  English  is  not  grand  in
French.  Great  is  the  proper  translation
of  ‘  Magnus  ’  and  ‘  Magnus  Supremus.’

“  3.  The  Great  Priories  of  each  nation¬
ality —  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,
with  their  dependencies  in  the  Colonies  —
retain  their  internal  government  and  legis¬
lation,  and  appoint  their  Provincial  Priors,
doing  nothing  inconsistent  with  the  su¬
preme  statutes  of  the  Convent  General.

“4.  The  title  Masonic  is  not  continued;
the  Order  being  purely  Christian,  none  but
Christians  can  be  admitted ;  consequently
it  cannot  be  considered  strictly  as  a  Ma¬
sonic  body:  Masonry,  while  inculcating
the  highest  reverence  for  the  Supreme  Be¬
ing,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  immortality
of  the  soul,  does  not  teach  a  belief  in  one
particular  creed,  or  unbelief  in  any.  The
connection  with  Masonry  is,  however,
strengthened  still  more,  as  a  candidate
must  now  be  two  years  a  Master  Mason,  in
addition  to  his  qualification  as  a  Royal
Arch  Mason.

“5.  The  titles  Eminent  ‘Commander’
and  ‘Encampment’  have  been  discon¬
tinued,  and  the  original  name  ‘Preceptor’
and  ‘  Preceptory  ’  substituted,  as  also  the
titles  ‘Constable’  and  ‘Marshal’  for  ‘First’
and  1  Second  Captains.’  ‘  Encampment  ’  is
a  modern  term,  adopted  probably  when,  as
our  traditions  inform  us,  ‘at  the  suppres¬
sion  of  the  ancient  Military  Order  of  the
Temple,  some  of  their  number  sought  ref¬
uge  and  held  conclaves  in  the  Masonic  So¬
ciety,  being  independent  small  bodies,
without  any  governing  head.’  ‘  Prior  ’  is
the  correct  and  original  title  for  the  head
of  a  langue  or  nationality,  and  ‘  Preceptor’
for  the  subordinate  bodies.  The  Precep-
tories  were  the  ancient  ‘Houses’  of  the
Templar  Order;  ‘Commander’  and  ‘Com-
manderies  ’  was  the  title  used  by  the  Order
of  St.  John,  commonly  known  as  Knights
of  Malta.

“  6.  The  title  by  which  the  Order  is  now


794


TEMPLARS


TEMPLARS


known  is  that  of  ‘The  United  Religious
and  Military  Orders  of  the  Temple  and  of
St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  Palestine,  Rhodes,
and  Malta.’  The  Order  of  the  Temple
originally  had  no  connection  with  that  of
Malta  or  Order  of  St.  John ;  but  the  com¬
bined  title  appears  to  have  been  adopted  in
commemoration  of  the  union  which  took
place  in  Scotland  with  ‘The  Temple  and
Hospital  of  St.  John,’  when  their  lands
were  in  common,  at  the  time  of  the  Refor¬
mation.  But  our  Order  of  ‘St.  John  of
Jerusalem,  Palestine,  Rhodes,  and  Malta,’
has  no  connection  with  the  present  Knights
of  Malta  in  the  Papal  States,  or  of  the  Pro¬
testant  branches  of  the  Order,  the  lineal
successors  of  the  ancient  Knights  of  St.
John,  the  sixth  or  English  langue  of  which
is  still  in  existence,  and  presided  over,  in
London,  by  His  Grace  the  Duke  of  Man¬
chester.  The  Order,  when  it  occupied  the
Island  of  Malta  as  a  sovereign  body,  was
totally  unconnected  with  Freemasonry.

“7.  Honorary  past  rank  is  abolished,
substituting  the  chivalric  dignities  of
‘  Grand  Crosses  ’  and  ‘  Commanders,’  limited
in  number,  and  confined  to  Preceptors.
These  honors  to  be  conferred  by  His  Royal
Highness  the  Grand  Master,  the  Fountain
of  Grace  and  Dignity;  and  it  is  contem¬
plated  to  create  an  Order  of  Merit,  to  be
conferred  in  like  manner,  as  a  reward  to
Knights  who  have  served  the  Order.

“8.  A  Preceptor  holds  a  degree  as  well
as  rank,  and  will  always  retain  his  rank
and  privileges  as  long  as  he  belongs  to  a
Preceptory.

“  9.  The  abolition  of  honorary  past  rank
is  not  retrospective,  as  their  rank  and  priv¬
ileges  are  reserved  to  all  those  who  now
enjoy  them.

“  10.  The  number  of  officers  .entitled  to
precedence  has  been  reduced  to  seven;  but
others  may  be  appointed  at  discretion,  who
do  not,  however,  enjoy  any  precedence.

“  11.  Equerries,  or  serving  brethren,  are
not  to  receive  the  accolade,  or  use  any  but
a  brown  habit,  and  shall  not  wear  any  in¬
signia  or  jewel:  they  are  to  be  addressed  as
‘Frater,’  not  Sir  Knight.  In  the  early
days  of  the  Order  they  were  not  entitled
to  the  accolade,  and,  with  the  esquires  and
men-at-arms,  wore  a  dark  habit,  to  distin¬
guish  them  from  the  Knights,  who  wore
white,  to  signify  that  they  were  bound  by
their  vows  to  cast  away  the  works  of  dark¬
ness  and  lead  a  new  life.

“  12.  The  apron  is  altogether  discon¬
tinued,  and  a  few  immaterial  alterations  in
the  insignia  will  be  duly  regulated  and  pro¬
mulgated  :  they  do  not,  however,  affect  the
present,  but  only  apply  to  future,  members
of  the  Order.  The  apron  was  of  recent  in¬
troduction,  tc  accord  with  Masonic  usage :  |


but  reflection  will  at  once  show  that,  as  an
emblem  of  care  and  toil,  it  is  entirely  in¬
appropriate  to  a  Military  Order,  whose
badge  is  the  sword.  A  proposition  to  con¬
fine  the  wearing  of  the  star  to  the  Pre¬
ceptors  was  negatived ;  the  star  and  ribbon
being  in  fact  as  much  a  part  of  the  ritual
as  of  the  insignia  of  the  Order.

“13.  From  the  number  of  instances  of
persons  totally  unfitted  having  obtained
admission  into  the  Order,  the  qualification
of  candidates  has  been  increased.  A  dec¬
laration  is  now  required,  to  be  signed  by
every  candidate,  that  he  is  of  the  lull  age
of  twenty-one  years,  and  in  addition  to
being  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  that  be  is  a
Master  Mason  of  two  years’  standing,  pro¬
fessing  the  doctrines  of  the  Holy  and  Un¬
divided  Trinity,  and  willing  to  submit  to
the  statutes  and  ordinances,  present  and
future,  of  the  Order.”

Templars  of  Scotland.  The  Stat¬
utes  of  the  Grand  Priory  of  the  Temple  of
Scotland  prescribe  for  the  Order  of  Knights
Templars  in  that  kingdom  an  organization
very  different  from  that  which  prevails  in
other  countries.

“The  Religious  and  Military  Order  of
the  Temple”  in  Scotland  consists  of  two
classes:  1.  Novice  and  Esquire;  2.  Knight
Templar.  The  Knights  are  again  divided
into  four  classes:  1.  Knights  created  by
Priories;  2.  Knights  elected  from  the  com¬
panions  on  memorial  to  the  Grand  Master
and  Council,  supported  by  the  recommen¬
dation  of  the  Priories  to  which  they  belong;
3.  Knights  Commanders;  4.  Knights  Grand
Crosses,  to  be  nominated  by  the  Grand
Master.

The  supreme  legislative  authority  of  the
Order  is  the  Chapter  General,  which  con¬
sists  of  the  Grand  Officers,  the  Knights
Grand  Crosses,  and  the  Knights  Com¬
manders.  One  Chapter  is  held  annually,
at  which  the  Grand  Master,  if  present,  acts
as  President.  The  anniversary  of  the  death
of  James  de  Molay,  March  11,  is  selected
as  the  time  of  this  meeting,  at  which  the
Grand  Officers  are  elected.

During  the  intervals  of  the  meetings  of
the  Chapter  General,  the  affairs  of  the
Order,  with  the  exception  of  altering  the
Statutes,  is  intrusted  to  the  Grand  Master’s
Council,  which  consists  of  the  Grand  Offi¬
cers,  the  Grand  Priors  of  Foreign  Langues,
and  the  Knights  Grand  Crosses.

The  Grand  Officers,  with  the  exception
of  the  Past  Grand  Masters,  who  remain  so
for  life,  the  Grand  Master,  who  is  elected
triennially,  and  the  Grand  Aides-de-Camp,
who  are  appointed  by  him  and  removed  at
his  pleasure,  are  elected  annually.  They
are  as  follows :

1  Grand  Master,


TEMPLE


TEMPLE


795


Past  Grand  Masters,

Grand  Seneschal,

Preceptor  and  Grand  Prior  of  Scotland,
Grand  Constable  and  Mareschal,

Grand  Admiral,

Grand  Almoner  or  Hospitaller,

Grand  Chancellor,

Grand  Treasurer,

Grand  Registrar,

Primate  or  Grand  Prelate,

Grand  Provost  or  Governor-General,
Grand  Standard-Bearer  or  Beaucennifer,
Grand  Bearer  of  the  Vexillum  Belli,
Grand  Chamberlain,

Grand  Steward,

Two  Grand  Aides-de-Camp.

A  Grand  Priory  may  be  instituted  by  the
Chapter  General  in  any  nation,  colony,  or
langue,  to  be  placed  under  the  authority
of  a  Grand  Prior,  who  is  elected  for  life,
unless  superseded  by  the  Chapter  General.

A  Priory,  which  is  equivalent  to  our
Commanderies,  consists  of  the  following
officers :

Prior,

Sub-Prior,

Mareschal  or  Master  of  Ceremonies,
Hospitaller  or  Almoner,

Chancellor,

Treasurer,

Secretary,

Chaplain  and  Instructor,

Beaucennifer,  or  Bearer  of  the  Beau-
seant,

Bearer  of  the  Red  Cross  Banner,  or  Vex¬
illum  Belli,

Chamberlain,

Two  Aides-de-Camp.

The  Chapter  General  or  Grand  Priory
may  unite  two  or  more  Priories  into  a  Com-
mandery,  to  be  governed  by  a  Provincial
Commander,  who  is  elected  by  the  Chapter
General.

The  costume  of  the  Knights,  with  the
exception  of  a  few  slight  variations  to  des¬
ignate  difference  of  rank,  is  the  same  as  the
ancient  costume.

Temple.  The  symbolism  of  Specula¬
tive  Masonry  is  so  intimately  connected
with  temple  building  and  temple  worship,
that  some  notice  of  these  edifices  seems  ne¬
cessary.  The  Hebrews  called  a  temple
beth,  which  literally  signifies  a  house  or
dwelling,  and  finds  its  root  in  a  word  which
signifies  “to  remain  or  pass  the  night,”  or
hecal,  which  means  a  palace,  and  comes
from  an  obsolete  word  signifying  “  magni¬
ficent.”  So  that  they  seem  to  have  had
two  ideas  in  reference  to  a  temple.  When
they  called  it  beth  Jehovah,  or  the  “  house
of  Jehovah,”  they  referred  to  the  continued
presence  of  God  in  it;  and  when  they  called
it  hecal  Jehovah,  or  the  “  palace  of  Jehovah,”
they  referred  to  the  splendor  of  the  edifice


which  was  selected  as  his  residence.  The  He¬
brew  idea  was  undoubtedly  borrowed  from
the  Egyptian,  where  the  same  hieroglyphic
l  l  I  signified  both  a  house  and  a  temple.
Thus,  from  an  inscription  at  Philae,  Cham-
pollion  ( Diet.  Egyptienne)  cites  the  sen¬
tence,  “  He  has  made  his  devotions  in  the
house  of  his  mother  Isis.”

The  classical  idea  was  more  abstract  and
philosophical.  The  Latin  word  templum
comes  from  a  root  which  signifies  “  to  cut
off,”  thus  referring  to  any  space,  whether
open  or  occupied  by  a  building,  which  was
cut  off,  or  separated  for  a  sacred  purpose,
from  the  surrounding  profane  ground.
The  word  properly  denoted  a  sacred  enclos¬
ure  where  the  omens  were  observed  by  the
augurs.  Hence  Varro  ( De  Ling.  Lai.,  vi.
81,)  defines  a  temple  to  be  “a  place  for  au¬
guries  and  auspices.”  As  the  same  prac¬
tice  of  worshipping  under  the  sky  in  open
places  prevailed  among  the  northern  na¬
tions,  we  might  deduce  from  these  facts  that
the  temple  of  the  sky  was  the  Aryan  idea,  and
the  temple  of  the  house  the  Semitic.  It  is
true,  that  afterwards,  the  augurs  having  for
their  own  convenience  erected  a  tent  with¬
in  the  enclosure  where  they  made  their  ob¬
servations,  or,  literally,  their  contemplations,
this  in  time  gave  rise  among  the  Greeks
and  the  Romans  to  permanent  edifices  like
those  of  the  Egyptians  and  the  Hebrews.

Masonry  has  derived  its  temple  symbol¬
ism,  as  it  has  almost  all  its  symbolic  ideas,
from  the  Hebrew  type,  and  thus  makes  the
temple  the  symbol  of  a  Lodge.  But  of  the
Roman  temple  worship  it  has  not  been  neg¬
lectful,  and  has  borrowed  from  it  one  of
the  most  significant  and  important  words
in  its  vocabulary.  The  Latin  word  speculor
means  to  observe,  to  look  around.  When
the  augur,  standing  within  the  sacred  pre¬
cincts  of  his  open  temple  on  the  Capitoline
hill,  watched  the  flight  of  birds,  that  from
it  he  might  deduce  his  auspices  of  good  or
bad  fortune,  he  was  said,  speculari,  to  spec¬
ulate.  Hence  the  word  came  at  length  to
denote,  like  contemplate  from  templum,  an
investigation  of  sacred  things,  and  thus  we
got  into  our  technical  language  the  title  of
“Speculative  Masonry,”  as  distinguished
by  its  religious  design  from  Operative  or
Practical  Masonry,  which  is  devoted  to
more  material  objects.  The  Egyptian
Temple  was  the  real  archetype  of  the  Mo¬
saic  tabernacle,  as  that  was  of  the  temple
of  Jerusalem.  The  direction  of  an  Egyp¬
tian  temple  was  usually  from  east  to  west,
the  entrance  being  at  the  east.  It  was  a
quadrangular  building,  much  longer  than
its  width,  and  was  situated  in  the  western
part  of  a  sacred  enclosure.  The  approach
through  this  enclosure  to  the  temple  pro¬
per  was  frequently  by  a  double  row  of


796


TEMPLE


TEMPLE


sphinxes.  In  front  of  the  entrance  were
a  pair  of  tall  obelisks,  which  will  remind
the  reader  of  the  two  pillars  at  the  porch
of  Solomon’s  Temple.  The  temple  was  di¬
vided  into  a  spacious  hall,  the  sanctuary
where  the  great  body  of  the  worshippers
assembled.  Beyond  it,  in  the  western  ex¬
tremity,  was  the  cell  or  sekos,  equivalent  to
the  Jewish  Holy  of  Holies,  into  which  the
priests  only  entered ;  and  in  the  remotest
part,  behind  a  curtain,  appeared  the  image
of  the  god  seated  on  his  shrine,  or  the
sacred  animal  which  represented  him.

Grecian  Temples,  like  the  Egyptian
and  the  Hebrew,  were  placed  within  an
enclosure,  which  was  separated  from  the
rofane  land  around  it,  in  early  times,
y  ropes,  but  afterwards  by  a  wall.  The
temple  was  usually  quadrangular,  although
some  were  circular  in  form.  It  was  divided
into  two  parts,  the  pronanos,  porch  or  ves¬
tibule,  and  the  naos,  or  cell.  In  this  latter
part  the  statue  of  the  god  was  placed,  sur¬
rounded  by  a  balustrade.  In  temples  con¬
nected  with  the  mysteries,  the  cell  was
called  the  adytum,  and  to  it  only  the

1>riests  and  the  initiates  had  access ;  and  we
earn  from  Pausanias  that  various  stories
were  related  of  calamities  that  had  befallen
persons  who  had  unlawfully  ventured  to
cross  the  threshold.  Vitruvius  says  that
the  entrance  of  Greek  temples  was  al¬
ways  towards  the  west;  but  this  statement
is  contradicted  by  the  appearance  of  the
temples  still  partly  existing  in  Attica,
Ionia,  and  Sicily.

Roman  Temples,  after  they  emerged
from  their  primitive  simplicity,  were  con¬
structed  much  upon  the  model  of  the
Grecian.  There  were  the  same  vestibule
and  cells,  or  adytum,  borrowed,  as  with
the  Greeks,  from  the  holy  and  the  most
holy  place  of  the  Egyptians.  Vitruvius
says  that  the  entrance  of  a  Roman  temple
was,  if  possible,  to  the  west,  so  that  the
worshippers,  when  they  offered  prayers  or
sacrifices,  might  look  towards  the  east;  but
this  rule  was  not  always  observed.

It  thus  appears,  notwithstanding  what
Montfaucon  (Antiq.  ii.,  1.  ii.,  ch.  2,)  says  to
the  contrary,  that  the  Egyptian  form  of  a
temple  was  the  type  from  which  other  na¬
tions  borrowed  their  idea.

This  Egyptian  form  of  a  temple  was  bor¬
rowed  by  the  Jews,  and  with  some  modifi¬
cations  adopted  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans,
whence  it  passed  over  into  modern  Europe.
The  idea  of  a  separation  into  a  holy  and  a
most  holy  place  has  everywhere  been  pre¬
served.  The  same  idea  is  maintained  in
the  construction  of  Masonic  Lodges,  which
are  but  imitations,  in  spirit,  of  the  ancient
temples.  But  there  has  been  a  transposi¬
tion  of  parts,  the  most  holy  place,  which


with  the  Egyptians  and  the  Jews  was  in  the
west,  being  placed  in  Lodges  in  the  east.

Temple,  Grand  Commander  of
tile.  ( Grand  Commandeur  du  Temple  )
The  fifty-eighth  degree  of  the  collection  of
the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France.  It  is
the  name  of  the  Knight  Commander  of  the
Temple  of  the  Scottish  Rite.

Temple  of  Ezekiel.  An  ideal  tem¬
ple  seen  by  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  in  the
twenty-fifth  year  of  the  captivity,  while  re¬
siding  in  Babylon.  It  is  supposed  by  Cal-
met,  that  the  description  given  by  the  pro¬
phet  was  that  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon,
which  he  must  have  seen  before  its  destruc¬
tion.  But  an  examination  of  its  admeasure¬
ments  will  show  that  this  could  not  have
been  the  fact,  and  that  the  whole  area  of
Jerusalem  would  not  have  been  sufficient
to  contain  a  building  of  its  magnitude.
Yet,  as  Mr.  Ferguson  observes,  ( Smith
Did.,)  the  description,  notwithstanding  its
ideal  character,  is  curious,  as  showing  what
were  the  aspirations  of  the  Jews  in  that
direction,  and  how  different  they  w’ere  from
those  of  other  nations ;  and  also  because  it
influenced  Herod  to  some  extent  in  his
restoration  of  the  temple  of  Zerubbabel.
Between  the  visionary  temple  of  Ezekiel
and  the  symbolic  city  of  the  New  Jerusa¬
lem,  as  described  by  the  Evangelist,  there
is  a  striking  resemblance,  and  hence  it
finds  a  place  among  the  symbols  in  the
Apocalyptic  degrees.  But  with  Symbolic
or  with  Royal  Arch  Masonry  it  has  no  con¬
nection.

Temple  of  Herod.  This  was  not
the  construction  of  a  third  temple,  but  only
a  restoration  and  extensive  enlargement  of
the  second,  which  had  been  built  by  Ze¬
rubbabel.  To  the  Christian  Mason  it  is  in¬
teresting,  even  more  than  that  of  Solomon,
because  it  was  the  scene  of  our  Lord’s
ministrations,  and  was  the  temple  from
which  the  Knights  Templars  derived  their
name.  It  was  begun  by  Herod  seven  years
b.  c.,  finished  A.  D.  4,  and  destroyed  by  the
Romans  in  A.  D.  70,  having  subsisted  only
seventy-seven  years.

Temple  of  Solomon.  The  first

Temple  of  the  Jews  was  called  hecal  Jeho¬
vah  or  beth  Jehovah,  the  palace  or  the  house
of  Jehovah,  to  indicate  its  splendor  and
magnificence,  and  that  it  was  intended  to
be  the  perpetual  dwelling-place  of  the
Lord.  It  was  King  David  who  first  pro¬
posed  to  substitute  for  the  nomadic  taber¬
nacle  a  permanent  place  of  worship  for  his
people;  but  although  he  had  made  the
necessary  arrangements,  and  even  collected
many  of  the  materials,  he  was  not  per¬
mitted  to  commence  the  undertaking,  and
the  execution  of  the  task  was  left  to  hia
son  and  successor,  Solomon.


TEMPLE


TEMPLE


797


Accordingly,  that  monarch  laid  the  foun¬
dations  of  the  edifice  in  the  fourth  year  of
his  reign,  1012  B.  c.,  and,  with  the  assist¬
ance  of  his  friend  and  ally,  Hiram,  king
of  Tyre,  completed  it  in  about  seven  years
and  a  half,  dedicating  it  to  the  service  of
the  Most  High  in  the  year  1004  B.  c.  This
was  the  year  of  the  world  3000,  according
to  the  Hebrew  chronology  ;  and  although
there  has  been  much  difference  among
chronologists  in  relation  to  the  precise  date,
this  is  the  one  that  has  been  generally  ac¬
cepted,  and  it  is  therefore  adopted  by  Ma¬
sons  in  their  calculations  of  different  epochs.

The  Temple  stood  on  Mount  Moriah,  one
of  the  eminences  of  the  ridge  which  was
known  as  Mount  Zion,  and  which  was
originally  the  property  of  Oman  the  Jeb-
usite,  who  used  it  as  a  threshing-floor,  and'
from  whom  it  was  purchased  by  David  for
the  purpose  of  erecting  an  altar  on  it.

The  Temple  retained  its  original  splendor
for  only  thirty-three  years.  In  the  year  of
the  world  3033,  Shishak,  king  of  Egypt,
having  made  war  upon  Rehoboam,  king  of
Judah,  took  Jerusalem,  and  carried  away
the  choicest  treasures.  From  that  time  to
the  period  of  its  final  destruction,  the  his¬
tory  of  the  Temple  is  but  a  history  of  al¬
ternate  spoliations  and  repairs,  of  profa¬
nations  to  idolatry  and  subsequent  restora¬
tions  to  the  purity  of  worship.  One  hun¬
dred  and  thirteen  years  after  the  conquest
of  Shishak,  Joash,  king  of  Judah,  collected
silver  for  the  repairs  of  the  Temple,  and
restored  it  to  its  former  condition  in  the
year  of  the  world  3148.  In  the  year  3264,
Ahaz,  king  of  Judah,  robbed  the  Temple
of  its  riches,  and  gave  them  to  Tiglath-
Pileser,  king  of  Assyria,  who  had  united
with  him  in  a  war  against  the  kings  of
Israel  and  Damascus.  Ahaz  also  profaned
the  Temple  by  the  worship  of  idols.  In
3276,  Hezekiah,  the  son  and  successor  of
Ahaz,  repaired  the  portions  of  the  Temple
which  his  father  had  destroyed,  and  re¬
stored  the  pure  worship.  But  fifteen  years
after  he  was  compelled  to  give  the  treasures
of  the  Temple  as  a  ransom  to  Sennacherib,
king  of  Assyria,  who  had  invaded  the  land
of  Judah.  But  Hezekiah  is  supposed,  after
his  enemy  had  retired,  to  have  restored  the
Temple.

Manasseh,  the  son  and  successor  of  Hez¬
ekiah,  fell  away  to  the  worship  of  Sabian-
ism,  and  desecrated  the  Temple  in  3306  by
setting  up  altars  to  the  host  of  heaven.
Manasseh  was  then  conquered  by  the  king
of  Babylon,  who  in  3328  carried  him  be¬
yond  the  Euphrates.  But  subsequently
repenting  of  his  sins  he  was  released  from
captivity,  and  having  returned  to  Jerusalem
he  destroyed  the  idols,  and  restored  the
altar  of  burnt-offerings.  In  3380,  Josiah,


who  was  then  king  of  Judah,  devoted  his
efforts  to  the  repairs  of  the  Temple,  por¬
tions  of  which  had  been  demolished  or  neg¬
lected  by  his  predecessors,  and  replaced
the  ark  in  the  sanctuary.  In  3398,  in  the
reign  of  Jehoiakim,  Nebuchadnezzar,  king
of  Chaldea,  carried  a  part  of  the  sacred
vessels  to  Babylon.  Seven  years  afterwards,
in  the  reign  of  Jechoniah,  he  took  away
another  portion;  and  finally,  in  3416,  in  the
eleventh  year  of  the  reign  of  Zedekiah,  he
took  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  and  entirely  de¬
stroyed  the  Temple,  and  carried  many  of
the  inhabitants  captives  to  Babylon.

The  Temple  was  originally  built  on  a
very  hard  rock,  encompassed  with  frightful
precipices.  The  foundations  were  laid  very
deep,  with  immense  labor  and  expense.  It
was  surrounded  with  a  wall  of  great  height,
exceeding  in  the  lowest  part  four  hundred
and  fifty  feet,  constructed  entirely  of  white
marble.

The  body  of  the  Temple  was  in  size
much  less  than  many  a  modern  parish
church,  for  its  length
was  but  ninety  feet,  ox,
including  the  porch,  one
hundred  and  five,  and
its  width  but  thirty.  It
was  its  outer  court,  its
numerous  terraces,  and
the  magnificence  of  its
external  and  internal
decorations,  together
with  its  elevated  posi¬
tion  above  the  surround¬
ing  dwellings  which  pro¬
duced  that  splendor  of
appearance  that  attract¬
ed  the  admiration  of  all
who  beheld  it,  and  gives
a  color  of  probability
to  the  legend  that  tells
us  how  the  Queen  of
Sheba,  when  it  first
broke  upon  her  view,
exclaimed  in  admira¬
tion,  “A  most  excellent
master  must  have  done  this  1  ”

The  Temple  itself,  which  consisted  of
the  porch,  the  sanctuary,  and  the  Holy  of
Holies,  was  but  a  small  part  of  the  edifice
on  Mount  Moriah.  It  was  surrounded  with
spacious  courts,  and  the  whole  structure
occupied  at  least  half  a  mile  in  circumfer¬
ence.  Upon  passing  through  the  outer
wall,  you  came  to  the  first  court,  called  the
court  of  the  Gentiles,  because  the  Gentiles
were  admitted  into  it,  but  were  prohibited
from  passing  farther.  It  was  surrounded
by  a  range  of  porticos  or  cloisters,  above
which  were  galleries  or  apartments,  sup¬
ported  by  pillars  of  white  marble.

Passing  through  the  court  of  the  Gentiles,


Holy

o  F

Holies.


Holy

Place.


Porch.

O  •


798


TEMPLE


TEMPLE


you  entered  the  court  of  the  children  of
Israel,  which  was  separated  by  a  low  stone
wall,  and  an  ascent  of  fifteen  steps,  into
two  divisions,  the  outer  one  being  occu¬
pied  by  the  women,  and  the  inner  by  the
men.  Here  the  Jews  were  in  the  habit  of
resorting  daily  for  the  purposes  of  prayer.

Within  the  court  of  the  Israelites,  and
separated  from  it  by  a  wall  one  cubit  in
height,  was  the  court  of  the  priests.  In
the  centre  of  this  court  was  the  altar  of
burnt-offerings,  to  which  the  people  brought
their  oblations  and  sacrifices,  but  none  but
the  priests  were  permitted  to  enter  it.

From  this  court,  twelve  steps  ascended  to
the  Temple,  strictly  so  called,  which,  as  I
have  already  said,  was  divided  into  three

Earts,  the  porch,  the  sanctuary,  and  the
loly  of  Holies.

The  porch  of  the  Temple  was  twenty
cubits  in  length,  and  the  same  in  breadth.
At  its  entrance  was  a  gate  made  entirely  of
Corinthian  brass,  the  most  precious  metal
known  to  the  ancients.  Beside  this  gate
there  were  the  two  pillars  Jachin  and  Boaz,
which  had  been  constructed  by  Hiram
Abif,  the  architect  whom  the  King  of  Tyre
had  sent  to  Solomon.

From  the  porch  you  entered  the  saxctu-
ARY  by  a  portal,  which,  instead  of  folding-
doors,  was  furnished  with  a  magnificent
veil  of  many  colors,  which  mystically  rep¬
resented  the  universe.  The  breadth  of  the
sanctuary  was  twenty  cubits,  and  its  length
forty,  or  just  twice  that  of  the  porch  and
Holy  of  Holies.  It  occupied,  therefore,
one-half  of  the  body  of  the  Temple.  In
the  sanctuary  were  placed  the  various  uten¬
sils  necessary  for  the  daily  worship  of  the
Temple,  such  as  the  altar  of  incense,  on
which  incense  was  daily  burnt  by  the  offi¬
ciating  priest;  the  ten  golden  candlesticks;
and  the  ten  tables  on  which  the  offerings
were  laid  previous  to  the  sacrifice.

The  Holy  of  Holies,  or  innermost
chamber,  was  separated  from  the  sanctuary
by  doors  of  olive,  richly  sculptured  and  in¬
laid  with  gold,  and  covered  with  veils  of  blue,
purple,  scarlet,  and  the  finest  linen.  The
size  of  the  Holy  of  Holies  was  the  same  as
that  of  the  porch,  namely,  twenty  cubits
square.  It  contained  the  ark  of  the  cove¬
nant,  which  had  been  transferred  into  it
from  the  tabernacle,  with  its  overshadow¬
ing  cherubim  and  its  mercy-seat.  Into
the  most  sacred  place,  the  high  priest
alone  could  enter,  and  that  only  once  a
year,  on  the  day  of  atonement.

The  Temple,  thus  constructed,  must  have
been  one  of  the  most  magnificent  struct¬
ures  of  the  ancient  world.  For  its  erec¬
tion,  David  had  collected  more  than  four
thousand  millions  of  dollars,  and  one  hun¬
dred  and  eighty-four  thousand  six  hundred


men  were  engaged  in  building  it  for  more
than  seven  years ;  and  after  its  completion
it  was  dedicated  by  Solomon  with  solemn
prayer  and  seven  days  of  feasting;  during
which  a  peace-offering  of  twenty  thousand
oxen  and  six  times  that  number  of  sheep
was  made,  to  consume  which  the  holy  fire
came  down  from  heaven.

In  Masonry,  the  Temple  of  Solomon  has
played  a  most  important  part.  Time  was
when  every  Masonic  writer  subscribed  with
unhesitating  faith  to  the  theory  that  Ma¬
sonry  was  there  first  organized ;  that  there
Solomon,  Hiram  of  Tyre,  and  Hiram  Abif
presided  as  Grand  Masters  over  the  Lodges
which  they  had  established ;  that  there  the
symbolic  degrees  were  instituted  and  sys¬
tems  of  initiation  were  invented;  and  that
from  that  period  to  the  present  Masonry
has  passed  down  the  stream  of  Time  in  un¬
broken  succession  and  unaltered  form.
But  the  modern  method  of  reading  Ma¬
sonic  history  has  swept  away  this  edifice  of
imagination  with  as  unsparing  a  hand,  and
as  effectual  a  power,  as  those  with  which
the  Babylonian  king  demolished  the  struct¬
ure  upon  which  they  are  founded.  No
writer  who  values  his  reputation  as  a  critical
historian  would  now  attempt  to  defend  this
theory.  Yet  it  has  done  its  work.  During
the  long  period  in  which  the  hypothesis
was  accepted  as  a  fact,  its  influence  was
being  exerted  in  moulding  the  Masonic  or¬
ganizations  into  a  form  closely  connected
with  all  the  events  and  characteristics  of
the  Solomonic  Temple.  So  that  now  al¬
most  all  the  symbolism  of  Freemasonry
rests  upon  or  is  derived  from  the  “  House
of  the  Lord”  at  Jerusalem.  So  closely  are
the  two  connected,  that  to  attempt  to  sep¬
arate  the  one  from  the  other  would  be  fatal
to  the  further  existence  of  Masonry.  Each
Lodge  is  and  must  be  a  symbol  of  the  Jew¬
ish  Temple;  each  Master  in  the  chair  a
representative  of  the  Jewish  king;  and
every  Mason  a  personation  of  the  Jewish
workman.

Thus  must  it  ever  be  while  Masonry  en¬
dures.  We  must  receive  the  myths  and  le¬
gends  that  connect  it  with  the  Temple,  not
indeed  as  historic  facts,  but  as  allegories;
not  as  events  that  have  really  transpired,
but  as  symbols  ;  and  must  accept  these  al¬
legories  and  these  symbols  for  what  their
inventors  really  meant  that  they  should  be
— the  foundations  of  a  science  of  morality.

Temple  of  Zerubhabel.  For  the
fifty-two  years  that  succeeded  the  destruc¬
tion  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  that
city  saw  nothing  but  the  ruins  of  its  an¬
cient  Temple.  But  in  the  year  of  the  world
3468  and  536  b.  c.,  Cyrus  gave  permission
to  the  Jews  to  return  to  Jerusalem,  and
there  to  rebuild  the  Temple  of  the  Lord.


TEMPLE


TEMPLE


799


Forty-two  thousand  three  hundred  and
sixty  of  the  liberated  captives  returned
under  the  guidance  of  Joshua,  the  High
Priest,  Zerubbabel,  the  Prince  or  Governor,
and  Haggai,  the  Scribe,  and  one  year  after
they  laid  the  foundations  of  the  second
Temple.  They  were,  however,  much  dis¬
turbed  in  their  labours  by  the  Samaritans,
whose  offer  to  unite  with  them  in  the
building  they  had  rejected.  Artaxerxes,
known  in  profane  history  as  Cambyses,
having  succeeded  Cyrus  on  the  throne  of
Persia,  he  forbade  the  Jews  to  proceed  with
the  work,  and  the  Temple  remained  in  an
unfinished  state  until  the  death  of  Artax¬
erxes  and  the  succession  of  Darius  to  the
throne.  As  in  early  life  there  had  been  a
great  intimacy  between  this  sovereign  and
Zerubbabel,  the  latter  proceeded  to  Baby¬
lon,  and  obtained  permission  from  the  mon¬
arch  to  resume  the  labor.  Zerubbabel  re¬
turned  to  Jerusalem,  and  notwithstanding
some  further  delays,  consequent  upon  the
enmity  of  the  neighboring  nations,  the
second  Temple,  or,  as  it  may  be  called  by
way  of  distinction  from  the  first,  the  Tem¬
ple  of  Zerubbabel,  was  completed  in  the
sixth  year  of  the  reign  of  Darius,  515  years
B.  c.,  and  just  twenty  years  after  its  com¬
mencement.  It  was  then  dedicated  with
all  the  solemnities  that  accompanied  the
dedication  of  the  first.

The  general  plan  of  this  second  Temple
was  similar  to  that  of  the  first.  But  it  ex¬
ceeded  it  in  almost  every  dimension  by  one-
third.  The  decorations  of  gold  and  other
ornaments  in  the  first  Temple  must  have
far  surpassed  those  bestowed  upon  the
second,  for  we  are  told  by  Josephus,  ( Antiq .,
xi.  4,)  that  “the  Priests  and  Levites  and
Elders  of  families  were  disconsolate  at  see¬
ing  how  much  more  sumptuous  the  old  Tem¬
ple  was  than  the  one  which,  on  account  of
their  poverty,  they  had  just  been  able  to
erect.”

The  Jews  also  say  that  there  were  five
things  wanting  in  the  second  Templewhich
had  been  in  the  first,  namely,  the  Ark,  the
Urim  and  Thummim,  the  fire  from  heaven,
the  divine  presence  or  cloud  of  glory,  and
the  spirit  of  prophecy  and  power  of
miracles.

Such  are  the  most  important  events  that
relate  to  the  construction  of  this  second
Temple.  But  there  is  a  Masonic  legend
connected  with  it  which,  though  it  may
have  no  historical  foundation,  is  yet  so
closely  interwoven  with  the  Temple  system
of  Masonry,  that  it  is  necessary  it  should
be  recounted.  It  was,  says  the  legend,
while  the  workmen  were  engaged  in  mak¬
ing  the  necessary  excavations  for  laying
the  foundation,  and  while,  numbers  con¬
tinued  to  arrive  at  Jerusalem  from  Baby¬


lon,  that  three  worn  and  weary  sojourners,
after  plodding  on  foot  over  the  rough  and
devious  roads  between  the  two  cities,  offered
themselves  to  the  Grand  Council  as  willing
participants  in  the  labor  of  erection.  Who
these  sojourners  were,  we  have  no  historical
means  of  discovering;  but  there  is  a  Ma¬
sonic  tradition  (entitled,  perhaps,  to  but
little  weight)  that  they  were  Hananiah,
Mishael,  and  Azariah,  three  holy  men,  who
are  better  known  to  general  readers  by  their
Chaldaic  names  of  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and
Abed-nego,  as  having  been  miraculously  "
preserved  from  the  fiery  furnace  of  Nebu¬
chadnezzar.  •

Their  services  were  accepted,  and  from
their  diligent  labors  resulted  that  important
discovery,  the  perpetuation  and  preserva¬
tion  of  which  constitute  the  great  end  and
design  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree.

As  the  symbolism  of  the  first  or  Solomon¬
ic  Temple  is  connected  with  and  refers
entirely  to  the  symbolic  degrees,  so  that  of
the  second,  or  Temple  of  Zerubbabel,  forms
the  basis  of  the  Royal  Arch  in  the  York
and  American  Rites,  and  of  several  high
degrees  in  other  Rites.

Temple,  Order  of  tlie.  When  the
Knights  Templars  had,  on  account  of  their
power  and  wealth,  excited  the  fears  and  the
cupidity  of  Pope  Clement  V.,  and  King
Philip  the  Fair,  of  France,  the  Order  was
soon  compelled  to  succumb  to  the  combined
animosity  of  a  spiritual  and  a  temporal
sovereign,  neither  of  whom  was  capable  of
being  controlled  by  a  spirit  of  honor  or  a
dictate  of  conscience.  The  melancholy
story  of  the  sufferings  of  the  Knights,  and
of  the  dissolution  of  their  Order,  forms  a
disgraceful  record,  with  which  the  history
of  the  fourteenth  century  begins.

On  the  13th  of  March,  in  the  year  1314,
and  in  the  refined  city  of  Paris,  James  de
Molay,  the  last  of  a  long  and  illustrious
line  of  Grand  Masters  of  the  Order  of
Knights  Templars,  testified  at  the  stake
his  fidelity  to  his  vows ;  and  eleven  years
of  service  in  the  cause  of  religion  were  ter¬
minated,  not  by  the  sword  of  a  Saracen,
but  by  the  iniquitous  sentence  of  a  Catholic
pope  and  a  Christian  king.

The  manufacturers  of  Masonic  legends
have  found  in  the  death  of  Molay  and  the
dissolution  of  the  Order  of  Templars  a  fer¬
tile  source  from  which  to  draw  materials
for  their  fanciful  theories  and  surreptitious
documents.  Among  these  legends  there
was,  for  instance,  one  which  maintained
that  during  his  captivity  in  the  Bastile  the
Grand  Master  of  the  Templars  established
four  Chiefs  of  the  Order  in  the  north,  the
south,  the  east,  and  the  west  of  Europe,
whose  seats  of  government  were  respectively
at  Stockholm,  Naples,  Paris,  and  Edin-


800


TEMPLE


TEMPLE


burgh.  Another  invention  of  these  Ma¬
sonic  speculators  was  the  forgery  of  that
document  so  well  known  as  the  Charter  of
Larmenius,  of  which  I  shall  presently
take  notice.  Previously,  however,  to  any
consideration  of  this  document,  1  must  ad¬
vert  to  the  condition  of  the  Templar  Order
in  Portugal,  because  there  is  an  intimate
connection  between  the  society  there  or-

fanized  and  the  Order  of  the  Temple  in
ranee,  which  is  more  particularly  the  sub¬
ject  of  the  present  article.

Surprising  as  it  may  appear,  it  is  never¬
theless  true,  that  the  Templars  did  not  re¬
ceive  that  check  in  Portugal  to  which  they
were  subjected  iu  France,  in  England,  and
some  other  countries  of  Europe.  On  the
contrary,  they  were  there  maintained  by
King  Denis  in  all  their  rights  and  privi¬
leges;  and  although  compelled,  by  a  bull
of  Clement  V.,  to  change  their  names  to
that  of  the  Knights  of  Christ,  they  con¬
tinued  to  be  governed  by  the  same  rules
and  to  wear  the  same  costume  as  their  pre¬
decessors,  excepting  the  slight  addition  of
placing  a  white  Latin  cross  in  the  centre
of  the  usual  red  one  of  the  ancient  Order;
and  in  the  decree  of  establishment  it  was
expressly  declared  that  the  king,  in  creat¬
ing  this  new  Order,  intended  only  to  effect
a  reform  in  that  of  the  Templars.  In  1420,
John  I.,  of  Portugal,  gave  the  Knights  of
Christ  the  control  of  the  possessions  of
Portugal  in  the  Indies,  and  succeeding
monarchs  granted  them  the  proprietorship
of  all  countries  which  they  might  discover,
reserving,  of  course,  the  royal  prerogative
of  sovereignty.  In  process  of  time  the
wealth  and  the  power  of  the  Order  became
so  great,  that  the  kings  of  Portugal  found
it  expedient  to  reduce  their  rights  to  a  con¬
siderable  extent ;  but  the  Order  itself  was
permitted  to  continue  in  existence,  the
Grand  Mastership,  however,  being  for  the
future  vested  in  the  sovereign.

We  are  now  prepared  to  investigate  un-
derstandingly  the  history  of  the  Charter  of
Larmenius,  and  of  the  Order  of  the  Tem¬
ple  at  Paris,  which  was  founded  on  the  as¬
sumed  authenticity  of  that  document.  The
writings  of  Thory,  of  Ragon,  and  of  Clavel,
with  tne  passing  remarks  of  a  few  other
Masonic  writers,  will  furnish  us  with
abundant  materials  for  this  narrative,  in¬
teresting  to  all  Freemasons,  but  more  espe¬
cially  so  to  Masonic  Knights  Templars.

In  the  year  1682,  ana  in  the  reign  of
Louis  XIV.,  a  licentious  society  was  estab¬
lished  by  several  young  noblemen,  which
took  the  name  of  “  La  Petite  Resurrection
des  Templiers,”  or  “  The  little  Resurrection
of  the  Templars.”  The  members  wore  con¬
cealed  upon  their  shirts  a  decoration  in  the
form  of  a  cross,  on  which  was  embossed


the  figure  of  a  man  trampling  on  a  woman,
who  lay  prostrate  at  Ins  feet.  The  em¬
blematic  signification  of  this  symbol  was,
it  is  apparent,  as  unworthy  of  the  character
of  man  as  it  was  derogatory  to  the  condi¬
tion  and  claims  of  woman ;  and  the  king,
having  been  informed  of  the  infamous  pro¬
ceedings  which  took  place  at  the  meetings,
dissolved  the  society,  (which  it  was  said  was
on  the  eveof  initiating  the  dauphin ;)  caused
its  leader,  a  prince  of  the  blood,  to  be  ig-
nominiously  punished,  and  banished  the
members  from  the  court;  the  heaviest
penalty  that,  in  those  days  of  servile  sub¬
mission  to  the  throne,  could  be  inflicted  on
a  courtier.

In  1705,  Philip  of  Orleans,  who  was  sub¬
sequently  the  regent  of  France  during  the
minority  of  Louis  XV.,  collected  together
the  remnants  of  this  society,  which  still  se¬
cretly  existed,  but  had  changed  its  object
from  a  licentious  to  one  of  a  political  char¬
acter.  He  caused  new  statutes  to  be  con¬
structed;  and  an  Italian  Jesuit,  by  name
Father  Bonani,  who  was  a  learned  an¬
tiquary  and  an  excellent  designer,  fabri¬
cated  the  document  now  known  as  the
Charter  of  Larmenius,  and  thus  pretended
to  attach  the  new  society  to  the  ancient
Order  of  the  Templars.

As  this  charter  is  not  the  least  interest¬
ing  of  those  forged  documents  with  which
the  history  of  Freemasonry  unfortunately
abounds,  a  full  description  of  it  here  will
not  be  out  of  place.

The  theory  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans  and
his  accomplice  Bonani  was,  (and  the  theory
is  still  maintained  by  the  Order  of  the
Temple  at  Paris,)  that  when  James  de  Mo-
lay  was  about  to  suffer  at  the  stake,  he  sent
for  Larmenius,  and  in  prison,  with  the  con¬
sent  and  approbation  of  such  of  his  knights
as  were  present,  appointed  him  his  succes¬
sor,  with  the  right  of  making  a  similar  ap¬
pointment  before  his  death.  On  the  demise
of  Molay,  Larmenius  accordingly  assumed
the  office  of  Grand  Master,  and  ten  years
after  issued  this  charter,  transmitting  his
authority  to  Theobaldus  Alexandrinus,  by
whom  it  was  in  like  manner  transmitted
through  a  long  line  of  Grand  Masters,  un¬
til  in  1705  it  reached  Philip,  Duke  of  Or¬
leans.  It  will  be  seen  hereafter  that  the
list  was  subsequently  continued  to  a  later
period.

The  signatures  of  all  these  Grand  Mas¬
ters  are  affixed  to  the  charter,  which  is
beautifully  executed  on  parchment,  illumi¬
nated  in  the  choicest  style  of  mediaeval
chirographv,  and  composed  in  the  Latin
language,  but  written  in  the  Templar  ci¬
pher.  From  the  copy  of  the  document
given  by  Thorv  in  his  Acta  Latomorum,  I
make  the  following  translation :  '  "


TEMPLE


TEMPLE


801


“  I,  Brother  John  Mark  Larmenius,  of
Jerusalem,  by  the  grace  of  God  and  the
secret  decree  of  the  most  venerable  and
holy  martyr,  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Sol¬
diery  of  the  Temple,  (to  whom  be  honor
and  glory,)  confirmed  by  the  common  coun¬
cil  of  the  brethren,  being  endowed  with  the
Supreme  Grand  Mastership  of  the  whole
Order  of  the  Temple,  to  every  one  who
shall  see  these  letters  decretal  thrice  greet¬
ing:

“  Be  it  known  to  all,  both  present  and  to
come,  that  the  failure  of  my  strength,  on
account  of  extreme  age,  my  poverty,  and
the  weight  of  government  being  well  con¬
sidered,  I,  the  aforesaid  humble  Master  of
the  Soldiery  of  the  Temple,  have  deter¬
mined,  for  the  greater  glory  of  God  and
the  protection  and  safety  of  the  Order,  the
brethren,  and  the  statutes,  to  resign  the
Grand  Mastership  into  stronger  hands.

“  On  which  account,  God  helping,  and
with  the  consent  of  a  Supreme  Convention
of  Knights,  I  have  conferred,  and  by  this
present  decree  do  confer,  for  life,  the  au¬
thority  and  prerogatives  of  Grand  Master
of  the  Order  of  the  Temple  upon  the  Emi¬
nent  Commander  and  very  dear  brother,
Francis  Thomas  Theobald  Alexandrinus,
with  the  power,  according  to  time  and  cir¬
cumstances,  of  conferring  the  Grand  Mas¬
tership  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple  and  the
supreme  authority  upon  another  brother,
most  eminent  for  the  nobility  of  his  educa¬
tion  and  talent  and  decorum  of  his  man¬
ners  :  which  is  done  for  the  purpose  of
maintaining  a  perpetual  succession  of
Grand  Masters,  an  uninterrupted  series  of
successors,  and  the  integrity  of  the  statutes.
Nevertheless,  I  command  that  the  Grand
Mastership  shall  not  be  transmitted  with¬
out  the  consent  of  a  general  convention  of
the  fellow-soldiers  of  the  Temple,  as  often
as  that  Supreme  Convention  desires  to  be
convened;  and,  matters  being  thus  con¬
ducted,  the  successor  shall  be  elected  at  the
pleasure  of  the  knights.

“  But,  lest  the  powers  of  the  supreme
office  should  fall  into  decay,  now  and  for
ever  let  there  be  four  Vicars  of  the  Grand
Master,  possessing  supreme  power,  emi¬
nence,  and  authority  over  the  whole  Order,
with  the  reservation  of  the  rights  of  the
Grand  Master;  which  Vicars  of  the  Grand
Masters  shall  be  chosen  from  among  the
elders,  according  to  the  order  of  their  pro¬
fession.  Which  is  decreed  in  accordance
with  the  above-mentioned  wish,  commend¬
ed  to  me  and  to  the  brethren  by  our  most
venerable  and  most  blessed  Master,  the
martyr,  to  whom  be  honor  and  glory.
Amen.

“  Finally,  in  consequence  of  a  decree  of
a  Supreme  Convention  of  the  brethren,  and
5  A  61


hy  the  supreme  authority  to  me  committed,
I  will,  declare,  and  command  that  the  Scot¬
tish  Templars,  as  deserters  from  the  Order,
are  to  be  accursed,  and  that  they  and  the
brethren  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  (upon
whom  may  God  have  mercy,)  as  spoliators
of  the  domains  of  our  soldiery,  are  now
and  hereafter  to  be  considered  as  beyond
the  pale  of  the  Temple.

“  I  have  therefore  established  signs,  un¬
known  to  our  false  brethren,  and  not  to  be
known  by  them,  to  be  orally  communicated
to  our  fellow-soldiers,  and  in  which  way  I
have  already  been  pleased  to  communicate
them  in  the  Supreme  Convention.

“  But  these  signs  are  only  to  be  made
known  after  due  profession  and  knightly
consecration,  according  to  the  statutes,
rites,  and  usages  of  the  fellow-soldiery  of
the  Temple,  transmitted  by  me  to  the  above-
named  Eminent  Commander  as  they  were
delivered  into  my  hands  by  the  venerable
and  most  holy  martyr,  our  Grand  Master,
to  whom  be  honor  and  glory.  Let  it  be
done  as  I  have  said.  So  mote  it  he.  Amen.

“  I,  John  Mark  Larmenius,  have  done
this  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  February,
1324.

“  I,  Francis  Thomas  Theobaldus  Alexan¬
drinus,  God  helping,  have  accepted  the
Grand  Mastership,  1324.”

And  then  follow  the  acceptances  and  sig¬
natures  of  twenty-two  succeeding  Grand
Masters  —  the  last,  Bernard  Kaymund  Fa-
bre,  under  the  date  of  1804.

The  society,  thus  organized  by  the  Duke
of  Orleans  in  1705,  under  this  charter,
which  purported  to  contain  the  signatures
manu  propria  of  eighteen  Grand  Masters
in  regular  succession,  commencing  with
Larmenius  and  ending  with  himself,  at¬
tempted  to  obtain  a  recognition  by  the  Or¬
der  of  Christ,  which  we  have  already  said
was  established  in  Portugal  as  the  legiti¬
mate  successor  of  the  old  Templars,  and  of
which  King  John  V.  was  at  that  time  the
Grand  Master.  For  this  purpose  the  Duke
of  Orleans  ordered  two  of  his  members  to
proceed  to  Lisbon,  and  there  to  open  nego¬
tiations  with  the  Order  of  Christ.  The
king  caused  inquiries  to  be  made  of  Don
Luis  de  Cunha,  his  ambassador  at  Paris,
upon  whose  report  he  gave  orders  for  the
arrest  of  the  two  French  Templars.  One
of  them  escaped  to  Gibraltar;  hut  the  other,
less  fortunate,  after  an  imprisonment  of
two  years,  was  banished  to  Angola,  in
Africa,  where  he  died.

The  society,  however,  continued  secretly
to  exist  for  many  years  in  France,  and  is
supposed  by  some  to  have  been  the  same
which,  in  1789,  was  known  by  the  name  of
the  Societe  d’Aloyau ,  a  title  which  might  be
translated  into  English  as  the  “  Society  of


802


TEMPLE


TEMPLE


the  Sirloin,”  — a  name  much  more  appro¬
priate  to  a  club  of  bons  vivants  than  to  an
association  of  knights.  The  members  of
this  society  were  dispersed  at  the  time  of
the  French  Revolution,  the  Duke  of  Casse
Brissac,  who  was  massacred  at  Versailles
in  1792,  being  its  Grand  Master  at  the  pe¬
riod  of  its  dispersion.  Thory  says  that  the
members  of  this  association  claimed  to  be
the  successors  of  the  Templars,  aud  to  be
in  possession  of  their  charters.

A  certain  Brother  Ledru,  one  of  the  sons
of  the  learned  Nicholas  Philip  Ledru,  was
the  physician  of  Casse  Brissac.  On  the
death  of  that  nobleman  and  the  sale  of  his
property,  Ledru  purchased  a  piece  of  fur¬
niture,  probably  an  escritoire,  in  which  was
concealed  the  celebrated  charter  of  Larme-
nius,  the  manuscript  statutes  of  1705,  and
the  journal  of  proceedings  of  the  Order  of
the  Temple.  Clavel  says  that  about  the
year  1804,  Ledru  showed  these  articles  to
two  of  his  friends  —  de  Saintot  and  Fabr6
Palaprat;  the  latter  of  whom  had  formerly
been  an  ecclesiastic.  The  sight  of  these
documents  suggested  to  them  the  idea  of
reviving  the  Order  of  the  Temple.  They
proposed  to  constitute  Ledru  the  Grand
Master,  but  he  refused  the  offer,  and  nomi¬
nated  Claudius  Matheus  Radix  de  Chevil-
lon  for  the  office,  who  would  accept  it  only
under  the  title  of  Vicar ;  and  he  is  inscribed
as  such  on  the  list  attached  to  the  Charter
of  Larmenius,  his  name  immediately  fol¬
lowing  that  of  Casse  Brissac,  who  is  re¬
corded  as  the  last  Grand  Master.

These  four  restorers  of  the  Order  were  of
opinion  that  it  would  be  most  expedient  to
place  it  under  the  patronage  of  some  dis¬
tinguished  personage;  and  while  making
the  effort  to  carry  this  design  into  execu¬
tion,  Chevillon,  excusing  himself  from  fur¬
ther  official  labor  on  account  of  his  ad¬
vanced  age,  proposed  that  Fabr6  Palaprat
should  be  elected  Grand  Master,  but  for
one  year  only,  and  with  the  understanding
that  he  would  resign  the  dignity  as  soon  as
some  notable  person  could  be  found  who
would  be  willing  to  accept  it.  But  Fabr6,
having  once  been  invested  with  the  Grand
Mastership,  ever  afterwards  refused  to  sur¬
render  the  dignity.

Among  the  persons  who  were  soon  after
admitted  into  the  Order  were  Decourchant,
a  notary’s  clerk;  Leblond,  an  official  of  the
imperial  library;  and Amal,  an  ironmonger,
all  of  whom  were  intrusted  with  the  secret
of  the  fraud,  and  at  once  engaged  in  the
construction  of  what  have  since  been  des¬
ignated  the  “  Relics  of  the  Order.”  Of  these
relics,  which  are  preserved  in  the  treasury
of  the  Order  of  the  Temple  at  Paris,  an  in¬
ventory  was  made  on  the  18th  day  of  May,
1810,  being,  it  is  probable,  soon  after  their


construction.  Dr.  Burnes,  who  was  a  firm
believer  in  the  legitimacy  of  the  Parisian
Order  and  in  the  authenticity  of  its  ar¬
chives,  has  given  in  his  Sketch  of  the  His¬
tory  of  the  Knights  Templars ,  (App.,  p.  xii.,)
a  copy  of  this  inventory  in  the  original
French.  Thory  gives  it  also  in  his  Acta
Laiomorum,  (ii.  143.)  A  brief  synopsis  of
it  may  not  be  uninteresting.  The  relics
consist  of  twelve  pieces — “  a  round  dozen  ”
—  and  are  as  follows:

1.  The  Charter  of  Larmenius,  already
described.  But  to  the  eighteen  signatures
of  Grand  Masters  in  the  charter,  which  was
in  1705  in  possession  of  Philip,  Duke  of  Or¬
leans,  are  added  six  more,  carrying  the  suc¬
cession  on  from  the  last-named  to  Fabr6
Palaprat,  who  attests  as  Grand  Master  in
1804.

2.  A  volume  of  twenty  -  seven  paper
sheets,  in  folio,  bound  in  crimson  velvet,
satin,  and  gold,  containing  the  statutes
of  the  Order  in  manuscript,  and  signed
“Philip.”

3.  A  small  copper  reliquary,  in  the  shape
of  a  Gothic  church,  containing  four  frag¬
ments  of  burnt  bones,  wrapped  in  a  piece
of  linen.  These  are  said  to  have  been
taken  from  the  funeral  pile  of  the  martyred
Templars.

4.  A  sword,  said  to  be  one  which  be¬
longed  to  James  de  Molay.

5.  A  helmet,  supposed  to  have  been  that
of  Guy,  Dauphin  of  Auvergne.

6.  An  old  gilt  spur.

7.  A  bronze  patina,  in  the  interior  of
which  is  engraved  an  extended  hand,  hav¬
ing  the  ring  and  little  fingers  bent  in  upon
the  palm,  which  is  the  form  of  the  episco¬
pal  benediction  in  the  Roman  Church.

8.  A  pax  in  gilt  bronze,  containing  a
representation  of  tit.  John,  under  a  Gothic
arch.  The  pax  is  a  small  plate  of  gold,
silver,  or  other  rich  material,  carried  round
by  the  priest  to  communicate  the  “  kiss  of
peace.”

9.  Three  Gothic  seals.

10.  A  tall  ivory  cross  and  three  mitres,
richly  ornamented.

11.  The  beauseant,  in  white  linen,  with
the  cross  of  the  Order.

12.  The  war  standard,  in  white  linen,
with  four  black  rays.

Of  these  “  relics,”  Clavel,  who,  as  being
on  the  spot,  may  be  supposed  to  know  some¬
thing  of  the  truth,  tells  us  that  the  copper
reliquary,  the  sword,  the  ivory  cross,  and
the  three  mitres  were  bought  by  Leblond
from  an  old  iron  shop  in  the  market  of  St.
Jean,  and  from  a  maker  of  church  vest¬
ments  in  the  suburbs  of  Paris,  while  the
helmet  was  taken  by  Arnal  from  one  of  the
government  armories.

Francisco  Alvaro  da  Sylva  Frey  re  de


TEMPLE


TEMPLE


803


Porto,  a  knight  of  the  Order  of  Christ,  and
a  secret  agent  of  John  VI.,  king  of  Por¬
tugal,  was  admitted  into  the  Order  in  1805,
and  continued  a  member  until  1815.  He
was  one  of  the  few,  Clavel  says,  whom
Fabre  and  the  other  founders  admitted  into
their  full  confidence,  and  in  1812  he  held
the  office  of  Grand  Master’s  Secretary.
Fabr€  having  signified  to  him  his  desire  to
be  recognized  as  the  successor  of  James  de
Molay  by  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Order
of  Christ,  Da  Sylva  sent  a  copy  of  the
Charter  of  Larmenius  to  John  VI.,  who
was  then  in  Brazil ;  but  the  request  for  re¬
cognition  was  refused.

The  Order  of  the  Temple,  which  had
thus  been  ingeniously  organized  by  Fabr6
Palaprat  and  his  colleagues,  began  now  to
assume  high  prerogatives  as  the  only  rep¬
resentative  of  ancient  Templarism.  The
Grand  Master  was  distinguished  by  the
sounding  titles  of  “Most  Eminent  High¬
ness,  Very  Great,  Powerful,  and  Excellent
Prince,  and  Most  Serene  Lord.”  The  whole
world  was  divided  into  different  jurisdic¬
tions,  under  the  names  of  provinces,  baili¬
wicks,  priories,  and  commanderies,  all  of
which  were  distributed  among  the  mem¬
bers  ;  and  proofs  of  nobility  were  demanded
of  all  candidates ;  but  if  they  were  not  able
to  give  these  proofs,  they  were  furnished
by  the  Grand  Master  with  the  necessary
patents.

The  ceremonies  of  initiation  were  divided
into  three  houses,  again  subdivided  into
eight  degrees,  and  were  as  follows :

I.  House  of  Initiation.

1.  Initiate.  This  is  the  Entered  Ap¬
prentice’s  degree  of  Freemasonry.

2.  Initiate  of  the  Interior.  This  is  the
Fellow  Craft.

3.  Adept.  This  is  the  Master  Mason.

4.  Adept  of  the  East.  The  Elu  of  Fifteen
of  the  Scottish  Rite.

5.  Grand  Adept  of  the  Black  Eagle  of  St.
John.  The  Elu  of  Nine  of  the  Scottish
Rite.

II.  House  of  Postulance.

6.  Postulant  of  the  Order.  The  Rose
Croix  degree.

III.  Council.

7.  Esquire.  Merely  a  preparation  for
the  eighth  degree.

8.  Knight,  or  Leviteof  the  Interior  Guard.
The  Philosophical  Kadosh

At  first  the  members  of  the  Order  pro¬
fessed  the  Roman  Catholic  religion,  and
hence,  on  various  occasions,  Protestants
and  Jews  were  denied  admission.  But


about  the  year  1814,  the  Grand  Master
having  obtained  possession  of  a  manuscript
copy  of  a  spurious  Gospel  of  St.  John,
which  is  supposed  to  have  been  forged  in
the  fifteenth  century,  and  which  contra¬
dicted  in  many  particulars  the  canonical
Gospel,  he  caused  it  to  be  adopted  as  the
doctrine  of  the  Order ;  and  thus,  as  Clavel
says,  at  once  transformed  an  Order  which
had  always  been  perfectly  orthodox  into  a
schismatic  sect.  Out  of  this  spurious  Gos¬
pel  and  an  introduction  and  commentary
called  the  “  Levitikon,”  said  to  have  been
written  by  Nicephorus,  a  Greek  monk  of
Athens,  Fabr6  and  his  colleagues  composed
a  liturgy,  and  established  a  religious  sect  to
which  they  gave  the  name  of  “  Johannism.”

The  consequence  of  this  change  of  reli¬
gious  views  was  a  schism  in  the  Order.
The  orthodox  party,  however,  appears  to
have  been  the  stronger;  and  after  the  others
had  for  a  short  time  exhibited  themselves
as  soi-disant  priests  in  a  Johannite  church
which  they  erected,  and  in  which  they  pub¬
licly  chanted  the  liturgy  which  they  had
composed,  the  church  and  the  liturgy  were
given  up,  and  they  retired  once  more  into
the  secrecy  of  the  Order.

Such  is  a  brief  history  of  the  rise  and
progress  of  the  celebrated  Order  of  the
Temple,  which  still  exists  at  Paris,  with,
however,  a  much  abridged  exercise,  if  not
with  less  assumption  of  prerogative.  It
still  claims  to  be  the  only  true  depository
of  the  powers  and  privileges  of  the  ancient
Order  of  Knights  Templars,  denouncing
all  other  Templars  as  spurious,  and  its
Grand  Master  proclaims  himself  the  legal
successor  of  James  de  Molay;  with  how
much  truth  the  narrative  already  given
will  enable  every  reader  to  decide.

The  question  of  the  legality  of  the  “Order
of  the  Temple,”  as  the  only  true  body  of
Knights  Templars  in  modern  days,  is  to  be
settled  only  after  three  other  points  have
been  determined:  First,  was  the  Charter
of  Larmenius,  which  was  brought  for  the
first  time  to  light  in  1705  by  the  Duke  of
Orleans,  an  authentic  or  a  forged  docu¬
ment?  Next,  even  if  authentic,  was  the
story  that  Larmenius  was  invested  with
the  Grand  Mastership  and  the  power  of
transmission  by  Molay  a  fact  or  a  fable?
And,  lastly,  was  the  power  exercised  by
Ledru,  in  reorganizing  the  Order  in  1804,
assumed  by  himself  or  actually  derived
from  Casse  Brissac,  the  previous  Grand
Master  ?  There  are  many  other  questions
of  subordinate  but  necessary  importance  to
be  examined  and  settled  before  we  can  con¬
sent  to  give  the  Order  of  the  Temple  the
high  ana,  as  regards  Templarism,  the  ex¬
clusive  position  that  it  claims.

Temple,  Second.  The  Temple  built


804


TEMPLE


TEMPLE


by  Zerubbabel  is  so  called.  See  Temple  of
Zerubbabel.

Temple,  Sovereign  Command¬
er  of  the.  See  Sovereign  Commander  of
the  Temple.

Temple,  Sovereign  of  the  Sov¬
ereigns  Grand  Commander  of
the.  ( Souverain  dee  Souverain  Grande  Com-
mandeur  du  Temple.)  A  degree  in  the  col¬
lection  of  Lemanceau  and  Le  Page.  It  is
said  to  be  a  part  of  the  Order  of  Christ  or
Portuguese  Templarism.

Temple,  Spiritual.  See  Spiritual
Temple.

Temple,  Symbolism  of  the.  Of

all  the  objects  which  constitute  the  Masonic
science  of  symbolism,  the  most  important,
the  most  cherished  by  Masons,  and  by  far
the  most  significant,  is  the  Temple  of  Jeru¬
salem.  The  spiritualizing  of  the  Temple
is  the  first,  the  most  prominent,  and  the
most  pervading  of  all  symbols  of  Free¬
masonry.  It  is  that  which  most  emphati¬
cally  gives  it  its  religious  character.  Take
from  Freemasonry  its  dependence  on  the
Temple;  leave  out  of  its  ritual  all  refer¬
ence  to  that  sacred  edifice,  and  to  the
legends  and  traditions  connected  with  it,
and  the  system  itself  would  at  once  decay
and  die,  or  at  best  remain  only  as  some
fossilized  bone,  serving  merely  to  show  the
nature  of  the  once  living  body  to  which  it
had  belonged.

Temple  worship  is  in  itself  an  ancient
type  of  the  religious  sentiment  in  its  pro¬
gress  towards  spiritual  elevation.  As  soon
as  a  nation  emerged  out  of  Feticism,  or  the
wmrship  of  visible  objects,  which  is  the
most  degraded  form  of  idolatry,  its  people
began  to  establish  a  priesthood,  and  to  erect
temples.  The  Goths,  the  Celts,  the  Egyp¬
tians,  and  the  Greeks,  however  much  they
may  have  differed  in  the  ritual,  and  in  the
objects  of  their  polytheistic  worship,  were
all  in  the  possession  of  priests  and  of  tem¬
ples.  The  Jews,  complying  with  this  law
of  our  religious  nature,  first  constructed
their  tabernacle,  or  portable  temple,  and
then,  when  time  and  opportunity  permitted,
transferred  their  monotheistic  worship  to
that  more  permanent  edifice  which  tow¬
ered  in  all  its  magnificence  above  the  pin¬
nacle  of  Mount  Moriah.  The  mosque  of
the  Mohammedan  and  the  church  or  chapel
of  the  Christian  is  but  an  embodiment  of
the  same  idea  of  temple  worship  in  a
simpler  form.

The  adaptation,  therefore,  of  the  Temple
of  Jerusalem  to  a  science  of  symbolism,
would  be  an  easy  task  to  the  mind  of  those
Jews  and  Tyrians  who  were  engaged  in  its
construction.  Doubtless,  at  its  original
conception,  the  idea  of  this  temple  sym¬
bolism  was  rude  and  unembellished.  It


was  to  be  perfected  and  polished  only  by
future  aggregations  of  succeeding  intellects.
And  yet  no  biblical  nor  Masonic  scholar
will  venture  to  deny  that  there  was,  in  the
mode  of  building  and  in  all  the  circum¬
stances  connected  with  the  construction  of
King  Solomon’s  Temple,  an  apparent  de¬
sign  to  establish  a  foundation  for  sym¬
bolism.

The  Freemasons  have,  at  all  events,
seized  with  avidity  the  idea  of  representing
in  their  symbolic  language  the  interior  ana
spiritual  man  by  a  material  temple.  They
have  the  doctrine  of  the  great  Apostle  of
the  Gentiles,  who  has  said,  “  Know  ye  are
the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the  spirit  of
God  dwelletli  in  you.”  The  great  body  of
the  Masonic  craft,  looking  only  to  this  first
Temple  erected  by  the  wisdom  of  King
Solomon,  make  it  the  symbol  of  life;  and
as  the  great  object  of  Masonry  is  the  search
after  truth,  they  are  directed  to  build  up
this  temple  as  a  fitting  receptacle  for  truth
when  found,  a  place  where  it  may  dwell,
just  as  the  ancient  Jews  built  up  their
great  Temple  as  a  dwelling-place  for  Him
who  is  the  author  of  all  truth.

To  the  Master  Mason,  this  Temple  of
Solomon  is  truly  the  symbol  of  human  life;
for,  like  life,  it  was  to  have  its  end.  For
four  centuries  it  glittered  on  the  hills  of
Jerusalem  in  all  its  gorgeous  magnificence;
now,  under  some  pious  descendant  of  the
wise  king  of  Israel,  the  spot  from  whose
altars  arose  the  burnt-offerings  to  a  living
God,  and  now  polluted  by  some  recreant
monarch  of  Judah  to  the  service  of  Baal ;
until  at  length  it  received  the  divine  pun¬
ishment  through  the  mighty  king  of  Baby¬
lon,  and,  having  been  despoiled  of  all  its
treasures,  was  burnt  to  the  ground,  so  that
nothing  was  left  of  all  its  splendor  but  a
smouldering  heap  of  ashes.  Variable  in
its  purposes,  evanescent  in  its  existence,
now  a  gorgeous  pile  of  architectural  beauty,
and  anon  a  ruin  over  which  the  resistless
power  of  fire  has  passed,  it  becomes  a  fit
symbol  of  human  life  occupied  in  the
search  after  divine  truth,  which  is  nowhere
to  be  found;  now  sinning  and  now  repent¬
ant  ;  now  vigorous  with  health  and  strength,
and  anon  a  senseless  and  decaying  corpse.

Such  is  the  symbolism  of  the  first  Tem¬
ple,  that  of  Solomon,  as  familiar  to  the
class  of  Master  Masons.  But  there  is  a
second  and  higher  class  of  the  Fraternity,
the  Masons  of  the  Royal  Arch,  by  whom
this  temple  symbolism  is  still  further  de¬
veloped.

This  second  class,  leaving  their  early
symbolism  and  looking  beyond  this  Tem¬
ple  of  Solomon,  find  in  scriptural  history
another  Temple,  which,  years  after  the  de¬
struction  of  the  first  one,  was  erected  upon


TEMPLE


TENT


805


its  ruins;  and  they  have  selected  the
second  Temple,  the  Temple  of  Zerubbabel,
as  their  prominent  symbol.  And  as  the
first  class  of  Masons  find  in  their  Temple
the  symbol  of  mortal  life,  limited  and  per¬
ishable,  they,  on  the  contrary,  see  in  this
second  Temple,  built  upon  the  foundations
of  the  first,  a  symbol  of  life  eternal,  where
the  lost  truth  shall  be  found,  where  new
incense  shall  arise  from  a  new  altar,  and
whose  perpetuity  their  great  Master  had
romised  when,  in  the  very  spirit  of  sym-
olism,  he  exclaimed,  “  Destroy  this  tem¬
ple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up.”

And  so  to  these  two  classes  or  Orders  of
Masons  the  symbolism  of  the  Temple  pre¬
sents  itself  in  a  connected  and  continuous
form.  To  the  Master  Mason,  the  Temple
of  Solomon  is  the  symbol  of  this  life;  to
the  Royal  Arch  Mason,  the  Temple  of
Zerubbabel  is  the  symbol  of  the  future  life.
To  the  former,  his  Temple  is  the  symbol  of
the  search  for  truth ;  to  the  latter,  his  is  the
symbol  of  the  discovery  of  truth  ;  and  thus
the  circle  is  completed  and  the  system
made  perfect.

Temple,  Workmen  at  tlie.  See

Workmen  at  the  Temple.

Templier.  The  title  of  a  Knight  Tem¬
plar  in  French.  The  expression  “Cheva¬
lier  Templier  ”  is  scarcely  ever  used  by
French  writers.

Templum  Hierosolymte.  Latin
for  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  supposed
by  some  to  be  a  phrase  concealed  under  the
monogram  of  the  Triple  Tau,,  which  see.

Ten.  Ten  cannot  be  considered  as  a
sacred  number  in  Masonry.  But  by  the
Pythagoreans  it  was  honored  as  a  symbol
of  the  perfection  and  consummation  of  all
things.  It  was  constituted  of  the  monad
and  duad,  the  active  and  passive  principles,
the  triad  or  their  result,  and  the  quaternior  or
first  square,  and  hence  they  referred  it  to
their  sacred  tetractys.  They  said  that  ten
contained  all  the  relations  of  numbers  and
harmony.  See  Tetractys.

Tengu.  A  significant  word  in  the
high  degrees  of  the  Scottish  Rite.  The
original  old  French  rituals  explain  it,  and
say  that  it  and  the  two  other  words  that
accompany  are  formed  out  of  the  initials
of  the  words  of  a  particular  sentence  which
has  reference  to  the  “  Sacred  treasure  ”  of
Masonry.

Tennessee.  Until  the  end  of  the
year  1813,  the  State  of  Tennessee  consti¬
tuted  a  part  of  the  Masonic  jurisdiction
of  North  Carolina,  and  the  Lodges  were
held  under  Warrants  issuing  from  the
Grand  Lodge  of  “North  Carolina  and  Ten¬
nessee,”  with  the  exception  of  one  Lodge
in  Davidson  County,  which  derived  its
Charter  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ken¬


tucky.  In  December,  1811,  a  convention
was  held  at  Knoxville,  when  an  address
was  directed  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  North
Carolina,  soliciting  its  assent  to  the  sever¬
ance  of  the  Masonic  jurisdiction  and  the
establishment  of  an  independent  Grand
Lodge.  In  October,  1813,  this  consent  was
granted,  and  a  convention  of  the  Lodges  was
ordered  by  the  Grand  Master  to  assemble
at  Knoxville  on  December  27,  1813,  that
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee  might  be
legally  constituted.  Delegates  from  eight
Lodges  accordingly  assembled  on  that  day
at  Knoxville,  and  a  convention  was  duly
organized.  A  deed  of  relinquishment  from
the  Grand  Lodge  of  North  Carolina  was
read.  By  this  instrument  the  Grand  Lodge
of  North  Carolina  relinquished  all  author¬
ity  and  jurisdiction  over  the  several  Lodges
in  the  State  of  Tennessee,  and  assented
to  the  erection  of  an  independent  Grand
Lodge.  A  Constitution  was  accordingly
adopted  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee
organized,  Thomas  Claiborne  being  elected
Grand  Master.

The  first  Royal  Arch  Chapters  in  Ten¬
nessee  were  instituted  by  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  and  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Ten¬
nessee  was  organized  in  1826.

The  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters  was  established  October  13,  1847.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Tennessee
was  organized  October  12,  1859.

There  are  in  the  State  a  few  bodies  of
the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,
which  derive  their  Charters  from  the  Su¬
preme  Council  for  the  Southern  J u  risdiction.

Tent.  The  tent,  which  constitutes  a
part  of  the  paraphernalia  or  furniture  of  a
Commandery  of  Knights  Templars,  is  not
only  intended  for  a  practical  use,  but  also
has  a  symbolic  meaning.  The  Order  of  the
Templars  was  instituted  for  the  protection
of  Christian  pilgrims  who  were  visiting
the  sepulchre  of  their  Lord.  The  Hospi¬
tallers  might  remain  in  the  city  and  fulfil
their  vows  by  attendance  on  the  sick,  but
the  Templar  must  away  to  the  plains,  the
hills,  and  the  desert,  there,  in  his  lonely
tent,  to  .watch  the  wily  Saracen,  and  to
await  the  toilsome  pilgrim,  to  whom  he
might  offer  the  crust  of  bread  and  the
draught  of  water,  and  instruct  him  in  his
way,  and  warn  him  of  danger,  and  give
him  words  of  good  cheer.  Often  in  the
early  history  of  the  Order,  before  luxury
and  wealth  and  vice  had  impaired  its
purity,  must  these  meetings  of  the  toilsome
pilgrim,  on  his  way  to  the  holy  shrine,  with
the  valiant  Knight  who  stood  by  his  tent
door  on  the  roadside,  have  occurred.  And
it  is  just  such  events  as  these  that  are
commemorated  in  the  tent  scenes  of  the
Templar  ritual.


806


TENURE


TERRITORIAL


Tenure  of  Office.  All  offices  in  the
bodies  of  the  York  and  American  Rites
are  held  by  annual  election.  But  the
holder  of  an  office  does  not  become  functus
officii  by  the  election  of  his  successor;  he
retains  the  office  until  that  successor  has
been  installed.  This  is  technically  called
“  holding  over.”  It  is  not  election  only,
but  election  and  installation  that  give  pos¬
session  of  an  office  in  Masonry.  If  a  new
Master,  having  been  elected,  should,  after
the  election  and  installation  of  the  other
officers  of  the  Lodge,  refuse  to  be  installed,
the  old  Master  would  “  hold  over,”  or  re¬
tain  the  office  until  the  next  annual  elec¬
tion.  The  oath  of  office  of  every  officer  is
that  he  will  perform  the  duties  of  the  office
for  twelve  months,  and  until  his  successor
shall  have  been  installed.  In  France,  in  the
last  century,  Warrants  of  Constitution  were
granted  to  certain  Masters  who  held  the
office  for  life,  and  were  thence  called  “  Mai-
tres  inamovibles,”  or  immovable  Masters.
They  considered  the  Lodges  committed  to
their  care  as  their  personal  property,  and
governed  them  despotically,  according  to
their  own  caprices.  But  in  1772  this  class
of  Masters  had  become  so  unpopular,  that
the  Grand  Lodge  removed  them,  and  made
the  tenure  of  office  the  same  as  it  was  in
England.

In  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite,  the  officers  of  a  Supreme  Council
hold  their  offices,  under  the  Constitutions  of
1786,  for  life.  In  the  subordinate  bodies
of  the  Rite,  the  elections  are  held  trien-
nially.  This  is  also  the  rule  in  the  Supreme
Council  of  theNorthern  Jurisdiction,  which
has  abandoned  the  law  of  perpetual  tenure.

Tercy.  One  of  the  nine  Elus  recorded
in  the  high  degrees  as  having  been  sent
out  by  Solomon  to  make  the  search  which
is  referred  to  in  the  Master’s  legend.  The
name  was  invented  by  Ramsay,  with  some
allusion,  not  now  explicable,  to  the  political
incidents  of  Stuart  Masons.  The  name  is
probably  an  anagram  or  corruption  of  some
friend  of  the  house  of  Stuart.  See  Ana¬
gram.

Terminus.  The  god  of  landmarks,
whose  worship  was  introduced  among  the
Romans  by  Numa.  The  god  was  represent¬
ed  by  a  cubical  stone.  Of  all  thegods,  Termi¬
nus  was  the  only  one  who,  when  the  new
Capitol  was  building,  refused  to  remove  his
altar.  Hence  Ovid  {Fasti,  ii.  673,  )  addressed
him  thus :  “  O  Terminus,  no  inconstancy
was  permitted  thee ;  in  whatever  situation
thou  hast  been  placed,  there  abide,  and  do
not  yield  one  jot  to  any  neighbor  asking
thee.”  The  Masons  pay  the  same  rever¬
ence  to  their  landmarks  that  the  Romans
did  to  their  god  Terminus.

Terrasson,  the  Afob£  Jean.  The


Abb 6  Terrasson  was  born  at  Lyons,  in
France,  in  1670.  He  was  educated  by  the
congregation  of  the  Oratory,  of  which  his
brother  Andr6  was  a  priest,  but  eventually
abandoned  it,  which  gave  so  much  offence
to  his  father,  that  he  left  him  by  his  will
only  a  very  moderate  income.  The  Abb6
obtained  a  chair  in  the  Academy  of  Sciences
in  1707,  and  a  professorship  in  the  Royal
College  in  1724,  which  position  he  occupied
until  bis  death  in  1750.  He  was  the  author
of  a  Critical  Dissertation  on  the  Iliad  of
Uomer,  a  translation  of  Diodorus  Seculus,
and  several  other  classical  and  philosophi¬
cal  works.  But  his  work  most  interest¬
ing  to  the  Masonic  scholar  is  his  Sethos,
histoire  ou  vie  tiree  des  monumens  anecdotes
de  Vancienne  Egypt,  published  at  Paris  in
1731.  This  work  excited  on  its  appear¬
ance  so  much  attention  in  the  literary
world,  that  it  was  translated  into  the  Ger¬
man  and  English  languages  under  the
respective  titles  of:  1.  Abris  der  wahren
Helden-Tugend,  oder  Lebensgeschichte  des
Sethos;  translated  by  Chro.  Gli.  Wendt,
Hamburg,  1732.  2.  Geschicte  des  Konigs

Sethos;  translated  by  Matth.  Claudius,
Breslau,  1777 ;  and  3.  The  Life  of  Sethos,
taken  from  private  Memoirs  of  the  ancient
Egyptians;  translated  from  a  Greek  MS.  into
French,  and  now  done  into  English,  by  M.
Lediard,  London,  1732.

In  this  romance  he  has  given  an  account
of  the  initiation  of  his  hero,  Sethos,  an
Egyptian  prince,  into  the  Egyptian  mys¬
teries.  We  must  not,  however,  be  led  into
the  error,  into  which  Kloss  says  that  the
Masonic  fraternity  fell  on  its  first  appear¬
ance,  that  this  account  is  a  well-proved,
historical  narrative.  Much  as  we  know
of  the  Egyptian  mysteries,  compared  with
our  knowledge  of  the  Grecian  or  the  Asi¬
atic,  we  have  no  sufficient  documents  from
which  to  obtain  the  consecutive  and  minute
detail  which  the  Abb6  Terrasson  has  con¬
structed.  It  is  like  Ramsay’s  Travels  of
Cyrus,  to  which  it  has  been  compared  —  a
romance  rather  than  a  history ;  but  it  still
contains  so  many  scintillations  of  truth,  so
much  of  the  substantiate  of  fact  amid  the
ornaments  of  fiction,  that  it  cannot  but
prove  instructive  as  well  as  amusing.  We
have  in  it  the  outlines  of  an  initiation  into
the  Egyptian  mysteries  such  as  the  learned
Abbe'  could  derive  from  the  documents  and
monuments  to  which  he  was  able  to  apply,
with  many  lacunae  which  he  has  filled  up
from  his  own  inventive  and  poetic  genius.

Terrible  Brother.  French,  Frlre
terrible.  An  officer  in  the  French  Rite,
who  in  an  initiation  conducts  the  candidate,
and  in  this  respect  performs  the  duty  of  a
Senior  Deacon  in  the  York  Rite.

Territorial  Jurisdiction.  It  haa


TESSELLATED


TESSELLATED


807


now  become  the  settled  principle  of.  at
least,  American  Masonic  law,  that  Masonic
and  political  jurisdiction  should  be  coter¬
minous,  that  is,  that  the  boundaries  which
circumscribe  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of
a  Grand  Lodge  should  be  the  same  as
those  which  define  the  political  limits  of
the  State  in  which  it  exists.  And  so  it
follows  that  if  a  State  should  change  its
political  boundaries,  the  Masonic  bounda¬
ries  of  the  Grand  Lodge  should  change
with  it.  Thus,  if  a  State  should  diminish
its  extent  by  the  cession  of  any  part  of  its
territory  to  an  adjoining  State,  the  Lodges
situated  within  the  ceded  territory  would
pass  over  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the  State  to  which  that  territory
had  been  ceded.

Tessellated.  From  the  Latin  tessella,
a  little  square  stone.  Chequered,  formed
in  little  squares  of  Mosaic  work.  Applied
in  Masonry  to  the  Mosaic  pavement  of  the
Temple,  and  to  the  border  which  surrounds
the  tracing-board,  probably  incorrectly  in
the  latter  instance.  See  Tessellated  Border.

Tessellated  Border.  Browne  says
in  his  Master  Key,  which  is  supposed  to
present  the  general  form  of  the  Prestonian
lectures,  that  the  ornaments  of  a  Lodge
are  the  Mosaic  pavement,  the  Blazing  Star,
and  the  Tessellated  Border;  and  he  defines
the  Tessellated  Border  to  be  “  the  skirt-work
round  the  Lodge.”  Webb,  in  his  lectures,
teaches  that  the  ornaments  of  a  Lodge  are
the  Mosaic  pavement,  the  indented  tessel,
and  the  blazing  star;  and  he  defines  the
indented  tessel  to  be  that  “  beautifully  tes¬
sellated  border  or  skirting  which  surrounded
the  ground-floor  of  King  Solomon’s  Tem¬
ple.”  The  French  call  it  “  la  houpe  den-
telee,”  which  is  literally  the  indented  tessel;
and  they  describe  it  as  “a  cord  forming
true-lovers’  knots,  which  surrounds  the
tracing-board.”  The  Germans  call  it  “die
Schnur  von  starken  Faden,”  or  the  cord  of
strong  threads,  and  define  it  as  a  border  sur¬
rounding  the  tracing-board  of  an  Entered
Apprentice,  consisting  of  a  cord  tied  in
lovers’  knots,  with  two  tassels  attached  to
the  ends.

The  idea  prevalent  in  America,  and  de¬
rived  from  a  misapprehension  of  the  plate
in  the  Monitor  of  Cross,  that  the  tessellated
border  was  a  decorated  part  of  the  Mosaic
pavement,  and  made  like  it  of  little  square
stones,  does  not  seem  to  be  supported  by
these  definitions.  They  all  indicate  that
the  tessellated  border  was  a  cord.  The  in¬
terpretation  of  its  symbolic  meaning  still
further  sustains  this  idea.  Browne  says
“  it  alludes  to  that  kind  care  of  Providence
which  so  cheerfully  surrounds  and  keens
us  within  its  protection  whilst  we  justly
and  uprightly  govern  our  lives  and  actions


by  the  four  cardinal  virtues  in  divinity,
uamely,  temperance,  fortitude,  prudence,
and  justice.”  This  last  allusion  is  to  the
four  tassels  attached  to  the  cord.  (See
Tassels.)

Webb  says  that  it  is  “emblematic  of
those  blessings  and  comforts  which  sur¬
round  us,  and  which  we  hope  to  obtain  by
a  faithful  reliance  on  Divine  Providence.”

The  French  ritual  says  that  it  is  intended
“to  teach  the  Mason  that  the  society  of
which  he  constitutes  a  part  surrounds  the
earth,  and  that  distance,  so  far  from  relax¬
ing  the  bonds  which  unite  the  members  to
each  other,  ought  to  draw  them  closer.”

Lenning  says  that  it  symbolizes  the  fra¬
ternal  bond  by  which  all  Masons  are  united.

But  Gadicke  is  more  precise.  He  defines
it  as  “  the  universal  bond  by  which  every
Mason  ought  to  be  united  to  his  brethren,”
and  he  says  that  “it  should  consist  of  sixty
threads  or  yarns,  because,  according  to  the
ancient  statutes,  no  Lodge  was  allowed  to
have  above  sixty  members.”

Oliver  (Landm.,i.  174,)  says  “the Tracing-
Board  is  surrounded  by  an  indented  or  tes¬
sellated  border  ....  at  the  four  angles  ap¬
pear  as  many  tassels.”  But  in  the  old
English  tracing-boards  the  two  lower
tassels  are  often  omitted.  They  are,  how¬
ever,  generally  found  in  the  French.  Len¬
ning,  speaking,  I  suppose,  for  the  German,
assigns  to  them  but  two.  Four  tassels  are,
however,  necessary  to  complete  the  sym¬
bolism,  which  is  said  to  be  that  of  the  four
cardinal  virtues.  The  tessellated,  more
properly,  therefore,  the  tassel  lated,  border
consists  of  a  cord  intertwined  with  knots,
to  each  end  of  which  is  appended  a  tassel.
It  surrounds  the  border  of  the  tracing-
board,  and  appears  at  the  top  in  the  follow¬
ing  form:


There  is,  however,  in  these  old  tracing-
boards  another  border,  which  surrounds  the
entire  picture  with  lines,  as  in  the  follow¬
ing  figure:


This  indented  border,  which  was  made  to
represent  a  cord  of  black  and  white  threads,
was,  I  think,  in  time  mistaken  for  tessella--,  or
little  stones ;  an  error  probably  originating


808


TESSELLATED


TESTS


in  confounding  it  with  the  tessellated  pave¬
ment,  which  was  another  one  of  the  orna¬
ments  of  the  Lodge.

We  find  that  we  have  for  this  symbol  five
different  names:  in  English,  the  indented
tarsel,  the  indented  tassel,  the  indented  tes-
sel,  the  tassel! ated  border,  and  the  tessellated
border;  in  French,  the  houpe  dentelee,  or
indented  tessel ;  and  in  German,  the  Schnur
von  starken  Faden,  or  the  cord  of  strong
threads.

The  question  what  is  the  true  tessellated
border  would  not  be  a  difficult  one  to  an¬
swer,  if  it  were  not  for  the  variety  of  names
given  to  it  in  the  English  rituals.  We
know  by  tradition,  and  by  engravings  that
have  been  preserved,  that  during  the  cere¬
monies  of  initiation  in  the  early  part  of
the  last  century  the  symbols  of  the  Order
were  marked  out  in  chalk  on  the  floor,  and
that  this  picture  was  encircled  by  a  waving
cord.  This  cord  was  ornamented  with
tassels,  and  formerly  a  border  to  the  trac¬
ing  on  the  floor  was  called  the  indented
tassel,  the  cord  and  the  tufts  attached  to  it
being  the  tassel,  which,  being  by  its  wavy
direction  partly  in  and  partly  outside  of
the  picture,  was  said  to  be  indented.  This
indented  tassel  was  subsequently  corrupted
by  illiterate  Masons  into  indented  tarsel,  the
appellation  met  with  in  some  of  the  early
catechisms.

Afterwards,  looking  to  its  decoration  with
tassels  and  to  its  position  as  a  border  to  the
tracing-board,  it  was  called  the  tassellated
border.  In  time  the  picture  on  the  floor
was  transferred  to  a  permanent  tracing-
board,  and  then  the  tassels  were  preserved
at  the  top,  and  the  rest  of  the  cord  was  rep¬
resented  around  the  board  in  the  form  of
white  and  black  angular  spaces.  These
were  mistaken  for  little  stones,  and  the  tas¬
sellated  border  was  called,  by  a  natural  cor¬
ruption,  the  tessellated  border.  Many  years
ago, when  I  first  met  with  the  idea  of  this  cor¬
ruption  from  tassellaled  to  tessellated,  which
was  suggested  to  Dr.  Oliver  by  “  a  learned
Scottish  Mason,”  whose  name  he  does  not
give,  I  was  inclined  to  doubt  its  correct¬
ness.  Subsequent  investigations  have  led
me  to  change  that  opinion.  I  think  that  I
can  readily  trace  the  gradual  steps  of  cor¬
ruption  and  change  from  the  original  name
indented  tassel,  which  the  early  French  Ma¬
sons  had  literally  translated  by  houpe  den¬
telee,  to  indented  tarsel,  and  sometimes,  ac¬
cording  to  Oliver,  to  indented  trasel ;  then  to
iassellated  border,  and,  finally,  to  tessellated
border,  the  name  which  it  now  bears.

The  form  and  the  meaning  of  the  symbol
are  now  apparent.  The  tessellated  border,
as  it  is  called,  is  a  cord,  decorated  with
tassels,  which  surrounds  the  tracing-board
of  an  Entered  Apprentice,  the  said  tracing-


board  being  a  representation  of  the  Lodge,
and  it  symbolizes  the  bond  of  love  —  tlie
mystic  tie — which  binds  the  Craft  whereso¬
ever  dispersed  into  one  band  of  brother¬
hood.

Tessel,  Indented,  See  Tessellated

Border.

Tessera  Hospitalis.  Latin.  Lit¬
erally,  “  the  token  of  the  guest,”  or  “  the
hospitable  die.”  It  was  a  custom  among
the  ancients,  that  when  two  persons  formed
an  alliance  of  friendship,  they  took  a  small
piece  of  bone,  ivory,  stone,  or  even  wood,
which  they  divided  into  two  parts,  each
one  inscribing  his  name  upon  his  half.
They  then  made  an  exchange  of  the  pieces,
each  promising  to  retain  the  part  intrusted
to  him  as  a  perpetual  token  of  the  covenant
into  which  they  had  entered,  of  which
its  production  at  any  future  time  would  be
a  proof  and  a  reminder.  See  the  subject
more  fully  treated  in  the  article  Mark.

Testimony.  In  Masonic  trials  the
testimony  of  witnesses  is  taken  in  two
ways  —  that  of  profanes  by  affidavit,  and
that  of  Masons  on  their  Masonic  obliga¬
tion.

Tests.  Test  questions,  to  which  the
conventional  answers  would  prove  the  Ma¬
sonic  character  of  the  person  interrogated,
were  in  very  common  use  in  the  last  cen¬
tury  in  England.  They  were  not,  it  is  true,
enjoined  by  authority,  but  were  conven¬
tionally  used  to  such  an  extent  that  every
Mason  was  supposed  to  be  acquainted  with
them.  They  are  now  obsolete ;  but  not  a
quarter  of  a  century  ago  I  heard  such
“catch  questions”  as  “Where  does  the
Master  hang  his  hat?”  and  a  few  others
equally  trivial,  used  in  this  country.

Oliver  gives  ( Golden  Remains,  iv.  14,)  the
following  as  the  tests  in  use  in  the  early
part  of  the  last  century.  They  were  intro¬
duced  by  Desaguliers  and  Anderson  at  the
revival  in  1717.  Some  of  them,  however,
were  of  a  higher  character,  being  taken
from  the  catechism  or  lecture  then  in  use
as  a  part  of  the  instructions  of  the  Entered
Apprentice.

What  is  the  place  of  the  Senior  Entered
Apprentice?

What  are  the  fixed  lights?

How  ought  the  Master  to  be  served?

What  is  the  punishment  of  a  cowan?

What  is  the  bone  box  ?

How  is  it  said  to  be  opened  only  with
ivory  keys?

By  what  is  the  key  suspended?

What  is  the  clothing  of  a  Mason?

What  is  the  brand  ?

How  high  was  the  door  of  the  middle
chamber  ?

What  does  this  stone  smell  of?

The  name  of  an  Entered  Apprentice  ?


TESTS


TEST


809


The  name  of  a  Fellow  Craft?

The  name  of  Master  Mason?

In  the  year  1730,  Martin  Clare  having,
by  order  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  remodelled
the  lectures,  he  abolished  the  old  tests  and
introduced  the  following  new  ones.

Whence  came  you?

Who  brought  you  here?

What  recommendation  do  you  bring?

Do  you  know  the  secrets  of  Masonry?

Where  do  you  beep  them?

Have  you  the  key?

Where  is  it  deposited?

When  you  were  made  a  Mason,  what  did
you  consider  most  desirable?

What  is  the  name  of  your  Lodge?

Where  is  it  situated?

What  is  its  foundation?

How  did  you  enter  the  Temple  of  Solo¬
mon?

How  many  windows  did  you  see  there?

What  is  the  duty  of  the  youngest  ap¬
prentice?

Have  you  ever  worked  as  a  Mason  ?

What  did  you  work  with?

Salute  me  as  a  Mason.

Ten  years  afterwards  Clare’s  tests  were
superseded  by  a  new  series  of  “  examina¬
tion  questions,”  which  were  promulgated
by  Dr.  Manningham,  and  very  generally
adopted.  They  are  as  follows  :

Where  were  you  made  a  Mason?

What  did  you  learn  there?

How  do  you  hope  to  be  rewarded?

What  access  have  you  to  that  Grand
Lodge?

How  many  steps?

What  are  their  names?

How  many  qualifications  are  required  in
a  Mason?

What  is  the  standard  of  a  Mason’s  faith?

What  is  the  standard  of  his  actions?

Can  you  name  the  peculiar  characteris¬
tics  of  a  Mason’s  Lodge?

What  is  the  interior  composed  of?

Why  are  we  termed  Brethren?

By  what  badge  is  a  Mason  distinguished?

To  what  do  the  reports  refer?

How  many  principal  points  are  there  in
Masonry  ?

To  what  do  they  refer?

Their  names?

The  allusion?

Thomas  Dunckerley  subsequently  made
a  new  arrangement  of  the  lectures,  and
with  them  the  tests.  For  the  eighteen
which  composed  the  series  of  Manning-
ham,  lie  invented  ten,  but  which  were  more
significant  and  important  in  their  bearing.
They  were  as  follows:

How  ought  a  Mason  to  be  clothed?

When  were  you  born?

Where  were  you  born?

How  were  you  born?

6  B


Did  you  endure  the  brand  with  fortitude
and  patience?

The  situation  of  the  Lodge  ?

What  is  its  name?

With  what  have  you  worked  as  a  Mason?

Explain  the  sprig  of  Cassia.

How  old  are  you?

Preston  subsequently,  as  his  first  contri¬
bution  to  Masonic  literature,  presented  the
following  system  of  tests,  which  were  at  a
later  period  adopted.

Whither  are  you  bound?

Are  you  a  Mason  ?

How  do  you  know  that?

How  will  you  prove  it  to  me?

Where  were  you  made  a  Mason  ?

When  were  you  made  a  Mason?

By  whom  were  you  made  a  Mason?

From  whence  come  you?

What  recommendation  do  you  bring?

Any  other  recommendation  ?

Where  are  the  secrets  of  Masonry  kept?

To  whom  do  you  deliver  them  ?

How  do  you  deliver  them  ?

In  what  manner  do  you  serve  your  Mas¬
ter?

What  is  your  name?

What  is  the  name  of  your  son?

If  a  Brother  were  lost,  where  should  you
hope  to  find  him?

How  should  you  expect  him  to  be  clothed?

How  blows  a  Mason’s  wind?

Why  does  it  thus  blow  ?

What  time  is  it?

These  Prestonian  tests  continued  in  use
until  the  close  of  the  last  century,  and  Dr.
Oliver  says  that  at  his  initiation,  in  1801,
he  was  fully  instructed  in  them.

Tests  of  this  kind  appear  to  have  existed
at  an  early  period.  The  “  examination  of
a  Steinmetz,”  given  by  Findel  in  his  History
of  Freemasonry,  presents  all  the  character¬
istics  of  the  English  “  tests.”

The  French  Masons  have  one,  “Com¬
ment  §tes  vous  entr6  dans  le  Temple  de
Salomon?”  and  in  this  country,  besides  the
one  already  mentioned,  there  are  a  few
others  which  are  sometimes  used,  but  with¬
out  legal  authority.  A  review  of  these
tests  will,  I  think,  lead  to  the  conclusion
adopted  by  Oliver,  that  “  they  are  doubt¬
less  of  great  utility,  but  in  their  selection
a  pure  and  discriminating  taste  has  not  al¬
ways  been  used.”

Test  Word.  In  the  year  1829,  during
the  anti-Masonic  excitement  in  this  coun¬
try,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  pro¬
posed,  as  a  safeguard  against  “  the  introduc¬
tion  of  impostors  among  the  workmen,”  a
test  word  to  be  used  in  all  examinations  in
addition  to  the  legitimate  tests.  But  as
this  was  deemed  an  innovation  on  the
landmarks,  and  as  it  was  impossible  that
it  could  ever  become  universal,  the  Grand


810


TETRACTYS


TETRAGRAMMATON


Lodges  of  the  United  States  very  properly
rejected  it,  and  it  was  never  used.

Tetractys.  The  Greek  word  rerpaicrv^
signifies,  literally,  the  number  four,  and  is

therefore  synony-
*  inous  with  the

quaternion  ;  but  it
^  lias  been  pecu-

9  liarly  applied  to  a

symbol  of  the  Py-
0  %  %  thagoreans,  which

9  is  composed  of  ten

dots  arranged  in
•  %  t  c  a  triangular  form

of  four  rows.

This  figure  was  in  itself,  as  a  whole,  em¬
blematic  of  the  Tetragrammaton,  or  sacred
name  of  four  letters,  (lor  tetractys,  in  Greek,
means  four,)  and  was  undoubtedly  learned
by  Pythagoras  during  his  visit  to  Babylon.
But  the  parts  of  which  it  is  composed  were
also  pregnant  symbols.  Thus  the  one  point
wras  a  symbol  of  the  active  principle  or
creator,  the  two  points  of  the  passive  prin¬
ciple  or  matter,  the  three  of  the  world  pro¬
ceeding  from  their  union,  and  the  four  of
the  liberal  arts  and  sciences,  which  may  be
said  to  complete  and  perfect  that  world.

This  arrangement  of  the  ten  points  in  a
triangular  form  was  called  the  tetractys  or
number  four,  because  each  of  the  sides  of
the  triangle  consisted  of  four  points,  and
the  whole  number  of  ten  was  made  up  by
the  summation  of  the  first  four  figures,  1  +
2  +  3+4  =  10.

Hierocles  says,  in  his  Commentaries  on  the
Golden  Verses  (v.  47):  “But  how  comes
God  to  be  the  Tetractys?  This  thou  mayst
learn  in  the  sacred  book  ascribed  to  Pythag¬
oras,  in  wrhich  God  is  celebrated  as  the
number  of  numbers.  For  if  all  things  exist
by  His  eternal  decrees,  it  is  evident  that  in
‘  each  species  of  things  the  number  depends
on  the  cause  that  produces  them.  .  .  .  Now
the  power  of  ten  is  four ;  for  before  we  come
to  a  complete  and  perfect  decade,  we  discover
all  the  virtue  and  perfection  of  the  ten  in
the  four.  Thus,  in  assembling  all  numbers
from  one  to  four  inclusive,  the  whole  com¬
position  makes  ten,”  etc.

And  Dacier,  in  his  Notes  on  these  Com¬
mentaries  and  on  this  particular  passage,
remarks  that  “  Pythagoras,  having  learned
in  Egypt  the  name  of  the  true  God,  the
mysterious  and  ineffable  name  Jehovah,
and  finding  that  in  the  original  tongue  it
was  composed  of  four  letters,  translated  it
into  his  own  language  by  the  word  te¬
tractys,  and  gave  the  true  explanation  of  it,
saying  that  it  properly  signified  the  source
of  nature  that  perpetually  rolls  along.”

So  much  did  the  disciples  of  Pythagoras
venerate  the  tetractys,  that  it  is  said  that
they  took  their  most  solemn  oaths,  espe¬


cially  that  of  initiation,  upon  it.  The  exact
words  of  the  oath  are  given  in  the  Golden
Verses,  and  are  referred  to  by  Jamblichua
in  his  Life  of  Pythayoras  :

Nai  ftS  rdv  ipcrtpa  Csvyu  t apatnia  Ttrpaxriw
llayav  hcvaou  Qioius,  aAA’  epxn  in'  tpyuif.

i.  e.,

“  I  swear  it  by  him  who  has  transmitted  into
our  soul  the  sacred  tetractys,

The  source  of  nature,  whose  course  is  eternal.”

Jamblichus  gives  a  different  phraseology
of  the  oath,  but  with  substantially  the  same
meaning.  In  the  symbols  of  Masonry,  we
will  find  the  sacred  delta  bearing  the  near¬
est  analogy  to  the  tetractys  of  the  Pythag¬
oreans.

The  outline  of  these  points  form,  it  will
be  perceived,  a  triangle;  and  if  we  draw
short  lines  from  point  to  point,  we  will
have  within  this  great  triangle  nine  smaller
ones.  Dr.  Hemming,  in  his  revision  of  the
English  lectures,  adopted  in  1813,  thus  ex¬
plains  this  symbol :

“The  great  triangle  is  generally  denom¬
inated  Pythagorean,  because  it  served  as  a
principal  illustration  of  that  philosopher’s
system.  This  emblem  powerfully  elucidates
the  mystical  relation  between  the  numerical

and  geometri¬
cal  symbols.  It
is  composed  of
ten  points,  so
arranged  as  to
form  one  great
equilateral  tri¬
angle,  and  at
the  same  time
to  divide  it  in¬
to  nine  simi¬
lar  triangles  of
smaller  dimensions.  The  first  of  these,
representing  unity,  is  called  a  monad,  and
answers  to  what  is  denominated  a  point  in
geometry,  each  being  the  principle  by  the
multiplication  of  which  all  combinations
of  form  and  number  are  respectively  gen¬
erated.  The  next  two  points  are  denomi¬
nated  a  duad,  representing  the  number  two,
and  answers  to  the  geometrical  line  which,
consisting  of  length  without  breadth,  is
bounded  by  two  extreme  points.  The  three
following  points  are  called  the  triad,  repre¬
senting  the  number  three,  and  may  be  con¬
sidered  as  having  an  indissoluble  relation
to  all  superficies,  which  consist  of  length
and  breadth,  when  contemplated  as  ab¬
stracted  from  thickness.”

Dr.  Hemming  does  not  appear  to  have  im¬
proved  on  the  Pythagorean  symbolization.

Tetragrammaton.  In  Greek,  it  sig¬
nifies  a  word  of  four  letters.  It  is  the  title
given  by  the  Talmudists  to  the  name  of


TEUTONIC


TEXAS


811


God  Jehovah,  which  in  the  original  Hebrew
consists  of  four  letters,  mrr.  See  Jeho¬
vah,.

Teutonic  Knights.  The  origin  of
this  Order  was  an  humble  but  a  pious  one.
During  the  Crusades,  a  wealthy  gentleman
of  Germany,  who  resided  at  Jerusalem,
commiserating  the  condition  of  his  country¬
men  who  came  there  as  pilgrims,  made  his
house  their  receptacle,  and  afterwards  built
a  hospital,  to  which,  by  the  permission
of  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  he  added
an  oratory  dedicated  to  the  Virgin  Mary.
Other  Germans  coming  from  Lubeck  and
Bremen  contributed  to  the  extension  of
this  charity,  and  erected  at  Acre,  during
the  third  Crusade,  asumptuous hospital,  and
assumed  the  title  of  Teutonic  Knights,  or
Brethren  of  the  Hospital  of  our  Lady  of
the  Germans  of  Jerusalem.  They  elected
Henry  Walpott  their  first  Master,  and
adopted  for  their  government  a  Buie  closely
approximating  to  that  both  of  the  Tem¬
plars  and  the  Hospitallers,  with  an  addi¬
tional  one  that  none  but  Germans  should
be  admitted  into  the  Order.  Their  dress
consisted  of  a  white  mantle,  with  a  black
cross  embroidered  in  gold.  Clark  says
{Hist,  of  Knighthood,  ii.  60,)  that  the  original
badge,  which  was
signed  to  them  by
Emperor  Henry  1
was  a  black  cross
tent;  and  that  form  of
cross  has  ever  since
been  known  as  a  Teu¬
tonic  Cross.  John,
king  of  Jerusalem,
added  the  cross  double
potent  gold,  that  is,  a
cross  potent  of  gold  on  the  black  cross.
The  Emperor  Frederick  II.  gave  them  the
black  double-headed  eagle,  to  be  borne  in
an  inescutcheon  in  the  centre  of  the  cross;
and  St.  Louis,  of  France,  added  to  it,  as  an
augmentation,  a  blue  chief  strewn  with
fleur-de-lis.

During  the  siege  of  Acre  they  did  good
service  to  the  Christian  cause ;  but  on  the
fall  of  that  city,  the  main  body  returned  to
Europe  with  Frederick  II.  For  many
years  they  were  engaged  in  crusades  against
the  pagan  inhabitants  of  Prussia  and
Poland.  Ashmole  says  that  in  1340  they
built  the  city  of  Maryburg,  and  there  es¬
tablished  the  residence  of  their  Grand
Master.  They  were  for  a  long  time  en¬
gaged  in  contests  with  the  kings  of  Poland
on  account  of  their  invasion  of  their  terri¬
tory.  They  were  excommunicated  by  Pope
John  XXII.,  but  relying  on  their  great
strength,  and  the  remoteness  of  their  prov¬
ince,  they  bid  defiance  to  ecclesiastical
censures,  and  the  contest  ended  in  their  re¬


ceiving  Prussia  proper  as  a  brief  of  the
kings  of  Poland.

In  1511,  Albert,  Margrave  of  Branden¬
burg,  was  elected  their  Grand  Master.  In
1525  he  abandoned  the  vows  of  his  Order ;
became  a  Protestant,  and  exchanged  his
title  of  Grand  Master  for  that  of  Duke  of
Eastern  Prussia;  and  thus  the  dominion  of
the  Knights  was  brought  to  an  end,  and
the  foundation  laid  of  the  future  kingdom
of  Prussia.

The  Order,  however,  still  continued  its
existence,  the  seat  of  the  Grand  Master
being  at  Mergentheim,  in  Swabia.  By  the
peace  of  Presburg,  in  1805,  the  Emperor
Francis  II.  obtained  the  Grand  Master¬
ship,  with  all  its  rights  and  privileges.  In
1809  Napoleon  abolished  the  Order,  but  it
still  has  a  titular  existence  in  Austria.

Attempts  have  been  made  to  incorporate
the  Teutonic  Knights  into  Masonry,  and
their  cross  has  been  adopted  in  some  of  the
high  degrees.  But  we  fail  to  find  in  his¬
tory  the  slightest  traces  of  any  actual  con¬
nection  between  the  two  Orders.

Texas.  Freemasonry  was  introduced
in  Texas  by  the  formation  of  a  Lodge  at
Brazoria,  which  met  for  the  first  time,  De¬
cember  27,  1835.  The  Dispensation  for
this  Lodge  was  granted  by  J.  H.  Holland,
Grand  Master  of  Louisiana,  and  in  his
honor  the  Lodge  was  called  Holland  Lodge,
No.  36.  It  continued  to  meet  until  Feb¬
ruary,  1836,  when  the  war  with  Mexico  put
an  end  to  its  labors  for  the  time.  In  Oc¬
tober,  1837,  it  was  reopened  at  Houston,  a
Charter  having  in  the  interval  been  issued
for  it  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana.  In
the  meantime  two  other  Lodges  had  been
chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana,
Milam,  No.  40,  at  Nacogdoches,  and  Mc-
Farlane,  No.  41,  at  San  Augustine.  Dele¬
gates  from  these  Lodges  met  at  Houston,
December  20,  1837,  and  organized  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  Bepublic  of  Texas,
Anson  Jones  being  elected  Grand  Master.

The  introduction  of  Boyal  Arch  Ma¬
sonry  into  Texas  was  accompanied  with
some  difficulties.  In  1838,  the  General
Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States  granted
a  Charter  for  a  Chapter  at  San  Felipe  de
Austin.  The  members,  finding  it  impracti¬
cable  to  meet  at  that  place,  assumed  the  re¬
sponsibility  of  opening  it  at  Galveston,
which  was  done  June  2,  1840.  This  irreg¬
ular  action  was,  on  application,  healed
by  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  Subse¬
quently  this  body  united  with  two  illegal
Chapters  in  the  Bepublic  to  form  a  Grand
Chapter.  This  body  was  declared  illegal
by  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  and  Ma¬
sonic  intercourse  with  it  prohibited.  The
Chapter  at  Galveston  submitted  to  the
decree,  and  the  so-called  Grand  Chapter  of


as-


812  T.\  G.\  A.-.  0.\  T.\  U.*.


THEOSOPHISTS


Texas  was  dissolved.  Charters  were  then
granted  by  the  General  Grand  Chapter  to
seven  other  Chapters,  and  in  1850  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Texas  was  duly  established.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  Texas  was
organized  January  19,  1855.

T.\  U.\  A.*.  6.-.  T.\  U.\  The  ini¬
tials  of  The  Grand  Architect  of  The  Universe.
Often  used  in  this  abbreviated  form  by  Ma¬
sonic  writers.

Tiiamiiiuz.  Spelled  also  Tammuz.
A  deity  worshipped  by  the  apostate  Jews
in  the  time  of  Ezekiel,  and  supposed  by
most  commentators  to  be  identical  with  the
Syria  n  god  Adonis.  See  Adonis,  Mysteries  of.

Thanks.  It  is  a  usage  of  French  Ma¬
sonry,  and  in  the  high  degrees  of  some
other  Rites,  for  the  candidate,  after  his  ini¬
tiation  and  the  address  of  the  orator  to
him,  to  return  thanks  to  the  Lodge  for  the
honor  that  has  been  conferred  upon  him.
It  is  a  voluntary  and  not  an  obligatory
duty,  and  is  not  practised  in  the  Lodges  of
the  York  and  American  Kites.

Theism.  Theological  writers  have  de¬
fined  theism  as  being  the  belief  in  the  ex¬
istence  of  a  deity  who,  having  created  the
world,  directs  its  government  by  the  constant
exercise  of  his  beneficent  power,  in  con¬
tradistinction  to  atheism,  which  denies  the
existence  of  any  such  creative  and  superin¬
tending  being.  In  this  sense,  theism  is
the  fundamental  religion  of  Masonry,  on
which  is  superimposed  the  additional  and
peculiar  tenets  of  each  of  its  disciples.

Theocratic  Philosophy  of  Free¬
masonry.  This  is  a  term  invented  by
Dr.  Oliver  to  indicate  that  view  of  Free¬
masonry  which  intimately  connects  its
symbols  with  the  teachings  of  pure  religion,
and  traces  them  to  the  primeval  revelations
of  God  to  man,  so  that  the  philosophy  of
Masonry  shall  develop  the  continual  gov¬
ernment  of  the  Divine  Being.  Hence  he
says :  “  It  is  the  Theocratic  Philosophy  of
Freemasonry  that  commands  our  unquali¬
fied  esteem,  and  seals  in  our  heart  that  love
for  the  Institution  which  will  produce  an
active  religious  faith  and  practice,  and
lead  in  the  end  to  ‘  a  building  not  made
with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.’  ”  He
has  developed  this  system  in  one  of  his
works  entitled,  The  Theocratic  Philosophy
of  Freemasonry,  in  twelve  lectures  on  its
Speculative,  Operative,  and  Spurious  Branches.
In  this  work  he  enters  with  great  minute¬
ness  into  an  examination  of  the  specula¬
tive  character  of  the  Institution  and  of  its
operative  division,  which  he  contends  had
been  practised  as  an  exclusively  scientific
pursuit  from  the  earliest  times  in  every
country  of  the  world.  Many  of  the  le¬
gendary  speculations  advanced  in  this  work
wEl  be  rejected  at  this  day  as  unsound  and


untenable,  but  his  views  of  the  true  phil¬
osophy  of  Freemasonry  are  worthy  of  pro¬
found  study.

Theological  Yirtues.  Under  the

name  of  the  Cardinal  Virtues,  because  all
the  other  virtues  hinged  upon  them,  the
ancient  Pagans  gave  the  most  prominent
place  in  their  system  of  ethics  to  Temper¬
ance,  Prudence,  Fortitude,  and  Justice.
But  the  three  virtues  taught  in  the  theology
of  St.  Paul,  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  as
such  were  unknown  to  them.  To  these,  as
taking  a  higher  place  and  being  more  inti¬
mately  connected  with  the  relations  of  man
to  God,  Christian  writers  have  given  the
name  of  the  Theological  Virtues.  They
have  been  admitted  into  the  system  of  Ma¬
sonry,  and  are  symbolized  in  the  Theolog¬
ical  ladder  of  Jacob.

Theorieus.  The  twelfth  degree  of  the
German  Rose  Croix.

Tlieosophists.  There  were  many
theosopbists  —  enthusiasts  whom  Vaughan
calls  “noble  specimens  of  the  mystic”  —
but  those  with  whom  the  history  of  Ma¬
sonry  has  most  to  do  were  the  mystical  re¬
ligious  thinkers  of  the  last  century,  who
supposed  that  they  were  possessed  of  a
knowledge  of  the  Divinity  and  his  works
by  supernatural  inspiration,  or  who  re¬
garded  the  foundation  of  their  mystical
tenets  as  resting  on  a  sort  of  Divine  intui¬
tion.  Such  were  Swedenborg,  who,  if  not
himself  a  Masonic  reformer,  has  supplied
the  materials  of  many  degrees ;  the  Mora¬
vian  brethren,  the  object  of  w  hose  associa¬
tion  is  said  to  have  been  originally  the
propagation  of  the  Gospel  under  the  Ma¬
sonic  veil ;  St.  Martin,  the  founder  of  the
Philalethans ;  Pernetty,  to  whom  we  owe
the  Order  of  Hluminati  at  Avignon ;  and
Chastanier,  who  was  the  inventor  of  the
Rite  of  Illuminated  Theosophists.  The
object  proposed  in  all  these  theosophic  de¬
grees  was  the  regeneration  of  man,  and  his
reintegration  into  the  primitive  innocence
from  which  he  had  fallen  by  original  sin.
Theosophic  Masonry  was,  in  fact,  nothing
else  than  an  application  of  the  speculative
ideas  of  Jacob  Biilime,  of  Swedenborg,  and
other  mystical  philosophers  of  the  same
class.  Vaughan,  in  his  Hours  with  the  Mys¬
tics,  (ii.  46,  i  thus  describes  the  earlier  the¬
osophists  of  the  fourteenth  century :  “  They
believed  devoutly  in  the  genuineness  of  the
Kabbala.  They  were  persuaded  that,  be¬
neath  all  the  floods  of  change,  this  oral  tra¬
dition  had  perpetuated  its  life  unharmed
from  the  days  of  Moses  downward  —  even
as  Jewish  fable  taught  them  that  the  cedars
alone,  of  all  trees,  had  continued  to  spread
the  strength  of  their  invulnerable  arms
below  the  waters  of  the  deluge.  They  re¬
joiced  in  the  hidden  lore  of  that  book  as  in.


THERAPEUTiE


THORY


813


a  treasure  rich  with  the  germs  of  all  phi¬
losophy.  They  maintained  that  from  its
marvellous  leaves  man  might  learn  the  an¬
gelic  heraldry  of  the  skies,  the  mysteries
of  the  Divine  nature,  the  means  of  converse
with  the  potentates  of  heaven.”

Add  to  this  an  equal  reverence  for  the
unfathomable  mysteries  contained  in  the
prophecies  of  Daniel  and  the  vision  of  the
Evangelist,  with  a  proneness  to  give  to
everything  divine  a  symbolic  interpreta¬
tion,  and  you  have  the  true  character  of
those  later  theosophists  who  labored  to  in¬
vent  their  particular  systems  of  Masonry.
For  more  of  this  subject,  see  the  article  on
Saint  Martin.

Nothing  now  remains  of  theosophic  Ma¬
sonry  except  the  few  traces  left  through  the
influence  of  Zinnendorf  in  the  Swedish  sys¬
tem,  and  what  we  find  in  the  Apocalyptic
degrees  of  the  Scottish  Rite.  The  systems  of
Swedenborg,  Pernetty,  Paschalis,  St.  Mar¬
tin,  and  Chastanier  have  all  become  ob¬
solete.

Therapeutic.  An  ascetic  sect  of  Jews
in  the  first  century  after  Christ,  whom  Mil-
man  calls  the  ancestors  of  the  Christian
monks  and  hermits.  They  resided  near
Alexandria,  in  Egypt,  and  bore  a  striking
resemblance  in  their  doctrines  to  those  of
the  Essenians.  They  were,  however,  much
influenced  by  the  mystical  school  of  Alex¬
andria,  and,  while  they  borrowed  much
from  the  Kabbala,  partook  also  in  their
speculations  of  Pythagorean  and  Orphic
ideas.  Their  system  pervades  some  of  the
high  degrees  of  Masonry.  The  best  account
of  them  is  given  by  Philo  Judaeus.

Theurgy.  From  the  Greek  Theos,  God,
and  ergon,  work.  The  ancients  thus  called
the  whole  art  of  magic,  because  they  be¬
lieved  its  operations  to  be  the  result  of  an
intercourse  with  the  gods.  But  the  mod¬
erns  have  appropriated  it  to  that  species  of
magic  which  operates  by  celestial  means  as
opposed  to  natural  magic,  which  is  effected
by  a  knowledge  of  the  occult  powers  of
nature,  and  necromancy  or  magic  effected
by  the  aid  of  evil  spirits.  Attempts  have
been  made  by  some  speculative  authors  to
apply  this  high  magic,  as  it  is  also  called,
to  an  interpretation  of  Masonic  symbolism.
The  most  notorious  and  the  most  prolific
writer  on  this  subject  is  Louis  Alphonse
Constance,  who,  under  the  name  of  Eliphas
Levy,  has  given  to  the  world  numerous
works  on  the  dogma  and  ritual,  the  history
and  the  interpretation,  of  this  thcurgic  Ma¬
sonry.

Third  Degree.  See  Master  Mason.

Thirty  -  Second  Degree.  See

Frince  of  the  Royal  Secret.

Thirty-Six.  In  the  Pythagorean  doc¬
trine  of  numbers,  36  symbolized  the  male


and  female  powers  of  nature  united,  be¬
cause  it  is  composed  of  the  sum  of  the  four
odd  numbers,  1  +  3-j-  5  -(-  7  =  16,  added  to
the  sum  of  the  four  even  numbers,  2  +  4  +  6
+  8  =  20,  for  16  +  20  =  36.  It  has,  how¬
ever,  no  place  among  the  sacred  numbers
of  Masonry.

Thirty-Third  Degree.  See  Sover¬
eign  Grand  Inspector  General.

Thory,  Claude  Antoine.  A  dis¬
tinguished  French  Masonic  writer,  who  was
born  at  Paris,  May  26,  1759.  He  was  by
profession  an  advocate,  and  held  the  official
position  of  Registrar  of  the  Criminal  Court
of  the  Chatelet,  and  afterwards  of  first  ad¬
junct  of  the  Mayor  of  Paris.  He  was  a
member  of  several  learned  societies,  and  a
naturalist  of  considerable  reputation.  He
devoted  his  attention  more  particularly  to
botany,  and  published  several  valuable
works  on  the  genus  Rosa,  and  also  one  on
strawberries,  which  was  published  after  his
death.

Thory  took  an  important  part,  both  as
an  actor  and  a  writer,  in  the  Masonic
history  of  France.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Lodge  “Saint  Alexandre  d’Ecosse,”
and  of  the  “  Contrat  Social,”  out  of  whose
incorporation  into  one  proceeded  the  Moth¬
er  Lodge  of  the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite,
of  which  Thory  may  be  justly  called  the
founder.  He  was  at  its  constitution  made
the  presiding  officer,  and  afterwards  its
treasurer,  and  keeper  of  its  archives.  In
this  last  capacity,  he  made  a  collection  of  rare
and  valuable  manuscripts,  books,  medals,
seals,  jewels,  bronze  figures,  and  other  ob¬
jects  connected  with  Freemasonry.  Under
his  administration,  the  library  and  museum
of  the  Mother  Lodge  became  perhaps  the
most  valuable  collection  of  the  kind  in
France  or  in  any  other  country.  After  the
Mother  Lodge  had  ceased  its  labors  in
1826,  this  collection  passed  by  a  previous
stipulation  into  the  possession  of  the  Lodge
of  Mont  Thabor,  which  was  the  oldest  of
the  Rite.

Thory,  while  making  collections  for  the
Lodge,  had  amassed  for  himself  a  fund  of
the  most  valuable  materials  towards  the
history  of  Freemasonry,  which  he  used
with  great  effect  in  his  subsequent  publica¬
tions.  In  1813  he  published  the  Annates
Originis  Magni  Galliarum  Orientis ,  ou  His-
toire  de  la  Fondation  du  Grand  Orient  de
France,  in  1  vol.,  8vo;  and  in  1815  his
Acta  Lalomorum,  ou  Chronologie  de  C  His-
toire  de  la  Franc- Magonnerie,  Franchise  et
etrangire,  in  2  vols.,  8vo.

The  value  of  these  works,  especially  of
the  latter,  if  not  as  well-digested  histories,
certainly  as  important  contributions  for
Masonic  history,  cannot  be  denied.  Yet
they  have  been  variously  appreciated  by  hia


814


THOUX


THREE


contemporaries.  Rebold  {Hist,  des  3  G.  L.,
p.  531,1  says  of  the  Annates,  that  it  is  one
of  the  best  historical  productions  that
French  Masonic  literature  possesses;  while
Besuchet  {Precis  Historique,  ii.  275,)  charges
that  he  has  attempted  to  discharge  the
functions  of  a  historian  without  exacti¬
tude  and  without  impartiality.  These  dis¬
cordant  views  are  to  be  attributed  to  the
active  part  that  Thory  took  in  the  con¬
tests  between  the  Grand  Orient  and  the
Scottish  Rite,  and  the  opposition  which  he
offered  to  the  claims  of  the  former  to  the
Supreme  Masonic  authority.  Posterity
will  form  its  judgment  on  the  character  of
Thory  as  a  Masonic  historian  without  ref¬
erence  to  the  evanescent  rivalry  of  parties.
He  died  in  October,  1827.

Thotix:  de  Salverte.  Founder  in
1763,  at  Warsaw,  of  the  Academy  of  Secrets,
which  see.

Thread  of  Life.  In  the  earliest  lec¬
tures  of  the  last  century,  we  find  this  cate¬
chism  :

Q.  “  Have  you  the  key  of  the  Lodge?

A.  “Yes,  I 'have.

Q.  “What  is  its  virtue?

A.  “To  open  and  shut,  and  shut  and
open.

Q.  “  Where  do  you  keep  it  ?

A.  “In  an  ivory  box,  between  my  tongue
and  my  teeth,  or  within  my  heart,  where  all
my  secrets  are  kept.

Q.  “  Have  you  the  chain  to  the  key?

A.  “Yes,  I  have.

Q.  “  How  long  is  it?

A.  “  As  long  as  from  my  tongue  to  my
heart.”

In  a  later  lecture,  this  key  is  said  to
“  hang  by  a  tow  line  nine  inches  or  a
span.”  And  later  still,  in  the  old  Presto-
nian  lecture,  it  is  said  to  hang  by  “the
thread  of  life,  in  the  passage  of  entrance,
nine  inches  or  a  span  long,  the  supposed
distance  between  guttural  and  pectoral.”
All  of  which  is  intended  simply  to  symbol¬
ize  the  close  connection  which  in  every
Mason  should  exist  between  his  tongue  and
his  heart,  so  that  the  one  may  utter  nothing
that  the  other  does  not  truly  dictate.

Three.  Everywhere  among  the  an¬
cients  the  number  three  was  deemed  the
most  sacred  of  numbers.  A  reverence  for
its  mystical  virtues  is  to  be  found  even
among  the  Chinese,  who  say  that  numbers
begin  at  one  and  are  made  perfect  at  three,
and  hence  they  denote  the  multiplicity  of
any  object  by  repeating  the  character  which
stands  for  it  three  times.  In  the  philoso¬
phy  of  Plato,  it  was  the  image  of  the  Su¬
preme  Being,  because  it  includes  in  itself
the  properties  of  the  two  first  numbers,  and
because,  as  Aristotle  says,  it  contains  within
itself  a  beginning,  a  middle,  and  an  end.


The  Pythagoreans  called  it  perfect  har¬
mony.  So  sacred  was  this  number  deemed
by  the  ancients,  that  we  find  it  designating
some  of  the  attributes  of  almost  all  the
gods.  The  thunder-bolt  of  Jove  was  three¬
forked  ;  the  sceptre  of  Neptune  was  a  tri¬
dent;  Cerberus,  the  dog  of  Pluto,  was
three-headed;  there  were  three  Fates  and
three  Furies;  the  sun  had  three  names,
Apollo,  Sol,  and  Liber;  and  the  moon
three  also,  Diana,  Luna,  and  Hecate.  In
all  incantations,  three  was  a  favorite  num¬
ber,  for,  as  Virgil  says,  “numero  Deus  im-
pari  gaudet,”  God  delights  in  an  odd  num¬
ber.  A  triple  cord  was  used,  each  cord  of
three  different  colors,  white,  red,  and  black ;
and  a  small  image  of  the  subject  of  the
charm  was  carried  thrice  around  the  altar,
as  we  see  in  Virgil’s  eighth  eclogue:

“  Terna  tibi  hsec  primum,  triplici  diversa  colore,

Licia  circumdo,  terque  hanc  altaria  circum

Effigiem  duco.”

£.  e.,

“  First  I  surround  thee  with  these  three  pieces
of  list,  and  I  carry  thy  image  three  times  round
the  altars.”

The  Druids  paid  no  less  respect  to  this
sacred  number.  Throughout  their  whole
system,  a  reference  is  constantly  made  to
its  influence ;  and  so  far  did  their  venera¬
tion  for  it  extend,  that  even  their  sacred
poetry  was  composed  in  triads.

In  all  the  mysteries,  from  Egypt  to  Scan¬
dinavia,  we  find  a  sacred  regard  for  the
number  three.  In  the  rites  of  Mithras,  the
Empyrean  was  said  to  be  supported  by
three  intelligences,  Ormuzd,  Mithra,  and
Mithras.  In  the  rites  of  Hindustan,  there
was  the  trinity  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and
Siva.  It  was,  in  short,  a  general  character
of  the  mysteries  to  have  three  principal
officers  and  three  grades  of  initiation.

In  Freemasonry,  the  ternary  is  the  most
sacred  of  all  the  mystical  numbers.  Be¬
ginning  with  the  old  axiom  of  the  Roman
Artificers,  that  tres  faciunt  collegium,  or  it
requires  three  to  make  a  college,  they  have
established  the  rule  that  not  less  than  three
shall  congregate  to  form  a  Lodge.  Then
in  all  the  Rites,  whatever  may  be  the  num¬
ber  of  superimposed  grades,  there  lie  at  the
basis  the  three  symbolic  degrees.  There
are  in  all  the  degrees  three  principal  offi¬
cers,  three  supports,  three  greater  and  three
lesser  lights,  three  movable  and  three  im-
movablejewels,  three  principal  tenets,  three
working-tools  of  a  Fellow  Craft,  three  prin¬
cipal  orders  of  architecture,  three  chief
human  senses,  three  Ancient  Grand  Mas¬
ters.  In  fact,  everywhere  in  the  system  the
number  three  is  presented  as  a  prominent
symbol.  So  much  is  this  the  case,  that  all


THREE


TIE


815


the  other  mystical  numbers  depend  upon
it,  for  each  is  a  multiple  of  three,  its  square
or  its  cube,  or  derived  from  them.  Thus,
9,  27,  81,  are  formed  by  the  multiplication
of  three,  as  3x3  =  9,  and  32  X  3  =  27,
and  3 2  X  32  =  81.

But  in  nothing  is  the  Masonic  significa¬
tion  of  the  ternary  made  more  interesting
than  in  its  connection  with  the  sacred  delta,
the  symbol  of  Deity.  See  Triangle.

Three  Globes,  Rite  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the.  On  September
13,  1740,  the  Lodge  of  the  Three  Globes,  zu
den  drei  Weltkugeln,  was  established  in  the
city  of  Berlin,  Prussia.  In  1744  it  assumed
the  rank  and  title  of  a  Grand  Mother  Lodge.
It  is  now  one  of  the  three  Prussian  Grand
Lodges.  At  first  it  worked,  like  all  the
other  Lodges  of  Germany,  in  the  English
system  of  three  degrees,  and  adopted  the
English  Book  of  Constitutions  as  its  law.
But  it  subsequently  became  infected  with
the  high  degrees,  which  were  atone  time  so
popular  in  Germany,  and  especially  with
the  Strict  Observance  system  of  Von  Hund,
which  it  accepted  in  1766.  At  the  extinc¬
tion  of  that  system  the  Grand  Lodge
adopted  one  of  its  own,  in  doing  which  it
was  assisted  by  the  labors  of  Dr.  I.  F.
Zollner,  the  Grand  Master.  Its  Rite  con¬
sists  of  seven  high  degrees  added  to  the
three  primitive.  The  latter  are  under  the
control  of  the  Grand  Lodge ;  but  the  seven
higher  ones  are  governed  by  an  Internal
Supreme  Orient,  whose  members  are,  how¬
ever,  elected  by  the  Grand  Lodge.  The
Rite  is  practised  by  about  two  hundred
Lodges  in  Germany.

Three  Grand  Offerings.  See

Ground- Floor  of  the  Lodge.

Three  Points.  Three  points  in  a
triangular  form  (.*.)  are  placed  after  letters
in  a  Masonic  document  to  indicate  thatsuch
letters  are  the  initials  of  a  Masonic  title  or
of  a  technical  word  in  Masonry,  as  G.\  M.\
for  Grand  Master,  or  G.\  L.\  for  Grand
Lodge.  It  is  not  a  symbol,  but  simply  a
mark  of  abbreviation.  The  attempt,  there¬
fore,  to  trace  it  to  the  Hebrew  three  yods,
a  Kabbalistic  sign  of  the  Tetragrammaton,
or  any  other  ancient  symbol,  is  futile.  It
is  an  abbreviation,  and  nothing  more;
althoiigh  it  is  probable  that  the  idea  was
suggested  by  the  sacred  character  of  the
number  three  as  a  Masonic  number,  and
these  three  dots  might  refer  to  the  position
of  the  three  officers  in  a  French  Lodge.
Ragon  says  ( Orthod .  Macon.,  p.  71,)  thatthe
mark  was  first  used  by  the  Grand  Orient  of
France  in  a  circular  issued  August  12, 1774,
in  which  we  read  “G.-.  O.’.  de  France.”
The  abbreviation  is  now  constantly  used  in
French  documents,  and,  although  not  ac¬
cepted  by  the  English  Masons,  has  been


very  generally  adopted  in  other  countries.
In  the  United  States,  the  use  of  this  abbre¬
viation  is  gradually  extending.

Three  Senses.  Of  the  five  human
senses,  the  three  which  are  the  most  im¬
portant  in  Masonic  symbolism  are  Seeing,
Hearing,  and  Feeling,  because  of  their  re¬
spective  reference  to  certain  modes  of  recog¬
nition,  and  because,  by  their  use,  Masons
are  enabled  to  practise  that  universal  lan¬
guage  the  possession  of  which  is  the  boast
of  the  Order.

Three  Steps.  See  Steps  on  the  Mas¬
ter’s  Carpet.

Threshing-Floor.  Among  the  He¬
brews,  circular  spots  of  hard  ground  were
used,  as  now,  for  the  purpose  of  threshing
corn.  After  they  were  properly  prepared
for  the  purpose,  they  became  permanent
possessions.  One  of  these,  the  property  of
Ornan  the  Jebusite,  was  on  Mount  Moriah.
It  was  purchased  by  David,  for  a  place  of
sacrifice,  for  six  hundred  shekels  of  gold,
and  on  it  the  Temple  was  afterwards  built.
Hence  it  is  sometimes  used  as  a  symbolic
name  for  the  Temple  of  Solomon  or  for  a
Master’s  Lodge.  Thus  it  is  said  in  the
ritual  that  the  Mason  comes  “  from  the
lofty  tower  of  Babel,  where  language  was
confounded  and  Masonry  lost,”  and  that  he
is  travelling  “  to  the  threshing-floor  of  Ornan
the  Jebusite,  where  language  was  restored
and  Masonry  found.”  The  interpretation
of  this  rather  abstruse  symbolic  expression
is  that  on  his  initiation  the  Mason  comes
out  of  the  profane  world,  where  there  is
ignorance  and  darkness  and  confusion  as
there  was  at  Babel,  and  that  he  is  approach¬
ing  the  Masonic  world,  where,  as  at  the
Temple  built  on  Oman’s  threshing-floor,
there  is  knowledge  and  light  and  order.

Throne.  The  seat  occupied  by  the
Grand  Master  in  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land  is  called  the  throne,  in  allusion,  prob¬
ably,  to  the  throne  of  Solomon.  In  Amer¬
ican  Grand  Lodges  it  is  styled  the  Oriental
Chair  of  Solomon,  a  title  which  is  also  given
to  the  seat  of  the  Master  of  a  subordinate
Lodge.

In  ecclesiology,  the  seat  in  a  cathedral
occupied  by  a  bishop  is  called  a  throne;
and  in  the  Middle  Ages,  according  to  Du
Cange,  the  same  title  was  not  only  applied
to  the  seats  of  bishops,  but  often  also  to  those
of  abbots,  or  even  priests  who  were  in  pos¬
session  of  titles  or  churches.

Tliunimim.  See  Urimand  Thummim.

Tic.  The  first  clause  in  the  covenant
of  Masonry  which  refers  to  the  preservation
of  the  secrets  is  technically  called  the  tie.
It  is  substantially  the  same  in  the  covenant
of  each  degree,  from  the  lowest  to  the
highest.

Tic,  Mystic.  See  Mystic  Tie.


816


TIERCE


TITLES


Tierce,  I>e  la.  He  was  the  first
translator  of  Anderson’s  Constitutions  into
French,  the  manuscript  of  which  he  says
that  he  prepared  during  his  residence  in
London.  He  afterwards  published  it  at
Frankfort,  in  1743,  with  the  title  of  His-
toire,  obligations  et  statuts  de  la  tris  venera¬
ble  confraternite  des  Francs- Maqons,  tirez  de
leur  archives  et  con/orm'es  aux  traditions  les
liis  anciennes,  etc.  De  la  Tierce  is  said  to
ave  been,  while  in  London,  an  intimate
friend  of  Anderson,  the  first  edition  of
whose  Constitutions  he  used  when  he  com¬
piled  his  manuscript  in  1725.  But  he  im¬
proved  on  Anderson’s  work  by  dividing  the
history  in  epochs.  This  course  Anderson
pursued  in  his  second  edition ;  which  cir¬
cumstance  has  led  Schneider,  in  the  Neuen
Journale  zur  Freimaurerei,  to  suppose  that,
in  writing  that  second  edition,  Anderson
was  aided  by  the  previous  labors  of  De  la
Tierce,  of  whose  work  he  was  most  proba¬
bly  in  possession.

Tile.  A  Lodge  is  said  to  be  tiled  when
the  necessary  precautions  have  been  taken
to  prevent  the  approach  of  unauthorized
persons;  and  it  is  said  to  be  the  first  duty
of  every  Mason  to  see  that  this  is  done
before  the  Lodge  is  opened.  The  word  to
tile  is  sometimes  used  in  the  same  sense  as
to  examine,  as  when  it  is  said  that  a  visitor
has  been  tiled,  that  is,  has  been  examined.
But  the  expression  is  not  in  general  use,
nor  do  I  think  that  it  is  a  correct  employ¬
ment  of  the  term.

Tiler.  An  officer  of  a  symbolic  Lodge,
whose  duty  is  to  guard  the  door  of  the
Lodge,  and  to  permit  no  one  to  pass  in  who
is  not  duly  qualified,  and  who  has  not  the
permission  of  the  Master.

A  necessary  qualification  of  a  Tiler  is,
therefore,  that  he  should  be  a  Master  Ma¬
son.  Although  the  Lodge  may  be  opened
in  an  inferior  degree,  no  one  who  has  not
advanced  to  the  third  degree  can  legally
discharge  the  functions  of  Tiler.

As  the  Tiler  is  always  compensated  for
his  services,  he  is  considered,  in  some  sense,
as  the  servant  of  the  Lodge.  It  is,  there¬
fore,  his  duty  to  prepare  the  Lodge  for  its
meetings,  to  arrange  the  furniture  in  its
proper  place,  and  to  make  all  other  arrange¬
ments  for  the  convenience  of  the  Lodge.

The  Tiler  need  not  be  a  member  of  the
Lodge  which  he  tiles;  and  in  fact,  in
large  cities,  one  brother  very  often  performs
the  duties  of  Tiler  of  several  Lodges.

This  is  a  very  important  office,  and,  like
that  of  the  Master  and  Wardens,  owes  its
existence,  not  to  any  conventional  regula¬
tions,  but  to  the  very  landmarks  of  the
Order ;  for,  from  the  peculiar  nature  of  our
Institution,  it  is  evident  that  there  never
could  have  been  a  meeting  of  Masons  for


Masonic  purposes,  unless  a  Tiler  had  been
present  to  guard  the  Lodge  from  intrusion.

The  title  is  derived  from  the  operative
art;  for  as  in  Operative  Masonry  the  Tiler,
when  the  edifice  is  erected,  finishes  and
covers  it  with  the  roof  (of  tiles),  so  in
Speculative  Masonry,  when  the  Lodge  is
duly  organized,  the  'filer  closes  the  door,
and  covers  the  sacred  precincts  from  all  in¬
trusion.

Tiler’s  Oath.  See  Oath,  Tiler’s.

Tilly  de  Grasse.  See  Grasse,  Tilly  de.

Timbre.  The  French  Masons  so  call
a  stamp,  consisting  of  the  initials  or  mono¬
gram  of  the  Lodge,  which  is  impressed  in
black  or  red  ink  upon  every  official  docu¬
ment  emanating  from  the  Lodge.  When
such  a  document  has  the  seal  also  attached,
it  is  said  to  be  “timbr£e  et  scell6e,”  i.  e.,
stamped  and  sealed.  The  timbre,  which
differs  from  the  seal,  is  not  used  in  English
or  American  Lodges.

Time.  The  image  of  Time,  under  the
conventional  figure  of  a  winged  old  man
with  the  customary  scythe  and  hour-glass,
has  been  adopted  as  one  of  the  modern
symbols  in  the  third  degree.  He  is  repre¬
sented  as  attempting  to  disentangle  the
ringlets  of  a  weeping  virgin  who  stands
before  him.  This,  which  is  apparently  a
never-ending  task,  but  one  which  Time  un¬
dertakes  to  perform,  is  intended  to  teach
the  Mason  that  time,  patience,  and  perse¬
verance  will  enable  him  to  accomplish  the
great  object  of  a  Mason’s  labor,  and  at  last  to
obtain  that  true  Word  which  is  the  symbol
of  Divine  Truth.  Time,  therefore,  is  in
this  connection  the  symbol  of  well-directed
perseverance  in  the  performance  of  duty.

Time  anti  Circumstances.  The
answer  to  the  question  in  the  ritual  of  in¬
itiation,  “  Has  he  made  suitable  profi¬
ciency?”  is  sometimes  made,  “Such  as
time  and  circumstances  would  permit.”  This
is  an  error,  and  may  be  a  mischievous  one,
as  leading  to  a  careless  preparation  of  the
candidate  for  qualification  to  advancement.
The  true  reply  is,  “  He  has.”  See  Advance¬
ment.

Tirshatha.  The  title  given  to  the
Persian  governors  of  Judea.  It  was  borne
by  Zerubbabel  and  Nehemiah.  It  is  sup¬
posed  to  be  derived  from  the  Persian  torsch,
austere  or  severe,  and  is  therefore,  says
'  Gesenius,  equivalent  to  “Your  Severity.”
It  is  in  the  modern  ritual  of  the  Supreme
Council  for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction  of
the  United  States  the  title  of  the  presiding
officer  of  a  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem.
It  is  also  the  title  of  the  presiding  officer
of  the  Royal  Order  of  Heredom  of  Kilwin-
ning.

Titles.  The  titles  conferred  in  the  rituals
of  Masonry  upon  various  officers  are  often


TITLES


TOASTS


817


apparently  grandiloquent,  and  have  given
occasion  to  some,  who  have  not  understood
their  true  meaning,  to  call  them  absurd  and
bombastic.  On  this  subject  Brother  Albert
Pike  has,  in  the  following  remarks,  given  a
proper  significance  to  Masonic  titles :

“Some  of  these  titles  we  retain;  but  they
have  with  us  meanings  entirely  consistent
with  the  spirit  of  equality,  which  is  the
foundation  and  peremptory  law  of  its  being,
of  all  Masonry.  The  Knight,  with  us,  is  he
who  devotes  his  hand,  his  heart,  his  brain
to  the  service  of  Masonry,  and  professes
himself  the  sworn  soldier  of  truth :  the
Prince  is  he  who  aims  to  be  chief  [Princeps],
first,  leader  among  his  equals,  in  virtue  and
good  deeds :  the  Sovereign  is  he  who,  one
of  an  Order  whose  members  are  all  sover¬
eigns,  is  supreme  only  because  the  law  and
Constitutions  are  so  which  he  administers,
and  by  which  he,  like  every  other  brother,
is  governed.  The  titles  Puissant,  Potent ,
Wise,  and  Venerable  indicate  that  power
of  virtue,  intelligence,  and  wisdom  which
those  ought  to  strive  to  attain  who  are
placed  in  high  offices  by  the  suffrages  of
their  brethren ;  and  all  our  other  titles  and
designations  have  an  esoteric  meaning  con¬
sistent  with  modesty  and  equality,  and
which  those  who  receive  them  should  fully
understand.”

Titles  of  Grand  Lodges.  The

title  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  is
“the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  Free
and  Accepted  Masons.”  That  of  Ireland,
“the  Grand  Masonic  Lodge.”  Of  Scot¬
land,  “  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Ancient  and
Honorable  Fraternity  of  Free  and  Accepted
Masons.”  That  of  France  is  “the  Grand
Orient.”  The  same  title  is  taken  by  the
Grand  Lodges  or  Supreme  Masonic  author¬
ities  of  Portugal,  Belgium,  Italy,  Spain,
and  Greece,  and  also  by  the  Grand  Lodges
of  all  the  South  American  States.  Of  the
German  Grand  Lodges,  the  only  three  that
have  distinctive  titles  are  “  the  Grand  Na¬
tional  Mother  Lodge  of  the  Three  Globes,”
“  The  Grand  National  Lodge  of  Germany,”
and  “  the  Grand  Bodge  Royal  York  of
Friendship.”  In  Sweden  and  Denmark
they  are  simply  called  “  Grand  Lodges.”
In  the  English  possessions  of  North  Amer¬
ica  they  are  also  called  “  Grand  Lodges.”
In  the  United  States  the  title  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Maine,  of  Massachusetts,  of
Rhode  Island,  of  Alabama,  of  Illinois,  of
Iowa,  of  Wisconsin,  of  Minnesota,  and  of
Oregon,  is  the  “Most  Worshipful  Grand
Lodge  of  Ancient  Free  and  Accepted  Ma¬
sons;”  of  New  Hampshire,  of  Vermont,
of  New  York,  of  New  Jersey,  of  Pennsyl¬
vania,  of  Arkansas,  and  of  Indiana,  is  “the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  Ancient  and  Honor¬
able  Fraternity  of  Free  and  Accepted  Ma-
6  C  62


sons ;  ”  of  Maryland,  of  the  District  of
Columbia,  of  Florida,  of  Michigan,  of  Mis¬
souri,  and  of  California,  is  the  “Grand
Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  ;  ”  of
South  Carolina  is  the  “Most  Worshipful
Grand  Lodge  of  Ancient  Free  Masons;”
of  all  the  other  States  the  title  is  simply
the  “  Grand  Lodge.”

Tito.  A  significant  word  in  the  high
degrees.  The  Scottish  Rite  rituals  give  the
name  of  Tito,  Prince  Harodim,  to  him  who
they  say  was  the  first  who  was  appointed  by
Solomon  a  Provost  and  Judge.  This  per¬
son  appears  to  be  altogether  mythical;  the
word  is  not  found  in  the  Hebrew  language,
nor  has  any  meaning  been  given  to  it.  He
is  represented  as  having  been  a  favorite  of
the  king  of  Israel.  He  is  said  to  have  pre¬
sided  over  the  Lodge  of  Intendants  of  the
Building,  and  to  have  been  one  of  the  twelve
illustrious  knights  who  were  set  over  the
twelve  tribes,  that  of  Naphtali  being  placed
under  his  care.  The  wffiole  of  this  legend
is,  of  course,  connected  with  the  symbolic
signification  of  those  degrees.

Toasts.  Anderson  says,  in  his  second
edition,  that  in  1719  Dr.  Desaguliers,  having
been  installed  Grand  Master,  “  forthwith  re¬
vived  the  old,  regular,  and  peculiar  toasts  or
healths  of  the  Freemasons.”  If  Anderson’s
statements  could  be  implicitly  trusted  as
historical  facts,  we  should  have  to  conclude
that  a  system  of  regulated  toasts  prevailed
in  the  Lodges  before  the  revival.  The  cus¬
tom  of  drinking  healths  at  banquets  is  a
very  old  one,  and  can  be  traced  to  the  days
of  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans.  From
them  it  was  handed  down  to  the  moderns,
and  especially  in  England  we  find  the  “  was-
hael”  of  the  Saxons,  a  term  used  in  drink¬
ing,  and  equivalent  to  the  modern  phrase,
“Your  health.”  Steele,  in  the  Tatter,  inti¬
mates  that  the  word  toast  began  to  be  ap¬
plied  to  the  drinking  of  healths  in  the
early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century.  And
although  his  account  of  the  origin  of  the
word  has  been  contested,  it  is  very  evident
that  the  drinking  of  toasts  was  a  universal
custom  in  the  clubs  and  festive  associations
which  were  common  in  London  about  the
time  of  the  revival  of  Masonry.  It  is  there¬
fore  to  be  presumed  that  the  Masonic
Lodges  did  not  escape  the  influences  of  the
convivial  spirit  of  that  age,  and  drinking  in
the  Lodge  room  duri  ng  the  hours  of  refresh¬
ment  was  a  usual  custom,  but,  as  Oliver  ob¬
serves,  all  excess  was  avoided,  and  the  con¬
vivialities  of  Masonry  were  regulated  by
the  Old  Charges,  which  directed  the  breth¬
ren  to  enjoy  themselves  with  decent  mirth,
not  forcing  any  brother  to  eat  or  drink
beyond  his  inclination,  nor  hindering  him
from  going  home  when  he  pleased.  The
drinking  was  conducted  by  rule,  the  Master


818


TOASTS


TOASTS


giving  the  toast,  hut  first  inquiring  of  the
Senior  Warden,  “Are  you  charged  in  the
West,  Brother  Senior?”  and  of  the  Junior
Warden,  “Are  you  charged  in  the  South,
Brother  Junior?”  to  which  appropriate  re¬
lies  being  made,  the  toast  was  drunk  with
onors  peculiar  to  the  Institution.  In  an  old
Masonic  song,  the  following  stanza  occurs:

“‘Are  you  charged  in  the  West?  are  you
charged  in  the  South  ?’

The  Worshipful  Master  cries.

‘  We  are  charged  in  the  West,  we  are  charged
in  the  South,’

Each  Warden  prompt  replies.”

One  of  the  catechetical  works  of  the  last
century  thus  describes  the  drinking  customs
of  the  Masons  of  that  period:  “The  table
being  plentifully  supplied  with  wine  and
unch,  every  man  has  a  glass  set  before
iin,  and  fills  it  with  what  he  chooses.  But
he  must  drink  his  glass  in  turn,  or  at  least
keep  the  motion  with  the  rest.  When,
therefore,  a  public  health  is  given,  the
Master  fills  first,  and  desires  the  brethren
to  charge  their  glasses;  and  when  this  is
supposed  to  be  done,  the  Master  says,
Brethren,  are  you  all  charged?  The  Senior
and  Junior  Wardens  answer,  We  are  all
charged  in  the  South  and  West.  Then  they
all  stand  up,  and,  observing  the  Master's
motions,  (like  the  soldier  his  right-hand
man,)  drink  their  glasses  off.”  Another
work  of  the  same  period  says  that  the  first
toast  given  was  “  the  King  and  the  Craft.”
But  a  still  older  work  gives  what  it  calls
“  A  Free-Mason’s  Health  ”  in  the  following
words :  “  Here’s  a  health  to  our  society  and
to  every  faithful  brother  that  keeps  his  oath
of  secrecy.  As  we  are  sworn  to  love  each
other,  the  world  no  Order  knows  like  this
our  noble  and  ancient  F raternity.  Let  them
wonder  at  the  Mystery.  Here,  Brother,  I
drink  to  thee.”

In  time  the  toasts  improved  in  their  style,
and  were  deemed  of  so  much  importance
that  lists  of  them,  for  the  benefit  of  those
who  were  deficient  in  inventive  genius,
were  published  in  all  the  pocket-books,
calendars,  and  song-books  of  the  Order.
Thus  a  large  collection  is  to  be  found  in
the  Masonic  Miscellanies  of  Stephen  Jones.
A  few  of  them  will  show  their  technical
character:  “To  the  secret  and  silent;”
“  To  the  memory  of  the  distinguished
Three;  ”  “  To  all  that  live  within  compass
and  square;”  “To  the  memory  of  the  Tyr¬
ian  artist;”  “To  him  that  first  the  work
began,”  etc.

But  there  was  a  regular  series  of  toasts
which,  besides  these  voluntary  ones,  were
always  given  at  the  refreshments  of  the
brethren.  Thus,  when  the  reigning  sover¬
eign  happened  to  be  a  member  of  the  Fra¬


ternity,  the  first  toast  given  was  always
“  The  King  and  the  Craft.”

In  the  French  Lodges  the  drinking  of
toasts  was,  with  the  word  itself,  borrowed
from  England.  It  was,  however,  subjected
to  strict  rules,  from  which  there  could  be
no  departure.  Seven  toasts  were  called
“Santes  d’  obligation,”  because  drinking
them  was  made  obligatory,  and  could  not
be  omitted  at  the  Lodge  banquet.  They
were  as  follows :  1.  The  health  of  the  Sov¬
ereign  and  his  family ;  2.  That  of  the
Grand  Master  and  the  chiefs  of  the  Order;
3.  That  of  the  Master  of  the  Lodge;  4
That  of  the  Wardens;  5.  That  of  the  other
officers;  6.  That  of  the  visitors;  7.  That
of  all  Masons  wheresoever  spread  over
the  two  hemispheres.  In  1872,  the  Grand
Orient,  after  long  discussions,  reduced  the
number  of  santes  (T  obligation  from  seven  to
four,  and  changed  their  character.  They
are  now:  1.  To  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,
the  Lodges  of  its  correspondence,  and  for¬
eign  Grand  Orients ;  2.  To  the  Master  of
the  Lodge ;  3.  To  the  Wardens,  the  officers,
affiliated  Lodges,  and  visiting  brethren;  4.
To  all  Masons  existing  on  each  hemisphere.

The  systematized  method  of  drinking
toasts,  which  once  prevailed  in  the  Lodges
of  the  English-speaking  countries,  has  been,
to  a  great  extent,  abandoned;  yet  a  few
toasts  still  remain,  which,  although  not
absolutely  obligatory,  are  still  never  omit¬
ted.  Thus  no  Masonic  Lodge  would  neglect
at  its  banquet  to  offer,  as  its  first  toast,
a  sentiment  expressive  of  respect  for  the
Grand  Lodge.

The  venerable  Oliver  was  a  great  admirer
of  the  custom  of  drinking  Masonic  toasts,
and  panegyrizes  it  in  his  Book  of  the  Lodge,
(p.  147.)  He  says  that  at  the  time  of  re¬
freshment  in  a  Masonic  Lodge  “the  song
appeared  to  have  more  zest  than  in  a  pri¬
vate  company ;  the  toast  thrilled  more
vividly  upon  the  recollection ;  and  the
small  modicum  of  punch  with  which  it
was  honored  retained  a  higher  flavor  than
the  same  potation  if  produced  at  a  private
board.”  And  he  adds,  as  a  specimen,  the
following  “  characteristic  toast,”  which  he
says  was  always  received  with  a  “profound
expression  of  pleasure.”

“  To  him  that  all  things  understood,

To  him  that  found  the  stone  and  wood,

To  him  that  hapless  lost  his  blood,

In  doing  of  his  duty,

To  that  blest  age  and  that  blest  morn
Whereon  those  three  great  men  were  born,
Our  noble  science  to  adorn

With  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty.”

It  is  not  surprising  that  he  should  after¬
wards  pathetically  deplore  the  discontin¬
uance  of  the  custom.


TOKEN


TOMB


819


Token.  The  word  token  is  derived
from  the  Anglo-Saxon  tarn,  which  means  a
sign,  presage,  type,  or  representation,  that
which  points  out  something;  and  this  is
traced  to  tcecan,  to  teach,  show,  or  instruct,
because  by  a  token  we  show  or  instruct
others  as  to  what  we  are.  Bailey,  whose
Dictionary  was  published  soon  after  the  re¬
vival,  defines  it  as  “  a  sign  or  mark ;  ”  but
it  is  singular  that  the  word  is  not  found  in
either  of  the  dictionaries  of  Phillips  or
Blount,  which  were  the  most  popular  glos¬
saries  in  the  beginning  of  the  last  century.
The  word  was,  however,  well  known  to  the
Fraternity,  and  was  in  use  at  the  time  of
the  revival  with  precisely  the  same  mean¬
ing  that  is  now1  given  to  it  as  a  mode  of  re¬
cognition.

The  Hebrew  word  ofh,  is  frequently
used  in  Scripture  to  signify  a  sign  or  me¬
morial  of  something  past,  some  covenant
made  or  promise  given.  Thus  God  says  to
Noah,  of  the  rainbow,  “it  shall  be  for  a
token,  of  a  covenant  between  me  and  the
earth ;  ”  and  to  Abraham  he  says  of  cir¬
cumcision,  “  it  shall  be  a  token  of  the  cove¬
nant  betwixt  me  and  you.”  In  Masonry,
the  grip  of  recognition  is  called  a  token,
because  it  is  an  outward  sign  of  the  cove¬
nant  of  friendship  and  fellowship  entered
iuto  between  the  members  of  the  Fraternity,
and  is  to  be  considered  as  a  memorial  of
that  covenant  which  was  made,  when  it
was  first  received  by  the  candidate,  between
him  and  the  Order  into  which  he  was  then
initiated.

Neither  the  French  nor  the  German  Ma¬
sons  have  a  word  precisely  equivalent  to
token.  Krause  translates  it  by  merkmale,
a  sign  or  representation,  but  which  has  no
technical  Masonic  signification.  The  French
have  only  attouchement,  which  means  the
act  of  touching;  and  the  Germans,  griff,
which  is  the  same  as  the  English  grip.  In
the  technical  use  of  the  word  token,  the
English-speaking  Masons  have  an  advan¬
tage  not  possessed  by  those  of  any  other
country.

Tolerance  Todge.  When  the  ini¬
tiation  of  Jews  was  forbidden  in  the  Prus¬
sian  Lodges,  two  brethren  of  Berlin,  Von
Hirschfeld  and  Catter,  induced  by  a  spirit
of  toleration,  organized  a  Lodge  in  Berlin
for  the  express  purpose  of  initiating  Jews,
to  which  they  gave  the  appropriate  name
of  Tolerance  Lodge.  This  Lodge  was  not
recognized  by  the  Masonic  authorities.

Toleration.  The  grand  characteristic
of  Masonry  is  its  toleration  in  religion  and
politics.  In  respect  to  the  latter,  its  tolera¬
tion  has  no  limit.  The  question  of  a  man’s
political  opinions  is  not  permitted  to  be
broached  in  the  Lodge;  in  reference  to  the
former,  it  requires  only  that,  to  use  the  lan¬


guage  of  the  old  charge,  Masons  shall  be
of  “that  religion  in  which  all  men  agree,
leaving  their  particular  opinions  to  them¬
selves.”  The  same  old  Charges  say,  “No
private  piques  or  quarrels  must  be  brought
within  the  door  of  the  Lodge,  far  less  any
quarrels  about  religion,  or  nations,  or  state
policy,  we  being  only,  as  Masons,  of  the
Catholic  religion  above-mentioned ;  we  are
also  of  all  nations,  tongues,  kindreds,  and
languages,  and  are  resolved  against  all
politics,  as  what  never  yet  conduced  to  the
welfare  of  the  Lodge,  nor  ever  will.”

Tomb  of'Adoniram.  Margoliouth,
in  his  History  of  the  Jews,  tells  the  legend
that  at  Saguntum,  in  Spain,  a  sepulchre
was  found  four  hundred  years  ago,  with
the  following  Hebrew  inscription:  “This
is  the  grave  of  Adoniram,  the  servant  of
King  Solomon,  who  came  to  collect  the  trib¬
ute,  and  died  on  the  day—”  Margoliouth,
who  believes  the  mythical  story,  says  that
the  Jesuit  Villepandus,  being  desirous  of
ascertaining  if  the  statements  concerning
the  tomb  were  true,  directed  the  Jesuit
students  who  resided  at  Murviedro,  a  small
village  erected  upon  the  ruins  of  Saguntum,
to  make  diligent  search  for  the  tomb  and
inscription.  After  a  thorough  investiga¬
tion,  the  Jesuit  students  were  shown  a
stone  on  which  appeared  a  Hebrew  in¬
scription,  much  defaced  and  nearly  oblit¬
erated,  which  the  natives  stated  was  “  the
stone  of  Solomon's  collector.”  Still  unsatis¬
fied,  they  made  further  search,  and  dis¬
covered  a  manuscript  written  in  antique
Spanish,  and  carefully  preserved  in  the
citadel,  in  which  the  following  entry  was
made :  “  At  Saguntum,  in  the  citadel,  in
the  year  of  our  Lord  1480,  a  little  more  or
less,  was  discovered  a  sepulchre  of  surpris¬
ing  antiquity.  It  contained  an  embalmed
corpse,  not  of  the  usual  stature,  but  taller
than  is  common.  It  had  and  still  retains
on  the  front  two  lines  in  the  Hebrew  lan¬
guage  and  characters,  the  sense  of  which
is:  ‘The  sepulchre  of  Adoniram,  the  ser¬
vant  of  King  Solomon,  who  came  hither  to
collect  tribute.’  ”

The  story  has  far  more  the  appearance
of  a  Talmudic  or  a  Rosicrucian  legend  than
that  of  a  historical  narrative.

Tomb  of  Hiram  Abif.  All  that  is
said  of  it  in  Masonry  is  more  properly  refer¬
red  to  in  the  article  on  the  Monument  in  the
Third  Degree.  See  Monument.

Tomb  of  Ifiram  of  Tyre.  Five
miles  to  the  east  of  the  city  of  Tyre  is  an
ancient  monument,  called  by  the  natives
Kabr  Hairan,  or  the  tomb  of  Hiram.  The
tradition  that  the  king  of  Tyre  was  there
interred  rests  only  on  the  authority  of  the
natives.  It  bears  about  it,  however,  the
unmistakable  marks  of  extreme  antiquity,


820


TONGUE


TORRUBIA


and,  as  Thompson  says,  ( The  Land  and  The
Book,  i.  290,)  there  is  nothing  in  the  mon¬
ument  itself  inconsistent  with  the  idea  that
it  marks  the  final  resting-place  of  that  friend
of  Solomon.  He  thus  describes  it:  “The
base  consists  of  two  tiers  of  great  stones,
each  three  feet  thick,  thirteen  feet  long,
and  eight  feet  eight  inches  broad.  Above
this  is  one  huge  stone,  a  little  more  than  fif¬
teen  feet  long,  ten  broad,  and  three  feet  four
inches  thick.  Over  this  is  another,  twelve
feet  three  inches  long,  eight  broad,  and  six
high.  The  top  stone  is  a  little  smaller  every
way,  and  only  five  feet  thick.  The  entire
height  is  twenty-one  feet.  There  is  nothing
like  it  in  this  country,  and  it  may  well  have
stood,  as  it  now  does,  ever  since  the  days
of  Solomon.  The  large  broken  sarcophagi
scattered  around  it  are  assigned  by  tradition
to  Hiram’s  mother,  wife,  or  family.”

Dr.  Morris,  who  visited  the  spot  in  1868,
gives  a  different  admeasurement,  which
is  probably  more  accurate  than  that  of
Thompson.  According  to  him,  the  first
tier  is  14  ft.  long,  8  ft.  8  in.  broad,  4  ft.
thick.  Second  tier,  14  ft.  long,  8  ft.  8  in.
broad,  2  ft.  10  in.  thick.  Third  tier,  15  ft.
1  in.  long,  9  ft.  11  in.  broad,  2  ft.  11  in.
thick.  Fourth  tier,  12  ft.  11  in.  long,  7  ft.
8  in.  broad,  6  ft.  5  in.  thick.  Fifth  tier,  12
ft.  11  in.  long,  7  ft.  8  in.  broad,  and  3  ft.  6
in.  thick.  He  makes  the  height  of  the
whole  19  ft.  8  in.

Travellers  havebeen  disposed  to  give  more
credit  to  the  tradition  which  makes  this  mon¬
ument  the  tomb  of  the  king  of  Tyre  than  to
most  of  the  other  legends  which  refer  to  an¬
cient  sepulchres  in  the  Holy  Land.

Tongue.  In  the  early  rituals  of  the
last  century,  the  tongue  is  called  the  key  to
the  secrets  of  a  Mason ;  and  one  of  the  toasts
that  was  given  in  the  Lodge  was  in  these
words :  “  To  that  excellent  key  of  a  Mason’s
tongue,  which  ought  always  to  speak  as
well  in  the  absence  of  a  brother  as  in  his
presence;  and  when  that  cannot  be  done
with  honor,  justice,  or  propriety,  that  adopts
the  virtue  of  a  Mason,  which  is  silence.”

Tongue,  Instructive.  See  Instinc¬
tive  Tongue.

Tongue  of  Good  Report.  Being
“under  the  tongue  of  good  report”  is
equivalent,  in  Masonic  technical  language,
to  being  of  good  character  or  reputation.
It  is  required  that  the  candidate  for  initia¬
tion  should  be  one  of  whom  no  tongue  speaks
evil.  The  phrase  is  an  old  one,  and  is  found
in  the  earliest  rituals  of  the  last  century.

Topaz.  In  Hebrew,  It

was  the  second  stone  in  the  first  row  of  the
high  priest’s  breastplate,  and  was  referred  to
Simeon.  The  ancient  topaz,  says  King,  ( An¬
tique  Gems,  p.  56,)  was  the  present  chryso¬
lite,  which  was  furnished  from  an  island  in


the  Red  Sea.  It  is  of  a  bright  greenish  yel¬
low,  and  the  softest  of  all  precious  stones.

Torches.  The  ancients  made  use  of
torches  both  at  marriages  and  funerals.
They  were  also  employed  in  the  ceremonies
of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries.  They  have
been  introduced  into  the  high  degrees,
especially  on  the  continent,  principally  as
marks  of  honor  in  the  reception  of  distin¬
guished  visitors,  on  which  occasion  they
are  technically  called  “  stars.”  Du  Cange
mentions  their  use  during  the  Middle  Ages
on  funeral  occasions.

Torgau,  Constitutions  of.  Tor-
gau  is  a  fortified  town  on  the  Elbe,  in  the
Prussian  province  of  Saxony.  It  was  there
that  Luther  and  his  friends  wrote  the
Book  of  Torgau,  which  was  the  foundation
of  the  subsequent  Augsburg  Confession,  and
it  was  there  that  the  Lutherans  concluded
a  league  with  the  Elector  Frederick  the
Wise.  The  Stonemasons,  whose  seat  wa3
there  in  the  fifteenth  century,  had,  with  the
other  Masons  of  Saxony,  accepted  the  Con¬
stitutions  enacted  in  1459  at  Strasburg.
But,  finding  it  necessary  to  make  some
special  regulations  for  their  own  internal
government,  they  drew  up,  in  1462,  Consti¬
tutions  in  112  articles,  which  are  known  as
the  “  Constitutions  of  Torgau.”  A  dupli¬
cate  of  these  Constitutions  was  deposited,
in  1486,  iu  the  Stonemason’s  hutte  at  Roch-
litz.  An  authenticated  copy  of  this  docu¬
ment  was  published  by  C.  L.  Stieglitz  at
Leipsic,  in  1829,  in  a  work  entitled  Ueber
die  Kirche  der  heiligen  Kunigunde  zu  Boch-
litz  und  die  Steinmetzhiitte  daselbst  An  ab¬
stract  of  these  Constitutions,  with  critical
comparisons  with  other  Constitutions,  was
published  by  Kloss  in  his  Die  Freimaurerei
in  ihrer  wahren  Bedeutung.  The  Consti¬
tutions  of  Torgau  are  important  because,
with  those  of  Strasburg,  they  are  the  only
authentic  Constitutions  of  the  German
Stonemasons  extant.

Torrubia,  Joseph.  A  Franciscan
monk,  who  in  1751  was  the  censor  and  re¬
viser  of  the  Inquisition  in  Spain.  Torrubia,
that  ha  might  be  the  better  enabled  to
carry  into  effect  a  persecution  of  the  Free¬
masons,  obtained  under  an  assumed  name,
and  in  the  character  of  a  secular  priest,
initiation  into  one  of  the  Lodges,  having
first  received  from  the  Grand  Penitentiary
a  dispensation  for  the  act,  and  an  absolu¬
tion  from  the  oath  of  secrecy.  Having
thus  acquired  an  exact  list  of  the  Lodges
in  Spain,  and  the  names  of  their  members,
he  caused  hundreds  of  Masons  to  be
arrested  and  punished,  and  succeeded  in
having  the  Order  prohibited  by  a  decree  of
King  Ferdinand  VI.  Torrubia  combined
in  his  character  the  bigotry  of  the  priest
and  the  villany  of  the  traitor.


TOURNON


TRADITION


821


Tournon,  M.  A  Frenchman  and
Freemason,  who  had  been  invited  into  Spain
by  the  government  in  order  to  establish  a
manufactory  of  brass  buttons,  and  to  in¬
struct  the  Spanish  workmen.  In  1757  he
was  arrested  by  the  Inquisition  on  the
charge  of  being  a  Freemason,  and  of  hav¬
ing  invited  his  pupils  to  join  the  Institu¬
tion.  He  was  sentenced  to  imprisonment
for  one  year,  after  which  he  was  banished
from  Spain,  being  conducted  under  an  es¬
cort  to  the  frontiers  of  France.  Tournon
was  indebted  for  this  clemency  to  his  want
of  firmness  and  fidelity  to  the  Order  —  he
having  solemnly  abjured  it,  and  promised
never  again  to  attend  its  assemblies.
Llorente,  in  his  History  of  the  Inquisition,
gives  an  account  of  Tournon’s  trial.

Tow,  Cable.  See  Cable  Tow.

Tower,  Degree  of  the.  ( Grade  de  la
Tour.)  A  name  sometimes  given  to  the  sec¬
ond  degree  of  the  Royal  Older  of  Scotland.

Tower  of  Babel.  See  Babel.

Town,  Salem.  The  Rev.  Salem
Town,  L.L.D.,  was  born  at  Belchertown,  in
the  State  of  Massachusetts,  March  5,  1779.
He  received  a  classical  education,  and  ob¬
tained  at  college  the  degree  of  Master  of
Arts,  and  later  in  life  that  of  Doctor  of
Laws.  For  some  years  he  was  the  Principal
of  an  academy,  and  his  writings  give  the
evidence  that  he  was  endowed  with  more
than  ordinary  abilities.  He  was  ardently
attached  to  Freemasonry,  and  was  for  many
years  Grand  Chaplain  of  the  Grand  Lodge
and  Grand  Chapter,  and  Grand  Prelate  of
the  Grand  Commandery  of  New  York.  In
1818  he  published  a  small  work,  of  two
hundred  and  eightv-three  pages,  entitled
A  System  of  Speculative  Masonry.  This  work
is  of  course  tinged  with  all  the  legendary
ideas  of  the  origin  of  the  Institution  which
revailed  at  that  period,  and  would  not  now
e  accepted  as  authoritative ;  but  it  contains,
outside  of  its  historical  errors,  many  valu¬
able  and  suggestive  thoughts.  Brother
Town  was  highly  respected  for  his  many
virtues,  the  consistency  of  his  life,  and  his
unwearied  devotion  to  the  Masonic  Order.
He  died  at  Greencastle,  Indiana,  February
24, 1864,  at  the  ripe  age  of  eighty-nine  years.

Townshcml,  Simeon.  The  puta¬
tive  author  of  a  book  entitled  Observations
and  Inquiries  relating  to  the  Brotherhood
of  the  Free  Masons,  which  is  said  to  have
been  printed  at  London  in  1712.  Boileau,
Levesque,  Thory,  Oliver,  and  Kloss,  men¬
tion  it  by  name.  None  of  them,  however,
appear  to  have  seen  it.  Kloss  calls  it  a
doubtful  book.  If  such  a  work  is  in  exist¬
ence,  it  will  be  a  valuable  and  much  needed
contribution  to  the  condition  of  Masonry
in  the  south  of  England  just  before  the
revival,  and  may  tend  to  settle  some  mooted


questions.  Levfesque  {Apergu,  p.  47,)  says
he  has  consulted  it;  but  his  manner  of  refer¬
ring  to  it  throws  suspicion  on  the  statement,
and  I  doubt  if  he  ever  saw  it.

Tracing -Board.  The  same  as  a
Floor-Cloth ,  which  see.

Trade  Gilds.  See  Gilds.

Tradition.  There  are  two  kinds  of
traditions  in  Masonry  :  First,  those  which
detail  events,  either  historically,  authentic
in  part,  or  in  whole,  or  consisting  altogether
of  arbitrary  fiction,  and  intended  simply  to
convey  an  allegorical  or  symbolic  meaning;
and  secondly,  of  traditions  which  refer  to
customs  and  usages  of  the  Fraternity,  espe¬
cially  in  matters  of  ritual  observance.

The  first  class  has  already  been  discussed
in  this  work  in  the  article  on  Legends,  to
which  the  reader  is  referred.  The  second
class  is  now  to  be  considered.

The  traditions  which  control  and  direct
the  usages  of  the  Fraternity  constitute  its
unwritten  law,  and  are  almost  wholly  ap¬
plicable  to  its  ritual,  although  they  are
sometimes  of  use  in  the  interpretation  of
doubtful  points  in  its  written  law.  Between
the  written  and  the  unwritten  law,  the
latter  is  always  paramount.  This  is  evi¬
dent  from  the  definition  of  a  tradition  as
it  is  given  by  the  monk  Vincent  of  Le-
rins:  “Quod  semper,  quod  ubique,  quod  ab
omnibus  traditum  est  ;”i.e.,  tradition  is
that  which  has  been  handed  down  at  all
times,  in  all  places,  and  by  all  persons.
The  law  which  thus  has  antiquity,  univer¬
sality,  and  common  consent  for  its  support,
must  override  all  subsequent  laws  which
are  modern,  local,  and  have  only  partial
agreement.

It  is  then  important  that  those  traditions
of  Masonry  which  prescribe  its  ritual  ob¬
servances  and  its  landmarks  should  be
thoroughly  understood,  because  it  is  only
by  attention  to  them  that  uniformity  in  the
esoteric  instruction  and  work  of  the  Order
can  be  preserved.

Cicero  has  wisely  said  that  a  well-consti¬
tuted  commonwealth  must  be  governed  not
by  the  written  law  alone,  but  also  by  the
unwritten  law  or  tradition  and  usage ;  and
this  is  especially  the  case,  because  thewritten
law,  however  perspicuous  it  may  be,  can
be  diverted  into  various  senses,  unless  the
republic  is  maintained  and  preserved  by
its  usages  and  traditions,  which,  although
mute  and  as  it  were  dead,  yet  speak  with  a
living  voice,  and  give  the  true  interpreta¬
tion  of  that  which  is  written.

This  axiom  is  not  less  true  in  Masonry
than  it  is  in  a  commonwealth.  No  matter
what  changes  may  be  made  in  its  statutes
and  regulations  of  to-day  and  its  recent
customs,  there  is  no  danger  of  losing  the
identity  of  its  modern  with  its  ancient  form


822


TRAMPING


TRAVELLING


and  spirit  while  its  traditions  are  recog¬
nized  and  maintained.

Tramping  Masons.  Unworthy
members  of  the  Order,  who,  using  their
privileges  for  interested  purposes,  travelling
from  city  to  city  aud  from  Lodge  to  Lodge,
that  they  may  seek  relief  by  tales  of  ficti¬
tious  distress,  have  been  called  “tramping
Masons.”  The  true  brother  should  ever
obtain  assistance;  the  tramper  should  be
driven  from  the  door  of  every  Lodge  or
the  house  of  every  Mason  where  he  seeks
to  intrude  his  imposture.

Transfer  of  'Warrant.  When  a
Lodge  has,  by  the  misconduct  of  its  mem¬
bers,  rendered  itself  unworthy  of  longer
possessing  a  Warrant,  the  modern  Consti¬
tution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  pre¬
scribes  that  the  Grand  Master  may,  after
the  Grand  Lodge  shall  have  decided  on
that  fact,  transfer  such  Warrant  to  other
brethren  whom  he  may  think  deserving,
with  a  new  number  at  the  bottom  of  the
Lodges  then  on  record.  No  such  power
has  been  granted  to  the  Grand  Masters  of
this  country.  They  may,  indeed,  arrest  a
Warrant  —  that  is,  suspend  the  labors  of  a
Lodge  until  the  next  meeting  of  the  Grand
Lodge  —  but  the  power  of  forfeiture  and
transference  of  Warrants  is  vested  only  in
Grand  Lodges.

Transient  Brethren.  Masons  who
do  not  reside  in  a  particular  place,  but  only
temporarily  visit  it,  are  called  “  transient
brethren.”  They  are,  if  worthy,  to  be  cor¬
dially  welcomed,  but  are  never  to  be  ad¬
mitted  into  a  Lodge  until,  after  the  proper
precautions,  they  have  been  proved  to  be
“true  and  trusty.”  This  usage  of  hos¬
pitality  has  the  authority  of  all  the  Old
Constitutions,  which  are  careful  to  incul¬
cate  it.  Thus  the  Landsdowne  MS.  charges,
“that  every  Mason  receive  or  cherish
Strange  Fellows  when  they  come  over  the
countrey,  and  sett  them  on  worke  if  they
will  worke,  as  the  manner  is,  (that  is  to
say)  if  the  Mason  have  any  moulde  stone
in  his  place,  on  worke ;  and  if  he  have  none,
the  Mason  shall  refresh  him  with  money
unto  the  next  Lodge.”

Although  Speculative  Masons  no  longer
visit  Lodges  for  the  sake  of  work  or  wages,
the  usage  of  our  Operative  predecessors  has
been  spiritualized  in  our  symbolic  system.
Hence  visitors  are  often  invited  to  take  a
part  in  the  labors  of  the  Lodge,  and  receive
their  portion  of  the  light  and  truth  which
constitute  the  symbolic  pay  of  a  Specula¬
tive  Mason.

Transition  Period.  Findel  calls
that  period  in  the  history  of  Masonry,  when
it  was  gradually  changing  its  character
from  that  of  an  Operative  to  that  of  a  Spec¬
ulative  society,  “  the  Transition  Period.”


:  It  began  in  1600,  and  terminated  in  1717
by  the  establishment  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England  in  London,  after  which,  says
Findel,  ( Hist.,  Lyon’s  trans.,  p.  131,)  “  mod¬
ern  Freemasonry  was  to  be  taught  as  a  spir¬
itualizing  art,  and  the  Fraternity  of  Opera¬
tive  Masons  was  exalted  to  a  Brotherhood
of  symbolic  builders,  who,  in  the  place  of
visible,  perishable  temples,  are  engaged  in
the  erection  of  that  one,  invisible,  eternal
temple  of  the  heart  and  mind.”

Transmission,  Charter  of.  A
deed  said  to  have  been  granted  by  James
de  Molay,  just  before  his  death,  to  Mark
Larmenius,  by  which  he  transmitted  to  him
and  to  his  successors  the  office  of  Grand
Master  of  the  Templars.  It  is  the  founda¬
tion  deed  of  the  “  Order  of  the  Temple.”
It  is  preserved  in  the  treasury  of  the  Order
in  Paris,  and  is  written  in  Latin  on  a  large
folio  sheet  of  parchment.  The  outward
appearance  of  the  document  is  of  great  an¬
tiquity,  but  it  wants  internal  evidence  of
authenticity.  It  is  therefore,  by  most  au¬
thorities,  considered  a  forgery.  See  Temple,
Order  of  the.

Travel.  In  the  symbolic  language  of
Masonry,  a  Mason  always  travels  from  west
to  east  in  search  of  light  —  he  travels  from
the  lofty  tower  of  Babel,  where  language
was  confounded  and  Masonry  lost,  to  the
threshing-floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite,  where
language  was  restored  and  Masonry  found.
The  Master  Mason  also  travels  into  foreign
countries  in  search  of  wages.  All  this  is
pure  symbolism,  unintelligible  in  any  other
sense.  For  its  interpretation,  see  Foreign
Countries  and  Threshing-Floor.

Travelling  Freemasons.  There
is  no  portion  of  the  history  of  the  Order  so
interesting  to  the  Masonic  scholar  as  that
which  is  embraced  by  the  Middle  Ages  of
Christendom,  beginning  with  about  the
tenth  century,  when  the  whole  of  civilized
Europe  was  perambulated  by  those  associa¬
tions  of  workmen,  who  passed  from  country
to  country  and  from  city  to  city  under  the
name  of  “  Travelling  Freemasons,”  for  the
purpose  of  erecting  religious  edifices.  There
is  not  a  country’  of  Europe  which  does  not
at  this  day  contain  honorable  evidences  of
the  skill  and  industry  of  our  Masonic  an¬
cestors.  I  therefore  propose,  in  the  present
article,  to  give  a  brief  sketch  of  the  origin,
the  progress,  and  the  character  of  these
travelling  architects.

Mr.  George  Godwin,  in  a  lecture  pub¬
lished  in  the  Builder,  (vol.  ix.,  p.  463,)  says:
“  There  are  few  points  in  the  Middle  Ages
more  pleasing  to  look  back  upon  than  the
existence  of  the  associated  Masons;  they
are  the  bright  spot  in  the  general  darkness
of  that  period,  the  patch  of  verdure  when
all  around  is  barren.”


TRAVELLING


TRAVELLING


823


Clavel,  in  his  Histoire  Pittoresque  de  la
Franc- Maqonnerie,  has  traced  the  organi¬
zation  of  these  associations  to  the  “collegia
artificum,”  or  colleges  of  artisans,  which
were  instituted  at  Rome,  by  Numa,  in  the
year  B.  c.  714,  and  whose  members  were
originally  Greeks,  imported  by  this  law¬
giver  for  the  purpose  of  embellishing  the
city  over  which  he  reigned.  They  con¬
tinued  to  exist  as  well-established  corpora¬
tions  throughout  all  the  succeeding  years
of  the  kingdom,  the  republic,  and  the  em¬
pire.  (See  Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers.)

These  “  sodalitates,”  or  fraternities,  began,
upon  the  invasion  of  the  barbarians,  to  de¬
cline  in  numbers,  in  respectability,  and  in
power.  But  on  the  conversion  of  the  whole
empire,  they,  or  others  of  a  similar  charac¬
ter,  began  again  to  flourish.  The  priests
of  the  Christian  Church  became  their  pa¬
trons,  and  under  their  guidance  they  de¬
voted  themselves  to  the  building  of  churches
and  monasteries.  In  the  tenth  century,
they  were  established  as  a  free  gild  or  cor¬
poration  in  Lombardy.  For  when,  after
the  decline  and  fall  of  the  empire,  the  city
of  Rome  was  abandoned  by  its  sovereigns
for  other  secondary  cities  of  Italy,  such  as
Milan  and  Ravenna,  and  new  courts  and
new  capitals  were  formed,  the  kingdom  of
Lombardy  sprang  into  existence  as  the
great  centre  of  all  energy  in  trade  and  in¬
dustry,  and  of  refinement  in  art  and  litera¬
ture.  It  was  there,  and  as  a  consequence
of  the  great  centre  of  life  from  Rome,  and
the  development  not  only  of  commercial
business,  but  of  all  sorts  of  trades  and
handicrafts,  that  the  corporations  known  as
gilds  were  first  organized.

Among  the  arts  practised  by  the  Lom¬
bards,  that  of  building  held  a  pre-eminent
rank.  And  Muratori  tells  us  that  the  in¬
habitants  of  Como,  a  principal  city  of  Lom¬
bardy,  Italy,  had  become  so  superior  as
masons,  that  the  appellation  of  Magistri
Comacini,  or  Masters  from  Como,  had  be¬
come  generic  to  all  of  the  profession.

Mr.  Hope,  in  his  Historical  Essay  on
Architecture,  has  treated  this  subject  almost
exhaustively.  He  says:

“We  cannot  then  wonder  that,  at  a
period  when  artificers  and  artists  of  every
class,  from  those  of  the  most  mechanical,
to  those  of  the  most  intellectual  nature,
formed  themselves  into  exclusive  corpora¬
tions,  architects  —  whose  art  may  be  said
to  offer  the  most  exact  medium  between
those  of  the  most  urgent  necessity,  and
those  of  mere  ornament,  or,  indeed,  in  its
wide  span  to  embrace  both — should,  above
all  others,  have  associated  themselves  into
similar  bodies,  which,  in  conformity  to  the
general  style  of  such  corporations,  assumed
that  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  and


was  composed  of  those  members  who,  after
a  regular  passage  through  the  different
fixed  stages  of  apprenticeship,  were  re¬
ceived  as  masters,  and  entitled  to  exercise
the  profession  on  their  own  account.

“  In  an  age,  however,  in  which  lay  in¬
dividuals,  from  the  lowest  subject  to  the
sovereign  himself,  seldom  built  except  for
mere  shelter  and  safety — seldom  sought,
nay,  rather  avoided,  in  their  dwellings  an
elegance  which  might  lessen  their  security ;
in  which  even  the  community  collectively,
in  its  public  and  general  capacity,  divided
into  component  parts  less  numerous  and
less  varied,  required  not  those  numerous
ublic  edifices  which  we  possess  either  for
usiness  or  pleasure;  thus,  when  neither
domestic  nor  civic  architecture  of  any  sort
demanded  great  ability  or  afforded  great
employment,  churches  and  monasteries
were  the  only  buildings  required  to  com¬
bine  extent  and  elegance,  and  sacred  archi¬
tecture  alone  could  furnish  an  extensive
field  for  the  exercise  of  great  skill,  Lom¬
bardy  itself,  opulent  and  thriving  as  it  was,
compared  to  other  countries,  soon  became
nearly  saturated  with  the  requisite  edifices,
and  unable  to  give  these  companies  of
Free  and  Accepted  Masons  a  longer  con¬
tinuance  of  sufficient  custom,  or  to  render
the  further  maintenance  of  their  exclusive
privileges  of  great  benefit  to  them  at  home.
But  if,  to  the  south  of  the  Alps,  an  earlier
civilization  had  at  last  caused  the  number
of  architects  to  exceed  that  of  new  build¬
ings  wanted,  it  fared  otherwise  in  the  north
of  Europe,  where  a  gradually  spreading
Christianity  began  on  every  side  to  produce
a  want  of  sacred  edifices,  of  churches  and
monasteries,  to  design  which  architects
existed  not  on  the  spot.

“  Those  Italian  corporations  of  builders,
therefore,  whose  services  ceased  to  be  nec¬
essary  in  the  countries  where  they  had
arisen,  now  began  to  look  abroad  towards
those  northern  climes  for  that  employment
which  they  no  longer  found  at  home:
aud  a  certain  number  united  and  formed
themselves  into  a  single  greater  association,
or  fraternity,  which  proposed  to  seek  for
occupation  beyond  its  native  land;  and  in
any  ruder  foreign  region,  however  remote,
where  new  religious  edifices  and  skilful
artists  to  erect  them,  were  wanted  to  offer
their  services,  and  bend  their  steps  to  un¬
dertake  the  work.”

From  Lombardy  they  passed  beyond  the
Alps  into  all  the  countries  where  Chris¬
tianity,  but  recently  established,  required
the  erection  of  churches.  The  popes  en¬
couraged  their  designs,  and  more  than  one
bull  was  dispatched,  conferring  on  them
privileges  of  the  most  extensive  character.
A  monopoly  was  granted  to  them  for  the


824


TRAVELLING


TRAVELLING


erection  of  all  religious  edifices ;  they  were
declared  independent  of  the  sovereigns  in
whose  dominions  they  might  be  temporarily
residing,  and  subject  only  to  their  own  pri¬
vate  laws;  they  were  permitted  to  regulate
the  amount  of  their  wages;  were  exempted
from  all  kinds  of  taxation;  and  no  Mason,
not  belonging  to  their  association,  was  per¬
mitted  to  compete  with  or  oppose  them  in
the  pursuit  of  employment.  And  in  one
of  the  papal  decrees  on  the  subject  of  these
artisans,  the  supreme  pontiff  declares  that
these  regulations  have  been  made  “  after
the  example  of  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  when
he  sent  artisans  to  King  Solomon  for  the
purpose  of  building  the  Temple  of  Jeru¬
salem.”

After  filling  the  continent  with  cathe¬
drals,  parochial  churches,  and  monasteries,
and  increasing  their  own  numbers  by  ac¬
cessions  of  new  members  from  all  the
countries  in  which  they  had  been  laboring,
they  passed  over  into  England,  and  there
introduced  their  peculiar  style  of  building.
Thence  they  travelled  to  Scotland,  and
there  have  rendered  their  existence  ever
memorable  by  establishing,  in  the  parish  of
Kilwinning,  where  they  were  erecting  an
abbey,  the  germ  of  Scottish  Freemasonry,
which  has  regularly  descended  through  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  to  the  present
day.

Mr.  Hope  accounts  for  the  introduction
of  non-working  or  unprofessional  members
into  these  associations  by  a  theory  which
is  confirmed  by  contemporary  history.  He
says :

“  Often  obliged,  from  regions  the  most
distant,  singly  to  seek  the  common  place
of  rendezvous  and  departure  of  the  troop,
or  singly  to  follow  its  earlier  detachments
to  places  of  employment  equally  distant;
and  that,  at  an  era  wrhen  travellers  met  on
the  road  every  obstruction,  and  no  conven¬
ience,  when  no  inns  existed  at  which  to
purchase  hospitality,  but  lords  dwelt  every¬
where,  who  only  prohibited  their  tenants
from  waylaying  the  traveller  because  they
considered  this,  like  killing  game,  one  of
their  own  exclusive  privileges ;  the  mem¬
bers  of  these  communities  contrived  to
render  their  journeys  more  easy  and  safe,
by  engaging  with  each  other,  and  perhaps
even,  in  many  places,  with  individuals  not
directly  participating  in  their  profession,
in  compacts  of  mutual  assistance,  hospi¬
tality  and  good  services,  most  valuable  to
men  so  circumstanced.  They  endeavored
to  compensate  for  the  perils  which  attended
their  expeditions,  by  institutions  for  their
needy  or  disabled  brothers;  but  lest  such
as  belonged  not  to  thei  r  communities  should
benefit  surreptitiously  by  these  arrange¬
ments  for  its  advantage,  they  framed  signs


of  mutual  recognition,  as  carefully  con¬
cealed  from  the  knowledge  of  the  uninitia¬
ted,  as  the  mysteries  of  their  art  themselves.
Thus  supplied  with  whatever  could  facili¬
tate  such  distant  journeys  and  labors  as
they  contemplated,  the  members  of  these
corporations  were  ready  to  obey  any  sum¬
mons  with  the  utmost  alacrity,  and  they
soon  received  the  encouragement  they  an¬
ticipated.  The  militia  of  the  church  of
Rome,  which  diffused  itself  all  over  Europe
in  the  shape  of  missionaries,  to  instruct
nations,  and  to  establish  their  allegiance  to
the  Pope,  took  care  not  only  to  make  them
feel  the  want  of  churches  and  monasteries,
but  likewise  to  learn  the  manner  in  which
the  want  might  be  supplied.  Indeed,  they
themselves  generally  undertook  the  supply;
and  it  may  be  asserted,  that  a  new  apostle
of  the  Gospel  no  sooner  arrived  in  the  re¬
motest  corner  of  Europe,  either  to  convert
the  inhabitants  to  Christianity,  or  to  intro¬
duce  among  them  a  new  religious  order,
than  speedily  followed  a  tribe  of  itinerant
Freemasons  to  back  him,  and  to  provide
the  inhabitants  with  the  necessary  places
of  worship  or  reception.

“  Thus  ushered  in,  by  their  interior  ar¬
rangements  assured  of  assistance  and  of
safety  on  the  road,  and,  by  the  bulls  of  the
Pope  and  the  support  of  his  ministers
abroad,  of  every  species  of  immunity  and
reference  at  the  place  of  their  destination,
odies  of  Freemasons  dispersed  themselves
in  every  direction,  every  day  began  to  ad¬
vance  further,  and  to  proceed  from  country
to  country,  to  the  utmost  verge  of  the  faith¬
ful,  in  order  to  answer  the  increasing  de¬
mand  for  them,  or  to  seek  more  distant
custom.”

The  government  of  these  fraternities,
wherever  they  might  be  for  the  time  lo¬
cated,  was  very  regular  and  uniform.  When
about  to  commence  the  erection  of  a  reli¬
gious  edifice,  they  first  built  huts,  or,  as  they
were  termed,  lodges,  in  the  vicinity,  in
which  they  resided  lor  the  sake  of  economy
as  well  as  convenience.  It  is  from  these
that  the  present  name  of  our  places  of  meet¬
ing  is  derived.  Over  every  ten  men  was
placed  a  warden,  who  paid  them  wages,  and
took  care  that  there  should  be  no  needless
expenditure  of  materials  and  no  careless
loss  of  implements.  Over  the  whole,  a  sur¬
veyor  or  master,  called  in  their  old  docu¬
ments  “  magister,”  presided,  and  directed
the  general  labor.

The  Abbe  Grandidier,  in  a  letter  at  the
end  of  the  Marquis  Luchet’s  Eaaai  sur  lea
Illumines,  has  quoted  from  the  ancient
register  of  the  Masons  at  Strasburg  the  reg¬
ulations  of  the  association  which  built  the
splendid  cathedral  of  that  city.  Its  great
!  rarity  renders  it  difficult  to  obtain  a  sight


TRAVELLING


TRAVELLING


825


of  the  original  work,  but  the  Histoire  Pit-
toresque  of  Clavel  supplies  the  most  promi¬
nent  details  of  all  that  Grandidier  has  pre¬
served.  The  cathedral  of  Strasburg  was
commenced  in  the  year  1277,  under  the
direction  of  Erwin  of  Steinbach.  The
Masons  who,  under  his  directions,  were
engaged  in  the  construction  of  this  noblest
specimen  of  the  Gothic  style  of  architec¬
ture,  were  divided  into  the  separate  ranks
of  Masters,  Craftsmen,  and  Apprentices.
The  place  where  they  assembled  was  called
a  “  hutte,”  a  German  word  equivalent  to
our  English  term  lodge.  They  employed
the  implements  of  masonry  as  emblems,
and  wore  them  as  insignia.  They  had  cer¬
tain  signs  and  words  of  recognition,  and
received  their  new  members  with  peculiar
and  secret  ceremonies,  admitting,  as  has
already  been  said,  many  eminent  persons,
and  especially  ecclesiastics,  who  were  not
Operative  Masons,  but  who  gave  to  them
their  patronage  and  protection.

The  fraternity  of  Strasburg  became  cele¬
brated  throughout  Germany,  their  supe¬
riority  was  acknowledged  by  the  kindred
associations,  and  they  in  time  received  the
appellation  of  the  “  haupt  hutte,”  or  Grand
Lodge,  and  exercised  supremacy  over  the
Awffe»ofSuabia,  Hesse,  Bavaria,  Franconia,
Saxony,  Thuringia,  and  the  countries  bor¬
dering  on  the  river  Moselle.  The  Masters
of  these  several  Lodges  assembled  at  Ratis-
bon  in  1459,  and  on  the  25th  of  April  con¬
tracted  an  act  of  union,  declaring  the  chief
of  the  Strasburg  Cathedral  the  only  and
perpetual  Grand  Master  of  the  General
Fraternity  of  Freemasons  of  Germany.
This  act  of  union  was  definitively  adopted
and  promulgated  at  a  meeting  held  soon
afterwards  at  Strasburg.

Similar  institutions  existed  in  France
and  in  Switzerland,  for  wherever  Chris¬
tianity  had  penetrated,  there  churches  and
cathedrals  were  to  be  built,  and  the  Travel¬
ing  Freemasons  hastened  to  undertake  the
labor.

They  entered  England  and  Scotland  at
an  early  period.  Whatever  may  be  thought
of  the  authenticity  of  the  York  and  Kil¬
winning  legends,  there  is  ample  evidence
of  the  existence  of  organized  associations,
gilds,  or  corporations  of  Operative  Masons
at  an  epoch  not  long  after  their  departure
from  Lombardy.  From  that  period,  the
fraternity,  with  various  intermissions,  con¬
tinued  to  pursue  their  labors,  and  con¬
structed  many  edifices  which  still  remain
as  monuments  of  their  skill  as  workmen
and  their  taste  as  architects.  Kings,  in
many  instances,  became  their  patrons,  and
their  labors  were  superintended  by  power¬
ful  noblemen  and  eminent  prelates,  who,
for  this  purpose,  were  admitted  as  members
6  D


of  the  fraternity.  Many  of  the  old  Charges
for  the  better  government  of  their  Lodges
have  been  preserved,  and  are  still  to  be
found  in  our  Books  of  Constitutions,  every
line  of  which  indicates  that  they  were  orig¬
inally  drawn  up  for  associations  strictly  and
exclusively  operative  in  their  character.

In  glancing  over  the  history  of  this  sin¬
gular  body  of  architects,  we  are  struck  with
several  important  peculiarities.

In  the  first  place,  they  were  strictly  eccle¬
siastical  in  their  constitution.  The  Pope,
the  supreme  pontiff  of  the  Church,  was
their  patron  and  protector.  They  were
supported  and  encouraged  by  bishops  and
abbots,  and  hence  their  chief  employment
appears  to  have  been  in  the  construction
of  religious  edifices.  Like  their  ancestors,
who  were  engaged  in  the  erection  of  the
magnificent  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  they  de¬
voted  themselves  to  labor  for  the  “  House
of  the  Lord.”  Masonry  was  then,  as  it  had
been  before,  and  has  ever  been  since,  inti¬
mately  connected  with  religion.

They  were  originally  all  operatives.  But
the  artisans  of  that  period  were  not  edu¬
cated  men,  and  they  were  compelled  to  seek
among  the  clergy,  the  only  men  of  learn¬
ing,  for  those  whose  wisdom  might  con¬
trive,  and  whose  cultivated  taste  might
adorn,  the  plans  which  they,  by  their  prac¬
tical  skill,  were  to  carry  into  effect.  Hence
the  germ  of  that  Speculative  Masonry
which,  once  dividing  the  character  of  the
fraternity  with  the  Operative,  now  com¬
pletely  occupies  it,  to  the  entire  exclusion
of  the  latter.

But  lastly,  from  the  circumstance  of  their
union  and  concert  arose  a  uniformity  of
design  in  all  the  public  buildings  of  that
period  —  a  uniformity  so  remarkable  as  to
find  its  explanation  only  in  the  fact,  that
their  construction  was  committed  through¬
out  the  whole  of  Europe,  if  not  always  to
the  same  individuals,  at  least  to  members
of  the  same  association.  The  remarks  of
Mr.  Hope  on  this  subject  are  well  worthy
of  perusal.  “  The  architects  of  all  the
sacred  edifices  of  the  Latin  church,  wher¬
ever  such  arose,  —  north,  south,  east,  or
west,  —  thus  derived  their  science  from  the
same  central  school ;  obeyed  in  their  de¬
signs  the  same  hierarchy  ;  were  directed  in
their  constructions  by  the  same  principles
of  propriety  and  taste;  kept  up  with  each
other,  in  the  most  distant  parts  to  which
they  might  be  sent,  the  most  constant  cor¬
respondence  ;  and  rendered  every  minute
improvement  the  property  of  the  whole
body  and  a  new  conquest  of  the  art.  The
result  of  this  unanimity  was,  that  at  each
successive  period  of  the  monastic  dynasty,
on  whatever  point  a  new  church  or  new
monastery  might  be  erected,  it  resembled


826


TRAVELLING


TRESTLE-BOARD


all  those  raised  at  the  same  period  in  every
other  place,  however  distant  from  it,  as  if
both  had  been  built  in  the  same  place  by
the  same  artist.  For  instance,  we  find,  at
particular  epochs,  churches  as  far  distant
from  each  other  as  the  north  of  Scotland
and  the  south  of  Italy,  to  be  minutely
similar  in  all  the  essential  characteristics.”

In  conclusion,  we  may  remark,  that  the
world  is  indebted  to  this  association  for  the
introduction  of  the  Gothic,  or,  as  it  has
lately  been  denominated,  the  pointed  style
of  architecture.  This  style  —  so  different
from  the  Greek  or  Roman  orders,  whose
pointed  arches  and  minute  tracery  distin¬
guish  the  solemn  temples  of  the  olden
time,  and  whose  ruins  arrest  the  attention
and  claim  the  admiration  of  the  spectator
—  has  been  universally  acknowledged  to  be
the  invention  of  the  Travelling  Freemasons
of  the  Middle  Ages.

And  it  is  to  this  association  of  Op¬
erative  artists  that,  by  gradual  changes
into  a  speculative  system,  we  are  to  trace
the  Freemasons  of  the  present  day.

Travelling  Warrants.  Warrants
under  which  military  Lodges  are  organized,
and  so  called  because  the  Lodges  which  act
under  them  are  permitted  to  travel  from
place  to  place  with  the  regiments  to  which
they  are  attached.  See  Military  Lodges.

Travenol,  Louis.  A  zealous  and
devoted  French  Mason  of  much  ability,
who  wrote  several  Masonic  works,  which
were  published  under  the  assumed  name
of  Leonard  Gabanon.  The  most  valuable
of  his  productions  is  one  entitled,  Cate-
chisme  des  Francs- Maqons,  precede  d'un
Abrege  de  V  Histoire  d’ Adoram,  etc.,  pub¬
lished  at  Paris  in  1743.

Treasure,  Incomparable.  This
was  a  phrase  of  mystical  import  with  the
‘  alchemists  and  hermetic  philosophers.  Per-
netty  ( Dictionnaire  Mytho-Hermetique )  thus
defines  it.  “  The  incomparable  treasure
is  the  powder  of  projection,  the  source
of  all  that  is  good,  since  it  procures  un¬
bounded  riches,  and  a  long  life,  without  in¬
firmities,  to  enjoy  them.”  The  “powder
of  projection”  was  the  instrument  by
which  they  expected  to  attain  to  the  full
perfection  of  their  work.  What  was  this
incomparable  treasure  was  the  great  secret
of  the  hermetic  philosophers.  They  con¬
cealed  the  true  object  of  their  art  under  a
symbolic  language.  “  Believest  thou,  O
fool,”  says  Artephius,  one  of  them,  “  that
we  plainly  teach  this  secret  of  secrets,
taking  our  words  according  to  their  literal
signification?”  But  we  do  know  that  it
was  not,  as  the  world  supposed,  the  trans¬
mutation  of  metals,  or  the  discovery  of  an
elixir  of  life,  but  the  acquisition  of  divine
truth.


Many  of  the  high  degrees  which  were
fabricated  in  the  last  centuryr  were  founded
on  the  hermetic  philosophy;  and  they,  too,
borrowed  from  it  the  idea  of  an  incompar¬
able  treasure.  Thus  in  the  ultimate  degree
of  the  Council  of  Emperors  of  the  East
and  West,  which  degree  became  afterwards
the  Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret  of
the  Scottish  Rite,  we  find  this  very  expres¬
sion.  In  the  old  French  rituals  we  meet
with  this  sentence:  “Let  us  now  offer  to
the  invincible  Xerxes  our  sacred  incom¬
parable  treasure,  and  we  shall  succeed  vic¬
toriously.”  And  out  of  the  initial  letters
of  the  words  of  this  sentence  in  the  orig¬
inal  French  they  fabricated  the  three  most
important  words  of  the  degree.

This  “  incomparable  treasure  ”  is  to  the
Masons  precisely  what  it  was  to  the  her¬
metic  philosophers — Divine  Truth.  “As  for
the  Treasure,”  says  one  of  these  books,  (the
Lumen  de  Lumine ,  cited  by  Hitchcock,)  “  it
is  not  yet  discovered,  but  it  is  very  near.”

Treasurer.  An  officer,  found  in  all
Masonic  bodies,  whose  duty'  it  is  to  take
charge  of  the  funds  and  pay  them  out
under  proper  regulations.  He  is  simply
the  banker  of  the  Lodge  or  Chapter,  and
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  collection  of
money,  which  should  be  made  by  the  Sec¬
retary.  He  is  an  elective  officer.  The
Treasurer’s  jewel  is  a  key,  as  a  symbol  that
he  controls  the  chest  of  the  Lodge.  His
position  in  the  Lodge  is  on  the  right  of  the
Worshipful  Master,  in  front.

Treasurer,  Grand.  See  Grand
Treasurer.

Treasurer,  Hernietie.  (Tresorier
hermetique.)  A  degree  in  the  manuscript
collection  of  Peuvret.  This  collection  con¬
tains  eight  other  degrees  with  a  similar
title,  namely:  Illustrious  Treasurer,  Treas¬
urer  of  Paracelsus,  Treasurer  of  Solomon,
Treasurer  of  the  Masonic  Mysteries,  Treas¬
urer  of  the  Number  7,  Sublime  Treasurer,
Depositor  of  the  Key  of  the  Grand  Work,
and,  lastly,  one  with  the  grandiloquent
title  of  Grand  and  Sublime  Treasurer,  or
Depositor  of  the  Great  Solomon,  Faithful
Guardian  of  Jehovah.

Trestle-Board.  The  trestle-board  is
defined  to  be  the  board  upon  which  the
Master  inscribes  the  designs  by  which  the
Craft  are  to  be  directed  in  their  labors.
The  French  and  German  Masons  have  con¬
founded  the  trestle-board  with  the  tracing-
board  ;  and  Dr.  Oliver  ( Landm .,  i.  132,)' has
not  avoided  the  error.  The  two  things
are  entirely  different.  The  trestle  is  a
framework  for  a  table  —  in  Scotch,  trest;
the  trestle-board  is  the  board  placed  for  con¬
venience  of  drawing  on  that  frame.  It  con¬
tains  nothing  but  a  few  diagrams,  usually
geometrical  figures.  Tne  tracing-board  is  a


TRESTLE-BOARD


TRIAD


827


picture  formerly  drawn  on  the  floor  of  the
Lodge,  whence  it  was  called  a  floor-cloth
or  carpet.  It  contains  a  delineation  of  the
symbols  of  the  degree  to  which  it  belongs.
The  trestle-board  is  to  be  found  only  in  the
Entered  Apprentice’s  degree.  There  is  a
tracing-board  in  every  degree,  from  the  first
to  the  highest.  And,  lastly,  the  trestle-board
is  a  symbol ;  the  tracing-board  is  a  piece  of
furniture  or  picture  containing  the  repre¬
sentation  of  many  symbols.


It  is  probable  that  the  trestle-board,  from
its  necessary  use  in  Operative  Masonry,
was  one  of  the  earliest  symbols  introduced
into  the  Speculative  system.  It  is  not,
however,  mentioned  in  the  Grand  Mys¬
tery,  published  in  1724.  But  Prichard,
who  wrote  only  six  years  afterwards,  de¬
scribes  it,  under  the  corrupted  name  of
trasel-board,  as  one  of  the  immovable  jewels
of  an  Apprentice’s  Lodge.  Browne,  in  1800,
following  Preston,  fell  into  the  error  of
calling  it  a  tracing-board,  and  gives  from
the  Pre9tonian  lecture  what  he  terms  “  a
beautiful  degree  of  comparison,”  in  which
the  Bible  is  compared  to  a  tracing-board.
But  the  Bible  is  not  a  collection  of  sym¬
bols,  which  a  tracing-board  is,  but  a  tres¬
tle-board  that  contains  the  plan  for  the
construction  of  a  spiritual  temple.  Webb,
however,  when  he  arranged  his  system  of
lectures,  took  the  proper  view,  and  restored
the  true  word,  trestle-board.

Notwithstanding  these  changes  in  the
name,  trestle-board,  trasel-board,  tracing-
board,  and  trestle-board  again,  the  defini¬
tion  ha9  continued  from  the  earliest  part
of  the  List  century  to  the  present  day  the
same.  It  has  always  been  enumerated
among  the  jewels  of  the  Lodge,  although
the  English  system  says  that  it  is  immov¬
able  and  the  American  movable;  and  it
has  always  been  defined  as  “  a  board  for
the  master  workman  to  draw  his  designs
upon.”

In  Operative  Masonry,  the  trestle-board
is  of  vast  importance.  It  was  on  such  an
implement  that  the  genius  of  the  ancient
masters  worked  out  those  problems  of
architecture  that  have  reflected  an  unfad¬
ing  lustre  on  their  skill.  The  trestle-board
was  the  cradle  that  nursed  the  infancy  of
such  mighty  monuments  as  the  cathedrals


of  Strashurg  and  Cologne;  and  as  they  ad¬
vanced  in  stature,  the  trestle-board  became
the  guardian  spirit  that  directed  their
growth.  Often  have  those  old  builders
pondered  by  the  midnight  lamp  upon  their
trestle-board,  working  out  its  designs  with
consummate  taste  and  knowledge,  —  here
springing  an  arch,  and  turning  an  angle
there,  until  the  embryo  edifice  stood  forth
in  all  the  wisdom,  strength,  and  beauty  of
the  Master’s  art.

What,  then,  is  its  true  symbolism  in
Speculative  Masonry  ?

To  construct  his  earthly  temple,  the  Op¬
erative  Mason  followed  the  architectural
designs  laid  down  on  the  trestle-board,  or
book  of  plans  of  the  architect.  By  these  he
hewed  and  squared  his  materials ;  by  these
he  raised  his  walls  ;  by  these  he  constructed
his  arches ;  and  by  these  strength  and  dura¬
bility,  combined  with  grace  and  beauty,
were  bestowed  upon  the  edifice  which  he
was  constructing.

In  the  Masonic  ritual,  the  Speculative
Mason  is  reminded  that,  as  the  Operative
artist  erects  his  temporal  building  in  ac¬
cordance  with  the  rules  and  designs  laid
down  on  the  trestle-board  of  the  master
workman,  so  should  he  erect  that  spiritual
building,  of  which  the  material  is  a  type,  in
obedience  to  the  rules  and  designs,  the  pre¬
cepts  and  commands,  laid  down  by  the
Grand  Architect  of  the  Universe  in  those
great  books  of  nature  and  revelation  which
constitute  the  spiritual  trestle  -  board  of
every  Freemason.

The  trestle-board  is  then  the  symbol  of
the  natural  and  moral  law.  Like  every
other  symbol  of  the  Order,  it  is  universal
and  tolerant  in  its  application;  and  while,
as  Christian  Masons,  we  cling  with  unfal¬
tering  integrity  to  the  explanation  which
makes  the  Scriptures  of  both  dispensations
our  trestle-board,  we  permit  our  Jewish  and
Mohammedan  brethren  to  content  them¬
selves  with  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament
or  Koran.  Masonry  does  not  interfere  with
the  peculiar  form  or  development  of  any
one’s  religious  faith.  All  that  it  asks  is
that  the  interpretation  of  the  symbol  shall
be  according  to  what  each  one  supposes  to
be  the  revealed  will  of  his  Creator.  But
so  rigidly  exacting  is  it  that  the  symbol
shall  be  preserved  and,  in  some  rational
way,  interpreted,  that  it  peremptorily  ex¬
cludes  the  atheist  from  its  communion,  be¬
cause,  believing  in  no  Supreme  Being  —  no
Divine  Architect — he  must  necessarily  be
without  a  spiritual  trestle-board  on  which
the  designs  of  that  Being  may  be  inscribed
for  his  direction.

Triad.  In  all  the  ancient  mythologies
there  were  triads,  which  consisted  of  a  mys¬
terious  union  of  three  deities.  Each  triad


828


TRIAD


TRIALS


was  generally  explained  as  consisting  of  a
creator,  a  preserver,  and  a  destroyer.  The
principal  heathen  triads  were  as  follows:
the  Egyptian,  Osiris,  Isis,  and  Horus;  the
Orphic,  Phanes,  Uranus,  and  Kronos;  the
Zoroastric,  Ormuzd,  Mithras,  and  Ahriman ;
the  Indian,  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva;
the  Cabiric,  Axercos,  Axiokersa,  and  Axi-
okersos ;  the  Phoenician,  Ashtaroth,  Milcom,
and  Chemosh;  the  Tyrian,  Belus,  Venus,
and  Tharnmuz;  the  Grecian,  Zeus,  Poseidon,
and  Hades;  the  Roman,  Jupiter,  Neptune,
and  Pluto ;  the  Eleusinian,  lacchus,  Per¬
sephone,  and  Demeter  ;  the  Platonic,  Taga-
thon,  Nous,  and  Psyche;  the  Celtic,  Hu,
Ceridwen,  and  Creirwy;  the  Teutonic,
Fenris,  Midgard,  and  ITela;  the  Gothic,
Woden,  Eriga,  and  Thor;  and  the  Scan¬
dinavians,  Odin,  Vile,  and  Ve.  Even  the
Mexicans  had  their  triads,  which  were
Vitzliputzli,  Kaloc,  and  Tescalipuca.

This  system  of  triads  has,  indeed,  been  so
predominant  in  all  the  old  religions,  as  to
be  invested  with  a  mystical  idea ;  and  hence
it  has  become  the  type  in  Masonry  of  the
triad  of  three  governing  officers,  who  are  to
be  found  in  almost  every  degree.  The
Master  and  the  two  Wardens  in  the  Lodge
ive  rise  to  the  Priest,  the  King,  and  the
cribe  in  the  Royal  Arch ;  to  the  Com¬
mander,  the  Generalissimo,  and  the  Captain
General  in  Templarism ;  and  in  most  of
the  high  degrees  to  a  triad  of  three  who
preside  under  various  names.

We  must,  perhaps,  look  for  the  origin  of
the  triads  in  mythology,  as  we  certainly
must  in  Masonry,  to  the  three  positions  and
functions  of  the  sun.  The  rising  sun  or
creator  of  light,  the  meridian  sun  or  its
preserver,  and  the  setting  sun  or  its  de¬
stroyer.

Triad  Society  of  China.  The  San

Hop  Hwai,  or  Triad  Society,  is  a  secret  po¬
litical  association  in  China,  which  has  been
mistaken  by  some  writers  for  a  species  of
Chinese  Freemasonry;  but  it  has  in  reality
no  connection  whatsoever  with  the  Masonic
Order.  In  its  principles,  which  are  far
from  innocent,  it  is  entirely  antagonistic  to
Freemasonry.  The  Deputy  Provincial
Grand  Master  of  British  Masonry  in  China
made  a  statement  to  this  effect  in  1855,
in  Notes  and  Queries,  1st  Ser.,  vol.  xii.,
p.  233.

Trials,  Masonic.  As  the  only  ob¬
ject  of  a  trial  should  be  to  seek  the  truth
and  fairly  to  administer  justice,  in  a  Ma¬
sonic  trial,  especially,  no  recourse  should
ever  be  had  to  legal  technicalities,  whose
use  in  ordinary  courts  appears  simply  to  be
to  afford  a  means  of  escape  for  the  guilty.

Masonic  trials  are,  therefore,  to  be  con¬
ducted  in  the  simplest  and  least  technical
method,  that  will  preserve  at  once  the


rights  of  the  Order  and  of  the  accused,
and  which  will  enable  the  Lodge  to  obtain
a  thorough  knowledge  of  all  the  facts  in
the  case.  The  rules  to  be  observed  in  con¬
ducting  such  trials  have  been  already  laid
down  by  me  in  my  Text  Book  of  Jurispru¬
dence,  (pp.  558-564,)  and  I  shall  refer  to
them  in  the  present  article.  They  are  a a
follows :

1.  The  preliminary  step  in  every  trial  is
the  accusation  or  charge.  The  charge
should  always  be  made  in  writing,  signed
by  the  accuser,  delivered  to  the  Secretary,
and  read  by  that  officer  at  the  next  regular
communication  of  the  Lodge.  The  ac¬
cused  should  then  be  furnished  with  an
attested  copy  of  the  charge,  and  be  at  the
same  time  informed  of  the  time  and  place
appointed  by  the  Lodge  for  the  trial.

Any  Master  Mason  may  be  the  accuser
of  another,  but  a  profane  cannot  be  per¬
mitted  to  prefer  charges  against  a  Mason.
Yet,  if  circumstances  are  known  to  a  pro¬
fane  upon  which  charges  ought  to  be  pre¬
dicated,  a  Master  Mason  may  avail  himself
of  that  information,  and  out  of  it  frame  an
accusation,  to  be  presented  to  the  Lodge.
And  such  accusation  will  be  received  and
investigated,  although  remotely  derived
from  one  who  is  not  a  member  of  the  Order.

It  is  not  necessary  that  the  accuser  should
be  a  member  of  the  same  Lodge.  It  is
sufficient  if  he  is  an  affiliated  Mason.  I
say  an  affiliated  Mason  ;  for  it  is  generally
held,  and  I  believe  correctly,  that  an  un¬
affiliated  Mason  is  no  more  competent  to
prefer  charges  than  a  profane.

2.  If  the  accused  is  living  beyond  the
geographical  jurisdiction  of  the  Lodge,  the
charges  should  be  communicated  to  him  by
means  of  a  letter  through  the  post-office,
and  a  reasonable  time  should  be  allowed
for  his  answer,  before  the  Lodge  proceeds
to  trial.  But  if  his  residence  be  unknown,
or  if  it  be  impossible  to  hold  communica¬
tion  with  him,  the  Lodge  may  then  proceed
to  trial — care  being  had  that  no  undue
advantage  be  taken  of  his  absence,  and
that  the  investigation  be  as  full  and  impar¬
tial  as  the  nature  of  the  circumstances  will
permit.

3.  The  trial  must  commence  at  a  regular
communication,  for  reasons  which  have
already  been  stated ;  but  having  com¬
menced,  it  may  be  continued  at  special
communications,  called  for  that  purpose;
for,  if  it  was  allowed  only  to  be  continued
at  regular  meetings,  which  take  place  but
once  a  month,  the  long  duration  of  time
occupied  would  materially  tend  to  defeat
the  ends  of  justice.

4.  The  Lodge  must  be  opened  in  the
highest  degree  to  which  the  accuser  has  at¬
tained,  and  the  examinations  of  all  wit-


TRIALS


TRIANGLE


829


nesses  must  take  place  in  the  presence  of
the  accused  and  the  accuser,  if  they  desire
it.  It  is  competent  for  the  accused  to  em¬
ploy  counsel  for  the  better  protection  of  his
interests,  provided  such  counsel  is  a  Master
Mason.  But  if  the  counsel  be  a  member
of  the  Lodge,  he  forfeits,  by  his  professional
advocacy  of  the  accused,  the  right  to  vote
at  the  final  decision  of  the  question.

5.  The  final  decision  of  the  charge,  and
the  rendering  of  the  verdict,  whatever  be
the  rank  of  the  accused,  must  always  be
made  in  a  Lodge  opened  on  the  third  de¬
gree;  and  at  the  time  of  such  decision,
both  the  accuser  and  the  accused,  as  well
as  his  counsel,  if  he  have  any,  should  with¬
draw  from  the  Lodge.

6.  It  is  a  general  and  an  excellent  rule,
that  no  visitors  shall  be  permitted  to  be
present  during  a  trial.

7.  The  testimony  of  Master  Masons  is
usually  taken  on  their  honor,  as  such.
That  of  others  should  be  by  affidavit,  or  in
such  other  manner  as  both  the  accuser  and
accused  may  agree  upon.

8.  The  testimony  of  profanes,  or  of  those
who  are  of  a  lower  degree  than  the  accused,
is  to  be  taken  by  a  committee  and  reported
to  the  Lodge,  or,  if  convenient,  by  the
whole  Lodge,  when  closed  and  sitting  as
a  committee.  But  both  the  accused  and
the  accuser  have  a  right  to  be  present  on
such  occasions.

9.  When  the  trial  is  concluded,  the  ac¬
cuser  and  the  accused  must  retire,  and  the
Master  will  then  put  the  question  of  guilty,
or  not  guilty,  to  the  Lodge.

Not  less  than  two-thirds  of  the  votes
should  be  required  to  declare  the  accused
guilty.  A  bare  majority  is  hardly  sufficient
to  divest  a  brother  of  his  good  character,
and  render  him  subject  to  what  may  per¬
haps  be  an  ignominious  punishment.  But
on  this  subject  the  authorities  differ.

10.  If  the  verdict  is  guilty,  the  Master
must  then  put  the  question  as  to  the  nature
and  extent  of  the  punishment  to  be  inflicted,
beginning  with  expulsion  and  proceeding,
if  necessary,  to  indefinite  suspension  and
public  and  private  reprimand.  To  inflict
expulsion  or  suspension,  a  vote  of  two-
thirds  of  those  present  is  required,  but  for
a  mere  reprimand,  a  majority  will  be  suffi¬
cient.  The  votes  on  the  nature  of  the
punishment  should  be  viva  voce,  or,  rather,
according  to  Masonic  usage,  by  a  show  of
hands.

Trials  in  a  Grand  Lodge  are  to  be  con¬
ducted  on  the  same  general  principles;  but
here,  in  consequence  of  the  largeness  of  the
body,  and  the  inconvenience  which  would
result  from  holding  the  examinations  in
open  Lodge,  and  in  the  presence  of  all  the
members,  it  is  more  usual  to  appoint  a


committee,  before  whom  the  case  is  tried,
and  upon  whose  full  report  of  the  testimony
the  Grand  Lodge  bases  its  action.  And
the  forms  of  trial  in  such  committees  must
conform,  in  all  respects,  to  the  general
usage  already  detailed.

Triangle.  There  is  no  symbol  more
important  in  its  signification,  more  various
in  its  application,  or  more  generally  dif¬
fused  throughout  the  whole  system  of  Free¬
masonry,  than  the  triangle.  An  examina¬
tion  of  it,  therefore,  cannot  fail  to  be  inter¬
esting  to  the  Masonic  student.

The  equilateral  triangle  appears  to  have
been  adopted  by  nearly  all  the  nations  of
antiquity  as  a  symbol  of  the  Deity,  in  some
of  his  forms  or  emanations,  and  hence,  pro¬
bably,  the  prevailing  influ¬
ence  of  this  symbol  was  car¬
ried  into  the  Jewish  system,
where  the  yod  within  the
triangle  was  made  to  repre¬
sent  the  Tetragrammaton,
or  sacred  name  of  God.

The  equilateral  triangle,  says  Bro.  D.  W.
Nash,  ( Freem .  Mag.,  iv.  294,)  “viewed  in
the  light  of  the  doctrines  of  those  who  gave
it  currency  as  a  divine  symbol,  represents
the  Great  First  Cause,  the  creator  and  con¬
tainer  of  all  things,  as  one  and  indivisible,
manifesting  himself  in  an  infinity  of  forms
and  attributes  in  this  visible  universe.”

Among  the  Egyptians,  the  darkness
through  which  the  candidate  for  initiation
was  made  to  pass  was  symbolized  by  the
trowel,  an  important  Masonic  implement,
which  in  their  system  of  hieroglyphics  has
the  form  of  a  triangle.  The  equilateral  tri¬
angle  they  considered  as  the  most  perfect
of  figures,  and  a  representative  of  the  great
principle  of  animated  existence,  each  of  its
sides  referring  to  one  of  the  three  depart¬
ments  of  creation,  the  animal,  vegetable,  and
mineral.

The  equilateral  triangle  is  to  be  found
scattered  throughout  the  Masonic  system.
It  forms  in  the  Royal  Arch  the  figure
within  which  the  jewels  of  the  officers  are
suspended.  It  is  in  the  ineffable  degrees
the  sacred  delta,  everywhere  presenting
itself  as  the  symbol  of  the  Grand  Architect
of  the  Universe.  In  Ancient  Craft  Ma¬
sonry,  it  is  constantly  exhibited  as  the  ele¬
ment  of  important  ceremonies.  The  seats
of  the  principal  officers  are  arranged  in  a
triangular  form,  the  three  lesser  lights  have
the  same  situation,  and  the  square  and  com-

fiass  form,  by  their  union  on  the  greater
ight,  two  triangles  meeting  at  their  bases.
In  short,  the  equilateral  triangle  may  be
considered  as  one  of  the  most  constant
forms  of  Masonic  symbolism.

The  right-angled  triangle  is  another  form
of  this  figure  which  is  deserving  of  atten-


830


TRIANGLE


TRIANGLE


tion.  Among  the  Egyptians,  it  was  the
symbol  of  universal  nature ;  the  base  repre¬
senting  Osiris,  or  the  male  principle;  the
perpendicular,  Isis,  or  the  female  principle;
and  the  hypothenuse,  Horus,  their  son,  or
the  product  of  the  male  and  female  prin¬
ciple.


This  symbol  was  received  by  Pythagoras
from  the  Egyptians  during  his  long  sojourn
in  that  country,  and  with  it  he  also  learned
the  peculiar  property  it  possessed,  namely,
that  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  two  shorter
sides  is  equal  to  the  square  of  the  longest
side  —  symbolically  expressed  by  the  for¬
mula,  that  the  product  of  Osiris  and  Isis  is
Hcrus.  This  figure  has  been  adopted  in
the  third  degree  of  Masonry,  and  will  be
there  recognized  as  the  forty-seventh  prob¬
lem  of  Euclid.

Triangle,  Double.  See  Seal  of  Sol¬
omon  and  Shield  of  David.

Triangle  of  Pythagoras.  See

Pentalpha.

Triangle,  Radiated.  A  triangle
placed  within  and  surrounded  by  a  circle
of  rays.  This  circle  is  called,  in  Christian


art,  “a  glory.”  When  this  glory  is  dis¬
tinct  from  the  triangle,  and  surrounds  it  in
the  form  of  a  circle,  it  is  then  an  emblem
of  God’s  eternal  glory.  This  is  the  usual
form  in  religious  uses.  But  when,  as  is
most  usual  in  the  Masonic  symbol,  the  rays
emanate  from  the  centre  of  the  triangle,
and,  as  it  were,  enshroud  it  in  their  bril¬
liancy,  it  is  symbolic  of  the  Divine  Light.
The  perverted  ideas  of  the  Pagans  referred
these  rays  of  light  to  their  sun-god  and
their  Sabian  worship.


But  the  true  Masonic  idea  of  this  glory
is,  that  it  symbolizes  that  Eternal  Light
of  Wisdom  which  surrounds  the  Supreme
Architect  as  a  sea  of  glory,  and  from  him
as  a  common  centre  emanates  to  the  uni¬
verse  of  his  creation.

Triangle.  Triple.  The  pentalpha,
or  triangle  of  Pythagoras,  is  usually  called
also  the  triple  triangle,
because  three  triangles
are  formed  by  the  in¬
tersection  of  its  sides.
But  there  is  another
variety  of  the  triple  tri¬
angle  which  is  more
properly  entitled  to  the
appellation,  and  which  is  made  in  the  an¬
nexed  form.

It  will  be  familiar  to  the  Knight  Tem¬
plar  as  the  form  of  the  jewel  worn  by  the
Prelate  of  his  Order.  Like  every  modifi¬
cation  of  the  triangle,  it  is  a  symbol  of  the
Deity;  but  as  the  degree  of  Knight  Tem¬
plar  appertains  exclusively  to  Christian
Masonry,  the  triple  triangle  there  alludes
to  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity.  In  the
Scottish  Rite  degree  of  Knight  of  the  East
the  symbol  is  also  said  to  refer  to  the  triple
essence  of  Deity;  but  the  symbolism  is
made  still  more  mystical  by  supposing  that
it  represents  the  sacred  number  81,  each
side  of  the  three  triangles  being  equivalent
to  9,  which  again  is  the  square  of  3,  the
most  sacred  number  in  Freemasonry.  In
the  twentieth  degree  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  or  that  of  “  Grand
Master  of  all  Symbolic  Lodges,”  it  is  said
that  the  number  81  refers  to  the  triple
covenant  of  God,  symbolized  by  a  triple
triangle  said  to  have  been  seen  by  Solomon
when  he  consecrated  the  Temple.  Indeed,
throughout  the  ineffable  and  the  philo¬
sophic  degrees,  the  allusions  to  the  triple
triangle  are  much  more  frequent  than  they
are  in  Ancient  Craft  Masonry.


TRIBE


TRIBUNAL


831


of  the  Hindus,  is  of  a  different  form,  con¬
sisting  of  three  concentric  triangles.  In
the  centre  is  the  sacred  triliteral  name,
AUM.  The  interior  triangle  symbolizes
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva;  the  middle
one,  Creation,  Preservation,  and  Destruc¬
tion;  and  the  exterior  one,  Earth,  Water,
and  Air.

Tribe  of  Judah,  Lion  of  the.

The  connection  of  Solomon,  as  the  chief  of
the  tribe  of  Judah,  with  the  lion,  which
was  the  achievement  of  the  tribe,  has
caused  this  expression  to  be  referred,  in  the
third  degree,  to  him  who  brought  light  and
immortality  to  light.  The  old  Christian
interpretation  of  the  Masonic  symbols  here
prevails;  and  in  Ancient  Craft  Masonry  all
allusions  to  the  lion,  as  the  lion's  paw,  the
lion's  grip,  etc.,  refer  to  the  doctrine  of  the
resurrection  taught  by  him  who  is  known
as  “the  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.”  The
expression  is  borrowed  from  the  Apoca¬
lypse,  (v.  5:)  “Behold,  the  Lion  which  is  of
the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  Root  of  David,  hath
prevailed  to  open  the  book,  and  to  loose  the
seven  seals  thereof.”  The  lion  was  also  a
mediaeval  symbol  of  the  resurrection,  the
idea  being  founded  on  a  legend.  The  poets
of  that  age  were  fond  of  referring  to  this
legendary  symbol  in  connection  with  the
scriptural  idea  of  the  “tribe  of  Judah.”
Thus  Adam  de  St.  Victor,  in  his  poem  De
Resurrections  Domini,  says :

“Sic  de  Juda  Leo  fortis,

Fractis  portis  dir*  mortis
Die  surgit  tertia,

Rugiente  voce  Patris.”

t.  e.,

Thus  the  strong  lion  of  Judah,

The  gates  of  cruel  death  being  broken,

Arose  on  the  third  day

At  the  loud-sounding  voice  of  the  Father.

The  lion  was  the  symbol  of  strength  and
sovereignty,  in  the  human-headed  figures
of  the  Nimrod  gateway,  and  in  other  Baby¬
lonish  remains.  In  Egypt,  it  was  wor¬
shipped  at  the  city  of  Leontopolis  as  typi¬
cal  of  Dom,  the  Egyptian  Hercules.  Plu¬
tarch  says  that  the  Egyptians  ornamented
their  temples  with  gaping  lions’  mouths,
because  the  Nile  began  to  rise  when  the
sun  was  in  the  constellation  Leo.  Among
the  Talmudists  there  was  a  tradition  of  the
lion,  which  has  been  introduced  into  the
higher  degrees  of  Masonry.

But  in  the  symbolism  of  Ancient  Craft
Masonry,  where  the  lion  is  introduced,  as  in
the  third  degree,  in  connection  with  the
“lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,”  he  becomes
simply  a  symbol  of  the  resurrection  ;  thus
restoring  the  symbology  of  the  mediaeval
ages,  which  was  founded  on  a  legend  that
the  lion’s  whelp  was  born  dead,  and  only


brought  to  life  by  the  roaring  of  its  sire.
Philip  de  Thaun,  in  his  Bestiary,  written
in  the  twelfth  century,  gives  the  legend,
which  has  thus  been  translated  by  Mr.
Wright  from  the  original  old  Norman
French :

“  Know  that  the  lioness,  if  she  bring
forth  a  dead  cub,  she  holds  her  cub  and
the  lion  arrives ;  he  goes  about  and  cries,
till  it  revives  on  the  third  day  ....  Know
that  the  lioness  signifies  St.  Mary,  and  the
lion  Christ,  who  gave  himself  to  death  for
the  people;  three  days  he  lay  in  the  earth

to  gain  our  souls . By  the  cry  of  the

lion  they  understand  the  power  of  God,  by
which  Christ  was  restored  to  life  and  robbed
hell.”

The  phrase,  “lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,”
therefore,  when  used  in  the  Masonic  ritual,
referred  in  its  original  interpretation  to
Christ,  him  who  “  brought  life  and  immor¬
tality  to  light.”

Tribes  of  Israel.  All  the  twelve
tribes  of  Israel  were  engaged  in  the  con¬
struction  of  the  first  Temple.  But  long
before  its  destruction,  ten  of  them  revolted,
and  formed  the  nation  of  Israel ;  while  the
remaining  two,  the  tribes  of  Judah  and
Benjamin,  retained  possession  of  the  Tem¬
ple  and  of  Jerusalem  under  the  name  of  the
kingdom  of  Judah.  To  these  two  tribes
alone,  after  the  return  from  the  captivity,
was  intrusted  the  building  of  the  second
Temple.  Hence  in  the  high  degrees,  which,
of  course,  are  connected  for  the  most  part
with  the  Temple  of  Zerubbabel,  or  with
events  that  occurred  subsequent  to  the  de¬
struction  of  that  of  Solomon,  the  tribes  of
Judah  and  Benjamin  only  are  referred  to.
But  in  the  primary  degrees,  which  are  based
on  the  first  Temple,  the  Masonic  references
always  are  to  the  twelve  tribes.  Hence  in
the  old  lectures  the  twelve  original  points
are  explained  by  a  reference  to  the  twelve
tribes.  See  Twelve  Original  Points  of  Ma¬
sonry.

Tribunal.  The  modern  statutes  of
the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite  for  the  Southern
Jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  direct
trials  of  Masonic  offences,  committed  by  any
brethren  of  the  Rite  above  the  18th  degree,
to  be  held  in  a  court  called  a  Tribunal  of
the  Thirty-First  degree,  to  be  composed  of
not  less  nor  more  than  nine  members.  An
appeal  lies  from  such  a  Tribunal  of  Inspec¬
tors  Inquisitors  to  the  Grand  Consistory
or  the  Supreme  Council.

Tribunal,  Supreme.  1.  The  sev¬
enty-first  degree  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim.
2.  The  meeting  of  Inquisitors  Inspectors
of  the  thirty-nrst  degree  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  according  to
the  modern  ritual  of  the  Mother  Council.


832


TRILITERAL


TROWEL


Triliteral  Name.  The  sacred  name
of  God  among  the  Hindus  is  so  called  be¬
cause  it  consists  of  the  three  letters,  A  U  M.
See  Aum.

Trinidad.  Masonry  was  introduced
into  the  island  of  Trinidad  by  the  estab¬
lishment  of  a  Lodge  called  “  Les  Freres
Unis,”  under  a  Charter  from  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  in  1797.  A  Charter
had  been  granted  the  year  before  by  the
Grand  Orient  of  France,  but  never  acted
on,  in  consequence  of  the  suspension  of
that  body  by  the  French  Revolution.  In
1804,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  in
its  capitular  capacity,  granted  a  Charter  for
a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  which  continued  to
meet  until  1813,  when  it  obtained  a  new
Warrant  of  Constitution  from  the  Supreme
Chapter  of  Scotland.  In  1814,  Templar
Masonry  was  established  by  a  Deuchar
Warrant  from  the  Grand  Conclave  of  Scot¬
land.  In  1819,  a  Council  of  Royal  and
Select  Masters  was  established.  Trinidad
has  at  present  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge
under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  and
there  are  also  several  Lodges  under  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England.

Trinosophs.  The  Lodge  of  the  Tri-
nosophs  was  instituted  at  Paris  by  the  cel¬
ebrated  Ragon,  October  15,  1816,  and  in¬
stalled  by  the  Grand  Orient,  January  11,
1817.  The  word  Trinosophs  is  derived  from
the  Greek,  and  signifies  students  of  three  sci¬
ences,  in  allusion  to  the  three  primitive  de¬
grees,  which  were  the  especial  object  of
study  by  the  members;  although  they
adopted  both  the  French  and  Scottish
Rites,  to  whose  high  degrees,  however,  they
gave  their  own  philosophical  interpreta¬
tion.  It  was  before  this  Lodge  that  Ragon
delivered  his  Interpretative  and  Philosophic
Course  of  Initiations.  The  Lodge  was  com¬
posed  of  some  of  the  most  learned  Masons
of  France,  and  played  an  important  part  in
Masonic  literature.  No  Lodge  in  France
has  obtained  so  much  celebrity  as  did  the
Trinosophs.  It  was  connected  with  a  Chap¬
ter  and  Council  in  w'hich  the  high  degrees
were  conferred,  but  the  Lodge  confined
itself  to  the  three  symbolic  degrees,  which
it  sought  to  preserve  in  the  utmost  purity.

Triple  Alliance.  An  expression  in
the  high  degrees,  wrhich,  having  been  trans¬
lated  from  the  French  rituals,  should  have
more  properly  been  the  triple  covenant.  It
is  represented  by  the  triple  triangle,  and
refers  to  the  covenant  of  God  with  his  peo-

?le,  that  of  King  Solomon  with  Hiram  of
‘yre,  and  that  which  binds  the  fraternity
of  Masons.

Triple  Tan.  The  tau  cross,  or  cross
of  St.  Anthony,  is  a  cross  in  the  form  of  a
Greek  T.  The  triple  tau  is  a  figure  formed  by
three  of  these  crosses  meeting  in  a  point,  and


therefore  resembling  a  letter  T  resting  on
the  traverse  bar  of  an  H.  This  emblem,
placed  in  the  centre  of  a
triangle  and  circle — both
emblems  of  the  Deity — con¬
stitutes  the  jewel  of  the
Royal  Arch  as  practised  in
England,  where  it  is  so
highly  esteemed  as  to  be
called  the  “emblem  of  all
emblems,”  and  “the  grand
emblem  of  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
sonry.”  It  was  adopted  in  the  same  form,
as  the  Royal  Arch  badge,  by  the  General
Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States  in  1859;
although  it  had  previously  been  very  gener¬
ally  recognized  by  American  Masons.  It
is  also  found  in  the  capitular  Masonry  of
Scotland.  .(See  Royal  Arch  Badge.)

The  original  signification  of  this  emblem
has  been  variously  explained.  Some  sup¬
pose  it  to  include  the  initials  of  the  Temple
of  Jerusalem,  T.  H.,  Templum  Hierosolymce  ;
others,  that  it  is  a  symbol  of  the  mystical
union  of  the  Father  and  Son,  H  signifying
Jehovah,  and  T,  or  the  cross,  the  Son.  A
writer  in  Moore’s  Magazine  ingeniously
supposes  it  to  be  a  representation  of  three
T  squares,  and  that  it  alludes  to  the  three
jewels  of  the  three  ancient  Grand  Masters.
It  has  also  been  said  that  it  is  the  mono¬
gram  of  Hiram  of  Tyre;  and  others  assert
that  it  is  only  a  modification  of  the  Hebrew
letter  shin,  which  was  one  of  the  Jewish
abbreviations  of  the  sacred  name.  Oliver
thinks,  from  its  connection  with  the  circle
and  triangle  in  the  Royal  Arch  jewel,  that
it  was  intended  to  typify  the  sacred  name
as  the  author  of  eternal  life.  The  English
Royal  Arch  lectures  say  that  “by  its  inter¬
section  it  forms  a  given  number  of  angles
that  may  be  taken  in  five  several  combina¬
tions  ;  and,  reduced,  their  amount  in  right
angles  will  be  found  equal  to  the  five  Pla¬
tonic  bodies  which  represent  the  four  ele¬
ments  and  the  sphere  of  the  Universe.”
Amid  so  many  speculations,  I  need  not  hesi¬
tate  to  oiler  one  of  my  own.  The  Prophet
Ezekiel  speaks  of  the  tau  or  tau  cross  as
the  mark  distinguishing  those  who  were
to  be  saved,  on  account  of  their  sorrow  for
their  sins,  from  those  who,  as  idolaters,
were  to  be  slain.  It  was  a  mark  or  sign  of
favorable  distinction ;  and  with  this  allu¬
sion  we  may,  therefore,  suppose  the  triple
tau  to  be  used  in  the  Royal  Arch  degree  as
a  mark  designating  and  separating  those
who  know  and  worship  the  true  name  of
God  from  those  who  are  ignorant  of  that
august  mystery.

Trivium.  See  Quadrivium.

Trowel.  An  implement  of  Operative
Masonry,  which  has  been  adopted  by  spec¬
ulative  Masons  as  the  peculiar  working-


TROWEL


TRUST


833


tool  of  the  Master’s  degree.  By  this  im¬
plement,  and  its  use  in  Operative  Masonry
to  spread  the  cement  which  binds  all  the
parts  of  the  building  into  one  common
mass,  we  are  taught  to  spread  the  cement
of  affection  and  kindness,  which  unites  all
the  members  of  the  Masonic  family,  where¬
soever  dispersed  over  the  globe,  into  one
companionship  of  Brotherly  Love.

This  implement  is  considered  the  appro¬
priate  working-tool  of  a  Master  Mason,  be¬
cause,  in  Operative  Masonry,  while  the  Ap¬
prentice  is  engaged  in  preparing  the  rude
materials,  which  require  only  the  gauge  and
gavel  to  give  them  their  proper  shape,  the
Fellow  Craft  places  them  in  their  proper
position  by  means  of  the  plumb,  level,  and
square ;  but  the  Master  Mason  alone,  hav¬
ing  examined  their  correctness  and  proved
them  true  and  trusty,  secures  them  perma¬
nently  in  their  place  by  spreading,  with
the  trowel,  the  cement  that  irrevocably
binds  them  together.

The  trowel  has  also  been  adopted  as  the
jewel  of  the  Select  Master.  But  its  uses
in  this  degree  are  not  symbolical.  They
are  simply  connected  with  the  historical
legend  of  the  degree.

Trowel  and  Sword.  When  Nehe-
miah  received  from  Artaxerxes  Longi-
manus  the  appointment  of  Governor  of
Judea,  and  was  permitted  to  rebuild  the
walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  restore  the  city
to  its  former  fortified  condition,  he  met
with  great  opposition  from  the  Persian
satraps,  who  were  envious  of  his  favor  with
the  king,  and  from  the  heathen  inhabitants
of  Samaria,  who  were  unwilling  to  see  the
city  again  assume  its  pristine  importance.
The  former  undertook  to  injure  him  with
Artaxerxes  by  false  reports  of  his  seditious
designs  to  restore  the  independent  kind-
dom  of  Judea.  The  latter  sought  to  ob¬
struct  the  workmen  of  Nehemiah  in  their
labors,  and  openly  attacked  them.  Nehe¬
miah  took  the  most  active  measures  to  re¬
fute  the  iusidious  accusations  of  the  first,
and  to  repel  the  more  open  violence  of  the
latter.  Josephus  says  ( Antiq.,  B.  XI.,  eh.
vi.,  g  8,)  that  he  gave  orders  that  the  builders
should  keep  their  ranks,  and  have  their
armor  on  while  they  were  building;  and,
accordingly,  the  mason  had  his  sword  on
as  well  as  he  that  brought  the  materials  for
building.

Zerubbabel  had  met  with  similar  opposi¬
tion  from  the  Samaritans  while  rebuilding
the  Temple;  and  although  the  events  con¬
nected  with  Nehemiah’s  restoration  of  the
walls  occurred  long  after  the  completion
of  the  second  Temple,  yet  the  Masons  have
in  the  high  degrees  referred  them  to  the
time  of  Zerubbabel.  Hence  in  the  fifteenth
degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite,  or  the  Knight
6  £  63


of  the  East,  which  refers  to  the  building
of  the  Temple  of  Zerubbabel,  we  find  this
combination  of  the  trowel  and  the  sword
adopted  as  a  symbol.  The  old  ritual  of
that  degree  says  that  Zerubbabel,  being  in¬
formed  of  the  hostile  intentions  of  the  false
brethren  from  Samaria,  “  ordered  that  all
the  workmen  should  be  armed  with  the
trowel  in  one  hand  and  the  sword  in  the
other,  that  while  they  worked  with  the  one
they  might  be  enabled  to  defend  themselves
with  the  other,  and  ever  repulse  the  enemy
if  they  should  dare  to  present  themselves.”

In  reference  to  this  idea,  but  not  with
chronological  accuracy,  the  trowel  and
sword  have  been  placed  crosswise  as  sym¬
bols  on  the  tracing-board  of  the  English
Royal  Arch.

Oliver  correctly  interprets  the  symbol  of
the  trowel  and  sword  as  signifying  that,
“  next  to  obedience  to  lawful  authority,  a
manly  and  determined  resistance  to  lawless
violence  is  an  essential  part  of  social  duty.”

Trowel,  Society  of  the.  Vasari,
in  his  Lives  of  the  Painters  and  Sculptors
(life  of  G.  F.  Rustici),  says  that  about  the
year  1512  there  was  established  at  Florence
an  association  which  counted  among  its
members  some  of  the  most  distinguished
and  learned  inhabitants  of  the  city.  It
was  the  “Society  della  Cucchiara,”  or  the
Society  of  the  Trowel.  Vasari  adds  that  its
symbols  were  the  trowel,  the  hammer,  the
square,  and  the  level,  and  had  for  its  patron
St.  Andrew,  which  makes  Reghellini  think,
rather  illogically,  that  it  had  some  relation
to  the  Scottish  Rite.  Lenning,  too,  says
that  this  society  was  the  first  appearance
of  Freemasonry  in  Florence.  It  is  to  be
regretted  that  such  misstatements  of  Ma¬
sonic  history  should  be  encouraged  by
writers  of  learning  and  distinction.  The
perusal  of  the  account  of  the  formation  of
this  society,  as  given  by  Vasari,  shows  that
it  had  not  the  slightest  connection  with
Freemasonry.  It  was  simply  a  festive  as¬
sociation,  or  dinner-club  of  Florentine
artists;  and  it  derived  its  title  from  the  ac¬
cidental  circumstance  that  certain  painters
and  sculptors,  dining  together  in  a  garden,
found  not  far  from  their  table  a  mass  of
mortar,  in  which  a  trowel  was  sticking.
Some  rough  jokes  passed  thereupon,  in  the
casting  of  the  mortar  on  each  other,  and
the  calling  for  the  trowel  to  scrape  it  off.
Whereupon  they  resolved  to  form  an  asso¬
ciation  to  dine  together  annually,  and,  in
memorial  of  the  ludicrous  event  that  had
led  to  their  establishment,  they  called  them¬
selves  the  Society  of  the  Trowel.

True  .llasons.  See  Academy  of  True
Masons.

Trust  in  God.  Every  candidate  on
his  initiation  is  required  to  dsnLrc  that


834


TRUTH


TSCHOUDY


his  trust  is  in  God.  And  so  he  who  denies
the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being  is  de¬
barred  the  privilege  of  initiation,  lor  athe¬
ism  is  a  disqualification  for  Masonry.  This
pious  principle  has  distinguished  the  Fra¬
ternity  from  the  earliest  period ;  and  it  is
a  happy  coincidence,  that  the  company  of
Operative  Freemasons  instituted  in  1.477
should  have  adopted,  as  their  motto,  the
truly  Masonic  sentiment,  “The  Lord  is
all  our  Trust.”

Truth.  The  real  object  of  Freema¬
sonry,  in  a  philosophical  and  religious  sense,
is  the  search  for  truth.  This  truth  is,
therefore,  symbolized  by  the  Word,  ^'rom
the  first  entrance  of  the  Apprentice  into
the  Lodge,  until  his  reception  of  the  high¬
est  degree,  this  search  is  continued.  It  is
not  always  found,  and  a  substitute  must
sometimes  be  provided.  Yet  whatever  be
the  labors  he  may  perform,  whatever  the
ceremonies  through  which  he  may  pass,
whatever  the  symbols  in  which  he  may  be
instructed,  whatever  the  reward  he  may
obtain,  the  true  end  of  all  is  the  attainment
of  truth.  This  idea  of  truth  is  not  the
same  as  that  expressed  in  the  lecture  of
the  first  degree,  where  Brotherly  Love,  Be¬
lief,  and  Truth  are  there  said  to  be  the
“three  great  tenets  of  a  Mason’s  profession.”
In  that  connection,  truth,  which  is  called  a
“  divine  attribute,  the  foundation  of  every
virtue,”  is  synonymous  with  sincerity,  hon¬
esty  of  expression,  and  plain  dealing.  The
higher  idea  of  truth  w’hich  pervades  the
whole  Masonic  system,  and  which  is  sym¬
bolized  by  the  Word,  is  that  which  is  prop¬
erly  expressed  to  a  knowledge  of  God.

Tschoudy,  Louis  Theodore.
Michaud  spells  the  name  Tschudi,  but  Lea¬
ning,  Thory,  Ragon,  Oliver,  and  all  other
Masonic  writers,  give  the  name  as  Tschoudy,
w’hich  form,  therefore,  I  adopt  as  the  most
usual,  if  not  the  most  correct,  spelling.

The  Baron  de  Tschoudy  was  born  at
Metz,  in  1720.  He  wTas  descended  from  a
family  originally  of  the  Swiss  canton  of
Glaris,  but  which  had  been  established  in
France  since  the  commencement  of  the  six¬
teenth  century.  He  was  a  counsellor  of
State  and  member  of  the  Parliament  of
Metz;  but  the  most  important  events  of  his
life  are  those  which  connect  him  with  the
Masonic  institution,  of  which  he  was  a
zealous  and  learned  investigator.  He  was
one  of  the  most  active  apostles  of  the  school
of  Ramsay,  and  adopted  his  theory  of  the
Templar  origin  of  Masonry.  Having  ob¬
tained  permission  from  the  king  to  travel,
he  wTent  to  Italy,  in  1752,  under  the  assumed
name  of  the  Chevalier  de  Lussy,  There  he
excited  the  anger  of  the  papal  court  by  the
publication  at  the  Hague,  in  the  same  year,
of  a  book  entitled,  Etrenne  au  Pape,  ou  les


I  Francs- Marons  Vengts  ;  i.  e.,  “A  New  YeaPj
Gift  for  the  Pope,  or  the  Free  Masons
Avenged.”  This  was  a  caustic  commentary
on  the  bull  of  Benedict  XIV.  excommunicat¬
ing  the  Freemasons.  It  was  followed,  in  the
same  year,  by  another  work  entitled,  Le  Vat¬
ican  Venye;  i.  e.,  “  The  Vatican  Avenged  ;”
an  ironical  apology,  intended  as  a  sequence
to  the  former  book.  These  two  works  sub¬
jected  him  to  such  persecution  by  the
Church  that  he  was  soon  compelled  to  seek
safety  in  flight.

He  next  repaired  to  Russia,  where  hia
means  of  living  became  so  much  impaired
that,  Michaud  says,  he  was  compelled  to
enter  the  company  of  comedians  of  the  Em¬
press  Elizabeth.  From  this  condition  he
was  relieved  by  Count  Ivan  Schouwalon,
who  made  him  his  private  secretary.  He
was  also  appointed  the  secretary  of  the
Academy  of  Moscow7,  and  governor  of  the
pages  at  the  court.  But  this  advancement
of  his  fortunes,  and  the  fact  of  his  being  a
Frenchman,  created  for  him  many  enemies,
and  he  was  compelled  at  length  to  leave
Russia  and  return  to  France.  There,  how¬
ever,  the  persecutions  of  his  enemies  pur¬
sued  him,  and  on  his  arrival  at  Paris  he
was  sent  to  the  Bastile.  But  the  interces¬
sion  of  his  mother  with  the  Empress  Eliza¬
beth  and  with  the  Grand  Duke  Peter  was
successful,  and  he  was  speedily  restored  to
liberty.  He  then  retired  to  Metz,  and  for
the  rest  of  his  life  devoted  himself  to  the
task  of  Masonic  reform  and  the  fabrication
of  new  systems.

In  1762,  the  Council  of  Knights  of  the
East  was  established  at  Paris.  Ragon  says
( Orthod .  Magon.,  p.  137,)  that  “its  ritual
was  corrected  by  the  Baron  de  Tschoudy,
the  author  of  the  Blazing  Star.”  But  this
is  an  error.  Tschoudy  was  then  at  Dietz,
and  his  work  and  system  of  the  Blazing
Star  did  not  appear  until  four  years  after¬
wards.  It  is  at  a  later  date  that  Tschoudy
became  connected  with  the  Council.

In  1766  he  published,  in  connection  with
Bardon-Duhamel,  his  most  important  work,
entitled,  L’Etoile  Flarnboyante,  ou  la  Societe
des  Francs- Masons  consideree  sous  tous  les
Aspects;  i.  e.,  “The  Blazing  Star,  or  the
Society  of  Freemasons  considered  under
every  point  of  view.”

In  the  same  year  he  repaired  to  Paris,
with  the  declared  object  of  extending  his
Masonic  system.  He  then  attached  him¬
self  to  the  Council  of  Knights  of  the  East,
which,  under  the  guidance  of  the  tailor
Pirlet,  had  seceded  from  the  Council  of
Emperors  of  the  East  and  West.  Tschoudy
availed  himself  of  the  ignorance  and  of
the  boldness  of  Pirlet  to  put  his  plan  of  re¬
form  into  execution  by  the  creation  of  new
degrees.


TUAPHOLL


TUBAL


835


In  Tschoudy’s  system,  however,  as  de¬
veloped  in  the  L'Etoile  Flamboyante,  he
does  not  show  himself  to  be  the  advocate
of  the  high  degrees,  which,  he  says,  are
“an  occasion  of  expense  to  their  dupes,
and  an  abundant  and  lucrative  resource  for
those  who  make  a  profitable  traffic  of  their
pretended  instructions.”  He  recognizes  the
three  symbolic  degrees  because  their  gra¬
dations  are  necessary  in  the  Lodge,  which
he  viewed  as  a  school;  and  to  these  he  adds
a  superior  class,  which  may  be  called  the
architects,  or  by  any  other  name,  provided
we  attach  to  it  the  proper  meaning.  All
the  high  degrees  he  calls  “Masonic  rev¬
eries,”  excepting  two,  which  he  regards  as
containing  the  secrect,  the  object,  and  the
essence  of  Masonry,  namely,  the  Scottish
Knight  of  St.  Andrew  and  the  Knight  of
Palestine.  The  former  of  these  degrees
was  composed  by  Tschoudy,  and  its  ritual,
which  he  bequeathed,  with  other  manu¬
scripts,  to  the  Council  of  Knights  of  the
East  and  West,  was  published  in  1780,
under  the  title  of  Ecossais  de  Saint  Andre,
contenant  le  developpement  total  de  l' art  royal
de  la  Franche-Magonnerie.  Subsequently,
on  the  organization  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Kite,  the  degree  was  adopt¬
ed  as  the  twenty-ninth  of  its  series,  and  is
considered  as  one  of  the  most  important
and  philosophic  of  the  Scottish  system.
Its  fabrication  is,  indeed,  an  evidence  of
the  intellectual  genius  of  its  inventor.

Ragon,  in  his  Orthodoxie  Magonnique,  at¬
tributes  to  Tschoudy  the  fabrication  of  the
Rite  of  Adonhiramite  Masonry,  and  the
authorship  of  the  Recueil  Precieux,  which
contains  the  description  of  the  Rite.  But
the  first  edition  of  the  Recueil,  with  the  ac¬
knowledged  authorship  of  Guillaume  de
St.  Victor,  appeared  in  1781.  This  is  prob¬
ably  about  the  date  of  the  introduction  of
the  Rite,  and  is  just  twelve  years  after
Tschoudy  had  gone  to  his  eternal  rest.

Tschoudy  also  indulged  in  light  litera¬
ture,  and  several  romances  are  attributed
to  him,  the  only  one  of  which  now  known,
entitled  Therese  Philosophe,  does  not  add  to
his  reputation.

Chemins  Despontfes  ( Encyc .  Magon.,  i.
143,)  says:  “The  Baron  Tschoudy,  whose
birth  gave  him  a  distinguished  rank  in  so¬
ciety,  left  behind  him  the  reputation  of  an
excellent  man,  equally  remarkable  for  his
social  virtues,  his  genius,  and  his  military
talents.”  Such  appears  to  have  been  the
general  opinion  of  those  who  were  liis  con¬
temporaries  or  his  immediate  successors,
lie  died  at  Paris,  May  28,  1769.

Tuaplioll.  A  term  used  by  the  Dru¬
ids  to  designate  an  unhallowed  circumam-
bulation  around  the  sacred  cairn,  or  altar;
the  movement  being  against  the  sun,  that


is,  from  west  to  east  by  the  north,  the  cairn
being  on  the  left  hand  of  the  circumambu¬
lator.

Tubal  Cain.  Of  Tubal  Cain,  the  sa¬
cred  writings,  as  well  as  the  Masonic  le¬
gends,  give  us  but  scanty  information.  All
that  we  hear  of  him  in  the  book  of  Gen¬
esis  is  that  he  was  the  son  of  Lamech  and
Zillah,  and  was  “  an  instructor  of  every
artificer  in  brass  and  iron.”  The  Hebrew
original  does  not  justify  the  common  ver¬
sion,  for  und~),  lotesh,  does  not  mean  “  an  in¬
structor,”  but  “a  sharpener,”  —  one  who
whets  or  sharpens  instruments.  Hence
Dr.  Raphall  translates  the  passage  as  one
“who  sharpened  various  tools  in  copper
and  iron.”  The  authorized  version  has,
however,  almost  indelibly  impressed  the
character  of  Tubal  Cain  as  the  father  of
artificers;  and  it  is  in  this  sense  that  he
has  been  introduced  from  a  very  early  pe¬
riod  into  the  legendary  history  of  Masonry.

The  first  Masonic  reference  to  Tubal
Cain  is  found  in  the  “  Legend  of  the  Craft,”
where  he  is  called  “the  founder  of  smith¬
craft.”  I  cite  this  part  of  the  legend  from
the  Dowland  MS.  simply  because  of  its
more  modern  orthography;  but  the  story
is  substantially  the  same  in  all  the  old
manuscript  Constitutions.  In  that  Manu¬
script  we  find  the  following  account  of
Tubal  Cain :

“  Before  Noah’s  flood,  there  was  a  man
called  Lamech,  as  it  is  written  in  the  Bible,
in  the  fourth  chapter  of  Genesis ;  and  this
Lamech  had  two  wives,  the  one  named
Ada  and  the  other  named  Zilla;  by  his
first  wife,  Ada,  he  got  two  sons,  the  one
Jubel,  and  the  other  Jubal:  and  by  the
other  wife  he  got  a  son  and  a  daughter.
And  these  four  children  founded  the  be¬
ginning  of  all  the  sciences  in  the  world.
The  elder  son,  Jabel,  founded  the  science
of  geometry,  and  he  carried  flocks  of  sheep
and  lambs  into  the  fields,  and  first  built
houses  of  stone  and  wood,  as  it  is  noted  in
the  chapter  above  named.  And  his  brother
Jubal  founded  the  science  of  music  and
songs  of  the  tongue,  the  harp  and  organ.
And  the  third  brother,  Tubal  Cain,  found¬
ed  smith-craft,  of  gold,  silver,  copper,  iron,
and  steel,  and  the  daughter  founded  the
art  of  weaving.  And  these  children  knew
well  that  God  would  take  vengeance  for
sin,  either  by  fire  or  water,  wherefore  they
wrote  the  sciences  that  they  had  found,  on
two  pillars  that  they  might  be  found  after
Noah’s  flood.  The  one  pillar  was  marble,
for  that  would  not  burn  with  fire ;  and  the
other  was  of  brafes,  for  that  would  not
drown  in  water.”

Similar  to  this  is  an  old  Rabbinical  tra¬
dition,  which  asserts  that  Jubal,  who  was
the  inventor  of  writing  as  well  as  of  music.


836


TUBAL


TUBAL


having  heard  Adam  say  that  the  universe
would  be  twice  destroyed,  once  by  fire  and
once  by  water,  inquired  which  catastrophe
would  first  occur ;  but  Adam  refusing  to
inform  him,  he  inscribed  the  system  of
music  which  he  had  invented  upon  two
illars  of  stone  and  brick.  A  more  modern
fasonic  tradition  ascribes  the  construction
of  these  pillars  to  Enoch.

To  this  account  of  Tubal  Cain  must  be
added  the  additional  particulars,  recorded
by  Josephus,  that  he  exceeded  all  men  in
strength,  and  was  renowned  for  his  warlike
achievements.

The  only  other  account  of  the  proto-
metallurgist  that  we  meet  with  in  any  an¬
cient  author  is  that  which  is  contained  in
the  celebrated  fragment  of  Sanconiatho,
who  refers  to  him  under  the  name  of
Chrysor,  which  is  evidently,  as  Bochart
affirms,  a  corruption  of  the  Hebrew  chores
ur,  a  worker  in  fire,  that  is,  a  smith.  San¬
coniatho  was  a  Phoenician  author,  who  is
supposed  to  have  flourished  before  the
Trojan  war,  probably,  as  Sir  William
Drummond  suggests,  about  the  time  when
Gideon  was  Judge  of  Israel,  and  who  col¬
lected  the  different  accounts  and  traditions
of  the  origin  of  the  world  which  were  ex¬
tant  at  the  period  in  which  he  lived.  A
fragment  only  of  this  work  has  been  pre¬
served,  which,  translated  into  Greek  by
Philo  Bvblius,  was  inserted  by  Eusebius  in
his  Prccparatio  Evangelica,  and  has  thus
been  handed  down  to  the  present  day.
That  portion  of  the  history  by  Sanconiatho,
which  refers  to  Tubal  Cain,  is  contained  in
the  following  words :

“A  long  time  after  the  generation  of
Hypsoaranios,  the  inventors  of  hunting
and  fishing,  Agreas  and  Alieas,  were  born  ;
after  whom  the  people  were  called  hunters
and  fishers,  and  from  whom  sprang  two
brothers,  who  discovered  iron,  and  the
manner  of  working  it.  One  of  these  two,
called  Chrysor,  was  skilled  in  eloquence,
and  composed  verses  and  prophecies.  He
was  the  same  with  Hephaistos,  and  in¬
vented  fishing-hooks,  bait  for  taking  fish,
cordage  and  rafts,  and  was  the  first  of  all
mankind  who  had  navigated.  He  was
therefore  worshipped  as  a  god  after  his
death,  and  was  called  Diamichios.  It  is
said  that  these  brothers  were  the  first  who
contrived  partition  walls  of  brick.”

Hephaistos,  it  will  be  observed,  is  the
Greek  of  the  god  who  was  called  by  the
Bomans  Yulcan.  Hence  the  remark  of
Sanconiatho,  and  the  apparent  similarity
of  names  as  well  as  occupations,  have  led
some  writers  of  the  last,  and  even  of  the
present,  century  to  derive  Vulcan  from
Tubal  Cain  by  a  process  not  very  devious,
and  therefore  familiar  to  etymologists.  By


the  omission  in  Tubal  Cain  of  the  initial
T,  which  is  the  Phoenician  article,  and  it*
valueless  vowel,  we  get  Balcan,  which,  by
the  interchangeable  nature  of  B  and  V,  is
easily  transformed  to  Vulcan.

“  That  Tubal  Cain,”  says  Bishop  Stilling-
fleet,  (Orig.  Sac ,  p.  292,)  “gave  first  occa¬
sion  to  the  name  and  worship  of  Yulcan,
hath  been  very  probably  conceived,  both
from  the  very  great  affinity  of  the  names,
and  that  Tubal  Cain  is  expressly  mentioned
to  be  an  instructor  of  every  artificer  in
brass  and  iron,  and  as  near  relation  as
Apollo  had  to  Vulcan,  Jubal  had  to  Tubal
Cain,  who  was  the  inventor  of  music,  or
the  father  of  all  such  as  handle  the  harp
and  organ,  which  the  Greeks  attribute  to
Apollo.”

Vossius,  in  his  treatise  De  Idolatria,
(lib.  i.,  cap.  36,)  makes  this  derivation  of
Vulcan  from  Tubal  Cain.  But  Bryant,  in
his  Analysis  of  Ancient  Mythology,  (vol.  i.,
p.  139,)  denies  the  etymology,  and  says
that  among  the  Egyptians  and  Babyloni¬
ans,  Vulcan  was  equivalent  to  Orus  or
Osiris,  symbols  of  the  sun.  He  traces  the
name  to  the  words  Baal  Cahen,  Holy  Bel,
or  sacred  Lord.  Bryant’s  etymology  may
be  adopted,  however,  without  any  inter¬
ference  with  the  identity  of  Vulcan  and
Tubal  Cain.  He  who  discovered  the  uses
of  fire,  may  well,  in  the  corruptions  of  idola¬
try,  have  typified  the  solar  orb,  the  source
of  all  heat.  It  might  seem  that  Tubal  is
an  attribute  compounded  of  the  definite
particle  T  and  the  word  Baal,  signifying
Lord.  Tubal  Cain  would  then  signify  “  the
Lord  Cain.”  Again,  dhu  or  du,  in  Arabic,
signifies  Lord ;  and  we  trace  the  same  signi¬
fication  of  this  affix,  in  its  various  inter¬
changeable  forms  of  Du,  Tu,  and  Di,  in
many  Semitic  words.  But  the  question  of
the  identical  origin  of  Tubal  Cain  and
Vulcan  has  at  length  been  settled  by  the
researches  of  comparative  philologists.
Tubal  Cain  is  Semitic  in  origin,  and
Vulcan  is  Aryan.  The  latter  may  be
traced  to  the  Sanscrit  ulka,  a  firebrand,
from  which  we  get  also  the  Latin  fulgur
and  fulmen,  names  of  the  lightning.

From  the  mention  made  of  Tubal  Cain
in  the  “  Legend  of  the  Craft,”  the  word  was
long  ago  adopted  as  significant  in  the  pri¬
mary  degrees,  and  various  attempts  have
been  made  to  give  it  an  interpretation.

Hutchinson,  in  an  article  in  his  Spirit  of
Masonry  devoted  to  the  consideration  of
the  third  degree,  has  the  following  refer¬
ence  to  the  word :

“  The  Mason  advancing  to  this  state  of
Masonry,  pronounces  his  own  sentence,  as
confessional  of  the  imperfection  of  the
second  stage  of  his  profession,  and  as  pro¬
bationary  of  the  exalted  degree  to  which


TUNE


TURKEY


837


he  aspires,  in  the  Greek  distich,  Tvypovxoeu,
( tumbonchoeo ,)  Struo  tumuluin:  ‘I  prepare
my  sepulchre;  I  make  my  grave  in  the
pollutions  of  the  earth;  I  am  under  the
shadow  of  death.’  This  distich  has  been
vulgarly  corrupted  among  us,  and  an  ex¬
pression  takes  place  scarcely  similar  in
sound,  and  entirely  inconsistent  with  Ma¬
sonry,  and  unmeaning  in  itself.”

But  however  ingenious  this  interpretation
of  Hutchinson  may  be,  it  is  generally  ad¬
mitted  that  it  is  incorrect.

The  modern  English  Masons,  and  through
them  the  French,  have  derived  Tubal  Cain
from  the  Hebrew  tebel,  earth,  and  kanah ,  to
acquire  possession,  and,  with  little  respect
for  the  grammatical  rules  of  the  Hebrew
language,  interpret  it  as  meaning  worldly
possessions.

In  the  Hemming  lectures,  now  the  au¬
thorized  English  system,  we  find  the  an¬
swer  to  the  question,  “  What  does  Tubal
Cain  denote?”  is  “Worldly  possessions.”
And  Delaunay,  in  his  Thuilleur,  (p.  17,)  de¬
nies  the  reference  to  the  proto-smith,  and
says :  “  If  we  reflect  on  the  meaning  of  the
two  Hebrew  words,  we  will  easily  recog¬
nize  in  their  connection  the  secret  wish  of
the  hierophant,  of  the  Templar,  of  the
Freemason,  and  of  every  mystical  sect,  to
govern  the  world  in  accordance  with  its
own  principles  and  its  own  laws.”  It  is  for¬
tunate,  I  think,  that  the  true  meaning  of  the
words  will  authorize  no  such  interpretation.
The  fact  is,  that  even  if  Tubal  Cain  were
derived  from  tebel  and  kanah,  the  precise
rules  of  Hebrew  construction  would  forbid
affixing  to  their  union  any  such  meaning
as  “worldly  possessions.”  Such  an  inter¬
pretation  of  it  in  the  French  and  English
systems  is,  therefore,  a  very  forced  and  in¬
accurate  one.

The  use  of  Tubal  Cain  as  a  significant
word  in  the  Masonic  ritual  is  derived  from
the  “  Legend  of  the  Craft,”  by  which  the
name  was  made  familiar  to  the  Operative
and  then  to  the  Speculative  Masons;  and  it
refers  not  symbolically,  but  historically  to
his  scriptural  and  traditional  reputation  as
an  artificer.  If  he  symbolized  anything,  it
would  be  labor;  and  a  Mason’s  labor  is  to
acquire  truth ,  and  not  worldly  possessions.
The  English  and  French  interpretation  has
fortunately  never  been  introduced  into  this
country.

Tune,  FreomsiMons’.  The  air  of

the  song  written  by  Matthew  Birkhead,
and  first  published  in  the  Book  of  Consti¬
tutions  of  1723,  with  the  title  of  “  the  En¬
tered  Prentice’s  Song,”  is  familiarly  and
distinctively  known  as  “the  Freemasons’
Tune.”  Mr.  William  Chappell,  in  a  work
entitled  Popular  Music  of  the  Olden  Time,
gives  the  following  interesting  account  of  it.


“  This  tune  was  very  popular  at  the  time
of  the  ballad  operas,  and  I  am  informed
that  the  same  words  are  still  sung  to  it  at
Masonic  meetings.

“The  air  was  introduced  in  The  Village
Opera,  The  Chambermaid,  The  Lottery,  The
Grub-Street  Opera,  and  The  Lover  his  own
Rival.  It  is  contained  in  the  third  volume
of  The  Dancing  Master,  and  of  Walsh’s
New  Country  Dancing  Master.  Words  and
music  are  included  in  Watt’s  Musical  Mis¬
cellany,  iii.  72,  and  in  British  Melody,  or
The  Musical  Magazine,  fol.,  1739.  They
were  also  printed  on  broadsides.

“In  the  Gentlemen's  Magazine,  for  Octo¬
ber,  1731,  the  first  stanza  is  printed  as  ‘  A
Health,  by  Mr.  Birkhead.’  It  seems  to  be
there  quoted  from  ‘The  Constitutions  of
the  Freemasons,’  by  the  Rev.  James  An¬
derson,  A.M.,  one  of  the  Worshipful  Mas¬
ters.

“There  are  several  versions  of  the  tune.
One  m  Pills  to  Purge  Melancholy,  ii.  230,
(1719,)  has  a  second  part;  but  that  being
almost  a  repetition  of  the  first,  taken  an  oc¬
tave  higher,  is  out  of  the  compass  of  or¬
dinary  voices,  and  has  therefore  been  gen¬
erally  rejected.

“In  A  Complete  Collection  of  Old  and
New  English  and  Scotch  Songs,  ii.  172,
(1735,)  the  name  is  given  as  ‘Ye  Com¬
moners  and  Peers ;  ’  but  Leveridge  com¬
posed  another  tune  to  these  words.

“In  The  Musical  Mason,  or  Freemasons'
Pocket  Companion,  being  a  collection  of
songs  used  in  all  Lodges,  to  which  are
added  the  ‘Freemasons’  March  and  Ode,’
(8vo,  1791,)  this  is  entitled  ‘The  Entered
Apprentice’s  Song.’

“Many  stanzas  have  been  added  from
time  to  time,  and  others  have  been  altered.”

Turban.  The  usual  head-dress  worn
in  Eastern  nations,  consisting  of  a  quilted
cap,  without  rim,  and  a  sash  or  scarf  of
cotton  or  linen  wound  about  the  cap.  In
Royal  Arch  Chapters,  the  turban,  of  a  pur¬
ple  color,  constitutes  the  head-dress  of  the
Scribe,  because  that  officer  represents  the
Jewish  prophet  Haggai.

Tureopolier.  The  third  dignity  in
the  Order  of  Knights  Hospitallers  of  St.
John,  or  Knights  of  Malta.  It  took  its
name  from  the  Turcopoles,  a  sort  of  light
horse  mentioned  in  the  history  of  the
Christian  wars  in  Palestine.  The  office  of
Turcopolier  was  held  by  the  Conventual
Bailiff,  or  head  of  the  language  of  Eng¬
land.  He  had  the  command  of  the  cavalry
of  the  Order.

Turkey.  A  writer  in  the  Freemasons?
Quarterly  Review  (1814,  p.  21,)  says  that
there  was  a  Masonic  meeting  in  Constanti¬
nople,  at  which  some  Turks  were  initiated,
but  that  the  government  prohibited  th«


838


TURQUOISE


TWELVE


future  meetings.  This  must  have  been  an
irregular  Lodge,  for  organized  Masonry  was
not  introduced  into  Turkey  until  1838,
when  the  first  Lodges  were  erected  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England.  They  were,
however,  soon  discontinued,  in  consequence
of  the  opposition  of  the  Mohammedan
hierarchy.  A  more  tolerant  spirit,  how¬
ever,  now  exists,  and  there  is  a  Provincial
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  having  under
its  jurisdiction  four  Lodges  at  Constanti¬
nople  and  four  at  Smyrna.  There  are  also
four  Lodges  at  Constantinople,  under  the
Grand  Orient  of  France;  four  at  Smyrna
and  one  at  Constantinople,  under  the  Grand
Orient  of  Italy ;  one  at  Constantinople,
under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland;  and
one  at  Constantinople,  under  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland.  There  are  also  three
Royal  Arch  Chapters,  —  two  of  them  at
Smyrna  and  Constantinople,  chartered  by
the  Supreme  Chapter  of  Scotland,  aqd  one
at  Constantinople,  chartered  by  the  Grand
Chapter  of  England.  There  are  also  two
Rose  Croix  Chapters,  —  one,  from  the  Su¬
preme  Council  of  England,  in  Constanti¬
nople  ;  and  the  other,  from  the  Grand  Ori¬
ent  of  Italy,  in  Smyrna.  In  these  Lodges
many  native  Mohammedans  have  been  in¬
itiated.  The  Turks,  however,  have  always
had  secret  societies  of  their  own,  which
has  led  some  writers  to  suppose,  errone¬
ously,  that  Freemasonry  existed  long  before
the  date  of  its  actual  introduction.  Thus,
the  Begtaschi  form  a  secret  society  in
Turkey,  numbering  many  thousands  of
Mussulmans  in  its  ranks,  and  none  but  a
true  Moslem  can  be  admitted  to  the  broth¬
erhood.  It  is  a  religious  Order,  and  was
founded  in  the  year  1328  by  the  Hadji
Begtasch,  a  famous  dervish,  from  whom  it
derives  its  name.  The  Begtaschi  have  cer¬
tain  signs  and  passwords  by  which  they  are
enabled  to  recognize  the  “true  brethren,”
and  by  which  they  are  protected  from  vag¬
abond  impostors.  A  writer  in  Notes  and
Queries  says,  in  allusion  to  this  society,  that
“One  day,  during  the  summer  of  1855,  an
English  merchant  captain,  while  walking
through  the  streets  of  a  Turkish  quarter  of
Constantinople,  encountered  a  Turk,  who
made  use  of  various  signs  of  Freemasonry,
some  of  which,  the  captain  being  a  Mason,
he  understood,  and  others  he  did  not.”  It
is,  however,  probable  in  this  instance,  con¬
sidering  the  date,  that  the  Turk  was  really
a  Mason,  and  possessed  some  higher  de¬
grees,  which  had  not  been  attained  by  the
English  captain.  There  is  also  another
equally  celebrated  Order  in  Turkey,  the
Melewi,  who  have  also  secret  modes  of
recognition.

Turquoise.  Oliver  says  ( Landm .,  ii.
521,)  that  the  first  stone  in  the  third  row  of


the  high  priest’s  breastplate  “was  a  ligure,
hyacinth,  or  turquoise.”  The  stone  was  a
ligure;  but  Oliver  is  incorrect  in  supposing
that  it  is  a  synonym  of  either  a  hyacinth
or  a  turquoise,  which  are  stones  of  a  very
different  nature.

Tuscan  Order.  The  simplest  of  the
five  orders  of  architecture,  as  its  columns
are  never  fluted,  and  it  does  not  allow  the
introduction  of  any  kind  of  ornament.  It
is  one  of  the  two  modern  orders,  not  being
found  in  any  ancient  example.  Hence  it
is  of  no  value  in  Masonic  symbolism.

Twelve.  Twelve  being  composed  of
the  mystical  numbers  7  -+-  5  or  of  3x4,
the  triad  multiplied  by  the  quarternion,  was
a  number  of  considerable  value  in  ancient
systems.  Thus  there  were  twelve  signs  of
the  zodiac,  twelve  months  in  the  year,
twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  twelve  stones  in  the
pectoral,  and  twelve  oxen  supporting  the
molten  sea  in  the  Temple.  There  were
twelve  apostles  in  the  new  law,  and  the
New  Jerusalem  has  twelve  gates,  twelve
foundations,  is  twelve  thousand  furlongs
square,  and  the  number  of  the  sealed  is
twelve  times  twelve  thousand.  Even  the
Pagans  respected  this  number,  for  there
were  in  their  mythology  twelve  superior
and  twelve  inferior  gods.

Twelve  Illustrious  Knights.
The  eleventh  degree  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite;  more  correctly
Sublime  Knight  Elected,  which  see.

Twelve  Lettered  IVame.  The
Jews  had  among  their  divine  names,  be¬
sides  the  Tetragrammaton,  a  two  lettered
name,  which  was  Jah,  a  twelve  lettered
and  a  forty-two  lettered  name.  None  of
these,  however,  were  so  sacred  and  unutter¬
able  as  the  Tetragrammaton.  Maimonides
says  of  the  twelve  lettered  name,  that  it
was  formerly  used  instead  of  Adonai,  as
being  more  emphatic,  in  place  of  the  Tetra¬
grammaton,  whenever  they  came  to  that
sacred  name  in  reading.  It  was  not,  how¬
ever,  like  the  Tetragrammaton,  communi¬
cated  only  to  their  disciples,  but  was  im¬
parted  to  any  that  desired  its  knowledge.
But  after  the  death  of  Simeon  the  Just,  the
Tetragrammaton  ceasing  to  be  used  at  all,
the  twelve  lettered  name  was  substituted  in
blessing  the  people;  and  then  it  became  a
secret  name,  and  was  communicated  only
to  the  most  pious  of  the  priests.  What
was  the  twelve  lettered  name  is  uncertain,
though  all  agree  that  it  was  not  a  name,
but  a  sentence  composed  of  twelve  letters.
Rabbi  Bechai  says  it  was  formed  by  a  tri¬
ple  combination  and  permutation  of  the
four  letters  of  the  Tetragrammaton;  and
there  are  other  explanations  equally  unsat¬
isfactory.

There  was  also  a  forty-two  lettered  name,


TWELVE


TWELVE


839


composed,  says  Bechai,  of  the  first  forty-
two  letters  of  the  book  of  Genesis.  An¬
other  and  a  better  explanation  has  been
propounded  by  Franck,  that  it  is  formed
out  of  the  names  of  the  ten  Sephiroth,
which  with  the  1,  vau,  or  and,  amount  ex¬
actly  to  forty-two  letters.  There  was  an¬
other  name  of  seventy-two  letters,  which
is  still  more  inexplicable.  Of  all  these
names,  Maimonides  ( More  Nev.,  I.  lxii.,)
says  that,  as  they  could  not  possibly  consti¬
tute  one  word,  they  must  have  been  com¬
posed  of  several  words,  and  he  adds  :

“  There  is  no  doubt  that  these  words  con¬
veyed  certain  ideas,  which  were  designed
to  bring  man  nearer  to  the  true  conception
of  the  Divine  essence,  through  the  process
we  have  already  described.  These  words,
composed  of  numerous  letters,  have  been
designated  as  a  single  name,  because,  like
all  accidental  proper  names,  they  indicate
one  single  object;  and  to  make  the  object
more  intelligible,  several  words  are  em¬
ployed,  as  many  words  are  sometimes  used
to  express  one  single  thing.  This  must  be
well  understood,  that  they  taught  the  ideas
indicated  by  these  names,  and  not  the  simple
pronunciation  of  the  meaningless  letters.”

Twelve  Original  Points  of  Ma¬
sonry.  The  old  English  lectures,  which
were  abrogated  by  the  United  Grand  Lodge
of  England  in  1813,  when  it  adopted  the
system  of  Hemming,  contained  the  follow¬
ing  passage:

“  There  are  in  Freemasonry  twelve  origi¬
nal  points,  which  form  the  basis  of  the  sys¬
tem,  and  comprehend  the  whole  ceremony
of  initiation.  Without  the  existence  of
these  points,  no  man  ever  was,  or  can  be,
legally  and  essentially  received  into  the
Order.  Every  person  who  is  made  a  Mason
must  go  through  these  twelve  forms  and
ceremonies,  not  only  in  the  first  degree,
but  in  every  subsequent  one.”

Hence,  it  will  be  seen  that  our  ancient
Brethren  deemed  these  “  Twelve  Original
Points  of  Masonry,”  a3  they  were  called,
of  the  highest  importance  to  the  ceremony
of  initiation,  and  they  consequently  took
much  pains,  and  exercised  much  ingenuity,
in  giving  them  a  symbolical  explanation.
But  as,  by  the  decree  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
they  no  longer  constitute  a  part  of  the  Eng¬
lish  ritual,  and  were  never  introduced  into
this  country,  where  the  “  Four  Perfect
Points”  constitute  an  inadequate  substi¬
tute,  there  can  be  no  impropriety  in  pre¬
senting  a  brief  explanation  of  them,  for
which  I  shall  be  indebted  to  the  industry
of  Oliver,  who  has  treated  of  them  at  great
length  in  the  eleventh  lecture  of  his  His¬
torical  Landmarks.

The  ceremony  of  initiation,  when  these
points  constituted  a  portion  of  the  ritual,


was  divided  into  twelve  parts,  in  allusion
to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  to  each  of
which  one  of  the  points  was  referred,  in  the
following  manner:

1.  The  opening  of  the  Lodge  was  symbol¬
ized  by  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  because  Reu¬
ben  was  the  first-born  of  his  father  Jacob,
who  called  him  “the  beginning  of  his
strength.”  He  was,  therefore,  appropri¬
ately  adopted  as  the  emblem  of  that  cere¬
mony  which  is  essentially  the  beginning  of
every  initiation.

2.  The  preparation  of  the  candidate  was
symbolized  by  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  because
Simeon  prepared  the  instruments  for  the
slaughter  of  the  Shechemites;  and  that  part
of  the  ceremony  which  relates  to  offensive
weapons,  was  used  as  a  token  of  our  abhor¬
rence  for  the  cruelty  exercised  on  that
occasion.

3.  The  report  of  the  Senior  Deacon  re¬
ferred  to  the  tribe  of  Levi,  because,  in  the
slaughter  of  the  Shechemites,  Levi  was
supposed  to  have  made  a  signal  or  report
to  Simeon  his  brother,  with  whom  he  was
engaged  in  attacking  these  unhappy  people
while  unprepared  for  defence.

4.  The  entrance  of  the  candidate  into  the
Lodge  was  symbolized  by  the  tribe  of  Ju¬
dah,  because  they  were  the  first  to  cross  the
Jordan  and  enter  the  promised  land,  com¬
ing  from  the  darkness  and  servitude,  as  it
were,  of  the  wilderness  into  the  light  and
liberty  of  Canaan.

5.  The  prayer  was  symbolized  by  the
tribe  of  Zebulun,  because  the  blessing  and
prayer  of  Jacob  were  given  to  Zebulun,  in
preference  to  his  brother  Issachar.

6.  The  circumambulation  referred  to  the
tribe  of  Issachar,  because,  as  a  thriftless
and  indolent  tribe,  they  required  a  leader
to  advance  them  to  an  equal  elevation  with
the  other  tribes.

7.  Advancing  to  the  altar  was  symbolized
by  the  tribe  of  Dan,  to  teach  us,  by  con¬
trast,  that  we  should  advance  to  truth  and
holiness  as  rapidly  as  that  tribe  advanced
to  idolatry,  among  whom  the  golden  serpent
was  first  set  up  to  receive  adoration.

8.  The  obligation  referred  to  the  tribe  of
Gad,  in  allusion  to  the  solemn  vow  which
was  made  by  Jeplithah,  Judge  of  Israel,  who
was  of  that  tribe.

9.  The  intrusting  of  the  candidate  with
the  mysteries  was  symbolized  by  the  tribe
of  Asher,  because  he  was  then  presented
with  the  rich  fruits  of  Masonic  knowledge^
as  Asher  was  said  to  be  the  inheritor  of
fatness  and  royal  dainties.

10.  The  investiture  of  the  lambskin,  by
which  the  candidate  is  declared  free,  re¬
ferred  to  the  tribe  of  Naphtali,  which  was
invested  by  Moses  with  a  peculiar  freedom,
when  he  said,  “0  Naphtali,  satisfied  with


840


TWENTY-FOUR


TYRE


favor,  and  full  with  the  blessing  of  the
Lord,  possess  thou  the  West  and  the
South.”

11.  The  ceremony  of  the  north-east  comer
of  the  Lodge  referred  to  Joseph,  because,  as
this  ceremony  reminds  us  of  the  most  super¬
ficial  part  of  Masonry,  so  the  two  half  tribes
of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  of  which  the
tribe  of  Joseph  was  composed,  were  ac¬
counted  to  be  more  superficial  than  the
rest,  as  they  were  descendants  of  the  grand¬
sons  only  of  Jacob.

12.  The  closing  of  the  Lodge  was  symbol¬
ized  by  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  who  was  the
youngest  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  and  thus
closed  his  father’s  strength.

Such  were  the  celebrated  twelve  original

f mints  of  Freemasonry  of  the  ancient  Eng-
ish  lectures.  They  were  never  introduced
into  this  country,  and  they  are  now  dis¬
used  in  England.  But  it  will  be  seen  that,
while  some  of  the  allusions  are  perhaps
abstruse,  many  of  them  are  ingenious  and
appropriate.  It  will  not,  perhaps,  be  re¬
gretted  that  they  have  become  obsolete;  yet
it  cannot  be  denied  that  they  added  some¬
thing  to  the  symbolism  and  to  the  religious
reference  of  Freemasonry.  At  all  events,
they  are  matters  of  Masonic  antiquity,  and,
as  such,  are  not  unworthy  of  attention.

Twenty-Four  Inch  Gauge.  A
rule  two  feet  long,  which  is  divided  by
marks  into  twenty-four  parts,  each  one  inch
in  length.  The  Operative  Mason  uses  it  to
take  the  necessary  dimensions  of  the  stone
that  he  is  about  to  prepare.  It  has  been
adopted  as  one  of  the  working-tools  of  the
Entered  Apprentice  in  Speculative  Ma¬
sonry,  where  its  divisions  are  supposed  to
represent  hours.  Hence  its  symbolic  use
is  to  teach  him  to  measure  his  time  so  that,
of  the  twenty-four  hours  of  the  day,  he  may
devote  eight  hours  to  the  service  of  God  and
a  worthy  distressed  brother,  eight  hours  to
his  usual  vocation,  and  eight  to  refresh¬
ment  and  sleep.  In  the  symbolic  language
of  Masonry,  therefore,  the  twenty-four  inch
gauge  is  a  symbol  of  time  well  employed.

Twenty-One.  A  number  of  mystical
import,  partly  because  it  is  the  product  of
3  and  7,  the  most  sacred  of  the  odd  num¬
bers,  but  especially  because  it  is  the  sum
of  the  numerical  value  of  the  letters  of  the
Divine  name,  Eheyeh,  thus:


n  ♦  rr  n

54-10  +  5+1=21.


•  It  is  little  valued  in  Masonry,  but  is
deemed  of  great  importance  in  the  Kabbala
and  in  Alchemy ;  in  the  latter,  because  it
refers  to  the  twenty-one  days  of  distillation
necessary  for  the  conversion  of  the  grosser
metals  into  silver.


Twenty-Seven.  Although  the  num¬
ber  twenty-seven  is  found  in  the  degree
of  Select  Master  and  in  some  of  the  other
high  degrees,  it  can  scarcely  be  called  in  it¬
self  a  sacred  number.  It  derives  its  im¬
portance  from  the  fact  that  it  is  produced
by  the  multiplication  of  the  square  of  three
by  three,  thus:  3  X  3  X  3  =  27.

Twenty-Six.  This  is  considered  by
the  Kabbalists  as  the  most  sacred  of  mys¬
tical  numbers,  because  it  is  equal  to  the
numerical  value  of  the  letters  of  the  Te-
tragrammaton,  thus:

n  i  n  ♦

5  +  6  +  5  +  10  =  26.

Two  Fettered  Name.  The  title

given  by  the  Talmudists  to  the  name  of
God,  |"p»  or  ddh,  which  see.

Tyler.  Tyle  and  Tyler  are  the  old  and
now  obsolete  spelling  of  Tile  and  Tiler,
which  see.

Type.  In  the  science  of  symbology  it  is
the  picture  or  model  of  something  of  which
it  is  considered  as  a  symbol.  Hence  the
word  type  and  symbol  are  in  this  sense  sy¬
nonymous.  Thus  the  tabernacle  was  a
type  of  the  Temple,  as  the  Temple  is  a
type  of  the  Lodge.

Typhon.  The  brother  and  slayer  of
Osiris,  in  the  Egyptian  mythology.  As
Osiris  was  a  type  or  symbol  of  the  sun,  Ty¬
phon  was  the  symbol  of  winter,  when  the
vigor,  heat,  and,  as  it  were,  life  of  the  sun
are  destroyed,  and  of  darkness  as  opposed
to  light.

Tyre.  An  ancient  city  of  Phoenicia,
which  in  the  time  of  King  Solomon  was
celebrated  as  the  residence  of  King  Hiram,
to  whom  that  monarch  and  his  father
David  were  indebted  for  great  assistance  in
the  construction  of  the  Temple  at  Jeru¬
salem.  Tyre  was  distant  from  Jerusalem
about  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  by
sea,  and  was  thirty  miles  nearer  by  land.
An  intercourse  between  the  two  cities  and
their  respective  monarchs  was,  therefore,
easily  cultivated.  The  inhabitants  of  Tyre
were  distinguished  for  their  skill  as  artif¬
icers,  especially  as  workers  in  brass  and
other  metals;  and  it  is  said  to  have  been  a
principal  seat  of  that  skilful  body  of  arch¬
itects  known  as  the  Dionysiac  fraternity.

The  city  of  Sidon,  which  was  under  the
Tyrian  government,  was  but  twenty  miles
from  Tyre,  and  situated  in  the  forest  of
Lebanon.  The  Sidonians  were,  therefore,
naturally  woodcutters,  and  were  engaged  in
felling  the  trees,  which  were  afterwards  sent
on  floats  by  sea  from  Tyre  to  Joppa,  and
thence  carried  by  land  to  Jerusalem,  to  be
employed  in  the  Temple  building.

Dr.  Morris,  who  visited  Tyre  in  1868,  de-


TYRE


UN  AFFILIATED


841


j

scribes  it  ( Freemasonry  in  the  Holy  Land,  p.
91,)  as  a  city  under  ground,  lying,  like  Je¬
rusalem,  twenty  to  fifty  feet  beneath  a  debr is
of  many  centuries.  It  consists,  to  use  the
language  of  a  writer  he  has  cited,  of  “  pros¬
trate  and  broken  columns,  dilapidated  tem¬
ples,  and  mounds  of  buried  fragments.”

Tyre,  Quarries  of.  It  is  an  error
of  Oliver,  and  some  other  writers,  to  suppose
that  the  stones  of  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem
were  furnished  from  the  quarries  of  Tyre.
If  there  were  such  quarries,  they  were  not
used  for  that  purpose,  as  the  stones  were
taken  from  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the
edifice.  See  Quarries.

Tyrian  Freemasons.  Those  who
sustain  the  hypothesis  that  Freemasonry
originated  at  the  Temple  of  Solomon  have
advanced  the  theory  that  the  Tyrian  Free¬
masons  were  the  members  of  the  Society
of  Dionysiac  Artificers,  who  at  the  time  of
the  building  of  Solomon’s  Temple  flour¬


ished  at  Tyre.  Many  of  them  were  sent  to
Jerusalem  by  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  to  as¬
sist  King  Solomon  in  the  construction  of
his  Temple.  There,  uniting  with  the  Jews,
who  had  only  a  knowledge  of  the  specula¬
tive  principles  of  Freemasonry,  which  had
been  transmitted  to  them  from  Noah,
through  the  patriarchs,  the  Tyrian  Free¬
masons  organized  that  combined  system  of
Operative  and  Speculative  Masonry  which
continued  for  many  centuries,  until  the  be¬
ginning  of  the  eighteenth,  to  characterize
the  Institution.  This  hypothesis  is  main¬
tained  with  great  ingenuity  by  Lawrie  in
his  History  of  Freemasonry,  or  by  Dr.
Brewster,  if  he  was  really  the  author  of
that  work,  and  until  recently  it  has  been
the  most  popular  theory  respecting  the
origin  of  Masonry.  But  as  it  is  wanting  in
the  support  of  historical  evidence,  it  has
yielded  to  the  more  plausible  speculations
of  recent  writers.


u.


XJ.*.  !>.*.  Letters  placed  after  the  names
of  Lodges  or  Chapters  which  have  not  yet
received  a  Warrant  of  Constitution.  They
signify  Under  Dispensation.

llden,  Conrad  Friedericli.  A
Masortic  writer  of  some  celebrity.  He  was
a  Doctor  of  Medicine,  and  at  one  time  a
Professor  in  Ordinary  of  the  University  of
Dorpat;  afterwards  an  Aulic  Counsellor
and  Secretary  of  the  Medical  College  of  St.
Petersburg.  He  was  from  1783  to  1785  the
editor  of  the  Archiv  fur  Freimaurerei  und
Rosenkreuzer,  published  during  those  years
at  Berlin.  This  work  contains  much  inter¬
esting  information  concerning  Rosicruci-
anism.  He  also  edited,  in  1785  and  1786,
at  Altona,  the  Ephemeriden  der  gesammten
Freimaurerei  auf  das  Logenjahr  1785  und
1786.

Fnafliliated  Mason.  A  Mason  who
is  not  a  member  of  any  Lodge.  As  this
class  of  Masons  contribute  nothing  to  the
revenues  nor  to  the  strength  of  the  Order,
while  they  are  always  willing  to  partake  of
its  benefits,  they  have  been  considered  as
an  encumbrance  upon  the  Craft,  and  have
received  the  general  condemnation  of  Grand
Lodges.

It  is  evident  that,  anterior  to  the  present
system  of  Lodge  organization,  whicli  dates
about  the  end  of  the  last  century,  there
could  have  been  no  unaffiliated  Masons.


And,  accordingly,  the  first  reference  that  we
find  to  the  duty  of  Lodge  membership  is  in
the  Charges,  published  in  1723,  in  Ander¬
son’s  Constitutions,  where  it  is  said,  after
describing  a  Lodge,  that  “every  Brother
ought  to  belong  to  one ;  ”  and  that  “  in  an¬
cient  times,  no  Mason  or  Fellow  could  be
absent  from  it,  especially  when  warned  to
appear  at  it,  without  incurring  a  severe  cen¬
sure,  until  it  appeared  to  the  Master  and
Wardens  that  pure  necessity  hindered  him.”
In  this  last  clause,  Anderson  evidently  re¬
fers  to  the  regulation  in  the  Old  Constitu¬
tions,  that  required  attendance  on  the  An¬
nual  Assembly.  For  instance,  in  the  old¬
est  of  these,  the  Halliwell  MS.,  it  is  said,
(I  modernize  the  language,)  “that  every
Master  that  is  a  Mason  must  be  at  the  Gen¬
eral  Congregation,  if  he  is  told  in  reason¬
able  time  where  the  Assembly  shall  be
hblden ;  and  to  that  Assembly  he  must  go,
unless  he  have  a  reasonable  excuse.”

But  the  “Assembly”  was  rather  in  the
nature  of  a  Grand  Lodge,  and  neglect  to
attend  its  annual  meeting  would  not  place
the  offender  in  the  position  of  a  modern
unaffiliated  Mason.  But  after  the  organi¬
zation  of  subordinate  Lodges,  a  permanent
membership,  which  had  been  before  un¬
known,  was  then  established ;  and  as  the
revenues  of  the  Lodges,  and  through  them
of  the  Grand  Lodge,  were  to  be  derived


842


UNAFFILIATED


UNANIMOUS


from  the  contributions  of  the  members,  it
was  found  expedient  to  require  every  Ma¬
son  to  affiliate  with  a  Lodge,  and  hence  the
rule  adopted  iu  the  Charge  already  cited.
Yet,  in  Europe,  non-affiliation,  although
deemed  to  some  extent  a  Masonic  oflence,
has  not  been  visited  by  any  penalty,  except
that  which  results  from  a  deprivation  of
the  ordinary  advantages  of  membership  in
any  association.

The  modern  Constitution  of  England,
however,  prescribes  that  “  a  brother  who  is
not  a  subscribing  member  to  some  Lodge,
shall  not  be  permitted  to  visit  any  one
Lodge  in  the  town  or  place  where  he  re¬
sides  more  than  once  during  his  secession
from  the  Craft.”  He  is  permitted  to  visit
each  Lodge  once,  because  it  is  supposed
that  this  visit  is  made  for  the  purpose  of
enabling  him  to  make  a  selection  of  the
one  in  which  he  may  prefer  working.  But
afterwards  he  is  excluded,  in  order  to  dis¬
countenance  those  brethren  who  wish  to
continue  members  of  the  Order,  and  to  par¬
take  of  its  benefits,  without  contributing  to
its  support.  The  Constitutions  of  the  Grand
Lodges  of  Ireland  and  Scotland  are  silent
upon  the  subject,  nor  is  any  penalty  pre¬
scribed  for  unaffiliation  by  any  of  the  Grand
Lodges  of  the  continent  of  Europe.

In  this  country  a  different  view  has  been
taken  of  the  subject,  and  its  Grand  Lodges
have,  with  great  unanimity,  denounced  un¬
affiliated  Masons  in  the  strongest  terms  of
condemnation,  and  visited  them  with  pen¬
alties,  which  vary,  however,  to  some  extent
in  the  different  jurisdictions.  I  know’,  how¬
ever,  of  no  Grand  Lodge  in  the  United
States  that  has  not  concurred  in  the  opin¬
ion  that  the  neglect  or  refusal  of  a  Mason
to  affiliate  w'ith  a  Lodge  is  a  Masonic  of¬
fence,  to  be  visited  by  some  penalty  and  a
deprivation  of  some  rights.

The  following  principles  may  be  laid
down  as  constituting  the  law  in  this  coun¬
try  on  the  subject  of  unaffiliated  Masons:

1.  An  unaffiliated  Mason  is  still  bound
by  all  those  Masonic  duties  and  obligations
which  refer  to  the  Order  in  general,  but  not
by  those  which  relate  to  Lodge  organization.

2.  He  possesses,  reciprocally,  all  those
rights  which  are  derived  from  membership
in  the  Order,  but  none  of  those  which  re¬
sult  from  membership  iu  a  Lodge.

3.  He  has  a  right  to  assistance  when  in
imminent  peril,  if  he  asks  for  that  assist¬
ance  in  the  conventional  way.

4.  He  has  no  right  to  pecuniary  aid  from
a  Lodge.

5.  He  has  no  right  to  visit  Lodges,  or  to
walk  in  Masonic  processions.

6.  He  has  no  right  to  Masonic  burial.

7.  He  still  remains  subject  to  the  gov¬
ernment  of  the  Order,  and  may  be  tried


and  punished  for  any  offence  by  the  Lodge
within  whose  geographical  jurisdiction  he
resides.

8.  And,  lastly,  as  non-affiliation  is  a  vio¬
lation  of  Masonic  law,  he  may,  if  he  re¬
fuses  to  abandon  that  condition,  be  tried
and  punished  for  it,  even  by  expulsion,  if
deemed  necessary  or  expedient,  by  any
Grand  Lodge  within  whose  jurisdiction  he
lives.

Unanimous  Consent.  In  the  be¬
ginning  of  the  last  century,  when  Masonry
was  reviving  from  the  condition  of  decay
into  which  it  had  fallen,  and  when  the  ex¬
periment  was  tried  of  transforming  it  from
a  partly  operative  to  a  purely  speculative
system,  the  great  object  was  to  maintain  a
membership  which,  by  the  virtuous  charac¬
ter  of  those  who  composed  it,  should  secure
the  harmony  and  prosperity  of  the  infant
Institution.  A  safeguard  was  therefore  to
be  sought  in  the  care  with  which  Masons
should  be  selected  from  those  who  were
likely  to  apply  for  admission.  It  wTas  the
quality,  and  not  the  quantity,  that  was  de¬
sired.  This  safeguard  could'  only  be  found
in  the  unanimity  of  the  ballot.  Hence,  in
the  sixth  of  the  General  Regulations,  adopt¬
ed  in  1721,  it  is  declared  that  “no  man  can
be  entered  a  Brother  in  any  particular
Lodge,  or  admitted  to  be  a  member  thereof,
without  the  unanimous  consent  of  all  the
members  of  that  Lodge  then  present  when
the  candidate  is  proposed,  and  their  con¬
sent  is  formally  asked  by  the  Master.”
And  to  prevent  the  exercise  of  any  undue
influence  of  a  higher  power  in  forcing  an
unworthy  person  upon  the  Order,  it  is
further  said  in  the  same  article:  “Nor  is
this  inherent  privilege  subject  to  a  dispen¬
sation;  because  the  members  of  a  particular
Lodge  are  the  best  judges  of  it;  and  if  a
fractious  member  should  be  imposed  on
them,  it  might  spoil  their  harmony,  or
hinder  their  freedom;  or  even  break  and
disperse  the  Lodge.”  But  a  few  years
after,  the  Order  being  now  on  a  firm  foot¬
ing,  this  prudent  fear  of  “spoiling  har¬
mony,”  or  “dispersing  the  Lodge,”  seems
to  have  been  lost  sight  of,  and  the  brethren
began  in  many  Lodges  to  desire  a  release
from  the  restrictions  laid  upon  them  by
the  necessity  for  unanimous  consent.  Hence
Anderson  says  in  his  second  edition :  “  But
it  was  found  inconvenient  to  insist  upon
unanimity  in  several  cases.  And,  there¬
fore,  the  Grand  Masters  have  allowed  the
Lodges  to  admit  a  member  if  not  above
three  ballots  are  against  him;  though  some
Lodges  desire  no  such  allowance.”  This
rule  still  prevails  in  England;  and  its
modern  Constitution  still  permits  the  ad¬
mission  of  a  Mason  where  there  are  not
more  than  three  ballots  against  him,  though


UNFAVORABLE


UNIFORMITY


843


many  of  the  Lodges  still  demand  una¬
nimity.

In  the  United  States,  where  Masonry  is
more  popular  than  in  any  other  country,  it
was  soon  seen  that  the  danger  of  the  in¬
stitution  lay  not  in  the  paucity,  but  in  the
multitude  of  its  members,  and  that  the
only  provision  for  guarding  its  portals  was
the  most  stringent  regulation  of  the  ballot.
Hence,  in  every  jurisdiction  of  the  United
States,  I  think,  without  an  exception,
unanimous  consent  is  required.  And  this
rule  has  been  found  to  work  with  such  ad¬
vantage  to  the  Order,  that  the  phrase,  “the
black  ball  is  the  bulwark  of  Masonry,”  has
become  a  proverb.

Unfavorable  Report.  Should  the
committee  of  investigation  on  the  character
of  a  petitioner  for  initiation  make  an  un¬
favorable  report,  the  general  usage  is  (al¬
though  some  Grand  Lodges  have  decided
otherwise)  to  consider  the  candidate  re¬
jected  by  such  report,  without  proceeding
to  the  formality  of  a  ballot,  which  is  there¬
fore  dispensed  with.  This  usage  is  founded
on  the  principles  of  common  sense;  for,  as
by  the  ancient  Constitutions  one  black  ball
is  sufficient  to  reject  an  application,  the
unfavorable  report  of  a  committee  must
necessarily,  and  by  consequence,  include
two  unfavorable  votes  at  least.  It  is  there¬
fore  unnecessary  to  go  into  a  ballot  after
such  a  report,  as  it  is  to  be  taken  for  granted
that  the  brethren  who  reported  unfavorably
would,  on  a  resort  to  the  ballot,  cast  their
negative  votes.  Their  report  is  indeed  vir¬
tually  considered  as  the  casting  of  such
votes,  and  the  applicant  is  therefore  at
once  rejected  without  a  further  and  un¬
necessary  ballot.

Uniformity  of  Work.  An  identity
of  forms  in  opening  and  closing,  and  in
conferring  the  degrees,  constitutes  what  is
technically  called  uniformity  of  work.
The  expression  has  no  reference,  in  its  re¬
stricted  sense,  to  the  working  of  the  same
degrees  in  different  Rites  and  different
countries,  but  only  to  a  similarity  in  the
ceremonies  practised  by  Lodges  in  the
same  Rite,  and  more  especially  in  the  same
jurisdiction.  This  is  greatly  to  be  desired,
because  nothing  is  more  unpleasant  to  a
Mason,  accustomed  to  certain  forms  and
ceremonies  in  his  own  Lodge,  than  on  a
visit  to  another  to  find  those  forms  and
ceremonies  so  varied  as  to  be  sometimes
scarcely  recognizable  as  parts  of  the  same
Institution.  So  anxious  are  the  dogmatic
authorities  in  Masonry  to  preserve  this  uni¬
formity,  that  in  the  charge  to  an  Entered
Apprentice  he  is  instructed  never  to  “suffer
an  infringement  of  onr  rites,  or  a  devia¬
tion  from  established  usages  and  customs.”
In  the  act  of  union  in  1813,  of  the  two


Grand  Lodges  of  England,  in  whose  sys¬
tems  of  working  there  were  many  differ¬
ences,  it  was  provided  that  a  committee
should  be  appointed  to  visit  the  several
Lodges,  and  promulgate  and  enjoin  one  sys¬
tem,  “  that  perfect  reconciliation,  unity  of
obligation,  law,  working,  language,  and
dress,  might  be  happily  restored  to  the
English  Craft.”  A  few  years  ago,  a  writer
in  C.  W.  Moore’s  Magazine,  proposed  the
appointment  of  delegates  to  visit  the  Grand
Lodges  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,
that  a  system  of  work  and  lectures  might
be  adopted,  which  should  thereafter  be
rigidly  enforced  in  both  hemispheres.  The
proposition  was  not  popular,  and  no  dele¬
gation  was  ever  appointed.  It  is  well  that
it  was  so,  for  no  such  attempt  could  have
met  with  a  successful  result.

It  is  a  fact,  that  uniformity  of  work  in
Masonry,  however  much  it  may  be  desired,
can  never  be  attained.  This  must  be  the
case  in  all  institutions  where  the  ceremo¬
nies,  the  legends,  and  the  instructions  are
oral.  The  treachery  of  memory,  the  weak¬
ness  of  judgment,  and  the  fertility  of  im¬
agination,  will  lead  men  to  forget,  to  di¬
minish,  or  to  augment,  the  parts  of  any
system  which  is  not  prescribed  within  cer¬
tain  limits  by  a  written  rule.  The  Rab¬
bins  discovered  this  when  the  Oral  Law
was  becoming  perverted,  and  losing  its  au¬
thority  as  well  as  its  identity  by  the  inter¬
pretations  that  were  given  to  it  in  the  schools
of  the  Scribes  and  Prophets.  And  hence,
to  restore  it  to  its  integrity,  it  was  found
necessary  to  divest  it  of  its  oral  character
and  give  to  it  a  written  form.  To  this  are
we  to  attribute  the  origin  of  the  two  Tal-
muds  which  now  contain  the  essence  of
Jewish  theology.  So,  while  in  Masonry  we
find  the  esoteric  ritual  continually  subjected
to  errors  arising  mainly  from  the  ignorance
or  the  fancy  of  Masonic  teachers,  the  moni¬
torial  instructions  —  few  in  Preston,  but
greatly  enlarged  by  Webb  and  Cross  —
have  suffered  no  change.

It  would  seem  from  this  that  the  evil  of
non-conformity  could  be  removed  only  by
making  all  the  ceremonies  monitorial;  and  so
much  has  this  been  deemed  expedient,  that
a  few  years  since  the  subject  of  a  writteil
ritual  was  seriously  discussed  in  England.
But  the  remedy  would  be  worse  than  the
disease.  It  is  to  the  oral  character  of  its
ritual  that  Masonry  is  indebted  for  its.  per¬
manence  and  success  as  an  organization.
A  written,  which  would  soon  become  a
printed,  ritual  would  divest  Symbolic  Ma¬
sonry  of  its  attractions  as  a  secret  associa¬
tion,  and  would  cease  to  offer  a  reward  to
the  laborious  student  who  sought  to  master
its  mystical  science.  Its  philosophy  and
its  symbolism  would  be  the  same,  but  the


844


UNION


UNION


books  containing  them  would  be  consigned
to  the  shelves  of  a  Masonic  library,  their
pages  to  be  discussed  by  the  profane  as  the
common  property  of  the  antiquary,  while
the  Lodges,  having  no  mystery  within  their
portals,  would  find  but  few  visitors,  and  cer¬
tainly  no  workers.

It  is,  therefore,  a  matter  of  congratula¬
tion  that  uniformity  of  work,  however  de¬
sirable  and  however  unattainable,  is  not
so  important  and  essential  as  many  have
deemed  it.  Oliver,  for  instance,  seems  to
confound  in  some  of  his  writings  the  cere¬
monies  of  a  degree  with  the  landmarks  of
the  Order.  But  they  are  very  different.
The  landmarks,  because  they  affect  the
identity  of  the  Institution,  have  long  since
been  embodied  in  its  written  laws,  and  un¬
less  by  a  wilful  perversion,  as  in  France,
where  the  Grand  Mastership  has  been
abolished,  can  never  be  changed.  But  vari¬
ations  in  the  phraseology  of  the  lectures,
or  in  the  forms  and  ceremonies  of  initia¬
tion,  so  long  as  they  do  not  trench  upon
the  foundations  of  symbolism  on  which  the
science  and  philosophy  of  Masonry  are
built,  can  produce  no  other  effect  than  a
temporary  inconvenience.  The  errors  of
an  ignorant  Master  will  be  corrected  by  his
better  instructed  successor.  The  variation
in  the  ritual  can  never  be  such  as  to  de¬
stroy  the  true  identity  of  the  Institution.
Its  profound  dogmas  of  the  unity  of  God,
and  the  eternal  life,  and  of  the  universal
brotherhood  of  man,  taught  in  its  symbolic
method,  will  forever  shine  out  pre-eminent
above  all  temporary  changes  of  phraseology.
Uniformity  of  work  may  not  be  attained,
but  uniformity  of  design  and  uniformity
of  character  will  forever  preserve  Free¬
masonry  from  disintegration.

Union,  Grand  Masters’.  Efforts
were  made  at  various  times  in  Germany  to
organize  an  association  of  the  Grand  pias¬
ters  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Germany.  At
length,  through  the  efforts  of  Bro.  Warnatz,
the  Grand  Master  of  Saxony,  the  scheme
was  fully  accomplished,  and  on  Play  31,
1868,  the  Grand  Plasters’ Union — Grass-
miestertag,  literally,  the  diet  of  Grand  Plas¬
ters  —  assembled  at  the  city  of  Berlin,  the
Grand  Plasters  of  seven  German  Grand
Lodges  being  present.  The  meetings  of
this  body,  which  are  annual,  are  entirely
unofficial ;  it  claims  no  legislative  powers,
and  meets  only  for  consultation  and  advise¬
ment  on  matters  connected  with  the  ritual,
the  history,  and  the  philosophy  of  Plasonry.

Union  Master’s  Degree.  An
honorary  degree,  said  to  have  been  in¬
vented  by  the  Lodge  of  Reconciliation  in
England,  in  1813,  at  the  union  of  the  two
Grand  Lodges,  and  adopted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  New  York  in  1819,  which  author¬


ized  its  Lodges  to  confer  it.  It  was  de¬
signed  to  detect  clandestine  and  irregular
Masons,  and  consisted  only  of  the  inves¬
titure  of  the  recipient  with  certain  new
modes  of  recognition.

Union  of  German  Masons.
( Verein  dcutacher  Maurer.)  An  association
of  Freemasons  of  Germany  organized  at
Potsdam,  May  19,  1861.  The  society
meets  annually  at  different  places.  Its
professed  object  is  the  cultivation  of
Masonic  science,  the  advancement  of  the
prosperity  and  usefulness  of  the  Order,
and  the  closer  union  of  the  members  in
the  bonds  of  brotherly  love  and  affection.

Union  of  Scientific  Freema¬
sons.  (Bund  acientifizcher  Freimaurer.)
An  association  founded,  November  28,
1802,  by  Fessler,  Fischer,  Mossdorf,  and
other  learned  Masons  of  Germany.  Ac¬
cording  to  their  act  of  union,  all  the  mem¬
bers  pledged  themselves  to  investigate  the
history  of  Freemasonry,  from  its  origin
down  to  the  present  time,  in  all  its  dif¬
ferent  parts,  with  all  its  systems  and  retro¬
gressions,  in  the  most  complete  manner,
and  then  to  communicate  what  they  knew
to  trustworthy  brethren.

In  the  assemblies  of  the  members,  there
were  no  rituals,  nor  ceremonies,  nor  any
especial  vestments  requisite,  nor,  indeed,
any  outward  distinctions  whatever.  A
common  interest  and  the  love  of  truth,  a
general  aversion  of  all  deception,  treach¬
ery,  and  secrecy  were  the  sentiments  which
bound  them  together,  and  made  them  feel
the  duties  incumbenton  them,  without  bind¬
ing  themselves  by  any  special  oath.  Conse¬
quently,  the  members  of  the  Scientific  Union
had  all  equal  rights  and  obligations;  thev  did
not  acknowledge  a  superior,  or  subordina¬
tion  to  any  Plasonic  authority  whatever.

Any  upright,  scientifically-cultivated
Master  Plason,  a  sincere  seeker  after  truth,
might  join  this  Union,  no  matter  to  what  Rite
or  Grand  Lodge  he  belonged,  if  the  whole
of  the  votes  were  given  in  his  favor,  and  he
pledged  himself  faithfully  to  carry  out  the
intention  of  the  founders  of  the  Order.

Each  circle  of  scientific  Plasons  was  pro¬
vided  with  a  number  of  copies  of  the  deed
of  union,  and  every  new  candidate,  when
he  signed  it,  became  a  partaker  of  the
privileges  shared  in  by  the  whole;  the
Chief  Archives  and  the  centre  of  the  Con¬
federation  were  at  first  to  be  in  Berlin.

But  the  association,  thus  inaugurated
with  the  most  lofty  pretensions  and  the
most  sanguine  expectations,  did  not  well
succeed.  “  Brethren,”  says  Findel,  (Hist.,
Lyon’s  Trans.,  p.  501,)  “  whose  co-operation
had  been  reckoned  upon,  did  not  join;  the
active  working  of  others  was  crippled  by
all  sorts  of  scruples  and  hindrances,  and


UNION


UNITED


845


Fessler’s  purchase  of  Kleinwall  drew  off  his
attention  wholly  from  the  subject.  Differ¬
ences  of  opinion,  perhaps  also  too  great  ego¬
tism,  caused  dissensions  between  many  mem¬
bers  of  the  association  and  the  brethren  of
the  Lodge  at  Altenburg.  Distrust  was  ex¬
cited  in  every  man’s  breast,  and,  instead  of
the  enthusiasm  formerly  exhibited,  there
was  only  lukewarmness  and  disgust.”

Other  schemes,  especially  that  of  the  es¬
tablishment  of  a  Saxon  Grand  Lodge,  im¬
paired  the  efforts  of  the  Scientific  Masons.
The  Union  gradually  sunk  out  of  sight,  and
finally  ceased  to  exist.

Union  of  the  Twenty-Two.  See
German  Union  of  Two  and  Twenty.

United  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land.  The  present  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land  assumed  that  title  in  the  year  1813,
because  it  was  then  formed  by  the  union
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Ancients,  called
the  “Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted
Masons  of  England  according  to  the  Old
Institutions,”  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Moderns,  called  the  “  Grand  Lodge  of  Free
and  Accepted  Masons  under  the  Constitu¬
tion  of  England.”  The  body  thus  formed,
by  which  an  end  was  put  to  the  dissensions
of  the  Craft  which  had  existed  in  England
for  more  than  three-quarters  of  a  century,
adopted  the  title,  by  which  it  has  ever  since
been  known,  of  the  “  United  Grand  Lodge
of  Ancient  Freemasons  of  England.”

United  States  of  America.  The
history  of  the  introduction  of  Freemasonry
into  the  United  States  of  America  is  discussed
in  this  work  under  the  titles  of  the  different
States  into  which  the  Union  is  divided,  and
to  which  therefore  the  reader  is  referred.

It  may,  however,  be  necessary  to  say,  in
a  general  view  of  the  subject,  that  the  first
notice  we  have  of  Freemasonry  in  the
United  States  is  in  1729,  in  which  year,
during  the  Grand  Mastership  of  the  Duke
of  Norfolk,  Mr.  Daniel  Cox  was  appointed
Provincial  Grand  Master  for  New  Jersey.
I  have  not,  however,  been  able  to  obtain
any  evidence  that  he  exercised  his  prerog¬
ative  by  the  establishment  of  Lodges  in
that  province,  although  it  is  probable  that
he  did.  In  the  year  1733,  the  “St.  John’s
Grand  Lodge”  was  opened  in  Boston,  in
consequence  of  a  Charter  granted,  on  the
application  of  several  brethren  residing  in
that  city,  by  Lord  Viscount  Montacute,
Grand  Master  of  England.  From  that
time  Masonry  was  rapidly  disseminated
throughout  the  country  bv  the  establish¬
ment  of  Provincial  Grand  Lodges,  all  of
which  after  the  Revolutionary  War,  which
separated  the  colonies  from  the  mother
country,  assumed  the  rank  and  preroga¬
tives  of  independent  Grand  Lodges.  The
history  of  these  bodies  being  treated  under


their  respective  titles,  the  remainder  of  this
article  may  more  properly  be  devoted  to
the  character  of  the  Masonic  organization
in  the  United  States.

The  Rite  practised  in  this  country  is
most  correctly  called  the  American  Rite.
This  title,  however,  has  been  adopted  with¬
in  only  a  comparatively  recent  period.  It
is  still  very  usual  with  Masonic  writers  to
call  the  Rite  practised  in  this  country  the
York  Rite.  The  expression,  however,  is
wholly  incorrect.  The  Masonry  of  the
United  States,  though  founded,  like  that
practised  in  every  other  country,  upon  the
three  symbolic  degrees  which  alone  con¬
stitute  the  true  York  Rite,  has,  by  its
modifications  and  its  adoption  of  high  de¬
grees,  so  changed  the  Rite  as  to  give  it  an
entirely  different  form  from  that  which
properly  constitutes  the  pure  York  Rite.
(See  American  Rite.')

In  each  State  of  the  Union,  and  in  most
of  the  Territories,  there  is  a  Grand  Lodge
which  exercises  jurisdiction  over  the  sym¬
bolic  degrees.  The  jurisdiction  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  however,  is  exercised  to  a
certain  extent  over  what  are  called  the
higher  bodies,  namely,  the  Chapters,  Coun¬
cils,  and  Commanderies.  For  by  the
American  construction  of  Masonic  law,  a
Mason  expelled  by  the  Grand  Lodge  for¬
feits  his  membership  in  all  of  these  bodies
to  which  he  may  be  attached.  Hence  a
Knight  Templar,  or  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,
becomes  ipso  facto  suspended  or  expelled
by  his  suspension  or  expulsion  by  a  sym¬
bolic  Lodge,  the  appeal  from  which  action
lies  only  to  the  Grand  Lodge.  Thus  the
Masonic  standing  and  existence  of  even  the
Grand  Commander  of  a  Grand  Command-
ery  is  actually  in  the  hands  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  by  whose  decree  of  expulsion  his
relation  with  the  body  over  which  he  pre¬
sides  may  be  dissevered.

Royal  Arch  Masonry  is  controlled  in
each  State  by  a  Grand  Chapter.  Besides
these  Grand  Chapters,  there  is  a  General
Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States,  which,
however,  exercises  only  a  moral  influence
over  the  State  Grand  Chapters,  since  it
possesses  “no  power  of  discipline,  admoni¬
tion,  censure,  or  instruction  over  the  Grand
Chapters.”  In  Territories  where  there  are  no
Grand  Chapters,  the  General  Grand  Chapter
constitutes  subordinate  Chapters,  and  over
these  it  exercises  plenary  jurisdiction.

The  next  highest  branch  of  the  Order  is
Cryptic  Masonry,  which,  although  rapidly
growing,  is  not  yet  as  extensive  as  Royal
Arch  Masonry.  It  consists  of  two  degrees,
Royal  and  Select  Master,  to  which  is  some¬
times  added  the  Super  Excellent,  which,
however,  is  considered  only  as  an  honorary
degree.  These  degrees  are  conferred  in


846


UNITED


UNKNOWN


Councils  which  owe  their  obedience  to
Grand  Councils.  Only  one  Grand  Council
can  exist  in  a  State  or  Territory,  as  is  the
case  with  a  Grand  Lodge,  a  Grand  Chapter,
or  a  Grand  Commandery.  Grand  Councils
exist  in  many  of  the  States,  and  in  any
State  where  no  such  body  exists,  the  Coun¬
cils  are  established  by  Charters  emanating
from  any  one  of  them.  There  is  no  Gen¬
eral  Grand  Council.  Efforts  have  been  re¬
peatedly  made  to  establish  one,  but  the
proposition  has  not  met  with  a  favorable
response  from  the  majority  of  Grand  Coun¬
cils.

Templarism  is  governed  by  a  Supreme
'  body,  whose  style  is  the  Grand  Encamp¬
ment  of  the  United  States,  and  this  body,
which  meets  triennially,  possesses  sover¬
eign  power  over  the  whole  Templar  system
in  the  United  States.  Its  presiding  officer
is  called  Grand  Master,  and  this  is  the
highest  office  known  to  American  Templar¬
ism.  In  most  of  the  States  there  are  Grand
Commanderies,  which  exercise  immediate
jurisdiction  over  the  Commanderies  in  the
State,  subject,  however,  to  the  superintend¬
ing  control  of  the  Grand  Encampment.
Where  there  are  no  Grand  Commanderies,
Charters  are  issued  directly  to  subordinate
Commanderies  by  the  Grand  Encampment.

The  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
is  very  popular  in  the  United  States.  There
are  two  Supreme  Councils,  —  one  for  the
Southern  Jurisdiction,  which  is  the  Mother
Council  of  the  world.  Its  nominal  Grand
East  is  at  Charleston,  South  Carolina;  but
its  Secretariat  has  been  removed  to  Wash¬
ington  city  since  the  year  1870.  The
other  Council  is  for  the  Northern  Jurisdic¬
tion.  Its  Grand  East  is  at  Boston,  Massa¬
chusetts  ;  but  its  Secretariat  is  at  New
York  city.  The  Northern  Council  has  ju¬
risdiction  over  the  States  of  Maine,  Ver¬
mont,  New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Con¬
necticut,  Rhode  Island,  New  York,  Penn¬
sylvania,  New  Jersey,  Delaware,  Ohio,  In¬
diana,  Illinois,  and  Wisconsin.  The  South¬
ern  Supreme  Council  exercises  jurisdiction
over  all  the  other  States  and  Territories  of
the  United  States.

United  Supreme  Council.  A

body  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite  was  formed  February  13,  1832,  in  the
city  of  New  York,  by  the  union  of  the  so-
called  Supreme  Council  of  the  United  States
and  the  Supreme  Council  of  South  Amer¬
ica,  which  assumed  the  title  of  the  “  United
Supreme  Council  for  the  Western  Hemi¬
sphere.”  This  body,  irregular  in  its  forma¬
tion  and  illegal  in  its  origin,  was  never
recognized  by  either  of  the  regular  Supreme
Councils  of  the  United  States,  and  is  now
extinct.

Unity  of  God.  Iu  the  popular  my¬


thology  of  the  ancients  there  were  many
gods.  It  was  to  correct  this  false  opinion,
and  to  teach  a  purer  theogony,  that  the  in¬
itiations  were  invented.  And  so,  as  War-
burton  says,  “  the  famous  secret  of  the
mysteries  was  the  unity  of  the  Godhead.”
This,  too,  is  the  doctrine  of  Masonic  initi¬
ation,  which  is  equally  distant  from  the
blindness  of  atheism  aud  the  folly  of  poly¬
theism.

Universality  of  Masonry.  The

boast  of  the  Emperor  Charles  V.,  that  the
sun  never  set  on  his  vast  empire,  may  be
applied  with  equal  truth  to  the  Order  of
Freemasonry.  From  east  to  west,  and  from
north  to  south,  over  the  whole  habitable
globe,  are  our  Lodges  disseminated.  Wher¬
ever  the  wandering  steps  of  civilized  man
have  left  their  footprints,  there  have  our
temples  been  established.  The  lessons  of
Masonic  love  have  penetrated  into  the  wil¬
derness  of  the  West,  and  the  red  man  of
our  soil  has  shared  with  his  more  enlight¬
ened  brother  the  mysteries  of  our  science;
while  the  arid  sands  of  the  African  desert
have  more  than  once  been  the  scene  of  a
Masonic  greeting.  Masonry  is  not  a  foun¬
tain,  giving  health  and  beauty  to  some  sin¬
gle  hamlet,  and  slaking  the  thirst  of  those
only  who  dwell  upon  its  humble  banks;
but  it  is  a  mighty  stream,  penetrating
through  every  hill  and  mountain,  and  glid¬
ing  through  every  field  and  valley  of  the
earth,  bearing  in  its  beneficent  bosom  the
abundant  waters  of  love  and  charity  for
the  poor,  the  widow,  and  the  orphan  of
every  land.

Universal  Uangnage.  See  Lan¬
guage,  Universal.

Universal  Harmony,  Order  of.

See  Mesmeric  Masonry.

Universi  Terrarum,  etc.  Docu¬
ments  emanating  from  any  of  the  bodies
of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite
commence  with  the  following  epigraph:
“Universi  Terrarum  Orbis  Architectonis
per  Gloriam  Ingentis,”  i.  e.,  “  By  the  Glory
of  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  Universe.”
This  is  the  correct  form  as  first  published,
in  1802,  by  the  Mother  Council  at  Charles¬
ton  in  its  Circular  of  that  year,  and  used
in  all  its  Charters  and  Patents.

Unknown  Philosopher.  One  of
the  mystical  and  theosophic  works  written
by  Saint  Martin,  the  founder  of  the  Rite  of
Martinism,  was  entitled  Le  Philosophe  In-
connu,  or  The  Unknown  Philosopher,
whence  the  appellation  was  often  given
by  his  disciples  to  the  author.  A  degree
of  his  Rite  also  received  the  same  name.

Unknown  Superiors.  When  the
Baron  Von  Hund  established  his  system  or
Rite  of  Strict  Observance,  he  declared  that
the  Order  was  directed  by  certain  Masons


UNTEMPERED


UPPER


847


of  superior  rank,  whose  names  as  well  as
their  designs  were  to  be  kept  secret  from
all  the  brethren  of  the  lower  degrees;
although  there  was  an  insinuation  that
they  were  to  be  found  or  to  be  heard  of  in
Scotland.  To  these  secret  dignitaries  he
gave  the  title  of  “Superiores  Incogniti,”
or  Unknown  Superiors.  Many  Masonic
writers,  suspecting  that  Jesuitism  was  at
the  bottom  of  all  the  Masonry  of  that  day,
asserted  that  S.  I.,  the  initials  of  Superiores
Incogniti,  meant  really  Societas  Jesu,  i.  e.,
the  Society  of  Jesus  or  the  Jesuits.  It  is
scarcely  necessary  now  to  say  that  the
whole  story  of  the  Unknown  Superiors  was
a  myth.

Untempered  Mortar.  In  the  lec¬
ture  used  in  the  United  States  in  the  early
part  of  the  present  century,  and  in  some
parts  of  the  country  almost  as  recently  as
the  middle  of  the  century,  the  apprentices
at  the  Temple  were  said  to  wear  their
aprons  in  the  peculiar  manner  character¬
istic  of  that  class  that  they  might  preserve
their  garments  from  being  defiled  by  “  un¬
tempered  mortar.”  This  is  mortar  which
has  not  been  properly  mixed  for  use,  and
it  thus  became  a  symbol  of  passions  and
appetites  not  duly  restrained.  Hence  the
Speculative  Apprentice  was  made  to  wear
his  apron  in  that  peculiar  manner  to  teach
him  that  he  should  not  allow  his  soul  to  be
defiled  by  the  “  untempered  mortar  of  un¬
ruly  passions.”

Unutterable  Name.  The  Tetra-
grammaton,  or  Divine  Name,  which  is  more
commonly  called  the  Ineffable  Name.  The
two  words  are  precisely  synonymous.

Unworthy  Members.  That  there
are  men  in  our  Order  whose  lives  and  char¬
acters  reflect  no  credit  on  the  Institution,
whose  ears  turn  coldly  from  its  beautiful
lessons  of  morality,  whose  hearts  are  un¬
touched  by  its  soothing  influences  of
brotherly  kindness,  whose  hands  are  not
opened  to  aid  in  its  deeds  of  charity,  is  a
fact  which  we  cannot  deny,  although  we
may  be  permitted  to  express  our  grief  while
we  acknowledge  its  truth.  But  these  men,
though  in  the  Temple,  are  not  of  the  Tem¬
ple  ;  they  are  among  us,  but  are  not  with
us;  they  belong  to  our  household,  but  they
are  not  of  our  faith ;  they  are  of  Israel,  but
they  are  not  Israel.  We  have  sought  to
teach  them,  but  they  would  not  be  in¬
structed;  seeing,  they  have  not  perceived;
and  hearing,  they  have  not  understood  the
symbolic  language  in  which  our  lessons  of
wisdom  are  communicated.  The  fault  is
not  with  us,  that  we  have  not  given,  but
with  them,  that  they  have  not  received.
And,  indeed,  hard  and  unjust  would  it  be
to  censure  the  Masonic  institution,  because,
partaking  of  the  infirmity  and  weakness  of


human  wisdom  and  human  means,  it  has
been  unable  to  give  strength  and  perfection
to  all  who  come  within  its  pale.  The  de¬
nial  of  a  Peter,  the  doubtings  of  a  Thomas,
or  even  the  betrayal  of  a. Judas,  could  cast
no  reproach  on  that  holy  band  of  Apostles
of  which  each  formed  a  constituent  part.

“Is  Freemasonry  answerable,”  says  Dr.
Oliver,  (Landm.,  i.,  p.  148,)  “for  the  mis¬
deeds  of  an  individual  Brother?  By  no
means.  He  has  had  the  advantage  of  Ma¬
sonic  instruction,  and  has  failed  to  profit
by.it.  He  has  enjoyed  Masonic  privileges,
but  has  not  possessed  Masonic  virtue.”
Such  a  man  it  is  our  duty  to  reform,  or  to
dismiss ;  but  the  world  should  not  condemn
us,  if  we  fail  in  our  attempt  at  reformation.
God  alone  can  change  the  heart.  Masonry
furnishes  precepts  and  obligations  of  duty
which,  if  obeyed,  must  make  its  members
wiser,  better,  happier  men ;  but  it  claims
no  power  of  regeneration.  Condemn  when
our  instruction  is  evil,  but  not  when  our
pupils  are  dull,  and  deaf  to  our  lessons ;  for,
in  so  doing,  you  condemn  the  holy  religion
which  you  profess.  Masonry  prescribes  no
principles  that  are  opposed  to  the  sacred
teachings  of  the  Divine  Law'giver,  and
sanctions  no  acts  that  are  not  consistent
with  the  sternest  morality  and  the  most  faith¬
ful  obedience  to  government  and  the  laws ;
and  while  this  continues  to  be  its  character,
it  cannot,  without  the  most  atrocious  injus¬
tice,  be  made  responsible  for  the  acts  of  its
unworthy  members.

Of  all  human  societies,  Freemasonry  is
undoubtedly,  under  all  circumstances,  the
fittest  to  form  the  truly  good  man.  But
however  well  conceived  may  be  its  laws,
they  cannot  completely  change  the  natural
disposition  of  those  who  ought  to  observe
them.  In  truth,  they  serve  as  lights  and
guides;  but  as  they  can  only  direct  men
by  restraining  the  impetuosity  of  their  pas¬
sions,  these  last  too  often  become  domi¬
nant,  and  the  Institution  is  forgotten.

Upper  Chambers.  The  practice  of
holding  Masonic  Lodges  in  the  upper  rooms
of  houses  is  so  universal  that,  in  all  my  ex¬
perience,  I  have  no  knowledge  of  a  single
instance  in  which  a  Lodge  has  been  holden
in  a  room  on  the  first  floor  of  a  building.
The  most  apparent  reason  for  this  is,  that
security  from  being  overseen  or  overheard
may  be  thus  obtained,  and  hence  Dr.  Oli¬
ver  says,  in  his  Book  of  the  Lodge,  (p.  44,)
that  “a  Masonic  hall  should  be  isolated,
and,  if  possible,  surrounded  with  lofty

walls . As,  however,  such  a  situation

in  large  towns,  where  Masonry  is  usually
practised,  can  seldom  be  obtained  with
convenience  to  the  brethren,  the  Lodge
should  be  formed  in  an  upper  story.”  This,
as  a  practical  reason,  will  be  perhaps  suf-


848


UPPER


URIM


ficient  to  Masons  in  general.  But  to  those
who  are  more  curious,  it  may  be  well  to
say,  that  for  this  custom  there  is  also  a
mystical  reason  of  great  antiquity.

Gregory,  in  his  Notes  and  Observations  on
some  Passages  of  Scripture,  (1671,  p.  17,)
says :  “  The  upper  rooms  in  Scripture  were
laces  in  that  part  of  the  house  which  was
ighest  from  the  ground,  set  apart  by  the
Jews  for  their  private  orisons  and  devo¬
tions,  to  be  addressed  towards  Solomon’s
Temple.”  This  room  received,  in  the  He¬
brew  language,  the  appellation  of  Alijah,
which  has  been  translated  by  the  Greek
huperoon,  and  improperly  by  the  Latin  cce-
naculum.  The  Hebrew  and  the  Greek  both
have  the  signification  of  an  upper  room,
while  the  Latin  appellative  would  give  the
idea  of  a  dining-room  or  place  for  eating,
thus  taking  away  the  sacred  character  of
the  apartment.  The  Alijah  was  really  a
secret  chamber  or  recess  in  the  upper  part
of  the  house,  devoted  to  religious  uses.
Hence  the  wise  men  or  Rabbins  of  Israel
are  called  by  the  Talmudists  beni  Alijah,
or  “  the  sons  of  the  upper  or  secret  room.”
And  so,  in  Psalm  civ.  2,  3,  the  Psalmist
speaks  of  God  as  stretching  out  the  heavens
like  a  curtain,  and  laying  the  beams  of  his
chambers  in  the  waters,  where,  in  the  orig¬
inal,  the  word  here  translated  “ chambers”
is  the  plural  of  Alijah,  and  should  more
properly  be  rendered  “  his  secret  cham¬
bers:”  an  allusion,  as  Dr.  Clarke  thinks,
to  the  holy  of  holies  of  the  tabernacle.
Again,  in  2  Chronicles  ix.  3,  4,  it  is  said
that  when  the  Queen  of  Sheba  had  seen
the  wisdom  of  Solomon  and  the  house  that
he  had  built  —  his  provisions,  servants,  and
cup-bearers,  “  and  his  ascent  by  which  he
went  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord — there
was  no  more  spirit  in  her.”  The  word
which  our  translators  have  rendered  “  his
ascent,”  is  again  this  word  Alijah,  and  the
passage  should  be  rendered  “  his  secret
chamber,”  or  “upper  room;”  the  one  by
which,  through  a  private  way,  he  was  en¬
abled  to  pass  into  the  Temple.

On  the  advent  of  Christianity,  this  Jew¬
ish  custom  of  worshipping  privately  in  an
upper  room  was  adopted  by  the  apostles
and  disciples,  and  the  New  Testament  con¬
tains  many  instances  of  the  practice,  the
word  Alijah  being,  as  I  have  already  re¬
marked,  translated  by  the  Greek  huperoon,
which  has  a  similar  meaning.  Thus  in
Acts  i.  13,  we  find  the  apostles  praying  in
an  upper  room ;  and  again,  in  the  twentieth
chapter,  the  disciples  are  represented  as
having  met  at  Ephesus  in  an  upper  room,
where  Peter  preached  to  them.  But  it  is
unnecessary  to  multiply  instances  of  this
usage.  The  evidence  is  complete  that  the
Jews,  and  after  them  the  primitive  Chris¬


tians,  performed  their  devotions  in  upper
rooms.  And  the  care  with  which  Alijah,
huperoon,  or  upper  chamber,  is  always  used
to  designate  the  place  of  devotion,  abun¬
dantly  indicates  that  any  other  place  vrould
have  been  considered  improper.

Hence  we  may  trace  the  practice  of  hold¬
ing  Lodges  in  upper  rooms  to  this  ancient
custom  ;  and  that,  again,  has  perhaps  some
connection  with  the  sacred  character  always
given  by  the  ancients  to  “high  places,”  so
that  it  is  said,  in  the  Masonic  lectures,  that
our  ancient  brethren  met  on  high  hills  and
low  vales.  The  reason  there  assigned  by
implication  is  that  the  meeting  may  be
secret ;  that  is,  the  lectures  place  the  Lodge
on  a  high  hill,  a  vale,  or  other  secret  place.
And  this  reason  is  more  definitely  stated  in
the  modern  lectures,  which  say  that  they  so
met  “to  observe  the  approach  of  cowans
and  eavesdroppers,  and  to  guard  against
surprise.”  Yet  it  is  not  improbable  that
the  ancient  symbolism  of  the  sanctity  of  a
high  place  was  referred  to  as  well  as  that
more  practical  idea  of  secrecy  and  safety.

Upright  Posture.  The  upright  pos¬
ture  of  the  Apprentice  in  the  north-east  cor¬
ner,  as  a  symbol  of  upright  conduct,  was  in¬
troduced  into  the  ritual  by  Preston,  who
taught  in  his  lectures  that  the  candidate
then  represented  “a just  and  upright  man
and  Mason.”  The  same  symbolism  is  re¬
ferred  to  by  Hutchinson,  who  says  that  “as
the  builder  raises  his  column  by  the  plane
and  perpendicular,  so  should  the  Mason
carry  himself  towards  the  world.”  Indeed,
the  application  of  the  corner-stone,  or  the
square  stone,  as  a  symbol  of  uprightness  of
conduct,  which  is  precisely  the  Masonic
symbolism  of  the  candidate  in  the  north¬
east,  was  familiar  to  the  ancients;  for  Plato
says  that  he  who  valiantly  sustains  the
shocks  of  adverse  fortune,  demeaning  him¬
self  uprightly,  is  truly  good  and  of  a  square
posture.

Uriel.  Hebrew,  /X'liX,  meaning  the
fire  of  God.  An  archangel,  mentioned
only  in  2  Esdras.  Michael  Glycas,  the
Byzantine  historian,  says  that  his  post  is  in
the  sun,  and  that  lie  came  down  to  Seth
and  Enoch,  and  instructed  them  in  the
length  of  the  years  and  the  variations  of
the  seasons.  The  book  of  Enoch  describes
him  as  the  angel  of  thunder  and  lightning.
In  some  of  the  Hermetic  degrees  of  Ma¬
sonry,  the  name,  as  representing  the  angel
of  fire,  becomes  a  significant  word.

Uriin  and  Thnmmim.  The  He¬
brew  words  D'llX,  Aurim,  and  D'on,  Thum-
im,  have  been  variously  translated  by
commentators.  The  Septuagint  translates
them,  “  manifestation  and  truth ;  ”  the
Vulgate,  “doctrine  and  truth;”  Aquila,
“lights  and  perfections;”  Kalisch,  “per-


URIM


URN


849


feet  brilliancy ;  ”  but  the  most  generally
received  interpretation  is,  “ light  and  truth.”
What  theUrim  and  Thummim  were  has
also  been  a  subject  of  as  much  doubt  and
difference  of  opinion.  Suddenly  intro¬
duced  to  notice  by  Moses  in  the  command,
(Exod.  xxviii.  30,)  “and  thou  shalt  put  in
the  breastplate  of  judgment  the  Urim  and
the  Thummim,”  —  as  if  they  were  already
familiar  to  the  people, — we  know  only  of
them  from  the  scriptural  account,  that  they
were  sacred  lots  to  be  worn  concealed  in  or
behind  the  breastplate,  and  to  be  consulted
by  the  high  priest  alone,  for  the  purpose
of  obtaining  a  revelation  of  the  will  of
God  in  matters  of  great  moment.  Some
writers  have  supposed  that  the  augury
consisted  in  a  more  splendid  appearance  of
certain  letters  of  the  names  of  the  tribes
inscribed  upon  the  stones  of  the  breastplate;
others,  that  it  was  received  by  voice  from
two  small  images  which  were  placed  be¬
yond  the  folds  of  the  breastplate.  A
variety  of  other  conjectures  have  been  haz¬
arded,  but  as  Godwyn  ( Moses  and  Aaron,
iv.  8,)  observes,  “he  spoke  best,  who  in¬
geniously  confessed  that  he  knew  not  what
Urim  and  Thummim  was.”

The  opinion  now  almost  universally  ac¬
cepted  is  that  the  Jewish  lawgiver  bor¬
rowed  this,  as  he  did  the  ark,  the  brazen
serpent,  and  many  other  of  the  symbols
of  his  theocracy,  from  the  usages  so  fa¬
miliar  to  him  of  the  Egyptian  priests,
with  which  both  he  and  Aaron  were  fa¬
miliar,  eliminating,  of  course,  from  them
their  previous  heathen  allusion,  and  giving
to  them  a  purer  signification.

In  reference  to  the  Urim  and  Thummim,
we  know  not  only  from  the  authority  of  an¬
cient  writers,  but  _

also  from  the  con¬
firmatory  testi¬
mony  of  more  re¬
cent  monumental
explorations,  that
the  judges  of
Egypt  wore  golden
chains  around  their  necks,  to  which  was
suspended  a  small  figure  of  Themi,  the
Egyptian  goddess  of  Justice  and  Truth.
“Some  of  these  breastplates,”  says  Gliddon,
( Anc .  Egypt.,  p.  32,)  “are  extant  in  Euro¬
pean  museums;  others  are  to  be  seen  on
the  monuments  as  containing  the  figures
of  two  deities — Ra,  the  sun,  and  Theme.
These  represent  Ra,  or  the  sun,  in  a  double
capacity,  physical  and  intellectual  light;
and  Thcmt  in  a  double  capacity,  justice  and
truth."

Neither  in  Ancient  Craft  nor  in  Royal
Arch  Masonry  have  the  Urim  and  Thum¬
mim  been  introduced;  although  Oliver  dis¬
cusses  them,  in  his  Landmarks,  as  a  type  of
6  0  64


mmmmrnmmm


Christ,  to  be  Masonically  applied  in  his
peculiar  system  of  a  Christian  interpreta¬
tion  of  all  the  Masonic  symbols.  But  the  fact
that  after  the  construction  of  the  Temple
of  Solomon  we  hear  no  more  of  the  consul¬
tation  by  the  priests  of  the  Urim  and  Thum¬
mim,  which  seem  to  have  given  way  to  the
audible  interpretation  of  the  divine  will  by
the  prophets,  would  necessarily  disconnect
them  with  Masonry  as  a  symbol,  to  be  ac¬
cepted  even  by  those  who  place  the  founda¬
tion  of  the  Order  at  the  Solomonic  era.

Yet  they  have  been  introduced  as  a  sym¬
bol  into  some  of  the  continental  high  de¬
grees.  Thus,  in  the  last  degree  of  the  Or¬
der  of  Brothers  of  Asia,  the  presiding  officer
wears  the  Urim  and  Thummim  suspended
from  a  golden  chain  as  the  jewel  of  his  office.

Reghellini  ( Esprit  du  dogme,  p.  60,)  thus
gives  the  continental  interpretation  of  the
symbol.

“  The  folly  of  Solomon  is  commemorated
in  the  instructions  and  ceremonies  of  a
high  degree,  where  the  Acolyte  is  reminded
that  Solomon,  becoming  arrogant,  was  for  a
time  abandoned  by  the  Divinity,  and  as  he
was,  although  the  greatest  of  kings,  only  a
mortal,  he  was  weak  enough  to  sacrifice  to
idols,  and  thereby  lost  the  communication
which  he  had  previously  had  through
the  Urim  and  Thummim.

“  These  two  words  are  found  in  a  degree
of  the  Maitre  ecossais.  The  Yenerables
of  the  Lodges  and  the  Sublime  Masters  ex¬
plain  the  legend  to  their  recipients  of  an
elevated  rank,  as  intended  to  teach  them
that  they  should  always  be  guided  by  rea¬
son,  virtue,  and  honor,  and  never  abandon
themselves  to  an  effeminate  life  or  silly  su¬
perstition.”

It  is,  I  think,  undeniable  that  Urim  and
Thummim  have  no  legitimate  existence  as
a  Masonic  symbol,  and  that  they  can  only
be  considered  such  by  a  forced  and  modern
interpretation.

Uriot,  Joseph.  The  author  of  a
work  entitled  Le  veritable  Portrait  d’un
Franc- Magon,  which  was  published  by  a
Lodge  at  Frankfort,  in  1742.  It  maybe
looked  upon,  says  Kloss,  as  the  earliest
public  exposition  of  the  true  principles  of
Masonry  which  appeared  in  Germany.
Many  editions  of  it  were  published.  M.
Uriot  also  published  at  Stongard,  in  1769,
a  work  entitled  Lettres  sur  la  Franche  Ma-
gonnerie;  which  was,  however,  only  an  en¬
largement  of  the  Portrait.

llrn.  Among  the  ancients,  cinerary
urns  were  in  common  use  to  hold  the  aslie3
of  the  deceased  after  the  body  had  been
subjected  to  incremation,  which  was  the
usual  mode  of  disposing  of  it.  He  who
would  desire  to  be  learned  upon  this  sub¬
ject  should  read  Sir  Thomas  Browne’s


850


URUGUAY


VALE


celebrated  work  entitled  Ilydriotaphice,  or
Urn  Burial,  where  everything  necessary  to
be  known  on  this  topic  may  be  found.  In
Masonry,  the  cinerary  urn  has  been  intro¬
duced  as  a  modern  symbol,  but  always  as
having  reference  to  the  burial  of  the  Temple
Builder.  In  the  comparatively  recent  sym¬
bol  of  the  Monument,  fabricated  by  Cross
for  the  degree  of  Master  in  the  American
Rite,  the  urn  is  introduced  as  if  to  remind
the  beholder  that  the  ashes  of  the  great  art¬
ist  were  there  deposited.  Cross  borrowed,
it  may  be  supposed,  his  idea  from  an  older
symbol  in  the  high  degrees,  where,  in  the
description  of  the  tomb  of  Hiram  Abif,  it
is  said  that  the  heart  was  enclosed  in  a
golden  urn,  to  the  side  of  which  a  trian¬
gular  stone  was  affixed,  inscribed  with  the
letters  J.  M.  B.  within  a  wreath  of  acacia,
and  placed  on  the  top  of  an  obelisk.

Uruguay.  Freemasonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  the  Republic  of  Uruguay  by  the
Grand  Orient  of  France,  tvhich,  in  1827,
chartered  a  Lodge  called  “the  Children  of


the  New  World.”  Up  to  1856,  other  Lodges
were  established  by  the  G.  Bodies  of  France
and  Brazil.  In  that  year  authority  was  ob¬
tained  from  the  Supreme  Council  and  Grand
Orient  of  Brazil,  Valley  of  Lavradio,  to  es¬
tablish  a  governing  Masonic  body,  and  the
Supreme  Council  and  Grand  Orient  of
Uruguay  was  regularly  constituted  at  Mon¬
tevideo,  in  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Usages.  See  Usages,  in  Addendum.

Utah.  Freemasonry  was  introduced
into  the  Territory,  October  7,  1867,  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Montana,  which  chartered
Wasatch  Lodge,  No.  8.  Mount  Moriah
Lodge,  No.  70,  was  chartered  October  21,
1868,  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Kansas,  and
Argenta  Lodge,  No.  21,  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Colorado,  September  26,  1871.
All  of  these  Lodges  are  situated  in  Salt
Lake  City.  In  January  16-20,  1872,  the
representatives  of  the  three  Lodges  met  at
Salt  Lake  City  and  organized  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Utah,  O.  F.  Strickland  being
elected  Grand  Master.


V.


Vacancies  in  Office.  Every  Ma¬
sonic  officer  is  elected  and  installed  to  hold
his  office  for  the  time  for  which  he  has  been
elected,  and  until  his  successor  shall  be  in¬
stalled.  This  is  in  the  nature  of  a  contract
between  the  officer  and  the  Lodge,  Chapter,
or  other  body  which  has  elected  him,  and
to  its  terms  he  signifies  his  assent  in  the
most  solemn  manner  at  the  time  of  his  in¬
stallation.  It  follows  from  this  that  to
resign  the  office  would  be  on  his  part  to
violate  his  contract.  Vacancies  in  office,
therefore*  can  only  occur  by  death.  Even
a  removal  from  the  jurisdiction,  with  the
intention  of  permanent  absence,  will  not
vacate  a  Masonic  office,  because  the  person
removing  might  change  his  intention,  and
return.  For  the  reasons  why  neither  res¬
ignation  nor  removal  can  vacate  an  office,
see  Succession  to  the  Chair.

Vale  or  Valley.  The  vale  or  valley
was  introduced  at  an  early  period  into  the
symbolism  of  Masonry.  A  catechism  of
the  beginning  of  the  last  century  says  that
“  the  Lodge  stands  upon  holy  ground,  or
the  highest  hill  or  lowest  vale,  or  in  the
vale  of  Jehoshaphat,  or  any  other  secret
place.”  And  Browne,  who  in  the  beginning
of  the  present  century  gave  a  correct  ver¬
sion  of  the  Pres  toman  lectures,  says  that


“  our  ancient  brethren  met  on  the  highest
hills,  the  lowest  dales,  even  in  the  valley
of  Jehoshaphat,  or  some  such  secret  place.”

Hutchinson  ( Sp .  of  Mas.,  p.  58,)  has  dilated
on  this  subject,  but,  as  I  think,  with  a  mis¬
taken  view  of  the  true  import  of  the  sym¬
bol.  He  says:  “We  place  the  spiritual
Lodge  in  the  vale  of  Jehoshaphat,  imply¬
ing  thereby  that  the  principles  of  Masonry
are  derived  from  the  knowledge  of  God,
and  are  established  in  the  judgment  of
the  Lord.  ”  And  he  adds :  “  The  highest
hills  and  lowest  valleys  were  from  the
earliest  times  esteemed  sacred,  and  it  was
supposed  the  spirit  of  God  was  peculiarly
diffusive  in  those  places.”

It  is  true  that  worship  in  high  places
was  an  ancient  idolatrous  usage.  But
there  is  no  evidence  that  the  superstition
extended  to  valleys.  Hutchinson’s  subse¬
quent  reference  to  the  Druidical  and
Oriental  worship  in  groves  has  no  bearing
on  the  subject,  for  groves  are  not  necessarily
valleys.  The  particular  reference  to  the
valley  of  Jehoshaphat  would  seem  in  that
case  to  carry  an  allusion  to  the  peculiar
sanctity  of  that  spot,  as  meaning,  in  the
original,  the  valley  of  the  judgment  of  God.
But  the  fact  is  that  the  old  Masons  did  not
derive  their  idea,  that  the  Lodge  was  situ-


VALLEY


VAULT


851


ated  in  a  valley,  from  any  idolatrous  prac¬
tice  of  the  ancients.

Valley,  in  Masonry,  is  a  symbol  of
secrecy.  And  although  I  am  not  disposed
to  believe  that  the  use  of  the  word  in  this
sense  was  borrowed  from  any  meaning
which  it  had  in  Hebrew,  yet  it  is  a  singu¬
lar  coincidence  that  the  Hebrew  word  tor
valley,  gnemeth,  signifies  also  “deep,”  or,  as
Bate  ( Critica  Hebraea)  defines  it,  “  whatever
lies  remote  from  sight,  as  counsels  and  de¬
signs  which  are  deep  or  close.”  This  very
word  is  used  in  Job  xii.  22,  where  it  is
said  that  God  “discovereth  deep  things  out
of  darkness,  and  bringeth  out  to  light  the
shadow  of  death.”

The  Lodge,  therefore,  is  said  to  be  placed
in  a  valley  because,  the  valley  being  the
symbol  of  secrecy,  it  is  intended  to  indicate
the  secrecy  in  which  the  acts  of  the  Lodge
should  be  concealed.  And  this  interpreta¬
tion  agrees  precisely  with  what  is  said  in
the  passages  already  cited,  where  the  Lodge
is  said  to  stand  in  the  lowest  vale  “  or  any
secret  place.”  It  is  supported  also  by  the
present  lecture  in  this  country,  the  ideas
of  which  at  least  Webb  derived  from  Pres¬
ton.  It  is  there  taught  that  our  ancient
brethren  met  on  the  highest  hills  and
lowest  vales,  the  better  to  observe  the  ap¬
proach  of  cowans  and  eavesdroppers,  and  to
guard  against  surprise.

Valley.  In  the  capitular  degrees  of
the  French  Rite,  this  word  is  used  instead
of  Orient,  to  designate  the  seat  of  the
Chapter.  Thus  on  such  a  body  a  docu¬
ment  would  be  dated  from  the  “  Valley  of
Paris,”  instead  of  the  “Orient  of  Paris.”
The  word,  says  the  Dictionnaire  Magonnique,
is  often  incorrectly  employed  to  designate
the  south  and  north  sides  of  the  Lodge,
where  the  expression  should  be  “  the  col¬
umn  of  the  south  ”  and  “  the  column  of
the  north.”  Thus,  a  Warden  will  address
the  brethren  of  his  valley,  instead  of  the
brethren  of  his  column.  The  valley  includes
the  whole  Lodge  or  Chapter;  the  columns
are  its  divisions.

Vassal,  Pierre  Gerard.  A  French
physician  and  Masonic  writer,  who  was
born  at  Manosques,  in  France,  October  14,
1769.  He  was  intended  by  bis  parents  for
the  Church,  and  entered  the  Seminary  of
Marseilles  for  the  purpose  of  pursuing  his
ecclesiastical  studies.  At  the  commence¬
ment  of  the  revolution  he  left  the  school
and  joined  the  army,  where,  however,  he
remained  only  eighteen  months.  He  then
applied  himself  to  the  study  of  medicine,
and  pursued  the  practice  of  the  profession
during  the  rest  of  his  life,  acquiring  a  large
reputation  as  a  physician.  He  was  elected
a  member  of  several  medical  societies,  to
whose  transactions  he  contributed  several


valuable  essays.  He  is  said  to  have  intro¬
duced  to  the  profession  the  use  of  the  digi¬
talis  purpurea  as  a  remedial  agent,  espe¬
cially  in  diseases  of  the  heart.  He  was
initiated  into  Masonry  about  the  year  1811,
and  thenceforth  took  an  active  part  in  the
Institution.  He  presided  in  the  Lodge,
Chapter,  and  Areopagus  of  the  Sept  Eeos-
sais  r6unis  with  great  zeal  and  devotion ;
was  in  1819  elected  Secretary  General  of
the  Grand  Orient,  and  in  1827  President  of
the  College  of  Rites.  He  attained  the
thirty-third  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Ac¬
cepted  Rite,  and  was  a  warm  advocate  of
Scottish  Masonry.  But  his  zeal  was  tem-
ered  by  his  judgment,  and  he  did  not
esitate  to  denounce  the  errors  that  had
crept  into  the  system,  an  impartiality  of
criticism  which  greatly  surprised  Ragon.
His  principal  Masonic  works  are  Essai  his-
torique  sur  V institution  du  Rit  Ecossais,  etc.,
Paris,  1827,  and  a  valuable  historical  con¬
tribution  to  Masonry  entitled  Cours  com-
plet  de  la  Maqonnerie,  ou  Histoire  generate  de
C Initiation  depuis  son  Origine  jusqu'd  sou  in¬
stitution  en  France,  Paris,  1832.  In  private
life,  Vassal  was  distinguished  for  his  kind
heart  and  benevolent  disposition.  The
Lodge  of  Sept  Ecossais  r6unis  presented
him  a  medal  in  1830  as  a  recognition  of
his  active  labors  in  Masonry.  He  died
May  4,  1840,  at  Paris.

Vault  of  Steel.  (  Voute  cTacier.)  The
French  Masons  so  call  the  Arch  of  Steel,
which  see.

Vault,  Secret.  As  a  symbol,  the  Se¬
cret  Vault  does  not  present  itself  in  the
primary  degrees  of  Masonry.  It  is  found
only  in  the  high  degrees,  such  as  the  Royal
Arch  of  all  the  Rites,  where  it  plays  an
important  part.  Dr.  Oliver,  in  his  Histor¬
ical  Landmarks,  (vol.  ii.,  p.  434,)  gives,
while  referring  to  the  building  of  the  second
Temple,  the  following  general  detail  of  the
Masonic  legend  of  this  vault.

“The  foundations  of  the  Temple  were
opened,  and  cleared  from  the  accumulation
of  rubbish,  that  a  level  might  be  procured
for  the  commencement  of  the  building.
While  engaged  in  excavations  for  this  pur¬
pose,  three  fortunate  sojourners  are  said  to
have  discovered  our  ancient  stone  of  foun¬
dation,  which  had  been  deposited  in  the  se¬
cret  crypt  by  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty,
to  prevent  the  communication  of  ineffable
secrets  to  profane  or  unworthy  persons.
The  discovery  having  been  communicated
to  the  prince,  prophet,  and  priest  of  the
Jews,  the  stone  was  adopted  as  the  chief
corner-stone  of  the  re-edified  building,  and
thus  became,  in  a  new  and  more  expressive
sense,  the  type  of  a  more  excellent  dispen¬
sation.  An  avenue  was  also  accidentally
discovered,  supported  by  seven  pair  of


852


VAULT


VAULT


pillars,  perfect  and  entire,  which,  from  their
situation,  had  escaped  the  fury  of  the  flames
that  had  consumed  the  Temple,  and  the
desolation  of  war  that  had  destroyed  the
city.  The  secret  vault,  which  had  been
built  by  Solomon  as  a  secure  depository  for
certain  secrets  that  would  inevitably  have
been  lost  without  some  such  expedient  for
their  preservation,  communicated  by  a  sub¬
terranean  avenue  with  the  king’s  palace;
but  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  the
entrance  having  been  closed  by  the  rubbish
of  falling  buildings,  it  had  been  discovered
by  the  appearance  of  a  keystone  amongst
the  foundations  of  the  sanctum  sanctorum.
A  careful  inspection  was  then  made,  and
the  invaluable  secrets  were  placed  in  safe
custody.”

To  support  this  legend,  there  is  no  his¬
torical  evidence  and  no  authority  except
that  of  the  Talmudic  writers.  It  is  clearly
a  mythical  symbol,  and  as  such  we  must
accept  it.  We  cannot  altogether  reject  it,
because  it  is  so  intimately  and  so  exten¬
sively  connected  with  the  symbolism  of  the
Lost  and  the  Recovered  Word,  that  if  we
reject  the  theory  of  the  Sacret  Vault,  we
must  abandon  all  of  that  symbolism,  and
with  it  the  whole  of  the  science  of  Masonic
symbolism.  Fortunately,  there  is  ample
evidence  in  the  present  appearance  of  Je¬
rusalem  and  its  subterranean  topography,
to  remove  from  any  tacit  and,  as  it  were,
conventional  assent  to  the  theory,  features
of  absurdity  or  impossibility.

Considered  simply  as  a  historical  ques¬
tion,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  existence
of  immense  vaults  beneath  the  superstruc¬
ture  of  the  original  Temple  of  Solomon.
Prime,  Robison,  and  other  writers  who  in
recent  times  have  described  the  topography
of  Jerusalem,  speak  of  the  existence  of
these  structures,  which  they  visited  and,  in
some  instances,  carefully  examined.

After  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by
Titus,  the  Roman  Emperor  Hadrian  erected
on  the  site  of  the  “House  of  the  Lord”  a
temple  of  Venus,  which  in  its  turn  was  de¬
stroyed,  and  the  place  subsequently  became
a  depository  of  all  manner  of  filth.  But
the  Caliph  Omar,  after  his  conquest  of  Je¬
rusalem,  sought  out  the  ancient  site,  and,
having  caused  it  to  be  cleansed  of  its  im¬
purities,  he  directed  a  mosque  to  be  erected
on  the  rock  which  rises  in  the  centre  of
the  mountain.  Fifty  years  afterward  the
Sultan  Abd-el-Meluk  displaced  the  edifice
of  Omar,  and  erected  that  splendid  build¬
ing  which  remains  to  this  day,  and  is  still
incorrectly  called  by  Christians  the  mosque
of  Omar,  but  known  to  Mussulmans  as  El-
kubbet-es-Sukrah,  or  the  Dome  of  the  Rock.
This  is  supposed  to  occupy  the  exact  site
of  the  original  Solomonic  Temple,  and  is  |


viewed  with  equal  reverence  by  Jews  and
Mohammedans,  the  former  of  whom,  says
Mr.  Prime,  ( Tent  Life  in  t he  Holy  Land,  p.
183,)  “  have  a  faith  that  the  ark  is  within
its  bosom  now.”

Bartlett.  (  Wulks  about  Jerusalem,  p.  170,)
in  describing  a  vault  beneath  this  mosque
of  Omar,  says:  “  Beneath  the  dome,  at  the
south-east  angle  of  the  Temple  wall,  con¬
spicuous  from  all  points,  is  a  small  subter¬
raneous  place  of  prayer,  forming  the  en¬
trance  to  the  extensive  vaults  which  sup¬
port  the  level  platform  of  the  mosque
above.”

Dr.  Barclay  ( City  of  the  Great  King)  de¬
scribes,  in  many  places  of  his  interesting
topography  of  Jerusalem,  the  vaults  and
subterranean  chambers  which  are  to  be
found  beneath  the  site  of  the  old  Temple.

Conformable  with  this  historical  account
is  the  Talmudical  legend,  in  which  the
Jewish  Rabbins  state  that,  in  preparing
the  foundations  of  the  Temple,  the  work¬
men  discovered  a  subterranean  vault  sus¬
tained  by  seven  arches,  rising  from  as  many
pairs  of  pillars.  This  vault  escaped  notice
at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  in  conse¬
quence  of  its  being  filled  with  rubbish.
The  legend  adds  that  Josiah,  foreseeing
the  destruction  of  the  Temple,  commanded
the  Levites  to  deposit  the  ark  of  the  cove¬
nant  in  this  vault,  where  it  was  found  by
some  of  the  workmen  of  Zerubbabel  at  the
building  of  the  second  Temple.

In  the  earliest  ages,  the  cave  or  vault
was  deemed  sacred.  The  first  worship  was
in  cave  temples,  which  were  either  natural
or  formed  by  art  to  resemble  the  excava¬
tions  of  nature.  Of  such  great  extent  was
this  practice  of  subterranean  worship  by
the  nations  of  antiquity,  that  many  of  the
forms  of  heathen  temples,  as  well  as  the
naves,  aisles,  and  chancels  of  churches
subsequently  built  for  Christian  worship,
are  said  to  owe  their  origin  to  the  religious
use  of  caves.

From  this,  too,  arose  the  fact,  that  the
initiation  into  the  ancient  mysteries  was  al¬
most  always  performed  in  subterranean
edifices;  and  when  the  place  of  initiation,
as  in  some  of  the  Egyptian  temples,  was
really  above  ground,  it  was  so  constructed
as  to  give  to  the  neophyte  the  appearance,
in  its  approaches  and  its  internal  structure,
of  a  vault.  As  the  great  doctrine  taught
in  the  mysteries  was  the  resurrection  from
the  dead, — as  to  die  and  to  be  initiated  wefe
synonymous  terms, — it  was  deemed  proper
that  there  should  be  some  formal  resem¬
blance  between  a  descent  into  the  grave
and  a  descent  into  the  place  of  initiation.
“  Happy  is  the  man,”  says  the  Greek  poet
Pindar,  “who  descends  beneath  the  hollow
earth  having  beheld  these  mysteries,  for


VEDAS


VEILS


853


he  knows  the  end  as  well  as  the  divine
origin  of  life ;  ”  and  in  a  like  spirit  Sopho¬
cles  exclaims,  “  Thrice  happy  are  they  who
descend  to  the  shades  below  after  having
beheld  these  sacred  rites,  for  they  alone
have  life  in  Hades,  while  all  others  suffer
there  every  kind  of  evil.”

The  vault  was,  therefore,  in  the  ancient
mysteries,  symbolic  of  the  grave ;  for  ini¬
tiation  was  symbolic  of  death,  where  alone
Divine  Truth  is  to  be  found.  The  Masons
have  adopted  the  same  idea.  They  teach
that  death  is  but  the  beginning  of  life;
that  if  the  first  or  evanescent  temple  of  our
transitory  life  be  on  the  surface,  we  must
descend  into  the  secret  vault  of  death  before
we  can  find  that  sacred  deposit  of  truth
which  is  to  adorn  our  second  temple  of
eternal  life.  It  is  in  this  sense  of  an  en¬
trance  through  the  grave  into  eternal  life
that  we  are  to  view  the  symbolism  of  the
secret  vault.  Like  every  other  myth  and
allegory  of  Masonry,  the  historical  relation
may  be  true  or  it  may  be  false ;  it  may  be
founded  on  fact  or  be  the  invention  of  imagi¬
nation  ;  the  lesson  is  still  there,  and  the  sym¬
bolism  teaches  it  exclusive  of  the  history.

Ve«las.  The  most  ancient  of  the  re¬
ligious  writings  of  the  Indian  Aryans,  and
now  constituting  the  sacred  canon  of  the
Hindus,  being  to  them  what  the  Bible  is
to  the  Christians,  or  the  Koran  to  the
Mohammedans.  The  word  Veda  denotes
in  Sanscrit,  the  language  in  which  these
books  are  written,  wisdom  or  knowledge,
and  comes  from  the  verb  Veda,  which,  like
the  Greek  OWa,  Foida,  signifies  “  I  know.”
The  German  weiss  and  the  English  wit
came  from  the  same  root.  There  are  four
collections,  each  of  which  is  called  a  Veda,
namely,  the  Rig-Veda,  the  Yazur-Veda,
the  Sama-Veda,  and  the  Atharva-Veda;
but  the  first  only  is  the  real  Veda,  the  others
being  but  commentaries  on  it,  as  the  Tal¬
mud  is  upon  the  Old  Testament.

The  Rig-Veda  is  divided  into  two  parts:
the  Mantras  or  hymns,  which  are  all  metri¬
cal,  and  the  Brahmanes,  which  are  in  prose,
and  consist  of  ritualistic  directions  con¬
cerning  the  employment  of  the  hymns,  and
the  method  of  sacrifice.  The  other  Vedas
consist  also  of  hymns  and  prayers;  but
they  are  borrowed,  for  the  most  part,  from
the  Rig-Veda.

The  Vedas,  then,  are  the  Hindu  canon  of
Scripture  —  his  book  of  the  law;  and  to
the  Hindu  Mason  they  are  his  trestle-
board,  just  as  the  Bible  is  to  the  Christian
Mason.

The  religion  of  the  Vedas  is  apparently
an  adoration  of  the  visible  powers  of  nature,
such  as  the  sun,  the  sky,  the  dawn,  and  the
fire,  and,  in  general,  the  eternal  powers  of
light.  The  supreme  divinity  was  the  sky,


called  Varuna,  whence  the  Greeks  got  their
Ouranas ;  and  next  was  the  Sun,  called
sometimes  Savitar,  the  progenitor,  and
sometimes  Mitra,  the  loving  one,  whence
the  Persian  Mithras.  Side  by  side  with,
these  was  Agni,  fire,  whence  the  Latin
ignis,  who  was  the  divinity  coming  most
directly  in  approximation  with  man  on
earth,  and  soaring  upwards  as  the  flame  to
the  heavenly  gods.  But  in  this  nature-
worship  the  Vedas  frequently  betray  an
inward  spirit  groping  after  the  infinite
and  the  eternal,  and  an  anxious  search  for
the  divine  name,  which  was  to  be  rever¬
enced  just  as  the  Hebrew  aspired  after  the
unutterable  Tetragrammaton.  Bunsen  ( God
in  History,  b.  iii.,  ch.  7,)  calls  this  “the  de¬
sire —  the  yearning  after  the  nameless
Deity,  who  nowhere  manifests  himself  in
the  Indian  pantheon  of  the  Vedas  —  the
voice  of  humanity  groping  after  God.”
One  of  the  most  sublime  of  the  Veda
hymns  ( Rig-Veda ,  b.  x.  hymn  121)  ends
each  strophe  with  the  solemn  question:
“  Who  is  the  god  to  whom  we  shall  offer
our  sacrifice  ?  ”  This  is  the  question  which,
every  religion  asks;  the  search  after  the
All-Father  is  the  labor  of  all  men  who  are
seeking  divine  truth  and  light.  The  Semi¬
tic,  like  the  Aryan  poet  in  the  same  longing
spirit  for  the  knowledge  of  God,  exclaims,
“  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him,
that  I  might  come  even  to  his  seat.”  It  is
the  great  object  of  ail  Masonic  labor,  which
thus  shows  its  true  religious  character  and
design.

The  Vedas  have  not  exercised  any  direct
influence  on  the  symbolism  of  Freemasonry.
But,  as  the  oldest  Aryan  faith,  they  became
infused  into  the  subsequent  religious  sys¬
tems  of  the  race,  and  through  the  Zend-
Avesta  of  the  Zoroastrians,  the  mysteries  of
Mithras,  the  doctrines  of  theNeo-platonists,
and  the  school  of  Pythagoras,  mixed  with
the  Semitic  doctrines  of  the  Bible  and  the
Talmud,  they  have  cropped  out  in  the
mysticism  of  the  Gnostics  and  the  secret
societies  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  have
shown  some  of  their  spirit  in  the  re¬
ligious  philosophy  and  the  symbolism  of
Speculative  Masonry.  To  the  Masonic
scholar,  the  study  of  the  Vedic  hymns  is
therefore  interesting,  and  not  altogether
fruitless  in  its  results.  The  writings  of
Bunsen,  of  Muir,  of  Cox,  and  especially  of
Max  Muller,  will  furnish  ample  materials
for  the  study.

Velnn-gerieht.  See  Westphalia,  Se¬
cret  Tribunal  of.

Veils,  Grand  Masters  of  the.

Three  officers  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of
the  American  Rite,  whose  duty  it  is  to  pro¬
tect  and  defend  the  Veils  of  the  Tabernacle,
for  which  purpose  they  are  presented  with


854


VEILS


VEILS


a  sword.  The  jewel  of  their  office  is  a
sword  within  a  triangle,  and  they  bear  each
a  banner,  which  is  respectively  blue,  purple,
and  scarlet.  The  title  of  “Grand  Master”
appears  to  be  a  misnomer.  It  would  have
been  better  to  have  styled  them  “  Masters  ”
or  “Guardians.”  In  the  English  system,
the  three  Sojourners  act  in  this  capacity,
which  is  an  absurd  violation  of  all  the  facts
of  history,  and  completely  changes  the
symbolism.

Veils,  Symbolism  of  the.  Neither
the  construction  nor  the  symbolism  of  the
veils  in  the  Royal  Arch  tabernacle  is  de¬
rived  from  that  of  the  Sinaitic.  In  the
Sinaitic  tabernacle  there  were  no  veils  of
separation  between  the  different  parts,  ex¬
cept  the  one  white  one  that  hung  before
the  most  holy  place.  The  decorations  of
the  tabernacle  were  curtains,  like  modern
tapestry,  interwoven  with  many  colors;  no
curtain  being  wholly  of  one  color,  and  not
running  across  the  apartment,  but  covering
its  sides  and  roof.  The  exterior  form  of
the  Royal  Arch  tabernacle  was  taken  from
that  of  Moses,  but  the  interior  decoration
from  a  passage  of  Josephus  not  properly
understood.

Josephus  has  been  greatly  used  by  the
fabricators  of  high  degrees  of  Masonry,
not  only  for  their  ideas  of  symbolism,  but
for  the  suggestion  of  their  legends.  In  the
Second  Book  of  Chronicles  (iii.  14),  it  is
said  that  Solomon  “made  the  veil  of  blue,
and  purple,  and  crimson,  and  fine  linen,
and  wrought  cherubims  thereon.”  This
description  evidently  alludes  to  the  single
veil,  which,  like  that  of  the  Sinaitic  tab¬
ernacle,  was  placed  before  the  entrance  of
the  holy  of  holies.  It  by  no  means  resem¬
bles  the  four  separate  and  equidistant  veils
of  the  Masonic  tabernacle.

But  Josephus  had  said  ( Antiq .,  1.  viii.,  c.
iii.,  I  3),  that  the  king  “also  had  veils  of
blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  the
brightest  and  softest  linen,  with  the  most
curious  flowers  wrought  upon  them,  which
were  to  be  drawn  before  these  doors.”  To
this  description  — which  is  a  very  inaccurate
one,  which  refers,  too,  to  the  interior  of  the
first  Temple,  and  not  to  the  supposed  ta¬
bernacle  subsequently  erected  near  its  ruins,
and  which,  besides,  has  no  biblical  author¬
ity  for  its  support  —  we  must  trace  the  ideas,
even  as  to  the  order  of  the  veils,  which  the
inventors  of  the  Masonic  tabernacle  adopt¬
ed  in  their  construction  of  it.  That  tab¬
ernacle  cannot  be  recognized  as  historical¬
ly  correct,  but  must  be  considered,  like  the
three  doors  of  the  Temple  in  the  symbolic
degrees,  simply  as  a  symbol.  But  this  does
not  at  all  diminish  its  value.

The  symbolism  of  the  veils  must  be  con¬
sidered  in  two  aspects;  first,  in  reference  to


the  symbolism  of  the  veils  as  a  whole,  and
next,  as  to  the  symbolism  of  each  veil  sep¬
arately.

As  a  whole,  the  four  veils,  constituting
four  divisions  of  the  tabernacle,  present
obstacles  to  the  neophyte  in  his  advance
to  the  most  holy  place  where  the  Grand
Council  sits.  Now  he  is  seeking  to  advance
to  that  sacred  spot  that  he  may  there  re¬
ceive  his  spiritual  illumination,  and  be
invested  with  a  knowledge  of  the  true  Di¬
vine  name.  But  Masonically,  this  Divine
name  is  itself  but  a  symbol  of  Truth,  the
object,  as  has  been  often  said,  of  all  a  Ma¬
son’s  search  and  labor.  The  passage  through
the  veils  is,  therefore,  a  symbol  of  the  trials
and  difficulties  that  are  encountered  and
must  be  overcome  in  the  search  for  and  the
acquisition  of  Truth.

This  is  the  general  symbolism ;  but  we
lose  sight  of  it,  in  a  great  degree,  when  we
come  to  the  interpretation  of  the  symbolism
of  each  veil  independently  of  the  others,
for  this  principally  symbolizes  the  various
virtues  and  affections  that  should  character¬
ize  the  Mason.  Yet  the  two  symbolisms
are  really  connected,  for  the  virtues  sym¬
bolized  are  those  which  should  distinguish
every  one  engaged  in  the  Divine  search.

The  symbolism,  according  to  the  system
adopted  in  the  American  Rite,  refers  to  the
colors  of  the  veils  and  to  the  miraculous
signs  of  Moses,  which  are  described  in  Ex¬
odus  as  having  been  sbowrn  by  him  to  prove
his  mission  as  the  messenger  of  Jehovah.

Blue  is  a  symbol  of  universal  friendship
and  benevolence.  It  is  the  appropriate
color  of  the  symbolic  degrees,  the  posses¬
sion  of  which  is  the  first  step  in  the  pro¬
gress  of  the  search  for  truth  to  be  now  in¬
stituted.  The  Mosaic  sign  of  the  serpent
was  the  symbol  among  the  ancients  of  res¬
urrection  to  life,  because  the  serpent,  by
casting  his  skin,  is  supposed  continually  to
renew  his  youth.  It  is  the  symbol  here  of
the  loss  and  the  recovery  of  the  Word.

Purple  is  a  symbol  here  of  union,  and  re¬
fers  to  the  intimate  connection  of  Ancient
Craft  and  Royal  Arch  Masonry.  Hence  it
is  the  appropriate  color  of  the  intermediate
degrees,  which  must  be  passed  through  in
the  prosecution  of  the  search.  The  Mosaic
sign  refers  to  the  restoration  of  the  leprous
hand  to  health.  Here  again,  in  this  repre¬
sentation  of  a  diseased  limb  restored  to
health,  we  have  a  repetition  of  the  allusion
to  the  loss  and  the  recovery  of  the  Word ;
the  Word  itself  being  but  a  symbol  of  Di¬
vine  truth,  the  search  for  which  constitutes
the  whole  science  of  Freemasonry,  and  the
symbolism  of  which  pervades  the  whole
system  of  initiation  from  the  first  to  the
last  degree.

Scarlet  is  a  symbol  of  fervency  and  zeal.


VENERABLE


VENGEANCE


855


and  is  appropriated  to  the  Royal  Arch  de¬
gree  because  it  is  by  these  qualities  that
the  neophyte,  now  so  far  advanced  in  his
progress,  must  expect  to  be  successful  in  his
search.  The  Mosaic  sign  of  changing  wa¬
ter  into  wine  bears  the  same  symbolic  refer¬
ence  to  a  change  for  the  better  —  from  a
lower  to  a  higher  state  —  from  the  elemental
water  in  which  there  is  no  life  to  the  blood
which  is  the  life  itself — from  darkness  to
light.  The  progress  is  still  onward  to  the
recovery  of  that  which  had  been  lost,  but
which  is  yet  to  be  found.

White  is  a  symbol  of  purity,  and  is  pe¬
culiarly  appropriate  to  remind  the  neo¬
phyte,  who  is  now  almost  at  the  close  of
his  search,  that  it  is  only  by  purity  of  life
that  he  can  expect  to  be  found  worthy  of
the  reception  of  divine  truth.  “  Blessed,”
says  the  Great  Teacher,  “are  the  pure  in
heart,  for  they  shall  see  God.”  The  Mosaic
signs  now  cease,  for  they  have  taught  their
lesson ;  and  the  aspirant  is  invested  with
the  Signet  of  Truth,  to  assure  him  that,
having  endured  all  trials  and  overcome
all  obstacles,  he  is  at  length  entitled  to  re¬
ceive  the  reward  for  which  he  has  been
seeking;  for  the  Signet  of  Zerubbabel  is  a
royal  signet,  which  confers  power  and  au¬
thority  on  him  who  possesses  it.

And  so  we  now  see  that  the  Symbolism
of  the  Veils,  however  viewed,  whether  col¬
lectively  or  separately,  represent  the  labo¬
rious,  but  at  last  successful,  search  for  di¬
vine  truth.

Venerable.  The  title  of  a  Worship¬
ful  Master  in  a  French  Lodge.

Venerable  Grand  Master  of  all
Symbolic  Lodges.  The  twentieth  de¬
gree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish
Rite.  See  Grand  Master  of  all  Symbolic
Lodges.  The  Dictionnaire  Magonnique  says
that  this  degree  was  formerly  conferred  on
those  brethren  in  France  who,  in  receiving
it,  obtained  the  right  to  organize  Lodges,
and  to  act  as  Masters  or  Venerables  for  life,
an  abuse  that  was  subsequently  abolished
by  the  Grand  Orient.  Ragon  and  Vassal
both  make  the  same  statement.  It  may  be
true,  but  they  furnish  no  documentary  evi¬
dence  of  the  fact.  An  examination  of  an
old  MS.  French  ritual  of  the  degree,  when
it  formed  part  of  the  Rite  of  Perfection,
which  is  in  my  possession,  shows  nothing
in  the  catechism  that  renders  this  theory
of  its  origin  improbable.

Venerable,  Perfect.  ( Venerable
Parfait.)  A  degree  in  the  collection  of
Viany.

Venezuela.  Freemasonry  first  pene¬
trated  into  Venezuela  in  the  beginning  of
the  present  century,  when  a  Lodge  was
instituted  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  Spain.
Several  other  Lodges  were  subsequently  es¬


tablished  by  the  same  authority.  In  1825,
Cerneau,  the  head  of  the  irregular  Supreme
Council  at  New  York,  established  in  Car¬
acas  a  Grand  Lodge  and  Supreme  Council
of  the  Scottish  Rite.  In  1827,  the  Libera¬
tor,  Simon  Bolivar,  having  by  his  decree
prohibited  all  secret  societies,  the  Masonic
Lodges,  with  the  exception  of  the  one  at
Porto  Cabello,  suspended  their  labors.  In
1830,  Venezuela  having  become  indepen¬
dent  by  the  division  of  the  Colombian  Re¬
public,  several  brethren  obtained  from  some
of  the  dignitaries  of  the  extinct  Grand
Lodge,  in  their  capacity  as  Sovereign  In¬
spectors  General  of  the  thirty-third  de¬
gree,  a  temporary  Dispensation  to  hold  a
Lodge  for  one  year,  in  the  expectation  that
they  would,  in  the  course  of  that  time,  be
enabled  to  obtain  a  Charter  from  some  for¬
eign  Grand  Lodge.  But  their  efforts,  in
consequence  of  irregularities,  were  unsuc¬
cessful,  and  the  Lodge  was  suspended.
For  eight  years,  Freemasonry  in  Venezu¬
ela  was  in  a  dormant  condition.  But  in
1838  the  Masonic  spirit  was  revived,  the
Lodge  just  referred  to  renewed  its  labors,
the  old  Lodges  were  resuscitated,  and  the
National  Grand  Lodge  of  Venezuela  was
constituted,  whether  regularly  or  not,  it  is
impossible  at  this  time,  with  the  insufficient
light  before  us,  to  determine.  It  was,  how¬
ever,  recognized  by  several  foreign  bodies.
The  Grand  Lodge  thus  established,  issued
Charters  to  all  the  old  Lodges,  and  erected
new  ones.  In  conjunction  with  the  In¬
spectors  General,  it  established  a  supreme
legislative  body,  under  the  name  of  the
Grand  Orient,  and  also  constituted  a  Grand
Lodge,  which  continued  to  exist,  with  only
a  few  changes,  made  in  1852,  until  the  pres-
entGrand  Lodge  and  Supreme  Council  were
established,  January  12,  1865.  There  are
at  present  in  Venezuela  a  Grand  Lodge,
which,  in  1870,  had  thirty-two  Lodges  un¬
der  its  obedience,  and  a  Supreme  Council
of  the  Scottish  Rite.

Vengeance.  A  word  used  in  the  high
degrees.  Barruel,  Robison,  and  the  other
detractors  of  Freemasonry,  have  sought  to
find  in  this  word  a  proof  of  the  vindictive
character  of  the  Institution.  “  In  the  de¬
gree  of  Kadosh,”  says  Barruel,  (Memoir es,
ii.  310,)  “the  assassin  of  Adoniram  be¬
comes  the  king,  who  must  be  slain  to  avenge
the  Grand  Master  Molay  and  the  Order  of
Masons,  who  are  the  successors  of  the  Tem¬
plars.”

No  calumny  was  ever  fabricated  with  so
little  pretension  to  truth  for  its  foundation.
The  reference  is  altogether  historical ;  it  is
the  record  of  the  punishment  which  fol¬
lowed  a  crime,  not  an  incentive  to  revenge.

The  word  nekam  is  used  in  Masonry  in
precisely  the  same  sense  in  which  it  is  cm-


856


VERGER


VERTOT


ployed  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah  (1.  15)
when  he  speaks  of  nikemat  Jehovah,  “the
vengeance  of  the  Lord,” — the  punishment
which  God  will  inflict  on  evil-doers.  The
word  is  used  symbolically  to  express  the
universally  recognized  doctrine  that  crime
will  inevitably  be  followed  by  its  penal  con¬
sequences.  It  is  the  dogma  of  all  true  re¬
ligions  ;  for  if  virtue  and  vice  entailed  the
same  result,  there  would  be  no  incentive  to
the  one  and  no  restraint  from  the  other.

Verger.  An  officer  in  a  Council  of
Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  whose  du¬
ties  are  similar  to  those  of  a  Senior  Deacon
in  a  Symbolic  Lodge.

Vermont.  Freemasonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  the  State  of  Vermont  in  1781,  in
which  year  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachu¬
setts  granted  a  Charter  for  the  establish¬
ment  of  a  Lodge  at  Cornish.  This  town
having  soon  afterwards  been  claimed  by
New  Hampshire,  the  Lodge  removed  to
Windsor,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river.
In  1785,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts
chartered  another  Lodge  at  the  town  of
Manchester.  A  Grand  Lodge  was  organ¬
ized  October  19,  1794,  at  Rutland.  I  have
been  unable  to  find  any  record  of  the  num¬
ber  of  Lodges  that  were  engaged  in  that
organization,  nor  is  there  any  evidence  that
there  were  at  that  time  in  existence  in  Ver¬
mont  any  other  than  the  two  which  had
been  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Mas¬
sachusetts.

In  no  State  of  the  Union  did  the  anti-
Masonic  party,  as  a  political  power,  exer¬
cise  so  much  influence  as  it  did  in  Ver¬
mont.  The  Grand  Lodge  was,  under  the
pressure  of  persecution,  compelled  to  sus¬
pend  its  labors  in  1833.  All  the  Lodges
under  its  jurisdiction  surrendered  their
Charters,  and  Masonry  for  fifteen  years
had  no  active  existence  in  that  State.  The
Grand  Lodge,  however,  did  not  dissolve,
but  continued  its  legal  life  by  regular,
although  private,  communications  of  the
officers,  and  by  adjournments,  until  the  year
1846,  when  it  resumed  vigor,  Bro.  Nathan
B.  Haswell,  who  wras  the  Grand  Master  at
the  time  of  the  suspension,  having  taken
the  chair  at  the  resumed  communication  in
January,  1846.  The  regularity  of  this  re¬
sumption,  although  at  first  denied  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  New  York,  was  generally
admitted  by  all  the  Grand  Lodges  of  the
United  States,  with  a  welcome  to  which  the
devotion  and  steady  perseverance  of  the  Ma¬
sons  of  Vermont  had  justly  entitled  them.

The  Grand  Chapter  was  organized  De¬
cember  20,  1804,  Jonathan  Wells  being
elected  first  Grand  High  Priest.  It  shared
the  destinies  of  the  Grand  Lodge  during
the  period  of  persecution,  but  was  reorgan¬
ized  July  18,  1849,  under  a  commission


from  Joseph  K.  Stapleton,  Deputy  General
Grand  High  Priest  of  the  United  States.

The  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters  was  organized  August  19,  1854,  by
a  Convention  of  four  Councils  held  at  Ver-
gennes,  and  Nathan  B.  Haswell  was  elected
Grand  Master.

The  Grand  Encampment  (now  the  Grand
Commandery)  was  originally  organized  in
1825.  It  subsequently  became  dormant.
In  1850,  the  Grand  Encampment  was  re¬
vived  ;  but  it  appearing  that  the  revival  was
attended  by  irregularities,  and  in  violation
of  the  Grand  Constitution  of  the  Grand
Encampment  of  the  United  States,  the
members  dissolved  the  body,  and  the  Dep¬
uty  Grand  Master,  William  H.  Ellis,  hav¬
ing,  in  December,  1850,  issued  a  commis¬
sion  to  three  subordinate  Encampments  to
organize  a  Grand  Encampment,  that  body
was  formed  January  14,  1852.

Vernlies,  J.  F.  A  French  litterateur
and  Masonic  wuiter,  who  was  in  1821  the
Venerable  of  the  Lodge  la  Parfaite  Hu¬
manity  at  Montpellier.  He  wrote  an  Essai
sur  V Histoire  de  la  Franc h e- Mo gonnerie,
depuis  son  etablissement  jvsi/a  nos  jours,
Paris,  1813 ;  and  Le  Far/ail  Mugon  ou  Re¬
pertoire  complet  de  la  Magonnerie  Sym-
bolique.  This  work  was  published  at  Mont¬
pellier,  in  1820,  in  six  numbers,  of  which
the  sixth  was  republished  the  next  year*
with  the  title  of  Apologie  des  Magons.  It
contained  a  calm  and  rational  refutation
of  several  works  which  had  been  written
against  Freemasonry.  Vernhes  became  an
active  disciple  of  the  Rite  of  Mizraim,  and
published  in  1822,  at  Paris,  a  defence  of  it
and  an  examination  of  the  various  Rites
then  practised  in  France.

Yertot  d‘Aiib«euf.  Ren^-Aubert
do.  The  Abby  Vertot  was  born  at  the
Chateau  de  Bennelot,  in  Normandy,  in
1665.  In  1715  the  Grand  Master  of  the
Knights  of  Malta  appointed  him  the  his¬
toriographer  of  that  Order,  and  provided  him
with  the  Commandery  of  Santenay.  Vertot
discharged  the  duties  of  his  office  by
writing  his  well-known  work  entitled  His¬
tory  of  the  Knights  Hospitallers  of  St.  John
of  Jerusalem,  afterwards  Knights  of  Rhodes,
and  now  Knights  of  Malta,  which  was  pub¬
lished  at  Paris,  in  1726,  in  four  volumes.
It  has  since  passed  through  a  great  number
of  editions,  and  been  translated  into  many
languages.  Of  this  work,  to  which  the
Abby  principally  owes  his  fame,  although
he  was  also  the  author  of  many  other  his¬
tories,  French  critics  complain  that  the
style  is  languishing,  and  less  pure  and
natural  than  that  of  his  other  writings.
Notwithstanding  that  it  has  been  the  basis
of  almost  all  subsequent  histories  of  the
Order,  the  judgment  of  the  literary  world


VESICA


VINTON


857


is,  that  it  needs  exactitude  in  many  of  its
details,  and  is  too  much  influenced  by  the
personal  prejudices  of  the  author.  The
Abb6  Vertot  died  in  1735.

Vesica  Piscis.  The  fish  was  among
primitive  Christians  a  symbol
of  Jesus.  (See  Fish.)  The
vesica  piscis,  signifying  literally
the  air-bladder  of  a  fish,  but,
as  some  suppose,  being  the
rough  outline  of  a  fish,  was
adopted  as  an  abbreviated  form
of  that  symbol.  In  some  old
manuscripts  it  is  used  as  a
representation  of  the  lateral
wound  of  our  Lord.  As  a
symbol,  it  was  frequently  em¬
ployed  as  a  church  decoration
by  the  Freemasons  of  the  Mid¬
dle  Ages.  The  seals  of  all
colleges,  abbeys,  and  other  religious  com¬
munities,  as  well  as  of  ecclesiastical  per¬
sons,  were  invariably  made  of  this  shape.
Hence,  in  reference  to  the  religious  charac¬
ter  of  the  Institution,  it  has  been  suggested
that  the  seals  of  Masonic  Lodges  should
also  have  that  form,  instead  of  the  circular
one  now  used.

Vexillum  Belli.  A  war-flag.  In
classical  Latin,  Vexillum  meant  a  flag  con¬
sisting  of  a  piece  of  cloth  fixed  on  a  frame
or  cross-tree,  as  contradistinguished  from
a  signum,  or  standard,  which  was  simply  a
pole  with  the  image  of  an  eagle,  horse,  or
some  other  device  on
the  top.  Among  the
pretended  relics  of  the
Order  of  the  Temple
is  one  called  “le  dra-

Eeau  de  guerre,  eu  laine
lanche,  it  quatre  raies
noires ;  ”  i.  e.,  the  standard  of  war,  of  white
linen,  with  four  black  rays;  and  in  the
statutes  of  the  Order,  the  Vexillum  Belli  is
described  as  being  “ albo nigroque  palatum,”
or  pales  of  white  and  black,  which  is  the
same  thing  couched  in  the  technical  lan¬
guage  of  heraldry.  This  is  incorrect.  The
only  war-flag  of  the  ancient  Knights  Tem¬
plars  was  the  Beauseant.  Ad¬
dison,  on  the  title-page  of  his
Temple  Church,  gives  what  he
calls  “the  war-banner  of  the
Order  of  the  Temple,”  and
which  is,  as  in  the  margin,  the
Beauseant,  bearing  in  the  centre
the  blood-red  Templar  cross.

Some  of  the  Masonic  Templars,
those  of  Scotland,  for  example,
have  both  a  Beaucenifer  or
Beauseant  bearer,  and  a  bearer  of  the  Vex¬
illum  Belli.  The  difference  would  appear
to  be  that  the  Beauseant  is  the  plain
white  and  black  flag,  and  the  Vexillum
6  II


Belli  is  the  same  flag  charged  with  the  red
cross.

Yiany,  Auguste  de.  A  Masonic
writer  of  Tuscany,  and  one  of  the  founders
there  of  the  Philosophic  Scottish  Bite.  He
was  the  author  of  many  discourses,  disser¬
tations,  and  didactic  essays  on  Masonic
subjects.  He  is,  however,  best  known  as
the  collector  of  a  large  number  of  manu¬
script  degrees  and  cahiers  or  rituals,  several
of  which  have  been  referred  to  in  this
work.

Vielle-Bru,  Rite  of.  In  1748,  the
year  after  the  creation  of  the  Chapter  of
Arras  by  the  Young  Pretender,  Charles
Edward,  a  new  Rite,  in  favor  of  the  cause
of  the  Stuarts,  was  established  at  Toulouse
by,  as  it  is  said,  Sir  Samuel  Lockhart,  one
of  the  aides-de-camp  of  the  Prince.  It
was  called  the  Rite  of  Vielle-Bru,  or  Faith¬
ful  Scottish  Masons.  It  consisted  of  nine
degrees,  divided  into  three  chapters  as  fol¬
lows:  First  Chapter,  1,  2,  3.  The  symbolic
degrees ;  4.  Secret  Master.  Second  Chapter,
5,  6,  7,  8.  Four  elu  degrees,  based  on  the
Templar  system.  Third  Chapter,  9.  Scien¬
tific  Masonry.  The  head  of  the  Rite  was
a  Council  of  Menatzchim.  In  1804  the
Rite  was  refused  a  recognition  by  the  Grand
Orient  of  France,  because  it  presented  no
moral  or  scientific  object,  and  because  the
Charter  which  it  claimed  to  have  from
Prince  Charles  Edward  was  not  proved  to
be  authentic.  It  continued  to  exist  in  the
south  of  France  until  the  year  1812,  when,
being  again  rejected  by  the  Grand  Orient,
it  fell  into  decay.

Villars,  Abfotf  Montfan?on  de.

He  was  born  in  Languedoc  in  M653,  and
was  shot  by  one  of  his  relatives,  on  the  high
road  between  Lyons  and  Paris,  in  1675.
The  Abbe  Villars  is  celebrated  as  the  author
of  The  Count  de  Gabalis,  or  Conversations  on
the  Secret  Sciences,  published  in  2  vols.,  at
Paris,  in  1670.  In  this  work  the  author’s
design  was,  under  the  form  of  a  romance,  to
unveil  some  of  the  Kabbalistic  mysteries
of  Rosicrucianism.  It  has  passed  through
many  editions,  and  has  been  translated
into  English  as  well  as  into  other  lan¬
guages.

Yineere  ant  Mori.  French,  Yaincre
ou  Mourir,  to  conquer  or  to  die.  The  motto
of  the  degree  of  Perfect  Elect  Mason,  the
first  of  the  elus  according  to  the  Clermont
or  Templar  system  of  Masonry.

Vinton,  David.  A  distinguished
lecturer  on  Masonry,  and  teacher  of  the
ritual  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  present
century.  His  field  of  labors  was  princi¬
pally  confined  to  the  Southern  States,  and
he  taught  his  system  for  some  time  with
great  success  in  North  and  South  Carolina.
There  were,  however,  stains  upon  his  char-


858


VIOLET


VIRGINIA


acter,  and  he  was  eventually  expelled  by,  I
think,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  former  State.
He  died  atShakertown,  Kentucky,  in  July,
1833.  Vinton  published  at  Dedham,  Mas¬
sachusetts,  in  1816,  a  volume,  containing
Selections  of  Masonic,  Sentimental,  and
Humorous  songs,  under  the  title  of  The  Ma¬
sonic  Minstrel.  Of  this  rather  trifling  work
no  less  than  twelve  thousand  copies  were
sold  by  subscription.  To  Vinton’s  poetic
genius  we  are  indebted  for  that  beautiful
dirge  commencing,  “Solemn  strikes  the
funeral  chime,”  which  has  now  become  in
almost  all  the  Lodges  of  the  United  States
a  part  of  the  ritualistic  ceremonies  of  the
third  degree,  and  has  been  sung  over  the
graves  of  thousands  of  departed  brethren.
This  contribution  should  preserve  the
memory  of  Vinton  among  the  Craft,  and
in  some  measure  atone  for  his  faults,  what¬
ever  they  may  have  been.

Violet.  This  is  not  a  Masonic  color,
except  in  some  of  the  high  degrees  of  the
Scottish  Rite,  where  it  is  a  symbol  of  mourn¬
ing,  and  thus  becomes  one  of  the  decora¬
tions  of  a  Sorrow  Lodge.  Portal  ( Coleurs
Symboliques,  p.  236,)  says  that  this  color  -was
adopted  for  mourning  by  persons  of  high
rank.  And  Campini  (  Vetera  Monumenta)
states  that  violet  was  the  mark  of  grief,
especially  among  kings  and  cardinals.  In
Christian  art,  the  Saviour  is  clothed  iu  a
purple  robe  during  his  passion ;  and  it  is
the  color  appropriated,  says  Court  de  Ge-
belin,  [Monde prim.,  viii.  201,)  to  martyrs,
because,  like  their  divine  Master,  they  un¬
dergo  the  punishment  of  the  passion.  Pre-
vost  [Hist,  des  Voyages,  vi.  152,)  says  that
in  China  violet  is  the  color  of  mourning.
Among  that  people  blue  is  appropriated  to
the  dead  and  red  to  the  living,  because
with  them  red  represents  the  vital  heat,
and  blue,  immortality ;  and  hence,  says
Portal,  violet,  which  is  made  by  an  equal
admixture  of  blue  and  red,  is  a  symbol  of
the  resurrection  to  eternal  life.  Such  an
idea  is  peculiarly  appropriate  to  the  use  of
violet  in  the  high  degrees  of  Masonry  as  a
symbol  of  mourning.  It  would  be  equally
appropriate  in  the  primary  degrees,  for
everywhere  in  Masonry  we  are  taught  to
mourn  not  as  those  who  have  no  hope.
Our  grief  for  the  dead  is  that  of  those  who
believe  in  the  immortal  life.  The  red  sym¬
bol  of  life  is  tinged  with  the  blue  of  immor¬
tality,  and  thus  we  would  wear  the  violet
as  our  mourning  to  declare  our  trust  in  the
resurrection.

Virginia.  There  is  much  obscurity
about  the  early  history  of  Freemasonry  in
this  State.  The  first  chartered  Lodge  ap¬
pears  to  have  been  the  “St.  John’s  Lodge”
at  Norfolk,  which  received  its  Warrant  iu
1741  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.  |


December  22, 1758,  the  “  Royal  Exchange
Lodge”  at  Norfolk  was  chartered  by  the
Athol  or  Ancient  York  Lodge.  But  be¬
tween  1741  and  1758  the  Lodge  of  Freder¬
icksburg  had  sprung  into  existence,  for  its
records  show  that  General  Washington  was
there  initiated  November  4,  1752.  This
Lodge  was  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Massachusetts  on  July  21, 1758,  but  had
been  acting  under  Dispensation  for  several
years  before.  In  1777  there  were  ten
Lodges  in  Virginia,  namely,  two  at  Nor¬
folk  and  one  at  each  of  the  following  places:
Port  Royal,  Fredericksburg,  Hampton,
Williamsburg,  Gloucester,  Cabin  Point,
Petersburg,  and  Yorktown.  On  the  6th
of  May  in  that  year,  deputies  from  five  of
these  Lodges  met  in  convention  at  Williams¬
burg,  “  for  the  purpose  of  choosing  a  Grand
Master  for  Virginia.”  So  says  the  record
as  contained  in  Dove’s  Text- Book.  The
convention,  however,  adjourned  to  June  23,
after  stating  its  reasons  for  the  election  of
such  an  officer.  On  that  day  it  met,  but
again  adjourned.  Finally,  it  met  on  Oc¬
tober  13,  1778.  The  record  calls  it  “a  Con¬
vention  of  the  Craft;”  but  it  assumed  the
form  of  a  Lodge,  and  the  Master  and  War¬
dens  of  Williamsburg  Lodge  presided.
Only  four  Lodges  were  represented,  namely,
Williamsburg,  Blandford,  Botetourt,  and
Cabin  Point.  The  modern  forms  of  Ma¬
sonic  conventions  are  not  found  in  the  pro¬
ceedings  of  this  convention.  Nothing  is
said  of  the  formation  of  a  Grand  Lodge,
but  the  following  resolution  was  adopted :

“It  is  the  opinion  of  this  Convention,
that  it  is  agreeable  to  the  Constitutions  of
Masonry  that  all  the  regular  chartered
Lodges  within  this  State  should  be  sub¬
ject  to  the  Grand  Master  of  the  said  State.”

Accordingly,  John  Blair,  Past  Master  of
the  Williamsburg  Lodge,  was  nominated
and  unanimously  elected,  and  on  the  same
day  he  was  installed,  by  the  Master  of  Wil¬
liamsburg  Lodge,  as  “Grand  Master  of  Free
and  Accepted  Masons  of  the  State  of  Vir¬
ginia.”  All  this  was  done,  if  we  may  trust
the  record,  in  Williamsburg  Lodge,  the
Master  thereof  presiding,  who  afterwards
closed  the  Lodge  without  any  reference  to
the  organization  of  a  Grand  Lodge.  We
may,  however,  imply  that  such  a  body  was
then  formed,  for  Dove  —  without,  however,
giving  any  account  of  the  proceedings  in
the  interval,  when  there  might  or  might  not
have  been  quarterly  or  annual  communica¬
tions —  says  that  a  Grand  Lodge  was  held
in  the  city  of  Richmond,  October  4,  1784,
wben  Grand  Master  Blair  having  resigned
the  chair,  James  Mercer  was  elected  Grand
Master.  Dove  dates  the  organization  of  the
Grand  Lodge  at  October  13,  1778.

Royal  Arch  Masonry  was  introduced


VIRGIN


VISITATION


859


into  Virginia,  it  is  said,  by  Joseph  Myers,
who  was  acting  under  his  authority  as
a  Deputy  Inspector  of  the  Scottish  Rite.
The  Grand  Chapter  was  organized  at  Nor¬
folk,  May  1,  1808.  It  has  never  recog¬
nized  the  authority  of  the  General  Grand
Chapter.

The  Cryptic  degrees  are  conferred  in
Virginia  in  the  Chapters  preparatory  to
the  Royal  Arch.  There  are  therefore  no
Councils  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters  in
the  State.

The  register,  or  roll  published  in  the  Pro¬
ceedings  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the
United  States  for  1871,  (p.  27,)  states  that
the  Grand  Commandery  of  Virginia  was
organized,  November  27,  1823.  But  from
a  report  of  the  committee  of  the  Grand
Encampment,  made  September  17,  1847,
we  learn  the  following  facts.  In  1824  there
existed  three  subordinate  Encampments  in
Virginia,  which  about  the  year  1826  formed
a  Grand  Encampment,  that  was  represented
that  year  in  the  General  Grand  Encamp¬
ment.  It  is  supposed  that  this  body  ceased
to  exist  soon  after  its  organization,  and  a
Charter  was  granted,  by  the  General  Grand
Encampment,  for  an  Encampment  to  meet
at  Wheeling.  On  December  11, 1845,  dele¬
gates  from  various  Encampments  in  Vir¬
ginia  met  at  Richmond  and  organized  a
new  Grand  Encampment  which  they  de¬
clared  to  be  independent  of  the  General
Grand  Encampment.  At  the  session  of
the  latter  body  in  1847,  it  declared  this
new  Grand  Encampment  to  be  “irregular
and  unauthorized,”  and  it  refused  to  recog¬
nize  it  or  its  subordinates.  Wheeling  En¬
campment,  however,  was  acknowledged  to
be  a  lawful  body,  as  it  had  not  given  its
adhesion  to  the  irregular  Grand  Encamp¬
ment.  In  January,  1851,  the  Grand  En¬
campment  of  Virginia  receded  from  its  po¬
sition  of  independence,  and  was  recognized
by  the  General  Grand  Encampment  as  one
of  its  constituents.  It  so  remained  until
1861,  when  the  Grand  Commandery  (the
title  which  had  been  adopted  in  1859)
seceded  from  the  Grand  Encampment  in
consequence  of  the  civil  war.  It,  however,
returned  to  its  allegiance  in  1865,  and  has
ever  since  remained  a  regular  portion  of
the  Templar  Order  of  the  United  States.

Virgin,  Weeping.  See  Weeping
Virgin.

Visible  Masonry.  In  a  circular
published  March  18,  1775,  by  the  Grand
Orient  of  France,  reference  is  made  to  two
divisions  of  the  Order,  namely,  Visible  and
Invisible  Masonry.  Did  we  not  know  some¬
thing  of  the  Masonic  contentions  then  ex¬
isting  in  France  between  the  Lodges  and
the  supreme  authority,  we  should  hardly
comprehend  the  meaning  intended  to  be


conveyed  by  these  words.  By  “Invisible
Masonry  ”  they  denoted  that  body  of  in¬
telligent  and  virtuous  Masons  who,  irre¬
spective  of  any  connection  with  dogmatic
authorities,  constituted  “  a  Mysterious  and
Invisible  Society  of  the  True  Sons  of  Ligh  t,”
who,  scattered  over  the  two  hemispheres,
were  engaged,  with  one  heart  and  soul,  in
doing  everything  for  the  glory  of  the  Grand
Architect  and  the  good  of  their  fellow-men.
By  “Visible  Masonry”  they  meant  the
congregation  of  Masons  into  Lodges,  which
were  often  affected  by  the  contagious  vices
of  the  age  in  which  they  lived.  The  form¬
er  is  perfect;  the  latter  continually  needs
purification.  The  words  were  originally
invented  to  effect  a  particular  purpose,  and
to  bring  the  recusant  Lodges  of  France
into  their  obedience.  But  they  might  be
advantageously  preserved,  in  the  technical
language  of  Masonry,  for  a  more  general
and  permanent  object.  Invisible  Masonry
would  then  indicate  the  abstract  spirit  of
Masonry  as  it  has  always  existed,  while
Visible  Masonry  would  refer  to  the  con¬
crete  form  which  it  assumes  in  Lodge  and
Chapter  organizations,  and  in  different  Rites
and  systems.  The  latter  would  be  like  the
material  church,  or  church  militant;  the
former  like  the  spiritual  church,  or  church
triumphant.  Such  terms  might  be  found
convenient  to  Masonic  scholars  and  writers.

Visitation,  Grand.  The  visit  of  a
Grand  Master,  accompanied  by  his  Grand
Officers,  to  a  subordinate  Lodge,  to  inspect
its  condition,  is  called  a  Grand  Visitation.
There  is  no  allusion  to  anything  of  the
kind  in  the  Old  Constitutions,  because
there  was  no  organization  of  the  Order  be¬
fore  the  eighteenth  century  that  made  such
an  inspection  necessary.  But  immediately
after  the  revival  in  1717,  it  was  found  ex¬
pedient,  in  consequence  of  the  growth  of
Lodges  in  London,  to  provide  for  some
form  of  visitation  and  inspection.  So,  in
the  very  first  of  the  Thirty-nine  General
Regulations,  adopted  in  1721,  it  is  declared
that  “  the  Grand  Master  or  his  Deputy  hath
authority  and  right  not  only  to  be  present
in  any  true  Lodge,  but  also  to  preside  wher¬
ever  he  is,  with  the  Master  of  the  Lodge  on
his  left  hand,  and  to  order  his  Grand  War¬
dens  to  attend  him,  who  are  not  to  act  in
any  particular  Lodges  as  Wardens,  but  in
his  presence  and  at  his  command ;  because
there  the  Grand  Master  may  command  the
Wardens  of  that  Lodge,  or  any  other  breth¬
ren  he  pleaseth,  to  attend  and  act  as  his
Wardens  pro  tempore.”

In  compliance  with  this  old  regulation,
whenever  the  Grand  Master,  accompanied
by  his  Wardens  and  other  officers,  visits  a
Lodge  in  his  jurisdiction,  for  the  purpose
of  inspecting  its  condition,  the  Master  and


860


VISITING


VOGEL


officers  of  the  Lodge  thus  visited  surrender
their  seats  to  the  Grand  Master  and  the
Grand  Officers.

Grand  Visitations  are  among  the  oldest
usages  of  Freemasonry  since  the  revival
period.  In  this  country  they  are  not  now
so  frequently  practised,  iii  consequence  of
the  extensive  territory  over  which  the
Lodges  are  scattered,  and  the  difficulty  of
collecting  at  one  point  all  the  Grand  Offi¬
cers,  many  of  whom  generally  reside  at
great  distances  apart.  Still,  where  it  can
be  done,  the  practice  of  Grand  Visitations
should  never  be  neglected.

The  power  of  visitation  for  inspection  is
confined  to  the  Grand  and  Deputy  Grand
Master.  The  Grand  Wardens  possess  no
such  prerogative.  The  Master  must  always
tender  the  gavel  and  the  chair  to  the  Grand
or  Deputy  Grand  Master  when  either  of
them  informally  visits  a  Lodge ;  for  the
Grand  Master  and,  in  his  absence,  the
Deputy  have  the  right  to  preside  in  all
Lodges  where  they  may  be  present.  But
this  privilege  does  not  extend  to  the  Grand
Wardens.

Visiting  Brethren.  Every  brother
from  abroad,  or  from  any  other  Lodge,
when  he  visits  a  Lodge,  must  be  received
with  welcome  and  treated  with  hospitality.
He  must  be  clothed,  that  is  to  say,  furnished
with  an  apron,  and,  if  the  Lodge  uses  them,
(as  every  Lodge  should,)  with  gloves,  and,
if  a  Past  Master,  with  the  jewel  of  his
rank.  He  must  be  directed  to  a  seat,  and
the  utmost  courtesy  extended  to  him.  If
of  distinguished  rank  in  the  Order,  the
honors  due  to  that  rank  must  be  paid  to
him.

This  hospitable  and  courteous  spirit  is
derived  from  the  ancient  customs  of  the
Craft,  and  is  inculcated  in  all  the  Old  Con¬
stitutions.  Thus,  in  the  Stone  MS.,  it  is
directed  “that  every  Mason  receive  and
cherish  strange  fellowes  when  they  come
over  the  countrie,  and  sett  them  on  worke,
if  they  will  worke,  as  the  manner  is ;  that
is  to  say,  if  the  Mason  have  any  mould
stone  in  his  place,  he  shall  give  him  a
mould  stone,  and  sett  him  on  worke ;  and
if  he  have  none,  the  Mason  shall  refresh
him  with  money  unto  the  next  Lodge.”
A  similar  regulation  is  found  in  all  the
other  manuscripts  of  the  Operative  Ma¬
sons;  and  from  them  the  usage  has  de¬
scended  to  their  speculative  successors.

At  all  Lodge  banquets  it  is  of  obligation
that  a  toast  shall  be  drunk  “  to  the  visiting
brethren.”  To  neglect  this  would  be  a
great  breach  of  decorum.

Visit.  Right  of.  Every  affiliated  Ma¬
son  in  good  standing  has  a  right  to  visit
any  other  Lodge,  wherever  it  may  be,  as
often  as  it  may  suit  his  pleasure  or  conve¬


nience  ;  and  this  is  called,  in  Masonic  law,
“  the  right  of  visit.”  It  is  one  of  the  most
important  of  all  Masonic  privileges,  be¬
cause  it  is  based  on  the  principle  of  the
identity  of  the  Masonic  institution  as  one
universal  family,  and  is  the  exponent  of
that  well-known  maxim  that  “  in  every
clime  a  Mason  may  find  a  home,  and  in
every  land  a  brother.”  It  has  been  so  long
and  so  universally  admitted,  that  I  have  not
hesitated  to  rank  it  among  the  landmarks
of  the  Order.

The  admitted  doctrine  on  this  subject  is,
that  the  right  of  visit  is  one  of  the  positive
rights  of  every  Mason,  because  Lodges  are
justly  considered  as  only  divisions  for  con¬
venience  of  the  universal  Masonic  family.
The  right  may,  of  course,  be  lost,  or  for¬
feited  on  special  occasions,  by  various  cir¬
cumstances  ;  but  any  Master  who  shall  re¬
fuse  admission  to  a  Mason  in  good  standing,
who  knocks  at  the  door  of  his  Lodge,  is
expected  to  furnish  some  good  and  satisfac¬
tory  reason  for  his  thus  violating  a  Masonic
right.  If  the  admission  of  the  applicant,
whether  a  member  or  visitor,  would,  in  his
opinion,  be  attended  with  injurious  conse¬
quences,  such,  for  instance,  as  impairing
the  harmony  of  the  Lodge,  a  Master  would
then,  I  presume,  be  justified  in  refusing
admission.  But  without  the  existence  of
some  such  good  reason,  Masonic  jurists
have  always  decided  that  the  right  of  vis¬
itation  is  absolute  and  positive,  and  inures
to  every  Mason  in  his  travels  throughout
the  world.  See  this  subject  discussed  in  its
fullest  extent  in  the  author’s  Text  Book  of
Masonic  Jurisprudence ,  pp.  203-216.

Vi  vat.  “Vivat!  vivat!  vivat  I”  is  the
acclamation  which  accompanies  the  honors
in  the  French  Rite.  Bazot  ( Manuel ,  p.  165,)
says  it  is  “  the  cry  of  joy  of  Freemasons  of
the  French  Rite.”  Vivat  is  a  Latin  word,
and  signifies,  literally,  “  May  he  live ;  ”  but
it  has  been  domiciliated  in  French,  and
Boiste  ( Dictionnaire  Universe l)  defines  it  as
“  a  cry  of  applause  which  expresses  the
wish  for  the  preservation  of  any  one.”  The
French  Masons  say,  “  He  was  received  with
the  triple  vivat,”  to  denote  that  “  He  was
received  with  the  highest  honors  of  the
Lodge.”

Vogel,  Paul  Joachim  Sigis-
mnnd.  A  distinguished  Masonic  writer
of  Germany,  who  was  born  in  1753.  He
was  at  one  time  co-rector  of  the  Sebastian
School  at  Altdorf,  and  afterwards  First
Professor  of  Theology  and  Ecclesiastical
Counsellor  at  Erlangen.  In  1785  he  pub¬
lished  at  Nuremberg,  in  three  volumes,  his
Briefe,  die Freimmirerei  betreffend ;  or,  “Let¬
ters  concerning  Freemasonry.”  The  first
volume  treats  of  the  Knights  Templars ;
the  second,  of  the  Ancient  Mysteries ;  and


VOIGT


VOUCHING


861


the  third,  of  Freemasonry.  This  was,  says
Kloss,  the  first  earnest  attempt  made  in
Germany  to  trace  Freemasonry  to  a  true,
historical  origin.  Vogel’s  theory  was,  that
the  Speculative  Freemasons  were  derived
from  the  Operative  or  Stonemasons  of  the
Middle  Ages.  The  abundant  documentary
evidence  that  more  recent  researches  have
produced  were  then  wanting,  and  the  views
of  Vogel  did  not  make  that  impression  to
which  they  were  entitled.  He  has,  how¬
ever,  the  credit  of  having  opened  the  way,
after  the  Abb6  Grandidier,  for  those  who
have  followed  him  in  the  same  field.  He
also  delivered  before  the  Lodges  of  Nurem¬
berg,  several  Discourses  on  the  Desiijn,
Character,  and  Origin  of  Freemasonry,  which
were  published  in  one  volume,  at  Berlin,
in  1791.

Voigt,  Friedericli.  A  Doctor  of
Medicine,  and  Professor  and  Senator  at
Dresden.  He  was  a  member  of  the  high
degrees  of  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observance,
where  his  Order  name  was  Eques  d  Falcone,
or  Knight  of  the  Falcon.  In  1788  he  at¬
tacked  Starck’s  Rite  of  the  Clerks  of  Strict
Observance,  and  published  an  essay  on  the
subject,  in  the  year  1788,  in  the  Acta  His-
torico-Ecclesiastica  of  Weimar.  Voigt  ex¬
posed  the  Roman  Catholic  tendencies  of  the
new  system,  and  averred  that  its  object  was
“to  cite  and  command  spirits,  to  find  the
philosopher’s  stone,  and  to  establish  the
reign  of  the  millennium.”  His  develop¬
ment  of  the  Kabbalistic  character  of  the
Rite  made  a  deep  impression  on  the  Ma¬
sonic  world,  and  was  one  of  the  most  effec¬
tive  attacks  upon  it  made  by  its  antagonists
of  the  old  Strict  Observance.

Voting.  Voting  in  Lodges  viva  voce,  or
by  “ aye”  and  “ nay,”  is  a  modern  innova¬
tion  in  this  country.  During  the  Grand
Mastership  of  the  Earl  of  Loudon,  on  April
6,  1736,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  on
the  motion  of  Deputy  Grand  Master  Ward,
adopted  “  a  new  regulation  of  ten  rules  for
explaining  what  concerned  the  decency  of
assemblies  and  communications.”  The
tenth  of  these  rules  is  in  the  following
words :

“The  opinions  or  votes  of  the  members
are  always  to  be  signified  by  each  holding
up  one  of  his  hands ;  which  uplifted  hands
the  Grand  Wardens  are  to  count,  unless  the
number  of  hands  be  so  unequal  as  to  render
the  counting  useless.  Nor  should  any  other
kind  of  division  be  ever  admitted  on  such
occasions.”

The  usual  mode  of  putting  the  question  is
for  the  presiding  officer  to  say:  “So  many
as  are  in  favor  will  signify  the  same  by  the
usual  sign  of  the  Order,”  and  then,  when
those  votes  have  been  counted,  to  say  :  “  So
many  as  are  of  a  contrary  opinion  will  sig¬


nify  the  same  by  the  same  sign.”  The  vote3
are  now  counted  by  the  Senior  Deacon  in  a
subordinate  Lodge,  and  by  the  Senior  Grand
Deacon  in  a  Grand  Lodge,  it  having  been
found  inconvenient  for  the  Grand  W  ardens
to  perform  that  duty.  The  number  of  votes
on  each  side  is  communicated  by  the  Dea¬
con  to  the  presiding  officer,  who  announces
the  result.

The  same  method  of  voting  should  be
observed  in  all  Masonic  bodies.

Voling,  Right,  of.  Formerly,  all
members  of  the  Craft,  even  Entered  Ap¬
prentices,  were  permitted  to  vote.  This
was  distinctly  prescribed  in  the  last  of  the
Thirty-nine  General  Regulations  adopted
in  1721.  But  the  numerical  strength  of
the  Order,  which  was  then  in  the  first  de¬
gree,  having  now  passed  over  to  the  third,
the  modern  rule  is  that  the  right  of  voting
shall  be  restricted  to  Master  Masons.  A
Master  Mason  may,  therefore,  speak  and
vote  on  all  questions,  except  in  trials  where
he  is  himself  concerned  as  accuser  or  de¬
fendant.  Yet  by  special  regulation  of  his
Lodge  he  may  be  prevented  from  voting  on
ordinary  questions  where  his  dues  for  a  cer¬
tain  period  —  generally  twelve  months  —
have  not  been  paid  ;  and  such  a  regulation
exists  in  almost  every  Lodge.  But  no
local  by-law  can  deprive  a  member,  who  has
not  been  suspended,  from  voting  on  the
ballot  for  the  admission  of  candidates,  be¬
cause  the  sixth  regulation  of  1721  dis¬
tinctly  requires  that  each  member  present
on  such  occasion  shall  give  his  consent  be¬
fore  the  candidate  can  be  admitted.  And
if  a  member  were  deprived  by  any  by-law
of  the  Lodge,  in  consequence  of  non-pay¬
ment  of  his  dues,  of  the  right  of  express¬
ing  his  consent  or  dissent,  the  ancient  reg¬
ulation  would  be  violated,  and  a  candidate
might  be  admitted  without  the  unanimous
consent  of  all  the  members  present.  And
this  rule  is  so  rigidly  enforced,  that  on  a
ballot  for  initiation  no  member  can  be  ex¬
cused  from  voting.  He  must  assume  the
responsibility  of  casting  his  vote,  lest  it
should  afterwards  be  said  that  the  candi¬
date  was  not  admitted  by  unanimous  con¬
sent.

Vouching.  It  is  a  rule  in  Masonry,
that  a  Lodge  may  dispense  with  the  exami¬
nation  of  a  visitor,  if  any  brother  present
will  vouch  that  he  possesses  the  necessary
qualifications.  This  is  an  important  pre¬
rogative  that  every  Mason  is  entitled  to  ex¬
ercise;  and  yet  it  is  one  which  may  so
materially  affect  the  well-being  of  the
whole  Fraternity,  since,  by  its  injudicious
use,  impostors  might  be  introduced  among
the  faithful,  that  it  should  be  controlled  by
the  most  stringent  regulations.

To  vouch  for  one  is  to  bear  witness  for


862


VOUCHING


VOUCHING


him,  and  in  witnessing  to  truth,  every  cau¬
tion  should  be  observed,  lest  falsehood  may
cunningly  assume  its  garb.  The  brother
who  vouches  should  know  to  a  certainty
that  the  one  for  whom  he  vouches  is  really
what  he  claims  to  be.  He  should  know
this,  not  from  a  casual  conversation,  nor  a
loose  and  careless  inquiry,  but  from  “  sttdct
trial,  due  examination,  or  lawful  informa¬
tion."  These  are  the  three  requisites  which
the  ritual  has  laid  down  as  essentially
necessary  to  authorize  the  act  of  vouch¬
ing.  Let  us  inquire  into  the  import  of
each.

1.  Strict  Trial.  By  this  is  meant  that
every  question  is  to  be  asked,  and  every
answer  demanded,  which  is  necessary  to
convince  the  examiner  that  the  party  ex¬
amined  is  acquainted  with  what  he  ought
to  know,  to  entitle  him  to  the  appellation
of  a  brother.  Nothing  is  to  be  taken  for
granted  —  categorical  answers  must  be  re¬
turned  to  all  that  it  is  deemed  important  to
be  asked;  no  forgetfulness  is  to  be  excused;
nor  is  the  want  of  memory  to  be  considered
as  a  valid  reason  for  the  want  of  knowledge.
The  Mason  who  is  so  unmindful  of  his  ob¬
ligations  as  to  have  forgotten  the  instruc¬
tions  he  has  received,  must  pay  the  penalty
of  his  carelessness,  and  be  deprived  of  his
contemplated  visit  to  that  society  whose
secret  modes  of  recognition  he  has  so  little
valued  as  not  to  have  treasured  them  in  his
memory.  The  “strict  trial”  refers  to  the
matter  which  is  sought  to  be  obtained  by
inquiry ;  and  while  there  are  some  things
which  may  safely  be  passed  over  in  the  in¬
vestigation  of  one  who  confesses  himself  to
be  “  rusty,”  because  they  are  details  which
require  much  study  to  acquire  and  constant
practice  to  retain,  there  are  still  other
things  of  great  importance  which  must  be
rigidly  demanded.

2.  Due  examination.  If  “  strict  trial  ”
refers  to  the  inatter,  “due  examination”
alludes  to  the  mode  of  investigation.  This
must  be  conducted  with  all  the  necessary
forms  and  antecedent  cautions.  Inquiries
should  be  made  as  to  the  time  and  place  of
initiation  as  a  preliminary  step,  the  Tiler’s
OB.  of  course  never  being  omitted.  Then
the  good  old  rule  of  “  commencing  at  the
beginning”  should  be  pursued.  Let  every
thing  go  on  in  regular  course ;  nor  is  it  to
be  supposed  that  the  information  sought
was  originally  received.  Whatever  be  the
suspicions  of  imposture,  let  no  expression
of  those  suspicions  be  made  until  the  final
decree  for  rejection  is  uttered.  And  let
that  decree  be  uttered  in  general  terms,
such  as,  “  I  am  not  satisfied,”  or  “  I  do  not
recognize  you,”  and  not  in  more  specific
language,  such  as,  “You  did  not  answer
this-  inquiry,”  or  “  You  are  ignorant  on  i


that  point.”  The  candidate  for  examina¬
tion  is  only  entitled  to  know  that  he  ha3
not  complied  generally  with  the  requisi¬
tions  of  his  examiner.  To  descend  to  par¬
ticulars  is  always  improper,  and  often  dan¬
gerous.  Above  all,  never  ask  what  the
lawyers  call  “  leading  questions,”  which  in¬
clude  in  themselves  the  answer,  nor  in  any
way  aid  the  memory,  or  prompt  the  forget¬
fulness  of  the  party  examined,  by  the
slightest  hints.

3.  Lawful  information.  This  authority
for  vouching  is  dependent  on  what  has  been
already  described.  For  no  Mason  can  law¬
fully  give  information  of  another’s  quali¬
fications  unless  he  has  himself  actually
tested  him.  But  it  is  not  every  Mason  who
is  competent  to  give  “  lawful  information.”
Ignorant  or  unskilful  brethren  cannot  do
so,  because  they  are  incapable  of  discover¬
ing  truth  or  of  detecting  error.  A  “  rusty
Mason  ”  should  never  attempt  to  examine
a  stranger,  and  certainly,  if  he  does,  his
opinion  as  to  the  result  is  worth  nothing.
If  the  information  given  is  on  the  ground
that  the  party  who  is  vouched  for  has  been
seen  sitting  in  a  Lodge,  care  must  be  taken
to  inquire  if  it  was  a  “just  and  legally  con¬
stituted  Lodge  of  Master  Masons.”  A
person  may  forget  from  the  lapse  of  time,
and  vouch  for  a  stranger  as  a  Master
Mason,  when  the  Lodge  in  which  he  saw
him  was  only  opened  in  the  first  or  second
degree.  Information  given  by  letter,  or
through  a  third  party,  is  irregular.  The
person  giving  the  information,  the  one  re¬
ceiving  it,  and  the  one  of  whom  it  is  given,
should  all  be  present  at  the  time,  for  other¬
wise  there  would  be  no  certainty  of  iden¬
tity.  The  information  must  be  positive,
not  founded  on  belief  or  opinion,  but  de¬
rived  from  a  legitimate  source.  And,
lastly,  it  must  not  have  been  received  cas¬
ually,  but  for  the  very  purpose  of  being
used  for  Masonic  purposes.  For  one  to  say
to  another,  in  the  course  of  a  desultory
conversation,  “A.  B.  is  a  Mason,”  is  not
sufficient.  He  may  not  be  speaking  with
due  caution,  under  the  expectation  that  his
words  will  be  considered  of  weight.  He
must  say  something  to  this  effect,  “I  know
this  man  to  be  a  Master  Mason,  for  such  or
such  reasons,  and  you  may  safely  recognize
him  as  such.”  This  alone  will  insure  the
necessary  care  and  proper  observance  of
prudence.

Lastly,  never  should  an  unjustifiable  deli¬
cacy  weaken  the  rigor  of  these  rules.  For
the  wisest  and  most  evident  reasons,  that
merciful  maxim  of  the  law,  which  says
that  it  is  better  that  ninety-nine  guilty
men  should  escape  than  that  one  innocent
man  should  be  punished,  is  with  us  re¬
versed;  so  that  in  Masonry  it  is  better  that


VOYAGES


WAGES


863


ninety  and  nine  true  men  should  he  turned
away  from  the  door  of  a  Lodge,  than  that
one  cowan  should  be  admitted.

Voyages.  The  French  Masons  thus
call  some  of  the  proofs  and  trials  to  which
a  candidate  is  subjected  in  the  course  of
initiation  into  any  of  the  degrees.  In  the
French  Rite,  the  voyages  in  the  symbolic
degrees  are  three  in  the  first,  five  in  the
second,  and  seven  in  the  third.  Their
symbolic  designs  are  thus  briefly  explained
by  Ragon  ( Cours  des  Init.,  pp.  90,  132,)  and
Lenoir,  (La  Franche-Maqonnerie,  p.  263 :)


The  voyages  of  the  Entered  Apprentice
are  now,  as  they  were  in  the  Ancient  Mys¬
teries,  the  symbol  of  the  life  of  man.
Those  of  the  Fellow  Craft  are  emblematic
of  labor  in  search  of  knowledge.  Those  of
the  Master  Mason  are  symbolic  of  the
pursuit  of  crime,  the  wandering  life  of
the  criminal,  and  his  vain  attempts  to  es¬
cape  remorse  and  punishment.  It  will  be
evident  that  the  ceremonies  in  all  the
Rites  of  Masonry,  although  under  a  dif¬
ferent  name,  lead  to  the  same  symbolic  re¬
sults.


w.


W.*.  An  abbreviation  of  Worshipful,
of  West,  of  Warden,  and  of  Wisdom.

Waecliter,  Eberhard,  Baron

Von.  Lord  of  the  Chamber  to  the  king
of  Denmark,  and  Danish  Ambassador  at
Ratisbon ;  was  born  in  1747.  He  was  at
one  time  a  very  active  member  of  the  Rite
of  Strict  Observance,  where  he  bore  the
characteristic  name  of  Eques  a  ceraso,  and
had  been  appointed  Chancellor  of  the  Ger¬
man  Priories  of  the  7th  Province.  When
the  spiritual  schism  of  the  Order  made  its
vast  pretensions  to  a  secret  authority  derived
from  unknown  superiors,  whose  names  they
refused  to  divulge,  Von  W'achter  was  sent
to  Italy  by  the  old  Scottish  Lodge  of  which
Duke  Ferdinand  was  Grand  Master,  that
he  might  obtain  some  information  from  the
Pretender,  and  from  other  sources,  as  to  the
true  character  of  the  Rite.  Von  W'achter
was  unsuccessful,  and  the  intelligence  which
he  brought  back  to  Germany  was  unfavor¬
able  to  Von  Hund,  and  increased  the  em¬
barrassments  of  the  Strict  Observance
Lodges.  But  he  himself  lost  reputation.
A  host  of  enemies  attacked  him.  Some
declared  that  while  in  Italy  he  had  made
a  traffic  of  Masonry  to  enrich  himself;
others  that  he  had  learned  and  was  practis¬
ing  magic;  and  others  again  that  he  had
secretly  attached  himself  to  the  Jesuits.
Von  W'achter  stoutly  denied  these  charges;
but  it  is  certain  that,  from  being  in  very
moderate  circumstances,  he  had,  after  his
return  from  Italy,  become  suddenly  and
unaccountably  rich.  Yet  Mossdorf  says
that  he  discharged  his  mission  with  great
delicacy  and  judgment.  Thory,  quoting
the  Beytrag  zur  neuesten  Geschicte,  (p.  150,)
says  that  in  1782  he  proposed  to  give  a
new  organization  to  the  Templar  system  of


Masonry,  on  the  ruins,  perhaps,  of  both
branches  of  the  Strict  Observance,  and
declared  that  he  possessed  the  true  secrets
of  the  Order.  His  proposition  for  a  reform
was  not  accepted  by  the  German  Masons,
because  they  suspected  that  he  was  an
agent  of  the  Jesuits.  Kloss  (Bibliog.,  No.
622'5)  gives  the  title  of  a  work  published  by
him  in  1822  as  Worte  der  Wahrheit  an  die
Menschen,  meine  Briider.  He  died  May  25,
1825,  one,  perhaps,  of  the  last  actors  in  the
great  Masonic  drama  of  the  Strict  Observ¬
ance.

Wages  of  a  Master  Mason,  Sym¬
bolic.  See  Foreign  Countries.

Wages  of  Operative  Masons.

In  all  the  Old  Constitutions  praise  is  given
to  St.  Alban  because  he  raised  the  wages
of  the  Masons.  Thus  the  Edinburgh-
Kilwinning  MS.  says:  “St.  Albans  loved
Masons  well,  and  cherished  them  much,
and  made  their  pay  right  good,  standing
by  as  the  realme  did,  for  he  gave  them  iis.
a  week,  and  3 d.  to  their  cheer ;  for  before
that  time,  through  all  the  land,  a  Mason
had  but  a  penny  a  day  and  his  meat,  until
St.  Alban  amended  it.”  We  may  compare
this  rate  of  wages  in  the  third  century  with
that  of  the  fifteenth,  and  we  will  be  sur-

frised  at  the  little  advance  that  was  made,
n  Grosse  and  Astle’s  Antiquarian  Repertory
(iii.,  p.  58,)  will  be  found  an  extract  from
the  Roles  of  Parliament,  which  contains  a
petition,  in  the  year  1443,  to  Parliament  to
regulate  the  price  of  labor.  In  it  are  the
following  items:  “And  y*  from  the  Fest
of  Ester  unto  Mighelmasse  y*  wages  of  eny
free  Mason  or  maister  carpenter  exceed  not
by  the  day  iiiid.,  with  mete  and  drynk,  and
withoute  mete  and  drink  yd.,  ob.

“A  Maister  Tyler  or  Sclatter,  rough  ma-


864


WAGES


WAGES


son  and  meen  carpenter,  and  other  artifi¬
cers  concernyng  beldyng,  by  the  day  iii d.,
with  mete  and  drynk,  and  withoute  mete
and  drynke,  iiid.,  ob.

“And  from  the  Fest  of  Mighelmasse
unto  Ester,  a  free  Mason  and  a  maister
carpenter  by  the  day  iiicf.,  with  mete  and
drynk,  withoute  mete  and  drink,  iiic?.,  ob.

“Tyler,  meen  carpenter,  rough  mason,
and  other  artificers  aforesaid,  by  the  day
ii d.,  ob,  with  mete  and  drynk,  withoute
mete  and  drynk  iiiic?.,  and  every  other
werkeman  and  laborer  by  the  day  id.,  ob,
with  mete  and  drynk,  and  withoute  mete
and  drink  iiid.,  and  who  that  lasse  deserveth,
to  take  lasse.”

Wages  of  the  Workmen  at  the
Temple.  Neither  the  Scriptures,  nor
Josephus,  give  us  any  definite  statement
of  the  amount  of  wages  paid,  nor  the  man¬
ner  in  which  they  were  paid,  to  the  work¬
men  who  were  engaged  in  the  erection  of
King  Solomon’s  Temple.  The  cost  of  its
construction,  however,  must  have  been  im¬
mense,  since  it  has  been  estimated  that  the
edifice  alone  consumed  more  gold  and  silver
than  at  present  exists  upon  the  whole
earth;  so  that  Josephus  very  justly  says
that  “Solomon  made  all  these  things  for
the  honor  of  God,  with  great  variety  and
magnificence,  sparing  no  cost,  but  using
all  possible  liberality  in  adorning  the  Tem-

f>le.”  We  learn,  as  one  instance  of  this
iberality,  from  the  2d  Book  of  Chronicles,
that  Solomon  paid  annually  to  the  Tyrian
Masons,  the  servants  of  Hiram,  “twenty
thousand  measures  of  beaten  wheat,  and
twenty  thousand  measures  of  barley,  and
twenty  thousand  baths  of  wTine,  and  twenty
thousand  baths  of  oil.”  The  bath  was  a
measure  equal  to  seven  and  a  half  gallons
wine  measure ;  and  the  cor  or  chomer,  which
we  translate  by  the  indefinite  word  measure,
contained  ten  baths ;  so  that  the  corn,  wine,
and  oil  furnished  by  King  Solomon,  as
wages  to  the  servants  of  Hiram  of  Tyre,
amounted  to  one  hundred  and  ninety
thousand  bushels  of  the  first,  and  one
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  gallons  each
of  the  second  and  third.  The  sacred  rec¬
ords  do  not  inform  us  what  further  wages
they  received,  but  we  elsewhere  learn  that
King  Solomon  gave  them  as  a  free  gift  a
sum  equal  to  more  than  thirty-two  millions
of  dollars.  The  whole  amount  of  wages
paid  to  the  craft  is  stated  to  have  been
about  six  hundred  and  seventy-two  mil¬
lions  of  dollars;  but  we  have  no  means  of
knowing  how  that  amount  was  distributed;
though  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  those
of  the  most  skill  and  experience  received
the  highest  wages.  The  Harodim,  or  chiefs
of  the  workmen,  must  have  been  better
paid  than  the  Ish  Sabal,  or  mere  laborers.


The  legend-makers  of  Masonry  have  not
been  idle  in  their  invention  of  facts  and
circumstances  in  relation  to  this  subject,  the
whole  of  which  have  little  more  for  a  foun¬
dation  than  the  imaginations  of  the  in¬
ventors.  They  form,  however,  a  part  of  the
legendary  history  of  Masonry,  and  are  in¬
teresting  for  their  ingenuity,  and  sometimes
even  for  their  absurdity.

There  was  an  old  tradition  among  the
English  Masons,  that  the  men  were  paid
in  their  Lodges  by  shekels,  —  a  silver  coin
of  about  the  value  of  fifty  cents,  —  and  that
the  amount  was  regulated  by  the  square  of
the  number  of  the  degree  that  the  workman
had  attained.  Thus,  the  Entered  Appren¬
tice  received  one  shekel  per  day ;  the
Fellow  Craft,  who  had  advanced  to  the
second  degree,  received  the  square  of  2,  or
2x2  =  4  shekels;  and  the  Mark  Man,  or
third  degree,  received  the  square  of  3,  or
3x3  =  9  shekels ;  whilst  the  ninth  degree,
or  Super  Excellent  Mason,  received  the
square  of  9,  or  9  X  9  =  81  shekels.

According  to  this  tradition  the  pay-roll
would  be  as  follows:


Shekel.


An  Entered  Apprentice  received  1
A  Fellow  Craft  “  4

=

$00  50
2  00

A  Mark  Man

9

=

4  50

A  Mark  Master  ‘

16

=

8  00

A  Master  Mason

25

=

12  50

An  Architect  ‘

36

;

18  00

A  Grand  Architect  ‘

49

■

24  50

An  Excellent  Mason  ‘

64

=

32  00

A  Super  Excellent  Mason  ‘

81

=•

40  50

But  this  calculation  seems  to  have  been
only  a  fanciful  speculation  of  some  of  our
ancient  brethren.

Other  traditions  give  a  classification  of
the  workmen  as  to  their  classes  and  the
number  of  men  in  each  class.  From  this
classification,  we  may  estimate  the  daily
expenditure  at  the  Temple,  in  the  article  of
wages,  at  the  following  amount:


Shekel!.  DoU*it.

30,000  Entered  Apprentices  received  30,000=  15.000
110,600  Fellow  Crafts  “  442,400  —  221,000

2,000  Mark  Men  “  18,000  —  9.000

1,000  Mark  Masters  “  16,000  =  8,000

3,564  Master  Masons  “  89,100  —  44,550

24  Architects  “  864  —  432

12  Grand  Architects  “  688=  294

72  Excellent  Masons  “  4,600  =  2,394

9  Super  Excellent  Masons  “  729  —  364


Prideaux  says  that  King  David  had  laid
up  for  the  building  of  the  Temple  immense
quantities  of  gold,  silver,  copper,  iron,  and
other  materials,  to  the  amount  of  £800,000,-
000,  or  in  round  numbers  about  four  thou¬
sand  million  dollars.  Now  the  daily  pay
estimated  in  the  preceding  roll,  which  is
$276,944,  would  amount  in  one  year,  de¬
ducting  Sabbaths,  to  $86,406,528,  or,  in  the
seven  years  occupied  in  building  the  Tern-


WAGES


WARDENS


865


pie,  to  $604,845,686.  A  large  amount  would
therefore  still  remain  out  of  the  four  thou¬
sand  millions  for  other  expenses.  So  that
comparing  the  estimate  of  the  tradition  with
that  of  Prideaux,  if  the  latter  be  true,  (which
is,  however,  denied  by  many  commentators,)
the  former  is  not  incredible.  But  after  all,
it  is  merely  a  legend  founded  on  a  specula¬
tion.

These  traditions  are  not  now  familiarly
known,  and  would  perhaps  be  soon  for¬
gotten,  were  it  not  that  they  have  been
preserved  by  some  of  our  writers  simply  as
antiquarian  relics  of  the  speculations  of
our  brethren  of  former  days.

The  traditions  in  reference  to  the  pay  of
the  Fellow  Crafts  have  been  preserved  in
the  ritual  of  the  Mark  Master’s  degree.

According  to  these  traditions,  there  were
two  divisions  of  the  Fellow  Crafts.  The
first,  or  higher  class,  worked  in  the  quar¬
ries,  in  finishing  the  stones,  or,  as  we  say
in  our  lectures,  “in  hewing,  squaring,  and
numbering”  them;  and,  that  each  one
might  be  enabled  to  designate  his  own
work,  he  was  in  possession  of  a  mark  which
he-placed  upon  the  stones  prepared  by  him.
Hence,  this  class  of  Fellow  Crafts  were
called  Mark  Masters,  and  received  their
pay  from  the  Senior  Grand  Warden,  whom
some  suppose  to  have  been  Adoniram,  the
brother-in-law  of  Hiram  Abif,  and  the
first  of  the  Provosts  and  Judges.  These
Fellow  Crafts  received  their  pay  in  money,
at  the  rate  of  a  half-shekel  of  silver  per
day,  equal  to  about  twenty-five  cents.
They  were  paid  weekly,  at  the  sixth  hour
of  the  sixth  day  of  the  week,  that  is  to  say
on  Friday,  at  noon.  And  this  hour  ap¬
pears  to  have  been  chosen  because,  as  wc
are  taught  in  the  third  degree,  at  noon,  or
high  twelve,  the  Craft  were  always  called
from  labor  to  refreshment,  and  hence  the
payment  of  their  wages  at  that  hour  would
not  interfere  with  or  retard  the  progress
of  the  work.

But  there  was  another,  and  it  is  prob¬
able  a  larger,  class  of  Fellow  Crafts,  young¬
er  and  more  inexperienced  men,  whose
Bkill  and  knowledge  were  not  such  as  to
entitle  them  to  advancement  to  the  grade
of  Mark  Masters.  These  workmen  were
not,  therefore,  in  possession  of  a  mark.
They  proved  their  right  to  reward  by  an¬
other  token,  and  received  their  wages  in
the  middle  chamber  of  the  Temple,  and
were  paid  in  corn,  wine,  and  oil,  agreeably
to  the  stipulation  of  King  Solomon  with
Hiram  of  Tyre.

Of  course,  it  would  be  a  waste  of  words  to
attempt  to  defend  the  authenticity  of  these
legends.  Based  on  the  theory  that  Free¬
masonry,  as  now  organized,  was  existing  at
the  building  of  the  Temple  of  King  Solo-
61  66


mon,  they  pass  away  with  that  assumption.
There  is  no  countenance  of  history  about
them.  Parts  of  them  are  symbolical,  and,
as  such,  of  use.  Greater  portions  are
merely  fanciful  speculations,  indulged  in
only  to  exhibit  ingenuity  and  to  test  credu¬
lity.  Dr.  Oliver,  who  is  never  reluctant  to
accept  a  plausible  legend,  says  of  the  tra¬
dition  of  the  wages,  that  “  indeed  the  prob¬
ability  is  that  the  tradition  has  been  fabri¬
cated  in  a  subsequent  age  without  the
existence  of  any  document  to  attest  its
authenticity.”

Wales.  Anderson  says,  in  his  second
edition,  that  Grand  Master  Inchiquin
granted  a  Deputation,  May  10,  1727,  to
Hugh  Warburton,  Esq.,  to  be  Provincial
Grand  Master  of  North  Wales,  and  another,
June  24  in  the  same  year,  to  Sir  Edward
Mansel,  to  be  Provincial  Grand  Master  of
South  Wales ;  and  it  is  at  this  period  that
we  may  date  the  introduction  of  Freema¬
sonry  into  the  principality,  for  ten  years
afterwards  the  same  writer  says  that  Lodges
were  in  existence.  Wales  forms  a  part  of
the  Masonic  obedience  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England,  and  the  Fraternity  there  are
directly  governed  by  three  Provincial  Grand
Lodges.

Wands.  Oliver,  under  this  title  in  his
Dictionary,  refers  to  the  three  sceptres
which,  in  the  Royal  Arch  system  of  Eng¬
land,  are  placed  in  a  triangular  form  be¬
neath  the  canopy  in  the  East,  and  which,
being  surmounted  respectively  by  a  crown,
an  All-seeing  eye,  and  a  mitre,  refer  to  the
regal,  the  prophetical,  and  the  sacerdotal
offices.  In  his  Landmarks  he  calls  them
sceptres.  But  rod  or  wand  is  the  better
word,  because,  while  the  sceptre  is  restricted
to  the  insignia  of  kings,  the  rod  or  wand
was  and  still  is  used  as  an  indiscriminate
mark  of  authority  for  all  offices.

Wardens.  In  every  Symbolic  Lodge,
three  are  three  principal  officers,  namely,
a  Master,  a  Senior  Warden,  and  a  Junior
Warden.  This  rule  has  existed  ever  since
the  revival,  and  for  some  time  previous  to
that  event,  and  is  so  universal  that  it  has
been  considered  as  one  of  the  landmarks.
It  exists  in  every  country  and  in  every  Rite.
The  titles  of  the  officers  may  be  different
in  different  languages,  but  their  functions,
as  presiding  over  the  Lodge  in  a  tripartite
division  of  duties,  are  everywhere  the  same.
The  German  Masons  call  the  two  Wardens
erste  and  zweite  Aufseher ;  the  French,  pre¬
mier  and  second  tSurveillant ;  the  Spanish,

frrimer  and  segundo  Vigilante;  and  the
talians, ,primo  and  seconao  Sorvegliante.

In  different  Rites,  the  positions  of  these
officers  vary.  In  the  York  and  American
Rites,  the  Senior  Warden  sits  in  the  West
and  the  Junior  in  the  South.  In  the  French


866


WARDENS


WARDER


and  Scottish  Rites,  both  Wardens  are  in
the  West,  the  Senior  in  the  North-west  and
the  Junior  in  the  South-west;  but  in  all,  the
triangular  position  of  the  three  officers
relatively  to  each  other  is  preserved;  for  a
triangle  being  formed  within  the  square  of
the  Lodge,  the  Master  and  Wardens  will
each  occupy  one  of  the  three  points.

The  precise  time  when  the  presidency  of
the  Lodge  was  divided  between  these  three
officers,  or  when  they  were  first  introduced
into  Masonry,  is  unknown.  The  Lodges  of
Scotland,  during  the  Operative  regime,
were  governed  by  a  Deacon  and  one  War¬
den.  The  Deacon  performed  the  functions
of  a  Master,  and  the  Warden  was  the  sec¬
ond  officer,  and  took  charge  of  and  distrib¬
uted  the  funds.  In  other  words,  he  acted
as  a  treasurer.  This  is  evident  from  the
minutes  of  the  Edinburgh  Lodge,  recently
published  by  Bro.  Lyon.  But  the  head  of
the  Craft  in  Scotland  at  the  same  time  was
called  the  Warden  General.  This  regula¬
tion,  however,  does  not  appear  to  have  been
universal  even  in  Scotland,  for  in  the  “Mark
Book”  of  the  Aberdeen  Lodge,  under  date
of  December  27, 1670,  which  was  published
by  Bro.  W.  J.  Hughan  in  the  Voice  of  Ma¬
sonry ,  (Feb.,  1872,)  we  find  there  a  Master
and  Warden  recognized  as  the  presiding
officers  of  the' Lodge  in  the  following  stat¬
ute  :  “  And  lykwayse  we  all  protest,  by  the
oath  we  have  made  at  our  entrie,  to  own
the  Warden  of  our  Lodge  as  the  next  man
in  power  to  the  Maister,  and  in  the  Mas¬
ter’s  absence  he  is  full  Maister.”

Some  of  the  English  manuscript  Consti¬
tutions  recognize  the  offices  of  Master  and
Wardens.  Thus  the  Harleian  MS.,  No.
1942,  whose  date  is  supposed  to  be  about
1670,  contains  the  “  new  articles  ”  said  to
have  been  agreed  on  at  a  General  Assembly
held  in  1663,  in  which  is  the  following  pas¬
sage  :  “  That  for  the  future  the  sayd  Society,
Company  and  Fraternity  of  Free  Masons
shal  bee  regulated  and  governed  by  one
Master  &  Assembly  &  Wardens,  as  ye  said
Company  shall  think  fit  to  chose,  at  every
yearelv  General  Assembly.”

As  the  word  “Warden”  does  not  appear
in  the  earlier  manuscripts,  it  might  be  con¬
cluded  that  the  office  was  not  introduced
into  the  English  Lodges  until  the  latter
part  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Yet  this
does  not  absolutely  follow.  For  the  office
of  Warden  might  have  existed,  and  no
statutory  provision  on  the  subject  have
been  embraced  in  the  general  charges  which
are  contained  in  those  manuscripts,  because
they  relate  not  to  the  government  of  Lodges,
but  the  duties  of  Masons.  This,  of  course,
is  conjectural ;  but  the  conjecture  derives
weight  from  the  fact  that  Wardens  were
officers  of  the  English  gilds  as  early  as  the


fourteenth  century.  In  the  Charters  granted
by  Edward  III.,  in  1354,  it  is  permitted
that  these  companies  shall  yearly  elect  for
their  government  “a  certain  number  of
Wardens.”  To  a  list  of  the  companies  of
the  date  of  1377  is  affixed  what  is  called
the  “Oath  of  the  Wardens  of  Crafts,”  of
which  this  is  the  commencement:  “  Yeshall
swere  that  ye  shall  wele  and  treuly  oversee

the  Craft  of - whereof  ye  be  chosen

Wardeyns  for  the  year.”  It  thus  appears
that  the  Wardens  were  at  first  the  presiding
officers  of  the  gilds.  At  a  later  period,  in
the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  we  find  that  the
chief  officer  began  to  be  called  Master;  and
in  the  time  of  James  I.,  between  1603  and
1625,  the  gilds  were  generally  governed  by
a  Master  and  Wardens.  An  ordinance  of
the  Leather-Sellers  Company  at  that  time
directed  that  on  a  certain  occasion  “the
Master  and  Wardens  shall  appear  in  state.”
It  is  not,  therefore,  improbable  that  the
government  of  Masonic  Lodges  by  a  Master
and  two  Wardens  was  introduced  into  the
regulations  of  the  Order  in  the  seventeenth
century,  the  “new  article”  of  1663  being
a  statutory  confirmation  of  a  custom  which
had  just  begun  to  prevail.

Senior  Warden.  He  is  the  second  officer
in  a  Symbolic  Lodge,  and  governs  the
Craft  in  the  hours  of  labor.  In  the  absence
of  the  Master  he  presides  over  the  Lodge,
appointing  some  brother,  not  the  Junior
Warden,  to  occupy  his  place  in  the  west.
His  jewel  is  a  level,  a  symbol  of  the  equality
which  exists  among  the  Craft  while  at
labor  in  the  Lodge.  His  seat  is  in  the
west,  and  he  represents  the  column  of
Strength.  He  has  placed  before  him,  and
carries  in  all  processions,  a  column,  which
is  the  representative  of  the  right-hand
pillar  that  stood  at  the  porch  of  King
Solomon’s  Temple.  The  Junior  Warden
has  a  similar  column,  which  represents  the
left-hand  pillar.  During  labor  the  column
of  the  Senior  Warden  is  erect  in  the  Lodge,
while  that  of  the  Junior  is  recumbent.  At
refreshment,  the  position  of  the  two  columns
is  reversed.

Junior  Warden.  The  duties  of  this  officer
have  already  been  described.  See  Junior
Warden.

There  is  also  an  officer  in  a  Commandery
of  Knights  Templars,  the  fifth  in  rank,  who
is  styled  “Senior  Warden.”  He  takes  an
important  part  in  the  initiation  of  a  can¬
didate.  His  jewel  of  office  is  a  triple  tri¬
angle,  the  emblem  of  Deity.

Wardens,  Grand.  See  Grand

Wardens.

Warder.  The  literal  meaning  of
Warder  is  one  who  keeps  watch  and  ward.
In  the  Middle  Ages,  the  Warder  was  sta¬
tioned  at  the  gate  or  on  the  battlements


WARLIKE


WAR


867


of  the  castle,  and  with  his  trumpet  sounded
alarms  and  announced  the  approach  of  all
comers.  Hence  the  Warder  in  a  Com-
mandery  of  Knights  Templars  bears  a
trumpet,  and  his  duties  are  prescribed  to
be  to  announce  the  approach  and  departure
of  the  Eminent  Commander,  to  post  the
sentinels,  and  see  that  the  Asylum  is  duly
guarded,  as  well  as  to  announce  the  ap¬
proach  of  visitors.  His  jewel  is  a  trumpet
and  crossed  swords  engraved  on  a  square
plate.

Warlike  Instrument.  In  the  an¬
cient  initiations,  the  aspirant  was  never
permitted  to  enter  on  the  threshold  of  the
Temple  in  which  the  ceremonies  were  con¬
ducted  until,  by  the  most  solemn  warning,
he  had  been  impressed  with  the  necessity
of  secrecy  and  caution.  The  use,  for  this
purpose,  of  a  “warlike  instrument”  in  the
first  degree  of  Masonry,  is  intended  to  pro¬
duce  the  same  effect.  A  sword  has  always
been  employed  for  that  purpose;  and  the
substitute  of  the  point  of  the  compasses,
taken  from  the  altar  at  the  time,  is  an  ab¬
surd  sacrifice  of  symbolism  to  the  conve¬
nience  of  the  Senior  Deacon.  The  com¬
passes  are  peculiar  to  the  third  degree.  In
the  earliest  rituals  of  the  last  century  it  is
said  that  the  entrance  is  “upon  the  point
of  a  sword,  or  spear,  or  some  warlike  in¬
strument.”  Krause,  ( Kunsturk .,  ii.  142,)  in
commenting  on  this  expression,  has  com¬
pletely  misinterpreted  its  signification.  He
supposes  that  the  sword  was  intended  as  a
sign  of  jurisdiction  now  assumed  by  the
Lodge.  But  the  real  object  of  the  cere¬
mony  is  to  teach  the  neophyte  that  as  the
sword  or  warlike  instrument  will  wound  or
prick  the  flesh,  so  will  the  betrayal  of  a
trust  confided  wound  or  prick  the  con¬
science  of  him  who  betrays  it.

War,  Masonry  in.  The  question
how  Masons  should  conduct  themselves  in
time  of  war,  when  their  own  country  is
one  of  the  belligerents,  is  an  important  one.
Of  the  political  course  of  a  Mason  in  his
individual  and  private  capacity  there  is  no
doubt.  The  Charges  declare  that  he  must
be  “a  peaceable  subject  to  the  civil  powers,
and  never  be  concerned  in  plots  and  con¬
spiracies  against  the  peace  and  welfare  of
the  nation.”  But  so  anxious  is  the  Order  to
be  unembarrassed  by  all  political  influences,
that  treason,  however  discountenanced  by
the  Craft,  is  not  held  as  a  crime  which  is
amenable  to  Masonic  punishment.  For
the  same  charge  affirms  that  “  if  a  brother
should  be  a  rebel  against  the  State,  he  is
not  to  be  countenanced  in  his  rebellion,
however  he  may  he  pitied  as  an  unhappy
man;  and  if  convicted  of  no  other  crime,
though  the  loyal  brotherhood  must  and
ought  to  disown  his  rebellion  and  give  no


umbrage  or  ground  of  political  jealousy  to
the  government  for  the  time  being,  they
cannot  expel  him  from  the  Lodge,  and  his
relation  to  it  remains  indefeasible.”

The  Mason,  then,  like  every  other  citizen,
should  be  a  patriot.  He  should  love  his
country  with  all  his  heart;  should  serve  it
faithfully  and  cheerfully;  obey  its  laws  in
peace;  and  in  war  should  be  ever  ready  to
support  its  honor  and  defend  it  from  the
attacks  of  its  enemies.  But  even  then  the
benign  principles  of  the  Institution  ex¬
tend  their  influence,  and  divest  the  contest
of  many  of  its  horrors.  The  Mason  fights,
of  course,  like  every  other  man,  for  victory  ;
but  when  the  victory  is  won,  he  will  re¬
member  that  the  conquered  foe  is  still  his
brother.

On  the  occasion,  many  years  ago,  of  a
Masonic  banquet  given  immediately  after
the  close  of  the  Mexican  war  to  Gen.  Quit-
man  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Caro¬
lina,  that  distinguished  soldier  and  Mason
remarked  that,  although  he  had  devoted
much  of  his  attention  to  the  nature  and
character  of  the  Masonic  institution,  and
had  repeatedly  held  the  highest  offices  in
the  gift  of  his  brethren,  he  had  never  really
known  what  Masonry  was  until  he  had  seen
its  workings  on  the  field  of  battle.

But  as  a  collective  and  organized  body—'
in  its  Lodges  and  its  Grand  Lodges — it  must
have  nothing  to  do  with  war.  It  must  be
silent  and  neutral.  The  din  of  the  battle,
the  cry  for  vengeance,  the  shout  of  vic¬
tory,  must  never  penetrate  its  portals.  Its
dogmas  and  doctrines  all  teach  love  and
fraternity;  its  symbols  are  symbols  of
peace;  and  it  has  no  place  in  any  of  its
rituals  consecrated  to  the  inculcation  of
human  contention.

Bro.  C.  W.  Moore,  in  his  Biography  of
Thomas  Smith  Webb,  the  great  American
ritualist,  mentions  a  circumstance  which
occurred  during  the  period  in  which  Webb
presided  over  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Rhode
Island,  and  to  which  Moore,  I  think,  in¬
considerately  has  given  his  hearty  com¬
mendation.

The  United  States  was  at  that  time  en¬
gaged  in  a  war  with  England.  The  people
of  Providence  having  commenced  the  erec¬
tion  of  fortifications,  the  Grand  Lodge
volunteered  its  services;  and  the  members,
marching  in  procession  as  a  Grand  Lodge
to  the  southern  part  of  the  town,  erected  a
breastwork,  to  which  was  given  the  name
of  Fort  Hiram.  I  doubt  the  propriety  of
the  act.  While  (to  repeat  what  has  been
just  said)  every  individual  member  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  as  a  Mason,  was  bound,  by  his
obligation  to  be  “true  to  his  government,”
and  to  defend  it  from  the  attacks  of  its
enemies,  it  was,  I  think,  unseemly,  and


868


WARRANT


WARRANT


contrary  to  the  peaceful  spirit  of  the  Insti¬
tution,  for  any  organized  body  of  Masons,
organized  as  such,  to  engage  in  a  warlike
enterprise.  But  the  patriotism,  if  not  the
prudence  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  cannot  be
denied.

Since  writing  this  paragraph,  I  have
met  in  Bro.  Murray  Lyon’s  History  of  the
Lodge  of  Edinburgh  (p.  83)  with  a  record
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  a  century
ago,  which  sustains  the  view  that  I  have
taken.  In  1777,  recruits  were  being  en¬
listed  in  Scotland  for  the  British  army,
which  was  to  fight  the  Americans  in  the
war  of  the  Revolution,  which  had  just
begun.  Many  of  the  Scotch  Lodges  offered,
through  the  newspapers,  bounties  to  all
who  should  enlist.  But  on  February  2, 1778,
the  Grand  Lodge  passed  a  resolution,  which
was  published  on  the  12th,  through  the
Grand  Secretary,  in  the  following  circular:

“  At  a  quarterly  meeting  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland,  held  here  the  second
instant,  I  received  a  charge  to  acquaint  all
the  Lodges  of  Scotland  holding  of  the
Grand  Lodge  that  the  Grand  Lodge  has
seen  with  concern  advertisements  in  the ,
ublic  newspapers,  from  different  Lodges  in
cotland,  not  only  offering  a  bounty  to  re¬
cruits  who  may  enlist  in  the  new  levies,
but  with  the  addition  that  all  such  recruits
shall  be  admitted  to  the  freedom  of  Ma¬
sonry.  The  first  of  these  they  consider  as
an  improper  alienation  of  the  funds  of  the
Lodge  from  the  support  of  their  poor  and
distressed  brethren ;  and  the  second  they
regard  as  a  prostitution  of  our  Order,
which  demands  the  reprehension  of  the
Grand  Lodge.  Whatever  share  the  brethren
may  take  as  individuals  in  aiding  these
levies,  out  of  zeal  to  serve  their  private
friends  or  to  promote  the  public  service,
the  Grand  Lodge  considered  it  to  be  re¬
pugnant  to  the  spirit  of  our  Craft  that
any  Lodge  should  take  a  part  in  such  a
business  as  a  collective  body.  For  Ma¬
sonry  is  an  Order  of  Peace,  and  it  looks  on
all  mankind  to  be  brethren  as  Masons,
whether  they  be  at  peace  or  at  war  with
each  other  as  subjects  of  contending  coun¬
tries.  The  Grand  Lodge  therefore  strongly
enjoins  that  the  practice  may  be  forthwith
discontinued.  By  order  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland.  W.  Mason,  Gr.  Sec.”

Of  all  human  institutions,  Freemasonry
is  the  greatest  and  purest  Peace  Society.
And  this  is  because  its  doctrine  of  univer¬
sal  peace  is  founded  on  the  doctrine  of  a
universal  brotherhood.

Warrant  of  Constitution.  The
document  which  authorizes  or  gives  a  War¬
rant  to  certain  persons  therein  named  to
organize  and  constitute  a  Lodge,  Chapter,
or  other  Masonic  body,  and  which  ends


usually  with  the  formula,  “for  which  this
shall  be  your  sufficient  warrant.”

The  practice  of  granting  Warrants  for
the  constitution  of  Lodges,  dates  only  from
the  period  of  the  revival  of  Masonry  in
1717.  Previous  to  that  period  “a  sufficient
number  of  brethren,”  says  Preston,  (p.  182,)
“met  together  within  a  certain  district  with
the  consent  of  the  sheriff,  or  other  chief
magistrate  of  the  place,  were  empowered  to
make  Masons,  ana  practise  the  rites  of  Ma¬
sonry  without  a  Warrant  of  Constitution.”
But  in  1717  a  regulation  was  adopted  “that
the  privilege  of  assembling  as  Masons,
which  had  been  hitherto  unlimited,  should
be  vested  in  certain  Lodges  or  assemblies
of  Masons  convened  in  certain  places;  and
that  every  Lodge  to  be  hereafter  convened,
except  the  four  old  Lodges  at  this  time  ex¬
isting,  should  be  legally  authorized  to  act
by  a  Warrant  from  the  Grand  Master,  for
the  time  being,  granted  to  certain  individ¬
uals  by  petition,  with  the  consent  and  ap¬
probation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  commu¬
nication;  and  that  without  such  Warrant
no  Lodge  should  be  hereafter  deemed
regular  or  constitutional.”  And  conse¬
quently,  ever  since  the  adoption  of  that
regulation,  no  Lodge  has  been  regular  un¬
less  it  is  working  under  such  an  authority.
The  word  Warrant  is  appropriately  used,
because  in  its  legal  acceptation  it  means  a
document  giving  authority  to  perform  some
specified  act.

In  England,  the  Warrant  of  Constitution
emanates  from  the  Grand  Master;  in  the
United  States,  from  the  Grand  Lod^e.
Here  the  Grand  Master  grants  only  a  Dis¬
pensation  to  hold  a  Lodge,  which  may  be
revoked  or  confirmed  by  the  Grand  Lodge;
in  the  latter  case,  the  Warrant  will  then  be
issued.  The  Warrant  of  Constitution  is
granted  to  the  Master  and  Wardens,  and  to
their  successors  in  office;  it  continues  in
force  only  during  the  pleasure  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  may,  therefore,  at  any  time  be
revoked,  and  the  Lodge  dissolved  by  a  vote
of  that  body,  or  it  may  be  temporarily  ar¬
rested  or  suspended  by  an  edict  of  the
Grand  Master.  This  will,  however,  never
be  done,  unless  the  Lodge  has  violated  the
ancient  landmarks,  or  failed  to  pay  due  re¬
spect  and  obedience  to  the  Grand  Lodge  or
to  the  Grand  Master.

When  a  Warrant  of  Constitution  is  re¬
voked  or  recalled,  the  jewels,  furniture,  and
funds  of  the  Lodge  revert  to  the  Grand
Lodge.

Lastly,  as  a  Lodge  holds  its  communica¬
tions  only  under  the  authority  of  this  War¬
rant  of  Constitution,  no  Lodge  can  be
opened,  or  proceed  to  business,  unless  it  be
present.  If  it  be  mislaid  or  destroyed,  it
must  be  recovered,  or  another  obtained;


WASHING


WASHINGTON


869


and  until  that  is  done,  the  communications
of  the  Lodge  must  be  suspended ;  and  if  the
Warrant  of  Constitution  be  taken  out  of
the  room  during  the  session  of  the  Lodge,
the  authority  of  the  Master  instantly
ceases.

Washing  Hands.  See  Lustration.

Washington,  Congress  of.  A

Congress  of  American  Masons  was  con¬
voked  at  the  city  of  Washington,  in  the
year  1822,  at  the  call  of  several  Grand
Lodges,  for  the  purpose  of  recommending
the  establishment  of  a  General  Grand
Lodge  of  the  United  States.  The  result
was  an  unsuccessful  one.

Washington,  George.  The  name
of  Washington  claims  a  place  in  Masonic
biography,  not  because  of  any  services  he
has  done  to  the  Institution  either  as  a
worker  or  a  writer,  but  because  the  fact  of
his  connection  with  the  Craft  is  a  source
of  pride  to  every  American  Mason,  at
least,  who  can  thus  call  the  “Father  of  bis
country”  a  brother.  There  is  also  another
reason.  While  the  friends  of  the  Institu¬
tion  have  felt  that  the  adhesion  to  it  of  a
man  so  eminent  for  virtue  was  a  proof  of
its  moral  and  religious  character,  the  oppo¬
nents  of  Masonry,  being  forced  to  admit
the  conclusion,  have  sought  to  deny  the
premises,  and,  even  if  compelled  to  admit
the  fact  of  Washington’s  initiation,  have
persistently  asserted  that  he  never  took  any
interest  in  it,  disapproved  of  its  spirit,  and
at  an  early  period  of  his  life  abandoned  it.
The  truth  of  history  requires  that  these
misstatements  should  be  met  by  a  brief  re¬
cital  of  his  Masonic  career.

Washington  was  initiated,  in  1752,  in  the
Lodge  at  Fredericksburg,  Virginia,  and  the
records  of  that  Lodge,  still  in  existence,
present  the  following  entries  on  the  subject.
The  first  entry  is  thus :

“Nov.  4th,  1752.  This  evening  Mr.
George  Washington  was  initiated  as  an
Entered  Apprentice;”  and  the  receipt  of
the  entrance  fee,  amounting  to  £2  3s.,  is
acknowledged.

On  the  3d  of  March  in  the  following
year,  “Mr.  George  Washington”  is  re¬
corded  as  having  been  passed  a  Fellow
Craft;  and  on  the  4th  of  the  succeeding
August,  the  record  of  the  transactions  of
the  evening  states  that  “  Mr.  George  Wash¬
ington,”  and  others  whose  names  arc  men¬
tioned,  have  been  raised  to  the  sublime
degree  of  Master  Mason.

For  five  years  after  his  initiation,  he  was
engaged  in  active  military  service,  and  it  is
not  likely  that  during  that  period  his  at¬
tendance  on  the  communications  of  the
Lodge  could  have  been  frequent.  Some
English  writers  have  asserted  that  he  was
made  a  Mason  during  the  old  French  War,


in  a  military  Lodge  attached  to  the  46th
Regiment.  The  Bible  on  which  he  is  said
to  have  been  obligated  is  still  in  existence,
although  the  Lodge  was  many  years  ago
dissolved,  at  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.  The
records  of  the  Lodge  are  or  were,  not  long
since,  extant,  and  furnish  the  evidence  that
Washington  was  there,  and  received  some
Masonic  degree.  It  is  equally  clear  that  he
was  first  initiated  in  Fredericksburg  Lodge,
for  the  record  is  still  in  possession  of  the
Lodge.

Three  methods  have  been  adopted  to
reconcile  this  apparent  discrepancy.  Bro.
Hayden,  in  his  work  on  Washington  and  his
Masonic  Compeers,  (p.  31,)  suggests  that  an
obligation  had  been  administered  to  him  as
a  test-oath  when  visiting  the  Lodge,  or  that
the  Lodge,  deeming  the  authority  under
which  he  had  been  made  insufficient,  had
required  him  to  be  healed  and  reobligated.
Neither  of  these  attempts  to  solve  the  diffi¬
culty  appears  to  have  any  plausibility.

Bro.  C.  W.  Moore,  of  Massachusetts,  in
the  Freemasons’  Monthly  Magazine,  (vol.  xi.,
p.  261,)  suggests  that,  as  it  was  then  the
custom  to  confer  the  Mark  degree  as  a  side
degree  in  Masters’  Lodges,  and  as  it  has
been  proved  that  Washington  was  in  pos¬
session  of  that  degree,  he  may  have  re¬
ceived  it  in  Lodge  No.  227,  attached  to  the
46th  Regiment.  This  certainly  presents  a
more  satisfactory  explanation  than  either
of  those  offered  by  Bro.  Hayden.

The  connection  of  Washington  with  the
British  military  Lodge  will  serve  as  some
confirmation  of  the  tradition  that  he  was
attentive  to  Masonic  duties  during  the  five
years  from  1753  to  1758,  when  he  Was  en¬
gaged  in  military  service.

There  is  ample  evidence  that  during  the
Revolutionary  War,  while  he  was  Com-
mander-in-Chief  of  the  American  armies,
he  was  a  frequent  attendant  on  the  meetings
of  military  Lodges.  A  few  years  ago,  Cap¬
tain  Hugh  Maloy,  a  revolutionary  veteran,
then  residing  in  Ohio,  declared  that  on  one
of  these  occasions  he  was  initiated  in  Wash¬
ington’s  marquee,  the  chief  himself  presid¬
ing  at  the  ceremony.  Bro.  Scott,  a  Past
Grand  Master  of  Virginia,  asserted  that
Washington  was  in  frequent  attendance  on
the  communications  of  the  brethren.  The
proposition  .made  to  elect  him  a  Grand
Master  of  the  United  States,  as  will  be
hereafter  seen,  affords  a  strong  presumption
that  his  name  as  a  Mason  had  become
familiar  to  the  Craft.

In  1777,  the  Convention  of  Virginia
Lodges  recommended  Washington  as  the
most  proper  person  to  be  elected  Grand
Master  of  the  Independent  Grand  Lodge  of
that  commonwealth.  Dove  has  given  in  his
Text- Book  the  complete  records  of  the  Con-


870


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


vention ;  and  there  is  therefore  no  doubt
that  the  nomination  was  made.  It  was,
however,  declined  by  Washington.

Soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  Revolu¬
tion,  a  disposition  was  manifested  among
American  Masons  to  dissever  their  connec¬
tion,  as  subordinates,  with  the  Masonic
authorities  of  the  mother  country,  and
in  several  of  the  newly-erected  States  the
Provincial  Grand  Lodges  assumed  an  in¬
dependent  character.  The  idea  of  a  Grand
Master  of  the  whole  of  the  United  States
had  aho  become  popular.  On  February  7,
1780,  a  convention  of  delegates  from  the
military  Lodges  in  the  army  was  holden
at  Morristown,  in  New  Jersey,  when  an
address  to  the  Grand  Masters  in  the  vari¬
ous  States  was  adopted,  recommending  the
establishment  of  “  one  Grand  Lodge  in
America,”  and  the  election  of  a  Grand
Master.  This  address  was  sent  to  the
Grand  Lodges  of  Massachusetts,  Pennsyl¬
vania,  and  Virginia;  and  although  the  name
of  Washington  is  not  mentioned  in  it,  those
Grand  Lodges  were  notified  that  he  was
the  first  choice  of  the  brethren  who  had
framed  it.

While  these  proceedings  were  in  progress,
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  had
taken  action  on  the  same  subject.  On
January  13, 1780,  it  had  held  a  session,  and
it  was  unanimously  declared  that  it  was  for
the  benefit  of  Masonry  that  “  a  Grand  Mas¬
ter  of  Masons  throughout  the  United  States”
should  be  nominated;  whereupon,  with
equal  unanimity,  Gen.  Washington  was
elected  to  the  office.  It  was  then  ordered
that  the  minutes  of  the  election  be  trans-
mittedi  to  the  different  Grand  Lodges  in
the  United  States,  and  their  concurrence
therein  be  requested.  The  Grand  Lodge
of  Massachusetts,  doubting  the  expediency
of  electing  a  General  Grand  Master,  de¬
clined  to  come  to  any  determination  on
the  question,  and  so  the  subject  was
dropped.

This  will  correct  the  error  into  which
many  foreign  Grand  Lodges  and  Masonic
writers  have  fallen,  of  supposing  that
Washington  was  ever  a  Grand  Master  of
the  United  States.  The  error  was  strength¬
ened  by  a  medal  contained  in  Merzdorf’s
Medals  of  the  Fraternity  of  Freemasons,
which  the  editor  states  was  struck  by  the
Lodges  of  Pennsylvania.  This  statement
is,  however,  liable  to  great  doubt.  The  date
of  the  medal  is  1797.  On  the  obverse  is
a  likeness  of  Washington,  with  the  device,
“  Washington,  President,  1797.”  On  the
reverse  is  a  tracing-board  and  the  device,
“  Amor,  Honor,  et  Justitia.  G.  W.,  G.  G.
M.”  French  and  German  Masonic  histo¬
rians  have  been  deceived  by  this  medal,
and  refer  to  it  as  their  authority  for  assert¬


ing  that  Washington  was  a  Grand  Master.
Lenning  and  Thory,  for  instance,  place  the
date  of  his  election  to  that  office  in  the  year
in  which  the  medal  was  struck.  More  re¬
cent  European  writers,  however,  directed
by  the  researches  of  the  American  author¬
ities,  have  discovered  and  corrected  the
mistake.

We  next  hear  of  Washington’s  official
connection  in  the  year  1788.  Lodge  No.
39,  at  Alexandria,  which  had  hitherto  been
working  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Penn¬
sylvania,  in  1788  transferred  its  allegiance
to  Virginia.  On  May  29  in  that  year  the
Lodge  adopted  the  following  resolution :

“The  Lodge  proceeded  to  the  appoint¬
ment  of  Master  and  Deputy  Master  to  be
recommended  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Vir¬
ginia,  when  George  Washington,  Esq.,
was  unanimously  chosen  Master;  Robert
McCrea,  Deputy  Master;  Wm.  Hunter,  Jr.,
Senior  Warden;  John  Allison,  Junior
Warden.”

It  was  also  ordered  that  a  committee
should  wait  on  Gen.  Washington,  “and
inquire  of  him  whether  it  will  be  agreeable
to  him  to  be  named  in  the  Charter.”  What
was  the  result  of  that  interview,  we  do  not
positively  know.  But  it  is  to  be  presumed
that  the  reply  of  Washington  was  a  favor¬
able  one,  for  the  application  for  the  Charter
contained  his  name,  which  would  hardly
have  been  inserted,  if  it  had  been  repug¬
nant  to  his  wishes.  And  the  Charter  or
Warrant  under  which  the  Lodge  is  still
working  is  granted  to  Washington  as
Master.  The  appointing  clause  is  in  the
following  words:

“  Know  ye  that  we,  Edmund  Randolph,
Esquire,  Governor  of  the  Commonwealth
aforesaid,  and  Grand  Master  of  the  Most
Ancient  and  Honorable  Society  of  Free¬
masons  within  the  same,  by  and  with  the
consent  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Virginia,
do  hereby  constitute  and  appoint  our  il¬
lustrious  and  well-beloved  Brother,  George
Washington,  Esquire,  late  General  and
Commander-in-Chief  of  the  forces  of  the
United  States  of  America,  and  our  worthy
Brethren  Robert  McCrea,  William  Hun¬
ter,  Jr.,  and  John  Allison,  Esqs.,  together
with  all  such  other  brethren  as  may  be  ad¬
mitted  to  associate  with  them,  to  be  a
‘first,  true,  and  regular  Lodge  of  Free¬
masons,  by  the  name,  title,  and  designation
of  the  Alexandria  Lodge,  No.  22.’”  In
1805,  the  Lodge,  which  is  still  in  existence,
was  permitted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  to
change  its  name  to  that  of  “  Washington
Alexandria,”  in  honor  of  its  first  Master.

The  evidence,  then,  is  clear  that  Wash¬
ington  was  the  Mast  er  of  a  Lodge.  Whether
he  ever  assumed  the  duties  of  the  office,
and,  if  he  assumed,  how  he  discharged  them.


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


871


we  know  only  from  the  testimony  of  Tim¬
othy  Bigelow,  who,  in  a  Eulogy  delivered
before  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,
two  months  after  Washington’s  death,  and
eleven  after  his  appointment  as  Master,
made  the  following  statement:

“The  information  received  from  our
brethren  who  had  the  happiness  to  be
members  of  the  Lodge  over  which  he  pre¬
sided  for  many  years,  and  of  which  he
died  the  Master,  furnishes  abundant  proof
of  his  persevering  zeal  for  the  prosperity  of
the  Institution.  Constant  and  punctual  in
his  attendance,  scrupulous  in  his  observ¬
ance  of  the  regulations  of  the  Lodge,  and
solicitous,  at  all  times,  to  communicate
light  and  instruction,  he  discharged  the
duties  of  the  Chair  with  uncommon  dig¬
nity  and  intelligence  in  all  the  mysteries
of  our  art.”

There  is  also  a  very  strong  presumption
that  Washington  accepted  and  discharged
the  duties  of  the  Chair  to  the  satisfaction
of  the  Lodge.  At  the  first  election  held
after  the  Charter  had  been  issued,  he  was
elected,  or  we  should  rather  say  re-elected,
Master.  The  record  of  the  Lodge,  under
the  date  of  December  20, 1788,  is  as  follows:

“His  Excellency,  General  Washington,
unanimously  elected  Master;  Robert  Mc-
Crea,  Senior  Warden;  Wm.  Hunter,  Jr.,
Junior  Warden;  Wm.  Hodgson,  Treasurer;
Joseph  Green  way,  Secretary;  Dr.  Frederick
Spanbergen,  Senior  Deacon ;  George  Rich¬
ards,  Junior  Deacon.”  The  subordinate
officers  had  undergone  a  change :  McCrea,
who  had  been  named  in  the  petition  as
Deputy  Master,  an  officer  not  recognized  in
this  country  was  made  Senior  Warden;
Wm.  Hunter,  who  had  been  nominated  as
Senior  Warden,  was  made  Junior  Warden;
and  the  original  Junior  Warden,  John
Allison,  was  dropped.  But  there  was  no
change  in  the  office  of  Master.  Wash¬
ington  was  again  elected.  The  Lodge
would  scarcely  have  been  so  persistent
without  his  consent;  and  if  his  consent  was
given,  we  know,  from  his  character,  that  he
would  seek  to  discharge  the  duties  of  the
office  to  his  best  abilities.  This  circum¬
stance  gives,  if  it  be  needed,  strong  confir¬
mation  to  the  statement  of  Bigelow.

But  incidents  like  these  are  not  all  that
are  left  to  us  to  exhibit  the  attachment  of
Washington  to  Masonry.  On  repeated  oc¬
casions  he  has  announced,  in  his  letters  and
addresses  to  various  Masonic  bodies,  his  pro¬
found  esteem  for  the  character,  and  his  just
appreciation  of  the  principles,  of  that  In¬
stitution  into  which,  at  so  early  an  age,  he
had  been  admitted.  And  during  his  long
and  laborious  life,  no  opportunity  was  pre¬
sented  of  which  he  did  not  avail  himself
to  evince  his  esteem  for  the  Institution.


Thus,  in  the  year  1797,  in  reply  to  an  af¬
fectionate  address  from  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Massachusetts,  he  says:  “My  attach¬
ment  to  the  Society  of  which  we  are  mem¬
bers  will  dispose  me  always  to  contribute
my  best  endeavors  to  promote  the  honor
and  prosperity  of  the  Craft.”

Five  years  before  this  letter  was  written,
he  had,  in  a  communication  to  the  same
body,  expressed  his  opinion  of  the  Masonic
institution  as  one  whose  liberal  principles
are  founded  on  the  immutable  laws  of
“truth  and  justice,”  and  whose  “grand
object  is  to  promote  the  happiness  of  the
human  race.”

In  answer  to  an  address  from  the  Grand
Lodge  of  South  Carolina  in  1791,  he  says :
“  I  recognize  with  pleasure  my  relation  to
the  brethren  of  your  Society,”  and  “  I  shall
be  happy,  on  every  occasion,  to  evince  my
regard  for  the  Fraternity.”  And  in  the
same  letter  he  takes  occasion  to  allude  to
the  Masonic  institution  as  “an  association
whose  principles  lead  to  purity  of  morals,
and  are  beneficial  of  action.”

In  writing  to  the  officers  and  members
of  St.  David’s  Lodge  at  Newport,  (R.  I.,)
in  the  same  year,  he  uses  this  language :
“  Being  persuaded  that  a  just  application
of  the  principles  on  which  the  Masonic  fra¬
ternity  is  founded  must  be  promotive  of
private  virtue  and  public  prosperity,  I  shall
always  be  happy  to  advance  the  interests
of  the  Society,  and  to  be  considered  by
them  as  a  deserving  brother.”

And  lastly,  for  I  will  not  further  extend
these  citations,  in  a  letter  addressed  in  No¬
vember,  1798,  only  thirteen  months  be¬
fore  his  death,  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Maryland,  he  has  made  this  explicit  dec¬
laration  of  his  opinion  of  the  Institution :

“  So  far  as  I  am  acquainted  with  the  doc¬
trines  and  principles  of  Freemasonry,  I
conceive  them  to  be  founded  in  benevo¬
lence,  and  to  be  exercised  only  for  the
good  of  mankind.  I  cannot,  therefore,
upon  this  ground,  withdraw  my  approba¬
tion  from  it.”

So  much  has  been  said  upon  the  Masonic
career  and  opinions  of  Washington  because
American  Masons  love  to  dwell  on  the  fact
that  the  distinguished  patriot,  whose  mem¬
ory  is  so  revered  that  his  unostentatious
grave  on  the  banks  of  the  Potomac  has  be¬
come  the  Mecca  of  America,  was  not  only
a  brother  of  the  Craft,  but  was  ever  ready
to  express  his  good  opinion  of  the  Society.
They  feel  that  under  the  panoply  of  his
great  name  they  may  defy  the  malignant
charges  of  their  adversaries.  They  know
that  no  better  reply  can  be  given  to  such
charges  than  to  say,  in  the  language  of
Clinton,  “  Washington  would  not  have  en¬
couraged  an  Institution  hostile  to  morality,


872


WASHINGTON


WEBB


religion,  good  order,  and  the  public  wel¬
fare.”

Washington  Territory.  Free¬
masonry  in  an  organized  form  was  intro¬
duced  into  Washington  Territory  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon,  which  established
four  Lodges  there  previous  to  the  year  1858.
These  Lodges  were  Olympia,  No.  5;  Steila-
coom,  No.  8;  Grand- Mound,  No.  21,  and
Washington,  No.  22.  On  December  6-9,
1858,  delegates  from  these  four  Lodges  met
in  convention  at  the  city  of  Olympia,  and
organized  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Free  and
Accepted  Masons  of  the  Territory  of  Wash¬
ington.  T.  F.  McElroy  was  elected  Grand
Master,  and  T.  M.  Feed,  Grand  Secretary.

The  high  degrees  of  the  American  Rite
have  not  yet  been  established  in  Washing¬
ton  Territory;  but  in  1872  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite  was  introduced  by
Bro.  Edwin  A.  Sherman,  the  agent  of  the
Supreme  Council  of  the  Southern  Jurisdic¬
tion,  and  several  bodies  of  that  Rite  were
organized.

Watchwords.  Used  in  the  thirty-
second  degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite  because  that  degree  has  a
military  form,  but  not  found  in  other  de¬
grees  of  Masonry.

Water -fall.  Used  in  the  Fellow
Craft’s  degree  as  a  symbol  of  plenty,  for
which  the  word  water-ford,  is  sometimes  im¬
properly  substituted.  See  Shibboleth.

Wayfaring  Man.  A  word  used  in
the  legend  of  the  third  degree  to  denote  the
person  met  near  the  port  of  Joppa  by  cer¬
tain  persons  sent  out  on  a  search  by  King
Solomon.  The  part  of  the  legend  which
introduces  the  wayfaring  man,  and  his  in¬
terview  with  the  Fellow  Crafts,  was  prob¬
ably  introduced  into  the  American  sys¬
tem  by  Webb,  or  found  by  him  in  the  older
rituals  practised  in  this  country.  It  is  not
in  the  old  English  rituals  of  the  last  cen¬
tury,  nor  is  the  circumstance  detailed  in
the  present  English  lecture.  A  wayfaring
man  is  defined  by  Phillips  as  “one  accus¬
tomed  to  travel  on  the  road.”  The  expres¬
sion  is  becoming  obsolete  in  ordinary  lan¬
guage,  but  it  is  preserved  in  Scripture  —
“he  saw  a  wayfaring  man  in  the  street  of
the  city,”  (Judges  xix.  17,)  —  and  in  Ma¬
sonry,  both  of  which  still  retain  many
words  long  since  disused  elsewhere.

Weary  Sojourners.  Spoken  of  in
the  American  legend  of  the  Royal  Arch  as
three  of  the  captives  who  had  been  restored
to  liberty  by  Cyrus,  and,  after  sojourning
or  remaining  longer  in  Babylon  than  the
main  body  of  thefr  brethren,  had  at  length
repaired  to  Jerusalem  to  assist  in  rebuild¬
ing  the  Temple.

It  was  while  the  workmen  were  engaged
in  making  the  necessary  excavations  for


laying  the  foundation,  and  while  numbers
continued  to  arrive  at  Jerusalem  from
Babylon,  that  these  three  worn  and  weary
sojourners,  after  plodding  on  foot  over  the
rough  and  devious  roads  between  the  two
cities,  offered  themselves  to  the  Grand
Council  as  willing  participants  in  the  labor
of  erection.  Who  these  sojourners  were,
we  have  no  historical  means  of  discovering ;
but  there  is  a  Masonic  tradition  (entitled,
perhaps,  to  but  little  weight)  that  they
were  Hananiah,  Mishael,  and  Azariah,
three  holy  men,  who  are  better  known  to
general  readers  by  their  Chaldaic  names
of  Shadrach,  Meshech,  and  Abed-nego,  as
having  been  miraculously  preserved  from
the  fiery  furnace  of  Nebuchadnezzar.

Their  services  were  accepted,  and  from
their  diligent  labors  resulted  that  impor¬
tant  discover)',  the  perpetuation  and  preser¬
vation  of  which  constitutes  the  great  end
and  design  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree.

Such  is  the  legend  of  the  American
Royal  Arch.  It  has  no  known  foundation
in  history,  and  is  therefore  altogether
mythical.  But  it  presents,  as  a  myth,  the
symbolic  idea  of  arduous  and  unfaltering
search  after  truth,  and  the  final  reward
that  such. devotion  receives.

Webb-Preston  Work.  The  title
given  by  Dr.  Robert  Morris  to  a  system  of
lectures  which  he  proposed  to  introduce,  in
1859,  into  the  Lodges  of  the  United  States,
and  in  which  he  was  partly  successful.  He
gave  this  name  to  his  system  because  his
theory  was  that  the  lectures  of  Thomas
Smith  Webb  and  those  of  Preston  were
identical.  But  this  theory  is  untenable,
for  it  has  long  since  been  shown  that  the
lectures  of  Webb  were  an  abridgement,
and  a  very  material  modification  of  those
of  Preston.  In  1863,  and  for  a  few  years
afterwards,  the  question  of  the  introduction
of  the  “ Webb-Preston  work”  was  a  sub¬
ject  of  warm,  and  sometimes  of  intemperate,
discussion  in  several  of  the  western  juris¬
dictions.  It  has  now,  however,  at  least  as
a  subject  of  controversy,  ceased  to  attract
the  attention  of  the  Craft.  One  favorable
result  was,  however,  produced  by  these  dis¬
cussions,  and  that  is,  that  they  led  to  a  more
careful  investigation  and  a  better  under¬
standing  of  the  nature  and  history  of  the
rituals  which  have,  during  the  present  cen¬
tury,  been  practised  in  this  country.  The
bitterness  of  feeling  has  passed  away,  but
the  knowledge  that  it  elicited  remains.

Webb,  Thomas  Smith.  No  name
in  Masonry  is  more  familiar  to  the  Amer¬
ican  Mason  than  that  of  Webb,  who  was
really  the  inventor  and  founder  of  the  sys¬
tem  of  work  which,  under  the  appropriate
name  of  the  American  Rite  (although
often  improperly  called  the  York  Rite),  is


WEBB


WEBB


873


universally  practised  in  the  United  States.
The  most  exhaustive  biography  of  him
that  has  been  written  is  that  of  Bro.  Cor¬
nelius  Moore,  in  his  Leaflets  of  Masonic
Biography,  and  from  that,  with  a  few  ad¬
ditions  from  other  sources,  the  present
sketch  is  derived.

Thomas  Smith  Webb,  the  son  of  parents
who  a  few  years  previous  to  his  birth  had
emigrated  from  England  and  settled  in
Boston,  Massachusetts,  was  born  in  that
city,  October  13,  1771.  He  was  educated
in  one  of  the  public  schools,  where  he  ac¬
quired  such  knowledge  as  was  at  that  time
imparted  in  them,  and  became  proficient
in  the  French  and  Latin  languages.

He  selected  as  a  profession  either  that
of  a  printer  or  a  bookbinder ;  his  biographer
is  uncertain  which,  but  inclines  to  think
that  it  was  the  former.  After  completing
his  apprenticeship  he  removed  to  Keene,  in
New  Hampshire,  where  he  worked  at  his
trade,  and  about  the  year  1792  (for  the
precise  date  is  unknown)  was  initiated  in
Freemasonry  in  Rising  Sun  Lodge  iu  that
town.

While  residing  at  Keene  he  married
Miss  Martha  Hopkins,  and  shortly  after¬
wards  removed  to  Albany,  New  York,  where
he  opened  a  book-store.  When  and  where
he  received  the  high  degrees  has  not  been
stated,  but  we  find  him,  while  living  at
Albany,  engaged  in  the  establishment  of  a
Chapter  and  an  Encampment.

It  was  at  this  early  period  of  his  life  that
Webb  appears  to  have  commenced  his
labors  as  a  Masonic  teacher,  an  office
which  he  continued  to  fill  writh  great  in¬
fluence  until  the  close  of  his  life.  In  1797
he  published  at  Albany  the  first  edition  of
his  Freemasons’  Monitor  ;  or,  Illustrations  of
Masonry.  It  purports  to  be  “  by  a  Royal
Arch  Mason,  K.  T.,  K.  M.,  etc.”  He  did
not  claim  the  authorship  until  the  subse¬
quent  edition;  but  his  name  and  that  of
his  partner,  Spencer,  appear  in  the  imprint
as  publishers.  He  acknowledges  in  the
preface  his  indebtedness  to  Preston  for  the
observations  on  the  first  three  degrees.
But  he  states  that  he  has  differently  ar¬
ranged  Preston’s  distributions  of  the  sec¬
tions,  because  they  were  “  not  agreeable  to
the  mode  of  working  in  America.”  This
proves  that  the  Prestonian  system  was  not
then  followed  in  the  United  States,  and
ought  to  be  a  sufficient  answer  to  those
who  at  a  later  period  attempted  to  claim
an  identity  between  the  lectures  of  Preston
and  Webb.

About  the  year  1801  he  removed  to
Providence,  Rhode  Island,  where  he  en¬
gaged  in  the  manufacture  of  wall-paper  on
a  rather  extensive  scale.  By  this  time  his
reputation  as  a  Masonic  teacher  had  been
6  K


well  established,  for  a  committee  was  ap¬
pointed  by  St  John’s  Lodge  of  Providence
to  wait  upon  and  inform  him  that  this
Lodge  (for  his  great  exertions  in  the  cause
of  Masonry)  wish  him  to  become  a  member
of  the  same.”  He  accepted  the  invitation,
and  passing  through  the  various  gradations
of  office  was  elected,  in  1813,  Grand  Master
of  the  Masons  of  Rhode  Island.

But  it  is  necessary  now  to  recur  to  pre¬
ceding  events.  In  1797,  on  October  24,  a
convention  of  committees  from  several
Chapters  in  the  Northern  States  was  held  in
Boston  for  the  purpose  of  deliberating  on
the  propriety  and  expediency  of  establish¬
ing  a  Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons
for  the  Northern  States.  Of  this  convention
Webb  was  chosen  as  the  chairman.  Pre¬
viously  to  this  time  the  Royal  Arch  degrees
had  been  conferred  in  Masters’  Lodges  and
under  a  Lodge  Warrant.  It  is  undoubtedly
to  the  influence  of  Webb  that  we  are  to
attribute  the  disseverance  of  the  degree
from  that  jurisdiction  and  the  establish¬
ment  of  independent  Chapters.  It  was  one
of  the  first  steps  that  he  took  in  the  organ¬
ization  of  the  American  Rite.  The  circu¬
lar  addressed  by  the  convention  to  the
Chapters  of  the  country  was  most  probably
from  the  pen  of  Webb.

The  Grand  Chapter  having  been  organ¬
ized  in  January,  1798,  Webb  was  elected
Grand  Scribe,  and  re-elected  in  1799,  at
which  time  the  body  assumed  the  title  of
the  General  Grand  Chapter.  In  1806  he
was  promoted  to  the  office  of  General
Grand  King,  and  in  1816  to  that  of  Deputy
General  Grand  High  Priest,  which  he  held
until  his  death.

During  all  this  time,  Webb,  although
actively  engaged  in  the  labors  of  Masonic
instruction,  continued  his  interest  in  the
manufacture  of  wall  paper,  and  in  1817  re¬
moved  his  machinery  to  the  West,  Moore
thinks,  with  the  intention  of  making  his
residence  there.

In  1816  he  visited  the  Western  States,
and  remained  there  two  years,  during  which
time  he  appears  to  have  been  actively  en¬
gaged  in  the  organization  of  Chapters,
Grand  Chapters  and  Encampments.  It
was  during  this  visit  that  he  established
the  Grand  Chapters  of  Ohio  and  Kentucky,
by  virtue  of  his  powers  as  a  General  Grand
Officer.

In  August,  1818,  he  left  Ohio  and  re¬
turned  to  Boston.  In  the  spring  of  1819,
he  again  began  a  visit  to  the  West,  but  he
reached  no  farther  than  Cleveland,  Ohio,
where  he  died  very  suddenly,  it  is  supposed
in  a  fit  of  apoplexy,  on  July  6,  1819,  and
was  buried  the  next  day  with  Masonic
honors.  The  body  was  subsequently  dis¬
interred  and  conveyed  to  Providence,  where.


874


WEDEKIND


WEISHAUPT


on  the  8th  of  November,  it  was  reinterred
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Rhode  Island.

Webb’s  influence  over  the  Masons  of  the
United  States,  as  the  founder  of  a  Rite,  was
altogether  personal.  In  Masonic  literature
he  has  made  no  mark,  for  his  labors  as  an
author  are  confined  to  a  single  work,  his
Monitor,  and  this  is  little  more  than  a  syl¬
labus  of  his  lectures.  Although,  if  we  may
judge  by  the  introductory  remarks  to  the
various  sections  of  the  degrees,  and  espe¬
cially  to  the  second  one  of  the  third  de¬
gree,  Webb  was  but  little  acquainted  with
the  true  philosophical  symbolism  of  Free¬
masonry,  such  as  it  was  taught  by  Hutchin¬
son  in  England  and  by  his  contemporaries
in  this  country,  Harris  and  Town,  he  was
what  Carson  properly  calls  him, the  ablest
Masonic  ritualist  of  his  day  —  the  very
prince  of  Masonic  workmen,”  and  this  was
the  instrument  with  which  he  worked  for
the  extension  of  the  new  Rite  which  he
established.  The  American  Rite  would
have  been  more  perfect  as  a  system  had  its
founder  entertained  profounder  views  of
the  philosophy  and  symbolism  of  Masonry
as  a  science ;  but  as  it  is,  with  imperfections
which  time,  it  is  hoped,  will  remove,  and
deficiencies  which  future  researches  of  the
Masonic  scholar  will  supply,  it  still  must
ever  be  a  monument  of  the  ritualistic  skill,
the  devotion,  and  the  persevering  labor  of
Thomas  Smith  Webb.

The  few  odes  and  anthems  composed  by
Webb  for  his  rituals  possess  a  high  degree
of  poetic  merit,  and  evince  the  possession
of  much  genius  in  their  author.

Wedekind,  Georg  Christian
Gottlieb,  Baron  von.  A  German
physician  and  Professor  of  Medicine  at
Metz,  and  a  medical  writer  of  reputation.
He  was  born  at  Gottingen,  January  8, 1761.
As  a  Mason,  he  was  distinguished  as  a
member  of  the  Eclectic  Union,  and  labored
effectually  for  the  restoration  of  good  feel¬
ing  between  it  and  the  Directorial  Lodge
at  Frankfort.  His  Masonic  works,  which
are  numerous,  consist  principally  of  ad¬
dresses,  controversial  pamphlets,  and  con¬
tributions  to  the  Altenburg  Journal  of  Free¬
masonry.  He  died  in  1831.

Weeping  Virgin.  The  weeping  vir¬
gin  with  dishevelled  hair,  in  the  monument
of  the  third  degree,  used  in  the  American
Rite,  is  interpreted  as  a  symbol  of  grief  for
the  unfinished  state  of  the  Temple.  Jeremy
Cross,  who  is  said  to  have  fabricated  the
monumental  symbol,  was  not,  we  are  sat¬
isfied,  acquainted  with  hermetic  science.
Yet  a  woman  thus  portrayed,  standing  near
a  tomb,  was  a  very  appropriate  symbol  for
the  third  degree,  whose  dogma  is  "the  resur¬
rection.  In  hermetic  science,  according
to  Nicolas  Flammel,  [Hieroglyph ica,  cap.


xxxii.,)  a  woman  having  her  hair  dishev¬
elled  and  standing  near  a  tomb  is  a  symbol
of  the  soul.

Weishanpt,  Adam.  He  is  cele¬
brated  in  the  history  of  Masonry  as  the
founder  of  the  Order  of  Illuminati  of  Ba¬
varia,  among  whom  he  adopted  the  char¬
acteristic  or  Order  name  of  typartacus.
He  was  born  February  6,  1748,  at  Ingold-
stadt,  and  was  educated  by  the  Jesuits,
towards  whom,  however,  he  afterwards  ex¬
hibited  the  bitterest  enmity,  and  was  equally
hated  by  them  in  return.  In  1772  he  be¬
came  extraordinary  professor  of  law,  and  in
1775  professor  of  natural  and  canon  law,  at
the  University  of  Ingoldstadt.  As  the  pro¬
fessorship  of  canon  Jaw  had  been  hitherto
held  only  by  an  ecclesiastic,  his  appoint¬
ment  gave  great  offence  to  the  clergy.
Weishaupt,  whose  views  were  cosmopolitan,
and  who  knew  and  condemned  the  bigotry
and  superstitions  of  the  priests,  established
an  opposing  party  in  the  University,  con¬
sisting  principally  of  young  men  whose
confidence  and  friendship  he  had  gained.
They  assembled  in  a  private  apartment,
and  there  he  discussed  with  them  philo¬
sophic  subjects,  and  sought  to  imbue  them
with  a  liberal  spirit.  This  was  the  begin¬
ning  of  the  Order  of  the  Illuminati,  or  the
Enlightened  —  a  name  which  he  bestowed
upon  his  disciples  as  a  token  of  their  ad¬
vance  in  intelligence  and  moral  progress.

At  first,  it  was  totally  unconnected  with
Masonry,  of  which  Order  "Weishaupt  was
not  at  that  time  a  member.  It  was  not
until  1777  that  he  was  initiated  in  the
Lodge  Theodore  of  Good  Counsel,  at  Mun¬
ich.  Thenceforward  Weishaupt  sought  to
incorporate  his  system  into  that  of  Ma¬
sonry,  so  that  the  latter  might  become  sub¬
servient  to  his  views,  and  with  the  assist¬
ance  of  the  Baron  Knigge,  who  brought
his  active  energies  and  genius  to  the  aid  of
the  cause,  he  succeeded  in  completing  his
system  of  Uluminism.  But  the  clergy,  and
especially  the  Jesuits,  who,  although  their
Order  had  been  abolished  by  the  govern¬
ment,  still  secretly  possessed  great  power,
redoubled  their  efforts  to  destroy  their  op¬
ponent,  and  they  at  length  succeeded.  In
1784,  all  secret  associations  were  prohibited
by  a  royal  decree,  and  in  the  following
year  Weishaupt  was  deprived  of  his  pro¬
fessorship  and  banished  from  the  country.
He  repaired  to  Gotha,  where  he  was  kindly
received  by  Duke  Ernest,  who  made  him  a
counsellor  and  gave  him  a  pension.  There
he  remained  until  he  died  in  1811.

During  his  residence  at  Gotha  he  wrote
and  published  many  works,  some  on  philo¬
sophical  subjects  and  several  in  explana¬
tion  and  defence  of  Illuminisin.  AmoDg
the  latter  were  A  Picture  of  the  Illuminati ,


WEISHAUPT


WEISHAUPT


875


1786;  A  complete  History  of  the  Persecutions
of  the  Illuminati  in  Bavaria,  1786.  Of  this
work  only  one  volume  was  published;  the
second,  though  promised,  never  appeared.
An  Apology  for  the  Illuminati,  1786 ;  An
Improved  System  of  the  Illuminati,  1787,  and
many  others.

No  man  has  ever  been  more  abused  and
villified  than  Weishaupt  by  the  adversaries
of  Freemasonry.  In  such  partisan  writers
as  Barruel  and  Robison  we  might  expect  to
find  libels  against  a  Masonic  reformer.  But
it  is  passing  strange  that  Dr.  Oliver  should
have  permitted  such  a  passage  as  the  follow¬
ing  to  sully  his  pages.  ( Landmarks ,  ii.  26.)

“Weishaupt  was  a  shameless  libertine,
who  compassed  the  death  of  his  sister-in-
law  to  conceal  his  vices  from  the  world  and,
as  he  termed  it,  to  preserve  his  honor.”

To  charges  like  these,  founded  only  in
the  bitterness  of  his  persecutors,  Weishaupt
has  made  the  following  reply:

“  The  tenor  of  my  life  has  been  the  op¬
posite  of  everything  that  is  vile ;  and  no
man  can  lay  any  such  thing  to  my  charge.”

Indeed,  his  long  continuance  in  an  im¬
portant  religious  professorship  at  Ingold-
stadt,  the  warm  affections  of  his  pupils,  and
the  patronage  and  protection,  during  the
closing  years  of  his  life,  of  the  virtuous  and
amiable  Duke  of  Gotha,  would  seem  to  give
some  assurance  that  Weishaupt  could  not
have  been  the  monster  that  he  has  been
painted  by  his  adversaries.

Illuminism,  it  is  true,  had  its  abundant
errors,  and  no  one  will  regret  its  dissolu¬
tion..  But  its  founder  had  hoped  by  it  to
effect  much  good:  that  it  was  diverted
from  its  original  aim  was  the  fault,  not  of
him,  but  of  some  of  his  disciples ;  and  their
faults  he  was  not  reluctant  to  condemn  in
his  writings.

His  ambition  was,  I  think,  a  virtuous
one;  that  it  failed  was  his,  and  perhaps  the
world’s,  misfortune.  “  My  general  plan,”
he  says,  “is  good,  though  in  the  detail
there  may  be  faults.  I  had  myself  to  create.
In  another  situation,  and  in  an  active  sta¬
tion  in  life,  I  should  have  been  keenly  oc¬
cupied,  and  the  founding  of  an  Order  would
never  have  come  into  my  head.  But  I
would  have  executed  much  better  things,
if  the  government  had  not  always  opposed
my  exertions,  and  placed  others  in  situa¬
tions  which  suited  my  talents.  It  was  the
full  conviction  of  this,  and  of  what  could
be  done,  if  every  man  were  placed  in  the
office  for  which  he  was  fitted  by  nature,
and  a  proper  education,  which  first  sug¬
gested  to  me  the  plan  of  Illuminism.”

What  he  really  wished  Illuminism  to  be,
we  may  judge  from  the  instructions  he  gave
as  to  the  necessary  qualifications  of  a  can¬
didate  for  initiation.  They  are  as  follows:


“Whoever  does  not  close  his  ear  to  the
lamentations  of  the  miserable,  nor  his
heart  to  gentle  pity;  whoever  is  the  friend
and  brother  of  the  unfortunate;  whoever
has  a  heart  capable  of  love  and  friendship;
whoever  is  steadfast  in  adversity,  unwearied
in  the  carrying  out  of  whatever  has  been
once  engaged  in,  undaunted  in  the  over¬
coming  of  difficulties ;  whoever  does  not
mock  and  despise  the  weak ;  whose  soul  is
susceptible  of  conceiving  great  designs,  de¬
sirous  of  rising  superior  to  all  base  motives,
and  of  distinguishing  itself  by  deeds  of
benevolence;  whoever  shuns  idleness;  who¬
ever  considers  no  knowledge  as  unessential
which  he  may  have  the  opportunity  of  ac¬
quiring,  regarding  the  knowledge  of  man¬
kind  as  his  chief  study;  whoever,  when
truth  and  virtue  are  in  question,  despising
the  approbation  of  the  multitude,  is  suffi¬
ciently  courageous  to  follow  the  dictates  of
his  own  heart,  —  such  a  one  is  a  proper
candidate.”

The  Baron  von  Knigge,  who,  perhaps,  of
all  men,  best  knew  him,  said  of  him  that
he  was  undeniably  a  man  of  genius,  and  a
profound  thinker;  and  that  he  was  all  the
more  worthy  of  admiration  because,  while
subjected  to  the  influences  of  a  bigoted
Catholic  education,  he  had  formed  his  mind
by  his  own  meditations,  and  the  reading
of  good  books.  His  heart,  adds  this  com¬
panion  of  his  labors  and  sharer  of  his
secret  thoughts,  was  excited  by  the  most
unselfish  desire  to  do  something  great,  and
that  would  be  worthy  of  mankind,  and  in
the  accomplishment  of  this  he  w'as  deterred
by  no  opposition  and  discouraged  by  no
embarrassments.

The  truth  is,  I  think,  that  Weishaupt
has  been  misunderstood  by  Masonic  and
slandered  by  un-Masonic  writers.  His  suc¬
cess  in  the  beginning  as  a  reformer  was
due  to  his  own  honest  desire  to  do  good.
His  failure  in  the  end  was  attributable  to
ecclesiastical  persecution,  and  to  the  faults
and  follies  of  his  disciples.  The  master
works  to  elevate  human  nature ;  the  scholars,
to  degrade.  Weisliaupt’s  place  in  history
should  be  among  the  unsuccessful  reformers,
and  not  among  the  profligate  adventurers.

Welcome.  In  the  ritual,  it  is  said  to
be  the  duty  of  the  Senior  Deacon  “to  wel¬
come  and  clothe  all  visiting  brethren.”
That  is  to  say,  he  is  to  receive  them  at  the
door  with  all  courtesy  and  kindness,  and  to
furnish  them,  or  see  that  they  are  furnished,
with  the  necessary  apron  and  gloves,  and,
if  they  are  Past  Masters,  with  the  appro¬
priate  collar  and  jewel  of  that  office,  with
an  extra  supply  of  which  all  Lodges  were
in  the  olden  time  supplied.  He  is  to  con¬
duct  the  visitor  to  a  seat,  and  thus  carry
out  the  spirit  of  the  old  Charges,  which


876


WELL


WESTPHALIA


especially  inculcate  hospitality  to  strange
brethren.

Well  Formed.  True,  and  Trus¬
ty.  A  formula  used  by  the  Grand  Master
at  the  laying  of  a  corner-stone.  Having
applied  the  square,  level,  and  plumb  to  its
different  surfaces  and  angles,  he  declares  it
to  be  “well  formed,  true,  and  trusty.”
Borrowed  from  the  technical  language  of
Operative  Masonry,  it  is  symbolically  ap¬
plied  in  reference  to  the  character  which
the  Entered  Apprentice  should  sustain
when,  in  the  course  of  his  initiation,  he  as¬
sumes  the  place  of  a  typical  corner-stone
in  the  Lodge.

Wesley,  Samuel.  At  one  time  the
most  distinguished  organist  of  England,
and  called  by  Mendelssohn  “  the  father  of
English  organ-playing.”  He  was  initiated
as  a  Mason  December  17, 1788,  and  in  1812,
the  office  of  Grand  Organist  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  being  in  that  year  first
instituted,  he  received  the  appointment  from
the  Grand  Master,  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  and
held  it  until  1818.  He  composed  the  an¬
them  performed  at  the  union  of  the  two
Grand  Lodges  in  1813,  and  was  the  com¬
poser  of  many  songs,  glees,  etc.,  for  the  use
of  the  Craft.  He  was  the  son  of  the  Bev.
Charles  Wesley,  and  nephew  of  the  cele¬
brated  John  Wesley,  the  founder  of  Meth¬
odism.  Born  February  24, 1760,  at  Bristol,
England,  and  died  October  11,  1837.  He
was  well  entitled  to  the  epithet  of  the
“  Great  Musician  of  Masonry.”

West.  Although  the  west,  as  one  of
the  four  cardinal  points,  holds  an  honor¬
able  position  as  the  station  of  the  Senior
Warden,  and  of  the  pillar  of  Strength  that
supports  the  Lodge,  yet,  being  the  place  of
the  sun’s  setting  and  opposed  to  the  east,  the
recognized  place  of  light,  it,  in  Masonic
symbolism,  represents  the  place  of  darkness
and  ignorance.  The  old  tradition,  that  in
primeval  times  all  human  wisdom  was  con¬
fined  to  the  eastern  part  of  the  world,  and
that  those  who  had  wandered  towards  the
west  were  obliged  to  return  to  the  east  in
search  of  the  knowledge  of  their  ancestors,
is  not  confined  to  Masonry.  Creuzer  (Sym¬
bolic )  speaks  of  an  ancient  and  highly-in¬
structed  body  of  priests  in  the  East,  from
whom  all  knowledge,  under  the  veil  of  sym¬
bols,  was  communicated  to  the  Greeks  and
other  unenlightened  nations  of  the  West.
And  in  the  “  Legend  of  the  Craft,”  contained
in  the  old  Masonic  Constitutions,  there  is
always  a  reference  to  the  emigration  of  the
Masons  from  Egypt  eastward  to  the  “  land
of  behest,”  or  Jerusalem.  Hence,  in  the
modern  symbolism  of  Speculative  Masonry,
it  is  said  that  the  Mason  during  his  ad¬
vancement  is  travelling  from  the  West  to  the
East  in  search  of  light.


Westphalia,  Secret  Tribunals

of.  The  Vehmgerichte,  or  Fehmgerichte,
were  secret  criminal  courts  of  Westphalia
in  the  Middle  Ages.  The  origin  of  this  in¬
stitution,  like  that  of  Masonry,  has  been
involved  in  uncertainty.  The  true  mean¬
ing  of  the  name  even  is  doubtful.  Vaem
is  said  by  Dreyer  to  signify  holy  in  the  old
Northern  languages;  and,  if  this  be  true,
a  Fehmgericht  would  mean  a  holy  court.
But  it  has  also  been  suggested  that  the  word
comes  from  the  Latin  fama,  or  rumor,  and
that  a  Fehmgericht  was  so  called  because
it  proceeded  to  the  trial  of  persons  whose
only  accuser  was  common  rumor,  the  max¬
im  of  the  German  law,  “no  accuser,  no
judge,”  being  in  such  a  case  departed  from.
They  were  also  called  Tribunals  of  West¬
phalia,  because  their  jurisdiction  and  exist¬
ence  were  confined  to  that  country.

The  Mediaeval  Westphalia  was  situated
within  the  limits  of  the  country  bounded
on  the  west  by  the  Rhine,  on  the  east  by
the  Weser,  on  the  north  by  Friesland,  and
on  the  south  by  Westerwald.  Render
( Tour  through  Germany ,  p.  186,)  says  that
the  tribunals  were  only  to  be  found  in  the
duchies  of  Gueldres,  Cleves,  and  West¬
phalia,  in  the  principal  cities  of  Corvey
and  Minden,  in  the  landgravate  of  Hesse,
in  the  counties  of  Bentheim,  Limburg,
Lippe,  Mark,  Ravensberg,  Rechlinghausen,
Rietzberg,  Sayn,  Waldeck,  and  Steinfort,
in  some  baronies,  as  Gehmen,  Neustadt,
and  Rheda,  and  in  the  free  imperial  city
of  Dortmund;  but  these  were  all  included
within  the  limits  of  Mediaeval  Westphalia.

It  has  been  supposed  that  the  first  secret
tribunals  were  established  by  the  Emperor
Charlemagne  on  the  conquest  of  Saxony.
In  803  the  Saxons  obtained  among  other
privileges  that  of  retaining  their  national
laws,  and  administering  them  under  impe¬
rial  judges  who  had  been  created  Counts
of  the  Empire.  Their  courts,  it  is  said,
were  held  three  times  a  year  in  an  open
field,  aud  their  sessions  were  held  in  public
on  ordinary  occasions ;  but  in  all  cases  of
religious  offence,  such  as  apostasy,  heresy,
or  sacrilege,  although  the  trial  began  in  a
public  session,  it  always  ended  in  a  secret
tribunal.

It  has  been  supposed  by  some  waiters
that  these  courts  of  the  Counts  of  the  Em¬
pire  instituted  by  Charlemagne  gave  origin
to  the  secret  tribunals  of  Westphalia,
which  were  held  in  the  thirteenth  and
fourteenth  centuries.  There  is  no  exter¬
nal  evidence  of  the  truth  of  this  hypothe¬
sis.  It  was,  however,  the  current  opinion
of  the  time,  and  all  the  earlier  traditions
and  documents  of  the  courts  themselves
trace  their  origin  to  Charlemagne.  Paul
Wigand,  the  German  jurist  and  historian.


WESTPHALIA


WESTPHALIA


877


who  wrote  a  history  of  their  tribunals,
( Fehmgericht  Westfdlens,  Hamburg,  1826,)
contends  for  the  truth  of  these  traditions;
and  Sir  Francis  Palgrave,  in  his  Rise  and
Progress  of  the  English  Commonwealth ,  says,
unhesitatingly,  that  “  the  Vehmic  tribunals
can  only  be  considered  as  the  original  ju¬
risdictions  of  the  old  Saxons  which  sur¬
vived  the  subjugation  of  their  country.”
The  silence  on  this  subject  in  the  laws  and
capitularies  of  Charlemagne  has  been  ex¬
plained  on  the  ground  that  these  tribunals
were  not  established  authoritatively  by
that  monarch,  but  only  permitted  by  a
tacit  sanction  to  exist.

The  author  of  the  article  on  the  Secret
Societies  of  the  Middle  Ages,  published  in
the  Library  of  Entertaining  Knowledge ,  wTho
has  written  somewhat  exhaustively  on  this
subject,  says  that  the  first  writers  who  have
mentioned  these  tribunals  are  Henry  of
Hervorden  in  the  fourteenth,  and  Abieas
Sylvius  in  the  fifteenth  century;  both  of
whom,  however,  trace  them  to  the  time  of
Charlemagne;  but  Jacob  ( Recherches  Histo-
riquessurles  Croisadeset  les  Templiers ,p.  132,)
cites  a  diploma  of  Count  Engelbert  de  la
Mark,  of  the  date  of  1267,  in  which  there  is
an  evident  allusion  to  some  of  their  usages.
Render  says  that  they  are  first  generally
known  in  the  year  1220.  But  their  abso¬
lute  historical  existence  is  confined  to  the
fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries.

The  secret  Westphalian  tribunals  were
apparently  created  for  the  purpose  of  pre¬
serving  public  morals,  of  punishing  crime,
and  of  protecting  the  poor  and  weak  from
the  oppressions  of  the  rich  and  powerful.
They  were  outside  of  the  regular  courts  of
the  country,  and  in  this  respect  may  be
compared  to  the  modern  “vigilance  com¬
mittees”  sometimes  instituted  in  this  coun¬
try  for  the  protection  of  the  well-disposed
citizens  in  newly-settled  territories  from  the
annoyance  of  lawless  men.  But  the  German
tribunals  differed  from  the  American  com¬
mittees  in  this,  that  they  were  recognized  by
the  emperors,  and  that  their  decisions  and
executions  partook  of  a  judicial  character.

The  Yelimic  tribunals,  as  they  arc  also
called,  were  governed  by  a  minute  system
of  regulations,  the  strict  observance  of
which  preserved  their  power  and  influence
for  at  least  two  centuries.

At  the  head  of  the  institution  was  the
Emperor,  for  in  Germany  he  was  recognized
ns  tne  source  of  law.  His  connection  with
the  association  was  either  direct  or  indi¬
rect.  If  he  had  been  initiated  into  it,  as
was  usually  the  case,  then  his  connection
was  direct  and  immediate.  If,  however,  he
was  not  an  initiate,  then  his  powers  were
delegated  to  a  lieutenant,  who  was  a  mem¬
ber  of  the  tribunal.


Next  to  the  Emperor  came  the  fre9
counts.  Free  counties  were  certain  districts
comprehending  several  parishes,  where  the
judges  and  counsellors  of  the  secret  ban
exercised  jurisdiction  in  conformity  with
the  statutes.  The  free  count,  who  was
called  Stuhlherr,  or  tribunal  lord,  presided
over  this  free  county  and  the  tribunal  held
within  it.  He  had  also  the  prerogative  of
erecting  other  tribunals  within  his  territo¬
rial  limits,  and  if  he  did  not  preside  in  per¬
son,  he  appointed  a  Freigraf,  or  free  judge,
to  supply  his  place.  No  one  could  be  in¬
vested  with  the  dignity  of  a  free  judge  un¬
less  he  were  a  Westphalian  by  birth,  born
in  lawful  wedlock  of  honest  parents;  of
good  repute,  charged  with  no  crime,  and
w'ell  qualified  to  preside  over  the  county.
They  derived  their  name  of  free  judges  from
the  fact  that  the  tribunals  exercised  their
jurisdiction  over  only  free  men,  serfs  being
left  to  the  control  of  their  own  lords.

Next  in  rank  to  the  free  judges  were  the
Sc hoppen,  as  assessors  or  counsellors.  They
formed  the  main  body  of  the  association,
and  were  nominated  by  the  free  judge,  with
the  consent  of  the  stuhlherr,  and  vouched  for
by  two  members  of  the  tribunal.  A  schoppe
was  required  to  be  a  Christian,  a  Westpha¬
lian  of  honest  birth,  neither  excommuni¬
cated  nor  outlawed,  nor  involved  in  any
suit  before  the  Fehmgericht,  and  not  a
member  of  any  monastic  or  ecclesiastical
order.  There  were  two  classes  of  these  as¬
sessors  or  schoppen  :  a  lower  class  or  grade
called  the  Ignorant,  who  had  not  been  in¬
itiated,  and  were  consequently  not  permit¬
ted  to  be  present  at  the  secret  session ;  and
a  higher  grade,  called  the  Knowing,  who
were  subjected  to  a  form  of  initiation.

The  ceremonies  of  initiation  of  a  free
judge  were  very  solemn  and  symbolic.  The
candidate  appeared  bareheaded  before  the
tribunal,  and  answered  certain  questions
respecting  his  qualifications.  Then,  kneel¬
ing,  with  the  thumb  and  forefinger  of  the
right  hand  on  a  naked  sword  and  halter,
he  pronounced  the  following  oath :  “  I  swear
by  the  Holy  Trinity  that  I  will,  from  hence¬
forth,  aid,  keep,  and  conceal  the  holy  Fehms
from  wife  and  child,  from  father  and  mother,
from  sister  and  brother,  from  fire  and  wind,
from  all  that  the  sun  shines  on  and  the  rain
covers,  from  all  that  is  between  sky  and
earth,  especially  from  the  man  who  knows
the  law ;  and  will  bring  before  this  free  tri¬
bunal,  under  which  I  am  sitting,  all  that
belongs  to  the  secret  jurisdiction  of  the  Em¬
peror,  whether  I  know  it  to  be  true  myself
or  have  heard  it  from  trustworthy  men,
whatever  requires  correction  or  punish¬
ment,  whatever  is  committed  within  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Fehm,  that  it  may  be
judged,  or,  with  the  consent  of  the  accuser,


878


WESTPHALIA


WESTPHALIA


be  put  off  in  grace  ;  and  will  not  cease  so  to
do  for  love  or  for  fear,  for  gold  or  for  silver,
or  for  precious  stones ;  and  will  strengthen
this  tribunal  and  jurisdiction  with  all  my
five  senses  and  power ;  and  that  I  do  not
take  on  me  this  office  for  any  other  cause
than  for  the  sake  of  right  and  j  ustice.  More¬
over,  that  I  will  ever  advance  and  honor
this  free  tribunal  more  than  any  other  free
tribunals;  and  what  I  thus  promise  will  I
steadfastly  and  firmly  keep;  so  help  me  God
and  his  Holy  Gospel.”

He  further  swore  in  an  additional  oath
that  he  would,  to  the  best  of  his  ability,
enlarge  the  holy  empire,  and  would  under¬
take  nothing  with  unrighteous  hand  against
the  land  and  people  of  the  Stuhlherr,  or  Lord
of  the  Tribunal.  His  name  was  then  in¬
serted  in  the  Book  of  Gold.

The  secrets  of  the  tribunal  were  then
communicated  to  the  candidate,  and  with
them  the  modes  of  recognition  by  which
he  could  be  enabled  to  discover  his  fellow-
members.  The  sign  is  described  to  have
been  made  by  placing,  when  at  table,  the
point  of  their  kuife  pointing  to  themselves,
and  the  haft  away  from  them.  This  was
also  accompanied  by  the  words  Stock  Stein,
Gras  Grein,  the  meaning  of  which  phrase
is  unknown.

The  duties  of  the  initiated  were  to  act  as
assessors  or  judges  at  the  meetings  of  the
courts,  to  constitute  which  at  least  seven
were  required  to  be  present;  and  also  to  go
through  the  country,  serve  citations  upon
the  accused,  and  to  execute  the  sentences
of  the  tribunals  upon  criminals,  as  well  as
to  trace  out  and  denounce  all  evil-doers.
The  punishment  of  an  initiate  who  had  be¬
trayed  any  of  the  secrets  of  the  society  was
severe.  His  tongue  was  torn  out  by  the
roots,  aud  he  was  then  hung  on  a  tree  seven
feet  higher  than  any  other  felon.

*The  ceremonies  practised  when  a  Fehra
court  was  held  were  very  symbolic  in  their
character.  Before  the  free  count  stood  a
table,  on  which  were  placed  a  naked  sword
and  a  cord  of  withe.  The  sword,  which
was  cross- hand  led,  is  explained  in  their
ritual  as  signifying  the  cross  on  which
Christ  suffered  for  our  sins,  and  the  cord
the  punishment  of  the  wicked.  All  had
their  heads  uncovered,  to  signify  that  they
would  proceed  openly  and  fairly,  punish  in
proportion  to  guilt,  and  cover  no  right  with
a  wrong.  Their  hands  also  were  uncovered,
to  show  that  they  would  do  nothing  covert¬
ly  and  underhand ;  and  they  wore  cloaks,
to  signify  their  warm  love  for  justice,  for
as  the  cloak  covers  all  the  other  garments
and  the  body,  so  should  their  love  cover
justice.  Lastly,  they  were  to  wear  neither
armor  nor  weapons,  that  no  one  might  feel  j
fear,  and  to  indicate  that  they  were  under


the  peaceof  the  empire.  They  were  charged
to  be  cool  and  sober,  lest  passion  or  intox¬
ication  should  lead  them  to  pass  an  unjust
judgment.

Writers  of  romance  have  clothed  these
tribunals  with  additional  mystery.  But  the
stories  that  they  were  held  at  night,  and  iu
subterranean  places,  have  no  foundation
save  in  the  imagination  of  those  who  have
invented  them.  They  were  held,  like  other
German  courts,  at  break  of  day  and  in  the
open  air,  generally  beneath  a  tree  in  the
forest,  or  elsewhere.  The  public  tribunals
were,  of  course,  open  to  all.  It  was  the
secret  ones  only  that  were  held  in  private.
But  the  time  and  place  were  made  known
to  the  accused  in  the  notification  left  at  his
residence,  or,  if  that  were  unknown,  as  in
the  case  of  a  vagabond,  at  a  place  where
four  roads  met,  being  affixed  to  the  ground
or  to  a  tree,  and  the  knowledge  might  be
easily  communicated  by  him  to  his  friends.

The  Chapter-General  met  once  a  year,
generally  at  Dortmund  or  Arensburg,  but
always  at  some  place  in  Westphalia.  It
consisted  of  the  tribunal  lords  and  free
counts,  who  were  convoked  by  the  Empe¬
ror  or  his  lieutenant.  If  the  Emperor  was
an  initiate,  he  might  preside  iu  person ;  if
he  was  not,  he  was  represented  by  his  lieu¬
tenant.  At  these  Chapters  the  proceedings
of  the  various  Fehm  courts  were  reviewed,
and  hence  these  latter  made  a  return  of  the
names  of  the  persons  initiated,  the  suits
they  had  commenced,  the  sentences  they
had  passed,  and  the  punishments  they  had
inflicted.  The  Chapter-General  acted  also
as  a  court  of  appeals.  In  fact,  the  relation
of  a  Chapter-General  to  the  Fehm  courts
was  precisely  the  same  as  that  of  a  Grand
Lodge  of  Masons  to  its  subordinates.  The
resemblance,  too,  in  the  symbolic  character
of  the  two  institutions  was  striking.  But
here  the  resemblance  ended,  for  it  has  never
been  contended  that  there  was  or  could  be
any  connection  whatever  between  the  two
institutions.  But  the  coincidences  show
that  peculiar  spirit  and  love  of  mystery
which  prevailed  in  those  times,  and  the  in¬
fluence  of  which  was  felt  in  Masonry  as
well  as  in  the  Westphalian  tribunals,  and
all  the  other  secret  societies  of  the  Middle
Ages.  .  ,  .

The  crimes  of  which  the  Fehmgericht
claimed  a  jurisdiction  were,  according  to
the  statutes  passed  at  Arensburg  in  1490,
of  two  kinds:  those  cognizant  by  the  secret
tribunal,  and  those  cognizant  by  the  public
tribunal.  The  crimes  cognizant  by  the
secret  tribunal  were,  violations  of  the
secrets  of  Charlemagne  and  of  the  Fehm¬
gericht,  heresy,  apostasy,  peijurv,  and
witchcraft  or  maeic.  Those  cognizant  by
the  public  tribunal  were,  sacrilege,  theft,


WESTPHALIA


WHITE


879


rape,  robbery  of  women  in  childbirth,  trea¬
son,  highway  robbery,  murder  or  man¬
slaughter,  and  vagrancy.  Sometimes  the
catalogue  of  crimes  was  modified  and  often
enlarged.  There  was  one  period  when  all
the  crimes  mentioned  in  the  decalogue  were
included ;  and  indeed  there  was  no  positive
restriction  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  tribu¬
nals,  which  generally  were  governed  in
their  proceedings  by  what  they  deemed  ex¬
pedient  for  the  public  peace  and  safety.

In  the  early  history  of  the  institution,  its
trials  were  conducted  with  impartiality,  and
its  judgments  rendered  in  accordance  with
justice,  being  constantly  restrained  by
mercy,  so  that  they  were  considered  by  the
populace  as  being  of  great  advantage  in
those  times  of  lawlessness.  But  at  length
the  institution  became  corrupt,  and  often
aided  instead  of  checking  oppression,  a
change  which  finally  led  to  its  decay.

When  any  one  was  accused,  he  was  sum¬
moned  to  appear  before  the  tribunal  at  a  cer¬
tain  specified  time  and  place.  If  he  was  an
initiate,  the  summons  was  repeated  three
times ;  but  if  not,  that  is,  if  any  other  than
an  inhabitant  of  Westphalia,  the  summons
was  given  only  once.  If  he  appeared,  an
opportunity  was  afforded  him  of  defence.
An  initiate  could  purge  "himself  by  a  simple
oath  of  denial,  but  any  other  person  was
required  to  adduce  sufficient  testimony  of
his  innocence.  If  the  accused  did  not  ap-
ear,  nor  render  a  satisfactory  excuse  for
is  absence,  the  court  proceeded  to  declare
him  outlawed,  and  a  free  judge  was  dele¬
gated  to  put  him  to  death  wherever  found.
Where  three  free  judges  found  any  one  fla¬
grante  delicto,  or  in  the  very  act  of  committing
a  crime,  or  having  just  perpetrated  it,  they
were  authorized  to  put  him  to  death  with¬
out  the  formality  of  a  trial.  But  if  he  suc¬
ceeded  in  making  his  escape  before  the
penalty  was  inflicted,  he  could  not  on  a
subsequent  arrest  be  put  to  death.  His
case  must  then  be  brought  for  trial  before
a  tribunal.

The  sentence  of  the  court,  if  capital,
was  not  announced  to  the  criminal,  and
he  learned  it  only  when,  in  some  secret
place,  the  executioners  of  the  decree  of
the  Fehmgericht  met  him  and  placed  the
halter  around  his  neck  and  suspended  him
to  a  neighboring  tree.  The  punishment  of
death  was  always  by  hanging,  and  from  a
tree.  The  fact  that  a  dead  body  was  thus
found  in  the  forest,  was  an  intimation  to
those  who  found  it  that  the  person  had
died  by  the  judgment  of  the  secret  tri¬
bunal.

It  is  very  evident  that  an  institution  like
this  could  be  justified,  or  even  tolerated,
only  in  a  country  and  at  a  time  when  the
power  and  vices  of  the  nobles,  and  the  gen¬


eral  disorganization  of  society,  had  ren¬
dered  the  law  itself  powerless ;  and  when
in  the  hands  of  persons  of  irreproachable
character,  the  weak  could  only  thus  be
protected  from  the  oppressions  of  the
strong,  the  virtuous  from  the  aggression  of
the  vicious.  It  was  in  its  commencement
a  safeguard  for  society ;  and  hence  it  be¬
came  so  popular  that  its  initiates  num¬
bered  at  one  time  over  one  hundred  thou¬
sand,  and  men  of  rank  and  influence
sought  with  avidity  admission  into  its
circle.

In  time  the  institution  became  demoral¬
ized.  Purity  of  character  was  no  longer
insisted  on  as  a  qualification  for  admission.
Its  decrees  and  judgments  were  no  longer
marked  with  unfaltering  justice,  and,  instead
of  defending  the  weak  any  longer  from  the
oppressor,  it  often  became  itself  the  will¬
ing  instrument  of  oppression.  Efforts  were
made  from  time  to  time  to  inaugurate  re¬
forms,  but  the  prevailing  spirit  of  the  age,
now  beginning  to  be  greatly  improved  by
the  introduction  of  the  Roman  law  and  the
spread  of  the  Protestant  religion,  was  op¬
posed  to  the  self-constituted  authority  of
the  tribunals.  They  began  to  dissolve
almost  insensibly,  and  after  the  close  of  the
sixteenth  century  we  hear  no  more  of  them,
although  there  never  was  any  positive  de¬
cree  of  dissolution  enacted  or  promulgated
by  the  State.  They  were  destroyed,  not  by
any  edict  of  law,  but  by  the  progressive
spirit  of  the  people.

West  Virginia.  Originally,  all  the
Lodges  in  the  western  part  of  Virginia  were
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  that  State.  But  the  new  State  of  West
Virginia  having  been  formed  in  1863,  nine
Lodges  sent  delegates  to  a  convention  held
at  Fairmount,  April  12,  1865,  which,  after
some  discussion,  adjourned  to  meet  again  on
May  10th  of  the  same  year,  when  the  Grand
Lodge  of  West  Virginia  was  organized,  and
W.  J.  Bates  elected  Grand  Master.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch
Masons  of  West  Virginia  was  organized,
November  16,  1871,  by  a  convention  of  five
Chapters.  The  Grand  Chapter  of  Virginia,
under  which  these  Chapters  held  their  War¬
rants,  had  previously  given  its  consent  to
the  organization.

White.  White  is  one  of  the  most
ancient  as  well  as  most  extensively  diffused
of  the  symbolic  colors.  It  is  to  be  found
in  all  the  ancient  mysteries,  where  it  con¬
stituted,  as  it  does  in  Masonry,  the  investi¬
ture  of  the  candidate.  It  always,  however,
and  everywhere  has  borne  the  same  signifi¬
cation  as  the  symbol  of  purity  and  inno¬
cence.

In  the  religious  observances  of  the  He¬
brews,  white  was  the  color  of  one  of  the


880


WHITE


WHITE


curtains  of  the  tabernacle,  where,  according
to  Josephus,  it  was  a  symbol  of  the  element
of  earth;  and  it  was  employed  in  the  con¬
struction  of  the  ephod  of  the  high  priest,
of  his  girdle,  and  of  the  breastplate.  The
word  pS,  laban,  which  in  the  Hebrew  lan¬
guage  signifies  “to  make  white,”  also  de¬
notes  “  to  purify ;  ”  and  there  are  to  be
found  throughout  the  Scriptures  many  allu¬
sions  to  the  color  as  an  emblem  of  purity.
“Though  thy  sins  be  as  scarlet,”  says  Isaiah,
“  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow.”  Jeremiah,
describing  the  once  innocent  condition
of  Zion,  says,  “her  Nazarites  were  purer
than  snow,  they  were  whiter  than  milk.”
“Many,”  says  Daniel,  “shall  be  purified
and  made  white.”  In  Eevelation,  a  white
stone  was  the  reward  promised  by  the  Spirit
to  those  who  overcame;  and  again,  “he
that  overcometh,  the  same  shall  be  clothed
in  white  garments ;  ”  and  in  another  part  of
the  same  book  the  Apostle  is  instructed  to
say  that  fine  linen,  clean  and  white,  is  the
righteousness  of  the  saints.  The  ancient
prophets  always  imagined  the  Deity  clothed
in  white,  because,  says  Portal,  (Des  Couleurs
Symboliques,  p.  35, )  “  white  is  the  color  of
absolute  truth,  of  Him  who  is;  it  alone  re¬
flects  all  the  luminous  rays ;  it  is  the  unity
whence  all  the  primitive  colors  emanate.”
Thus  Daniel,  in  one  of  his  prophetic  visions,
saw  the  Ancient  of  days,  “  whose  garment
was  white  as  snow,  and  the  hair  of  his  head
like  pure  wool.”  Here,  says  Dr.  Henry,
[Comm,  in  loco,)  the  whiteness  of  the  gar¬
ment  “  noted  the  splendor  and  purity  of
God  in  all  the  administrations  of  his  justice.”

Among  the  Gentile  nations,  the  same
reverence  was  paid  to  this  color.  The
Egyptians  decorated  the  head  of  their
deity,  Osiris,  with  a  white  tiara.  In  the
school  of  Pythagoras,  the  sacred  hymns
were  chanted  in  white  robes.  The  Druids
clothed  their  initiates  who  had  arrived  at
the  ultimate  degree,  or  that  of  perfection,
in  white  vestments.  In  all  the  mysteries
of  other  nations  of  antiquity,  the  same  cus¬
tom  wa3  observed.  White  was,  in  general,
the  garment  of  the  Gentile  as  well  as  of  the
Hebrew  priest3  in  the  performance  of  their
sacred  rites.  As  the  divine  power  was  sup¬
posed  to  be  represented  on  earth  by  the
priesthood,  in  all  nations  the  sovereign
pontiff  was  clad  in  white.  Aaron  was  di¬
rected  to  enter  the  sanctuary  only  in  white
garments;  in  Persia,  the  Magi  wore  white
robes,  because,  as  they  said,  they  alone  were
pleasing  to  the  Deity ;  and  the  white  tunic
of  Ormuzd  is  still  the  characteristic  garment
of  the  modern  Parsees.

White,  among  the  ancients,  was  conse¬
crated  to  the  dead,  because  it  was  the  sym¬
bol  of  the  regeneration  of  the  soul.  On
the  monuments  of  Thebes  the  manes  or


ghosts  are  represented  as  clothed  in  white;
the  Egyptians  wrapped  their  dead  in  white
linen;  Homer  (Iliad,  xviii.  353,)  refers  to  the
same  custom  when  he  makes  the  attendants
cover  the  dead  body  of  Patroclus,  pharei
leuko,  with  a  white  pall ;  and  Pausanias  tells
us  that  the  Messenians  practised  the  same
customs,  clothing  their  dead  in  white,  and
placing  crowns  upon  their  heads,  indicating
by  this  double  symbolism  the  triumph  of
the  soul  over  the  empire  of  death.

The  Hebrews  had  the  same  usage.  St.
Matthew  (xxvii.  59,)  tells  us  that  Joseph
of  Arimathea  wrapped  the  dead  body  of  our
Lord  “in  a  clean  linen  cloth.”  Adopting
this  as  a  suggestion,  Christian  artists  have,
in  their  paintings  of  the  Saviour  after  hi3
resurrection,  depicted  him  in  a  white  robe.
And  it  is  with  this  idea  that  in  the  Apoca¬
lypse  white  vestments  are  said  to  be  the
symbols  of  the  regeneration  of  souls,  and
the  reward  of  the  elect.  It  is  this  consecra¬
tion  of  white  to  the  dead  that  caused  it  to
be  adopted  as  the  color  of  mourning  among
the  nations  of  antiquity.  As  the  victor  in
the  games  was  clothed  in  white,  so  the  same
color  became  the  symbol  of  the  victory
achieved  by  the  departed  in  the  last  combat
of  the  soul  with  death.  “  The  friends  of  the
deceased  wore,”  says  Plutarch,  “his  livery,
in  commemoration  of  his  triumph.”  The
modern  mourning  in  black  is  less  philo¬
sophic  and  less  symbolic  than  this  ancient
one  in  white.

In  Speculative  Masonry,  white  is  the
symbol  of  purity.  This  symbolism  com¬
mences  at  the  earliest  point  of  initiation,
when  the  white  apron  is  presented  to  the
candidate  as  a  symbol  of  purity  of  life  and
rectitude  of  conduct.  Wherever  in  any  of
the  subsequent  initiations  this  color  ap¬
pears,  it  is  always  to  be  interpreted  as  sym¬
bolizing  the  same  idea.  In  the  thirty-third
degree  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Eite,  the  Sovereign  Inspector  is  in¬
vested  with  a  white  scarf  as  inculcating
that  virtuous  deportment  above  the  tongue
of  all  reproach  which  should  distinguish
the  possessors  of  that  degree,  the  highest  in
the  Eite.

This  symbolism  of  purity  was  most  prob¬
ably  derived  by  the  Masons  from  that  of
the  primitive  church,  where  a  white  gar¬
ment  was  placed  on  the  catechumen  who
was  about  to  be  baptized,  as  a  token  that
he  had  put  off1  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and,
being  cleansed  from  his  former  sins,  had
obliged  himself  to  maintain  an  unspotted
life.  The  ancient  symbolism  of  regenera¬
tion  which  appertained  to  the  ancient  idea
of  the  color  white  has  not  been  adopted  in
Masonry ;  and  yet  it  would  be  highly  ap¬
propriate  in  an  Institution  one  of  whose
chief  dogmas  is  the  resurrection.


WHITE


WIDOW’S


881


White  Ball.  In  Freemasonry,  equiv¬
alent  to  a  favorable  or  affirmative  vote.
The  custom  of  using  white  and  black  balls
seems  to  have  been  derived  from  the  Ro¬
mans,  who  in  the  earlier  days  of  the  re¬
public  used  white  and  black  balls  in  their
judicial  trials,  which  were  cast  into  an  urn,
the  former  acquitting  and  with  the  latter
condemning  the  accused.

White  Cross  Knights.  A  title
sometimes  applied  to  the  Knights  Hos¬
pitallers  of  St.  John,  from  the  color  of  their
cross.  Porter  (Hist.  Knts.  of  Malta,  i.  166,)
says:  “Yilliers  hastily  assembled  a  troop
of  White  Cross  Knights,  and,  issuing  from
the  city  by  a  side  gate,  made  a  circuit  so
as,  if  possible,  to  fall  upon  the  flank  of  the
foe  unperceived.”

White  Mantle,  Order  of  the.

The  Teutonic  Knights  were  so  denomi¬
nated  in  allusion  to  the  color  of  their
cloaks,  on  which  they  bore  a  black  cross.

White  Masonry.  ( Magonnerie
blanche.)  A  title  given  by  French  writers
to  Female  Masonry,  or  the  Masonry  of
Adoption,

White  Stone.  A  symbol  in  the  Mark
degree  referring  to  the  passage  in  the
Apocalypse  (ii.  17):  “To  him  that  over-
cometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden
manna;  and  I  will  give  him  a  white  stone,
and  in  the  stone  a  new  name  written,  which
no  man  knoweth,  saving  he  that  receiveth
it.”  In  this  passage  it  is  supposed  that  the
Evangelist  alluded  to  the  stones  or  tesserae
which,  among  the  ancients  and  the  early
Christians,  were  used  as  tokens  of  alliance
and  friendship.  Hence  in  the  Mark  de¬
gree,  the  white  stone  and  the  new  name  in¬
scribed  upon  it  is  a  symbol  of  the  covenant
made  between  the  possessors  of  the  degree,
which  will  in  all  future  time,  and  under
every  circumstance  of  danger  or  distress,
secure  the  kind  and  fraternal  assistance  of
all  upon  whom  the  same  token  has  been
bestowed.  In  the  symbolism  of  the  degree
the  candidate  represents  that  white  stone
upon  whom  the  new  name  as  a  Mark  Master
is  to  be  inscribed.  See  Mark  and  Tessera
Hospitalis.

White,  W’illiani  Henry.  Distin¬
guished  for  his  services  to  the  Craft  of  Eng¬
land,  whom  he  served  as  Grand  Secretary
for  the  long  period  of  forty-seven  years.
He  was  the  son  of  William  White,  who  was
also  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England  for  thirty-two  years,  the  office
having  thus  been  held  by  father  and  son
for  seventy-nine  years.  William  Henry
White  was  born  in  1778.  On  April  16,
1799,  he  was  initiated  in  Emulation  Lodge,
No.  12,  now  called  the  Lodge  of  Emulation,
No.  21,  having  been  nominated  by  his
father.  December  15,  1800,  he  was  elected
6  L  66


Master  of  the  Lodge,  and  presided  until
1809.  In  1805  he  was  appointed  a  Grand
Steward,  and  in  1810  Grand  Secretary,  as
the  assistant  of  his  father.  This  office  was
held  by  them  conjointly  for  three  years.
In  1813,  at  the  union  of  the  two  Grand
Lodges,  he  was  appointed,  with  Edwards
Harper,  Joint  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Uni¬
ted  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  in  1838
sole  Grand  Secretary.  In  1857,  after  a  ser¬
vice  of  nearly  half  a  century,  he  retired  from
the  office,  the  Grand  Lodge  unanimously  vot¬
ing  him  a  retiring  pension  equal  in  amount
to  his  salary.  On  that  occasion  the  Earl  of
Zetland,  Grand  Master,  said :  “  I  know  of
no  one,  and  I  believe  there  never  was  any
one  who  has  done  more,  who  has  rendered
more  valuable  services  to  Masonry  than
our  worthy  Brother  White.”  In  view  of
the  great  names  in  Masonic  literature  and
labor  which  preceded  him,  the  eulogium  will
be  deemed  exaggerated ;  but  the  devotion
of  the  Grand  Secretary  to  the  Order,  and
his  valuable  services  during  his  long  and
active  life,  cannot  be  denied.  During  the
latter  years  of  his  official  term,  he  was
charged  with  inactivity  and  neglect  of  duty,
but  the  fault  has  been  properly  attributed
to  the  increasing  infirmities  of  age.  A  ser¬
vice  of  plate  was  presented  to  him  by  the
Craft,  June  20,  1850,  as  a  testimonial  of
esteem.  He  died  April  5,  1866.

Widow’s  Son.  In  Ancient  Craft  Ma¬
sonry,  the  title  applied  to  Hiram,  the  archi¬
tect  of  the  Temple,  because  he  is  said,  in  the
First  Book  of  Kings,  (vii.  14,)  to  have  been
“a  widow’s  son  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali.”
The  Adonhiramite  Masons  have  a  tradition
which  Chapron  gives  ( Necessaire  Maqonn.,
p.  101,)  in  the  following  words  :  “The  Ma¬
sons  call  themselves  the  widow’s  sons,  be¬
cause,  after  the  death  of  our  respectable
Master,  the  Masons  took  care  of  his  mother,
w'hose  childen  they  called  themselves,  be¬
cause  Adonhiram  had  always  considered
them  as  his  brethren.  But  the  French
Masons  subsequently  changed  the  myth  and
called  themselves  ‘Sons  of  the  Widow,’  and
for  this  reason.  ‘As  the  wife  of  Hiram
remained  a  widow  after  her  husband  was
murdered,  the  Masons,  who  regard  them¬
selves  as  the  descendants  of  Hiram,  call
themselves  lions  of  the  Widow.’  ”  But  this
myth  is  a  pure  invention,  and  is  without
the  scriptural  foundation  of  the  York  myth,
which  makes  Hiram  himself  the  widow’s
son.  But  in  French  Masonry  the  term
“Son  of  the  Widow”  is  synonymous  with
“  Mason.”

The  adherents  of  the  exiled  house  of
Stuart,  when  seeking  to  organize  a  system
of  political  Masonry  by  which  they  hoped
to  secure  the  restoration  of  the  family  to
the  throne  of  England,  transferred  to


882


WIFE


WINDING


Charles  II.  the  tradition  of  Hiram  Ahif
betrayed  by  his  followers,  and  called  him
“  the  Widow’s  Son,”  because  he  was  the
son  of  Henrietta  Maria,  the  widow  of
Charles  I.  For  the  same  reason  they  sub¬
sequently  applied  the  phrase  to  his  brother,
James  II.

Wife  and  Daughter,  Mason’s.

See  Mason's  Wife  and  Daughter.

Williclmshad.  Congress  of.  At

Wilhelmsbad,  near  the  city  of  Hanau  in
Hesse-Cassel,  was  held  the  most  important
Masonic  Congress  of  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury.  It  was  convoked  by  Ferdinand,
Duke  of  Brunswick,  Grand  Master  of  the
Order  of  Strict  Observance,  and  was  opened
July  16,  1782.  Its  duration  extended  to
thirty  sessions,  and  in  its  discussions  the
most  distinguished  Masons  of  Germany
were  engaged.  Neither  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Germany,  nor  that  of  Sweden,  was
represented;  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
Three  Globes,  at  Berlin,  sent  only  a  letter:
but  there  were  delegates  from  Upper  and
Lower  Germany,  from  Holland,  Russia,
Italy,  France,  and  Austria;  and  the  Order
of  the  Illuminati  was  represented  by  the
Baron  von  Knigge.  It  is  not  therefore
surprising  that  the  most  heterogenous
opinions  were  expressed.  Its  avowed  ob¬
ject  was  the  reform  of  the  Masonic  system,
and  its  disentanglement  from  the  confused
mass  of  rites  and  high  degrees  with  which
French  and  German  pretenders  or  enthu¬
siasts  had  been  for  years  past  overwhelming
it.  Important  topics  were  proposed,  such
as  the  true  origin  of  Speculative  Masonry,
whether  it  was  merely  conventional  and
the  result  of  modern  thought,  or  whether  it
was  the  offspring  of  a  more  ancient  order,
and,  if  so,  what  was  that  order;  whether
there  were  any  Superiors  General  then  ex¬
isting,  and  who  these  Unknown  Superiors
were,  etc.  These  and  kindred  questions
were  thoroughly  discussed,  but  not  defined,
and  the  Congress  was  eventually  closed
without  coming  to  any  other  positive  deter¬
mination  than  that  Freemasonry  was  not
essentially  connected  with  Templarism,  and
that,  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Rite
of  Strict  Observance,  the  Freemasons  were
not  the  successors  of  the  Knights  Templars.
The  real  effect  of  the  Congress  of  Wil¬
helmsbad  was  the  abolition  of  that  Rite,
which  soon  after  drooped  and  died.

Will.  In  some  of  the  continental  Rites,
and  in  certain  high  degrees,  it  is  a  custom
to  require  the  recipiendarv  to  make,  before
his  initiation,  a  will  and  testament,  exhib¬
iting  what  are  his  desires  as  to  the  distribu¬
tion  of  his  property  at  his  decease.  The
object  seems  to  be  to  add  solemnity  to  the
ceremony,  and  to  impress  the  candidate
with  the  thought  of  death.  But  I  am  in¬


clined  to  think  that  it  is  a  custom  which
would  be  “  more  honored  in  the  breach  than
the  observance.”  It  is  not  practised  in  the
York  and  American  Rites.

Wilfcon  Manuscript.  In  the  mar¬
ginal  notes  to  the  Manifesto  of  the  Lodge  of
Antiquity,  published  in  1778,  there  is  refer¬
ence  to  an  “0.  MS.  in  the  hands  of  Mr.
Wilson  of  Broom  head,  near  Sheffield,
Yorkshire,  written  in  the  reign  of  King
Henry  VIII.”  It  seems,  from  the  context,
to  have  been  cited  as  authority  for  the  ex¬
istence  of  a  General  Assembly  of  the  Craft
at  the  city  of  York.  But  no  part  of  the
MS.  has  ever  been  printed  or  transcribed,
and  it  is  now  apparently  lost.

Winding  Stairs.  In  the  First  Book
of  Kings  (vi.  8)  it  is  said:  “The  door  for
the  middle  chamber  was  in  the  right  side
of  the  house ;  and  they  went  up  with  wind¬
ings  stairs  into  the  middle  chamber,  and
out  of  the  middle  into  the  third.”  From
this  passage  the  Masons  of  the  last  century
adopted  the  symbol  of  the  winding  stairs,
and  introduced  it  into  the  Fellow  Craft’s
degree,  where  it  has  ever  since  remained,
in  the  York  and  American  Rites.  In  one
of  the  high  degrees  of  the  Scottish  Rite  the
winding  stairs  are  called  cochleus,  which  is
a  corruption  of  cochlis,  a  spiral  staircase.
The  Hebrew  word  is  lulira,  ltom  the  obso¬
lete  root  lul,  to  roll  or  wind.  The  whole
story  of  the  winding  stairs  iu  the  second
degree  of  Masonry  is  a  mere  myth,  without
any  other  foundation  than  the  slight  allu¬
sion  in  the  Book  of  Kings  which  has  been
just  cited,  and  it  derives  its  only  value
from  the  symbolism  taught  in  its  legend.
See  Middle  Chamber  and  Winding  Stairs,
Legend  of  the.

Winding  Stairs,  Legend  of  the.

I  formerly  so  fully  investigated  the  true
meaning  of  the  legend  of  the  winding  stairs,
as  taught  in  the  degree  of  Fellow  Craft,  that
I  can  now  find  nothing  to  add  to  what  I
have  already  said  in  my  work  on  The  Sym¬
bolism  of  Freemasonry,  published  in  1869.
I  might,  in  writing  a  new  article,  change
the  language,  but  I  could  furnish  no  new
idea.  I  shall  not,  therefore,  hesitate  to
transfer  much  of  what  I  have  said  on  this
subject  in  that  work  to  the  present  article.
It  is  an  enlargement  and  development  of
the  meagre  explanations  given  in  the  ordi¬
nary  lecture  of  Webb.

In  an  investigation  of  the  symbolism  of
the  winding  stairs,  we  shall  be  directed  to
the  true  explanation  by  a  reference  to
their  origin,  their  number,  the  objects
which  they  recall,  and  their  termination,
but  above  all  by  a  consideration  of  the  great
design  which  an  ascent  upon  them  was  in¬
tended  to  accomplish.

The  steps  of  this  winding  staircase  com-


WINDING


WINDING


883


menced,  we  are  informed,  at  the  porch  of
the  Temple ;  that  is  to  say,  at  its  very  en¬
trance.  But  nothing  is  more  undoubted  in
the  science  of  Masonic  symbolism  than  that
the  Temple  was  the  representative  of  the
world  purified  by  the  Shekinah,  or  the  Di¬
vine  Presence.  The  world  of  the  profane
is  without  the  Temple ;  the  world  of  the  in¬
itiated  is  within  its  sacred  walls.  Hence  to
enter  the  Temple,  to  pass  within  the  porch,
to  be  made  a  Mason,  and  to  be  born  into  the
world  of  Masonic  light,  are  all  synonymous
and  convertible  terms.  Here,  then,  the  sym¬
bolism  of  the  winding  stairs  begins.

The  Apprentice,  having  entered  within
the  porch  of  the  temple,  has  begun  his
Masonic  life.  But  the  first  degree  in  Ma¬
sonry,  like  the  lesser  mysteries  of  the  an¬
cient  systems  of  initiation,  is  only  a  prepa¬
ration  and  purification  for  something
higher.  The  Entered  Apprentice  is  the
child  in  Masonry.  The  lessons  which  he
receives  are  simply  intended  to  cleanse  the
heart  and  prepare  the  recipient  for  that
mental  illumination  which  is  to  be  given
in  the  succeeding  degrees.

As  a  Fellow  Craft,  he  has  advanced  an¬
other  step,  and  as  the  degree  is  emblematic
of  youth,  so  it  is  here  that  the  intellectual
education  of  the  candidate  begins.  And
therefore,  here,  at  the  very  spot  which  sep¬
arates  the  porch  from  the  sanctuary,  where
childhood  ends  and  manhood  begins,  he
finds  stretching  out  before  him  a  winding
stair  which  invites  him,  as  it  were,  to  as¬
cend,  and  which,  as  the  symbol  of  discipline
and  instruction,  teaches  him  that  here  must
commence  his  Masonic  labor  —  here  he
must  enter  upon  those  glorious  though  dif¬
ficult  researches  the  end  of  which  is  to  be
the  possession  of  divine  truth.  The  wind¬
ing  stairs  begin  after  the  candidate  has
passed  within  the  porch  and  between  the
pillars  of  strength  and  establishment,  as  a
significant  symbol  to  teach  him  that  as  soon
as  he  has  passed  beyond  the  years  of  irra¬
tional  childhood,  and  commenced  his  en¬
trance  upon  manly  life,  the  laborious  task
of  self-improvement  is  the  first  duty  that  is
placed  before  him.  He  cannot  stand  still,
if  he  would  be  worthy  of  his  vocation ;  his
destiny  as  an  immortal  being  requires  him
to  ascend,  step  by  step,  until  he  has  reached
the  summit,  where  the  treasures  of  knowl¬
edge  await  him.

The  number  of  these  steps  in  all  the  sys¬
tems  has  been  odd.  Vitruvius  remarks  —
and  the  coincidence  is  at  least  curious  —
that  the  ancient  temples  were  always  as¬
cended  by  an  odd  number  of  steps;  and  he
assigns  as  the  reason,  that,  commencing
with  the  right  foot  at  the  bottom,  the  wor¬
shipper  would  find  the  same  foot  foremost
when  he  entered  the  temple,  which  was


considered  as  a  fortunate  omen.  But  the
fact  is,  that  the  symbolism  of  numbers  was
borrowed  by  the  Masons  from  Pythagoras,
in  whose  system  of  philosophy  it  plays  an
important  part,  and  in  which  odd  numbers
were  considered  as  more  perfect  than  even
ones.  Hence,  throughout  the  Masonic  sys¬
tem  we  find  a  predominance  of  odd  num¬
bers;  and  while  three,  five,  seven,  nine,  fif¬
teen,  and  twenty-seven,  are  all-important
symbols,  we  seldom  find  a  reference  to  two,
four,  six,  eight,  or  ten.  The  odd  number
of  the  stairs  was  therefore  intended  to  sym¬
bolize  the  idea  of  perfection,  to  which  it
was  the  object  of  the  aspirant  to  attain.

As  to  the  particular  number  of  the
stairs,  this  has  varied  at  different  periods.
Tracing-boards  of  the  last  century  have
been  found,  in  which  only  five  steps  are  de¬
lineated,  and  others  in  which  they  amount
to  seven.  The  Prestonian  lectures,  used  in
England  in  the  beginning  of  this  century,
gave  the  whole  number  as  thirty- eight,  di¬
viding  them  into  series  of  one,  three,  five,
seven,  nine,  and  eleven.  The  error  of
making  an  even  number,  which  was  a  vio¬
lation  of  the  Pythagorean  principle  of  odd
numbers  as  the  symbol  of  perfection,  was
corrected  in  the  Hemming  lectures,  adopted
at  the  union  of  the  two  Grand  Lodges  of
England,  by  striking  out  the  eleven,  which
was  also  objectionable  as  receiving  a  secta¬
rian  explanation.  In  this  country  the
number  was  still  further  reduced  to  fifteen,
divided  into  three  series  of  three,  five,  and
seven.  I  shall  adopt  this  American  division
in  explaining  the  symbolism;  although,
after  all,  the  particular  number  of  the  steps,
or  the  peculiar  method  of  their  division
into  series,  will  not  in  any  way  affect  the
general  symbolism  of  the  whole  legend.

The  candidate,  then,  in  the  second  de¬
gree  of  Masonry,  represents  a  man  starting
forth  on  the  journey  of  life,  with  the  great
task  before  him  of  self-improvement.  For
the  faithful  performance  of  this  task,  a  re¬
ward  is  promised,  which  reward  consists  in
the  development  of  all  his  intellectual  fac¬
ulties,  the  moral  and  spiritual  elevation  of
his  character,  and  the  acquisition  of  truth
and  knowdedge.  Now,  the  attainment  of
this  moral  and  intellectual  condition  sup¬
poses  an  elevation  of  character,  an  ascent
from  a  lowrer  to  a  higher  life,  and  a  passage
of  toil  and  difficulty,  through  rudimentary
instruction,  to  the  full  fruition  of  wisdom.
This  is  therefore  beautifully  symbolized  by
the  winding  stairs,  at  whose  foot  the  aspi¬
rant  stands  ready  to  climb  the  toilsome
steep,  while  at  its  top  is  placed  “  that  hiero¬
glyphic  bright  which  none  but  Craftsmen
ever  saw',”  as  the  emblem  of  divine  truth.
And  hence  a  distinguished  writer  has  said
that  “  these  steps,  like  all  the  Masonic  sym-


884


WINDING


WINDING


bols,  are  illustrative  of  discipline  and  doc¬
trine,  as  well  as  of  natural,  mathematical,
and  metaphysical  science,  and  open  to  us
an  extensive  range  of  moral  aud  specula¬
tive  inquiry.”

The  candidate,  incited  by  the  love  of  vir¬
tue  and  the  desire  of  knowledge,  and  withal
eager  for  the  reward  of  truth  which  is  set
before  him,  begins  at  once  the  toilsome  as¬
cent.  At  each  division  he  pauses  to  gather
instruction  from  the  symbolism  which  these
divisions  present  to  his  attention.

At  the  first  pause  which  he  makes  he  is
instructed  in  the  peculiar  organization  of
the  order  of  which  he  has  become  a  disci¬
ple.  But  the  information  here  given,  if
taken  in  its  naked,  literal  sense,  is  barren,
and  unworthy  of  his  labor.  The  rank  of
the  officers  who  govern,  and  the  names  of
the  degrees  which  constitute  the  Institution,
can  give  him  no  knowledge  which  he  has
not  before  possessed.  We  must  look  there¬
fore  to  the  symbolic  meaning  of  these  allu¬
sions  for  any  value  which  may  be  attached
to  this  part  of  the  ceremony.

The  reference  to  the  organization  of  the
Masonic  institution  is  intended  to  remind
the  aspirant  of  the  union  of  men  in  society,
and  the  development  of  the  social  state  out
of  the  state  of  nature.  He  is  thus  re¬
minded,  in  the  very  outset  of  his  journey,
of  the  blessings  which  arise  from  civiliza¬
tion,  and  of  the  fruits  of  virtue  and  knowl¬
edge  which  are  derived  from  that  condition.
Masonry  itself  is  the  result  of  civilization ;
while,  in  grateful  return,  it  has  been  one  of
the  most  important  means  of  extending
that  condition  of  mankind.

All  the  monuments  of  antiquity  that  the
ravages  of  time  have  left,  combine  to  prove
that  man  had  no  sooner  emerged  from  the
savage  into  the  social  state,  than  he  com¬
menced  the  organization  of  religious  mys¬
teries,  and  the  separation,  by  a  sort  of  divine
instinct,  of  the  sacred  from  the  profane.
Then  came  the  invention  of  architecture  as
a  means  of  providing  convenient  dwellings
and  necessary  shelter  from  the  inclemencies
and  vicissitudes  of  the  seasons,  with  all  the
mechanical  arts  connected  with  it;  and
lastly,  geometry,  as  a  necessary  science  to
enable  the  cultivators  of  land  to  measure
and  designate  the  limits  of  their  possessions.
All  these  are  claimed  as  peculiar  character¬
istics  of  Speculative  Masonry,  w'hich  may
be  considered  as  the  type  of  civilization,  the
former  bearing  the  same  relation  to  the  pro¬
fane  world  as  the  latter  does  to  the  savage
state.  Hence  we  at  once  see  the  fitness  of
the  symbolism  which  commences  the  aspi¬
rant’s  upward  progress  in  the  cultivation  of
knowledge  and  the  search  after  truth,  by
recalling  to  his  mind  the  condition  of  civili¬
zation  and  the  social  union  of  mankind  as


necessary  preparations  for  the  attainment
of  these  objects.  In  the  allusions  to  the
officers  of  a  Lodge,  and  the  degrees  of  Ma¬
sonry  as  explanatory  of  the  organization
of  our  own  society,  we  clothe  in  our  sym¬
bolic  language  the  history  of  the  organiza¬
tion  of  society.

Advancing  in  his  progress,  the  candi¬
date  is  invited  to  contemplate  another
series  of  instructions.  The  human  senses,
as  the  appropriate  channels  through  which
we  receive  all  our  ideas  of  perception,
and  which,  therefore,  constitute  the  most
important  sources  of  our  knowledge,  are
here  referred  to  as  a  symbol  of  intellec¬
tual  cultivation.  Architecture,  as  the  most
important  of  the  arts  which  conduce  to
the  comfort  of  mankind,  is  also  alluded  to
here,  not  simply  because  it  is  so  closely
connected  with  the  operative  institution  of
Masonry,  but  also  as  the  type  of  all  the
other  useful  arts.  In  his  second  pause,  in
the  ascent  of  the  winding  stairs,  the  aspi¬
rant  is  therefore  reminded  of  the  necessity
of  cultivating  practical  knowledge.

So  far,  then,  the  instructions  he  has  re¬
ceived  relate  to  his  own  condition  in  society
as  a  member  of  the  great  social  compact,
and  to  his  means  of  becoming,  by  a  knowl¬
edge  of  the  arts  of  practical  life,  a  necessary
and  useful  member  of  that  society.

But  his  motto  will  be,  “  Excelsior.”  Still
must  he  go  onward  and  forward.  The  stair
is  still  before  him ;  its  summit  is  not  yet
reached,  and  still  further  treasures  of  wis¬
dom  are  to  be  sought  for,  or  the  reward  will
not  be  gained,  nor  the  middle  chamber ,  the
abiding-place  of  truth,  be  reached.

In  his  third  pause,  he  therefore  arrives  at
that  point  in  which  the  whole  circle  of  hu¬
man  science  is  to  be  explained.  Symbols,
we  know,  are  in  themselves  arbitrary  and
of  conventional  signification,  and  the  com¬
plete  circle  of  human  science  might  have
been  as  well  symbolized  by  any  other  sign
or  series  of  doctrines  as  by  the  seven  liberal
arts  and  sciences.  But  Masonry  is  an  insti¬
tution  of  the  olden  time;  and  this  selection
of  the  liberal  arts  and  sciences  as  a  symbol
of  the  completion  of  human  learning  is  one
of  the  most  pregnant  evidences  that  we  have
of  its  antiquity.

In  the  seventh  century,  and  for  a  long
time  afterwards,  the  circle  of  instruction  to
which  all  the  learning  of  the  most  eminent
schools  and  most  distinguished  philosophers
was  confined,  was  limited  to  what  were  then
called  the  liberal  arts  and  sciences,  and
consisted  of  two  branches,  the  trivium  and
the  quadrivium.  The  trivium  included
grammar,  rhetoric,  and  logic;  the  quad¬
rivium  comprehended  arithmetic,  geometry,
music,  and  astronomy.

“  These  seven  heads,”  says  Enfield,  “  were


WINDING


WINDING


885


supposed  to  include  universal  knowledge.
He  who  was  master  of  these  was  thought
to  have  no  need  of  a  preceptor  to  explain
any  books  or  to  solve  any  questions  which
lay  within  the  compass  of  human  reason,
the  knowledge  of  the  trivium  having  fur¬
nished  him  with  the  key  to  all  language,
and  that  of  the  quadrivium  having  opened
to  him  the  secret  laws  of  nature.”

At  a  period,  says  the  same  writer,  when
few  were  instructed  in  the  trivium,  and  very
few  studied  the  quadrivium,  to  be  master  of
both  was  sufficient  to  complete  the  character
of  a  philosopher.  The  propriety,  therefore,
of  adopting  the  seven  liberal  arts  and  sci¬
ences  as  a  symbol  of  the  completion  of  hu¬
man  learning  is  apparent.  The  candidate,
having  reached  this  point,  is  now  supposed
to  have  accomplished  the  task  upon  which
he  nad  entered  —  he  has  reached  the  last
step,  and  is  now  ready  to  receive  the  full
fruition  of  human  learning.

So  far,  then,  we  are  able  to  comprehend
the  true  symbolism  of  the  winding  stairs.
They  represent  the  progress  of  an  inquiring
mind,  with  the  toils  and  labors  of  intellect¬
ual  cultivation  and  study,  and  the  prepara¬
tory  acquisition  of  all  human  science,  as  a
preliminary  step  to  the  attainment  of  divine
truth,  which,  it  must  be  remembered,  is
always  symbolized  in  Masonry  by  the
Word.

Here  let  me  again  allude  to  the  symbol¬
ism  of  numbers,  which  is  for  the  first  time
presented  to  the  consideration  of  the  Ma¬
sonic  student  in  the  legend  of  the  winding
stairs.  The  theory  of  numbers  as  the  sym¬
bols  of  certain  qualities  was  originally  bor¬
rowed  by  the  Masons  from  the  school  of
Pythagoras.  It  will  be  impossible,  how¬
ever,  to  develop  this  doctrine,  in  its  entire
extent,  in  the  present  article,  for  the  nu¬
meral  symbolism  of  Masonry  would  itself
constitute  materials  for  an  ample  essay.
It  will  be  sufficient  to  advert  to  the  fact
that  the  total  number  of  the  steps,  amount¬
ing  in  all  to  fifteen  in  the  American  system,
is  a  significant  symbol.  For  fifteen  was  a
sacred  number  among  the  Orientals,  because
the  letters  of  the  holy  name  JAH,  were,
in  their  numerical  value,  equivalent  to  fif¬
teen;  and  hence  a  figure  in  which  the
nine  digits  were  so  disposed  as  to  make
fifteen  either  way  when  added  together
perpendicularly,  horizontally,  or  diago¬
nally,  constituted  one  of  their  most  sacred
talismans.  The  fifteen  steps  in  the  winding
stairs  are  therefore  symbolic  of  the  name
of  God.

But  we  are  not  yet  done.  It  will  be  re¬
membered  that  a  reward  was  promised  for
all  this  toilsome  ascent  of  the  winding
stairs.  Now,  what  are  the  wages  of  a  Spec¬
ulative  Mason  ?  Not  money,  nor  corn,  nor


wine,  nor  oil.  All  these  are  but  symbols.
His  wages  are  Truth,  or  that  approximation
to  it  which  will  be  most  appropriate  to  the
degree  into  which  he  has  been  initiated.
It  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful,  but  at  the
same  time  most  abstruse,  doctrines  of  the
science  of  Masonic  symbolism  that  the
Mason  is  ever  to  be  in  search  of  truth,  but
is  never  to  find  it.  This  divine  truth,  the
object  of  all  his  labors,  is  symbolized  by  the
Word,  for  which  we  all  know  he  can  only
obtain  a  substitute  ;  and  this  is  intended  to
teach  the  humiliating  but  necessary  lesson
that  the  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  God
and  of  man’s  relation  to  him,  which  knowl¬
edge  constitutes  divine  truth,  can  never  be
acquired  in  this  life.  It  is  only  when  the
portals  of  the  grave  open  to  us,  and  give  us
an  entrance  into  a  more  perfect  life,  that
this  knowledge  is  to  be  attained.  “  Happy
is  the  man,”  says  the  father  of  lyric  poetry,
“  who  descends  beneath  the  hollow  earth,
having  beheld  these  mysteries:  he  knows
the  end,  he  knows  the  origin  of  life.”

The  middle  chamber  is  therefore  sym¬
bolic  of  this  life,  where  the  symbol  only  of
the  Word  can  be  given,  where  the  truth  is
to  be  reached  by  approximation  only,  and
yet  where  we  are  to  learn  that  that  truth
will  consist  in  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the
G.  A.  O.  T.  U.  This  is  the  reward  of  the
inquiring  Mason  ;  in  this  consist  the  wages
of  a  Fellow  Craft;  he  is  directed  to  the
truth,  but  must  travel  farther  and  ascend
still  higher  to  attain  it.

It  is,  then,  as  a  symbol,  and  a  symbol
only,  that  we  must  study  this  beautiful
legend  of  the  winding  stairs.  If  we  attempt
to  adopt  it  as  a  historical  fact,  the  ab¬
surdity  of  its  details  stares  us  in  the  face,
and  wise  men  will  wonder  at  our  credulity.
Its  inventors  had  no  desire  thus  to  impose
upon  our  folly ;  but  offering  it  to  us  as  a
great  philosophical  myth,  they  did  not  for
a  moment  suppose  that  we  would  pass  over
its  sublime  moral  teachings  to  accept  the
allegory  as  a  historical  narrative  without
meaning,  and  wholly  irreconcilable  with
the  records  of  Scripture,  and  opposed  by
all  the  principles  of  probability.  To  sup¬
pose  that  eighty  thousand  craftsmen  were
weekly  paid  in  the  narrow  precincts  of  the
Temple  chambers,  is  simply  to  suppose  an
absurdity.  But  to  believe  that  all  this  pic¬
torial  representation  of  an  ascent  by  a  wind¬
ing  staircase  to  the  place  where  the  wages
of  labor  were  to  be  received,  was  an  alle¬
gory  to  teach  us  the  ascent  of  the  mind
from  ignorance,  through  all  the  toils  of
study  and  the  difficulties  of  obtaining
knowledge,  receiving  here  a  little  and  there
a  little,  adding  something  to  the  stock  of
our  ideas  at  each  step,  until,  in  the  middle
chamber  of  life,  —  in  the  full  fruition  of


886


WIND


WISCONSIN


manhood ;  —  the  reward  is  attained,  and  the
purified  and  elevated  intellect  is  invested
with  the  reward  in  the  direction  how  to  seek
God  and  God’s  truth ;  to  believe  this,  is  to
believe  and  to  know  the  true  design  of  Spec¬
ulative  Masonry,  the  only  design  which
makes  it  worthy  of  a  good  or  a  wise  man’s
study.

Its  historical  details  are  barren,  but  its
symbols  and  allegories  are  fertile  with  in¬
struction.

Wind,  Mason's.  Among  the  Ma¬
sonic  tests  of  the  last  century  was  the
question,  “How  blows  a  Mason’s  wind?”
and  the  answer  was,  “  Due  east  and  west.”
Browne  gives  the  question  and  answer  more
in  extenso,  and  assigns  the  explanation  as
follows :

“  How  blows  the  wind  in  Masonry?

“  Favorable  due  east  and  west.

“ To  what  purpose?

“  To  call  men  to,  at,  and  from  their  labor.

“  What  does  it  further  allude  to?

“  To  those  miraculous  winds  which  proved
so  essential  in  working  the  happy  deliver¬
ance  of  the  children  of  Israel  from  their
Egyptian  bondage,  and  proved  the  over¬
throw  of  Pharaoh  and  all  his  host  when  he
attempted  to  follow  them.”

Krause  very  correctly  thinks  that  the
fundamental  idea  of  the  Masonic  wind
blowing  from  the  east  is  to  be  found  in  the
belief  of  the  Middle  Ages  that  all  good
things,  such  as  philosophy  and  religion,
came  from  the  East.  In  the  German  ritual
of  The  Three  Sts.  John's  Degrees  of  the  Mother
Lodge  of  the  Three  Glebes,  the  idea  is  ex¬
pressed  a  little  differently.  The  catechism
is  as  follows :

“  Whence  comes  the  wind  ?

“  From  the  east  towards  the  west,  and
from  the  south  towards  the  north,  and  from
the  north  towards  the  south,  the  east,  and
the  west.

“  What  weather  brings  it?

“Variable,  hail  and  storm,  and  calm  and
pleasant  weather.”

The  explanation  given  is,  that  these
changing  winds  symbolize  the  changing
rogress  of  man’s  life  in  his  pursuit  of
nowledge— -now  clear  and  full  of  hope,  now
dark  with  storms.  Bode’s  hypothesis  that
these  variable  winds  of  Masonry  were  in¬
tended  to  refer  to  the  changes  of  the  con¬
dition  of  the  Roman  church  under  English
monarchs,  from  Henry  VIII.  to  James  II.,
and  thus  to  connect  the  symbolism  with
the  Stuart  Masonry,  is  wholly  untenable,
as  the  symbol  is  not  found  in  any  of  the
high  degrees.  It  is  not  recognized  in
the  French,  and  is  obsolete  in  the  York
Rite.

Window.  A  piece  of  furniture  in  the
Mark  degree.  It  is  a  mere  symbol,  having


no  foundation  in  truth,  as  there  was  no
such  appendage  to  the  Temple.  It  is  sim¬
ply  intended  to  represent  the  place  where
the  workman  received  his  wages,  symbolic
of  the  reward  earned  by  labor.

W  ine.  One  of  the  elements  of  Masonic
consecration,  and,  as  a  symbol  of  the  inward
refreshment  of  a  good  conscience,  is  in¬
tended,  under  the  name  of  the  “  wine  of  re¬
freshment,”  to  remind  us  of  the  eternal
refreshments  which  the  good  are  to  receive
in  the  future  life  for  the  faithful  perform¬
ance  of  duty  in  the  present.

Wings  of  the  Cherubim,  Ex¬
tended.  The  candidate  in  the  degree
of  Royal  Master  of  the  American  Rite  is
said  to  be  received  “beneath  the  extended
wings  of  the  cherubim.”  The  expression
is  derived  from  the  passage  in  the  First
Book  of  Kings  (vi.  27 ),  which  describes  the
setting  of  “  the  cherubim  within  the  inner
house.”  Practically,  there  is  an  anachron¬
ism  in  the  reference  to  the  cherubim  in  this
degree.  In  the  older  and  purer  ritual,  the
ceremonies  are  supposed  to  take  place  in
the  council-chamber  or  private  apartment
of  King  Solomon,  where,  of  course,  there
were  no  cherubim.  And  even  in  some
more  modem  rituals,  where  a  part  of  the
ceremony  referred  to  in  the  tradition  is  said
to  have  occurred  in  the  holy  of  holies,  that
part  of  the  Temple  was  at  that  time  unfin¬
ished,  and  the  cherubim  had  not  yet  been
placed  there.  But  symbolically  the  refer¬
ence  to  the  cherubim  in  this  degree,  which
represents  a  searcher  for  truth,  is  not  ob¬
jectionable.  For  although  there  is  a  great
diversity  of  opinion  as  to  their  exact  sig¬
nification,  yet  there  is  a  very  general  agree¬
ment  that,  under  some  one  manifestation
or  another,  they  allude  to  and  symbolize
the  protecting  and  overshadowing  power
of  the  Deity.  When,  therefore,  the  initiate
is  received  beneath  the  extended  wings  of  the
cherubim,  we  are  taught  by  this  symbolism
how  appropriate  it  is,  that  he  who  comes  to
ask  and  to  seek  Truth,  symbolized  by  the
True  Word,  should  begin  by  placing  himself
under  the  protection  of  that  Divine  Power
who  alone  is  Truth,  and  from  whom  alone
truth  can  be  obtained.

Wisconsin.  In  January,  1843,  Free¬
masonry  was  introduced  into  Wisconsin  by
the  establishment  of  Mineral  Point  Lodge
at  Mineral  Point,  Melody  Lodge  at  Platte-
ville,  and  Milwaukee  Lodge  at  Milwaukee,
all  under  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Missouri.  December  18,  1843,  delegates
from  these  three  Lodges  assembled  in  con¬
vention  at  Madison,  and  organized  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Wisconsin,  Rev.  B.  T.
Kavanaugh,  the  Master  of  Melody  Lodge,
being  elected  Grand  Master.

The  Grand  Chapter  was  established  Feb-


WISDOM


WOELLNER


887


ruary  13,  1850,  and  Dwight  F.  Lawton
elected  Grand  High  Priest.

The  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters  was  organized  in  1857,  and  James
Collins  elected  Grand  Master.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  organized
October  20,  1859,  and  Henry  L.  Palmer
elected  Grand  Commander.

Wisdom.  In  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,
•wisdom  is  symbolized  by  the  east,  the  place
of  light,  being  represented  by  the  pillar  that
there  supports  the  Lodge  and  by  the  Wor¬
shipful  Master.  It  is  also  referred  to  King
Solomon,  the  symbolical  founder  of  the
Order.  In  Masonic  architecture  the  Ionic
column,  distinguished  for  the  skill  in  its
construction,  as  it  combines  the  beauty  of
the  Corinthian  and  the  strength  of  the
Doric,  is  adopted  as  the  representative  of
wisdom.

King  Solomon  has  been  adopted  in  Spec¬
ulative  Masonry  as  the  type  or  representa¬
tive  of  wisdom,  in  accordance  with  the
character  which  has  been  given  to  him  in
the  First  Book  of  Kings  (iv.  30-32) :  “  Sol¬
omon’s  wisdom  exceeded  the  wisdom  of  all
the  children  of  the  east  country,  and  all
the  wisdom  of  Egypt.  For  he  was  wiser
than  all  men;  than  Ethan  the  Ezrahite,
and  Heman  and  Chalcol  and  Darda,  the
sons  of  Mahol;  and  his  fame  was  in  all  the
nations  round  about.”

In  all  the  Oriental  philosophies  a  con¬
spicuous  place  has  been  given  to  wisdom.
In  the  book  called  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon,
(vii.  7,  8,)  but  supposed  to  be  the  produc¬
tion  of  a  Hellenistic  Jew,  it  is  said:  “I
called  upon  God,  and  the  spirit  of  wisdom
came  to  me.  I  preferred  her  before  scep¬
tres  and  thrones,  and  esteemed  riches
nothing  in  comparison  of  her.”  And  far¬
ther  on  in  the  same  book,  (vii.  25-27,)  she
is  described  as  “the  breath  of  the  power
of  God,  and  a  pure  influence  [emanation]
flowing  from  the  glory  of  the  Almighty,
....  the  brightness  of  the  everlasting
light,  the  unspotted  mirror  of  the  power  of
God,  and  the  image  of  his  goodness.”

The  Kabbalists  made  Chochma,  noon,
or  Wisdom,  the  second  of  the  ten  Sephiroth,
placing  it  next  to  the  Crown.  They  called
it  a  male  potency,  and  the  third  of  the
Sephiroth,  Binah,  or  Intelligence,

female.  These  two  Sephiroth,  with  Keter,
“iro.  or  the  Crown,  formed  the  first  triad,
and  their  union  produced  the  Intellectual
World.

The  Gnostics  also  had  their  doctrine  of
Wisdom,  whom  they  called  Achamoth.  They
said  she  was  feminine;  styled  her  Mother,
and  said  that  she  produced  all  things
through  the  Father.

The  Oriental  doctrine  of  Wisdom  was,
that  it  is  a  Divine  Power  standing  between


the  Creator  and  the  creation,  and  acting
as  His  agent.  “Jehovah,”  says  Solomon,
( Proverbs  iii.  19,)  “  by  wisdom  hath  founded
the  earth.”  Hence  wisdom,  in  this  philos¬
ophy,  answers  to  the  idea  of  a  vivifying
spirit  brooding  over  and  impregnating  the
elements  of  the  chaotic  world.  In  short,
the  world  is  but  the  outward  manifestation
of  the  spirit  of  wisdom.

This  idea,  so  universally  diffused  through¬
out  the  East,  is  said  to  have  been  adopted
into  the  secret  doctrine  of  the  Templars,  who
are  supposed  to  have  borrowed  much  from
the  Basilideans,  the  Manicheans,  and  the
Gnostics.  From  them  it  easily  passed  over
to  the  high  degrees  of  Masonry,  which  were
founded  on  the  Templar  theory.  Hence,  in
the  great  decoration  of  the  thirty-third  de¬
gree  of  the  Scottish  Rite,  the  points  of  the
triple  triangle  are  inscribed  with  the  letters
S.A.P.I.E.N.T.I.A.,  or  Wisdom.

It  is  not  difficult  now  to  see  how  this  word
WUdom  came  to  take  so  prominent  a  part
in  the  symbolism  of  Ancient  Masonry,  and
how  it  was  expressly  appropriated  to  King
Solomon.  As  wisdom,  in  the  philosophy
of  the  East,  was  the  creative  energy,  —  the
architect,  so  to  speak,  of  the  world,  as  the
emanation  of  the  Supreme  Architect,  —  so
Solomon  was  the  architect  of  the  Temple,
the  symbol  of  the  world.  He  was  to  the
typical  world  or  temple  what  wisdom  was
to  the  great  world  of  the  creation.  Hence
wisdom  is  appropriately  referred  to  him  and
to  the  Master  of  the  Lodge,  who  is  the  rep¬
resentative  of  Solomon.  Wisdom  is  always
placed  in  the  east  of  the  Lodge,  because
thence  emanate  all  light,  and  knowledge,
and  truth.

Withdrawal  of  Petition.  It  is  a

law  of  Masonry  that  a  petition  for  initiation
having  been  once  presented  to  a  Lodge,
cannot  be  withdrawn.  It  must  be  subjected
to  a  ballot.  It  must  be  submitted  to  the
action  of  the  Lodge.  The  rule  is  founded
on  prudential  reasons.  The  candidate  hav¬
ing  submitted  his  character  for  inspection,
the  inspection  must  be  madfe.  It  is  not  for
the  interests  of  Masonry,  (the  only  thing  to
be  considered,)  that,  on  the  prospect  of  an
unfavorable  judgment,  he  should  be  per¬
mitted  to  decline  the  inspection,  and  have
the  opportunity  of  applying  to  another
Lodge,  wherecarelessnessor  ignorance  might
lead  to  his  acceptance.  Initiation  is  not
like  an  article  of  merchandise  sold  by  rival
dealers,  and  to  be  purchased,  after  repeated
trials,  from  the  most  accommodating  seller.

Witnesses.  See  Trials.

Woellner,  Joliann  Christoph
Yon.  A  distinguished  Prussian  states¬
man,  and  equally  distinguished  as  one  of
the  leaders  of  the  Rosicrucinn  Order  in
Germany,  and  the  Rite  of  {Strict  Observ-


888


WOLF


WOOG


ance,  to  whose  advancement  he  lent  all  the
influence  of  his  political  position.  He  was
born  at  Dobritz,  May  19, 1732.  He  studied
theology  in  the  orthodox  church,  and  in
1750  was  appointed  a  preacher  near  Berlin,
and  afterwards  a  Canon  at  Halberstadt.  In
1786,  King  William  III.,  of  Prussia,  ap¬
pointed  him  privy  counsellor  of  finance,
an  appointment  supposed  to  have  been
made  as  a  concession  to  the  Rite  of  Strict
Observance,  of  which  Wbllner  was  a  Pro¬
vincial  Grand  Master,  his  Order  name  being
Eques  d  cubo.  In  1788  he  became  Minister
of  State,  and  was  put  at  the  head  of  eccle¬
siastical  affairs.  No  Mason  in  Germany
labored  more  assiduously  in  the  cause  of
the  Order  and  in  active  defence  of  the
Rite  of  Strict  Observance,  and  hence  he
had  many  enemies  as  well  as  friends.  On
the  demise  of  King  William  he  was  dis¬
missed  from  his  political  appointments,  and
retired  to  his  estate  at  Grossriez,  where  he
died  September  11,  1800.

Wolf.  In  the  Egyptian  mysteries,  the
candidate  represented  a  wolf  and  wore  a
wolf’s  skin,  because  Osiris  once  assumed
the  form  of  that  animal  in  his  contests  with
Typhon.  In  the  Greek  mythology,  the
wolf  was  consecrated  to  Apollo,  or  the  sun,
because  of  the  connection  between  lulce,
light,  and  lukos,  a  wolf.  In  French,  wolf
is  louve,  and  hence  the  word  louveteau,  sig¬
nifying  the  son  of  a  Mason.  See  Lewis
No.  3.

Wolfenbiittel,  Congress  of.  A

city  of  Lower  Saxony,  in  the  principality
of  Wolfenbiittel,  and  formerly  a  possession
of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick.  In  1778  Ferdi¬
nand,  Duke  of  Brunswick,  convoked  a  Ma¬
sonic  Congress  there,  with  a  view  of  reform¬
ing  the  organization  of  the  Order.  Its
results,  after  a  session  of  five  weeks,  were  a
union  of  the  Swedish  and  German  Masons,
which  lasted  only  for  a  brief  period,  and
the  preparation  for  a  future  meeting  at
Wilhelmsbad.

Woman.  The  law  which  excludes
women  from  initiation  into  Masonry  is  not
contained  in  the  precise  words  in  any  of
the  Old  Constitutions,  although  it  is  con¬
tinually  implied,  as  when  it  is  said  in  the
Landsdowne  MS.,  (year  1560,)  that  the
Apprentice  must  be  “  of  limbs  whole,  as  a
man  ought  to  be,”  and  that  he  must  be  “  no
bondman.”  All  the  regulations  also  refer
to  men  only,  and  many  of  them  would  be
wholly  inapplicable  to  women.  But  in  the
Charges  compiled  by  Anderson  and  Desa-
guliers,  and  published  in  1723,  the  word
“woman”  is  for  the  first  time  introduced,
and  the  law  is  made  explicit.  Thus  it  is
said  that  “  the  persons  admitted  members
of  a  Lodge  must  be  good  and  true  men ,
....  no  bondmen,  no  women”  etc.


Perhaps  the  best  reason  that  can  be  as¬
signed  for  the  exclusion  of  women  from  our
Lodges  will  be  found  in  the  character  of
our  organization  as  a  mystic  society.  Spec¬
ulative  Freemasonry  is  only  an  application
of  the  art  of  Operative  Masonry  to  purposes
of  morality  and  science.  The  Operative
branch  of  our  Institution  was  the  fore¬
runner  and  origin  of  the  Speculative.
Now,  as  we  admit  of  no  innovations  or
changes  in  our  customs,  Speculative  Ma¬
sonry  retains,  and  is  governed  by,  all  the
rules  and  regulations  that  existed  in  and
controlled  its  Operative  prototype.  Hence,
as  in  this  latter  art  only  hale  and  hearty
men,  in  possession  of  all  their  limbs  and
members,  so  that  they  might  endure  the
fatigues  of  labor,  were  employed,  so  in  the
former  the  rule  still  holds,  of  excluding  all
who  are  not  in  the  possession  of  these  pre¬
requisite  qualifications.  Woman  is  not
permitted  to  participate  in  our  rites  and
ceremonies,  not  because  we  deem  her  un¬
worthy  or  unfaithful,  or  incapable,  as  has
been  foolishly  supposed,  of  keeping  a  secret,
but  because,  on  our  entrance  into  the  Order,
we  found  certain  regulations  which  pre¬
scribed  that  only  men  capable  of  enduring
the  labor,  or  of  fulfilling  the  duties  of  Op¬
erative  Masons,  could  be  admitted.  These
regulations  we  have  solemnly  promised
never  to  alter ;  nor  could  they  be  changed,
without  an  entire  disorganization  of  the
whole  system  of  Speculative  Masonry.

Wood -cutters,  Order  of.  See
Fendeurs.

Woog,  Carl  Christian.  Born  at

Dresden  in  1713,  and  died  atLeipsic,  April
24,  1771.  Mossdorf  says  that  he  was,  in
1740,  a  resident  of  London,  and  that  there
he  wras  initiated  into  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,
and  also  into  the  Scottish  degree  of  Knight
of  St.  Andrew.  In  1749,  he  published  a
Latin  work  entitled,  Presbyterorum  et  Diaco-
norum  Achaice  de  Martyrio  iSancti  Andrece
Apostoli.  Epistola  Encyclica,  in  which  he
refers  to  the  Freemasons  (p.  32)  in  the
following  language :  “  Unicum  adhuc  addo,
esse  inter  csementarios,  seu  lapicidas  liberos,
(qui  Franco  muratoriorum  Franc-Masons
nomine  communiter  insigniuntur  quique
rotunda  quadratis  miscere  dicuntur,)  quos-
dam  qui  S.  Andrese  memoriam  summa  ven-
eratione  recolant.  Ad  minimum,  si  scriptis,
quae  detecta  eorum  mysteria  et  arcana  re-
censent,  fides  non  est  deneganda,  certum
erit,  eos  quotunnis  diem  quoque  Andreas,
ut  Sancti  Johannis  diem  solent,  festum
agere  atque  ceremoniosum  celebrare,  esseque
inter  eos  sectam  aliquam,  quae  per  crucem,
quam  in  pectore  gerant,  in  qua  Sanctus
Andreas  funibus  alligatus  haereat,  &  reliquia
se  destinguunt ;  ”  i.  e.,  “I  add  only  this,
that  among  the  Freemasons  (commonly


WORD


WORD


889


called  Franc- Magons,  who  are  said  to  min¬
gle  circles  with  squares,)  there  are  certain
ones  who  cherish  the  memory  of  St.  An¬
drew  with  singular  veneration.  At  all
events,  if  we  may  credit  those  writings  in
which  their  mysteries  and  secrets  are  de¬
tected  and  exposed,  it  will  be  evident  that
they  are  accustomed  to  keep  annually,  with
ceremonies,  the  festival  of  St.  Andrew  as
well  as  that  of  St.  John;  and  that  there  is  a
sect  among  them  which  distinguish  them¬
selves  from  the  others  by  wearing  on  their
breast  the  cross  on  which  St.  Andrew  was
fastened  by  cords.”  Woog,  in  a  subsequent
passage,  defends  the  Freemasons  from  the
charge  made  by  these  Expositions  that  they
were  irreligious,  but  declares  that  by  him
their  mysteries  shall  remain  buried  in  profound
silence  —  “per  me  vero  maneant  eorum
mysteria  alto  silentio  sepulta.”  It  is  ap¬
parently  from  these  passages  that  Mossdorf
draws  his  conclusion  that  Woog  was  a  Free¬
mason,  and  had  received  the  Scottish  de¬
gree  of  Knight  of  St.  Andrew.  They  at
least  prove  that  he  was  an  early  friend  of
the  Institution,  and  that  he  must  have
known  something  of  Ramsay’s  degree,
which  was  about  that  time  introduced  into
England.

Word.  When  emphatically  used,  the
expression,  “the  Word,”  is  in  Masonry
always  referred  to  the  third  degree,  although
there  must  be  a  word  in  each  degree.  In  this
latter  and  general  sense,  the  Word  is  called
by  French  Masons  “  la  parole,”  and  by
the  Germans  “ein  Worterzeichen.”  The
use  of  a  Word  is  of  great  antiquity.  We
find  it  in  the  ancient  mysteries.  In  those
of  Egypt  it  is  said  to  have  been  the  Tetra-
graminaton.  The  German  Stonemasons  of
the  Middle  Ages  had  one,  which,  however,
I  think  was  only  a  password  by  which  the
travelling  Companion  might  make  himself
known  in  his  professional  wanderings.
Lyon  (Hist  of  the  L.  of  Edinb.,  p.  22,)  shows
that  it  existed,  in  the  sixteenth  and  subse¬
quent  centuries,  in  the  Scotch  Lodges,  and
he  says  that  “the  Word  is  the  only  secret
that  is  ever  alluded  to  in  the  minutes  of
Mary’s  Chapel,  or  in  those  of  Kilwinning,
Atcheson’s  Haven,  or  Dumblane,  or  any
other  that  we  have  examined  of  a  date

frior  to  the  erection  of  the  Grand  Lodge.”
ndeed,  he  thinks  that  the  communi¬
cation  of  this  Word  constituted  the  only
ceremony  of  initiation  practised  in  the
Operative  Lodges.  At  that  time  there  was
evidently  but  one  Word  for  all  the  ranks  of
Apprentices,  Craftsmen,  and  Masters.  He
thinks  that  this  communication  of  the
Mason  Word  to  the  Apprentices  under  oath
constituted  the  germ  whence  has  sprung  the
Symbolical  Masonry.  But  it  must  be  re¬
membered  that  the  learned  and  laborious
6  M


investigations  of  Bro.  Lyon  refer  only  to
the  Lodges  of  Scotland.  There  is  no  suffi¬
cient  evidence  that  a  more  extensive  system
of  initiation  did  not  prevail  at  the  same
time,  or  even  earlier,  in  England  and  Ger¬
many.  Indeed,  Findel  has  shown  that  it
did  in  the  latter  country ;  and  it  is  difficult
to  believe  that  the  system,  which  we  know
was  in  existence  in  1717,  was  a  sudden  de¬
velopment  out  of  a  single  Word,  and  for
which  we  are  indebted  to  the  inventive
genius  of  those  who  were  engaged  in  the
revival  at  that  period.  Be  this  as  it  may,
the  evidence  is  conclusive  that  everywhere,
and  from  the  earliest  times,  there  was  a
Word.  This  at  least  is  no  modern  usage.

But  it  must  be  admitted  that  this  Word,
whatever  it  was,  was  at  first  a  mere  mark
of  recognition.  Yet  it  may  have  had,  and
probably  did  have,  a  mythical  signification,
and  had  not  been  altogether  arbitrarily
adopted.  The  word  given  in  the  Sloane
MS.,  No.  3329,  which  Bro.  Hughan  places  at
a  date  not  posterior  to  1700,  is  undoubtedly
a  corrupted  form  of  that  now  in  use,  and
with  the  signification  of  which  we  are  well
acquainted.  Hence  we  may  conclude  that
the  legend,  and  the  symbolism  connected
with  it,  also  existed  at  the  same  time,  but
only  in  a  nascent  and  incomplete  form.

The  modern  development  of  Speculative
Masonry  into  a  philosophy  has  given  a
perfected  form  to  the  symbolism  of  the
Word  no  longer  confined  to  use  as  a  means
of  recognition,  but  elevated,  in  its  connec¬
tion  with  the  legend  of  the  third  degree,  to
the  rank  of  a  symbol.

So  viewed,  and  by  the  scientific  Mason  it
is  now  only  so  viewed,  the  Word  becomes
the  symbol  of  Divine  Truth,  the  loss  of
which  and  the  search  for  it  constitute  the
whole  system  of  Speculative  Masonry.  So
important  is  this  Word,  that  it  lies  at  the
very  foundation  of  the  Masonic  edifice.
The  Word  might  be  changed,  as  might  a
grip  or  a  sign,  if  it  were  possible  to  obtain
the  universal  consent  of  the  Craft,  and
Masonry  would  still  remain  unimpaired.
But  were  the  Word  abolished,  or  released
from  its  intimate  connection  with  the  Hi-
ramic  legend,  and  with  that  of  the  Royal
Arch,  the  whole  symbolism  of  Speculative
Masonry  would  be  obliterated.  The  Insti¬
tution  might  withstand  such  an  innovation,
but  its  history,  its  character,  its  design,
would  belong  to  a  newer  and  a  totally
different  society.  The  word  is  what  Der-
mott  called  the  Royal  Arch,  “  the  marrow
of  Masonry.”

Word,  Lost.  See  Lost  Word.

W  ord,  Mason.  In  the  minutes  and
documents  of  the  Lodges  of  Scotland  dur¬
ing  the  sixteenth,  seventeenth,  and  eigh¬
teenth  centuries,  the  expression  “  Mason


890


WORD


WORKMEN


word  ”  is  constantly  used.  This  continu-  j
ous  use  would  indicate  that  but  one  word
was  then  known.  Nicolai,  in  his  Essay  on
the  Accusations  against  the  Templars,  quotes
a  “small  dictionary  published  at  the  be¬
ginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,”  in
which  the  “  Mason’s  word  ”  is  defined.

Word,  Sacred.  A  term  applied  to
the  chief  or  most  prominent  word  of  a  de¬
gree,  to  indicate  its  peculiarly  sacred  char¬
acter,  in  contradistinction  to  a  password,
which  is  simply  intended  as  a  mode  of
recognition.  It  is  sometimes  ignorantly
corrupted  into  “secret  word.”  All  signifi¬
cant  words  in  Masonry  are  secret.  Only
certain  ones  are  sacred.

W’ord,  Significant.  See  Significant
Word.

Word,  True.  Used  in  contradistinc¬
tion  to  the  Lost  Word  and  the  Substitute
Word.  To  find  it  is  the  object  of  all  Ma¬
sonic  search  and  labor.  For  as  the  Lost
Word  is  the  symbol  of  death,  the  True  Word
is  the  symbol  of  life  eternal.  It  indicates
the  change  that  is  always  occurring  —  truth
after  error,  light  after  darkness,  life  after
death.  Of  all  the  symbolism  of  Speculative
Masonry,  that  of  the  True  Word  is  the  most
philosophic  and  sublime.

Work.  See  Labor.

Working-Tools.  In  each  of  the  de¬
grees  of  Masonry,  certain  implements  of
the  Operative  art  are  consecrated  to  the
Speculative  science,  and  adopted  to  teach
as  symbols  lessons  of  morality.  With  these
the  Speculative  Mason  is  taught  to  erect
his  spiritual  temple,  as  his  Operative  pre¬
decessors  with  the  same  implements  con¬
structed  their  material  temples.  Hence
they  are  called  the  working-tools  of  the  de¬
gree.  They  vary  but  very  slightly  in  the
different  Rites,  but  the  same  symbolism  is
preserved.  The  principal  working-tools  of
the  Operative  art  that  have  been  adopted
as  symbols  in  the  Speculative  science,  con¬
fined,  however,  to  Ancient  Craft  Masonry,
and  not  used  in  the  higher  degrees,  are,  the
twenty-four  inch  gauge,  common  gavel,
square,  level,  plumb,  skerrit,  compasses,
pencil,  trowrel,  mallet,  pickaxe,  crow,  and
shovel.  See  them  under  their  respective
heads.

Work,  Waster  of  tlie.  An  archi¬
tect  or  superintendent  of  the  building  of  an
edifice.  Du  Cange  (Glossarium)  thus  de¬
fines  it:  “Magister  operis  vel  operarum
vulgo,  maitre  de  Poeuvre,  cui  operibus  pub-
licis  vacare  incumbit,”  i.  e..  “Master  of  the
work  or  of  the  works,  commonly,  maitre  de
P  oeuvre,  one  whose  duty  it  is  to  attend  to
the  public  works.”  In  the  Cooke  MS.,  (line
529,)  it  is  said:  “And  also  he  that  were
most  of  connying  [skill]  scholde  be  gov-
ernour  of  the  werke,  and  scholde  be  callyd


maister.”  In  the  old  record  of  the  date  of
Edward  III.,  cited  by  Anderson  in  his
second  edition,  (p.  71,)  it  is  prescribed  “  that
Master  Masons,  or  Masters  of  Work,  shall
be  examined  whether  they  be  able  of  cun¬
ning  to  serve  their  respective  lords.”  The
word  was  in  common  use  in  the  Middle
Ages,  and  applied  to  the  Architect  or  Mas¬
ter  Builder  of  an  edifice.  Thus  Edwin  of
Steinbach,  the  architect  of  the  Cathedral
of  Strasburg,  is  called  Master  of  the  Work.
In  the  monasteries  there  was  a  similar
officer,  who  was,  however,  more  generally
called  the  Operarius,  but  sometimes  Magis¬
ter  operis.

Workmen  at  the  Temple.  We

have  no  historical  account,  except  the  mea¬
gre  details  in  the  Books  of  Kings  and
Chronicles,  of  the  number  or  classification
of  the  workmen  at  the  Temple  of  Solomon.
The  subject  has,  however,  afforded  a  fertile
theme  for  the  exercise  of  the  inventive
genius  of  the  ritualists.  Although  devoid
of  interest  as  a  historical  study,  an  acquaint¬
ance  with  these  traditions,  especially  the
English  and  American  ones,  and  a  com¬
parison  of  them  with  the  Scriptural  account
and  with  that  given  by  Josephus,  are  neces¬
sary  as  a  part  of  the  education  of  a  Masonic
student.  I  furnish  the  legends,  therefore,
simply  as  a  matter  of  curiosity,  without  the
slightest  intention  to  vouch  for  their  au¬
thenticity.

In  the  Second  Book  of  Chronicles,  chap,
ii.,  verses  17  and  18,  we  read  as  follows :

“  And  Solomon  numbered  all  the  stran¬
gers  that  were  in  the  land  of  Israel,  after
the  numbering  wherewith  David  his  father
had  numbered  them ;  and  they  were  found
an  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  and  three
thousand  and  six  hundred.

“  And  he  set  threescore  and  ten  thousand
of  them  to  be  bearers  of  burdens,  and  four¬
score  thousand  to  be  hewers  in  the  moun¬
tain,  and  three  thousand  and  six  hundred
overseers  to  set  the  people  a-work.”

The  same  numerical  details  are  given  in
the  second  verse  of  the  same  chapter.
Again,  in  the  First  Book  of  Kings,  chap,
v.,  verses  13  and  14,  it  is  said:

“And  King  Solomon  raised  a  levy  out
of  all  Israel ;  and  the  levy  was  thirty  thou¬
sand  men.

“  And  he  sent  them  to  Lebanon,  ten
thousand  a  month  by  courses :  a  month
they  were  in  Lebanon,  and  two  months
at  home:  and  Adoniram  was  over  the
levy.”

The  succeeding  verses  make  the  same
enumeration  of  workmen  as  that  contained
in  the  Book  of  Chronicles  quoted  above,
with  the  exception  that,  by  omitting  the
three  hundred  Harodim,  or  rulers  over  all,
the  number  of  overseers  is  stated  in  the


WORKMEN


WORKMEN


891


Book  of  Kings  to  be  only  three  thousand
three  hundred.

With  these  authorities,  and  the  assist¬
ance  of  Masonic  traditions,  Anderson,  in  the
Book  of  Constitutions,  (2d  ed.,  p.  11,)  con¬
structs  the  following  table  of  the  Craftsmen
at  the  Temple :


Harodim,  Princes,  Eulers,  or  Pro¬
vosts,  . 300

Menatzchim,  Overseers,  or  Master

Masons, . 3,300

Ghiblim,  Stone  Squarers, )  all
Ischotzeb,  Hewers,  l  Fellow  80,000

Benai,  Builders,  j  Crafts,

The  levy  out  of  Israel,  who  were
timber  cutters,  ....  30,000


All  the  Freemasons  employed  in
the  work  of  the  Temple,  exclu¬
sive  of  the  two  Grand  Wardens,  113,600


Besides  the  Ish  Sabal,  or  men  of  bur¬
then,  the  remains  of  the  old  Canaanites,
amounting  to  70,000,  who  are  not  num¬
bered  among  the  Masons.

In  relation  to  the  classification  of  these
workmen,  Anderson  says,  “Solomon  par¬
titioned  the  Fellow  Crafts  into  certain
Lodges,  with  a  Master  and  Wardens  in
each,  that  they  might  receive  commands  in
a  regular  manner,  might  take  care  of  their
tools  and  jewels,  might  be  paid  regularly
every  week,  and  be  duly  fed  and  clothed ;
and  the  Fellow  Crafts  took  care  of  their  suc¬
cession  by  educating  Entered  Apprentices.”

Josephus  makes  a  different  estimate.  He
includes  the  3,300  Overseers  in  the  80,000
Fellow  Crafts,  and  makes  the  number  of
Masons,  exclusive  of  the  70,000  bearers  of
burthens,  amount  to  only  110,000.

A  work  published  in  1764,  entitled  The
Masonic  Pocket-Book ,  gives  a  still  different
classification.  The  number,  according  to
this  authority,  was  as  follows :


Harodim,

Menatzchim,

Ghiblim,

Adoniram’s  men,  .


300

3,300

83,000

30,000


Total,


.  116,600


This  account  makes  no  allusion  to  the
300  Harodim,  nor  to  the  levy  of  30,000 ;  it  is,
therefore,  manifestly  incorrect.  Indeed,  no
certain  authority  can  be  found  for  the  com¬
plete  classification  of  the  workmen,  since
neither  the  Bible  nor  Josephus  gives  any
account  of  the  number  of  Tyrians  employed.
Oliver,  however,  in  his  Historical  Landmarks,
has  collected  from  the  Masonic  traditions  an
account  of  the  classifications  of  the  work¬
men,  which  I  shall  insert,  with  a  few  addi¬
tional  facts  taken  from  other  authorities.

According  to  these  traditions,  the  follow¬
ing  was  the  classification  of  the  Masons
who  wrought  in  the  quarries  of  Tyre :


Super  Excellent  Masons,
Excellent  Masons,

Grand  Architects,
Architects,  .

Master  Masons,

Mark  Masters,

Markmen,

Fellow  Crafts,


6

48

8

16

2,376

700

1,400

53,900


Total,


58,454


These  were  arranged  as  follows :  The  six
Super  Excellent  Masons  were  divided  into
two  Grand  Lodges,  with  three  brethren  in
each  to  superintend  the  work.  The  Excel¬
lent  Masons  were  divided  into  six  Lodges
of  nine  each,  including  one  of  the  Super
Excellent  Masons,  who  presided  as. Master.
The  eight  Grand  Architects  constituted  one
Lodge,  and  the  sixteen  Architects  another.
The  Grand  Architects  were  the  Masters,
and  the  Architects  the  Wardens,  of  the
Lodges  of  Master  Masons,  which  were  eight
in  number,  and  consisted,  with  their  offi¬
cers,  of  three  hundred  in  each.  The  Mark
Masters  were  divided  into  fourteen  Lodges
of  fifty  in  each,  and  the  Markmen  into
fourteen  Lodges  also,  of  one  hundred  in
each.  The  Mark  Masters  were  the  Masters,
and  the  Markmen  the  Wardens,  of  the
Lodges  of  Fellow  Crafts,  which  were  seven
hundred  in  number,  and  with  their  officers
consisted  of  eighty  in  each.

The  classification  of  the  workmen  in  the
forest  of  Lebanon  was  as  follows :


which,  together  with  the  70,000  Ish  Sabal,
or  laborers,  will  make  a  grand  total  of
186,600  workmen.

According  to  the  statement  of  Webb,
which  has  been  generally  adopted  by  the
Fraternity  in  the  United  States,  there  were :

Grand  Masters,  ....  3

Overseers . 3,300

Fellow  Crafts,  ....  80,000

Entered  Apprentices,  .  .  .  70,000


Super  Excellent  Masons,  .  .  3

Excellent  Masons,  ...  24

Grand  Architects,  ...  4

Architects, .  8

Master  Masons,  ....  1,188

Mark  Masters,  ....  300

Markmen,  .  .  .  ...  600

Fellow  Crafts,  ....  23,100

Entered  Apprentices,  .  .  .  10,000


Total, .  35,227


892


WORKMEN


WORLDLY


These  were  arranged  as  follows:  The
three  Super  Excellent  Masons  formed  one
Lodge.  The  Excellent  Masons  were  di¬
vided  into  three  Lodges  of  nine  each,  in¬
cluding  one  of  the  Super  Excellent  Masons
as  Master.  The  four  Grand  Architects  con¬
stituted  one  Lodge,  and  the  eight  Archi¬
tects  another,  the  former  acting  as  Masters
and  the  latter  as  Wardens  of  the  Lodges
of  Master  Masons,  which  were  four  in  num¬
ber,  and  consisted,  with  their  officers,  of
three  hundred  in  each.  The  Mark  Masters
were  divided  into  six  Lodges  of  fifty  in
each,  and  the  Markmen  into  six  Lodges
also,  of  one  hundred  in  each.  These  two
classes  presided,  the  former  as  Masters  and
the  latter  as  Wardens,  over  the  Lodges  of
Fellow  Crafts,  which  were  three  hundred
in  number,  and  were  composed  of  eighty  in
each,  including  their  officers.

After  three  years  had  been  occupied  in
“hewiug,  squaring,  and  numbering”  the
stones,  and  in  “felling  and  preparing”  the
timbers,  these  two  bodies  of  Masons,  from
the  quarries  and  the  forest,  united  for  the
purpose  of  properly  arranging  and  fitting
the  materials,  so  that  no  metallic  tool
might  be  required  in  putting  them  up,  and
they  were  then  carried  up  to  Jerusalem.
Here  the  whole  body  was  congregated  under
the  superintending  care  of  Hiram  Abif,  and
to  them  were  added  four  hundred  and
twenty  Lodges  of  Tyrian  and  Sidonian  Fel¬
low  Crafts,  having  eighty  in  each,  and  the
twenty  thousand  Entered  Apprentices  of
the  levy  from  Israel,  who  had  heretofore
been  at  rest,  and  who  were  added  to  the
Lodges  of  their  degree,  making  them  now
consist  of  three  hundred  in  each,  so  that
the  whole  number  then  engaged  at  Jeru¬
salem  amounted  to  two  hundred  and  seven¬
teen  thousand  two  hundred  and  eighty-one,
who  were  arranged  as  follows :

9  Lodges  of  Excellent  Masons,  9
in  each,  were  ....  81

12  Lodges  of  Master  Masons,  300
in  each,  were  ....  3,600

1,000  Lodges  of  Fellow  Crafts,  80
in  each,  were  ....  80,000

420  Lodges  of  Tyrian  Fellow

Crafts,  80  in  each,  were  .  .  33,600

100  Lodges  of  Entered  Appren¬
tices,  300  in  each,  were  .  .  30,000

70,000  Ish  Sabal,  or  laborers,  .  70,000


Total, . 217,281

Such  is  the  system  adopted  by  our  Eng¬
lish  brethren.  The  American  ritual  has
greatly  simplified  the  arrangement.  Ac¬
cording  to  the  system  now  generally
adopted  in  this  country,  the  workmen  en¬
gaged  in  building  King  Solomon’s  Temple


are  supposed  to  have  been  classified  as
follow's :

3  Grand  Masters.

300  Harodim,  or  Chief  Superintendents,
who  were  Past  Masters.

3,300  Overseers,  or  Master  Masons,  di¬
vided  into  Lodges  of  three  in  each.

80,000  Fellow  Crafts,  divided  into  Lodges
of  five  in  each.

70,000  Entered  Apprentices,  divided  into
Lodges  of  seven  in  each.

According  to  this  account,  there  must
have  been  eleven  hundred  Lodges  of  Master
Masons;  sixteen  thousand  of  Fellow  Crafts;
and  ten  thousand  of  Entered  Apprentices.
No  account  is  here  taken  of  the  levy  of
thirty  thousand  who  are  supposed  not  to
have  been  Masons,  nor  of  the  builders  sent
by  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  whom  the  English
ritual  places  at  thirty-three  thousand  six
hundred,  and  most  of  whom  we  may  sup¬
pose  to  have  been  members  of  the  Dionysiac
Fraternity  of  Artificers,  the  institution  from
which  Freemasonry,  according  to  legendary
authority,  took  its  origin.

On  the  whole,  the  American  system  seems
too  defective  to  meet  all  the  demands  of  the
inquirer  into  this  subject — an  objection  to
which  the  English  is  not  so  obnoxious.
But,  as  I  have  already  observed,  the  whole
account  is  mythical,  and  is  to  be  viewed
rather  as  a  curiosity  than  as  having  any
historical  value.

Workshop.  The  French  Masons  call
a  Lodge  an  “ atelier”  literally,  a  work¬
shop,  or,  as  Boiste  defines  it,  “  a  place
where  Craftsmen  work  under  the  same
Master.”

World.  The  Lodge  is  said  to  be  a
symbol  of  the  world.  Its  form  —  an  oblong
square,  whose  greatest  length  is  from  east
to  west — represents  the  shape  of  the  in¬
habited  world  according  to  the  theory  of
the  ancients.  The  “  clouded  canopy,”  or
the  “  starry-decked  covering  ”  of  the  Lodge,
is  referred  to  the  sky.  The  sun,  which  en¬
lightens  and  governs  the  world  at  morning,
noon,  and  evening,  is  represented  by  the
three  superior  officers.  And,  lastly,  the
Craft,  laboring  in  the  work  of  the  Lodge,
present  a  similitude  to  the  inhabitants  of
the  world  engaged  in  the  toils  of  life.
While  the  Lodge  is  adopted  as  a  copy  of  the
Temple,  not  less  universal  is  that  doctrine
which  makes  it  a  symbol  of  the  world.
See  Form  of  the  Lodge.

Worldly  Possessions.  In  the
English  lectures  of  Dr.  Hemming,  the  word
Tubal  Cain  is  said  “to  denote  worldly  pos¬
sessions,”  and  hence  Tubal  Cain  is  adopted
in  that  system  as  the  symbol  of  worldly
possessions.  The  idea  is  derived  from  the
derivation  of  Cain  from  kanah,  to  acquire,
to  gain,  and  from  the  theory  that  Tubal


WORLDLY


WREN


893


Cain,  by  his  inventions,  had  enabled  his
pupils  to  acquire  riches.  But  the  deriva¬
tive  meaning  of  the  word  has  reference  to
the  expression  of  Eve,  that  in  the  birth  of
her  eldest  son  she  had  acquired  a  man  by
the  help  of  the  Lord;  and  any  system
which  gives  importance  to  mere  wealth  as
a  Masonic  symbol,  is  not  in  accord  with  the
moral  and  intellectual  designs  of  the  Insti¬
tution,  which  is  thus  represented  as  a  mere
instrument  of  Mammon.  The  symbolism
is  quite  modern,  and  has  not  been  adopted
elsewhere  than  in  English  Masonry.

Worldly  Wealth.  Partial  clothing
is,  in  Masonry,  a  symbol  teaching  the  aspi¬
rant  that  Masonry  regards  no  man  on  ac¬
count  of  his  worldly  wealth  or  honors;  and
that  it  looks  not  to  his  outward  clothing,
but  to  his  internal  qualifications.

Worship.  Originally,  the  word  “to
worship  ”  meant  to  pay  that  honor  and
reverence  which  are  due  to  one  who  is
worthy.  Thus,  where  our  authorized
version  translates  Matthew  xix.  19,
“  Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother,”
Wycliffc  says,  “  Worschip  thi  fadir  and  thi
modir.”  And  in  the  marriage  service  of
the  Episcopal  Church,  the  expression  is  still
retained,  “  with  my  body  I  thee  worship,”
that  is,  honor  or  reverence  thee.  Hence
the  still  common  use  in  England  of  the
words  worshipful  and  right  worshipful  as
titles  of  honor  applied  to  municipal  and
judicial  officers.  Thus  the  mayors  of  small
towns,  and  justices  of  the  peace,  are  styled
“Worshipful,”  while  the  mayors  of  large
cities,  as  London,  are  called  “Right  Wor¬
shipful.”  The  usage  was  adopted  and  re¬
tained  in  Masonry.  The  word  worship,  or
its  derivatives,  is  not  met  with  in  any  of  the
old  manuscripts.  In  the  “  Manner  of  con¬
stituting  a  New  Lodge,”  adopted  in  1722,
and  published  by  Anderson  in  1723,  the
word  “  worship  ”  is  applied  as  a  title  to  the
Grand  Master.  In  the  seventeenth  century,
the  gilds  of  London  began  to  call  them¬
selves  “Worshipful,”  as,  “the  Worshipful
Company  of  Grocers,”  etc.;  and  it  is  likely
that  the  Lodges  at  the  revival,  and  per¬
haps  a  few  years  before,  adopted  the  same
style.

Worshipful.  A  title  applied  to  a
symbolic  Lodge  and  to  its  Master.  The
Germans  sometimes  use  the  title  “  hocli-
wiirdig.”  The  French  style  the  Worshipful
Master  “  Venerable,”  and  the  Lodge,  “  Re¬
spectable.”

Worshipful  Lodge.  See  Worship¬
ful.

Worshipful  Master.  See  Worship¬
ful.

Worshipful,  Most.  The  title  of  a
Grand  Master  and  of  a  Grand  Lodge.

Worshipful,  Right.  The  title  of


the  elective  officers  of  a  Grand  Lodge  be¬
low  the  Grand  Master.

Worshipful,  Very.  Not  now  in

use.  It  was  formerly  applied  as  a  title  to
the  Senior  and  Junior  Grand  Wardens  in
the  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina.

Wren,  Sir  Christopher.  One  of

the  most  distinguished  architects  of  Eng¬
land,  was  the  son  of  Dr.  Christopher  Wren,
Rector  of  East  Knoyle  in  Wiltshire,  and
was  born  there  October  20,  1632.  He  was
entered  as  a  gentleman  commoner  at  Wad-
ham  College,  Oxford,  in  his  fourteenth
year,  being  already  distinguished  for  his
mathematical  knowledge.  He  is  said  to
have  invented,  before  this  period,  several
astronomical  and  mathematical  instru¬
ments.  In  1645,  he  became  a  member  of  a
scientific  club  connected  with  Gresham
College,  from  which  the  Royal  Society  sub¬
sequently  arose.  In  1653,  he  was  elected
a  Fellow  of  All  Souls’  College,  and  had
already  become  known  to  the  learned  men
of  Europe  for  his  various  inventions.  In
1657,  he  removed  permanently  to  London,
having  been  elected  Professor  of  Astronomy
at  Gresham  College.

■  During  the  political  disturbances  which
led  to  the  abolition  of  the  monarchy  and
the  establishment  of  the  commonwealth,
Wren,  devoted  to  the  pursuits  of  philoso¬
phy,  appears  to  have  kept  away  from  the
contests  of  party.  Soon  after  the  restoration
of  Charles  II.,  he  was  appointed  Savillian
Professor  at  Oxford,  one  of  the  highest  dis¬
tinctions  which  could  then  have  been  con¬
ferred  on  a  scientific  man.  During  this
time  he  was  distinguished  for  his  numerous
contributions  to  astronomy  and  mathe¬
matics,  and  invented  many  curious  ma¬
chines,  and  discovered  many  methods  for
facilitating  the  calculations  of  the  celestial
bodies.

W ren  was  not  professionally  educated  as
an  architect,  but  from  his  early  youth  had
devoted  much  time  to  its  theoretic  study.
In  1665  he  went  to  Paris  for  the  purpose
of  studying  the  public  buildings  in  that
city,  and  the  various  styles  which  they  pre¬
sented.  He  was  induced  to  make  this  visit,
and  to  enter  into  these  investigations,  be¬
cause,  in  1660,  he  had  been  appointed  by
King  Charles  II.  one  of  a  commission  to
superintend  the  restoration  of  the  Cathe¬
dral  of  St.  Paul’s,  which  had  been  much
dilapidated  during  the  times  of  the  com¬
monwealth.  But  before  the  designs  could
be  carried  into  execution,  the  great  fire  oc¬
curred  which  laid  so  great  a  part  of  Lon¬
don,  including  St.  Paul’s,  in  ashes.

In  1661,  he  was  appointed  assistant  to
Sir  John  Denham,  tne  Surveyor-General,
and  directed  his  attention  to  the  restoration
of  the  burnt  portion  of  the  city.  His  plana


894


WREN


WREN


were,  unfortunately  for  the  good  of  Lon¬
don,  not  adopted,  and  he  confined  his  atten¬
tion  to  the  rebuilding  of  particular  edifices.
In  1607,  he  was  appointed  the  successor  of
Denham  as  Surveyor-General  and  Chief
Architect.  In  this  capacity  he  erected  a  large
number  of  churches,  the  Royal  Exchange,
Greenwich  Observatory,  and  many  other
public  edifices.  But  his  crowning  work,
the  masterpiece  that  has  given  him  his
largest  reputation,  is  the  Cathedral  of  St.
Paul’s,  which  was  commenced  in  1675  and
finished  in  1710.  The  original  plan  that
was  proposed  by  Wren  was  rejected  through
the  ignorance  of  the  authorities,  and  dif¬
fered  greatly  from  the  one  on  which  it  has
been  constructed.  Wren,  however,  super¬
intended  the  erection  as  master  of  the
work,  and  his  tomb  in  the  crypt  of  the
Cathedral  was  appropriately  inscribed  with
the  words :  “  Si  monumentum  requiris,  cir-
cumspice ;  ”  i.  e.,  “  If  you  seek  his  mon¬
ument,  look  around.”

In  1672,  Wren  was  made  a  Knight,  and
in  1674  he  married  a  daughter  of  Sir  John
Coghill.  To  a  son  by  this  marriage  are  we
indebted  for  memoirs  of  the  family  of  his
father,  published  under  the  title  of  Paren-
talia.  After  the  death  of  this  wife,  he  mar¬
ried  a  daughter  of  Viscount  Fitzwilliam.

In  1680,  Wren  was  elected  President  of
the  Royal  Society,  and  continued  to  a  late
period  his  labors  on  public  edifices,  build¬
ing,  among  others,  additions  to  Hampton
Court  and  to  Windsor  Castle.

After  the  death  of  Queen  Anne,  who  was
the  last  of  his  royal  patrons,  Wren  was  re¬
moved  from  his  office  of  Surveyor-General,
which  he  had  held  for  a  period  of  very
nearly  half  a  century.  He  passed  the  few
remaining  years  of  his  life  in  serene  retire¬
ment.  He  was  found  dead  in  his  chair
after  dinner,  on  February  25,  1723,  in  the
ninety-first  year  of  his  age.

Notwithstanding  that  much  that  has  been
said  by  Anderson  and  other  writers  of  the
last  century,  concerning  Wren’s  connection
with  Freemasonry,  is  without  historical
confirmation,  there  can,  I  think,  be  no
doubt  that  he  took  a  deep  interest  in  the
Speculative  as  well  as  in  the  Operative
Order.  The  Rev.  J.  W.  Laughlin,  in  a  lec¬
ture  on  the  life  of  Wren,  delivered  in  1857,
before  the  inhabitants  of  St.  Andrew’s,  Hol-
born,  and  briefly  reported  in  the  Freema¬
sons’  Magazine,  said  that  “  Wren  was  for
eighteen  years  a  member  of  the  old  Lodge
of  St.  Paul’s,  then  held  at  the  Goose  and
Gridiron,  near  the  Cathedral,  now  the
Lodge  of  Antiquity;  and  the  records  of
that  Lodge  show  that  the  maul  and  trowel
used  at  the  laying  of  the  stone  of  St.
Paul’s,  together  with  a  pair  of  carved  ma¬
hogany  candlesticks,  were  presented  by


Wren,  and  are  now  in  possession  of  that
Lodge.”  By  the  order  of  the  Duke  of  Sus¬
sex,  a  plate  was  placed  on  the  mallet  or
maul  which  contained  a  statement  of  the
fact.

Mr.  C.  W.  King,  who  is  not  a  Mason,  but
has  derived  his  statement  from  a  source  to
which  he  does  not  refer,  (but  which  was
perhaps  Nicolai,)  makes,  in  his  work  on  the
Gnostics,  (p.  176,)  the  following  statement,
which  is  here  quoted  merely  to  show  that
the  traditionary  belief  of  Wren’s  connection
with  Speculative  Freemasonry  is  not  con¬
fined  to  the  Craft,  He  says:

“  Another  and  a  very  important  circum¬
stance  in  this  discussion  must  always  be
kept  in  view:  our  Freemasons  (as  at  present
organized  in  the  form  of  a  secret  society)
derive  their  title  from  a  mere  accidental
circumstance  connected  with  their  actual
establishment.  It  was  in  the  Common  Hall
of  the  London  Gild  of  Freemasons  (the
trade)  that  their  first  meetings  were  held
under  Christopher  Wren,  president,  in  the
time  of  the  Commonwealth.  Their  real
object  was  political  —  the  restoration  of
monarchy;  hence  the  necessary  exclusion
of  the  public,  and  the  oaths  of  secrecy  en¬
joined  on  the  members.  The  pretence  of
promoting  architecture,  and  the  choice  of
the  place  where  to  hold  their  meetings,
suggested  by  the  profession  of  their  presi¬
dent,  were  no  more  than  blinds  to  deceive
the  existing  government.”

Anderson,  in  the  first  edition  of  the
Constitutions,  makes  but  a  slight  reference
to  Wren,  only  calling  him  “the  ingenious
architect,  Sir  Christopher  Wren.”  I  am
almost  afraid  that  this  passing  notice  of
him  who  has  been  called  “  the  Vitruvius  of
England”  must  be  attributed  to  servility.
George  I.  was  the  stupid  monarch  who  re¬
moved  Wren  from  his  office  of  Surveyor-
General,  and  it  would  not  do  to  be  too  dif¬
fuse  with  praise  of  one  who  had  been
marked  by  the  disfavor  of  the  king.  But
in  1727  George  I.  died,  and  in  his  second
edition,  published  in  1738,  Anderson  gives
to  Wren  all  the  Masonic  honors  to  which
he  claims  that  he  was  entitled.  It  is  from
what  Anderson  has  said  in  that  work,  that
the  Masonic  writers  of  the  last  century  and
the  first  half  of  the  present,  not  requiring
the  records  of  authentic  history,  have  drawn
their  views  of  the  official  relations  of  Wren
to  the  Order.  He  first  introduces  Wren
(p.  101)  as  one  of  the  Grand  Wardens  at
the  General  Assembly  held  December  27,
1663,  when  the  Earl  of  St.  Albans  was
Grand  Master,  and  Sir  John  Denham,
Deputy  Grand  Master.  He  says  that  in
1666  Wren  was  again  a  Grand  Warden,
under  the  Grand  Mastership  of  the  Earl  of
Rivers;  but  immediately  afterwards  he


WREN


WYKEHAM


895


ealls  him  “  Deputy  Wren,”  and  continues
to  give  him  the  title  of  Deputy  Grand
Master  until  1685,  when  he  says  (p.  106)
that  “  the  Lodges  met,  and  elected  Sir
Christopher  Wren  Grand  Master,  who  ap¬
pointed  Mr.  Gabriel  Cibber  and  Mr.  Ed¬
mund  Savage  Grand  Wardens;  and  while
carrying  on  St.  Paul’s,  he  annually  met
those  brethren  who  could  attend  him,
to  keep  up  good  old  usages.”  Anderson
(p.  107)  makes  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and
Lennox  Grand  Master,  and  reduces  Wren
to  the  rank  of  a  Deputy;  but  he  says  that
in  1698  he  was  again  chosen  Grand  Master,
and  as  such  “celebrated  the  Cape-stone”  of
St.  Paul’s  in  1708.  “Some  few  years  after
this,”  he  says,  “Sir  Christopher  Wren
neglected  the  office  of  Grand  Master.”
Finally,  he  says  (p.  109)  that  in  1716  “the
Lodges  in  London  finding  themselves  neg¬
lected  by  Sir  Christopher  Wren,”  Masonry
was  revived  under  a  new  Grand  Master.
Some  excuse  for  the  aged  architect’s  neglect
might  have  been  found  in  the  fact  that  he
was  then  eighty-five  years  of  age,  and  had
been  long  removed  from  his  public  office  of
Surveyor-General.

Noorthouck  is  more  considerate.  Speak¬
ing  of  the  placing  of  the  last  stone  on  the
top  of  St.  Paul’s,  —  which,  notwithstanding
the  statement  of  Anderson,  was  done,  not
by  Wren,  but  by  his  son, —  he  says,  ( Consti¬
tutions,  p.  204,)  “  the  age  and  infirmities  of
the  Grand  Master,  which  prevented  his  at¬
tendance  on  this  solemn  occasion,  confined
him  afterwards  to  great  retirement ;  so  that
the  Lodges  suffered  from  want  of  his  usual
presence  in  visiting  and  regulating  their
meetings,  and  were  reduced  to  a  small
number.”

Noorthouck,  however,  repeats  substan¬
tially  the  statements  of  Anderson  in  refer¬
ence  to  Wren’s  Grand  Mastership.  How
much  of  these  statements  can  be  authenti¬
cated  by  history  is  a  question  that  must  be
decided  only  by  more  extensive  investiga¬
tions  of  documents  not  yet  in  possession  of
the  Craft.  Findel  says  {Hist.,  p.  127,)  that
Anderson,  having  been  commissioned  in
1735  by  the  Grand  Lodge  to  make  a  list  of
the  ancient  Patrons  of  the  Masons,  so  as  to
afford  something  like  a  historical  basis,
“  transformed  the  former  Patrons  into
Grand  Masters,  and  the  Masters  and  Super¬
intendents  into  Grand  Wardens  and  the  like,
which  were  unknown  until  the  year  1717.”

Of  this  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  but  there
is  other  evidence  that  Wren  was  a  Free¬
mason.  In  Aubrey’s  Natural  History  of
Wiltshire,  (p.  277,)  a  manuscript  in  the
library  of  the  Royal  Society,  Halliwell
finds  and  cites,  in  his  Early  History  of
Freemasonry  in  England ,  (p.  46,)  the  fol¬
lowing  passage :


“  This  day,  May  the  18th,  being  Monday,
1691,  after  Rogation  Sunday,  is  a  great  con¬
vention  at  St.  Paul’s  Church  of  the  frater¬
nity  of  the  Adopted  Masons,  where  Sir
Christopher  Wren  is  to  be  adopted  a  Bro¬
ther,  and  Sir  Henry  Goodric  of  the  Tower,
and  divers  others.  There  have  been  kings
that  have  been  of  this  sodality.”

If  this  statement  be  true,  —  and  we  have
no  reason  to  doubt  it,  from  Aubrey’s  gen¬
eral  antiquarian  accuracy,  —  Anderson  is
incorrect  in  making  him  a  Grand  Master
in  1685,  six  years  before  he  was  initiated
as  a  Freemason-  The  true  version  of  the
story  probably  is  this:  Wren  was  a  great
architect  —  the  greatest  at  the  time  in  Eng¬
land.  As  such  he  received  the  appointment
of  Deputy  Surveyor-General  under  Den¬
ham,  and  subsequently,  on  Denham’s
death,  of  Surveyor-General.  He  thus  be¬
came  invested,  by  virtue  of  his  office,  with
the  duty  of  superintending  the  construc¬
tion  of  public  buildings.  The  most  impor¬
tant  of  these  was  St.  Paul’s  Cathedral,  the
building  of  which  he  directed  in  person,
and  with  so  much  energy  that  the  parsi¬
monious  Duchess  of  Marlborough,  when
contrasting  the  charges  of  her  own  archi¬
tect  with  the  scanty  remuneration  of  Wren,
observed  that  “  he  was  content  to  be  dragged
up  in  a  basket  three  or  four  times  a  week  to
the  top  of  St.  Paul’s,  and  at  great  hazard,
for  £200  a  year.”  All  this  brought  him
into  close  connection  with  the  gild  of  Free¬
masons,  of  which  he  naturally  became  the
patron,  and  subsequently  he  was  by  initia¬
tion  adopted  into  the  sodality.  Wren  was,
in  fact,  what  the  mediasval  Masons  called
Magister  Operis,  or  Master  of  the  Work.
Anderson,  writing  for  a  purpose,  naturally
transformed  this  title  into  that  of  Grand
Master  —  an  office  supposed  to  be  unknown
until  1717.  Aubrey’s  authority  sufficiently
establishes  the  fact  that  Wren  was  a  Free¬
mason,  and  the  events  of  his  life  prove  his
attachment  to  the  profession.

Wrestle.  A  degree  sometimes  called
the  “  Mark  and  Link,”  or  Wrestle.  It  was
formerly  connected  with  the  Mark  degree
in  England.  Its  ceremonies  were  founded
on  the  passage  contained  in  Genesis  xxxii.
24-30.

Writing.  The  law  which  forbids  a
Mason  to  commit  to  writing  the  esoteric
parts  of  the  ritual  is  exemplified  in  some
American  Lodges  by  a  peculiar  ceremony;
but  the  usage  is  not  universal.  The  Druids
had  a  similar  rule ;  and  we  are  told  that  they,
in  keeping  their  records,  used  the  letters  of
the  Greek  alphabet,  so  that  they  might  be
unintelligible  to  those  who  were  not  author¬
ized  to  read  them.

Wykeham,  William  of.  Bishop  of
Winchester.  Born  at  Wykeham  in  Hamp-


896


WYSEACRE


XAINTRAILLES


shire  in  1324,  and  died  in  1404.  He  was
eminent  both  as  an  ecclesiastic  and  states¬
man.  In  1359,  before  he  reached  the  epis¬
copate,  Edward  III.  appointed  him  sur¬
veyor  of  the  works  at  Windsor,  which  castle
he  rebuilt.  In  his  warrant  or  commission,
he  was  invested  with  power  “to  appoint  all
workmen,  to  provide  materials,  and  to  order
everything  relating  to  building  and  re¬
pairs.”  He  was,  in  fact,  what  the  old  man¬
uscript  Constitutions  call  “The  Lord,”
under  whom  were  the  Master  Masons.
Anderson  says  that  he  was  at  the  head  of
four  hundred  Freemasons,  was  Master  of
Work  under  Edward  III.,  and  Grand  Mas¬
ter  under  Richard  II.  And  the  Freemasons'
Magazine  (August,  1796,)  styles  him  “one
of  the  brightest  ornaments  that  Freema¬
sonry  has  ever  boasted.”  In  this  there  is,


of  course,  a  mixture  of  myth  and  history.
Wykeham  was  an  architect  as  well  as  a
bishop,  and  superintended  the  building  of
many  public  edifices  in  England  in  the
fourteenth  century,  being  a  distinguished
example  of  the  connection  so  common  in
mediaeval  times  between  the  ecclesiastics
and  the  Masons.

Wyseacre.  The  Leland  MS.,  referring
to  Pythagoras,  says  that,  “  wynnynge  en-
traunce  yn  al  Lodges  of  Maconnes,  he
lerned  muche,  and  retournedde  and  worked
yn  Grecia  Magna  wachsynge,  and  becom-
mynge  a  mightye  wyseacre.”  The  word
w’iseacre,  which  now  means  a  dunce  or  silly
person,  is  a  corruption  of  the  German  weris-
sager,  and  originally  signified  a  wise  saver
or  philosopher,  in  which  sense  it  is  used  in
the  passage  cited.


X.


Xaintrailles,  Madame  de.  A

lady  who  was  initiated  into  Masonry  by  a
French  Lodge  that  did  not  have  the  excuse
for  this  violation  of  law  that  we  must  accord
to  the  Irish  one  in  the  case  of  Miss  St.
Leger.  Clavel  (Hist.  Pittoresq.,  p.  34,)  tells
the  story,  but  does  not  give  the  date,  though
it  must  have  been  about  the  close  of  the  last
century.  The  law  of  the  Grand  Orient  of
France  required  each  Lodge  of  Adoption
to  be  connected  with  and  placed  under  the
immediate  guardianship  of  a  regular  Lodge
of  Masons.  It  was  in  one  of  these  guar¬
dian  Lodges  that  the  female  initiation
which  we  are  about  to  describe  took  place.
The  Lodge  of  “  Freres- Artistes,”  at  Paris,
over  which  Brother  Cuvelier  de  Trie  pre¬
sided  as  Master,  was  about  to  give  what  is
called  a  Fete  of  Adoption,  that  is,  to  open
a  Lodge  for  female  Masonry,  and  initiate
candidates  into  that  rite.  Previous,  how¬
ever,  to  the  introduction  of  the  female
members,  the  brethren  opened  a  regular
Lodge  of  Ancient  Masonry  in  the  first
degree.  Among  the  visitors  who  waited
in  the  antechamber  for  admission  was  a
youthful  officer  in  the  uniform  of  a  captain
of  cavalry.  His  diploma  or  certificate  was
requested  of  him  by  the  member  deputed  for
the  examination  of  the  visitors,  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  having  it  inspected  by  the  Lodge.
After  some  little  hesitation,  he  handed  the
party  asking  for  it  a  folded  paper,  which
was  immediately  carried  to  the  Orator  of  the
Lodge,  who,  on  opening  it,  discovered  that


it  was  the  commission  of  an  aide-de-camp,
which  had  been  grauted  by  the  Directory  to
the  wife  of  General  de  Xaintrailles,  a  lady
who,  like  several  others  of  her  sex  in  those
troublous  times,  had  donned  the  masculine
attire  and  gained  military  rank  at  the  point
of  the  sword.  When  the  nature  of  the  sup¬
posed  diploma  was  made  known  to  the  Lodge,
it  may  readily  be  supposed  that  the  surprise
was  general.  But  the  members  were  French¬
men  :  they  were  excitable  and  they  were
gallant :  and  consequently,  in  a  sudden  and
exalted  fit  of  enthusiasm,  which  as  Masons
we  cannot  excuse,  they  unanimously  deter¬
mined  to  confer  the  first  degree,  not  of
Adoption,  but  of  regular  and  legitimate
Freemasonry,  on  the  brave  woman  who  had
so  often  exhibited  every  manly  virtue,  and
to  whom  her  country  had  on  more  than  one
occasion  committed  trusts  requiring  the
greatest  discretion  and  prudence  as  well
as  courage.  Madame  de  Xaintrailles  was
made  acquainted  with  the  resolution  of  the
Lodge,  and  her  acquiescence  in  its  wishes
requested.  To  the  offer,  she  replied,  “  I
have  been  a  man  for  my  country,  and  I  will
again  be  a  man  for  my  brethren.”  She  was
forthwith  introduced  and  initiated  as  an
Entered  Apprentice,  and  repeatedly  after¬
wards  assisted  the  Lodge  in  its  labors  in  the
first  degree.

Doubtless  the  Irish  Lodge  was,  under  all
the  circumstances,  excused,  if  not  justified,
in  the  initiation  of  Miss  St.  Leger.  But
for  the  reception  of  Madame  de  Xaintrailles


XAVIER


YATES


897


we  look  in  vain  for  the  slightest  shadow  of
an  apology.  The  outrage  on  their  obliga¬
tions  as  Masons,  by  the  members  of  the
Parisian  Lodge,  richly  merited  the  severest
punishment,  which  ought  not  to  have  been
averted  by  the  plea  that  the  offence  was
committed  in  a  sudden  spirit  of  enthusiasm
and  gallantry.

Xavier  Mier  fe  Campello,  Fran¬
cisco.  He  was  Bishop  of  Almeria,  and
Inquisitor-General  of  Spain,  and  an  ardent
persecutor  of  the  Freemasons.  In  1815,
Ferdinand  VII.  having  re-established  the
Inquisition  in  Spain  and  suppressed  the
Masonic  Lodges,  Xavier  published  the  bull
of  Pius  VII.,  against  the  Order,  in  an  ordi¬
nance  of  his  own,  in  which  he  denounced
the  Lodges  as  “Societies  which  lead  to
sedition,  to  independence,  and  to  all  errors
and  crimes.”  He  threatened  the  utmost
rigors  of  the  civil  and  canon  laws  against
all  who  did  not,  within  the  space  of  fifteen
days,  renounce  them  ;  and  then  instituted  a
series  of  persecutions  of  the  most  atrocious
character.  Many  of  the  most  distinguished
persons  of  Spain  were  arrested,  and  im¬
prisoned  in  the  dungeons  of  the  Inquisi¬
tion,  on  the  charge  of  being  “  suspected  of
Freemasonry.”

Xerophagists.  On  the  28th  of  April,
1748,  Pope  Clement  XII.  issued  his  bull
forbidding  the  practice  of  Freemasonry  by


the  members  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church.
Many  of  the  Masons  of  Italy  continued,
however,  to  meet ;  but,  for  the  purpose  of
escaping  the  temporal  penalties  of  the
bull,  which  extended,  in  some  cases,  to  the
infliction  of  capital  punishment,  they
changed  their  esoteric  name,  and  called
themselves  Xerophagvtts.  This  is  a  com¬
pound  of  two  Greek  words  signifying  “eaters
of  dry  food,”  and  by  it  they  alluded  to  an
engagement  into  which  they  entered  to
abstain  from  the  drinking  of  wine.  They
were,  in  fact,  the  first  temperance  society
on  record.  Tbory  says  (Act.  Lat.,  i.  346,)
that  a  manuscript  concerning  them  was
contained  in  the  collection  of  the  Mother
Lodge  of  the  Philosophic  Scottish  Rite.

Xerxes.  A  significant  word  in  the
degree  of  Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal
Secret,  the  thirty-second  of  the  Ancient  and
Accepted  Scottish  Rite.  He  is  referred  to  in
the  old  rituals  of  that  degree  as  represent¬
ed  by  Frederick  the  Great,  the  supposed
founder  of  the  Rite.  Probably  this  is  on
account  of  the  great  military  genius  of  both.

Xinxe.  A  significant  word  in  the  high
degrees.  Delaunay  ( Tuileur ,  p.  49,)  gives
it  as  Xincheu,  and  says  that  it  has  been
translated  as  “  the  seat  of  the  soul.”  But
in  either  form  it  has  evidently  undergone
such  corruption  as  to  be  no  longer  compre¬
hensible.


Y.


Y.  One  of  the  symbols  of  Pythagoras
was  the  Greek  letter  Upsilon,  T,  for  which,
on  account  of  the  similarity  of  shape,  the
Romans  adopted  the  letter  Y  of  their  own
alphabet.  Pythagoras  said  that  the  two
horns  of  the  letter  symbolized  the  two  dif¬
ferent  paths  of  virtue  and  vice,  the  right
branch  leading  to  the  former  and  the  left  to
the  latter.  It  was  therefore  called  “  Litera
Pythagorse,”  the  letter  of  Pythagoras.  Thus
the  Roman  poet  Martial  says,  in  one  of  his
epigrams :

“  Litera  Pythagoree,  discrimine  secta  bicorni,
Humana:  vitae  speciem  pra-ferre  videtur.”
t.  e.,

“  The  letter  of  Pythagoras,  parted  by  its  two-
branched  division,  appears  to  exhibit  the  image
of  human  life.”

Yates,  Giles  Fonda.  The  task  of
writing  a  sketch  of  the  life  of  Giles  Fonda
6N  67


Yates  is  accompanied  with  a  feeling  of
melancholy,  because  it  brings  to  my  mind
the  recollections  of  years,  now  passed  for¬
ever,  in  which  I  enjoyed  the  intimate
friendship  of  that  amiable  man  and  zeal¬
ous  Mason  and  scholar.  His  gentle  mien
won  the  love,  his  virtuous  life  the  es¬
teem,  and  his  profound  but  unobtrusive
scholarship  the  respect,  of  all  who  knew
him.

Giles  Fonda  Yates  was  born  in  1796,  in
what  was  then  the  village  of  Schenectady,
in  the  State  of  New  York.  After  acquiring
at  the  ordinary  schools  of  the  period  a
preliminary  liberal  education,  he  entered
Union  College,  and  graduated  with  distinc¬
tion,  receiving  in  due  time  the  degree  of
Master  of  Arts.

He  subsequently  commenced  the  study
of  the  law,  and,  having  been  admitted  to
the  bar,  was,  while  yet  young,  appointed
Judge  of  Probate  in  Schenectady,  the  du-


898


YATES


YATES


ties  of  which  office  he  discharged  with
great  ability  and  fidelity.

Being  blessed  with  a  sufficient  compe¬
tency  of  the  world’s  goods,  (although  in  the
latter  years  of  his  life  he  became  poor,)
Bro.  Yates  did  not  find  it  necessary  to  pur¬
sue  the  practice  of  the  legal  profession  as  a
source  of  livelihood.

At  an  early  period,  he  was  attracted,  by
the  bent  of  his  mind,  to  the  study  not  only
of  general  literature,  but  especially  to  that
of  archaeology,  philosophy,  and  the  occult
sciences,  of  all  of  which  he  became  an  ardent
investigator.  These  studies  led  him  natu¬
rally  to  the  Masonic  institution,  into  which
he  was  initiated  in  the  year  1817,  receiving
the  degrees  of  Symbolic  Masonry  in  St.
George’s  Lodge,  No.  6,  at  Schenectady.
In  1821  he  affiliated  with  Morton  Lodge,
No.  87,  of  the  same  place,  and  was  shortly
afterwards  elected  its  Senior  Warden.  Re¬
turning  subsequently  to  the  Lodge  of  his
adoption,  he  was  chosen  as  its  Master  in
1844.  He  had  in  the  meantime  been  ad¬
mitted  into  a  Chapter  of  the  Royal  Arch
and  an  Encampment  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars;  but  his  predilections  being  for  Scot¬
tish  Masonry,  he  paid  but  little  attention
to  these  high  degrees  of  the  American
Rite.

The  following  extract  from  an  address
delivered  by  him  in  1851,  before  the  Su¬
preme  Council  of  the  Northern  Jurisdic¬
tion,  contains  a  brief  summary  of  a  portion
of  his  labors  in  the  cause  of  Scottish  Ma¬
sonry.

“  I  turned  my  attention,”  says  Bro.
Yates,  “  to  the  history  of  the  Sublime  de¬
grees  very  soon  after  my  initiation  as  a
Mason.  My  intercourse,  in  1822,  with  sev¬
eral  old  Masons  in  the  city  of  Albany,  led
to  the  discovery  that  an  Ineffable  Lodge
of  Perfection  had  been  established  in  that
ancient  city  on  the  20th  of  December,  1767.

I  also  discovered  that  not  only  the  Ineffa¬
ble  but  the  Superior  degrees  of  our  Rite
had  been  conferred  at  the  same  time  on  a
chosen  few  by  the  founder  of  the  Lodge,
Henry  A.  Francken,  one  of  the  Deputies  of
Stephen  Morin  of  glorious  memory.  It
was  not  long,  moreover,  before  I  found  the
original  Warrants  of  this  Lodge,  its  Book
of  Minutes,  the  Patents  of  Ill.  Bros.  Samuel
Stringer,  M.  D.,  Jeremiah  Van  Rensselaer,
and  Peter  W.  Yates,  Esquires,  Deputy  In¬
spectors  General  under  the  old  system  ;  also
the  Regulations  and  Constitutions  of  the
nine  Commissioners,  etc.,  1761,  and  other
documents  that  had  been  left  by  Bro.
Francken  with  the  Albany  brethren  when
he  founded  their  Lodge.  With  the  con¬
currence  of  the  surviving  members  of  said
Lodge  in  Albany,  Dr.  Jonathan  Eights  and
the  Hon.  and  R.  W.  Stephen  Van  Rens-  \


selaer,  P.  G.  M.  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
New  York.  I  aided  in  effecting  its  revival.
The  necessary  proceedings  were  then  insti¬
tuted  to  place  the  same  under  the  superin¬
tendence  of  a  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of
Jerusalem,  as  required  by  the  Old  Consti¬
tutions  ;  and  such  Grand  Council  was  sub¬
sequently  opened  in  due  form  in  said  city.

“Having  been  made  aware  of  the  ‘New
Constitutions  of  the  Thirty-third  Degree,’
ratified  on  the  1st  of  May,  1786,  conferring
the  supreme  power  over  our  Rite  on  ‘  Coun¬
cils  of  Nine  Brethren,’  I  hastened  to  place
myself  in  correspondence  with  Moses
Holbrook,  M.  D.,  at  the  time  Sovereign
Grand  Commander  of  the  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  at  Charleston,  and  with  my  esteemed
friends,  Joseph  McCosh,  Illustrious  Grand
Secretary  General  of  the  last-named  Coun¬
cil,  and  Bro.  Gourgas,  at  that  time  Illus¬
trious  Grand  Secretary  General  of  the  H.
E.  for  this  Northern  Jurisdiction.  Lodges
of  Perfection  in  the  counties  of  Montgom¬
ery,  Onondaga,  Saratoga,  and  Mouroe,  in
the  State  of  New  York,  were  successively
organized  and  placed,  agreeably  to  the  Con¬
stitutions,  under  the  superintendence  of  the
Grand  Council  before  named.  The  estab¬
lishment  of  this  last-named  body  was  con¬
firmed,  and  all  our  proceedings  in  Sublime
Freemasonry  were  legalized  and  sanctioned
by  the  only  lawful  authorities  in  the  United
States,  the  aforesaid  Supreme  Councils.

“  On  the  16th  day  of  November,  1824, 1
received  a  Patent  appointing  me  S.  of  S.
of  a  Consistory  of  S.  P.  of  the  R.  S.  estab¬
lished  in  the  city  of  Albany.

“  In  1825,  I  took  my  vows,  as  a  ‘  Sover¬
eign  Grand  Inspector  General,’  between  the
hands  of  our  said  Brother  Joseph  McCosh,
he  having  been  specially  deputed  for  that
purpose.  I  was  shortly  after  constituted
and  accredited  the  Representative  of  the
Southern  Supreme  Grand  Council  near  the
Northern  Supreme  Grand  Council,  of  which
last  I  was  made  and  ever  since  have  been  a
member.”

In  1851,  he  was  elected  Sovereign  Grand
Commander  of  the  Supreme  Council  for  the
Northern  Jurisdiction,  but  soon  after  re¬
signed  the  office  in  favor  of  Edward  A.
Raymond.  As  he  at  that  time  had  removed
his  residence  to  the  city  of  New  York,  he
was  immediately  appointed  Deputy  In¬
spector  for  the  State,  and  afterwards  was
elected  Grand  Commander  of  Cosmopolitan
Sovereign  Consistory  of  the  State  of  New
York.

The  last  years  of  his  life  were  oppressed
with  poverty,  and  he  was  compelled  to  ac¬
cept  a  subordinate  office  in  the  Custom-
House  of  New  York,  where,  in  my  visits
to  that  city,  I  often  beheld  him  faithfully
I  laboring  at  his  desk  on  tasks  which  I  pain-


YATES


YEAR


899


rtilly  felt  were  uncongenial  to  his  culti¬
vated  intellect.  He  died  December  13,
1859,  in  the  city  of  New  York.

Bro.  Yates  was  the  author  of  a  work  en¬
titled  History  of  the  Manners  and  Ceremo¬
nies  of  the  Indian  Tribes,  in  which  h*e  seeks
ingeniously,  if  not  satisfactorily,  to  discover
a  Masonic  meaning  in  the  Indian  mystic
rites.  He  was  also  engaged  for  many  years
in  the  compilation  of  a  valuable  Reperto-
rium  of  Masonry,  a  work  the  manuscript  of
which  he  left  unfinished  at  the  time  of  his
death.  But  most  of  his  Masonic  writings
appeared  in  contemporary  journals.  Moore’s
Freemasons’  Magazine  and  Mackey’s  Ma¬
sonic  Quarterly  Review  contain  valuable
communications  from  his  pen  on  subjects
of  Masonic  archaeology,  in  which  science
he  had  no  superior.  He  was  also  a  poet
of  no  mean  pretension,  as  his  Odes  of  Per¬
fection  sufficiently  show.

In  an  address  delivered  before  the  Lodge
of  Sorrow  held  by  the  New  York  Lodge  of
Perfection  on  the  occasion  of  his  demise,
Bro.  Charles  T.  McClenachan  has  paid  to
Giles  F.  Yates  this  true  and  appropriate
tribute :

“  In  the  latter  years  of  his  life,  this  illus¬
trious  Brother, — so  just,  so  pure,  so  firm  in
mind,  so  unobtrusive,  and  yet  so  deeply
wrapt  in  the  one  great  ideal  of  Perfection,
known  by  Masonic  reputation  around  the
wide  world,  —  passed  daily  unheeded  from
the  tediousness  of  duty  to  the  pleasures  of
study ;  never  forsaking  the  one  great  object
of  his  life  —  the  solving  of  the  Mysteries,
the  searching  after  Truth.  Active,  thought¬
ful,  penetrating,  his  whole  soul  ever  cen¬
tred  inagrasping  desire  to  comprehend  the
fulness  of  the  Great  Intelligence,  the  Rou-
ach  Elohim,  or  Divine  Existence  —  his
bright  ideal  of  Perfection  which  dwells  not
on  earth  —  he  has  now  found  full  relief  in
death  and  the  certain  knowledge  of  the
Divine  reality.”

But  the  subject  of  this  sketch  has  him¬
self  frankly  and  honestly,  as  was  ever  his
wont,  described  his  own  character:

“  I  would  fain  have  you  believe,  my  dear
brethren,”  said  he,  “that,  as  a  member  of
the  Masonic  institution,  if  I  have  had  any
ambition,  it  has  been  to  study  its  science,
and  to  discharge  my  duties  as  a  faithful
Mason,  rather  than  to  obtain  its  official
honors  or  personal  benefits  of  any  kind.
Self-aggrandizement  has  never  formed  any
art  of  my  Masonic  creed,  and  all  who
now  me  can  bear  witness  that  it  never  has
of  my  practice.”

The  motto  he  had  selected  was  “  prodesse
quam  conspici,”  to  do  good  rather  than  to
be  conspicuous,  and  to  that  sentiment  he
was  consistently  faithful  throughout  his
well-spent  life.


Yaveron  Hamaim.  A  significant
word  in  the  high  degrees.  The  French
rituals  explain  it  as  meaning  “  the  passage
of  the  river,”  and  refer  it  to  the  crossing
of  the  river  Euphrates  by  the  liberated
Jewish  captives  on  their  return  from  Baby¬
lon  to  Jerusalem  to  rebuild  the  Temple.
It  is  in  its  present  form  a  corruption  of  the
Hebrew  sentence,  QtQfJ  yavaru

hamaim,  which  signifies  “they  will  cross,
or  pass  over,  the  waters,”  alluding  to  the
streams  lying  between  Babylon  and  Jeru¬
salem,  of  which  the  Euphrates  was  the  most
important.

Year,  Hebrew.  The  same  as  the
Year  of  the  World,  which  see.

Year  of  Uglit.  Anno  Lucis,  in  the
year  of  light,  is  the  epoch  used  in  Masonic
documents  of  the  Symbolic  degrees.  This
era  is  calculated  from  the  creation  of  the
world,  and  is  obtained  by  adding  four  thou¬
sand  to  the  current  year,  on  the  supposition
that  Christ  was  born  four  thousand  years
after  the  creation  of  the  world.  But  the
chronology  of  Archbishop  Usher,  which
has  been  adopted  as  the  Bible  chronology
in  the  authorized  version,  places  the  birth
of  Christ  in  the  year  4004  after  the  crea¬
tion.  According  to  this  calculation,  the
Masonic  date  for  the  “  year  of  light”  is  four
years  short  of  the  true  date,  and  the  year
of  the  Lord  1874,  which  in  Masonic  docu¬
ments  is  5874,  should  correctly  be  5878.
The  Ancient  and  Accepted  Masons  in  the
beginning  of  this  century  used  this  correct
or  Usherian  era,  and  the  Supreme  Council
at  Charleston  dated  their  first  circular,  is¬
sued  in  1802,  as  5806.  Dalcho  ( Ahim .  Rez.,
2d  ed.,  p.  37,)  says:  “  If  Masons  are  deter¬
mined  to  fix  the  origin  of  their  Order  at  the
time  of  the  creation,  they  should  agree
among  themselves  at  what  time  before
Christ  to  place  that  epoch.”  At  that  agree¬
ment  they  have  now  arrived.  Whatever
differences  may  have  once  existed,  there  is
now  a  general  consent  to  adopt  the  incor¬
rect  theory  that  the  world  was  created  4000
B.  c.  The  error  is  too  unimportant,  and
the  practice  too  universal,  to  expect  that  it
will  ever  be  corrected.

Noorthouck,  ( Constitutions ,  p.  5,)  speak¬
ing  of  the  necessity  of  adding  the  four
years  to  make  a  correct  date,  says:  “But
this  being  a  degree  of  accuracy  that  Ma¬
sons  in  general  do  not  attend  to,  we  must,
after  this  intimation,  still  follow  the  vulgar
mode  of  computation  to  be  intelligible.”

As  to  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  it
is  by  no  means  to  be  supposed  that  Masons,
now,  intend  by  such  a  date  to  assume  that
their  Order  is  as  old  as  the  creation.  It  is
simply  used  as  expressive  of  reverence  for
that  physical  light  which  was  created  by
the  fiat  of  the  Grand  Architect,  and  which  is


900


YEAR


YELLOW


adopted  as  the  type  of  the  intellectual  light
of  Masonry.  The  phrase  is  altogether  sym¬
bolic.

Year  of  Masonry.  Sometimes  used
as  synonymous  with  Year  of  Light.  In  the
last  century,  it  was  in  fact  the  more  frequent
expression.

Year  of  the  Deposile.  An  era

adopted  by  Royal  and  Select  Masters,  and
refers  to  the  time  when  certain  important
secrets  were  deposited  in  the  first  Temple.
See  Anno  Depositions.

Year  of  the  Discovery.  An  era
adopted  by  Royal  Arch  Masons,  and  refers
to  the  time  when  certain  secrets  were  made
known  to  the  Craft  at  the  building  of  the
second  Temple.  See  Anno  Inventions.

Year  of  the  Order.  The  date  used
in  documents  connected  with  Masonic
Templarism.  It  refers  to  the  establishment
of  the  Order  of  Knights  Templars  in  the
year  1118.  See  Anno  Ordinis.

Year  of  the  World.  This  is  the  era
adopted  by  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  and  is  borrowed  from  the  Jewish
computation.  The  Jews  formerly  used  the
era  of  contracts,  dated  from  the  first  con¬
quests  of  Seleucus  Nicator  in  Syria.  But
since  the  fifteenth  century  they  have
counted  from  the  creation,  which  they  sup¬
pose  to  have  taken  place  in  September,
3760  before  Christ.  See  Anno  Mundi.

Yeas  and  Nays.  The  rule  existing
in  all  parliamentary  bodies  that  a  vote  may
be  called  for  “  by  yeas  and  nays,”  so  that
the  vote  of  each  member  may  be  known
and  recorded,  does  not  apply  to  Masonic
Lodges.  Indeed,  such  a  proceeding  would
be  unnecessary.  The  vote  by  yeas  and
nays  in  a  representative  body  is  taken  that
the  members  may  be  held  responsible  to
their  constituents.  But  in  a  Lodge,  each
member  is  wholly  independent  of  any  re¬
sponsibility,  except  to  his  own  conscience.
To  call  for  the  yeas  and  nays  being  then
repugnant  to  the  principles  which  govern
Lodges,  to  call  for  them  would  be  out  of
order,  and  such  a  call  could  not  be  enter¬
tained  by  the  presiding  officer.

But  in  a  Grand  Lodge  the  responsibility
of  the  members  to  a  constituency  does  exist,
and  there  it  is  very  usual  to  call  for  a  vote
by  Lodges,  when  the  vote  of  every  member
is  recorded.  Although  the  mode  of  calling
for  the  vote  is  different,  the  vote  by  Lodges
is  actually  the  same  as  a  vote  by  yeas  and
nays,  and  may  be  demanded  by  any  mem¬
ber.

Yeldis.  An  old  hermetic  degree,  which
Thory  says  was  given  in  some  secret  societies
in  Germany.

Yellow.  Of  all  the  colors,  yellow
seems  to  be  the  least  important  and  the  least
general  in  Masonic  symbolism.  In  other


institutions  it  would  have  the  same  insig¬
nificance,  were  it  not  that  it  has  been
adopted  as  the  representative  of  the  sun,
and  of  the  noble  metal  gold.  Thus,  in
colored  blazonry,  the  small  dots,  by  which
the  gold  in  an  engraved  coat  of  arms  is  desig¬
nated,  are  replaced  by  the  yellow  color.  La
Colorabiere,  a  French  heraldic  writer,  says,
[Science  Heroique,  p.  30,)  in  remarking  on
the  connection  between  gold  and  yellow,
that  as  yellow,  which  is  derived  from  the
sun,  is  the  most  exalted  of  colors,  so  gold
is  the  most  noble  of  metals.  Portal  [Des
Couleurs  Symboliques,  p.  64,)  says  that  the
sun,  gold,  and  yellow  are  not  synonymous,
but  mark  different  degrees  which  it  is  diffi¬
cult  to  define.  The  natural  sun  was  the
symbol  of  the  spiritual  sun,  gold  represented
the  natural  sun,  and  yellow  was  the  emblem
of  gold.  But  it  is  evident  that  yellow  de¬
rives  all  its  significance  as  a  symbolic  color
from  its  connection  with  the  hue  of  the
rays  of  the  sun  and  the  metal  gold.

Among  the  ancients,  the  divine  light  or
wisdom  was  represented  by  yellow,  as  the
divine  heat  or  power  was  by  red.  And
this  appears  to  be  about  the  whole  of  the
ancient  symbolism  of  this  color.

In  the  old  ritual  of  the  Scottish  and  her¬
metic  degree  of  Knight  of  the  Sun,  yellow
was  the  symbol  of  wisdom  darting  its  rays,
like  the  yellow  beams  of  the  morning,  to
enlighten  a  waking  world.  In  the  Prince
of  Jerusalem,  it  was  also  formerly  the  char¬
acteristic  color,  perhaps  with  the  same
meaning,  in  reference  to  the  elevated  posi¬
tion  that  that  degree  occupied  in  the  Rite
of  Perfection,  and  afterwards  in  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Rite.

Thirty  or  forty  years  ago,  yellow  was  the
characteristic  color  of  the  Mark  Master’s
degree,  derived,  perhaps,  from  the  color  of
the  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  who  originally
issued  charters  for  Mark  Lodges;  for  it  does
not  seem  to  have  possessed  any  symbolic
meaning.

In  fact,  as  I  have  already  intimated,  all
the  symbolism  of  yellow  must  be  referred
to  and  explained  by  the  symbolism  of  gold
and  of  the  sun,  of  which  it  is  simply  the
representative.

Yellow  Jacket.  Prichard  says  that
in  the  early  part  of  the  last  century  the
following  formed  a  part  of  the  catechism:

“ Have  you  seen  your  Master  to-day?

“  Yes.

“  How  was  he  cloathed  ?

“  In  a  yellow  jacket  and  a  blue  pair  of
breeches.”

And  he  explains  it  by  saying  that  “the
yellow  jacket  is  the  compasses,  and  the  blue
breeches  the  steel  points.”

On  this  Krause  (Kunsturk.,  ii.  78,)  re¬
marks  that  this  sportive  comparison  is


YEVELE


YORK


901


altogether  in  the  puerile  spirit  of  the  pecu¬
liar  interrogatories  which  are  found  among
many  other  crafts,  and  is  without  doubt
genuine  as  originating  in  the  working
Lodges.  Prichard’s  explanation  is  natural,
and  Krause’s  remark  correct.  But  it  is  vain
to  attempt  to  elevate  the  idea  by  attaching
to  it  a  symbolism  of  gold  and  azure  — the
blue  sky  and  the  meridian  sun.  No  such
thought  entered  into  the  minds  of  the  illit¬
erate  operatives  with  whom  the  question
and  answer  originated.

Yevele,  Henry.  He  was  one  of  the
Magistri  Operis,  or  Masters  of  the  Work,  in
the  reign  of  Edward  III.,  for  whom  he  con¬
structed  several  public  edifices.  Anderson
says  that  he  is  called,  “  in  the  Old  Records,
the  King’s  Freemason but  his  name  does
not  occur  in  any  of  the  old  manuscript
Constitutions  that  are  now  extant.

Yggrasil.  The  sacred  ash-tree  of  the
Scandinavian  mysteries,  which  Oliver  says
was  analogoustothemystical  ladder  of  other
Rites.  If  so,  the  symbolism  is  very  abstruse.

Y-lia-lio.  Higgins  (Anaca/ypsis,  ii.
17,)  cites  the  Abb6  Bazin  as  saying  that
this  was  the  name  esteemed  most  sacred
among  the  ancient  Egyptians.  Clement  of
Alexandria  asserts,  in  his  Stromata,  that  all
those  who  entered  into  the  temple  of  Serapis
were  obliged  to  wear  conspicuously  on  their
persons  the  name  I-ha-ho ,  which  he  says
signifies  the  Eternal  God.  The  resemblance
to  the  Tetragrammaton  is  apparent.

Yo<l.  The  Hebrew  letter  \  equivalent
in  sound  to  I  or  Y.  It  is  the  initial  letter
of  the  word  mn\  or  Jehovah,  the  Tetra¬
grammaton,  and  hence  was  peculiarly  sa¬
cred  among  the  Talmudists.  Basnage,  (lib.
iii.,  c.  13,)  while  treating  of  the  mysteries
of  the  name  Jehovah  among  the  Jews,  says
of  this  letter :

“The  yod  in  Jehovah  is  one  of  those
things  which  eye  hath  not  seen,  but  which
has  been  concealed  from  all  mankind.  Its
essence  and  matter  are  incomprehensible;
it  is  not  lawful  so  much  as  to  meditate  upon
it.  Man  may  lawfully  revolve  his  thoughts
from  one  end  of  the  heavens  to  the  other,
but  he  cannot  approach  that  inaccessible
light,  that  primitive  existence,  contained  in
the  letter  yod;  and  indeed  the  masters  call
>  the  letter  thought  or  idea,  and  prescribe  no
bounds  to  its  efficacy.  It  was  this  letter
which,  flowing  from  the  primitive  light,
gave  being  to  emanations.  It  wearied  itself
by  the  way,  but  assumed  a  new  vigor  by  the
sense  of  the  letter  j"7,  which  makes  the  sec¬
ond  letter  of  the  Ineffable  Name.”

In  Symbolic  Masonry,  the  yod  has
been  replaced  by  the  letter  G.  But
in  the  high  degrees  it  is  retained,  /\
and  within  a  triangle,  thus,  con-  A  \
stitutes  the  symbol  of  the  Deity./ _ \


Yoni.  Among  the  Orientalists,  the
yoni  was  the  female  symbol  corresponding
to  the  lingam,  or  male  principle.  The
lingam  and  yoni  of  the  East  assumed  the
names  of  Phallus  and  Cteis  among  the
Greeks.

York  Constitutions.  This  docu¬
ment,  which  is  also  called  Krause’s  MS.,
purports  to  be  the  Constitutions  adopted
by  the  General  Assembly  of  Masons  that
was  held  at  York  in  926.  (See  York  Le¬
gend.)  No  original  manuscript  copy  of  it
can  be  found,  but  a  German  translation
from  a  Latin  version  was  published,  for  the
first  time,  by  Krause  in  Die  drei  dltesten
Kunsturkunden  der  Freimaur  erbruderschaft.
It  will  be  found  in  the  third  edition  of  that
work,  (vol.  iii.,  pp.  58-101.)  Krause’s  ac¬
count  of  it  is,  that  it  was  translated  from
the  original,  which  is  said,  in  a  certificate
dated  January  4,  1806,  and  signed  “Stone-
house,”  to  have  been  written  on  parch¬
ment  in  the  ancient  language  of  the  coun¬
try,  and  preserved  at  the  city  of  York,
“  apud  Rev.  summam  societatem  architec-
tonicam,”  which  Woodford  translates  “  an
architectural  society,”  but  which  is  evi¬
dently  meant  for  the  “Grand  Lodge.”
From  this  Latin  translation  a  German  ver¬
sion  was  made  in  1808  by  Bro.  Schneider
of  Altenberg,  the  correctness  of  which,  hav¬
ing  been  examined  by  three  linguists,  is
certified  by  Carl  Erdmann  Weller,  Secre¬
tary  of  the  Government  Tribunal  of  Saxony.
And  it  is  this  certified  German  translation
that  has  been  published  by  Krause  in  his
Kunsturkunden.  An  English  version  was
inserted  by  Bro.  Hughan  in  his  Old  Charges
of  British  Freemasons.  The  document  con¬
sists,  like  all  the  old  manuscripts,  of  an  in¬
troductory  invocation,  a  history  of  archi¬
tecture  or  the  “  Legend  of  the  Craft,”  and
the  general  statutes  or  charges ;  but  several
of  the  charges  differ  from  those  in  the  other
Constitutions.  There  is,  however,  a  gen¬
eral  resemblance  sufficient  to  indicate  a
common  origin.  The  appearance  of  this
document  gave  rise  in  Germany  to  dis¬
cussions  as  to  its  authenticity.  Krause,
Schneider,  Fessler,  and  many  other  distin¬
guished  Masons,  believed  it  to  be  genuine;
while  Kloss  denied  it,  and  contended  that
the  Latin  translation  which  was  certified
by  Stonehouse  had  been  prepared  before
1806,  and  that  in  preparing  it  an  ancient
manuscript  had  been  remodelled  on  the
basis  of  the  1738  edition  of  Anderson’s
Constitutions,  because  the  term  “Noachida”
is  employed  in  both,  but  is  found  nowhere
else.  At  length,  in  1864,  Bro.  Findel  was
sent  by  the  “Society  of  German  Masons”
to  England  to  discover  the  original.  His
report  of  his  journey  was  that  it  was  nega¬
tive  in  its  results ;  no  such  document  was  to


902


YORK


YORK


be  found  in  the  archives  of  the  old  Lodge
at  York,  and  no  such  person  as  Stonehouse
was  known  in  that  city.  These  two  facts,
to  which  may  be  added  the  further  argu¬
ments  that  no  mention  is  made  of  it  in  the
Fabric  Rolls  of  York  Minster,  published  by
the  Surtees  Society,  nor  in  the  inventory
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  York  which  was  ex¬
tant  in  1777,  nor  by  Drake  in  his  speech
delivered  before  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1726,
and  a  few  other  reasons,  have  led  Findel  to
agree  with  Kloss  that  the  document  is  not
a  genuine  York  Charter.  Such,  too,  is  the
general  opinion  of  English  Masonic  schol¬
ars.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the
General  Assembly  at  York,  in  926,  did  frame
a  body  of  laws  or  Constitutions ;  but  there
is  almost  as  little  doubt  that  they  are  not
represented  by  the  Stonehouse  or  Krause
document.

York  Legend.  The  city  of  York,
in  the  north  of  England,  is  celebrated  for
its  traditional  connection  with  Masonry
in  that  kingdom.  No  topic  in  the  his¬
tory  of  Freemasonry  has  so  much  engaged
the  attention  of  modern  Masonic  scholars,
or  given  occasion  to  more  discussion,
than  the  alleged  facts  of  the  existence  of
Masonry  in  the  tenth  century  at  the  city
of  York  as  a  prominent  point,  of  the  call¬
ing  of  a  congregation  of  the  Craft  there  in
the  year  926,  of  the  organization  of  a  Gen¬
eral  Assembly  and  the  adoption  of  a  Con¬
stitution.  During  the  whole  of  the  last  and
the  greater  part  of  the  present  century,  the
Fraternity  in  general  have  accepted  all  of
these  statements  as  genuine  portions  of
authentic  history ;  and  the  adversaries  of
the  Order  have,  with  the  same  want  of  dis¬
crimination,  rejected  them  all  as  myths;
while  a  few  earnest  seekers  for  truth  have
been  at  a  loss  to  determine  what  part  was
historical  and  what  part  legendary.  Re¬
cently,  the  discovery  of  many  old  manu¬
scripts  has  directed  the  labors  of  such
scholars  as  Hughan,  "Woodford,  Lyon,  and
others,  to  the  critical  examination  of  the
early  history  of  Masonry,  and  that  of  York
has  particularly  engaged  their  attention.

For  a  thorough  comprehension  of  the
true  merits  of  this  question,  it  will  be  nec¬
essary  that  the  student  should  first  acquaint
himself  with  what  was,  until  recently,  the
recognized  theory  as  to  the  origin  of  Ma¬
sonry  at  York,  and  then  that  he  should
examine  the  newer  hypotheses  advanced  by
the  writers  of  the  present  day.  In  other
words,  he  must  read  both  the  tradition  and
the  history.

In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  I  propose  to
commence  with  the  legends  of  York  Ma¬
sonry,  as  found  in  the  old  manuscript  Con¬
stitutions,  and  then  proceed  to  a  review  of
what  has  been  the  result  of  recent  investi¬


gations.  It  may  be  premised  that,  of  all
those  who  have  subjected  these  legends  to
the  crucible  of  historical  criticism,  Brother
William  James  Hughan  of  Cornwall,  in
England,  must  unhesitatingly  be  acknowl¬
edged  as  “  facile  princeps,”  the  ablest,  the
most  laborious,  and  the  most  trustworthy
investigator.  He  was  the  first  and  the
most  successful  remover  of  the  cloud  of
tradition  which  so  long  had  obscured  the
sunlight  of  history.

The  legend  which  connects  the  origin  of
English  Masonry  at  York  in  926  is  some¬
times  called  the  “  York  Legend,”  sometimes
the  “Athelstane  Legend,”  because  the
General  Assembly,  said  to  have  been  held
there,  occurred  during  the  reign  of  that
king ;  and  sometimes  the  “  Edwin  Legend,”
because  that  prince  is  supposed  to  have  been
at  the  head  of  the  Craft,  and  to  have  con¬
voked  them  together  to  form  a  Constitution.

The  earliest  extant  of  the  old  manuscript
Constitutions  is  the  ancient  poem  com¬
monly  known  as  the  Halliwell  MS.,  and
the  date  of  which  is  conjectured  (on  good
grounds)  to  be  about  the  year  1390.  In
that  work  we  find  the  following  version  of
the  legend :

“  Thys  craft  com  ynto  Englond  as  y  yow  say,

Yn  tyme  of  good  kynge  Adelstonus’  "day  ;

He  made  tlio  botlie  halle  and  eke  bowre,

And  hye  tern  plus  of  gret  honowre,

To  sportyn  him  yn  bothe  day  and  nygth,

An  to  vorschepe  hys  God  with  alle  hys  mygth.
Thys  goode  lorde  loved  thys  craft  ful  wel,

And  purposud  to  strenthyn  hyt  every  del,

For  dyvers  defawtys  that  yn  "the  craft  he  fonde;
He  seude  aboute  ynto  the  londe
After  alle  the  masonus  of  the  crafte,

To  come  to  hym  ful  evene  strayfte,

For  to  amende  these  defnutys  alle
By  good  consel  gef  hyt  mytgth  falle.

A  semble  thenne  he  cowthe  let  make
Of  dyvers  lordis  yn  here  state
Dukys,  erlys,  and  barnes  also,

Knygthys,  sqwyers  and  mony  mo,

And  the  grete  burges  of  that  syt6,

They  were  ther  alle  yn  here  degre;

These  were  there  uclion  algate,

To  ordeyne  for  these  masonus  astate,

Ther  they  sowgton  by  here  wytte
How  they  mygthyn  governe  hytte :

Fyftene  artyculus  they  there  sowgton,

And  fyftene  povntys  ther  they  wrogton.”

For  the  benefit  of  those  wbo  are  not  fa¬
miliar  with  this  archaic  style,  the  passage
is  translated  into  modern  English.

“This  craft  came  into  England,  as  I  tell
you,  in  the  time  of  good  king  Athelstan’s
reign ;  he  made  then  both  hall,  and  also
bower  and  lofty  temples  of  great  honor,  to
take  his  recreation  in  both  day  and  night,
and  to  worship  his  God  with  all  his  might.
This  good  lord  loved  this  craft  full  well,  and
purposed  to  strengthen  it  in  every  part  on
account  of  various  defects  that  he  discovered


YORK


YORK


903


in  the  craft.  He  sent  about  into  all  the
land,  after  all  the  masons  of  the  craft,  to
come  straight  to  him,  to  amend  all  these
defects  by  good  counsel,  if  it  might  so  hap¬
pen.  He  then  permitted  an  assembly  to  be
made  of  divers  lords  in  their  rank,  dukes,
earls,  and  barons,  also  knights,  squires,  and
many  more,  and  the  great  burgesses  of  that
city,  they  were  all  there  in  their  degree;
these  were  there,  each  one  in  every  way  to
make  laws  for  the  estate  of  these  masons.
There  they  sought  by  their  wisdom  how
they  might  govern  it;  there  they  found  out
fifteen  articles,  and  there  they  made  fifteen
points.”

The  next  old  document  in  which  we  find
this  legend  recited  is  that  known  as  the
“  Cooke  MS.,”  whose  date  is  placed  at  1490.
The  details  are  here  much  more  full  than
those  contained  in  the  Halliwell  MS.  The
passage  referring  to  the  legend  is  as  follows:

“And  after  that  was  a  worthy  kynge  in
Englond,  that  was  callyd  Athelstone,  and
his  yongest  son  lovyd  well  the  sciens  of
Gemetry,  and  he  wyst  well  that  hand  craft
had  the  practyke  of  the  sciens  of  Gemetry
so  well  as  masons ;  wherefore  he  drew  him
to  consell  and  lernyd  [the]  practyke  of  that
sciens  to  his  speculatyf.  For  of  specula-
tyfe  he  was  a  master,  and  he  lovyd  well
masonry  and  masons.  And  he  bicome  a
mason  hymselfe.  And  he  gaf  hem  [gave
them]  charges  and  names  as  it  is  now  usyd
in  Englond  and  in  other  countries.  And
he  ordeyned  that  they  schulde  have  reson-
abull  pay.  And  purchesed  [obtained]  a  fre
patent  of  the  kyng  that  they  schulde  make
a  sembly  when  thei  sawe  resonably  tyme  a
[to]  cum  togedir  to  her  [their]  counsell  of
the  whiche  charges,  manors  &  semble  as  is
write  and  taught  in  the  boke  of* our  charges
wherefor  I  leve  hit  at  this  tyme.”

Thus  much  is  contained  in  the  MS.  from
lines  611  to  642.  Subsequently,  in  lines
688-719,  which  appear  to  have  been  taken
from  what  is  above  called  the  “  Boke  of
Charges,”  the  legend  is  repeated  in  these
words :

“In  this  manner  was  the  forsayde  art
begunne  in  the  lond  of  Egypt  bi  the  for-
sayd  maister  Euglat  [Euclid],  &  so  hit  went
fro  lond  to  londe  and  fro  kyngdome  to
kyngdome.  After  that,  many  yeris,  in  the
tyme  of  Kyng  Adhelstone,  wiche  was  sum
tyme  kynge  of  Englonde,  bi  his  counsell
and  other  gret  lordys  of  the  lond  bi  comin
common]  assent  for  grete  defaut  y-fennde
found]  among  masons  thei  ordeyned  a
certavne  reule  ainongys  hem  [them].  On
[one]  tyme  of  the  yere  or  in  iii  yere,  as
nede  were  to  the  kyng  and  gret  lordys  of
the  londe  and  all  the  comente  [commu¬
nity],  fro  provynce  to  provynce  and  fro
countre  to  countre  congregacions  scholde


be  made  by  maisters,  of  all  maisters  ma¬
sons  and  felaus  in  the  forsayd  art.  And  so
at  such  congregacions  they  that  be  made
masters  schold  be  examined  of  the  articuls
after  written,  &  be  ransacked  [thoroughly
examined]  whether  thei  be  abull  and  kun-
nyng  [able  and  skilful]  to  the  profyte  of
the  lordys  hem  to  serve  [to  serve  them],
and  to  the  honor  of  the  forsayd  art.”

Seventy  years  later,  in  1560,  the  Lands-
downe  MS.  was  written,  and  in  it  we  find
the  legend  still  further  developed,  and
Prince  Edwin  for  the  first  time  introduced
byname.  That  manuscript  reads  thus :

“  Soone  after  the  Decease  of  St.  Albones,
there  came  Diverse  Warrs  into  England
out  of  Diverse  Nations,  so  that  the  good
rule  of  Masons  was  dishired  [disturbed]
and  put  down  until  the  tyme  of  King
Adilston.  In  his  tyme  there  was  a  worthy
King  in  England,  that  brought  this  Land
into  good  rest,  and  he  builded  many  great
workes  and  buildings,  therefore  he  loved
well  Masons,  for  he  had  a  sone  called  Ed¬
win,  the  which  Loved  Masons  much  more
than  his  Father  did,  and  he  was  soe  prac¬
tized  in  Geometry,  that  he  delighted  much
to  come  and  talke  with  Masons  and  to
learne  of  them  the  Craft.  And  after,  for  the
love  he  had  to  Masons  and  to  the  Craft,
he  was  made  Mason  at  Windsor,  and  he
gott  of  the  King,  his  Father,  a  Charter  and
commission  once  every  yeare  to  have  As¬
sembly,  within  the  Realme  where  they
would  within  England,  and  to  correct
within  themselves  Faults  &  Tresspasses
that  were  done  as  touching  the  Craft,  and
he  held  them  an  Assembley,  and  there  he
made  Masons  and  gave  them  Charges,  and
taught  them  the  Manners  and  Comands
the  same  to  be  kept  ever  afterwards.  And
tooke  them  the  Charter  and  commission  to
keep  their  Assembly,  and  Ordained  that  it
should  be  renewed  from  King  to  King,  and
when  the  Assembly  were  gathered  to-
geather  he  made  a  Cry,  that  all  old  Masons
or  young,  that  had  any  W riteings  or  V nder-
standing  of  the  Charges  and  manners  that
weere  made  before  their  Lands,  where¬
soever  they  were  made  Masons,  that  they
should  shew  them  forth,  there  were  found
some  in  French,  some  in  Greek,  some  in
Hebrew,  and  some  in  English,  and  some  in
other  Languages,  and  when  they  were  read
and  over  seen  well  the  intent  of  them  was
vnderstood  to  be  all  one,  and  then  he
caused  a  Book  to  be  made  thereof  how  this
worthy  Craft  of  Masonrie  was  first  founded,
and  he  himselfe  comanded,  and  also  then
caused,  that  it  should  be  read  at  any  tyme
when  it  should  happen  any  Mason  or  Ma¬
sons  to  be  made  to  give  him  or  them  their
Charges,  and  from  that,  until  this  Day,
Manners  of  Masons  have  been  kept  in  this


904


YORK


YORK


Manner  and  forme,  as  well  as  Men  might
Governe  it,  and  Furthermore  at  diverse
Assemblyes  have  been  put  and  Ordained
diverse  Charges  by  the  best  advice  of  Mas¬
ters  and  Fellows.”

All  the  subsequent  manuscripts  contain
the  legend  substantially  as  it  is  in  the
Landsdowne ;  and  most  of  them  appear  to
be  mere  copies  of  it,  or,  most  probably,  of
some  original  one  of  which  both  they  and
it  are  copies.

In  1723  Dr.  Anderson  published  the  first
edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions ,  in
which  the  history  of  the  fraternity  of  Free¬
masons  is,  he  says,  “  collected  from  their
general  records  and  their  faithful  traditions
of  many  ages.”  He  gives  the  legend  taken,
as  he  says,  from  “a  certain  record  of  Free¬
masons  written  in  the  reign  of  King  Ed¬
ward  IV.,”  which  manuscript,  Preston  as¬
serts,  “  is  said  to  have  been  in  the  possession
of  the  famous  Elias  Ashmole.”  As  the  old
manuscripts  were  generally  inaccessible  to
the  Fraternity,  (and,  indeed,  until  recently
but  few  of  them  had  been  discovered,)  it  is
to  the  publication  of  the  legend  by  Ander¬
son,  and  subsequently  by  Preston,  that  we
are  to  attribute  its  general  adoption  by  the
Craft  for  more  than  a  century  and  a  half.
The  form  of  the  legend,  as  given  by  Ander¬
son  in  his  first  edition,  varies  slightly  from
that  in  his  second.  In  the  former,  he  places
the  date  of  the  occurrence  at  930;  in  his
second,  at  926:  in  the  former,  he  styles  the
congregation  at  York  a  General  Lodge;  in
his  second,  a  Grand  Lodge.  Now,  as  the
modern  and  universally  accepted  form  of
the  legend  agrees  in  both  respects  with  the
latter  statement,  and  not  with  the  former,
it  must  be  concluded  that  the  second  edi¬
tion,  and  the  subsequent  ones  by  Entick
and  Noorthouck,  who  only  repeat  Ander¬
son,  furnished  the  form  of  the  legend  as
now  popular.

In  the  second  edition  of  the  Constitutions,
(p.  63,)  published  in  1738,  Anderson  gives
the  legend  in  the  following  words :

“In  all  the  Old  Constitutions  it  is  writ¬
ten  to  this  purpose,  viz. :

“  That  though  the  antient  records  of  the
Brotherhood  in  England  were  most  of  them
destroyd  or  lost  in  the  war  with  the  Danes,
who  burnt  the  Monasteries  where  the  Rec¬
ords  were  kept;  yet  King  Athelstan,  (the
Grandson  of  King  Alfred,)  the  first  an-
nointed  King  of  England,  who  translated
the  Holy  Bible  into  the  Saxon  language,
when  he  had  brought  the  land  into  rest  and
peace,  built  many  great  works,  and  encour¬
aged  many  Masons  from  France  and  else¬
where,  whom  he  appointed  overseers  there-  i
of:  they  brought  with  them  the  Charges  and
Regulations  of  the  foreign  JLodges.  and  pre¬
vail’d  with  the  King  to  increase  the  wages.

“  That  Prince  Edwin,  the  King’s  Brother,  1


being  taught  Geometry  and  Masonry,  for
the  love  he  had  to  the  said  Craft,  and  to  the
honorable  principles  whereon  it  is  grounded,
purchased  a  Free  Charter  of  King  Athel¬
stan  his  Brother,  for  the  Free  Masons  hav¬
ing  among  themselves  a  Connection,  or  a
power  and  freedom  to  regulate  themselves,
to  amend  what  might  happen  amiss,  and  tc
hold  an  yearly  Communication  in  a  General
Assembly.

“That  accordingly  Prince  Edwin  sum¬
mon’d  all  the  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  in
the  Realm,  to  meet  him  in  the  Congrega¬
tion  at  York,  who  came  and  form’d  the
Grand  Lodge  under  him  as  their  Grand
Master,  a.  d.  926.

“  That  they  brought  with  them  many  old
Writings  and  Records  of  the  Craft,  some  in
Greek,  some  in  Latin,  some  in  French,  and
other  languages;  and  from  the  contents
thereof,  they  framed  the  Constitutions
of  the  English  Lodges,  and  made  a  Law  for
themselves,  to  preserve  and  observe  the
same  in  all  Time  coming,  etc.,  etc.,  etc.”

Preston  accepted  the  legend,  and  gave  it
in  his  second  edition  (p.  198)  in  the  fol¬
lowing  words :

“  Edward  died  in  924,  and  was  succeeded
by  Athelstane  his  son,  who  appointed  his
brother  Edwin  patron  of  the  Masons.  This
prince  procured  a  Charter  from  Athelstane,
empowering  them  to  meet  annually  in  com¬
munication  at  York.  In  this  city,  the  first
Grand  Lodge  of  England  was  formed  in
926,  at  which  Edwin  presided  as  Grand
Master.  Here  many  old  writings  were  pro¬
duced  in  Greek,  Latin,  and  other  languages,
from  which  it  is  said  the  Constitutions  of  the
English  Lodge  have  been  extracted.”

Such  is  the  “  York  legend,”  as  it  has
been  accented  by  the  Craft,  contained  in
all  the  old  manuscripts  from  at  least  the
end  of  the  fourteenth  century  to  the  present
day;  officially  sanctioned  by  Anderson,
the  historiographer  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in
1723,  and  repeated  by  Preston,  by  Oliver,
and  by  almost  all  succeeding  Masonic
v7riters.  Only  recently  has  any  one  thought
of  doubting  its  authenticity;  and  now
the  important  question  in  Masonic  litera¬
ture  is  whether  it  is  a  myth  or  a  history  —
whether  it  is  all  or  in  any  part  fiction  or
truth  —  and  if  so,  what  portion  belongs  to
the  former  and  what  to  the  latter  category.
In  coming  to  a  conclusion  on  this  subject,
the  question  necessarily  divides  itself  into
three  forms.

1.  Was  there  an  Assembly  of  Masons  held
in  or  about  the  year  926,  at  York,  under
the  patronage  or  by  the  permission  of  King
Athelstan  ?

There  is  nothing  in  the  personal  char¬
acter  or  the  political  conduct  of  Athelstan
that  forbids  such  a  possibility  or  even  prob¬
ability.  He  wTas  liberal  in  his  ideas,  like


YORK


YORK


905


his  grandfather  the  great  Alfred  ;  he  was  a

{>romoter  of  civilization ;  he  patronized
earning,  built  many  churches  and  monas¬
teries,  encouraged  the  translation  of  the
Scriptures,  and  gave  charters  to  many  oper¬
ative  companies.  In  his  reign,  the  “  fritli-
gildan,”  free  gilds  or  sodalities,  were  incor¬
porated  by  law.  There  is,  therefore,  noth¬
ing  improbable  in  supposing  that  he  ex¬
tended  his  protection  to  the  Operative
Masons.  The  uninterrupted  existence  for
several  centuries  of  a  tradition  that  such  an
Assembly  was  held,  requires  that  those  who
deny  it  should  furnish  some  more  satisfac¬
tory  reason  for  their  opinion  than  has  yet
been  produced.  “  Incredulity,”  says  Vol¬
taire,  “is  the  foundation  of  history.”  But
it  must  be  confessed  that,  while  an  excess
of  credulity  often  mistakes  fable  for  reality,
an  obstinacy  of  incredulity  as  frequently
leads  to  the  rejection  of  truth  as  fiction.
The  Rev.  Mr.  Woodford,  in  an  essay  on  The
Connection  of  York  with  the  History  of  Free¬
masonry  in  England,  inserted  in  Hughan’s
Unpublished  Records  of  the  Craft,  has  criti¬
cally  discussed  this  subject,  and  comes  to
this  conclusion.  “  I  see  no  reason,  there¬
fore,  to  reject  so  old  a  tradition,  that  under
Athelstan  the  Operative  Masons  obtained
his  patronage,  and  met  in  General  Assem¬
bly.”  To  that  verdict  I  subscribe.

2.  Was  Edwin,  the  brother  of  Athelstan,
the  person  who  convoked  that  Assembly  ?
This  question  has  already  been  discussed  in
the  article  Edwin,  where  the  suggestion  is
made  that  the  Edwin  alluded  to  in  the
legend  was  not  the  son  or  brother  of  Athel¬
stan,  but  Edwin,  king  of  Northumbria.
Francis  Drake,  in  his  speech  before  the
Grand  Lodge  of  York  in  1726,  was,  I
think,  the  first  who  publicly  advanced  this
opinion ;  but  he  does  so  in  a  way  that  shows
that  the  view  must  have  been  generally  ac¬
cepted  by  his  auditors,  and  not  advanced  by
him  as  something  new.  He  says:  “You
know  we  can  boast  that  the  first  Grand
Lodge  ever  held  in  England  was  held  in
this  city,  where  Edwin,  the  first  Christian
<dng  of  Northumbria,  about  the  six  hun¬
dredth  year  after  Christ,  and  who  laid  the
foundation  of  our  Cathedral,  sat  as  Graud
Master.”

Edwin,  who  was  born  in  586,  ascended
the  throne  in  617,  and  died  in  633.  He
was  pre-eminent,  among  the  Anglo-Saxon
kings  who  were  his  contemporaries,  for
military  genius  and  statesmanship.  So  in¬
flexible  was  his  administration  of  justice,
that  it  was  said  that  in  his  reign  a  woman
or  child  might  carry  everywhere  a  purse
of  gold  without  danger  of  robbery,  —  high
commendation  in  those  days  of  almost  un¬
bridled  rapine.  The  chief  event  of  the
reign  of  Edwin  was  the  introduction  of
6  0


Christianity  into  the  kingdom  of  Northum¬
bria.  Previous  to  his  reign,  the  northern
metropolis  of  the  Church  had  been  placed
at  York,  and  the  king  patronized  Paulinus
the  bishop,  giving  him  a  house  and  other
possessions  in  that  city.  The  only  objec¬
tion  to  this  theory  is  its  date,  which  is  three
hundred  years  before  the  reign  of  Athelstan
and  the  supposed  meeting  at  York  in  926.

3.  Are  the  Constitutions  which  were
adopted  by  that  General  Assembly  now  ex¬
tant?  It  is  not  to  be  doubted,  that  if  a
General  Assembly  was  held,  it  must  have
adopted  Constitutions  or  regulations  for  the
government  of  the  Craft.  Such  would
mainly  be  the  object  of  the  meeting.  But
there  is  no  sufficient  evidence  that  the  Regu¬
lations  now  called  the  “York  Constitutions,”
or  the  “Gothic  Constitutions,”  are  those
that  were  adopted  in  926.  It  is  more  prob¬
able  that  the  original  document  and  all
genuine  copies  of  it  are  lost,  and  that  it
formed  the  type  from  which  all  the  more
modern  manuscript  Constitutions  have  been
formed.  There  is  the  strongest  internal
evidence  that  all  the  manuscripts,  from  the
Halliwell  to  the  Papworth,  had  a  common
original,  from  which  they  were  copied  with
more  or  less  accuracy,  or  on  which  they
were  framed  with  more  or  less  modification.
And  this  original  I  suppose  to  be  the  Con¬
stitutions  which  must  have  been  adopted  at
the  General  Assembly  at  York.

The  theory,  then,  which  I  think  may  safely
be  advanced  on  this  subject,  and  which  must
be  maintained  until  there  are  better  reasons
than  we  now  have  to  reject  it,  is,  that  about
the  year  926  a  General  Assembly  of  Masons
was  held  at  York,  under  the  patronage  of
Edwin,  brother  of  Athelstan,  at  which
Assembly  a  code  of  laws  was  adopted,  which
became  the  basis  on  which  all  subsequent
Masonic  Constitutions  were  framed.

York.  Manuscripts.  Originally
there  were  six  manuscripts  of  the  Old  Con¬
stitutions  bearing  this  title,  because  they
were  deposited  in  the  Archives  of  the  now
extinct  Grand  Lodge  of  all  England,  whose
seat  was  at  the  city  of  York.  But  the  MS.
No.  3  is  now  missing,  although  it  is  men¬
tioned  in  the  inventory  made  at  York  in
1779.  Nos.  2,  4,  and  5  are  now  in  pos¬
session  of  the  York  Lodge.  Recently  Bro.
Hughan  discovered  Nos.  2  and  6  in  the
Archives  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
at  London.  The  dates  of  these  manuscripts,
which  do  not  correspond  with  the  number
of  their  titles,  are  as  follows :

No.  1  has  the  date  of  1600.

“  2  “  “  1704.

“  3  “  “  1630.

“  4  “  “  1693.

“  5  “  “  1670.

“  6  “  “  1680.


906


YORK


YORK


Of  these  manuscripts,  No.  1  was  published
by  Bro.  Hughan  in  his  Old  Charges  of
British  Freemasons,  and  Nos.  2  and  4,  by  the
same  author,  in  his  History  of  Freemasonry
in  York.  The  other  manuscripts  are  as  yet
unpublished.  Bro.  Hughan  deems  No.  4
of  some  importance  because  it  contains  the
following  sentence :  “  The  one  of  the  elders
takeing  the  Booke,  and  that  hee  or  shee  that
is  to  be  made  mason  shall  lay  their  hands
thereon,  and  the  charge  shall  bee  given.”
This,  he  thinks,  affords  some  presumption
that  women  were  admitted  as  members  of
the  old  Masonic  gilds,  although  he  admits
that  we  possess  no  other  evidence  confirma¬
tory  of  this  theory.  The  truth  is,  that  the
sentence  was  a  translation  of  the  same
clause  written  in  other  old  Constitutions
in  Latin.  In  the  York  MS.  No.  1,  the
sentence  is  thus :  “  Tunc  unus  ex  senioribus
teneat  librum  et  Me  vel  illi,”  etc.,  i.  e.,  “  he
or  they.”  The  writer  of  No.  4  copied,  most
probably,  from  No.  1,  and  his  translation
of  “  hee  or  shee  ”  from  “  Me  vel  Mi,”  instead
of  “he  or  they”  was  either  the  result  of  ig¬
norance  in  mistaking  illi,  they,  for  ilia,  she,
or  of  carelessness  in  writing  shee  for  they.
It  is  evident  that  the  charges  thus  to  be
sworn  to,  and  which  immediately  follow,
were  of  such  a  nature  as  made  most  of  them
physically  impossible  for  women  to  perform ;
nor  are  females  alluded  to  in  any  other  of
the  manuscripts.  All  Masons  there  are
“Fellows,”  and  are  so  to  be  addressed.

There  are  two  other  York  Manuscripts  of
the  Operative  Masons,  which  have  been
published  in  the  Fabric  Rolls  of  York  Min¬
ster,  an  invaluable  work,  edited  by  the  Rev.
James  Raine,  and  issued  under  the  patron¬
age  and  at  the  expense  of.the  Surtees  Society.

York.  Rite.  This  is  the  oldest  of  all
the  Rites,  and  consisted  originally  of  only
three  degrees:  1.  Entered  Apprentice;  2.
Fellow  Craft;  3.  Master  Mason.  The  last
included  a  part  which  contained  the  True
Word,  but  which  was  disrupted  from  it
by  Dunckerley  in  the  latter  part  of  the
last  century,  and  has  never  been  restored,  j
The  Rite  in  its  purity  does  not  now  exist
anywhere.  The  nearest  approach  to  it  is  '>
the  St.  John’s  Masonry  of  Scotland,  but
the  Master’s  degree  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  |
Scotland  is  not  the  Master’s  degree  of  the
York  Rite.  When  Dunckerley  dismembered
the  third  degree,  he  destroyed  the  identity
of  the  Rite.  In  1813,  it  was  apparently
recognized  by  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  when  it  defined  “pure  Ancient
Masonry  to  consist  of  three  degrees,  and  no
more :  viz.,  those  of  the  Entered  Appren¬
tice,  the  Fellow  Craft,  and  the  Master  Ma¬
son,  including  the  Supreme  Order  of  the
Holy  Royal  Arch.”  Had  the  Grand  Lodge


1  abolished  the  Royal  Arch  degree,  which  was
then  practised  as  an  independent  Order  in
England,  and  reincorporated  its  secrets  in
the  degree  of  Master  Mason,  the  York  Rite
would  have  been  revived.  But  by  recogniz¬
ing  the  Royal  Arch  as  a  separate  degree,
and  retaining  the  Master’s  degree  in  its
mutilated  form,  they  repudiated  the  Rite.
In  the  United  States  it  has  been  the  almost
universal  usage  to  call  the  Masonry  there
practised  the  York  Rite.  But  it  has  no
better  claim  to  this  designation  than  it  has
to  be  called  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite,
or  the  French  Rite,  or  the  Rite  of  Schroder.
It  has  no  pretensions  to  the  York  Rite.  Of
its  first  three  degrees,  the  Master’s  is  the
mutilated  one  which  took  the  Masonry  of
England  out  of  the  York  Rite,  and  it  has
added  to  these  three  degrees  six  others
wThich  were  never  known  to  the  Ancient
York  Rite,  or  that  which  was  practised  in
England,  in  theearlier  halfof  the  eighteenth
century,  by  the  legitimate  Grand  Lodge.
In  all  my  writings  for  years  past,  I  have
ventured  to  distinguish  the  Masonry  prac¬
tised  in  the  United  States,  consisting  of
nine  degrees,  as  the  “  American  Rite,”  a
title  to  which  it  is  clearly  and  justly  enti¬
tled,  as  the  system  is  peculiar  to  America,
and  is  practised  in  no  other  country.

Bro.  Hughan,  speaking  of  the  York  Rite,
( TJnpubl .  Rec.,  p.  148,)  says  “there  is  no  such
Rite,  and  what  it  was  no  one  now  knows.”
I  think  that  this  declaration  is  too  sweep¬
ing  in  its  language.  He  is  correct  in  say¬
ing  that  there  is  at  this  time  no  such  Rite.
I  have  just  described  its  decadence  ;  but  he
is  wrong  in  asserting  that  we  are  now  igno¬
rant  of  its  character.  In  using  the  title,
there  is  no  reference  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of
all  England,  which  met  for  some  years  dur-
iug  the  last  century,  but  rather  to  the  York
legend,  and  to  the  hypothesis  that  York
was  the  cradle  of  English  Masonry.  The
York  Rite  was  that  Rite  which  was  most
probably  organized  or  modified  at  the  re¬
vival  in  1717,  and  practised  for  fifty  years
by  the  Constitutional  Grand  Lodge  of  "Eng¬
land.  It  consisted  of  only  the  three  sym-*
bolic  degrees,  the  last  one,  or  the  Master’s,
containing  within  itself  the  secrets  now
transferred  to  the  Royal  Arch.  This  Rite
was  carried  in  its  purity  to  France  in  1725,
and  into  America  at  a  later  period.  About
the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  the
continental  Masons,  and  about  the  end  of
it  the  Americans,  began  to  superimpose
upon  it  those  high  degrees  which,  with  the
necessary  mutilation  of  the  third,  have  given
rise  to  numerous  other  Rites.  But  the  An¬
cient  York  Rite,  though  no  longer  culti¬
vated,  must  remain  on  the  records  of  history
as  the  oldest  and  purest  of  all  the  Rites.


ZABUD


ZEDEKIAH


907


Z.


Zabnd.  •  A  historical  personage  at  the
court  of  King  Solomon,  whose  name  ap¬
pears  in  several  of  the  high  degrees.  In
that  of  Select  Master  in  the  American  Rite,
it  has  been  corrupted  into  Izabud.  He  is
mentioned  in  1  Kings  iv.  5,  where  he  is
described  in  the  authorized  version  as
being  “principal  officer  and  the  king’s
friend.”  The  original  is  Zabud  ben  Nathan
cohen  regneh  hahmelek ,  which  is  literally
“  Zabud,  son  of  Nathan,  a  priest,  the  friend
of  the  king.”  Adam  Clarke  says  he  was
“the  king’s  chief  favorite,  his  confidant.”
Smith  ( Did .  Bib.)  says:  “This  position,
if  it  were  an  official  one,  wras  evidently  dis¬
tinct  from  that  of  counsellor,  occupied  by
Ahithophel  under  David,  and  had  more  of
the  character  of  private  friendship  about
it.”  Kitto  ( Cyclopced.  Bib.  Lit.)  says  of  Za¬
bud  and  of  his  brother  Azariah,  that  their
advancement  in  the  household  of  King
Solomon  “may  doubtless  be  ascribed  not
only  to  the  young  king’s  respect  for  the
venerable  prophet  (their  father),  who  had
been  his  instructor,  but  to  the  friendship
he  had  contracted  with  his  sons  during  the
course  of  education.  The  office,  or  rather
honor,  of  ‘  friend  of  the  king,’  we  find  in
all  the  despotic  governments  of  the  East.
It  gives  high  power,  without  the  public  re¬
sponsibility  which  the  holding  of  a  regular
office  in  the  state  necessarily  imposes.  It
implies  the  possession  of  the  utmost  confi¬
dence  of,  and  familiar  intercourse  with,  the
monarch,  to  whose  person  ‘the  friedd’  at
all  times  has  access,  and  whose  influence  is
therefore  often  far  greater,  even  in  matters
of  state,  than  that  of  the  recognized  min¬
isters  of  government.”

This  has  been  fully  carried  out  in  the  le¬
gend  of  the  Select  Master’s  degree.

Zabulon.  The  Greek  form  of  Zebu-
lun,  the  tenth  son  of  Jacob.  Delaunay
( ThuiUeur ,  p.  79,)  says  that  some  ritualists
suppose  that  it  is  the  true  form  of  the  word
of  which  Jabulum  is  a  corruption.  This  is
incorrect.  Jabulum  is  a  corrupt  form  of
Gib/itn.  Zabulon  has  no  connection  with
the  high  degrees,  except  that  in  the  Royal
Arch  he  represents  one  of  the  stones  in  the
Pectoral.

Zadok.  A  personage  in  some  of  the
Ineffable  degrees  of  the  Scottish  Rite.  In
Scripture  he  is  recorded  as  having  been  one
of  the  two  chief  priests  in  the  time  of
David,  Abiathar  being  the  other.  He  sub¬
sequently,  by  order  of  David,  anointed  Solo¬
mon  to  be  king,  by  whom  he  was  rewarded
with  the  post  of  high  priest.  Josephus
[Ant.  x.  8,  #  6,)  says  that  “Sadoc,  the  nigh
priest,  was  the  first  high  priest  of  the  Tem¬


ple  which  Solomon  built.”  Yet  it  has
been  supposed  by  some  authors,  in  conse¬
quence  of  his  name  not  being  mentioned  in
the  detailed  account  of  the  dedication,  that
he  had  died  before  the  completion  of  the
Temple.

Zarathustra.  The  name,  in  the  Zend
language,  of  that  great  reformer  in  religion
more  commonly  known  to  Europeans  as
Zoroaster,  which  see.

Zarthan.  The  Zarthan  of  2  Chroni¬
cles  iv.  17  appears  to  be  the  same  place  as
the  Zeredatha  of  1  Kings  vii.  46.  In  the
Masonic  ritual,  the  latter  word  is  always
used.  See  Zeredatha.

Zeal.  Ever  since  the  revival  in  1717,
(for  it  is  found  in  the  earliest  lectures,)  it
was  taught  that  Apprentices  served  their
Masters  with  “freedom,  fervency,  and
zeal ;  ”  and  the  symbols  of  the  first  two  of
these  virtues  were  chalk  and  charcoal.  In
the  oldest  rituals,  earthen  pan  (which  see)
was  designated  as  the  symbol  of  zeal ;  but
this  was  changed  by  Preston  to  clay,  and  so
it  still  remains.  See  Fervency  and  Freedom.

The  instruction  to  the  Operative  Mason
to  serve  his  Master  with  freedom,  fervency,
and  zeal’ — to  work  for  his  interests  wil¬
lingly,  ardently,  and  zealously  —  is  easily
understood.  In  its  application  to  Specula¬
tive  Masonry,  for  the  Master  of  the  Work
we  substitute  the  Grand  Architect  of  the
Universe,  and  then  our  zeal,  like  our
freedom  and  our  fervency,  is  directed  to  a
higher  end.  The  zeal  of  a  Speculative
Mason  is  shown  by  advancing  the  morality,
and  by  promoting  the  happiness  of  his
fellow-creatu  res.

Zedekiali.  A  personage  in  some  of
the  high  degrees;  whose  melancholy  fate  is
described  in  the  Second  Book  of  Kings  and
in  the  prophecies  of  Jeremiah.  He  was
the  twentieth  and  last  king  of  Judah.
Wheu  Nebuchadnezzar  had  in  his  second
siege  of  Jerusalem  deposed  Jehoiachin,
whom  he  carried  as  a  captive  to  Babylon,
he  placed  Zedekiah  on  the  throne  in  his
stead.  By  this  act  Zedekiah  became  trib¬
utary  to  the  king  of  the  Chaldees,  who  ex¬
acted  from  him  a  solemn  oath  of  fidelity
and  obedience.  This  oath  he  observed  no
longer  than  till  an  opportunity  occurred  of
violating  it.  In  the  language  of  the  author
of  the  Books  of  Chronicles,  “  he  rebelled
against  King  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  had
made  him  swear  by  God.”

This  course  soon  brought  down  upon  him
the  vengeance  of  the  offended  monarch,
who  invaded  the  land  of  Judah  with  an
immense  army.  Remaining  himself  at
Riblah,  a  town  on  the  northern  border  of


908


ZELATOR


ZENNAAR


Palestine,  he  sent  the  army  under  his  gen¬
eral,  Nebuzaradan,  to  Jerusalem,  which
was  invested  by  the  Babylonian  forces.
After  a  siege  of  about  one  year,  during
which  the  inhabitants  endured  many  hard¬
ships,  the  city  was  taken  by  an  assault,  the
Chaldeans  entering  it  through  breaches  in
the  northern  wall.

It  is  very  natural  to  suppose,  that  when
the  enemy  were  most  pressing  in  their  at¬
tack  upon  the  devoted  city ;  when  the
breach  which  was  to  give  them  entrance
had  been  effected ;  and  when,  perhaps,  the
streets  most  distant  from  the  Temple  were
already  filled  with  Chaldean  soldiery,  a
council  of  his  princes  and  nobles  should
have  been  held  by  Zedekiah  in  the  Tem¬
ple,  to  which  they  had  fled  for  refuge,  and
that  he  should  ask  their  advice  as  to  the
most  feasible  method  of  escape  from  the
impending  danger.  History,  it  is  true,
gives  no  account  of  any  such  assembly ;  but
the  written  record  of  these  important  events
which  is  now  extant  is  very  brief,  and,  as
there  is  every  reason  to  admit  the  proba¬
bility  of  the  occurrence,  there  does  not  ap¬
pear  to  be  any  historical  objection  to  the
introduction  of  Zedekiah  into  the  legend
of  the  Super  Excellent  Master’s  degree,  as
having  been  present  and  holding  a  council
at  the  time  of  the  siege.  By  the  advice  of
this  council,  Zedekiah  attempted  to  make
his  escape  across  the  Jordan.  But  he  and
his  attendants  were,  says  Jeremiah,  pur¬
sued  by  the  Chaldean  army,  and  overtaken
in  the  plains  of  Jericho,  and  carried  before
Nebuchadnezzar.  His  sons  and  his  nobles
were  slain,  and,  his  eyes  being  put  out,  he
was  bound  in  chains  and  carried  captive  to
Babylon,  where  at  a  later  period  he  died.

Zelator.  The  first  degree  of  the  Ger¬
man  Rose  Croix.  The  title  expresses  the
spirit  of  emulation  which  should  charac¬
terize  the  neophyte.

Zendavesta.  The  scriptures  of  the
Zoroastrian  religion  containing  the  doc¬
trines  of  Zoroaster.  Avesta  means  the  sa¬
cred  text,  and  Zend  the  commentary.  The
work  as  we  now  have  it  is  supposed  to  have
been  collected  by  learned  priests  of  the  Sas-
sanian  period,  who  translated  it  into  the
Pehlevi,  or  vernacular  language  of  Persia.
The  greater  part  of  the  work  was  lost  dur¬
ing  the  persecutions  by  the  Mohammedan
conquerors  of  Persia.  One  only  of  the
books  has  been  preserved,  the  Vendidad,
comprising  twenty -two  chapters.  The
Yasna  and  the  Vispered  together  consti¬
tute  the  collection  of  fragments  which  are
termed  Vendidad  Sad6.  There  is  another
fragmentary  collection  called  Yesht  Sade'.
And  these  constitute  all  that  remain  of  the
original  text.  So  that,  however  compre¬
hensive  the  Zendavesta  must  have  been  in


its  original  form,  the  work  as  it  now  exists
makes  but  a  comparatively  small  book.

The  ancients,  to  whom  it  was  familiar,  as
well  as  the  modern  Parseesy  attribute  its
authorship  to  Zoroaster.  But  Dr.  Haug,
rightly  conceiving  that  it  was  not  in  the
powrer  of  any  one  man  to  have  composed  so
vast  a  work  as  it  must  have  been  in  its
original  extent,  supposes  that  it  was  the
joint  production  of  the  original  Zarathustra
Sitama  and  his  successors,  the  high  priests
of  the  religion,  who  assumed  the  same
name.

The  Zendavesta  is  the  scripture  of  the
modern  Parsee ;  and  hence  for  the  Parsee
Mason,  of  whom  there  are  not  a  few,  it  con¬
stitutes  the  Book  of  the  Law,  or  Trestle-
Board.  Unfortunately,  however,  to  the  Par¬
see  it  is  a  sealed  book,  for,  being  written  in
the  old  Zend  language,  which  is  now  extinct,
its  contents  cannot  be  understood.  But  the
Parsees  recognize  the  Zendavesta  as  of  Di¬
vine  authority,  and  say  in  the  catechism,
or  compendium  of  doctrines  in  use  among
them:  “We  consider  these  books  as  heav¬
enly  books,  because  God  sent  the  tidings
of  these  books  to  us  through  the  holy
prophet  Zurthost.”

Zenith.  That  point  in  the  heavens
which  is  vertical  to  the  spectator,  and  from
which  a  perpendicular  line  passing  through
him  and  extended  would  reach  the  centre
of  the  earth.  All  the  old  documents  of  the
Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  are
dated  “  under  the  Celestial  Canopy  of  the
Zenith  which  answers  to  - the  lati¬

tude  of  the  place  whence  the  document  is
issued  being  then  given.  The  latitude
alone  is  expressed  because  it  indicates  the
place  of  the  sun’s  meridian  height.  The  lon¬
gitude  is  always  omitted,  because  every  place
whence  such  a  document  is  issued  is  called
the  Grand  East,  the  one  spot  where  the  sun
rises.  The  theory  implied  is,  that  although
the  south  of  the  Lodge  may  vary,  its  chief
point  must  always  be  in  the  east,  the  point
of  sunrising,  where  longitude  begins.

Zennaar.  The  sacred  cord  used  in  the
Hindustanee  initiation,  and  which  writers
on  ritualism  have  compared  to  the  Masonic
apron.  Between  eight  and  fifteen  years  of
age,  every  Hindu  boy  is  imperatively  re¬
quired  to  receive  the  investiture  of  the  zen¬
naar.  The  investiture  is  accompanied  by
many  solemn  ceremonies  of  prayer  and  sac¬
rifice.  After  the  investiture,  the  boy  is
said  to  have  received  his  second  birth,  and
from  that  time  a  Hindu  is  called  by  a  name
which  signifies  ‘  twice  born.”

Coleman  ( Mythology  of  the  Hindus,  p.
155,)  thus  describes  the  zennaar:

“  The  sacred  thread  must  be  made  by  a
Brahman.  It  consists  of  three  strings,  each
ninety-six  hands  (forty-eight  yards),  which


ZERBAL


ZERUBBABEL


909


are  twisted  together :  it  is  then  folded  into
three,  and  again  twisted ;  these  are  a  second
time  folded  into  the  same  number,  and  tied
at  each  end  in  knots.  It  is  worn  over  the
left  shoulder  (next  the  skin,  extending  half¬
way  down  the  right  thigh)  by  the  Brahmans,
Retries,  and  Vaisya  castes.  The  first  are
usually  invested  with  it  at  eight  years  of
age,  the  second  at  eleven,  and  the  Vaisya
at  twelve.  The  period  may,  from  especial
causes,  be  deferred  ;  but  it  is  indispensable
that  it  should  be  received,  or  the  parties
omitting  it  become  outcasts.”

Zerbal.  The  name  of  King  Solomon’s
Captain  of  the  Guards,  in  the  degree  of
Intimate  Secretary.  No  such  person  is
mentioned  in  Scripture,  and  it  is  therefore
an  invention  of  the  ritualist  who  fabricated
the  degree.  If  derived  from  Hebrew,  its
roots  will  be  found  in  t?,  zer,  an  enemy,
and  baal,  and  it  would  signify  “an
enemy  of  Baal.”

Zeredatlia.  The  name  of  the  place
between  which  and  Succoth  are  the  clay
grounds  where  Hiram  Abif  is  said  to  have
cast  the  brazen  utensils  for  the  use  of  the
Temple.  See  Clay  Ground.

Zerubbabel.  In  writing  the  life  of
Zerubbabel  in  a  Masonic  point  of  view,  it
is  incumbent  that  reference  should  be  made
to  the  legends  as  well  as  to  the  more  strictly
historical  details  of  his  eventful  career.
With  the  traditions  of  the  Royal  Arch,  and
some  other  of  the  high  degrees,  Zerubbabel
is  not  less  intimately  connected  than  is
Solomon  with  those  of  Symbolic  or  Ancient
Craft  Masonry.  To  understand  those  tra¬
ditions  properly,  they  must  be  placed  in
their  appropriate  place  in  the  life  of  him
who  plays  so  important  a  part  in  them.
Some  of  these  legends  have  the  concurrent
support  of  Scripture,  some  are  related  by
Josephus,  and  some  appear  to  have  no  his¬
torical  foundation.  Without,  therefore,
vouching  for  their  authenticity,  they  must
be  recounted,  to  make  the  Masonic  life  of
the  builder  of  the  second  Temple  complete.

Zerubbabel,  who,  in  the  book  of  Ezra,  is
called  “  Sheshbazzar,  the  prince  of  Judah,”
was  the  grandson  of  that  King  Jehoiachin,
or  Jeconiah,  who  had  been  deposed  by
Nebuchadnezzar  and  carried  as  a  captive  to
Babylon.  In  him,  therefore,  was  vested  the
regal  authority,  and  on  him,  as  such,  the
command  of  the  returning  captives  was
bestowed  by  Cyrus,  who  on  that  occasion,
according  to  a  Masonic  tradition,  presented
to  him  the  sword  which  Nebuchadnezzar
had  received  from  his  grandfather,  Je¬
hoiachin.

As  soon  as  the  decree  of  the  Persian
monarch  had  been  promulgated  to  his
Jewish  subjects,  the  tribes  of  Judah  and
Benjamin,  with  the  priests  and  Levites,


assembled  at  Babylon,  and  prepared  to  re¬
turn  to  Jerusalem,  for  the  purpose  of  re¬
building  the  Temple.  Some  few  from  the
other  tribes,  whose  love  of  their  country
and  its  ancient  worship  had  not  been  ob¬
literated  by  the  luxuries  of  the  Babylonian
court,  united  with  the  followers  of  Zerub¬
babel,  and  accompanied  him  to  Jerusalem.
The  greater  number,  however,  remained;
and  even  of  the  priests,  who  were  divided
into  twenty-four  courses,  only  four  courses
returned,  who,  however,  divided  themselves,
each  class  into  six,  so  as  again  to  make  up
the  old  number.  Cyrus  also  restored  to  the
Jews  the  greater  part  of  the  sacred  vessels
of  the  Temple  which  had  been  carried
away  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  five  thousand
and  four  hundred  were  received  by  Zerub¬
babel,  the  remainder  being  brought  back,
many  years  after,  by  Ezra.  Only  forty-two
thousand  three  hundred  and  sixty  Israelites,
exclusive  of  servants  and  slaves,  accom¬
panied  Zerubbabel,  out  of  whom  he  se¬
lected  seven  thousand  of  the  most  valiant,
whom  he  placed  as  an  advanced  guard  at
the  head  of  the  people.  Their  progress
homewards  was  not  altogether  unattended
with  danger;  for  tradition  informs  us  that
at  the  river  Euphrates  they  were  opposed
by  the  Assyrians,  who,  incited  by  the  temp¬
tation  of  the  vast  amount  of  golden  vessels
which  they  were  carrying,  drew  up  in  hos¬
tile  array,  and,  notwithstanding  the  remon¬
strances  of  the  Jews,  and  the  edict  of  Cyrus,
disputed  their  passage.  Zerubbabel,  how¬
ever,  repulsed  the  enemy  with  such  ardor
as  to  ensure  a  signal  victory,  most  of  the
Assyrians  having  been  slain  in  the  battle,  or
drowned  in  their  attempt  to  cross  the  river
in  their  retreat.  The  rest  of  the  journey
was  uninterrupted,  and,  after  a  march  of
four  months,  Zerubbabel  arrived  at  Jerusa¬
lem,  with  his  weary  followers,  at  seven
o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  22d  of  June,
five  hundred  and  thirty-five  years  before
Christ.

During  their  captivity,  the  Jews  had  con¬
tinued,  without  intermission,  to  practise  the
rights  of  Freemasonry,  and  had  established
at  various  places  regular  Lodges  in  Chaldea.
Especially,  according  to  the  Rabbinical  tra¬
ditions,  had  they  instituted  their  mystic  fra¬
ternity  at  Naliarda,  on  the  Euphrates;  and,
according  to  the  same  authority,  we  are  in¬
formed  that  Zerubbabel  carried  with  him  to
Jerusalem  all  the  secret  knowledge  which
was  the  property  of  that  Institution,  and  es¬
tablished  a  similar  fraternity  in  Judea.  This
coincides  with,  and  gives  additional  strength
to,  the  traditions  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree.

As  soon  as  the  pious  pilgrims  had  arrived
at  Jerusalem,  and  taken  a  needful  rest  of
seven  days,  a  tabernacle  for  the  tempora¬
ry  purposes  of  divine  worship  was  erected


910


ZERUBBABEL


ZERUBBABEL


near  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  Temple,  and
a  Council  was  called,  in  which  Zerubbabel
presided  as  King,  Jeshua  as  High  Priest,
and  Haggai  as  Scribe,  or  principal  officer
of  State.  It  was  there  determined  to  com¬
mence  the  building  of  the  second  Temple
upon  the  same  holy  spot  which  had  been
occupied  by  the  first,  and  tbe  people
liberally  contributed  sixty-one  thousand
drachms  of  gold,  and  five  thousand  minus
of  silver,  or  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  million  of
dollars,  towards  defraying  the  expenses;  a
sum  which  sinks  into  utter  insignificance,
when  compared  with  the  immense  amount
appropriated  by  David  and  Solomon  to  the
construction  of  their  Temple.

The  site  having  been  thus  determined
upon,  it  was  found  necessary  to  begin  by
removing  the  rubbish  of  the  old  Temple,
which  still  encumbered  the  earth,  and  pre¬
vented  the  workmen  from  making  the  nec¬
essary  arrangements  for  laying  the  founda¬
tion.  It  was  during  this  operation  that  an
important  discovery  was  made  by  three  so¬
journers,  who  had  not  originally  accom¬
panied  Zerubbabel,  but  who,  sojourning
some  time  longer  at  Babylon,  followed  their
countrymen  at  a  later  period,  and  had  ar¬
rived  at  Jerusalem  just  in  time  to  assist
in  the  removal  of  the  rubbish.  These  three
sojourners,  whose  fortune  it  was  to  discover
that  stone  of  foundation,  so  iutimately  con¬
nected  with  the  history  of  Freemasonry,
and  to  which  we  have  before  had  repeated
occasion  to  allude,  are  supposed  by  a  Ma¬
sonic  tradition  to  have  been  Esdras,  Zacha-
riah,  and  Nehemiah,  the  three  holy  men,
who,  for  refusing  to  worship  the  golden
image,  had  been  thrown  by  Nebuchadnez¬
zar  into  a  fiery  furnace,  from  which  they
emerged  uninjured.  In  the  Chaldee  lan¬
guage,  they  were  known  by  the  names  of
Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abed-nego.  It  was
in  penetrating  into  some  of  the  subterra¬
nean  vaults,  that  the  Masonic  stone  of
foundation,  with  other  important  myste¬
ries  connected  with  it,  were  discovered  by
the  three  fortunatesojourners,  and  presented
by  them  to  Zerubbabel  and  his  companions
Jeshua  and  Haggai,  whose  traditionary
knowledge  of  Masonry,  which  they  had
received  in  a  direct  line  from  the  builders
of  the  first  Temple,  enabled  them  at  once  to
appreciate  the  great  importance  of  these
treasures.

As  soon  as  that  wonderful  discovery  was
made,  on  which  depends  not  only  the  ex¬
istence  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree,  but  the
most  important  mystery  of  Freemasonry,
the  Jews  proceeded  on  a  certain  day,  be¬
fore  the  rising  of  the  sun,  to  lay  the  founda¬
tion-stone  of  the  second  Temple;  and  for
that  purpose,  we  are  told,  Zerubbabel  se¬
lected  that  stone  of  foundation  which  had


been  discovered  by  the  three  sojourners.
On  this  occasion,  we  learn  that  the  young
rejoiced  with  shouts  and  acclamations,  but
that  the  ancient  people  disturbed  them
with  their  groans  and  lamentations,  when
they  reflected  on  the  superb  magnificence
of  the  first  Temple,  and  compared  it  with
the  expected  inferiority  of  the  present
structure.  As  in  the  building  of  the  first
Temple,  so  in  this,  the  Tyrians  and  Sido-
nians  were  engaged  to  furnish  the  timber
from  the  forests  of  Lebanon,  and  to  conduct
it  in  the  same  manner  on  floats  by  sea  to
Joppa.

Scarcely  had  the  workmen  well  com¬
menced  their  labors,  when  they  were  inter¬
rupted  by  the  Samaritans,  who  made  ap¬
plication  to  be  permitted  to  unite  with
them  in  the  construction  of  the  Temple.
But  the  Jews,  who  looked  upon  them  as
idolaters,  refused  to  accept  of  their  ser¬
vices.  The  Samaritans  in  consequence  be¬
came  their  bitter  enemies,  and  so  prevailed,
by  misrepresentations,  with  the  ministers
of  Cyrus,  as  to  cause  them  to  put  such  ob¬
structions  in  the  way  of  the  construction  of
the  edifice  as  seriously  to  impede  its  prog¬
ress  for  several  years.  With  such  diffi¬
culty  and  danger  were  tbe  works  conducted
during  this  period,  that  the  workmen  were
compelled  to  labor  with  the  trowel  in  one
hand  and  the  sword  in  the  other.  To  com¬
memorate  these  worthy  craftsmen,  who  were
thus  ready,  either  to  fight  or  to  labor  in  the
cause  of  God,  as  circumstances  might  re¬
quire,  the  sword  and  trowel  crosswise,  or,
as  the  heralds  would  say,  en  saltire,  have
been  placed  upon  the  Royal  Arch  Tracing-
Board  or  Carpet  of  our  English  brethren.
In  the  American  ritual  this  expressive  sym¬
bol  of  valor  and  piety  has  been  unfortu¬
nately  omitted.

In  the  seventh  year  after  the  restoration
of  the  Jews,  Cyrus,  their  friend  and  bene¬
factor  died,  and  bis  son  Cambyses,  in  Scrip¬
ture  called  Ahasuerus,  ascended  the  throne.
The  Samaritans  and  the  other  enemies  of
the  Jews,  now'  becoming  bolder  in  their
designs,  succeeded  in  obtaining  from  Cam¬
byses  a  peremptory  order  for  the  stoppage
of  all  the  works  at  Jerusalem,  and  the
Temple  consequently  remained  in  an  un¬
finished  state  until  the  second  year  of
the  reign  of  Darius,  the  successor  of  Cam¬
byses.

Darius  appears  to  have  had,  like  Cyrus,
a  great  friendship  for  the  Israelites,  and
especially  for  Zerubbabel,  with  whom  he
was  well  acquainted  in  his  youth.  We  are
informed,  as  an  evidence  of  this,  that,  when
a  private  man,  he  made  a  vow,  that  if  he
should  ever  ascend  the  throne,  he  would
restore  all  the  vessels  of  the  Temple  that
had  been  retained  by  Cyrus.  Zerubbabel,


ZERUBBABEL


ZINNENDORF


911


being  well  aware  of  the  friendly  disposition  I
of  the  king,  determined,  immediately  after
his  accession  to  power,  to  make  a  personal
application  to  him  for  his  assistance  and
protection  in  rebuilding  the  Temple.  Ac¬
cordingly  he  departed  from  Jerusalem,  and
after  a  journey  full  of  peril,  in  which  he
was  continually  attacked  by  parties  of
his  enemies,  he  was  arrested  as  a  spy  by
the  Persian  guards  in  the  vicinity  of
Babylon,  and  carried  in  chains  before
Darius,  who  however  immediately  recog¬
nized  him  as  the  friend  and  companion  of
his  youth,  and  ordering  him  instantly  to  be
released  from  his  bonds,  invited  him  to  be
present  at  a  magnificent  feast  which  he  was
about  to  give  to  the  Court.  It  is  said  that
on  this  occasion,  Zerubbabel,  having  ex¬
plained  to  Darius  the  occasion  of  his  visit,
implored  the  interposition  of  his  authority
for  the  protection  of  the  Israelites  engaged
in  the  restoration  of  the  Temple.  The
king  promised  to  grant  all  his  requests,
provided  he  would  reveal  to  him  the  secrets
of  Freemasonry.  But  this  the'  faithful
prince  at  once  refused  to  do.  He  declined
the  favor  of  the  monarch  at  the  price  of
his  infamy,  and  expressed  his  willingness
rather  to  meet  death  or  exile,  than  to  vio¬
late  his  sacred  obligations  as  a  Mason.
This  firmness  and  fidelity  only  raised  his
character  still  higher  in  the  estimation  of
Darius,  who  seems,  indeed,  to  have  been
endowed  with  many  noble  qualities  both
of  heart  and  mind.

It  was  on  this  occasion,  at  the  feast  given
by  King  Darius,  that,  agreeably  to  the
custom  of  Eastern  monarchs,  he  proposed
to  his  courtiers  the  question  whether  the
power  of  wine,  women,  or  the  king,  was  the
strongest.  Answers  were  made  by  different
persons,  assigning  to  each  of  these  the  pre¬
cedency  in  power;  but  when  Zerubbabel
was  called  on  to  assert  his  opinion,  he  de¬
clared  that  though  the  power  of  wine  and
of  the  king  might  be  great,  that  of  women
was  still  greater,  but  that  above  all  things
truth  bore  the  victory.  Josephus  says  that
the  sentiments  of  Zerubbabel  having  been
deemed  to  contain  the  most  wisdom,  the
king  commanded  him  to  ask  something
over  and  above  what  he  had  promised  as
the  prize  of  the  victor  in  the  philosophic
discussion.  Zerubbabel  then  called  upon
the  monarch  to  fulfil  the  vow  that  he  had
made  in  his  youth,  to  rebuild  the  Temple,
and  restore  the  vessels  that  had  been  taken
away  by  Nebuchadnezzar.  The  king  forth¬
with  granted  his  request,  promised  him  the
most  ample  protection  in  the  future  prose¬
cution  of  the  works,  and  sent  him  home  to
Jerusalem  laden  with  honors,  and  under
the  conduct  of  an  escort.

Henceforth,  although  from  time  to  time


annoyed  by  their  adversaries,  the  builders
met  with  no  serious  obstruction,  and  finally,
twenty  years  after  its  commencement,  in
the  sixth  year  of  the  reign  of  Darius,  and
on  the  third  day  of  the  month  A'dar,  515
years  B.  c.,  the  Temple  was  completed,  the
cope-stone  celebrated,  and  the  house  sol¬
emnly  dedicated  to  Jehovah  with  the  great¬
est  joy.

After  this  we  hear  nothing  further  of
Zerubabbel,  nor  is  the  time  or  manner  of
his  death  either  recorded  in  Scripture  or
preserved  by  Masonic  tradition.  We  have,
however,  reason  for  believing  that  he  lived
to  a  good  old  age,  since  we  find  no  suc¬
cessor  of  him  mentioned  until  Artaxerxes
appointed  Ezra  as  the  Governor  of  Judea,
fifty-seven  years  after  the  completion  of
the  Temple.

Zinnendorf,  Johann  Wilhelm
Ton.  Few  men  made  more  noise  in  Ger¬
man  Masonry,  or  had  warmer  friends  or
more  bitter  enemies,  than  Johann  Wilhelm
Ellenberger,  who,  in  consequence  of  his
adoption  by  his  mother’s  brother,  took  sub¬
sequently  the  title  of  Yon  Zinnendorf,  by
which  he  is  universally  known.  He  was
born  at  Halle,  August  10,  1731.  He  was
initiated  into  Masonry  at  the  place  of  his
birth.  He  afterwards  removed  to  Berlin,
where  he  received  the  appointment  of
General  Staff  Surgeon,  and  chief  of  the
medical  corps  of  the  army.  There  he
joined  the  Lodge  of  the  Three  Globes,
and  became  an  ardent  disciple  of  the  Rite
of  Strict  Observance,  in  which  he  took  the
Order  name  of  Eques  a  lapide  nigro.  He
was  elected  Master  of  the  Scottish  Lodge.
He  had  the  absolute  control  of  the  funds
of  the  Order,  but  refusing  to  render  any
account  of  the  disposition  which  he  had
made  of  them,  an  investigation  was  com¬
menced.  Upon  this,  Zinnendorf  withdrew
from  the  Rite,  and  sentence  of  excommuni¬
cation  was  immediately  afterwards  pro¬
nounced  against  him.

Zinnendorf  in  return  declared  the  Strict
Observance  an  imposture,  and  denounced
its  theory  of  the  Templar  origin  of  Ma¬
sonry  as  false.

In  the  meantime,  he  sent  his  friend  Hans
Carl  Baumann  to  Stockholm,  that  he  might
receive  manuscripts  of  the  degrees  of  the
Swedish  system  which  had  been  promised
him  by  Carl  Friederich  von  Eckleff,  Scottish
Grand  Master  of  the  Chapter  in  that  city.
Baumann  returned  with  the  manuscripts,
which,  however,  it  appears  from  a  subse¬
quent  declaration  made  by  the  Duke  of
Sudermania,  were  very  imperfect.

But,  imperfect  as  they  were,  out  of  them
Zinnendorf  constructed  a  new  Rite  in  op¬
position  to  the  Strict  Observance.  Pos¬
sessed  of  great  talent  and  energy,  and,  his


912


ZINNENDORF


ZOROASTER


enemies  said,  of  but  little  scrupulousness  as
to  means,  he  succeeded  in  attracting  to  him
many  friends  and  followers.  In  1766,  he
established  at  Potsdam  the  Lodge  “  Min-
erval,”  and  in  1767,  at  Berlin,  the  Lodge
of  the  “  Three  Golden  Keys.”  Masons
were  found  to  give  him  countenance  and
assistance  in  other  places,  so  that  in  June
24,  1770,  twelve  Lodges  of  his  system  were
enabled  to  unite  in  the  formation  of  a  body
which  they  called  the  Grand  Lodge  of  all
the  Freemasons  of  Germany.

The  success  of  this  body,  under  the  ad¬
verse  circumstances  by  which  it  was  sur¬
rounded,  can  only  be  attributed  to  the
ability  and  energy  of  its  founder,  as  well
as  to  the  freedom  with  which  he  made  use
of  every  means  for  its  advancement  with¬
out  any  reference  to  their  want  of  firmness.
Having  induced  the  Prince  of  Hesse-
Darmstadt  to  accept  the  Grand  Mastership,
he  succeeded,  through  his  influence,  in  ob¬
taining  the  recognition  and  alliance  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1773;  but  that
body  seven  years  after  withdrew  from  the
connection.  In  1774,  Zinnendorf  secured
the  protectorship  of  the  king  of  Prussia  for
his  Grand  Lodge.  Thus  patronized,  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Germany  rapidly  ex¬
tended  its  influence  and  increased  in
growth,  so  that  in  1778  it  had  thirty-four
Lodges  under  its  immediatejurisdiction,  and
provincial  Lodges  were  established  in  Aus¬
tria,  Silesia,  Pomerania,  Lower  Saxony,
and  Russia.  Findel  explains  this  great  ac¬
cession  of  strength  by  supposing  that  it
could  only  have  been  the  consequence  of
the  ardent  desire  of  the  German  Masons  to
obtain  the  promised  revelations  of  the  high
degrees  of  the  system  of  Zinnendorf.

In  1774,  Zinnendorf  had  been  elected
Grand  Master,  which  office  he  held  until
his  death.

But  he  had  his  difficulties  to  encounter.
In  the  Lodge  “Royal  York,”  at  Berlin,  he
found  an  active  and  powerful  antagonist.
The  Duke  of  Sudermania,  Grand  Master  of
Sweden,  in  an  official  document  issued  in
1777,  declared  that  the  Warrant  which  had
been  granted  by  Eckleff  to  Zinnendorf,  and
on  the  strength  of  which  he  had  founded  his
Grand  Lodge,  was  spurious  and  unauthor¬
ized  ;  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Sweden  pro¬
nounced  him  to  be  a  fomenter  of  disturb¬
ances  and  an  insolent  calumniator  of  the
Swedish  Grand  Master,  and  in  1780  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  withdrew  from
its  alliance.

But  Zinnendorf  was  undismayed.  Hav¬
ing  quit  the  service  of  the  government  in
1779,  he  made  a  journey  to  Sweden  in  an
unsuccessful  effort  to  secure  all  the  docu¬
ments  connected  with  the  Swedish  system.
Returning  hence,  he  continued  to  preside


over  the  Grand  Lodge  with  unabated  zeal
and  undiminished  vigor  until  his  death,
which  took  place  June  6,  1782.

Von  Zinnendorf  undoubtedly  committed
many  errors,  but  we  cannot  withhold  from
him  the  praise  of  having  earnestly  sought
to  introduce  into  German  Masonry  a  better
system  than  the  one  which  was  prevail¬
ing  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  eighteenth
century.

Zinnendorf,  Rite  of.  The  Rite
invented  by  Count  Von  Zinnendorf,  and
fabricated  out  of  imperfect  copies  of  the
Swedish  system,  with  additions  from  the
Illuminism  of  Avignon  and  the  reveries  of
Swedenborg.  It  consisted  of  seven  degrees,
divided  into  three  sections  as  follows :

I.  Blue  Masonry.

1.  Apprentice.

2.  Fellow  Craft.

3.  Master.

II.  Red  Masonry.

4.  Scottish  Apprentice  and  Fellow

Craft.

5.  Scottish  Master.

III.  Capitular  Masonry.

6.  Favorite  of  St.  John.

7.  Chapter  of  the  Elect.

It  was  practised  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Germany,  which  had  been  established  by
Zinnendorf,  and  by  the  Lodges  of  its  obe¬
dience.

Zion.  Mount  Zion  was  the  south-west¬
ern  of  the  three  hills  which  constituted  the
high  table-land  on  which  Jerusalem  was
built.  It  was  the  royal  residence,  and
hence  it  is  often  called  “  the  city  of  David.”
The  name  is  sometimes  used  as  synonymous
with  Jerusalem.

Zizon.  This  is  said,  in  one  of  the  In¬
effable  degrees  of  the  Scottish  Rite,  to  be
the  name  of  the  balustrade  before  the  Sanc¬
tum  Sanctorum.  There  is  no  such  word  in
Hebrew,  but  it  may  be  a  corruption  of  the
Talmudic  NPf>  ziza<  which  Buxtorf  (Lex.
Jalm.)  defines  as  “a  beam,  a  little  beam,  a
small  rafter.”

Zodiac,  Masonic.  (Zodiaque  Maqon-
nique.)  A  series  of  twelve  degrees,  named
after  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  the
first  being  the  Ram.  It  was  in  the  series
of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France,  and
in  the  manuscript  collection  of  Peuvret.

Zoroaster.  More  correctly,  Zarathus-
tra.  He  was  the  legislator  and  prophet  of
the  ancient  Bactrians,  out  of  whose  doc¬
trines  the  modern  religion  of  the  Parsees
has  been  developed.  As  to  the  age  in
which  Zoroaster  flourished,  there  have  been
the  greatest  discrepancies  among  the  an¬
cient  authorities.  The  earliest  of  the  Greek
writers  who  mentions  his  name  is  Xanthus


ZOROASTER


ZOROASTER


913


of  Lydia,  and  he  places  his  era  at  about
600  years  before  the  Trojan  war,  which
would  be  about  1800  years  before  Christ.
Aristotle  and  Eudoxus  say  that  he  lived
6000  years  before  Plato ;  while  Berosus,  the
Babylonian  historian,  makes  him  a  king
of  Babylon,  and  the  founder  of  a  dynasty
which  reigned  over  Babylon  between  2200
and  2000  b.  c.  The  Parsees  are  more  mod¬
erate  in  their  calculations,  and  say  that
their  prophet  was  a  contemporary  of  Hys-
taspes,  the  father  of  Darius,  and  accord-
ingly  place  his  era  at  550  B.  c.  Haug,  how¬
ever,  in  his  Essays  on  the  Sacred  Language ,
etc.,  of  the  Parsees,  declares  that  this  suppo¬
sition  is  utterly  groundless.  He  thinks
that  we  can,  under  no  circumstances,  assign
him  a  later  date  than  1000  B.  C.,  and  is  not
even  disinclined  to  place  his  era  much  ear¬
lier,  and  make  him  a  contemporary  of
Moses.

Bro.  Albert  Pike,  who  has  devoted  much
labor  to  the  investigation  of  this  confused
subject  of  the  Zoroastrian  era,  says,  in  an
able  article  in  Mackey’s  National  Freemason,
(vol.  iii.,  No.  3:)

“  In  the  year  1903  before  Alexander,  or
2234  B.  c.,  a  Zarathustrian  king  of  Media
conquered  Babylon.  The  religion  even
then  had  degenerated  into  Magism,  and
was  of  unknown  age.  The  unfortunate
theory  that  Vitaqpa,  one  of  the  most  effi¬
cient  allies  of  Zarathustra,  was  the  father
of  Darius  Hystaspes,  has  long  ago  been  set
at  rest.  In  the  Chaldean  lists  of  Berosus,
as  found  in  the  Armenian  edition  of  Euse¬
bius,  the  name  Zoroaster  appears  as  that  of
the  Median  conqueror  of  Babylon  ;  but  he
can  only  have  received  this  title  from  being
a  follower  of  Zarathustra  and  professing  his
religion.  He  was  preceded  by  a  series  of
eighty-four  Median  kings;  and  the  real
Zarathustra  lived  in  Bactria  long  before
the  tide  of  emigration  had  flowed  thence
into  Media.  Aristotle  and  Eudoxus,  ac¬
cording  to  Pliny,  place  Zarathustra  6000
years  before  the  death  of  Plato ;  Herinippus,
5000  years  before  the  Trojan  war.  Plato
died  348  b.  c.  ;  so  that  the  two  dates  sub¬
stantially  agree,  making  the  date  of  Zara-
thustra’s  reign  6300  or  6350  B.  c. ;  and  I
have  no  doubt  that  this  is  not  far  from  the
truth.”

Bunsen,  however,  (God  in  History ,  vol.
i.,  b.  iii.,  ch.  vi.,  p.  276,)  speaks  of  Zara¬
thustra  Spitama  as  living  under  the  reign
of  Vistaspa  towards  the  year  3000  B.  c.,
certainly  not  later  than  towards  2500  B.  c.
He  calls  him  “one  of  the  mightiest  intel¬
lects  and  one  of  the  greatest  men  of  all
time;”  and  he  says  of  him:  “Accounted
by  his  contemporaries  a  blasphemer,  athe¬
ist,  and  firebrand  worthy  of  death ;  regarded
even  by  his  own  adherents,  after  some  cen-
6  P  68


turies,  as  the  founder  of  magic,  by  others
as  a  sorcerer  and  deceiver,  he  was,  never¬
theless,  recognized  already  by  Hippocrates
as  a  great  spiritual  hero,  and  esteemed  the
earliest  sage  of  a  primeval  epoch  —  reaching
back  to  5000  years  before  their  date  —  by
Eudoxus,  Plato,  and  Aristotle.”

The  name  of  this  great  reformer  is  always
spelled  in  the  Zendavesta  as  Zarathustra,
with  which  is  often  coupled  Spitama  ;  this,
Haug  says,  was  the  family  name,  while  the
former  was  his  surname,  and  hence  both  he
and  Bunsen  designate  him  as  Zarathustra
Spitama.  The  Greeks  corrupted  Zarathus¬
tra  into  Zarastrades  and  Zoroastres,  and  the
Romans  into  Zoroaster,  by  which  name  he
has  always,  until  recently,  been  known  to
Europeans.  His  home  was  in  Bactria,  an
ancient  country  of  Asia  between  the  Oxus
River  on  the  north  and  the  Caucasian  range
of  mountains  on  the  south,  and  in  the  im¬
mediate  vicinity,  therefore,  of  the  primal
seat  of  the  Aryan  race,  one  of  whose  first
emigrations,  indeed,  was  into  Bactria.

The  religion  of  Zoroaster  finds  its  origin
in  a  social,  political,  and  religious  schism
of  the  Bactrian  Iranians  from  the  primi¬
tive  Aryans.  These  latter  led  a  nomadic
and  pastoral  life  in  their  native  home,  and
continued  the  same  habits  after  their  emi¬
gration.  But  a  portion  of  these  tribes,
whom  Haug  calls  “the  proper  Iranians,”
becoming  weary  of  these  wanderings,  after
they  had  reached  the  highlands  of  Bactria
abandoned  the  pastoral  and  wandering  life
of  their  ancestors,  and  directed  their  atten¬
tion  to  agriculture.  This  political  secession
was  soon  followed  by  wars,  principally  of  a
predatory  kind,  waged,  for  the  purpose  of
booty,  by  the  nomadic  Aryans  on  the  agri¬
cultural  settlements  of  the  Iranians,  whose
rich  fields  were  tempting  objects  to  the
spoiler.

The  political  estrangement  was  speedily
and  naturally  followed  by  a  religious  one.
It  was  at  this  time  that  Zoroaster  appeared,
and,  denouncing  the  nature-worship  of  the
old  Aryan  faith,  established  his  spiritual
religion,  in  which,  says  Bunsen,  “the  an¬
tagonisms  of  light  and  darkness,  of  sun¬
shine  and  storm,  become  transformed  into
antagonisms  of  good  and  evil,  of  powers
exerting  a  beneficent  or  corrupting  influence
on  the  mind.”

The  doctrine  of  pure  Zoroastrianism  was
monotheistic.  The  Supreme  Being  was
called  Ahuramazda,  and  Haug  says  that
Zoroaster’s  conception  of  him  was  perfectly
identical  with  the  Jewish  notice  of  Jehovah.
He  is  called  “the  Creator  of  the  earthly
and  spiritual  life,  the  Lord  of  the  whole
universe,  at  whose  hands  are  all  the  crea¬
tures.”  He  is  wisdom  and  intellect;  the
light  itself,  and  the  source  of  light;  the


914


ZOROASTER


ZURTHOST


rewarder  of  the  virtuous  and  the  punisher
of  the  wicked.

The  dualistic  doctrine  of  Ormuzd  and
Ahrimaues,  which  has  falsely  been  attrib¬
uted  to  Zoroaster,  was  in  reality  the  develop¬
ment  of  a  later  corruption  of  the  Zoroasteric
teaching.  But  the  great  reformer  sought
to  solve  the  puzzling  question  of  the  origin
of  evil  in  the  world,  by  supposing  that  there
existed  in  Ahuramazda  two  spirits,  inhe¬
rent  in  his  nature,  the  one  positive  and  the
other  negative.  All  that  was  good  was  real,
existent ;  while  the  absence  of  that  reality
was  a  non-existence  or  evil.  Evil  was  the
absence  of  good  as  darkness  was  the  absence
of  light.

Zoroaster  taught  the  idea  of  a  future  life
and  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  The  doc¬
trine  of  the  resurrection  is  one  of  the-prin-
cipal  dogmas  of  the  Zendavesta.  He
also  clearly  inculcated  the  belief  of  a  heaven
and  a  hell.  The  former  called  the  house
of  hymns,  because  the  angels  were  supposed
to  sing  hymns  there;  the  latter  the  house
of  destruction,  and  to  it  were  relentlessly
consigned  the  poets  and  priests  of  the  old
Aryan  religion.

The  doctrine  of  sacred  names,  so  familiar
to  the  Hebrews,  was  also  taught  by  Zoro¬
aster.  In  one  of  the  Yashts,  a  portion  of
the  Zendavesta,  Ahuramazda  tells  Zara-


thustra  that  the  utterance  of  one  of  his
sacred  names,  of  which  he  enumerates
twenty,  is  the  best  protection  irom  evil.
Of  these  names,  one  is  ahmi,  “I  am,”  and
another,  ahmi  yat  ahmi,  “  I  am  who  I  am.”
The  reader  will  be  reminded  here  of  the
holy  name  in  Exodus,  Ehyeh  aahtr  Ehyeh,
or  “  I  am  that  I  am.”

The  doctrine  of  Zoroaster  was  not  for¬
ever  confined  to  Bactria,  hut  passed  over
into  other  countries;  nor  in  the  transmis¬
sion  did  it  fail  to  suffer  some  corruption.
From  its  original  seat  it  spread  into  Media,
and  under  the  name  of  Magism,  or  the  doc¬
trine  of  the  Magavas,  i.  e.,  the  mighty  ones,
was  incorporated  at  Babylon  with  the  Chal¬
dean  philosophy,  whence  we  find  its  traces
in  the  Rabbinism  and  the  Kahbalism  of  the
Hebrews.  It  was  carried,  too,  into  Persia,
where  it  has  been  developed  into  the  mod¬
ern  and  still  existing  sect  of  the  Parsees,
of  whom  we  now  find  two  divisions,  the
conservatives  and  liberals ;  the  former  culti¬
vating  the  whole  modified  doctrine  of  Zoro¬
aster,  and  the  latter  retaining  much  of  the
doctrine,  but  rejecting  to  a  very  great  ex¬
tent  the  ceremonial  ritual.

Znrthost.  The  name  given  by  the
modern  Parsees  to  Zarathustra  or  Zoro¬
aster.  They  call  him  their  prophet,  and  their
religious  sect  the  Zaithosti  community.


INDEX.


Aaron,  i.

Aaron’s  Rod,  1.

Ab,  1.

Abaeus,  1.

Abaddon,  1.

Abbreviations,  1.

Abda,  3.

Abdamon,  3.

Abelites,  3.

Abibalk,  3.

Abide  by.  See  Stand  to  and
abide  by,  3.

Abif,  3.

Abiram,  4.

Abie,  4.

Ablution,  5.

Abnet,  5.

Aborigines,  5.

Abrac,  5.

Abracadabra,  5.

Abraham,  5.

Abraham,  Antoine  Firmin,  6.
Abraxas,  6.

Stones,  6.

Absence,  7.

Acacia,  7.

Acacian,  9.

Academy,  9.

of  Ancients  or  of  Secrets,  9.
of  Sages,  9.

of  Secrets.  See  Academy  of
Ancients,  9.

of  Sublime  Masters  of  the
Luminous  Ring,  9.
of  True  Masons,  9.

Platonic,  10.

Acanthus,  10.

Accepted,  10.

Acclamation,  11.

Accolade,  11.

Accord,  11.

Accusation.  See  Charge,  11.
Accuser,  11.

Aceldama,  11.

Acerellos,  R.  S.,  11.

Achad,  11.

Acharon  Schilton,  12.

Achias,  12.

Achishar,  12.

Achtariel,  12.

Acknowledged,  12.

Acousmatici,  12.

Acquittal,  12.

Acta  Latomorum,  13.

Acting  Grand  Master,  13.
Active  Lodge,  13.


Active  Member,  13.

Actual  Past  Masters,  13.

Adad,  13.

Adam,  13.

Adams,  John  Quincy,  14.

Adar,  14.

Adarel,  14.

Addresses,  Masonic,  14.

Adelpli,  15.

Adept,  15.

Prince,  16.
the,  16.

Adeptus  Adoptatus,  16.
Coronatus,  16.

Exemptus,  16.

Adhering  Mason,  16.
Adjournment,  16.

Admiration,  Sign  of,  17.
Admission,  17.

Admonition,  17.

Adonai,  17.

Adonhiram,  18.

Adonhiramite  Masonry,  18.
Adoniram,  21.

Adoniramite  Masonry.  See
Adonhiramite  Masonry,  21.
Adonis,  Mysteries  of,  21.
Adoption,  Masonic,  26.
Adoptive  Masonry,  27.
American,  33.

Egyptian,  34.

Adoration,  34.

Advanced,  34.

Advancement,  Hurried,  34.
Adytum,  37.

ASneid,  37.

.Eon,  37.

.Era  Architectonica,  37.
Affiliated  Mason,  37.
Affirmation,  38.

Africa,  38.

African  Architects,  Order  of,  38.
Brother,  41.

Brothers,  41.

Builders.  See  African
Architects,  41.

Lodges.  See  Negro  Lodges,
41.

Agapaj,  41.

Agate,  42.

Stone  of,  42.

Age,  Lawful,  42.

Masonic,  -12.

Agla,  43.

Agnostus,  Irenoeus,  43.

Agnus  Dei,  43.


Agrippa,  Henry  Cornelius,  43.
Ahabath  Olam,  45.

Ahiah,  46.

Ahinian  Rezon,  46.

Ahisar.  See  Achishar,  49.
Aholiab,  49.

Ahriman,  50.

Aichmalotarch,  50.

Aid  and  Assistance,  50.
Aitcheson  -  Haven  Manuscript,
51.

Aix-la-Chapelle,  51.

Akirop,  52.

Alabama,  52.

Alapa,  52.

Alarm,  52.

Alban,  St.  See  Saint  Alban,  53.
Albertus  Magnus,  53.

Albrecht,  Henry  Christoph,  53.
Alchemy,  53.

Aid  worth,  the  Hon.  Mrs.,  54.
Alethophile,  55.

Alexander  I.,  55.

Alexandria,  School  of,  55.
Alfader,  55.

Algabil,  56.

Alincourt,  Francois  d’,  56.
Allegiance,  56.

Allegory,  56.

Allocution,  56.

Allowed,  56.

All-Seeing  Eye,  57.

All-Souls’  Day,  57.

Almanac,  Masonic,  57.
Almighty,  57.

Almond-Tree,  57.

Almoner,  58.

Alms-Box,  58.

Almsgiving,  58.

Alnwick  Manuscript,  58.
Al-om-Jah,  58.

Aloyau,  Society  de  1’,  58.

Alpha  and  Omega,  58.
Alphabet,  Angels’,  59.

Hebrew,  59.

Masonic.  See  Cipher,  59.
Samaritan,  59.

Alpina,  59.

Altar,  60.

Altenberg,  Congress  of,  60.

Lodge  at,  61.  ■

Amaranth,  61.

Amar-jah,  61.

Amazons,  Order  of,  61.

Amen,  61.

Amendment,  61.


915


916


INDEX,


American  Mysteries,  62.

Bite,  62.

Ameth.  See  Emeth,  63.
Amethyst,  63.

Amicists,  Order  of,  63.

Amis  Reunis,  Loge  des,  63.
Ammon.  See  Amun ,  63.
Ammonitish  War,  63.
Amphibalus.  See  Saint  Am-
phibalus,  63.

Amulet.  See  Talisman,  63.
Amun,  63.

Anachronism,  63.

Anagram,  64.

Ananiah,  64.

Anchor  and  Ark,  64.

Knight  of  the.  See  Knight
of  the  Anchor,  65.

Order  of  K  nights  and  La¬
dies  of  the,  65.

Ancient  and  Accepted  Rite.  See
Scottish  Rite,  65.

Craft  Masonry,  65.

Free  and  Accepted  Ma¬
sons,  65.

Masons,  65.

Reformed  Rite,  68.
of  Days,  68.

Ancients.  See  Ancient  Ma¬
sons,  68.

Ancient,  The,  68.

York  Masons,  68.

Anderson,  James,  68.

Manuscript,  68.

Andrea,  John  Valentine,  69.
Andre,  Christopher,  69.
Andrew,  Apprentice  and  Fellow
Craft  of  St.,  69.

Cross  of  St.  See  Cross,  St.

Andrew’s,  69.

Favorite  of  St.,  69.

Grand  Scotch  Knight  of.
See  Knight  of  St.  Andrew,
69.

Androgynous  Degrees,  69.

Masonry,  70.

Angel,  70.

Angelic  Brothers,  70.

Angels'  Alphabet.  See  Alpha¬
bet,  Angels’,  70.

Angerona,  70.

Angle,  70.

Angular  Triad,  70.

Animal  Worship,  70.

Annales  Chronologiques,  71.
Originis  Magni  Galliarum
Orientis,  etc.,  71.
Anniversary.  See  Festivals,  71.
Anno  Depositionis,  71.
Hebraico,  71.

Inventionis,  71.

Lucis,  71.

Mundi,  71.

Ordinis,  71.

Ammaire,  71.

Annual  Communication,  71.

Proceedings,  71.

Annuities,  71.

Anointing,  71.

Anonymous  Society,  72.
Ansyreeh,  72.

Antediluvian  Masonry,  72.
Anthem,  72.

Anti-Masonic  Books,  72.


Anti-Masonic  Party,  75.
Anti-Masonry,  76.

Antin,  Duke  d’,  76.
Antipodeans,  76.

Antiquity,  Lodge  of,  76.
Manuscript,  76.
of  Freemasonry,  77.

Anton,  Dr.  Carl  Gottlob  von,  78.

Hieronymus,  78.

Ape  and  Lion,  Knight  of  the.
See  Knight  of  the  Ape  and
Lion,  79.

Aphanism,  79.

Apocalypse,  Masonry  of  the,  79.

Ortler  of  the,  80.
Apocalyptic  Degrees,  80.
Aporrheta,  80.

Appeal,  Right  of,  81.
Appendant  Orders,  81.
Apple-Tree  Tavern,  81.
Apprenti,  81.

Apprentice.  See  Apprentice,
Entered,  81.

Architect,  81.

Perfect,  81.

Prussian,  81.

Cohen,  81.

Egyptian,  81.

Entered,  81.

Hermetic,  82.

Kabbalistic,  82.

Mason,  82.

Masoness,  82.

Masoness,  Egyptian,  82.
Mystic,  82.
of  Paracelsus,  82.
of  the  Egyptian  Secrets,  82.
Philosopher,  by  the  No.  3,
83.

Hermetic,  83.
to  the  No.  9,  83.

Pillar.  See  Prentice  Pil¬
lar,  S3.

Scottish,  83.

Theosopliist,  83.

Apron,  83.

Araunah.  See  Oman,  85.
Arbitration,  85.

Arcana,  85.

Arcani  Disciplina,  85.

Arch,  Antiquity  of,  85.

Catenarian.  See  Catenarian
Arch,  85.
of  Enoch,  85.
of  Heaven,  85.
of  Solomon,  Royal,  85.
of  Steel,  85.

of  Zerubbabel,  Royal,  85.
Royal.  See  Royal  Arch,  So.
Archaeology,  85.

Archetype,  86.

Architect,  S6.

African.  See  African  Archi¬
tects,  86.

by  3,  5,  and  7,  Grand,  S6.
Grand,  86.

Master.  See  Grand,
Master  Architect,  86.
Little,  86.
of  Solomon,  86.

Perfect,  86.

Perfect  and  Sublime  Grand,

86.

Architectonicus,  86.


Architecture,  86.

Piece  of,  87.

Archives,  87.

Grand  Guardian  of  the,  87.
Keeper  of  the,  87.
Archiviste,  87.

Ardarel,  87.

Arelim,  87.

Areopagus,  9i.

Arithmetic,  87.

Ark,  87.

and  Anchor.  See  Anchor
and  Ark,  87.
and  Dove,  87.

Mariners.  See  Royal  Ark
Mariners,  87.

Noah’s,  87.

of  the  Covenant,  87.

Substitute,  88.

Arkite  Worship,  89.
Armenbiische,  89.

Armes,  89.

Armiger,  89.

Armory,  89.

Arras  of  Mason rv,  89.

Arras,  Primordial  Chapter  of,
90.

Arrest  of  Charter,  90.
Arthusius,  Gotthardus,  90.

Art,  Royal.  See  Royal  Art,  90.
Arts,  90.

Liberal.  See  Liberal  Arts
and  Sciences,  90.
Ascension  Day,  90.

Ashe,  D.  D.,  Rev.  Jonathan,  90.
Asher,  Dr.  Carl  Wilhelm,  91.
Ashlar,  91,

Ashmole,  Elias,  91.

Asia,  Initiated  Knights  and
Brothers  of,  92.

Perfect  Initiates  of,  92.

Ask,  Seek,  Knock,  92.

Aspirant,  92.

Assassins,  92.

of  the  Third  Degree,  93.
Assembly,  93.

Assistance.  See  Aid  and  Assist¬
ance,  94.

Associates  of  the  Temple,  94.
Association,  94.

Astraea,  94.

Astronomy,  94.

Asylum,  94.

for  Aged  Freemasons,  94.
Atelier,  94.

Atheist,  95.

Athelstan,  95.

Athol  Masons,  95.

Attendance.  See  Absence,  95.
Attouehement,  95.

Attributes,  95.

Atwood,  Henry  C.,  95.

Atys,  95.

Auditor,  95.

Aufseher,  96.

Augustine,  St.  See  Saint  Au¬
gustine,  96.

Aum,  96.

Aumont,  96.

Auserwahlter,  96.

Austin.  See  Saint  Augustine, 96.
Australasia,  96.

Austria,  96.

Authentic,  97.


INDEX,


917


Authenticity  of  the  Scriptures,
97.

Autopsy,  97.

Auxiliary  Degrees,  97.

Avenue,  97.

Avignon,  Illuminati  of,  97.
Avouchment.  See  Vouching,  97.
Award,  97.

Ayes  and  Noes,  97.

Aynon,  97.

Azariah,  97.

Baal,  98.

Babel,  98.

Babylon,  98.

Red  Cross  of,  99.
Babylonish  Captivity.  See  Cap¬
tivity,  99.

Pass,  99.

Back,  99.

Bacon,  Francis,  99.

Baculus,  100.

Baden,  101.

Badge,  101.

of  a  Mason,  102.

Royal  Arch,  102.

Bafomet.  See  Baphomet,  102.
Bag,  102.

Bagulkal,  102.

Bahrdt,  Karl  Fred.,  102.
Baldachin,  102.

Baldrick,  102.

Baldwyn  II.,  102.

Encampment,  102.

Balkis,  103.

Ballot,  103.

Box,  104.

Reconsideration  of  the.  See
Bee.  of  the  Bal.,  104.
Secrecy  of  the,  105.
Unanimity  of  the,  105.
Balsamo,  Joseph.  See  Caglios-
tro,  105.

Baltimore  Convention,  105.
Baluster,  106.

Balzac,  Louis  Charles,  106.
Banners,  Royal  Arch,  106.
Banquet.  See  Table-Lodge,  107.
Baphomet,  107.

Baptism,  Masonic,  107.

Bard,  108.

Bastard,  108.

Barefeet.  See  Discalceation,  108.
Barruel,  Abbe,  108.

Basket,  109.

Basle,  Congress  of,  109.

Baton,  109.

Bat  Parliament,  109.

Bavaria,  109.

Bay  Tree,  109.

Bazot,  Etienne  Francois,  110.

B.  D.  S.  P.  II.  G.  F.,  110.
Beadle,  110.

Beaton,  Mrs.,  110.

Beaucenifer,  110.

Beauchaine,  110.

Beauseant,  110.

Beauty,  111.

and  Bands,  111.

Becker.  See  Johnson,  111.

Rudolph  Zacharias,  111.
BSdarride,  The  Brothers,  111.
Beehive,  111.

Behavior,  111.


Behold  Your  Master,  112.

Bel,  112.

Belenus,  112.

Belgium,  112.

Belief,  Religious,  112.

Bells,  112.

Benac,  112.

Bendekar,  112.

Benedict  XIV.,  113.
Benediction,  113.

Beneficiary,  113.

Benefit  Fund,  113.

Benevolence,  113.

Fund  of,  113.

Bengabee,  113.

Bengal,  113.

Benjamin,  114.

Benkhurim,  114.

Benyah,  114.

Berith,  114.

Berlin,  114.

Bernard,  David,  114.

Saint,  114.

Beryl,  114.

Beyerle,  Franjois  Louis  de,  114.
Bezaleel,  114.

Bible,  114.

Bearer,  115.

Bibliography,  115.

Bielfeld,  Jacob  Frederick,  115.
Birkhead,  Matthew,  115,

Black,  115.

Ball,  115.

Black-board,  116.

Black  Brothers,  Order  of  the, 116
Blazing  Star,  116.

Order  of  the,  118.

Blessing.  See  Benediction,  118.
Blind,  118.

Blindness,  118.

Blow,  118.

Blue,  119.

Blanket,  120.

Degrees,  120.

Lodge,  120.

Masonry,  120.

Master,  120.

Board  of  General  Purposes,  120.
of  Relief.  See  Belief,  Board
of,  120.

Boaz,  120.

Bode,  Johann  Joachim  Chris¬
toph,  120.

Boeber,  Johann,  121.

Boehmen,  Jacob,  121.
Bohemann,  Karl  Adolf,  121.
Bohemia,  121.

Bombay,  121.

Bonaim,  121.

Bondman,  122.

Bone,  122.

Box,  122.

Bonneville,  Chevalier  de,  122.

Nicolas  de,  122.

Book  of  Charges,  122.
of  Constitutions,  122.

guarded  by  the  Tiler’s
Sword,  124.
of  Gold,  124.
of  the  Law,  1 24.

Books,  Anti-Masonic.  SeeAnti-
Masonic  Books,  125.

Border,  Tesselated.  See  Tessel-
ated  Border,  125.


Bourn,  125.

Box-Master,  125.

Boys’  School,  125.

Brahmanism,  125.

Brazen  Serpent.  See  Serpent
and  Cross,  125.

Knight  of  the.  See  Knight
of  the  Brazen  Serpent,  125
Brazil,  125.

Bread,  Consecrated,  126.
Breadth  of  the  Lodge.  See  Form
of  the  Lodge,  126.

Breast,  126.

Breastplate,  126.

Breast,  The  Faithful,  128.
Breast  to  Breast.  See  Five  Point*
of  Fellowship,  128.

Brethren,  128.

of  the  Bridge.  See  Bridge
Builders,  etc.,  128.
of  the  Mystic  Tie,  128.
Bridge  Builders  of  the  Middle
Ages,  128.

Brief,  130.

Bright,  130.

Broached  Thurnel,  130.

Broken  Column,  131.

Brother,  131.

Brotherhood,  131.

Brotherly  Kiss.  See  Kiss,  Fra¬
ternal,  131.

Love,  131.

Brothers  of  the  Rosy  Cross.  See
Bosicrucians,  132.

Browne,  John,  132.

Bru.  See  Vielle  Bru,  Bite  of,  132.
Bruce,  Robert,  132.

Brian,  Abraham  Van,  133.
Brunswick,  Congress  of,  133.
Buenos  Ayres,  133.

Buh,  133.

Buhle,  Johann  Gottlieb,  133.  1

Builder^  133.

Smitten.  See  Smitten  Build¬
er,  133.

Builders,  Corporations  of.  See
Stonemasons  of  the  Middle
Ages ,  133.

Bui,  133.

Bull,  Papal,  133.

Bulletin,  134.

Bunyan,  John,  134.

Burdens,  Bearers  of,  134.
Burial,  134.

Burning  Bush,  134.

Burnes,  James,  135.

Burns,  Robert,  135.

Business,  135.

Byblos,  135.

By-Laws,  135.

CABALA,  126.

Cabiric  Mysteries,  136.
Cable  Tow,  136.

Cable  Tow’s  Length,  136.

Cabul,  136.

Cadet-Gassicourt, Charles  Louis,
137.

Cadmillus,  137.

Caduceus,  137.

Csementarius,  137.

Cagliostro,  138.

Canier,  143.

Cairns,  143.


918

Calcott,  Wellins,  143.

Calendar,  143.

California,  144.

Calling  Off,  144.

On,  145.

Calumny.  See  Back,  145.
Calvary,  145.

Camp,  146.

Campe,  Joachim  Heinrich,  146.
Canada,  146.

Candidate,  146.

Candidates,  Advancement  of.
See  Advancement,  Harried,
146.

Candlestick,  Golden,  146.
Canopy,  147.

Clouded,  147.

Canzler,  Carl  Christian,  147.
Cape-Stone,  147.

Capitular  Degrees,  147.

Masonry,  148.

Captain  General,  148.
of  the  Guard,  148.
of  the  Host,  148.

Captivity,  148.

Carausius,  149.

Carbonarism,  149.

Carbuncle,  150.

Cardinal  Points,  150.

Virtues,  150.

Carlile,  Richard,  150.

Carpet,  150.

Casmaran,  150.

Cassia,  150.

Castellan,  151.

Casting  Voice  or  Vote,  151.
Catafalque,  151.

Catch  Questions,  151.
Catechism,  151.

Catenarian  Arch,  151.

Catharine  II.,  151.

Caution,  152.

Cavern,  152.

Cedars  of  Lebanon,  152.
Celebration,  153.

Celestial  Alphabet.  See  Alpha¬
bet  of  Angels ,  153.

Celtic  Mysteries.  See  Druidism,
153.

Celts,  153.

Cement,  153.

Cemeteries,  Masonic,  153.
Censer,  153.

Censor,  153.

Censure,  153.

Centaine,  Order  of,  153.
Centennial,  154.

Centralists,  1 54.

Central  Point.  See  Point  with¬
in  a  Circle,  154.

Centre,  Opening  on  the,  154.
Cephas,  154.

Ceremonies,  154.

Master  of.  See  Master  of
Ceremonies,  154.

Ceres,  154.

Cerneau,  Joseph,  154.
Certificate,  154.

Chaillou  de  Joinville,  155.
Chain,  Mystic,  155.
of  Flowers,  155.
of  Union.  See  Chain,  Mys-
~  tic,  155.

Triangular,  1 55.


INDEX.


Chair,  155.

Master  in  the,  155.

Oriental,  155.

Passing  the,  155.

Chairman,  155.

Chaldea,  155.

Chaldeans  or  Chaldees,  156.
Chalice,  156.

Chalk,  Charcoal,  and  Clay,  156.
Chamber,  Middle.  See  Middle
Chamber,  156.
of  Reflection,  156.
Chancellor,  156.

Grand,  156.

Chaos,  156.

Disentangled,  156.

Chapeau,  156.

Chapel,  157.

St.  Mary’s,  157.

Chapiter,  157.

Chaplain,  157.

Grand,  157.

Chapter,  157.

General  Grand.  See  Gen¬
eral  Grand  Chapter,  157.
Grand.  See  Grand  Chapter,
157.

Mason,  157.

Masonry,  157.

Rose  Croix.  See  Rose

Croix,  Prince  of,  157.
Royal  Arch,  157.

Chapters,  Irish.  See  Irish

Chapters,  157.

Characteristic  Xame.  See  Or¬
der  Name,  157.

Charcoal.  See  Chalk,  etc.,  157.
Charge,  157.

Charges,  157.

of  1722,  158.

Charity,  158.

Committee.  See  Committee
on  Charity,  158.

Fund,  158.

Charlatan,  159.

Charlemagne,  159.

Charles  Martel,  159.

I.  and  II.,  159.

XIII.,  159.

Order  of,  159.
Charleston,  159.

Charms,  Magical.  See  Talis¬
man,  159.

Chart,  159.

Charter,  159.

Chartered  Lodge,  160.

Charter  Member,  160.

of  Cologne.  See  Cologne,
Charter  of,  160.
of  Transmission.  See  Trans¬
mission,  Charter  of,  160.
Chasidim,  160.

Chastanier,  Benedict,  160.
Chastity,  160.

Chasuble,  160.

Checkered  Floor.  See  Mosaic
Pavement,  160.

Chef-d’oeuvre,  160.

Chereau,  Antoine  Guilliaume,
160.

Cherubim,  161.

Chesed,  161.

Chevalier,  161.

Chibbelum,  161.


Chicago,  Congress  of,  161.

Chief  of  the  Tabernacle,  161.

of  the  Twelve  Tribes,  161.
Chiefs  of  Masonry,  161.

Chili,  161.

China,  161.

Chinese  Secret  Societies,  162.
Chisel,  162.

Chivalry,  162.

Christ,  Order  of,  162.
Christianization  of  Freemason¬
ry,  162.

Church,  Freemasons  of  the,  163.
Cipher  Writing,  163.

Circle,  165.

Circular  Temples,  165.
Circumambulation,  Rite  of,  165.
Circumspection,  166.

City  of  David,  166.

of  the  Great  King,  166.
Civilization  and  Freemasonry,
166.

Clandestine,  167.

Lodge,  167.

Mason,  167.

Clare,  Martin,  167.
Classification  of  Masons,  167.
Clay  Ground,  167.

Clean  Hands.  168.

Cleave,  168.

Clefts  of  the  Rocks,  168.
Clement  XII.,  168.

Clerks  of  Strict  Observance,
168.

Clermont,  Chapter  of,  169.
College  of,  169.

Count  of,  169.

Clinton,  De  Witt,  169.

Closing,  169.

Clothed,  170.

Clothing  the  Lodge,  170.
Clouded  Canopy.  See  Canopy,
Clouded,  170.

Cloud,  Pillar  of.  See  Pillar  of
Fire  and  Cloud,  170.

Cloudy,  170.

Clubs,  170.

Coat  of  the  Tiler,  170.

Coclileus,  170.

Cock,  170.

Cockade,  171.

Cockle  Shell,  171.

Ccetus,  171.

Coffin,  171.

Cohen,  171.

Cohens,  Elected.  See  Pascalis,
Martin,  171.

Cole,  Benjamin,  171.
Manuscript,  171.

Samuel,  171.

Collar,  171.

Colleges,  Masonic,  172.

Collegia  Artificum,  172.
Collegium,  172.

Cologne,  Cathedral  of,  172.
Charter  of,  173.

Congress  of,  174.

Colonial  Lodges,  174.

Colorado,  174.

Colors,  Symbolism  of,  174.
Columbia,  British,  174.

District  of,  175.

Column,  175.

Combination  of  Masons,  175.


INDEX,


919


Commander,  175.

Grand.  See  Grand  Com¬
mander,  175.
in-Cliief,  175.

Commandery,  175.

Grand,  176.

Committee,  176.

General,  176.
of  Charity,  176.
of  Finance,  176.
on  Foreign  Correspondence,
176.

Private,  178.

Report  of.  See  Report  of  a
Committee,  178.

Common  Gavel.  See  Gavel,  178.
Communication,  178.

Grand,  178.
of  Degrees,  178.

Quarterly,  179.

Communion  of  the  Brethren.

See  Bread,  Consecrated,  179.
Como,  179.

Compagnon,  179.
Compagnonage,  179.
Compagnons  de  la  Tour,  181.
Companion,  181.

Compasses,  181.

Composite,  181.

Concealment  of  the  Body.  See
Aphanism,  181.

Conclave,  181.

Concordists,  181.

Confederacies,  182.

Conference  Lodges,  182.
Conferring  Degrees,  182.
Confusion  of  Tongues,  182.
Congregations,  182.

Congresses,  Masonic,  182.
Consecration,  182.

Elements  of,  182.
Conservators  of  Masonry,  182.
Grand.  See  Grand  Con¬
servators,  183.

Consistory,  183.

Grand.  See  Grand  Con¬
sistory,  183.

Constable,  Grand,  183.
Constantine.  See  Red  Cross  of
Rome  and  Constantine,  183.
Constituted  Legally,  183.
Constitution  of  a  Lodge,  183.
Constitutions  of  1762,  183.
of  1786,  184.

Old.  See  Records,  Old,  185.
Secret.  See  Secret  Consti¬
tutions,  185.
Consurarnatum  est,  185.
Contemplative,  185.

Continental  Lodges,  185.
Contumacy,  185.

Convention,  185.

Night,  185.

Conversation,  185.

Convocation,  185.

Grand,  185.

Cooke’s  Manuscript,  185.
Cope-Stone.  S eeCape-Stone,  186.
Cord,  Hindu  Sacred.  See  Zen-
naar,  186.

Silver.  SeeSilver  Cord,  186.
Threefold.  See  Threefold
Cord,  186.

Cordon,  186.


Corinthian  Order,  186.

Corner,  North-East.  See  North-
East  Comer,  186.

Stone,  Symbolism  of  the,

186.

Corn  of  Nourishment,  187.

Wine,  and  Oil,  187.
Cornucopia,  187.
Correspondence.  See  Committee
on  Foreign  Correspondence,

187.

Corresponding  Grand  Secretary,

187.

Corybantes,  Mysteries  of,  187.
Cosmopolite,  188.

Council,  188.

Chamber,  188.

Grand.  See  Grand  Council,

188.

of  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,

188.

of  Royal  and  Select  Masters,
188.

of  Royal  Masters,  188.
of  Select  Masters,  188.
of  the  Trinity,  188.
Supreme.  See  Supreme
Council,  188.

Courtesy,  188.

Coustos,  John,  188.

Couvreur,  190.

Couvrir  le  Temple,  190.
Covenant  of  Masonry,  190.
Covering  of  the  Lodge,  191.
Cowan,  191.

Craft,  192.

Masonry,  Ancient.  See
Ancient  Craft  Masonry,
192.

Crafted,  192.

Craftsman,  192.

Create,  192.

Creation,  192.

Creed,  A  Mason’s,  192.

Creuzer,  Georg  Fred.,  193.
Crimes,  Masonic,  193.

Cromlech,  193.

Cromwell,  193.

Cross,  194.

Double.  See  Cross,  Patri¬
archal,  195.

Jerusalem,  195.

Maltese,  195.

of  Constantine.  See  Laba-
rum,  195.
of  Salem,  195.

Passion,  195.

Patriarchal,  195.

St.  Andrew’s,  196.

Tau,  196.

Templar,  196.

Teutonic,  196.

Thrice  Illustrious  Order  of
the,  196.

Triple.  See  Cross  of  Salem,
196.

Cross-Bearing  Men,  196.
Crossing  the  River,  196.

Cross,  Jeremy  L.,  196.
Cross-legged  Knights,  197.

Masons,  197.

Crotona,  197.

Crow,  197.

Crown,  197.


Crown,  Knightofthe.  SeeKnight
of  the  Crown,  197.
Princesses  of  the,  197.
Crowned  Martyrs.  See  Four
Crowned  Martyrs,  197.
Crowning  of  Masonry,  197.
Crucefix,  Robert  T.,  197.
Crucifix,  198.

Crusades,  198.

Crux  Ansata,  198.

Crypt,  199.

Cryptic  Degrees,  199.

Masonry,  199.

Cteis,  199.

Cubical  Stone,  199.

Cubit,  199.

Culdees,  199.

Cunning,  199.

Cup  of  Bitterness,  200.

Curetes,  200.

Curiosity,  200.

Curious,'  200.

Customs,  Ancient.  See  Usages,
in  Addendum.

Cynocephalus,  200.

Cyrus,  200.

DA  COSTA  HYPPOLITO,
Jose,  200.

Daduchos,  201.

Dagger,  201.

Dais,  201.

Dalcho,  M.D.,  Fred.,  201.
Damascus,  202.

Dame,  202.

Dames  of  Mt.  Tabor,  202.

the  Order  of  St.  John,  202.
Damoisel,  202.

Dan,  202.

Danger,  202.

Dannebrog,  203.

Dantzic,  203.

Darius,  203.

Darkness,  203.

Darmstadt,  Grand  Lodge  of,  203.
D’Assigny,  Doctor  Fitield,  203.
Dates,  Masonic.  See  Calendar,
204.

Dathan,  204.

Daughter,  Mason’s.  See  Ma¬
son's  Wife  and  Daughter,
204.

of  a  Mason,  204.

David,  204.

Shield  of.  See  Shield  of
David,  204.

Dazard,  Michel  Francois,  204.
Deacon,  204.

Deacon’s  Rod.  See  Rod,  Dea¬
con’s,  204.

Deaf  and  Dumb,  204.

Death,  205.

of  the  Mysteries,  205.
Debate,  205.

Decalogue,  205.

Deeius,  206.

Declarat  ion  of  Candidates,  206.

the  Master,  206.
Decorations,  206.

Dedication  of  a  Lodge,  206.

the  Temple,  209.
Defamation.  See  Back,  210.
Definition  of  Freemasonry,  210.
Deformity,  210.


920


INDEX.


Degrees,  210.

Ancient  Craft.  See  Ancient
Graft  Masonry,  211.
Androgynous,  211.
Apocalyptic.  See  Apoca¬
lyptic  Degrees,  211.

High.  See  Hautes  Grades,
211.

Honorary.  See  Honorary
Degrees,  211.

Ineffable.  See  Ineffable
Degrees,  211.
of  Chivalry,  211.
of  Knowledge,  211.
Philosophical.  See  Philo¬
sophical  Degrees,  211.
Symbolic.  See  Symbolic
Degrees,  211.

Deism,  211.

Deity.  See  Grand  Architect  of
the  Universe,  212.

Delalaride,  Charles  Florent  Jac¬
ques,  212.

Joseph  Jerome  Francois,
212.

Delaunay,  Francois  H.  Stanis¬
laus,  212.

Delaware,  212.

Delegates,  212.

Delta,  212.

Demeter,  212.

Demit,  212.

Denmark,  212.

Deposite,  213.

Year  of.  See  Anno  Depo-
silionis,  213.

Depth  of  the  Lodge,  213.
Deputation,  213.

Depute  Grand  Master,  213.
Deputy,  213.

Grand  Chapter,  213.

Master,  213.

Lodge,  214.

Master,  214.

Dermott,  Laurence,  214.
Derwentwater,  214.

Desaguliers,  John  Theophilus,
214.

Des  Etangs,  Nicholas  Charles,
216.

Design  of  Freemasonry,  217.
Destruction  of  the  Temple,
217.

Detached  Degrees,  217.

Deuchar  Charters,  217.

Deus  Meumque  Jus,  218.
Development,  218.

Device,  218.

Devoir,  219.

of  a  Knight,  219.
Devotions,  219.

Dialectics,  219.

Diamond,  219.

Dieseal,  219.

Dieu  et  mon  Droit.  See  Deus
Meumque  Jus,  219.
le  Vent,  219.

Dignitaries,  219.

Limit,  219.

Diocesan,  222.

Dionysian  Architects,  222.

Mysteries,  222.

Dionysus,  223.

Diploma,  223.


Director  of  Ceremonies,  Grand,
223.

Directory,  223.

Homan  Helvetic,  223.
Discalceation,  Kite  of,  223.
Disciplina  Arcani.  See  Disci¬
pline  of  the  Secret,  224.
Discipline,  224.

of  the  Secret,  224.
Discovery  of  the  Body.  See
Eurcsis,  226.

Year  of  the,  226.
Dispensation,  226.

Lodges  under.  See  Lodges
under  Dispensation,  226.
Dispensations  of  Keligion,  226.
Dispersion  of  Mankind,  227.
Disputes,  228.

Distinctive  Title,  228.

Distress,  Sign  of.  See  Sign  of
Distress,  228.

District  Deputy  Grand  Master,
228.

Grand  Lodges,  228.
Documents,  Three  Oldest.  See
Krause,  228.

Dog,  228.

Dolmen,  228.

Dominican  Republic,  228.
Donats,  228.

Door,  228.

Doric  Order,  228.

Dormant  Lodge,  229.

Dormer,  229.

Dotage,  229.

Double  Cube,  229.

Headed  Eagle.  See  Eagle,
Double-Headed,  229.
Dove,  229.

Draeseke,  Johann  Heinrich
Bernhardt,  229.

Drake,  M.  D.,  Francis,  229.
Dramatic  Literature  of  Mason¬
ry,  229.

Dresden,  Congress  of,  230.

Dress  of  a  Mason.  See  Clothed,
230.

Drop  Cloth,  230.

Druidical  Mysteries,  230.
Druses,  231.

Duad,  231.

Dualism,  231.

Dub,  232.

Due  East  and  West,  232.
Examination,  232.

Form,  232.

Guard,  232.

Duelling,  232.

Dues,  232.

Dumbness,  232.

Dummy,  232.

Dunckerley,  Thomas,  232.
Dupaty,  Louis  Emanuel  Charles
Mercier,  235.

Duty,  235.

A.GLE,  235.

and  Pelican,  Knight  of  the.
See  Knight  of  the  Eigle
and  Pelican,  236.
Double-Headed,  236.
Knight  of  the.  See  Knight
of  the  Eagle,  237.

Knight  of  the  American.


See  Knight  of  the  Ameri¬
can  Eagle,  237.

Eagle,  Knightof  the  Black.  See
Knight  of  the  Black  Ea¬
gle,  237.

Knight  of  the  Gold.  See
Knight  of  the  Gold  Ea¬
gle,  237.

Knightof  the  Prussian.  See
Knight  of  the  Prussian
Eagle,  237.

Knight  of  the  Bed.  See
Knight  of  Use  Red  Eagle,
237.

Knight  of  the  White  and
Black.  See  Knight  of  the
White  and  Black Eagle,  237
Eagles,  Knight  of  the  Two
Crowned.  See  Knight  of  the
Two  Groomed  Eagles,  237.
Ear  of  Corn,  237.

the  Listening,  237.

Earthen  Pan,  237.

East,  237.

and  West,  Knight  of  the.
See  Knight  of  the  East
and  West,  238.

Grand,  238.

Indies.  See  India.

Knight  of  the.  See  Knight
of  the  East,  238.

Easier,  238.

Monday,  238.

Eastern  Star,  Order  of  the,  238.
East  Port,  238.

Eavesdropper,  238.

Ebony  Box,  238.

Eclectic  Masonry,  238.

Rite,  239.

Union,  239.

Ecossais,  239.

Architect,  Perfect,  239.
English,  239.

Faithful,  239.

French,  239.

Grand,  240.

Architect,  240.

Master,  240.

Knight,  240.

Master,  240.

Novice,  240.
of  Clermont,  240.
of  England,  240.
of  Franville,  240.
of  Hiram,  240.
of  Messina,  240.
of  Montpellier,  240.
of  Naples,  240.
of  Perfection,  240.
of  Prussia,  240.
of  St  Andrew,  240.
of  St.  George,  240.
of  the  Forty,  240.
of  the  Lodge  of  Prince  Ed¬
ward,  240.

of  the  Sacred  Vault  of
James  VI.,  240.
of  the  Three  J.  J.  J.,  240.
of  Toulouse,  240.
of  the  Triple  Triangle,  240.
Parisian,  240.

Perfect  240.

Ecossism,  240.

Ecuador,  240.


INDEX.


921


Edict  of  Cyrus,  240.

Edicts,  241.

Edinburgh,  241.

Congress  of,  241.

Edwin,  241.

Egg,  Mundane,  241.

Eglinton  Manuscript,  242.
Egyptian  Masonry.  See  Cagli-
ostro,  242.

Mysteries,  242.

Priests,  Initiations  of  the,
243.

Eheyeh  asher  Eheyeh,  244.
Eight,  245.

Eighty-One,  245.

El,  245.

Elchanan,  245.

Elders,  245.

Elect.  See  Elu,  245.

Brother,  245.

Cohens,  Order  of.  See  Pas-
chalis,  Martin ,  245.
Commander,  245.

Grand,  245.

Lady,  Sublime,  245.

Little  English,  245.

Master,  245.
of  Fifteen,  245.
of  London,  245.
of  Nine,  246.
of  Nine  and  Fifteen,  246.
of  Perignan,  246.
of  the  New  Jerusalem,  246.
of  the  Twelve  Tribes,  246.
of  Truth,  Rite  of,  246.
of  Twelve.  See  Knight  Elect
of  Twelve,  246.

Perfect,  246.

and  Sublime  Mason.
See  Perfection,  De¬
gree  of,  246.
Philosopher,  246.

Secret,  Severe  Inspector,  246
Sovereign,  246.

Sublime,  246.

Supreme,  246.

Election  of  Officers,  246.
Elective  Officers,  246.

Eleham.  See  Elchanan,  246.
Elements,  246.

Elephanta,  247.

Eleusinian  Mysteries,  247.
Eleven,  249.

Eligibility  for  Initiation.  See
Qualifications  of  Candidates,
249.

Elihoreph,  249.

Elizabeth  of  England,  249.

of  Portugal,  249.

Elohim,  249.

Eloquence  of  Masonry,  249.
Elu,  250.

Elul,  250.

El  us,  250.

Emanation,  250.

Emanuel,  250.

Embassy,  250.

Emblem,  250.

Emerald,  251.

Emergency,  251.

Emergent  Lodge,  251.

Meeting,  251.

Emeritus,  251.

Erneth,  251.

5Q


Eminent,  251.

Emperor  of  Lebanon,  251.
Emperors  of  the  East  and  West,
251.

Emunah,  252.

Encampment,  252.

General  Grand,  252.

Grand,  252.

Encyclical,  252.

En  famille,  252.

England,  252.

Englet,  254.

Engrave,  254.

Enlightened,  254.
Enlightenment,  Shock  of.  See
Shock  of  Enlightenment,  254.
Enoch,  254.

Brother,  256.

Legend  of,  256.

Rite  of,  256.

En  Soph,  257.

Entered,  257.

Apprentice.  S ee  Apprentice,
257.

Entick.  John,  257.

Entomb  merit,  257.

Entrance,  Points  of.  See  Points
of  Entrance,  257.

Shock  of.  See  Shock  of  En¬
trance,  257.

Envy,  257.

Eons,  257.

Rite  of  the,  257.

Ephod,  257.

Ephraimites,  257.

Epoch,  258.

Epopt,  258.

Equality,  258.

Equerry,  258.

Eques,  258.

Professus,  259.

Equilateral  Triangle.  See  Tri¬
angle,  259.

Equity,  259.

Equivocation,  259.

Eranoi,  259.

Erica,  259.

Ernest  and  Falk,  260.

Erwin  von  Steinnach,  260.
Esoteric  Masonry,  260.

Essenes,  260.

Esther,  263.

Eternal  Life,  264.

Eternity,  264.

Ethics  of  Freemasonry,  264.
Ethiopia,  265.

Etymology,  265.

Euclid,  265.

Legend  of,  265.

Eulogy,  266.

Eumolpus,  266.

Eunucli,  266.

Euphrates,  266.

Euresis,  266.

Evangelist.  See  St.  John  the
Evangelist,  266.

Evergreen,  266.

Exalted,  266.

Examination  of  Candidates,  266.
the  Ballot-Box,  267.
Visitors,  267.

Excavations,  267.

Excellent,  267.

Masons,  267.


Excellent  Master,  267.

Most.  See  Most  Excellent,

267.

Right.  See  Right  Excel¬
lent,  268.

Super.  See  Super  Excel¬
lent,  268.

Very.  See  Very  Excellent,

268.

Exclusion,  268.

Exclusiveness  of  Masonry,  268.
Excuse,  269.

Executive  Powers  of  a  Grand
Lodge.  See  Grand  Lodge,  269.
Exemplification  of  the  Work,
269.

Exoteric,  269.

Expert,  269.

Expositions,  269.

Expulsion,  270.

Extended  Wings  of  the  Cheru¬
bim,  271.

Extent  of  the  Lodge,  271.
External  Qualifications,  271.
Extinct  Lodge,  271.

Extra  Communication,  271.
Extraneous,  271.

Extrusion,  271.

Eye.  See  All-Seeing  Eye,  271.
Ezekiel,  Templeof.  See  Temple
of  Ezekiel,  271.

Ezel,  271.

Ezra,  271.

TV.,  272.

A  Fabre  -  Palaprat,  Bernard
Raymond,  272.

Faculty  of  Abrac,  272.

Faith,  272.

Faithful  Breast.  See  Breast,
the  Faithful,  272.

Fall  of  Water.  See  Waterfall,
272.

Family  Lodge,  272.

Fasces,  272.

Favorite  Brother  of  St.  Andrew,
272.

St.  John,  272.

Feast,  272.

Feasts  of  the  Order,  272.
Feeling,  272.

Fees  of  Honor,  272.

Felicity,  Order  of,  272.

Feld  Loge,  273.

Fellow,  273.

Craft,  273.

Perfect  Architect,  273.
Fellowship,  Five  Points  of.  See
Points  of  Fellowship,  273.
Female  Masonry.  See  Adoption,
Rite  of,  273.

Masons,  273.

Fendeurs,  273.

Ferdinand  IV.,  274.

VI. ,  274.

VII. ,  274.

Fervency,  274.

Fessler,  Ignaz  Aurelius,  274.

Rite  of,  275.

Festivals,  276.

Fidelity.  See  Fides,  276.

Fides,  276.

Fiducial  Sign,  276.

Fifteen,  276.


922


INDEX,


Finances,  277.

Finch,  William,  277.

Fines,  277.

Fire,  277.

Philosophers.  See  Theoso-
phisls,  277.

Pillars  of.  See  Pillars  of
Fire.  211 .

Purification  by.  See  Puri¬
fication  by  Fire,  277.
Worship,  277.

Fish,  278.

Five,  278.

Pointed  Star,  278.

Points  of  Fellowship.  See
Points  of  Fellowship,  279.
Senses,  279.

Fixed  Lights,  279.

Flaming  Sword,  279.

Floats,  279.

Floor,  279.

Cloth,  279.

Flooring,  279.

Florida,  279.

Fludd,  Robert,  2S0.

Folkes,  Martin,  280.

Fool,  281.

Footstone,  2S1.

Foot  to  Foot,  2S1.

Fords  of  the  Jordan,  281.
Foreign  Country,  281.

Foresters’  Degrees,  281.

Forest  of  Lebanon.  See  Leba¬
non,  281.

Forfeiture  of  Charter,  281.
Form,  281.

of  the  Lodge,  282.

Formula,  282.

Fortitude,  282.

Forty-Seventh  Problem,  282.
Foul,  284.

Foundation-Stone,  284.

of.  See  Stone  of  Founda¬
tion,  2S4.

Fountain,  284.

Four,  284.

Crowned  Martyrs,  284:
Fourfold  Cord,  287.

Fourteen,  288.

France,  288.

Francis  II.,  290.

Francken.  Henry  A.,  290.
Franc-Mason,  Franc-Mafon-
nerie,  290.

Frankfort-on-the-Main,  290.
Franklin,  Benjamin,  290.
Frater,  291.

Fraternally,  291.

Fraternity,  291.

Fraternize,  291.

Frederick  of  Nassau,  291.
the  Great,  291.

William  III.,  294.

Free,  294.

and  Accepted,  294.

Born,  294.

Freedom,  295.

Fervency,  and  Zeal,  295.
Freeman,  295.

Freemason,  295.

Freemasonry,  History  of,  296.
Freemasons  of  the  Church,  297.
Free-Will  and  Accord,  298.
Freimaurer,  298.


Freimaurerei,  298.

French,  Benjamin  Brown,  298.
Rite,  299.

Friendly  Societies,  299.

Friend  of  St.  John,  299.

Truth,  299.

Friendship,  299.

Fund  of  Benevolence,  299.
Funds  of  the  Lodge,  300.
Funeral  Rites.  See  Burial,  300.
Furlac,  300.

Furniture  of  a  Lodge,  300.
Fustier,  300.

Future  Life,  300

300.

.  Gabaon,  302.

Gabaoune,  303.

Gabor,  303.

Gabriel,  303.

Gaedicke,  Johann  Christian,
303.

Galahad,  303.

G.\  A.-.  0.\  T.\  U.\,  303.
Garinous,  303.

Gassicourt,  Cadet  de,  303.
Gaston,  John,  303.

Gates  of  the  Temple,  303.
Gauntlets,  303.

Gauge.  See  Twenty-four  Inch
Gauge,  303.

Gavel,  303.

Gebal,  304.

Gedaliah,  304.

Gemara.  See  Talmud,  304.
General  Assembly.  See  Assem¬
bly,  304.

Grand  Chapter,  304.

High  Priest,  305.
Lodge,  305.
Generalissimo,  308.

Gentleman  Mason,  308.
Genuflection,  308.

Geometrical  Master  Mason,  309.
Geometric  Points,  309.
Geometry,  309.

Georgia,  309.

German  Union  of  Two  and
Twenty,  309.

Germany,  309.

Ghiblim,  310.  ,

Gibalim,  310.

Giblim,  310.

Gilds,  310.

Gilkes,  Peter  William,  312.
Girdle,  312.

Glaire,  Peter  Maurice,  312.
Gleason,  Benjamin,  312.

Globe,  312.

Glory,  Symbol  ef  313.

Gloves,  313.

Gnostics,  314.

Goat,  Riding  the,  315.

God,  315.

Godfather,  316.

Goethe,  John  Wolfgangvon,  316
Golden  Candlestick,  316.

Fleece,  316.

Key,  Knight  of  the.  See
Knight  of  the  Golden  Key,
316.

Lance,  Knight  of  the.  See
Knight  of  the  Golden
Lance,  316.


Golgotha,  316.

Good  Samaritan,  316.

Shepherd,  317.

Sign  of  the,  317.

Goose  and  Gridiron,  317.
Gormogons,  317.

Gothic  Architecture,  317.
Constitutions,  318.
Mysteries.  See  Scandina¬
vian  Mysteries,  318.
Gourgas,  John  James  Joseph.
318.

Grades,  318.

Grammar,  318.

Grand  Architect,  318.

of  the  Universe,  318.
Chapter,  318.

Commander,  319.

of  the  Eastern  Star,
319.

Conclave,  319.
Conservators,  319.
Consistory,  319.

Council,  319.

East,  319.

Encampment.  See  Encamp¬
ment,  Grand,  319.

High  Priest,  319.

Inquiring  Commander,  319.
Inspector,  Inquisitor  Com¬
mander,  319.

Lodge,  319.

Manuscript,  321.
Master,  321.

Architect,  321.

Mason,  321.
of  all  Symbolic  Lodges,
321.  '

of  Light,  321.

Offerings,  321.

Oflicers,  321.

Orient,  322.

Pontiff,  322.

Principals,  322.

Prior,  322.

Secretary,  322.

Stewards,  322.

Lodge,  322.

Tiler,  322.

Treasurer,  322.

Wardens,  323.

Grasse  Tilly,  Alexandre  Fran-
fois  Auguste  Comte  de,  323.
Grave,  323.

Greater  Lights.  See  Lights,  Sym¬
bolic,  324.

Greece,  324.

Mysteries  in,  324.

Green,  324.

Greeting,  324.

Gregorians,  324.

Greinemann,  Ludwig,  325.

Grip,  325.

Groton,  325.

Ground-Floor  of  the  Lodge,  325.
King  Solomon’s  Temple,
325.

Guard.  See  Due  Guard,  325.
of  the  Conclave.  See  Knight
of  the  Christian  Marl:, 325.
Guards,  325.

Guerrier  de  Dumast,  325.
Gugomos,  Baron  Von,  325.
Guibbs,  326.


INDEX,


923


Guillemain  de  St.  Victor,  Louis,
326.

Gustavus  IV.,  326.

Guttural  Point  of  Entrance,  326.
Gymnosophist,  326.

H.\  A.'.  B.\,  326.

Hadeeses,  326.

Hagar,  326.

Haggai,  326.

Hague,  Tlie,  327.

Hah,  327.

Hail  or  Hale,  327.

Hall  Committee,  327.

Masonic,  327.

Hamburg,  330.

Hand,  330.

Left.  See  Left  Hand,  331.
Eight.  See  Right  Hand,  331 .
to  Back.  See  Points  of
Fellowship,  331.
to  Hand.  See  Points  of
Fellowship,  331.

Hanover,  331.

Haram,  Grand,  331.

Hardie,  James,  331.

Harleian  Manuscript,  331.
Harmony,  332.

Universal.  See  Mesmeric
Masonry,  332.
Harnouester,  332.

Harodim,  332.

Grand  Chapter  of,  332.
Prince  of,  333.

Harpocrates,  333.

Harris,  Thaddeus  Mason,  333.
Hasidim,  Sovereign  Prince,  333.
Hat,  333.

Haupt-Hutte,  333.

Hautes  Grades,  333.

Heal,  334.

Hearing,  334.

Heart,  334.

of  Hiram  Abif,  334.

Hecart,  Gabriel  Antoine  Joseph,
334.

Height  of  the  Lodge,  334.
Heldmann,  Dr.  Friedrich,  334.
Helmet,  334.

Helmets,  to  Deposit,  335.

to  Kecover,  335.

Help.  See  Aid  and  Assistance,
335.

Hemming,  D.  D.,  Samuel,  335.
Henrietta  Maria,  335.

Henry  VI.,  335.

Heredom,  335.

Hermaimes,  336.
Hermaphrodite,  336.

Hermes,  336.

Hermetic  Art,  336.

Kite,  336.

Herodem.  See  Heredom,  336.
Royal  Order  of.  See  Royal
Order  of  Scotland,  336.
Heroden,  336.

Heroine  of  Jericho,  336.

Hesed,  337.

Hexagon,  337.

Hieroglyphics,  337.
Hierogrammatists,  337.
Hierophant,  337.

High  Degrees,  337.

Highest  of  Hills,  337.


High  Grades,  338.

Priest,  338.

Priesthood,  Order  of,  338.
Priest  of  the  Jews,  340.
Twelve,  341.

Hindustan,  Mysteries  of,  341.
Hiram,  342.

Abif,  342.
or  Huram,  342.

Hiramites,  345.

Hiram,  King  of  Tyre,  345.
the  Builder.  See  Hiram
Abif,  346.

Hirschau,  Wilhelm  von,  346.
II.'.  K.'.  T.\,  346.

Ho-hi,  346.

Holiness  to  the  Lord,  347.
Holland.  See  Netherlands,  347.
Holy  Ghost,  Knight  of  the.
See  Knight  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  347.

Ground,  347.

Lodge,  347.

Name,  347.
of  Holies,  347.

Place,  348.

Sepulchre,  Knight  of  the.
See  Knight  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre,  348.
Honorable,  348.

Honorarium,  348.

Honorary  Degrees,  348.

Masons,  348.

Members,  348.
Thirty-thirds,  349.

Honors,  Grand,  349.

Hoodwink,  350.

Hope,  350.

Manuscript,  350.

Horn  of  Plenty,  350.

Horns  of  the  Altar,  350.
Hoschea,  350.

Hospitality,  350.

Hospitaller,  Knight.  See  Knight
Hospitaller,  350.

Hospitallers  of  Jerusalem,  351.
Host,  Captain  of  the.  See  Cap-
tarn  of  the  Host,  351.
Hour-Glass,  351.

Hours,  Masonic,  351.

of  Initiation,  351.

How  go  Squares?  351.

II.'.  R.\  D.'.  M.\,  351.

Hu,  351.

Humility,  352.

Hund,  Baron  Von,  352.
Hungary,  355.

Hutchinson,  William,  355.
Hutte,  357.

Huzza,  357.

T  A.  A.  T.,  357.

-L.  I  Am  that  I  Am,  357.

Iatric  Masonry,  357.

Iconology,  358.

Idaho,  358.

Idiot,  358.

Idolatry,  358.

Igne  Natura  Renovatur  In¬
tegra,  358.

Ignorance,  358.

Ih-Ho,  358.

I.  II.  S.,  358.

Ijar,  358.


Illinois,  358.

Illiteracy,  359.

Illuminated  Theosophists,  359.
Illuminati,  359.
of  Bavaria,  359.
of  Avignon.  See  Avignon,
360.

of  Stockholm,  360.
Uluminism,  360.

Illustrious,  360.

Elect  of  the  Fifteen,  360.
Imitative  Societies,  360.
Immanuel,  360.

Immortality  of  the  Soul,  361.
Immovable  Jewels.  See  Jewels
of  a  Lodge,  361.

Implements,  361.

Impostors,  361.

In  Activity,  362.

Inauguration,  362.

Incense,  362.

Inchoate  Lodges,  362.
Incommunicable,  362.
Incorporation,  362.

Indefeasible,  363.

Indelibility,  363.

Indented  Tarsel,  363.

Tessel,  363.

India,  363.

Indiana,  363.

Indifferents,  363.

Induction,  363.

Inductor,  363.

Industry,  364.

Ineffable  Degrees,  364.

Name,  364.

Ineligible,  364.

Information,  Lawful,  364.
Inherent  Rights  of  a  Grand
Master,  364.

In  Hoc  Signo  Vinces,  365.
Initiate,  365.

Initiated  Knight  and  Brother
of  Asia,  365.

Initiate  in  the  Egyptian  Secrets,
365.

in  the  Mysteries,  365.
in  the  Profound  Mysteries,
365.

Initiation,  365.

In  Memoriam,  365.

Inner  Guard,  365.

Innovations,  365.

I.-.  N.\  R.\  I.'.,  366.

Insignia.  See  Jewels  of  Office,
367.

Inspector.  See  Sovereign  Grand
Inspector  General,  367.
Installation,  367.

Installed  Masters,  Board  of,  367.
Installing  Officer,  367.
Instruction,  367.

Lodge  of.  See  Lodge  of  In¬
struction,  367.

Instructive  Tongue.  See  Tongue,
the  Instructive,  367.
Instrumental  Masonry,  367.
Integrity,  367.

Intemperance,  368.

Intendaut  of  the  Building,  368.
Intention,  368.

Internal  Preparation.  See  Prep¬
aration  of  Candidates, MS
Qualifications,  368.


924


INDEX.


Intimate  Initiate,  368.

Secretary,  368.

Introductor  and  Introductress,
368.

Intrusting,  368.

Investiture,  368.

Invincible,  368.

Inwood,  Jethro,  368.

Ionic  Order,  368.

Iowa,  369.

Ireland,  369.

Irish  Chapters,  370.

Colleges,  371.

Degrees.  See  Irish  Chap¬
ters,  371.

Iron  Tools,  371.

Isaac  and  Ishmael,  371.

Ish  Chotzeb,  371.

Sabal,  371.

Sodi,  371.

Isis,  371.

Italy,  371.

Izabud,  372.

TACHIN,  372.

Jachinai,  372.

Jacobins,  372.

Jacob’s  Ladder,  373.

Jacques  de  Molay.  See  Molay,
375.

Jah,  375.

Jamblichus,  375.

Janitor,  376.

Japan,  376.

Japheth,  376.

Jasper,  376.

Jebusite.  See  Oman,  376.
Jedadiah,  376.

Jehoshaphat,  376.

Jehovah,  376.

Jekson,  381.

Jena,  Congress  of,  381.
Jephthah,  381.

Jericho,  Heroine  of.  See  Hero¬
ine  of  Jericho,  381.
Knight  of.  See  Knight  of
Jericho,  381.

Jermyn,  Henry,  381.

Jerusalem,  381.

Knight  of.  See  Knight  of
Jerusalem,  382.

New,  382.

Prince  of.  See  Prince  of
Jerusalem,  382.

Word,  382.

Jesuits,  382.

Jewel  of  an  Ancient  Grand  Mas¬
ter,  382.

Member's,  382.

Jewels,  Immovable.  See  Jewels
of  a  Lodge,  382.

Movable.  See  Jewels  of  a
Lodge,  382.
of  a  Lodge,  382.

Official,  383.

Precious,  383.

Jews,  Disqualification  of,  383.
Jezirah  or  Jetzirah,  Book  of,  384
Joabert,  384.

Joachim,  Order  of,  384.
Johannite  Masonry,  384.
Johauuites,  384.

John’s  Brothers,  384.

Johnson,  384.


John  the  Baptist.  See  Saint
John  the  Baptist,  385.
the  Evangelist.  See  Saint
John  the  Evangelist,  385.
Jones,  Inigo,  385.

Stephen,  385.

Joppa,  386.

Jordan,  386.

Charles  Stephen,  386.

Fords  of  the,  386.

Joseph  II.,  386.

Josephus,  Flavius,  386.

Joshua,  386.

Journey,  387.

Journeyman,  387.

Jova,  387.

Jua,  387.

Judah,  387.

and  Benjamin,  387.

Jug  Lodges,  387.

Junior  Adept,  387.

Entered  Apprentice,  387.
Overseer,  387.

Warden,  387.

Jupiter,  Knight  of.  See  Knight
of  Jupiter,  387.

Jurisdiction  of  a  Grand  Lodge,
387.

Lodge,  388.

Supreme  Council,  388.
Justice,  388.

Justification,  388.

Just  Lodge,  388.

KAABA,  389.

Kabbala,  389.

Kadiri,  Order  of,  392.

Kadosh,  392,  393.

Grand,  Elect  Knight,  393.
Knight,  393.
of  the  Jesuits,  393.
Philosophic,  393.

Prince,  393.

of  Death,  393.

Kamea,  393.

Kasideans,  393.

Katharsis,  393.

Keeper  of  the  SeaLs,  393.

Kelly,  Christopher,  393.

Key,  394.

of  Masonry.  See  Knight  of
the  Sun,  394.

Key-Stone,  394.

Kilwinning,  395.

Manuscript,  396.

Mother  Lodge,  397.

System,  397.

King,  397.

Kiss,  Fraternal.  397.
of  Peace,  397.

Kloss,  Georg  Burkh.  Franz,  397.
Kneeling,  397.

Knee  to  Knee,  397.

Knigge,  Adolph  Franz  Frie-
derieh  Ludwig,  Baron  Von,
397.

Knighthood,  398.

Knight,  405.

Black.  See  Black  Brothers,
405.

Commander,  405.

of  the  Temple.  See
Sovereign  Command¬
er  of  the  Temple ,  405.


Knight  Commander  of  theWhite
and  Black  Eagle,  405.
Crusader,  405.

Elect  of  Fifteen,  405.

Elect  of  Twelve,  Sublime,
405.

Hospitaller.  See  Knight  of
Malta,  406.

Illustrious  or  Illustrious
Elect,  406.

Jupiter,  406.

Kadosh.  406.

of  Cromwell,  406.
Masonic,  406.

Mahadon,  406.
of  Asia,  Initiated.  See^4*ia,
Initiated  Knights  of,  406.
of  Athens,  406.
of  Aurora,  406.
of  Beneficence,  407.
of  Brightness,  407.
of  Christ,  407.
of  Constantinople,  407-
of  Hope,  407.
of  Iris,  407.
of  Jerusalem,  407.
of  Justice,  407.

■  of  Malta,  407.

Masonic,  410.
of  Masonry,  Terrible,  412.
of  Palestine,  412.
of  Patinos,  412.
of  Perfumes,  412.
of  Pure  Truth,  412.
of  Purity  and  Light,  412.
of  Rhodes,  412.
of  Rose  Croix.  See  Bose
Croix,  412.

of  St.  Andrew,  Grand  Scot¬
tish,  412.

Free,  413.
of  the  Thistle,  413.
of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem, 413
Palestine,  413.
of  the  Altar,  413.
of  the  American  Eagle,  413.
of  the  Anchor,  413.
of*the  Ape  and  Lion,  413.
of  the  Arch,  413.
of  the  Argonauts,  413.
of  the  Banqucting-Table  of
the  Seven  Sages,  413.
of  the  Black  Eagle,  413.
of  the  Brazen  Serpent,  413.
of  the  Burning  Bush,  414.
of  the  Chanuca,  414.
of  the  Christian  Mark,  414.
of  the  Columns,  414.
of  the  Comet,  414.
of  the  Cork,  414.
of  the  Courts,  414.
of  the  Crown,  414.
of  the  Door,  414.
of  the  Dove,  414.
of  the  Eagle,  414.
and  Pelican,  414.
reversed,  414.
of  the  East,  415.

and  West,  415.
of  the  Eastern  Star,  415.
of  the  East,  Victorious,  415.

White,  416.
of  the  Election.  416.
Sublime,  416.


INDEX,


925


Knight  of  the  Golden  Eagle,  416.
Fleece,  416.

Key,  416.

Star,  416.

of  the  Grand  Arch,  416.
of  the  Holy  City,  Benefi¬
cent,  416.

Holy  Sepulchre,  416.
of  the  Interior,  416.
of  the  Kabbala,  417.
of  the  Lilies  of  the  Valley,
417.

of  the  Lion,  417.
of  the  Mediterranean  Pass,
417.

of  the  Moon,  417.
of  the  Morning  Star,  417.
of  the  Ninth  Arch,  417.
of  the  North,  417.
of  the  Phoenix,  417.
of  the  Prussian  Eagle,  417.
of  the  Purificatory,  418.
of  the  Pyramid,  418.
of  the  Rainbow,  418.
of  the  Red  Cross,  418.

Eagle,  418.
of  the  Rose,  418.
of  the  Rosy  and  Triple
Cross,  419.

of  the  Rosy  Cross,  419.
of  the  Round  Table,  419.

of  King  Arthur,  419.
of  the  Royal  Axe,  419.
of  the  Sacred  Mountain,

419.

of  the  Sanctuary,  420.
of  the  Sepulchre,  420.
of  the  South,  420.
of  the  Star,  420.
of  the  Sun,  420.
of  the  Sword,  420.
of  the  Tabernacle,  420.
of  the  Divine  Truths,

420.

of  the  Temple,  420.
of  the  Three  Kings,  420.
of  the  Throne,  420.
of  the  Triple  Cross,  420.
Period,  420.

Sword,  421.

of  the  Two  Crowned  Eagles,

421.

of  the  West,  421.
of  the  White  and  Black
Eagle,  421.

of  the  White  Eagle,  421.
of  Unction,  421.

Perfect,  421.

Professed.  See  Eques,  Pro-
fessus,  421.

Prussian,  421.

Rower,  421.

Royal  Victorious,  421.
Sacrificing,  421.

Knights  of  the  East,  Council  of,
421.

Knight  Templar,  421.

Masonic,  427.

Knight,  Victorious,  434.
Knowledge,  434.

Degrees  of.  See  Degrees  of
Knowledge,  434.

Konx  Ompax,  434.

Koran,  435.


Krause,  Carl  Christian  Frie-
derich,  435.

Kuin,  Km,  436.

T  ABARUM,  437.

Ju  Labor,  437.

Laborare  est  orare,  437.
Laborers,  Statutes  of,  437.
Lacorne,  438.

Ladder,  438.

Brahmanical,  438.

Jacob’s.  See  Jacob's  Lad¬
der,  438.

Kabbalistic,  438.

Mithraitic,  439.
of  Kadosh,  439.
Rosicrucian,  439.
Scandinavian,  439.
Theological,  439.

Ladrian,  439.

Lady,  439.

Lalande.  See  De  la  Lalande,  439
Lamb,  439.

of  God.  See  Lamb,  Paschal,
439.

Paschal,  439.

Lambskin  Apron.  See  Apron,
439.

Landmarks,  439.

Language,  Universal,  443.
Lapicida,  444.

Larmenius,  Johannes  Marcus,

444.

Larudan,  Abb6,  444.

Latin  Lodge,  444.

Latomia,  444.

Latres,  445.

Latumus,  445.

Laurel  Crown,  445.

Laurens,  J.  L.,  445.

Laurie.  See  Lawrie,  Alexander,

445.

Lawful  Information.  See  Infor¬
mation,  Laivful,  445.

Law,  Moral.  See  Moral  Law,  445
Oral.  See  Oral  Law,  445.
Parliamentary.  See  Parlia¬
mentary  Law,  445.
Lawrie,  Alexander,  445.

Law,  Sacred.  See  Sacred  Law,

446.

Laws,  General.  See  Laws  of
Masonry,  446.

Local.  See  Laws  of  Ma¬
sonry,  446.
of  Masonry,  446,

Lawsuits,  446.

Lax  Observance,  446.

Layer,  447.

Lebanon,  447.

Prince  of.  See  Prince  of
Lebanon,  447.

Le  Bauld  de  Nans,  Claude
Etienne,  447.

Lechangeur,  447.

Lecture,  447.

Lecturer,  Grand,  448.

Lectures,  History  of  the,  448.
Lefranc,  455.

Left  Hand,  455.

Side,  455.

Legally  Constituted.  See  Con¬
stituted,  Legally,  455.

Legate,  455,


Legend,  456.

of  Enoch.  See  Enoch,  456.
of  Euclid.  See  Euclid,  456.
of  the  Craft,  456.
of  the  Gild,  459.
of  the  Royal  Arch  Degree,
459.

of  the  Third  Degree,  459.
Legislation,  462.

Lehrling,  462.

Leland,  John,  462.

Manuscript,  462.
Lemanceau,  464.

Length  of  the  Lodge.  See  Ex¬
tent  of  the  Lodge,  464.

Lenoir,  Alexandre,  464.

Lepage,'  455.

Lerouge,  Andre.  Joseph  Etienne,
465.

Lesser  Lights,  465.

Lessing,  Gottfried  Ephraim,

465.

Lessons,  465.

Letter  of  Application,  466.
Letters,  Patent.  See  Patents,

466.

Lettuce,  466.

Leucht,  466.

Level,  466.

Levi,  Eliphas,  466.

Levite,  Knight,  466.

of  the  External  Guard,  466.
Levites,  466.

Levite,  Saerificer,  466.
Levitikon,  466.

Levy,  466.

Lewis,  466.

Lexington,  Congress  of,  467.
Libanus,  467.

Libation,  407.

Libavius,  Andreas,  467.

Liberal  Arts  and  Sciences,  468.
Libertas,  468.

Libertine,  468.

Liberty  of  Passage,  469.
Library,  469.

Lieutenant  Grand  Commander,
469.

Life,  469.

Eternal.  See  Eternal  Life,
469.

Member,  469.

Light,  469.

Lights,  Fixed,  471.

Light,  To  bring  to,  471.

Ligure,  471.

Lily,  471.

Work,  471.

Limbs.  See  Qualifications,
Physical,  471.

Lindner,  Friederich  Wilhelm,
471.

Line,  471.

Linear  Triad,  471.

Lines,  Parallel.  See  Parallel
Lines,  471.

Lingam,  471.

Link,  472.

Linnecar,  Richard,  472.

Lion’s  Paw,  472.

Literature  of  Masonry,  472.
Litigation.  See  Lawsuits,  472.
Livery,  472.

Livre  d’Or,  472.


926


INDEX.


Local  Laws.  See  Laics  of  Ma-
-  sonry ,  472.

Locke’s  Letter,  472.

Lodge,  472.

Chartered.  See  Chartered
Lodge,  474.

Clandestine.  See  Clandes¬
tine  Lodge,  474.
Constituted.  See  Consti¬
tuted,  Legally,  474.
Dormant.  See  Dormant
Lodge,  474.

Emergent.  See  Emergent
Lodge,  475.

Extinct.  See  Extinct  Lodge,
475.

Holy.  See  Holy  Lodge,  475.
Hours,  475.

Just.  See  Just  Lodge,  475.
Master,  English,  475.
French,  475.

Occasional.  See  Occasional
Lodge,  475.
of  Instruction,  475.
of  St.  John,  475.

Perfect.  See  Perfect  Lodge,
475.

Regular.  See  Regular  Lodge,

475.

Room,  475.

Royal.  See  Royal  Lodge,

476.

Sacred.  See  Sacred  Lodge,
476.

Symbol  of  the,  476.

Loge,  476.

Logic,  476.

Lombardy,  476.

London,  476.

Lost  Word,  476.

Lotus,  477.

Louisiana,  477.

Louveteau.  See  Lewis,  477.
Lowen,  477.

Low  Twelve,  478.

Loyalty,  478.

Luchet,  Jean  Pierre  Louis,  Mar¬
quis  de,  478.

Luminaries,  478.

Lustration,  478.

Lux,  478.

Lux  e  Tenebris,  478.

Lux  Fiat  et  Lux  Fit,  479.

L.  V.  C.,  479.

Lyons,  Congress  of,  479.

MAACHA,  479.

Mac,  479.

Macbenac,  480.

Maccabees,  480.

Macerio,  480.

Macio,  480.

Majon,  480.

Mafonetus,  480.

Mafonne,  480.

Egyptienne,  4S0.

Ma$onner,  480.

Maczo,  4S0.

Made,  480.

Madman,  480.

Magazine,  4S0.

Magi,  480.

Magic,  480.

Squares,  4S1.


Magicians,  Society  of  the,  481.
MagLster  Ccementariorum,  481.
Hospitalis.  See  Master  of
the  Hospital,  481.
Lapidum,  481.

Militiae  Christi.  See  Master
of  the  Soldiery  of  Christ,
481.

Perrerius,  481.

Templi.  See  Master  of  the
Temple,  481.

Magi st ri  Comacini.  See  Como,
481.

Magnanimous,  481.

Magnetic  Masonry,  482.

Magus,  482.

Man,  482.

Maher-Shalal-Hash-Baz,  482.
Maier,  Michael,  4S2.

Maine,  482.

Maitre  Ma$on,  482.

Maltresse  Agissante,  482.

Majon,  482.

Maitrise,  482.

Major,  482.

Illuminate,  482.

Majority,  482.

Make,  482.

Malach,  482.

Malachi,  4S3.

Mallet,  483.

Malta,  483.

Cross  of.  See  Cross  of
Malta,  483.

Knight  of.  See  Knight  of
Malta,  483.

Maltese  Cross.  See  Cross  of
Malta,  483.

Man,  483.

Mandate,  483.

Mangourit,  Michel  Ange  Ber¬
nard  de,  483.

Manna,  Pot  of,  483.
Manningham,  Thomas,  483.
Mantle,  484.

of  Honor,  4S4.

Manual,  484.

Point  of  Entrance,  484.
Sign,  484.

Manuscripts,  4S4  and  634.
Marcheshvan,  485.

Mark,  4S5.

Man,  486.

Master,  486.

of  the  Craft,  Regular,  487.
Marks  of  the  Craft,  487.
Marrow  in  the  Bone,  488.
Marseilles,  Mot  her  Lodge  of,  4SS.
Marshal,  488.

Martel,  488.

Martha,  4S8.

Martinism,  488.

Martin,  Louis  Claude  de  St.  See
Saint  Martin,  4S8.

Martyr,  4S8.

Martyrs,  Four  Crowned.  See
Four  Crowned  Martyrs,  48S.
Maryland,  488.

Mason,  Crowned,  489.

Derivation  of  the  Word,  489.
Masoney,  490.

Mason  Hermetic,  490.

Masonic  Hail.  See  Hall,  Ma¬
sonic,  490.


Mason,  Illustrious  and  Sublime
Grand  Master,  490.
of  the  Secret,  490.
Operative.  See  Operative
Mason,  490.

Perfect,  490.

Philosopher,  490.

Practical,  490.

Masonry,  490.

Operative.  See  Operative
Masonry,  490.

Origin  of.  See  Origin  of
Masonry,  490.
Speculative.  See  Specula¬
tive  Masonry,  490.
Masons,  Company  of,  490.
Mason,  Scottish  Master,  490.
Masons,  Emperor  of  all  the,  490.
Mason,  Speculative.  See  Spec¬
ulative  Mason,  490.

Stone.  See  Stonemasons,  490
Sublime,  490.

Operative,  490.

Mason’s  Wife  and  Daughter,  490.
Mason,  True,  A90.

Masoretic  Points,  490.
Massachusetts,  490.

Massonus,  491.

Master,  Absolute  Sovereign
Grand,  491.
ad  Vitarn,  491.

Ancient,  491.

Architect,  Grand.  See
Grand  Master  Archi¬
tect,  491.

Perfect,  491.

Prussian,  491.

Blue,  491.

Builder,  491.

Cohen,  491.

Crowned,  491.

Egyptian,  491.

Elect.  See  Elect  Master,  491.
English,  491.

Perfect,  491.

Four  Times  Venerable,  491.
Grand.  See  Grand  Master,
491.

Hermetic,  491.

Hlustrious,  491.

Symbolic,  491.
in  Israel.  See  Intendant
of  the  Building,  491.
in  Perfect  Architecture,  491.
in  the  Chair,  491.

Irish,  491.

Kabbalistic,  492.

Little  Elect,  492.

Mason,  492.

Most  High  and  Puissant,
493.

Wise,  493.

Mystic,  493.

of  all  Symbolic  Lodges,
Grand.  See  Grand  Mas¬
ter  of  all  Symbolic  Lodges,
493.

ofa  Lodge.  See  Worshipful
Master,  493.
of  Cavalry,  493.
of  Ceremonies,  493.
of  Dispatches,  493.
of  Finances,  493.
of  Hamburg,  Perfect,  493.


INDEX.


927


Master  of  Infantry,  493.
of  Lodges,  493.
of  Masters,  Grand,  493.
of  Paracelsus,  493.
of  Secrets,  Perfect,  493.
of  St.  Andrew,  493.
ofthe  Chivalry  ofChrist, 493.
of  the  Hermetic  Secrets,
Grand,  493.
of  the  Hospital,  493.
of  the  Key  to  Masonry,
Grand,  494.

of  the  Legitimate  Lodges,
Grand,  494.
of  the  Palace,  494.
of  the  Sages,  494.
of  the  Seven  Kabbalistic
Secrets,  Illustrious,  494.
of  the  Temple,  494.
of  the  Work,  494.

Past.  See  Past  Master,  494.
Perfect.  See  Perfect  Master,
494.

Architect,  494.

Irish.  See  Perfect  Irish
Master,  404.

Philosopher  by  the  Number
3,  494.

by  the  Number  9,  494.
Hermetic,  494.

Private,  494.

Provost  and  Judge,  494.
Puissant  Irish.  See  Puissant
Irish  Master,  494.
Pythagorean,  494.

Koyal.  See  Royal  Master,
494.

Secret.  See  Secret  Master,
494.

Select.  See  Select  Master,
494.

Supreme  Elect,  494.
Theosophist,  494.
through  Curiosity,  494.
to  the  Number  15,  494.
True,  494.

Worshipful.  See  Worship¬
ful  Master,  494.

Materials  of  the  Temple,  494.
Maters.  495.

Matriculation  Book,  495.

Mature  Age,  495.

Maul,  or  Setting  Maul.  See  Mai  -
Medals,  495.  [let,  495.

Mediterranean  Pass,  495.
Meeting  of  a  Chapter.  See  Con-
.vocation,  495.
of  a  Lodge.  See  Communi¬
cation,  495.

Meet  on  the  Level,  495.

Meister,  495.

im  Stuhl,  495.

Melancthon,  Philip,  495.
Melchizedek,  495.

Degree  of,  496.

Melech,  496.

Melesino,  Rite  of,  496.

Melita,  496.

Member,  Honorary.  Seellono-
rary  Member,  496.

Life.  See  Life  Member,  496.
of  a  Lodge,  496.
Membership,  Right  of,  496.
Memphis,  Rite  of,  496.


Menatzchim,  499.

Mental  Qualifications.  See
Qualifications,  499.

Menu,  499.

Mercy,  499.

Prince  of.  See  Prince  of
Mercy,  499.

Seat,  499.

Meridian  Sun,  499.

Merit,  499.

Mesmer,  Friederich  Anton,  499.
Mesmeric  Masonry,  499.
Mesopolyte,  499.

Mesouraneo,  499.

Metals,  499.

Metal  Tools,  499.

Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France,
500.

Mexico,  500.

Michael,  500.

Michigan,  500.

Microcosm.  See  Man,  500.
Middle  Ages,  500.

Chamber,  500.

Miles,  501.

Military  Lodges,  501.

Militia,  501.

Minerval,  501.

Minister  of  State,  501.
Minnesota,  501.

Minor,  501.

Illuminate,  501.

Minute  Book,  501.

Minutes,  501.

Misconduct,  502.

Miserable  Scald  Masons.  See
Scald  Miscrables,  502.

Mishna.  See  Talmud,  502.
Mississippi,  502.

Missouri,  502.

Mistletoe,  502.

Mithras,  Mysteries  of,  502.
Mitre,  504.

Mizraim,  504.

Rite  of,  504.

Moabon,  505.

Mock  Masons,  505.

Modern  Rite.  See  French  Rite,
505.

Moderns,  505.

Molart,  William,  505.

Molay,  James  de,  506.

Monad,  506.

Monitor(  506.

Monitorial  Instruction,  506.
Sign,  506.

Monitor,  Secret.  See  Secret
Monitor,  506.

Monogram,  506.

Montana,  506.

Montfaufon,  Prior  of,  507.
Months,  Hebrew,  607.

Masonic,  507.

Montpellier,  Hermetic  Rite  of,
507.

Monument,  507.

Moon,  507.

Moore,  James,  508.

Mopses,  508.

Morality,  508.

of  Freemasonry,  608.

Moral  Law,  508.

Moravian  Brethren,  508.
Morgan,  William,  508.


Moriah,  Mount,  508.

Morin,  Stephen,  509.

Moritz,  Carl  Philipp,  509.
Morphey,  509.

Mortality,  Symbol  of,  509.
Mortar,  Un  tempered.  See  Un¬
tempered  Mortar,  510.

Mosaic  Pavement,  510.

Symbolism,  510.

Moses,  511.

Mossdorf,  Friederich,  511.

Most  Excellent,  511.

Master,  511.

Puissant,  511.

Worshipful,  511.

Mot  de  Semestre,  511.

Mother  Council,  511.

Lodge,  511.

Motion,  512.

Motto,  512.

Mould,  512.

Stone,  512.

Mount  Calvary.  See  Calvary,
512.

Moriah.  See  Moriah,  512.
Sinai.  See  Sinai,  512.
Mourning,  512.

Mouth  to  Ear,  512.

Movable  Jewels.  See  Jewels  of
a  Lodge,  512.

Muenter,  Friederich,  512.

Munk house,  D.  D.,  Rev.  Rich¬
ard,  512.

Murr,  Christoph  Gottlieb  von,
513.

Muscus  Domus,  513.

Music,  513.

Mustard  Seed,  Order  of,  513.
Myrtle,  513.

Mystagogue,  513.

Mysteries,  Ancient,  513.
Mystery,  517.

Mystes,  517.

Mystical,  517.

Mysticism,  517.

Mystic  Tie,  517.

Myth,  517.

Historical,  518.
Philosophical,  518.
Mythical  History,  518.
Mythology,  518.

NAAMAH,  519.

Nabaim.  See  Schools  of  the
Prophets,  519.

Naked,  519.

Name  of  God,  519.

Names  of  Lodges,  521.

Namur,  525.

Naphtali,  525.

Naples,  525.

Napoleonic  Masonry,  525.
National  Grand  Lodge  of  Geir
many,  525.

Nayinus  Greens,  525.

Nazareth,  526.

Nebraska,  526.

Nebuchadnezzar,  526.
Nebuzaradan,  526.

Negro  Lodges,  526.

Neighbor,  527.

Nekam,  527.

Nekamah,  527.

Nembroth,  527.


928


Neophyte,  527.

Neoplatonism,  527.

Ne  Plus  Ultra,  527.
Netherlands,  527.

Net- Work,  528.

Nevada,  528.

Ne  Varietur,  528.

New  Brunswick,  528.
Hampshire,  528.

Jersey,  528.

York,  528.

Nicolai,  Christoph  Friederieh,

Night,  529.

Nile,  530.

Nil  nisi  clavis,  530.

Nimrod,  530.

Nine,  530.

Nineveh,  531.

Nisan,  531.

Noachidae,  531.

Noachite,  or  Prussian  Knight,
531.

Sovereign,  532.

Noachites,  532.

Noah,  532.

Precepts  of,  534.

Noffodei,  534.

Nomenclature,  534.

Nomination,  534.

Non- Affiliation,  535.
Nonesynches,  535.

Non  Nobis,  535.

Kesident,  535.

Noorthouck,  John,  535.

North,  535.

Carolina,  535.

East  Corner,  536.

Notuma,  536.

Nova  Scotia,  536.

Novice,  537.

Majonne,  537.
Mythological,  537.

Scottish,  537.

Numbers,  537.

N umeration  by  Letters,  538.
Nursery,  538.

OATH,  538.

Corporal,  540.
of  the  Gild,  541.

Tiler’s,  541.

OB,  541.

Obedience,  541.

of  a  Grand  Body,  541.
Obelisk,  542.

Objections  to  Freemasonry,  542.
Obligated,  542.

Obligation.  542.

Oblong  Square,  542.
Observance,  Clerks  of  Strict.  See
Clerks  of  Strict  Observance,
542.

Lax.  See  Lax  Observance,
542.

Relaxed,  542.

Strict.  See  Strict  Observ¬
ance,  542.

Obverse,  542.

Occasional  Lodge,  543.

Occult  Masonry,  543.

Sciences,  543.

Occupied  Territory,  543.
Octagon,  543.


INDEX.

Odd  Numbers,  543.

Offences,  Masonic.  See  Crimes,
Masonic,  543.

Ofierings,  the  Three  Grand.  See
Ground-Floor  of  the  Lodge,
543.

Officers,  543.

Jewels.  See  Jewels,  Offi¬
cial,  543.

Office,  Tenure  of,  543.

Oheb  Eloah,  543.

Karobo.  See  Oheb  Eloah,
543.

Ohio,  543.

Oil,  544.

Old  Man,  544.

Regulations,  544.

Olive,  544.

Branch  in  the  East,  Broth¬
erhood  of  the,  544.

Oliver,  George,  544.

Omega.  See  Alpha  and  Omega,
546.

Omnific  Word,  546.

On,  546.

Onyx,  547.

Opening  of  the  Lodge,  547.
Operative  Art,  549.

Masonry,  549.

Masons,  549.

Option,  549.

Oral  Instruction,  549.

Law,  551.

Orator,  551.

Order,  551.

Name,  552.
of  Business,  552.
of  Christ.  See  Christ,  Or¬
der  of,  552.

of  the  Temple.  See  Tem¬
ple,  Order  of  the,  532.
Rules  of,  553.

Orders  of  Architecture,  553.
Egyptian,  553.
of  Knighthood,  553.
of  the  Day,  554.

Ordinacio,  554.

Ordination,  554.

Ordo  ab  chao,  554.

Oregon,  554.

Organist,  Grand,  554.
Organization  of  Grand  Lodges.

See  Grand  Lodge,  554.

Orient,  554.

Grand.  See  Grand  Orient,
554.

Commander  of  the,  554.
Interior,  554.

of  France,  Grand.  See
France,  555.

Order  of  the,  555.

Oriental  Chair  of  Solomon,  555.
Philosophy,  555.

Rite,  555.

Orientation,  555.
original  Points,  555.

Origin  of  Freemasonry,  556.
Orleans,  Duke  of,  556.

Ormus  or  Ormesius.  See  Rose
Croix,  Golden,  556.

Ormuzd  and  Ahriman,  556.
Ornaments  of  a  Lodge,  556.
Oman  the  Jebusite,  556.
Orphan,  556.


Orpheus,  557.

Orphic  Mysteries,  557,

Osiris,  557.

Mysteries  of,  558.

Oterfut,  558.

Otreb,  558.

Out  of  the  Lodge,  558.

Oval  Temples,  558.

Overseer,  558.

Ox,  558.

Oyres  de  Ornellas,  Prajao,  558.

Ozee,  558.

PAGANIS,  Hugo  de,  559.

Paganism,  559.

Paine,  Thomas,  559.

Palestine,  559.

Explorations  in,  559.
Knight  of.  See  Knight  of
Palestine,  559.
of  St  John  of.  See
Knight  of  St.  John
of  Palestine,  559.
Palladic  Masonry,  559.
Palladium,  Order  of  the,  559.
Palmer,  560.

Pantacle,  560.

Pap  worth  Manuscript,  560.
Paracelsus,  560.

Sublime,  560.

Parallel  Lines,  560.

Paris,  Congresses  of,  560.
Parliamentary  Law,  561.

Parrot  Masons,  561.

Parsees,  561.

Particular  Lodges,  561.

Parts,  561.

Parvis,  561.

Paschal  Feast,  561.

Paschalis,  Martinez,  561.
Paschal  Lamb.  See  Lamb,  Pas¬
chal,  562.

Pas  perdus,  562.

Passages  of  the  Jordan.  See
Fords  of  the  Jordan,  562.
Passed,  562.

Passing  of  C’ouyng,  562.
Password,  562.

Past,  562.

Master,  562.

Pastophori,  563.

Pastos,  563.

Patents,  563.

Patience,  563.

Patriarchal  Masonry,  563.
Patriarch,  Grand,  564.
of  the  Crusades,  564.
of  the  Grand  Luminary,  564
Patron,  564.

Patrons  of  Masonry,  564.

Paul,  Confraternity  of  Saint,  564
I.,  564.

Pavement,  Mosaic.  See  Mosaic
Pavement.  564.

Pavens,  Hugh  de,  564.

P.  D.  E.  P.,  564.

Peace,  564.

Pectoral,  565.

of  the  High  Priest,  565.
Pedal,  565.

Pedestal,  565.

Pedum,  565

Pelasgian  Religion,  565.

Peleg,  565.


INDEX,


929


Pelican,  565.

Pellegrini,  Marquis  of,  566.
Penal  Sign,  566.

Penalty,  566.

Pencil,  568.

Penitential  Sign,  568.
Pennsylvania,  568.

Work,  568.

Penny,  569.

Pentagon,  569.

Pentagram,  569.

Pentalpha,  569.

Perau,  Gabriel  Louis  Calabre,
570.

Perfect  Ashlar.  See  Ashlar,  570.

Initiates,  Rite  of,  570.
Perfection,  570.

Perfectionists,  570.

Perfection,  Lodge  of,  570.

Rite  of,  571.

Perfect  Irish  Master,  572.

Lodge.  See  Just  Lodge,  572.
Master,  572.

Prussian,  572.

Union,  Lodge  of,  572.
Perignan,  572.

Periods  of  the  Grand  Architect.

See  Six  Periods,  572.

Perjury,  572.

Pernettv,  Antoine  Joseph,  573.
Perpendicular,  573.
Persecutions,  573.

Perseverance,  575.

Order  of,  575.

Persia,  575.

Persian  Philosophical  Rite,  576.
Personal  Merit,  576.

Peru,  576.

Petition  for  a  Charter,  576.
for  a  Dispensation,  577.
for  Initiation,  577.

Peuvret,  Jean  Eustache,  577.
Phainoteletian  Society,  577.
Phallic  Worship,  577.

Phallus.  See  Phallic  Worship,
578.

Pharaxal,  578.

Pharisees,  578.

Phenicia,  578.

Philadelphes,  Lodge  of  the,  578.
Philadelphia,  578.
Philadelphians,  Rite  of  the.  See
Primitive  Rite,  578.
Philalethes,  Rite  of  the,  578.
Philip  IV.,  579.

Philippian  Order,  579.
Philocoreites,  Order  of,  579.
Philo  Juda;us,  579.

Philosopher,  Christian,  579.
Grand  and  Sublime  Her¬
metic,  579.
of  Hermes,  579.

Sublime,  579.

Unknown,  579.

The  Little,  579.

Unknown,  579.
Philosopher’s  Stone,  579.
Philosophic  Degrees,  580.

Scottish  Rite,  580.
Philosophy,  Sublime,  580.
Phoenix,  580.

Physical  Qualifications,  580.
Picart’s  Ceremonies,  581.
Pickaxe,  581.  .

6R


Piece  of  Architecture,  581.
Pilgrim,  581.

Penitent,  582.

Pilgrim’s  Shell.  See  Scallop
Shell,  582.

Weeds,  582.

Pilgrim  Templar,  582.

Warrior,  582.

Pilier,  582.

Pillar,  582.

Pillars  of  Cloud  and  Fire,  583.
of  Enoch,  583.
of  the  Porch,  583.

Pinceau,  587.

Pine  Cone,  587.

Pirlet,  587.

Pius  VII.,  587.

Place,  587.

Planche  Tracee,  587.

Plans  and  Designs,  587.

Platonic  Academy.  See  Acade¬
my,  Platonic,  587.

Plenty,  587.

Plot  Manuscript,  587.

Robert,  M.  D.,  587.

Plumb,  588.

Line,  589.

Rule,  589.

Plurality  of  Votes.  See  Ma¬
jority,  589.

Poetry  of  Masonry,  589.

Points,  589.

of  Entrance,  Perfect,  589.
of  Fellowship,  Five,  590.
Twelve  Grand.  See  Twelve
Grand  Points,  590.

Point  within  a  Circle,  590.
Poland,  591.

Politics,  592.

Polkal,  592.

Polycronicon,  592.

Pomegranate,  592.

Pommel,  593.

Pontifes  Freres.  See  Bridge
Builders,  593.

Pontifex.  See  Bridge  Builders,
593

Pontiff,  593.

Grand.  See  Grand  Pontiff,
594.

Poor  Fellow-Soldiers  of  Jesus
Christ,  594.

Poppy,  594.

Porch  of  the  Temple.  See  Tem¬
ple  of  Solomon,  594.

Porta,  Gambattista,  594.
Portugal,  594.

Postulant,  594.

Pot  of  Incense,  594.

of  Manna.  See  Manna,  Pot
of,  594.

Poursuivant,  594.

Practicus,  594.

Prayer,  594.

Pre-Adamite,  595.

Precaution,  595.

Precedency  of  Lodges,  595.
Preceptor,  595.

Preceptory,  595.

Precious  Jewels.  See  Jewels,
Precious,  595.

Preferment,  595.

Prelate,  596.

of  Lebanon,  596.

59


Prentice,  596.

Pillar,  596.

Preparation  of  the  Candidate,
596.

Preparing  Brother,  596.
President,  597.

Presiding  Officer,  597.
Prestonian  Lecture,  597.

Lectures,  597.

Preston,  William,  597.
Pretender,  601.

Previous  Question,  601.

Price,  Henry,  601.

Prichard,  Samuel,  601.

Priest,  602.

Grand  High.  See  Grand
High  Priest,  602.

High .  See  High  Priest,  602.
Royal,  602.

Theosophist,  602.
Priesthood,  Order  of  High.  See
High  Priesthood, Order  of,  602
Priestly  Order,  602.

Primitive  Freemasonry,  602.
Rite,  603.

Scottish  Rite,  604.

Prince,  604.

Adept.  See  Adept,  Prince,
604.

Depositor,  Grand,  604.
Mason,  604.
of  Jerusalem,  604.
of  Lebanon.  See  Knight  of
the  Royal  Axe,  605.
of  Libanus,  605.
of  Mercy,  605.
of  Rose  Croix.  See  Rose
Croix,  Prince  of,  605.
of  the  Captivity,  *605.
of  the  East,  Grand,  605.
of  the  Levites,  605.
of  the  Royal  Secret.  See
Sublime  Prince  of  the
Royal  Secret,  605.
of  the  Seven  Planets,  Illus¬
trious  Grand,  605.
of  the  Tabernacle,  605.
Princess  of  the  Crown,  606.
Principal  Officers,  606.
Principals,  606.

Principal  Sojourner,  606.
Printed  Proceedings,  606.

Prior,  607.

Grand.  See  Grand  Prior,
607.

Priory,  607.

Prison,  607.

Private  Committee.  See  Com¬
mittee,  Private,  607.
Privileged  Questions,  607.
Privilege,  Questions  of,  607.
Probation,  607.

Problem,  Forty-Seventh.  Sea
Forty-Seventh  Problem,  607.
Processions,  607.

Proclamation,  608.

of  Cyrus,  609.

Profane,  609.

Proficiency,  609.

Pro  Grand  Master,  610.
Progressive  Masonry,  610.
Promise,  611.

Promotion,  611.

Proofs,  611.


930


INDEX,


Property  of  a  Lodge,  612.
Prophet,  612.

Prophets,  Schools  of  the.  See
Schools  of  the  Prophets,  612.
Proponenda,  612.

Proposing  Candidates,  612.
Proscription,  612.

Proselyte  of  Jerusalem,  612.
Proselytism,  612.

Protector  of  Innocence,  614.
Protocol,  614.

Prototype,  614.

Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  614.
Master,  614.

Officers,  614.

Master  of  the  Red  Cross,  614.
Provost  and  Judge,  614.

Proxy  Installation,  614.

Master,  614.

Prudence,  614.

Prussia,  615.

Prussian  Knight.  See  Noachite,
615.

Pseudonym,  615.

Publications,  Masonic,  615.
Public  Ceremonies,  617.
Puerility  of  Freemasonry,  618.
Puissant,  620.

Irish  Master,  620.

Pulsanti  Operietur,  620.
Punishments,  Masonic,  620.
Purchase,  620.

Pure  Freemasonry.  See  Prim¬
itive  Freemasonry,  621.
Purification,  621.

Purity,  621.

Brothers  of,  621.

Purple,  621.

Brethren,  621.

Lodges,  621.

Pyron,  Jean  Baptiste,  621.
Pythagoras,  622.

School  of,  622.

Qualifications  of  Can¬
didates,  623.

Quadrivium.  624.

Quakers,  624.

Quarrels,  624.

Quarries,  624.

Quarterly  Communication,  625.
Quarternionj  625.

Quebec,  625.

Questions  of  Henry  VI.,  625.
Quorum,  625.

RABBANAIM,  626.

Rabbinism,  626.

Rabboni,  626.

Ragon,  J.  M.,  626.

Ragotzky,  Carl  August,  627.
Rains,  627.

Raised,  627.

Ramsay,  Andrew  Michael,  627.

Rite  of,  630.

Ratisbon,  630.

Rawlinson  Manuscript,  630.
Received  and  Acknowledged,
631.

Reception,  631.

Recipient,  631.

Recognition,  Modes  of,  631.
Recommendation,  632.
Reconciliation,  Lodge  of,  633.


Reconsideration,  Motion  for, 633.

of  the  Ballot,  633.

Recorder,  633.

Records,  Old,  633.

Rectification,  634.

Rectified  Rite.  See  Martinism,
634.

Rose  Croix,  Rite  of.  See
Rose  Croix,  Rectified,  634.
Recusant,  634.

Red,  634.

Cross  Knight,  635.

Knight  of  the.  See
Knight  of  the  Red
Cross,  635.

Legend,  635.
of  Babylon,  See  Baby¬
lonish  Pass,  635.
of  Rome  and  Constan¬
tine,  635.

Sword  of  Babylon,  636.
Letters,  636.

Reflection,  Chamber  of.  See
Chamber  of  Reflection,  636.
Reformed  Helvetic  Rite,  636.

Rite,  636.

Refreshment,  636.

Regalia,  637.

Regeneration,  637.

Regent,  637.

Reghellini,  M.,  637.

Regimental  Lodge,  638.
Register,  638.

Registrar,  Grand,  638.
Registration,  638.

Registry,  638.

Regular,  638.

Regulations.  See  Old  Regula¬
tions,  639.

Rehum,  639,

Reinhold,  Karl  Leonhard,  639.
Reinstatement.  See  Restoration,
639.

Rejection,  639.

Rejoicing,  639.

Relief,  639.

Board  of,  639.

Religion  of  Masonry,  639.
Religious  Qualifications.  See
Qualifications,  641.

Removal  of  Lodges,  641.
Renouncing  Masons,  641.
Repeal,  642.

Report  of  a  Committee,  642.
Reportorial  Corps,  642.
Representative  of  a  Grand
Lodge,  642.

Representatives  of  Lodges,  642.
Representative  System,  642.
Reprimand,  642.

Reputation,  643.

Residence,  643.

Resignation  of  Membership,  643.

of  Office,  643.

Resolution,  643.

Respectable,  643.

Response,  643.

Restoration,  643.

Resurrection,  644.

Returns  of  Lodges,  644.

Reuben,  644.

Revelations  of  Masonry.  See
Expositions,  644.

Reverend,  644.


Reverential  Sign,  645.

Revival,  645.

Revoke,  646.

Rhetoric,  646.

Rhode  Island,  646.

Rhodes,  646.

Knight  of.  See  Knight  of
Rtiodes,  646.

Ribbon,  646.

Ridel,  Cornelius  Johann  Ru¬
dolph,  646.

Right  Angle,  646.

Eminent,  647.

Excellent,  647.

Hand,  647.

Side,  648.

Worshipful,  648.

Ring,  Luminous.  See  Academy
of  Sublime  Masters  of  the
Luminous  Ring,  648.
Masonic,  648.

Rising  Sun,  649.

Rite,  649.

Ritter,  650.

Ritual,  650.

Robelot,  650.

Robert  I.,  650.

Roberts’  Manuscript,  650.

Robes,  651.

Robins,  Abbe  Claude,  651.
Robison,  John,  651.

Rockwell,  William  Spencer,  652.
Rod,  652.

Deacon’s,  652.

Marshal’s.  See  Baton,  652.
of  Iron.  652.

Steward’s,  653.

Treasurer’s.  See  Staff  treas¬
urer’s,  653.

Roessler,  Carl,  653.

Roll,  653.

Roman  Colleges  of  Artificers, 653
Romvel,  658.

Rosaic  System,  658.

Rosa,  Philipp  Samuel,  658.
Rose,  658.

and  Triple  Cross,  659.
Croix,  659.

Brethren  of  the,  659.
Jacobite,  659.

Knight,  659.

Magnetic,  659.
of  Germany,  659.
of  Gold,  Brethren  of
the,  659.

of  Heredom,  660.
of  the  Dames,  660.
of  the  Grand  Rosary,

660.

Philosophic,  660.
Prince  of,  660.
Rectified,  662.
Sovereign  Prince  of,
662.

Knights  and  Ladies  of  the.
See  Knight  of  the  Rose,
662.

Order  of  the,  662.
Rosenkreuz,  Christian,  663.
Rosicrucianism,  663.
Rosicrucian  Society  of  England,
666.

Rosy  Cross,  666.

Rough  Ashlar.  See  Ashlar,  666.


INDEX


931


Round  Table,  King  Arthur’s,

666.

Towers  of  Ireland,  666.
Rowers.  See  Knight  Rower ,  666.
Royal  and  Select  Masters.  See
Council  of  Royal  and  Se¬
lect  Masters,  666.

Arch,  Ancient.  See  Knight
of  the  Ninth  Arch,
666.

Apron,  666.

Badge,  666.

Banners.  See  Banners,
Royal  Arch,  667.
Captain,  667.

Clothing,  667.

Colors,  667.

Degree,  667.

Grand,  669.

Jewel,  669.

Masonry,  67ft.
of  Enoch,  670.
of  Ramsay,  670.
of  Solomon,  670.
Zerubbabel,  670.

Robes,  670.
Tracing-Board,  670.
Word.  See  Tetragram-
maton,  671.

Working  -  Tools.  See
Working- Tools,  671.
Ark  Mariners,  671.

Arr,  671.

Axe,  674.

Lodge,  674.

Master,  674.

Order  of  Scotland,  675.
Priest,  678.

Secret,  Sublime  Prince  of
the.  See  Sublime  Prince
of  the  Royal  Secret,  678.
R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  678.

Ruffians,  678.

Rule,  679.

Rule  of  the  Templars,  679.
Rulers,  680.

Russia,  680.

SABAISM,  680.

Sabaoth,  680.

Sabbath,  680.

Sabianism.  See  Sabaism,  SSI.
Sackcloth,  681.

Sacred  Asylum  of  High  Ma¬
sonry,  681.

Lodge,  681.

Sacrificant,  681.

Sacrifice,  Altar  of.  See  Altar,  681
Sacrifices  681.

Saint  Adhabell,  681.

Alban,  681.

Albans,  Earl  of,  682.
Amphibalus,  682.

Andrew,  Knight  of.  Soe
Knight  of  St.  A  ndrew,  681 .
Andrew’s  Day,  682.
Augustine,  682.

Bernard,  682.

Domingo,  682.

Sainte  Croix,  Emanuel  Joseph
Guilhem  de  Clermont-Lodftve
de,  683.

Saint  George’s  Day,  683.
Germain,  683.


Saint  John,  Favorite  Brother  of,
683.

Lodge  of.  See  Lodge
of  St.  John,  683.
of  Jerusalem,  Knight
of.  See  Knight  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem,
683.

John’s  Masonry,  683.

Order,  683.

John  the  Almoner,  683.
the  Baptist,  684.
the  Evangelist,  684.
Leger.  See  Aldworth,  Mrs.,
684.

Martin,  Louis  Claude,  684.
Nicaise,  685.

Paul’s  Church,  685.

Saints  John,  685.

Festivals  of.  See  Festivals,

686.

Saint  Victor,  Louis  Guillemain
de,  686.

Salfi,  Francesco,  686.

Salix,  686.

Salle  des  Pas  Perdus,  686.
Salomonis  Sanctificatus  Illumi-
natus,  Magnus  Jehova,  686.
Salsette,  686.

Salt,  686.

Salutation,  686.

Salutem,  686.

Salute  Mason,  686.

Samaria,  687.

Samaritan,  Good.  See  Good  Sa¬
maritan,  687.

Samaritans,  687.

Samothracian  Mysteries,  687.
Sanctuary,  687.

Sanctum  Sanctorum,  687.
Sandwich  Islands,  687.

San  Graal,  687.

Sanhedrim,  688.

Sapicole,  The,  688.

Sapphire,  688.

Saracens,  688.

Sardius,  688.

Sarsena,  688.

Sash,  688.

Satrap,  689.

Savalette  de  Langes,  689.
Sayers,  Anthony,  689.

Scald  Miserables,  689.

Scales,  Pair  of,  690.
Scallop-Shell,  690.

Scandinavian  Mysteries.  See
Gothic  Mysteries,  691.

Scarlet.  See  Red,  691.

Scenic  Representations,  691.
Sceptre,  691.

Schaw  Manuscript,  691.

William,  691.

Schismatic,  692.

Schisms,  692.  »

Schneider,  Johann  August,  693.
Schools,  694.

of  the  Prophets,  694.
Schrepfer,  Johann  Georg,  694.
Schroeder,  Friederich  Joseph
Wilhelm,  694.

Friederich  Ludwig,  695.
Schroeder’s  Rite.  See  Schroe¬
der,  Friederich  Joseph  Wil¬
helm,  695.


Schroeder’s  System.  See  Schroe¬
der,  Friederich  Imdwig,  695.
Sciences,  Liberal.  See  Liberal
Arts  and  Sciences,  695.
Scientific  Masonic  Association,
695.

Scotland,  696.

Royal  Order  of.  See  Royal
Order  of  Scotland,  696.
Scott,  Charles,  696.

Scottish,  696.

Degrees,  697.

Master.  See  Ecossais,  696.
Rite,  697.

Templars.  See  Templars
of  Scotland,  698.
Trinitarians.  See  Prince
of  Mercy,  698.

Scribe,  698.

Scriptures,  Belief  in  the,  698.

Reading  of  the,  698.
Scythe,  700.

Seal,  700.

of  Solomon,  700.

Seals,  Book  of  the  Seven,  701.

Keeper  of  the,  701.

Search  for  Truth,  701.

Seceders,  701.

Second  Temple.  See  Temple  of
Zerubbabel,  701.

Secrecy  and  Silence,  701.
Secretary,  702.

General  of  the  Holy  Em¬
pire,  702.

Grand.  See  Grand  Secre¬
tary,  702.

Secret  Doctrine,  702.

Master,  702.

Monitor,  703.

of  the  Secrets,  The,  703.

Societies,  703.

Vault.  See  Vault,  Secret,  704
Sectarianism,  704.

Secular  Lodges,  704.

Sedition  Act,  704.

Seeing,  704.

Seekers,  704.

Select  Master,  704.

Semestre,  705.

Senatorial  Chamber,  705.
Seneschal,  705.

Senior  Deacon.  See  Deacons,
706.

Entered  Apprentice,  706.
Warden,  706.

Senses,  Five.  See  Five  Senses,
706.

Sentinel,  706.

Sephiroth,  706.

Septenary,  706.

Sepulchre,  706.

Knight  of  the  Holy.  See
Knight  of  the  Iioly  Sepul¬
chre,  706.

Serapis,  Mysteries  of.  See  Egyp¬
tian  Mysteries,  706.

Sermons,  Masonic,  706.

Serpent,  707.

and  Cross,  707.

Knight  of  the  Brazen.  See
Kn  ight  of  the  Brazen  Ser¬
pent,  707.

Worship,  708.

Serving  Brethren,  708.


932


Seth,  708.

Sethos,  708.

Setting  Sun,  708.

Seven,  708.

Stars,  709.

Seventy  Years  of  Captivity,  709.
Shaddaij  709.

Shamir,  709.

Sharp  Instrument,  710.

Shastras,  710.

Sheba,  Queen  of,  710.

Shekel,  710.

Shekinah,  710.

Shem,  710.

Ham,  Japheth,  711.
Hamphoraseh,  711.

Sheriff,  711.

Shethar-Boznai.  See Tatnai,7\l
Shew-Bread,  711.

Shibboleth,  711.

Shield,  711.

of  David,  712.

Shock,  712.

of  Enlightenment,  712.
of  Entrance,  712.

Shoe,  713.

Shovel,  713.

Shrine,  713.

Side  Degrees,  713.

Sight,  Making  Masons  at,  713.
Sign,  715.

Signature,  716.

Signet,  716.

of  Truth,  716.
of  Zerubbabel,  716.
Significant  Word,  716.

Sign  of  Distress,  716.

Silence.  See  Secrecy  and  Si¬
lence,  717.

Silver  and  Gold,  717.

Cord,  717.

Sinai,  717.

Sintooism,  717.

Sir,  717.

Siroc,  717.

Sister  Lodges,  718.

Sisters  by  Adoption,  718.

of  the  Gila,  718.

Situation  of  the  Lodge,  718.

Six  Lights,  718.

Periods.  718.

Skeleton,  719.

Skirrit,  719.

Skull,  719.

and  Cross-bones,  719.
Slander,  719.

Slave.  See  Free  Bom,  719.
Sloaue  Manuscripts,  719.

Slip,  720.

Smith,  George,  720.

Smitten  Builder,  721.

Snow,  John,  721.

Snows.  See  Bairn,  721.

Social  Character  of  Freemason¬
ry,  721.

Socius,  721.

Sodalities,  721.

Sofism,  721.

So  Help  Me  God,  722.
Sojourner.  See  Principal  So¬
journer,  722.

Soldiers  of  Christ,  722.
Solomon,  722.

House  of,  724.


INDEX.


Solomon,  Temple  of.  See  Tem¬
ple  of  Solomon,  724.

Solstices,  724.

Songs  of  Masonry,  725.

Son  of  a  Mason,  726.

Sons  of  Light,  726.

of  the  Prophets,  726.
of  the  Widow,  726.
Sorbonne,  726.

Sorrow  Lodge,  726.

Soul  of  Nature,  726.

South,  727.

Carolina,  727.

Sovereign,  727.

Commander  of  the  Temple,

727.

Grand  Inspector  General,

728.

Master,  729.

Prince  Mason,  729.

of  Rose  Croix.  See
Bose  Croix,  729.
Spain,  729.

Sparticus,  730.

Speculative  Masonry,  730.

Spes  mea  in  Deo  est,  732.
Sphinx,  732.

Spire,  Congress  of,  732.
Spiritualizing,  732.

Spiritual  Lodge,  732.

Temple,  732.

Spoulee,  John  de,  733.
Spreading  the  Ballot,  733.
Sprengseisen,  Christian  Frie-
derich  Kessler  von,  733.

Sprig  of  Acacia.  See  Acacia,  733.
Spurious  Freemasonry,  733.
Spurs,  734.

Square,  735.

and  Compass,  735.

Squin  de  Flexiau,  736.

Staff,  737.

Stairs,  Winding.  See  Winding
Stairs,  738.

Standard,  738.

Bearer,  738.

Stand  to  and  Abide  by,  738.
Star,  738.

Blazing.  See  Blazing  Star,
738.

Eastern.  See  Eastern  Star,
738.

Five  -  Pointed.  See  Five-
Pointed  Star,  738.
in  the  East,  738.
of  Jerusalem,  738.
of  the  Syrian  Knights,  738.
Starck,  Johann  August  von,  738.
Stare  Super  Yias  Antiquas,  740.
State,  740.

Stations,  740.

Statistics  of  Freemasonry,  740.
Statute  of  Henry  VI.  See  La¬
borers,  Statute  of,  741.
Statutes,  741.

St  Clair  Charters,  741.

William,  741.

Steinbach,  Erwin  of.  SeeErwin
of  Steinbach,  743.

Steinmetz,  743.

Step,  743.

Steps  on  the  Master’s  Carpet,
743.

Sterkin,  743.


Stewards,  743.

Grand.  See  Grand  Stew¬
ards,  743.

Lodge.  See  Grand  Stew¬
ard’s  Lodge,  743.

Stirling,  743.

St.  Leger.  See  Aldworth,  744.
St.  Martin.  See  Saint  Martin,
744.

Stockings,  744.

Stolkin,  744.

Stone,  744.

Corner.  See  Corner-Stone,
744.

Cubical.  See  Cubical  Stone,
744.

Manuscript,  744.
Stonemasons  of  the  Middle  Ages,
744.

Stone,  Nicholas.  See  Stone
Manuscript,  750.
of  Foundation,  750.
Pavement,  755.

Rejected,  755.

Squarers.  See  Giblim,  755.
White,  755.

William  Leete,  755.
Worship,  756.

Strasburg,  Cathedral  of,  757.

Congress  of,  758.

Strength,  758.

Strict  Observance,  Rite  of,  758.
Striking  Off,  758.

Stuart  Masonry,  758.

Sublime,  760.

Degrees,  761.

Grand  Lodge,  761.

Knight  Elected,  761.
Masons,  761.

Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret,
761.

Solomon,  762.

Sublimes,  The,  762.

Submission,  762.

Subordinate  Lodge,  762.

Officers,  762.

Subordination,  762.

Substitute  Ark.  See  Ark,  Sub¬
stitute,  762.

Candidate,  762.

Grand  Master,  763.

Word,  763.

Succession  to  the  Chair,  763.
Succoth,  765.

Sufferer,  765.

Summons,  765.

Sun,  765.

Knight  of  the.  See  Knight
of  the  Sun,  766.

Moon,  and  Stars,  766.
Worship,  766.

Super  Excellent  Masons,  766.
Master,  766.

Superintendent  of  the  Works,
Grand,  767.

Superior,  767.

Superiors,  Unknown.  See  Un¬
known  Superiors,  767.
Super-Masonic,  767.
Supplanting,  767.

Supports  of  the  Lodge,  767.
Supreme  Authority,  769.

Commander  of  the  Stars,
769.


INDEX.


933


Supreme  Consistory,  709.

Council,  769.

Suspension,  771.

Sussex,  Duke  of,  772.

Sweden,  772.

Swedenborg,  773.

Rite  of,  775.

Swedish  Rite,  776.

Switzerland,  776.

Sword,  778.

and  Trowel.  See  Trowel
and  Sword ,  779.

Bearer,  779.

Grand,  779.
of  State,  779.

Pointing  to  the  Naked
Heart,  780.

Templar’s,  780.

Tiler’s,  780.

Sworn  Brothers,  780.

Syllable,  780.

Symbol,  780.

Compound,  781.

Symbolic  Degrees,  782.

Lectures,  783.

Lodge,  783.

Machinery,  783.

Masonry,  783.

Symbolism,  the  Science  of,  783.
Symbol  of  Glory,  783.
Syndication  of  Lodges,  783.
Synod  of  Scotland,  784.

Syria,  784.

System,  784.

Tabernacle,  784.

Chief  of  the.  See  Chief  of
the  Tabernacle,  786.
Prince  of  the.  See  Prince
of  the  Tabernacle,  786.
Table  Lodge,  786.

Tablets  of  Hiram  Abif,  787.
Taciturnity,  788.

Tactics,  788.

Talisman,  788.

Talmud,  789.

Tamarisk,  790.

Tannehill,  Wilkins,  790.

Tapis,  790.

Tarsel,  790.

Board,  790.

Tarshatha,  790.

Tassels,  790.

Tasting  and  Smelling,  790.
Tatnai  and  Shethar-Boznai,  790.
Tau,  791.

Cross,  791.

Team,  791.

Tears,  791.

Temnelorden  or  Tempelherreu-
orden,  792.

Temperance,  792.

Templar.  See  Knight  Templar,
792.

Templarius,  792.

Templar  Land,  792.

Origin  of  Masonry,  792.
Templars  of  England,  793.

of  Scotland,  794.

Temple,  795.

Grand  Commander  of  the,
796.

of  Ezekiel,  796.
of  Herod,  796.


Temple  of  Solomon,  796.
of  Zerubbabel,  798.

Order  of  the,  799.

Second,  803.

Sovereign  Commander  of
the.  See  Sovereign  Com¬
mander  of  the  lemple,  804.
of  the  Sovereigns  Grand
Commander  of  the,
804.

Spiritual.  See  Spiritual
Temple ,  804.

Symbolism  of  the,  804.
Workmen  at  the.  See  Work¬
men  at  the  Temple,  805.
Templier,  805.

Templum  Hierosolymae,  805.
Ten,  805.

Tengu,  805.

Tennessee,  805.

Tent,  805.

Tenure  of  Office,  806.

Tercy,  806.

Terminus,  806.

Terrasson,  the  Abbe  Jean,  806.
Terrible  Brother,  806.
Territorial  Jurisdiction,  806.
Tessel,  Indented.  See  Tessellated
Border,  808.

Tessellated,  807.

Border,  807.

Tessera  Hospitalis,  808.
Testimony,  808.

Tests,  808.

Test  Word,  809.

Tetractys,  810.

Tetragrammaton,  810.

Teutonic  Knights,  811.

Texas,  811.

T.\  G.\  A.-.  0.\  T.\  U.\,  812.
Thammuz,  812.

Thanks,  812.

Theism,  812.

Theocratic  Philosophy  of  Free¬
masonry,  812.

Theological  Virtues,  812.
Tlieoricus,  812.

Theosophists,  812.

Therapeutae,  813.

Theurgy,  813.

Third  Degree.  See  Master  Ma¬
son,  813.

Thirty-Second  Degree.  See
Prince  of  the  Boy  al  Secret,
813.

Six,  813.

Third  Degree.  See  Sov¬
ereign  Grand  Inspector
General,  813.

Thory,  Claude  Antoine,  813.
Thoux  de  Salverte,  814.

Thread  of  Life,  814.

Three,  814.

Globes,  Rite  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  the,  815.

Grand  Offerings.  See
Ground  -  Floor  of  the
Lodge,  815.

Points,  815.

Senses,  815.

Steps.  See  Steps  on  the
Master’s  Carpet,  815.
Threshing-Floor,  815.

Throne,  815.


Thummim.  See  Urim  and
Thummim,  815.

Tie,  815.

Mystic.  See  Mystic  Tie,  815.
Tierce,  De  ia,  816.

Tile,  816.

Tiler,  816.

Tiler’s  Oath.  See  Oath,  Tiler’s,
816.

Tilly  de  Grasse.  See  Grasse,
Tilly  de,  816.

Timbre,  816.

Time,  816.

and  Circumstances,  816.
Tirshatha,  816.

Titles,  816.

of  Grand  Lodges,  817.

Tito,  817.

Toasts,  817.

Token,  819.

Tolerance  Lodge,  819.
Toleration,  819.

Tomb  of  Adoniram,  819.
of  Hiram  Abif,  819.
of  Tyre,  819.

Tongue,  820.

Instructive.  See  Instruc¬
tive  Tongue,  820.
of  Good  Report,  820.

Topaz,  820.

Torches,  820.

Torgau,  Constitutions  of,  820.
Torrubia,  Joseph,  820.

Tournon,  M.,  821.

Tow,  Cable.  See  Cable  Tow,  821.
Tower,  Degree  of  the,  821.

of  Babel.  See  Babel,  821.
Town,  Salem,  821.

Townshend,  Simeon,  821.
Tracing-Board,  821.

Trade  Gilds.  See  Gilds,  821.
Tradition,  821.

Tramping  Masons,  822.

Transfer  of  W arrant,  822.
Transient  Brethren,  822.
Transition  Period,  822.
Transmission,  Charter  of,  822.
Travel,  822.

Travelling  Freemasons,  822.

Warrants,  826.

Travenol,  Louis,  826.

Treasure,  Incomparable,  826.
Treasurer,  826.

Grand.  See  Grand  Treas¬
urer,  826.

Hermetic,  826.
Trestle-Board,  826.

Triad,  827.

Triads,  Druidical,  828.

Triad  Society  of  China,  828.
Trials,  Masonic,  828.

Triangle,  829.

Double.  See  Seal  of  Solo¬
mon  and  Shield  of  David,
830.

of  Pythagoras.  See  Pen-
talpha,  830.

Radiated,  830.

Triple,  830.

Tribe  of  Judah,  Lion  of  the,  831.
Tribes  of  Israel,  831.

Tribunal,  831.

Supreme,  831.

Triliteral  Name,  832.


934


INDEX.


Trinidad,  832.

Trinosophs,  832.

Triple  Alliance,  832.

Tau,  832.

Trivium.  See  Quadrivium,  832.
Trowel,  832.

and  Sword,  833.

Society  of  the,  833.

True  Masons.  See  Academy  of
True  Mu sons,  833.

Trust  in  God,  833.

Truth,  834.

Tsehoudy,  Louis  Theodore,  834.
Tuapholl,  835.

Tubal  Cain,  835.

Tune,  Freemasons’,  837.
Turban,  837.

Turcopolier,  837.

Turkey,  837.

Turquoise,  838.

Tuscan  Order,  838.

Twelve,  838.

Illustrious  Knights,  838.
Lettered  Name,  838.
Original  Points  of  Mason¬
ry,  839.

Twenty-Four  Inch  Gauge,  840.
One,  840.

Seven,  840.

Six,  840.

Two-Lettered  Name,  840.

Tyler,  840.

Type,  840.

Typhon,  840.

Tyre,  840.

Quarries  of,  841.

Tyrian  Freemasons,  841.

TT---  O  '-,  841.

Uden,  Conrad  Friederich,
841.

Unaffiliated  Mason,  841.
Unanimous  Consent,  842.
Unfavorable  Report,  843.
Uniformity  of  Work,  843.
Union,  Grand  Masters’,  844.
Master’s  Degree,  844.
of  German  Masons,  844.
of  Scientific  Freemasons,
844.

of  the  Twenty-Two.  See
German  Union  of  Two
and  Tiventy,  845.

United  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land,  845.

States  of  America,  845.
Supreme  Council,  846.
Unity  of  God,  846.

Universality  of  Masonry,  846.
Universal  Language.  See  Lan¬
guage,  Universal,  846.
Harmony,  Order  of.  See
Mesmeric  Masonry,  846.
Universi  Terrarum,  etc.,  846.
Unknown  Philosopher,  846.

Superiors,  846.

Untempered  Mortar,  847.
Unutterable  Name,  847.
Unworthy  Members,  847.

Upper  Chambers,  847.

Upright  Posture,  848.

Uriel,  848.

Urim  and  Thummim,  848.
Uriot,  Joseph,  849.


Urn,  849.

Uruguay,  850.

Utah,  850.

T7ACANCIES  in  Office,  850.

V  Vale  or  Valley,  850.

Valley,  851.

Vassal,  Pierre  Gerard,  851.
Vault  of  Steel,  851.

Secret,  851.

Vedas,  853.

Vehm-gericht.  See  Westpha¬
lia,  Secret  Tribunal  of,  853.
Veils,  Grand  Masters  of  the,
853.

Symbolism  of  the,  854.
Venerable,  855.

Grand  Master  of  all  Sym¬
bolic  Lodges,  855.

Perfect,  855.

Venezuela,  855.

Vengeance,  855.

Verger,  856.

Vermont,  856.

Vernhes,  J.  F.,  856.

Vertot,  d’Aubceuf,  Rene-Aubert
de,  856.

Vesica  Piscis,  857.

Vexillum  Belli,  857.

Viany,  Auguste  de,  857.
Vielle-Bru,  Rite  of,  857.

Villars,  Abbe  Montfaujon  de,
857.

Vincere  aut  Mori,  857.

Vinton,  David,  857.

Violet,  858.

Virginia,  858.

Virgin,  Weeping.  See  Weeping
Virgin,  859.

Visible  Masonry,  859.
Visitation,  Grand,  859.

Visiting  Brethren,  860.

Visit,  Right  of,  860.

Vivat,  860.

Vogel,  Paul  Joachim  Sigis-
mund,  860.

Voigt,  Friederich,  861.

Voting,  861.

Right  of,  861.

Vouching,  861.

Voyages,  862.

W.'.,  863.

Waechter,  Eberhard,  Bar¬
on  von,  863.

Wages  of  a  Master  Mason,  Sym¬
bolic.  See  Foreign  Coun¬
tries,  863.

of  Operative  Masons,  863.
of  the  Workmen  at  the
Temple,  864.

Wales,  865.

Wands,  865.

Wardens,  865.

Grand.  See  Grand  TFar-
dens,  866.

Warder,  866.

Warlike  Instrument,  867.

War,  Masonry  in,  867.

Warrant  of  Constitution,  868.
Washing  Hands.  See  Lustra¬
tion,  869.

Washington,  Congress  of,  869.
George,  869.


Washington  Territory,  872.
Watchwords,  872.'

Water-fall,  872.

Wayfaring  Man,  872.

Wear)'  Sojourners,  872.

Webb- Preston  Work,  872.

Thomas  Smith,  872.
Wedekind,  Georg  Christian
Gottlieb,  Baron  von,  874.
Weeping  Virgin,  874.
Weishaupt,  Adam,  874.
Welcome,  875.

Well  Formed,  True,  and  Trusty,
876.

Wesley,  Samuel,  876.

West,  876.

Westphalia,  Secret  Tribunals
of,  876.

West  Virginia,  879.

White,  879.

Ball,  881.

Cross  Knights,  881.

Mantle,  Order  of  the,  881.
Masonry,  881.

Stone,  881.

William  Henry,  881.
Widow’s  Son,  881.

Wife  and  Daughter,  Mason’s.
See  Mason’s  Wife  and  Daugh¬
ter,  882.

Wilhelmsbad,  Congress  of,  882.
Will,  882.

Wilson  Manuscript,  882.
Winding  Stairs,  882.

Legend  of  the,  882.

Wind,  Mason’s,  886.

Window,  886.

Wine,  886.

Wings  of  the  Cherubim,  Ex¬
tended,  886.

Wisconsin,  886.

Wisdom,  887.

Withdrawal  of  Petition,  887.
Witnesses.  See  Trials,  887.
Woellner,  Johann  Christoph
von,  887.

Wolf,  888.

Wolfenbiittel,  Congress  of,  888.
Woman,  888.

Wood  -  cutters,  Order  of.  See
Fendeurs,  888.

Woog,  Carl  Christian,  888.
Word,  889.

Lost.  See  Lost  Word,  889.
Mason,  889.

Sacred,  890.

Significant.  See  Significant
Word,  890.

True,  890.

Work.  See  Labor,  890.
Working-Tools,  890.

Work,  Master  of  the,  890.
Workmen  at  the  Temple,  890.
Workshop,  892.

World,  892.

Worldlv  Possessions,  892.

Wealth,  893.

Worship,  893.

Worshipful,  893.

Lodge.  See  Worshipful,
893.

Master.  See  Worshipful ,
893.

Most,  893.


INDEX,


935


Worshipful, Right,  893.

Very,  893.

Wren,  Sir  Christopher,  893.
Wrestle,  894.

Writing,  895.

Wykeham,  William  of,  895.
Wysacre,  896.

XAINTRAILLES,  Madame
de,  896.

Xavier,  Mier  e  Campello,  Fran¬
cisco,  897.

Xerophagists,  897.

Xerxes,  897.

Xinxe,  897.

Y  897.

j  Yates,  Giles  Fonda,  897.
Yaveron  Hamaim,  899.

Year,  Hebrew,  899.
of  Light,  899.


Year  of  Masonry,  900.
of  the  Deposite,  900.
of  the  Discovery,  900.
of  the  Order,  900.
of  the  World,  900.
Yeas  and  Nays,  900.
Yeldis,  900.

Yellow,  900.

Jacket,  900.

Yevele,  Henry,  901.
Yggrasil,  901.

Y-ha-ho,  901.

Yod,  901.

Yoni,  901.

York  Constitutions,  901.
Legend,  902.
Manuscripts,  905.
Rite,  906.

ZABUD,  907.

Zabulon,  907.


Zadok,  907.

Zarathustra,  907.

Zarthan,  907.

Zeal,  907.

Zedekiah,  907.

Zelator,  907.

Zendavesta,  908.

Zenith,  908.

Zennaar,  908.

Zerbal,  909.

Zeredatha,  909.

Zerubbabel,  909.

Zinnendorf,  Johann  Wilhelm
von,  911.

Rite  of,  912.

Zion,  912.

Zizon,  912.

Zodiac,  Masonic,  912.

Zoroaster,  912.

Zurthost,  914.


'  .


■


-


'


ADDENDUM


TO

ORIGINAL  WORK,


CONTAINING  NUMEROUS  OMITTED  SUBJECTS  AND  THE
RESULTS  OF  LATER  RESEARCH  AND  DISCOVERY
TO  THE  PRESENT  TIME.

BY

C.  T.  McCLENACHAN.


5  a


937


PREFACE  TO  ADDENDUM.


IT  would  be  superfluous  to  enlarge  u*pon  the  original  very  excellent  Preface  by
Dr.  Albert  G.  Mackey,  in  which  he  sets  forth  most  lucidly  liis  objects  and
the  fulness  of  his  purpose  in  compiling  the  “  Encyclopaedia  of  Freemasonry  and
its  Kindred  Sciences,”  were  it  not  that  advancing  time  and  continued  investigation
have  disclosed  additional  information  in  return  for  the  deep  and  persistent
researches  of  eminent  and  indefatigable  seekers  after  more  light  in  Masonry,
— otherwise  an  Addendum  to  his  valuable  work  would'be  entirely  gratuitous.

As  the  young  student  or  older  devotee  looks  for,  and  is  entitled  to  receive,  the
latest  Masonic  information  and  deductions  derived  from  research  in  a  work  of
this  class,  I  have  with  diffidence  undertaken  to  carry  on  the  work  of  the  Doctor
from  the  standpoint  where  he  ceased  his  labors  ten  years  ago ;  not  by  withdraw¬
ing  a  word  from,  or  interpolating,  the  original,  but  by  means  of  a  voluminous
Addendum  replacing  the  few  pages  of  Supplement  that  concluded  the  original
work,  and  which  consisted  of  material  incidentally  omitted  in  its  relative  position.
This  addition,  therefore,  is  a  more  complete  compilation  of  subsequent  discoveries
and  opinions.

I  have  been  induced  to  undertake  this  pleasing  task  because  such  action  is
fraternally  invited  toward  the  close  of  the  Doctor’s  Preface,  and  who  also  says,  “  I
do  not  present  this  work  as  perfect,  for  I  well  know  that  the  culminating  point
of  perfection  can  never  be  attained  by  human  effort.  But  under  many  adverse
circumstances,  I  have  sought  to  make  it  as  perfect  as  I  could.  Encyclopaedias  are,
for  the  most  part,  the  result  of  the  conjoined  labor  of  many  writers.”  Neither
do  I  assume  perfection  in  the  Addendum,  but  hope  to  advance  an  additional
step  toward  completion.

Who  more  appropriately  should  carry  out  this  invitation  and  effort  of  the
esteemed  Doctor  than  one  who  knew  him  intimately  and  revered  him  for  nearly
a  generation,  and  who  it  is  not  improbable  would  have  been  selected  by  him,  had
the  choice  been  given  the  original  author  and  compiler  to  continue  a  work  which
is  “the  result  of  the  conjoined  labor  of  many  writers.”

This  Addendum,  therefore,  is  offered  as  a  loving  tribute  to  an  esteemed  author,
who  had  no  peer  in  his  successful  endeavors  to  add  so  materially  to  the  general
information  of  the  Craft.

C.  T.  McClenaciian.


New  York,  January  1,  1891.


939


ALBERT  GALLATIN  MACKEY.


“  Great  Giver,  grant  me  Thy  last  gift  and  best ,
The  gift  of  rest.”


“IV  "yO  more  active  life,  in  the  cause  of  the  welfare  of  his  fellow-man,  can  be  referred
1  \|  to  with  greater  pride  than  that  of  Albert  Gallatin  Mackey,  who  was
born  at  Charleston,  South  Carolina,  on  the  12th  of  March,  1807.  Having  passed  four
years  beyond  the  threescore  and  ten,  ever  studying  the  best  interests  of  humanity,
the  period  for  rest  became  welcome, — and  thus,  at  “Old  Point  Comfort,”  on  the  20th
of  June,  1881,  the  eminent  scholar  and  Mason  yielded  to  the  inevitable  in  nature.

He  was  the  youngest  son  of  Dr.  John  Mackey,  also  a  native  of  South  Carolina,
born  in  Lancaster  district,  and  a  lineal  descendant  of  the  celebrated  Highland  chieftain,
Rob  Roy  Macgregor.  At  an  early  age,  Albert  the  son  became  dependent  upon  his
own  energy.  After  receiving  an  excellent  English  education  and  an  elementary  course
in  the  classical  languages, — which  he  subsequently  and  assiduously  privately  pursued,
— he  became  a  tutor,  receiving,  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  the  appointment  of  teacher  of
the  public  school  on  John’s  Island,  in  the  neighborhood  of  Charleston.  While  thus  em¬
ployed,  he  devoted  himself  so  sedulously  to  the  study  of  medicine  that  he  was  admitted
to  the  South  Carolina  medical  college  at  Charleston,  and  was  graduated  March,  1832,
receiving  his  diploma  as  a  doctor  of  medicine.  His  thesis  in  Latin  obtained  the  first


941


942


MEMOIR  OF  ALBERT  GALLATIN  MACKEY.


prize — an  equivalent  to  the  first  honor  in  other  colleges.  For  some  years  he  prac¬
tised  his  profession  in  the  vicinity  of  Charleston,  which  city,  in  1836,  was  visited  by  the
Asiatic  cholera.  Dr.  Mackey,  residing  about  fifty  miles  from  the  city,  hastened  to  the
scene  of  the  plague,  taking  charge  of  a  plantation  on  one  of  the  neighboring  islands
where  the  cholera  was  raging  among  the  negroes.  Without  assistance,  for  several
weeks  he  skilfully  treated  the  disease,  and  finally  checked  its  progress.  He  then
returned  to  the  city,  which  became  his  permanent  residence,  and  where,  December  28,
1836,  he  married  Miss  Sarah  Pamela  Hubbell.  In  1838  he  was  elected  demonstrator  of
anatomy  in  the  South  Carolina  medical  college — the  college  in  which  he  was  graduated
six  years  before — and  was  also  appointed  physician  of  the  city  almshouse.

Although  Dr.  Mackey  was  devoted  to  his  profession,  his  strong  literary  taste,  and
especially  his  fondness  for  linguistic  and  archseological  pursuits,  led  him,  about  1842,
to  relinquish  the  practice  of  medicine  and  to  devote  himself  entirely  to  literature.
Subsequently  he  was  connected  with  many  literary  and  political  journals,  such  as  the
Southern  Quarterly  Review,  Literary  Bulletin,  Southern  Patriot,  Charleston  Evening  News,
Total  Abstinence  Banner,  Charleston  Sun,  and  Morning  Transcript,  of  some  of  which  he
was  the  principal  and  of  others  the  associate  editor.  He  also  contributed  largely  to
literary  magazines,  and  his  fugitive  pieces  are  scattered  over  the  pages  of  Southern
periodical  literature.  As  a  lecturer  on  literary  subjects,  Dr.  Mackey  was  eminently
successful  whenever  he  entered  the  lyceuin,  and  his  lectures  on  the  “Temperaments,”
“The  Middle  Ages,”  “The  True  Condition  of  Woman,”  “The  Poetry  of  Talismans,”
and  on  other  subjects,  were  received  with  much  favor  wherever  delivered.

It  is  in  Masonry,  however,  that  Dr.  Mackey  attained  his  greatest  celebrity,  for  to
that  and  its  kindred  sciences  he  devoted  the  best  years  of  his  life.  He  was  initiated,
passed,  and  raised  to  the  sublime  degree  of  Master  Mason  in  1841,  in  St.  Andrew’s
Lodge,  No.  10,  at  Charleston,  S.  C. ;  immediately  afterwards  he  affiliated  with  Solomon’s
Lodge,  No.  1,  of  the  same  city,  and  in  December,  1842,  was  elected  Master  thereof.
In  the  following  year,  December,  1843,  he  was  elected  Grand  Secretary,  and  in  March,
1845,  Grand  Lecturer  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina.  In  both  offices  he  was
continued  uninterruptedly  until  1866,  combining  with  the  duties  of  the  Secretariat
that  of  preparing  the  Reports  on  Foreign  Correspondence.  In  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Royal  Arch  Masons  of  South  Carolina,  Dr.  Mackey  was  elected  Grand  Lecturer  in
1845,  Deputy  Grand  High  Priest  in  1847,  and  in  each  successive  year,  until  1854,
when  he  was  made  Grand  High  Priest,  in  which  position  he  served,  by  continuous
re-elections,  until  1867.  Upon  the  organization,  in  1860,  in  South  Carolina  of  a  Grand
Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters,  he  was  elected  Grand  Master.  During  the  period
he  filled  these  important  positions  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  Grand  Chapter,  and  Grand
Council  of  South  Carolina,  he  exercised  a  potential  and  beneficial  influence  over  the
Masonry  of  that  State,  which  grew  under  his  fostering  care  from  a  condition  of  weakness
to  one  of  great  prosperity.  His  Annual  Reports  on  Foreign  Correspondence,  and  his
instructive  lectures  and  addresses,  gave  him  a  reputation  which  was  shared  by  the  Bodies
he  represented.  In  1859,  the  Royal  Arch  Masons  of  the  United  States,  at  their  triennial
convocation  in  Chicago,  elected  him  to  the  highest  position  within  their  gift,  that  of


MEMOIR  OF  ALBERT  GALLATIN  MACKEY.


943


General  Grand  High  Priest — an  office  which  he  held  for  six  years.  At  an  early  period
Dr.  Mackey  took  an  interest  in  Scottish  Rite  Masonry,  the  abstruse  philosophy  of
which  he  found  congenial.  In  1844,  he  received  the  Thirty-third  or  ultimate  degree  of
that  rite,  became  a  member  of  the  Supreme  Council  for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction
of  the  United  States,  and  was  immediately  elected  its  Secretary-General,  which  he  con¬
tinuously  occupied  until  his  death.  For  many  years  he  was  the  oldest  member  of  the
Rite  in  the  United  States,  in  virtue  of  which  he  held  the  position  of  Dean  of  the
Council,  and,  as  a  mark  of  respect  and  esteem,  that  Supreme  Body,  by  special  enact¬
ment,  made  the  office  of  Secretary-General,  which  is  usually  the  sixth  in  rank,  the
third  office  during  his  life.

As  a  contributor  to  the  literature  and  science  of  Freemasonry,  Dr.  Mackey’s  labors
have  been  more  extensive  than  those  of  any  other  in  this  country  or  in  Europe.  Rob
Morris,  than  whom  no  one  has  had  better  opportunities  of  judging,  said  in  1856,  in  his
Reminiscences,  that  “  the  character  of  Dr.  Mackey  as  a  profound  and  lucid  historian  and
writer  in  all  departments  of  Masonry  is,  we  conceive,  unequalled  by  any  living  writer,
unless  it  be  the  venerable  Dr.  Oliver  of  England.”

In  1845,  Dr.  Mackey  published  his  first  Masonic  work,  entitled  A  Lexicon  of  Free¬
masonry,  which  he  from  time  to  time  revised,  corrected,  and  enlarged,  until  it  finally
contained  twice  as  much  matter  as  the  first  edition.  Of  this  book  about  eighteen
editions  have  been  published  in  this  country,  and  four  in  England.  In  1851  he  pub¬
lished  his  second  work,  entitled  The  Mystic  Tie.  Then  followed  The  Ahiman  Rezon  of
South  Carolina,  in  1852 ;  Principles  of  Masonic  Law,  in  1856 ;  Book  of  the  Chapter,  in
1858 ;  Text-Book  of  Masonic  Jurisprudence,  in  1859 ;  History  of  Freemasonry  in  South
Carolina,  in  1861 ;  Manual  of  the  Lodge,  in  1862 ;  Cryptic  Masonry,  in  1867  ;  Symbolism
of  Freemasonry  and  Masonic  Ritual,  in  1869;  Encyclopaedia  of  Freemasonry,  in  1874;  and
Masonic  Parliamentary  Law,  in  1875.

Dr.  Mackey  also  contributed  largely  to  the  Masonic  periodical  press  of  the  country.
In  1849  he  established  and  edited  the  Southern  and  Western  Masonic  Miscellany,  which
he  discontinued  after  the  close  of  the  fifth  year.  In  1857  he  undertook  the  publication
of  n  Masonic  review,  the  first  number  of  which  made  its  appearance  in  July,  under
the  title  of  The  American  Quarterly  Review  of  Freemasonry ;  but,  after  an  existence  of
two  years,  the  publication  was  discontinued,  it  being  evident,  as  asserted  in  the  valedic¬
tory,  that  a  Masonic  magazine  of  so  high  a  standard  was  in  advance  of  the  Masonic  age.

Upon  the  suspension  of  the  Quarterly  Review  of  Freemasonry,  Dr.  Mackey  was  invited
to  assume  editorial  charge  of  a  department  of  the  American  Freemason,  which  he  accepted
in  July,  1859 ;  but  his  connection  with  that  magazine  continued  for  a  year  only

In  1865  he  was  solicited  to  take  charge  of  a  department  in  the  Masonic  Trowel,  to
which  he  consented,  his  first  article  appearing  in  the  September  number  of  1865,  and
for  the  successive  numbers  he  continued  to  write  for  nearly  three  years.

In  October,  1871,  Dr.  Mackey  again  began  the  publication  of  a  Masonic  magazine  of
his  own,  Mackey's  National  Freemason.  Although  a  periodical  of  great  merit,  it,  like
his  Quarterly  Review,  was  too  profound  in  its  disquisitions  to  suit  the  general  reader,
and  consequently  after  three  years  it  was  discontinued.  Immediately  thereafter,  Dr.


944


MEMOIR  OP  ALBERT  GALLATIN  MACKEY.


Mackey’s  services  were  secured  for  the  Voice  of  Masonry,  of  which  he  became  one  of  the
editors  in  January,  1875,  and  for  over  four  years  was  a  constant  contributor  to  the
columns  of  that  periodical.

Dr.  Mackey  was  ever  too  much  of  a  litterateur  to  become  a  politician  by  profession,
yet  the  force  of  circumstances  for  a  time  drew  him  within  its  lines.  During  the  late
War  of  the  Rebellion,  in  opposition  to  the  dominant  sentiment  of  the  people  of  his  own
State  (South  Carolina)  and  the  opinions  of  his  most  influential  and  nearest  friends,  he
maintained  an  undisguised  allegiance  to  the  Federal  Union,  and  continued  through  the
whole  contest  zealously  loyal  to  the  National  government.  He  embraced  every  oppor¬
tunity  to  afford  relief  to  the  Federal  prisoners  whom  the  fortunes  of  war  brought  within
his  reach,  and  many  still  remember  with  gratitude  the  services  he  then  rendered  them.
In  recognition  of  his  well-known  devotion  to  the  cause  of  the  Union,  he  was  appointed,
in  July,  1865,  by  the  President  of  the  United  States,  Collector  of  Customs  at  the  port
of  Charleston.  In  1868,  in  accordance  with  the  reconstruction  acts  of  Congress,  a  con¬
vention  of  the  people  of  South  Carolina  was  called  to  form  a  constitution.  To  this
convention  he  was  chosen  a  delegate  from  the  county  of  Charleston,  and  upon  its
organization  was  unanimously  elected  president.  At  the  first  session  of  the  Legislature,
held  in  pursuance  of  the  new  constitution,  he  was  within  one  vote  of  being  elected  to
the  Senate  of  the  United  States.  He  subsequently  withdrew  from  politics,  and  at  the
invitation  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  Scottish  Rite  Masons  for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction
of  the  United  States,  removed,  in  1870,  to  the  city  of  Washington,  D.  C.,  where  he
continued  to  reside  until,  advised  by  his  physician,  he  went  to  Old  Point  Comfort,
Virginia,  and  there  died  in  June,  1881.

In  the  eulogy  over  Dr.  Mackey,  delivered  by  Past  Grand  Master  Henry  Buist,  of
Georgia,  before  the  Supreme  Council  for  the  Southern  Jurisdiction,  he  said  of  the
Doctor :

“He  was  a  fearless  and  gifted  speaker;  his  language  was  courteous  and  manner
dignified;  and  occasionally,  in  his  earnestness  to  maintain  what  he  conceived  to  be
the  right,  he  became  animated  and  eloquent.  Positive  in  his  convictions,  he  was  bold
in  their  advocacy.  His  course  of  action  once  determined  on,  supported  by  an  approv¬
ing  conscience,  no  fear  or  disfavor  or  discomfiture  could  swerve  him  from  his  fixed
purpose.

“Whatever  was  the  emergency,  he  was  always  equal  to  it.

“  Where  others  doubted,  he  was  confident;  where  others  faltered,  he  was  immovable;
where  others  queried,  he  affirmed.

“  He  was  faithful  to  every  public  and  Masonic  duty.  Treachery  found  no  place  in
his  character.  He  never  betrayed  a  trust.

“  He  was  eminently  sincere  and  loyal  to  his  friends,  and  those  who  were  most  inti¬
mately  associated  with  him  learned  to  appreciate  him  the  most.

“  He  was  generous  and  frank  in  his  impulses,  and  cherished  malice  toward  none,
and  charity  for  all.

“His  monument  is  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  knew  him  longest  and  best.

“  He  is  no  longer  of  this  earth.  His  work  among  men  is  ended ;  his  earthly  record
is  complete.”  C.  T.  Mc€.


ADDENDUM.


A  Ao  ADAM


A.  (tf.Jlep A.)  Iu  the  Accadian,  Greek,
Etruscan,  Pelasgian,  Gallic,  Samaritan,
and  Egyptian  or  Coptic,  of  nearly  the  same
formation  as  the  English  letter.  It  origi¬
nally  meant  with  or  together,  but  at  pres¬
ent  signifies  one.  In  most  languages  it  is
the  initial  letter  of  the  alphabet;  not  so,
however,  in  the  Ethiopian,  where  it  is  the
thirteenth.  The  sacred  Aleph  has  the  nu¬
merical  value  of  one,  and  is  composed  of
two  Yods,  one  on  either  side  of  an  inclined
Vau.  It  is  said  to  typify  the  Trinity  in
Unity.  The  Canaanite  signification  is  Bull,
symbol  of  generation.  The  Divine  name
in  Hebrew  connected  with  this  letter  is

rrrrN,  ahih.

Aaron's  Band.  A  degree  instituted
in  1824,  in  New  York  city,  mainly  for  social
purposes,  and  conferred  in  an  independent
body.  Its  ceremonies  were  not  dissimilar
to  those  of  High  Priesthood,  which  caused
the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  State
to  take  umbrage,  and  the  small  gathering
dispersed.

Abaciscus.  The  diminutive  of  Aba¬
cus,  and,  in  architecture,  refers  to  the
squares  of  the  tessellated  pavement  or
checkered  flooring  of  the  ground  floor  of
the  Solomon ian  Temple.

Abazar.  The  title  given  to  the  Mas¬
ter  of  Ceremonies  in  the  Sixth  Degree  of
the  Modern  French  Rite.

Abclial.  The  father  of  Hiram,  the
King  of  Tyre.

Abdici.  (Heb.,  Servant  of  God.)  The
name  of  an  angel  mentioned  by  the  Jewish
Kabbalists.  lie  is  represented  in  Milton’s
Paradise  Lost,  Book  V.,  as  one  of  the  ser¬
aphim,  who,  when  Satan  tried  to  stir  up  a
revolt  among  the  angels  subordinate  to  his
authority,  alone  and  boldly  withstood  his
traitorous  designs :

Among  the  faithless,  faithful  only  he  ;
Among  innumerable  false,  unmoved,
Unshaken,  unseduced,  unterrified,

His  loyalty  he  kept,  his  love,  his  zeal.

The  name  Abdiel  became  the  synonym  of
honor  and  faithfulness.

5  T


Abdilorinm.  A  secret  place  for  the
deposit  of  records — a  Tabularium.

Aberoorn,  Earl  of.  James  Hamil¬
ton,  Lord  Paisley,  named  Grand  Master  of
England  by  the  retiring  G.  Master,  the
Duke  of  Richmond,  in  1725.  He  was  at
that  time  the  Master  of  a  Lodge,  and  as¬
sisted  in  instituting  the  existing  Lodge  of
Benevolence.

Abib.  The  original  name  of  the  He¬
brew  month  Nisan,  nearly  corresponding
to  the  month  of  March,  the
first  of  the  ecclesiastical
year.  Abib  is  frequently
mentioned  in  the  Sacred
Scriptures,  and  signifies
green  ears  of  corn  or  fresh
fruits.

Abibala.  The  first
Assassin  in  the  Elu  of  the
Modern  French  Rite.  De¬
rived  from  the  Hebrew
words  Abi  and  balah,  father
of  destruction.

Acacia.  Acacia  vera,
or  Nilotica,  in  Africa,  called
babul  tree  in  India,  and  its
gum  babul,  which  is  similar  to  gum-arabic.
The  bark  of  Acacia  Arabica  is  a  powerful
tonic  in  India.

Academic  des  Illumines  d’Av-
ignon.  A  Hermetic  system  of  philoso¬
phy,  created  in  1785.

Adam.  The  Entered  Apprentice  de¬
gree  symbolizes  the  creation  of  man  and
his  first  perception  of  light.  In  the  Elo-
hist  form  of  the  Creation  we  read,  “  Elohim
said,  ‘  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  ac¬
cording  to  our  likeness,  and  let  him  have
dominion  over  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  over
the  fowls  of  the  air,  over  the  cattle,  and
over  all  the  earth,  and  over  every  reptile
that  creeps  upon  the  earth  1  ’  And  Elohim
created  man  in  his  image;  in  the  image  of
Elohim  he  created  him;  male  and  female
he  created  them.  .  .  .  And  Yahveh  Elohim
formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and
breathed  in  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,
and  man  was  made  a  living  being.’’  With-

945


60


946


ADAM


ADDENDUM.


ADAM


out  giving  more  than  a  passing  reference  to
the  speculative  origin  and  production  of  man
and  to  hisspontaneous generation — Principe
Generateur — as  set  forth  by  the  Egyptians,
when  we  are  told  that  “  the  fertilizing  mud
left  by  the  Nile,  and  exposed  to  the  vivify¬
ing  action  of  heat  induced  by  the  sun’s
rays,  brought  forth  germs  which  spring  up
as  the  bodies  of  men,”  accepted  cosmogo¬
nies  only  will  be  hereinafter  mentioned ;  thus
in  that  of  Peru,  the  first  man,  created  by  the
Divine  Omnipotence,  is  called  A/pa  Cam-
asca,  “Animated  earth.”  The  Mandans,  one
of  the  N orth  American  tribes,  relate  that  the
Great  Spirit  moulded  two  figures  of  clay,
which  lie  dried  and  animated  with  the
breath  of  his  mouth,  one  receiving  the
name  of  First  Man,  and  the  other  that  of
Companion.  Taeroa,  the  god  of  Tahiti,
formed  man  of  the  red  earth,  say  the  in¬
habitants  ;  and  so  we  might  continue.  But
as  Francois  Lenormant  remarks  in  the  Be¬
ginnings  of  History,  let  us  confine  ourselves
to  the  cosmogony  offered  by  the  sacred
traditions  of  the  great  civilized  nations  of
antiquity.  “  The  Chaldeans  call  Adam  the
man  whom  the  earth  produced.  And  he
lay  without  movement,  without  life,  and
without  breath,  just  like  an  image  of  the
heavenly  Adam,  until  his  soul  had  been
given  him  by  the  latter.”  The  cosmogonic  j
account  peculiar  to  Babylon,  as  given  by
Berossus,  says:  “Belos,  seeing  that  the
earth  was  uninhabited,  though  fertile,  cut
off  his  own  head,  and  the  other  gods,  after
kneading  with  earth  the  blood  that  flowed
from  it,  formed  men,  who  therefore  are  en¬
dowed  with  intelligence,  and  share  in  the
divine  thought,”  etc.  The  term  employed
to  designate  “  man,”  in  his  connection  with
his  Creator,  is  admu,  the  Assyrian  counter¬
part  of  the  Hebrew  Adam.  (G.  Smith,  |
Chaldean  Account  of  Genesis.)  Lenormant  j
further  says,  that  the  fragments  of  Berossus
give  Adoros  as  the  name  of  the  first  patri¬
arch,  and  Adiuru  has  been  discovered  on
the  cuneiform  inscriptions.

Zoroaster  makes  the  creation  of  man  the
voluntary  act  of  a  personal  god,  distinct
from  primordial  matter,  and  his  theory
stands  alone  among  the  learned  religions  of  ,
the  ancient  world.

According  to  Jewish  tradition  in  the
Targumim  and  the  Talmud,  as  also  to  Moses
Maimonides,  Adam  was  created  man  and
woman  at  the  same  time,  having  two  faces,
turned  in  two  opposite  directions,  and  that
during  a  stupor  the  Creator  separated  Hav-
vah,  his  feminine  half,  from  him,  in  order
to  make  of  her  a  distinct  person.  Thus
were  separated  the  primordial  androgyn.

With  Shemites  and  Mohammedans  Adam
was  symbolized  in  the  Lingam,  whilst  with
the  Jews  Seth  was  their  Adam  or  Lingam,  j


and  successively  Noah  took  the  place  of
Seth,  and  so  followed  Abraham  and  Moses.
The  worship  of  Adam  as  the  God-like  idea,
succeeded  by  Seth,  Noah,  Abraham,  and
Moses,  through  the  symbolism  of  pillars,
monoliths,  obelisks,  or  Matsebas  (images),
gave  rise  to  other  symbolic  images,  as  where
Noah  was  adored  under  the  emblems  of  a
man,  ark,  and  serpent,  signifying  heat,  fire,
or  passion.

Upon  the  death  of  Adam,  says  tradi¬
tional  history,  the  pious  Gregory  de¬
clared  that  the  “dead  body  should  be  kept
above  ground,  till  a  fulness  of  time  should
come  to  commit  it  to  the  middle  of  the
earth  by  a  priest  of  the  most  high  God.”
This  traditional  prophecy  was  fulfilled,  it
is  said,  by  the  body  of  Adam  having  been
preserved  in  a  chest  until  about  1800  B.  c.,
when  “Melchizedek  buried  the  body  in
Salem  (formerly  the  name  of  Jerusalem),
which  might  very  well  be  the  middie  of  the
habitable  world.”

The  Sethites  used  to  say  their  prayers
daily  in  the  Ark  before  the  body  of  Adam.
J.  G.  R.  Forlong,  in  his  Rivers  of  Life,  tells
us  that  “  It  appears  from  both  the  Sabid
Aben  Batric  and  the  Arabic  Catena,  that
there  existed  the  following  ‘  short  litany,
said  to  have  been  conceived  by  Noah.’
Then  follows  the  prayer  of  Noah,  which
was  used  for  so  long  a  period  by  the  Jew¬
ish  Freemasons  at  the  opening  of  the
Lodge :

“  ‘  0  Lord,  excellent  art  thou  in  thy  truth,
and  there  is  nothing  great  in  comparison
of  thee.  Look  upon  us  with  the  eye  of
mercy  and  compassion.  Deliver  us  from
this  deluge  of  waters,  and  set  our  feet  in  a
large  room.  By  the  sorrows  of  Adam,  the
first  made  man  ;  by  the  blood  of  Abel,  thy
holy  one ;  by  the  righteousness  of  Seth,  in
whom  thou  art  well  pleased;  number  us
not  amongst  those  who  have  transgressed
thy  statutes,  but  take  us  into  thy  merciful
care,  for  thou  art  our  Deliverer,  and  thine
is  the  praise  for  all  the  works  of  thy  hand
for  evermore.  And  the  sons  of  Noah  said,
Amen,  Lord.’  ”

The  Master  of  the  Lodge  would  omit  the
reference  to  the  deluge  and  add  the  follow¬
ing  to  the  prayer:  “  But  grant,  we  beseech
thee,  that  the  ruler  of  this  lodge  may  be
endued  with  knowledge  and  wisdom  to  in¬
struct  us  and  explain  his  secret  mysteries,
as  our  holy  brother  Moses  did  (in  his  lodge)
to  Aaron,  to  Eleazar,  and  to  Ithamar  (the
sons  of  Aaron),  and  the  several  elders  of
Israel.”

Adam  Kadmon.  In  theKabbalistic
doctrine,  the  name  given  to  the  first  ema¬
nation  from  the  Eternal  Fountain.  It
signifies  the  first  man,  or  the  first  produc¬
tion  of  divine  energy,  or  the  son  of  God,


AFFILIATE


ADDENDUM.


ALPHABET


947


and  to  it  the  other  and  inferior  emanations
are  subordinate.

Affiliate,  Free.  The  French  gave
the  name  of  “  free  affiliates”  to  those  mem¬
bers  of  a  lodge  who  are  exempted  from  the
payment  of  dues,  and  neither  hold  office
nor  vote.  Known  among  Americans  as
“honorary  members.”

Africa.  In  the  French  Rite  of  Adop¬
tion,  the  south  of  the  lodge  is  called  Africa.

African  Brotherhood.  The  Pur-
rah  is  a  strong  brotherhood  in  the  country
back  of  the  Sierra  Leone.  The  ceremonies
are  sealed  to  the  uninitiated,  and  are  dis¬
covered  to  be  in  progress  by  the  howls  and
dancing  lights.  Profane  intrusion  would
be  death.  The  object  or  purpose  of  the
brotherhood  is  not  known.  Two  other
associations  exist,  known  as  the  Samo  and
the  Bundo,  but  their  ceremonies  and  defi¬
nite  object  have  not  been  promulgated.

Africa,  South.  A  movement  com¬
menced  in  1881  has  proved  to  be  au  fait
accompli  in  the  constitution  of  a  District
Grand  Lodge,  English  Constitution,  for
Natal,  Free  State,  Griqualand  West,  and
Transvaal  in  South  Africa.  There  are  few
towns  where  Masonry  flourishes  as  health¬
fully  as  it  does  in  Cape  Town.  Masonic
buildings  in  that  section  compare  well
with  some  of  the  handsome  structures  in
other  countries.  The  Grand  Lodge  has  in¬
stituted  a  Masonic  Board  of  Education,
which  is  in  its  fourth  year,  and  out  of
a  treasury  of  $2000  spent  $1000  for  edu¬
cation.

Agatliopades.  A  liberal  ecclesiasti¬
cal  order  founded  in  Brussels  in  the  six¬
teenth  century.  Revived  and  revised  by
Schayes  in  1846.  It  had  for  its  sacred  sign
the  pentastigma  .  I.

Agenda.  The  order  of  business,  or
order  of  the  day.  The  prospective  busi¬
ness  to  be  brought  before  an  association,
and  frequently  used  in  the  higher  degrees
of  Masonry,  thus  the  “  Agenda  Paper.”
Also  a  book  of  precepts.

Allah.  Son  and  successor  of  Omri,
King  of  Israel  from  918  to  897  B.c.  He
married  Jezebel,  through  whose  influence
the  Phoenician  worship  of  Baal  was  intro¬
duced,  the  king  turning  to  idolatry,  and  the
priests  and  prophets  of  Jehovah  being
cruelly  persecuted.  He  was  slain  by  an
arrow  in  the  third  war  against  Syria.

Alaska.  Freemasonry  was  introduced
into  the  Territory  of  Alaska  by  Bro.  James
Biles,  Grand  Master  of  Washington  Terri¬
tory,  who  granted,  on  April  14,  1868,  a  dis-

Eensation  for  the  establishment  of  Alaska
lodge,  at  Sitka.  A  Warrant  of  Constitu¬
tion  was  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Washington,  September  17,  1869.


Allah.  (Assyrian  (Fig.  \).ilu;  Aramaic,
nSx,  elah ;  Hebrew,  ni'fX,  eldah. )  The

(Fig.  L)  (Fig.  2.)  (Fig.  3.)

JJ,

Arabic  name  of  God,  derived  from  (Fig.  2)
ildh,  god,  and  thearticle  (Fig.  3)  al,  expressing
the  God  by  way  of  eminence.  In  the  great
profession  of  the  Unity,  on  which  is  founded
the  religion  of  Islam,  both  terms  are  used,  as,

mm


pronounced  “  La  ilaha  ill’  Allah,”  there
is  no  god  but  God,  the  real  meaning  of  the
expression  being,  “There  is  only  one  God.”
Mohammed  relates  that  in  his  night  journey
from  Mecca  to  Jerusalem,  on  ascending
through  the  seven  heavens,  he  beheld  above
the  throne  of  God  this  formula;  and  the
green  standard  of  the  Prophet  was  adorned
with  the  mystic  sentence.  It  is  the  first
phrase  lisped  by  the  infant,  and  the  devout
Moslem  utters  the  profession  of  the  faith  at
all  times,  in  joy,  in  sorrow,  in  praise,  in
prayer,  in  battle,  and  with  his  departing
breath  the  words  are  wafted  to  heaven ;  for
among  the  peculiar  virtues  of  these  words
is  that  they  may  be  spoken  without  any  mo¬
tion  of  the  lips.  The  mourners  on  their
way  to  the  grave  continue  the  strain  in
melancholy  tones.  Around  the  supreme
name  is  clustered  the  masbaha,  or  rosary,
of  the  ninety-nine  beautiful  names  of  God,
which  are  often  repeated  by  the  Moham¬
medan  in  his  devotions.  (  W.  S.  Paterson.)

Alliance,  Sacred.  An  organization
of  twenty-one  brethren  possessing  the  ulti¬
mate  degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite,  formed
in  New  York,  September  19,  1872,  who  as¬
semble  annually  on  that  day.  One  by  one,
in  the  due  course  of  time,  this  Assembly  is
to  decrease  until  the  sad  duty  will  devolve
on  some  one  to  banquet  alone  with  twenty
draped  chairs  and  covers  occupied  by  the
imaginary  presence  of  his  fellows.  It  was
instituted  to  commemorate  the  breaking  of
a  dead-lock  in  the  close  corporation  of  the
Supreme  Council  by  the  admission  of  four
very  prominent  members  of  the  Fraternity.

Alphabet,  Number  of  Fetters
in.  In  the  Sandwich  Island  alphabet  there
are  1 2  letters ;  the  Burmese,  19;  Italian,  20;
Bengalese,  21 ;  Hebrew,  Syrian,  Chaldee,
Phoenician,  and  Samaritan,  22  each  ;  Greek,
24 ;  Latin,  25 ;  German,  Dutch,  and  English,
26  each  ;  Spanish  and  Sclavonic,  27  each  ;
Persian  and  Coptic,  32  each ;  Georgian,  35 ;
Armenian,  38;  Russian,  41;  Muscovite,


948


AL-SIRAT


ADDENDUM.


APRON


43 ;  Sanskrit  and  Japanese,  50  each  ;  Ethi-
opic  and  Tartarian,  202  each.

Al-Sirat.  (Ar.,  the  path.)  The  very
narrow  bridge  extending  from  this  world  to
the  next  over  the  abyss  of  hell,  which  must
be  passed  by  every  one  who  would  enter
the  Mohammedan  paradise.  Its  width  will
compare  with  a  hair,  the  edge  of  a  sword,  or
the  thread  of  a  famished  spider.  The  virtu¬
ous  cross  swiftly  and  safely,  the  sinful  stum¬
ble  and  fall  to  the  bottomless  pit.  Koran.

Amal-sagglii.  (Great  labor.)  The
name  of  the  5th  step  of  the  mystic  ladder
of  Kadosh,  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Amaranth,  Order  of  the.  Insti¬
tuted  by  Queen  Christina  of  Sweden  in
1653,  and  numbering  31,  composed  of
15  knights,  15  ladies,  and  the  Queen  as
the  Grandmistress.  The  insignia  consisted
of  two  letters  A  interlaced,  one  being  in¬
verted,  within  a  laurel  crown,  and  bearing
the  motto,  Dolce  nella  memoria.  The  an¬
nual  festival  of  this  equestrian  Order  wTas
held  at  the  Epiphany.  A  society  of  a
similar  name,  androgynous  in  its  nature,
was  instituted  in  1883,  under  the  supervision
of  Robert  Macoy,  of  New  York,  to  supple¬
ment  the  Order  of  the  Eastern  Star,  having
a  social  and  charitable  purpose,  the  ritual  of
which,  as  well  as  its  constitutional  govern¬
ment,  has  met  with  much  commendation.

Amenti.  See  Book  of  the  Dead.

Amor  Honores  Just  it  ia.  A  motto
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  used  prior
to  the  union  of  1813,  and  is  to  be  found
graven  on  the  “Masonic  Token”  of  1794,
commemorative  of  the  election  of  the
Prince  of  Wales  as  M.  W.  Grand  Master,
Nov.  24,  1790.

Ainru.  The  name  given  to  the  Phoeni¬
cian  carpenter,  who  is  represented  in  some
legends  as  one  of  the  Assassins.  Fanor  and
Metusael  being  the  other  two.

Amsliaspamls.  The  name  given  in
the  Persian  Avesta  to  the  six  good  genii  or
powerful  angels  whocontinuously  wait  round
the  throne  of  Ormudz,  or  Ormazd.  Also  the
name  of  the  six  summer  months  and  the  six
productive  working  properties  of  nature.

Anakim.  A  small  race  of  giants  in
stature  in  the  south  of  Palestine  who
terrified  the  Hebrew  spies  upon  entering
the  Land  of  Promise  from  Kadesh-Barnea.

Ancient  and  Primitive  Kite.
One  of  the  later  modifications  or  out¬
growths  from  the  Memphis  Rite.  Accord¬
ing  to  the  constitution,  the  order  dates
in  France  from  1838 ;  in  America  from
1856 ;  and  in  England  from  Oct.  8,
1853.  In  1865  the  degrees  of  the  order
were  reduced  in  number  from  95  to  33,
and  the  name  of  the  Sovereign  Sanctuary,
etc.,  changed  to  Supreme  Council,  as  was
alleged  by  Harry  Seymour,  of  New  York,
then  chief  of  the  order,  for  the  more  suc¬


cessful  competition  with  the  Supreme
Council  of  33  degrees  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish
Rite,  from  which  he  had  been  expelled.

Anima  Mundi,  Soul  of  the  World.
A  doctrine  of  the  early  philosophers,  who
conceived  that  an  immaterial  force  resided
in  nature  and  was  the  source  of  all  physical
and  sentient  life,  yet  not  intelligential.

Anno  Egyptiaco.  In  the  Egyptian
year.  The  date  used  by  the  Hermetic
Fraternity,  and  found  by  adding  5044  to
the  Vulgar  Era  prior  to  each  20th  July,
being  the  number  of  years  since  the  con¬
solidation  of  the  Egyptian  monarchy  under
Menes.

Anubis,  or  Anepu.  Egyptian  deity,
son  of  Osiris  and  Nephthys.  The  Greek
Hermes.  Having  the  head  of  a  jackal,
with  pointed  ears  and  snout,  which  the
Greeks  frequently  changed  to  those  of  a
dog.  At  times  represented  as  wearing  a
double  crown.  His  duty  was  to  accompany
the  souls  of  the  deceased  to  Hades  (Amen-
thes),  and  assist  Horus  in  weighing  their
actions  under  the  inspection  of  Osiris.

Apex,  Kite  of.  See  Sat  B’hai,
Order  of.

Apis.  The  sacred  bull,  held  in  high
reverence  by  the  Egyptians  as  possessing
divine  powers,  specially  the  gift  of  prophecy.
As  it  was  deemed  essential  the  animal
should  be  peculiarly  marked  by  nature,
much  difficulty  was  experienced  in  pro¬
curing  it.  The  bull  was  required  to  be
black,  with  a  white  triangle  on  its  fore¬
head,  a  white  crescent  on  its  side,  and  a
knotted  growth,  like  a  scarabseus,  under
the  tongue.  Such  an  animal  being  found,
it  was  fed  for  four  months  in  a  building
facing  the  East.  At  new  moon  it  was
embarked  on  a  special  vessel,  prepared
with  exquisite  care,  and  with  solemn  cere¬
mony  cohveyed  to  Heliopolis,  where  for
forty  days  it  was  fed  by  priests  and  women.
In  its  sanctified  condition  it  was  taken  to
Memphis  and  housed  in  a  temple  with  two
chapels  and  a  court  wherein  to  exercise.
The  omen  was  good  or  evil  in  accordance
with  which  chapel  it  entered  from  the
court.  At  the  age  of  25  years  it  was  led  to
its  death,  amid  great  mourning  and  lamen¬
tations.  The  bull  or  apis  was  an  important
religious  factor  in  the  Isian  worship,  and
was  continued  as  a  creature  of  reverence
during  the  Roman  domination  of  Egypt.

Apron,  Washington's.  On  the
next  page  is  a  faithful  representation  of
the  emblems,  wrought  in  needle-work  upon
white  satin  by  Madame  Lafayette,  for  a
Masonic  apron,  which  the  Marquis  con¬
veyed  from  Paris  to  General  Washington
at  Mount  Vernon.  It  was  a  cherished
memorial,  which  after  Washington’s  death
was  formally  presented  to  the  “  Washing¬
ton  Benevolent  Society,”  at  Philadelphia.


ARABICI  addendum.  ARKANSAS  949


Arafoici.  An  Arabian  sect  of  the
second  century,  who  believed  that  the  soul
died  with  the  body,  to  be  again  revived
with  it  at  the  general  resurrection.

Aranyaka.  An  appendage  to  the
Veda  of  the  Indians  supplementary  to
the  Brahmanas,  but  giving  more  promi¬
nence  to  the  mystical  sense  of  the  rites  of
worship.

Arbroath,  Abbey  of,  England.
Erected  during  the  12th  century.  Rev.
Charles  Cordinet,  in  his  description  of  the
ruins  of  North  Britain,  has  given  an  ac¬
count  of  a  seal  of  the  abbey  Arbroath
marked  “  Initiation.”  The  seal  was  ancient
before  the  abbey  had  an  existence,  and  con¬
tains  a  perfectly  distinct  characteristic  of
the  Scottish  Rite.

Arcade  de  la  Pelleterie.  The

name  of  derision  given  to  the  Orient  of
Clermont  in  France,  that  is  to  say,  to  the
Old  Grand  Lodge,  before  the  union  in
1799.

Arolueology.  Masonic.  As  well

expressed  in  The  ( London )  Freemason,  “  We
are  just  at  the  portals  of  Masonic  history,”
despite  all  that  has  been  done  and  written
of  late  years,  not  only  are  we  still  on  the
“  threshold  of  inquiry,”  but  we  may  have
to  modify  many  of  our  views,  and  not  a
few  of  our  conclusions.  The  Guild  the¬
ory  is  still  warmly  supported  in  England.
Primceval  religion,  especially  the  “  Pyra-
midical  School,”  and  the  connection  of
Masonry  with  the  “Ancient  Mysteries,”
are  all  again  being  carefully  worked  over.
Hermetieism  is  not  discarded,  and,  as  our
numerous  careful  students  press  onward,
we  may  all  be  compelled  to  modify  es¬
sentially  many  dogmatic  declarations  and
countless  hasty  assumptions.  In  all  this,
Brother  Robert  Freke  Gould,  of  London,
is  revealing  wonders  by  the  publication  of


his  quarto  work  on  “  The  History  of  Free¬
masonry,”  the  fourth  volume  of  the  six  be¬
ing  at  present  in  the  hands  of  the  publish¬
ers.  This  is  the  Masonic  work  of  the  age.

Arcliimagus.  The  chief  officer  of
the  Mithraic  Mysteries  in  Persia.  He  was
the  representative  of  Ormudz,  or  Ormazd,
the  type  of  the  good,  the  true,  and  the  beau¬
tiful*  who  overcame  Ahriman,  the  spirit  of
evil,  of  the  base,  and  of  darkness.

Architect.  Engineer  and.  An
officer  in  the  French  Rite,  whose  duty  it
is  to  take  charge  of  the  furniture  of  the
Lodge.  In  the  Scottish  Rite,  such  officer
in  the  Consistory  has  charge  of  the  general
arrangement  of  all  preparatory  matters  for
the  working  or  ceremonial  of  the  degrees.

Argonauts,  Order  of.  A  German
androgynous  Masonic  society  founded  in
1775,  by  brethren  of  the  Rite  of  Strict
Observance.  Much  of  the  myth  of  the
Argonauts  was  introduced  into  the  forms
and  ceremonies,  and  many  of  the  symbols
taken  from  this  source,  such  as  meeting  upon
the  deck  of  a  vessel,  the  chief  officer  being
called  Grand  Admiral,  and  the  nomencla¬
ture  of  parts  of  the  vessel  being  used.
The  motto  was  Ed  Lebe  die  Freude,  or  Joy
forever.

Arianism.  The  doctrine  of  Arius,
a  presbyter  of  Alexandria,  promulgated  in
321  A.  D.,  which  was  inconsistent  with  the
divinity  of  Christ.  Bishop  Alexander  in¬
sisted  that  the  Son  isco-eternal,  co-essential,
and  co-equal  with  the  Father.  Arius  op¬
posed  this,  and  asserted  that  there  was  a
time  when  the  Son  was  not,  as  the  Father
begat  the  Son,  and  the  latter  therefore
could  not  be  eternal.  The  controversy
lasted  many  years,  when  Alexander  called
a  council  of  ids  clergy,  which  was  attend¬
ed  by  nearly  100  bishops,  and  Arius  was
deposed  and  excommunicated.

Ariel.  In  the  demonology  of  the  Kab-
bala,  the  spirit  of  air;  theguardian  angel  of
innocence  and  purity  :  hence  the  Masonic
synonym.  A  name  applied  to  Jerusalem;
a  water  spirit.

Arkansas.  Dr.  Mackey  observes  that
much  obscurity  concerns  the  early  history
of  Masonry  in  Arkansas  That  the  dis¬
astrous  conflagration  of  November,  1864,
which  destroyed  the  Grand  Lodge  hall,
consumed  all  the  records  anterior  to  1846.
Grand  Secretary  Blocher  says  that  on  Feb¬
ruary  22, 1832,  three  Lodges — Washington,
Western  Star,  and  Moridng  Star  (C.  W.
Moore  asserted  there  was  another) — as¬
sembled  at  Little  Rock  in  convention  and
organized  the  Grand  Lodge.

Coleman’s  Masonic  Calendar  for  1880  says
the  Grand  Lodge  was  organized  November
26,  is::-.

The  Grand  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Ma-


950


ARK


ADDENDUM.


AROBA


sons  was  organized  April  28, 1851,  by  three  [
Chapters,  located  at  Fayetteville,  Little
Rock,  and  El  Dorado,  which  had  previ¬
ously  received  charters  from  the  General
Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States.

The  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters  was  established  in  the  year  1860.

The  Grand  Commandery  of  the  Order  i
of  the  Temple  was  organized  on  March
23,  1872.

A  Lodge,  Council,  Chapter,  Council  of
Kadosh,  and  Consistory  of  the  Scottish
Rite  are  established  at  Little  Rock.

Ark  Mariner.  Royal,  Jewel  of.
The  jewel  of  this  degree  prefigures  the
teachings,  which  are  unique,  and  draw
their  symbols  from  the  sea,  rain,  ark,  dove,
olive-branch,  and  Rainbow.  This  last  sym¬
bol,  as  El’s  sign,  “ overshadows ”  the  ark,


which  really  is  the  sign  of  Tshtar.  The  ark
is  said  to  have  contained  all  the  elements
of  Elohim’s  creative  power,  and  in  “about
nine  months  and  three  days  there  came
forth  the  pent-up  energies  of  Maiya;”
her  symbol  is  the  dove  with  the  mystic
olive,  which  are  sacred  to  her.  The  whole
underlying  thought  is  that  of  creation.

Armor.  In  English  statutes,  armor  is
used  for  the  whole  apparatus  of  war;  of¬
fensive  and  defensive  arms.  In  the  Order
of  the  Temple  pieces  of  armor  are  used  to
a  limited  extent.  In  the  chivalric  degrees
of  the  Scottish  Rite,  in  order  to  carry  out
the  symbolism  as  well  as  to  render  effect  to
its  dramas,  armor  pieces  and  articles  for
use  of  knights  become  necessary,  with
mantling,  crest,  mottoes,  etc.  Some  are
herein  enumerated  :

Ai  llettes — Square  shields  for  the  shoul¬
ders.

Anlace — Short  dagger  worn  at  the  gir¬
dle.


Baldeic — Belt  diagonally  crossing  the
body.

Battle-axe — Weapon  with  axe-blade
and  spear-head.

Beaver — Front  of  helmet,  which  is
raised  to  admit  food  and  drink.

Beaker — The  drinking-cup  with  mouth.

Hp.

Belt — For  body.  Badge  of  knightly
rank.

Brassart — Armor  to  protect  the  arm
from  elbow  to  shoulder.

Buckler — A  long  shield  for  protecting
the  body.

Corselet — Breast-plate.

Crest — Ornament  on  helmet  designat¬
ing  rank.

Cuirass — Back-plate.

Fasces — Armor  for  the  thighs,  hung
from  the  corselet.

Galling — Sharp  metallic  knuckles  on
gauntlet.

Gauntlet — Mailed  gloves.

Gorget — Armor  for  the  neck.

Halberd — Long-pole  axe.

Hauberk — Shirt  of  mail,  of  rings  or
scales.

Helmet  or  Casque — Armor  for  the
head.

Jambeux — Armor  for  the  legs.

J  upon — Sleeveless  jacket,  to  the  hips.

Lance — Long  spear  with  metallic  head
and  pennon.

Mace — Heavy,  short  staff  of  metal,  end¬
ing  with  spiked  ball.

Mantle— Outer  cloak.

Morion — Head  armor  without  visor.

Pennon — A  pennant,  or  short  streamer
bifurcated.

Plume — The  designation  of  knighthood.

Sallet — Light  helmet  for  foot  soldiers.

Spear — Sword,  spur,  shield.

Yisor — Front  of  helmet  (slashed),  mov¬
ing  on  pivots.

Aroba.  Pledge,  covenant,  agreement.
(Latin,  Arrhabo,  a  token  or  pledge.  He¬
brew,  Arab,  which  is  the  root  of  Arubbah,
surety,  hostage.)  This  important  word,  in
the  Fourteenth  Degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite,
is  used  when  the  initiate  partakes  of  the
“Ancient  Aroba,”  the  pledge,  or  covenant
of  friendship,  by  eating  and  drinking  with
his  new  companions.  The  word  is  of  greater
import  than  that  implied  in  mere  hospital¬
ity.  The  word  “  aroba  ”  appears  nowhere
in  English  works,  and  seems  to  have  been
omitted  by  Masonic  writers.  The  root
“arab”  is  one  of  the  oldest  in  the  He¬
brew  language,  and  means  to  interweave  or
to  mingle,  to  exchange,  to  become  surety
for  any  one,  and  to  pledge  even  the  life
of  one  person  for  another,  or  the  strongest
ledge  that  can  be  given  (Genesis  xliii.  9).
udah  pleads  with  Israel  to  let  Benjamin


ARTISAN


ADDENDUM.


AURORA


951


go  with  him  to  be  presented  in  Egypt  to
Joseph,  as  the  latter  had  requested.  He
says:  “Send  the  lad  with  me;  I  will  be
surety  for  him and  before  Joseph  he
makes  the  same  remark  in  Gen.  xliv.  32.
Job,  in  chap.  xvii.  3,  appealing  to  God,
says :  “  Put  me  in  a  surety  with  thee ;  who
is  he  who  will  strike  hands  with  me?”  (See
also  1  Sam.  xvii.  18.)  In  its  pure  form,  the
word  “arubbah”  occurs  only  once  in  the
Old  Testament  (Prov.  xvii.  18) :  “  A  man
void  of  understanding  striketh  hands,  and
becometh  surety  in  the  presence  of  his
friend.”  In  Latin,  Plautus  makes  use  of
the  following  phrase :  “  Hunc  arrhabonem
amoris  a  me  accipe."

Artisan.  Chief.  An  officer  in  the
Council  of  Knights  of  Constantinople.

Arundel,  Thomas  Howard,
Earl  of.  Tradition  places  Arundel  as
the  Grand  Master  of  English  Freemasons
from  1633  to  1635.  This  is  in  accordance
with  Anderson  and  Preston.

Aryan.  One  of  the  three  historical
divisions  of  religion— the  other  two  being
the  Turanian  and  the  Shemitic.  It  pro¬
duced  Brahmanism,  Buddhism,  and  the
Code  of  Zoroaster.

Asarota.  A  variegated  pavement
used  for  flooring  in  temples  and  ancient
edifices.

Ases.  The  twelve  gods  and  as  many
goddesses  in  the  Scandinavian  mythology.

Asia.  In  the  French  Rite  of  Adoption,
the  east  end  of  the  Lodge  is  called  Asia.

Assyrian  Architecture.  The  dis¬
covery  in  1882  of  the  remains  of  a  town,
close  to,  and  north  of,  Nineveh,  built  by
Sargon,  about  721  B.  c.,  in  size  about  a  mile
square,  with  its  angles  facing  the  cardinal
points,  and  the  inclosure  containing  the
finest  specimens  of  their  architecture,  re¬
vived  much  interest  in  archaeologists.  The
chief  place  of  regard  is  the  royal  palace,
which  was  like  unto  a  city  of  itself,  every¬
thing  being  on  a  colossal  scale.  The  walls
of  the  town  were  45  feet  thick.  The  in¬
clined  approach  to  the  palace  was  flanked
by  strangely  formed  bulls  from  15  to  19  feet
high.  There  were  terraces,  courts,  and  pas¬
sage-ways  to  an  innermost  square  of  150
feet,  surrounded  by  staie  -apartments  and
temples.  The  Hall  of  Judgment  was
prominent,  as  also  the  astronomical  observ¬
atory.  All  entrances  to  great  buildings
were  ornamented  by  colossal  animals  and
porcelain  decorations  and  inscriptions.

Astrology.  A  science  demanding  the
respect  of  the  scholar,  notwithstanding  its
designation  as  a  “  black  art,”  and,  in  a
reflective  sense,  an  occult  science;  a  system
of  divination  foretelling  results  by  the
relative  positions  of  the  planets  and  other
heavenly  bodies  toward  the  earth.  Men


of  eminence  have  adhered  to  the  doctrines
of  astrology  as  a  science.  It  is  a  study  well
considered  in,  and  forming  an  important
part  of,  the  ceremonies  of  the  “Philo-
sophus,”  or  fourth  grade  of  the  First  Order
of  the  Society  of  Rosicrucians.  Astrology
has  been  deemed  the  twin  science  of  as¬
tronomy,  grasping  knowledge  from  the
heavenly  bodies,  and  granting  a  proper
understanding  of  many  of  the  startling
forces  in  nature.  It  is  claimed  that  the
constellations  of  the  zodiac  govern  the
earthly  animals,  and  that  every  star  has
its  peculiar  nature,  property,  and  function,
the  seal  and  character  of  which  it  impresses
through  its  rays  upon  plants,  minerals,  and
animal  life.  This  science  was  known  to  the
ancients  as  the  “  divine  art.”  See  Magic.

At  ossa.  The  daughter  of  King  Cyrus
of  Persia,  Queen  of  Cambyses,  and  after¬
ward  of  Darius  Hystaspes,  of  whom  she
had  Xerxes.  Referred  to  in  the  degree  of
Prince  of  Jerusalem,  16th,  Scottish  Rite.

Attliakatba.  An  immense  com¬
mentary  of  258  volumes,  on  the  canonical
books  of  Buddhism,  and  formerly  regarded
as  of  equal  authority  with  them.  It  is
ascribed  to  Badhagosha,  about  420  A.  D.
The  Tripitaka  and  the  Atthakatha  together
are  said  to  contain  two  million  lines.

“  Audi,  Vide,  Tace.”  ( Hear ,  see,
and  be  silent.)  A  motto  frequently  found
on  Masonic  medals,  and  often  appropri¬
ately  used  in  Masonic  documents.

Auditors.  The  first  class  of  the  secret
system  adopted  by  the  Christians  in  their
early  days.  The  second  class  were  Cate¬
chumens,  and  the  third  were  The  Faithful.

Auffselier.  German  for  warden,  or
overseer,  having  the  erste  or  zweite,  meaning
the  first  or  second  overseer.

Auger.  An  implement  used  as  a
symbol  in  the  Ark  Mariner’s  Degree.

Augustus  William,  Prince  of
Prussia.  Born  in  1722,  died  in  1758.
Brother  of  Frederick  the  Great,  and  father
of  King  Frederick  William  II.  A  member
of  Lodge  “  Drei  Weltkugeln,”  Berlin.

Aurora.  ( Aurea  hora,  golden  hour;
avpios  upa,  morning  hour,  the  dawn  of  day.)
In  Hebrew  the  light  is  called  Aur,  and  in
its  dual  capacity  Aurim.  Hence  Urim,
lights; — as,  Thme,  Thummim,  perfections.
Ra  is  the  sun,  the  symbolic  god  of  the
Egyptians,  and  Ouro,  royalty.  Hence  we
have  Aur,  Ouro,  Ra,  which  is  the  double
symbolic  capacity  of  “  Light.”  Referring
to  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  Re  is  physical
and  intellectual  light,  while  Thme  is  the
divinity  of  truth  and  justice.

Aurora  is  the  color  of  the  baldric  worn
by  the  brethren  in  the  16th  Degree  of  the
Scottish  Rite,  which  in  the  legend  is  said
to  have  been  presented  by  King  Darius  to


952


AVATAR


ADDENDUM.


BALDER


the  captive  Zerubbabel  on  presentation  of
his  liberty,  and  that  of  all  bis  people,  who
bad  been  slaves  in  Babylon  for  seventy
years.

Avatar.  The  descent  of  a  Hindu
deity ;  an  incarnation.

Avis  of  Portugal.  See  Evora,
Brothers  of.

Axe.  See  Knight  of  the  Boyal  Axe,
Mackey.

Azariali.  One  of  Daniel’s  three
friends,  605  B.  c.  The  King  of  Judah,
809  B.  c.

Azazel.  “Scapegoat,”  the  “demon
of  dry  places.”  Translated  by  others  to
be  the  fallen  angel  mentioned  in  the  Book
of  Enoch,  and  identical  with  Sammael,  the
Angel  of  Death.  Symmachus  says,  “the
goat  that  departs;”  Josephus,  “the  averter
of  ills,”  “  caper  emissarius.”

Two  he-goats,  in  all  respects  alike  and
equal,  were  brought  forward  for  the  day
of  atonement.  The  urn  was  shaken  and
two  lots  cast;  one  was  “For  the  Name,”
and  the  other  “For  Azazel.”  A  scarlet
tongue-shaped  piece  of  wood  was  twisted
on  the  head  of  the  goat  to  be  sent  away,
and  he  was  placed  before  the  gate  and


delivered  to  his  conductor.  The  high
priest,  placing  his  two  hands  on  the  goat,
made  confession  for  the  people,  and  pro¬
nounced  The  Name  clearly,  which  the
people  hearing,  they  knelt  and  worshipped,
and  fell  on  their  faces  and  said,  “ Blessed
be  the  Name.  The  Honor  of  His  kingdom
forever  and  ever.”  The  goat  was  then  led
forth  to  the  mountain-side  and  rolled  down
to  death.

Azrael.  (Heb.,  help  of  God.)  In  the
Jewish  and  the  Mohammedan  mythology,
the  name  of  the  angel  who  watches  over
the  dying  and  separates  the  soul  from  the
body.  Prior  to  the  intercession  of  Mo¬
hammed,  Azrael  inflicted  the  death  penalty
visibly,  by  striking  down  before  the  eyes
of  the  living  those  whose  time  for  death
was  come.  See  Henry  W.  Longfellow’s
exquisite  poem,  Azrael.

Aztec  lVritlngs.  The  key  to  the
Aztec  writings,  it  is  alleged,  has  been  dis¬
covered  by  Rev.  Father  Damago  Soto,  of
Concordia,  Vera  Cruz.

Azure.  The  clear,  blue  color  of  the
sky.  Cerulean.  The  appropriate  color  of
the  symbolic  degrees  sometimes  termed
Blue  Degrees.


B


B.  (2,  Beth.)  A  labial  consonant  stand¬
ing  second  in  most  alphabets,  and  in  the
Hebrew  or  Phoenician  signifies  house,  prob¬
ably  from  its  form  of  a  tent  or  house,  thus  :


and  finally  the  Hebrew  2,  having  the  nu¬
merical  value  two.  When  united  with  the
leading  letter  of  the  alphabet,  >  it  sig¬
nifies  Ab,  Father,  Master,  or  the  one  in
authority,  as  applied  to  Hiram  the  Archi¬
tect.  This  is  the  root  of  Baal.  (See
Mackey.)  Hebrew  name  of  Deity  con¬
nected  with  this  letter  is  “plFQ,  Bakhur.

Bacon,  Boger.  An  English  monk
who  made  wonderful  discoveries  in  many
sciences.  He  was  born  in  Ilcbester  in  1214,
educated  at  Oxford  and  Paris,  and  entered
the  Franciscan  Order  in  his  twenty-fifth
year.  He  explored  the  secrets  of  nature,  and
made  many  discoveries,  the  application  of
which  were  looked  upon  as  magic.  He
denounced  the  ignorance  and  immorality


of  the  clergy,  resulting  in  accusations,
through  revenge,  and  final  imprisonment.
He  was  noted  as  a  Rosicrucian.  Died  1292.

Bactylea.  The  sacred  stones  wor¬
shipped  bv  the  Phoenicians  and  Bactrians,
and  believed  by  them  to  have  fallen  from
heaven.  Presumptively,  meteoric  stones.

Batardt,  K.  F.  Born  1741,  died
1792.  A  German  teacher,  said  to  have
been  made  a  Mason  in  England,  and  on
his  return  to  Germany  established  “  The
German  Union,”  a  yuasi-Masonic  Society
of  six  degrees — “Young  Men,”  “Men,”
“  ElderMen,”  “ Mesopolites,”  “Diocesans,”
and  “  Overseers.”  The  society  was  short¬
lived,  and  its  author  imprisoned  in  1789  for
a  libel  on  Wollner,  the  minister.

Balder  or  Baldur.  The  ancient
Scandinavian  or  older  German  divinity.
The  hero  of  one  of  the  most  beautifuTand
interesting  of  the  myths  of  the  Edda ;  the
second  son  of  Odin  and  Frigga,  and  the
husband  of  the  maiden  Nanna.  In  brief,
the  myth  recites  that  Balder  dreamed  that
his  life  was  threatened,  which  being  told
to  the  gods,  a  council  was  held  by  them
to  secure  his  safety.  The  mother  pro¬
ceeded  to  demand  and  receive  from  every
inanimate  thing,  iron  and  all  metals.


BAND


ADDENDUM.


BENAI


953


fire  and  water,  stones,  earth,  plants,  beasts,
birds,  reptiles,  poisons,  and  diseases,  that
they  would  not  injure  Balder.  Balder  then
became  the  subject  of  sport  with  the  gods,
who  wrestled,  cast  darts,  and  in  innumerable
ways  playfully  tested  his  invulnerability.
This  finally  displeased  the  mischievous,
cunning  Loki,  the  Spirit  of  Evil,  who,  in
the  form  of  an  old  woman,  sought  out  the
mother,  Frigga,  and  ascertained  from  her
that  there  had  been  excepted  or  omitted
from  the  oath  the  little  shrub  Mistletoe.
In  haste  Loki  carried  some  of  this  shrub  to
the  assembly  of  the  gods,  and  gave  to  the
blind  Hoder,  the  god  of  war,  selected  slips,
and  directing  his  aim,  Balder  fell  pierced
to  the  heart.

Sorrow  among  the  gods  was  unutterable,
and  Frigga  inquired  who,  to  win  her  favor,
would  journey  to  Hades  and  obtain  from
the  goddess  Hel  the  release  of  Balder.
The  heroic  Helmod  or  Herinoder,  son  of
Odin,  offered  to  undertake  the  journey.
Hel  consented  to  permit  the  return  if  all
things  animate  and  inanimate  should  weep
for  Balder.

All  living  beings  and  all  things  wept,  save
the  witch  or  giantess  Thock  (the  step¬
daughter  of  Loki),  who  refused  to  sym¬
pathize  in  the  general  mourning.  Balder
was  therefore  obliged  to  linger  in  the  king¬
dom  of  Hel  until  the  end  of  the  world.

Band.  The  neck  ribbon  bearing  the
jewel  of  the  office  in  Lodge,  Chapter,  or
Grand  Lodge  of  various  countries,  and  of
the  symbolic  color  pertaining  to  the  body
in  which  it  is  worn.

Banner  Bearer.  The  name  of  an
officer  known  in  the  higher  degrees  in  the
French  Rite.  One  who  has  in  trust  the
banner;  similar  in  station  to  the  Standard
Bearer  of  a  Grand  Lodge,  or  of  a  Supreme
Body  of  the  Scottish  Rite.

Banneret.  A  small  banner.  An  offi¬
cer  known  in  the  Order  of  the  Knights
Templar,  who,  with  the  Marshal,  had
charge  of  warlike  undertakings.  A  title
of  an  order  known  as  Knight  Banneret,
instituted  by  Edward  I.  The  banneret  of
the  most  ancient  order  of  knighthood  called
Knight  Bachelor  was  shaped  like  Fig.  1.


(Fig.  1 )  (Fig.  2.)  (Fig.  3.)


The  Knights  Banneret,  next  in  age,  had
a  pennon  like  Fig.  2.  That  of  the  Barons
like  Fig.  3.

Barbati  Fratres.  Bearded  Brothers
— at  an  earlier  date  known  as  the  Con-
versi — craftsmen  known  among  the  Con¬
ventual  Builders,  admitted  to  the  Abbey
Corbey  in  the  year  851,  whose  social  grade
5  U


was  more  elevated  than  the  ordinary  work¬
men,  and  were  freeborn.  The  Conversi  were
filiates  in  the  Abbeys,  used  a  (jwm-monas-
tic  dress,  could  leave  their  profession  when¬
ever  they  chose  and  could  return  to  civil
life.  Converts  who  abstained  from  secular
pursuits  as  sinful  and  professed  conversion
to  the  higher  life  of  the  Abbeys,  without
becoming  monks.  Scholae  or  guilds  of  such
operatives  lodged  within  the  convents.  We
are  told  byBro.Geo. F. Fort  (in  his  “Criti¬
cal  Inquiry  Concerning  the  Mediaeval  Con¬
ventual  Builders,  1884”)  that  the  scholae  of
dextrous  Barbati  Fratres  incurred  the  an¬
ger  of  their  co-religionists,  by  their  haughty
deportment,  sumptuous  garb,  liberty  of
movement,  and  refusal  to  have  their  long,
flowing  beards  shaven — hence  their  name
— thus  tending  to  the  more  fascinating  at¬
tractions  of  civil  life  as  time  carried  them
forward  through  the  centuries  to  the  middle
of  the  thirteenth,  when  William  Abbott,
of  Premontre,  attempted  to  enforce  the  rule
of  shaving  the  beard.  “  These  worthy  an¬
cestors  of  our  modern  craft  deliberately  re¬
fused,”  and  said,  “  if  the  execution  of  this
order  were  pressed  against  them,  ‘they
would  fireevery  cloisterand  cathedral  in  the
country.’  ”  The  decretal  was  withdrawn.

Batli  Kol.  (Sipro,  Daughter  Voice,
or  Daughter  of  the  Voice.)  The  Jews  say
that  the  Holy  Spirit  spoke  to  the  Israelites
in  the  days  of  the  Tabernacle  through  the
Urim  and  Thummim,  and  under  the  first
Temple  by  the  Prophets,  and  under  the
second  by  the  Bath  Kol,  an  inferior  divine
intimation  to  the  oracular  voice  proceed¬
ing  from  the  Mercy-Seat,  as  a  daughter  is
supposed  to  be  inferior  to  the  mother.

Bar  Mitzvah  (Son  of  Command¬
ment).  An  Israelite  who  attains  the  age
of  thirteen  years  and  one  day,  and  is  thence¬
forth  responsible  for  his  own  sins :  corre¬
sponding  to  the  Christian  rite  of  confirma¬
tion.  A  Bar  Mitzvah  among  the  Orthodox
is  bound  to  observe  the  three  fundamental
principles  of  wearing  the  Talith,  the  Phy¬
lacteries,  and  the  observance  of  the  Mezuza.

Basilica.  A  hall  or  court-room  in
which  the  king  administered  the  laws.
Some  of  these  were  of  vast  size,  accommo¬
dating  the  Tribunal,  which  consisted,  in
addition  to  the  curule  chair  of  the  praetor
and  space  required  by  the  suitors  and  their
advocates,  of  seats  for  the  jury  approxi¬
mating  two  hundred.

A  rectangular  building,  mentioned  in
Anderson’s  Constitution.

Battery.  A  given  number  of  blows
by  the  gavels  of  the  officers,  or  by  the
hands  of  the  Brethren,  as  a  mark  of
approbation,  admiration,  or  reverence,  and
at  times  accompanied  by  the  acclamation.

Beuai.  See  JJonaim ,  Mackey.


954


BENAKAR


ADDENDUM.


BOOK


Bcnakar.  The  name  of  a  cavern  to
which  certain  assassins  fled  for  concealment.

Benefit  Societies.  Societies  of  re¬
cent  growth,  known  among  the  Masonic
organizations  of  all  classes  and  depart¬
ments,  to  render  combined  aid  in  case  of
the  death  of  a  member.  Organizations  of
small  or  no  capital,  paying  the  officers  an
indifferent  compensation,  but  levying  an
assessment  on  each  member  for  the  benefit
of  the  relatives  or  others  in  the  event  of
death  of  one  of  their  number.  These  life
insurance  associations  are  generally  pro¬
tected  by  the  laws  of  the  State  or  other
Government,  are  exempt  from  execution,
not  liable  to  be  seized  by  any  legal  or
equitable  process  to  pay  any  liability  of  a
member.  They  are  based  on  well  defined
insurance  tables,  and  where  integrity  exists
success  follows.

Benevolent  Institutions.  U.  S.

There  are  five  institutions  in  the  U.  States
of  an  educational  and  benevolent  character,
deriving  their  existence  in  whole  or  in  part
from  Masonic  beneficence :  1.  Girard  Col¬
lege,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania;  2.  Ma¬
sonic  Widows’  and  Orphans’  Home,  Louis¬
ville,  Kentucky ;  3.  Oxford  Orphan  Asylum,
Oxford,  N.  Carolina ;  4.  St.  John’s  Masonic
College,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas;  5.  Masonic
Female  College,  Covington,  Georgia.

Beside  the  Stephen  Girard  Charity  Fund,
founded  over  a  half  century  ago  in  Phila¬
delphia,  the  capital  investment  of  which  is
$62,000,  the  annual  interest  being  devoted
“to  relieve  all  Master  Masons  in  good
standing,”  there  is  a  Charity  Fund  of
$60,000  for  the  relief  of  the  widows  and
orphans  of  deceased  Master  Masons,  and
an  incorporated  Masonic  Home,  which  will
now,  in  very  early  time,  be  made  effective.
The  District  of  Columbia  has  an  organized
Masonic  charity,  entitled  St.  John’s  Mite
Association.  Idaho  has  an  Orphan  Fund,
to  which  every  Master  Mason  pays  annually
one  dollar.  Indiana  has  organized  the
Masonic  Widows’  and  Orphans’  Home  So¬
ciety.  Maine  has  done  likewise ;  and  Ne¬
braska  has  an  Orphans’  School  Fund,  al¬
though  no  building  has  been  proposed.

Bible.  (Bt/fto?,  “  Book.”)  A  collective
name  for  the  writings  constituting  the  pro¬
fessed  rule  of  faith  and  practice  of  the
Christian  church,  and  composed  of  the  Old
Testament  of  39  books,  originally  written
in  the  Hebrew  language,  mainly,  and  the
New  Testament  of  27  books,  written  in
Greek.  The  Old  Testament,  to  the  exclu¬
sion  of  the  New,  is  also  the  Bible  of  the
Jews,  and  contains  the  oldest  literature  in
existence.  The  New  Testament  was  writ¬
ten  within  the  first  century  of  our  era.  The
number  of  Christians  in  the  world  is  about
380,000,000 ;  of  Jews,  7,000,000.


Boeliim.  (p’3D>  weepings.)  A  pass¬
word  in  the  Order  of  Ishmael.  An  angel
spoke  to  Hagar  as  she  wept  at  the  well
when  in  the  wilderness  with  her  son  Ish¬
mael.  The  angel  is  looked  upon  as  a  spir¬
itual  being,  possibly  the  Great  Angel  of
the  Covenant,  the  Michael  who  appeared
to  Moses  in  the  burning  bush,  or  the
Joshua,  the  captain  of  the  hosts  of  Jehovah.

Book  of  Mormon.  This  sacred
book  of  the  Mormons  was  first  published
in  1830  by  Joseph  Smith,  who  claimed  to
have  translated  it  from  gold  plates  which
he  had  found  under  divine  guidance  secreted
in  a  stone  box.  The  number  of  Mormons
is  estimated  at  about  150,000  in  the  United
States,  and  50,000  in  other  countries.

Book  of  the  Bead,  containing  the
ancient  Egyptian  philosophy  as  to  death
and  the  resurrection.  A  portion  of  these
sacred  writings  was  invariably  buried  with
the  dead.  The  Book  in  fac-simile  has  been
published  by  Dr.  Lepsius,  and  translated
by  Dr.  Birch.  The  myth  of  the  “Judg¬
ment  of  Amenti  ”  forms  a  part  of  the
“  Book  of  the  Dead,”  and  shadows  forth
the  verities  and  judgments  of  the  unseen
world.

The  Amenti  was  the  Place  of  Judgment
of  the  Dead,  situated  in  the  West,  where
Osiris  was  presumed  to  be  buried.  There
were  forty-two  assessors  of  the  amount  of
sin  committed,  who  sat  in  judgment,  and
before  whom  the  adjudged  passed  in  suc¬
cession.

There  seems  to  be  a  tie  which  binds
Freemasonry  to  the  noblest  of  the  cults
and  mysteries  of  antiquity.  The  most
striking  exponent  of  the  doctrines  and  lan¬
guage  of  the  Egyptian  Mysteries  of  Osiris
is  this  “  Book  of  the  Dead,"  or  Ritual  of  the
Underworld,  or  Egyptian  Bible  of  165
chapters,  the  Egyptian  title  of  which  was
“  The  Manifestation  to  Light,”  or  the  Book
revealing  light  to  the  soul.  Great  depen¬
dence  was  had,  as  to  the  immediate  attain¬
ment  of  celestial  happiness,  upon  the  hu¬
man  knowledge  of  this  wonderful  Book,
especially  of  the  principal  chapters.  On  a
sarcophagus  of  the  11th  dynasty  (chronol¬
ogy  of  Prof.  Lepsius,  say  B.  c.  2420)  is  this
inscription :  “  He  who  knows  this  book  is
one  who,  in  the  day  of  the  resurrection  of
the  underworld,  arises  and  enters  in ;  but
if  he  does  not  know  this  chapter,  he  does
not  enter  in  so  soon  as  he  arises.”  The
conclusion  of  the  first  chapter  says:  “  If  a
man  knows  this  book  thoroughly,  and  has
it  inscribed  upon  his  sarcophagus,  he  will
be  manifested  in  the  day  in  all  the  forms
that  he  may  desire,  and  entering  into  his
abode  will  not  be  turned  back”  (Tiele’i
Hist.  Egyptian  Be/.,  25).

The  Egyptian  belief  was  that  portions  of


BOOK


ADDENDUM.


BUDDHISM


955


the  Book  were  written  by  the  finger  of
Thoth,  back  in  the  mist  of  time,  B.  c.  3000.
The  125th  chap,  describes  the  last  judg¬
ment.  The  oldest  preserved  papyrus  is  of
the  18th  dynasty  (b.  c.  1591,  Lep.).  The
most  perfect  copy  of  this  Book  is  in  the
Turin  Museum,  where  it  covers  one  side  of
the  walls,  in  four  pieces,  300  feet  in  length.

The  following  extract  is  from  the  first
chapter:

“  Says  Thot  to  Osiris,  King  of  Eternity,
I  am  the  great  God  in  the  divine  boat ;  I
tight  for  thee ;  I  am  one  of  the  divine  chiefs
who  are  the  True  living  Word  of  Osiris.
I  am  Thot,  who  makes  to  be  real  the  word
of  Horus  against  his  enemies.  The  word
of  Osiris  against  his  enemies  made  truth  in
Thot,  and  the  order  is  executed  by  Thot.
I  am  with  Horus  on  the  day  of  celebrating
the  festival  of  Osiris,  the  good  Being,  whose
Word  is  truth  ;  I  make  offerings  to  Ra  (the
Sun) ;  I  am  a  simple  priest  in  the  under¬
world,  anointing  in  Abydos,  elevating  to
higher  degrees  of  initiation ;  I  am  prophet
in  Abydos  on  the  day  of  opening  or  up¬
heaving  the  earth.  I  behold  the  mysteries
of  the  door  of  the  underworld;  I  direct
the  ceremonies  of  Mendes;  I  am  the  as¬
sistant  in  the  exercise  ofitheir  functions ;  I
am  Grand  Master  of  the  Craftsmen

WHO  SET  UP  THE  SACRED  ARCH  FOR  A  SUP¬
PORT.”  See  Truth.

Book  of  the  Fraternity  of
Stonemasons.  Some  years  ago,  a
manuscript  was  discovered  in  the  archives
of  the  city  of  Cologne  bearing  the  title  of
Bruderschaftsbuch  der  Steinmetzen,  with  rec¬
ords  going  back  to  the  year  1396.  Stein-
brenner  ( Grig,  and  Early  Hist,  of  Masonry,
p.  104)  says:  “It  fully  confirms  the  con¬
clusions  to  be  derived  from  the  German
Constitutions,  and  those  of  the  English  and
Scotch  Masons,  and  conclusively  proves  the
inauthenticity  of  the  celebrated  Charter  of
Cologne.”

Rosonian,  The.  The  fourth  degree
of  the  African  Architects.

Boswell,  John  (of  Auchinlek).  A
Scottish  laird  of  the  family  of  the  biographer
of  Dr.  Johnson.  His  appearance  in  the
Lodge  of  Edinburgh  at  a  meeting  held  ut
Holy  rood  in  June,  1600,  affords  the  earliest
authentic  instance  of  a  person  being  a
member  of  the  Masonic  fraternity  who  was
not  an  architect  or  builder  by  profession.
Kenning' s  Cyclopcedia.

Box  of  Fraternal  Assistance.
A  box  of  convenient  shape  and  size  under
the  charge  of  the  Hospitaller  or  Almoner,
in  the  Modern  French  and  A.  A.  Scottish
Rites,  wherein  is  collected  the  obligatory
contributions  of  the  duly  assembled  breth¬
ren  at  every  convocation,  which  collections
can  only  be  used  for  secret  charitable  pur¬


poses,  first  among  the  members,  but  if  not
there  required,  among  worthy  profane;  the
Master  and  the  Hospitaller  being  the  only
ones  cognizant  of  the  name  of  the  benefi¬
ciary,  together  with  the  brother  who  sug¬
gests  an  individual  in  need  of  the  assistance.

Brazen  Laver.  See  Laver.

Brazen  Pillars.  See  Pillars,

Mackey.

Bridge.  A  most  significant  symbol  in
the  15th  and  16th  Degrees  of  the  Scottish
Rite,  at  which  an  importantevent  transpires.
The  characteristic  letters  which  appear  on
the  Bridge,  L.  O.  P.,  refer  to  that  liberty  of
thought  which  is  ever  thereafter  to  be  the
inheritance  of  those  who  have  been  sym¬
bolically  captive  for  seven  weeks  of  years.
It  is  the  new  era  of  the  freedom  of  expres¬
sion,  the  liberation  of  the  former  captive
thought.  Liberty,  but  not  License.  See
Lahah  Der  or  Pessah;  also,  Liber.

Britliering.  The  Scotch  term  for
Masonic  initiation.

Brothers  of  the  Bridge.  Ac¬
cording  to  Mackenzie,  a  charitable  and
religious  brotherhood  which  arose  in  the
south  of  France  in  the  Middle  Ages,  the
members  devoting  themselves  to  building
bridges,  making  roads,  erecting  hospitals,
and  otherwise  providing  for  the  comfort
and  protection  of  travellers  and  pilgrims.
Two  bridges  are  mentioned,  that  of  Bon
Pas,  three  miles  from  Avignon,  1177-1188,
and  that  over  the  Rhone,  Pont  d’Esprit,
commenced  1185.  Ramsay  affirms  that
this  order  united  with  the  Knights  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem,  and  afterwards  with
the  Roman  builders,  and  thus  would  imply
a  direct  connection  between  them  and  Free¬
masonry.  Several  of  the  degrees  of  the
French  system  take  some  of  their  decora¬
tions  from  the  Order  of  the  Brothers  of  the
Bridge.

Buchanan  MTS.  Published  for  the
first  time  in  Gould’s  History  of  Freemasonry,
vol.  i.  Bro.  Gould  says,  “  This  parchment
roll  was  presented  to  the  G.  Lodge  of  Eng¬
land  by  Mr.  George  Buchanan,  Whitby,
March  3,  1880,  who  is  of  the  opinion
that  it  is  of  the  latter  part  of  the  seven¬
teenth  century— say  from  1660  to  1680,”
and  this  date  seems  to  meet  tBe  approval
of  the  critical  Gould.  “The  scroll  was
found  with  the  papers  of  the  late  Mr.
Henry  Belcher,  an  antiquarian ;  and  is
presumed  to  have  been  among  the  effects
of  the  former  Grand  Lodge  of  All  Eng¬
land”— (  York).

Buddhism.  The  religion  of  the  dis¬
ciples  of  Buddha.  It  prevails  over  a  great
extent  of  Asia,  and  is  estimated  to  be
equally  popular  with  any  other  form  of
faith  among  mankind.  Its  founder,  Bud¬
dha, — a  word  which  seems  to  be  an  appella-


956


BUI


ADDENDUM.


BURI


tive,  as  it  signifies  the  enlightened, — lived
about  five  hundred  years  before  the  Chris¬
tian  era,  and  established  his  religion  as  a
reformation  of  Brahmanism.

The  moral  code  of  Buddhism  is  very  per¬
fect,  surpassing  that  of  any  other  heathen
religion.  But  its  theology  is  not  so  free
from  objection.  Max  Muller  admits  that
there  is  not  a  single  passage  in  the  Bud¬
dhist  canon  of  scripture  which  presupposes
the  belief  in  a  personal  God  or  a  Creator,
and  hence  he  concludes  that  the  teaching
of  Buddha  was  pure  atheism.  Yet  Upham
(Hist,  and  Doct.  of  Bud.,  p.  2)  thinks  that,
even  if  this  be  capable  of  proof,  it  also  rec¬
ognizes  “the  operation  of  Faith  (called
Damaia ),  whereby  much  of  the  necessary
process  of  conservation  or  government  is
infused  into  the  system.”

The  doctrine  of  Nirvana,  according  to
Burnouf,  taught  that  absolute  nothing  or
annihilation  was  the  highest  aim  of  virtue,
and  hence  the  belief  in  immortality  was
repudiated.  Such,  too,  has  been  the  gen¬
eral  opinion  of  Oriental  scholars ;  but  Mul¬
ler  ( Science  of  Religion,  p.  141)  adduces
evidence,  from  the  teachings  of  Buddha,  to
show  that  Nirvana  may  mean  the  ex¬
tinction  of  many  things  —  of  selfishness,
desire,  and  sin — without  going  so  far  as  the
extinction  of  subjective  consciousness.

The  sacred  scripture  of  Buddhism  is  the
Tripitaka,  literally,  the  Three  Baskets.  The
first,  or  the  Yinaya,  comprises  all  that  re¬
lates  to  morality ;  the  second,  or  the  Sitras,
contains  the  discourses  of  Buddha ;  and  the
third,  or  Abhidharma,  includes  all  works
on  metaphysics  and  dogmatic  philosophy.
The  first  and  second  Baskets  also  receive
the  general  name  of  Dharma,  or  the  Law.
The  principal  seat  of  Buddhism  is  the  island
of  Ceylon,  but  it  has  extended  into  China,
Japan,  and  many  other  countries  of  Asia.
See  Aranyaka,  Atthakatha,  Mahabharata,
Pilaka,  Puranas,  Ramayana,  Shaster,  Sruti,
Tantra,  Upanishad,  Upadevas,  Veda,  and
Vedanga.

liul.  The  primitive  designation  of  the
month  Marehesvan.  See  Zif.

Bull.  (Lat.,  bulla,  that  which  is  round
or  swelling.)  The  designation  given  to  the
capsule  of  the  seal  attached  to  important
documents  emanating  from  an  emperor  or
from  a  pope;  and  as  thus  applied  to  the
seal,  it  became  the  designation  of  the  docu¬
ment,  The  Bull  is  issued  by  the  apostolic
chancellor  when  promulgated  by  a  pope,
and  dates  from  the  day  of  incarnation,  in
contradistinction  to  briefs,  which  are  dated
from  the  day  of  the  nativity.

The  several  important  Bulls  which  have
been  issued  by  the  popes  of  Borne  intended
to  affect  the  fraternity  of  Freemasons  are
as  follows:  the  Bull  In  Eminenti  of  Clem¬


ent  XII.,  dated  27th  April,  1738.  This
Bull  was  confirmed  and  renewed  by  that
beginning  Providas,  of  Benedict  XIV.,  17th
May,  1751 ;  then  followed  the  edict  of  Pius
VII.,  in  1821 ;  the  apostolic  edict  Quo
Graviora  of  Leo  XII.,  in  1825;  that  of
Gregory  XVI.,  in  1832 ;  Pius  IX.  in  1865 ;
and  finally  that  of  Leo  XIII.,  who  ascended
to  the  papacy  in  1878,  and  issued  his  Bull,
or  encyclical  letter,  “  Humanurn  Genus,”
in  1884.

Whatever  may  have  been  the  severity  of
the  Bulls  issued  by  the  predecessors  of  Leo
XIII.,  he  with  great  clearness  ratifies  and
confirms  them  all  in  the  following  language:
“  Therefore,  whatsoever  the  popes  our  pre¬
decessors  have  decreed  to  hinder  the  designs
and  attempts  of  the  sect  of  Freemasons;
whatsoever  they  have  ordained  to  deter  or
recall  persons  from  societies  of  this  kind,
each  and  all  do  we  ratify  and  confirm  by
our  Apostolic  authority.”  At  the  same
time  acknowledging  that  this  “society  of
men  are  most  widely  spread  and  firmly
established.”

This  letter  of  the  Boman  hierarchy  thus
commences :  “  The  human  race,  after  its
most  miserable  dejection,  through  the  wiles
of  the  devil,  from  its  Creator,  God,  the
giver  of  celestial  gifts,  has  divided  into  two
different  and  opposite  factions,  of  which
one  fights  ever  for  truth  and  virtue,  the
other  for  their  opposites.  One  is  the  king¬
dom  of  God  on  earth  .  .  .  the  other  is  the
kingdom  of  Satan.”

That,  “  by  accepting  any  that  present
themselves,  no  matter  of  what  religion,
they  (the  Masons)  gain  their  purpose  of
urging  that  great  error  of  the  present  day,
viz.,  that  questions  of  religion  ought  to  be
left  undetermined,  and  that  there  should
be  no  distinction  made  between  verities.
And  this  policy  aims  at  the  destruction
of  all  religions,  specially  at  that  of  the
Catholic  religion,  which,  since  it  is  the
only  true  one,  cannot  be  reduced  to  equality
with  the  rest  without  the  greatest  injury.”

“  But,  in  truth,  the  sect  grants  great
license  to  its  initiates,  allowing  them  to
defend  either  position,  that  there  is  a  God,
or  that  there  is  no  God.”

Thus  might  we  quote  continuous  pas¬
sages,  which  need  only  to  be  stated  to  pro¬
claim  their  falsity,  and  yet  there  are  those
who  hold  to  the  doctrine  of  the  infallibility
of  the  pope.  See  Bull,  Papal,  Mackey.

Burl,  or  Bure.  The  first  god  of
Norse  mythology.  In  accordance  with  the
quaint  cosmogony  of  the  ancient  religion
of  Germany  or  that  of  Scandinavia,  it  was
believed  that  before  the  world  came  into
existence  there  was  a  great  void,  on  the
north  side  of  which  was  a  cold  and  dark
region,  and  on  the  south  side  one  warm


c


ADDENDUM.


CALATRAVA


957


and  luminous.  In  Niflkeim  was  a  well,  or
the  “  seething  caldron,”  out  of  which  flowed
twelve  streams  into  the  great  void  and
formed  a  huge  giant.  In  Iceland  the
first  great  giant  was  called  Ymir,  by  the
Germans  Tuisco,  whose  three  grandchil¬
dren  were  regarded  as  the  founders  of  three
of  the  German  races.

Cotemporary  with  Ymir,  and  from  the


great  frost-blocks  of  primeval  chaos,  was
produced  a  man  called  Buri,  who  was  wise,
strong,  and  beautiful.  His  son  married  the
daughter  of  another  giant,  and  their  issue
were  the  three  sons  Odin,  Wili,  and  We,
who  ruled  as  gods  in  heaven  and  earth.

By  some  it  is  earnestly  believed  that  upon
these  myths  and  legends  many  symbols  of
Masonry  were  founded.


C.  The  third  letter  of  the  English  al¬
phabet,  but  was  not  known  iu  the  Hebrew,
Phoenician,  or  early  Aryan  languages.

Caaba  or  Kaaba.  (Arabic,  Ka'abah,
cubic  building.)  The  square  building  or
temple  in  Mecca.  More  especially  the  small
cubical  oratory  within,  held  in  adoration
by  the  Mohammedans,  as  containing  the


Iboiiis.  Born  in  Paris,  January  23, 1769,
and  died  in  same  city,  November  21,  1821.
In  early  life  he  was  a  violent  opponent  of
Masonry,  but  became  one  of  its  chief  sup¬
porters  ere  his  death.  He  was  the  author
of  Le  Tombeau  de  Jacques  de  Malay.

faSidniva.  Jlililary  Order  of.

Instituted  11-58,  during  the  reign  of  Sancho


PILGRIMS  PRAYING  UNDER  THE  PORCH  OF  THE  KAABA,  AT  MECCA.


black  stone  said  to  have  been  given  by  an
angel  to  Abraham.  See  Allah.

The  inner  as  well  as  the  outer  structure
receive  their  name  from  Ka‘ab,  cube.  The
above  engraving  is  from  a  forthcoming
work,  Splendor  of  the  Shrine,  by  William  S.
Paterson,  New  York.

Cadet-OaHslcourt,  Charles


III.,  King  of  Castile,  who  conquered  and
gave  the  Castle  of  Calatrava,  an  important
fortress  of  the  Moors  of  Andalusia,  to  the
Knights  Templar,  who  subsequently  relin¬
quished  their  possession  of  it  to  the  king.
The  king,  being  disappointed  in  the  ability
of  the  Templars  to  retain  it,  then  offered
the  defence  of  the  place  to  Don  Raymond


958


CALENDAR


ADDENDUM.


CANOPY


#


of  Navarre,  Abbot  of  St.  Mary  of  Hitero,
a  Cistercian  convent,  who  accepted  it.  Don
Raymond  being  successful,  the  king  gave
the  place  to  him  and  his  companions,  and
instituted  the  Order  of  Calatrava.  A  Grand
Master  was  appointed  and  approved  of  by
the  Pope,  Alexander  III.,  1164,  which  was
confirmed  by  Innocent  III.  in  1198.  The
knights  had  been  granted  the  power  of
electing  their  own  Grand  Master;  but  on
the  death  of  Don  Garcias  Lopez  de  Par-
della,  1489,  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  an¬
nexed  the  Grand  Mastership  to  the  Crown
of  Castile,  which  was  sanctioned  by  Pope
Innocent  VIII.

Calendar.  Eras  corresponding  with
1884.

The  year  1884  constitutes  the  108th  of
the  Independence  of  the  United  States,
until  July  4.

1888th  of  the  birth  of  Christ;  our  present
era  having  begun  four  years  after  his  birth.

766th  Anno  Ordinis  of  the  Knights
Templar,  dating  from  their  organization  in
1118  A.  D.

1253d  of  the  Persian  Era,  which  began
June  19,  N.  S.,*632  A.  D.

1301st  of  the  Hejra,  and  began  Novem¬
ber  2,  1883.

1332d  of  the  Armenian  Ecclesiastical
year.

1600th  of  the  Era  of  Diocletian,  or  Era
of  Martyrs.

1922d  of  the  Spanish  Era,  or  Era  of  the
Caesars.

1929th  of  the  Julian  Era,  or  since  the
reformation  of  the  Calendar  of  Nunta  Pom-
pilius.

2196th  of  the  Grecian  Era  of  the  Seleu-
cides.

2414th  of  the  Anno  Inventionis  of  Royal
Arch  Masonry,  and  dates  from  the  build¬
ing  of  the  second  Temple,  530  B.  c.

2631st  of  the  Babylonish  Era  of  Nabo-
nassar,  which  began  February  26, 3967,  J.  P.

2637th  of  the  Old  Roman  Era,  a.  u.  c.,
according  to  Varro.

2660th  of  the  Olympiads  of  Greece,  or
the  last  year  of  the  665th  Olympiad,  ending
in  July.

3899th  of  the  year  of  Abraham,  used  by
Eusebius.

4232d  of  the  Deluge,  according  to  Usher
and  the  English  Bible.

4986th  of  the  Cali  Yuga,  or  Hindoo  and
Indian  Era.

5521st  of  the  Chinese  Calendar,  begin¬
ning  February  11,  1884,  and  the  17th  in  a
cycle  of  sixty  years.

5644th  of  the  Creation,  according  to  the
Minor  Era  of  the  Jews.  It  ends  on  the
last  day  of  the  month  Elul.

6243d  of  the  Greater  Rabbinical  Era  of
the  Jews.


7012th  of  the  World,  according  to  Euse¬
bius.

5828th  of  the  World,  according  to  Scali-
ger.

5884th  Anno  Lucis.  This  date  is  used
by  Craft  Masons,  as  they  date  from  the
Creation  of  the  World.

5888th  of  the  World,  according  to  Usher
and  the  English  Bible.

5376th  of  the  World,  according  to  the
Antiochian  and  Abyssinian  Eras.

7386th  of  the  World,  according  to  the
Alexandrian  Era.

7392-93d  of  the  year  of  Constantinople,
used  by  the  Byzantine  historians.  This  is
the  same  in  the  Septuagint  version  of  the
Bible.  It  dates  the  Creation  on  the  first
of  the  Jewish  month  Tisri,  5508  B.  c.,  or
7392  years  ago.  There  are  about  a  hundred
and  forty  eras  respecting  the  age  of  the
World.

The  Hindu  year  is  quite  irregular.  The
Hindus  divide  the  zodiac  into  27  parts,
from  some  of  which  they  name  the  months.
While  they  know  our  twelve  signs,  they
make  no  use  of  them.  Each  of  theirs  has
thirteen  and  a  half  degrees;  on  an  average
the  sun  moves  through  two  and  one-quarter
every  month.  In  every  three  years  the
Hindus  gain  about  one  month  more  than
if  they  reckoned  by  solar  time.  Hence,
they  require  an  intercalary  month  in  a
little  less  than  three  years.  The  Hindu
“Cycle  of  Jupiter”  is  sixty  years,  and  is
important,  because  it  was  ever  a  practice  in
Southern  India,  when  dating  documents,  to
annex  the  name  of  the  year  of  the  cycle.
One  year  of  Jupiter’s  cycle  answers  to  the
time  during  which  the  planet  passes  through
the  sign  of  the  zodiac.  The  correctness  of
calculation  of  Hindu  lunar  motions  is  little
excelled  by  astronomers  of  the  present  day.

Prior  to  the  year  1752,  the  Christian
year  began  at  the  feast  of  the  Annuncia¬
tion,  on  the  25th  March.  In  Monstrelet’s
chronicle,  we  find  the  year  was  counted
from  Lady  Day,  or  else  from  Easter;  and
in  earlier  ages  from  Christmas.  See  Anno
Egyptiaco  and  Yezdegerdian.

(  ali(l.  A  sultan  of  Egypt  about  1110.
A  devotee  of  Secret  Mystic  Science,  and  a
disciple  of  the  learned  Prince  Morieu.

Caneellarius.  An  office  of  high
rank  and  responsibility  among  the  Knights
Templar  of  the  Middle  Ages,  performing
the  duties  of,  or  similar  to,  the  Chancellor.

Canopy,  Celestial.  Ritualists  seem
divided  in  the  use  of  the  terms  “  Clouded
Canopy  ”  and  “  Celestial  Canopy  ”  in  the
First  Degree.  For  the  former,  see  “  Can¬
opy,  Clouded  ”  and  “  Covering  of  the
Lodge,”  by  Mackey.  It  would  seem  that
the  unclouded  grandeur  of  the  heavens
should  not  be  without  advocates.


CANTALEVER


ADDENDUM.


CATACOMBS


959


Sir  John  Lubbock  gives  the  following
description  of  the  heavens  filled  with  stars
in  connection  with  the  latest  discoveries :
“  Like  the  sand  of  the  sea,  the  stars  of
heaven  are  used  as  a  symbol  of  numbers.
We  now  know  that  our  earth  is  but  a  frac¬
tion  of  one  part  of  at  least  75,000,000
worlds.  But  this  is  not  all.  In  addition
to  the  luminous  heavenly  bodies,  we  cannot
doubt  there  are  countless  others  invisible
to  us  from  their  great  distance,  smaller  size,
or  feebler  light ;  indeed,  we  know  that  there
are  many  dark  bodies  which  now  emit  no
light,  or  comparatively  little.  Thus  the
floor  of  heaven  is  not  only  ‘thick  inlaid
with  patines  of  bright  gold,’  but  studded
also  with  extinct  stars,  once  probably  as
brilliant  as  our  own  sun.”

Cantalever.  A  projecting  block  or
bracket  which  supports  a  balcony.  The
upper  section  or  table  of  a  cornice.  The
eaves  of  the  temple  or  other  building.


Capitular  Statistics.  Brother  Jo-
siah  H.  Drummond,  P.  G.  Master  of  Maine,
whose  figures  are  reliable,  fixes  the  number
of  Royal  Arch  Chapter  Masons  in  North
America  at  132,737  in  1883.  See  Statistics ,
Royal  Arch.

Capripede,  Ratur  et  Laici
Fuge.  A  burlesque  dining  degree,
mentioned  in  the  collection  of  Fustier.

Capucliin.  One  of  the  monks  of  the
Order  of  St.  Francis.  They  went  bare¬
footed,  were  long-bearded,  and  wore  a  gown
or  cloak  of  dark  color  made  like  a  woman’s
garment  with  a  hood.

Carmelites.  Monks  of  an  order
established  on  Mount  Carmel,  in  Syria,
during  the  twelfth  century.  They  wore  a
brown  scapular  passing  over  the  shoulder
and  diagonally  across  the  back  and  body,
thus  crossing  the  gown  from  right  to  left.

Carpenters,  Order  of.  An  organ¬
ized  body  in  Holland  and  Belgium,  with
central  point  of  assembly  at  Antwerp.
Their  gatherings  were  at  night  in  some
neighboring  forest.

Carthusians.  A  religious  order
founded  by  Bruno  in  1080,  and  named
from  Chartreux,  in  France,  the  place  of


their  institution.  They  were  noted  for
their  austerity.

Cartulary.  An  officer  who  has  charge
of  the  register  or  other  books  of  record.

Caryatides.  The  women  of  Caryae,
a  city  of  Arcadia,  or  the  priestesses  serving
in  the  Temple  of  Diana.  Female  figures
used  instead  of  columns  for  support  in
buildings.  Figures  of  women  serving  to
support  entablatures.  When  those  of  men
are  used,  they  are  termed  Telamones  and
Atlantes.  The  inhabitants  of  Caryae  hav¬
ing  joined  the  Persians  after  the  battle  of
Thermopylae,  the  Greeks,  after  their  vic¬
tory  over  the  Persians,  destroyed  the  town,
slew  the  men,  and  carried  the  women  into
captivity.  The  female  form,  in  national
costume,  was  used  to  support  entablatures
as  commemorative  of  their  disgrace.

Catacombs.  Subterraneous  passages,
at  times  opening  into  small  chambers,
formed  generally  in  a  soft  rock  which  is
easily  excavated,  such  as  tufa.  Catacombs
are  to  be  found  in  many  countries,  and
are  used  either  as  places  of  sepulture  or
concealment  of  the  living.  Those  near


THE  NORTHERN  SECTION  OF  THE  CATACOMB  OF
CALLIXTUS.


Rome  are  on  the  Via  Appia,  to  whose
dreary  crypts  the  early  Christians  retired
for  seclusion  and  worship,  and  where  the
bodies  of  many  saints  and  martyrs  were
consigned.  The  above  engraving  shows
but  a  small  portion  of  the  northern  sec¬
tion  of  the  catacomb  of  Callixtus.  The
passage-ways  were  labyrinthian,  consisting
of  narrow  galleries  shooting  out  in  most
unexpected  directions,  and  at  times  ending
in  a  cell  for  the  placing  of  bodies  of  the
dead,  one  above  the  other,  separated  by  the
natural  stone,  with  stone  doors,  on  which
were  placed  the  letters  D.  M.  (Deo  Maxi¬
mus)  or  X  P,  the  Greek  letters  for  Christ.
At  irregular  intervals  these  galleries  ex¬
pand  into  wide  and  lofty  vaulted  chambers,
having  the  appearance  of  large  chapels.
They  are  reported  as  over  twenty  miles  in
length,  although,  in  consequence  of  the
fallen  portions,  only  about  six  miles  would
seem  to  exist.  The  galleries  are  generally
about  eight  feet  high  and  five  wide.  When
the  Lombards  besieged  Rome  in  the  eighth


960


CATECHUMEN


ADDENDUM.


CHERUBIM


century,  many  of  the  catacombs  were  de¬
stroyed.  Frescoes  of  considerable  value
are  still  to  be  found  in  those  that  are  now
open.  The  catacombs  in  Egypt  were  ex¬
tensively  explored  by  Belzoni  in  1818,
when  the  sarcophagus  of  Psammetichus,
formed  of  Oriental  alabaster  exquisitely
sculptured,  was  discovered  and  taken  to
England.  The  catacombs  of  Paris  are
quite  extensive.  The  Twenty-sixth  de¬
gree,  Scottish  Rite,  contains  much  on  this
subject.

Cateclinmeil.  One  who  had  attained
the  second  degree  of  the  Essenian  or  early
Christian  Mysteries  and  assumed  the  name
of  Constans.  There  were  three  degrees  in
the  ceremonies,  which,  to  a  limited  extent,
resembled  the  Pagan  services.  Of  the  three
classes,  the  first  were  Auditors,  the  second
Catechumens,  and  the  third  the  Faithful.
The  Auditors  were  novices,  prepared  by
ceremonies  and  instruction  to  receive  the
dogmas  of  Christianity.  A  portion  of
these  dogmas  was  made  known  to  the
Catechumens,  who,  after  particular  purifi¬
cations,  received  baptism,  or  the  initiation
of  th etheogenesis  (divine  regeneration);  but
in  the  grand  mysteries  of  that  religion — the
incarnation,  nativity,  passion,  and  resurrec¬
tion  of  Christ — none  was  initiated  but  the
Faithful.  The  Mysteries  were  divided  into
two  parts — the  first,  styled  the  Mass  of  the
Catechumans;  the  second,  the  Mass  of  the
Faithful.

Many  beautiful  ceremonies  and  much
instruction  touching  these  matters  will  be
found  in  that  most  enticing  degree  called
Prince  of  Mercy,  and  known  as  the  Twenty-
sixth  in  the  Scottish  Rite  services.

Cathari,  Society  of  the.  An
Italian  heretical  secret  society  organized
in  the  twelfth  century,  with  doctrines  sim¬
ilar  to  the  Albigenses  and  Maniehees,  pro¬
claiming  metempsychosis,  and  enforcing
industry,  enjoining  charity,  establishing
schools,  and  opposed  to  the  judicial  death
penalty.  They  disavowed  the  adoration  of
the  cross,  with  a  feeling  that  an  instrument
of  torture  should  not  be  held  in  veneration.
Their  secret  services  fell  under  the  disap¬
proval  of  the  Church  of  Rome.

Cenephorus.  The  officer  in  charge
of  the  smaller  sacred  implements  used  for
the  sacrifice,  and  who  bore  them  with  the
holy  incense  and  other  sacred  light  material
in  the  processional  services.

Ceridwen.  The  Isis  of  the  Druids.

Chaldean  Cylinder.  The  cylin¬
der  so  recently  discovered  by  Mr.  Rassam
in  the  course  of  his  excavations  in  Baby¬
lonia,  which  has  attracted  so  much  atten¬
tion  of  the  London  Society  of  Biblical
Archaeology,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable
yet  made  known,  by  reason  of  the  light  it


throws  upon  the  ancient  chronology  of  the
Chaldean  Empire.  It  dates  from  the  time
of  Nabonides,  and  records,  among  various
things,  that  this  sovereign,  digging  under
the  foundations  of  the  Temple  of  the  Sun-
god  at  Sippara,  forty-five  years  after  the
death  of  King  Nebuchadnezzar,  came
upon  a  cylinder  of  Naramsin,  the  son  of
Nargon,  which  no  one  had  seen  for  “3200
years.”  This  gives  as  the  date  of  the
ancient  sovereign  named  3750  B.  c.  This,
and  the  fact  pointed  out  by  Prof.  Oppert,
that  there  was  in  those  early  days  already
“  lively  intercourse  between  Chaldea  and
Egypt,”  will  have  to  be  taken  into  account
by  future  Bible  critics.  This  destroys  the
conception  of  Abraham,  the  founder  of
the  Jews,  as  a  wanderer  or  nomad,  and
establishes  the  existence  of  two  highly
civilized,  as  well  as  cultured,  empires  in
Egypt  and  Chaldea  more  than  5500  years
ago;  that  the  high-road  between  them  lay
direct  through  Southern  Palestine,  and
that  Abraham  was  a  native  of  the  one  great
empire  and  an  honored  visitor  in  the  other.
Thus  has  been  opened  up  a  new  field  for
investigation  in  the  matter  of  Akkad  and
Akkadian  civilization.

Chapter  of  R.  Arch  Ilasons,
An  Old.  There  is  in  Boston,  .Mass.,  a
chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  which  was
holden  in  St.  Andrew’s  Lodge  and  formed
about  the  year  1764.  See  Royal  Arch  Ma¬
sons,  Massachusetts  ;  also,  Pennsylvania.

Characteristics.  The  prefix  to  sig¬
natures  of  brethren  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish
Rite  is  as  follows :  To  that  of  the  Sovereign
Grand  Commander,  the  triple  cross  cross-
|  let,  as  in  (1),  in  red  ink.  To  that  of  an
Inspector-General  other  than  a  Com¬
mander  (2),  in  red  ink.  To  that  of  a
Brother  of  the  Royal  Secret,  32°  (3),  in  red
ink.  In  the  Northern  Jurisdiction  of  the
U.  S.,  a  Rose  Croix  Knight  will  suffix  a
triangle  surmounted  by  a  cross  in  red  ink,
as  in  (4).  In  all  cases,  it  is  usual  to  place
the  degree  rank  in  a  triangle  after  the  name.


12  3  4


Cheriihim  or  Kernbim  and
Ark.  Much  light  has  been  thrown  upon
the  plastic  form  of  these  symbols  during
the  past  few  years,  not  only  as  to  the
Cherubim  of  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant
spoken  of  in  Exodus,  Samuel,  Kings,  and
Chronicles,  but  those  of  Chaldeo- Assyrian
art  which  beautified  the  gates  of  the  palace
of  Sennacherib  at  Nineveh,  and  other  struc-
.  tures.


CHERUBIM


ADDENDUM.


CHERUBIM


961


For  the  construction  of  the  Ark,  God
directed  Moses  that  “the  Kerubim  shall
stretch  their  wings  above  it,  covering  the
propitiatory  with  their  wings,  and  facing
one  another,  and  the  Kerubim  shall  have
their  faces  turned  toward  the  propitiatory
(mercy-seat).”  The  Kirubi  of  the  Assy¬
rian  type,  in  the  shape  of  bulls  with  ex¬
tended  wings,  in  nowise  meet  the  descrip¬
tion  given  above.  The  figures  which  can
be  found  in  various  places  upon  Egyptian
monuments,  placed  face  to  face  on  either
side  of  the  Naos  of  the  gods,  and  stretch¬
ing  out  their  arms,  furnished  with  great
wings,  as  though  to  envelop  them  (Wilkin¬
son,  Manners  and  Customs  of  Ancient  Egyp¬
tians,  1878,  vol.  iii.),  more  fully  meet  the
idea — in  fact,  it  is  convincing,  when  we  re¬
member  the  period,  and  note  that  all  else
about  the  sacred  furnishings  of  the  Tab¬
ernacle,  or  Ohel-mo‘ed,  are  exclusively
Egyptian  in  form,  as  well  as  the  sacerdotal
costumes.  (See  IdEgypte  et  Moise ,  by  Abbe
Ancessi,  Paris,  1875.)  Furthermore,  this
was  most  natural,  since  the  period  was
immediately  after  the  exodus.  The  Keru¬
bim  of  the  Ark  were  remodelled  by  Solo¬
mon  after  designs  furnished  by  his  father,
David  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  18).


At  this  epoch,  says  Francois  Lenormant,
Professor  of  Archaeology  at  the  National
Library  of  France,  in  his  Beginnings  of
History,  1882,  the  Egyptian  influence  was
no  longer  supreme  in  its  sway  over  the
Hebrews;  that  the  Assyro- Babylonian  influ¬
ence  balanced  it;  that  the  new  Kerubim,
then  executed,  may  have  been  different
from  the  ancient  ones  as  described  in  Ex¬
odus;  in  fact,  Kirubi  after  the  Assyrian


THE  ARK  OF  PHILE.


type,  which  formed  a  Merkabah  fa  chariot,
1  Chron.  xxviii.  18),  upon  whicn  Yahveh
was  seated.  In  the  Egyptian  monuments
the  gods  are  often  represented  between  the


forward-stretching  wings  of  sparrow-hawks
or  vultures,  placed  face  to  face,  and  birds
of  this  kind  often  enfold  with  their  wings
the  divine  Naos.

The  adornment  of  the  Tabernacle,  as
mentioned  in  Exodus,  excluded  every
figure  susceptible  of  an  idolatrous  charac¬
ter,  which  is  far  from  being  the  case  in
what  we  know  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon.
In  the  matter  of  plastic  images,  none  was
admitted  save  only  the  Kerubim,  which
were  not  only  placed  upon  the  Ark,  but
whose  representations  are  woven  into  the
hangings  of  the  Mishkan  and  the  veil
which  separates  the  Holy  Place  from  the
Holy  of  Holies.  It  is  therefore  most  prob¬
able  that  the  Kerubim  of  Exodus  were
great  eagles  or  birds — Kurubi — while  un¬
der  the  remodelling  by  Solomon  these  were
changed  to  Kirubi  with  human  faces.

The  prophet  Ezekiel  describes  four  hay-
y6th  or  kerubim,  two  and  two,  back  to
back,  and  going  “each  one  straight  for¬
ward”  toward  the  four  quarters.  The
Kerubim  of  the  Merkabah  of  Ezekiel  have
four  wings— two  lifted  up  and  two  cover¬
ing  their  back — and  four  human  faces  set
in  pairs,  to  the  right  and  to  the  left,  one
of  a  man,  one  of  a  bull,  one  of  a  lion,  and
one  of  an  eagle — the  faces  of  creatures
which  combine  all  the  emblems  of  strength
depicted  by  the  Chaldeo- Assyrian  bull.
Ezekiel  (Yehezqel)  thus  describes  the  Ker¬
ubim  with  several  faces  which,  alternately
with  the  palm-trees,  decorated  the  frieze
around  the  interior  of  the  temple  at  Jeru¬
salem:  “Each  Kerub  had  two  faces,  a
man’s  face  turned  one  way  toward  the
palm-tree,  and  a  lion’s  face  turned  the
other  way  toward  the  other  palm-tree;
and  it  was  in  this  wise  all  around  the
house.”

The  following  information,  furnished  by
Prof.  Lenormant,  on  the  subject  of  Cheru¬
bim,  is  important:  “Deductions  were  for¬
merly  made  from  the  Aryan  theory  to
support  primitive  tradition  as  to  origin
and  form,  but  these  have  been  overthrown,
and  the  Semitic  interpretation  made  mani¬
fest  through  finding  the  name  of  the  Keru¬
bim  in  the  cuneiform  inscriptions;  that
in  place  of  referring  the  Hebrew  word
kerub  to  the  Aryan  root  grabh,  ‘  to  seize,’
the  word  is  more  properly  of  Semitic  origin,
from  the  root  kdrab,  signifying  ‘bull,’  or
a  creature  strong  and  powerful  (X3VED)-
Referring  to  the  prophet  Ezekiel  i.  10  and
x.  14,  the  two  parallel  passages  use  the
word  kerub  interchangeably  with  shor,
‘bull,’  the  ‘  face  of  a  bull’  and  ‘face  of  a
cherub,’  which  are  synonymous  expressions.
Since  we  have  come  to  know  those  colossal
images  of  winged  bulls  with  human  faces,
crowned  with  the  lofty  cidaris,  decorated


5  V


61


962


CHINA


ADDENDUM.


CHROMATIC


with  several  pairs  of  horns,  which  flanked
the  gateways  of  the  Assyrian  palaces,  a
number  of  scholars,  intimately  acquainted
with  antique  sculpture,  have  been  zealous
in  associating  them  with  the  Kerubim  of
the  Bible.  .  .  .  The  winged  bull  with  a
human  head  figures  in  a  bas-relief  in  the
palace  of  Khorsabad  as  a  favoring  and
protecting  genius,  which  watches  over  the
safe  navigation  of  the  transports  that  carry
the  wood  of  Lebanon  by  sea.  The  bulls
whose  images  are  placed  at  the  gateways
of  the  palaces  and  temples,  as  described  in
the  above  ideographic  group,  are  the  guar¬
dian  genii,  who  are  looked  upon  as  living
beings.  As  the  result  of  a  veritable  magical
operation,  the  supernatural  creature  is  sup¬
posed  to  reside  within  these  bodies  of  stone.”

In  a  bilingual  document,  Akkadian  with
an  Assyrian  version,  we  read  invocations
to  the  two  bulls  who  flanked  the  gate  of
the  infernal  abode,  which  wrere  no  longer
simulacra  of  stone,  but  living  beings,  like
the  bulls  at  the  gates  of  the  celestial  pal¬
aces  of  the  gods.  The  following  is  one  of
the  unique  expressions  made  in  the  ears
of  the  bull  which  stands  to  the  right  of
the  bronze  inclosure :

“  Great  Bull,  most  great  Bull,  stamping
before  the  holy  gates,  he  opens  the  interior ;
director  of  Abundance,  who  supports  the
god  Nirba,  he  who  gives  their  glory  to  the
cultivated  fields,  my  pure  hands  sacrifice
toward  thee.”

Similar  expressions  were  then  made  in
the  bull’s  left  ear.

These  genii,  in  the  form  of  winged  bulls
with  human  countenances,  were  stationed
as  guardians  at  the  portals  of  the  edifices
of  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  and  were  given
the  name  of  Kirubi ;  thus,  Kirubu  damqu
lippaqid,  “  May  the  propitious  Kirubguard.”
Numerous  authorities  may  be  given  to  show
that  the  Chaldeo-Assyrians’  Kirub,  from
the  tenth  to  the  fifth  century  before  our
era,  whose  name  is  identical  with  the  He¬
brew  Kerub,  was  the  winged  bull  with  a
human  head.  The  Israelites,  during  the
times  of  the  Kings  and  the  Prophets,  pic¬
tured  to  themselves  the  Kerubim  under
this  form.*

China.  A  secret  society,  akin  to  Ma¬
sonry  and  indigenous  to  China,  is  the  “  Most
Ancient  Order  of  Suastica,”  or  the  Brother¬
hood  of  the  Mystic  Cross,  said  to  have  been
founded  1027  B.  c.  by  Fohi,  and  introduced
into  China  975  B.  c.  It  contains  three
degrees :  Apprentice  Brothers,  Tao  Sze  (or
Doctors  of  Reason),  and  Grand  Master.
The  Apprentice  wears  the  Jaina  Cross,


*  “  The  figures  of  the  Cherubim  are  said  to  have
defeated  Dante’s  power  of  constructive  imagina¬
tion.”


worked  on  a  blue  silk  ribbon ;  the  Tao  Sze
wears  a  cross  of  silver;  and  the  Grand
Master  one  in  gold.  The  meetings  are
called  “Tents.”  For  Chinese  Faith, see  King.

There  is  a  District  Grand  Lodge  of  Free
and  Accepted  Masons  at  Hong  Kong  and
South  China,  which  holds  its  Communica¬
tions  in  December.

Chinese  Classics  and  Symbol¬
ism.  Mr.  Giles,  well  versed  in  matters
pertaining  to  Chinese  literature,  customs,
and  archaeology,  is  the  authority  for  stating
that  in  the  written  language  of  the  Chinese


many  curious  expressions  were  in  use  seven
hundred  years  before  the  Christian  era,  or
only  about  two  hundred  years  after  the
death  of  King  Solomon,  bearing  close
proximity  to  those  used  prominently  in
Masonry.  The  following  quotation  from
the  works  of  Mencius,  the  great  disciple
of  Confucius,  is  given  in  illustration:  “A
Master  Mason,  in  teaching  his  apprentices,
makes  use  of  the  compasses  and  the  square.
Ye  who  are  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of  wis¬
dom  must  also  make  use  of  the  compasses
and  the  square.”  These  two  words,  “  com¬
passes”  and  “square,”  in  the  Chinese  lan¬
guage  represent  “order,  regularity,  and
propriety.”  Mr.  Giles  points  out  that  in
the  oldest  of  the  Chinese  classics,  “  which
embraces  a  period  from  the  twenty-fourth
to  the  seventh  century  before  Christ,  there
are  distinct  allusions  to  this  particular
symbolism.”  See  King.

Chromatic  Calendar.  “The
Five  Points.”  In  the  great  Temple,
usually  known  as  the  Ocean  Banner  Monas¬
tery,  at  Honam,  a  suburb  of  Canton,  China,
we  find  four  colossal  idols  occupying  a  large
porch,  each  image  being  painted  a  different
color.  Ch’i-kwoh,  who  rules  the  north  and
grants  propitious  winds,  is  dark;  Kwang-
muh  is  red,  and  to  him  it  is  given  to  rule
the  south  and  control  the  fire,  air,  and
water ;  To-man’  rules  the  west,  and  grants
or  withholds  rain,  his  color  being  white;
while  Chang-tsang,  whose  color  is  green,
rules  the  winds  and  keeps  them  within
their  proper  bounds,  his  supreme  control
being  exercised  over  the  east.  The  old
custom  of  associating  colors  with  the  four
quarters  of  the  globe  has  probably  led  to
the  habit  of  describing  the  winds  from
these  respective  points  as  possessed  of  the
same  colors.  The  fifth,  the  earth,  the  cen¬
tral  remaining  point,  still  is  conjectural.
Thus,  we  also  find  in  China  a  set  of  deities
known  as  the  five  rulers ;  their  colors,  ele¬
ments,  and  points  may  be  thus  represented :


1.

2.

3.

4.

5.


Black.

Red.

Green.

White.

Yellow.


Water.

Fire.

Wood.

Metal.

Earth.


North.

South.

East.

West.

Middle.


Back.

Breast.

Mouth.

Knee.

Foot.


CHROMATIC


ADDENDUM.


CLAVEL


963


These  again  are  in  turn  associated  with
the  planets,  and  the  study  of  Chinese  and
Babylonian  planet-colors  is  full  of  curious
points  of  similarity.

Black,  typifying  the  north,  has  two
direct  opponents  in  symbolic  colors,  and
these  are  red  and  white.  The  first  as  im¬
plying  ignorance  arising  from  evil  passions,
the  second  indicating  ignorance  of  mind.
Red-black  is  called  in  Hebrew  □in,  Heum,
from  which  comes  Heutne,  an  inclosing
wall.  Black  from  white,  in  Hebrew,  is
“int?,  sehfier,  signifying  the  dawn  of  light
to  the  mind  of  the  Masonic  profane.  The
hand  to  back ,  as  the  words  of  wisdom  are
about  to  be  spoken.

In  the  Egyptian,  the  black  Osiris  ap¬
pears  at  the  commencement  of  the  Funereal
Ritual,  representing  the  state  of  the  soul
which  passes  into  the  world  of  light.
Anubis,  one  of  the  sons  of  Osiris,  who
weighs  the  soul  in  the  scales  of  Amenti,
and  is  the  god  of  the  dead,  is  black.  The
Conductor,  or  Master  of  Ceremonies,  Thoth
Psychopompe,  has  the  head  of  the  black
Ibis.  See  Truth.

Red.  In  Hebrew,  the  fire  of  love,  which
burns  in  the  south,  is  nix,  are ,  to  burn.
On  Egyptian  monuments,  and  in  their
temples,  the  flesh  of  men  is  painted  red,
and  that  of  women  yellow.  The  same  dif¬
ference  exists  between  the  gods  and  god¬
desses,  except  where  specially  otherwise
defined.  Man’s  name  in  Hebrew  signifies
red,  and  as  the  image  of  fire  is  love,  it  is
the  universal  tie  of  beings  from  breast  to
breast.

Green.  pV,  Irq,  viridis,  verdure.  JTpt
the  firmament,  also  the  winds.  Green
designates  the  beginning,  the  creation,  the
birth,  as  the  world  was  called  into  being
in  the  wisdom  of  God  by  his  word  of  mouth, ,
and  Light  was  to  appear  in  the  East.
Phtha  was  the  Egyptian  Creator  of  the
world;  he  was  at  times  represented  with
his  flesh  painted  green,  and  holding  a
sceptre  of  four  colors,  red,  blue,  green,  and
yellow:  fire,  air,  water,  and  earth.  The
god  Lunus,  the  Moon,  in  Hebrew  n"V,
irhe,  is  formed  of  one  of  the  roots  of
green,  signifying  to  found  or  set  in  order.
Green  is  the  symbol  of  Victory  as  well  as
Hope,  in  the  symbolic  colors  (of  Mackey,
which  see).

White.  *|in,  Heur ,  to  be  white;
O'-nn,  Heurim,  to  be  noble  and  pure.
The  Egyptian  spirits  of  the  dead  were
clothed  in  white,  like  the  priests.  Phtha,
the  creator  and  regenerator,  was  frequently
robed  in  a  white  vestment,  symbol  of  the
egg  from  which  he  was  born,  enveloped  in
the  white  or  albumen.  The  head  of  Osiris
was  draped  in  a  white  tunic.  While  the
Chinese  metaphorically  represented  Metal


by  this  color,  the  Egyptians  and  Hebrews
made  it  the  symbol  of  Earth.  Its  reference
to  the  West  would  imply  the  first  point
whereat  the  profane  bent  the  knee  in  sup¬
plication  to  the  Deity.

Yellow.  any,  Tseb,  gold  color,  desig¬
nates  a  radiation  of  light,  signifying  to
shine,  to  be  resplendent.  Man,  or  the
male  principle,  symbolized  by  ardent  fire,
was  represented  by  red,  and  the  female
principle,  identified  with  the  idea  of  light
or  flame,  represented  by  yellow  or  light-
colored  earth,  over  which  the  swift-footed
messenger  bears  the  tidings  of  a  Mason’s
distress  and  the  return  of  obligatory  succor.
This  light  of  the  fire,  the  female  of  divine
beauty,  the  Egyptian  Venus,  was  called
Athor,  signifying  dwelling  of  Horus,  and
was  thus  represented.


Cir^nit.  Fort,  in  his  Early  History  and
Antiquities  of  Freemasonry ,  says :  “  Northern
kings,  immediately  upon  acceding  to  the
throne,  made  a  ‘gait’  or  procession  about
their  realms.  According  to  the  Scandi¬
navian  laws,  when  real  property  was  trans¬
ferred,  possession  was  incomplete  until  a
circuit  was  made  around  the  estate  by  the
buyer  and  vendor.”

During  the  installation  ceremonies  of
the  Master  of  a  Masonic  Lodge,  a  pro¬
cession  of  all  the  Craftsmen  march  around
the  room  before  the  Master,  to  whom  an
appropriate  salute  is  tendered.  This  Cir¬
cuit  is  designed  to  signify  that  the  new
incumbent  reduces  the  Lodge  to  his  pos¬
session  in  this  symbolic  manner.

Clavel,  T.  Bcguc.  An  abb6.  A
French  Masonic  writer,  who  published,  in
1842,  a  Histoire  PUtoresquc  de  la  Franc- Ma-
qonnerie  et  des  Societes  A  nciennes  et  Modernes.
This  work  contains  a  great  amount  of  inter¬
esting  and  valuable  information,  notwith¬
standing  many  historical  inaccuracies,  es¬
pecially  in  reference  to  the  Ancient  Ac¬
cepted  Scottish  Rite,  of  which  the  author
was  an  adversary.  Clavel  is  also  the  author
of  another  work,  published  in  1844,  and
entitled  Histoire  Pittoresque  des  Religions,


964


CLECHE


ADDENDUM.


CONVENTIONS


Doctrines,  Ceremonies  el  Coutumes  Religicuses
de  tous  les  Reuples  du  Monde.  For  the  pub¬
lication  of  the  former  work  without  au¬
thority,  he  was  suspended  by  the  Grand
Orient  for  two  months,  and  condemned  to
pay  a  fine.  Clavel  appealed  to  the  intelli¬
gence  of  the  Fraternity  against  this  sen¬
tence.  In  1844,  he  commenced  the  publi¬
cation  of  a  Masonic  Journal  called  the
Grand  Orient,  the  title  of  which  he  subse¬
quently  changed  to  the  Orient.  As  he  had
not  obtained  the  consent  of  the  Grand
Orient,  he  was  again  brought  before  that
body,  and  the  sentence  of  perpetual  ex¬
clusion  from  the  Grand  Orient  pronounced
against  him.  Rebold  says  that  it  was  the
act  of  a  faction,  and  obtained  by  unfair
means.  It  was  not  sustained  by  the  judg¬
ment  of  the  Craft  in  France,  with  whom
Clavel  gained  reputation  and  popularity.
Notwithstanding  the  Masonic  literary  la¬
bors  of  Clavel,  an  account  of  the  time  of
his  birth,  or  of  his  death,  appears  to  be  ob¬
scure.  His  desire  seemed  to  be  to  establish
as  history,  by  publication,  those  views
which  he  personally  entertained  and  form¬
ed  ;  gathered  from  sources  of  doubtful
character,  he  desired  they  should  not  be
questioned  in  the  future,  semel pro  semper.

C'leelie.  A  cross  charged  with  another
of  the  same  figure,  but  whose  color  is  that
of  the  field.

College.  The  regular  Convocation  of
the  subordinate  bodies  of  the  Society  of
Rosicrucians  is  called  an  Assemblage  of
the  College,  at  which  their  mysteries  are
celebrated,  by  initiation  and  advancement,
at  the  conclusion  of  which  the  Mystic  Cir¬
cle  is  broken.

Colleges,  Irisli.  Established  in
Paris  about  1730,  and  were  rapidly  being
promulgated  over  France,  when  they  were
superseded  by  the  Scottish  Chapters.

Collocatio.  The  Greek  custom  of
exposing  the  corpse  on  a  bier  over  night,
near  the  threshold,  that  all  might  be  con¬
vinced  of  the  normal  death.

Colored  Fraternities.  The  secret
societies  of  negroes  claiming  to  be  Masonic
are  quite  extensive,  embracing  fourteen
Grand  Lodges,  to  wit :  that  of  Arkansas,
Colorado,  Dominica,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Li¬
beria,  Mississippi,  Missouri,  New  Jersey,
New  York,  North  Carolina,  Ontario,  Penn¬
sylvania,  and  South  Carolina.

Companions,  The  Twelve.  The
Eev.  George  F.  Fort  relates  that  the
“  twelve  Companions  of  G.  Master  Hiram
correspond  unquestionably  to  the  twelve
zodiacal  signs,  or  the  twelve  months  of  the
year.  The  ground-work  of  this  tradition
of  the  twelve  is  a  fragment  of  ancient  nat¬
ural  religion,  common  to  both  Oriental  and
European  nations ;  or,  more  properly,  was


derived  from  identical  sources.  The  treach¬
erous  Craftsmen  of  Hiram  the  Good  are
the  three  winter  months  which  slew  him.
He  is  the  sun  surviving  during  the  eleven
consecutive  months,  but  subjected  to  the
irresistible  power  of  three  ruffians,  the  win¬
ter  months;  in  the  twelfth  and  last  month,
that  luminary,  Hiram,  the  good,  the  beau¬
teous,  the  bright,  the  sun  god,  is  extin¬
guished.”

Connecticut.  The  first  Lodge  organ¬
ized  in  Connecticut  was  Hiram  Lodge,  at
New  Haven,  which  received  its  charter,  in
1750,  from  St.  John’s  Grand  Lodge,  of
Boston.  Other  Lodges  were  instituted,
some  by  authority  from  Massachusetts,
others  from  that  derived  from  New  York.
A  convention  of  delegates  from  twelve
Lodges  assembled  at  New  Haven,  July  8,
1789,  and  organized  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Connecticut,  Pierpont  Edwards  being
elected  Grand  Master.

In  1796,  there  were  three  Royal  Arch
Chapters  in  Connecticut.  In  1797,  these
Chapters  had  entered  into  an  association,
probably  with  the  idea  of  establishing  a
Grand  Chapter.  On  January  24,  1798,  a
convention  of  delegates  from  Massachu¬
setts,  Rhode  Island,  Connecticut,  and  New
York  was  held  at  Hartford,  when  a  confer¬
ence  was  had  on  the  subject  of  the  two  con¬
ventions,  the  delegates  from ’Connecticut
united  with  those  from  the  other  States  in
forming  the  “  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter
of  the  Northern  States  of  America.”  By
the  constitution  then  adopted,  the  “  Deputy
Grand  Chapter”  of  Connecticut  was  estab¬
lished.  The  title  was  changed  in  the  sub¬
sequent  year  for  that  of  “  Grand  Chapter.”
Webb  gives  the  precise  date  of  the  organ¬
ization  of  the  Grand  Chapter  as  May  17,
1798.  See  Royal  Arch  Grand  Bodies  in
America.

The  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters  was  organized  in  1819.

The  Grand  Encampment  of  Knights
Templar  was  organized  September  13,
1827,  but  is  now  known  as  the  Grand  Com-
mandery.

Conventions  or  Congresses  of

Masons  in  chronological  order: —

926.  York,  under  Prince  Edwin  of
England.

1275.  Strasburg,  under  Edwin  Yon  Stein-
bach.

1459.  Ratisbon,  under  Jost  Dolzinger.

1464.  Ratisbon,  under  Grand  Lodge  of
Strasburg.

1469.  Spire,  under  Grand  Lodge  of  Stras-
burg.

1535.  Cologne,  by  Hermann,  Bishop  of
Cologne.

1563.  Basle,  by  Grand  Lodge  of  Stras¬
burg.


CORIUM


ADDENDUM.


CRATA


965


1717.  London,  by  the  Four  Old  Lodges.
Organization  of  Grand  Lodge.

1730.  Dublin,  by  the  Dublin  Lodges.

1736.  Edinburgh.  Organization  and  in¬
stitution  of  Grand  Lodge.

1756.  The  Hague,  by  the  Royal  Union
Lodge.

1762.  Paris  and  Berlin,  by  nine  commis¬
sioners  nominated  by  the  Sov.  G.  Council
of  P.  of  Masonry.

1763.  Jena,  by  the  Lodge  of  Strict  Ob¬
servance.

1764.  Jena,  by  Johnson  or  Beeker,  de¬
nounced  by  Baron  Hund.

1765.  Altenberg,  a  continuation  wherein
Hund  was  elected  G.  M.  of  Rite  of  Strict
Observance.

1772.  Kohl,  by  Ferdinand  of  Brunswick
and  Baron  Hund,  without  success.

1775.  Brunswick,  by  Ferdinand,  Duke
of  Brunswick.

1778.  Lyons,  by  Lodge  of  Chevaliers  Bi-
enfaisants.

1778.  Wolfenbiittel,  by  Duke  of  Bruns¬
wick.

1782.  Wilhemsbad,  an  impotent  session
for  purification.

1781.  Paris,  a  medley  of  Lovers  of  Truth
and  United  Friends.

1786.  Berlin,  alleged  to  have  been  con¬
vened  by  Frederick  Second  of  Prussia.

1822.  Washington,  a  mutual  assemblage
of  American  Lodges.

1843.  Baltimore,  a  mutual  assemblage
of  American  Lodges.

1847.  Baltimore,  a  mutual  assemblage
of  American  Lodges.

1853.  Lexington,  Ky.,  a  mutual  assem¬
blage  of  American  Lodges.

1855.  Paris,  by  Grand  Orient  of  France.

1859.  Chicago.  A  volunteer  assemblage.

1875.  Lausanne.  A  convention  of  the
Supreme  Councils  of  the  Scottish  Rite
of  the  World,  which  subsequently  led  to
an  eternal  bond  of  unity  both  offensive
and  defensive.

Corium.  An  armor  worn  by  Roman
soldiers  made  of  leather  scales,  aud  much


used  in  the  time  of  Edward  I.  The  leather
leaves  or  scales  overlapping  each  other,


made  the  armor  impervious  to  arrows,  and
caused  the  glance  of  spears  and  javelins.

Coronet,  Ducal.  (Italian,  Coronet-
ta.)  An  inferior  crown  worn  by  noblemen,
such  as  that  of  a  Brit¬
ish  duke,  adorned  with
strawberry  leaves ;  that
of  a  marquis  has  leaves
with  pearls  interposed ;
that  of  an  earl  has  the
pearls  above  the  leaves ;
that  of  a  viscount  is
surrounded  with  pearls
only;  that  of  a  baron
has  only  four  pearls.  The  ducal  coronet
is  a  prominent  symbol  in  the  Thirty-third
degree  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Cosniist.  A  religious  faith  of  late
recognition,  having  for  its  motto,  “  Deeds,
not  Creeds,”  and  for  its  principle  the
service  of  humanity  is  the  supreme  duty.
The  design  of  Cosmism  is  to  join  all  men
and  women  into  one  family,  in  which  the
principle  of  equality,  together  with  that  of
brotherly  love  (that  is,  love  of  the  human
race),  is  the  predominant  one,  and  the
moral  and  material  welfare  of  all  the  sole
aim  and  purpose.

The  Cosmists  are  enjoined  to  act  as  fol¬
lows  :  To  give  one  another  encouragement
and  aid,  both  material  and  moral ;  to  cul¬
tivate  all  their  faculties;  to  contemplate
all  mankind  as  brethren;  to  be  courteous
and  forbearing  to  each  and  all ;  to  practise
charity  without  publicity  or  ostentation.

Freemasonry  is  an  intensely  theistical
institution ;  but  its  principles  could  scarcely
be  better  expressed  than  those  above  enu¬
merated  as  tbe  foundation  of  the  Cosmistic
faith ;  more  especially  in  the  motto,  “  Deeds,
not  Creeds.”

There  is  an  observable  difference  between
Cosmists  and  Secularists,  Collectivists  and
Positivists.

Cottyt  o,  Mysteries  of.  These  were
instituted  in  Thrace,  and  thence  found  their
way  into  Greece  and  Rome,  and  were  known
as  the  Rites  of  the  Bona  Dea.  The  mem¬
bers  were  exclusively  women.  The  intrud¬
ing  of  Clodius,  in  female  disguise,  into  the
ceremonies,  was  severely  paid  for.

Council  of  Allied  Masonic  De¬
grees.  England.  An  organization  re-
orted  to  have  been  formed  in  1880  to  em-
osom,  protect,  and  promulgate  all  side
degrees  of  a  Masonic  or  other  secret  char¬
acter,  and  those  otherwise  unclaimed  that
may  appear  as  waifs.  The  central  organ¬
ization  is  termed  the  “Council  of  Allied
Masonic  Degrees.”  One  of  its  subordinates
is  Ebor  Council,  at  York.

Craft  Statistics.  See  Statistics  of
Graft  Masons.

Crata  Itcpoa.  An  Egyptian  Rite


966


CRESSET


ADDENDUM.


CUMULATION


of  seven  degrees:  1.  Pastophoros  or  Ap¬
prentice.  2.  Neocoros  or  Fellow  Craft.  3.
Melanophoros  or  Master.  4.  Kistophoros,
Provost  and  Judge.  5.  Balahate,  Knight
and  Priest  Philosopher.  6.  Knephnu,  King
(Royal  Arch  or  Astronomos).
7.  Propheta.  These  were  first
published  in  1770,  and  appear
to  have  had  no  really  ancient
origin  or  authority.

Cresset.  An  open  lamp
formerly  having  a  cross-piece
filled  with  combustible  material,
such  as  naphtha,  and  recognized
as  the  symbol  of  Light  and
Truth.

Crimson.  (Crimoysin,  0.
Eng.)  A  deep-red  color  tinged
with  blue,  emblematical  of  fer¬
vency  and  zeal ;  belonging  to  several  de¬
grees  of  the  Scottish  Rite  as  well  as  to  the
Holy  Royal  Arch.

Crosier.  The  staff  surmounted  by  a
cross  carried  before  a  bishop  on  occasions
of  solemn  ceremony.  They  are  generally
gilt,  and  made  light;  frequently  of  tin,  and
hollow.  The  pastoral  staff  has  a  circular
head.


Crosses.  In  referring  to  the  philo¬
sophic  triads  and  national  crosses,  there
will  be  found  in  a  work  entitled  The  <  eltic
Druids,  by  Godfrey  Higgins,  the  following:
“Few  causes  have  been  more  powerful  in
producing  mistakes  in  ancient  history  than
the  idea,  hastily  formed  by  all  ages,  that
every  monument  of  antiquity  marked  with
a  cross,  or  with  any  of  those  symbols  which
they  conceived  to  be  monograms  of  Christ
the  Saviour,  was  of  Christian  origin.  The
cross  is  as  common  in  India  as  in  Egypt
or  Europe.”  The  Rev.  Mr.  Maurice  re¬
marks  ( Indian  Antiquities ):  “Let  not  the
piety  of  the  Catholic  Christian  be  offended
at  the  assertion  that  the  cross  was  one  of
the  most  usual  symbols  of  Egypt  and
India.  The  emblem  of  universal  nature
is  equally  honored  in  the  Gentile  and
Christian  world.  In  the  Cave  of  Ele¬
phants,  in  India,  over  the  head  of  the
principal  figure  may  be  seen  the  cross,


with  other  symbols.”  Upon  the  breast  of
one  of  the  Egyptian  mummies  in  the  mu¬
seum  of  the  London  University  is  a  cross
upon  a  Calvary  or  mount.  People  in  those
countries  marked  their  sacred  water-jars,
dedicated  to  Canopus,  with  a  Tau  cross,
and  sometimes  eveu  that  now  known  as
the  Teutonic  cross.  The  fertility  of  the
country  about  the  river  Nile,  in  Egypt,
was  designated,  in  distance  on  its  banks
from  the  river  proper,  by  the  Nilometer,
in  the  form  of  a  cross.  The  erudite  Dr.  G.
L.  Ditson  says:  “The  Rabbins  say  that
when  Aaron  was  made  High  Priest  he  was
marked  in  the  forehead  by  Moses  with  a
cross  in  the  shape  of  that  now  known  as
St.  Andrew’s.”  Proselytes,  when  admitted
into  the  religious  mysteries  of  Eleusis,
were  marked  with  a  cross.  (See  Cross,
Mackey.)

Crowns.  As  the  result  of  considerable
classification,  Brother  Robert  Macoy  pre¬
sents  nine  principal  crowns  recognized  in
heraldry  and  symbolism :  1st.  The  Tri¬
umphal  crown,  of  which  there  were  three
kinds — a  laurel-wreath,  worn  by  a  General
while  in  the  act  of  triumph;  a  golden
crown,  in  imitation  of  laurel-leaves;  and
the  presentation  golden  crown  to  a  con¬
quering  General.  2d.  The  Blockade  crown
of  wild-flowers  and  grass,  presented  by  the
army  to  the  commander  breaking  and  re¬
lieving  a  siege.  3d.  The  Civic  crown  of
oak-leaves,  presented  to  a  soldier  who
saved  the  life  of  his  comrade.  4th.  The
Olive  crown,  conferred  upon  the  soldiery
or  commander  who  consummated  a  tri¬
umph.  5th.  The  Mural  crown,  which
rewarded  the  soldier  who  first  scaled  the
wall  of  a  besieged  city.  6th.  The  Naval
crown,  presented  to  the  Admiral  who  won
a  naval  victory.  7th.  The  Vallary  crown,
or  circlet  of  gold,  bestowed  on  that  soldier
who  first  surmounted  the  stockade  and
forced  an  entrance  into  the  enemy’s  camp.
8th.  The  Ovation  crown,  or  chaplet  of
myrtle,  awarded  to  a  General  who  bad
destroyed  a  despised  enemy  and  thus  ob¬
tained  the  honor  of  an  ovation.  9th.  The
Eastern  or  Radiated  crown,  a  golden  circle
set  with  projecting  rays.

The  crown  of  Darius,  used  in  Red  Cross
knighthood  and  in  the  Sixteenth  degree
Scottish  Rite,  was  one  of  seven  points,  the
central  front  projection  being  more  promi¬
nent  than  the  other  six  in  size  and  height.

Cumulation  of  Rites.  The  prac¬
tice  by  a  Lodge  of  two  or  more  Rites,  as
the  American  or  York  and  the  Ancient
Accepted  Scottish,  or  the  Scottish  and
French  Modern  Rites.  This  cumulation
of  Rites  has  been  practised  to  a  consider¬
able  extent  in  France,  and  in  Louisiana
in  the  United  States.


D


ADDENDUM.


DECLARING


967


D


D.  The  fourth  letter  of  the  Phoenician,
the  Hebrew,  the  Greek,  the  Roman,  and
of  nearly  all  alphabets.  In  Hebrew  it  is
*1,  Daleth,  signifying  the  door  of  life,  a  rep¬
resentation  of  which  was  probably  its  origi¬
nal  hieroglyph,  thus :


1  shows  the  approximation  to  the  Hebrew
Daleth  ;  2,  the  Greek  Delta,  resembling  the
opening  of  a  tent.  The  numerical  value
of  is  lour ;  as  a  Roman  numeral  it  stands
fo-  500.  The  Divine  name  in  Hebrew  con¬
nected  with  this  letter  is  but,  Daghul,  In-
signis.

Dactyli.  Priests  of  Cybele,  in  Phryg¬
ia,  of  whom  there  were  five,  which  num¬
ber  could  not  be  exceeded,  and  alluded  to
the  salutation  and  blessing  by  the  five  fin¬
gers  of  the  hand.

Daedalus.  A  famous  artist  and  mech¬
anician,  whose  genealogy  is  traced  in  the
Greek  myths  as  having  sprung  from  the
old  Athenian  race  of  kings,  the  Erechthei-
dse.  He  is  said  to  have  executed  the  Cre¬
tan  labyrinth,  the  reservoir  near  Megaris
in  Sicily,  the  Temple  of  Apollo  at  Capua,
and  the  celebrated  altar  sculptured  with
lions  on  the  Libyan  coast.  He  is  said  to
be  the  inventor  of  a  number  of  the  “Work¬
ing  Tools”  used  in  the  various  degrees  of
Masonry,  the  plumb-line  and  the  axe,  most
of  the  tools  used  in  carpentry,  and  of  glue.
Of  him  is  told  the  fable  of  his  flying  safely
over  the  Algean  by  means  of  wings  made
by  himself.  His  nephew,  Perdix,  is  the
reputed  inventor  of  the  third  Great  Light
in  Masonry,  the  Comp'asses,  which  are  ded¬
icated  to  the  Craft.  Through  envy  Daeda¬
lus  is  said  to  have  hurled  his  nephew,  Per¬
dix,  from  the  Temple  Athene.

Dilgraini,  Hubert.  A  writer  in
the  Amsterdam  Journal  of  November  3,
1735,  on  the  subject  of  Freemasonry,  which
caused  an  edict  from  the  States  General
forbidding  Masonic  gatherings  throughout
the  country.

Dagran,  I, on  is.  President  of  a
General  Assembly  of  thirty  Lodges,  held
on  St.  John’s  Day,  1756,  at  the  Hague,  for
the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Hol¬
land.  It  was  at  this  December  meeting
that  Baron  Van  Aerssen  Beyeren  Van
Hogerheide  was  appointed  Grand  Master.

Dakota.  The  Grand  Lodge  was  or¬
ganized  July  21, 1875.  In  1883,  there  were


fifteen  Lodges,  and  during  the  year  four¬
teen  dispensations  were  granted  for  new
Lodges.  Membership,  1533.  It  has  a
flourishing  G.  Chapter,  and  on  May  14,
1884,  a  G.  Commandery  of  K.  Templar
was  organized,  with  five  Commanderies.

Dalmatic.  A  robe  worn  by  deacons
in  some  Christian  churches.  Originally
made  of  linen,  as  shown  by  early  Christian
paintings  on  the  walls  of  the  Catacombs  at
Rome,  but  now  generally  made  of  heavy
woollen  or  silk  material,  as  the  planeta
worn  by  the  priest.  This  article  of  dress
has  become  quite  common  in  many  of  the
degrees  of  various  Rites.

Dambool.  The  vast  rock  temple  of
the  Buddhists  in  Ceylon,  containing  a  pro¬
fusion  of  carvings,  figures  of  Buddha  of
extraordinary  magnitude.  Monuments  of
this  deity  are,  in  the  common  Singhalese
term,  called  Dagoba,  but  the  more  general
name  is  Stupa  or  Tope.  See  Topes.

Daniel.  The  countersign  with  “  Da¬
rius”  for  Monday  in  the  32d  Degree,  Scot¬
tish  Rite.  A  Hebrew  prophet,  contempo¬
rary  of  Ezekiel,  about  600  B.  c.  Carried
captive  to  Babylon  in  the  fourth  year  of
Jehoiakim,  but  selected  for  instruction  in
all  the  learning  of  the  Chaldeans  by  order
of  the  Court.  His  skill  in  the  interpreta¬
tion  of  dreams  was  famed.  He  became
Governor  of  Babylon  under  Nebuchad¬
nezzar,  and  the  first  ruler  of  the  whole
Medo-Persian  Empire,  inferior  only  to
Darius,  the  king.  Under  Cyrus  he  had
been  Grand  Master  of  the  Palace  and
Interpreter  of  Visions,  as  narrated  in  the
15th  Degree,  Scottish  Rite.  He  did  not
return  with  his  countrymen  to  Judea  when
granted  their  liberty.  It  is  a  dispute  as  to
when  he  died,  or  where,  but  the  majority
favor  Sushan,  in  Persia,  when  he  was  90
years  of  age.  At  the  present  day  a  tomb
is  shown  in  this  ancient  city  bearing  his
name;  in  fact,  it  is  the  only  standing
structure  there.  Daniel  was  noted  and
famed  for  his  piety,  and  as  well  for  his
worldly  possessions.

Dao.  The  Zend  name  for  light,  from
Daer,  to  shine.

Darakiel.  A  responsive  word  in  the
23d  Degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite.  Sx'JVI.
Latin,  JDirectio  Dei.

Darius  I.  See  Cyrus,  King.

Decanus.  An  officer  in  the  Knights
Templar  system  of  Baron  Hund,  who,  in
the  absence  of  the  Grand  Master  and  his
Prior,  possessed  the  right  to  preside  in  the
Chapter.

Declaring  OIF.  “When  a  brother
ceases  to  visit  and  pay  his  monthly  sub-


968


DEGREES


ADDENDUM.


DIU


Bcription,  he  thereby  declares  himself  off
the  Lodge.”  ( Symbolical  Dictionary.)  In
England,  A.  F.  A.  Woodford  says,  the
brother  “resigns.”  Various  designations
rule  in  the  United  States,  the  chief  one
being  “  dropped  from  the  roll.”  In  some
States  the  brother  is  punished  by  “suspen¬
sion.”  If,  however,  in  certain  States,  he  is
clear  of  the  books,  upon  application  he  can
receive  a  certificate  to  that  effect,  and  be
dropped  from  the  roll.  In  England  he
gets  a  “clearance  certificate.”  In  Scotland
a  “dimit”  is  issued  under  the  seal  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland.

Degrees,  when  were  Three  Cre¬
ated  ?  Rather  than  rely  upon  any  facts
that  can  be  produced  by  American  students,
it  is  safer  to  look  to  the  earnest  seekers  for
historical  light  in  the  Mother  Masonic  coun¬
try,  especially  to  Brothers  W.  J.  Hughan,
R.  F.  Gould,  and  “Masonic  Student.”  We
therefore  make  free  with  their  printed  opin¬
ions.  No  one  has  ever  contended  that  the
three  degrees  as  we  have  them  to-day  were
the  same  before  1717,  in  arrangement,  in
teaching,  and  in  terminology,  because,  con¬
sidering  the  alterations  which  have  taken
place  since  1721,  to  go  back  to  that  date
would  be  an  absurd  contention.  There  is
undoubted  evidence  of  more  degrees  than
one  previous  to  1717,  and  that  remembering
the  continuous  division  of  the  Craft  into
Masters,  Fellows,  and  Apprentices  from  un¬
doubted  evidence,  Masonic  and  un-masonic,
it  is  a  fair  hypothesis,  in  fact  a  rational  and
logical  argument,  that  esoteric  ritual  also
ran  “on  all  fours”  with  exoteric  arrange¬
ments.  To  assume  that  the  second  and
third  degrees  were  arranged  between  1717
and  1721  or  1723,  appears  as  the  actual
negation  of  all  evidence  and  common  sense,
as  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  Anderson
and  Payne  and  the  Masons  of  1723  delib¬
erately  gave  themselves  to  a  tissue  of  mis¬
representation.  This  position  is  confirmed
by  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  a  sodality  of
a  secreta  receptio  in  the  seventeenth  century,
as  may  be  found  by  Plot’s  statements,  Ash-
mole’s  diary,  the  Chester  Harleian  MS.,
and  other  evidence.  True,  the  degrees  were
technical  and  honorary,  and  mark  no  dif¬
ference  of  teaching  or  secret  symbolism,
but  we  have  already  in  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury  a  statement  that  a  distinct  threefold
division  of  degree  teaching  did  exist,  which
is  hostile  to  the  hypothesis  that  our  present
arrangement  dates  from  only  1717-1721.
That  in  Dermot’s  statement  we  have  the
germ  of  truth  of  the  whole  matter,  namely,
that  from  1717  to  1721  the  society  was  in  a
weakly  state,  and  that  Stukelev’s  evidence
is  important,  on  this  particular.  But  to
presume  that  all  should  lend  themselves  to
a  falsehood  in  1723,  and  again  in  1738,  and  j


that  the  Society  of  Freemasons  had  con¬
cocted  the  present  system  between  1717  and
1721-1723,  and  should  suddenly  come  for¬
ward  with  two  new  degrees,  is  contrary  to
all  experience.  What  evidence  is  there  to
build  up  any  new  theory?  Let  proof  be
furnished  by  the  production  of  a  MS.  ritual
of  any  part  of  the  last  century.  The  earli¬
est  ritual  MS.  evidence  is  transcribed  1715,
though  probably  composed  earlier,  but  this
supports  the  antiquity  of  the  degrees.  The
printed  evidence  commences  in  1721,  and
certainly  seems  clearly  to  point  to  a  long-
continued  system  of  three  degrees.

A.  F.  A.  Woodford  says:  “The  Scotch
Lodge  minutes,  or  the  acknowledged  stat¬
utes  of  the  Craft  Lodges  (1598),  show  two
steps,  or  degrees,  to  have  then  existed.  Ap¬
prentices  got  the  ‘Mason  Word;’  then  in
the  admission  of  ‘  Fellow  or  Master,’  there
was  some  sort  of  ceremony  at  which  En¬
tered  Apprentices  should,  nay  must,  be
present.  Subsequently,  Apprentices  were
excluded  on  the  admission  of  Fellows  and
Masters.  The  Apprentices  were  turned  out
in  1759.”

Deiseil.  The  counterpart  of  Tuathal.
Mackenzie,  in  the  Royal  Masonic  Cyclopae¬
dia,  says  “  Deiseil  is  used  by  the  Druids  as
a  term  for  the  circumambulation  of  the  sa¬
cred  Cairns.  Derived  from  deas,  south,
and  tul,  a  course;  that  is  in  a  southward
direction  following  the  course  of  the  sun.
The  opposite  is  Tuathal,  in  a  northward
direction,  as  is  observed  at  the  present  day
in  approaching  the  grave  with  a  corpse.”

Denclerali.  A  ruined  town  ol  Upper
Egypt,  of  great  interest  in  consequence  of
its  astronomical  allusions  on  the  ceiling  of
the  main  portico  supported  on  twenty-four
columns,  which  is  covered  with  figures  and
hieroglyphics.  This  is  in  the  principal
temple,  which  is  220  by  50  feet.  The  nu¬
merous  mythological  figures  are  arranged
in  zodiacal  fashion.  Recent  archaeological
travellers  doubt  the  reference  to  astronomy,
in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  the  Crab.
The  temple  dates  from  the  period  of  Cleo¬
patra  and  the  earlier  Roman  emperors,  and
is  one  of  the  finest  and  best  preserved  struct¬
ures  of  the  kind  in  Egypt.  The  chief  deity
was  Athor,  the  goddess  of  night,  correspond¬
ing  with  the  Greek  Aphrodite.  See  Zo¬
diac.

Desert.  The  outer  court  of  a  tent  in
the  Order  of  Ishmael,  or  of  Esau  and  Rec¬
onciliation.

Diu.  (The  “Shining  light  of  Heaven.”)
An  Indian  word  applied  to  the  Supreme
God,  of  the  same  signification  as  the  Greek
words  Zeus  and  Theos,  and  the  Latin  Deus,
Jupiter  (Jovis);  in  Sanskrit,  Dewas;  in
Lettish.  Dews;  in  Gothic,  Tliius;  and  in
j  North  German,  Tyr.


DIVINING-ROD


ADDENDUM.


EBAL


969


Divining-Rod,  or  Pedum.  The

Moderator,  or  royal  Master,  was
imaged  with  the  ureus  on  his  fore-
head,  the  pedum  and  the  whip  be-
tween  his  knees.  The  Divining-
Rod  was  a  symbol  of  moderation.  K
pn,  Heq,  signifies  a  law,  a  statute,  I
or  custom ;  ppn,  Heqq,  a  legislator,  I
a  sceptre,  a  king,  moderator,  and  I
a  Pedum.  Hence,  a  staff.  It  is  Ij
represented  by  a  crook  surmounted  fl
on  a  pole.  The  rod  of  the  Rose  a
Croix  Knight  is  dissimilar;  it  is  Jf
straight,  white,  like  a  wand,  and  yet  ^
may  be  used  as  a  helping  or  leaning  staff.

Dodd’s  Constitutions.  A  pam-
hlet  of  twenty  pages,  in  quarto,  the  title
eing  “The  beginning  and  the  first  foun¬
dation  of  the  Most  Worthy  Craft  of  Ma¬
sonry  ;  with  the  Charges  thereunto  belong¬
ing.  By  a  deceased  Brother,  for  the  benefit
of  Ids  widow.  London :  printed  for  Mrs.
Dodd  at  the  Peacock  without  Temple  Bar.
1739.  Price,  sixpence.”  The  only  copy
known  to  exist  is  in  the  possession  of  Rich¬
ard  Spencer,  London.  See  Spencer  Manu¬
script  in  this  Addendum.

Pontine  Dens  Mens.  (Adonai
elohai.)  Found  in  the  Third  Degree  of  the
Scottish  Rite.

Dominicans,  Order  of.  Founded
at  Toulouse,  in  1215,  by  Dominic  (Domin¬
go)  de  Guzman,  who  was  born  at  Cala-
horra,  in  Old  Castile,  1170.  He  became
an  itinerant  to  convert  the  heretical  Albi-
genses,  and  established  the  Order  for  that
purpose  and  the  cure  of  souls.  The  Order
was  confirmed  by  Innocent  III.  and  Ho-
norius  III.,  in  1216.  Dress,  white  garment,
with  black  cloak  and  pointed  cap.  Domi¬


nic  died  at  Bologna,  1221,  and  was  canon¬
ized  by  Gregory  IX.  in  1233.

Dove,  Knights  and  Ladies  of
the.  An  extinct  secret  society,  of  a  Ma¬
sonic  model,  but  androgynous,  instituted  at
Versailles,  in  1784.

Rowland  Manuscript.  First  pub¬
lished  by  James  Dowland,  in  Gentleman’s
Magazine,  May,  1815,  vol.  Ixxxv.,  p.  489.
“Written  on  along  roll  of  parchment,  in
a  very  clear  hand,  apparently  early  in  the
seventeenth  century,  and  very  probably  is
copied  from  a  manuscript  of  earlier  date.”
Brother  William  J.  Hughan  says:  “Bro¬
ther  Woodford,  Mr.  Sims,  and  other  emi¬
nent  authorities,  consider  the  originalof  the
copy,  from  which  the  manuscript  for  the
Gentleman’ s  Magazine  was  written,  to  be  a
scroll  of  at  least  a  century  earlier  than  the
date  ascribed  to  Mr.  Dowland’s  MS.,  that
is,  about  1550.”

Drops,  Three.  The  mystic  number
of  drops  of  blood  from  the  White  Giant,
that  in  the  Persian  mysteries  restored  sight
to  the  captives  in  the  cell  of  horrors  when
applied  by  the  conqueror  Rustam.  In  India,
a  girdle  of  three  triple  threads  was  deemed
holy ;  so  were  three  drops  of  water  in  Brit¬
tany,  and  the  same  number  of  drops  of
blood  in  Mexico.

Due  Examination.  See  Vouching,

Mackey.

Ryans.  Sanskrit  for  sky ;  bright,  ex¬
alted.  The  Deity,  the  sun,  the  celestial
canopy,  the  firmament,

“Dye  na  Sore,”  or  “Die  Wanderer
aus  dem  Sanskrit  Ubersetzt."  A  Masonic
romance,  by  Von  Meyern,  which  appeared
at  Vienna  in  1789,  and  contains  a  complete
account  of  Masonic  festivities.


E.


E.  (Heb.,  H-)  The  fifth  letter  in  the
English  and  in  the  Graeco-Roman  alpha¬
bets.  In  form  the  Hebrew  ,-f  is  quite  sim¬
ilar  to  Clieth ,  C7>  which  has  a  numerical
value  of  eight,  while  that  of  He  is  five.  The
signification  is  window,  and  in  the  Egyp¬
tian  hieroglyphs  is  represented  by  a  hand
extending  the  thumb  and  two  fingers.  It
also  represents  the  fifth  name  of  God,
“inn  (Hadur),  Formosus,  Majestuosus.

Ebiil.  According  to  Mackenzie,  the
following  was  introduced  into  the  lectures
of  Masonry  in  the  last  century:  “Moses
commanded  Israel  that  as  soon  as  they  had
5  W


passed  the  Jordan,  they  should  go  to  She
chein,  and  divide  into  two  bodies,  each  com¬
posed  of  six  tribes:  one  placed  on,  that  is,
adjacent  to,  Mount  Ebal ;  the  other  on,  or
adjacent  to,  Mount  Gerizim.  The  six  tribes
on  or  at  Gerizim  were  to  pronounce  bless¬
ings  on  those  who  should  faithfully  observe
the  law ;  and  the  six  on  Mount  Ebal  were
to  pronounce  curses  against  those  who
should  violate  it.  This  Joshua  executed
(Deut.  xxvii ;  Joshua  viii.  30-35).  Moses
enjoined  them  to  erect  an  altar  of  unhewn
stones  on  Mount  Ebal,  and  to  plaster  them
over,  that  the  law  might  be  written  on  the


970


EBAN


ADDENDUM.


EDWARD


altar.  Shechem  is  the  modern  Nab-
lous.”

£ban  Bohan.  The  stone  which
Bohan  set  up  as  a  witness-stone,  and  which
afterwards  served  as  a  boundary-mark  on
the  frontier  between  Judah  and  Benjamin
(Joshua  xv.  f>;  xviii.  17).

Eben-Ezer.  (Heb.,  "Uj'rrpx,  stone
of  help.)  A  stone  set  up  by  Samuel  be¬
tween  Mizpeh  and  Shen,  in  testimony  of
the  Divine  assistance  obtained  against  the
Philistines  (1  Sam.  vii.  12).

Eblis.  The  Arabian  name  of  the
prince  of  the  apostate  angels,  exiled  to
the  infernal  regions  for  refusing  to  worship
Adam  at  the  command  of  the  Supreme,
Eblis  claiming  that  he  had  been  formed  of
ethereal  fire,  while  Adam  was  created  from
clay.  The  Mohammedans  assert  that  at
the  birth  of  their  prophet  the  throne  of
Eblis  was  precipitated  to  the  bottom  of
hell.  The  Azazel  of  the  Hebrews.

Ecbatana.  An  ancient  city  of  great
interest  to  those  who  study  the  history  of
the  rebuilding  of  the  temple.  Its  several
names  were  Agbatana,  Hagmatana,  and
Acbmeta.  Tradition  attributes  the  found¬
ing  of  the  city  to  Solomon,  Herodotus  to
Deioces,  728  B.  c.,  the  Book  of  Judith  to
Arphaxad.  It  was  the  ancient  capital  of
Media.  Vast  quantities  of  rubbish  now
indicate  where  the  palace  and  citadel  stood.
The  Temple  of  the  Sun  crowned  a  conical
hill  inclosed  by  seven  concentric  walls.
According  to  Celsus,  there  was  thus  exhib¬
ited  a  scale  composed  of  seven  steps  or
stages,  with  an  eighth  at  the  upper  ex¬
tremity.  The  first  stage  was  composed
of  lead,  and  indicated  Saturn ;  the  second,
of  tin,  denoted  Venus;  the  third,  of
copper,  denoted  Jupiter;  the  fourth,  of
iron,  denoted  Mars;  the  fifth,  of  divers
metals,  denoted  Mercury;  the  sixth,  of
silver,  denoted  the  Moon ;  the  seventh,  of
gold,  denoted  the  Sun ;  then  the  highest,
Heaven.  As  they  rose  in  gradation  toward
the  pinnacle,  all  the  gorgeous  battlements
represented  at  once — in  Sabean  fashion —
the  seven  planetary  spheres.  The  princi¬
pal  buildings  were  the  Citadel,  a  strong¬
hold  of  enormous  dimensions,  where  also
the  archives  were  kept,  in  which  Darius
found  the  edict  of  Cyrus  the  Great  con¬
cerning  the  rebuilding  of  the  Holy  Temple
in  Jerusalem.

Eclectic  (Bund  or)  Union.  See

Eclectic  Union,  in  the  body  of  this  work.
The  Rev.  Bro.  A.  F.  A.  Woodward  says
there  are  nowr  twelve  of  these  Lodges  and
1396  brethren.

Ecossais  d’Angers,  or  Ecossais

d’Alcidony.  Two  degrees  mentioned
in  a  work  entitled  Philosophical  Considera¬
tions  on  Freemasonry.


Edda.  An  Icelandic  word,  literally
translated  great-grandmother,  as  referred  to
in  Scandinavian  poetry.  There  are  in  real¬
ity  two  books  of  this  name  which  were
deemed  inspired  by  the  ancient  Germans,
Norwegians,  and  Swedes,  and  there  grew
out  so  many  myths  from  these  canonical
writings,  that  great  difficulty  is  now  expe¬
rienced  as  to  what  were  apocryphal.  The
myths  springing  from  the  old  German  the¬
ology  are  full  of  beauty;  they  pervade  Free¬
masonry  extensively  and  so  intimately  that
they  are  believed  by  many  of  the  best  stu¬
dents  to  be  the  origin  of  a  large  number  of
its  legends  and  symbols.

The  older  of  the  two,  called  The  Edda
of  Samund  the  Learned,  was  written  in  a
language  existing  in  Denmark,  Sweden,
and  Norway  as  early  as  the  eighth  century.
Samund  Sigfusson,  an  Icelandic  priest  born
in  1056,  collected  thirty-nine  of  these  poems
during  the  earlier  portion  of  the  twelfth
century.  The  most  remarkable  of  these
poems  is  the  Oracle  of  the  Prophetess,  con¬
taining  the  cosmogony,  under  the  Scandi¬
navian  belief,  from  the  creation  to  the
destruction  of  the  world.  A  well-preserved
copy  was  found  in  Iceland  in  1643.

The  younger  Edda  is  a  collection  of  the
myths  of  the  gods,  and  of  explanations  of
meters  of  Pagan  poetry,  and  is  intended
for  instruction  of  young  scalds  or  poets.
The  first  copy  was  found  complete  in  1628.
The  prologue  is  a  curious  compendium  of
Jewish,  Greek,  Christian,  Roman,  and  Ice¬
landic  legend.  Its  authorship  is  ascribed
to  Snorro  Sturleson,  born  in  1178 ;  hence
called  Edda  of  Sncrrro.

Edinburgh -Iiilw inning  Man¬
uscript.  See  Kilwinning  Manuscript  in
this  Addendum.

Edward  the  Confessor,  King.

Said  to  have  been  a  patron  of  Masonry  in
England  in  1041.

Edward.  Kings.  The  four  kings,
numerically  known  as  the  First,  Second,
Third,  and  Fourth,  appear  as  favorers,
abettors,  and  protectors  of  the  Institution
of  Freemasonry.

Edward.  Prince.  Son  of  George
III ,  and  Duke  of  Kent,  was  initiated  in
1790,  at  Geneva,  in  the  Lodge  £>e  l’ Union
des  Cceurs;  was  Grand  Master  of  the  An¬
cients,  and  resigned  to  the  Duke  of  Sussex
on  the  memorable  occasion  of  the  Union
in  England,  1813.

Edward  III.  Manuscript.  A

manuscript  quoted  by  Anderson  in  his  sec¬
ond  edition  (p.  71),  and  also  by  Preston,  as
an  old  record  referring  to  “the  glorious
reign  of  King  Edward  III.”  The  whole
of  the  record  is  not  cited,  but  the  passages
that  are  given  are  evidently  the  same  as
those  contained  in  what  is  now  known  as


EDWIN


ADDENDUM.


ELECT


971


the  Cooke  MS.,  the  archaic  phraseology
having  been  modernized  and  interpolations
inserted  by  Anderson,  as  was,  unfortunate¬
ly,  his  habit  in  dealing  with  those  old  doc¬
uments.  Compare,  for  instance,  the  fol¬
lowing  passages:

From  the  Cooke  MS.  “  When  the  master
and  the  felawes  be  forwarned  ben  y  come
to  such  congregacions  if  nede  be  the  Scher-
effe  of  the  countre  or  the  mayer  of  the  Cyte
or  alderman  of  the  town  in  wyche  the  con¬
gregacions  is  holden  schall  be  felaw  and
sociat  to  the  master  of  the  congregacions
in  helpe  of  hym  agenst  rebelles  and  up-
bervng  (upbearing]  the  rygtof  the  reme.”

Edward  III.  MS.,  as  quoted  by  Anderson.
“That  when  the  Master  and  Wardens  pre¬
side  in  a  Lodge,  the  sheriff  if  need  be,  or
the  mayor  or  the  alderman  (if  a  brother)
where  the  Chapter  is  held,  shall  be  sociate
to  the  Master,  in  help  of  him  against  rebels
and  for  upholding  the  rights  of  the  realm.”

The  identity  of  the  two  documents  is  ap¬
parent.  Either  the  Edward  III.  MS.  was
copied  from  the  Cooke,  or  both  were  de¬
rived  from  a  common  original. — Mackey.

Edwin  Charges.  The  charges  said
to  have  been  given  by  Prince  Edwin,  and
contained  in  the  Antiquity  MS.,  are  some¬
times  so  called.  See  Antiquity  Manuscript
in  the  body  of  this  work.

Eglinton  Manuscript.  So  called
because  it  was  discovered  many  years  ago
in  the  charter-chest  of  Eglinton  castle.  It
is  written  in  the  Scottish  dialect,  and  bears
the  date  of  “  XXVII.  December,  1599.”  An
exact  copy  of  it  has  been  published  by  Bro.
Hughan  in  his  Unpublished  Records  of  the
Craft.

Egyptian  Hieroglyphs.  The  ex¬
tent  of  parallelism  between  the  innumera¬
ble  hieroglyphs  on  the  tombs  and  monu¬
ments  of  India  and  Egypt  and  the  symbols
and  emblems  of  Freemasonry,  taken  to¬
gether  with  their  esoteric  interpretation,
has  caused  very  many  well-thinking  Ma¬
sons  to  believe  in  an  Indian  or  Egyptian
origin  of  our  speculative  institution  of  the
present  day.  So  close  and  numerous  are
these  symbols  and  their  meaning  that  it
becomes  difficult  for  the  mind  to  free  itself
from  a  fixed  conclusion ;  and  some  of  the
best  students  feel  confident  in  their  judg¬
ment  to  this  end,  more  especially  when  trac¬
ing  the  Leader,

“  Moses, learned
in  all  the  wis¬
dom  of  the
Egyptians,”  from  that  country  to  Palestine
with  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  and  their
successors  building  that  Holy  House  in
Jerusalem,  which  has  become  the  chief  Ma¬
sonic  symbol.  Some  have  abominated  this
theory  on  the  ground  of  alleged  polythe-


ft


MSSorMES,


ism  existing  among  the  Egyptians;  but
this  existed  only  at  a  later  day  in  the  life
of  the  nation,  as  it  also  existed  among  the
corrupted  Jews  in  its  worst  form,  for  which
see  2  Kings  ch.  17-21.

Bro.  Thomas  Pryer  presents  this  evi¬
dence  of  a  monotheistic  belief,  of  pristine
purity,  among  the  early  Egyptians,  ages
prior  to  Abraham’s  day.  We  give  the
hieroglyphs  and  their  interpretation :


May
thy  soul
attain  (come)
to


Khnum  (Spirit  of  God,  one  of
the  forms  of  Amon,  the  Crea¬
tor),

The  Creator  (the  idea  denoted  by
a  man  building  the  walls  of  a
city)

of  all


mankind  (literally  men  and  wo¬
men).


May  thy  soul  attain  to  Khnum,  the  Crea¬
tor  of  all  mankind.


How  prophetical  were  the  Books  of
Hermes,  “O  Egypt,  Egypt!  a  time  shall
come,  when,  in  lieu  of  a  pure  religion,  and
of  a  pure  belief,  thou  wilt  possess  naught
but  ridiculous  fables,  incredible  to  pos¬
terity;  and  nothing  will  remain  to  thee,
but  words  engraven  on  stone,  the  only  mon¬
uments  that  will  attest  thy  piety.”

Egyptian  Months.  Named  Thoth,
Paophi,  Athyr,  Choiak,  Tybi,  Mechir,
Phamenoth,  Pbarmuthi,  Pashons,  Payni,
Epiphi,  and  Mesore.  The  above  twelve
months,  commencing  with  March  1,  were
composed  of  thirty  days  each,  and  the  five
supplementary  days  were  dedicated  to  He-
siri  (Osiris),  Hor  (Horus),  Set  (Typhon),
His  (Isis),  and  Nebti  (Nephthys).  The
sacred  year  commenced  July  20 ;  the  Alex¬
andrian  year,  August  29,  B.  c.  25.

Elai  beni  almanali  (Hebrew,
ruo’lX  'J3  'Sx,  Hue  venite  filii  vidua’).  Third
Degree  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Elai  beni  eineth  (Heb.,  nnx  U3  ’Sx,
Hue  venite filii  veritatis) .  Som etimes  appl  ied
to  the  Twenty-sixth  Degree  of  the  A.  A.
Scottish  Rite.

Elect,  Symbolical.  Fifth  Degree
of  the  Reformed  Rite  of  Baron  Von
Tschoudy.

Electa.  Fifth  Degree  in  the  American
Adoptive  system  of  the  Eastern  Star.

Elect,  Depositary.  A  degree  men¬
tioned  in  Pyron’s  collection.


972


ELECT


ADDENDUM.


ENGLAND


Elect,  Grand  Prince  of  the
Three.  A  degree  mentioned  in  Pyron’s
collection.

Elect,  Irish.  ( Elu  Irlandais.)  The
first  of  the  high  grades  of  the  Chapters  of
that  name.

Elements,  Test  of  the.  A  cere¬
monial  in  the  First  and  Twenty-fourth  de¬
grees  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Eloliini.  Jehovah.  The  first  of
these  two  words  is  an  expression  used
throughout  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis,  as
applied  to  God  in  the  exercise  of  His  creative
power,  and  signifies  the  “  Divine  Omnipo¬
tence,  the  Source  of  all  power,  the  Power
of  all  powers,”  which  was  in  activity  in  the
Creation.  After  which  the  expression  used
for  Deity  is  Jehovah,  which  implies  the
Providence  of  God,  and  which  could  not
have  been  active  until  the  world  had  been
created  by  Elohim.  See  Jehovah ,  Mackey.

Eniounali.  ( Fidelity ,  Truth.)  The
name  of  the  Fourth  Step  of  the  mystic  lad¬
der  of  the  Kadosh  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish
Rite.

England.  During  one  period  of  the
eighteenth  century  there  existed  four  Grand
Lodges  in  England  :  1.  “The  G.  Lodge  of
England,”  located  at  London  ;  2.  “The  G.
Lodge  of  all  England,”  located  at  York.
3.  “  The  G.  Lodge  of  England  according  to
the  Old  Constitutions;”  and,  4.  “TheG.
Lodge  of  England  and  South  of  the  Trent,”
which  last  tw'o  had  their  G.  East  at  Lon¬
don.

Concession  has  been  granted  that  the
first  Grand  Lodge  formation  was  in  1717,
and  theretofore  were  held  “  Assemblies  ”
irregularly  convened.  The  second  G.  Lodge
bears  date  1725,  and  emanated  from  that
immemorial  Masonic  Lodge  that  gave  such
reverence  to  the  city  of  York.  The  third
in  the  line  was  given  birth  by  malcontents
who  broke  from  the  first  parent  about  the
middle  of  the  century.  And  the  fourth,
whose  existence  lasted  from  1779  to  nearly
the  close  of  the  century,  was  instituted  by
the  York  Grand  Lodge  in  compliance
with  the  request  of  members  of  the  Lodge
of  Antiquity,  of  London  ;  but  its  existence
was  ephemeral,  in  consequence  of  the  re¬
moval  of  the  disturbing  cause  with  the
regular  G.  Lodge,  and  which  granted  the
number  “  Two  ”  to  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity.

All  subordinate  Lodges  existing  at  pres¬
ent,  and  which  had  their  being  prior  to  the
union,  in  December,  1813,  were  subjects  of
either  the  first  or  the  third  of  the  above
designated  four  G.  Lodges,  and  known  re¬
spectively  as  the  “  Moderns  ”  or  the  “  An¬
cients,”  these  titles,  however,  having  no
recognized  force  as  to  the  relative  antiquity
of  either.  The  “  Ancients  ”  have,  at  times,
been  known  as  “Atholl  Masons.”  The


Grand  Lodge  of  England  has  revised  its
Book  of  Constitutions  thirteen  times  since
the  “Union”  of  1813.

English  Freemasonry  is  sui  generis,  or,
as  the  Rev.  Bro.  Woodford  says,  “indige¬
nous  and  peculiar,  in  that  it  is,  both  in  its
theory,  its  unity,  and  practical  develop¬
ment,  unlike  any  other  known  system.  We
mean  by  this  that  it  rests  upon  the  three
symbolical  grades,  but  makes  the  Royal
Arch  the  completion  of  the  Masonic  edi¬
fice.  .  .  .We  have  received  it  from  our
Masonic  forefathers,  and  such  we  mean  to
hand  it  on  to  our  Masonic  children.  It  is
a  system  which  is,  after  all,  the  foundation
of  every  other  European,  American,  and
Asiatic  system  ;  and  in  our  opinion,  when¬
ever  others  have  deviated  from  it,  or  con¬
tracted  it,  or  expanded  it,  they  have  done
wrong.  The  English  system  is,  in  its  prac¬
tical  development,  cosmopolitan  and  uni¬
versal,  and,  while  it  is  both  reverential
and  religious  in  all  that  pertains  to  the
great  truths  of  Divine  wisdom,  it  depre¬
cates  all  controversial  contention  and  ig¬
nores  all  denominational  declarations.”

All  this  appears  sound,  but  we  opine
that  English  Masonry  in  England  changed
in  its  forms  and  ceremonies  from  time  to
time,  after  having  planted  the  fraternity
among  distant  peoples.

England.  Tlie  First  Record  of
Grand  Lodge  of.  Bro.  R.  F.  Gould
furnishes  the  valuable  information  that  the
minutes  of  Grand  Lodge  commence  24th
June,  1723,  and  those  bearing  such  date
are  signed  by  “John  Theophilus  Desagu-
liers,  Deputy  Grand  Master.”  They  are
entered  in  a  different  handwriting,  under
date  of  29th  November,  1723,  19th  Febru¬
ary,  1724,  28th  “A prill  1724,”  and  are  not
signed  at  foot.  On  24th  June,  1724,  the
Earl  of  Dalkeith  presided  in  Grand  Lodge,
and  the  following  signatures  are  appended
to  the  recorded  minutes: —

“Dalkeith,  G.  M.,  1724”  (sic).

“J.  T.  Desaguliers,  Dep.  G.  M.”
“Fra  Sorrell,  Senr.,  G.  W.”

“  John  Senex,  Junr.”

The  minutes  of  21st  November,  1724,
17th  March,  20th  May,  24th  June,  and  27th
November,  1725,  are  unsigned.  But  to
those  of  27th  December,  1725,  are  ap¬
pended  the  signatures  of
“  Richmond  &  Lenox,  G.  Mr.,  1725”  (sic),
“  M.  Ffolkes,  D.  G.  M. ,”
and  two  G.  Wardens.

Signatures  are  again  wanting  to  the
proceedings  of  28th  February  and  12th
December,  1726,  but  reappear  under  date
of  27th  “Ffebry  1726”  [27],  viz. : —
“Paisley,  G.  Mr.,  1726”  (sic),
and  the  next  three  succeeding  officers.

The  minutes  of  the  following  27th  May


ENOCHIAN


ADDENDUM.


EVORA


973


(1727)  were  signed  by  “  Inchiquin,  G.  M.,
1727,”  and  the  next  three  succeeding
officers.

The  earliest  minutes  were  not  signed  on
confirmation,  but  were  verified  by  the  four
Grand  officers,  or  such  of  them  as  took
part  in  the  proceedings  recorded.  The
minutes  say  that  “  the  late  G.  M.  went
away  without  ceremony  ”  because  Dr.
Desaguliers  was  re-elected  Deputy  G.  M.

Enocliian  Alphabet.  One  of  the
most  important  alphabets,  or  ciphers,
known  to  historic  Masons  is  the  Enochian,
in  consequence  of  the  revelations  made  in
that  character.  Tradition  says  the  Chris¬
tian  princes  were  accompanied  in  their
journey  to  Palestine  by  Freemasons,  who
fought  by  their  side,  and  who,  when  at  the
Holy  City,  discovered  important  MSS.,  on
which  some  of  the  historic  degrees  were
founded ;  that  some  of  these  MSS.  were  in


was  active  about  1750.  The  Lodge  “  Irene,”
at  Hamburg,  was  founded  1757.

Etlianim,  or  Tisliri.  The  seventh
sacred  month,  or  the  first  month  of  the
Hebrew  civil  year,  commencing  with  the
new  moon  in  September.

Europe.  An  appellation  at  times  given
to  the  west  end  of  the  Lodge.

Eva.  The  acclamation  used  in  the
French  Rite  of  Adoption.

Evasigelicon.  The  gospel  belong¬
ing  to  the  so-called  “ Ordre  du  Temple”
at  Paris,  and  professedly  a  relic  of  the  real
Templars.  Some  believe  in  its  antiquity;
but  others,  from  external  and  internal  evi¬
dence,  fix  its  date  subsequent  to  the  fifteenth
century.  It  is  apparently  a  garbled  version
of  St.John’s  Gospel.  It  is  sometimes  con¬
founded  with  the  “  Leviticon  but,  though
bound  up  in  the  same  printed  volume,  it  is
entirely  distinct.


Syriac  and  others  in  Enochian  characters ;
and  that  on  their  return,  when  at  Venice,
it  was  ascertained  that  the  characters  were
identical  with  those  in  the  Syriad  column,
spoken  of  by  Josephus,  and  with  the  oldest
copies  in  which  the  Book  of  Enoch  was
written,  and  are  of  great  antiquity.  The
brethren  in  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite  are
largely  instructed  as  to  matters  pertaining
hereto  in  the  13th  and  14th  Degrees.

We  present  an  exact  copy  of  the  alpha¬
bet,  as  may  be  found  by  comparison  with
that  in  the  Bodleian  Library.

The  name  He  No  C  H,  in  Hebrew,  sig¬
nifies  “  taught ,”  or,  more  properly,  “ dedi¬
cated.' "  In  the  Koran  Enoch  is  called
“  Edris,”  from  darasa,  to  study,  which
word,  more  liberally  translated,  means,
“  to  read  or  to  study  with  attention.”  See
Enoch,  Mackey.

Eli  Sopli.  See  “  The  Dogmatic  Kab-
bala,”  under  Kabbala,  Mackey.

Eostre.  Easter,  a  name  given  to  the
paschal  festival  in  the  spring  of  the  year.

Erlking.  A  name  found  in  one  of
the  sacred  sagas  of  the  Scandinavian  my¬
thology,  entitled  Sir  Ola f  and  the  Erlking' s
Daughter,  and  applied  to  the  mischievous
goblin  haunting  the  Black  Forest  of  Thu¬
ringia.

Esp^rance.  Under  the  name  of
“Chevaliers  et  Chevalieres  de  PEspdrance”
was  founded  in  France,  and  subsequently
in  Germany,  an  androgyn  Order.  Said  to
have  been  instituted  by  Louis  XV.,  at  the
request  of  the  Marquis  de  Chatelet,  and


Evates.  The  second  degree  in  the
Druidical  system.  Of  the  three  degrees
the  first  was  the  Bards,  the  second  Evates
or  Prophets,  and  the  third  Druids  or  Sanc¬
tified  Authorities.

Eveillos,  Seete  des.  (Sect  of  the
enlightened  )  According  to  Thory,  a  society
presumed  to  be  a  branch  of  Weisliaupt’s
Illumines  that  existed  in  Italy.

Evcrgeten,  Bund  der.  (From  the
Greek  evepyirr/c,  a  benefactor.)  A  secret
order  after  the  manner  of  the  Illuminati.
Woodford  says  it  was  founded  in  Silesia
about  1792,  by  a  certain  Zerboni  of  Glogan,
Lieut,  von  Leipzinger,  the  merchant  Con-
tessa,  Herr  von  Reibnitz,  and  five  others;
that  Fessler  worked  in  it;  that  it  used
Masonic  forms.  Some  of  the  members
got  into  difficulty  and  prison  at  Breslau
in  1796,  and  about  1801  the  society  became
defunct.

Evora,  Knights  of.  There  is  a
very  ancient  city  in  Portugal  of  1200  pop¬
ulation.  Quintus  Sertorius  took  it  80  B.  c.
The  Roman  antiquities  are  unrivalled.  The
aqueduct  erected  by  Sertorius  has  at  one
end  a  marvellous  architectural  tower  rising
high  above  the  city,  perfect  in  its  condition
as  when  built,  70  b.  c.  In  1147,  King  Al¬
fonso  I.,  of  Portugal,  instituted  the  Order
of  the  New  Militia  in  consequence  of  the
prowess  exhibited  by  the  troops  in  the
siege  of  Lisbon  against  the  Moors.  When
they  conquered  Evora  in  1166,  the  king  by
decree  changed  their  name  to  Knights  of
Evora.


974


EXCALIBAR


ADDENDUM.


FAMILIES


Excalibar.  King  Arthur’s  famous
sword,  which  he  unfixed  from  a  miracu¬
lous  stone  after  the  unavailing  efforts  of
200  of  his  most  puissant  barons.  Hence,
Arthur  was  proclaimed  king.  When  dy¬
ing,  Arthur  commanded  a  servant  to
throw  the  sword  into  a  neighboring  lake,
but  the  servant  twice  eluded  this  command.
When  he  finally  complied,  a  hand  and  arm
arose  from  the  water,  seized  the  sword  by
the  hilt,  waved  it  thrice,  then  sinking  into
the  lake,  was  seen  no  more.

Exegefical  and  Philanthropi-
cal  Society.  According  to  Thory,
founded  at  Stockholm  in  1787.  It  united
Magnetism  to  Swedenborgianism,  and  lived
a  brief  life  at  Strassburg.

Exodus.  The  date  of  the  Exodus  has
been  determined  by  the  excavations  re¬
cently  made  at  Tel  el-Maskhfita.  This  is
the  name  of  large  mounds  near  Tel  el-Ke-
ber,  excavated  by  M.  Naville  for  the  Egyp¬
tian  Exploration  Fund,  wherein  he  found
inscriptions  showing  that  they  represent
the  ancient  city  of  Pithom,  or  Succoth,  the
“treasure-cities”  (Ex.  i.  11),  and  that
Ramses  II.  was  the  founder.  This  was  the
Pharaoh  of  the  oppression.  The  walls  of


the  treasure-chambers  were  about  six  hun¬
dred  and  fifty  feet  square  and  twenty-two
feet  thick.  From  Pithom,  or  Succoth,
where  the  Israelites  were  at  work,  they
started  on  their  Exodus  toward  Etham
(Khetam),  then  to  Pi-hachiroth  (Ex.  xiv.
2),  and  so  on  north  and  east.  The  Exodus
took  place  under  Meneptah  II.,  who  as¬
cended  the  throne  B.  c.  1325,  and  reigned
but  a  short  period.  It  was  along  the  isth¬
mus  that  the  Egyptian  army  perished  pur¬
suing  the  retreating  Israelites  as  they
crossed  between  the  Lake  Serbonis  and  the
waters  of  the  Mediterranean,  amidst  the
“sea  of  papyrus  reeds,”  the  ydm  stiph,  that
has  often  proved  disastrous  to  single  or  con¬
gregated  travellers.  See  S.  Birch,  LL.D.,  in
Ancient  History  from,  the  Monuments,
Brugsch-Bey’s  lecture,  17th  September,
1874 ;  but  more  particularly  the  late  dis¬
coveries  above  referred  to,  in  Fresh  Lights,
etc.,  by  A.  H.  Sayce.

Expert,  Perfect.  Conferred  in  three
grades,  and  cited  in  Fustier’s  collection.

Expert,  Sublime  English.  Men¬
tioned  in  Fustier’s  collection.

Exterior.  First  grade  of  the  Oriental
Rite,  cited  by  Fustier.


F.


F.  The  sixth  letter  in  the  English  and
Latin  alphabets,  and  the  same  as  the  Greek
digamma  or  the  <p  or  ph,  and  the  vau  of
the  Hebrew,  which  has  a  numerical  value
of  six.  F  is  the  abbreviation  of  Frere  or
Brother.

Falk,  De,  Rabbi.  A  native  Israel¬
ite  of  Fiirth,  who  attracted  some  attention
in  London  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth
century  in  consequence  of  his  presumed  ex¬
traordinary  powers,  acquired  through  the
secrets  of  the  Kabbala,  as  aTbaumaturgist.
It  was  alleged  that  he  could  and  did  trans¬
mute  metals,  and  thereby  acquired  large
sums  with  which  he  was  liberal  to  the  poor.
A  merry  incident  is  perhaps  familiar  to  the
reader.  An  invitation  was  extended  by  the
Baal  Shem  (the  sacerdotal  pronouncer  of
the  Holy  Name)  to  the  Doctor  to  call  as  a
visitor  for  a  friendly  and  philosophical  dis¬
cussion.  This  was  assented  to,  when  the
Doctor  was  asked  to  fix  a  time.  He  did  so
by  taking  from  his  pocket  a  small  taper
and  handing  it  to  his  new  friend,  saying:
“  Light  this,  sir,  when  you  get  home,  and
I  shall  be  with  you  as  soon  as  it  goes  out.”
This  the  gentleman  did  next  morning,  ex¬


pecting  an  early  call,  but  the  taper  ap¬
peared  to  have  a  charmed  life,  and  it  was
deposited  in  a  special  closet,  where  it  con¬
tinued  to  burn  for  three  weeks,  and  until
in  the  evening  the  Doctor  drove  up  to  the
door  and  alighted,  much  to  the  surprise
of  the  host,  who,  with  wonderment,  had
watched  the  bright-burning  taper.  As  soon
as  his  visitor  was  announced,  the  light  and
candlestick  had  disappeared.  The  Doctor
was  asked  if  the  candlestick  would  be  re¬
turned,  when  he  replied,  “  It  is  already  in
the  kitchen and  so  it  was  found.  A  fur¬
ther  incident  is  mentioned  of  his  leaving
upon  his  death  a  sealed  box  to  his  partic¬
ular  friend,  Aaron  Goldsmid,  stating  that  to
open  it  portended  evil.  Aaron  could  not
withstand  his  curiosity,  and  one  day  opened
it,  and  ere  the  night  came  Aaron  was  picked
up  dead.

Familicn  Eogen.  A  lodge  meet¬
ing,  according  to  the  Germans,  for  the  con¬
sideration  of  family  or  lodge  matters,  at
which  visitors  are  expected  or  requested  to
retire.  At  times  the  term  Conferenz  Logen
is  used  to  designate  the  lodge  open  for  the
disposal  of  private  affairs.


FANATICISM


ADDENDUM.


FOUR


975


Fanaticism.  The  English  interpre¬
tation  of  the  name  of  the  second  assassin
of  the  G.  Master,  or  mankind.  The  frenzy
that  overbalances  the  mind.  The  Gravelot
or  Romvel  of  philosophical  Masonry.

Fanor.  The  name  given  to  the  Syrian
Mason,  who  is  represented  in  some  legends
as  one  of  the  assassins.  Amru  and  Metu-
sael  being  the  other  two.

Favorite  Brother  of  Solomon.

The  seventh  degree  of  the  Swedish  rite.

Feix-Feax.  A  word  signifying  School
of  Thought,  and  is  found  in  the  first  degree
of  the  French  Adoptive  rite.

Felicity,  Order  of.  An  androgy¬
nous  system  of  four  degrees  instituted  in
France  by  M.  Chambonnet,  1743,  and  was
transformed  five  years  thereafter  into  the
Knight  of  the  Anchor.

Feuillants.  An  androgynous  sys¬
tem,  found  in  Fustier’s  collection,  and  gov¬
erned  by  the  statutes  of  St.  Bernard.

Fidelity  of  Baden  Burlach,
Order  of.  Instituted  in  171b  by  Charles
Margrave  of  Baden  Durlach.  The  mem¬
bers  of  the  Order  were  knighted,  selections
being  made  only  from  the  nobles  of  ancient
family.  The  reigning  princes  were  hered¬
itary  Grand  Masters.

Field  Lodge,  or  Army  Lodge.  A
lodge  duly  instituted  under  proper  author¬
ity  from  a  grand  body  of  competent  juris¬
diction,  and  authorized  to  exercise  during
its  peripatetic  existence  all  the  powers  and
privileges  that  it  might  possess  if  perma¬
nently  located.  Charters  of  this  nature,
as  the  name  implies,  are  intended  for  the
tented  field,  and  have  been  of  the  greatest
service  to  humanity  in  its  trying  hours,
when  the  worst  of  passions  are  appealed  to.

Findel,  J.  G.  A  Masonic  writer  of
more  than  ordinary  note,  who  was  admitted
in  the  lodge  “  Eleusis  zur  Verschwiegen-
heit,”  at  Baireuth,  in  1856.  He  was  editor
of  the  Bauhutle,  an  interesting  journal,  at
Leipsic,  in  1858,  and  added  materially  to
Masonic  literature  in  founding  the  Verein
Deutscher  Freimaurer,  about  1860,  and  pub¬
lishing,  in  1874,  Geist  und  Form  der  Frei¬
maurer  ei.

Firrao,  Joseph.  A  cardinal  priest
who,  in  1739,  published  an  edict  of  the
Pope  Clement  XII.  against  Freemasonry.

Florian,  Squill  de.  The  first  ac¬
cuser  of  Grand  Master  Jacques  de  Molay
and  the  Knights  Templar.  He  was  subse¬
quently  assassinated.

Fort  Hiram.  An  earthwork  erected
on  October  3,  1814,  at  Fox  Point,  Rhode
Island,  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  with  the
members  of  the  subordinate  Lodges,  about
two  hundred  and  thirty  in  number.  The
object  was  to  build  a  fortification  for  de¬
fence,  and  the  G.  Lodge,  of  which  Thomas


Smith  Webb  was  Grand  Master,  through
its  Deputy,  Sen.  G.  Warden,  and  W.  Bro.
Carlisle,  were  authorized  to  work  on  the
defences.  They  formed  a  procession,
marched  in  the  early  morning  to  the  Point,
and  by  sunset  had  completed  their  labors,
consisting  of  a  breastwork  four  hundred
and  thirty  feet  in  length,  ten  wide,  and  five
high.  They  then  marched  and  counter¬
marched  upon  the  parapet  from  one  ex¬
tremity  to  the  other,  when  the  G.  Master
gave  the  work  the  appellation  of  Fort  Hi¬
ram,  which  was  approved  and  sanctioned
by  the  Governor.

Forty.  The  multiple  of  two  perfect
numbers — four  and  ten.  This  was  deemed
a  sacred  number,  as  commemorating  many
events  of  religious  signification,  some  of
which  are  as  follows :  The  alleged  period  of
probation  of  our  first  parents  in  Eden  ;  the
continuous  deluge  of  forty  days  and  nights,
and  the  same  number  of  days  in  which  the
waters  remained  upon  the  face  of  the  earth ;
the  Lenten  season  of  forty  days’  fast  ob¬
served  by  Christians  with  reference  to  the
fast  of  Jesus  in  the  Wilderness,  and  by  the
Hebrews  to  the  earlier  desert  fast  for  a
similar  period  ;  of  the  forty  years  spent  in
the  Desert  by  Moses  and  Elijah  and  the
Israelites,  which  succeeded  the  conceal¬
ment  of  Moses  the  same  number  of  years
in  the  land  of  Midian.  Moses  was  forty
days  and  nights  on  the  Mount.  The  days
for  embalming  the  dead  were  forty.  The
forty  years  of  the  reign  of  Saul,  of  David,
and  of  Solomon ;  the  forty  days  of  grace
allotted  to  Nineveh  for  repentance;  the
forty  days’  fast  before  Christmas  in  the
Greek  Church ;  as  well  as  its  being  the
number  of  days  of  mourning  in  Assyria,
Phoenicia,  and  Egypt,  to  commemorate  the
death  and  burial  of  their  Sun  God ;  and  as
well  the  period  in  the  festivals  of  the  resur¬
rection  of  Adonis  and  Osiris ;  the  period
of  forty  days  thus  being  a  bond  by  which
the  whole  world,  ancient  and  modern,  Pa¬
gan,  Jewish,  and  Christian,  is  united  in
religious  sympathy.  Hence,  it  was  deter¬
mined  as  the  period  of  mourning  by  the
Supreme  Council  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite
of  the  Northern  Jurisdiction  U.  S.

Forly-two.  The  number  of  judges
required  to  sit  by  the  body  of  the  Egyptian
dead  pending  the  examination,  and  without
which  the  deceased  had  no  portion  in
Amenti.  See  Truths.

Forty-two-Lettered  Name.  See
Twelve- Lettered  Name,  Mackky.

Four  New  Years.  According  to
the  Talmud  there  were  four  New  Years.
The  first  of  Nisan  was  the  new  year  for
kings  and  festivals;  the  reign  of  a  king
was  calculated  from  this  date.  The  first  of
Elul  was  a  new  year  for  the  tithing  of  cat-


976


FOUR


ADDENDUM.


FRANKS


tie.  The  first  of  Tishri  was  a  new  year  for
civil  years,  for  years  of  release,  jubilees,
and  planting.  The  first  of  Shebat  was  a
new  year  for  the  tithing  of  trees.

“  Four  Old  Fodges.”  Of  the  four
old  Lodges  which  constituted  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  on  St.  John  the  Bap¬
tist’s  Day,  1717,  the  “Lodge  of  Antiquity ,”
No.  2,  London,  was  the  first.  It  is  said  to
have  existed  from  thevear  1691,  but  Brother
Hughan  thinks  it  must  be  much  older.  The
Lodge  meets  by  “Time  Immemorial  Con¬
stitution,”  having  no  warrant,  and,  until
the  “Union,”  was  first  on  the  roll;  a  de¬
cision,  however,  by  ballot,  lost  it  its  numer¬
ical  priority.  As  Lodges  were  known  by
the  house  in  which  they  met,  Antiquity
Lodge  was  designated  “  The  West  Indian  and
American."

“  The  Royal  Somerset  House  and  Inver¬
ness ,”  No.  4,  London,  is  the  junior  of  the
tour  Lodges  which  constituted  the  Grand
Lodge.  At  that  time  it  met  at  the  “  Rum¬
mer  and  Grapes"  Tavern,  Westminster,  and
subsequently  at  the  “Horn,”  which  latter
gave  the  Lodge  a  name  for  many  years.
This  Lodge  now  represents  three  united
Lodges,  the  names  of  two  of  which  are  to
be  found  in  its  present  designation.

Of  the  four  “  original ”  Lodges,  two  only
have  been  on  the  roll  from  1740  as  of
“  Time  Immemorial  Constitution.”  The
original  number  “Two”  ceased  working
about  1736,  and  number  “Three”  accepted
a  “New  Constitution”  (now  No.  12),  and
is  known  as  “  Fortitude  and  Cumberland.”

“The  four  original  Lodges,  after  the
issue  of  the  ‘Regulations’  of  1723,  simply
enjoyed  the  advantage  of  being  ahead  of  all
the  Warrant  Lodges,  the  privilege  of  as¬
sembling  by  ‘Time  Immemorial  Constitu¬
tion,’  and  the  honor  of  having  established
the  first  Grand  Lodge  in  the  universe.”
See  Freemasonry ,  Early  British.

France.  Discussion  and  an  attempted
avoidance  of  a  threatening  Masonic  calam¬
ity  by  a  large  number  of  the  fraternity  of
France  did  not  avail  to  prevent  the  General
Assembly  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France
from  completing  its  overthrow  and  that
of  its  subordinates  by  the  almost  unani¬
mous  adoption  of  the  now  famous  amend¬
ment  of  Art.  I.  of  the  Constitution  of  Ma¬
sonry,  on  Sept.  14,  1877.

The  following  is  the  text  of  the  amend¬
ment  and  of  the  original  second  paragraph
which  was  expunged :

Original  paragraph:  “ Freemasonry  has
for  its  principles  the  existence  of  God,  the
immortality  of  the  soul,  and  the  solidarity
of  mankind.”

Substituted  amendment :  “  Whereas,
Freemasonry  is  not  a  religion,  and  has
therefore  no  doctrine  or  dogma  to  affirm


in  its  Constitution,  the  Assembly  adopting
the  Viieu  IX.,  has  decided  and  decreed  that
the  second  paragraph  of  Article  I.  of  the
Constitution  shall  be  erased,  and  that  for
the  words  of  the  said  article  the  following
shall  be  substituted :  I.  Being  an  institu¬
tion  essentially  philanthropic,  philosophic,
and  progressive,  Freemasonry  has  for  its
immediate  objects,  search  after  truth,  study
of  uni  versal  morality,  sciences  and  arts,  and
the  practice  of  benevolence.  It  has  for  its
principles,  utmost  liberty  of  conscience  and
human  solidarity,  and  its  motto  is  Liberty,
Egalite,  et  Fraternite.”

The  adoption  of  the  above  was  after  a  full
and  deliberate  consideration  by  its  constit¬
uents,  who  for  more  than  a  year  were  in  the
throes  of  deep  deliberation  and  judgment.

In  pursuing  the  above  course  France,
through  the  Grand  Orient,  rejected  Ma¬
sonry.  and  not  Masonry  France.  The
result  was  deep  and  sorrowful  considera¬
tion  of  the  continuance  of  friendly  rela¬
tions  by  the  Masonic  powers  of  the  world,
resulting  in  the  rapid  cessation  of  comity
and  representation  with  a  once  proud  Ma¬
sonic  Centre,  which  in  letters  of  fire  sub¬
stituted  force  superieure  and  principe  crea¬
ture  for  the  great  Masonic  symbol  of  God.
Consequently,  as  there  can  be  no  Masonry
without  God,  Masonry  ceased  to  have  an
organized  existence  in  that  country,  and
although  the  Grand  Orient  continues  to
exist  iD  name,  it  is  not  Masonic.

The  Supreme  Council  of  the  A.  A.  Scot¬
tish  Rite  in  France,  however,  stood,  and
still  stands,  true  to  all  the  principles  of
Masonry,  prominently  including  the  Father
which  is  in  Heaven,  who  was,  is,  and  ever
shall  be  in  his  personal  existence.  A  large
dependency  of  Craft  Lodges  owe  allegiance
to  the  Supreme  Council,  the  number  at
last  report  being  eighty-three,  while  those
which  still  linger  about  the  Orient,  not
confident  of  their  future,  including  in  the
geographical  boundary  of  France  all  its
possessions  and  dependencies,  will  approx¬
imate  two  hundred  and  fifty,  many  ofwhich
exist  in  name  only,  and  are  indifferent  to
Masonry.

A  “Central  Grand  Lodge  of  France”
was  attempted  in  1879,  and  at  another
period  a  “  Grande  Loge  Symboligue  Ecos-
saise  ”  was  assayed  by  several  Lodges  which
had  become  discontented  with  the  discip¬
line  of  the  Supreme  Council  given  to  “La
Justice,  No.  133,”  and  to  “Les  Hospital-
iers  de  Saint  Ouen,  No.  135,”  six  other
Lodges  having  united  with  them,  but  they
met  with  varied  success.

Franks.  Order  of  Regenerated.
A  political  brotherhood  that  was  instituted
in  1815,  flourished  for  awhile,  and  imitated
in  its  ceremonies  the  Masonic  fraternity’.


FREDERICK


addendum.  FREEMASONRY


977


Frederick  Henry  Louis,  Prince
of  Prussia,  was  received  into  Masonry  at
Berlin  by  Frederick  the  Great,  his  brother,
in  1740.

Freemasonry,  Early  British.

Brother  Robert  Freke  Gould  in  the  history
he  is  now  writing,  after  years  of  research,
aided  by  the  best  English  Masonic  talent,
is  so  succinct  as  to  “  late  discoveries,”  that
on  this  most  interesting  Masonic  subject
he  is  quoted :  “  The  minutes  of  Scottish
Lodges  from  the  sixteenth  century,  and
evidences  of  British  Masonic  life  dating
farther  back  by  some  two  hundred  years
(than  the  second  decade  of  the  last  cen¬
tury)  were  actually  left  unheeded  by  our
premier  historiographer,  although  many
of  such  authentic  and  invaluable  docu¬
ments  lay  ready  to  hand,  only  awaiting
examination,  amongst  the  muniments  in
the  old  Lodge  chests.  .  .  By  the  collection
and  comparatively  recent  publication  of
many  of  the  interesting  records,  so  much
evidence  has  been  accumulated  respecting
the  early  history,  progress,  and  character
of  the  craft  as  to  be  almost  embarrassing,
and  the  proposition  may  be  safely  advanced
that  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Great  Britain  are
the  direct  descendants,  by  continuity  and
absorption,  of  the  ancient  Freemasonry
which  immediately  preceded  their  institu¬
tion,  which  will  be  demonstrated  without
requiring  the  exercise  of  either  dogmatism
or  credulity.  ”

“  The  oldest  Lodges  in  Scotland  possess
registers  of  members  and  meetings,  as  well
as  particulars  of  their  laws  and  customs,
ranging  backward  nearly  three  hundred
years.  (These)  will  form  an  important
link  in  the  chain  which  connects  what  is
popularly  known  as  the  Lodges  of  Modern
Freemasonry,  with  their  operative  and
speculative  ancestors.  ”

There  are  no  Lodge  records  in  England
of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  records  of
only  one  between  1700  and  1717.

The  original  St.  Clair  Charters  (see  ante ,
p.  741)  in  the  custody  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland,  dated,  respectively,  1601-2  and
1628,  are  referred  to  by  Gould.  Then  are
considered  the  Schaw  Statutes,  No.  1,  of  A.  d.
1598  (see  ante,  p.  691),  the  Schaw  Statutes,
No.  2,  of  A.  D.  1599,  and  their  relevancy  to
“ Mother  Kilwinning"  Lodge,  Ayrshire,  No.  0,
with  an  important  certificate  from  William
Schaw,  which  proves  that  the  document
of  1599  was  intended  exclusively  for  the
Masons  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Kil¬
winning  Lodge.  The  subject  of  the  “ Lodge
of  Edinburgh,"  No.  1,  and  its  career  from
its  earliest  records,  dating  back  to  1599,
down  to  the  year  1736,  when  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland  was  inaugurated,  as
most  fully  described  in  Lyon’s  history  of
’&X  62


this  ancient  Lodge,  passes  under  review;
then  appears,  as  Brother  Gould  says,  one
of  the  adornments  of  that  history  in  the
fac-simile  of  the  record  of  that  Lodge,
showing  that  the  earliest  minute  of  the
presence  of  a  speculative  freeman  Mason  in
a  Lodge,  and  taking  part  in  its  delibera¬
tions,  is  dated  June  8,  1600.  It  is  to  be
noted  that  “the  admission  of  General
Alexander  Hamilton,  on  May  20, 1640,  and
of  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  Patrick  Hume,  Bart.,
on  Dec.  27,  1667,  are  specially  recorded  as
constituting  these  intrants  ‘Felow  and  Mr
off  the  forsed  craft,’  and  ‘ Fellow  of  craft  ( and
Master )  of  this  lodg,’  respectively.”  It  is
assumed  that  Master  simply  meant  a  com¬
pliment  ;  certainly,  there  was  nothing  cor¬
responding  with  the  ceremony  of  a  Master
Mason’s  degree  at  that  time.  Many  of  the
operatives  did  not  view  the  introduction
of  the  speculative  element  with  favor,  and
at  one  time  they  were  arrayed  in  hostile
camps;  but  eventually  those  who  supported
the  “  Gentlemen  ”  or  “  Geomatic  Masons  ”
won  the  day,  the  Domatics  having  to  suc¬
cumb.  In  the  Lodge  of  Aberdeen,  the
majority  in  A.  d.  1670  were  actually  non¬
operative  or  speculative  members.

On  March  2, 1653,  appears  the  important
fact  of  the  election  of  a  “  joining  member."
Again,  Lyon  declares  that  the  reference  to
“  frie  mesones,”  in  the  minute  of  Dec.  27,
1636  ,  is  the  earliest  instance  yet  discovered
of  “  Free-Mason  ”  being  applied  to  desig¬
nate  members  of  the  Mason  craft,  and  con¬
siders  that  it  is  used  as  an  abbreviation  of
the  term  “ Freemen  Masons.”  But  while
concurring  therein,  as  did  Bro.  Hughan,
Gould  thinks  the  word  freemason  may  be
traced  back  to  1581,  when  the  “  Melrose  ”
version  of  the  “Old  Charges”  was  origi¬
nally  written.

“  Canongate  Kilwinning"  Lodge,  No.  2,  was
commissioned  or  warranted  by  the  Lodge
of  Kilwinning,  No.  0,  granting  powers  to
several  of  their  own  members  resident  in
the  Canongate,  Edinburgh,  and  dated  Dec.
20,  1667.  This,  Bro.  Gould  says,  was  a
direct  invasion  of  jurisdiction,  for  it  was
not  simply  a  charter  to  enable  their  mem¬
bers  to  meet  as  Masons  in  Edinburgh,  but
also  to  act  as  independently  as  “  Mother  Kil¬
winning”  herself,  with  a  separate  existence,
which  was  the  actual  result  that  ensued.

“Scoon  and  Perth  ”  Lodge,  No.  3,  is  much
older  than  No.  2,  although  fourth  on  the
roll,  though  the  authorities  state  that  it
existed  “  before  1658,”  and  the  Grand  Lodge
acknowledges  this  date  at  the  present  time,
placing  Nos.  0  and  1,  however,  as  “ before
1598,”  and  No.  57  (Haddington)  at  1599,
there  being  also  many  bearing  seventeenth
century  designations.

The  Lodge  of  "Glasgow  St.  John,"  No.  3,


978


FRfiRES


ADDENDUM.


GABRIEL


bis,  is  next  mentioned  as  “  an  old  Lodge,
undoubtedly,  though  its  documents  do  not
date  back  as  far  as  some  of  its  admirers
have  declared.”  The  Rev.  A.  T.  Grant  is
quoted  as  saying  that  every  line  is  incon¬
sistent  with  the  charter  phraseology  of  the
eriod  to  which  it  has  been  assigned.  But
Ir.  W.  P.  Buchan  states  that  the  first
notice  in  the  minutes  of  the  “Glasgow  In¬
corporation  of  Masons”  bears  date  Septem¬
ber  22, 1620,  viz.,  “  Entry  of  Apprentices
to  the  Lodge  of  Glasgow,  the  last  day  of
Dec.,  1613  years,  compeared  John  Stewart,
&c.”  It  is  with  strong  argument  allowed
the  date  of  1613,  and  was  placed  on  the
roll  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  in
1850  as  No.  3,  bis;  it  was  exclusively
operative.  There  is  now  but  a  solitary  rep¬
resentative  left  of  the  ancient  ateliers,  which
still  prefers  isolation  and  independence  to
union  and  fraternity:  the  old  Lodge  of
Melrose.

“  Glasgow  Kilwinning  ”  Lodge,  No.  4,
dates  from  1735.

“  Canongate  and  Leith,  Leith  and  Canon-
gate  ”  Lodge,  No.  5,  is  authoritatively  ac¬
knowledged  as  dating  from  1688.

Lodge  of  “Old  Kilwinning  St.  John,”  In¬
verness,  No.  6,  was  granted  a  Charter  of
Confirmation  on  Nov.  30, 1737,  its  existence
being  admitted  from  the  year  1678,  but  a
cloud  rests  upon  the  latter  record.

“  Hamilton  Kilwinning  ”  Lodge,  No.  7,  is
considered  to  date  from  the  year  1695.

Thus  Bro.  Gould,  in  his  remarkable  His¬
tory,  continues  quoting  old  Charters,  Laws,
Statutes,  &c.,  back  even  to  the  16th  century,
in  a  most  interesting  manner,  dissenting
largely  from  the  early  history  of  Bro.
George  H.  Fort,  and  as  well  from  the  An¬
tiquities  of  Freemasonry,  by  Bro.  Findel.
See  “Four  Old  Lodges,”  in  Addendum.

Freres  Pontives.  See  Bridge
Builders  of  the  Middle  Ages,  Mackey.


rey  or  Freia.  Grimme,

in  his  Deutsche  Mytholr
ogie,  pp.  191,  279,  traces
the  name  Freia  through
the  ancient  Teutonic  di¬
alects  and  explains  it
to  signify  plenty  and
beauty.  Also,  see  Thorpe,
Northern  Mythology ,  vol.
i.,  pp.  197,  198.  The
column  or  pillar  set  apart  to  the  goddess
Frey  in  the  temple  of  Upsala  became  the
pillar  of  beauty  or  plenteousness.  Bro.
Fort  says,  in  his  Antiquities,  the  three  di¬
vinities  in  the  Norse  temple  at  Upsala,  in
Denmark,  Odin,  Thor,  and  Frey,  were
typical  supports  of  the  universe, — Wisdom,
Strength,  and  Beauty, — or  the  three  of  the
ten  columns  in  the  Hebrew  sephiroth,  in
the  Jewish  philosophy,  designated  as  Sa-
pientia,  Pulchritudo,  and  Fundamentum ;
which,  like  the  three  columns  existing  in  a
Lodge  of  Freemasons,  symbolize  the  mor¬
alistic  pillars  of  the  world,  represented  by
the  Lodge  itself.  An  additional  significant
fact  confronts  us  at  this  point:  the  column
of  Beauty  or  Plenty,  originally  emblematic
of  Frey,  is  situated  in  the  south  of  the
Lodge.  A  Masonic  symbol — sheaf  of
grain — always  suspended  above  that  sta¬
tion,  denotes  plenteousness.  Freia  may
also  be  comparatively  described  as  the
Scandinavian  Isis.

Fund.Grand Masters’.  Afundover
which  the  G.  Master  of  the  United  G.  Lodge
of  England  exercises  exclusive  control.
Fylfot.  An  ancient  symbol  well  known
among  Heralds.  It  is  some-
^  times  known  as  the  crux  dis-
simulata,  found  in  the  catacombs
“  ^  of  Rome,  and  forms  one  of  the
symbols  of  the  degree  of  Prince
of  Mercy,  Scottish  Rite  System.  See  Jaina
Cross,  in  Addendum.


G.


tG.  (Hebrew,  j.  Chaldaic,
or  hieroglyphic.)  The  7th  letter
of  the  English  and  Roman  alpha¬
bets.  In  the  Greek  and  many  other
alphabets  it  is  the  3d  in  place ;  in
the  Russian,  Wallachian,  and  some  others
it  is  the  4th ;  in  the  Arabic  the  5th,  and
in  the  Ethiopian  the  20th.

In  Hebrew  it  is  called  “Gimel,”  is  of
the  numerical  value  of  3,  and  its  signi¬
fication  is  camel.  It  is  associated  with


the  third  sacred  name  of  God  in  Hebrew,
*7111  (Ghadol),  magnus.  In  Masonry  it  is
given  as  the  initial  of  God.  The  Masonic
use  of  the  letter  tends  to  the  belief  of  a
modern  form  in  the  ceremony  of  the  Fellow
Craft  Degree.  See  G.  0.  D.

Gabriel.  (Heb.,  Mighty  one  of  God. )
The  chief  of  the  seven  archangels.  He
interpreted  to  Daniel  the  vision  of  the
ram  and  the  he-goat,  and  made  the
prophecy  of  the  “seventy  weeks”  (Dan.


GANGLER


ADDENDUM.


GOETIA


979


viii.  and  ix.) ;  he  announced  the  future
appearance  of  the  Messiah  (Dan.  ix.  21,
27).  In  the  New  Testament  he  foretold  to
Zacharias  the  birth  of  John  the  Baptist
(Luke  i.  11),  and  to  Mary  the  birth  of
Christ  (Luke  i.  26).  Among  the  Rabbins
Gabriel  is  entrusted  with  the  care  of  the
souls  of  the  dead,  and  is  represented  as
having  taught  Joseph  the  seventy  lan¬
guages  spoken  at  Babel.  In  addition,  he
was  the  only  angel  who  could  speak  Chal¬
dee  and  Syriac.  The  Talmud  speaks  of
him  as  the  Prince  of  Fire,  the  Spirit  pre¬
siding  over  thunder.  The  Mohammedans
term  him  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  and  believe
that  he  dictated  the  Koran  to  Mohammed.

Gangler.  The  title  given  to  the  can¬
didate  in  the  Scandinavian  mysteries,  sig¬
nifying  wanderer.  The  application  is  also
made  to  the  sun.

Gaudin,  Theobald.  Known  as
the  monk  Gaudini.  Elected  Grand  Master
of  Templars,  1291;  died  1301.

Gerbier,  Doctor.  An  energetic
Mason,  and,  as  mentioned  in  The  Royal
Masonic  Cyclopaedia,  one  of  the  irremov¬
able  Masters  of  the  ancient  Grand  Lodge
of  France.  He  is  said  to  have  fabricated
the  title  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France,  which  it  was  pretended  had  ema¬
nated  from  Edinburgh,  in  1721.

Gheuioul  Dinah  Thebonnah.
(Prudence  in  the  midst  of  vicissitude.)
The  name  of  the  seventh  step  of  the  mys¬
tical  Kadosh  ladder  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish
Rite.

Gibber,  Gabriel.  Mentioned  as
warden  under  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  and
said  to  have  been  Grand  Master  of  Masons
in  England  in  1685.

Gibeali.  A  Hebrew  word  signifying
a  “  hill,”  and  giving  name  to  several  towns
and  places  in  ancient  Palestine.  The  only
one  requiring  special  mention  is  “Gibeah
of  Benjamin,”  a  small  city  about  four  miles
north  of  Jerusalem.  It  was  the  residence,
if  not  the  birthplace,  of  King  Saul.

In  the  French  Rite  it  symbolically  refers
to  the  Master,  who  must  be  pure  in  heart,
that  the  High  and  Holy  One  may  dwell
therein.  The  word  is  also  used  in  the
Swedish  Rite.

Gilead.  See  Galahad,  Mackey.

Gilgul,  Doctrine  of.  We  learn
from  Bro.  Kenneth  R.  H.  Mackenzie’s
Cyclopaedia  that  certain  of  the  learned
Jews  have  believed,  for  many  centuries,  in
the  doctrine  of  Gilgul,  according  to  which
the  bodies  of  Jews  deposited  in  foreign
tombs  contain  within  them  a  principle  of
soul  which  cannot  rest  until,  by  a  process
called  by  them  “the  whirling  of  the  soul,”
the  immortal  particle  reaches  once  more
the  sacred  soil  of  the  Promised  Laud.


This  whirling  of  souls  was  supposed  to  be
accomplished  by  a  process  somewhat  simi¬
lar  to  that  of  the  metempsychosis  of  the
Hindus,  the  psychical  spark  being  con¬
veyed  through  bird,  beast,  or  fish,  and,
sometimes,  the  most  minute  insect.  The
famous  Rabbi,  Akiba  (followed  by  the
Rabbis  Judah  and  Meir),  declared  that
none  could  come  to  the  resurrection  save
those  of  the  Jews  who  were  buried  in  the
Holy  Land,  or  whose  remains  were,  in  the
process  of  ages,  gradually  brought  thither.
In  Picard’s  wonderful  and  laborious  work
there  are  many  references  to  this  doctrine.
The  learned  may  consult  further  authori¬
ties  on  this  curious  subject  in  the  Kabbala
Denudata  of  Heinrich  Khunrath,  1677.

Glastonbury,  Holy  Thorn  of.
There  is  an  ancient  market  town  in  County
Somerset,  Eng.,  with  a  population  of  3700,
which  owes  its  origin  to  a  celebrated  ab¬
bey,  founded,  according  to  tradition,  in  60
a.  d.  We  are  further  told  that  Joseph  of
Arimathea  was  the  founder,  and  the  “  mi¬
raculous  thorn  ”  which  flowered  on  Christ¬
mas  day  was  believed  by  the  common  peo¬
ple  to  be  the  veritable  staff  with  which
Joseph  aided  his  steps  from  the  Holy  Land.
The  tree  was  destroyed  during  the  civil
wars,  but  grafts  flourish  in  neighboring
gardens.  Glastonbury,  has  the  honor  of
ranking  St.  Patrick  (415  A.  D.)  and  St.
Dunstan  among  its  abbots.  In  1539  Henry
VIII.  summoned  Abbot  Whiting  to  sur¬
render  the  town  and  all  its  treasures,  and
on  his  refusal  condemned  him  to  be  hanged
and  quartered,  and  the  monastery  confis¬
cated  to  the  king’s  use,  which  sentence  was
immediately  carried  into  execution.  King
Arthur  is  said  to  be  buried  in  this  place.

G.  O.  D.  The  initials  of  Gomer,  Oz,
Dabar.  It  is  a  singular  coincidence,  and
worthy  of  thought,  that  the  letters  com¬
posing  the  English  name  of  Deity  should
be  the  initials  of  the  Hebrew  words  wisdom,
strength,  and  beauty ;  the  three  great  pillars,
or  metaphorical  supports,  of  Masonry.  They
seem  to  present  almost  the  only  reason  that
can  reconcile  a  Mason  to  the  use  of  the  ini¬
tial  “G”  in  its  conspicuous  suspension  in
the  East  of  the  Lodge  in  place  of  the  Delta.
The  incident  seems  to  be  more  than  an  ac¬
cident.

131  Dabar,  Wisdom,  D.

Oz,  Strength,  O.

10J  Gomer,  Beauty,  G.

Thus  the  initials  conceal  the  true  meaning.

God  and  His  Temple,  Kniglit
of.  A  degree  mentioned  by  Fustier.

Goelia.  A  contra-distinctive  term  to
Theurgia,  the  first  signifying  black  magic,
the  latter  white  magic.  The  demons  of
darkness  were  invoked  and  no  crime  or
horror  stayed  the  power.  Alchemy  and


980


GOLDEN


ADDENDUM.


GRAIN


chemistry  were  the  powerful  arms  relied
on.

Golden  I, ion  of  llesse-Cassel,
Order  of  the.  Instituted  by  Frederick
II.,  14th  of  August,  1770,  under  a  decree  of
6th  July,  to  recompense  virtue  and  merit.
The  Grand  Master  is  the  reigning  sover¬
eign  of  Hesse-Cassel.  Motto,  “Yirtute  et
Fidelitate.”

Golden  Stole  of  Venice.  ( Cavali -
eri  della  Stola  d’Oro.)  An  ancient  order  of
knighthood,  conferred  by  the  republic  of
Venice.  The  number  of  knights  wTas  un¬
limited.  The  decoration,  worn  over  the
left  shoulder,  was  richly  embroidered  with
flowers  of  gold,  and  being  in  width  a  hand-
breadth,  fell  behind  and  before  to  the  knee.
An  ambassador,  for  some  distinctive  ser¬
vice,  was  deemed  worthy.  The  ducal  robe
was  of  red  material.

Golden  Thaler,  or  Gold  Gulden,  w^e
are  informed  by  Bro.  Woodford,  is  the  St.
John’s  offering,  as  it  was  called  under  the
strict  observance  in  Germany,  and  which
amounted  to  one  ducat,  or,  at  the  least,  one
and  two-thirds  of  a  thaler,  which  was  paid
by  every  member  on  St.  John’s  Day.  This
practice  is  still  kept  up  in  many  German
Lodges  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor  fund.

Gomel.  (Heb.  Sol,  L.  retribuens.)  Ir¬
regularly  given  as  Gomer  and  Gomez.  A
word  found  in  the  26th  Degree  A.  A.  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  signifying  reward.

Gonfalon.  (Ital.  Gon/alone,  0.  Ger¬
man,  Gundfano .)  An  ecclesiastical  war-
flag  or  banner,  a  standard ;  used  in  several


of  the  chivalric  degrees  of  Masonry.  The
chief  magistrates  in  Italian  cities  wdien
hearing  this  ensign  are  known  as  Gonfa¬
loniers.  The  banner  is  triune,  of  white  silk,
trimmed  and  mounted  with  gold.

Goodall.  The  reputed  author  of  the
expose  of  Masonry,  knowrn  as  “  Jachin  and
Boaz.”  It  is  said  that  he  was  at  one  time
Master  of  the  W.  India  and  American
Lodge,  now  known  as  the  Lodge  of  An¬
tiquity.

Gould,  Robert  Freke.  A  barris¬
ter-at-law,  Past  Senior  Grand  Deacon
of  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
and  author  of  “The  Four  Old  Lodges,”


“  The  Atholl  Lodges,”  &c.,  now  engaged
on  a  great  work,  “  The  History  of  Free¬
masonry,  its  Antiquities,  Symbols,  Consti¬
tutions,  Customs,  &c. ;  embracing  an  inves¬
tigation  of  the  Records  of  the  Organizations
of  the  Fraternity  in  England,  Scotland,  Ire¬
land,  British  Colonies,  France,  Germany,
and  the  United  States,”  to  be  completed  in
six  volumes,  of  which  three  are  in  the  hands
of  the  subscribers,  and  from  which  judgment
can  already  be  passed  of  their  inestimable
value  to  all  Masons.  The  history  is  “  de¬
rived  from  official  sources,”  and  is  not  of
that  “ creationist  school”  so  continuously
indulged  in  by  Masonic  book-makers.  The
first  chapter  delves  in  the  consideration  of
“  the  four  systems  or  sects,  from  each  of
which,  according  to  different  schools  of
thought,  may  be  traced  the  modern  system
of  Freemasonry.  These  are  the  Ancient
Mysteries,  the  Essenes,  the  Roman  Col¬
legia,  and  the  Culdees.”  Then  are  consid¬
ered  “The  Old  Charges  of  British  Free¬
masons,”  “The  Stonemasons  (Steinmelzen)
of  Germany,”  “The  Craft  Guilds  ( Corps
d’£tat)  of  France,”  “The  Companionage,”
“Mediseval  Operative  Masonry,"  “The
Statutes  Relating  to  the  Freemasons,”
“  Early  British  Freemasonry,”  &c.  From
this  illustrated  quarto  work,  the  liberty  has
been  taken  of  occasionally  making  extracts
in  this  Addendum,  not,  however,  without
due  consideration  for  the  author.

Gourgas,  John  James  Joseph.
Born  in  Geneva,  Switzerland,  in  1777,  of  a
patrician  family,  and  emigrated  to  London
during  the  old  French  Revolution.  He
became  well  known  as  a  merchant  on  the
Royal  Exchange.  Upon  coming  to  Amer¬
ica  in  the  earliest  days  of  the  century,  he
wras  initiated  into  Masonry  in  1803,  and
was  passed  and  raised  before  the  close  of
the  year.  After  receiving  the  Holy  Royal
Arch,  he  gave  his  attention  to  the  A.  A.
Scottish  Rite,  then  entering  upon  its  youth¬
ful  vigor,  and  received  the  Thirty-second
Degree  on  July  9,  1806,  that  of  Inspector
on  August  4,  1806,  and  was  one  of  the
six  Inspectors  General  who,  on  Novem¬
ber  8,  1808,  established  Concordia  Cres-
cimus  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem  in
the  city  of  Brooklyn.  He  became  Deputy
Inspector  on  Nov.  12, 1808,  Secretary  of  the
Holy  Empire,  N.  Jur.,  in  1813,  the  Supreme
Council  having  been  formed  on  August  5
of  that  year.  He  was  Special  Deputy  from
1822  to  1832,  and  then  became  Commander,
and  so  continued  until  1851,  when  he  re¬
signed.  He  died  in  New  York  in  1863.

Grain  oOInstard,  Order  of  the.
(Ger.  Der  Or  den  vom  Sen/  Korn.)  An  order
instituted  in  Germany,  based  on  Mark  iv.
30  and  32,  the  object  being  the  propagation
of  morality.


i


GRAND


ADDENDUM.


HABAKKUK


981


Grand  Director  of  the  Ceremo¬
nies.  An  important  offi¬
cer  in  the  United  Grand
Lodge  of  England ;  a  sim¬
ilar  office  to  that  of  Grand
Master-General  of  Cere¬
monies  of  a  Supreme  Coun¬
cil,  upon  whom  the  order
of  the  Grand  Body  largely
depends,  and  who  has
charge  of  the  service  or
ceremonies  of  whatever
nature  that  may  tran¬
spire.

Grand  Elect,  Per¬
fect  and  Sublime
Mason.  The  Fourteenth  Degree  of  the
A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.  See  Perfection,  Lodge
qf,  Mackey.

Gravelot.  The  name  of  the  second
ol  the  three  conspirators  in  the  Master’s
Degree,  according  to  the  Adonhiramite
Rite.  The  others  are  Romvel  and  Abiram.
The  etymology  of  Gravelot  is  unknown.

Grumbach,  Sylvester.  Mentioned
in  the  legend  of  the  Strict  Observance,  aud
was  the  reputed  Grand  Master  of  the  Tem¬
plars  from  1330  to  1332,  and  was  the  twenty-
second  Grand  Master.

Gymnosopliists.  (Signifying  “naked
sages.”)  A  name  given  by  the  Greeks  to
those  ancient  Hindu  philosophers  who
lived  solitarily  in  the  woods,  wore  little
or  no  clothing,  and  addicted  themselves  to
mystical  contemplation  and  the  practice  of
the  most  rigorous  asceticism.  Strabo  di¬
vides  them  into  Brahmans  and  Samans,
the  former  of  whom  adhered  to  the  strict¬
est  principles  of  caste,  while  the  latter  ad¬
mitted  any  one  into  their  number  regarding
whose  character  and  kindred  they  were  sat¬
isfied.  They  believed  in  the  immortality
of  the  soul  and  its  migration  into  other
bodies.  They  practised  celibacy,  abstained
from  wine,  and  lived  on  fruits.  They  held
riches  in  contempt,  and  abstained  from  sen¬
sual  indulgences.


Gypsies.  Cornelius  Van  Paun,  more
generally  known  as  De  Paun,  in  his  Phil¬
osophical  Researches  on  the  Egyptians  and
Chinese  (Paris,  1774),  advances  the  theory
that  Freemasonry  originated  with  the  Gyp¬
sies.  He  says :  “  Every  person  who  was  not
guilty  of  some  crime  could  obtain  admis¬
sion  to  the  lesser  mysteries.  Those  vaga¬
bonds  called  Egyptian  priests  in  Greece
and  Italy  required  considerable  sums  for
initiation ;  and  their  successors,  the  Gyp¬
sies,  practise  similar  mummeries  to  obtain
money.  And  thus  was  Freemasonry  in¬
troduced  into  Europe.”  But  De  Paun  is
remarkable  for  the  paradoxical  character
of  his  opinions.  Mr.  James  Simpson,  who
has  written  a  rather  exhaustive  History
of  the  Gypsies  (1866),  finds  (p.  387)  “a  con¬
siderable  resemblance  between  Gypsyism,
in  its  harmless  aspect,  and  Freemasonry —
with  this  difference,  that  the  former  is  a  gen¬
eral,  while  the  latter  is  a  special,  society;
that  is  to  say,  the  Gypsies  have  the  lan¬
guage,  or  some  of  the  words  and  the  signs
peculiar  to  the  whole  race,  which  each
individual  or  class  will  use  for  different
purposes.  The  race  does  not  necessarily,
and  does  not  in  fact,  have  intercourse  with
every  other  member  of  it.  In  that  respect
they  resemble  any  ordinary  community  of
men.”  And  he  adds:  “There  are  many
Gypsies  Freemasons;  indeed,  they  are  the
very  people  to  push  their  way  into  a  Masons’
Lodge;  for  they  have  secrets  of  their  own,
and  are  naturally  anxious  to  pry  into  those
of  others,  by  which  they  may  be  benefited.
I  was  told  of  a  Gypsy  who  died,  lately,  the
Master  of  a  Masons’  Lodge  A  friend,  a
Mason,  told  me  the  other  day  of  his  hav¬
ing  entered  a  house  in  Yetholm  where  were
five  Gypsies,  all  of  whom  responded  to  his
Masonic  signs.”  But  it  must  be  remem¬
bered  that  Simpson  is  writing  of  the  Gyp¬
sies  of  Scotland,  a  kingdom  where  the  race
is  considerably  advanced  above  those  of
any  other  country  in  civilization  and  in
social  position. — Mackey.


H.  (Heb.  n,  Cheth  ;  the  hieroglyph  was
an  altar  thus,
and  finally  the
Hebrew  n)

The  eighth  let¬
ter  in  the  al¬
phabet,  and  in  the  Hebrew  has  the  value
in  number  of  8,  while  the  Heb.  J"f,  He,


□


R


which  is  of  the  same  hieroglyphic  forma¬
tion.  has  the  numerical  valuation  of  5.

Habakkuk.  (Heb.  plp3H,  a  strag¬
gler,  a  favorite.)  The  eighth  of  the  twelve
minor  prophets.  No  account  is  contained
in  the  Hook  of  Habakkuk,  either  of  the
events  of  his  life  or  the  data  when  he  lived.
He  is  believed  by  many  to  have  flourished


D82


HABIN


ADDENDUM.


HEBREW


about  G30  b.  c.  In  the  32d  Degree  of  the
A.  A.  Scottish  Rite,  his  name  answers  to
the  passwords  Tuesday  and  Xerxes.

llnbin.  (Heb.  |'in,  intelligius.)  Name
of  the  initiate  in  the  fourth  degree  of  the
modern  French  rite,  sometimes  given  as
Johaben,  or  Jabin.

Habrauiali,  or  Jabainiah.  ( Fa -

num  excelsum.)  Said  to  be  used  in  the  30th
Degree  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite  in  France ;
it  is  not  used  in  America.

lfaequet,  G.  A  French  notary  at
Port-au-Prince,  subsequently  a  member  of
the  Grand  Orient  of  Paris,  and  President
of  the  Royal  Arch  Chapter  at  Paris  in
1814.

Hafedlia.  The  second  of  the  four
ods  worshipped  by  the  Arab  tribe  of  Ad,
efore  the  time  of  Mohammed,  to  which
Hild,  or  Heber,  was  sent.  These  were
Sakia,  the  god  of  rain  ;  Hafedha,  the  pre¬
server  from  danger ;  Razeka,  the  provider
of  food;  and  Salema,  the  god  of  health.

Hallelujah.  (Praise  the  Lord.)  Ex-

firession  of  applause  in  the  degree  of  Sub-
ime  Ecossais,  Heavenly  Jerusalem,  and
others.

Halliwell  MS.  J.  O.  Halliwell  took
the  name  of  Phillips,  and  edited,  in  1840,
“The  Early  History  of  Freemasonry  in
England,”  commonly  known  as  the  “Ma¬
sonic  Poem,”  or  “  Halliwell  MS.,”  “  Brit.
Museum  Bib.  Regia  17  a  ff  32.”  Bro.
Woodford  remarks,  in  “Henning's  Cyclo¬
paedia,”  that  “it  is  somewhat  curious  that
to  Grandidier  and  Halliwell,  both  non-
Masons,  Freemasonry  owes  the  impetus
given  at  separate  epochs  to  the  study  of  its
archaeology  and  history.  Mr.  Phillips  is
a  well-known  writer  on  general  antiquities,
and  has  edited  many  very  curious  and  im¬
portant  works.”  Halliwell  considered  his
MS.  of  a  date  “not  later  than  the  latter
part  of  the  fourteenth  century,”  that  is,
more  than  half  a  century  before  the  Strass-
burg  Constitutions.  For  quotation  from
this  MS.,  see  ante,  p.  287.

Hamaliel.  The  name  of  the  angel
that,  in  accordance  with  the  Kabbalistical
system,  governs  the  planet  Venus.

Hamilton.  Hon.  Robt.  M.  A.,
M.  I>.  Born  1820;  died  May,  1880,  at
Jamaica,  of  which  island  he  was  District
Grand  Master.  This  English  gentleman
was  a  member  of  the  Queen’s  Body  Guard.
He  was  appointed  District  G.  Master  of
Jamaica,  Nov.  5,  1858;  District  G.  Supt.
of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  Jan.  10,  1859;
Prov.  G.  M.  M.  M.,  1877  ;  and  was  a  super¬
numerary  member  of  the  Supreme  Coun¬
cil,  33d,  of  England,  and  Prov.  G.  Master
of  the  Royal  Order  of  Scotland.

Hands,  United.  Clasped  hands  are
a  symbol  of  fidelity  and  trust.  A  Spanish


work  was  published  at  Vittoria,  in  1774,
where  three  hands  are  shown  united  in  the
vignette  on  the  title.  *

Haphtziel.  (Heb.  Voluntas

Dei.)  A  covered  word  used  in  the  23d  De¬
gree  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Har.  The  name  of  the  second  king  in
the  Scandinavian  Mysteries.

Harbinger.  The  title  of  an  officer
in  the  Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  and
also  in  the  Knights  of  St/John  the  Evan¬
gelist.

Harnspices,  Order  of.  The  word

Haruspice  appears  to  come  from  haruga  or
harvix,  a  ram  for  offering,  and  spicere,  to
look:  therefore  implying  a  soothsayer  or
aruspice.  The  founder  of  the  Etruscan  order
was  Tages,  doubtless  a  myth  of  self-crea¬
tive  power.  This  order  is  claimed  to  have
been  re-established  in  Rome  at  the  time
of  the  foundation  of  the  city.  It  embraced
two  divisions,  those  who  formed  their  judg¬
ment  from  the  movements  and  habits  of
animals  as  well  as  the  flight  of  birds,  and
those  who  judged  and  foretold  events  by
the  inspection  of  the  entrails  of  newly
killed  animals.  These  were  the  precursors
of  naturalists  and  physiologists.  The  two
sections  of  the  order  were  recognized  as
Haruspex ,  ab  aris  aspiciendis,  and  Extispex,
ab  extis  inspiciendis.

If  ay  ti.  Freemasonry,  which  had  been
in  existence  for  several  years  in  the  island
of  Hayti,  was  entirely  extinguished  by  the
revolution  which  drove  out  the  white  in¬
habitants.  In  1809,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  granted  a  charter  for  a  Lodge  at
Port-au-Prince,  and  for  one  at  Caves.  In
1817,  it  constituted  two  others,  at  Jeremias
and  at  Jacmel.  Subsequently,  a  Provin¬
cial  Grand  Lodge  was  established  under
obedience  to  England.  Jan.  25, 1824,  this
Provincial  Grand  Lodge  declared  its  inde¬
pendence  and  organized  the  Grand  Orient
of  Hayti,  which  is  still  in  existence;  but
in  consequence  of  the  want  of  official  corre¬
spondence,  we  are  left  in  great  ignorance
as  to  the  actual  condition  of  Freemasonry
in  Hayti.

Hebrew  Chronology.  The  eccle¬
siastical  year  commences  1st  Nisan,  March,
but  the  civil  reckoning  begins  1st  Tishri,
September,  which  is  New  Year’s  day.

The  following  dates  are  accepted  by  the
Hebrews,  as  given  by  Dr.  Zunz  in  Remarks
prefacing  “The  24  Books  of  the  Holy  Scrip¬
tures  according  to  the  Massoretic  Text.”

BEFORE  COMMON  ERA.

3988,  Creation.

2332,  Flood.

2040,  Abraham  born.

1575,  Moses  born.

1495,  Exodus.

1051,  David  acknowledged  king.


HEBREW


ADDENDUM.


HESSE


983


BEPORE  COMMON  ERA.

1015,  First  Temple  commenced.

586,  First  Temple  destroyed.

536,  Cyrus’s  Decree.

516,  Second  Temple  completed.

330,  Alexander  conquers  Palestine.

The  succeeding  dates  are  in  accord  with
the  research  of  other  authorities.

The  Temple  was  dedicated  on  five  occa¬
sions  :

1st.  B.  c.  1001,  15th  day  ofTishri  (Etha-
nim  and  Abib)  (1  Kings  viii.  2-62).

2d.  B.  c.  726,  when  purified  from  the
abominations  of  Ahaz.

3d.  B.  c.  516, 3  Adar,  upon  completion  of
Zerubbabel’s  Temple.

4th.  b.  c.  164,  25th  Kislev,  after  the  vic¬
tory  of  Judas  Maccabaeus  over  the  Syrians,
the  service  lasted  eight  days.

5th.  B.  c.  22,  upon  completion  of  Herod’s
Temple.

The  three  Temples  were  destroyed  on  the
same  day  and  month  of  the  year.  The
“threefold  destruction”  of  the  Temple
took  place  on  the  9th  Ab,  or  fifth  ecclesias¬
tical  month.  The  destruction  of  the  Solo-
mouian  Temple,  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  took
place  b.  c.  588,  or  four  hundred  and  sixteen
years  after  dedication.  The  taking  of  the
city  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus  is  commemo¬
rated  as  a  fast  day  on  the  17th  Tamuz.

Passover,  14th  Nisan;  “Little”  Pass-
over,  loth  Iyar.

Pentecost,  or  “  First  Fruits,”  commemo¬
rating  the  giving  of  the  law  on  Mount
Sinai,  6th  Sivan.

Great  Day  of  Atonement,  10th  Tishri.

Feast  of  Tabernacles,  15-21  Tishri.

Fast  for  commencement  of  siege  of  Jeru¬
salem  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  10th  day  of  Te-
beth.

Feast  of  Purim,  14th  and  15th  Adar.

King  Cyrus  liberated  the  Jews,  b.  c.  538.

King  Darius  confirmed  the  decree,  B.  c.
520.  See  Cyrus ,  King.

Hebrew  Faith.  See  Talmud.

Heler.  A.  A  tyler  or  tegulator.  From
the  Anglo-Saxon  “hilan.”  Also  written
“  Hillyar”  and  “  Hilliar.”

Hermumlad,  The.  (Spanish,
“Brotherhood.”)  An  association  of  the
.  principal  cities  of  Castile  and  Aragon
bound  by  a  solemn  league  for  the  defence
of  their  liberties  in  time  of  trouble.  The
sovereigns  approved  this  brotherhood  as
agents  for  suppressing  the  increasing  power
of  the  nobles,  and  without  cost  to  the  gov¬
ernment.  The  Hermandad  was  first  estab¬
lished  in  Aragon  in  the  thirteenth  century,
and  in  Castile  about  thirty  years  later,
while,  in  1295,  thirty-five  cities  of  Castile
and  Leon  formed  a  joint  confederacy,
pledging  themselves  to  take  summary  ven¬
geance  on  every  robber  noble  who  injured


a  member  of  the  association.  The  Santa,
or  Holy  Brotherhood,  finally  checked  so
effectually  the  outrages  of  the  nobles,  that
Isabella  of  Castile,  in  1496,  obtained  the
sanction  of  the  Cortez  to  reorganize  and
extend  it  over  the  whole  kingdom.

Hermetic  Philosophy.  Pertain¬
ing  or  belonging  to  that  species  of  philoso¬
phy  which  pretends  to  solve  and  explain  all
the  phenomena  of  nature  from  the  three
chemical  principles,  salt,  sulphur,  and  mer¬
cury.  Also  that  study  of  the  sciences  as
pursued  by  the  Rosicrucian  fraternity.  A
practice  of  the  arts  of  alchemy  and  similar
pursuits,  involving  a  duplex  symbolism
with  their  peculiar  distinctions.

Herring,  James.  Born  in  London,
England,  January  12, 1794;  died  in  France,
October  8,  1867 ;  buried  in  Greenwood
Cemetery,  New  York,  October  27,  1867.
The  family  emigrated  to  America  in  1805.
James  was  initiated  in  Solomon’s  Lodge,
Somerville,  New  Jersey,  in  1816.  He  was
Master  of  Clinton  Lodge,  New  York  city,
in  1827, 1828, 1832,  and  1834,  a  period  when
the  anti-Masonic  spirit  was  in  its  zenith.
He,  with  the  remaining  members  of  Clin¬
ton  Lodge,  united  with  St.  John’s,  No.  1,
and  met  in  union  December  18,  1834.  He
instituted  the  formation  of  Lodge  of  Strict
Observance,  which  was  constituted  by
Grand  Lodge,  December  27,  1843,  R.  W.
Bro.  Herring  being  the  Master,  with  which
Lodge  he  remained  until  his  death.  On
the  3d  September,  1828,  he  was  appointed
Assistant  Grand  Secretary,  and  on  June  3,
1829,  was  elected  Grand  Secretary,  which
office  he  retained  until  1846.  He  sided  with
the  “  Phillips  ”  or  “  Herring  ”  Grand  Body
at  the  split  in  Grand  Lodge  on  June  5, 1849,
and  remained  its  Grand  Secretary  until
1858,  when,  in  June,  the  two  Grand  Lodges
were  fused.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Con¬
vention  of  Grand  Lodges  held  in  Wash¬
ington  March  7,  1842.  Bro.  Herring  de¬
livered  the  oration,  on  the  25th  August,
1847,  in  St.  John’s  Lodge,  in  commemo¬
ration  of  the  M.  W.  G.  Masters,  Morgan
Lewis  and  Alex.  H.  Robertson,  and  other
eminent  Masons,  on  the  occasion  of  the
First  Lodge  of  Sorrow  held  in  America  in
the  English  language.  He  was  exalted  in
Jerusalem  Chapter,  No.  8,  R.  Arch,  N.  Y  ,
January  5, 1817,  dubbed  a  Knight  Templar
in  Columbian  Commandery,  No.  1,  N.  Y.,
and  was  received  a  Sov.  G.  I.  General,  33d
Scottish  Rite.  Bro.  Herring  was  a  P.  H.
Priest,  P.  G.  G.  Sec.  of  the  G.  G.  Chapter,
U.  S.,  P.  G.  Master  of  the  G.  E  ncampment,
N.  Y.,  and  Officer  of  the  G.  G.  Encamp¬
ment  of  U.  S.,  and  P.  G  Representative
of  the  Orients  of  Brazil  and  France.

Ilesse  Cassel.  Freemasonry  appears
to  have  been  founded  in  this  electorate  iu


984  IIIBBUT  HAKKEBER  addendum.


HITTITES


1743,  by  a  Lodge  at  Marburg,  called  “  Zu
den  drei  Lowen,”  which  afterwards  took
the  name  of  “Marc  Aurel  zum  flammen-
den  Stern.”  A  lodge  also  appears  to  have
existed  in  1771,  at  Cassel,  called  “  Zum
blauen  Lowen.”  In  1817  the  Grand  Mother
Lodge  of  Hesse  Cassel  was  founded,  which
lasted  until  1821,  when  the  government
closed  all  Lodges.  In  1849  one  was  re¬
opened  by  General  von  Helmschwerdt,  but
it  was  closed  in  1855.  It  is  now  under¬
stood  that  this  Lodge  has  been  reopened.

Hikbut-Iiakkeher.  (Beating  of
the  sepulchre.)  A  Mohammedan  belief  as
to  the  state  of  the  soul  after  death.  The
form  and  mode  of  judgment  is  explained
in  A l  Koran.  The  sarcophagus  of  an
orthodox  Moslem  is  so  constructed  that
the  deceased  can  sit  upright  when  notified
by  his  angel  of  the  approach  of  the  exam¬
iners,  who  question  him  as  to  his  faith  in
the  unity  of  God  and  the  mission  of  Mo¬
hammed.  Satisfactory  answers  insure
peace;  but  if  to  tbe  contrary,  he  is  beaten
on  the  temples  with  iron  maces  until  he
roars  with  anguish.  The  two  angels,
Monker  and  Nakti,  then  press  the  eartb
upon  the  body,  which  is  gnawed  and  stung
by  ninety-nine  seven-headed  dragons  until
the  day  of  resurrection.  As  the  Moham¬
medan  was  an  imitative  religion,  we  natu¬
rally  look  for  the  origin  of  its  customs  and
beliefs  in  older  faiths ;  thus  the  Hib-
but-Iiakkeber  is  found  in  tbe  Jewish,
which  taught  that  the  angel  of  death
would  sit  on  a  new-made  grave,  the  soul
would  return  to  the  body,  which  would  m
stand  up,  the  angel  striking  it  thrice  l:i
with  a  chain,  half  iron  and  half  fire;
at  the  first  blow  all  the  limbs  were
loosened,  at  the  second  the  bones  were
dispersed,  but  gathered  again  by  angels,
and  the  third  stroke  reduces  it  to  dust.

This  need  not  occur  to  those  who  died
on  the  Sabbath  or  in  the  laud  of  Israel.

See  Gilgul.

Hierony mites.  A  hermit  order  es¬
tablished  in  the  fourteenth  century,  formed
from  the  third  Order  of  St.  Francis.  Fol¬
lowers  of  Thomas  of  Siena,  who  estab¬
lished  themselves  among  the  wild  districts
of  the  Sierra  Morena,  and  so  forming  a
community,  obtained  approval  of  Pope
Gregory  XI.  in  1374.

Hierophant,  or  Myslagog.  The
Chief  Priest  of  the  Eleusinians,  selected
from  the  grade  of  Eumolpidens.  He  was
selected  for  his  imposing  personal  presence,
and  his  dignity  was  sustained  by  the  gran¬
deur  of  his  attire,  his  head  encircled  with
a  costly  diadem.  He  was  required  to  be
perfect  in  animal  structure,  without  blem¬
ish,  and  in  the  vigor  of  life,  with  a  com¬
manding  voice.  He  was  presumed  to  be


surrounded  by  a  halo  of  holiness.  His
duty  was  to  maintain  and  also  expound
the  laws.  He  was  the  introductor  of  the
novices  into  the  Eleusinian  Temple,  and
passed  them  from  the  lesser  into  the  greater
mysteries,  where  he  became  the  Demiurg,
and  impressed  the  initiate,  while  instruct¬
ing  him,  by  his  manner  and  voice.  His
title  of  Mystagog  was  awarded  because  he
alone  revealed  the  secret  or  mystery.

Hieropliylax.  Title  of  the  guardian
of  the  holy  vessels  and  vestments,  as  used
in  several  Rites.

H  iraiu.  The  King  of  Tyre;  was  the
ally  of  David,  as  well  as  of  Solomon,  and
was  material  in  his  service  toward  the  build¬
ing  of  the  Holy  House,  notwithstanding
the  God  of  the  Hebrew  differed  essentially
from  the  ideal  god  of  the  people  of  Tyre.
Hiram  reigned  over  the  Tyrians  for  thirty-
four  years;  he  permitted  Solomon’s  ships
to  participate  in  the  profitable  trade  of  the
Mediterranean,  and  Jewish  sailors,  under
the  instructions  of  Tyrian  mariners,  were
taught  how  to  bring  from  India  the  gold  to
enrich  their  people  and  beautify  the  temple
of  their  king.  Tradition  says  that  Hiram
gave  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  King
Solomon  (see  Mackey).

Near  Tyre  there  is  a  tomb  which,  to  this
day,  has  been  pointed  out  as  that  of  Hi¬
ram,  King  of  Tyre,  as  delineated  below.


Hittites.  A  powerful  nation,  whose
two  chief  seats  were  at  Kadesh,  on  the
Orontes  and  Carchemish,  on  the  Euphra¬
tes,  and  who  subjected  as  allies,  forces  from
Palestine,  Lydia,  and  the  Troad.  This
great  empire  had  at  times  contended  with
the  Egyptian  monarchs  before  the  days  of
the  exodus.  The  Assyrians  also  had  felt
their  power.  They  were  foremost  in  arms
and  in  the  arts,  and  carried  their  religion
to  the  shores  of  the  iEgean ;  in  fact,  as
showm  by  the  recent  explorations  and  dis¬
coveries  of  1879,  the  early  civilization  of
Greece  and  other  European  nations  was  as
much  indebted  to  them  as  it  was  to  the
Phoenicians.  Egyptian  inscriptions  bear
out  the  truth  of  these  discoveries,  and  more
firmly  establish  Biblical  history.  Jerusa¬
lem  came  w  ithin  the  influence  of  this  great


HOBEN


ADDENDUM.


I-COLM-KILL


985


empire.  The  Hittites  were  finally  subdued
by  the  capture  of  their  famous  capital,
Carchemish,  by  Sargon,  b.  c.  717.  For
Biblical  references,  see  Judges  i.  26;  1  Kings
x.  28,  29;  2  Kings  vii.  6.

The  system  of  writing  by  the  Hittites  was
unique  ;  their  letters  were  hieroglyphic  and
their  sculptures  a  peculiar  and  curious  style
of  art,  some  of  which  may  be  found  in  the
British  Museum.  See  Fresh  Lights,  etc.,  by
Sayce,  chap.  5.

Hoben.  The  name  given,  in  some  of
the  high  degrees,  to  one  of  the  three  con¬
spirators  commemorated  in  the  Master’s
Degree.  The  derivation  is  uncertain.
Oben,  in  Hebrew,  means  a  stone;  or  it
may  be  a  corruption  of  Habbone,  the
Builder  or  Mason.

Hodin.  The  Blind  Fate  mentioned
in  the  Scandinavian  mysteries.  See  Bal¬
der.

Holy  City,  Knight  of  the.  The

fifth  and  last  of  the  degrees  of  the  rectified
Kite  of  the  Benevolent  Knights  of  the
Holy  City,  or  the  Rite  of  Strict  Observ¬
ance,  settled  at  Wilhelmsbad  in  1782.

Horn.  The  tree  of  life  and  man  in  the
Zoroastrian  doctrine  of  the  Persians.

Homaged.  Firstemployed  by  Entick,
in  his  edition  of  the  constitutions,  in  ref¬
erence  to  the  installation  of  the  Earl  of
Kintore,  in  1740,  as  Grand  Master:  “  Who
having  been  homaged  and  duly  congratu¬
lated  according  to  the  forms  and  solemnity
of  Masonry.”  He  never  repeats  the  word,
using  afterwards  the  expression,  “  received
the  homage.”  Noorthouck  adopts  this
latter  expression  in  three  or  four  instances,
but  more  generally  employs  the  word“rec-
ognized  ”  or  “  selected.”  The  expression
“to  do  homage”  to  the  Grand  Master  at


his  installation,  although  now  generally
disused,  is  a  correct  one, — not  precisely  in
the  feudal  sense  of  homagium,  but  in  the
more  modern  one  of  reverence,  obedience,
and  loyalty.

Hospitaller.  An  officer  in  each  of
the  bodies  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite,  and
in  the  Modern  French  Rite,  whose  duty  it
is  to  collect  the  obligatory  contributions
of  the  members,  and,  as  the  custodian,  to
disburse  the  same,  under  the  advisement
of  the  Master,  to  needy  brethren,  or  even
worthy  profanes  who  may  be  in  distress.
The  fund  is  entirely  a  secret  one,  and  is
reserved  apart  from  all  other  receipts  and
disbursements.

Houel.  A  Grand  Officer  of  the  G.
Orient  in  France  in  1804.  G.  Orator  of
the  Grand  Chapter  in  1814.

Htigliaii,  Will.  James.  The  his¬
tory  of  Masonry  in  England,  in  which  the
brotherhood  of  the  world  is  so  deeply
interested,  will  never  have  justice  done  to
its  historians  unless  there  is  placed  among
the  first  entitled  to  the  crown  of  immor¬
telles  the  name  of  William  James  Hughan.
He  was  initiated  in  St.  Aubyn  Lodge,  No.
954,  Devonport,  July  14,  1863,  exalted  in
1865  in  Royal  Arch  Ch.,  No.  50,  Glasgow,
and  has  been  honored  with  membership  in
many  Lodges  and  departments  of  Masonry,
including  the  Order  of  the  Temple,  Royal
Order  of  Scotland,  Scottish  Rite,  Rosi-
crucians,  etc.  The  fraternity  has  an  inter¬
national  interest  in  him,  and  look  forward
hopefully  to  the  attainments  by  his  con¬
tinued  labors,  which  have  resulted  already
so  favorably.

Hur.  (Heb.  “Tin,  liberty.)  A  term
used  in  the  Fourth  Degree  of  Perfect  Mis¬
tress  in  the  French  Rite  of  Adoption.


L


I.  The  ninth  letter  in  the  alphabets  of
Western  Europe,  called  by  the  Greeks
Iota,  after  its  Shemitic  name.  The  Hebrew
equivalent  is  of  the  numerical  value  of
10,  and  signifies  a  hand.  The  oldest  forms
of  the  letter,  as  seen  in  the  Phoenician  and
Samaritan,  have  a  rude  resemblance  to  a
hand  with  three  fingers,  but  by  a  gradual


simplification,  the  character  came  to  be
the  smallest  in  the  alphabet,  and  iota,  or
5  Y


“jot,”  is  a  synonym  for  a  trifle.  The
thumb  and  two  fingers  are  much  used,  and
are  of  great  significance,  in  religious  forms,
as  well  as  in  Freemasonry.  It  is  the  po¬
sition  of  the  hand  when  the  Pope  blesses
the  congregation,  and  signifies  the  Three
in  One.  The  Hebrew  letter  ain,  y,  with
the  numerical  value  of  70,  possesses  and
gives  the  English  sound  of  the  letter  i.

I-4'olna-Ii  ill.  An  island  south  of
the  Hebrides,  once  the  seat  of  the  Order
of  the  Culdees,  and  contains  the  ruins  of
the  monastery  of  St.  Columha,  founded
A.  D.  565.  Tradition  plants  the  fouuda-


986


ICONOCLASTS


ADDENDUM.


INDISCHE


tion  of  the  Rite  of  Heredom  on  this
island.

Iconoclasts.  (Gr.  eikon,  image,  and
Mazo,  I  break.)  The  name  used  to  desig¬
nate  those  in  the  Church,  from  the  eighth
century  downward,  who  have  been  opposed
to  the  use  of  sacred  images,  or,  rather,  to
the  paying  of  religious  honor  or  reverence
to  such  representations.  Image-worship
prevailed  extensively  in  the  sixth  and
seventh  centuries  in  the  Eastern  Empire.
The  iconoclast  movement  commenced  with
the  imperial  edict  issued,  in  726,  by  the
Emperor  Leo  III.,  surnamed  the  Isaurian,
who  allowed  images  only  of  the  Redeemer.
The  second  decree  was  issued  in  730.  This
was  opposed  strenuously  by  Popes  Gregory
II.  and  III.,  but  without  avail.

Idaho.  Two  Lodges  holding  charters
from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon  and  one
from  that  of  Washington  Territory  met  in
convention  at  Idaho  City,  on  December  10,
1867,  and  organized  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Idaho,  which  in  its  sessions  is  migratory.
Royal  Arch  Masonry  was  introduced  by
the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United
States,  which  granted  a  charter  for  Idaho
Chapter  at  Idaho  City,  September  18, 1868,
for  Cypress  at  Silver  City,  and  Boise  at
Boise  City,  both  September  20,  1870.

Ijar.  0«K.)  (Zif.)  The  eighth  month
of  the  Hebrew  civil  year,  and  corresponding
with  the  months  of  April  and  May,  begin¬
ning  with  the  new  moon  of  the  former.

Illuminate  Theosopliists.  One
of  the  grades  of  Benedict  Chastanier,
apparently  of  a  Swedenborgian  nature.

Iniaum.  The  appellation  given  to
the  most  honored  teacher  of  Mohamme¬
danism.  The  title  of  the  Sultan,  as  the
spiritual  chief  of  all  Moslems.

Imniaterialism.  A  doctrine  re¬
lating  to  the  quality  of  God  and  of  the
human  soul,  showing  that  He  forms  an
absolute  contrast  to  matter,  and  is  the
basis  of  the  qualities  of  eternity,  omnipo¬
tence,  and  unchangeableness.  The  imma¬
teriality  of  the  soul  includes  simplicity  as
another  of  its  qualities.

Impost.  The  point  where  an  arch
rests  on  a  wall  or  column.  Husenbeth
says  imposts  were  “  members  of  a  secret
society  of  Tyrian  artists  who  were  hired
by  King  Solomon  to  erect  the  temple,  in
order  to  distinguish  them  from  the  Jews,
who  performed  the  more  humble  labors,
were  honored  with  the  epithet  of  free  an¬
nexed  to  the  name  of  builder  or  Mason,
and,  being  talented  foreigners,  were  freed
from  the  usual  imposts  paid  to  the  state
by  the  subjects  of  Solomon.”

Incense.  Regulations  for  Use.
From  the  Talmud  we  learn  that  the  mix-
lire  of  the  perfume  of  incense  was  com¬


posed  of  balm,  mycha,  galbanum,  frankin¬
cense,  of  each  an  equal  weight,  viz.,  70
manehs ;  myrrh,  cassia,  spikenard,  and  saf¬
fron,  of  each  an  equal  weight,  16  manehs;
costus,  12  manehs;  the  rind  of  an  odorifer¬
ous  tree,  3  manehs;  cinnamon,  9  minebs;
soap  of  Carsine,  9  kabs;  wine  of  capers,  3
seahs  and  3  kabs,  and  if  caper  wine  could
not  be  had,  strong  white  wine  was  substi¬
tuted  for  it;  salt  of  Sodom,  the  fourth  part
of  a  kab,  and  of  an  herb  called  maa-a-lay
o-shon,  a  small  quantity.  Rabbi  Nathan
said  a  small  quantity  of  the  amber  of  Jor¬
dan.  If  honey  was  mixed  with  it,  it  was
profane;  and  if  it  was  deficient  in  any  one
of  its  ingredients,  the  priest  was  accounted
worthy  of  death.

Rabbi  Simeon,  the  son  of  Gamliel,  says,
that  the  balm  issues  from  an  incision  in  the
tree  called  balsamon.  The  soap  of  Carsina
was  to  refine  the  omycha,  that  it  might
have  a  handsome  appearance.  The  wine
of  capers  was  brought  to  soak  the  cloves  or
mycha  therein,  that  it  might  become  hard.
And  though  the  “water  from  the  feet”  was
proper  for  the  purpose,  yet  it  was  not  used
because  it  was  not  decent  to  bring  it  into
the  temple.

Increase  of  Wages.  ( Augmenta¬
tion  de  gages.)  To  ask  for  an  increase  of
wages,  is,  in  the  technical  language  of
French  Masonry,  to  apply  for  advancement
to  a  higher  degree.

Indian  Calendar.  The  Indian  or
Hindu  year  begins  in  April,  thus:  1st  Vai-
sakha,  13th  April;  1st  Jyaishtha,  14th  May;
1st  Ashadha,  14th  June;  1st  Sravana,  16tli
July;  1st  Bhadrapada,  16th  August;  1st
Asvina,  16th  September ;  IstKartlika,  17th
October;  1st  Agrahayana  or  Margasirslia,
16th  November;  1st  Pansha,  15th  Decem¬
ber;  1st  Magha,  13th  January;  1st  Phalgu-
na,  12th  February;  1st  Caitra,  13th  March.
The  days  of  the  week,  commencing  with
Sunday,  are  Aditya,  Soma,  Mangala,  Bu-
dha,  Guru,  Sukra,  and  Sani.  The  Hindu
era,  until  April  13,  1885,  is  1937.

Indian  Faith.  See  Buddhism.

Indisclie  Mysterien.  Indian
Mysteries.  In  the  German  Cyclopaedia
we  find  the  following:  “The  East  Indians
have  still  their  mysteries,  which  it  is  very
probable  they  received  from  the  ancient
Egyptians.  (?)  These  mysteries  are  in  the
possession  of  the  Brahmans,  and  their  an¬
cestors  were  the  ancient  Brachmen.

“It  is  only  the  sons  of  these  priests  who
are  eligible  to  initiation.  Had  a  grown-up
youth  of  the  Brachmen  sufficiently  hard¬
ened  his  body,  learned  to  subdue  his  pas¬
sions,  and  given  the  requisite  proofs  of  his
abilities  at  school,  he  must  submit  to  an
especial  proof  of  his  fortitude  before  he  was
admitted  into  the  mysteries,  which  proofs


INDISCHE


ADDENDUM.


INIGO


987


were  given  in  a  cavern.  A  second  cavern
in  the  middle  of  a  high  hill  contained  the
statues  of  nature,  which  were  neither  made
of  gold,  nor  of  silver,  nor  of  earth,  nor  of
stone,  but  of  a  very  hard  material  resem¬
bling  wood,  the  composition  of  which  was
unknown  to  any  mortal.

“These  statues  are  said  to  have  been
given  by  God  to  his  Son,  to  serve  as  models
by  which  he  might  form  all  created  beings.
Upon  the  crown  of  one  of  these  statues
stood  the  likeness  of  Bruma,  who  was  the
same  with  them  as  Osiris  was  with  the
Egyptians.  The  inner  part,  and  the  en¬
trance  also  into  this  cavern,  was  quite  dark,
and  those  who  •wished  to  enter  into  it  were
obliged  to  seek  the  way  with  a  lighted
torch.  A  door  led  into  the  inner  part,  on
the  opening  of  which  the  water  that  sur¬
rounded  the  border  of  the  cavern  broke
loose.

“  If  the  candidate  for  initiation  was  wor¬
thy,  he  opened  the  door  quite  easily,  and  a
spring  of  the  purest  water  flowed  gently
upon  him  and  purified  him.  Those,  on
the  contrary,  who  were  guilty  of  any  crime,
could  not  open  the  door;  and  if  they  were
candid,  they  confessed  their  sins  to  the
priest,  and  besought  him  to  turn  away  the
anger  of  the  gods  by  prayer  and  fasting.

“In  this  cavern,  on  a  certain  day,  the
Brachmen  held  their  annual  assembly.
Some  of  them  dwelt  constantly  there;  oth¬
ers  came  there  only  in  the  spring  and  har¬
vest — conversed  with  each  other  upon  the
doctrines  contained  in  their  mysteries,  con¬
templated  the  hieroglyphics  upon  the  stat¬
ues,  and  endeavored  to  decipher  them.
Those  among  the  initiated  who  were  in  the
lowest  degrees,  and  who  could  not  compre¬
hend  the  sublime  doctrines  of  one  God,
worshipped  the  sun  and  other  inferior
divinities.  This  was  also  the  religion  of
the  common  people.  The  Brahmans,  the
present  inhabitants  of  India,  those  pure
descendants  of  the  ancient  Brachmen,  do
not  admit  any  person  into  their  mysteries
without  having  first  diligently  inquired
into  his  character  and  capabilities,  and
duly  proved  his  fortitude  and  prudence.
No  one  could  be  initiated  until  he  had
attained  a  certain  age;  and  before  his  in¬
itiation  the  novice  had  to  prepare  himself
by  prayer,  fasting,  and  almsgiving,  and
other  good  works,  for  many  days.

“  When  the  appointed  day  arrived  he
bathed  himself  and  went  to  the  Guru,  or
chief  Brahman,  who  kept  one  of  his  own
apartments  ready  in  which  to  perform  this
ceremony.  Before  he  was  admitted  he  was
asked  if  he  earnestly  desired  to  be  initi¬
ated? — if  it  was  not  curiosity  which  in¬
duced  him  to  do  so? — if  he  felt  himself
strong  enough  to  perform  the  ceremonies


which  would  be  prescribed  to  him  for  the
whole  of  his  life,  without  the  exception  of
a  single  day?

“  He  was  at  the  same  time  advised  to  de¬
fer  the  ceremony  for  a  time,  if  he  had  not
sufficient  confidence  in  his  strength.  If
the  youth  continued  firm  in  his  resolution,
and  showed  a  zealous  disposition  to  enter
into  the  paths  of  righteousness,  the  Guru
addressed  a  charge  to  him  upon  the  man¬
ner  of  living,  to  which  he  was  about  to
pledge  himself  for  the  future.  He  threat¬
ened  him  with  the  punishment  of  heaven
if  he  conducted  himself  wickedly ;  prom¬
ised  him,  on  the  contrary,  the  most  glori¬
ous  rewards  if  he  would  constantly  keep
the  path  of  righteousness.  After  this  ex¬
hortation,  and  having  received  his  pledge,
the  candidate  was  conducted  to  the  pre¬
pared  chamber,  the  door  of  which  stood
open,  that  all  those  who  assembled  might
participate  in  the  offering  about  to  be
made.

“  Different  fruits  were  thrown  into  the
fire,  while  the  High  Priest,  with  many
ceremonies,  prayed  that  God  might  be
present  with  them  in  that  sacred  place.
The  Guru  then  conducted  the  youth  be¬
hind  a  curtain,  both  having  their  heads
covered,  and  then  gently  pronounced  into
his  ear  a  word  of  one  or  two  syllables,
which  he  was  as  gently  to  repeat  into  the
ear  of  the  Guru,  that  no  other  person  might
hear  it.  In  this  word  was  the  prayer  which
the  initiated  was  to  repeat  as  often  as  he
could  for  the  whole  day,  yet  in  the  greatest
stillness  and  without  ever  moving  the  lips.
Neither  durst  he  discover  this  sacred  word
unto  any  person.  No  European  has  ever
been  able  to  discover  this  word,  so  sacred
is  this  secret  to  them.  When  the  newly
initiated  has  repeated  this  command  sev¬
eral  times,  then  the  chief  Brahman  instructs
him  in  the  ceremonies,  teaches  him  several
songs  to  the  honor  of  God,  and  finally  dis¬
misses  him  with  many  exhortations  to  pur¬
sue  a  virtuous  course  of  life.”  See  Pitris.

Ineffable  Triangle.  The  two  tri¬
angles  encrusted  one  upon
the  other,  containing  the
Ineffable  Name  in  Enoch-
ian  characters,  represent¬
ed  in  the  eleventh  of  the
Ineffable  series.  Good  and
evil,  light  and  darkness,
life  and  death,  are  here
not  wanting  in  symbol¬
ism,  foreshadowing  the  philosophic  degrees,
and  furnishing  the  true  original  of  the  two
interlaced  triangles  adopted  in  modern
Masonry.  See  Enochian  Alphabet.

Inigo  Jones  HIS.  Brother  Gould’s
History  (vol.  i.,  p.  63)  informs  us  that  this
MS.  was  published  only  in  the  Masonic


988


INITIATE


ADDENDUM.


IVORY


Magazine ,  July,  1881.  A  very  curious  folio
MS.,  ornamented  title  and  drawing  by
Inigo  Jones,  old  red  morocco,  gilt  leaves,
dated  1607,  was  sold  by  Patrick  &  Simpson,
November  12, 1879,  and  described  as  “  The
Ancient  Constitutions  of  the  Free  and
Accepted  Masons.”  The  revered  Brother
Woodford  became  its  possessor,  who  men¬
tions  it  as  “  a  curious  and  valuable  MS.
per  se,  not  only  on  account  of  its  special
verbiage,  but  because  it  possesses  a  frontis¬
piece  of  Masons  at  work,  with  the  words
‘Inigo  Jones  delin.’  at  the  bottom.  It  is
also  highly  ornamented  throughout,  both
in  the  capital  letters  and  with  ‘finials.’  It
is  of  date  1607  .  .  .  It  is  a  peculiarly  inter¬
esting  MS.  in  that  it  differs  from  all  known
transcripts  in  many  points,  and  agrees  with
no  one  copy  extant.”  Brother  Gould  re¬
marks,  “  This,  one  of  the  latest  ‘  discoveries,’
is  certainly  to  be  classed  amongst  the  most
valuable  of  existing  versions  of  our  manu¬
script  ‘Constitutions.’  ”

Initiate  into  the  Sciences,  The.
Brother  Kenneth  Mackenzie  informs  us
that  this  is  the  title  of  the  second  degree
of  a  Masonic  system  founded  on  the  doc¬
trines  and  principles  of  Pythagoras.

Inner  Order.  Name  of  the  sixth
grade  of  Von  Hund’s  Templar  system.

Insect  Shermah.  A  Jewish  belief
that  the  Solomonian  Temple  was  con¬
structed  by  Divine  means,  that  the  stones
were  squared  and  polished  by  a  specially-
created  worm  called  samis,  and  that  the
stones  by  innate  power  came  to  the  temple
ground,  and  were  placed  in  position  by
angelic  aid.  The  worm  has  been  desig¬
nated  “  the  Insect  Shermah.”

Intolerance.  The  arch-enemy  of
Freemasonry.  Toleration  is  one  of  the
chief  foundation-stones  of  the  Fraternity,
and  Universality  and  Brotherly  Love  are
ever  taught.  Notwithstanding,  intolerance
has,  and  ever  has  had,  its  grip  upon  the
brotherhood,  and  insidiously  does  its  silent
and  undermining  work.  Human  powers
are  limited  or  circumscribed.  Man  by
nature  is  weak,  and  is  largely  the  creature
of  early  education  ;  yet  no  institution  has
such  resisting  power  and  is  of  such  avail
as  Freemasonry  against  that  great  enemy
of  man,  which  has  destroyed  more  of  the
human  race  than  any  other  evil  power.
The  synonym  may  be  found  in  the  Third
and  Tenth  degrees,  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Inversion  of  Tetters.  In  some
of  the  French  documents  of  the  high
degrees  the  letters  of  some  words  were
inverted — not  apparently  for  concealment,
but  as  a  mere  caprice.  Hence  Thory
( Fondat ,  p.  128)  calls  them  inversions  en-
fantines  (childish  inversions).  Thus  they
wrote  spn-io  ajsojj  for  Rosse  crucis.  But


in  all  French  cahiers  and  rituals,  or,  as
they  call  them,  tuilleurs ,  words  are  inverted ;
that  is,  the  letters  are  transposed  for  pur¬
poses  of  secrecy.  Thus  they  would  write
Nomolos  for  Solomon,  and  Marih  for
Hiram.  This  was  also  a  custom  among
the  Kabbalists  and  the  Alchemists,  to  con¬
ceal  secret  words.

Invisibles,  Tes.  ( The  Invisibles.)
A  secret  order  of  which  iittle  is  known.
Thory  quotes  a  German  writer,  wrho  says :
“C’est  la  secte  la  plus  dangereuse;  les
receptions  des  initios  se  font  la  nuit,  sous
une  voftte  souterraine,  et  la  doctrine  des
initians  preche  l’ath&sme  et  le  suicide.”
We  need  no  more  upon  this  subject,  and
believe  the  society  “sleeps  the  sleep  that
knows  no  waking.”

Ionian  Islands.  Freemasonry  ap¬
pears  to  have  been  founded  at  Corfu,  by  a
Lodge  called  “  Loge  de  St.  Napofoon,”
under  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  in  1811.

Irani.  (Heb.,  aureum  excelsus.)

The  former  ruling  Prince  of  Idumea.

Isclingi.  (Heb.,  salus  mea.)

One  of  the  five  Masters,  according  to  the
Masonic  myth,  appointed  by  Solomon  after
the  death  of  Hiram  to  complete  the  Tem¬
ple.

Isiac  Table.  Known  also  as  the
Tabula  Isiaca,  Mensa  Isiaca,  and  Tabula
Bembina.  A  monument  often  quoted  by
archaeologists  previous  to  the  discovery  of
hieroglyphics.  A  flat  rectangular  bronze
plate,  inlaid  with  niello  and  silver,  56  by
36  inches  in  size.  It  consists  of  three  com¬
partments  of  figures  of  Egyptian  deities
and  emblems;  the  central  figure  is  Isis.
It  was  sold  by  a  soldier  to  a  locksmith,
bought  by  Cardinal  Bembo  in  1527,  now
in  Royal  Museum  in  Turin.

Israfeel.  In  the  Mohammedan  faith,
the  name  of  the  angel  who,  on  the  judg¬
ment  morn,  will  sound  the  trumpet  of
resurrection.

Itratics,  Order  of.  A  society  of
adepts,  engaged  in  the  search  for  the  Uni¬
versal  Medicine;  is  now  extinct.  Men¬
tioned  by  Fustier.

I.W.’.I.'.O.'.T.*.  ( Inveni  Yerbum

in  Ore  Leonis.)  Initial  letters  of  significant
words  used  in  the  13th  Degree,  A.  A.  Scot¬
tish  Rite.  They  have  reference  to  the  re¬
covery  of  the  key  of  the  Sacred  Ark,  which
contains  certain  treasures.  The  Ark  and
its  key  having  been  lost  in  the  forest  during
a  battle  which  occurred  when  the  Jews  were
journeying  through  the  wilderness,  the  key
was  found  in  the  mouth  of  a  lion,  who
dropped  it  upon  the  ground  on  the  ap¬
proach  of  the  Israelites.  Much  symbolical
teaching  is  deduced  from  the  historical
myth.

Ivory  Key.  The  symbolic  jewel  of


J


ADDENDUM.


JEWISH


989


the  4th  Degree,  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.  On
the  wards  of  the  key  is  the  Hebrew  letter
zain.


Iza<ls.  The  twenty-eight  creations  of
the  beneficent  deity  Ormudz,  or  Aura-
mazda,  in  the  Persian  religious  system.


J.


J.  The  tenth  letter  in  the  English  al¬
phabet.  It  is  frequently  and  interchange¬
ably  used  with  I,  and  written  in  Hebrew
as  Yod  (’),  with  the  numerical  value  of  10,
and  having  reference  to  the  Supreme.

Jaaborou  Hamiuaim.  (Heb.,
O’Srrrqy’,  aqucB  transibunt.)  A  word
of  covered  significancy  in  the  15th  Degree
of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.  It  also  has
reference  to  the  L.  D.  P.  f?ee  Liber.

Jabescheli.  (Heb.,  Earth.)

Also  written  Jebschah.  See
Mackey.

Jabulum.  A  corrupted  word  used  in
two  of  the  degrees  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish
Rite,  the  13th  and  17th.  The  true  word
and  its  meaning,  however,  are  disclosed  to
the  initiate.

Jafuhar.  The  second  king  in  the
Scandinavian  mysteries.  The  synonym  for
Thor.

Jalicb.  (Heb.,  ^!“P,  concedens.)  A  sa¬
cred  name  used  in  the  13th  Degree  of  the
A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Jaina  Cross.  Used  by  several  orders,
and  found  in  the  abbeys  of
Great  Britain  and  on  the  monu¬
ments  of  India.  Its  significa¬
tions  are  many.  This  cross  was
adopted  by  the  Jainas,  a  hetero¬
dox  sect  of  the  Hindus,  who  dissent  from
Brahmanism  and  deny  the  Yedas,  and
whose  adherents  are  found  in  every  prov¬
ince  of  Upper  Hindustan.  They  are
wealthy  and  influential,  and  form  an  im¬
portant  division  of  the  population  of  India.
This  symbol  is  also  known  as  the  Fylfot.
It  is  a  religious  symbol  mentioned  by
Weaver  in  his  Funeral  Monuments,  by  Dr.
H.  Schliemann  as  having  been  found  in  the
presumed  ruins  of  Troy,  by  De  Rossi  and
others  in  the  Catacombs  of  Christian
Rome,  and  there  termed  the  Crux  dissimit-
lata.  It  has  been  found  on  almost  every
enduring  monument  on  the  globe,  of  all
ages,  and  in  both  hemispheres.

Jainas.  See  above.

James  II.  and  III.  of  Scotland.

See  Stuart  Masonry,  Mackey.

Jaminim,  or  Ianiinini.  (Heb.,
water.)  See  Mackey.

Japanese  Faith.  See  Kojiki;  also
Nihonyi.


Jasher.  Booh  of.  (Heb.,  Sepher

ha-yashar,  The  Book  of  the  Upriyht.)  One
of  the  lost  books  of  the  ancient  Hebrew's,
which  is  quoted  twice  (Josh.  x.  13;  2  Sam.
i.  18).  A  Hebrew  minstrelsy,  recording
the  warlike  deeds  of  the  national  heroes,
and  singing  the  praises  of  eminent  or  cele¬
brated  men.  An  original  is  said  to  be  in
the  library  at  Samarkand.

Jeksan.  (Heb.,  jtPp’.)  Name  of  one
of  the  sons  of  Abraham  and  Keturah
(Gen.  xxv.  2).  Used  in  the  3d  Degree  of
the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.  See  Jekson,  Mac-
key.

Jeplithali's  Daughter.  The  1st

Degree  in  the  American  Order  of  the
Eastern  Star,  or  Adoptive  Rite.  It  incul¬
cates  obedience.  Color,  blue.  See  Eastern
Star,  Mackey.

Jerusalem,  Heavenly.  The  city
of  God.  Mentioned  and  described  in  the
19th  Degree,  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.  Mainly
taken  from  the  Apocalypse  xxi.  2.

Jesse.  A  large  candlestick,  of  metal,
with  many  sconces,  hanging  from  the  ceil¬
ing,  and  symbolically  referring  to  the
Branch  of  Jesse.

Jetzirah,  Sepher,  or  Book  of.

(Heb.,  Book  of  the  Creation  )  See  Jezirah,
Mackey.  A  traditional  document,  said  to
have  been  written  by  the  Priest-King  Abra¬
ham.  It  has  six  perakim,  or  chapters,
subdivided  into  thirty-three  mishnas,  or
sections.  The  book  is  intended  as  a  me¬
thodical  view  of  the  universe.  For  Se-
pheroth,  see  Kabbala,  Mackey.

Jewish  Bites  and  Ceremonies.
A  period  of  excitement  in  iavor  of  the
rites  of  Judaism  centred  upon  and  per¬
vaded  the  people  of  various  nations  during
the  early  portion  of  the  fourteenth  century.
The  ceremonies  grew  and  took  fast  hold
upon  the  minds  of  the  Romans,  and,  com¬
bining  with  their  forms,  spread  to  Constan¬
tinople  and  north-west  to  Germany  and
France.  The  Jewish  rites,  traditions,  and
legends  thus  entered  the  mystic  schools.
It  was  during  this  period  the  legend  of
Hiram  first  became  known  (Bro.  G.  H.
Fort),  and  Jehovah’s  name,  and  mystic
forms  w'ere  transmitted  from  Byzantine
workmen  to  Teutonic  sodalities  and  Ger¬
man  guilds.  Thus,  also,  when  the  Chris-


990


JEZEEDS


ADDENDUM.


KENNING’S


tian  enthusiasm  pervaded  the  North,
Paganism  gave  way,  and  the  formal  toasts
at  the  ceremonial  banquets  were  drunk  in
the  name  of  the  saints  in  lieu  of  those  of
the  Pagan  gods.

Jezeeds.  A  Mohammedan  sect  in
Turkey  and  Persia,  which  took  its  name
from  the  founder,  Jezeed,  a  chief  who  slew
the  sons  of  Ali,  the  father-in-law  of  Mo¬
hammed.  They  were  ignorant  in  the  ex¬
treme,  having  faith  in  both  the  Hebrew
Bible  and  Koran;  their  hymns  were  ad¬
dressed,  without  distinction,  to  Moses,
Christ,  or  Mohammed.

Jobel.  (Heb.,  S3V ,jubilans.)  A  name
of  God  used  in  the  Thirteenth  Degree  A.  A.
Scottish  Rite.

Jocliebed.  (Heb.,  “03V>  God-glori¬
fied.)  The  wife  of  Amram,  and  mother  of
Miriam,  Moses,  and  Aaron.

Joliaben.  (Heb.,  p~fiT ;  Latin,  Filius
Dei.)  A  name  of  continuous  use  in  the  A.
A.  Scottish  Rite,  and  also  mentioned  in  the
Fourth  and  Fifth  Degrees  of  the  modern
French  Rite.

Joinrille,  Cbaillonde.  S eeChail-
lon  de  Joinville,  Mackey.

Joksliau.  (Heb.,  J^p’,  fowler.)  The


second  son  of  Abraham  and  Keturah,  whose
sons  appear  to  be  the  ancestors  of  the  Sa-
beans  and  Dedanites,  who  inhabited  part
of  Arabia  Felix.  Same  as  Jeksan.

Joram.  (Heb.,  ,  excelsus.)  One

of  three  architects  sent  by  Solomon  to  su¬
perintend  the  cutting  and  preparing  of
timber.

Jordan,  Karl  Stephan.  Born

1700,  died  1745.  Privy  Councillor  to  the
King  of  Prussia,  and  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Lodge  of  the  Three  Globes,  at  Berlin.

Joshaphat,  son  of  Aliilud.  The
name  of  tne  Orator  in  the  Degree  of  Pro¬
vost  and  Judge,  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Jnbalcain.  Erroneously  used  for  Tu-
balcain,  which  see.  Jubal  was  the  second
son  of  Lamech  by  his  first  wife,  Ada,  and
was  the  founder  of  the  science  of  music;
while  the  third  son,  Tubal  Cain,  was  a  fa¬
mous  smithwright.

Jnbela-o-ni.  The  mythical  names
of  assassins,  the  true  interpretation  of
which  is  only  known  to  the  initiate  who  is
an  esoteric  student.

Judith.  (Heb.,  jmn*-)  Used  in
the  French  Adoptive  5lasonry,  and  in  the
Fifth  Degree  of  Sov.  Illustrious  Ecossais.


K.


K.  (Heb.,  3,  Caph,  signifying  hollow
of  the  hand.)  This  is  the  eleventh  letter
of  the  English  alphabet,  and  in  Hebrew
has  the  numerical  value
of  20.  In  the  Chaldaic  or
hieroglyphic  it  is  repre¬
sented  by  a  hand.

Kabbalistic  Companion.  A  de¬
gree  found  in  the  archives  of  the  Mother
Lodge  of  the  Philosophical  Rite  of  France.

Kansas.  In  the  year  1855  there  were
three  Lodges  in  Kansas,  holding  warrants
from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri.  On
November  14,  1855,  two  of  these  Lodges
met  in  convention  at  Leavenworth.  In
consequence  of  the  absence  of  the  third
Lodge,  the  convention  adjourned  until
December  27,  1855,  on  which  day  the  two
Lodges  of  Smithton  and  Leavenworth  met,
and,  Wyandot  Lodge  being  again  absent,
the  delegates  of  these  two  Lodges  organized
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Kansas,  and  elected
Richard  R.  Reece  Grand  Master.

But  these  proceedings  were  considered
illegal,  in  consequence  of  the  convention
having  been  formed  by  two  instead  of  three
Lodges;  and,  accordingly,  another  conven¬


tion  of  the  three  chartered  Lodges  in  the
Territory  was  held  March  17,  1856,  and
the  proceedings  of  the  previous  convention
ratified  by  a  re-enactment,  the  same  Grand
Master  being  re-elected.

The  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  was  es¬
tablished  January  27, 1866.

The  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters  was  organized  December  12,  1867.

The  Grand  Commandery  was  organized
December  29,  1868.

Karmatians.  A  Mohammedan  sect
that  became  notorious  from  its  removal  of
the  celebrated  black  stone  of  the  Caaba,
and,  after  retaining  it  for  twenty-two  years,
voluntarily  surrendered  it.  Founded  by
Karmata  at  Irak  in  the  ninth  century.

Kelleruiann,  marshal.  Duke
de  Valmy,  member  of  the  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  and  Grand  Officer  of  Honor  of  G.  0.
of  France;  elected  1814.  Born  1770,  died
1835.  Served  in  the  battles  of  Marengo,
Austerlitz,  and  Waterloo.

Kenning's  Masonic  Cyclopae¬
dia.  Edited  by  Rev.  A.  F.  A.  Woodford,
in  London,  contemporaneously  with  the
Encyclopaedia  of  Dr.  A.  G.  Mackey,  in


KENTUCKY


ADDENDUM.


KINGS


991


America,  but  published  subsequently  by
the  well-known  Bro.  George  Kenning,  198
Fleet  Street,  London,  to  whom  the  work  is
dedicated  in  affectionate  terms.  It  is  with
confidence  and  presumed  liberty  that  we
have,  on  occasion,  availed  ourself  of  the
views  and  quoted  the  language  of  the  Rev.
Bro.  Woodford.  Kenning’s  Cyclopcedia  is
rendered  unusually  invaluable  in  conse¬
quence  of  the  fulness  of  its  bibliography.
Kloss’s  well-known  Bibliographic  der  Frei-
maurer  does  not  become  so  great  a  necessity,
having  Kenning;  yet  other  subjects  have  not
been  permitted  to  suffer  in  consequence  of
the  numerous  short  biographic  sketches.
The  work  is  an  admirably-arranged  octavo
of  nearly  seven  hundred  pages.

Kentucky.  Organized  Freemasonry
was  introduced  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Virginia,  which,  in  the  year  1788,  granted
a  charter  for  Lexington  Lodge,  No.  25,  at
Lexington.  This  was  the  first  Lodge  insti¬
tuted  west  of  the  Alleghany  Mountains.

Three  other  Lodges  were  subsequently
chartered  by  Virginia,  namely,  at  Paris,
Georgetown,  and  Frankford,  and  a  dispen¬
sation  granted  for  a  fifth  at  Shelbyville.
These  five  Lodges  met  in  convention  at
Lexington  on  September  8,  1800.  Having
resolved  that  it  was  expedient  to  organize
a  Grand  Lodge,  and  prepared  an  address  to
the  Grand  Lodge  of  Virginia,  the  conven¬
tion  adjourned  to  October  16th.  On  that
day  it  reassembled  and  organized  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Kentucky,  William  Mur¬
ray  being  elected  Grand  Master.

Chapters  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  inde¬
pendent  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  were  first
established  by  Thomas  Smith  Webb  in
1816,  and  the  Grand  Chapter  was  formed
December  4,  1817.

The  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select
Masters  was  organized  December  10,  1827.

The  Grand  Encampment  (now  the  Grand
Commandery)  was  organized  October  5,
1847.

Scottish  Masonry  was  introduced  into
Kentucky,  and  the  Grand  Consistory  or¬
ganized  at  Louisville,  in  August,  1852,  by
Bro.  Albert  G.  Mackey,  Secretary-General
of  the  Supreme  Council  for  the  Southern
Jurisdiction.

Kliem.  The  Egyptian  Deity,  Amon,
in  the  position  metaphorically  used  in  rep¬
resentations  of  Buddha  and  by  the  Hermetic
philosophers,  one  hand  toward  Heaven  and
the  other  toward  Nature.

Kbepra.  An  Egyptian  Deity,  pre¬
siding  over  transformation,  and  repre¬
sented  with  the  beetle  in  place  of  a  head.

Kber-beb.  The  Master  of  Ceremo¬
nies  in  the  Egyptian  system  of  worship.

Kbcsvan  or  G'besvan.  (ptvn-)  The
same  Hebrew  month  as  Marchesvan ,  which


see.  Under  the  title  Marchesvan,  there  is
an  error  in  the  statement  that  it  begins  in
November.  It  does  sometimes,  but  more
usually  with  October,  and  therefore  corre¬
sponds  to  October  and  November.

Klietein  el  Nabiiui.  Mohammed,
the  seal  of  the  prophets.

Klion.  The  title  given  to  the  dead,
subject  to  examination  as  depicted  in  ch.
125  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  in  the  Egyp¬
tian  Ritual.

Kliotbah.  The  Confession  of  Faith
under  the  Mohammedan  law.

Kburum-Abi.  A  variation  of  the
name  of  Hiram  Abi.

Ki.  A  word  used  in  the  old  Ritual  of
the  Eighth  Degree  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish
Rite.

King  of  tbe  Sanctuary.  A  side
degree  formerly  conferred  in  the  presence
of  five  Past  Masters,  now  in  disuse.

King  of  the  World.  A  degree  in
the  system  of  the  Philosophical  Rite.

Kings,  Tbe  Five.  The  sacred  code
of  the  older  Chinese.  The  word  king  sig¬
nifies  web  of  cloth,  or  the  warp  that  keeps
the  threads  in  position,  or  upon  which  we
may  weave  the  sombre  and  golden  colors
that  make  up  this  life’s  pictured  history.
This  great  light  in  Chinese  secret  societies
contains  the  best  sayings  of  the  best  sages
on  the  ethico-political  duties  of  life.  They
cannot  be  traced  to  a  period  beyond  the
tenth  century  B.  c.,  although  the  religion  is
believed  to  be  older.

Some  of  the  superior  classes  of  Chinese
are  believers  in  the  great  philosopher  Lao-
tse,  and  others  in  the  doctrines  of  Confu¬
cius.  The  two  religions  appear  to  be  twin
in  age,  not  strikingly  dissimilar,  and  each
has  been  given  a  personality  in  color  in
accordance  with  the  character  of  ethics  be¬
lieved  in  by  the  two  writers.  Lao-tse  and
Confucius  were  the  revivers  of  an  older
religion,  the  former  of  whom  was  born  604
B.  c.,  and  the  latter  fifty-four  years  subse¬
quently.

The  five  kings  are,  the  Yih-King,  or
Book  of  Changes;  the  Shi-King,  or  Book
of  Songs;  the  Shu-King,  or  Book  of  An¬
nals;  the  Ch’un  Ts’iu,  or  “Spring  and
Autumn ;”  and  the  Li-King,  or  Book  of
Rites.  The  fourth  book  was  composed  by
Confucius  himself,  while  the  first  three  are
supposed  to  have  been  compiled  by  him,
and  the  fifth  by  his  disciples  from  his
teachings.

Dr.  Legge,  Prof,  of  Chinese  Classics  at
Oxford,  England,  and  Dr.  Medhurst  assert
that  there  are  no  authentic  records  in  China
earlier  than  1100  b.  c.,  and  no  alphabetical
writing  1500  b.  c.

The  grandeur  of  the  utterances  and  bril¬
liancy  of  the  intellectual  productions  of


992


KISLEV


ADDENDUM.


KRISHNA


Confucius  and  Mencius,  as  law-givers  and
expounders  of  the  sacred  code  of  the  Chi¬
nese,  called  The  Five  Kings,  are  much  to
be  admired,  and  are  the  trestle-board  of
fully  80,000,000  of  the  earth’s  population.

Kislev  or  Chislev.  (iSou  )  The
third  month  of  the  Hebrew  civil  year,  and
corresponding  with  the  months  November
and  December,  beginning  with  the  new
moon  of  the  former.

Kuewt-neb-s.  The  Egyptian  god¬
dess  personifying  the  West,  facing  the  East.

Knife  and  Fork  Degree.  Those
Masons  who  take  more  delight  in  the  re¬
freshments  of  the  banquet  than  in  the  la¬
bors  of  the  Lodge,  and  who  admire  Mason¬
ry  only  for  its  social  aspect,  are  ironically
said  to  be  “  Members  of  the  Knife  and
Fork  Degree.”

The  sarcasm  was  first  uttered  by  Der-
mott,  when  he  said  in  his  Ahiman  Rezon,
p.  36,  speaking  of  the  Moderns,  that  “  it
was  also  thought  expedient  to  abolish  the
old  custom  of  studying  geometry  in  the
Lodge;  and  some  of  the  young  brethren
made  it  appear  that  a  good  knife  and  fork
in  the  hands  of  a  dexterous  brother,  over
proper  materials,  would  give  greater  satis¬
faction  and  add  more  to  the  rotundity  of
the  Lodge  than  the  best  scale  and  compass
in  Europe.”

Kniglit  Evangelist.  A  grade  for¬
merly  in  the  archives  of  the  Lodge  of  “St.
Louis  des  Amis  Reunis,”  at  Calais.

Knights  of  St.  John  the  Evan¬
gelist  of  Asia  in  Europe.  Founded
at  Schleswig  and  Hamburg  by  Count  of
Ecker  and  Eckhoffen,  in  1786,  out  of  his
Order  of  the  “True  Light,”  founded  the
previous  year.

Knights  of  the  True  Eight.

A  degree  founded  by  Count  of  Ecker  and
Eckhoffen,  in  1785.

Knocks,  Three.  When  the  Craft
were  to  be  called  to  labor  in  old  North
Germany,  “the  Master  should  give  three
knocks,  a  Pallirer  two,  consecutively ;  and
in  case  the  Craft  at  large  were  imperatively
demanded,  one  blow  must  be  struck,  morn¬
ing,  midday,  or  at  eventide.”  ( Ordnung
der  Sleinmetzen,  1462,  Art.  28.)  Fort,  in
his  Early  History ,  etc.,  says,  “  three  strokes
by  a  Master  convened  all  the  members  of
that  degree;  two  strokes  by  the  Pallirer
called  the  Fellows,  and  by  a  single  blow
each  member  was  assembled  in  Lodge.  In
the  opening  and  closing  of  Teutonic  tri¬
bunals  of  justice,  the  judge  carried  a  staff
or  mace,  as  an  emblem  of  jurisdiction,  and
order  was  enjoined  by  a  blow  on  the  pedes¬
tal  by  the  Arbiter.”

Kenning  mentions  an  exposition  of  Ma¬
sonry,  known  as  “Three  Distinct  Knocks,”
purporting  to  have  been  republished  iu


1767,  by  H.  Sergeant,  Without  Temple  Bar.
Dermott  says  Daniel  Tadpole  was  the  edi¬
tor.

Kojiki.  {Book  of  Ancient  Traditions.)
The  oldest  monument  of  Sintonism,  the
ancient  religion  of  Japan.  It  is  written  in
pure  Japanese,  and  was  composed  by  order
of  the  Mikado  Gemmio,  A.  D.  712,  and  first
printed  about  1625.  The  adherents  of  Sin¬
tonism  number  about  14,000,000.

Korali.  Was  the  son  of  Izhar,  uncle
of  Moses,  and  famed  for  beauty  and  wealth.
It  is  related  that  he  refused  to  give  alms,
as  Moses  had  commanded,  and  brought  a
villanous  charge  against  Moses,  who  com¬
plained  thereof  to  God ;  the  answer  was  that
the  earth  would  obey  whatever  command
he  should  give;  and  Moses  said,  “O  earth,
swallow  them  up ;”  then  Korah  and  his
confederates  were  sinking  into  the  ground,
when  Korah  pleaded  formercy,  which  Moses
refused.  Then  God  said,  “Moses,  thou
hadst  no  mercy  on  Korah,  though  he  asked
pardon  of  thee  four  times;  but  I  would
have  had  compassion  on  him  if  he  had
asked  pardon  of  me  but  once.” — Al  Bei-
dawi.

Koran  or  Al  Coran.  ( The  Read¬
ing.)  The  book  of  faith  of  the  Mohamme¬
dans,  or  of  about  one-eighth  of  the  human
race.  It  is  a  single  volume  of  114  chapters
of  very  unequal  length,  written  in  Arabic,
and  containing  the  doctrines  and  pretended
revelations  of  Mohammed,  “The  Prophet,”
whose  followers  number  over  180,000,000.

Krause  Manuscript.  A  title  some¬
times  given  to  the  so-called  York  Constitu¬
tions,  a  German  translation  of  which  was
published  by  Krause,  in  1810,  in  his  Kunst-
erkunden.  See  York  Constitutions,  in  the
body  of  this  work.

Krishna  or  Christna.  One  of  the

Trimurti  in  the  Hindu  religious  system.
The  myth  proceeds  to  state  that  Devana-
guy,  upon  the  appearance  of  Vishnu,  fell
in  a  profound  ecstasy,  and  having  been
overshadowed  (Sanskrit),  the  spirit  was  in¬
carnated,  and  upon  the  birth  of  a  child,
the  Virgin  and  Son  were  conducted  to  a
sheepfold  belonging  to  Nanda,  on  the  con¬
fines  of  the  territory  of  Madura.  The  newly
born  was  named  Krishna  (in  Sanskrit,  sa¬
cred).  The  Rajah  of  Madura  had  been  in¬
formed  in  a  dream  that  this  son  of  Devana-
guy  should  dethrone  and  chastise  him  for
all  his  crimes;  he  therefore  sought  the  cer¬
tain  destruction  of  the  child,  and  ordained
the  massacre,  in  all  his  states,  of  all  the
children  of  the  male  sex  born  during  the
night  of  the  birth  of  Krishna.  A  troop  of
soldiers  reached  the  sheepfold  of  Nanda,
the  lord  of  a  small  village  on  the  banks  of
the  Ganges,  and  celebrated  for  his  virtues.
The  servants  were  about  to  arm  in  defence,


L


ADDENDUM.


LANSDOWNE


993


when  the  child,  who  was  at  his  mother’s
breast,  suddenly  grew  to  the  appearance
and  size  of  a  child  ten  years  of  age,  and
running,  amused  himself  amidst  the  flock
of  sheep.  The  exploits  of  this  wonder
child,  his  preaching  the  new  or  reformed
doctrine  of  India,  his  disciples  and  loved
companion  Ardjouna,  the  parables,  philo¬
sophic  teaching,  the  myth  of  his  transfigu¬
ration,  his  ablutions  in  the  Ganges  before


his  death,  and  tragic  end,  together  with  the
story  of  his  revival  after  three  days,  and
ascension,  are  graphically  told  by  many
authors,  perhaps  more  brilliantly  in  La
Bible  dans  I'lnde,  as  translated  into  Eng¬
lish  by  Louis  Jacolliot.

Kulma.  The  Hindustani  Confession
of  Faith.

Knn.  Arabic  for  Be,  the  creative  fiat
of  God.


L.


L.  (Heb.,S;  Samaritan, The  shape  1
of  the  twelfth  English  letter  is  borrowed
from  that  of  the  Oriental  lomad,  coinciding
with  the  Samaritan.  The  numerical  value
in  Hebrew  is  thirty.  The  Roman  numeral
L  is  fifty.  Hebrew  name  of  Deity,  as  an
equivalent,  is  hdS,  Limmud,  or  Doctus.
This  letter  also  signifies  a  stimulus,  gener¬
ally  female.

Laanali.  (Heb.,  ruyb.)  Wormwood,
a  word  used  in  the  Order  of  Ishmael.

Lahady.  A  member  of  the  G.  Loge
de  France,  banished,  in  1766,  for  alleged
libel.  An  exile  to  Blois,  in  Oct.,  1767,  for
permitting  Masonic  assemblies  at  his  resi¬
dence  contrary  to  the  orders  of  the  gov¬
ernment.

Laboratory.  The  place  where  ex¬
periments  in  chemistry,  pharmacy,  etc.,
are  performed;  the  workroom  of  the  chem¬
ist.  An  important  apartment  in  the  con¬
ferring  of  the  degrees  of  the  Society  of
Rosicrucians.

Labrnin.  From  the  Latin.  A  lip  or
edge,  as  of  a  dish  or  font;  having  reference
to  the  vase  at  the  entrance  of  places  of
worship  for  preliminary  lustration.

Labyrinth.  A  place  full  of  intrica¬
cies,  with  winding  passages,  as  the  Egyp¬
tian,  Samian,  and  Cretan  labyrinths.  That
of  the  Egyptians  was  near  Lake  Moeris,
which  contained  twelve  palaces  under  one
roof,  and  was  of  polished  stone,  with  many
vaulted  passages,  and  a  court  of  3000  cham¬
bers,  half  under  the  earth  and  half  above
them.  Pliny  states  it  was  3600  years  old
in  his  day.  The  labyrinth  is  symbolical
of  the  vicissitudes  and  anxieties  of  life,  and
is  thus  metaphorically  used  in  a  number
of  the  degrees  of  various  Rites.  Sage  of
the  Labyrinth  is  the  eighteenth  grade,  Rite
of  Memphis,  in  the  Order  of  1860.  Sage
Sublime  of  Labyrinth,  the  fifty-fifth  grade
of  the  same  organization.  See  Catacombs.

Lacepede,  U.  €1.  E.  dc  la  Ville.

5  Z  63


A  French  savant  and  naturalist,  born  in
1756,  died  1825.  President  of  the  Legisla¬
tive  Assembly  in  1791.  Master  of  the  Lodge
“  De  St.  Napoleon”  in  1805.  An  account
of  his  installation  is  recorded  by  Kloss.

Lakak  Deror  Pessah.  (Hebrew,
riD3  Tin  np7.)  The  initials  of  these  three
words  are  found  on  the  symbol  of  the
Bridge  in  the  Fifteenth  Degree  of  the  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  signifying  liberty  of  passage  and
liberty  of  thought.  See  Bridge,  also  Liber.

Lamaism.  The  name  of  the  religion
prevalent  in  Tibet  and  Mongolia.  (Tibet,
Llama,  pronounced  lama,  a  chief  or  high
priest.)  Buddhism,  corrupted  by  Sivaism,
an  adoration  of  saints.  At  the  summit  of
its  hierarchy  are  two  Lama  popes,  hav¬
ing  equal  rank  and  authority  in  spiritual
and  temporal  affairs.

Lamballe,  The  Princess  of.
Niece  of  Marie  Antoinette,  murdered  in
1792  at  Paris.  The  Grand  Mistress  of  the
so-called  Mother  Lodge  of  “La  Maqonne-
rie  d’Adoption.”

Lamina  Sabactani.  An  expres¬
sion  used  in  the  Masonic  French  Rite  of
Adoption.

Lamp.  Knight  of  the  Inextin¬
guishable.  A  degree  so  designated  by
Fustier  and  Thory.

Lanee.  A  weapon  for  thrusting  at  an-
enemy,  usually  adorned  with  a  small  flag,
made  of  tough  ash,  weighted  at  one  end,,
and  pointed  at  the  other.

Langes,  Savalette  de.  The  Master
of  “  Les  Amis  R6unis,”  who  aided  in
founding  the  system  of  Philaletes  in  1775.

Lansdowne  MS.  This  version  of
the  “  Old  Charges  ”  is  of  very  early  date,
about  the  middle  or  latter  half  of  the  six¬
teenth  century,  as  these  “Free  Masons  Or¬
ders  and  Constitutions”  are  believed  to
have  been  part  of  the  collection  made  by
Lord  Burghley  (Sec.  of  State,  temp.  Edward
VI.),  who  died  a.  d.  1598.


994


LANTURELUS


ADDENDUM.


LESSER


Brother  Gould,  in  his  History  (vol.  i.,  p.
61),  says  the  “  MS.  is  contained  on  the
inner  side  of  three  sheets  and  a  half  of
stout  paper,  eleven  by  fifteen  inches,  mak¬
ing  in  all  seven  folios,  many  of  the  princi¬
pal  words  being  in  large  letters  of  an  orna¬
mental  character.  Mr.  Sims  (MS.  Depart¬
ment  of  the  British  Museum)  does  not
consider  these  ‘  Orders  ’  ever  formed  a  roll,
though  there  are  indications  of  the  sheets
having  been  stitched  together  at  the  top,
and  paper  or  vellum  was  used  for  addi¬
tional  protection.  It  has  evidently  ‘seen
service.’  It  was  published  in  Freemasons’
Mag.,  February  24,  1858,  and  Hughan’s
Old  Charges  (p.  31).  The  catalogue  of  the
Lansdowne  MSS.  —  which  consisted  of
twelve  hundred  and  forty-five  volumes,
bought  by  Parliament,  in  1807,  for  £4925
— has  the  following  note  on  the  contents
of  this  document:  ‘No.  48.  A  very  foolish
legendary  account  of  the  original  of  the
Order  of  Freemgsonry’ — in  the  handwrit¬
ing,  it  is  said,  of  Sir  Henry  Ellis.”

LantureIiis,Ordre<les.  Instituted,
according  to  Clavel,  in  1771  by  the  Marquis
de  Croismare.  Its  purposes  or  objects  are
not  now  understood.

La  Rocliefoucanlt,  Bayers,  Le
Marquis  de.  G.  Master  of  the  “  Rite
Ecossais  Philosophique  ”  in  1776.  A  Mason
of  considerable  note.

Lasalle,  Troubat  de.  One  of  the
founders  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the  “  Rite
Ecossais  Philosophique.”

Lateran  Councils.  They  were  five
in  number,  regarded  as  ecumenical,  and
were  held  in  the  Church  of  St.  John
Lateran  in  Rome,  in  1123, 1139, 1179, 1215,
and  1512.

Latour  d’Anvergne,  Le  Prince

de.  President  of  the  Mother  Lodge  of  the
“Rite  Ecossais  Philosophique”  in  1805,
and  member  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France
in  1814.

Laver,  Brazen.  A  large  brazen  ves¬
sel  for  washing  placed  in  the  court  of  the
Jewish  tabernacle,  where  the  officiating
priest  cleansed  his  hands  and  feet,  and  as
well  the  entrails  of  victims.  Constructed
by  command  of  Moses  (Exod.  xxxviii.  8).
A  similar  vessel  was  symbolically  used  at
the  entrance,  in  the  modern  French  and
Scotch  Rites,  when  conferring  the  Appren¬
tice  Degree.  It  is  used  in  many  of  the  de¬
grees  of  the  latter  Rite.

Lawful  Information.  See  Vouch¬
ing,  Mackey.

Law,  Sacred.  The  Sacred  Script¬
ures,  the  Bible,  the  Great  Light  in  Ma¬
sonry.

Lay  Brothers.  A  society  founded
in  the  eleventh  century,  consisting  of  two
classes,  who  were  skilled  in  architecture;


also  recognized  as  a  degree  in  the  Rite  of
Strict  Observance.

Lazarus,  Order  of.  An  order  in¬
stituted  in  Palestine,  termed  the  “  United
Order  of  St.  Lazarus  and  of  our  Beloved
Lady  of  Mount  Carmel.”  It  was  a  mili¬
tary  order  engaged  against  the  Saracens,
by  whom  it  was  nearly  destroyed.  In  1150
the  knights  assumed  the  vows  of  Obedience,
Poverty,  and  Chastity,  in  the  presence  of
William  the  Patriarch.  In  1572,  Gregory
XII.  united  the  Italian  knights  of  the  order
with  that  of  St.  Maurice.  Vincent  de  Paul,
in  1617,  founded  a  religious  order,  which
was  approved  in  1626,  and  erected  into  a
congregation  in  1632,  and  so  called  from
the  priory  of  St.  Lazarus  in  Paris,  which
was  occupied  by  the  order  during  the
French  revolution.  The  members  are
called  Priests  of  the  Mission,  and  are  em¬
ployed  in  teaching  and  missionary  labors.

Lemierre,  A.  M.  Born  in  1733,
died  in  1793.  A  writer  of  merit  who  be¬
longed  to  the  “Neuf  Sceurs,”  and  was
present  at  the  reception  of  Voltaire.

Leaning,  C.  The  assumed  name  of
a  learned  German  Mason,  who  resided  at
Paris  in  1817,  where  Krause  speaks  of  him
as  an  estimable  man  and  well-informed
Freemason.  He  was  the  first  projector
of  the  Encyclopadie  der  Freimaurerei,  which
Findel  justly  calls  “  one  of  the  most  learned
and  remarkable  works  in  Masonic  litera¬
ture.”  The  manuscript  coming  into  the
possession  of  the  Leipsic  bookseller,  Brock  -
haus,  he  engaged  Friedrich  Mossdorf  to
edit  it.  He  added  so  much  to  the  origi¬
nal,  revising  and  amplifying  all  the  most
important  articles  and  adding  many  new
ones,  that  Kloss  catalogues  it  in  his  Bib¬
liographic  as  the  work  of  Mossdorf.  The
Encyclopadie  is  in  three  volumes,  of  ■which
the  first  was  published  in  1822,  the  second
in  1825,  and  the  third  in  1828.  A  second
edition,  under  the  title  of  Handbvch  der
Freimaurerei,  was  published  under  the  edi¬
torship  of  Schletter  and  Zille. — Mackey.

Leontiea.  Ancient  sacrificial  festivals
in  honor  of  the  sun ;  the  officiating  priests
being  termed  Leontes.

Leo  XII.,  Pope.  Born  in  1760,  died
in  1829.  On  the  12th  of  April,  1826,  he
issued  the  well-remembered  bull,  beginning
“Quo  graviora  mala,”  against  the  Free¬
masons.

Lesser  Lights.  The  custom  preva¬
lent  in  some  localities,  of  placing  the  burn¬
ing  tapers,  or  three  symbolic  lesser  lights,
east,  west,  and  south,  near  the  altar,  is  some¬
times  changed  so  that  these  respective  lights
are  burning  on  the  pedestals  of  the  Master
and  his  two  Wardens  at  their  several  sta¬
tions.  In  the  old  Teutonic  mythology,  and
in  accordance  with  medieval  court  usage,


LEVIT


ADDENDUM.


LUZ


995


flaming  lights  or  fires  burned  before  each
column,  similarly  situated,  on  which  rested
the  image  of  Odin,  Thor,  and  Frey.  These
columns  are  further  represented  as  Wis¬
dom,  Strength,  and  Beauty,  sustaining  the
“Starry-decked  Heaven,”  roof  or  ceiling
colored  blue,  with  stars.

Levit,  I>er.  The  Levite  was  the
fourth  grade  of  the  Order  of  the  Knights
of  the  True  Light.

Liber.  Liberty.  Of  which  the
eagle,  in  the  Rose  Croix  degree,  is  symbol¬
ical.  Liberty  of  thought,  speech,  and
action,  within  the  bounds  of  civil,  politi¬
cal,  and  conscientious  law,  without  license.
A  book,  and  hence  the  word  library,  or
collection  of  books.  It  was  also  one  of  the
names  of  the  god  Bacchus.  The  freedom
which  knowledge  confers.  Liber,  the  bark,
or  inner  rind  of  a  tree,  on  which  books
were  originally  written ;  hence,  leaves  of  a
book  and  leaves  of  a  tree;  or,  similarly  in
Latin,  folio  of  a  book,  the  foliage  of  a  tree.
Thus,  the  “  tree  of  knowledge”  becomes  the
“  book  of  wisdom ;  ”  the  “  tree  of  life  ”  be¬
comes  the  “  book  of  life.”  See  Lakak
Deror  Pessah,  Add.,  and  Libertas,  Mackey.
The  Bridge  mentioned  in  the  Sixteenth


Degree,  Scottish  Rite,  has  the  initials  of
Liberty  of  Passage  over  its  arches.

Liberty,  Ordre  de  la.  [Order  of
Libert;/.)  A  French  androgyn  Order,  in¬
stituted  in  Paris,  1744,  and  the  precursor
of  “La  Maqonnerie  d’Adoption.”

“  Liberty,  Equality,  Frater¬
nity.”  The  motto  of  the  French  Free¬
masons.

Libyan,  or  Lybic  Chain.  The

Eighty-fifth  grade  of  the  Rite  of  Memphis;
old  style.

Liclit,  Ritter  von  Wahren.

Knight  of  the  True  Light,  presumed  to
have  been  founded  in  Austria,  in  1780,  by
Hans  Heinrich  Freiherr  von  Ecker  and
Eckhoffen.  It  consisted  of  five  grades.

Liclitseher,  Oder  Frleuelitete.
( The  Enlightened.)  A  mystical  sect  estab¬
lished  at  Schlettstadt  by  Kiiper  Martin
Steinbach,  in  the  sixteenth  century.  Men¬
tioned  in  the  “  Handbuch,”  in  1566,  by  Pas¬
tor  Reinhard  Lutz.  It  delved  in  Scriptural
interpretation.

Lilis,  or  Lilitli.  In  the  popular  be¬
lief  of  the  Hebrews,  a  female  spectre,  in
elegant  attire,  who  secretly  destroys  chil¬


dren.  The  fabled  wife  of  Adam,  before  he
married  Eve,  by  whom  he  begat  devils.

Lily  of  the  Valley.  A  side  degree
in  the  Templar  system  of  France.

Lion,  Chevalier  du.  ( Knight  of
the  Lion.)  The  twentieth  grade  of  the
third  series  of  the  Metropolitan  Chapter  of
France.

Lion  of  the  Tribe  of  Judah.

See  Tribe  of  Judah,  Lion  of  the,  Mackey.

Livre  d’Architecture.  The  French
designation  of  the  book  of  minutes.

Livre  d’Eloquence.  A  French
expression  for  a  collection  of  minutes  of
addresses  made  in  a  Lodge.

Loki.  See  Balder.

Louis  Napoleon.  Second  Adjoint
of  the  Grand  Master  of  the  G.  Orient  of
France.  Nominated,  in  1806,  king  of  Hol¬
land.  Louis  Napoleon  III.  was  widely
known  as  an  interested  Mason.

Ludewig,  H.  E.  An  energetic  Ma¬
son,  born  in  1810,  in  Germany;  died  in
1856,  in  America.  By  “powers  from  home”
this  ardent  brother  attempted  to  set  up  an
independent  authority  to  the  existingGrand
Lodge  system  in  the  United  States ;  but,
like  many  such  attempts,  it  flashed  bril¬
liantly  for  a  season,  but  proved  of  ephem¬
eral  nature.

Lufton.  One  of  the  French  terms  for
Louveteau,  or  Lewis ,  which  see,  Mackey.

Lully,  Raymond.  A  celebrated
chemist  and  philosopher,  the  seneschal  of
Majorca,  surnamed  le  docleur  illumine.  His
discoveries  are  most  noted,  such  as  the
mode  of  rectifying  spirits,  the  refining  of
silver,  etc.  He  was  born  about  1234.  In
1276  he  founded  a  college  of  Franciscans
at  Palma,  for  instruction  in  Eastern  lore,
and  especially  the  study  of  the  Arabic  lan¬
guage,  for  which  purpose  he  instituted  sev¬
eral  colleges  between  the  years  1293  and
1311.  He  died  in  1314.  He  is  known  as
an  eminent  Rosicrucian,  and  many  fables
as  to  his  longevity  are  related  of  him.

Lumiere,  La  Grande.  ( The  Grand
Light. )  A  grade  in  the  collection  of  Brother
Viany.

Lumiere,  La  Vraie.  [The  True
Light,  or  Perfect  Mason.)  Originally,  ac¬
cording  to  Thory,  part  of  the  system  of  the
Royal  York  at  Berlin.

Limus.  An  Egyptian  deity,  known  as
Klions  Lunus,  and  represented  as  hawk¬
headed,  surmounted  by  the  crescent  and
disc.  When  appearing  with  the  head  of  an
ibis,  he  is  called  Thoth-Lunus.  His  wor¬
ship  was  very  extensive  through  ancient
Egypt,  where  he  was  known  as  Aah,  who
presides  over  rejuvenation  and  resurrec¬
tion.  Champollion  mentions  in  his  Pan¬
theon  a  Lunus  bifrons.

Luz.  An  ever-living  power,  according


996


LYON


ADDENDUM.


to  the  old  Jewish  rabbins,  residing  in  a
small  joint-bone  existing  at  the  base  of  the
spinal  column.  To  this  undying  principle,
watered  by  the  dew  of  heaven,  is  ascribed
the  immortality  in  man.

“R.  Joshua  Ben  Hananiah  replied  to
Hadrian,  as  to  how  man  revived  in  the
world  to  come,  ‘From  Luz,  in  the  back¬
bone.’  When  asked  to  demonstrate  this,
he  took  Luz,  a  little  bone  out  of  the  back¬
bone,  and  put  it  in  water,  and  it  was  not
steeped ;  he  put  it  in  the  fire,  and  it  was
not  burned  ;  he  brought  it  to  the  mill,  and
that  could  not  grind  it;  he  laid  it  on  the
anvil,  and  knocked  itwith  ahammer,butthe
anvil  was  cleft,  and  the  hammer  broken.”

IL.yon,  I>a\  id  Murray.  While  this
encyclopaedia  is  not  intended  as  a  biograph¬
ical  sketch  book,  yet  there  are  Masons  so
prominent  in  its  literature,  and  enjoying
so  large  a  share  of  the  affection  of  their
brethren,  that  some  space  is  gladly  ac¬
corded  to  a  well-spring  of  memory.  Such
is  David  Murray  Lyon,  of  whom  A.  F.  A.
Woodford  speaks  none  too  highly  in  that
most  admirable  work,  known  the  world
over  as  Kenning’ s  Cyclopaedia  of  Freemason-


MA£ON

ry.  We  take  none  too  much  liberty  in
making  abstracts.

“  Bro.  D.  Murray  Lyon  is,  without  doubt,
the  foremost  Masonic  student  of  Scotland,
either  of  this  or  any  other  period ;  and  the
results  of  his  continuous  and  arduous  re¬
searches  are  to  be  found  in  all  the  books
and  periodicals  of  the  Craft  for  the  last
twenty  years,  both  at  home  and  abroad.
It  is  simply  impossible  to  furnish  anything
like  an  accurate  and  complete  list  of  his
many  valuable  contributions  which  have
adorned  Masonic  magazines  from  the  time
of  his  initiation  in  the  Lodge  Ayr,  St.  Paul,
No.  204,  Scotland,  in  1856.  .  .  .  His  chief
works  have  been  the  History  of  the  Mother
Lodge  Kilwinning ,  Scotland  the  History  of
the  Old  Lodge  at  Thornhill,  and,  finally,  the
History  of  the  Ancient  Lodge  at  Edinburgh
(Mary’s  Chapel),  from  the  sixteenth  cen¬
tury.  This  grand  work,  a  most  massive
and  splendid  volume,  has  placed  Bro.  Lyon
in  the  front  rank  of  Masonic  authors.  .  .  .
Bro.  Lyon  enjoys  the  confidence  and  the
esteem  of  the  Craft  in  Europe  and  Amer¬
ica,  and  all  delight  to  honor  one  so  worthy,
in  every  sense,  of  their  regard.”


M.


M.  (Heb.,  f2,  Mem),  which  signifies  w’a,-
ter  in  motion,  having  for  its  hieroglyph
a  waving  line,  referring  to  the  surface  of
the  water.  As  a  numeral,  M  stands  for
1000.  In  Hebrew  its  numerical  value  is
40.  The  sacred  name  of  Deity,  applied
to  this  letter,  is  Meborach,  Bene¬
dicts.  ’

Mackenzie,  Kenneth  It  H.

(“  Cryptonymus.”)  Editor  of  The  Royal
Masonic  Cyclopaedia  of  History,  Rites,  Sym¬
bolism,  and  Biography,  containing  upwards
of  3000  subjects,  together  with  numerous
original  archaeological  articles  on  topics
never  before  treated  in  any  similar  work;
published  in  London  by  Bro.  John  Hogg,
Paternoster  Row.  This  admirable  and
standard  work  of  nearly  800  pages,  octavo,
is  replete  with  that  useful  information  so
necessary  to  the  neophyte  or  the  student  in
Masonry.  The  thorough  examination  of
the  work  incident  to  this  present  compila¬
tion  has  further  convinced  the  writer  of  its
extreme  value.  The  liberty  of  quoting  at
times  direct  from  The  Royal  Masonic  Cyclo¬
paedia  is  hereby  acknowledged,  as  is  further
mentioned  in  treating  on  various  subjects
herein.  The  treatises  on  “  Rosicrucian-


ism,”  and  the  “Kabbalah,”  are  especially
commendable;  in  fact  they,  -with  numbers
of  others,  may  be  termed  complete  system¬
atic  expositions.  Bro.  Mackenzie  is  an
Honorary  Member  of  the  Canongate  Kil¬
winning  Lodge,  No.  2,  Scotland,  and  a
Magus,  IX.,  in  the  modern  Rosicrucian
system.

Ma^on.  The  liberty  is  herein  taken
of  giving  from  Rev.  A.  F.  A.  Woodford,  ed¬
itor  of  Kenning’s  Cyclopaedia,  London,  Eng.,
the  derivation  of  this  word,  thus :  “  The
Norman-French  word  for  ‘  mason  ’ — as  the
operative  mason  in  early  days  was  called
Me  macon,’  and  this  was  corrupted  into
maccon,  maccouyn,  masoun,  masouyn,  mes-
souyn,  and  even  mageon.  The  word  seems
to  come  from  ‘maqonner,’  which  had  both
its  operative  meaning  and  derivative  mean¬
ing  of  conspiring,  in  1238,  and  which  again
comes  from  ‘  mansio,’  a  word  of  classic  use.
Some  writers  have  derived  the  word  *  maqon  ’
from  maison ;  but  though  ‘maisonner’  and
maejonner  appear  eventually  to  be  equiva¬
lent  to  ‘  mansionem  facere,’  in  its  first
meaning,  ‘maison’  seems  to  be  simply  a
wooden  house,  as  ‘maisonage’  is  defined
by  Roquefort  to  be  ‘  Bois  de  charpente


ADDENDUM.


MAGI


MAgON

propre  a  batir  les  maisons,’  and  then  he
adds,  ‘C’est  aussi  Faction  de  batir.’  Roque¬
fort  seems  to  prefer  to  derive  ‘  maisonner  ’
from  the  Low  Latin  verb  ‘  mansionare.’
Be  this  as  it  may,  we  have  in  the  word
maqon,  as  it  appears  to  us,  a  clear  evi¬
dence  of  the  development  of  the  operative
guilds  through  the  Norman-French  artifi¬
cers  of  the  Conquest, who  carried  the  opera¬
tive  guilds,  as  it  were,  back  to  Latin  ter¬
minology,  and  to  a  Roman  origin.”  See
Mason,  Mackey.

Ma^ondaiisla  YoieDroite.  ( The

Mason  in  the  Right  Way.)  The  second
grade  of  the  system  of  Avignon.

Ma^on  du  Secret.  ( The  Mason  of
the  Secret.)  The  sixth  grade  of  the  re¬
formed  rite  of  Baron  Tschoudy,  and  the
seventh  in  the  reformed  rite  of  St.  Martin.
— Thory.

llla^on,  Eeossais.  Maitre.  See

Mason,  Scottish  Master,  Mackey.

Ma^onne  Maitresse.  Third  grade
of  the  Maqonnerie  d’ Adoption.

Ma^onnerie  Rouge.  (Red  Free¬
masonry.)  The  designation  of  the  four
high  grades  of  the  French  Rite.  Bazot
says  that  the  name  comes  from  the  color
worn  in  the  fourth  grade.

Ma^onnieke Soeieteiten.  Dutch
MasonicClubs,  somewhat  likeunto  the  Eng¬
lish  Lodges  of  Instruction,  with  more,  per¬
haps,  of  the  character  of  a  club.  Kenning’ s
Cyclopcedia  says  “there  were  about  nineteen
of  these  associations  in  the  principal  towns
of  Holland  in  1860.”

“  Macoy’s  Cyclopedia.”  “A  Gen¬
eral  History,  Cyclopedia,  and  Dictionary
of  Freemasonry,”  containing  some  300  en¬
gravings,  by  Robert  Macoy,  33°,  published
in  New  York,  which  has  passed  through
a  number  of  editions.  It  was  originally
founded  on  A  Dictionary  of  Symbolical
Masonry,  by  George  Oliver,  D.D.  Bro.
Macoy  has  occupied  the  prominent  posi¬
tion  of  Deputy  G.  Master  of  the  G.  Lodge
of  New  York,  and  is,  and  has  been  for  a
series  of  years,  the  G.  Recorder  of  the
State  G.  Cornmandery  of  the  Order  of  the
Temple,  K.  T.

Macrocosm,  (yaspoc  k noun^,  the  great
world.)  The  visible  system  of  worlds ;  the
outer  world  or  universe.  It  is  opposed  to
Microcosm,  the  little  world,  as  in  man.  It
has  been  used  as  the  Macric  soul  in  oppo¬
sition  to  the  Micric  animal  life,  and  as  the
soul  of  the  universe  as  opposed  to  the  soul
of  a  single  world  or  being.  A  subject  of
much  note  to  the  Rosicrucians  in  the  study
of  the  Mysterium  Magnum.

Magazine.  Mackey  says  the  earliest
Masonic  magazine  was  the  Freimaurer  Zeit-
uvg,  issued  in  Berlin  in  1783,  but  the  Rev.
Bro.  Woodford,  of  Loudon,  Eng.,  who  has


997

I  had  later  search,  states  that  the  earliest
was  Der  Freymaurer,  published  in  1738,
by  Bernhard  Christoph  Breitkopf,  at  Leip-
sic,  of  which  he  has  a  copy,  and  was  fol¬
lowed  in  1742  by  Der  bedachtige  Freimaurer,
Hamburg,  by  Tr.  Fr.Tentzel,  1742.  In  1743
the  Aufmerksame  Freimaurer  appeared  at
Gorlitz,  and  subsequently  several  others,
purely  Masonic,  all  mentioned  by  Kloss.
Many  new  Masonic  journals,  also,  begin¬
ning  with  the  Neue  europaische  Fama,  in
1737,  and  Des  europaische  Staas  Secretdr,  in
1740,  contained  articles  relating  to  Free¬
masonry.  In  England  the  first  Masonic
magazine  was  of  1793.  Although  we  had
no  English  Masonic  journal  to  boast  of,
many  of  the  London  papers  alluded  to
Freemasonry,  such  as  the  St.  James’  Even¬
ing  Post,  quoted  lately  by  Bro.  W.  J.  Hughan,
so  early,  too,  as  1734;  and  probably  later
“  excerpta  ”  relating  to  Freemasonry  may
be  discovered.  The  first  official  calendar,
as  we  have  said  before,  in  England  was
1777.  In  France  the  first  official  journal
seems  to  have  been  Etat  du  Grand  Orient
de  France,  in  1778 ;  while  the  Etrennes
Interessantes  were  published  in  1797.  There
is,  however,  in  the  St.  James’  Evening  Post,
dated  from  Paris,  January  2, 1738,  reprinted
what  is  the  Paris  letter,  first  published,  we
believe,  in  the  so-called  Secrets  of  Masonry,
by  S.  P.,  London,  1737,  as  Bro.  Hughan
points  out,  and  which  is  also  dated  Paris,
January  13,  1737.  How  far  this  is  orig¬
inal  or  fictitious  is  not  now  very  easy
to  say.  On  this  subject,  Bro.  Woodford
pays  a  handsome  compliment  to  the  Amer¬
ican  literary  Masons  in  these  words,  which
we  heartily  endorse:  “We  ought  never,  it
appears  to  us,  to  forget  the  great  debt  of
gratitude  which  Masonic  students  owe  to
many  admirable  Masonic  magazines  in  the
United  States,  which  had  not  the  success
they  deserved,  though  many  have  flour¬
ished  and  are  still  to  the  fore,  and  to  their
accomplished  editors.  Among  these  may
be  fairly  mentioned  C.  W.  Moore,  Dr.  A.
G.  Mackey,  Bros.  Hynemann,  Brown,  Mor¬
ris,  Bailey,  Gouley,  C.  Moore,  cum  multis
afiis.”  We  designate  specially  two  now
at  the  meridian  of  literary  genius — The
Voice  of  Masonry,  by  John  W.  Brown,  of
Chicago,  editor  and  publisher,  and  The
Freemason’s  Repository,  now  in  its  13th
volume,  edited  by  Henry  W.  Rugg,  of
Providence,  R.  I.

Magi.  The  Three.  The  “  Wise
men  of  the  East”  who  came  to  Jerusalem,
bringing  gifts  to  the  infant  Jesus.  The
tradit  ional  names  of  the  three  are  Melchior,
an  old  man,  with  a  long  beard,  offering
gold  ;  Jasper,  a  beardless  youth,  who  offers
frankincense;  Balthazar,  a  black  or  Moor,
with  a  large  spreading  beard,  who  tenders


998


MAGNA


A  DDENDUM.


MAN


myrrh.  The  patron  saints  of  travellers.
“  Tradition  fixed  their  number  at  three,
probably  in  allusion  to  the  three  races
springing  from  the  sons  of  Noah.  The
Empress  Helena  caused  their  corpses  to  be
transported  to  Milan  from  Constantinople.
Frederick  Barbarossa  carried  them  to  Co¬
logne,  the  place  of  their  special  glory  as
the  Three  Kings  of  Cologne.” — Yonge.
Magi  is  the  title  of  the  three  principal  offi¬
cers  ruling  the  society  of  the  Rosicrucians.

Magna  est  reritas  et  prtevale-
l>it.  (  The  truth  in  great ,  and  it  will  prevail .)
The  motto  of  the  Red  Cross  degree,  or
Knights  of  the  Red  Cross.

Magnan,  B.  P.  A  marshal  ofFrance,
nominated  by  Napoleon  III.,  emperor,  as
Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Orient  of
France,  in  1862,  and,  though  not  a  member
of  the  great  fraternity  at  the  time,  was  initi¬
ated  and  installed  Grand  Master,  February
8, 1862,  and  so  remained  until  May  29, 1865.

Maliabliarata.  A  Sanskrit  poem,
recounting  the  rivalries  of  the  descendants
of  King  Bharata,  and  occupying  a  place
among  the  Shasters  of  the  Hindus.  It  con¬
tains  many  thousand  verses,  written  at
various  unknown  periods  since  the  comple¬
tion  of  the  Ramayana.

Maliarteva.  (“  The  great  god.”)  One
of  the  common  names  by  which  the  Hindu
god  Siva  is  called.  His  consort,  Durga,  is
similarly  styled  Mahadevi  (the  great  god¬
dess).  In  Buddhistic  history,  Mahadeva,
who  lived  two  hundred  years  after  the  death
of  the  Buddha  Sakyamuni,  or  343,  is  a  re¬
nowned  teacher  who  caused  a  schism  in  the
Buddhistic  Church.

Maliakasyapa.  The  renowned  dis¬
ciple  of  Buddha  Sakyamuni,  who  arranged
the  metaphysical  portion  of  the  sacred
writings  called  Abhidharma.

Malcolm  III.  (King  of  Scotland.)
Reported  to  have  chartered  the  Lodge  ‘‘St.
John  of  Glasgow”  in  the  year  1057.

Man,  or  Perfected  Creation.  The
symbol  representing/>e?yecfedcTeaft'o/?,which
is  “  very  common  on  ancient  Hindu  mon¬
uments  in  China,”  embraces  so  many  of
the  Masonic  emblems,  and  so  directly  re¬
fers  to  several  of  the  elementary  principles
taught  in  philosophic  Masonry,  that  it  is
here  introduced  with  its  explanations.  For-
long,  in  his  Faiths  of  Man,  gives  this  ar¬
rangement  :

A — is  the  Earth,  or  foundation  on  which
all  build.

Wa —  Water,  as  in  an  egg,  or  as  con¬
densed  fire  and  ether.

Ra — Fire,  or  the  elements  in  motion.

Ka — Air,  or  wind — Juno,  or  Io  ni ;  a  con¬
densed  element.

Cha — Ether,  or  Heaven,  the  cosmical
Former.


This  figure  is  frequently  found  in  India:

i  Iw  A  Ether,  or  Heaven,

Air,

/  \  Fire,


Water,


Earth.


As  these  symbols  are  readily  interpreta¬
ble  by  those  conversant  with  Masonic  hie-
roglvphs,  it  may  be  seen  that  the  elements,
in  their  ascending  scale,  show  the  perfected
creation.  Forlong  remarks  that  “  as  it  was
difficult  to  show  the  All-pervading  Ether,
Egypt,  for  this  purpose,  surrounded  her
figures  with  a  powder  of  stars  instead  of
flame,  which  on  Indra’s  garments  were  Yo-
nis.  This  figure  gradually  developed,  be¬
coming  in  time  a  very  concrete  man,  stand¬
ing  on  two  legs  instead  of  a  square  base, —
the  horns  of  the  crescent  (Air),  being  out¬
stretched,  formed  the  arms,  and  the  reful¬
gent  Flame  the  head,  which,  with  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  represented  the  sun,
or  Fire,  and  gives  Light  to  all.  To  this
being,  it  was  claimed,  there  were  given
seven  senses;  and  thus,  perfect  and  erect,
stood  Man,  rising  above  the  animal  state.”

The  seven  senses  were  seeing,  hearing,
tasting,  feeling,  smelling,  understanding,
and  speech.  See  Ecclesiasticus  xvii.  5  :

“The  Lord  created  man,  and  they  re¬
ceived  the  use  of  the  five  operations  of  the
Lord ;  and  in  thesixth  place  he  imparted  (to)
them  understand/??  <7, andintheseventhspeecA,
an  interpreter  of  the  cogitations  thereof.”

The  words  “seven  senses”  also  occur  in
the  poem  of  Taliesin,  called  “  Y  Bid  Mawr,
or  the  Macrocosm”  [Brit. Mag.,  vol. 21, p. 30).
See  further  the  “  Mysterium  Magnum  ”  of
Jacob  Boehmeu,  which  teaches  “how  the
soul  of  man,  or  his  inward  holy  body,”
was  compounded  of  the  seven  properties
under  the  influence  of  the  seven  planets:

“  I  will  adore  my  Father,

My  God,  my  Supporter,

"Who  placed,  throughout  my  head,

The  soul  of  my  reason,

And  made  for  my  perception
M  y  seven  faculties

Of  Fire,  and  Earth,  and  Water,  and  Air,
And  mist,  and  flowers,

And  the  southerly  wind,

As  it  were  seven  senses  of  reason
For  my  Father  to  impel  me
With  the  first  I  shall  be  animated,


MANGO


ADDENDUM.


MANUSCRIPTS


999


With  the  second  I  shall  touch,

With  the  third  I  shall  cry  out,

With  the  fourth  I  shall  taste,

With  the  fifth  I  shall  see,

With  the  sixth  I  shall  hear,

With  the  seventh  I  shall  smell.”

Mango.  The  branches  of  this  tree  are
a  prominent  feature  in  all  Eastern  religious
ceremonies.  The  mango  is  the  apple-tree
of  India,  with  which  man,  in  Indian  tale,
tempted  Eve.

Maniclucans..  _  (Also  termed  Gnos¬
tics.)  A  sect  taking  its  rise  in  the  middle
of  the  third  century,  whose  belief  was  in
two  eternal  principles  of  good  and  evil.
They  derived  their  name  from  Manes,  a
philosopher  of  Persian  birth,  sometimes
called  ManicluEus.  Of  the  two  principles,
Ormudz  was  the  author  of  the  good,  while
Ahriman  was  the  master  spirit  of  evil.
The  two  classes  of  neophytes  were,  the
true,  siddi  Jean;  the  listeners,  samma  tin.

Maniohiens,  lies  I'reres.  A  se¬
cret  Italian  society,  founded,  according  to
Thory  and  Clavel,  in  the  eighteenth  cen¬
tury,  at  which  the  doctrines  of  Manes  were
set  forth  in  several  grades.

Mann.  Der.  The  Man,  the  second
grade  of  the  “  Deutsche  Union.”

Mann.  By  reference  to  the  Book  of
the  Dead,  it  will  be  found  that  this  word
covers  an  ideal  space  corresponding  to  the
word  west,  in  whose  bosom  is  received  the
setting  sun.  Also  see  Truth.

Manuscripts,  Apocryplial.  Hav¬
ing  great  reliance  on  the  critical  ability
and  the  excellent  judgment  of  Bro.  Robert
Freke  Gould,  of  England,  it  is  well  to  quote
the  result  of  his  examination  of  certain
manuscripts  that  have  been  accepted  by
many  in  the  past  as  without  question.  By
reference  to  page  634,  ante,  of  this  work,  a
schedule  of  37  manuscripts  will  be  found.
No.  36  is  the  Leland-Locke  Manuscript,  of
1753.  It  is  the  first  of  six  documents  fall¬
ing  within  the  category  of  apocryphal
MSS.  mentioned  by  Bro.  Gould.  It  was
also  deemed  apocryphal  by  Dr.  Mackey.
(See  Leland  MS.)  Bro.  Gould  says:  “It
remains  to  be  noticed,  that  among  the
Masonic  annalists  of  our  own  day,  there
yet  lingers  a  solitary  believer  in  the  credi¬
bility  of  this  MS ,”  and  then  quotes  Bro.
Fort.  The  second  is  The  Steinmetz  Cate¬
chism,  or  the  Entered  Apprentice's  Lecture —
an  eighteenth  century — one  of  the  Krause
manuscripts — Dr.  Mackey’s  No.  34.  The
argument  is  full  as  to  the  non-authenticity
of  the  document,  and  reference  should  be
had  to  Bro.  Gould’s  History,  pp.  489-92.
The  third  is  the  Malcolm  Canmore  Charter,
which  came  to  light  in  1806,  consequent
upon  the  “claim  of  the  'Glasgow  Freemen
Operative  St.  John’s  Lodge’  to  take  prece¬


dence  of  the  other  Lodges  in  the  Masonic
procession,  at  the  laying  of  the  foundation-
stone  of  Nelson’s  monument  on  ‘Glasgow
Green,’  although  at  that  time  it  was  an
independent  organization.”  The  contro¬
versy  as  to  this  old  (?)  document  was  live¬
ly,  but  finally  it  was  pronounced  to  be  a
manufactured  parchment,  and  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Scotland  declined  to  recognize
it  of  value.  The  fourth  MS.  is  that  of
Krause,  known  as  Prince  Edwin’s  Constitu¬
tion  of  926.  Upon  this  unquestioned  reli¬
ance  had  for  decades  been  placed,  then  it
came  to  be  doubted,  and  is  now  little  cred¬
ited  by  inquiring  Masons.  Bro.  Gould  closes
his  recital  of  criticisms  with  the  remark  :
“  The  original  document,  as  commonly  hap¬
pens  in  forgeries  of  this  description,  is  miss¬
ing;  and  how,  under  all  the  circumstances
of  the  case,  Krause  could  have  constituted
himself  the  champion  of  its  authenticity,  it
is  difficult  to  conjecture  Possibly,  however,
the  explanation  may  be,  that  in  impostures
of  this  character,  credulity,  on  the  one  part,
is  a  strong  temptation  to  deceit  on  the  other,
especially  to  deceit  of  which  no  personal
injury  is  the  consequence,  and  which  flat¬
ters  the  student  of  old  documents  with  his
own  ingenuity.”  These  remarks  are  spe¬
cially  quoted  as  relating  to  almost  all  apoc¬
ryphal  documents.  The  fifth,  the  Charter
of  Cologne,  is  the  37th  manuscript  men¬
tioned  in  Dr.  Mackey’s  schedule  ( see  p.
634,  also  p.  173),  and  was  believed  by
him  to  be  of  no  authentic  value.  Bro.
Gould  cites  Bobrik  and  Dr.  Schwetschke
as  careful  and  decisive  examiners  who
have  pronounced  against  the  genuineness
of  the  MS.  The  sixth,  the  Larmenius
Charter,  or  the  Charter  of  Transmission,  is
that  “upon  which  rests  the  claims  of  the
Order  of  the  Temple  to  being  the  lineal  suc¬
cessors  of  the  historic  Knights  Templars,
which  was  not  published  until  between
1804  and  1810,  and  its  earlier  history,  if
indeed  it  has  one,  is  so  tainted  with  im¬
posture,  as  to  remove  any  possibility  of  un¬
ravelling  the  tangled  web  of  falsehood  in
which  the  whole  question  is  enveloped.”
The  argument  following  is  voluminous,  and
Bro.  Gould’s  History  should  be  consulted.

Manuscripts,  Old.  As  a  matter  of
the  first  importance  to  students  of  the  ori¬
gin  and  history  of  Freemasonry,  there  is
herein  given,  in  sequence  of  age,  the  old
records  or  MSS.,  so  far  as  they  have  been
unearthed  and  classified;  they  all  relate
to  the  old  charges  of  British  Freemasons.
The  following  synoptical  list  is  made  up
from  Bro.  Robert  Freke  Gould’s  History,
vol.  i.,  p.  60-106.

1.  “  Halliwell,”  fourteenth  century.  Brit.
Museum  (Bib.  Reg.  17  A  1).  Early  History
of  Ereemasonry  in  England,  by  J.  O.  Halli-


1000


MANUSCRIPTS


ADDENDUM.


MARCONIS


well,  Esq.,  F.  R.  S.,  London,  1840,  etc.  MS.
on  vellum  5x4  inches,  bound  in  Russia,
having  thereon  G.  R.  11, 1757,  and  the  royal
arms.  Mr.  Halliwell  (Phillips)  states,  “this
is  the  earliest  document  yet  brought  to  light
connected  with  the  progress  of  Freemason¬
ry  in  Great  Britain.”  Casley  ascribes  it  to
the  fourteenth  century,  and  Kloss  as  be¬
tween  1427  and  1445.

2.  “Cooke,”  fifteenth  century.  Brit.  Mu¬
seum  (Addl.  MSS.  23,198).  Published  in
London,  1861,  and  edited  by  Mr.  Matthew
Cooke,  hence  its  title.  Mr.  Bond’s  estimate
is  early  fifteenth  century.  (See  Cooke's
MSS.,  by  Mackey.)  Wooden  cover,  vellum
sheets  connected  with  twine,  size  of  No.  1.

3.  “Lansdowne,”  sixteenth  century.  B.
Museum  (No.  98,  art.  48).  Published  by
W.  James  Hughan,  in  his  Old  Charges,  p.

31.  Mr.  Bond  places  the  date  at  1600,
others  earlier.  The  MS.  is  on  the  inner
sides  of  3 £  sheets  stout  paper  11  x  15  inches,
making  seven  folios.

4.  “  Grand  Lodge,”  1583.  G.  Lodge  of
England.  First  published  by  Hughan  in
Old  Charges.  A  parchment  roll  9  feet
long,  5  inches  wide.  Date,  Dec.  25, 1583.

5.  “York,  No.  1,”  seventeenth  century.
The  York  Lodge,  No.  236,  York.  A  parch¬
ment  roll,  7  feet  by  5  inches,  containing  the
constitutions  of  Masonry.

6  and  7.  “  Wilson,  Nos.  1  and  2,”  seven¬
teenth  century.  Thirlestane  House,  Chel¬
tenham.  Published  in  Masonic  Magazine,
1876.  The  MSS.  are  on  vellum,  and  by
Rev.  A.  F.  A.  Woodford  deemed  to  be  of
sixteenth  century.

8.  “Inigo  Jones,”  1607.  Rev.  A.  F.  A.
Woodford.  Published  in  Masonic  Maga¬
zine,  July,  1881.  A  folio  MS.,  with  orna¬
mented  title  and  drawing.

9.  “  Wood,”  1610.  Rev.  A.  F.  A.  Wood¬
ford.  Published  in  Masonic  Magazine ,  June,
1881.  On  vellum,  with  illuminated  letters
scattered  throughout.  Like  No.  8,  it  refers
to  the  old  “  Constitutions  of  Masonrve.”

10.  “York,  No.  3,”  1630.  At  York,
1779.  A  parchment  roll  of  “  Charges  on
Masonry.”

11.  “  Harleian,  1942,”  seventeenth  cen¬
tury.  B.  Museum.  Published  in  part  in
Freemasons'  Quarterly  Review,  1836,  also  in
Hughan’s  Old  Charges.  The  MS.  contains
“The  New  Articles.”  Of  age,  early  seven¬
teenth  century.

12.  “  Harleian,  2054,”  seventeenth  cen¬
tury.  B.  Museum.  “A  book  in  folio,  con¬
taining  many  tracts,  etc.,”  written  on  four
leaves  of  paper,  containing  six  and  a  half
pages.

13.  “Sloane,  3848,”  1646.  B.  Museum.
Published  in  Old  Charges.  Written  on
paper.

14.  “  Sloane,  3323,”  1659.  B.  Museum.


Published  in  Masonic  Sketches.  Written
on  six  leaves,  5x4  inches.

15.  “  Buchanan,”  seventeenth  century.
Freemasons’  Hall,  London.  Published  in
Gould’s  History.  A  parchment  roll ;  1660
to  1680.

16.  “  Kilwinning,”  seventeenth  century.
“  Mother  Kilwinning  Lodge,”  Scotland.
Hughan’s  Masonic  Sketches  (Part  II.).

17.  “Atcheson  Haven,”  1666.  G.  Lodge
of  Scotland.

18.  “Aberdeen,”  1670.  Ancient  Lodge

rtf  A  liprflppn

19.  “  Melrose,  No.  2,”  1674.  Old  Lodge
at  Melrose,  Scotland.

20.  “  Hope,”  seventeenth  century.  Lodge
of  “  Hope,”  Bradford,  Yorkshire.

21.  “  York,  No.  5,”  seventeenth  century.
“  York  ”  Lodge,  at  York.

22.  “  York,  No.  6,”  seventeenth  century.
The  “York”  Lodge.

23.  “Antiquity,”  1686.  Lodge  of  An¬
tiquity,  London.

24.  “  Supreme  Council,  No.  1,”  1686.  33
Golden  Square,  London.

25.  “  York,  No.  4,”  1693.  The  “  York  ”
Lodge

26.  “Alnwick,”  1701.  Alnwick.

27.  “  York,  No.  2,”  1704.  The  “  York  ”
Lodge.

28.  “  Scarborough,”  1705.  G.  Lodge  of
Canada.

29.  “Papworth,”  1714.  Wyatt  Pap-
wTorth,  London.

30.  “Gateshead,”  1730.  Lodge  of  “In¬
dustry,”  Gateshead.

31.  “Rawliuson,”  1730.  Bodleian  Li¬
brary,  Oxford.

31  A.  “  Harris,”  1738.  (John  Constable)
London.

Late  Transcripts  of  the  Old  Charges.

32.  “Spencer,”  1726.  E.  T.  Carson,  Cin¬
cinnati,  Ohio.

33.  Woodford,  1728.  A.  F.  A.  Wood¬
ford,  London.

34.  “Supreme  Council,  No.  2,”  1728.
33  Golden  Square,  London.

35.  “Melrose,  No. 3,”  1762.  Old  Lodge

of  Afpl  rns;p

36.  “Tunnah”  (1720  or  other).  W.  J.
Hughan,  Truro.

37.  “  Wren”  (1600  or  other).  A.  F.  A.
Woodford,  London.

Slarconis,  Gabriel  Matliien,

more  frequently  known  as  De  Negre,  from
his  dark  complexion,  was  the  founder  and
first  G.  Master  and  G.  Hierophant  of  the
Rite  of  Memphis,  brought  by  Sam’l  Honis,
a  native  of  Cairo,  from  Egypt,  in  1814,  who
with  Baron  Dumas  and  the  Marquis  de
la  Rogne,  founded  a  Lodge  of  the  Rite  at
Montauban,  France,  on  April  30,  1815,
which  was  closed  March  7,  1816.  In  a


MARCONIS


ADDENDUM.


MASONIC


1001


work  entitled  The  Sanctuary  of  Memphis,
by  Jacques  Etienne  Marconis,  the  author
— presumptively  the  son  of  G.  M.  Marconis
— who  styles  himself  the  founder  of  the  Rite
of  Memphis,  thus  briefly  gives  an  account
of  its  origin  :  “  The  Rite  of  Memphis,  or
Oriental  Rite,  was  introduced  into  Europe
by  Ormus,  a  seraphic  priest  of  Alexandria
and  Egyptian  sage,  who  had  been  convert¬
ed  by  St.  Mark,  and  reformed  the  doctrines
of  the  Egyptians  in  accordance  with  the
principles  of  Christianity.  The  disciples
of  Ormus  continued  until  1118  to  be  the
sole  guardians  of  ancient  Egyptian  wis¬
dom,  as  purified  by  Christianity  and  Solo-
monian  science.  This  science  they  com¬
municated  to  the  Templars.  They  were
then  known  by  the  title  of  Knights  of
Palestine,  or  Brethren  Rose  Croix  of  the
East.  In  them  the  Rite  of  Memphis  rec¬
ognizes  its  immediate  founders.”

The  above,  coming  from  the  G.  Hiero¬
phant  and  founder,  should  satisfy  the  most
scrupulous  as  to  the  conversion  of  Ormus
by  St.  Mark,  and  his  then  introducing  the
Memphis  Rite.  But  Marconis  continues
as  to  the  object  and  intention  of  his  Rite:
“The  Masonic  Rite  of  Memphis  is  a  com¬
bination  of  the  ancient  mysteries  ;  it  taught
the  first  men  to  render  homage  to  the  Deity.
Its  dogmas  are  based  on  the  principles  of
humanity ;  its  mission  is  the  study  of  that
wisdom  which  serves  to  discern  truth ;  it  is
the  beneficent  dawn  of  the  development  of
reason  and  intelligence;  it  is  the  worship
of  the  qualities  of  the  human  heart  and
the  impression  of  its  vices;  in  fine,  it  is
the  echo  of  religious  toleration,  the  union
of  all  belief,  the  bond  between  all  men,  the
symbol  of  sweet  illusions  of  hope,  preach¬
ing  the  faith  in  God  that  saves,  and  the
charity  that  blesses.”

We  are  further  told  by  the  Hierophant
founder  that  “The  Rite  of  Memphis  is  the
sole  depository  of  High  Masonry,  the  true
primitive  Rite,  the  Rite  par  excellence,
which  has  come  down  to  us  without  any
alteration,  and  is  consequently  the  only
Rite  that  can  justify  its  origin  and  the
combined  exercise  of  its  rights  by  consti¬
tutions,  the  authenticity  of  which  cannot
be  questioned.  The  Rite  of  Memphis,
or  Oriental  Rite,  is  the  veritable  Masonic
tree,  and  all  systems,  whatsoever  they  be,
are  but  detached  branches  of  this  institu¬
tion,  venerable  for  its  great  antiquity,  and
born  in  Egypt.  The  real  deposit  of  the
principles  of  Masonry,  written  in  the  Chal¬
dee  language,  is  preserved  in  the  sacred  ark
of  the  Rite  of  Memphis,  and  in  part  in  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  at  Edinburgh,
and  in  the  Maronite  Convent  on  Mount
Lebanon.”  “  Brother  Marconis  de  Negre,
the  Grand  Hierophant,  is  the  sole  couse-
6  A


crated  depositary  of  the  traditions  of  this
Sublime  Order.”

The  above  is  enough  to  reveal  the  char¬
acter  of  the  father  and  reputed  son  for
truth,  as  also  of  the  institution  founded  by
them,  which,  like  the  fire-fly,  is  seen  now
here,  now  there,  but  with  no  steady  bene¬
ficial  light.  Also,  see  Memphis,  Mackey.

Marconis,  Jacques  Etienne.
Born  at  Montauban,  January  3, 1795;  died
at  Paris,  November  21, 1868.  See  Memphis,
Rite  of,  Mackey.

Marduk.  A  victorious  warrior-god,
described  on  one  of  the  Assyrian  clay  tab¬
lets  of  the  British  Museum,  who  was  said
to  have  engaged  the  monster  Tiamat  in  a
cosmogonic  struggle.  He  was  armed  with
a  namzar  (grappling-hook),  ariktu  (lance),
shibbu  (lasso),  qashtu  (bow),  zizpau  (club),
and  kabab  (shield),  together  with  a  dirk  in
each  hand.

Maria  Tlieresa.  Empress  of  Aus¬
tria,  who  showed  great  hostility  to  Free¬
masonry,  presumably  from  religious  lean¬
ings  and  advisers.  Her  husband  was
Francis  I.,  elected  Emperor  of  Germany  in
1745.  He  was  a  zealous  Mason,  and  had
been  initiated  at  the  Hague  in  1781,  at  a
Special  Lodge,  at  which  Lord  Chesterfield
and  Dr.  Desaguliers  were  present.  He  was
raised  at  Houghton  Hall,  the  same  year,
while  on  a  visit  to  England.  He  assisted
to  found  the  Lodge  “  Drei  Kanonen,”  at
Vienna,  constituted  in  1742.  During  the
forty  years’  reign  of  Maria  Theresa,  Free¬
masonry  was  tolerated  in  Vienna  doubtless
through  the  intercession  of  the  Emperor.
It  is  stated  in  the  Pocket  Companion  of
1754,  one  hundred  grenadiers  were  sent  to
break  up  the  Lodge,  taking  twelve  prison¬
ers,  the  Emperor  escaping  by  a  back  stair¬
case.  He  answered  for  and  freed  the  twelve
prisoners.  His  son,  Emperor  Joseph,  in¬
herited  good-will  to  Masonry.  He  was  G.
Master  of  the  Viennese  Masons  at  the  time
of  his  death.

Martinism.  See  Rite  des  Plus  Coens.

Masoney.  Used  in  the  Strassburg
Constitutions,  and  other  German  works  of
the  Middle  Ages,  as  equivalent  to  the  mod¬
ern  Masonry.  Kloss  translates  it  by  Mason-
hood.  Lessing  derives  it  from  masa,  Anglo-
Saxon,  a  table,  and  says  it  means  a  Society
of  the  Table.  Nicolai  deduces  it  from  the
low  Latin  massonya,  which  means  both  a
club  and  a  key,  and  says  it  means  an  exclu¬
sive  society  or  club,  and  so,  he  thinks,  we
get  our  word  Masonry.  Krause  traces  it  to
mas,  mase,  food  or  a  banquet.  It  is  a  pity
to  attack  these  speculations,  but  we  are  in¬
clined  to  look  at  Masoney  as  simply  a  cor¬
ruption  of  the  English  Masonne.

Masonic  Colors.  The  colors  appro¬
priated  by  the  Fraternity  are  many,  and


1002


MASONIC


ADDENDUM.


MEDALS


even  shades  of  the  same  color.  The  prin¬
cipal  ones  are  blue,  to  the  Craft  degrees;
purple,  to  the  Royal  Arch ;  white  and
black,  to  the  Order  of  the  Temple ;  while
all  colors  are  used  in  the  respective  degrees
of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite:  notably,  the
nine-colored  girdle,  intertwined  with  a
tenth,  worn  in  the  Fourteenth  Degree  of
the  last-named  system.

Masonic  Literature.  See  Litera¬
ture  of  Masonry,  Mackey.

Masons,  Company  of.  One  of  the
Livery  Companies  of  London,  but  not  one
of  the  twelve  great  ones.  It  had  a  coat-of-
arms  granted  in  1464,  confirmed  by  Thomas
Benett  in  1521.  It  is  doubtful,  somewhat,
when  this  Company  was  actually  incorpo¬
rated  by  Royal  Charter.  Ashmole  dwells
somewhat  upon  this.  He  calls  himself  the
“Senior  Fellow”  among  them,  but  proba¬
bly  means  that  he  was  the  oldest  Freema¬
son  among  those  present.  Whether  Ash¬
mole  was  admitted  to  what  we  call  the
Second  Degree  is  at  present  impossible  to
state;  but  the  Rev.  Bro.  Woodford  says:
“  Though  following  the  evidence  of  the
Scottish  Minute  Books  as  far  as  they  are
decisive  on  the  subject — as  we  have,  so  far,
no  available  English  evidence  of  that  date
— we  should  be  inclined  to  say  Fellow  of
Craft.”  “Fellows”  appears  to  be  indiffer¬
ently  used.  The  accepted  “Fellows”  seem
to  have  been  nine  in  number.  There  were
evidently  two  associations,  the  one  being
the  “  Masons’  or  Freemasons’  Company,”
the  other  the  “  Society  of  Freemasons,”  to
which  Robert  Padgett  Clerk  belonged,  who
transcribed  the  Antiquity  MSS.  in  1686.

Masons,  Emperor  of  all  tlie.

A  degree  in  the  collection  of  Fustier.

Masora.  A  Hebrew  work  on  the
Bible,  intended  to  secure  it  from  any
alterations  or  innovations.  Those  who
composed  it  were  termed  Masorites,  who
taught  from  tradition,  and  who  invented
the  Hebrew  points.  They  were  also  known
as  Melchites.

Massena,  Andre.  Duke  of  Rivoli,
Prince  of  Essling,  and  a  Marshal  of  France,
born  at  Nice  in  1758.  Early  in  the  French
Revolution  he  joined  a  battalion  of  volun¬
teers,  and  soon  rose  to  high  military  rank.
He  was  a  prominent  grand  officer  of  the
French  Grand  Orient.  He  was  designated
by  Napoleon,  his  master,  as  the  Robber,  in
consequence  of  his  being  so  extortion¬
ate.

Mat lioo.  ( Amiability ,  sweetness .)  The
name  of  the  Third  Step  of  the  Mystic  Lad¬
der  of  the  Kadosh  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish
Rite.

Matter.  A  subject  deemed  of  impor¬
tant  study  to  the  alchemical  and  hermeti-
cal  devotee.  The  subject  will  not  be  dis¬


cussed  here.  It  holds  a  valued  position  for
instruction  in  the  Society  of  the  Rosicru-
cians,  who  hold  that  matter  is  subject  to
change,  transformation,  and  apparent  dis¬
solution  ;  but,  in  obedience  to  God’s  great
laws  of  economy,  nothing  is  lost,  but  is
simply  transferred.

Maurer.  German  for  Mason,  as  Mau-
rerei  is  for  Masonry,  and  Freimaurer  for
Freemason.

Maurer,  Griis.  A  German  Masonic
operative  expression,  divided  by  some  into
Gruss  Maurer,  Wort  Maurer,  Schrift  Mau¬
rer,  and  Brieftrager — that  is,  those  who
claimed  aid  and  recognition  through  signs
and  proving,  and  those  who  carried  written
documents.

Mailt.  The  consort  of  the  god  Amon,
usually  crowned  with  a  pschent  or  double
diadem,  emblem  of  the  sovereignty  of  the
two  regions.  Sometimes  a  vulture,  the
symbol  of  maternity,  of  heaven,  and
knowledge  of  the  future,  shows  its  head
on  the  forehead  of  the  goddess,  its  wings
forming  the  head-dress.  Horapollo  says
the  vulture  designates  maternal  love  be¬
cause  it  feeds  its  young  with  its  own  blood ;
and,  according  to  Pliny,  it  represents  heaven
because  no  one  can  reach  its  nest,  built  on
the  highest  rocks,  and,  therefore,  that  it  is
begotten  of  the  winds.  Maut  is  clothed  in
a  long,  close-fitting  robe,  and  holds  in  her
hand  the  sacred  Anch,  or  sign  of  life.

Maximilian,  Joseph  I.  King  of
Bavaria,  who,  becoming  incensed  against
the  Fraternity,  issued  edicts  against  Free¬
masons  in  1799  and  1804,  which  he  re¬
newed  in  1814.

Mecklenburg.  Masonry  was  intro¬
duced  here  in  1754,  but  not  firmly  rooted
until  1799.  There  are  two  Provincial  G.
Lodges,  with  13  Lodges  and  1250  Breth¬
ren.

Medals.  No  Masonic  medal  appears
to  have  been  found  earlier  than  that  of
1733,  commemorative  of  a  Lodge  being
established  at  Florence,  by  Lord  Charles
Sackville.  The  Lodge  appears  not  to  have
been  founded  by  regular  authority ;  but,
however  that  may  be,  the  event  was  com¬
memorated  by  a  medal,  a  copy  of  which
exists  in  the  collection  in  possession  of  the
Lodge  “Minerva  of  the  Three  Palms,”  at
Leipsic.  The  obverse  contains  a  bust  rep¬
resentation  of  Lord  Sackville,  with  the
inscription — “Carolvs  Sackville,  Magister,
FI.”  The  reverse  represents  Harpocrates  in
the  attitude  of  silence,  leaning  upon  a
broken  column,  and  holding  in  his  left
arm  the  cornucopia  filled  with  rich  fruits,
also  the  implements  of  Masonry,  with  a
thyrsus,  staff,  and  serpent  resting  upon  the
fore  and  back  ground.

The  minimum  of  charity  found  among


MEGAC03M


ADDENDUM.


MEZUZA


1003


Mark  Masters  is  the  Roman  penny  ( de¬
narius ),  weighing  60  grains  silver,  worth


THE  PENNY  OF  THE  MARK  MASTER.


fifteen  cents.  The  above  was  struck  at
Rome,  under  Tiberius,  A.  D.  18.  The  por¬
trait  is  “  Tiberius the  reverse,  the  “  God¬
dess  Clemency.”  The  inscription  reads:
“  Tiberius  Ctesar  Augustus,  the  son  of  the
Deified  Augustus,  the  High  Priest.”

Two  medals,  weighing  120  grains  each,
of  silver,  about  thirty  cents,  were  struck  off
at  Jerusalem,  under  Simon  Maccabee,  the
Jewish  ruler,  B.  c.  138,  139.  They  are  the
oldest  money  coined  by  the  Jews.  The  de¬
vices  are  the  brazen  laver  that  stood  before
the  Temple,  and  three  lilies  springing  from
one  stem.  The  inscriptions,  translated  from
the  Hebrew  of  the  oldest  style,  says,  “  Half¬
shekel;  Jerusalem  the  Holy.”

Bro.  Robt.  Morris  and  Bro.  Coleman,  in
their  Calendar ,  furnish  much  valuable  in¬
formation  on  this  subject.


THE  JEWISH  HALF  SHEKEL  OF  SILVER  (TWO  SPECI¬
MENS).

Megacosm.  An  intermediate  world
great,  but  not  equal  to  the  Macrocosm,  and
yet  greater  than  the  Microcosm,  or  little
world,  man.

Molten.  An  Egyptian  mythological
serpent,  the  winding  of  whose  body  repre¬
sented  the  tortuous  course  of  the  sun  in
the  nocturnal  regions.  The  serpentine
course  taken  when  travelling  through  dark¬
ness.  The  direction  metaphorically  repre¬
sented  by  the  initiate  in  his  first  symbolic
journey  as  Practicus  in  the  Society  of  the
Rosicrucians.

Meliour.  Space,  the  name  given  to
the  feminine  principle  of  the  deity  by  the
Egyptians.


Meister.  German  for  Master;  in
French,  Maitre;  in  Dutch,  Meester;  in
Swedish,  Mastar;  in  Italian,  Maestro;  in
Portuguese,  Mestre.  The  old  French  word
appears  to  have  been  Meistrier.  In  old
French  operative  laws,  Le  Mestre  was  fre¬
quently  used.

Memphis.  See  Mar  conk  Gabriel


Mafhieu.

Mer-Sker.  The  space  in  which  the
sun  moves,  as  an  Egyptian  personification,
signifying  the  habitation  of  Horus.

Merzdorf,  J.  Ii.  T.  A  learned  Ger¬
man  Mason,  born  in  1812.  Initiated  in
Apollo  Lodge,  at  Leipsic,  in  1834.  He
resuscitated  the  Lodge  “  Zum  goldenen
Hirsch,”  Oldenburg,  and  was  for  years
Deputy  Master.  He  published  Die  Sym-
bole,  etc.,  Leipsic,  1836,  and  later  several
other  works.

Mesliia,  Mesliiane.  Correspond¬
ing  to  Adam  and  Eve,  in  accordance  with
Persian  cosmogony.

Metusael.  The  name  given  to  the
Hebrew  quarryman,  who  is  represented  in
some  legends  as  one  of  the  assassins.  Fa-
nor  and  Amru  being  the  other  two.

Meztizil.  The  third  fundamental  prin¬
ciple  of  Judaism,  or  the  sign  upon  the  door¬
post.  The  precept  is  founded  upon  the
command,  “  And  thou  shalt  write  them
upon  the  posts  of  thy  house,  and  on  thy
gates”  (Deut.  vi.  4-9;  xi.  13-21).  The
door-posts  must  be  those  of  a  dwelling ;
synagogues  are  excluded.

The  Karaite  Jews  affix
Mezuzas  tosynagogues,and
not  to  private  houses.  The
Mezuza  is  constructed  as
follows:  the  two  above-
mentioned  portions  of
Scripture  are  written  on
ruled  vellum  prepared
according  to  Rabbinical
rules,  then  rolled  and  fitted
into  a  metallic  tube.  The
word  Shaddai  (Almighty)
is  written  on  the  outside  of
the  roll,  and  can  be  read,
when  in  the  tube,  through
a  slot.  The  Mezuza  is
then  nailed  at  each  end  on
the  right-hand  door-past,
while  the  following  prayer
is  being  said:  “Blessed
art  thou,  O  Lord  our  God !

King  of  the  Universe,  who
hath  sanctified  us  with  His
laws,  and  commanded  us
to  fix  the  Mezuza.”  Under
the  word  Shaddai  some
Jews  write  the  three  an¬
gelic  names  Coozu,  Bemuchsaz,  Coozu.  To
these  some  pray  for  success  iu  business.


1004


MILLIN'


ADDENDUM.


MOABON


The  Talmud  estimates  the  virtue  of  the
Talith,  the  Phylacteries,  and  the  Mezuza  in
the  following  terms.  “  Whosoever  has  the
phylacteries  bound  to  his  head  and  arm,
and  the  fringes  thrown  over  his  garments,
and  the  Mezuza  fixed  on  his  door-post,  is
safe  from  sin ;  for  these  are  excellent  me¬
morials,  and  the  angels  secure  him  from
sin ;  as  it  is  written,  ‘  The  angel  of  the
Lord  encamped  round  about  them  that
fear  Him,  and  delivereth  them’”  (Ps.
xxxiv.  7).

Milliii  <le  Grand  liaison,  A.L.

Born,  1759;  died,  1818.  Founder  of  the
Magasin  Encyclopccdique.  He  was  a  Ma¬
son  under  the  Bite  Ecossais,  and  also  be¬
longed  to  the  “Mere  Loge”  of  the  “Bite
Ecossais  Philosophique.”

Misclicliau,  Miscbapberetli,
Miscbtai,  myn  ptJ?D,  Tent  of  Testi¬
mony.  NJOI  ptyo,  Tent  of  Festival.  See
Twenty -fourth  Degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite.
VOiPO  is  used  in  the  Thirtieth  Degree.

Mistletoe.  ( Viscum  Album.)  In
Scandinavian  countries  called  Mistel.  A
parasitic  evergreen  plant  bearing  a  gluti¬
nous  fruit.  When  found  attached  to  the
oak,  where  it  is  rare,  it  was  an  object  of
superstitious  regard  among  the  Druids.  It
was  from  a  fragment  of  this  plant  that  the
dart  was  made  which  cost  the  life  of  Bal¬
der,  according  to  the  Scandinavian  Myste¬
ries.  See  Raider.


The  Mistletoe,  to  the  Scandinavian,  is
the  coincident  symbol  of  the  acacia  to  the
Mason,  the  ivy  to  those  of  the  Mysteries  of
Dionysius,  the  myrtle  to  those  of  Ceres,  the
erica  or  heath  to  those  of  the  Osirian,  the
lettuce  to  those  of  the  Adonisian,  and  the
lotus  or  water-lily  to  those  of  India  and
Egypt.  The  Mistletoe  that  caused  the  death
of  Balder  was  deemed  sacred  as  the  repre¬
sentative  of  the  number  three.  The  berries
and  leaves  of  the  plant  or  vine  grow  in
clusters  of  three  united  on  one  stalk.  It


was  profanation  to  touch  it.  It  was  gath¬
ered  with  ceremony,  and  then  consecrated,
when  it  was  reputed  to  possess  every  sana¬
tive  virtue,  and  denominated  “All  Heal.”

Mitclicll,  James  W.  S.  A  Masonic
writer  and  journalist,  was  born  in  the  State
of  Kentucky,  in  the  year  1800.  He  was
initiated  into  Masonry  in  Owen  Lodge,  at
PortWilliam,  now  Carrollton,  Kentucky,  in
the  year  1821.  He  subsequently  removed
to  the  State  of  Missouri,  where  he  took  a
prominent  position  in  the  Masonic  frater¬
nity,  and  held  the  offices  of  Grand  Master  of
the  Grand  Lodge,  Grand  High  Priest  of  the
Grand  Chapter,  and  Grand  Commander  of
the  Grand  Commandery  of  Knights  Tem¬
plars.  In  1848  he  established,  in  the  city
of  St.  Louis,  a  monthly  journal,  entitled  the
Masonic  Signet  and  Literary  Mirror,  which
he  removed  to  Montgomery,  Alabama,  in
1852,  where  it  lasted  for  a  short  time,  and
then  was  discontinued  for  want  of  patron¬
age.  In  1858  he  published  The  History  of
Freemasonry  and  Masonic  Digest,  in  two
volumes,  octavo.  Brother  Mitchell  was  a
warm-hearted  and  devoted  Mason,  but,  un¬
fortunately  for  his  reputation  as  an  author,
not  an  accomplished  scholar,  hence  his
style  is  deficient,  not  only  in  elegance,  but
even  in  grammatical  purity.  His  natural
capacity,  however,  was  good,  and  his  argu¬
ments  as  a  controversialist  were  always
trenchant,  if  the  language  was  not  polished.
As  a  Masonic  jurist  his  decisions  have  been
considered  generally,  but  by  no  means  uni¬
versally,  correct.  His  opinions  were  some¬
times  eccentric,  and  his  History  possesses
much  less  value  than  such  a  work  should
have,  in  consequence  of  its  numerous  inac¬
curacies,  and  the  adoption  by  its  author  of
all  the  extravagant  views  of  earlier  writers
on  the  origin  of  Masonry.  He  died  at
Griffin, Georgia,  November  12, 1873,  having
been  for  many  years  a  great  sufferer  from
illness.  (Dr.  Mackey.)

Moabite  Stone.  A  relic  of  black
basalt,  rounded  at  tbe  top,  two  by  four  feet,
across  it  being  an  inscription  of  thirty-four
lines  in  the  letters  of  the  Hebrew-Phoeni-
cian  alphabet,  discovered  in  the  ruins  of
ancient  Dibon,  by  Dr.  Klein,  a  German
missionary,  in  1869.  A  record  of  Mesha,
King  of  Moab,  who  (2  Kings  iii.  5),  after
Ahab’s  death,  “rebelled  against  the  King
of  Israel.”  Chemosh  was  the  national  god
of  the  Moabites.  The  covenant  name  of
the  God  of  Israel  occurs  in  the  inscription,
showing  that  the  name  was  not  then  un¬
pronounceable,  or  unknown  to  the  neigh¬
boring  nations.  The  described  wars  date
in  the  tenth  century  B.  c.

Moabon  (pxin).  He  whom  the  Junior
Warden  represents  in  the  14th  Degree  of
the  A.  A.  Scottish  Bite,  as  the  tried  and


MOHAMMED


ADDENDUM.


MORRIS


1005


trusty  friend  of  Hiram  the  Builder.  (.See
Gen.  xix.  36.)

Mohammed.  See  Koran.
Mohrints.  Initiates,  pilgrims,  those
entering  upon  an  important  undertaking.

Moira,  Francis  Rawdon,
Baron.  Born  1754,  died  1826.  A  dis¬
tinguished  statesman  and  Mason.  He  was
Acting  Grand  Master  of  England  from  1790
to  1812.  Also  Grand  Master  of  Scotland
in  1806.  As  a  Mason  he  was  always  ener¬
getic.  Dr.  Oliver  says,  “To  no  person  had
Masonry  for  many  years  been  more  in¬
debted  than  to  the  Earl  of  Moira,  now
Marquess  Hastings.”  He  died  while  gov¬
ernor  of  Malta.

Moloch.  (Heb.  Molech,  king.)  The
chief  god  of  the  Phoenicians,  and  a  god  of
the  Ammonites.  Human  sacrifices  were
offered  at  his  shrine,  and  it  was  chiefly  in
the  valley  of  Tophet,  to  the  east  of  Jerusa¬
lem,  that  this  brutal  idolatry  was  perpe¬
trated.  Solomon  built  a  temple  to  Moloch
upon  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  Manasseh,
long  after,  imitated  his  impiety  by  making
his  son  pass  through  the  fire  kindled  in
honor  of  this  deity.  Wierus  calls  Moloch
Prince  of  the  realm  of  tears.

First  Moloch,  horrid  king,  besmeared  with
blood

Of  human  sacrifice  and  parents’  tears;

Though  for  the  noise  of  drums  and  timbrels
loud,

Their  children’s  cries  unheard,  that  passed
through  fire

To  his  grim  idol.  .  .  Nor  content  with  such
Audacious  neighborhood,  the  wisest  heart
Of  Solomon  he  led,  by  fraud,  to  build'

His  temple  right  against  the  temple  of  God,

On  that  oppiobrious  hill ;  and  made  his  grove,
The  pleasant  valley  of  Hinnom,  Tophet  thence
And  black  Gehenna  called,  the  type  of  Hell.

— Par.  Lost,  B.  1.

Moore,  diaries  Whitlock.  A

distinguished  American  Masonic  journal¬
ist,  born  in  Boston,  Mass.,  March  29, 1801.
His  own  account  of  his  initiation  into
Masonry  is  in  the  following  words:  “In
February,  1822,  I  was  proposed  for  the
degrees  of  Masonry  in  Massachusetts
Lodge,  then,  as  now,  one  of  the  three
oldest  in  Boston,  and  but  for  the  inter¬
vention  of  business  engagements,  I  should
have  been  received  into  Masonry  on  the
evening  of  my  coming  of  age.  Before  that
evening  arrived,  however,  I  was  called
temporarily  to  the  State  of  Maine,  where,
in  May  following,  I  was  admitted  into
Kennebec  Lodge,  at  Hallowell,  with  the
consent  and  approbation  of  the  Lodge  in
which  I  had  been  originally  proposed.  I
received  the  third  degree  on  the  evening
of  the  12th  of  June.”

On  October  10, 1822,  he  affiliated  with  the
Lodge  St.  Andrew.  In  October,  1872,  that


Lodge  celebrated  his  semi-centennial  mem¬
bership  by  a  festival.

In  1825  he  took  the  Capitular  Degrees
in  St.  Andrew’s  Chapter,  and  was  elected
High  Priest  in  1840,  and  subsequently
Grand  High  Priest  of  the  Grand  Chapter.
He  was  made  a  Knight  Templar  in  Boston
Encampment  about  the  year  1830,  and  was
Eminent  Commander  in  1837.  In  1841  he
was  elected  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand
Encampment  of  Massachusetts  and  Rhode
Island,  which  office  he  held  for  three  years.
In  1832  he  received  the  Royal  and  Select
Degrees  in  Boston  Council,  over  which  he
presided  for  twelve  years.  He  was  elected
General  Grand  Captain-General  of  the
Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States
in  1847,  and  General  Grand  Generalissimo
in  1850.  In  1844  he  was  received  into,  the
Ancient  Accepted  Scottish  Rite,  and  in  the
same  year  was  elected  Secretary- General
of  the  Holy  Empire  in  the  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  for  the  Northern  Jurisdiction  of  the
United  States,  an  office  which  he  held  until
his  resignation  in  1862.

“  When  he  was  elected  R.  G.  Secretary
of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1834,”  says  Brother
John  T.  Heard,  in  his  Historical  Account
of  Columbian  Lodge  (page  472),  “it  was
the  moment  when  the  anti-Masonic  ex¬
citement  was  raging  with  its  greatest  vio¬
lence  in  this  State,  and  his  first  official  act
was  to  attest  the  memorial  written  by  him,
surrendering  to  the  Legislature  the  act  of
incorporation  of  the  Grand  Lodge.”

The  Grand  Lodge  surrendered  its  charter
and  its  corporate  powers  that  it  might
escape  the  persecution  of  an  anti-Masonic
Legislature.  The  memorial,  however,
boldly  stated  that  “by  divesting  itself  of
its  corporate  powers,  the  Grand  Lodge  has
relinquished  none  of  its  Masonic  attributes
or  prerogatives.”  In  Masonic  authorship,
Bro.  Moore  is  principally  distinguished  as
a  journalist.  In  1825  he  established  the
Masonic  Mirror,  which  was  merged  in  1834
in  the  Bunker  Hill  Aurora,  a  paper  with
whose  Masonic  department  he  was  asso¬
ciated.  In  1841  he  commenced  the  publi¬
cation  of  the  Freemason' s  Monthly  Maga¬
zine,  which  he  published  for  33  years,  in
fact  until  his  death.  In  1828  and  1829  he
published  the  Amaranth,  or  Masonic  Gar¬
land  ;  in  1843  the  Masonic  Trestle-Board.
Brother  Moore  died  at  Boston,  Mass.,  of
pneumonia,  on  December  12,  1873.

Morana.  The  Bohemian  goddess  of
winter  and  death,  Maryana  of  Scandinavia.

Moriiiou  Faitli.  See  Book  of  Mor¬
mon.

Morris,  Hubert,  Born

August  31,  1818.  Was  first  brought  to
Masonic  light  March  5,  1846,  in  Oxford
Lodge,  at  a  place  of  the  same  name  iu


1006


MOUNT


ADDENDUM.


MYSTIC


Mississippi.  The  life  of  Bro.  Morris  has
been  so  active  and  untiring  for  the  benefit
of  the  institution  of  Masonry,  that  he  has
iiad  the  opportunity  of  filling  very  many
positions  in  all  the  departments  of  Masonry,
and  was  Grand  Master  of  Masons  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Kentucky  in  1858-59.
His  writings  cover  Masonic  jurisprudence,
rituals  and  hand-books,  Masonic  belles-
lettres,  history  and  biography,  travels,  and
contributions  to  The  Review,  Keystone,  Ad¬
vocate,  N.  Y  Dispatch,  and  other  papers  and
periodicals.  His  Masonic  songs  and  poetic
effusions  stand  out  in  prominent  volumes
on  the  shelf.  He  is  the  author  of  We
Meet  upon  the  Level,  which  is  sufficient  to
render  his  name  immortal.  A  complete
biography  of  Bro.  Robert  Morris  would  fill
volumes.

Mount  Caf.  In  the  Mohammedan
mythology,  a  fabulous  mountain  which
encircles  the  earth.  The  home  of  the
giants  and  fairies,  and  rests  upon  the
sacred  stone  Sakhral,  of  which  a  single
grain  gives  miraculous  powers.  It  is  of
an  emerald  color,  and  its  reflected  light  is
the  cause  of  the  tints  of  the  sky.

Mozart,  J.  C.  W.  G.  Born  in  1756  at
Salzburg,  and  died  Decembers,  1791,  at  Vi¬
enna.  One  of  the  greatest  and  most  delight¬
ful  of  musical  composers.  He  first  saw  the
Masonic  light  about  1780,  and  was  a  mem¬
ber  of  the  Lodge  “Zur  gekronten  Hoff-
nung.”  There  were  many  musical  com¬
positions  and  dedications  to  Masonry  by
this  eminent  composer.

Murat,  Joachim.  Born  in  1771,
executed  in  1815.  The  great  cavalry  gen¬
eral  of  Napoleon,  and  titular  king  of
Naples.  In  1803  he  was  appointed  Si.  G.
Warden  iu  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.
When  the  5th  Supreme  Council  of  the
World  was  established  at  Naples,  on  the
11th  June,  1809,  by  the  Supreme  Council
at  Milan,  a  concordat  became  necessary,
and  was  executed  3d  May,  1811,  between
the  Grand  Orient  which  was  created  June
24,  1809,  and  the  Supreme  Council  of  Na¬
ples,  whereby  the  latter  should  have  sole
control  over  the  degrees  beyond  the  18th,
in  like  manner  as  signified  in  the  concor¬
dat  of  France.  King  Joachim  Murat  ac¬
cepted  thesupremecommandof  both  bodies.
The  change  in  his  political  surroundings
allowed  him  no  permanent  rest.

Mural,  Joacliim,  Prince.  Son
of  the  King  of  Naples.  Was  appointed
Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Orient  of
France,  and  initiated  February  26,  1825.
He  resigned  the  office  in  1861.

Musical  Instruments,  Ancient.
As  in  the  Fellow  Crafts’  degree,  music  is
dilated  upon  as  one  of  the  liberal  arts,  the


sweet  and  harmonious  sounds  being  the
representative  of  that  harmony  which
should  ever  exist  among  the  brethren,  we
are  apt  to  inquire  what  were  the  instru¬
ments  used  by  the  ancients  in  their  mysti¬
cal  service.  The  oldest  ever  discovered,  we
believe,  is  a  small  clay  pipe  not  over  three
inches  in  length,  found  by  Captain  Willock
among  the  presumed  ruins  of  Babylon  ;  if
so,  it  must  be  2600  years  old.  By  the  use
of  the  two  finger  holes,  the  intervals  of  the
common  chord,  C,  E,  and  G,  are  produced,
or  the  harmonic  triad.  From  the  ruins  of
Nineveh  we  have  countless  representations
of  the  harp,  with  strings  varying  from  ten
to  twenty-six  ;  the  lyre,  identical  in  struct¬
ure  with  that  of  the  Greeks ;  a  harp¬
shaped  instrument  held  horizontally,  and
the  six  to  ten  strings  struck  with  a  plec¬
trum,  which  has  been  termed  the  Asor,
from  its  resemblance  to  the  Hebrew  instru¬
ment  of  that  name.  There  is  also  the
guitar-shaped  instrument,  and  a  double
pipe  with  a  single  mouthpiece  and  finger-
holes  on  each  pipe.  The  Assyrians  used
musical  bells,  trumpets,  flutes,  drums,  cym¬
bals,  and  tambourines.  The  Abyssinians
call  their  lyre  the  Kissar  (Greek,  kithara).
There  is  also  the  flute,  called  Monaulos,
which  is  of  great  antiquity,  and  named  by
the  Egyptians  Photins,  or  curved  flute,
l  The  crooked  horn  or  trumpet,  called  Buc-
I  cina,  and  the  Cithara,  held  sacred  in  conse¬
quence  of  its  shape  being  that  of  the  Greek
:  delta.

Muta.  The  Roman  goddess  of  silence.

Muttra,  or  Mathura.  The  birth-

|  place  of  the  Hindu  Redeemer,  Krishna.

The  capital  of  a  district  in  the  North-west
i  Provinces  of  British  India.

Myrrh.  A  resinous  gum  of  a  tree
growing  in  Arabia,  valued  from  the  most
:  ancient  times  (Gen.  xxxvii.  25).  It  was
among  the  presents  Jacob  sent  to  Egypt,
and  those  brought  to  the  infant  Jesus  by
the  wise  men  of  the  East.

Mysteries,  Mexican.  Instituted
!  among  the  Mexicans  (Aztecs),  and  was  of
a  sacred  nature.  The  adherents  adopted
!  the  worship  of  some  special  deity,  Quetzal-
coatl  (the  Mexican  Saviour),  under  secret
rites,  and  rendered  themselves  seclusive.  A
similar  order  was  that  called  Tlamacazajotl,
also  the  order  known  as  Telpochtliztli.  It
I  is  understood  that  under  the  sway  of  the
Aztecs,  the  Mexican  Mysteries  had  some
Masonic  affinities.  See  Aztec  Wri  ings.

Mystic  Crown,  Knights  and
Companions  of  the.  A  Society  form¬
ed  by  the  adherents  of  Mesmer,  in  August,
17S7,of  a  beneficent,  non-political,  and  non¬
sectarian  nature,  to  which  Master  Masons
only  were  admitted.


N


ADDENDUM.


NORTH


1007


N.


N.  (Heb.  J.)  The  fourteenth  letter  in
the  English  and  Hebrew  alphabets ;  its
numerical  value  is  50,  and  its  definition,
fish.  As  a  final,  Nun  is  written  J,  and
then  is  of  the  value  of  700.  The  Hebrew
divine  appellation  is  JOIJ,  or  Formida-
bilis.

Naharda,  Brotherhood  of.  Af¬
ter  the  destruction  of  the  Solomonial  Tem¬
ple,  the  captives  formed  an  association
while  slaves  at  Naharda,  on  the  Euphrates,
and  are  there  said  to  have  preserved  the
secret  mysteries.

\  a  os.  The  ark  of  the  Egyptian  gods.

A  chest  or  structure  with  more  height  than
depth,  and  thereby  unlike  the  Israelitish
Ark  of  the  Covenant.  The  winged  fig¬
ures  embraced  the  lower  part  of  the  Naos,
while  the  cherubim  of  the  Ark  of  Yahveh
were  placed  above  its  lid.  Yahveh  took
up  his  abode  above  the  propitiatory  or
covering  between  the  wings  of  the  cheru¬
bim,  exteriorly,  while  the  gods  of  Egypt
were  reputed  as  hidden  in  the  interior  of
the  Naos  of  the  sacred  barks,  behind  her¬
metically  closed  doors.  See  Cherubim.

Napoleon  I.  It  has  been  claimed,
and  with  much  just  reason,  as  shown  in  his
course  of  life,  that  Napoleon  the  Great
was  a  member  of  the  Brotherhood,  and  it
is  said  was  initiated  at  Malta,  between
June  12  aud  July  19,  1798.  The  Abeille
Magonnique  of  1829,  and  Clavel,  in  1830,
allege  that  he  visited  a  lodge  incognito  in
Paris.  His  life  indicated  favor  to  the  fra¬
ternity,  and  in  1804  he  appointed  Joseph
Buonaparte  G.  Master  of  the  Grand  Orient.
Lucien  and  Louis  Buonaparte  were  of  the
fraternity,  as  also  Jerome.  Louis  Napoleon
III.  was  a  member  of  the  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite  of  France.

Narhonne,  Kite  of.  See  Philadel¬
phians ,  Mackey.

Neitli.  The  Egyptian  synonym  of  the
Greek  Athene  or  Minerva.

Nemesis.  According  to  Hesiod,  the
daughter  of  Night,  originally  the  personi¬
fication  of  the  moral  feeling  of  right  and
a  just  fear  of  criminal  actions;  in  other
words,  Conscience.  A  temple  was  erected
to  Nemesis  at  Attica.  She  was  at  times
called  Adrasteaand  Rhamnusia,  and  repre¬
sented  in  the  earliest  days  a  young  vir¬
gin  like  unto  Venus;  at  a  later  period,
as  older  and  holding  a  helm  and  wheel.
At  Rhamnus  there  was  a  statue  of  Neme¬
sis  of  Parian  marble  executed  by  Phidias.  ,
The  festival  in  Greece  held  in  her  honor  I
was  called  Nemesia.

Neocorns.  A  name  of  the  guardian
of  the  Temple.


Nepkalia.  Festivals,  without  wine,
celebrated  in  honor  of  the  lesser  deities.

Nergitl.  (Heb.  7J"U.)  The  synonym
of  misfortune  and  ill-luck.  The  Hebrew
name  for  Mars;  and  in  astrology  the  lesser
Malefic.  The  word  in  Sanskrit  is  Nrigal.

New  Templars.  An  Order  of  five
degrees  instituted  in  France  in  the  early
part  of  this  century.  The  degrees  were
termed — Initiati ;  Intimi  Initiati ;  Adepti ;
Orientales  Adepti;  and  Maguae  aquilae
nigrae  sancti  Johannes  Apostoli  Adepti.

Nick.  (Dan  ish,  Nikken.)  The  spirit
of  the  waters,  an  enemy  of  man,  the  devil,
or  in  the  vulgate,  “  Old  Nick.”

Nieotiates,  Order  of.  A  secret  or¬
der  mentioned  by  Clavel,  teaching  the
doctrines  of  Pythagoras.

Nihongi.  (“Chronicles  of  Nihon.”)
The  companion  of  the  Kojiki;  the  two
works  together  forming  the  doctrinal  and
historic  basis  of  Sintonism.  The  Japanese
adherents  of  Sinsyn  are  termed  Sintus,  or
Sintoos,  who  worship  the  gods,  the  chief  of
which  is  Ten-sio-dai-yin.  The  Nihongi
was  composed  about  720  A.  d.,  with  the
evident  design  of  giving  a  Chinese  coloring
to  the  subject-matter  of  the  Kojiki,  upon
which  it  is  founded.

Nonis.  A  significant  word  in  the
32d  Degree  of  the  Scottish  Rite  The
original  old  French  rituals  endeavor  to
explain  it,  and  say  that  it  and  two  other
words  in  conjunction  are  formed  out  of  the
initials  of  the  words  of  a  particular  apho¬
rism  which  has  reference  to  the  secret  arcana
and  “  sacred  treasure  ”  of  Masonry.  Out
of  several  interpretations,  no  one  can  be
positively  asserted  as  the  original,  although
the  intent  is  apparent  to  him  to  whom  the
same  may  lawfully  belong.

Normal.  A  perpendicular  to  a  curve ;
and  included  between  the  curve  and  the
axis  of  the  abscissas.  Sometimes  a  square,
used  by  operative  Masons,  for  proving  an-
gles.

Nornae.  In  the  Scandinavian  Mvs-
I  teries,  these  were  three  maidens,  known  as
I  Urd,  Verdandi,  and  Skuld,  signifying  Past,
Present,  and  Future.  Their  position  is
seated  near  the  Urdar-wells  under  the
world-tree  Yggdrasil,  and  there  determine
the  fate  of  both  gods  and  men.  They  daily
j  draw  water  from  the  spring,  and  with  it  and
|  the  surrounding  clay  sprinkle  the  ash-tree
Yggdrasil,  that  the  branches  may  not
wither  and  decay.

Nortli.  This  point  of  the  compass,  or
place  of  Masonic  darkness,  must  not  be  con¬
strued  as  implying  that  in  theTempleofSol-
omon  no  light  or  ventilation  was  had  from


1008


NORTH


ADDENDUM.


NYCTAZONTES


this  direction.  The  Talmud,  and  as  well
Josephus,  allude  to  an  extensive  opening
toward  the  North,  framed  with  costly  mag¬
nificence,  and  known  as  the  great  “Golden
Window.”  There  were  as  many  openings
in  the  outer  wall  on  the  north  as  on  the
south  side.  There  were  three  entrances
through  the  “Chel”  on  the  north  and  six
on  the  south.  See  Temple.

While  once  within  the  walls  and  Chel
of  the  temple  all  advances  were  made  from
east  to  west,  yet  the  north  side  was  mainly
used  for  stabling,  slaughtering,  cleansing,
etc.,  and  contained  the  chambers  of  broken
knives,  defiled  stones,  of  the  house  of  burn¬
ing,  and  of  sheep.  The  Masonic  symbol¬
ism  of  the  entrance  of  an  initiate  from  the
north,  or  more  practically  from  the  north¬
west,  and  advancing  toward  the  position
occupied  by  the  corner-stone  in  the  north¬
east,  forcibly  calls  to  mind  the  triplet  of
Homer :

“  Two  marble  doors  unfold  on  either  side;

Sacred  the  South  by  which  the  gods  descend  ;

But  mortals  enter  on  the  Northern  end.”

So  in  the  Mysteries  of  Dionysos,  the  gate
of  entrance  for  the  aspirant  was  from  the
north  ;  but  when  purged  from  his  corrup¬
tions,  lie  was  termed  indifferently  new-born
or  immortal,  and  the  sacred  south  door  was
thence  accessible  to  his  steps.

In  the  Middle  Ages,  below  and  to  the
right  of  the  judges  stood  the  accuser,  facing
north;  to  the  left  was  the  defendant,  in  the
north  facing  south.  Brother  George  F.
Fort,  in  his  Antiquities  of  Freemasonry ,  says :

“  In  the  centre  of  the  court,  directly  before
the  judge,  stood  an  altar  piece,  upon  which
an  open  Bible  was  displayed.  The  south,
to  the  right  of  the  justiciaries,  was  deemed
honorable  and  worthy  for  a  plaintiff;  but
the  north  was  typical  of  a  frightful  and  dia¬
bolical  sombreness.  Thus,  when  a  solemn
oath  of  purgation  was  taken  in  grievous
criminal  accusations,  the  accused  turned
toward  the  north.  The  judicial  headsman,
in  executing  the  extreme  penalty  of  out¬
raged  justice,  turned  the  convict’s  face
northward.  When  Earl  Hakon  bowed  a
tremulous  knee  before  the  deadly  powers
of  Paganism,  and  sacrificed  his  seven-year
old  child,  he  gazed  out  upon  the  far-off,
gloomy  north.

“In  Nastrond,  or  shores  of  death,  stood
a  revolting  hall,  whose  portals  opened  to¬
ward  the  north — the  regions  of  night.
North,  by  the  Jutes,  was  denominated
black  or  sombre ;  the  Frisians  called  it  fear
corner.  The  gallows  faced  the  north,  and
from  these  hyperborean  shores  everything  |
base  and  terrible  proceeded.  In  conse-  j


quence  of  this  belief,  it  was  ordered  that,
in  the  adjudication  of  a  crime,  the  accused
should  be  on  the  north  side  of  the  court
enclosure.  And  in  harmony  with  the  Scan¬
dinavian  superstition,  no  Lodge  of  Masons
illumines  the  darkened  north  with  a  sym¬
bolic  light,  whose  brightness  would  be  un¬
able  to  dissipate  the  gloom  of  that  cardinal
point  with  which  was  associated  all  that
was  sinistrous  and  direful.”

North  Star.  This  star  is  frequently
used  as  a  Masonic  symbol,  as  are  the  morn¬
ing  star,  the  day  star,  the  seven  stars.
Thus,  the  morning  star  is  the  forerunner
of  the  Great  Light  that  is  about  to  break
upon  the  Lodge;  or,  as  in  the  grade  of
G.  Master  Architect,  twelfth  of  the  Scot¬
tish  system,  the  initiate  is  received  at  the
hour  “when  the  day  star  has  risen  in  the
east,  and  the  north  star  looked  down  upon
the  seven  stars  that  circle  round  him.”
The  symbolism  is  truth;  thus,  the  North
star  is  the  pole  star,  the  Polaris  of  the
mariner,  the  Cynosura,  that  guides  Masons
over  the  stormy  seas  of  time.  The  seven
stars  are  the  symbol  of  right  and  justice
to  the  order  and  the  country.

Novitiale.  The  time  of  probation,
as  well  as  of  preparatory  training,  which,
in  all  religious  orders,  precedes  the  solemn
profession  at  least  one  year.  By  dispensa¬
tion  only  can  the  period  of  time  be  reduced.
Novices  are  immediately  subject  to  a  supe¬
rior  called  Master  of  Novices,  and  their
time  must  be  devoted  to  prayer  and  to
liturgical  training.

Nuk-pe-nuk.  The  Egyptian  equiv¬
alent  for  the  expression  “  I  am  that  I  am.”

Nun.  (Heb.  a  fish,  in  Syriac  an
infchom.)  The  Ciialdaic  and  hieroglyphic
form  of  this  Hebrew  letter  was  like  Fig.
1,  and  the  Egyptian  like  Fig.  2,  signify-

Fig.  1.  Fig.  2.

ing  fishes  in  any  of  these  forms.  Joshua
was  the  son  of  Nun,  or  a  fish,  the  deliv¬
erer  of  Israel.  As  narrated  of  the  Noah
in  the  Hindu  account  of  the  deluge,
whereby  the  forewarning  of  a  fish  caused
the  construction  of  an  ark  and  the  salva¬
tion  of  one  family  of  the  human  race  from
the  flood  of  waters.  See  Beginnings  of
History,  by  Lenormant.

Nyaya.  The  name  of  the  second  of
the  three  great  systems  of  ancient  Hindu
philosophy.

Nyctazontes.  An  ancient  sect  who
praised  God  by  day,  but  rested  in  quiet
and  presumed  security  during  the  night.


o


ADDENDUM.


ORIFLAMME


1009


0.


O.  The  fifteenth  letter  in  the  English
and  in  most  of  the  Western  alphabets.  The
corresponding  letter  in  the  Hebrew  and
Phoenician  alphabets  was  called  Ayn,
that  is,  eye;  the  primitive  form  of  the
Phoenician  letter  being  the  rough  picture
of  an  eye,  or  a  circle  with  a  dot  in  the
centre.  This  dot  will  be  observed  in
ancient  MSS.,  but  being  dropped
the  circle  forms  the  letter  O.  The
numerical  value  is  70,  and  in  He¬
brew  is  formed  thus,  the  hiero¬
glyphic  being  a  plant,  as  well  as
at  times  a  circle  or  an  eye.

Oak  Apple,  Society  of  the.  In¬
stituted  about  1658,  and  lapsed  under  the
disturbances  in  England  during  the  reign
of  James  II.,  but  it  lingered  among  the
Stuart  adherents  for  many  years.

Cannes.  The  earliest  instructor  of
man  in  letters,  sciences,
and  arts,  specially  in
architecture,  geometry,
botany,  and  agricul¬
ture,  and  in  all  other
useful  knowledge,  was
the  fish  god  Cannes
(myth).  This  univer¬
sal  teacher,  according
to  Berossus,  appeared
in  the  Persian  Gulf,
bordering  on  Baby¬
lonia,  and,  although  an
animal,  was  endowed
with  reason  and  great
knowledge.  The  usual  appearance  of  the
creature  was  that  of  a  fish,  having  a  hu¬
man  head  beneath  that  of  a  fish,  and  feet
like  unto  a  man.  This  personage  conversed
with  men  during  the  day,  but  never  ate
with  them.  At  Kouvunjik  there  was  a
colossal  statue  of  the  fish-god  Oannes.  The
following  is  from  the  Book  of  Enoch  (Vol.
II.,  p.  154) :  “  The  Masons  hold  their  grand
festival  on  the  day  of  St.  John,  not  know¬
ing  that  therein  they  merely  signify  the
fish-god  Oannes,  the  first  Hermes  and  the
first  founder  of  the  Mysteries,  the  first
messenger  to  whom  the  Apocalypse  was
given,  and  whom  they  ignorantly  confound
with  the  fabulous  author  of  the  common
Apocalypse.  The  sun  is  then  (midsummer-
day)  in  its  greatest  altitude.  In  this  the
Naros  is  commemorated.”  See  Alexander
Polyhislor.

©bed.  (Heb.  "Oiy,  serving.)  One
of  nine  favored  officials,  selected  by  Solo¬
mon  after  the  death  of  H.  Abif.

©both.  Ventriloquism.  It  will  be
6  B  64


found  so  denominated  in  the  Septuagint
version,  Isaiah  xxix.  3,  also  xix.  3.

©brack,  H ibernns.  Grand  Master
of  the  Order  of  the  Temple  in  1392,  ac¬
cording  to  the  chronology  of  the  Strict
Observance  of  Germany.

Orient.  (Heb.  D*1X-)  The  carne-
lian  or  agate  in  the  high-priest’s  breast¬
plate.  It  was  of  a  red  color,  and  claimed
to  possess  medical  qualities.

Odin.  The  chief  Scandinavian  deity
and  father  of  Balder  (which  see).  The
counterpart  of  Hermes  and  Mercury  in
the  Egyptian  and  Roman  mythologies.
Odin  and  his  brothers  Vili  and  Ve,  the
sons  of  Boer,  or  the  first-born,  slew  Ymir
or  Chaos,  and  from  his  body  created  the
world.  As  ruler  of  heaven,  he  sends
daily  his  two  black  ravens,  Thought  and
Memory,  to  gather  tidings  of  all  that  is
being  done  throughout  the  world.

Ogniins.  The  Druidical  name  for
Hercules,  who  is  represented  with  num¬
berless  fine  chains  proceeding  from  the
mouth  to  the  ears  of  other  people,  hence
possessing  the  powers  of  eloquence  and
persuasion.

Ouccli.  (Heb.  pV.)  The  bird  Phoenix,
named  after  Enoch  or  Phenoch.  Enoch
signifies  initiation.  The  Phoenix,  in  Egyp¬
tian  mythological  sculptures,  as  a  bird,  is
placed  in  the  mystical  palm-tree.  The
Phoenix  is  the  representative  of  eternal
and  continual  regeneration,  and  is  the
Holy  Spirit  which  brooded  as  a  dove  over
the  face  of  the  waters,  the  dove  of  Noah
and  of  Hasisatra  or  Xysuthrus  (which
see),  which  bore  a  sprig  in  its  mouth.

Ophites.  The  Brotherhood  of  the
Serpent,  which  flourished  in  the  second
century,  and  held  that  there  were  two
principles  of  seons  and  the  accompanying
theogony.  This  Egyptian  fraternity  dis¬
played  a  living  serpent  in  their  ceremonies,
which  was  reverenced  as  a  symbol  of  wis¬
dom  and  a  type  of  good.

©rrier  Hook.  The  book  to  which
all  appeals  were  made,  in  the  Order  of
Strict  Observance,  as  to  matters  of  history,
usage,  or  ritual.  It  was  invariably  bound
in  red.

©riflaiiinic.  The  ancient  banner
which  originally  belonged  to  the  Abbey  of
St.  Denis,  and  was  borne  by  the  Counts  of
Vezin,  patrons  of  that  church,  but  which,
after  the  country  of  Vezin  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  French  crown,  became  the
principal  banner  of  the  kingdom.  It  was
charged  with  a  saltire  wavy  Or,  with  rays


1010


OURIEL


ADDENDUM.


PARIKCHAI


issuing  from  the  centre  crossways ;  Seccee
into  five  points,  each  bearing  a  tassel  of
green  silk.

Ouriel.  See  Uriel,  Mackey.


Oziall.  (Heb.  n'tJ7  I  Latin,  Fortitudo
domini.)  A  prince  of  J  udah,  and  the  name
of  the  Senior  Warden  in  the  Fifth  Degree  of
the  French  Rite  of  Adoption.


P.


P.  The  sixteenth  letter  of  the  English
and  Greek  alphabets,  and  the  seventeenth
,  of  the  Hebrew,  in  which  last  men-
A-sj  tioned  language  its  numerical  value
is  80,  is  formed  thus  signifying  a

^  mouth  in  the  Phoenician.  Thesacred
name  of  God  associated  with  this  let¬
ter  is  nna  Phodeh  or  Redeemer.

Paelmcamac.  The  Peruvian  name
for  the  Creator  of  the  universe.

Palestine,  Order  of.  Mentioned
by  Baron  de  Tschoudy,  and  it  is  said  was
the  fountain  whence  the  Chevalier  Ramsay
obtained  his  information  for  the  regulation
of  his  system.

Palia.  An  altar  cloth,  also  a  canopy
borne  over  the  head  of  royalty  in  Oriental
lands.

Palmer,  Henry  h.  Born  in  New
York,  October  18,  1819.  A  present  resi¬
dent  of  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin,  and  presi¬
dent  of  the  Northwestern  Mutual  Life
Insurance  Co.  He  is  the  author  of  the
celebrated  report,  in  October,  1849,  which
resulted  in  the  union  of  the  two  Grand
Lodges  in  New  York,  the  “  Herring-Phil-
lips  ”  and  the  “  New  York  ”  Grand  Lodge.
Brother  Palmer  has  occupied  almost  every
known  position  in  Craft  Masonry,  and  has
been  the  commanding  officer  of  every  one
of  its  departments.  He  is  P.  G.  Master  of
the  G.  Encampment  of  K.  T.  of  the  U.  S.,
and  the  present  G.  Commander  of  the  Su¬
preme  Council  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite,
Northern  Jurisdiction  of  the  U.  S.  of
America.

Pantheism.  A  speculative  system,
which,  spiritually  considered,  identifies  the
universe  with  God,  and,  in  the  material  form,
God  with  the  universe.  Material  Panthe¬
ism  is  subject  to  the  criticism,  if  not  to  the
accusation,  of  being  atheistic.  Pantheism
is  as  aged  as  religion,  and  was  the  system
of  worship  in  India,  as  it  was  in  Greece.
Giordano  Bruno  was  burned  for  his  panthe¬
istic  opinions  at  Rome  in  1600.

Pantheistic  Brotherhood.  De¬
scribed  by  John  Toland,  in  his  Pantheisti-
eon,  as  having  a  strong  resemblance  to
Freemasonry.  The  Socratic  Lodge  in  Ger¬
many,  based  on  the  Brotherhood,  was  of
short  duration.


Papyrus.  “The  papyrus  leaf,”  says
J.  W.  Simons,  in  his  Egyptian
Symbols,  “  is  that  plant  which
formed  tablets  and  books,  and
forms  the  first  letter  of  the  name
of  the  only  eternal  and  all-power¬
ful  god  of  Egypt,  Amon,  who  in
the  beginning  of  things  created
the  world,”  whose  name  signified
occult  or  hidden.  The  word  nSp,
ole,  which  signifies  a  leaf,  and  to  inscribe
on  tablets  forms  olm,  the  antique  origin
of  things,  obscure  time,  hidden  eternity.

The  Turin  Funeral  Papyrus  is  a  book
published  by  Dr.  Lepsius  in  original  char¬
acter,  but  translated  by  Dr.  Birch.  This
Book  of  the  Dead  is  invaluable  as  con¬
taining  the  true  philosophic  belief  of  the
Egyptians  respecting  the  resurrection  and
immortality.  The  manuscript  has  been
gathered  from  portions  which  it  was  obli¬
gatory  to  bury  with  the  dead.  The  excava¬
tions  of  mummies  in  Egypt  have  been  fruit¬
ful  in  furnishing  the  entire  work.

Parikcliai,  Agroucliada.  An
occult  scientific  work  of  the  Brahmans.
According  to  a  work  by  Louis  Jacolliot,
1884,  the  Fakirs  produced  phenomena  at
will  with  superior  intervention  or  else
with  shrewd  charlatanism  :  processes  that
were  known  to  the  Egyptians  and  Jew¬
ish  Kabbalists.  The  doctrines  are  those
known  to  the  Alexandrian  school,  to  the
Gauls,  and  as  well  to  the  Christians.  In
the  division  of  the  Kabbala,  the  first
treated  of  the  History  of  the  Genesis  or
Creation,  and  taught  the  science  of  nature;
the  second,  or  Mercaba,  of  the  History  of
the  Chariot,  and  contained  a  treatise  on
theology.

There  were  three  degrees  of  initiation
among  the  Brahmans  :

1st.  According  to  selection,  the  candidate
became  a  Grihasta,  a  Pourohita  or  Fakir,
or  in  twenty  years  a  Guru.

2d.  A  Sannvassis  or  Cenobite  and  Vana-
prasthas,  and  lived  in  the  Temple.

3d.  A  Sannyassis-Nirvany  or  Naked
Cenobite.

Those  of  the  third  degree  were  visible
only  once  in  five  years,  appearing  in  a  col¬
umn  of  light  created  by  themselves,  at


PARIS


ADDENDUM.


PARVIN


1011


midnight,  and  on  a  stand  in  the  centre  of
a  great  tank.  Strange  sounds  and  terrific
shrieks  were  heard  as  they  were  gazed  upon
as  demi-gods,  surrounded  by  thousands  of
Hindus.

The  government  was  by  a  Supreme  Coun¬
cil  of  seventy  Brahmans,  over  seventy  years
of  age,  selected  from  the  Nirvany,  and
chosen  to  see  enforced  the  Law  of  the  Lotus.
The  Supreme  Chief,  or  Brahmatna,  was  re¬
quired  to  be  over  eighty  years  of  age,  and
was  looked  upon  as  immortal  by  the  popu¬
lace.  This  Pontiff  resided  in  an  immense
palace  surrounded  by  twenty-one  walls.

The  primitive  holy  word  composed  of
the  three  letters  A.  U.  M.,  comprises  the
Vedic  trinity,  signifying  Creation,  Pres¬
ervation,  and  Transformation,  and  symbol¬
ize  all  the  initiatory  secrets  of  the  occult
sciences.  By  some  it  has  been  taught  that
the  “  Honover,”  or  primordial  germ,  as  de¬
fined  in  the  Avesta,  existed  before  all  else.
Also  see  Manou,  Book  xi.,  Sloca  265.  The
following  unexplained  magical  words  were
always  inscribed  in  two  triangles:  L’om.
L'rhom-sh'hrum.  Sho'rim.  Ramaya-Na-
harna.

He  who  possessed  the  word  greater  than
the  A.  U.  M.  was  deemed  next  to  Brahma.
The  word  was  transmitted  in  a  sealed  box.

The  Hindu  triad,  of  which  in  later  times
OM  is  the  mystic  name,  represents  the
union  of  the  three  gods,  viz.,  a  (Vishnu),
u  (Siva),  m  (Brahma).  It  may  also  be
typical  of  the  three  Vedas.  Cm  appears
first  in  the  Upanishads  as  a  mystical  mono¬
syllable,  and  is  thus  set  forth  as  the  object
of  profound  meditation.  It  is  usually
called  pranava,  more  rai  ely  akshararn.  The
Buddhists  use  Om  at  the  beginning  of
their  Vidya  Shad-akshari  or  mystical  for¬
mulary  in  six  syllables  (viz.,  Om  mani  pad
me  hum).  See  Pitris  and  Iudische  Myste-
rien,  in  Addendum  ;  and  Aum,  in  Mackey.

Paris  Constitutions.  A  copy  of
these  Constitutions,  said  to  have  been
adopted  in  the  thirteenth  century,  will  be
found  in  G.  P.  Depping’s  Collection  de  Docu¬
ments  inedits  sur  T  Histoire  de  France  (Paris,
1837).  A  part  of  this  work  contains  the
Reglemens  sur  les  arts  el  metiers  de  Paris,
rediges  ate  13 me  siecle  et  connus  sous  le  nom
de  livre  des  metiers  d' Etienne  Boileau.  This
treats  of  the  masons,  stonecutters,  plas¬
terers,  and  mortar-makers,  and,  as  Stein-
brenner  ( Or.  and  Hist,  of  Mas.,  p.  104)  says,
“is  interesting,  not  only  as  exhibiting  the
peculiar  usages  and  customs  of  the  Craft  at
that  early  period,  but  as  showing  the  con¬
nection  which  existed  between  the  laws  and
regulationsof  the  French  Masons  and  those
of  the  Stein metzen  of  Germany  and  the
Masons  of  England.”  A  translation  of  the
Paris  Constitutions  was  published  in  the


Freemason'’ s  Magazine,  Boston,  1863,  p.  201.
In  theyear  1743,  the  “  English  Grand  Lodge
of  France  ”  published,  in  Paris,  a  series  of
statutes,  taken  principally  from  Anderson’s
work  of  the  editions  of  1723  and  1738.  It
consisted  of  twenty  articles,  and  bore  the
title  of  General  Regulations  taken  from  the
Minutes  of  the  Lodges,  for  the  use  of  the  French
Lodges,  together  with  the  Alterations  adopted
at  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Grand  Lodge,
December  11, 1743,  to  serve  as  a  rule  of  action
for  the  said  kingdom.  A  copy  of  this  docu¬
ment,  says  Findel,  was  translated  into  Ger¬
man,  with  annotations,  and  published  in
1856  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Freimaurer  of
Altenberg.

Parlirer.  In  the  Lodges  of  Stone¬
masons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  there  was
a  rank  or  class  of  workmen  called  Parli-
rers,  literally,  spokesmen.  They  were  an
intermediate  class  of  officers  between  the
Masters  of  the  Lodges  and  the  Fellows,
and  were  probably  about  the  same  as  our
modern  Wardens.  Thus,  in  the  Stras¬
bourg  Constitutions  of  1459,  it  is  said :
“  No  Craftsman  or  Mason  shall  promote
one  of  his  apprentices  as  a  parlirer  whom
he  has  taken  as  an  apprentice  from  his
rough  state,  or  who  is  still  in  the  years  of
apprenticeship,”  which  may  be  compared
with  the  old  English  charge  that  “  no
Brother  can  be  a  Warden  until  he  has
passed  the  part  of  a  Fellow-Craft.”  They
were  called  Parlirers,  properly,  says  Held-
mann,  Parlierers,  or  Spokesmen,  because,
in  the  absence  of  the  Masters,  they  spoke
for  the  Lodge,  to  travelling  Fellows  seeking
employment,  and  made  the  examination.
There  are  various  forms  of  the  word.
Kloss,  citing  the  Strasbourg  Constitutions,
has  Parlirer;  Krause  has,  from  the  same
document,  Parlierer,  but  says  it  is  usually
Polier ;  Heldmann  uses  Parlierer ,  which
has  been  now  generally  adopted.  «

Parole.  A  Mol  de  semestre,  communi¬
cated  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  and
in  addition  an  annual  word  in  November,
which  tends  to  show  at  once  whether  a
member  is  in  good  standing.

Parsees.  See  Zend  Avesta.

Parvin.  Theodore  S.  Born  Janu¬
ary  15,  1817,  in  Cumberland  Co.,  New  Jer¬
sey.  His  journey  in  life  gradually  tending
westward,  he  located  in  Ohio,  and  gradu¬
ated  in  1837  in  theCincinnati Law  School.
He  was  appointed  private  secretary  by
Robert  Lucas,  first  governor  of  Iowa,  in
which  State  he  became  Judge  of  the  Pro¬
bate  Court  and  afterwards  “Curator  and
Librarian.”  Bro.  Parvin  was  initiated  in
Nova  Cesarea  Lodge,  No.  2,  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  March  14,  1838,  and  raised  the  9th
of  May  following.  He  was  exalted  in  Iowa
City  Chapter,  No.  2,  January  2,  1845.  He


1012


PASSAGE


ADDENDUM.


PENNSYLVANIA


has  held  many  very  prominent  positions  in
Masonry ;  is,  and  has  been  since  1871,
Grand  Recorder  of  the  G.  Encampment
K.  T.  of  the  U.  S.  A.  In  1859  he  received
the  Degrees  of  the  Scottish  Rite  and  was
crowned  in  that  year  an  Inspector-General
33d.

Passage.  The  Fourth  Degree  of  the
Fessler  Rite,  of  which  Patria  forms  the
fifth.

“  Passing  tlie  River.”  A  mystical
alphabet  said  to  have  been  used  by  theKab-
balists.  These  characters,  with  certain  ex¬
planations,  become  the  subject  of  consider¬
ation  with  brethren  of  the  Fifteenth  Degree
A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.  The  following  are
the  characters :


that  the  victim  be  disembowelled,  his  body
burnt  to  ashes  and  scattered  as  dust  to  the
winds.  Judges  of  the  secret  Vehmgericht
passed  sentences  of  death  as  follows :  ‘  Your
body  and  flesh  to  the  beasts  of  the  field,  to
the  birds  of  the  air,  and  to  the  fishes  in  the
stream.’  The  judicial  executioner,  in  carry¬
ing  into  effect  this  decree,  severed  the  body
in  twain,  so  that,  to  use  the  literal  text,  ‘  the
air  might  strike  together  between  the  two
parts.’  The  tongue  was  oftentimes  torn
out  as  a  punishment.  A  law  of  the  early
Roman  Empire,  known  as  ex  Jure  Orientis
Caesareo,  enacted  that  any  person,  suitor
at  law  or  witness,  having  sworn  upon  the
evangelists,  and  proving  to  be  a  perjurer,
should  have  the  tongue  cut  from  its  roots.

A  cord  about  the  neck  was  used  svm-


a  ZRJl'Ai


bolically,  in  criminal  courts,  to  denote
that  the  accused  was  worthy  of  the  ex¬
treme  penalty  of  law  by  hanging  or  de-
S  n  m  1  O  J  t  eh  z  u  v  St  capitation.  When  used  upon  the  person

of  a  freeman,  it  signified  a  slight  degree

7T  n  (V  V/  tl  A  r  V  /  of  subjection  or  servitude.”

«-*  '  T-^  V  xj  AA  I  A  /  Some  eminent  brethren  of  theFrater-

,  ,  .  ,  _  j.  nity  insist  that  the  penalty  had  its  ori-

d  (jf  D  h.  I  S  a  K  L  p  N  gin  in  themanner  in  which  the  lamb  was


Pax  Yobiseiim.  (“Peace  be  with
you  !  ”)  Used  in  the  Eighteenth  Degree  A.
A.  Scottish  Rite.

Peetasli.  The  demon  of  calumny  in
the  religious  system  of  Zoroaster,  Persia.

Penalty.  The  origin  of  penalties  in¬
voked  in  Masonry  has  been  the  subject  of
much  research.  In  addition  to  what  is  so
well  said  by  Dr.  Mackey,  as  to  obsecration,
it  may  be  judicious  to  note  the  opinion  of
Bro.  G.  F.  Fort,  and  as  well  the  law  as  set
down  in  the  Talmud.  Bro.  Fortsays,  in  the
29th  chap,  of  his  Early  History  and  Anti¬
quities,  that  “Penalties  inflicted  upon  con¬
victs  of  certain  grades  during  the  Middle
Ages,  were  terrible  and  inhuman.

“The  most  cruel  punishment  awaited
him  who  broke  into  and  robbed  a  Pagan
temple.  According  to  a  law  of  the  Fris¬
ians,  such  desecration  was  redressed  by
dragging  the  criminal  to  the  seashore  and
burying  the  body  at  a  point  in  the  sands
where  the  tide  daily  ebbed  and  flowed.
(Lex  Frlsion.,  Add.  Sap.,  Tit.  12.)

“A  creditor  was  privileged  to  subject
his  delinquent  debtor  to  the  awful  pen¬
alty  of  having  the  flesh  torn  from  his
breast  and  fed  to  birds  of  prey.  Convicts
were  frequently  adjudged  by  the  ancient
Norse  code  to  have  their  hearts  torn  out.
(Grimm,  Deutsche  Rechts-A Iterthumzr,  p.
690.  And  for  the  following,  see  pp.  693
and  700.)  The  oldest  death  penalties  of
the  Scandinavians  prescribed  that  the  body
should  be  exposed  to  fowls  of  the  air
to  feed  upon.  Sometimes  it  was  decreed


sacrificed  under  the  charge  of  the  Cap¬
tain  of  the  Temple,  who  directed  the  priests :
and  said,  “  Come  and  cast  lots.”  “  Who  is
to  slaughter?”  “Who  is  to  sprinkle?”
“Go  and  see  if  the  time  for  slaughter  ap¬
proaches  ?  ”  “  Is  it  light  in  the  whole  East,
even  to  Hebron  ?  ”  and  when  the  priest  said
“  Yes,”  he  was  directed  to  “  go  and  bring  the
lamb  from  the  lamb-chamber this  was  in
the  north-west  corner  of  the  court.  The
lamb  was  brought  to  the  north  of  the  altar,
its  head  southward  and  its  face  northward.
The  lamb  was  then  slaughtered  ;  a  hole  was
made  in  its  side,  and  thus  it  was  hung  up.
The  priest  skinned  it  downward  until  he
came  to  the  breast,  then  be  cut  off  the
head,  and  finished  the  skinning;  he  tore
out  the  heart;  subsequently  he  cleft  the
body,  and  it  became  all  open  before  him ;
he  took  out  the  intestines,  etc.;  and  the  va¬
rious  portions  were  divided  as  they  had
cast  lots.  (The  Talmud,  Joseph  Barclay,
LL.D.)

Pennsylvania.  The  Masonic  his¬
torical  interest  in  no  one  State  of  the  Union
centred  so  thoroughly  as  in  the  origin  of
Masonry  and  the  formation  of  a  Grand
Lodge  in  Pennsylvania.  A  fraternal  rivalry
was  warmly  incited  by  this  State  claiming
priority  over  Massachusetts  and  all  other
States  as  regards  the  great  Brotherhood.
The  question  seems  to  be  now  permanently
removed  from  further  inquiry.  Indeed,
Dr.  Mackey,  in  his  brief  sketch  in  the
body  of  this  work,  favored  the  Boston
theory,  but  regretted  his  error  before  the
printer’s  ink  had  dried.


PENNSYLVANIA


ADDENDUM.


PERSIA


1013


It  is  now  evident  that  a  deputation  was
issued  by  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  Grand
Master  of  England,  on  June  5,  1730,  to
Daniel  Coxe,  of  New  Jersey,  as  “Provin¬
cial  Grand  Master  of  New  York,  New
Jersey,  and  Pennsylvania,  ordaining  that
the  brethren  who  do  now  reside,  or  who
may  hereafter  reside,  in  all  or  any  of  the
said  provinces,  shall,  and  they  are  hereby
empowered,  every  other  year  on  the  feast
of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  to  elect  a  Provin¬
cial  Grand  Master,  who  shall  have  the
power  of  nominating  and  appointing  his
Deputy  Grand  Master  and  Grand  War¬
dens.”  That  the  brethren  in  Pennsylvania
availed  themselves  of  this  authority  on
St.  John  the  Baptist’s  day,  1732,  and
elected  William  Allen  Grand  Master;  that
at  the  succeeding  election,  June  24,  1734,
Benjamin  Franklin,  who  had  become  a
member  in  February,  1731,  was  elected
Grand  Master.  Other  Grand  Masters  were
elected  from  time  to  time,  among  them
very  eminent  men ;  to  wit,  Thomas  Hop-
kinson,  Humphry  Murray,  James  Hamil¬
ton,  Joseph  Shippen,  William  Ball,  Joseph
Shippen,  Philip  Syng,  Thomas  Bond,  James
Milnor,  Josiah  Randall,  Chief-Justice  Gib¬
son,  George  M.  Dallas,  Chief-Justice  Read,
and  Col.  James  Page.

The  original  ledger  account  of  the  first
Masonic  Lodge  organized  in  Philadelphia,
“St.  John’s,”  has  been  discovered  by  the  in¬
defatigable  Junior  Grand  Warden,  Clifford
P.  MacCalla,  in  the  Historical  Society  of
Pennsylvania,  covering  the  dates  from
June  24,  1731,  to  June  24,  1738.  This
book  is  doubtless  the  oldest  Masonic  Lodge
record  in  America.  It  appears  that  it  was
presented  to  the  Historical  Society  by
George  T.  Ingham,  of  Salem,  New  Jersey,
on  November  8,  1880,  he  having  received
it  from  a  descendant  of  David  Hall,  a
partner  of  Benjamin  Franklin  in  the
printing  and  publishing  business.

“Secessions  and  expulsions  in  England
marked  the  period  from  1738  to  1752,  when
another  Grand  Lodge  was  formed,  composed
of  the  seceding  brethren,  who  .  .  .  di¬
vided  the  third  degree,  and  from  the  latter
part  of  that  degree  formed  a  fourth  degree,
styled  the  Holy  Royal  Arch,”  presumably
in  1740.  This  division  was  practically  set
on  foot  by  the  Ancients,  afterwards  so
called,  who  were  the  Seceders,  and  were
so  recognized  in  contradistinction  to  the
Moderns,  who  adhered  to  the  three  degree
system.  Of  these  latter,  three  Lodges  ex¬
isted  in  Pennsylvania  in  1755.  In  1758
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  Ancients,
issued  warrants  for  Lodges  Nos.  2  and  3  in
Philadelphia,  the  latter  being  styled  Royal
Arch  Lodge,  No.  3.  These  Arch  Lodges
continued  and  prospered,  although  from


the  loss  of  records  their  earliest  minutes
only  date  1767,  and  are  thence  continuous.
On  September  5,  1789,  by  the  adoption  of
by-laws,  the  name  of  the  Chapter  appears
as  Jerusalem  Chapter,  No.  3.  The  Grand
Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  on  the  26th  of
December,  1795,  opened  the  Grand  Holy
Royal  Arch  Chapter  under  its  sanction,
and  thus  was  formed  the  first  Grand
Chapter  in  America.

Pcntacle,  The.  The  “  pentaculum
Salomonis, ”  or  magical  pentalpha,  not  to
be  confounded  with  Solomon’s  seal.  The
pentacle  is  frequently  referred  to  in  her¬
metic  formulae.

Perfect  Master.  The  Fifth  Degree
in  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite,  wherein  Lodges
of  Sorrow  are  frequently  observed.

Perfect  Prussian.  A  grade  in¬
vented  at  Geneva  in  1770,  and  belonging
to  the  Noachite  rites.

Perfect  Stone.  A  name  frequently
given  to  the  cubic  stone  discovered  in  the
13th  Degree  of  Perfection,  the  10th  of  the


Ineffable  Series.  It  denotes  justice  and
firmness,  with  all  the  moral  lessons  and
duties  in  which  the  mystic  cube  is  calcu¬
lated  to  instruct  us.

Periclyte,  or  Paraclete.  (John
xiv.  16.)  Christ  promised  to  send  after
him  another  paraclete.  The  followers  of
Mohammed  have  accepted  the  implication,
claiming  the  newcomer  to  be  Mohammed,
and  that  he  is  paraclete,  or  illustrious.

Persia.  From  late  discoveries  of  in¬
scriptions  pertaining  to  Cyrus,  as  mentioned
in  the  excellent  little  London  work,  called
Fresh  Light  from  the  Ancient  Monuments
(pp.  166-186),  A.  H.  Sayce,  M.A.,  it  would
appear  that  this  king  was  a  polytheist,  and
that  he  was  not  a  king  of  Persia,  although
he  acquired  that  country  after  his  conquest
of  Astyages,  B.  c.  559,  between  the  sixth  and
ninth  years  of  Nabonidos.  Cyrus  w'as  king
of  Elam.  The  empire  he  founded  was  not
a  Persian  one ;  Darius,  the  son  of  Hystas-
pes,  at  a  subsequent  period,  was  the  real
founder  of  that  kingdom.  Prof.  Sayce  con¬
tinues:  “It  was  only  as  the  predecessor  of
Darius,  and  for  the  sake  of  intelligibility  to
the  readers  of  a  later  day,  that  Cyrus  could
be  called  a  king  of  Persia”  (Ezra  i.  2).
The  original  words  of  his  proclamation,
“King  of  Elam,”  have  been  changed  into
the  more  familiar  and  intelligible  “  King


1014


PERSIAN


ADDENDUM.


PIKE


of  Persia.”  Elsewhere  in  the  Bible  (Isa.
xxi.  1-10),  when  the  invasion  of  Babylon
is  described,  there  is  no  mention  of  Persia,
only  of  Elam  and  Media,  the  ancestral  do¬
minions  of  Cyrus.  This  is  in  strict  accord¬
ance  with  the  revelations  of  the  Monu¬
ments,  and  testifies  to  the  accuracy  of  the
Old  Testament  records.

Cyrus  never  besieged  Babylon,  a  city  fif¬
teen  miles  square.  It  opened  its  gates  to
his  general  without  battle,  B.  c.  538.  The
description  by  Herodotus  belongs  to  the
reign  of  Darius.  Mr.  Bosanquet  asserts
that  the  Darius  of  the  Book  of  Daniel  is
Darius  the  son  of  Hystaspes.

Cyrus  had  learned  that  a  disaffected  con¬
quered  people  imported  into  a  kingdom  was
a  constant  menace  and  danger,  and  he  re¬
turned  the  Jewish  exiles  to  Jerusalem  to
rebuild  their  city  and  be  a  fortress  and
check  upon  Egypt.  The  nations  which  had
been  brought  from  East  and  West  were  re¬
stored  to  their  lands  along  with  their  gods.
So  it  was  with  the  captives  of  Judah.  His
dominions  extended  from  the  Hellespont
almost  to  India.

Cyrus  was  a  worshipper  of  Merodach,
originally  the  Sun-god,  who  is  mentioned
and  intended  by  the  name  Bel,  and  Nebo,
his  prophet  (Isa.  xlvi.  1).  His  first  act
after  acquiring  Babylonia  was  to  restore  the
Babylonian  gods  to  their  shrines,  from
which  they  had  been  removed  by  Nabo-
nidos,  and  further  asks  for  their  interces¬
sion.  The  theory  that  Cyrus  believed  in
but  one  supreme  god — Ormudz— must  be
abandoned.  God  consecrated  Cyrus  to  be
His  instrument  in  restoring  His  chosen
people  to  their  land,  not  because  the  king
of  Elam  was  a  Monotheist,  but  because  the
period  of  prophecy,  “  ten  weeks  of  years,”
was  drawing  to  a  close.

These  statements  are  made  upon  the  au¬
thority  of  the  three  inscriptions  among
the  clay  documents  lately  discovered  in
Babylonia  by  Mr.  Rassam,  and  translated
bv  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  and  Mr.  Pinches.
The  first  of  these  is  a  cylinder,  inscribed
by  order  of  Cyrus;  the  second  a  tablet,
which  describes  the  conquest  of  Babylonia
by  Cyrus;  while  the  third  is  an  account
given  by  Nabonidos  of  his  restoration  of
the  temple  of  the  Moon-god  at  Haran,  and
of  the  temples  of  the  Sun  god  and  of
Anunit  at  Sepharvaim.

Cyrus  ascended  the  throne  B.  C.  559,  and
was  slain  in  battle  against  the  Massagetae,
B.  c.  529.  He  was  followed  by  Cambyses
(son )  until  b.  c.  521 ,  when  he  was  succeeded
by  Smerdis,  a  Magian  usurper,  who  reigned
seven  months.  Darius  I.,  son  of  H  ystaspes,
a  nobleman,  conspired  with  six  others  and
murdered  Smerdis,  when,  by  device,  Darius
obtained  the  throne  over  liis  companions,


b.  c.  521.  The  celebrated  siege  of  Babylon
lasted  two  years ;  the  city  finally  succumbed
to  the  strategy  of  General  Zopyrus,  516.
Darius  reigned  36  years,  died  b.  c.  485.

Persian  Faith.  See  Zend  Avesta.

Pliilosoplms.  The  fourth  grade  of
the  First  Order  of  the  Society  of  Rosicru-
cians,  as  practised  in  Europe  and  America.

Phylacteries.  The  second  funda¬
mental  principle  of  Judaism  is  the  wearing
of  phylacteries;  termed  by  some  writers
Tataphoth,  “ornaments,”  and  refer  to  the
law  and  commandments,  as  “Bind  them
about  thy  neck ;  write  them  upon  the  table
of  thine  head  ”  (Prov.  iii.  3  ;  vi.  21 ;  viii.  3).
The  phylacteries  are  worn  on  the  forehead
and  arm,  and  are  called  in  Hebrew  Te-
phillin,  from  Palal,  to  pray.  These  consist
of  two  leathern  boxes.  One  contains  four
compartments,  in  which  are  inclosed  four
portions  of  the  law  written  on  parchment
and  carefully  folded.  The  box  is  made  of
leather  pressed  upon  blocks  of  wood  spe¬
cially  prepared,  the  leather  being  well
soaked  in  water.  The  following  passages
of  the  law  are  sewn  into  it :  Ex.  xiii.  1-10,
11-16;  Deut.  vi.  4-9;  xi.  13-21.  On  this
box  is  the  letter  (shin),  with  three  strokes
for  the  right  side,  and  the  same  letter  with
four  strokes  for  the  left  side  of  the  wearer.
The  second  box  has  but  one  compartment,
into  which  the  same  passages  of  Scripture
are  sewed  with  the  sinews  of  animals,  spe¬
cially  prepared  for  this  object.  The  phy¬
lacteries  are  bound  on  the  forehead  and
arm  by  long  leathern  straps.  The  straps
on  the  head  must  be  tied  in  a  knot  shaped
like  the  letter  (dalelh).  The  straps  on
the  arm  must  go  round  it  seven  times,  and
three  times  around  the  middle  finger,  with
a  small  surplus  over  in  the  form  of  the  let¬
ter  ’  (yod).  Thus  we  have  the  ’Ijy,  Shad-
dai,  or  Almighty.  The  phylacteries  are
kept  in  special  bags,  with  greatest  rever¬
ence,  and  the  Rabbis  assert  “  that  the  sin¬
gle  precept  of  the  phylacteries  is  equal  to
all  the  commandments.”

Pike,  Albert.  Born  at  Boston,  Mass.,
December  29,  1809,  and  is  still  living  and
laboring  to  consummate  his  Masonic  life
work.  After  a  sojourn  in  early  life  in
Mexico,  he  returned  to  the  United  States
and  settled  in  Little  Rock,  Arkansas,  as  an
editor  and  lawyer.  Subsequent  to  the  war
of  the  rebellion,  in  which  he  had  cast  his
fortunes  with  the  South,  he  located  in
Washington,  D.  C.,  uniting  with  ex-Sena-
tor  Robert  Johnson  in  the  profession  of  the
law,  making  his  home,  however,  in  Alex¬
andria.  His  library,  in  extent  and  selec¬
tions,  is  a  marvel,  especially  in  all  that
pertains  to  the  wonders  in  ancient  litera¬
ture.  Bro.  Pike  is  the  Sov.  G  Commander
of  the  Southern  Supreme  Council,  A.  A,


PINNACLES


ADDENDUM.


POINT


1015


Scottish  Rite,  having  been  elected  in  1859.
He  is  Prov.  G.  Master  of  the  G.  Lodge  of
the  Royal  Order  of  Scotland  in  the  U.  S.,
and  an  honorary  member  of  almost  every
Supreme  Council  in  the  world.  His  stand¬
ing  as  a  Masonic  author  and  historian,  and
withal  as  a  poet,  is  most  distinguished,  and
his  untiring  zeal  is  without  a  parallel.

Pinnacles.  Generally  ornamented
terminations  much  used  in  Gothic  archi¬
tecture.  They  are  prominently  referred
to  in  the  Eleventh  Degree  of  the  A.  A.  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  where  the  pinnacles  over  the
three  gates  support  the  warning  to  all
evil-doers,  and  give  evidence  of  the  cer¬
tainty  of  punishment  following  crime.

Pitaka.  (“  Basket.”)  The  Bible  of  Bud¬
dhism,  containing  116  volumes,  divided
into  three  classes,  collectively  known  as
the  Tripitaka  or  Pitakattayan,  that  is,  the
“Triple  Basket;”  the  Soutras,  or  discourses
of  Buddha;  the  Vinaga,  or  Discipline;
and  the  Abhadharma,  or  Metaphysics.  The
canon  was  fixed  about  240  B.  C.,  and  com¬
mands  a  following  of  more  than  one-third
of  the  human  race — the  estimates  vary
from  340,000,000  to  500,000,000.  Masoni-
cally  considered,  this  indeed  must  be  a
great  Light  or  Trestle-Board,  if  it  is  the
guide  of  the  conduct  and  practice  of  so
vast  a  number  of  our  brethren ;  for  are  not
all  men  our  brethren?

Pitdali.  (Heb.  ,“I“ltOD  )  One  of  the
twelve  stones  in  the  breastplate  of  the
High  Priest,  of  a  yellow  coior.  The  Sans¬
krit  for  yellow  is  pita.

Pitris.  Spirits.  Among  the  Hin¬
dus,  Pitris  were  spirits;  so  mentioned  in
the  Agrouchada  Parikchai ,  the  philosoph¬
ical  compendium  of  the  Hindu  spiritists,
a  scientific  work  giving  an  account  of  the
creation  and  the  Mercaba,  and  finally  the
Zohar;  the  three  principal  parts  of  which
treat  “of  the  attributes  of  God,”  “of  the
world,”  and  “of  the  human  soul.”  A
fourth  part  sets  forth  the  relevancy  of
souls  to  each  other,  and  the  evocation  of
Pitris.  The  adepts  of  the  occult  sciences
were  said  by  the  votaries  of  the  Pitris  of
India  to  have  “entered  the  garden  of  de¬
lights.”  See  Parikchai,  Agrouchada  ;  also,
Indische  Mysterien.

Pointed  Cubical  Stone.  The

“Broached  Thurnel”(see  Mackey),  men¬
tioned  by  Dr.  George  Oliver  and  others  in
the  Tracing-Board  of  an  Entered  Appren¬
tice,  and  known  to  the  French  Mason  as  the
pierre  cuhique,  has  an  axe  inserted  in  the
apex.  Brother  William  S.  Rockwell  con¬
sidered  this  feature  in  the  Tracing-Board
remarkable  and  suggestive  of  curious  re¬
flections,  and  thus  reasoned :  “  The  cubic
stone  pointed  with  an  axe  driven  into  it,
is  strikingly  similar  to  a  peculiar  hiero¬


glyphic  of  the  Egyptians.  The  name  of
one  of  their  gods  is  written  with  a  deter¬


minative  sign  affixed  to  it,  consisting  of  a
smooth  rectangular  stone  with  a  knife  over
it;  but  the  most  singular  portion  of  the
circumstance  is,  that  this  hieroglyphic,
which  is  read  by  Egyptologists,  Seth,  is  the
symbol  of  falsehood  and  error,  in  contra¬
distinction  to  the  rough  (Brute)  stone,
which  is  the  symbol  of  faith  and  truth.
The  symbol  of  error  was  the  soft  stone,
which  could  be  cut;  the  symbol  of  truth,
the  hard  stone,  on  which  no  tool  could  be
used.”

Seth  is  the  true  Egyptian  name  of  the  god
known  afterward  by  the  name  of  Typhon,
at  one  time  devoutly  worshipped  and  pro¬
foundly  venerated  in  the  culminating
epoch  of  the  Pharaonic  empire,  as  the
monuments  of  Karnac  and  Medinet-Abou
testify.  But  in  time  his  worship  was  over¬
thrown,  his  shrinesdesecrated,  his  name  and
titles  chiselled  from  the  monumental  gran¬
ite,  and  he  himself,  from  being  venerated
as  the  giver  of  life  and  blessings  to  the
rulers  of  Egypt,  degraded  from  his  posi¬
tion,  treated  as  a  destroying  demon,  and
shunned  as  the  personification  of  evil.
This  was  not  long  before  the  exode  of  the
children  of  Israel.  Seth  was  the  father
of  Judaeus  and  Palestinus,  is  the  god  of  the
Semitic  tribes  who  rested  on  the  seventh
day,  and  bears  the  swarthy  complexion,  rn
xpoa  ivvppos,  of  the  hated  race.  Seth  is  also
known  by  other  names  in  the  hieroglyphic
legends,  among  the  most  striking  of  which
is  Bar,  that  is  Bal,  known  to  us  in  sacred
history  as  the  fatal  stumbling-block  of
idolatry  to  the  Jewish  people.  See  Tri¬
angle  and  Square.

Points,  The  Five.  See  Chromatic
Calendar.

Point  within  a  Circle.  An  addi¬
tion  to  what  Dr.  Mackey  very  fully  sets
forth  as  an  explanation  of  the  term  and
emblem  point  within  a  circle,  may  be  given,
by  referring  to  one  of  the  oldest  symbols
among  the  Egyptians,  and  found  upon
their  monuments,  which  was  a  circle  cen¬
tred  by  an  A  U  M,  supported  by  two
erect  parallel  serpents;  the  circle  being
expressive  of  the  collective  people  of  the
world,  protected  by  the  parallel  attributes,
the  Power  and  Wisdom  of  the  Creator.


1016


POMME


ADDENDUM.


PRESS


The  Alpha  and  Omega,  or  the  \j(/,  C  0
representing  the  Egyptian  omnipotent
God,  surrounded  by  His  creation,  having
for  a  boundary  no  other  limit  than  what


may  come  within  his  boundless  scope,  his
Wisdom  and  Power.  At  times  this  circle
is  represented  by  the  Ananta  (Sanskrit,
eternity),  a  serpent  with  its  tail  in  its  mouth.
The  parallel  serpents  were  of  the  cobra
species.

It  has  been  suggestively  said  that  the
Masonic  symbol  refers  to  the  circuits  or
circumambulation  of  the  initiate  about  the
sacred  Altar,  which  supports  the  three
Great  Lights  as  a  central  point,  while  the
brethren  stand  in  two  parallel  lines.

Pomme  Yerte  (Green  Apple),  Or¬
der  of"  file.  Mentioned  by  Mackenzie
as  an  androgynous  Order,  instituted  in
Germany  in  1780,  and  afterwards  intro¬
duced  into  France.

Pooroosli.  The  spirit  or  essence  of
Brahm  in  the  Indian  religious  system.

Poriiforium.  A  banner  like  unto
the  gonfalon,  used  as  an  ensign  in  cathe¬
drals,  and  borne  at  the  head  of  religious
processions.

Praxoeans.  The  followers  of  Prax-
eas  in  the  second  century,  who  proclaimed
a  unity  in  God,  and  that  He  had  suffered
upon  the  cross.

Press,  Masonic.  The  number  of
the  Masonic  press  throughout  the  world  is
small,  but  the  literary  ability  commands
attention.  In  every  nation  Masonry  has  its
advocate  and  newsbearer,  in  the  form  of  a
weekly  or  semi-monthly  chronicle  of  events,
or  the  more  sedate  magazine  or  periodical,
sustaining  the  literature  of  the  Fraternity.

The  following  schedule  is,  we  regret  to
say,  incomplete:


The  Freemason,  weekly,  London,  Eng.

The  Freemason  Chronicle,  weekly,  Lon¬
don,  Eng.

The  Freemason’s  Calendar  and  Pocket-
Book,  published  annually,  for  the  benefit
of  the  Charity  Fund,  under  the  sanction  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  London,  Eng.

The  Kneph,  England.

The  Masonic  Magazine,  London,  Eng.

The  Cosmopolitan  Masonic  Calendar,
Diary,  and  Pocket-Book.  Fourteenth  year.
London.  George  Kenning.

Irish  Freemason’s  Calendar  and  Direc¬
tory.  Published  by  G.  Lodge  of  Ireland,
Dublin.  Printed  by  S.  Underwood.

La  Chaine  d’Union,  de  Paris,  weekly,
Paris,  France.

Republique  Ma<;onnique,  Paris,  France.

Le  Monde  Ma<jonnique,  Paris,  France.

Bulletin  du  G.  Or.  de  France,  Paris,
France.

Bulletin  Ma<;onnique  de  la  G.  L.  Sem.
Ecossaisse,  Paris,  France.

Le  Droit  des  Femmes,  Paris,  France.

El  Taller,  Sevilla,  Spain.

La  Reforma,  Hellin,  Albacete,  Spain.

La  Justicia,  Madrid,  Spain.

La  Humanidad,  Alicante,  Spain.

Boletin  Oficial  de  G.  Orient,  Spain.

El  Mallete,  Barcelona,  Spain.

Groot  Oosten,  La  Haya,  Holland.

Die  Bauhiitte,  Leipzig,  Germany.

The  Kelet,  monthly,  Budapesth,  Hun¬
gary.

Bulletin  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  Belgium,
Brussels.

Bulletin  Van  Het,  Nederlandsch.

Triunghiul,  Bucharest,  Roumania.

La  Donna,  Bologne,  Italy.

Alpina,  Switzerland.

Revista  Pithagoras,  Athens,  Greece.

•Revista  Tinerfe,  Canary  Islands.

The  Freemason,  monthly,  Sydney,  N.
S.  W.

Australian  Freemason,  Sydney,  X.  S.  W.

Freemason’s  Chronicle,  monthly,  Syd¬
ney,  N.  S.  W.

The  Rough  Ashlar,  monthly,  Adelaide.

Victorian  Freemason,  weekly,  Mel¬
bourne,  Victoria,  Australia.

The  Masonic  Record  of  Western  India,
Allahabad,  Asia.

La  Revista  Masonica,  monthly,  Lima,
Peru.

Boletin  Oficial  de  G.  Orient,  Venezuela.

La  Abeja,  Caracas,  Venezuela.

Aurora  Escocesa,  Rio  Janeiro,  Brazil.

Boletin  do  Grande  Or.  do  Brazil,  Rio
Janeiro,  Brazil.

La  Acacia,  monthly,  Buenos  Ayres.

El  Promotor,  Baranquilla,  Colombia.

La  Fraternite,  Porte  au  Prince,  Hayti.

La  Tolerance,  Porte  au  Prince,  Hayti.

La  Adelphia,  Mayaguez,  P.  R.


PRESS


ADDENDUM.


PULLEN


1017


El  Abogado  Cliristiano  Ilustrado,  Mex¬
ico.

Boletin  del  Sob.  Cap.  Tenocb,  Mexico.
Boletin  Masonica,  monthly,  Mexico.

La  Esperanza,  City  of  Mexico.

La  Cadena  de  Union,  Vera  Cruz,  Mexico.
El  Heraldo  Mexicano,  Saltillo,  Mexico.
El  Diario  del  Hogar,  City  of  Mexico.

La  Tolerancia,  City  of  Mexico.

La  Trulla,  organ  of  the  Grand  Logia
“  El  Sol,”  Vera  Cruz,  Mexico.

El  Luveton,  Coahuila,  Mexico.

El  Dia,  Puebla,  Mexico.

La  Luz,  Puebla,  Mexico.

La  Gacetillan,  Leon  Guanajuato,  Mexico.
El  Pensamiento,  Yucatan,  Merida.

El  Simbolismo,  Tlaxcala.

El  Maestro  do  Escuela,  Orizaba.

La  Gran  Logia,  Habana,  Cuba.

Luz  de  Aviguanabo,  Habana,  Cuba.
Boletin  Oficial,  Colon  y  Cuba,  Habana.
El  Oriente, semi-monthly,  Habana,  Cuba.
El  Oriente  Avisador,  Mas.  de  Cuba,
Habana.

La  Luz,  Habana,  Cuba.

La  Escuadra,  Habana,  Cuba.

Cuba  Masonica,  Habana,  Cuba.

La  Union,  Cienfuegos,  Cuba.

Boletin  Oficial  del  Sup.  Con.  de  Colon,
Cuba.

El  Delta,  Cienfuegos,  Cuba.

El  Yucayo,  Matanzas,  Cuba.

La  Fraternidad,  Santiago  de  Cuba.
Revista  Masonica,  Santiago  de  Cuba,

Los  Tres,  Regia,  Cuba.

The  Canadian  Craftsman,  monthly  mag.,
Port  Hope,  Ontario,  Canada.

The  Freemason,  Toronto,  Canada.

The  Masonic  Tablet,  Loudon,  Ontario,
Canada.

The  Liberal  Freemason,  monthly  mag.,
Boston,  Mass.

F  reemason’s  Repository,  monthly.  Provi¬
dence,  R.  I.

Masonic  Token,  monthly,  Portland,  Me.
Loomis’  Masonic  Journal,  New  Haven,
Conn.

The  Masonic  Chronicle,  Columbus,  Ohio.
Masonic  Review,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.
Mystic  Tie,  Beverly,  W.  Virginia.
Masonic  Eclectic,  Washington,  D.  C.
The  Masonic  Journal,  New  York.
Hebrew  Leader,  weekly,  New  York.

N.  Y.  Dispatch,  weekly,  New  York.

El  Delta,  weekly,  New  York
The  Brooklyn  Review,  weekly,  Brook¬
lyn,  N.  Y.

Evening  Chronicle,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
The  Keystone,  weekly,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
The  Progress,  Vicksburg,  Miss.

Voice  of  Masonry,  monthly,  Chicago,

Masonic  Advocate,  Indianapolis,  Tnd.
Masonic  Home  Journal,  Louisville,  Ivy.
<iC


The  Texas  Freemason,  Fort  Worth,
Tcxtis

Priestly  Vestments.  The  High
Priest  ministered  in  eight  vestments,  and
theordinary  priest  in  four, — the  tunic,  draw¬
ers,  bonnet,  and  girdle.  To  these  the  High
Priest  added  the  breastplate,  ephod,  robe,
and  golden  plate,  and  when  occasion  re¬
quired  the  Urim  and  Thummim.

Prince  of  Jerusalem,  Jewel  of.
Should  be  a  gold  incrustation  on  a  lczenge-
shaped  piece  of  mother-of-pearl.  Equipoise
scales  held  by  hand,  sword,  five  stars,  one


larger  than  the  other  four,  and  the  letters
D  and  Z  in  Hebrew,  one  on  either  side  of
the  scales.  The  five-pointed  crown,  within
a  triangle  of  gold,  has  also  been  used  as  a
jewel  of  this  Sixteenth  Degree.

Prince  of  Wales’  (hand  Lodge.
About  the  time  of  the  reconciliation  of  the
two  contending  Grand  Lodges  in  England,
in  1813,  they  were  called,  by  way  of  distinc¬
tion,  after  their  Grand  Masters,  That  of
the  “  Moderns”  was  called  the  “  Prince  of
Wales’  Grand  Lodge,”  and  that  of  the
“Ancients”  the  “Duke  of  Kent’s  Grand
Lodge.”  The  titles  were  used  colloquially,
and  not  officially.

Proelus.  Known  as  the  successor  of
Syrianus  as  the  head  of  the  Athenian  school.
Born  in  Constantinople,  412,  died  at  Athens,
485.  Proelus  was  a  Neo-Platonist,  and
waged  war  against  the  new  religion  of  Chris¬
tianity,  which  caused  him  to  be  banished
from  tbe  city;  but  was  subsequently  read¬
mitted.  His  works  were  chiefly  mystical,
such  as  devoting  hymns  to  the  sun,  Venus,
or  the  poetic  muses,  and  so  far  were  harm¬
less.

Propyl  scum  (also  Propylon).  The
court  or  vestibule  in  front  of  an  edifice.

Psaterians.  A  sect  of  Arians  who
maintained,  at  the  Council  of  Antioch,  a.
i).  360,  that  the  Son  was  dissimilar  to  the
Father  in  will ;  that  He  was  made  from
nothing;  and  that  in  God,  creation  and
generation  were  synonymous  terms.

Pullen,  William  11}  <le.  An  emi-


1018


PUNJAUB


ADDENDUM.


RAPHAEL


nent  and  accomplished  craftsman  of  Eng¬
land,  who  has  become  renowned  among
English  and  American  “  workmen  ”  for  his
excellence  in  the  conduct  of  the  forms  and
varied  ceremonies  of  Masonry.

Punjaub.  Freemasonry  was  founded
in  Punjaub,  India,  in  1872,  by  an  ardent
Mason,  W.  Bro.  Major  Henry  Basevi,  but
whose  failing  health  caused  him  to  forsake
his  post  shortly  thereafter,  leaving  as  his
successor  Major  M.  Ramsay,  who  became
R.  W.  D.  Grand  Master.  By  last  returns
received  there  were  21  Lodges,  aggregating
725  members.  It  is  reported  authoritatively
that  in  1879  the  institution  maintained,
clothed,  and  educated  twenty-one  chil¬
dren.

Plli'iiuas.  (“Knowledge/’)  The  text¬


books  of  the  worshippers  of  Vishnu  and  of
Siva,  forming,  with  the  Tantras,  the  basis
of  the  popular  creed  of  the  Brahmanical
Hindus.  There  are  about  18  Puranas,  and
as  many  more  minor  works,  called  Upa-
puranas,  all  written  in  Sanskrit,  and  founded
to  some  extent  upon  the  Mahabharata  and
Ramayana.  Otherwise  their  date  is  very
uncertain.  The  followers  of  Brahmanism
number  about  175,000,000.

Purrali,  The.  A  society  of  Sussu  ^
negroes  exercising  similar  powers  to,  and
for  a  somewhat  similar  purpose  as,  the
Vehmgericht.

Pursuivant.  The  third  and  lowest
order  of  heraldic  officers.  In  Masonry,
the  lowest  officer  in  rank  except  the  Tyler,
if  he  may  be  termed  an  officer.


Q.


Q.  (Heb.  p,  Q  or  K,  Koph')  The  sev¬
enteenth  letter  in  the  English  and  modern
Latin  alphabets.  In  the  Phoenician  or
Ancient  Hebrew  its  form  was  one  circle
within  another.  Its  numerical  value  is
100.  The  Canaanite  signification  is  ear.

Quadriviuin  and  Triviiim.  The
seven  liberal  arts  and  sciences.  The  Quad-
rivium,  in  the  language  of  the  schools,
were  the  four  lesser  arts,  arithmetic,  music,
geometry,  and  astronomy  ;  while  the  Triv-
ium  were  the  triple  way  to  eloquence  by  the
study  of  grammar,  logic,  and  rhetoric.

Qualifications  of  Candidates.
A  free  man,  uninfluenced  and  unimpor¬
tuned  by  Masonic  companions,  coming  of
his  own  will,  without  expectation  of  re¬


ward  or  with  sinister  intention,  possessing
a  favorable  impress  of  the  Brotherhood
from  whatever  other  source,  willing  to  sub¬
mit  to  the  forms  and  usages  of  the  society,
imbued  with  a  belief  in  the  Almighty  and
ever-living  God,  leading  a  virtuous  life,
of  lawful  age,  yet  not  in  dotage,  and  pos¬
sessed  of  moral  courage,  reasonable  intelli¬
gence  and  education.  And  in  the  United
States  not  physically  blemished  by  mate¬
rial  imperfections  of  the  body.

Qnetzialcoatl.  The  Mexican  idea
of  the  Deity  of  Enlightenment.  The  spirit-
man  from  whom  they  received  their  civili¬
zation,  and  for  whose  second  coming  they
wait.  Him  for  whom  they  mistook  Cortez,
and  therefore  welcomed  him  with  joy.


R.


R.  (Heb.  *1,  Fesh.)  The  eighteenth
letter  in  the  English  and  other  Western
alphabets.  The  word  Resh  signifies  fore¬
head,  and  in  the  Phoenician  and  hiero¬
glyphic  character  is  thus  repre¬
sented.  Its  numerical  value  is
200,  and  the  equivalent  as  a  name
of  God  is  Eahum,  signify¬

ing  clemency.

Rainbow,  The  Most  Ancient
O.’der  of  the.  A  secret  association
existing  in  Moorfields  in  1700.


Raising  Sheet.  A  term  sometimes
given  to  one  of  the  common  properties
known  to  Master  Masons.

Ramayana.  The  great  epic  of  an¬
cient  India,  deemed  a  sacred  writing  by
its  people,  narrating  the  history  of  Rama,
or  Vishnu  incarnate,  and  his  wife  Siva.
It  contains  about  24,000  verses,  in  seven
books,  written  in  Sanskrit,  and  is  ascribed
to  Valmiki,  who  lived  about  the  beginning
of  the  Christian  era.

Raphael.  (Hebrew  interpretation,


RED


ADDENDUM.


ROSICRUCIANS


1019


“The  healing  of  God.’1)  The  title  of  an
officer  in  a  Rose  Croix  Chapter.  The  name
of  the  angel,  under  the  Kabbalistical  sys¬
tem,  that  governed  the  planet  Mercury.
A  messenger.

Red  Brother.  The  sixth  and  last
degree  of  the  Swedenborgian  system.

Revelation.  An  extract  from  Mac¬
kenzie’s  Royal  Masonic  Cyclopedia  says
upon  this  subject:  “With  infinite  learning
and  patience  the  author  of  The  Book  oj
Cod,  who  preserves  strict  anonymity,  has
endeavored  to  show  that  the  work  (Apoca¬
lypse)  was  originally  revealed  to  a  primae¬
val  John,  otherwise  Oannes,  and  identical
with  the  first  messenger  of  God  to  man.
This  theory  is  sufficiently  remarkable  to  be
mentioned  here.  The  Messengers,  twelve
in  number,  are  supposed  by  the  author  to
appear  at  intervals  of  600  years.  Thus:
1,  Adam,  A.  M.  3000 ;  2,  Enoch,  A.  M.  3600;
3,  Fold,  A.  M.  4200;  4,  Brigoo,  A.  M.  4800;
5,  Zarathustra,  A.  M.  5400;  6,  Thoth,  a.m.
6000;  7,  Amosis  or  Moses,  a.  m.  6600;  8,
Laotse.  A.  M.  7200;  9,  Jesus,  A.  M.  7800;
10,  Mohammed,  a.  m.  8400;  11,  Chengiz-
Khan,  a.  m.  9000;  and,  12,  the  twelfth
messenger  yet  to  be  revealed,  A.  M.  9600.”
With  the  aid  of  this  theory,  the  whole
history  of  the  world,  down  to  our  own
days,  is  shown  to  be  foretold  in  the  Apoca¬
lypse,  and  although  it  is  difficult  to  agree
with  the  accomplished  writer’s  conclusions,
supported  by  him  with  an  array  of  learn¬
ing  and  a  sincere  belief  in  what  is  stated,
no  one  with  any  taste  for  these  studies
should  be  without  this  wonderful  series  of
books.  The  same  author  has  published,  in
two  volumes,  a  revised  edition  of  the  Book
of  Enoch ,  with  a  commentary,  and  he  prom¬
ises  to  continue,  and,  if  possible,  complete
his  design.

Revels,  Master  of  tlie.  An  officer
attached  to  the  royal  or  other  eminent
household,  whose  function  it  was  to  pre¬
side  when  the  members  and  guests  were  at
refreshment,  physical  and  intellectual,  to
have  charge  of  the  amusements  of  the  court
or  of  the  nobleman  to  whose  house  he  was
attached  during  the  twelve  Christmas  holi¬
days.  In  Masonic  language,  the  Junior
Warden.

Revestiary  The  wardrobe,  or  place
for  keeping  sacred  vestments.  Distinctive
costumes  in  public  worship  formed  a  part
not  only  of  the  Jewish,  but  of  almost  all
the  ancient  religions.  The  rerestiary  was
common  to  them  all.  The  Master  of  the
Wardrobe  became  a  necessity.

Rite  ries  Kins  Coens,  on  Pr6-
tres.  A  system  adopted  in  1750,  but
which  did  not  attain  its  full  vigor  until
twenty-five  years  thereafter,  when  Lodges
were  opened  in  Baris,  Marseilles,  Bordeaux,


and  Toulouse.  The  devotees  of  Martinez
Pasqualis,  the  founder,  were  called  Mar-
tinistes,  and  were  partly  Hermetic  and
partly  Swedenborgian  in  their  teachings.
Martinez  was  a  religious  man,  and  based
his  teachings  partly  on  the  Jewish  Kabbala
and  partly  on  hermetic  supernaturalism.
The  grades  were  as  follows:  1.  Apprenti;
2.  Compagnon  ;  3.  Maitre;  4.  Grand  Elu;
5.  Apprenti  Coen  ;  6.  Compagnon  Coen ;
7.  Maitre  Coen ;  8.  Grand  Architecte;  9.
Grand  Commandeur.

Rose  Croix,  Jewel  of  the.  Al¬
though  there  are  six  well-known  Rose
Croix  degrees,  belonging  to  as  many  sys¬
tems,  the  jewel  has  invariably  remained
the  same,  while  the  interpretation  has  some-


m


what  differed.  There  is  here  presented  the
usual  jewel  of  a  Rose  Croix  Knight,  and
also  that  of  the  M.  Wise  Sov.  of  an  English
Chapter.

Rosicrucians,  Ancient  ami
Modern.  The  Rosicrucian  Society,  in¬
stituted  in  the  fourteenth  century,  was  an
extraordinary  Brotherhood,  excitingcurios-
ity  and  commanding  attention  and  scrutiny.
The  members  delved  in  abstruse  studies :
many  became  Anchorites,  and  were  en¬
grossed  in  mystic  philosophy  and  the¬
osophy.  This  strange  Fraternity,  asserted
by  some  authorities  to  have  been  instituted
by  Roger  Bacon  near  the  close  of  the  thir¬
teenth  century,  filled  the  world  with  renown
as  to  their  incomprehensible  doctrines  and
presumed  abilities.  They  claimed  to  be
the  exponents  of  the  true  Kabbala,  as  em-


1020  ROSICRUCIANS


addendum.


ROY  AT.


bracing  theosophy  as  well  as  the  science
of  numbers.  They  were  said  to  delve  in
strange  things  and  deep  mysteries;  to  be
enwrapt  in  the  occult  sciences,  sometimes
vulgarly  termed  the  “Black  Art;”  and  in
the  secrets  of  magic  and  sorcery,  which  are
looked  upon  by  the  critical  eyes  of  the
world  as  tending  to  the  supernatural,  and
a  class  of  studies  to  be  avoided.

These  mystics,  for  whom  great  philan¬
thropy  is  claimed,  and  not  without  reason,
are  heard  of  as  early  as  the  commencement
of  the  fourteenth  century,  in  the  person  of
Raymond  Lully,  the  renowned  scholiast
and  metaphysical  chemist,  who  proved  to
be  an  adept  in  the  doctrines  taught  at  the
German  seat  of  hermetic  learning  in  1302,
and  who  died  in  1315.  Fidelity  and  secrecy
were  the  first  care  of  the  Brotherhood.
They  claimed  a  kinship  to  the  ancient
philosophies  of  Egypt,  the  Chaldeans,  the
Magi  of  Persia,  and  even  the  Gym  noso¬
phists  of  India.  They  were  unobtrusive
and  retiring  in  the  extreme.  They  were
learned  in  the  principles  and  sciences  of
chemistry,  hermeticism,  magnetism,  astrol¬
ogy,  astronomy,  and  theosophy,  by  which
they  obtained  great  powers  through  their
discoveries,  and  aimed  at  the  universal  sol¬
vent — the  Philosopher’s  Stone — thereby
striving  to  acquire  the  power  of  transmut¬
ing  baser  metals  into  silver  and  gold,  and
of  indefinitely  prolonging  human  life.  As
a  Fraternity  they  were  distinct  from  the
Kabbalists,  Illuminati,  and  Carbonari,  and
in  this  relation  they  have  been  largely  and
unpleasantly  misrepresented.  Ignorance
and  prejudice  on  the  part  of  the  learned  as
to  the  real  purposes  of  the  Rosicrucians,
and  as  to  the  beneficence  of  that  Frater¬
nity,  has  wrought  them  great  injustice.
Science  is  infinitely  indebted  to  this  Order.
The  renowned  reviver  of  Oriental  literature,
John  Reuchlin,  who  died  in  1522;  the
famous  philosopher  and  classic  scholar,
John  Picus  di  Mirandola,  who  died  in
1494;  the  celebrated  divine  and  distin¬
guished  philosopher,  Cornelius  Henry
Agrippa,  who  died  in  1535;  the  remarka¬
ble  chemist  and  physician,  John  Baptist
Von  Helruont,  who  died  in  1(544  ;  and  the
famous  physician  and  philosopher,  Robert
Fludd,  who  died  in  1(537,  all  attest  the
power  and  unquestioned  prominence  of  the
famous  Brotherhood.  It  is  not  the  part  of
wisdom  to  disdain  the  Astrological  and
Hermetic  Association  of  Elias  Ashmole,
author  of  the  Way  to  Bliss.  All  Europe
was  permeated  by  this  secret  organization,
and  the  renown  of  the  Brotherhood  was
preeminent  about  the  year  1615.  Wessel’s
Fama  Fraternitalis,  the  curious  work  Secre-
tioris  Philosophic^  Consuleratis,  and  Cum
Confessione  Fraternitatis,  by  P.  A.  Gabella,


with  Fludd's  Apologia,  the  Chemische  Iloch-
zeil  of  Christian  llosenkreuz,  by  Valentine
Andrae;  and  the  endless  number  of  vol¬
umes,  such  as  the  Faina  llamissa,  establish
the  high  rank  in  which  the  Brotherhood
was  held.  Its  curious,  unique,  and  attrac¬
tive  Rosaic  doctrines  interested  the  masses
of  scholars  of  the  sixteenth  and  seven¬
teenth  centuries.  With  the  Rosicrucians
worldly  grandeur  faded  before  intellectual
elevation.  They  were  simple  in  their  at¬
tire,  and  passed  individually  through  the
world  unnoticed  and  unremarked,  save  by
deeds  of  benevolence  and  humanity.

The  Modem  Society  of  Rosicrucians  was
given  its  present  definite  form  by  Robert
Wentworth  Little,  of
England,  but  a  few’  years
ago ;  it  is  founded  upon
the  remains  or  the  em¬
bers  of  an  old  German
association  which  had
come  under  his  obser¬
vation  during  some  of
his  researches.  Brother
Little  Anglicized  it,  giv¬
ing  it  more  perfect  sys¬
tem.  The  purpose  of
Robert  Wentworth  Lit¬
tle  was  to  create  a  liter¬
ary  organization,  having
in  view  a  base  lor  the
collection  and  deposit
of  archaeological  and
historical  subjects  per¬
taining  to  Freemasonry,
secret  societies  in  gen¬
eral,  and  interesting
provincial  matter;  to
inspire  a  greater  disposi¬
tion  to  obtain  historical
truth  and  to  displace
error;  to  bring  to  light
much  in  relation  to  a  certain  class  of  sci¬
entists  and  scholars,  and  the  results  of  their
life-labors,  that  were  gradually  dying  away
in  the  memories  of  men.  To  accomplish
this  end  he  called  about  him  some  of  his
most  prominent  English  and  Scottish  Ma¬
sonic  friends  inclined  to  literary  pursuits,
and  they  awarded  their  approval  and  hearty
co-operation.  See  Tlosicrucianism,  Mac  KEY.

Royal  Arch  Grand  Bodies  in
America.  The  first  meeting  of  dele¬
gates  out  of  which  arose  the  General  Grand
Chapter  was  at  Boston,  October  24.  1797.
The  convention  adjourned  to  assemble  at
Hartford,  in  January,  1798,  and  it  was  there
the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  Northern  States
of  America  was  organized.  Again,  on  the
9th  of  January,  1799,  an  adjourned  meet¬
ing  was  held,  whereat  it  was  resolved  to
change  its  name  to  that  of  “General  Grand
Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  Northern  States


ROYAL


ADDENDUM.


RUSSIA


1021


of  America.”  On  January  9,  1806,  the
present  designation  was  adopted,  to  wit:
“  The  General  Grand  Chapter  of  Royal
Arch  Masonry  for  the  U.  S.  of  America.”
New  York  was  determined  upon  as  the
place  for  the  first  convocation,  September,
1812,  and  the  sessions  to  be  made  septen¬
nial.  It  failed  to  meet  at  the  appointed
time,  but  an  important  convocation  was
held  in  New  Y'ork  city  on  June  6,  1816.

Joseph  K.  Wheeler,  G.  Secretary,  in  his
introduction  to  the  Records  of  Capitular
Masonry  in  the  State  of  Connecticut,  says,
after  mentioning  the  names  of  the  Chap¬
ters  represented  at  the  organization  of  the
Grand  Chapter  in  1798:  “  In  tracing  their
history  it  will  be  observed  that  all  of  these
Chapters  obtained  their  authority  from  a
Washington  Chapter  in  the  city  of  New
York,  with  the  exception  of  Vanderbroeck,
No.  5,”  chartered  at  an  early  date,  by  the  G.
Chapter  of  New  York,  after  which  no  more
Chapters  tvere  established  by  any  authority
outside  the  jurisdiction  of  Connecticut  ex¬
cept  Lynch  Chapter,  No.  8,  located  at  Read¬
ing,  and  Weston,  which  was  chartered  by
the  Grand  Chapter  of  N.  York,  August  23,
1801,  which  charter  was  signed  bv  Francis
Lynch,  H.  P.  Grand  Chapter  of  R.  A.  Ma¬
sons;  James  Woods,  King;  and  Samuel
Clark,  Scribe ;  which  was  admitted  to  mem¬
bership  in  G.  Chapter  of  Conn.,  May  19,
1808.

It  is  of  interest  here  to  note  that  the  old¬
est  Chapter  in  New  York  State  is  Ancient,
No.  1,  whose  date  of  origin  is  lost,  its  rec¬
ords  up  to  1804  having  been  destroyed  by
fire,  but  tradition  fixes  the  year  1763.  For
years  it  wielded  the  powers  of  a  Grand
Chapter,  and  until  1799  was  known  as  the
Old  Grand  Chapter.  It  granted  charters
for  Chapters  in  New  York,  New  Jersey,
and  Connecticut.  In  this  last  named  State
it  issued  a  charter  to  Lynch  Chapter  (see
above),  which  was  received  into  full  fellow¬
ship  by  the  G.  Chapter  of  Connecticut,  al¬
though  the  G.  Chapter  of  New  York  had
been  in  existence  some  time  before  the
charter  was  issued.

On  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Chapter
of  the  State  of  New  York,  the  numbers  1
and  2  were  left  vacant  for  the  acceptance
of  Old  and  Washington  Chapters  (which
latter  was  an  offspring  of  the  former),  who
at  that  time  refused  to  place  themselves
under  its  jurisdiction.  In  1806,  Old  Chap¬
ter  enrolled  itself  as  “Ancient”  under  the
State  Grand  Body,  accepted  the  number
one,  and  was  further  honored  by  having  its
11.  Priest,  James  Woods,  elected  Dep.  G.
11.  P  riest.  Also  see  Pennsylvania.

■loyal  Aroli  Masonry,  Massa¬
chusetts.  A  statement  of  the  origin


and  record  of  St.  Andrew’s  Chapter  in  Bos¬
ton  is  to  trace  early  Royal  Arch  Masonry
in  Massachusetts.  The  following  is  ex¬
tracted  from  Comp.  Thomas  Waterman’s
admirable  history  of  St.  Andrew’s  Royal
Arch  Chapter,  the  result  of  much  earnest
research:  “The  first  meeting  recorded  of
this  Chapter  was  held  on  the  28th  of  Au¬
gust,  1769,  and  was  then  styled  the  Royal
Arch  Lodge,  of  which  R.  W.  James  Brown
was  Master.”  It  is  presumable  this  Lodge
derived  its  authority  from  the  Grand  Lodge
(Ancients)  of  England,  as  did  that  of  the
same  name  in  Philadelphia,  whereby  it  was
authorized  to  confer  the  Holy  Royal  Arch
Degree.

Comp.  Waterman  adds:  “It  appears  by
the  record  that  the  Degrees  of  ‘  Excellent,
Super-Excellent,  and  Royal  Arch’  were
conferred  in  the  Royal  Arch  Lodge.”  Win-
throp  Gray,  on  April  17,  1770,  was  elected
Master.  On  the  succeeding  May  14,  “  Most
Worshipful  Joseph  Warren,  Esq.,”  was
made  a  Royal  Arch  Mason.  No  record
appears  between  March  26,  1773,  and
March  20,  1789.  In  an  old  register-book,
dated  April  1,  1789,  is  found  “Original
members,  April  1,  1789,  M.  E.  William
McKeen,  H.  P.”  The  next  recorded  elec¬
tion,  October  21,  1790,  gives  William  Mc¬
Keen,  R.  A.  Master.  “On  November  28,
1793,  the  Degree  of  Mark  Master  was  con¬
nected  with  the  other  Degrees  conferred  in
the  Chapter.”  “January  30,  1794,  the
words ‘Royal  Arch  Chapter  ’  are  used  for
the  first  time  in  recording  the  proceedings
of  the  Chapter.”

“The  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  Mas¬
sachusetts  was  organized  by  delegates  from
St.  Andrew’s  Chapter,  Boston,  and  King
Cyrus’  Chapter,  Newburyport,  who  assem¬
bled  at  Masons’  Hall,  in  the  Green  Dragon
Tavern,  Boston,  on  Tuesday,  the  13th  of
March,  A.  n.  1798.”

Ritchiel.  In  the  old  Jewish  Angel-
ology,  the  name  of  the  angel  who  ruled  the
air  and  the  winds.  The  angel  in  charge  of
one  of  the  four  tests  in  Philosophic  Ma¬
sonry.

Russia,  Secret  Societies  of.

First,  the  Skopzis,  founded  about  1740,  by
Seliwanoff,  on  the  ruins  of  an  anterior  sect,
the  Chlysty,  which  was  originated  by  a
peasant  named  Philippoff,  in  the  seven¬
teenth  century.  The  Skopzis  practise  self-
mutilation  and  other  horrors.  They  are
rich,  and  abound  throughout  Russia  and  in
Bulgaria.  Second,  the  Montainists,  who
declare  that  they  have  a  “  living  Christ,”  a
“living  Mother  of  God,”  a  “living  Holy
Spirit,”  and  twelve  “living  Apostles.”
Their  ceremonies  are  peculiar  and  but
little  resembling  those  of  Masonry.


1022


8


ADDENDUM.


BALA  DIN


s.


S.  (Heb.  Q,  Samech.)  The  nineteenth
letter  in  the  English  alphabet.  Its  numer¬
ical  value  is  60.  The  sacred  application  to
the  Deity  is  in  the  name  Somech,  1010,
Fulcieus  or  Firmas.  The  Hebrew  letter
Shin  (a  tooth,  from  its  formation,  P)  is
of  the  numerical  value  of  300.

Saadli.  One  of  a  certain  Indian  sect,
who  have  embraced  Christianity,  and  who
in  some  respects  resemble  the  Quakers  in
their  doctrine  and  mode  of  life.  Some¬
times  written  saud.

Sabbal.  (“  The  Burthen.”)  The  name
of  the  sixth  step  of  the  mystic  ladder  of
Kadosh  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Sacellum.  A  walled  inclosure  with¬
out  roof.  Au  ornamental  chapel  within  a
church.

Sacred  Law.  The  first  Tables  of  Stone,
or  Commandments,  which  were  delivered
to  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai,  are  referred  to
in  a  preface  to  the  Mishna,  bearing  this
tradition:  “God  not  only  delivered  the
Law  to  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai,  but  the
explanation  of  it  likewise.  When  Moses
came  down  from  the  Mount  and  entered
into  his  tent,  Aaron  went  to  visit  him,  and
Moses  acquainted  Aaron  with  the  Laws  he
had  received  from  God,  together  with  the
explanation  of  them.  After  this  Aarou
placed  himself  at  the  right  hand  of  Moses,
and  Eleazar  and  Ithamar  (the  sons  of
Aaron)  were  admitted,  to  whom  Moses
repeated  what  he  had  just  before  told  to
Aaron.  These  being  seated,  the  one  on
the  right  hand,  the  other  on  the  left  hand
of  Moses,  the  seventy  elders  of  Israel,  who
compose  the  Sanhedrim,  came  in,  and
Moses  again  declared  the  same  laws  to
them,  as  he  had  done  before  to  Aaron  and
his  sons.  Lastly,  all  who  pleased  of  the
common  people  were  invited  to  enter,  and
Moses  instructed  them  likewise  in  the  same
manner  as  the  rest.  So  that  Aaron  heard
four  times  what  Moses  had  been  taught  by
God  upon  Mount  Sinai,  Eleazar  and  Itha¬
mar  three  times,  the  seventy  elders  twice,
and  the  people  once.  Moses  afterwards
reduced  the  laws  which  he  had  received
into  writing,  but  not  the  explanation  of
them.  These  he  thought  it  sufficient  to
trust  to  the  memories  of  the  above-men¬
tioned  persons,  who,  being  perfectly  in¬
structed  in  them,  delivered  them  to  their
children,  and  these  again  to  theirs,  from
age  to  age.”

The  Sacred  Law  is  repeated  in  the  ritual
of  the  Fourteenth  Degree  A.  A.  Scottish
Rite.

8adda.  (Persian  Saddar,  the  hundred
gates.)  A  work  in  the  Persian  tongue.


being  a  summary  of  the  Avesta,  or  sacred
books.

SaddiKees.  (Zedukim.)  A  sect
called  from  its  founder  Sadoc,  who  lived
about  250  years  B.  c.  They  denied  the
resurrection,  a  future  state,  and  the  exist¬
ence  of  angels.  The  Sadducees  are  often
mentioned  in  the  New  Testament,  the
Talmud,  and  the  Midrash.  The  tenets
of  the  Sadducees  are  noticed  as  contrasted
with  those  of  the  Pharisees.  While  Jesus
condemned  the  Sadducees  and  Pharisees,
he  is  nowhere  found  criticising  the  acts,
words,  or  doctrines  of  the  third  sect  of  the
Jews,  the  Essenes;  wherefore,  it  has  been
strongly  favored  that  Jesus  was  himself
one  of  the  last-named  sect,  who  in  many
excellent  qualities  resembled  Freemasons.

Sagitta.  The  keystone  of  an  arch.
The  abscissa  of  a  curve.

Saint  Andrew.

Brother  of  St.  Peter
and  one  of  the  twelve
Apostles.  He  is  held
in  high  reverence  by
the  Scotch,  Swedes,
and  Russians.  Tra¬
dition  says  he  was
crucified  on  a  cross
thus  shaped,  X-  Or¬
ders  of  knighthood
havebeen  established
in  his  name.  See
Kniqhts  of  St.  Andrew,
Mackey.

Saint  Constan¬
tino,  Order  of.
Presumed  to  have  been  founded  by  the
Emperor  Isaac  Angelus  Comnenus,  in
1190.

Sakinat.  The  Divine  presence.  The
Shekinah,  which  see.

Sakti.  The  female  energy  of  Brahma,
of  Vishnu,  or  especially  of  Siva.  This
lascivious  worship  was  inculcated  in  the
Tantra  (“  Instrument  of  Faith  ”),  a  San¬
skrit  work,  found  under  various  forms,  and
regarded  by  its  numerous  Brali mar.ical  and
other  followers  as  a  “  fifth  Veda.”

Salaam.  The  name  of  the  Arabic
form  of  salutation,  which  is  by  bowing
the  head  and  bringing  the  extended  arms
from  the  sides  until  the  thumbs  touch,  the
palms  being  down.

Saladin.  More  properly  Salah-ed-
din,  Yussuf  ibn  Ayub,  the  Sultan  of  Egypt
and  Syria,  in  the  time  of  Richard  Coeur-
de-Lion,  and  the  founder  of  the  Ayubite
dynasty.  As  the  great  Moslem  hero  of  the
third  Crusade,  and  the  beau-ideal  of  Mos¬
lem  chivalry,  he  is  one  of  the  most  impos-


SANDALPHON


ADDENDUM.


SERAPHIM


1023


ing  characters  presented  to  us  by  the  his¬
tory  of  that  period.  Born  at  Takreit,  1137  ;
died  at  Damascus,  1193.  In  his  manhood
he  had  entered  the  service  of  Noureddin.
He  became  Grand  Vizier  of  the  Fatimite
Calif,  and  received  the  title  of  “the  Vic¬
torious  Prince.”  At  Noureddin’s  death,
Salah-ed-din  combated  the  succession  and
became  the  Sultan  of  Syria  and  Egypt.
For  ten  succeeding  years  he  was  in  petty
warfare  with  the  Christians,  until  at  Tibe¬
rias,  in  1187,  the  Christians  were  terribly
punished  for  plundering  a  wealthy  caravan
on  its  way  to  Mecca.  The  king  of  Jeru¬
salem,  two  Grand  Masters,  and  many  war¬
riors  were  taken  captive,  Jerusalem  stormed,
and  many  fortifications  reduced.  This
roused  Western  Europe;  the  kings  of
France  and  England,  with  a  mighty  host,
soon  mac^e  their  appearance;  they  cap¬
tured  Acre  in  1191,  and  Richard  Cceur-de-
Lion,  with  an  invading  force,  twice  de¬
feated  the  Sultan,  and  obtained  a  treaty  in
1192,  by  which  the  coast  from  Jaffa  to
Tyre  was  yielded  to  the  Christians.

Salah-ed-din  becomes  a  prominent  char¬
acter  in  two  of  the  Consistorial  degrees  of
the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite,  mainly  exemplify¬
ing  the  universality  of  Masonry.

Samlnlplion.  In  the  Rabbinical
system  of  Angelology,  one  of  the  three
angels  who  receive  the  prayers  of  the  Is¬
raelites  and  weave  crowns  from  them.
Longfellow  availed  himself  of  this  idea  in
one  of  his  most  beautiful  poems.

Sardinia.  Freemasonry  was  intro¬
duced  into  this  kingdom  in  1739,  when
Piedmont  and  Savoy  were  made  a  province.

Sastra.  One  of  the  sacred  books  of
the  Hindu  law.

Sat  15‘liai.  Royal  Oriental  Or¬
der  of  tlie.  Said  to  have  originated  in
India,  and  so  named  after  a  bird  held  sa¬
cred  by  the  Hindus,  whose  flight,  invariably
in  sevens,  lias  obtained  for  the  Society  the
appellation  of  the  “  Seven  Brethren,”  hence


the  name.  It  embosoms  seven  degrees —
Arch  Censor,  Arch  Courier,  Arch  Minister,


Arch  Herald,  Arch  Scribe,  Arch  Auditor,
and  Arch  Mute.  It  promises  overmuch.

The  foregoing  figure  is  termed  the  Mys¬
tery  of  the  Apex.

Saxony.  The  first  Masonic  Lodge  in
Saxony  appeared  at  Dresden,  in  1738;
within  four  years  thereafter  two  others  had
been  established  in  Leipzig  and  Altenburg.
The  Grand  Body  was  formed  in  1812.

Sclior-Eaban.  (“  White  Ox,”  or
morally,  “Innocence.”)  The  name  of  the
Second  step  of  the  Mystic  Ladder  of  Ka-
dosli  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Scorpion.  A  genus  of  Arachnidct,  of
numerous  species,  with  an  elongated  body,
but  no  marked  division  between  the  thorax
and  abdomen.  Those  of  the  south  of  Europe
and  on  the  borders  of  the  Mediterranean
have  six  eyes.  This  reptile,  dreaded  by
the  Egyptian,  was  sacred  to  the  goddess
Selk,  and  was  solemnly  cursed  in  all  tem¬
ples  once  a  year.

Scottish  Rite,  A.  A.  See  Supreme
Councils.

Scroll.  The  written  portion  of  the
Jewish  law,  read  at  stated  periods  before
the  congregation,  and  preserved  in  the  syn¬
agogue  with  great  security.

Sefitld  Scliauiagan.  A  secret  Mos¬
lem  Society,  called  also  the  Candidati,  from
being  clothed  in  white.  They  taught  that
the  wicked  would  be  transformed,  after
death,  into  beasts,  while  the  good  would  be
reabsorbed  into  the  Divine  Creator.  The
chief  was  known  as  the  Veiled  Prophet.

Sejjin.  The  Arabic  register  of  all  the
wicked,  also  the  title  of  the  residence  of
Eblis.

Selamu  Aleiluim,  Es.  The  Ara¬
bic  salutation  of  “  Peace  be  with  you  ;  ”
which  meets  with  the  response  “ Aleikum
es  Selaam.”  These  expressions  are  promi¬
nently  in  use  by  ancient  Arabic  associations.

Seiuelius.  An  officer  in  the  Sixth
Degree  of  the  Modern  French  Rite,  known
as  the  Grand  Master  of  Dispatches.

Senses,  Seven.  See  Man.

Sepliora.  W ife  of  Moses,  and  daugh¬
ter  of  Raguel  or  Jethro,  Priest  of  Midian.
Mentioned  in  the  Fourth  Degree  of  the
French  Rite  of  Adoption.

Serapliiui.  (Heb.,  Sin-

gular  Seraph ,  signifying  “  burning,  fiery.”
Celestial  beings  in  attendance  upon  Jeho¬
vah,  mentioned  by  Isaiah.  Similar  to  the
Cherubim,  having  the  human  form,  face,
voice,  two  hands,  and  two  feet,  but  six
wings,  with  four  of  which  they  cover  their
face  and  feet — as  a  sign  of  reverence —
while  with  two  they  fly.  Their  specific
office  is  to  sing  the  praises  of  the  Holy  One,
and  convey  messages  from  heaven  to  earth.

Seraphim,  Order  of.  A  Swedish
Rite,  instituted  in  1334,  revived  in  1748.


1024


ADDENDUM.


SETTING-MAUL

The  number  of  knights,  exclusive  of  the
royal  family,  was  twenty-four.

Setting-Maul.  A  wooden  hammer
used  by  Operative  Masons  to  “set”  the
stones  in  their  proper  positions.  It  is  in
Speculative  Masonry  a  symbol,  in  the
Third  Degree,  reminding  us  of  the  death
of  the  builder  of  the  Temple,  which  is  said
to  have  been  effected  by  this  instrument.
In  some  Lodges  it  is  very  improperly  used
by  the  Master  as  his  gavel,  from  which  it
totally  differs  in  form  and  in  symbolic  sig¬
nification.  The  gavel  is  a  symbol  of  order
and  decorum;  the  setting-maul,  of  death
by  violence.

Seven.  The  sun  was  naturally  the
great  central  planet  of  the  ancient  seven,
and  is  ever  represented  as  the  central  light
of  the  seven  in  the  branched  candlestick.
Of  the  days  of  the  week  one  was  known  as
Sol’s  day,  or  Sun¬
day,  and  as  the  Sun
was  the  son  of  Sat¬
urn,  he  was  ush¬
ered  in  by  his  father
Saturn  (or  Satur¬
day),  whom  he  su¬
perseded.  The  Jews
got  their  Sabbath
from  the  Babylo-
n  ians  about  700  B.  c.
(Anc. Faiths,  p.  863  ;
also  see  Philo  Judaeus,  Josephus,  and  Clem¬
ent  of  Alexandria),  while  Sol’s  day  dates
from  time  immemorial,  and  was  always  a
sacred  one.  In  a  phallic  sense,  when  the
sun  has  been  in  conjunction  with  the
moon,  he  only  leaves  Luna  after  impreg¬
nation,  and  as  Forlong,  in  his  Rivers  of
Life,  expresses  it,  “the  young  sun  is  that
faint  globe  we  so  often  see  in  the  arms  of
the  new  moon,”  which  is  in  gestation  with
the  sun.  The  occult  meaning  of  the  word
Mi-mi  perhaps  is  here  revealed,  as  men¬
tioned  in  2  Kings  xviii.  27,  being  defined
Firewater.  Mi  is  the  name  of  the  sun,  and
as  well  signifies  gold.  It  is  designated  in
the  musical  scale,  and  is  also  the  name  of
fire  in  Burmese,  Siamese,  and  cognate
tongues,  as  mentioned  by  Forlong  in  treat¬
ing  of  the  Early  Faiths  of  Western  Asia
(Vol.  II.,  p.  65).

Next  to  the  sun  in  beauty  and  splendor
the  moon  leads  all  the  hosts  of  heaven.
And  the  Occidental,  as  well  as  the  Oriental,
nations  were  strongly  moved  in  their
imaginations  by  the  awful  majesty,  the  sol¬
emn  silence,  and  the  grandeur  of  that
brilliant  body  progressing  nightly  through
the  starry  vault:  from  the  distant  plains
of  India  to  ancient  Egypt,  and  even  those
far-off  lands  where  the  Incas  ruled,  altars
were  erected  to  the  worship  of  the  Moon.
On  every  seventh  day  the  moon  assumed  a  ;


SEVEN

new  phase,  which  gave  rise  to  festivals  to
Luna  being  correspondingly  celebrated  ;
the  day  so  set  apart  was  known  as  Moon-
day,  or  the  second  day  of  the  week,  that
following  Sun-day.  “The  Moon,  whose
phases  marked  and  appointed  their  holy
days  ”  (Cicero,  Tusculan  Disputation's,
Book  I.,  ch.  28).  In  the  Hebrew,  Syrian,
Persian,  Phoenician,  Chaldean,  and  Saxon,
the  word  Seven  signifies  full  or  complete,
and  every  seventh  day  after  the  first  quar¬
ter  the  moon  is  complete  in  its  change.
In  all  countries  the  moon  is  best  known
under  the  beautiful  figure  of  the  unveiling
Queen  of  Heaven.


The  relative  values  of  Seven  in  the
musical  scale  and  in  the  ancient  planetary
formula  are  as  follows:


Si  .

.  Moon  .

.  Silver.

Ut  .

.  Mercury

.  Quicksilver.

Re  .

.  Venus  .

.  Copper.

Mi  .

.  Sun

.  Gold.

Fa  .

.  Mars

.  Iron.

Sol  ,

.  Jupiter.

.  Tin.

La  .

.  Saturn  .

.  Lead.

The  eminent  professor  of  music,  Carl
Bergstein,  in  connection  herewith,  fur¬
nishes  the  information  that  Guido  Are-
tinus,  Monk,  in  the  eleventh  century,  the
great  reformer  of  music,  invented  the  staff,
several  keys,  and  the  names  ut,  re,  mi,  fa,
sol,  la,  si;  they  being  taken  from  a  prayer
to  St.  John  to  protect  the  voice,  running
thus,

Ut  queant  laxis  ZVsonare  fibris

Mi ra  gestoruin  Famuli  tuorum

Solve  polluti  Zabii  reatum,  Sancte  Johannes.

The  literal  translation  of  which  would  be
,  rendered:


SEVEN


ADDENDUM.


SILENT


1025


11  For  that  (or  to  enable)  with  expanded  breast
Thy  servants  are  able  to  sing  the  praise  of  Thy
Deeds,  forgive  the  polluted  lips  the  sins
uttered.”

The  syllable  ut  has  since  been  changed  for
the  more  satisfactory  do.

In  the  year  1562  there  was  printed  at
Leipzig  a  work  entitled  Heptalogium  Virgilii
Salsburgensis,  in  honor  of  the  number  seven.
It  consists  of  seven  parts,  each  embracing
seven  divisions.  In  1624  appeared  in  Lon¬
don  a  curious  work  on  the  subject  of  num¬
bers,  bearing  the  following  title,  “  The  Secret
of  Numbers  according  to  Theological,  Arith¬
metical,  Geometrical ,  and  Harmonical  Com¬
putation  ;  drawn,  for  the  better  part,  out  of
those  Ancients,  as  well  as  Neoteriques.  Pleas¬
ing  to  read,  profitable  to  understand,  open¬
ing  themselves  to  the  capacities  of  both
learned  and  unlearned ;  being  no  other
than  a  key  to  lead  men  to  any  doctrinal
knowledge  whatsoever.”  In  the  ninth
chapter  the  author  has  given  many  nota¬
ble  opinions  from  learned  men,  to  prove
the  excellency  of  the  number  seven.
“  First,  it  neither  begets  nor  is  begotten,
according  to  the  saying  of  Philo.  Some
numbers,  indeed,  within  the  compass  of
ten,  beget,  but  are  not  begotten  ;  and  that
is  the  unarie.  Others  are  begotten,  but
beget  not,  as  the  octonarie.  Only  the  sep-
tenaries  have  a  prerogative  above  them  all,
neither  begets  nor  is  begotten.  This  is  its
first  divinity  or  perfection.  Secondly,  this
is  a  harmonical  number,  and  the  well  and
fountain  of  that  fair  and  lovely  Sigamma,
because  it  includeth  within  itself  all  man¬
ner  of  harmony.  Thirdly,  it  is  a  theologi¬
cal  number,  consisting  of  perfection.
Fourthly,  because  of  its  compositure;  for
it  is  compounded  of  the  first  two  perfect
numbers  equal  and  unequal,  three  and  four ;
for  the  number  two,  consisting  of  repeated
unity,  which  is  no  number,  is  not  perfect.
Now  every  one  of  these  being  excellent  of
themselves  (as  hath  been  demonstrated),
how  can  this  number  be  but  far  more  ex¬
cellent,  consisting  of  them  all,  and  partici¬
pating,  as  it  were,  of  all  their  excellent
virtues?”

Hippocrates  says  that  the  septenary
number,  by  its  occult  virtue,  tends  to  the
accomplishment  of  all  things,  is  the  dis¬
penser  of  life  and  fountain  ofall  its  changes ;
and,  like  Shakespeare,  he  divides  the  life
of  man  into  seven  ages.  In  seven  months
a  child  may  be  born  and  live,  and  not  be¬
fore.  Anciently  a  child  was  not  named
before  seven  days,  not  being  accounted
fully  to  have  life  before  that  periodical  day.
The  teeth  spring  out  in  the  seventh  month,
and  are  renewed  in  the  seventh  year,  when
infancy  is  changed  into  chiWhood.  At
thrice  seven  years  the  faculties  are  devel-
6  D  65


oped,  manhood  commences,  and  we  become
legally  competent  to  all  civil  acts;  at  four
times  seven  man  is  in  full  possession  of  his
strength ;  at  five  times  seven  he  is  fit  for
the  business  of  the  world;  at  six  times
seven  he  becomes  grave  and  wise,  or  never ;
at  seven  times  seven  he  is  in  his  apogee,
and  from  that  time  he  decays;  at  eight
times  seven  he  is  in  his  first  climacteric;
at  nine  times  seven,  or  sixty-three,  he  is  in
his  grand  climacteric,  or  years  of  danger;
and  ten  times  seven,  or  threescore  years  and
ten,  has,  by  the  Royal  Prophet,  been  pro¬
nounced  the  natural  period  of  human  life.

Slialal  Shalom  Abl.  (Hebrew,
’SX  Dibit'  V?S!',  Diripuit  pacem  patri.)  A
covered  word  in  the  Fifteenth  Degree  of
the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Sbalasb  Esrim.  (Heb.  d'-iet  whip.)
“  Twenty-three,”  and  refers  to  a  day  in  the
month  Adar,  noted  in  the  Sixteenth  De¬
gree  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Sbaster.  (“Instruction.”)  Any  book
held  more  or  less  sacred  among  the  Hindus,
whether  included  in  the  Sruti  or  not.  The
Great  Shasters  comprise  the  Vedas,  the
Upavedas,  and  the  Vedangas,  with  their
appended  works  of  learning,  including  the
Puranas,  the  Ramayana,  and  the  Maha-
bharata.

Sbcbat.  (rOCM  The  fifth  month
of  the  Hebrew  civil  year,  and  correspond¬
ing  with  the  months  January  and  Febru¬
ary,  beginning  with  the  new  moon  of  the
former.

Sbelum  lecka.  The  password  of
the  Order  of  Felicity.  It  is  of  Arabic
root,  signifying,  “  Peace  be  with  you !  ”

Shemiitic.  One  of  the  three  histori¬
cal  divisions  of  religion — the  other  two
being  the  Turanian  and  the  Aryan — and
embraces  Mosaism,  Christianity,  the  Ed-
daic  Code,  and  Moslemism.

Shermah,  Insect.  See  Insect  Sher-
mah.

Sbesba.  The  seven-headed  serpent
floating  in  the  cosmical  ocean,  upon  which
the  throne  of  Brahma  rested.

Sbinto.  The  national  worship  of  the
Japanese,  and  signifies  the  “path  of  the
gods.”  It  is  presumed  to  be  more  ancient
than  the  days  of  King  Solomon,  and  is
analogous  to  sun  worship.

Slioulkain.  (Heb.  pjrSlBf,  Fimbria
possessionis.)  Stolkin,  mentioned  in  the
Ninth  and  other  Degrees  of  the  A.  A.  Scot¬
tish  Rite.

Sijcl,  Al.  The  recording  angel  in  Is¬
lam.

Silent  Brotherhood.  Dwellers  in
the  priories  of  Clugny  and  Hirsan  in  the
eleventh  century  were  placed  under  rigid
discipline  as  to  speech.  Those  of  Clugny
were  the  first  to  adopt  the  system  of  signs


1026


SILOAM


ADDENDUM.


SOLOMON’S


for  daily  intercommunication,  which  sys¬
tem,  by  consent  or  permissal,  granted  after
application  through  three  special  messen¬
gers  from  the  priory  of  Hirsan,  was  adopted
by  that  priory  in  all  its  elaborateness,  and
indeed  enlarged  and  perfected  by  the  well-
known  Abbot  William.  The  doctrine  of  a
perfect  silence  in  such  extensive  communi¬
ties  became  noteworthy  in  history.  These
earnest  and  devoted  men,  under  strong  dis¬
cipline,  as  “  Conversi  or  barbati /raters,”  were
encouraged  by  the  abbeys  of  the  Middle
Ages.  Their  labors  were  conducted  in
companies  of  ten  each,  under  deans  of  the
monastery,  who  were  in  turn  instructed  by
wardens  and  superiors.

Siloam  Inscription.  An  inscrip¬
tion  accidentally  discovered  in  1880  by  a
native  pupil  of  Mr.  Schick,  a  German  ar¬
chitect,  who  had  long  settled  in  Jerusalem.
It  is  chiselled  in  the  rock  that  forms  the
southern  wall  of  the  channel  which  opens
out  upon  the  ancient  Pool  of  Siloam,  and  is
partly  concealed  by  the  water.  The  present
modern  pool  includes  the  older  reservoir,
supplied  with  water  by  an  excavated  tun¬
nel,  1708  yards  long,  communicating  with
the  Spring  of  the  Virgin,  which  is  cut
through  the  ridge  that  forms  the  southern
part  of  the  Temple  Hill.  The  pool  is  on
the  opposite  side  of  the  ridge,  at  the  mouth
of  the  Tyropceon  (Cheesemakers)  valley,
which  is  now  filled  with  rubbish,  and
largely  built  over.

The  inscription  is  on  an  artificial  tablet
in  the  rock,  about  nineteen  feet  from  the
opening  upon  the  pool.  The  first  intelli¬
gible  copy  was  made  by  Prof.  A.  H.  Sayce,
whose  admirable  little  work,  called  Fresh
Light  from  the  Ancient  Monuments,  gives
full  details.  Dr.  Guthe,  in  March,  1881,
made  a  complete  facsimile  of  the  six  lines,
which  read  thus :

“  (Behold)  the  excavation !  now  this  is
the  history  of  the  excavation.  While  the
excavators  were  still  lifting  up  the  pick,
each  towards  his  neighbor,  and  while  there
were  yet  three  cubits  to  (excavate,  there
was  heard)  the  voice  of  one  man  calling  to
his  neighbor,  for  there  was  an  excess  in
the  rock  on  the  right  hand  (and  on  the  left).
And  after  that  on  the  day  of  excavating,
the  excavators  had  struck  pick  against  pick,
one  against  the  other,  the  waters  flowed
from  the  spring  to  the  pool  for  a  distance
of  1200  cubits.  And  (part)  of  a  cubit  was
the  height  of  the  rock  over  the  head  of  the
excavators.”

The  engineering  skill  must  have  been
considerable,  as  the  work  was  tortuous,  and
yet  the  excavators  met  at  the  middle.
There  is  no  date,  but  the  form  of  the  let¬
ters  show  the  age  to  be  nearly  that  of  the
Moabite  stone.  Scholars  place  the  date


during  the  reign  of  Hezekiah.  “  He  made
the  pool  and  the  aqueduct,  and  brought  the
water  into  the  city”  (2  Kings  xx.  20,  Heb.
B.).  The  discovery  was  an  important  one.
Prof.  Sayce  deduces  the  following :  “That
the  modern  city  of  Jerusalem  occupies  very
little  of  the  same  ground  as  the  ancient
one;  the  latter  stood  entirely  on  the  rising
ground  to  the  east  of  the  Tyropceon  valley,
the  northern  portion  of  which  is  at  present
occupied  by  the  Mosque  of  Omar,  while
the  southern  portion  is  uninhabited.  The
Tyropceon  valley  itself  must  be  the  Valley
of  the  Sons  of  Hinnom,  where  the  idolaters
of  Jerusalem  burnt  their  children  in  the
fire  to  Moloch.  It  must  be  in  the  southern
cliff  of  this  valley  that  the  tombs  of  the
kings  are  situated,”  they  being  buried  un¬
der  the  rubbish  . with  which  the  valley  is
filled;  and  “among  this  rubbish  must  be
the  remains  of  the  city  and  temple  de¬
stroyed  by  Nebuchadnezzar.  Here,  as  well
as  in  the  now  obliterated  Valley  of  the
Cheesemakers,  probably  lie  the  relics  of
the  dynasty  of  David.”

Hebrew  inscriptions  of  an  early  date  have
hitherto  long  been  sought  for  in  vain.
Seals  and  fragmentary  inscriptions  have
heretofore  been  discovered.  Several  of
these  seals  have  been  found  in  Babylonia
and  Mesopotamia,  and  are  regarded  as
memorials  of  the  Jewish  exiles ;  but  the
Schick  discovery  gives  us  a  writing  cer¬
tainly  as  old  as  the  time  of  Isaiah.

Simorgli.  A  monstrous  griffin,  guar¬
dian  of  the  Persian  mysteries.

Sirat,  As  or  Al.  See  Al-Sirat.

44  Sit  L.UX  et  Tux  Fuit.”  A  motto
frequently  used  in  Masonry,  although  some¬
times  written,  “Lux  Fiat  et  Lux  Fit,”  sig¬
nifying,  “  Let  there  be  light,  and  there
was  light ;”  the  strict  translation  from  the
Hebrew  continues,  “  And  the  Lord  took
care  of  the  light,  that  it  was  useful,  and
he  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness.”

Sivan.  (JVD.)  The  ninth  month  of  the
Hebrew  civil  year,  and  corresponding  with
the  months  May  and  June,  beginning  with
the  new  moon  of  the  former.

Smaragdine,  Tablet  of  Her¬
mes.  The  foundation  of  Hermetic  know¬
ledge,  with  an  unknown  author.  Translated
in  the  Oedipus  Aeggptiacm.

Softas.  Students  in  the  universities
of  Islam.

Soli  Sanctissimo  Sacrum.  (“Sa¬
cred  to  the  most  holy  Sun.”)  Mentioned
in  the  Twenty-eighth  Degree,  A.  A.  Scot¬
tish  Rite.

Solomon’s  Temple  and  Serpent
Worship.  The  following  description
of  Solomon’s  Temple,  by  J.  G.  R.  For-
long,  in  his  admirable  work,  Rivers  of  Life,
should  not  be  passed  by  in  a  Masonic  en-


SOLOMON’S


ADDENDUM.


SOLOMON’S


1027


cyclopaedia;  his  experience  under  many
qualifications  renders  his  opinion  entitled
to  weighty  thought,  yet  he  rends  the  Ma¬
sonic  ideal  and  great  central  symbol  most
wofully.

Forlong  says  the  Temple  was  a  poor  im¬
itation  of  the  grand  Egyptian  temple  near
Edfou,  20  miles  south  of  Thebes.  This
was  450  feet  long  and  140  feet  broad,  or
upwards  of  14  times  the  size  of  the  Hebrew
shrine,  or  that  one  of  the  Edfou  temple
halls  would  swallow  up  the  Jewish  temple,
which  was  only  1 20  feet  long,  40  broad,  and
60  high;  with  a  tower  porch  40  x  20  feet
and  240  high :  and  further,  that  it  may
have  been  gilt  like  the  Buddhist  temples
in  Burmah.  The  Holy  of  Holies  was  cut
off  with  “  golden  chains”  from  the  rest  of
the  inner  temple,  and  was  40  feet  long ;
shrouded  and  bedecked  with  two  hooded
serpents,  called  cherubim,  and  with  chains
and  garlands,  which  are  serpent  symbols.
The  carvings,  with  like  significancy,  were
symbolic  palm-trees,  open  flowers,  and
cherubim,  etc.  Forlong  continues,  stating
that  “  according  to  the  Arabic,  Syrian,  and
Alexandrian  Bible,  the  porch  should  be
only  20  cubits  high,  but  let  us  stand  to  the
orthodox  Bible.  That  theark-box  with  its
phallic  tower  is  in  accordance  with  the
whole  of  a  Sivaik  shrine;  that  the  tower-
porch  is  but  the  Egyptian  obelisk,  or  the
Buddhist  pillars,  or  those  of  Hercules  which
stood  near  the  Phoenician  temple ;  or  the
spire  of  the  Christian  church.  That  the  pil¬
lars  Jachin  and  Boaz  are  within  the  tower-
porch.  That  an  altar  was  an  ark  with  a
‘  mercy-seat,’  or  place  of  fire  and  sacrifice.”

The  following  specifications  and  draw¬
ings  are  then  given :

“  No.  I.  is  a  Ground  Plan  of  Temple.  This
has  a  total  length  of  120  feet,  of
which  the  sanctum  is  40  feet,  and
beyond  this,  but  separate,  is  the
spire  and  porch,  20  by  40  feet.

The  Molten  Sea  (2Chron.  iv.  10)
and  a  staircase  appear  to  be  on
each  side  at  the  entrance,  whilst
in  the  porch  is  placed  Jachin  and
Boaz,  the  chariot  of  the  sun,  etc.

I  am  unable  to  comprehend  the
details  of  windows  and  doors,
upper  and  lower  stories,  and  par¬
titions,  owing  to  the  imperfect
and  often  contradictory  terms
given  in  Kings  and  Chronicles  ;  but  in  the
leading  figures  no  architect  can  make  a
mistake.  Such  temples  are  especially  com¬
mon  amongst  the  phallic  worshippers  of
southern  India.  A  lofty  entrance-porch
usually  adorns  the  front ;  on  entering  we
find  phallic  poles,  with  altars  for  sacrifice,
etc.;  and  in  the  innermost  recess  the  sanc¬
tuary  or  oracle  of  the  Cultus.


“  No.  II.  is  a  Block  Plan  of  Site,  showing
that  the  shrine  is  to  be  placed  true  east
and  west,  so  that  the  Ark  or  altar  may  see
the  morning  sun  of  the  midsummer  sol¬


stice  rise  over  Mount  Olivet,  with  a  ray
which  bisects  the  inner  and  outer  walls  of
the  inclosure,  which  I  take  to  be  trape¬
zoidal  in  form,  owing  to  the  course  of  the
cliffs  that  bound  the  summit  eastwardly.

“No.  III.  is  a  Longitudinal  Section  of
Temple.  This  gives  details  of  spire  and
position  of  the  phalli,  Jachin  and  Boaz,
and  determines  their  height  as  something
between  50  and  60  feet,  also  the  elevation,
etc.,  of  the  sanctum  and  oracle.  The  ark
having  been  early  lost,  I  place  a  plain
maha-deva  or  stone,  which  the  Rev.  T.
Wilson  tells  us  was  all  that  existed  in
the  second  temple.


k


“No.  IV.  is  a  Front
Section  of  Porch.  This
shows  its  appearance
from  the  front,  with  the
relative  heights  of  tem¬
ple  in  two  stories;  but
the  chroniclers  are  here
very  defective,  one  mak¬
ing  the  sanctum  portion
lower  than  the  rest  by
10  feet  or  so.  ”

J.  G.  R.  Forlong
adopts  two  feet  to  a
Solomon’s  cubit,  which
is  the  amount  allowed


by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  and  has  been  ap¬
proved  by  eminent  authority.  At  the  en¬
trance  of  the  Temple  stood  the  mighty
Baal,  represented  by  chariots  with  horses
yoked,  whilst  ever  around  him  and  in  the


1028


SON


ADDENDUM.


ST.  ANTHONY


courts,  sacred  then  to  all  heaven’s  other
orbs,  were  his  priests,  called  chemorim,
burning  incense  to  the  sun,  moon,  and
twelve  zodiac  constellations.  There  also
sat  the  temple-women  weaving  hangings,
which  symbolized  serpents.  At  the  gate
of  this  “holy  city  of  David  and  Solomon,”
where  lived  Joshua,  the  governor,  were  the
“high  places”  to  phallic-worship,  as  Hin-
dostan  so  well  knows  these,  at  the  entering
in  of  all  her  cities.  In  “the  valley  of
the  sons  of  Hinnom  ”  the  drums  of  Tophiin
were  ever  sounding,  to  drown  from  the  ears
of  loving  but  fanatical  parents  the  wails
and  shrieks  of  their  offspring,  consigned
by  ruthless  and  bloody  priests  into  the  red
hot  stomach  of  the  great  brass  god  Moloch,
or  else  clasped  by  his  horrid  arms  to  his
burning  frame.  See  Temple.

Sion  of  Hiram.  A  mixed  tradition
states  that  Ay  non  was  a  son  of  Hiram
Abif,  and  was  appointed  master  of  the
workmen  who  hewed  the  cedars  and  shaped
the  timber  for  the  temple,  and  was  recog¬
nized  for  his  geometrical  knowledge  and
skill  as  an  engraver.

Soter.  An  appellation  implying  “  Sa¬
viour.”

Spencer  Manuscript.  Bro.  Rich¬
ard  Spencer,  the  celebrated  Masonic  bibli-
opolist  of  London,  in  the  preface  to  his  re¬
print  of  The  Old  Constitutions,  published  in
1871,  says  he  possesses  a  Masonic  tract  of
twenty  pages,  printed  in  quarto,  the  title
of  which  is  as  follows :  “  The  beginning
and  the  first  foundation  of  the  most  worthy
Craft  of  Masonry,  with  the  charges  there¬
unto  belonging.  By  a  deceased  Brother,
for  the  benefit  of  his  widow.  London :
printed  for  Mrs.  Dodd  at  the  Peacock,  with¬
out  Temple  Bar,  1739.  Price  sixpence.”
This,  he  thinks,  is  very  like  the  Constitu¬
tions  of  1726,  printed  by  him  in  1870,  and
is  apparently  copied  from  a  similar  manu¬
script.  The  tract  to  which  Bro.  Spencer
refers  has  not  been  reprinted  by  him,  but
the  unknown  manuscript  of  which  it  is
supposed  to  be  a  copy  has  been  entitled  the
Spencer  Manuscript.

Squarmen.  The  companies  of
wrights,  slaters,  etc.,  in  Scotland,  in  the
seventeenth  century,  were  called  “Squar-
men.”  They  had  ceremonies  of  initiation,
and  a  word,  sign,  and  grip,  like  the  Ma¬
sons.  Lyon  (Hist,  of  the  L.  at  Edinh.,
p.  23)  says:  “The  ‘Squarmen  Word’  was
given  in  conclaves  of  journeymen  and  ap¬
prentices,  wrights,  slaters,  etc.,  in  a  cere¬
mony  in  which  the  aspirant  was  blind¬
folded  and  otherwise  ‘  prepared ;  ’  he  was
sworn  to  secrecy,  had  word,  grip,  and  sign
communicated  to  him,  and  was  afterward
invested  with  a  leather  apron.  The  en¬
trance  to  the  apartment,  usually  a  public


house,  in  which  the  ‘brithering’  was  per¬
formed,  was  guarded,  and  all  who  passed
had  to  give  the  grip.  The  fees  were  spent
in  the  entertaining  of  the  brethren  present.
Like  the  Masons,  the  Squarmen  admitted
non-operatives.”  In  the  St.  Clair  charter
of  1628,  among  the  representatives  of  the
Masonic  Lodges,  we  find  the  signature  of
“  George  Liddell,  deakin  of  squarmen  and
now  quartermaistir.”  This  would  show
that  there  must  have  been  an  intimate
connection  between  the  two  societies  or
crafts.

Sruti.  (“Revelation.”)  A  collective
name  of  those  Sanskrit  writings  supposed
by  the  Hindus  to  have  been  revealed  by  a
deity,  and  applied  at  first  only  to  the  Vedic
Mantras  and  Brahmanas,  but  afterward
extended  to  the  older  Upanishads.

St.  Alban’s  Regulations.  The
regulations  said  to  have  been  made  by  St.
Alban  for  the  government  of  the  craft  are
referred  to  in  the  Stone  MSS.  cited  by  An¬
derson,  in  his  second  edition  (p.  57),  and
afterwards  by  Preston.  See  St.  Alban,  in
body  of  this  work.

St.  Anthony.  An  order  taking  its  rise
from  the  life  and  hab¬
its  of  St.  Anthony,  the
hermit,  who  died  about
357.  His  disciples,
called  Anchorites,  near
Ethiopia,  lived  in  aus¬
terity  and  solitariness
in  the  desert,  until
John,  emperor  of  Ethi¬
opia,  in  370,  created
them  a  religious  order
of  knighthood,  and  be¬
stowed  privileges  upon
them  under  the  title  of
St.  Anthony,  who  was
made  patron  of  the
empire.  They  estab¬
lished  monasteries,
adopted  a  black  habit,
and  wore  a  blue  cross  in  the  shape  of  a  Tau.

The  vow  embraced  chastity,  defence  of
the  Christian  faith,  to  guard  the  empire,
obey  their  superiors,  and  go  to  war  when
and  wheresoever  commanded.  Marriage  re¬
quired  a  license.  There  were  two  classes —
combatants  and  non-combatants — the  sec¬
ond  class  being  composed  of  those  too  old
for  military  duty.  Yet  ere  they  retired
they  were  required  to  serve  three  years
against  Arabian  pirates,  three  against  the
Turks,  and  three  against  the  Moors.

The  ancient  monastery  is  in  the  deserts
of  Thebais,  surrounded  by  an  oval  wall
500  paces  in  circumference  and  40  feet  in
height.  It  is  entered  by  ropes  let  down
from  the  watch  house,  the  crane  being
turned  by  monks.  By  age,  the  cells,  which


ST.  JOHN


ADDENDUM.


STATISTICS


1029


are  four  by  five  by  seven  feet,  have  been
reduced  from  300  to  40.  Advantage  had
been  taken  of  one  of  nature’s  curiosities
in  obtaining  abundant  water  from  a  riven
rock,  which  is  reached  through  a  subterra¬
neous  passage  of  50  paces,  extending  be¬
yond  the  walls.  In  France,  Italy,  and
Spain  there  are  ecclesiastical  and  military
organizations  styled  Knights  of  St.  An¬
thony,  who  wear  a  plain  cross,  the  princi¬
pals  a  double  cross.  The  chief  seat  is  at
Vienna.  In  the  abbey  rest  the  remains
of  St.  Anthony.

St.  John,  the  Evangelist.  The

elaborate  and  expressive  coat-of-arms  of
the  German  Masons,  as  taken  from  an
authentic  old  drawing  (Heideloff),  a.  d.
1515,  a  representation  of  which  will  be
found  in  the  third  volume  of  Gould's  His¬
tory,  p.  145,  tends  to  show  that  Dr.  Mackey
had  overlooked  the  same  (see  p.  684)  when
writing  as  to  the  age  when  the  Evangelist
was  known  to  Masonry,  if  the  German
Masons  of  1515  were  legitimately  our  fore¬
fathers  in  the  Fraternity.  The  coat-of-
arms  has  encrusted  on  a  shield  a  ball,
toward  the  centre  of  which  one  point  of
each  of  four  compasses  is  directed,  thus :


this  shield  is  surmounted  by  an  ornamental
breastplate  and  scroll-work  of  leaves,  at  the  su¬
perior  portion  of  which,  from  a  ducal  crown,
issues  an  eagle  with  uplifted  wings  and  a  pen
in  its  beak  ;  in  a  circle  surrounding  the  head
are  the  words  “  S.  Johannes  Evangelista.”

Statistics  of  Craft  Masonry  in  the
United  States  of  America,  and  those  countries
lying  north  of  the  same,  from  latest  reports
received  up  to  July  1,  1890  :


Grand  Lodges.

No  of  Sub¬
ordinates.

Members

Alabama .

*274

8,501

Arizona .

*5

424

Arkansas .

427

13,000

British  Columbia

10

750

California .

241

15,831

Canada  .

354

20,499

Colorado .

75

5,252

Connecticut .

111

15,434

Grand  Lodges.

No.  of  Sub¬
ordinate.

Members.

Delaware  .......

21

1,699

District  of  Columbia  .  .

*21

3,946

Florida .

*82

3,396

Georgia .

297

13,500

Idaho  .

*12

748

Illinois .

683

42,369

Indiana .

470

23,890

Indian  Territory  ....

38

1,375

Iowa .

441

22,463

Kansas .

330

17,333

Kentucky .

432

15,263

Louisiana .

108

4,259

Maine .

191

20,675

Manitoba .

*15

1,707

Maryland .

*88

5,027

Massachusetts .

*223

30,110

Michigan .

363

30,685

Minnesota .

185

12,000

Mississippi .

270

7,966

Missouri .

537

26,945

Montana .

33

1,833

Nebraska .

188

9,282

Nevada  .

19

1,024

New  Brunswick  .

*34

1,885

New  Hampshire  ....

*75

8,280

New  Jersey .

164

13,610

New  Mexico .

*8

629

New  York .

720

7n  77Z

North  Carolina  ....

241

9,456

North  Dakota .

33

1,464

Nova  Scotia .

*67

2,887

Ohio .

488

34,840

Oregon .

*51

3,564

Pennsvlvania  .

391

41,170

P.  E.  Island  .

*12

494

Quebec .

*68

3,050

Rhode  Island .

35

3,964

South  Carolina  .  .

*181

5,329

South  Dakota  .  .  .

2,766

Tennessee .

*412

16,155

Texas  .

*428

21,558

Utah .

7

491

Vermont .

100

8,742

Virginia .

231

9,400

Washington  .  .  .

65

3,025

West  Virginia .

*80

4,070

Wisconsin .

*189

13,387

Wyoming .

12

'650

*  From  Report  of  1884.

Statistics  of  Capitular  Masonry —
Royal  Arch — in  the  United  States  of  America,


to  July  1,  1890.

Grand  Chapters.  Members.

Alabama .  725

Arkansas .  1,689

British  Columbia .  100

California .  4,650

Canada .  3,807

Colorado .  1,716

Connecticut . 44,610

Delaware .  357

District  of  Columbia .  1,524

Florida .  441

Georgia .  2,000

Illinois . 13,279

Indiana . ; .  5,443

Indian  Territory .  184

Iowa .  6,449


1030


STATISTICS


ADDENDUM.


STRASBURG


Grand  Chapters.  Members.

Kansas  .  3,917

Kentucky .  2,490

Louisiana .  584

Maine .  4,690

Maryland .  1,342

Massachusetts . 10,722

Michigan .  9,733

Minnesota .  3,600

Mississippi .  1,072

Missouri .  5,265

Nebraska .  2,418

Nevada .  353

New  Brunswick .  338

New  Hampshire .  2,607

New  Jersey .  2,736

New  York . 15,646

North  Carolina .  603

North  Dakota .  355

Nova  Scotia .  517

Ohio . 12,000

Oregon .  851

Pennsylvania . 12,467

Quebec .  435

Rhode  Island .  1,957

South  Carolina .  407

South  Dakota .  1,095

Tennessee .  2,097

Texas .  4,235

Utah .  136

Vermont .  2,249

Virginia .  1,418

Washington .  470

West  Virginia .  652

Wisconsin .  4,468


Statistics  of  the  Order  of  the
Temple  in  all  countries  wherein  it  has  been
established,  1890  :


Grand  Commanderies.

Subor¬

dinates.

Mem¬

bers.

Alabama,  1889  .

5

209

Arkansas .

12

350

California .

29

2,475

Colorado  .  .  • .

16

939

Connecticut .

11

1,734

N.  Dakota  <t  South  Dakota  .  .

12

689

Georgia .

8

400

Illinois .

Ol

7,507

Indiana .

32

2,816

Iowa .

54

3,793

Kansas .

33

2,247

Kentucky .

23

1,661

Louisiana .

4

375

Maine .

19

2.324

Marvland .

8

897

Mas.  and  Rhode  Island,  1889  .

41

8.110

Michigan .

40

4,222

Minnesota .

21

2,000

Mississippi .

12

244

Missouri .

OD

3,253

Montana .

7

271

Nebraska .

99

New  Hampshire,  1889  ....

10

1,473

New  Jersev .

16

1,401

New  York .

56

8,663

North  Carolina .

8

231

Ohio .

43

6,351

Oregon .

3

192

Pennsvlvania .

66

8,758

Tennessee .

14

912

Texas

24

1,420

Grand  Commanderies.

Subor¬

dinates.

Mem¬

bers.

Utah .

2

102

Vermont .

10

1,093

Virginia .

19

1,064

Washington .

5

201

West  Virginia .

9

492

Wisconsin,  1889  .

22

2,191

Wvoming,  1589  .

3

161

G.  Lnc.  subordinates,  1889  .  .  .

22

1,932

Canada,  1890  .

31

990

England  and  Wales,  18S4  .  .  .

112

2,800

Ireland,  “  ...

44

1,100

Scotland,  “  ...

9

270

k‘Slellato  Se<let  Solo.”  (“He  sits
on  his  starry  throne.”)  A  symbolic  expres¬
sion  in  the  Twenty-eighth  Degree  of  the  A.
A.  Scottish  Rite.

Strasbiirg,  C  onstitution*,  of.  On

April  25,  1459,  nineteen  Bauhiitten,  or
Lodges,  in  Southern  and  Central  Germany
met  at  Ratisbon,  and  adopted  regulations
for  the  government  of  the  German  stone¬
masons.  Another  meeting  was  held  shortly
afterwards  at  Strasburg,  where  these  statu  tes
were  definitively  adopted  and  promulgated,
under  the  title  of  Ordenunye  der  Steinrnetzen
Strassburg,' or  “Constitutions  of  the  Stone¬
masons  of  Strasburg.”  They  from  time  to
time  underwent  many  alterations,  and  were
confirmed  by  Maximilian  I.  in  1498,  and
subsequently  by  many  succeeding  emperors.
This  old  document  has  several  times  been
printed ;  in  1810,  by  Krause,  in  his  drei
dltesten  hinstertunden  der  Freim crur er bruder¬
schaft ;  in  1819,  by  Heldmann,  in  die  drei
dliesten  gescb  ichiliehen  Denlrna/ederdeutechen
Freimaurerbruderschaft ;  in  1844,  by  Heide-
loff,  in  his  Bauhiiite  des  Mittelulters  in  ihrer
icahren  Bedeutung ;  Findel  also,  in  1866,  in¬
serted  portions  of  it  in  his  Geschichie  der
Freimaurerei,  which  work  has  been  ably
translated  into  English  by  Bro.  D.  Murray
Lyon.

The  invocation  with  which  these  Consti¬
tutions  commence  is  different  from  that  of
the  English  Constitutions.  The  latter  be¬
gin  thus:  “The  might  of  the  Father  of
Heaven,  with  the  wisdom  of  the  blessed
Son,  through  the  grace  of  God  and  good¬
ness  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  be  three  per¬
sons  in  one  Godhead,  be  with  us,”  etc.
The  Strasburg  Constitutions  begin:  “In
the  name  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  of  the  gracious  Mother
Mary,  and  also  her  blessed  servants,  the  four
holy  crowned  ones  of  everlasting  memory,”
etc.  The  reference  to  the  Virgin  Mary  and
to  the  four  crowned  martyrs  is  found  in  none
of  the  English  Constitutions  except  the  old¬
est  of  them,  the  Halliwell  MS.  But  Kloss
has  compared  the  Strasburg  and  the  Eng¬
lish  statutes,  aud  shown  the  great  simi-


STRICT


ADDENDUM.


SUPREME


1031


larity  in  many  of  the  regulations  of  both.
( Mackey. )

Strict  Trial.  See  Vouching,  in  the
body  of  this  work.

Stukely,  I>r.  In  accordance  with  the
Doctor’s  diary,  he  “  was  made  a  Mason,
January  6,  17*21,  at  the  Salutation  Tavern,
Tavistock  street,  London,  with  Mr.  Collins
and  Captain  Rowe,  who  made  the  famous
diving  engine.”  The  Doctor  adds :  “  I  was
the  first  person  in  London  made  a  Free¬
mason  in  that  city  for  many  years.  We  had
great  difficulty  to  find  members  enough  to
perform  the  ceremony.  Immediately  upon
that  it  took  a  run,  and  ran  itself  out  of  breath
through  the  folly  of  its  members.”  The
Stukely  papers  containing  the  Doctor’s
diary  are  of  continuous  interest;  and  ac¬
cording  to  Rev.  W.  C.  Lukis,  P.  M.,  F.  S.
A.,  “  Pain  (or  Payne)  had  been  re-elected
Grand  Master  in  1720,  and  Dr.  Desaguliers
was  the  Immediate  Past  Grand  Master.”
The  last  mentioned  Brother  pronouncing
the  Oration  on  June  24, 1721,  at  Stationers’
Hall:  on  the  following  St.  John’s  Day
(Evangelist),  December 27, 1721,  “We  met
at  the  Fountain  Tavern,  Strand,  and  by  con¬
sent  of  the  Grand  Master  present,  Dr.  Beal
constituted  a  new  Lodge,  where  I  waschosen
Master.”  A  trite  remark  of  Dr.  Stukely  as


to  symbolism,  was:  “The  first  learning  of
the  world  consisted  chiefly  of  symbols,  the
wisdom  of  the  Chaldeans,  Phoenicians,
Egyptians,  Jews,  of  Zoroaster,  Sancho-
niathon,  Pherecydes,  Syrus,  Pythagoras,
Socrates,  Plato,  of  all  the  ancients  that  have
come  to  our  hand,  is  symbolic.”

Sun  of  Mercy,  Society  of  the.
Of  this  Society  little  is  known,  but  Antoine
Joseph  Pernetty,  the  presumed  author  of  the
28th  Degree,  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite,  became  a
devotee  to  it,  and  induced  Swedenborg  to
become  a  member.  Its  central  point  ap¬
pears  to  have  been  Avignon  and  Mont¬
pellier;  and  its  nature  Hermetic.

Supreme  Councils,  A.  A.  Scot¬
tish  Kite.  These  Councils  are  organ¬
ized  in  almost  every  country  of  the  world,
a  number  being  under  royal  patronage,  and
in  many  nations  are  the  governing  power
over  all  existing  Masonry.  A  synoptical
history  of  all  the  Supreme  Councils  that
have  ever  existed,  with  the  manner  of
their  formation  in  chronological  order,  is
published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Su¬
preme  Council  for  the  Northern  Masonic
Jurisdiction  for  1881,  pages  123-150.  From
this  article  is  taken  the  following  list,  giv¬
ing  the  Supreme  Councils  which  have  re¬
ceived  general  recognition:


Supreme  Council.

Grand  Commander.

Orient.

Constituted.

Southern  Jur.  U.  S.  A.

Albert  Pike  .  .  .

Charleston  .

May

31,  1801.

France

Louis  Proal

Paris  .  .

Sept.

22,  1804.

Spain  ....

Manuel  de  Llanos  y  Persi  .

Madrid

July

4,  1811.

Northern  Jur.  U.  S.  A.

Henry  L.  Palmer

Boston

Aug.

5,  1813.

Belgium

Pierre  Vanhumbeek

Bruxelles  .

Mar.

11,  1817.

Ireland

John  F.  Towushend  .

Dublin

June

11,  1826.

Brazil  ....

Dr.  F.  Jose  Cardoza  .

Lavradio

#

1829.

Peru  ....

Fr.  Javier  Mariatgui

Lima  .

Nov.

2,  1830.

New  Granada

Juan  M.  Grau  .

Cartagena  .

.  #

1833.

England,  Wales,  etc.  .

Earl  of  Lathom

London

Oct.

26,  1845.

Scotland

Edinburgh  .

•  •

1846.

Uruguay

Carlos  de  Castro

Montevideo  .

.  ,

1856.

Argentine  Republic  .

Domingo  F.  Sarmiento

Buenos  Ayres

Sept.

13,  1858.

Turin,  of  Italy  .

Dr.  Timoteo  Riboli  .

Turin  .

.

1858.

Colon  (Cuba)

Juan  1.  Zuazo  .

Havana

Mar.

25,  1859.

Mexico

Carlos  Pacheco  ,

Mexico

April  28,  1S68.

Portugal

A.  S.  De  Castro  Guedes

Lisbon

Oct.

30,  1869.

Cluli  ....

J.  De  D.  M.  Beneveute

Valparaiso  .

May

11,  1870.

Central  America .

Manuel  A.  Bonillo

San  Jose

Nov.

27,  1870.

Greece  ....

Prince  Iihodokanakis

Athens

July

24,  1872.

Switzerland

Lausanne  .

Mar.

30,  1873.

Canada

William  H.  Hutton  .

Hamilton  .

Oct.

16,  1874.

Egypt  ....

S.  A.  Zola  ....

Cairo  .

,  .

1878.

Tunis  ....

Gustav  Desmons  .  .

Tunis  .

May

11,  1880.

The  following  Supreme  Councils  have
been  formed,  but  have  not  received  formal
recognition  and  the  courtesy  of  an  exchange
of  representation.  Dominican  Republic,
Florence,  Hungary,  Luxembourg,  Naples,
Palermo,  Rome,  Turkey,  and  Venezuela.
The  number  of  these  Supreme  Bodies  ac¬
complishes  33.

On  the  22d  of  September,  1875,  a  con¬
gress  of  the  various  Supreme  Councils  was


convened  at  Lausanne, Switzerland,  to  con¬
sider  such  matters  as  might  then  and  there
be  submitted  for  consideration  and  united
action,  and  be  deemed  for  the  general  bene¬
fit  of  the  Rite.  Much  speculation  and  lack
of  confidence  was  the  result  among  many
of  the  invited  participants  lest  they  might
be  committed  by  uniting  in  the  conference.
The  Congress,  however,  was  held,  and  a
declaration  of  principles  set  forth.  There


1032


SUPREME


ADDENDUM.


SYSTYLE


was  also  stipulated  and  agreed  upon  a
treaty,  involving  highly  important  meas¬
ures,  embraced  within  28  articles,  which
was  concluded  September  22,  1875.  “The
intimate  alliance  and  confederation  of  the
contracting  Masonic  powers  extended  and
extends  under  their  auspices  to  all  the  sub¬
ordinates  and  to  all  true  and  faithful  Ma¬
sons  of  their  respective  jurisdictions.”
“  Whoever  may  have  illegitimately  and
irregularly  received  any  Degree  of  the  A.
A.  Scottish  Rite  can  nowhere  enjoy  the
prerogatives  of  a  Freemason  until  he  has
been  lawfully  healed  by  the  regular  Su¬
preme  Council  of  his  own  country.”  The
confederated  powers  again  recognized  and
proclaimed  asGrandConstitutionsof  the  A.
A.  Scottish  Rite,  the  constitutions  and  stat¬
utes  adopted  May  1,  1876,  with  the  modifi¬
cations  and  “Tiler  ”  adopted  by  the  Congress
of  Lausanne,  the  22d  of  September,  1875.

The  declaration  and  articles  were  signed
by  representatives  of  eighteen  Supreme
Councils,  who  recognized  the  territorial
jurisdictions  of  the  following  Supreme
Councils,  to  wit:


Northern  Jur.,  U.  S.
Central  America,
Belgium,

Chili,

Scotland,

France,

Hungary,

Italy,

Peru,

Argentine  Republic,
Uruguay.


Southern  J  ur.,  U.  S.
England,

Canada,

Colon,

U.  S.  of  Colombia,
Greece,

Ireland,

Mexico,

Portugal,

Switzerland,

Venezuela.


The  same  delegates,  by  virtue  of  the  plen¬
ary  powers  they  held,  and  by  which  they
were  justified,  promised,  for  their  princi¬
pals,  to  maintain  and  defend  with  all  their
power,  to  preserve,  and  cause  to  be  ob¬
served  and  respected,  not  only  the  terri¬
torial  jurisdiction  of  the  Confederated  Su¬
preme  Councils  represented  in  the  said
Congress  at  Lausanne,  and  the  parties
therein  contracting,  but  also  the  territorial
jurisdiction  of  the  other  Supreme  Councils
named  in  the  foregoing  table.

It  is  not  possible  to  give  statistics  as  to
the  number  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite  Ma¬
sons  in  the  world,  but  calculating  those,
of  whatever  degree,  who  are  governed  by
Supreme  Councils  in  the  different  nations,
it  is  but  reasonable  to  presume  one-half  of
the  entire  Fraternity  is  of  that  Rite,  and
as  a  matter  of  extensiveness,  it  is  par  ex¬
cellence  the  Universal  Rite.  In  many  na¬
tions  there  is  no  other  Rite  known,  and
therein  it  confers  all  the  degrees  of  its  sys¬
tem,  including  the  first  three.  Among  the
English  speaking  Masons,  it  builds  its
structure  upon  the  York  or  the  American
system  of  three  degrees.


In  the  United  States  the  number  of  this
Rite,  enrolled  and  unenrolled,  will  approx¬
imate  twenty-five  thousand  in  the  two  Ju¬
risdictions.  Its  organizations  are  to  be
found  in  every  prominent  city  and  many
towns,  and  in  numerous  instances  possess¬
ing  and  occupying  temples  built  specially
to  accommodate  its  own  peculiar  forms,
elegant  of  structure  and  in  appointments,
and  of  great  financial  value.

The  progress  of  this  Rite  in  the  last  half
century  has  been  most  remarkable,  and  its
future  appears  without  a  cloud.

Sword,  Revolving.  With  the  Cher¬
ubim,  Yahveh  stationed  at  the  gale  of
Eden,  “  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of
Life,”  the  lahat  ha'hereb  hammithhappeketh ,
“  The  revolving  phenomenon  of  the  curved
sword,”  or  “  the  flaming  blade  of  the  sword
which  turns.”  There  were  two  cherubim,
one  at  each  side  of  the  gate.  These  angels,
or  winged  bulls,  did  not  hold  the  weapon
iri  their  hands,  but  it  was  apart,  separate
from  them.  The  lahat  ha'hereb  was  en¬
dowed  with  proper  motion,  or  turned  upon
itself.  There  was  but  one,  and  presuma¬
bly  it  was  between  the  cherubim,  suspend¬
ed  at  a  certain  height  in  the  air.  Prof.
Lenormant,  in  speaking  of  this  terrible
weapon,  states,  that  “the  circumference,
which  was  turned  fully  upon  the  spectator,
could  have  been  full  of  eyes  all  around,  and
that  when  the  prophet  says  ‘  that  they  had
a  circumference  and  a  height  that  were
dreadful,’  the  second  dimension  refers  to
the  breadth  of  their  rims,”  and  when  ad¬
vancing  with  the  cherubim  against  the  ir¬
reverent  intruder  at  the  forbidden  gate,  it
would  strike  and  cut  him  in  pieces  as  soon
as  it  should  graze  him.  The  symbolism
of  this  instrument  has  been  fixed  by  Obry
as  the  tchakra  of  India,  which  is  a  disk
with  sharp  edges,  hollow  at  the  centre,
which  is  flung  horizontally,  after  having
been  whirled  around  the  fingers.  “A  weap¬
on  for  slinging,  shaped  like  a  disk,  mov¬
ing  horizontally  with  a  gyratory  motion,
like  that  of  a  waterspout,  having  a  hollow
centre,  that  the  tips  of  the  fingers  can  pass
through,  whence  seven  divergent  rays  issue
toward  a  circumference,  about  which  are
studded  fifty  sharp  points.”  See  Cheru¬
bim.

Syrian  Rite.  A  religious  sect  which
had  its  origin  in  Syria,  and  which  was  an¬
ciently  comprehended  in  the  patriarchates
of  Antioch  and  of  Jerusalem.  It  was  an  ex¬
ceedingly  flourishing  system.  Before  the
end  of  the  fourth  century  it  numbered  119
distinct  sees,  with  a  population  of  several
millions.  The  liturgy  is  known  as  the  Lit¬
urgy  of  St.  James.

Systyle.  An  arrangement  of  columns
in  which  the  intercolumniation  is  equal  to
the  diameter  of  the  column.


T


ADDENDUM


TEMPLE


1033


T.


T.  The  twentieth  letter  of  the  English
alphabet,  and  the  twenty-second  and  last
of  the  Hebrew.  As  a  symbol,  it  is  con¬
spicuous  in  Masonry.  Its  numerical  value
as  [2.  Teth,  is  9,  but  as  f),  Thau,  it  is  400.
See  Tau,  Mackey.

Tabaor.  Toffet.  Edom.  Three  obso¬
lete  names  which  are  sometimes  given  to
the  three  Elect  in  the  Eleventh  degree  in
the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Tablets,  Engraved.  A  designation
frequently  used  in  the  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite
for  the  book  of  minutes  or  record;  as  in
the  Rose  Croix  Chapter  is  used  the  term
engraved  columns.”


Talith.  An  oblong  shawl  worn  over
the  head  or  shoulders,  named,  from  its
having  four  corners,  the  arba  canphoth.
It  is  also  called  tsitsith,  from  the  fringes
on  which  its  holiness  depends.  The  talith
is  made  of  wool  or  camel’s  hair.  The  wool
fringe  is  carefully  shorn  and  specially  spun.
Four  threads,  one  of  which  must  be  blue,
are  passed  through  eyelet  holes  made  in
the  four  corners.  The  threads  being
double  make  eight.  Seven  are  of  equal
length ;  the  eighth  must  twist  five  times
round  the  rest  and  be  tied  into  five  knots,
and  yet  remain  equal  in  length  to  the
other  seven.  The  five  knots  and  eight
6  E


threads  make  thirteen,  which,  with  the
value  of  the  Hebrew  word  tsitsith,  600,
accomplishes  613,  the  number  of  precepts
of  the  moral  law,  and  which  is  the  number
of  letters  in  Hebrew  composing  the  deca¬
logue.  613  represents  248  positive  pre¬
cepts,  or  members  of  the  human  body,  and
365  negative  precepts,  or  number  of  human
veins.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  wore  the  tsitsith  :
“And  behold  a  woman  .  .  .  came  behind
him  and  touched  the  hern  of  his  garment”
(Matt.  ix.  20) ;  and  he  rebuked  the  Pharisees
for  their  ostentation  in  enlarging  the  “  bor¬
ders  ”  (upacKeda,  fringes)  of  their  garments.
(Matt,  xxiii.  5.)

Taljaliad.  Rendered  in  Hebrew  thus :
1iTbC3,  “Angel  of  Water,”  and  found  in  the
Twenty- ninth  degree  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish
Rite  ritual.

Tanmiuz.  The  tenth  month

of  the  Hebrew  civil  year,  and  correspond¬
ing  to  the  months  June  and  July,  begin¬
ning  with  the  new  moon  of  the  former.

Tanga-Tango.  A  Peruvian  triune
symbol,  signifying  “one  in  three  and  three
in  one.”

Tchandalas.  Mentioned  in  the  In¬
stitutes  of  Manu  as  a  class  of  pariahs,  or  the
lowest  in  society,  but  are  referred  to  as  the
inventors  of  brick  for  building  purposes,
as  is  attested  by  Vina-Snati  and  Veda
Vyasa.  In  the  course  of  time  they  were
banished  from  the  towns,  the  rites  of
burial,  and  the  use  of  rice,  water,  and
fire.  They  finally  emigrated,  and  became
the  progenitors  of  great  nations.

Tebeth.  j"Op.  The  fourth  month
of  the  Hebrew  civil  year,  and  correspond¬
ing  to  the  months  December  and  January,
beginning  with  the  new  moon  of  the  former.

Telamones.  See  Caryatides.

Templar  Statistics.  See  Statistics
of  the  Order  of  the  Temple.

Temple  of  Solomon,  Plan  of,  ac¬
cording  to  the  Talmud,  Josephus  (Antiqui¬
ties,  xv.,  xi.  5,  etc.),  and  the  best  Jewish
authorities.  See  The  Talmud,  by  Joseph
Barclay,  LL.D.,  published  in  London,
1878,  John  Murray,  Albemarle  Street.

The  Temple  was  located  toward  and
along  the  north  of  an  extensive  square,
walled  and  triple  colonnaded.  The  Royal
Tyropoeon  Bridge,  being  at  the  south-west
approach,  led  into  the  “Mountain  of  the
House,”  or  Court  of  the  Gentiles,  which


1034


TEMPLE


addendum.  TEN  EXPRESSIONS  1035


was  a  large  open  space  for  gathering  of  the
people  and  procuring  offerings.  On  either
side  of  the  openings  through  the  wall
round  the  courts  were  fixed  the  “  Slabs  of
Warning,”  one  of  which  was  discovered  in
Jerusalem  in  1871,  and  contains  these
words:  “No  stranger  is  allowed  to  pass
within  the  balustrade  round  the  Temple
and  enclosure.  If  found,  the  offender
must  take  the  consequence,  and  his  death
will  follow.”  (For  general  description  of
Temple  of  Solomon,  see  ante,  pages  796-8.)

No  man  was  permitted  to  be  irreverent
opposite  the  eastern  gate  of  the  Temple,
for  it  is  opposite  the  Holy  of  Holies.  No
man  was  to  go  on  the  “  Mountain  of  the
House”  with  his  staff,  shoes,  or  purse,  nor
with  dust  on  his  feet,  nor  is  he  to  spit  at
all.  It  was  also  directed  that  every  man
should  greet  his  friend  in  The  Name;  as
it  is  said:  “And  behold  Boaz  came  from
Bethlehem,  and  said  unto  the  reapers,
‘The  LORD  be  with  you;’  and  they  an¬
swered  him,  ‘The  LORD  bless  thee.’”

The  priests  guarded  the  Sanctuary  in
three  places:  in  the  Houses  of  Abtinas,
Nitzus,  and  Moked;  the  younger  priests
in  the  upper  chambers.

The  Temple  services  were  arranged  by  a
council  of  fourteen — the  High  Priest,  his
deputy  the  Suffragan,  and  twelve  priests.

REFERENCES  TO  PLAN  OF  TEMPLE.

1.  Wall  round  courts,  with  13  openings.

2.  The  Chel;  space  between  smaller  wall
and  wall  of  court.

•3.  Shops.

4.  Small  Sanhedrin.  Contained  3  rows  of
23  men  each.

5.  Eastern  Gate.  The  chief  gate,  called
“Beautiful.”  (Acts  iii.  2.)

6.  Court  of  Women,  with  chests  at  the
entrances  for  offerings.

7.  Chamber  of  Wood,  arranged  for  each
day’s  use.

8.  Chamber  of  Nazarites,  for  boiling  peace-
offerings  and  burning  hair.

9.  Chamber  of  Lepers,  where  they  shaved
their  hair.

10.  Chamber  of  Oil,  for  the  candlestick
and  flour-offerings.

11.  Second  Small  Sanhedrin.  Contained  3
rows  of  23  men  each.

12.  Chambers  of  Music,  under  the  court,
for  instruments  and  vocal  practice.

13.  Gate  of  Nicanor,  approached  by  15
steps.

14.  Court  of  Israel.  Length,  187  cubits;
breadth,  11  cubits.

15.  Chambers  of  Vestments  and  Spicery.

16.  1’lace  of  Blessing.  A  landing  of  3  steps.

17.  Chambers  for  salt,  water,  and  skins.

18.  Slaughter-house.

19.  Tables  of  Cleansing.

20.  Altar  of  Burnt-offerings.


21.  The  Ascent  to  the  Altar,  the  which  it
was  not  permitted  to  touch.

22.  Court  of  Priests.  Length,  135  cubits;
breadth,  11  cubits.

23.  Place  of  Ashes.

24.  The  Laver  and  its  pedestal.

25.  The  Draw-well.

26.  Steps  to  the  Porch  ;  3  -J—  1  -J—  2  -f-  4
1  =  11  steps  to  the  Porch.

27.  Two  Pillars — Jachin  and  Boaz.

28.  The  Porch.  In  length  70  cubits,  in
breadth  11  cubits.

29.  Chambers  of  Broken  Knives.

30.  Veil  at  entrance  of  Porch,  20  by  40
cubits.

31.  Unoccupied  space,  called  “Circumfer¬
ence”  and  “  The  Descent  of  Rain-water.”

32.  Chambers  round  Sanctuary ;  3  tiers,
one  above  the  other;  total,  38.

33.  The  Middle  Chamber,  but  not  so
specially  designated.  Two  tiers  high.

34.  Door  of  Sanctuary  ;  10  by  20  cubits.

35.  Golden  Altar  of  Incense.

36.  Candlestick.

37.  Golden  Table  of  Shewbread.

38.  Two  golden  Pedestals,  on  which  to
temporarily  place  the  blood  of  the  bullock
and  goat.

39.  Two  Veils,  within  the  traksin,  or  par¬
tition-wall,  which  was  a  cubit  in  width.  The
veils  did  not  touch  each  other  by  three  hand-
breadths;  hence  the  separation  of  the  Holy
Place  from  the  Holy  of  Holies.

40.  Holy  of  Holies  ;  20  by  20  cubits.

41.  Ark,  resting  on  Stone  of  Foundation.

42.  Chamber  of  Moked  (Burning),  and
chambers  for  sheep,  baking,  etc.

43.  House  of  Nitzus,  for  the  guards.

44.  Gates.

45.  Chambers  for  supply  of  water  and
wood.

46.  Chamber  of  Hewn  Stone,  for  Great
Sanhedrin;  3  rows  of  23  men  each.

47.  Water-gate  for  the  Altar.

48.  Upper  Chamber  of  Abtinas.  A  watch-
chamber.

Ten  Expressions.  Using,  as  do  the
Rabbins,  the  expression,  “  In  the  begin¬
ning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the
earth,”  as  one,  we  find  nine  other  expres¬
sions  in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  in
which  “God  said;”  thus  making  ten  ex¬
pressions  by  which  the  world  was  created.
There  were  ten  generations  from  Adam  to
Noah,  to  show  that  God  was  long-suffering
before  he  deluged  the  earth.  For  a  similar
reason,  says  the  Talmud ,  there  were  ten
generations  from  Noah  to  Abraham,  until
the  latter  “took  the  reward  of  them  all.”
Abraham  was  proved  with  ten  trials.  Ten
miracles  were  wrought  for  the  children  of
Israel  in  Egypt,  and  ten  at  the  Red  Sea.
Ten  plagues  afflicted  the  Egyptians  in
Egypt,  and  ten  at  the  Red  Sea.  And  ten
miracles  were  wrought  in  the  Holy  Tem¬
ple.  See  Ten,  p.  803.


1036  TENSIO-DAI-SIN


ADDENDUM.


THOR


Tcnsio-Dai-$in.  A  deity  held  in
adoration  by  the  Japanese;  the  zodiacal
sun,  with  its  twelve  constellations,  as  the
representative  of  the  god  and  his  twelve
apostles.  This  omnific  being,  like  the  zo¬
diacal  light,  of  triangular  form,  seen  only
in  the  evening  after  twilight  and  in  the
morning  before  dawn,  and  whose  nature  is
unknown,  is  possessed  of  ineffable  attri¬
butes,  inexpressible  and  unutterable,  with
a  supreme  power  to  overcome  eruptions  of
nature  and  the  elements.  Like  unto  Ma¬
sonry,  there  are  four  periods  of  festival,
to  wit,  in  the  third,  fifth,  seventh,  and
ninth  of  the  third,  fifth,  seventh,  and
ninth  months.  The  initiates  are  called
Jammabos,  and  wear  aurora-colored  robes,
like  unto  the  light  of  the  dawn  of  day.

Ternary  Allusions.  Some  of  the
well-considered  and  beautiful  thoughts  of
Rev.  George  Oliver  on  Ternary  Allusions
as  applicable  to  the  construction  of  the
Temple  services  of  Solomon  are  the  three
principal  religious  festivals — the  Feast  of
Passover,  of  Pentecost,  and  of  Tabernacles.
The  Camp  was  threefold.  The  Tabernacle,
with  its  precinct,  was  called  “The  Camp
of  the  Divine  Majesty;”  the  next,  “The
Camp  of  Levi,  or  little  host  of  the  Lord ;”
and  the  largest,  “The  Camp  of  Israel,  or
the  great  host.”  The  tribes  were  mar¬
shalled  in  subdivisions  of  three,  each  being
designated  by  a  banner  containing  one  of
the  cherubic  forms  of  the  Deity.  The  Tem¬
ple,  in  like  manner,  had  three  divisions
and  three  symbolical  references — histori¬
cal,  mystical,  and  moral.  The  golden  can¬
dlestick  had  twice  three  branches,  each
containing  three  bowls,  knobs,  and  flowers.
In  the  Sanctuary  were  three  sacred  uten¬
sils — the  candlestick,  the  table  of  shew-
bread,  and  the  altar  of  incense;  and  three
hallowed  articles  were  deposited  in  the
Ark  of  the  Covenant — the  tables  of  the
law,  the  rod  of  Aaron,  and  the  pot  of
manna.  There  were  three  orders  of  priests
and  Levites,  and  the  High  Priest  was  dis¬
tinguished  by  a  triple  crown.

Three  allusions  may  be  observed  through
the  whole  of  Jewish  history.  Thus,  Elijah
raised  the  widow’s  son  by  stretching  him¬
self  upon  the  child  three  times.  Samaria
sustained  a  siege  of  three  years.  Some  of
the  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah  reigned
three  years,  some  three  months,  some  three
days.  Rehoboam  served  God  three  years
before  he  apostated.  The  Jews  fasted
three  days  and  three  nights,  by  command
of  Esther,  before  their  triumph  over  Ha-
man.  Their  sacred  writings  had  three
grand  divisions — the  law,  the  prophets,
and  the  psalms.

In  the  Masonic  system  there  were  three
Temples — those  of  Solomon,  Zerubbabel,


and  Herod.  The  Jews  speak  of  two  that
have  been,  and  believe  in  one,  as  described
by  Ezekiel  the  Prophet,  yet  to  come.  The
Rabbis  say :  “  The  third  Temple  we  hope
and  look  for.”  See  Three,  Mackey.

Tetratfites.  Believers  in  the  occult
powers  of  the  numeral  four,  and  in  a
Godhead  of  four  persons  in  lieu  of  three.
In  this  connection,  the  following  figure  is
worthy  of  examination,  it  being  a  star  of
five  points  inclosing  the  three  letters  of


the  Ineffable  Name,  but  forming  theTetra-
grammaton,  the  She m  Hamphorash.  This
figure  has  been  claimed  to  represent  the
God  Head.

Tlieopaschites.  Followers  of  Peter
the  Fuller,  who  flourished  in  the  fifth  cen¬
tury,  and  believed  in  the  crucifixion  of  all
three  of  the  Godhead.

Theorieus.  The  second  grade  of  the
“First  Order”  of  the  Society  of  Rosicru-
cians.  See  Rosicrucian.

Tlieriog.  The  613  precepts  into  which
the  Jews  divided  the  Mosaical  law.  Thus
the  Hebrew  letters  numerically  ex¬

press  613.  See  description  of  Talith.

Thirteen,  The.  A  Parisian  society
claiming  to  exercise  an  occult  influence
during  the  First  Empire.  A  society  of
growing  proportions  in  the  United  States,
intended  to  confound  and  uproot  supersti¬
tion,  with  an  indirect  reference  to  Arthur’s
Round  Table  and  the  Judas  of  infamy.

Thokatli.  rpip,  strength.  An  ex¬
pression  known  to  the  Brethren  of  the
Scottish  Rite  in  the  Twelfth  degree.

Tliomists.  An  ancient  Christian
church  in  Malabar,  said  to  have  been
founded  by  St.  Thomas.

Thor,  or  Thorr,  contracted  from  Tho-
nar,  and  sometimes  known  as  Donar.  This
deity  presided  over  the  mischievous  spirits
in  the  elements,  and  was  the  son  of  Odin
and  Freyia.  These  three  were  known  in
mythology  as  the  triune  deity — the  Father,
Son,  and  Spirit.  Thor’s  great  weapon  of
destruction  or  force  was  the  Miolner,  the
hammer  or  mallet,  which  had  the  marvel¬
lous  property  of  invariably  returning  to  its
owner  after  having  been  launched  upon  its


THREE  FIRES


addendum.  TORCHBEARER


1037


mission,  and  having  performed  its  work  of
destruction.

Three  Fires.  Guardians  of  the  Sixty-
seventh  degree  of  the  Modern  Rite  of
Memphis.

Three-Fold  Cord.  A  triple  cord
whose  strands  are  of  different  colors ;  it  is
used  in  several  rites  as  an  instructive  sym¬
bol.  See  Zennaar.

Three  Sacred  Utensils.  These
were  the  .vessels  of  the  Tabernacle  as  to
which  the  Rev.  Joseph  Barclay,  LL.D.,
makes  the  following  quotation:  “Rabbi
Jose,  son  of  Rabbi  Judah,  said  a  fiery  ark,
and  a  fiery  table,  and  a  fiery  candlestick  de¬
scended  from  heaven.  And  Moses  saw  them,
and  made  according  to  their  similitude;  ”
and  thus  comments:  “They  also  think  that
the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  is  concealed  in  a
chamber  under  the  Temple  Enclosure,  and
that  it  and  all  the  holy  vessels  will  be  found
at  the  coming  of  the  Messiah.”  The  Apoc¬
rypha,  however,  informs  us  that  Jeremiah
laid  the  Tabernacle,  and  the  Ark,  and  the
Altar  of  Incense  in  a  “  hollow  cave,  in  the
mountain,  where  Moses  climbed  up  and
saw  the  heritage  of  God.  And  the  place
shall  be  unknown  until  the  time  that  God
gather  his  people  again  together,  and  re¬
ceive  them  into  Mercy.”  (2  Mac.  ii.  4-7.)
The  sacred  vessels,  which  were  taken  to
Rome  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem
in  A.  D.  70,  and  are  now  seen  sculptured
on  the  Arch  of  Titus,  were  carried  off  to
Africa  by  the  Vandals  under  Genseric.
Belisarius  took  them  to  Constantinople  in
A.  D.  520.  They  were  afterward  sent  back
to  Jerusalem,  and  thence  they  are  supposed
to  have  been  carried  to  Persia,  when  Chos-
roes  plundered  the  Holy  City,  in  June,  614.

Thugs.  A  Hindoo  association  that
offered  human  sacrifices  to  their  divinity
Kali.  It  was  dreaded  for  its  violence  and
the  fierceness  of  its  members,  who  were
termed  either  Stranglers  or  Aspirants.

Thurible.  From  Turis,  frankincense;
Ivos,  a  sacrifice.  A  metallic  censer  for
burning  incense.  It  is  of  various  forms,
but  generally  in  that  of  an  ornamental  cup
suspended  by  chains,  whereby  the  Thurifer
keeps  the  incense  burning  and  diffuses  the
perfume.

Thurifer.  The  bearer  of  the  thuri¬
ble,  or  censer,  prepared  with  frankincense,
and  used  by  the  Romish  Church  at  Mass
and  other  ceremonials ;  as  also  in  the  Phil¬
osophic  Degrees  of  Masonry.

Thursday.  The  fifth  day  of  the  week.
So  called  from  its  being  originally  conse¬
crated  to  Thor,  or  the  Icelandic  Thorr,  the
god  of  thunder,  answering  to  the  Jove  of
the  Romans.

Tiluk.  The  sacred  impress  made  upon
the  forehead  of  the  Brahman,  like  unto  the  j


Tau  to  the  Hebrew,  or  the  cross  to  the
Christian.

Tisri.  nt?D.  The  first  month  of
the  Hebrew  civil  year,  and  corresponding
to  the  months  of  September  and  October,
beginning  with  the  new  moon  of  the  former.

Titan  of  the  Caucasus.  The
Fifty-third  degree  of  the  Memphis  Rite.

Topes.  Pillars,  also  signifying  towers
and  tumuli.  This  is  a  corruption  of  the
Sanskrit  word  Stoopa,  meaning  mounds,
heaps,  karns.  The  Topes  of  the  Karli
temple,  a  Buddhist  shrine,  which  may  be
seen  up  the  Western  Ghats  from  Bom¬
bay  to  Poona,  are  presumed  to  be  Phallic
pillars  placed  in  front,  precisely  as  Solomon
placed  his  Jachiu  and  Boaz.  Some  trav¬
ellers  state  that  only  one  of  these  pillars
stands  at  present.  The  pillars  were  shaft
plain,  with  a  capital  carrying  four  lions,
representing  power  and  cat-like  salacious¬


ness.  Between  these  pillars  may  beseen  the
great  window  which  lights  all  the  Temple,
arched  in  the  form  of  a  horse-shoe,  which
is  the  Isian  head-dress  and  Maiya’s  holy
sign,  and  after  which  the  Roman  Church
adopts  one  of  Mary’s  favorite  head  dresses.
It  is  the  “  crown  of  Venus  Urania.”

These  pillars  are  prominent  features  of
Buddhist  sacred  buildings,  and  when  com¬
posed  of  a  single  stone  are  called  a  Lat.
They  are  frequently  ornamented  with
honeysuckles.  The  oldest  monument  hith¬
erto  discovered  in  India  is  a  group  of  these
monoliths  set  up  by  Asoka  in
of  the  third  century  B.  c.  They
were  all  alike  in  form,  inscribed
with  four  short  edicts  con¬
taining  the  creed  and  princi¬
pal  doctrines  of  Buddhism.

These  pillars  stood  originally
in  front  of  some  sacred  build¬
ings  which  have  perished ;
they  are  polished,  45  feet  each
in  height,  and  surmounted  by
lions.  The  Thuparamya  Tope,
in  Ceylon,  has  184  handsome
monoliths,  26  feet  in  height,
round  the  centre  holy  mound.

Torclibearer.  The  fifteenth  officer
]  in  the  High  Council  of  the  Society  of


the  middle


1038


TRAPPISTS


ADDENDUM.


TREE  WORSHIP


Rosicrucians ;  also  known  as  an  officer  in
the  Appendant  Order  of  the  Holy  Sepul¬
chre.  One  who  bears  a  torch.

Trappists,  Order  of  Religious.

An  order  founded  by  the  devotee  of  secret
organizations,  Count  La  Perche,  in  1140.

Tredic.  The  king  highest  in  rank  in
the  Scandinavian  Mysteries.

Tree  Alphabet.  There  are  alpha¬
bets  used  among  the  Persians  and  Arabs
at  the  present  day  as  secret  ciphers,  which
it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  were  original,
and  ages  ago  adopted  and  recognized  as
the  ordinary  business  mode  of  communi¬
cation  among  men.  Among  these  the  Tree
Alphabet  is  the  most  common.  The  Phil¬
osopher  Dioscorides  wrote  several  works
on  the  subject  of  trees  and  herbs,  and  made
prominent  the  secret  characters  of  this  al¬
phabet,  which  became  known  by  his  name,
and  was  adopted  and  used  by  others.

The  characters  were  distinguishable  by
the  number  of  branches  on  either  side  of
the  tree;  thus,  the  TH  is  recognizable  from
the  SH,  notwithstanding  each  has  three
limbs  on  the  left  hand  of  the  stem  or  trunk,
by  the  one  having  six  and  the  other  seven
branches  on  the  right  hand  side.

As  an  example,  here  are  nine  of  the
mystic  characters  and  their  relative  values :


X/f  f  f  f  f  |f  f

A  THOT.  H  TLB  SHYI.


The  characters  in  the  lower  line  given
above  are  of  relative  value,  and  known  as
the  Alphabet  of  Hermes  or  Mercury.

Tree  Worship.  The  important  po¬
sition  which  this  peculiar  faith  occupied
among  the  peoples  in  the  earliest  ages  of
the  world  is  apt  to  be  overlooked  in  the
multitude  of  succeeding  beliefs,  to  which
it  gave  many  of  its  forms  and  ceremonies,
and  with  which  it  became  materially
blended.  In  fact,  Tree  and  Serpent  Wor¬
ship  were  combined  almost  at  their  incep¬
tion.  So  prominent  a  position  does  Tree
Worship  take  in  the  opinion  of  Fergusson,
in  his  absorbing  work  on  Tree  and  Serpent
Worship,  that  he  designates  the  Tree  as
the  first  of  Faiths;  and  adds  that  “long
before  the  Theban  gods  existed,  Tree  and
Serpent  Faiths  flourished.  The  Methidy
tree  was  brought  into  the  later  religion,  to
shade  with  holy  reverence  the  tomb  of
Osiris;  the  Sycamore  was  holy  to  Netpe,


and  the  Persea  to  Athor,  whilst  the  Tam¬
arisk  played  an  important  part  in  all  the
rites  and  ceremonies  of  Osiris  and  Isis ;
and  all  who  are  orthodox  will  acknowledge
that  Abram  seemed  to  consider  that  he
could  not  worship  his  Jove  till  he  had
planted  his  grove  and  digged  a  well  (Gen.
xxi.  33).  His  Oak  or  ‘Terebinth,’  or  tur¬
pentine  tree,  on  the  plains  of  Mamre,  was
commonly  worshipped  till  the  fourth  cen¬
tury  a.c.,  and  it  is  revered  by  Jews  to  the
present  hour.”  And  again:  “That  long
ere  Buddha  or  his  saints  were  represented
by  images  and  adored,  long  ere  the  caves
and  temples  of  that  faith  had  sanctuaries
for  holy  relics,  the  first  actual  symbol-worship
he  can  trace  is  that  of  the  Bo  tree,  which  he
describes  as  upon  a  bas-relief  in  a  cave
called  the  Jodea-Gopa  (Katak,  Bengal),
proving  how  early  that  worship  was  intro¬
duced,  and  how  pre-eminent  it  was  among
the  Buddhists  of  those  days;”  and  says  J.
G.  R.  Forlong,  in  his  Rivers  of  Life,  or
Faiths  of  Man,  “before  Vedic  days;  and
can  be  found  in  almost  every  cave  and
temple  allied  to  the  Phallic  faith  as  cer¬
tainly  as  can  be  found  ever  standing  at  the
entrance  of  these  ‘Houses  of  God’  the
Phallic  pillar  or  pillars.  It  is  the  old  story
whether  we  turn  to  Solomon’s  temple,  1000
B.  c.,  or  to  the  Karli  Buddhist  temples,
which  gaze  down  upon  us  from  Bombay  to
Poona,  and  which  date  from  about  the
Christian  era.”

The  Bael  tree,  as  a  representative  of  the
triad  and  monad,  was  always  offered  at


Lingam  worship,  and  the  god  was  com¬
monly  to  be  found  uuder  an  umbrageous
Bael.

All  nations,  Aryans  in  particular,  con¬
sidered  tree  planting  a  sacred  duty.  The
grand  old  trees  became  centres  of  life  and
of  great  traditions,  and  the  character  of
the  foliage  had  its  symbolic  meanings.

At  the  Jewish  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  at
the  autumnal  harvest,  Jews  are  ordered  to
hang  boughs  of  trees,  laden  with  fruit,
round  the  borders  of  their  booths,  also
boughs  of  barren  trees.  The  worshippers


TREE  WORSHIP  addendum.


TRIANGLE


1039


go  to  the  synagogue  carrying  in  their  right
hand  one  palm  branch,  three  myrtles,  and
two  willows,  all  tied  together;  and  in  the
left  hand  a  citron  branch  with  fruit  on  it.
These  they  make  touch  each  other,  and
wave  to  the  east,-  then  south,  then  west,
and  then  north:  this  is  termed  Hosana.
On  the  seventh  day  of  the  Feast,  all  save
the  willow  bough  must  be  laid  aside.

The  Palm,  as  a  tree,  yields  more  to  man
than  any  other  class  of  trees.  Nineveh
shows  the  Palm  surrounded  by  winged
deities  holding  the  pine  cone — symbol  of
life,  which  there  takes  the  place  of  the
Crux  Ansata.  The  Phoenix  resting  on  the
Palm  signifies  “  Resurrection  to  eternal
life.”  The  four  evangelists  are  depicted
in  “an  evangelum,”  in  the  library  of  the
British  Museum,  as  all  looking  up  to  the
Palm  tree.  Christians,  for  a  similar  ideal,
erected  a  cross-bar,  and  placed  an  Alpha
and  an  Omega  on  it.


PALM  TREE  WITH  CROSS.


At  Najran,  in  Yemen,  Arabia,  Sir  William
Ouseley  describes  the  most  perfect  tree
worship  as  still  existing  close  to  the  city.
The  tree  is  the  Palm  or  Sacred  date.  The
Palm  has  always  borne  a  most  important
part  in  all  the  faiths  of  the  world  down  to
the  present  day.  The  Jews  gave  the  Palm
a  distinguished  place  in  architecture.  The
tree  and  its  lotus  top,  says  Kitto,  took  the
place  of  the  Egyptian  column  on  Solo¬
mon’s  famous  phalli,  the  Jachin  and  Bom.

The  two  trees  in  Genesis  were  those  of
Life  and  Knowledge,  and  were  probably
drawn  from  the ‘Egyptian  and  Zoroastrian
6tories.  But  no  further  reference  is  taken


in  the  Bible  of  the  “Tree  of  Knowledge”
after  Genesis,  but  to  that  of  Life,  or  the
“ Tree  which  gives  Life”  as  in  the  Apoca¬
lypse  ii.  7.  This  is  also  the  Eastern  name
and  significance  of  the  Lingam  or  Pillar;
and  when  covered  with  carved  inscriptions,
the  Toth  or  Pillar  in  Egypt  became  known
as  the  “  Tree  of  Knowledge.”

Triangle  ami  Square.  As  the
Delta  was  the  initial  letter  of  Deity  with

1.  3.


the  ancients,  so  its  synonym  is  among
modern  nations.  It  is  a  type  of  the  Eter¬
nal,  the  All-Powerful,  the  Self-Existent.

The  material  world  is  typified  by  the
“  square”  as  passive  matter,  in  opposition
to  force  symbolized  by  the  triangle.

The  Square  is  also  an  emblem  of  human¬
ity,  as  the  Delta  or  Triangle  typifies  Deity.

The  Delta,  Triangle,  and  Compasses  are
essentially  the  same.  The  raising  one
point,  and  then  another,  signifies  that  the
divine  or  higher  portion  of  our  nature
should  increase  in  power,  and  control  the
baser  tendencies.  This  is  the  real,  the
practical  “journey  toward  the  East.”

The  interlacing  triangles  or  deltas  sym¬
bolize  the  union  of  the  two  principles  or
forces,  the  active  and  passive,  male  and
female,  pervading  the  universe.  (1.)

The  two  triangles,  one  white  and  the
other  black,  interlacing,  typify  the  min¬
gling  of  the  two  apparent  powers  in  nature,
darkness  and  light,  error  and  truth,  igno-


2.


ranee  and  wisdom,  evil  and  good,  through¬
out  human  life.  (2.)


1040


TRIFELS


ADDENDUM.


TRYONISTS


The  triangle  and  square  together  form  the
pyramid  (3.),  as  seen  in  the  Entered  Ap¬
prentice’s  apron.  In  this  combination  the
pyramid  is  the  metaphor  for  unity  of  mat¬
ter  and  force,  as  well  as  the  oneness  of  man
and  God.  The  numbers  3,  5,  7,  9,  have
their  places  in  the  parts  and  points  of  the
square  and  triangle  when  in  pyramidal
form,  and  imply  Perfection.  See  Pointed
Cubical  Stone.

Trifels.  The  name  of  the  ruined  cas¬
tle,  four  miles  from  Madenburg,  on  a
mountain  slope,  where  Sir  Richard  Cceur
de  Lion  was  a  prisoner  for  more  than  a
year,  by  decree  of  the  emperor  Henry  VI.,
and  until  his  liberation  by  the  faithful
Blondel.  Naught  remains  but  thirty  feet
of  the  tower  and  some  fragments  of  wall.
It  is  recorded  that  there  may  be  seen  en¬
graven  deep  in  the  window-stone  of  the
tower  this  mark :  the  passion  cross  standing:
upon  the  square  with  an  apex  upward,  and
having  upon  it  an  inverted  TAU  of  pro¬
portionate  size  at  an  inclination  of  about
forty-nine  degrees.

Trilithon.  Three  stones,  two  of
which  are  placed  parallel  on  their  ends,
and  crossed  by  the  third  at  the  top.


THE  TRILITHON  AT  ST.  MICHAEL'S  MOUNT,  LAND'S  END.


Trinitarians,  Order  of.  An  an¬
drogynous  order  founded  in  1198,  in  the
time  of  Innocent  III.,  for  the  purpose  of
ransoming  Christians  from  the  Moors.

Trinity,  Religions  Fraternity
of  the  Holy.  Instituted  at  Rome  by
St.  Philip  Neri  in  1548.

Tripitaka.  Tri,  three,  and  Pitaka,
basket.  The  canonical  book  of  the  Budd¬
hists,  written  two  hundred  years  after  the
third  (Ecumenical  Council,  or  about  60
B.  c.  The  former  Asiatic  Indra  doctrines
having  become  intolerable,  Sakya,  a  re¬
former  in  religion,  rejected  the  god  Brah¬
ma,  and  the  holy  books  of  the  Veda,  the
sacrifices  and  other  rites,  and  said :  “  My
law  is  grace  for  all.”  These  sacred  writ¬
ings  of  the  Hindus  were  called  the  Three
Baskets :  the  basket  of  Laws,  the  basket  of
Discipline,  and  the  basket  of  Doctrines.
The  first  basket  is  called  “  Dharma,”  and


relates  to  the  law  for  man  ;  the  second,  “  Vi-
nava,”  and  relates  to  the  discipline  of  the
priests ;  and  the  third,  “  Abhidharma,”  and
pertains  to  the  gods.  It  is  estimated  that
350,000,000  of  people  believe  in  these  writ¬
ings  as  sacred  and  canonical.

True  Tight.  Sit  lux  et  lux  fuit.  The
translation  from  the  Hebrew  Bible  of  this
passage,  so  often  quoted  in  Masonry,  is :
“And  the  Lord  said,  ‘Let  there  be  light,
and  it  was  light.’  And  the  Lord  took  care
of  the  light,  that  it  was  useful ;  and  He  di¬
vided  the  light  from  the  darkness.”

Truro  Cathedral.  A  Protestant
edifice  erected  at  a  seaport  of  Cornwall,
Eng.,  standing  at  the  junction  of  two
rivers,  the  Allen  and  the  Kenwyn.  On  the
20th  May,  1880,  the  Grand  Master  of  Ma¬
sons  (Prince  of  Wales)  laid  two  corner¬
stones  of  the  cathedral  with  great  pag¬
eantry,  pomp,  and  ceremony.  This  was
the  first  time  a  Grand  Master  of  Masons  in
England  .was  known  to  lay  the  corner-stone
of  an  ecclesiastical  structure ;  this  was,  also,
the  first  occasion  on  which  the  present
Grand  Master  had  performed  such  a  ser¬
vice,  in  Masonic  clothing,  surrounded  with
his  staff  and  officers,  in  rich  robes  and  in
the  costume  of  Masonry.

Truth.  Thm,  or  HCH.  Thme,

integritas,  Justice  and  Truth.  This  was  the
name  of  the  Egyptian  goddess.  This  one
of  the  three  great  Masonic  principles  is
represented  among  the  Egyptians  by  an
ostrich  feather;  and  the  judicial  officer
was  also  thus  represented,  “because  that
bird,  unlike  others,  has  all  its  feathers
equal.”  Horapollo.  The  Hebrew  word
fit’,  ion,  signifies  an  ostrich,  as  also  a
council;  and  the  word  run,  Enne,  is  in¬
terpreted,  poetically,  an  ostrich,  and  also  a
song  of  joy,  or  of  praise  ;  hence,  “  the  happy
souls  thus  ornamented,  under  the  inspec¬
tion  of  the  lords  of  the  heart's  joy,  gathered
fruits  from  celestial
trees.”  In  the  judg-
ment  in  Amend,  the
l  f-  sou^  advances  toward

3§fF\  the  goddess  Thme,

yjfj0  SS  who  wears  on  her

head  the  ostrich
jr"  fW  feather.  In  the  scale,

Anubis  and  Horus
weigh  the  actions  of  the  deceased.  On  one
side  is  the  ostrich  feather,  and  on  the  other
the  vase  containing  the  heart,  (See  next
page.)  Should  the  weight  of  the  heart  be
greater  than  the  feather,  the  soul  is  entitled
to  be  received  into  the  celestial  courts.  The
forty-two  judges,  with  heads  ornamented
with  ostrich  feathers,  sit  aloft  to  pronounce
judgment.  See  Book  of  the  Dead.

Tryonists.  Those  Pythagoreans  who
abstained  from  animal  food.


TSAPHIEL


ADDENDUM


UNIVERSALISTS  1041


Tsapliiel.  Sx'DX.  Mirans  Deus,  the
angel  governing  the  Moon,  in  accordance
with  the  Kabbalistical  system.

Tsedakali.  np-ix.  Justice.  The  first
step  of  the  mystical  ladder,  known  to  the
Kadosli,  Thirtieth  degree  A.  A.  Scottish
Rite.

Tsidoni.  Venator.  A  Seeker

or  Inquirer.  A  name  used  in  the  Twenty-
second  degree  of  the  A.  A.  Scottish
Rite.


Tsoim.  A  term  used  infre¬

quently  to  designate  visitors.

Tui>  Raani  Amal  Abal.  Heb.
S3N  Sty?  3iID.  It  is  just  to  reward
labor.  An  expression  found  in  the  Thir¬
teenth  degree  A.  A.  Scottish  Rite.

Turanian.  One  of  the  three  histor¬
ical  divisions  of  religion, — the  other  two
being  the  Aryan  and  the  Semitic,  —  and
embraces  the  two  sacred  codes  of  China,
viz.,  those  of  Confucius  and  Lao-tse.


u.


U7.  The  twenty-first  letter  of  the  Eng¬
lish  alphabet,  is  a  modification  of  the
Greek  letter  T,  upsilon  ;  it  is  in  the  Hebrew
j/'V. °r  in  theChaldaic and  hieroglvphical,
the  head  of  an  animal  with  horns,  hence
its  symbolism.  U  has  a  close  affinity  to  V,
hence  they  were  formerly  interchanged  in
writing  and  printing.

Unhele.  To  uncover,  or  reveal.  Spen¬
ser,  in  the  Faery  Queen ,  says,  “Then  sud¬
denly  both  would  themselves  unhele.’’

United  Friars,  Fraternity  of.
A  society  established  in  1785,  for  the
“cultivation  of  a  liberal  and  rational  sys¬
tem  of  good  fellowship.”  The  place  of
6  F  06


meeting  was  known  as  the  College  of  St.
Luke.  The  society  was  a  charitable  one,
giving  liberally  to  the  poor.  There  were
a  number  of  Colleges,  the  “  London  Col¬
lege  languished,  and  finally  died  a  natural
death  about  1825.”  Mackenzie  gives  the
particulars  of  this  Fraternity.

Universal  Aurora,  Society  of
tlie.  Founded  at  Paris,  in  1788,  for  the
practice  of  mesmerism;  Cagliostro,  “the
Divine  Charlatan,”  taking  an  active  part
in  its  establishment.  Very  little  at  this
day  is  known  of  it.

Universalists,  Order  of.  A  so¬
ciety  of  a  Masonic  bearing,  founded  by


1042


UNPUBLISHED


addendum.  VAN  RENSSELAER


Retif  de  la  Bretonne,  in  Paris,  about  1841,
and  having  but  one  degree.

“  Unpublished  Records  of  the

Craft.”  A  work  thus  entitled,  edited  by
Brother  Hughan,  was  lately  published,
containing  many  MSS.  of  value,  theretofore
unknown  to  the  general  Masonic  public.
Many  others  have  since  been  traced,  and
the  work  of  Masonic  progress  has  a  large
field  in  the  near  future  which  will  be  pro¬
ductive  of  great  historic  good.

Upadcvas.  Minor  works  regarded  as
appendices  to  the  four  Canonical  Vedas,
and  comprising  the  Ayurveda,  on  medicine,
the  Dhanurveda,  on  archery,  the  Gan-
dharvaveda,  on  music,  and  the  Silpasastra,  or
Arthasastras,  on  mechanics  and  other  prac¬
tical  subjects.  These  were  looked  upon  as
inspired  works  and  so  classed.

Upanishado  (“  Mystic.”)  A  name
given  to  certain  Sanskrit  works,  of  which
about  150  are  known,  founded  upon  the
Brahmana  portion  of  the  Vedas,  and  con¬
taining  the  “mysterious  doctrine”  of  the
process  of  creation,  the  nature  of  a  Su¬
preme  Being,  and  its  relation  to  the  human
soul.  The  older  Upanishads  are  placed
among  the  Sruti,  or  writings  supposed  to
be  inspired.  See  Sruti.

“Upright  Man  and  Mason, —
and  given  it  strictly  in  charge  ever  to  walk
and  act  as  such  before  God  and  Man.”
Admonition  in  the  Apprentice  Degree.
The  definition  of  Man  is  interwoven  with
the  triangle  or  pyramid,  hence  true  and
upright.  In  S.  P.  Andrew’s  Radical  Ety¬
mology,  or  the  origin  of  Language  and  Lan¬
guages,  we  find  the  following:  “Through¬
out  the  Indo-European  family  of  languages,
the  syllable  ma  (changeable  to  me,  mi,  mo,
mu)  means  ‘great,’  and  na  (changeable  to
ne,  ni,  no,  nu )  means  ‘  small,’  as  their
primal  sense.  Hence  mana,  mena,  menu,
etc.,  mean  ‘  great-small,’  and  thence  ‘  ratio  ’
or  ‘  proportion,’  allied  with  tapering,  the
cone,  pyramid,  or  triangle.  The  Latin
men-sa  is  ‘a  surveyor’s  triangular  measur¬
ing-board;’  me(n)ta,  ‘anything  conical;’


mon-s,  ‘  a  mountain  ;  ’  men-s,  ‘  the  mind,’
i .  e.,  ‘ratio;’  Sanskrit,  md ;  Latin,  men-
8urn  ;  Eng.,  measure;  hence,  Sansk.,  mana,
manu,  to  think.”  Also  see  Man.

Ur.  (Hebrew,  “n^jA’re.)  Fire,  light,  or
spirit.

Usages.  The  peculiarity  of  constant
intercourse  between  the  kings  of  Israel
and  Tyre  pending  the  construction  of  the
Holy  House,  has  been  frequently  com¬
mented  upon.  That  this  was  so  is  evi¬
dent  from  the  old  sacred  Scriptures,  as  well
as  from  cumulative  history  by  Josephus
and  others.  This  ancient  custom  of  inter¬
communication  would  not  be  so  marked,
had  these  two  kings  ever  met,  yet  during
the  years  of  construction,  gifts  and  mes¬
sages  seem  to  have  led  to  the  more  intimate
custom  of  propounding  problems  and  diffi¬
cult  questions.  Hence  the  inducement  to
speculate  upon  whether  there  was  any  se¬
cret  tie  between  these  two  kings  or  merely
friendship  and  business.  The  customs,
habits,  and  usages  of  the  ancients  are  vis¬
ible  in  every  form  and  ceremony  of  Masonic
work,  as  well  as  in  the  instruction,  except
where  modern  innovators  have  injured,
while  endeavoring  to  improve,  the  time¬
worn  yet  mellowed  services  of  the  Brother¬
hood.  Oneof  the  most  beautiful  expressions
occurring  in  the  Catechism  of  Freemason¬
ry  is  the  answer  to  an  interrogatory  as  to
the  position  of  the  hand  in  assuming  the
vow  of  the  First  Degree;  to  wit,  “In  ac¬
cordance  with  ancient  usages  the  right  hand
has  always  been  deemed  the  seat  of  Fidel¬
ity.”  A  somewhat  similar  expression  oc¬
curs  in  relation  to  the  casting  off  of  the
shoe ;  answer,  “  This  was  in  accordance
with  the  usages  of  the  ancient  Israelites ;  a
man  plucked  off  his  shoe  and  gave  it  to  his
neighbor;  this  was  testimony  in  Israel.”
The  shoe  was  the  symbol  of  subjection
when  sent  by  rulers  to  princes.  (4th  Book
Ruth,  7th  v.)  It  was  the  symbol  of  hu¬
miliation  and  surrender  with  Germans  and
Israelites.  The  formal  divestiture  was  sur¬
render  of  title.


Y.


V.  (Heb.  1,  vau )  The  twenty-second
letter  in  the  English  alphabet;  of  the  He¬
brew,  numerical  value  of  six.  Its  definition
a  nail,  which  in  form  it  represents,  and  as  a
divine  name  connected  with  it  is  Vezio,
cum  sp/endore;  the  V  and  O  in  Hebrew
being  equal.  As  a  Roman  numeral  its
value  is  five.


Yagao,  or  Bagaos.  Found  in  the

Fourth  Degree  of  the  French  Rite  of
Adoption.

Yallialia.  The  North  German  or
Scandinavian  hall  of  the  gods.

Van  Rensselaer,  Killian  Hen¬
ry.  Born  1799,  died  January  28,  1881.
A  native  of  Albany,  N.  Y.  State,  and  de-


V.  D.  S.  A.


ADDENDUM.


VOLTAIRE


1043


scendant  of  the  well-known  old  Knicker¬
bocker  family,  whose  name  he  bore.  He
had  held  various  positions  in  Craft  Masonry,
hut  in  1824  he  became  prominent  in  the  A.
A.  Scottish  Rite,  to  which  he  devoted  him¬
self  for  the  remainder  of  his  life,  becoming
an  Inspector  General  on  June  17, 1845.  Bro.
Van  Rensselaer  commanded  the  Supreme
Council  that  rebelled  against  the  ruling  of
Edward  A.  Raymond,  and  thus  was  formed
another  Supreme  Body  in  the  Northern
States,  whose  difficulties  were  finally  over¬
come,  as  were  all  schisms  of  every  nature
of  the  Scottish  Rite,  on  the  17th  of  May,
1867.  “Bro.  Van,”  as  he  was  familiarly
termed,  resided  during  the  last  thirty  years
of  his  life  in  the  West,  and  died  in  Califor¬
nia,  an  outlying  suburb  of  Cincinnati,  Ohio.
One  more  sincerely  devoted  to  the  cause
of  Masonry,  and  without  a  day  of  relent¬
ing  earnestness,  will  not  in  time  be  found.

V.  1).  S.  A.  (  Veut  Dieu  Samt  Amour.)
Four  words  supposed  to  be  repeated  by  the
fratersof  the  Temple  during  certain  pauses
in  the  ceremonies.  While  P.  D.  E.  P.
refers  to  the  motto  “  Pro  Deo  et  Patria.”

Veadar.  (T1JO.)  That  is,  the  second
Adar.  A  month  intercalated  by  the  Jews
every  few  years  between  Adar  and  Nisan,
so  as  to  reconcile  the  computation  by  solar
and  lunar  time.  It  commences  sometimes
in  February  and  sometimes  in  March.

Yedaiiga.  (“Limb  of  the  Veda.”)
A  collection  of  Sanskrit  works  on  the
grammar,  lexicography,  chronology,  and
ritual  of  theVedic  text.  They  are  olderthan
the  Upanishads,  and  are  placed  among  the
Great  Shasters,  though  not  among  the  Sruti.

Veritas.  Signifying  “truth”  a  sig¬
nificant  word  in  Templar  Masonry.  See
Truth.

Vessels  of  Gold  and  Silver,  for

the  service  of  the  First  Temple,  were  almost
numberless,  according  to  Josephus  ;  thus  :


Gold.  Silver.

Vessels  of  gold  .  .  .  20,000  40,000

Candlesticks  ....  4,000  8,000

Wine  cups .  80,000  .

Goblets .  10,000  20,000

Measures .  20,000  40,000

Dishes .  80,000  160,000

Censers .  20,000  50,000


234,000  318,000

Vestments  for  the  priests  .  .  .  21,000

Musical  instruments .  600,000

Stoles  of  silver  for  the  Levites  .  200,000


The  vessels  and  vestments  were  always
protected  by  a  hierophylax  or  guardian.

Veterans.  Associations  of  Masons
“  who,  as  such,  have  borne  the  burden  and
heat  of  the  day  ”  for  at  least  21  years’  active


service — in  the  State  of  Connecticut,  30
years.  A  number  of  these  societies  exist
in  the  U.  States,  their  objects  being  largely
of  a  social  nature,  to  set  an  example  to  the
younger  Masons,  and  to  keep  a  watchful
eye  on  the  comfort  of  those  whose  years  are
becoming  numbered.  The  assemblies  are
stated  or  casual,  but  in  all  cases  annual  for
a  Table  Lodge.  These  associations  per¬
petuate  friendship,  cultivate  the  social  vir¬
tues,  and  collate  and  preserve  the  history
and  biography  of  their  members.

Viceroy  Eusebius.  The  name  of
the  second  officer  in  the  Conclave  of  the
Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine.

44  Virtiile  et  Sileutio  ”  and  “  Gloria
in  Excelsis  Deo,”  are  significant  mottoes  of
the  Royal  Order  of  Scotland.

Visiinu.  See  Puranas.

Vitra.  The  representative  deity  of
darkness  in  Vedic  mythology,  and  the  an¬
tagonist  of  Indra,  as  the  personified  light.
Vitra  also  represents  ignorance,  supersti¬
tion,  fanaticism,  and  intolerance,  the  op¬
ponents  of  Masonry.

Voisliiiuvus.  Those  who  worship
Vishnu,  in  white  garments,  and  abstain
from  animal  food.  Believers  in  the  third
member  of  theTrimurti  according  to  Hindu
mythology,  in  him  who  was  believed  to  be
the  preserver  of  the  world,  and  who  had  un¬
dergone  ten  Avatars  or  incarnations,  to
wit,  a  bird,  tortoise,  wild  boar,  andro-lion,
etc.,  of  which  the  deity  Krishna  was  the
eighth  incarnation  in  this  line  of  Vishna,
and  in  which  form  he  was  supposed  to  be
the  son  of  Devanaguy  and  reared  by  the
shepherd  Nanda.

Voltaire.  (Francois- Marie  Arouet.)
One  of  the  most  famous  of  French  writers,
born  at  Chatenay,  near  Sceaux  in  1694.
His  early  life  was  loose  and  varied.  In
1728  he  became  infatuated  with  a  Madame
du  Chatelet.  His  literary  works  cover  some
90  volumes.  In  1743,  government  dis¬
patched  him  on  a  mission  to  Frederick  the
Great,  by  whom  he  was  held  in  high  favor,
and  in  1750,  at  the  request  of  the  king,  he
made  his  residence  in  Berlin,  but  five  years
later  they  quarrelled,  and  Voltaire  moved
to  Ferney,  Switzerland.  His  literary  talent
was  most  varied,  and  in  invective  he  had
no  equal.  During  his  exile  in  England  he
imbibed  Deistical  theories,  which  marked
his  life.  He  was  charged  with  atheism.
He  was  initiated  in  the  Lodge  of  the  Nine
Sisters,  at  Paris,  February  7,  1778,  in  the
presence  of  Franklin  and  others  distin¬
guished  in  Masonry.  Died  May  30,  1778,
which  gave  rise  to  a  memorable  Lodge  of
Sorrow  held  ou  the  succeeding  28tli  of  No¬
vember.


1044


w


ADDKKDL'M.


XYSUTHRUS


W.


W.  The  twenty-third  letter  of  the  Eng¬
lish  alphabet,  which  originated  in  the  Mid¬
dle  Ages,  is  a  double  v,  and  is  peculiar  to
the  English,  German,  and  Dutch  alphabets.

Wahabite*.  A  Mohammedan  sect,
established  about  1740,  dominant  through
the  greater  part  of  Arabia.  Their  doctrine
was  reformatory,  to  bring  back  the  observ¬
ances  of  Islam  to  the  literal  precepts  of  the
Koran.  Mecca  and  Medina  were  conquered
by  them.  The  founder  was  Ibn-abd-ul-Wa-
hab,  son  of  an  Arab  sheik,  born  in  the  lat¬
ter  part  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and
died  1787.  Their  teachings  have  been  re¬
ceived  by  the  Mussulman  population  of
India,  and  much  uneasiness  is  feared  there¬
from.

Wallacliia,  Grand  Scottish  De¬
gree  of.  Found  in  Fustier’s  lists.

Wellington,  Duke  of.  The  “  Hero
of  Waterloo,”  and  the  renowned,  was  initi¬
ated  in  LodgeNo.  494,  about  December,  1790.

44  Westminster  and  Keystone.”

The  third  of  the  three  oldest  warranted
Lodges  in  England,  having  been  chartered
in  1721.  The  first  is  Friendship,  No.  6,  and
the  second  the  British,  No.  8.  Those  as¬
sembling  without  warrants  are  only  two,  and
are  numbered  two  and  four,  “Antiquity”
and  “  Somerset  House.”

Wheat.  An  emblem  of  plenty  under
the  name  of  “  Corn,”  which  see  in  the  body
of  this  work.

Widow,  Sons  of  the.  A  society
founded  in  the  third  century,  by  a  Persian
slave,  Manes,  who  had  been  purchased  and
adopted  by  a  widow.  It  consisted  of  two
degrees,  Auditor  and  Elut.


William,  Emperor  of  Ger¬
many.  An  honorary  member  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  and  protector
of  Freemasonry  in  Germany,  his  son,  the
crown  prince,  being  deputy-protector.

Wolfgang,  Albert,  Prince  of
Pippe  Schaumbcrg.  Born  in  1699,
died  in  1748.  One  of  the  Masonic  circle
whom  Frederick  the  Great  favored  and
sought  at  times  to  meet.

Woodford  Manuscript.  A  man¬
uscript  in  the  possession  of  one  of  Eng¬
land’s  most  esteemed  Masons,  Bev.  A.  F.
A.  Woodford,  editor  of  Kenning’ s  Cyclopaedia
of  Freemasonry ,  of  700  pages,  London.  Bro.
Huglian  says  it  is  almost  a  verbatim  copy
of  the  Cooke  MSS.  The  indorsement  upon
it  reads,  “  This  is  a  very  ancient  record  of
Masonry,  which  was  copied  for  me  by  Wil¬
liam  Reid,  Secretary  to  the  Grand  Lodge,
1728,”  etc.  It  formerly  belonged  to  Mr.
William  Cowper,  clerk  to  the  Parliament,
and  subsequently  to  the  historian,  Sir  J.
Palgrave.

Wound,  Mason’s.  Nicolai,  in  the
appendix  to  his  Essay  on  the  Accusations
against  the  Templars ,  says  that  in  a  small
dictionary,  published  at  the  beginning  of
the  eighteenth  century,  the  following  defi¬
nition  is  to  be  found,  “  Mason’s  Wound.
It  is  an  imaginary  wound  above  the  elbow,
to  represent  a  fracture  of  the  arm  occa¬
sioned  by  a  fall  from  an  elevated  place.”
The  origin  and  esoteric  meaning  of  the
phrase  have  been  lost.  It  was  probably
used  as  a  test,  or  alluded  to  some  legend
which  has  now  escaped  memory.  Also,  the
Master’s  penalty  in  the  degree  of  Perfection.


t


X.


X.  The  twenty-fourth  letter  of  the
English  alphabet  and  the  last  letter  of
the  proper  Latin  alphabet.  As  a  numeral
it  stands  for  ten.

Xystus.  In  ancient  architecture  a
long  and  open,  but  sometimes  covered,
court  with  porticoes,  for  athletic  exercises.

Xysutbrus.  The  name  of  the  Bab¬
ylonish  king  at  the  time  of  the  Deluge.
According  to  Berossus,  ninth  of  a  race
who  reigned  432,000  years.  Also,  Adraha-


sis  of  Surippak,  son  of  TJbara-Tutu,  the
patriarch,  to  whom,  according  to  the  Deluge
Tablet,  the  gods  revealed  the  secret  of  the
impending  deluge,  and  who  erected  an  ark
accordingly,  whereby  he  and  his  family
and  sevens  of  all  clean  beasts  were  saved.
Xysutbrus  means  “shut  up  in  a  box  or
ark,”  from  the  two  characters  signifying
“enclosed,”  and  “box,”  respectively.  In
Accadian  he  is  called  Tamzi  (Tammuz),
“  The  sun  of  life.”


Y


ADDENDUM.


ZACCHAI


1045


Y.


Y.  The  twenty-fifth  letter  of  the  Eng¬
lish  alphabet,  and  is  derived  from  the
Greek  T.  It  came  into  use  by  Roman
writers  in  the  time  of  Cicero,  in  spelling
words  borrowed  from  the  Greek.

Yaksha.  The  name  of  a  class  of
demigods  in  Hindu  mythology,  whose  care
is  to  attend  on  Kuvera,  the  god  of  riches,
and  see  to  his  garden  and  treasures.

Yalla.  A  word  said  to  have  been  used
by  the  Templars  in  the  adoration  of  the
Baphometus,  and  derived  from  the  Saracens.

Yania.  (Sankr.  Yama,  a  twin.)  Ac¬
cording  to  the  Hindu  mythology,  the  judge
and  ruler  of  the  departed ;  the  Hindu  Pluto,
or  king  of  the  infernal  regions;  originally
conceived  of  as  one  of  the  first  pair  from
whom  the  human  race  is  descended,  and
the  beneficent  sovereign  of  his  descendants
in  the  abodes  of  the  blest ;  later,  a  terrible
deity,  the  tormentor  of  the  wicked.  He  is
represented  of  a  green  color,  with  red  gar¬
ments,  having  a  crown  on  his  head,  his
eyes  inflamed,  and  sitting  on  a  buffalo,
with  a  club  in  his  hand.

Yellow  Caps,  Society  of.  The
name  of  a  society  said  to  have  been  found¬
ed  by  Ling-Ti,  in  China,  in  the  eleventh
century.

Yezdegerdian.  Pertaining  to  the
era  of  Yezdegerd,  the  last  Sassanian  mon¬
arch  of  Persia,  who  was  overthrown  by  the
Mohammedans.  The  era  is  still  used  by
the  Parsees,  and  began  16th  of  June,  632,

A.  D.

Yeziclee.  One  of  a  sect  bordering  on
the  Euphrates,  whose  religious  worship
mixes  up  the  Devil  with  some  of  the  doc¬
trines  of  the  Magi,  Mohammedans,  and
Christians.

Yggdrasil.  The  name  given  in  Scan¬
dinavian  mythology  to  the  greatest  and
most  sacred  of  all  trees,  which  was  con¬
ceived  as  binding  together  heaven,  earth,
and  hell.  It  is  an  ash,  whose  branches
spread  over  all  the  world,  and  reach  above
the  heavens.  It  sends  out  three  roots  in
as  many  different  directions ;  one  to  the
Asa-gods  in  heaven,  another  to  the  Frost-


giants,  the  third  to  the  under-world.  Under
each  root  springs  a  wonderful  fountain,  en¬
dowed  with  marvellous  virtues.  From  the
tree  itself  springs  a  honey-dew.  The  ser¬
pent,  Nithhoggr,  lies  at  the  under-world
fountain  and  gnaws  the  root  of  Yggdrasil ;
the  squirrel,  Ratatoskr,  runs  up  and  down,
and  tries  to  breed  strife  between  the  ser¬
pent  and  the  eagle,  which  sits  aloft.

York,  Edw  ard  Augustus,  Duke
of.  Initiated  a  Mason  in  1766.

York,  Frederick,  Duke  of.  In¬
itiated  a  Mason  in  “  Britannia  Lodge,”
London,  November  21,  1787.  A  commem¬
orative  Masonic  token  was  issued  in  1795 ;
the  Duke  of  York  having  been  installed
W.  M.  of  the  “  Prince  of  Wales  Lodge,”
March  22,  1793.

York  Grand  Eodge.  Brother
Woodford  says  this  is  a  short  title  for  “  The
Grand  Lodge  of  all  England,”  held  at
York,  which  was  formed  from  an  old  Lodge,
in  1725,  at  work  evidently  during  the  sev¬
enteenth  century,  and  probably  much  ear¬
lier.  The  annual  assembly  was  held  in
the  city  of  York  by  the  Masons  for  centu¬
ries,  and  is  so  acknowledged  virtually  by
all  the  MSS.  from  the  fourteenth  century.
A  list  of  Master  Masons  of  the  York  Min¬
ster,  during  its  erection,  is  preserved,  of  the
fourteenth  century ;  and  legend  and  actual
history  agree  in  the  fact  that  York  was  the
home  of  the  Mason-craft  until  modern
times— the  “Charter  of  Prince  Edwin”
being  one  of  the  earliest  traditions.  The
Grand  Lodge  preserved  its  position  in  the
north  of  England  until  1792,  when  it
finally  died  out,  it  having  constituted  other
Lodges,  and  a  “  Grand  Lodge,  south  of  the
Trent”  (at  London).  All  of  the  “York”
Lodges  succumbed  on  the  decease  of  their
“Mother  Grand  Lodge.”  There  has  not
been  a  representative  of  the  Ancient  York
Grand  Lodge  anywhere  whatever  through¬
out  this  century.

Yug,  or  Yuga.  One  of  the  ages,  ac¬
cording  to  Hindu  mythology,  into  which
the  Hindus  divide  the  duration  or  exist¬
ence  of  the  world.


Z.  (Heb.,  f,  Zain.)  Twenty-sixth  and
last  letter  of  the  English  alphabet.  In
Hebrew  the  numerical  value  is  seven.
This  letter  was  added  to  the  Latin  from


the  Greek  in  the  time  of  Cicero.  The
Greek  letter  is  zeta ,  £.

Zacchai.  (Heb.,  ^.)  A  name  ap¬
plied  to  the  Deity.


1046


ZADKI-EL


ADDENDUM.


ZOAN


Zudki-cl.  The  name  of  one  of  the
angels  of  the  seven  planets,  according  to
the  Jewish  rabbins; — the  angel  of  the
planet  Jupiter.

Zaplinsilli-panneali.  An  Egyp¬
tian  title  given  to  the  patriarch  Joseph  by
the  Egyptian  king  under  whom  he  was
viceroy.  The  name  has  been  interpreted
“  Revealer  of  secrets,”  and  is  a  password
in  the  old  rituals  of  the  Scottish  Rite.

Zarriel.  The  angel  that,  in  accord¬
ance  with  the  Kabbalistical  system,  gov¬
erns  the  sun.

Zarvan-akar-ana.  (“Time  with¬
out  limits.”)  According  to  the  Parsees,
the  name  of  a  deity  or  abstract  principle
which  existed  even  before  the  birth  of
Ahriman  and  Ormudz.

Zebuloit.  Son  of  Jacob  and  Leah;
in  the  exodus  his  tribe  marched  next  to
Judah  and  Issachar,  and  received  the  ter¬
ritory  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  south
half  of  the  Lake  of  Galilee,  including  Rim-
mon,  Nazareth,  and  the  plain  of  Buttauf,
where  stood  Cana  of  Galilee.  Heb.  (1^31,
Heaven,  or  the  abode  of  God.  See  Jabulum.

Zechariali.  “The  son  of  Iddo,”
born  in  Babylonia  during  the  captivity,
who  joined  Zerubbabel  on  his  return  to
Palestine.  A  leader  and  a  man  of  influ¬
ence,  being  both  priest  and  prophet.

Zelator.  The  first  degree  in  the  First
Order  of  the  Rosicrucian  Society.

Zemzeiu.  The  holy  well  in  Mecca.

Zenana.  The  inner  portion  of  a  gen¬
tleman’s  house  in  India,  devoted  to  the  use
of  females.  In  contrast  with  the  front  or
gentleman’s  portion,  it  is  devoid  of  com¬
forts.  Each  woman  has  a  small  cell,  on
second  or  third  story,  fronting  on  the  inner
court  of  the  square  structure.

Zend  Avesta.  (“Commentary  and
text.”)  The  Bible  of  the  ancient  Per¬
sians  and  of  the  modern  Parsees  or  Gue-
bers,  who  number  about  7000  in  Persia
and  200,000  in  India.  It  is  ascribed  to
Zoroaster  (see  Zend  Avesta,  Mackey),
who  is  said  to  have  written  2,000,000
verses,  covering  12,000  cowskin  parch¬
ments.  In  its  present  fragmentary  state  it
consists  of  the  Vendidad,  of  22  chapters,
being  the  one  surviving  part  (the  20th)  of
an  original  work  of  21  parts ;  the  Yazna,
of  72  chapters;  the  Visparad,  of  23  chap¬
ters  ;  24  sections  called  Yashts,  and  a  few
fragments.

Zeraias.  One  of  the  three  officers
appointed  by  king  Solomon  to  superintend
the  hewing  of  the  timbers  in  the  forests  of
Lebanon.

Zetland,  Tliomas  Dumlas,
Karl  of.  One  of  the  most  noted  of  the
noblemen  of  England,  born  in  1795,  and
initiated  in  the  “  Prince  of  Wales  Lodge,


No.  259.”  Appointed  S.  G.  Warden  in
1832,  Deputy  in  1839,  Pro.  G.  M.  in  1840.
Upon  the  decease  of  the  Duke  of  Sussex,
in  1843,  the  Earl  became  the  chief  ruler
of  the  craft,  until  March,  1844,  when  he
was  elected  M.  W.  G.  M.  He  was  Prov.
G.  Master  of  North  and  East  Yorkshire
from  1835  until  he  died,  in  1873.

Zeus.  Greatest  of  the  national  deities
of  Greece,  son  of  Chro-
nos  and  Rhea,  brother  of
Poseidon  and  Hera,  and
husband  of  the  latter.
Mostly  worshipped  in
Crete,  Arcadia,  and  Do-
dona.  Finally  the  great
Hellenic  divinity,  identi¬
fied  with  Jupiter  of  the
Romans  and  Amon  of  the
Libyans.  Zeus  was  rep¬
resented  as  of  majestic
form,  holding  in  one  hand
a  sceptre,  and  in  the  other  a  thunderbolt,
signified  by  the  above  symbol.

Zi.  In  the  Izdubar  legends,  a  kind  of
spiritual  essence  residing  in  every  organic
thing,  each  created  object  having  its  special
Zi,  of  which  the  Supreme  Being  was  a
more  exalted  genus.  Zi  was  also  by  a
parity  of  reasoning  regarded  as  the  soul
of  man,  and  even  man  himself.

Zicu  or  Ziggara.  The  Accadian
name  for  primaeval  matter.

Zif.  (Iyar)  T’Jvf.  The  eighth  month
of  the  civil  and  the  second  of  the  sacred
year  of  the  Hebrews,  commencing  on  the
first  of  the  new  moon  in  the  month  of
April.  The  name  of  this  month  is  men¬
tioned  but  once  in  the  Scriptures,  and  then
as  relating  to  the  date  of  the  commence¬
ment  of  Solomon’s  Temple.  The  month
Bui,  or  Marchesvan,  is  mentioned  as  the
date  of  the  completion  of  the  Temple.

Zillali.  Wife  of  Lamech,  mother  of
Tubal  Cain  and  Naamah.  One  of  the  few
females  mentioned  as  of  the  antediluvian
period.

Zinzendorf,  Count  von,  Xieo-
latis  Ludwig.  Founder  of  the  exist¬
ing  sect  of  Moravian  brethren ;  also  of  a
religious  society  which  he  called  the
“  Order  of  the  Grain  of  Mustard-Seed.”
He  was  ordained  bishop  of  the  Moravians
in  1737,  at  request  of  King  Frederick  Wil¬
liam  I.  of  Prussia,  went  to  London,  and
was  received  by  Wesley.  In  1741  pro¬
ceeded  to  Bethlehem,  in  America,  and
founded  the  Moravian  settlements.  A
prolific  author  of  a  hundred  volumes.
Born  at  Dresden  1700,  died  1760.

Zitliern.  An  instrument  of  music  of
28  strings  drawn  over  a  shallow  box ;  both
hands  are  employed  in  playing  on  it.

Zoan.  An  Egyptian  town,  known  to


ZODIAC


ADDENDUM.


ZUNI


1047


the  Greeks  as  Tanais,  presumed  to  have
been  founded  3700  B.  c.,  and  probably
the  residence  of  the  Pharaohs  of  the
Exodus.

Zodiac.  Many  of  the  Egyptian  tem¬
ples  contain  astronomical  representations ;
notably  those  of  Esneli,  Contra  Latopolis,
and  Denderah,  were  famous  fol  their  zodi¬
acal  ceilings.  Antiquity  was  accorded  to
the  records  of  the  Egyptian  empire  by
calculations  made  from  the  positions  of
the  stars  on  the  monuments  and  on  these
ceilings.  Closer  criticism  now  reveals
these  positions  to  be  fanciful  and  the  data
unreliable.  The  zodiac  of  Denderah  has
been  removed  to  Paris,  where  it  forms  the
chief  ornament  of  the  museum  of  the
Louvre.  Those  remaining  in  Egypt  are
suffering  from  deterioration.  Crosses  will
be  found  to  be  a  portion  of  five  of  the
signs  of  the  zodiac.

Zoliar.  (Heb.  “IH?.  splendor.)  After
the  surrender  of  Jerusalem,  through  the
victory  of  Vespasian,  among  the  fugitives
was  Rabbi  Simon  Ben  Jochai,  who  re¬
mained  an  Anchorite  for  twelve  years,
became  visionary,  and  believed  he  was
visited  by  the  prophet  Elias.  His  son,
Rabbi  Eliezer,  and  his  clerk,  Rabbi  Abba,
when  visiting  himself,  took  down  his  pro¬
nounced  divine  precepts,  which  were  in
time  gathered  and  formed  into  the  famous


Sohar  or  Zohar.  From  this  work,  the
Sepher  Jetzirah,  and  the  Commentary  of  the
Ten  Sephiroth  was  formed  the  Kabbala.  The
Zohar,  its  history,  and  as  well  that  of  its
author,  overflow  with  beautiful  yet  ideal
mysticism.

Zoliariti.  {“The  Illuminated.”)  A
society  founded  by  Jacob  Franck  at  the
beginning  of  the  last  century.

Zonar.  The  symbolic  girdle  of  the
Christians  and  Jews  worn  in  the  Levant,
as  a  mark  of  distinction,  that  they  may
be  known  from  the  Mohammedans.

Zsckokke,  J.  II.  D.  One  of  the
most  eminent  Masons  and  German  authors
known  to  this  century.  Born  at  Magde¬
burg,  1771,  died  1848.

Zuni  Indians.  A  tribe  inhabiting
New  Mexico,  U.  S.,  whose  mystic  services
have  attracted  the  attention  of  Masonic
scholars  in  consequence  of  their  similarity
to  those  in  vogue  by  the  Masonic  frater¬
nity.  These  Indians  have  a  formal  relig¬
ious  initiation,  in  which  the  suppliant
kneels  at  the  altar  to  take  his  vows,  after
being  received  upon  the  point  of  an  in¬
strument  of  torture  to  the  flesh.  Among
their  forms  and  ceremonies  are  facing  the
east,  circumambulation,  tests  of  endurance,
and  being  peculiarly  clothed.  Incense  is
burned,  and  the  sun  worshipped  at  its
rising.


INDEX  TO  ADDENDUM,


A  945.

-C\.>  Aaron’s  Band,  945.
Abaciscus,  945.

A  bazar,  945.

Abchal,  945.

Abdiel,  945.

Abditorium,  945.

Abercoru,  Earl  of,  945.

Abib,  945.

Abibala,  945.

Acacia,  945.

Academiedes  Illuminesd’Avig-
non,  945.

Adam,  945.

Kadmon,  946.

Affiliate,  Free,  947.

Africa,  947.

South,  947.

African  Brotherhood,  947.
Agathopades,  947.

Agenda,  947.

Aliab,  947.

Alaska,  947.

Allah,  947.

Alliance,  Sacred,  947.

Alphabet,  Number  of  Letters
in,  947.

Al-Sirat,  948.

Amal-Sagghi,  948.

Amaranth,  Order  of  the,  948.
Amenti,  948.

Amor  Honores  Justitia,  948.
Amru,  948.

Amshaspands,  948.

Anakim,  948.

Ancient  and  Primitive  Rite,  948.
Anima  Mundi,  948.

Anno  Egyptiaco,  948.

Auubis  or  Auepu,  948.

Apex,  Rite  of,  948.

Apis,  948.

Apron,  Washington’s,  948.
Arabici,  949.

Aranvaka,  949.

Arbroath,  Abbey  of,  949.
Arcade  de  la  Pelleterie,  949.
Archaeology,  Masonic,  949.
Archimagus,  949.

Architect,  Engineer  and,  949.
Argonauts,  Order  of,  949.
Arianism,  949.

Ariel,  949.

Arkansas,  949.

Ark  Mariner,  Royal,  Jewel  of,
950.

Armor,  950.

Aroba,  950.


Artisan,  Chief,  951.

Arundel,  Thomas  Hcfward,  Earl
of,  951.

Aryan,  951.

Asarota,  951.

Ases,  951.

Asia,  951.

Assyrian  Architecture,  951.
Astrology,  951.

Atossa,  951.

Atthakatha,  951.

Audi,  Vide,  Tace,  951.

Auditors,  951.

Auffseher,  951.

Auger,  951.

Augustus  William,  Prince  of
Prussia,  951.

Aurora,  951.

Avatar,  952.

Avis  of  Portugal,  952.

Axe,  952.

Azariah,  952.

Azazel,  952.

Azrael,  952.

Aztec  Writings,  952.

Azure,  952.

B  952.

,  Bacon,  Roger,  952.
Bactylea,  952.

Bahrdt,  K.  F.,  952.

Balder  and  Baldur,  952.

Band,  953.
i  Banner  Bearer,  953.

Banneret,  953.

Bar,  Mitzvah,  953.

Barbati  Fratres,  953.

Basilica,  953.

Bath  Kol,  953.

Battery,  953.

Benai,  953.

Benakar,  954.

Benefit  Societies,  954.

I  Benevolent  Institutions,  U.  S.,
Ho4

Bible,  954.

Boehim,  954.

Book  of  Mormon,  954.
of  the  Dead,  954.
of  the  Fraternity  of  Stone¬
masons,  955.

Bosonian,  The,  955.

Boswell,  John,  955.

Box  of  Fraternal  Assistance,  955.
Brazen  Laver,  955.

Pillars,  955.

Bridge,  955.


I  Brithering,  955.

Brothers  of  the  Bridge,  955.
Buchanan  MS.,  955.

Buddhism,  955.

Bui,  956.

Bull,  956.

Buri,  or  Bure,  956.

p  957.

vj,  Caaba,  or  Kaaba,  957.
Cadet-Gassicourt,  Charles  Lou¬
is,  957.

Calatrava,  Military  Order  of,
957.

Calendar,  958.

Calid,  958.

Cancellarius,  958.

Canopy,  Celestial,  958.
Cautalevers,  959.

Capitular  Statistics,  959.
Capripede,  Ratur  et  Luci  Fuge,

959.

Capuchin,  959.

Carmelites,  959.

Carpenters,  Order  of,  959.
Carthusians,  959.

Cartulary,  959.

Caryatides,  959.

Catacombs,  959.

Catechumen,  960.

Cathari,  Society  of  the,  960.
Cenephorus,  960.

Ceridwen,  960.

Chaldean  Cylinder,  960.
Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,
An  Old,  960.

Characteristics,  960.

Cherubim  or  Kerubim  and  Ark,

960.

China,  962.

Chinese  Classics  and  Symbol¬
ism,  962.

Chromatic  Calendar,  “  The  Five
Points,”  962.

Black,  963.

Red,  963.

Green,  963.

White,  963.

Yellow,  963.

Chronology,  Hebrew.  See  He¬
brew  Chronology.

Circuit,  963.

Clavel,  T.  Begue,  963.

Cleche,  964.

College,  964.

Colleges,  Irish,  964.

Collocatio,  964.

1048


INDEX  TO  ADDENDUM,


1049


Colored  Fraternities,  964.
Companions,  The  Twelve,  964.
Connecticut,  964.

Conventions  or  Congresses,  964.
Conversi.  See  Barbali  Fralres.
Corium,  965.

Coronet,  Ducal,  965.

Cosmist,  965.

Cottyto,  Mysteries  of,  965.
Council  of  Allied  Masonic  De¬
grees,  965.

Craft  Statistics,  965.

Grata  Repoa,  965.

Cresset,  966.

Crimson,  966.

Crosier,  966.

Crosses,  966.

Crowns,  966.

Cumulation  of  Rites,  966.
Cyrus,  King.  See  Persia.

D  967.

j  Dactyli,  967.

Daedalus,  967.

Dagraim,  Hubert,  967.

Dagrau,  Louis,  967.

Dakota,  967.

Dalmatic,  967.

Dambool,  967.

Daniel,  967.

Dao,  967.

Darakiel,  967.

Darius  I.  See  Cyrus,  King.
Decanus,  967.

Declaring  Off,  967.

Degrees,  When  were  Three  Cre¬
ated  ?  968.

Deiseil,  968.

Denderah,  968.

Desert,  968.

Diu,  968.

Divining  Rod  or  Pedum,  969.
Dodd’s  Constitutions,  969.
Domine  Deus  Meus,  969.
Dominicans,  Order  of,  969.
Dove,  Knights  and  Ladies,  969.
Howland  Manuscript,  969.
Drops,  Three,  969.

Due  Examination,  969.

Dyaus,  969.

Dye  ua  Sore,  969.

E  969.

,  Ebal,  969.

Eban  Rohan,  970.

Eben-Ezer,  970.

Eblis,  970.

Ecbatana,  970.

Eclectic  (Ruud  orl  Union,  970.
Ecossais  d’Angers,  or  Ecossais
d’Alcidony,  970.

Edda,  970.

Edinburgb-Kil winning  Manu¬
script,  970.

Edward  the  Confessor,  King,
970.

Kings,  970.

Prince,  970.

III.  Manuscript,  970.

Edwin  Charges,  971.

Eglinton  Manuscript,  971.
Egyptian  Hieroglyphs,  971.

Months,  971.

Elai  beni  almanah,  971.

6  G


Elai  beni  emeth,  971.

Elam.  See  Persia.

Electa,  971.

Elect,  Depositary,  971.
Symbolical,  971.

Grand  Prince  of  the  Three,
972.

Irish,  972.

Elements,  Test  of  the,  972.
Elohim.  Jehovah,  972.
Emotinah,  972.

Eugland,  972.

The  First  Record  of  Grand
Lodge  of,  972.

Enochian  Alphabet,  973.

En  Soph,  973.

Eostre,  973.

Erlking,  973.

Esperance,  973.

Ethanim,  or  Tisri,  973.

Europe,  973.

Eva,  973.

Evangelicon,  973.

Evates,  973.

Eveillcs,  Secte  des,  973.
Evergeten,  Ruud  der,  973.

Evora,  Knights  of,  973.
Excalibar,  974.

Exegetical  and  Philanthropical
Society,  974.

Exodus,  974.

Expert,  Perfect,  974.

Sublime  English,  974.
Exterior,  974.

F  974.

,  Faithful,  The.  See  Cate -
chumen.

Falk,  De  Rabbi,  974.

Familien  Logen,  974.

Fanaticism,  975.

Fanor,  975.

Favorite  Rrother  of  Solomon,
975.

Feix-Feax,  975.

Felicity,  Order  of,  975.
Feuillauts,  975.

Fidelity  of  Raden  Durlach,  Or-  j
der  of,  975.

Field  Lodge,  975.

Findel,  J.  G.,  975.

Firrao,  Joseph,  975.

Florian,  Squin  de,  975.

Fort  Hiram,  975.  «

Forty,  975.

Forty-two,  975.

Uttered  Name,  975.

Four  New  Years,  975.

Old  Lodges,  976.

France,  976.

Franks,  Order  of,  Regenerated,  i
976.

Frederick  Henry  Louis,  977.
Freemasonry,  Early  Rritish, 977.  :
FrSres  Pontives,  978.

Frey,  or  Freia,  978.

Fund,  Grand  Masters’,  978.
Fylfot,  978.

G  978.

,  Gabriel,  978.

Gangler,  979.

Gauain,  Theobald.  979.

Gerbier,  Doctor,  979.


Ghemoul  Binah  Thebounah,

979.

Gibber,  Gabriel,  979.

Gibeah,  979.

Gilead,  979.

Gilgul,  Doctrine  of,  979.
Glastonbury,  Holy  Thornof,979.
G.  O.  D.,  979.

God  and  His  Temple,  Knights
of,  979.

Goetia,  979.

Golden  Lion  of  Hesse-Cassel,
Order  of,  980.

Stole  of  Venice,  980.
Thaler,  980.

Gomel,  980.

Gonfalon,  980.

Goodall,  9S0.

Gould,  Robert  Freke,  980.
Gourgas,  John  James  Joseph,

980.

Grain  of  Mustard,  Order  of  the,
980.

Grand  Chapter.  See  Connecti¬
cut.

Director  of  the  Ceremonies,
981.

Elect,  Perfect  and  Sublime
Mason,  981.

Gravelot,  981.

Grumbach,  Sylvester,  981.
Gymnosophists,  981.

Gypsies,  981.

H9S1.

,  Habakkuk,  981.

Habin,  982.

Habramah  or  Jabamiah,  982.
Hacquet,  G.,  982.

Hafedha,  982.

Hallelujah,  982.

Halliwell  MS.,  982.

Hamaliel,  982.

Hamilton,  Hon.  Robert  M.  A.,
M.D.,  982.

Hands,  United,  982.

Haphtziel,  982.

Har,  982.

Harbinger,  982.

Haruspices,  Order  of,  982.
Hayti,  982.

Hebrew  Chronology,  982.

Faith,  983.

Heler,  A.,  983.

Hermanclad,  The,  983.
Hermetic  Philosophy,  9S3.
Herring,  James,  983.

Hesse  Cassel,  983.
Hibbut-Hakkeber,  9S4.

Hierony mites,  984.

Hierophant,  or  Mystagogue,
984.

Hierophylax,  984.

Hiram,  984.

Ilittites,  984.

Hoben,  985.

Hodin,  985.

Holy  City,  Knights  of  the,  985.
Horn,  985.

Homaged,  985.

Hospitaller,  9S5.

Houel,  985.

Hughan,  Wm.  James,  985.

II  ur,  985.


1050


INDEX  TO  ADDENDUM.


T  985.

I,  I-Colm-Kill,  985.

Iconoclasts,  986.

Idaho,  986.

Ijar,  986.

Illuminate  Theosophists,  9S6.
Imauiu,  9S6.

I  inmaterialism,  986.

Impost,  986.

I  license,  Regulations  for  use,  986.
I  ncrease  of  Wages,  986.

Indian  Calendar,  986.

Faith,  986.

Indische  Mysterien.  Indian
Mysteries,  986.

Ineffable  Triangle,  987.

Inigo  Jones  MS.,  987.

Initiate  into  the  Sciences,  988.
Inner  Order,  988.

Insect  Shermah,  988.
Intolerance,  988.

Inversion  of  Letters,  988.
Invisibles,  Les,  988.

Ionian  Islands,  988.

Iram,  988.

Ischngi,  9S8.

Isiac  Table,  98S.

Israfeel,  9S8.

Itratics,  Order  of,  988.

I.-.V.-.  I.-.  0.\  L.\,  988.

Ivory  Key,  988.

Izads,  989.

989.

}  Jaaborou  Hammaim,  989.
Jabescheh,  9S9.

Jabulum,  989.  See  Zebulon.
Jafuhar,  989.

Jaheb,  989.

Jaina  Cross,  9S9.

Jainas,  989.

James  II.  and  III.  of  Scotland,

9S9._

Jaminim,  or  Iaminim,  989.
Japanese  Faith,  989.

Jasher,  Book  of,  989.

Jeksan,  989.

Jephthah’s  Daughter,  989.
Jerusalem,  Heavenly,  9S9.
Jesse,  989.

Jetzirah,  Sepher,  9S9.

Jewish  Rites  and  Ceremonies,

989.

Jezeeds,  990.

Jobel,  990.

Jochebed,  990.

Johaben,  990.

Joinville,  Chaillon  de,  990.
Jokshan,  990.

Joram,  990.

Jordan,  Karl  Stephan,  990.
Joshaphat,  Son  of  Ahilud,  990.
Jubalcain,  990.

Jubela-o-m,  990.

Judith,  990.

K  990.

,  Kabbalistic  Companion,

990.

Kansas,  990.

Karmatians,  990.

Kellermann,  Marshal,  990.
Kenning’s  Masonic  Cyclopaedia,
990.


Kentucky,  991.

Khem,  991.

Khepra,  991.

Kher-heb,  991.

Khesvan  or  Chesvan,  991.
Khetem  el  Nabiim,  991.

Khon,  991.

Khotbah,  991.

Khurum-Abi,  991.

Ki,  991.

King  of  the  Sanctuary,  991.

of  the  World,  991.

Kings,  The  Five,  991.

Kislev  or  Chislev,  992.
Knewt-neb-s,  992.

Knife  and  Fork  Degree,  992.
Knight  Evangelist,  992.
Knights  of  St.  John  the  Evan¬
gelist  of  Asia  in  Europe,
992.

of  the  True  Light,  992.
Knocks,  Three,  992.

Kojiki,  992.

Korah,  992.

Koran  or  A1  Coran,  992.

Krause  Manuscript, 992.
Krishna  or  Christua,  992.
Kulma,  993.

Kuu,  993.

L99.3.

j  Laanah,  993.

Labady,  993.

Laboratory,  993.

Labruru,  993.

Labyrinth,  993.

Lacep&de,  B.  G.  E.  de  la  Yille,

993.

Lakak  Deror  Pessah,  993.
Lamaism,  993.

Lamballe,  The  Princess  of,  993.
Lamma  Sabactani,  993.

Lamp,  Knight  of  the  Inextin¬
guishable,  993.

Lance,  993.

Langes,  Savalette  de,  993.
Lansdowne  MS.,  993.
Lauturelus,  Ordre  des,  994.

La  Rochefoucault,  Bayers,  Le
Marquis  de,  994.

Lasalle,  Troubat  de,  994.
Lateran  Councils,  994.

Latour  d’Auvergne,  Le  Prince
de,  994.

Laver,  Brazen,  994.

Lawful  Information,  994.

Law,  Sacred,  994.

Lay  Brothers,  994.

Lazarus,  Order  of,  994.
Lemierre,  A.  M.,  994.

Lenning,  C.,  994.

Leontiea,  994.

Leo  XII.,  994.

Lesser  Lights,  994.

Levit,  Der,  995.

Liber.  Liberty,  995.

Liberty,  Ordre  de  la,  995.
Libertv,  Equality,  Fraternity,
995.

Libyan  or  Lybic  Chain,  995.
Licht,  Ritter  von  Wahren,  995.
Lichtseher,  Oder  Erleucbtete,
995.

Lilis  or  Lilith,  995.


Lily  of  the  Valley,  995.

Lion,  Chevalier  du,  995.

of  the  Tribe  of  Judah,  995.
Livre  d’Architecture,  995.

d’Eloquence,  995.

Loki,  995.  See  Balder.

Louis  Napoleon,  995.

Ludewig,  H.  E.,  995.

Lufton,  995.

Lully,  Raymond,  995.

Lumiere,  La  Grande,  995.

La  Vraie,  995.

Lunus,  995.

Luz,  995.

Lyon,  David  Murray,  996.

M  996.

j  Mackenzie,  Kenneth  R.

H.,  996.

Mac;on,  996.

dans  la  Voie  Droite,  997.
du  Secret,  997.

Ecossais,  Maitre,  997.
Majonne  Maitresse,  997.
Ma9onnerie  Rouge,  997.
Ma^onnieke  Societeiten,  997.

“  Macoy’s  Cyclopaedia, ”  997.
Macrocosm,  997.

Magazine,  997.

Magi,  The  Three,  997.

Magna  est  veritas  et  praevale-
bit,  99S.

Magnan,  B.  P.,  99S.
Mahabharata,  998.

Mahadeva,  998.

Mahakasyapa,  99S.

Malcolm  III.,  998.

Man,  998.

Mango,  999.

Manichieans,  999.

Manichiens,  Les  Freres,  999.
Mann,  Der,  999.

Manu,  999.

Manuscripts,  Apocryphal,  999.
Old,  999.

Marconis,  Gabriel  Mathieu,

1000.

Jacques  Etienne,  1001.  ■
Marduk,  1001.

Maria  Theresa,  1001.

Martinism,  1001.

Masoney,  1001.

Masonic  Colors,  1001.
Literature,  1002.

Press.  See  Press,  Masonic.
Masons,  Company  of,  1002.

Emperor  of  all  the,  1002.
Masora,  1002.

Massena,  Andre,  1002.

Mathoc,  1002.

Matter,  1002.

Maurer,  1002.

Grass,  1002.

Waut,  1002.

Maximilian,  Joseph  I.,  1002.
Mecklenburg,  1002.

Medals,  1002.

Megacosm,  1003.

Mehen,  1003.

Mehour,  1003.

Meister,  1003.

Memphis,  1003.

Mer-Sker,  1003.

Merzdorf,  J.  L.  T.,  1003.


INDEX  TO  ADDENDUM.


1051


Meshia,  Meshiane,  1003.
Metusael,  1003.

Mezuza,  1003.

Millin  de  Grand  Maison,  A.  L.,

1004.

Mistletoe,  1004.

Mitchell,  James  W.  S.,  1004.
Moabite  Stone,  1004.

Moabon,  1004.

Mohammed.  See  Koran.
Mohrims,  1005.

Moira,  Francis  Rawdon,  Baron,

1005.

Moloch,  1005.

Moore,  Charles  Whitlock,  1005.
Morana,  1005.

Mormon  Faith.  See  Book  of
Mormon.

Morris,  Robert,  LL.D.,  1005.
Mount  Caf,  1006.

Mozart,  J.  C.  W.  G.,  1006.
Murat,  Joachim,  1006.

Joachim,  Prince,  1006.
Musical  Instruments,  Ancient,

1006.

Muta,  1006.

Muttra,  1006.

Myrrh,  1006.

Mysteries,  Mexican,  1006.
Mystic  Crown,  Knights  and
Companions  of  the,  1006.


1007.

;  Naharda,  Brotherhood  of,
1007.

Naos,  1007.

Napoleon  I.,  1007.

Narbonne,  Rite  of,  1007.

Neith,  1007.

Nemesis,  1007.

Neocorus,  1007.’

Nephalia,  1007.

Nergal,  1007.

New  Templars,  1007.

Nick,  1007.

Nicotiates,  Order  of,  1007.
Nihongi.  1007.

Nonis,  1007.

Normal,  1007.

Nornae,  1007.

North,  1007.

Star,  1008.

Novitiate,  1008.

Nuk-pe-nuk,  1008.

Nun,  100S.

Nyava,  1008.

Nyctazontes,  1008.


O  1009.

,  Cannes,  1009.

Oak  Apple,  Society  of  the,  1009.
Obed,  1009.

Oboth,  1009.

Obrack,  Hibernus,  1009.

Odem,  1009.

Odin,  1009.

Ogmius,  1009.

Onech,  1009.

Ophites,  1009.

Order  Book,  1009.

Oriflamme,  1009.

Ouriel.  See  Uriel.

Oziah,  1010.


1010.

;  Pachacamac,  1010.
Palestine,  Order  of,  1010.

Pal  la,  1010.

Palmer,  Henry  L.,  1010.
Pantheism,  1010.

Pantheistic  Brotherhood,  1010.
Papyrus,  1010.

Parikchai,  Agrouchada,  1010.
Paris  Constitutions,  1011.
Parlirer,  Kill.

Parole,  1011.

Parsees.  See  Zend  A  vesta.
Parvin,  Theodore  S.,  1011.
Passage,  1012.

“  Passing  the  River,”  1012.

Pax  Vobiscum,  1012.

Peetash,  1012.

Penalty,  1012.

Pennsylvania,  1012.

Pentacle,  The,  1013.

Perfect  Master,  1013.

Prussian,  1013.

Stone,  1013.

Periclyte,  or  Paraclete,  1013.
Persia,  1013.

Persian  Faith.  S ee Zend  Avesta.
Philosophus,  1014.

Phylacteries,  1014.

Pike,  Albert,  1014.

Pinnacles,  1015.

Pitaka,  1015.

Pildah,  1015.

Pitris,  Spirits,  1015.

Pointed  Cubical  Stone,  1015.
Points,  The  Five.  See  Chro¬
matic  Calendar.

Point  within  a  Circle,  1015.
Pomme  Verte  (Green  Apple),
Order  of  the,  1016.

Pooroosh,  1016.

Portiforium,  1016.

Praxoeans,  1016.

Press,  Masonic,  1016.

Priestly  Vestments,  1017.

Prince  of  Jerusalem,  Jewel  of,

1017.

of  Wales’  Grand  Lodge,
1017.

Proclus,  1017.

Propylieum,  1017.

Psaterians,  1017.

Pullen,  William  Hyde,  1017.
Punjaub,  1018.

Puranas,  1018.

Purrah,  The,  1018.

Pursuivant,  1018.

Q101S.

,  Quadrivium  and  Trivium,

1018.

Qualifications  of  Candidates,
1018.

Quetzialcoatl.  1018.

R1018.

,  Rainbow,  The  Most  An¬
cient  Order  of  the,  1018.
Raising  Sheet,  1018.

Ram  ay  ana,  1018.

Raphael,  1018.

Red  Brother,  1019.

Revelation,  1019.

Revels,  Master  of  the,  1019.


Revestiary,  1019.

Rite  des  Elus  Coens,  ou  Pretres,

1019.

Rose  Croix,  Jewel  of  the,  1019.
Rosicrucians,  Ancient  and  Mod¬
ern,  1019.

Royal  Arch  Grand  Bodies  in
America,  1020.

Arch  Masonry,  Massachu¬
setts,  1021.

Ruchiel,  1021.

Russia,  Secret  Societies  of,  1021.

Q  1022.

kjj  Saadh,  1022.

Sabbal,  1022.

Sacellum,  1022.

Sacred  Law,  1022.

Sadda,  1022.

Sadducees,  1022.

Sagitta,  1022.

Saint  Andrew,  1022.

Constantine,  Order  of,  1022.
Sakinat,  1022.

Sakti,  1022.

Salaam,  1022.

Saladin,  1022.

Sandalphon,  1023.

Sardinia,  1023.

Sastra,  1023.

Sat  B’hai,  Royal  Oriental  Order
of  the,  1023.

Saxony,  1023.

Schor- Laban,  1023.

Scorpion,  1023.

Scottish  Rite,  A.  A.  See  Su¬
preme  Councils.

Scroll,  1023.

Sefidd  Schamagan,  1023.

Sejjin,  1023.

Seiamu  Aleikum,  Es,  1023.
Semelius,  1023.

Senses,  Seven.  See  Man.
Sephora,  1023.

Seraphim,  1023.

Order  of,  1023.
Setting-Maul,  1024.

Seven,  1024.

Shalal  Shalom  Abi,  1025.
Shalash  Esrim,  1025.

Shaster,  1025.

Shebat,  1025.

Shelu  m  lecka,  1025.

Shemitic,  1025.

Shermah,  Insect.  See  Insect
Shermah.

Shesha,  1025.

Shinto,  1025.

Shoulkain,  1025.

Sijel,  Al,  1025.

Silent  Brotherhood,  1025.
Siloam  Inscription,  1026.
Simorgh,  1026.

Si  rat,  As  or  Al.  See  Al-Sirat.

“  Sit  Lux  et  Lux  Fuit,”  1026.
Sivan,  1026.

Smaragdine,  Tablet  of  Hermes,
1026.

Softas,  1026.

Soli  Sanctissimo  Sacrum,  1026.
Solomon's  Temple  and  Serpent
Worship,  1026.

Son  of  Hiram,  1028.

Soter,  1028.


1052


INDEX  TO  ADDENDUM.


Speculative  Mason,  The  First.
See  Freemasonry,  Early  lirit-
ish.

Spencer  Manuscript,  1028.
Squarmen,  1028.

Sruti,  1028.

St.  Alban’s  Regulations,  1028.
Anthony,  1028.

John,  the  Evangelist,  102!).
Statistics  of  Capitular  Masonrv,

1029.

of  Craft  Masonry,  1029.
of  the  Order  of  tThe  Temple,

1030.

"Stellato  Sedet  Solo,”  10.30.
Strasburg,  Constitutions  of,  1030.
Strict  Trial,  1031.

Stukely,  Dr.,  1031.

Sun  of  Mercy,  Society  of  the,

1031.

Supreme  Councils,  A.  A.  Scot¬
tish  Rite,  1031.

Sword,  Revolving,  1032.

Syrian  Rite,  1032.

Systyle,  1032.


T.


1033.

Tabaor,  1033.


-  5

Tablets,  Engraved,  1033.

Talith,  1033.

Taljahad,  1033.

Tamniuz,  1033.

Tanga-Tango,  1033.

Tchandalas,  1033.

Tebeth,  1033.

Telamones.  See  Caryatides.
Templar  Statistics.  See  Statis¬
tics  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple.
Temple  of  Solomon,  1033.

Ten  Expressions,  1035.
Tensio-Dai-Sin,  1036.

Ternary  Allusions,  1036.
Tetradites,  1036.

Theopaschites,  1036.

Theoricus,  1036.

Theriog,  1036.

Thirteen,  The,  1036.

Thokath,  1036.

Thomists,  1036.

Thor,  1036.

Three  Fires,  1037.

-Fold  Cord,  1037.

Sacred  Utensils,  1037.
Thugs,  1037.

Thurible,  1037.

Thurifer,  1037.

Thursday,  1037.

Tiluk,  1037.

Tisri,  1037.

Titan  of  the  Caucasus,  1037.
Topes,  1037.

Torchbearer,  1037.


Trappists,  Order  of  Religious,
1038.

Tredic,  1038.

Tree  Alphabet,  1038.

Worship,  1038.

Triangle  and  Square,  1039.
TrifeJs,  1040.

Trilithon,  1040.

Trinitarians,  Order  of,  1040.
Trinity,  Religious  Fraternity  of
the  Holy,  1040.

Tripitaka,  1040.

True  Light,  1040.

Truro  Cathedral,  1040.

Truth,  1040.

Tryonists,  1040.

Tsaphiel,  1041.

Tsedakah,  1041.

Tsidoni,  1041.

Tsoim,  1041.

Tub  Baani  Amal  Abal,  1041.
Turanian,  1041.

TT  1041.

U  ,  Unhele,  1041.

United  Friars,  Fraternity  of,

1041.

Universal  Aurora,  Society  of
the,  1041.

Universalists,  Order  of,  1041.

“  Unpublished  Records  of  the
Craft,”  1042.

Upadevas,  1042.

Upanishad,  1042.

“  Upright  Man  and  Mason,”

1042.

Ur,  1042.

Usages,  1042.

TT  1042.

\  ,  Yagao,  or  Bagaos,  1042.
Valhalla,  1042.

Van  Rensselaer,  Killian  Hen¬
ry,  1042.

V.  D.  S.  A.,  1043.

Yeadar,  1043.

Vedanga,  1043.

Vessels  of  Gold  and  Silver,

1043.

Veterans,  1043.

Yieerov  Eusebius,  1043.

“  Virtute  et  Silentio,”  1043.
Vishnu.  See  Furanas.

Vitra,  1043.

Voishnuvus,  1043.

Voltaire,  1043.

W  1044.

,  Wahabites,  1044.
Wallachia,  Grand  Scottish  De¬
gree  of,  1044.


Wellington,  Duke  of,  1044.

“  Westminster  and  Keystone,"
1044.

Wheat,  1044.

Widow,  Sons  of  the,  1014.
William,  Emperor  of  Germany,
1044.

Wolfgang,  Albert,  Prince  of
Lippe  Schaumberg.  1044.
Woodford  Manuscript,  1044.
Wound,  Mason’s,  1044.

X  1044.

,  Xystus,  1044.

Xysuthrus,  1044.

Y  1045.

X  ,  Yaksha,  1045.
i  Yalla,  1045.

Yama,  1045.

Yellow  Caps,  Society  of,  1045
Yezdegerdian,  1045.

Yezidee,  1045.

Yggdrasil,  1045.

York,  Edward  Augustus,  Duke
of,  1045.

Frederick,  Duke  of,  1045.
Grand  Lodge,  1045.

Yug,  or  Yuga,  1045.

Z  1045.

1  Zacchai,  1045.

Zadki-el,  1046.
Zaphnath-paaneah,  1046.
Zarriel,  1046.

Zarvan-akar-ana,  1046.

Zebulon,  1046.

Zechariah,  1046.

Zelator,  1046.

Zemzem,  1046.

Zenana,  1046.

Zend  Avesta,  1046.

Zeraias,  1046.

Zetland,  Thomas  Dundas,  Earl
of,  1046.

Zeus,  1046.

I  Zi,  1046.

Zicu  or  Ziggara,  1046.

Zif,  1046.
i  Zillah,  1046.

Zinzendorf,  Count  von,  Nico¬
laus  Ludwig,  1046.

Zithern,  1046.

Zoan,  1046.

Zodiac,  1047.

Zohar,  1047.

Zohariti,  1047.

Zonar,  1047.

Zschokke,  J.  H.  D.,  1047.

Zuui  Indians,  1047.


THE  END,
