Voyages from Montreal (Alexander Mackenzie, 1801)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1801 first edition (https://archive.org/details/P000055). Mackenzie's voyages to the Arctic Ocean (1789) and across the Rockies to the Pacific (1793) — the first transcontinental crossing of North America.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

r 


¢ 
eat Den 
uo 


ae] 


ae 


anunvh 


VOYAGES. 
FROM 
- MONTREAL 


e 


Continent of North America, €c. Sc.’ 


on ; 
Ne eta he 
Dest § 


Mee 


' 
4 
a ' ~ . , 
“4 1 
- ' 
; - 
. . . 
a 
. , ; 
. . 
' . . 
. a 
i 4 
4 . ; 
“ee 
; ; ° + ad 
’ ‘ a - a 
' t - . 
‘ % 
4 


rent paanineen, 


ATX AN DIR MACKEN ATE sq: 


Aa 


TOYAGES 


; FROM ; 
a M ON. ER E A L, 
; fegh Veit 
thon a ee an a a 
~ ee ors oe 


Se LON: TH He a VER 


foes poe mt wigs 
' wns } 
+ vole so 
por al a > ‘ 


oe ee ein noe 7 
CONTI F NORTH Al 


a ' Q “an 
os BROZEI AND PACIFIC OCEANS; : 
i rare Peak ae ore Chaba ce fn 


os x 0 cee - 


. IELUSTRATED, win sas. | 
_'. BY-ALEXANDER MACKENZIE, ESQ. 


ms - LONDON:. . ' 


PRINTED FOR T, CADELL, JUN. AND W. DAVIES, STRAND ; COBBETT AND MORGAN, 
ia PALL-MALL; AND W. CREECH, AT EDINBURGH, cS . 


at tp olf . 
RY R, NOBLE, OLD-BAILEY,” 


- eI 


Z 
. . M.DCCC.Y, ‘ 


me ue 
eon 
<a . 
we . 
oF 
‘ eo — 
2 ot . 


ee, 


* 


TO 


HIS MOST SACRED MAJESTY 

™ os . 
GEORGE THE THIRD, 

_ - - NG 


THIS VOLUME 


/ TS INSCRIBED, 


BY HIS MAJESTY’S 


MOST FAITHFUL: SUBJECT, 


- 


AND 
“om 


"DEVOTED SERVANT, 


a 


ALEXANDER MACKENZIE. 


+ ~~ 


ve 


phe 


« 
t 


PREFACE. 


-On prefenting this Volume to my Country, it is not neceflary to enter 
into a particular account of thofe voyages whofe journals form the prin: 


cipal part of it, as they will be found, I truft, to explain themfelves. ° 


It appears, however, to be a duty, which the Public havea right to 
expe&t from me, to ‘tate the reafons which have influenced me in 
‘delaying the publication of them. | 


“he 


It has been afferted, that a mifunderftanding between a perfon high - 
' in office and myfelf, was the caufe of this procraftination. It has alfo . 


been propagated, that it was occafioned by that precaution which the 
policy of commerce “will fometimes fuggeft; but they are both equally 


devoid of foundation. The one is an idle tale; and there could be no, 


folid reafon for concealing the circumftances of difcoveries, whole 
arrangements and profecution were fo honourable to my affociates and 
“myfelf, at whofe expence they were undertaken. The delay a€tually 
‘arofe from the very active and bufy mode of life in which I was engaged 
fince the voyages have been. completed ; and when, at length, the op- 


portunity arrived, the apprehenfion of prefenting mylelf to the Public © 


~ in the charaéter of an Author, for which the courfe and occupations of 
Ae my 


7 my 7 Tile have by no'means: 5 qualified m me, “made me hefitate 4 in committing ; 
_my papers. to.the Prefs; being much better calculated. to perform. the 


a : ‘voyages, arduous: as they. might be, than to write an account of: them. 


» However, they. are now. offered to the Pablic with the fabmiffion that . 


“becomes: me. a 


I: owas, ‘ed, at an: a early period of. life, by. commercial views, ‘to ‘the - 


7 country North-Weft. of. Lake Superior, in North America, and being . 
endowed by Nature. with: an inquifitive: ‘mind and “enierprifing fpirit ; bo - a 
~ pofleffing alfo. a. “conttitution’ and frame of body ‘equal to the moft oe = 


arduous: undertakings, and being familiar with. ‘toilfome exertions in. the - 


~ profecation. of. mercantile . purluits, Lnot only: contemplated the pragii ae 
_osabiity, of, penetrating acrofs the continent of. America, ‘but was con- | 
~ fident‘in’ thé qualifications,. as I was animated by the defire; to undertake ot _ 


the perilous enterprize. _ a Be ee Be ha 


“The general utility” of fuch a “difeovery, “has! been univerfally ace: ee 


~ knowledgeds while the withes: of my particular: friends and commercial | 
-affociates, that. I Should. proceed in the purfuit OF it, contributed to 


~ quicken the. execution of. this favourite project. of my own ambition: foe 

- ° and as the “completion. of it extends - ‘the. boundaries: of: geographic cee 
_ cience, and. adds . new. “countries to. the realms ‘of Britifh ‘commerce, a : 
the danger I have encountered, and the. toils I have fuffered, have found aa 
“their ‘Tecompence} ‘nor. will the many. tedious and ‘weary days, or. the ee 
| _ gloomy. and inclement hes which I have palfed, have been n paffed 2 7 ae 


in vain, a re 


PREFACE, vy 


, The firlt voyage has fettled the dubious point of a prafticable’ Notihe 


Well paflage ;, and I truft, that. it Kas fet that long agitated. queftion at 
reft, and .extinguifhed the difputes refpedting it for ever. An enlarged 
 difcuffion, of. that fubjéG will be found to, occupy the: concluding pages 
of this volume, 7 a 


In this voyage, I was not only without‘the neceffary books and inftru- 
ments, but alfo felt myfelf deficient in the feiences of aftronomy and 
navigation: :1 did not hefitate, therefore,.to undertaké.a winter's voyage 
to this country, int order to procure the one and acquire the other. 
Thefe objeéts being aecomplifhed, I returned, to. determine the praéti- 
cability of a commercial communication. through the continent. of 
‘North America, between the Atlantic and: Pacific’ Oceans, - which is 
proved by my fecond journal. | Nor doI-hefitate'to declare my decided . 
opinion; that very great and effential advantages may. be derived by. ex- 


+, 
Bee 


tending our trade from oné fea. to the other. 


? 


Some account of the fur trade of Canada, from that country, of the 
_ native, inhabitants, and of the extenfive diftriéts conneéted ° with it,- 
“forms a preliminary difcourfé, which. will, I traft, prové interefting to - 
a fiation whofe general policy is blended with, and whofe profperity i is 
fupported by, the purfuits of commerce, It will alfo. qualify the. reader, 
te purfue the fucceeding voyages. with luperior intelligence. and fatisfac-’ 


ry 
1 # 


tions 


Thefe voyages. will ‘not, I fear, afford the- variety that may be ex- 


Pefled, from them ;- and-that which they offered. to the eye, is not of.a 
nature | 


. 
afen 


5 


Oi) 
1 uw 
: 


watch the favage 
tribe who might m 


VA : 
. + 
. i 
, 
, 


vi PREFACE, 


nature to be effectyally transferred to the page. Mountains and vallies, 
the dreary wafte, and wide-fpreading forefts, the lakes and rivers fuc- 
ceed each other in general defcription ; and, except on the coafts of the 
Pacific Ocean, where the villages‘ were permanent, and the inhabitants 
in a great meafure ftationary, {mall bands of wandering Indians: are 


' the only people whom I fhall introduce to the acquaintance of my 
> readers. Oo , 


The beaver and the buffalo, the moofe-deer and the elk, which are 


. the principal animals to be found in thefe countries, are already fo 


familiar to the naturalifts of Europe, and have been fo often as Well as 


‘corredtly defcribed in their works, that the bare mention of them, as" 
they. enlivened the ‘landfcape, or were hunted for food; with a cur- 


fory account of the foil, the courfe and navigation of lakes and rivers, 
and their various produce, is all that can be reafonably expetted from 
me, _ ae : 

% 


I do not poflels the fcience of the naturalift; and even if the 


qualifications ‘of that chara@ter had been ‘attained by me, its curious 


fpirit would not have been gratified. I could not ftop to dig into 
the earth, over whofe furface I was compelled to’ pafs with rapid 
fleps; nor could I turn afide to collet the plants which » nature 


might have { attered | on ‘the way, when my thoughts wére anxi- 


over me. I had td encounter perils ‘by land and perils by water; to 
o was our guide, or to guard again thofe of his . 
itate our deftruction, 1 had, alfo, the paffions ; and 


/ 
, 


AN / 


— + fears 2 


PREFACE. . vii 


fears of others to control and fubdue. To day I had to afluage the 
rifing difcontents, and on the morrow to cheer the fainting fpirits, of 
the people who accompanied me. The toil of our navigation .was in- 
ceffant, and oftentimes extreme; and in our progrefs over land we 
had no protection from the feverity of the elements, and poffeffed no- 
accommodations. or conveniences but fuch as’ could be contained in 
the burden on our fhoulders, which. aggravated the toils of our march,. 
and added to the wearifomenefs of our way. 
° t 

’ Though the events which compofe my journals, may have little in. 
themfelves. to ftrike the imagination of thofe who love.to be aftonithed,, 
or to gratify the curiofity of fuch as are enamoured of romantic adven-. 


. tures; neverthelefs, when it is confidered that I explored thofe waters. _ 


which had never:before borne any other veffel than the canoe of the 


- favage;-and traverfed thofe deferts where an European had never before. 


" prefented himfelf tothe eye of its fwarthy natives; when to thefe 


confiderations are added the important obje€ts which were purfued,, 


-with the dangers that -were encountered, and the difficulties that 


were furmounted. to attain them, this work will, I flatter myfelf, be. 
found to excite an intereft, and conciliate regard, in the minds of 
thofe who perufe it: 2...’ 

The general. map which illuftrates this volume, is reduced. by Mr. 
Arrow{mith from his three-fheet map of North-America, with the lateft 
difcoveries, which he is about to- republifh.” His profeffional abilites are 


_ _ well known, and no encomium of mine will advance the general and: © 


a 


merited opinion of them.. 


Before 


i PREFACE oo ae 
: * Before I conclude, I muft beg leave to. inform my readers, that they: 7 
8 are not to expeét the ‘charms of: embellifhed narrative, or animated de-: - 


| feription; the approbation due.to firaplicity and to. truth i is all I prefume:_ oe 


i 40 claim; and I. am not without the hope. that this claim will be. allowed. 
> me, I have defcribed whatever I faw with the impreffions of the moment. © 


which prefented i it to me. The fucceflive. circumftances of. my progrefs 


are related without exaggeration or difplay. T have’ feldom allowed:my-. we | 


o felf to wander. into -conjeétures and whenever conjeéture: hag been i in 


be" ‘on: thofe. fubjebts which, from, the habits and ‘experience of - my life, _— 


a will junlify an. unreferved | ‘communication “of my. opinions. » oT am —_ 
“not a a candidate for literary. fame: at the: fame. time, 1 ‘cannot. but” in= ee 


~ dulge the: hope | that this voliime,. with. all. its ‘imperfe@ions, will: We 


: dulged, it. will be found, I truft, to be accompanied with the temper of a 
‘man who is nat difpofed’ to think. tao highly of himfelf: and if, at. any ; oe 
‘time Thave. delivered. myfelf with confidence, it will appear, ‘TL. hope, to - 7 


. not be thought unworthy: the. attention of, the. fcientific. geographer; oe 


ee ‘and that, by- unfolding. countries, hitherto: unexplored, and which, I pre- : 


i fame, ' may. ¥ now: be: confidered as a. part of the Britith dominions, it. itil - 


os be be received a as a 2 faithful tribute to the re profperity © of my: cqumiry.. 


ae pees : cle 


ee Soa 


. mee Lonpox; 7 ae ns 


cn ! 
i apo oo po eB de 


ERICA, 


2 


J ge onavtets 4 me 
ae, 7 _ . is . 


EE bd 
met) 


2 
at 


» between Latitudes 40 and 70 NORTH, and Longitudes 45 and J 


a 


( exannire MACKENEIES TRACK 


Fone Montreal @ Fort Chipewyan <n Aen to the Novi 


a 


Le 7609. &to heel Pacific Ocean 27 7793. 


~ . . . toe : are A 


oa 
\ 


“THE Shai at oe a 
Mean by Agr : sas : ee re Pee A 
ea is ert — cao - . . \ oe, : oe : 


Soins the Sea 


Thie Ris ren by ladian regere ” 
“1. Tiny high Hille 


‘ Chesterfield . T eS 
— . Shah, Hag te——— 


RGD pe mace Se vowta ae an Kye B 
f Mtge, > Cheefadawie  bakeg SU. Linke | “pangins Intel 


canter Ine Ee 


. ind Stoney : a, nite fee 


2. Birhibvs To 
ar nas I. 
3 


pow. 


Clow 


: Wholdyach nck I. 

7 : pliak Boots ; Sols. 
i Hiah Rook, 

oe 

ee em 


" Rocky Milk yy 


. 
Ete or . 
Eup, Cheer 


fi ss 
4 


Fwd River 


: ea 


vest Chipewyan . euport 


as 
a Seat kelapide 


- 
nm 


~ 


AS 


Kain Deer 
\. hake § 


MU RS. 
= 
5 


> : 
2 ews 
Lo port! 
sil Fa, 


- pa . inking be & 
DQ. Pog ~ a BO, Vera As 
~ Wh bh, 18 


Lat 


gee vic : Shines bet he 
fatlr : : 


.P or AMERICA, 


nd 70 NORTH, a and Longitades 40 Ab and 180. WEST, 
ING MA C KE N, LIE i Tr: RA CK 


f 
f 
~ ictal 


* GRE EN A x, va 


val @ Fort Chipewyan 4707 dhence tothe North Sea. 


80, &lo tle Welt Pacific Ocean 793. an 


THE. SEA. 
len by pe teen 
Rormay is 


6 UIT TL 


: . 7 
Wit e . 1 
at 4 
a 4 7 eet 
f | : 


-, A Sepelas Bay 


Too : : 
eis ; oe ee Caines « 
Lake < x : ee 
: x ~ a ot + : 
Peete : 
so poe This Ret Inn : 
Manne the Sea, 
"Tiny high Malls 


W044 


aN si as A a . f ‘\ 


| y : ; . 7 oe xo 


( “Theye ye Ayre Yo. pe ne 
. ! a ‘ 
\ 
t 
i 


baneewy + i 
rn wee ee : 

a! adi ne 
ae : ee prt 


mo “ai a 
Sg | + uate aad Hh | . 
Ne iy nla a . Seine 2, 


e , 0 ; i culler 


on . ! \ . 

_ . . os \ 

‘' vy Chesterfield op.) 00 | 

ye ' 4 “ay ¥ 
Huh Wage te f 


: i _ . eee? Se i) Eber ays kyo. | 
Ins, Oe ie A te ; oy 
ad LAN, i, aN 74 OY Wat af . Toe: hoe, 
: noo ‘ , fe i ‘ YF Veevdtilfy : : : 
Y Yate | n . . “4 ‘ : sy } Methiye Lb. “ Py ceudnn ST Byavkee 
Sew Ea Vz t f Ant ty . “ a . lake 5 4 ‘ ad 
gi - ‘2 : and Stony >| ha , ii oe. 
rae . oe mt : ! ORY ed Catvandg ith. 
Kk ntl fourttare ga WN ‘ re © GT ake oe ra ar 
ae ; ; =e a Clowes Lat SP ae 
« ae rs 


2 = a: : piver vs preven 
Pe Clow, a ao al 


og ee ope: 
ae TERS , tga IRR Nad [YP 
, tre Lake ay habe ga ee ee erent 
. Mae + . 
\yath Kyed he — . 
Thanke, divas Intel ; + aahint 
a epee tlt @ Satie 
Carel, 


4 
py dalabert & 
it a wae 


3 


- Oe OR a EE YOM ge 
ff eenss a oR yee ‘wr 


ee 5 — WI helitvachuck Db, 


Ly ce opgiat eke 
: : Miah Roe og. 

a tee ui 
~ Rocks: Hilke” 


re ; eestor, pair 
atel ipranatie . z caapre C4 


Eat aiver 


n 
: e 


pene 


y a 
nit 


_ : a . bapeeet 


«ss 


- seg 


Rain Deer 
Luke 


Bet 
“geal kelanee p 


S 2 
Ve ami a 


La ba drone 
& Lake 


IN 


(Ny cct Herd Ld 


tm ho 


Ree 


A Beaver Lake os 


a "Red Deer 
a a o 
+ ot 

8 


. Pinedeland B. 


i 


 Brackroor — i. 
oor. t 

ee AB ; ore 
 Tihamo RBENM  Manchstoass 


a ee Lo 1 
BN Muiitoe Le | 
” oo 1 


Haul 
* Goose de: 


Pijshar Haren Pes 


4 ‘ F 
uth Aranch How’ a 

iJ. oo en ie 
. Z a, Ee WO™  ay! 


tap 


om 1 Fatusliwn 200 | : 
ON Panttty oF ak oe 
| MUR Creek. VE dite (dial Geek 7 


10 353 


533 


" 


toy 
wy, “a ye 

sRoxsirait fal 
“lower p apake : 


Equi 


saps here 
apejon Sere | 
i pede WD 


V4, 


fed capeiom sme _ a : . 
aa 2 . wane : (ogc eer 
Sie “mo a wet S | a a a _ 105 100, 7 : : ; i : ‘Longitude We 


no London: Publiched 2 Det aboe tne, Menrudes Ue heise NOE Noch? Steet Starad . 


ae 
high eg pei 
ho 


+f 


waft, OANA. pws _— 
gh : a ai 
: _ SF eaine t, 


and Stoney ‘ 


: Anum is 7 


1, alt Pe 


: “Wha ltivachuek be _ 


0 


ener a 
ee 


‘Ta lt Owe SK 
“Lake 


“ 


aoe 
yer 


‘ r 
OThevehoye kved. L, 


I! : 
Cheefadawe 


SREB rece an 
- . Metliyy/h ; ade (By 
” ke 


Le 


tr ae’ 
Cafsandg hh o° 
Jake os / f 


£ ; fi. oe 
pees De MM Clow 
ors 


A+ ‘ 
hc dy ahaa. 
eo) Lake 


9 


a Rupide. 


 BLAcCKFoor | 
A / Bras OOT . lees. 
Pe eT oe 
. Kamen . zi ND Manchst cass \: 
. . 7 Ne : [ees 
- , . i 
Sy enatiitoeg | 
woo. i ca i 
oa Panne\iny 7 Se 
S PLaTRELY OF Cn, Ode re 
tn this G o x Edge Gal Grek 


South Branch 


8 ae “ase oe 
etek Branch He” sh 


Baw 


Grants Hoy 


0 
v 


= : + ggfuller Pe 
. Cheaterfielsl Tntet “fl 


Baek Nirny, { 
lant 


SP Ody See aie 
Ce es Fe Te a etioc™ 


sere 
gyeleo™® 


ric wen 


hale cove 
> | Bhindtibus I: 
Novil Bay Wingate 


oon ‘ 
+ es) MG, Faquitt 
Farias RB H 


* pp dalahert \ 


cette 


ys fort ; 
cherchill 


Cape 
“y A River 


t 


Thocburne i De 
- TEDe elle te. 


ras ean 
Ae } Wey, . : 
*ohhotn | \ 


fo z N E ERAL u ow I 8 T "0 R y Sone 


| ht He : 3 a “oF por 


hi . an 
ye ‘ . 7 


FUR TRADE. 


Ba HE far trade, from the cailiel fettlement oft Canada, was s confidered 


of ‘thé: firft importance to ‘that’ colony. “The: ‘country was then bd : 
* populous, ‘that, in’ the, Vicinity: of 1 the ‘eftablithindts, the anintals ae 


ig 


hunt a < - 


t 


il : A GENERAL HISTORY - 7 


the,manners and cuftoms of favage life, than for favages to rife into | 

a flate of civilization. Such was the event with thofe who thus accom- 
panied the natives on their’ hunting’ and trading excurfiens; for they 
became fo -atta attached to the e Indian mode of life, that they loft all-relifh —— 


emcees ttt etm re PH 
caer tt ant 


for their former habits and native homes. Hence they derived the title 
of \Coureurs des Bois, became a kind of pedlars, and were extremely 
ufeful to the merchants engaged in the fur trade; who gave them 


the’ neceffary credit to proceed-on their commercial ‘undertakings. 
Three or four of ‘thefe people would join their flock, put their pro-_____ 
perty into’ a birch-bark canoe, ‘which’. they’ worked’ themfelves, and © 
either accompanied the natives in their excurfions, or went at once to 
the country where they knew they were to hunt. At length, thefe 

" voyages extended to twelve or fifteen months, when they returned with, 
rich cargoes of furs, and followed by great numbers of the: natives. 

- During the fhort time requifite to fettle their’ accounts with the. mer- 
chants,. and procure: frefh credit, they. generally contrived: to {quander | 
away all their gains, when they returned to renew their favourite mode 
of life: their views being anfwered, and their labour fufficiently rewarded, 
by. indulging themfelves i in: extravagance and difipation during the fhort 

fpaceo one month i in ‘twelve or’ fifteen. Doe et, 

This indiferéace: about _amaffing. property, and the pleafure: of-living 
free from all reftraint, foon brought on a: JicentioufriefS of manners which _ 
could not long éfcape the vigilant obfervation of the miffionaries, whoa 

had much reafon-to Complain of their being a difgrace to the Chrif- 

.’ tian religion ; by not’ only fwerving from its. duties themfelves, but by. 


ae oo “~ 
; oe 
' > . . ’ 
; 


fo: 


_ os OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. ti 


thus bringing it into difrepute with thofe of the natives: who had become 
| converts to-it ; ‘and, corfequently, obftruating the great objeét to which. 
thofe ‘pious men had devoted. their lives.” The A » therefore, exerted: their. — 


eterno war 


ohe was allowed to go up the country to. traffic with the Indians, without 
gy licence from. the’ e government, rs 
: : , 


ay . + oe Sy beat 4 1 a 
ote ve * oS aL aa eats 


At fet thefe. , petmifions w were, sof courfe, granted only, to thofe whofe 
__-—charater-was fuch as could give no: alarm to, the zeal’ of the miffionaries : z- 
but they weré afterwards beftoweéd a8 rewards for, fervices, on officers, and 
their widows ; and they, who were'not willing’op able to make ufe of them, 
> (which may be fuppofed to be always the cafe with thofe of the latter 
’ defcription). -were-allowed:to felt them to the.merchants, whe necelfarily 
employed. the, Coureurs des. bois;; in, qhality of their agents. and :thefe 
people, ‘as. may :be .imagined,, gave. fofficient ¢ eaule for, the renewal of 
former ‘Sompiaints; fo that the: e: remedy Pp sel in faG; worfe than. the * 
difeafe. PR a wa ie the vee Le 
AE: length; military. “_ were: » eftablithed:at the J confluence of the dif 
ferent large Jakes of. Canada, which,.ird great imeafure,.: checked, the 
evil confequences that followed: from the-improper. condua of, thefe 
forefters; and; at: the fame.time; protected. the trade, ' Befides, 4. number 
of able and rélpeGable mien retired fromthe army, :profecuted. the trade 
in: perfon, -urider’ their. refpettive'licences, -with great .order:.and regu- 
. larity,,dnd extended’ it ‘to: fircls a.-diftance, as, in-thofe days, was conf: 
> “deredito bean aftonithing effort of commercial enterprize.:. Thefe per: | 
. fons andthe: smdhonaries-having: combined their . views: at. the _fame_ : 


iw ag GENERAL HISTORY * 


time, fecured the refpeét: of the natives,and the: obedience: ‘of the people - 


neceffarily employed:in the laborious parts. of thissurider taking. « » hele. 
" gentlemen denominated themfelves-commanders, and snot traders, though, 


if fufferings and -hardfhips: in: the profecution of the. great work which, 
they had undertaken, deferved applaufe and. admiration, they. had, an 
___ undoubted claim. to. be admired and applauded: they {pared no labour, 

“and avoided ‘rio’ danger in’ the execition of theit:important office ;; and 


_. Ht as. to‘be-ferioufly lamented; that-their~ pious eiideavours; did -not- meet. 


with: the: faccefs which’ they: deferved : for there.3s hardly. atraceto be 
found. beyond ‘the cliivated! patsy of their: ‘meritorious functions,’ WG 


va € 
ak, p a&e be corn yooe wes or omy te aval . i. 1 . hoe 
Ma i .e wey re WF. ta had ere i eek sy new vet vit ry rate arene? 


7 ‘t The caiife’ of thiy failure muft be attributed: to a want: of due confi~ 
deration 1 in the: inode entployed: by: the: miffionaries td : propagate the 
réligion’ of which | ithey:-were: the: zealous. tminifters. «. They: habjtuated- 
themfelves: tothe: Tavage life; anid: naturalifed themfelves. torthe favageé 


mamners, and, by thus becoming dependant, as it were, on the natives; they, | 


~———they were intitied to bot :thole charatters: and, as- for, thé miflionariés,;: : , 


acquired, their contempt rather than their veneration. If they. had been’. 


as ‘well: bcquainted with: human :natire; jas: they! {were -with: thé artiéles, of 
their faith; they: ‘would have known, that :the:, tincultivated amind ofsatt 
Indian muff be difpofed by much preparatory. ‘methdd and: infirnQion to 
| ¥ecéive'the-revealed truths of: ‘Chiiftianity;to ak. ude its. fanGiions;iand 
be ‘iinpelled’ to good by the: hope-of jits ‘reward, or‘turned-fiom evil: by. 
the’ fear: of iis «punithments. ,: They! fhould.-have: began. their work: by: 
teaching’ fome: eof: thofe: ufeful arts:which are ‘the inlets -6f, rknowledge; and 
- dead thetiind by degrees, to objetts:of higher comprehenfion:.; Agricul. 
. ture’. fo " fossed | ito” fx: and: combine flacietys vend Preparatoryntf 


~ boos 


OF THE. FUR: TRADE, &e. v 


abjests | of -fupetior cohfideration, thould have beenthe, fic thing intro- 
duced : jamong;‘a, favage people:, at, attaches the: wandering tribe to that 


___—fpot-where-itradds-for much to thelr Comforts; w while it gives, them a. fenfe 


of property, and of lafting poffeffion,. inftead of the uncertain hopes 


of the. chale,,and the fugitive ‘produce of uncultivated wilds. Such 


were, ‘the. means by which the forelts of Paraguay were ; converted. into a 
feene of. abundant cultivation, and i its favage inhabitants introduced to 
all. the: advan ntages. of'a -Sisilined ile - 


' t 
vee leone + . aor teas ‘ ‘ 
Cae oe vy pees a pls t 


The Canadian miffionaries fhould have been contented to improve the 
morals of;.their,own countrymen, fo that, by: meliorating their chara€ter 
and, conduét, they would have given a firiking example of. the effe&. of 
religion in promoting the; comforts of life.to the furrounding favages; 
"and might by degrees have extended its benign influence to the. remoteft 
regions of that country, which was the.objett, and intended ‘to be the 


fcene,’ of their évangelic.1 labours. _.. But, by::bearing. , the, ight of the | 


—Gofpel at once: ‘tothe diftance of:two thonfand five hundred. miles. from, 
the; civilized part of the colonies, it was foon ob{cured, by. the ploud.« of 
ignorance ‘that, darkened the human mind in thofe, diftant. regions. 

. .-The whole of, thei Jong. route el have often travelled, and the recol 
| leftion of fuch a people as the: miffionaries having been there, was.con- 

fined to a few: fuperannuated. Canadians, who had not left. that country 

fince the ceffion to the Englith, in 1763, and who particularly mentioned 


the death, of, fome, and the. diftreffing: fituation. of them all. But if thele 


religious’ men: did not, attain the objefts, of their. perfevering piety, they. 


werey dur rng itheir miffion, of. Breat, fervice; to ‘the commanders ; who 
ae oe _ spares 


-u 


“A GENERAL HISTORY 

engaged: in thofe ‘diftant expeditions, and’ fpread. the fur ‘trade as far 
Welt as the banks of the Salkatchiwine river, in 53+} Nort Jatitade, and: 
longitude 102 Well.“ ene : 


we te be thee ba ge bass 
- A‘ an early period of their intercoutfe with ‘the favages; ‘aCuftony was 
intyoduced -of:a very excellent tendency, but is now unfortunately dif- 
continued, : of not’ felling: any fpirituous liquor to the. natives.’ Fhis 
admirable regulation 'was for fome-'time ‘obferved, with all the. refpeét 
due to the religion by which it was fan@tioned, and whofe fevereft cen- 
fates: follawed the violation: of it. A painful penance could alone reftore 
/ the-offendér to the fufpended. rites of the facrament. . ‘T he cafuiiftry-of 
"trade, however, difcovered'a-way to gratify the Indians with their fayour- 
ite: cordial. without incurring -the ecclefiaftical: penalties, by giving, 
inftead d of felling it to: them, Se a pe 


7 « re ee ae eg rr a, . 
eS SO 


ae 


Vv 


Bat’ Se tithanding ‘all: the‘reftri@tions: with ‘which commerce. was 
éppreffed under the ‘Freiach government, the fur trade was extended: t6_ 
_ the! immenfe diftance which has ‘been- already fated; and furmounted *.. 

_ many molt. difeouraging ° ‘difficulties; ‘which: will -be- hereafter noticéd; }- . 
while; at the fame time, no exertions were made from: Hudfon's Bay ta to ~ _ _ 
- obtaia ' ‘even a fhare-of the tradé of. a-country which; accofding to’ the. | 


charter: of that: company; ‘belonged: tort, and, from its’ Proximity, is: fo 


fanéhe more: accellible to: the merelintile adventurer, ae acne: 


any ~ 


“ ‘ , *! 
at? fg yt . "ote gsi oa ge go gr vat! “noe oe, Pel oy} 
Sak od ans a ar en m corn o€ pa Ree See a eS Sorte MT Lae ath ob 


“OF thefe ‘trading commanders, Ti ‘uniderRood: that two ‘attempted't to — 
a peneerate te thé-Pacifie Ocean; butte uimolt extent of their j jourteyE 
could’ never ‘Jearn; whic nay 1 be atitibuted, indeed, to'a’ failure’ ‘oF the 


nnideraking. . . | 
os pe mo 7 , "For “ 


“OF THE FUR: TRADE, — ; iyi 


For. ome time after the conquelt of Canada, this:tradewas fufperded, 
which: tiuft:have: been vety advantageous to .thé:!Hudfon’s-Bay Com 
_pany, dsall the ‘inhabitants to_ the! :Weltward.of Lake- Superiors-were-——— 


mw. FE oe nim a 
‘peter rstarmunsneent nite reeiliintttttt tet eet A, 


obligedto go:to.them for fuch articles -as ‘their habitual afe had renderéd 
neceflary, :: Some of the Canadians. who had lived:long: with them, and 
were become-attached to a favage life, accompanied thém thither annually, 
till mercantile adventurers again appéaréd from their: own country, after 
an: interval of feveral years, owing, as I fuppofe, to an ignorance of: ‘the 
country.in the conquerors, and- their want of: ‘commercial confidence in 
the ‘conquered. T. here were,’ indedd, other. difcouragernents, fuch as 
the immenfe length of the. journey’. neceffary: to:réach: the limits beyond 
which this.commerce muft begin; . the rifk of property; the-expences 
attending fuch-a:.long tranfpost; and an ignorance of the language of 
thofe who, from ‘their..expeérience, muft be“neceflarily.: employed asthe 
“intermediate agents between. them and the natives,:: But,-nétwithand- 
ing theft difficulties, the trade, by:degrees, began to {pread: over the dif- 
ferent: paits'to: wHich it.had been :carried:by -the French, though at a 
‘preat: vit of the Hives, as well a as’ the Propertys ¢ of: their new: “pollelfors, 


pee cep ee reemenneeennernta 


aif iion towards the Eiglith; from’ their: having been i it alliance: with 
their.natural enemies the Iroquois; ‘and there were not wanting a-fufficient 
nuinber of difeontented, difappointed. people to keep alive fach 4 notion, 
fo-that for along: tn they were confidered-and: tredted -as' objetts of 
hoftility. To prove this difpofition ‘of the Indians,;-we* have: only :to 
- refer to the condu& of Pontiac, at Detroit, and the furprile and. taking 


, ob Mickilimekinac, about this. period. vehi us Peep pat ow ort . 
Oph bods Sind dere, ee Thre owt Dp oe 
AMY ‘ . ht . ; a : ow Hence 


Neng tees . 
here . - one 


‘ier 


are A GENERAL HISTORY — 
Hence it arofe, that|it was fo late as the year "1766, before.which, the 


trade I mean to corifider, commenced. from \Michiliniakinac.}: The: firft 
-who attempted it were fatisfied:to go the'length of the River Cameniftiquia, 


___ about. thirty. niiles.to the Eaftward!-of.-theGrande~Portage, where* ‘the-———- 


French had aprincipal eftablifhment,:and: was the line of their communi- 
cation with the interior country, «It was once deftroyed by fire,::! Here 
they went and returned:fuccefsful in; the: following’ {pring to Michilima- 


-kinac.. Their fuccefs! induced: them to ‘renew. their journey, and incited 


others to follow.their:example..-Some of them remained. at.Camenifti- 
quia; while: others proceeded toarid beyond the Grande Portage; which, 
fince that. time :has:become the principal éntrepot of. that: trade, and is 
fituated-in.a bay, in atitude!48.-North, and longitude: go: Welt. : ‘After 
pafling the: ufualfeafon: there; they went back to. Michilitakinac: as 
before, and‘encouraged by the trade, returned in increafed numbers. :;One 
of thefe, ‘Thomas: Curry; with ‘a fpirit ‘of; enterprize: ‘fuperior: to. that’ of 


his contempdrariés, determined to penetrate to the furtheft limits of the 


French difcoveries.in that: country:;. or at leaft:till the froft fhould:ftop 


“him... ; For this purpofe he: procured : ‘guides and.i ‘interpreters, who ‘were © 
acquainted with the country;-and: with : four .canoes ‘arrived: at! Foit _ 
~~ Bourbon, whigh was -orie: of their. pofts, at: the ‘Welk: end:of ‘the’ Cedar-~ “~~ 


Lake, on the waters of the Safkatchiwine:.=.: ‘His: rifk and toi were well re- 
- compenfed, for. he came back the. following {pring : with: his canoes ‘filled 


with fine furs, with which he Procesded to to Canada, and was.  fatisfied never a 


again. to return to the ‘Indian: country. . ee 


f 4 f . 2 7 , ‘ . ’ 
" . tae cit boa, ms bow ” < : eae ey -, 
ae amy Yo wate a bed Ow teed eR we 


E rom ‘this period people began to. {pread 6 over every. rypaitof thie‘ coun- 
try, Particularly w where the French had. eflablithed fettlements. « 


rr 


Ei a ne ‘Mr. James 


eo OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. xi 


- Mr. James Finlay was the firft who followed Mr. Curry’s -example, 
and with the fame number. of canoes, arrived, i in the courfe of the-next-———— 
— feafon;—at~Nipawee;:the- laft:- of the-French-fettlements-on- the: -bank-of- a 
the Safkatchiwine River, in ‘latitude nearly ‘43 North, andi longitude 
ve 103 Weft: he found the.good fortune, as he followed, in every refpett, 
the example, of his predeceffor, Lore 


ere 


* As may be fappofed, there were now people enough ready to replace 
them, and the trade was purfued with fuch avidity, and irrégularity, that 
a __-in-a--few-years_it-beeame the reverfe of what it ought to have been. An 
animated competition prevailed;.and the contending parties carried the 
trade beyond: the.F rench.limits, though with no. benefit:to:therisfelves or 
neighbours, ‘the: Hudfon’s-Bay Company; who.in the year 1774, and 
not till then, thought proper to move from.home to the -Eaft bank of 
Sturgeon Lake,tin latitude -53. 56. North, and longitude ro2..15.. Weft, 
and became: more. e Jealons of .their fellow. vfs and, perhaps, with 


Fat 
la tateing 

an 
ae 


Slate, 
“Feta, 


--~ =.different: eflablithiments ‘while, onthe: contrary;*there is not-;a foitary _ 
inflance‘that the Canadians ‘have’ followed’.them; and there are many ° 
trading pofts which they have not yet. attained, This, however, will no 
_ longer:be.a myltery when the nature and. policy of. the Hudfon’s-Bay 
Company:is-compared with that which has. been t purine’ py 8 their.rivals 
Jin. n this, trade.-Bat, to return ‘to: my ‘fubje&. ... ans 

Low Neu! METER 
This. @ompetition, which ‘has been. already. mentioned, gave a fatal 
"Heli xo!thBuvade frémi Canada; and, vith, other. incidental Caufes, in my _ 


f 
i. 
‘ 


C1 . bi - opinion, 


fi 


4 
1 


x. A GENERAL HISTORY 


opinion, contributed to its rnin. This trade was carried on in a very 
diftant country; out of the reach of legal reftraint, and where there was a 
—_ free {cope giver to-any ways or means” in attaining” -advantage:-—"Fhe——~---- 
confequence was not only the lofs of commercial benefit to, the. perfons 
engaged im it, but ‘af the. gaad opinion of the natives, and the:refpe&t of 
their men, who were inclined to follow their example ;. fo that with drink- 
ing, caroufing, and quarrelling with the Indians along their route, and 
among themfelves, they feldom reached their winter q 4rters; andif they 
did, it was generally by dragging their, property aon fledges, as the 
navigation was. clofed up by the froft, When at ‘length they were 
avrived, the objeGs of each was to injure his. rival traders in the opinion 
of the natives:as. much as ‘was.In their power, ‘by: mifreprefentation and 
prefents, for which the-agents employed: were peculiarly caleulated. 
_ Fhey confidered the command: of their employer as Binding on them, 
and however wrong or: irregular the ‘tranfaétion, the refponfibility refted 
with the: principal. who: dire€ted! them. - This 1 4s. Indian:law.. Thus did 
they. waflé their credit and their. property. with the natives, till the firft ~~ 
_ Was/paft redemption, and the laft was nearly exhairlted.;-.fo-that-towards--—--— 
the: {pring in-each year, the rival..parties found it: abfolutely. neceflary, 
to’ join, and make one common ftock. of what remained; for ‘the. pur- 
polé of trading with the: natives, who could’ entertaia'no refpe& for 
perfons who had conduéted: themfelves with fo mueh irregularity and 
deceit... The winter, ‘fherefore was one-continued {cene of difagreements 
and quarrels. If any ong had the precaution:or good fenfeto:keep clear: 
of théle proceedings, he derived a proportionable advantage from his 
good conduét, and. frequently proved. a.peace-maker between.the parties. 


Fe fach-an-beight had they-catzied: this licentious; condua, that they: 


‘were 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. KL 


were in a continual flate’ of ‘alarm, and were even frequently {topped to 
pay: tribute on their. route into the country; though they had ‘adopted. 


the plan “of travelling together i in parties of thirty or forty canoes, ‘and - 
keeping their men armed; which fometimes, indeed, proved neceffary 
for their defence. 


"Thus was the trade carried on for feveral years, and confequently bs- 

coming worfe and worle, fo that the partnérs, who met them-at the 
Grande Portage, naturally complained of their ill fuccefS. But fpeciouis’ 
reafons were always ready to prove that it arofe from circumftances 
which they’ could not at that time: control; and encouragement were 
held forth to hope that a change would foon take place, which would 
make ample amends for att difappointments. : 


; It was about this time, that Mr. Jofeph Frobifher one : of of the gentlemen 
- engaged. in- the-trade, -determined. ‘ta: penetrate..into-the--country ‘yer — 


. unexplored; to the: North and Weftward,and,-in-the fpring of the year 


1775; met the Indians from that quarter on their way to Fort Churchill, 
at Portage.de_ Traite, fo. named: from that circumftance on the banks of 
the: Miffinipi, or Churchill River, latitude 55. 25. North, longitude 109%. 
Weft. It was, indeed, with fome difficulty that he could induce thém 
to trade with him, but he at-length procured as many furs as his 
canoes ‘could .carry.. In this perilous expedition he fuftained every 
kind:.of hardfhip. incident..to a journey through a wild and favage 
country, -where his fubfiftence depended on, what the woods and the 
waters, produced. Thefe. difficulties, neverthelefs,’ did not difcourage 


him: in {rom .sttutning.in the folowing year, when he war equally fuccefsfele 
b 2 He 


xi. a . A GENERAL HISTORY: 


He then fent his brother to:explore the country ftill further Weft, who 
‘penetrated as’ far as the:lake of Ifle a la Croix, in latiiude © 55: 26. North, 
and Jongitude 108 Welt. ° ro ms oes oO 
He, however, never «after wintered among the Indians, though he 

retained a large interelt i in the trade, and a principal fhare in the direc- 

tion of it till the year 1798,: when ‘he retired:to ‘enjoy ‘the’ fruits -of his 
Jabours’;: and, by chis- hofpitality, became known’ to: every telpeblable 


fr 


ftranger who vifited: Canada. es nL Bees 
* ‘Fhe faccels of: this gentleman: induced: others ‘to follow his example, 
and inthe fpring of the year: 1778, fome ofthe traders on’ ‘thé : Safkat- 
chiwine River, finding they had a. quantity of'zoods:to fpare; agreed 'té 
put them into a “joint fiock, and gave the ‘charge and management of 
them to Mr. Peter‘Pond, who, i in four canoes, 'was-direGted ‘to“entér the 
~~~Englifh River; fo called by:Mr. Frobifher;to follow his’ track, and ‘proceed 
fill further ; if: poflible, to Athabafca, ‘a country hitherto unkriown' but 
from Indian. report.‘ In’ this’ enterprife he: at length fucceéded, and 
"pitched his tent on the banks of the Elk River, by hia erroneouily éalléd 
. ~the Athabafca River, about thirty miles. from the Lake of the Hills; into 
which.1 it empties itfelf. wis 


renee et eine 


“Here he pafled ‘the winter o: 8 -9;.faw i a val concourfe ‘of. the 
Knifteneaux and Chepewyan tribes, who ufed to carry their furs annually 
‘to-Churchill; the latter- ‘by-the-biarren rounds, , wheré.they—fuffered in-_. 
numerable hardfhips,. .and:were -fometimes- even-ftarved to: death.” The © 
former: followed the courfé of the lakes and rivers, throagh a country 
that, 


», 
+t 


com 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &. xt 


that abounded in animals, ‘and’ where there was. plenty of fifh: but - 
‘though they did not fuffer from want of food, the intolerable fatigue of 
fuch a journey could not be eafily repaid to an Indian : they were, there- 
fore, highly gratified. by feeing people come to their country to relieve 
them fron fuch. long, toilfome,; and. dangerous journies; and were im- 
“mediately, reconciled to give an advanced price for.the articles neceflary 
to, their; ‘comfort. and ‘converiience. , Mr.iPond's reception ‘and ; fuccefs 
was : ‘accordingly beyond. his expeGtation;,, and he; procured twice, as 
many furs as his .canoes- would carry. They, .alfo:fupplied him with.as. 
much provifion as ‘he required during. his refidence among them, and 
‘ fufficient for his homeward. voyage: -Such,.of., the: furs, as he could, not, 
embark, he’ fecured in. one ,of his: winter hats, and, they. were. found the 


ee 
Se 


, anton) REP owe Pe Bho as Beye! 

. | hele; however,. were ‘but ‘partial advantages and could. not. prevent 
_ ithe people of Canada. Frou, feeing ‘the improper conduét; of fome of. sheir 
affociates, which rendered it dangerous, to,remaip’any. longer among the 
natives, .. Moft of them who-paffed. the-winter at the: Safkatchiwine, got” 
to :the Eagle hills, where;.in -the {pring .of the. -year..1°78p;.a few days pre- 
vious to'their intended departure, a large band of Indians being. engaged 
win drinking about their houles, one of the tradefs, to eafe himfelf of the 
troublefome importunities of a native, gave him a dofe of gaudanum in . 
aplals. of’ grog, which effetually. “preverited him. from; giving, further 
trouble to any:one, by fetting him ‘afleep; for: eyer: jj; “This, accident pro- 
duced:.a.fray;.in which one of thé traders, and: feveral of the men, were 
killed, «while: the. reft had no other means ‘to fave: themfelves but bya _ 


precipitate flight, abandoning” a. confiderable quantity of goods, and 
‘ near 


amt 


Mea 
ee 


/ 
xiv A GENERAL HISTORY _ 


“near‘half the furs which they had collefted: during the ‘voter and: the 
Apring. nos ; soy 


. About the fame time, ‘two of the eftablifhments on the Affiniboin 
river, were attacked with lefs juftice, when feveral white men, and a 
greater number of Indians were killed. In fhort, it appeared, that the 
natives had formed a refolution to extirpate the’ traders; and,-without 
entering into any further reafonings on the. fubje&, it appears to be in- 
controvertible, that the irregularity purfued in carrying on the trade has 
brought it into its prefent forlorn fituation ; and nothing but the greateft 
calamity that could have’ befallen the natives; faved the traders from . 
defiru@ion: this was thé fmall pox, which'{pread its deftru€tive and 
defolating power, as the fire confumes the ‘dry ‘grafs of the field. ‘The 
~ fatal infe@tion fpread around with a baneful rapidity which ‘no flight. 


_ could efcape; and -with-a fatal’ effe&t'that nothing ‘could -refift.  It.de- 


ftroyed with {ts peftilential breath wholé families. and ‘tribes; and the 
horrid fcene prefented’ to théfe who'had the melancholy and affli€ting 
opportunity of beholding i it, acombination of the dead, the dying, and — 
fuch' as to avoid’ the ‘horrid’ fate of their friends around them, ‘pre-- 
- pared to difappoint- the plague of its prey; PY terminating their own 


exiflenee. 9 = 1 - 


- The habits andi lives of thefe devoted people, which provided not tor 
day for the wants of to-morrow, muft have heightened the pains of fuch 
‘an affli@ion, by leaving them not only without remedy, but even without 
alleviation. Nought-awas left them but to.fubmit in agony and defpair. 


To 


- _ OF THE FUR TRADE, ~&e, KV 
To aggravate the pidture, if aggravation: awe poflible,. may be addcd, 
the putrid carcafes which the wolves, with a furious voracity, dragged 
forth from the huts, or ‘which were mangled within them by the dogs, 
whofe hunger was fatisfied with the: disfigured remains of their mafters. 
Nor was it uncommon for the. father of a family, whom the inféion 
had not reached, to call.them around him, to reprefent the cruel fuffer- 
ings and horrid fate of their’. relations, from the. influence of fome evil 
fpirit who, was preparing ‘to extirpate their-race’; and té-incite- them: to- 
baffle death, with all its ‘horrors, by their own poniards. At the fame 
‘time, if their hearts failed them: in “his neceflary a&t, he was himfelf 
ready to perform the deed of mercy with his own hand, as the laft a& 
of his affe@ion,: and: inftantly'to follow them to the common’ place of 
refi and refuge from human. evil. | 


It was never fatisfactorily afcertained by what means this- malignant 
_- diforder was introduced, but it was generally fuppofed to be from the 
Mifliffoaic, by ‘a war party. 


The confequencé of ‘this melancholy event to the traders muft be 
felf-evident; ‘the‘means ‘of difpofing of their goods were cut off; and no 


3,1 furs were obtained, but fuch as had been gathered from the habitations 


of the deceafed Indians, which could not be very confiderable : nor did 

they look from the lofles of the: prefent year, with any encouraging €X- 

peétations to. thofe which weré to come. The only fortunate people 
confifted! of'a party who had again. penetrated’ to the Northward, and 

Weltward i in 1780, at fome-diftance up the Milinips or  Englith River, 

‘to 


Moe eth 


xvi , OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. 


to Lake la Rouge. . Two unfortunate circuimftances, however, happened 


to them; which are as follow.) oboe dn Ee 


. . , . _— f ‘ f i rf, Ty 
Po ‘ . vy : oy 


Mr. Wadin, a Swifs gentleman, of firiét probity and known fobriety; 


had gone there in the year 1779, and remained during the fummer 1780. " 


His pattners and others, engaged in an oppofite intereft, when at the 
Grande Portage, agreed to fend a:quantity of goods. on their j joint ace 
count, which was accepted, and. Mr. Pond ;was ‘propofed by them to be 
their reprefentative to aét in conjunétion with Mr. Wadin. ‘Two men, of 
more oppofite chara€ers,’could ‘not, perhaps, have been found. In fhort 


from various caufes, their fituations- became. very uncomfortable to'each © 


other, and mutual ill-will was :the natural -confequence :.;without enter- 
ing, therefore, into a minute hiftory of thefe tranfaGtions, it will be fuf- 
ficient to obferve, that, about the end of the year 1780, or ‘the begin- 
ning: of the year 1781, Mr. Wadin had received Mr. Pond and one of his 
own clerks to ditiner ; and, in the courfe of the, nighit,. the. former, was 
fhot through the-lower part of the thigh, when it was faid that ‘fie ex: 


pired from the lofs of blood, and was buried next morning at eight | 


o'clock. Mr, Pond, and the clerk, were, tried for. this murder at Mon-. 
treal, and acquitted : néverthelels, their innocence, .was. not. fo. apparent 


as to extinguith the original fufpicion, tat et ge ae 


' : am . ran rn) 


The other ‘circumfance. was this. In: the {pring of ; the} year, Mr. 


Pond fent .the . abovementioned clerk to” meet;. ithe. ‘Indians from ‘the 


Northward, who ufed to: go annually to Hudfon’s. Bay; when. he. @afily: 
perfuaded: thém.to trade, with him, and return back,. that they, might!not 


ind 2G | | take 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. xvii 


take the contagion: which had depopulated the country to. the Eaftward: 


of them: but moft unfortunately they caught it here, and carried it with 
them, to the deftruétion of themfelvés-and the neighbouring tribes, - 


The country being thus depopulated, the traders and their friends 
from Canada, who, from various caufes already nientioned, were very’ 
much reduced in number, became confined to two parties, who began 


_ferioufly to think of making permanent eftablifhments on the Miffinipi - 


river, and at Athabalca ; for which purpofe, in 1781-2, they fele€ted their 
beft cance-men, being ignorant,that the fmall pox penetrated that way. 


_ The moft-expeditious party got only.in time to the Portage la Loche, 


Se, 


or Mithy: Ouinigam Portage, which dividesthe waters of the Miffinipi from 
thofe:that fall into the Elk river, to difpatch one canoe ftrong handed, 
end light-loaded, to that country; but, on their arrival there, they _ 
found, in every dire€tion, the ravages of the fimall’ pox,; fo that, 


‘from: the great diminution of the natives, they returned'in“the fpring 


with ino more than feven packages of beaver. The ftrong woods and 
mountainous countries afforded a refuge to thofe who fled from the 
contagion of the plaitis ; but they were fo alarmed at the furrounding 


deftru&tion:. that. they avoided. the traders, and'were difpirited from: hunt- 


' ing: except for their fubfiftence. ‘Fhe traders, however, who returned 


“into: the’ country in: the- year 1782-3, found'the inhabitants in fome fort 


of. tranquillity; and-more numerous than’ they: had-reafoix' to -expeét, fo 
that their fuccefs-was: ‘proportionably better. 


During the-winter of: 1785-45 the merchants ‘of Canada, engaged in 
this tradé,. formed -a-jun&tion of interefts, under the name of the North. ° 
. ' , c . . Welt , 3 


XVili A GENERAL HISTORY 

‘Weft Company, and divided it into fixteen fhares, without depofiting any 
capital; each party furnifhing a: proportion or quota of fuch articles as 
‘were neceflary to carry on the trade: the refpeftive parties agreeing 
to fatisfy the friends they had in the country, who were not provided for, 
according to this agreement, out of the proportions which they held. 
The management of the whole was accordingly entrufted to Mefirs. Ben- 
‘jamin and Jofeph F robifher, and Mr. Simon: M‘Tavifh, two difting 
houles, who had the greateft intereft and influence ‘in the country, and for . 
which they were to receive a ftipulated commiffianin all tranfaGtions. 


- In the fpring, t two , of thofe gentlemen went to the Grande Portdge 
with their credentials, which were confirmed and ratified by all the parties — 
having an. option, except’Mr. Peter Pond,. who was not fatisfied with 
_the fhare allotted him.’ Accordin gly he, and another gentleman, Mr. Peter 
Pangman, who had a right to be.a’ partner, but for. whom no provifion — 
had been made, came to Canada, with a determination’ ‘to. return to. the 
country, if they could find any perfons to join them, and give their fcheme 
a proper UPpOre | _ 


The traders: in a the country, and merchants at Montreal, thus. en 

tered i into a co-partnerfhip, which, by -thefe means, ‘was confolidated 
“tand direGed by. able men, who, from the powers with which they were 
. entrufted, could carry.'on the trade to the utmoft extent: it would 
‘bear. The traders in the country, therefore,’ having every reafon 
to expeét that their paft and future labours would be recompenfed, for- 
got all their former animofities, and. engaged with the utmoft fpirit and 
attivity, to forward the general intereft; fo. that, in the following year, 

’ they 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. xix 


they met their agents at the Grande Portage, with their canoes Jaden 
with rich furs from the different parts of that immenfe tra€t of country. 
But this fatisfa@ion was not to be enjoyed without fome interruption; 
and they were mortified to find that Mr. Pangman had prevailed on. 
Mefirs. Gregory and Macleod to join him, and give him_their fupport 
“in the bufinefs, though deferted by Mr: Pond, who-aécepted the terms 
offered by his former-affociates,—-—-—- =" 


In the counting houfe of Mr. Gregory I had been five years; and at 
this period had left him, with a {mall adventure of goods, with which 
he had entrufted me, to feek my fortune at Detroit. He, without 
any folicitation.on my part, had procured an. infertion in .the agree. 
ment, that I fhould be admitted a partner in this bufinels, on con- 
_ dition that I would. proceed to the Indian country in the following 
{pring, 1785 His partner came to Detroit to make me fuch a propo- 
' fition. I readily affented to it, and immediately proceeded to the 
Grande Portage, where I jomed my affociates, 


We now found that independent of the natural difficulties of the 
undertaking, we fhould:have to encounter every other which they, who _ 
were already in poffeffion of the trade of the country, could throw in | 
‘ our way, and which their circumftances enabled them to do. ‘Nor did 
they doubt, ftom their own fuperior experience, as well as that of their 
clerks and men, with their local knowledge ‘of, the country and its 
inhabitants, that they fhould. foon compel us. to leave the coun- 
try to them. .The event, however, did not juftify their expeéta- 


“tions; for, after the fevereft firuggle ‘ever known in’ that part of the 
; ce. -. world, 


~ 


XX | A GENERAL, HISTORY. 


‘world, and fuffering every oppreffion which’a jealous and rival f{pirit could | 
“inftigate; after the murder of one of our partners, the laming of another, 
andthe narrow efcape of one. of our clerks, who received a bullet 
through his powder horn, in the execution of. his duty, they. were com- 
pelled to allow us a fhare”of the trade. As we had already incurred a 
lofs, this union was, in every refpeéct, a defirable event to Us; and was 
~ concluded in the month of July 1787. 


This commercial eftablifhment was now founded on a more folid bafis 
than any hitherto known in the country ; and it not only continued 
in full force, Vigour, and profperity, in {pite of -all interference from 
Canada, but maintained at leaft an equal fhare of advantage with the 
Hudfon’s-Bay Company, notwithftanding the fuperiority of their local 
fituation. The following account of this felf-eref&ted concern will mani- 
felt the caufe of its fuccefs. 


It affumed the title of the North-Weft Company, and was ‘no 
more than an affociation of commercial men, agreeing among them- 
felves to carry on the fur trade, unconneéted with any: other bufinefs, 
though many of the parties engaged had:extenfive concerns: alto- 
” gether foreign to it. It may be faid to have been fupported entirely 


__... pon credit; for, whether the capital belonged to the proprietor, or was 


borrowed, it equally bore intereft, for which, the affociation was annually 
accountable. It confifted,of twenty fhares, unequally divided among 
the perfons concerned. Of thefe, a certdin proportion was held by 
the people who managed the bufinefs in Canada, and were ftyled agents 
for. the Company, ‘Their duty was to import the neceflary goods from 

England 


“ | OF THE FUR FRADE, &e. | xxi 


England, ftore them at their owt expetice at Montreal, get them: made 
up into the articles fuited to the trade, pack and forward them, ‘and’ . 
fupply the cath’ that’ might be wanting for the outfits ; for which ‘théy” 
received, independent of the profit on their fhares, a commiiffion on’ the 
amount of the accounts, which they were obliged: to make out annually, 


and keep the adventureof each year diftin&.’ Two of them went an- - 


nually: to the’ Grande Portage, ‘to manage and tranfaét the bufinefs’ 
there, and on the communication at Detroit, Michilimakinac, Sti Mary’s, 


and’ Montieal, where they received ftores, packed up, and thipped’ the’ 


company’s furs for England, on which they Had’ alfo a fmall‘commiffion. 
The remaining fhares were held by the proprietors, who were obliged to 


winter and-mahage the’bufinefs ‘of ‘the concern with the Indians; and their: 


refpective clerks; &c. - They * Wwere'riot fappofed to be under any obliga- 


_ tion to furnifh capital; or even credit, If they obtained any capital by’ 
_ the trade, it was'to remain in the hands of the agents’; ‘for which they were: 
allowed ‘intereft: Some of them, from their long fervices and influence, 


held doublé fhares, and'were allowed to retiré from the bufinefs at ‘any 
period | of the exifting coricern, with ‘one of thofe fhares, naming any 


young man‘in’ the company’s férvice’ to fucceed him in the ‘other. Se- 


niority and merit were, however, confidered as affording a‘ claim to the- 


fucceffion, which, neverthelefs, could not be difpofed of without the con- 


‘currence of the majority’ of ‘the coricérn; “who, at the fame time rélieved 
the feceding perfon from’ any refponfibility refpeGting the fhare that he 
transferred; anid accounted for ‘it’ according: tothe antiual value or rate of 


the property; fo that the feller could have no advantage but that of get- 
ting the fhare of ftock which he retained realifed, and receiving for the 


transferred fhare what was fairly detérmined to be the worth of it. The 
former 


i 


xxii A GENERAL HISTORY, | a 


former was alfo difcharged from all duty, and‘became a dormant part- 
ner. Thus, all the young men who were net provided for at the-begin-. 
ning of the contraét, fucceeded in fucceffion to the charaéter anid advan- 
ade of partners. They entered into the Company's fervice for five or 
feven yeatunder fuch expeétations, and their reafonable profpeéts were 
feldom difappeinted : there were, indeed, inftances when they fucéeeded 
to fhares, before their apprenticefhip was expired, and it'frequently hap- 
pened that they were provided for while they were in a {tate of articled 
clerkfhip. Shares were transferrable only to the concern at large, as no 
perfon could. be admitted as a partner who had not ferved his time to 
the trade, The dormant partner indeed might difpole of his intereft to 
any one he chofe, but if the tranfaGtion were not acknowledged by. his 
affociates, the purchafer could only be confidered as his agent or attor-, 
ney. Every fhare had a vote, and two thirds formed a majority. This. 
regular and equitable mode of providing for the clerks of the company, 
excited a {pirit of emulation in the difcharge of their various duties, and, 
in faét, made every agent a principal, who perceived his own profperity . 
to be immediately conneéted with that\of his employers. Indeed, with- 
out fuch a fpirit, fuch a trade could not have become fo extended and , 
advantageous, as it has- been and now is, | 

In 1788, the grofs amount of the adventure for the year did ‘not ex- . 
ceed forty thoufand pounds,* but by the exertion, enterprife, and-in- 
duftry of the proprietors, it was brought in eleven years to triple that 


3 


* This might be pfoperly called the ftock of the company, as it ivincluded,. with the expenditure of . 
the year, the amount of the property ‘unexpended; which had been appropriated for the ¢ adventure of eee 
that year, and was carried on to the account of the following adventure. : eo 


? 


t, eters amount 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. XX 


amount and upwards; yielding proportionate profits, and furpaffing, in 
fhort, any thing known in America. 


Such, therefore, being the profperous ftate ‘of the company, it, 
very naturally, tempted others to interfere with the concern in a man-' 
ner by no means beneficial to the company, and commonly ruin- 
ous to the undertakers, : 


In:1798 the concern underwent a new form, the fhares were increafed, i 
to forty-fix, new partners being admitted, -atid” others retiring. This’ 
‘period was the termination of the: company, which was not renewed 
by all the parties concerned in it, the majority continuing to a& upon 
the old ftock, and ‘under the old firm; the others beginning a new 
one; and it now remains to be decided, whether two parties, under 
the fame regulations and by the fame exertions, though unequal in num- 
ber, can continue to carry on the bufinefs to a fuccefsful iffue. The 
contrary opinion has been held, which, if verified, will make it the i in- 
tereft of the parties again to coalefce; for neither is deficient in capital 
to fupport their obftinacy ina lofing trade, as it is not to be fuppofed 
that either will yield on any other terms than perpetual participation. 


It will'not be faperfluous in this place, to explain the general mode of 
carrying on the fur trade. 


The agents _ are ‘obliged to order the neceffary goods from England 
in the month of Oétober, eighteen months before they can leave Mon- 
treal ; that is, they are not fhipped from London until the {pring fol- 

lowing, 


xxiv A GENERAL HISTORY 


lowing, when they arrive in Canada in the fammer. In the courfe of 
the following winter they are made up into fuch articles as are required 
for the favages; they are then packed into parcels of ninety pounds 
_ weight each, but cannot be fent from Montreal until the May following ; 
fot that they do not get to market until the enfuing winter, when they are 
exchanged for furs, which come to Montreal the next fall, and from 
thence are fhipped, chiefly to London, where they are not fold or paid 
for before the fucceeding [pring, or even as late as June; which is forty- 
two months after the goods were ordered in Canada; thirty-fix after 
they had been fhipped from England, and twenty-four after they: had 
been forwarded from Montreal ; fo that the merchant, allowing that. he 
has twelve months credit, does not receive a return to pay for: thole 
goods, and the neceflary expences attending them, which is about equal 
to the value of the goods themfelves, till two years after they are'con- 
fidered as cath, which makes this a very heavy, bufinels, There is. everr 
a {mall proportion of it that requires twelve months longer: to. bring 
round. the payment, owing to the. immenfe diftance i it.is carried, and-from 
the fhortnefs of the feaforis, which prevents, the, furs, even after F they are 
collefted, from coming out of the. country. for-that period... 

* This will be better illuftrated by the following ftatement % _ . _ 


We will fuppofe the goods for 1798 ; ; 
The orders for the goods are fent to this country es te, Le agth O€&. 1796-. 


They are : thipped f from London. el er ie -March. 47970 
" They arrive in Montreal - - - - = June“1797. 
They are made up in the courfe of that fummer and winter. - 
They : are fent from Montreal . + - - 0 =~ May 17986- 
They arrive in the Indian country, and are exchanged for furs the following. winter 1798-9. 
Which furs come to Montreal, °  - -" ~ ’ _ Sept. 1799 
And; are hipped for ‘London, where they are fold in in Neh and nd Apr and paid 
“for in May or June ee - - - ~' 4800. . 


‘ ; “The 7 


; OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. * XY 
The articles néeceflary for this trade, are’coarfe woollen cloths of dif. 
ferent kinds; milled blankets of different fizes; arms and ammunition; , 
twilt and. carrot tobacco; Manchetter: goods; linens, and coarfe fheet- 
ings;. thread, lines, and twine; commen chardware; cutlery and iron- 
mongery of feveral defcriptions; keitles of brafs and copper, and fheet- 
aron; filk and cotton handkerchiefs; hats, fhoes aiid hofe; calicoes and 
printed.’ ‘cottons, . &e.. &e. &c." Spirituous liquors and provifions” are 
purchafed i in’ Canada, Thefe, and the expence of tranfport to and from 
the Indian: ‘country, ‘including wages to clerks, interpreters, guides, and 
canoe-men,-with-the expénce of making. up, the goods for the market, 
form about half the annual: amount againtt: the adventure. 


‘ 3 


~- 


bees 


This expenditiae i in "Canada ultimately tends to the encouragemrent of 
Britifh manufaétory, for thofe who are employed ‘In the different 
branches of this bufinels, are ‘enabled by their gains ¢ to purchafe fach 
Britifh articles as they souft otherwife forego. oo 


- The: produce of the year of which Iam now peaking, confifted of the 
; ‘following furs and peltries: a 


4 ay : 
hog ead haan re 


7 106,000 Beaver fkins, , Go0o Lynx fkins, ce, 
2160 Bear ikins, oi. + G00 Wolverine fkins,- - .. 
1500, Fox fkins, 7 1650 Fifher fkins, - * 
~ Stee wile ’ “4 = 7 . : , “ ‘ 
“4000 +Kitt Fox fkins, 100 Rackoon kins, 
4600 Otter fkins,. © _ 3800 Wolf ikins,. 
17,000 ‘Mufquath tkins, -7oo Ek tkins, 
» 82,900 Martén fkins,  - oy 750 Deertkins, ; 
1809, Mink fkins, = - _*. ‘1200 Deer fkins, drefled, -, - 
_ §20 “Buffalo robes, anda quantity of caftorim. 
a ; : . a, on .- .” “ 8. OF 
, ‘ewe “oo 
a “4 * carn vs bd & 
2 J Aty baal 
: & * ae * . “ . . * ; ~ 
2 ~ 2 te ’ - ” , % 


¥s 


* 


psy -* A GENERAL HISTORY - 


/ 


» 


- Of thefe were diverted frori the Britith market; being { fent through the . 


: United States to China, 13,364 fkins, fine beaver, weighing 19283 pounds; 


4250 fine otters;tand 4724 “kitt foxes. They would have found their 
way to the China market’at any rate, but this deviation from the Britith 


‘ channel arofe fromthe. following circumftance : 


pe . 


_ An advénture of this kind was andertaken by a. sefpeftable i houte in 


. London, half concerned with’ the. North-Weft Company i in’ the . -year 


1792. The furs were of the beft kind, and fuitable to.the market; and 
“the adventurers continued: this connexion, for. five’ fucceflive years, to 
the annual amount of forty thoufand pounds, “ “At the winding up.of - 
the concern of 1792, 1793, 1794, 2795, in the year 1797; (the adven- - 
ture of 1796 not being included, as the furs were not fent: to China, but 
difpofed of in London), the’ North- Weft Company experienced, a lofs 
of upwards of £40,000 (their half,) which was principally owing to the 
difficulty of getting home the produce procured i in return’ for''the furs _ 
from China, in the Eaft India Company’s fhips, together with the duty 
* payable, and the various reftri€tions of that company. _ Whereas, from: - 
America there are no impediments; they get immediately to market, 
and the produce-of them is brought back, and pérhaps fold in the courfe 
of twelve months. From fuch advantages the furs of Canada will no 
doubt find their way to China by America, which- would not abe the 


~ . cafe if Britith {ubjeéts' had the fame privileges: that are’ BNowed to. 
] 


«foreigners, as London would then be found the beft and, fate market, 


ae 2 
But to return to’ our bencpal ‘fabjeQ. —We fhall now proceed to 


confider the number of men. employed i in the con¢ern i “viz. fifty clerks, 
ayoy te SS Seventy: 


1 Be oe Fe e 
< e . 


we 


* 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. exvii 


' feventy;one interpreters and clerks, one thoufand one hundred and 


twenty canoe men, and thirty-five guides. , Of thele, five clerks, eighteen . 


guides, 'and three hundred and fifty canoe men, were employed ‘for the 
, fammerfesfon - -in. going from Montreal. to ‘the Grande Portage,".in 
canoes; part of whom proceeded from thence to-Rainy Laké,.as will be’ 
hereafter explained, and are called. Pork-eaters, or Goers. and ‘Comers. 
Thefe were hired in Canada or Montreal, and.were abfent from the iit of 


May till., the latter, end .of September. , ‘For this trip the guides had « 


tL” 


9 


from eight ‘hundred to‘a thoufand livres,.and a fuitable equipment; * 


the foremari and fteerfman from four to fix hundred lives; thémiddle- 
men from two hundred and fifty to three hundred and fifty livres, with 
an equipment of one blanket, one fhirt, and one pair-of trowfers; and 
were maintained during’ that. period at the expence of their employers. 

Independent of .their-wages, they were allowed to traffic, and.many of 
them earned to the, amount of: their wages. About one third of thefe went 
to winter, and, had more than double the above wages and: equipment. 
_Allthe others were hired by the year, and fome times for three years; she 
of the clerks many were apprentices, who were generally. engaged for fi 


- gr feven years, for which they had only-one hundred pounds, provifion . . 


and clothing. Such of them who..could not be provided for as partnels, « 
at the expiration of this time, were allowed from one hundred pounds to 
three hundred pounds per annum, ‘with all neceflaries, till provifion was 
made for. them. Thole who ated in the two-fold’ capacity of clerk and 
interpreter, or were fo denominated, had no other expeétation than the 
payment, of wages to. the amount of from one thoufand to four thoufand 
livres. ‘per annum, with clothing and provifions. — The guides, who are a 


very pfeful £ fet of men; atted alfo in the additional capacity of interpreters, 
, 4 2... ; and 


fit ate 


n 


¢ 


! 


XXViii _ ‘A’GENERAL’ HISTORY: ’ | 
and had a ftated quantity of goods, confidered as fufficient for their 
wants, their wages being from: one.to ‘three thoufand livres. ‘The canoe’ 
men are of. two: defcriptions, foremen and fteerfmen, and ‘middlemen. 
The two firft were allowed dnniudlly one thoufand two hundred, and the 
Yatter four: hindred, livres each. ‘The firft clafs had what is called aw 
equipment; confifting:of two blankets, two fhirts, two pair of trowfers, 
two handkerchiefs, fourteen pounds of carrot tobaccoj and: forthe trifling 
* articles, “The latter had:ten pounds of. tobacco, 'and:allithe other arti- 
* les: thofe are called ‘North Men, or Winterers; .and to the laft clafs of 
.© people’ Were attached upwards of feven hundred Indian. ‘women and 
-chilren, * vigtualled ; at the: © expence of the company. cf 
This fir caf of of people are: hired i in Montréal five months before they 
‘fet out, ‘and: receive their equipments, and one third: of their wages in: 
advance;; ‘and an adequate idea of the labour‘ ‘they undergo may: be: 
formed ‘from the following account of the * country through ‘which: : ‘they’ os 
pals, and. their’ ‘thanner of proceeding. wba pee Ee 


7 - . “6 Youn ay 


r 


~ " The aécelfary number of catioes- being purchafed, at about three hun- 
dred livres each, ‘the goods formed into packages, and: the lakes: and: 
rivers free of ice, ‘which they ufually are in the beginning of May, they’ 
dre then’ difpatched fromLa Chine, eight miles ‘above Montreal; with’ 
eight: or ten ‘men in each canoe; and their: baggage; and fixty-five! packs 
ages: of. “goods, fix: hundred weight ‘of ‘bifciit, ‘two hundied ‘weight of - 
pork, three buthels of peafe, for the men’s provi ions) two! ait “clots : ‘to. 


prteee 


to’ bail “out: ‘the water, with’ a iquaintity of: gui; bark, “and watape| to: 


on oe —  Fepair 


SOF THE. FURITRADE, &c. ack 


repair the veffel.. ‘An Luropean'oa feeing one of thefe fender veffels thus | 


laden, heaped: up, ‘and. funk with her igunwale within: fix’ inches :of the 
water, would think:his' fate- inevitable. in: fuch'a: boat, when le refleéted: 
on the nature Of her! voyage bhtthe. Canadians. are fo:expert that few 


accidents happen. Pe me OR Ms dur 
° soya *. ° . . ‘ : 


“Leaving La: Chine; they, arose & to. ‘St. Ann’ Sy" within, two giles of 


the Weftern' ‘extremity of: the ‘ifland of: Montreal, the: lake: df: the: ‘two: 
mountains being i in fight, which may be termed. the commencement.:of 
the Utawas: River. At'the rapid: of ‘Ste ‘Ann they aré: obliged‘to take 
out part, if not the whole of their lading.. It is from this: {pot' that. the 
Canadians confider they take their departure, as it poffeffes thé laft church 
on the ifland, which is dedicated to the tutelar faint of voyagers, 


-| r a . os “ . 
woe Tet tee a ie ts ie 


wee 


mee 


. "Phe lake ofthe two: mountains. is about twenty miles long, .but not” 


more than three wide, ‘and:!furrounded: by cultivated. fields;) except the. 
Seignoty belonging to theclergy, though nominally im poffeffion.of the.two ; 


tribes of Iroquois-and: Algonquins, whofe village is fituated on'a delightfal 
point of land.under the'hills, which, by the title of mountains, give a haine 
to the lakey.: Near the the extremity: ‘of thé pojat their ehurch'is: built, whieh 
- divides the: village.in two parts, forming a regular angle‘alony:the water 
fide. On the Eaft.is the ftation of the Algonquins, and on.the Weft, 


‘one of ‘the Iroquois,:confifting’in all of ‘about’ five hundred’ warriors, . 


_. Bach patty has itsomiffionary, and-divine worfhipsis performed’ accord- 
ing to dhecitesofiche: Roman: Cathdlic:religion; i in their. refpe@ive lan- 
guages “im the! fame: church: sand | ifo. affidueus have their paftors been, 
that thefe:! ‘People sdmve: been: iniftrugted in ‘reading: and writing in. theif 


eree ae . own 


(REX _ A GENERAL HISTORY’ + 
own language, and are better inftru€ted than: the Canadian inhabitants: of 
the country of the: lower ranks: but nofwithftanding thefe advantages, 

and though the eftablifhment i is nearly coeyal: with . tlig: colonization. of 
the country, they. do not- advance towards’ a ftate‘of civilization, but; Te- 
tain their ancient habits, language, and cuftoms, and are becoming every 
day more depraved, indigent, and infignificaht. The country around 

.them, though very ;capable of‘cultivation; ‘prefents only a few miferable 
~patches of: grotind, fown by ‘the women with. maize. and rvegetables. 
During. the winter feafon; they leave their habitations, and pious paftors, 
to'follow the chafe;.according.to:thé cuftom of. théir forefathers.-.Such _ 
is,\indeed;:the ftate of all the villages. near:the cultivated: parts of Eanada. 


uN, 


But.we hall. now leave them ‘to:progded’ on Our:voyagel nc 6 unt > 
* Me ruta k beard ab EE chlapiea f Lat em et, 
:. Atthe end of the lake the water éontraéts into the Utawas River, | 
which, after:a ‘courfe of. fifteen: amiles, is interrupted ‘by ai: fucceffion ‘of | 
_ -Yapids, and cafdades for upwards’-of ten-milésyat the foot‘of which the 
. ._Canadian, ain Seignories: tefmidates and. all above, them: were ‘wafte land; 
till the conclufion , of the. Asnerigan’ war, when they were:furvéyed: by 
order of government, and. granted to. the officersiand meniof the eighty- 
fourth | regiment, when. réduced; “but -principally: to the: former, Hand 
confequentiys dittle inhabited, though very: capable of caliyation’ co 


Hoge ee re ge ' 
y i 


; ‘ got Ata “ey a ’ a yak ae wel “oa ont! 
The voyagers pare: frequently obliged: -£6: unload:-their ‘canioes, and of 
carry..the goods.upon.: ‘their backs, 6r rather:diifpended in flings from 


their heads.; Each man’s; ordinary load ‘is two.packaes;though-fome: 


carry three. Here the canoe 16 towed by a ftrongiline;: ‘There aré fome 
. places where'the ground will. not admit. of their-carrying:the' whole ; 
’ : . they- 


oh 


wo OF THE FUR TRADE, Be. , "  xxxi 


; they then make two trips, that is, ‘leave half their lading, and go and 
land i it'at the diftance required. ‘and then return for: that which was 
left. In this diftance are three ‘carrying-places, the length of which 
‘depends in a great meéafure upon the ftate of the water, whether higher 
or lower; from the laft of thefe the riveris about a mile and an half 
wide, and has'a regular current for about’ fixty miles, when it endsét 
the ‘firft Portage. ‘de Chaudiere, where the body of water falls twenty-five 
feet, over: cragged, excavated rocks; an a. molt’ wild, romantic manner. 
At a‘finall : diftance: below, is the river Rideau’-on the left, ‘falling 
over. a perpendicular rock, inear forty: feet high, in ‘one feet, dffaming 
the appearance: OF 2 curtain 5» and from-which circumftance: it*dérives its 
name.:'To this extent ‘the: larids’ have been farveyel as before obferved, - 
and, are’very! fit for ‘culturé,” Many: loyalifts are fettled upon the river. 
Rideau, :! and have, I am told, thriving plantations,_‘ Sortie: ‘American 
families ‘preferring the Britifh territory; have’ alfo eftablifhed ‘themfélves 
along a river on the’ oppofite fide; where the. foil-i is exeellent.. Nor do 
‘T think *the/ period ‘is : far diftant, when the: lands will betoime ‘fettled 
~ from this viejnity- to-Montreal: ee ns 
yeas 4 \ bah ail. a a ee ne nar 
‘Over this’ portage, whidh is fix hundred and forty-three paces: ‘Tong, the - 
canoe and all the lading is carried. The rock!is-fo fteep | and difficult of 
__aecels, that 1 it requires twelve men to: take the canoe out of the water: it 
is then carried by fix men, two’ at’ each ‘end, onthe’ fame fide, and two 
under'the: ‘oppofite gunwale in the-middle}’ From hence to the next is but 
“a, Short diftance, in which they make two trips oyer the fecond Portage.de 
Chaudiere, which is feven’ hundred - paces, to carry the loading alone. 
From hence to the next and laft Chaudiere, or Portage des Chenes, i is about 
. a fix - 


- 
. 


XExH . GENERAL: ‘HISTORY? ) 


+ 


fix miles, with a very ftrong ‘current, here the goods are carried feven 


hundred and forty:paces; ithe, canoe., being towed up, by the line,’ when 


the water is not; very highy “We. now enter Lac des, Chaudicres, which 
is computed, to be thirty: miles ‘i in, length... Though it, 1s called a lake, 
therg, isa firong draught downwards, and)its ; breadth, is from, two to. four 


miles., At, the. end of- this is thé. Portage des Ghats, ‘over which the edrioe : 


and lading are, carried two. handred: and feventy-four pacess, and very di€- 
‘ficult. it is for, the former; , ‘The river.is here barred, by. a:ridge of black 


rocks, rifing in. pinnacles and covered with wood, which, from the, Small 


quai antity of foil that nourithes it, is, low. and itinted.... The river finds its 
-way.over.anid through thiele rocks,in numeérops channels, falling fifteen feet 
and.upwards:.. From hence two trips ate made through a ferpentine chan- 
_nel, formed. by the-rocks,-for feveral.miles, when the current flackens, and 
is accordingly called the Lake des Chats... At.che channels of.the gtand 
_alumet; which are ¢omputed to be at the diftance of eighteen miles, the 
current recovess its flrength, and proceeds .to the Portage. Dufort, which 
is two hundred: and_forty-fiye paces long’; over which the canoe, and 
baggage are tran{ported. F rom hence the current becomes: more rapid, 
and requires two trips to the Décharge des Sables*, where the goods 
are carried. -One hundred :and_ thirty-five paces, and the canoe. towed. 
Then, follows - the Mountain . Portage, where - the,-canoe, and. lading 
are alfo carried threé, hundred .and, eighty- -five paces; then’ to. ‘the 
Décharge of the., Derigé where the goods 2 are.carried two hundred, ‘and 


fifty paces ; and thence to the grand. Calumet. , » This, is the’ Jongeft’ 


) 
uae Ws “nao wat tees rib oe wots noes os 


* The save where the goods alone ate eanied | is called a Dechargeand that where goods: and canoes 
‘are both Lranfported, overland, ty  deniontinated a Portage. 


- Bea sis * 
2 os MW a ee ain Ve Bean! saad er woad 
. : * 1 ' 


” 


: ° _ earryip ge 


4 iP 


fayad 


4, ae 
seatper Me ts 


PEE 3 4 - 
& 


* 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. , XXXL 


carrying -plade ih, this iriver, and is about two thoufand. and thirty-five 
paces.: ‘It is a high hillor mountain. » From the upper pant of: ‘this Por- 
tage the current is fleady, and is only.a branch.of the’Utawas River, 
which joins the main‘channel, that keeps a more Southern courfe, ‘at the 
diftance of twelve computed leagues.’ ‘Six leagues further it forms Lake 
Coulonge, whichis about four leagues i inlength:. from thence it: “proceeds 
‘through the channels of the Allumettes to.the - Portage, where spast of the 
lading ‘is taken out, and carried three hundred and forty-two ‘paces, 
Then ‘fucceeds the Portage des Allumettes, which is but twenty-five 
| spaces, over a rock difficult of accefs,.and but a very fhort diftance from 
‘Lake Coulonge. From Portage de-Chenes to this {pot, is'a fine deer- 
~. hunting country, and the land in many parts very fit’for cultivation. 
“From hence.the river fpreads wide, and is full of iflands, with fome cur- 
rent for feven leagues, to the beginning of Rediere.Creu/é, or Deep River, 
which runs in the form of a canal, about a mile and an half wide, for 
about thirty-fix-miles ; ‘bounded upon:the North’ by:very*high racks, 
‘with low. land/on the South, and fandy-; ‘it is-intercepted again -by falls 
sand ‘cataraéts, ‘fo that ‘the ‘Portages -of the two Joachiis almoft join. 
‘The firflis nine hundred and:twenty-fix-paces;the next’ {@ven ‘hundred 
-and twenty, anil both very bad. roads., From ihenCe'is-afteady -current.of 
-ninemilesitothe‘River du Moine, iwhdre there has'getierally:been.a-trad- 
‘ing houfe ; ‘the.ftream then becomes: firong for four leagues,when a rapid 
facceeds; ‘which: requires two :trips.”” A little way onward is the: Decharge, 
cand ctofe'to'iit, the:Portage of the Roche:Capitaine,févan, a handred anid 
cminetysfeven pacesin’ length. . (From jhence twotrips: -are|made through 
-a marraw ichannel of the ‘Roche: Capitaine, -made-by.an ifland four-miles 
in length, oA #rong ‘current now Succeeds, :for about fix\leagues.to the 
ae o e . . Portage 


~ 


xxxiv A GENERAL HISTORY 


‘Portage of the two.rivers, which is about eight hundred and twenty 
paces; from thence it is three leagues to the Décharge of the Trou, 
which is three hundred paces., . Near adjoining is the rapid of Levellier; 
from whence, including the rapids of Matawoen, where there is no 
-carrying-place, it is about thirty-fix miles to, the forks of the fame name; 
in latitude 463. North,.and longitude 78. Welt, and is at the computed 
‘diftance of four hundred miles from Montreal. At this place the Petite 
Riviere falls into the Utawas. ‘The latter comes in a North-Welterly 7 
‘dire€tion, forming feveral lakes.in its courfe. The principal of them is 
‘Lake Temefcamang, where there has always been a trading poft, which 
-may be faid to continue, bya facceffion of rivers and lakes, upwards of 
fifty leagues from the Forks, paffing near the waters of the Lake 
-Abbitiby, in latitude 483-.which is received by the Moofe Rwer that 
vemptes itfelf into James Bay. . - 
“The Petite Riviere takes a South-Weft direétion, is fall'of rapids and | 
-eataratts to its fource, and is not more than fifteen leagues in length, in 
.the courfe of which are the following. interruptions—The Portage of 
Plein Champ, three hundred and nineteen paces; the Décharge- ‘of the 
" Rofe, one hundred and forty-five paces; the Décharge of: Campion, one 
-hundred and eighty-four paces; the Portage of the Groffe Roche, one 
‘hundred and fifty paces; the Portage of Pareffeux, four hundred’ and 
two paces; the Portage of Priarie, two- hundred -and: eighty-feven paces; 
the Portage of La Cave, one hundred paces; Portage of Talon; two 
hundred and_feventy-five paces; which, for its length, is the worft on 
the communication; Portage Pin de Mufique, four hundred and fifty- 
fix paces, where many men have been~crufhed to death by : the 
a . canoes, 


” OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. xEXY: 


canoes, and others have received irrecoverable injuries, The laft in this: 
river is the Turtle Portage, eighty-three paces, on entering the.lake of 
that name, where, indeed, the river may be faid to take its fource. From 
' the firft vafe to the great river, the country has the appearance of having 
been over-run by fire, and confifts in general of huge rocky hills. The 
whole diftance which is the height of land, between the..waters. of the 
St. Laurence and the Utawas, i is one thoufand five hundred and thirteen 


- paces to a. {mall canal in a plain, that is juft, fufficient.té carry the 


loaded canoe about one mile to the next vafe, which is feven hundred . 

and twenty-five paces. It would be twice this diftance, but the. narrow 

creek is dammed in the beaver fafhign, to float the canoes to this barrier, 

through which they pafs, when the river is juft fufficient to bear. them 

through a fwamp of two miles to the laft vafe, of one thoufand 

and twenty-four paces in length. . Though the river is increafed, in this 

part, fome care is neceflary to avoid rocks and ftumps of trees. In about 

fix miles.is the lake Nepilingui, which is computed to be,twelve leagues 

long, though the route of ‘the canoes Is fomething more: it is about ff 

teen miles wide in the wideft part, and bounded with rocks,’; Its inha- sat 

bitants confift of the remainder of a numerous converted tribe, called 

Nepifinguis of the ‘Algonquin nation.. Out of it flows the; Riviere des 

Francois, over rocks of a confiderable height. In a bay to the Eaft of 

this, the road leads over -the:Portage of the-Chaudiere des Frangois,.five 

hundred and forty-four. paces, to ftill water. - It. muft have acquired the 

name of Kettle, from a great number of holes. in: the; folid rock: of ;a 
cylindrical form, and not unlike that culinary utenfil.- They are obferv- 
_able in many parts along: ftrong bodies of. water, and where, at, certain 
feaforis, and:diftin® periods, it -is, well, known, the water inysidates ; at 
! “eg . the 


xxxvi A GENERAL HISTORY 


the bottom df them’ are ‘generally found a number of {mall ftonies and 
pebbles. This’ citcumftance jaftifies the conclufion, that at fome former 
period thele.rocks formed the bed of a branch of: the difcharge of this 
lake, although fome of them aré upwards of ten feet above the prefent 
" Yevel of the water at its greateft height. They ate, irideedj to be feen-in 
“every lake and river throughout this wide extended ‘country. The . 
' French river is very irregular, both as to its breadth and fornt, ahd is fo 
interfperfed with iflands, that in the whole courfe of it thé banks are fel- 
doin vifiblé.’ OF its various channels, that which is generally followed 
by thé canoes is obftru@ed by the following Portages, viz. ‘des Pins, 
fifty-two ‘paces; Feaiafille,-thirty-fix paces; Parifienne, one hundred 
paces; Recélet; forty-five paces; and the Petite 'Feaufille, twenty-five 


"paces. Inv féveral parts there dré guts~or ¢hanhels, where ‘the water 


flows with great velocity, which are not’ more than twicé-the breadth of 
a canoe. Thé diftance to Lake Huron is. eftimated at twenty-five 
leagues, which this river enters in the latitude '45:-53. North, thats, at 
the point of lard thréé or four miles within the lake! ‘There is hardly 
a foot of foil to be feen from one end of the French ‘river-to the other, 
its banks confifting of hills of entire rock. The ‘coaft of the lake is the 
fame, but lower, backed at fome diftance by high lands. The courfe runs 
through nimerous iflands to the North of’ Weft to the fiver Teffalon, 
€omputed to be about fifty leagues from: the: French river, and which I 
found to be if latitude 46. 12; 21, Northy' and froiti thence crofling, from 
HMatid to ifland, the arm of the lake that recéives the water- of Lake 
Superior (which continues the fame courfe), the ‘route changes to the 
South of Weft ten leagues to the Detour, paffing’ the end of the ‘ifland of 
St. Jofeph;-within “fix ‘milés of ‘the former place: On that ifland'there 

’ has. 


OF: ‘THE FUR TRADE, &e. XXXVI 


has been a military, cflablithment fince the upper polls were given up to. 
the. Americatiy i the year 1794; and is the Wefternmoft military 
pofition which we have in this country. It is a place of no trade, and 
the greater, part, if not the whole of the Indians, come here for no i 
purpole but to receive the prefents which our goyernment annually 
allows them, They are from the American territory (except about 
thirty families, who are the inhabitants of the lake from the French river, 
arid of the Algonquin nation) and trade in their peltries, as they ufed 
formerly to do at Michilimakinac, but principally with Britith fubjeéts, 
The Americans pay them very little attention, and tell them that they 
keep poffeffion of their country by right. of conqueft : that, as their 
brothers, they will be friends with them while they. flelerve it; and that 
their traders will bring them every kind of goods they require, whieh 
they may procure by their induftry. 
“ ~ Our commanders treat them ina very different m Loner, and, under the 
character of the reprefentatives of their father; (which parental title the 
natives give to his. prefent Majefty, the common father of all his people) 
prefent them with fuch things as the aétual- flate of their ftores will 


allow. 7 co | SS 
7T 


| How far this tondug,. if continued, may, at a future exigency, keep 
thefe people in our intereft, if they are even worthy of. it, is not an object 
of my prefent: confideration : at the fame time, I cannol avoid exprel- 
fing my perfect conviGtion, that it would not be of the Teaft advantage 
to our prefent or future. commerce in that country, of to the people 


themfelves.;.ag it. only tends to keep many of them in aiftate of idlenefs 
_ about 


sxxvii A GENERAL HISTORY 


about our military eftablifhments. The ammunition which they receive 
is employed to kill game, ih order to procure rum in return, though their 
families may be ina ftarving condition: hence it is, that, in confequence 
of flothful and diffolute lives, their numbers are in a very perceptible 


ftate of diminution, , a oy 


From the Detour to the ifland of Michilimakinac, at the confluence of 
the Lakes Huron and Michigan, in latitude 45. 54. North is about forty-. 
miles, To keep the direét courfe to Lake Superior, the north fhore 
from the river Teffalon fhould be followed ; croffing to the North-Weft 
end of St. Jofeph, and pafling between it andthe adjacent iflands, which’ 
makes a diftance of fifty miles to the fall of St..Mary, at the foot of 
which, upon the South fhore, there is a village, formerly a place of great 
refort for the inhabitants of Lake Superior, and confequently of confi- 
derable trade: it is now, however, dwindled to nothing, and reduced 
to about thirty families, of the Algonquin nation, who are one half of 
the year ftarving, and the other half intoxicated, and ten or twelve Ca- 
nadians, who have been in the. Indian country from an early period of 
life, and intermarried with the natives who have brought them families. 
Their inducement to fettle there, was the great quantity of white fith 
that are to be taken in and about the falls, with very little trouble, par- 
ticularly 1 in the autumn, when that fifh leaves the lakes, and ‘comes to 
the running and {hallow waters to {pawn. . Thefe, when {alt can be pro- 
cured, are pickled juft as the froft fets in, and prove very good food with 
potatoes, which they have'of late cultivated with fuccefs. “The natives 
live chiefly on this fith, which they hang up by: the tails, and preferve 
throughout the winter, or at Jeaft as long. as they Jaft; for whatever 

SM, _ quantity 


.OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. XXXIX 


quantity they may have taken, it is never known that their ceconomy 
is fuch as to make them laft through the winter, which ‘renders their 
fituation very diftrefling ; for if they had a€tivity fufficient to purfue the 
labours of the chafe, the woods are become fo barren of game as to 
afford them no great profpeét of relief. In the {pring of the year they, 
and the other inhabitants, make a quantity of fugar from the maple tree, 
which they exchange with the traders for neceflary articles, or carry it 
to Michilimakinac, where they expeft a better price. One of -thefe 
traders was agent for the North-Weft Company, receiving, ftoring, and 


forwarding fuch articles as come by the way of the lakes upon their | 


veffels : for it is to be obferved, that a quantity of their goods are fent 
by that route from Montreal in boats to Kingfton, at the entrance of 
Lake Ontario, and‘from thence in veffels to Niagara, then over land ten 
miles to a water communication, by boats, to Lake Erie, where’ they 
are again received into veffels, and carried over that lake up the river 
Detroit, through the lake and river’ Sinclair to Lake Huron, and from 
thence to the Falls of St. Mary’s, when they are again landed and carried 
for a mile above the falls, and fhipped over Lake Superior to the Grande 
| Portage. This-is found to be a lefs expenfive” method than by canoes, 
but attended with more rifk, and requiring more time, than one fhort 
feafon of-this country will admit ; for the goods are always fent from 
Montreal] "the preceding fall; and befides, the company. get the whole’ 
of their provifions from Detroit, as flour and Indian corn; as. alfo 
-confiderable fupplies from -Michilimakinac of maple fugar, tallow, 
gum, &e, &e. 


For the purpole of conveying all thefe things, they have two veffels 
upon 


i ' 


xl __ “A GENERAL HISTORY: 


, upon the Lakes Erie ‘and. Huron, and one‘on Lake Supetiot, of from fifty 


to feventy tons burthen, This being, therefore; the depot for tranfports, 
the Montreal canoes, on their arrival; were forwarded over Lake Superiot, 
with only five men in each; the others were ‘fent'to Michilimakinac - 


for additional, canoes, which: were required to profecute the trade, and 


then take a lading there, or at St. Maty’s, aiid follow the others. - ‘At 
‘length they all arrive at the Grande Portage, which is one hundred ‘and 
fixty leagues from St. Mary’s, and fituated on a‘pleafant bay on the North 
fide of the Jake, in latitude 48. North and longitude go. Weft from:Greeri- 
wich, where the compafs, has not above five degrees Eaft variation. 


At the.entrance of the bay i is an ifland which fcreens' the harbour from 
every wind except the Svath. The fhallownels of the water, however, 
renders it neceffary for ‘the velfel to anchor near’a ‘mile‘from. the fhore, 
‘where'there is not ‘more than fourteen feet water. This Take ke juftifies the 


“idame’ that ‘has ‘been’ given to ‘it: the Falls of St. Mary, whith i is its 


“Notthern extremity, being in ‘latitude 46. gi. North, and im ‘Tongitie 
84 Weft, Where ’there is‘no-variation of the compafs whatever, while ‘its 
“Southern extremity, at the River St. Louis, is in Tatitudle 46. 45: North. 

and longitude 92 10. ‘Ween its ae breaddh i is one ‘hundred and 
‘than one ‘thoufand: ‘two hundred in miles. . Along its North fhore is s the Yafett 
“navigation, as it is a continued mountainous embankment ofr rock, from 


‘three hundred ’to one thouland five’ hundred ‘feet-i in ‘height, - ‘There are 


numerous coves and fandy bays to land, which are frequently’ fheltered 
by iflands from the fwell of the lake. This is particularly the cafe at 
‘the diftance of one hundred miles to the’ E4hwitd of the Grande’ Pottage, 


‘and is called the Pays Plat: 


This 


et ae 
ae 


% 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. xii 


_ This feems:.to haye been .caufed by fome convulfion of nature, for | 


many of the iflands. difplay .a.compofition of Java, intermixed -with 
round ftones of. the fize..of a pigeon’s egg. The furrounding rock is 
generally. hard, and of a dark blue-grey, though it frequently has the 
appearance of iron and copper. . The South fide of the lake, aa Point. 
_ Shagoimigo Eaft, is almoft a continual ftraight line of fanidy beach, in- 
terfperfed with rocky precipices of lime-ftones, fometimes rif ing to an 
hundred feet in. height, without a bay. The’ embankments from that 
point’ Weftward are, in general, of ftrong clay, mixed with ftones, which’ 
renders the navigation irkfome and dangerous. On ‘the fame fide, 

at the River Tonnagan, is found a quantity of virgin’ copper. The 
Americans, foon after they got poffeffion of that country, fent an en. 
gineer thither; and I fhould not be furprifed to hear of their employing 
people to work the mine. Indeed, it might be well worthy the attention 
of the Britifh fubje&ts to work the mines on the North coaft, though 
they a are not fuppofed to be fo rich as thofe on dl the South. 


Lake Superior i is the largeft and moft ‘magnificent body of freth water 
in the world: it is clear and pellucid, of gréat depth, and’ abounding in. 
a great variety of fifh, which are the moft excellent of their kind. There 
are trouts of three kinds, weighing from five to fifty pounds,’ fturgeon, 
pickerel, pike, red and white carp, black bafs, herrings, &c, &c. and the 
~ daft and beft of all, the Ticamang, or white fifh, which. weighs from. 
four to fixteen pounds, and i is of a a fuperior quality in thefe waters. . 


This lake may be denotiinated the grand refervoir of the River 


St Laurence, as- no confiderable rivers difcharge themfelves ‘into it. 
'f£ The 


- lit A GENERAL HISTORY. 


The principal ones are, the St. Louis, the Nipigon, the Pic, and the 
Michipicoten. Indeed, the extent of country from which any of them: 
flow, or take their courfe, in any dire&tion, cannot admit of it, in confe- 
quence of the ridge of land that feparates them from the rivers that 
empty themfelves into Hudfon’s-Bay, the gulph of Mexico, and the. 
waters that fall in Lake Michegan, which afterwards become a part of 


‘the St. Laurence, . ee eres 


This vaft colleG@tion of watef'i§ often covered with fog, particularly 
when the wind is from the Eaft, which, driving againft the high barren 
‘rocks on the North and Weft fhore, diffolves in torrents of rain. It 
is very generally faid, that the ftorms on this lake are denoted by a {well 
on the preceding day ; but this circumftance did not appear from my 
obfervation to be a regular phenomenon, as. the twells more frequently 
fubfided without any fublequent wind. 


Along the furrounding rocks of this immenfe lake, evident marks 
appear of the decreafe of its water, by the lines obfervable along them. 
The fpace, however, between, the higheft and the loweft, is not fo great 
as in the fmaller lakes, as it does not amount to more. than fix feet, the 
former being very faint. 


The inhabitants that are e found alotig the o coat of this water, ‘are all of 
the Algonquin nation, the whole of which do not exceed 1 150. families.* 


* In the year 1668, when the firft miffionaries vifited the South of this lake, they found the 
country full of inhabitants, They relate, that, about this time a band of the Nepifingues, who were 
converted, emigrated to the Nipigon country, which is to the North of Lake Superior, Few of their 
defcendants are how remaining, and not'a trace of the religion communicated - ‘to them” is to be 


difcovered. , 
Thefe 


* 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &. xiii 


Thefe people live chiefly on fith;. indeed, from what, has been faid 
of the country, it cannot: be expeéted to abound in animals, as it is 


totally’ ‘deftitute of that fhelter, which is fo néceffary to them. The 


rocks appear to have been over-run by fire, and the ftinted timber, 
which once grew there, is frequently feen lying ‘along the furface ‘of 
‘them: but it is not ealy to be reconciled, that any thing“thould 
grow where ‘there is fo, little appearance of foil. Between the fallen 


trees there are briars, with hurtleberry and gooleberry buthes, rafp~ ~ . 


berries, &c. which invite the: bears in greater or lefler numbers, as 
they are a favourite food of’ that animal : beyond thefe rocky banks 


hay 


are found-a few moofe and: fallow deer. The waters’ alone are abun- 


Gantly inhabited. 


A very curious phenomehon was obferyed fome years ago at the Grande ° 
a 


Portage, for which no‘obvious caufe could be afligned. The water 


withdrew with great precipitation, leaving the grolind dry that had - 


never before been vifible, the fall being equal to four perpendicular feet, 
and rufhifiy back with great velocity above the common mark, «It con- 


tinued thus falling and rifing for feverak: hours, gradually decreafing 


_ till it flopped at its ufual height. - T here, is frequently an irregular 
influx and deflux, which does not exceed ten inches, and.i is attributed 


. to the wind, 


The bottom of the bay, which forms an amphitheatre, is clear and 
. inclofed;-and ‘on the left’ corner of it, beneath an hill, three“ or four 
hundred feet in height, and crowned by others of a ftill efeater altitude, 


~ 


\. #. 


fo ? is. 


A 
“t 


- xliv . A. GENERAL HISTORY 


is the fort, picketed in with cedar pallifadoes, and iiclofing houfes built 
with wood and covered with fhingles. . They are calculated for every 
convenience of trade, as well as to accommodate the proprietors and 
clerks during their fhort refidence there. - The.North men live under 
tents: but the more frugal pork-eater lodges beneath his canoe. The foil 
immediately bordering on‘the lake has not proved very propitious, as 
nothing but potatoes have been found to anfwer the trouble of cultiva- . 
tion. This circumftance is-probably owing to the cold damp fogs of the 
lake, and the moifture of the ground from the {prings: that iffue from 
beneath the hills. There are meadows in the vicinity that yield. abun- 
dance of hay for the cattle; but, as to agriculture, it has 1 not hitherto | 
_ been ‘an objeét of ferious confideration. | 

ee - 

. I fhall - now leave thefe , geographical notices, to give fome farther 
accouiit of the people from Montreal.—When they ‘are arrived at the 
Grande Portage, which is near nine miles over, each of them has 
to carry eight packages of fach goods and provifions as are neceflary for 


'- the interior country. This is a labour which cattle cannot conveniently’ 


perform in fummer, as both horfes and.oxen were tried by the company 
without fuccefs, They are only’ ufeful for light; bulky arfiftes or for 
tranfporting upon fled ges, during the winter, whatever goods may remain 
there, efpecially provition, of wh which i it is ufual to have a year’s ftock on. | 


Chand. | Se , 


ier 
| Having finithed this toillome part of their - duty, if more goods are he- 
. cliry to be tranfported, they are’ allowed a’ Spanifh. dollar “for each. 


Sek 
So, NEES package: 


i 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &. xlv 


40% 


- package : -and fo inured are they to this kind of labour, that I have 
known fome of them fet off with two packages of ninety pounds each, 

and return with two others of the fame weight, in the courfe of fix hours, 
‘being a diftance of eighteen” miles over. hills and mountains, This 
‘necéflary part’ of thé bufinefs being over, if the feafon be early they 
have fome refpite, but this depeiids upon the time the. North men begin 
.to arrive from their winter quarters, which they commonly do early i in 
July. ' At this period, it is néceflary to feleét from ‘thé pork-eaters, a 
number of men, among whom are the recruits, or winterers, fufficient 
to man the North canoes neceflary to carry, to the river of the rainy 
lake, the goods and provifion requifite for the Athabafca country ; as the 
people of that country, (owing to the fhortnefs of the feafon and length 
of the road, can come no further), are equipped there, and exchange - 
ladings. with the people of whom we are fpeaking, and both return 
from whence they came. This. voyage is performed in the courfe 
of a month, and they are allowed proportionable - “wages for their 
fervices. 
the Me eS, Co a . 

. The north. men being arrived at the Graride Portage, are regaled 
with bread, pork, butter, liquor, and tobacco, and .fuch as have not en- 
’ tered into. agreements during ‘the winter, which is cuftomary, are con- 
_tra@ed with, to return and erform the voyage for one, two, or three — 
years; their accounts are alfo fettled, and fuch as‘choofe to fend any of 
their earnings-to Canada, receive drafts to tranfmit to. their relations or 
friends; and.as foon as they can be got ready, which réquites no more 
‘than a fortnight, they are again. difpatched to-their refpeftive depart= . 
Swe - ments, 


svi A GENERAL ‘HISTORY - 


ments. It 1s, - indeed, very. credit | to diekn as {érvants, that. though 
, they are fometimes affembled to the number. of twelve hundred men, in- 
dulging themfelves in the free ufe of liquor, and quarrelling with each 
other, they always fhew the greateft refpeét to their employers, who 
are comparatively but few in number, and beyond the aid of any legal 
power to.enforce due. obedience. —- In-fhort,-a-degree. of fubordination 
can only be maintained by the good opinion thefe men-entertain of their 
employe ets, which has been uniformly the cafe, fince- the trade has as been 
formed and condufted on a regular fylem. : 


The people being difpatched to_ their refpedtive winter quarters, 
the agents from Montreal, affifted by their clerks, prepare to return 
there, by- getting the furs acrof the portage, and re-making them 
into packages of one hundred pounds weight each, to fend them to 
Montreal; where they commonly arrive about: the month -« ‘Of’ r Sep- 
__ tember. _ _, . , 

The mode of living at the Grande Portage, is as follows: The pro- 
paetors, clerks, guides, and interpreters, amefS together, to the. number 
of'fdmetimes an hundred, at feveral tables, in. one large hall, the pro- 
wihen confifting of bread, falt pork, beef, hams, fifh, and ‘venifon, but- 

' ter, peas, Indian com, potatoes, tea, fpirits, wine, &c. and plenty of 
milk, for which purpofe feveral milch cows are conflantly kept. The 
mechanics have ygtions. .of fach provifion, but the canoe-men, both from . 
the North and Montreal, have no other allowance here, or in the voyage, . 
than Indian com and meked ft. - Fhe cora for this purpofe is pre- 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &. - —_—_axivi 


pared before it leaves Detroit, by boilirig it ina ftrong alkali, which 
takes off the outer hufk; it 1s then well wafhed, and carefully dried upon 
ftages, when it is fitforufe. One quart of this is boiled for two hours, over 


a moderate: fire, in a gallon of water; to which, when it has-boiled a - 


{mall time, ‘are added two ounces of melted fuet ; this caufes the corn, | 


to fplit, and in the time mentioned makes a pretty thick pudding. If to 
this is added a little falt, (but not before it is ‘boiled, as it would inter- 
rupt the operation), it makes an wholefome, palatable food, and eafy of 
digeftion. ° This quantity is fully fufficient for,a man’s fubfiftence 
during twenty-four hours; though it is not fufficiently heartening to 
fuftain the ftrength neceffary for a flate of aftive labour. The Ame- 


ricans call this difh hominee*, 


4 


The trade from the Grande Portage, is, in fome particulars, carried on’ 


in a different manner ‘with that from Montreal. The canoes uféd’in 
the latter tranfport are now too large for the former, and fome of about 
half the fize are procured from the natives, and are navigated by four, 
five, or fix men, according to the diftance which they have togo. They 
carry a lading of about thirty-five packages, on an average; of thefe 
twenty-three are for the purpofe of trade, and the reft are employed for 
provifions, ftores, and baggage. In each of thele canoes are a foreman 
and fteerfman; the one to be always on the look out, ‘and dire& the 
paflage of the veffel, andithe other to attend the helm. They alfo carry 
her, whenever that offices neceflary. The foreman bas the command, 


ay od 


* Corn is the cheapeft provifion that can be procured, though from the expence of tranfport, 
the bufhel colts about twenty fhillings Rerling, at. the Grande Portage, A man’s daily allowance 
does not exceed ten-pence, ° 


\ - 2 
a 

‘ 
af 
’ 


sneer perenne nt meant meena EPRI T 


Ts | Ynankeoon ouininal 


and 


~ 


t 


xlviii, ' A GENERAL HISTORY 


and the middle-men obey both;. the latter earn only two-thirds of the 
wages which are paid the two former. Independent of thefe’a conduéior 
or pilot is appointed to every four or fix of thefe canoes, whom they 
are all obliged to obey; and is, or -at- leaft-is-intended:to-be,_a. perfon 


of {uperior experience, for which he is proportionably paid. ; 


In thefe canoes, thus loaded, they embark at the North fide, of the 
portage, on the river Au Tourt, which is very inconfiderable; and 
after about two’ miles of a Wefterly courfe, is obftru€ted by the Par- 


tridge Portage, fix hundred paces long: In the {pring this makes a con. _ 


" fiderable fall, when the water is- high, over a perpendicular rock of one 
hundred and twenty feet. F from thence the river continues to-be fhal- 


low, and requires great care to prevent the bottom of the canoe from 


being injured by sharp rocks, for a diftance of three miles and an half to 
the Priarie, or Meadow, when half the lading is taken out, and carried - 
by part of the crew, while two of them are conduéting the canoe among 
the rocks, with the remainder, to the Carreboeuf Portage, three miles 
and an half more, when’ they unload and come back two miles, and 
embark what was left for the other hands to carry, which they alfo 
_ dand with the former; all of which is carried fix hundred. and eighty 

paces, and the canoe led up againft the rapid. : From hence’ the water 1s’ 
- better calculated to carry canoes, and leads by a winding courfe to the 
North of Weft three miles to the Outard Portage, over which the canoe, 
and every thing in her, is carried for two thoiffind four hundred paces. 
At the further end is a very high hill to deféend, over which hangs a 
tock upwards of feven hundred feet high. Then fucceeds the Outard 
7 Lake, about fix miles long, lying in a North- Welt courle, and about two 


: a | miles 


3 
~ 
~. 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. xix 


miles. wide in the broadeft part. After ‘paffing a very [mall rivulet, they 
conie to the Elk Portage, over which the canoe and lading are again car- 
ried one thoufand one hundred and twenty paces ; when they enter the lake 


§. ~ of the fame name, which is an hand{ome piece of water, running North-Weft 


about:four’ miles; ‘and not more than one mile and an, half wide*. They 
then land at the Portage de Cerife, over which, and in the face of a con- 
» fiderable ‘hill, the canoe ahd cargo are again tranfported for one thou- 
fand and-fifty paces.. This is only feparated from the fecond Portage 
de Cerife,by .a mud-pond (where there is plenty: of water lilies), of a 
quarter of amile in length ; and this is again feparated by a fimilar pond, 
from the laft Portage de: Cefile, which is four hundred and ten paces. 
Here the fame operation is to be performed for three hundred and eighty 
paces, They next enter on the Mountain Lake, running North-Welt 
by Welt fix miles long, and about two miles in its greateft breadth, In 
the centre of this lake, and,to.the right is the Old Road, by which I 
never. pafled; but an, adequate..notion may, be formed of it from the 
road I am going to defcribe, and which is univerfally preferred. This i is 


firft, the fmall new portage over which every thing 1 is carried for ms. g 
hundred and twenty-fix, paces, over, hills and gullis;, the whole is then ., 


embarked ona, narrow; line. of water; that. meanders South- Welt abonttwo — 
miles and.an half. It is, snecelfary, tounload, here, for the. Jength of the 
canoe, and then ‘proceed, Weft half. a mile,. to the: new Grande Portage, 
which i ig three: thoufand one h hundred paces j in. Jength, and over very rough 


ground, which Tequires | the. utmoft exertions of the men,- and frequently | 


James them: from hence ey approach the Role Hake, the ‘Portage of 


“* “Here i is a ‘a mot excellent Eery for white ih, which are exquifite 


g . that 


ca e 


ape 


I A GENERAL HISTORY 


that name being oppofite to the jun€tion of the road from ‘the’ Mountain 
Lake. They then embark on the Rofe ‘Lake, about one mile‘from’the 
Eaft end of it, and fteer Weft by South, in an oblique ‘courfe;, acrofs it 
two miles; then Weft-North-Weft paffing the Petite Perche to the’ Mar: 
ten Portage three miles. { ‘In this part ‘of the lake the bottom’ is-mud and 
flime, with about three or four feet of water over it; atid ‘here I'fre- 
quently ftruck a canoe pole of twelve feet long, without rrieeting any othet 
obftruétion than if the whole were water: it has, however, a’peculiar fic- 
tion or attraftive power, fo that it is difficult:to paddle‘a canoé over ‘it. 
There is a {mall {pace along the South fhore, where''the water is deep, 
and this effect is not felt. In’ proportion to the diftatice from this part, 
the fu€tion becomes more’ ‘powerful: iE have, indééd: been’ told’ ‘that 
loaded canoes have been'in danger of beitig fwallowed t up, aid have ‘only 
owed their prefervation to other canoes, which’ were lighter, ‘Thave, 
myfelf, found it very difficult to get away from this attraGtive power, -with 
fix men, and great exertion, though théy‘did net appear to be in any 


arora rider, mart ton bee. repo fp ob 


danger of finking. ). 


os 
+ . . . a 
; : . mys rn be 


Over againit thisi is a. very high,:rocky ridge, on ‘the South fide, called 
‘Marten Portage, which is but twenty paces’ long, and fepardted roti the 
Perche Portage, which is four hundred and eighty paces, by: a mtid-pond, 
covered with white lillies, From hence the’ ‘courfe i is on. the Take of the 
fame nante, Welt-South- wet three iniles: to ‘the height of land, Where . 
the % waters of the Dove t or Pigeon River terminate, and which i Is ‘one Of the 
fources” of the: ‘gréat ‘St. “Laurence in this dire&tion: Having ‘cattied 
the canoe and lading over it, fix hundred and feventy-nine paces, they 

. embark\, 


+ 
4, 


v 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. oi 


embark on the lake.of Hauteur de Terre*, which is in the fhape of an 
horfe-fhoe. It is- centered, near the curve, and left at the extremity of 
the Weftern limb, through a very fhallow channel, where the canoe 
paffes-half-loaded for, thirty paces with the. current, which leads through 
the fucceeding. Jakes,-and rivers, and difembogues itfelf, by the river 
Nelfon; into , Hudfon’s-Bay. The firft of thefe is Lac de pierres 4 fufil, 

running Weft-South-Weft feven miles long, and two wide, and, making . 
an angle at North-Weft one mile more, becomes a river for half a mile, 


tumbling over a rock, ahd forming a fall and portage, called the Efealier, 


“of fifty-five paces; but from hence it is neither lake or river, but pof- 


feffes the charaéter of both, and ends between large rocks, which caufe 
a current or rapid, falling into a lake-pond for about two miles and’ an 
half, Weft-North-Weit, to the portage of the Cheval du Bois. Here the 
canoe and contents are carried three hundred and eighty paces, between 
rocks; and within a quarter. of a mile is the ‘Portage des Gros Pins, 
which is fix hundred: and forty paces overan high ridge. The oppofite 


‘fide of it is wafhed by a {mall lake three miles round; and the courfe is 


through the Eaft end.or fide of it, three quarters of a mile North-Eaft, 
where there is a vapid. An irregular, meandering channel, between 
rocky banks, | then fugceeds, for feven miles and an half, to the Maraboeuf 
Lake, which extends. North four miles, and i is three quarters of a mile 
wide, terminating by,a rapid and. décharge, | of one hundred and eighty 
paces, the.rock, of. Saginaga being in fight, which caules a fall of about 


~ 


feven:feet, and Brose of fifty-five paces. 


Ow tind ss no 2 
* The route, which. we have been travelling hitherto, leads along the high rocky land. or bank of 
Lake Superior on the left. “Tke’ ‘face of the country offers a wild {cene of huge hills and rocks, feparated 


by flony valliés, lakes, and/ponds, Wherever ‘there is the léaft foil, itis well covered with trees. 


ee go te Lake 


~ 


2a 


lily A GENERAL HISTORY 


Lake Saginaga takes its names from i its numerous “lands, “Its gréateft 
length from Eaft to Welt is about fourteen miles, with very irregular 
inlets, is no where more than three miles wide, and” terminates at the {mall 
portage of La Roilie, of forty-thtee pates. F rom: thence: 4s ‘'a" rocky, 
{tony paflage of one mile, to Priarie Portage, whith’ is very’ improperly 
naméd, as there is no ground about it that’ anfwéts’ to that -deferip- 
tion, except a finall ‘fpot at the embarking. place’ at’ the Welt end: 
to the Eaft is an ehtite bog; and it is with’ great: ‘difficulty that “the 
lading can be landed upon flages, forined by driving piles into the mud, 
and {preading branches of trees over them. ‘ The portage rifes ona ftony 
ridge, over which the canoe and’ cargo muft 'be carried for fix hundred 
and eleveii | paces. This is facceeded by. an: embarkation on ‘a: finall 


bay, where the bottoin is the fame as has been defcribed ‘in the Weft-end ° 


of Rofe Lake, and it is with great difficulty that 4 laden canive 1s worked 
over it, but if does not comprehend more than a diftance of two hundred 
yards. Fiom heice the progrefs continues ‘through’ irregular: channels, 
bounded by rocks, in a Wefterly’ courfe for about five miles, to the little 


Portage des Coutéaux, of one hundred and ‘ixty-five’ paces, and-the-- 
: Lac des Couteaux, running about South-Welt ‘by’ ‘Welt twelve miles, 


atid from a quarter to two miles wide. A deep bay runs Eaft three 
miles from the Weft end, where it is difcharged by a rapid--river, and 
after running two rhiles Weft, it again becomes ftill water. ‘In this fiver 
are’ two cartying-places, the one fifteen; and the other- one-hundred 
and ninety paces. From this to'the Portage des Carpes'is:oné mile North- 
Welt, leaving a narrow lake on the Eaft that runs parallel with the 
Lake des Conteaux, half its length, where there is a cartying-place, ‘which 
is ufed when.the water in the river laft mentioned is too low.-. The 

_ | | | Portage 


a 


ppeeveteantatecete #oatebe 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. lilt 


Portage des Carpes is three hundred and ninety paces, from whence the 
water’ {preads irregularly .between rocks, five miles North-Weft and. 
South-Eaft to the portage of Lac Bois Blanc, which is one hundred and 
eighty paces. Ten follows the lake of that name, but I think impro- 
perly fo called, as the natives name it the Lake Pafcau Minac 
Sagaigan, or’ Dry ‘Berries, ° Do, re 
wT de mote Cot gba. roy, 
. Before the. frill pox ravaged this country, and completed, what. the’ 
Nodowafis, in their warfare, had gone far to accomplifh, the deftruc- 
tion of its inhabitants, the population. was very numerous ; this was allo 
a favourite part, where they made their canoes, &c, the lake abounding 
in fifh, the country round.it being plentifully fupplied with various kinds 
of. ‘game, and. the rocky ridges, that form the boundaries of the water, 
covered-with a variety of berries... | 
setae ce btm nus le a thor hua: te, 
When the French were in poffeflion ‘of this country, they had feveral 
trading ¢ftablifhments onthe iflands and. banks of this lake: , Since thar” 
period;‘the few péople.remaining, whorwere of the Algonquin nation, : 
could hardly find fubfiftence ;, game having become fo. fearce, that they” 
depended principally for food upon fifh, and wild rice which grows 
fpontaneoutly i in r thele parts. : co 
“This lake is irregular in‘ its: ts-form, and { Its ‘atmo extent fom Fah to 
Welt 4s Fifteen. milés ; ia point-of land, called Point au: Pin, jutting into it, 
divides it'in'two-patts: it then makes a fecond:angle at the Welt end, to 
thd leller Portage'de Bois Blanc,two hundred pacesin: length.» This chan- 
Har ig! Hotide, ‘and: ‘ig limetcepted by feveral rapids inthe courle. af a 


uid ' mile ; 


live A: GENERAL HISTORY » 


mile: it runs Welt-North-Weft to the Portage des Pins, over which the 
Canoe and lading is again carried four hundred’ paces. ‘From hence 
the channel is alfo intercepted by very dangerous rapids for two miles 
Wefterly, to the point of Portage du Bois, which is two hundred and 


eighty paces. Then fucceeds the portage of Lake Croche one mile- 


more, where the carrying-place is eighty paces, and is followed by an 
embarkation on that lake, which takes its name from its figure. It ex- 


tends eighteen miles, in a meandering form, and 1 in a welterly direftion; 


it is in general very narrow, and, at about twotthirds of its length be- 
comes very contracted, with a ftrong current. 

‘Within three miles of the laft. Portage is a remarkable rock,- with 
a {mooth face, but {plit and cracked’ in different parts,'.which, hang 
over the water. Into one of its horizontal chafms a great: number ;of 


arrows have been fhot, which i is faid to have been done by a war: party 


° of the Nadowafis : or Sieux, ‘who. had done: much,-mifchief in, this 


country, and left thefe weapons as a warning to the Chebpvis. or. natives, 
that, notwithftanding its lakes, rivers,. and- rocks, it. was Rot inacceflible 


to theirenemies,  =«-+—s te TO es; wet 


ft . Pegye 1h nah wieat Pasty a Le ry . iy 

* Lake Croche is terminated 4 by the Portage; de Rideau; four hundred 
paces long, and derives its name fro the appearance of the water, falling 
over.arock of upwards of thirty feet SeV¥eral rapids. fucceed with intervals 


OF {till water,'for about three. miles to the;F lacon: postage, which is very, 


difficult, is four hundred paces long, and: leads to the Lake. of LaCroix, 


fo:named ‘front‘its fhape. It runs about N orth-Weft eighteen t miles to the 
Beaver Dam, and then finks into'a deep bay nearly: Ealt, ,The,courfe.to 
: ' ) . a the 


% 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &e. ~ aly 


the Portage is Weft by North for fixteen miles more from the Beaver 
Dam,;and into the Eaft bay is a road which, was frequented by the 
_ French, and followed through lakes and rivers until they came to Lake 
Superior ‘by, the river Caminiltiquia, thirty miles Eaft ‘of the Grand | 


Potrages 


$ 
~ 


. ns Soo : J ‘ J 
‘Portage la Croix ‘is fix hundred paces long: to the next portage isa 
quarter of a mile, arid,its:length is forty paces; the river winding four . 
miles tofVermillion Lake, which tuns fix or feven miles North-North- 
Welt, and by a narrow ftraiticommunicates with Lake Namaycan, which 
takes its name from a particular place at the foot of a fall, where the 
natives {pear fturgeon.: Its. courfe is about N orth-North- Welt and South- 
South-Eaft,-with a bay running Eaff, that gives it the form of.a triangle: 
its.length is about fixteen miles.to the Nouvelle Portage. The difcharge 
of the lake is from a bay on the. left, and the portage one hundred and 
"eighty paces, to which fucceeds a very: {mall river, from whence there - 
is but a fhort-diftance to the next Nouvelle Portage, three hundred and 
twenty paces long. It is then neceflary to émbark on a fwamp, or over- 
flowed country, where wild rice grows in great abundance, There is a~ 
channel or {mall river in the centre of this’ {wamp, which is kept with 
difficulty, and runs South and North one mile and a half, with deepening 
water. The courfe continues North-North-Welt one mile to the Chau- 
 diere Portage, which..is' caufed by the dilcharge of the waters running 
on. the-leftof the road from Lake Naymaycan,which ufed to be the 
common. ‘route, bat: that. which I have defcribed isthe, fafele as. well as 
. fhorteft,, From hence there, is fome current though the water. is wide 


{fpread, and its courfe about North :by. Welt three. miles-and an half to’ 
the 


tf 
ae 


1 
% 


4 
x 


ivi A GENERAL HISTORY | 


the Lac. de la Pluie, which lies nearly Eat and Welt; frdm: thence. 
about fifteen tniles is a Harrow ftrait thatjidivides the land into. ‘two un- 


equal parts, from whence. to its difcharge i is a diftance of twenty. foil’ 
“miles. ‘There is a deep. bay running’ North-Weft on, the right, that ‘is’ 
‘not included, and is remarkable fpr furnifhing the natives with a kind of Ms 
* foft,’red ftone, of which they make their pipes; it alfo affords an excel- 
Tent fithery, both in the farnmér and winter; and from it is anvealy, fafe, 
and fhort road to the Lake.du Bois, (which T:fhall mention prefently) 


for the Indians to pafs in their {mall canoes, through a {mall Take. and 


ona {mall tiver, whofe banks furnith, abundance of wild rice. ‘The dif-. 


chargé.bf this lake“is called ‘Lake de la Pluie River, at whofe entrance 
there is a rapid, ‘below which ‘is a fine bay,'where there had’ been an“ ex- 
~*~ téenfive pickettéd fort and building when poffeffed by the French: the fite 
Of it is at prefent a beaueiful meadow, furrounded with groves of oaks, 


From hence there is'a ftrong current for two miles, where the water falls 7 


over ‘a’ rock twenty feet, and, from the confequent turbulence of the 
water, the carrying:place, which is three hundred and twenty paces long, 


derives the name of Chaudiere. “Two miles onward is the prefent 
__ trading eflablifhment, fituated om an hight bank. ‘on the North fide’ of the 


river | in 48. 37. North latitudes mS te Pris 


. . . tf 
tt mo Ceey pe oe ear , 
ae re eR ESE, Ae kt ee a 


Here: the people from Montreal come to'meet tholé who arrive from 


* ‘the Athabafca country, as *has been alreadly--defcribed; and “exchange 
"Tading with them, -This'is-alfo the refidence of the firft i¢hiefor Sachem, : 


of all the Algonquin £ tribes, ighabiting the different parts ‘of this’ country. 
He isby diftin@ion called Neétam, ‘which irnplies perfonal pre-eminence, 
Here allo the elders meet in council-to treat of peace orwar, 3h 07" 


This 


! 


fuceS . OF THE FUR TRADE, &. Wii 


one This is one of the fineft rivers in the North-Welft, and runs a courie 
Welt and Eaft one hundred and twenty computed miles; but i in’ taking its 
courfe and diftance minutely I make it only eighty. Its banks are covered 

with a rich foil, particularly to the North, which, in many parts, .are 
clothed with fine open groves of oak, with the maple, the pine, and the 
cedar. The Southern bank is not -fo-elevatéd, and difplays the maple, 

the white birch, and the cedar, with ‘the {pruce, the alder, and various 
underwood. _ Its waters abound in fith, particularly the dturgeon, which 
the.natives both {pear and take ‘with drag-nets. But notwithftanding 

the promife of this foil, the Indians do not attend to ‘its cultivation, 


though.they are not ignorant of the. common protefs; and - ‘are fond’ of 


the Indian ‘corn, when. they can get it from us. Jo 


Though the foil. vat ‘the ‘fort ‘is F Riff - cay there is-a garden, which, | 


unaffifted as -it is:by - smanure, ‘Or any parsicalat ‘attention, is tolerably 
produétive, Met ee: 


/ 
~s 


- A 
‘We now-proceed to:mention:the Lake diz Bujsyiritowhich this river. dif 


charges itfelf in latitude 49. North, and was'formerly famous for the xich- . 


nels of :its:banks-and’ waters, which aboundedh with ‘whatever «was necef- 


fary to.a Lavage life, The ech iad feleral feptlenients in and about 


dt ; sbut at might be. almoit concluded, uthat [ome fatal circumftance had 


defiroyed: the | game, as‘war “and the: Sinallipoxthad ‘diminifhed the irthabit- 
ome At having been : wery unproductive gndaniihals finge the Britifh fub- 

jeets shave been: vengaged in travelling shrough: it;: :though’$ IDNOW ap- — 

spears!to-be mecoyering ‘its -priftine fate. | Fhe few Indians who inhabit 


h | it 


aot 
ted 


f° _ — 
a XN 
fff . . . 


Wii ~ . |. »A GENERAL sistoR ne 


4S 


. it might live very. conntortably, if they. werdinct fo immoderately fond « 


7 of fpirituous: liquors. ~- pies Cos aoe aa 
; . . 


; i a, oy wd bear, a ‘ 4 uy Bet, i t _ wt a 
This lake is alfo repilered rématkable, in confequence of: therAimericains 
having: named; sit. ag, the Slot, from: which a, line of boundary, Hetween 


a them and Britifh: “America, was to run Weill, ntl it ftruck.the Miff ifippi; 


‘which, howevef,..can never; : happen, .as. the: Plog -Well ‘part of: the 


Lake du Bois, is ii latitude 49: 37.Noith, arid longitude 94091: Welk, 


‘and the Northernmoft branch of the: fouiere*of: ithe Miliflippi is :in- lati- 

~ gude, AT abe North, and longitude. 98+! Os! Welt, ve oe by. Mr. 
“Thomfon, aftronomer-t to the, North. Wel} Gompatys who 

** prefsly for that purpofe: in, the, fpring: “of 17980": ‘He,.in.the fame: year, de- 


as - fent: eX= 


termined thé Northern bend of the Miflifoury to be in latitude 47. 32. 


. North, and longitude -.101. BBs Welt; wand, according:.to : the Indian ace 


-counts,.it runs to the-fouth, of Welt, fo that, if the Miflifoury were even 
to be confitlered as the Miipp no Weftem line could ftrike it.’ 


‘eos 


It does not appear t to! ‘meio be clearly determined what courfe EN 


‘Line _js,to take, or fromnwhat pant of. Lake, Superior it ftrikes* through 


the country to the ake, du Bois! Wee it to,follow the principal-waters 


‘to their, fource, it ought for keeps through: Lake Superior taithe: River _ 
St, Louis, and. follow that diver'to its fourees clofe' to: -which is thetdurce 
of the waters falling i inta:the!river-afs Lake Ja Pluie, whi¢his d-common . 


7 _-route of the, Indigna to, Hieshake, diy, Bois the. St. -Lonis paffés within 


a Short diftance s of a: ‘ hégnchiWf.. the. Mififfippi, where: :4t: becomes sna- 


&. ‘vigable- for carioes. This: will. appear: ‘more: evident: from. confulting 


~y . ‘ am | the ° 
% . . . . 7 
a a 


ad 


b 


OF THE FUR TRADE, Be . a Tix: 


‘the map ; and. if the navigation of the Miftitipi is, onf dered. as. sof: 


any confequence, by this country, from that part es the Biche, fuch 1S - 
the neareft way ¢ to’ get'a at it. ce , SLeadt ase he uns 6 


we : a eo sh ek ete tee al 
But to return to .our narrative. - The Lake. du’. Bois i is, aS.far. as. I. 
could ‘learn, nearly round, and the canoe, courte: through ‘then centre. 
of it among a clufter of iflands, fome’ of which dre,fo' extenfivé that: 
they may be taken for the-main ‘land, - ‘Fhe, teducéd -courfe ‘would. be- 
nearly, South: and North, But: following the navigating courfe; I make’ 
the: diftance feventy-five-miles, though. in.a direét Jine. it would fall 


very {hort ‘of that length, , ,At ‘about: two-thirds /ofiit cthere is a fmall. 


_carrying-place, when the water is low. ! Ehe.catrjing+place out of the 


lake is on an ifland, and named Portage du Rat, in, latiftidé 49: 97. North. 
and-longitude 94%. Welt, it is about fifty paces long.’ The'lake difcharges 
itfelfeat both ends of this ifland, and .forms.the River. Wifipic, which 
is a large body of water; interlperfed with mumerons iffinds, caufing 


_ various, channels and intérruptions of portages: and rapids. In fome 
ae eee 


parts it has‘the appearance of lakes, with: fleady: currents;"I eftimate 
its. winding courfe | to the Dalles eight. milés; to the Grand Dé- 
"charge. twenty-five miles and.an half, which is‘a Jong carrying-place for 
the goods; from thence to the little Décharge:.one. milé: and an half; 


. tothe. Terre. Jatine Portage two miles and ah:half} then to its galet — 


\ 


id ° . . + . . . 
ep rete et cre ito: 


€ . - i » ° . 
> . ° - 
? . , . 
oof , ry 
. . ‘ ‘ . 
. . 
‘y o \ on 
‘ oa 
. Yo . ° on 
o. s * a t 
» . 
‘e¢ 
. 
« 2 


} 


feventy: yards ;, two miles and three quarters to-the! Terre Blanche, near — 
which, j Is a fall of from four'to five feet ; three ‘miles.and an half to Por- 
tage. de Lifle,. whee be 

om the. North fhoreja trading eftablifhment, which is theirdad, in boats, 


ere is a trading-polt;-and, abgut eleven ‘miles, | 


qe 


Ix A,GENERAL HISTORY 


to Albany River, and from thence to Hudfon’s Bay. There‘is alfo. a 
communication with Lake Superior, through what is called the Nipigars 
country, that enters the Lake Winipic about thirty-five leagues Eaft of the: 
Grande Portage. In fhort, the country is fo broken by lakes and rivers, 


that people may find their way in canoes in any dire€tion they pleafe. . 


It is now: four miles to Portage de Lifle, which is but fhort, though 
feveral canoes havé been loft in-attempting to: run the rapid. From 
thence it is twenty-fix miles to Jacob’s-Falls, which are about fifteen feet 
| high; and fix miles and'an half to the woody point; forty yards from which 
ig another Portage, They both form an high fall, but not perpendicular, 
From thence to-another galet, or- rocky: Portage, ‘is: about’ two miles, 
which i is one continual: ‘rapid and cafcade; and about two’ miles. further 
is the Chute A l’Efclave, which is upwards of thirty feet. The: Portage 
is long, through a point covered with: wood: it is fix miles and’ an half 
more to the barrier, and ten miles. to the Grand’ Rapid. From thence, 
on the North fide, isa fafe road, when the waters are high, through {mall 
rivers and lakes, to the Lake du Bonnet; called the Pinnawas, from the 
man who dif{covered.it: to the White River, fo called from its being, for 
a confiderable length, a Tucceffion of falls and cataraéis, is twelve miles, 
Here are feven portages, in fo fhort a fpace,.that the whole of them are 
difcernible at the fame moment. From this to Lake du Bonnet is fifteen 
miles more, and ‘four. miles acrofs i it to-the rapid. “Here the Pinnawas 
Toad joins, arid fiom thence it is two miles’ to the Galet du-Lac du Bonnet; 


from this to” the Galet du Bonnet one inile-and an half; thence to the Por- _ 


tage of the fame name is three miles. This Portage is néar half a league 
in length, and derives its name from a cuftom the Indians have of crown- | 
_ ing ftones,, laid i ma circle, on the’ higheft r6ck i in the portage, with 
Ue a - wreaths, 


’ 


4 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. “ki 


wreaths of herbage-and branches. There have been examples. of men 


taking feven: packages. of: ninety: pounds. each, at, one end: of the por- 


tage, and putting them down at the other without ftopping. 


To this, another fmall. portage immediately fucceeds,. over a. rock 
producing: afall. From thence to. the fall of Terre Blanche:is.two miles 
and an half; to-the firft portage-Des Eaux qui Remuent is three miles’; 
to the next, of the fame name, is but.a few. yards diftant;, to the third 
and laft, which is a Décharge, is.three miles and an half; and- from: this 
to the aft: Portage of the river one mile and an half ; and to the eftablifh- 
ment, or provifion. houfe, is two miles and anhalf Here alfo. the French 
had their principal:iniand: dep6t, and.got- their canoes made, ° 


’ It is here, that the prefent traders, going to great diftances, and where. 


provifion is.difficult to. procure, receive a fupply to carry them to the 
Rainy. Lake, or Lake Superior. From the eftablifhment to the entrance 
of Lake Winipic is four miles and an half, latitude 50. 37. North. 


The country, foil, produce, and climate, from Lake Superior to | 


this place bear a general refemblance,. with a predominance of rock 


& 


- and water:, the former is of the granite. kind. ‘Where there is any 


foil. it is well covered: with wood;, fuch as oak, elm, afh of dif- © 


ferent kinds, maple of two: Kinds, pines ef various 'defcriptions, among . 


which are what t call the cyprefs, with the hickory, iron-wood, 
liard, poplar, cedar, black and’ white birch, &c. &e. Vaft quan- 


tities. of wild rice are feen throughout the country, which the natives. - 
| collec 


ho 
\" 
“ 


_ rants, rafpberries, poires, &c. 


Ixii A GENERAL HISTORY 


colleét in the month of Auguft for their winter flores.* To the North 
of fifty degrees, it is s hardly known, or at leaft does not come to 
maturity. . - . 

Lake Winipic is the great refervoir of feveral large’ rivers, and dif- 
charges itfelf by the .River: ‘Nelfon into Hudfon’s Bay. The firft in 
rotation, next to that I have juft. defcribed, is the Affi boin, or Red 
River, which, at the diftance of forty miles coattwife, aidkboguesn 
the South-Weft fide of the lake’ Winipjc. It alternately receives’ thofe | 
two denominations from its dividing, at the diftance of about thirty miles 
from the lake, into two large branches. The Eaftern branch, called the 
Red River, runs in a Southern direétion to near the head waters of the 
Miffifippi. On this are two trading eftablifhments. .The country on 
either fide is but partially fupplied with wood, and confifts of plains co- 


-veréd with herds of the buffalo and the elk, efpecially on the Weftern 


fide. On the Eaftern fide are lakes and rivers, and the whole coun- 
try is-well wooded, level, abounding~in beaver, bears, moole-deer, 

fallow-deer, &c. &c. The natives, who are of the Algonquin tribe, 

are fot very numerous, and are confidered as the natives~of. Lake Su- 
perior: This country being near the Miffiffippi, is’alfo inhabited by the 
Nadowafis, who are the natural enemies of the former; the head of the 
water being’ the war-line,-they are in a continual ftate of hoftility ; and 
though the Algonquing are equally brave, the others generally out-num- 
ber them; it is vét'y probable, therefore, that if the latter continue to ven-, 
ture re pat of the ‘Woods, which. form. their only proteStion, they will foon’ 

; weg | x 


* The fruits: are, Rrawherves, hartleberries, plumbs, and cherries; hazlenuts, goofeberries, cur- 


: . , 
° . ; -_ be : 


s 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. Ixiii 


be-extirpated.. There is not, perhaps, a finer country in.the world for 
the refidence of uncivilifed man, than-that which occupies the {pace be- 
tween this river and’‘Lake Superior. ..It.abounds in every thing’ neceflary 
to the wants and comforts of fuch a people. + Fifh, -venifon, and fowl, 
with wild rice, are in great plenty; while, at the fame time, their fubfift- 
ence requires that may exercife fo neceflary to health and vigour, | 
gas Peak Lat 
This great extent of country Was ‘folmerly very. populous, but from 
the information I received, the aggregate of its. inhabitants.does: not ex- 
ceed three hundred warriors; and, among the few whom J faw, it ap- 
peared to me that the widows were :more: numerous: than the men. 
‘Fhe-rackoon i is a native of this country; but is feldom found to the 
Notthward of it. RO ON Sea ee a ad Cote 


+ 7 y Fey a “ 
oo ) , . cn tea 

2 ‘ : - , . . . ate ee ead woe 
+ ws . 


“The other branch is called after the: tribe of the: Nadawafis, who. here 


7 “go. -by the name’ of-Affiniboins: ghd are’ the principal inhabitants of it. 


It rutis from off the North-North-Welt, and, in the latitude of 514. Welt, 
and: longitude -103. rifing in the fame mountain’ as the river Dauphin, 
of:which Ithall {peak an: due order. . They ‘muft have feparated from 


tHeir ination’ at. ai time beyond | our knowledge, and live.in: peace with 


4 


the Algonquins and Knifteneaux. ae x Saget of 
». "Phe country between this:and tne-fRea River,.is almoft a continual 
‘plain to thei:Mififoury.: The ‘foil is.sfand. ‘and ‘gravel, with -a flight 


‘interpiixtitre of :eatth,:and. produces. a: fhort. grafg.1:Tyees .are very 


rare; ‘nor are there on the. banks -of the river: fufficient, except .In 


"Particular ‘pots, to’ build houfes and fupply fire-wood for the trading 
. eftablilhments 


a 


\ 


Ixiv A GENERAL HISTORY _ 


eftablifhments, of which there are four principal ones. Both thefe 
rivers are navigable for canoés to their fource, without a fall; though in 

.fome parts there are rapids, caufed by: occafional beds of lime- ftone, 
and gravel but.in general they a. fandy bottom. ‘ 


- The Affiniboins, and fome of. the Fall, or Big bellied Indians, are the . 


principal inhabitants of this country, and border on the river, occupying 
the centre part of it; -that.next Lake Winipic, and about its fource, being 


the ftation of the Algonquins and Knifteneaux, who have.chofen it.in pre- ' 


ference to their own country. - They do .not.exceed five hundred fami- 
lies. They are not -beaver ‘hunters, which :accounts:for :their allowing 


the divifion juft mentioned, as:the lower .and upper parts. of this river 
have thofe animals, which are not found in the intermediate diftri&t. . 


‘They confine thémfelves to hunting the buffalo, and trapping wolves, 
' which cover the» country. What ‘they do, -not want.of the former ‘for 
_ Taiment and -food, ‘they :fometimes :make ‘into pemmican, or pounded 


‘meat, while’ ‘they: melt :the: fat, cand. »prepate therflinis ‘in “their hair, :for 


winter. ‘Eheswolves they:never eat, butiproduce.a tallow from their fat, 
-and:prepare :their-fkins; :all which -they:bring to exchange for arms: and 
sammunition,:rum, tobacco, knives, and ¢arious baubles,’ with th “tho 


go to traffic 1 in their country. 


, The ~Algonquins, and the ‘Kuiifteneaux,:on the eontrary, attend to -. 


_ cthe:fur-hunting, fo -that :they iacquire thé -additional .articles of cloth, 
blankets, &c. ‘but their paffion-forrum: soften -puts:itsout -of their ; power 
‘to tupply themfélves ‘with veal necellarics, 


Poa. ‘ . . . “oy 
“ , ‘ of * ‘ 3 
. . ‘ - fe ° 1 
- he... ' 
, % . ane. |, 
- . 
: Loa . 
, . 
. e 


Seg 
ay 


. “OF THE FUR TRADE, &e. _ dxv 


The next river’ of magnitude is the river Dauphiti, which empties 


vitfelf. at thé head of St. Martin’s Bay, on the Welt fide of the Lake 
: Winipic, latitude nearly 52. 15. North, taking its fource i in the fame moun- 
tains as the laft-mentioned river, as well as the Swan and Red-Deer. 
‘River; the! laiter. pafling through the lake of the fame name, as well as 


~ the: former, and both continuing. their courfe through’ the Manitoba Lake, 


: which, from “thence, runs parallel’ ‘with Lake ‘Winipic, to within nine 


miles of the Red River, and~ ‘by what is called: the river Dauphin, . 


‘difembogues its’ waters, as already defcribed, into that lake. “Thefe 
' rivers are very rapid, and interrupted by falls, &c. the bed being generally 
rocky... All this country, to. the South branch. of ‘the. Safkatchiwine, 


abounds in beaver, moofe-deer, ‘fallow. deer, elks, bears, buffalos, &c. 


The foil i is good, and wherever any attempts have -been made to raife 


the efeuleat = &c. it has been found produétive, 
On thefe waters are three principal forts for trade. Fort Dauphin, 
which was eftablifhed by the French before the conqueft. Red-Deer- 


River, and Swan-River Forts, with occafional detached pofts from thefe. 


. The inhabitants are the Knifteneaux, “trom the North of Lake Wini- 
‘pic;. and Algonquins from the country, between the Red- River and 


Lake Superior; and fome from the Rainy Lake: but.as they are not 


fixed:inhabitants, their number cannot be determined: they do not, how- 


ever, at any time exceed two hundred warriors. In,general they are’ 


: good. hunters. There is no other ‘confiderable river except the 


’. ‘Safkiatchiwine, which ‘I fhall mention prefently, that empties itlelf into 
Z the Lake Wanipic, | 


° 
- - . , 
ra an “st sy fos . ro 5 ‘ ana eo 


ate | “aT Yo. . _ - . ‘ ne 
i ge Thole - 


wo 


xii A GENERAL ‘HISTORY | 


Thofe.on the North fide, are, inconfiderable; owing to-the com parative. 
wiginity, of the high Jand: that feparates the waters coming’; this: way, 
-from:thofe difcharging into Hudfon’s: bay, ‘The courfe. of the lake.is 
‘abott: Weft-North-Weft, and: South:South- Eaft, and the Eaft.end of it 
is in 50. 37. North. ‘It contraéts at about a quarter of. its length. to..a 
Arait,.in latitude 51. 45. and is no more than two miles broad, where the. 
‘South ‘fhore:is.. gained’ through iffands,. and crolling. various.bays.to the 
.difcharge © of the Safkatchiwine, in latitude 59. 15, -‘This'‘Jake,in. common 
wwith thofe of this country, is bounded on. the: North. with. banks of :black 


a ™ 


and: grey rock,. and on the.South by.a low, level country, occafionally . | 


interrupted. witha ridge or bank of. lime-flones, dying i in ‘{tratas, and. nif- 
ing tocthe perpendicular height. of :from twerity: to. forty-feet; thefe.are 
-eovered with a -fmail- quantity of. earth,. forming a. level furface,: which 
bears timber, but ofa! ‘moderate “growth, .and:declines; to:.4; fwamp. 


‘ Where the banks are low, it is evident in many places that the waters. 


<areswithdrawn, and. never nile: to: 0 thole: heights. which. ~were ; Formerly. 


£ 


~wathed. by them. | vo! Os ut 


. 
wa : ros, 


the inhabitants -who-are found . along’ this lake, - -are of: the: Knife 


eaux ‘and- Algonquin tribes, and but few-in.number, though. game is not 


“fearce; and there is fifh -in _Bteat- abundance. ‘The black -bafs-is found 


‘there, -aiid-no further: Well; and. beyond it ‘no-staple trees: are_feen, 


-either hard or, fof, a 


: . . 
nr rn ond voter, 


. ee ws tage . “es 
" On- entering the“ Safkatchiwine, inthe -courle:of few--miles,:the 
ts the paflage. Itis‘about three miles. long. ‘Throu gh 


great rapid interr 


the greateft part of it the ganoe is towed, half or full laden, according to- \. | 
“= the ~ > 


a 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &. Axi 
the fate ‘of the waters: the canoe and its contents are‘ then ‘carried 
one thoufand one hundred paces. ‘The chantiel here: iy néat''a. mile 
wide, the waters tumbling over ridges of rocks that traverfe the river, 
The fouth bank is very high, rifing upwards of fifty feet, of the fame 
rock as feen on the South fide, of the Lake Winipic, and! the: North 
is’ not more than a third of ‘that height. There is an exceHént fturgeon- 
fihery at thé foot of this cafcade, and‘vaft'numbers of pelicans, cormo- 
rants, Ke. frequent it, where they watch to feize the ‘fifh that may Be 
killed’ of difabled by the force of the’ waters. 

s 

_ About two" miles from this Portage’ the navigation is’ again initer- _ 
rapted’ by the -Portage of thé Roché. Rouge, which’ is an hundred 
yards Tong’ and a mile and an half from thehce the: river is barred 
by’ a range of iflands, forming rapids between them’ aid’ through: thefe 
it’ is the’ fame. diffancé to the rapid of Lake Travers, which is' four ~ 
miles’ "right acrofs,, and eight milés in length. Then fuccceeds the 
Graride Déchatge, and feveral rapids, for four miles to the Cedar Lake, 
which’ is enteied through a fmall' channel: on the left, formed’ by an- 
ifland, as going” round it “would occafion lofs of time: In this: dif. 
tance banks of rocks (fucki as lave already been defcribed), appear at 
interyals on either fide; the reft of the country is low. _ This is the cafe 
| along tlie South bank of the lake and the’ iflands, while the North fide, 
which is very uricomiion, is level throughout. ‘This lake runs firft Weft 
four miles, then as miuch more Weft-South-Welt, acrofsa deep bay on the 
; right, then fix miles to the’ Point de Lievre, and acrofs another bay again 
on the right; then North-Weft eight miles, acrofs a ftill deeper bay on the 


“right; and feven miles parallel with the North coaff, North-North- Welt 
12. . |. through 


Ixviii A GENERAL HISTORY | 


through iflands, five miles more to Fort ‘Bourbon’, fituated, on a 
{mall ifland, diyiding this from Mud:Lake. 


The Cedar Lake is from four to twelve miles wide, exclufive of the 


‘bays. Its banks are covered with wood, and abound in game, and. its 


waters produce plenty of fith, particularly the flurgeon: The Mud--. 
Lake, and the neighbourhood of the Fort. Bourbon, abound with geefe, 
ducks, fwans, &c. and was formerly remarkable for a vaft number of 
martens, of which i it cannot now boaft but a very fimall proportion. 


The Mud-Lake muft have formerly been a part of the Cedar Lake, but 
the immenfe quantity of earth and fand, brought, down by the Satkatchi- 
wing; has filled up this.part of i it for a circumference whofe diameter i is at 
leaft fifteen Or twenty 1 miles: part of which {pace is. fill covered with a 
few feet of water, but the greateft proportion is fhaded with large trees, fach 
as the liard, the fwamp-afh, and the willow. ~ This land confifts, of "many 
iflands, which confequently, form various channels, feveral of which are, 
accafionally dry, and" bearing} young wood. It is, indeed, more than pro- 


' bable that this river - wil? ir in: the courfe of time, convert the whole of the 
‘ Cedar Lake into a forett. To the N orth-Weft the cedar is nat to be found. ; 


rely, 


near its fources in 1 the tocky mountains, for canoes, and ‘without a 
b 3 


carrying-place, making a -great bend to, Cumberland Houfe, an Sturgeon. 


Lake. From the confluence of i its North. and South. branchesiits courfe 


_* ‘This was alfo a principal poh of the French, who gave 'it its ‘name, a 


+ oy 
’ 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. ° | xix 


is Wefterly; {preading itfelf, it receives. “feveral tributary. ftreams, and 
encompafles a large track of country, which i is level, particularly along" 
the South, branch, .but 1s little known. Beaver, and other animals, ° 
whofe furs are valuable, are ‘amongtt the inhabitants of the North. Welt | 
branch, and the. plains-are covered with buffalos, wolves, and fmall. 
foxes; particularly about the South branch, which, however, has of late | 
claimed fome attention, as it is now underftood, that where the plaing . 
terminate towards the rocky mountain, there is a {pace ‘of hilly country | 
clothed with wood, and inhabited alfo by animals of the fur kind.. This. 
has been aétually determined to be the cafe towards the head of the . 
North branch, where the trade has been carried to about the latitude ; 
54 North, and longitude 114. Weft. The bed and banks of the Tater, 
in. fome few places, difcover a {tratum of free-ftone’; but, in general, 
they are compofed of earth and fand. The plains are {and and gravel, 
covered with. fine grafs, and mixed with a {mall quanty of vegetable earth, 
This is particularly obfervable along the North branch, -the ‘Weft fide of . 
which is covered with wood. 


There are on this; Tiver five principal fa€tories for the convenience of 
trade with the natives. Nepawi Houfe, South. branch Houle, Fort- 
George .Houfe, Fort-Auguftus Houfe, and: Upper Eftablifhment. There 
have been many others, which, from various caufes, have been changed 


for thefe, while there, are occafionally others depending on each of 


them. 


“a 


The inhabitants, from the information I could, obtain, are la fol- 


~ low: ; 
, At * 


nk ASG ENERAL “HISTORY 
‘Ri Nepavi, and ‘South-Branch Houle, about thirty tents of Khite- 
neaux, of ninety wartiors: ‘and Bxty tents’ ‘of Stone ‘Indians, or ‘AMfiniboins, ‘. 


who. are their neighbours, ‘and are "eu to two" hundred men’: their’ 
hunting, ground. extends “ipwaids: to. -abouit the e Eagle Hills. Nekt't to’ 


: cighty't tents or upwatds e ilflencaux’ on either fide of hes ‘river, their: 
num riber a lay 7 bé two hundred: Te ‘the ‘fame country até ohé htittdréd and 


eat i 
foi tents” “of Stoné-Indians ; not’ ‘quite half of” them inhabit the Welt 7 
re Sy 


woody country’s the ‘others’ never leave the plains, ‘and ‘their's umbers - 
cannot be’ lel than’ fouir ‘hundred and fifty’ men, “At the’ si bithern Héadi’ 


Tap ree, 


ee of, the North brafich ‘dwells a’ ‘tribe ‘called: Sailer’, éonifiting ‘of ; 
about’ thirty- five tents, or. one ‘ hindtéd and twenty’ men. “Oppolite’ to : 
thof e » Eaftward, on ‘the ‘head-Wwatets! of” the’ Sduth- Branch, 8te the Pitay 

nieaux, 0 the number ‘of front twelve to" fiftédn hundred ied. Next 
to ‘them, on the fame water, are ‘the ‘Blood: ‘ndidiig, ‘of the’ fade nation ag” 
the laf, to the number of about Bitty tents! orto’ hatdred” and fifty” 
men. From them downwards extend the Black Feet eTndians: OF the fame: 
nation a as the two > Haft tribes : : their number may’ be e eight hundred men. 


tae we 


branch, are ‘the F all, or P Bigbalied Tada, w who iy: anabtini to si 


é 


fix hundred warriors. 


; OF: all thefe diftctent’ tribés; thofé’ sie iBIRBIE' the’ Broker éoutitry di 
the North-Weft fide, and the fource of the North’ branch; are beaVé 
hunters; the others deal i in provifions, wolf, ‘buffalo, and fox fkins ; and 


vase 


many people'c onthe South branch do ‘not trode’ themnfaliest to bine near 
~ dh 


Spa eaears -nea - poetry ne 
s ‘ - re ee 


OF EHE FUR. TRADE, &e, 9° dat. 


Pine as 


_ dhe trading eablifhments. -Thofe who,do, choo fe fueh eftaplifhyments as 
are. next to, their country... . The: Stone- Indians ‘here, are the fame people 


as the Stone-Indians, or Affiniboins, whe inhabit, the river o of that, pame.a al. 
ready,defcribed, and both are detached tribes from the Nadawafis, who jn / 


; 
i 
/ 


habit the. Weflern fide, pf the, Miffiffippi, and lower, part ofthe Miffifoury,/ 

The. Fall, or,,Big-bellied. Indians, are from the South;Eaftward allo, god 
of a people who iphabit the, plains, from J the North bend of the laft AER 
tioned river, Jatitude 47..g2.,North, longitude, 101. 25.. Wel ,to,.the 
South bend of. the- Affiniboin River, to. the, number of {even ‘hundred 


amen. Some, of them, occafionally come, ta,the latter river to. exchange 
reffed, buffalo OPES, and, bad wolf-fkins for articles, ‘of BP, ,great - 
Tela Po , es ae 


PT . A 


- The Picaneaur, Black;Feet, and Blond-Indiains, Are, a. difind people, 

. fpeak a language of their own, and, I have reafon:to think,’ are travel- 
ling North-Weltward, as well as the others juft mentioned: nor have 

‘T heafd of any Indians with whofe language, that which’ they fpeak ! has 

any, affinity. .-They are the people who .deal. in horfés and take? them 
‘upon the war-parties towards. Mexico ; from. which, it is evident, that 

‘the. country: 0 che: South-Eaft ‘of: them, .confifts' of : plains, asthofe 

animals « cou il not well be-conduéted. through an’ billy and: woody youn 


try intefett Hed by ¥ waters. ~ mo ares crane 


_ ~The 'Sarfees, who are - but few j in number, Appear riba! their” Tar 
“guage, -to come ‘on: the contrary: ‘from: the’ North-Weltwdrd,-‘and’ are 


‘of the: fame’ people: “as: the: e- Rocky: ‘Mountain indiaiié detetibed in’ “ny 
, oo ees a Te 8 See ea ean Lob son, “ih, feeoridi 


Mei A GENERAL HISTORY © 

fécond journal, “who “are'a triBé’of the’ Chepéwyatis’; and, as"for the 
Kniffdneatix, there is‘no quéftion oF their having been, and continuing to 
be, invaders of this country; from the'Eaftward: ‘ Formerly, they ftruck 
terror into’ all ‘tHe other tribes whoiti ‘they’ met; but how they have loft 
the refpeét that’ was paid them ;" a¥: ‘thofe ‘whom they’ formerly confidered - 
as barbarians, are” riow their allies; and: ‘confequently bécome better aé-" 
quainted with them, and have acquired ' the ufe.of firearms.) The. 
fornter <a care’ {ll.-proud without power, ‘and: affea tostonfider the others 
ag théirinferiors: thofe- ‘confequently are extremely jealous of them, and, 
‘depending upon their own fupériority in numbers, will-not fubmit 
‘tainely ‘to their’ infults ; “fo ‘that ‘thé’ confequenées often prove fatal; and 
the Knifteneaux are thereby decreafing both in power and number’: 
fpirituous liquors alfo tend to their diminution, as they are inftigated 
thereby ‘to engage-in quarrels which h frequently have the mot: difaftrous 


termination among ‘themfelves.:. 6 °° M2 OLB td eek: 


” AC pee 
“nfs aay) 1 Me “yas ' wo ol ae 
be Coa ae a. , . asSee pe ee ee a ‘ 


. aa o. 
. The. ‘Stone-Indians muft not be confidered in the.fame. poist. of view. 


relpe€ting the ‘Koifteneaux, for’: they -have ‘been . generally’-.obliged, 
4rom, various’ caufes? t to-court their alliance. They, .however, : ‘are 
not -without. their, difagreements, and itis. ‘fometimes very; difficult to 
compole ;:their : differences, . Thefe. quarrels . occafionally jtake place 
with the traders, and fometimes have a tragical conclufion.. They gene- 
rally originate in confequence of ftealing women and horfes: they 
have, great numbers ¢ of the latter. throughout. their, :plains, which are” 
brought, jas. has: been _obferved, _from the + Spam Aettlements, do 


vatid 


va 
4 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &. — .~.. xxiii 


Thofe horfes are diftindly employed as beafts of burden, and to chafe 
the buffalo. The former are not confidered as being of much value, 
as they may be purchafed for a gun, which cofts no more than twentys.. 
one pounds i in Great-Britain. Many of the hunters -cannot_be pur 
chafed with ten, the gpmparative value, w which exceeds the property of 


any native. - 


- Of thefe ufeful animals no care whatever is taken, as when they are 
no longer employed, they are turned loofe winter and fummer to pro- 
“vide for themfelves. Here, it is to be obferved, that the country, in 
general, on the Weft and North fide of this great river, is broken by 
- the Jakes and rivers with {mall i intervening plains, where the foil is good, 

and the grafs grows to fome length. To thefe the male buffalos refort 
for the winter, and if it be very fevere, the females alfo are obliged to 


f 


leave the Plains. 


But to return to the route by which the progrels Welt and North i 1s 


made through this continent. 

:, . ; A 

- We leave the Safkatchiwine * by entering the river which forms the 
difcharge of the Sturgeon Lake, on whofe Eaft bank is fituated Cumber- 
land houfe, in latitude 53. 56. North, longitude 102.15. The diftance 
between the entrance of the lake and Cumberland -houfe is eftimated at 


twenty miles, It is very evident that the mud which is carried down by 


‘™ It-may be proper to obferve, that the French had two fettlements-upon the Safkatchiwine, long 
before, and at the conqueft of Canada ; the firft at the Pafquia, near Carrot River, and the other at 
Nipawi, where they had agricultural itiftruments and wheel carriages, marks of both being found 
abouf thofe cftablifhments, where the foil is excellent. 


k ae the 


Foal 


‘Ixxiv -A GENERAL ‘HISTORY | 


the Safkatchiwine River, has forméd the land that lies between it and the 
lake, for the diftance of upwards of twenty miles in the line of the river, 
which is inundated during one half of the fummer, though covered with — 
_wood. This lake forms an irregular horfe-flioe, one fide of which runs 
to the North-Weft, and bears the name of Pine-Ifland Lake, and the 
other known by the name already mentioned, runs to the Ealt of North, 
and is the largeft: its length is about twenty- feven miles, and its greatelt 
breadth aboit fix miles.’ The North fide of the latter is the fame’ kind 
of rock as that defcribed in Lake Winipic, omthe Welt fhore. Ih lati- 
tude 54. 16. North, the Sturgeon- Weir River difcharges .itfelf into this 
lake, and its bed appears to be of the fame kind of rock, and is aloft a 
continual rapid, Its direét: courle i is about Weft by North, and with its 
windings, is about thirty miles. It takes its waters into the Beaver Lake, 
the South-Weft fide of which: confifts of the fame rock lying in thin 
ftratas: the route then procéeds from ifland to ifland for- about twelve 
miles, and along the North fhore,: :for four miles more, thé whole being 
a ‘North-Weft courfe to the entrance of a river, in latitude, 54. 32, North. 
The lake, for this diftance, is about four or five miles ‘wide, and abounds 
with fifh common tothe country. The part of it upon the right of that 
which has been defcribed, appears more confiderable. -The iflands are’ 
rocky, and the lake’ itfelf furrounded by ‘rocks. The communication 
from hence to.the Bouleau Lake, alternately. narrows into rivers ‘and— 
{preads into {mall lakes. The interruptions~are, tHe Pente Portage, 
which is fucceeded_by the Grand Rapid, where there is a Décharge, 
the Carp Portage, the Bouleau Portage in latitude 54. 50. North, in- 
cluding .a diftance, together with the windings; of thirty-four ‘miles, 
ina Wellerly direftion, The Lake de Bouleau then follows, . This 


a lake 


OF THE F UR TRADE, Xe. Ixxv 


Take might with greater ‘propriety,. ‘be denominated a canal, as it 


is not. more, than a mile’in- breadth. Its courfe is rather to the 
Eaft of North for twelve miles to Portage de L’lfle. From thence 
there is ftill water to Portage d’Epinettes, except an adjoining rapid, | 
The diftance is not more than four miles Wehterly. After crofling 
this. Portage, it is not more than two miles to Lake Miron, which 


is in latitude 55.7. North. Its length is about twelve miles, and, its 


. breadth irregular, from two to ten miles. It is only feparated from 


Lake du Chitique,: or Pelican Lake, by a fhort, narrow, and fatal... 
ftrait. That lake is not more than feven miles long, and its courfe 
about, North-Weft.. The Lake des Bois then fucceeds, the paflage to ~ 
which is through fmall lakes, feparated by falls and rapids. The 
firft is a Décharge: then follow the three galets, in immediate fuc-_ 
ceffion. From hence Lake des Bois runs about twenty-one. miles. 
Its courfe is South-South-Eaft, and North-North-Weft, and is full of : 
iflands. The paflage continues through an intricate, narrow, winding, 
and fhallow channel for eight miles. ~The interruptions in this diftance — 
are frequent, but depend much on the ftate of the waters. Having 
paffed: them, it is neceffary to: crofs the’ Portage de Traite, or, as it is 


called by the Indians, Athiquifipichigan Ouinigam, or the Portage of 


the Stretched Frog-Skin, to the Miffinipi. . The waters already defcribed 
difcharge themfélves into Lake Winipic, and augment thofe of the 
river Nelfon. Thefe which we are now entering are called the Miffinipi, 
or great Churchill River. ~ { 

All the country to.the South and Eajt of this, within the line of the 
progrefs that, has been defcribed; is interfperfed by lakes, hills, and 


- yivers, and is full of animals; of the. fur-kind, as well-as the moofe-deer. 


ke Its 


lxxvi A GENERAL HISTORY | 


oe The traders from Canada fucceeded for feveral yeats in getting the 


latgeft proportion of their furs, till the year 1793, when the fervants of . 


that company thought proper to fend people amongft them, (and why 
they did not do it before is beft ‘known to themfelves), for the purpofe 
of tradg, and fecuring their credits, which the Indians were apt to forget. 


‘From the fhort diftance they had to come, and, the quantity of goods 


__ Its inhabitants are the Knifteneaux Indians, who are called by the fer-: .- 
‘vants of the Hudfon’s-Bay Company, at York, their home- guards. 


they fupplied; >the trade hay in a great’ meafure,, reverted to them, as-the . 


merchants from Canada could not meet them upon equal terms. - What 
added to the lofs of the latter, was the murder of one of their traders, 
by the Indians, about this period. Of thefe people not above eighty 
men have been known to the ‘traders from Canada, but they confift of a 
much greater number. 


os 


' The Portage de Traite, as has'been already hinted, received its name 
from Mr. Jofeph. Frobifher, who penetrated into this: part.of the country 
from Canada, as early as the years'1774 and 1775, where'he: met with 
the Indians in the fpring, on, their way to ‘Churchill, according. to 


annual cuftom, with their canoes fall of valuable furs. They traded”. 


with him for as many of them as his canoes could carry, and”in 
confequencé of this tranfaftion, the Portage’ received and has fince re- 


; 
By ak 
ye 


ue 


tained its prefent appellation. He alfo denominated thefe ‘waters the ~ 


Englifh River. The Miffinipi, is the name which it received from 


the Knifteneaiix, when they’ firft came to this country, and either_de- ‘ 


firoyed .or drove back the natives, whom they held in great-contempt, 


on many accounts, but particularly for their’ ignorance’ in- hunting: 


the 


bane 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. Ixxvii 


the ‘beaver, as well as in preparing, firetching, and drying’ the {kins of 
thofe animals. And as,a fignof their derifion, they ftretched the {kin of a 
frog, and hung it up at the Portage. This was, at that time, the utmoft 
extent of their conquelt.or warfaring-progrefs Welt, and is in latitude 
55. 25. North, and longitude 1033. Welt. The river here, which bears 
the appearance of ia lake, takes its name from the Portage, and is full of 
iflands. ‘It runs from Eaft to Weft about fixteen miles, and ‘is from 
four to five miles broad. . Then fucceed falls and cafcades which.form — 
‘ "what is called the grand rapid. From thence there is a fucceffion of 
~ {mall lakes and rivers, interrupted by rapids and falls, viz. the Portage 
de. Bareel, the Portage de L’Ifle, and thatiof the Rapid River. The 
courfe, is twenty miles from Eatt- South- Eaft to Noith- North-Welt. 
The Rapid-River Lake then runs Welt five miles, and.is of an oval ' 
form. The rapid river is the difcharge of Lake la Ronge, where 
there has been an eftablifhment for trade ‘from thé year:1782. . Since —--- 
the. {mall pox ravaged thefe parts, there have been but few inhabi- 
tants; thefe are of the Knifteneaux tribe, and do not:exceed thirty 
men, - The direét navigation continues to be through rivers and canals, 
interrupted: ‘by rapids; and the diftance to the firft Décharge-is four 
miles, in a Welterly dire€ion. Then follows Lake de la Montagne, 
which runs South-South-Weft three miles and an half,.then Nofth fix 
miles, through narrow channels, formed by iflands, and continues 
| North- North-Weft five miles, to the portage of the ‘fame name, which 
is no fooner croffed, than another appears in fight, leading to the Otter 
Lake, from whence it is nine miles Wefterly to the Otter Portage, 
in latitude 55: 39. Between this and the Portage du Diable, are 
feveral rapids, ‘and the diftance three miles and an-half, Thén fuc- 


geeds the lake of the fame name, running from South-Ealt to North- 
” Weft, 


Ixxviti A GENERAL HISTORY:.' 


Wel, five rhiles, and: Weft four miles: and‘an‘ half,’ ‘There ig then a-fuc- 
¢effion of {mall lakes, rapids, and falls, producing the Portage-des Ecors, 
Portage du Galet, and: Portage des Morts, the whole comprehending ‘a 
diftance of fix miles; to the. lake .of' the latter nanie. Oni, the left fide 
is a point covered with human bones, the relics of the fall pox; which 
circumflance gave the Portage ahd the lake this melancholy denomina- 
tion: Its courfe-is South-Weft: fifteen ‘miles; while its breadth < does not, 
exceed three miles. From thence a rapid. river leads - to~Portage de 
Rallier, which is followed. -by Lake de L’Ifle d’Ours: it is, however; im- 
properly called a lake, as it contains frequent impediments amonptt ‘its 
iflands; fom rapids. -There is a very dangerous one about the centre of 
it, which is named -the’ Rapid:-qui ne parle: point;‘or that néver {peaks, 
from its filent’ whirlpool-motion,: ‘In ‘fome of. the- whirlpools’ the 
fudtion is fo powerful, that they are: carefully avoided. ' At fome- dif- - 
tance from the filent rapid,” Is ‘a: narrow- ftrait, - where ‘the: ‘Indians 7 
have painted red figures" on the face of'a’rock, ‘and where it was their 
cuftom formerly to make an: ‘offering ‘of fome of the articles which’ they 
had with them, in their way to and from Churchill. The courfe in this 
_ lake, which is very tneandéring, may: ‘be eftimated at thirty-eight miles, 
and is terminated by the Portage‘ du Canot Tourner, from the danger to 
which thofe are fubje@ who venture to run ‘this rapid. From thence a. 
river of one mile and‘an half North-Weft courfe leads to the Portage de: 
Bouleau, and in about half a mile'to Portage. des Epingles; fo called from 
, the tharpnefs of its flores. - Then follows the Lake des Souris, the: direc 
tion acrofs which is amongft iflands, North-Weft by Welt fix ‘miles; In 
_ this traverfe is an ifland, which is remarkable for a very large fone, in 
the form of a’ bear, on which the natives have painted the: ‘head and 


fhout 


tate 
ar 


OF THE ‘FUR TRADE,. &c. Ixxix 


~ fnout of that animal; and here they alfo were formerly accuftomed to 

offer facrifices, This lake is feparated only by a narrow ftrait from the 
Lake’ du Serpent, which. runs North-North-Weft feven- miles, to @ nar- 

row channel,that conneéts it with another lake, bearing: the fame name, © 
and,running the fame courfe for eleven miles, when the. rapid of the fame 
‘denomination is entered on'the Welt fide of the lake. It is to be remarked 

here, that for about three or four miles on the North-Weft fide of this 

lake, there is am high bank of clay.and fand, clothed with cypiefs trees, 
a.circumftance which is not obfervable on any lakes hitherto mentioned, 

as they are bounded, particularly on the North, by black and grey rocks. 

It may alfo be confidered: as a moft extraordinary circum ftance, that the 
Chepewyans, go ‘North-Welt from hence to the barren ‘grounds,. which 

are’ their’ own ‘country, without the affiftance of ‘canoes; as it is well 
known that in every other part which has been défcribéd, from Cumber- 4. 
Jand Houfe, the country is broken on either fide of the dire@ion to a , 
great extent: fo that a-traveller-could not, go at right angles with any . 
of the waters already mentioned, without meeting with others in every 

, eight or ten’ miles. . ‘This will alfo be'found to be very much the cafe 

in proceeding to > Rortage JaLoch,e - -: . ~~ 


= The'laft mentioned rapid is upwards of three miles long, North- Weft 
by Welt; there is, however, no carrying, as the line and poles are fufli- 
cient to drag'and fet the canoe:againft the current. Lake Croche is 
then ,croffed in a Welterly direétion of fix miles; though ‘its whole length 
~ may be, twice that diftance; after which | ‘it ‘contraéts to: a river that 


‘runs Welterly for ten miles, when it forms a bend, which ‘is left to the 
: South 


\ 


Jens - A GENERAL HISTORY ° 


South, and entering a portion of i its waters called the Grafs River, whofe 
‘meandering courfe is about fix miles, but in a direét line not more than 
half that length, where it receives its waters from the great river, which then 
runs Welterly eleven miles before it forms the Knee Lake, whofe direction 
is to the North of Weft. It is full of iflands for eighteen miles, and its - 
greateft apparent breadth is not more than five miles. The portage of 
the fame name is feveral hundred yards long, and over large ftones. Its 
latitude. is 55. ‘fo. and longitude 106: 36. Two miles further North is . 
the commencement of the Croche Rapid, which is a fucceffion of caf- 
cades for about threé miles, making a bend due South to the Lake 
du Primeau, whofe. courfe is various, and through iflands, to the dif- 
tance of about fifteen miles. “The, banks of this lake are low, ftony, 
_ and marfhy, whole’grafs and rufhes, afford fhelter and ‘food to great 
numbers.of wild fowl. At its Weftern extremity is' Portage la Puife, 
from whence the river takes a meandering courle, widening and con; 
_traéting at intervals, ‘and is much interrupted by rapids. After a 
Wefterly courfe of twenty miles, it reaches Portage Pellet. From 
hence, in the courfe of feven miles, are three rapids, to which fucceeds 
the Shagoina Lake, which may be eighteen miles in circumference. 

‘Then Shagoina ftrait.and: rapid lead into the Lake of Ifle a la Croifé, in 
which the courfe is,South twenty miles, and South-South-Weft fourteen . 
milés, to the Point au Sable; oppofite to which is the difcharge of the 
Beaver-River, bearing South fix miles: the lake in the diftance run, does 
not exceed twelve miles in’ its greatelt breadth. It now tums Welt- 
South-Welt, the ifle a la ‘Croifé being onthe South, and the main land . 
on the: North; and ‘it iclears the. one. and. the other ‘in, the “diltance 
of three miles, the water prefenting an open horizon to right and 
left: that on the left formed by a deep: narrow bay, about ten leagues 
in 


wa 
ft 


and longitude 107. 48. Weft. 


game of the crofs, which ft 
natives. A 


OF THE-FUR TRADE, & 9 Txxxi 


indepth; and that to the right by what is called la Riviere Creufe, 
or Deep River, being a canal of ftill: water,-which is here four miles 
wide. On following the laft courfe, Ile ala Croffe Fort appears on a 
low ifthmus, at the diftance of five miles, and is in latitude 55. 25. North, 


e 
+ ‘ R ‘ - , a ‘ : _ ° 
This lake and fort take their names from the ifland.juft mentioned, 
which, as Fras been already fihas 8 received it denomination from the 
rms a principal amufement among the 


The fituation of this [ the abundance of the fineft fith i in the 


4 “world to be found in its ‘waters, the richnefs of its furrounding banks and 


forefts,-in moofe and fallow deer, with the vaft numbers of the {maller' 
tribes of animals, whofe {kins are precious, and the numerous flocks of. 
wild fowl that frequent it in she {pring and fall, make it a moft defir- 


\ 


able {pot for the conftant refidence of fome, and the occafional rendez- - 


vous of others of the inhabitants of the country, particularly of the 
‘Kniftenaux, ~ 


we 
¥ 


_.Who.the original people were that were‘driven from it, when con- 


~ guered ‘by.the Knifteneaux is not now known, as’ not a fingle veftige re- 


mains.af them. The latter, and the Chepewyans, are the only people that 
have been known here; and it is evident that the laft-mentioned confider 
thenfelves as. ‘ftrangers, and feldom remain longer than three or four years, 
without vifiting their relations and” friends i in- the barren grounds, which 


they tenm their native country. They were for: fometime treated by 
. } a . the 


Ixxxii A GENERAL HISTORY 


the Kniftencaux as enemies; who now allow them. to hunt’ to ‘the 
North: of the track which has been defcribed, from Fort du Traite up- 
wards, but when they occafionally. meet them, they infift on contribu: 
tions, and frequently punifh refiftance with their arms. This is fometimes 
done at the forts, or places of trade, but then it appears to be a voluntary 
gift. A treat of rum is expe€ted’on the occafion, which the Chepewyans 
on no other account ever purchafe; and thofe only who have had fre- 
quent intercourfe with the Knifteneaux have any inclination to drink - 
aC. 


When the Europeans firft penetrated into this country, in 1777, the 

- people of both tribes were numerous, but. the {mall pox was fatal to them 
all, fo’ that there does not exift of the oneyat prefént, more than forty re- 
fident families; and the other has been from about thirty to two hur 
"died families. “Thefe numbers are applicable to the conftant and lefs ambix 

} tious inhabitants, who are fatisfied’ with the quiet poffeffion of a country 
“affording, without rifk or much trouble, every thing neceffary to heir 
comfort; for fince traders have fpread themfelves over it, if isno nok the 
rendezvous of the errant Knifteneaux, part of whom fed annually tore 
turn thither from the country of the Beaver River, whicki ‘they had ex- 
plored to its fource in their war and hunting excurfions and as far as the 


J 


Safkatchiwine, where they fometimes met people of their-own nation, whe ~ 
had profecuted fimilar conquefls up that‘river. In that country they 
found abundance of fifh and mney Aue as have been already defcribed, 
. with the addition of the buffalos, who. range in the partial patches re) 
meadow {cattered along the rivers and lakes. - From. thence’ they Te- 
turned in the pring to the'friends whom they had left; and, at the’fame: 
time: 


/ OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. Ixxxiti 
time met with others who ‘had penetrated, ‘with the fame defigns, into the 
Athabafca ¢ountry, which will be defcribed hereafter, 


The {pring was the period of this joyful meeting, when their time was 
occupie in feafting, dancing, and other paftimes, which were occa- 
Fonat fapended for facrifice, and religious folemnity: while the nar- 
ratives of their travels, and. the hiftory of their wars, amufed and animated: 
the feftival. The time of rejoicing was but fhort, and was foon inter- 
rupted by the neceffary preparations for their annual journey to Churchill, 
to exchange their furs for fuch European articles as were now become 
neceflary to them. The fhortnefs of the feafons, and the great length 
of their way requiring the utmoft difpatch, the moft a€tive men of the 
tribe, with their youngeft women, and a few of their children undertook 
the voyage, under the dire&tion of fome of their chiefs, following the © 
waters already defcribed, to their difcharge at Churchill Fa@tory, which 
are called, as has already been obferved, the Miffinipi, or Great Waters. 
There they remained no longer. than was fufficient to barter their 
commodities, with a-fupernumerary, and a day or two to gratify them- 
felves with the indulgence of {pirituous liquors. At the fame time the 
inconfiderable quantity, they could purchafe to carry away with them, 
for a regale with their friends, was held facred, and referved to heighten 
the enjoyment of ‘their return home, when the amufements, feftivity, 
and religious folemnities of. the fpring were repeated. The ufual time 
appropriated to thefe convivialities being completed, they feparated, to 
purfue their different objeéts; and if they were determined to go to war, 
they made the neceflary arrangements for their future operations. 


le. - But 


Ixxxiv ' A GENERAL HISTORY 


But we mult now renew the progrefs of the route. It is not more 
than two miles from Ifle a la Croffe Fort, to a point of land which 
forms a cheek of that part of the lake called the Riviere Creufe, whick 
pteferves the breadth. already mentioned for upwards of twenty miles; 

. then contraéts to about: two, for the diftance of ten miles more, when it. 
_~pens to Lake Clear, which is very wide;and commands an open horizon, 
keeping the Weft fhore for fix miles. The-whole of the diftance men- 
‘tioned is about North-Weft, when, by a narrow, crooked channel, turn- 
ing to the South of Weft, the entry is made into Lake du Boeuf, which is 
contraéted near the middle, by a projecting fandy point; independent of 
which it mayi be defcribed as from fix to twelve miles in breadth, thirty- 
fix miles long, and in a North-Weft diref&tion.. At the North-Weft 
' end, in latitude 56. 8. it receives the waters of the river la Loche, which, 
jn the fall of, the year,-is very fhallow, and navigated with difficulty 
even by halfladen canoes. Its water is not fufficient to form flrong 
rapids, though from its rocky bottom the canoes are frequently ‘in’ con- 
fiderable danger. Including its meanders, the courfe of this river may 

‘be computed at twenty-four miles, and receives its firft waters from the 
Jake of the fame name; which is about twerity miles long, and fix wide; 
“4nto which a fmall river ‘flows, fufficient to bear loaded canoes, '. for 
about a mile and an half, where the navigation ceafes; and the canoes, 
with their lading, are cartied over the Portage la Loche for ‘thirteen, 
smiles. . mo, re 


This portage is the ridge that divides the waters which difcharge them- 
-felves into. Hudfon’s Bay, from thofe that flow into. the Northern ocean, 
and is in the latitude 56, 20. and longitude 109, 15. Weft. It runs.South, 

| ; : | Welt 


pene 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. Ixxxv 


Weft until it lofes its local height between the Safkatchiwine and Elk ' 
Rivers; clofe on the bank of the former, in latitude 53- 36. North, and 
longitude 119. 45. Weft, it may be traced in an Eafterly dire€tion toward 
latitude 8. 12. North, and longitude 1033. Welt, when it appears to 
take its courfe due North, and may probably reach the Frozen Seas. 


From. Lake le Souris, the banks of the rivers and Jakes difplay a 
fmaller portion of folid rock. The land is low and ftony, intermixed 
with a light, fandy foil, and clothed with wood. That of the Beaver — 
River is of a more produétive quality: but no part of it has ever been 
cultivated by the natives or. Europeans, except a fmall garden at the 
He a la-Crofle, which well repaid the labour beftowed upon it. 


- The Portage Ia Loche is of a level furface, in fome parts abounding 
with flones, but in general it is an entire fand, and covered: with. the 
eyprels, the pine, the fpruce fir, and: other trees natural to its foil, With- 
in three miles of the North-Welt termination, there is a {mall round 
Fake, whofe diameter does not exceed 2B mile, and-which affords a trif- 
fing elphe to the labour of carrying, Within a mile of the termina- 
- appears to be equally impraBticablé i in any way, as- ip coRRATO! ‘of i a facet. 
fion ofteight hills, fome of which are almoft perpendicular; neverthelefs, 
the Canadians contrive to. furmount all thefe-difficulties, even with their 
_ eanoes and lading, 


This precipice, which nifes. upwards of a'thoufand feet above the plain 


beneath i it;: commands a.moft extenfive, romantic, ‘and ravifhing profpeéct. 
F rom 


Ixxxvi "A GENERAL’ HISTORY 


From thence the eye looks down on the courfe of the little river, by fome 
_ called the Swan river, and by others, the Clear-Water and Pelican river, 

beautifully meandering for upwards. of thirty miles. The valley, which’ 

is at once refrefhed and adorned by it, is about three miles in breadth f nd is 
confined. by two lofty ridges of equal height, difplaying a moft delightful: 
intermixture of wood and lawn, and ftretching on till the blue mift obfcures 
the profpe@. Some parts of the inclining heights are covered with ftately 
forefts, relieved by promontories of the fineft verdure, where the elk and 
buffalo’ find pafture. Thefe are. contrafted by {pots where fire has de= - 

firoyed the woods, and left a dreary void behind it.. Nor, when I beheld. — 
this wonderful difplay of uncultivated nature, was the moving {cenery of 
human occupation wanting to complete the piéture. From this elevated. 
fituation, I beheld my people, diminifhed, as it were, to half their fize, 
employed in pitching their tents in a ‘charming meadow, and among the 
canoes, which,. being turned upon their. fides, prefented their. reddened 
bottoms in contraft with the furrounding-verdure. »-At-the fame. time, 
the procefs of gumming them produced numerous {mall-{pires of fmoke, 
which, as they rofe, enlivened the {cene, and at length blended with the 
Jarger columns-that afcended from the fires, where the {uppers were pre: 


paring. It was in the-month of September. when I enjoyed.a fcene, of | 


which Ido not prefume to give an adequate defcription ;_ and as it; was 
the’ rutting feafon of ‘tlie elk, the whiftling of that animal was. heard 
in all the variety which the echoes could, afford: it. oy hanes dy 


Dat ee ee ben 

This river, which waters and refle@ts fuch enchanting feenery, runs, 
including. its windings, upwards of eighty miles, -when it rdifcharges 
itfelf in the Elk River, according to. the denomination of the:natives; but 


common! y 


QF THE FUR TRADE, &c. — Ixxxvii 


commonly called by the white people, the Athabafca River, in latitude 
56. 42. North. 


- At-a fmall-diftance from Portage'la Loche, feveral carrying-places in- 
terrupt the navigation of the river ; about the middle of which are fome 
mineral {pringsswhofe, margins are covered. with fulphureous incrufta- 
tions., At the junétion or fork, the Elk River.is about three quarters of 
a mile in breadth, and runs in a fteady current, fometimes contraéting, 
but never increafing its channel, till, after receiving feveral {mall ftreams, 


it difcharges itfelf into'‘the Lake of the Hills, in latitude 58. 36. North. ' 


At -about twenty-four miles-from-the Fork, ‘are fome bitumenous foun- 
tains, into which a pole of twenty feet long may be inferted: without the 


leaft refiftance. . The bitumen is in a fluid ftate, and. when mixed with , 


gum, or the.xrefinous fubftance.collected from ‘the fpruce fir, ferves- to 
gum the canoes. In its heated flate it emits a {mell like that of fea-coal. 


The banks of the river, which are there very elevated, difcover véins of ~ 


. the fame bitumenous quality. At a {mall diftance from. the Fork, houfes 
_ have been ereéted for the convenience of trading with a party of the 
Knileneaux, who vib the adgacent country for the  urpofe of hunting. 


. At the - diane of about’ forty miles from the « lake, is the: Old Efe 
blifhment, which: has’ been already mentioned, -as forined.by Mr. Pond 
in the year 1778-9, and which’ was the only one in this part of the world, 
till the year 1785... In.the year. 1788, it was transferred to. the Lake of 
the Hills, and formed on a point ‘on ‘its Southern fide, at about eight 
miles from the difcharge of the river. “It was named Fort Chepewyan, 


vand.is in: latitude 58 98.- North,: v Tongitude: 110% 26, Weft, and much 
PE OP Lads fe better 


Ixxxviii A GENERAL HISTORY 


better fituated for trade and flhing, as as the people. here have recourle to 
water for their fupport. 
- - tC 
This being the place which’ I mate:my head-quarters for eight, years, 
and from whence I took my.depatture, on both’ my expeditions, I fhall 
give fome account of it, with. the manner of carrying on the trade there, 
and other circumftances connieéted with it. 


- The laden, canoes which leave Lake la ‘Pluie about the firft of Auguft, 
do not arrive here till the latter end of September, or the beginning of 
" O&ober, when a neceflary proportion of themi‘is dif [patched up the Peace 
River to trade with the Beaver and: Rocky-Moustain, Indians. Others 
are fent to the Slave River and Lake, or beyond’ them, and traffic with 
the inhabitants of that country. A fmall part of them, if not left at the 
Fork of the Elk River, ' return thither for the Knifteneaux, while the 


ref of the people and merchandife remain ‘here to carry: On trade with 
the  Chepewyans, 


Here have I arrived with sainety - “or an. hundred men without any 
_ provifion for their fuftenance ; for whatever quantity might haye been 
obtained from the natives duting the fummer; dt: could . not be more 
than fafficient for the people difpatched + to. their different: polis; and 
even if there were a cafual fuperfluity,. it was abfolutely neceflary to 
preferve it untouched, for the demands of the. fpring, The whole de- ° 
pendance, therefore, of thofe ‘who remained, was.on the lake, and ‘fifhing 
implements for the means of our fapport, ‘The nets are fixty fathom ~ 
im length, when fet, and contain fifteen ‘mefhes of five inches in-depth. 
The manner of ufing them is as follows: A {mall ftone and wooden 


, 
fons 


_buoy 


a 


( 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &«. Ixxxix 


buoy are faftened to the fide-line oppofite to each other, at about the dif 
tance. of two fathoms: when the net is carefully thrown into the water, 
the flone finks it to the bottom, while the buoy keeps it at its full ex- 
tent, and it is fecured in its fituation by a ftone at either end. The 
nets arevifited every day, and taken out évery other day to be cleaned 


and dried. This’ is.a very ready operation when the waters are not. 


frozen, but when the froft has fet in, and the ice has acquired its greateft 
thicknefs, which. is fometimes | as much as five feet, holes are cut in it at 
the diftance of thirty feet from each other, to the full length of the net ; 

one of them is larger than the reft, being generally about four feet {quare, 
and is calléd the bafon: by means of them, and poles of a propor- 
tionable lerigth, the nets are. placed in and drawh out of the water. 
The fetting of hooks and lines is fo fimple an employment as to render 
a'defetiption unneceflary. The white fifh Are. the principal obje&@ of 


purfuit:: they fpawn in’ the fall of the year, and, at about the fetting ’ 


in- of the hard froft,.crowd in fhoals to the {hallow water, when as 
many as poffible are taken, in order that a portion of them may be laid by 
in the froft to provide againft the {carcity of winter; as, during that feafon, 
the fith of every defcription decreafe in the lakes, if they do not altogether 
difappear. "Some have fappofed that during this period they are ftation- 
ary, or affume: an ina€tive flate, If there fhould be any intervals of 
warm weather’ during | the fall, it is s neceflary to fufpend -the fifh by the 
tail, ‘though they are not fo good as thofe which are altogether preferved 
by the froft. In'this ftate they remain to the beginning of. April, when 
they have. heen: found as. {weet as when they were caught.’ * 


. * This fifhery requires the moft unremitting attention, “as the voyaging Canadians are equally i in- 
dolent, extravagant, “and improvident, when ‘left to themfelves, and rival the favages in a negiett of 


the morrow, . . 5 
; : m ” _ Thus 


na 


A GENERAL HISTORY 


XC 
Thus do thefe voyagers live, year after year, entirely upon fifh, with- 
out even the qiickening flavour of falt, or the variety of any farinaceous 
root or vegetable. Salt, however, if their habits had not réndered it 
unneceffary, might be obtained i in this country to the Weftward of the 
Peace River, where it lofes its name in that of the ‘Slave River, from the 
numerous falt-ponds and fprings to be found there, which will fupply in 
any quantity, ina fate of concretion, and perfectly white and clean, 
When the Indians pals that way they bring a {mall quantity to the ° fort, 
with other articles of traffic. oo 

During a fhoit period “of ‘the {pring and fall, great numbers of wild. 
fowl frequent this country, which ptove'a very gratifying food after fuch 
a long privation of flefh-meat. It'is remarkable, however, that the Ca< 
nadians who frequent the Peace, Safkatchiwine, and Affiniboin rivers, 
and live altogether on venifon, have a lefs healthy appearance than thofe 
whofe fuftenance’ is obtamed from the-waters.’ At the fame time the 


{curvy is wholly unknown among them. 


" In the fall of the year the natives meet the traders at the forts, where 
they barter the furs or provificns which they may have procured : they 
then obtain credit, and proceed to- hunt the beavers; and donot return 
till the beginning-of the year ; ‘when’ they ‘are again fitted’out in the 
fame manner and come back the latter end of March, or the beginning 


of April. They are now unwilling to. repair to the beaver hunt until the - 


waters are clear of i ice, that they may kill‘them with ‘fire-arms, which. 
“the Chepewyans are, averfe to employ. - The | major part of the latter 
‘return to the parten -grounds, and live during the fummer with, theiz 

° relations 


yo 
‘ 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. KCI 


relations and friends in the enjoyment of that plenty which is derived 
from numerous herds of deer. But thofe of that tribe who are moft 
partial to thefe defarts, cannot remain there in winter, and they are 
obliged, with the deer, to take thelter in the woods during that rigorous 
feafon, when they contrive to kill a few beavers, and fend them by young 


men, to exchange for iron utenfils and ammunition. 


. Till the year 1782, the people of Athabafca fent or carried their furs 

regularly to Fort Churchill, Hudfon’s Bay ; and fome of them have; fince 
that time, repaired thither, notwithftanding they could have provided 
theméelves with all the neceflaries which they required. The, difference 
of ‘the price fet .on goods here and at that factory, made it an object 
with the Chepewyans, to undertake a journey.of five or fix months, in 
the courfe of which they were reduced‘to the moft painful extremities, 
and:often loft their ‘ives from ‘bunger and fatigue. At prefent, however, 
this traffic is in“a great meafure difcontinued, as they were obliged 
to expend in the courfe of their.j journey, that very ammunition which 


was its moft alluring object. 


t,t 
Some Acomns oe the Knisteneaux Indians, 


“THESE people are fpread over a vaft extent of country. Their 


| _ Tanguage } is the fame as that ‘of the people svko inhabit, the coaft of 
m 2 Britifh 


xi A GENERAL HISTORY 

Britith America on the ‘Atlantic, with the exception of the Efqui~ 
maux*, and continues along the Coaft of Labrador, and the gulph and 
banks of St. Laurence to Montreal. - The: line then follows the Utawas 
river to its fource and continues from thence neary Welt along t the 
Hudlon’s Bay. It then proceeds till it Arikes the | iddle part of the 
river Winipic, following that water through the Lake Winipic, to the 
difcharge of the Safkatchiwine into it; from thence it accompanies 
the’ latter to Fort George, when the line, -ftriking by the head of 
the Beaver River to she Elk:-River, runs along its banks to its dif. 
.< charge in the Lake of the Hills; from which it, may be carried 
back Eaft, to ‘thie, Ifle 4-la Croffe; and’ fo on to. Churchill by the 
Miffinipi. The whole ‘of the ‘tra&t between ‘this line and Hudfon’s . 
Bay and Straits, (except that. of the Efquimaux in the Jatter),; may 
be faid to be exclufively the country of the Knifteneaux.’ So ne... of 
them, indeed, have penetrated further “Weft and South to” thé Red 
River, to the’ South of Lake Winipic, and the South branch “of the 
Safkatchiwine, 

They are of a moderate flature, well proportioned, and’ of great 
aftivity, Examples of deformity are feldom to be feen among them.. 
_ Their complexion is of a copper colour, and their hair ,black, which: 

" is common. to all the natives of North America, ‘It/is cut in -vari~ 
ous forms, according to the fancy of the feveral tribe, and by fome is. 


| / 
* The finilarity between their language, and that of the Algonquins, i is an unequivocal :proof 
that they are the fame, people, Specimens of their refpedtive tongues will- be hereafter. given, 
hee lef 


! 


a . 


: Teft. in: the. Tong, lank, flow: of nature. ‘They. very ‘generally extrac - 
their beards, and both {exes manifelt a difpofition to’ pluck, the hair from 


e ery ‘part of ‘the body. and» limbs. ‘Their eyes. are ‘black; keen, and — a 


; pehetrating 5 ‘their. countenance open and agreeable, and it is a: principal 


aa objet ‘of their vanity to give every: poffible. decoration to their perfons, - | 
7 A imaterial_ article'in: their: toilettes . iS ‘vermilion, which they: contraft 7 on 


with their native blue, white, and brown, 1 earths, to. which charcoal. is 


- Frequently added. 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &. | xeith 


oo i bn ws : : 


‘Their drefs 3 is at once ‘fimple aad commedions. Tt conlifts of “eight, 7 - a : . 


4 egg, reaching. near: the. hip:.a ftrip of cloth’ or leather, called” 


~~ affian, about | a. foot wide, and. five. feet long, whole. ends. are. - drawn, a 
inwards and hang ‘behind and before, ’ ‘over a belt tied. round the oe 


a wailt. for. that purpofe : a. “clofe: vell or fhirt reaching down to” the: - - é 


: former garment, and’ cin@ured with-a broad ftrip. of par chment faften ed’ 
| with thongs behind; and a. cap. for the head, -confifting of a: Piece. of 


- fur, or fmall. kin, with: the broth of the animal as a ‘fafpended | orna-_ 7 oe 
S ment : a ‘kind. of tobe ‘is: thrown. ‘occafionally over the ‘whole of. the ee 


deel and ferves both: night and. day. Thefe’ articles, with: the: ade. 
dition, of thoes and’ mittens, -conftitute the. variety “of: their. apparel. 
woeThe materials vary. according to the feafon, sand: confit of dreffed 


: “mnoofe-fkin, beaver” prepared with’ the. fur,” ‘OF. Enropeaai ‘woollens. oe 


“The: Jeather is. neatly. painted, and: fancifully worked i in: fome: parts with | 


porcupine quills, and moofe: deer hair: the thirts and leggins are alfo : - : 


‘adorned. with fringe and. taffels nor are the. thoes: and mittens with-', 7 


“out, fomewhat. of: appropriate decoration, and” worked. with. a..con=. 
: i fiderable degree 0 of fil and taftes : Thefe habiliments are put on, how- 


every, Po la 


xciv A GENERAL HISTORY 
t 


; ever, as fancy or convenience fuggelts; and they will fometimes 
." proceed to the chafe in the fevereft froft, covered only with the flightell 
of them, Their head-drefles are cémpofed of the feathers of the {wan, 
the eagle, and other birds. The teeth, horns, and claws .of different 
animals, are alfo the occafional ornaménts of the head and neck. 

“Their hair, however arranged, is always befmeared with greale’ “The 

" making of-every article of drefs is a female occupation; and the women, 

“though by no means inattentive to the decoration of their own per- "” 
fons, appear to have a {till greater degree of pride in attending to the 
appearance of the men, whofe faces are painted with more care than 
thofe of the women. | 

The female drefs is formed of the fame materials as thofe of the other “ 
fex, but of a different make and arrangement. Their fhoes.are commonly 
plain, and their. leggins. gartered ‘beneath-the knee. The coat, ar body 
" covering, falls down to the middle. of the leg, and is faftened over the 

! Shoulders with cords, a flap or.cape turning down about eight inches; 
both before and behind, and agreeably ornamented with quill-work and 

ftinge; the bottom is alfo fringed, and ‘fancifully painted as high as 

"the knee. As it is very loofe, it is enclofed round the waift with a fiff 
-belt, decorated with taffels, and faftened behind. The arms.are covered 
to. the wrift, with detached fleeves, which(are fewed .as far as the bend 

.of the arm; from thence they are drawn up to the neck, and the cor- 
ners of them fall down behind, as low as the waift... ‘The cap, when 


they wear one, confifts of a certain quantity of ' ‘eather or éloth, fewed 


at one end, by which means it is kept on the héad, and, hanging down 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. xc” 


the back, is faftened to.the belt, as well as under the chin.’, The 
upper garment is a:robe like that worn by the men. Their hair is die 
vided on the crown, and tied behind, or fometimes faftened in large knots 
over the“ears, They are fond of European articles, and prefer: ‘them 
to their own native commodities, Their ornaments confit in cdmmon 
with all favages, in bracelets, rings, and fimilar baubles. Some/ of the 
“women tatoo three perpen icular lines, which: are fometimes; ‘double : 
one from the centre of the chin to that of the under lip, and one parallel 


on either fide tothe corner of the mouth. 


{ 


“Of all the nations which ¥ have feen on this continent, the Knifte- 
neaux: women are the moft comely. Their figure is Benerally well pro-——__ : 
portioned, and the regularity of their features would be acknowledged “ 

“by the more civilized people of Europe. Their complexion haslefs of * 
that dark tinge which is common to thofe favages who have lef cleanly 


habits. : ' ; ‘ . > 


Thefe people are, in general, fubjett.to few diforders. “The tues 
venerea, however, is a common complaint, but cured by the applica- 
tion of fimples,’with whofe virtues they appear to be well acquaint- 
ed. They are alfo- abject to fluxes, and pains in the breaft, which - 
fome have attributed-to the very cold and keen air which they inhale; - ‘ 
_ but I fhould imagine that thefe complaints mult frequently Proceed i 
from their immoderate indulgence in fat meat at their feafts, particularly 
a wher they have been preceded by long fafling. | 


a 


. They are naturally mild and affable, as well as juft in their deal- ~ 


doayy 
es 
on 
Yer, 
Ayay 
fas 
ry 


2 
< * 


uve” 


xevi . A GENERAL HISTORY 


ings, not only among themfelves, but with’ ftrangers*. . They are alfo 
generous and hofpitable, and good-natured in the extremie, ‘except when 
their nature is perverted by the inflammatory influence: of {pirituous 
~'Hquors, To ‘their children they are indulgent to a fault, . The father, 
though he affumes no command ‘over them, is: ever anxious, to in- 
firuét them in all the preparatory qualifications for ‘war and hunt- 


ing; while the mother is equally. attentive to her daughters — in 


teaching them every thing that:is confidered as neceflary to their 
charaéter ‘and fituation.: It does not appear that the hufband makes 
any diftinftion between the children of his wife, though.they may be 
the offspring of different fathers, Illegitimacy ‘is only attached to thofe 
who are born before their mothers have cohabited with any n man by the 
title of hufband. . 

- It does not appear, that chafliy i is confidered by. them as a virtue ; 
“or that fidelity is believed to be effential to the happinefs of wedded 
life. Though it fometimes happens that the infidelity of a wife is. 
punithed by the hufband with the lofs of her hair, nofe, and perhaps. 
life; fuch feverity proceeds from its having been pratifed without his’ 
permiffion : for a temporary interchange of wives is not “uncommon ; " 
and the offer of their perfons i is confidered as a necellary part of the 
hofpitality due to flrangers. 


_ When z a man: lofes his wile, it is confidered :2 as a. duty. to rnarty her 


peer 5 cect mentee eat meena at Go 


- ot 
hes 


* They have been called thieves, but ‘when that vice can with jiattice 1 be attributed to them, 


it pd be traced to their connection with the civilized people who Come into their country to 
tratiic. 


é 


Ger, 


j 
{ 
/ 


Lo | OF THE FUR TRADE, Sec ‘xevii 


fifter,. if the has one por, he may,if he pleas, have them both at the 


, 
ne f. . 
if . ae . : : ’ 


fame time, re is 
el go . of ' ' 
wea th Stes Nt bp pe Pos mah OS 


Tt wil appéar fromthe fatal confequences I have repeatedly imputed 
to the’. ufé of. {pirituous liquors, ‘that T! more particularly confider 
thele people as having been,‘morally {peaking, great fufferers from 

_ theircommunication with’ thé fubjeéts ‘of civilized’ nations,’- At the 
fame ‘time’ they: were :not, in-a ftate of nature, without their vices, 
and''fome’ of them of''a kind which ji is the moft abhorrent to.cul- 
tivated'and refleéting man, I thall only obferve that inceft and id beftiality 
are among them. a : 


: . 
“1 ae . t a . 
oe the ot ot 


"When" a young: man marries, he immediately goes to, live with the 
father and mother of his wife, who treat him, neverthelefs, as a perfeét 
firanger, till after the birth of his firft child:. he then attaches himfelf 
more: to them, than his own parents ; and his wife no ‘longer gives him . 
any other denomination than that of the father of her child. ... 

|, The profellion: of the men ‘is war and hunting, and the ‘more ac- 
tive. fcene ‘of. their duty, is’ the field of battle, and the chafe, in the 
woods. They alfo {pear fifh, ‘but ' the ‘management of ‘the nets is_ 
left ° to ‘the. women. - The: females of ‘this nation are in-the fame’ 
fubordinate | ftate with ‘thofe of: call. ‘ other’ favage’ tribes; but the 
feverity, ; -of ‘their - labour. is much “diminithed. by their fituation on 
_ _the!_banks- ‘of -lakes -and., rivers, “where they employ canoes, . In 
__.+_-théavinter, -when~ the--waters -are frozen, they, make their journies, 


which - are. never oF any. Brea, Jength, with Hedges drawn by dogs. 
n : They 


Lat 


x¢yiii A GENERAL HISTORY 

They are, at the fame time fubjest ta every kind oF domeftic drudgery : 
they drefs the leather, make the clothes and fhoes, weave the nets, collegt 
wood, ereét the tents, fetch water, and perform every culinary fervice; fo 
that when the duties of maternal care are added, it vill appear that 
the life of thefe women is an uninterrupted Tucceffion of toil and. pain, 


Henk 


This, indeed, is the fenfe they entertain, of theix. own fityation; and, ~ 


under. the influence of that fentiment, they: are fometimes- known ta 
deftroy their female childyen, to faye them from, the miferies' which they 


°O., themfelves have fuffered, They alfo have a ready way, by the ule of 


certain fimples, of procuring abortions; which they, fometimes, praGtife, 
from their hatred of the-father, or to fave themfelves the. trouble, which, 
children occafion: and, as I have been credibly informed, this unna- 


tural aét is repeated. without any injury to: ‘the health:o of the women — 


| who perpetrate it. 


“The funeral rites begin, like alt other folemti ceremonial; with finok- 


ing, and are concluded by a feaft. “Fhe body is dreffed-in: the beft habili- 
ments poflefled by the deceafed, or his relations, and is then depofited " 
in a grave, lined with. branches: fome. domeftic utenfils’ are placed ‘on 


it, anda kind of canopy ‘ereéled over it, During’ this ceremony, great’ 
Jamentations are made, and if the departed: perfon. is very much regretted 
the near relations cut off their hair, pierce the fiefhy- part of their. thighs: 
and arms with arrows, Xnives, &c..and- blacken-theii faces with’ charcoal: 


oe 


If they have diftinguithed themfelves in war, they are formetimes laid:ona: - 


kind of {caffolding ; . and I have been: ‘informed- ‘that ‘women, as in the’ 
Eaft, have been known to’ facrifice themfelves to ‘the manes of their’ 


‘hufbands, The whole of the Property belonging. to the, departed perfon 
is 


OF THE FUR TRADE, Bo. XCix | 


is deftroyed, and thie relations take in exchange. for the wearing apparel, 

any rags that will cover their nakednefs. "The -feaft beftowed on the 
occafion, which is, of at leaft ufed to be, Fepeated afinually, is accompa: 
nied with éulogiums on the deceafed, and without any ats of ferocity, 
On thé tomb are carved or painted the fymbols of his. tribe, which are 
taken from the different animals of the country. | 


ft 
H t 


Many and vations aré the motives which induce a‘ favage to engage 
in war. To. prove his courage, or to revenge the death of his rela- 
tioris, or fome of his tribe, by the maflacre of anenemy. If the tribe 
feel themfelves called upori to go to war, the elders convene the people, 
in-ordef to know the general opinion. If it be for war, the chief pub- 
liflies his intentioti to fmoke in the facred ftem at a certain period, to 
Which-folemnity, meditation and fafting are required as preparatory ce- 
“remonials. 'When the people are thus aflembled, andthe meeting fanc- 
tified by the cuftom’ of frnoking; the chief. enlarges: on the caufes which 
have called theni together, and the neceffity-of the meafures propofed 
on the occafion: He then irivites thofe who ‘are willing. to -fol- 
low him,-to faioke out-of the facred flem, which is confidered as- the 
token of enrolment; and if it fhould be the general opinion, that 
afliftance is‘ necéffary, others. are invited, with great: formality, to join 
them. Every individual. who attends thefe meetings. brings fomething 
with him as a token of his warlike intention, or as an objeét of facrilice, 
whieh, when, the affembly dilfolves, is fufpended from poles near the 


; place of conineil.. : 


a 


- fy 7 4 — , + 
_ They! hair frequent fealls, and ‘particular: citcumfances never fail to 


n2 produce ; 


c A GENERAL HISTORY |:.: 
produce them; fuch as a tedious illnels,’ long: fating, Bt. ‘On: thefe 
occafions it is ufual for the perfon who:means to give the entertainment; 
to announce his defign, on a certain: day; of opening the thediciné m8 
and {moking out of his facred ftem. This declaration is confidered as | 
facred vow that cannot be broken, ‘There are allo Rated periods; fach 
as the {pring and autumn, when they engage in. very long! and. folemn 
ceremonies. On thefe occafions dogs are offered as facrifices, and thofe 
which are very fat, and milk-white, are preferred. They alfo:miake. large 
offerings of their property, whatever’ it 'may- “be. «THE! ‘{eéne’ of thefe' ce: 
_ yemonies is in an open inclofure on the’ bank of .a -river: or ‘lake; and. in | 
the moft confpicuous fituation, in order that fach as are pafling-along’ or 
travelling, may be induced to make their offerings.” "There‘is alfo-a-par- 
ticular cuftom among them, ‘that, on thefe occafions; if ‘any--of thé tribe, 
or even a ftranger, fhould be pafling -by, ‘and ‘be’ in‘real want of - any 
thing that is difplayed as an offering, he has‘a right tor take it, fo that 
he replaces it with fome article he can fpare, though it be-of far inferior . 
value: but to take or touch any thing wantonly is confidered.as.a facri- 
legious at, and highly infulting to the ‘great’ Mafter of. Life; to ufe 
their own expreflion, who is the facred objett oer devotion. 

The fcene of private facrifice is thé lodge of the perfon who performs 
it, which i is prepared: for that purpofe by removing every thing: out oF-it, 
and fpreading green branches in every part. “The: fire“and- athes 
- are alfo taken away. A new hearth is made of frefh earth, and another 
fire is lighted. The owner of the dwelling remains alone'in it; and-he 
begins the ceremony by fpreading a piece of new cloth, or a well-dreffed, 
moofe-fkin neatly painted, on which he opens ‘his: ‘medicine bag and 


_expofes 
a . 


woot . 
lag won 
vee AAS cent we : . - 
ee : - ve 
1 ' £ . ‘ ry 
‘ , gtk att v . 
. . ta 7 
« . . “4 


OF THE-EUR.FRADE,; &c, Gi 


expoles - its contents, ¢onfifting: of:.vatious articles.,.:The ‘principal of 
them is: a kind of, houfehold: god, which is a fmall-carved. image-about 


eight. inches long. ‘Its firlt. covering: is ‘of down, over which a: piece. of - 


beech bark is clofelystied, sand ‘the whole: ds:eriveloped:i in fevera]: folds of 
red:and blue‘cloth. This little.ifigureisian: objeét: of: the,moft pious res 
gard... ‘The next article is: his war-eap, which is decorated. with. the fea- 
thers and plumes.of-{carce birds, beavers, arid eagle's claws, &c. :; There 
is -alfo.fufpended froin it.a quill’ or featherifornevery enemy, whom. the 


- qwner,of it-has flain.in battle: ...The remaining. contents of the. bag are, 


a. piece. of Brazil tobacco; i feveral Toots and, fimples, ‘which .are-in great 
eftimation for.theiz medicinal: qualities; abd a pipe. Thefe articles being 
all expofed, and the ftem :refting: uponitwo forks; as‘it muft not ‘touch 


_ the ground, the. mafter.of.the lodge fends, for the perfon: he, moft-efteems; 


who fits down.:oppofite: to; -him:;; the pipe; is then filled .and.fixed.to..the 
ftem. A pair of wooden pincers is provided to put the fire in the pipe, and 
a double-pointed pin, to empty it of the remnant of tobacco, which is not 


“€onfumed. '.. This arrangement: being-made, the men affemble, and fome- 


times the women:are allowed tobe humble: {pe€tators, while the moft re- 
ligious awe and folemnity..pervades:ithe:!whole. «The. Michiniwais;.,or 
Affiftant, takes up the pipe, lights it,and prefents it to the officiating 
perfon, who receives it:ftanding and:holds it between bath his hands. . He 
then turns. himfelf to the Eaft; and draws a few -whiffs; which he-blows to 
that point. The fame-teremony he-obferves:to the other three quarters, 


with this eyes. direéted : upwards: during the «whole :of--it.:, He:holds ‘the _ 


ftem. about the middle: between:the: three; firlt-fingers of both. hands, and 
raifing them upon a line with his forehead, he -fwings it, three times 


‘round from the Eait, with the fun, when, after pointing and balancing it 
1 OO in 


0 


te" 


ci _ . -A GENERAL HISTORY: * 
in various dire€tions, he repofes it on the forks ;- he then. makes a {peech 

to explain the ‘defign'of their being called together, which concludes 
with an, acknowledgment of paft mercies, and a prayer. for the continu- 
ance of them, from the Mafter of Life. “He then fits down, and the whole’ 
company declare their approbation and thanks by uttering the word ho / 
with an emphatic prolongation of the laft letter. The Michiniwais then 
takes up the pipe- and holds: it to the mouth of the officiating perfon, 

who, after {moking three whiffs out of it, utters a fhort prayer, and then 
goes round with it, taking his courfe’from Eaft to Welt, to every perfor 
prefent, who. individually fays fomething to him on the‘occafion: and: 
thus the pipe is generally fmoked. out; when, after turning. it three or 
four times round his head, he drops’ it, downwards,. and replaces it. in 
its. original fituation.: i\He then. returns: the company thanks for their 
attendance, ‘and: withes them, as well as the’ whole tribe, health and long 
Uife. ee ee 


Thefe fmoking rites precede every: matter of great importance, with - 
. more or lefs ceremony, but always. with-equal folemnity. The utility of 
them will. ay om the fc llowin elation: ! 

If a chief is.anxious to: ‘know the aifpoftion of. his people towards him, 
or if. he wifhes to’ fettle any. difference: between them,’ he announces his’ 
“intention of opening: his: medicine-bag and: fmoking:i ur his facred ftem; 
and no:man who.entertains.a gradge againftany: of ‘the party thus dffem- 
bled can:fmoke with. the facred: fem ; as that ceremony eiBpates: all: sit 


ferences, and ij is never violated: , Foo Poti a hee 


"OF THE; FUR TRADE, be cli 


No) one’ can n avoid attending on thele occafions; but a perfon may 
attend and be excufed from aflifting at the ceremonies, by acknowledg- 
ing that he has not undergone the neceflary purification. (The. having 
cohabited with, his wife, or,any other woman, within “eae hours 
| preceding. the ‘ceremony, renders him unclean, and, confequently, dif- 
qualifies him from performing any, part of it. . Ifa contraét. is entered 
into and folemnifed by the ceremony. of fmoking, it never fails of being - 
faithfully fulfilled. . Ifa perfon, previous to his going a journey, leaves 
the facred flem asa pledge of his, return, na, confideration whatever. will 


prevent him from, executing his engagementi#” ng 


pieces of wood. tokens:of inyitation to.fuch as he withes to- partake of 
it, At the appoi ted time ‘the guefts.. arrive, each bringing a difh or 
platter, and a: knife, ; and take their feats on each fide of the chief, who-re- 
ceives them fitting, according to their refpettive ages. The: pipe is then 
lighted, and he makes an equal divifion of every thing that, is, pro- 
vided, _ While the campany are enjoying their meal, the chief fings, 
and aceompanies his fong .with the. iambourin, or , thifhiquoi, oF 
rattle, The gueft who has. firft eaten his portion: is confidered_ as 
the moft, ‘Giftinguithed perfon, if. there fhould be any who cannot 
finith, the. whole: of their mefs, they ¢ endeavour to prevail. on fome. of 
their friends to eat it for them, who.are, rewarded for their afifiance 
* with ammunition and tobacco. It is proper alfo to remark, that at 


7 Tei is However be lamented, that of late there i isa a relaxation ori duties soigially attached 


to thele-feftivals.:, wl Te Tp Cerra Doe 
“ . ae oO thefe 


Pes ~ , , 
to Baek we - 74 FL ” . oo ae re ar) 
; . . . a4 


ae 


‘civ ‘A GENERAL HISTORY"! 
" ‘thefe feafts a fmall quantity of méat' or:'drink is facrificéd, before’ they 
‘begin to gat by throwing it it into the: fire, oron theeatth, = 9 5" 


, . ’ ry 

ey > aa ‘ Boyt 
bee ~ Poa ’ ‘ ’ . ¢ L Bebop \ 
‘ : 1 


. . * 4 : 
€ n . f : 


» Thee feafts differ accordiig to ‘circumstances 5 “fometimes eal mian’s 
allowance is ‘no mbré than he can ‘dilpatch i ina couplé of' hours.” ‘At 
other times ‘the quaitity is fufficient to fupply éach, of them’ with’ food 
for a week, ‘though it muft be devoured in’a day. On thefe’ ‘octafioiis 
it is very’ difficult” to’ procure fabftitutes, and the ‘whole mutt be’ eaten 
whatever time it’ may: require. ‘At fome’ of thefe’-entertainméint? “there 
is a more rational arrangement, when the guefts’ are“‘allowed to carry 
home with them the fuperfluous part of their, Portions. Great care is 
always. taken that the Bones: may ‘be burned, ‘as ‘it F would ‘be confidered | 
a ‘profanation w were the dogs Be fermitted to’ touch’ thei. Said 


tyne 
va ee ae adhe 


7 


The public feats are cdidutted i in ‘the fami’ maniiét, but ‘wich fome 
4dditional ceremony. “Several chiefs officiate at them, aind | Procure the 
neceflary ptovifions, as “well as’ ‘prepare’. -a proper ‘place, of reception 
for the_ _numerous” company: ’ “Here the guefts, difeourle ‘apon public 
topics, repeat the’ herbic‘deeds of their forefathers, and‘ excite the’ rifing 
“generation té follow their ekainple, The'é elitettainment$ on ‘thefe occa- 
fions confit of. ‘dried’ ‘meats, as “it would” nist ‘be’ pradicable to ‘drefi a 
fufficient’ quantity ‘of frefh meat’ for’ rfc a large alleys though the 
women and: children are excluded.” hat fo 


'y ieee 
ree way ae 


“rh 


ow a ° o ate 


in + ' vor 
op fee tsb dc ee nae : 
“Le a Wl Pe bs ted 
> . ‘ 


SIS, Pray 


ae. dead; but they have been, for fome. time, growing into: to-difiifes and 


I never had an opportunity of being. prefent at any of them, 
‘ . The 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. 


cv: 


The women, who are forbidden to enter the places facred to thefe 


feftivals, dance and fing around them, and fometimes beat ‘time to the 


mytfic within them ; which forms an agreeable contraft. 


| ‘With refpeft to their divifions of time, they compute the length of 


their journies by the number of nights pafled in performing them; and 


they divide the’ year by. the fucceffion of moons. 


In this calculation, 


however, they are. not altogether corrett, as they cannot account for the 


odd A days. 


feafons, > 


May = - 
June - -. 


Ko 


Augaft = Aupahon ° Pithim - 


September V 
O@ober - 


N oveniber 


ave d 


December’ « 


January ~. “Kufhapawafticanum o Pifhim 
1 ¥ "1 ‘ . ; ~ 


_ jays = 


\ 
Atheiky fe) Pithim - 
Oppint o Pifhim § = 


Aupatoeno fe) Pithim a 


Wafkifeon o Pilhim - 


Witac 0 Pitkin ee 
‘Thithigon Péwai o Pifhim 
- Kufkatinayoui.o Pifhim -: | 


Pawatchicananafis 0 Pifhim 


Oo 


we 


- 
a 


‘The names es which they give to the moons are deferiptive of the feveral 


Frog-Moon. 
The-Moon in which birds 


" “begin to lay their eggs. . 
‘The Moon. when-birds caft 


their feathers, a 


The Moon when the young. 


birds begin to fly, -- 
The Moon when the moofe- 
deer caft their horns; - 


~The ‘Rutting-Moon..: | 


Hoar-Froft-Moon. 
Ice-Moon. 


. Whirlwind- Moon. 
Extreme cold Moon.. 


F bray 


. forma confiderable part ‘of the European traffic with them. 


cvi A GENERAL HISTORY 


February - Kicht Pithim - +. = Big Moon; fome fay, Old 


Moon, 
March - Mickyfue Pifhim - -« Eagle Moon. ! L 
April - Nifcaw o Pifhim: - . Goole-Moon, ~~ 


. Thefe people. know the medicinal virtues of many herbs and fimples, 
and apply the roots of plant and the bark of trees with-ficcels, But 
the conjurers, who-monopglize the medical {cience, ‘find it neceffary ; 
to blend myftéry with their art, and do not communicate their know- 


ledge. Their materia medica they adminifter in the form of | purges - 
‘and clyfters;.but the remedies and furgical operations are fappofed to 


derive much of their effect from. magic and incantation, When a blifter 
rifes in the foot from the froft, the chaffing of the fhoe, &c, they im- 


mediately open’ it, and apply the heated blade of a ‘knife. to. the part, 


which, painful as it may be, is found to ‘be’ efficacious. _A tharp. flint 


. ferves them as a lancet’for letting blood, as well as for fearification ‘in 


bruifes and fwellings. For {prains, the dung of an animal jul killed -is. 
confidered as the beft remedy. They are very fond of European medi-’ 
cines, though they are ignorant of their application: and thofe articles 


”, 


Among their various fuperftitions, they believe that the vapour ¢ which 
is feen to hover over. smoilt and fwampy places, is the fpirit of fome perfon 
lately dead. They alfo fancy another fpirit which appears, in the fhape, 
of a man, upon the trees: near the lodge of a perfon déceafed, whole pro- . 
perty has not been: interred with: them. : He‘is vreprefented: as bearing a. 
gun in his hand, and i it isbelieved that he does: not return to his reft, till the 


_ Property that, has been withheld from: the grave has been factificed to it, 


eo, Co , Examples ; 


ze 


“4 
\ 


‘OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. evi 
. Examples of the Kniftencaux and - Algonquin Tongueds- 


Knifteneaux, : Algonquin: 


. Sah so 8 | & 
_Good Spirit = ~Ki jai Manitou ~ Ki jai.Manitou, « 


Evil Spirit - Matchi manitou . - Matchi‘manitdu...~ 
Man ~ . « Ethini . | ---* js —w—Jnini.. nn 
Woman --  -  Efquois’ Se - Ich-quois. zm 
Male’ _- ‘= Naphew - Aquoifi, ~~ 
Female’ - - Non-genfe’ - - Non-genfe 
Infant - _ «=, A’ wath ith - - Abinont-chen. ~~~ {% 
Head. - -.  Ustiquoin - - QOchiti-goine. 
Forehead . ~ | - Escaa tick - - Ocatick. 
Hair = Wes ty-k - - Wineffis. 
Eyes = -. Es kis oc - -  Ofkingick. 
Nofe | - ‘= Ofkiwin _ - - O'chengewane. 
‘Noftrls +. ° - Ootithee gomow ~- Ni-de-ni-guom. 
- ~Mouth --= - %. Otoune « + + O tonne. ° 

‘My:teeth,  ~« -.~ Wip pit tah ~ us. Nibit. 

' Tongue .-  -.~ Otaithani - - O-tai-na-ni. 
Beard - | -. Michitoune . - - Omichitonn. 
Brain - . + Withitip - ~ .Aba-e winikan. 
Ears . - . + Otow ee gie - O-ta wagane. 
Neck - . + Ogquiow - - O’quoi gan. 

- Throat» - O koot tas gy ~ - Nigon dagane. 
‘Arms, . - ~ Onifk ~ #« Onic. . 
Fingers “+ ° ~ Che.chee ~ - Ni nid gines, 

Nails | -- + \Wos kos fia - - Os-kenge.- 
Side ~ - .O's ipig. gy - - Opikegan. 
My back - ~~ Nopisquan- - - Ni-pi quoini, 
My belly -- - - Nattay - - Ni my fat. 
Thighs - +» Opovam - -- | - .Obouame-”- : 
My ‘knees’ - Noche quoinnah. ..- Ni gui tick. 
Legs.- -. | + Nofk - - Ni gatte.- . 
Heart- =. -« Othea © - . ~ Qthai. 
My father - Noatawie’ - ~~ Noffai. — 
My mother .- - Nigah wei - .- Nigah. 
My boy (fon) .: '- .Negoufis .. -- - Nigouiflés 

) Netanis - - Nidanils. 


My girl (daughte 


"My uncle - 


‘evil 


My brother, elder’ - 
My fifter, elder 

My grandfather _ 
My grandmother 


My nephew 

My niece - 
My mother in law 
My brother in4aw 
My companion - 
My hufband 
Blood - 
Old Man - 
J am angry 

I fear - 

Joy ot . 
Hearing: - 
Track -" 


- Chief, great ruler’ - 
| Thief - 


Buffalo - 
Ferret - 


‘Polecat . ~ 
Elk 


Rein deer 
Fallow deer ~~ 
Beaver -.- 
Woolverine 


. Squirrel 


Minx - 
‘Otter - 


Hare - 


Excrement | ~ 


‘Ne mils - 


‘'Noka mils — - 


Mouftouche - 

Sigous ~ 

‘Shicak - 
Mouftouche . 


. Attick — - 
_ Attick ~ oC 
-Amik 2. 

= Quiquakatch = 4 


. Saquafue - - 


- Mayegan i. 
.Wapouce,—- 


Kniftencaux, 


Ni fiefs - 


Ne moo fhum_ +" 
N’ o kum - 


Ne too fim’ -' 
Ne too fim efquots 
Nifigoufe = 
Niftah. *: . 


_Ne wechi wagan | 


Ni nap pem . 
Mith oe - 
Shinap - a 
Ne kis fi wafh en” 
Ne goostow « =." 
Ne hea tha tom 
Pethom os 
Mis conna - 


~“Haukimah = 


Kifmouthefk ~. 
Meyee—— © 


Ennequachas 


Nekick — 


Wappiftan = «. 
Moulwah' x 
Mafqua. _ 
Wiak = - _ 


-% 


en er ee ee ee | 


en ee ee | 


A GENERAL HISTORY 


Algongjuin. 
Nis-a-yen. 
Nimifain. © 

_Ni-mi-chomils. 
No-co-mifs. _ 
Ni ni michomen. «— 
Ne do jim. 
Ni-do-jim equois. - 
‘Ni figoutfifs. 
Nitah, 
Ni-wit-chi-wagan. 
Ni na bem. » a 
Mifquoci, ie 
. Aki win fe, ee 


. Nif katiffiwine. ~ > °.” 


Nifeft gufe: 3 
‘\Mamoud gikifii =~ 

Oda wagane 

Pemi ka wois. :. 


. Kitchi onodis. 
: Ke moutifké, 


Moui. 
Pichike, - 

. Shingoufs.-. . 
Shi-kak, 
Michai wot. 


. Atick. 


” Wa: wafquefh. ; 


Amic. | - oo 
Quin quoagki, 
-Otchi ta mou.: ee 
-Shaugouch,: = 
Niguick.- .  ¢ 
-Maygan. 
Wapouce.- _» 
‘Wabichinfe. 

_Monfe 


: Macqua. oe a 7 
Od-jilck, - 


ee ey 


| 
| 


Lynx. 
Porcupine 
Fox 
Mufk Rat 
Moule 


~ 


hoa 


4 


Cow Buffalo 


- Meat-flefh 


Crow, Corbeau ° 


Swan 
Turkey 
Pheafants 
Bird 
Outard - 


7” 


~ 


we 


a 
pea 


ay 


~ 
~ 
~ 
- 
om 
- 
- 
- 
- 
~ 
~- 
~ 
- 
a 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. ix 


Knifleneaux, 


Picheu 

Cau quah - 
Ma kifew - 
“Wayalk 
Abicufhifs 


Nofhi Mouftouche — 


Wias 
Atim . - 
Makufue 
Sy Sip | 


~~ 


‘wt 


on r 


',.Ca Cawkeu.- - 


Wapifeu 


- Mes fei thew 


-Okes kew 


ie ‘Pethefew. 


— . 


White Goole. 
-- Grey Goofe . 


Partridge 


‘Water Hen 


_. Dove — 
Eg 


Carp - 


Pike or Jack 


a. 


~ Sturgeon -: + 


ad 


[| 


ee ee ee | 


Nifcag an 


Wey Wois 


ow 


 Peftafifh_.: - . - 


-- Pithew 


Chiquibifh- 


Omi" Mee 


‘Wa Wah 


-Kenonge ;* « 


Na may bin, 4 


“Na May 


aha 


Ie, 
" 


White F ifh a ie ~ Atieaming ee - 
Pikrel”. + © = Oc-chaw ~ -° 
Fith (in general)’--~ Kenongé.- = 
Spawn --  « . Waquon - 
Fins - - Chichikan’ - 
Trout - ‘ Nay goufe ~ 
Craw Fifh - - A thag gee - 
Fro _ - Athic - 
Walp ~— - Ah moo - 
Turtle ~ - Mikinack - 
Snake ~ = Kinibick - 
Awl. mov om Ofeajick ° + 


pete ee ued ae Fo et ek bk a eg 


hag fi oe hb t pe te gy tb yp gy eet 


Algonquin. 


Pechou. 

Kack. 

Wagouche. 
Wa-jack. 

Wai wa be gou noge. 
Nochena pichik, 
Wi-als: 

Ani-moufe. 
Me-guiflis. 


‘Shrfip. 
‘' KaKak: - 


Wa-pe-fy. 
Miffiflay. - 
Ajack. 


_Pi-na-fy.- 


Nie kack. 

Woi wois; 

Pos-ta kik. ? 
Pen ainfe. - 

Che qui bis. — 

O -mi-mis. 


Wa Weni. 


_ Kenongé. 
Na me bine.. 
Na Maiu. | 
‘Aticaming. . 


Oh-ga. 


. Ki-cons. - 
a quock. 


O nidj-igan. 
Na Men Goule. - 


O ma ka ki. 
A mon. 


‘Atha kens chacque. 


_Mi-ki-nack. 
‘Ki nai bick. 


Ma-gole. — 
- . Needle 


Legge + 


Cx 


Needle | -° 
Fire Steel =~ 
Firewood + 
Cradle - 
Daggen- 
Arrow - -« 


Fifh Hook 
Ax - 


Ear-bob - 
Comb - 
Net -. 
“Tree - 
Wood -. 
Paddle . . 
Canoe - 
Birch Rind 
Bark - 
Touch Wood 
Leaf =: 
Grafs - 
Rafpberries 
Strawberries. 


_ Athes - - 


Currant -. 


Road - 
Winter - 
Ifland - 
Lake. - 
Sun “ae 
Moon - 


' Da Lm, 
Night L 


Snow _.. 
rk ae 
ey 


to 


fay 


sr fF © @ #@ a 8 8 ee 


7 bop a be © g © 6 #8 


A GENERAL 


Knifteneaux. 


Saboinigan__ 
Appet. 


Nepethah .. 
Mafquofi .. 


Counah 


a 


. Mifqui-meinac~ * 
O’-tai-e minac. - 


V, 


teaeereese 


' 


-§ tlt 


a 


HISTORY 


Algonquin. 


_ Sha-bo nigan. 
_ Scoutecgan. 
_ Miffane. 


Tickina-gan. 


Na-ba-ke-gou-man. 


of, e 
_ Metti¢'ka nouins. 


Maneton Migquifcane. 


Wagagvette. 


Na be chi be foun. 


Pin ack wan. 
Affap. 
Miti-coum. 
Mitic. 
About. 


_ S-chiman. .- 


. Wig nafs. 
~ On-na-guege. 


Sa-ga-tagan. 


“N ibiche, 


. Mafquofi. | 
: Mifqui meinac. 
«O’-tai-e minac, 


Pecouch - + / Pengaqui. 
Scou tay = -' Scou tay... °° 
Shomenac - ‘= Shomenac. 
. Pakifhihow - - | = A Winni. 
Aluski \ - - A Shifk. 
 Kifijiwin - ‘= Ki fi chi woin. 
', Mefcanah . ~ ? Mickanan. 
| Pipoun ~ ‘ Pipone. 
 Miniftick - ~ Mainifs. ; 
Sagayigan - - Sagayigan. ~~ 
Pifm 8 ~- Kips. 8 ~ 
Tibifca pefim (the night i rg - | 
_Sun. =: ~ , Dibic kijifs. 
Kigigah. . = :7.= Kigi gatte, 
Tibifea’ ; .- <.. ---Dibickawte, 
os ~. So qui po. 


Rain 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. “oxi 


Knifteneaux. © _ Algonquin, . 
Rain ~ += Kimiwoin- - - Kimi woini. 
Drift © - - Pewane — - -- Pi-woine. 
Hail ~ 2° Sheseagan~ = - ~ Me qua menfan. 
Ice -> °.'= Mefquammg ~- - Mequam. .° 
Froft -  . Aquatn. —" « ~ Gas-ga-tin, ~ 
Mitt en Picafyow- - - An-quo-et. 
Water - . Nepec. - + 7 Ni-pei. 
World, - ~ ’Meffeafky (allthe earth) Miffi achki, 
Mountain ~ “Wachee. - ~ Watchive. 
Sea - . Kitchikitchi ga ming.- Kitchi-kitchi ga ming. 
Morning - -- Kequifhepe — - ~ Ki-ki-jep. 
Mid-day - ~ Abetah quifheik: - Na ock quoi. 
Portage, - © - + Unygam - - Ouni-gam. 
Spring - +. Menoufcaming - Mino ka ming. 
River ‘ - Sipee - - Sipi. 
Rapid -. ., Bawaftick  - - Bawetick. 
Rivulet - . - Sepeefis - - Sipi wes chin. 
_ Sand - -. Thocaw ~ '~ Ne gawe.° 
' Earth 4) 6 Afkee _ - Ach ki. 
' Star -~ > .- Attack - ' =~ Anang. 
Thunder ~ = Pithufew-  - - Nim ki. 
Wind - °.4 Thoutin-- - - No tine 
Calm-« = «= ~ Athawoftin - . A-no-a-tine, 
Heat —~ - =, Quithipoi - - Aboycé. 
Evening -  -, Ta kathiké - ~ O’n-a-guche. 
North - - Kywoitin- - ~ Ke woitinak. 
South - -~ Sawenawoon  - . ~ Sha-wa-na-wang. 
Fatt - - ~°- Cofaweaftak_” - . -: War-ba-no-notine. 
Wet - Paquifimow, - - Panguis-chi-mo... 
To-morrow -. Wabank ~ - Wa-bang. 
Bone ~ - Ofkann - - ,.Oc-kann. 
Broth -'  *= 'Michim waboi. - Thaboub. 
Featt - - Maquafeg” - - Wicon qui wine, 
Greafe or oil . Pimis ~ - Pimictais. 
Marrow. fat =~: Ofcan pimis—- - - QOfka-pimitais. 
Sinew ~ = Alstis— _ - Artis. 
Lodge .- * ~ Wig-waum - -~ Wreti-wam. 
Bed: -  , ~ Ne pa win - - Ne pai wine. a 
. ' Within 


i 


CXil 


Within - 
Door - 

Difh - 

Fort « - 


_ Sledge - 


te 
wa 


gly 
_ . Handfome 
Beautiful = - 


Cinfture: + 


Cap - 
Socks - 
Shirt - 
Coat - - 
Blanket - 
Cloth ~~ 
Thread -- 
Garters - 
Mittens - 
Shoes __.- 
Smoking bag 
Portage fling. 


ane 


Straiton -— 


Medicine - 
Red - 
Blue - 
White - 
Yellow. - 
Green ~ - 


‘Brown - 


Grey, &e. 


Deaf  < - 
Good-natured 


Pregnant: ~- 


Fat - 
Big -: 
Small or little 


Shor t “. 


i 


A GENERAL HISTORY 


Kniftencaux. 


\ 
Pendog ké 4 
Squandam 
Othagan - 
Wafgaigar- . 
Tabanafk 
Poquoatehoun~ 
Aftotin - 
Afhican - 
Papackeweyan— 


Papife-co-wagan 
Wape weyang— **z,, + 
Maneto weguin - | * 


\ 


Catawallifeu 


Kiffi Sawenogan 


Nima petonr | 
Mithiwafhin~ 
Paawie— — - 
Outhineu 
Muthikitee 


\Abifafheu_ 


Chemafifh - | 


— 


"Mache na goufeu 7 


4 


woe teen @ bas 


Algonquin. | 
Pendig. 


‘Scouandam. 


O' na gann. 


_Wa-kuigan. .. 
Otabanac. 
‘Ketche pifou. 
” Pe matinang. 
.Achi-gan. . 


Papakiweyan, | 
Papile-co-wagan. 


*: Wape weyan. 


Maneto weguin. 


Affabab -_ - Affabab. .. - 
Chi ki-bifoon ~- Nigafke-tafe befoun. 
_ Aftiffack . - Medjicawine. 
Mafkifin os ~ ‘Makifin. 

_ Kufquepetagarr - Kafquepetagan. 
Apilan 8 - - Apican. 3 
Goi'afk - - Goi-ack. 
Mas kikee~ . +. = Macki-ki. | 
Mes coh~ _ ~- . = Mes-cowa. 

- Kafqutch (fameasblack)_ O-jawes-cowa, — 
“Wabifca— = -.° =~ +~Wabifca. 

Saw waw—  - — . ~. O-jawa. 

‘Chibatiquarey - - O'jawes-cowa. 


O'jawes-cowa. 
O'jawes-cowa. 
Mous-counu-goufe, 


:. Nam biffa. - oo 
Quoi Natch, +’ 
Ka ki be chai. 


Onichifhin. 


-Andjioko.. 
Ouil-ni-noe. aie 


Mefsha. ot 
Agu-chin, . 
Tackofi, - 
Skin 


Thirteen ©: 


. Fourteen ' 
Fifteen 
Sixteen 

"Seve teen 


, 


Eighteen 


"Nineteen --- 


nwt 
met 
ay See 


m= - 


fe * - 


‘ 
ane me 


ee ee ee ee SS 2 A | 


e 


OF THE.FUR TRADE, &c. 


. Knifteneaux, 
_ Wian— - 
| Kinwaim + 
““Malcawa~ - 


Sagatahaw - 

Nitha miflew~ - 

Mahta waw- 

. Nima Guflaw-- 
/Ofguineguifh = - 
Kiffin - 
Kichatai =~ 
Minoufcaming _ 
Nibin__ - 

. Tagowagonk 

- Peyac - 
‘Nifheu’ -. 

’ Nifhtou - 

‘Neway ~ 
-Ni-annan . - - 
. Negoutawoefic 
‘Nifh woific = - 

~Jannanew = 
“Shack = - 
Mitatat - 

: Peyac ofap - 


.Nifheu of - 


. .Nichtou ofap 


:Neway ofap.- 
-‘Niannan ofa 


Nigoutawoelic ofap . 
* Nith woelic ofap - 


» Jannanew-olap ‘- 


‘Shack’ofap =: 


ye. p - 


tee torr fp ) eee 8 ee tet Bg ky 


' 


cxiil 
Algonquin, 
Wian. 


Kiniwa, 
Mache-cawa. 
Mascawife. =, 
Cha-goutai-ye. 
Cha-goufi. 

Ka wa ca-tofa. 
Son qui taigé. ~' 
Ofkinigui. 
Kiffinan. 

Kicha tai. 
Minokaming. 
Nibiqui. 
Tagowag. 
Pecheik, 

Nige. | 


‘ Nis-wois. 


Ne-au. 


"Na-nan. 


Ni gouta waswols, . 
Nigi-was-wois. 
She was wois. 


‘Shang was wois, 


Mit-affwois, 


‘Mitaffwois, hachi,’ pe- 


cheik, 


' Mitaffwois, hachi, nige. 


Mitaffwois, hachi, . nif- 
" ‘WOIs. a . . 
Mitaffwois, hachi, ne-au. 


- “‘Mitaffwols, hachi,nanan. 


Mitaflwois, hachi, ne- 
-goutawafwois, 


Mitaffwois,- hachi, nigi 


. wafwois; 
Mitaffwois, ‘hachi, fhi- 


* wafwois- . 


Mitaffwois, hachi, fhah 
as woOls, ; ; 
Twenty 


an 


cxiv 


Twenty ~ 
Twenty-one 


Tw ty-two, &c. 


Thiny  - 
Forty --- - 
Fift ‘a 
Sixty  -- 
Seventy ~ 7 
Eight mG 
Nin ms - 


Hunidred - 
Two Hundred. 


One houfand. 


de! 


A GENERAL HISTORY 


Kuifleneaux. 


-: Nifheu mitenah 


See 


1 


* 


ene vaes 


Fir... - - 7% 
Lat me TY 
More .: -". 
Better 2. ~ 2.: 
Beft .. - 


J;orme | = 
You, or thou 


a {hey, or them . 


My, or mine 
Yours -.  |~ 


, Who {a --, 
. Whom fo rv 
_ What moe 


His, ‘or her's 


-) "2. Nican 
» Squayatch 


‘Some, or fome few 


' The fame oe 


All the world: 
All the men, . 


- 


os 


_ 


, 


ofa 


Nifheu mitenah nifhew 


ofa 


Nifhtou mitenah 
“‘Neway mitenah ; 


Niannan.mitenah , 


t 


—~, = Nifhew mitenah peyae,, 


lL 


’ 
- 
‘ 


- 


' Nifwois mitanan. 
‘+ Neau mitanan. ~ 
Nanan mitanan. “.. | 


- 


‘ 


Negoutawoific mitenah 


Nifhwoific mitenah 7 


Jannaeu mitenah 
’ Shack mitenah 
‘Mitana mitinah 


_Nefhew mitena a inite+ 


* nah 


-. Mitenah mitena mite- 


7 
2 


nah 


-Minah 


* 


Athiwack mithawathin. 
. Athiwack mithawafhin - 


-: Nitha 
‘Kitha 


Nithawaw- 


Nitayan ~~~ 4, 


| Bitayan 


" Awoing 


Otayan , 
..Kakithau. 


Pey' peyac 


. Withawaw 


- . 


> 
- 
‘s = 


Tabefcoutch 


Mifli acki wanque | 
- Kakithaw Ethi nyock 


Ss a 


Algonquin. 


N igeta-nan. 


Nigeta nan, hachi, pe- 
chic. 


“Nigouta was .wOis mi- 
‘ taman. - 

- -Nigi was wois mitanan. 
‘She-was wois mitanan. 


- Shang was wois mitanan. 


, Ningoutwack, 
“Nige wack. 


Kitchi-wack. 


_ Nitam. ° 


-- Shaquoiyanque. - 


- Awa chi min. 


_Awachimino nichi then, 
‘Kitchi 0 nichi Thine i 
7 Nin - . 

- Kin. ; Y 
Win na wa.. 


«| Nina wa.- 
: Nida yam. 
~ Kitayam. *, 


“Avon. © ok. es 
- “Kegoi 1 
“Wa. ete 
Otayim mis.. - 
* Kakenan.: 

Pe-pichic: 
Mi ta yoche; ~ 
Mithiwai afky. 
Miffi Inini wock, ° 

More: 


More - 
Now and then 
Sometimes 
Seldom - 
Arrive = 
Beat ~ 
Toburn- - = 
To fing - 
Tocut - ° 
To hide - 
To cover 

To believe 
Toflleep =" 
To difpute 

To dance 

To ive ~- 
To do ~- 
To eat - 
To die - 
To forget 

To {peak | 
To cry (tears) 
To laugh o 
To fet down 
To walk - 
To fall - 
To work 
—Tokil- - 
To fell _ 
To live - 
To fee ~ 
Tocome , - 
Enough ~ + 
Ciy (tears) 
Tthails = 
Thereis “°°. 
-There is fome --. 


ar ee 


es oe 


Mina - 


' J as-cow-puco 


OF THE FUR “TRADE, &c. 


Knifteneaux. 


' Ta couchin “ 
- Otamaha - 


Miftafcafoo © 
Nagamoun 

' Kifquifhan 
Catann ~ - 
Acquahoun~ - 


Taboitam - 


Nepan _ 
Ke ko mi towock 
Nemaytow . 
Mith .. 9 -— 
Ogitann . o 
Wiffinee ~ 


- Nepew— - 


-Winnekifkifew 
. Athimetakcoufé 
Mantow ~- - 
Papew — -« 


- Nematappe - 


- Pimoutais - 
Packifin ~ 


Ah tus kew -, 
Nipahaw rm 


Attawoin - 


: Pimatife . - 


Wabam 


Aftamoteh . 
_ Egothigog 

- -Manteau «| - 
Shiflagan — an 
Ayawa- oe | 


> ae 


ee ee ee 


1 koa @eeteoe 


tera. 


Algonquin. | © 
Mina wa. Lo 


Nannigoutengue, 


Wica-ac-ko. 
Ta-gouchin. 
Packit-ais. 
Icha-quifo. 
Nagam: © 

ul qui jan. 
ene 
A co na oune. 
Tai boitam. 
Ni pann. 
Ki quaidiwine, 
Nimic: 
Mih. 
Crgitoune. 
Wifliniwin. - 
Ni po wen. 


Wot ni mi kaw. - 


Aninntagouffé. — 
Ma wi: 
Pa-pe. 


Na matape win, 


Pemouffai.--. 


Panguifhin, © °-: -’ 


Anokeh. 
Nibhi-woes. 
Ata wois. 


_Pematis. 


Wab. - 
Pitta-fi-moufs. - 
Mi mi nic. 
Ambai ma wita. 
Sai faigaun, 


; Aya wan. 


cx 


Ie 


cxvi . A GENERAL HISTORY 


. Kniftencaux. .. Algonquin. 
It rains -. <=. Quimiwoin . - +; Qui mi woin. 

. After to-morrow. - _Awis wabank - - - Awes wabang. 
To-day ~ - - Anoutch - - Non gum. 
Thereaway § - Netoi ue - Awoité. .. bos 
Much = Michett - - Ni bi wa. 

refently - Pichifqua ye Pitchinac.. 

ake, heart . - Quithipeh - = , Wai.we be. 

his morning == Shebas - «+: = Shaibas. 
This night . - Tibifcag =.= De bi cong. 
Above ~., °=» Efpiming ~ + .O kitchiai. 
Below = - Tabaffith ~ Ana mai. 
Truly a. uv Taboiy - '«. Neda wache. - 

Already §- «. - ‘SSafhay 9 .- | - Sha fhaye, 

Yet, more -..Minah (=): . - Minawao 0 ok. 
Yefterday -~. Tacoufhick - =... = Pitchinago. -.” | 
Far - - Wathow . - ‘.: Waffa. 
Near ~ - Quifhiwoac -~ .«. Paifhou. .' 
Never - = , Nima 'wecatch i. Ka wi ka... 
‘No - . :Nima - »  ~= Ka wine. 
. Yes - - Ah ~ o- oii Ta - 
By-and-bye - Pa-nima - - ve )-Pa-nima. | 
Always - - Ka-ki-kee’ - ~ Ka qui nick, 
Make hafte. - Quethe ch - ~. Niguim. - 
- Mewaifha | - :.= Mon witha. 


Its long fince 


Some Account of the Chepewyan Indians. 


THEY are a numerous people, who confider the-country’ between the. 
parallels of latitude-60, and 65. Northand longitude 100. to 110. Weft, 
as their lands or home. They fpeak_a copious language, which is very 
difficult to be attained, and fornithes aialets ‘to the, various emigrant 
tribes which ‘inhabit the following tmmenie- ‘track~of country,” whofe: 
boundary: 


OF THE FUR: TRADE, &e.  exvii 


boundary I fhall defcribe*, , It begins-at;Churchill, and ‘runs:along the 
line of feparation between them and the Knifteneaux, up the Miffinipi to 
the Ifle & la Crofle;: pafling:- on through the Buffalo Lake, River Lake,.- 
and Portage: la Loche: from thence. it, proceeds by the Elk River to 

the Lake of the Hills, and goes direétly Weft to the Peace River; and 
up , that river to its fource. and: tributary waters;. from wherice it. pro- 

ceeds to. the waters of. the rivér: Eolumbia; and follows that river to 

latitude 52. 24. North; and longitude 122. 54. Weft, where the Chepe- 

‘wyans have.the Atnah or Chin Nation for their neighbours. It then takes - 
aline due Weft to the fea- eat, within which, the country is poffeffed by 

‘a people: who fpeak. their. languaget, and,are_confequently defcended 

from them.:' there can be ‘no-doubt, therefore, of their progrefs being to 

the Eaftward.. A tribe of them is even known at the upper eftablifhments : 
on the Safkatchiwine; ahd I do not pretend-to afcertain how far they 

may follow the Rocky Mountains to the Eaft. 

Is i is snot ‘pollble to > form any. ny jut ‘imate of their numbers, but it is 
apparent, neverthelefs, that ‘they -are by. no means proportionate to:the 
- svaft extent of their territories; -which ‘may, in fome degtee, be attributed 
to the ‘ravages of the. {mall pox,, which ‘are, more or lefs, evident 
thoughout this part’of the.continent. - | 
.. The notion which. thefe people entertain of the creation, is of a very 


‘ ‘ , ’ 1 - ce Moy -f 
os betee F . . ha 


* Thof of them, who come to trade with us, ‘do not exceed eight hundred men, and have a 
* Gnattek cing ‘ef ‘thé! Knifteneaux tongue, in whichathey @ carry on their dealings with us, 


+ The coaft i ds inhabited on ‘the’ Notih- Welt by; the Efkimaux, and on the Pacific Ocean by a 
people different from both, : 
ree fingulak 


Nha 
2 aa 


on the tops of which they preferyed themfelves, ene as 


xviii A GENERAL HISTORY 


“fingular nature.’ They believe'that, at the firft, the globe was one vaft'and' : 


entire ‘ocean, inhabited by no living creature, except a mighty bird, 


whofe eyes were fire, whofe glances were lightning, ‘and the: chap.” - 


ping of whofe wings were thunder.’ On his defcent to the ocean, ‘and 
touching it, the earth inftantly arofe, and ‘remained-on the furface of the 
waters. This'omnipotent bird then called’ forth all the: variety of ani- 
mals from the earth,- except’ the’ Chepewyans, who ‘wére produced 
from a dog; and this’ circumftance ‘occafions their averfion to the’ fleth 
of that animal, as well as: the people who eat it. ‘This extraordinary 
tradition proceeds to relate, that the’ great bird, having finifhed his work, 
made an arrow,'which was: to be preferved with great care, and to remain 
untouched; “but that the Chepewyanis were fo devoid of ‘underftand- 


“ing; as to carry if‘away; and the facrlege fo’ enraged’ | the great bird, that 


he has never fince appeared, © BTL ee 


They have alfo a tradition amongft them, that they originally came . 


from another country, inhabited by very: wicked people,:and’ had-tra- 
verfeda great lake, which was narrow, fhallow, aiid full of iflands; whéie 


they had fuffered great’ mifery, it being always winter, with ice: ‘and deep 


fnow. At the Copper-Mine River, where they- made'thé firft-land, the 
ground was covered with copper, over which a-body of earth’had. ‘fince 


been -colleéted, to the depth of a man’s height. They believe, alfo, that 


in ancient times their‘ anceftors lived till their feet wéré worn ‘out with 


walking, and their throats with eating. They defcribe a deluge, when , 


the waters {pread over the whole ‘earth, ‘except - the ‘higheft maoiuntains 


They 


r 


mM 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &. ~ ; -— Cxix 


_ , They believe, ‘that immediately after their death, they pafs into ano- 

" ther world, where they, arrive at a large river, on which they embark ina 
ftone canoe, and that'a gentle current bears them on to an extenfive lake, 
in the centre of which is a'moft beautiful ifland; and that,.in the view of 
this delightful abode, they receive that judgment for their. condué dur- 
ing life, -which terminates their final, tate and unalterable-allotment. If 
their good. action’ aré declared to predominate, they: are’ landed upon 
the ifland, where there is:to be no end to their happinefs; which, how- 
ever,. according to their notions, confifls in an ‘eternal enjoyment :of 
fenfual pleafure, and carnal gratification. .But if their bad a@tions weigh 
down the-balance, the {tone canoe finks at once, and leaves them up to: 
their chins in the water,to behold and regret’ the reward enjoyed by — 
the good, and eternally {truggling, but,with unavailing endeavours, to 
‘reach the blifsful ifland, from which they'are excluded for ever. 


‘They have fome faint notions: of the tranfmigration of the foul; fo 
that if: a child be born with teeth, they inflantly imagine, from its pre- 
mature appearance, that it bears a. refemblancé to fome. perfon who 
had lived to.an advanced period, and that he has aflumed a renovated 
life, with thefe extraordinary tokens of maturity. 


The Chepewyans are fober, timorous, and vagrant, with a felfifh dif- 
-pofition which has fometimes created fufpicions of their integrity. Their 
Mature has nothing remarkable in it; but though they are feldom corpu- 

lent, they-are fometimes robuft. Their complexion is fwarthy.; ‘their fea- 
= tures coarfe, aiid their hair lank, but not alwpys of a dingy black; nor have: 
. they. univerfally the piercing eye, which gerierally animates the Indian 
countenance;-: « 


exx A GENERAL HISTORY: ' 


countenance.} ‘The women ‘have a: more agreeable.afpe& than the men, 


but their gait is:awkward, which proceeds from.their being accuftomed, 
nine months. in the year, ‘to ‘travel .on fnow-fhoes.and. drag fledges 
of a weight from two to four hundred pounds, «They are -very fubmif- 
five to their hufbands, awho have, however, their'fits of jealoufy; and, 
‘for very trifling caufes, treat them with fuch:cruelty as fometinies to ‘oc- 
cafion their death: They are frequently objetts of traffic; and the father 
poffeffes the right of difpofing of -his. daughter*... The men ‘in -general 
‘extract their beards,’ though fome..of:themare feen.to prefer a bufhy, 
black beard, .to.a'fmooth chin. They cut.their-hair in various forms, ‘or 
leave it.in .a long, natural flow, according’ as their .caprice) or “fancy 
fuggefts. The women always.wear it in great length; and fome of them 


are very attentive .to its arrangement; ;’ If: they .at any time appear de- 


Spoiled of ‘their trefles, it is sto'be. efteemed-a proof :of the hufband’s 
jealoufy, and is confidered as a feverer punifhment than manual, cor- 
-re€tion, :Both fexes . have - blue..or. black bars,’ or from.one to four 
-ftraight lines on ‘their cheeks or forehead, ‘to. ‘diftinguith the: tribe: to 
which they belong. Thefe.marks are.either:tatooed;.or made-by draw- 
-ing a thread;-dipped in the: © necellary'¢ colour, beneath the fin. et 

There are no people more atentive fo the cmt of their: deel, or 


pate, 


‘poled of the fkins of deer;, -andtheir: fawns, cand: dreffed.a as: fine: as any 


chamois: jeather, in the hair. In the fummer: their apparel’ iis ‘the’ “fame, 
“ercept that it. is prepared witkout:the hair..: ‘Their thoes and: leggins 


oy, a ; , fee oe obo cis cat rot re wat 


oral ‘ , foe ow eo ee) TR Oy 


; * > They do not, however, fel them as faves, but. as -fompanionst to. thofe who are fppoled to live 
more comfoiabty ‘than'themfelves, °°". Pt ROSS 


he : , are 


£ 


wt 
% 


— they: generally, ary ‘their meat in the fun.® 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c. —_ / OKxE 


, ‘ . 4 
are fewn together, the latter’reaching upwards to thé’ middle, and being 
fupported by-a‘belt, under: which a {mall -piece:of leather is drawn to 


' cover the private. parts,'the ends.of: which fall down both before. and 


behind. ‘In the flioes they put the hair of the ‘moofe or rein-deer :with 
additional : pieces. of leather as focks.‘: The fhirt of coat, when girted 
round the-waitt, ‘reaches :to. the middle’. of the thigh,. and: the’ mittens 
are fewed to the, fleeves, ‘or -aré: fufpended ‘py ftrings from: the fhoulders, 
A, ruff or. tippet. furrounds, the. neck, and the fkin of the head of the: deer 
forms a curious “kind of cap. A robe, made, of feveral deer. or fawn 
fkins fewed together, covers: the whole. | This: drefs is worn fingle‘ or 
double, but. always in the winter, sith the hair- within and without; 


_ Thus ,arrayed, a Chepewyan will lay himfelf down on: the ice inthe: 


middle-of a lake, and repofe in comfort ; though he will fometimes find 
a difficulty:in the-morning to difencumber himfelf from the {now-diift- 


ed.on him during the night. If im his paflage he fhould be ‘in want of 


provifion, he.cuts, an hole in the ice, when he feldom fails of staking 
fome.trout or pike, whofe eyes he inftantly fcoops out, and cats. asa 
_ great delicacy ; but if they fhould: not be fufficient to fatisfy his appe- 
‘tite, ‘he- will, an this - neceflity make his. meal of the’ fifh in its: raw 
fate; but, thofe ‘whom I- faw,. preferréd to drefs their viCtuals when 
circumftances’ admitted the neceflary preparation. When they’ are in 
that part of their country which does not produce a fufficient quan- 
tity of -wood for fuel, they. are reduced to the fame" exigency, though 


oe 


The 


i * The ‘provific on ‘called Pemican, on which the Chepewyani, as well as the other favages of this 
‘country, chiefly fubGit in their j journies, is prepared i in the following manner. The léan parts of the .. 


fet of the larger animals are cut in thin flices,,and are placed on a w rooden grate over a flow fire, or 
° qs expofed 


ae 


exxiv = A ‘GENERAL HISTORY 


» 


_ time “they tamely fubmit to the Knifteneaux, who are hot £6 3 numerous 
as themfelves, when they treat them as enemies. By ay 


.. They.do not, affeét that cold referve at: meeting, either among 'them- 
felves or-ftrangers; which is common with the Kaifteneaux,' but com: 
municate mutually, and at-once, all the information of which they. are7\_ 
poffeffed.’ Nor are they roufed like them from ‘an ‘apparent torpor to 
a {tate of great a€tivity. They are confequently more uniform in this, 
refpeG, though they. are.of a’ avery perlevering difpofition when their 
intereft is concerned. 


cA ra wee “oe 


AS thee people a are-not addiQed to: {pirituous liquors,. they have a a 
regular and uninterrupted ufe: of their underftanding, which is always 
direfted to the advancement of their.own intereft; and: this. difpofition, | 

™. “as may be readily imagined, fometimes occafions them . to--be.charged 

e with fraudulent habits, They will fubmit with patience tothe fevereft 
- treatment, when they are’ confeious-that they deferve i it, but will never 
forget oF or forgive ' any -wanton or unneceflary- rigour, A. moderate 

conduét I never’ found to, fail, ner do I hefitate to reprefent them; 


7 altogether, as the mott peaceable ‘tribe of Indians known in North 
America. : ; 


wot 


4 


. 6 a 0% 
, 2 


_. There are. conjurers and high-priefts, but Iwas: not prefent at any of 
_their— ceremonies; ; though they certainly operate’ in. an extraordinary. 
manner on: the imaginations: of the people. i in the cure of diforders, 
Their principal maladies are, rheumatic } pains, the flux and confumption. 


The venereal . complaint: is very common; but though its .progréfs’ is 


” 


flow, 


Pp? 


flow, it gradually und 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &. cxxV 


i es th the conititution, and brings on premature 
decay.. They have récourfe to fuperlition ir_ cure, and ‘charms 

are their only remedies, except.the bark of the willow, which~bein 

burned and reduced to powder, is {trewed upon green wounds and ulcers, — 
and. places contrived for promoting perfpiration. Of the ufe of fimples >: , 
and plants they. have no knowledge; nor can it be expected, as their 
country does not produce them. . re b. 


Though they have enjoyed fo long an intercourfe with Europeans, 
their country~ is fo"barren, as hot to-bé Capable of producing the ordi- 
nary neceflaries naturally introduced: by fuch .a communication; and 
they continue, in a great meafure, their own inconvenient and awkward. 
modes of taking their game and. preparing it when taken. Sbrnetimes7-~ — 
they drive the deer into the fimall lakes, where, they {pear them, or, force 
them into. inclofures; where the bow and-,arrow are’ employed againtt 
ther. Thefe animals are alfo taken. in, fnares: made of. fkin.;; Inthe ° 
former inftance the game is divided among thofe who have beenengaged 
in the purfuit of it,. In the latter it is confidered as private property ; 
neverthelefs, any; unfuccelsful hunter: pafling- by, may take a ‘deer fo 
canght, leaving, the head, fkin, and faddle for the owner. . Thus, though 
they have no regular government, as every man’ is lord in his own 


"Ses 


family, they are influenced, more ‘or ‘Tefs, by. certain, /prineiples w which 


“4 


conduce to their general benefit. 


t - 
: . - os ‘2 
1 Satan enacted mr tan, 4 


In their quarrels with each other, they very rarely proceed to a greater 
degree of violence than is occafioned by blows, wreftling, and pulling of 
| oe ' the 


Sanh 


~ 


CXXVi . “A GENERAL. HISTORY. | 


the hair, while their abufive language confifts in applying the name of - 


the moft offenfive animal to the objett of their difpleafure, and adding 


the term ugly, and chiay, or fuill- born.* cf 


7 fe 


Their arms and domeftic apparatus, in addition to the articles, pro- 
cured from Europeans, are fpears, bows, and arrows, fifhing-nets, and 
Jines made of green deer-fkin thongs. They have ‘alfo nets: for taking 
“the beaver as lie endeavours to efcape from his lodge ‘when it is broken 
‘open. It is fet ina particular manner forthe purpole, and ‘a’ man is 


‘employed to watch the momient when he enters the {nare,.ot he would ~ 
foon cut his way through it. He is then thrown ‘upon the: ice, where. 


he remains as if he had no lifeinhim, ). ot 
; - te = : Your 


. r 
at 
’ 


The fnow-fhoes are of very fuperior workmanfhip.’” The inner part of, . 


their frame is ftraight, the outer one is curved, and it-is pointed at both 
ends, with ‘that. infront’ turned up. They are alfo laced with great 
neatnefs with thongs made of deer-fkin. The fledges are formed of thin 
flips of board turned up alfo in front, and are highly polifhed with 
crooked knives, in order ‘to flide along with facility. Clofe-grainied 
wood i is, on that account, the beft; but theirs are made. of the red, or 


Framp fprucet tee ee 


a . 
2 
ray 


‘The country, which thefe people-eléie as their ‘and, ‘has: ¢ avery; 
Small quantity of earth, and produces little or no wood or herbage. 


ers re : : , 
porns Be t art foe 


4 * ‘This name “is ajfo applicable to the. foctus of an | animial,- when killed, whidly i is confidered as-one 
of the greatef¥ delicacies; —__ ; . ve 


oo , a tes 


we 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c.  exxvii 
Its chief vegetable fubftance is tlie mofs, on which the déer feed ; and 
a kind of rock mofs; which, in times of {carcity, ‘preferves the lives of 
the natives. : When boiled in water, it diffolves into a clammy, glutinous, 
fubftance, that affords a very fufficient nourifhment. But, notwith{tand- 
ing’ the barren ftate of ‘their country, with proper care and economy, 
thefe people might:live in great comfort, for the lakes abownd with fith, 
and the hills are.covered with deer. Though, of all the Indian people 
of this continent they are confidered as the moft provident, they fuffer 


' feverely at certain feafons, and particularly in the dead of winter, when 


° 


they are under the neceflity of retiring to their {canty;' ftinted woods. 
To: the*Weftward of.them. the mufk-ox may be found, but they have 
no’ dependence on it as an article of fuftenance. There are alfo large . 
hares, a few white wolves, peculiar to their country, ‘and feveral kinds 
of foxes, with white and grey partridges, &c. . The beaver and mioofe- 
deer they do not find till they come within Go degrees North ‘latitude; 
and the buffalo is ftill further South. That animal is known’ to frequent 
an. higher latitude to the Weftward of their country. Thefé people 
‘bring pieces of beautiful variegated marble, which are found on the fur-— 
face of the'earth. Itis eafily worked, bears a fine polith, and hardens’ 
with time;! it endures heat, and is manufattured into pipes or calumets, 


~. aS they-are very fond of {moking tobacco; a luxury which:the Euro- 


peans communicated to them. ie 


e - . - @ . 
ici ssinofegsents or recreations are but few. Their mufic is fo 
inliarmonious, and their dancing ‘fo awkward, that they might be fup- 


. pofeds:to~be, afhamed of both, as they very feldom. praétife either. 


They-alfo: thot: at marks, and. play at the games common among them ; 
weer . but ° 


Pare Feeney 


exsvii __ . A GENERAL HISTORY: ’ 


but in fat they prefer fleeping to either; and the’ greater part of their 
time is pale in procuring food, and refting f from the toil necellary t to 


obtain‘t it. araae oa, 
. “ te t . ‘ ‘, , yet ti ,te + 
“4 a . 4 ty mo, ge 


They are alfo of a’querulous difpofition, and are.continually making 
complaints; which they ‘exprefs by a conftant repetition of the word 
eduiy, “it is hard,” in a whining and plaintive tone of voices. -i) - ... 


' : 
te eote 
fot aotheoie, 4 
1 


They are fuperftitious in the extreme, and.almoft every ation of their 


lives, however trivial, is: more or lef influenced by-fome whimfical notion. 


I never obferved that they had any particular, form of religious ‘worthip; 
but ‘as they believe in a. good and evil {pirit, and a flate of future 
_rewards and punifhments, they cannot be devoid of religious impreffions, 
At the fame time they -manifeft a decided unwillingnels to make. any 
communications on the fubject. | 


"The Chéepewyans have been accufed of abandoning their aged and 
infirm people to perifh, and of not burying their dead; but thefe are 
melancholy neceflities, which proceed ‘from their wandering way .of 
life. They are by no means univerfal, for it: is’ within:my knowledge, 


~ that a man, rendered helplef&s by the palfy, was carried-about for many — 


years, with the greateft tendernefs and attention, till he ‘died_a- ‘natural 
death. That they fhould not bury their dead in their own country can- 
not be imputed to them as a cuftom arifing from a favage. infenfibility, 
‘ as they inhabit fuch high latitudes that ‘the ground never thaws;. but 
“It is well known, that when they are in the woods,. they. cover their 
dead. with ‘trees. Befides, they manifeft. no, common :réfpect:-to- thé 
| memory 


Ne 


OF .THE FUR TRADE, &. | cxxixt - 


memory of their departed friends, by a long period of mourning, cut- 
ting off their hair, and never making ufe of the property of the deceafed,- 
Nay, they frequently deltroy or facrifice their own, as a token of regret 
and forrow. 


a 


if there be any people who, from the barren ftate of their country, 


~ might be fuppofed to be” éannibals by nature, thefe people, ‘from the 


difficulty they, at times, experience in procuring food, might be liable 
to that imputation. But, in all my knowledge of them, I never was ac- 
quainted with one inftance of that difpofition ; nor among all the natives 


" which I met with in’a route of five thoufand miles, did I fee or! thier, of 
_ an example of cannibalifm, but fuch. as arofe’ from that irrefiftible mre- ~~ 


ceflity, which has been known: to impel even the’ oft civilifed people’ 
to-eat each other. 


Bangle f the Chepewyan Tonge. 


uw 


Man ~ - “, 


- Dinnie.- 

Woman ~ - Chequois:~ . fy 
Youngman _—_ = - Quelaquis. ~ — 
Young woman | - - Quelaquis. chequoi- 

My fon - - Zi azayr- coo, 

My daughter ~ = - Zi lengai-- «: ° , . oo 
My hufband. - - Zi dinnie. =~ Ye 

- My wife - - - Zi zayuna— “* 

My brother - - Zi raing,. 

My- father. ° - - Zi tah. 
‘My mothr*>. - ” = - Zi nah. 

My grandfather - - - Zi unal.— 

Me or my (8 - See._ 

I - - Ne. 

You - le - Nun. 

They ~~ -. - - Be. 

Head - a - Edrhie. 


de : . 
° Qa 
r . Hand _| 


cxxX A. GENERAL HISTORY 


Hand - 

Leg. ” 

Foot = - 

. Eyes - 

Teeth - 

Side - 
Belly - 
‘Tongue . oo: . 
Hair . >, 
Back 7 6 

: . Blood . = 
The Knee . 

‘Clothes or Blanket . 

Co 


Leggin = 
Stines - 
‘Robe or Blanket 
Sleeves = 
. « Mittens -3 
Cap - 
Swan ¢ so 
‘Duck . - 
Goofe - 
White partridge 


_ Grey partridge | 
Bufalb - 
Moofe deer 


Rein-deer . 


Beaver, . 
Bear’ ~- 
Otter - 
Martin - 
Wolvereen | 
Wolf. | - 
Fox .- °* 
Hare a 
Dog - 
Beaver-fkin 


Otter-fkin . 
Moofe-fkin - 


- Fat - 
’ Greafe  - - 


Pa er SO De DO 


cahw . 


Law. os 
Edthen. 


Thelk~ 
Kinchee.* 


' Thath- : . rat Toa 


Bah. . 
Geeler ee 
Sah.— wot 
Kagouce 

Keth.- 

Gah.— . . 

Cafs bah. 

De ee. 


Nagu 
Yeis ne: ee 


Zah thith_ a 
Naby-ai thith— __ 
Deny-ai thith, 


_ Meat 


OF THE FUR TRADE, &c.. “exxxi 


Meat a) wos a: Bid- 
Pike -. we Uldiah-— 
. White-fifh 2 -\' - Slouey. ~ 
Trout 1°" 8 - Slouyzinaic- 
Pickerel wos - O’Gah. 
Fifhhook ~ - Ge-eth_- - 
Fifhline _” ~ ‘ye . Clulez— 
*., 4 ~ Slachy,.. 
s hh ee - Naghur 
+ iM - Tagh-y. 
™ : ~é - ; Deng k ‘ 
” . - ae 
- ~ -- Alki tar-hy3 
“ - ~ i 
“0s - Alki deing-hy. \ 
me tty -. Cakina hanoth- ha. \ 
-— 0M - -Ca noth na. | 
~ - Na ghur cha notli na. 
0. fe - Counn— | 
in - ~ Toué- 
“ ~ - Dethkin.= 
-. ~ - Thun. 
~ = a Yath. 
ee - Thinnelfee— 
“ - - Toue 
J - Tefle _ 
Mountain 5 + - Zeth:- a 
Stone . ~ - - Thaih: 
Berries — .- - - Gui-ehi— 
Hot - - Edowht., - 
Cold - - - Edzah- 
Ifland ~ - - Nouey: 
Gun - - - Telkithy— 
Powder - - Telkithy counna._ 
Knife = - - Bef 
Axe - - ~ Thynle—<_ 
Sun - - 
Moon - - } Sah. 
Red ~ - - Deli coufe~ 
Black - we -- Dell zin~ 
Trade, or barter “ - Na-houn-ny+ 
Good -. - - Leyzong~ 


Not 


A. GENERAL HISTORY, Bo. 
oa Not good ooo 
/. Stinking. 0 wo 
/.. Bad,ugly | PN 
| Long f ince | we 
~~ Now, toslay 
“> “Fo-morrow: .. ue 
_- « By-and-bye, or preenly 
 Houte, or lodge 
Canoe oe fa a 
a Leather-lodge oe 
a Chief - ne ee 


_ Leyzong poly — | - : 
, Geddey.-- = 


. Slieney, a0. he ee 
Sine inna. oo Wea 
. et Ganneh. 
—> Gambeh. 
-Carahoulleh.. 
- Gooen., #. 
i ~ Shaluzees 
~ “The o ball. - 
eo UN’ abalay. a3 
- Besta, oo 
- Bedzy. 
Rane 
> Unfhaw. ~~ 
-Ghautah- . 
Ba “choinichdinhe.” oS 
~Bucnoinichadinh. sy Poo, 
| Elche. : aan . 
-: Sy lod, innay..- 
-.- Foo hanniltu. 
© Beds-hanniltu. .”: 
~ Sloeeh anneltu.~ : 
. Bid Barheethers”. 
To Barhithen. 
Netha uzanye" 
Nilduay-uzany. 
Nitha-hillai. 


er ee 


eo Gie me water. 
2 Give me meats ee c= 
> Give me fi 802 
Give me meat. to eat” 
‘Give me. water to drink 
Is it far off ee 
» Js.it-near. 
-- It is not far 
/ » Its near: -Nilduay 
oo “How many | ; s 
-. . What call you. “him, c or that . sEtla houllia. 
. Come. here 0520) ¥eu deflay. 
’ Pain,or faffering  Lyah. 
~ Tt’s hard | ~ Eduyahs.- 
a  Youlie 2 ye:  Untzeecs- 
- What then’ ve Ealick 


ae am “s a v a bob. i bk © bb 8 be Ob a 8 et a4 s oes a ' 
_ . : : : an * ( 5 ’ 
a rer , eo oa roe ; 


rc) 


von van neereigniammenge’ sie aentemtninwaanitite,* 


“40. 2 ot . 
NOE HO PUM cite 


We 


Dp 
es 


A 
CH 


. 


“hy 


Sion 


r 
4 


: . . oT a 
> pore wo oo 
i, : 
oe i : 
: A - oe a bee . : Coa oe eo pees eae 
. i ee an _. md 7 = 
25 1 aslo Li 
en - 
= i oe 
. 1 
\ . 
foege 
mae i a ’ : : 2 
. . ot . . . = _ 7 
+ 7 _. eb ; 
an ~ 7 : \" . i 
: ns 
. I. 
t i 
L . 
yo. . 
booce 1 
“de { : 
* 4 ml ene — wee - naan an 
— —t 7 . . 
: i 
. 1 
at ‘ : 
t : . : 
[ie . Ve. a 
il . 
. i . q y 
ae 
ae | 
= - - wee ele - ne - 
7 oe . i : 
ot | : 
a i : . 
S. - : i. j . 
A Leek en » : 
. ot pal 1 a Sanaa = a _ L 2 
Jot Wee, . : TTT ore sine 
: “A i * : 
i: . i . . 


nN. 
= 
- 


: Great. Bear . Lake ®. . 


= 
- ‘ eae 
YS 2 = 
>. rn 
“ aw. 
. se 
. eee 
f ~~ 
Fs 
a, & 
. ; 
. i 
2 og 
m: 
= . 
TER 


| 
Uanitiye 


/ 
t 

! 

| 
oh 


“132 


Fond + = 
7) LP. . . 5 —— 
. - — ed _ : vou 3 : 
° ~ — a arapenaions oats. L Two et ied oe ~ cn _ 
; , ° - Lene. oo : 
7 7 : a “ —~ or He SR 
i : : > we TF 
. ae ope a e wy 7 
- a F : . : 
in 
u Lee = 
a 7 : 
ws ; a a 
s aoe . \ 
om \ 
- i - . 
: : u 
_ Ve - 
; _ yt so 4 epee 
_- eet : H + 
. 4 . 
ee ayo _= 


: . . BO, So . BO - Te eg a 


4 


4 


amt | 
i ee 
“Su ; Tv 
=: en 
. ch - Z 
7 _ _ ee 
ei re : 
. . 4 


em 


pees ee aah aoe eee 


! 
rol 
a . 
= } -o . 
am ~ ~ ~ To 7 . 
: |. ~~ _ yoo a : — : 
. H ee 
: ; wee 
‘ geek 
: i gr 
Lot, f “ 7 : 
2 ~ : 
& : : . : 
x : a ' : 
= ~ ~ . 1- ° 
~ ao cebe e . , i 
: aaa a a _ bog . 
J ; oi 5 — — 


Gr 


“as os 


eee 


Girrent Mack 


129) 
f 
i 
2 
t 
! 
ND IANS 


FORT CHIPEWY 


ee a 
‘ tothe. 


BEAVER (< 


INDIANS. 


STRONG Bo 


\ Rein Deer of" 8 


t - + 
. ele. Carieboet OF, ° 


ar { 


be \ 
‘ 


: pee NG NORTH SEA 


Ne 
; Bear Lake 


vo yt ; 7 ' 
. Cetreigy de : ? ; 
VCR Nye, 4: » , 
ip herr: I 6 
as yee “eng a f , ° al H 
on boo mo, t ! . : \ 
ee : | ! 7 
' : 
i 


| | | 
= en ; a 7 : oa cds 
INLAND INDIANS ote woe } is 


aE 
Current {| 
A renrdiiniy 


\- 


a Lat Caches © 


—o er. 
| Mein Deer or 
Tele Cartebort 6, 


FORT CHIPEWYA 


al 
1 
{ 
“ 
a 


ce 


io 


> oe 
my 


: ae 
means! 
re 

5 ed 


‘ 


a 


i 
i 


NO Rein Deer or. 
oy ‘ 


Tas tia heen, ow 


Tele Carteboct 


petterta Patbbiwkecdt a. 


waa, 


ae 
me 


18 


ora diy tleinaniter Mae Kern sia WP, TON tisde 


Wares Cirriadt 


maze. oo 


ult vee 


" $rrone Bow 


, G2 
. | . ot, 
on ares a 
a ; oe 
pee ee a 
ote “Ny 7 oo 


yey tt ‘ 
© ha Cached 09 


6h: _ 
Lo Jrde Cariehort © 6 


. Coys 
cr 
} 


co ; aa 
g NO Rein Dee? on, 
E > 9 \ 


Ae 
i 


Kes 


Go 


° 


Sa weaprings 


I 
be 


ves JOURNAL  - bo ae 


Lake. Obliged to wait till the moving of the ice. Three families of 


: » Plan named Ya a 4 la Cache.’ “Clouds of apie ca 


Wee embarked at: nine , Siclock § in. , the” ‘moming, at- Fort Chepewyan, 
on ‘theSouth fide: of the Lake of the Hills, ain Jatitude 58. 40. North, 
and longitude 1: Ho, 39° ‘Welt from Greenwich, and ‘compals has fixteent - 


an an 


“CHAPTER L 


“Embathed at Far  Chepewyan, on, ‘the. ‘Lake fi the: Hills in company with 
M. Le Roux, Account of the party, “provifvo fons, e. Direttion of 
the. cours “Enter one of the branches. of the Lake. Arrive in: the 
Peace River. - “Appearance of the land. Navigation oft the river. Arrive. 
at the mouth of t the Dog River. Succe effive defeription of. “feveral car ring 
places. A canoe loft in one of the Falls. Encamp on Point de Roche. 
Courfe. continued. _ Set. the nets, Be. Arrive at the: Slave Lake, The 
"weather extremely, cold. _ Banks of 3 the river. deferibed, ‘with: its trees, oe 
foil, Bo “Account of the. animal produtti tons, and the ffnery of the 7 oe 


“Indians arrive from’ Athabafea. ‘Beavers, geet and fwans filled. “The « : 
mets endangered a 1Ce. ~ Re-imbark and, land on a fall ifland. Conirfe - 
~ continued along ‘the firey and acres, the, tos of the Lake, Various. . - - 


ue, nen . 
Wednel. 3. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE _ 


degrees variation Eaft, in a canoe made. of birch bark. The crew con- | 


fifted of four Canadians, two of- whom were attended by their wives, 
and a German; we were accompanied alfo by an Indian, who had 
acquired the title of Englith Chief, and his two wives, ina {mall canoe, 
with two young Indians; his followers in another fmall canoe. . Thefe 


. Men were engaged to ferve us in the twofold capacity of interpreters 


and.hunters. This Indian was-one of the followers of the “chief who 
conduéted Mr. Hearne to the copper-mine river, and has fince been a _ 
principal leader of ‘his countrymen \ who were in ‘the habit of carrying 
furs to Churchill Fagtory, Hudfon’s Bay, and till of late very much 
attached to the intereft ‘of that company. * Thefe circumltances pro- 


‘cured him the appellation of the Englifh Chief. 


4 


We were alfo accompanied by a canoe that I had equipped for the 
purpofe of trade, and given the cliarge of it to M. Le Roux, « one of the 
Company's clerks. In this I was obliged to fhip ‘part “of our provif ion; 
which, with the clothing nneceflary for us‘on the voyage, a proper 
affortment of the articles of merchandize as prefents; to enfure us a 
friendly reception among the Indians, and the ammunition and arms 
requifite for defence, as well asa fupply for our hanters, were, more 
than our own canoe could, carry, but by the” time we fhould part com- 
pariy, there’ was every reafon to fappofe that our expenditure would 
make fufficiént room 1 for the whole. | 

We proceeded twenty-one miles to the ‘Welt, and then took.a courfe 
of nine miles to North-North-Welt, ‘when, we entered, the river, or ‘one 
of the branches of the; lake, of. which there are feveral, . _ Wethen fteered., 
North five miles, when our courle changed for, two miles to North- 

North 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 8 


North-Eaft, and here at. feven in the:evening we landed and pitched +789 

; . ; ~ . June, 
our, tents... Oneof’. the ‘hunters killed. a goofe, and a couple of ducks; —~——" 
atthe fame time-the canoe was taken out of thé water, to be gummed, 
which, neceflary Bufinels was effeGtually perfoumed, “ 


YT T Re ete 
’ 


<r 


heey ae pine ane, 


We embarked | at four this morning, and proceeded North-North- ‘Thutty 4, 
Raft. balf a ‘mile, North one mile and a half, Weft two miles, North- 
Weft two: miles, Weft-North-Weff one .inilé and a half, North-North- 

Weft half a mile, and Weft-North-Welt two miles, when this. branch. 
lofes itfelf in the Peace River.. It is remarkable, that the cur- 
rents of: .thelé various “branches of the lake, when the. Peace River 

is- high, asin -May" and Auguft,, runinto. the Igke, which in the 
ether months: of the: yéar returns its. waters to them; whence to this 
place, ‘the branch. :isi:not :more than: two hundred -yards wide, nor 

lefs. than'an hundred and:twenty. ; "The banks are rather low, except: in- 

ane place, -where.an huge.'rock rifes above them, . The low land is 
eovered with wood, fuchas-white: birch;. pines of different. kinds. withi 

the. poplar, three kinds, of willow; aniithe liard. 

(ihe. Peace River is upwards-of.a, mile .brqad':at, this. fpot, and its” 
current is ftronger than that.of the ‘channel which communicates with: 
the lake. It here, indeed, affumes the name. of the Slave River.*, a 
The: courfe of. this. day: was: as follgws:—North-Weft two thiles,, 
- North- -North-Weft, through ulands, fix males, North four miles. and a 
Pall Narth, by Eaft two. miles,: Welt by’ North fix miles, North one 


f “# The Slave Indians having been driven from, their tiginal country, by their enemies.the Kniftc- 
naox; along the ‘borders of “this part df the'river, it récetved’thist title, though it by no méans “involves” 
the.idea of fervitude, but was, given‘ to-thele fugitives ag-a’ term, of: reproagh; that denoted ‘wiore than; 
éommon favagenels, 

ae Bo . 5 mile, 


ts 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


mile, North-Ealt by Eaft two miles, North:one mile.. We now defcended 


t—~—J a rapid, and proceeded North:Weft feven miles and a half, North- 


Friday 5. 


‘Welt nine miles, North by Welt fix miles, North-Weit by. Welt one mile 
and a half, North-Weft by North. half a mile, North-North-Welt fix 
miles, North one mile, North-Weft by Welt four miles, North-North- 
Ealt one mile. Here we arrived at the iouth of the Dog ‘River, where 
we landed, and unloaded our canoes, at half paft feven in: the evening, 
on the Eaft fide, and clofe by the rapids. At this Ration the river is 
near two leagues in breadth.) 0 eh ey 7 
At three o'clock in the morning we embarked, but unloaded our. catioes 
at the firft rapid. ‘When we had reloaded, we entereda {mall channel, 
which is. fofmed by the iflands, and, in about -half an hour; we came 
to -the-carrying place. It is three hundred and eighty paces in length, 
and very commodious, except at thé further end_of it. -;We found-fome_ 


__ difficulty in reloading at this fpot, from the: large quantity ‘of dce which 


had not yet thawed. From hence to the next carrying place, called the 
Portage d’Embarras, is about fix miles, and is occafioned by | the, drift wood 


filling up the fmall channel, which is one thoufand and twenty paces in: 


length; from heneé to‘the next is one’mile and a half, while the-diftance to 
that which fucceeds; does not-exceéd one hundred and: fifty yards. ' It is 
about the fame length as the‘laft; and from hence to’the carrying place 


called the Mountain, is aboutifour: miles: further’; when we entered ‘the 


gteat.river. ‘The’ fmaller .oné,-or the‘ channel, affords by far the beft: 


_paflage, as it is without hazard’of any. kind; though: I bélieve a fhorter 
‘courfe would be found on the outfide of the iflands, and’ ‘Without fo , 
“many carrying places. That called: the Mountain i is three hundred.and 


thirty-five “paces itz length; from thence ‘to: the: next, named the * Peli- 


, a a . can, 


ft 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


can, there’ is: about a -mile ‘of dangerous rapids. The landing is very..." 


Reep, and clofe to the fall. The length’ of this carrying-place is eight 


hundred and. twenty paces. — — 


. 
flog 


The whole of the party were now: ‘employed i in taking the baggage 


"ahd the canoe up the hill. One of the Indian canoes went down the 


fall, and was dathed to pieces. The woman who-had: the management’ 


“of it; Dy quitting it ini time, prelerved he her life, though fhe loft the little 
property i it contained. | 


tos. 
. as 


The éotirle from | the place we e quitted i in the morning Is about North- - 


Welt, and comprehends’ a diftance, of fifteen miles. From hence to the 
next and laf carrying place, i is about nine miles; in which diftance there 
are three rapids: courle North-Weit by Welt. The carrying path is 
very bad;.and five hundred and thirty-five paces in length. Our canoes 
being lightened; paffed on the outfide of the oppofite ifland, which ren- 


dered the carrying’ of the baggage very fhort indeed, being not more - 


than the length of a canoe. “In the year 1786, five men were drowned, 
nd two canoes and fome packages loft, in the rapids on the other fide 


__ of the river, which occafioned this Place to be called the Portage des” 


Noyés. They were proceeding to the Slave Lake, in the fall of that 


year, under the dire&tion of Mr. Cuthbert Grant. We proceeded from — 


hence’ fix ‘miles, and encamped on Point~de_ Roche, at half paft five 
in the’ afternoon. The men and Indians were very “much fatigued ; 
but:the hunters had provided fevén geefe, a beaver, and four ducks. 


"We embarked at half paft two in the morning, and fteered North- 
Weft by North twenty-one miles, N orth- Weft by Weft five miles, Weft- 
North- 


Saturday 6. 


—_— 


di 


‘ 
Sa 


i 


oy 
? 


w 
ry 


jouRNAL OFA: VOYAGE THROUGH. TRE 


Nor th-Welk’ ‘four miles, Welt fix. miles, doubled a paint, North-North. 
vere Haft one mile, Haft five. ‘iniiles, North! two, miles,, North- Weft by. North, 
“> one mile and a half, Weft-North-Welt three miles, NorthRafk by: Eaft 
‘two miles, doubled a point one mile and a half, Weft by North nine 


miles, North-Welk by: Welt, fix. milea, _NorthNorth; Welk: five miles ; 
here we landed.;at fix oclock in the evening, unloaded, and, eacamped., 
Nets: were allo fet.in,, a final]; adjacent .river,,.;We, had_an head, wind, 
during the/greater part, of the, day, | and, the weather, was. become fo cold, — 
that the Indians_were obliged to make ufe, of their mittens, In. this, 


va day’s Progrels: we killed feven gecle a and fix ducks. 


Sunday 4. 


At half patt three we. renewed our ‘voyage, ind’ proceeded. Well- 
North-Wefi, one mile, round . an ifland one mile, North-Weft two miles 
and a half, South by ~ Welk three miles, Welt. ‘Scuth- Welt‘ one mile, 
South-Weft by South half a mile, North-Wef three miles, Weft-North- 


Welt three miles. and a half, North feven miles ..,d a half, North- Welt 


by North four miles, North two miles and a half, North-Weft by North . 
two miles. The rain, which had prevailed for fome time, now came on 
with fuch violence, that we were obliged to land and unload, to prevent 
the goods.and baggage from getting wet; the. weather, however, foon . 
cleared up, fo that we reloaded the canoe, ‘and got under Way. We now 
continued our courfe North ten miles, Welt one mile anda half,and North 


one mile and a half, when the rain came on again, and rendered it abfo- 


lutely neceflary for us to get on fhore for the night, at about, half paft 
three! We hada ftrong North-North-Eaft wind throughout the day, 
which greatly impeded us; M. Le Roux, however, with his party, pafled 
on infearch of a landing’ place more agreeable to them. The Indians 
killed a couple of geele,. and as many ducks. ‘The rain continued 
through the remaining part of the day. 


FEBhe 


.. NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 
The night was'véty boifterous; atid tht tain did not ceafe till two in 
the aftet'ioon Of this day; ‘but as the wind did not abate of its violeiice, 


we wete prevented from Brdcecding till the morrow. . | | 


We embarked at half 1 pat two in the morfing, the weather being calm 
“and foggy. Soon after otir two young mén joined us, whom we had not 


7 17894 


June. 


ee | 
Monday 8. 


Tuefday’ 9. 


-fecn for two days’; but during their abfence they had killed four 


beavers: dnd’ ten geele. After a°tourfe of ofe mile North:Weit 
by North, ' We obfétved ' an: Opening on the tight, which we took 
fot a fork'‘of the sivél, but it proved to be a lake, We returned and 
fteered South-Weft by Welt one milé and a half, Weft-South-Welt one 
mile and:a half, Welt one mile, when we entered a very fall branch of 
the rivet on the Eaft bank; at the itfouth of which I was informéd thete 
had been ‘a carrying’ placé, owing to’ the quantity of drift wood, which 
then filled tip thé paflage, but, has fince been carried away. The courfe 
‘of this river is meandering, and tends to the North, and in about ten 
miles falls into the Slave Lake, where’we arrived at nine in the morn- 
Ling, when we found a great change ‘in the weather, as it was become 
extremely cold.‘ The lake was entirely covered with ice, and did not 
‘feem in any degree to have’ given way, but near the fhore. The gnats 
and mufkitoes which were Very troublefome during our paflage along 
the river, did not venture to accompany, US to this colder region. 


. The banks of the river both ‘above and below the rapids, were on 
both ‘fides: covered with the various kinds of wood common’ to: this 


country ; ‘particularly the Weftern fide; the land bein g lower and ‘confift-” 


ing of a ‘rich black foil. ‘This artificial ground i 1S carried down by the 
ae ‘ yo ftream, 


é 


1789. | 
June. . 


~ 


: ao™. ; , ' — ne) 
JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


fiream, ‘and refts upon. drift wood,’ ‘fo as.to be eight. or. ten-feet deep. 


L+~— The eaftern banks are more ‘elevated; andthe foil a yellow clay mixed 


* with gravel ; fo that'the trees are ‘neither fo large. or numerous as on the, 


 oppofite fhore: The ground was not thawed above fourteen inches in 


depth ; notwithftanding the-leaf was-at its,full growth; ‘while along the 
. lake there was fcarcely any appearance of verdure, . 


The Indians informed ‘me, that, at_a very fmall diftance from either 
bank of the river, are very. extenfive plains, frequented by, large herds of 
buffaloes; while. the moofe and rein: -deer ke “ih: the woods that border 
on it. -The beavers, which are in, great numbers, build their: habi- . 
tations in the {mall lakes and rivers, as, in the larger ftreams, the ice’ 
_ carries every thing along with: it, during the {pring. The mud banks 
in, the river are covered with wild fowl; and we this morning killed two 
{wans, ten gecle, and one beaver, without ' faffering the delay of an 


: ” hour; fo that we might have foon filled the canoe with thems: “af that . 


(oN ‘had been our object. 


Me 


- From the {mall river we fteered Eaft, along the infide orang fand- 
bank, cfivered with ‘dkift wood and enlivened by a few willows, which» 
ftretchés on as far as the houfes ereéted by .Meflrs, Grant and Le Roux, 
“In 1785. We often ran aground, as for five facoetliv€ miles the depth | 
‘of the water'no where exceeded three feet. T. here we found « our people, 


Q 
_ who had artived early. in the morning; and whom we had-not, feen fince 


the pteceding Sunday. We. iow. unloaded the canoe, and pitched our 
tents, as there was every appearance that we fhould be obliged. to Temain 


4, _ here for fome time, I then Srdered the: nets to be fet, as. it: was abfo- 


- lutely 


ame 


‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ . 7 ‘ ‘ cl ‘ 


o 


_ NORTH-WEST CON TINENT OF F AMERICA. 


lutely neceflary that the ftores provided for out “fatute voyage fhould 


"remain untouched. ‘The’ fit we now caught + were carps poiffors i in.’ 


connu, white filh, ‘and trout. 


tt rained during’ he, greatelt part of the preceding night, and the 


.. ‘weather did not clear up till the afternoon of this day. This circurt- 


ftance had very much weakened the i ice, and fent two of the Indians on 


are hunting party to-a lake at the diftance of nine miles, which; they 


informed me, was frequented by animals of various kinds, | Out fifhery 


this day was not fo abundant as it had been on the preceding afternoon. 


The weather was fine: and clear with a trong welterly wind. The 


_ worhen were employed!’ in gathering berries’ of different forts, of which 


there area great plenty; and’ I accompanied one of my people to a {mall 
adjacent:ifland, where-we picked’ up fome ‘dozens’ of a geefe, anid 
dugk-eggs;' we alfo killed a couple of f gacks and: a’ goole 
: le . ot a ; 
Tithe evening the bidigas returned; without having feen any of the 
larger animals... A fwan and a grey:crane were the‘ only fruits of their 
expedition. We caught no other fifh but a {mall quantity of pike, 


_ which is. too! comifion: to te a favourite food with the’ people of the 


country: “Fhe i jew moved: a little to the: eaftward. © 


The ‘wiiber « € jnued’ the fame, as’ > yeltenday: and” ihe “aulguitoes 
begamto-vifit-us-ingreat‘ numbers, The ice moved again in the fame 


“cho, 
= 


Wednef, 10, 


Thurfday 11, 


\ 


Friday 12. 4 


Ww 


dick Bion; and‘ Kafeénded: an ‘Fill; bue could’ riot’ perceive that it was , 
brokimsis the’ midéle- of the lakes". The Hanters‘ilfed a “goofe and three . 


dudis, . sg . i Be 
. . uy L x 
- 


@. Cc ia ‘ The 


, . ; , + 
1 . ~~ cof 
eo o 8 . wee toy > 
5, . ‘ . 
: y 


10 


1789, 
vine. 


aed 
Saturday 19. 


g 


Sunday 14. . 


~4 


JOURNAL OF. A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


The weather was cloudy, and the wind changeable till about :fun-fet, 


when it fettled in the north. It drove back the ice which was.now very 
much broken along the fhore, and covered our nets. One of:the hunters 
who had been at the Slave River the’ ‘preceding evening, returned with, 
three beavers | and fourteen geefe. He. was accompanied by three 
families of Indians, who left Athabafca the fame day as myfelf: they did 


not bring me any fowl ; and they pleaded i in “excule, that they had tra- 
‘yelled with fo much. expedition, as: to prevent them from procuring fuf- 


| ficient provifions for themfelves. By a meridian line, I found the varia- 
“tion of the compals to be about twenty degrees eaft. 

The weather was clear and the wind remained in the fame ‘quarter. 
“The ice was much broken, and driven to-the fide of the lake, fo that we 
were apprehenfive’for the lofs of our nets, as they. could not, at prefent, 
be extricated. At fun-fet there was an appearance of a ‘violent: guit of 
wind from the fouthward, as the {ky became on a fudden, in that quarter, 
of a very dufky blue colour, and the lightning was very frequent. But 


_inftead of wind there came on a very heavy rain, ‘which promifed to 


‘ diminifh the quantity of broken ice. eR a 


Monday 15. 


oN 


In the morning, ‘the bay fil continued to be fo fall of i ice, that we could 
not get at our nets. About noon, the wind veered to the Weftward, and . 


‘not only: uncovered the nets, but cleared a paflage to the oppofite iflands, 


When we raifed the nets iwe found them very‘much -fhattered, and but 


few fifth taken, We now ‘ftruck our. ‘tents, and -embarked : cat fun-fet, 


when we made the tra wverle, which was about eight miles: North-Eaft by 


North i in about two hours. - At half paft eleven P..Mi..we: ¢ landed; On a. 
ee re “fal 


wee 


ae 


” 


tot 


/ 


o 


a 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 11 
! : 
{mall ifland and proceeded to gum the canoe. At this time:the atmofphere srt. 


wae faiciently clear to ‘admit of reading or writing without the.aid of —~—~ - 
artificial light. We had.not feen a ftar fince the fecond day after we left’ 
Athabafca, About twélve o'clock, the moon made its appearance above 
the tops of the trees, the lower horn being in a ftate of eclipfe, which 

, continued. for about fix minutes, in a; cloudlels; ‘fky. vie 


I took foundings three ti times in thercourle of the traverfe, ‘when I found 


fix fathoms, water, with a-muddy bottom. - 
5 


. We were prevented from embarking this morning by a very ftrong Tuefday 16, 
wind from the North, and the vaft quantity of floating ice. Some trout’ 
were-caught with the hook and line, but the net was not fo fuccefsful. 
I had an obfervation which gave 61. 28. North latitude. 


\ 


The wind becoming moderate, we embarked about, one, taking a 

North- Weft courfe, through iflands of ten miles, i in which we took’ in’ 

a confiderable quantity ‘of water. \After. making feveral traverfes, we 

landed at-five P.M: and having pitched our tents, the hooks, lines, and 
Ee nets, were immediately fet. . During the courle of the day there was: ” 


ef _occafional. thunder. | te ee 7 
Ne, : _ ; 
. , “We proceeded, and ‘takitg up our nets as we paffed, we found no Wednef 17. 
more than feventeen fith, and were flopped within ‘ a mile by. the ice. 
. The! Indians, . however, brought :us. back ‘to a point where our; fifhery 
was:yery-fuccefsful. ‘They proceeded alfo.on an’ hinting party, as-well, 
"ag, to: dilcover a. pallage among the iflands but at-three in.-the afters; 
/ C 2 74 . noon 


m - Are { 
13 \ 


et 


13 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


1789. non they returned without -having fucceeded: im either obje&t. We 
Lenomw were, however, in expeétation, that, as the wind blew very {trong, it 
_ would force a paffage. About. fun-fet, the weather became overcalt, 

with thunder, lightning, and rain, =...» Chee a, 


, Pastas y ft Oh ye y 
i 


pO we Et 

Thurfday18, The nets were taken up at four this morning with abundance of fifh, 
. and we fteered North-Weft four miles, where the ice again prevented 
our progrefs, .A South-Eaft wind ‘drove-it among: the iflands, in fizeh a 
manner as to impede our paflage, and we could'pefteive at fome'diftance 

a-head, that it was but little broken, We now fet our nets in four 

. fathom water. Two of our hunters had killed a rein-deer and its ‘fawn, 
They had met with two Indian. families; and in the evening, a man: be- 
longing to one of them, paid us a vifit: he informed ie; that’ theicé 
had not ftirred on the fide of the ifland oppofite tous: ‘Fhefe people 
live entirely on fifh, and were waiting to crofs the lake as foon ¢ as it 
fhould be clear of ice, es mo, \ 

. pes re er 

Friday 19. _° This morning our-nets: were unprodudtive; as they Fielded! us. no more 
than fix filb, which were of a very bad kind: In the forenoon, the In-: 

dians proceeded to. the large ifland: oppofile to us, in’ fearch of game, 
The weather was cloudy, and the wind changeable ‘at the fame time; 

we were peftered by mufquitoes, though, in a great meafure, furrounded 

_ with+ice. - , Ce Cs 

' e , ‘ eee ; Panes ops lin! ae f° 
Saturday 20, We took up: our nets; but without any fifh..” Tt ‘Yained!: vwdiy: hard’ 
‘daring the night and. this morning: neverthelefs, M: ‘Le Roux’ and His . 


People went back to-t the point. bile we; > tad quitted: on the’ 8th; but 


eo sO, - 0. I did 


1 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA: 13 
I did-hot think it prudent to thové, As Iwas watching for 4 paflagé 178. 


through the ice, I ptottifed to fend for them when I could obtain it: 
It raitied at thtervals till about dive o'clock ; when we loaded our canoe, 


atid ftecred for the large ifland, Well fix "milés. When we ¢atie to the 


point ‘of it, we foittid a great quantity of ‘ide ; we, however, fet ' our 
_ nets, and foon caught plenty of fifh, In our way thither we mét out 
- hunters, but they had taken nothing.’ I took foundings at an hundred 
yards froitt the ifland, when we weré in twétity-one fathorn water. Here 
~ we found abundance of cranberries and fmall {pring ohions, “I now dif: 
patched two'men t for M. Le Roux, and his people. , 


A Southerly wind blew through the night, and drové the ice to the 


Northward, ‘Fhe two men whom I had fent to 'M.. Le Roux, returned. 
at eight this priottiing ; they parted with him at a fall diftance fron us, 


Sunday 214. 


but the wind bléw fo hard, that fe was obliged’ to put to fhoré, Having — 


a glimpfe of the fut, when it was twelve by my watch, I found the lati- 
tude 61. 44. North’ latitude. “At two-in the afternoon, M. Le Roux, and: 
iis people arrived. “At five, thé'ice being almoft all driven paft to the 
. Northward, we accordingly eribarked, and’ fteered Weft ‘fifteen miles, 
through: smtict Broken ice, and on the outfide of the’ iflards, though i if 


appeared: to be very folid to the North-Eaft, f fourdkthiree times in » 
this diftance, and’ found: it feventy-five, forty-four, and fixty, fathom. . 


water, We pitched | our tents on one of a clufter of fmall’ ‘iflands that’ 


were within three miles of the main land, which we would not Teach i in: 


confequence of the ice. - 


| We faw fome rein-deer‘on one of the iflands,: and: our huriters: went 


5 in- 


Monday 22. 


turn it was called. Tle a ‘a Cache, . 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE. 


in purfuit of them, when they killed five large and two fmall ones, which 
was eafily accomplifhed, as the animals had no fhelter to which they 
could run for protection, They had, ;without ‘doubt, crofled: the ice 
to this {pot, and the thaw coming on had detained , .them there, and 


made them an eafy prey to the’ purfuer: . This, ifland “was. accordingly * 


named Ife de Carrebeul, a NY, 
a arn aa , ‘ ‘ 1 ‘ 


I fat up the whole of, this night to oblerve the fetting and rifing. of the 


fun. That'orb was beneath the horizon four hours twenty-two’ minutes, 


and rofe North 20 Eat by compals. It, however, froze fo hard, that 


during the fun’s difappearance the water was covered with ice half a 


quarter of an inch thick, 2°’, ot, 


Shon 
' 


Tog 


We embarked at half paft three in the morning, and rounding the out- 


‘fide of the iflands, fteered North-Weft thirteen miles along the icd, edging 
in for the main land, the wind Welt, then Weft.two miles; but it blew fo 


hard as to oblige us'to land on an ifland at half. pait nine, from whence 
we could juft diftinguifh land to the South- Faft, at the diftance of about 


_ twelve leagues ; ; though we could not determine} Whether gt ‘was a cor 


tinuation of the iflands, or the fhores of the lak ie im took ! Jan lobferva- 


"tion at noon, which gave me.61. 53: North the. variation of the: compal 


being, at the fame time, about tw6-poi M..Le Roux’s people having 


provided two bags of pemican*. to be left in the ifland- againft pein re re- 


. _ nm 
. - 
a 

“ala ot 


* Sometimes the land looms, fo that there may bea great deception as sto 1 the diftance: and I think 


: this was, the cafe at prefent. 


ae “F F ith dried i in the, fun, and. afterwards ‘pounded for the conveniencé of carriage - 


, The 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 1 
The wind being moderated, we proceeded again at half paft two in ied 
. the afternoon, and fteering Weft by North among the iflands, made a —~— 
courfe of eightéen | miles, We encamped at eight o'clock on a {mall 
ifland, and fince eight 3 in the morning had not paffed any ice. Though 
the weather was far from being warm, we were-tormented, and our reft 
interrupted, by the hi hoft of nulquitoes that accompanied us, 


4 


Bro an 


a ne 


r 
4 
8 
} 
4 TOT t 
t 
« 1 
te . Q. } ~ ve 
t : 
. oo * 4 
‘y, . 
is 
4 
aé . , 
“ 
r 
. ’ ‘ 4 
at wel t * 
3 i . v 
i t ‘ ua t 
! + Pye ‘ 1h 4 a t 
an r 
. 
\ . 
4 -} > 
aor * 
: > CHAP 
’ 
é ye 
‘ “te 
. ; an 
y ¢ 
. os . 
y . fiicgh Rada aon : , , tdale bs 7 ghoet 
. t a ~ 
1 - 
. x 
i 
° ‘ 
4 
ft we n 
\ 
ww yo 
. Zz a ge 


6 JOURNAL OF A. VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


! 


CHAPTER Th 


Landed at Some, lodges of Red- Knife] Indians: “procure 9 one of then te aff 
in navigating the bays. Conference ‘with the Indians, I ake léave of 

i M. Le Roux, and continite the voyage. Different appearances of the land; 
"tts vegetabletproduce. Vifit an ifland wheré the wood had been felled, 
Further defcription of the Coaft. Plenty of rein and moofe-deer, and 
white partridges. Enter a very deep bay. Interrupted by ice. Very 
blowing weather. Continue to coaft,the bay. Arrive at the’ mouth of 
a river. Great numbers of Sifh and wild fowl. “ Defeription of the land 
on either fide. Curtous appearance of ‘woods that had been burned. 
Came ii in fight of the Horn Mountain. Continue to Kill geefe and fwans, 
° . 8c. Violent florm. | 


1489. j ‘ 


June. 
Tuefday 23. "Towarps m morning, the Indians’ who had not been able to keep up 
with us the preceding day, now joined us, and brought two fwans and a 
goofe, At half palt three we re-embarked, and fteering Weft by Northa 
mile and an half, with a Northerly wind, we came to the foot of a traverfe 
acrofs a deep bay, Welt five miles, which receives a confiderable river at 
‘the bottom of it; the diftance about twelve miles. The North-Wett 
_ fide_of the bay was covered with many fmall iflands that were furrounded 
with. ice ; but the wind driving it a little off the ‘land, we had a clear 
“\ paflage on the infide of them. We fieered: ‘South Weft nine miles under. 
fail, 


fe, 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


fail, then North-Weft nearly, through the iflands, forming a courle of 


1789, 
June, 


17 


fixteen miles; We landed on the main land at half paft two inthe after- -—~-—~ 


noon at three lodges of Red-Knife Indians, fo called from their copper, 
knives. They informed us, that there were many more lodges of their 
friends at no great diftance; and one of the Indians fet off to~fetch 
them: they alfo faid, that we fhould-fee no more of them at prefent ; as 
the Slave and Beaver Indians, as well as others of the tribe, would not 
be here til] the time that the fwans caft their feathers. In the afternoon | 


it rained a torrent. 


M. Le Roux purchafed of thefe Indians upwards of eight packs of Wednef. 24. 


good beaver and marten fkins; and there were not above twelve of 


" them qualified to kill beaver. The Englifh chief got upwards of an 


chundred fkins on the {core of. debts due to him, of- which he had many . 


" outftanding i in this country. Forty of them he gave on account of debts 


due by him finep the winters of 1786 and 1787, at the Slave Lake; the. 
reft’ he exchanged for rum and other neceflary articles; and T added a" 


{mall quantity of that liquor as an encouraging prefent to him and his 
young men. I had feveral confultations with thefe Copper Indian 
people,. but could obtain no information that was material to our expe- 
_ dition; nor were they acquainted with any part of the river, which, was 
the objeét of my refearch, but the mouth of it. In order.to fave as much 
time as poffible in circumnavigating the bays, [ engaged one of the In- 
dians, to conduét us; and I accordingly equipped him with: various 
articles of clothing, &c.. I alfo purchafed ‘a large. new canoe, ‘that he 

might embark with the two young Indians in’ my fervice. | 
| This day, at noon, I took: ian ‘obfervation, which gave me 62. ib North 
Dp " Jatitude 5) > 


% 
‘ 
my Poa 


we ham de 
» 


18 


tne, 
pen peered 


Thurfday 25. 


é 
f 
¢ 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


Jatitude;_the variation of the compas being about twenty- -fix or twenty- 
feven degrees to thé Ealt. 


/ 6 
In the afternoon I affembled the Indians, in order to inform them that 
I fhould.take my departure on the following day ; ; but that people would 
remain on the fpot till their countrymen; whom they had mentioned, 
fhould arrive; and, that, if they brought a fufficrent quantity of fkins to 


make it anfwer, the Frenchmen would return’ for more goods, with.a. 


view to winter here, and build-a fort,* which would be continued as long 
as they fhould be found to deferve i it. They affured me, that it would be 
a great encouragement to them to have a fettlement of ours in their 
country; __ and that they fhould exert themfelves to the utmoft to kill 
beaver, las they would then-be certain of getting an adequate value for 


’ them. Hitherto, they faid, the Chepewyans always pillaged them; or, 


at moft, gave little or nothing for the fruits. of their labour, which’ had 
greatly difcouraged them ;. and that, in confequence of this treatment, 


res 


they had no motive to purfue the beaver, but to obtain a fufficient . 


quantity of food and raiment. 


1 
p 


Ss 
‘I now wrote to Meffrs. Macleod and Mackenzie, and addreffed my. 


papers to the former, at Athabafca. 


We left this place at three this morning, our canoe being deeply Jaden, 


‘as we had embarked fome packages that had come in the canoes of 


M. Le Roux. ‘We were faluted on our departure with fome vollies of 


ial arms, which we returned, and ftegred South by Welt Atraight 


. Forti is the name given to any eftablifhment i in this is countrys 
| ~ ; acrofs 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


acrofs the bay, which is here no more than two miles and a half broad, 


with a Inuch greater breadth in feveral parts, and full of iflands. 1 


but, fr m/the accounts of the natives, it is fifteen leagues in depth, 
rh the courfe’ of the traverfe and found fix fathoms with a 
fandy bottom. Here, the land has a very different appearance from 
that on which we have been fince we entered the lake. Till we 
arrived here there was one continued view of high hills and iflands 
of folid rock, whofe’ furface was occafionally. enlivened with mofs, 
fhrubs, and a few {cattered trees, of a very ftintéd growth from an in- 
fufficiehcy of ‘foil to nourifh them. But, notwithftanding their barren 
appearance, almoft every part of them produces berries of various kinds, 
fuch as cranberries, juniper-berries, ra{pberries, partridge berries, 
goofeberries, and the pathagomenan, which. is fomething like a rafp- 
berry ; it grows on a {mall ftalk-about a foot anda half high, in wet, 
mofly, fpots. Thefe fruits are in great abundance, though: they are not 
to be found in the fame places, but in fituations and afpeéts fuited to 
their peculiar natures. 


The land which borders the lake in this part is loofe and fandy, but 


is well covered with wood, compofed of trees of a larger growth: it 
gradually rifes from the fhore, and at fome diftance forms a ridge of 
high land running along the coaft, thick with wood and a rocky fummit 


& 


Tifing above it. 


We fered South-South-Eaft nine miles, when we were very 
much interrupted by drifting ice, and with fome difficulty reached 


an .ifland, where we landed at feven. I immediately proceeded to 


D2- | the 


“ote 2 
a 


Friday 26. 


aniles acrofs two deep bays: then South-South.Eaft, with iffands in fight 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


the further part of it, ia order to difcover if there was any probability 
of our being able to get from thence in the courfe of the day. It is 
about five miles in circumference, and 1 was very much. farprized to 
find thatthe greater part of the wood with which it was formerly co- 
vered, had been cut down within twelve or fifteen years, and that the 
remaining ftumps were become altogether rotten. On making sinquiry 
concerning the caufe of this extraordinary circumftance, the Englifh’ 
chief informed me, that feveral winters ‘ago, many of the Slave Indians 
inhabited the iflands that were {catered over the bay, as the furrounding 
waters abound with fifh throughout the year, bat that they had been 
driven away by the Kniftenaux, who continually madé war upon them. 
If an eftablifhment is to be made in this country, it muft be in the neigh- 
bourhood of this place on account of the wood and: the finery: < r 
At eleven we ventured to ‘re-embark, as the ‘wind -had’ ‘driven the 
preateft part of the ice paft ‘the ifland, though we {till had' fo- encounter 
fome broken pieces of it, which threatened to damage our Canoe, We 
fteered South-Eaft from point to point acrofs five bays, twenty-one miles. 
We took foundings feveral times, and found from fix: to ten fathom 


"water. “f obférved that the country. gradually. idefcended: inland, .and 

” -was {till better covered ‘with wood than.in the higher sparts.:: Wherever 
‘we approached the land, we perceived deferted lodges.. ‘The hunters 

' killed two fwans and a beaver; and at length we landed at eight. o'clock 
_in the evening, when we unloaded and gummed our canoe, 


e 


We continued our route at five o'clock, fteermg South-Eaft. for“ten 


to 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


to the Eaftward. We then traverfed another bay in a courfe of three 
_miles,‘then South one mile to a point which.we named the Detour, and 
South-South- Weft four miles and an half, when there was an heavy 


fwell off the lake. Here I took an ‘obfervation, when we were in * 


61; 40. North latitude. ‘We then proceeded South- Welt four: miles, and 
Weft-South-Weft among iflands: on one of which our Indians killed 


‘two. rein-deer, but we loft three hours aft wind in going for them: this. 
icourfe -was nine miles. . About feven in the evening we were obliged to. 


land for the ‘night, as the wind became too ftrong fram the 'South-Eaft, 
We thought we could obferve land in this direftion when the wind was 


coming ‘on from fome diftance. On the other fide -of the Detour, the 


land: is‘ low, and the fhore is -flat and ‘dangerous, there being no fafe 
_ Place to land in bad weather, except in the’ iflands which we had. juft 
. -paffed. There-feemed to be plenty. of moofe and rein-deer in this 
‘country, as we faw their tracks wherever we landed. "There weré alfo 
~ “Breat numbers of. white ‘partridges, which are.at this feafon of a grey 
colour; like that of the moor-fowl.’ There was fonie floating ice in the 


| Jake; and the Indians killed a-couple of fwatis. 


At three this morning we were in the canoe, after having paffed a very Ssturday 27. 


teftlefs night from the perfecution-of the mufquitoes.: The weather-was 
fine and calm, and our courfe Weft-South- Welt nine miles, when we 
came to the foot ofa traverfe, the oppofite point in fight bearing South- 
Welt, diftance twelve miles. The bay is at leatt eight miles deep, and this 
courfe two miles more, in all ten ‘miles. It now became’ very foggy, and. as 
‘the. bays were fo ‘numerous, we landed for.two hours, when the weather 


‘cleared up; and we took the advantage of fteering South thirteeri miles, ° 


: and 


“92 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


1789. and paffed. feveral {mall bays, whén we came to the point of a very deep , 
t——— one, whofe extremity was not difcernible; the land bearing South from - 
us, at the diftance of, about ten miles.. Our guide not having been here’ 
for eight winters, was at a lofs what courfe to take, though as well as he 
could recolleé, this bay appeared to be the entrance of the river. Ac- 

_ cordingly, we fteered down it, about Weft-South-W eft, ‘illawe were in- 
volved in a field of broken ice. We ftill could not difcover.thé bottom of 
the bay, and a fog coming on, made it very difficult for usto get toan ifland 
nto the South-Weft, and it was nearly dark when we effeéted a landing. 

“Sunday 28 | Ata quarter paft three we were. figain on the water, and as we could 
perceive no current fetting into this bay, we made the, beft of our -way 
; to the point that- bore South’ from us yeflerday afternoon. We. con- 
| tinued our courfe South three miles more, South by Welt feven ‘miles, . 
Weft fifteen miles, when by obfervation we were gin 61 degrees | 
North latitude; we then proceeded Weft-North-Weft two miles.. Here 
we came to the foot of a traverfe, the oppofite land bearihg South-Weft, 
diftance fourteen miles, when we fleered into ‘a deep bay, about a 
Wefterly courfe; and though we had no land a head in fight, we in- 

. dulged the hope of finding a paflage, which, according to the Indian, 

would conduét us to the entrance of the river. | 


me 


Having a'flrong wind aft, we loft fight of the Indians, nor could we 
put on fhore to wait for them, without rifking material damage to 
the jeandé, till we ran to the bottom of the bay, and were forced 
among the rathes ; ; when we difcovered that there was no paflage there. 
In about two or three hours they joined us, but would not approach our 
. _ fire, 


-_ NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


fire, as there ‘was no good ground: for an encampment: they emptied 


their canoe of the water which it had taken in, and continued their 


route, but did not encamp till fun-fet. The Englifh chief was very much. 


' . irritated againft the Red-Knife Indian, and even threatened to murder 
him, for’ having undertaken to guide us in acourfe of which he was 
ignorant; nor had we any reafon to be fatisfied with him, though he 
{till continued to encourage us, by declaring that he recolleéted having 
: paffed from the river, through the woods, to the place where he had 
' Janded.' In the blowing weather to-day, we were obliged to make ufe 
of our large kettle, to keep our canoe from filling, although we did not 
carry above three feet fail, The Indians very narrowly efcaped. 


We “embarked at four this evening, and fteered along. the South- 
Welt fide of the bay. At half paft five we. ‘reached the extremity of the 
point, which we doubled, and found it to be the branch or paffage that 
was the objeét of our fearch, and occafioned iby’ avery long, ifldnd, which 
feparates it from the main channel of the river. «It is about half a mile 
acrofs, and not more than fix feet in depth; the water appe red to 


abound in fifh, and was covered with fowl, fuch’ as fwans, geefe, and’ 


feveral’ kinds of ducks, particularly black ducks, that. were very 
numerous, but we could not get within gun fhot of them:. | 


The current, though not very ftrong, fet us. South-Welt by Welt, 
and we followed this courfe fourteen miles, till we paffed the point of 
the long ifland, where the Slave Lake difcharges itfelf, and is ten miles 
dn breadth. T here. is not more than from five to two fathom water, 


fo that when the lake 1 is low, it may. be’ ‘pre{umed. the greateft part of 
: this 


23 
14989. 
June. 
(cameos proton! 


Monday 29 


_ were previouilly to be found. 


-JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE -- 


this charinel muft: be dry. The river now turns. to the weftward, 


becoming gradually narrower for twenty-four, myles; till it is. mot more 


thah half a mile wide; the current, howev er, 1s” then much | itronger, and 
the foundings were three fathom and a half. The land on the North 
fhore from the lake is low, and covered with trees; that tothe South 
is much higher, and has alfo an abundance of wood.’ The current is‘very 
Rrong, and the banks are of an equal height on both fides, confifting 
of a yellow clay, mixed with final ftones; they are covered with large 
quantities of burned wood, lying on the ground, and young poplar trees, 


that have {prung up fince the fite that deftroyed the larger wood. : It i is 0" 


a very curious and extraordinary circumftance, that’ land covered with 


‘{pruce pine, and white birch, when laid wafte by fire, fhould fubfe- 
_~ quently produce nothing but poplars, where none: “of that fpecies of tree 


A fuiff breeze from the Faftwatd drove us on: ata great rate under - 
fail, in the fame courfe, though obliged to wihd among iflands. We . 
kept the North channel for about ten miles, whofe‘ current: is. much 
ftronger than that of the South ; fo that the latter is confequently 
the better road to come up. Here the river ‘widened, and the: wind 
dying away, we -had recourfe ‘to our paddlés: “We kept -our courfe 
to the North-Weft, on the North fide of the river, which is here 


‘much wider, and affumes the form of a finall lake; we. could’ not, 


' however, difcover. an openiitg in’ any direétion, fo that we were at.a 


lofs what courfe to take, as our ‘Red-Knife Indian .had' never ex- 


‘plored ‘beyond our préfent fituation. He at the fame -time informed ~ 


us that a river falls-in from the ‘North, ‘which takes its rife inthe Horn 
Mountain, now in fight, which i is the country of the Beaver Indians ; 
and 


NORTHWEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


" apdithat' he and: bis; relations! frequently mect on that fiver. -' He alfo 
‘added, that: these. ard: ety extanfive plains on both fides of: it, ‘which. Neeser 


hound jn. byfilatsiand moofe deer i 


: hell sides alk | bod wey us ble 14 eh oe area ‘ 
ar By: keaping-ithids courfe,: we got imto'‘fhallows, fo. that we were 
forged..to; ‘fleer to:ithei: Deft; titk we srecovered':deep: water, which we- 


followed, till the channel of the river opened’ om us. tocthe! fouthward. 
we now made for the fhore, and éncamped foon after funfet. Our 
courfe ought to have been Welt fifteen miles, fince-we “took to the 
paddle, the Horn Mountains bearing from us North-Welft, and: Tanning 
North-North-Eaft and. South-South- Welt. Our foundings, which were 


_ frequent during the courfe of the day, were from three to fix fathoms 
_water. The hunters killed two geefe and a fwan: it appeared, indeed, 


that great numbers of fowls breed in the iflands which we had pafled. 


78g. 
WHE. 


95 


“. 4 ‘e oy $ 
At four this morning we got under way, the weather being fine and Tuelday go. 


calm. Our courfe was South-Weft by South thirty-fix miles. On the. 


South fide of the river is a ridge of low mountains, running Eaft and 
Weft by compafs. The Indians picked up a white goofe, which 


appeared to have been lately fhot with an arrow, and was quite frefh. , 
_ We proceeded South-Weft by South fix miles, and then came to a bay 


on our left, which is full of {mall iflands, and appeared to be the entrance 
of a river from the South. Here the ridge of mountains terminates. 


. This courfe was fifteen miles. 


’ 


ALB \ 
soo Pa 


eee ad 


At fix in the afternoon there was an appearance of bad weather; we 


| landed, therefore, for the night; but before we could pitch our tents, a 


E ; violent 


26. | JOURNAL OF A:VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


-1789. - violent tempelt came on, with thunder,’ lightning, and rain, which, ‘how: 
eae ever, foon:ceafed, but.not before we: had fuffered the:inconvehience’ of 
being drenched by it. The Indians-werévery much ‘fatizied,! having 
been employed in running after wild fowl, which had lately-caft their | 
feathers; they, However, caught five fans; ‘and the famé number of 
geele. | J founded feveral times an the.courleiof the ‘day, and! found from 


four. to fix fathoms: water) . .-. .ceir (di av ic serfinite ons Lp ceva ale. 


’ , ms’ f bem 
. . ; ot ny soe f * ro . ror very sabe t react oe 
ts vert, bbe Cte eo ap got sb oo 90% Deb eee 
r 
‘* { ‘ *, { 
~ . ‘ t ooo wrante . 
: og rorloah tag 
' oa er if re 4, 
: ’ ' Baers ft Oakes Saeed 
moa a ee 2 . I ' 
‘ seyt - - 7 * ; eg hen ap thet rene vr eer 
. “st yl} _ oo Fg OP FPG pe Bebef Phiten Faget 
a t 
, ‘ Lor testy ery 
or 3 Chi po gi obehaes 'y) 4 
r 1 + r t - + rm 1 
oe + an 3 ~ i we Y * Ff 
. ry ‘ a fog dba FL tt ” . yvt ts ] rik Hareen pews) fled a 
* + ~ ¢ -_ 7 . + . ” . 
Poe - “ so hot, it oy teen oder pege Peep Wy re 
res soe, roy aa de : Pa 4k? SI tabk es ey iG St Tl2 
. a 
. * 7 
on 7 a 
y -f . _! , - 6 toa ee 1 are wr oappyee oe 1. .f 
yy ve ° re te ae Pot MVP Petcare GRP TWA be 
4 . . ., ' 
u y Y - nn) . * . ey Sor 
. . orn . oy mee on . wy ore Ml rpc 
' ‘ ee Tate OT STS SEALER? hte et 
oS 
: ' me pee nw ee Simi Tybee ore - my ye sides LF 
acd we ke fo fag 2 cw ae - hy rt nee 3 yf ate rele ave 
r 
n oe eye ra’ + ‘ road 
a . y : Girerereeyty cach #iy Fi 
3 TT 8B hl be yah FR aD Gey ears pitt ‘09 bt: Mand Fe 
2 H H ‘ 
' ; faa » EF yet j ant i y be pen mp ae 
' so ee re r “ whayt, ay 430 . ra . 
‘ . * rloe thee tare baht dee yd nee TD gl 1D. af Gs DLT 
: . toa 
fae OED e, eg BF 
noe . eo yt TOR ay LER TF ry Parbrge L eps) LY TES ae 
. 5 4 
© , be 7 - ' or “, aa 
1 ' an ve tole - note pet ogy pteyre oft ‘ * 
oy! . aoe ow be atest Aw eg es REE BE oe th hee : 3 
n : : 
w 
- . wt gent ak s 
‘ , ft ras : 4, Sst. f Yee DeevtT do da 
7 
~ , 
, et et 1149) eet 
as Byatt Pa hb fr oh vee et Te } aa 
> é Hy . 
, CH P. 
. ‘ > : A ° 
‘ " j . + 
rr rare oye meee es ge we En old, an. 
ee ate ky 7 Os ar ap ee A I GL OD a att ofa Pe 
y . 
- wed > \ . ae “ ; - 
, + Sa tety as pptpeten aed Fy Tea, 
* v. } > +e wee ae sbagtt Ree SU SU Ia a St 
3 " 7 
o oy 
' . wh 


arn 


: Yoastner! ‘ 
ped rr ad so At ak Tora ds oof 


, 
es 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT, OF AMERICA. 


i re . ‘, . , . . 
pee toe tes tae rome 
PegQeaehapoput Si ee, a cn oar wa 


pad alban ), cc HAP-T- E R: Big 


a 


4 


Continine dir coir: “The river narrows: 2 atl he lead. Pasi a final, 

“piver: Violent rain: * Lind ona fmill ifand,! Enpelt to arrive atthe 
i rapids: ‘Conicedl taio bags’ of pemican in an ifand.' A view of mountains. 
«Paps Sfetieral' encampments: of the natives: “Arrive ‘among the ¢fands. 
- ‘Afeeiid an high hills V iolence of the: current: ‘Ice feen along the banks 


Sof the: river; “Land ‘at a village “of the’ natives. Their’ condudt and 
aa appearance, ~ Fheir fabulous Sfories. The Englifh Chief and. Indians: 
+ difeontented. Obtain ‘anew guide. ‘Singular cuftoms' of the natives. 


** Ain account of their dances. Defcription’ of their’ perfonsy drefs, ‘orna 
ments, ‘buildings, army for war and hunting, canoes, Sc.’ “Pafed on 
among iflands. Encamped beneath an hill, and prevented from afcending 

by the: maufruitoes. *Eainded: at- ani’ encampment, Condu of ‘the:'inha- 

 bitants.! T; hey abound ti-fabulous ‘accounts ‘of dangers... Land at: other 

““encampinénts: Procure plénty of hares ‘and: partridges. Our. guide 

anxious to ‘return. Land and-alarm, the. natives; called the’ ‘Hare 

Z tidians, Be Ce «Bachan o ‘out 7 guide. * State eof the weather oN 


1 
it 


ye 


, . on 
rt Cotac detec te te p yc ye ‘ agtaop og 
lacdytnc i Te rerere) ant egy be 


‘At ‘alt | path four i in. 1 the morning we. continued | our, voyage, and in 


ay hort. time, found, the river: narrowed to, -about., half a-mile. | Our 


wif 


gourfe was Wefterly, among -iflands, with, a, ftrong. current. Though 


ithe, land i is. high on. bath; fides, the banks are not' ‘perpendicular. This 
r E 2 . courfe 


27 
vey 


1789. 
july. 


| ed 
Wednef. 1, 


Sao 
p 
ie 


JOURNAL OF A VGYAGE THROUGH Fak 
courfe was twenty-one miles; and on founding we found nine fathoms 
water, We then proceeded Weft-North-Weit nine miles, and pafled a 
river upon the South-Eaft ‘fide; we founded, and found twelve fathoms; 
and then we went North-Welt by Weft three miles. Here I loft my 
lead; which trad fattened at the bottom, with ‘part of the. line,, the current 
rinning fo Arong, that we gouldsnot clear it, with eight paddies, and.the 
ftrength of the line, which was equal to four paddles, _ Continued, North 
by . Well. five. miles, and faw an high mountain, bearing South from us ; 
we then proceeded North: Weft -by North four miles. | We, now.pafled a 
{mall siver on the North fide, then doubled a point to, .Welt-South- 
Welt,” At-one’ o'clock there ‘came. on lightning: and thunder, with: wind 
and rain, which. céafed-in about half an ‘hour, . sand deft us, almoft: ide- 


. luged with wet, as we-did-not land, There were. great quantities of 


ice along the-banks of the: WAVED. key ao Ap ake ae 
Ve ee eee ld etenig 

We Jattdedupon'a final, ifena, where there..were. the poles of four ° 
ledges flaading, which, we ,concluded to have tbelonged:to the Knifti- 
neaux, on their war. excutfions, fix. orfeven years.ago. This. courle was 
fifteen miles" Weft, to where-the tiver of the Mountain falls.in from 


the Southward.: Jt appears to. be... yery.. large. iver, whofe -mouth is 


Ovary CA a oy 
. 


half a mile broad. About fix milesfurther a {mall river flows in the 


fame dire@ion; and our whole courle was twenty-four miles. We 


Janded oppolite to an ifland, the mountains‘to the Southward being in 


fight. ~ As. our cande ‘was deeply laden, and ‘Delnig alfo:in' “daily ex 
pebtation of coniing ‘to “thie Yapids ot fall, which’ we H4d beech’ ‘taught to 
confider with apprehenifion, we’ éoncealed two bags oF: pemican in ‘the 
oppofite i ‘land, in ‘the “hope th that they would be of future fervige—to-ts. 
a a The 
eyo, , / \ . 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 29 
The Indians were of a diffebent opitiion, as they entertained ho expee- | 17894 
_ tation OF returning that Malon, when the: hidden provilions would be mae 
{poiled. Near uswete two Indian encanpiments ‘of the, lat year. By 
the manner in which thefe ‘people cut-their, wood, it appears that«they’ 
have no iton’ tools.’ The currentwas very Rrong durine the whol of; 
this day’s voyage $ ‘and in thévalticle of: provifions two fwans were all’ 
thatthe hunters were ¢ able to procure, Be one 
The mnotning was very foepy. but at half. ‘pat five. ‘we embarked; it Thurflay 2. 
cleared: ‘up, however, at feven, when ‘we Uifcovered that: the water, from 
being very lithipid and clear, was become dark and muddy. ° This alter- 
‘ation muft have proceeded-from the influx-of fome river to the ‘South- 
ward, but where thefe ftreams firft blended their waters the fog had J 
prevented: us from obferving. - At nine we perceived.a very high moun- 
trin'a-head, which appeared; -on’ oar néarer approach; to be rather a 
dufter of mountains, ‘firetthing’as far as our-view.could-reach to, the 
Southward, and whofe tops were-loft in the clouds... At noon there was 
lightning, thunder, and rain, and at ohe, we came abrealt of the moun- 
tains: ? their fammits appeared: to be’ barren and rocky, but their declivi- 
ties were: ‘covered with wood: they: appeared alfo to be fprinkled with 
white. tones, which-gliftened in the fun,‘and were called by the Indians 
: iiinctoe feria, or fpirit Rones. ‘I fafpefted that they-were Talc, though 
they’ potefeda tore brilliant whitenefs: on our return, however, thefe 
appearanives were’ ‘diffolved, as they “were nothing more than n patches: ‘Of 
fow: nee es : 
oe None hoy 
Our Fourfe had been Welt- South-Wel shiney miles, and we pro- 
“ ceeded 


Pa 


Friday 3. 


“4 
3 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


ceeded with: great, caution; as we.continually expeéted ta approach fome 
great rapid or: fall.,. This was. fuch a prevalent idea, that all of us were 
occafionally. perfuaded, that we, heard thofe founds, which betokened'a fall 


_ of water. Our. courfe’ changed to. Welt by; North, along, the mountains, 


twelve miles, North by Welt twenty-one miles, and at eight o'clock in the 
evening we went on fhore for, the night. on:the North fide, of the river, 
We faw feveral encampments of the natives, fome. of, which had been 
erected in the prefent {pring, and others at fome former period. The - 


_ hunters. killed only one fwan and a, beaver: the latter was the; firff of 


its Aind which w we had fen. in a this river. , The Indians comping of the 


accuftomed to fuch fevere, gu as. it it occafioned, | 


Ther rain was continual through the night, and ids not t fubfide till 
twelve niles, the river being enclofed by high mountains c on ‘either fide. 
We had a. ftrong head-wind, and_ the jrain was fo. violent, as to compel 
us to land at. ten o'clock. According: to my. reckoning, fince my lat 


. obfervation;. ‘we had, run‘ two hundred and feventeen, miles | Weft, and 


forty-four miles North. At a quarter, paft- ‘two. the rain, fubfided, and 
we got again a under way, our former. courfe continuing. for five miles. 


7 Here a river fell in from the North, and in:a fhort time the, current be- 
. tame ftrong and rapid, running with great rapidity among. rocky iflands, 


which were the’ fir that we had. feen i in, this, river, and. indicated our — 


near approach to rapids and falls.. Our prefént courfe was North- 


Welt by North ten miles, North-Weft | three miles, Weft-North-Welt 
“twelve miles, and North-Wet three miles; when we encamped at eight 


wf 


in 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT oF AMERICA, 31. 


"jn ‘the evening; at the foot of an high’ hills on: ‘the’ riofth thore, Which in 1789. 
fothie parts itofe’ perpendicular from the ‘river: “1 imuiiediately afeended i Tt? Cmenymnend 
‘accompanied: by two men ‘dnd 'fome Indiais, 4bd‘in'about an ‘houf and, . 
an‘halfywith very’ ‘hard walking; we gained the fummit, when I was very 

mitch fiurptized to find it crowned by an: ‘encampment. The. Indiahs i int 
forinéd'me, that 'it'is the cuftom of the _people who’ have no arms to 

chioofe théfe' élevatéd {pots for the places of their refidence, as they can 

séfider ‘them ‘naceeffible to their ¢ enemies, ‘particularly the Knifteneaux, 

of Whéin’ they:aré: in’ continual dread. The profpeé from this height _ 

wal iit: fo lextetifive as we: expeéied, as it was terminated by a circular 

Taiige ‘of hills,’ of tlie fame elevation as that on which we-ftood. The in- 

“tervals bétween ‘the: hills were covered with-{mall lakes, which were inha- 

-bitéd. by. gredt ‘iumbers of fwans. ” We faw no trees but the: pine and the 


birch, which were {mall in fize and- few in number, «|. . eb, 
. Wt 


’ 
f 
t 


wt 


1 We ‘were’ ‘obliged ‘to‘fhorten ‘our flay hare, from‘ the {warms of .muf- 
quitoes: which: attacked us on all fides, .and were;"indeed, the only-in- * 
habitants-of: the place. ‘We faw feveral encampments‘of the nativesin . *: 
‘the-coutfe of the ‘day,:but' none of them: were ofthis -year’s eftablifl- 
‘yient:¢ Since four in the afternoon the current had’ been do ‘ftron g that ‘it 
‘was}'at‘length, in' an. aGtual ebullition, and produced an: hiffing noife like. 
‘ackettle of water in’ a moderate ftate of. boiling. The weather was now — —— 
become: cextremely cold, which was the more fenfibly ; felt, as it had been 
‘very: fultryi fore. time before arid fincé we: had been.in the r river. C7 
ns Fa’ Boe cara Se role egg pee 4S ae 

At! fivétin' the morning: the wind and wéather: having undergone NO Saturday. 


stein from vyefterdays ‘we proceeded ‘North«Welt oft by ‘Welt twenty-two 
- rt a / nn miles, 


y i 


é 


3 fo 
! . / 


32 


uly, 
it 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


miles, North-Welt fix.miles, North-Welt by North four miles, and. Wel 
North-Weift five miles: we. then. paffed the’ mouth of.a {mall:river from 


‘the North, and after doubling’ ‘a. -point,, South- Welt ‘one mile, we paffed 


the influx of another -river from the. South. - ‘We then continued our 
courfe North-North-Weft, with a mountain a-head; fifteen miles, when 


the opening of two rivers. appeared oppofite to each other : we then pro. 


ceeded Welt four miles, and North-Weft thirteen miiles,; At eight in the 
evéning, we encamped on an ifland., The current'was,as {trong through 
the whole of this day as it had been the preceding afternoon; neverthelels, 
a quantity : of ‘ice appeared along. the banks. of the river, “The hunters 
kiled a beaver:and.a.goole, the former, of which. fank: before they could 
get to him: : beavers, atters, bears, ‘&e. if fhot dead, at once; remain like 
‘a bladder, but if there remains enough of life for. them to Aregsle, they 


. foon fill with water and go to the bottom. 


& . : 

The fun fet laft night. at fifty-three. minutes.:paft nine, by my watch, 
and rofe at feven minutes before two this morning’: we: embarked-foon 
after, leering North-North-Weft, through iffarids for five miles,.and Weft 
four miles. The river then encreafed in breadth, and the curcent beganto 
flacken 1 ina fmall degree; after the continuation of our courfe, we’ perceiv- 
ed a ridge of high mountains before us, covered with. fnovi, Weit-South- 
Welt ten miles, and at three-quarters paft feven ‘o'clock, we Faw. feveral 
fmokes on the North fhore, which we made. every. ‘exertion to. approach. 
As we drew nearer, we difcovered:the natives. running about im gveéat ap- 
parent confufion; fome were making to the’ woods, and “others hurrying 


_ to their canoes, ~Qur-hunters landed. before us, and vaddneffed the few 


that had not eleapes, 4m: the pe aegessyom: Jangnage, iehichy. fd gueat was 


Vy ‘ther 
wid, f 


s { 


Pane 
Se “S . 
~*~ * . ’ 


. 1 
NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 
heir confufion and terror, they did not appear to ‘underfland. But 
when they perceived that it was impoffible to-avoid us, as we were all 
landed, they. made us figns to keep at a diftance, with which we com- 
plied, and not only unloaded our canoe; but pitched’ our tents; be- 
fore we made any attempt to approach them. During this interval, the 
Englith chief and his young men were employed in reconciling them 
to our arrival: and when they had recovered’ from their alarm, 
of hoftile intention, it appeared that fome of them perfeétly com- 
-. prehended the language of our Indians; fo that they were at length 
_ perfuaded, though not without evident figns of relu€tance’and appre- 
henfion, to come to us. Their reception, however, foon diffipated their 
fears, and they haftened to call their fugitive companions from their 


4 
\ 


i . ‘ 


- hiding places. 


‘There were five families, confifting of twenty-five or thirty perfons, 
and of two different tribes, the Slave and Dog-rib Indians. , We made 
them fmoke, though it was evident they did not know the ufe of tobacco ; 
we likewife fupplied them with grog; but Iam difpofed to think, that 


. they accepted our civilities rather from fear than inclination. We ac- 


- quired a more-effe€tual influence over them by the diftribution of knives, 
beads, awls, rings, gartering, fire-fteels, flints, and hatchets; fo that they 
became more familiar even than we expected, for we could’not keep 
them out of our tents : though I did not obferve that they attempted to 


purloin any thing. 


Thé information which they’ gave refpe@ting the river, had fo much 
of the fabulous, that I fhall not detail it: it will be fufficient jut 
i | ee to 


1. -, 


"1789. 


33: 


* July. ; 


« oar 
~ at 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


to mention their attempts to perfuade us, that it would require feveral 
winters to get to the fea, and that old age would come upon us before 
the period of our return: we were alfo to encounter montfters of fuch 


- horrid fhapes and deftruStive powers as could only exift in their wild 


imaginations. They added, befides, that there were two impaffable falls 

in the river, the firft of which was about thirty days margh from us. 
Though I placed no faith in thele firange relations, they had a very 

different effet. upon. our Indians, who were already tired of the voyage. 


It was their opinion and: anxious wilh, that we fhould not hefitate to 


return. They faid that, according to the information which they had 
received, there were very few animals in the country beyond’ us, and 
that as we proceeded, the {earcity would increafe, and we fhould abfo- 
Jutely perifh from hunger, if no other accident befel us. It was with no 
{mall trouble that they. were. convinced of the folly of thele rea foxings ; 
and, by my defire, they induced one of thofe Indians to accompany 
us, in confideration of a {mall kettle, an axe,a knife, and fome other 


_ articles. * ne 


1 
‘Fhough. it was now three o'clock in the afternoon, the canoe was 
ordered to be reloaded, and as we were ready to embark’ our new 
recruit was defired to prepare himfelf for. his departure, which he would 


‘have declined; but, as none of his.friends would take his place; we may 


be faid, after the delay of an hour, to have compelled him to embark. 
Previous to his departure a ceremony took place, of which I could 
not learn. the meaning: he cut off a lock. of his hair, and having 
divided. it. into three parts, he, faftened: one. of: them to the hair on: the | 

, a . upper. 


N ORTH-WEST CONTINEN T OF AMERICA: 


upper part of his wife's head, blowing on it three times with the utmoft 


1789. 
uly 


35 


violence in his power, and uttering certain words. The other two he a 


faftened with the fame formalities, on.the ‘heads of his two children. 


During our fhort fay with thefe people, they amufed us with dancing, 
which they accompanied with their voices; but neither their fong or 
their dance poffeffed much variety,. The men and women formed a pro- 
mifcuous ring. The former have_a bone dagger or piece of ftick be- 
tween the fingers of the right hand, which they Keep extended above the 
head, in continual motion: the left they feldom raife fo high, but work 
it backwards and forwards in an horizontal dire&tion ; while they leap 
about and throw themfelves into various antic poftures, to the meafure of 
their mufic, always bringing their heels clofe to each other at every 
paufe. The men occafionally howl] in imitation of fome animal, and he 
who continues this violent exercife for the longeft period, appears ‘to 
be confidered as the beft performer. The women fuffer their arms to 
hang as without the power of motion... They are a meagre, ugly, ill- 
. made people, particularly about the legs, which are very clumfy and co- 


vered with fcabs. The latter circumftance proceeds probably from their ~ 


habitually roafting them before the fire. Many of them appeared to be 
. in a very unhealthy late, which is owing, as I imagine, to their natural 


filthinefs.. They are of a moderate ftature, and as far as could be difco-_ 


"-vered, through the coat of dirt and greafe that covers them, are’ ‘of a 
fairer complexion than the generality of Indians who are the natives of 
| warmer r climates. ’ : 
Some of them have their hair of a great lenigth while others fuffer 

a long trefs to fall behind, and the reft-is cut fo fhort as to expofe 
Feo -- their 


a 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


their ears, but no other attentign whatever is paid to it. The beards of 
fome of the old men were long, and the reft had them pulled out by 
the roots, fo that not an hair could be feen on their chins. The men 
have two double lines, either black or blue, tattooed upon each’ cheek, 
from the ear to the nofe. ‘The griftle of the latter‘is perforated fo as 
to admit a-goofe-quill or a {mall piece of wood to be paffed through the 
orifice. . Their clothing is made of the dreffed fkins of the rein or moole- 
deer, though more commonly of the former. Thele they prepare in the 
hair for winter, and make fhirts of both, which reach to the middle 
of their thighs. Some of them are decorated with an embroidery of 
very neat workmanthip with porcupine quills and the hair of the moofe, 
coloured red, black, yellow, and white... Their upper garments are-fuf- 
ficiently, large to cover the whole body, with a fringe round the bottom, 
and are ufed both fleeping and awake. Their leggins come half way up 
the thigh, and are fewed to their fhoes: they are embroidered. round the 
ancle, and upon, every feam. The drefs of the women is the fame as 


that of the. men. The former have no covering on their: private parts, 


except a taffel of leather which dangles from a {mall cord, as it appears, 


Me 


N. 


to keep off the flies, which would otherwife~be very troublefome. ; 
Whether circumcifion be praétifed among them,I cannot pretend to 
fay, but the appearance of it was general among thofe whom I faw. ’- 


/ Their ornaments confift of gorgets, bracelets for the arms and wrifts, 


: made of wood, horn, or bone, belts, garters, and a kind of band to go 


round the head, compofed of {trips of leather of one inch and an half 


~ broad, embroidered with porcupine quills, and ftuck round with the 


claws of bears or wild fowl inverted, to which are fufpended a few fhort 


; thongs of the fkin ofan animal that refembles the ermine, in the form 


of 


’ 


Pe ee a, 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. ™ 87 


* 


of a taffel.. Their cin€tures and garters are formed of. porcupine quills 17h9% 
woven. with finews, in a ftyle of. peculiar fkill and neatnefs: they have -—.—~ 
others of different materials, and more.ordinary workmanthip ; and to 
both they attach a long fringe of ftrings of leather, worked round with 
hair of various colours.. Their mittens are allo"f ifpepded from the 
neck in a pofition convenient for the reception of the hands.. 
| ‘Their lodges are of a very fimple ftrudture: a. few poles fupported by. 
j a fork, and forming a femicircle at the bottom, with fome branches or a: 


i piece of bark as a covering, conftitutes the whole of their native architec- 


‘ture... They. build two of thefé huts facing each other, and make the 
fire. between them.. The furniture harmonifes with'the buildings: they. 
have a few -difhes of wood, bark,. or horn; ‘the veffels.in which. they. 
cook their viuals,. aré’in the fhape of a. gourd, narrow. at. the top and. 


wide at the bottom; and of watape*, fabricated i in fuch a. manner: as tor 


1 
1 


hold water, which is made to boil by putting a fucceffion of red-hot.ftones. 


i 
_/ intoit, Thefe veffels contain from two.o fix gallons. They. have a nums- . 


| ” ber of fmall leather bags to hold their embroidered work, lines,and.nets: - ” 
| They always keep.a large quantity. ofthe fibresiof willow bark, which they ; 
_ work into thread on-their thighs. , Their nets: are: from. three to. forty 
fathoms i in length, and‘from thirteen.te thirty-fix. mefhes j in depth. - The 
fhort.deep ones they. fet in the eddy, current of. rivers; and the long ones 
in the lakes, -They. hkewife make lines. of the finews of the rein-deer,. 
and. .manufaéture their, hooks from wood, horn; or bone. . Theit arms 


and weapons | for hunting, are hows and arrows, {pears, daggers, and poga- 


we ue 


, ** Watape’j is, the name given’ to the divided'roots of the fpruce- fir, which the ‘natives weave into a: 


\ degree of dompagtnels ti that renders i it capable “of' containing a fluid. . The different parts of.the bark’, 


canoes, are, alfo fewed together with this kind of filament. — ‘ . 
co magans;, 


38 


1789: © 
July. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


magans, or clubs. The bows are about five or fix feet in length, and 
the ftrings are of finews or raw fkins. The arrows are two feet and 
an half long, including the barb, which is varioufly formed of bone, 
horn, flint, iron, or copper, and:are. winged with three feathers. The 
pole of the fpears is about fix feet in length, and pointed ‘with a barbed 
bone of ten inches. With this weapon they ftrike the rein-deer in the 


‘water. The daggers are flat and fharp-pointed, about twelve inches 


long, and made of horn or bone: The pogamagon is made ‘of the horn 
of the rein-deer, the branches being all cut off, except that which forms the 


- extremity. This inftrument is about two feet in length, and is employ- 


ed to difpatch their enemies in battle, and fuch animals as they. catch in 
{nares placed for that purpofe. Thefe are about three fathom long, and 
are made of the green {kin of the rein or moofe-deer, but in fuch {mall 


. firips, that it requires from ten to thirty ftrands to make’ this cord, 


whichis not thicker than a codline; and. ftrong enough to refift 
any animal that can be entangled in it. ‘Snares or noofes are. alfo 


_made of finews to take leffer animals, fuch as hares and white partridges, 
which a are very numerous. Their axes are manufa€tured of a piece of 


brown ¢ or grey ftone from fix to eight inches long, and two inches thick. 
The infide is flat, and the outfide round: and tapering to an edge, an 


'.anch wide. They are faftened by the middle with the flat fide inwards 


to an handle two: feet. long, with a cord of green fkin. This is the tool 
with which they fplit their ‘wood, and we belie e, the only one of its kind . 


“among them. They kindle fire, by ftriking tégether a piece of white or 


yellow pytites “and a flint ftone, over a piece of touchwood. They are 
univerfally provided with a fmall bag containing thefe materials, fo that 
they are in a continual. ftate of Preparation to produce fire. From the ad- 

° joining 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


joining tribes, the Red-Knives and Chepewyans, they procure, in barter 
for marten {kins and a few beaver, {mall pieces of iron, of which they 
' manufacture knives, by fixing them at the end of a fhort ftick, and with 


them and the beaver’s teeth, they finifh all their work. They keep them | 


in a fheath hanging to their neck, which alfo contains their awls both of 
iron and horn. 


Their canoes are {mall, pointed at both ends, flat-bottomed and co- 
vered i in the fore part. They are made of the bark of the birch-tree. and 
fir-wood, but of fo flight-a conftru€tion, that the man whom one of thefe 
light veffels bears on the water, can, in return, carry it over land with- 
out any difficulty. Itis very. feldom/that more than one perfon embarks 

‘inf them, nor are they’ capable of receiving more than two. The 
paddles are fix feet long, one half of which is occupied by a blade, 
of. about eight inches wide. Thefe people informed us, that we 
had paffed large: bodies of Indians who inhabit the mountains on the 
alt fide of the river. 


S. 


At four o'clock | in the afternoon we embarked, and.our Indian ace 


39 
278 
‘Jy 


= 


quaintance promifed to remain on the bank of: the river till the fall, in | 


cafe we fhould return. - Our courfe was Weft-South-Well,-and we foon 
pafled the Great Bear Lake River, which is of a confiderable depth, and 
an hundred yards wide: its water is clear, and has the greenilh hue of the 
fea, We.had not proceeded more than fix miles when we were obliged 
to.land,for the night, in confequence of an heavy guilt of wind, accom- 
panied. with rain, We encamped beneath a rocky hill, on. the top of 
‘which, according to. the information of our gnide, it blew a. florm every: 

. day: 


ee 


40 


1739. 
July 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


day throughout the year. He. found himfelf very ‘uncomfortable in 


—~— his new fituation, and pretended that he was very ill, in order that he 


} 


Monday 6, 


Tuefday rE 


might be permitted to return to his relations. To prevent his efcape, 
it became neceflary to-keep a ftriét watch over him during the night, 


At three o’clock, in a very raw and cloudy morning, we embarkéd, 
and fteered Weft-South-Weft four miles, Weft four miles, Welt-North- 


| Welt five miles, Weft eight miles, Weft by South: fixteen miles, Welt 
. ‘itwenty-feven miles, South-Weft nine miles, then Weft fix miles, and 
on “encamped at half paft feven. We pafled through numerous. iflands, 


and had the ridge of fnowy mountains always in fight. Our conduétor 
informed us that great numbers ‘of bears, and {mall white buffaloes, 


frequent thofe mountains, which are alfo inhabited by Indians, We 
encamped ina fimilar fituation to that of the preceding evening, beneath - 


another high rocky hill, which *I attempted to afcend, in company with 
one of the hunters, but before we had got half way to the fummit, we were 
almoft fuffocated by clouds of mufquitoes, and were obliged to. réturn. 
I obferved, however, that the mountains terminated. here, and ‘that a 


' river flowed from the Weftward: I alfo difcovered a ftrong ripling 


current, or rapid, which ran clofe under a fteep precipice of the hill. - 


We. embarked at four in the morning, and ctoffed to the oppo- 


fite fide of the. river, in-confequence of the ‘rapid; but. we might 
have fpared ourfelves this trouble, as there would have been ‘no dan- 
ger in continuing our courfe, without any circuitous deviation what- 
ever. This circumftance convinced us of the erroneous account given 
by the natives of the great and approaching dangers of our navigation, 


* as 


a 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


as'this rapid was-ftated‘to be one of them, Our courfe wasnow North- 
North-Weft‘three miles, Weft-North-Weft: four’ miles, North-Weft 
ten miles;: North two miles, when-we'came to a river'that flowed from 
the Eaftward. Here “we landed at an-encampment of. four fires, all-the 
inhabitants:of which ran off with the utmoft {peed, except an’old man and 
an old woman, Our guide called aloud to. the fugitives, and entreated 
them to ftay, but without effect: the old man, however, -did not hefitate 
_to:approach us, and reprefented himfelf as too far advanced in.life; and 
too indifferent about the fhort time he had.to. remain in the world, to 
be. ‘very’ anxious about elcaping from any danger that threatened. him; 
at the fame time he pulled: this. grey’ hairs from his héad by handfulls to 
diftribute ‘among: ‘us, ‘and implored our favour for himfelf and-his rela- 
tions, ‘Our. “guide, however, at’ length removed his fears, and perfuaded 
him to zecall the fugitives, who confifted of eighteen peoplé; whom-I 
reconciled to me on their return with prefents of beads, knives, awls, &c. 
with which they appeared to be greatly delighted. They differed in 


| no: refpe from thofe whom we had already feen; nor were: they defi- 


cient ia hofpitable attentions; ‘they provided us with fith, which: sas 
very well boiled, and cheerfully ‘accepted by us. Our guide fill 


fickeried- after’ ‘his honte, and. was- fo anxious to return thither, that we ° 


were. c-ynder the neceflity of forcing him:to embark. - 


eer . 
efoos 


“Prete peopl infotmied us that “we were clofe to-another great rapid, 


and‘ that theré' were feveral- lodges: of their relations’ in its vicinity. 
- Four eatioes, with'a man in-each, followed us, to point out the par- 
ticular @haninels ‘we: fhould follow for the fecure paflage of thé rapid. 
. They: ‘alo abounded i in- difcouraging ftories concerning the dangers and 


dittclties which we were to encounter. 
. G From 


_ 42 


1789: 


July. 


| s 


JOURNAL OFA VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


From hence our courfe was North. North- Eaft two- miles, when, the 
river appeared to be enclofed, as it were, with lofty, perpendicular, 
white rocks, which did not afford us a very agreeable profpe&t. : We 
now went on fhore in order to examiné the rapid, but’ did: not perceive 
any figns of it, though the Indians ftill continued to magnify, its, dangers: 
however, as they ventured down, it, in their fall canoes, our appre- 
henfions were confequently removed, and we followed them at fome 
diftance, but did not find any’ increafé in the rapidity of the current; 


_at length the Indians informed us that.we. fhould, find no other rapid 


but that which was now-bearing us along.” ‘The river at this: place is 
‘not above three hundred yards in breadth, but on founding I found 


fifty fathoms’ water?” “At the two rivulets. that offer their tributary ftreams 


from either fide, we found fix. families, confifting’ of about thirty-five 
perfons, who gave us ‘ai ample quantity of excellent fifh, which were, 
Kowever, confined’ to white fifh, the’ poiffon Anconnu, and another of a 


round form and greenifh’ éoloii; -which awas: about fourteen inches in -’: 


length. We gratified theni with ‘a- few prefents, and. continued. our 
voyage, The men, however, followed us.in fifteen canoes. | 
ne - boos, 7 


". This narrow channel is three miles long, and -its courfe- North-North- 


Eaft. We then fteeréd North three miles, and landed ‘at- an encamp- 
ment of three or more families, containing twenty-two perfons, which 
was fituated on the bank of a river, of a confiderable appearance, which 
eaine from the Eaftward. We obtained hares and partridges. from. thefe 
people; and prefented in return fuch articles as, greatly. delighted them. 
They very much ‘regretted that they had ‘no’ goods or merchandize to ~ 
exchange with us, as they had left them. ata Take, from whence the river’. 


"siflued, 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


iffued, sand in ‘whofe: vicinity fome of their people were employed | in 
fetting. {nares for rein, deer. They, engaged to, go. for, their. articles 
of:trade, and would wait- our return, which we affured: them would: be 
within two:months. There was a youth among them in the capacity 


of a flave,' whom our, Indians, underftood. much better than any of the 


natives of, this country; whom . they. had yet feen: he was invited to 
accompany, us, but, took the firft opportunity. to. conceal himfelf, ‘and 
we faw'him no more. at 

“We now. fered Wel five miles, when + we, again 1 landed, and: found 
two families, containing feven people,: but had reafon to_ believe that 
there, were others, hidden: in the woods,, We received from, them two 
dozen. of hares, and they. were about to.boil two more, which they 
alfo gaye.us. We. were not ungrateful for their, kindnefs, ‘and’ left 


them. . Our courfe was: now North-Weft four miles, and at nine we’ 


‘Tande and pitched our tents, when-one of our people killed a grey 
crane. Our conduétor renewed his complaints, not, as he affured . us, 
from any apprehenfion of our ill-treatment, but of the Efquimaux, whom 
he’ reprefented as.a very wicked and malignant people ; who would put 
us_all to. death. He added, alfo; that it was but two fummers. fince a 
large. party: of them’ came up this river, and. killed many of his relations. 
Two: Indians followed. us from the. abt an re 

oat half pal twolin, the f morning we embarked, and fteered a Weltetly v 
courfe, 2 dnd, foon’ after -put. athore.at two lodgés of nine Indians. . We 


Wednef. 8. 


made them:.a. few, trifling -prefents, but without difemnbarking, and .had - 


proceeded | but a fmall diftance from thence, . when. we. obferved feveral 
, . G2 : {mokes 


fee ‘ 
1 ’ 


d4 


178g. 
July. 


Soy perceived the natives climbing the afcent to gain the woods. .The 


v 
Lite 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


{mokes beneath an hill, on the North fhore, and: on our ‘approach we 


Indians, however, in the two {mall canoes’ which. were ahead of us,. 


having affured them of our friendly intentions,‘ they returned: to their, 


fires, and we difembarked. : Several of them were clad in. hare-fkins, 


‘but in every other circumftance they: refenbled thofe- whom we had 


already feen, . We were, however, informed that they were of a different 
tribe, called ‘the ‘Hare Indians, as hares and fifh are’ their principal: fup- 
port, from the {carcity of rein-deer and beaver, which are the. only 
animals of the larger kind that frequent this ‘part. of the country, 
They were twenty-five in number; and among them was-a woman who, 
was afflicted with an abcefs i in, the belly,’ and. reduced, in confequerices Z 
to a mere ‘fkeleton: at the fame time feveral old. women -were finging: | 

and howling’ around her ‘but whether. .thefe noifes were to operaté as.a 
charm for’ her cure, or inerely. toamufe and confole her, I do hot ‘pre- 


tend to determine. A- fall quantity of our: ufual’ prefents were | 


received bre them with the greatel fatisfaction. ° 

Here we made an exchange of our guide, who had become fo. trouble- 
fome that we were obliged to watch him night and day, except ‘wher 
he was upon the water. The man, however, who had’ agreed to go. int 


" his place foon repented of his engagement, and endeavoured to perfiade - 


us that fome of his relations further. down the river, would readily ac- 

company us, and. were much better acquainted with thé river than him- 
felf. But, as. he. had. informed. us ten minutes before. that we fhould fee 
no.’ ‘mare of his tribe, we paid: very lnttle attention. to. his remonflrances, 


and compelled bim to embark. oe foe \ 


Lt 


es 
o- |  , Fi 

Too, “ye x ga 
. . ; . 


ye 


NORTH WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


In about three hours a man overtook us ina {mall canoe, and we, 


iz 


78h. 


fulpeéted that his obje&t was to facilitate, in fome way or other, the Siew 


elcape -of our conduétor. About twelve we alfo obferved an Indian 


walking along the North- Eaft fhore, when the’ {mall canoes paddled . 


towards him. We accordingly followed, and found three men, three 


women, and two children, who had been on.an hunting expedition. - 


They had-fome fleth of the rein-deer, which. they offered.to us, but it 
was" {6 rotten, as well as offenfive to the fmell, that we excufed our- 
felves- from: aecepting it. ‘They had, alfo their: wonderful ftories of 


danger ‘and: terror, as well as their countrymen, whom we had already 


feen; and we were now-informed, that behind the oppofite ifland:there 


was a Manitoe or {pirit, in. the. river, which fwallowed every perfon that . 


: approached it. ‘As it would have employed half a: day to: have indulged’ 
our curiofity in proceeding to examine this phatiomenon, we did: not 
deviate from our courfe; but. left thefe people-with the ufual prefeiits, 
and proceeded on our voyage. ' Our courfe and diftance:this day. were 
Weft twenty-eight, miles, Welt-North-Weft twenty-three miles, Welt- 


South-Weft fix miles, Weft by North five miles, South-Weft four miles,. 


and encamped: at “eight ‘o'clock. A fog prevailed. the greater part of 
the ay, with frequent fhowers: of final xain.. a 


an ~ + ; %, 
‘ : ot * tok . CHAP: 
- te + ’ 


ay 


4 


46 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


CHAPTER Iv. 4. 


The new guide. makés his. efcape. |, Compel. another to fupply his. place, 
Land .at an encampmient of another tribe of. Indians... Account of their 
mannersy—arefs, -weapons, Be. Traffic with, them, - Defeription. of a 
beautiful fit. Engage another guide. His curious behaviour. . Killa 

fox and ground-hog. Land at an encampment of .a tribe called the 

7 _ Deguthee’ Denees, or Quarellers. Saw flax growing wild. The varying 
 » charatier of the river and :tts. banks. Diftant, mountains, .,Perplextty 
Srom the namerous channels, of the river. Dete?mined to proceed... Land. 

“where there had been ‘an: ‘encampment of the Efguimaux. . Saw, large, ; 

- flocks: of wild, fowl.’ View of the fun’ at midnight, - Defeription of 4. 

: place: lately, deferted by. the Indiains, Houfés of the natives deferibed. 
‘Frequent fhowers. Saw a black fox. The difcontents of our. hunters re- 

‘newed, and pacified. - Face of the. country. ,Land.at:a [poe lately. anha- 
| bited. Peculiar circumftances of it. Arrive. at the entrance of the lake 
Proceed to an epand. Some account of- tt. 


et glus v8 
+ a tots 
a “oe en. 


— "Tuunper and raif prevailed during the night, and, in the courle 
of it, our guide deferted; we therefore compelled another of thefe 

| pedple,: very much againf his will, to fupply. the place of his fugitive 
countryman. We alfo took away the paddles of one of them who 


‘yemained 


4 
an 
See, 


CON TINENT: OF AMERICA. 


‘NORTH. WES) 


remained’ behind, that_ he might not follow tis on any. {cheme.of pro- | 


-moting the efcape of his companion, viho was not eafily pacified, ; At 
length,’ however, we ' fucceedéd in the aét of conciliation, and .at, half 
, paft three quitted our ftation. «In. a.fhort:time ‘we faw a {moke on the 
Eaft fhore; and direéted our courfe towards it. Our new guide began 
immediately ‘to call to.the people that belonged to it in a particular 
manner, which we did not comprehend. He informed: us that -they 


. were not of his tribe, but were a very wicked, malignant people, who 


would: beat us- cruelly, pull our hair with great violence from our heads, 
and mal-treat us in ‘various other ways 

. Themen waited 0 our, arrival, but the women and children took to the 
‘woods. There were but, four of thefe people, and previous to our land- 
ing, ‘they a all harangued us at the: fame, moment, and apparently with 
“violent anger and refentment.. Our hunters did not underftand them, 
_ but.no fooner had. our guide addrefled them, than they were appeafed. 
' I prefented them with beads, awls, &c.- and when. the women and chil- 
dren returned from the woods, they were gratified with. fimilar articles. 
There : were fifteen of them; and of a more pleafing appearance than 
any, which ‘we had_ hitherto. feen, as they were healthy, full of flefl, 
and . clean in, their perfons. Their language. was fomewhat , different, 
but, I, believe. chiefly in the accent, for they and our, guide converfed 
intelligibly with each other;. and the En glifh chief ‘clearly comprehended 
one e.pf them, though he was not himfelf underftood. . 


: J 


’ 
eyipt my 


"Their arms, s and: utenti differ but little from t thole which have ‘been) 


deforibed j In a former chapter. ‘The cconly 3 iron they havei isin fall pieces; \ 
- 7 - ; SO ; - me : which 


| 


Gale ' 
7 
JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE | 


which ferve them for: knives, - They obtain ‘this metal,'frami the Efqui, - 
maux Indians, . ‘Their arrows are made of very light wood,, and are winged 
only with two feathers; ; their Bows differed ‘from any which we.had fen, 
and we underftood that they were furnifhed by the Efquimaux, who are 
their neighbours: they confilt. of. two pieces, with a, very ftrong. cord — 
of finews along the back, which is ‘tied.in feveral places,. to preferve its 
fhape; when this cord becomes wet, it requires a ftrong. bower) ng, and _ 


a powerful arm to draw it... The - -veffel:in. which they prepare their 


_ food, is: made of a.thin. frame: of wood,.and of. an oblong, fhape; the 


bottom is fixed in a curve, in the fame.manner as a cafk. )‘Their fhirts 
are not cut fquare at the bottom, but taper to a point, from the belt 
downwards as low as-the knee, both before and behind; with a border, 
embellifhed ‘with a fhort fringe. They ufé alfo Another’ Fringe, fimilar 
to that which fias ‘been already defcribed, with: the. addition of the flone 
of a “grey faritiaceous berty, of the fize and Shape: ofa large barley- 


com: itis of a brown colour, and fluted, and bemng- bored ‘18 Fun on 


~ each Atring of the fringe} with this they decorate their fhirts, by fewing 


- it in ‘a femicircle ‘on the breaft and back,, and: créfling: over* ‘both 


Ahoulders ; the fleeves are wide and thort, but the mittens fapply. their 


deficiency, as they are long enough. to’ reach over a part ‘of the fleeve, 
and are “commodioutly fufpended by a ‘cord from the- neck.” Bes their 
leggins were made with waiftbands, they might with great ‘propriety be 


denominated trowfers: they faften them with ‘a’ cord’ round the’ middle, 


\ 


fo that they appear to have a ‘fenfe of decency, which their’ neighbours. 
cannot boalt, Their fhoes are fewed to their leggins, and decorated on - 
‘every feam. “One of the men was clad in a thirt ‘made of the ‘Kins of the 
miulk-rat “The drels of the'y women is the fame as that of the men, except 


regen ot “ - a 
ween og : 


+ in 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA.” 


in their fhirts, which are longer, and without thé finifliing of a fringe on . 
their breaft, Their peculiar mode of tying the hair is as follows:—that 


which grows on the temples, or the fore part of the {kull, is formed into 
two queues, hanging down before the edrs; that of the {calp ‘or crown 
, is fafhioned in the fame manner to the-back of the neck, and is then tied 
_ with the reft of the hair, at fome diftance from the head. A thin cord 
is employed for thefe purpofes, ‘and very neatly worked with hair, 
artificially coloured. The women, and, ‘indeed, fome of the men, let 
their hair hang loofe on their r thoulders, whether i it be long or fhort. 


We purchafed a couple of very large moofe fkins from them, which 
_were very well dreffed; indeed. we did not fuppofe that there were any 


of thofe animals in the country; and it appears from the accounts of ~ 


the natives themfelves, that they are very {carce: As for the beaver, the 
exiftence of fuch a creature does not feem to be known by them, Our 
people bought fhirts of them, and many curious articles, &c. They 
prefented us with a moft delicious fith, which was lefs than an her- 
‘ring, and: very beautifully {potted with black and yellow : its dorfal 
fin reached from the head to the tail; in its expanded fiate takes a 
triangular form, and? is variegated With the colours that enliven the 
fcales: the head. is very fall, gad the mouth i is armed with fharp- 
* pointed teeth, 


«We prenile onthe native whofe language was moft intelligible, to 


accompany ys. -He informed us that we fhould fleep ten nights more 
before we arrived at-the fea; that feveral of his relations réfided in the 
“immediate yicinity'of this part of the river, and ‘that in’ three nights we 


, 


_. Cj #H fhould - 


eee enti 


§O 


i 489. 
july. 


JOURNAL OF A “VOYAGE THROUGH THE | 
fhould meet ‘with the Efquimaux, with. whom they had, formerly ade 


Lennon war, but were now in a ftate of peace and amity. He mentioned the 


‘ 

i 
i 
a * 


laft Indians whom .we had feen in terms of great, dénifiens defcribing 
them as being no better than old wemen,,andi,as. abominable liars; 
which coincided with the notion we already encerigined. of shes. 1: 


r Lot 


_ As-we ‘puthed off, r,fome of my men.. difchanged thee fouling -pieces, 

that were only loaded, with. _ powder, at: . shé” report. af which the 
Indians were very mu¢h. alarmed, as they had‘not before heard: the dif- 
charge of fire arms. This circumftance had fuch an effeft upon our 
guide, that we had reafon to.apprehend. he would not, fulfil his: promife. 
When, however, he-was informed that the noife! which.e had heard was 
a fignal of friendthip, he was pérfuaded. to. embark: in his..own. fall 
canoe, though he: had been: offered,a feat in omrss oo bls 

oo Pas le, 
 Fwo of his companions, whombe reprefented ‘as his brotliers, followed 
us.in their canoes; and they amiuled us:ndt only, with their native fongs, 
hut with; others, in imitation, of the, Efquimaux ;.'and:our new guide.was 
{o enlivened: by them, that the antics:he -peiformed;: in:keeping-time to 
the finging, alarmed. us with::continual ‘apprehénfiow, that. his: boat — 
rauft.upfet; but-he was, not, long: contenit, witht hisconfined: Rtwation;: and 
paddling up along-fide our canoe, requefted us to receive: Bind;:4n jit, 
though but a fhort time before he had refolutely refufed to accept our 
invitation, .No_fooner had he entered. our. canoe, thab,ihe began, to 
perform an Efquimans. dance; tg,ourndfmallalarm. He; wiass;eow: 
ever, foon prevaileduponto-be,maore tradquils: when bebeganse difplay 
various: anderen iets acearding tO. > the. caftoms: Of the Bfquimatexs: of 

~ _.which 


NORTH.WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


which he boafted an intimate acquaintance. On our putting to fhore, 
in’ order to leave his canoe, he informed us, that on the oppofite hill the 
Efquimaux, three winters before, killed his grandfather. We fawa fox, 
and a ground hog on the hill, the latter of. which the brother of our 
puide thot with his bow and arrow. . 4 


. About four in the afternoon we perceived a fmoke on thé Welt fhore, 
when we traverfed and landed. The ‘tatives ‘made a’ moft terrible 
uproar, talking with great vociferation, and running about as if they 
‘were deprived of their fenfes, while the greater part of the women, with 
the children, fled away. Perceiving the diforder. ‘which our appearatice 
occafioned among thefe people, we had waited fome time before we 
‘quitted’ the canoe; and I have no doubt, if. we had been without 
people to introduce us, that they would have attempted fome violence 
againft us; for when the Indians fend away their women and children, it 
is always with an hoftile defign. . At length we. pacified’ them with the 
‘ufual prefents, but.they preferred. beads to any of the articles that I 
-offered them; particularly. fuch’ as ‘were of a blue colour; and one-of 
them even requefted to exchange a knife ‘which T had given him for a 
{mall quantity of thofe ornamental baubles, I purchafed of them two 
 fhirts: for my ‘hunters; and at the fame time they prefented tne’ with 
fome: arrows, and. dried fifh.. Fhis party confifted . of five families; to 
the amount, as I: fuppofe, of farty men, women, and children; bat I did 
“pot fee: them all; as feveral were afraid to: venttire from ‘their hiding- 
| “place: They are called Deputhee-Dinces, or the Guarfvellers, . 


_ Our guide, like his predeceffors, now manifefted his. with to leave us, | 


He _~and 


BY 
1789. 


ly, 
a 


vw 


52 JOURNAL? OFA VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


i789 and entertained fimilar apprehenfions that we fhould not return by this . 
=e paflage. He had his alarms alfo refpe&ting the Efquimaux, who might 
kill us, and take away the womeri. ' Our Indians, however, affured him 
that we had no fears of any kind, and that he need not be alarmed for 
himfelf. They alfo convinced him that we ‘fhould return: by the way 
"we were going, fo that he confented to re-embark without giving us 
any further trouble ;'and eight fmall canoes followed us. . Our courfes 
this day were South-Weft by Weft fix miles, South-Weft by South 
thirty miles, South-Weft three miles, Welt by South twelve miles, Weft 
' by North two miles, and ' we encamped at eight 1 in the. evening c on the 
‘Eaftern bank of the river. 


The Indians whom I found here, informed me, that from the place 
ij where I this morning met the firft of their tribe, the diftance overland, on 
a - the Eaft fide, to the fea, was not long; and that from hence, by pro- 
ceeding to the Weftward, it was {till fhorter. They alfo reprefented the 
Jand on both fides as projedting to a.point. . Thefe people do not appear 
to harbour any thievifh difpofitions; at leaft we did not perceive that ~ 
they took, or wanted to take, any thing from us by ftealth or artifice. 
They enjoyed the amufements of dancing and Jumping in commen with 
thofe we had already feen; and, indeed, thefe-exercifes feem to.be their — 
favourite diverfions, About mid-day the weather was fultry, but in the 
afternoon it became cold, There was a large quantity of. wild flax,.the 
growth. of the laft year, laying on the ground, and the new plants were . 
{prouting up through it, This circumftance T did not oblerye in any 


other part, | 


f 


At 


eq 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT. OF: AMERICA, | 


_ At four in the’ morning we embarked, at a {mall diftance from the place 
of our éncarnpment; the river, which ‘here becomes narrower, . flows 
between high: rocks; and a meandring courfe took us North-Weft four 
miles. ‘At.this {pot the; ‘banks. became low; indeed, from the firft rapid; 
the country. does not wear a mountainous appearance; -but the banks of 


the river. are generally lofty, in fome places perfeétly naked, and in - 


others: well. covered, ‘with {mall trees, fuch as the fir and the birch. 
We continued our ‘laft.courfe for two. miles, with mountains before us; 


’ 


whole tops. were ‘coveréd: with fnow. © 


, 
bootogsy ’ - 
ode * “ +4 


. The land islow on. both fides of the river, except thefe mountains, 
whofe bale is diftant. about ten miles: here the river. widens, and runs 
through various channels, formed by iflands, fome of which are without 
a tree, and little. more than banks of mud and fand; while others are 
covered with: a kind of. {pruce -fir;-and trees of a’ larger fize than we 
had feen- for-the Jatt: ten days. . Their banks, which are about fix feet 
above the furface of the water, difplay a face of folid ice, intermixed 
with veins, of. black: éarth and as the: heat of the fun melts the ice, the 
trees frequently, fall into;the-tiver,. 00) 2 


¢, 


ee Seer are Me . - Loe bole : 
So various were the ‘chantiels of the river: at this: tine, that we were 
at a lofs which to. take.’ Our guide preferred, the Eafternmoft, on ac- 


count, of the ‘Efquimaux,} but I determined to take the middle channel, as 


it appeared 4 4o,be.a larger, body of water, and running:North and: South : i 


befides, as there,was, agreater chance of feeing them corieluded, that. we 


could always go to the Eaftward, whenever we might prefer it, Our courfe 


was 


53 


1 8 ry 
tee 


Friday 10. 


JOURNAL OF A: VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


was now Welt by North fix miles; North-Weft by Welt, the {nowy moun. 
tains‘ being Weft by South from: us, and ‘ftretching to the Northward as 


“far aswe could fee. ‘According to the information of the Indians, they 


are part of the chain of mountains.which we:approached.on the third 
of this month. I-.obtained an obfervation. this day that gave’ me 67, 47. 
North latitude, which was farther North than I éexpeéted, according to the 
courfé I kept; but the difference was owing to: the variation of the com- 
pafs,, which was more Eafterly than. I-imagined. F rom ‘hence it was 
evident that thefe waters emptied .themfelves. into the Hyperborean 


‘Sea; and though it was probable that, from the want of provifion, we 


could:.not return to Athabafca inthe couife’ of: the feafon, I neverthe- 


-lefs;. determined ‘to’ penetrate | to the difcharge of : ‘themy : rote 


t . r 
Parad Lite be : . ve a rey 
yarns a to aan . pr tae Tat een 


My new condaétor being very much: difcouraged.and* quite tired of 


his fituation, ufed. his influence :to; prévent’our! proceeding. He lad 
never been,:he faid; at:.the:/Benahulla Toe;or White'Man’s Lake; and 
that. when he went to the Efquimatx! hake, which isat-no great diftance, 
he paffed dver land fromithe plage where Wwe'fotind: him, and to that part 
where the Efquimaux pafs the fummets “n-forty my hunters allo be- 


or,came fo difheartened from thefe accounts, and other circumftances, that 


T'was confident they would have‘léft me; if-ie-had ‘béeni i ni their power. 
I, however; fatisfied:them,:in fome’ dépreppbytheulffirahes,: that I would 
proceed onwards :but :feven ‘days iiore; and if .did'not ‘theri-get to the 
fea,:L-would ‘return; «Indeed;thelow! fate: of: wat provifions, without 
any? other: confiderdtion; formed 2 a-very- fufficlentnteciitiry for the’ main- 


enya a 5 Wes 
ta eR rn 


2 Sor eet 
ata da te eras! en 


dora away smuda Dawa iet nics o3e oS” tenance 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF. AMERICA. 55 


tenance df ‘thy engagement. Our laft courfe was.thirty-two miles, with itt: 
a ftronger current than could: be: cexpetied | in fach alow country, | yaw 
a a My ela Nie ma 
. We now: prodedded North: Worth Welt four ailes, North. Well three! 
miledy NorthsEalt two: miles,«North-Weft by Welt three miles; did 
Narth-Eadh two’ miley «At half palit eight in the’ evening we landed and! 
pitched-ourlitents, near. to.wherd:there had. been. three encampments of 
the: Edquimaux;:fince the ‘breaking up of the:ice,. . Fhe natives, who fol- 
lowed-us yefterddiy; left ws at.our’ ftation this’ irorning,  Ia-the ‘courle 
of. the day we: law large flocks:of wild fowl «7. ...0 0: be PUT " 
, rol Cisuhowolg tude, 7 Oo 
I fat up all night to obferve the fun, At half paft twelve I called up Saturday 11. 
one of. the :men, to. view: a fpeétacle, which. he: had bevér, before! feen ; 
when, ¢ on.feeing the fun, fo high,: he: thought! it .wadia/figual to embark, 
and hegan to, call. the:xeft of his companions; who: would:fearcely: be pert 
fuaded.by me, that. the fun-hag not deleehded ‘nedrer to thedorizon; and 
that; itpwas new; but a. fhort time: opel Byidhight,;.. ono bras banc cs 
Lg gy pte be Cre 
- We <pofehi however, till three quarters: after.three, ‘whien we: ‘entered , 
the canoe, and. fleered‘about North-Welt; the river. taking..a very: fers 
pentine. courfe..;, About feveti we faw a ridge’ of" highi land sist owelwe 
weilanded at. a: fpat where: we ‘obferved thap-forhe sof: the natives: had 
- Tately-beenta counted, thirty places-where theres had! beer? firey yaad: 
fome ofthe mon: who:went further, :faw assmany mord.th Theyinnalt have 
been-here,for acépfderable time! though itrdoesendp appeir thibt they 
had exeRted, any: huitss.,.Ao greatl umber" of ipolesy howevet;:wete: feen 
fixed ia:theriver;towhich-they hid:attached theizsiets;and there feesned 
; to 


56 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


. 780" to be an excellent fifhery. One of tlie; fith, of the many which we faw 
temy--, Jeap out of the water, fell into our canoe; it was. about ten inches 
long,, and of a round fhape. »About the places where they had made 

their fires were fcattered pieces of whalebone, and thick burned leather, 

with parts of the frames of three canoes; we could alfo obferve where 

they had fpilled train oil; and there was the fingular appearance of a 

| {pruce fir, ftripped of its: branches. to the. top like an Englifh may-pole. 

The weather was cloudy, and the air cold and ‘unpleafant. From this 

place for about five. miles, the river widens, it then flows in a variety 

of narrow, meandering channels, amongit low. illands, enlivened with no 

trees, but a few dwarf willows. . | 


“At Bui, we landed, where there were three houfes, or rather huts, be- 

longing to the natives. .. The ground-plot is of an oval form, about 

.. ~ fifteen. feet long, ten feet wide i in the middle, and eight:feet at either 
end :. the whole of it is dug about, twelve inches: below the furface of 

: ‘the ground, and one half of it is covered over-with-willow ‘branches; 
which probably ferves as a bed for the whole family. A pace, in 

' the middle of the other part, of about four -feet - wide, is deepened 
twelve inches more, and’ is the only fpot ‘i in the houfe-where a grown’ 

* perfon can: fland upright, One fide of it is-covered, as has been 

; already’ deferibed, and the other is the hearth. ia fire-place, of which, 
however,.they do not make much ufe. - Though it was clofe to the - 

: wall, the. lattér.\did not appear to be’ burned... The. ‘door: or entrance . 

} js; in the middle. of one’ end of the houfe,.and:i is) ‘about two feet and 
7 an half high and. two feet wide, and has a covered way: oF: porch five 
feet in length; fo that it is: abfolutely neceflary to creep ‘om ‘all fours 


on ; . : ‘ . in 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. ' 


in order to get into, or out of, this curious habitation. There is an hole 
of about eighteen inches {quare on the top. .of it, which ferves the three 
fold: purpofe. of a window, an occafichnal door, and a chimney. The 
under-groufd part of the floot is lined with fplit wood. Six or eight 


| ftumps of {mall: ‘trees driven into the. ‘earth, with the root upwards, on | 


1789. 
July. 


" which~are! Iaid fomne crofs pieces of timber, fupport the roof of the.’ 


building, ‘which is an oblong fquare of ten feét by fix. The. whole 
__ is made of difift:wood:coyered with branches-and dry grafs; over which 
. is laid a:foot deep of earth,-- On each ‘fide of thefe houfes are a few 
 {quare holes in the ground of about two feet in depth, which are covered 
‘with, {plit-wood and earth, except in the middle, Thefe appeared to 
be contrived for the prefervation of the winter flock of provifions. In 
and. about: the houfes we found “ledge runners and bones, pieces of 
: whaleboge,-and poplar bark cut: in circles, which are ufed as corks to 
buoy. the- nets, and ‘are fixed to them by pieces . of whalebone. Before 
each hut a’ great number.of ftumps of trees weie fixed in the ground, 
upon which it appeared that they hung their fifh to odry. 


We now continued our voyage, ‘and encamped at eight’o’clock, ‘I 


calculated: our courfe at about North-Wefl, and, allowing for the wind- 


ings;that we: had’ made:fifty-four miles. We expeéted, throughout the 
day; to-meet with fome of'the natives. On feveral of the iflands we per- 
ceived: the-print.of their feet in the fand,’as if they-had been‘there but a 
few days before; to procure wild fowl. There were frequent fhowers of 
ram:in the afternoon, ‘and the weather was raw and difagreeable: We faw 


ai black: fox »but-trees were’ now become very rare objeéts, except a afew 


dwarf willows, of i06t riore thati-tlifee feet in height. ; 
- ye I The 


ey. ~ 


July. 


- JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


The difeontents of our ' hunters were now renewed by the accounts 


“—v—-" which’ our guide had, been giving of that part of our voyage that was 


Sunday 12, 


approaching, According to his information, we were. to’ fee a larger 
Jake on the morrow. Neither he nor his relations, he faid, knew any 
thing about it, except that part which is oppofite to, and not far from, 
their country. The Efquimaux alone, he added, tnhabit its fhores, and 
kill a large fith that is found'in it, which is 4 principal part of their food; 
this, we prefiimed, muft be the whale. He alfo mentioned white bears 


and another large animal which was feen in thofe parts, but.our hunters - 
. could not underftand the defeription which he.gave of it. | He alfo re- 


prefented their canoes as being of a large conftruétion, which would com _ 


modioufly contain four or five families. However, to réconcile the 
Englifh chief to the neceflary continuance in my fervice, . I! prefented 
him with: one of my capots or travelling coats; at the fame time, to 
fatisfy the guide, and keep him, if poffible, in-good: humour; I gave him 


a {kin of the’ moofe-deer, which, in his, opinion, was.a valuable prefent. 
: a . 7 


It rained with violence throughout the‘night, and till two in the morn- | 


ing; the weather’ continuing very cold, We proteeded onthe fame 
meandering courfe as. yelterday, ‘the wind: North-North-Weft, and: the 
country fo naked that fcarce a fhrub was to be feen, Attenin the'morn- 
ing, we landed where there were four huts , exattly the fame- as. thofe 
which have been fo lately defcribed.. .The adjacent land ‘is: high 
and covered with’ fhort grafs and. flowers, ‘though: the earth was not 


thawed above’ four inches from the furface; beneath which was a 


folid body of ice. This beautiful : ‘appearance, however, was. ftrangely 


contrafted with the i ice and {now. that’ are. {een in. the vallies. “Lhe foils. 


“where 


™ 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 59 


where there is any} is a yellow clay mixed with ftones. . Thefe huts ap- 1789. 
pear. to have been inhabited during the laft winter ; and we had reafon’—v—-~ 
to, think, that fome of the natives had been lately there, as the beach 
was covered with the track of their feet. Many of the runners and bars _ 
of their fledges were laid together, near the houfes, in a manner that 
feemeéd to-denote the return of the proprictors. There were alfo pieces 
-of netting made. of finews, and fome bark of the willow. The thread of 
the former was plaited, and no ordinary portion of time muft have been ; 

_ employed in manufa@turing fo great a length of cord. A fquare ftone- 
kettle, with a flat bottom, alfo occupied our attehtion, which was capable~ 
of containing two gallons ; and we were. puzzled .as to the means thefe 

employed to have chifelled it out of a folid rock into 


4 
i 


people muit have 
its ¢ refent. form. | To thefe articles.may be added, {mall pieces of flint 
fixed into handles of wood, which, probably, ferye as knives feveral ce 
wooden difhes; the ftern and part of a large canoe; pieces of very thick 
leather, ‘which we conjeétured to be the covering of a-Canoe; feveral — 

' bones of large fith, and two heads; but we could not determine the ani- _ 
malto which they belonged, though we conjeftured that it muft be the ~ 

fea-horfe. | fe oe 


ro 


-; When:we had fatisfied our curiofity we re-embarked, ‘but. we’ were 
at.a lofs what courfe.to fleer, as.our guide feemed to be as ignorant of 

| this country as ourfelves. Though the current was very ftrong, we ap- 
peared to have come to the entrance of the lake. The ftream fet to the ; J 
Weft, and.we went with it to an high point, at the diftance of about eight - 
miles, which we conjeétired to be an ifland; but, on approaching it, we ; 
perceived it.to be connetted with the fhore by alow neck of land, I now 

‘ la. took 


a — 
™. . j ca . ~ ' 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


took an obfervation which gave 69, 1. North latitude. From the point 


‘that has been jaft mentioned, we continued the fame -courfé for the 


Welternmoft point of an high, ifland, and’ the Welternmolt Hand t in fi ehh 
at the diftance of fifteen miles. ay Stag fee 

The lake was quite open to us to the Weftward,.and out.of the channel 
of the river there was not more than four feet water,! and in fome places 
the depth did not exceed one foot. From the: ‘fhallownels. of the 
water it was" impoffible to’ coaft tq the.’ Weftward. :: At five o'clock - 
we arrived at the ifland, and during the’ laft fifteen. miles, five feet was 
the deepeft water. _The lake now appeared to be covered with ice, for 
about two leagues diftance, and‘no land ahead, fo that-we were prevented 
from proceeding in this direétion by the 1 ice, and. the fhallownels of the 
water along the fhore. : i | 


; we 
; ee 
o, ‘ - 

Ad aod v 


‘We landed at the boundary of our voyage in this direftion,. and as 
foon as the tents were pitched I ordered the-nets.to be. fet, when I pro- 
ceeded, with the Englifh chief to the. higheft part of. the ‘ifland, from 
which we difcovered the folid ice, - extending from the-South+Welt-by ~~ 
compals to the Faftward. As. far as the eye could reach to the South- 
Weftward, we could dimly perceive a: chdin of moiisitains,ftretching 
further to the North than the edge ef the ice, at thé diftance:of upwards 
of twenty leagues. To the-Eaftward we faw many iflands, and in our 


" progrefs we met with a confiderable number ‘of. white partridges, now 


become brown: There were alfo” flocks of very beautiful: plovers, 


and: I found the nef of one of them with four eggs. « White. ‘owls,’ 


likewile, were among: the ‘inhabitants of the place: but ‘the dead, as 
; well 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA., or 61 


well as the, living, demanded our attention, for we came to the grave of x79. 
: uly. 


one of the natives, by which lay a bow, a paddle, and a fpear. The -—~—_—=n 


Indians informed me fhat they landed on a {mall ifland, about four 
leagues from hence, where they had feen the tracks of two men, that'wére 
quite frefh; they had alfo found a fecret {tore of train oil, and feveral 
bones of white bears were fcattered about the place where it was hid. 
The wind was now fo high that it was impracticable for us to vifit the 


Cores chiens 


nets. - . ‘ " , : , oS i 


. My people could not, at t this tine, refrain from expreffions of real 
“concern, that they were - obliged to. return without reaching ‘the fea: 

_ indeed the hope of attaining this obje& encouraged them to bear, with- 
out Tepining, the hardittips of our unremitting voyage. For fome time 

paft their fpirits were animated by the expeétation. that another, day 
would bring them to the Mer d’oueft; and even in our prefent- fituation 
they declared their readinefs to follow me wherever I fhould be pleafed 

to lead them. We faw feveral large white gulls, and. other birds, whole. 

back, and: upper feathers of the wing, 2 are brown; and whole ‘belly, and 
under “feathers of- the-wing are white. . 


CHAP. 


| 


i 
4s 
c 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE’ , - | 


CHAPTER v. 


we” 


The baggage removed from the rifihg of the water. One of the nets driven 


dway by the wind and current. Whales are Seen. Go in pur fuit of them, - 


bit prevented from continuing it by the fog. Proceed to take a view 


of the ice. Canoe in danger from the fwell. Examine the iflands. 


| Deferibe one of them. Erétt a poft to perpetuate our v efit there. The 
“rifing of the water appears to be the tide. Succefs ful Filhing. Uncertain 


weather. Sail among the. iflands. Proceed to a river. Temperature 
of the air improves. Land on a‘ fmall ifland, ‘whichis a place of fepul- 
ture, Defcription of i wt. See a great number of wild fowl. Fine view 
of the’ river from the “high land. The hunters kill rein-deer. Cran- 
berries, Gc. found in great ‘plenty. The appearance and fiate of the 


, Lountry. Our guide deferts. Large flight of Eeefe: kill many. of 
them. Violent: rain, Return up the river. Leave the channels jor the 


main fiream. Obliged to tow the canoe. Land among the natives. 
Circumsptances concerning them. Thei* “acount of the Efquimaux: 


Indians, Accompany the natives to their huts. Account of our 


“provifions, ‘ 


- 2989, 
Joly. 


Keemonyrtetnaned 
Monday ag. 


. \ VE E had no fooner retired to reft laft night, if I may. ‘ufe that expret 


fion, 1 in a country where the fun never finks beneath the horizon, than fome | 
of the people were obliged to rife and remove the baggage, on account 


of 


7 oY 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


of ngs of the water. At eight-in the morning the weather was pice 
uly, 
fine and calm, which afforded an opportunity to examine the nets, one -—~—" 


of which had been driven. from its pofition by the wind and current. 
We caught feven poiffons in¢onnus, which were unpalatable; a white 
fith, that proved delicious;'and another about the fize of an herring, 
which none of us had ever feen before, except.the Englifh chief, who 
recognized ‘it.as being ofa kind that abounds in Hudfon’s Bay. About 
noon the wind bléw hard ‘from. the Weftward, when I took an obfer- 
vation, which gave 6g. 14. North latitude, and the meridian variation of 
the compaf{s was. thirty-fix degrees Eaftward*. 


This afternoon I re-afcended the hill, but. could not difcover that the 
ice had. been put in motion by the force of the wind.. At the fame time 
E could juft diftinguifh two fmall iflands in ‘the ice, to the North-Weft 
by compafs. Inow thought it neceffary to give a new net to my men 
to mount, in. order to. ebtain as. much. provifiom as poffible from the 
water, our ftores being reduced to. about five hundred weight, which, 
without any. other fupply,. would ‘not have fufficed. for. fifteen people 


Q 


1989 


above twelve days, One of the young Indians, however, was fo-fortu-—_— 


nate as to find the net that had heen mill ing, and which contained. three: 


of the poiffons inconnus.. 


63 


. It blew very hard: from the N orth-Weft fince the preceding evening, Tuelry 14, 


Having fat up till three in the morning, I flept longer than ufual; but | 


' about éight one of:my men {aw a.great many. animals.in the water, which: 


:* The longitude. has: fitice. been difcovered ‘by the. dead reckoning to be 195, Weft.. 
° he 


” 64 


“Be 
July: 
renee 


_ JOURN AL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


‘she at firlt fuppofed to be pieces of i ice.. About nine, however, I. was 
awakened to'‘refolve the doubts which had. takén_ place: refpeéting this 
extraordinary appearance. : I. immediately’ perceived: that = were 
whales; and having ordered the canoe to bé prepared, we embarked in 
purfuit of them. * It was; indeed, a very wild.and unrefleCting enterprile, 
and it was.a very fortunate circumftance:that we failed in our. attempt to 
overtake them, as a ftroke from the tail of. one: of thefe enormous fifh 
would have dafhed the canoe to. pieces.:::We may; pérhaps, ‘have been 
indebted to the foggy weather. for our! fafety, as. at prevented us 


' from continuing our purfuit.:. Our guide informed: us that they are 


the fame kind of filh which are the principal food of the Efquimaux, 
and.théy were frequeritly feen as largeas our.canoe. ” The part of them 


yen “whi¢h appeared above the: water was altogether white, and they were 


y + 


~“iriuch: Target than: the lrgelt porpoile. 3 


~ About twelve the “fog. difprted, and being. curious to take a view of 


: 2 “the ice, I gave’orders-for: ‘the: canoe to be got.inm ‘readinefs.. We accord- 
irigly embarked; and. the’ Indians followed. us.. We ‘had not, however, 


been an hour & on the Water, when the. wind rofe. ona fudden: from_ the 


North-Eaft, "and obliged us. to tack about, and the ret tye: ‘of the fog. pre- 
vented us» from afcértaining ; our diftance:from the 1 Ice; indeed, ‘from ‘this 
circumftance,, the ifland which we had | fo lately left was but dimly 
feen. ‘TFhough-the wind: ‘was clofe, we’ veritured to: hoift the. fail} and 
from the violence: of the’ fwell it was by great exertions that two men 


could bale out the, water fromr our canoe. We-were in-a’ flate of a€tual - 


danger, and felt’ every correfponding emotion ‘of pleafure when we 
reached the land: ~ The Indians had fortanately got mote: to windward, 
-. { 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. ° 


fo that the; {well in fome,meafure drove them on fhore, though their 
canoes. were nearly filled with water; and: had they, been: laden, we 


fhould. have, feen,-them'no more.., As.I did not propofe to fatisfy my, 
curiofity. at;the -rifk of fimilar dangers, we continued our, courfe along, 


the iflands,,which {creened. us ..from the. wind... I was-now. determmed, 
to‘ take.an more. particular examination of: the iflands,. in, the hope: of 
meeting: with parties of the natives, from, whom I.might.be able to obtain 
fome interefting . intelligence, though ‘our conduCtor difcouraged -my. 


expeétations by reprefenting them-as very. fhy and. inacceffible. people. - 


At:the fame time he-informed’me that, we fhould probably. find fome of 


wall 


them, if we navigated the channel which he-had originally.recommended 
us'toenter, =. «,” ; yo hs Tea te Ty ee 


ter yteey 
Deb bec ad per cee ee tte teehee Pe rr oar) . Van ea 
t J 5 


. : coe a - 
. al PG, ee ray ails ty “ 1 2 pat \ "ete ve ‘ “4 . 3 _™ 


“At eight we encamped on the Faftern end of the iland, ‘which I had 


named the ,Whale.Hland. .. It is: about teven. leagues. in-length, -Eaft 


and ‘Weft -by,compafs; ;but ,not more-than. half a: mile.,in breadth, 
We faw feyeral.red foxes;.one of which was. killed. . There, were, ,alfo 
five or fix very oldzhuts on- the point where we. had. taken our ftation. 
The nets were now fet, and one of them in five fathom water, the cur- 


rent fetting. North: Eaft by. compals. ‘This morning, I. ordered #:Pot to 


place, my. own name, the umber of perfons which, I had with ‘me ang 
the time we remained there, ety te dep ce ee eS beep sody 


whos eer STE o oy eyed ES 7 nag a A ae ene 20) aed 

, Being, awakened, by: fome. cafual circumftancey at, Four 1 this, morning, 
I was furprifed on perceiving that the water had flowed under, our ‘baggage. 
As the wind had not changed, and: did not. blow with greater violence than 


K “when 


: 
_ 


Wednef, 15. 


} 


JOURN AL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


when we: went’ to reft, we were all of opinion that this circumftance 
proceeded fromthe tide. _ We had, indeed, obferved at the: other end 
of ‘the ‘ifland that the water rofe and fell; but we. then imagined 


hat it muft have’ Been occafioned by the-wind. The. -water. continued 


to rife till ‘about’ fix,) but I could not -afcertain: the time-with the re- 
quifite precifi on, as the wind then began to blow, with ‘great vio- 
lence; I therefore determined, at all events, to remain here-till the next 
morning, though, as it happened,'the flate af the wind was fuch as to 
render. my flay here an aét of neceffity.) Our nets were not very {ue- 
eefsful,-as they prefented us with only eight. fifh, From an obfervation 
which I obtained at noon, we were in 6g.-7. North latitude. As the 
evening approached, the wind increafed, and the weather became cold. 


. Two fwans were e the only provilion which the hunters procured for. us. 


~ ~~" ~““Bhurfday 16, 


ao a 
The rain did pot ceafe till feven this- morning, ‘the weather being at 


: fatervals very cold and unpleafant, ‘Such ‘was ‘its inconftancy, that I 


fixteen or: eighteen inches. 


gould not make an accurate obfervation ; but the tide appeared to rife 


We. now embarked, and fteered under fail among ‘the iflands, where I 
hoped! to meet with fome-of the natives, bit my expe@ation: was not 
pratified. Our guide imagined that they were § gone to theirdiftant haunts, 
where they fith for whales and hunt the rein-deer, that are  oppofite 
to his country. His relations, he faid, fee them every year, | but he-did not 
encourage us to expeéét that we fhould find any of them, inlefs i it weré ata 
fmall-river that falls into the great one,. from: the Eaftward, at a confider- 


‘able diftarice from our ‘immediate fituation, ‘We accordingly madé for the 


; a river, 


‘ NORTH WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. f 67 

river, and ftemmed the -current. ‘At two.in theafternoon the ‘water was s789- 
quite fhallow in every part of our courfe, and. we could always find the “~~~: 
‘bottom with the paddle, At feven we landed, encamped, and fet the | 
nets. -Here the Indians killed two geefe, two cranes, and 4 white owl. —- 
Since we entered the river, we experienced a very agreeable change in 

“the temperature of the air; but this pleafant circumftance was not with- 
out its inconvenience, as it fubje6ted us.to the perfecution of the muf 


quitoes. 


. ‘On taking up the nets, they were found to contain but fix filh, We friday 17. 
‘embarked at four in the morning, and paffed four encampments, which 
appeared to have beeri -very lately. inhabited. . We then landed upona 
_ {mall round ifland,-clofe tothe Eaftern fhore, which poffefled fomewhat of 
a facred-charafter, as the top-of it feemed to be a place’ of fepulture, from 
.the numerous graves which we obferved there. We found the frame of 
a {mall canoe, ‘with various difhes, troughs, and other utenfils, which 
had been the living property of thofe whe could now ufe'them no more, 
and form the ordinary:accompaniments of their laft abodes: As no part 
of the fkins that rmuft have covered the canoe was remaining, we con- 
cluded that ‘it had been eaten: by wild animals that inhabit, or occa- 
“‘fionally frequent, the land. The frame of the canoe, which -was entire, 
‘was’ put together with ‘whalebone : it was fewed iri fome parts, and tied 
ins others. The fledges:were from four to eight feet long; the length / 3° 
of tlie-bars.was upwards of two feet; the runhers were two‘inches thick 
.and nitle inches deep; the prow was two feet and an half high, and formed 
of. two ‘pieces; fewed-.with whalebone; to. three other thia fpars of 
wood, which: weie of the fame height, and fixed in the runners by means 
ee Ke of 


! 


68 


1789. 
July- 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE: THRQUGH THE 


of mortifes, were fewed two thin broad bars lengibways, at a. {mall dif. 


‘Ty tance from each other; thefe frames. were’ fixed together ‘with tliree or 


four’ crofs bars, tied faft upon the runners; and on. the lower edge of the 


latter, ‘fmall ‘pieces of horn were faftened by. wooden pegs, that they 
might flide with greater facility. ‘They are drawn by. fhafts, which I 


_ imagine are applied ‘to any particular fledge as. ‘they. are wanted, as I Taw 


no more than one pair of them. a 

About half paft one we came oppofite to the firft {pruce-tree that we 
had feen for fome time: there are but very: few of them on the main land, 
and they are very fmall; thofe are. larger -which:are found on the 
-iflands, where they grow in patches, and‘clofe-together. ...It is, indeed, 


“very extraordinary that there fhould be any wood whatevér in a country 


where the ground never thaws above fivé inches from:the furface. We 
landed at feven in the evening. T. he weather ‘was now very pleafant, 


-and in the courfe of. the. day we.faw great numbers. of wild: fowl, with 


their young ones, but they. were fo fhy thatswe: could not approach them. 


- The Indians-were not very fuccefsful in their foraging party, as they killed 


only two.gréy cranes, and.a grey goofe.... Two of :theny were employed 
on the highland to. the Eaftward, through the. gréater part of . the day, 


in fearch of rein-deer, but they could:difcover nothing: more than a few 
-.t¥acks.of that animal.; .Lalfo afcended the high land, from-whence I-had 
_a.delightful view:of, the-river, -divided.into innumerable ‘ftreams,::mean- 
.dering through iflands, fome of which were covered; with , wood; and 
others with: grafs. ° The mountains, that formed the appofite :horizon, 
were at the diftance of: forty. miles... The inland view.was neither. fo 


extenfive Ror agreeable, being: terminated: by near. range. of bleak, 
; barren 


es. 


NORTEHLWEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 6 


barrett hills, between which are fmall lakes or ponds, while, the fur- 1189. 
rounding. country is covered. with tufts of mofs, without the fhade ofa “a 
“fingle ‘tree. Along the hills is a kind of fence, made with branches, 

where the natives had.fet {nares to catch white te partridges. . 


- The nets did not oioducea fingle fh, and at three o'clock in the morn. Saturday if. 
ing we took our departure. The weather was fineand clear, and we paffed 
feyeral encampments. As the prints of human feet were very frefh in 
‘the fand, it could not: have been long fince the natives had vifited the 
fpot... We now proceeded in the hope of, meeting with fome of them at | 
the river, whither our guide was conduéting us with that expe€tation. ' 
We obferved a great number of trees, in different places, whofe branches 
chad been lopped off to the tops. They denote the immediate abode of 
the natives, and probably ferve for fignals to dire& each other to their re- 
{petive winter quarters. Our hunters, in the courfe of the day killed two 
‘yein-deer, which were the only large animals that we had-feen fince we had 
-been ini this river, and proved a very feafonable fupply, as our Pemmican 
‘had ‘become. mouldy for fome time paft; though in that fituation we: 
‘swere under the neceflity of eating it. 
bee Lat oo . ton a Soy , ae 
“Jn the ‘vaillies and low’ lands near the river, cranberries are found 
(gn great: abundance, ' particularly in -favourable. afpefts. It is a fingular 
‘circumftance; that.the fruit of two, fucceeding years may be gathered at 
«the: fame time; . from the-fame fhrub. Here was alfo another,berry, of 
Za very pale yellow colour, that-refembles a rafpberry, and jg. of.a very 
agreeable flavour. .There is-a great variety of ysther~ptants and herbs, 


Sunday 19. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


The weather became cold towards the afternoon, with the appearance 


‘killed eight geefe, During the greater part of the day I walked with the 


Englifh chief,.and found it very. difagreeable and fatiguing. Though | 
the country is fo elevated, it was one continual morafs, except on the - 
fummits of fome barren hills. Aé I carried my hanger’ in my hand, I” 


frequently examined if any part of the ground was in a ftate of thaw, 
but could never force the blade into it, beyond the depth of fix or eight: 
inches.’ The face of the high land, towards the river, is in fomie places 
-rocky, and in others a mixture of fatid and ftone, veined with a kind of- 


ed earth, with which the natives bedaub_themfelves, 
aaa uv 


It rained, and blew hard from the North, till eight in the motning, 
when we difcovered that our conduétor had efcaped.' I was, indeed, 


| furprifed'at | his honefty, as-he left the moofe-fkin which I had given him 


fize to thofe that frequent the vicinity’ ‘of ‘Aghabatea, | At eight; awe’ took 


for a covering, and went off in his thirt, though the weather was very | 
cold. I inquired; of the Indians if they had given him any caule of 


offerice, or had obferved any recent difpofition in Him: to defert us, but 
they affured me that they had not in any. inftance difpleafed him: at the 
fame time they recolleéted that he had expreffed his apprehenfions of 
being taken away as a flivé; and his alarms wete probably ‘itcreafed 
on the preceding day, when he faw them kill the twoéin-deer with fo 
much readinels. In the afternoon the weather. becamé: fine and clear, 
when we faw large flights of geele with their young ones, and the-hunters 
killed twenty-two of them: As they had at'this time calf their feathers, 
they could not fly: They were of 4 fmall kind, and‘much inferior in 


our 


~ 


/ NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, -- 


our ftation near an Indian encampment, and, as we had. oblerved in 
fimilar fituations, pieces of bone, rein-deer’s horn, &c, were feattered 
about it. It alfo. appeared, that the natives had been employed here in. 


working. wood. into army, utenfils, &e. 


We embarked : at three-this morning, when the weather was cloudy, 
"with {mall rain and aft wind, . About twelve the rain became fo violent 
as to compel us to encamp at two in the afternoon.. We faw gréat num. 
bers of fowl, and killed: among us fifteen geefe and four fwansy Had 
the weather been more favourable, we. fhould haye added confiderably 
to- our booty. ‘We-now paffed the river, where we expected to meet 
fome of the natives, but difcovered no-figns of.them. The ground 
clofe to the river does not rife to. any. confiderable height, and’ the hills, 
which are at a- {mall diftance, are covered with the. ipruce fir and fmall 
birch trees, to their very. fummits, , 

We embarked at half paft one this: morning, when the weather was 
‘cold and unpleafant, and the wind: South-Weit. At ten, we left the 
channels formed by the iflands for the uninterrupted channel of the river, 


‘where we found. the current fo ftrong, that it was abfolutely neceflary’ 


Monday 20, 


Tuefday 21, 


totow the canoe with a line. The land on.both-fides was elevated,-and . 


almoft perpendicular, and the fhore beneath it, which is of no. great 
breadth, was covered with a grey ftone that falls from the precipice. 


We made much greater expedition with the line, than we could have 


done-with the paddles.. The men in’ the canoe relieved two of thofe on 
thore;evéry two hours, fo that it was very hard and fatiguing - duty, but 


it faved a great.deal of that time which was fo precious to us. At half 
ee paft 


| _ 
72 | ’ JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


z 789. paft eight, we landed at the fame fpot where we. had, already encamped 


ane on n the ninth inftant. - Te a ree Re 
In about an hour after our arrival, we ‘were joined by eleven -of the 
natives, who were: ftationed further up the river, and there were fome 
" among them whom we had not feen during our’ former vifit to this place, « 
The brother of-our late guide, however, was-of the*party, and ‘was edger\, 
in ‘his. inquiries after-him; but our account did not prove fatisfattory. 
They all gave evident-tokens of their ci ulpcion, and each, of them made 


sdeiftana’ their eloquence, though sey csnjeftured it. to be very unfa.’ - 
wourable to.our affertions. ‘The brother, néeverthelefs, propofed to: barter “ 
Ahis.credulity for a finall quantity of beads, and promifed to believe every 
thing I-fhould fay, if I would gratify him.with afew of thofe baubles : 
but he did not fucceed in his propofition, and I contented. myfelf with 
awe him the bowl and arrows which our conduttor had left with us. 


gel ie” : eh a tle, coeera 
“My. people were‘ now neceffarily : engaged i in putting the firé-arnis in 
order, ‘after ‘the violent ratz~of. the preceding - day.; ; an. employment 
which very much attraGted the! curiofity, and appeared, informe ‘degree to . 
awaken the apprehenfions, of:thé. natives, To their i inquiries coricerning . 
the motives of our preparation, we anfwe ed by. fhewing a piece of meat — 
and a goole, and informing them, that we were. preparing our.arms‘to pro- 
~ eure fimilar provifions:. at.the fame:timé we affured them, though it was 
our intention to kill any animals we might: find, there-was dolintention 
to hurt or injure them.. They, however, entreated:us not to difcharge our 
Pieces, in their prefence,: -I requefted: the: Englith -chief.to' afk them fome 


queftions, 


NORTH. WEST CONTIN ENT OF AMERICA. 


queftions, ‘which they either did not or would not underftand ; ‘fo that I 
failed in Obtaining any information from them. : 


All my people went to reft; but-I thought it prudent to fit.up, in 
order to, watch the motions of ithe, natives. This circumftance was a 
fubjeét of their inquiry ; and their, Curiofity was {till more excited, when 


they: faw me employed in writing. About twelve o'clock I perceived . 


four of their women coming along the fhore; and they were no foorier 


feen ‘by’ their friends, than they ran haftily to meet theif, ‘and perfuaded 


two of them, who,'I -fuppofe, were young, “to return, while they 


brought the other two who were very old, to enjoy the warmth of . 
our fire; i but, after ftaying there for about half an ‘hour, they i alfo re- 


treated. : Thofe who remained, immediately kindled a fmall fire, 
and Jaid-themfelves down to fleep round it, like fo many whelps, 
having neither fkins or garments of any kind ‘to cover them, 
notwithflanding the cold that prevailed. My people, having placed 
_ their kettle of meat on the fire, I was obliged to guard it from the natives, 

‘who made feveral attempts to pollefs themfelves of its contents; and this 

was the only- inftance I had hitherto. difcovered, of their being influenced 
bya pilfering difpofition. ’ It-might, perhaps, be a general opinion, that 


provifions were a common property. I now faw the fan fet for the firft 
time fince- I had beén here before.. During the preceding night; the. | 


Sg 


ye 
TB 
t 489. : a 


‘ July. ‘y 
ements * 


. pee cacerae ged 
RO ee 


weather was fo cloudy, that I could not obferve its defcent to the horizon: ee 


The water had funk, at this place, upward of three feet fince we had 
7 Pafled a down: the river: " : 


” 


“we begen our ated at half ‘palt’ three this 1 morning, the-men. beifig’ Wednef. 22. ° 


L:.. _employed : 


; " JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


employed to tow the canoe. 1 walked with the Indians to their huts, 
which were at a greater. diftance than.I had any reafon to expeét, for it 
occupied three, hours in hard walking to reach them. We paffed a narrow 
and deep river in our way, at the mouth of which the natives had fet 
their nets. They had hid their effets, and fent their young women into 
the woods, as we faw but! very few of the former, and none of the latter. 
They had large huts built with drift wood on the declivity of the beach, 
and in the infide the earth was dug‘away, ‘fo as to form a-level floor. At 
each end was a ftout fork, whereon was laid a ftrong ridge-pole, which: 
_ formed a {upport to the whole ftru@ure, and a covering of fpruce bark pre- 
ferved it from the rain. Various {pars of different heights were fixed 
within the hut, and covered with fplit fifh that hung on them to dry; 
and fires were made indifferent parts to‘accelerate the operation, ‘There 
"were rails alfo on the outfide of ‘the building, which were hung 
around with fifh, but in a frellier fate than thofe within. The {pawn is 
 alfo carefully preferved and dried in the fame mariner. We obtained as - 
many fifh from them‘as the canoe could conveniently contain, and’ fome 
firings of beads were the piice paid for them,’ an article which they 
preferred to every other. Iron they held in little or no éfimation. 
| . a wn go ’ 

_ During the two hours that I emia here, I employed ‘the Englith 
chief-in a continual ftate of i inquiry concerning thefe people. The in- 
formation that refulted from this conference was as follows. 


This nation or tbe j 1S very numerous, with whom the Efquimaux had 
been continually at variance,.a people who take every advantage of at-. 
tacking thofe who: are not in a ftate to defend themfelves ; and though 
o . they. 


a 


cN ORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF /AMERIGCA, 


they had promifed friendthip, had ately, ‘and in the moft treacherous 
manner, butchered fome of their people. Asa proof of this circum- 
ftance, the relations’ of the deceafed fhewed us, that they had cut off 


_ their hair. on the occafion. ~ They alfo declared their determination to 


withdraw all confidence in fature from the Efquimaux, and to collet ” 


themfelves in.a formidable body, that they might be enabled to © revenge 


: the death of their friends. 


,, From their account, a {trong party of Efquimaux occafionally afcends 


this river, in large canoes, fearch of flint.ftones, which they employ to | 


point their ‘pears and arrows. They were now at their lake due Eaft 
from the Spot. ‘where we then were, which was at nd great diftance over 


land, where: they kill the rein-deer, and that they would foon begin to © 


catch big’ “fith for the winter flock. _ We could not, however, obtain any 
information refpe€ting the lake in the direGtion in which we were: To 
the Eaftward and Wellward where they faw it, the ice breaks up, but 


foon freezes a again. 
a, * 


The “Efquimaux informed them that they faw large canoes full of 
white men to the Weftward, eight or ten, winters ago, from whom they 


obtained j iron in exchange for leather. : The lake where- they met ‘thefe 


canoes, is called by , them. Belhoullay Toe, or’ White Man’s Lake. 
They alfo reprefented: the Efquimaux as, drefling’like.themfelves." They 
wear their hair fhort, and. have two} sholes perforated, one:on each. fide 
of, the. mouth, in a line with ‘the under. lip,: in, which, they place long 
beads that,they find in the lake. | “Their bows: ate, fomewhat different 
from. thofe ufed.by the natives we had feen,-and they.employ flings from 
, . es whence 


eho 
oN 


76 


3780, 
| 


July. 
—y——_ form 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH-THE 


whence they throw flanes with fuch dexterity that they prove’ very 
idable weapons in the-day of battle, 7 oe yy 


We alfo learned in ‘addition from the natives, that we fhould not fee 


- any more of their relations, as they had all left the Tiver to go in purfuie 


of rein-deer for their provifions, and .that they themfelves fhould en- 
gage in a fimilar expedition in a few days. Rein-deer, bears, wolvereens, 
martens, foxes, hares, and white buffaloes are the only quadrupeds in 
their country ; and that the latter were only to be found in the moun- 
tains-to the Weftward, — So 


We proceeded with the line throughout the day, except two hours, 
when we employed the fail. We encamped at eight in the evening. 
From the place we quitted this morning, the banks of the river are well 
covered with {mall wood, fpruce, firs, birch, and willow. We found it 


| very warm during the whole of our progrels,- 


Thurfday 23, 


4 fee 
At five in the morning we proceeded on our voyage, but found it 
very difficult to travel along the beach, We obferved feveral places where 


» the natives had Hationed themfelves and fet their nets firice our paflage 


downwards. We paffed a {mall river, and at five g’clock our Indians 
Put to fhore in order to eneamp, but we proceeded onwards, which dif- 
pleafed them very much, from the fatigue they fuffer¢d, and at eight we 
encamped at our pofition of the Sth inftant. ‘Fhe day was very fine, 


‘and: we employéd’ the towing line throughout the. courfe of it. © Ar ten, 


our hunters returned, fullen and. diffatisfied.- We had not touched arty | 
of our provifion fores for fix days, in which time we had'confumed-two 


_. oy rein 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, °° 7 


rein-deer, four fwans, forty-five geefe, and a confiderable, quantity of fifh:; +789. ‘ 
but it is to be confidered, that we were ten men, and four women, 
I have always obferved, that the north men poffeffed very hearty appe- 
tites, but they were very,much exceeded by thofe with me, fince we 
entered this river. I fhould really have thought it abfolute gluttony in 
-my people, if my own appetite had not increafed in a fimilar ptopér- 
tion, . 


4 oy y \ 


one 


-,% . 
8, 


Bo. JOURNAL OFA, VOYAGE THROUGH: THE. 


chet CHAPTER” MIE 

-Employ the towing line. © ‘Defeription of a ; plac where the Indians ‘come 
to colleét flaunt. - Thetr fh Sh wyne/s and fufpicions. Current leffens. Appear. 
ance of the country... Abundance of hares. Violent florm. Land 
near three lodges. Alarm of the Indians. Supply of fifh from them. 
Their fabulous accounts. Continue to fee Indian lodges. Treatment of 
a difeafe. Mifunderftanding with the natives. The interpreter harangues 
them. Their accounts fimilar to thofe we have already received. Their 
curious condudt. Purchafé fome beaver feins. * Shoot one of their dogs. 


The confequence of that aét: - Apprehenfions of the women. Large” 


quantities of liquorice, Swallow's nets ‘feen in the precipices. Fall 
in with @ party of natives killing geefe. Circumftances concerning them. 
Hurricane. Variation of the weather. Kill great numbers of gee 
Abundance of feveral kinds’ of berries. State of the rivér and its 
bank : , 


1789. -- 
July. ~.. 


Friday 24. Ay five we continued our courfe, but, ina very fhort time, were under 
the neceflity of applying to the aid of the line, the ftream being fo ftrong 
ds. to render all our attempts unavailing to ftem i it with the paddles, We 
paffed a {mall river, on each fide of which the natives and Efquimaux 
collet flint. The bank is an high, fteep, and foft rock, variegated with 


red, 


/ 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF ‘AMERICA. 


red, ‘green; and yellow hues. « From the continual dripping of water, 
parts of it frequently fall and break into {mall ftony flakes like flate, but 


not fo hard. Among ther are found pieces of Petrolium, which bears 


a refemblance to yellow wax, but is more friable. The Englith chief 


informed me, that rocks: of a fimilar kind, are {cattered about. ithe 


country, at the back of the Slave Lake, where the Chepewyans col- 
leet copper. 


‘At ten, we had an aft wind, and the men who had been engaged in 
towing, re-embarked. «At twelve we obferved a lodge on the fide of the 
river, and its inhabitants running about in great confufion, or hurry_ 


ing to the woods. Three men waited our arrival, though they re- 


mained at fome diftance from us, with their bows and arrows ready to be 
employed; or at leaft, that appeared to be the idea they wifhed to con- 
vey tous, by continually {napping the ftrings of the former, and the figns 
they made to forbid our approach. The Englifh chief, whofe language 
they, in fome degree, underftood, endeavoured’ to remove their diftruft 
of ug; but till I went to them with a prefent of beads, they refufed to 


have any communication with us. 


. - 
, 
¥ 


When they firft perceived our fail, they took us for the Efquimaux — 


Indians, who employ a fail in their canoes. "They were fufpicious of 
our defigns, and queftioned ‘us with a view to obtain fomne knowledge of 
them. On feeing us-in poffeffion of forie'of the'clothes, bows; &c, which 
mutt have belonged to {ome of ‘the Déguthee Denees, or Quarrellers, 
they imagined; that we had killed fome of them, and were bearing away. 


the fruits of our victory. They appeared, indeed; to be. of the fame’ 


tribe, 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


tribe, though they were. afraid of acknowledging it, From their quef- 
tions, it was evident that: they by had not received any natice of ur being 
in thole parts. : Ce 
"They would not acknowledge that they had any women with them, 
though we had feen them running’ to the woods ;.;but pretended ‘that 
they had been left at a confiderable diftance from the river, with fome 
_ relations, who were engaged in -killing rein-deer. Thefe people had 
been here but a fhort time, and ther’ lodge was not yet «completed; 
“nor had ‘they any fith in a ftate of preparation for. their. provifion. I 
gave them a knife and: fome beads for an horn-wedge or chifel, with 
which they fplit their canoe-wood. One of my Indians having broken 
his paddle, attempted to take one of theirs, which wag immediately con- 
'_ tefted by-its owner, and on my interfering to prevent this aG of injuftice, . 
he manifefted his gratitude to me on the occafion,.. We loft an hour 
and a half in this conference. 


"Lhe Englith chief was during the whole of the time in the woods, 
where fome of the hidden property was difcovered, but the women con- 
trived to elude the fearch that was made after them. Some of thefe 
articles were purloined, but I was ignorant, of ‘this circumftance, till we 
had taken our departure, or I fhould certainly have given an ample re- 
muneration. Our chief expreffed, his difpleafure at their running away. 
te conceal themfelves, their property, and their young women, in very 

‘bitter. terms., He faid -his. heart was fet againit, thofe flaves; and com- 
plained aloud of his Gifappointment i in coming {fo far withont, feeing the. 
natives, and. getting fomething. from, them,..- aa 


ves 
ae eer? 


Me 


oe fan 
Gene . 
tad 

« 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


“We employed ‘the fail and ‘the paddle fince ten this morning; and 
vitched our tents at feven in the evening.” We had no fooner encamped 
"than we were vilited by‘an Indian whom Wwe had feen before, and whofe 
family was\at a {mall diflance up the river: at nine he: left us. The 
weather was clear and ferene. ; . 


t ‘ . * s 3 
a) 


: We embarked ‘this morning at a quarter paft three, and at feven we 
paffed:the lodge of the Indian ‘who had vifited us the preceding evening: 
‘There ‘appeated'to have been more than one family, and we naturally 
concluded that'our vifitor had made fuch-an unfavourable report of ‘us, 
as-'to“indute: his°companions to: fly on our approach. "Their fire was 
. not extitiguified, and they had left a confiderable eayantty of fh fcat- 
tered about’ their dwelling. ee ae 


Doe 
Woe F wn 


The viciiher was’ now: very fultry; but the cutrent had relaxed. of ifs 
force, fo that: the paddle was fufficient for our ‘progrefs during the 
greatelt part of the day. The inland part of the country is mountainous 


and the banks.of the river low, but covered with wood, among which is: 


- the poplar, but of {mall growth, and the firft which we had feen on our 
return. ‘A pigeon alfo: flew” by us, ‘and Hares appeared to be in great 
plenty. ‘We pafled mahiy Indian elicampments which we didnot fee in 
our paflage down the’ river.: “About feven‘the fky, to the Weltward, “be- 
‘canie““of a: fteel-blue colour,‘ cavith: lighting and thunder’ We > Accord: 
‘ingly landed to prepare ourfelves againit the coming ftorm; but before 
we: could -ereét ‘our tents, it came on with fuch violence, that we ex- 
potted’ it. tétarry every ‘thing before‘it: '* The-tidge- pole of my tent was 


broken ia the middle; “whereit was found, and” nite Inches and an half in 
cans! M : circumference ; 


81 


448g, 
July. 


Saturday 25. 


« 


20 


| | | 
82 | ~—-«.._: JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE |. «; 
my circumference ;,and we were'obliged to throw ourfelves” flat on the 
nae ground to efcape being wounded by the ftones that were hurled. about 
in the air.like fand. The violence of the ftorm, liowever, fubfided fi.a 

fhort time, but left the fky overcaft with the appearance:of rain. 
TE : ! oa, | a 


_ Sunday 26.. It rained from the preceding evening to this morning, when we em- 
barked at four oclock. . At eight. we landed. at’ three. large Indian 
lodges. Their inhabitants, _who. were afleep, ° expreffed:,. uncommon 
alarm and agitation when they were awakened by us, though-moft of 
them had feen us before. -Their habitations -were.crowded with fih, 
hanging to dry 1 in’ every part; but.as we wanted fome for prefent ule, 
we fent their young men.to vifit the. hets, and, they returned with. abun- 


dance of large white fifh, to which the name.has. been, given: of poifan 
inconnu; fome of a round fhape, and: green colour; and a few white 
ones; ‘all which were very agreeable food, Some beads, and,a few other 
trifles, were gratefully received in return... Thefe péople-are very fond 
of iron work of any: ‘kind, and my. men purchafed. feveral of their articles 
for. finall f pieces of tin, oo 


There were five or fix perfons whom we had not feen. before;. and 
among them was a Dog-rib Indian; whom fome private./quarrel, had 
driven from his country. The Englihh chief underftood him as: well as 
one of his: own 1 ‘hation, and gave the: following account. of. their. con- 
verfation:—~ = a 


_He had been informed. by ‘the people with whom he now lives, the 
Hare Indians, that there-is another -rivér on the other: fide « of, the: moun- 
tains 


om NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


tains:to the South-Weft,-which falls “into the Belhoullay Toe, or White- 
~ man’s. Lake,.in comparifon of which.that.on whofe banks we then weré, 
was -but.a fall ftream; that the natives were very large; and. very wicked, 
and kil] common. men. with their. eyes;,that they make canoes larger 
than. ours; that; thofe who: inhabit the entrance: of it kill a kind of beaver, 
the {kin of which 1 is almalt. redy and iheat’ large canoes often frequent it. 
As. there is no. known’ ommunication by water; with this river, the na- 
- tives who faw it,went over the mountains. . -° -)- 


. ‘ 1 , ‘ 1 . 1 
nes ‘ ” . ' 
+ : , a? Se om : " , vs ? 


As he mentioned. that. there were fome beavers i in this part of the 


83 


1789. 
July 


fa 


country, I told, him to hunt it, and: defire the others to do the fame, as. | 


-well .as:.the'martens, foxes, beaver-eater or .wolvereen, &e. which they 
- might,carry to -barter for iron-with his'own nation, who are fupplied 


with goods by us, near: their country. He was anxious to know whe- 


. ther we fhould return that way: atthe fame time he informed us that 


"we fhould fee but few of the natives along the river, as all the youngmen . 


" were engaged in killing rein-deer, near the Efquimaux Lake, which, he 
alfo: faid, was at’ no great ‘diftance, _ The latter he reprefented as very 
treacherous, and added, that they had: killed one of-his people. He told 
us-likewile, that-fome,plan of revenge was. meditating; unlefs the offend- 
ng party. paid a fafficient. “price for the body. of the murdered perfon. 
My Indians were very, sapxious to , polfels, themfelves-of a, woman that 
was with the natives, but ‘as they‘ were, not. willing to part with her, I 
interfered,.to. prevent her being taken by force: indeed-I was obliged to 
-exercife the utmoft vigilance,as the Indians.who accompanied mé were ever 


ready to,take what:they could from the natives, without making them any 
re M2 return, 


—" 


v 


van JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


1789. return, About twelve we pafled.a, river of.fome appearance, flowing 
eyes ‘from the, Eaftwatd. One of the natives who. followed. us,:called it the 
Winter Road:River,. We did not find the ftream ftrong to-day along the 

fhore, as there were many eddy currents: we therefore employed the fail 
“during fomte hours.of it, and went on fhore for the night at half paft feven: 
‘Mondy 27. The weather was now fine, and we renewed our voyage at half ‘palt- 
| two. Atfeven we landed where. there were three families, fituated clofe. 
to the rapids. , We found but few people; for as the. Indian who fol- 
lowed. us: yefterday had arrived here before ‘us, we’ fuppofed that the 

greater part had fled, on the intelligence which he gave' of our approach. 
Some of thefe people we,had feen before, when they told-us that they had . 
left their property at a lake in the neighbourhood, and ‘had promifed: to 
fetch it before our return; but we now found. them as unprovided as 
when we left them. They had pleas of fith, forne of which- “was 38 packed 
up in birch bark. ; ' 


During the time we remained with them, which ‘was-not-more than 
two hours, I endeavoured to ‘ obtain fome-additional- intelligence refpect- 
ing the river which had been mentioned ‘on the precedirig day; when'they 
declared their total i ignorance. of - it, but from the: ‘reports’ of: others; as 
they had never béen beyond the mountains, on the oppofite fide of their 

; _—owi Tiver: they had, however, been‘ informed.that it was larger’ than that 
oo which wathed the banks‘wheteon they lived; and that i its courfe was towards 

the mid-day fun. They’ added, ‘that-there were people at-afinall dif- 
tante up’ the river, who inhabited-the-oppofite mountains;‘and liad lately - 

defcended from therm to obtain fupplies of -fifh, - Thefespeople, théy'fag- 

_ gefted,. 


Ma 


! 


NORTH. WEST CON TINENT OF ANIERICA. - 


gelled, mult bé well acquainted’ with'the other river,‘ which’ was the 


objeét, of my’ inquiry. I engaged: onéof them, by a bribe of fome — 


_ beads, to defcribe the‘circumjacent éountty upon the fand. - This fingular 


map ‘he immediately’ undertook to delineate,’and. accordingly traced out’ 


a very long point of land between the tivers, thowgh without paying the 


leaft attention to their courfes, which he reprefeated as Tunning into’ the ~ 


_ great’ lake, at’ the extremity of ‘which;'as he-had béen told ‘by Indiatis of 


~ other tiations, there was a Belhoullay Couin, or White’ Man's” Fort. 
This I took to be Unalafcha Fort,-and:confequently the river to ‘the 


Welt to be Cook's River ; and that the body of water or fea into’ which 
this river difcharges itfelf at Whale Ifland; conmuhicates with Norton 
Sound... I made-an advantageous propofition, to this man to accompany 


me acrofs’ the ‘mountains: to - “the -other river, ‘but he tefufed. it, ‘At. 


the fame: tine he recommended ‘me ‘to’ the people already mentioned, 
who ‘were: filhing i in the neighbouthood, as better qualified: to afl me 


"in the undertaking which I had Proporeds 


‘One of this {mall company of natives ‘was’ grievoufly afflifted with 


ulcers in his back; -arid the only ‘attention which was. paid'to his miferable’ 


condition, as-far at leaft as we-could difcover; proceeded from a woman; 
who carefully. employed a bunch of feathers in Preventing the’ flies from 


feling apon his fores. cya ; 
eT inl f 


At te ten this- ‘morning: we re landed near the lodges which had already been’ 


mentioned to-us, and I ordered'my ‘people’ to make preparation for paffing’ 
the temainiing “part of the: day: here; in ‘order to obtain’ tHat’ familiarity 


with the fatives which mi ightin induce ther t to afford me, without referve, the 
information 


ee 2 


86 


1789. 
July. 


JOURNAL OF, A VOYAGE: THROUGH THE 


information | that I fhould require: from them. This. objett, -however, 


L—~——/_ was in danger of being. altogether, fruftrated,. by a mifunderftanding that . 


had taken place. between the natives, and my, young: Indians, who were 
already arrived there. Before, the. latter cguid, difembark,. the former 
feized the canoe, and, dragged 4 it on’ fhore, and in this’aét of violence the 
. boat was broken, from the’ weight, of the, perfons.in it,;: : This infult, was 
on the,point of being ferioufly revenged, when I arrived, to prevent the 
confequences of fuch a difpofition, ; The ; evariation of ‘the compals was 
about * twenty-nine degrees, to the Eaft. id! wag? 
ee a vai whee ea ty rere 
. At four j in “the afternoon I ordered my interpreter to o-harangue he 
natives, aflembled in council; but his long difeourfe obtained’ little fatif- 
fattory intelligence from them, ‘Their account ofthe river:to the Welt- 
_ward, was fimilar to. that which we had already. received ; and their 
-defcription of the, inhabitants of that country, was full more: abfurd and 
ridiculous. They reprefented them as. being’ ofa giganitic flature, and 
-adomed with wings; which, however, they” never employed i in flying. 
That they fed.on large birds,, which they. killed, with the greateft. eale, 
though. common men would be certain vidiims of their voracity if they. 
ventured to approacli them... They alfo defcribed the ;péople thaf'inha- 
bited the mouth of the ' river as pofleffing, the. extraordinary, power of kill- 
ing v with their: eyes, and. devouring a large beaver atafingle, meal. They 
added that canoes of very large dimenfions vili ted that place. They 
did not, however,, relate. thefe -ftrange, circumflances. from: their own ~ 
knowledge, but on the reports of other. tribes, as they themfelves never: 
ventured to..proceed’ beyond the. firft. mountains,, where they. went in 
fgarch of, the. fmall, white buffaloes, as the, inhabitants of, the other fide 


.-  endeayour 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT: ‘OF AMERICA, |’ 


: endeavour ‘to kill them whenéver they meet, -’ They likewile: mentioned 


’ 79: 
July. 


87 | 


_ that’ the fources of thofe ftreams,which are tributary to both the great ——— 


rivers,’are feparated by the mountains; ‘It appeared to us, however, that 


thefe: people knew more about the country ‘than they chofe ‘to commu- 


nicate, or. at leaft reached me; as the‘interpreter; who had‘long been tired . 
‘of the-voyage, might conceal-fuch‘a part of their communications ‘as, in 


‘inchis ‘opinion, would ‘induce me to follow ‘new routes, or’ extend my 
excurfions. “No fooner was the conference concluded, than. they began 
‘to dance, which is their favourite, and, except jumping, their only amufe- 
ment.’ In this paftime old and. young, male and) | female; continued their 


exertions, till their ftrength was exhautted. . “This exercife was accom: ° 


panied -by. loud: imitations: of the various noifes: produced by the rein- 
déer, the bear, and the wolf. Ce Os, 

When hey had finifhed their aintics, defired. the “Englith ¢ chief to 
renew the former fubjeéts;; which: he did without fuccefs.- I therefore 
affumed:an- angry ‘air, expreffed my fufpicions that they withheld their, 


information, and:concluded witha menace, that-if they did not give me- 


all:thie fatisfa8tion i in their’ power, I-would: force one of them along with 
the! tostnd¥row, to: ‘point « out the road to the other river.’ On: this. decla- 
ration, they: all, at one and:the fame moment, became ‘fick, and anfwered 


in'a very: fainttone, that they knéw:no more than they had already com- 


_'municated,. and: that they. fhould die if I-took.any-of them away. . They 
began.to. perfuadedny interpreter to. remain with them, as ‘they loved him 
-as well as they did ‘themfelves, ‘and ‘that‘he would beikilled if heCon- 
tinued ‘with: mes / Nor ‘did this propofition,. aided as it-was-by. the folici- 
tation-of -his-wothnen, fail of: producing.a- confiderable effet bpon. ‘him, 


though he endeavoured to conceal it from me | . 
aan I how 


Jak 


* $8 . JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


; 7. » Lnow found that it would be fruitlefs: for’ me to expeét any accounts 
oe of the country, or the other great river, till I got to’ the: river of the Bear 
Lake, where I expetted to find fome of the natives;- who: ‘promifed to wait 
for-us there. Thefe. people had aftually mentioned this river to me 

- when we patfed them, but I then paid. to‘ attention to that circumftance, 
as.I imagined it to be either a mifunderflanding of' my interpreter, or 
-that it was an invention which, ‘with. their other: Ties, might tend to pre- 


‘ vent me from Protecting * down their rivers tine 


7 We were re plentfully fappliéd with fifh, as: well ary. as freth, by thefe - 
_people;. they a alfo gathéred as ‘many v whjrtle-berries-as-we-chofe, for-which 
we paid with “the ufual articles of ‘beads, awls,~ ‘Anives;' and: tin.’ J pur- 

., Chafed a few: beaver-tkins of them, which, according’ to their accounts, 
are not very numerous in this country ; and that they do not abound in 

’ moofé-deer and buffaloes. ‘They were alarnied for fomé of their young 
men, who were killing geefe higher’ up, the river, and éntreated us to do 
therh no karim. - About fun-fet I was-under the neceflity: of fhooting one _ 

| of their dogs, -as we’ could -not keep_thofe ahimals from: our baggage, 
ne ( was in vain that I. had -remonftrated on this .fubje@, fo. that I fe 

— “ = obliged to: commit the aét' which hag: been, jut. meritioned,- - When thefe - 

a“ . - peoplé heard the report-of. the piftol,- -and faw the dog déad, they-were 
feized with a. very general alarm, and-the ‘wonien’ took their: :ebildren on 
their backs and rah ‘inte the woods, “Eordered the caufe’ of this-a& of 
feyerity to be explained, ‘with: the :affurance: that no. injury would be 
‘offered to themfel ves: ‘The woman, however, to whom the-dog belonged, 
' was'very ‘much affeRed, ‘and declared:that the lofs of . five: children, dur- 
ing the preceding. winter, had nof afieBed, her: fo much as the ‘death of 

. Pe ae peg - this 


ert 
ey 


a 


N ORTH-WEST CON TINENT OF. AMERICA. 


this animal.. But her grief was not of very long duration; and a few 
beads, &c. foon affuaged her forrow. Butas they can without difficulty — 
get rid of their .affliétion, they” can with, equal eafe affume it, and feign 
ficknefs: if it be-neceffary with the fame verfatility. When we arrived 
this morning, we found the/women in tears, from an apprehenfion. that 
‘we were’come to take them away. To the ¢ye: of: an European they. 
certainly:-were objects of difguft ; but there were thofe among my party 
who obferved fome hidden charms in thefe females which rendered them. 
objects ‘oF defire, and means were found, I believe, that very foon dif- 
fipated their alarms and fubdued their coynels. 


On‘ the upper part of the beach, liquorice giew in great abundance 
and:it was.now in bloffom. I pulled u p fome of the rosts,’ which were 
large arid long; but the natives were ignorant ‘of. its qualities, and con- 

. fidered it as a weed of no ufe or value. od . 
At four this morning I ordered my people to prepare for our depar- 
ture; and. while they were loading the canoe, I went with the Englifh 
chief to vifit the lodges, but the greater part of their inhabitants had 
quitted them during the night, and thofe that remained pretended fick- 
nefs, and refufed to rife. : When, however, they, were convinced that: we 
did not mean to take any of them with us, their. ficknefs, abandoned 

_ them, - and when we -had embarked, ‘they came forth, from their huts, to 


- defire that. we would vifir their nets, which were at 4. {mall diftance up 


the river, and, take all, the fith: we might find in them. . We accordingly 


availed, ourfeves of this ® permilien and { took. as.many as, were neceflary 
for our: >Own fupply.:-. we 3 i Sarg poe a, ae * pee bee, oe 
. N We 


sore 


, 


a 
‘ 
‘ ‘ 
— ; 
” ’ 
, , . . 


By 


298 
Joly 


\ 


‘Tuefday 28, 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


1789 ‘We landed fhortly after. where there were two more lodges, which 
eae were full of fifh, but without any inhabitants, who were probably with 
the natives whom we had juft left. My Indians, in rummaging thefe 
places, found feveral articles which they. propofed to take; I therefore 

. gave beads and awls, to ‘be left as the purchafe of them ; but this 

att of juftice they were not able to comprehend, ‘as the people them- 

felves were not prefent. I took up a fet-and left a large knife in the 

plate of it. It was about four fathoms long, and thirty-two mefhes in 
depth: :thefe nets are much more convenient to fet in the eddy current 

than our long ones. This is the place that the Indians’ call a rapid 

though we went up it all the way with the paddle; fo.that the current — 

could not be fo flrong here, as in many other ‘parts of the river; indeed 

if it Were fo, the difficulty of towing would be almoft infuperable, as in 


go 


many parts the rocks, which are of a great. height‘and rather projet 
over. the water, leave no fhore between them and the ftream. Thefe 
precipices abound in {wallows’ “nefits. The weather was. now very 
~ fultry, and at eleven’ we were under the neceflity of landing to. > gum our 


canoe. 
. 1. 


" 


In about an hour we fet forward, and.at one in the afternoon, 
went on fhore at a fire, which we fuppofed to have been kindled by the 
young men, who, as we had been already. informed, were hunting geele. 
Our hunters found their canoe and the fowl they had got, fecreted 1 in © 
the woods ; and {oon after, the people them{felves, whom they brought to 
the waterfide. Out“of two hundred gecle we picked thirty-fix which ' 
were eatable; the reft were putrid and emitted ‘an horrid ftench, They 
had béen killed fome time without having been gutted, and in this ftate 

—— of 


|. NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


of loathfome rottennefs, we have every reafon to fuppofe they. are eaten 
by the natives. We paid for thofe which we had taken, and departed, 
At feven in the evening, the weather became cloudy and overcalt; at 
eight we encamped ; at nine, it began to thunder with great violence; 
an heavy rain fucceeded,, accompanied with an hurricane, that blew down 


91 


1489, 
July. 


our tents, and threatened to carry away the canoe, which had been . 


fattened to fome trees with a cod-line, -The ftorm lafted two hours and 
deluged us with wet... , 


- Yefterday the. weather was cloudy ‘and the heat infupportable ; and 
now we ‘could not put on clothes enough to keep us warm. We 
embarked -at a quarter paft four with an aft wind, which drove us 
on at a great rate, though the current is very ftrong. At ten we came to 


. the other rapid which we got up with the line on the- Welt fide, where. 


we found it much ftronger than when we went down; the water ‘had 
alfo fallen at leaft five feet fince that time, fo that feveral fhoals appeared 
in the river which we had not feen before. One of my hunters narrowly 
ef¢aped being drowned in crofling a river that falls.in from the Weit- 
ward, and is the moft confiderable, except the mountain -river, that 
' flows jin this dire€tion. “We had ftrong’ Northerly and cold wind 
" throughout the whole-of the day, and took our ftation for the night 
at a quarter paft eight. -We killed a goofe and caught fome young 


_ vones, 


We renewed our: voyage at four this morning after a very rainy night. 
The weather was cloudy, but the cold had moderated, and the.wind was 
Ne2 . North- 


Wednel. 29. 


Thurfday 30. 


a 


1789. 
valy, 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 
North-Welt. We were enabled to employ the fail during part of the 


aa day, and encamped at about feven in the evening. We killed eleven 


Friday 91. 


old geefe and forty young ones which had juft begun to fly. The Englith 
chief was very much irritated againft one of his young men: that jealouly 
oceafioned this uneafinefs, and “that -it was not: without very fuf- 
ficient eaufe; was all I could difcover: For the laft two ‘or: three days 
we had edten the liquorice root, of which there is great abundance on 
the banks of the river. We found it a powerful aftringent. 


- The rain was continual throughout the-night, and did. not ‘fubfide til 
Hine this morning, when we. renewed our progrefs. The wind and 
weather the fame as yefterday. About three in the afternoon it cleared 


. up-and the wind died_away,, when it became warm, -At:five the wind 


veered to-the Eaft, and brought cold along with it. ; There: were plenty 
of -whirtle berries, rafpberries, and -a-berry called Poire, which. grows 
in the, greateft’ abundance. We were. very ‘much impeded. in our 


way by fhoals of fand and {mall ftones; which ;render ‘the : water 


fhallow at a diftance from the fhore. -In other -places the bank of the 
river is lofty: . it is formed of black earth and fand, and, as it is conti- 
nually falling, difplayed.to us, in fome parts, a face of folid-ice, to within 


' a foot of the furface. .We -finifhed this day’s voyage at a quarter before 


eight, and in the courfe of it killed feven geefe.. 


We-now had ‘recourfe to our corn; for we had only confumed three 


_ days. of our original. provifion. fince we began to mount the. current. 
_ It was my intention to have afcended the river on the South fide. from 


the 


- 


NORTH WEST. CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 93 


the laft rapid, to difcover if there were any rivers of confequence that | se 
flow from the Weltward : but the fand-banks were fo numerous and aa 
‘the current fo'ftrong, that I was compelled to traverfe to the oppofite 
fide, where the eddy currents are very frequent, which gave us an oppor- 


tunity. of fetting our nets and making much more head-way. 


i] 


? 
. ‘ ' a ‘ . 
Loe be ned e - ’ so ; . ‘ 
st * yoo. 1 4 e+ mg . ve , t . . ‘ 
we 
\ 
’ f,¢ ‘ 
‘ \ a 
a wl 
a hh ? Af aan } 
f 
1 a 
try kay ‘ 1 a i % 
why ay j yo4 
Pa od - 
1% 3 ‘ Noo tan : wy 
} ? 
‘ an . . 
J , 4 vee 
‘ - ‘ ty ‘ ’ . oe a) 
< 
1 
4 
- : x 3 oa. ‘ 4 ros 
t : 
4 2 ' 
J . 
‘ t of 
, x - to. 
1 
° 
4 
a, t x - ‘ 
’ ‘ \ 
” 
x ef ‘ 
° 
. .ofe oy e t 
' CHAP. 
“ 7 * 
* 
t ~ - 5 , 
. ae - ? 4 , 
t ” 
an ~ j 3 ; . 3 
+ 7 re vat + 
* TSP fay “ f4 ay ? 
al . . 
4 bps » : 
. tka Ane “ fu 
t ~ 


94 


Auguft. 


eee 
Sarda 


’ verfed and landéd to take the canoe in tow: here was an encampment 


JOURNAL OF 4: VOYAGE: THROUGH: THE 


/ 
on 


“CHAPTER ‘vi 


ra yey . mye Cys oy fy fe ve ve 
ea cra : ries VS 1 if yy 1 


Voyage continued.” - '$épca! the ‘integrity of the hide preter | Stars of able. 
Spring's of mineral water, and lumps of tron ore. Arrive at the river of 

the Bear Lake. Coal mine in a ftate of combuftion. Water of the river 
diminifhed. Continue to fee Indian encampments, and hill Eeefes. 8, 
Hunting excurfions. A canoe found on the edge of a wood. Attempt to 
afcend a mountain. Account of the paffage to wt. See a few of the 
natives. Kill a beaver and fome hares. Defign of the Englifh chief. 
Killa wolf, Changeable fiate of the weather. Recover the Pemmican, 
which had been hidden in an ifland. Natives fly at our approach. Meet 
with dogs. Altercation with the Englifh chief. Account of the articles 
left by the fugitives. Shoals of the river covered with faline matter. 
Encamp at the mouth of the river of the mountain. The ground on fire 
on each fide of tt. Continue to_fee encampments of the natives. Varwous 
hinds of berries. Kull geefe, fwans, Gc. Gc. Gc. Corroding quality of | 
the water. Weather changeable. Reach the entrance of the Slave Lake. 
Dangers encountered on entering it. Caught pike and trout. Met M. Le 

| Roux on the lake, Further circumftances till our return to Fort Chepe- 
wyan, Conclufion of the voyage. : . 


» 


\ 
A 


V V E embarked at three this morning, the weather, being clear and 
cold, with the wind at South-Eaft. At three in the afternoon we tra- 


of 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT. OF AMERICA, 


of the natives, which ‘we ‘had reafon to fuppofe they had quitted the. 


95 


Alok 


preceding day. At five we perceived a family, confifting of a man, two ad 


women, and as many children, {tationed ‘bythe fide of the water, whom 
we had-not ‘feen before. i They informed us;.that they'had but few fith, 
and that none of their friends were in the neighbourhood, except the 
inhabitants of one lodge onthe other fide of the river, anda man who 
_bélonged to‘them, and who was now occupied in hunting. I now found 


_ my interpreter very unwilling to afk fuch queftions as were dittated tohim, - 


from ‘the: ‘appréhenfion, as Timagined, that I might obtain {uch inielli- 
gence as would’ prevent him :from feeing’ Athabafca this feafon. We 
left him'with the Indian, ‘and pitched our. tents at the fame place where 


we'had’paffed the night on the filth of laft month. The Englith: chief 


came along’ with thé Indian to our fire ; and ‘the ‘latter informed: us-that 
the native who went down part of the river with ‘us had paffed. there, 
and that we fhould meet with three lodges of his tribe above the river of 


the Bear Lake. - Of ihe river to the Weftward he knew nothing. but. 


from the relation of others, This was ‘the firft night, fince “our. de- 


parture from Athabaica, when 1 It was fufficiently dark to. repder the ftars: 


vifible. 


We {et off at three this morning with the towing-line.-’ I walked with 
my Indians,’as they went fafter than the canoe,‘and particularly ‘as I 
fafpeAed : ‘that they wanted to airive at the huts of the’natives be- 
fore me. “In our way,T obferved feveral {mall fprings’ -of mineral water 
running-from the foot of the mountain, and along the beach I faw feveral 
lumps. of 3 iron ore, When we'came to ‘the river-of the Bear Lake, I or- 
dered one’ of the yourig: Indidns-to' wait for my canoe, and I took my 


Sunday 2. 


; place - 


96 


i 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE: THROUGH T HE. 


place in their {ynall Ganoe, This river is about: two’ hundred and fifty 


— yards broad at this’ place, the -water clear-and of:a greenifh colour. 


- caufe of.it in,the prefent inftance; . 


When LJanded'on-the oppofite fhore, I difcovered that, the ‘natives had | 
been there very'lately from: the print of their feet in the fand: We con- 
tinued walking till five in the afternoon, when we faw feveral fmokes 
along the’ fhore. As we naturally.concluded, that thefe’ were. certain 


. indications where we fhould meet the natives who were, the objetts.of our 


fearch, we quickened our pace ;, but,‘in our progrefs, experienced.a very 
fulphurous {mell, and: at length difcovered that the. whole bank.was on 
firé for a very’ confiderable diftance. . It proved to ‘be a coal mine, to 
avhich the -fire had':communicated, from an-.old Inflian. encampment. . 
The beach was covered with coals,. and. the’ Englith ‘chief gathered fome 
of the, fofteft he could find,'as-a-black dye; it being, the mineral, as he 
informed me, with which.the natives render their quills black. 

'. Here we waited fot the large canoe, 5, which artived : an 2 hour after us. 
At half, paft ten; iwe faw feveral Indian marks, which confifted of pieces of 
bark fixed on poles,and pointing to the woods, oppofite to which js an old 
beaten road, that bore the marks of being lately frequented ; the beach alfo 


' was covered with tracks. At a {mall diftance were the poles of five lodges 
.° dtanding ;_ where we landed,and unloaded our canoe. ‘I thea difpatched 


one.of,my men and two young Indians to fee if they, could find any natives 
within a:day’s march: of us;, I,wanted the Englith .chief.to go, but he 
pleaded fatigue, ,and; that jit would be of.no-ufe, ; This was the firft time 


“he had refufed to. comply. with my oie and jealouly, I believe, was the 


though | I had taken every, precaution 


ee A en 


_ that he. fhowld: snot; haye-caufe to-be jealous of the, Canadians. ‘There 


| > was 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, — 97 
was not, at this time, the leaft: appearance of fnow-on the: -oppofite As. 
mountains, though they: were almoft covered with it when'we paffed ok: 
before, » Set two. nets, and at eleven o'clock at night’ the men ‘and In: 
dians returned: ’ «They had ‘been to. their firft’ encampment, where 
there were four fires,:and which'had been ‘quitted’ a fhort ‘time be- 
fore’; “fo that they were obliged to ‘make’ the circuit’ of feveral {mall 
lakes which. the natives crofs with their canoes. ' This encampment was 
on the borders of a lake which was too large for them to venture round 
it, fo that they did not proceed any further. : They faw feveral’ beavers 
and beaver lodges.in thofe {mall lakes: : They killed one of thefe ani- 
mals whofe fur begah to get long, a fure indication that the fall of the year 
approaches, ». They alfo faw-many old tracks of the moofe and rein-deer. 

This‘is the time when the rein-deer leave the plains to come to the 
woods, as the mufquitoes begin to difappear;. I, therefore, apprehended 
that we fhould not find a.fingle Indian on the river fide, as they would 
be in or r about the mountains letting {nares to take them. 
We' proceéded with a ftrong Wefterly wind, at four this morning, Monday 3. 
the weather being cloudy and cold. At twelve it cleared up and 
became fine: the current alfo increafed. The water had fallen fo~ 
much fince otir paffage..down . the ‘river, that: here, ‘as-in other ‘places, 
we' difcovered: many ‘hoals ‘which: were not. then. vifible.“-We ‘killed - 
feveral geele of:a larger: fize than thofe which we -had ‘generally feen. 
~ Several: ‘Indian: encampments were: feen along. the river, and we. Tanded — 
at eight for the night... a 


Bw 
i f . 

tf 2 oft vt . ‘ . ~ . x 

RFE eet ere i doarl ot : ; 


At four in the morning we renewed our ir courfe, when it was fine and Tuelday 4. 
Per ears ve msn OQ calm.” 


fa 


8 JOURNAL OF 4 VOYAGE THROUGH THE 
BE. calm. The night had been cold and a very heavy dew had falled. ‘At 
ay nine we were obliged to land inorder to gum. ‘thé canoe, ‘when ‘the 
r weather hecame :extremely | warm. Numerous stracks of: rein deer ap- 
_ speared on the {fide of the river. At half paft five” we took our ftation 
for ‘the might, and. fet-the nets. ‘The current ‘was: very’ flrong : all day, 
vand-we found it very difficult to walk along :the’ beach, d from the -large 
Mones which : were fcattered over it, en 
Wednel. 5. We: raifed our nets:but had not the. good fortune to take a fingle fih. 
* ‘The water-wasnow become fo low that the eddy currents would not admit 
of, fetting- them. The; current: ‘had not relaxed ‘its flrength; and the’ dif- 
Seulty of walking along the beach was continued.” ‘The air was now 
become fo cold, that our.éxercifé, violent.as it was, farce’ kept us warm. 
‘We paffed feveral spoints which we’ fhould nat shave accomplithed, if the 
" ganoe had been loaded. We were-very ‘much fatigued, ‘and at, fix were 
glad to conclude-our toilfome march. ‘Thé Indians killed ‘two geele. 
The women who did not quit the canoe, were continually employed i in 
snaking {hogs.of. moofe-fkin, for the men, as.a: pair’ did not laf ‘more. ¢. than 
aday. ! : 


Thuriday 6. “The rain prevented us from : proceeding til half pat: fix; ‘wthen we 
_ ihad a ftrong aft wind, which, aided. ‘by’ the: paddles, drove wus jon ata’ 
, great rate:. We encamped at fix to wait for ‘our Indians, -whom we had 
mot feen fince the moining ; and.at half paft-feyen: they | ‘arrived very 
much diffatisfied with their day’s journey. ‘Two days had now élapled 
fince we had feen the leaft appearance of Indian‘habitations. 


+ r 
r sot : a er a . , sp ara vege 
t By ~ et ti ar ioe 


Friday 7. ' -AWe embarked | at half paft three, and foon after perceived two rein- 
— “ ‘deer’ 


- 


“NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. gg. \-- 


deer:on the beach before us. We accordingly checked our courfe ;, but Ae 
our Indians, in contending who fhould be the firft to get near thefe ant-. nora 
mals, alarmed and loft them. We, however, killed a female rein-deer, 

and from the wounds in her. hind-legs, it was fuppofed that fhe had been 

-purfued by wolves, who .had devoured her young one: her udder’ was 

- full of milk, and one of the young Indians poured it among fome boiled. 

corn, which he ate with great delight, efteeming’ it. a. very delicious 

food.. At five in the afternoon we faw. an. animal. running. along the 

beach, but could not determine,.whether it was a grey fox or a dog. 

In a fhort time we went afhore for the night, at the-entrance of a {mall 
river, as. Ithought there might | be fome natives in. the vicinity of the | 

place. I ordered: my, hunters to put their fuzees in: order, and. gave: 

. them ammunition to proceed on an hunting party the next day ; they: 

were alfo inftruéted to difcover if there were‘any natives in the neigh- 

bouring mountains, I founda. {mall canoe at the edge of the woods, 
which contained a paddle arid.a bow: it had: been repaired. this: fprings ' 
and.the-workmanfhip of the bark excelled any that Ihad.yet feen. We 2 ~~» 
faw- feveral éncampments: in the courfe of the day. The current of the 

river’ was very 7 Brow g, and aca the Points equal to rapids 


"Fie rain was‘ very violent throughout the night, and, continued till Saturday 8. 
‘the afternoon of this. day, when the weather began o clear, with a 
firong, cold, a d']Wefterly wind, - At’ three the Indians proceeded OF | 
the hunting: expedition, and at eight they returned without having, met . 
With the: leaft, facgels ; though ,they faw: numerous tracks of the’ rein- 
aed ‘Bhey-e edmie to an-old beaten-road,, which’ on¢ of them followed 
7 O2 for 


100 
1789. 
Augut. 


Wemncoe tna 


Sunday 9. 


i 


Monday 10. 


/ 


JOURNAL OF A’ VOYAGE THROUGH. THE 


for fome' time ;: but it did: not ‘appear to have. been: ‘lately. frequented. | 


The rain now returned and continued till the mornings: >). 

Oo a ey Ce Loe 
We renewed our’ voyage at half pat three, the weather. being cold 
and cloudy; byt at ten it-became clear and ‘moderate. We faw another 
canoe at. the. outfide of the: wood; and. one’ of the Indians -killed:a dog, 
which was in a meagre, emaciated condition. - We perceived various 
places where the ‘natives’ had: made their fires ‘for. thefe people refide 
but-a fhort time’ near the river, | and. remove from one bank to the 
other, as-it fuits their purpofes., We faw a ‘path which’ was con- 
neéted with. another on the oppofite fide of the river.; .The water had 
-rifen confiderably fince laft night, and there had been‘a ftrong‘current 
throughout the.day. At feven we made to. the fhore’ and: ‘encamped. 


, a 
‘ ' 


- At three this morning we returned to our canoe’; the: weather fine and. 
clear, with a light wind from the South-Eaft:. The Indians ‘were_be- 


fore us in purfuit of game. At ten-we landed oppofite to the: mountains 


which we had paffed on the fecond:of the laft: ‘month, in order. to. afcer- 


tain the variation of the: compafs, at this: place; but this was “accom: 
plithed i in al very imperfeét manner; as I could not depend on my watch. 


_ One of the hunters joined. us here; fatigued-and unfuccelsful.:,:.As ithefe . 


mountains are the laft of any confiderable magnitude on:the, South: ‘Welt 


fide, of the riyer, L ordered “my men to crof-to: that fide’ of it;, that ° 


Imight afcend one of them. “It was’ near-four-in-the’ afternoon: when I 


landed, and-I loft no time in ‘Proceeding | to, the attainment of my obs 


je&. . I was accompanied only By young’ Indian, as--the curiofity of © 


7 “wot , . ‘ ‘ , 
we og? . . , aha . : , my 


. “e 
- 


‘ 5 
NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. - 101 


my: people was: fubdued by: the fatigue. they had undergone; and .we A789. 
foon had reafon.to believe: that. we: fhould: pay dearly ‘for the indulgence nS 
of our own. +» Thé wood, which was’ chiefly of fpruce firs, was fo thick 
that, it:was ‘with great .difficulty. we made our. way through it.. When 


we had: walked upwards of-an ‘hour, the-under-wood"decreafed, while 


the’ white birch: and :poplar were the: largeft ‘and talleft of their kind that 
Ivhad-ever feen.: The ground now. began to’ rife, and was covered ~~ 
with ‘{niall pines, and. at length we got ‘the firft: view of the moun- . 
tains . fince | we had left the“canoe; as: they’ appeared to be ‘no nearer - 
to us, though we had been walking for three hours, than when we had 
feen them from the: rivér, my companion exprefled a very great anxiety 
to.return ; ‘his fhoes and. leggins were torn to pieces, and. he. was alarmed 
atthe idea of pafling through fuch bad roads during the night. I per+ 
fifted, however, in proceeding, with a determination to pafs the night 


‘on the mountains .and* ‘return; on’ the’. morrow. - As we. approached 


them, the ' ground: was quite marlhy, and-we waded in.water and grafs_ 


‘. ‘up to the knees, till-we eame ‘within-a mile”of them, when I fud- a 


. dénly funk up to.my arm-pits; and it was with fome difficulty that r 


extricated myfelf from this difagreeable fituation, I now found it im- 


" poflible: ‘to proceed: to. crofs' this marfhy~ ground in a ftraight line. was 


impratticable; and it extended fo far,to the right and left, that I could 
‘not attempt.to'make the circuit :: I therefore determined to return.to the 


Pty. hey: moe . ‘ 
1 ba Fa gs aioe 1 o4 


‘eanoe, and: arrived: = about midnight, very much fatigued with this \ 


. fruitlels. Jeumey 


ab roe ke ~ 
ee 
“We cobferved feveral tracks along, the beach,and ,an .encampment at” Tuefday 13. 


othe edge of the woods, which: ‘appeared to be five or: fix days old. We 
_ _ fhould 


fans , 
ne 9 


~ 


wf 
wn 


fhould have continued our mage along this fide of, the: T1V 


a——~ 


not. {éen our hunters fince yelterday morhings , We. accordi 


, barked before three, and at five. traverfed the river,. when we fawtwo of . 


them coming down i in fearch of us... They- had killed no other. ani pals | 


than one, beaver, and a. few hares. According to. their. account,’ ‘the 
_woads were fo thick that it was impoffible to follow. the. game. through 


them. . . They had feen feveral of the. natives encampments, ‘at no great 
diftance. from the river; ; and it was their opinion that they had difcovered. 
us in. our pallage down it, and had taken ‘care to avoid t tis ; oat 


" acéounted for the: foaall number we had feen’on. our return, . : 


I requetted thie Englih chief to return n with 2 meta the other fide: of the 


* rive, in. order. that he might proceed to difcover the natives, whofe 


tracks and habitations we had feen there; but he was backward in comply- | 
ing with my defire, and propofed to fend the.young men; -but I could not 


* traft to them, and at the.fame tinje was become:rather doubtful’ of him. 
‘They were flill-afraid left I fhould obtain, fuch accounts of the other. river - | 


as would induce me to travel overland to it, and’ that. they fhould. be 
called upon to accompany me. Lygas,, indeed, informed by: one: of’ my 
own people, that the Englith chief, his wives and companions, had: deter- 
mined to leave me’ on-this fide of the Slave Lake,-in-order-to go to the 
eountry of the’ Beaver Indians; and-that about the ntiddle ofthe winter 


he would'feturn to that lake, where he had. appointed to -méet fome of 
Jhis relations, who, during the laft fpring, had been engagedit iy war. 


a. | ce , 
’ We now traverfed: the river,’ and continued! to: vtech hie: indians till 


7 afk twebve, when we laft all waces:of,theiy itv confequeste, aseinia- 


mK a os , gined, 


. N ORTH: WEST CON TINENT OF AMERICA, 


gined, of their. having erofled to'-the Eaftern fide. We faw feveral’ 
‘dogs on both fhorés; .and one of the” young. Andians, killed.a wolf, 
which. the .men-ate ‘with’ great ‘fatisfaGtion: we.-fhot, alfo, fifteen 
young geefe that were. now beginning to fly.. It-was eight when we 
took ourievening tation, having loft four hours,in making our travérfes. 
‘There owas no. interruption’ OF: the fine weather during the courfe of this 
day. a ee 


, - oo 
ra a y stet + og rhe, . hoa tye yyt 
. “ ile 


‘We proceeded on our Noyage at three this morning, ‘and | difpatched 
‘the two: young Indians acrofs the river, that we might not mifs any of the 
‘natives that fhould be on the banks of it. We faw many places where 


109 


1789. 
Au guilt. ye) 
Peainaria 


Wednef, 12. 


fires had: been lately made. along the; sheach, as well asfite running ‘in the , 


-woods, : At four we arrived at an éncdmpthent which had been left 
‘this ‘morning. | ‘Their tracks were obfervable’in {éveral places i in the 
“woogs,and as it might ‘be pra{umed ‘that they.:could' not ‘be-at any 


‘great diftance, it was propofed to the chief to accompany me in featch 


‘of them: «We accordingly, though with fome hefitation on his ‘part, pene- 
- ‘trated feveral milés‘into the ‘woods; but without: difcovering the. objeéts 
tof dur-refearch. ‘The: fire chad f{pread- all” over the country, and had 
buried about three: inches of the black, lightifoil, which covered a body 
of cold..clay, tiat was fio hard as not to receive:the -leait impreffion of 
Zour feet? At ten we returned from our. unfuccefsful excurfion. In the 
“mean «time the thunters:‘had “killed: fevey. geefe.:) T. here izwere. feveral 
fhowers OF | rain, ‘accompanied withi-gufts of wind: and thunder!” ‘Fe 
ita had: ‘heen: fet: auripg our abfence;:: rears Tote 3 
> wad nee va yf as oe ree UV Baye Kae oft ‘oo ho _ wate 


* a 
a 


» emer takes up,' bupsnot are fifh was. found i in. thems-and: pt 
oO ‘ ‘y 7 YY : . “half: 
“ Mw? ~ af 6 ' . ? . : ‘ 


> % 


Thurfc. 13> 


\ 
% 


104 JOURNAL OF A\VOYAGE THROUGH THE 

aoe half paft three we coitinued our route,. with very favourable weather. 
—-~— We pafled feveral places, ‘where fires: had been made by. the natives, and 
-many tracks were’ perceptible along: the beach: -:.At feven we were oppo- 
fite: the ifland -wheré our’ Pemmican; had been. concealed: ‘two of the 
Indians’ were, accordingly difpatched in’ fearch of it; and ‘it: proved 
, very acceptable, as:it: rendered:us more’ independent.of! the provifions 
which van tolbe obtained, by our fowling pieces, and qualified us to 
"get out of the river without’ that delay Awhich our hunters would other- 
4 wile haverequired. . In a fhort time.we: perceived a {moke: on the fhore 
y’ 7 to the South-Welt, at the diftance of. three leagues, which :did not appear -_ 
a | to procedd { from any running fire. "The Indians, who were a.little ' way 
. _ ahéad of us,-did'not difcover them; being engaged. in the purfuitjof, a 
flock of: "geefe,.at which they fired feveral {hots, when ‘the fnioke i imme- 
diately difappéared; and in. a fliort time we faw feveral of ‘the riatives 
srun along the fhore, fome" of whom entered their ‘canoes. Though we 
were almoft oppofite to them,'we ‘could: not crofs: ‘the river without 
_ going further ‘up it, from .the! flrength. of thé, current; : J ‘therefore or- 
wo" ~  sdered our Indians..to:make. every poflible exertion, in: order: to. fpeak 
-. with them; and ‘wait our-artival:. - But as ‘foon as.our fniall. caiioe trick 
"Oe off, we could perceive:.the' Poor. affrightéd people: ‘haftert. tothe thor, 

and after _ drawing their canoes.‘on the beach, hurry into. .the woods. 
ws was paft ‘ten before we landed atthe place. where they had. deferted ‘nd | 
-cances, whith were four in numbéer:: - ‘They. were: fo: terrified that they. 
‘had left feveral articles ‘on the beach.:I. was very, much: difpleafed with 
* my Indians, who inftead of feeking. thé:natives; were ‘dividing’ theif pro- 
a perty. I rebuked the Englifh chief with fome feverity. for. his conduét, 
a ‘and’ immediately. ordered him, his: ‘young = meni and: nyown People to 
fe go 


nar 


AN op 


4a 


ner as, the flaves, (the name given to 
: country), and that he would remain among them. His harangue was 
: fueceeded by a loud and bitter lamentation; and his relations aflifted the 


\ 
| 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


go in fearch of the fugitives, but their fears had made them too nimble 
for.us, and we could not overtake them. We {aw feveral dogs in the 
woods and fome of them followed us to our canoe. 


‘The Englith « chief was ee ,mpuch difpleafed at my reproaches, ind 


expreffed himfelf to me- ain® érfon to that, effe&t. This was.the very 7 


opportunity which I wanted, | to. make him acquainted with my diflatis- 
faftion for fome'time paft. F fhated.tor him that I had come a great way, 
and at a very confidérable expence, without having obtained the object 

of. my wifhes, and that I fufpefted he had concealed from me a principal 
part of what the natives had told him refpeéting the country, left he 


~ fhould be obliged to follow me: that his reafon for not killing game, &c. 


was. his jedloufy, ‘whith likewife prevented him from looking alter the na- 


tives as he ought ; and that. we had never giyen him any caufe for any fuf-. 
picions of us, Thefe fuggeftions irritated him in a very high degree, and he. 


accufed me of {peaking ill words to him; he denied the charge of jealoufy, 


and declared that he did ‘not conceal any thing f from us ; and that asto 


the ill fuccefs of their hunting, it arofe from the, nature of the country, 
and the {earcity, which had hitherto appeared, of animals in it. ° He con- 
cluded by informing me that he would not accompany me any further ; 


that ‘though he was witourhnmaneey he could live in the fame man-.-- 


é inhabitants of that part of the 


vociferations of his grief; though they -faid that their, tears flowed for 
thei: dead friends. I did not interrupt their grief for two hours, but as 


I could: not well do without: them, I was at length obliged to footh it, and 


44 “ re ee induce .’ 


i t 


106 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


Ave induce the chief to change his ‘refolution, which he did, but with great 
ae apparent relu€tance; When we embarked as we had hitherto done. 


The articles/which the fugitives hail left behind them, on.the prefent 
occafion, were bows, arrews, fnares for moofe and rein-deer, and for 
hares; to thefé maybe added a few difhes, made of bark, fome {kins of 
beaver, and old beaver robes, with afmall robe 


the-marten and th 
made of the fkin of the lynx.’ ‘Their canoes were coarfely made of the 

~ bark of the fpruce-fir, and will carry two or three people. I ordered my 
men to remove them to the fhade, and gave moft of the other articles 
to the young Indians. The: Englith chief would not accept of any of 
them. In the place, and as the purchafe of them, I left fome cloth, fome 

fmall knives, a file, two fire-fteels, a comb, rings, with beads and awls. 
_Lalfo ordered a marten {kin to be placed on a proper mould, and a bea- 

ver {kin to be firetched on a frame, to which I tied.a feraper. The Indians 

_ were of opinion that, all thefe ace would’be loft, as the natives were 
- fo much’ frightened that they would never return. Here-we loft fix 
| hours; and on our quitting the place, three of the dogs which I. have 

, a eady mentioned followed us along thebeach, © 
7. We pitched our tents at half paft eight, at.the entrance of the river 

of the mountain; and while the. people were unloading the canoe, I took. 

' a walk along:the beach, and on the fhoals, which being uncovered fince 

we paffed down, by the finkitig of. the waters, were -now white with a 

/ faline fubftance. 1 fent for the Englith chief to fop with me, and a dram 

pr two difpelled all his heart-burning and difcontent. Hé informed’ me 


that it was acuftom.with the Chepewyan chiefs to go to war after they — 
(, ; , had 


ns - 
aan) ‘ : ~ 
~ ’ 


we 


ee SL 


wo 


unites them. We pafléd feveral encampments of the natives, and a river 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 107 


had fhed tears, in order to wipe away | the difgrace attached to fuch a AD. 
feminine weaknefs, and that in the enfuing {pring he fhould not fail to et 
execute his defign; at the fame time he declared his ‘intention to con- 

tinue with us as long as I fhould want him. I took care that he fhould 

carty fome liquid confolation to his lodge, to prevent the return of his” 

chagrin. The weather was fine, and the Indians killed three geefe. ~ 


At a quarter before four this morning, we returned to our canoe, and Fridsy 14, 
went, about two miles up the river er of the mountains. Fire was in the —_ 
grotnd on ‘each fide of it. In traverfing, I took foundings, and found 
five, four and an half, and three and an half fathoms water. _ Its. ftream 
was very muddy, a and formed a cloudy ftreak along the water of the great 
river, on the Weft fide fo ‘the Eaftern rapid, whire the waters of the, two 
rivers at length blend in one: It was impoffible not to. confider it as an 
extraordinary circumftance, that the- current of the former river {hould 


» not incorporate with that of the latter, but flow, as it were, in diftin@ | 


{treams at fo great a diftance, and till the contraéted ftate of the-channel 


which flowed i in from the North, that had the appearance of being navi- ok 
—gable., We concluded our voyage of this day at half paft five—in—the- — cae ee 


' afternoon... T here were > pleaty of berries, which my people called poires ; 5° 


they are of. 2. purple hue, fomewhat bigger than a pea, and of a lufcious 
tafte; there were allo goofeberries, and a few ftrawberries,’ 
WE aniaued our courle from three in the morning “till half pafl five Saturday 15. 
in the: afternoon. We faw feveral encampments along the beach, till it 
became too narrow to admit them; when the banks rofe into a confider- 
oo Pe ° , . . able «> 


Sunday 16. 


Monday 17. 


Tuefday 18, 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


able degree of elevation, and there were more eddy currents. The 
’ Indians killed twelve geefe, and berries were colle€ted in great abund. ; 
ance. The weather was fultry throughout the day: 


We continued our voyage at a quarter before four, and j in five hours | 
paffed the place where we “tad been ftationed on the 1 gth of June. . Here 
the river widened, and its: ‘fhores bécame flat. The land on the North 
fide is low, compofed of a black foil, mixed with ftones, but agreeably _ 
covered with the afpen, the poplar, the white bircbs the fpruce fir, &c. | 
The current was fo moderate, that we proceeded upon it almoft as faft as 
in dead water. At twelve we paffed an encampment of three fires, which 
was the only one we faw in the courfe.of the day. The weather was the 
fame as yefterday. . 4 ‘ 

We proceeded at half paft three ; and faw three fucceffive encampments. 
From the peculiar ftru€ture of the huts, we imagined that fome of the 
Red-Knife Indians had been i in this part of the country, though | it is not 
‘ual for them to come this way. Ihad laft night ordered the young 


Indians to precede us; for. the -purpofe. -of. hunting, and at ten -we-ovet- --— 


took them. They had killed five young fwans; and the Englith chief 
prefented us with an eagle, three cranes, .a {mall beaver, and two geele,, 
We encamped at feven this evening on the fame Spot which; had been 


our refting-place on the 2gth ¢ pf. June. 
i 


4 


At four this morning I equipped all the Indians for an hunting ex- | 


- curfion, atid fent them onward, as our ftock of provifion was nearly ex- 


‘‘haufted. We followeet at half paft fix, and. croffed over to the North 


“ ; ‘fhore, | 


2 NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 
fhore, where the: land is low ‘4nd {carcely vifible in the horizon, It 
was near twelve when | ‘we arrived: “Inow got an obfervation, when it 
was 61. 39. North latitude. We were near five miles to the North of 
the main channel of the river. The freth tracks and,beds of buffaloes 
were very'perceptible. Near this place a river flowed in from the Horn 

mountains which are at no great diftance. We landed at five in the 
afternoon, and before the canoe was unloaded, the Englith chief arrived 
with the tongue of a cow, or, female»buffalo, when four men and the 
Indians were difpatched for the fleth; but ‘they did’ not return till it 
was dark, with five geele. They informed me, that they had feen feveral 
human tracks. in the, fand on the oppofite land. The fine weather 


continued without interruption. 


4 


The Indians were again fent forward in ‘puri of game: and fome 
time! being employed i m gumming the canoe, we did not embark till half 
-paft five, and at, nine we landed to wait the. return of the. hunters. I 
| here ‘found the variation of,the compafs.to. be about twenty degrees 
A Raft: - a | 

Be 

|The people : made themfelves paddles’ ‘nd’ ‘repaired the canoe. It is. 
ah | extiaordinary circuimftance for which I do not pretend to account, 

‘that there is fome: peculiar quality in the water of this. river, which cor- 
' _rodes' -wood,, from the’ deftruétive .effe&t it had on the paddles.’ ~The 


hunters’arrived at a late hour without having feen any large animals. 


Their booty: confifted oily, of three fwans and as many geefe. The 
, ‘women: were employed ‘in gathering cranberries and crowberries, which 
, Were found in great abundance. a | 


’ . oa ’ . 7 
: ; 
- 
La . 
ore We 
, 


+ 


+ 


: 
1 ’ . ~ t 
fo. 
= to Ps ‘ . 
alee ae 
2 . 4 . - 4 
; 
. 


Wednef. 19, _ 


110 


1789, 
Auguft, 
_—., | 
Thurflay 20. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE.THROUGH THE 


We embarked at four o'clock, and took thé North fide of the: channel, 
though the current was on that fide much ftronger, in order to take a 
view of the river, which had been mentioned to me in our. paffage down- 
wards, as flowing’ from. the country of the Beaver Indians; and which 
fell in hereabouts, We could not, however, difcover i it, and: it is pro- 
bable that the account was referable to ‘the river which we had. pafled on 
Tpefday. The current was very ftrong, and we croffed over to an ‘ifland 
oppolite to us; “here. it was {till more impetuous, and alfumed the hurry 
of a rapid. We found an awl arid a paddle on, the fide of the water ; ; 


' the former we knew to belong to the Kniftineaux : _I fuppofed it to be 


_ Friday es, 


mana 


Saturday 2: 22. 


_ the chief Merde-d’ours and his party, who went, to, war laft {pring, and 
had taken this route on their return to Athabafca. | Nor is it improba- 
ble that they may have been the caule that we faw fo few of the natives 
on the banks of this river. The weather. was raw and cloudy, arid formed’ 
a ‘very, unpleafant contraft to, the warm, funny days which immediately 
preceded it. We took up our abode for the night at half: ‘paft feven, on - 
the Northern fhore, where the adjacent country is both low.and flat- 
The Indians killed five young fwans, and a beaver. There was an ap- — 


pearance of rain. Soo co 

The weather was cold, ‘with a trong Ealterly.. win “and frequent 
fhowers, fo-that we were detained j in our’ flation.. In the afternoon ‘the | 
f Indians got on the track of « a 1. moofe-deer,. but were not fo: fortunate as 


to, overtakeit, .. > L- 3 nr ee 
3 \ ‘ ° 
hag A, , 


ty me 4 


i “4 \ eb . be. rr a. as 
‘The wind veered, wt fl : and. continued. to blow 
" flrong and cold. We, however renewed our: voyage, and; in. three’ 

’ : » hours” - 


4 


4 


NORTH-WEST CON TINENT OF AMERICA.’ 


~ hours reached the entrance of the Slave Lake, under half. fail ; with the 
‘ paddle, it would have taken us at leaft eight hours. The Indians did ' 


sare! 


, 


M11 
1789. 
Augult 
"en pol 


not arrive till -four hours after us; but the wind was fo. violent; that it’ 


was not expedient to venture into the laké; we therefore fet.a net and 
encamped for the night. The women gathered large quantities of the 
fruit, already mentioned, called Pathagomenan, and cranberries, crow- 
berries, moofeberries, &ec. The Indians killed two fwans and three gecle. 


| . ‘The 1 net ‘produced but five Small pike, and at five we embarked, and 


entered the lake by the fame channel through which we had paffed from 


Sunday 23. 


iit - The South-Weft fide: would-have been the fhorteft, but we were not 


certain of there: being plenty of fifh along the coaft, and we were fure 


of finding abundance of them in the courfe we preferred. . Befides, 
Lexpeéted to find my people at the place where Heft them, as they had 
received orders to remain there till the fall. 


§ 


A 
- We paddled a dong way into a deep bay to get the 2 wind, and having’ 


left our maft behind us, We landed to cut another. We then hoifted fail 


‘and were driven op at a’ great rate. At twelve the wind and fwell were 
augmented to {uch a degree, that our’ under yard broke, but luckily ‘the 


mai{t thwart refifted, till we had time to. faften down the yard with a- 


. pole, without lowering fail. We took in a large quantity of water, and 
had our maft -givén way, in all probability, we fhould vhave filled: and ; 
fark, Our courfe ‘continued to be very dangerous, along a flat, lee- 


fhore, withdut Being able to land till three in the afternoon. Two men — 


. were: continually. employed in bailing” - out-the water which we took in . 
on all fides. We fortunately doubled a point that fereened wbdrom the ; y 


BA 


paid 


wind | 


112 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


a 
1789. wind and fwell, and encamped for the night, in:order: to ‘wait for our 
ae Indians. We then fet our nets, made a yard and. matt; and}gummed the 
canoe, ‘On vifiting the nets, we found fix: white: fith, and two pike, 
The women gathered cranberries and crowberries i in great plenty ; and 

as the night came on the weather became more moderate. . 


Monday 24. » Our nets this morning produced fourteen white filh, ‘ten pikes, anda 

couple of trouts. At five we embarked with a light breeze from the 

South, when we hoifted fail, and proceeded flowly, as our Indians had not 
come up with us. At eleven we went on fhore to prepare the kettle; and | 

dry the nets; at one we were again onthe water. .At four in the after- 

noon we perceived a large canoe with a fail, and two fmall ones ahead; 

we foon came up with them, when they proved to be M. Le Roux and an 

Indian, with his family, who were on an hunting party, and had been out 

twenty five days. It was his i intention to have gone as far as the river, to 

leave a letter for me, to inform me of his fituation. He had fen no . 

_ more Indians wheré'I had left him ; ‘but ‘had -made a voyage to Lac la 
Marte; where he met. eighteen {mall canoes of the'Slave ‘Indians, from 
whom he obtained five packs’ of- {kins, which were principally. thofe of 
the marten, Thére were four Beaver Indians among them, who. had’ 
- bartered the greateft part of the abovementioned articles. with, them, be- 
fore his arrival. They informed him that their’ relations had more 
Akins, but that they were afraid to venture with them, though they -had 
been informed that People were to come with goods. to- barter: for them. 
He gave thefe people a-pair of i ice chifels. each, and other atticles, and 
Aen them away to condué their ‘friends to. thé Slave: Lake, where he 
<was.to,remain- daring: ‘the fueceeding winter, »: cou weak Be 


" . : 4 - * 
, e 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


We fet three nets, and in a fhort time caught twenty fifh of different 


113 | 


Avge 


kinds, In the dufk of the evening the Englifh chief arrived with a moft aus 


pitiful account that he had like to have been drowned in trying to follow 
us; and that the other men had alfoa very narrow efcape. . Their canoe, 
he faid, had broken on the {well, at fome diftance from the fhore, but as 
it was flat, they had with his affitance been able to fave themfelves. He 
added, that he left them lamenting, left they fhould not overtake me, if 
I did’ not wait for them: he alfo exprefled his apprehenfions that they 
would not be able to repair their canoe. This evening I gave my men 
fome rum to cheer-themi after their fatigues, 


—. We rofe this morning at a late hour, when we vifited the nets, which 

' produced but few fifh: my people, indeed, partook of the ftores of 
M. Le Roux. At eleven the young Indians arrived, and reproached me 
for having left them fo far behind. They had killed two fwans, and 
brought me one of them. The wind was Southerly throughout the day, 
and tc too ftrong for us to depart, as we were at the foot of a grand tra- 
verfe; _At noon I had an oblervation, which gave 61.29. North lati- 
tude. Such: was the ftate of the weather, that we could not vifit our 
nets. In the afternoon the fky darkened, and there'was lightning, ac- 


‘ 


cee 


Tuefday 26. 


. companied with loud claps of thunder. The wind alfo veered round to . 


the Weftward, and blew an hurricane. 


It rained throughout the night, and till eight in the morning, without Wednef. 26. 


~any.alteration in the wind. The Indians went on an hunting excurfion, 
but returned altogether without fuccefs in the evening. “One of them 
was fo unfortunate as to mifs a moofe-deer. In‘thé afternoon there were 


' heavy fhowers, with thunder, &e. oo 


Q co We 


Vhurld. 


Friday 28, 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


We’ cmbarked before four, and hoifted’ fail, At nine we landed to ° 


? drefs victuals, and wait for M. Le Roux and the Indians. At eleven we 


” proceeded with fine and calm weather. At four in the afternoon a light 


breeze fprang up to the Southward, to which we fpread our fail, and at 


half paft five in the afternoon went on fhore for the night. We then ; 


fet our nets. The Englith chief ‘and his people being quite exhaufted 
with fatigue, he this morning expreffed his defire to remain behind, in 


It blew very hard throughout the night, and this morning, fy that we . 
found it a bulinels of fome difficulty to get ‘to our nets ; our trouble, 


~ however, was repaid by a confiderable quantity of white fith, trout, &c, 


Towards the afternoon the wind increafed, _Two of ‘the men who had 


been gathering berries faw two moofeideer, with the tracks of buffaloes — 


and rein-deer. = About fun-fet we heard two fhots, and faw a fire on the 
oppofite fide of the bay; we accordingly made a large ‘fire alfo, that our 
pofition might’be determined. When we were all gone to bed, we heard 
the report 6f a gun very near us, and in a very fhort time the Englifh 
chief prefented himfelf drenched with wet, and in’ much apparent 
confufion inforihed me that the canoe with his ‘companions was 


| broken to pieces; and that they had loft their fowling pieces, and 
.the flefh of a rein-deer, which they had killed’this morning. They 


were, he faid, ata very fhort diftance from us; and at the fame time 
requelted that. fire might be fent to’ them, as: they” were flarving with 


cold, They and his women, however, foon joined us, and were: “imme © 
diately’ accommodated with dry clothes.° 


ra 


ne 


order to proceed to the country of the Beaver Indians, engaging at the | 
- fame time that he would return to Athabafca in the courfe of the winter, 


y, 


- tye . 
NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


I fent the Indians on an hunting party, but they returned without fuc- 
cefs; and they exprefled their determination not to follow me any further, 


~ 
Y 


‘from their apprehenfion of being drowned. 


~ 


t "% — 
‘ 


- Weembarked at one this morning, and. took from the nets a large trout,. 


: apd twenty white fifh. At fun-rife a {mart aft breeze {prang up, which — 


wafted us to M. Le Roux’s houfe by two in the afternoon.: “It was late 
before hé and our Indians arrived; “when, according to a promife which 
I had made the latter, I gave them a plentiful equipment of iron n ware, 
ammunition, tobacco, &c. aS a recompence for apm 


ence they had fuftained with me. . : 


I propoled ‘to the Englith chief to proceed to the country of the 


Beaver Indians, and bring them, to difpofe of their peltries to. M. Le 
_Roux, whom. I intended to leave’ there the enfuing winter. He had 
already engaged to’ be at ‘Athabalea, in the month of March next, 


[ 
j 


‘ “with plenty of furs. 
“y fat up z al night tomake,the néceflary arrangements for the embarka- 
tion: of this morning, and to prepare. inftru€tions for M. Le Roux. We 
obtained fome provifions here, and parted. from him at five, with fine calm 
weather. It foon, however, | became neceflaiy to Jand on a {mall ifland, to 
ftop the ledkage.of the canoe, which hag been occafioned by the fhot of an 


‘arrow under the water mark, by fome Indian children: While this byurfinels. 


"was proceeding, we took the opportunity « of drefling fome fifh. Attwelve 


the wind {prang up: from the Sopth- -Eaft, which was in the’teeth of our, 


nd inconveni- | 


115° 


89, 
Aout 


(nanan yametnmand ” 
" Saturday 29. ; 


Peo, 
Sunday 30.8. 


Monday She 
Zé 


direétion, fo that, dur progrefs was greatly impeded. I had an obfervation, _ 
BO \ Q2 . which ; 


116 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


1789. which gave 62. 15. North latitude. We landed at feven.in the evening, 


September. . - . 
‘—y—~ and: pitched our tents.: 


_ We continued our voyage at five in the morning, the weather calm 
and fine, and paffed the Ifle 4 la Cache about twelve, but could not per- 
ceive the land, which was feen in our former paflage.; On paffing the 

_CarreBoeuf Iflands,:at five in the afternoon, we faw land to the South by 
Welt, which we ‘thought was the oppofite fide of the lake, ftretching 
away to a great diftance. We landed at half paft fix. in the evening, 


Tuefday 1. 


when there was thunder, and an appearance of change in the weather. 


Wedsef,2, It rained and blew hard the latter part of the night. At half paft five 
~ the rain fubfided, when we made a traverfe of twelve miles, and took in 
a good deal of water. At twelve it became calm; when-I-had an 
- obfervation, which gave 61. 36. North latitude. At three in the after- 
* noon there was a flight breeze from the Weftward, which foon increafed, 
' when we hoifted fail, and took a traverfe of twenty-four miles for the 
point of the old Fort, where we arrived at feven and ftopped for the 
night. This traverfe fhortened our way three leagues; indeed we did 
not expect to have cleared-the lake in fuch a fhort time. - 


Thurfday 3.. It blew with great violence. chroughut the night, and at four i in the 
‘morning we embarked, when we did : ist make more than five miles in 
three hours without topping ; notwithftanding we were : theltered from 
the {well by along bank... We now entered the fmall river, where 
the wind could have no effe&t upon us. There were frequent fhowers in 
the courfe of the day, and we encamped at fix in the evening, . -- - 

. The 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA; 47 


The morning was dark and cloudy, neverthelefs we embarked. at five; Senin 189. 
ember, 


but at ten it cleared up:. We faw a few fowl, ‘and at feven in, the even- baa 
ay’ 4. 


ing went on fhore for the night. 
The- weather continued to be cloudy. At five we proceeded, and at Saturday 5, 

eight. it began to rain very hard. In about half an hour we put to 

fhore, and were detained for the remaining part of the day. 


_ It rained throughout the night, with a {trong North wind. Numerous Sunday 6. 
flocks. of wild fowl paffed to the Southward ; at fix in the afternoon, the 
-rain, in fome meafure, fubfided, and we embarked, but it foon returned 
with renewed violence ;' we neverthelefs: took- the advantage of an aft 
wind, though it coft us a complete drenching. The hunters killed fever 
__ geefe, and we pitched’our tents.at half paft fix in the evening. 


‘“ 


We were on the water at five this morning, with an head-wind, ac- Monday 7. 
companied by fucceflive fhowers. At three in the afternoon we ran the 
canoe on a ftump, and it filled with water before fhe could be got to 
land: Two hours were employed in repairing her, and at feven in the — 


evening we took our ftation for the night. 


‘We renewed our voyage.at half paft four in a thick-mift which lafted. Tuefday 8. 
till, niné; when it cleared away, and fine weather fucceeded. At three 
in the afternoon we came to the firft carrying-place, Portage des Noyes, 
and encamped at the upper end of it to dry our clothes, fome of which 
were almoft rotten. | 


a 


We . 


418 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


5 +789. “We embarked at five in the morning, : -and.i ‘our canoe was damaged 

: eptem er, 

War, On the-mens’ fhoulders who were bearing 4 it over the . carrying-place, 
canei, 9. 


called Portage du Chetique. The guide: -répaired her,.. however, 
while the other men were employed in carrying the baggage. The 
canoe was gummed at the carrying-place, namedithe Portage dela Mon- 
tagne. After having paffed the carrying places, we encampéd at the 
Dog River, at half paft four in the afternoon, in a.ltate of great fatigue. 
The canoe was again gummed, and paddles were made to replace thofe 
that had been broken in afcending the rapids, A fwan ‘was the only 
animal we killed throughout the day. | 


{ 


Thurfday 10, “| ‘There was rain and violent wind -during the ‘night: in the morn- . 
‘ing-the former fubfided and the latter increafed,.. At’ half .paft five 
we continued :our ‘courfe: with a North-Wefterly »wind. At’ feven we 
hoifted fail: in the forenoon there were frequent fhowers of rain 
- atid hail, and. in the afternoon ‘two thowers of fhow!: the wind was at 
‘this time’ very flrong, and at fix'in the.evening we danded at :a Jodge 

oC OF Knifteneaux, confifting of three-men-and ‘five women':and: children. 
“They ‘were on their return ‘from ‘war, and. one -ofthemwas “ery fick: 
‘they feparated from the reft-of ‘their party in the enemys country, from 
abfolute-hunger. After this feparation, they met with a family of the 
‘hoftile tribe, ‘whom they deftroyed. - They were entirely ignorant.of the 
fate of their friends, but imagined, ‘that they shad returned ‘to the Peace 
‘River, or had vpenthed ‘for waritiof food. I gave medicine to the fick,” 
mo nr! boos and 

* This man had conceived an idea, that the people with whom he had been at ‘war’ had thrown 

medicine at him, which had caufed his prefent complaint, and that he defpaired of recovery. The 


natives are fo fuperftitious, that this idea alone was fufficient tokill him, Of this weaknef I took ad- 
vantage ; 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


and a fmall. portion of ammunition to the healthy; which, indeed, they . 
very much wanted, as they had entirely lived for the laft fix months on 


the produce of their bows and arrows. They appeared to have been 


great fufferers by their expedition. 


a 


It froze hard during the night,-and was very cold throughout the 
day, with an appearance of {now. ‘We embarked at half paft four in 


the morning, and continued our courfe till fix in the evening, when 


we landed for the night at our encampment of the third of June. - 


‘7 


The weather was cloudy and alfo very cold. At eight we em: 


| barked with a North-Eaft wind, and entered the Lake of the -Hills. 


About ten, the wind veered to the Weftward, and was as {trong as we 
could bear it with the high fail, fo thidt we arrived at Chepewyan fort by 


three o’clock, in thé afternoon, wh€re we found Mr. Macleod, with five 
men, bufily employed in building a new houfe. Here, then, we con- 


cluded this voyage, which had occupied the confiderable {pace of one 
hundred and two days. : ; ia 


& 


vantage; and aflured him, that if he would never more go to war with fiich poor defencelefs people, 


“that I would cure him. To this propofition he readily confented, and on my giving him medicine, 


which confifted of Turlington’s balfam, mixed in water, I declared, that it would lofe its effe€t, if he 


was not fincere in the promife that he made me. In fhort, he a€tually recovered, was true to his 


engagements, and on all occafions manifefted his gratitude to me, 


A119: 


1789, 
September. 


Da pretend 


Friday 11. 


7g et 
Saturday -T2, 


ees 


: 
a 
co, 
er 
aha gn ce 
woe 
ge 
ry 7 
tee 
, 


n 
aan 
, 


a 


N 
' 
t 
oo * 
Paee 
vane 
6 
Sy 
2 ad 


ra i 
~ a 
‘5 

"4 
fad 
doa oe 

! 

ee 

‘ 

at 
ee 
. 
Tyke 


f 
, 7 

- oF 
~ a 
thy 

1G? ys oF 

sade oye * 
rr 
; ag 

r 
1 te 
= we a 
“ 

He : 
3 j 
. my } 

+ ohh ‘ 
ae 

~ th oe8 ' 
toy 

Gib ay 
ro, - 

. fa 

Ce spate 

foe 
., : 

. vf 

oF 
" 4 
’ 


re 


: - JOURNAL | 
_ SECOND VOYAGE, &. 


CHAPTER I. 


ra 


Leave Fort Chepewyan. Proceed to the Peace River. State of the Lakes, 
. Arrive at Peace Point.’ The reafon affigned for ws name. The weather 


- colds: Arrive at the Falls. Defeription of the country. Land at the . 


_ Fort, called The Old Eftablifhment, The principal building deftroyed by 
fire. Courfe of the river. Arrive at another fort. Some account of the 
_ natives. Depart from thence. Courfe of the river continued. It divides 
. into two branches. Proceed along the principal one. Land at the place 

of our winter's refidence. .. Account of its circumftances and inhabitants, 
_.€8c. Preparations for eretting a fort, Gc. Bc. Table of the weather. 
.. Broke the. thermometer. Froft fets in. Defeription of birds, . 


3 


Havine made every neceflary preparation, I left Fort Chepewyan, 
to proceed up the Peace River. I had refolved to go as far as-our moft 
diftant fettlement, which would occupy the remaining part of the feafon, 


nen R it. 


1792. 
Ooker 10. 


122 . JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH BHE 
ont: it being the route by which I propofed to attempt my next difcovery, 

oObere 
eed acrofs the mountains from the fource of that river; for whatever diftance 
I could reach this fall, would be a proportionate. advancement of my 


voyage. mn 
In confequence of this defign, I left the eftablifhment of Fort Chepe- 
wyan, in charge of Mr. Roderic Mackenzie, accompanied by two canoes 
_ laden with the neceflary articles for trade: we accordingly fteered Weft 
for one of the branches that communicates with the Peace River, called 
the Pine River ; at the entrance of which we waited for the other canoes; 
in order to take fome fupplies from them, as I had reafon to apprehend 
they would not be able to keep tp with us. We entered the Peace. 
River at feven in the morning of the 12th, taking a Wefterly courle, 
aN It is evident, that all the Jand between-it and the Lake of the Hills, 
as far as the Elk River, is formed by the quantity of earth and mud, 
which is carried down by the ftreams of thofe two great rivers. In this 
fpace there are feveral lakes. The lake, Clear Water, which is the deepeft, 
Lake Vaflieu, and the Athabafca Lake, which is the largeft of the three, 
and whofe denomination in the Kniftineaux language, implies, a flat 
low, fwampy country, fubje& to inundations: “The two laft lakes are 
now fo fhallow, that, from the calf jaft mentioned, there is every 
reafon to expeét, that in a few yeats, they will have exchanged their ~ 
charaéter and become extenfive forefts. 


This country is fo level, that, at fome feafons, it is entirely overflowed, 

which accounts for the periodical influx and reflux of the waters between 
oe the Lake of the Hills and the Peace River, 

° oe On 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


On the 19th at noon we came to, the Peace Point; from which, ace 
cording to the report of my interpreter, the river derives its name; it 
. was the {pot where the Knifteneaux and Beaver Indians fettled their dif- 
_ pute; the real name of the river and point being that of the land which 

was the objeét of contention. | 


- When this country was formerly invaded by the Knifteneaux, they 
found the Beaver Indians inhabiting the land about Portage la Loche; 
~ and the adjoining tribe were thofe whom they called flaves. _ They drove 
both thefe tribes before them; when the latter proceeded down the 
river from’ the Lake of the Hills, in confequence of which that part of 
‘it obtained the name of the Slave River. The former proceeded up the 
river; and when the Knifteneaux made peace with them, this place was 
fettled to be the boundary. 


We continued our voyage, and I did Sot find the current fo ftrong in 


this river as I had been induced to believe, though this, perhaps, was _ 


not the period to form ‘a correét notion of that circumftance, as well as 
of the breadth, the water being very low; fo that the ftream has not 
, appeared to me to be i in any part that I have feen, more than a quarter 


4% + 
’ 


ofa mile wide. 


The weather was cold and raw, foras to render our progrefs unplea- 
fant; at thé fame time we did not relax in our expedition, and, at three 
on the afternoon of the 17th, we artived at the falls, The river at this 
place i is about four hundred yards broad, and the fall about twenty: feet 
high: the firft carrying place is eight hundred paces in length, and the 
\ , Re _laft, 


Y 
i 
* 
/ 3 


124 


1792. 
Otober. 


Kner cmtmmamadl 


JOURNAL,OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


laft, which is about a mile onwards, is fomething more than two thirds of 
that diflance. . Here we found feveral fires, from which circumftance we 
concluded, that the canoes deftined for this quarter, which left the fort 


fome days before us, could not be far arhead. The weather continued 


to be very cold, and the fhow that fell during the night was feveral 


‘inches deep. - - 


On the morning of the 18th, as foon as we got out of the draught of the 
fall, the wind being at North-Eaft, and ftrong in our favour, we hoifted 
fail, which carried us on at a confiderable rate againft the current, and 
paffed the Loon River before twelve o'clock; from thence we foon came 


' along the Grande Ile, ; dt the upper end of which we encamped for the 


night. It now froze very hard: indeed, it had fo much the appearance of 
winter, that I began to entertain fome alarm left we might be ftopped by 
the ice: we therefore fet off at three o'clock in the morning of the igth, 
and about eight we landed at the Old Eftablifhment. 


The paffage to this place from Athabafca sa having. been farveyed by 
M. Vandrieul, formerly i in the Company’s fervice, I did not think it ne- 
ceflary to give any particular attention to it; I fhall, however, juft ob- 
ferve, that the courfe in general from the Lake of the Hills to the falls, 
is Wefterly, and as much to the North‘as the South of it, from thence 
it is about Welt-South-Welt to this fort. - 


The country in general is low from our entrance of the river to 
the falls, and with the exception of a few open parts covered with 
grafs, it is clothed with wood, Where the banks are very, low 

eee 
the 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. | 125 


‘the foil is good, being compofed of the fediment of the river and ce 
putrefied leaves and vegetables, Where they are more elevated, ~~—~ 
they difplay'a face of yellowifh clay, mixed with {mall ftones. Ona 

_ ‘line with the falls, and on either fide of the river, there are faid to be very 
extenfive plains, which afford pafture to numerous herds of buffaloes. 
Our people a-head flept here laft night, and, from their careleffnefs, the 
fire was communicated to and burned down, the large houfe, and was 


proceeding faft to the fmaller buildings when we arrived to. extinguith it. 


’ ‘We continued our voyage, the courfe of the river being South-Weift 
‘by Weft one mile and a quarter, South by Eaft one mile, South-Weft by 
South three. miles, Weft by South one mile, South-South-Weft two 
miles, South four miles, South-Weft feven miles and an half, South by 
Weft one mile, North-North-Weft two miles and an half, South five 
miles and a quarter, South-Weft one mile and an half, North-Eaft by 

~ Eaft three miles and an half, and South-Eaft by Eaft one mile. 


“We overtook Mr. Finlay, with his canoes, who was encamped near- 

the fort of which he was going to take the charge, during the enfuing 

. winter, and made every neceflary preparative for a. becoming appear~ 

____ance on our arrival the following morning.’ Although I had been fince 

the year 1787 in the Athabafca country, I had never yet feen a a fingle 
native of that part of it which we had now reached, ; 

__ At fix o'clock in the morning of the goth, we landed before the houfe 

| amid{t the rejoicing and firing of the people, who were animated with the 


—_ profpedt of again indulging themfelves in the luxtdry of rum, of which 
they 


= 
. i, 
mn ‘ ’ 


126 


"179%, 


_ Oktober. 


JOURNAL’ OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


they had been deprived fince the beginning of May ; as it is a prac- 


“—.—~ tice throughout the North-Welft, neither .to fell or give any rum to 


the natives during the’ fummer. There was at this time only one chief 
with his people, the other two being hourly expetted with their bands ; 


‘ and on the aift and ged they all arrived except the war chief and 


fifteen men. As they very foon expreffed their defire of the expeét- 
ee 


Pt 


ed regale, I calléd-them-together, to the number of forty-two hunters, 
or men capable of bearing arms, to offer™ fome-advice;-whigh-would 
be equally advantageous to them and to us, and I ftrengthened my 
admonition with a nine gallon cafk of reduced rum and a quantity of 
tobacco. At the fame time I obferved, that as I fhould not often vifit 
them, I had inftanced a greater degree of liberality than they had becn 


accuftomed to. 


The number of people belonging to this eftablifhment amounts to about 


three hundred, of which, fixty are hunters. Although they appear from 


their language to be of the fame flock as the Chepewyans, they differ’ 
from them in appearance, manners, and cuftoms, as they -have adopted 
thofe of their former enemies, the Knifteneaux’ they fpeak their lan- - 
guage, as well as cut their hair, paint, and drefg like them, and poffefs 
their immoderate fondnefs for liquor and tobacco... This defcription, 
however, can be applied only to the men, as the. women are lefs - 
adorned even than thofe of the Chepewyan tribes.. We could. not ob- 
ferve, without fome degree of furprize, the contraft between the neat and 


- decent’ appearance of the men, and the naftinefs of the women. Iam 


difpofed, however, to think that this circumfance is generally owing to 
the extreme fubmiffion and abafement of the latter: for I obferved, that 
: one 


as 
, 


~\ 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, | 


one of the chiefs allowed two of his wives more. liberty: and familiarity , 0 


127 


179%. 
Etober. 


than were accorded to the others, as well as a more becoming exterior, “—~——4 


and their appearance ‘was proportionably pleafing. I fhall, however, 
take a future opportunity to Fpeak more at large on this fubjeét. 


\ 


‘There -were frequent changes of the weather in the courfe of the | 


tay, andit froze rather hard in the night. The thicknels of the ice in 


the moshing was a fufficient notice for me to proceed. I accordingly 
gave the natives fuch good counfel as might influence their behaviour, 
communicated my direftions to Mr. Findlay for his future conduét, and’ 


took my leave under feveral vollies of mufketry, on the morning of the 23d. 


[had already difpatched my loaded canoes two days before, with direGions  _ 


to continue their progrefs without waiting for me. Our‘courfe was South- — 


South-Eaft one mile and an half, South three quarters; Eaft feven miles 
and an half, veering gradually. to the Weft four miles’ and an half. 
South-Eaft by Soutli three miles, South- Eaft three. miles and an half, 
Eaft-South- ‘Ealt to Long Point three miles, South:Weft one mile and 


- a quarter, Eatt by North’ four miles and three quarters, Welt three: wiles 
and.an half, Weift- South-Weft one mile, Fatt by South five miles and | 


un half, South three miles and three quarters, South-Eaft by South 


: thr€e miles, Eaft-South-Eaft three miles, Eaft-North-Eaft one’mile, when 
. thert was a river that flowed in on the right, Eaft two miles and an half, 


Eaft- South- Eaft half a mile, South-Eaft by South feven miles and an 
half, South two miles, South-South-Eaft three miles and an half; in’ the 
“gourlé. of which we pafled an“ifland South by Welt, where a rivulet 
flowed i in on the right, one mile, Eaft one mile arid an half, “South five 


miles, | South- Ealt by 8 South four miles and an half, South “Welt one 
, , - mile 


t 

H 

t 

i 

t . 

t 

£ f 
: ~ 


. y 
e ~ 
- VWs. a 

s 

/ pon 


ae > yent i it; fo that on their. arrival ‘they 3 were: quite: -exhanfted:. “Not were. 


| JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE | 


- mile, South-Eaft: by Ealt foie’ miles and an half, Wel-South-Welt half _ 
a mile, South-Wett fix. miles and three quarters, South-Eaft by. South one 
mile and. an half, South one Inile and an half, South-Eaft by South. two oN 
miles: South- Welt threé quarters of : a mile, South- Eat ‘by. South: two. - . 
-anileg and. an half, Eaft by South. one mile and three quarters, South . a 
; two miles, South-Eaft one. mile: and an. half, South- South- Eaft half. ale; 
a mile, Eat by South ‘two: miles and. an half, North- Eaft. three miles, 7 
South: Welt by Weft fhort diftance to the eftablifhiment of. laf year, “Eafe 
~ / North- Eaft four. miles,’ South: South- Eaft. one: mile and three quarters, 7 
on South’ half a mile, South- Eaft: by South three quarters of a: ‘mile, North- 7 a 
a Eaft by Eaft one mile,. ‘South three. miles; South- South-Eatt ‘one mile o = 
. and three’ quarters, South by.’ Eaft four. miles and a half,. South-Weft | 
three miles, ‘South by Eaft two miles, South by: Welt: one. mile. and. an a 
a 7 half, South- Welt. two. miles, South by” ‘Welt four. miles and an half : 
ca i - South: Welt. one mile and: an. half, and. South by Eaft three miles. “Here a 
we arrived atthe forks of the river ; “the Eaftern branch appearing to: be - 
5 7 : not more: than half the fize of the Weftern one, We purfued the latter; 
| aoe ina. -courfe South- Weft by Wet fix: ‘miles, and landed: On’ ‘the firft of a 7 
7: ‘November a at the. place which: ‘was defigned. to be my ‘winter: refidence : a 
. " indeed; the-weather. had been. fo.cold and difagreeable, that I was more ae 
* than’ once. apprehetifive of c our being: flopped. by. the i ice,. and, after all, . 
At required the: utmoft exertions of, which. my. men. ‘were. capable to ‘pre co, 


po their Jabours. at an, end, for there ‘was nota fingle hut: to. receive us: it. a 
os was, however, now. in my power: to’ Reed and: faftain thera 1 in a more co 


comfortable n manner. eee aoe 


ale” 


VC 


499 


30 - 


in 
| 


4 


D, 


’ 


Ah 


a ttha hoes 


(NATION 


- NANSCU 


ey 


“tw 
2.8 
K 
-S- 
“N 
&. 


te 


-— 


ee fe Aaa N 


A eR SE Ea A SO SS OS SE YS DT” UO RE SEC 


7. West: from -3}26Greenwich” + 


28 iL 


ongitude 1 


3 
¥ 
‘ 


Te taeiiensie NSE North Street Strand.. 
kevaniter Machen ‘ Te 


‘ 


London: Published 18 0 


ponte ti ae 


2 


: . “ 


us 


eoeetl. 


ce 


N 


UO ? 


‘! 


et 


ATION. 


dle. inde 


ch MacKenzie NCIS North Street Stra 


‘ 


oy 


55 
ed eer 
Lake . 


-Norhiuwest 0 CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


We foond two. men here who: ‘had been fent forward daft iting: for 


- “s-the: purpofe of fquaring. timber for the ere€tion. of an: houfe, and ei, — 


~ ing pallifades, &e: to furround:it.* With then was the: priltcipal ‘chiét “ ce 
- of the place, and: about feventy men, who™ had: been anxioully: yaiting ee 


“- for our arrival, and: received us’ with every: mark: of fatisfa@ion andive ~~ 


| - gard. which they could exprels. _Tfwe imight judge: from the eputanitity of 7 : : - . 
powder: that was walted on. our. arrival, “they. certainly had 1 net: ‘beet ia : es : 


want of ammunition, at leatt fe during the farniner 


ww 


ay The banks of ther river, + from the falls, are in 0 generil tlt, & except at ae coe! 
os ‘ol woody points, accidentally fotitied i iti the i manner I have already’ wie. i. 7 a 
‘tioned: they alfo difplayed, in all their broken parts, a face of clay, itter- 


Aa = mixed with lone; yin n fome places t there likewife fe appeared a black mould. : - 


oan the ¢ famines of £1788, a ‘Gall fot w was cleared at t the ola ra abi 7 


: ment, which i is fitaated ona bank thirty, feet above the level of the river, . oS ; a 7 : spe 
oo and: was: fown with: wwrnips, | carrots; and: parfnips. “The fill: grew toa Cee. oe oh 
_latge: fize, and the: ‘others: thrived: very. -well. An’ experittient was alfo. aan 


° pade: with’ potatoes.and cabbages, thie former of which: were fucdefsful; a 


. "but for:want of care the- latter’ failed. The next. winter ‘the: ‘perfor who. ma a - - 
: shad@nidertaken-this cultivation, fulfered the: potatoes, ‘which had been col- os o — : : 

o Teed: ‘for: feed}ito: catel ‘the: froft'- and-none. had been. fince brought to eres 

oo this! place. “Phere i is not the leatt doubt but the foi would Id be’ very \pro- ea 

7 | dudtive; i ifa’ proper’ attention’ ‘was given to its preparation. In the fall'of - a : 4 

» athe: year: 1984, whet rv fir ‘attived : at’ “Athabafea, Mr Pond" ‘was 7 - mee 
y fettled’ on the banks of the Elk River, where’ he remained. for three’ years, oe Pos 


- and hac had | formed as: fine a: kitchen garden as ever faw i in. | Canada. % 


430 


179% 


Dec. mber. 
“—~v———4_ produce the cyprefs tree, arrow-wood, and the thorn. Qn either fide of . 


their. country, took their leave. 


| 


ws 


~ JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE rHRouGé T THE 


-,In addition to the wood which flourified below -the fall; thefe banks 


the river, though invifible from it, are extenfiye plains, which abound in 
. buffaloes, elks, wolves, foxes, and bears. Ata confiderable diftance:to 


the’ Weftward, is an immenfé ridge of high land or mountains; which take 


‘an.oblique direétion. from below the falls, and are inhabited’ by great 


numbers. of deet, who are feldom difturbed, but, when the Indians’ go to 
hunt the beaver in thofe parts; ‘and, being tired of the flefh of the latter, 
vary their food with that of the former. This ridge bears the name of- 
the-Deer Mountain. Oppofite to our: prefent fituation, are beautiful 
meadows, with various animals grazing ‘on them, and groves of poplars 
irregularly {catered over them. ° OG SE tory 


y r 
a yee! 


~My tent was no fooner pitched, ‘than I fummoned ‘the Tadians toge: 7 


ther, and gave each of them about four inches of Brazil tobacco,. a dram 
of fpirits, and lighted the ‘pipe. As they had been very troublefome to 
my: predeceffor, I informed them that. I had heard of their inifcondudt, ‘and 
was come among them to inquire into the truth of it.. I added alfothat 


: it would be an eftablifhed rule with me to’treat them. with’. -kindnefs, 
if their behaviour fhould be {uch as to deferve it; -but, at the fame’ time, : 


that I fhould be equally fevere if'they: failed-in thofe returns which I:had 


a right to expeét from them. I then prefented them ‘with a.quantity of ~. 


zum, which I recommended to be ufed with difcretion;. and added. ifome 
tobacco, as a token of peace. They, in return,: ‘made me the: faireft 
promifes; and, having expreffed the pride hey felt ‘on nbeholding m me. in 


4 


, ° . S 
NORTH: -WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. -) age 


‘TI’ now proceeded to examine my fituation; and it was with: great 1798. 
ber, 
fatisfaGtion I obferved that the two men who had been ‘fent hither {ome asaapaesirg 
time before us, to cut and {quare timber for our future operations, had 


employed the intervening period with aétivity and fkill. They had 
' formed a fufficient quantity of pallifades ‘of eighteen feet long, and feven 


inches in diameter, to inclofe ‘a -{quare {pot of an hundred and twenty 


feet; they had alfo dug a ditch of three feet deep to receive them; and 


had prepared timber, planks, (Se. forthe erestion ofan houfe, “= ‘ * 

4 : a ; 
. Iwas, however, fo much’ occupied i in fettling maiters with the Indians, < 
and equipping them ‘for, their winter hunting, that I ‘could not: give 4 my 
attention to any other abjett, till the 7th, when I fet all hands at work to 


_ conftru& the fort, build the houfe, and form ftore-houles. On: ithe pte- 


ceding day: the river began, to’ run with ice, which we call the laft of the 
navigation. On the 11th we had a South-Weft wind, with fnow. On 
the 16th the ice ftopped i in the other fork, which was not above, a league 


from us, acrofs the i intervening neck of land. The water in this branch 
continued to.flow till the aod, when it was arrefted alfo by the froft, fo 
that we had a paflage acrofs the river, which would laft to the latter end 
of the fucceeding April: © This was 4 fortunate circumftance, as we de- | 
pended for our fupport upon what the hunters could provide'for us, and 
they ‘had been. prevented. by’ the running of the ice from crofling the 
river, They how; However;-very; fhortly procured us as much frefh meat: 
as ‘we ‘required, though it’ was for fome .time:a toilfomé bufinefs to’ my 


people, for'-s. there’ was not yet a -fufficient quantity of fnow to’ run” 


fledges; they were ‘under the _neceflity” of : loading themfelves with thée 
fpoils Of the éhafe: Moe, - te! ; 
; S2 On 


te 


gw % 


ga, JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 

1798 On the 97th the froft was fo fevere that the axes of the workmen be- 
December. . . oo ; 
Lert camealmoft as brittle as-glafs. The weather was very various until the 


2d.of December, when my Farenheit’s thermometer was injured by.an 
accident, which rendered jt altogether ufelefs. The following table, 
therefore, from the 16th’ -of November, to ‘this unfortunate circum- 
flance, is the only correét account.of the weather which I can offer, ., © 


,t 


é 2 Liss] ] 2 feisielg | 2 I 
: 3 (sgigie le. yslelei2) Bo 
2 S [EGIS SWE RIS | Be IP oe cee a 
a en pee re | | —emnerennreenrancematpa, 
oo u | oth on. [erp lb po ms 
‘ _ |tel alg » tegl . felondy ft. 
i} plear fie feo clear | 6'i jag] . ‘| ditto ii. Le re 
«ftp deaf EBEL 6 14/ESE ‘clear . 
ot gab Haiheyy 6': | g| NW)’ ditto ||Strong wind, : hose 
4l[———| ditto }12] [14/4 ditto 6! ‘9 ——jcloudy at 10 laft might FY below, 0. 
yx}: ¢ ‘Fag D5 lm - 4 wr Rsver flop; ped, >- thoi 
cloudy {12} [2gl-——~ cloudy 6 2é|—|cloudy Ice drove, Pod water rifes, 
+ ot Nv deglear [19] legit clear |] 6)> [is] .N. ilce drave again,” 
Bl g ditto } 12) of oJNEJ | 6, 1) INE. cloudy 
251 Sra] ‘be-| ditto fal gf :[r— G2} |---| ‘clear |!Snowed laft night '2 inches. 
26} oficl | N, | ditto j12} | 2} N 6: of of N. | ditto’ 
a} fle] ditto, }22t- [ 2] 6': | a|S WI ditto 


6,7] |,S. | ditto After dark, over cathe 
4lr-—~jclondy | 12] ‘f1g/--— | @ .} 7pm) ditto (|Ditto, alittle wind S.W. 
S. a2! |igl S, cloudy | g! 16 S. (cloudy 

‘Haat frofS. BH oH gl: faylScE.): ditto. Fell g inches fnaw laft night 


Ve8l 8/16] |——4 ditto | 12 — 


In this fituation, removed from all thofe ready aié€ which add fo much, 

* to the comfort, and indeed is a principal charaéteriftic of civilized life, 
I was under the neceffity of employing my judgment.and experience in. 
acceflory cireumftances, hy no. means conneéted with the habits of my 

life, or the enterprife in which I was immediately engaged, I. .was now: 
among a people who had no knowledge whatever of remedial applica; 

> tion 


WG gy 
¢ 


NORTH WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. - "133 


tion to thofe-diforders and accidents to which man is liable in every part De pea Seer 
of the globe, in the diftant wildernefs, as in.the peopled city. They had --~—~ 
not. the Jeaft acquaintance with that primitive medicine which confifts in 

an experience of the healing virtues,of. herbs and _plants, and is frequentl ys 
found.among uncivilifed and favage’ nations. -: This circumftance now 

obliged. me'to be their phyfician and furgeon, as a woman with a {welled 

breaft, which had beenalacerated with flint ftones for the cure of it, pre- 

fented herfelfto'my attention; and.by ‘cleanlinefs, pouliices, and healing |. 
falve,I fucceeded in producing:a cure. One of thefe péople alfo, who was 

at work in the woods, was attacked with a fudden pain near the firft joint 
of his thumb, which’ difabled him from holding an axe. On examining 
his arm, I was aftonifhed to find a narrow. red {tripe, about half -an inch \ 
wide, from his thumb to his fhoulder; the pain was violent, and accom- 

panied with chillinefs and fhivering. This was a cafe that appeared to be \_ 
beyond my {kill, but it was neceflary to do fomething towards relieving ? 
the mind of the patient, though I might be unfuccefsful in removing his / 
complaint. I accordingly prepared a kind of volatile hiniment of rum 
and foap, with which I ordered his arm to be rubbed, but with little or 
‘no effect. He was in a raving ftate throughout the night, and the red 
firipe not only encreafed, but was alfo accompanied with the appear- | 
ance of feveral blotches on his body, and pains in. his ftomach : the | 
propriety of taking fome blood from him now occurred to me, and I ven- 
tured, from abfolute neceflity, to perform that operation for the firft time, jo 
and‘with an effeét that juftified the treatment. The following night . . 
afforded him reft, and in a fhort time he regained his former health and 
aftivity. 


I was 


2a 
. 


134 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE! 


pets, 2 was Very. much farprifed’on walking! in the woods ‘at fuch an inele- 
\——’ ment period of the year, to be faluted with the finging of birds, while: 
. they feemed by their vivacity-to be a€tuated by the invigorating power. 
of a more genial feafon.: OF théfe birds the male was fomething” lefs. 

‘than the robin; ‘part ‘of his body is of a delicate fawn. colour,:and.his 
neck, breaft, and belly, of a deep fcarlet; the wings are-black, edged, 
with fawn colour, ‘and two. white {tripes-running acrofs 'them ;: the.tail; is/ 
variegated,.and the head ‘crowned with a tuft. . The female’ is {maller: 

than the male, and of'a.fawn colour throughout, except: on: the neck; 

- which is ‘enlivened by.an hue ‘of .gloffy yellow.’ I have no doubt but. 

they are conftant inhabitants’ of this’ ‘timate, as well:as fome' other {mall 

birds which we faw, Of al grey colour: i eee Dia 


toot : : torte Foye bo Eb ety roy ys . - 
holt s wan rope podbeedet CS Og te they red id 


CHARTER! epg epen, 


a? 


Renoved fron the’ tent to the houfe. Bagi habitations for the people. 7 he 

—hardfrips they fut ioffer. Vrolent hurritane, Singular cir cuniflances at- 
tending’ at. The commencement of the new year: An Indian cured of a 
dangerous wound. “State of the weather.’ ‘Curious cuftoms among the 

~ fridians, on the death of a relation. Account of a quarrel. An Indian’ 5 

“reafoning on it. “Murder of one of the Indians. ‘The cause of it, Some 
cx account of the Rocky Mountain Indians. “Curious circumpance réfpelting 
 @ woman in labour, &e, Ads bifprte beiween ‘two Indians, ‘which arofé 
from gaming. * “An ‘account of one of their games. "Indian fuuper ition. 
 Mildnef” of the feafon. The ‘Indians prepare now foes. | "Singular 


cuftoms. Further account of their manners. The flavifh “hate of the 


women. Appearance of. Spring. Di Vifpatch canoes with the trade to. fort 
- Chepecgyan, | Make preparation for the wage of di lifeovery, 


atee 


L. THIS “day removed frovi the tent:.into the houfe which had | been 
ereéted for me, and.fet all the:men to begin. the: buildings intended for 
. ‘their own. habitation. Materials fufficient: to ére&t a:range .of five houfes 
for. them,.of about feventeen by twelve feet, were already colle€ted. It 
would be,iconfidered_ by: the inhabitants-of @ milder‘climate, as a ‘great 


135 


1792. 
2 pedis? 29. 


\ sae ptettanannl 


_ evil,.to he: iexpofed. to:the! weather: at this:rigorous feafon of theyear;- but-——-——— 


thele. ‘people a are inured to.it, and it is neceflary to. defcribe:i in fome mea- 
/ : fure 


* 


136 


1792+ 
December, 
(nena ttn 


JOURNAL OF ‘A. VOYAGE’ THROUGH ‘THE 


fure the hardfhips which they undergo without a murmur, in order to 
convey a general notion of them... eee 


The men who were now with'me, left this ‘place in the beginning of 
laft May, an went to the Rainy Lake in canoes, Jaden with, packs of 
far, which, fi m “the immenfe length | of the voyage, and other. con- 
curring: circumflances, is a moft Tevere trial of patience and perfeverance : 
there they do not remain a fufficient time. for ordinary Tepofe, when 
they take, a load of goods i in exchange, and proceed ‘on their return, 
in a great meafure, day and night. ‘They had been arrived near two 
months, and, all that time, had been. continually engaged i in very toillome, 
labour, with nothing more than a common fhed to proteét them from 


| the ‘froft and fnow. ‘Such is the life which thefe people lead; any is 


continued with unremitting exertion, till ‘their flrength i is tof in n prema, 


. 4 ShG 
ture old agen fo + Moy : - 
: a pa ote beth ' ‘ Li ehhh VER "hay TY ees 


Me 


arnees as 


“The Canadians remarked, that the weather w we had. on ‘the thy 26th, 
and 27th of this month, denoted fach as we ‘hight expett i in the three 
fucceeding months. On the goth, the-wind being at North-Eaft, and the 
weather calm and cloudy, a rumbling noife was heard in the air like dif- | 
tant thunder; whea the fky cleared: away in. the -South-Wely i fiom 
whence: there: blew : a. perfedk! ‘hurricand,; whichbdafted: till eighe: 
Soon: after it commenced, .the: atmosphere vbecame fo» warm that. it 
diffolved all the faow .on:the grouhd: even the icé was: edvered “with 
water,. and’ ‘had! the, fame. appearance.ias -when! it: is. breaking’ up’ in 
the fpring::: Fromieight:to nme: this weather becanie: calm; :but ‘imme- 


diately: after! a jwinidt anofe ‘foom: the: Diorth- Bafb- with equal: vigleee; 


4 


ak . with 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


with clouds, rain, and hail, which continued throughout the sight and 


137 
pie. 


till the evening of the next day, when it turried to fnow. One of the manga 


people who wintered at Fort Dauphin in the year 1780, when the fmall- . 


pox firft appeared there, informed me, that the weather flere was of a 
fmilar defeription. 


. On the firft day of January, my , people, in conformity to thé ufual Jetty Ae 


cuftom, awoke meat the break of day with the difcharge of fire-arms, 
with which they congratulated the appearance of the new year. In re- 
turn, they were treated with plenty of {pirits, and‘when there is any 


flour, cakes aré always added to their: regales, which was the cafe ou. . 


the prefent occafion.. | 


1 -On my arrival here laft fall, I found that one of the yoting: Indiatis. 


had-loft the ule‘of his right. hand by the burfting of a gun, and that his 
thumb: had-been maitned'in fuch a manner as to hang only by a fmall 
firip of flefh. Indeed, when he was brought to me, his wound was in 


\ 


| 


1 


‘fuch an offenfive ftate, and emitted fuch a putrid {mell, that it required / 


all’ the refoluttion E.poffeffed to examine it His friends had. done every | 
thing-in-their power’ to relieve hii; but as it confifted’ only ‘in finging | | 
about him; aiid blowing upon his hand, the wound, as may be well ima- | 


gined, had. got into the deplorable flate in which I found it. I-was \ : 


rather alarmed: at the difficulty‘of the cafe, but as the young man’s life 


was in a flate of hazard, I was determined to rifk my furgical reputation, — 


and ‘accordingly took -him- under my’ care. I immediately formed a 
poulifte of bark, firipped from: the roots: of the fpruce-fir, which I 


appled to the wound? Having: firft wathed: it with’ the juice of the 
T bark: 


wf 
\ 


138 - . JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE‘THROUGH THE 


1793: bark: this proved a very painful drefling: in a few days, however, ‘the 
Rlaipatln wound was clean, and the proud flefh around it.deftroyed. I wilhed 
_ very much in this ftate of the buiinefs to’have feparated: the thumb. from 

the hand, which I well knew muft be. effeéted before the cure. could be 

; performed; but he would not confent to that operation,. till, by. the ap- 

- plication of vitriol, the flefh by which the, thumb was fufpended, was 
fhrivelled almoft to a thread.. When I had fucceéded. in. this. objeét, I 

- \ \ perceived that the wound. was clofing rather fafter*than.I defired.. The 
| falve I applied on the occafion was. made of the Canadian balfam, wax, 

and tallow dropped from a burning: candle: into water. In fhort, I was 
fo fuccefsful, that about Chriftmas’my patient engaged ,in:an, hunting 
» “ «party, and brought me the tongue of an elk: nor was he finally un- 
- grateful. When he left me I received the warmeft acknowledgments, both 

~ from himfelf, and the relations with whom he’ departed, for, my, care: of 
Lo him. .I certainly did not {pare my-time or attention‘on, the occafion, as 


I regularly dreffed his wound three. times a day; during : the. courte ofa 


month, eh ee eb oT Pa De 

te Be oy! ny ee ee : 
On the. ath in the morning the weather was calm, clear, and very cold ; 

_— the wind blew from the South-Weft, and in the courfe of the; afternoon 
it began to thaw. I ‘had. already. obferved. at Athabalea, that this wind 

_ never failed to bring us clear mild. weather, whereas, when i it blew from 

: the oppofite quarter, it produced’ {now. - ‘Here. itNig_much | more per- 
ceptible, for if it blows hard South-Weft for four-hours; a thaw is the 
confequence, and if. the wind is at North- Eaft it brings fleet and fnow - | 
To.this caufe it may be attributed, that there is now fo-little fnow in . 


this part of the world. T hefe, warm ,winds come, off the. Pacific Ocean, 


~, which 


- NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 139 


which cannot, in a direét line, be’ very far from us; the diflance being Ptias 
anuarys 
fo fhort, that though they pafs over mountains covered with fnow, there “~w>-~ 


is not time for them to cool. 


There being feveral of the natives at the houfe at this time, one of a 

them, who had received an account of the death of his father, proceeded 

in filence to his lodge, and. began to fire off his gun. As it was night, 

and fuch a noife being fo uncommon at fuch an hour, efpecially when , 
it was.‘fo ‘often repeated, I fent my interpreter to inquire into the caufe ~. | 
‘of it, whén he ‘was informed by the man himfelf, that this wasa common 
cuftom with them on the death of a near relation, and was a warning to 
their-friends ‘not to:approach, ‘or intrude upon: them, as’ they were, in 
confequence of their lofs, become carélefs of life. ‘The chief to whoin 
the deceafed perfon.was alfo related, appeared with his war-cap-on his. 
head, which is‘only worn on. thefe, folemn occafions, or when preparing: | 


ee 


for battle, and confirmed to me this fingular cuftom of firing guns,in 
order to exprefs their grief for the death of relations and friends.* © The 
women alone indulge in tears on fuch occafions ; the men co fidering it 
“As-aimark of pufillanimity and a want of fortitude to: betray any per- 
fonal tokens, of fenibalty or forrow. 


se, 
a 


The Indians informed nie, that. they had been’ to hunt at a‘la gé lake, 
called. ‘by the Knifteneaux, the Slave hake, which derived-its name froni zi 
‘Ne 
that of, its’ original. inhabitants, who were called Slaves. They: repre- 


* When they are drinking together, they frequently, prefent their guns to each other, when wae 
the parties have not other means of procuring rum. On fuch an occafion they always difc arge 
; their piéces, as a proof, I imagifie, of their being in good order, and to determiife the quantity of 
* Higuor the may Propole to get i in exchange for them. 


orn Dee eye Te. re —— fented 


Le 


¢ 


January 10. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH, THE 


fented i it as'a large body of water, and: that it lies about one hundred 
and twenty miles due Eaft from this place. It is well ‘known ta. “the 
Knifteneaux, who are among the inhabitants of the plains on the banks 
of the Safkatchiwine river; for formerly, when they ufed to come to 
make war in this country, they came in their canoes: to that lake, and 
left them there; from thence there is a beaten path all the way to the 
Fork, or Eaft branch of this river, which was their war-road. . - . 


Among the people who were now here, there were two Rocky Moun- 
tain Indians, who declared, that the people to whom we had,given that 


. denomination, are by no means entitled to it, and that their country’ has 


ever been in the vicinity of our prefent fituation, . They ‘faid, in fupport 
of their affertion, that thefe people-were entirely ignorant of thofe parts 
which are adjacent to the mountain, as well. as ‘the.navigation ‘of the, 


- yiver ; that the Beaver Indians had greatly encroached upon them, and 


would: foon force them to retire'to the foot of ‘thefe ‘mountains. - They 
reprefented’ themfelves as the only real natives of that ‘country then 
with me: and. added, that the country, and. that-part of. the river that 


_ intervenes between this place and the mountains, bear'much the fame 
. appearance as that around us; that the former ‘dbounds ‘with animals, 


but that the courfe of the latter is interrupted, near, and in the moun- 
tains, by fucceflive rapids and confiderable. falls... Thefe. men alfo in- 
formed me, that there-is anothei: great river towards the mid-day fun, 
whofe current runs in that direétion, and. that. the diftance from. it‘is not 
great acrofs the mountains, ae eo 
"Fhe natives brought me plenty of: furs. ‘The final ‘quantity of 
{now,-at this time, was particularly: favourable for hunting the beaver, as 
from 


LL 


! 


i NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


from this circumftance, thofe animalé could, with the greater facility, be 
traced from their lodges to their lurking-places. 


On the 12th the hunter arrived, having left his mother-in-law, who 
was lately become a widow with three {mall children, and in a@tual la- 
bour of a fourth. Her daughter related this circumftance to the women 
here, without the leaft appearance of concern, though fhe reprefented 
her as in a fate of great danger, which probably might proceéd from 


her being abandoned in this unnatural manner, At the fame time with: _ 


out any apparent confciou{nels of her own barbarous negligence; if the 
poor abandoned woman fhould die, fhe would moft probably lament her 
with great outcries, and, perhaps, cut off one or two joints of her fingers 
as tokens-of her grief. The Indians, indeed, confider the flate of a 
woman in labour as among the moft trifling occurtences of c6fporal 
pair to which human nature is fubjeét, and’ they miay be, in fomé meas 
fare, juftified in this apparent infenfibility from the circumftancés of that 
fituation among themfelves. It is by no means uncominion in thé hafty 


removal of their camps from one pofition to another, fora wonidn to 
be taken in labour, to deliver herfelf in her way, without any affiftance . 
er notice from her affociates in the joumey, and to overtake them ‘before 
‘they complete the arrangements of theit evening Ration, with her iéWw= 


a horn babe on-her back. 


- Lwas this morning threatened with a very unpledfant event, which, 
however, I was fortunately enabled to control. Two young Indians 


being engaged in one of- theig: games, a difpute enfued, which rofe to — 


fuch an height, that they drew their kalvety and if I had not happened 
. to 


141 
1793: 


a 


142 ' JOURNAL OF A’VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


ye, to have appeared, they. would, I doubt not, have employed them to 
“-—~-——_ very bloody purpofes. So. violent was their rage, that after I.had turned 
_ them both out of the houfe, and feverely.reprimanded them, they ftood 

in the fort for at leaft ‘half am. hour, looking at each other, with a. moft 


vindictive alpett, and. in fullen filence. 


‘The game which produced this {tate of bitter enmity; is called that 
of the Platter, from a. - principal article of it, The Indians play at, it 
in the following. manner. | 


_ The inflruments. of it ; confit of a -platter, or. dith, ‘made of wood a or 
bark, and fix round, .or {quare, but flat pieces of metal,-wopd, or fone, 
whofe fides or furfaces are of different colours. |'Thefe are: ‘put. into, the 
’ dit, and after being for fome time fhaken together, are thrown. Apto 
the air, and: received again in the dith with confi derable. dexterity ; 
when, by the number that are ‘turned up of the fame mark .or’ ‘colour; 
the game is regulated. If there fhould be equal numbers, the throw is - 

{\ not reckoned if two or four, the latter changes hands. ;; . 

On the 1 ath, one eof thefe people c: came to me, and prefented: in himfelf 
a curious example of Indian fuperftition. He requefted me: “to, furnifh 
him with’ a remedy that might be applied to the j joints Of his, ‘legs, and - 


thighs, of which he had, ina a great meafure loft the ufe for five winters. 


“ ing found a. wolf with _two whelps' in an old. Beaver lodge, he fet fire 
_ to it and ‘confumed ‘them. eG 


“oe t . . ~ t ' 
foo 1 . + . 34 nn) fo4 
‘* . de » as a er 8 
~ “t M 
‘ 
, 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA‘ | 143 


. The winter had been fo mild,-that the fwans had but lately’left us, and 5a 
: anuary. 
at this advanced period there was very litle {now on the ground: it was; “=~” 


however, at this time. a.foot anda half.in. depth, in’the environs’ of the 8 
eftablithment -below this, which is at the diftance ‘of about feventy 


fn 


leagues.’, 


& Yh 


4°On.the 28th: the Indians were now employed i in making their fnow- 
fhoes, as the fnow: had not hitherto fallen 1 in fufficient quantity to render , 


f 


them: neceflary. . 


The weather now became very cold, and it froze fo hard in the night February 2. 
that:my watch topped a circumftance that had never happened to this | 
watch finceiy. refidence i in the country. 


There was.a lodge of indians here, who were abfolutely ftarving with 

eold.and.hunger. They had lately loft near relation, and had, accord- 
ing to cuftom, thrown away every thing belonging to them, and ‘even 

exchanged the few-articles of raiment which they pofleffed,in order,asI ~” 

~prefume, to:get rid of every thing that may bring the deceafed to their re-_ 
membrance.-.. They:alfo deftroy every thing belonging to any deceafed 
perfon; except what they confign to the grave with ‘the late owner of 
_them.: We had fome difficulty to make them comprehend that the debts 
of ‘a man who dies fhould be difcharged, if he left-any furs behind him: 
but thofe who underftand this principle: 6f- juftice, and profels to.adhere 
to it, never fail to prevent the appearance of any {kins beyond fuch as 
may be neceflary to fatisly the debts of their dead relation, 


On. the ah I had an. obfervation’ for the longitude In’ thé tourfe “of 


; this 4, 


af 
44 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE: TH ROUGH THE 


5798+, this. day .one of my nien,:who had been ‘fone tinie: swith the Tidians, came: 
aa to.inform me.that one of them. had threatened to {tab him; ‘and on his pre. 
. ferring a. complaint to the.man with whom he now lived, and to whont- | 
I had. given him. in. charge, he replied, that he had: been. very :impru- | 
dent to play and quarrel with the young Indians out of his lodge, .where 

no one would dare to come and quarrel with him; but that if he had 
loft his.life, where he had been, it would have been the confequence. of 
hig.own folly. ‘Thus, even among thefe children of nature, it appears 
that a man’s, houfe is his caftle, where the proteftion of: hofpitality: is 
vgudly maintained. 

The hard feof. which had; prevailed. from the beginning of F February 

continued to the 16th of March, when the wind blowing fromthe South: - 


Welt; the weather became mild. 
\ . 


a ee ey dete dead 


ay On the, oad, a: wolf tives fo bold -as, to- venture. among: the Indian 
ites ands was very near carrying: off. a,child.. ! | 


I had another. obfervation of: Jopiter and his Iatelites for the: « longi 
‘tude. On the 1gth:fome- geefe were feen, and thee birds are always con» 
fidered as the harbingers of fpring. On the 1{t of :Aipril my hunters fhot 
five.of them.. This. was.a much earlier period than'I ever remember to 
have obferved.the vifits: of wild. fowl in this part of the world.: The 
weather had. been mild, for'the Jafii'fortnight, and there-was a. promife of 
its continuance.. On the sth.the fnow: had entirely: difappeared, 
o! 7 ra at ri cnn ane aeneeeneremnenennes tor ememmeuneeere nee 
At half paft four this morning I was awakened to be informed that 
an Indian hud: been-hilled:..' Faccordingly Jiaftened to-the ‘camp,'where 
- ms ‘ . found 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 145 


* Yfound: two women employed in rolling up the dead body of.a man, _ 1793- 
~9/ealled thie White Partridge, in a beaver robe, whicli I had lent him.. ‘He ys 
had received four mortal wounds from a dagger, two within the collar, 
bone, one in the left breaft, and another in the {mall of the back, with two ~ 
cuts acro{s his head. The murderer, who had been my hunter through- 
out the winter, had fled; and it was pretended that feveral relations 
of the deceafed were gone'in purfuit of him. The hiftory of this ‘un 


fortunate event is as follows:— 


{ 


oe 


| Thefe two men sn vad been comrades for four years; the murderer had 
three wives; and the young man who was killed, becoming enamoured 
of one. of ‘them, the hufband confented to yield her to him, with the 
referved power. of claiming her as, his property, when it. fhould be his 
pleafure. This conneftion was uninterrupted for near three years, whén, 
whimfical as it may appear, the hufband became jealous, and the public 
amour. was fufpended. The parties, however, made their private. aflig- 
nations, which caufed the woman to be fo ill treated by her hufband, that 
the paramour was determined to take her away by force; and this project » 
ended in his death. ‘This is a very common praétice among the Indians, 
and generally terminates in very ferious and fatal quarrels, In confequence 
of this event all the Indians went away in great apparent hurry and con- 
fufion, and in the evening not one of them was to be feen about the fort. 


-. The Beaver and Rocky Mountain Indians, who traded with us in this 
river, did not exceed an hundred and fifty men, capable of bearing 
__arms; two tl thirds of whom call themfelves Beaver Indians. . The latter 

differ only from the former, as they have, more or lefs, imbibed the cul . 
to ~U - toms. 


fires 


146 


i798 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


“toms and manners of the Knifteneaux. ‘AAs Ihave already obferved, 


a they are paffionately fond of liquor, and in the moments of their fefti- 


'-yity will barter any thing they have in their poffeffion for it. 


Though the Beaver Indians made their peace with the Knifteneaux, 
at Peace Point, as already mentioned, yet they did not fecure a flate of 
amity from others of the fame nation, who-had driven away the natives 
of the Safkatchiwine and Miffinipy Rivers, and joined at the head water of 
the latter, called the Beaver River: from thence they proceeded Weft by 
the Slave Lake juft defcribed, on their war excurfions, which they often 
repeated, even till the Beaver Indians had procured arms, which. was in 
the year 1782. If it fohappened that they miffed them, they proceeded 
Weltward till they were certain of wreaking their vengeance on thofe 
of the Rocky Mountain, who being without arms, became an eafy prey 
to their blind and favage fury. All the. European’ articles they pof- 
{efled, previous to the year 1780, were obtained from.the Knifteneaux 
and Chepewyans, who brought them from Fort Churchill, and for which 


they were made to pay an extravagant price. 
. oo t 

‘As late as the year't786, when the firft traders from Canada arrived on 

the banks of this river, the natives. employed bows and fnares, but at 

prefent very little ufe is made of the former, and the latter are.no longer 


known. They fill entertain a great dread of their natural enemies, but 


__ they are. fince become fo. well.armed, that. the others now call them their 
‘allies, The men are in general of a comely appearance, and fond of per- 


fonal decoration. - The women are ofacontrary difpofition; and the flaves 
of the men: in’ common with all the Indian tribes polygamy is allowed 


‘among 


8 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 147 


among them. They are very fubje@ to jealoufy, and fatal confe- 1793. 
quences frequently refult from the indulgence of that paffion. Butnét- “— 
.withftanding: the vigilance and feverity which is exercifed by the huf. 
band, it feldom happens that a woman is without her favourite, who, 

in the. abfence of the hufband, exaéts the fame fubmiffion, and practifes 

the fame tyranny. And fo premature is the tender paffion, that it is 
fometimes known to invigorate fo early a period of life as.the age of 
eleven or twelve years. The women are not very prolific; a circum- 
ftance which may be attributed, in a great meafure, to the hardfhips that 

they fuffer, for except a few fmall dogs, they alone perform that labour ~ 
which is allotted to beafts of burthen in other countries. It is not uncom-' 

mon, while the men carry nothing but a gun, that their wives and daugh~ 

- ters follow with fuch weighty burdens, that if they lay them down they 
cannot replace them, and that is a kindnefs which the men will not deign v 
to perform; fo that during their journeys they are frequently. obliged to 

lean againft a tree for a {mall portion of temporary relief. When they 

arrive at the place which their tyrants have chofen for their encamp- 

ment, they arrange the whole in a few minutes, by forming a curve of 

poles, meeting at the top, and expanding into circles of twelve or fifteen 

feet diameter at the bottom, covered with dreffed fkins of the moofe 

fewed together. During thefe preparations, the men fit down quietly to 

the enjoyment of their pipes, if they happen to have any tobacco. But — 
notwithftanding this abje&t ‘ftate of flavery and fubmiflion, the women 
havea confiderable influence on the opinion of the men in every thing 


except their own domeftic fituation. 


-- Thefe Indians are excellent hunters, and their exercife in that capacity 
—_ Ue is 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE | 


is fo vidlent as to reduce them in general to a very meagre appearance. 


Their religion is of a very contraéted nature, and I never witneffed any 
ceremony of devotion which they had not borrowed from the Knifte- 
neaux, their feafts and fafts being in imitation of that people. They are 
more vicious and warlike than the Chepewyans, from whence they fprang, - 
though they do not poffels their felfifhnefs, for while they have the means 
of purchafing their neceflaries, they are liberal and generous, but when 
thofe are exhaufted they become errant beggars:. they are, however, re- 
maikable for their honefty, for in the whole tribe there were only two 


women and a man who had been known to have {werved from that virtue, 


and they were confidered as abjetts of difregard and reprobation. They 
are afflifed with but few difeafes, and their only, remedies confift in 
binding the.temples, procuring perfpiration, finging, and blowing on the 
fick perfon, or affeGted part. When death overtakes any of them, their 
property, as I-have before obferved, is facrificed and: deftroyed; nor is 
there any failure of lamentation or mourning on-fuch occafion: they- 
who are more nearly. related to the departed perfon, black their faces, 
and fometimes cut off thei’ hair; they alfo pierce their arms with 
knives and arrows. . The grief of the females is carried to’a fill 
greater excels; they not. only cut their. hair, ‘and cry and howl, but 


‘they will fometimes, with the utmoft deliberation, employ fome fharp 


inftrument to feparate the nail from the finger, and then force back 
the flefh beyond the firft joint,. which they immediately. amputate.. 
But this extraordinary mark of affli@ion is anly difplayed on the | 


. death of a favourite fon, an hufband, or a. father. . Many, of the old 


women have fo often repeated this ceremony, that they have not a com- 
plete finger remaining on either hand. The women renew their lamen- 
tations 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 149 


__ tations at the graves of their departed relatives for a long fucceffion of  1793- 
years. They appear, in common with all the Indian tribes, to be very —~~—7 

fond of their children, but they are as carelefs in their mode of fwadling 

them in their infant ftate, as they are of their own drefs: the child is 

laid down on a board, of about two feet long, covered with a bed of 

mofs, to which it is faftened by bandages, the mofs being changed as 

often as the occafion requires. The chief of the nation had no lefs than 
nine wives, and children in proportion. 


When traders firft appeared among thefe people, the Canadians were 
treated with the utmoft hofpitality and attention; but they have, by 
their fubfequent conduét, taught the natives: to withdraw that re{[peét 
‘from them,.and fometimes to. treat them with indignity. They differ 
very much from. the Chepewyans and Knifteneaux, in the abhorrence 
they profefs of any carnal communication between their women and the 
white people. They carry their love of gaming to excefs;. they will 
purfue it for'a fucceffion of days. and. nights, and no apprehenfion of 
ruin, nor influence of domeftic affeCtion, will reftrain them from the 
indulgence of it. They area quick, lively, a€tive people, with a keen, 
penetrating, dark eye; ‘and though they are very fufceptible of anger, 
are as eafily appeafed. The males eradicate their beards, and the females 
their hair in every part, except their heads, where it-is {trong and black, 
‘and,without a curl. There are many old men among them, but they are 
in general ignorant of the {pace in which they- have been inhabitants of 
the, earth, though one of them told me that he recolle¢ted fixty winters. 


‘ . eo ca ~are . ° » > ° 
-.An-Indian in.fome meafure explained his.age to me, by relating that 
a - he 


150 


1793. 
ApHl. 
w_,, 


uw 


| 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


he reniembered: the oppofite hills‘ and plains, now interfperfed -with: 
~ groves of poplars, when they were covered with mofs, and without any- 
animal inhabitant but the rein-deer. By degrees, he faid, the’ face of 


5 the country changed to its prefent appearance, when the elk came from 


the Eaft, and was followed by the buffalo; the rein-deer then retired to 
the long range of high lands that, at a confiderable diftance, run n parallel 


with this river. 


On the goth of April I had an obfervation of Jupiter and his fatellites, 
for the longitude, and we were now vifited by our fummer companions 
the gnats and mofquitoes. On the other fide of the river, which was yet 
covered with ice, the plains were delightful ; the trees were budding, and 
many plants in bloflom. «Mr. Mackay brought me a bunch of ‘flowers 
of a pink colour, and a yellow button, encircled with fix leaves of alight 
purple. The change in the appearance of nature was as fudden as it was 
pleafing, for a few days only were pafled away fince’ the ground. was 


~ coveréd with fnow:--On the-25th-the-river-was-cleared ‘of, the ice. 


I now found that the death of the man called the White Partridge, had 
~ deranged all the plans which I had fettled with the Indians for the {pring 
hunting. They had affembled at fome diftance from the fort, and’ fent . 
an embaffy to me, to demand rum to drink, that they. might have an 
opportunity” of crying for their déeceafed brother: ‘It would be ‘con- 
fidered as an-extreme degradation in an Indian to weep when fober, but 
a ftate of intoxication fanétions all irregularities. On my refufal, they 
threatened to go to war, which, from motives of intereft as well as 
humanity, we did our utmoft to difcourage ; and-as a-fecond meflage 

was 


"NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. ~ 152 


was brought by perfons of fome weight among thefe people, and on 798° 
whom I could depend, I thought it prudent to comply with the demand, ae 
-on an exprefs condition, that they would continue peaceably at 
‘home... - 


The month of April being now paft, in the early part of which I-was 
moft bufily employed in trading with the Indians, I ordered 6ur old 
canoes to be repaired with bark, and added-four new ones to them, 
when. with the furs and provifions I-had purchafed, fix canoes were 
loaded and difpatched on the 8th of May for Fort Chepewyan. I had, 
however, retained fix of the men who agreed to accompany me on my 
proje&ted voyage of difcovery. I alfo engaged my hunters, and clofed 
the bufinefs of the year for the company by writing my public and pri- 
vate difpatches. 


“Having afcertaitied, by various obfervations, the latitude of this place 
to be 56. 9. North, and Jongitude 117. 95.15. Weft:—on the oth day 
of May, I found, that ‘h tiny acrometer was. one hour forty-fix minutes ' 
flow to apparent time; the mean going of. it L had found to be twenty- 
two feconds flow in twenty-four hours. Having fettled this point, the _ 
canoe was put into the water: her dinienfions were twenty-five feet long 
within, exclufive of the curves of flem and ftern, twenty-fix inches hold, 
and four feet nine inches beam. At the fame time fhe was fo light, that 
two men could carry her on a good road three. or four miles without 
refting. In this flender veffel, we fhipped provifions, goods for prefents, 
arms, ammunition, and baggérge, to the weight of three thoufand pounds, 


and an equipage of ten people; viz. Alexander Mackay, Jofeph Landry, 
Charles 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


Charles Ducette,* Francois: Beaulieux, Baptill Biffon, Francois. Courtois, 
and Jacques Beauchamp, with two Indians as hunters and interpreters, 
One of them, when a boy, was ufed to be fo idle, that he. obtained the 
reputable name of Cancre, which he IN Dolletfess "With thefe-perfons—— 
I embarked at {even in the evening. My winter interpreter, with another 

perfon, whom I left here to-take care of the fort, and fupply-the natives 
with ammunition during the fummer, thed tears on the refletion of 
thofe dangers which we might encounter in our expedition, while my own — 
people offered up their prayers that we might return in fafety from it, 

{ 


* Jofeph Landry and Charles Ducette were with me in my former voyage. 


of 


"NORTH-WEST GONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


CHAPTER IM. 
Proceed on. thé voyage of di ifcovery. Beautiful feenin ry. The canoe too 
“heavily laden. The country in a fate of combuftion. Meet with an hunt- 
ing party. State: of the river, Sc. Meet with Indians. See the tracks 
of bears, and one of their dens. Sentiment of an Indian. Junction 
- of ‘the Bear River. Appearance of the country, State ‘of the river. 
| Obferve a fall of timber. “Abundance of animals. See fome bears. 
«: Come in fight of the rocky mountains. The canoe receives an unjury and 


as repaired. Navigation dangerous. Rapids and falls. Succefion of 
too 


difficulties and dangers, 


a eeeennenatainen 22> aes meenneneeneenann 


i 


1793- 
May. 


. W: E began. o our voyage with a courfe South by Weft againit a Tharfehy 9 


trong current one mile and three quarters, South-Weft by South one 
mile, and landed before eight on an ifland for the night, 


. The weather was clear and®pleafant, though there was a keennefs’ in 


Friday 10, . , 


the air; and at.a quarter paft three in the morning .we continued. our — 


voyage, fteering’ South-Weft three quarters of a mile, South-Weft by 
South. one, mile and a quarter, South’three quarters of a mile, South- 
Welt by: South.one quarter of a mile, South- Welt by Welt: one mile, 


South-Welt by South three miles, South by Weft three quarters of a 
p.¢ . mile, 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE. 


| mile, and South- Weft one mile. The canoc being flrained from its havin aving. 


been very heavily laden, became fo leaky, that we were obligéd to iS'land, 
unload, and gum it, As this circumftance took place about twelve, I had 
an opportunity of taking an. altitude, which made our latitude 55 5B 48. 


When the aoe was repaired we continued our courle, fteering South- 


Welt by Welt one mile’ and an half, when I had the misfortune to drop 2 


my pocket-compals into the water; Welt half a mile, Weift- South-Welt” 
four miles and anthalf. Here,.the banks are fteep and hilly, and in fome 
parts undermined by the river. Where the earth has given way, the face 
of the clills difcovers numerous ftrata, confifting of reddifh earth and 
{mall ftone3, bitumen, and a greyifh earth, below which, near the water; 
edge, isa red ftone. Water iffues from moft of the banks, and the ground 
on which it {fpreads is covered with a thin white {curf, or particles of 
a faline fubftance: there are feveral of thefe. falt fprings. At half paft 


fix in the afternoon the young men landed, when they killed“ant elle" -° 


and wounded a buffalo. In this fpot we formed our encampment -for 


’ the night. 


From the » place which we quitted this morning, the Weft fide of the 


river difplayed a fucceffion of the moft beautiful fcenery I had ever be- 
held. The ground rifes at intervals toa confiderable height, and ftretch- 


_ Ing inwards toa confiderable‘diftance : at every interval or paufe in the 


rife, there is a very gently-afcending {pace or law, which is alternate 


with abrupt precipices to the fammit of the whole, or, at leaft as far as- 


the eye could diftinguifh, This maguificent theatre of nature has all 
the decorations which the trees and animals of the. country can afford it: 


groves _ 


nl 


o 
om 


> 


X 
| NORTH- WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. . 155 


> proves of poplars in every fhape vary the fcene; and their intervals are “02: 
enlivened with vaft herds of elks and buffaloes: the former choofing ¢ the —— a 
fteeps_ and uplands, and the latter preferring the plains. At this time 
the buffaloes were attended with their young ones who were’ frifking . 
about ‘them ; andj appeared that the elks would. foon exhibit the fame . 


__eoliv gping- -eireifinftance. ‘Tbe. whole country difplayed an exuberant 


verdure ; “the trees that bear ¥ bloffom’ were advancing faft to that de- 
. lightful appearance, and ‘the velvet rind of their branches refle&ting the 
oblique rays of a rifing or fetting fun, dded a {plendid gaiety to the 
fcene, which no’ expreffions of mine “eh qualified to defcribe. The 
Faft fide of the river confifts of a range pt high land covered with the 
white {pruce and the foft birch, while the banks abound with the alder. 
and the willow. The/ water continued to rifé, ‘and the current being 
proportionably Rtrong, we made a greater ufe of fetting poles than 
paddles. 


The weather'was overcaft, With a ftrong wind a-head; we embarked Ssturday 11, 


at four in the morning, and left all the frefh meat behind us, but the 


portion which had been affigned to the kettle; the canoe being already 


too heavily laden. Our courfe was Weft-South-Weft one mile, where 


@ {mall river flowed in from the Eaft, named ,Quifeatina Sepy, or River 
» with the High Banks ; Welt half a mile, South half a mile, South-Weft 
by Weft three quartérs of amile, Weft one mile and a quarter, South- 
Welt a quarter of a- mile, South-South-Weft half'a mile, and Weft by 
South a mile and an half” ‘Here E took a meridian-altitude, which gave 
55. 56: 3. North latitude. We then proceeded ‘Weft three miles and an 


half, ‘Weft-South- Weit,. -ayheres the whole plain was on fire, one mile, 
Xo - ; ~ , Welt - 


"% 

yt 
fe’. » 
4 

& 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


Weft one mile, and:the wind fo ftrong a-head, that it occafioned the,canoe 
to take in watér, and otherwife impeded-our-progrefs, Here we landed 
to take time, with the -mean of three, altitudes, which made the watch 


‘flow, 1. 42. 10. apparent time. oe ot 


woe 


at 


We now proceeded Well-South-Welt, one mile and a quarter, where 


we found a chief of the Beaver Indians on an, hunting’ party. I re; 


" mained, however, in my canoe, and though it. was getting late, I did not 


choofe to encamp with thefe people, left the friends of my “hunters 
might difcourage them from proceeding on the voyage. , We, therefore, 
continued our courfe, but feveral Indians kept company with us, 
running dlong the bank and -converfing with my people, who were fo - 
attentive to them,’ that they drove the canoe.on-a ftony flat, fo that we 
were under the neceflity of landing to repair the damages, and put up 
for the night, though very contrary to my wifhes. My hunters obtained 
permiffion to proceed with fome of thefe people to their lodges, on the 
promife of being back by. the break of day; though I was not without 
Some apprehenfion refpeCting them. The chief, however, and another 


, man, as well as feveral people from the lodges, joined us, before we-had 


completed the repair of the canoe; and they made out a melancholy 


'  ftory, that they had neither ammunition or tobacco fufficient for their 


neceflary {upply.during the f{ummer. I accordingly referred him to the 
Fort, where plenty of thofe articles were, left in the care. of my inter- 


- preter, by whom they would be. abundantly farnifhed: if they were 


aétive and induftrious in purfuing their occupations. I did not fail, on 


this occafion, to magnify the advantages of the prefent expedition;  obferv- 
ing, at the fume time, that its fuccel would depend on the. fidelity and 


8 net . conduct ,” 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


conduét of the young men who were retaincd by me to hunt. The 


chief alfo. propofed to. borrow my. canoe, in order to. tranfport hinifelf ——~-- 


and. family ‘acrofs the tiver: feveral plaufible reafons, it is true, fug- 
gelted themfelves for refifting his propofition; but'when I ftated to him, 
that, as the canoe was intended for a,voyage of fuch confequence, no 
woman. could be permitted to be embarked in it, he acquiefced in the re- 
fufal. It was near. twelve at night when he took his leave, after I had 
gratified him with a prefent of tobacco. ’ . 

* Some of-the Indians paffed the night with us, and I was informed by 
them, that satcording to our mode of proceeding, we fhould, in ten days, 
‘get. as far as the rocky mountains, The’ young: men now returned, to 


my great fatisfaQtion, and with.the appearance of contentment : though ; 


I was not pleafed when they- dreffed themfelves in the clothes which I 
_ had given them before we left the Fort, as it betrayed fomé latent defign. 


At four in the morning’ we proceeded on our voyage, fteering Weft 
. three miles, including one of our courfe yefterday, North-Weft by North 
four miles, Weft two miles and an‘half, North-Weft by Weft a mile and 
an half, North by Eaft two miles, North-Weft by Weft one mile, -and 
North-North-Weft three’ miles. After a continuation of our courfe 
wheré to.the North for a mile and an half; we landed for the night on an 
ifland feveral of the Indians vifited us, but unattended by their-women, 
who remained.in their camp, which was at fome diftance from us. 


The land on both fides of the river, during the two laft days, is very 


-much elevated, but particularly im the latter part.of it;and, on the Weftern 
; . fide, 


aw 


Sunday 124 


| JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE < 


- fide, prefents in different places, white, fteep, and lofty cliffs. Our . 


view being confined by thefe circumftanees, we did not fee fo-many 
animals as on the 10th. Between thefe lofty boundaries, the river be- 
comes narrow, and in a great meafure free’ from iflands; for’ we had 
pafled only four : the ftream, indeed, was not more than from two 
hundred to three hundred yards broad; whereas before thefe’ cliffs 
prefled upon it, its breadth was twice that extent and befprinkled with 


“iflands. ‘We killed an elk, and fired feveral fhots at animals from the 


canoe. 


The greater part of this band’ being Rocky Mountain Indians, I en- 
deavoured to obtain forne intelligence’ of out intended route, but they 
all pleaded ignorance, and, uniformly declared, that they knew nothing 
of the country beyond the firft mountain: at-the fame time they were of 
opinion, i from the ftrength of the current and the rapids, we fhould 

ere by water ; though they did not hefitate to-exprefs their fur- 
prife at the expedition we had already made. 


not get 


I inquired, with fome anxiety, after an old man who had already - 
given me an decount of the country beyond the limits of his tribe, 
anid was very much difappointed at being informed, that’ he had not 
been feen for upwards of a moon, This man had been at ‘war on 
another large river beyond the Rocky: Mountain, and defcribed to me 
a fork of it between the mountains; the Southern branch of which he di- 
reéted me to take : from thence, he faid, there was a carrying-place of 


about a day’s march for'a young man {o get to the other river. To prove 


.the truth of-his relation, he confented, that his fon, who:had been with 


him 


- NORTH-WEST. CONTINEN T oF AMERICA. 


him in thole parts, fhould accompany me; and he accordingly fent him 
to: the Fort fome days before my departure; but the preceding night he 
deferted with another young man, whole application to attend me as a 
hunter, being refufed, he perfuaded the other to leave me. I now 
thought it right to repeat to them: what I had faid to the chief of the 
firft band, refpeCting the advantages which would be derived from the 
voyage, that the young men might be encouraged to remain with me; 
as without them I fhould not have attempted to proceed. 


4 


The firft obje@ that prefented itfelf to me this morning was the young 


man whom I have already mentioned, as having feduced away my in- 


tended: guide. At any other,time or place I fhould have chaftifed him 
for his paft conduét, but in my fituation it was neceflary to pals over his 
offence, left he fhould endeavour to exercife the fame influencewver thofe 
who were fo effential to my fervice. Of the deferter he gaye no fatis- 
fa&tory account, but continued to exprefs his with to attend me in his 
place, for which he did not poffefs any neceflary qualifications. 


_ The weather was cloudy, with an appearance of rain; and the Indians 
preffed me with great. earnefinels to pals the day with them, and hoped 


to prolong my flay among them by afuring me that the winter-yet.._ 


lingered in the rocky mountains: but my objeét was to lofe no time, and 
having given the chief fome tobacco for a {mall quantity of meat, 
we embarked at four, when my young men could not conceal their 
chagrin—at—parting with their friends,” for fo long a period as_the 
voyage threatened to occupy.’ When I had affured them that in 


-three_ moons we. fhould return to them, we proceeded on our courle, 
. at 77 tee Wet 


= a - ] } 
ey 


1793’ 
M 


Monday 13. 


460 


"Ts agg. 
May. © 


_- 


* 

ar 4 . la s & 4, 

le . “4 ~ ee 48 
a n 7 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE nanoven THE | 
Welt-North-Weft half a mile, Weft-South-Weill one mile and an half, 


Lent Welt by North three miles, North-Weft by Weft two miles and an half, 


— South-Weft by Welt half a mile, South-South-Weft a mile and an half, 


and South-Welfl a mile and a, half. Here, I1-had:a meridian altitude, 
which gave 56. 17. 44. North latitude. 

The laft courfe continued a “mile. and: ah half, South b by-¥ ‘Weft.three 
quarters of a mile, South-Weft by South three miles and an-half; and 
Welt-South-Welt two miles and an half. Here the land lowered on 
both fides, with an increafe of wood, and’ difplayed great numbers of 


animals. The river.alfo_widened_from_ three to_five hundred-yards, and | __ 


was full of iflands and flats.. ‘Having continued our courfe three miles, — 


_ we made for the fhore at feven, to pals the Might. Fa a 


At the place from whence we proceeded this morning, a river falls in 
from the North; ‘there are alfo feveral iflands, and‘ “many: rivulets on 
either fide, which’; ‘are. too {mall to ‘deferve particular notice; — We 
perceived along the river ‘tracks of large bears, fome of which. were nine 
inches wide, and of a proportionate length. . We faw‘one of their dens, 
or winter quarters,.called watee, in an ifland, which :was'ten feet deep, 
five feet ‘high, and fix feet wide;. but we had.not yet feen one of thofe ani- 
mals. The Indians entertain great apprehenfion of=this kind of :bear, 


_ which is called the grifly bear, and they never venture to attack:it but in 


a party of at leaft three or four’ “Our hanters, though they -had been 
much ‘higher | than this part of our. voyage, by land, knew nothing of the 


river. One’of them mentioned, that having been’ engaged in’ a war ex- 


' pedition; his -party.on their return made their canoes, at fome diftance 


below 


~ ps: 


7 _tendance, and you mutt follow him.” 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


below us. The wind was North throughout the day, and at times blew 
with confiderable violence. 


‘The apprehenfions which I had felt refpe€ting the young men were 
not altogether groundlefs, for the eldeft of them told me that his uncle 
had laft night ‘addreffed him in the following manner:—“ My nephew, 
. your departure makes my heart painful. The white people may be faid 
to rob'us of you. They are about to condué you into the midft of our 
enemies, and you may never more return to us. Were you not with 
the Chief*, I know not what I fhould do, but he requires your at- 


~ 


a oe SOT ee 
ci worm 


s««-The.weather was clear, and the air fharp, when we embarked at half Tuefday 14. 


paft four. Our courfe was South by Weft one mile and an half, South- 
Weft by South half a mile, South-Weft. We here found it neceffary to 


Se * . . ° ‘ 
unload, and gum the canoe, in which operation we loft an hour; when 


we, proceeded on the laft courfe one mile and an half. I now took a 


meridian altitude, which gave 56. 11. 19. North latitude, and continued to 
proceed Weft-South- Welt two miles and an half, Here the Bear River, 
which is of a large appearance, falls in from the Eaft; Weft three miles 
and an half, South-South-Welt one mile and an half; and South-Weft 
four miles and an half, when we encamped upon an ifland about feven in 


the evening. 


During the early part of the day, ing current was not {fo flrong as We 


. Thefe people, : as well as all the natives on this fide of Lake Winipic, give the mercantile agent. 
that diftinguifhed appellation. ; 


Y had 


162 


1 Maw. 


JOURNAL. OF A; VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


had. generally found. it,, bub towards.the evening it became’ very rapid, 


cae and was broken by numerous iflands. We were gratified,.as.ufual, with... 


Wednef, ig. 


the fight of animals. The land on the Welt fide is very irregular, but 
has. the appearance of being a. good beaver country ; indeed we faw fome 
of thefe animals.in the river. Wood is in great plenty, and: feveral 
riyulets added their fireams to'the main river. A goofe was the only 
article of provifion, which we procured ‘to day. Smoke was s teen, but 
at.a great diftance before us. 


. The rain prevented us from.continuing our route till paft fix in the 
morning, when our courfe was South- Weft. by. Weft three ‘quarters of a 
mile; at which time we paffed a river on the left, Weft by South two 
miles and am half. . The.bank was fteep, and the currenti ftrong. The laft 
courfe continued one mile and an half, Weft-South-Weft. two miles, 
where a river flowed in from the right, Weft by South one mile and an 
half, Weft-North-Weft one mile, and Weft by North. twosmiles. . Here 
the land takes the form of an high ridge, and-cut our coutfe, which was 
Welt for three miles, , at right angles. We now completed ‘the voyage 
of this day. | 


In the preceding night-the water rofe: upwards of two inches, and had — 


. Tifen.in this proportion fince our departure. The: wind, which was ~ 


Weft-South-Weft, blew very hard throughout the day, and with the 
ftrength of the current, greatly impeded our progrefs. The river, in 
this part of it, is full of iflandss; and-the land, on-the South or left fide, is 
thick with wood, Several rivulets alfo fall in from that quarter, At 
the entrance-of- the laft river: which we pafled, there was a quantity of 
wood, 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


-wood, which had been cut down: by axes, and ifome by the beaver. ‘This 
fall, however, was.not made, in the opinion of my peaple, by any of the 
Indians with whom we were acquainted. 


The land to the rightris of a very irregular elevation and appearance, 
‘compofed in fome places of clay, and rocky cliffs, and others exhibiting 
dtratas of red, green, and yellow colours. Some parts, indeed, offer a 
beautiful fcenery, in fome-degree :fimilar to that which we paffed on the 
fecond day of our voyage, and equally enlivened with the elk and the buf- 
falo, who were feeding in great numbers, and unmolefted by the hunter. 
In an ifland which we paffed, there was a large quantity ‘of white birch, 
-whofe bark might be employed in the conftru€tion of canoes. 


The weather being clear, we reimbarked at four in the morning, and 


Thurfday 16, 


proceeded Weft by North three miles. Here the land again appeared as .. * 


if it. run acrofs our courfe, and a confiderable river difcharged itfelf by 
various ftreams. According to the Rocky Mountain Indian, it is called 
‘the Sinew River. This {pot would be an excellent fituation for a fort or 


factory, as there is plenty of wood, and every reafon to believe that the ’ 


country ‘abounds in beaver. As for the other animals, they are in evi- 
dent abundance, as in every dire€tion the elk and the buffalo are feen in 
poffeffion of the hills and the plains. Our courle continued Weft-North- 
Welt three miles and an half, North-Weft one mile,and an half, South- 
Weft ‘by Weft two miles; (the latitude was by obfervation 56. 16. 54.) 
North, ‘Weft by North half a mile, Weft-North-Weft three quarters of a 
mile; a {mall river appearing on the right, North-Weft one mile and an 
half, Weft by North half a mile, Weft by South one mile and an half, 


Welt one: mile; a and.at feven we formed our encampment. 
Y2 Mr. Mackay, 


164 


Ng . 
y-— wounded a buffalo, but we only took a part of the flefh of the former. 


Friday 17. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


Mr. Mackay, and one of the young men, killed: two elks, and mortally 


The land above the {pot where -we encamped, fpreads into an extenfive 
plain, and ftretches on to a very high ridge, which, in fome parts, pre- 
fents a face of rock, but is principally covered ‘with verdure, and varied 
with the poplar and white birch tree. The country is fo crowded with 
animals as to have the appearance, in fome places, of a ftall-yard, from 


it. The foil is black and light. We this day faw two grifly and hideous 


bears. 


It froze during the night, and the air was fharp in the morning, when 


‘the ftate of the ground, and the quantity of dung which is fcattered over ~ - 


we continued our courfe Wel!-North-Weft three miles and an half, South- - 
Weft by South two miles and an half, South-Weft by Weft one mile: 


and an half, Weft three quarters of a mile, Weft-South-Weft one mile 
and a quarter, and South-Weft by South one mile and an half. At two in 
the afternoon the rocky mountains appeared'in fight, with their fum- 
mits covered with fnow, bearing South-Weft by South: they formed a 
very, agréeable object to every perfon in the canoe, as we attained the 
view of them much fooner than we expected. A {mall river was feen on 
our right, and we continued our progrefs South-Weft by South fix miles, 
when we landed at feven, which was our ufual-hour of encatiipment. 

a ° ve, 

Mr. Mackay, who was walking ‘along the fide of the river, difcharged 
his piece at a buffalo, when it burft near the muzzle, but without any 
mifchievous confequences. On the high grounds, which were on the 
oppofite fide of the river, we faw a buffalo tearing up and down with 


great fary, but. -could not difcern the caufe of his.impetuous motions; my’ 


huntes 


/ 
/ 


/ 


__— 


~ 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


hunters conje€tured that he had been wounded with’an’arrow by fome 
of the natives, / We aftended feveral rapids i in the Curfe of the day, and 
faw one bear. 


a 
It again froze very hard during the night, and at four-in the morning 
we continued! our voyage, 4 but we had not proceeded two hundred yards, 
before jnaiiétident happened to the canoe, which did not, however, em- 
ploy. more than three quarters of an hour to complete the repair. | We 


then fteered South by’ Weft one mile and three quarters, South-Weft by 
‘South three miles, South-Weft by Weft one mile and a quarter, Weft 


by South three quarters of a.mile, South-Weft half a mile, Weft by 


‘South one mile, South by Weft one'mile and an half, South- South- Welt, 


where there is a {mall run of water from the right, three miles and an half, 
when the canoe ftruck on the ftump of a tree, and unfortunately where.the 
banks were {o fteep that there was no place to unload, except a {mall 


‘{pot, on which we contrived to difpofe the lading m the bow,. which 
‘lightened the-canoe fo: as to raife the broken part of it above the furface ~ 
‘of the water; by which contrivance we reached a convenient fituation. 


It required, however, two hours to complete the repair, when the. wea- 
ther became dark and cloudy, with thunder, lightning, and rain; we, 


‘however, continued the laft courfe half a mile, and at fix'in the evening 


_we were compelled by the rain to land for the night. 


About noon we had landed on an ifland where there were eight lodges 


‘of laft year." The natives had prepared bark. here: for-five canoes, and 


there is a road along the hills where they f had paffed.’ Branches were cut 


cand broken along it; and they had alfo, ftripped off the bark of the trees, 


‘Reet the interior rind, which forms a part of their food. 


Saturday 18, 


The 


266 


My. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


The current was very ftrong through ithe whole .of the day,.and the | 


cee, coming up along fome of ithe banks was’ rendered very dangerous, 


Sunday 19. 


from the continual falling of large ftones, from the upper’ parts of 
them. This place appears to be a particular pafs for animals acrofs 
the river, as there are paths leading to nt on both fides, every ten 


yards. 


In the courfe of the day we faw.a ground hog, and two cormorants. 
The earth alfo appeared in feveral places to have been turned up by the 


bears, in fearch of roots. - 


It rained very hard in the early part of the night, but the weather be- 
came clear towards the morning, when -we embarked at our ufual hour. 
As the current threatened to be very ‘trong, Mr. Mackay, the two 
‘hunters, and myfelf, went on fhore, in order to lighten the canoe, and 


-afcended the hills, which are covered. with cyprefs, and but little encum- 


bered with underwood. We found:a eaten path, and ,before we had 
walked a mile fell in with an herd of buffaloes, with their young ones; 
but I would not fuffer the Indians to fire on them, from an apprehenfion 
that the. report of their fowling pieces would alarm:the-natives that might 
bein the. neighbourhood ; for-we werevat this time ‘fo:near the mountains, 
as to juflify our expeétation of feeing.fome of them. We, however, 
fent our dog after the herd, and a calf was foon fecured by him. While 
the young men ‘were. {kinning. the animal,’ we heard: two:reports of fire- _ 
arms from the’ canoe, which -we anfwered, as it-wasia‘fignal for. my return: 
we then heard another, ‘and immediately haftened :down‘the hill; with our 
veal, through a wery: ‘clofe wood. ‘There we imet-one of :fhemien, who 
i J ae oa Qo tte informe! 


? 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA., 


informed us'that the canoe was at a fmall-diftance below, at the foot of 


a very: {trong rapid, and: that as {éveral waterfalls appeared up the: ‘river, 
we fhould be: obliged to unload and carry. I accordingly: 'haftened 
to the canoe, and was greatly difpleafed that fo much time had’been 


loft, as I had given previous. direGions that the river fhould be followed’ | 


as:long as it was practicable. The laft Indians whom we faw had in- 
formed us that at the:firft‘mountain there. was a confiderable fucceflion. 
of rapids, eafcades, and falls, which-they never attempted to afcend; and: 
where they ‘always paffed over land the length of a day’s march. My men: 
imagined that the: carrying: place-was.at a fmall diftance below us; as 
a path appeared to afcend an hill, where’ there were feveral lodges, of the: 
laft: year’s. confirution. The account which had been given me of the 
rapids, was- perfe€tly corre€t: though by crofling to the other fide, I 
muft acknowledge with fome rifk, in fuch an heavy- laden’ canoe, the 


rive appeared to: me to be practicable, as far as we could fee: the tras 


verfe; therefore, was attempted, and proved fuccefsful. “We now towed 


the canoe along an ifland, and proceeded without any confiderable dif-- 


ficulty till we reached the extremity of it, when the line could be no lon- 
ger employed; and in endeavouring to clear the point of the ifland, the 


canoe was driven with fuch violence on a ftony fhore, as to receive con- 


**. fiderable injury. We now employed every exertion in our power to 


__Yepair the breach that had been niade, as well as to dry fuch articles of 
“our loading as more immediately required it: ‘we then tranfported the 
wholeacrofs the point, when we reloaded, and ‘continued our courfe 
about three-quarters of a mile: We could now proceed no further on 


- this fide-of the water, and: the traverfe-was rendered: extremely danger: oo 


ous;'not only from-the ftrength of the current, but by the cafcades juft 
below 


168 


No. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE, 


below us, which, if we had got among them, would have involved us and 


eaagaa the canoe in one common deftru&ion. .We had no other alternative 


than to return by the fame courfe we came, or to hazard the traverfe, the 
river on this fide being bounded by a range of fteep, over-hanging rocks, 
beneath which the current was driven’on with refiftlefs impetuofity from 
the cafcades. Here are feveral iflands of folid. rock, covered with a 
{mall portion of verdure, which have been, worn away by the con- 
ftant force of the current, and occafionally,; as I prefume, of ice, at , ; 
the water's edge, fo as to be reduced in that part to one fourth the extent 
of the upper furface; prefenting, as it were, fo many large tables, each of 
which was fupported by a pedeftal of a more circum{cribed projection. 

They are very elevated for fuch a fituation, and afford an afylum for 
geefe, which were at this time breeding on them. By croffing from one 
to the other of thefe iflands, we came at length to the main traverle, on 
which we ventured, and were fuccefsful in. our paflage. ’ Mr, Mackay, 
and the Indians, who. obferved our manceuvres from the top of a rock, - 
were in continual alarm for our fafety, with which their own, indeed, 
may be faid to have been nearly conneéted: however, the dangers 
that we encountered were very much augmented by the heavy .. load- 
ing of the canoe. _ as eo 


When we had effeéted our paflage, the current on the Weft fide was 
almoft equally violent with that from whence we had juift efcaped, but 
the craggy bank being fomewhat lower, we were enabled, with a line of 
fixty fathoms, to tow the canoe, till we came.to the foot. of the moft rapid 
cafcade we had hitherto feen, Here we unloaded, and -carried every 
thing over arocky point of an hundred and twenty paces, . When the 

canoe 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


canoe was reloaded, I, with thofe of my people who were not immedi- 
ately employed, afcended the bank, which was there, and indeed, as far as 
we could fee it, coimpofed of clay, ftone, and a yellow gravel. My prefent 
fituation was fo elevated, that the men, who were coming up a ftrong 


point could not hear nie, though ] Lealled to'them with the utmoft flrength 


of:my:-voice, to lighten, the canoe of part of its lading. And here I 
could not but reflect, with infinite anxiety, on the hazard of my enter- 


. prize: one falfe ftep of thofe who were attached to the'line, or the break- » 


_ ing of the Hine itfelf, would have at once confi gned the canoe, and every 

» thing it contained, to inftant deftruétion : it, however, afcended the rapid 
_ in. perfeét fécurity, but new: dangers immediately prefented.themfelves, 
for ftones, both {mall:and great, were continually rolling from the bank, 
{§-as to render the fituation of thofe who were dragging the canoe be- 
neath it extremely perilous; befides, they were at every ftep in danger, 
from the fteepnefs of the ground, of falling into the -water: nor was my 
folicitude diminifhed by.my being neceffarily removed at times from 
the fi ght of them. “ 


Tn our. -pafflage through the woods, we came to an inclofure, which 
had been formed by the natives for the purpofe of fetting {nares for the 
elk, and of which we could not difcover the extent. After we had 
travelled for fome hours through the foreft, which confifted of the 
{pruce, birch, and the largeft poplars Ihad ever feen, we fink down 
upon the river, where:the bank is low,’and near the foot of a mountain ; 

between which, dfid’an high ridge, the river flows in a channel of about 
one‘hundred yards broad ; though, ata {mall diftancé below, it rufhes on 


between’ ‘perpendicular rocks, where i iti i3not ‘much more than half that’ 


~ ZK 7 breadth. 


170 “ JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


798" breadth. Here I remained, in gre t anxiety, expe@ing the arrival of 
Lynn. the canoé, and after fome time I-fent Mr. Mackay with one of the In- 
dians down the river in fearch of it, ‘and with the other I went up it to 
examine what we might expeét ‘in ‘that quarter. In about a mile and 
_a half I came to a part where the river Wwathes the feet of lofty precipices, 
and prefented, in thé form of rapids aid cafcades, a fucceflion of diff- 
culties to our navigation. As the canoe, did not come in fight we re- 
turned, and from the place where: I he pe with Mr. Mackay, we 
faw the men carrying it overa. {mall rock point. - We met them at the 
entrance of the narrow chainel already mentioned ; their difficulties had 
been great indeed, and the canoe had been \proken, but they had per- 
fevered with fuccefs, and having pafled the carrying-place, we proceeded 
with the line as far as I had already been, when we .crofled over and 
encamped on the oppofite beach; but there was \no wood on this fide 
of the water, as the adjacent country had been entirely overrun by fire. | 
We faw feveral elks feeding on the edge of the oppofite precipice, which 
was upwards of three hundred feet-in height. \ 


Our couffe to-day was about South-South-Welt two. ommiles and an half 
South-Welt half a mile, South- Weft by South one mile and an half, South- 

, by Welt halfa mile, South- Wet halfa mile, and Weft one mile and an half. 
There was a fhower of hail, and fome rain from flying clouds.. I now dif- . 
patched a man with. an Indian to vifit the rapids above, when the latter 
foon left him to purfue a beaver, which was feen inthe fhallow water on 
the infide of a-ftony ifland; and though Mr. Mackay, and the other 
Indian joitied him, the animal at length efcaped. from their purfuit. 

7 Several others were feen i in the courle of the’ day;,which Eby no means 

amo ae 7 ' expedited, 


 & 4 


vy 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 171 


_ expeéted, as the banks are almoft every where fo much elevated above 1793: 
the channel of the river. Juft as the obfcurity of the night drew on, “~y-~ 
the man returned with an account that it would be impra€ticable to 

pafy {évéral points, as well as the {uper-impending promontories. 


The weather was. clear with a fharp air, and we renewed our voyage Monday 20. 
at a quarter paft four, on a courfe South-Weft by Weft three quarters -~ 
ofa mile, We now, with infinite difficulty paffed along the foot of a 
rock, which, fortunately, was not an hard ftone, fo that we were enabled 
to cut fteps in it for the diftance of twenty feet; from which, at the 
hazard of my life, I leaped on a {mall rock below, where I received thofe 
who followed me on my fhoulders. In this manner four of us paffed 
and dragged up the canoe, in which attempt we broke her. Very 
luckily, a dry tree had fallen from the rock above us, without which we 
could not have made a fire, as no wood was to be procured within a 
mile of the place. When the canoe was repaired, we continued towing 
it along the rocks to the next point, when we embarked, as we could 
not at prefent make any further ufe of the line, but got along the rocks 
ofa round high ifland of ftone, till we came to a fmall fandy bay. As 
we had already damaged the canoe, and had every reafon to think that _ 
fhe foon would rifk much greater injury, it became neceflary for us to 
fupply ourfelves with bark, as our provifion of that material article was 
almoft exhaufted; two men were accordingly fent to procure it, who , “\ .. 
foon returned with the neceflary ftore. Sak 
~. Mr. Mackay,.and the Indians who had been on fhore, fince we broke 


_ the canoe, were prevented. from coming to us by the rugged and im- , 
- _ ‘Zo ; eo, paffable 


172 


| ee 


1793» 
May. 
v—~ with’ the-affiftance of poles; with which we pufhed onwards till we.came 


JOURNAL. OF. Ai VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


paffable fiate of the ground. We, therefore, again refumed our courfe 


beneath precipice, where we could not find any bottom ; {9 that wé were 
again obliged'to" have: recourfe to the line, the management of which — 
was rendered not only difficult but dangerous, as the men employed in 
towing were‘under the néceffity of pafling on the outfide of trees that 
grew ‘on the: edge-of the precipice... We, however, furmounted this dif- 
ficulty; as we ‘had done many-others,..and the people..who had been 
walking over land now joined us.’ ‘They alfo had met with -their ob- . 
ftacles in paffing the mountain... .. «| ae 

‘It now became neceflary for us to make a traverle, where the water 
was {6 rapid, that.fome of the people ftripped themfelves to their fhirts 
that they might be the better prepared for fwimming, in-cafe any ‘accl- 
dent happened to the canoe, which’ they ferioufly apprehended ; but.we 
fucceeded in our. attempt without any other. inconvenience, except that 


_ Of taking in water. We now came to a cafcade, when it was thought 


neceflary to take out part of the lading. At noon we ftopped to take an 
altitude, oppofite to a fmall river that flowed in from the left: whileI . 


-was thus’ engaged, the men went on fhore to faften the ‘canoe;. but,as the 
current was not very ftrong, they had been negligent,in- performing a 
~~, this_office ; it proved, -however, fufficiently powerful. to. ‘fheer, her off, 


and if it had not happened that one: of the men, from abfolute fatigue 
had remained and held ‘the end of the line, ,we fhould have, been de- 
prived of every means of profecuting our voyage, as well as of pre- 
fent a ‘ But notwithftanding the ftate: of. my,mind on fuch 
an aldfining circumftance, and an-intervening cloud that interrupted 
' me, 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 
me, the altitude which I took has been fince proved to be tolerably 
correét, and gave 56. North latitude. Our laft courfe was South-South- 


i 


Weft two miles and a quarter. 


| We now continued our toilfome and perilous progrefs with the line 
Welt by North, and-as we proceeded the rapidity of the current in- 
creafed, fo.that in the diftance of two, miles we were obliged to unload 
four times, and carry every thing:but the canoe : indeed, in many, places, 
it was with the utmoft difficulty, that we could prevent her from being 
dafhed to pieces againft the rocks by, the violence of the eddies. At five 
we had proceeded to where the river.was one continued rapid.» Here 
we again took every-thing out of the canoe, in order to tow her up. with 
the line, though the rocks were fo fhelving as greatly to increafe the toil 
-and hazard of. that operation. At length, however, the agitation of the 
water was fo great, that a wave firiking on ‘the bow of the canoe broke 
‘the line, and filled us with inexpreffible difmay, as it. appeared impof- 
fible that the veflel could efcape from being dafhed to pieces, and. thofe 
who were in her from perifhing. Another wave, however, more pro- 
pitious than the former, drove her out of thé tumbling water, fo that the 
men were enabled. to bring her athore, and.though, fhe;had been carried 


_over-rocks, by thefe.. fwells which - left them. naked a.moment. after,: the 


_canoe- ‘had received'no material. i injury, The,men were, however, m fuch 
a fate from. theirlate alarm, that, it-would not only have been unavailing 
but imprudent to have -propoled any further, progrefs.. at-prefent, parti- 
cularly as the river above us, as far as -we coud fee, was one white fheet 


of foaming'water. 


- mo . . 
Lote ys mm : a 


CHAP: 


~ 


174 


‘ May. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


CHAPTER Uv. 


Continuation of dificulties and dangers. Difcontents among the people. 


State of the river and its*banks. Volcanic’ chafms in the-earth: Di/- 
patch vartous perfons to difcover ways acrofs.the mountain. Obftacles 
prefent themfelves on’ all fides. ' Preparations made to attempt the 
mountain. Account of the afcent with the. canoe and baggage. The 
trees that are found there. Arrive at the river. Extraordinary ctr- 
cumftances of it. Curious hollows ‘in the rocks. Prepare the canoe. 


; Renew our progrefs up the river. The ftate of it. Leave fome tokens 


of amity for the natives. The weather very cold, Loft a book of my 


- obfervations for several days. Continue to proceed up the river. Send 


a letter down the current in a rum-keg. Came to the forks, and pro- 
ceed up the Eaflern branch. Circum tances of tt it. 


1793s Tuar the difcouragements, difficulties, : and: dangers, which - had 
hitherto attended the progrefs of our enterprize, fhould have excited a 
with in feveral of thofe who were engaged in it to difcontinue the purfuit, 
_ might be naturally expeBted; and indeed it Degen ¢ to be muttered on all 
‘fides that there was no alternative but to-rétuin. 


AS, 


Inftead of paying any attention to thefe murmurs, I .defired ‘those 


who had uttered: them to exert themfelves in gaining an afcent of the 


hill, 


‘, 
5 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


hill, and encamp there for the night. In the mean time I fet off with 


one of the Indians, and though I continued my examination of the river . 


almoft as long as there was any light to affift me, I fould fee no end of 
the rapids and cafcades; I was, therefore, perfectly | {Atisfied, that it would 
be impraéticable to. proceed any further by water. We returned from 
this reconnoitring excurfion very much fatigued, with our fhoes worn 
out and wounded feet; when I found that, by felling trees on the de- 
clivity of the firft hill, my people had contrived to afcend it. 


From the place where I had taken the altitude at noon, to the place ' 


where we made our landing, the river is not more than fifty yards wide, 
_ and flows between ftupendous rocks, from whence huge fragments fome- 
times tumble down, and falling from fuch an height, dafh into {mall ftones, 
with fharp points, and form the beach between the rocky projeétions. 
Along the face of fome of thefe precipices, there appears a ftratum of a 
bitumenous fubftance which refembles coal; though while fomeof the 
pieces of it appeared to be excellent fuel, others refifted, for a confider- 


able time, the action of fire, and did not emit the leaft flame. The whole 


of this day’s courfe would have been altogether impraéticable, if the water 
had been higher, which muft be the cafe at certain. feafons. We faw alfo 
feveral. encampments of the Knifteneaux. along the river, which muft 
have been formed by them on their war exeurfions: a.decided proof of 
the favage, blood-thirfty difpofition of that people; as nothing lefs 
than fuch a fpirit could impel them to encounter the difficulties of this 
almoft inacceffible country, whofe natives. are equally: unoffending and 
defencelel. 


Mr. 


a 
oF 


? 


176 


4 193+ 
May. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE | 


Mr, Mackay informed me, that in pafling over the mountains, he ob- 


es ferved feveral chafms in the earth that’ emitted heat and’ {moke, ‘which 


Tuelday 21. 


diffufed a {trong fulphureous ftench. I fhould certainly have: vifited this ~- 
phenomenon, if I had been fufficiently qualified as a naturalift, to have 
offered {cientific conjeCtures or obfervations.thereon.. ° 

It rained in the morning, and did not ceafe.till about eight, and as the 
men had been very fatigued and difheartened, I {uffered_ them to con- 
tinue their reft till that hour. Such was the ftate of the river, as I have 
already, obferved, that no alternative was left us; nor ‘did any means of 
proceeding prefent themfelves to us, but the paffage of the mountain 


over which we were to carry.the canoe as well as the baggage. As this - —- ~ 


was a very-alarming enterprize; Fdifpatc hed" Mr. Mackay with tt three men 
and the two Indians to. proceed in a ftraight courfe from the top of the 
mountain, and to keep the line of the river till they fhould find it na- 
vigable, . If it fhould be their opinion, that there was no pratticable paf- 
fage in that dire€tion, two of them were inftru€ted to return in order to 
make their report;* while the others were to go-in fearch of the Indian - 
carrying-place. While they were engaged in this excurfion, the people 
who ‘remained with me were employed in .gumming. the ‘canoe, and 

making handles for the axes. Atnoon'I got ‘an altitude, which made 
‘our Jatititude 56.0. 8.- At three o'clock had. time, when my watch was 
flow 1. gt. 92. Apparent time. oa baat le 


“At fan-tet, Mr. Mackay returned with one e of the men, “and in a about 
two hours was followed by the others. They had penetrated: thick 
woods, afcended hills and funk ipto vallies, till’ they got beyond the 


rapids, 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


fapids, :which, according to their. ¢alculation, was'a diftance ‘of three 


leagues. The two parties returned by different routes, but they both 
.-agreed, that with. all its difficulties, and they were of a very alarming 


nature, the outward courfe ‘was that which muft be preferred. Unpro- | 


‘ mifing, however, asithe account of their expedition appeared, it did not 
fink them into a flate of difcouragement ; and a kettle of wild rice, 
- fweetened:. with fugar, which had been prepared for their return, with 
their ufual regale of rum, foon renewed that courage which difdained all 
obftacles that threatened, our progrefs: and they went to reft, with a- full 
determination to {urmount them on the morrow. I fat up, in the hope 
of ‘getting an obfervation of Jupiter and his firft fatellite, but t the cloudy 
weather * Prevented my: obtaining # it. | 

At break of day we entered on the extraordinary journey which was 
to occupy the remaining part of it. The men began, without delay, to: 
cut'a road up the mountain, and as the trees were but of {mall growth, 
I- ordered them to fell thofe which they found convenient, in fuch a 
manner, that they ‘might fall parallel with the road, but, ‘at the fame 


Wednef, 22: . 


time, not feparate them entirely from the ftumps; fo that they might | 


| form a kind of.railing on either fide. The baggage was now brought 
from the waterfide.to our encampment. This was likewife frori the” 
fleep fhelving of the rocks, a-very perilous undertaking, as one falfe ftep 


of any of the people employed in it, would have been inftantly followed 


by falling headlong into the wate. When this important objett was at- 
tained, the whole-of the party proceedéd with no fmall degree of appre- 
henfion, to fetch the. canoe, which, in a fhort time, was alfo brought to: 
the encampment; and, as foon as wehad recovered from our fatigue, we 

os 0 Aa advanced 


is 


JOURNAL OF A ‘VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


advanced with it up the mountain, having the line-doubled. and faftened 
fucceffively as we went on to the ftumps; while.a man at the end of 
it, hauled it, round a tree, ‘holding: it on and fhifting it as: we pro- 


* ceeded; fo that we may be faid, with ftrié& truth, to have warped the 


canoe up the mountain: indeed by a general and moft laborious exer- 
tion, we got every thing to the fummit by two in the afternoon. . At 
noon, the latitude was. 56. 0. 4 47 Worth. At five, I fent the men to cut 
the road onwards, which’ they, effeGted for about a mile, when they 
returned. 


; ‘The weather was cloudy at intervals, with fhowers.and thunder. At 


Tharfday 23. 


about ten, I obferved an emerfion of Jupiter's fecond.-fatellite; time 
by the achrometer 8. 32. 20. by which I. found the longitude to be 
120. 29. 30. Welt from Greenwich. 


The weather was clear at ‘four this morning, when: the n men began to 
carry, I joined’Mr. Mackay, and the tw6 Indians in the Jabour of 
cutting a road. The ground continued rifing gently till noon, when it 
began to decline; but though on fuch an elevated fituation, we could 
fee but little, as mountains of a ftill higher elevation and covered with 
{now, were feen far above us in every. _diretion. “In the afternoon 
the ground became very uneven; hills and- deep -defiles: -alternately pre- 
fented .themfelves to us. Our progrefs, however, exceeded my expec- 
tation, and it was not till four. in the afternoon that the carriers over- 
took us. At five, in a ftate of fatigue that may be more readily con- 


ceived than expreffed, we encamped near a rivulet.or Spring that iffued 
from beneath’a large mafs of ice and {now. . 


sa 


Our 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


. Our toilfome journey of this day I compute at about three miles ; 
along the firft of which the land’ is covered with plenty of wood, con- 
fifting of large trees, encumbered with little underwood, through which 
it was by no means: difficult to open: a road, 'by following a well-beaten 
elk path: for the two fucceeding miles we found the country over- 
{fpread with the trunks.of. trees, laid low by fire’ fome years ago; among 
which large copfes had fprung up of a clofe growth, and intermixed 
with briars, fo as to render the paflage through them painful and 


tedious. The foil in the woods is light and of a dufky colour; that’ 


in the burned country is a mixture of fand and clay with {mall ftones. 
‘The trees are fpruce, red-piné, cyprefs, poplar, white birch, willow, 
alder, arrow-wood, yed-wood, liard, fervice-tree, bois-picant, &c. I 
never faw any’ of the laft kind before. It rifes to about nine feet in 


179 


1993. 
aye 


height, grows in joints without branches, and is tufted at the extremity. _ 


The ftem is of an equal fize from the bottom to the top, and does not 


exceed an inch in diameter; it is covered with fmall prickles; which 


caught our trowlers, and working through them, fometimes found their 
way to the flefh. The shrubs are, the goofeberry, the currant, and 
{everal kinds of briars. 


“We continued our very laborious journey, which led us down fome 
fteep hills, and through a wood of tall pines. After much toil and trou- 
ble in bearing the canoe through the difficult paflages which we encoun- 
tered, at-four in the .afternoon we arrived at the river, fome hundred 
yards above the rapids or falls, with all our baggage. I compute the dif- 
tance of this day’s progrefs to be about four miles ;- indeed I'fhould have 
meafured the whole of the way, if Thad not been obliged to engage per- 


a Aa2: fonally 


Fiiday 24. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


fonally in the labour of making the road, © But after all, the Indian carry- 
ing way, whatever may be its length, and I think it cannot exceed ten 
miles, will always be found more fafe and expeditious than the Pallage 
which our toil and perleverance formed and furmounted. 


- Thofe of my people who vifited this: place on the 21ft, were of opinion 
that the water hadrifen very much fince that time. About two hundred - 
yards belew us.the ftream rufhed with an aftonifhing but filent velocity, 
between perpendicular rocks, which are not more than sthirty- five yards 
afunder: when the water is high, it rans over ‘thofe rocks; i in a channel three 
times that breadth, where it’ is bounded ‘by far more elevated precipices: 


‘In the former are deep round holes, fome of which are full of water, 


while others are empty, in whofe bottom are fmall round ftones, as 


- fmooth as marble. Some. of: thefe natural cylinders would contain two 


hundred gallons. At a fmall diftance below the firft of thefe rocks, the 
channel widens in a kind of zig-zag progreffion; and it was really awful 
to behold with ‘what infinite force the water drives againft the’rocks on 
one fide, and with what impetuous firength it is ‘repelled o the other: it 
then falls back, as ‘it were, into a more ftrait but meh over 
which it is toffed in high, foaming, half: formed billows, as far as the eye 


_ could follow i ite. 


The you gmen n informed me that this wa the: ‘place where their relations 


. had told me that 1 fhould meet with a. fall. equal-to that of Ni lagara: to ex- 


culpate them, however, from their apparent ‘mifinformation, ‘they declared ° 
that their friends were ‘not “aetuftomed tofutter falfehoods, and that the 


-fall had probably been deftroyed, Py the forée.of the water, It is, how- 


ever, 


NORTH- wsT CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


ever, very. evident that thofe people had not been here, or did not adhere 
tothe truth: - By the number of trees which appeared to have been felled 
with axes, we difcovered that the Knifteneaux;,or fome tribes who are 
known ‘to employ: that inftrament, had paffed this way. ,.We. pafled 
_ through.a f{nare enclofure, but faw. no animals, though the country was 
very ‘much interfe€ted by their tracks...- ©. =... 


. Itrained throughout the night, and till twelve this day; while the bufi- 


Saturday 25. 


nefs of. preparing great and {mall poles, and putting the canoe in - 


order, &c..caufed us to remain here till five in the afternoon. I now 
attached. a‘knife, with.a fteel, flint, beads, and. other trifling articles to a 
pole, which Tereéted, and-left as a'token.of amity tothe natives. When 
1 was making this arrangement, one. of my attendants, wham I have 


already defcribed under the title of the-Cancre, added ta:my affortment: 


_ afmall round piece of gréeti woad, chewed at: one end jn the form of a 
brufh, which the ‘Indians ufe: to pick the marrow out of bones. This he 
7 “informed me was an emblem of a country.abounding in artimals. The 


water had rifen during our flay here one-foot and an half perpendicular 


height. 


6 
\ 


We now embarked) and our courfe was North-Weft one mile and 


three quarters, . There: were mountains on all fides: of us, which were 


covered: with. fnow: one/in particular; ‘on the. South. fide of :the river,’ 


-rofée-t9 a great height.» We. continued. to proceed Welt three quarters 
of’a mile, North-Weft one mile, and. Weft-South-Weft a quarter of,a 
mile, when we encamped for the night. ..:The-Cancre killed a {mall elk. 


y 


babe a ia a , wae zt } ate . + a toe 
. ' a i * » 
2 ; , The 


. 
“ / 
vf _/. 
I 
, 


182. JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE: / ‘ 
1793: The weather was clear and: fharp, and) between thiee -and four 
Sun te? ner: in the morning we renewed our voyage; our’ firft courfe being Welt 


by South three miles and an half, when the men complained of the 
-_ cold in their fingers, as they were obliged to pufh on ‘the canoe with 
the poles. Here a fmall river flowed. in‘ from the North... We now 
‘s continued to fteer Welt-South-Weft a quarter of: a mile, Weft-North- 
Wet -a mile and an half, and Weft two miles, when we ‘found our. 
felves on a parallel with a chain 6f mountains on both fides the river, 
running South and North. The ver, both yefterday: and the-early part 
of to-day, was from four to eight undred yards wide, and full of iflands, 
but was at this.time diminifhed to about two hundred | yards | broad, and 
free from iflands, with a {moéth but ftrong- current. ~ Our next: courfe 
was .South- Welt two miles, when.we encountered a rapid, and faw an 
" encampment of the Knifteneaux.’ ‘ We now- proceeded North-Weft by 
Weft one mile, among iflands, South-Weht by Weft three quarters of 
a mile, South-South-Eaft one mile, veered to South- Weft through iflands 
three miles and an half, and South by Eaft halfa mile. Hereariver 
poured in on the left, which was the moft confiderable that we had feen 
fince we had paffed‘the mountain. At feven i in the evening we'landed 
and encamped. "S 


‘Though. the fun’] had—fhone : L. us throughout. the day, the, air” 
~ was fo cold that the men, though aétively employe , could not refift it 
“without the aid of their blanket coats.. “This cirtumftance might in 
* fome degree be expeéted from ‘the-furrounding mountains, which were | 
covered with ice and {now; .but .as they. are.not fo high as to produce 
the extreme cold which we fuffered, it muft be more Particularly attri: 
>. buted * 


ed 


a 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


buted to the high fituation of the country itfelf, rather than to the local - 


1793. 
Ma 


183 


ay. 


elevation of the mountains, the greateft height of which does not exceed —~—~ 


fifteen hundred feet; though in general they do not rife to half that alti- 
tude. But a3 I had not been able to take an exa& meafurement, I do 
- not prefume upon the accuracy of my conjeéture. Towards the bottom 


of thefe heights, which were clear of fnow, the trees were putting forth . , 


their leaves, while thofe in their middle region ftill retained all the cha- 
ra€teriftics of’ winter, and on their upper parts there was little or no 
wood, 


* The ‘weather was clear, and we continued our voyage at the ufual 
hour, when we fucceffively found feveral rapids and points to, impede“our 
-_progrel. At noon our latitude was “56. 5. 54. North. The Indians 
killed a ftag; and one of the men who went to fetch it was very much 
endangered by the rolling down of.a large : flone from the-heights above 


_ him. 


toy - ’ ‘ 
ve > 


Monday 27. 


ca 


+ 


& 


The day was very cloudy. The mountains on both fides of the river Tuelday 28. 


“feemed to have funk, in their elevation, dufing the voyage-of yefterday. 
To-day they refumed their former altitude, and run fo clofe on either fide 
of the channel, that all view was excluded of every thing but themfelves. 
‘This: part of the current was not broken by iflands; but in the afternoon 
we approached fome cafcades, which obliged us-to carry!our canoe and 
Its lading for feveral hundred yards. .Here we obferved an encampment 


* From this-day, to the 4th of June the courfes of my voyage are , omitted, as I loft the book that 
contained them: I was in the habit of fometimes indulging firy{elf with a fhort doze in the canoe, and 
I imagine that the branches of the trees brufhed' my book from mé,.when I was in fuch a fituation, 

‘ which h renders the account of thefe few w days i lefs diftina than ufual. m - 


cd 


. of . 


4 


? 


‘ 


ft 
4 ame 


38, JOURNAL OF A'VOYAGE THROUGHUTHE 
1793.” of the: riatives; though fome tine had elapfed ‘fince it had been inhabited, 
cant The greater patt of the day was divided between heavy thowers and fmall: 
rain ; and we took ‘our ftation on the fhore about fix in the evening, 


Fn 


about three miles abbve thelaft rapid. © es _ 


‘ 


* ao yy ge, wt hoon, ‘ ’ ot oan -- 
as pe ’ vil ‘ soe : at rep oe Bb 


Wednel. 29. “The rain was fo violent throughout the whole of this day, that. we aia 
: not veritirre £0 proceed. As we had almoft vexpended the. contents of a 

‘ ram-keg, and this being-a:day which allowed of no. aétive employment, I 

~~ . amufed myfelf with the experiment of enclofing: a letter ‘in it, and dif- 
7 ' patching it down the ftream, to take its fate, I according introduced a 
“written account of all our hardthips, 8c. carefully enclofed in bark, into 


. the fnall barrel by-the bung-hole, which’ being carefully fecured, 1 L con- 


fi fignéd this epiftolatory cargo to ‘then mercy ‘of the current. , - 


Md 


“ - = tee . Lon, 
a “~_ 4g 


J 1 


Tharld, go, = “We: were alarmed this morning at break of day, by the continual bark- 


Ut ing of our ‘dog, who never ceafed from \running backwards antl forwards - 
"in the rear of our fituation : when, however, the day advanced, “we~dif- 
: a - . covered the caule of our alarm to proceed: from i a wolf, who was parad- 
. | a 88 a ridge a few yards behind us, and had been moft probably allured 2 


by the fcent of our {mall portion of frefh meet.» The weather was cloudy, 

7 but it did not prevent 1 us from renewing our progrefs at™a very early 
., . hour, A confiderable rivet appeared front e left, and -we continued 
"our courfe till feven in the. evening, wher w Janded at night where 

. gp there was an-Indian encainpment. et 


a 


© Friday gi. _ The morning was. clear’ and cold;, and the current-very. pqwerful. On 
we croffing the mouth of. a river “that flowed 3 in from ahe- -right of us, We 
re mo, 2 . -* were 
3 a4 st - 4 an) 
\ a. ‘ . ° ‘ ; , y 2 o> 
we . . - . ‘ _ . ‘ 
o ~ of e 


, 1 2 ‘ % . . > - . 
ro ‘ > ‘ 
1° 2 + ~ 
oe . , an 7 - , ee a - . 


were ery much cndarigired; indeed. all the. rivers: which Fvhave lately, +793: 
feen, ‘appear to overflow their natural. limits, as it may-be fuppofed, from: aii 
the melting of themolntain fnow..’: The :water is altndft white,.the bed 
' of the river being of ttme-ftone:. ‘hei mountains are éne, folid-anafs. of 
the fame materials, but: without: ithe: leaft:fhade of trees, or:decoration :of 
foliage. Atynine théimen-were fo cold that wé landed, in ordento kindle 
‘a fire, which: was: confidered as a ‘yery uncommon: circumftance ‘at.this 
feafon; ‘ai final: quantity of-rum, showever, ferved as an adequate. fulb- 
flituté;.and the: current being: fo fmooth as-to admit of the ufe.of pad- 
dles, I encouraged | them to proceed without any | further delay. Ina ) 
fhort time an extenfive view opened upon us, difplayiag a beautiful theet 
of water, that twa heightened:by the calmnefs:.of the weather, and“ 
fplendid. fam. ‘Here the mountains, which were. covered with. wofd, 
opened on either fide, fo that we entertained the: ‘hope of foon: leaving.them | 
behind us.» When, we had to the términation of this profpeét, the 
river was barred with i ana {malhiflands.- - Fo:pr 
ceed onwards, we weré under the neceffity iof-clearing, a narrow ‘paflage 
ofthe drift! wood, on the left: fhoré. ‘Here the: view convinced us, that 
. ourdate hopes were..without foundation, .as there: appeared. a ridge.:or. 
s chain. of mountains, running South and North as, far 3 as s the eye could 
reach: hoy at oy tated 
: : a , boat ow da 4 
On: advancing -t two § Lo three -miles, “we a ived: ati the fork, “one 
branch’ running. ‘about Wefi:North- Weil, .and :the other ; ‘South. South-. 
_Eaft... If I had, been. goveriied by. my.own judgmeni; Tfhould hayp: taken 
the former, as’ it “appeared to.me to he the moft: likely4o bring us neareft a 
tothe part where.I withéd to fall on the Pacific Ocean, but the old iin, 
ad , . ara B be _ whom 


oe ao ° ’ ga 


- NORTH-WEST: CONTINENT! OP AMERICA. ~ i85 


eo? 


~ 
186 
"19938", 


ay. 
en and 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE | 


whom Ihave already mentioned as having been frequently on war ex- 
peditions.in this country, had warned me not, on any account, to follow 
it,.as .it:was foon loft in various branches among the mountains, and that 


there was.no great river.that ran in any direétion near it;. but by. follow. 


ing the latter, he faid, we fhould arrive at a carrying-plate to another large 


river, that did not exceéd a.day’s march, where the, inhabitants build 
houfes, and live upon iflands.. There was.fo much apparent truth in the 


’ 74 , 
old:man’s narrative, that Idetermined to-be.governed by it; for I did not 


entertain the Jeatt doubt, if I could get into the other river, . that 
fhould reach the ocean. * 


4 


Eaft branch, which appeared ‘to be more rapid than the other, though 
it did not poflefs an- equal. breadth. Thefe circumftances difpofed 
my men..and Indians, the latter in particular being very tired of the 
voyage, to. exprefs their wifhes . that J fhould take the Weftern branch, 


efpecially when they ‘perceived the difficulty. of ftemming the cur- , 
» tent,-in the dire@tion « ‘on which I had determined. .Indeéd the ruth of 


water was:{o powerful, that we were the.greateft part of the afternoon 


. in. getting two or three miles—a very: tardy and mortifying progrefs, and 


’ which, with the voyage, was openly execrated by many of thofe who- 
‘were engaged in it: and the inexprefhible toil thefe people had endured, 


as well as the. dangers: they had encountered; required fome-degree of 
confideration ; therefore employed: thofe arguments which were the beft 


. calculated. tc calm their; Smmediate rdifcontents, as:-well-a’ to ‘encourage 
ithe fature hopes, though, ‘at the fame, time I delivered my’ {entiments in, 


» fash @ Reaniner) as to convince-them that I was s determined to proceed. 


_ I accordingly -ordered my fteerfman to proceed~at once to the |; 


! 
I 
| 


= me . ‘ + . % 7 On: 


a 


| 
} 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 187 


Qn the ift of June we embarked at fun-rife, and towards noon the 4798 
current began to flacken; we then put to- thore, 1 in order’to gum the \~—~ 
canoe, when a meridian altitude gave me 55. 42. 16. North latitude. We 
then continued our courfe; and towards the evening the current began to 
recover its former ftrength: - Mr. Mackay and the Indians had already’: ~~ 
difembarked;-%o walk and lighten the boat. At fun-fet we encamped on. 

"a point, being. the firft: dryland which had been found on this fide the 
river, that wad fit’ for’ our purpofe, fince our people went on fhore. In 


et 


the morning we  paffed a large rapid river, that flowed in from the night 8 
\ oo 

In no } part BE the North-Wett did I fee fo much beaver-work, within _ 
an equal diflance, as in the courfe of this day. In fome places they 
had ‘cut down feveral acres of large poplars; and we faw alfo a 
great number. of  thefe aétive and fagacious animals. The. time which 
thefe. wonderful : creatures allot for their labours, whether 1 in ere€ling 
their curious habitations, or. providing food, is the. ‘whole of the in- 
terval between ‘the fetting and the rifing fun, | 


“Towards the dulky part of the evening we heard feveral difcharges - 
‘from the fowling pieces of * our people, which .we an{wered, to im- 
‘form them of our fituation ; ‘and fome tine after it was dark, they 
arrived in an equal {tate of fatigue and alarm: they were alfo obliged to 
fwim acrofs a-channel in order to get to us, as we were fituated on an ifland, 
.though we were ignorant. of the circumflance, ull they came to inform 
us. One of the Indians ‘was pofitive that he*heard the difcharge of fires 
arms above our encampment ; and on comparing’ the number of our 
- ~ Gifchaiges. with ‘theirs, there: appeared. to be fome foundation for his . 

Bba : . alarm, 


188 JOURNAL“OF 'ASVOYAGE.THROUGH THE 
og alarng’as we imagined that we had heard two-reports .mdre. ‘than they 
“—v— “acknowledged ; and, in. their turn, they declared ‘that::they ‘had: heard 
“twice the number’ ‘oF thofe whick:we-knewihat'proceeded ifrom:us. . The 
‘Indians were. therefore certain, that: the-Kinifteneaux muftbein ‘our vici- 
‘nity, on’a war expedition, and ‘confequently, if‘ they: were numerous, we 
{hould have: had no-reafgn to: expeét. the Teal -mercy from them jn this 
-diftant country.’ ‘Though 'I-did-‘not.believe that! circumftance, of that 
‘any of the natives:could be:in‘poffeflion: of :firezarms; L thought ‘it right, 
-at all events, we'fhould-be prépared: ' Our fufeés.were, therefore; primed 
and loaded, and having extinguifhed our fire, each of us took his ftation 
vat: the foot-of:a tree, where we pafled anv unedfy and: reftlefs night, 
wml at gah a De | 
+ The fucceeding n ‘morning. ‘being clear: and pleafant, ‘we, proceeded at 
‘an early hour againtt. a rapid current, interfe&ted by iflands. About 
eight we pafled two. large trees, whofe rosts having. been undermined 
-by :the current, had: recently. fallen into the river; and; ‘i my opi- 
nion, the ctath, of their fall. had- occafioned the. noife: which. caufed 
our late alarm. In this manner the water ravages the iflands,, in 
thefe: rivers, ° ‘and by driving. down great quantities of wood, forms the 
foundations of others. The men were fo oppreffed with' fatigue, that it 
was neceffary they fhould encamp at fix in the afternoon. We, there- 
‘fore, landed .on a fandy ifland, which is a very uncommon obje&, as the 
& | -greater partzof the :iflands confit of a bottom of round .ftones and 
gravel, tovered.'from three :to ten feet. with mud and:old drift-wood. 
. Beave er-work was: as. frequently feen as on the’ preceding day: 
_ 


"9 


: N es - . 
On the advaf “of “June. we renewed. our.voyage with ‘the. riffing { fun. At 


cei 3 ' re noon - 


a 


u 


NORTH-WEST:CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 189 


noon I obtained a meridian altitude, which gave 55. 22° 3. North lati- | oe 
tude. Ialfo took time, and the watch was flow 1. go. 14. apparent time, “=——~—~ 
According to my calculation, this ‘place 3 is about twenty-five miles South- 


Faft of the fork.* | 


'* | hall, now proceed with my ufual regularity, which, as I have already mentioned, has been, for 
_ fome days, fufpended, from the lofs of my book of obfervation. 


we 


JOURNAL OF AVOYAGE THROUGH THE = 


CHAPTER Vv. 


Continue our voyage. Heavy fog. The water rifes. Succeffion of courfes. 
Progre effive account of this branch. ~Leave the canoe to proceed, and 
afcend an hill to reconnoitre. Climb a tree. to extend my view of the 
country. Return to the river. The canoe not arrived. Go in fearch of 
it. Extreme heat, mufquitoes, Gc. Increafing anxiety refpetting the 
‘canoe. It at length appears. Violent form. Circumftances of our pro- 
grefs. Forced to haul the canoe up the fiream by the branches of trees. 
Succeffion of courses. Wild parfnips along the river. Expeét to meet — 
withmatives. Courfes continued. Fall in with, ‘fome natives. Our inter- 7 
courfe ‘with them. Account of theit drefs, arms, utenfils, and manners, 
Sc. New difcouragements and difficulties prefent themfelves. | 


ge OR BN ' 
“Tuckey a. We embarked this morning ‘at burn in a very heavy fog The water 
had been continually rifing, and, insmany places, overflowed its banks. 
The current alfo was fo ftrong, that our progrefs was very tedious, and 
"required the moft laborious exertions.’ Our courfe was this day, South- 
South-Eaft one mile, South-South- Weft half a mile, South-Eafl three 
quarters of a mile, North- Eaft by Eaft three quarters: of. a mile, South- 
Eaft half.a mile, South-Eaft by South one mile, South:South-Eaft one. 


mile three quarters, South- Eaft by South half a » mile Ef by. South a 


quarter 
re 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 191 


quarter of a mile, South-Eaft” three quarters of a mile, North-Eaft by 4793+ 
Eaft half a.mile, Eaft by North a quarter of a mile, South- Eaft halfa a 
mile, South-Eaft by South a quarter of a mile, South-Eaft by Eaft half 
a mile, North-Eaft by Eaft half a mile, North-North-Eaft three quarters 

.. Of a mile, to South by Eaft one mile and an half. We could not find a 
place fit for an encampment, till nine at night, when we landed ona 
bank of gravel, of which little more appeared above water than the {pot 


? 


we occupied, 


This morning we found our canoe and baggage in the water, which wednet ¢. 
had continued rifing during the night... We then gummed the canoe, as 
we arrived at~too late an hour to perform that operation on the pre- . 
ceding evening. ‘This neceffary bufinefs being completed, we traverfed 
to the North fhore, where I difembarked with Mr. Mackay, and the _ 

_ hunters, in order to afcend an adjacent ‘mountain, with the hope of 
obtaining a-view of the interior part of the country. I direfted my 
people to proceed with all poffible diligence, and that, if they met with 
any accident, or found my return neceffary, they fhould fire two guns. 
They alfo underftood, that when they fhould hear the fame fignal from 
me, they were to anfwer, and wait for me, if I were behind them. 


When we had afcended to the fummit of the hill, we’ found that it 
extended onwards in an.even, level country ; fo that, encumbered as _ 
we were, with the thick wood, no diftant view “could be obtained; I 
therefore climbed a very lofty tree, from whofe top I difcerned on the 
right a ridge of mountains covered with fnow, ‘bearing about North- 


“Wet from thence another. ridge of chigh: land, whereon no fnow was 
vifible, 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE. THROUGH THE 


vifible, {tretched towards the South; betweén which and the fnowy:hills 
on the Eaft fide, there appeared to be an opening, which we determined 


yoann 


to be the courfe of the river. 


t 


aot 


Having obtained all the fatisfa@tion that the nature of the place would ~ 
admit, we proceeded forward to:overtake the:canoe, and after.'a':warm 
walk came down upon the river, when we difcharged our pieces twice, but” 
received no anfwering fignal. I was of opinion, that the canoe was be- 
fore us, while the Indians entertained an oppofite notion. I, however, 
croffed another point of land, and came again to the.waterfide about 


ten. Here we had a long view of.the river, which circumiftance excited 


jn my mind,’ fome doubts of my former fentiments. We: repeated our 


fignals, but without any return; and as every moment now increafed my 


. anxiety, I left Mr. Mackay. and one of the Indians at this. {pot to make a 


large-fire, and fend branches adrift:down the current as notices of our 
fituation, if the canoe was behind us; and. proceeded withthe other Indian 


acrols’a very long point, where the river makes a confiderable bend, in 


a, order that I, might be fatisfied if the ‘canoe was a-head.. Having been 
"accuftomed, for the laft fortnight to very cold weather; I found the heat 
of this day almoft infupportable, as. our way lay over a dry fand, which 


was relieved by no fhade, but fuch as a few {cattered cypreffes could afford 
us. About twelve we arrived once more at the river, and the'difcharge of 
our pieces was as unfuccefsful. as it had hitherto been. ‘The water rufhed 


- before us with tincommon velocity ; and we:alfo tried the. experiment of 


fending freth branches down it... To add to’the: difagreeabléneli of our 
fituation, the gnats and mufquitoes appeared. in. fwarnis: to. torment us. 
~ When. we returned to our companions, we: found that they. had not been 


7 


} ” mo contented 


€ ™ 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


contented with remaining in the pofition where Thad left them, but 
had been three or four miles down the river, but were come back to 
their. ftation, without having made any difcovery of the people on the 
water. 7 | 


Various very unpleafing conjectures at once perplexed and diftrefled 


us: the Indians, who are inclined to magnify evils of any and every 
‘kind, had at once configned the canoe and every one on board it to" 


the bottom; and were already fettling a plan to return upon a raft, 
as well as ‘calculating the number of nights that ‘would be required to 
reach their home. As for myfelf, it will be eafily believed, that my 
inind was in a ftate of extreme agitation; and the imprudence of my 
condué in leaving the people, in fuch a fituation of danger-and toilfome 


exertion, added a very painful miortification to the fevere apprehenfions 


1 already fuffered : it was an a€t of indifcretion which might have put an — 
end to the voyage that I had fo much at heart, and compelled me at 


length to fubmit to the {cheme which my hunters had already formed 
for our return. . i Z a 

- At half paft fx in the evening, Mr. Mackay and the Cancre fet off to 
proceed down the river, as far as they could before’the night came on, 
and to continue their journey in the morning to the place where we had 


encamped the preceding evening. I alfo propofed to make my ex- | 


curfion upwards; and, if we both failed of fuccefs in meeting: ‘the 


_ canoe; ot was ; agreed that we fhould return to the place where we now 


* feparated. 


”s 
i 


194 


1793+ 


June. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


i 
' In this fituation we had-wherewithal to drink ‘in’ plenty, but with 


bea folid food we were totally unprovided. We had not feen even a partridge 


a w/ 


throughout the day, and the tracks of rein-deer that we had difcovered, 
were of an old date. We were, however, preparing to make a bed of 
the branches of trees, where we fhould have had no other canopy than 


that a us by the heavens, when we heard a fhot, and foon after 


another, which was the notice.agreed upon, if Mr. Mackay and the In- 
dian {lrould fee the canoe: that fortunate’circumftance was alfo confirmed 
by a return of the fignal from the people. I was, however, fo fatigued 


from’ thé heat and-exercife of the day, as well as incommoded from 


drinking fo.much’ cold water, that I did not wifh to remove till the 
following morning; but the Indian ‘made fuch bitter complaints’ of 
the cold and hunger which he fuffered, that I complied with his folici- 
tations to depart; and it was almoft dark when we reached the canoe, 
barefooted, and drenched with rain. But thefe inconveniences affected 
me very little, when I faw myfelf once more furrounded ‘with my 
people. They informed me, that the canoe had been broken; and that 


they |had this day experienced much greater toil and hardfhips than 
on any former occafion. I thought it prudent to affect a belief of 


évery reprefentation that they made, and even to. comfort each of | 


them with a confolatory*dram:: for, however difficult the paflage might 


have been, it was too fhort to have’ occupied the whole day, if they 
had not relaxed in their exertions. ~The rain was accompanied with 


thunder and lightning. 


It appeared from the various encampments. which we had feen, and 
from feveral paddles we had found, that the natives frequent this part of 
. the 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


the country at the latter end of the f{ummer and the fall. T he courfe 
to day was nearly Eaft-South-Eaft two miles and an half, South by Weft 
one mile; South-South-Eaft one mile and an half, Eaft two miles, and 
- South-Eaft by South one mile. 
—, 

At half paft four this morning we Ssatinued our voyage, our courfes 
being South-Eaft by South one mile, Eaft by South three quarters of a 
mile, South-Eaft by Eaft two miles. The whole of this diftance. we 


Thurfday 6. 


proceeded by hauling the canoe fiom branch to branch, The current © 


was fo ftrong; that it was impoflible to. ftem it with the paddles; the 


depth was too great to receive any affiftance from the poles, and the - 


bank of ‘the river was fo clofely lined with willows and other trees, that 
it was impoflible to ‘employ the line. As it was paft twelve before we 
could find a‘place that would allow of our. landing, I could not geta 


meridian altitudé, We occupied the reft of the-day in repairing the 


canoe, drying our eloaths, and making paddles and poles: to. replace 


thofe which baa en broken or loft. 


"The morning was clear and calm; and fince we had been at. this 


Friday Je 


flation the water. had rifen two inches; fo that the current became. ° 


- fill “flronger; and its velocity had already been fo. great: as. to. jaf: 
tify our defpair in getting up it, if we. had-not been fo long accuf- 


tomed to furmount it. I laft might obferved an emerfion of Jupiter's - 
firft fatellite, but inadvertently “went to: bed,: Without: committing the . 


exact time to writing: if my memory. is corre, it was 8, 18. 10. 
. by the time- -piece- The canoe, which had been, little better, than 


4° 


a wreck, being now repaired, we proceeded Eafl: two: miles anda.’ 


Cc2 quarter, 


~ 4 


JOURNAL OF A. VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


quarter, South-South-Ealt half a mile, South-Eaft a quarter of a mile; 


~~ when we landed to take an altitude for time. We continued our route 


Saturday 9, 


at South-Eaft by Eaft three quarters of a mile, and landed again to de. . 


termine the latitude, which is 55. 2. 51. To this I’add, 2. 45. Southing, 
which will make the place of taking altitude for time 55. 5. 96. with 
which I find that my time-piece was flow 1. 32. 23. apparent time; and 
made the longitude obtained 122. 35: 50. Welt of Greenwich, 


8 From this place we proceeded Eaft by South four miles andan half, 


Eaft-South-Eaft one mile and an half, in which {pace there falls in ai 
{mall river from the Eatt ;. Eaft half a mile, South-Eaft a mile and an, 
__half, Eaft_a.quarter-of-a-mile;and-eticamped at feven o’clock.. Mr. 
~ Mackay and the hunters walked the greateft part of the day, and in the ° 


courle of their excurfion killed a porcupine.* Here we found the-bed. 
of a very large bear quitefrefh. During the day feveral Indian’ encamp- 
ments were feen, which were of. a late ereftion.. The current had alfo 
loft fome of its impetuofity during the greater part-of the day. 


It rained and thundered through the night, and at four in the’ morn- 
ing we again encountered the current,’ Our courfe was:Eafta quarter of 
a mile, round to South by Eaft along.a very high white fandy bank on 
the Eait fhore, three quarters ofa mile,” South-South-Eaft a quarter of a 
mile, South-South- Welt’: a quarter of a mile, South-South-Eaft one mile 
and a quarter, South- Eaft.two rales, with a flack current; South-Eaft by 


+ ee : 


* We had been obliged to indulge our -hunters with — idle i in ‘the canoe, left their being coms; 


pelled to thare in the labour of navigating it fhould difguft and drive them from us. We, therefore; 
employed them 2s much as poffible on fhore, as well to’ procure provifions as to dighten the candde- 


EPS9. 
so ! 
=] 


hog 


\ 


c 


- NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


Eaft two miles and a quarter, Eaft a quarter of a mile, South-South- 
Eaft a quarter of a mile, South-Eaft by South four miles and an-half, 
South-Eaft one mile and an half, South-South-Weft half a mile, Eaft- 
North-Eaft-half a mile, Eaft-South-Eaft a ‘quarter of a mile, South-Eaft 
by South one-mile, South-Eaft by Eaft half.a mile, Eaft by South three 


quarters of ‘2 mile, when the mountains were in full view in this direc- 


tion, and Eaftward, For the three laft days we could only fee them at 
fhort intervals and long diftances; but till then, they were continually 


in fight on‘either fide, from our entrance into the fork: ‘Thofe tothe . 


~ 


left were at no great diftance from us. 


For the laft two days we had been anxioufly looking out for the car- 
rying-place, but could not difcover it, and our only hope was in fuch 
information as we fhould be able to procure from the natives. All that 


"remained for us to do, was to pufh forwards till the river fhould be no” 
longer navigable; it had now, indeed, overflowed its banks, fo that it 


was 2 yen at night before we could difcover a place to encamp. Having 


found lenty of wild parfneps, we gathered the tops, and boiled them 


with pemmican for our fupper. 


The rain of this morning terminated in an heavy mift at half paft 


- five, when we embarked and fteered South-Eaft one mile and an half, 


when it veered "North-North-Eaft half a mile, South-Eaft three quarters 
of amile, Eaft by South ‘three quarters of a mile, Eaft-South- Eaft a 
quarter of a mile, South-South-Eaft a quarter of amile, South-Eaft by 
Eaft one mile, North-Eaft by Eaft half a mile, South-Eaft by Eaft half a 
mile, South-Eaft by South three quarters of a mile, South-Eaft three 


Sunday 9. 


quarters _ 


yy 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


quarters of a.mile, Eaft by South half a mile, South-Eaft by Eaft half a 
mile, Eaft:North- Eaft three quarters of a mile, when it veered to South- 
South- Eaft half a mile, then, back-to Eatt (when a-blue mountain, clear 
of fnow, appeared az head) one-mile: and. an :half; ‘North-Eaft -by Eaft — 
half a mile, Eaft-by North one mile, when it ‘veered to:South-Eaft half 
a mile, then on to North- Welt three quarters of.‘a»mile, and, back to, 
North-Eaft by Eaft half a mile, South. by Weft a quarter -of.a mile, 
North-Eaft by Eaft to North-North-Eaft half a mile, South-South-Eaft 
a quarter of a mile. and Eaft. by North half a mile}. ‘here we perceived a 
fmell of fire; and in a fhort time heard people in ‘the woods, as if in a 
flate of great confufion, which was occafioned, as we afterwards under- 
flood, by their difcovery of us:| At the fame time this unexpeéted cir- _ 
cumftance produced fome little difcompofure among ourfelves,-as our 
arms were not in a ftate of preparation, and we were as- yet: unable to 
afcertain the number of the party. « I confidered, that if there were but 
few it would be needlefs to purfue them, as, it would -not be probable 
that we fhould overtake them in thefe thick woods; and if they were nu- 
merous, it would be an aét of great imprudence to make the attempt, at 
Jeaft during their prefent alarm. I therefore ordered. my people to ftrike 
off to the oppofite fide, that we might fee if any of them had fufficient 
courage to, remain; but, before we were. half. over thé: river,: ‘which, in 


_ this part, is. not more than an hundred. yards wide, two: men- appeared on 
a rifing ground over againft.us, brandifhing. their” {pears; -difplaying their 


bows and arrows, and .accompanying theit’ hoftile. geftures with loud 
vociferations. . My interpreter did not, hefitate to affure them; that they 
might difpel their apprehenfions, as “we “were whité, people; who medi- 
fated no injury, but were, on the contrary, defirous~ of :dernonftrating 


every 


ee 


_ -NORTH-WEST,CONTINENT OF AMERICA: 199 
every mark of kindnefs and friendfhip: They did not, however, feem  -1793- 
 difpofed: to confide ‘in our declarations, and actually threatened, if we 
‘came over before they were more fully fatisfied of* our peaceable i inten- 
tions, that they. ‘would difcharge their arrows at us. : This was a decided _ 
kind of condu& which I did not expe@; at the fame time I'readily com- 
~~~~plied with their propofition, and after fome time had paffed in hearing 
and anfwering their queftions; they confented to our landing, though not 
without betraying very evident fymptoms of fear and diftruft, They, 
however, laid afide their weapons, and when I flepped forward and took 
‘each of them by the hand, one of them, but with a very tremulous aétion, ~ / 
-drew his knife from his fleeve, and prefented it to me ds a mark of his 
‘fabmiffion to my will and pleafure.. On our firft hearing the noife of 
thefe. people in the woods, we difplayed our flag, which was now fhewn 
‘to, themr as‘a -token of friendthip.. They examined us, and every thing ae 
,about us, with a minute cand fufpicious attention. They had heard, in- | 
deed, of white mén? y but ‘this was the firft time that they had ever feen an 7 
human ‘being of a complexion different from their own. The party had | 
:been here but a few“hours; nor-had they yet ereGted their fheds ; and, 
except the two men now with us, they had all fled; leaving their little 
property behind them. To thofe which had given us fuch a proof of 
their confidence, we paid’ the moft conciliating attentions in our power. 
One of them I fent to recal-his people, and the other, for very obvious 
reafons, we kept with us. Inthe mean 'time the canoe was unldaded; the 


mecellary bagesge carried up the.bill, and the tents pitched. 


a 


TRS Here I determined to remain ; ‘till the Indians became fo familiarized 


wath, us, aS to. ‘give all the intelligence which we imagined might be ob- 
tained 


200 ° 


4793+ 


* June. 


_ JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH, THE 


tained from them. In faét, it had been my intention to land where I 
might moft probably difcover the carrying- -place, which was our more 
immediate objeét, and undertake marches of ‘two or three days, in differ. 
ent dire€tions,-in fearch of another river. If unfuccefsful in this attempt, 


it was my purpofe to continue my progtefs up the prefent river, as far as 


it was navigable, and if we did not meet with natives to inftru@ us in 
our further progrefs, Lhad determined to return to the fork, and take the 
other branch, ‘with the hope of better fortune. — 


It was about three in the afternoon when we landed, and at five the © 
whole party of Indians were aflembled. It confifted’ only of three 
men, three women, and feven or. eight ‘boys and girls, With their 
feratched legs, bleeding fect, and difhevelled hair, as in the hurry of theit 
flight they had left their fhoes. and leggins behind them, they -difplayed 
a moft wretched appearance: ¥ they were confoled, however, with heads, 
and other trifles, which feemed to pleafe them; they had pemmican alfo 
given them to eat, which was not unwelcome, and if our opinion, at 
leaft, fuperior to their own provifion, which confifted entirely of dried 
fith, : 7 , mo 

When I thought that they. were fuficiently compa, 1 fent for the’ . 
men to my tent, to gain fuch information telpefting the country as I. 
concluded it was in their power to afford me. But my expeélations were » 


- by’no means fatisfied: they faid that they were not acquainted’ with apy 


river to the Weftward, but that there was one from whence they were 
juft arrived, aver a carrying-place of eleven days march, which they res. 
prefented as. being a branch only: of the river before us... Their iron 

; _ , . “ 3 work : 


g : 
* 
' 
> 


“NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


work they obtained froin the: people who inhabit the bank of that’ river, 


20s 


1793+ 


unts 


and an-adjacent lake, in exchange for beaver {kins, and dreffed moofe “~~—~ 


thins. They reprefented the latter as travelling, during a moon, to get 
to the country‘ of-other tribes, who live in houfes, with whom’ they traffic 
for the fame commodities; and that thefe alfo extend their,journies in the 
~ fate manner to the féa coaft, or, to «ifé-their expreffion; the Stinking 
_ Lake, where they trade with. people like us, that Come-there in yellels 4s 
big as iflands, ‘They added, that the people to the W eftward, as they 


have beet told, are very:numerous. Thofe who inbabit the other branch - 


they :flated as confifting of about forty families, while they themfelves 
did hot: amount to more ‘than a fourth ofthat number; and were 
 alimoft continually compelled to-xemain ‘in their ftrong holds, where 
they fometirnes perithed with cold.and hunger, to fecure thiemfelves from 
their enemies, who never failed to attack them whenever: an opportunity 
Prefented felt 


. , : 
try mot os : fo wey sy . 
foabee tas . , oa tk fy oa og mo, - os 


this account of; “the country, from a‘people who I-had’ every teafon to 
7 fuppofe'were well acoraied with every part of it, threatened to difeon-— 
tert the projet on’ which my heart was fet, and in which my'whole 
mind was occupied." It-oceurred to me, however, that from far, or 
other motives, they might be tardy in-their communication; I'therefore 
affixed them that; if they. wottld direét me to the river which I defcribed 
'~tothem, I would ‘come in large veflels, ‘like chofe that their: neighbours 
- had deferibed: tothe mouth of it, arid bring ‘them arts’ 4nd ammunition 
Sie exchange” forthe’: ‘produce of their: country °f6 that’they might be 
‘able 40 defend thetnfelves agairf their enemies; ‘and no longer remain in 


: “that abjett; ‘difttelfed, ‘and fugitive fate ‘in: which they then lived, 
cre ; Dd’ | “ted 


202 


4793+ 


«June, 


JOURNAL OF ‘AV VOYAGE: THROUGH :THE 


added alfo, ‘that. in the meantime, if they would, on:my return, accom- 
‘pany ‘me below'the mouhtains,.to:a country. awhich was, very abundant in 
sanimals, I-would furhifh: them;, sand heir. ‘companions,.1 -with every thing 
-they ‘might-want; and- make. peace: between: them and the: Beaver Indians, 
<But all. .thele:promifes: did : not appear tof advance’ the objeé& of my in-. 
cps, and they ‘fill; perfifled?in their: signoranceé' of, any: {uch 1 fiver ap 

I had: mentioned; that difcharged’ itfelf into the feas por dy al, a 


. - ‘ - ' 
hope vid re oer rhe ew epee : Mey age oF .! 
‘ es Js 1h" edt olay, TRIS cP OES a7 ‘ “ ooh. wok 


In: this fiate: of ‘pérplexity; and. difappointment, various: projects pre: 


ented. themfelves to:my mind, -which. were’no fooner,.formed. than they 


swere difcoveretl to: be impraCticable, and ;were -confequently/abandoned. 
-At-one tiie I thought of leaving the-cano¢, and -every-thing ‘it: contained, 
:to-.go. over. land, arid: purfue’that-chain:; of; ¢dnnexion -by which thele 
‘people: obtain their iron-work ; but.a: very brief.courfe of refletion con- 


*vinced me that it would be impoffible for us to carry provifions for our 


fupport through any confiderable part of fuch a journey, as well as pre- 


- fents; to fecure’ usd kind -reception-aniong ‘the nativés, and-ammiunition 


for the ferjice.of the hunters, and, to. defend ourlelyes againft any. act of 
hofti}ity., At anothef, time iny: folicitude- for the fuccefsof the: expedi- 
‘ton ificited/a with to,remaif with-thé-natives, and,'go to.the fea by the 


" way:théy ‘had defcribed;; . -but-thé:accomplifhmerit of fuch a-journey, even 


if io Saccident should: interpofe; would have. required a portion of time 
‘which it,was not im my power'tobeftow. In my -prefent ‘late of informa- 


. ition; to, proceed further: up the ‘river was confidered asa fruitlefs wafte of 


-toilfomie:exettion; and; ta:return unfitccelsful,-after’ all. our labour; fuf- 
ferings,.:and:. dangets, :was .an--idea ‘too ‘painful tO; indulge. ‘Befides, I 
Jcould-not.yét abandon.:the: ‘hope that the, Indians Jnighbnot yet,be fu - 
Bhs hye . ficiently 


‘ 


“NORTH-WEST:CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 208 


ficiently: compofed and ‘confident,'to “dilclofe: their reat knowledge of the 4799 
-—--—country~ freely and" full. to me. - Nor -was: [altogether without my “-y-~ 
‘doubts refpetting the fidelity of.. my interpreter, who being very much _ 
tired of:the voyage; might: be: induced.to withhold thofe communica- 
‘tions which.would induce’ me to continue it, .I therefore continued my 
_ xattentions to the natives, | regaled them: with fuch ‘provifions. as I: had, 
_ andulged their. children: with a tafte of fagar, and determined to fufpend 
samy .converfation with them till. the following morning. On. my-.ex- 
prefling a défire to partake of their fifh, they brought mea few dried 
_ trout, well cured, that had been taken in the river which they lately 
— Aeft, ; » Oneioti the men allo Provght me five beaver tkins, as a'prefent, 
is The folicitude that poflefied. my: mindsinterrupted i my repolé; ivhén Monday 10. 
zthe dawn appeared I had already. quitted my.bed, and: was waiting with ° 
‘impatience -for another conferencé .with, :the-aiatives.. ‘The fun, how- 
cevery had rifen before: they left their leafy. bowers, whither they had re- | 
tired with their children, having moft hofpitably: reigned their beds, and 


the partners of them, to the folicitations of my young men. 


. y ” tye 


Pes rapture ol fool sta gb ly : 
ae A now repeated:my- inquiries; but thay perplexity was notremoved by any 
favourable variation in their anfwers.*: About nine, however, one.of them, 
_fill' remaining at my fire, in converfation with the interpreters, I underftood 
serighgh ‘of his language“td ktiow'that hei mentioned fomething about a 
Jgreat ‘river, atithe fame time pointing fignificantly up-that which was be- 
Hore us. Or) tay! inquiring of the interpreter relpettinig: that’ expreffion, 
JL-was: ‘iriformed: that he Knew:of a‘large river! ighat*tuiis‘towards the: mid- 


payin, a ‘branch of which: flowed, neat the fource of shat’ which :we no 
: _ ‘ts _ . ° D d 2 & . ° et ‘- my Y AS were 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE: THROUGH. THE 


were now navigating; and that there ‘were only three {mall lakes, and as 
many carrying-places, leading to a {mall river, which difcharges itfelf into . 
the preat river, but thatthe latter did not empty ‘itfelf into the fea. The 
inhabitants, he faid, built houtes, lived on iflands, and were:d numerous 
and’ warlike people. Ldefired him to defcribe the road to the’ other 


river, by delineating itswith a piece of coal, on a ftrip of bark, which 


he accomplifhed to my: fatisfaétion. The opinion that the river did not 


-difcharge itfelf. into the fea, I very confidently imputed. to his i ignorance 


of the country.: 


My hopes were: nov renewed, ind an, “obje prefented ifelf which 
awakened my utmoft j impatience. To facilitate its attainment, one of 
the Indians was. induced, by ‘prefents, to accompany me asa guide to 
the firft inhabitants, which we might .expe& to meet on the {mall lakes 
in our wWay,. .1 accordingly refolved to depart with all expedition, and 


while my people were: making every neceflary preparation, at employed 
myfelf i in waiting the following defcription of the 1 natives around me: 


4 
ce uy 
a ; ‘ ve » 


They are low in ture, not éxceedin g five feet fix or feven inches; and 
they are of that meagre appearance which might be-expected. ina péople 
whofé life is one fucceffion of difficulties, in procuring. fubfiftence. Their 


faces aré round; with’ “bigh cheek bones; and their eyes, which are fmall, 
are of adark brown colour ; the cartilage. ‘oftheir nofe is perforated, but 
_ without any ornaments: fufpended from it; their hair is of:a dingy black, 


hanging loofé and j in diforder over their fhoulders, bat irregularly. cut in 
the front, :fo.as.not..to: obftrug ‘the. ight; their beards: are-eradicated, 


_with_the- exception of a few ftrageling hairs;:and their, complexion. id. 
_fwarthy yellow. ~~ 2h 4 


ye ; 4 Their 


* 


‘NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA.,, 


| Their drefs confilts of robes made of the kins of the beaver, the ground 


205. 


1 798s 


hog, and the rein-deer, drefled 1 in the hair, and of the moofe-fkin without an an) 


'. jt. ~All of them are ornamiented with a fringe, while fome of them have 
taflels hanging down the feams; thofe ofthe groiind hag are decorated 


onthe fur fide with the tails. of the animal, which they do not fepa- , 


rate from-them. Their garments they tie over the fhoulders, and faften 


them round the middle with a belt of green fkin, which is as ftiff as 
horn. : Their leggins are long, ‘and, if they were topped with a'waiftband, 
might be called trowfers: they, as well as their fhoes, aré made of 


drefled moofe, elk, or~rein-deer fkin. The organs of: generation they * 


leave uncovered. 7, 


“The women differ little in ‘their drefs from the men, except in the 
addition ‘of an :apron, which is faftened round the waift, and hangs down 
_ to the knees. | They are in general of a. more‘lufty make than the other 


fex, and taller in proportion, but infinitely their inferiors in cleanlinefs., 


A black artificial ftripe croffes the face beneath the eye, from ear to ear, 
which I firft.took for {cabs, from the accumulation of dirt on it. Their 
hair, which is longer than that of the men, is divided from the forehead 
- to the crown,’ ‘and drawn back in long plaits behind the,ears. T ‘hey, have 
alfo- a few white beads, which they-get where they procure ihetiron 

. they’ are from. a line to an inch in length, and ‘are worn in their éars, 
' but are not ‘of European manufa@iure. . Thefe, with bracelets made 
"of horn and bone, compofe all the ornaments which decorate their per- 
fons. Necklaces of the grilly or white bear's laws, | are worn exclu- 


> 


‘ively Kan the, men, © 


ad 


L? 


Their - 


June. 


Cl! 


1 


_ They have two kinds of fpears, but ‘both. are, double edged, and of well} 
: polifhed iron; one of: them is about twelve inches long, and two wide; *+’ 


- JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


7 Their arms confift of bows made of cedar, fix feet in length, with a 


fhort iron {pike at one end, and:ferve occafionally as a fpear. Their 
arrows are well made, barbed, and pointed with iron, flint, ftone, or bone; 
they are feathered, and» from’ two. to.two feet and an half in Jength, 


the other about half/thé width, and two thirds of. the length; the fhafis 
of the firft ‘areieight feet i in. length, and the latter fix. They have alfo 


‘Spears.made of bone... Their Knives confift. of pieces of iron, fhaped and 


handled by. themfelves: : Their’ axes are. fomething like our adze, and 
they ufe them in the fame manner as we employ that inftrument... They 
were, indeed, furnifhed with iron in a manner that I could not have fup- 

pofed, and. plainly proved: to me; that: ‘their Commiunication with thofe,. 
who communicate ‘with:the inhabitants of the fea coaft,: cannot. be very 


‘difficult, and from. their ample; provifion of: iron- weapiitis, the. means of 


procuring it mult be of a more diftant origin than I. had 2 at :firft conjec- 
tured. re 
, : v4 ‘ - 4 *s _ st ‘ wie thy. 


_ They have {nares made of green fkin, wBich, they, cut to. ‘the fize of 


7 fuurgeon twine, and twift:a certain apinber-‘ofthem.together; and 


me, 


a a 


though when completed they do not; -exceéd the. thicknefs: of --a’cod-line, 
their ftrength is fufficient: to hold. a moofe deer:  they-are:from. one and” 
an half to two fathoms in Jength: : Their nets and. fithing lines:are made of 


. willow-bark and. nettles;.:thofe :made of the- latter: are finerianad fnoother 


than if made with hempen.thread,; “Their: ‘hooks are, {mall bones, fixed 


.in pieces of wood ‘{plit for that purpofe, and tied-zqund with fing 


watape, which has’ been particularly deféribed in ‘the former voyage: 
ee - a -  "  ~ Their 


*. 


i? , ‘ 
Pe tos 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, aoz 


heir kettles ‘are alfo made of watape, which is fo clofely woven, that 4 479 
they never leak, and they heat water in them, by putting red- hot {tones -—~—J 
into'it. There is,one kind of them, made of {pruce- bark, which they 
 Jhang over the fire, but at fuch 2. diftance as to receive the heat without 
being within reach of the blaze; a very tedious'operation, They have 
- various difhes of wood and bark ; fpoons of horn and wood, and buckets; 
‘bags of leather and net-work, and bafkets. of bark, fome of which hold 
their fithing- tackle, while others are contrived to be carried on the back. 
They have a brown kind of earth in great abundance, with which they 
rub their clothes, not only for ornament but utility, as it prevents the 
leather from becoming hard after it has been wetted. They have: {pruce 
bark in great plenty, with which they make their canoes, an operation 
that does not require any great portion of {kill or ingenuity, and is 
managed i in the following manner.—The bark is taken off the tree the 
whole length of the intended canoe, which i is commonly about eighteen 
feet, and-is fewed with watape at both ends; two laths are then laid, and 
"fixed along the edge of the -bark: ‘which forms the gunwale; in ’ thefe 
are fixed'the bars, and againft them bear the ribs or timbers, that are - | 
cut to the length to which the bark can be ftretched; and, to give addi- 

. tional ftrength, ftrips of wood, are laid between them: to make the 
whole water-tight, gum is abundantly employed. Thefe veffels carry 
_ from two'to five-people. Canoes of a fimilar conftru€tion were ufed by ~ _ 
the Beaver Indians within thefe few years, but they now very generally H 
efaploy : thofe made, of the bark of the birch tree, which are by far more 
durable;. Their paddles are about fix feet long, and about one foot is ‘ 
occupied by the blade, which is in the fhape of an heart. — 

| Previous 


408 , JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE. THROUGH THE 


EE 


1195 " Previous 6 our departure, the itatives had caught a couple of trout, 
ee: ‘of about fix pounds weight, which they brought mé, and I paid them 
‘with beads. They likewife gave me a net, made of nettles, the {kin of 

a inoole- deer, . “dteffed, and a white horn in the fhiape of a {poon, which 

. #éfUmbles the hort of the ‘buffalo of the Copper-Mine River; but their 
‘déleription of the-animal to which it belongs does not anfwer to that. 

c My young then alfo pot two -quivers of excellent atrows, a collar of 

| white ‘bear's claws, of a pteat length, hort bracelets, anid other articles, 

\ for which they received an ample ¢ remuneration. 


j 


My CHAP, 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


- ,,, CHAPTER VL 


209 


Continue 4 the voyage. State of the rwer. Succeffionof cour/es. Sentiment . 


| of the guide. Conical mountain. Continuation of courfes. Leave the 
7 main branch. Enter ‘dnother: ‘Defeription of it....Saw beaver... Enter a 
‘lake. Arrive’ at the upper Source of. the ‘Unjigah, or Peace River, 
Land, and crofs to a Second lake. Local circumftances. Proceed to a 


third lake. Enter'a river. Encounter various dificiltres. In danger’ 


of being loft. The circumftances of that fituation de eferibed. Alarm and 
:  diffatisfaftion among the people. ‘They are at length compofed. The canoe 
" repaired. Roads cut through woods. Paps moraffes. The guide deferts. 

After a fucce, effion of di ificulties, danger. Crs, and toilfome marches, we arrive 
at the great rivers” Teer 


- Be, 
yr sf 


a, 


Ar teri we were ready to embarks. I then took leave of the Indians, 
but encoutaged them torexpett us in two moons, and exprefled an hopé 


that I fhould’ fini them'on the road with any of their relations whom’ 


they might meet. 1 alfo returned the beaver. {kins to the man who-had 
prefented them to me, defiring him to take care’of them till 1 came back? 
" when’ I would purchafe ‘them: of him. Our’ guide expreffed much lefs 
: concern about the undertaking in which he had engaged, than his com- 
. passions, xe ‘appeared’ to benaffetted. wich great folicitude for. his 
faketys DX. aT ES oy rae . modo. : oer 
Ty _ \ 7 A _ Ee a ; We 


1793, 


une. 
! 


ee amnand 
Monday 1Q. 


_ #10 


1793¢ 


une. 


JOURNAL OF A-YOYAGE THROUGH THE 
We now puthed off the canoe from the bank, and proceeded Eaft half 


L—y~—~ a mile, when a. river flowed in from the left, about half as large as that 


~ mile, Eafi one fixth of a mile, South-South-Welt one twelfth of a mile, 


which we were navigating. We continued the fame courfe three quar- 
ters of a mile, when we miffed two of our fowling pieces, which had been 
forgotten, and I fent their owners back for them, who were abfent on 
this errand upwards of an hour. We now proceeded North’ Eaft by 
Eaft half a mile, North-Ealft by North three quarters of a mile, when the 
current flackened : there was a verdant fot on, the, left, where, from, 
the. remains of fome Indian. timber-work, it appeared, that the natives 
have - frequently encamped. Our, next courfe was Ealt one mile, and 
we faw a ridge, of mountains covered with {now to the South-Eaft, The 
land on our right was low and marfhy for three, or. four miles, when it 
rofe into a range of heights that extended to the. mountains. We pro- 
ceeded Eaft-South- Ealt a mile and an half, South- Eaft by Eaft one mile, 
Eat by South three quarters of a mile, South-Eaft by Eaft one mile, Eaft 
by South half a mile, North-Eaft by Eaft one mile, South- Eaft half a 
mile, Eaft-North-Eaft a mile--and a quarter, South- South- Eaft halfa 
mile, North-North-Eaft a mile and an ‘half: here a river flowed in from 


the left, which was about.,one-fourth .part as large as.that which re- 


ceived its tributary, waters..; We.-then, continued’, Eaft ‘By, South half 
a mile, to the foot of the -mountain on the South :of,the above river. 
The cpurfe"‘now veered’ fhort, - ‘South- Welt | by W eft three quarters 


. of a mile, Eat by:Squth a quarter of 4, mile, South half a mile,» 


South.Eait by South half a mile, South-Wef,; a quarter of a,mile, Ealt , 
by South a quarter of a niile, yeered to Wel:North. Weft a-quarter of a 
mile, South-Welt one eighth of a mile, Eaft South-Eaa one-quarter ofa 


Eaft 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. “O14 


Eaft South-Eaft one eighth of a mile, North-Eaft by Eaft one third ofa —_ +795. 
mile, Eaft by North one twelfth of a mile, North-Eaft by Eaft one third alee 
of a mile, Eaft one fixteenth of a'mile, South-Eaft one twelfth of -a : 
mile, North-Eaft by Eaft one twelfth of a mile, Eaft one eighth of a 

mile, and. Eaft-South- Eaft half a mile, when we landed at feven o'clock 

and encamped, During the greateft part of the diftance we came to- 

day, the river runs clofe under the mountains on. the left,’ 


- The- morning ‘was clear and cold. On my interpreter’s encouraging Tuefday 11. 
the guide to difpel all-apprehenfion, to maintain his fidelity to me, and 
not to defert in the night, “ How is it poflible for’ me,” he replied, * to 
* leave the lodge of the Great Spirit!—When he tells me that he has no 
* further occafion for me, I will then return to my children.” As we 
proceeded, however, he foon loft, and with good reafon, his exalted 


motions of : me; 


* At four we cSntinned our voyage, fteering Eaft by South a mile and 
an half, Eaft’ by Eaft half a mile, A river appeared on the left, at 
the foot of a mountain which, from itS conical form, my young 
“Indian called the Beaver Lodge Mountain. Having proceeded South- 
. South-Eaft half a mile, another river appeared from the right.. We now 
came in a line with the beginning of the’ mountains we faw yelter- 
day: others of the-fame kind ran parallel with them on the left fide 
of the river, which was reduced to’ the breadth of fifteen yards, and 


ange 
.¢ 
, 


with a moderate current. 


We now fteered’ Eafl:North-Eal one 2 eighth o ofa nile South-Eaft by 
E e2 South 


VR 


214 


4793: 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE, 


| 
South one eighth, of a mile, Eaft-South-Eaft one fixth of a mile, South. 


ee Weft one.eighth of a mile, Eaft- South-Eaft one eighth. of a mile, South- 


South-Eaft one fixth of a mile, North-Eaft by- Eaft one, twelfth of a 


mile, Eaft-South-Eaft half a mile, South- -Welt by. Weft. one'ghird of a 


mile, . South- South-Eaft one eighth of.,a-mile, Southi-Soult Weft éne 
quarter of.a mile, North- Eaft one ‘fixth | of a mile, South: by Welt one 
fourth of a mile, ‘Eaft three quarters. of a _mile,. and. North-Eaft | one 
quarter of a mile. Here the mountain on the left appeared to be com-. 


7 pofed, of. a fucceffion of round hills, covered with-wood. almott. to their 


faummits, which were white with {now, and crowned with withered trees. 
We now. ives Eaft, ina line with | the.high lands on the right five. miles; 
North on¢ twelfth of a mile, North- -Kaft by North one.eighth ofa mile, 
South by Eaft one fixteenth of a mile, North-Ealt by,,.North. one fourth 
of,a mile, where, another, river, fell in from the right; : North-Eaft-by Eaft 
one fixth of a mile, Eaft two miles and an half, South one twelfth ofa 
mile, North-Eaft half a mile, South-Eaft one third of a mile, Eaft one 
mile and a quarter,;South-South,Welt one fixteenth -of. a mile, North- 
Faft by Eaft, haifa mile, Eaft. one mile, and. three. quarters, South: and 
South-Weft by Weft, half a.mile, North-Eaft half a-mile, South ene: third 
of a mile, North-Eaft by, North. one; fixth of ja,mile,;Eaft by’ South one 
fourth ofa mile, South one eighth of.a mile,:South-Eaft three quarters of 
a;mile. The canoe had taken: ‘in fo much water, that it.was neceffary for 
us to land here, in.order to ftop the leakage, which occafioned the delay of 
an hour and.a _quatter,. -North-Eaft a quarter of a mile, Eaft-North-Eaft 
a quarter of a mile, South-Eaft by South a fixteenth Of.3. mile, Eaft by 
South a twelfth of a mile, North-Eaft one fixth of a mile, Eaft- South- 
Eaft. one, fixteerith. of a, mile, South: Welt; half: caxmile,-N orth-Eaft a 


ae Loa quarter 


‘NORTH-WEST CON TINENT OF AMERICA. 215 


quarter of a mile, Eaft by South half a mile, South-South-Eaft one 4799 
twelfth of a mile, Eaft half a mile, North-Eaft by North a quarter of —~~—~ 
a mile, South- -South- -Eaft a quarter of a mile, North-Eaft by North one 
twelfth of a-mile, where a {mall river flowed in-from the left, South- 
Eaft by Eaft one twelfth of a mile, South by Eaft a quarter of a mile, 
South-Eaft one eighth of a mile, Eaft éne twelfth of a mile, North-Eaft 
by North.a quarter of a mile, South half a mile; South-Eaft by South 
one. eighth ofa mile, North-Eaft one fourth of a mile, South-Eaft by 
Eaft, and South-Eaft by South one third of a mile, Faft-South-Eaft, and 
North-North-Eaft one third of a mile, and South by Weft, Eaft and 
Eaft-North-Eaft, one eighth of a mile. | 

-Here we quitted the main branch, which, according to the informa- 
tion of our guide, terminates at a fhort diftance, where it is fupplied by | 
the fnow which covers the mountains. In the fame dire€tion is a valley 
_ which appears to be of very great depth, and is full of fvow, that rifes 
nearly to the height of the land, and forms a refervoir of itfelf fufficient 
to furnifh.a river, whenever there is a moderate degree of heat. The 
branch which we. left was not, at this time; more than ten yards broad, , 
while that which we entered was ftill lefs. Here the current was very 
trifling, and the channel fo meandering, 1 that we fometimes found it dif. 
- ficult to work the canoe. forward. The ftraight courfe from this to 
the entrance of a {mall‘lake or pond, is about Eaft one mile. This 
entrance ‘by,the river into the lake was’ almoft choked: up by a 
quantity of , drift-wood, which appeared to me to:be an extraordi- 
nary _circumftance ; but I. afterwards found, that it falls down from 
the mountains.. The water; however, was fo high, that. the country. 

was 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


was entirely overflowed, and we paffed “with the canoe ‘among the 
branches of trees. The principal wood along the banks is fpruce, 
intermixed with a few white birch, growing on detached {pots, the 
intervening {paces being covered with willow and alder. We ad. 
vanced about a mile in the lake, and took up our ftation for the night 
at an old Indian encampment. Here we expeéted to meet with natives, 
but-were difappointed ; but'our guide encouraged us with ‘the hope of 
feeing fome on the morrow. - We faw beaver ir) the courfe of the after- 
noon, but did not difcharge our pieces, from’ the: fear of alarming the 
inhabitants; there were alfo fwans in great numbers, with geéfe and » 
ducks, which we did not difturb for the fame reafon, We obferved alfo 
the tracks of moofe-deer that had croffed the river; and wild parfneps 


"grew here in abundance, which have been already mentioned as a grate- 


ful vegetable. Of birds, we faw blue jays, yellow birds, and one beauti- 
ful humming-bird: of the firft and latt, I had not feen any fince I had 
been in the North-Welt. 

The weather was the fame as s yelterday, and we proceeded between three 
and four in the morning. ‘We took up the net which we had fet the pre- 
ceding evening, when it contained a trout, one white fith, one carp, and 
three jub. Thelake is about two miles in length, Eaft by South, and from 


‘three to five, hundred yards wide. This I confider as the higheft and 


Southernmoft fource of the Unjigah, or Peace River, latitude, 54. 24. 
North, longitude 121. Weft of Greenwich, which, after a winding courle 
through a vaft extent of country, receiving many large rivers in its pro- 
grefs, and pafling through the Slave Lake, empties itfelf into the F rozen 
Ocean, in 70.-North latitude, and about 135 Weft longitude, — 

. _ We 


‘ . NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


. We :landed and unloaded, where we, found a beaten ‘path leading 
over a low ridge of land of eight hundred and feventeen paces in length 
to another {mall lake. The diftance between the two mountains at this 
"plage is about a'quarter of a mile, rocky precipices prefenting them, 
felves on both fides. A few large fpruce trees and liards were {cat- 


tered over the carrying-place. There were alfo willows along the — 


fide of the water, with plenty of grafs and weeds. The. natives had lefr 
their old canoes here, with bafkets hanging on the trees, which contained 
various articles. From the latter I took a net, fome- hooks, a goat's 
horn, and a.kind of wooden trap, in which, as our guide informed me, 
the ‘ground-hog-is taken. I left, however, in exchange, a knife, fome 
fire-fteels, beads, awls, &c. Here two {treams tumble down the rocks 


from the right, and lofe themfelves in the lake which we had-left; while: 


two others fall from the oppofite*heights, and glide into the lake which 
_we were approaching ;- this being the higheft point of land dividing thefe 
waters, and we'are now going with the ftream., This lake runs in the fame 
eourfe as the laft, but is rather narrower, and not more than half the length. 
We were obliged to clear away {ome floating drift-wood to get to the 
earrying-place, aver which is a beaten path of only an hundred and 
feventy-five paces long. The lake empties itfelf by a fmall river, which; 
if the channel were not interrupted by large | pee that had fallen acrofs 
jt, would have admitted of our canoe with all its lading: the impedi- 
ment, indeed, might have been removed by two axe-men in a few hours. 
_ On the edge of the water, we obferved a large quantity of thick, yellow, 


feuin or froth, ofa an acrid tafte and {mell. 


. oT | We 


218 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


4798 We embarked on this lake, which is in the fame'courfe; and about 
—v— the fame fize as that which we had juft left, and from-whience we paffed 
into a fmall river, that was fo full of fallen wood, as to‘employ fome 
time, and require fome exertion, to force a paflage. At the entrance, it 
afforded no more water than was juft fufficient to bear the canoe; but it 

- was foon increafed by many {mall ftreams which came in broken rills ° 
down the ruggéd fides of the mountains, and were furnifhed, as I fup- 
pole, by the melting of the fnow. Thefe acceffory J ftreamlets:had all the 
coldnefs of'ice.’ Our courfe continued to be obftruéted | by banks of 
gravel, as well as trees which’ had fallen acrof the river, We’ were 
obliged to force our way through the one, and to cut through the other, 
at a.great expence of time and trouble. In many places the current 
was alfo very rapid and méandering.. At four in ‘the afternoon, we 
di flopped to unload:and carry, and at five we entered a {mall round lake 
of about one. third of a mile in diameter. From -the laft lake to this 
is, I think, in a ftraight line, Faft by South fix miles, though it is twice 

that diftance by the winding of. the river. We again entered the river, 

which foon rah with great rapidity, and rufhed-impetuoufly over'a bed of 

flat flones.. At half paft fix we were ftopped by two large trees that lay 

acrofs the river, and it-was with. great difficulty that the canoe was ‘pre- 

, vented from driving againft them. Here, we unloaded and. formed our | 
encampment. . 


_‘The weather was cloudy and raw, ‘and as ‘the circupaances of this 


| 

| 

| 

| . was cold as ice, we were almoft j in a  benumbed Rate, * Some of he 
—— ol people who had gone. afhore | to lighten the canoe, experienced great dif 
ficulty 


“ shy 


peepee wet ft 
xR 
¥ 


. NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


feulty in reaching us, from the rugged fate of the country; it was, in 


de¢éd; almoft dark when they arrived. We had no fooner landed than 
_ I-fent two men down the river to bring | me fome account of its circum- 
| flances, that I might form a judgment of the difficulties which ‘might 
await us on ‘the morrow; and they brought back a fearful detail of rapid 
currents; fallen trees, and large ftones. At this place our guide mani- 
fefted evident fymptoms of difcontent : he’had been very ‘much alarmed 
in ‘going down fome of the’ rapids with us, and expreffed an anxiety to 
return. He fhewed us a mountain, at no great diftance, which he re- 
prefented as being on the other fide of a river, into ) which this empties 
itfelf. | 


‘! At an-early hour of this’ morning the men began to cut a road, in 
order to carry the catioe and lading beyond the rapid; .and by feven they 


217 


1 793, 
eRegnany 


runity sg \ 


"were ready.” That bufinefs’ was foon-effetted, and the canoe. reladen,. — 


to: proceed with the current which ran with great rapidity. In order to 
lighten her, ‘it was my intention to walk with fome of the people; but 
thofé in the boat with great earneftnefs requefted me to embark, de- 
claring, at: the fame time, that, if they perifhed, I fhould perith with 
them. I did not then i imagine in-how fhort a petiod their apprehenfion 
‘would be juftified. We accordingly pushed off, and had ‘proceeded but 
avery fhort way when the canoe ftruck,’and notwithftandig all our ex- 
ertions, the violence of the current was fo great as to drive her fideways 
down the river, and’ break: her by the firft bar, when I inflantly jumped 
into the water, and the men followed my example; but before we could 
fet her-ftraight, or ftop:her, we came to deeper water; fo that we were 
_ obliged to-re-embark ‘With .the utmoft precipitation. QOneé of the men 

“ ee pee 


aio 


a * 
218 ~~‘ JOURNAL OF A- VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


1793 who was not fufficiently a€tive, was left to get on fhore in the beft man- 
i ner in his power. We had hardly regained our fituations when we 
drove againft a rock which fhattered the flern of the canoe in fuch a 
manner, that it held only by the gunwales, fo that the fteerfman could 
_ no longer keep his place. The violence of this flroke drove us to the, - 
oppofite fide of the river, which is but narrow, when the bow met with 
the fame fate as the flern. At this moment the foreman feized on fome 
branches of a fmall tree iti the hope of bringing up the canoe, but fuch 

“was their elafticity that, in a manner not eafily defcribed, he was jerked 
on fhore in an inftant, and with a degree of violence that threatened his 
deftruétion, But we had no time to turn from our’own fituation to inquire 
what had befallen him ; for, in a few moments, we came acrofs a cafcade 
which broke feveral large holes in the bottom of the canoe,-and ftarted 
all the bars, except one behind the fcooping feat. If this accident, how- 
ever, had not happened, the veffe} muft have been irretrievably overfet. 
The wreck becoming flat- on the. water, we all jumped out, while the 
fteerfman, who had been compelled ‘to abandon’ his place, and had not 
recovered from his fright, called out to-his companions to fave themfelves. 
My peremptory commands fuperfeded the effeéts of his fear, and they all 

~ held faft to the. wreck; to which fortunate refolution we owed our fafety, 
as we fhould otherwife have been dafhed againft the rocks by the force 
of the water, or driven over the cafcades. In this condition ‘we were 
forced feveral hundred yards, and every yard on the verge of deftruftion ; 

/ but, at, length, we moft fortunately arrived in fhallow water and a‘fmall _ 
eddy, wi ere we were enabled to make a ftand, from. the weight of the canoe 
tefling on. the ftones, rather than from any exertions of our exhaufted 
ftrength, For though our efforts were thort, they were pufhed to the, 

utmoft, 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


utmoft, as life or death depended on them. This alarming feene, with 


219 
1793+ 


June. 


all its terrors and dangers, occupied only a few minutes ;' and in the pre-- —~— 


fent fufperifion of it, we called to the people on fhore to come to our 


however, was the firft with us; he had efcaped unhurt from the extraor- 


dinary jerk with which he was thrown out of the boat, and juft as we . 


were beginning to take our effeéts out of the water, he appeared to give his 
affiftance. The Indians, when they faw our deplorable avons inftead 
of making the leaft effort to help us, fat down and gave Vent to their 


tears. I was on the outfide of the canoe, where I remained till every’ 


thing was got on fhore, in a ftate of great pain from the extreme cold of 
the water; fo that at length, it was with difficulty I could ftand, from 
the benumbed ftate of my limbs. . | 


“ “ 
eax we 
ae 


ae: x he lofs was confiderable and important, for it confifted of our whole 


cone sh 


re ek of balls, and fome of our furniture ; but thefe confiderations were 
int he he impreffions. of of 0 our miraculous efcape. Our firft inquiry 


ae 
to get on fhore, and in a fhort time his appearancé removed o our anxiety. 


We had, however, fuftained no perfonal i injury of confequence, and my 


bruifes feemed to be in the greater proportion. 


4 ° 


al the different atticfes were e now fpread 0 out to ‘to diy~The powder 
had fortunately received no damage, andiall my inftruments had efcaped. 
Indeed, when. my. people began to recover from their alarm, and to enjoy 
a fenfe. of fafety,. fome of them; if not all, were by no. means forry for 
; Ff2 our 


‘ 
od 


* affiftance, and they immediately obeyed the fummons. The foreman,’ 


>220 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


“1793 our late misfortune, from the hope that. it muft put a period to our 


unts 


L—.—~ voyage, particularly as we were without a canoe, and all the bullets funk 


r 


in the river. It did not, indeed, feem poftible to them that we could pro- © 
ceed under thefe circumitances. I liftened, however, to the obfervations 


. that were made on the occafion without replying to them, till their panic — 


was difpelled, and they had got thernfelves warm, and comfortable, with 
an hearty meal, and rum enough to:raife their {pirits. 


* 1 then addreffed them, by recommending them all to be thankful: 
“for their late very.narrow efcape. I alfo ftated, that the navigation 
was not impratticable in itfelf, but from our ignorance of its courfe; 
and that our late experience. would enable us to purfue our voyage 
with gueater fecurity. I brought to their recolleétion, $hat Idid not 
deceive them, and that they were made acquainted with ‘the diffi- 
culties and dangers they muft expeét to encounter, before they en- 
gaged to accompany me, . I alfo urged: the honour of conquering dif- 
afters, and the difgrace that would attend them on their return home, 
without having attained the obje€t of the expedition. Nor did I fail 
to mention the courage and refolution.which was the peculiar boaft*of 
the North men; and that-I.depended on them, at that moment, forthe 
maintenance of their charaéter. . I quieted their apprehenfion as to the - 
lofs of the bullets, by bringing to their recolleG@tion that we ftill had fhot’ 
from which they might be manufaftured: -I at the fame time acknow- 
ledged the difficulty of reftoring the wreck of the canoe, but confided in 
our fkill and exertion to put it in fach a ftate as would carry us on to 


~ where we might procure bark, and -build a new: one. th fhort, my ha- 


y _ or . Yrangue 


ry 


NORTH- WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 7 


rangue produced the defired effeét, and a very general affent appeared t to 
go wherever I fhould lead the way. 

Various opinions were offered in the prefent pofture of affairs, and it 
was rather a general wifh that the wreck fhould be abandoned, and all 


the lading carried to the river, which our guide informed us was at no 
great diftance, and in the vicinity of woods where he believed there was * 


plenty of bark. This projeét feemed not to promife that certainty.to 
_ which I looked in my prefent operations; befides, I had my doubts ref- 
petting the views of my guide, and confequently could not confidéin the 
reprefentation he made tome. I therefore difpatched two of the men 
at nine in the morning, with one of the young Indians, for I did not 
venture to truft the guide out of my fight, in fearch of bark, and to 
endeavour, if it were poffible, in the courfe ofthe day, to penetrate to 
the great river, into which. that before us difcharges itfelf in the direc- 
tion which the guide had communicated. I now joined my people 
_in order to repair, as well as circumftances would admit, our wreck of 
a canoe, and I began to fet them the example. 


At noon I had an altitude, which gave 54. 23. North latitude. At 


° 


four in the afternoon I took time, with the hope that in the night I might ~ 


obtain an obfervation of Jupiter, and his fatellites, but I had not a fufh- 


cient horizon, from the propinquity of the mountains. The refult of. 


my calculation for time was 1. 38, 28. flow apparent time. 


It now grew late, and the people who had been fenton the ex-- © 
curfion ‘already mentioned, were not yet returned; about ten o'clock, 
‘however, 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE: THROUGH THE { 


however, I heard a man halloo, and'I very gladly returned the fignal. 


-In a fhort time our young Indian arrived with a fmall roll of indifferent 


bark; he was oppreffed with fatigue and hunger, and his clothes torn to 
rags: he had parted with the other two men at {un-fet, who had walked 
the whole day, in a dreadful country, without procuring any good bark, 
or being able to get to the large river. His account of the river, on whofe 
banks we were, could not be more unfavourable or d\fcouraging; it had 
appeared to him to be little more than a fucceflion of falls and rapids, 


with occafional interruptions of fallen trees. 


Our guide became fo diffatisfied and troubled in ‘mind, that we » could 
not obtain from him any regular account of ‘the country before us. All 
wecould colle& from him’ Was,, that the river: ints which this empties 


' atfelfis but a branch of a large river, the great fork bein; g at no great dif- 


tance from the confluence of this; and that he knew of no lake, or large — 
body of ftill water, ‘in the vicinity of thefe rivers. T® this account of 


the country, he added fome ftrange, fanciful, but terrifying deferips 


tions of the natives, fimilar to thole which were mentioned in the former’ 


eet 


voyage. = | a 
We had an efcape this day, which I mult, add to the many inftances of 
good fortune which I. experienced in this perilous’ expedition. The 
powder had been fpread out, to the amount of eighty pounds weight, to 
receive the alr; and, in this _fituation, one. of the men carelefsly and 


 compofedly walked acrofs it with a lighted pipe in his mouth, but with- 


out any ill confequence, refulting from fuch an a€t of criminal negligence. 

I need not add that one : {park might have put @ period to all my anxiety 

and ambition, oan 
I ‘obferved 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


I obferved feveral trees and plants on the banks of this river, which I 


223 


1793: 
une 


had not feen to the North of the latitude 52. fuch as the cedar, maple, —— 
hemlock, &c. At this time the water rofe faft, and pafled on with the | 


rapidity of an arrow fhot from a bow. ©. 


TT he weather was is fine, clear, and warm, and at an early hour of the Fridy14. 


morning we refumed our repair of the canoe, At half paft feven our 


two men returned hungry and cold, not having tafted food, or enjoyed | 


the leaft repofe for twenty-four hours, with their clothes torn mto tatters, 


and their fkin lacerated, in pafling through the woods. Their account 


was the fame as that brought by the Indian, with this exception, that they 
had reafon to think they faw the river, or branch which our guide had: 
mentioned; but they were of opinion that from the frequent obftri@ions 
in this river, we fhould have to carry the whole way to it, through a 
dreadful country, where much time and labour would be required to 


open.a paflage through it. 


‘Difcouraging as thefe accounts were, they did not, however, interrupt 


for a moment the tafk in which we were engaged, of repairing the canoe; 
and this work we contrived to complete by the conclufion of the day. 
The bark which was brought by the Indian, with fome pieces of oil- 
. cloth, and plenty of gum, enabled us to put our fhattered veffel ina con- 


dition to anfwer our prefent purpofes. The guide, who has been men-~’ 
tioned as manifefting continual figns of diffatisfaétion, now aflumed an air’ 
of contentment, which J attributed to. a fmoke that was vifible in the 


dire€tion of the river; as he naturally expeCed, if we fhould fall in with 


any Hiatives, which was’ now very probable, from fuch a circumftance, 
that - 


ee 


Saturday J 5. 


be 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


- that he fhould be releafed from a fervice which he had found fo irkfome 


and full of danger., I had an obfervation at noon, which made our lati-. . 
tude 54. 23. 43. North. I alfo took time, and found it flow apparent 
time 1. 38 44. . eo, 


. The weather continued: the fame as the preceding day, and according to 


the dire€tions which I had previoufly given, my people began ata very carly | 


hour to open a road, through which we might carry a part of ourlading; 
as I was fearful of rifquing the whole of it in. the canoe, in its prefent 
weak flate, and in a part of the river which is full of fhoals and rapids. 
Four men were employed to conduét her, lightened as fhe was of twelve 
packages. They paffed feveral dangerous places, and met with various 
obftruétions, the current of the river being frequently ftopped by rafts 
of drift wood, and fallen trees, fo that after fourteen hours hard labour . 
we had .not made more. than. three miles, Our ‘courfe.was South-Eaft 
by Eaft, and as we had not met with any accident, the ren appeared to. 


_ feel_a renewed | courage to continue their voyage. In the morning, how- 


ever;one6f the c he crew, whofe name was Beauchamp, peremptorily refufed 


_to-embark jin the canoe. . This being the firft example of abfolute dif- 
obedience: which had yet appeared during the courfe of our expedition, ~ 


I fhould ‘not have paffed it over without taking fome very fevere means 
to prevent a repetition of it; but as he had the general:charaéter of a 
fimple fellow, among his companions, and had been ‘frightened out .of 


~~ what little fenfe he pofleffed, by. our late dangers, I rather preferred to 


confider -him .as unworthy of accompanying us, and ‘to,téprefent- him 
as an. object of ridicule and contempt for. his: pufillaninious® behaviour ; 
though, in fact, he was a very ufeful, active, and laborious- tan; « 


my . ; 


a) 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT. OF AMERICA, son 


At: the clofe of the day we affembled round a blazing fire; and tha $790 
whole party, being enlivened with the ufual beverage which I fupplied eee 
on thefe occafions, forgot their fatigues and apprehenfions; nor did 
they fail to anticipate the pleafure they fhould enjoy in getting clear: 
of their prefent difficulties, and gliding onwards with-a {trong and fteady 
ftream, which our guide had defcribed ‘as the chara€terillic of the largé 
river we foori expected to enter, 

The fine weather continued, and we began our work, as we had done Sunday 16, 

~ the preceding day; fome were occupied in opening a road, others were | 
carrying, and the reft employed in conduéting the canoe. I was Of the | | 

fir party, and foon difcovered that we had encamped about half | 

a mile above feveral falls, over which we could: not attempt to run.the | 

canoe, lightened even as fhe was. This circumftance rendered it necef- : 

fary that the road fhould be made fafficiently wide to admit the cance to. 

_ pals; a tedious and toilfome work. In running her’ down a rapid abdve 

" the falls, an. hole was broken in her bottom, which occafioned a confi- 

derable delay, as we were deftitute of the materials neceffary for her 

effe€tual reparation, “On: my being informed of this misfortune, I. re-. 

turned, and ordered Mr. Mackay, with two Indians, to quit their occu- 

pation in making the road, and endeavour to penetrate to the great 

river, according, to the’ direftion which the guide had communicated, 
os without paying any attention to the courfe of the river before us. 

When the people had repaired the canoe in the beft manner they were 
able, we condu@ed her to the head of the falls;- fhe was then unloaded 


and: taken out of the water, when we carried her for a comiderable.dif 
Gg tance ~ 
; 


\ 


£26 | 


v3 


tf 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE. 


tatice through.a ‘low; fwampy country. I appointed four men to this 


ane) laborious. office, which they executed at the’ peril of their lives, for the 


canoe was 1 now become fo heavy, from the’ additional quantity’ of bark ..- 


and gum " necelfary to patch her up, that two men’‘could not carry her 
more ‘than ari hundred yards, without being relieved; and as their way 
lay through deep mud, which was rendered more difficult by the roots 
and proftrate trunks of trees, they were every moment in: danger of fall- . 
ing; and beneath fuch a weight, one falfe ftep might have been attended 
with fatal confequences. The other two men.and myfelf followed as faft 
ag we could, with the lading. Thus did we toil till feven o’clock in the 
evening, to get to the termination of the road that had been made in the 
‘morning. Here Mr, Mackay and the Indian n joined us, after having been 


at‘ the river, ‘which they reprefented as rather. large, - - They had alfo ob- 


ferved, that the lower. part of the river before us was fo full.of fallen-wood, 
that the attempt to clear a paflage through it, would: be’an: unavailing 
-labour. ‘The country. through which they had paffed was-morafs, and 
-almoft impenetrable wood. .In pafling « over one of the embarras,-our dog, 
which was following them, fell: in; and it was with very preat difficulty 
that he was faved, as the current had carried him under the drift. They 
brought with them two gecle, which had been fhot in:the.courfe of their 
expedition, To add to-our perplexities. and embarraffments, we were 
penentes by mufguitoes at and: fand- fliés, through th the whole of the day. 


The extent of our journey was not more than two: miles es South -Eaft ; 
and‘ fo ‘much fatigue'and pain had been fuffered in the courfe of it, that 
my: people,” as’ might. be: expeéted; ‘looked forward to'a continuance of 
it with difcouragement and difmay.. I was,' indeed, informed that mur- 


murs 


‘NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


murs prevailed among them, of which, however, I took no notice, 
When we were aflembled together for the night, I gave each of them a 
dram, and in a fhort time they retired to the repofe which they fo much 
required. We could difcover the termination of the mountains at a 


confiderable diftance on either fide’ of us, which, according to my cone. 


je&ture, marked the courfe of the great river, On the mountains to the 
Eaft there were feveral fires, as their fmokes were very ville tous. 
Exceflive heat prevailed throughout the day. “ 


ee 


Having fat up till twelve daft night, which had been my conftant, prac- 
tice fince we had taken our prefent guide, I awoke Mr. Mackay to watch 
him in tufn.- I then laid down to reft, and at three I was awakened 
to be informed that he had deferted. Mr. Mackay, with whom I was 
difpleafed on this occafion, vand the Cancre, accompanied by the dog, 
went in fearch of him, but he had’ made his efcape: a defign which he 
had for fome time meditated, though I had done every thing in my power 
to induce him to remain | with 1 me. 


This misfortune did not produce any relaxation in our exertions. 


227 


1793. 
Tas 


Monday 17. 


At an early hour of the morning we were all employed in cutting a paf- 


{age of three quarters of a mile, through which we carried our canoe and 
cargo, when we put her into the water with her lading, but in a very 


fhort time were ftopped by the drift-wood, and were obliged to land 


"and carry. In fhort, we purfued our alternate journies, by land and 
‘water, till noon, when we could proceed no further, from the various 
{mall unnavigable channels into which the river branched in every di- 
reGtion ; and no other mode of getting forward now remained for us, but 

Gga2 by 


928 


1993- 
June. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE ~ 


by cutting a'road acrofs a neck of land. I accordingly difpatched two 
men to afcertain the exaét diftance, and we employed the interval of their. 
abfence in unloading and getting the canoe out of the water. It was 
eight in the evening-when we arrived at the bank of the great river, 
This journey was three quarters of a mile Eaft-North-Eaft, through a 


_ continued {wamp, where, in many places, we waded up to the middle of 


our.thighs, Our courfein the {mall river was about South-Eaft by Eaft | 
three miles. At length.we enjoyed, after all our toil and anxiety, the in- | 
expreffible fatisfa€tion of finding ourfelves on the bank of.a navigable 
river, on the Welt fide of the firft. great range of mountains. 


; to. 
ne -_ : — CHAP. 
- ae ha” cotta ; . 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, ag 


CHAPTER vil 


Rainy night. Proceed on the gfe river, Curcumftances of tt. Account 

* of courfes. Come to rapids, Objerve feveral fmokes. See a flght of white ° 
ducks. Pafs over a carrying-place with the canoe, Sc. The difficulties 

- of that paffage. Abundance of wild onions, Re-embark on the river, See 
* fome of the natives. They defert their camp and fly into the woods. 
, Courfes continued. Kill a red deer, Sc. Circuinftainces of the river. 
- Arrive at an Indian‘habitation. Defeription of ut. Account of ¢ a curious — 
- machine to catch fh. Land to procure bark for. the ‘purpofe of conftrull- 
. ‘ing a new-cance. Conceal a quantity of pemmican for provifion on our 
 welurn. Swecefion of courfes.’ Meet with fome of the natives.. Our inter- 
. courfe with them. Their information refpetiing the river, and the country. 
o Peferithen of thofe people. Bo 


ia 


eo 48 + poh Ne 1793 
_ . De : we , June. 
Ty rained throughout the night and till fever: in the morning; nor was 7 ,.ay 18, 


T forry.that the weather gave me an excufe for indulging my people with: - 
that additional reft, which their. fatigues, during the laft three days, ren+ 


’ _ dered fo:.comfortable to them. Before eight, however, we were: on the 


swater, and: dsivenion:by a {trong current, when we fteered. Eaft-South- 
Eaft half a mile; South-Weft by South half a mile; South-South-Eaft 
doalf: armile, : South Welt half a. mile,-went. round ta. North-Weft half a: 
r " = mile, 


at 


230 


1793 


June. 


\ JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


mile, back ed South-South-Eaft three quarters of a mile, South-South. _ 


Welt half a mile, South by Eaft a quarter of a mile, and South-Weft by 
South three quarters of a mile. Here the water had fallen confiderably, 
fo that feveral mud and fand-banks were vilible. There was alfo an hill 
ahead, Welt-South- Welt. | . 

* The weather was fo: hazy that we could not fee’ acrols the river, which 
is here. ab jut two" hundred yards. wide. We now ‘proceeded South by 
Weft.one third of a mile, when we faw a confiderable quantity of beaver 
work along the banks, North- ‘North- Welt half a- mile, South-Weit by . 
Weft. one; mile and an-half; South- South: Welt one third of.a.mile, 
Welt: by Soith one third of a mile, South: by Eaft, half a mile. Moun- 


tains rofe lon the left, immediately above the river, whofe fummiis were 


covered vtith {fnow;, South-Weft half a mile, South a quarter of--a mile, 
South-Eaft' one’ third ‘of a:mile,; South- South-Welt.half,a,mile. ..Here 
are. fever. L iflands, we ‘then. veered to Weft: by: South .a:third,of a mile, 
South- Soha a fixth of a mile. On thie- -right}, ithe idand is, high, 
rocky, and covered with wood, Weft South-Weft one foie, a final. xiver 
running in from the South-Eaft,. South-Welt half a mile, South three 
quarters . a mile, South-Weft ‘half a mile, South by Weft half a mile. 


~ Here a rdcky point protrudes from the left, and matrows.the ‘river to an 


hundred yards; South-Eaft“half.a mile, Eaft by y South one.eighth of a 
mile. The.current now was’ ‘very flrong; but perfeétly fafe, South-Eaft - 


by South) an eighth of a mile, Weft by North ‘one third. of a mile, South 


by Welt 8 twelfth of a mile, South-Weft- one fourth: of ‘a mile. | - Here 


> the high Jand terminates én né fide of the river, while!.rocks rife.to a 
confiderable height immediately. abové the other, ‘and the:channel: widens 


| < 7 to 


\ 


meet ew cae 


. | | 
NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


to an +hundred and fifty yards, Weft by South one mile. The river now 
narrows again between rocks of a moderate height, North-North ~Eaft an 
eighth of a mile, veered to South-Weft an eighth of a mile, South and 
South- Welt half a mile. The couritry appeared to be low, as far as I 
could judge of it from the canoe, as the view is confined by woods at 
the diftance of about an hundred yards from the banks, Our courfe 
continued ‘Welt by North ‘two miles, North half a mile, North. Weft a 
quarter of a: mile, South-Weft two miles, North-Weft-three quarters of a 
mile ; when a ridge of high land appeared | in this direétion, Weft one 
fnile. A {mall river flowed in from the North, South a quarter of a mile, 
North-Wett halfa mile, South-South-Weft two miles aid an half, South- 
. Ratt three quarters of a mile; a rivulet loft itfelf-in the main ftream, Weft- 


Notth-Welt ‘half a mile: Here the current.flackened, and-we proceeded © 


South-South-Welt three quarters of a milé, South- Welt three quarters. of 
a: mile, South by Eaft three quarters of a mile, South-Eaft by, Eaftione mile, 
wlien it veered gradually to Weft North-Welft half 4 mile; the river. being 
~ full of iflands. ‘We proceeded due North, with little cutrent, the. river 
-préfenting a beautiful {heet of water for a mile and an half, South-Weit 
by Welt one mile, Weft-North-Weft one mile, when it veered round to 


- South-Eafl-one mile, Weft by North one ‘mile, Sauth-Eaft one mile, Weft 


by North three quarters.of a mile, South one eighth ofa mile, when we 
eame-to' an‘Indian cabin of late ereGtion. . Here was the great fork, of 


which our, guide had informed us, and it appeared to be the largeft branch — 


from, the, South-Eaft. It is about:half a mile in breadth, and‘ affumes the 


form of a lake. The current was very flack, and we got into the middle- . 


of the’ channel, when we fteered Weft, and founded in fixteen feet water. 


ik tidge of- high. land.now: ftretched on, as:it: were, -acrofs our prefent 
. dire€tion ; 


age JOURN AL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH: THE 


1793. dire€tion’ this courfe.was three miles. We then protéeded Weft.-South- 
a! Welt two miles, and founded in twenty-four feet water. Here the river nar, 
rowed and the current increafed. : We then continued out courle North. 
North-Weft three quarters of a mile, a {mall river falling in from the 
North-Eaft.: -It now veered to South by Weft one mile and a. quarter, 
Welt. South-Weft four miles ard an half, Weft by North one mile anda 
quarter, . North-Weht by Welt one mile, Weft. a mile and a quarter; 
the land was high on both fides, and the: river narrowed to an hundred 
and fifty, or two hundred yards ; “North- Welt three quarters of a mile, 
‘South-Weft by South two miles and an half: here its breadth again . 
increafed; South by Weft one mile, Weft-South-Weft half a.mile, South- 
. Weft by South three miles, South-South-Eaft gne mile, with a fmall 
fiver running in from the left, South.with a ftrong current one mile, then 
Eaft three quarters of a mile, South-Weift, one, mile, South-South-Eaft | 
__amile and an half; the‘four laft.diftances being a:contidual. rapid ; ‘South: 
Weft by Weft one mile, Eaft-North-Eaft a mile and’ an half, Eaft-Soutl- 
Eaft ong mile, where a fmall, river flowed in ox. the right; South-Weft 
by South two miles and’an fialf, when another {mall river appeared from 
the fame quarter; South.by Eaft half a mile, and South-Weft by Weft 
one nile and a quarter:-here we landed for the night.. When we had 
paffed the lait river we obferved fmoke rifing from it, as if produced by 
fires that had been frefh lighted; I therefore concluded that. there were 
natives.on its banks;. but I-was unwilling to fatigue “thy people, by 
pulling back againi the current in. order to.go in fearch of them. 


" This river appeared, ots its high water-marky to: have fallen » ‘no more 
than one foot, while, the fmallex-branch,. from a fimailar: ‘meafarement, had 
funk 


oa 
f 


‘NORTH. WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


ca) 


funk two feet and art half. “On our entering it, we faw a flock of ducks 
which.were entirdly white, except the bill and part of the wings. The 
‘heather was cold and raw throughout the day, and the wind South-Welk. 


We law fnoke tifing in columns from many parts of tlie woods, and I 


thould have'been more anxious to fee the natives, if there had been any 
perfor with me who could have introduced me to them; but as that , 


oy 


object could not be then attained without confiderable lofs of time, I de- - 


tériined'tdé: purfue the navigation while it continued to be fo favourable, 
‘and to wait till my return, if no very convenient opportunity offered i in 
the: mean time, to 0 engage in’ an intercourle with them, 
toy vay ; ' “ ° ‘ 
paft that hour, ‘our. courfe was Eaft by South three quarters of a mile; a 
-{mill ‘fiver flowing in from the right., : We then proceeded South by Eaft 
half a:mile; and Soath-South-Welt.a mile: and an half, . Daring the laft 
diftance; clouds:of thick fmoke rofe from the. woods, that darkened the at- 
mofpheré, accompanied with a {trong odour of the guid of cyprefs and the 
" {pruce-fir. ~ Our courfes continued to be South-Welft a mile and a quar- 
ter, Nortli-Welt:by Welt three quarters of a mile; South-South-Eaft 4 mile 
and a quarter,.Eaft three quarters-of a mile, South-Weft one mile, Welt 
by South three quaries of a mile, South-Eaft by South three quarters of 


“The morning: was foggy, . and at tliree we were on the water.’ At t half Wednel, 19 


a mile, South by Weft halfa mile, Weft by: South three. quarters ofa mile, _, 
South by: Welt two miles and an half. “In the aft. courfe there was an . 


ifland, and it appeared tome, that the main channel of the river had for- 
metly been onthe other fide-of it. “The banks were here compofed, of 
‘high white cliffs,;crowned with pinnacles ‘in: very grotelque: thapes., We 
continudd to fteer South-Eaftby South-a mile and:ah half, South by Eaft 


wh . Hh | half 


nO4 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH. THE 


1793 half a mile, Eaft one mile_and.a quarter, South-Eaft, iby: ‘Eaft: one hile, 
Lay South by. Eaft. three quarters of a mile, SougHEaft. Shy Eat: one mile, 
South-South-Eaft half a mile, Eaft one mile/and.a.quartér, South by Ealt 
halfa mile, Eaft’a mile and an half, Souk seuth Batt tree miles, and 
South-Welt. three quarters of a mile. « Jn the laft. courfe’the rocks con: 
trated in-‘fuch.a manner.on, both fides.of tlie: river, as to.afford the ap- 
pearance of the upper:part of a: fallor‘catarat:. Under this apprehen- 
fion. we ‘landedion the Jeft fhore;.where,;we found: a_ kind. of. foot-path, 
imperfettly traced; ‘throu gh which we conjeCtured, that the’ natives. occa- 
. fionally paffed with their canoes:and baggage. On examining the courfe 
of the river, however, there did not appear to be any fall as we expected; 
but the rapids, were. of .a- confiderabile;.léngth and impaffable for a ‘light 
canoe. ; We had therefate nio:alterdativé but td.wideni-the: road fo. as to 
| admit the, paflage ofcour: canoé; which: was now, carried :with great diffi- 
culty ;. as from her frequent; repairs, ' fand -otual ways! ‘of: ‘the-ufual ma- 
terials; her: weight, was:fuch; that fhe tracked’ and broké. oui, thé fhoulders 
of the men who bore her. : The’ labe ur and fatigue-of this undertaking, 
from eight till twelve, beggars, ail defcription, when weat length conqueted 
this afflicting paflage, of abont Half a, mile, over airo¢ky-and molt: rugged 
_ th 2Our courfe was, ‘South-South: Weft: Here If tookla-meridian alti- 
tude which gave me 53. 42. 29. :North, latitude.. _We,: however,’ loft fome 
time to put our canoe :in a.éondition tq: Carry us :onwards} .i:Qur courfe - 
was South a quarter.of amile to the hextcarrying-placé; whichiwasinothing 
. more than.a rocky point about twice the length. of the, canoe; (From the 
extremity of this point to; the rocky and‘almoft, perpendicular bank that 
rofe an the oppofite fhore, is not.miore than forty.on filty,yatds, : The great 
body: -of, water, at the; fame’ time ‘tumbling in Shedefhve éafcddes along 
sy ATi the 


‘NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF ‘AMERICA. 


the firft: ‘carrying-place, rolls through this narrow’ pattie ina very tur- 
bid' current, and full of whirlpobls. Gn’ the banks of the rivér there was 


-éreat plenty of wild onions; which whien mixed up with our penimican was- 


a’ great improvement of it; thot gh they produced a phy fical éffe& on our 
appetites; which: was rather inconvenient:to the‘ftate ofc our’ Provifions, ' 


a ! 


ee a waa _ eanhanras & repng fot eee 
Here we embarked, aiid fteered South-Eaft by ‘Eaft three quarters of 


a mile, We now faw a {moke-on the fhore; but before we could reach 


lind’ the natives“had. ‘deférted:, theircamp, ‘ which appeared to .be 
‘ére€ted ‘for no more than‘ two. familiesi. ‘My. two Indians were inftantly 
‘difpatched in:fearch of then; arid, ‘by following their:tracks,'they: foon 
overtook thei but their. Jatiguageawas mutually’ unintelligible; and all 
‘attempts to'produce a friendly Communication: were fruitlefs.?) They. no 
fooner: perceived my’ young’ men!'than they —preparéd ‘their ‘bows and 
arrows, and‘made fignhs-for them ‘not ‘to advance; and they ‘thought it 
prudent to -defift from proeéeding; though ‘not before’ thevnatives had 
‘difcharged five arrows:at them, which,-however,:they. avoided, by.means 
ofthe’ trees. . When they returned with thisaccount,-I very:much re- 
gretted that I had not aceompanied:ithem; and-as-thefe! people. could 
not be at any very great diftance, I took Mr. Mackay, and one of the 
Indians with me in order to overtake them; but they had got fo far that 
‘it would have’ beet-impradént in.me: to have followed therm, “My In- 


dians, who; I believe, wéreterrified at the manner in which thefe-natives - 


received them; informed med that; befides their bows; arrows, and.fpéars, 
they were armed wwith-dlong: knives, and:that they accompanied their 
ftrange“anti¢s? with ménacing:dations and! Ioud:fhoutings. On my re- 
turn, ‘E-found m¢ people ihdulgite!théir: euriofity’i lixexamining the bags 
Fetdos Hhe and 


235 


1793: 


236 JOURNAL OF. A VOYAGE THROUGH THE . 


1799 and bafkets which the. natives had left behind them, Some of them 
wage contained their fithing tackle, {uch as nets, lines, dc, others ofa. ee 
fize were filled with a red eaith, with which they, paint themfelvts.. 
feveral of the bags there were. alfo fundry. articles of which we did not 
know the we. I prevented my men from taking any: of; them; ; and for 
a few articles of mere curiofity, which I took myfelf, I left fuch things 
f_-in exchange:as would’be much more ufeful to their owners, 
‘ Atfour-we left this'place, proceeding'with the ftream, South-Eatt three 
quarters of a-mile, Eaft-Squth-Eaft one mile, South three quarters of a 


mile, South-South.Weft, ane mile, South by..Haft, three quarters of a — 


hile, South-Soiith-Eaft one mile, South-South-Weff two. miles, South. 


South-Eatt. three miles. and’ a quarters Eaft- by North one mile, South. . 


South-Eaft oné mile and a quarter, with a rapid, South-South-Wekk three 


quarters of a milé, South ohe mile and.an half, South-Eait, one mile and 
a quarter; South three: quarters of a-mile, ‘and South-South-Eaft one mile 
and an-half, At-balf palit feven-we linded- for the. night, where a fmall - 
river flowed in from the right.: The weather was fhowery, accompanied . 
with feveral loud claps of thunder, The banks were overfhadowed - 


by lofty firs, and wide- ‘preading cedars. , 


* Thurlday a0. The morning was 1s foggy, and at half pa four 9 we proceeded with a. 


South wind, South-Eaft by Eaft two miles, South-South-Eaft two. miles 
- and an half, and South-South-Weft twa, miles, The. fog, was. fo. thick, 
that we could not; ice the length of:our canoe, which rendered:our pror 
grefs dangerous, as we might have come fuddenly-upon a cafcade-or vio- 


- lentrapid. Our next’ couirle was Well.N orth Weft two miles and.an half, 


which 


x 
te 


cements NOC 


ac] 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 
which. camprehended a rapid. Being clafe in with the, left bank of the 


237 


\ 
4 2 7 < 
eee 


fiver, we perceived two red deer at the very edge of the water: We Sams 


killed one of them, and wounded the other, which was very fmall.; We... 


now, landed, and the Indians followed ithe wounded animal, which they 
foon caught, and would have fhot another in the woods, if our dog, who 
fallawed ‘them, had not difturbed it, From the number of their ‘tracks 
it: appeared that they: abounded in this country. They -are not fo 
large as the elk of the Peace River, “but are the real red deer, which 
I never faw in. the North, though I haye been told, that they are to 


be, found in, great numbers in the plains along the Red, or Affiniboin — 


River. The bark had been tripped off many of the fpruce trees, and 
carried.away, as I prefumed, by the natives, for the: ‘purpofe of covering 
their, cabins. .. ‘We now got the. venifon on board, and ‘continued our 
. voyage. South«Weft one mile, South-a mile and an half,.and Weft one 
mile. Here the country changed its appearance; thej banks were but 
of. a moderate height, from whence the ground. continued gradually 
rifing toa confiderable diftance, covered with. poplars sand cypreffes, 
but without any kind of underwood. There are alfo feveral low 
points which the river, that is here about three hundred yards in 
breadth, fometimes overflows, and are fhaded with the liard, the foft 
birch,, the {pruce, and the willow. For fome diftance before we~ 
came to this part of the river, our view was confined within very 
tugged, irregular, and lofty banks, which were varied with the pop- 
lar, different kinds of {pruce fir, {mall birch trees, cedars, alders, and 
feveral fpecies of the: willow. Our next courfe was South- Weft by 
Welt, fix miles, “when we landed at a deferted houfe, which was the. 
only Indian habitation of this kind that I had fen on this fide’ of 


‘Mechili-. 


oe 
a - 
2 ° Cok, 
. aay 
. Mass 
ir 


ay 


~sJOURNAL OF A'V ‘AGE THROUGH: THE 


1793:  Mechilimakina: ‘Tt ‘was about® ‘thirty. feet - t long and “twenty wide, wih 


June. 


238 


tn three doors, three feet: ‘high by ‘c ‘one foot and an ‘halfin breadth.” From 


this and other circumftances, it ‘appears’ to have ‘bebxconftrugted fy Or - 
three: families: There:-weére alld ‘three fire-places, ‘at !equal diflances, -- 
frorn each other ; andthe ‘bedswere on'either' fide of thems. ‘Behind the 
"beds was a narrow’ fpace, in ‘the foriti ofa’ “matiger! and fomewhat _ 
elevated, which was approptiated to- ‘the purpofe of keeping’ fifh.. The 
wall of the houfe, which was’ five ’féet in height; was formed of very 
ftrait {pruce- timbers, brought iclofe- ‘together,’ ‘and laid ifito each ther 
at,the corners.’ ‘The roof’-Wwas fupported by a ridge: pole; refting on 
two upright forks: of about tén feet’ high’; that ‘and the wall Support a 
certain number: of! ‘pars; ‘which: até ‘covered ‘with’ {ptuce bark; ‘and the 
whole’attached ‘and {ettired by the fibres ‘of thé cedar, One of the gable 
ends is clofell’ with ‘lit ‘boatds’ the’ other with’ poles. Large rods are 
. alfoifixed acrofs. the upper part of the building, where fith’ may ‘hang and * 
dry. To give: ‘the”-walls additional ftrengthi upright’ polts ate fixed in 
the ground, ‘dt “equal “diflarice’, both within ‘and’ ‘without, “of the: faine 
height ; as “the ‘wall “and fitynly attached “with bark fibres. Opening 
appear ‘alfo' between ‘the’ logs in the’ wall, ‘for the uipolé, as I con 
jeduuted, of difcharging their arrows ata belieging enemy ; ; “they would 
be needlels for the’ purpofe ‘OF } giving’ ight, which is fatficiently ifforded 
by fiffures between the logs of the building, fo that j i appeared to ‘be con 
firu€ted inerely for’ a fammer habitation,” There + was ‘nothing ‘further to 


(to Phar drei. 
attraet’ our attention’ i in or “about the hile, “except, a large machine, 


which’ nuit ‘have rendered the. ‘alting off ihe rook sbfetately necel- 
ane F HOB anes ved 
fay, i in order to have. introduced i it, Tt was of’ a évtindrical form, | fifteen 
oui G0 Lualiud, GbHbLl 
feet’ long, ‘anid’ ‘four’ feet’ and’é an air in diameter one end was 3 fquare, 


nace hike 


. 


. 


* 


NORTH-WEST, CONTINENT. OF AMERICA. - 


like the. head of. a cafk, and.a conical machine was fixed inwards to the 


239 


1793+ 
_ June. 


other-end,.of fimilar-dimenfions: atthe extremity of which was an open- —~—~ 
_ing-of, about feven|inches.diameter.’ ‘This machine: was: certainly con- 


~ trived.to_fet in ‘the river, to catch large fifh; and very: well adapted to that 


ie relle 


putpofe} as when they-are_once in, ff mult be impollible for themn;to, get 
out, unlefs: they fhould. have ftrength” fufficient to;b bréak through :it. “It 
was. .made: of :long. piéces of {plit- wood;: ‘rounded to” the~fize.: LOf a 


{mall finger, and placed at the diftance’of: an‘inch afunder, on fix hoops ; ; 


to this was added a kind of boot of the fame materials, into which it may 
be fuppofed that, ‘the fith’ are driven, when- they’are to-be-taken-out. 
The. houfe was-lefi ia: fuch ‘apparent’order as to mark the defign of. its 
owners to return thither.: It anfwered)in-évery particular:the, defcrip- 


tion :givén.us by. jour late’ guide,. except, that it was not fituated onan 


if 
G 


, t r ‘ . aan 
ifland, woede TO, aqoet beely » = ae . | ibe 
' 

5 


rane ‘ t t ‘ 
. . aan Lf : 
(ow oS. ae vt OM wo ve abo : ts 


“We left.this place,.and.fteered South by Eat one nile and-a quarter ~ 


whén we paffed-where there had been another houfe, of which the ridge- 


pole and ‘fupporters alone remained: the ice had probably carried away 


the body- of iti: The-bank was at this time covered with water; and a 
{mall river. flowed.in on the left.. On a point we obferved an eréétion 


-_that:had the appearance of .a tomb; it was in an oblong form, covered; 


and: very. neatly’ walled with.bark, :} A ‘pole was fixed near it, to which, at 
the height of tenor twelverfeet;a piece of bark. was attached, which was 
probably.a memorial, ér.dymbol!of diftin@tion..-.Our next courfe was 
South by Weft,twa.miles and an half; when we faw an houfe on an ifland, 
South-Eaft by Eaft-sone, mile’ and: three quarters, in:which we obferved 
another, ifland,-with: ah houfe3 }iipan, it." A ‘river- alfo- flowed . from. the 
rights. and the land was high and rocky, and wooded with the epinette. 


Our | 


{ 


240 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH. THE 


F 198+ Our canoe was now become fo ‘crazy, that it was:a matter of abfolute 
tL—v—— neceffity to conftrua anothers! and as from the appearance of the.country 
there was reafon'to expeét. that bark was tobe found, .we landed at 

eight, with the hope-of procuring it.:::I accordingly difpatched four men 

with that commiffion, and at twélve they: returned with a fufficient 
quantity: to make the. bottom of a canoe: of. five fathom in length, and 

four feet and amhalf in height. At noon I had.an obfervation, which 


C ' _ gave.me 53: 7 38, North latitude. 


We now continued our voyage South-Eaf by South one mile and an. 
_ half, Eaft-Sooth-Eaft one mile, Eaft-North- Eafthalf a mile, South- Eatt 
two miles, Sonth-Eaft by South one-mile, South-Eaft fix miles, and 
Eaft-North-Eaft, * “Here the-river_narrows between fteep rocks, and a 
yy XN Japid fucceeded, which was fo olen deeseatetseséae to run it 
“ I therefore ordered the loading to be taken out of the canoe, but fhe was 
now become. fo heavy that the men preferred. running the rapid to the 
- carrying her overland: Though I did notaltogether approve of their’ 
propofition, I was unwilling to oppole it. ‘Four of them under- 
took this hazardous expedition, and I haftened to the foot of the 
rapid with great anxiety, to wait the event, which turned out as I ex- 
pected. The water was fo ftrong, that although they kept clear of 
the rocks, the canoe filled, and in this ftate-they drove half way down the 
rapid, ‘but fortyhately fhe did not overfet; _and having’:got her into an 
eddy, they emptied her,.and in an half-drowned: condition arrived fafe 
on fhore. The carrying-place is about half a mile over,-with an Indian 
path acrofs it. Mr, Mackay, ‘and the. hunters, faw -fome deer on an | 
iland above the rapids and had. that ‘difcovery been- sade before’ the 
oo ue ar .., departure 


NORTH -WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. — 


departure of the canoe, there is little doubt but’ we.fhould have added a a 
‘confiderable quantity of venifon to our ftock of provifions. Our veflel 
swas in fueh. a-wretched condition, as I’ have already obferved, ‘that it 
occafioned a delay of three hours to put her in a condition to proceed. 
“At length we continued our, former courfe, Eaft-North- Eat a mile and 
‘an half, when we paffed an extenfive Indian encampment $ Eaft-South- 
Eaft one mile, where a {mall river appeared on the left; South-Eaft by 
‘South one mile and three quarters, Eaft by South half a mile, Eaft by 
North one mile, and faw another honfe on an ifland.; South half a mile, 
Welt three quarters of a mile, South-Weft half a mile, where the cliffs 
of whité and red clay appeared like the ruins of ancient caftles. Our 
- canoe.now veered gradually to Eaft-North-Eaft one mile and an half, 
_ when we landed in a ftorm of rain and thurider, where we perceived the 
remains of Indian houles. It was impoffible to determine the wind in 


Me 


nl, Y part of the day, as it came a-head in all our dire€tions. 


i. ae ; 
As Iwas'very fenfible OF Fie ticle of procuring provifions in this 
country, I thought it prudent to guard againit any polibility-of -diftrels 
.of that kind on our return; I therefore ordered ninety pounds weight of 
pemmican to be buried in an hole, fufficiently deep to admit of a ‘fire 
“over it without doing any injury to our hidden treafure, and which 
| would, at the fame time, fecure it from the natives of the country, or 


: the wild animals of the, woods. ° 


The morning was very ‘cloudy, and at four o’clock we renewed our 
voyage, fteering South by Eaft one mile and a quarter, Eaft-South-Eaft 
‘halfa mile, South by Eaft one mile and an half, Ealt half a mile, South: 


241 


4793+ 


June. 


Friday 21. 


li . ; Eaft — 


oo 


_ and they follow 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


Eaft two miles, where a large river flowed in from the left, and a {maller 
one from the right. We then continued South by Weft three quarters 
of.a mile, Eaft by South a mile and an half, South three quarters of a 

mile, South-Eaft by Eaft one mile, South by Eaft half'a.mile, South-Eaft 
three quarters of a mile, South-Eaft by South half a mile, South-Eaft by 


| Eaft half a mile, the cliffs. of blue and yellow clay; ‘difplaying the fame 


grotelque fhapes as thofe which we paffed yefterday, South-South-Ealt 
a mile and an half, South by Eaft two miles. The latitude by obferva- 


tion was 52. 47- 5h North. 


Here we perceived a fmall new canoe, that had been drawn up to the 
edge of the woods, and foon after another appeared, with one man in it, 
which came out of a {mall river. He no fooner faw us than he gave the 
whoop, to alarin his friends, who immediately appeared on the bank, ~ 
armed with bows and arrows, and fpears. They were thinly habited, - 


and difplayed the moft outrageous antics.. Though they were cer- 


tainly in a ftate of great apprehenfion, they manifefted by their geftures 


that they were refolved to attack us, if we fhould venture to land. | 


therefore ordered the men to ftop the way of the canoe, and even to - 
check her drifting with the current, as it would have been extreme folly 
to have approached thefe favages -before their fury had in fome degree 
fubfided. My interpreters, who underftood their language, informed 
me that they threatened us with inftant death if we drew nigh the fhore; 
the menace by difcharging a volley of arrows, fome 


of which fell fhort\of the canoe, and ‘others pafled over it, fo that they 
fortunately did us nO-injury. As‘we had been carried by. the current 


below the {pot where the Indi 


‘were, I orderéd my. people to paddle 
: ~ 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


to.the oppofite fide of the river, without the leaft appearance of ¢onfu- 
- fion, fo that they brought me abreaft of them. My interpreters, while 
we were within hearing, had done every thing in their power to pacify 
‘them, but in vain. We alfo obferved that they had fent off a canoe with 
two.men, down the river, .as we concluded, to communicate their alarm, 
and.procure affiftance. This circumftance determined me to leave no 
means untried that might engage us in a friendly intercourfe with them, 
before they. acquired additional fecurity and’ confidence, by the arrival, 
of their relations and neighbours, to whom their ‘fituation would be 


fhortly notified. 


- I therefore formed the following adventurous project, which was hap- 
~ pily crowned with fuccefs. I left the canoe, and walked by mylelf along 
the beach, in order to induce fome of the natives to come to me, which 
J imagined they might be difpofed to do, when they faw me alone, with- 
out any apparent pofibility of - receiving affiftance from my people, and 
would confequently imagine that a communication with me was -not 
a fervice of danger. At the fame time, in order to poffels the utmoft 
fecurity of which my fituation ‘was fufceptible, I direfted one of the 
Indians to flip into the woods, with my gun and his own, and to con- 
eal himfelf from their difcovery; he alfo had orders to keep as neat 
‘me as poffible, without being feen; and if any of the natives. fhould 
“venture, acrofs, and attempt to fhoot. me from the water, it was his, 
inftruétions to lay him low: at the fame time he was particularly en- 
joined not to fire till I had difcharged one or both of the piftols that I 


carried, in-my belt. If, however, any of them were. to land, and apr | 


| _proach my ;perfon, he was immediately to jom: me, Ja the mean time 
Tia , " ‘my 


244 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


722 my other interpreter affured them that we entertained the moft® friendly 
—y~—~ difpofition, which I confirmed by fuch fignals as I conceived would be 
comprehended by them. I had not, indeed, been long at my ftation, 

and my Indian in ambufh behind me, when two of the. natives came 

off in a canoé, but {topped when they had got. within an hundred yards 

of me. I made figns for them to Jand, and as an inducement, difplayed 

» , looking glafies, beads, and other alluring trinkets.’ At length, but with 
every mark of. extreme apprehenfion, they approached the fhore, ftern 
foremoft, but would: not venture. t6é.Jand. I now made them a pre- 
fent of fome beads, with which they were going to puth off, when I 
renewed my entreaties, and, after fome time, prevailed on them to come 
athore, and fit down by me. ’ “My hunter now thought ‘it right to: join 

_ me, and created fome alarm i in my new acquaintance. ~ It was, how- 
ever, foon removed, and I had the fatisfa@tion to find: that he, and 
a ahefe people perfeétly underftood each other. J inftru@ted him to fay 
every thing that might tend to footh their fears and win'their confidence. 

I expreffed my wifh to conduét them to our canoe, but they declined my 
offer; and when they obferved fome of my people coming towards us, 
they requefted me to let them return ; and I was fo-well fatisfied with 
the progrefs I had madé in my intercourfé with them, that I did not 
-hefitate a moment in complying with their defire. During their fhort 
ftay, they obferved us, and every thing about us, with a mixture of 
admiration’ and aftonifhment. We could ‘plainly diftinguifh that their _ 
friends received them with great joy on their return, and that the articles 
which they carried back with them were examined with a general 
and eager curiofity; they ‘alfo appeared: to hold a confultation, which 
‘Tafed about i a quarter of an hour, ‘and the refult was; an invitation to 
come 


a 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


come over to them, which was cheerfully accepted. Neverthelefs, on 


245 


1793» 


June. 


our landing, they betrayed evident figns of confufion, which arofe, pro-- — 


, bably from the quicknefs of our movements, as the profpeét of a friendly 


communication: had. fo. cheered .the fpirits of my people, that they pad- 
dled acrofs the river with the utmoft expedition. The two men, how- 
ever, who had been with us, appeared, very naturally, to poffefs the 


greatelt-{hidre of.courdge on the ‘occafion, and were ready to receive us 


on our-landing; but ouridemeanor foon difpelled all their apprehen- 


_fions, and the: moft . familiar communication ‘took place between us: 


When [had fecured their confidence, by the difiribution of trinkets 
among them, and treated. the children with fugar, I inftruéted my in- 
terpreters to colle& every necellary information in: n their power té afford 


me, 


° 


"According to..their account,’ this river, whofe courfe is very. exten- ’ 
- five, runs.towards the midday fun; and that at its mouth, as they had 
been informed, white people were building houfes. They reprefented ° 


its..current to be uniformly ftrong, and that in three places it was’ 


altogether. impaffable,: from. the falls and rapids, which poured along 


_ between perpendicular rocks that-were much higher, and more rugged, \ 


than any we had yet feen, and would not admit of any paflage over them. 

_ But befides the dangers-and difficulties of the navigation, they added, 
‘that we fhould have to encounter the inhabitants of the country, who 
were very. numerous. They alfo reprefented their immediate neigh- 
- bours as a verygpalignant race, who lived inJarge-fubterraneous recefles: 

and when they avere.made to: uunderftand that it was-our’ defign to pro- 
ceed to the fea, they diffuaded us from profecuting 0 our intention, as we 


fhould . 


on 


in great, canoes. so nS 


/ JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH. THE 


‘fhould certainly become a facrifice to the favage fpirit of the natives, 


Thele people they defcribed as poffefling' iron, arms, and utenfils, which 
they procured from their neighbours to the Weftward, and were obtained 
by a commercial progrefs from people ‘like ourfelves; who brought them 


® 


Such an account of our fituation, exaggerated as it might be in fome 
points, and erroneous in others, was fufficiently alarming, and awakened 
very painful refleétions ; neverthelefs it did not operate on-my mind fo a3 
to produce any change in my original determination. » My firlt object, 
therefore, was to perfuade two of thefe people to accompany me, that they 
might fecure for us a favourable reception from their neighbours. To 


" this propofition they affented, but exprefled fome degree of diffatisfaGtion 


at the immediate departure, for which we were making preparation; but - 
when’ we were ready to enter the: canoe, ‘a {mall one was feen doubling - 
the poirit below, with three men in it.- We'thought it prudent to wait — 
for their'arrival; and they proved to be fome of their relations, who had 
received the alarm from the meffengers, which I have already: mentioned 
as having been fent down the river for that purpofe, and who-had 
pafled on, as we were afterwards. informed, to-extend the notice of our 
arrival. Though thefe people faw us in, the midft .of- their friends, they 
-difplayed the moft menacing aétions, and hoflile poftures: wAt length, 
however, this wild, favage {pirit appeared’ to-fubfide, and they were per- 


_ fuaded to.land. One of. them, who was a‘middle. aged perfon, whofe 


_ agitations had been le{s frequent than thofe of his companions, and. who 
“was treated with particular refpe& by them’ all, inquired who we were, 


‘whence we-came; whither :we were goirig;’ “and: what! was ‘the! motive’of 
our 


ee 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. | 


our coming into that country.. When his friends had fatisfied him as 
far as they were able, refpe€ting . us, he inftantly advifed us to delay our 
departure for that night, as their relations below, paving , been by this 
time alarmed by the meffengers, who had been fent for that purpofe, 
would certainly oppofe our paflage, notwithftanding I had two of their 
own people with me. He added, that they would all of them be here 
by fun-fet, when they would be convinced, as he was, that we were good 
people, and meditated no ill defigns againit 1 them. 


Such were the reafons which this Indian uiged i in favour of our re- 
maining till the next morning ; and they were too well founded for me 
to mink in complying with them ;. befides, by prolonging my flay till 
. the next morning, it was probable that I might obtain fome i important in- 

‘glligence refpeéting the. country through which I was to pas, and the 
people who inhabited it. I accordingly ordered the canoe to be unloaded, 
taken out of the water, and gummed... My tent was alfo pitched, and the 
natives were now, become fo familiar, that I was obliged to let them know 


my) with to be alone and undifturbed. 


My! firft application to the native whom I have already particularly 
‘mentioned, was to obtain. from him fuch a plan of the river, as he fhould 
be. enabled to give me; and he complied with this pequel with a de- 
.  giee of readinefs and intelligence that evidently proved it was by no 
means‘a new bufinefs.to him. In order to acquire’the belt informa- 


tion he could communicate, T affured him, if I found his, account cor- 


reCt, that I fhould either return myfelf, or fend others to them, with 


fuch articles as they appeared to want: particularly arms and ammuni- 


tion, with which. they, would be able to prevent their. enemies from in- 


vading 


Sue 
NY 


\ 


~s 
: — 


ae 


Py ae JOURNAL OF A’ VOYAGE THROUGH THE 

1793- —-vading them!! I obtained, showever,:no addition to what I alrgady-knew,™. 

aaa but that the country below us, as far as he was acquainted with it, 
abounded in animals, and that the river produced. plenty of fifh. 


Our cande was now become fo weak, leaky, and unmanageable, that 


eo 


‘sit became’ a'matter of abfolute neceffity to conftruét a new one; ‘and I 
‘had been’ informed, that if we delayed that important work till we got 
further down the river, we fhould not be able to procure bark. I there. 
fore difpatched two of my people, with an Indian, in fearch of that ne- 


tL 


ceflary material, The weather was fo’ cloudy that I could not get an 
obfervation.* ; 
I paffed the reft of the day in converfing with thefe people: they con- - 
filed of feven families, containing eighteen men; they were clad in 
ra | leather, and had fome beaver and rabbit-{kin blankets. They had not, 
been long arrived in this part of ‘the country, where they propofed to 
pafs the fammer, to catch fifh for their wiriter provifion; for this purpofe 
they were preparing machines fimilar to that which we found in the firt — 
Indian houfe we faw and defcribed. The fifh which they take in them 
are Mtge, and only vifit this part of the river at certain feafons. Thefe 
‘people differ very little, if at all; either in their appearance, language, or 
roanners, from the Rocky-Mountain Indians. Thé men whom I {ent in 
fearch of bark, returned with a eertain quantity of it, but of a very in- 
different kind. We were not gratified with the arrival of any of the na- 
- ‘tives whom we expeéted from a lower part of ‘the river. 


* The obfervation, already mentioned, I got on my return. 
- al a 7: 
rns 


| CHAP. 


abe 
> 
fo 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. * 249 


so -  CHAPTER VUL 


Raga: our voyages icompanied by two of the natives. Account of courfe CS. 


"State of the river. fe Arrive at a ' fubterranean houfe. See feveral natives. 


Brief de cfeription of them. Accotnt -of aur conference with them. ' Saw 
other natives. Defeription of them. Their ‘condull, Sc. The account . 
which they gave of the country. The narvative of a female prifoner.  *, - 
The perplexities of my fi ‘uation, Specimen of the language of two, tribes, , 
Change the plan of my journey. Return up the river. | Succeff Fon “of ‘ 
dangers and difficulties. Land on an ifland to build anothe? carice, ~~ 


Ar tx in the morning we proceeded on our voyage, with two of the — 
Indians, one of them ina {mall pointed canoe, made after the fafhion of 
the Efquimaux, and the other in our own. This precaution was necef-  - 
fary i in a two-fold point of view, ag the {mall canoe could be fent ahead 
td. {peak to any of the natives, that’ might be feen down the river, and, 


thus divided, would not be eafy_ for. them both to make their efcape. 


, Mr. Mackay alfo embarked with the Indian, which feemed to afford him 


7 great fatisfaGtion, and he was thereby enabled to dep us company 


with diminution oflabour, 


| Our cours were South- South-Eaft a mile and an half, South. Eaft 
2 K k -- halt . 


- 550: 


1793. 
ve half a mile, South by Welt half a mile, South-Eaft by Eaft one mile, — 


Te ae 
ry ae rn 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH. THE 
half a mile, South by Eaft four miles and ¢ an half, South-Eait bys Sduth 


“South-South-Weft a mile and an, half, South by Eaft one mile anda 
quarter. The country, on the right, prefented avery beautiful appearance: 


~ t-rofe at firft rather abruptly to the’height of twenty-five feet, when the 
" precipice was fucceeded by an inclined plain to the foot of another fleep; 


which was followed by another extent. of gently-rifing ground: thefe 
objeéts, which were fhaded with groves of fir, prefenting themfelves alter- 
nately.to a confiderable diftance. 


cD 


_ We now landed near an houfe, the roof of which alone appeared above 


| ground ; but it was deferted by its inhabitants who had been alarmed at 
. our approach, ‘We obferved feveral men in the fecond fteep, who dif- 


played the fame poftures and menacing ations as thofe which we have fo 
lately. defcribed. Our conduétors went to them immediately on an 
vembafly of friendfhip, and, after a very vociferous. difcourfe, one of them 
was perfuaded to come to us, but, prefented a ‘very ferocious afpeét: the 

reft, who were feven in number, ‘foon followed his’ example. They held: 
their bows ‘and arrows in their hands, and appeared i in their garments, 
which were faftened round the neck, but left the right arm free for action. 
A cord faftened a blanket or leather covering under the right arm- 
pit, fo that it hung upon the ‘Teft fhoulder, and might be occafionally 
employed as a target, that would turn an arrow which was nearly fpent. 


’ As foon.as’ they had recovered from their apprehenfions, ten women ; 


made their appearance, but without any childrei, whom, Ii imagine, they 
chad fent to a greater diftance, to be out of the reach of all pofhible 
‘danger. I diftributed a few prefents among them, and left my guides to 

| * ‘explain > 


% 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. - 251 5 


explain to them the objeét of my journey, and the ‘friendlinefs of my de- \ pis 
figns, with which they had themfelves been made acquainted ; their fears P~—~7 
being at length removed, I gave them a fpecimen of the ufe to which we [ 
applied our fire-arms: at the fame time, I calmed their aftonifhment, by the 
~~aflurance, that, though we could at once deftroy thofe who did us injury, | 
we'could equally proteé thofe who fhewed us kindnefs. Our flay here 
did not exceed half an hour, and we feft thefe people with favourable’ 


v 


impreffions of us. 


From this place we fteered Eaft:-hy North half a mile, South by Zaft 
three quarters’ of a mile, and. South: ‘by. Weft a mile and an half, when 
we. landed : again on feeing fome of the natives on the high ground, 
whofe appearance was more wild and ferocious than any whom 
we had yet feen. Indeed I was under fome apprehenfion that our 
guides, who went to conciliate them to us, would have fallen a prey to 
their favage fury. Atlength, however, they were perfuaded to-enter- *< 
tain a more favourable opinion of us, and they approached us one after 

_ another, to the number of fixteen men, and feveral women, I fhook 
"hands with them all, and defired my interpreters ‘to :explain that faluta- . 
tion as a token of friendfhip. As this was not a. place where we could 
remain with the neceffary convenience, I propofed to proceed further, 
infearch of a more commodious fpot. They immediately invited us to 
“pafs the night at ‘their lodges, which were at no great diftance, and pro- 
mifed, at the fame time, that they would, in the morning, fend two men 
to introduce us to the. Mext nation, who were very numerous, and ill- 
~ difpofed towards ftrangers. As we were pulhing ‘from the fhore, we 
were very: auch farprifed at hearing a woman pronounce feveral words 
“3 Kke . in 


Ae . 


‘ , \ 


ost . JOURNAL-OF A VOYAGE THROUGH rub 


4793 in the Knifteneaux language. She proved to be a Rocky-Mountain 
wey native, fo that my interpreters perfeétly underftood her. She informed us 
that her country is at the forks of this river, and that fhe had been taken 
prifoner by the Knifteneaux, who had carried her acrofs the mountains.- 
After having paffed the greatelt part of the fummer with them, fhe had 
contrived to efcape, before they Wad reached their own country, and ‘had 

_ re-crofled the mountains, when fhe expeéted to meet her own friends : 
but after fuffering all the hardfhips incident to fuch a journey, fhe had 
been taken by a war-party of the people with whom fhe then was, 
who had driven her relations from the river into the mountains. She 
had fince- been detained by her prefent hufband, of.whom fhe had-no 
caufe to complain; | neverthelefs: fhe exprefled a ftrong defire to returri | 
to her own people. I prefented -her with‘ feveral ufeful articles, and 
di _ defired her to come to me at the lodges, which flie readily engaged ‘to 
4 do. We arrived thither before.the Indians, and landed,.as we had pro- 
, mifed, | “It was now near twelve at noon,.but.on attempting to take an 

altitude I found the angle too great for my fextant.. 


The natiyes whom wé had already fen, and feveral others, foon joined 

us, with a greater number of women than. I had yet feen; but I did 

not obferve the female prifoner among them. There were thirty-five of » 

. them, and my remaining ftore of prefents. was not fufficient to.enable me 

a to be very liberal to fo many claimants. - Among the men I found four’ 
| of the adjoining nation, and a Rocky-Mountain Indian, who had 
“been with them for fome time. As he ‘was: underftood. by my inter- 

preters, and was himlelf well acquainted with the language. of the 

Strangers, I poffefled the means of obtaining every information refpecting 

: a . vs the 


jee ne eas i 


| uh “: ( 
NORTH- WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


the country, which it mi wht be in their power... to ford me. For this 
purpofe I felected an elderly man, from the four {trangers, whofe coun- 
tenance had-prepofleffed me in his favour. ‘I flated to thefe people, as 
.- I had already done to thole from whom’I had hitherto derived informa- 
tion, the objetts of my voyage, and the very great advantages which 
they would receive from my fuceefsful termination of it. They ex- 
preffed themfelves very much fatisfied at my communication, and affured 
me that they. would not deceive me refpeéting the fubje&t ‘of my inquiry. 


An old man alfo, who appeared to poffefs the charaéter of a chief, de- ; 


clared his wifh to fee me return to his land, and that his two young 
daughters fhould then be at my difpofal. I now proceeded to requeft 
the native, whom I had particularly feletted, to commence his informa- 
tion, by drawing a {ketch of the country upon_a large piece of bark, and 
he immediately entered on the work, frequently appealing to, and fome- 


times: afking the advice of, thofe around him. He defcribed the river as . 


running to the Eaft of South, receiving many rivers, and every fix or 
. eight leagues encumbered with falls and rapids; fome of which were 
very dangerous, and fix of them impra@icable. The carrying-places he 
reprefented.as.of great length, and paffing over hills and mountains. He 
depiGted the'lands of three other: tribes, in fucceffion, who {poke different 
- languages. Beyond them he'knew nothing either of the river or country, 
- only-that it was ftill a long way, to the fea; and that, as he had heard, there 
was a lake, before they reached the water, which i the natives.did not drink, 

’ Asfar.as hig knowledge of the river extended, the country on either fide was 
level, in many places without wood, and abounding in red deer,and fome of 
a {mall fallow kind;. Few of thenatives, he faid, would come to the banks. 


for fome time; but that.ata certain feafon they. would arrive there in great 
numbers,. 


a 


of 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE ' 


numbers, to fifh, They now procured ‘iron; brals, copper, and trinkets, 
from the Weltward; but formerly thefe articles were obtained from the 


lower parts-of. the Tiver, thou gh in fiall quantities. A knife was produced ~ 
which had-been brought. from thar-quarter., 1 The blade was ten inches 


_ long, and an inch and an half broad, but with.a very blunted “edge:- The. 


ae . eee 


handle was of horn. We underftood -that: this inftrument ‘had been 
obtained from white men, long before they had heard that any came to 
the Weftward. One very old man obferved, that as long as he could 
remember, he was told .of white people to the Southward; and that he 
had heard, though he did not vouch for the truth of the report, that one 
of them had made an attempt te come up the river, and was.deftroyed, 


Thefe people defcribe the diftance acrofs the country as very fhort to 
the Weltern ocean; anid, according to my own idea, it cannot be above 
five or fix degrees. If-the .affertion.of Mr. Mears be correét, it cannot 
be fo far,as the inland fea which he mentions ‘within Nootka, muft come . 
as far Eaft as 126 Weft longitude. . They affured us that the road was 
not difficult, as they avoided the mountains, keeping along the low lands 
between them, many parts of which are-entirely free from'wood. Ac- - 
cording to their-account, this way is fo often travelled by them, that 
their ‘path is viftble throughout’ the whole journey, which lies along 
Fmall lakes and rivers. It otcupied them, they faid, no more than fix 
nights, to go to where they meet the people who barter iron, brafs, cop- 
per, beads, &c. with them, for dreffed Jeather, and bea cayer, , bear, lynx, 
fox, and: marten’ fan, 6, AT he iron isabdut cighteen-iniches of two-inch 
bar.” To: ‘thie they” give ‘an edge ‘at one end, amd fix it to-an‘handle 


“at abe ‘angles, which they employ as-dn axe. When the-iron is . 
OO _worn——— 


cece eenee FE emt pam annem eI ER . 


- _ 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 055 


worn down, they fabricate it into points for their arrows and {pikes, _1793- 
Before they procured iron they employed bone ard-horn for thofe pur- haa 
pofes, The copper and brafs they convert into collars, arm-bands, 
bracelets,'and other ornaments. They fometimies allo point their arrows — 
with thofe metals. They:had been informed by thofe whom they meet 
to trade with, that the white people, from whom thefe articles are ob- 
tained, were building houfes at the diftance of three days, or two nights 

sjourney from the place where they met laft fall. With this route they 


: all appeared to be well acquainted. 


' I now requefted that they would fend for the female prifoner whom I 
faw yefterday, but I received only vague and evafive anfwers: they 
probably apprehended, that it was our defign to take her from them. 
I was, ; however, very much difappointed at being prevented from having 
an interview with: her, as fhe might have given me a correét account: of 
sunnthe country beyond the forks of the river, as well as of the pals, through 
; the mountains, from them. 
My people: had Iiftened with great attention to the relation which: had. 
beer given me, and it feemed to be their opinion, that-it would be ab- 
folute madnefs to attempt a paflage through fo many favage and bar- 
| ‘barous’ nations. My fituation may, indeed, be more eafily conceived 
"than expreffed : ‘Thad no more than thirty days provifion remaining, 
exclufive of fuch fupplies as I might obtain : from’ om the natives, _and_the ———-----— 
toil of our hunters, which, ch, However, was forpret precarious as‘to be matter of 
little dependerice-befides, our ammunition would foon be exhaufted, 


—Patiilany our ball, of which we had not more than ‘an. hundred-and 
yd ; fifty, 


256 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 
1798- fifty, and about thirty pounds weight of fhot, which, indeed, might be 


‘June. 


“—~—~ converted into bullets, though with great \ wafte,, st 

" The more I-heard of the river, the more I was convinced it could not 
empty itfelf into the ocean to the North of what is called the River of the 
Weft, fo that with its windings, the diftance muft be very great. Such 
being the difcouraging ' circumftances of my fituation, which were now — 
heightened by the difcontents. of my people, I'could not but be alarmed 

- at the idea of attempting to get to the difcharge of fuch a rapid river, 
efpecially when I refleGted on the tardy progrefs of my return up it, even 
if I fhould meet with no obftru€tion from the natives; a circumftance 
not very probable, from the numbers of ‘them which would then be on 
the river; and whom I could have no. opportunity of conciliating in my 
paffage down, for the reafons which have been altready mentioned. At 
all events, I muft give up every expeétation of returning this feafon to ~ 
Athabafca, Such were my refle€tions at this period; but inftead of con- 
tinuing to indulge them, I determined to proceed with refolution, and fet 
future-events at defiance. At the fame time I fuffered myfelf to nourith 
the hope that I might be. able to penetrate with more fafety, and in a 
fhorter period, to the ocean by the inland, weftern communication. 


: To carry this projeé& into execution I muft have returned a oSiifiderable 

_—__—diftance-up the river, which-would-neceflarily be attended with a very 
ferious inconvenience, if I pafled over every other; as in.a voyage of this—__ 

kind, a retrograde motion could not fail to cool the ardour, flacken the 

zeal, and weaken the confidence of thofe, who have no greater inducement 


in the undertaking, than to follow the conduétor of it, . Such was the 
ftate 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT, OF AMERICA. 


flate of my mind: ‘at this period, and fach the circumftances by which 
it was diftreffed and diftiabted. 


, 


’ . 
‘ 
' \eesnempomanneasd, 


f 


To the pedple who had given me, “the foregoing inforination, I pre- 


fented fome beads, which they preferred. to any other articles i in my pof- 


‘ 


WAY 
feffion, and I récompenfed i in the ‘fame manner two of them’ who commu- , 


* nicated to me the following vocabulary 3 in the languages ‘of the Nagailer 


and Atnah tribes.. . 


Coa b des 
Ld 


The Napailer,- 
. or Chin-Indians, 


r Nah, 41, hew, 


The'Athah.: x 
or Carrier-Indians. - 


Thlouttin. _ 


eet 


Thi aby; uae ; _ Cat owdin.,*, sah it 


- Goughs +, Ghlioughe i. esa 
Nenzeh, Pifax. 
Thies hy 1 SCAPACAYe eh ony 


) Dekins,;: uth “vy -Shedeay, Atta gh © 


Od 


t Ihre se, ».Calietha, ae ane 


. Leg 5) Rim : Squacht. oy 
STongues cor city BROW vor, Degwhesile, oy 
Ear, . ‘ Zach, _ Ithlinah. en 
Man, Dinay, Scuynlouch, 
we Woman, :- LET Chiqoui, haa bode §mofledgen{k. aan hy 
“|. Beaver, | Zab, .. ys Schughysn,, 
_ ih «Billy, Cen  ¥ezey, a ; Dikoy;Beh, ..- ——— 
aan a _Sleing, = Seacah, 
, Ground-hog; .: , . Thidau, .- +, - Sarai’ oe 
pee lg “Iron, . , Thlifitch, . .., 151 Soucoumang. 
a ae bi Fie, 


558 | JOURNAL OF A-VOVAGE THROUGH THE. 


Bdge te TRG Magallerf eg Dba Adhd 
__Junes or Chin-Indians, OF, r Cartier-Indians, 7 
Fire, Coun, “Pen ck, 
Water, «|. Tou, _ mo oh ; Shaweliquoih,, _ 
- "Stone, _ : “ (Beh, : —_ piled on, 
. Bow, 2. —_ “Ket - signal _ 
. | Arrow, “gah, ’ ""Squaili - 
a Yes, on : Nel, maig. 
_ Plains, Thoughoud, ilela. 
~ Come heres Andett: a hla-elyeh, 
ro ee . aby 5 


, 


og The Atnali baiiidge has no afin fo any with which. I ain’ acquaint. 
d _ ed; but the’ ‘Napatler’ differs very' tittle from that {fpoken by ‘the Beaver 
Indians, and switalot the fame af dat lof the Chepewyant ee 


ne 7 uf epteggies Aan 
"We had adhtiidefiftorm with head tain + and int iii ge it 
had fubfided; fhe %idians amufed ‘ts ‘With finging and daricinyg, ‘in which _ 
they ‘were joititd’by the young worléi: Four men now dttivéd whom. 

we had not yee féeti; they had left- “their families at’ foe’ diftance | 


in the coun ght exprefled” ‘iy dehire that we fit “vifit them 

there. eciel: (EBs re t 

. - Le . soe 

lo inre ; cnet . bo fink 
1 ols . 


Sundyy 23. After“ FeAl ‘tight, I called the idians together, fbr ‘hom I yel- 


== terday-receivetl thie intelligence whith “has been already “tettioned, in 


~ the hope cheer ‘thy itional information. “From their 

former account they-tid not makethie Katt deviation ; but they informed 
me further’ HaLWhere they left this! 4 tiver, a fmalldiie from the Welt- 

_ ward falg' “EGP, Wich was navigable: for their canoes during'four days, 


a wrth a 


and 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. | 859 


and from thence they flept: but two nights, to get ‘to ‘the people with {ia 
whom they trade, and who have wooden canoes much larger than ourg, “~y=~7 
in which they.go down a river to the: fea, ., They; continued to inforna 
me, that if I went that way we: muft leave our own canoe behind us; 
_ but they thought it probable that thofe people would furnith ys with 
/ another, From thence they ftated the diftance to be only one day’s 
‘voyage. with the current to the lake whole water is nayfeons,-and where 
ithey ‘had heard that great canoes ‘came’ two winters ago, jand. that the 
‘ people belonging to them, brought great quantities of goods and built 
houfes, ; 7 


- At the commencement of this sconyeérfation, I was ‘yery: much fare 

4 “pag by the following queftion. fram one of the Indians: “* What,’ de- 
a r makéed the, “* can:be the- reafon that you are {o. panticular and anxiqus @ 
in \ your Anquiries: -of wus : *relpeting a Maante of. this country do.ngt - 


‘anfwer jt. ‘At ‘length, “however, 1 replied that-v we > certainly. were. AG. 
-quainted with the principal circumfances of every part of ithe svorld; . 
.that knew where ‘the fea is, and where Imyéelf then was,but.that [did 

not exactly ‘underftand what obftacles might. interrupt. me in-getting to 

jt; with which, he and his relations muft be well acquainted, as they 
thad fo frequently: furmounted them. Thus I fortunately preferved: the 
itprefion in their. minds, of the- Taperionty of. white. people oven them 
Aclsres. . ae Po, 


ta 


Ht, Was NOW, however, abfolutly-necellny shat I hould come toa. afinal 
Lie .- deter- 


260 JOURNAL ‘OF A VOYAGE THROUGIL THE 


1798  “detérminatipnWwhich'route to take; and no long'interval of reflection ' 
a was employed;-'beford I preferred to go ‘over land; the. comparative 
. fhiortnefs and {ecurity of fuch’a journey, were :alone' fafficient to deter- 

mine me.’ I ac¢ordingly propofed to two of the Indians to accompany | 

‘me; and one of them readily affented to my-propofition. © 

a . 

| ¥ ndw'called thofe of my people about me, who had not been prefent 

‘at miy! confultation with the natives; and after paffing.a warm eulogium | 

‘on their fortitude, patience; and’ perfeverance,’I! ftated: the’ difficulties 

that threatened our continuing to navigate the river, the length of time 

it would require, and the fcanty provifion we had for fuch a voyage: I 

‘then’ pidceeded for: the. foregoing reafons to propofe a fhorter route, by 

‘trying’ the over-land‘road to’ the fea. At the fame: time, as I: knew from 
- ‘éxperience; the difficulty of retaining guides; and’ as:many’ circumftances 
‘might dctut to’ prevent our-progrefs in that direétion, I'declared my re- 

‘folutiod ‘hbtito'attempt it, unlefs they would engage, if we could not after 

‘all ‘proceed over ‘land, to'retixtni with’me} and continue our voyage to 

the’ difcharge’ of the’ waters; whatever the diftance ‘might be. At all 

‘events, T declared; if the moft folemn imainner, that I would ‘not abandon 

my defigh of reaching the fea: if I-madeé the: attempt alone, and that k., 

‘ ‘did’ ‘not defpair of. Heturning in’ fafety to my friends. © mo oe 
- his propelition niét with the mot zealous return; and ‘they unani- 
;imoufly: affared-ihe, that they were’as' willing now-as'they had ever been, 
to abide by my refolutions, whatever they might be, and to follow me 
wherever I fhould go. I therefore requefted them to prepare for an 
immediate departure, and at the’ fame time gave notice to the man who 


a ; had 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


had engaged to be our guide,'to be in readinefs to accompany us. 


261 


1793: 


unc. 


“When our determination to return up the river was made known, feveral ~~~ _ 


of the natives took a very abrupt departure; but to thofe who remained, 


T gave a few ufeful articles, explaining to them at the fame time, the ad- 
‘vantages that would refult to them, if their relations conduéted me to the 
fea, along fuch a road as they had defcribed, I had already given a 
moofe {kin to fome of the women for the purpofe ‘of making fhoes, 
which were now brought us; they were well fewed but ill fhaped, and 
a few: beads were confidered as a fufficient remuneration for the {kill 
| ‘employed on‘them. Mr. Mackay, by my defire, engraved my name, 
‘and the date of the year on a tree, | 
“When we were ready to depart, ‘our guide propofed, for the fake of 
‘expedition, to go over land to his lodge, that he might get there before 
us, to make fome neceffary preparation for his journey. Idid not ‘alto- 
“gether” relifh his defign, but was obliged to confent: I thought it. pru- 
dent, however, to Pe Mr. Mackay, and the two Indians along with 


him. Our place of rendezvous, was the fubterraneous houfe which we 


| pafled yefterday. | 


At ‘ten in thé morning we embarked, and went up the current much 
“fatter than I expeéted with fuch a crazy veflel as that which carried us. 
* We met our people at the houfe as had been appointed ; but the Indian 


th continued to prefer going on by land, and it would have been need-. 


Jef for. ‘me to oppofe him. He proceeded, therefore, with his former 


companions, whom I defired to keep him in good humour by every rea- 
fonable 


JOURNAL OF A. VOYAGE: TH ROUGH THE 


fonable gratification.” They; were alfo furnifhed with a few articles that 
might be of ufe if they fhould meet with ftrangers. 

In ‘a fhort time after we had left. the houfe, I faw a wooden canoe 
coming down the river, with three natives: in it, who, as foon as they 


perceived us, made for the hore, and hurried into the woods. On pal-"_ 


fing-their' veflel, we'dilcovered it to be one of thofe which we had feen 


at the lodges. A. fevere guilt of wind; with rain, came from the South- . 
- South*Ealt. ‘This we found to be a very prevalent wind in thefe parts, * 
We foon paffed another wooden cance drawn ftern foremoft .on the 
fhore; a circumftance which we had -not hitherto obferved. “The men 
worked very hard, and though I imagined we went head very falt, we 
could not reach theJodges,'but landed-for the night at nine, clofe to-the 
‘encampment of two families ofthe natives whom we had formerly feen 
at the lodges. I immediately went.and fat down with them, when they 
-_gave fome roafted fifh; two:of my-men who followed me were gratified 
-alfo with fome of their provifions, The youngeft of the two ‘natives 
‘now quitted the fhed, and did-not -return during the time I remained 
there, I endeavoured to explain to the other by figns, .the caufe of - 
my fudden return, which he ‘appeared to underftand. In the mean 
_time my ‘tent was pitched, ‘and .on my -going to it, I was: ‘rather. fur- - 
prifed.that he. did not follow-me; as ‘he had been, conftantly with me 
“during ‘the day. and night. I-had_ pafled with his party on going down. 
‘We, however, went to reft.in,aiftate of perfeét fecuritys nor had we 
the leaft. Ht apprehenfion for the ‘eiety -of our people who were - gone hy 
land, 


We 


oy. 


NORTH- WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. - 


' We were in our canoe by four this morning, and paffed by the Indian 
hut, which appeared in a flate of perfeét tranquillity. .We foon came.in 
‘fight of the point where we firft faw the natives, and at eight were much 
furprifed and difappointed at feeing Mr. Mackay, and our two Indians 


coming alone from the ruins _ of an houfe that had been partly carried 


N 
fos 


had appointed to meet. Nor was our furprife 
-nifhed by,the alarm which was painted in their countenances. When we 
had landed, they informed me that they had taken refuge in that place, 


with the determination to fell their lives, which they confidered in the . 


moft imminent danger, as dear as poffible. Ina very fhart time after they 
had left-us, they met a party of the Indians, whom we had known at this 
x, place, and were probably thofe whom we had feen to land from their 
canoe, They appeared to be in a ftate of extreme rage, and had their 
bows bent, with their arrows acrofs them. The. guide ftopped to afk 


them: fome -queftions, which my people did not underftand, and then fet. 


263 . 


17 
june, 


Monday ade 


off with Ais utmoft fpeed. Mr. Mackay, however, did not leave him 


till they were both exhaufted with running. . When the -young mam 
- came up, he then faid, that fome treacherousslefign was meditated againft 
them, as he: was induced to believe from the declaration of the natrves, 


who told‘him that they were going to do_mifchi f, but refufed to name ~ 


the erientfy. | _ The guide then conduéted them through very bad ways, as 
falt as ithey could run; and whem he was’ defired to ‘flacken his pace, 
he artfwered that they might follow him in any manner they pleafed, but 
that’Ke was impatient to get to his family, in order to preparethoes, apfd 


‘other’ neceflaries, for his journey, They did not, however, think it pro 


dent’ t6 quit him, and he would not ftoptill ten at night. . On palling a 
mek track 


- 7) 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE: - 


track that’ was but. lately made, they began to be ferioufly alarmed, and, 


on inquiring of the guide. where they were, he pretended not to under-. 


‘ftand them. They then all laid down, exhaufted with fatigue, and with- 


out any kind of covering: they were cold, wet; and hungry, but dared 
not light a’ fire, from. the apprelienfion of anenemy. This comfortlefs 


{pot they left at.the dawn of day, and,,on their arrival at the lodges,. 


found them’ ‘delerted ; the property. of the Indians being {cattered about, 
as if abandoned for ever. The guide then made two: or three trips into 
the ‘woods, calling aloud, and bellowing like a madman. | At length 
he fet_ off in the fame diteétion as they came, and had not fince appeared. 
To heighten their mifery, as.they did not find’us at the place appointed, 


"they concluded that we were all deftroyed, and had already’ ‘formed their 


_ plan to take to the woods, and crofs in’ as a’ dire@ a line as they could 


i" proceed, to the. watefs of the Peace River, a{cheme which could only be 
; fuggefted by defpair. * * They intended to have waited for us. til{inoon, 


and if we did’not appear by that time, to have entered without, further 


| delay ot on their defeat expedition, — a a tgs 


ayes eR 


This alarm among the natives was a very unexpe€téd as well as perilous 


event, anémy powers of ‘conjetture were exhaifted in fearching | for the 
caufg of it. * At ‘general panic feized all around ‘me, and any further pro- 
fecution of the voyage. was now confidered by them. as altogether hope- 
Jefs and impraticable, But without paying the leaft attention to their 


_ opinions or’ “ farmifes, 1 ordered them to take. every, thing. out of the 


canoe, except, fix packages: when that, was ‘done, I left four men to 


might, where I hoped to And’ the. two men, with Hheir families, whom we 


had , 


‘oe 


SP 


7 


- take care of the lading, and. returned with the others to our camp of laft ° 


eal 


NORTH-WBST* CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 265, 


-hadafeen ‘thenes and: toibe-able to.ibring them. to lodge ‘with us, wv, when’ I as 
theitd Wait the'iffue of this myterious bufinels, Thisproje@, however, “~~ 
heheh wal ‘fot thefe people had quitted their theds in tthe fllence 

inight,: and. had not takenia fi ingle article of their little property 
Ae them. “ish ato) Da 
bre stra: ise aig he - wh ; 

... eiDhéle perplexing. circum ftances made a deep impreflion on my :mitid, 
hot ‘as: tovoarimmediate fafety,.for I-entertained not the leaft apprehen- 
fion of the Indians I.had -hitherto feen,even if their'whole force fheuld 
have'been: combined to. attack sus, but thele untoward évents-feemed to 
' threatensthe profecution'of my journey;.and I could not refle&t on the 


ae péffibitity of {uch a difappointment but with fenfations little fhort .of 


Sagomnpli ~ Whatever:might have beén:the: swavering difpofition of the peo- 
ple on former occafions, they.were now decided in their opinions as td 
the neceffity of returning-without delay ; and when we came back to them, 
theinery: Wass Let us» teimbark, and ibe gone.” This, however, was 
notvmy defign, andin ashore: peremptory tone'than I ufaally employed, —.. 
they wérevordered to unload the canoe; and takesher out of the water. 

On examining our -property,: feveral articles’. appeated to ‘be mifling, 
Which:the fridians:intufzhave pirloinéd; ‘and ‘asiong them were an aKe, 
tworknives;:and'the young :meni'y bag of mitdicines: ‘We now took’a 

~ pofition that was the bdlt calailatéd for defence, got our arms in coms; iy s 
plete. Grier, filled cach man’s: flafkvefpdwder, and diftributed an hundred hs a 
bullewy which iwere all thaptremaiiied, while forhe were eniployed in ne 
meliiig down that tomakestiore, ! The Aweathek - was fo cloudy ‘that i 
had Hotian apporediity! oftaktig ant obfatvetibks, Be 


to pale re nee ‘ + 
Jaa eee ae ee a a 


MIROG CG Geis cd Vine baraw baidyte, 


fim . Mm / , While 


266 


Py 798° 
June. 


A 
“ho 


* 
yo 


© JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH: THE 


While. we were.emiployed in making thele’ preparations;:sva: fay an 


Uenyet Indian in a canoe come down: the ‘river,’ and land at the:-huts,; ‘which 


he began to examine. On perceiving: us‘heiftood Mtill;-as if ‘in a::ftate 


of fufpenfe, when Iiinftantly difpatched one: ofimy Indians; towards him; 
but no perfuafions could induce him to have confidence in us‘: he even 


threatened that he would haften to join his friends, who would come and_ 
‘kill-us.- At the’ conclufion’ of this. menacé'-he: difappeated.. | On ‘the 


return, of my young-man; with this account of thei interview, I pretended 
to diferedit ‘the whole, and attributed at to his’ own apprehenfi ons and 


7 alatms. This, > -howwever, he denied, and:afkedi:with’ a:lookand: tone of 
 refentment, whether he had ever told mea lie? Though -he: was- but 2 


‘young man, He faid, he had been.on war: excurfions before he: cane! with 
we; and that ke thouild no: no Tonger: ‘confidér:me as a: wife :mdn which he 
had hitherto done’: : DO Bon sis eh eee Tet no ae 
EN nar, ae oo hauediiw Me crore are Tey 

To add to‘our ‘diftrefies we: Had-not ‘an: ounce: of -gum-for-the-repara- 
tion of the canoé, and-not-one of -thé.men si om to;ven- 
ture into the woods:‘to ‘colle@ its:In this perplexing: fitiation:I enter: 
tained the ;hopethat in the courfe!ofithe night: fome of:thenatives: would 


return, to take away a patt ‘ati, leaft of the -thirigs , whieh, théy . had-Jeft 


behind them, as they-had ‘gone: away without the covering: neceflary, ‘to 
defend them from the weather -and: the’ fliéss, ‘therefore :ordered.. the 
eanoe to be leaded, and dropped: tolan-6ld: houfe, one fide! of which, with 
its roof, had-been carried away bysthe, water ;i- but the three remaining 
angles were fufficient to ‘fhelter.us fromcthe-woads.; -I.then: -ordered two 


ftrong piquets to be driven. into the. ground, to; whieh-the €anoe. was 


faftened, fo. that if we: ‘were-hard prefled: we had: only to ftep. on. board 


s a7 ar if — oo . and 


ea 


aS 


NORTH-WEST CON TIN ENT OF AMERICA. 


and puth. off. . ‘We were. under the necellity of making a {moke to keep 
off the {warms of flies, which would have: otherwife tormented us; but 
we did not venture to excite a blaze, as it would have been a mark for 


the arrows of the enemy. Mr. Mackay and myfelf, with three men kept ©" 


alternate watch, and allowed the Indians to do as they fancied. ' I- took 
the firft watch, and the others laid down in.their .clothes by us. ‘Talfo 
placed a centinel at.a {mall diftance, who ‘was relieved every hour.’ The 
weather. was “ony, with fhowers of rain, ~~ | 


3 


i At one I called up. the. other watch, and laid down toa {mall portion: of Tuefday 25. 


broken reft.- .At:five I-arofe, and as the fituation which we left. yefterday 
was - preferable to:that which. we then occupied, I determined to return 
‘to; it, . On our arrival: Mr, Mackay informed me that the men had ex- 
prefled: their diffjtisfaion to him in a very unreferved manner, and had 
in very“ftrong, terms declared their refolution ‘to follow me no further in 
my propoled’ enterprizés I did:not appear, however, to have received 


fuch “communications. from, him,‘ and: continued to employ my whole — 


thoughts i in! contriving, ‘means to bring about a reconciliation with the 
natives, which; alone. would enable me:to Procure guides, without whofe 
. affiflance,it would:be impoffible for me to proceed, when my darling pro- 
je@h would énddn ‘difappointment. Ct 


i. ee roo ca re ee te Sted 


a 


At twelve, we,faw.a- man coming with the. ream, upon a raft, and he. 


mult haye, difcaveres us before. we percenve him, as, he was working 


flantly, fled in into the woods. L now. had. al 
60. 23. natural horizon, (the ang . eins, more than ithe. fexiant, could 
Sarre iE . Mm 


‘meafure 


ant) 


268 


+ 798° 
Jun 


JOURNAL OFA VOYAGE THROUGH. THE 


mealure with: the aitificial horizon,) one-mile:.and:an. half diftant; and 


boy the; eye five feet above the. level of: the, water, gaveg2.47- gi. North 


yr 


latatude:; ok oy ane ne ee Le Wy 


: ' ' 
so 
1 olen dat JFde oe ed te rage » t 


While I was thus employed, thé r men Idaded.the: canoe. without having 
received, any. orders: fron, me, and as. this: was: the fir time:théy had 
venitured).to aft. i ini fuck. a decided. manner, I: naturally: concluded, that 


they had preconcerted a plan:for their return: 4 thought: it’ prudent, _ 
however, to take no notice of this tranfaction, and to wait the iffue of 


future; cireumflances, Ait this) moment:our: Indiang:perceived a perfon 


~~ ins thei edge of the woods.above:us;'and they wereimimediately difpatehed. 


to. difcover who it was. <Ajter anfhiort.abferce ‘they retarted with 4 
young: woman; whom we Had: feen before: ‘her language was not clearly 
‘comprehended: by us; fo. that we could not learn: fromsher, at-leafh with. 


any:degree: of certainty, the caule’ of thishunfortunate: alarm that had 


taken: place among the natives: She told is that':her“errand, was to | 


fetch fome things which. fhe. had: left- behind: her ;:'and‘otie' of the dogs. 
whom: we. found here, appeared::to: iacknowledge: ‘ther‘‘as? lis -miftrels: 
We treated her with great kindnefs,: gave: her’ fomething: to ‘eat, and 
added.a.prefent of fuch articles. as we thought ..might ‘pleafe -her.: "On 
her exprefling a wih to leave us, we readily. confented to-her departure, . 
and indulged the hope that her' reception would induce the natives to. 
return in peace,.and give us an opportunity to‘convincé” them, that we 


. bad-no hoftile defigns; whatever agdinft thems» On: leaving: tis; {fhe went: 


up the river without taking a finglé'articlé of her‘own, and the: ‘dig fol- 


owed. The wind. was changeable: throughout:« the: day; and thére were 


4 


. feveral fhowers in the: courfe ofit, 7% DEY Gk eu da tt et 


Though 


‘NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 269 


Though a very apparent anxiety prevailed among the people for their vera . 
departure, I appeared: to be wholly inattentive to jt, and at eight in the ge _ 
evening I ordered four men to ftep into the canoe, which had been Iéaded OT 
for fevera] hours, and:drop down to our guard-houfe,.and my command ~ 
was immediately obeyed: the reft of us proceeded there by land. When 
Inwas! yet at a confiderable diftance from.the houfe, ‘and ‘thought it im» 
poffible'for an arrow to reach it, having'a bow and quiver in my hanrd,, 
I-very imprudently’ let fly. an arrow, when; to my aftonifhment: andi in- 
finite alarm, I Heard it ftrike a log of the houfe. The men who had jaf’ 
landed; imagined: that they were attacked. by an‘enemy. from: the woods. 
Their: confafion was in'proportion to their: imaginary danger, and on-my 
artival-I'found that-the arrow had pafled'within a foot of one'of the mens ~ 
- though it‘had'no -point, the: weapon; incredible-as it may appear, had. 
entered van’ hard; dry'log of wood: upwards of an'inch. But this was 
- not all‘: -for the’ men readily. availed ‘themfelves of this circumftance, to 
rematk upon the danger of remainiitg in the power of a people poft 
felled of fach means Sf.deftru@tion.. Mr. Mackay having the firft watch, 
I ldid myfelf down in my cloak. co — . 
| ae - a ee 
‘About midnight a raftling noife- was: heard: ia’ the- woods whieh Wednet 26. 
éreated a’ general alarm; and‘1. was awakened to-be informed of the cir- 
eumftanice,dut heardinothing. At one I took.my turn of the’ watch, and) 
our dog'continued unceafingly to run’ backwards and forwards along th 
AKirts‘of, the wood in a’ ftate of' refllefs Vigilance.’ At two'in the morn ae 
ing ‘the-centinel informed me, that’ he faw fomething like an hum 
_-figure creeping along on all-fours about fifty paces above'us. After + 
_fome time had pafled in-our fearch, J.at length difcovered that his infor- 


_ mation. 


Ne 


(270 


1793+ 
~ Jung , 


on 


JOURNAL OF ‘A VOYAGE THROUGH: THE 


mation was true, and it.appeared to me that a bear had occafioned the: 


\—~—~4 alarm; but when ‘day appeared, it proved to bei an old; grey-haired, 


blind man, who had been €ompelled to leave his hidingplace by ex- 


treme hunger, being tod infirm. to join im the flight of the. natives to 
whom he belonged. Whén I:put my handon’ this objeét. of decaying 


nature, his alarm was fo great, that I expeéted it would have thrown him 


into convulfions. I immediately :led him to our fire which had been jut 
lighted, and gave him fomething to eat; which he much wanted, as he 


had not tafted: food for two days.. : When his. hunger was fatisfied, and he 


had -got warm and compoled,, | .requefted -him:‘to acquaint me with the 
caufe of that alarm which had taken place refpetting us among: his rela- 
tions and friends, whofe regard!.we appeared to have. conciliatéd but a 
few days paft, He replied; that very foon after we had left them, fome 
natives arrived from abevej who. informed them ‘that we were enemies ; 
and our unexpected return,jin dire€t, contradi€tion to our own declara- 
tions, confirmed them in ‘that opinion. , They were. now, he faid, fo 
fcattered, that a confiderable ..time would elapfe, before. they could 
meet again. We gave him the real hiftory of our retura, as well as 
of the defertion of our guide, and, at the fame time, ftated the impol- 


- fibility of our proceeding,, unlefs we’ procured a native to conduét us. 
' He replied, that if “he had ‘not loft. his fight; he would with the greateft 


. readinefs have accompanied, us on our journey. He alfo confirmed the - 


accounts which we had received: of the country,, and the route to the 
Weltward. I did not negle&-to. employ every argument_in my power, 
that he might be perfuaded of our ‘friendly aiipolitions | to the inhabitants 


‘ " wherefoever we might. meet them. 


™~ 


At 


>. NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. : 


At fan-rife we perceived a canoe with one man in it on the oppofite 
fide ofithe' river, andiat'our requeft, the blirid man called to him to-come 


to. us,/but-he returned: no/anfwer, and continued his courfé as faft as he 


could: paddle down the current. He was confidered as a {py by my men, 
and I was confirmed in that opinion, when I faw a wooden canoe drift- 
ing with. the: ftream'clofe in to the other fhore, where it was more than: 


. probable'that fome of the natives might be concealed. It might, therefore, 


Have-been an ulelels enterprile, or perhaps fatal to the future faceels of 
aur undertaking, if we had: purluéd thefe’ people: as they might, through. 


_ fear, have employed their arnis againtt us,.and provoked us to retaliate. 


ct ait M 
™ LHOo 4 ‘ . ine . t a 


<« TRe oldman informed’ me, that fome of the natives whom F had feen 
Keré, were gone'up the ‘river, and thofe whom: I faw below had left their 


. Fate! Hation to: gather. a‘ root in the plains, which, when dried, forms a 
. ery, 4% e- fy Sof gee ye 1 ry . 4 a « ‘ ‘ hoe 
‘ eonifiderable article‘in their winter ftock of provifions. He had a woman, 


- 


- that he mutt accompany me: for the purpofé of introducing us to his. 


wee 


rapes 


héYaid, with him; who-ufed to fee us walking-along the fmall adjoining. 


river, but when he called. her he received no-anfwer, fo that fhe had pro- 
bably fled to join her people: He informed me, alfo, that he expetted 


4'€onfiderable:nutitber‘of his tribe‘to come-on the upper part of the river’ 
‘to vatch’fith for‘theit ‘préfent fapport, and: to cure them for their winter: 
flore’s. aniohg whom’ he had‘ fon and-two brothers, ‘ 


slat lt 
eye, _ wed eS OME zy ht eget : ‘. on 


“In: idonfequende of thefecommunieations, T deemed it altogether: un-- 


neceflary to-lofe any: more time at this place, and.I informed the old man 


‘fiends. and felations, ‘and: that if-we met with his‘fon' or. brothers, I de- 


_ pended Jupon’him‘ td ‘perfuade them, or fome ‘of their-party, to attend us 


“a phy . as. 


a 


ye 


272 


1793- 
June. 
beer 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


as guides in our meditated expedition, .He. exprefled, bie withes::to be 
excufed from this ‘fervice, and in. other -circumfanses, weidhoduld not 
have infifted on. it, but, fituated.as:.we wete,, we: Could mot sield ito his 
requel wo Sop ok gor atl awe yiabae iin 
, : : ' eins GRUP Gen daVnbitos eae ban, 
At feven i in the morning. we left this, place, which, named ; Deferter’s 
River or Creek. - Our blindg- Buide NAS: however, fo averle te.comtinuing 


‘with us, that I was under, thezwery, difagreeable necefity..of ordering the 


men to carry him“ into the canoe 5, and this. was, ithe firft, i ab: during my. - 
voyage, that had the femblance, of. violent. dealing... He -cgntinyed,to 
{peak i in a very loud tone, while he remained, according to his conjec- 

ture, near enough to the camp. to.be heard, but in a language; that 1 pur’ 
interpreters did not underftand, «On afking bim what he Jaid, and why 
he did not Tpeak in:a language. known to us, he replied, that the. woman 
underftood him better in that which, he fpoke, and, he;. requelted.. her, if 
fhe heard ‘him, to come for him to. the COrYIME:PIACEy. Benepe he :ex- 
Petied we fhould leave him. ool a ee ee 


Bilas aalelesa 
At length our canoe was, become do.leaky;. that i it was abfolutely unfit | 
for dervice; and it was the unremitting employment pf one. perfon to keep 
her clear of water: we, therefore, inquired ofthe old man where we could 
conveniently obtain the articles neceffary to build a new one; and we un- 


‘derftood from him that, at Tome, diftance, up-the tiver,-we -fhould find 


‘ pleaty « of bark and cedar, ear de ay Poors a SADE CGR bo Lt ove 


7 gdp aedea: vende ace fou 

At ten, being atthe foot of a -arépid “we Tawa; Snalheanoe noming gdown 
‘with twe men in.it.. We thought it: would,-be:impoflible for them to 
| e{cape, 


ws 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


efcape, and therefore ftruck off from the fhore with a defign to intercept 

. them, dire@ting the old man at the fame time to addrefs them; but they 
no fooner perceived us, than they fteered into the ftrength of the cur- 
rent, where I thought that they muft inevitably perifh; but their attén- 
tion’ appeared to be engroffed by the fituation of their canoe, and they 
efcaped without making us the leaft reply. 


About three in the afternoon we perceived a lodge at-the entrance of 
a confiderable river on the right, as well as the tracks of people in the 


‘mud at the mouth of a {mall river on the left. As they appeared to be 


_ frefh, we landed, and endeavoured to trace them, but without fuccefs. 


H 
1 
\ 
4 


| 
\ 
| 


| 
| 


{ 
I 
{ 


. We then croffed over to the lodge, which was deferted, but all the ufual 


; . 4. . 
furniture of fuch buildings remained untouched. e 


& 

Throughout the whole of this day the men had been in a ftate of 
extreme ill-humour, and as they did not choofe openly to vent it upon 
me, they difputed and quarrelled among themfelves, About fun-fet 
the canoe ftruck upon the flump of a tree, which broke a large hole 


in her bottom; a circumftance that gave them an opportunity to let 


‘Joofe their difcontents without referve.: I left them.as-foon as we had 


. landed, and afcended an elevated bank, in a ftate of mind which I 


{carce wifh to recolleét, and fhall not attempt to defcribe. At this - 


‘ place there was a fubterraneous houfe, where I determiried to pals 


: the night. — The water had rifen fince we had paffed down, and it 


was with the utmoft exertion that we came up feveral points in the 
courle of the day. 


Na -: a . We 


me 


aot 
aT 


274 


en poten 
Vhurlday 37. 


17199 
une, 


( 


‘NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


We embarked at half paft four, with very favourable weather, and at 
eight we landed, where there was an appearance of our being able to 
procure bark; we, however, obtained but a {mall quantity. At twelve 
we went on fhore again, and colleéted as much as was neceflary for our 
purpofe. It now. remained for us to fix on a proper place for building 
another canoe, as it was impofitble to proceed with our old one, which 
was become an abfolute wreck. “At five in the afternoon we came toa 
fpot well adapted to the’ bufinefs in which we were about to engage. It 
was on a {mall ifland not much encumbered with wood, though there . 


was plenty of the {pruce kind on the oppofite land, which was only di- 


vided from us by afmall channel. We now landed, but before the canoe 


was unloaded, and the tent pitched, a violent thunder-ftorm came on, 
accompanied with rain, which did not fubfide till the night Nad clofed 
in upon us. Two of our men who had been in the woods for. axe- 
handles, faw a deer, and one of them fhot at it, but unluckily miffed his 


aim. A net was alfo prepared and fet in the eddy at the end of the 
ifland. @ 


~ , : 
1 . 
of . . 
' as 
a . 
. , , 
’ . o 
% 


€ . ‘ 
la CHAP. 

ae by 4 > . . 
rg . Se ; 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


-\ . -. 
CHAPTER ‘VIL a) 


278 


: Make preparations to build a canoe, Engage in that important work. Jt ~ 


_ proceeds with great expedition. The guide who had deferied arrives with 


another Indian. He communicates agreeable intelligence. They take an 


opportunity to quit the ifland. . Complete the canoe. Leave the ifland, 
which was now named the Canoe Ifand. Obliged to put the people on 
Jfhort allowance. Account of the navigation. Dofficult afcent of a rapid. 
'Frefh perplenities. Continue our voyage up the river. Meet the guide 
and fome of his friends. Conceal fome pemmican and other articles. 
Make preparations for proceeding over land. Endeavour to Jfecure the 
canoe tall our return. Proceed on our journey, Vartous circumfiances 
of tt. ; 

t 
aarti 


2 
an 


Ara -very early hour of the morning every man was employed in 
: ‘making preparations for. building another canoe, and different parties 
went in fearch of wood, watape, and gum. At two in the afternoon 
they all returned ficcefsful, except the collef&tors of gum, and of that 
article it was feared we fhould not obtain here a fufficient fupply for our 
‘immediate wants. After a neceffary portion of time allotted for refrefh- 


1793» 


june, 


L 
Friday 28. 


ment, each began his refpeétive work. I had an altitude.at noon, which 


made us in-53. 2. 32. North latitude. ~ . 
: Nn2 : The 


276 


1793+ 


une 


. JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


The weather continued to be fine. At five o'clock we renewed our 


‘--y--~ labour, and the canoe was got in a flate of -confiderable forward- 


"Saturda ay 2Q. 


nefs. The condu€tor of the work, though -a good man, wa re- 
markable for the tardinef$ of ‘his operations, whatever they might be, 
and more difpofed to eat than 'to be aétive; I, therefore, took this Qp- 
portunity of unfolding my fentimeats to him, and thereby difcovering 
to all around me the real flate of my mind, and the refolutions I had 


formed for my future conduét. ter reproaching him for his general 


" ina€tivity, but particularly on thegprefent occafion, whén our time was 


. fo precious, I mentioned the apparant want of economy bh of himfelf 


and his companions, in the article of provifions. I informed him that I 


was not.altogether a ftranger to their late converfations, from whence 


_ I drew the conclufion that they wifhed to put an end to the voyage. If 


that were fo, I expreffed.my wilh that they would be ‘explicit, and tell 
me at once of their determination to follow-me no longer. I concluded, 
however, by afluring him, that whatever plan they had meditated to pur- 
fue, it was my fixed and unalterable determination to proceed, in fpite 
of every difhiculty that might oppofe, or danger that fhould threaten ine. 
The man was very much mortifted at my addrefling this remonftrance 


"particularly to him; and replied, that he‘did not deferve my difpleafure: 


. more than the reft of them. My objeé being an{wered, the converla- 
tion dropped, and the work went on. 


a 


_ About two in the afternoon one of the men perceived a canoe with 


two natives in it, coming along the infide of the ifland, but the water 


being fhallow, it turned back, and we ‘imagined that on perceiving us 


_ they had taken the alarm; “but we were agreeably ‘furprifed on feeing 


° them 


S) a 
> ° 
‘ ' + 


al 
NOR TH-WEST CONTINENT OF: AMERICA. 


them come up the outfide of the ifland, when we recogniled « our guide, 
and one of the natives whom we had already feen. .The former began 
immediately to apologize for his conduét, and affured me that fince 
he had. left me, his whole time had been employed . in fearching after 
his family; who had been feized with the general. ~panic,,, that had 


been occafioned by the falfe reports of the people who had firft’ fled ; 


from us. He faid it was generally apprehended by the natives that 
we had been unfriendly to their relations above, who were expeGed 


upon the river in great numbers at this time; and that many of the: 


Atnah or Chin nation, had come up the river to where we had been, 


in the hope of feeing us, and were very much difpleafed with him 
and cis friends. for having neglected to give them an early noticé of 


our arrival there. He added, that the two men whom we had feen’ 


yeflerday, or the day before, were juft returned from their rendezvous, 
with the natives of the fea coaft, afd had brought a meflage, from his 
brother-in-law, that he had a new axe for him, and not to forget to 
bring a moofe fkin dreffed in exchange, whith he a€tually had in his 
canoe. He expeéted to meet him, he faid, at the other end of the 


’ carrying- -place. © _ mo, i 


. This was as pleafing intelligence as we had reafon to expeét, and 
it is almoft fuperfluous to obferve that we ftood in great need of it. 


I had a meridian ‘altitude, which gave 53.3.7. North latitude. Talfo : 


took time in the fore and afternoon, that gave a mean of 1, 97. 42. 
Achrometer flow apparent time, which, with an obferved immerfion 
of Jupiter's firlt farellite, made our longitude 122, 48. Welt of Green- 
wich. ; + 


a The 


“978. +. JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


798" ‘The blind old man gave a very favourable account of us to his friends, 


a and they all» three were very merry, together daring the whole ‘of the . 


afternoon. That our guide, However, might not, efcape from us during 


"_ the night, I determined to watch hi a 


Sunday 90. | Our frangers conduéted themfelves with great good- humour through." 


out the day. According to their information we fhould find their friends 
above and below the carrying-place. They mentioned, alfo, that fome 


of them were-not of their tribe, but are allied to the people of : the feax 


coatt, who: de with the white men, _ Thad a- meridian altitude, that 


gave 53. 3. 17. North latitude. - me 

, a: = a 
so Jaye Laft night Thad the firft watch, when one of my, Indians propofed to 
fit up with me, as he underftood, from the old man’s converfation, that 


4 


he intended, in the courfe of the night, to make his efcape. Accord-" 
ingly : at‘eleven I extinguifhed my light, and fat quietly i In try tent, from , 
whence ‘I could obferve the motions of the natives. . About twelve, . os 


though § the night was.rather dark, I obferved’ the old man creeping on his — 


hands. and knees fowards the water-fide. We “accordingly followed him 


/ very quietly to the canoe, and he would have gone away with it, if he 


had not .been interrupted in his defign. .On upbraiding him for his 
treacherous conduéf, when he had been treated with fo much kindnels 

by us, he denied the i Intention of which w e kecufed him, and declared 

that his fole obje€t was-to affuage his thir. At length, howevef, he 

oe acknowledged - ‘the -trath, and when we 'brought-him to the fire, his 
friends, who now awoke, on being, informed of what,had palled, repro- 
bated. his condudt, and afked him’ ‘how he could expeét thatthe white 


people 


Py ° oo ’ . . . . a. 
5 


' Tae . ° 
5 . . G oy lw . 5 
4 . wt . a) 
. c 4 
. Lia ° > 
> . ° “ONS 
> af, : t. co 
cy : 
a oe? ; _ 7 . 
> * ‘ ‘ . 
2° oe ° . . . 


as 


NORTH-WEST CON TINENT OF AMERICA. 279 


people ' would return to this country,. if they experienced fuch’ ungrateful | yes: 
treatment. The guide faid, for his. part, he was not a woman, and would oe -— 
never run away ‘through fear. But notwithftanding this courageous de- 
claration, at one J awakened. Mr. Mackay, related’ to him what- had 


_palled, and requefted him not to indulge himfelf in fleep till I fhould 


“files +It was feven’ before I awoke, and’on quitting my tent I was fur- 
prifed at not feeing thé guide and his companion, and my apprehenfions 
were increafed when I obferved that the canoe was removed from its 
late fituation, To my inquiries after them, fome of the men very com- 
poledly anfwered that they were gone up the river, and had left the old 
_man behind them. Mr. Mackay alfo told me, that while he was bufily. 
. employed on the canoe, they had got to the point before he had obferved 
Rasen of 8 
day the guide had expreffed his defign, as foon as the fun was up, to go 
‘and wait for us, a ib might find his friends. I hoped this might 


‘their departure, The interpreter now informed me that at the 


be true; ;; but that my¢*people fhould fuffer them to depart without 
giving me notice, was a circumftance that awakened very, painful re- 
fleGions i in my breaft. ‘The weather was clear in the forenoon. “My ob- 
fervation this day gave 53. 3. 32. North latitude. . : 
| At fivein the afteiiivion our veflel was completed, and ready for fer- 
vice. She proved a -Rronger and better boat, than the old one, ‘though . 
. hadi it not been for the’ ‘gum obtained from the latter, it would have been 
a matter of great difficulty to have procured a fufficiency of that article 
to have prevented, her from leaking. The remainder ofthe day. was 
employed by ‘the people:in cleaning and refrefhing themfelves;. as they , 


had enjoyed no relaxation from their labour fince we landed on this {pot. 
; s ~ ge ae oe ‘ The 


. $ 
a ¢ ‘ # 
. ‘ . r 
1 . , ; ‘ r 
a e i a 
1 
, 


' 
% 


280 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


1798: The old-man having manifefted for various and probably very: falla- 

ae cious reafons, a very great averfion to accompany us any further, it did 

| not appear that there was any neceflity to force his inclination. We 

| now put our arms in order, which was foon accomplifhed, .as they were. 

at all times a general object of attention. 
a 

Tuclday2, It rained throughout the’ night, but at hal¥ patt three. we were ready to 

embark, when I offered to conduét the old man where he had fuppofed. 

we fhould meet his friends, but he declined the propofition. -I therefore 

direfted a few pounds of pemmican to be left with him, for his imme- 

diate fupport, and took leave of him and the place, which I named Canoe 

A " Ifland- , During our flay there we had been moft cruelly tormented by 
‘flies, particularly the fand- fly, which’ [ am difpofed to confider as the . 4 

moft tormenting*infe@ of its ‘fize in nature. I was alfo compelled’ to 

‘put the people upon fhort allowance, and confine them to two. meals 

a-day, a regulation peculiarly offenfive to a Canadian voyager. One 

+ “of thefe‘meals was compofed of the dried ‘rows of: fil, pounded, and 

| boiled-in water, thickened with a {mall quantity of flour, and fattened 

| 3 _ with a bit of grian. Thefe articles, being brought to the confiftency 

of an hafty pudding, produced a fubftantial and not unpleafant difh. 
The natives are very careful of the rows of fifh, which they dry, and pre- 


- fervein bafkets made of bark. Thofe we ufed were found in the huts of the 

firft people who fled from us. During our abode in Canoe Ifand, the water 

‘ funk three perpendicular, feét. I now gave the mena dram each, which 
ae - could nat’ but be confidered, at this tine, as a very comfortable treat. 


. They~ were;-indeed, in _in high fpirits, when they perceived the fuperior " 
“y Rr 
excellence of the new veflel, and reflected t that it was-the-work of their 
+ ee ee 
‘own hands, . . 
: yo oo — - At 


“ 
t 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


At eleven we arrived at ‘the rapids, and the foreman, who had not 
forgotten the fright he fuffered on coming down’ it, propofed that the 
canoe and lading fhould be carried over the mountain. I threatened him 


__ with taking the office, of foreman on mylelf, and fuggetted the ‘evident 


Pood 


change there was in the appearance of the water fince we paffed i it, which 
upon examination had funk four feet and an half. As the water did 
not feem fo ftrong on the Weft fide, I determined to crofs: over, having 
firfl put Mr. Mackay, and our two hunters, on fhore, to try the woods 
for game. We accordingly traverfed, and got up clofe along the rocks, 


"toa  confiderable diftance, with | the paddles, when we could proceed no 


- that which oppofed our progrefs.; they were then to faflen the end ef the | 


further without “afliftance | fr rom the line; and to draw it acrols a perpen- 


mount for the diftance of ftfty-fathoms, appeared to be an infur- 


mountabl¥obftacle. The general opinion was to returh, and carry on 


the other fide; I defired, however, two of the men to take the ling; which. 


was feventy fathoms in length, with a {mall roll of bark, and endeavour to 
climb up the rocks, from whence they were to defcend on the other fide of 


line to the roll of bark, which the current would bring to us; this being 


- effeéted, they would bé able to draw us up. This was an enterprife of 


difficulty and danger, but it was crowned with fuccels; though. to get to” 
the water’s edge above, the men were obliged. to let themfelves down . 


with the line, run round a tree, from the fummit.of the rock: By a re" 


petition of the fame operation, we at length cleared the’ rapid, with the 
additional trouble of carrying the canoe, and unloading at two cafcades. 


"We were not more than two hours:getting up shis difficult part of the 


river, including: the time employed i in repairing an “hole which. had been 


broken in the carioe, by the negligence of the fteerfman, 
; Oo . oo. Here 


282 
1793 
July. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


Here we expeéted to meet with the nitives, but there was not the 


ae leaft appearance of them, except that the guide, his companion, and two 


Wednef. Be . 


“yy * 


others, had apparently paffed the carrying-place. We faw feveral fith leap 
out of the water, which appeargit te-be of the falmon kind.’ The old man, 
indeed, had informed us that this was the feafon when. the large fifh be- 


gin to come up the river. Our ‘hunters returned, but had not feen the 


track of any animal. We now continued our journey; the current was 


not ftrong, but we met with, frequent impediments from:the fallen trees, 
-which lay along’the banks. We landed. at eight 1 in the evening 5 and 


} 
{uffered inflefcribable 1 inconveniences from the flies. 


? 


It had’ rained hard in the night, and there was fome. {mall rain in the 


morning. At four we entered our canoe, and at ten we came to a fmall . 


"river, which anfwered to the defcription of that whofe courfe the natives’ 


~. faid , they follow in their journies towards the fea coaft; we therefore put’ 


into it, and endeavoured, t to > difcover-iF-our- “guide. had janded here; but 
there were no traces -of~him ¢ or of any others. My-~ ~former™ ‘perplexities 


were now renewed. if I pafled this river, it ‘was-probable that I “might 


' mifs' the natives; and I had reafori to fufpeét that my men would Bot 


-confent tq return thither. As for attempting the'woods, without a guide, 


té introduce us tothe firft inhabitants, fuch a determination would be” 


little fhort of abfolute madnefs. At length, after ‘mich painful reflec-_ 


tion, I refolved to come’at once .to a full explanation with my people,” 


° and I experienced a confiderable relief from this refolution. Accord: 


u 


“- ingly, after repeating the promife they had fo lately made me, on\our , 
putting back up the river, T. reprefented to them that this ‘appeared to™ 
me'to be the {pot from’ which the natives took their departure for the 


5 


. . . fea 
o & 8 


% 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 283 


; 

fea coaft, and added, withal, that I was determined to try it; for though — 1793. 
2 uy, 

our guide had left us, it was poffible that, while we were making the “-v—-— 


* neceflary preparations, he or.fome others might appear, to relieve us 
from our prefent difficulties. I now found, to my great fatisfaétion, 
that they had not come to any fixed determination among themfelves, . 
as fome of them-immediately affented to undertake the woods with me. 
Others, however, fuggefted that it might be better to proceed a few 
leagues further up the river, in expeftation of finding our guide, 
or procuring anothér, and that after all we might return, hither. 


This plan I very readily agreed to adopt, but before I left this place, 


to which I gave the name: of the Welt-Road River, I fent fome of 
the. men into the woods, in different dire€tions, and went fome 
diftance up ‘the ‘river myfelf, which I found to be navigable only for 
{mall canoes. Two of the men found a good beaten path, leading up 
an hill ju behind us, which I imagined to be the great road. 


f 


At four in the afternoon we left this place, proceeding up the river; 


r | Bs 
ut 


and had not been upon the water more than three quarters of an hour, 
when we faw two canoes coming with the ftream. No fooner did the 


. tener en 
people in'them perceive us than they landed, and we went on ffore-at— 


the fame place with them. They proved to be our guide, and fix of his 
relations. He was covered with a painted beaver robe, fo"that we > 


- {carcely knew him in his fine habiliment. He inftantly defired us to 


1% 


7 ‘ingly gave him a jacket, a “pair of trowlers, and an handketchief, as 


.acknowledge that he had not difappointed us, and declared, vat the fame | 


~ time, that it was his .conftant intention to keep his word. I accord- 


a reward for his honourable conduét. The flrangers‘examined us with 
» Oo2 | the 
7° 


ar 


Qo. 


oe EL 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE FHROUGH THE 


the moft minute attention, and two of them,.as | was now informed, be- 


-~1 longed to the people whom we firft faw, and who fled with fo much 
‘alarm from us. They told me, alfo, that they were fo terrified on that 


occafion, as not .to approach their huts for two days; and that when 
they ventured thither, they found the greater. part of their property! de- 


‘flroyed, by the fire running in the ground. According to their ac- 


. count; they were of a different tribe, though I found no difference in. 


Tuefday 4¢ 


their language from that of the Nagailas or Carriers: They are called 
Nafcud Denee. Their lodges were at fome diftance, on a {mall lake, 
where they take fifh, and if our guide had not gone for them there, we 
fhould not have feen an human being on the. river. They informed me 
that the road by their habitation is the fhorteft, and they propofed that 
we fhould take it. ~ oe _ 


‘ 
& 


At an early hour this morning, and at the fuggeftion of our guide, 
we proceeded to the landing-place that leads to the ftrangers lodges. 
Our. great difficulty here. was to procure a temporary feparation 
from our company, in,order to hide. fome, articles we could, not carry 
with. us, and. which i wouldgiave been. imprudent to leave in, the power 


. of the natives, Ageétdingly: Mr. "Mackay, and one of our, Indians em- 


barked: with them, and, foon. rin: out of our fight. At our firft hiding- 
place we left a bag of penimican, weighing ninety: pounds,.two. bags. of 
wild rice, and a gallon keg of Sanpowder. Previous to: our putting 
thefe articles in the ground, we rolled: them up-in. oil: ' cloth, and dreffed: 


leather. In the fecond: hiding-place, and id guarded -with. ‘the fame rollers, 


we hid two.bags of Indian corn, or maize, e, and a. ‘balg-of different articles 


of merchandife, When we had completed this: important objeét, we 
' proceeded: 


- OL 


rc 


a “NORTH. WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. | - 


covered the whole with large pieces of timber. . 
. . > 


‘Ss While, we were eagerly employed in. this neceffa 


- proceeded till half paft eight, when we landed at the entrance ofa {inall 


rivulet, where our friends were waiting for us. 


Here it was neceflary that we fhould leave our canoe, and whatever wé 
could.not carry on our backs. Inthe firft place, therefore, we prepared 
a flage, on which the cdnoe was placed bottom upwards, and fhaded by 
a covering of {mall trees and branches, to keep her from the fun. We 
then built an oblong hollow {quare, ten’ feet by five,-of green logs, 


wherein we placed every article it was neceflary fer us to leave here, and - 


and his ns companions were fo impatient to be gone, that we could not tere 


senanmnnarnanana Ss arnt 


had-fome difficulty im veriuacing another of the natives to' remain, who 
ifed to wait our’: 


\ 


had undertook to-condué us: where the guide had pr 
arrival. : . 


‘At noon we were’ ina ffate of preparation to enter the wodds, an 


undertaking of which I fhall not here give any preliminary Opinion, but 


leave thofe.who read it to judge for themfelves. 


w 


weighing from eighty: five to ninety pounds eachs a-cafe with my inftri- 


"ments, a parcel of goods for prefents, weighing‘ ninety’ pounds, and a par- 


", cel containing ; animunition of the fame weight. Each of the Canadians 


had! a’ burden of about ninety pounds, . with a gun; and {ome-ammuni- . 


" tlon, 
AL , 


bufinefs, our’ guide 


- We carried: On our backs four bags and an half of pemimican, 


Tus, 


286 


1793+ 
July. . ; . or: 
—~ carry, befides their gun, &c. with which they were very much diffatis- 


-—-- 


- JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


tion. The Indiaws had about forty-five pounds ‘weight of pemmican to 


fied, and if they had dared would have inflantly left us. They had 
hitherto been very much indulged, bat the moment was now arrived 
when indulgence was no longer pra€ticable. My own load, and that of 
Mr. Mackay, confifted of twenty-two pounds of pemmican, fome rice, a 
little fugar, dc. amounting ‘in, the whole to about feventy pounds each, 
befides our arms and ammunition. I had alfo-the tube of my telefcope 


| fwung acrofs my fhoulder, which was a troublefome addition to my bur- 


then. It was determined that we fhould content ourfelves with two meals 


a-day, which were regulated without difficulty, as our Provifions did not 


require the ceremony of cooking. 

In this ftate of equipment we began our journey, as I have already 
mentioned, about twelve at noon, the -commencenent of which was a 
fteep afcent of about a mile; it lay along’ 2 well-beaten path, but the 
country througtt which «it led was rugged and ridgy, and full of wood. 
When we,were in a fate of extreme heat, from the toil of our journey, 


. °: the rain came on, and continued till the evening, and even _when it 


” ceafed the undéfwood continued i its drippings upon us. — 


About half paft fix we arrived at an Indian camp of three fires, where 


--we.found our ¥ guide, and on his recommendation .we determined to re- 


main there for the night. The ‘computed diftance of this day’s journey 
was about twelve geographical miles ; , thé courfe about Welt. 


At fant an elderly man and three, other tatives joined us : from: the 
Weltward. 


NORTH-WEST cower OF AMERICA, — | 98% 


Weltward. The former bore a lance that, very much refembled a fer- 19a 
jeant’s halberd. He had lately received it, by way of barter, from the “v7 
‘natives of the Sea-Coalt, who procured it from the white men. We ' 
fhould meet, he faid, with many of his countrymen who had juft re- ’ 
turned. from thence. According to his report, it ‘did not require more—- 
than fix days journey, for people who are not heavily laden, to reach ( 
the country of thofe with whom they bartered their {kins for iron, &c. 
and from thence it is not.quite two day’s march to the fea. They pro- _ 
pofed to fend two young men on before us, to notify to the different 
tribes that we were approaching, that they might not,be furprifed at our 
appearance, and be difpofed to afford us a friendly reception. This was — 
_a meafure which I could not but approve, and endeavoured by fome 
{mall prefents to prepoffefs our couriers in our favour. 

Thefe people live but poorly at this feafon, and I could procure no 
provifion from them, but a few fmall, dried fifh, as I think, of the carp 
kind. They had feveral European articles; and. one of them had a 
{irip of fur, which appeared to me to be of the.fea otter. He obtained 
it from the natives of the coatft, and exchanged it with me for fome . 


a 


_ beads and, a brafs crofs. 


' We retired to reft in as much fecurity as if we had been long habituated 
toa confidence i in our prefent affociates: indeed, we had no alternative; ” 
for fo great were the fatigues of the day ir in our mode of travelling, that 
we were in great need of reft at night. 


We had no ‘fooner lai ourfelyes down to reft lait night, than the’ Friday 5. 


\ a natives 


“P 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


' 
natives began to fing, 1 in a mAnner very differerit from what I had been 
accuftomed to hear atidhg favages. It was not accompanied either with 


' dancing, drum, orrattle; but confifted of foft, plaintive tones, and a modu- 


lation that was‘rather agreeable: it had fomewhat the air of church mufic. 
As the natives had requefted me not to quit them at a very early hour in 
the morning, it was five before I defired that the young men, who were to 
proceed with ts, fhould depart, when they prepared to, fet off: but, on 


calling to our.guide,to condu& us, he ‘aid, that -he bia not intend to.. 


accompany us any further, as the young men would anfwer our purpofc 
as well as himfelf. I knew it would be in vain to remontftrate with 
him, and therefore {ubmitted to his caprice without a feply. However, I 
thought proper to inform him, that one of my people had loft his dag, 
or poignard, and requefted his affiftance in the recovery of it. He afked.. 
me what I would, give him to conjure it back again; and a knife was 


" agreed ta be tHe price of his necromantic exertions. “Accordingly, all 


the dags and knives in the place were gathered together, andthe natives 
formed a circle round. them; the ‘conjurer alfo remaining in. the middle. 
When this part of the ceremony was arranged, he began to fing, the reft 
joining in the chorus;. and .after fome:time he produced the pomgnard 
which was ftruck in the ground, _and returned it to me. 
: 4 
At feven we were ready to depart; when I-was furprifed to hear our: 
late. guide propofe, without any folicitation on.our part,to refume his office; 
and he a@tually. condited us as far as.a {mall-lake, where.we found an en- 
campment of three families. The young men who had undertaken to con- 
du& us were not well underftood by. my interpreters, who continued to 
__be fo. difplealed. with their'j ‘journey, that they. performed. this. part of their 
- a duty 


Pal 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


duty with great relu€tance. I endeavoured to perfuade an elderly man 


289 


i ae 


of this encampment to accompany us to the next tribe, but no induce- ele 


ment of mine could prevail on him to comply with my wifhes. 1 was, 
therefore, obliged to content myfelf with the guides I had already en- 
gaged, for whom we were obliged to wait fome time, till they had 
provided fhoes for their journey. I exchanged two halfpence here, 
one of his prefent Majefty, and the other of the State of Mafla- 
chufet’s Bay, coined in 1787. They hung as ornaments in children’s 


+ ears. ‘ ‘ ! 


My fituation here was rendered rather unpleafant by the treatment 
which my hunters received from thefe people. The former, it appeared, 
were confidered as belonging to a tribe who inhabit the mountains, and 
are the natural enemies of the latter. We had alfo been told by one of 


the natives, of a very ftern afpeét, that he had been ftabbed by a rela- ° 


tion of theirs, and pointed to a {car as the proof of it. Twas, there- 


fore, very glad to’ proceed on my journey. 


Our guides conduéted us along the lake through thick woods, and 
without any path, for about a mile and an half, when we loft fight of it. 
This piece of water is about three miles long and one broad. We then 
croffed a creek and entered upon a beaten track, through an open coun- 
try, fptinkled with cyprefs trees. At twelve the fky became black, 
and an heavy guft with rain fhortly followed, which continued for up- 
__wards of an hour.. When we perceived the approaching ftorm, we fixed 
» our thin, light oil-cloth to fcreen us from it. On rénewing our march, 
- as. the bufhes were very wet, I defired our guides, they having no bur- 

, Pp | . ~ _ «dens, 


290 


™N 


ae 
he wy i 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


dens, . to walk in Front,. and beat them as they. went : this tafk they chofe 
to decline, and accordingly I undertook it. . Our road ‘now lay along a 
lake, and acrofs & creek that rain mto it. The guides: informed, me, that 


"this part of the country abounds in beaver : many traps were feen along 


the road which had been. fet for lynxes and martens. °° About a'quarter - 


of a mile from the place where ‘we had bén ftopped by the rain, the 


ground was covered with hail, and as we .advariced, the hailftones i in- 
creafed i in ize, fome of them being as big as mufket-balls. ‘In this man- 
- ner was the ground whitened for upwards of two miles. At five in the 


_aftérnoon we arrived on the banks of another lake, when i it again threat- 


ened ram; and we had already-been fufficiently wetted-in thé-courfe of 
the day, to. look with. complacency towards a repetition of it: we ac- 
cordingly { fixed our thed, the rain continuing with great : violence through 
the remainder of the day. it was, therefore, determined, that 1 we fhould 


oe \ 


op here for the night. ) SE ene 


’ t 
| : an 
“ . ' \¢ 
t ta . 
~ 


\ 


In the courfe of the day we « paffed three winter t uts ; they confifted of 


"low walls, with a ridge- pole, covered with the brariches of the Canadian | 


balfam-tree. ‘One of niy men had a violent pain if his ‘née, and I 


| -atked the giides to take a fhare-of his burden, as. they: had. nothing to 


-_ 


Saturday 6G. * 


carry. but their beaver robes, and: bows and arrows, bat’ they eould not 
be made to underfiand a word of my réqueft. : 


At four this. snoring Tarole from my bed, “tba has ‘it was. - AS we 
muft-have. been i in a moft. urifortunate. predicament, if our gitides fhould 


have. deferted-us-in-the-night,-by_way-of Lecurity, I-propofed to the . 


youngeft of them to, fleep. with me, and he readily’ eonfented. Thefe 
, people 


‘laid down v upon it, we covered ourfelyes with my camblet cloak, My 
companion’s hair being greafed with fifh-oill, and his body {meared with 


. 


interiupt my reft; but ae inconyeniences ielded to my fatigue, and 


 F paffed a nigh of found re of 


oo : “ 
. rf . v . le , 1 


r 
“ 


a ‘took ‘the lead in our, march, as I'had dohe yefterday, i in order to. 


syle the branches of the wet whieh continued to hang upon them, ‘We 
proceeded with all poffible expetition through a level country with -but 
. ttle ‘under-wood ; the larger trees were' 0 ‘the \fir kind.” At half pait 
eight we fell upon the road, which Wwe firft intended to have taken from 
‘the. Great River, and muft be fhorter: th fi that which. we. had travelled. 
"The Weft-road river was alfo in fight, Winding through a valley.. We had 
‘not met with any water fince our enc dmpment of ia night = and though 

- the’ river: was dt Auch a diftance 


a 


we: ‘were affliGed with violent thir 


~, 


'-from ‘ws, “and the defcent to it fo lgng and fteep, that -we were: compelled - 


to be fatisfied with cafting our lor ing looks towards it, ‘There appeared 


. eople have no covering! but their beaver g garments, and that of my com- 
panions: was a nelt of vermin. I, however, f read it. under us, and, having, 


redearth, my fenfe. of fmelling, as well as t at of feeling, threatened to_ 


NOL. 
29% 


‘1799- 
July. 
Nene 


to be more water, in the: river Here, than at its difcharge. The Indian - 


‘account, that’ it is navigable for their canoes, is, believe, perfettly 


-correét, , . Sf et 


cy 


/ 


. fringed round the bottom with 


Y 


JOURNAL OF A vovact 7: THROUGH THE 


when + we had paffed them, to return home. ‘Ipropofed that oné,of them 
Should remain with us, while two of my ‘people fhould leave, theit Joads 
behind and accempany the other to the lodges: ‘But they: would fot flay 
tb hear our  perfualidns, 3 and ~were e foon out of fighte, © | 


7 dot 


ak 
4 


" ‘Tnow defi red the Cancre to ‘leave his burden,. ‘ake « a ‘fmall quan. 


tity : of provifion, with his arms and blanket, and follow me..: I alfo-. 


told my men to come.on as faft as they could, and that I would wait for, 


a them as foon: as I had formed ah ‘acquaintance* “with; wider eh al the 
" country before us. We accordingly followed per> guides with all. the 


expedition i in our power, but did not: @yertaktethem till we .came to a 
family of natives, confifting of one mas, two women, and fix ‘children, 


"with whom we found them, Thele peop! eBetrayed no figns of fear at 


our appearance,: and the man willingly congerfed -with-my interpreter, — 


_ to whom he madeshimfelf more intelligible, ‘than. our, guides had been: 
: able to do- They, however, had informed fim of. the. -objeét of our 
| journey. He. pointed out to us one of his wivés, who was a native of the 


fea coaft, which was Not a very great: diflance froni. us.: This woman 


“ was more inclined ‘to corpulency than any ‘we had yet: fen,’ was.of low 
"lature, with an oblong. face, grey yes, and.a flattith nofe.. She. was’ de- 
_ eorated with ornaments‘of ahi fuch as large blue beads, either 


pendant from. her ears, , encircling ; ‘her neck,~or braided in her hair: the 


alfo wore bracelets of brafs, copper, and horn. Her garments confifted 


ofa “kind of tunic, which: was: overed: ‘with a robe. “OF matted bark, 
kin: of the fea: otter. - - None-of the women” 


a whom: I had feen fince we ‘croft d the mountain wore this: ‘kind of tunic ; ., 
; ‘their blankets pe merely git ru round the wailt,. She: chad. learned the 


d nguage 


-NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 203 


a. language of her hufband’s tribe, and confirmed his account, that we were — 1793. 
" at'no great diftance from the fea. : They were on their way, fhe’ faid, Sie 
to! the great river to filh. Age.feemed to’ be an objet of oreat venera~ 
‘tion among ghele people, for they. carried an old woman by turns on their | 
backs who was quite blind and infirm from the very advanced petiod of 
her life. °° * " coe pe 
a — =: me 


Our people: having joined us and refted. themofeives, I requefied our 


be 


nr 


guides to proceed, when the elder of them told me that he-fhould not go 
any further, but that thefe people would fend-a boy to accompany his 
brother, and I began to think. myfelf.rather fortunate, that we.-werenot 
_ deferted by them all ep ee 7 3 

. About noon we o parted, and j in two , hours we came.up with two m men 
“and their families: when we firlt faw them they were fitting down,. -as if 
to reft themfelves ;. but,no fooner did they. perceive us than they rofe up- 

_ and feized theit drs. The boys who were behind us immediately ran 
‘forwards and fpoke to them, when they laid by their arms and received 9 ~ | 
us as friends. ‘They had been eating green berries and dried fifh. We 

, had, indeed, {carcely. jomed them, when a woman and a boy came from 
the'river with water, which they. very hofpitably ‘gave us to drink. The 
_ people of, this party had a-very fickly appearance, which’ niight have 
been’ the’ confequence.of difeafe, or that’ indolence which is fo natural to 
them}, or of both. -::;One of the women had a tattooed ling along the chin, 

“of the fame length as. her mouth, De ee as 


~ 


pis a a ‘ , ‘ 7 , ° ‘ or 


- The lads now informed me hat ey would go no. “farther “but that , 
thefe se 


’ 


294. _ JQURNAL OF & VOYAGE. THROUGH THE 


sma thefe men would-take their placess-and: they, patted fide. their families 
“—\— with as little appiarent concern;-as if they were; entire frangers to each 
other: Qne of them ‘was .very well: ‘antlerftood: iby my: interpreter, and | 

hadi refided: among'the ‘natives: of the »fea:caaft, whom he had lef but a 
thort:time.’.. According ta his:information, we! were approaching a river; 

which was neither large nor long;- but whofe banks are inhabited; and 

that i in the bay which: the {ca forms at.the mouth of it, a great wooden 

cance, with-white. people; atrives: about the: time wien the leaves, begin 

to grows: F: A prefume im thevearly pare of May. oe, “3 
SW se panied with #2 Taft: stiles cit to’an uneven, hilly, 
and fwampy country, through which: our’ way was' impeded: by a’con+ 
fiderable number of fallen trees. At five in the afternoon we were over- 
taken “by a heayy fhower' of'rain and hail; and being’ at the fame time 
a very: Muek fatigued; we. eneaniped for-the-nightinéar a fmall.creek. : Qur 
a ééurfe; til we’camé to ‘the “river, ‘was about: South+Weft:'tén miles, and 
| then’ ‘Welt, twelve or fourteén miles. :¥ thought it: pradént; by ‘way of 
fecurity, to fubmit to the fame inconveniences. have already defcribed, 


? 


and fhared the beaver robe of one of my ‘guides: during the night. -- » 
a pa ww on Stl Ol) beosiet oa nergnde bash 7 
‘Sundy 7. ~- Iwas fo bufily emplayed in: colle@ing intelligence:from’ our: conduc. 
‘to¥s, that F laft night. forgot,to wind. up :my:time-piece, and: it» was. the 
only inftance of: fach an at of inégligenve aco l-teft Fort: Chepewyan, 
on the'14th-of laft O@ober.s :At sfiveowe:: quitted ‘our lation, and; pra- 
. ceeded acrofs two mountains, covered with fpruce;.paplay| white-birch, 
and other trees, We then defcended into a level country, where we 
“feonia good road, through woods of cyprefss Wei them: caine ‘£6 :two- 
ie _ Amall 


- 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERIGA, 
friiall Jakes, at the diffance of about fourteen: miles! ;Courfe about Weft. 


ROS 


ap. 


Through them. theiriver paffes, and dur toad kept i in: parallel line with ae 


ion a‘range of elevated iground.: On.obferving.fomie people before us, 
our guides haftened:to. meet ¢herh,’and,-on their approacti, ont .of them 
ftepped Féiward with ai’ axe in his hands: Fhié party conlifted only of 
a man, two women, and the fame.nunibet .of children. . _ The ‘eldeft, of 
the women, who probably was the man’s mother, was engaged, when we 


_ joined! them, in. clearing. a cirtukar {pot, of about five:feet. in diameter, 


oft the: weeds that, infefted its nor did’ our arrival interrupt her ethploye 
“ment; which was facred to tlie metnory-of the dead..-:./The: Ipot: to which — 
her pious care was devoted, contained’ the’ grave of} dn: hitfbahd, and a 
' fon, and: whenever fhe > Palled this ways fhe "always Repped ‘to: ‘pay this 
axibate. af affebtion. i a 


~ 


sis foon-as we had. taken our mornmg’ allowaiice;’ we fet forwards, and 
about three we’ perceived miore: people: before-us,-: After fome’ alarm’ we 
came up with them. They. cGnlited of:feven men, as many women, and 
feveral children. Here I as under the neceflity of procuring another 
‘guide, and ‘we continued our; ‘route .on: the: fame: fide.of the river, till fix 
_ inthe evening, when: we  croffed: ite Et. was: kneecdeep, and about an. 
shundréd yards over. : I wilhed 1 now “to ‘top : fold the: hight; as we were all 
-of-us ‘Very much fatigued, but -our: guide recotimended:us. to’ proceed‘ 
“onwards,ta a-family of his friends; at a-fmall: Giftarice. from thence, where 
awe Arrived. at/half paft fevem. He, had-gone. forward, ‘and: procured us a 
swelcome and quiet reception. ‘There’ being: a‘net hanging: to dry, I re- 
~qjuelted the: man :to: ptepare and fet ith the. water, which He did with: 
great. expedition, and then prefented me with a few {mall drted fith, »-Our 


aly cot : courfe 


i 


296 


yee 
July 


o 
JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


courfe was South-Weft about twelve miles, part of which was an exten- 


ae five {wamp, that was feldom Jefs than knee’ deep. Inthe courfe of the 


Monday 8, 


afternoon we had feveral fhowers of rain. I-had attempted to,take an _ 


altitude, but it was paft meridian. The water of the river before the 
lodge was quite ftill, and expanded itfélf into the form of'a {mall Jake. In 
many other places, indeed, it’had afflumed:the fame form. 9 ~ 

It rained throughout the’. night, atid: it was feven in the morning be- 
fore the weather would allow us to proceed. - The guide brought me 
five {mall boiled fifh, ‘in a platter: made of bark; fome of them were of 
the carp ‘kind, and the reft of a fpecies, for which I am not qualified to 
_furnifh a name. Having dried our clothes, we fet off on our march. 
about eight, and our guide very cheerfully continued to accompany US ; 
“but he was not altogether fo intelligible as his predeceffors i in our fervice. 
We learhed from him, however, that this lake, through which the-river 


’ _opjaffes, extends to the foot of the mountain,:and that he expefted to meet 


nine men, of a tribe which inhabits the N orth fide'of the river... <.; 


.. In_this-part of our journey we were furprifed with the appearance of 
- feveral ‘regular bafons, {ome of them fuinifhéd with water, anid. the others 
empty; their. flope from the edge to the: bottom formed an angle of about 
forty-five. degrees, and their perpendicular depth. was about twelve feet. 
Thofe that contained water, difcovered gravel near ‘their edges, while 
the empty ones were covered with- gtafs and herbs, aniong which we 
_ difeovered muftard, and mint.’ Thére were.alfo feveral. places from 
‘whence the: water appears to have’ retired, which are covered with the 
fame foil and herbage. cans! Pee 

We 


AQ 
ie 


4 


7 . NORTH-WEST CONTINENT. OF AMERICA. 


“We now ;proceeded.. along a very. uneven: country; the, upper parts of 


which. were. covered, with: poplars, ‘a a little. ;under-wood, and plenty of 
grals:. the. intervening vallies were watered .with rivulets,: From thefe 


circumftances, and the. general. appearance of vegetation, I could. NOt acr - 


z count for the. apparent abfence of animals of every | kind. . 


7 4 : : . ‘ 
oer 3 134 “| 2 aa ~ s 
a a ek ve ’ 4, ‘ tf Loa, 


At) two: In’ the afternoon. we arrived at, the largeft river that we had 
fens fi ince ‘we. left our: canoe;: and which forced its. way: ‘between and 


over, the huge flones that oppofed.its current. : Our courfe was about . 


~ South-South-Welt fixteen miles along the river, which might here 
jultify. the-title: of ‘a:lake.. » The. road’was .good, and our next courfe, 
‘which, iwas. - Welt. by South, brought: us: onward ten ‘miles,--where we 
encamped, “fatigued and wet, it having rained three ‘parts of the day. 
| Thisirivér abounds with fifh, and muft fall’ into the great river, further 
down, than we had extended our voyage. td 


. . hoa ‘ * 
vet. Mai , ok 


oA heavy and continued rain fell through great part of the night, and as” 


we were in fome meafure expofed to it, time was required to dry our 
clothes ; fo.that it was half patt feven in the morning before we were: ready 
, to fet out.; As. we:found the country fo -deftitute of: gaine, and: forefee- 
ing. the: difficulty of procuring provifions for our return, i thought it pru- 
derit:ta conceal. half a. bag of pemmican; having fent off the Indians, 
and:all-my people except two;-we buried it under the fire-place, as we had 
‘done on.a former ‘occafion, - ‘Wei foon overtook our party,‘and con- 
' tinnedicur réute along the-river or lake: About twelve'l had ‘an altitude, 
Dutat was:inaccurate from the clondinefs of the weather: ‘~ We continued 


~~ our. progrefs.till five in’ the afternoon, when the water’ began'to narrow, 


ee i QO q . and 


298 


A798» 
July 


ad 


Haury 


oe fy 
JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE -\ 


and in about half an hour: we came to a ferry, where: we founda finall 


raft, At this time it began to thunder, and torrents of rain foon followed, 


* which terminated our ‘journey for the day. ‘Our courle was about South, 


twenty-one miles from’ the lake already mentioned, ‘We now. difcovered 


“the tops of mountains, covered with inow, over very. high intermediate, 
land: ’ We: killed a whitehead, and | a. grey eagle, and three grey par® 
“tridges ; we faw. alfo two otters in the river, and feveral beaver lodges’. 


along i it. When the rain cealed, we canghta fev fimall fith, and repaired 


- Wednef, 10. 


a 


the raft for the fervice of the enfuing day. .. 
At an early hour of this mporning-y we . prepared to , eros s the water. The 
traverle” is about thirty yards, and it required five trips to: get us all 
over, At a-fhort diftance. below, a fall river falls i in, that comes from 


the dire&tion in which we were. procéeding, : It ‘is a, rapid- for about 
three hundred yards, when it expands into a lake, along which our road - 


conduéted us, and beneath a range of beautiful hills, covered with ver- 


dure.. At half pat eiglit: we came to the termination of the lake, where: 
_there were two houfes that occupied a :moft delightful fituation,and as they. 


contained, their neceflaty furnitare, it feemed probable that their owners 
intended. fhortly to return... : Near them. _were feyeral graves. or: tombs, to 


which’ the natives are particularly attentive, and neyer fuffer any her 
bage to grow upon them. © In’about half‘ an.hour we reached. a place 


' where there were two temporary huts, that contained thirteeidi men, with 


‘whom we found our guide who had. preceded. us,- in, .order, to feeure a 
“ good. reception, The buildings were detached feom each other, and 


conveniently. placed. for -fifhing in. the. lake... Their. inhabitants called * 


#hemfelves Sloua-cufs-Dinais, which. denomination, as far “as $ my intev- 


rerg 
44 


- 2, 7. 7” preter, 


& 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF. AMERICA. 


preter ‘could expla it to ne I underftood to mean Red- fifh Men..” 


They: were ‘miuch more cleanly, healthy, and agreeable in their appear= 
ance, than any of the. natives whom we had paffed ; neverthelefs, I have 
no doubt that they are the fame people, from their name alone, which is 
of the Chepewyan language.’ My i interpreters, however, undeiftood very 
little of what they {aid, fo that. I did not expedt much information front 


them, Some of them faid ié Was a journey-of four days to the fea, and 
others were of opinion that it was fix; and there, were among them who: 
extended it to eight; but they all uniformly. declated that’ they -had been . 

, to. the coaft. They did not entertain. the {malleft ‘apprehenfion of.” 
danger. from us, and, when we difcharged our pieces, expreffed-no fen- - 
«’ fation, but that of aftonifhment, which,. , as ~may-be- fuppofed,, was ‘pro-" 


-portionably encreafed when one of the ‘hunters, thot an eagle, at a cons : oe 
fidérable diftance. At, twelve I obtained an “altitude; which: made , 


our latitude 58> 4+. 3% North, being not fo far South. as I exe. 


Po 
toe 


| pebted. 


I now went, accompanied. by c one sof my-men, an intetpreter, and the | 
guide, to vifit fome huts at ‘the diftance of a mile. On. our arrival the in- 
habitants prefented us with a > difh of boiled ‘ trout, ofa forall kind, > The 


‘fith would‘have been excellent if it had not tafted .of the kettle, which 
was made of the bark of the white fpruce, and of the dried grafs with 


which i it was boiled. Befides this kind of trout, red and white carp-and . 7 Se, 


jub, a are the only: fih I faw 3 as the produce of thefe waters... 


*y wt 


- Thefe people appeared to , Hive in a flate of comparative comfort: 


ey take. a greater fhare j in the Jabour of the women; ’ ‘than i is: common, 
| aa Se among 


’ : 4 
tela , 
: ' . a 
‘ a 


, 7 . 


ue 
é 


‘ + 
| 
4 
s 
. 
. 


| go JOURNAL OF A VOYAGHTAROUGIN THE 
fee atndig ‘the. favage tribes, and dre,’ ds”: ‘Liwastinformed: Content: with’ Otie 


oe’ wits” Though 'this cirevinftaice. may ‘proteed rather:from the difficulty 
| of proeutiti Tubfiftence; ‘thar: atiy habitual averfion 10 polygamy. 


‘| iat % - bees TORET att ofeeet WP Ue wl ih ea ga 

_.My preferit ‘guide now: informed ‘me; :thatvhe. could not” procéed any 
further, and I accofdingly: engaged two lof: thefe people to fucceed -him | 
in that offices ‘but when : they defired us to proceed’ oti the. beaten | path 
without them, as they: could not fet off. till- the following day, I deter- 
mined to ftay‘that!night; in order to accommodate myfelf to their: con- 
~ venience, I diftributed fome trifles.among the wives and children of the 
men who:were to be our future guides,and returned.to my péople: We ” 
came back by a different-way, and paffed by-two buildings, éreGed. be- 
< tween four : tres, and about fifteen Feet-from--the ’ ‘ground; ‘which ap- 
. peared to me to be intended as magazines for.-winter ‘provifions. At 
‘. four in the afternoon, we: proceeded ‘with ‘confiderable’ expedition, by 
the fide of the lake, till fix, when we came.to the end of it: wé.then 
frock off through amuch lefs beaten track, and at half paft feven flopped 
“for: the night: Our courfe was s about Welt-South-Wet thirteen miles, 

and Welt-fix miles Se a ee mo | 


“Phurlday 1, / 1 polled a moft uncomfortable night: the: frft part of-it'T: was tor- 
‘mented with flies, and: in the latter deluged’ with rain: © “In the morning 

- the weather’ cleared, and: as foon as ‘our’ ‘clothes were’ “dried, we pro- 

ceeded through a a thorafs. - This part ofthe cotintry had been laid watte 

-by fire, and the fallen trees added to the: pain and perplexity of our 

way. An high; rocky ridge: ftretched along’ ‘our left..." hough ‘the-rain . 

returned, we: continued our progrefs till noon; when our ‘guides ‘took to 


te Lo ane ~~ fome 


° . nt . . . 
- m4 : ; , . 
¢ , fs ; ; , 
. . eo 


1 


i Sie. Dor ee 


NORTH-WEST! CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 4 


fome trees. for fhelter. ‘We ‘then fpread our oil-cloth, and, with fome 
difficulty, made a fire. About: two the. vain ceafed, when we contitiued ‘ 
‘our journey through, ‘the fame kind’ ofvcouitry: which we: had»hitherto 


paffed. ' “At half paft three we camé,in fight of'a lake; the land, at, the 


fame time gradually rifing tor a range! of ‘mountains’ whofe'- tops wére 
covered with fhow: «: We foon after’ obferved ‘two: frefh tracks, which, 


' feemed ‘to ‘furprife ‘our ‘guides, - but’ they: fuppofed them’to “have ‘been 
made by'the,inhabitants of the country: who were corte into this-part of 
' jtto fith.. At-five in the afternoon we wete fo wet’ and cold; (for it had 

_ at intervals ‘continued to rain,) tliat we were compelled to fLop' for ‘the ; 


* 


night." We paffed fever rivulets ‘and’a creek in this day’s journey: ‘As 
Tchad ‘hitherto regulated. our courfé bythe fun, I could not form an ac- 


‘curate’ judgment of this route, as we had not been favoured with a-fight 
“oft it during the day ;- “but Li imagine it torhave begin ‘nearly in the fame’ di- 


" re€tion as that of yelterday: Our: diftance could not have been lefs than 


fifteen: miles... re re 


“Our conduétors now began to complain of our mode ‘of travelling, 
and inéntioned their intention of leaving us; and my interpréters, who 
were equally “diffatisfied, ‘added to ‘our perplexity ‘by- their condu@. 
Befides, thele circumftances, and’ the apprehienfion' ‘that the diftance 


» from ‘the: fea ‘might be greater than I had: itmbgined, it-became a matter 
. of: real nieceffity that we fhould begin ‘to diminifh the’ confumption of 


pofition which‘was as unwelcome to my People, “as it was necellay to be 


put into immediate praétice. ae 


. ‘our ‘provifions, and: ‘to: fubfift'upon two-thirds of our alléwance} a‘pro-, 


3o2 | 
ay. 793. | 


My ot 


Friday aay 
\ 


, 
| 
. 


\ _ which preceded on otir left. | 


JOURNAL OF-A VOYAGE. THROUGH THE. 


At half pat five this morning * we proceeded on. our journey, with 
cloudy weather, and, when we.came to, the end of ‘the lake feveral tracks 
were vifible: ‘that led to the fide of the water; from which circumftance I 
concluded, that fome of the natives were fifhing along the banks of it, 
This lake is not more than three miles long, and about one broad. We 

then paffed four fmaller lakes, the two firft being on our right, and thofe 
A {mall river allo, flowed \acrofs our way. 
| from the right, and we paffed it. over a beavet-dam.,: A larger‘ake now | 
| ‘appeared on‘our right, and the mountains on each fide of us were,covered 


with fhow. We afterwards came to another lake on our right, .and foon 


| reached a river, “which our guides ‘informed ‘us_was the fame ‘that we had 


pafled on a raft. They faid it was ‘navigable for canoes from the great 
river, except two rapids, one of. which we had feen., -At this place it is 
upwards of twenty yards’ acrofs,. arid deep : water. One of the guides 
fwam: over to fetch a raft which was on the oppofite. fide’ ; and having 

’ encreafed its dimenfions, we’ crofled at. two trips, except, four. of the 
men; “who preferred {wimming. - 


"Here: our. -conduétors renewed their ‘menace’ of leaving us, ‘and. IV was. 
obliged to: give them feveral’ articles, and promife more, in order fo 


induce them to continue till we could, procure. other natives to fucceed _ 


them. At four in the, afternoon wé forded the, fame river, ‘and being 
. with the guides at fome diftance before: the reft of the people; IT fat down. 
to wait for them, and.no fooner did they arrive, than the former fet off 
with fo much {peed, that my attempt | to’ follow ‘them proved: unfuccefs- 
ful. One of my Indians, however, ‘who had no: doad,. overtobk them, 
when they. excufed themfelves to. him by declaring, that their fole 


motive ; 


was 


~ NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, =” — go 


motive for leaving us, was to'prevent the people, whom. they expefted 1793, 
“ to find,’ from footing their arrows: at us. At feven o'clock, how- ance 
ever, we were fo fatigued, that we encamped without them: the moun- - sO 
; tains covered with fhow now appeared to be direftly before us. As we 
were colleéting wood for our fire, we difcovered a crofs road, where it Of, 
appeared that people ‘had paffed within feven or eight days. In fhort, 
‘our fituation was fuch as to afford a juft caufe of alarm, and.that of the 
people with me was of a nature to defy immediate alleviation, It was > 
| neceflary, however, for me to attempt it; and I refted my principles of 
encouragement on-a reprefentation of our paft perplexities and unéx- 
petted relief, and endeavoured. to, excite in them the -hope of fimilar 
good fortune.. I ftated to them, that we could not be at a great diftance 
from the fea, and that there were but few natives to pals, till we fhould 
arrive among thofe, who being accuftomed to vifit the fea coaft, and; 
having feen white people, would be difpofed to treat us with kindnefs: 
Such was the general tenor of the reafoning T employed on the occafion;, 


and Iw was s happy ‘to find. that i it was not offered i in a vain. 


~ 


~ 


6 ¢ 
The weather had been cloudy til three i in the afternoon, when the fare 


appeared ; but furrounded, as we .were, with {now-clad mountains, the 
air became fo cold, that the violence of our exercife, was not {ufficient to- 
produce a comfottable degree of warmth, Our courfe to-day was from 
Weft: to South, and at leaft thirty-fix miles. - The Jand in. general was 
very ‘barren’. and ftony, and lay in ridges, with cyprefs trees fcattered’ 
over. ‘them. ° We paffed feveral fwamps, where we faw nothing: to conlole 
‘us. but a few tracks of deer, : : 


. . 
' _ woe 
ta * _ . a » 


904 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE: THROUGH! THE 


ee - The weather: this morning was clear: buticold,: and oir: feanty cover=' 
ay j ing was: not: fufficient to. protec: us « from the: feverity of. the night. ° 
Saturday 49: About five, after we had warmed - ourfelves,iat:a large: fire, we: ‘pro. 
ceeded on our dubious journey.. ‘In about an hours we Camie.to the.edge 
° of a. wood, when we. perceived ‘an honfe? fituated on‘a green ‘fpot; and 
| by the fide of a fmall.river.., The finolté‘that iffued from it informed us 
., that it was inhabited;, ..I immediately ‘puthed : forward toward ‘this: iman- . 
fion, while my people.were in fuch a-flate'of alarm; that’ they: followed 
me with the utmoft -reluGtance,:.: On; looking back. -perceivéd::that: we 
were in an Indian defile, ‘of: fifty, yards in length.-.I, however, was clofe’ 
upon the houfé before the. Anhabjtants , perceived : “as, when’ the: women va 
and. children uttered: the. moft horrid: fhrieks, andthe only ‘man who-ap- ' 
peared to be- with. _them, ¢{caped- -out ofa. back, door,:which J: reached ia in 
time to‘prevent the womer and children. from following him.. The-man - 
fled with all his {peed into the wood, and I called.in vain: on my inter- 
" ~preters.,to fpéak to, him, but. they ‘were fo ‘agitated with fe x’ as.to jhave 
loft the power. of utterance, ., It:is.- impoflible to deferibe the diftrefg and * 


alarm of thefe poor pegple, who believing that -they were. attacked by ° 


enemies, expe&ted..an immediate -maflacre,, rwhich, among: ithemfelves, 
wa neyer fails, to follow fuch: aDeVEMte. ye Gates, yt 


‘ + 
La rot 
ee ot oe, - 
De oe METS EES ae ee Sones a aes 
a re ee Oe eee bs os ee 


Our prifoners confifted of, three.. women, and feven, . childvea. hich a 
appajently, compofed three. families.-_.At Jength,. Jhowever, by, our’de= - 
meanor, and our. prefents, Ae contrived. tg. diffipate. their, apprehenfions. 

~ One of the..women then informed, _us,-that. their . people,- with féveral 
othets, had left that place three nights before, on: a’ trading journey 
to a tribe whom fhe called Annah, which is the name the -Chepewyans 
y, | Se give 


ek 


. ‘NORTH.WEST. CONTINENT OF AMERICA,: 305 


“give "to the Knifteneaux,, at the -diftance of. ‘three: days. Stie added alfo, spe 
that from ‘the mountaitis ‘before US, which - “were: covered , with fnow, the 
fea was vifible ; and’ ‘aeconipanied her infornvation with. di prefent of. a 
‘couple of, dried filh, We now ckpreffed, our defi that, the :mati might _ 
be induced to feturn, and. éonduét. us in | the road to the: fea. “Indeed, it 
was Hot’ long: before he difcovered hit fel i in the wood, ‘when he: was 
affured, both: ‘by the women and our interpreters; that we had no hoftile . 
defign again{t him ;: but thefe affurances* had no effeét ‘in quieting. his 
apprehenligns. I then: ‘attempted to go'to him alone, and thewed him:a 

\ knife, beads; Ses to induce him to come: to me; ‘but he, in. return, ‘made 

an hoftile difplay of -his bow ‘and ‘arrows; and, having’ for a.time exhi- 

_ bited a-variety of ftrahge antics, again ‘difappeared. “However, he foon 
” prefénted himfelf, in another quarter, 4 and after a: facceff on of. parleys 
~ between’ us, he‘engaged to ° oe and aceémpany OS, - 
Da ile thefe negotiations were proceeding, I ptopofed to" vil the fifh- 

ing-1 machines, to’ whith the women- readily confented, .and. I found jin 

them ‘twenty fmall :fith, ‘fuch-as_ trout, carp, and -jub, for which I gave 

her:a large knife; a prefent that. appeared, to be requally unexped- 

ed’ ‘and: gratifying’ to -her. ‘Another man now came towards -us, from 

an hill, talking’ aloud from the. timé he appearedtill he reached us, The 

__pitrport of his s fpeech was, that he ‘threw: himéelf upon -our- mercy, and 

we might’ Agile ‘himy “iFit was our~pleafure,..but } ‘that from what.he..had. 

heard; he; doked:rather for’ our ‘friendhhip - than’ our.-erimity. He was SO 

an eller y perfori,'of a decent appearatice, and L. gave ‘him fome articles” 

“fo conciliate him to us, ‘The firft man now’ ‘followed: ‘with: a lad: along 


f # Nvith him, both of whom were the fons of .the old man, and, ‘on his ar- 
Rr | — —_ * rival. 


ve JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE - 


iT 
va 
’ 


+ rivaly hé gave’ me, feveral half-dried fifh, which I confidered as a peace. 
offeri ing. - After fome-converfation with thefe.. ‘people, - refpefting the 
_ country, and-iour future progrefs through it, we retired to. relt, with 


; 7 ‘fenfations ‘very different from thofe with: which we, had. tifen. in the 


- Sunday 14. 


‘tude.’ I Tlikewile took time an the afternoon. 


howd prsier the beaten way. - > \ es Fe 


‘morning. “The weather-had been generally cloudy, throughout the day,. 


and when the; fun, was obfcured, extremely ‘cold: for: the feafon, At 
noon I obtaine "aymeridian altitude, which gave. 52. 58. 53: North late 


t 


+ a 
o 


This morning we ¢ had a bright fan, with an a Balt wind.” Thefe people 
examined their fithing machines, when they found in them: ‘a great number 
“of fmall fith, and we dreffed as many of them as we could eate. Thus was © 


our departure fetarded until feven, when we ‘proceeded, on our r journey, 
accompanied by the, man. ‘and his two fons.. As-I did not..want the” 
younger, and fhould be obliged to feed him, I requelted of his: father to. - 


“leave him, for the purpofe of fifhing for the;women, He replied, that 


they were accuftomed to fifh for themfelves,. and that I need not be appic- 
henfive of -their encroaching upon my provifions, as ‘they were ufed to 


fuftain themfelves i in their j journies on, herbs, “and the inner tegument of 


the bark of trees, for the flripping of- which he. had a thin: piece of bone, , 
then hanging by his fide, The Jatter i is of a glutinous quality, of a 
clammy, {weet tafte, and ig generally conti dered by the: more interior In; 


" dians as a delicacy, rather.than ain- article of common food, Our guide 
informed me that there i is a fhort cut crofs the mountains, but as there 
. was no trace of a road, and it would fhorten our journey but one day, he 


~ 


Bat. | he : a, “* 


7 


ns (Coe 


ia 


/ 


N ORTH- WEST * CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


” We accordingly proceeded along a lake, Weft five miles.. We then 
croffed a fimall river, and _paffed through a fwamp, about: .South- 


“Weft, when we began gradually to afcend for fome time ‘till we 


gained the fummit of an hill, where we had an extenfive view to 


the South-Eaft, from which direftion a confiderable river appeared’ to 


. flow, at the diftance of about ,three miles: it was-reprefented to me 


“as being navigable for: canoes. “ [he defcent of this hill was more fteep _ 


than: sits-afcent, and was fuccedded ‘by another, whofe top, though not 
_- fo elevated as the laft, afforded.a view of the range of mountains, co- 
" weied with fnow, which, according to the intelligence of our guide, 


7 terminates’ in the ocean, We now left a {mall lake on our left, then’ 


\. 


croffed a creek running out-of i it, and.at one in the afternoon’ came to an 


-houfe, of the fame conftruGtion and dimenfions as have already been.men-, 


a tioned, but the materials were much better prépated and finifhed. The 


‘timber was fquared on two fides, and the bark taken off the two others ; 
._ the ridge pole was alfo fhaped in the fame manner, extending about eight 
or ten feet beyond the gable end, and fupporting a fhed over the door: 

the end of it was carved i into the fimilitude of a {nake’s head. , Several, 
hieroglyphics and figures of a fimilar workmanthigy 2 and painted with. 
red earth, decorated the interior of the building. The inhabitants had 
left the houfe but a ‘{liort time, and there weré feveral bags or bundles, 
in'it, which I did not. fuffer to be’ difturbed. Near it were two tombs, fur- 


rounded i in a neat manner with boards, and*covered with bark. . Befide- 


them feveral poles had been erééted, one of swhich was {quared, and all of 
them painted. From each. of them were fufpended feveral rolls or par- 


“ cels of bark, and o our ur guide gave the following account of them; which, 


= one Bra SO . and 


38 


1798 
July 


fe 


\ wo 


f 


JOURNAL.OF A: VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


and the’incidental errors of intérpretation, appeared to!involve two dif- 


) nad ferent ‘modes of treating, their dead; or it might.be. one:.andl thé fame. 


ceremony, which. .we did not diftinly: comprehend: at: all events, it is 


_ the praétice of thefe. people to.-bum: the bodies, of their dead, except the 


larger bones, which are. roledupin: bark. and fifpended: from poles, as. 1 
have: already: deferibed. According: to the other account, it‘appeared 
that they . aGtually ‘bury their dead; iand when -anothér.of the family 
- dies, the 2 remairis of the perfon who. was laft interred:are taken from; the 
grave and burned, as hasbeen already ‘nientioned; -fo that the members 
ofa. family are thus fucceflively buried and, burned; to. make toom-for 
dach: other ; and one tomb: proves fulficient for a family through facceed-, 
ing generations, Phere.is no houfe in this country withgut-a fonib- in 


_ its vicinity. Our Iaft courfe extended about ten. miles. ,.:.; 


. We continued our journey along the lake'before: thé. houle, and, criofl- . 
ing a fiver that flowed out of it, Game:to a: Kind of bank, or weir, formed: 
by: the natives, for-the purpofe of placing their fifhing machines, many 
‘OF which, of different fizes, were lying on the fide of the river, Our 
- guide placed: one of them, with the'vertain expeétation that on his :return. 

he theald. find plenty of-fith in it. We proceeded’ nine miles further, on 
. a good road, Wef-Séuth- Welt, when.we came to.a fmall, Jake: we:tHen 


crofled: a-river that ran out of it, -and our guides. were In. continial, OX 


_ —peélation of. meeting: with: fome of the natives, - ‘Fo:this place: eur cour 
was ‘a ‘mile and an half, iin the fame dire@ion as the laft:’. At‘nine, at 
“nightwe croffed-a: river‘on rafts, our: daft: diflance. being: about:four miles 
South-Eaft, on-a winding road, through a fwampy country, dod; along: a 
- fagceffion of fmall, lakes, We: were. now: quite: vexhaufied, -and ,it was 

oe _ ~ abfolnely* 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT /ORAMBRIG(Y 289, 
abfilutely:neceffany, far usto. flop (for shg night, “The, weather being: Tuan 
clear throughputithe day, weap, no, re4{on, toeomplaip, of, the cgld.,.“<<— 
Quer. guides eneourpged, us with the-hape-that,, in «twp days. of. ia 
eet, we Pann atrive.amgng the. nen of the. ther, MAHAD. f.7, 


a 


4 ee ee 4] erg ths, cat Level sad 
At fine this morning we wgre ag ais in.potions and, paling: along. 4, Monday 15. 
tiyer, we at length. forded i it. This ftream yas not.more.than knee; e:deep, 
about thirty yards over,’ and with a ftony, bottom, The. old. man went 
onward by. himfelf; i in-the hope ‘of. falling:in with, the people, -whony he 
‘ expedited to. meet in.the,courle of the day;., At-eleyen.we came up. with 
hish;- and, the; natives. whom he expegted, con§iling of. five:anen, and 
part of their families. They: received us with, great, kindnefs, me 
amined us ‘with the. moft. minute attention. . ‘hey --muf, however, : avg 
heen told that we wére whité, as out-faces:no longer indicated that: dif 
tinguifhing complexion: “They called. themfelvessNéguia-Dinais,and 
were come: in a different dire€tion from: us, but were-now going! thedame 
way, to the Anah-yoe Tefle or River, and appeaxed to: be very: such 
- fatisfied with. our having joined’them. --They prelettedns ssh fame 
— fith- which: they had: jut taken an, the mace sone. lake. - _ JO me ad 


f 


Naw? 
2 


a 


Here I expefted that our + guides, like their oredecelfors, would have 
quitted! us,but,.on the: contrary; they: exprefled themfelvés:to be foibapipy. 

_ in ‘our'company, :and: that of their: friends, tat thet voluntarily, and 
with, ‘great:cheerfulnels. proceeded to pafs another night! with us. )-Onr 
newiacquaintance were. people of avery: ‘pleafing afpedt. The hair of 

~ the women was tied in large loofe knots:-over the, ears, and plaited with. 


great neatnefs from’ the divifion of the head,.fo as.to be included in the- 
al. _ ; : : knots, 


gO: 


1 799 


t 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


knots: ‘Some of them had adorned | their treffes with beads, with a 


ee very: ‘pretty’ ‘fet.’ The men were clothed in leather, their’ hair was’ 


nlicely- combed; ‘and their complexion ‘was fairer,,or perhaps it may » 
be faid, with more proptiety, that. they. weré“more cleanly, than any of! 
the natives whom, we had yet feen. Their eyes, though keen and fharp, 


‘-* are not of that’ dark colour, fo getierally obfervable.i in the various tribes 


of Indians; they were, on the contrary, of a grey ‘hue; ‘with a tinge of 
red. There was ‘one man amongft them’ of at Jeaft fix’ feet four inches 
in’ heights, -his manners were affable,'and he had. ‘a-more  prepoffelling ap- 


| peararice ‘than any: Indian I-had met with in my journey-;/he was about — 


twenty-cight years of age; anid. was treated with particular refpe& by his 
party. iEvery man, woman,and child, carried.a proportionate burden, 
confifting of beaver coating and parchment, as well as’ {kins‘of the otter, 
the fnaiten, ‘the bear, :the lynx, and dreffed moofe-fkins, The laft they 
procure froin the Rocky-Mountain Indians. _ According to their account, 
the ‘peoplesof:the féa coaft prefer them to any’ ‘other article, | Several 
of their relations and ‘friends, they faid, were already-gone, as well 
provided:as themfelves, to barter. with the people of the coaft; who. 
barter them in their turn, except the dreffed leather, with white: people 
who, as they had been informed, arrive there in large ca canoes. 


Gach. an ‘efeort + was the molt fortunate circumftance that could happen 


"Gn our favour. They told us, that as the:women and. children. could not 


trdvel faft, we fhould be: three days.in getting tothe end of ‘our journey.; 
which’ muft be: fuppofed to ‘have been very agreeable information to 


people 1 m- -our exhaufted: condition, a ot ears oe eae 


“gh tye x 
a os Mee ee tl 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT. OR‘AMERICA. . gu 


vIn about half. an. hour. after we had: joined’ out new acquaintance, the 79a 
‘Sg for | moving onwards wis given: by. the, leader of the party, who —y—~ 
vociferated the. words, Huy, Huy, when hig. people joined, him and con- 
‘tinued a clamorous converfation, , We; jpaffed ‘along, a: winding road over 
- shillsyand through fwampy vallies, from South to, Weft... We then erofled 
: :a deep, wnarrow river, which difcharges itfelf into a lake,.on ,whole fide 
‘we flopped at five.-in’ the afternoon, for ‘the: night, though’. we had re- 
:pofed: feveral times. fince twelve at noon; fo that our mode of travelling 
chad, undergone a very agreeable change. ' I compute the diftance of this 
sday’s journeyat about twenty miles. In. the middle of. the. day the, 
‘weather was clear and fultry. , 7 
, | one 
y ‘We all fat down on al very pleafant: green {pot, and were no fooner ; 
“feated than our guide and one of the®party prepared to engage - in play. 
IThey had each a bundle of about fifty fimall fticks, neatly. polithed, ofthe ” 
; ize of a quill,-and five inches long: : acertain number. of thefe fticks had 
‘Ted lines round them ; and as many of thefe as one of the players might 
find convenient were curioufly rolled up in dry grafs, and according to’ 
the judgment : -of his antagonift refpedting | their number and, marks, he 
loft or won.: Our, friend was apparently’ the lofer, as he, parted with 
his bow and arrows, and feveral articles. which-I had given.him.. cist ty ler 


( 


t 


Reger 0 San oe ge 
: . The weather of: this morning was s the fame as. s yefterdays, 5 but our rele Tuefday 16, 
Jow-travellers were.inino hurry to proceed, and Iwas under the. neceflity’ 
of prefiing: thea, into, greater’ expedition, by: réprefenting t the almoft eX 
~ haufted Aateiof 1 our, provifions,, They, however, affured. us, that after 
»  .the-next, night ey fleep we Ahould arrive at: the fiver where they were 
po, going, © 


a 


3° . ‘ j 
a | ry 
ae ' , 


+ 
¢ 


S 


gre 


£793. 
uly, 


i? 


¢ ‘ * ; 


-fooRNAL or X VOYAGE THROUGET THE 
going; ahd’ that “we. fhould’ there .get fiff in’ great: abundance. My * 


wens young ‘ién, from an ‘aét of inprudence, deprived ‘themfelves ilaft night of 


that eft which was fo neceflaty to them. ‘One of the ftrangers afking 


“then feveral: quéftions refpebing. us, and concerning théirown ‘country, 
“oné OF thet | gave ‘fuch' atifvers aswere not ‘credited: iby the audiencé; 


Whetéupin He -démanded,. ina’ very atigry tone, if they thought-he was 
difpoied to tell lies, like the Rocky-Mountain Indians ;and:one’ of that 


tribe happening ‘to be of the: party, a quarrel ‘enfued,-which might have 
been atténided, with ‘the ‘inoft! ferious confequetices, ‘if it-hadnot been for- 


“tundtely prevented by thé interference of thofe who were'not interefted 


, 


in the difpute. 


“Though our ftock-of provifions was getting Yo low, I determined 
-Heverthélels, to Hide ‘about twenty pounds of ‘pemmican, by: way of pro- 
‘viding’ againift our réturn. I theréfore'left' two of the men behind, with 
‘diteBiions: 10 uty i it, as ‘afta, under the place where we had made our 


‘fire. , ‘ a ! ve oe : eo 1 . ‘ ‘ . Lon, ae 


1 
€ a 


- Our éourle was about Welt:South- Welt! iby thé fide ‘of ‘the. like, a and — 


Gn’ ‘about two ‘niles we ‘caine to’ the-énd OF it. ‘Heré was a general Halt, 
_when my ‘rijen'é Svertook ‘us, ‘I was tow infornied; that fome “people of 
another tribe were fent for, who -wifhed very much to ‘fee us, two, of 


“whoin’ would accompany is ovér the Mountaiis’; ;that;ag for: themfelves, 


‘they had chariged their mnftid, and aténdéd to follow: a final diver which 
“iffued out ‘ “OF ‘the’ Take; “and weit ina direBiion: very idiffereny froin: the 
“fide of out jourhey: THs Was a Uifappowweiiet,; ‘which Jeheagh: iiok: tf 
“simon to us; might have beer fatwa by coniidetablen imbon venienees. 


j 


NORTH -WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, ~~ 


teh 313 
Ity was ny with to continue with, ther whatever way they went ; bat oe 
July. 
neither my promifes or ontieaties would avail: thefe people were not to -~—~_ 
__ beturned from their-purpofe ; and when J reprefented the low fate ofour 


provifions, one of them anfwered, that if we would {tay with them all 


night, he would boil a kéttle of fith- roes for us. _ Accordingly,: without 


receiving any anfwer, he began to make preparation to fulfil his en- 


-gagement. He took’ the Toes out: of a ‘bag, and having bruifed them. 


- between two ftones, put them in water tofoak. His wife then took .an} , 


handful of dry grafs in her harid, with which fhe fqueezed them throug] 

her’ fingers: 3 in the mean time her hufband was employed in gatherin 
wood to make a fire, for the purpofe of heating ftones. When fhe 
had finifhed her operation, fhe filled a watape kettle nearly full of water, 


and poured the roes into it.. When the ftones were fufficiently heated, ‘ 


fome of them were put into the kettle, and others were thrown in from 


time to time, till the water was in a fate of boiling; the woman alfo con- 
tinued ftirring the contents: of the kettle, till they were brought toa thick 
| ‘confiftency ; the ftones were then taken out, and the whole was feafoned 
with about a pint of {trong rancid oil. The {mell of this curious difh 


was fufficient to ficken me without talting it, but the hunger of my . 


. people furmownted. the’ ‘naufeous’ meal. When unadulterated by the 


Rinking oil, thefe boiled roes are not unpalatable food. 


In the mean time four of the people who had been expeéted, artived, 


‘and, accéiding to the account given of'them, were of two tribes whom 
{ had not yet known. After fome converfation, they propofed, that I 


fiould, continue my: rouite by their houfes; but the old guide, who was now | 


preparing to ‘Jeave us, informed me that it would lengthen my Journey's ; 


a 


a 


Ss - fee and 


: ~é 


Wednef, 17. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


~ and by-his advice I propofed to them to conduét'us along the road which 
had been already marked out to us. This they undertook without the 


leaft heGtation; and, at the fame time, pointed, out to: me the pafs inthe . 


mountain, bearing South by Eaft by compafs. - Here I had a meridians 


altitude, and took time. § 


é 


At four in the afternoon we parted with our late fellow-travellers in a 


‘very friendly manner, and immediately forded the river. The wild 


parfnep, which luxuriates oni the borders of the lakes and rivers, is a 
favourite food of the natives: they roaft the‘tops of this. plant, in their 


‘tender ftate,. over the fire, and taking off the outer rind, they are then | 


a very palatable food. 


a 


‘We now entered the woods, and fome » time: after arrived on the 


‘banks of another iver that flowed. from the mountain, ‘which-—we_ alfo « 
7 — 4. forded. - The country foon after we left the river was {wampy ; and the 
: fire having paffed through i it, the number of trees, which had fallen, added 
“to the toil of ourjourney. Ina fhort time we began to afcend, and con- 


tinued afcending till nime at night. We walked upwards. of fourteen, 
miles, according to my computation, in the courfe of the-day, though the 


ftraight line of diflance might not be more than ten. Notwithftanding | 


that we were furrounded by mountains covered with fnow, we were very 
much tormented with mufquitoes. ” ' 


Before the fun rofe, our : guides furmoned. us to.proceed, when we de- 
| fcended into a beautiful valley, watered by a fmall fiver. At eight we 
‘came to’ the teriination of it, where we faw a ‘great number of moles, 

‘ and 


NORTH- WEST CONTIN ENT OF AMERICA. 


5p me ra 


x | 
and ee again ‘to afcend. | We"now, perceived many ground- hogs, 
and heaid theri whiftle in every dire@ion.- The Indians went in pur- 


fait of them, and’ foon joined us with a feriale and her litter, almofht * 


grown to their full fize. T hey ftripped off their {kins, and gave the car- 
cafes to my people. They alfo pulled up a root, which appeared like 


a bunch of white berries of the fize of a pea; its fhape was that of | 


a fig, while it had the colour and tafte of a potatoe. 


i 


We now gained the fummit of the mountain, and found ourfelves 
furrounded by f{now. But this circumftance is caufed rather by the . 
quantity of {now drifted i in the pafs, than ‘the real height of the fpot, 
as the furrounding mountains rife to a much higher degree of cleva~ 


tion, The {now had become fo-compaét that, our feet hardly mage ° 


a perceptible impreffion on it. We obferved, however, the tracks of 
-an herd of {mall deer which muft have pafled a fhort time before us, 
and the Indians and my hunters went immediately in purfuit of them. 
Our way was now nearly. level, without theJeaft fnow, and not a tree to 
-be feen in any part of it. The grafs is very fhort, and the foil a reddifh 


- ‘clay, intermixed with fmall ftones. The face of the hills, where they are ; 


--not enlivened with verdure, appears, at a diftance, as if fire had paffed 
over them. It now began .to hail, {now, and rain, nor could we find 


any fhelter. but the leeward fide of an huge rock. The wind alfo rofe 
‘ into a tempeft,'and the weather was as diftrefling’as any I had ever ._ 


-experienced. After an abfence of an hour and an half, our hunters 
brought a {mall doe of the rein-deer fpecies, which .was all they had 


killed, though they fred twelve fhots at a large herd of them. Their ill’ 


) $2 / : ; fuccefs 


= 


316 


1798+ 
July 


¢ 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


fuccels they attributed-to the weather. I propofed to leave half of the ve- 


ne nifon in the fnow, but the men preferred carrying it, though their ftrength 


‘was very much exhautted. ‘We had been fo'long fhivering with cold in 
‘this fituation ‘that we were glad to, fenew our march...: Here and there ’ 
were fcattered a few crowberry bufhes and ftirted willows; ;*the former 


‘of ‘which had not yet bloffomed. | 


.. Before us appeared a ttupendous mountain, whofe {now-clad fummit 
was loft in the clouds ;. between it and our immediate courfe, flawed the 


, -Tiver to which we were going. . The Indians informed us that it was at 
"no great, diftance.’ As foon as we could. gather a fufficient quantity of 
wood, we ftopped to drefs fome of. our yenifon ; and it is‘almoft fuper- 


fluous to add, that. we made an: heartier meal than wé had done for many 
a day before. - To the comfort which I have juft:mentioned, I added that . 


' of taking off my beard; as well as changing my linen, and my people fol- 


lowed the humanifing example. - We then. fet forwards, and came toa 
large pond, on whofe. bank we found a tomb, -but lately made, with a 
pole, as ufual, ereéted ‘befide it, on which two figures of birds were paint- 
ed, and by them the guides diftinguifhed the tribe to which the deceafed » 


- perfon belonged. ‘One of them, very unceremonioully, opened the bark 


and {hewed us the bones which it contained, while the other threw down 


_ the pole, and having poffeffed himfelf of the feathers that wére: tied to it, 


fixed'them on his own head, 1 therefore conjeétured, that thefe funeral 
memorials belonged: to an individual of a tribe at enmity with them. 
° ‘ , K mo, . / My ey - oo . 
We continued our route’with’a confiderable degree of expedition, and 
as we proceeded the mountains appeared to withdraw from us, The. 
" country 


% 


9 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA.. 


country between’ them foon opened. to our view, which apparently added 
16, their awful elevation. ' We continued to defcend till we came to the 
brink of a: precipice; from whence our guides difcovered the river to us, 
and: a'village on its banks. . This precipice, or-rather fucceflion’ of pre- 


cipices,, is. Covered’ with large timber, which confifts of ;the pine, the. 


Aprace, the hemlock, the.birch, and other trees, Our conduétors in- 
formed us,. that it abounded in animals, which, from their defcription, 
Imuft be wild. goats. In about two hours we arrived at the bottom, -where 


.there.isa conflux of two rivers, that-iffue from the mountains. “We.crofled . - 


the one which was to the left. They are both very rapid, and con- 


tinue fo till they unite their currents, forming a ftréam of about twelve fo 


--yards in breadth. ' Here the tirnber was alfo very lar ge; but I could not 
dearn from-our conduétors why the moft confiderable hemlock trees were 
Atripped of their bark to the tops of them. I concluded, indeed, at that 
time that the inhabitants tanned their leather with it, Here were alfo 
the largeft and loftieft elder and cedar trees that:I had ever feen. We 
“were now fenfible of an entire change in the climate, and’ the berries 


. were quite ripe. 


. 4 


The fan was about to fet, whem our conduétors left us to follow them 


‘as, well as we could. j.We were prevented, however, from going far- 
aftray, for we were hemmed in on both fides and behind by fuch a barrier ' 


_ag hature! never before prefented to my view. Our. guides had. the pre- 
caution to’ mark the road for us, by breaking the branches of trees as 


they paffed. .. This {mall river muft, at certain fealons, rife.to an uncom* 


mon height and ftrength of current moft probably ‘on the melting of 


ithe fnow; as.we faw a large quantity of drift wood Lying twelve feet above 
a 2 a the 


a 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


the immediate level of the river. ‘ This circumftance impeded our pro- 


’ grefs, and the protruding rocks frequently forced:us to _pafs through the’ 
water. It was now dark, without the leaft appearance of hoitfes, though 


it would be impoffible to have feen them, if there -had ‘been any, at the 


: diftance of twenty yards, from the thicknefs of t the woods. My men 
_-were anxious to ftop for the night; ‘indeed the fatigue they had fuffered bo 


jutified the’ propofal, and I'left them to their thoice; but: as-the anxiety)” 


of my mind impelled me forwards, they continued to follow. me, till I 


found myfelf.at the edge of the woods; and, notwith{tanding the remon- | 


‘ ftrances that were made, I proceeded, feeling rather’ than feeing my way,” 
+ till I arrived at.an houfe, and foon. difcovered feveral fires, in {mall huts, 


with people bufily employed i in cooking their fifh. I. walked into ‘one 
of them without the leaft ceremony, threw down my burden, ‘and, after 
fhaking” hands\ with fome of the people, fat down upon it. They re- 
ceived me without the leaft appearance of furprize, but foon made figns 


for me to go up to the Jarge houfe, which was ereGted; on upright pots, at 


fome diftance from the ground. Abroad piece of timber with fteps cut in 


. __it, led to the f{caffolding even with the floor, and by’ this curious kind of 


\ 


Jadder I entered the houfe at one end; and. having paffed three fires, at 
equal diftances in the middle of the building; I was received by feveral peo- 
ple, fitting upon avery wide board, at the upper end of it. I hock hands 
with them; and-feated myfelf befide a man, the dignity of whofe counte- 
nance induced me to give him that preference. I foon difcovered:one of my 
guides feated : a little above'me; with a neat mat {pread before him, which _ 
I fuppofed to be the place of honour, and appropriated to ftrangers. In 
a fhort time my. people arrived, and placed themfelves near me, when 


‘the man, by whom I fat, , Immediately rofe, and: fetched, from behind a 


i - . plank ~ 


- 
7. 


ae] 


- 


NORTH-WEST ‘CONTINENT OF’ AMERICA. ' 


plank-of about four feet wide, a quantity of roafted ‘falmon. . He then 


‘dire&ted-a mat to be placed before me and Mr. Mackay, who was ‘now 


fitting by me.. When this ceremony was performed, he. brouglit a falmon 
for each of us, and half an one to each of my men. The fame plank 


. a19 


3799" 
t 
ee, 


ferved alfo as a fereen for the béds, \whither the women and children. . 


“were already retired ; -but,whether’ that circumftance took _place, on our, 


arrival, or was the natural confequerice of the late ‘hour of the night; I ' 


did not difcover. The figns of: our proteétor feemed to denote,.that we . 


might fleep.in the houfe, but as we did not underftand him with a fuffi- 
cient degree of certainty, I thought it prudent, from the fear of giv- 


: ing offence, to. order thé men to make a fire without, that we might 


fleep by it. When he obferved our. defign, he placed boards for us that - 


we might not take our repole on the. bare ground,.and ordered | a fire to 


"be prepared for us. We had not been Jong feated rdund it, when we re: 


ceived a large dith of falmon roes, pounded, fine and beat up with . 


“water fo as to have the appearance ofacream. Nor was it without fome 
kind of feafoning that gave it a bitter tafte. Another difh, fon, followed; 
‘the principal article of which» was alfo falmon- r6es, witha Jarge propor- 
‘tion of gooleberries, and an herb that appeared to be forrel. Its acidity 


rendered. it more agreeable to my. tafte than the former preparation. 


Having been regaled with thefe delicacies, for fuch they were confidered. 


“by that hofpitable fpirit which provided thern, we laid-ourfelves down 
to reft with no other canopy than the fky ; but I never enjoyed a more 


found ‘and refréfhing. reft, though T I had a board for my ‘bed, and a-bil- ~ 


let for. my pillow: 


. At five this moraing I awoke, and found that the natives: had lighted 
"a fire 


Thurfday 18, 


| JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE — 


ma) 


a fire for us; and were fitting by it. ~My hofpitable friend immediately - 


—~ brought me fome berries and roafted falmon, and his companions foon 


followed: his. examnple, The former; which confifted. among many others, 


of goofeberries, ‘whirtleberries, ard tafpberries, were the fine faw 
or tafted, of their refpettive kinds. They alfo > Brough the dried roes of 
fith to eat with the berries. ray ' 


Salmon i is fo abundant i in this river, that thee peoplé have a sonflant. 
and: plentiful fupply of that excellent fifh. To take. them with :more 
facility, they had, with great labour, formed an embankment. or, weir ° 
acrofs the river for the. purpofe of placirig their fifhing’ machines, which 


they difpofed both above and below it. “‘Lexpreffed. my ‘wilh ‘to -vifit 
. this extraordinary work, but thefe people are'fo fuperftitious; that they - 


would not allow me a nearer examination than I could.obtain. by view- 
ing it from the bank. The river is about’ fifty: yards in breadth, and: by 


' obferving a man fifh with a dipping net, I judged’; it to be ‘about ten feet’ 


deep at the foot of the fall.’ -The weir is a work -of ‘great labour, and 


contrived with confiderable ingehuity.- It was near four feet above the 


level of the water, at he time I faw-it, and nearly the height of the bank 


on which I ftood to examine it. -The ftreamis ftoppéd nearly’ two thirds 


by i it. It is conftruéted by fixing ‘finall trees in thie: bed : ‘of the river 


‘ina flanting poli tion (which.could be. praGticable orly when’ the water, 


is: much lower than 1-faw it) ‘with: ‘the thick’ pait - déwawards ; ‘over . 
thefe. is laid-a bed. of gravel, on which is placed: ‘a range | ‘of. leffer | 
trees, and fo on alternately till the work is. brouglit ‘to: its proper 
height. Beneath it the. machines | are placed, into which the falmon 


fall when they. attempt to leap over. On. either - fide. there. isa large _ 


frame 


Fare 
“a 


- NORTH-WEST CON TINENT OF AMERICA. 


frathe: of timber-work fix. feet above’ the level’ of the upper water, in | 


which: pallages are leftfor the falmon leading direétly into the machines, 
which are taken up at pleafure. At the foot’ of the. fall dipping nets 
ate. alfo Saceefially employed. 2 RTE 
ape, ae . ' pho! , 

“The water of this river is of the colour of affes milk, which I-attributed 
in -part'to the, limeftone that in many places forms. the bed-of the river, 


but principally to the rivulets. which. fall from mountains of the fame 
| material. // 


| thee pedple. indulge ‘an extreme 3¢ fuperfttion refpe@ting their fifh, as 


it, is. apparently their only animal. food.: ' Fleth they néver tafte, and on€ . 


of-their dogs having picked.and: {wallowed part-of a bone’ which.we had 
‘left, was beaten by his- mafter till he difgorged it,» One: of: my. people 
alfo haying. thrown a bone of the deer ‘into the river, a: native, who had 
oblerved . the circum@ance, immediately dived and brought it ‘up, and, 


© haying: configned it to the fire, inftantly Proceeded, ta wath his i pelluted 


f. ad 


hands...:: . es nn pelts _ _ rien ' a t “ te yh 4 ven Perens x 
. ‘ . 
. a \ ‘oo an . be Maye . 


_é 


As we were fill at fome ‘diftance from the fea, I made application to 
my friend. to: procire,us.a canoe ‘or two,..with. people: to. conduc us 


thither.;. ‘After he had miade-various:excufes, I at:length comprehended | 


that, his.orily objeGtion. was.to the embarking venifor in-a. canoe:on. sheik 
’ giver, asthe fifh would. inftantly: {mell.it and abandon; theta, ‘fo. that he, 
his friends, and relations, mutt flarve.- .I foon-eafed his. appreherifions on 
that point, . and: idefited :to-know what. I muft do‘with the venifon’ thit 


.. remained, when he told: me: tQ, igive-it to one of the: ‘firaiiger's vitom’ Ke 
Bm ms Tt. Sa - pointed 


an ayy 
pede 


wef 


922 


4793» 
July 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH. THE 


> ft 


pointed out to me, as. being of a tribe that eat flefh. I now requefted 


: —— him to furnifh ; me with fome frefh falmon in. its raw fate ; but, inflead © 


, 
a 
‘ 


of | complying with ‘my with, he brought :me a couple of them reafted, 
obferving at'the ‘fame. timé, that the, current was. very ftrong, and. would 
bring us to. the next village, where our'wants would. -be abundantly fup- 
“plied. ‘In fhort, he requefted that we would make hafte to depart. This 
was rather unexpebted after fo much kindnefs and hofpitality, but.our 
ignorance of the language prevented us: from: being able to difcover the 
caufe. 


-: Ateight:this morning; fifteen men armed, the friends and:relations of 
thefe people, arrived by land, in confequence of notice fent:them in-the 
-. night, immediately after the appearance .of ‘our guides. ‘They are more 


corpulent:and of.a better appearance than the inhabitants of-the interior, 
‘Their-language totally different from’ any I had heard’; “the.Atnah and _ 
Chin tribe, as far. as I.can judge: from the very little-I faw of that people, 
‘bear the neareft refemblance to them... They appear to be of a quiet. and 


‘peaceable charaéter, and nevér “Make any hoftile incurfions into the lands 
of their neighbours 


so Pheir del confi of a fingle robe t tied -over the shoulders, falling 
down behind, to. the heels, and before, a little below the knees, with’a deep 
fringe round the bottom... It.is gerierally made of the-bark of the cedar 
tree, which they-prepareias fine as‘hemp:;' though ‘fome of thefé garments 
are interwoven with ftrips.of thé fea-otter kin, which give them the appear- 
ance of a,fur-on one fide.’ Others have, ftripes:of red/and. yellow threads 
_ fancifally introduced. toward .the " borderspwhich: have-a:very agreeable 


effe&i, 


“NORTH: WEST CONTINENT OE AMERICA. 


effet. The men have no other covering than that which’ i have de- 
-{eribed, and. they unceremonioutly lay it afide when they | find it conve- 
nient. ‘In addition to this robe, the women wear a clofe fringe hanging 
down before them about two feet in length, and half as wide. When 


‘they fit down they draw this between their thighs. ‘They wear their | 
‘hair fo’: fhort, that :it ‘requires little care-or. combing. The men have . 


‘theirs in plaits, and -being . fmeared_with oil and red earth, inftead of a 


‘comb they. have'a fmall:{tick hanging by a ftring fromgne of the locks, 


:which they ‘ertploy. to alleviate any itching or’ irritation in the head. 
-The colour: of the eye. is grey. with a tinge of red. They. have all high 
-cheek-bones, ‘but the women are more remarkable for. that feature than 
the men. Their houfes, arms, and utenfils I, fhall. es hereafter. 


y prefented my friend with feveral aiticles, and.alfo diftributed fome 
among others of the natives who had been attentive to us. “One of my 


guides t had ‘been very “ferviceable i in procuring canoes for t us to ‘proceed _ 


‘on ‘our ‘expedition ; he appeared alfo to be very: defirous of giving thefe 
‘people : a favourable impreffion of us; and I was very much concerned 
| that he ‘hould 1 leaye i me as s he did, without giving me the Jeaft notice of 


eye Ff 


+ 1 
‘ ‘ ‘ oan + y . . 


"Be “28. a1. . North venga 


‘ 


-— vand ran upwar of fix imileg an hour. . “We came to a weir, fach as I. 


Yv 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE.THROUGH ‘THE 


a iss armbar eh, 
eer Ta osnohg eb tat 

aT re Dolph toad ae ys 
ee 7 ho rap ite: Need grey yh tity 
‘Continue our i journey. Embark-o on a river... Come to ‘ah. ‘weiro. it Dexterity 
. ofthe natuesinpafing it. Arrive atia villdges.cAlarin. occafioned 
= ining the natives. The fubfequent fauourable ‘reception, ‘accompanied 
o with @ banquet. of ‘ceremony. . ‘Circumflancés. of: ite’ Defeription:: “of a 
©... wallage, its houfes, and places of. devotion, » Account: of the: cuptoms, moile 
Ih “of tiving; and :fuperfition of the inhabitants. Deforiptron:of -theichief’s 


i 


cérioe.:: ‘Leave’ the place, and ‘proceed on alin ad Head vase od, 


. : ” t ‘ an 
f° ion 
na bilge “aaa 


Aro one, in “the afternoon we embarked, ‘Githout” Tin baggage, i in 


ae ¢ me . 
CE Gd Mak an pe ae Ba pay ta, nop 
. 


two canoes, accompanied by feven of the natives, The! ftream was rapid, 
at, 


ati 


have already de fcribed, where’, the alives landed us, and. hot over. it 
‘without taking a drop of. water, . TI hey, then Teceived us on board again, 


SM a, 


and we: ‘continued, our voyage, pafling many canoes. on ‘the river, fome , 


with people in them, and others’empty. We proceeded ata very, great 


-rate for about two hours and an half, when we were informed that’ we. 
muft land, as the village was only at-a thort, diftance, I had imagined 


that the Canadians who accompanied me_were the moft expert canoe- 


men: in the world, but they are very: inferior to thefe people, as they” 


themfelves acknowledged, in n conducting thofe velfels 


Some - 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 
io Sottie-of the Indians ran before us,'to announce our approach, wher 


wwe’ took our bundles and followed. “Wehdd ‘walked along’a! ‘well-beateh — 
path, ‘through ‘a kind of coppice, when we ‘were ififormed ‘of the arrival 


of our couriers at the ‘houfés, by! ithe: Idud'and confuled talking of the 


inkiabitants. ' As we: ‘approached the’ edge. of the wood, and’: were’ almioft 
in/fight of the -houfes, the Indians who: weré before 1 me: abide figris for 
itie to-take’thé lead,-and that they would follow... The noifé ahd con- 
fufion of the natives now feemed ‘to encreafé, and when We''cdme in 
fight of the village, we faw them running from houfe to houfe fome 
atmed ‘with Bows arid atrows, others’ ‘with fpears, -and many. ‘with ¢ Axes, as 
if-iti'a ‘flate ‘of great’ ‘alarm. This very unpleafant and unexpedied cir- 
_Euttftance; ‘Lattributed’to our fwidden arrival, and the’ wety ‘hort; notice 
oP which had-Beeh given them. At all events, Uhad but ore. line of 
' bbndae to ‘purlue, which was'to walk refolutely up’ to ‘them, without 
itdnifefting any fignd of apprehenfion’ at their hoftile appeararice. This 
fefolution produced” the defired effeét, for as we approached the houfes, 


= —#hie'gicater part ‘of the people’ laid down their weapons, and came forward. 


to meet us: ‘Twas, however, foon obliged to ftop from’ the number of 
them that’ furréunded me. ‘I fhook hands, as ufual with fuch : as were 
the nearelt'to’ me, when an “elderly man broke through thé crowd, and 
igok me in his arms; another then came, who turned him’ away without 
the leaft ceremony, and paid me the fame compliment. The latter * was 
fSllowed: by.’ a ‘young. snan, whom I Undérftood ” ‘to ‘be ‘his | fon.” ’ Thefe 
eniBraces, which at fir rathier furptifed ine, T hoon found ‘to be marks 
~ of ‘regard and Aridndthip: ‘The crowd prefled' “with fo much vidlence 
and contention to get a a view of ‘us, that’ ‘we “could, not ‘move in any 
dit eGtioli. ‘Ain opening’ was ‘at Tength’ made to * alfow a “perfou’ to 
. approach 


F 
wy 
R oeks 


s 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


approach me, whom the old man -made me underftand was another of. 
his fons. I inftantly ftepped forward to meetihim, and: prefented my 
hand, whereupon he ‘broke the flring of a very handfome robe of fea- 
otter dkin, which he,had on, and, covered: me with it; .This was as flat- 
tering areception as. I could poffibly -receive,’efpecially,as I confidered 
him to‘be the eldelt.fon of the chief. Indeed it appeared to me that we 
had been detained here. for the purpofe of giving him time to. bring the 
robe with-which he had prefented 1 me. | 


The chief now made figns for us to follow. him, and he conduéted us 
through a narrow coppice, for feveral hundred. yards, till we came to an | 
-houfe built on the ground, which was of larger. dimenfions,; and formed 
of better materials than any. J had hitherto feen; it was his. refidence, 
We were no fooner arrived there, than he dire€ted mats to, be. {pread 
before i it, on which we ‘were: told to, take our. feats, when the men of the 
village, who came to indulge their curiofity, were ordered | to keep behind 
‘us. In our front other mats.were placed, where the, chief, and his coun- 

fellors took their feats. In the intervening fpacey! mats, which were very 
clean, and ofa much neater workmanthip t than thofe on which-we-fat were 
alfo fpread, and a fimall roafted falmon placed before each, of.us. When — 
we had fatisfied ourfelves with the fith; one of the people who came with : 
us from the laft village approached, with a kind of ladle in one hand, 
containing oil, and in the other fomething that refembled the i inner rind 
of the cocoa-nnt, but of a lighter colour; this he. dipped i in the oil, ‘and, 
having eat it, indicated by] his geflures how palatable ] he thought i it, He 
then prefented me with a fall Piece of i it, which I chofe to, tafte in its dry 


. flate, though the. oil was free from any unpleafant J fell. A fquare, cake 
“of 


Ne 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA.. 


of this: was next produced, when a man took it to the water near the. 


houfe, and having thoroughly foaked it, he returned, and, after he had 
pulled it to pieces like oakum, put it into a well- made trough, about-three 
feet long, nine inches wide, and five. deep; he then plentifully {prinkled 
it with falmon. oil, and manifefted by hisown example that we were to 
eat ofit. Ijuft tafted it, and found the oil perfeétly fweet, without which 
the other ingredient would have been very infipid. The chicf partook 
of it with great avidity, after it had received an additional quantity of. 
oil. This difh is confidered by thefe people asa great delicacy; and-on 
examination, I difcovered it to confift of the i inner rind of the hemlock 
tree, taken off early in, fummer, and put into a frame, which ‘fhapes it 
into cakes of fifteen inches long, ten broad, ‘and half an inch thick ; and 
‘in this form I-fhould fuppofe it may be’ preferved for a great length of 


time. This difcovery fatisfied me refpecting the;many hemlock trees 
which I had oblerved Tipped of their bark, ‘ 


Th this fituation we ‘remained for upwards of three hours, and not one 
eo ao 

-of the curious natives left.us-during all that time, except.a party of ten 

or twelve of them, whom. the chief ordered to go and catch fifh, which 


" they. did: in great: ‘abubdance, with dipping nets, at the foot of the 
Weir. - 


‘At length we were relieved from the gazing crowd, and gota lodge 
ereéted, and: covered i in for our reception .duriag the night. “I now. pre- 
fented the young chief with a blanket, in return for the robe with which 


fre had ‘favoured me, and feveral other articles, that appeared to be very . 


gratifying to him. ’ I alfo prefented fome to his father, and amongit them 
oF , , was: 


of 


JOURNAL. OF A:VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


was'a pair of {ciffars, whofe ufe I explained’ to him, for. clipping ‘his 
beard, which was of great length ; and to that urpole he immediately 
applied them. My diftribution of firilar artigfes was alfo: extentled to 
‘others, who had been attentive to’ us. "THe communication, however, 
between us: was awkward and inconvenient, for it was carried on. -entirely 
by figns, as there was not a perfon’ ‘with: me who was qualified for the 
office of an interpreter. poy eh . 

“We were all of us- very defirous to’ get fome freth falmon, that we 
might drefs them in our own “way, but’ could not by any'means obtain ~ 
that’ gratification, though there were thoufands of that. fifh ftrung on 
cords, which were faftened to fakes in the: river. They ‘were ‘even . 
averfe to our approaching the {pot where they clean ‘and prepare them 
for their own eating: They had, indeed, taken’ our kettle from us, left 


we fhould employ it in getting-water-from the. river; and they all igned 


as the reafon for this precaution; that the falmon diflike the {mell of iron. 
At the fame time they fupplied: us with. wooden boxes, which were capa- 
ble of holding any fluid. .. Two of the-men. that went:to fifh, in a :canoe 
capable of containing ten people, returned . with.a falk: lading-of falmon, 
that: ‘weighed: from. fix.to forty pounds, though: the fan greater’. part of 
them were under twenty. They immediately ftrung the whole of them, 
as I have already mentioned, in the river.’ ‘ 
Tr now madé the tour of the villig, whi Se @ 
houtes, and fevenbuilt on the ground, befides- a confiderable numberof 
other- buildings. or feds, which-are*ufed. only as’ kiteliens;°and: places 
for « ‘cuting their fifh. - ‘The. fobmier are ‘‘Coniftradted: by fixiag.ia: certain 
ve - number 


NORTH-WEST'CONTINENT OF AMERICA. | 


number of pofts in the earth, on fome of which are laid, and to others are 
faftened, the fupporters of the floor, at abou twelve feet above’ the furface 
- of the ground: their length is from an hundred to an hundred and twenty 
feet; and they are.about forty feet in * breadih Along the-centre are 
built three, four, or five hearths, for the two- fold purpole of giving 
- ‘warmth, and dreffing their fifh, The whole length of the building on 


either fide is divided by cédar planks, into partitions‘or apartments of 
_ feven feet {quare, in the front of which there are boards, about three feet.___ 


-wide, over which, though they are not-immovably fixed, the inmates of 
thefe receffes generally pafs, when they go to reft. The greater part of 
them are intended:for that purpofe, and {uch are’covered:with boards, at 
‘the height of the wall of the houfe, which is about feven or eight féet, 


‘and reft upon beams that ftretch-acrofs the building. On thofe.alforare... - 
: placed the chefts which contain their provifions,\wenfils, and whatever 


they. ‘poffels. ” The intermediate {pace is fuflicient for domeftic pur- 
pofes.. On poles that run’along the beams, ‘hang roafted, fifi, andthe 
whole building is well covered with boards and bark, except within. a. 


. | few inches tof the ridge.pole; where open fpaces are left on each fide. 
to let in light and.emit the fmoke. At-the end of the houfe that fronts. _ 


"the river, is a narrow {caffélding, which, is alfo afcended by a piece of 


‘timber, with fteps cut-in it;:and at each corner of this ereGtion there are. 


openings, for. the inhabitants toeale. mature. | As it ‘does not appear to 


be a cuftom among. them to remove thefe heaps of excremental filth,. 


it} may be fuppoled’ ‘that the-effluyia does not annoy them. 


By 


: The houfes. which ref on the ground are built of the fame materials, 


“and on the fame plan. :..A floping flage that niles to’a crofs piece of timber, 
wer ? oe, Uu - fapporied 


: oon - 


g90 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE. THROUGH THE 


fe 


1799 ‘ fupporied. by two forks, j joins’ alfo to-the main building, for rtf pure 
ie poles which need not be repeated: ° 


. . ‘we Sy ae nee ros 

When -we were furrounded by: the natives on’ our arrival, I counted 
‘fixty-five men, and feveral of them may be {uppofed to have been abfent; 
I cannot, therefore, caléulaté, the inhabitants of this. villige at lefs than 
two hundred: fouls. - : Oe : - 

The ‘people who accompanied us hither, fromy the other village, 
had given the chief a very. particular account of every thing they knew ; ;- 
concerning us: I was, therefore, requefted to produce my aftronomical 
inftruménts; nor could I have any objection to afford them this fatis- 
‘faGtion, | as they would: néceffatily add to our. Amportance in their - °, 


‘opinion, coy path ee Sy 
. 7 2 . f., , wa . . -_ 


(7 


Near the hou of the. chie€ I I. obfervied: feveral. oblong fquares, of 

. about twenty. feet by eight.’ They weére made of thick cedar. boards, 

: * ’. ; which were joined with fo ‘much neatnels, that I at firlt thought they 

" viere ‘one’ piece, They were. painted with Hieroglyphics, ‘and: figures 

"of different. animals, and. with. a. degree of corre@nefs that: was. not to 

be expefted from fuch aw uncultivated ‘peoples  : -eould. not learn 

the ufé of them, ‘bat’ they’ appeared to be: ealealated for oceafional - 

aéts of devotion or facrifice, which’ all thefe tribes perform _ atTeaft 
twice in the yeat, at the {pring and fail...’ I-was confirmed. smvthis opinion J 

‘bya large building i in the middle of the. village, which J at firft took for - 

» thé half finifhed frame of an. houfe. “The ground-plot of it «was fifty 

feet by forty-five; each end is: formed aby fouit flout epolts, fixed perpen- 

; . dicularly 


7 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT. OF AMERICA, 


_ diculatly in the ground. The corner ones.are plain, and fupport. a beam 


33% 
+198 


of the whole Jength, having three intermediate props on each fide, but of ae 


a larger fize, and eight or nine feet in height. The. two centre pofts, at 
each end, are two feet and an half in diameter, and carveg. into human 
' figures, fupporting two. ridge poles on their heads, at twelve feet from 
the ground. The figures at the upper pare of this [quare reprefent two 
peffons, with their hands upon theif knees, as if they fupported the 


weight. with pain and difficulty: the others oppofite to them ftand_, 


at their eafe, with their hands refting on their hips, In the area of 


the building there were. the remains of feveral fires. The pofts, poles, 
and figures, were painted red and black ; but the feulpture of thefe _ 


People iS {uperior to their painting. 


“Soon after I had retired t to ref laft night, the chief paid me a vifit to Friday 19. 


_ infift on my going to his bed- -companion, and taking my place himfelf; 
but, notwithftanding his repeated entreaties, I refifted this offering of his 


hof} pitality. 


At an early hour this morning I was again vifited by the chief, in com- 
pany with his fon. The former complained of a pain in his breaft ; to 


relieve his fuffering, I gave -him’a few drops of Turlington’s Balfam ona. | 


. piece of fugar; and I was rather furprifed to- fee him take it without the 


leaft hefitation.. When he had ‘taken my medicine, he requefted me to — 


follow him, and conduéted me toa fhed,-where feveral people were al- 
fembled round a fick man, who.was another of his fons. They immediately 
‘uncovered him, and fhewed me a violent ulcer in. the {mall of his back, 


in. the , fouleft- ftate. that can be imagined. One: of -his knees was allo. _ 


sUu2 ; afflidted 


is 


832 
4193- 
July 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH! THE... 


affliéted in: the fame manner. ° This unhappy mart was’ réduced toa 


a) fkeleton, and, from his appearance;-was: drawing near. 40 an end of his 


\ 


-pains...:"They requefted that. 1 would touch him, and his father was very 
urgent with me to ‘adminifter medicine; but he was in fuch a dangerous 
flate, that J thought it prudent to yield no further to thé importunities . 
than to give the fick perfon a few drops.of.Turlington’s balfam in fome 
_ water. ‘I therefore: left them, but was foon called back -by’ the loud’ 
“Jamentations: -of the women, and was rather apprehenfive that fome in- 


" convenieiicé” mi ht-refult from my compliance with the chief's requeft. 


On- my returri Tyfouna the -the native phyficians bufy: i in’ praétifing their 
fkill and art-on the patient. “They blew on him, and then whiftled; at 
times they prefled ‘their extended fingers, with all their: ftrength on his 
ftomach ; they alfo put their fore fingers doubled into. his. mouth, and 


' fpouted water from their own with great violence‘into his face. To 


-{upport thefe operations the wretched fufferer was held up in a fitting 
poftute ; and _when,they were concluded, he was laid down and ‘covered 
with anew robe made of the {kin ofalynx. I had oblerved that his belly 
_and breaft were covered with fears, and I underftooid that they were 
- eaufed bya cuftom prevalent: among: them, -of applying pieces of lighted 
touch-wood to their fleth, in order to relieve pain or demonftrate their © 
courage. He was now placed on-'a broad plank, and carried. by fix 
men into the woods, where'I was invited to accompany ‘ther I could 
‘not ‘conjeéture what would be the end. of this eeremony, iavticatany 
as I faw one man carry fire, ‘anothier. an axe, and F third dry wood: I 
was, indeed, difpofed to fulpe& that, as it was ‘their cuftom to barn’ ‘the 
dead, they ‘intended ‘to.relieve the poor nian from his pain, and perform 
the laft fad duty. of furviving affeGtion, When they had advaniced a fhort 


diftanee 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


diftarice i into the wood, they laid him. upon a clear {pot, and kindled a 
fire againtt his: back, when the phyfician began to fcarify the ulcer with 
a very blunt: inftrument, the cruel pain of which operation the patient 
bore with incredible refolution. The fcene affli€ted me and I left it. 

'. On. my return to our lodge, I obferved before the door of the chief's 
tefidence, four heaps of falmon, each of which confifted of between 
three and four hundred fifh, Sixteen women were employed in clean- 
‘ing and preparing ther. They firft feparate the head from the body, 
the former of which they boil; they then cut the latter down the back on 


"each fide of the bone, leaving one third of the fifh adhering to it, and _ 
__ afterwards take out the guts. The bone is roafted for immediate ufe, 


and the other parts are dreffed in the-fame manner, but with more atten- 
tion, for future provifion. While they are before the fire, troughs are 


7 placed under them to receive-the oil. The roes are alfo ‘carefully pre- 


ferved, and form a favourite article of their. food. 


After I had obferved thefe culinary preparations, I paid a vifit to the 
chief, who prefented me with a roafted falmon; he then opened one of 
his chefts, and took out of ita garment. of blue cloth, decorated with 
brafs buttons; and another of a flowered cotton, which I fuppofed were 
Spanifh; it had been trimmed with leather fringe, after the fafhion of 
their own cloaks. Copper and brafs are in great eftimation among them, 


and of the former they have great plenty: they point their arrows 


and {pears with it, and work it up into perfonal ornaments; fuch as col- 
lars, -ear-rings, and bracelets, which they wear on their wrifts, arms, and 


legs. I prefume they find it the inoft advantageous. article of trade with: 
the 


: © 
Js 


3 i 


the more inland tribes. ‘They alfo bound in iron +I faw fome of their 


a twifted collars of that metal which ‘yeighed upwards of twelye pounds, 


Tt is generally beat into bars of fourteen inches in length, and, one 
inch three quarters wide.-: ‘The brafs is in thin. fquares: .their- copper 
is in'larger pieces, and fome of it appeared to be old ftills cut up. 
They -have - various trinkets; but. their i iron ‘ig: manufa@tured only into 


_ poniards and daggers. Some of the former have very neat handles, with 


a filver coin ofa quarter or eighth of a dollar fixed on the end of them. 


. The blades of the latter are from ten to twelve inches in length, and about 


_- 


four inches. broad at’ the top, from which’ they gradually leffen into a ” 


| point. 


When I produced my inflruments to take an altitude, I was defired not 


'to make ufe of them. I could hot then difcover. the caufe of this -re- 


queft, but T experienced the good effe&. of the apprehenfion which they 
occafioned, as it was very effectual i in haftening : ‘my departure. I had 
applied feveral times to the chief to ‘prepare canoes and people to take 


“me and my party to the’ fea, but very little. attention had been paid to 


_ ny application till noon; when I was informed that a canoe: was pro- 


perly equipped for my voyage, and.that the young chief would accom-. 
pany me. Enow-diftovered-that they had entertained no perfonal fear 
of the inftruments, but. were apprehenfive that. the operation of them 
might frighten the falmon from that part of the river. The obfervation 

taken in this village gave me 5% 25: 52 North latitude. 
In compliance with the chief's 5: requeltT defied iny people totake | 
their bundles, and lay. them down on-the bank of the'river, In the meap 
time. 


~ 


NORTH-WEST ‘CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


Aime I went to take the dimenfions of his large canoe, .in. which, it, was 


dignified: tome, that. about ten. winters. ago he wert a. confiderable-dif- 


tance towards: the: mid-day fun, with. forty of his people, wher he faw 


two large veffels.full of fuch men as-myfelf, by whom. he. was kindly re- 
ceived: they were, he faid, the firft white people he had feen. They 
were probably the fhips commanded by Captain Cook. This canoe was 


. built of cedar, forty-five feet long, four feet wide, and three feet and a 


half in depth. It was painted black and decorated with white figures 


of fith of different kinds. The gunwale, fore and aft, was inlaid with the ' 


teeth of the fea-gtter,* 


When I returned to the river, the natives who were to accompany us, 
and my people, were already in the canoe. The latter, however, in- 
formed me, that. one of our axes was mifling. I immediately applied 


‘to the chief, and requefted its reftoration ; but he would not underftand 


me ‘till I fat myfelf down on a ftone, with my afms in a ftate of pre- 
paration, and made it appear to him that I fhould not depart till the 


_ flolen article was reftored. The village was immediately in a ftate of 
uproar, and fome danger was apprehended from .the confufion that 
* prevailed‘in it. The axe, however, which had been. hidden under the =| 
- chief’s canoe, was foon returned. ‘Though this infirnment was not, in 


itfelf, of fufficient value-to juftify a difpute with thefe people, I appre- 


“herded that the faffering them to ‘keep it, after we had declared its lofs, 


* As Captain Cooke’ has mentioned, that the people of the {ea-coaft adorned their canoes with 
human teeth, I was more particular in my inquiries; the refult of which was, the moft fatisfaftory 
proof, that he was miftaken: but his miftake arofe from the very great refemblance there is between 
human teeth and thofe of the dea-otter. tee 


mo might 


396 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE — 


3708+ might have occafioned the lofs of every thing we carried with us, and 

—~—~ of our lives alfo., My people were diffatisfied with me at the moment; 

| -but I thought myfelf right then, and, I think now, ‘that the circumftances 
-in which we were involved, juftified the meafure which I adopted... 


“y 


ro. 


CHAP. 


oe 


. 


- arrived at two houfes, where we were, in fome degree, obliged to go on ae 
‘fhore, as we were informed that the owner of them was a perfon » of . 
confideration. He indeed received and regaled us in the fame manner 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 997 


CHAPTER XI 


Renew our voyage. Circumftances of the river. Land at the houfe of a 
chief. Entertained-by him. Carried down the river with great rapidity 
to another houfe. Received with kindnefs.. Occupations of the inha- 
bitants on its banks, Leave the canoe at a fall, Pafs over land to 
“another village. Some account of it. Obtain a view of an arm of the 
fea. Lof our dog. | Procure another canoe. Arrive at the arm of the | 
- fe. Circumftances of i. One of our guides returns home.  Coajt along ; 
a bay. “Some defcription of it. | Meet with Indians. Our communica- 
“tion with them. Ther fu ufpicious conduéé towards us. Pafs onwards. 
Determine the latitude and longitude. Return to the river. Dangerous 
encounter with the Indians. Proceed on our journey. a! 


1793 
July 
an 


Ar cone ‘in ‘the afternoon swe renewed our voyage in a large ‘canoe Sauday abs” 
with four of the natives. We found the river almoft one continued ~ 
rapid, -and in half an hour we came to an houfe, where, however, we 

did not land, though invited by the inhabitants. In about an hour we A 


ral 


x xX oO as : 


338 


1793¢ 


July. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


as-at the laft village; - and to increafe his confequence, he produced many 


“—-v—~ European articles, and amongft them were at leaft forty pounds weight 


+ 


of old copper ftills. We made our ftay as fhort as poffible, and our hoft 
embarked with us. In a'very fhort time we were carried by the rapidity 
of the current to another houfe of very large dimenfions, which was 

partitioned into different apartments, and \ whofe doors were on the fide, 
The inhabitants received us with great kindnefs ; but inflead of fifh, 
they placed a long, clean, and well madé trough before u us full of berries. ° 
In addition to thofe which we had. “Already fen, there were fome 
black, that were larger than the huckle’ berry, and of a “richer flavour ; 

and, others white, which refembled the blackberry in every thing but 
colour. Here we’ faw a woman with two pieces ‘of copper in hier under 

lip, as itlefcribed by Captain Cook. I continued my, ufaal’ ‘prattice of 
making! thefe pebiple prefents i in \Feturn for ‘their "friendly reception 2 and 
entertainment, oa 


at rn 


4 


The ndvigation of the river now w Became: more e difficult, from the nu- 
merous channels into which it was. divided, without any.fenfible dimi- 
nution in the velocity of its carrent. We {oon reached another houfe 
of the common fize, where we were well received ; but whether our 
_-Baides had informed them that we:were-not in want of any thing, or 
~~ that they-were deficient in inclination, or perhaps the: ‘means, of being 
hofpitable to us, they: did not offer us any refiefhment. They were ina 
ftaté of bufy preparation. “Some of the women were employed in beat- 
ing and preparing the inner rind of the cedar-bark, to which they gave 
,the appearance of flax. Others were {pinning with a diftaff and -{pindle. 
One.of them was weaving a robe'éF it, intermixed with Atripes of the fea~ 

otter — 


ee 


| é 
. 4 . 
~NORTH-WEST GONTINENT OF AMERICA. 
otter fkin, ora frame of adequate contrivance that was placed, againft the 
fide of the'houfe. The men were fifhing on the river with drag-nets be- 
tween two-.canoes; Thefe, nets are forced by poles to the bottom, the 
current driving them: before it; by which means the falmon coming up 


the river are intercepted, andi give notice of their being taken by the 


ftruggles they make in the bag or fleeve of ihe.net.. There are no weirs 
in this part of the river, as I fuppofe, from the. numerous channels into 
which it is divided. The machines, therefore, are placed along the 
banks, and confequently thefe people are not fo well fupplied with fith 
as the village which has: been already defcribed, nor do they appear 
to poffefs the fame indufiry. ‘The inhabitants. of the. laft houfe accom- 


’ panied us in a large canoe. They recommended: us to leave ours © 


~ here, as.the next village was but at a fmall diftance: from us, and the 


water more rapid than that which we had pafled. They informed us | 


'. alfo; that we were approaching a:cafcade. I diretted them to fhoot it, 
and proceeded myfelf to the foot thereof, where I re-imbarked, and we 
went on with great velocity, till we came to a fall, where.we left our 
canoe, and carried our luggage along a road through a wood for fome 


hundred yards, when we came to a village, confifting of fix very large _ 
houles; ereétéd on pallifades, rifing twenty-five feet from the ground, 


which differed in no.one circutnftance from thofe already defcribed, but 
the, height of their‘elevation. They contained only four'men and their 
. -families. . The reft of the inhabitants were with us and in the fmall 
houfes which.we:paffed higher up the river,* * Thefe people do not feem 
to enjoy the aburidance of their neighbours, as the men who returned 


. Mr, Johnftone came to thefe houfes the firtt day of the preceding month. 
Xx 2 from 


349 


1793+ 
July. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


from fifhitig: had. no more than five falmon; they refufed to fell one of 
them, but gave mé~one roafted of a very indifferent kind. In the 
houfés there were feveral chefts or boxes containing different articles 
that belonged to the people whom.we had lately pafled. If I were to 
judge by the heaps of filth beneath thefe buildings, they muft have been 
eretted at-a’more diftant period than any which we had pafled. From — 
thefe houfes I could perceive the termination of the river, and its dif- 


charge into a narrow arm of the: fea. 


Asit was now half pall fix in the evening, and the weather cloudy, E 
determined to reniain here for the night, and for that ‘purpofe we pof- 
feffed ourfelves of one of the unoccupied houfes. : The remains. of our 
laft meal, which we brought with us, ferved for our fupper, as we. 
could ‘not procure a-fingle fifh from the natives. The courfe of the - 
river is about Weft, and.the diftance-from the great village upwards of 
thirty-fix miles, ‘Flere we had loft.our dog, a circumftance of no fmalk 


* Hegret to Meg he ae 


Saturday 20, 


We rofe at.a very early hour this morning, when I prepofed to the 
Indians to. run down» dur canoe, or-procure another at this place. To — 
both thefe propofals they turned ‘a deaf ear, as: they imagined. that F- 
thould be fatisfied with having 'come in fight’ oF the fede: Two of them 
péremptorily refufed to proceed’; -but the other't two having confented to 


-contitiue with us, we obtained a larger canoe ‘thanolirformér one, ‘and 


though it was in a leaky. flate we were glad to poffels it,’ 


| At about eight we got out of the river, which difcharges. itfelf by 


various 


Lf 


wa 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


various channels into an, arm of the fea, The tide was out, and had 
« left a large {pace covered. with fea-weed. “The furrounding hills were 


involved in fog. The wind was at Welt, ‘which was a-head of us, and 
very ftrong ; the’ bay appearing to be from. one to three miles in breadth. 


As we advanced along the land we faw a great number of fea-otters. We 


fired feveral fhots at them, but without any fuccefs from the rapidity 
“with which they plunge under the water. We alfo faw many {mall por- 
poifes or divers. The white-headed eagle, which is common in the in- 


terior parts; fome {mall gulls, a dark bird which is inferior in fize to the | 


gull, and a few {mall ducks, were all the birds which prefeited them- 
felves to our view. : 


¥ 


At two in the afternoon the {well was fo high, and the wind, which’ 
"owas againft us, fo boifterous, that we could not proceed with our leaky: 


| veffel, we therefore: landed in a {mall cove on the right fide ofthe bay. 
_Oppofite to us appeared another {rial bay, in-the mouth of which is an 
ifland, and where, according to the information of the Indians, a river 


difcharges itfelf that abounds in falmon, — 


we 


Our young Indians now difeovered a very evident difpofition to leave 
us; and, in the evening, one of them made his efcape. Mr. Mackay, . 


however, with thé other, purlued and brought him back; but as it was. 
by no means neceffary to detain, him, particularly as proviions did not 
abound. with us, I-gave him a {mall portion, with a pair of fhoes, which 
were neceffary for his j journey; and a filk handkerchief, telling him at the 


fame time, that he might go and inform his friends, that we fhould alfo., 
_return — 


342, JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


41a" return in three nights: ‘He accordingly | left us, and his companion, rhe / 
wy young chief, went, with him, , 8 


When we landed, the tide was $ going out, and at a quarter pall four it 
was ebb, the water having fallen in that fhort period éleven feet’ and 
an half. Since we left the river, not-a quarter Of an hour had paffed in | 

. which.we ‘did not {ee porpoifes and fea-otters. Soon after ten it was ° 
high water, which rendered it neceflary that our baggage fhould be fhifted 
feveral times, though. not till fome of the things had been wetted, 


_ We were now reduced to the neceflity of looking ont for frefh water, 
with which we were plentfully fupplied by the rills that ran down | from 


the mountains. . 


When it was dark the young chief returned to, us, bearing a large 
porcupine on his back. He firft cut the animal open, and having dif- 
encumbered it of the entrails, threw them -into the fea; he then: finged 
its {kin, and boiled it in feparate pieces, as our kettle was not fufficiently 
€apacious to contain the whole: nor did he go to reft, till, with the 
afhiftance of two of my people who happeried to be awake, , every morfel 
of it was devoured. er ; 

[had flattered mylelf with the hope of getting a  diftance of the moon. 
and flars, but the cloudy weather ‘continually. difappointed me, and I 
began to fear that.I fhould fail in this. important objeé ; particularly as 
our provifions weré at. a-very low ebb, and we had, as yet, no reafon to. 

| -expedt- . 


" NORTH- WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


exped any affiftance from the natives... Our ftock was, at this time, re- 


3438 


Tae 


ily. 
duced to twenty pounds weight-of pemmican, fifteen pounds of rice, es 


and fix pounds of flour, among ten half-ftarved meh, in a leaky veflel,., 
and on a barbarous coaft. Our courfe from the river was about Weft. 
South-Welt, diftance ten miles, 


At forty minutes paft four this morning it was low water, which made Sunday 22, 


fifteen. feet perpendicular height below the high-water mark of lait night. 
_ Mr. Mackay colle&ted a quantity of {mall mufcles which we boiled. 
Our people did not partake of this regale, as they are wholly unac- 
quainted: with fea fhell-fifh, Our young chief being miffing, we imagined 
“that he had taken his flight, but, as we were preparing to depart, he for- 


tunately made his appearance: from. the woods, where he had beén to ~ 


._ take his ref after his feaft of laft night. At fix we were upon the water, 


/ when we cleared-the {mall bay, which we named Porcupine Cove, and - 


/ fteered Weft-South-Weft for feven miles, we then opened a channel 


about two males and an half wide at South-South-Welft, and had a view ~ 


often or twelve miles intoit. As I could not afcertain the diftance from 


the open fea, and being uncertain whether we were in.a-bay or among. 
inlets and channels ‘of iflands, I confined my fearch to a proper place 
for taking an obfervation. We fteered, therefore, along the land on the a ; 
left, Weft-North-Weft a mile and an half; then. North-Welf one fourth we 
of a milé, and North three miles: to: an ifland; the land’ continuing to _ 
run North-North-Wef, then. along the ifland, South-South-Weft half.a 


mile, Weft a’mile and an half, and from thence direétly acrofs to the 
dang on 1 the left,” (where I had an altitude,) South-Weft three miles.* 


| * The Cape or Point Menzies ‘of Vancouver, - 


+ “a 


. From , 


| B44 


1198. 
July. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


From this pofition: a channel, of which the ifland we left appeared to. 


Leman make a cheek, bears North by Eaft. 


e 


‘Gnder the land wé mét with three canoes, with fifteen men in them, 
and laden with their moveablés, as if proceeding to a new fituation, or 


* returning toa former one. They manifeftéd no kind of miftrult or fear ° 


of us, but entered into converfation with our young man, as I fuppofed, to 
obtain fome information’ concerning us. It did not appear that they were 
_ the fame people. as thofe we had lately fen, as they {poke the lan- 
guage of our young chief, with a 1 different accent. They. then examined 
every thing we had in, our, ganoe, with an air of indifference and dif- 
‘dain. ‘One of them,in particular made me ‘underftand, with an air of 
infolence, that a large cénoe: had lately been in this bay, with people 
in her like’me, and that one of them, whom he called Macudah, had fired 
on him and his friends, and that Benfins had ftruck him ‘on the back, 

with thé “flat part-of. his fword. He alfo mentioned another name, the 
articulation of which I could not determine. At the fame time he illuf-. 


trated thefe circumftances by the affiftance of my gun and [word; and I ' 


‘ do not doubt but he well deferved the treatmént which he defcribed. 
He alfo produced feveral European articles, which could not have been 
long 3 in his poffeffion. From his conduét and. appearance, I wifhed very 
much to be rid of him, and, flattered myfelf that He would profe- 


cute his voyage, which appeared to be in dn oppofite dire&tion to our 


" “courfe. However, when I prepared to part from_ them, they turned 


- >" 
aa — 
onanan een 


their canoes about, and perfuaded my young man to leave me, which I 


‘could not Prevent. 


i> 


We 


* 


ry 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. | | 845 


We coafted along the land* at about Weft-South- Welt for fix miles, ig 
‘and met a canoe with two boys in it, who were difpatched to fummon Sv 
the people on that part of the coaft to join them. The trouble efomée : 
fellow now forced himlelf into my canoe, and pointed out a narrow 
channel on the oppofite fhore, that Jed to his village, and requefted us 
to fleer towards. it, which J accordingly ordered. His importunities 
now became Very irkfome, and he wanted to fee every thing we had, 
particularly my inftruments, concerning which he muft have received 
information from my young man. He afked for my hat, my handker- 
chief, and, in fhort, every thing that he faw about me. At the fame 
time he frequently repeated the unpleafant intelligence that he had been 
fhot at by people of my colour. At fome diftance from the land a chan- 
nel opened to us, at South- Welt by Weft, ‘and pointing that way, he 
made me underftand that Macubah'came there with his large canoe, 
When we were in mid-channel, I perceived fome fheds, or the remains 
of old buildings, on the fhore; and as, from that circumftance, I thought 
; it probable that fome Europeans might have been there, I diretted my 
~ fteerfman . to. make for" that {pot. The traverle, is upwards of three . 


° miles North- Welt. 


” We landed, and found the ruins’of a village, in a fituation calculated 
for defence. The place itfelf was over grown with weeds, and in the 
centre of the houfes there was a temple, of the fame form and conftruc- 
_tion as that which I defcribed at the large village. We “were foon fol- 
" lowed by ten canoes, each of which contained from three to fix men., They — 
_—) 
_ * Naed by Vancouver King’s Iflgnd. | 


Yy yo ; sn fob . 


oes 


346 


1792- 
Take 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


informed us that we Were expedited at the village, where we fhould fee 


‘—.—~ snany of them. From their geheral deportment I was very apprehen- 


- five that fome -hoftile défign was meditated againft us, and for the firft” 


time J acknowledged my apprehenfionis to my people. Taccordingly de- 
fired them to be very much upon their guard, and to be prepared if any 
violence was offéred to defend themfelves to the Jaft. 


We liad tio fooner landed, than we took poffleffion of a rock, where 
there was yrot-fpace for more than twice our number, and which ad- | 
witted of our: defending ourfelves with advantage, i in cafe we fhould be 


attacked. The people in. the three firft canoes,’ were the moft troubles | ne 


fome, but, afier doing their utmoft to irritate us, they went away.” ‘They 


"were, however, io fooner gone, than an hat, an handkerchief, and feve- 


ral other articles, were miffi ing. The reft of our vifitors’ continued theif 
preffing invitations to accompany them to their village, but finding our 
refolution to decline them was not to be’ fhaken, they, about ‘fun-fet re- 
lieved us fromm all further importunities, by their departure, . 


Another ¢ canoe, however, foon arrived, with feven flout, well- looking, 
men. They brought a box, which contained a very fine fea-otter fin,” 
and 4 Boat fkin, that was beautifully white, ‘For the former they de- 


_Wanded' my hanger, which, as may well be fappofed, could not be {pared 


in ‘our prefent fituation, and they aétually- refufed to take a yard and an 


- half of common broad cloth, with fome other ‘articles, for the kin, which 


proves the unréfleGting iimprovidence of our Earopean traders. The 

goat-fkin was fo bulky that I did not offer to purchafe it. Thefe men 

alfo told me that Macubah had been there, and“left his fhip behind a 
point 


‘NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


point of land in the: channel, South- Welt from US; from whence he had 
come to their village in boats, which thefe people reprefented by imitat- 


ing our manner of rowing. ‘When IT offered them what they did not’ 


choofe to accept for the otter-fkin, they fhook their heads, and very dif- 
tinétly anfwered,{‘ No, no.” And to irk their refufal of any thing 
“nofyllable. Ino one of the canoes which’ had, deft us, s, there ° was a feal; 
a I wifhed to purchafe, but could not peifiade ¢ the natives to part with 
, They had alfo a fifh, which I now;faw ben the firft tine. Jt was 
shout eighteen inches in length, of the fhape: and appearance of a trout, 
with ftrong, fharp teeth. We faw great numbers of the animals which 


we had taken for-fea otters, but I was-now difpoled to think that 4 great 


part of them, at leaft, muft have: been feals. 


| The natives having left us, we “made a fire to warm gurfelves, and as 
for fupper, there wag but little of that, for our whole daily allowance 
did not amount to what wss fufficient for a fingle meal, The weather 
was clear throughout the day, which was fucceeded by a fine moon-light 
night. I direéted the people to keep watch by two in turn, and laid my- 
elf down i in my cloak, 
This morning the-freather was clear and pleafant; nor had any thing 
occurred to tb threaghoa the night. One folitary Indian, in- 
deed, came to us with abeut half a, pound of boiled feal’s flefh, and the 
head of a {mall falmon, for'which he afked an handkerchief, but after- 
wards accepted a few beads. As this man came alone, I concluded that 
no general, plan had been formed among the natives to annoy us, but 
this opinion did not-altogether calm the apprehenfions of my. people. = 
. Yye2 Soon 


Monday 22. 


318 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


+798 Soon after eight in the morning, I took five altitudes for time, and the 
uly 


———_ mean of them was 36° 48° at fix in the afterrfvon, 58. 34. time, by the 


watch, which makes the achrometer flow apparent time 1" 217 44", 
Two canoes now arrived from the fame quarter as the reft, with feve- 

ral men, and our young Indian along with them. They brought a very 

few {mall fea-otter. fkins, out of feafon, with fome .pieces of: raw feal’s 


fleth. The former were of no value, bit hunger compelled fome of my 


people to take the latter, at an extravagant price. Mr. Mackay lighted.a 
bit of touch wood with a burning-glafs, in the cover of his tobacco-box, 
which fo furprifed the natives, that they exchanged the beft of their otter 


- {kins for it. The young man was now very anxious to perfuade our people 
‘to depart, as the natives, he faid, were as numerous as mufquitoes, and of 


very malignant charafter. This information produced fome very ear- 
neft. remonftrances to me to haften our departure, but as I was determined | 
not to leave this ‘place, except I was abfolutely compelled to it, till Thad 
afcertained its fituation, thefe folicitations were not repeated. 4 


While I was taking a meridian, two canoes, of a larger fize, and well 
manned, appeared from the main South-Welt channel. They feemed 
to be the fore-runners of others, who were coming to co-operate with the 
people of the village, in confequence of the meflage fent by the two boys, 
which has been already mentioned; and our young Indian, who under- 
ftood them, renewed his entreaties for our departure, as ‘they would foon 
come to fhoot their arrows, and hurl their {pears at us. In relating our . 
danger, his agitation was fo violent that he foamed at the mouth. 
Though I was not altogether free from apprehenfions on the occafion, it 
Bo ; - Oo , _ ‘was 


| 


nk? 
yo . 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. | 


was neceflary for me to ‘difguife them, as-my people were panic ftruck, 
and. fog of them afked if it was my determination to remain there to be 


facrificed? My reply was the fame as their former importunities had 


received, that I would not ftir till I had accomplifhed my objeét; at the 
fame time, to humour their fears, I confented that they fhould put every 
thing into the canoe, that we might be in a flate of preparation to de- 


part. | The two canoes now approached the fhore, and in a fhort time five - 
men 


j with their families, landed very quietly from them. . My inftruments 
being expofed, they examined them with much apparent admiration and 
aftonifhment. My altitude, by an artificial horizon, gave 52° 21* 39”; 
that byt the natural horizon was 52° 20 48” N orth latitude.* 


| Thele Indians were of a different tribe from thofe which I had already 
een, as our guide did not underftand their language. Inow mixed up 


i : 
fome vermilion in melted greafe, and infcribed, in large charafters, on 


ithe South-Eaft face of the rock on which we had flept laft night, this 
brief memorial—* Alexander Mackenzie, from Canada, by land, the 
twenty-fecond of July, one thoufand feven, hundred and‘ninety-three.” 


' AsI thought that we were too near the village, I confented to leave 

this place, and accordingly ‘proceeded North-Eaft three miles, when we 
landed on a point, in a {mall cove, where we fhould. not be readily feen, 
and could not be attacked except in our front. 4 - 


Among other articles that had been ftolen from us, at our laft flation, 


_ % This I found to be the cheek of Vancouver's: Cafcade Canal, 


Was - 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


was a founding-line, which I intended to have employed in this bay, 
though I fhould not probably have found the bottom, at any diftance 
from the fhore, as the appearance both of the water and Jand indicated 
a great depth. The latter difplayed a folid rock, rifing, as it appeared 
to me, from three to feven hundred feet above high water mark. Where 


. any foil was {catered about, there were cedars, {fpruce-firs, white biré h, 


and other trees of large growth, , From its precipices iffued lircams of 
fine water, as cold as ice, -.: 


The two canoes which we had left at our lait ftation, = 
hither; and when they were preparing to depart, our young chief em- 
barked with them. I was determined, however; to prevent his efcape, 


| and compelled him, by aftual, force, to come on fhore, for I thought it 


much better to incur his difpleafure, than to fuffer him to expofe himfelf™ 
to any untoward accident among. Strangers, or to return to his father be- 


-fore us. The men in the canoe made figns for him to. go over the hill, 


and that they would. take him” on board at the other fide of it. As I 
was neceflarily engaged i in other matters, I defired . my. people. to take 

care that he fhould not run away ; ; but they peremptorily refufed to be 
employed i in keeping him againft his will. I was, therefore, reduced to 
the neceflity of watching hién myfel - . ae a ° ~~ 


Be 


I took five altitudes, and the rhean of them was 29. 93. 48. A 
at 3. 5. 53. in the afternoon, by the watch, which makes-it flow apparent 


time oF 22" 38° 
the fore a Bad ag 
In the forenoon it was. tat “4 244 22 -, 
Mean of both . 41 22°11 
Difference nine hours going of the time-pieceflow' '“ ~ 8 
| 1 22 19 


I obferved 


“hey p . é 


NORTH. WEST CONTINENT Or AMERICA. 


f-oblerved ‘an emerfion of ‘Jupiter's third fatellite, which gave 
8°32" 21” difference of longitude. I thet obferved an emerfion of Jupi- 
ter’s firft fatellite, which gave 8. 31. 48. The mean of thefe obfervations 
is 8° 32" 2” which is equal to 128. 2. Welt of Greenwich. 

Thad now determined my, fituation, which is the moft fortunate cir- 
cumftance of my long, painful, and perilous journey, as a few cloudy 
days would have prevented me from afcertaining the final. longitude of it.® 


‘At twelve it was high water, but the tide did not come within a foot 
and an half of the high water mark of laft night. As foonas,I had com- 
pleted my obfervations, we left this'place: it was then ten o'clock in the 
afternoon. We retumed the fame way that we came, and though the 
tide was running out very flrong, by keeping clofe in with the rocks, we 


proceeded at a confiderable rate, as my people were very anxious f to get 


out of the reach of the inhabitants of this coaft. 


During our courfe we faw feveral fires on the land to the Southward, 
and after the day dawned, their fmokes were vifible. At half paft four 
this morning we arrived at our: encampment of the night of the arft, 


. which had been named Porcupine Cove. The tide was out, and con- 


fiderably Jower than we found it when we were here before; the high- 


* Mr.. Meares was undoubtedly wrong in the idea, fo pofitively infifted on by him in ‘his voyage, 
that there was a North-Welt paflage to the Southward of fixty-nine degrees and an half «f latitude,.as 
1 flatter “‘my/élf has been proved by my former voyage. Nor can I réfrain from expreffing my lurprife 


at his affertion, that there was an inland fea or archipelago of great extent between the iflands « of Nootka 


and the main, about the latitude where I was at this time. Indeed I have been informed that 
Captair Grey, who commanded an American veffel, and on whofe authority hg ventures this opinion, 
denies tlrat he had | given Mr. Meares any fuch information. Brfides, the, contiary 1s indubitably 
proved by Captain Vancouver’s furvey, from which no 10 appeal can bé maue. ; 


4 


Tuefday 23. 


water | 


"852 


"1993+ 


ly. 
July. 


JOURNAL OF.A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


" water mark being above the place where we had made our fire. This 


fluétuation muft be occafioned by the aétion of the wind upon the water, 
in thofe narrow channels. ° 
; ae 4 | 

_As we continued onwards, towards the river, we faw a canoe, well 
manned, which at firft made from us with great expedition, ‘but after- 
wards waited, as if to reconnoitre us; however, it kept out of our way, 
and allowed us to pafs. The tide being, much lower than wheit'we were 
here before, we were under the neceflity of. landing a mile below the 
village, We obferved that flakes were fixed in'the ground. along the 
bay, arid in fome places machines were faftened to them}\as I ‘afterwards 
learned, to intercept the feals and otters. ‘Thefle works. are very exten- 
five, and muft have been ere€ted with no common labour, The only 
bird we faw today was the white-headed eagle.* 

Our guide direBted us to draw the « canoe out of the reach of the tide 
and to leave it. He would not wait, however, till this operation was 
performed, and I did not with to let him-go alone. - I thetefore: followed 
him through a bad road encumbered with underwood. » When we had 
quitted the wood, and were in fight, of the houfes, the young man being * 
about fifteen or twenty paces before me, I.was-furprifed to fee-two men 
ranning down towards me from.one of the houfes, with daggers in their 
hands and fury in their afpeét, From their hoftile appearance, I could 
not dqubt of their purpofe. I therefore ftopped.fhort, threw down my 
cloak, and put myfelf inva pofture of defence, with my ‘gun prefented 


oS . '* This bay was now named Mackenzie’s Outlet. - 


i . 
. __ towards 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 953 


_ towards them. Fortunately for me, they knew the effet of fire-arms, HH 8+ 
and inftantly dropped their daggers, which were .faftened by a ftring to 
their wrifts, and had before been held in a menacing attitude. I let my 

gun alfo fall into my left hand, and drew my hanger. Several others 
foon joined them, who were armed in the fame manner; and among. 
them I recognifed the man whom I have already mentioned as being fo 
troublefome to us, and who now repeated the names of Macubah and 
Benzins, fignifying at the fame time by. his ation, as on a former oc- | 
cafion, that he had been fhot at by them.: ‘Until I faw him my mind 
was $ undifturbed but the moment he appeared, conceiving that he was 

the caule of. my prefent perilous 1 ‘fituation, my refentment predominated; 
and, if he had come within’ my ‘Teach, I verily believe, that I fhould 


have terminated his infolence for ever. 


_ The reft now approached fo near, that one of them contrived to 
get behind me, and grafped me in his arms. Ifoon difengaged myfelf 
from him; and, that he did not avail himfelf of the opportunity. which 
he had of plunging his dagger i into me, I cannot conjeéture.; ' They cer- 
tainly might have overpowered me, and though I fhould probably. have 


killed one or two of them, I muft have fallen at’ laf. 
2 


~{7 eee 


: One of my ‘people now came out of the wood. “On his appearance 7 

_ they: inftantly took to flight, and with the utmoft fpeed fought ‘fhélter 

im the houfes from whence they had iffued. -It was, however, upwards 

of ten minutes before:all my people joined me; and as they came one 

after’ ‘the other, thefe people might have fucceflively difpatched every 
Zz . _ one 


354 


a 1 
Jay. 


| occafion fhould require it. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


_ one of us, If they had killed me, in the firft inftance, this confequence” 


would certainly have followed, and not one of us would have returned . 


home to tell the horrid fate of his companions. 


After having ftated the danger I had encountered, I told ° my people 
that I was determined to, make thefe natives feel the impropriety of their 
conduét toward us, and compel them to return my hat and cloak which 
they had taken in the fcuffle, as well as the articles previoufly purloined 
from us; for moft of the men-who were in the three canoes that we firft 
faw, were now in the village. I therefore told my men to prime their 
pieces afrefh, and prepare themfelves for an attive. ufe of them, : if, the 


B 


We now drew up before the houfe, and made figns for fome one to 
come down tous. : At length our young chief appeared, and told us that 
thé men belonging to the canoes had not only informed his friends, that 
we liad treated him very ill, but that we had killed four of their com- 
panions ‘whom we had met in the|bay. When I had explained to them 
as, well aé- it ‘was in-‘my power, the'falfehood of fuch a ftory, I infifted on 
the reftoration of every thing’ that had been:taken from us, as well as a 
neceflary fupply of fifh, as the conditions of my departure ; accordingly 
the things were-reftoréd, and a few dried fifh along with them, A re- 
conciliation now took place, but: our guide or young chief was fo much 


terrified that he would remain no longer with -us, and requefted us to 


follow with his father’s canoe, or mifchief would follow. I determined, 
however, before: my departure, | to take an obfervation, and at noon got . 
> a a meridian 


t 


wwe]. 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 355 


a meridian altitude, making this place, which I named Rafcal’s Village, 1703. 
52+ 23. 43. North latitude. 7 
a. 
On my informing the natives that we wanted fomething more to eat, 
they brought us two falmons; and when we fignified that we had no 
_ poles to fet the canoe againft the current, they were furnithed with equal 
alacrity, fo anxious were they for our departure. I paid, however, for 
_ every thing which we had received, and did not forget the loan of the 


- canoe, 


356 


17936 
July. 
Ley 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


“4 
' 


CHAPTER ‘XIL. 


Return up'the river, Slow progrefs of. the comoe , from the Jjiréngth of the 
current. The hofiile party of the mativer precede US. _Tinfebuous con- 
duit of my people. Continue our ‘véry tedious ‘voyage. Core ta ‘fome 
houfes ; received with great hindne/s. Arrive at the principal, or Salmon 
Village, Our prefent reception very different from that we experienced 
on our former vifit. Continue our journey. Circumftances of it. Find 
our dog. Arripe at the Upper, or Friendly Village. Meet with a very 
hind reception. | Some further account of the manners and cuftoms of its 
inhabitants. Brief vocabulary of theer language. ° 


- “Tue current of the river was fo -ftrong, that I fhould have complied | 


“with the withes of my people, and gone by land, but one of my Indians 
was fo weak, that it was impoffible for him’ to perform the journey. He 


had been ill fome time; and, indeed, we had bcen all of us more or lefs _ 


affli€ed with colds on the fea coaft. Four of the people therefore fet off 
“with the canoe, and it employed.them an hour to get halfa mile. In the 
mean time the native, who has been already mentioned as having treated 
us with fo much infolence, and four of his companions, went up the river 


in a canoe, which they had above the rapid, with as many boxes as men 
; ' ‘ a . in 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 
~4 : 


inher. ‘This circumfance was the caufe of frefh alarm, as it was gene- 
rally concluded that they would produce the fame mifchief and danger 
in.the villages above,'as they had in that below. Nor was it forgotten 
that the young chief had left us in a manner which would not be inter- 
preted in our favour by his fatker-and friends. 


Nae length the canoe : arrived, and,the people declared j in the’ moft un- 
referved terms, that they would proceed no further ‘in her; but when 


they were made acquainted witlrthe circumftances which have juft been 


Met 


deferibed, their violence increafed, and the greater part of the men an- 


nounced their deterini Mination to attempt the mountains, ‘and endeavour, . 


by palling over them,, to gain the road by which we came to the firft 
-gillage. Sq, seTajved were they to purfue this plan, that’ they threw 
every thing which they had into the river, except their blankets, [ 


- .gyas all this time fitting patiently on a ftone, and indulging the hope 


that, when their frantic terror had fubfided; their returning reafon 
would have difpofed them to perceive the rafhnels of their pro- 


je; but when I obferved that they perfifted i in it, Ind longer re>_ 


jmained a filent liftener to their paffionate declarations, but proceeded 
to employ fuch arguments as I-trufted would turn’ them from their 
- fenfelefs and impraticable purpofe. After, ‘reproving my young Indian 
int very fevere terms, for encouraging the reft to follow their mad de- 
.ofign ‘of paffi ng the mountains, -I addreffed myfelf generally to them,, 
ftating the difficulty of afcending the mountains, the eternal fhows with 
which they: were overed, our fmall ftock of provifions, which two days 
would exhauft, and the confequent probability that we fhould perifh with 


cold aad banger. 1 urged the folly of ‘bemg effefted by the alarm of « 


.- . dan ger 


sty 


Meeceaneerte . , . 
. . 


4 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 


danger which might not exift, and if i it did, I encouraged them’ with the 
~ means we pofleffed of furmounting it. Nor did I forget to urge the in- 


humanity and injuftice, of leaving the poor, fick Indian to languith and 
‘die. {allo added, that as my particular objeft had been accomplithed, I 
had now no other but our common fafety ; that the fole wifh of my 
heart was to employ the beft means in my power, and to purfue the beft 
method which my underftanding ‘could fuggeft, to fecure them and my- 
felf from every danger that might impede our return. 

‘My fteerfman, who had been with me for five years in that capacity, 
inftantly replied that he was ready to follow me wherever I fhould go, but 


' that he would never again enter that canoe, as he had folemnly fworn he 
would not, while he was in the rapid. His example was followed by - 


all the reft, except twd, who embarked with Mr: Mackay,* myfelf, and 
the fick Indian. The current, however, was fo ftrong, that we dragged 
up the greateft part of the way, by the branches of trees.“-Qur-progrefs;~— 


eT 


_ as may be imagined, was very tedious, and attended with uncommon 


labour ; the party who went by land being continually obliged to wait 


.* ° forus. Mr. Mackéy’s gun was carried out of the canoeand loft, at a time 


' Lan 
tes 


aw” 


& 


when we appgared to ftand in very great need of it, as two canoes, with 
fixteen or eighteen men, were coming down the-ftream; and the appre- 
henfions which they oceafioned did not fubfide till they, fhot PY us with 
great rapidity. 


At feng we came in fight of thehoufe, when we faw our young Indian 
* It is but common jaltice to him, to mention in this place that 1 had every feafon to be 


- 


oy, 


futishod with his condu&. : ee cee 
7 m, . ; A yi 


‘but we were neverthelefs well received by the inhabitants, who prefented 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. . 859 


with fix others, in a canoe coming to meet us. This wasa very en- 1793: 
couraging circumflance, as it fatisfied us that the natives who had.pre- ~~ 
ceded, and whole malignant defigns we had every reafon to fulpeé, 
had not been able to prejudice the people againft us. We, therefore, 
landed at the houfe, where we were. received in a friendly ‘manner, and 
having procured fome fifh, we proceeded on our journey. ‘, 


It was almoft dark when we arrived at the next houfe, and the firft 
perfons who prefented themfelves to our obfervation were the turbulent 


Indian and his four companions. ‘They were not very agreeable objeéts ; 


‘us with fifh and berries. The Indians who had caufed us fo much 


alarm, we now difcovered to be inhabitants of the iflands, and traders in; an 
various articles, {uch as cedar-bark, prepared to be wove into mats, fifh-." , 


f{pawn, copper, iron, and beads, the latter of which they get on their own | 
coaft. For thefe they receive in exchange roafted_falmon, themlock-bark-—-———--— 


* place,.I recommended them. to return to their reft. I was the firft awake 


1 8 
ae 


cakes, andthe other kind made of falmon roes, forrel, and bitter berries. 


Having procured as much fifh as would ferve us for our fupper, and the 
meals of the next day, all my peoplé went to reft except one, with whom 
I kept the firft watch, * sO ° 


After twelve laft night, I'called up Mr. Mackay, and one of the men, Weft cy al 
to relieve us, but-as a general tranquillity appeared to prevail in the 


4 


the morning, and fent Mr. Mackay to fee if our canoe.remained where 


« we left it; but he returned to inform me that the Iflanders had loaded ‘it . 


_with their articles .of traffic, and were ready to depart. - On this intel- 


ligence 


< 


| JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


ligence I hurried to, the water fide, and f{eizing the canbe by the flem, I 
fhould certainly have overfet it, and turned the three men that were in it, 
with all their merchandife, into the river, had not one of the people of 
the houfe, who had been very kind to us, informed me that this was their 
own canoe, and that my guide had gone off with ours. Atthe fame mo- 
ment the other two Indians who belonged to the party, jumped nimbly 
into it, and pufhed off with all the hafte and hurry that their fears may be 
fuppofed to ditate. 


We now found ourfelves once more without a guide or a canoe. We 
were, however, fo fortunate as to engage, without much difficulty, two 
of thefe people to accompany.us; as, from the ftrength of the current, 
it would not have been poflible for us to have proceeded by water with-— 
otit their affiftance. As the houfe was upon an ifland, we féfried over 
the pedeftrian party to the main bank of the river, and continued our 


courfe.till our-conduétors-came-to-their- fifhing-ground; when they Pro- 
poled to land us, and our fmall portion of baggage; but as ourg.comn- 
panions were on the oppofite fhore, we could not acquiefce, and after 
fome time perfuaded them to proceed further with? us. Soon after we 


‘met the chief, who had regaled us in our voyage down the river. He 


was feining between two canoes, and had taken a confiderable ‘quantity 
of falmon. He took us on board with him, and proceeded upwards with 
great expedition. Thefé people are furprifingly fkilful and aétive in 


Setting againft a ftrong curremit. In the rougheft part they aloft: filled 


the canoe with ‘water, by way of a fi portive alarm tous. 


_ We landed at. the houte of the chief, and he immediately placed a fith 
before 


PF 


po 
NORTH-WEST CONTINENT. OF AMERICA; 


before me. Our people: now appeared.on: the’ oppofite bank,. when a 
canoe was fent for them. As foon’as they had made their. meal of. fith, 
they proceeded on their route, and we followed them, the chief and one. 
of the natives’ hgving undertaken to condu@ Us. ' 


At five i In the afternoon we came to, two houles, swhich. we chad not feen 
in going down. They were, upon an ifland, and. I_was obliged. to.fend 


for the walking party, as our conduétors,. from the latenefs of the hour, 


refufed to proceed any further with us till the next day: One. of 
‘our men, being at a {mall diftance before the others, had. been attacked 
-by’a female. ‘bear, with two cubs, but another’ of them arrived to 
his refcue, and fhot her., Their fears probably prevented. them from 


killing the two young ones:. | They brought a part of-the meat, but it. 


“was. very indifferent.. We were: informed that’ our former guide, or 


___young chief, had _pafled this Place, at a very early hour of the.moraing, 


_ oir foot.; 


_.* Thefe people take plenty of another fith, befides. falmon, which weigh — 


from fifteen to-forty pounds. This fith is broader than the falmon, of a: 
greyith colour, and with an hunch on. its. back ; the. ilefh.is white, but, 
neither rich nor well flavoured. Its jaw and teeth are like thofe of a. 
"dog, and. the latter are larger and. flronger, than-any I had ever feen in a 
fith of equal ‘fize: thofe in front: bend inwards, like the claws of a bird of 
Prey. It delights i in fhallow’ water, and, its native name is Dilly.., 

We received. as. many. 5 fith and berries. from thefe people:as. completely 
fatisfied our appetites.: The latter. excelled. any of. the. kind that. we 
: “3g AU : _ had. 


962: JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE’ THROUGH THE 


? 


v7, had feen. ‘I faw, alfo, three. kinds of goofeberries, which, as. we paffed 
ay through the woods, we found in great abundance,” 


‘ 


_ 


Thuflay 35. arois before the fun, and the adhehes was ery fine. The. men She 
‘were to accompany us went to vifit their: machines, and brought ba¢k ON 
plenty of fifh, which ‘they ftrang on a rope, and left them in the: river, “ 

We now embarked ‘thirteen in a carioe, and landed. my men: on the South “y 
“bank, as it would have been impracticable to have ftemmed the tide with 
fuch a load. “The under-wood was fo thick that it was with great diffi- « 
culty they could pafs through i it. «At nine we were under. the necefity A 
‘of waiting to ferry them over a river from the South, which i is not ford- 
able. After fome tiine we came to two deferted houfes, “As. the foot of a 
rapid,. beyond | which our boatmen abfolutely refufed to’ condué us by 
water. Here was a road which led” ‘oppofite to the village, We had, | 


oll; and we fuffered very y feverely for: ‘the indulgence of j it 5. for the 
~~ floors were covered with fleas, and we-were immediately i in the ‘fame 
condition, for which - we ‘had no remedy but | to: take to -the’ water. 
_ ‘There was not a fpot round ‘the houfes, ‘free: from grals, th that was not * 
alive, a as it were, with this vermain. -_ oe i rare , 
-Our guides propofed-to conduét ti us on’our way, and we ye followed them 
on a.well-beaten track. They, however; went fo fat, that we could not 
all of ug keep up with’thern, particularly our fick Indian; whofe fituation 
‘was very embarrafling to us, and at length they contrived to efcape. I 


| 


very much: withed for thefe ‘meni to have accompanied ‘us to the’ village, 


in order to do away any il imprelfcis: ‘which: might have atifen fromthe 
oo a - . ° - young 


‘NORTH. WEST CONTINENT. OF AMERICA, © 363 


young ‘ehiel’s 3 report to his father, which we were, naturally led to ex- ya 
pede would not bei in our favour. Be no! 
" ‘This road ondafted us. through the fineft wood of cedar trees that I 
had ever feen. I'meafured feveral-of them that were twenty-four feet 
in the girth, and of a proportionate height, The alder trees are alfo of 

} an uncommon fize; feveral of them were feven feet and an palfi in circum- 
ference, and rofe.to forty feet, ,Without a branch; but my meni declared. 

- ‘that they had, im their progres, feeri muchelarger of both kinds. The 
other wood was hemlock, white birch, two fpecies of {pruce-firs, wil- 
lows, &c. ' Many of the’ largé cedars appeared to have been examined, 
as I fappofe by the natives, for the purpofe of making « canoes, but finding 
them hollow at heart, they were fuffered to ftand. There was but little 

~ underwood, and the foil was a black rich mould, which would well re- 


__...__.ward_the trouble_of cultivation. F rom the remains of bones on certain 


fpots, it is probable that the. natives may have occafionally ‘burned their 
if 


dead inyhis wood... 


vorliieaNtrtearenctevardvnaserteseceevee 
_ a 
cay - ; , ‘ 
Pa a 
ee 


+ 7 psit-wasuncertain vat our reception might be at the village, I exa. 


mined every man’s arms and ammunition, and gave Mr. Mackay, who.. 
had unfortunately loft his gun; one -of mispiltols. Our late condugors. 
. had informed us thatthe man, whom we left in a dying flate, and to: 
whom I-had adminiftered fome Turlington’s balfam; was dead; and: it 
was: by no means improbable that I might be sauperied of. * haftening 


his end 


At ong in the ‘afternoon ‘we came to ‘the bank of the river, w which was 
ws ee oO gA2 ._ . @ppofite: 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


oppofite to the village, which appedred to: be in a:flate of perfed: tran- 
‘quillity. Several of the natives were fifhing: ‘above and below the weir, 
and they very readily took us over in their canoes. The people now 
hurried down:to the water fide, but I perceived-none‘of ‘the chief's family 
among them. - ‘They made figns to me to: go-to‘his-houfe;-I fignified to 


them not to: crowd about us, and indeed drew a line, beyond which I | 


made them underftand they muft-not pals, I now-dire€ted Mr. Mackay, 
and the, men to. remain there, with their arms in, readinefs, and to keep 
the natives‘at a-diflance, as I was determined to go alone to the chief's 
houfe ; -and if they fhould hear the report of: my piftols, they. were ordered 
to make the belt of their way from thefe people;ds.it would then be equally 
fruitlefs and dangerous to attempt the giving me any affiftance, as it 
would be only inthe _laft extremity, and when I was certain of their in- 
tention to deftroy me, that I fhould difcharge my piltols, “My gun I gave 


-to Mr. Mackay, when, with my loaded piftols it in my belt, and a poniard.in __——- 


my_hand,-I-proceeded-to the abode of the chief, -I had a wood to pals 


in my way thither, which was interfeted by various paths, and I took . 


one that led to the back inftead of the front of the houfe; and as the 
@wvhole had-been very much altered fince I was here before, I concluded 
that I had loft-.my way. But I ‘continued to proceed, 


HY 


with the chief’s wife, who. informed me, that he’ was at the next, houfe. 


On my going round it, I perceived that they -had thrown open the gable 
ends, and added two wings, nearly as ‘long as the body, both.of which 
were hung round with falmon as :clofe as they + sould be placed.: As 
fome women who were s fupping on n falmon't roes and berries. They in in- 
_ vited me to partake of their fare, and.I was about.to.accept their inyitation, 
when 


~ 


wa 


7 My 
. 


‘N ORTH. WEST CON TIN EN T OF AMERICA. 


when: :Mr. Mackay joined me, as both himfelf and all-my party were ° 


‘alarmed at my being alone. Nor was‘his alarm leffened by. an old man 
whom‘he'met in the wood, and whio made ufe of. figns to perfuade him 
to return, As he came without his gun, I gave.him one of my pittols. 
When I faw the women continue their employment without paying the 
Jeaft attention to‘us, I could not imagine that any hoftile defign’ was pre* 
paring againit us. ‘Though the non-appearance :of the men awakened 
fome degree of fufpicion that I fhould not be received with the fame 
welcome as ori my former wifit. “At length the chief: appeared, and his 
fon, who ‘had been our guide, following -him : difpleafure was painted 
in the old man’s countenance, arid he held in his hand a bead tobacco 
pouch which belonged to Mr, ‘Mackay, and the young chief had pur: 
loined from hica. When he had approached within three or four. yards 


> hand, but he did not maké any very ‘cordial return to my falutation ; 
at'thy fame time-he made figns for me to‘difcharge my. piftol, and give 
chim ny hanger which Mr. Mackay had brought me, but I did not pay 
the-lea “attention-to either of his demands. ae 


We now joined the chief, who explained to me that he was in a flate 
“of deep .diftrels for the lofs of his -{on, and made me underftand that he 
had cit off -his-hair and blackened his face on the melancholy occafion. 
He alfo repréfented ce alarm which he had fuffered refpeéting -his. fon 
who had accompanied us; ‘as he- apprehended we had killed. him, or had 
"all of us perifhed together. When he had finifhed his narrative, I took 
him and‘his-fon by their hand, and-requefted them to come with me to 


: , 
ooh 


the. 


es 


Vv 


of me, he threw it at me With great indignation, and walked away. I 
ollowed him, however, until he had paffed his fon, whom I took by the, 


1799s 
July. 


——J 


+ 


366- JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


192 the place where had left my people, who-were rejoiced to fee us-return, 
i having’ been-in a ftate of great anxiety from our. long abfence. Iim- — 
mediately remunerated the young chief.for his company and.affiftance 
in our voyage to the fea, as well as his father, for his former atten- 
tions.’ I gave them.cloth and. knj ves, and, indeed, a portion. of every 
thing which now remained. to us. The prefents had the defired effeth | - 
‘of réftoring us to their favour; but thefe people are of. fo. changeable. an 
nature, that there is no fecurity with them. I procured; thiee robes and 
. two otter-fkins, and if I could have given fuch. articles “in. exchange as. 
‘they preferred, I fhould: probably have obtained more: I now repre- . , 
. fented the length-of the way which, I had to Bo, an and requefted fome' fifh 
a to fupport us. on our journey, when he defired us.to follow him to the 
| ‘houfe, where mats were immediately- arranged and a fifh placed before — 
each of us. 7 my 


le awd , ‘ - . wee -+; “ pe a 


ane - _. - ee nee ee 


~ We were now informed, that our dog, whom we had: loft, had: been 
howling about the village ever fince we left it,-and that they had reafon.  ~ 
to believe he left the woods at night to eat. the fith he could find ‘about 
the houfes. I immediately difpatched. Mr. Mackay,and.a man, in fearch 
of the animal, but they returned without him. 

When I manifefted my. intention to proceed a on my. journey; the chief 
volintarily fent. for ten roafted falmon, and. having attended us, with his. 
fon, and a great number of his people, to'the laft“houfe i in the village, we 
took our leave... It was. then: half’ paft three i in the afternoon, « a 


fd direBed Mr, Mackay to take the lead, and the others | to. , Yellow him 


- oo . in 
‘ ‘ 


a 


NORTH. WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 


in Indian files, at a long and fteady pace, as I determined to bring up 


time a confiderable number came running after us; fome of them making 
| figns for us to ftopjand others rufhing by me. I perceived alfo, that thofe 
who followed us were the ftrangers who live among thefe people, and are 
kept by thém in a ftate of awe and fubjeftion; and one of them made 
figns to me that we were taking a wrong road. I immediately called 
out to Mr. Mackay to ftop.. This was. naturally enough taken for an 
alarm, and threw my people into great diforder. -When, however, I was 


underftood, and we had: muftered-again, our Indian informed us, that the . 


noife we heard was occafioned by.a debate among the natives, whether 
tlfey’ thould ftop us oF not. When, therefore, we had got into the night 


road, I “nade fach arrangements as might beneceflary for our defence, if 


we fhould have an experimental proof that our late and fickle friends were. 


‘converted into. enémies. 


Our way was through a forett. of flately cedars, beneath a range of 


lofty hills, covered with rocks, and without any view of the river. The 
path was well beaten, but’ rendered incommodious by the large Blages 


‘Which lay. along it. 


As we were. continuing our route, we all felt the fenfation of having 


| found a loft. friend at the fight of our dog; but he appeared, in a great 


degree, ; to have loft his former fagacity.. He ran in a wild way, back- 


wards and forwards ; and though he kept our road, I could not induce - 


4° him 


3 


‘$67 


1793- 


uly. 
the rear, I adopted this meafure from a confufion that was 'obfervable ler 


‘among the natives which I did not comprehend. I was not without | 
my fufpicions that {ome mifchief was in agitation, and they were in- 
_ creafed from the confufed noife we heard in the village.. At the fame 


ad 


368 


1793¢ 
uly. 


"JOURNAL OF A.VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


him to acknowledge his matter. | Sometimes he feemed difpofed to ap- 


ay proach as if he knew US ; and then, on a fudden, he would turn away, 


aN 26, 


as if alarmed at our appearance. The poor animal: was ° ‘reduced 
-almoft to a fkeleton, and we occafionally dropped fomething. to fupport 
"him, and by degrees he recovered his former fagacity. 


When the night came on we topped at a fmall diftance from the river, 
but did not ventire to make a fire.’ Every. man took his tree, and laid 
down in his clothes, and ‘with his arms, beneath the fhade of its branches, 
We had: removed to a fhort diftance from the path; no eentinel was. now 


appointed, and every one was left. to-watch for -his own fate ) 


After a very refleh, though undifturbed ight, we fet forward ’as foon | 


as day appeared, and walked on with all poflible expediti ition, till we got 


to the upper, which we: now called F Friendly Village, ax and was the frit 


"_we vilited on our outward:j journeys a 


It was eight in the morning of a very fine day when. we arrived, and 
found.a very material. alteration in the place fince we left it. Five ad- 


ditional houfes: had: been ‘ere¢ted and were filled with falmon: the in- | 
creafeof inhabitants was in the fame Proportion: - . We were received : 


with great: ‘kindnefs, and a: ‘mefferiger was’ ‘difpafched to inform the chief, 
whofe name was Soocomlick, and who was then‘at his fifhigg-weir, ‘of our 


arrival, He immediately returned to the village to onfirni the cordial re- | 


céption of his people; and: having: conducted’ ui to his houte, entertained 
us with the moft: refpe@tful hofpitality: - In. fhort, ie behaved"to us ‘with 
fo much attention and d kindnels, that I did not t withhold any thing in my 


eb power os 


| 
NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF-AMERICA, _ 369 


power to give, which might afford him fatisfa€tion. I prefented him with 1709 
two yards of blue cloth, an axe, knives, and. various other articles. He “~v—~’ 
gave me in: return a large fhell. which refembled the under fhell of 
a Guernfey oyfter, but fomewhat larger. Where they procure’ them I 
‘could not difcover, but they cut and polifh them for bracelets, ear-rings, 
and other perfonal ornaments. He regretted that he had no fea-otter. 
fkins to give me, but engaged to provide abundance of them whenever _ ~ 
_either my friends or myfelf. fhould return by fea ; an expeClation which 
I thought it right ‘to encourage among thefe people. He alfo earneftly 
requefted me-to bring him a gun and ammunition. I might have pro- 
cured many: curious articles at this place, but was prevented by the’con- 
fideration.that we muft have carried them on our backs upwards of three 
_ ndindred “n miles through a mountainous country. The young chief, to 
a ° his other aéts of kindnels, added as large a fupply of fifh as we chofe to 


_ take a 


~ re , 
/ . ; 4 
nw ' a : oe 


oo 


Our vif did not occafion any particular interruption of the ordinary 
ypation of the men efpecially of the ‘womeny-who were employed 


‘confiftency, they took out with ladles, and poured it'into- frames of about 
twelve inches {quare and one deep, the bottom being covered with a 
large leaf, which were then expofed to the fun till their contents became fo" 
many dried. cakes. The roes that are mixed up with the bitter berries, are 

_ Prepared i in the fame way. From the quantity of this kind of provifion, . 

bea it-niuft be‘a principal article of food, and probably of traffic. Thefe 
People have allo portable. chefts of cedar, in. whieh=they pack them, as 

: ; 3 B_ - | ‘ well 


~ f 


Y 


wy 


4! 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


well’ as their falmon, both dried and roafted. It appeared to me, that 
. they eat no flefh, except fuch as the fea may afford them, as that of the 
- fea-otter and the, feal. The only inftance we obferved to the contrary, 


was in the young Indian who accompanied us among the iflands, and - 


has been already mentioried as feafling..gn the flefh of a porcupine: 

whether this be their cuftom throughout he year, or only during the 
feafon of the falmon fifhery ; or, whethér there were any cafts of them, 
as in India, I cannot pretend to determine. It is certain, however, that 


they are not hunters, and I have alread mentioned the abhorrence they ° 


exprefled at fome venifon which we brought to their village. During 
our former vifit to thefe people, they requefted us not to‘difcharge our 
fire-arins, ‘left the report fhould frighten away the falmon, but now they 
éxpreffed a with that I fhould explain the ufe and management of them. 


—— 


Though their demeanour to us was of the moft, friendly nature, and | 
they appeared without any arms,, except a few who accidentally had _ 


their daggers, I did not think -it altogether prudent to difcharge our 
pieces; I therefore fired one Of my piftols at a tree marked for the. 
purpofe, when I put four out of five buck- fhot, with-which it was loaded, 
into the circle, to their extreme aftonifhment and admiration. 
, ae : ae | 

| Thele people were in general of the middle lature, Lfet, and better 
clothed with flefh than any of the natives of the terior lone. Their 
faces are round, with high chéek bones, and their complexion between 
the olive and. the copper. They have fmall grey eyes with a tinge of 


Ted; they have wedge heads, and’ theit: hair is of a dark brown colour; 


inclining to black. Some’wear it long, keep it well combed, and let it 
‘hang loofe over their Shoulders, while they divide and tie: it in Knots over 
thé 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


the. temples. Others arrange its plaits, and bedawb at with brows. carth, 
fo-as to render it impervioys, to the comb’; they, “therefore” carry a 
bodkin about: them to eafe the frequent irritation, which may be fup- 
pofed to proceed from. fuch a ftate of the head. The women are in, 


clined to be fat, wear their hair fhort, and appear to be.very fubje& to _ 


fwelled legs, a malady that, probably; proceeds from the pofture in: 
which they are always-fitting: as they are. chiefly employed in the,do- 
meftic engagements of {pinning, weaving, preparing the fifh, and nurfihg 
their children, which did not appear to be humerous. Their cradle 
' differed from any that 1 had feen; it confifted of a frame fixed round a 
board of fufficient length, in. which the child; after it has been fwathed, 

is placed on a bed of mofs, and a conduétor contrived to carry off the 
urinary difcharge. They are flung over’ one fhoulder by ‘means of a 
cord faftened under the other, fo that the infant is always in.a pofition 
___.to be readily applied-to, the breaft, when i it requires nourifhment + I faw 


: feveral whofe heads. wére inelofed in boards covered with: Teather, till” 
- they attain. the fotm of a wedge. The women wear no clothing but the 


robe, either loofe or tied round the middle with a girdle, as the occafion 


may require, with the addition of a fringed apron, already mentioned, 7 


and a cape, in the form of an inverted bowl or difh.” To the robe and 
_ cap, the men add, ¥ when it rains, a circular mat with an opening in the 
'” middle fafficient to admit the head, which extending over the fhoulderg, 


throws off the wet. They alfo occafionally wear, fhoes off dreffed moofe- 


' fin, for’ which they’ are indebted to their neighbours:. Thole parts 
whieh among afl civilized nations are covered from fainiliar view, are 


teie open'y expoted: 


- 


. ~ + 
ote? 
— 


“a 


He my . (Hee 
. . ro Don tg B 2 Bae” _ Phey . 
a +. ‘ + . . “ 


7 
372 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE, 


yar They are altogether’ dependent on the fea and. rivers for their fufte- 

nent nance, fo that they may be confidered as a ftationary people;: hence it 

is that the’men engage in thole toilfome employments, ‘which the tribes 
who fupport themfélves by the chafe, ledve entirely to‘ the women, 
Polygamy is permitted among them, though, according to my obferva- 
tion, moft of the men were fatisfied with one wife, with whom, how- 
ever, ‘chaflity is not confidered: as a neceflary virtue. I faw -but one 
.woman whole cunder lip was “fplit and : disfigured’ with an’ appendant 
"ornament. The ‘fen frequently bathe, and the boys are continually j in 
‘the water. They have nets and lines of various kinds and fizes, which 

- are made of cedar bark, and would not be known ’from thofe made of — 
hemp. Their hooks confift of two ‘pieces of wood or bone, forming 

, when fixed together, an obtufe angle. a 

| ° Their fpears or darts are from four to fixteen feet i in length; ind barb 

or point being fixed in a focket, which, when the animal is. ftiuck, flips’ 
from it: thus the barb being faftened by a firing to the handle, remains as 

\a buoy; or enables the aquatic hunter to’ tire and take his. prey. They 


“f 
’ 
g 


e 


? 


~ 


as are employed againit. fea-otters, feals, and large fh, 


~~ Their hagchets are made p * rincipally. of about Bre inches of bar: 
ron, fixed into a wooden handle, as I have already ‘defcribed them ; ; a 
. . though they have fome of ,bone or horn: with thele, a mallet. and 


mult alfo have other, tools with which, they: complete. and. folfther 


le vital that many citeumfances may be fuppoted to havegfeaped me nie. : 


Se se ; Their . 
> hh ; “ , ot ; : oC ; 


: 
: wo wy 
. . . * 
~ . . ‘ . ‘ : Nee 
. w 
. « a . . 
‘ . : . 
oe? aL 
. o 
. . o a ‘ ‘ 
: * . 
oo 
’ 
rd ’ . e 
s . . 
‘ 


. wooden wedge, they: hew. their timbers: and form their planks. They 


ey 


co 


o 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. gag 


Their canoes are made out of the cedar tree, and will’ carry from eight 1793. ; 
tio fifty perfons. . , _ ey. 


4 
a 


Their warlike weapons, which; as far | as I could judge, they ‘very 
.feldom have: occafion to employ, are bows’ and arrows, {pears, and i 
daggers. - The arrows'are fuch as have been ‘already defcribed, but rathé: 
of a flighter make. . The bows are not more than ‘two feet and an half 

in:Jength; they are formed of a flip of red cedar; the grain being op on 
' one fide untouched with any tool, while the other is fecured“with finewsio 
a attached to it by a kind of glue. Though | this weapon has a.very flender \ 
appéarance, it throws an-arrow with great'force, and to'a etplidesbl 
diftance. Their {pears aré about ten feet long, and pointed w iton/ 
: . Their daggers are of various kinds, being of Britifh, Spanilh, and Ame- oe 
rican manufaQuree*y; pe age ee 
eo! ‘ - = 

‘Their nésifehold: furniture confifts’ of boxes, troughs, and dithes form- 

‘éd ‘of wood, with. different veflels made of ' watape. ‘Thefé are- employed, 
according’ to: ‘their feveral applications, to contain their valuables and - 


‘provifions, as: welk, a: as for:-culinary purpofes, and to carry water. The « ; ° ’ 
women ‘make ufe ‘of mufcle-thells to fplit and clean their fifh, _and which, ~ 
. aré very. well Il adapted t to that purpole. ~ { ie : a ce 


Their : ornaments are e necklaces, collars; bracdlets’ for, ig arms, wif, . 


$, with carrings, oc. ° is 


“They ‘burn their:dead, and a difpay their: mourning; by ‘outring. theie a 
hit hort, and blackening’ their fac ok Though I faw feveral places where 


: oe cf & - boties 


374 


4798, 


JOURNAL OF A-VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


‘baddies had been burnéd, I was furprifed at nat fecing any tomb or. memo- 


A rial of the dead, ‘particularly when their neighbours are fo fuperititioully 


tone + 


v 


attentive to the ereCtion and prefervation of them. - 
: Bagg Sb Te, Ue : 
ve eG 
From the number ‘oftheir. canoes, as. well as. the quantity of their 
chefts and boxes, to contain their. moveables, as well-as the infuficiency 


' of their- houfes, to guard againft the. rigours: of a feveré: winter, and the 


appearance of the ground around thieir habitations,’ it ‘is evident that 


_ thefe people refide here only during the fummer. or:falman feafon, which 


does not probably laft: more-than three months, > It:may'be.reafonably —- 


inferred, therefore, that they: have villages: on ‘the fea:cdaft, which, they 
inhabit during the reft:of the year. There it may be fuppoled they leave 


_ .:the'fick, the: infirm, and.the aged; ‘and thither they: may bear the athefof 
_-thofe who die at the place of thett fummer refidence., .:: . 


re 


“OF their-religion. I can’ fay but tittle as. my-means. of: obfervation were | 
very. ‘contraéted.’ ‘I could: ‘difcover, however, that’they, believed in a 


good and an evil fpirit: and that they, have: fome, forms of worlhip to,con- 


‘eiliate the proteétion: of: one, and | perhaps to. avert ithe enmity.of the - 


_ others is &ipparent from the templés, whidb Ihave deleribed,.:and where, 


_4.at ftated periods, it may be prefumed. ‘they hald: the feafts, aad perform 
the facrifices, which their. religion, whatever, it t may be, has inftituted as 


+ 


. the ceremonials of thet public wortbip...- Cesog dete g asian 


5 . . 
vue rs ire - 
: 7 
CoP ye ‘ oh, 


From the very little I could difeover of their government, it is altoge- 


"ther diferent from, any politcal regulation ‘which. had: been: remarked 


. <2 


eH 


4 : ' cod 
ie a wae 1 por ae one em ba ras wotet. by 
° 


v| 


6 ; ; . oN 


m7 


a Wi & 


° 


| 7 
by me among the favage: tribés.' Ie is dn: this. river alone that one’man } 


375 
ay 


appears to‘have an exclufive and hereditary right to what was neceflary. to cae 


the exiftence of thofe who. are.affociated with him. I allude to the fal- 
mon weir, or ffhing place, the fole right to Which, confers: of the chief 
an arbitrary power. .Fhofe eriibankments ‘could not havé-beén’ formed / 
without a very great and affociated labour; and, as might be fappoled, 
on the condition. that thofe who aflifted i in ‘conftru@ing it fhould enjoy a 
participating right in the advantages to be derived from it. Neverthe- 
lefs, i it.evidently appeared to me, thatthe chief's. power over-it,.and the 
people {was unlimited, and without control, ‘No-one could ith with- 
out iN vition or carry home a larger’ portion of- what. he had 
caught, than was {et apart for him. No one ‘could build: an houfe with- 
out his confent; and all his commands appeédred to be.followed with 
implicit obedience. The people at large: feemied to bé on 2 perfeét 


- equality, while the ftrangers among. them were obliged to obey the com- 


* mands’ 6 the natives in general, or quit the village. They appear to be 
ofa friendly difpofition, but they -are fubje&t to fudden gufts.of paflion, 


which are as quickly compofed ; and the tranfition is inftantaneoiis, from» 


-violent irritation to the moft tranquil demeanor. . Of the many tribes of — - 


favage people whom I have feen, thefe appear to be’ the moft: fufcepti- 
ble of civilization. They might foon be. brought to cultivate the. little 


ground about them which is ‘capable. .of-it.s Phere is‘a narrow ‘border 


“of anh Black oil; on either ‘fide of the river, over a bed!.of gravel, 


tudes in Europe. . L % . 
Somer get ta Sy lo, oe ” : The 
; on e . : on 
« t . . ‘ 
wa - hoe 2. 8 t 
z Wo 7 _ | ; ; 
ns ; 


which ;would yield any grain or fruit, that are common to, fisiilar lati- 


376 JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE: 
ice The very few words’ which I colleéted of their ogg as fo. 
nm low: — ( " 
.. Zimilk, Salmon. ©. 
‘Dilly, 
Sepnas, Hair of the head. 
. Kigtis,. An axe, 
Glougus,..... Eyes.  - 
. + Itzas, Teeth, =o . 
a “Ma-acza,.  Nofe. | 
.~ ‘Ich-yeh, , Leg. 
: Shous-fhey; - Hand, | 
, ie "Watts; _ Dog. 
OF So Dlavachle, Houle. oa Lo 
SN Zimnez, » Bard mat robe. 
gee | - Couloun, - Beaver or otter ditto. 
ee ' Dichts, ~ * Stone. — 
ra Neach, Fire.) 
Lona! _ ikaw, Waters ey 
- 3 . Gits com, “. Amat. nF 
co : - Shiggimis, : \"Phréad.. . ; 
~ re ue " Till-kewan,.” “Cheft or box. " 
“ "Thlogatt, . . Cedar bark: . 
° ok imoat,. ~Beads got upon thelr coaft. 
de ~caiette, & bonnet.’ ; 
7 © Couny)'s: ” A.clatn fk yee 
*“Nochatky, ° . 
a : Caiffre,:. “wha? Bore 
ot » a oes Bo “ 
a er wee hal 1 ae Os 


wt 


A fith of the fize of a falmon, with canine teeth, 


JA diff compofed.¢ of bese and falmon Toes. 


rm 


nat 


CHAP. 


* 


“ 


“ NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. | 
» “ sed 
CHAPTER XII 


\ 


Leave the Friendly Village. . Altentions of the natives at our departure. 


Stop to, divide our provifions. Begin to afcend the mountains. Circum- 
cumfances of the afcent. Journey continued. Arrive at the place from 
whence we Sit out by land. Meet with Indians there. Find the canoe, 


_ and all the other articles in a ftate of perfect fecurity and prefervation. 


; Means employed to compel the reftoration of articles which were afterwards 
| ftolen: Proceed on our homeward-bound voyage. Some account of the 
imatives onthe river. Ti he canoe is run ona rock, Bc. Circumftances of the - 


" -yoyage. Enter the Peace River. Statement of cours. Continue our 


route. ‘Corcumftances- of it. Proceed onwards in.a fmall canoe, with an 
Indian, to the lower fort, leaving ‘the re oft of the people to follow me. 


Arrive at Fort Chepewyan. The voyage concluded. | 


~ 


377 


Ar eleven in’ ‘the , morning. we. left this place which I called Friendly. say 
"Village, accornpanied by every* man ‘belonging to it, who attended us 


oo about . a’ mile, when, we took a, “cordial teave: of them; and if we might 


judge from appearances; they pened from | us with h regret. 


, h, 


Ina fhort time we haltad, to s make a divifion. of our: 1 fith; ‘and each man. 


: had about. twenty pounds: weight of it, except Mr. Mackay and mylelf, 


"who were content: “with: fhotter. allowance, that-we might} have; lefs weight _ 


‘o 


- ta 


, 4 \ 2 “owe : C 
hy ; a | 
‘ eo4 ‘ ’ ' re a é ewer See ee 
ee . ' . a ‘ . - - 
! ‘, . : ' . 
‘ , . a . 


2 Dye ot, 
"oe 


378 


- 
July 


_ JOURNAL OFA VOYAGE THROU GH THE 


~~ 


to carry? | We had alfoa little flour, and fome pemmican. Having com- 


e—-—— pleted this arrangement with all poffible expedition, we proceeded on- 


7 


~ 


which was at the foot of the precipice, where the ford was three feet deep, 


JY ards, theground. rifing gradually, as we continued our route. When we 
were clear of the wood, we faw the mountain ‘towering above, and ap-. 


parently of impracticable afcent. We foon came to the fork of the river, 


and very rapid. Our young Indian, though much recovered, was ftill too 
weak. to ‘crofs the water, and with fome difficulty I catried him ‘over on 


| my back. 


ce 
° 


, of obiedlss© ‘of which, ints, n 
ae ar Me, so Even 


« It-was now one in the afternoon, and we s had to afcend the fummit 
of ‘thé ‘firft mountain before night came on, in ‘order ‘to look for water. 


I left the fick Indian, with his companion : ‘and ‘ore of my men, to fol-- 


dow: ‘us, as his ftrength would permit | him, 1) fatigue of afcending 


" thefe .precipices I fhall not attempt to defcribe,. ,and it was paft five. . 
when we arrived -at a {pot where we- ve-could get wa er, and in fuch an ex- 


tremity of wearinefs, that i it was with great pai ¥ of us could crawl 
about to gather wood, for thégecelary purpofejof. making a fire. "To 


moment for the fitua- 


relieve our anxiety, Which began't increafe eve 


tion ‘of the Indian, about feven he and his companions arrived; when we | 


confoled ourfelves by fitting rourid “a blazing re, talking of -paft: dan- 


‘gers, and indulging the. delightful Lrefleftion hat we were thus far ad- 
~ a _vanced on our homeward j Journey Nor. was it poflible: to be in this 


" fituation without: contemplating: the wonders of 1 it ‘Such was the depth 
of the. ‘precipices below, and the height of ‘the. mountains’ above, 


with the” rude and’ wild. thagnificence ; -of the’ feenery around, that I . 


hall not attempt to deferibe fu hb an aftonifhing and awful combination 
iio can n convey an adequate idea. 


2c 


ran 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 


Even at this place, which is only, as it were, the firft ftep towards gaining 
the fummit of the mountains, the climate was very fenfibly changed. The 
' air that fanned the village which we left at noon, was mild and cheering; 
the grafs was verdant, and the ‘wild fruits ripe around it. But here the 
fnow. was not yet diflolved, the ground was ftill bound by the froft, the 
herbage had {carce begun to ipring, and the crowberry bufhes were juft 
beginning to bloffom. 


‘So great is our fatigue of yefterday, that it was late before we proceeded 
to return over the mountains, by the fame route which we had followed i in 


379 
Tae 
Lyd 


Saturday 276 


our outward journey. There was little or no.change in the appearance 


of the mountains fince we pafled” them, thouge the ¥ weather was very fine. 


At nine this morning we ¢ arrived at the pot where we flept with the 
natives on the 16th inftant, ‘and found our pemmican i in good condition 
where we, had buried it. : 


. The latitude of this olacé, by obfervation; when I paffed, I found t to ; 
be 52. 46. 32. I now took time, and the diftance between fun and. - 


! 


moon. I had alfo an azimuth, to afcertain the variation. 


>We continued our  Youte ‘with fine weather, ‘and without meeting a 


Sunday 28. 


fingle perfon on our way, the natives being all gone, as-we fuppofed, to 
the Great. River. .We recovered all our hidden flores of provifions, and - 
arrived about two in the afternoon. of Sunday, Auguit th the 4th, at the - 


“place which we had left a month before, 


A Genfiderable number of Indians “were encamped on the oppolite fide - 


c 


— 8G8 : a . of 


., 


_ Was aécordingly fent to inform them of our arrival. 


ee 


q 
é 


“ JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


y + 


of the {mall river, and in confequence of the weather, confined to their 


lodges :~-as- they muft have heard of, ifnot feen, us, and. our arms being’ 


out-of order from the rain, ‘I was not ‘fatisfied with ‘our fituation but did 
hot with to create an alarm. We, therefore, kepti in the edge of the wood, 


“and called to them, when they turned: out like fo many furies, with their 


arms in: their hands, and threatening deftruGtion if § we dared to approach 
their. habitations. We remained in out ftation till their paffion and ap- 
prehenfions had fubfided, when our interpreter gave them the neceflary 
information refpeCting us.. They proved to be ftrangers‘to us, but were 
the relations of thofe whom we had already feen here, and who, as they 


told us, were upon-an ifland’; at fome diftance up the. river. . A meffenger . 


4 


“On examining the canoe, and-our property, which-we had left behind, 
Ve found it in: perfe fafety; nor was: there the print of aé-foot near ’ 
the {pot. We now. pitched c our tent, and made’a blazin g fire, and I treated 
- myfelf, as well as the people, with'a dram; but we had been fo long with- 
bbe tafting. any {pirituots liquor, ‘that we had loft: all relith for. it. 
The Indians riow arrived: frou above, and were rewarded for the care 
they had taken of our property with fuch:articles as weré acceptable to 
them. ' 

' At nine’ this morning. I fent: five ‘men in the canoe, for the vafious 
‘articles we-had left-below, and they foon returned with them} and ex 
cept fome ‘bale goods, which had got ‘wet, they ‘were in good: order, : 
particularly the provifions, of which. we were now in great need, 
, Many. of the natives arrived botti fromthe upper-and lower paris of 
pnt © the 


NORTH- WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA;- 


| the river, each of whom was-dreffed in a beaver robe. I purchafed 


fifteen’ of them; and they preferred large knives in exchange. It is an 
extraordinary circumflance, that thefe people, who might have taken all 


the property we left behind us, without the leaft fear of deteétion, fhould. 


t 


381 - 


aed. , 
ae 


leave that untouched, and purloin any of our utenfils, which our con- 
fidence in their honefty gave them a ready: opportunity of taking. In‘ 


fa&t, feveral articles were mifling, and as I was very anxious to avoid a 


- quarrel with the natives,.in this ftage of our journey, I told thofe who 


remained near us, without any appearance of anger, that their relations 
who: were gone, had no idea of the mifchief that would refult to them 


from: taking our property. I gravely added, that ‘the falmon, which was’. 


not only their favourite food, but abfolutely neceflary to their exiftence, 


came from the fea which belonged to us white men; and that as, at the 


entrance of the river, we could prevent ‘thofe fifh from coming up it, we 
poffeffed the power to ftarve them and their children, To avert our 
anger, therefore, they muft return all the articles, that had: been ftolen 
from us. This fineffe fucceeded. _ Meffengers were difpatched to order 
the reftoration of every thing that had been taken. We purchafed feve. 


~ 


afforded. a ee 


At noon this day, which [allotted for repofe, I gota meridian altitude, 
©, 1. 14. which gave 53- 24-10” J -alfo took time. The’ weather had 


been cloudy at intervals, Co 7 


pon 
é 


Every neceflary preparation had. beeh made yefterday for us to con-_ 
- tinie our route to day; but before | ‘our departure; fome of the natives - 


- ral large falmon. of them :and | enjoyed the delicious meal which they 


Tuefday 6. 
foie 


L 


arrived” 


382 


1793- 
uft. 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE 


arrived with part of the flolen ‘articles; ‘the reft, they faid, had been 


Au 
oY taken by people down the. river, who would be here in the courfe of the 


morning, and recommended their children’ to our commiferation, and. 


_ themfelves to our forgiven. 


The morning was cloudy, with {mall rain, neverthelels I ortlered the 


‘men to load.the canoe,,and we. proceeded in shigh {pirits on finding 


ourfelves once more fo © comfortably together in, it. ‘We landed at 


_ an houle on the firft ifland, where we procured a few falmon, and four. 


fine beaver fkins, | There had been much more rain in thefe parts than 
in the country: above, as the’ water! was pouring down the hills in tor- 
rents. The river confequently rofe with great rapidity, and very: much 
impeded our progrefs, 7 . 


The eaple on this river are generally of the middle fize, though I faw - 
many tall men among them.. In the cleanlinefs of their perfons they re- 
femble rather the Beaver Indians than the Chepewyans,. They are igno- 
rant of  theyfe of fire arms, and their only weapons are bows and arrows, . 
and fpears. “They catch the largeranimals in fnares, but though their 
country abounds in’ them, and the rivers and. lakes produce plenty: of 


‘fith, they ‘find a ‘difficulty i in fupporting themfelves, and: are never to be 


feen but in fimall bands. _of two.or three families. | There is no regular 
government among them; nor do they appear to have a fafficient com. 
jmiunication or underftanding with each- other, to. defend. themfelves 
‘againft an invading enemy, to whom they fall an eafy prey. They have 
call the ‘animals common on the Weft. fide of the mountains, except the 
1¢| wolf at leaft-we:faw none of. the latter, and.there: being 


- none 
“Ak 


A 


NORTH: WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA. 8g 


fidine of the foriier, it ig ‘evident that their progrefs is from the South. ee 
Eaft. The fame language | is {poken, with Very little exception’ fro ut a 


_ the extent of my travels down this river, antl'in a direét line from ‘the 


*North- Eaft. head of it im the latitude 53° or 54° to Hudfon’s Bay ; “fo- + 


a different people. As to the people to the Eaftward ‘of F this river, J 


. this line without. knowing any language except his own, would under- 


that a Chepewyan, from ‘which tribe they. have all fprung,'might leave ; 0... 


Fast 


Churchill River, and’ "proceeding in every dire@tion to the North- Welkgfre” 


Bboy oa mo 
am nN ra 7 


ftand them all: 1 except the’ natives of the fea.coaft, who are altogether 


am not qualified to fpeak of them. a 
r, ‘ ‘ ne 


‘At twelve ‘we-ran our canoe upon ‘a rock, fo that we were obliged. to 


Jand in order to- ‘repair ‘the ‘injury ‘fhe had received; and as the rain 


‘came on with great violence, ‘we temained here for the night. .The 


falmon were now driving up the current in fuch large’ fhoals, that the 


water feeméd, as it ‘were, to be coverediwith the fins of them. 


About nine this morning the weather ‘cleared, and we embarked, Wednel.-3: 
The fhoals of falmon continued as yefterday. There were frequent 


. fhowers throughout the day, and every brook was deluged irito‘a river. 
“The water had rifen at leaft one foot and an half: perpendicular in the 
Tak twenty-four hours. ‘In the dufk of the evening we landed for the 


~ 


night. “ 


‘The water continued tifing, ‘during the: nights fo that we were -dif. Thprldays. 
sturbed twice in the courle of it, to remove our baggage. At fix-in the 
morning we were on our'way, and proceeded with continual and Jabo- 
yeep ° . . Sa “rious : 
Q , . g - 
4 


' 
. 
' - 
v ato. . 
. t ? , N | 
‘ 4 . . , 


- me 


| ore Pid 9 7 : cave alee of at five, after: 


| NORTHWesT CONTINENT of or 


444. 30: North Hatin. . We. 


“tes gimeridian’ ‘altitude, iliich: paves 


continued: oar’ ‘Youtemearly: ‘Eat aid: att three in the wdc ape © ‘ ae a 


the. fork, when:I: took: ‘time; “aitdl the: diftaniee’ ‘betwen: ther fe’ anid midony « 
At four 3 ate the ‘afternoon: we: ete: the: shai’ branch’. The! ‘eubrent: Wels. 
* quite: flack, a8 the water ad, fallen: fix! feot,(-whiell asufl! Jdrevé Beew itt - : 
the courle of three: ce days, “At fan-fet we: ‘axided! Yani: took: ont # Ration 


“Bhere wabievery say : 
we e reriewed! our, c woyager: however, ab: a very carly: hota aid ce 6. 


oo rocks than’ in: our. ‘outward paflage ; them are as. perpendicular 
asa wall, and give the: idea oftafucteflion' ofiioinous Gothie ch¢tehes.” 
: Wer were now y slay hherinmed aby th orn which h tavetot: ett 


we oF” ae : . 


erainiwthe aight anid ems watt Ty a | os 


386 “RPuanar: OF A VOYAGE THROUGH. THE: 


Augut of our rum ‘to fortify and fupport them, The canoe was. fo: heavy that 
Tow. the: lives of two of them were endangered i in'this horrible ‘carrying places: 
At the fame, time; ‘it, muft-be obferved, that from the” “fatiguing. éircum: 
ftances. of. our! ‘journey, and the, inadequate flate : :of, our provifions,. the 
natural; ftrength.of the;men had been greatly diminifhed, - - We enchmped : 

on: the banks’ of the bad: FiVeD. be wee ot) ee elvis oT 

Se oe vga lata 

’ Thurfdaysg, The weather was now clear, and the fun hone upon us. The water 

f cio Was, much, lower: than i in the downward: paflage, but-as. cold as ice, and, 
unfortunately, the men; were obliged to be continually. in it-to- drag on 
the canoe. ; ; There were ahany embarras, through. whichia a paflage. might 
have, been: made, but, we were: unider, the neceffity. of; icatrying both. thé 

eande and: bageages: boat aa Ltt i he me ‘ oe tae gerpnsys cu 


“4 


a) roa eer t “3 Oth: < iGt ag bee wayne reg lees tho 
! per oO 5 if i oa mad ree a wad De abd 


About. fan-fe We, arriyfid. at:our: encamipmieat of the. agth, of, June, 
where foine of ,as had. nearly, taken our: eternal, voyage.. : The legs and 
feet of the°men were fo:benunibed, 'that Iwas ‘very; ap apprehenfive of tie 

. confequences. The water; béing- low; we madé a: fearch iforsour bag. of - 
ball, but without. Auccels.;. ‘Fhe, river -was full, sof falman; and. another 


ed 


fith Tike the black bal. ; a (). EVisdys tne to . 


ool Y 


was 


Fridy26. © The weather continued: to, be the, fame as:yelterday, and. at two ‘the 
: afternoon we, came, to the;cartying-place; -which: ‘leads- to. the: firft: fmalt 
lake; ‘but.it was fofilled with drift, wood, that atonfiderable | portion « of 

| time was employed. in making.our way Shrough it:i; We now. xeathed the- 
high land which feparates the fouree.of the; ‘Tacoutchie! eflejon Columbia: 
_ | River, and. Unjigab, OF. Peace, Rivers the Jatter of: which, -aftet 3 feéceivin g 
ae _ . -* many 


NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, 

. shan} tributary fireams,'pafles through the’ great ‘Slave Lake, and dif: 
- embogues itfelf in:the'Frozen: Ocean, in ‘jatituide 69 North, longitude 
. 135+ Weft from: Greenwich ; while the former; confined by the immenfe 
mountains that run nearly parallel with the Pacific: ‘Ocean, and keep it 
in a Southern courle, empties itfelf in nas: 20. North latitude and longi. 
tude-124.:Welt from Greenwich, CE ee 
one gat Betis ye de Ee 
OCDE could: have: fpared dl the tingfind fad t been cable. to’ exert b mye 
for I was now afflied. with afwelling 3 in: my. anicles, fo that I could not 
. everi walk, but.with great pain and: difficulty, it was. ‘ny ‘intention’ to 


have faken: fome falmon: alive, and. colonifed ‘them in. the Peace River, 


. though: tis: very pdoubeful whether: that fith: ‘would live. in| ‘watets that, 


Sot get ge 4 bd 


have not.a communication:with the-fea.:: 3. °° 3 02 


. 

‘ x ft efoy Re i + 

+ , - Rhy eae ¢ : ’ ry 

- a og re v a onal erated te fe Peytie: Det, wee Ji on Sa 
weer : 


a 


oats oe eba gs 4 


. 


- Some:;of -the: inhabitants hadsbeenhere:fince! we - © polled: and I ap- 


“y prehend,'that.on feeing our: road’ ‘through their’ country, ‘they ‘miftook us 
: for chemies,-and had: therefore deferted the-place,-which: is a‘mOft con? 


venient, {tation ;! ‘as: on: one. fide; ‘there: is ‘great’ plenty. of. white fith: land. 


trout, jub, carp, &c. and on the other, abundance ‘of falméti; ‘aiid’ ‘prot 


bably other fifh. Several things that I had left here i in exchange for 
‘anticles.-of : ‘which: I; -had. poffeffed. “myfelf as. objeéts of curiofity; were 
taken awayy.-i The: whittle: berries: were: now Tipe; and: very fine: ‘of their 


ee 


. . 4 , my : 
fe ra « . 2 aad ‘ roby 2 ae Pan ; wR? - 
kinds “hee ut a ee Oe SC 5 ‘leat ae tie Bh ne . . 
Loo. > . ; { 
‘ . , : ‘ i ! 
. . “ . woe 3 2 He ~ NN 
. . : ee, Loy Foogt og 
tur, = wre te , OE FEC tee Do th > val, th Na oF 


cere One TES Be 


* The; morning’ wasccloidyand at five: we! ‘renewed: dur’ ptogiell.~ “We 
"-were:tompelled to: »-cilery- ftom the. lake-to: the Peact River, t the paligs 


v nod = . 3 D 2 = . from’ 


. 
Wyte. a 
3 et 


.' 


387 


igs. 


Augutt. - 


Saturday 1. 


Sunday 18, 


383 
Ae 


JOURNAL OF A-VOYAGE THROUGH THE 
from the falling of the water;: being wholly: pbitmnttéd-bydrift-woods 


herrys= The meadow through which we; pafled was entirely inundated ; and from | 


the ftate of my foot and, ancle;:I was obliged, ‘shough with: : h great wreluce | 
tance, to fabmit te to be ‘carried over it. cn 78 si Spelt Santeteat 


’ : ‘ weer s ¢ f 
~ . u ' 
a“ ve a i. oieep2 a £93 oye ae arr nen oe tts 


‘At half if paft f feven we began to > lide iloog with: the ‘cuittent. of: the’ 
Peacé River; -and almoft at every canoe’s length we perceived Beaver . 
rdadg.to-and.fram the river. At two,in.the, afternoon, an ‘objed attract 
ed opr notice’ af she: entrance of a: {iiall/iriver;: which’ proved to.be the: 
four beaver thins,-already: sientioned:to have been prefented to’me by a - 
pative, and teft:in his pofléficn. to-reveive:them:on my-return.:':] imas 


“gine, sAberefore, -that! heinig. under :the’ neceflity: ofdéaving the rivery.ct; 


perhaps, fearing to meet us again,: Hehad:takenithis: method td-reftore. 
them to me;. and to reward his honefty, I left three times thé value‘of:the- 
{kins, in their place. The. fhow:. ‘appedréd in. patches on the inountains. 

At four in. the afterngon- wepaffed. thei. place: where-wves found. thedirft ° 
natives,-and : landed, fos the: sightrat:a laterhdar::Iw-the cowfe of . 

the, day we caught -mine-outards; or r Gand gece ‘but: they: werd as: yev 
without their feathers. a ede a a i Pana 


ne . 

sw 4, 
net 6 
cere * 


~ * sony ‘ ov Al net 
p> rw oe sas fh ot sy ¢ reat 


tere ara: BReP Te Vote oF tg 
As fron anit was, slight WES prticedell oni: our! byl ‘and ‘drove oxt 
before she cumest, which was-very: mach diminithed iad ftréngels, fired 
we came up it. The water indeed was fo low, that in. many parts:id 
expofed ‘a gravelly beach. At. eleven we/ Jan ed_at .our encampment 
of-the Seventh of June, to gusaythe eandecand any varich sonweitiien 
reccambat hed andl at bait: HE pall five. antived ait the, plang tite 


oN © 8 D8 “ re cre 


" soRtEWESt CORTKGRITY OF AMERIK, «= «8g 


biek oP riuib otatidi, “oh thé Foukeh OF pte, “iH Whieh Vere beret SBR. 
burs: atid: diftatites: between that day: and the: twenty ‘fikth of ‘May, ea) 
. whieh 1 had how 4 aa openly t6 tipply ih “ “They Wee 46: follsw: wo . 
, dat Bod Ge de dad ate Crea 4 
“aNGrtheleertn wel Halt a‘-thile, ral by’ North: half'a mile, Néith by! 
Bafha quarter ofa tnilé: Novis Weft by Wett'd qlidttet OF a-tuilé, Welt: 
South-Wet half a nile, Noith: Weft a title and’a quartet, NoithiNoitl 
Welt three quarters of d'inile, ‘North by: Eaft half a'mile, Nothi-Welt 
7 thireé. quarters of & mile; “Welt half 4 mile, North: Welt dhirte qiarets of 
og nile; ‘WeftsNoith- welt dite: me andes Qitartet; ‘Nortl threé quartets 
of 4 tile; Welt by North of ‘quarter of milé’ North-Weft one nilé: . 
| did df half Wels NovehoWell half a tile, ‘Norih-Norti- Weft thirée’ quits 
dere of a nidlé, Welt dnt quafter of a mile; Nortl-Notih-Eaft half av. rile, 
Nott. NonkeWel two niles and North- Welt fout miles : ve 


, e 
1, ny wove 
. St aa oa peated “> of we, 


“We sri fever niditie in’ goidg up thar part of this FIVE Which we cath 
mow today’; dnd it’ now. firaritied; ‘as it-“Weré, With Heavers aiid- aid 
fow?. ° Kheré- was Yai in the aftertidot, ‘atta A bot fasie: ‘re’ took Gat 


Ration for the’ night er 0 ae 
Soe Te lagi le EVES Ley pg Tene weet te Pe RT 


de! had Tene fail fait thtéugtio Out thé: ighres "Oe Courke: 0-7 Menday 19- 


Was: SéuekSouth-Welt thiee'quditers of a tile Wel North: Well half 
a mile, North half‘ 4 hile, NotthiwWel’by Welkthite: Guiteérs OF 2 wie 
North by Weft halfa mile; a fmall river to the left, South-Weft by Weft 
"died: quarieie ofa Vipdile} Wen North: Welt sailed a "Half Worth. 
“Wereby: North four mnie; a river ‘ont the righ; War NOHHEW eff: thiee: 
qaartiie ofa rile; oa confiderable tiver'fidm He'Tekt; Notift ortho Welt 


Par aereais . oa two 


- 399 


Aug 


1793» 
ult. 


- JOURNAL OF A MOYAGE THROUGH THE 
two miles, North’ half a mil, Wel. North-Went one “mile and: an. half; 


aaa a rivulet on ‘the Tight, “North: Welt by Welt one. mile, and a quarter, 


Weft-North-Welt one) ‘mile, . Welt- South, Weft a ‘quarter. of a amile, 


North-North- Weft half a mile, North-Wett half a mile, ‘Welt-South- 


Weft three quarters of : cm mile, | North-Weft by Weft three. miles, Wett- ' 
South-Welt three quarters, of a mile, North-Wett. ‘by, Welt. one: ‘anile;, 

{mall river on the right, South-Welt a. er ofa mile, WeltsNorth- Wel 
‘ilands, four miles and: an half,, a. tiveon. 1 the J left, North half; a mild, 
Weft a quarter of a mile, North. a quarter ofa amile; ‘North-Welt by Weft 


. three’ quarters of.a mile, ‘North- North-Eaft three quaiters: ‘of a! mile,” 
_ North-Weft by North half a mile, Welt-North-Welt ‘aemile“an dan: half, 
and Noyth-Wekt by North half. a nile. . : The; mountains: ywere. covered 


with frefh {fnow, whole fhowers had diffolved i in rain, before they reached : 
‘ns. North- Weft three quarters ‘of imile, South-Welt s a quarter of amile; 
‘North a mile and three quarters, Weft-Notth-Welt a mile and a quarter, 
North-Wef, a, mile’ and an half,. ‘North-North-Wef half..a mile, Welt. 


North-Weft a, quarter of a wile, North shalf a mile ;. here., the. current 


“was flack ¢ ‘North-Weft by North half. a mile, North-Weit by: ‘Welt.a 
quarter of a mile, North-North-Welt i a quarter. of a mile, North-Weft by. 
‘Weft one mile ‘and a quarter, North half a mile, North-Eaft by North 
one_mile and three quarters, South-Weft one. mile and a. quarter, with 


Wee 


an ifland, North: ‘by, Eaft one mile, North-Weft.. * Here the. other branch 
opened to us, at. the diflance of three: quarters. of a mile. et Sis 


> my 


+ ‘ , . ‘ i 
+ 7 ay5 . . . - wt x wo 
f. : wet, Be efyte 1s 
ont tte g ' . 


I expefted from the flacknefs of. the ‘eptrent in. a this branch; that tthe 
Wehers one would be high,’ but. I. found i it ‘equally, Tow. : I. had, . every 
yeafon to believe thet, from the BpPer part of this braneh, the. diflaneé 


vaya 


o nae : ‘ “gould 


a0 
rt 
; 
e 


. 
‘NoRTH.West CONTINENT OF AMERICA. gg 
could’ not be great to the: ‘country through which I ‘ paffed: when I left the | Aires. 
Great, River; butit has fince been determined otherwife by Mr. J. F inlay, eee 
who’ was fent: to explore it, and found i its navigation foon terminated by 


' , 

' . , ae my - ’ 
~ 4 . we \ 

q et ' 


falls and ‘rapids. po a 


«The branches aie. about two hundred yards i in breadth; and the water 
was, fix feet lower: than on our upward. paflage. Our courle, after the 
jndticn, was North-North-Weft one. mile, the rapid North- Eaft down: ite 
three quarters of a ‘inile, ‘North h by: Weft one mile and a quate, North © 


oe a 


“les and’ an half, Eaft-North- Eall a quarter. of a.mile;: a. rivulet; ‘Eat bby. 
South one mile and an half, North- Eaft two. ‘miles, Eait-North-Eaft. one — 
mile, North-North. Eaft a quarter of a mile, North-Eait by, Eaft halfa 
mile, Eafe ‘South-Eaft a quarter ‘of :amile; Eaft-North -Eaft half a nile, 
North- Eat two. imiles, North- Eaft -by: Eaft two miles and ‘a quarter; 
South-Eaft: by] Eaft a quarter ofa mile; a. rivulet. from the left ;. Balt, by 
North a. mile: atid ; an half, Eaft by South one. mile, Eaft-North-Eaft’one 

mile: -and three quarters ; a river, on.the right; North-North-Eaft three . 
“quarters ofa mile, North: Eaft a mile and an half, North-Eaft by Eaft: af 
mile.and. ‘@ quarter, Eaft- North-Eaft half. a miles and North- Eaft by 

~ North half.a:mile.’ Here we landed at’our encampment of the.27th of _ 

* June; from whence-I difpatched : a. letter i an an empty keg, as was ‘men: - 
tioned in that period of my, journal, which fet forth. our. ar exifting fate, 


e 


‘Progrels, and ex pefaton - 


te 


oa bee my eg - rige of : to . nee : ow ’ ve ¢ 
,f 2 a . + " wef ‘ . oo ra z ae Tw og a wos 
+ 


ppough: the: “weather. was clear, we could: not t embark this morning Tuelday 20, 
“before five, : ‘as there, was a. rapid: very near us, which: ‘required ‘day-light , 


to rom: ity that we might not: ‘break: ‘our canoe on the rocks. » “The bag. 


i * 
tp oy ‘ ’ i gage 
6 - : ~ > . . 
, 


ie 


a 


JOURNAL OF 4 VOYAGE Rover pa; 


At, Bags w4 were, obliged: tg. cary. Qur -conrte-was: North by: Haft,,a. mile 
eo and.an half, _North-Notth- Eat a mile and an, half. Gown, another rapid 


gn the. Welk: fida, it  Fequirgs great, care,;to, keep idireQly-between, the 
eddy current, and that which was driving down with fo much impetudlityy 
We then’ proceeded North -North-Wef, a river from the right; a nile 
and a. quarter, ‘North: North-Eaft a nile: and..an_half, a iver ftom), the 


| Jef 3: North. one amile and, uhrqe quarters, North- Eat twouzhiles, North | 


Eaft by. Eat Wo milés, and: a quarter, Eaft /by., North one mile, Northy 
Eab by. Eafk four imilgs, a river. from, the'left, and Eaft by South: amileanit 
an half’, “Here: was: our encampment: ‘on.the: 26th. of May, beyond. whigh! 


: “igcwould: he altagether: fuperfluous. for. me to. take.the: courHleay astheyare 


inferted-inicheit Proper Places Be i 2, reas 
Bow Poko ga dias us. ‘ob , re we 
dks we: céntinned: our. soyage, our! ‘attention was. attraGied, by. theapr - 
pearange of an: Indian:encampment.’ : ‘We. accordingly. landed, and-found 


there had been. five firés, and: within that number. of: days, :fo: that: there 


+ 
un oa (kien 


' mufphaveibeen fome. inhabitants in. the. neighbourhood, thoughi we ‘wera 


not fo. fortunate’ ‘as.to.fée, them. -It appeared that they. had killed:anums 


_ bet.of animals; and>fledi inla: ftate.of.alarm,. as:three of ; their canoes werp 
deft: carelefly. onthe beach; and: their. padilles Jaying about i in diforden: 


Weifoon after. came; tothe: carrying-place.calledithe Portage: dé:la Mow ) 
tagne de. Roche: | Here I had: a. meridian: altitude, which madeche- Jeti 
tude. 56: oo North! 33.0 aloe toad yi fet heed, ae ih a moon 


wes Gs ei ey “ig . 
The-water, : as I have already obferved, was ‘much lower than when we . 


“tec? gate, up ig thoughat the faine time, the.current appeared £6 be; fronger 


from shis iplece,te the, forks;, the nanigation, howevery'wouldynowhe 
_algendede wi uh greater fasilisy,, asutbesaiaa Sanytieechaleches sey; fo 
. that: 


Sang 


‘NORTH-WEST: GONTINENT OF AMERICA. 
‘that poles.2 or the towing line, may’ be, employed: with the beft effet, 
“ver the ¢ current overpowers the ule of ‘paddles. | 


fy 


We were now reduced toa very fhort allowance; the difappoint- 


DRL, therefore, at spot. feeing, any: animals was proportioned to our 


- Sxigences, as we did, not poffels at this time more than, “was fuficient to 


ferye, us for, two meals,. Inow difpatched Mr, | Mackay and the Indians, 


£9 proceed to the foot of the rapids, and endeavour in their way to pro- 


‘cure fome provilions, v while I prepared to employ the utmoft. expedition . 
' ~ in getting: there ;, having determined, notwithfanding’ the difinclination 
“of. my. people, froin: the regollegtion of what. they had fuffered in coming. 


thatway, to return by. the fame route, -, I had obferved, indeed, that the 


water “which - had fallen. fifteen feet perpendicular, at the narrow pals 


below. US," ‘had loft much. of +i ‘its former turbulence. - 7 


ys . : vo 
4 “os f 
\ faa a, 


AS difpatch. was eifential in “procuring a fapply. of ptovifions, we did 
not delay a moment. in making preparation, to. renew our progrefs. . 


Five of the men een to carry the baggage, while the fixth and my- 


ene 


lining znd timbers to the. air, whicl ‘avould ‘ender, het much lighter, 
About fun-fet Mr. Mackay. and our -hunters;returned, with heavy k bur- 


dens.of: the:fleth of.a buffalo: though, Hot-very tender, it was very. ac 


ceptable, ‘and “Was the only “animal that, they had feen,. though t the country 
‘was. covered, with - tracks” of theiny.a as, well as:of the. moofe-deer, and 
the elk. | The,former, had doné -eptting, and the:: ‘latter, were begin- 


ningsto, ran...;Qur. people , returned, having | left their loads: mid-way 


on. he. ‘sanrying. place, My ‘companion : and: amyfelf, completed | our 


et, | - gE" _under- 
‘ . « 4% 


398° 


1799. 
., Augult 


394 | 


agin. 


Wednel. #3, 


JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE THROUGH THE? 7 


tinderiaking, andthe cande ‘was ‘teady to ‘be ‘catieal “it ‘ei. 
An hearty meal concluded the day, and’ every fear of fuiuKe Wat “was 
removed, oo 


“ : t . ; ™ 
vey t jeotk Rv sy in UMS or ae A a 


- When’ the’ moming dawhed \ we fet forwards, bilt ds a ‘fire’ had palled 
through the’ portage, it was with difficulty” ‘wel eduld irdce’ out’ i road in’ 
many parts;.and with’ all thie exertiony of which we wel 2 aipabie, we'did: 


not arrive at’ ‘thie river ‘till, four’ in the’ afieriidén.” we found ilitiolt 


as much: ‘ditficuley in carrying our’ cande! dowt the’ mouiitain ‘as We 
had’ in’ getting it up ‘the mén ‘Beith wet if ftrong” as br ‘hie ‘foriner 
oécafion, ‘hough’ ‘they were i ‘petter pi Hi aa Was now enabled 


' to affit. them; ‘ny ‘ancle! pbeitip’ ‘alibi? well? | We: ebtilé ho’: however! 


 ‘Thefe- occiipations ‘employed: us'tilF'a very: lite'tioit pores ve lob ade | 


Thurld. 22, 


7 proceed any ‘farther till the: ‘following’ day,7a8 wel" ‘had thé-cande to gun, 
| with- feveral great and finall polés'to* ‘prepare ; hole we "Had Fete! ‘here 


having been carried away by’ the. water, though- -we had left them in a 
pofition from’ fifteen t to ‘twenty ‘feet 'above the’ Wateranatk?! at hat time. 


r ; ra 
voy 4, 7" . . os ” 

ak af Die boagits uaa att ee wed hoe WEES os fe ch 36 HES Ath te PRES 
. ‘s* . 


xy fe 


» The “night was ° ‘cold; ‘arta “Hough” ‘the’ iotiig vids tie add ‘cleasiiie 
was feven’ before’ we were” id 4 RateoF prépaPstici to'leaive this iB pee; | 


- fometimes: driving with’ the -Gittent;and ‘at“other times fhobting? tHe 


tapids: ' The’ ‘Tate Had’ of inden oF their ‘former’ frengilry Wparewe, 


mpeg 


neverthielefs, thought: it HecelRity to’ land very’ frequently; th: ‘ordek to 


ok éxdmine ‘the’ tapids beféte We coi could Ventute ‘to’ run ‘théint “aprowever, r, 


the” “canbe “being light, we very forthinately” patted thet “all, Gud-“at 
hoon: artived ‘ate the place where E ‘appointed 'tié'theét!Mr.- Mackaysand 


_ the hunters : there | we. found thi, with ‘Plenty ‘oF “exellent fat: ‘meat, . 


cd : iA Q ; | ‘ x ly 


wy 


} 


“NORTHWEST CONTINENT OF AMERICA, |: $95 
. ready..roafted; as they had killed two elks within a few hundred yards of Ree 
- the {pot where we.then:were, When the men‘had fatisfied their.appe- ae 
tites, Ifentthein for:as much of the meat -as' they could carry. In 
coming hither, Mr. Mackay: informed. me,, that he arid the hunters: kept 
along the high land, and did not fee or crofs the Indian path. At the 
fanie’ time; théte"t¢an: be no doubt: but the: road, from’ this place to the 
- apper part ‘of ‘the: -rapids 4 is tb be preferred t to that Which we came, hoth 
for expedition ahdsfafety:: ee tet Pk 
After. haying here about an hour and an half, we. proceeded with’ | 
‘the ftteam, uid -laided: where I had forgotten my pipé-tomahawk’.and 
Real, ofr the’ eighiteenth of May. 'The former of them-I now recovered. 


"oy ot . 
vt wa fe . ee dt 7 
we 


i mage Fy es BE ee, , 
Oa Jeaving the mouitains we faw animals’ ‘grazing in every ‘direc- 
_ tion. _In paffing along an ifland, we fired at an elk, and broke its 
a legs: and; ‘as vit’ was: now: time’ ‘to"ientanip, we. landed; ‘when- the 
hunters” purftied *: the?:woutided: ‘animal; which had crofled “over “to 
thestmain ' land; ‘but could not ‘get up the’ ‘bank. We went after -it, 
_ therefore;:in ‘the: ‘eatioe; and killed it. To give fome_ notion’ 6f our 
- appetites, I-thall- Maté-the: ‘elk: or” at ‘leaft, the ‘earcafe. of i it, which we 
brought away, to have weighed two hundred. and fifty ‘pounds; "and as 
_we had taken a very hearty mital at one o ‘clock, it might naturally be; 
.. fappofed. that we fhould-not:be. very’ voracious -at’ fupper} ncverthelefs, _ 
« akettle:falhofithe’ elk -flefh ‘was ‘boiled: and eaten) and that veel ré° 
» plenifhed: and? puton the -fire. :. "All ‘that’ remaitied, with’ ‘the’ bones, 
See swasvplaced,cafter.: the. Indian’ fathion,. round: the fire- to Toaft, 


Mek i rh eee wer. ob  , 3 E 2 oe re a and 


JOURNAL OF A. VOYAGE THROUGH THE 
and ‘at ten next, morning the. whole: wad: confumed: cby ten! peérfons, and 


Lv? a large dog, who was allowed his, fhare of. the: banquets: This. 18 no 


Friday 29. 


exaggerations. nor-did any inconvenience: # redult from what: mayibe cons 

fidered as an, ia Ine inate indetgensess ae gol u 
‘ é 

My a 4 i . Sp a re f ‘ as re ere 

poy et t g oe Pres i oH tis wt be a nly 


We’ were: on the water: etore. :May-light 3 and: when. she. fun: role: rs 


| beautiful. country appeared, around.us, enriched :and: animated: by large: 


* . Saturday 24, . 


who were. as, ,aftonithed to fee: US, aS. if, we had been. the firft, white’ mes...’ 


herds of wild'cattle. The weather was now fo warm;. that to: uss who 
had not of late been accuftomed to. heat, it was overwhelming and: Op-" : 
_preffive. , In the courfe ‘of this.day, we killéd. a‘buffalo and.a. ‘bears bat’ 


uo ine UST 


we were , now inthe midft of abundance,, and they; were:not fafficiently : 


fat to fatisfy our, faftidious appetites, fo . -weleft, them: where. they: fell. ; 
We landed for the night, and | Prepared ‘ourfelves for, arriving . at. the | 


Fort on the following day... (eos andthe de pean, 


toot 

2G). 
f. 

¥ r lp ees eer tt we 

ree ibe var, yee bres aan eee, s an a iy woe 


The weather was the fame 3s: yellerday, and ; the- country increafing -_ 
in beauty ; :. though ¢ as ‘we approached the Fort, the: seattle, dppepred. pros - 


portionably to diminifh. ‘We now Janded “at: two ,; Jodges: of Indians, |. 


oo whom. they, had ever beheld, WwW hen we had, pale thele’ peoples not an. 


fire-arms while-the. wien, were: in.fach Spitits,: and-made fuch ap ittive: : 
ule of their Paddles, that we: ainived, hefore: the: two, -menqwhom. WE 7 
. j : Ld Bo OT EN ae in 


animal was to be fen on mae. borders. of she, river: coarlar eres 


Bhan ~ 


: mn we * moe ee ony wo Ent 
. : oth $id a ees yin. fee ables 


At leagth, a as we- -rounded, a point, ‘and: ame-ini iview of, the: Bott: wwe! _ - 


threw. out our. flag, and, Laccompahiedit with di general: difehatge sof:onr 


we 


“NORTH: WEST: connie TF. OR; AMERICA: . 


tefteve i in-the:. Spring, canlasrapaver' their fenfestto, arlinge ss a Thugwe- 
landed at four.in:the afernoon, atthe place which we, left on she- ninth 


of: May. ime Here anys: voyager: af Aifcovesy.tstminate.. Dhejz toils 
and, their. dangers, :théir, fplicitudes,and.. Falforingsu hove nati beet ex: 


“pegerated in my: deloriptions:: Onethe jcontyary ishmany infances,, Jan 
guage: bas -failed:me ‘inthe attempt:toidefariba them. J received, hows 


ever; the: teward; of any: ‘Jabours, forthey: were; crowasit Awith: fagcek 


wy 


’ * t . o 
‘ aby n + 
irr 3 wo “AG Gh ards tas al lg pisihy Ears ry i? rf a OA Gt. 2 adver 


AS I. haves now. reamed the charatter-of, 9 trader: Ifhall, Ot: ‘trouble 


amy..tedders with’any’ fublequént conesirti} bist; content myfelfr withnthe 


clofing ‘information,’ ithae! dftercan! abfence:iof;, eleven imonthsiiT-atrived 7 


_ at Fort: ‘Chepevpinj:iwhetei Tremained, for: the’ ‘purpolted of trade, during 


: ; the: fucoseding Npinteriy 3 beat ee yt yal 5 ate “Ot Hest at at “yrs fates s ppeeyet - Phyed fh 


ppp, echt 


Cee atye + : hye rr rn y 
“wes j TTR Ve et Ae La hae churned ¢ ‘grorly SOOT AP gp esp 


- ' - he a ‘ 
ee RS oT ITER * 


‘ r By, “~ ays Bh ade ; earars iL mes pte 4 yi spe wae 2G ou tages oes ay ft hy 
ype oo yey. SOR ak th cae Sob es 5h ans pares, A at nly? woe bre 


“APH follévitig’ weiietal, Bul: fhérd; ‘ge Opraphicaliviewsof the country 
inay! HOt be” impropit/to'elofe this' workjlas-welbasfonie remarks’ om thé 


: pfobable‘advantages that! ‘thay ‘be'derived‘from ddvaiding’ the frade'oPr, . 


| under ‘Proper ‘regulations, a and a by” the fpirie of. eovntneycial entetprize, 

py fippoting’ a'line ‘eit thie’ aatbuedes rs Ean 46 the! Pacific; well: in 
‘ ‘hepa ‘OF forty-five ved degieds Be Nenh actidediie Willy Thinks 
nal! ekeribdline Brtithtervies sriés“in.: onthe Auieriear’ aE or & dnv'of 


| Spit ion? that’ ne Getta oF ihe éogiitry'td’the Sbuth \epthib ine; ‘avHhioli 


Wwe Have ie ihe € iO? chains! eu to. ie Wo thiNe th BF ity which’ anay 
onige she 


hi ender pawwerso> = Bob eT Sula ad ort gndye% died: 


ve e 
age 


Bayi: thecdatinde aheealy shentonel add she “bs nOHEE 


oy: TT 


| JOURNAM.OF A VOYAGE THROUGH tHe 
The outline’ ‘of What'T fhall call! the’ firft Wivifie fron fiw along that track’ of 


; éountry’ which’ runs’ fromthe! ‘head! of: sJaimes-Bay, itiaboiit Jatitadd pts 
Noith,. along the: Euftcinicoaft)'as far North ag toyand: ‘through; -Hudfon’s . 
7 Straits, round. by Labrador). contiiiuing onthe Atlatitic ‘coalt; ‘on.thé out 


fide of the: ‘great iffanids, ini the: galt of St: Laureri¢e’ reoather tiver St. ‘Croix, 
by-which it takes its coarfe;td:the height’of land that'divides thé waters 
emptying thenifel ves ints'the Atlantic, from thofe difchargedints: the'river 
St. Laurence. Then following’ thee heights, as the boundary between 


| the Britifh:poffeffionis; eid thofe ofthe Americdm States, it makés:an arigle 


Wefterly until: it ftrikes” the: difcharge ‘of Lake: Champlain,:in' latitude 
45. North when: it keeps-adirelt Welt line'till-it ftrikes the rivér St. Lau: 
réerice? above ‘Lake: Sty ‘Fraticis; where it. divides! the Indian willage’ St 
Rigeft; from whence ‘it follows the centre of the watersiof-the'great.river 
St. Laurence: it then proceeds: through. Lake Ontario, the conneftion 
between it and Lake-Erie; through-the Jatter; arid its chain of connec- 
tion, by the river Detroit, as far South ‘as latitude" 42s North, and. then 
through thé lake-and:xiver St: Glair, asralfo Lake, Huron;-through which 
it” ‘continues! 10: the ftrait.af. St. Matys latitude: 46, North; i, : from. which, we 
willappofe ithe: line to Bike to‘the; Eaft of. North £9: ths head of Jame 


re zy ory oe th : 
nee ‘ Pa ES ECE Sates 
ss i re oee « raaew 


a : OF this - great tra, more:th than alfierepseinted asbarrens ind broken, 
Ailplaying: a farface ‘of; rork rand frelh seater Jakes with: a very featiered 


DF Sind ah 


‘pad. feantyspropartion, af: foik: 23 ai Such is sthéwrhole: coalt.o of Labrador, 


and; the Jandy, called ; Hall: Main jtoicthe( WE afi:t erbeights;,wh ich 
divide. flie- waters running/into'¢he riydr, anid gulf-o of, a “Eatirence,; from ’ 
thofe flowing into ) Hudfon’s Bay, It is con nfennebay inhabited. only. yy 

oo . a ‘ew 


cd 


 quenthiifiGreatBritaid retaibs the sight obeatenii 
‘divifion Aitsniuft bein-aslawer latitndesrand: whi . varlahat thay dey the 


spragauriat abide. olgini¥: 9B G1. Oi i soviteoed) oe watt ted stole 


” . 
a i ° 


* she Séuthoofthe Golumbid. ofkhisediviiontis s then! 


_ NORTHWEST CONTINENT. ap. AMERIOA, 


a ferwifairages; iahofe suimbers., aveipiéportioned> toiehe'feantiiels -of ithe’ 
Aoil;;ongr is itrprobables from: the-famiei-caule, that: they,will: Leficrea fe; 


: The: freth:: rand: Hfalb waters, >with: atid; siiantity, Of; ogamey. whith © 
” theinfews zo Mitited :stooils|vafford, fupply: ‘she. -wafits:/of wnathne!:;, from 


whence: sto: that; of; the; line. .of, ithe; Ainerican ; boundaryy: and the __- 


Atlantic:>océan;: the foil, : wherever: ‘cultivation phas ; Beeps atteinptéds 


has, yielded: abuindanées! particdlasly,ons! ithe; wiven; .Stliaurence, from - 
Qtiebee upwards, tq: the: line of, boundary! ‘Alseady,qnenitioneds :but 4 


very: inconfiderable. proportioniol, it, thas! beenzbrbken: by. the; plough: 


fhate.io . WH ho -g2hons oth eg vlniog sit ob peers nod ont de 
eee IO ole ‘ullyid- Je rinsimavergad oft creer EME SY 

(i Dhebline ofthe Second. idiviGiose ay. estracedafion that: sof; the fife. 
at St. Mary's; from which-alfo:the line iofiA mérican, bontidary funs,iand 


oj is faidito. ‘continue!/through:. Akake, Superior, (ans thedugh qlaRecalled- 


the-Long. Lake which. has-no. exiftence)yiteu' the: Lake! ofthe Woods; in . 
latitude: 49° 37. North,, from whence. it, is. -alfo. faid. to run Weft to the 
Miflifipipwhich;itymaj:do o;:by. givingitwgadd deal-of:Sotithing, buvhot 
-otherwifeyasi the: fonréesof: tHat ivan does ‘not: extend- fu rther, North, than 
Jatitudes: 47 338! pMdrthe whereitsisino:imose thanca- fuiallebréok conte ° 
lon elie of. 


or 


e™ 


ling muft; ebeccontinued. NV Vel-til sit terimihates Sms thes Pacific: Oceaiis to 
Obst] boise bgt the, Parific. 


‘OckameurtheWelljethe FrozetoSea tind ‘Hudfon's | Bayiionod thes North 
cand’ ‘Bath: i?PheRufkans; jfideed,mayselaiia’ ‘withijties the ilandsiona 
coat: from Behring *s Straits to: ‘Gook's : Entry: sHOkfon ub SSW worl si 


wate ten b 


a rer 


” The 


899 


2 


ae 


400 


JOURNAL OF .A NOVYAGE THROUGH THE _ 
2 The Swholeof- this ecbumtiy:-will: long: coitinnein:theqpoffellion of 
id prefent ‘inhabitantsy‘ds ahéyowilh remain: apoiitentéd \withithe “proditcé 
of the woods and watersfor their fapportjleaving: ‘she ledrdh; rota tariolus 


‘eatules, ‘invite ovitgire Mate. 22D hel opropobtionsof ic that fs fit: for eultivds 


tidh is:very- deaull,: landois tilt lefcin the interiot parts’t:ft is :alfo.: apery 
difficale of accels; eatid aehillt ‘any latid yeriains‘micultivatedto the Soith 
oftit; thers willbe 3: -teriptdtion to fee it.: « Befidedy:ind elimbtetis not 


in. ‘general ‘Faificienely> genital to-bring' t the frnitscof the. earth: toumatdrity! ; 
“Te will-alfo be: anafylom. for the defcendants of the ofiginal! inhabitants 


of the. country to the South, who prefer the modes of life. of theit 
forefathers, to the’ improvements of civilifation, _ Of this. difpofition . 
there-is a recent inflance.:..A firall colony Of. Troqubis ‘einigratdd: “to'the 
bankscof the: Bafkatchiwine; ‘iti'1999,:who?-had: ‘been btought:ip from 
ihdis anfancy dynder ithe: Romifhy smifiionaries; znd intfirudted nor them at 
a will wt ir eided of: Montel 3 og aa pute airak gusto: 


7 f 


’ . aw . bal . - ° 
gi Of Bow? out bi 5h! oils. abd ERE A dlrigpe UE DL Sn e 


we 


im Ac firther’ diviffon’ a) this coxintry:: is ‘tharked: by: a tidge: of high 
land, rifing, as itiwere; fromthe: ‘coat, of Labrador, ind!running neatly 


_ Sorith- Welt :¢olithé fource 266-the:\Utasras <Riverlinibvdiing the-Wwaters’ 


going ieither andy tothieoriver atid'galf: of! Sts: Laurefice, cand: Hudfon's 


. Bay, as before obferved: 1 Bromotheneé it: ftbetches::t¢° the. Norfivaf 
Welt, :to: thi: Nérthivard cofs Cake: Supericiy't6 latitude spoNarth, and 


lonigitadd: 8g. Mick; wien ti tit forks ftoriilthe latheoinke at:aboudt Sains 
Welt; and continnds the'fanid divifion@of:iwatérs: ‘@ntilsit-pafies: “NW orth,of 
the:fource: ofthe Miiliipisy The former, cour runs, as‘has-been dbferved, | 
ina : North-Weft. diredtion,, untihit Arllies the aver’ Nélfon, Separating the — 
waters that, difcharge themfelves into Lake Winipic,, which forms part 
enn fe _-0£ 


“NORTH-WEST: CONTINENT: oF. AMERICA. 


. = of te faid, riverjiandiithofe that. allo: “empty! themfelyes. into: Hud{fon’s 
| - Bay cbys the: ‘Albany, Severn, and; Hay’s, ori Hill's: Rivers: F rom thence 
” it;keepsia icourle; of, about, Welt-North; Wel; tilbit. Forms: ithe Banks of 
oat? the, MiGinipii, OF, Churchill; ;River,: at, Pottage:de: Traite, latitude: 55s 25. 


Notth,: Jt now, continues.in'aWeftern, direftion,, between‘the: Safkatchi- 


7 “qwine-and the fource, of. the, Miflinipi,, or. Beaver!-River; which; sit; leaves 


“behind; sand; divides, the. Salkatchiwine: from: the, Elk. River, when, | 


1, deaving thofe,alfp. behind, and; ;purfuing,, the: fame: direBtion ; it. leads! to 
othe high land, that, lies between, the. Unjigah and ; Tacoutche-rivers, fiom 
“whence i it may be fuppofed to be the fame ridge, F rom the. head of the 


“Beaver: River,.o on: the ‘Wefts:the, fame: kind. of, high gtound, uns Jo.’ the 


_ Eat, of: North, ‘between, ithe, waters. of. ‘the, Elk ‘River and:the: Mifinipi 


. forming )ithe- Portage’, da) Loche,: and, ‘continuing: onto; athe - latitude 
STS: Noxthe: dividing. the waters.. that: ron to. Hu dfon's: Bay Atomithole 
: going. to: the-North Sea, from, thence ‘its courte is, nearly North; when: an 

‘angle rans, from, it, 40: the North ‘of the Slave Lake, tit ait! ike ‘Mace 


“Kenzie. River: » ftraas winubsteds al 7 a WE rthes «3 


pat or hoe Yer? 
SEY wD rg By 


oth: i 3 EGS Bee i 1 My, satel: “fe 


‘ay <The. laf; ‘but by: no imeang the Jeallit the: iene ridge oF! hasan Ton 


pf ridges of: ‘fony mountaing.whioke, Northern’ ‘extremity dips i in, the- North : 


= Sea, in latitude:7o: North, and; Jangitude: £95..Welk, scanning nearly Sonth- 

“ Eafty and. beginsto% be. parallel swith: the: ‘coat, OF: the Pacific: Ocean from 
Cook’ eentry,antt: {emawards to.she| Columbia. Fyornthenee i it appears: tO 

"  agple, ihe.coatt, burs Hill L-contipuing; withiJefSislevation,. to. divide: the: waters 
of the: Atlasitic From,thofe which.run- into the Pacific, In thofe fnow-clad 


alg th Fee sae oilarrion lls i° VEEP ey 


‘ nr es ‘ moy ‘y ~ - 
~ 
yy of ‘ " 
‘ . Wak 
. ' ‘ 


4, 
_stagiantains. ile eM eas we adit: ‘the Mififouri +6 be its fource, = 


f] 


% 


“which 


chivwine, in‘about latitudes: Noveh} ai and 4 
10 this narrow; belé are; irhinenfe: ‘plains; or: ries; “commending: an a ; 
points vat. about’ ‘the fuGi, oft the: ‘River’ ‘of fie q Moanitain with: Mad. 


JOURNAL..OF A Ouse nto ene 


‘which: flbwsiinto,the eiGulphiet (Mexiée ythe River: Netto niet i 16 
ins Hudfon’s Bay ;"' Mackenzie's” River, hat dfohanges ‘feta ito vitie . 
= eiBeOueati c 


North’ Sea ; hand: ithe iCGhuibia’ inti’ Helebgoit into” thei 
The, great: ‘River:iSt.. Laurenceandt Chorchill Rivel) “With Giidny effer 


ores; detive their, fources’ far ‘hort: of! ‘thele. sHbaataiis Teast: indedd} the: 
extenfidn- of thefe miounitains'fo far'Géuthiién: the tea 164Rt: tharprevenits 


the! Colimbia froin : ‘finding a. more dite Surf! ranblieiffedinas sit Suns. 


obliquely! with’ the ‘coat: pads ofieight dee tees": ‘of dladelde ‘before: dk | 


sh ad ane 


aah ae Be z og Pye gt 3 ody nee : 


mingles" ‘witlr the: ocean.’ ae ee ae 


as ve Fe Lore, Peet 
ng ie siege rare ‘She oe . ne we 


oe 8,  furthée te be objerved tas et noni om Cos ath 7 


sh that ang th thee Bafterikits'is isa natbowliip pie ie fy insite seh, 


and: inieven ‘ground; therditer edge’ of ‘whily produees ‘Goal and: bitumeti: - 


thefé 7 fawcoh' the babkeor Muck 2 nzieIORivedy as Far NG chest 
tude:66.": F ‘alfo difeovéred ehientt i Hi ‘iny feeond j Souinney a Lat thie ¢ C6 iene: 


ment: of, the rocky mountains in 56. North: Jatitude; at id: 190; Wel :longit- 
tude; and. the fame was obferved by. Mz. F idler, one of the: fervants ofthe. | 
thé fouree'o ‘of ae South bra aricHiOF, thé Safkate. | 
ia én 23 ae WenmclNext noe 


Hiidfon’ s-Bay. Coripatiy; vat 


Vsodthyilh they feach.. 


ae an ye an R 


n Rive eon whence | 


ye 
‘ 


Deo 


cs * ‘Blumen is. aif, found on ithé “coatt ‘of the. ws gisele, ‘ia 166 Na _ 
ose by Macktnzie's Rivers ‘and alfo meal. af the fk of ‘the Elk Rivers". 


. 


a ae: 2 Hoa 


r 


> NORTHLWEST CONTINENT oF AMERICA), ote 


, he take: ae ‘more: Southern’: direBion, ‘along: the. ‘Miliippi towards 


+ Mexieo,! f Adjoining ito! “thefe: plains 3 18 a: ‘broken country, Comipoted. ‘of 


“ [> en 7 ff: ef . t ; 
7 Takes; rocks ang oie i hig nel Met Dales ier ogy Sorbent 
‘iy ssf Pits ye yf at LTS pee wi cys ray ‘x ae Beg iahy tg : 


| ‘hdBtom | i the banks “oft thé). fivers‘irubning” throught the” plats, there 
un appeared; to, Ooze. a‘ ‘faline, fluid, concreting into:a’ thing: feurf.én: the 


or pial Near; shat: ‘parts, of; the: Slave; ‘River: where: it’ Pitot ‘Totes : the 
af ‘namie: of Peace Rivers; andalong:: tthe, extréme: edge: of ithéfe plains»: are 
: very: Atrong- alt fprings; which in.thie fummer- ‘concrete: ‘and: cryftallize in’ 


| great quantities... About: the; Lake: Dauphin,{on: ‘the! ‘South: Welt: fide 
-_ of: “Lake Winipic; -ares alos 1 thany: fale: ponds; ‘buts it ‘Tequires: avegular 
: piocelsito. form- falt: fron ‘them: -siblong the: Weet banks’ of: ‘the former 

. 4s; to, ‘be. fens at vintervals,-and traced’ int the, ling off the:direBlion of. the 


plaits;: @ fof rock: “of: lime.ftohe; in. shin ‘and neatly: hhorjzonial: firatas; _ 

a .particularl yc jon: sthe; Beaver, Gedary Winipics cénd-Superigr: la fess as allo ' 

(in sthesbeds' of thes rivers; ‘crofling? that; lines; It is: alfo:. ‘retaa Neable’ ‘dhagy 
"athe narrowelk part. “of Dake .W V linipic; where i it jis not mote ‘than’ ‘two | 


. ‘miles i in: ‘breadth;- -the Webiifi idle, i is: faced. “with: rocks’ of this, fone thirty 


feet erpendiclar while; ‘onthe Ealt ‘fide, the rocks are. more elevated, 7 . 


Sonar Weer | , 


SEE ie 


tet 


- The tae iy 


cereale se 


Bey wart - rh one 
SEU tad 


s; county. i 


_ 


a‘all:the ets i 


Tha ” Beate SHE AS sa 
” 


7 “ Fa 
' ” ft 


404 


"! 


JOURNAL: ‘OF iA! VOvAGE mmukouait THe 7 


“There is anther very lange: diftig “iii ch’ mutt nat: ie forgot ana 7 


behind: all the others :in fitaation as‘ swell: as Farloiljiproduicd) and climate. 


‘This comprehends’ the traf’ called ‘the: ‘Barren: Giourils; which . Bs 
the’ North“ ofa’ line drawn from ‘Churchill, ‘along: the: North: ‘border 


of the’ Rein'Dedt Haké,: ito “the: North sof thei: ‘Lake oF: ihe! Hills ‘and 
Slave Lake; ‘and along’ ‘thé North: fide: ‘of thie hatter-t to thie! rocky.’ foun 


’ tains,: which’ tétminatein’ the Worth :Seajillatitudas “go. North; Hand? lois 


gitudei: #95." Welt in. ‘the’ Swhole) éxtent“of “which iio: ‘trees ake! ‘wvifible; 


except! a few ftinted: ‘Ontes,. feattered along its! iviversand with; fearce'ariy 


thing. of flirface that‘cam be’ cilled: ‘earths! yet: this inhofpitable *vegion'is 


inhabited: by:a: pecple swho-ate: accultonied: toithe: Tife iit’ ‘tequires.'« ‘Nor 
has: ‘bountiful Nature ‘withheld the fneans" oF fubliftericey ithe ‘rein’ det; 


the hills; though. they! bear nothing bata: hore curling 2 Hits ‘ola {péeies 
of which; that :grows “ont the>rocks; the: people ‘theinfelyes: tubal whet 


| which fupply:’ ‘bork: food:and: ‘elothings:ave fatiitieds with the: e\prodice of 


famine’invades: théin. # i Their: final: lakestarenot: furnifhed: wit a ‘great. 7 


variety: OF fith, but‘fachas. they prodicé’a ate: excellent; ‘which; eit harés. 
avi partridges, form: a ‘propottion: sof tei fod gS 


wy fea y i , 
Sy vals cov gy 
wee) at te ae oe ise roma Pate ores 


: whee i 
4 ato ae ie fos oH ‘4 One ACA: ats. is afi ae s° oH, a4 fee ies Lisepel : Sy" 


fy 


The dlimmiate. ‘muh neteflarily be fevere"s in faehia ‘coun 88 wane 


defcribed, and which difplays fo large fuiface’ of freth’ /water.’ Its. feve~ 


vity is exttemé: ‘ba thecbatt’ ‘of Pludfon’s Bay, at Hd presi fro its | 


immediate: ‘expolare to the! Nor onal Ws tak bli 


tee eh ren “ye ete ae wb he Bey, 


Oden,» prin Gye gdehoy 


atest 4 me) ey op vies Ny vomit eet 
Pan ioe Sth ASPENS = s Rae tea Tae baa 


iis ‘of the Fro ozen 


a 
aacly 


wee 


Thet wind, in  croffing dine y font ft “he? ay 


‘Yi, - , 


over Ca nda an the. ~ on 
2 Jw SEE Bo oe deb, ~ Britifh: 


ah 


po “t 


NORTH: NEST: CONTINENT. ‘OF: AMERICA. 
the. Atlantic; as. well, as’ i over: the Eaftern: States of 


> Britt, dominigns ‘ 


North’ America" to Mhat" ‘ocean, (where. they. give: ta thofe: countties.a - 
“length of: winter, vag onithing' to: the: inhabitants ‘of the fame’ latitudes i in. 


Enrope), continue to, JFetain: a; “great! degree ‘of -force and:cald : in. their 
“pallage; even/over! the: Atlantic, ‘particularly at. the time when the’ fun is 


_dingita, ‘Southern ‘declination, The fame. winds. which : come from. the 


-Erozen. ‘Ocean, “ower the: :barreni:: grounds, ‘and: acrofs frozen: lakes-and: 


fhowy: plairis, bounded: bythe. rocky: mountains, ;lofe: their; frigid:.in- | 


“fluence, as | they travel: in a Southern ‘direétion, till, they get to. the 
Atlantic. Ocean, where they, clofé: their progrefs. Is not this, a fufficient 
: -€oule for: ithe; difference, betviegn te climate i in Amierica andt ‘that; of the 
. fame: mnie in Eo 7 Then ad whe we Bie Sal preg * 


y tae uf 
‘ mt a ac ae ca weit ay ve aoe 


“Te has: been frequently’ advanced, that the difference of clearing sires 
the. wood. has:had. an aftonifhing influence in meliorating. ‘the climate’ i in 


YH. -t 1d aoe ye hey, ave dprrtiyer s ws sae 


’ ‘ 8 2 , 
a ) ‘ ‘ 
eee 4% : by . along tho 
re : a) 3 Ve VT oer. ree 
' gs . 


‘the; former?! ¢: butelvam not: ‘difpofed. to: aaffent™ to. ‘that opinion in: ‘the | 


. proportion of the’ ‘country; cleared; ‘compared, with the: whole The! eni- 
. ployment:of the’ axe: ‘may; ‘Have had fome inconfiderable effeat ‘bit L ook 


7 om to: other: eaules.:; ok tnyfelf oblervedi ‘in'a. country; which: was in ‘an abfotute 
> Bate. of; nature, that: the: climate i is: improving sand this: ‘éifeumftance “was. . 


“confirmed. to me: by. the: flative ‘idhabitaats: “of ite ‘Such’: a ‘change, ‘there? 
» fore, taift, proceed | fron’ fome: ‘predominating dpération: iti. the: fyftemn of 


: extent’ whiclsit: ‘propoles:.to. eftablith, ewhen I, confider:, thé very’ trifling 7 


the globe which is] beyond: my conjetture, and, indeed, above’ my" ‘compre- 7 


henfion; and: mays: ‘probably, ir in ‘the ‘courfe. of time, give’ “to, América the cli- 


“Sy Ses 


— and that many, Takes are dining, and filling up. by the earth. 


mate, of Europe. Iti is well known, indéea, that! the waters aré decreafing . 


which. 


405 - 


406 


JOURNAL OFA Vovace taRoveH ae 


which i ig ‘carried into them from the. higher leis by’ the rivers! “and thi 
may: have fome: ‘partial: eff. i via bar F ois cs 


“, to age 4 “ny tt Ce re \ 
. ' t Ye uf } ‘ ‘ a oe welas fi we whe, 
on PTE ws i. wa i tab a7) Sn oy aan ete ae beh vr ie ‘a 


. 1 » ' 


. 


* The. climate ‘on. the: ‘Welt coaft of America’‘affimilates imtich | more: ‘a 
that. of ‘Europe: in: the’ fame, latitudes’: think: very" little difference. will 
be found, except fach as ‘Proceeds’ froti ‘the: vicinity of high’ mountains : 
“covered with fnow. ‘This vis ian additional : proof : that: ‘the: differed 
in. the. temperature’ of the air. ‘proceeds: from ‘the! caufe aren men. 
tioned. et eh PSG mss gsht 


‘ a wal wha at 


Thames 


Cony Much has’ been. faid, ‘and muck mote Akl ‘remains’ +6: “he. faid' ‘on’ the 
peopling of América, ‘On this fubjeat I hall confine: ‘tnylfelf to one ‘or: 
_two obfervations, and leave my readers to- draw. their inferences from: 
them. a eee eset: ae aka 


' ern 
ee ny - ~ “af 2 


by po 


a : . , . t 4 
' : 
i ° Pop rts ae ngs anes “of, te Bu an is 
at 


The progref of. the inhabitants of: ‘the’ country innmiediately under out’ . 
obfervation, which i is’ comprifed . within’ the dine: of; latitude™ ABS -Northy' 
is. as. follows; that, of; the _Elquimanss, who; -Poflets: the’ fea coafti: fiom: * 

the. ‘Atdantic. through. Hiudfon’s- -Straits and: ‘Bay, round't6 ‘Mackenzie's 
‘River, (and. I bélieve farther) i is. ‘kaigwn: tor ‘béweftward ether Heyer 
quit, the: coat, -and agree in. appearance, “manners y language) and: ‘habits 
with, the, inhabitants of - Greenland, The: -different: tribes: ¥ hom’ “Bidet 
feribe under’ ‘the. ame of Algonquing: and: Kiiftendang, but: originally. , 
the. fame people, were. the inhabitants, OF - the} Atlan é oat; andi thie | 
* Banks, ‘of the: river. ‘St: Laurence,.and,,adjacent-< countries: : 
: ‘Welterly, and. they ane ane found Welt Hand: N 
* ay rh ry 


“E a ‘palalsrb ane ae bos. 


nein pers madryy sat . 


ran 


"NORTHWEST. CONTINENT OF AMERICA: | “Moy 


ts Athabfen On he /eohtrdty the: Chepewyans, and the ‘numerous 

- thibes, who: fpeak: theity'languagé, occupy. the. whole. ‘fpace, between the 
a  Knifieneau,: countryvand that::of:! the: Efquimaux,. fitetchinig: :-behind 
the natives. ‘of they coaft, of; thes Pacific, to:: Jatitude, 5% + North, on the’ 
“iver: ‘Columbia. « Their, progrelsi is Eafterly; andy:according to their 
“own: traditions; ithey came; from Siberia, agreeing, 10 drefSyand ‘manner 
«with vibe peopleine ino OW : found upon, ‘the coaft of: Afia. shehit jor 


‘ ‘ 
dine iN Satz 


gy, " . ve t ee eth a . 
. pds fake ue ot ays UTP he au ye mw) Oba Sage pes arn ea ae ” 


_ OF the inhabitants of the coaft of the Pacific Ocean we’ know Tittle: 

“mgr. than, that: ‘they’ are. flationary: ‘there, 7 The: N adowafi s or, Affiniboins, 
as well, as. thes different, tribes, not particularly defcribed;. inhabiting. ithe 

plains on and. about; the fautce and banks ‘of ,the Safkatchiwine,¢ and Affini~ 


bariye aha aes WEES 


Relpsits rs aN, From, the Senn, and. their Proetel is: North Welt. 


CTS, 


oe wits a Pay ', tp aipels gat bee fhoep ve teste Bree feb es 3 te 
— & fe yo taf wo sd eas Rete hth 2 Lk gre, er ar ee ec Used 


a re 


% we 
4 4 rare hy ie my 
sid ney gh AG Mere we Chie 2 
rot fa 
. ‘ ' . Fangs aan, 0s tit ged ge ee tee tae de og fy . 
te tae - - ya ag Fae ecebed dane APP OSE LEO th, 

a ” oe Hoy ! 5 

es oT ' , 


aed oy? 


balys RaLadye . 
fhe Atlantic to. “the, Pacific. ‘Ocean, has for 3 pany, yeas “excited the 


"attention ‘of "governments, and ‘encouraged the > enterprifing. fpitit of indi- we 


whin he : wie k fe Sb od 


: i oa ! viduals, "The ‘non-exiftence, however, of any fuch pradical paflage being 


Mig he OY wP A Peay. oO 


wih iS 


at tlength. determined, the praGticability of 2 a pallage through ¢ the continents 


as Afia and America ‘becomes. an ‘object of confideration,. The, Ruflians, 


1 ne OG Py fei Ee . #2 a 


- who: firft” difcoveréd that, along t the. coafts of, Afia ne ufefal.or regular 
lo onavigal ation “exited; oun, an interior _Sommunication By rivers, See = 


foe mse a ane aa el vt Na hi! he Ed iis Bie mB ea BIG iy 


7 mob - and: 


fina, 


1 
T 


« 


408 


JOURNAL OF A’ VOYAGE: THROUGH THE 


through that long and: wide-eittended : continent}'t to the frat: that: fepa. 
rates’ Afia from, ‘América, over which they: paffed to. thé adjacent iflands 


"+ and. contirient of the latter. “Our-fituation, at: ‘length; ‘is in fome' degree 


- finilar to theirs : ‘the’ ‘non-exiftence: of a'prafticable: pallage by fea arid 

the - ‘exiftence of ‘one: through’ the continent, are’ clearly iproved and’ 
"it réquirés. only’ the ' countenance ‘and? fapport’ ‘of the: 'Britith' Govern. | 
ment, to increafe in a very aniple proportion" ‘this “national: advantage, 
and fecure the trade of that comeny to its fubjetts,. . 
a STO CE hes re He | 

| Experience, however, “has proved, ‘that’ ‘this trade, From: its very: natiire 
cannot be carried. on by individuals." “Ar véty: large chpital, or credit, or 


| indeed ‘both; i is neceflary; and confequently an, ‘allociation of imen’ ‘of 


“| wealth to aire, witht mien of entetptie to alt, it iti one € oni inicrelt, 


wt 


fucceed the former, in continual and progreffive faccelfion: ‘Such was 
the equitable and fuccefsful mode: “adopted by. the jerchants from Ca- 
nada, which has been already Gefcribed: ty 


* ‘ 


—_ y 


“The jundion ‘Of ich. a commercial iti. wih fale! Hudios SBay 


nly . 
Company, is the’ impoitant vmeafure ‘swhich: sé would’ ‘propole, afd ‘the: 


trade might! thén | be carried ' ‘On: ‘with: a. very: ‘fupetior, ‘degree « of advan-: oe 


tage, both’ "private and ‘public, ‘under: the: ‘privilege’ of their. charter, and.” 


would prove, in’ BA, ‘the’ ‘complete fatftintae oF the “conditions,” ‘on 
whi ch’ ie was s ffl gianted, : 


a We. Li es 
Sp . 


Ses 


Ie w iit Bea an ei injuftice to diher pa ey tebe cdlade is the: . 
rn ; ae ' . ‘option we 


tee 
er 


‘ ‘ 
ad 


_ NORTH-WEST CONTINENT OF: AMERICA, 


‘option of fuch an: undertaking ; Fort the one: has a right: by. charter, fas 
“mgt ‘the: othepa right by: prior: pote fvony! as! being {ucceffors. tothe fub- 
fees! of France,: who: were exchofively. pofloffed of all the' then known, 


parts: of this country, before: ‘Canada: was’ ceded: ta Great-Brivain, except: a 


the:.coaftedf Hiadfin's Bay , cane: having themfelves, been the difcoverers. 


of a valt extént:-of: doumtry-fince added to. his + Mejety' si territories, even: 


4 


| to the Hyperborean and the Pacific Oceans ? 


a’ Let raag ered + 
fae ie . Was ort rhe Bae Tony Jah rei i 


rans ‘ f 
ae fof Mp be taka Dg rae pe 


2 OTF, ‘therefore, that! company fhould decline; or. be: anierlei to engage 
‘inj fachi an extenfive, ‘and perhaps hazardous, undertaking it would not,: 
 fitely, be ar uhteafonable propofal: to them, from government, to give: 


ipsa right whick they: refiale to exercife, on: allowing. then. a, jab. and | 


‘Feafonable: “dndémbification for their! ftock;: regulated . by. tthe. average 


dividends. ‘of 4! certain. nuinber of years, or ‘the; ‘aBtnal price “at ‘Which | 


they transfer their Rock, mo we Puaeree 


Loy chjoyiae. thé piiitege: of the company’ 's! ‘charter, thovigh Bint for a 
Titnited: period, ‘there 'are-adventurers ‘who! would. be: ‘willing, -as they are. 


abld::to. engage: in: and: cayry. onthe propofed commercial undertaking, 
“as well as to. give the moft ample and fatisfattory feeurity to government 
for’ the’ fiélfilment of its contract with, the company. Ft would, at the- fame: 
time;, be, equally. ‘necelfary. to ‘ada’ a. fimilae. paiilege. of trade. < on. 2 the: 


1 tas 


| Colina ‘River, andi its tebusery wateks..’ a ee Mona 


mot , . Te 4 
ne ar om wt 2 en tog cre aa “et a? 94 ‘ on o 


Sse wt 


exeluive Tight to: carry on. their: “trade as. s. they think proper, and com 


tintie’ it ‘on the'r narrow feale: "and ‘with fo little benefit to. the ‘publica as they 


wo. Bowdo; 3 if they fhould’ refufe to enter into a co-operative jun@ion with. 


gG@. ws others, 


> ‘ + 


as 


, 


.- JOURNAL.OF.A VOYAGE ‘THROUGH: THE 


others; what réafonable calufe can’ they. affign: to government; for denying 
‘the’ navigation of the: bay ‘to Nelfon’s River; and, by:i its waters; a paflage: 


to and from: the intetior country, for the .ufe of. the: adventurers, and! for, 
_ the; fole- purpofe: of. tranfport, under’ the molt’: fevere.and binding : Tes; 
“firiGions’ not. to, interfere ;with: their: trdde;.an, the! coaltyadd. the:c Country 


betweeb it and. the atta eftablifhmeits of. the Canadiain traders, woe aa 


c. twty “e 17? ' Ty 


Ay otees yee weer TE aye wen ye ati yt +4 
pes Paar] aM} fyb uo: ohne one oat pod ta 85 


tae 
io 


By thefe waters that - difcharge themfelves i into, ‘Hudfon’s Bay at Port 
Nelfon, it: is! propoféd: to: carry: on “the trade: toy their fource,; at°the 
head. ‘of: the. Safkatchiwine- River;: which. rifes: +in, the: Rocky: ‘Mountains, 


‘not eight degrees of. longitude from thé: Pacific Ocean. The. Tacoutche. | 
Gr: Colujnbia-tiver: flows’ alfo*fcom: the fame! isountaing} and: ‘difcharges: : 


itlelé:: Tikewife i in ‘the Pacific; ant latitirde- 46. 20%. | Both: of them; ‘are, 
"capable of receiving : hips. at their mouths; and: are navigable throughout. 
. for boats. 7 ~ . a - areatt 3 efit a Ce, ae ey 


2 yee 
~ fi 


e 


The diftsnce between’ thefe -waters is only, kiiown; fie: ‘the! ‘tepott’ of 
‘the Indians. -: IB chowever,, this. ‘communication: thould: provesinaccelfi~: = 
ble; the: ‘Foute’ I urfued, though. B Tonges dn. -Confequetice, oF: the. great. 


, ~ waa . - nw 7 ’ vor 
Sob eps pte mop rete ire ee De ran b trlel gi we 
se . VON earn aren aane Brats he 24i be ne on ae, hy eds plots a 
~ 


_« Independent’ of the. prokestion of. thik great, obj conceive that the, merchants “froin, Caniday 


are entitled 1 to fuck ‘anindulgence,. (evenif they fhould be confidered as not pofleffing ‘a “rightful claim,), : 


_ in’ ordersthit they might-be' enabléd., té ‘extend thei: ‘trade’. beycrid: thee: ‘prefent ‘Lithits, -ahd. “Have 


"it in their power to fupply the natives with a larger, quantity of uleful: carticles 5, the" enkianced, valite: of 
whieh and the piefent difficulty of  tranfporting them, will be fully comprehended ‘when ‘ 1. ‘telate,: that. : 
_the tra&t of tranfport oceupies : an extent of from three to four thoufand miles, through upwards of fixty. “ 


_ alfo be ‘oblerved, ‘that” thofe waters are intercepted byt more, than t two hundred. rapids, along: hick the 
articles of ;merchandife are ‘chiefly carried :on men’s backs,: and .over:, an‘huridséd and thirty? carrying. “ 
plicés;, “from. twenty-five paces. to thirteen miles in length; where’ the andes and cargoes pre Py, ; 


“lage, lakesy and numerous Tiverss . and that, the means, of; tranfpott are. Alight.-bagk,, ~Sangesi, It: mut 


oy re 


Perk Cab PEs oy ET Phar Ss A 


the fame! toilfome and pious ‘operations. *: 


2 ‘ ie se » opt oder -* 
Piss arene! aE. tale SL aw OF rid 4 met ram SULES 


oa 


Soe a oo. “De _ 


‘NORTH: WEST, CONTINENT: OF AMERICA. 


angle - -it makes -to the, North, will anfiver,. “every neceffayy : :purpofe. 
But :whatever, courfe; may,, ‘be- taken: from she, Atlantic,’ vthe,,; Columbia 
is) the, dine , Lf ; , communication, ; from. she, Pacific Oceans, spointed. out. 


th. ion Pree 


~~by jnature,. as: itsis the- only; navigable river in the whole extent. of 


- Vancouver's, minute furvey of that, coaft: its banks alfo; form the. fir 


entry,and,,confequently, the. moft- Northern: fituation Ait'for'vo lonization, ~~ 


level country in all the Southern extent of continental: coaft from Cook’s 


eae 


4it 


and fuitable to-the,refidence of.a civilized -people., -By opening thisinter- 
-  -eourfe between, the. Atlantic. and Pacific Oceans;and forming regular efta- 


blithments through the-interior, and at both ¢xtremesy as well as along the _ 


coafts, and iflands, the.« entire, commandiof. the: fur} trade of-North:America 


- might be obtained, from latitude 48. North to the pole, except that portion 
of it which.the Ruffians, have'i in the Pacific. To this may be added the. 


fifhing in.both feas, ‘and the markets of the four quarters | of the globe. 


"Such would be the field for commercial enterprife, and . -incalculuble 
would: be the produce: of i it, when fupported by ‘the operations’. of 


; that ‘credit and capital which Great Britain fo pre-eminently poffeffes. 


- Then: would this country begin. to. be remunerated for the expences it - 
~ has faftamed, in’ ‘difcovering: and, furveying the coaft. of the Pacific 


a ‘Ocean, which i is. at prefent. ‘left. fo American adventurers, who. without 


a regularity, of capital, or’ the: defire of conciliating future confidence, look 


altogether to the interelt of. ‘the’ moment. oT hey, therefore, | colle& all 


- the fins: they can procure, : and i in. ‘any manner that fits them, and hav- 


| ‘ing ‘exchanged. them at Canton for ‘the produce of China, Teturn to their . 


“own country. » “Such adventurers, and many of them;. ‘asI have. been ' 
2 informed, have: been’ very: fuccelsful, ‘would ‘inflantly clappeat ‘from 


; before a wellsregulated, trade.” ae 0 reed a 


an OR. 


_ ao 


2 ” JOURNA OF AVOYAGES “8 re 


vo a ’ 4 


‘ 


4 


‘It would be- very unbecotninig in’ mie ti :ejppole: fie :fttomnent, ‘that. 
' the Eaft India‘ Company: would: hefitsté to’ ‘allow'thole-pri privileges to’ their 
fellow fibjeQe ‘which: are. permitted’ ‘tor feiteignéts; fa avtrade that's fo 


- ‘much out of: ‘the i line of thelt own “Commerce: and thetefote ' canridt be we 


t 


. . “ “So ga cat pal wk tage ee 

injuriot AY to. > ita ore ot vad “bap rahe eT ‘ een Meds ees 2 
' an . waa ' 1 ” . ce 

: : ae i - toe a hy Ft varterieg Pap d 

a. meh OS BE ae MIA SE a z \ aan eed TT 


ome ——~Ma y-political-reafons; which! t-te et eines ——— 
mutt, piefent themfelves tqythe! imind of: every’ ‘man: acquiinted with the - 
enlarged fyftem and ‘capacities’ of ‘Britith ‘Commerce, in fipport ‘of the 
meafure which IF have: wery: briefly faggéfted; as proiniling the rnb ita 
portant advantages to: the’ e trade ‘ofthe ‘inited Higa ead 


+ % 


% + 
> .of : vf pals an ryt wie fae ay, Eye gy . 
; ete ba fat Oy wh atlas fetish oh 2a EN weet . 
: . 
} - 
° ; 
: : 
: - ‘ 
ra ’ , 
1. 
pos - 
eo aPOD  t : 
J . My 
1 man 
t 
see 7 ' 
. ' . _ . 
‘ ve a wy . 
- ‘ may -3 i spy ante tet oy Ty eee 
a GB ae EN SG Sa aR Sie PYRO A aoe ope dey 
- : t ‘ , Cot 4 v q ' oa aad v * : 
. : . “4 t 4 Arr 3 t Lue 
? "a . "En any, ers . wee hanes : wes ° ey, ay de yr per ayn at “3 Larte L 
? ie 5 wht Foy a eT Eg gyn te oe oo coe Pe Ok Dee Pt a 
ep t hy : atten y * ros ome os 
x . eRe 
: A sop ong : ” 
! ta "4 Sk aby ty home gtn 
. ‘. 1 et “at aos ae oa veo Ph hee aes 
At i Ve eats . ¢ re ren mrs ‘ an dee a ao eee Oe a ee et 
TE THE END. : ‘ 
« om : « . 
. ‘ tae ay eT} rs 
‘ Sot a bag Ca pata RT on “re hie £ 
: , 
Ce ~ Bos tat at . 
dee Soyer ’ gut aera, a faa? 
. ‘ 
' “ 7 - 
a cree? : * 
ee a add Oe “ 4 feet ber y / 
we Soe ; 
7 ~ Pa Fa aac alae a) ! 
. a : Sf + oF whteate .4y i , 
Y . ~ . ia ree 
. ep on Jy Ny were aaa theta ie 
po Leb pin aed rr ee ter eho tod : “ 7 a 
Te pee, ese . , eeaal ~ oe ‘ ts a ; ‘ . 
Sn hee i en ire Pa cue ; h pegrers ni - 
. eye x Yq btys ghee tha sep Lous an ihe 6 : a eu aah ton ? 
By t * eats ae Haas Ake FKP SG a byte. A Aad t 
» Noatgy fe EOE HEE YE ; 
. aoe? 2 a Arey wie oe oe a 
Orn Batuzy. . Lo, obit be af ve os 4 f. crest 
4 - . . 1 t ye — 
‘ ~ ‘ - . 
. ' 
te ~ x 7 
a . a * * 1 
we, re . 
, 1 
- t 
“ 


tot Senge of the pafiages to which they ro - 


PRELIMINARY ACCOUNT OF “THE FUR ‘TRADE, 


2, folCaix read Croffe, a On - a 


Page | 12, Line 
: a8; Jorthirty” read forty. a UT . 
15s 16, fp 'Milliffaoric read ‘Milifouti, CON, te aan 
17 41, ‘s Portage. mee 
21, 9, fr and Montreal, where. they. received Dawe rad anda at Montres, where 
i they received, ftored, Ke. | . ede a 
2% “4 . fer others read winterers. $s, 8 . 
ad, 2 fr four read eight, a toy - 
' 425 _Jir this veadthe+).0, 2 0 
315 24, broverreadto. "ow: ee 
. 32, 14; sfor at read to, bred Bo 
335 “9. for Portage read décharge. . 
‘at, byjlead d of b but a very fhort ditance from Lake ‘Coulonge read at avery 
“ ~ f+ fhort diftance ffom the Décharge, 
834 8 for the latter comes in read the latter river comes from. 
‘ 26,. after the word paces add next to this ismauvais de Mufique, where, oe. 
35> «By 4nftead of take its fource from. the firft vale to the great river read at the Gift 
secre pe vale, from whence! the great river. .~ : 
: 54: “for. the whole diftance read the’ diftance of this Portage, me 
—. 36, 51: for in every Jake and river read along: every great river. 
399 ‘dele the whole of... i ¢ 
40, - 4 Sor Ste. Mary’s:read St. Mary's coaftways, a 
435 ‘for clear read is cleared of wood, wo, . 
46, tA ‘por about! read ‘in. ° . es oS 
» § 2, 4) for Perche'read'Peche, — ~ 
: 26, for they.readiwez ff. . 
$15 ty for which ‘leads.through ‘read. suhich ‘condudis thele-waters through the furc- 
: ceeding lakes.and rivers, till they difcharge themfelves, 
- 1ty for ends readruns,. - wo ‘ 
. a2, dele falling into a lake-pond. “ . 
- LL Mg » y vor Ja Roche read le Roché. * | ° 5 
. “BBs. ' 6, for lake Paftaiy &c. read Paflean. Mine Sagnign, or lake of Dey Berries, . 
GS dy 4, _for portage read pointe. 
$5. 21, after an half, ; place a period ;. after water, a@ comma: ° 
56, 2, for land read lake, ‘ 
60, ° - +8, for that enters lake Winipic, read which enters that ake, 
63; 15, dele off. a Dy 
935." dy for pounds read fhillings. ae - \ oo 
oo ., 289, for which read of which, — ; rn . 
rae >) aa, dele of the lake. inn I r 
~' Boy 20, for Croifé read Croffe. pe 
83, . 12, deleand a.’ - ” ; . . 
101, ‘+ gy ° for beech-tree read birch-tree.. oo — - i T 
fob, ¢ 18, for confiderable read inconfiderable. . . oe 
oe - . ‘ JOURNALS 


oe 
ae | 


in 
pt bes 


2 n ; 
. ~ \ ; vs : whe : 
7 ERRATA | , 
, 7 : 
. . JOURNALS or THE, MOYAGES, & yo . oe 
17 ' tye ot , 
‘ pide 8, r Line 20, or 148 vad 4 86. J toe, 
Bd £ the fecond, 86. fifh vead flefh, 9° Pee tata ng! 
18, “Ds for Frenchmen read Canadians. vege 
2 29, _ #2, (forevéning'’read morning. “' = . 
27, 10, for army read arms, _ 
48, | ‘ 10, ‘for curve read‘ groove. cre (ne 
- 88, 10, _for whirtle-berries read hurtle-berries - we 
104, 12s for them read it, es Oe ep 
105, , for obtained read completed. a a A 
- “105 “Tt eRe geele. nee eee . 
133). ., for thele people réad* “my people rn Ce Coole ar 
138, , . 14, for the read is., 7 er , mi 
141, "gy for the hunter read Our, hunter, crs v! 
“15%. 20, » dele where, ‘ me .. 
' at, for ifland feveral vead where-feverile, re Cre a 
184,: ‘9, for according read accordingly." on el ‘ 
Rit, a@ for Ealt by Eaft read Eat South-Ea , oS ees ; . . 
2 -216, date omitted. os fs Oa a ve 
~ 17, read ‘Wednefday 12, res ae ay . ; 
yo 2575. - 9; for Chin Indians read, Carries" Ins and vice” ‘ny a Mies > 
i _ 988, 80," for ftrtick' read tuck. arene Oe ' 
. 207, 7° date Wanting: ee vr Seb an ee ns . . 
- B22,. thy” for andFead' or, ; me ey, mo 
| 9g2, e145 for tkinsof-a lynx, read fins of the’ Ie es i . 
” 334, | B “for beat into bars ‘read in bars) 7 ee hn mo 
. 335» ” 6, for.their aan manufaftured’ only’ into seid the matufaGured iron icon 
351, ty in the: Rote, for’ pofitively 'yead earnefty.* ze i 25 ; 
. 2, for paflage read ee pallage. ae Ye cro Bo 
381, _ 22, dtleo. 1. 4%¢ be YR et Retin wk . 
so ' 388, - * 19, for Cando read Canada.” Viet Gn tate be tam —— 
A ey \-;: 22, for from read along. Ue re 
7 404, ' 43; dele difference of". ° nr ae oe oe ae 
~ ° 410, _ 11, --for.and Columbia ‘rivers flow ead. or Columbia River fléws. ot, 
eT ei aay ia themfelvés read itfelf. fC eS) a ey, a 
ny et ator Inge eae ene toe wy re 
Histo be be oBfered that the, Courfes throughout the ‘Tournals. are tied, ty Compatssand 
woe a ~ that. the Variation maf be confidered. 
: an . eee en TE 
: wile Se 


fos ‘ . ve : 
, mo, _ co 


t . . 
. ” . 
1 : 
' 
‘ 
a \ 
‘ ' 
so8 ‘ 
x 
4 
, - , 
1 ‘ . 
‘ . . 
. ° 
' a , 
‘ 
' 
1 
uot PF 
, a . 1 
va . 
’ 
+ - f 
1 ° ~ 
' * - 
. . . . . 
x . . ~ s* . 
' , 
, . * tee 
* 
: b ~ 
> ’ . - 
‘ ooo af - : 
~ 1 ‘ ‘ 
. : ~ 
‘ . - - 
' 
; rn ~ 7. 
, + ‘ ‘ . ° 
. - . ' . 
. r , se : 
. « 
- . : * . i 
. * 
- ~ ~ . a 
a8 a] ° . ; 
‘ 
Pete . . 
as Mt a 
: * Gente Were . ’ - , \ 
; | . é ~ ; 
x ’ a ’ 
ut 
- , , - a ‘ . 
» . ' y 
' ; a 
. ad ~ ° 
' - . . - ~ 
; ‘ 
- t : ' 
a ; . sos 


, . Me a I 
, et! , pete ‘ ‘ , i ‘ ‘ 
; 1 ete agen gi RE vig 1 te as “ pow . h on 1 * tot vet Fe 
Tn ok Tasker voy te te are rota So ' poe ys \ 
Lota wt Gy ! vow RELLY toatl " ‘ ‘ ‘ mt 
ind a yee, q aa rye woe : nore 
i yee fo — , ‘s _ ae vp vee gt ead wl f, 1 ’ 
be ; . / cae vue 7 wy thy 
a u ’ ‘ fl ie) os ' f h , 
he 8 : a ' ' “ ‘ : ‘ 
. lay ‘ 1 ‘ ‘4 ‘ 
. , , y a ‘ . ’ ' 
t tou ‘ 4 ' 
. - 4 ‘ : _ bj 
‘ . ‘ ‘ . 
ve . € ‘ ' 
« a . , 
a ; oo, . ‘ 3 
t ‘ ‘ ‘ 
‘ my 1 t ‘ ' ; 
‘ oy . . . r . , 
7 : : b i - 
: ae ia 
. \ , / te ‘ 
ve 4 Ne ‘ ' . 
~ ' ‘ , 
. / an ° » ‘ 1 
. 1 . 4 ' - 
‘ : 4 
: 1 : : ’ 
. ~ * . ‘ 
. wo 1 ‘ 1 ’ 
. 
wt . . ' 


4! 


¢ 
rf 
