A prodigious & tragicall history of the arraignment, tryall, confession, and condemnation of six witches at Maidstone, in Kent, at the assizes there held in July, Fryday 30. this present year. 1652. Before the Right Honorable, Peter Warburton, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas. / Collected from the observations of E.G. Gent. (a learned person, present at their conviction and condemnation) and digested by H.F. Gent. To which is added a true relation of one Mrs. Atkins a mercers wife in Warwick, who was strangely caried away from her house in July last, and hath not been heard of since.

[Transcribed from the EEBO-TCP keyboarded edition (CC0 1.0, textcreationpartnership). Original spelling retained.]

[page 2]

[page 3]

Kent the firſt Chriſtian, laſt conquered, and one of the moſt flouriſhing and fruitful Provinces of England, is the Scene, and the beautifull Town of Maidſtone, the Stage, whereon this Tragicall Story was publickly acted, at Maidſtone Aſſizes, laſt paſt.

AMongſt many others that then made their entrance, and were preſented as ſuſpected of Witch-craft, before the Reverend and honourable Judge Warburton, who then ſate Judge over criminall Offendors: the moſt notorious were, Anne Aſhby, alias Cobler, Anne Martyn, Mary Browne, Mildred Wright, and Anne Wilſon, all of Cranbrooke, a Market Town in Kent, and Mary Read of Lenham in the ſame County; all which were convicted of the execrable and Diabolicall crime of Witch-craft, and for the ſame received ſentence of death, on Friday the 30. day of July laſt; of whoſe actions and confeſſions I ſhall give you a few particulars, but thoſe you will confeſſe, very rare and remarkable.

Anne Aſhby alias Cobler, who was the chief Actreſſe, and who had the greateſt part in this Tragedy, and Anne Martyn, confeſſed at the time of their triall, that the Divell had known them carnally, and that they had no hurt by it.

[page 4]

The ſaid Aſhby alias Cobler, in view of this Obſervator, fell into an extaſie before the Bench, and ſwell'd into a monſtrous and vaſt bigneſs, ſcreeching and crying out very dolefully; and being recovered, and demanded if the Divell at that time had poſſeſſed her, ſhe replyed ſhe knew not that, but ſhe ſaid that the ſpirit Rug came out of her mouth like a Mouſe.

And further concerning this ſpirit Rug, it is reported, that the ſaid Aſhby alias Cobler being under Examination before a Juſtice of Peace, before whom ſhe was carried by certain Souldiers of Colonell Humfreys Regiment; at the ſame time of her examination, a certain Groom that was in preſence ſaid come Rug into my mouth, which Groom, as it is reported, died within a fortnight after, near unto the City of London.

The ſaid Anne Aſhby further confeſſed, that the Divell had given them a piece of fleſh, which whenſoever they ſhould touch, they ſhould thereby affect their deſires.

That this fleſh lay hid amongſt graſſe, in a certain place which ſhe named, where upon ſearch it was found accordingly.

This fleſh was of a ſinnewy ſubſtance, and ſcorched, and was ſeen and felt by this Obſervator, and reſerved for publique view, at the ſign of the Swan in Maidſtone.

The ſaid Anne Aſhby, Anne Martyn, and one other of their Aſſociates, after they were caſt, and upon the pronunciation of Judgement againſt them, pleaded that they were with child pregnant, but confeſſed it was not by any man, but by the Divell.

One Dock of Greſham, alias Creſham, Doctor to Anne Aſhby, is committed to cloſe impriſonment, and not permitted

[page 5]

to ſpeak with any perſon, without the preſence of his Keeper.

A Pin being thruſt to the head into one of their arms, the party did not feele it, neither did it draw bloud from her, which was Mary Browne, Anne Wilſon, or Mildred Wright.

Mary Read of Lenham had a viſible Teat under her tongue, and did ſhew it to many, and it was likewiſe ſeen by this Obſervator.

It is likewiſe to be noted, that the aforeſaid Anne Aſhby, alias Cobler, during the time of her extaſie, when ſhe ſwell'd in that prodigious manner before mentioned, uttered many ſpeeches which did greatly amaze and aſtoniſh the Auditory, proceeding from her in that manner, of which there was no ſmall number of Witneſſes, in ſo great and generall a confluence of people, ſome of which the Obſervator remembreth, but forbears at preſent to ſet down the particulars.

So upon the proceedings aforeſaid, and the evidences brought in againſt them, the ſaid Anne Aſhby, alias Cobler, Anne Martyn, Mary Browne, Anne Wilſon, and Mildred Wright of Cranbrook, and Mary Read of Lenham, being legally convicted, were according to the Laws of this Nation, adjudged to be hanged, at the common place of Execution.

Some there were that wiſhed rather they might be burnt to Aſhes; alledging, that it was a received opinion amongſt many, that the body of a Witch being burnt, her bloud is prevented thereby from becomming hereditary to her Progeny in the ſame evill, which by hanging is not; but whether this opinion be erroneous, or not, I am not to diſpute.

[page 6]

Beſides theſe former ſix condemned Witches, there were at the ſame time ſome others of Greanes Arraigned, who although ſentence of death did not then paſſe againſt them, yet one whoſe name was Creed, was by three ſeverall Indictments found guilty by the Grand Jury, conſiſting of perſons of good integrity, and eſtates. And in the aforeſaid black Liſt, were muſtred one Reynolds, and one Wilſon, with both their Wives.

It is ſuppoſed that nine children, beſides a man and a woman, were bewitched; 500 pounds worth of Cattel loſt, and much Corn at Sea wrack'd, by Witchcraft.

They confeſſed they had bewitched a child, that had been languiſhing along time; this child died about the time of their trials, whoſe pourtraicture in wax was found, where they had laid it, under the Threſhold of a doore.

To this diſcourſe the bodies of three Children lately found at Chatham, may have ſome reference, which however it will not be much amiſſe to inſert here; although it be doubtfull, whether their deaths be to be attributed to Sorcery, or any other violent means; two of theſe bodies appeared but in part, the reſt being conſumed; the third was the entire body of a Male-child, having a Navell five inches long.

And here you may obſerve the helliſh and infernall eſtate of thoſe wretched deluded people, calld Witches, whom their Grand-maſter the Devill, at one time or other leaves in the lurch; as here you may perceive in the Story of theſe miſerable Wretches, who deſervedly received the Sentence of Condemnation, as aforeſayd; for it is written, Thou ſhalt not ſuffer a Witch to live.

[page 7]

A true Relation of one Mrs. Atkins, a Mercers Wife in Warwick, who was ſtrangely carried away from her houſe in July laſt, and hath not been heard of ſince.

IN Warwick Town one Mrs. Katherine Atkins, a Mercers Wife, ſtanding at her door on Saturday night, the 24. July, 1652. A certain unknown Woman came to her and ſayd, Miſtris, pray give me two-pence, ſhe anſwered, two-pences are not ſo plentifull, and that ſhe would give her no Mony. Pray Miſtris, ſayd ſhe, then give me that Pin, ſo ſhe took the Pin off her ſleeve and gave her, for which ſhe was very thankfull, and was going away. Miſtris Atkins ſeeing her ſo thankfull for a Pin, called her again, and told her if ſhe would ſtay, ſhe would fetch ſome Victuals for her, or give her ſome thread, or ſomething out of the ſhop. She anſwered, ſhe would have nothing elſe, and bid a pox of her Victuals, and ſwore (by God) ſaying, You ſhall be an hundred miles off within this week, when you ſhall want two-pence as much as I, and ſo ſhe went grumbling away.

Hereupon the ſayd Miſtris Atkins was much troubled in mind, and did adviſe with ſome Friends what were beſt to be done in ſuch a caſe, but receiving no reſolution from any one what to do, ſhe attended the Event what might befall within ſuch a time, and upon the 29. of July, ſhe expreſt to a Kinſman Mr. Nicholas Bikar, that ſhe was much troubled about the foreſayd buſineſſe, but hoped the time was ſo near expired, that it would come to nothing.

[page 8]

But the ſayd Thurſday night betwixt the houres of 8. and 9. She going into the Shop, and returning thence in the Entry adjoyning to the ſayd Shop, ſhe was immediately gone, by what means and whither we do not know, nor can we hear of upon enquiry made to this preſent.

The deſire of her Husband and Friends is of all the Inhabitants of this Nation, That if they hear of any ſuch party in ſuch a loſt condition as is before expreſſed: That there may be ſpeedy notice given thereof to her Husband in Warwick, and that all convenient proviſions both of Horſe and mony may be made for the conveying of her to the place aforeſayd, and ſuch as ſhall take pains, or be at expences herein ſhall be ſufficiently recompenced for the ſame, with many thanks.

It's likewiſe deſired that the Miniſters in London, and elſewhere, where the notice of theſe preſents ſhall come, would be pleaſed to preſent her ſad condition to God in their ſeverall Congregations. The truth hereof we teſtifie, whoſe names are ſubſcribed.

John Hallford,

Richard Vennour, Miniſter in Warwick.

Hen. Butler, Miniſter in Warwick.

Joſeph Fiſher, Miniſter.

FINIS.

[page 5]
