Village-Communities in the East and West (Henry Sumner Maine, 1871)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1871 first edition (https://archive.org/details/villagecommunit00mainuoft).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

VILLAGE  -  COMMUNITIE  S


EAST AND WEST.


BY

THE SAME
4

AUTHOR.

ANCIENT

LAW : ITS

CONNECTION WITH

THE EaeLY HiSTOBY OP SoCIKTY, AND ITS

Kelation

TO  Modern

Ideas. Uh  Edition,

8vo.  125.

VILLAGE-COMMUNITIES


IN THE


EAST AND WEST.


SIX LECTURES DELIVERED AT OXFORD


HENEY SUMNER MAINE,

CORPUS DIOFKSSOR OF JURISPRUDENCE IN THE UNIVERSITY,

FORMERLY LAW MEMBER OP THE SUPREME GOVERNMENT OK INDIA,

AUTHOR OP '  ANCIENT LAW.'


LONDON:
JOHN MUREAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

1871.


The  fight  of  translation  is  reserved,


tONDON: PKINTKD BY

SPOXTlS«.OOi,Z5 A^f, CO.. l.i,W-8THEKT 8QCAKK

AND PAttHAMiJWf BXUiiiiT


PEEFACE


The  Six  Lectures  which  follow  were  desio^ned  as
an  introduction  to  a  considerably  longer  Course,  of
which  the  object  was  to  point  out  the  importance,
in  juridical  enquiries,  of  increased  attention  to  the
phenomena  of  usage  and  legal  thought  which  are
observable  in  the  East.  The  writer  had  not  intended
to  print  these  Lectures  at  present;  but  it  appeared
to  a  part  of  his  audience  that  their  publication  might
possibly  help  to  connect  two  special  sets  of  investi-

fc  gations,  each  of  which  possesses  great  interest,  but
is  apparently  conducted  in  ignorance  of  its  bearing
on  the  other.  The  fragmentary  character  of  the  work
must  be  pleaded  in  excuse  for  the  non-performance
of  some  promises  which  are  given  in  the  text,  and
for  some  digressions  which,  with  reference  to  the
main  subject  of  discussion,  may  appear  to  be  of  un-
reasonable length.

Kv The  eminent  German  writers whose  conclusions


VI  PREFACE.

are  briefly  summarised  in  the  Third  and  Fifth
Lectures  are  comparatively  little  known  in  England,
and  a  list  of  their  principal  works  is  given  in  the
Second  Appendix.  For  such  knowledge  of  Indian
phenomena  as  he  possesses  the  writer  is  much  in-
debted to  the  conversation  of  Lord  Lawrence,  whose
capacity  for  the  political  direction  of  the  natives  of
India  was  acquired  by  patient  study  of  their  ideas
and  usages  during  his  early  career.  The  principal
statements  made  in  the  text  concerning  the  Indian
Village  Communities,  have  been  submitted  to  Mr.
George  Campbell,  now  Lieut. -Governor  of  Bengal,
who  has  been  good  enough  to  say  that  they  coincide
in  the  main  with  the  results  of  his  own  experience
and  observation,  which  have  been  very  extensive.
No  general  assertions  are  likely  to  be  true  without
large  qualification  of  a  country  so  vast  as  India,
but  every  effort  has  been  made  to  control  the  state-
nients  of  each  informant  by  those  of  others.

Some  matter  has  been  introduced  into  the  Lectures
which,  for  want  of  time,  was  omitted  at  their  de-
livery.

February  1871.


CONTENTS^


LECTURE I.

THE EAST, AND THE STUDY OF JURISPRUDENCE.

Comparative  Jurisprudence — Comparative  and  Historical  Methods —
The  Past  and  the  Present — Limits  of  Comparative  Jurisprudence —
Method  of  Comparison — Enquiries  of  Von  Maurer — The  Mark  and
English  Law  —  Eastern  and  Western  Communities  —  Characteris-
tics of  Indio-Modern  Theories  of  Eace — The  Patriarchal  Family
—Barbarous  Forms  of  the  Family — Origin  of  Law  in  the  Family —
Village  Community — Law  of  Nature — Codified  Brahminical  Law —

I Feudal System  —  Conditions of Juridical Study— English Ignor-
ance of  India — Disappearance  of  Indian  Phenomena — Influence  of
Western  Ideas— Influence  of  Physical  Science — Influence  of  British
•  Empire page  1


»


k


LECTURE II.

THE SOURCES OF INDIAN LAW.


ndian  Settlements — Settlement  and  Revenue  Courts  —  The  Civil
Courts— The  Indian  Judicial  System — The  Supreme  Courts — English
Law  in  India — Indian  Opinion  on  English  Law— Locality  of  Custom
— The  Will  of  Bengal — Wills  and  Collective  Property — A  Modern
Indian  Will — The  Sudder  Court — Influence  of  Sudder  Courts — De-
velopment of  Hindoo  Law — Effect  of  Juridical  Commentaries — The
Bar  and  English  Law — Mahometan  Law — The  Pundits — Codified
Hindoo  Law — Varieties  of  Native  Usage— The  Written  Law — Hindoo
Widow's  Estate — Preservation  of  Customary  Law — Caste  in  India —
Tradition— Diff'erent  Forms  of  Tradition — Popular  Ignorance  of  Law
in  England — The  Experts  and  English  Law — Indian  and  Teutonic
Village  Systems 29


Vlil  CONTENTS.

LECTURE III.

THE WESTERN VILLAGE COMMUNITY.

Antiquity  of  Indian  Customary  Law — Traditional  Law — Analysis  of  a
Law— Indian  Conceptions  of  Law— English  Influence  on  Legal  Con-
ceptions— Unwilling  Assumption  of  Sovereignty — Influence  of  Courts
of  Justice — Change  in  Nature  of  Usage — Growth  of  Conception  of
Right  —  Influence  of  English  Law  —  Connection  of  Eastern  and
Western  Custom — Von  Maurer — The  Teutonic  Village  Community —
The  Arable  Mark — English  Theories  of  Land- Law — The  Arable
Mark  in  England — Shifting  Severalties — The  Common  Fields — Their
Great  Extent— Extract  from  Marshall — Scott  on  Udal  Tenures —
Commonty  of  Lauder — Peculiarities  of  Scottish  Example — Vestiges
of  the  Mark page  63


LECTURE IV.

THE EASTERN VILLAGE COMMUNITY.

The  Indian  Village  Community — Mahometan  Theory  of  Ownership —
Land  Settlement  of  Bengal — The  Indian  Proprietary  Unit — The
Indian  Village — The  Cultivated  Land — The  Growth  of  Custom —
Water  Rules — The  Sources  of  Primitive  Law — Customs  of  Re-
partition— The  Village — Secrecy  of  Family  Life — Dislike  of  English
Criminal  Law  —  Fictions  Attending  Legislation — Village  Rules —
Origin  of  Indian  Towns — Indian  Capitals — The  Village  Waste —
The  Indian  Wastes — The  Government  and  the  Wastes — The  Village
Council — Peaceful  Character  of  Population — Hereditary  Trades —
Remuneration  of  Village  Traders— The  Outsiders — Absorption  of
Strangers  by  Community ........  101


LECTURE V.

THE PROCESS OF FEUDALISATION.

Feudalism — The  Beneflces — The  Manor — The  Manorial  Group — New
Condition  of  the  Waste — Changes  in  the  Grass-lands — The  Free
Tenants — Settlements  of  Villeins — The  Manorial  Courts — Encroach-
ments of  the  Lord — Roman  and  Feudal  Law — Causes  of  Feudalisation
— Growth  of  Suzerainties — Leading  Families — Elements  of  Feudal
System — Systematic  Feudalism — Antiquarianism  of  Indian  Politics —
Political  Results of  Settlements — Various Forms of Settlement —


I


CONTENTS.  IX

Growth  in  Power  of  Official  Holder — Mahometan  Assumptions —
Indian  Schools  of  Opinion — Indian  Forms  of  Property — The  Headman
— Property  Eecognised  by  the  English — Absolute  Ownership — Nature
of  Rights  of  Property — Development  of  Absolute  Ownership —
Vested  Rights  in  India — The  Feudalisation  of  Europe — Cultivation  of
Waste-land — Improvements  in  Tillage — Village  Communities  and
Customs — Customary  Tillage — Servile  Dependants  of  Villagers —
Villages  cease  to  absorb  Strangers — Nasse's  Work — The  Statute  of
Devises — Rules  for  Construing  Wills — Restraints  on  Testamentary
Power PAGE  129


LECTURE  VI.

THE  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  PRICE  AND  RENT.

Structure  of  Village  Communities — Divisions  of  the  Community — Pro-
perty within  the  Community — Traditions  as  to  Rights — Exactions
of  Indian  Sovereigns — Indian  Rent — Difficulty  of  Question — Anglo-
Indian  Ideas — Customary  and  Competition  Rents — The  Protected
Tenants — Indian  and  English  Forms  of  Property — True  Character  of
Problem — The  Irish  Clan — Rack-Rent  paid  by  Strangers — Primitive
Notions  as  to  Price — Early  Measure  of  Price — Basis  of  Political
Economy — The  Market — Markets  and  Neutrality — Influence  of  Market
Law — Sentiments  adverse  to  Political  Economy — Primitive  Com-
mercial Principles — Influence  of  Carrying  Trade — Price  and  Rent —
Market  for  Land  in  England — New  Information  required — Village
Communities  in  America 173


Appendices . « . .  203

Index • •  217


J^ tL


,,.„^_  CcWC£^l/\JLt.oy^ ^ CVdOLd


Errata.


Page  7,  line  15,  /<?r  it  is  removed  from  it  read  one  is  removed  from
the  other.

Page  61,  line  16,  for  coincidence  with  the  writers  read  coincidence
with  the  conclusions  of  the  writers.


THE  EAST,  MD  THE  STUDY  OP  JUEISPKUDENCE,


-U <L


C  c^\  ce^fAA.  ccnt^ <rii m/vc^  o


■--p\A.  ccr-^ ^f(


I


VILLAGE -COMMUNITIES


IN THE


EAST AND WEST.


LECTURE L


THE  EAST,  MD  THE  STUDY  OF  JUEISPEUDENCli.


CONTENTS.

Comparative  Jurisprudence — Comparative  and  Historical  Methods —
The  Past  and  the  Present — Limits  of  Comparative  Jurisprudence — ■
Method  of  Comparison — Enquiries  of  Von  Maurer— The  Mark  and
English  Law  —  Eastern  and  Western  Communities — Characteris-
tics of  Indio-Modern  Theories  of  Race  —  The  Patriarchal  Family
— Barbarous  Forms  of  the  Family — Origin  of  Law  in  the  Family —
Village  Community — Law  of  Nature — Codified  Brahminical  Law —
Feudal  System — Conditions  of  Juridical  Study — English  Ignorance
of  Lidia — Disappearance  of  Indian  Phenomena — Influence  of  Western
Ideas — Influence  of  Physical  Science — Influence  of  British  Empire.


LECT.  I.  THE STUDY OF JURISPRUDENCE.


LECTURE I.

THE  EAST,  AND  THE  STUDY  OF  JURISPRUDENCE.

In  the  Academical  Statute  which  defines  the  duties  of
the  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  the  branches  of  en-
quiry to  which  he  is  directed  to  address  himself  are
described  as  the  investigation  of  the  history  and
principles  of  law,  and  the  comparison  of  the  laws  of
various  communities.  The  lectures  to  which  I  am
about  to  ask  your  attention  will  deal  in  some  detail
with  the  relation  of  the  customary  law  of  the  East,
and  more  particularly  of  India,  to  the  laws  and  usages,
past  and  present,  of  other  societies ;  but,  as  we  are
employed  upon  a  subject — and  this  is  a  warning  which
cannot  be  too  soon  given — in  which  ambiguities  of
expression  are  extraordinarily  common  and  extremely
dangerous,  I  perhaps  should  state  at  once  that  the
comparison  which  we  shall  be  making  will  not  con-
stitute Comparative  Jurisprudence  in  the  sense  in
which  those  words  are  understood  by  most  modern
jurists,  or  in  that  which,  I  think,  was  intended  by  the
authors  of  the  statute.  Comparative  Jurisprudence  in
this  last  sense  has  not  for  its  object  to  throw  light  upon


4  COMPARATIVE  JURISPRUDENCE.  lkct.  i.

the  history  of  law.  Nor  is  it  universally  allowed  that
it  throws  light  upon  its  philosophy  or  principles.
What  it  does,  is  to  take  the  legal  systems  of  two  dis-
tinct societies  under  some  one  head  of  law — as  for
example  some  one  kind  of  Contract,  or  the  department
of  Husband  and  Wife — and  to  compare  these  chapters
of  the  systems  under  consideration.  It  takes  the
heads  of  law  which  it  is  examining  at  any  point  of
their  historical  development,  and  does  not  affect  to
discuss  their  history,  to  which  it  is  indifferent.  What
is  the  relation  of  Comparative  Jurisprudence,  thus
understood,  to  the  philosophy  of  law  or  the  determi-
nation of  legal  principle,  is  a  point  on  which  there
may  be  much  difference  of  opinion.  There  is  not  a
little  in  the  writings  of  one  of  the  greatest  of  modern
juridical  thinkers,  John  Austin,  which  seems  to  imply
that  the  authors  and  expositors  of  civilised  systems
of  law  are  constrained,  by  a  sort  of  external  compul-
sion, to  think  in  a  particular  way  on  legal  principles,
and  oh  the  modes  of  arriving  at  juridical  results.
That  is  not  my  view;  but  it  is  a  view  which  may  de-
serve attentive  consideration  on  some  other  occasion.
It  would,  however,  be  universally  admitted  by  com-
petent jurists,  that,  if  not  the  only  function,  the  chief
function  of  Comparative  Jurisprudence  is  to  facihtate
legislation  and  the  practical  improvement  of  law.  It
is  found,  as  matter  of  fact,  that  when  the  legislators
(and  I  here  use  the  term  in  its  largest  sense)  of  dif-


LECT.  T.  COMPARATIVE JUKISPRUDENCE.  5

ferent  communities  pursue,  as  they  frequently  do,  the
same  end,  the  mechanism  by  which  the  end  is  at*
tained  is  extremely  dissimilar.  In  some  systems  of
law,  the  preliminary  assumptions  made  are  much
fewer  and  simpler  than  in  others ;  the  general  propo-
sitions which  include  subsidiary  rules,  are  much
more  concise  and  at  the  same  time  more  comprehen-
sive, and  the  courses  of  legal  reasoning  are  shorter
and  more  direct.  Hence,  by  the  examination  and
comparison  of  laws,  the  most  valua,ble  materials  are
obtained  for  legal  improvement.  There  is  no  branch
of  juridical  enquiry  more  important  than  this,  and
none  from  which  I  expect  that  the  laws  of  our  coun-
try will  ultimately  derive  more  advantage,  when  it
has  thoroughly  engrafted  itself  upon  our  legal  educa-
tion. Without  any  disparagement  of  the  many  un-
questionable excellences  of  English  law — the  eminent
good  sense  frequently  exhibited  in  the  results  which
it  finally  evolves,  and  the  force  and  even  the  beauty
of  the  judicial  reasoning  by  which  in  many  cases  they
are  reached — it  assuredly  travels  to  its  conclusions
by  a  path  more  tortuous  and  more  interrupted  by
fictions  and  unnecessary  distinctions  than  any  system
of  jurisprudence  in  the  world.  But  great  as  is  the
influence  which  I  expect  to  be  exercised  in  this  coun-
try by  the  study  of  Comparative  Jurisprudence,  it  is
not  that  which  we  have  now  in  hand ;  and  I  think  it
is  best  taken  up  at  that  stage  of  legal  education  at


6  COMPARATIVE  AND HISTORICAL  METHODS, lect.  i.

whicli  the  learner  has  just  mastered  a  very  difficult
and  complex  body  of  positive  law,  like  that  of  our
own  country.  The  student  who  has  completed  his
professional  studies  is  not  unnaturally  apt  to  believe
in  the  necessity,  and  even  in  the  sacredness,  of  all
the  technical  rules  which  he  has  enabled  himself  to
command ;  and  just  then,  regard  being  had  to  the  in-
fluence which  every  lawyer  has  over  the  development
of  law,  it  is  useful  to  show  him  what  shorter  routes
to  his  conclusions  have  been  followed  elsewhere  as
a  matter  of  fact,  and  how  much  labour  he  might
consequently  have  been  spared.

The  enquiry  upon  which  we  are  engaged  can  only
be  said  to  belong  to  Comparative  Jurisprudence,  if
the  word  '  comparative  ^  be  used  as  it  is  used  in
such  expressions  as  '  Comparative  Philology '  and
'  Comparative  Mythology.'  We  shall  examine  a
number  of  parallel  phenomena  with  the  view  of
establishing,  if  possible,  that  some  of  them  are  re-
lated to  one  another  in  the  order  of  historical  succes-
sion. I  think  I  may  venture  to  affirm  that  the  Com-
parative Method,  which  has  already  been  fruitful  of
such  wonderful  results,  is  not  distinguishable  in  some
of  its  applications  from  the  Historical  Method.  We
take  a  number  of  contemporary  facts,  ideas,  and
customs,  and  we  infer  the  past  form  of  those  facts,
ideas,  and  customs  not  only  from  historical  records
of  that past  form,  but  from  examples  of  it  which


LEcr.  I.  THE PAST AND THE PRESENT.  7

have  not  yet  died  out  of  tlie  world,,  and  are  still  to
be  found  in  it.  When  in  truth  we  have  to  some  ex-
tent succeeded  in  freeing  ourselves  from  that  limited
conception  of  the  world  and  mankind,  beyond  which
the  most  civilised  societies  and  (I  will  add)  some
of  the  greatest  thinkers  do  not  always  rise ;  when
we  gain  something  like  an  adequate  idea  of  the  vast-
ness  and  variety  of  the  phenomena  of  human  society;
when  in  particular  we  have  learned  not  to  exclude
from  our  view  of  earth  and  man  those  great  and
unexplored  regions  which  we  vaguely  term  the  East,
we  find  it  to  be  not  wholly  a  conceit  or  a  para-
dox to  say  that  the  distinction  between  the  Present
and  the  Past  disappears.  Sometimes  the  Past  is  the
Present;  much  more  often  it  is  removed  from  it
by  varying  distances,  which,  however,  cannot  be
estimated  or  expressed  chronologically.  Direct
observation  comes  thus  to  the  aid  of  historical
enquiry,  and  historical  enquiry  to  the  help  of  direct
observation.  The  characteristic  difficulty  of  the
historian  is  that  recorded  evidence,  however  saga-
ciously it  may  be  examined  and  re-examined,  can
very  rarely  be  added  to ;  the  characteristic  error  of
the  direct  observer  of  unfamiliar  social  or  juridical
phenomena  is  to  compare  them  too  hastily  with
familiar  phenomena  apparently  of  the  same  kind.
But  the  best  contemporary  historians,  both  of
England  and  of  Germany,  are  evidently  striving  to


8  LIMITS OF COMPARATIVE JURISPRUDENCE, lect.  i.

increase  their  resources  through  the  agency  of  the
Comparative  Method ;  and  nobody  can  have  been
long  in  the  East  without  perceiving  and  regretting
that  a  great  many  conclusions,  founded  on  patient
personal  study  of  Oriental  usage  and  idea,  are  vitiated
through  the  observer's  want  of  acquaintance  with
some  elementary  facts  of  Western  legal  history.

I  should,  however,  be  making  a  very  idle  pre-
tension if  I  held  out  a  prospect  of  obtaining,  by
the  application  of  the  Comparative  Method  to  juris-
prudence, any  results  which,  in  point  of  interest  or
trustworthiness,  are  to  be  placed  on  a  level  with
those  which,  for  example,  have  been  accompHshed
in  Comparative  Philology.  To  give  only  one  reason,
the  phenomena  of  human  society,  laws  and  legal
ideas,  opinions  and  usages,  are  vastly  more  affected
by  external  circumstances  than  language.  They  are
much  more  at  the  mercy  of  individual  volition,  and
consequently  much  more  subject  to  change  effected
deliberately  from  without.  The  sense  of  expediency
or  convenience  is  not  assuredly,  as  some  great  writers
have  contended,  the  only  source  of  modification  in
law  and  usage;  but  still  it  undoubtedly  is  a  cause  of
change,  and  an  effective  and  powerful  cause.  The
conditions  of  the  convenient  and  expedient  are,
however,  practically  infinite,  and  nobody  can  reduce
them  to  rule.  And  however  mankind  at  certain
stages  of  development may  dislike to have their


LECT.  I.  METHOD OF COMPAKISON.


usages  changed,  they  always  probably  recognise
certain  constraining:  influences  as  suflicient  reasons  ,  .^
for  submitting  to  new  rules .  There  is  no  country,  E  <K,jr  rJ^^
probably,  in  which  Custom  is  so  stable  as  it  is  in  a<3'<^
India ;  yet  there,  competing  with  the  assumption
that  Custom  is  sacred  and  perpetual,  is  the  very
general  admission  that  whatever  the  sovereign  com-
mands is  Custom.  The  greatest  caution  must  there-
fore be  observed  in  all  speculations  on  the  inferences
derivable  from  parallel  usages.  True,  however,  as
this  is,  there  is  much  to  encourage  further  attention
to  the  observed  phenomena  of  custom  and  further
observation  of  customs  not  yet  examined.  To  take
very  recent  instances,  I  know  nothing  more  striking
among  Mr.  Freeman's  many  contributions  to  our
historical  knowledge  than  his  identification  of  the
fragments  of  Teutonic  society,  organised  on  its
primitive  model,  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  Forest
Cantons  of  Switzerland.  This,  indeed,  is  an  example
of  an  archaic  political  institution  which  has  survived
to  our  day.  The  usages  which  it  has  preserved  are
rather  political  than  legal ;  or,  to  put  it  in  another
way,  they  belong  to  the  domain  of  Public  rather  than
to  that  of  Private  law.  But  to  usages  of  this  last
class  clearly  belong  those  samples  of  ancient  Teutonic
agricultural  customs  and  ancient  Teutonic  forms  of
property  in  land  which  Yon  Maurer  has  found  to
occur  in  the  more  backward  parts  of  Germany. I


10  ENQUIRIES OF VON MAURER.  lect.  i.

shall  have  to  ask  a  good  deal  of  your  attention  here-
after to  the  results  announced  by  the  eminent  writer
whom  I  have  just  named;  at  present  I  will  confine
myself  to  a  brief  indication  of  his  method  and  con-
clusions and  of  their  bearing  on  the  undertaking
we  have  in  hand.

Yon  Maurer  has  written  largely  on  the  Law  of
the Mark or  Township, and  on the Law  of  the
KvyaUxV  Manor. The  Township  (I  state  the  matter  in  my

V*1> 'T- li**^'^  own  way)  was  an  organised,  self-acting  group  of
^ittfuA*^  ieutonic  lamilies,  exercismg  a  common  proprietor-
^/ fv5^**^  ship  over  a  definite  tract  of  land,  its  Mark,  cultivat-
ing its  domain  on  a  common  system,  and  sustaining
itself  by  the  produce.  It  is  described  by  Tacitus  in
the  '  Germany '  as  the  '  vicus  ' ;  it  is  well  known  to
have  been  the  proprietary  and  even  the  political  unit
of  the  earliest  English  society;  it  is  allowed  to  have
existed  among  the  Scandinavian  races,  and  it  sur-
vived to  so  late  a  date  in  the  Orkney  and  Shetland
Islands  as  to  have  attracted  the  personal  notice  of
Walter  Scott.  In  our  own  country  it  became  ab-
sorbed in  larger  territorial  aggregations,  and,  as  the
movements  of  these  larger  aggregations  constitute
the  material  of  political  history,  the  political  histo-
rians have  generally  treated  the  Mark  as  having
greatly  lost  its  interest.  Mr.  Freeman  speaks  of  the
politics  of  the  Mark  as  having  become  the  politics
of  the  parish  vestry. But  is  it  true  that  it  has  lost


LECT.  I.  THE MAKE AND ENGLISH LAW.  11

its  juridical,  as  it  has  lost  its  political  importance  ?
It  cannot  reasonably  be  doubted  that  the  Family  was  q.  i  ^
the  great  source  of  personal  law  ;  are  there  any  {Jc^^^rv/a^'c,  *
reasons  for  supposing  that  the  larger  groups,  in^^^^'^c^  «^.  f^J
which  Families  are  found  to  have  been  primitively  tofv  w  ^iyjn/wi
combined  for  the  purposes  of  ownership  over  land,  ^  '-^^^^<^^
were  to  anything  like  the  same  extent  the  sources  of
proprietary  law?  So  far  as  our  own  country  is  con-
cerned, the  ordinary  text-books  of  our  law  suggest
no  such  conclusion  ;  since  they  practically  trace  our
land-law  to  the  customs  of  the  Manor,  and  assume
the  Manor  to  have  been  a  complete  novelty  intro-
duced into  the  world  during  the  process  which  is
called  the  feudalisation  of  Europe.  But  the  writings
of  Yon  Maurer,  and  of  another  learned  German  who
has  followed  him,  Nasse  of  Bonn,  afford  strong  reason
for  thinking  that  this  account  of  our  legal  history
should  be  reviewed.  The  Mark  has  through  a  great
part  of  Germany  stamped  itself  plainly  on  land-law,
on  agricultural  custom,  and  on  the  territorial  distri-
bution of  landed  property.  Nasse  has  called  atten-
tion to  the  vestiges  of  it  which  are  still  discoverable
in  England,  and  which,  until  recently,  were  to  be
found  on  all  sides  of  us  ;  and  he  seems  to  me  to
have  at  least  raised  a  presumption  that  the  Mark  is
the  true  source  of  some  things  which  have  never  been
satisfactorily  explained  in  English  real-property  law.
The work  of  Professor  Nasse  appears  to  me  to


12  EASTERN AND WESTERN COMMUNITIES. lect.  i.

require  some  revision  from  an  English  professional
lawyer;  but,  beyond  attempting  this,  I  should  pro-
bably have  left  this  subject  in  the  hands  of  writers
who  have  made  it  their  own,  if  it  were  not  for  one
circumstance. These  writers  are  obviously  unaware
of  the  way  in which Eastern phenomena confirm
their  account  of  the  primitive  Teutonic  cultivating
group,  and  may  be  used  to  extend  it. The  Village
X.  coYwnrv-wxvv^i  Community  of  India  exhibits  resemblances  to  the
>j^M<^  f^'<Hwer6^tc>nic  Township  which  are  much  too  strong  and
I^^^iiiii  «^  ^cvr/r-vr^  to  be  accidental ;  where  it  differs  from  the

ari^J^!r#r*^^ownship,  the  difference  may  be  at  least  plausibly
I  j  explained. It  has  the  same  double  aspect  of  a  group
i~  I ! of  families  united  by  the  assumption  of  common  kin-

j  ship,  and  of  a  company  of  persons  exercising  joint
'  ownership  over  land.  The  domain  which  it  occupies
is  distributed,  if  not  in  the  same  manner,  upon  the
same  principles;  and  the  ideas  which  prevail  within
the  group  of  the  relations  and  duties  of  its  members
to  one  another  appear  to  be  substantially  the  same.
But  the  Indian  Village  Community  is  a  living,  and
not  a  dead,  institution.  The  causes  which  trans-
formed the  Mark  into  the  Manor,  though  they  may
be  traced  in  India,  have  operated  very  feebly ;  and
over  the  greatest  part  of  the  country  the  Village
Community  has  not  been  absorbed  in  any  larger  col-
lection of  men  or  lost  in  a  territorial  area  of  wider
extent. For  fiscal  and  legal  purposes  it  is  the  pro-


LECT.  I.  CHARACTERISTICS OF INDIA.  13

prietary  unit  of  large  and  populous  provinces.  It
is  under  constant  and  careful  observation,  and  the
doubtful  points  which  it  exhibits  are  the  subject  of
the  most  earnest  discussion  and  of  the  most  vehe-
ment controversy.  No  better  example  could  there-
fore be  given  of  the  new  material  which  the  East,  and
especially  India,  furnishes  to  the  juridical  enquirer.

If  an  ancient  society  be  conceived  as  a  society  in
which  are  found  existing  phenomena  of  usage  and
legal  thought  which,  if  not  identical  with,  wear  a  strong
resemblance  to  certain  other  phenomena  of  the  same
kind  which  the  Western  world  may  be  shown  to  have
exhibited  at  periods  here  belonging  chronologically
to  the  Past,  the  East  is  certainly  full  of  fragments
of  ancient  society.  Of  these,  the  most  instructive,
because  the  most  open  to  sustained  observation,  are
to  be  found  in  India.  The  country  is  an  assemblage
of  such  fragments  rather  than  an  ancient  society
complete  in  itself.  The  apparent  uniformity  and
even  monotony  which  to  the  new  comer  are  its  most
impressive  characteristics,  prove,  on  larger  experience,
to  have  been  merely  the  cloudy  outline  produced  by
mental  distance ;  and  the  observation  of  each  succeed-
ing year  discloses  a  greater  variety  in  usages  and
ideas  which  at  first  seemed  everywhere  identical.
Yet  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  first  impressions  of
the  Englishman  in  India  are  correct.  Each  indi-
vidual in India is  a slave to  the customs  of  the


J4  MODERN THEORIES OF RACE.  lect.  i.

group  to  which  he  belongs ;  and  the  customs  of  the
several  groups,  various  as  they  are,  do  not  differ
from  one  another  with  that  practically  infinite
variety  of  difference  which  is  found  in  the  habits
and  practices  of  the  individual  men  and  women  who
make  up  the  modern  societies  of  the  civilised  West.
A  great  number  of  the  bodies  of  custom  observable
in  India  are  strikingly  alike  in  their  most  im-
portant features,  and  leave  no  room  for  doubt
that  they  have  somehow  been  formed  on  some
common  model  and  pattern.  After  all  that  has  been
achieved  in  other  departments  of  enquiry,  there
would  be  no  great  presumption  in  laying  down,  at
least  provisionally,  that  the  tie  which  connects  these
various  systems  of  native  usage  is  the  bond  of  com-
mon race  between  the  men  whose  life  is  regulated
by  them.  If  I  observe  some  caution  in  using  that
language  on  the  subject  of  common  race  which  has
become  almost  popular  among  us,  it  is  through  con-
sciousness of  the  ignorance  under  which  we  labour
of  the  multitudinous  and  most  interesting  societies
which  envelope  India  on  the  North  and  East.
Everybody  who  has  a  conception  of  the  depth  of
this  ignorance  will  be  on  his  guard  against  any
theory  of  the  development  or  inter-connection  of
usage  and  primitive  idea  which  makes  any  preten-
sions to  completeness  before  these  societies  have
been  more  accurately  examined.


LECT.  I.  THE PATRIARCHAL FAMILY.  15

Let  me  at  this  point  attempt  to  indicate  to  you
the  sort  of  instruction  which  India  may  be  expected
to yield  to  the  student  of  historical  jurisprudence.
There  are  in  the  history  of  law  certain  epochs  which
appear  to  us,  with  such  knowledge  as  we  possess,  to
mark  the  beginning  of  distinct  trains  of  legal  ideas  /.
and  distinct  courses  of  practice. One  of  these  is  the  'V,ji^:aA.tk*
formation  of  the  Patriarchal  Family,  a  group  of  men ^<'^v^^
and  women,  children  and  slaves,  of  animate  and  in-
animate property,  all  connected  together  by  common
subjection  to  the  Paternal  Power  of  the  chief  of  the
household. I  need  not  here  repeat  to  you  the  proof
which  I  have  attempted  to  give  elsewhere,  that  a
great  part  of  the  legal  ideas  of  civilised  races  may
be  traced  to this  conception,  and  that  the  history
of their development is the history of its slow
unwinding. You may, however, be aware that
some enquirers have of  late shown themselves
not  satisfied to accept the  Patriarchal Family  as
a  primary  fact  in  the  history  of  society. Such  dis-
inclination is,  I  think,  very  far  from  unnatural. The
Patriarchal Family is not a simple  but  a  highly
complex  group,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  super-
ficial passions,  habits,  or  tendencies  of  human  nature
which at all  sufficiently  accounts for  it. If  it  is
really  to  be  accepted  as  a  primary  social  fact,  the
explanation assuredly lies among  the secrets  and
mysteries  of  our  nature,  not  in  any  characteristics


16  BARBAROUS FORMS OF THE FAMILY. tEcx.  i.

which are on  its surface. Again, under its best
ascertained  forms,  the  Family  Group  is  in  a  high
degree  artificially  constituted,  since  it  is  freely  re-
cruited by  the  adoption  of  strangers. All  this  justi-
fies the  hesitation  which  leads  to  further  enquiry ;  and
it  has  been  strongly  contended  of  late,  that  by  in-
vestigation of  the pi*actices arid ideas of  existing
savage  races,  at  least  two  earlier  stages  of  human
society  disclose  themselves  through  which  it  passed
before  organising  itself  in  Family  Groups. In  two
separate  volumes,  each  of  therii  remarkably  ingenious
and  interesting,  Sir  John  Lubbock  and  Mr.  McLennan
conceive  themselves  to  have shown that the  first
steps  of  mankind  towards  civilisation  were  taken  from
a  condition  in  which  assemblages  of  men  followed
practices  which  are  riot  found  to  occur  universally
even  in  animal  nature. Here  I  have  only  to  observe
that  many  of  the  phenomena  of  barbarism  adverted
to  by  these  Writers  are  found  in  India. The  usages
appealed  to  are  the  usages  of  certain  tribes  or  races,
sometimes  called  aboriginal,  which  have  been  driven
into  the  inaccessible  recesses  of  the  widely  extending
mountain  country  on  the  north-east  of  India  by  the
double  pressure  of  Indian  and  Chinese  civilisation,  or
which  took  refuge  in  the  hilly  regions  of  Central  and
Southern  India fi-om  the  conquest  of  Brahminical
invaders,  whether  or  not  of  Aryan  descent. Many
of  these  wild  tribes  have  now  for  many  years  been


LECT.  I.  ORIGIN OF LAW IN THE FAMILY.  17

under British observation, and have indeed been
administered by British Officers. The  evidence,
therefore, of  their usages and ideas which is or
may  be  forthcoming,  is  very  superior  indeed  to  the
shppery testimony concerning savages which is
gathered  from  travellers'  tales. It  is  not  my  inten-
tion in  the  present  lectures  to  examine  the  Indian
evidence  anew,  but,  now  that  w^e  know  what  interest
attaches  to  it,  I  venture  to  suggest  that  this  evidence
should  be  carefully  re-examined  on  the  spot. Much
which  I  have  personally  heard  in  India  bears  out  the
caution  which  I  gave  as  to  the  reserve  with  which
all  speculations  on the antiquity of  human  usage
should  be  received. Practices  represented  as  of  im-
memorial antiquity,  and  universally  characteristic  of
the  infancy  of  mankind,  have  been  described  to  me
as  having  been  for  the  first  time  resorted  to  in  our
own  days  through  the mere pressure of  external
circumstances  or  novel  temptations.

Passing  from  these  wild  tribes  to  the  more  ad-
vanced assemblages  of  men  to  be  found  in  India,  it
may  be  stated  without  any  hesitation  that  the  rest
of  the  Indian  evidence,  whencesoever  collected,  gives
colour  to  the  theory  of  the  origin  of  a  great  part
of  law  in  the  Patriarchal  Family.  I  may  be  able
hereafter  to  establish,  or  at  all  events  to  raise  a
presumption,  that  many  rules,  of  which  nobody  has
hitherto discerned the historical beginnings, had

c


18  VILLAGP: community.  lect.  t.

really  their  sources  in  certain  incidents  of  the  Patria
Potestas, if  tlie Indian evidence  may  be  trusted.
And upon that  evidence  many  threads  of  connec-
tion between  widely  divided  departments  of  law  will
emerge from the obscurity in which they have
hitherto  been  hidden.
\KiXff^^/L  ^^^^^^^ -^^^  ^YiQ  Patriarchal  Family,  when  occupied  with
^  those  agricultural  pursuits  which  are  the  exclusive
employment  of  many  millions  of  men  in  India,  is
generally  found  as  the  unit  of  a  larger  natural  group,
the  Village  Community. The  Village  Community
is  in  India  itself  the  source  of  a  land-law  which,  in
bulk  at  all  events,  may  be  not  unfairly  compared
with the  real-property  law  of  England. This  law
defines  the  relations  to  one  another  of  the  various
sections  of  the  group,  and  of  the  group  itself  to  the
Government,  to other  village  communities,  and  to
certain  persons  who  claim  rights  over  it. The  corre-
sponding cultivating  group  of  the  Teutonic  societies
has  undergone  a  transformation  which  forbids  us  to
attribute  to  it,  as  a  source  of  land 4a w,  quite  the  same
importance  which  belongs  to  the  Indian  Village  Com-
munity. But  it  is  certainly  possible  to  show  that
the  transformation  was  neither  so  thorough  as  has
been  usually  supposed,  nor  so  utterly  destructive  of
the features of  the group  in  its primitive  shape.
When  then  the  Teutonic group  has been re-con-
structed by  the  help  of  observed  Indian  phenomena


LECT.  T.  LAW OF NATUEE.  19

a  process  which  will  not  be  completed  until  both

sets  of  facts  have  been  more  carefully  examined
than  heretofore  by  men  who  are  conscious  of  their
bearing  on  one  another — it  is  more  than  likely  that
we  may  be  able  to  correct  and  amplify  the  received
theories  of  the  origin  and  significance  of  English  real-
property  law.

Let  me  pass  to  another  epoch  in  legal  history.
More  than  once,  the  jurisprudence  of  Western  Europe
has  reached  a  stage  at  which  the  ideas  which  presided
over  the  original  body  of  rules  are  found  to  have  been
driven  out  and  replaced  by  a  wholly  new  group  of
notions,  which  have  exercised  a  strong,  and  in  some
cases  an  exclusively  controlling  influence  on  all  the
subsequent  modifications  of  the  law. Such  a  period
^  was arrived  at  in  Roman  law, when  the  theory  of
a  Law  of  Nature  substituted  itself  for  the  notions
which  lawyers  and  politicians  had  formed  for  them-
selves concerning  the  origin and sanctions of  the
rules  which  governed  the  ancient  city. A  similar
displacement of  the  newer  legal  theory  took  place
when  the  Roman  law,  long  since  affected  in  all  its
parts  by  the  doctrine  of  Natural  Law,  became,  for
certain  purposes  and  within  certain  limits,  the  Canon
law — a  source  of  modern  law  which  has  not  yet  been
sufficiently  explored. The more recent  jurispru-
dence of  the  West  has  been  too  extensive  to  have
been  penetrated  throughout  by  any  new  theory,  but

c 2


20  CODIFIED BIIAHMINICAL LAW.  lect.  i.

it  will  not  be  difficult  to  point  out  that  particular
departments  of  law  have  come  to  be  explained  on
moral  principles  which  originally  had  nothing  what-
ever to  do  with  them,  and  that,  once  so  explained,
they  have  never  shaken  off  the  influence  of  these
principles.  This  phenomenon  may  be  shown  to  have
occurred  in  India  on  a  vast  scale.  The  whole  of
the  codified  law  of  the  country — ^that  is,  the  law  con-
tained in  the  Code  of  Manu,  and  in  the  treatises
of  the  various  schools  of  commentators  who  have
written  on  that  code  and  greatly  extended  it — is
theoretically  connected  together  by  certain  definite
ideas  of  a  sacerdotal  nature.  But  the  most  recent
observation  goes  to  prove  that  the  portion  of  the
law  codified  and  the  influence  of  this  law  are  much
less  than  was  once  supposed,  and  that  large  bodies
of  indigenous  custom  have  grow  up  independently
of  the  codified  law.  But  on  comparing  the  written
and  the  unwritten  law,  it  appears  clearly  that  the
sacerdotal  notions  which  permeate  the  first  have
invaded  it  from  without,  and  are  of  Brahminical
origin.  I  shall  have  to  advert  to  the  curious  circum-
stance that  the  influence  of  these  Brahminical  theories
upon  law  has  been  rather  increased  than  otherwise
by  the  British  dominion.

The  beginning  of  the  vast  body  of  legal  rules  which,
for  want  of  a  better  name,  we  must  call  the  feudal
system,  constitutes,  for  the  West,  the  greatest  epoch  in


LECT.  I.  FEUDAL SYSTEM.  21

its  legal  history. The  question  of  its  origin,  difficult
enough  in  regard  to  those  parts  of  Europe  conquered
by barbarian invaders which were inhabited by
Komanised populations, seemed to  be  embarrassed
with much greater difficulty  when it had to be
solved in respect of countries like England and
Germany  Proper,  where  the  population  was  mainly
of  the  same  blood,  and  practised  the  same  usages,  as
the  conquerors  of  the  Empire. The  school  of  German
writers,  however,  among  whom  Yon  Maurer  is  the
most  eminent,  appears  to  me  to  have  successfully
generalised  and  completed  the  explanation  given  in
respect  of  our  country  by  Enghsh  historical  scholars,
by  showing  that  the  primitive  Teutonic  proprietary
system  had  everywhere  a  tendency,  not  produced  from
without,  to  modify  itself  in  the  direction  of  feudalism ;
so  that  influences  partly  of  administrative  origin  and
(so  far  as  the  Continent  is  concerned)  partly  traceable
to  Roman  law  may,  so  to  speak,  have  been  met  half-
way. It  will  be  possible  to  strengthen  these  argu-
ments by  pointing  out  that  the  Indian  system  of
property  and  tenure,  closely  resembling  that  which
Maurer  believes  to  be  the  ancient  proprietary  system
of  the  Teutonic  races,  has  occasionally,  though  not
universally,  undergone  changes  which  bring  it  into
something  like  harmony  with  European  feudalism.

Such  are  a  few  of  the  topics  of  jurisprudence —
touched  upon,  I  must  warn  you,  so  shghtly  as  to


22  CONDITIONS OF JURIDICAL STUDY.  lect.  i.

give  a  very  imperfect  idea  of  their  importance  and
instructiveness — upon  which  the  observed  phenomena
of  India  may  be  expected  to  throw  light. I  shall
make  no  apology  for  calling  your  attention  to  a  line
of  investigation  which  perhaps shares  in  the bad
reputation  for  dulness  which  attaches  to  all  things
Indian. Unfortunately,  among  the  greatest  obsta-
cles to  the  study  of  jurisprudence  from  any  point  of
view  except  the  purely  technical,  is  the  necessity  for
preliminary  attention  to  certain  subjects  which  are
conventionally regarded as uninteresting. Every
man  is  under  a  temptation  to  overrate  the  importance
of  the  subjects  which  have  more  than  others  occupied
his  own  mind,  but  it  certainly  seems  to  me  that  two
kinds  of  knowledge  are  indispensable,  if  the  study  of
historical  and philosophical  jurisprudence  is  to  be
carried  very  far  in  England,  knowledge  of  India,  and
knowledge  of  Roman  law — of  India,  because  it  is  the
great  repository  of  verifiable  phenomena  of  ancient
usage  and  ancient  juridical  thought — of  Eoman  law,
because,  viewed  in  the  whole  course  of  its  develop-
ment, it connects these ancient usages and this
ancient  juridical  thought  with  the  legal  ideas  of  our
own day. Roman law  has  not  perhaps as  evil  a
reputation  as  it  had  ten  or  fifteen  years  ago,  but
proof  in  abundance  that India  is  regarded  as  su-
premely uninteresting  is furnished by  Parliament,
the  press,  and  popular  literature. Yet  ignorance  of


LECT.  I.  ENGLISH IGNORANCE OF INDIA.  23

India is more discreditable to Englishmen than
ignorance  of  Roman  law,  and  it  is  at  the  same  time
more  unintelligible  in  them. It  is  more  discreditable,
because  it  requires  no  very  intimate acquaintance
with  contemporary  foreign  opinion  to  recognise  the
abiding  truth  of  De  Tocqueville's  remark  that  the
conquest and  government  of  India are  really the
achievements  which  give  England  her  place  in  the
opinion of  the world. They are undeniably ro-
mantic achievements  in  the  history  of  a  people  which
it is the fashion abroad to  consider unromantic.
The ignorance is  moreover  unintelligible,  because
knowledge  on  the  subject  is  extremely  plentiful  and
extremely  accessible,  since  English  society  is  full  of
men  who  have  made  it  the  study  of  a  life  pursued
with an ardour  of  public spirit which would be
exceptional  even  in  the field of  British domestic
pohtics. The  explanation  is  not,  however,  I  think,
far  to  seek. Indian  knowledge  and  experience  are
represented  in  this  country  by  men  who  go  to  India
all  but  in  boyhood,  and  return  from  it  in  the  matu-
rity of  years. The  language  of  administration  and
government  in  India  is  English, but  through  long
employment  upon  administrative  subjects,  a  technical
language  has  been  created,  which  contains  far  more
novel  and  special  terms  than  those  who  use  it  are
commonly aware. Even, therefore, if the great
Indian  authorities  who  live  among  us  were  in  perfect


24  DISAPPEARANCE OF INDIAN PHENOMENA, lect.  i.

mental  contact  with  the  rest  of  the  community,  they
could only communicate their ideas through an
imperfect  medium. But it may be  even  doubted
whether  this  mental contact  exists. The  men of
whom  I have  spoken certainly  underrate the  ig-
norance of India which prevails in England on
elementary  points. If  I could  suppose myself  to
have  an  auditor  of  Indian  experience,  I  should  make
him  no  apology  for  speaking  on  matters  which  would
appear  to  him  too  elementary  to  deserve  discussion;
since  my  conviction  is  that  what  is  wanting  to  unveil
the  stores  of  interest  contained  in  India  is,  first,  some
degree  of  sympathy  with  an  ignorance  which  very  few
felicitous  efforts  have  yet  been  made  to  dispel,  and,
next,  the  employment  of  phraseology  not  too  highly
specialised.

If,  however,  there  are  reasons  why  the  jurist
should  apply  himself  to  the  study  of  Indian  usage,
there  are  still  more  urgent  reasons  why  he  should
apply  himself  at  once.  Here,  if  anywhere,  what
has  to  be  done  must  be  done  quickly.  For  this
remarkable  society,  pregnant  with  interest  at  every
point,  and  for  the  moment  easily  open  to  our  obser-
vation, is  undoubtedly  passing  away.  Just  as  ac-
cording to  the  Brahminical  theory  each  of  the  Indian
sacred  rivers  loses  in  time  its  sanctity,  so  India  itself
is  gradually  losing  everything  which  is  characteristic
of  it. I  may  illustrate  the  completeness  of  the  trans-


LECT.  I.  INFLUENCE OF WESTERN IDEAS.  25

formation  wliich  is  proceeding  by  repeating  what  I
have  learned,  on  excellent  authority,  to  be  the  opinion
of  the  best  native  scholars :  that  in  fifty  years  all
knowledge  of  Sanscrit  will  have  departed  from  India,
or,  if  kept  alive,  wall  be  kept  alive  by  the  reactive
influence  of  Germany  and  England. Such  assertions
as  these  are  not  inconsistent  with  other  statements
which  you  are  very  likely  to  have  heard  from  men
who have passed a life  in Indian  administration.
Native Indian  society  is  doubtless  as  a  whole  very
ignorant,  very  superstitious,  very  tenacious  of  usages
which  are  not  always  wholesome. But  no  society  in
the  world  is  so  much  at  the  mercy  of  the  classes
whom  it  regards  as  entitled  by  their  intellectual  or
religious  cultivation  to  dictate  their  opinions  to  others,
and  a  contagion  of  ideas,  spreading  at  a  varying  rate
of  progress,  is  gradually  bringing  these  classes  under
the  dominion  of  foreign  modes  of  thought. Some  of
them  may  at  present  have  been  very  slightly  affected
by  the  new  influence ;  but  then  a  comparatively  slight
infusion  of  foreign  idea  into  indigenous  notions is
often  enough  to  spoil  them  for  scientific  observation.
I  have had unusual opportunities  of  studying  the
mental  condition  of  the  educated  class  in  one  Indian
province. Though  it  is  so  strongly  Europeanised
as  to  be  no  fair  sample  of  native society  taken  as  a
whole,  its  peculiar  stock of  ideas is  probably  the
chief  source  from  which  the  influences  proceed  which


26  INFLUENCE OF PHYSICAL  SCIENCE.  lect.  i.

are  more  or  less  at  work  everywhere. Here  there
has  been  a  complete  revolution  of  thought,  in  litera-
ture, in  taste,  in  morals,  and  in  law. I  can  only
compare  it  to  the  passion  for  the  literature  of  Greece
and  Rome  which  overtook  the  Western  world  at  the
revival  of  letters ;  and  yet  the  comparison  does  not
altogether hold,  since  I  must  honestly  admit  that
much  which  had  a  grandeur  of  its  own  is  being  re-
placed by  a  great  deal  which  is  poor  and  ignoble.
But  one  special  source  of  the  power  of  Western  ideas
in  India  I  mention  with  emphasis,  because  it  is  not
l^Jih  as  often  recognised  as  it  should  be,  even  by  men  of
>Ly^^  ^,,>:j:>^ndian experience. These  ideas  are  making  their
U^^^^^^  way  into  the  East  just  at  the  period  when  they  are

themselves  strongly  under  the  influence  of  physical
knowledge,  and  of  the  methods  of  physical  science.
Now,  not  only  is  all  Oriental  thought  and  literature
embarrassed  in  all  its  walks  by  a  weight  of  false
physics,  which  at  once  gives  a  great  advantage  to  all
competing  forms  of  knowledge,  but  it  has  a  special
difficulty  in  retaining  its  old  interest.  It  is  elabo-
rately inaccurate,  it  is  supremely  and  deliberately
careless  of  all  precision  in  magnitude,  number,  and
time.  But  to  a  very  quick  and  subtle -minded  people,
which  has  hitherto  been  denied  any  mental  food  but
this,  mere  accuracy  of  thought  is  by  itself  an  in-
tellectual luxury  of  the  very  highest  order.

It  would  be  absurd  to  deny  that  the  disintegration


LECT.  I. INFLUENCE OF THE BEITISH EMPIRE.  27

of  Eastern  usage  and  thought  is  attributable  to  British

dominion. Yet  one  account  of  the  matter  which  is

very  hkely  to  find  favour  with  some  EngHshmen  and

many  foreigners  is  certainly  not  true,  or  only  true

with  the  largest  qualifications. The  interference  of 'J  ^^^^^v^^yw*^

the  British  Government  has  rarely  taken  the  form  of  )^  c^h^^^^^

ment.  The  dominant  theory  has  always  been  that
the  country  ought  to  be  governed  in  conformity  with
its  own  notions  and  customs;  but  the  interpretation
of  these  notions  and  customs  has  given  rise  to  the
widest  differences  of  opinion,  and  it  is  the  settled
habit  of  the  partisans  of  each  opinion  to  charge  their
adversaries  with  disregard  of  native  usage.  The
Englishman  not  personally  familiar  with  India
should  always  be  on  his  guard  against  sweeping
accusations  of  this  sort,  which  often  amount  in  reality
to  no  more  than  the  imputation  of  error  on  an
extremely  vague  and  difficult  question,  and  possibly
a  question  which  is  not  to  be  solved  by  exclusively
Indian  experience.  If  I  were  to  describe  the  feeling
which  is  now  strongest  with  some  of  the  most  ener-
getic Indian  administrators,  I  should  be  inclined  to
call  it  a  fancy  for  reconstructing  native  Indian  society
upon  a  purely  native  model  ;  a  fancy  which  some
would  apparently  indulge,  even  to  the  abnegation  of
all  moral  judgment.  But  the  undertaking  is  not
practicable. It  is  by  its  indirect  and  for  the  most


I


23  INFLUENCE OF THE BEITISII EMFIRE. lect.  i.

part  unintended  influence  that  tlie  British  power
metamorphoses  and  dissolves  the  ideas  and  social
forms  underneath  it;  nor  is  there  any  expedient  by
which  it  can  escape  the  duty  of  rebuilding  upon  its
own  principles  that  which  it  unwillingly  destroys.


I


LECTURE IT.

THE SOURCES OF INDIAN LAW.


CONTENTS.

Indian  Settlements  —  Settlement  and  Revenue  Courts  —  The  Civil
Courts — The  Indian  Judicial  System — The  Supreme  Courts — English
Law  in  India — Indian  Opinion  on  English  Law — Locality  of  Custom
— The  Will  of  Bengal— Wills  and  Collective  Property— A  Modern
Indian  Will — The  Sudder  Court — Influence  of  Sudder  Courts — De-
velopment of  Hindoo  Law — Effect  of  Juridical  Commentaries — The
Bar  and  English  Law — Mahometan  Law — The  Pundits — Codified
Hindoo  Law — Varieties  of  Native  Usage — The  Written  Law — Hindoo
Widow's  Estate — Preservation  of  Customary  Law — Caste  in  India —
Tradition — Different  Forms  of  Tradition — Popular  Ignorance  of  Law
in  England — The  Experts  and  English  Law— Indian  and  Teutonic
Village  Systems.


LECT.  II.  INDIAN QUASI-JUDICIAL AGENCIES.  31


LECTURE 11.

THE SOURCES OF INDIAN LAW.

The  bodies  of  customary  law  which  exist  in  India
have  now  and  then  been  more  or  less  popularly  de-
scribed by  acute  observers  who  were  led  to  examine
them  by  curiosity  or  official  duty;  but  on  the  whole
the  best  information  we  possess  concerning  native
usage  is  that  which  has  been  obtained  through
judicial  or  quasi-judicial  agency.  The  agency  which  qiUj^y)c~iAo(
I  have  here  called  '  quasi -judicial '  belongs  to  a  part
of  Anglo -Indian  administration  which  is  very  little
understood  by  Englishmen,  but  which  is  at  the  same
time  extremely  interesting  and  instructive.  Its
origin  and  character  may  be  described  as  follows —
inadequately  no  doubt,  but  still  without  substantial
inaccuracy.

The  British  Government,  like  all  Eastern  sovereigns,
claims  a  large  share  of  the  produce  of  the  soil,  most
of  which,  however,  unlike  other  Eastern  sovereigns,
it  returns  to  its  subjects  through  the  judicial  and
administrative services which it maintains, and


jji


82  , INDIAN SETTLEMENTS.  lect.  ii.

through the public  works  which  it systematically
executes. Some  person,  or  class  of  persons,  must  of
ouJ^«vv  H  l^  course  be  responsible  to  it  for  the  due  payment  of
)J;^^^^tv^  rv^t^^^his  '  land-revenue,'  and this person  or  class  must
to^AA)  f^  ^ have the power of  collecting it from the other
JULft<£r;^*[:i'^^H.owners and cultivators of  the soil. This double
necessity, of  determining  the  persons  immediately
responsible  for  its  share  of  the  profits  of  cultivation
and  of  investing  them  with  corresponding  authority,
has  involved  the  British Indian  Government,  ever
since  the  very  infancy  of  its  dominion, in  what  I
believe  to  be  the  most  arduous  task  which  a  govern-
ment ever  undertook. It  has  had  not  only  to  frame
an  entire  law  of  land  for  a  strange  country,  but  to
effect  a  complete  register of  the  rights which the
law confers on individuals and definite classes.
When a province is first incorporated with the
Empire,  the  first  step  is  to  efi'ect  a  settlement  or
adjustment  of  the  amount  of  rent  claimable  by  the
State. The functionaries charged  with this duty
\ are known as the Settlement  Ofiicers. They  act
I under  formal  instructions  from  the  provincial  govern-
ment which  has  deputed  them ;  they  communicate
freely  with  it  during  their  enquiries  ;  and  they  wind
them  up  with  a  Settlement  Eeport,  which  is  often
a  most  comprehensive  account  of  the  new  province,
its history,  its  natural  products,  and  above  all  the
usages  of  its  population. But  the  most  important


LECT.  II. SETTLEMENT  AND BEVENUE COURTS.  38

object  of  the  Settlement  operations — not  second  even

to  the  adjustment  of  the  Government  revenues — is  '^^^  (IL-,yiA'

to  construct  a  '  Kecord  of  Rights/  which  is  a  detailed

register  of  all  rights  over  the  soil  in  the  form  in

which  they  are  believed  to  have  existed  on  the  eve

of  the  conquest  or  annexation. Here  it  is  that  the

duties  of  the  Settlement  Officers  assume  something

of  a  judicial  character. The  persons  who  complain

of  any  proposed  entry  on  the  register  may  insist  on

a  formal  hearing  before  it  is  made.

When  the  Record  of  Rights  has  been  completed
and  the  amount  of  Government  revenue  has  been
adjusted,  the  functions  of  the  Settlement  Officers  are
at  an  end,  and  do  not  revive  until  the  period  is  closed
for  which  the  Settlement  has  been  made. But,  during
the  currency  of  this  period,  questions  between  the  ^ .  , ii^
State  and  the  payer  of  land-tax still continue ^^  t^^ji  \s.oS^ A,
arise  in  considerable  number,  and  it  is  found  practi-  ^"-^""^^^^^ ^X^
cally  impossible  to  decide  on  such  questions  without  ^c^Cs^e^y*^^,^
occasionally  adjudicating  on  private  rights. Another '^'''''^''''**^
quasi-judicial  agency  is  therefore  that  of  the  function-
aries who,  individually  or  collectively,  have  jurisdic-
tion in  such  disputes,  and  who  are  variously  known
as  Revenue  Officers,  Revenue  Courts,  and  Revenue
Boards — expressions extremely  apt  to  mislead the
Englishman  unused  to  Indian  official  documents. The
Circulars  and  Instructions  issued  by  their  superiors
to  Settlement  and  Revenue  officers,  their  Reports  and

D


84  THE CIVIL  COURTS.  lect.  ii.

decisions  on  disputed  points,  constitute  a  whole  litera-
ture of  very  great  extent  and  variety  and  of  the
utmost  value  and  instructiveness.  I  am  afraid  I
must  add  that  the  English  reader,  whose  attention  is
not  called  to  it  by  official  duty,  not  unusually  finds
it  very  unattractive  or  even  repulsive.  But  the
reason  I  believe  to  be  that  the  elementary  knowledge
which  is  the  key  to  it  has  for  the  most  part  never
been  reduced  to  writing  at  all.

So far  as  the  functions of  the Settlement  and
j,^^  ,,-jt^c/^ Ee venue  Officers constitute  a  judicial  agency,  the
ci/]lw</vv^  •^^jurisdiction exercised by  them  was  at  first estab-
lished by  the  British  Government  not  in  its  character
of  sovereign,  but  in  its  capacity  of  supreme  land-
owner. It was merely  intended to enforce the
claim  of  the  State  with  some  degree  of  regularity  and
i  C;ftA^«^'^''^^^^*caution. The  strictly  judicial agency  of  which I
;  c«>«^ ^ spoke is  that  of  the  Civil  Courts,  which  are  very
much  what  we  understand  in  this  country  by  ordi-
nary Courts  of  Justice. Theoretically,  whenever  the
Settlement  or  Revenue  Courts  decide  a  question  of
private  right,  there  is  almost  always (I  need  not
state  the  exceptions)  an  appeal  from  their  decision  to
the Civil  Courts. Yet,  taking  India  as a  whole,
these appeals are surprisingly  few in comparison
with  the  cases  decided. This  is  one  of  the  reasons
w^hy  the  literature  of  Settlement  and  Eevenue  opera-
tions is  a  fuller  source  of  information  concerning  the


LECT.  II.  THE INDIAN JUDICIAL  SYSTEM.  35

customs  of  ownership  and  tenure  observed  among
the  natives  of  India  than  the  recorded  decisions  of
the  Civil  Courts.

Yet,  though  the  results  of  quasi-judicial  agency  in
India  are,  on  the  whole,  more  instructive  than  the
results  of  strictly  judicial  agency,  the  Indian  Civil
Courts  have  nevertheless  been  largely  instrumental
in  bringing  into  light  the  juridical  notions  peculiar
to  the  country,  in  contrasting  them  with  the  legal
ideas  of  the  Western  World,  and  to  a  certain  extent
in  subjecting  them  to  a  process  of  transmutation.
For  reasons  which  will  appear  as  I  proceed,  it  is
desirable  that  I  should  give  you  some  account  of
these  .courts.  I  will  endeavour  to  do  it  briefly  and
only  in  outline.

All  India  at  the  present  moment,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  most  unsettled  provinces,  is  under  the
jurisdiction  of  five  High  or  Chief  Courts.  The  dif-
ference between  a  High  and  Chief  Court  is  merely
technical,  one  being  established  by  the  Queen's
Letters  Patent,  under  an  Act  of  Parliament,  the
other  by  an  enactment  of  the  Indian  Legislature.  Of
these  courts,  three  are  considerably  older  than  the
rest,  and  are  in  fact  almost  as  old  as  the  British
dominion  in  India.  When,  however,  the  texture  of
the  jurisdiction  of  the  High  Courts  which  sit  at
Calcutta,  Madras,  and  Bombay,  is  examined,  it  is
seen to consist  of  two parts, having a different

d2


36  THE SUPREME COURTS.  lect.  ii.

history.  An  Indian  lawyer  expresses  this  by  saying
that  the  three  older  High  Courts  were  formed  by
the  fusion  of  the  '  Supreme '  and  *  Sudder '  Courts,
words  which  have  the  same  meaning  but  which
indicate  very  different  tribunals.

The  Supreme  Courts,  invested  with  special  judicial
powers  over  a  limited  territory  attached  to  the  three
old  fortified  factories  of  the  East  India  Company  at
Calcutta,  Madras,  and  Bombay — or,  as  they  were
once  called,  and  are  still  called  officially.  Fort  William,
Fort  St.  George,  and  Bombay  Castle — may  be  shortly
described  as  three  offshoots  from  Westminster  Hall
planted  in  India.  They  were  'Courts  of  Record,
exercising  Civil,  Criminal,  Admiralty,  and  Ecclesiasti-
cal jurisdiction,'  and  their  judges  were  barristers
taken  straight  from  the  English  Bar.  Although  a
series  of  statutes  and  charters  provided  securities  for
the  application  of  native  law  and  usage  to  the  cases
of  their  native  suitors,  and  though  some  of  the
best  treatises  on  Hindoo  law  which  we  possess  were
written  by  Supreme  Court  judges,  it  would  not  be
incorrect  to  say  that  on  the  eve  of  the  enactment
of  the  several  Indian  Codes,  the  bulk  of  the  jurispru-
dence administered  by  the  Supreme  Courts  consisted
of  English  law,  administered  under  English  pro-
cedure. Lord  Macaulay,  in  the  famous  essay  on
Warren  Hastings,  has  vividly  described  the  conster-
nation which  the  most important of  these courts


LECT.  ir.  ENGLISH LAW IN INDIA.  37

caused  in  its  early  days  among  the  natives  subject  to
its  power  ;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  establish-
ment of  a  tribunal  on  similar  principles  would  now-
a-days be regarded as a  measure of  the utmost
injustice and  danger. Yet  there  is  something  to  be
said  in  mitigation of  the  condemnation which the
Supreme  Courts  have  received  everywhere  except  in
India. The  great  quantity  of  English  law  which  had
worked  its  way  into  their  jurisprudence  is  doubtless  i.
to be  partially  accounted  for by the  extravagant  !
estimate  universally set  by English  lawyers  upon
their  own  system,  until  their  complacency  was  rudely
disturbed  by  Bentham ; but  at  the  same  time  the  [  h^"^
apparently  inevitable  displacement  of  native  law  and 4"^^ jK
usage  by  English  law,  when  the  two  sets  of  rules  are/  ^

in  contact,  is  a  phenomenon  which  may  be  observed'
over  a  great  part  of  India  at  the  present  moment.
The  truth  is  that  the  written  and  customary  law  of
such  a  society  as  the  English  found  in  India  is  not  of
a  nature  to  bear  the  strict  criteria  applied  by  English
lawyers.  The  rule  is  so  vague  as  to  seem  capable
of  almost  any  interpretation,  and  the  construction
which  in  those  days  an  English  lawyer  would  place
on  it,  would  almost  certainly  be  coloured  by  associa-
tions collected  from  English  practice.  The  strong
statements,  too,  which  have  been  made  concerning
the  unpopularity  of  these  courts  on  their  first
establishment  must  be  received  with  some  caution.


38  INDIAN OPINION ON  ENGLISH LAW.  lect.  ii

Unquestionably  great  and  general  dismay  was  caused
by  their  civil  procedure,  conferring  as  it  did  powers
of  compelling  the  attendance  of  witnesses,  and  of
arresting  defendants  both  before  and  after  judgment,
which  were  quite  foreign  to  the  ideas  of  the  country.
There  were  constant  complaints,  too,  of  the  applica-
tion of  the  English  law  of  forgery  to  India.  It  is
true  that,  as  regards  the  case  which  Lord  Macaulay
has  sketched  with  such  dramatic  force,  Nuncomar
appears  to  me,  upon  the  records  of  the  proceedings,
to  have  had  quite  as  fair  a  trial  as  any  Englishman
of  that  day  indicted  for  forgery  would  have  had  in
England,  and  to  have  been  treated  with  even  more
consideration  by  the  Court.  But  the  introduction  of
the  law  under  which  he  suffered  was  felt  as  a  general
grievance,  and  there  are  many  representations  on
the  subject  in  the  archives  of  the  Indian  Government.
These  archives,  however,  which  have  been  recently
examined,  and  in  part  published,  seem  to  me  to  prove
that  the  native  citizens  of  Calcutta,  so  far  from  com-
plaining of  the  civil  law  imported  by  the  Supreme
Court  from  Westminster  Hall  and  of  the  bulk  of  the
criminal  law,  actually  learned  to  echo  the  complacent
encomiums  on  its  perfection  which  they  heard  from
English  Judges.  The  fact  appears  to  me  so  well
established  that  I  venture  to  draw  some  inferences
from  it.  One  is  of  a  political  nature,  and  need  not
be  dwelt  on  here. A  nervous  fear  of  altering  native


LECT.  II.  LOCALITY OF CUSTOM.  39

custom  lias,  ever  since  the  terrible  events  of  1857,
taken  possession  of  Indian  administrators;  but  the
truth  is  the  natives  of  India  are  not  so  wedded  to
their  usages  that  they  are  not  ready  to  surrender
them  for  any  tangible  advantage,  and  in  this  case
the  even  justice  of  these  courts  was  evidently  re-
garded as  quite  making  up  for  the  strangeness  of
the  principles  upon  which  they  acted.  Another  con-
clusion is  of  more  direct  importance  to  the  jurist.
Complete  and  consistent  in  appearance  as  is  the
codified  law  of  India,  the  law  enunciated  by  Manu
and  by  the  Brahminical  commentators  on  him,  it
embraces  a  far  smaller  portion  of  the  whole  law  of
India  than  was  once  supposed,  and  penetrates  far
less  deeply  among  the  people.  What  an  Oriental  is
really  attached  to  is  his  local  custom,  but  that  was
felt  to  have  been  renounced  by  persons  taking  refuge
at  a  distance  from  home,  under  the  shelter  of  the
British  fortresses.

The  chief  interest  of  these  Supreme  Courts  to  the
student  of  comparative  jurisprudence  arises  from  the
powerful  indirect  influence  exerted  by  them  on  the
other  courts  which  I  mentioned,  and  with  which
eight  years  ago  they  were  combined — the  Sudder  ^^  lijAiMr^
Courts.  Nevertheless,  some  of  the  questions  which
have  incidentally  come  before  the  Supreme  Courts,
or  before  the  branch  of  the  High  Court  which  con-
tinues their  jurisdiction,  have  thrown  a  good  deal  of


4t)  THE WILL OF BENGAL.  lbct.  ir.

light  on  tlie  mutual  play  of  Eastern  and  Western
legal  tliouglit  in  the  British  Indian  Empire.  The
judges  who  presided  over  the  most  important  of
these  courts  very  early  recognised  the  existence  of
testamentary  power  among  the  Hindoos.  It  seems
_l'*H  that,  in  the  province  of  Lower  Bengal,  where  the
ir^\jj^J%^^  village -system  had  been  greatly  broken  up,  the  head


^^^  ^  ^f  t^^  household  had  the  power  of  disposing  of  his
Zp^'^^-'^  patrimony  during  life.  Whether  he  could  dispose  of
^^\^h^  it  at  death,  and  thus  execute  a  disposition  in  any
^J\or^  way resembling a will, has  always been  a much

disputed  question  —  which,  however,  contemporary
opinion  rather  inclines  towards  answering  in  the
negative.  However  that  may  be,  the  power  of
making  a  will  was  soon  firmly  established  among  the
Hindoos  of  Lower  Bengal  by,  or  through  the  influence
of,  the  English  lawyers  who  first  entered  the  country.
For  a  long  time  these  wills,  never  very  frequently
used,  were  employed,  as  the  testaments  of  Roman
citizens  can  be  shown  to  have  been  employed,  merely
to  supplement  the  arrangements  which,  without
them,  would  have  been  made  by  the  law  of  intestate
succession.  But  the  native  lawyers  who  practise  in
Calcutta  live  in  an  atmosphere  strongly  charged  with
English  law,  and  wills  drafted  by  them  or  at  their
instance,  and  exactly  resembling  the  will  of  a  great
English  landed  proprietor,  were  coming  in  increasing
numbers  before  the  Courts,  up  to  the  time  when  the


LFCT.  IT.  WILLS AND COLLECTIVE rROPERTY.  41

law  ol  testamentary  succession  was  finally  simplified
and  settled  by  a  recent  enactment  of  the  Indian
Legislature.  In  such  wills  the  testator  claimed  to
arrange  a  line  of  succession  entirely  for  himself,
not  only  providing  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  property
by  his  descendants  in  such  order  as  he  pleased,  but
even  excluding  them,  if  he  liked,  altogether  from  the
succession;  and,  in  order  to  obtain  his  object,  he  also
necessarily  claimed  to  have  the  benefit  of  a  number
of  fictions  or  artificial  notions,  which  made  their  way
into  English  law  from  feudal  and  even  from  scho-
lastic sources.  The  most  interesting  of  these  wills
was  executed  by  a  Brahmin  of  high  lineage  who
made  a  fortune  at  the  Calcutta  Bar,  and  he  aimed
at  disinheriting  or  excluding  from  the  main  line  of
succession  a  son  who  had  embraced  Christianity.
The  validity  and  effect  of  the  instrument  have  yet  to
be  declared  by  the  Privy  Council;  and  all  I  can  say
without  impropriety  is  that,  in  those  parts  of  India
in  which  the  collective  holding  of  property  has  not
decayed  as  much  as  it  has  done  in  Lower  Bengal,
the  liberty  of  testation  claimed  would  clearly  be
foreign  to  the  indigenous  system  of  the  country.
That  system  is  one  of  common  enjoyment  by  village -
communities,  and,  inside  those  communities,  by
families.  The  individual  here  has  almost  ,no  power
of  disposing  of  his  property ;  even  if  he  be  chief  of
his  household,  the  utmost  he  can  do,  as  a  rule,  is  to


42  A MODERN INDIAN WILL.  lect.  ii.

regulate  the  disposition  of  his  property  among  his
children  within  certain  very  narrow  limits.  But  the
power  of  free  testamentary  disposition  implies  the
greatest  latitude  ever  given  in  the  history  of  the
world  to  the  volition  or  caprice  of  the  individual.
Independently,  however,  of  all  questions  of  substance,
nothing  could  be  more  remarkable  than  the  form  of
the  will  which  I  spoke  of  as  having  fallen  under
the  jurisdiction  of  the  tribunal  which  now  represents
the  Supreme  Court  of  Calcutta.  Side  by  side  by
recitals,  apparently  intended  to  conceal  the  breach
in  the  line  of  descent,  by  affirming  that  the  tes-
tator had,  while  living,  made  suitable  provision  for
the  disinherited  son,  were  clauses  settling  certain
property  in  perpetuity  on  the  idols  of  the  family,
and  possibly  meant  to  propitiate  them  for  the  irregu-
larity in  the  performance  of  the  sacra  which  the  new
devolution  of  the  inheritance  inevitably  entailed.
The  testator  formally  stated  that  he  and  his  brothers
had  failed  in  business,  that  all  the  property  they  had
inherited  had  been  lost  in  the  disaster,  and  that  the
fortune  of  which  he  was  disposing  was  acquired  by
piis  individual  exertions.  This  was  meant  to  take  the
funds  with  which  the  will  dealt  out  of  the  Hindoo
family  system  and  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  the
gains  of  a  brother  belonged  to  the  common  stock
of  the  joint  family.  But  these  provisions  referring
to  Hindoo  joint  property  were  followed  by  others


LECT.  IT.  THE SUDDER COURT.  43

creating  joint  estates  on  the  English  model ;  and  here
the  testator  employed  legal  terms  only  capable  of
being  thoroughly  understood  by  a  person  familiar
with  that  extraordinary  technical  dialect  expressing
the  incidents  of  joint-tenancy  which  the  fathers  of
English  law  may  be  seriously  suspected  of  having
borrowed  from  the  Di^dnity  Schools  of  Oxford  and
Cambridge.

The  other  court  which  has  been  recently  com-
bined with  the  court  I  have  been  describing,  re-
tained to  the  last  its  native  name  of  Sudder  Court.
It  underwent  some  changes  after  its  first  establish-
ment, but  it  may  be  roughly  said  to  date  from  the
assumption  by  the  English  of  territorial  sovereignty.
When  finally  organised,  it  became  the  highest  court  of
appellate  jurisdiction  fi'om  all  the  courts  established
in  the  territories  dependent  on  the  seat  of  govern-
ment, saving  always  the  Supreme  Court,  which  had
exclusive  jurisdiction  within  the  Presidency  Town,
or  (as  it  might  be  called)  the  English  metropolis.
The  nature  of  the  local  tribunals  from  which  an
appeal  lay  to  the  Sudder  Court  is  a  study  by  itself;
and  I  must  content  myself  with  stating  that  the
Indian  judicial  system  at  present  resembles  not  the
English  but  the  French  system;  that  a  number  of
local  courts  are  spread  over  the  country,  from  each
of  which  an  appeal  lies  to  some  higher  court,  of
which  the  decisions  are  again  appealable  to  the  court,


44  INFLUENCE OF SUDDER COURTS.  lect.  ti.

whether  called  Sudder  or  High  Court,  which  stands

,,jjBpU^/jjfj^ at  the  apex. The  Sudder  Courts  therefore  decided  in

^  _^j2^  the  last  resort  questions  arising  originally  at  some  point

^^^  or  other  of  a  vast  territory,  a  territory  in  some  cases

containing  a  population  equal  to  that  of  the  largest

European States. Except the Indian Settlement

and Revenue Courts  which  I  began this Lecture

by  describing,  no  tribunal  in  the  world  has  ever  had

to  consider  a  greater  variety  of  law  and  usage.

What  that  law  and  usage  was,  the  Sudder  Court
used  to  ascertain  with  what  some  would  call  most
conscientious  accuracy  and  others  the  most  technical
narrowness. The  judges of the Court were not
lawyers,  but  the  most  learned  civilians  in  the  service
of  the  East  India  Company,  some  of  whom  have  left
names  dear  to  Oriental  learning. They  were  strongly
influenced  by  the  Supreme  Court  which  sat  in  their
neighbourhood;  but  it  is  curious  to  watch  the  dif-
ferent effect  which  the  methods  of  English  law  had
'«4jj*^J;^^^^ the  two  tribunals. At  the  touch  of  the  Judge  of
^^J^  U  ^ c the  Supreme  Court,  who  had  been trained  in  the
<N>^  English  school  of  special  pleading,  and  had  probably

come  to  the  East  in  the  maturity  of  life,  the  rule  of
native  law  dissolved  and,  with  or  without  his  inten-
tion, was  to  a  great  extent  replaced  by  rules  having
their  origin  in  English  law-books.  Under  the  hand
.rj^  \w^  joi  the  Judges  of  the  Sudder  Courts,  who  had  lived
^^^\Xjif^^^P^.  since  their  boyhood  among  the  people  of  the  country.


J.ECT.  II.  INFLUENCE OF SUDDER COURTS.  45

the  native  rules  hardened,  and  contracted  a  rigidity
which  they  never  had  in  real  native  practice.  The
process  was  partly  owing  to  their  procedure,  which
they  seem  to  have  borrowed  from  the  procedure  of  the
English  Court  of  Chancery,  at  that  time  a  proverb  at  once
of  complexity  and  technical  strictness.  It  has  been
said  by  an  eminent  Indian  lawyer  that,  when  the  Judges
of  the  Sudder  Courts  were  first  set  to  administer  native
law,  they  appear  to  have  felt  as  if  they  had  got  into
fairyland,  so  strange  and  grotesque  were  the  legal  prin-
ciples on  which  they  were  called  to  act.  But  after
a  while  they  became  accustomed  to  the  new  region,
and  began  to  behave  themselves  as  if  all  were  real
and  substantial.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  they  acted  as
if  they  believed  in  it  more  than  did  its  native  inhabi-
tants. Among  the  older  records  of  their  proceedings
may  be  found  injunctions,  couched  in  the  technical
language  of  English  Chancery  pleadings,  which  for-
bid the  priests  of  a  particular  temple  to  injure  a  rival
fane  by  painting  the  face  of  their  idol  red  instead  of
yellow,  and  decrees  allowing  the  complaint  of  other
priests  that  they  were  injured  in  property  and  repute
because  their  neighbours  rang  a  bell  at  a  particular
moment  of  their  services.  Much  Brahminical  ritual
and  not  a  little  doctrine  became  the  subject  of  de-
cision. The  Privy  Council  in  London  was  once
called  upon  to  decide  in  ultimate  appeal  on  the  claims
of  rival  hierophants  to  have  their  palanquin  carried


46  DEVELOPMENT OF HINDOO LAW.  lect.  ir.

cross-wise  instead  of  length-wise ;  and  it  is  said  that
on  another  occasion  the  right  to  drive  elephants
through  the  narrow  and  crowded  streets  of  one  of
the  most  sacred  Indian  cities,  which  was  alleged  to
vest  in  a  certain  religious  order  as  being  in  possession
of  a  particular  idol,  was  seriously  disputed  because
the  idol  was  cracked.

There  is  in  truth  but  little  doubt  that,  until  educa-
tion began  to  cause  the  natives  of  India  to  absorb
Western  ideas  for  themselves,  the  influence  of  the
Enghsh  rather  retarded  than  hastened  the  mental
development  of  the  race.  There  are  several  depart-
ments of  thought  in  which  a  slow  modification  of
primitive  notions  and  consequent  alteration  of  prac-
tice may  be  seen  to  have  been  proceeding  before  we
entered  the  country ;  but  the  signs  of  such  change  are
exceptionally  clear  in  jurisprudence,  so  far,  that  is
to  say,  as  Hindoo  jurisprudence  has  been  codified.
Hindoo  law  is  theoretically  contained  in  Manu,  but
it  is  practically  collected  from  the  writings  of  the
jurists  who  have  commented  on  him  and  on  one
another.  I  need  scarcely  say  that  the  mode  of  de-
veloping law  which  consists  in  the  successive  com-
ments of  jurisconsult  upon  jurisconsult,  has  played
a  very  important  part  in  legal  history.  The  middle
and  later  Roman  law  owes  to  it  much  more  than  to
the  imperial  constitutions ;  a  great  part  of  the  Canon
law  has  been  created  by  it ;  and,  though  it  has  been


LECT.  II. EFFECT OF JUDICIAL COMMENTARIES.  47

a  good  deal  checked  of  late  years  by  the  increased
activity  of  formal  legislatures,  it  is  still  the  principal
agency  in  extending  and  modifying  the  law  of  con-
tinental countries.  It  is  worth  observing  that  it  is
on  the  whole  a  liberalising  process.  Even  so  obsti-
nate a  subject-matter  as  Hindoo  law,  was  visibly
changed  by  it  for  the  better.  No  doubt  the  dominant
object  of  each  successive  Hindoo  commentator  is  so
to  construe  each  rule  of  civil  law  as  to  make  it
appear  that  there  is  some  sacerdotal  reason  for  it;
but,  subject  to  this  controlling  aim,  each  of  them
leaves  in  the  law  after  he  has  explained  it,  a  stronger
dose  of  common  sense  and  a  larger  element  of  equity
and  reasonableness  than  he  found  in  it  as  it  came
from  the  hands  of  his  predecessors.

The  methods  of  interpretation  which  the  Sudder
Courts  borrowed  from  the  Supreme  Courts  and  which
the  Supreme  Courts  imported  from  Westminster  Hall,
put  a  stop  to  any  natural  growth  and  improvement  of
Hindoo  law.  As  students  of  historical  jurispudence,
we  may  be  grateful  to  them  for  it;  but  I  am  clearly
persuaded  that,  except  where  the  Indian  Legislature
directly  interfered — and  of  late  it  has  interfered
rather  freely, — the  English  dominion  of  India  at  first
placed  the  natives  of  the  country  under  a  less  ad-
vanced regimen  of  civil  law  than  they  would  have
had  if  they  had  been  left  to  themselves.  The  pheno-
menon seems  to  me  one  of  considerable  interest  to  the


48


THE BAR AND ENGLISH LAW.


LECT. II.


c


jurist.  Why  is  it  that  the  English  mode  of  develop-
ing law  by  decided  cases  tends  less  to  improve  and
liberalise  it  than  the  interpretation  of  written  law  by
successive  commentators  ?  Of  the  fact  there  seems
no  question.  Even  where  the  original  written  law  is
historically  as  near  to  us  as  are  the  French  Codes,  its
development  by  text-writers  is  on  the  whole  more
rapid  than  that  of  English  law  by  decided  cases.
The  absence  of  any  distinct  check  on  the  commen-
tator and  the  natural  limitations  on  the  precision  of
language  are  among  the  causes  of  the  liberty  he
enjoys;  so  also  is  the  power  which  he  exercises  of
dealing  continuously  with  a  whole  branch  of  law;
and  so  too  are  the  facilities  for  taking  his  own  course
afforded  him  by  inconsistencies  between  the  dicta  of
his  predecessors — inconsistencies  which  are  so  glaring
in  the  case  of  the  Hindoo  lawyers,  that  they  were
long  ago  distributed  into  separate  schools  of  juridical
doctrine.  The  reason  why  a  Bench  of  Judges,  ap-
plying a  set  of  principles  and  distinctions  which  are
still  to  a  great  extent  at  large,  should  be  as  slow  as
English  experience  shows  them  to  be  in  extension
V  ^nd  innovation,  is  not  at  first  sight  apparent.  But
K  V'U/*  doubtless  the  secret  lies  in  the  control  of  the  English
•^  ^-f'  Bench  by  professional  opinion — a  control  exerted  all

the  more  stringently  when  the  questions  brought
before  the  courts  are  merely  insulated  fragments  of
particular  branches  of  law. English  law  is,  in  fact.


L£CT.  II.  MAHOMETAN LAW.  40

confided  to  the  custody  of  a  great  corporation,  of
which  the  Bar,  not  the  Judges,  are  far  the  largest
and  most  influential  part.  The  majority  of  the  cor-
porators w^atch  over  every  single  change  in  the  body
of  principle  deposited  with  them,  and  rebuke  and
practically  disallow  it,  unless  the  departure  from
precedent  is  so  slight  as  to  be  almost  imperceptiblCi

Let  us  now  consider  what  was  the  law  which,
under  the  name  of  native  custom,  the  courts  which
I  have  been  describing  undertook  to  administer.  I
shall  at  present  attend  exclusively  to  the  system
which,  as  being  the  law  of  the  enot-raous  majority  of
the  population,  has  a  claim  to  be  deemed  the  common-
law  of  the  country — Hindoo  law.  If  I  were  techni*
cally  describing  the  jurisdiction,  I  should  have  to
include  Mahometan  law,  and  the  very  interesting
customs  of  certain  races  who  have  stood  apart  from
the  main  currents  of  Oriental  conquest  and  civili-
sation, and  are  neither  Mahometan  nor  HindoOi
Mahometan  law,  theoretically  founded  on  the  Koran,
has  really  more  interest  for  the  jurist  than  has
sometimes  been  supposed,  for  it  has  absorbed  a
number  of  foreign  elements,  which  have  been  amal-
gamated by  a  very  curious  process  with  the  mass  oi
semi-religious  rules  ;  but  the  consideration  of  this
may  conveniently  be  postponed,  as  also  the  discussion
of  the  outlying  bodies  of  non- Hindoo  usage  found  in
various  parts  of  the  comitry.

E


60  THE PUNDITS.  lect.  ii.

The  Hindoo  law,  then,  to  which  the  English in
India  first  substantially  confined  their  attention,  con-
sisted, first,  of  the  Institutes  of  Manu,  pretending  to
a  divine  inspiration,  of  which  it  is  not  easy  to  define
the  degree  and  quality,  and,  next,  of  the  catena  of
commentators belonging  to  the  juridical  school  ad-
mitted to  prevail  in  the  province  for  which  each  par-
ticular court  was  established. The  Court  did  not  in
early  times  pretend  to  ascertain  the  law  for  itself,  but
took  the  opinion  of  certain  native  lawyers  ofiicially
attached  to  the  tribunal. But  from  the  first  there
were  some  specially  learned  Englishmen  on  the  bench
who  preferred  to  go  for  themselves  to  the  fountains
of  law,  and  the  practice  of  consulting  the  '  Pundits '
was  gradually  discontinued. These  Pundits  laboured
long  under  the  suspicion,  to  a  great  degree  unmerited,
of  having  trafficked  mth  their  privilege,  and  having
often,  from  corrupt  motives,  coined  the  law  which
they  uttered  as  genuine. But  the  learned  work  of
Mr.  West  and  Professor  Biihler,  following  on  other
enquiries,  has  gone  far  to  exonerate  them, as the
greater  part  of  their  more  important  opinions  have
been  traced  to  their  source  in  recognised  authorities.
That  they  were never corrupt  it  is  unfortunately
never  safe  to  affirm  of  Orientals  of  their  time ;  but
their opportunity was probably taken from the
vagueness  of  the  texts  which  they  had  to  interpret.
There  are  in  fact  certain  dicta  of  Hindoo  authorita-


LECT. IT.


CODIFIED HINDOO LAW.


51


UA<


tive  commentators  upon  which  almost  any  conclusion
could  be  based.

The  codified  or  written  law  of  the  Hindoos,  then  J  .  ij

assumed  to  include  their  whole  law,  consisted  of  a <... .^ — j-r
large  body  of  law  regulating  the  relations  of  classes,  ti^^  vvJt*/v*^<>'v^o-«
especially  in  the  matter  of  intermarriage ;  of  a  great  I
body  of  family  law,  and  a  correspondingly  extensive
law  of  succession ; and  of  a  vast  number  of  rules \
regulating  the  tenure  of  property  by  joint  families, I
the  effects on  proprietary  right  of  the  division  of ;
those  families,  and  the  power  of  holding  property
independently  of  the  family. There  was  some  law
of Contract and some law of  Crime  ; but large
departments  of  law were scantily represented, or
not at all,  and  there  was  in  particular  a  singular
scarcity  of  rules  relating  specially  to  the  tenure  of
land,  and  to  the  mutual  rights  of  the  various  classes
engaged  in  its  cultivation. This  last  peculiarity  was
all  the  more  striking  because  the  real  wealth  of  the
country  is,  and  always  has  been,  agricultural,  and
the  religious  and  social  customs  of  the  people,  even
as  recorded  in  the  codified  law,  savour  strongly  of
agriculture  as  their  principal  occupation.

It  would  seem  that  doubts  as  to  the  relation  of
the  codified  or  written  law  to  the  totality  of  native
usage  were  entertained  at  a  very  early  time,  and
collections  were  made  of  local  rules  which  applied  to
the  very  points  discussed  by  the  Brahminical  jurists,

E 2


52  VAEIETIES OF NATIVE USAGE.  t.ect.  ir.

and  yet  disposed  of  them  in  a  very  different  manner.
These  doubts  have  steadily  gained  strength.  I
think  I  may  venture  to  lay  down  generally,  that  the
more  exclusively  an  Anglo-Indian  functionary  has
been  employed  in  '  revenue '  administration,  and  the
further  removed  from  great  cities  has  been  the  scene
of  his  labours,  the  greater  is  his  hesitation  in  admit-
ting that  the  law  assumed  to  begin  with  Manu  is,  or
ever  has  been,  of  universal  application.  I  have  also
some  reason  to  believe  that  the  Judges  of  the  newest
of  the  High  Courts,  that  established  a  few  years
ago  for  the  provinces  of  the  North- West  in  which
primitive  usage  was  from  the  first  most  carefully
observed  and  most  respected^  are  of  opinion  that  they
would  do  great  injustice  if  they  strictly  and  uniformly
administered  the  formal  written  law.  The  conclusion
arrived  at  by  the  persons  who  seem  to  me  of  highest
authority  is^  fi^st^  that  the  codified  law — Manu  and
his  glossators — embraced  originally  a  much  smaller
body  of  usage  than  had  been  imagined,  and,  next^
that  the  customary  rules,  reduced  to  writing,  have
been  very  greatly  altered  by  Brahminical  expositors,
constantly  in  spirit,  sometimes  in  tenor.  Indian  law
may  be  in  fact  affirmed  to  consist  of  a  very  great
number  of  local  bodies  of  usage,  and  of  one  set  of
customs,  reduced  to  writing,  pretending  to  a  diviner
authority  than  the  rest,  exercising  consequently  a
great  influence  over  them,  and  tending,  if  not  checked,


I


LECT.  II.  THE WEITTEN LAW.  53

to  absorb  tliem.  You  must  not  understand  that  these
bodies  of  custom  are  fundamentally  distinct.  They
are  all  marked  by  the  same  general  features,  but
there  are  considerable  differences  of  detail;  and  the
interest  of  these  differences  to  the  historical  jurist  is
very  great,  for  it  is  by  their  help  that  he  is  able
chiefly  to  connect  the  customs  of  India  with  what
appear  to  have  been  some  of  the  oldest  customs  of
Europe  and  the  West.

As  you  would  expect,  the  written  law,  having
been  exclusively  set  forth  and  explained  by  Brahmins,
is  principally  distinguished  from  analogous  local
usages  by  additions  and  omissions  for  which  sacer-
dotal reasons  may  be  assigned.  For  instance,  I  have
been  assured  from  many  quarters  that  one  sweeping
theory,  which  dominates  the  whole  codified  lav/,  can
barely  be  traced  in  the  unwritten  customs.  It  sounds
like  a  jest  to  say  that,  according  to  the  principles  of
Hindoo  law,  property  is  regarded  as  the  means  of/
paying  a  man's  funeral  expenses,  but  this  is  not  so
very  untrue  of  the  written  law,  concerning  which  the
most  dignified  of  the  Indian  Courts  has  recently  laid
down,  after  an  elaborate  examination  of  all  the
authorities,  that  '  the  right  of  inheritance,  according;
to  Hindoo  law,  is  wholly  regulated  with  reference  to,
the  spiritual  benefits  to  be  conferred  on  the  deceased!
proprietor.'  There  are  also  some  remarkable  dif-
iferences  between  the  written  and  unwritten  law  in


54  HINDOO WIDOW  S ESTATE.  lect.  ii.

their  construction  of  tlie  rights  of  widows.  That
the  oppressive  disabilities  of  widows  found  in  mo-
dern Hindoo  law,  and  especially  the  prohibition  of
re-marriage,  have  no  authority  from  ancient  records,
has  often  been  noticed.  The  re-marriage  of  widows
is  not  a  subject  on  which  unwritten  usage  can  be  ex-
pected to  throw  much  light,  for  the  Brahminical  law
has  generally  prevailed  in  respect  of  personal  family
relations,  but  the  unwritten  law  of  property,  which
][>  1  largely  differs  from  the  written  law,  undoubtedly
ir^ i(^  gives colour to  the notion  that  the  extraordinary

j^^^^% harshness  of  the  Hindoo  text-writer  to  widows  is  of
i^  sacerdotal origin. A custom, of  which  there are

many  traces  in  the  ancient  law  of  the  Aryan  races,
but  which  is  not  by  any  means  confined  to  them,
gives  under  various  conditions  the  government  of
the  family,  and,  as  a  consequence  of  government,
the  control  of  its  property,  to  the  wife  after  the
death  of  her  husband,  sometimes  during  the  minority
of  her  male  children,  sometimes  for  her  own  life
upon  failure  of  direct  male  descendants,  sometimes
even,  in  this  last  contingency,  absolutely.  But  the
same  feeling,  gradually  increasing  in  strength,  which
led  them  in  their  priestly  capacity  to  preach  to  the
widow  the  duty  of  self-immolation  at  her  husband's
funeral-pyre,  appears  to  have  made  her  proprietary
rights  more  and  more  distasteful  to  the  Brahminical
texi -writers;  and  the  Hindoo  jurists  of  all  schools,


LECT.  II. PRESERVATION OF CUSTOMARY LAW.  55

though  of  some  more  than  others,  have  striven
hard  to  maintain  the  principle  that  the  life  of  the  ^
widow  is  properly  a  life  of  self-denial  and  humilia-  / 1
tion.  Partly  by  calling  in  the  distinction  between
separate  and  undivided  property,  and  partly  by  help
of  the  distinction  between  movable  and  immovable
property,  they  have  greatly  cut  down  the  widow's
rights,  not  only  reducing  them  for  the  most  part
(where  they  arise)  to  a  life-interest,  but  abridging  this
interest  by  a  variety  of  restrictions  to  little  more
than  a  trusteeship.  Here  again  I  am  assured  that
any  practice  corresponding  to  this  doctrine  is  very
rarely  found  in  the  unwritten  usage,  under  which
not  only  does  the  widow  tend  to  become  a  true  pro-
prietress for  life,  but  approaches  here  and  there  to
the  condition  of  an  absolute  owner.

The preservation,  during  a  number  of  centuries
which  it  would  be  vain  to  calculate,  of  this  great  ^o^y^^'^V^^^
of  unwritten  custom,  differing  locally  in  detail,  but*^  'Uso^Jcryji'
connected  by  common  general  features,  is  a  pheno-^^'^''^'^  ^Ayj^
menon  which  the  jurist  must  not  pass  over. Before
I  say  anything  of  the  conclusions  at  which  it  points,
let  me  tell  you  what  is  known  of  the  agencies  by
which  it  has  been  preserved. The  question  has  by
no  means  been  fully  investigated,  but  many  of  those
best entitled  to have  an  opinion  upon  it  have  in-
formed  me that one great  instrumentality is  the
perpetual  discussion  of  customary  law  by  the  people


C6  CASTE IN INDIA.  lect.  ii.

''-£;;rlX4:^  ^^ ^^^1  perhaps,  too  apt  to  forget  that

-""'^  in  all  stages  of  social  development  men  are  compara-

tively intelligent  beings,  who  must  have  some  sub-
jects of  mental  interest. The  natives  of  India,  for
poor  and  ignorant  men,  have  more  than  might  be
expected  of  intellectual  quickness,  and  the  necessities
of  the  climate  and  the  simplicity  of  their  habits  make
the  calls  on  their  time  less,  and  their  leisure  greater,
than  would  be  supposed  by  persons  acquainted  only
with  the  labourers  of  colder  climates. Those  who
know  most  of  them  assert  that  their  religious  belief
is  kept  alive  not  by  direct  teaching,  but  by  the  con-
stant recitation  in  the  vernacular  of  parts  of  their
sacred  poems,  and  that  the  rest  of  their  thought  and
conversation  is  given  to  their  usages.  But  this,  doubt-
less, is  not  the  whole  explanation. I  have  been  asked
— and  I  acknowledge  the  force  of  the  question — how
traditions  of  immemorial  custom  could  be  preserved
by  the  agricultural  labourers of  England, even  if
they  had more  leisure  than  they  have? But  the
answer  is  that  the  social  constitution  of  India  is  of  the
extreme  ancient,  that  of  England of  the  extreme
modern  type. I am aware that  the  popular  im-
pression here  is  that  Indian  society  is  divided,  so  to
speak,  into  a  number  of  horizontal  strata,  each  re-
presenting a  caste. This  is  an  entire  mistake. It  is
extremely  doubtful  whether  the  Brahminical  theory
of  caste  upon  caste  was  ever  true  except  of  the  two


LECT.  II.  TRADITIOX.  57

highest  castes ;  and  it  is  even  likely  that  more  impor-
tance has  been  attached  to  it  in  modern  than  ever
was  in  ancient  times.  The  real  India  contains  one
priestly  caste,  which  in  a  certain,  though  a  very
limited,  sense  is  the  highest  of  all,  and  there  are,
besides,  some  princely  houses  and  a  certain  number
of  tribes,  village  cpmmunities,  and  guilds,  which  still
in  our  day  advance  a  claim,  considered  by  many
good  authorities  extremely  doubtful,  to  belong  to
the  second  or  third  of  the  castes  recognised  by  the
Brahminical  writers.  But  otherwise,  caste  is  merely
a  name  for  trade  or  occupation,  and  the  sole  tangible
effect  of  the  Brahminical  theory  is  that  it  creates  a
religious  sanction  for  what  is  really  a  primitive  and
^.-  natural  distribution  of  classes.  The  true  view  of
~  India  is  that,  as  a  whole,  it  is  divided  into  a  vast
number  of  independent,  self-acting,  organised  social
groups — trading,  manufacturing,  cultivating.  The
English  agricultural  labourers  of  whom  we  spoke,
are  a  too  large,  too  indeterminate  class,  of  which
the  units  are  too  loosely  connected,  and  have  too
few  interests  in  common,  to  have  any  great  power
of  retaining  tradition.  But  the  smaller  organic
groups  of  Indian  society  are  very  differently  situated.

iThey  are  constantly  dwelling  on  traditions  of  a  cer-
tain sort,  they  are  so  constituted  that  one  man's
interests  and  impressions  correct  those  of  another,


58  DIFFERENT FORMS OF TRADITION.  li:ct.  ii.

permanent  machinery  for  declaring  traditional  usage,
and  solving  doubtful  points.  Tradition,  I  may  ob-
serve, has  been  the  subject  of  so  much  bitter  polemi-
cal controversy  that  a  whole  group  of  most  in-
teresting and  important  questions  connected  with  it
have  never  been  approached  in  the  proper  spirit.
Under  what  conditions  it  is  accurate,  and  in  respect
of  what  class  of  matters  is  accurate,  are  points  with
which  the  historical  jurist  is  intimately  concerned.
I  do  not  pretend  to  sum  up  the  whole  of  the  lessons
which  observation  of  Indian  society  teaches  on  the
subject,  but  it  is  assuredly  the  belief  of  men  who
were  at  once  conscientious  observers  and  had  no
antecedent  theory  to  sway  them,  that  naturally
organised  groups  of  men  are  obstinate  conservators
of  traditional  law,  but  that  the  accuracy  of  the
tradition  diminishes  as  the  group  becomes  larger  and
wider.

The  knowledge  that  this  great  body  of  traditional
law  existed,  and  that  its  varieties  were  just  suffi-
ciently great  for  the  traditions  of  one  group  to  throw
light  on  those  of  another,  will  hereafter  deeply  affect
the  British  administration  of  India.  But  I  shall  have
to  point  out  to  you  that  there  are  signs  of  its  being
somewhat  abused.  There  has  been  a  tendency  to
leave  out  of  sight  the  distinctions  which  render
different  kinds  of  tradition  of  very  different  value;
the  distinction,  for  example,  between  a  mere  tradition


LECT.  II. POPULAR  IGNORANCE  OF  LAW  IN  ENGLAND.  59

as  to  the  rule  to  be  followed  in  a  given  case  and  a
tradition  which  has  caused  a  rule  to  be  followed ;  the
distinction,  as  it  has  been  put,  between  customs
which  do  and  customs  which  do  not  correspond  to
practices.  If  a  tradition  is  not  kept  steady  by
corresponding  practice,  it  may  be  warped  by  all
sorts  of  extraneous  influences.  The  great  value  now
justly  attached  in  India  to  traditional  law  has  even
brought  about  the  absurdity  of  asking  it  to  solve
some  of  the  most  complicated  problems  of  modern
society,  problems  produced  by  the  collapse  of  the
very  social  system  which  is  assumed  to  have  in  itself
their  secret.

I  have been conducted  by  this  discussion  to  a
|topic on  which  a few  words may  not  be thrown

Lway.  Not  only  in  connection  with  the  preservation
fof  customary  law,  but  as  a  means  of  clearing  the
imind before addressing oneself  to a considerable

Lumber  of  juridical  questions,  I  must ask  you to
[believe  that  the  very  small  place  filled  by  our  own  cLo^  ^  ^a^^
English  law  in  our  thoughts  and  conversation  is  a^ <2^cum4^

menomenon  absolutely  confined  to  these  islands. A

^ery  simple  experiment,  a  very  few  questions  asked
after  crossing  the  Channel,  will  convince  you  that
Frenchmen,  Swiss,  and  Germans  of  a  very  humble
order  have  a  fair  practical  knowledge  of  the  law
which  regulates  their  everyday  life.  We  in  Great
Britain  and  Ireland  are  altogether  singular  in  our


60  THE EXPERTS AND ENGLISH LAW.  lect.  iu

tacit  conviction  that  law  belongs  as  much,  to  the
class  of  exclusively  professional  subjects  as  the
practice  of  anatomy.  Ours  is,  in  fact,  under  limita-
tions which  it  is  not  necessary  now  to  specify,  a
body  of  traditional  customary  law;  no  law  is  better
known  by  those  who  live  under  it  in  a  certain  stage
of  social  progress,  none  is  known  so  little  by  those
who  are  in  another  stage.  As  social  activity  multi-
plies the  questions  requiring  judicial  solution,  the
method  of  solving  them  which  a  system  of  customary
law  is  forced  to  follow  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  add
enormously  to  its  bulk.  Such  a  system  in  the  end
beats  all  but  the  experts ;  and  we,  accordingly,  have
turned  our  law^s  over  to  experts,  to  attorneys  and
solicitors,  to  barristers  above  them,  and  to  judges  in
the  last  resort.  There  is  but  one  remedy  for  this —
the  reduction  of  the  law  to  continuous  writing  and
its  inclusion  within  aptly-framed  general  propositions.
The  facilitation  of  this  process  is  the  practical  end  of
scientific  jurisprudence.

As  in  the  lectures  which  follow  I  shall  not  often
appeal  to  what  are  ordinarily  recognised  as  the  foun-
tains of  Hindoo  law,  it  was  necessary  for  me  to
explain  that  the  materials  for  the  conclusions  which
I  shall  state — un^vritten  usages,  probably  older  and
purer  than  the  Brahminical  written  law — are  now
having  their  authority  acknowledged  even  by  the
Indian  Courts,  once  the  jealous  conservators  of  the


LECT.  11. INDIAN  AND TEUTONIC VILLAGE  SYSTEMS.  61

integrity  of  the  sacerdotal  system.  These  ma-
terials are  partly  to  be  found  in  that  large  and
miscellaneous  official  literature  which  I  described  as
having  grown  out  of  the  labours  of  the  functionaries
who  adjust  the  share  of  the  profits  of  cultivation
claimed  by  the  British  Government  as  supreme  land-
lord; but  much  which  is  essential  to  a  clear  under-
standing can  only  be  at  present  collected  from  the
oral  conversation  of  experienced  observers  who  have
passed  their  maturity  in  administrative  office.  The
inferences  suggested  by  the  written  and  oral  testi-
mony would  perhaps  have  had  interest  for  few  except
those  who  had  passed,  or  intended  to  pass,  a  life  in
Indian  office;  but  their  unexpected  and  (if  I  may
speak  of  the  impression  on  myself)  their  most  start-
ling coincidence  with  the  writers  who  have  recently
applied  themselves  to  the  study  of  early  Teutonic
agricultural  customs,  gives  them  a  wholly  new  value
and  importance.  It  would  seem  that  light  is  pouring
from  many  quarters  at  once  on  some  of  the  darkest
passages  in  the  history  of  law  and  of  society.  To
those  who  knew  how  strong  a  presumption  already
existed  that  individual  property  came  into  existence
after  a  slow  process-  of  change,  by  which  it  disengaged
itself  from  collective  holdings  by  families  or  larger
assemblages,  the  evidence  of  a  primitive  village  system
in  the  Teutonic  and  Scandinavian  countries  had  very
great  interest;  this  interest  largely  increased  when


62  INDIAN AND TEUTONIC VILLAGE SYSTEMS. lect.  ii.

England,  long  supposed  to  have  had  since  the
Norman  Conquest  an  exceptional  system  of  property
in  land,  was  shown  to  exhibit  almost  as  many  traces
of  joint-ownership  and  common  cultivation  as  the
countries  of  the  North  of  the  Continent ;  but  our
interest  culminates,  I  think,  when  we  find  that  these
primitive  European  tenures  and  this  primitive  Euro-
pean tillage  constitute  the  actual  working  system  of
the  Indian  village  communities,  and  that  they  deter-
mine the  whole  course  of  Anglo-Indian  administration.


LECTURE III.


THE AYESTERN TILLAGE COMMUNITY.


I

I


CONTENTS.

Antiquity  of  Indian  Customary  Law — Traditional  Law — Analysis  of  a
Law — Indian  Conceptions  of  Law — English  Influence  on  Legal  Con-
ceptions— Unwilling  Assumption  of  Sovereignty — Influence  of  Courts
of  Justice — Change  in  Nature  of  Usage — Growth  of  Conception  of
Right  —  Influence  of  English  Law  —  Connection  of  Eastern  and
Western  Custom — Von  Maurer — The  Teutonic  Village  Community —
The  Arable  Mark  —  English  Theories  of  Land-Law  —  The  Arable
Mark  in  England — Shifting  Severalties — The  Common  Fields — Their
Great  Extent — Extract  from  Marshall — Scott  on  Udal  Tenures —
Commonty  of  Lauder — Peculiarities  of  Scottish  Example — Vestiges
of  the  Mark.


LECT.  III.  ANTIQUITY OF CUSTOMARY LAW.  65


LECTURE III.

THE WESTERN VILLAGE COMMUNITY.

I  HAVE  AFFIRMED  the  fact  to  be  established  as  well  as
any  fact  of  the  kind  can  be,  that  there  exist  in  India
several — and  it  may  even  be  said,  many — considerable
bodies  of  customary  law,  sufficiently  alike  to  raise  a
strong  presumption  that  they  either  had  a  common
origin  or  sprang  from  a  common  social  necessity,  but
sufficiently  unlike  to  show  that  each  of  them  must
have  followed  its  own  course  of  development.  There
exists  a  series  of  writings  which  pretend  to  be  a
statement  of  these  customs,  but  this  series  proves  to
include  a  part  only  of  the  whole  body  of  usage ;  it
probably  embodied  from  the  first  only  one  set  of  cus-
tomary rules,  and  its  form  shows  clearly  that  it  must
have  had  a  separate  and  very  distinct  history  of  its
own.  Few  assertions  respecting  lapse  of  time  and
the  past  can  safely  be  made  of  anything  Indian ;  but
there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  all  this  cus-
tomary  law  is  of  very  great  antiquity.  I  ne\3d  scarcely
point  out  to you  that  such facts  as these  have  a

F


G6  TRADITIONAL LAW.  lect.  hi.

bearing  on  more  than  one  historical  problem.  If,  for
example,  I  am  asked  whether  it  is  possible  that,  when
the  Roman  empire  had  been  overrun  by  the  Northern
races,  the  Roman  law  could  be  preserved  by  mere
oral  transmission  in  countries  in  which  no  breviaries
of  that  law  were  published  by  the  invading  chiefs  to
keep  it  alive,  I  can  only  say  that  observation  of
India  shows  such  preservation  to  be  abstractedly  pos-
sible ;  and  shows  it  moreover  to  be  possible  in  the  face
of  written  records  of  a  legal  or  legislative  character
which  contain  no  reference  to  the  unwritten  and
orally  transmitted  rules.  But  I  should  at  the  same
time  have  to  point  out  that  nothing  in  India  tends  to
prove  that  law  may  be  orally  handed  down  from  one
generation  to  another  of  men  who  form  an  indeter-
minate class,  or  that  it  can  be  preserved  by  any
agency  than  that  of  organised,  self-acting,  social
groups.  I  should  further  have  to  observe  that,  unless
there  have  been  habits  and  practices  corresponding  to
the  traditional  rules,  those  rules  may  be  suspected
of  having  undergone  considerable  modification  or
depravation.

I  pass,  however,  to  matters  which  have  a  closer
interest  for  the  jurist,  and  which  are,  therefore,  dis-
cussed with  more  propriety  in  this  department  of
study.  So  long  as  that  remarkable  analysis  of  legal
conceptions  effected  by  Bentham  and  Austin  is  not
very  widely  known  in  this  country  (and  I  see  no  signs


i


LECT.  III.  THE ANALYSIS OF A LAW.  67

of  its  being  known  on  the  Continent  at  all),  it  is
perhaps  premature  to  complain  of  certain  errors  into
which  it  is  apt  to  lead  us  on  points  of  historical  juris-
prudence. If,  then,  I  employ  the  Indian  legal  pheno-
mena to  illustrate  these  errors,  I  must  preface  what
I  have  to  say  with  the  broad  assertion  that  nobody
who  has  not  mastered  the  elementary  part  of  that
analysis  can  hope  to  have  clear  ideas  either  of  law  or
of  jurisprudence.  Some  of  you  may  be  in  a  position  to
call  to  mind  the  mode  in  which  these  English  jurists
decompose  the  conception  of  a  law,  and  the  nature
arid  order  of  the  derivative  conceptions  which  they
assert  to  be  associated  with  the  general  conception.
A  law,  they  say,  is  a  command  of  a  particular  kind.
It  is  addressed  by  political  superiors  or  sovereigns  to  ZlZ^f—j^^
political  inferiors  or  subjects  ;  it  imposes  on  those  ,
subjects  an  obligation  or  duti/  and  threatens  a  penalty  '

(or  sanction)  in  the  event  of  disobedience.  The
power  vested  in  particular  members  of  the  community
of  drawing  down  the  sanction  on  neglects  or  breaches
of  the  duty  is  called  a  Right.  Now,  without  the  most
violent  forcing  of  language,  it  is  impossible  to  apply
these  terms,  command,  sovereign,  obligation,  sanction,
rig] it,  to  the  customary  law  under  which  the  Indian
village  communities  have  lived  for  centuries,  practi-
cally knowing  no  other  law  civilly  obligatory.  It
would  be  altogether  inappropriate  to  speak  of  a  poli-
tical superior  commanding  a  particular  course  of  action

F  2


e^  INDIAN CONCEPTIONS OF A LAW.  j.ect.  hi.

to  the  villagers.  The  council  of  village  elders  does  not
ax:aAv  ^^W  command  anything,  it  merely  declares  what  has
^t-^/^o^j^  always  been.  Nor  does  it  generally  declare  that
which  it  believes  some  higher  power  to  have  com-
manded; those  most  entitled  to  speak  on  the  subject
deny  that  the  natives  of  India  necessarily  require
divine  or  political  authority  as  the  basis  of  their
usages ;  their  antiquity  is  by  itself  assumed  to  be  a
sufficient  reason  for  obeying  them.  Nor,  in  the
sense  of  the  analytical  jurists  is  there  right  or  duty  in
an  Indian  village  community  ;  a  person  aggrieved
complains  not  of  an  individual  wrong  but  of  the  dis-
.  turbance  of  the  order  of  the  entire  little  society*  More
[  a^l^tL^  lUj  (^  than  all,  customary  law  is  not  enforced  by  a  sanction.
In  the  almost  inconceivable  case  of  disobedience  to
the  award  of  the  village  council,  the  sole  punishment,
or  the  sole  certain  punishment,  would  appear  to  be
universal  disapprobation.  And  hence,  under  the
system  of  Bentham  and  Austin,  the  customary  law  of
India  would  have  to  be  called  morality — an  inversion
of  language  which  scarcely  requires  to  be  formally
protested  against.

I  shall  have  hereafter  to  tell  you  that  in  certain  of
the  Indian  communities  there  are  signs  of  one  family
enjoying  an  hereditary  pre-eminence  over  the  others,
so  that  its  head  approaches  in  some  degree  to  the
position  of  chief  of  a  clan,  and  I  shall  have  to  explain
that  this  inherited  authority  is  sometimes  partially


LECT.  iTi. ENGLISH  INFLUENCE  ON  LEGAL  CONCEPTIONS. GO

and  sometimes'exclusively  judicial,  so  that  the  chief  be-
comes a  sort  of  hereditary  judge.  Of  communities  thus
circumstanced  the  juristical  analysis  to  which  I  have
been  referring  is  more  nearly  true.  So  too  the  codi-
fied Brahminical  law  could  be  much  more  easily
resolved  into  the  legal  conceptions  determined  by
Bentham  and  Austin.  It  assumes  that  there  is  a
king  to  enforce  the  rules  which  it  sets  forth,  and  pro-
vides a  procedure  for  him  and  his  subordinates,  and
penalties  for  them  to  inflict ;  and  moreover  it  becomes
true  law  in  the  juristical  sense,  through  another
peculiarity  which  distinguishes  it.  Every  offence
against  this  written  law  is  also  a  sin  ;  to  injure  a
man^s  property  is  for  instance  to  diminish  the  power
of  his  sons  to  provide  properly  for  expiatory  funeral
rites,  and  such  an  injury  is  naturally  supposed  to
entail  divine  punishment  on  its  perpetrator.

We  may,  however,  confine  our  attention  to  the
unwritten  usages  declared  from  time  to  time  by  the
council  of  village  elders.  The  fact  which  has
greatest  interest  for  the  jurist  is  one  which  has  been
established  by  the  British  dominion  of  India,  and
which  could  not  probably  have  been  established
without  it.  It  may  be  described  in  this  way.
Whenever  you  introduce  any  one  of  the  legal  concep-
tions determined  by  the  analysis  of  Bentham  and
Austin,  you  introduce  all  the  others  by  a  process
which  is apparently inevitable. No better  proof


70  UNWILLING ASSUMPTION OF SOVEREIGNTY,  lect.  in.

could  be  given  that,  though  it  be  improper  to  employ
these  terms  sovereign^  subject^  command^  obligation^
right^  sanction^  of  law  in  certain  stages  of  human
thought,  they  nevertheless  correspond  to  a  stage  to
which  law  is  steadily  tending  and  which  it  is  sure
ultimately  to  reach.

Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  the  revolution
of  legal  ideas  which  the  English  have  effected  in
India  was  not  effected  by  them  intentionally.  The
relation  of  sovereign  to  subject,  for  instance,  which
is  essential  to  the  modern  juridical  conception  of  law,
was  not  only  not  established  by  them,  but  was  for
long  sedulously  evaded.  When  they  first  committed
themselves  to  a  course  of  territorial  aggrandisement,
they  adopted  a  number  of  curious  fictions  rather
than  admit  that  they  stood  to  the  people  of  India  as
political  superior  to  political  inferior.  Nor  had  they
the  slightest  design  of  altering  the  customary  law  of
the  country.  They  have  been  accused  of  interfer-
ing with  native  usages,  but  when  the  interference
(which  has  been  on  the  whole  very  small)  has  taken
place,  it  has  either  arisen  from  ignorance  of  the  exist-
ence of  custom  or  has  been  forced  on  them,  in  very
recent  times  and  in  the  shape  of  express  legislation,
by  necessities  which  I  may  be  led  hereafter  to
explain.^ The  English  never  therefore  intended  that

^  I  have  endeavoured  to  redeem  this  promise  in  part  by  printing
in  an  Appendix  a  Minute  recorded  in  India  on  the  subject  of  the
over-legislation  not  infrequently  attributed  to  the  British  Govern-
ment.


»


LECT.  III. INFLUENCE OF COURTS OF JUSTICE.  71

the  laws  of  the  country  should  rest  on  their  com-
mands, or  that  these  laws  should  shift  in  any  way
their  ancient  basis  of  immemorial  usage.  One  change
only  they  made,  without  much  idea  of  its  importance,
and  thinking  it  probably  the  very  minimum  of  conces-
sion to  the  exigencies  of  civilised  government.  They
established  Courts  of  Justice  in  every  administrative
district.  Here  I  may  observe  that,  though  the
Brahminical  written  law  assumes  the  existence  of
king  and  judge,  yet  at  the  present  moment  in  some
of  the  best  governed  semi-independent  native  States
there  are  no  institutions  corresponding  to  our  Courts
of  Justice.  Disputes  of  a  civil  nature  are  adjusted
by  the  elders  of  each  village  community,  or  occasion-
ally, when  they  relate  to  land,  by  the  functionaries
charged  with  the  collection  of  the  prince's  revenue.
Such  criminal  jurisdiction  as  is  found  consists  in  the
interposition  of  the  military  power  to  punish  breaches
of  the  peace  of  more  than  ordinary  gravity.  What
must  be  called  criminal  law  is  administered  through
the  arm  of  the  soldier.

In  a  former  lecture  I  spoke  of  the  stiffness  given
to  native  custom  through  the  influence  of  English
law  and  English  lawyers  on  the  highest  courts  of
appeal.  The  changes  which  I  am  about  to  describe
arose  from  the  mere  establishment  of  local  courts  of
lowest  jurisdiction  ;  and  while  they  have  effected  a
revolution, it is a revolution which in the first


n  CHANGE IN  NATURE OP USAGE.  lect.  iir.

instance was  conservative  of  the  rigidity  of  native
usage. The  customs  at  once  altered  their  character.
They  are  generally  collected  from  the  testimony  of
the  village  elders  ;  but  when  these  elders  are  once
called  upon  to  give  their  evidence,  they  necessarily
lose  their  old  position. They  are  no  longer  a  half-
judicial,  half-legislative  council. That which they
have  affirmed  to  be  the  custom  is  henceforward  to
be  sought  from  the  decisions  of  the  Courts  of  Justice,
or  from  official  documents  which  those  courts  receive
as  evidence ;  such,  for  example,  as  the  document  which,
under  the  name  of  the  Record  of  Rights,  I  described
to  you  as  a  detailed  statement  of  all  rights  in  land
drawn  up  periodically  by  the  functionaries  employed
in  settling  the  claim  of  the  Government  to  its  share
A  o^oiz.  r^  •'^^^ ^^  ^^^  rental. Usage,  once  recorded  upon  evidence
v,Atvw  (u^^ given,  immediately  becomes  written  and  fixed  law.
vv-Cvo^ci  4  ^ ^^^  ^^  ^^  ^^y  longer  obeyed  as  usage. It  is  hence -
^^'^^^^f^  forth  obeyed  as  the  law  administered  by  a  British

Court,  and  has  thus  really  become  a  command  of  the
sovereign.  The  next  thing  is  that  the  vague  sanc-
tions of  customary  law  disappear.  The  local  courts
have  of  course  power  to  order  and  guide  the  execu-
tion of  their  decrees,  and  thus  we  have  at  once  the
sanction  or  penalty  following  disobedience  of  the
command.  And,  with  the  command  and  with  the
sanction,  come  the  conceptions  of  legal  right  and  duty.
1  am  not  speaking  of  the  logical  but  of  the  practical


LECT.  III. GROWTH OF CONCEPTION OP HIGHT.  73

consequence.  If  I  had  to  state  what  for  the  moment
is  the  grea,test  change  which  has  come  over  the
people  of  India  and  the  change  which  has  added  most
seriously  to  the  difficulty  of  governing  them,  I  should  ;  '^^1^/^^^
say  it  was  the  growth  on  all  sides  of  the  sense  ofi,^^^  ,-^AVM.'
individual  legal  right ;  of  a  right  not  vested  in  the
total  group  but  in  the  particular  member  of  it
aggrieved,  who  has  become  conscious  that  he  may
call  in  the  arm  of  the  State  to  force  his  neighbours  to
obey  the  ascertained  rule.  The  spread  of  this  sense
of  individual  right  would  be  an  unqualified  advantage
if  it  drew  with  it  a  corresponding  improvement  in
moral  judgment.  There  would  be  little  evil  in  the
British  Government  giving  to  native  custom  a  con-
straining force  which  it  never  had  in  purely  native
society,  if  popular  opinion  could  be  brought  to  approve
of  the  gradual  amelioration  of  that  custom.  Unfor-
tunately for  us,  we  have  created  the  sense  of  legal
right  before  we  have  created  a  proportionate  power
of  distinguishing  good  from  evil  in  the  law  upon
which  the  legal  right  depends.

You  will  see  then that  the  English  government
of  India  consciously  introduced  into  India  only  oneQ^^^^j^-c^w  rv
of the conceptions discriminated by the  juridical  l^^-^")  *«.j/v^-
analysis  of  a  law. This  was  the  sanction  or  penalty ;  ^j^ujiav^  c/\Mv
in  establishing  Courts  of  Justice  they  of  course  con-  ^'^"''^  ^  v^
templated  the  compulsory  execution  of  decrees. But
in  introducing  one  of  the  terms  of  the  series  you  will


74  INFLUENCE OP ENGLISH LAW.  lect.  hi.

observe  they  introduced  all  the  others — the  political
superior,  the  command,  the  legal  right  and  the  legal
duty.  I  have  stated  that  the  process  is  in  itself  one
conservative  of  native  usage,  and  that  the  spirit  in-
troduced from  above  into  the  administration  of  the
law  by  English  lawyers  was  also  one  which  tended
to  stereotype  custom.  You  may  therefore  perhaps
recall  with  some  surprise  the  reason  which  I  assigned
in  my  first  liccture  for  making  haste  to  read  the
lessons  which  India  furnishes  to  the  juridical  student.
Indian  usage,  with  other  things  Indian,  was,  I  told
you,  passing  away.  The  explanation  is  that  you
have  to  allow  for  an  influence,  which  I  have  merely
referred  to  as  yet,  in  connection  with  the  exceptional
English  Courts  at  Calcutta,  Madras,  and  Bombay.
Over  the  interior  of  India  it  has  only  begun  to  make
itself  felt  of  late  years,  but  its  force  is  not  yet  nearly
spent.  This  is  the  influence  of  English  law;  not,  I
mean,  of  the  spirit  which  animates  English  lawyers
and  which  is  eminently  conservative,  but  the  conta-
gion, so  to  speak,  of  the  English  system  of  law, —  the
,^^_  efl*ect  which  the  body  of  rules  constituting  it  pro-
gj^vc/T/^ji^'.^^  duces  by  contact  with  native  usage.  Primitive  cus-
\j^^'^r^  J  tomary  law  has  a  double  peculiarity :  it  is  extremely
^  A^  scanty  in  some  departments,  it  is  extremely  prodigal

of  rules  in  others  ;  but  the  departments  in  which
rules  are  plentiful  are  exactly  those  which  lose  their
importance as the movements of society  become


LECT.  III.  INFLUENCE OF ENGLISH LAW.  75

quicker  and  more  various.  The  body  of  persons  to
whose  memory  the  customs  are  committed  has  pro-
bably always  been  a  qaasi-legislative  as  well  as  a
quasi-judicial  body,  and  has  always  added  to  the
stock  of  usage  by  tacitly  inventing  new  rules  to  apply
to  cases  which  are  really  new.  When,  however,  the
customary  law  has  once  been  reduced  to  writing  and
recorded  by  the  process  w^hich  I  have  described,  it
does  not  supply  express  rules  or  principles  in  nearly
sufficient  number  to  settle  the  disputes  occasioned  by
the  increased  activity  of  life  and  the  multiplied  wants
which  result  from  the  peace  and  plenty  due  to  British
rule.  The  consequence  is  wholesale  and  indiscrimi-
nate borrowing  from  the  English  law — the  most
copious  system  of  express  rules  known  to  the  world.
The  Judge  reads  English  law-books  ;  the  young
native  lawyers  read  them,  for  law  is  the  study  into
which  the  educated  youth  of  the  country  are  throw-
ing themselves,  and  for  which  they  may  even  be  said
to  display  something  very  like  genius.  You  may
ask  what  authority  have  these  borrowed  rules  in
India.  Technically,  they  have  none  whatever  ;  yet,
though  they  are  taken  (and  not  always  correctly
taken)  from  a  law  of  entirely  foreign  origin,  they  are
adopted  as  if  they  naturally  commended  themselves
to  the  reason  of  mankind  ;  and  all  that  can  be  said
of  the  process  is  that  it  is  another  example  of  the
influence,  often  felt  in  European  legal  history,  which


7G  CONNECTION  OP  EASTERN  AND  WESTERN  JUSTICE,  lect.  iir.

express  written  law  invariably  exercises  on  unwritten
customary  law  when  they  are  found  side  by  side.
For  myself,  I  cannot  say  that  I  regard  this  transmu-
tation of  law  as  otherwise  than  lamentable.  It  is  not
a  correction  of  native  usage  where  it  is  unwholesome.
It  allows  that  usage  to  stand,  and  confirms  it  rather
than  otherwise  ;  but  it  fills  up  its  interstices  with
unamalgamated  masses  of  foreign  law.  And  in  a
very  few  years  it  will  destroy  its  interest  for  the
historical  jurist,  by  rendering  it  impossible  to  deter-
mine what  parts  of  the  structure  are  of  native  and
what  of  foreign  origin.  Nor  will  the  remedial  pro-
cess which  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  apply  for  the
credit  of  the  British  name  restore  the  integrity  of  the
native  system.  For  the  cure  can  only  consist  in  the
enactment  of  uniform,  simple,  codified  law,  formed
for  the  most  part  upon  the  best  European  models.

It  is  most  desirable  that  one  great  branch  of  native
Indian  usage  should  be  thoroughly  examined  before  it
decays,  inasmuch  as  it  is  through  it  that  we  are  able
to  connect  Indian  customary  law  with  what  appears
to  have  once  been  the  customary  law  of  the  Western
World.  I  speak  of  the  Indian  customs  of  agricultural
tenure  and  of  collective  property  in  land.

For  many  years  past  there  has  been  sufificient
evidence  to  warrant  the  assertion  that  the  oldest  dis-
coverable forms  of  property  in  land  were  forms  of
collective  property,  and  to  justify  the  conjecture  that


LECT.  III.  VON MAURER.  77

separate  property  had  grown  through  a  series  (though
not  always  an  identical  series)  of  changes,  out  of  col-
lective property  or  ownership  in  common.  But  the
testimony  which  was  furnished  by  the  Western  World
had  one  peculiarity.  The  forms  of  collective  property
which  had  survived  and  were  open  to  actual  observa-
tion were  believed  to  be  found  exclusively  in  countries
peopled  by  the  Sclavonic  race.  It  is  true  that  histo-
rical scholars  who  had  made  a  special  study  of  the
evidence  concerning  ancient  Teutonic  holdings,  as,  for
example,  the  early  English  holdings,  might  have  been
able  to  assert  of  them  that  they  pointed  to  the  same
conclusions  as  the  Sclavonic  forms  of  village  property  ;
but  the  existing  law  of  property  in  land,  its  actual
distribution  and  the  modes  of  enjoying  it,  were  sup-
posed to  have  been  exclusively  determined  in  Teutonic
countries  by  their  later  history.  It  was  not  until
Von  Maurer  published  a  series  of  works,  in  which  his
conclusions  were  very  gradually  developed,  that  the
close  correspondence  between  the  early  history  of
Teutonic  property  and  the  facts  of  proprietary  enjoy-
ment in  the  Germany  of  our  own  day  was  fully  estab-
lished ;  and  not  two  years  have  elapsed  since  Nasse
called  attention  to  the  plain  and  abundant  vestiges
of  collective  Teutonic  property  which  are  to  be  traced
in  England.

I  shall  not  attempt  to  do  more  than  give  you  such
a  summary  of  Yon  Maurer's  conclusions  as  may  suffice


78  THE TEUTONIC VILLAGE COMMUNITIES, lect.  hi.

to  connect  them  with  the  results  of  official  observation
and  administrative  enquiry  in  India.  You  will  find
a  somewhat  fuller  compendium  of  them  in  the  paper
contributed  by  Mr.  Morier  to  the  volume  recently
published,  called  '  Systems  of  Land  Tenure  in  Various
Countries.'  Mr.  Morier  is  the  English  Charge  d' Af-
faires at  Darmstadt,  and  he  assures  me  that  his  account
of  the  abundant  vestiges  of  collective  property  which
are  to  be  found  in  the  more  backward  parts  of
Germany  may  easily  be  verified  by  the  eye.  They
are  extremely  plain  in  some  territorial  maps  with
which  he  has  been  good  enough  to  supply  me.

The  ancient  Teutonic  cultivating  community,  as  it
existed  in  Germany  itself,  appears  to  have  been  thus
organised. It consisted of a  number of families
^fiSj^Y  standing  in  a  proprietary  relation  to  a  district  divided
^  '  into  three  parts. These  three  portions  were  the  Mark

^  lu^r<^AAAi  of  the  Township  or  Village,  the  Common  Mark  or
waste,  and  the  Arable  Mark  or  cultivated  area.  The
community  inhabited  the  village,  held  the  common
mark  in  mixed  ownership,  and  cultivated  the  arable
mark  in  lots  appropriated  to  the  several  families.

Each  family  in  the  township  was  governed  by  its
own  free  head  or  paterfamilias.  The  precinct  of  the
family  dwelling-house  could  be  entered  by  nobody
but  himself  and  those  under  his  patria  potestas,  not
even  by  officers  of  the  law,  for  he  himself  made  law
within  and  enforced  law  made  without.


LECT.  III. THE TEUTONIC VILLAGE COMMUNITIES.  79

But,  while  he  stood  under  no  relations  controllable
by  others  to  the  members  of  his  family,  he  stood  in  a
number  of  very  intricate  relations  to  the  other  heads
of  families.  The  sphere  of  usage  or  customary  law
was  not  the  family,  but  the  connection  of  one  family
with  another  and  with  the  aggregate  community.

Confining  ourselves  to  proprietary  relations,  we
find  that  his  rights  or  (what  is  the  same  thing)  the
rights  of  his  family  over  the  Common  Mark  are  con-
trolled or  modified  by  the  rights  of  every  other
family.  It  is  a  strict  ownership  in  common,  both  in
theory  and  in  practice.  When  cattle  grazed  on  the
common  pasture,  or  when  the  householder  felled  wood
in  the  common  forest,  an  elected  or  hereditary  ofiicer
watched  to  see  that  the  common  domain  was  equitably
enjoyed.

But  the  proprietary  relation  of  the  householder
which  has  most  interest  for  us  is  his  relation  to  the
Arable  Mark.  It  seems  always  in  theory  to  have  been
originally  cut  out  of  the  common  mark,  which  indeed
cat!  only  be  described  as  the  portion  of  the  village
domain  not  appropriated  to  cultivation.  In  this  uni-
versally recognised  original  severance  of  the  arable
mark  from  the  common  mark  we  come  very  close  upon
the  beginning  of  separate  or  individual  property.
The  cultivated  land  of  the  Teutonic  village  community
appears  almost  invariably  to  have  been  divided  into
three  great  fields. A  rude  rotation  of  crops  was  the


80  THE ARABLE MARK.  lect.  hi.

object  of  this  threefold  division,  and  it  was  intended
that  each  field  should  lie  fallow  once  in  three  years.
,  ,  The  fields  under  tillas^e  were  not  however  culti-

J^a  o-Lon^  i^  vated  by  labour  in  common.  Each  householder  has
^\^G^U/r^  liis  own  family  lot  in  each  of  the  three  fields,  and
^^"^^^^  ^  '  this  he  tills  by  his  own  labour,  and  that  of  his  sons
and  his  slaves.  But  he  cannot  cultivate  as  he
pleases.  He  must  sow  the  same  crop  as  the  rest  of
the  community,  and  allow  his  lot  in  the  uncultivated
field  to  lie  fallow  with  the  others.  Nothing  he  does
must  interfere  with  the  right  of  other  households  to
have  pasture  for  sheep  and  oxen  in  the  fallow  and
among  the  stubbles  of  the  fields  under  tillage.  The
rules  regulating  the  modes  of  cultivating  the  various
lots  seem  to  have  been  extremely  careful  and  compli-
cated, and  thus  we  may  say  without  much  rashness
that  the  earliest  law  of  landed  property  arose  at  the
same  time  when  the  first  traces  of  individual  property
began  to  show  themselves,  and  took  the  form  of
usages  intended  to  produce  strict  uniformity  of  culti-
vation in  all  the  lots  of  ground  for  the  first  time
appropriated.  That  these  rules  should  be  intricate
is  only  what  might  be  expected.  The  simplicity
of  the  earliest  family  law  is  not  produced  by  any
original  tendency  of  mankind,  but  is  merely  the
simplicity  which  goes  always  with  pure  despotism.
Ancient  systems  of  law  are  in  one  sense  scanty.
The number  of  subjects  with  which  they deal  is


LECT.  III.  THE ARABLE MARK.  81

small,  and,  from  tlie  modern  jurist's  point  of  view,  jyw*-*^  ^^  ^

there  are  great  gaps  in  them. But  the  number  of'^^^'^^^j.^^^^ji^  *

minute  rules  which  they  accumulate  between  narrow

limits is very surprising. The most astonishing

example  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  translation  of

the  Ancient  Irish  law  now  in  course  of  publication

by  the  Irish  Government. The.  skeleton  of  this  law

is  meagre  enough,  but  the  quantity  of  detail  is  vast —

so  vast  that  I  cannot  but  believe  that  much  of  it  is

attributable  to  the  perverted  ingenuity  of  a  class  of

hereditary  lawyers.

The  evidence  appears  to  me  to  establish  that  the
Arable  Mark  of  the  Teutonic  village  community  was  ^V^"""^  ^^
occasionally  shifted  from  one  part  of  the  general  y^fW^
village  domain  to  another.  It  seems  also  to  show^y  JUov^y  <L.i^
that  the  original  distribution  of  the  arable  area  was  '^^«^''*^  r'^
always  into  exactly  equal  portions,  corresponding  to  \^,^.^  u^^^Jm
the  number  of  free  families  in  the  township.  Nor  '^*^^*''^*^
can  it  be  seriously  doubted  upon  the  evidence  that"^)  *^  'T^T^  vT
the  proprietary  equality  of  the  families  composing  jU^Jt  t/wJfe^  cmJU.
the  group  was  at  first  still  further  secured  by  % . TT^'^^t^ aa,jL
periodical  redistribution  of  the  several  assignments.  _i;;;^jU^t«C^  <i^v^jt
The  point  is  one  of  some  importance.  One  stage  in
the  transition  from  collective  to  individual  property
was  reached  when  the  part  of  the  domain  under
cultivation  was  allotted  among  the  Teutonic  races  to
the  several  families  of  the  township ;  another  was
gained  when  the  system  of  '  shifting  severalties '  came

G


QMA>*^


82  THE ARABLE MARK.  lect.  hi.

to  an  end,  and  each  family  was  confirmed  for  a
perpetuity  in  the  enjoyment  of  its  several  lots  of
land.  But  there  appears  to  be  no  country  inhabited
by  an  Aryan  race  in  which  traces  do  not  remain  of
the  ancient  periodical  redistribution.  It  has  con-
tinued to  our  own  day  in  the  Eussian  villages.
Among  the  Hindoo  villagers  there  are  widely  ex-
tending traditions  of  the  practice ;  and  it  was  doubt-
less the  source  of  certain  usages,  to  be  hereafter
described,  which  have  survived  to  our  day  in  Eng-
land and  Germany.

I  quote  from  Mr.  Morier's  paper  the  following  ob-
'eJTtr^  H-ru^^^""'^^  servations.  '  These  two  distinct  aspects  of  the  early
;«^"^*M^*  Teutonic  freeman  as  a  "lord  "  and  a  "  commoner"

united  in  the  same  person— one  when  within  the  pale
of  his  homestead,  the  other  when  standing  outside
that  pale  in  the  economy  of  the  mark — should  not  be
lost  sight  of  In  them  are  reflected  the  two  salient
characteristics  of  the  Teutonic  race,  the  spirit  of
individuality,  and  its  spirit  of  association ;  and  as  the
9;Ction  and  reaction  of  these  two  laws  have  deter-
mined the  social  and  political  history  of  the  race,  so
they  have  in  an  especial  manner  affected  and  deter-
mined its  agricultural  history.'

Those  of  you  who  are  familiar  with  the  works  of
Palgrave,  Kemble,  and  Freeman,  are  aware  that  the
most  learned  writers  on  the  early  English  proprietary
system  give  an  account  of  it  not  at  variance  in  any


LECT.  HI. ENGLISH THEORIES OF LAND-LAW.  83

material  point  with  the  description  of  the  Teutonic
mark  which  I  have  repeated  from  Yon  Maurer.  The
question,  then,  which  at  once  presses  on  us  is  whether
an  ancient  form  of  property,  which  has  left  on
Germany  traces  so  deep  and  durable  that  (again  to
quote  Mr.  Morier)  they  may  always  be  followed
on  ordinary  territorial  maps,  must  be  believed  to  have
quite  died  out  in  England,  leaving  no  sign  of  itself
behind?  Unquestionably  the  answer  furnished  by
the  received  text-books  of  English  real-property  law
is  affirmative.  They  either  assume,  or  irresistibly
suggest,  that  the  modern  law  is  separated  from  the
ancient  law  by  some  great  interruption ;  and  Nasse,
the  object  of  whose  work  is  to  establish  the  survival
of  the  Mark  in  England,  allows  that  German
enquirers  had  been  generally  under  the  impression
that  the  history  of  landed  property  in  this  country
was  characterised  by  an  exceptional  discontinuity.
There  is  much  in  the  technical  theory  of  our  real-
property  law  which  explains  these  opinions  ;  and  it
is  less  wonderful  that  lawyers  should  have  been  led
to  them  by  study  of  the  books,  than  that  no  doubt
of  their  soundness  should  have  been  created  by  facts
with  which  practitioners  were  occasionally  well
acquainted.  These  facts,  establishing  the  long  con-
tinuance of  joint  cultivation  by  groups  modelled  on
the  community  of  the  Mark,  were  strongly  pressed  ^^_^U  u^^i
upon  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  i™L

G  2  ^


84  ENGLISH THEORIES OF LAND-LAW. lect.  hi.

which  sat  to  consider  the  subject  of  inclosures  in
1844  by  a  witness,  Mr.  Blamire,  who  was  at  once  a
lawyer  and  an  official  unusually  familiar  with  English
landed  property  in  its  less  usual  shapes.  Yet  Mr.
Blamire  appears  (^Evidence  before  Select  Committee
,of  1844,'  p.  32,  q.  335)  to  have  unreservedly  adopted
the  popular  theory  on  the  subject,  which  I  believe  to
be  that  at  some  period — sometimes  vaguely  associated
with  the  feudalisation  of  Europe,  sometimes  more
precisely  with  the  Norman  Conquest — the  entire  soil
of  England  was  confiscated  ;  that  the  whole  of  each
manor  became  the  lord's  demesne;  that  the  lord
divided  certain  parts  of  it  among  his  free  retainers,
but  kept  a  part  in  his  own  hands  to  be  tilled  by  his
villeins;  that  all  which  was  not  required  for  this
distribution  was  left  as  the  lord's  waste ;  and  that  all
customs  which  cannot  be  traced  to  feudal  principles
grew  up  insensibly,  through  the  subsequent  tolerance
of  the  feudal  chief.

There  has  been  growing  attention  for  some  years
past  to  a  part  of  the  observable  phenomena  which
prove  the  unsoundness  of  the  popular  impression.
Many  have  seen  that  the  history  of  agriculture,  of
land-law,  and  of  the  relations  of  classes  cannot  be
thoroughly  constructed  until  the  process  has  been
thoroughly  deciphered  by  which  the  common  or
waste -land  was  brought  under  cultivation  either  by
the  lord  of  the  manor  or  by  the  lord  of  the  manor


LECT.  111.  THE ARABLE MARK IN ENGLAND.  85

in  connection  with  the  commoners.  The  history  of
Inclosures  and  of  Inclosure  Acts  is  now  recognised  as
of  great  importance  to  our  general  history.  But
corresponding  study  has  not,  or  not  of  late,  been
bestowed  on  another  set  of  traces  left  by  the  past.
The  Arable  Mark  has  survived  among  us  as  well  as  A^^-^^^^  ^»^^^
the  Common  Mark  or  waste,  and  it  the  more  de-
serves our  attention  in  this  place  because  its  interest
is  not  social  or  political  but  purely  juridical.

The  lands  which  represent  the  cultivated  portion
of  the  domain  of  the  ancient  Teutonic  village  com-
munities are  found  more  or  less  in  all  parts  of  England,
but  more  abundantly  in  some  counties  than  in  others.  ^  ^^j^
They  are  known  by  various  names. When  the  soil  is  c^ywwmjtk^  4jms
arable,  they  are  most  usually  called  '  common,'  'corn-  ^  c/^^t^w^«>^«^
monable,'or  '  open '  fields,  or  sometimes  simply  '  inter-  /"'^^"^/oyv^^yo^^^
mixed '  lands. When  the  lands  are  in  grass,  they  are
sometimes known  as '  lot  meadows,' sometimes  as
'lammas  lands,'  though  the  last  expression  is  occa-
sionally used  of  arable  soil. The  *  common  fields  '  are
almost  invariably  divided  into  three  long  strips,  sepa-  j»
rated  by  green  baulks  of  turf. The  several  properties
consist in subdivisions of  these strips, sometimes
exceedingly  minute;  and  there is a  great deal of
evidence  that  one  several  share  in  each  of  the  strips
belonged  originally  to  the  same  ownership,  and  that
all  the  several  shares  in  any  one  strip  were  originally
equal  or  nearly  equal,  though  in  progress  of  time  a


8^


THE  COMMON FIELDS.


LECT. III.


rr^J>t


good  many  have  been  accumulated  in  the  same  hands.
The  agricultural  customs  which  prevail  in  these
common  fields  are  singularly  ahke.  Each  strip  bears
two  crops  of  a  dilFerent  kind  in  turn  and  then  lies
fallow.  The  better  opinion  seems  to  be  that  the
custom  as  to  the  succession  of  crops  would  not  be
sustained  at  law ;  but  the  right  to  feed  sheep  or  cattle
on  the  whole  of  one  strip  during  the  fallow  year,  or
among  the  stubbles  of  the  other  two  strips  after  the
crops  have  been  got  in,  or  on  the  green  baulks  which
divide  the  three  fields,  is  generally  treated  as  capable
j  of  being  legally  maintained.  This  right  has  in  some
cases  passed  to  the  lord  of  the  manor,  but  sometimes
it  is  vested  in  the  body  of  persons  who  are  owners  of
the  several  shares  in  the  common  fields.  The  grass
lands  bear  even  more  distinct  traces  of  primitive
usage.  The  several  shares  in  the  arable  fields,  some-
times, but  very  rarely,  shift  from  one  owner  to
another  in  each  successive  year ;  but  this  is  frequently
the  rule  with  the  meadows,  which,  when  they  are
themselves  in  a  state  of  severalty,  are  often  distribu-
ted once  a  year  by  casting  lots  among  the  persons
entitled  to  appropriate  and  enclose  them,  or  else
change  from  one  possessor  to  another  in  the  order  of
the  names  of  persons  or  tenements  on  a  roll.  As  a
rule  the  inclosures  are  removed  after  the  hay -harvest;
and  there  are  manors  in  which  they  are  taken  down
by the villagers on Lammas Day (that is. Old


LECT.  III.  SHIFTING SEVERALTIES.  87

Lammas  Day)  in  a  sort  of  legalised  tumultuary
assembly.  The  group  of  persons  entitled  to  use  the
meadows  after  they  have  been  thrown  open  is  often
larger  than  the  number  of  persons  entitled  to  en-
close them.  All  the  householders  in  a  parish,  and
not  merely  the  landowners,  are  found  enjoying  this
right.  The  same  peculiarity  occasionally,  but  much
more  rarely,  characterises  the  rights  over  common
arable  fields;  and  it  is  a  point  of  some  interest,  since
an  epoch  in  the  history  of  primitive  groups  occurs
Ip  when  they  cease  to  become  capable  of  absorbing
strangers.  The  English  cultivating  communities  may
be  supposed  to  have  admitted  new-comers  to  a  limited
enjoyment  of  the  meadows,  up  to  a  later  date  than
the  period  at  which  the  arable  land  had  become  the
exclusive  property  of  the  older  families  of  the  group.
The  statute  24  Geo.  II.  c.  23,  which  altered  the
English  Calendar,  recites  (s.  5)  the  frequency  of
these  ancient  customs  and  forms  of  property,  and
provides  that  the  periods  for  commencing  common
enjoyment  shall  be  reckoned  by  the  old  account  of
time.  They  have  been  frequently  noticed  by  agri-
cultural writers,  who  have  strongly  and  unanimously
condemned  them.  There  is  but  one  voice  as  to  the  ^^^.^jLiruni.  4^^
barbarousness  of  the  agriculture  perpetuated  in  the  '^^  c<oa*via.^
common  arable  fields,  and  as  to the quarrels  and  ^

heart-burning  of  which  the  'shifting  severalties'  in
the  meadow  land  have  been  the  source. But  both


88  GREAT EXTENT OP  THE COMMON FIELDS, lect.  hi.

common  fields  and  common  meadows  are  still  plenti-
ful on  all  sides  of  us.  Speaking  for  myself  person-
ally, I  have  been  greatly  surprised  at  the  number  of
instances  of  abnormal  proprietary  rights,  necessarily
implying  the  former  existence  of  collective  owner-
ship and  joint  cultivation,  which  comparatively  brief
enquiry  has  brought  to  my  notice ;  nor  can  I  doubt
that  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  instances  of  such
rights  could  have  been  produced  in  vastly  greater
numbers,  since  Private  Acts  of  Parliament  for  the
inclosure  of  commonable  fields  were  constantly
passed  in  the  latter  part  of  the  last  and  the  earlier
part  of  the  present  century,  and  since  1836  they
have  been  extensively  enclosed,  agglomerated,  and
exchanged  under  the  Common  Fields  Inclosure  Act
passed  in  that  year,  and  under  the  general  powers
more  recently  vested  in  the  Inclosure  Commissioners.
The  breadth  of  land  which  was  comparatively  recently
in  an  open,  waste,  or  commonable  condition,  and
which  therefore  bore  the  traces  of  the  ancient  Teu-
tonic cultivating  system,  may  be  gathered  from  a
passage  in  which  Nasse  sums  up  the  statements  made
in  a  number  of  works  by  a  writer,  Marshall,  whom  I
shall  presently  quote.  '  In  almost  all  parts  of  the
country,  in  the  Midland  and  Eastern  Counties  par-
ticularly, but  also  in  the  West — in  Wiltshire  for  ex-
ample— in  the  South,  as  in  Surrey,  in  the  North,  as
in  Yorkshire,  there  are  extensive  open  and  common


I.ECT.  III. GREAT EXTENT OF THE COMMON FIELDS.  89

fields.  Out  of  316  parishes  in  Northamptonshire,  89
are  in  this  condition;  more  than  100  in  Oxfordshire ;
about  50,000  acres  in  Warwickshire ;  in  Berkshire,
half  the  county ;  more  than  half  of  Wiltshire  ;  in
Huntingdonshire,  out  of  a  total  area  of  240,000  acres,
130,000  were  commonable  meadows,  commons,  and
common  fields.'  (Ueber  die  Mittelalterliche  Feld-
gemeinschaft  in  England,'  p.  4.)  The  extent  of  some
of  the  fields  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact,  stated  to
me  on  good  authority,  that  the  pasturage  on  the  divid-
ing baulks  of  turf,  which  were  not  more  than  three
yards  wide,  was  estimated  in  one  case  at  eighty  acres.
These  footprints  of  the  past  were  quite  recently  found
close  to  the  capital  and  to  the  seats  of  both  Uni-
versities. In  Cambridgeshire  they  doubtless  corre-
sponded to  the  isolated  patches  of  dry  soil  which  were
scattered  through  the  fens,  and  in  the  metropolitan
county  of  Surrey,  of  which  the  sandy  and  barren  soil
produced  much  the  same  isolation  of  tillage  as  did  the
morasses  of  the  fen  country,  they  occurred  so  close  to
London  as  to  impede  the  extension  of  its  suburbs,
through  the  inconvenient  customs  which  they  placed
in  the  way  of  building.  One  of  the  largest  of  the
common  fields  was  found  in  the  immediate  neigh-
bourhood of  Oxford;  and  the  grassy  baulks  which
anciently  separated  the  three  fields  are  still  conspi-
cuous from  the  branch  of  the  Great  Northern  Kailway
which  leads  to  Cambridge.


ga  EXTRACT FROM MARSHALL.  lect.  hi.

The  extract  from  Marshall's  '  Elementary  and  Prac-
tical Treatise  on  Landed  Property '  (London,  1804)
which  I  am  about  to  read  to  you,  is  in  some  ways
very  remarkable.  Mr.  William  Marshall  was  a  writer
on  agriculture  who  published  largely  between  1770
and  1820,  and  he  has  left  an  account  of  the  state  of
cultivation  in  almost  every  English  county.  He  had
been  engaged  for  many  years  in  '  studying  the  im-
provement and  directing  the  management  of  several
large  estates  in  England,  Wales  and  Scotland,'  and  he
had  taken  a  keen  interest  in  what  he  terms  '  provin-
cial practices.'  The  picture  of  the  ancient  state  of
England  which  follows,  was  formed  in  his  mind  from
simple  observation  of  the  phenomena  of  custom,
tillage,  and  territorial  arrangement  which  he  saw
before  his  eyes.  You  will  perceive  that  he  had  not
the  true  key  in  his  possession,  and  that  he  figured  to
himself  the  collective  form  of  property  as  a  sort  of
common  farm,  cultivated  by  the  tenantry  of  a  single
landlord.

'  In  this  place  it  is  sufficient  to  premise  that  a  very
few  centuries  ago,  nearly  the  whole  of  the  lands  of
England  lay  in  an  open,  and  more  or  less  in  a  com-
monable state,  Each  parish  or  township  (at  least
in  the  more  central  and  northern  districts),  comprised
different  descriptions  of  lands  ;  having  been  sub-
jected, during  successive  ages,  to  specified  modes  of
occupancy, under ancient and strict regulations.


I.ECT.  III.  EXTRACT FROM MARSHALL.  91

which  time  had  converted  to  law.  These  parochial
arrangements,  however,  varied  somewhat  in  different
districts ;  but  in  the  more  central  and  greater  part
of  the  kingdom,  not  widely;  and  the  following  state-
ment may  serve  to  convey  a  general  idea  of  the  whole
of  what  may  be  termed  Common-field  Townships,
throughout  England.

'  Under  this  ingenious  mode  of  organisation,  each
parish  or  township  was  considered  as  one  common
farm  ;  though  the  tenantry  were  numerous.

'  Round  the  village,  in  which  the  tenants  resided,
lay  a  few  small  inclosures,  or  grass  yards  ;  for  rear-
ing calves,  and  as  baiting  and  nursery  grounds  for
other  farm  stock.  This  was  the  common  farmstead,
or  homestall,  which  was  generally  placed  as  near  the
centre  of  the  more  culturable  lands  of  the  parish  or
township  as  water  and  shelter  would  permit.

'  Round  the  homestall,  lay  a  suit  of  arable  fields  ;
including  the  deepest  and  soundest  of  the  lower
grounds,  situated  out  of  water's  way  ;  for  raising
corn  and  pulse  ;  as  well  as  to  produce  fodder  and
litter  for  cattle  and  horses  in  the  winter  season.

'And,  in  the  lowest  situation,  as  in  the  water-
formed  base  of  a  river ed  valley,  or  in  swampy  dips,
shooting  up  among  the  arable  lands,  lay  an  extent  of
meadow  grounds,  or  ''  ings  "  ;  to  affbrd  a  supply  of
hay,  for  cows  and  working  stock,  in  the  winter  and
spring  months.


92  EXTRACT FROM MARSHALL.  lect.  hi.

'  On  the  outskirts  of  the  arable  lands,  where  the
soil  is  adapted  to  the  pasturage  of  cattle,  or  on  the
springy  slope  of  hills,  less  adapted  to  cultivation,  or
in  the  fenny  bases  of  valleys,  which  were  too  wet,  or
gravelly  water  formed  lands  which  were  too  dry,  to
produce  an  annual  supply  of  hay  with  sufficient  cer-
tainty, one  or  more  stinted  pastures,  or  hams,  were
laid  out  for  milking  cows,  working  cattle,  or  other
stock  which  required  superior  pasturage  in  summer. '

'  While  the  bleakest,  worst-soiled,  and  most  distant
lands  of  the  township,  were  left  in  their  native  wild
state ;  for  timber  and  fuel ;  and  for  a  common  pasture,
or  suit  of  pastures,  for  the  more  ordinary  stock  of
the  township  ;  whether  horses,  rearing  cattle,  sheep,
or  swine  ;  without  any  other  stint,  or  restriction,  than
what  the  arable  and  meadow  lands  indirectly  gave  ;
every  joint-tenant,  or  occupier  of  the  township,
having  the  nominal  privilege  of  keeping  as  much
live-stock  on  these  common  pastures,  in  summer,  as
the  appropriated  lands  he  occupied  would  maintain,
in  winter.

'  The  appropriated  lands  of  each  township  were  laid
out  with  equal  good  sense  and  propriety.  That  each
occupier  might  have  his  proportionate  share  of  lands
of  different  qualities,  and  lying  in  different  situations,
the  arable  lands,  more  particularly,  were  divided  into
numerous  parcels,  of  sizes,  doubtless,  according  to  the
size  of  the  given  township,  and  the  number  and  rank
of  the  occupiers.


LECT.  Ill-  EXTEACT FROM MARSHALL.  93

*  And,  that  the  whole  might  be  subjected  to  the  same
plan  of  management,  and  be  conducted  as  one  common
farm,  the  arable  lands  were  moreover  divided  into
compartments,  or  "  fields,"  of  nearly  equal  size,  and
generally  three  in  number,  to  receive,  in  constant
rotation,  the  triennial  succession  of  fallow,  wheat  (or
rye)  and  spring  crops  (as  barley,  oats,  beans,  and
peas)  :  thus  adopting  and  promoting  a  system  of  hus-
bandry, which,  howsoever  improper  it  is  become,  in
these  more  enlightened  days,  was  well  adapted  to  the
state  of  ignorance,  and  vassalage,  of  feudal  times  ;
when  each  parish  or  township  had  its  sole  proprietor  ;
the  occupiers  being  at  once  his  tenants  and  his
soldiers,  or  meaner  vassals.  The  lands  were  in  course
liable  to  be  more  or  less  deserted  by  their  occupiers,
and  left  to  the  feebleness  of  the  young,  the  aged,  and
the  weaker  sex.  But  the  whole  township  being,  in.
this  manner,  thrown  into  one  system,  the  care  and
management  of  the  live-stock,  at  least,  would  be  easier
and  better  than  they  would  have  been,  under  any
other  arrangement.  And,  at  all  times,  the  manager
of  the  estate  was  better  enabled  to  detect  bad  hus-
bandry, and  enforce  that  which  was  more  profitable
to  the  tenants  and  the  estate,  by  having  the  whole
spread  under  the  eye,  at  once,  than  he  would  have
been,  had  the  lands  been  distributed  in  detached
inclosed  farmlets  ;  besides  avoiding  the  expense  of
inclosure. And  .another  advantage  arose  from  this


94  SCOTT ON UDAL TENURES.  lect.  in.

more  social  arrangement,  in  barbarous  times  :  the
tenants,  by  being  concentrated  in  villages,  were  not
only  best  situated  to  defend  each  other  from  predatory
attacks  ;  but  were  called  out,  by  their  lord,  with
greater  readiness,  in  cases  of  emergency.'  (Marshall,
pp.  111-113.)

The  readers  of  the  '  Pirate  '  are,  I  dare  say,  aware
that  Sir  Walter  Scott  had  his  attention  strongly
attracted  to  the  so-called  Udal  tenures  of  Orkney  and
Shetland.  The  fact  has  more  juridical  interest  than
it  once  had,  now  that  recent  writers  have  succeeded
in  completely  identifying  the  ancient  Scandinavian
and  ancient  German  proprietary  usages.  In  the
diary  which  he  wrote  of  his  voyage  with  the  Com-
missioners of  Lighthouses  round  the  coasts  of  Scot-
land, Scott  observes :  '  I  cannot  get  a  distinct  account
of  the  nature  of  the  land-rights.  The  Udal  pro-
prietors have  ceased  to  exist,  yet  proper  feudal
tenures  seem  ill  understood.  Districts  of  ground  are
in  many  instances  understood  to  belong  to  townships
or  communities,  possessing  what  may  be  arable  by
patches  and  what  is  moor  as  a  commonty  pro  indi-
viso.  But  then  individuals  of  such  a  township  often
take  it  upon  them  to  grant  feus  of  particular  parts  of
the  property  thus  possessed  pro  indiviso.  The  town
of  Lerwick  is  built  upon  a  part  of  the  commonty  of
Sound ;  the  proprietors  of  the  houses  having  feu-rights
from  different  heritors  of  that  township,  but  why


LECT.  in.  COMMONTY OF LAUDER.  93

from  one  rather  than  other  ....  seems  altogether
uncertain'  (Lockhart's  'Life  of  Scott,'  iii.  p.  145).
That  these  tenures  survived  till  lately  in  the  northern
islands  has  been  long  known,  but  there  has  been  a
general  impression  that  the  strict  and  consistent
feudalism  of  Scotland  had  effaced  the  traces  of  older
Teutonic  usage  in  the  Lowlands.  Yet  a  Eeturn
recently  presented  to  Parliament  suggests  that  a  re-
examination of  Scottish  agricultural  customs  might
be  usefully  undertaken.  '  There  are,'  it  is  stated,
'  within  the  bounds  of  the  royalty  of  the  burgh  of
Lauder  105  separate  portions  of  land  called  Bur-
gess Acres.  These  vary  in  extent  from  one  and  a
half  acre  to  three  and  a  half  acres.  To  each  such
acre  there  is  a  separate  progress  of  writs,  and  these
"  Acres  "  are  the  private  and  absolute  property  of
individuals.  .  .  .  No  one  has  hitherto  been  admitted  a
burgess  of  the  burgh  who  has  not  been  an  owner  of
one  of  these  Burgess  Acres.  The  lands  of  the  burgh
consist  of ...  .  Lauder  Common,  extending  to  about
1,700  acres,  which  has,  from  all  time  of  which  there  is
any  record,  been  possessed  thus.  A  portion  of  it  has
been  set  off  periodically,  say  once  in  ^ye  or  seven
years,  to  be  broken  up  and  ploughed  during  that  time,
and  at  the  end  of  that  time  fixed  has  been  laid  down
in  grass,  and  grazed  along  with  the  other  lands  :
when  another  portion  of  the  common  was,  in  the  same
way,  broken  up  and  ploughed,  and  again  laid  down  in


M  COMMOXTY OF LAUDER.  lect.  hi.

grass.  The  portion  of  the  common  so  broken  up  and
ploughed  at  a  time  has,  of  recent  years,  been  about
130  acres  in  extent.  An  allotment  of  this  portion  of
the  common  has  been  given  to  the  owner  of  each  of
the  105  burgess  acres,  whether  he  happened  to  be  a
burgess  or  not,  one  allotment  for  each  acre.  The
portion  laid  off  for  cultivation  is,  in  the  first  place,
cut  into  the  number  of  allotments  required,  and  the
share  of  each  person  is  decided  by  lot.  The  condi-
tions attached  to  the  taking  of  hill  parts  have  been,
compliance  with  a  system  of  cultivation  prescribed  by
the  town  council,  and  payment  of  a  small  assessment,
generally  just  sufficient  to  reimburse  the  burgh  for
expenses  laid  out  in  making  roads,  drains,  &c.,  to
enhance  the  value  of  the  land  for  cultivation.  These
allotments  have  been  called  "Hill  parts,"  and  the
average  worth  of  each  is  11.  per  annum.  The  whole
of  the  remainder  of  the  common  has  been  used  for
grazing  purposes,  and  has  been  occupied  as  follows :
Each  burgess  resident  within  the  bounds  of  the  burgh
has  grazed  on  the  common  two  cows,  or  an  equivalent,
and  a  certain  number  of  sheep — at  present,  and  for
some  years,  fifteen ;  and  each  widow  of  a  burgess,
resident  in  the  burgh,  has  grazed  on  the  common  one
cow,  or  an  equivalent,  and  a  certain  number  of  sheep
— at  present,  and  for  many  years,  twelve '  ( '  Return
of  Boroughs  or  Cities  in  the  United  Kingdom,  pos-
sessing Common  Land,'  Appendix  L,  House  of
Commons,  August  10,  1870).


LECT.  III. PECULIARITIES OF SCOTTISH EXAMPLE.  97

It  may  be  doubted  whether  a  more  perfect  example
of  the  primitive  cultivating  community  is  extant  in
England  or  Germany.  As  compared  with  the  English
instances,  its  form  is  extremely  archaic.  The  arable
mark,  cultivated  under  rules  prescribed  by  the  town
council,  shifts  periodically  from  one  part  of  the  domain
to  another,  and  the  assignment  of  parcels  within  the
cultivated  area  is  by  lot.  It  is  interesting  too  to
observe  that  the  right  to  land  for  purposes  of  tillage
is  inseparably  connected  with  the  ownership  of  certain
plots  of  land  within  the  township.  A  similar  con-
nection between  the  shares  in  the  common  field  and
certain  ancient  tenements  in  a  village  is  sometimes
found  in  England  and  has  been  formally  established
at  law.  (See  the  bitter  complaints  of  Marshall,
'  Rural  Economy  of  Yorkshire,'  i.  55.)  On  the  other
hand,  a  group  of  persons  more  loosely  defined  has  the
right  to  pasture  on  the  part  of  the  common  in  grass,
and  this  peculiarity  occurs  also  in  England.  I  am
informed  that  most  of  the  Scottish  burghs  have
recently  sold  their  '  commonties ;  '  but  it  is  to  be
hoped  that  all  traces  of  the  ancient  customs  of  en-
joyment have  not  been  quite  obliterated.

Upon  the  evidence  collected  by  Nasse,  supplied
by  the  works  of  Marshall,  and  furnished  by  the  wit-
nesses examined  before  the  Select  Committee  of  1844,
and  upon  such  as  I  have  myself  been  able  to  gather,
the  vestiges  of  the  Teutonic  village  community  which

H


98  VESTIGES OF THE MARK.  lect.  hi.

remained  before  the  inclosures  of  the last century

and  the  present  may  be  thus  compendiously  described :

The  arable  part  of  the  domain  was  indicated  (1)  by

simple  intermixed  fields,  i,e.  fields  of  nearly  equal  size

mingled  together  and  belonging  to  an  extraordinary

number  of  owners,  so  that,  according  to  Mr.  Blamire's

statement,  in  one  parish  containing  2,831  acres  there

were  (in 1844)  2,315 pieces of  open land which

included  2,327  acres,  giving  an  average  size  of  one

acre (Evidence,  Select  Committee,  p. 17,  q. 185)  ;

(2)  by  fields  of  nearly  equal  size  arranged  in  three

long  strips  and  subject  to  various  customs  of  tillage,

the  most  universal being the fallow  observed by

each of  the strips in successive years  ; (3) by

'  shifting severalties ' of arable  land, which were

not,  however, of  frequent  occurrence  ; (4)  by  the

existence  of  certain  rights  of  pasture  over  the  green

baulks  which  prevented  their  removal.

The  portion  of  the  domain  kept  in  grass  was
represented  :  ( 1 )  by  '  shifting  severalties  '  of  mea-
dow land,  which  were  very  frequent,  the  modes  of
successive  allotment  being  also  very  various  ;  (2)  by
the  removal  of  inclosures  after  hay -harvest  ;  (3)  by
the  exercise,  on  the  part  of  a  community  generally
larger  than  the  number  of  persons  entitled  to  enclose,
of  a  right  to  pasture  sheep  and  cattle  on  the  meadow-
land  during  the  period  when  the  hay  was  not  matur-
ing for  harvest.


LECT.  III.  VESTIGES OF THE MARK.  99

The  rights  known  to  exist  over  Commons  constitute
much  too  large  a  subject  to  be  treated  of  here.  But
two  relics  of  the  ancient  collective  cultivation  may  be
specially  mentioned.  The  supervision  of  the  commu-
nal officer  who  watched  over  the  equitable  enjoyment
of  the  pastures  has  become  the  custom  of  '  stint  of
common,'  by  which  the  number  of  the  beasts  which
the  commoner  might  turn  out  on  the  waste  is  limited
and  regulated.  There  is  also  a  good  deal  of  evidence
that  some  commons,  now  entirely  waste,  bear  the
traces  of  ancient  tillage.  The  most  probable  explana-
tion is  that  in  these  cases  the  whole  of  the  arable
mark  had  been  removed  from  one  part  of  the  domain
to  another,  and  that  the  traces  of  cultivation  show  the
place  of  common  fields  anciently  deserted.


H 2


I


LECTURE IV.


THE EASTERN VILLAGE COMMUNITY,


CONTENTS.

The  Indian  Village  Community — Mahometan  Theory  of  Ownership —
Land  Settlement  of  Bengal  —  The  Indian  Proprietary  Unit  —  The
Indian  Village — The  Cultivated  Land — The  Growth  of  Custom —
Water  Rules — The  Sources  of  Primitive  Law — Customs  of  Ke-
partition — The  Village — Secrecy  of  Family  Life — Dislike  of  English
Criminal  Law — Fictions  Attending  Legislation — Village  Rules —
Origin  of  Indian  Towns — Indian  Capitals — The  Village  Waste  —
The  Indian  Wastes — The  Government  and  the  Wastes — The  Village
Council  —  Peaceful  Character  of  Population  —  Hereditary  Trades  —
Remuneration  of  Village  Traders — The  Outsiders — Absorption  ot
Strangers  by  Community.


LECT.  IV.  THE INDIAN VILLAGE COMMUNITY.  J  03


LECTURE  lY.

THE EASTERN VILLAGE COMMUNITY.

I  PROPOSE  in  tliis  Lecture  to  describe  summarily
and  remark  upon  the  Indian  forms  of  property  and
tenure  corresponding  to  the  ancient  modes  of  holding
and  cultivating  land  in  Europe  which  I  discussed  at
some  length  last  week.  It  does  not  appear  to  me  a
hazardous  proposition  that  the  Indian  and  the  ancient
European  systems  of  enjoyment  and  tillage  by  men
grouped  in  village  communities  are  in  all  essential
particulars  identical.  There  are  diiferences  of  detail
between  them,  and  I  think  you  will  find  the  discus-
sion of  these  differences  and  of  their  apparent  causes
not  uninteresting  nor  barren  of  instruction  to  the
student  of  jurisprudence.

No  Indian  phenomenon  has  been  more  carefully
examined,  and  by  men  more  thoroughly  in  earnest,
than  the  Village  Community.  For  many  years  past
the  discovery  and  recognition  of  its  existence  have
ranked  among  the  greatest  achievements  of  Anglo-
Indian  administration.  But  the  Village  Community
did  not  emerge  into  clear  light  very  early  in  the


104  MAHOMETAN THEORY OF OWNERSHIP. lect.  iv.

history  of  our  conquest  and  government.  Although
this  peculiar  group  is  referred  to  in  Manu,  the  English
found  little  to  guide  them  to  its  great  importance  in
the  Brahminical  codified  law  of  the  Hindoos  which
they  first  examined.  Perhaps  in  the  large  space
assigned  in  that  law  to  joint-property  and  partitions
they  might  have  found  a  hint  of  the  truth,  if  the
great  province  in  which  they  were  first  called  upon
to  practise  administration  on  a  large  scale,  Lower
Bengal  or  Bengal  Proper,  had  not  happened  to  be  the
exact  part  of  India  in  which,  from  causes  not  yet
fully  determined,  the  village  system  had  fallen  into
great  decay.  The  assumption  which  the  English
first  made  was  one  which  they  inherited  from  their
Mahometan  predecessors.  It  was,  that  all  the  soil
belonged  in  absolute  property  to  the  sovereign,  and
that  all  private  property  in  land  existed  by  his
suff*erance.  The  Mahometan  theory  and  the  corre-
sponding Mahometan  practice  had  put  out  of  sight  the
ancient  view  of  the  sovereign's  rights,  which,  though
it  assigned  to  him  a  far  larger  share  of  the  produce  of
the  land  than  any  western  ruler  has  ever  claimed,  yet
in  nowise  denied  the  existence  of  private  property  in
land.  The  English  began  to  act  in  perfect  good  faith
on  the  ideas  which  they  found  universally  prevailing
among  the  functionaries  whom  they  had  taken  over
from  the  Mahometan  semi-independent  viceroys  de-
throned by  their  arms. Their  earliest  experiments,


LECT.  IV.  LAND SETTLEMENT OF BENGAL.  105

tried  in  the  belief  that  the  soil  was  theirs  and  that
any  land-law  would  be  of  their  exclusive  creation,  have
now  passed  into  proverbs  of  maladroit  management.
The  most  famous  of  them  was  the  settlement  of
Lower  Bengal  by  Lord  Cornwallis.  It  was  an  at-
tempt to  create  a  landed-proprietary  like  that  of  this
country.  The  policy  of  conferring  estates  in  fee
simple  on  the  natural  aristocracy  of  certain  parts  of
India  (and  I  mean  by  a  '  natural  aristocracy '  an
aristocracy  formed  under  purely  native  conditions  of
society  by  what  amounts  to  the  sternest  process  of
natural  selection)  has  had  many  fervent  advocates
among  Indian  functionaries,  and  has  very  lately  been
carried  out  on  a  considerable  scale  in  the  newly-
conquered  province  of  Oudh.  But  the  great  pro-
prietors established  by  Lord  Cornwallis  were  un-
doubtedly, with  few  exceptions,  the  tax-gatherers  of
the  former  Mahometan  viceroy.  The  recoil  from  what
was  soon  recognised  as  a  mistake,  brought  a  system
into  fashion  which  had  been  tried  on  a  small  scale
at  an  earlier  date,  and  which  was  in  fact  the  reverse
of  Lord  Cornwallis's  experiment.  In  the  southern
provinces  of  the  peninsula,  the  English  Government
began  to  recognise  nothing  between  itself  and  the
immediate  cultivators  of  the  soil;  and  from  them  it
took  directly  its  share  of  the  produce.  The  effect
was  to  create  a  peasant-proprietary.  This  system,  of
which  the  chief  seat  was  the  province  of  Madras,  has,  in


106  THE INDIAN PROPRIETARY UNIT.  lect.  iv.

my  opinion,  been  somewhat  unjustly  decried.  Now  that
it  has  been  modified  in  some  details,  and  that  some
mistakes  first  committed  have  been  corrected,  there
is  no  more  prosperous  population  in  India  than  that
which  has  been  placed  under  it;  but  undoubtedly  it
is  not  the  ancient  system  of  the  country.  It  was  not
till  English  conquest  was  extending  far  to  the  north-
west, and  till  warlike  populations  were  subjugated
whose  tastes  and  peculiarities  it  was  urgently  neces-
sary to  study,  that  the  true  proprietary  unit  of  India
^j;^„^^  (  xA  f^^^  "was  discovered.  It  has  ever  since  been  most  carefully
Z  wv^^tc  -|  ^^^  continuously  observed. There  have  been  many

vehement  and  even  violent  disputes  about  some  of
its  characteristics;  but  these  disputes  will  always,  I
think,  be  found  to  arise,  or  at  least  to  derive  their
point,  from  an  attempt  to  make  it  fit  in  with  some
theory  of  English  origin.  There  is  no  substantial
difference  of  opinion  about  its  great  features.  I
regret  exceedingly  that  I  cannot  refer  you  to  any
book  in  which  there  is  a  clear  or  compendious  account
of  it.  Perhaps  the  best  and  most  intelligible  is  that
given  by  a  distinguished  Indian  functionary,  Mr.
George  Campbell,  in  that  same  volume  on  '  Systems  of
Land  Tenure '  to  which  I  referred  you  for  Mr.  Morier's
summary  of  Von  Maurer's  conclusions.  But  the  de-
scription is  necessarily  much  too  brief  for  a  subject  of
such  extent,  and  full  information  must  be  obtained  from
the  extensive  literature  of  Revenue  and  Settlement


LKCT.  IV.  THE IjS^DIAN VILLAGE.  107

which  I  spoke  of  some  time  since  as  having  had  its
materials  collected  by  quasi -judicial  agencies.  But
the  student  who  attempts  to  consult  it  should  be
warned  that  much  of  the  elementary  knowledge
which  has  to  be  acquired  before  its  value  and  interest
can  be  completely  understood  is  only  at  present  to  be
gathered  from  the  oral  statements  of  experienced
Indian  functionaries.  In  the  account  of  the  Indian
cultivating  group  which  follows  you  will  understand
that  I  confine  myself  to  fundamental  points,  and
further  that  I  am  attempting  to  describe  a  typical  form
to  which  the  village  communities  appear  to  me  upon
the  evidence  I  have  seen  to  approximate,  rather  than
a  model  to  which  all  existing  groups  called  by  the
name  can  be  exactly  fitted.

If  very  general  language  were  employed,  the
description  of  the  Teutonic  or  Scandinavian  village
communities  might  actually  serve  as  a  description  of
the  same  institution  in  India.'  There  is  the  arable
mark,  divided  into  separate  lots  but  cultivated
according  to  minute  customary  rules  binding  on  all.
I  Wherever  the  climate  admits  of  the  finer  grass  crops,
there  are  the  reserved  meadows,  lying  generally  on
the  verge  of  the  arable  mark.  There  is  the  waste  or
common  land,  out  of  which  the  arable  mark  has  been
cut,  enjoyed  as  pasture  by  all  the  community  pro
indiviso.  There  is  the  village,  consisting  of  habita-
tions each  ruled  by  a  despotic  pater -familias. And


108  THE CULTIVATED LAND.  lect.  iv.

there  is  constantly  a  council  of  government  to  deter-
mine disputes  as  to  custom.  But  there  are  some
characteristics  of  the  institution  of  which  no  traces,
or  very  faint  traces,  remain  in  Europe,  though  they
probably  once  existed,  and  there  are  some  differences
between  the  European  and  Indian  examples.  Iden-
tity in  the  main  being  assumed,  a  good  deal  of
instruction  may  be  obtained  from  these  distinctions
of  detail.

First  as  to  the  arable  mark,  or  cultivated  portion  of
the  village  domain.  Here  you  will  naturally  expect
the  resemblances  to  be  general  rather  than  specific.
The  official  publications  on  Indian  Settlement  law
contain  evidence  that  in  some  parts  of  the  country
the  division  into  three  common  fields  is  to  be  found;
but  I  do  not  attach  any  importance  to  the  fact,  which
is  probably  quite  accidental.  The  conditions  of
agriculture  in  a  tropical  coimtry  are  so  widely
different  from  those  which  can  at  any  period  be
supposed  to  have  determined  cultivation  in  Northern
and  Central  Europe  as  to  forbid  us  to  look  for  any
resemblances  in  India,  at  once  widely  extended  and
exact,  to  the  Teutonic  three-field  system.  Indeed,
as  the  great  agent  of  production  in  a  tropical  country
is  water,  very  great  dissimilarities  in  modes  of
cultivation  are  produced  within  India  itself  by
relative  proximity  to  running  streams  and  relative
exposure to the periodical rain-fall. The true


{


LECT.  IV.  GROWTH OF CUSTOM.  109

analogy  between  the  existing  Indian  and  the  ancient
European  systems  of  tillage  must  be  sought  in  the
minute  but multifarious  rules governing  the  pro-
ceedings of  the cultivators  ; rules which in both
cases  have  the  same  object — to  reconcile  a  common
plan  and  order  of  cultivation  on  the part  of  the
whole  brotherhood  with  the  holding  of  distinct  lots
in the arable land by separate families. The
common  life  of  the  group  or  community  has  been  so
far broken up as to admit of private property
in cultivated land, but not so far as to allow
departure from  a  joint  system  of  cultivating  that
land. There have been functionaries  serving  the
British Government of  India who have had the
opportunity  of  actually  observing  the  mode  in  which
rules  of  this  kind  grow  up. Wherever  the  great
canals of  irrigation  which  it  has  constructed  pass
through  provinces  in  w^hich  the  system  of  village
communities survives in any completeness, the  ^^^^^^*^^  °^
Government  does  not  undertake — or  perhaps  I  should^  ^^  Wc/\v,  i
rather say it has not hitherto undertaken — the')^'^^!"^  ^'  ^
detailed  distribution  of  water  to  the  peasants  inha-
biting the  village. It  bargains  with  them  to  take  a
certain  quantity  of  water  in  return for  a  certain
addition  to  the revenue  assessed  upon  them, and
leaves  them,  when  the  water  has  once  been  conducted
to  the  arable  mark,  to  divide  it  between  themselves
as  they  please. A  number  of  minute  rules  for  regu-


110  WATER RULES.  lect.  iv.

lating  each  man's  share  of  the  water  and  mode  of
using  it  are  then  imposed  on  the  village,  by  the
council  of  elders,  by  the  elective  or  hereditary  func-
tionary who  sometimes  takes  its  place,  or  by  the
person  who  represents  the  community  in  its  con-
tracts with  Government  for  payment  of  land-rent.
I  have  been  told,  however,  by  some  of  those  who
have  observed  the  formation  of  these  rules,  that
they  do  not  purport  to  emanate  from  the  personal
authority  of  their  author  or  authors  ;  nor  do  they
assume  to  be  dictated  by  a  sense  of  equity  ;  there  is
always,  I  am  assured,  a  sort  of  fiction,  under  which
some  customs  as  to  the  distribution  of  water  are
supposed  to  have  existed  from  all  antiquity,  although
in  fact  no  artificial  supply  had  been  even  so  much  as
thought  of.  It  is  further  stated  that,  though  it  is
extremely  common  among  English  functionaries  to
speak  of  the  distribution  of  water  as  regulated  by  the
agreement  of  the  villagers,  yet  no  such  idea  really
enters  the  mind  of  the  community  or  of  its  represen-
tatives as  that  there  can  be  or  ought  to  be  an  express
or  implied  contract  among  the  cultivators  respecting
their  several  shares.  And  it  is  added  that,  rather
than  have  a  contract  or  agreement,  it  would  appear
to  them  a  much  more  natural  and  reasonable  arrange-
ment that  the  distribution  should  be  determined  by
casting  lots.  Authority,  Custom,  or  Chance  are  in
fact  the  great  sources  of  law  in  primitive  communi-


LECT. IV.  THE SOURCES OF PRIMITIVE LAW.  Ill

ties  as  we  know  them,  not  Contract.  Not  that  in  the
minds  of  men  who  are  at  this  stage  of  thought  the
acknowledged  sources  of  law  are  clearly  discrimi-
nated. There  are  many  customary  duties  of  which
the  most  plausible  account  that  can  be  given  is  that
they  were  at  the  outset  obligations  of  kinship,
sanctioned  by  patriarchal  authority ;  yet  childish
stories  attributing  their  origin  to  mere  accident  are
often  current  among  the  Indian  villagers,  or  they  are
said  to  be  observed  in  obedience  to  the  order  of  some
comparatively  modern  king.  I  have  already  said
that  the  power  of  the  sovereign  to  create  custom  is
WL_  very  generally  recognised  in  India  ;  and  it  might
^  even  be  said  that  such  ideas  of  the  obligatory  force
of  agreement  as  exist  are  nowadays  greatly  mixed
up  with  the  notion  of  obedience  to  government.  It
is  often  stated  that  an  agreement  written  on  the
stamped  paper  of  the  State  acquires  in  the  native
view  a  quality  which  is  quite  independent  of  the
legal  operation  of  the  stamp ;  and  there  is  reason  to
believe  that  the  practice,  which  prevails  through
whole  provinces,  of  never  performing  an  agreement
till  performance  has  been  decreed  by  a  Court,  is  to  a
very  great  extent  accounted  for  by  an  impression
that  contracts  are  not  completely  binding  till  the
State  has  directed  them  to  be  executed.
k  Among  the  non- Aryan  peasantry  who  form  a  con-
V  siderable proportion  of  the  population  in  the  still

I


112  CUSTOMS OF RE-PARTITION.  lect.  iv.

thinly  peopled  territory  called  the  Central  Provinces,
the  former  highroad  of  Mahratta  brigandage,  there
are  examples  of  the  occasional  removal  of  the  entire
arable  mark  from  one  part  of  the  village  domain  to
another,  and  of  the  periodical  redistribution  of  lots
within  the  cultivated  area.  But  I  have  not  obtained
information  of  any  systematic  removal,  and  still  less
of  any  periodical  re -partition  of  the  cultivated  lands,
when  the  cultivators  are  of  Aryan  origin.  But  ex-
perienced Indian  officials  have  told  me  that  though
the  practice  of  redistribution  may  be  extinct,  the
tradition  of  such  a  practice  often  remains,  and  the
disuse  of  it  is  sometimes  complained  of  as  a  grievance.
If  English  influence  has  had  anything  to  do  with
arresting  customs  of  re-partition,  which  are,  no  doubt,
quite  alien  to  English  administrative  ideas,  it  is  a
fresh  example  of  destructive  influence,  unwillingly
and  unconsciously  exercised.  For  the  separate,  un-
changeable, and  irremovable  family  lot  in  the  culti-
vated area,  if  it  be  a  step  forwards  in  the  history  of
property,  is  also  the  point  at  which  the  Indian  village
community  is  breaking  to  pieces.  The  ^probability,
however,  is  that  the  causes  have  had  their  operation
much  hastened  by  the  English,  but  have  not  been
created  by  them.  The  sense  of  personal  right  grow-
ing everywhere  into  greater  strength,  and  the  ambi-
tion which  points  to  wider  spheres  of  action  than  can
be  found  within  the  Community,  are  both  destructive


LECT.  IV.  THE VILLAGE.  113

of  the  authority  of  its  internal  rules. Even  more

fatal  is  the  increasing  feeling  of  the  sacredness  of  p - .  ■  y^

personal  obligation  arising  out  of  contract. The  par-  ■>  i  lo^^w  t.^  ^  ^'^''

tition  of  inheritances  and  execution  for  debt  levied

on  land  are  destroying  the  communities — this  is  the

formula  heard  nowadays  everywhere  in  India. The

brotherhood  of  the  larger  group  may  still  cohere,  but

the  brethren  of  some  one  family  are  always  wishing

to  have  their  shares  separately;  and  creditors  who

would  have  feared  to  intrude  on  the  village  domain

now  break  the  net  of  custom  by  stepping  without

ceremony  into  the  lot  of  a  defaulting  debtor.

I  now  pass  to  the  village  itself,  the  cluster  of  home-
steads inhabited  by  the  members  of  the  community.
The  description  given  by  Maurer  of  the  Teutonic  Mark
of  the  Township,  as  his  researches  have  shown  it  to
him,  might  here  again  pass  for  an  account,  so  far  as
it  goes,  of  an  Indian  village.  The  separate  households,
each  despotically  governed  by  its  family  chief,  and
never  trespassed  upon  by  the  footstep  of  any  person
of  different  blood,  are  all  to  be  found  there  in  practice;
although  the  theory  of  the  absolute  rights  of  heads  of
families  has  never,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  been
acknowledged  by  the  British  Government.  But  the
Indian  villages  have  one  characteristic  which  could
only  have  been  gathered  from  observation  of  a  living
society.  The  German  writers  have  been  struck  with
that  complete  immunity  of  the  Teutonic  homestead

I


114  SECRECY OF FAMILY LIFE.  lect.  iv.

from  all  external  interference,  which  in  this  country
found a later expression in the long-descended
common -place that an Englishman's house is his
castle. But a characteristic which  in India goes
along  with this  immunity, and to  a  great extent
»c.TLK.^p L explains it,  is the  extraordinary  secrecy  of  family
sTuir^nvMJ^ '^ life;  a  secrecy  maintained,  I  am  told,  in  very  humble
'"^''^^^^  ^iouseholds  and  under  difficulties  which  at  first  sight
^i^w*^  would  seem  insurmountable. There  can  be  no  ques-

tion that,  if  the  isolation  of  households  in  ancient
societies  was  always  accompanied  by  this  secrecy  of
their  interior  life,  much  which  is  not  quite  intelli-
gible in  early  legal  history  would  be  explained.  It
is  not,  for  example,  easy  to  understand  the  tardiness
with  which,  in  Eoman  society,  the  relations  of  Pater-
familias and  Filius-familias  became  the  subject  of
moral  judgment,  determining  the  interference  of  the
Prastor ;  or,  again,  taking  the  form  of  public  opinion,
and  so  ultimately  issuing  in  legislation.  But  this
would  be  much  more  comprehensible  if  the  secrets
of  family  life  were  nearly  as  carefully  guarded  as
they  are  at  this  moment,  even  in  those  parts  of
India  where  the  peculiar  Mahometan  jealousy,  which
has  sometimes  been  erroneously  thought  a  uni-
*  versal Eastern feeling, has never yet penetrated.

So,  again,  it  is  only  a  conjectural  explanation  of  the
scantiness  of  ancient  systems  of  law  as  they  appear
in  the  monuments  in  which  an  attempt  was  made
to set them formally forth, that the lawgiver


LECT.  IV. DISLIKE OF ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW.  115

merely  attempted to fill, so to speak,  the inter-
stices between  the  families,  of  which the aggrega-
tion formed  the  society. To  the  extent to  which
existing  Indian  society  is  a  type  of  a  primitive  society,
there  is  no  doubt  that  any  attempt  of  the  public  law-
giver to  intrude  on  the  domain  reserved  to  the  legis-
lative and  judicial  power  of  the  pater-familias  causes
the  extremest  scandal  and  disgust. Of  all  branches  of
law,  criminal  law  is  that  which  one  would  suppose  to
excite  least resentment  by  trespassing  on  the  for-
bidden limits. Yet,  while  many  ignorant  statements
are  constantly  made  about  the  rash  disturbance  of
native  Indian  ideas  by  British  law  and  administration,
there  is  really  reason  to  believe  that  a  grievance  most
genuinely  felt  is  the  impartiality  of  that  admirable
Penal  Code  which  was  not  the  least  achievement  of
Lord  Macaulay's  genius,  and  which  is  undoubtedly
destined  to  serve  some  day  as  a  model  for  the  crimi-
nal law  of  England. I  have  had  described  to  me  a
collection  of  street-songs,  sung  in  the  streets  of  the
city  which  is  commonly  supposed  to  be  most  impa-
tient of  British  rule  by  persons  who  never  so  much  as
dreamed  of  having  their  words  repeated  to  an  English-
man. They  were  not altogether friendly to the
foreign  rulers  of  the  country,  but  it  may  be  broadly
laid  down  that  they  complained  of  nothing  which
might  naturally  have  been  expected  to  be  the  theme
of  complaint. And,  without  exception,  they  declared

I  2


116  FICTIONS ATTENDING LEGISLATURE. lect.  iv.

that  life  in  India  had  become  intolerable  since  the
English  criminal  laws  had  begun  to  treat  women
and  children  as  if  they  were  men.

I  read  to  you  from  Mr.  Morier's  compendium  of
Von  Maurer's  results,  a  passage  pointedly  con-
trasting the  independence  of  the  Teutonic  freeman  in
his  homestead  and  its  appurtenances  with  his  com-
plete subjection  to  customary  rule  when  he  cultivated
the  arable  mark,  or  pastured  his  sheep  and  cattle  in
the  common  mark.  I  trust  there  is  no  presumption
in  my.  saying  that  in  some  of  the  most  learned  writers
on  the  Mark,  there  seems  to  me  too  great  a  tendency
to  speak  of  the  relations  of  the  free  chiefs  of  Teutonic
households  to  one  another  as  determined  by  what,  for
want  of  a  more  appropriate  term,  must  be  called  spon-
taneous legislation.  It  is  no  doubt  very  difficult,  in
observing  an  Indian  village  community,  to  get  rid  of
the  impression  that  the  council  of  elders,  which  is  the
only  Indian  counterpart  of  the  collective  assembly  of
Teutonic  villagers,  occasionally  legislates;  and,  if  very
strict  language  be  employed,  legislation  is  the  only
term  properly  expressing  the  invention  of  customary
rules  to  meet  cases  which  are  really  new.  Yet,  if  I
may  trust  the  statements  of  several  eminent  Indian
authorities,  it  is  always  the  fact  or  the  fiction  that
this  council  merely  declares  customary  law.  And
indeed,  while  it  is  quite  true  of  India  that  the  head
of  the  family  is  supposed  to  be  chief  of  the  household,


LECT.  IV.  VILLAGE RULES.  117

the  families  within  the  village  or  township  would  i
seem  to  be  bound  together  through  their  representa-
tive heads  by  just  as  intricate  a  body  of  customary  ;
rules  as  they  are  in  respect  of  those  parts  of  the  1
village  domain  which  answer  to  the  Teutonic  common
mark  and  arable  mark.  The  truth  is,  that  nothing
can  be  more  complex  than  the  customs  of  an  Indian
village,  though  in  a  sense  they  are  only  binding  on
chiefs  of  families.  The  examination  of  these  customs,
which  have  for  their  object  to  secure  a  self-acting  or-
ganisation not  only  for  the  community  as  a  whole,  but
for  the  various  trades  and  callings  which  fractions  of
it  pursue,  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the  present
Lectures,  but  it  is  a  subject  full  of  interest.  I  ob-
serve that  recent  writers  are  dissatisfied  with  the  his-
torical theory  which  attributes  the  municipal  institu-
tions of  mediaeval  Europe  to  an  exclusively  Roman
origin,  and  that  they  are  seeking  to  take  into  account
the  usages  inherited  from  the  conquerors  of  the
Empire.  From  this  point  of  view,  the  customary
rules  securing  the  interdependence  and  mutual  re-
sponsibility of  the  members  of  an  Indian  village
community,  or  of  the  various  subordinate  groups
which  it  may  be  shown  to  include,  and  the  modes  of
speech  in  use  among  them,  which  are  said  to  fluctuate
between  language  implying  an  hereditary  brotherhood
and  language  implying  a  voluntary  association,  appear
to  be  worthy  of  careful  examination. There  is  reason


118  ORIGIN OF INDIAN TOWNS.  lect.  iv.

to  believe  that  some  European  cities  were  originally
nothing  more  than  the  township-mark  of  a  Teu-
tonic village  community  which  has  subsequently
grown  to  greatness.  It  is  quite  certain  that  this  was
the  origin  of  the  large  majority  of  the  towns  which
you  see  marked  on  the  map  of  India.  The  village,  in
becoming  more  populous  from  some  cause  or  other,
has  got  separated  from  its  cultivated  or  common  do-
main ;  or  the  domain  has  been  swallowed  up  in  it ;  or  a
number  of  diiFerent  villages  have  been  founded  close
together  on  what  was  perhaps  at  one  time  unprofit-
able waste  land,  but  which  has  become  exceptionally
valuable  through  advantages  of  situation.  This  last
was  the  origin  of  the  great  Anglo-Indian  city  of  Cal-
cutta, which  is  really  a  collection  of  villages  of  very
modern  foundation.  Here,  however,  it  may  be
proper  that  I  should  state  that  the  very  greatest
Indian  cities  had  a  beginning  of  another  kind.
Doubtless  most  of  the  Indian  towns  grew  out  of  vil-
lages, or  were  originally  clusters  of  villages,  but  the
most  famous  of  all  grew  out  of  camps.  The  Mogul
Emperors  and  the  Kings  of  the  more  powerful  Hindoo
dynasties  differed  from  all  known  sovereigns  of  the
Western  world,  not  only  in  the  singular  indefiniteness
of  the  boundaries  of  their  dominions  and  in  the  per-
petual belligerency  which  w^as  its  consequence,  but  in
the  vast  onerousness  of  their  claims  on  the  industry
of  their  subjects. From  the  people  of  a  country  of


LECT.  IV.  INDIAN CAPITALS.  119

which  the  wealth  was  almost  exclusively  agricultural,
they  took  so  large  a  share  of  the  produce  as  to  leave
nothing  practically  to  the  cultivating  groups  except
the  bare  means  of  tillage  and  subsistence.  Nearly  all
the  movable  capital  of  the  empire  or  kingdom  was
at  once  swept  away  to  its  temporary  centre,  which
became  the  exclusive  seat  of  skilled  manufacture  and
decorative  art.  Every  man  who  claimed  to  belong  to
the  higher  class  of  artificers  took  his  loom  or  his
tools  and  followed  in  the  train  of  the  King.  This
diversion  of  the  forms  of  industry  which  depend  on^
movable  wealth  to  the  seat  of  the  court  had  its  first
result  in  the  splendour  of  Oriental  capitals.  But  at
the  same  time  it  made  it  easier  to  change  their  site,
regarded  as  they  continued  to  be  in  the  light  of  the
encampment  of  the  sovereign  for  the  time  being.
Great  deserted  cities,  often  in  close  proximity  to  one
another,  are  among  the  most  striking  and  at  first
sight  the  most  inexplicable  of  Indian  spectacles.
Indian  cities  were  not,  however,  always  destroyed  by
the  caprice  of  the  monarch  who  deserted  them  to
found  another  capital.  Some  peculiar  manufacture
had  sometimes  so  firmly  established  itself  as  to
survive  the  desertion,  and  these  manufacturing  towns
sometimes  threw  out  colonies.  Capitals,  ex-capitals
retaining  some  special  art  or  manufacture,  the
colonies  of  such  capitals  or  ex-capitals,  villages  grown
to  exceptional greatness,  and  a  certain  number  of


120  THE VILLAGE WASTE.  lect.  iv.

towns  which  have  sprung  up  round  the  temples  built
on  sites  of  extraordinary  sacredness,  would  go  far  to
complete  the  list  of  Indian  cities.

The  Waste  or  common  land  of  the  Village  Com-
munity has still to  be considered. One  point of
difference  between  the  view  taken  of  it  in  the  East
and  that  which  seems  at  all  times  to  have  been  taken
in Europe, deserves to be specially noted. The
tji  ifA/^A members  of  the  Teutonic  community  appear  to  have
y^  f^- valued  the  village  waste  chiefly  as  pasture  for  their
^JT^C, cattle,  and  possibly  may  have  found  it  so  profitable
tM^t^  uv  for  this  purpose  as  to  have  deliberately  refrained  from
^^^^  "^  ^ increasing;  that  cultivated  portion  of  it  which  had  been
^AtrJ^tj  (^ turned  into  the  arable  mark. These  rights  of  pasture
vwv-^vc  y^^  vested  in  the  commoners  are  those,  I  need  scarcely
tell  you,  which  have  descended  but  little  modified  to
our  own  day  in  our  own  country;  and  it  is  only  the
modern  improvements  in  the  methods  of  agriculture
which  have  disturbed  the  balance  between  pasture
and  tillage,  and  have  thus  tended  to  multiply  Inclosure
Acts. But  the  vast  bulk  of  the  natives  of  India  are
a  grain  and  not  a  flesh-eating  people. Cattle  are
mostly  regarded  by  them  as  auxiliary  to  tillage. The
view  therefore  generally  taken  (as  I  am  told)  of  the
common-land  by  the  community  is  that  it  is  that  part
of  the  village -domain  which  is  temporarily  unculti-
vated, but  which  will  some  time  or  other  be  cultivated
and  merge  in  the  arable  mark. Doubtless  it  is  valued


LECT.  TV.  THE INDIAN WASTES.  121

for  pasture,  but  it  is  more  especially  valued  as  po-
tentially capable  of  tillage.  The  effect  is  to  produce
in  the  community  a  much  stronger  sense  of  property
in  common-land  than  at  all  reflects  the  vaguer  feeling
of  right  which,  in  England  at  all  events,  characterises
the  commoners.  In  the  later  days  of  the  East  India
Company,  when  all  its  acts  and  omissions  w^ere  very
bitterly  criticised,  and  amid  the  general  re-opening  of
Indian  questions  after  the  military  insurrection  of
1857,  much  stress  was  laid  on  the  great  amount  of
waste  land  which  official  returns  showed  to  exist  in
India,  and  it  was  more  than  hinted  that  better
government  would  bring  these  wastes  under  cultivation,
possibly  under  cotton  cultivation,  and  even  plant  them
with  English  colonists.  The  answer  of  experienced
Indian  functionaries  was  that  there  was  no  waste  land
at  all  in  India.  If  you  except  certain  territories
which  stand  to  India  Proper  much  as  the  tracts  of
land  at  the  base  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  stand  to  the
United  States — as,  for  example,  the  Indo-Chinese
province  of  Assam — the  reply  is  substantially  correct.
The  so-called  waste  lands  are  part  of  the  domain  of
the  various  communities  which  the  villagers,  theoreti-
cally, are  only  wanting  opportunity  to  bring  under
cultivation.  Yet  this  controversy  elicited  an  admis-
sion which  is  of  some  historical  interest.  It  did  appear
that,  though  the  native  Indian  Government  had  for
the  most  part  left  the  village  communities  entirely  to


122  THE GOVERNMENT AND THE WASTES. lect.  iv.

themselves  on  condition  of  their  paying  the  revenue  as-
sessed upon  them,  they  nevertheless  sometimes  claimed
(though  in  a  vague  and  occasional  way)  some  ex-
ceptional authority  over  the  wastes  ;  and,  acting  on
this  precedent,  the  British  Government,  at  the  various
settlements  of  Land  Revenue,  has  not  seldom  inter-
fered to  reduce  excessive  wastes  and  to  re -apportion
uncultivated  land  among  the  various  communities  of
a  district.  In  connection  vdth  this  claim  and  exercise
of  right  you  will  call  to  mind  the  power  vested  in  the
early  English  Kings  to  make  grants  of  waste  to  in-
dividuals in  severalty,  first  with  and  afterwards  without
the  consent  of  the  Witan  ;  and  we  shall  see  that  the
much  more  extensive  rights  acquired  by  the  lord  over
the  waste  than  over  any  other  portion  of  the  village-
domain,  constitute  a  point  of  capital  importance  in  the
process  known  as  the  feudalisation  of  Europe.

India  has  nothing  answering  to  the  assembly  of
adult  males  which  is  so  remarkable  a  feature  of  the
ancient  Teutonic  groups,  except  the  Council  of  Village
Elders.  It  is  not  universally  fovmd.  Tillages  fre-
quently occur  in  which  the  affairs  of  the  community
are  managed,  its  customs  interpreted,  and  the  disputes
of  its  members  decided  by  a  single  Headman,  whose
office  is  sometimes  admittedly  hereditary  but  is  some-
times described  as  elective  ;  the  choice  being  generally,
however,  in  the  last  case  confined  in  practice  to  the
members  of  one  particular  family,  with  a  strong  pre-


LECT.  IV.  THE VILLAGE COUNCIL.  123

ference  for  the  eldest  male  of  the  kindred,  if  he  be  not
specially  disqualified. But  I  have  good  authority  for
saying  that,  in  those parts  of  India  in which the
village community is most perfect and in  which
there are the clearest signs of  an original pro-
prietary equality  between  all  the  families  composing  the  a  j,
group,  the  authority  exercised  elsewhere  by  the  Head- ^SZ3Z^ —
man  is  lodged  with  the  Village  Council. It  is  always  '^  5  (^  V
viewed  as  a  representative  body,  and  not  as  a  body  y^'Y^'^^^*^^
possessing  inherent  authority,  and,  whatever  be  its  (yjx(^ .  L
real  number,  it  always  bears  a  name  which  recalls  its  '^^  -  ^<,^/</>k/v
ancient  constitution  of  Five  persons.

I  shall  have  hereafter  to  explain  that,  though  there
are  strong  general  resemblances  between  the  Indian
village  communities  wherever  they  are  found  in  any-
thing like  completeness,  they  prove  on  close  inspection
to  be  not  simple  but  composite  bodies,  including  a
number  of  classes  with  very  various  rights  and  claims.
One  singular  proof  of  this  variety  of  interests,  and  at
the  same  time  of  the  essentially  representative  charac-
ter of  the  village  council,  is  constantly  furnished,  I  am
told,  by  a  peculiar  difficulty  of  the  Anglo-Indian
functionary  when  engaged  in  '  settling  ^  a  province
in  which  the  native  condition  of  society  has  been  but
little  broken  up.  The  village  council,  if  too  numerous,
is  sure  to  be  unmanageable ;  but  there  is  great  pressure
from  all  sections  of  the  community  to  be  represented
in  it,  and  it  is  practically  hard  to  keep  its  numbers


124  PEACEFUL CHARACTER OF POPULATION. lect.  iv.

down.  The  evidence  of  the  cultivators  as  to  custom
does  not  point,  I  am  told,  to  any  uniform  mode  of
representation  ;  but  there  appears  to  be  a  general
admission  that the  members  of  the  council  should

•  j^  <vvo«A^ be elderly men. No example of village or of
\j^  \j.o^^^ district  government  recalling  the  Teutonic  assembly

jwjvx  c^f^  of  free  adult  males  has  been  brought  to  my  notice.
While  I  do  not  affect  to  give  any  complete  explana-
tion of  this,  it  may  be  proper  to  remember  that,
though  no  country  was  so  perpetuall}^  scourged  with
war  as  India  before  the  establishment  of  the  Pax
Britannica,  the  people  of  India  were  never  a  military
people.  Nothing  is  told  of  them  resembling  that
arming  of  an  entire  society  which  was  the  earliest,  as
it  is  the  latest,  phase  of  Teutonic  history.  No  rule
can  be  laid  down  of  so  vast  a  population  without  ex-
ceptions. The  Mahratta  brigands  when  they  first  rose
against  the  Mahometans  were  a  Hindoo  Hill-tribe
armed  to  a  man  ;  and  before  the  province  of  Oudh
was  annexed,  extreme  oppression  had  given  an
universally  military  character  to  a  naturally  peaceful
population.  But,  for  the  most  part,  the  Indian  village
communities  have  always  submitted  without  resistance
to  oppression  by  monarchs  surrounded  by  mercenary
armies.  The  causes,  therefore,  which  in  primitive
societies  give  importance  to  young  men  in  the  village
assembly  were  wanting.  The  soldiers  of  the  com-
munity had  gone  abroad  for  mercenary  service,  and


lECT.  IV.  HEREDITARY TRADES.  125

nothing  was  required  of  the  council  but  experience
and  civil  wisdom.

There  is  yet  another  feature  of  the  Indian  cultiva-
ting groups  which  connects  them  with  primitive
Western  communities  of  the  same  kind.  I  have
several  times  spoken  of  them  as  organised  and  self-
acting.  They,  in  fact,  include  a  nearly  complete  '^  \,  ^  «
establishment  of  occupations  and  trades  for  enabling  [^  ^  ^^
them  to  continue  their  collective  life  without  assist-  J

ance  from  any  person  or  body  external  to  them.
Besides  the  Headman  or  Council  exercising  quasi-
judicial,  quasi-legislative,  power,  they  contain  a  vil-
lage police,  now  recognised  and  paid  in  certain
provinces  by  the  British  Government.  They  in-
clude several  families  of  hereditary  traders  ;  the
Blacksmith,  the  Harness-maker,  the  Shoemaker.
The  Brahmin  is  also  found  for  the  performance  of
ceremonies,  and  even  the  Dancing-Girl  for  attend-
ance at  festivities.  There  is  invariably  a  Village-
Accountant,  an  important  personage  among  an
unlettered  population,  so  important,  indeed,  and  so
conspicuous  that,  according  to  reports  current  in
India,  the  earliest  English  functionaries  engaged  in
settlements  of  land  were  occasionally  led  by  their
assumption  that  there  must  be  a  single  proprietor
somewhere,  to  mistake  the  Accountant  for  the  owner
of  the  village,  and  to  record  him  as  such  in  the
I  official  register. But  the  person  practising  any  one


126  REMUNERATION OF VILLAGE TRADERS. lect.  iv.

ous^  Vj>j^(^  ^^  these  hereditary  employments  is  really  a  servant
oov'V^^aJ^  h  of  the  community  as  well  as  one  of  its  component
^-^^  ^  members. He  is  sometimes  paid  by  an  allowance  in

grain,  more  generally  by  the  allotment  to  his  family
of  a  piece  of  cultivated  land  in  hereditary  possession.
Whatever  else  he  may  demand  for  the  wares  he
produces,  is  limited  by  a  customary  standard  of
price,  very  rarely  departed  from.  It  is  the  assign-
ment of  a  definite  lot  in  the  cultivated  area  to
particular  trades,  which  allows  us  to  suspect  that  the
early  Teutonic  groups  were  similarly  self-sufficing.
There  are  several  English  parishes  in  which  certain
pieces  of  land  in  the  common  field  have  from  time
^J>^^  immemorial  been  known  by  the  nameof  ajarticular

'  .trade ;  and  there  is  often  a  popular  belief  that  nobody,

not  following  the  trade,  can  legally  be  owner  of  the
lot  associated  with  it. And  it  is  possible  that  we
here  have  a  key  to  the  plentifulness  and  persistence
of  certain  names  of  trades  as  surnames  among  us.
B  o..  ^5^^^  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  certain  callings,  ex-
I  ^  - A tremely  respectable  and  lucrative,  do  not  appear  in
)^  ^^ India  to constitute those who  follow  them  mem-
,fM^ ^ bers  of  the  village community. Eminent officials
have  assured  me  that,  so  far  as  their  experience  ex-
tends, the  Grain-dealer  is  never  a  hereditary  trader
incorporated  with  the .  village group, nor is he a
member  of  the  municipality  in  towns which  have
grown  out  of  one  or  more  villages. The  trades  thus


LECT.  IV.  THE OUTSIDERS.  127

remaining  outside  the  organic  group  are  those  which
bring  their  goods  from  distant  markets;  and  I  shall
try  to  show  the  significance  of  this  fact  hereafter.

There  are  in  Central  and  Southern  India  certain  cWWv^^
villages  to  which  a  class  of  persons  is  hereditarily  at-^^-^^''^^'^^
tached  in  such  a  manner  as  to  show  most  unmistakeably."^^  ^
that  they  form  no  part  of  the  natural  and  organic^J^/?^^
aggregate  to  which  the  bulk  of  the  villagers  belong.
These  persons  are  looked  upon  as  essentially  impure ;
they  never  enter  the  village,  or  only  enter  reserved
portions  of  it;  and  their  touch  is  avoided  as  con-
taminating. It  is  difficult  to  read  or  listen  to  the
accounts  given  of  them  without  having  the  mind
carried  to  those  singular  races  or  classes  which,  in
certain  European  countries,  were  supposed  almost  to
our  own  day  to  transmit  from  father  to  son  the  taint
of  a  mysterious  uncleanness.  Yet  these  Indian
'  outsiders,'  as  they  have  been  called  (by  Sir  H.  B.
Frere  in  '  The  Church  and  the  Age,'  p.  357),  to  avoid
using  the  word  '  outcast,'  which  has  a  different
meaning,  bear  extremely  plain  marks  of  their  origin.
Though  they  are  not  included  in  the  village,  they
are  an  appendage  solidly  connected  with  it ;  they
have  definite  village  duties,  one  of  which  is  the
settlement  of  boundaries,  on  which  their  authority
is  allowed  to  be  conclusive.  They  evidently  repre-
sent a  population  of  alien  blood,  whose  lands  have
been  occupied  by  the  colonists  or  invaders  forming


128 ABSORPTION  OF  STRANGERS  BY  COMMUNITY. lect.  iv.

the  community.  Everybody  who  has  used  his  eyes
in  India  will  be  on  his  guard  against  certain  ex-
travagances of  the  modern  theory  of  Race,  and  will
be  slow  to  believe  that  identity  of  language  and
identity  of  religion  necessarily  imply  identity  of  eth-
nical origin.  The  wonderful  differences  of  external
aspect  which  are  readily  perceived  between  natives
of  Indian  provinces  speaking  the  same  language,  and
the  great  'deviation  from  what  is  regarded  as  the
Aryan  type  of  form  and  feature  observable  among
populations  whose  speech  is  a  near  derivative  from
Sanscrit,  have  their  most  reasonable  explanation  in
the  power  of  absorption  which  the  village  group
may  from  many  indications  be  inferred  to  have
possessed  in  the  earlier  stages  of  development.  But
the  faculty  of  taking  in  strangers  from  without  is
one  which  it  loses  in  time,  and  there  were  always
probably  some  materials  too  obstinately  and  obtru-
sively foreign  to  be  completely  absorbed.  Under
this  last  head,  the  '  outsiders  '  of  the  Southern  villages
apparently  fall.


LECTURE V.

THE PEOCESS OF FEUDALISATION.


CONTENTS.

Feudalism — Tlie  Benefices — The  Manor — The  Manorial  Group — New
Condition  of  the  Waste — Changes  in  the  Grass-lands — The  Free
Tenants — Settlements  of  Villeins— The  Manorial  Courts — Encroach-
ments of  the  Lord — Roman  and  Feudal  Law — Causes  of  Feudalisation
— Growth  of  Suzerainties — Leading  Families — Elements  of  Feudal
System — Systematic  Feudalism — Antiquarianism  of  Indian  Politics —
Political  Results  of  Settlements — Various  Forms  of  Settlement —
Growth  in  Power  of  Official  Holder — Mahometan  Assumptions —
Indian  Schools  of  Opinion — Indian  Forms  of  Property — The  Headman
— Property  Recognised  by  the  English — Absolute  Ownership — Nature
of  Rights  of  Property — Development  of  Absolute  Ownership —
Vested  Rights  in  India — The  Feudalisation  of  Europe — Cultivation  of
Waste-land — Improvements  in  Tillage — Village  Communities  and
Customs — Customary  Tillage — Servile  Dependants  of  Villagers —
Villages  Cease  to  Absorb  Strangers — Nasse's  Work — The  Statute  of
Devises — Rules  for  Construing  Wills — Restraints  on  Testamentary
Power.


LECT.  V.  FEUDALISM.  131


LECTURE Y.

THE PROCESS OF FEUDALISATION.

The  student  of  legal  antiquities  who  has  once  con-
vinced himself  that  the  soil  of  the  greatest  part  of
Europe  was  formerly  owned  and  tilled  by  proprietary
groups,  of  substantially  the  same  character  and  com-
position as  those  which  are  still  found  in  the  only
parts  of  Asia  which  are  open  to  sustained  and  care-
ful observation,  has  his  interest  immediately  drawn
to  what,  in  truth,  is  the  great  problem  of  legal  history.
This  is  the  question  of  the  process  by  which  the  pri-
mitive mode  of  enjoyment  was  converted  into  the
agrarian  system,  out  of  which  immediately  grew  the
land-law  prevaihng  in  all  Western  Continental  Europe
before  the  first  French  Revolution,  and  from  which
is  demonstrably  descended  our  own  existing  real-
property  law.  For  this  newer  system  no  name  has
come  into  general  use  except  Feudalism,  a  word  which
has  the  defect  of  calling  attention  to  one  set  only  of
its  characteristic  incidents.  We  cannot  reasonably
doubt  that  one  partial  explanation  of  its  origin  is,  so
far  as  it  goes,  correct. It  arose  from  or  was  greatly

K 2


132  THE BENEFICES.  lect.  v.

.  .  influenced  by  the  Benefices,  grants  of  Roman  provin-

^"^r^'^^  cial  land  by  the  chieftains  of  the  tribes  which  overran
"^^"^""^  the  Roman  Empire ;  such  grants  being  conferred  on

their  associates  upon  certain  conditions,  of  which  the
commonest  was  military  service.  There  is  also  toler-
ably universal  agreement  that  somewhere  in  Roman
law  (though  where^  all  are  not  agreed)  are  to  be
found  the  rules  which  determined  the  nature  of  these
beneficiary  holdings.  This  may  be  called  the  theory
of  the  official  origin  of  feudalism,  the  enjoyment  of
land  being  coupled  with  the  discharge  of  certain  de-
finite duties;  and  there  are  some  who  complete  the
theory  by  asserting  that  among  the  Teutonic  races,
at  all  events,  there  was  an  ineradicable  tendency  in
iiU  offices  to  become  hereditary,  and  that  thus  the
Benefices,  which  at  first  were  held  for  life,  became  at
last  descendible  from  father  to  son.

There  is  no  question,  as  T  said,  that  this  account
is  more  than  probable,  and  that  the  Benefices  either
began  or  hastened  the  changes  which  led  ultimately
to  feudalism.  Yet  I  think  that  nobody  whose  mind
has  dwelt  on  the  explanation,  has  brought  himself  to
regard  it  as  complete.  It  does  not  tell  us  how  the
Benefices  came  to  have  so  extraordinary  a  historical
fortune.  It  does  not  account  for  the  early,  if  partial,
feudalisation  of  countries  like  Germany  and  England,
where  the  cultivated  soil  was  in  the  hands  of  free  and
fully  organised  communities,  and  was  not,  like  the


LECT.  V.  THE MANOR.  133

land  of  Italy  or  Gaul,  at  the  disposal  of  a  conquering
king — where  the  royal  or  national  grants  which  re-
sembled the  Benefices  were  probably  made  out  of
waste  land — and  where  the  influence  of  Roman  law
was  feebly  felt  or  not  at  all.

The  feudalisation  of  any  one  country  in  Europe
must  be  conceived  as  a  process  including  a  long  series
of  political,  administrative,  and  judicial  changes;  and
there  is  some  difficulty  in  confining  our  discussion  of
it  to  changes  in  the  condition  of  property  which  be-
long more  properly  to  this  department  of  study.  But
I  think  we  may  limit  our  consideration  of  the  subject
by  looking  at  it  in  this  way.  If  we  begin  with
modern  English  real-property  law,  and,  by  the  help
of  its  records  and  of  the  statutes  affecting  it,  trace  its
history  backwards,  we  come  upon  a  period  at  which
the  soil  of  England  was  occupied  and  tilled  by  separ-
ate proprietary  societies.  Each  of  these  societies  is,
or  bears  the  marks  of  having  been,  a  compact  and
organically  complete  assemblage  of  men,  occupying  a
definite  area  of  land.  Thus  far  it  resembles  the  old
cultivating  communities,  but  it  differs  from  them  in
being  held  together  by  a  variety  of  subordinate  rela-
tions to  a  feudal  chief,  single  or  corporate,  the  Lord.
I  will  call  the  new  group  the  Manorial  group,  and
though  my  words  must  not  be  taken  as  strictly
correct,  I  will  say  that  a  group  of  tenants,  autocra-
tically  organised and governed, has succeeded a


134  THE MANORIAL GROUP.  i.ect.  v.

group  of  households  of  which  the  organisation  and
government  were  democratic. The  new  group,  as
known  to  our  law,  is  often  in  a  state  of  dissolution,
but,  where  it  is  perfect,  it  consists  of  a  number  of
^►(^ persons  holding  land  of  the  Lord  by  free  tenures,
^"^ *jtf^  ^^^  ^^  ^  number  of  persons  holding  land  of  the  Lord
^ZZ^ by  tenures  capable  of  being  shown  to  have  been,  in
their  origin,  servile — the  authority  of  the  Lord  being
exercised  over  both  classes,  although  in  different  ways,
through  the  agency  of  a  peculiar  tribunal,  the  Court
Baron. The  lands  held  by  the  first  description  of
tenants are technically known  as the  Tenemental
lands ;  those  held  by  the  second  class  constitute  the
Lord's  Domain. Both  kinds  of  land  are  essential  to
Xf, the  completeness  of  the Manorial  group. If  there
\^^  j/\^ are  not  Tenemental  lands  to  supply  a  certain  mini-
^^^^w^ mum  number  of  free  tenants  to  attend  the  Court
^  >^ Baron,  and,  according  to  the  legal  theory,  to  sit  with
"""''^  the  lord  as  its  judges,  the  Court  Baron  can  no  longer

in  strictness  be  held  ;  if  it  be  continued  under  such
circumstances,  as  it  often  was  in  practice,  it  can  only
^  be  upheld  as  a  Customary  Manorial  Court,  sitting  for
A^f^Jj^  the  assessment  and  receipt  of  customary  dues  from
^^  0^1  r^ the  tenants  of  the  Domain. On  the  other  hand,  if


J^ there  be  no Domain,  or  if  it be  parted  with,  the
jC^  I  ^^^^^^ity  ^f  ^^  Lord  over  the  free  tenants  is  no  longer

d^  Manorial ;  it  becomes  a  Seignory  in  gross,  or  mere

Lordship.


LECT.  V.  NEW CONDITION OF THE WASTE.  135

Since  much  of  the  public  waste  land  of  our  country
is  known  to  have  passed  by  national  or  royal  grant  to . ,,
individuals  or  corporations,  who,  in  all  probability,  .^^J^j^^^^^
brought  it  extensively  under  cultivation from  the  k^^n/^^
first by  servile  labour,  it  cannot  be  supposed  that
each  of  the  new  Manorial  groups  takes  the  place  of  a
Village  group  which  at  some  time  or  other  consisted
of  free  allodial proprietors. Still,  we  may  accept
the  belief  of  the  best  authorities  that  over  a  great
part  of  England  there  has  been  a  true  succession  of
one  group  to  the  other. Comparing,  then,  the  two,
let  us  ask  what  are  the  specific  changes  which  have
taken  place ? The  first,  and  far  the  most  important  /j  (U^^J^
of  all,  is  that,  in  England  as  everywhere  in  Western  .^-^(»^  ^
Europe,  the  waste  or  common-land  of  the  community  /W.  t^yy-^^  t.
has  become  the  lord's  waste. It  is  still  ancillary  to
the  Tenemental  lands ;  the  free  tenants  of  the  lord,
whom  we  may  provisionally  take  to  represent  the
freemen  of  the  village  community,  retain  all  their
ascertained  rights  of  pasture  and  gathering  firewood,
and  in  some  cases  similar  rights  have  been  acquired
by  other  classes;  but,  subject  to  all  ascertained  rights,
the  waste  belongs,  actually  or  potentially,  to  the  lord's
domain. The  lord's  '  right  of  approvement,'  afiirmed
by  the  Statute  of  Merton,  and  extended  and  confirmed
by  subsequent  statutes,  permits  him  to  enclose  and
appropriate  so  much  of  the  waste  as  is  not  wanted  to
satisfy  other  existing  rights ;  nor  can  it  be  doubted


136  CHANGES IN THE GRASS-LANDS.  lect.  v.

that  he  largely  exercises  this  right,  reclaiming  part
of  the  waste  for  himself  by  his  personal  dependants
and  adding  it  to  whatever  share  may  have  belonged
to  him  from  the  first  in  the  cultivated  land  of
the  community,  and  colonising  other  portions  of  it
with  settlements  of  his  villeins  who  are  on  their
way  to  become  copyholders.  The  legal  theory  has
altogether  departed  from  the  primitive  view;  the  waste
is  now  the  lord's  waste  ;  the  commoners  are  for  the
most  part  assumed  to  have  acquired  their  rights  by
sufferance  of  the  lord,  and  there  is  a  visible  tendency
in  courts  and  text-writers  to  speak  of  the  lord's  rights,
not  only  as  superior  to  those  of  the  commoners,  but
as  being  in  fact  of  greater  antiquity.

When  we  pass  from  the  waste  to  the  grass  lands
which  were  intermediate  between  the  common  land
and  the  cultivated  area,  we  find  many  varieties  in
the  degree  of  authority  acquired  by  the  lord.  The
customs  of  manors  differ  greatly  on  the  point.  Some-
times, the  lord  encloses  for  his  own  benefit  from
Candlemas  to  Midsummer  or  Lammas,  and  the
common  right  belongs  during  the  rest  of  the  year  to
a  class  of  burgesses,  or  to  the  householders  of  a
village,  or  to  the  persons  inhabiting  certain  ancient
tenements.  Sometimes,  the  lord  only  regulates  the
inclosure,  and  determines  the  time  of  setting  up  and
removing  the  fences. Sometimes,  other  persons  en-


LECT.  V.  THE FREE TENANTS.  137

close,  and  the  lord  has  the  grass  when  the  several
enjoyment  comes  to  an  end.  Sometimes,  his  right
of  pasture  extends  to  the  baulks  of  turf  which  sepa-
rate the  common  arable  fields  ;  and  probably  there  is
no  manorial  right  which  in  later  times  has  been  more
bitterly  resented  than  this,  since  it  is  practically  fatal
to  the  cultivation  of  green  crops  in  the  arable  soil.

Leaving  the  meadows  and  turning  to  the  lands
under  regular  tillage,  we  cannot  doubt  that  the  free
holders  of  the  Tenemental  lands  correspond  in  the
main  to  the  free  heads  of  households  composing  the
old  village  community.  The  assumption  has  often
been  made,  and  it  appears  to  be  borne  out  by  the
facts  which  can  be  established  as  to  the  common
fields  still  open  or  comparatively  lately  enclosed.
The  tenure  of  a  certain  number  of  these  fields  is  free-
hold ;  they  are  parcelled  out,  or  may  be  shown  to  have
been  in  the  last  century  parcelled  out,  among  many
different  owners  ;  they  are  nearly  always  distributed
into  three  strips,  and  some  of  them  are  even  at  this
hour  cultivated  according  to  methods  of  tillage  which
are  stamped  by  their  very  rudeness  as  coming  down
from  a  remote  antiquity.  They  appear  to  be  the
lands  of  a  class  which  has  never  ceased  to  be  free,
and  they  are  divided  and  cultivated  exactly  as  the
arable  mark  of  a  Teutonic  township  can  be  inferred,
by  a  large  induction,  to  have  been  divided  and  tilled.


138  SETTLEMENTS OF VILLEINS.  lect.  v.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  many  large  tracts  of  inter-
mixed land  are  still,  or  were  till  their  recent  enfran-
chisement, copyhold  of  particular  manors,  and  some
of  them  are  held  by  the  intermediate  tenure,  known
as  customary  freehold,  which  is  confined  by  the  legal
theory  to  lands  which  once  formed  part  of  the  King's
Domain.  I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  the  pro-
portion of  common  lands  held  by  these  base  tenures
to  freehold  lands  of  the  same  kind,  but  there  is  no
doubt  that  much  commonable  or  intermixed  land  is
found,  which  is  not  freehold.  Since  the  descent  of
copyhold  and  customary  freehold  tenures  from  the
holdings  of  servile  classes  appears  to  be  well  esta-
blished, the  frequent  occurrence  of  intermixed  lands
of  this  nature  seems  to  bear  out  the  inference  sug-
gested by  Sir  H.  Ellis's  enumeration  of  the  conditions
of  men  referred  to  in  Domesday  Book,  that,  during
the  long  process  of  feudalisation,  some  of  the  free
villagers  sank  to  the  status,  almost  certainly  not  a
uniform  status,  which  was  implied  in  villenage.  (See
also  Mr.  Freeman's  remark, '  Hist.  Norm.  Conq.'  i.97.)
But  evidence,  supplied  from  quarters  so  wide  apart  as
British  India  and  the  English  settlements  in  North
America,  leads  me  to  think  that,  at  a  time  when  a
system  of  customary  tillage  widely  prevailed,  assem-
blages of  people  planted  on  waste  land  would  be  likely
to  copy  the  system  literally;  and  I  conjecture  that
parts  of  the  great  wastes  undoubtedly  reclaimed  by


LECT.  V.  THE MANORIAL COURTS.  139

the  exercise  of  the  right  afterwards  called  the  lord's
*  right  of  approvement'  were  settled  by  servile  colonies
modelled  on  the  ancient  Teutonic  township.

The  bond  which  kept  the  Manorial  group  together
w^as  evidently  the  Manorial  Court,  presided  over  by
the  lord  or  his  representative.  Under  the  name  of
Manorial  Court  three  courts  are  usually  included,
which  legal  theory  keeps  apart,  the  Court  Leet,  the
Court  Baron,  and  the  Customary  Court  of  the  Manor.
I  think  there  cannot  be  reasonable  doubt  of  the  le-
gitimate descent  of  all  three  from  the  assembly  of  the
Township.  Besides  the  wide  criminal  and  civil  juris-
diction which  belonged  to  them,  and  which,  though  it
has  been  partly  abolished,  has  chiefly  lost  its  impor-
tance through  insensible  decay,  they  long  continued
in  the  exercise  of  administrative  or  regulative  powers
which  are  scarcely  distinguishable  from  legislation.
Other  vestiges  of  powers  exerted  by  the  collective
body  of  free  owners  at  a  time  when  the  conceptions  of
legislative  and  judicial  authority  had  not  yet  been
separated,  remained  in  the  functions  of  the  Leet  Jury ;
in  the  right  asserted  for  the  free  tenants  of  sitting  as  i
Judges  in  the  Court  Baron ;  and  in  the  election  of
various  petty  officers.  It  is  true  that,  as  regards  one
of  these  Courts,  the  legal  theory  of  its  character  is  to
a  certain  extent  inconsistent  with  the  pedigree  I  have
claimed  for  it.  The  lawyers  have  always  contended
that  the  Court  Leet  only  existed  through  the  King's


140  THE MANORIAL COURTS.  lect.  v.

grant,  express  or  implied;  and  in  pursuance  of  the
same  doctrine  they  have  laid  down  that,  whereas  the
lord  might  himself  sit  in  the  Court  Baron,  he  must
have  a  person  of  competent  legal  learning  to  repre-
sent him  in  the  Court  Leet. But  this  only  proves
that  the  Court  Leet,  which  was  entrusted  with  the
examination  of  the Frankpledge,  had  more  public
importance  than  the  other  Manorial  Courts,  and  was
therefore  more  distinctly  brought  under  the  assump-
tion which  had  been  gradually  forming  itself,  that
royal  authority  is  the  fountain  of  all  justice. Even
in  the  last  extremity  of  decline,  the  Manorial  Courts
have  not  wholly  ceased  to  be  regarded  as  the  tie
which  connects  the  common  interests  of  a  definite
group  of  persons  engaged  in  the  cultivation  of  the
soil. Marshall  ('  Rural  Economy  of  Yorkshire,'  i.  27)
mentions  the  remarkable  fact  that  these  Courts  were
sometimes  kept  up  at  the  beginning  of  the  century
by  the  voluntary  consent  of  the  neighbourhood  in
certain  districts  where,  from  the  disappearance  of  the
servile tenures  which had enabled  the  Customary
Courts  to  be  continued,  the  right  to  hold  them  had
been  forfeited. The  manorial  group  still  sufficiently
cohered  for  it  to  be  felt  that  some  common  authority
was  required  to  regulate  such  matters  as  the  repair  of
minor  roads,  the  cleansing  of  rivulets,  the  ascertain-
ment of  the  sufficiency  of  ring-fences,  the  assessment
of  the  damages  of  impounded  cattle,  the  removal  of
nuisances,  and  the  stocking  of  commons.


LECT.  V.  ENCROACHMENTS OP THE LORD.  141

On  the  whole,  the  comparison  of  the  Village  Group
with  the  English  group  which  I  have  called  Manorial
rather  than  Feudal,  suggests  the  following  general
observations.  Wherever  that  collective  ownership  of
land  which  was  a  universal  phenomenon  in  primitive
societies  has  dissolved,  or  gone  far  to  dissolve,  into
individual  property,  the  individual  rights  thus  formed
have  been  but  slightly  affected  by  the  process  of  feu-
dalisation.  If  there  are  reasons  for  thinking  that
some  free  village  societies  fell  during  the  process  into
the  predial  condition  of  villenage — whatever  that
condition  may  really  have  implied — a  compensating
process  began  at  some  unknown  date,  under  which
the  base  tenant  made  a  steady  approach  to  the  level
of  the  freeholder.  Even  rights  which  savoured  of  the
collective  stage  of  property  were  maintained  compara-
tively intact,  provided  that  they  were  ascertained:
such  as  rights  of  pasture  on  the  waste  and  rights  of  j  \  y^^^"'^''^
several  or  of  common  enjoyment  (as  the  case  might
be)  in  the  grass  land.  The  encroachments  of  the  lord
were  in  proportion  to  the  want  of  certainty  in  the
rights  of  the  community.  Into  the  grass  land  he
intruded  more  than  into  the  arable  land  ;  into  the
waste  much  more  than  into  either.  The  conclusion
suggested  to  my  mind  is  that,  in  succeeding  to  the
legislative  power  of  the  old  community,  he  was
enabled  to  appropriate  to  himself  such  of  its  rights  as
were  not  immediately  valuable,  and  which,  in  the
event  of  their  becoming  valuable,  required  legislative


4JL<-o:L5AJbcM,


142  ROMAX AND FEUDAL LAW.  lect.  v.

adjustment  to  settle  the  mode  of  enjoying  them.
Let  me  add  that  the  general  truth  of  my  description
of  the  character  of  the  change  which  somehow  took
place,  is  perhaps  rendered  antecedently  more  probable
by  the  comparison  of  a  mature,  but  non-feudal,  body
of  jurisprudence,  like  the  Eoman  law,  with  any  deeply
feudalised  legal  system.  You  will  remember  the
class  of  enjoyable  objects  which  the  Roman  lawyers
call  res  nullius^  res  puhlici  usus^  res  omnium  or  univer-
sorum ;  these  it  reserves  to  the  entire  community,  or
confers  on  the  first  taker.  But,  under  feudalised  law,
nearly  all  these  objects  which  are  capable  of  several
enjoyment  belong  to  the  lord  of  the  manor,  or  to  the
king.  Even  Prize  of  War,  the  most  significant  of  the
class,  belongs  theoretically  to  the  sovereign  in  the
first  instance.  By  a  very  singular  anomaly,  which
has  had  important  practical  results,  Game  is  not
strictly  private  property  under  English  law ;  but  the
doctrine  on  the  subject  is  traceable  to  the  later
influence  of  the  Roman  law.

There  must  be  a  considerable  element  of  conjec-
ture in  any  account  which  may  be  given  of  a  series
of  changes  which  took  place  for  the  most  part  in
remote  antiquity,  and  which  probably  were  far  from
uniform  either  in  character  or  in  rate  of  advance.  It
happens,  however,  that  the  vestiges  of  the  earlier
stages  of  the  process  of  feudalisation  are  more  dis-
cernible in  Germany  than  elsewhere,  both  in  docu-


I.ECT.  V.  CAUSES OF FEUDALISATION.  143

mentary  records  and  on  the  face  of  the  land  ;  owing
in  part  no  doubt  to  the  comparatively  feeble  action
of  that  superior  and  central  authority  which  has
obHterated  or  obscured  so  much  in  our  own  country.
A  whole  school  of  writers,  among  whom  Von  Maurer
has  the  first  place,  has  employed  itself  in  restoring
and  interpreting  these  traces  of  the  Past.  How  did
the  Manor  rise  out  of  the  Mark  ? — this  is  their  way
of  stating  the  problem.  What  were  the  causes  of
indigenous  growth  which,  independently  of  grants  of
land  by  royal  or  national  authority,  were  leading  to
a  suzerainty  or  superiority  of  one  cultivating  com-  ,^^q^5vaxJt,  c\
munity  over  another,  or  of  one  family  over  the  rest  cwv^  uxmJ^
of  the  families  composing  the  village  community  P"'^"'^^*^^^'^
The  great  cause  in  the  view  of  these  writers  was  the
exceeding  quarrelsomeness  of  these  little  societies,
and  the  consequent  frequency  of  intertribal  war.  ^
One  community  conquers  another,  and  the  spoil  of  war,
is  generally  the  common  mark  or  waste  of  the  worsted!
community.  Either  the  conquerors  appropriate  and
colonise  part  of  the  waste  so  taken,  or  they  take  the
whole  domain  and  restore  it  to  be  held  in  dependence
on  the  victor- society.  The  change  from  one  of  these
systems  to  another  occurred,  you  will  remember,  in
Roman  history,  and  constitutes  an  epoch  in  the  deve-
lopment of  the  Roman  Law  of  Property.  The  effect
of  the  first  system  on  the  Teutonic  communities  was
inequality  of  property ;  since  the  common  land  appro-


(TVm:^  (MJ^  cvtv


144  GROWTH OF SUZERAINTIES.  lect.  v.

priated  and  occupied  does  not  seem  to  have  been
equally  divided,  but  a  certain  preference  was  given  to
the  members  of  the  successful  community  who  had
most  effectually  contributed  to  the  victory. Under
the  second  system,  when  its land was  restored  to
the  conquered  society,  the  superiority  over  it  which
remained  to  the  victor,  bore  the  strongest  analogy  to
a  suzerainty  or  lordship. Such  a  suzerainty  was  not,
however, exclusively created by success in war.
Sometimes  a  community  possessed  of  common  land
exceptionally  extensive  or  exceptionally  fertile  would
send  colonies  of  families  to  parts  of  it. Each  of  these
new  communities  would  receive  a  new  arable  mark,
but  such  of  the land as remained unappropriated
would  still  be  the  common  land  of  all  the  townships.
At  the  head  of  this  sort  of  confederacy  there  would,
however,  be the original mother -community from
which  the  colonists  proceeded, and  there  seems  no
doubt  that  in  such  a  state  of  things  she  claimed  a  supe-
riority or  suzerainty  over  all  the  younger  townships.
But,  even  if  we  had  the  fullest evidence  of  the
growth  of  suzerainties  in this inchoate shape, we
should  still  have  advanced  a  very  little  way  in  trac-
ing the  transmutation  of  the  village  system  into  the
manorial  system,  if  it  were  not  for  another  phenome-
non to  which  Landau  has  more  particularly  called
attention. The  Teutonic  communities,  though  their
organisation  (if  modern  language  must  be  employed)


LECT.  V.  LEADING FAMILIES.  145

can  only  be  described  as  democratic,  appear  neverthe-
less to  have  generally  had  an  abiding  tradition  that
in  some  one  family,  or  in  some  families,  the  blood  -
which  ran  in  the  veins  of  all  the  freemen  was  purest ;  n
probably  because  the  direct  descent  of  such  family  or
families  from  a  common  ancestor  was  remembered  or
believed  in. From  the  members of  these  families,
the  leader  for  a  military  expedition  would  as  a  rule
be  chosen  ;  but  as  in  this  stage  of  thought  the  different
varieties  of  power  were  not  distinguished  from  one
another,  the  power  acquired  by  the  chieftain  would
be  a  combination  of  political,  military, and  judicial
power. The  choice  of  the leader would in great
emergencies  be  a  true  election,  but  on  less  serious
occasions  would  tend  to  become  an  acquiescence  in
the  direction  of  the  eldest  male  agnate  of  the  family
which  had  the  primacy  of  the  township. Similarly
the  power  which  had  at  first  been  more  military  than
anything  else,  would in more  peaceful  times  tend
rather  to  assume  a  political  and  judicial  form. The
leader  thus  taken  from  the  privileged  family  would
have  the  largest  share  of  the  lands  appropriated  from
conquered  village -societies  ;  and  there  is  ground  for
supposing  that  he  was sometimes rewarded  by  an
exceptionally  large  share  of  the  common  land  belong-
ing to  the  society  which  he  had  headed. Everything  in
fact  which  disturbed  the  peaceful  order  of  the  village
system  led to the aggrandisement of  the leading  I


at  work  which  were  leading  to  inequality  of  property
•^  in land. There  were causes at  work  which  were


146  ELEMENTS OF FEUDAL SYSTEM.  lect.  v.

family  and  of  its  chief.  Among  the  privileges  which
he  obtained  was  one  of  which  the  importance  did  not
show  itself  till  much  later.  He  became  powerful
enough  in  his  own  township  to  sever  his  own  plot  of
land  from  the  rest,  and,  if  he  thought  fit,  to  enclose
it;  and  thus  to  break  up  or  enfeeble  that  system  of
common  cultivation  imder  rules  of  obligatory  custom
1  which  depended  mainly  on  the  concurrence  of  all  the
*  villagers.

There  were  therefore,  in  the  cultivatmg  communi-
x^^yties  of  the  German  and  Scandinavian  races,  causes

i^\j)i-Vf<5t^  leading  to  the  establishment  of  superiorities  or  suze-
*'^\jLy»fe^f  ainties  of  one  township  over  another. There  were
wJjrf^U^  causes  at  work  which  tended  to  place  the  benefits  of
'\j^  an  unequal  proprietary  system  and  the  enjoyment  of

jA^  these  suzerainties  in  the  hands  of  particular  families,

and  consequently  of  their  chiefs  for  the  time  being.
Here  you  have  all  the  elements  of  the  system  we  are
compelled  to  call  feudal.  But  the  system  in  its
ultimate  development  was  the  result  of  a  double  set
of  influences.  One  set,  which  I  have  been  describing,
were  of  primitive  growth.  Another  showed  them-
selves when  powerful  Teutonic  monarchies  began  to
be  formed,  and  consisted  in  grants  of  national  waste
land  or  of  the  soil  of  conquered  provinces.  Doubtless
some  of  the  grantees  were  chiefs  of  families  already


LECT.  V.  SYSTEMATIC FEUDALISM.  147

risen  to  power  under  indigenous  Teutonic  conditions ;
but  in  any  case  a  Beneficiary  would  be  a  chieftain  of
a  peculiarly  powerful  class. The  cultivators  of  his
land  would  either  be  persons  settled  on  it  by  himself,
or  they  would be  vanquished  provincials  who  had
no  rights  which  he  did  not  choose  to  recognise  or
concede. It  is  not,  therefore,  surprising  that  there
should  have  been  a  completer  constitution  of  feudalism
in  the  countries  which  at  the  time  of  conquest  were
filled with Romanised populations. The mould
would be Teutonic, but the materials would be
unusually  plastic,  and here  would more especially
come  into  play  the  influence  of  Roman  law,  giving
precision  to  relations  which  under  purely  Teutonic
social  conditions  may  have  been  in  a  high  degree
vague  and  indefinite. It  is  well known  that  this
systematic  feudalism  reacted  upon  the  more  purely
Teutonic  societies  and  gave  an  impulse  to  changes
which  were  elsewhere  proceeding  at  a  slower  pace.

I  have  very  briefly  summarised  the  results  of  a
very  long  and  laborious  enquiry,  and  only  so  far  as
is  necessary  for  my  immediate  purpose.  Merely
remarking  that  I  can  see  little  or  nothing  in  the
conclusions  of  these  eminent  German  writers  which
is  out  of  harmony  with  the  account  given  by  English
scholars  of  the  parallel  phenomena  of  change  mani-
fested in  England  before  the  Conquest,  I  proceed  to
ask,  following  the  scheme  of  these  Lectures,  whether

I.  2


148  ANTIQUARIANISM OF INDIAN POLITICS. lect.  v.

the  experience  of  Englishmen  in  India  throws  any-
light  or  has  any  bearing  upon  the  questions  which
have  been  occupying  us?  It  is  not  too  much  to  say
that  the  phenomena  observed  in  the  East,  and  those
estabUshed  in  the  West  by  historical  research,  illus-
trate one  another  at  every  point.  In  India  these  dry
bones  live.  Not  only,  as  I  have  told  you,  is  the
Village  Community  the  basis  of  British  administration
in  those  provinces  in  which  the  art  of  government
has  to  be  practised  with  skill  and  caution,  but  a
number  of  controversies  turning  on  the  mode  of
transition  from  the  village  system  to  what  I  have
called  the  manorial  system  are  as  earnestly,  and  some-
times even  as  violently,  debated  by  our  countrymen
in  the  East  as  are  the  great  aspects  of  politics  among
ourselves.  All  Indian  disputes  take,  I  should  explain,
a  historical  or  antiquarian  shape.  The  assumption
universally  made  is  that  the  country  must  be  governed
in  harmony  with  the  established  usages  of  the  natives,
and  each  administrative  school  has  therefore  to  justify
its  opinions  by  showing  that  the  principles  to  which
it  adheres  are  found  in  some  sense  or  other  to  underlie
the  known  customary  law  of  India.  The  extrava-
gance of  partisanship  which  here  shows  itself  in
unqualified  assertion  of  the  universal  applicabihty
of  general  propositions  has  its  Indian  counterpart  in
unqualified  assertion  of  the  universal  existence  of
particular  customs. The  Indian  controversy  is,  how-


LECT.  V. POLITICAL KESULTS OF SETTLEMEiSTS.  149

ever,  a  controversy  about  facts  which,  though  they
are  more  complex  than  the  disputants  suppose,  are
nevertheless  much  simpler  than  the  material  of
English  political  controversy ;  and  the  results  are
therefore  proportionately  more  instructive  to  the  by-
stander who  has  entire  sympathy  with  neither  party.
Let  us  suppose  a  province  annexed  for  the  first
time  to  the  British  Indian  Empire.  The  first  civil
act  of  the  new  government  is  always  to  effect  a  settle-
ment of  the  land  revenue;  that  is,  to  determine  the
amount  of  that  relatively  large  share  of  the  produce
of  the  soil,  or  of  its  value,  which  is  demanded  by  the
sovereign  in  all  Oriental  States,  and  out  of  which
all  the  main  expenses  of  government  are  defrayed.
Among  the  many  questions  upon  which  a  decision
must  be  had,  the  one  of  most  practical  importance  is,
'  Who  shall  be  settled  with  ?  ' — with  whom  shall  the
settlement  be  made?  What  persons,  what  bodies,
what  groups,  shall  be  held  responsible  to  the  British
Government  for  its  land  revenue  ?  What  practically
has  to  be  determined  is  the  unit  of  society  for  ^-^^  U
agrarian  purposes;  and  you  find  that,  in  determining  '^vCa^^zHm
it,  you  determine  everything,  and  give  its  character
finally  to  the  entire  political  and  social  constitution  of
the  province.  You  are  at  once  compelled  to  confer  on
the  selected  class  powers  co-extensive  with  its  duties
to  the  sovereign.  Not  that  the  assumption  is  ever
made  that  new  proprietary  powers  are  conferred  on  it.


150  VARIOUS FORMS OF SETTLEMENT.  lect.  v.

but  what  are  supposed  to  be  its  rights  in  relation  to  all
other  classes  are  defined ;  and  in  the  vague  and  floating
order  of  primitive  societies,  the  mere  definition  of  a
right  immensely  increases  its  strength. As  a  matter
of  fact,  it  is  found  that  all  agrarian  rights,  whether
superior  or  subordinate  to  those  of  the  person  held
responsible  to  Government,  have  a  steady  tendency  to
decay. I  will  not  ask  you  to  remember  the  technical
names  of  the  various  classes  of  persons  '  settled  with '
in  difi^erent  parts  of  India — Zemindars, Talukdars,
Lumberdars — names  which  doubtless  sound  uncouth,
and  which,  in  fact,  have  not  an  identical  meaning
throughout  the  country — ^but  I  dwell  on  the  fact  that
the  various  interests  in  the  soil  which  these  names
symbolise  are  seen  to  grow  at  the  expense  of  all  others.
Do  you,  on  entering on  the settlement of  a  new
province,  find  that  a  peasant  proprietary  has  been
displaced  by  an  oligarchy  of  vigorous  usurpers,  and
do  you  think  it  expedient  to  take  the  government
dues  from  the  once  oppressed  yeomen  ? The  result  is
the  immediate  decline,  and  consequently  bitter  dis-
content, of  the  class  above  them,  who  find  themselves
sinking  to  the  footing  of  mere  annuitants  on  the  land.
Such  was  the  land  settlement  of  Oudh,  which  was
shattered  to  pieces  by  the  Sepoy  mutiny  of  1857,  and
which  greatly  affected  its  course. Do  you,  reversing
this  policy,  arrange  that  the  superior  holder  shall  be
answerable  to  Government  ? You  find  that  you  have


t


LECT.  V. GEOWTH IN POWER OF OFFICIAL HOLDER. 151

created  a  landed  aristocracy  which  has  no  parallel  in
wealth  or  power  except  the  proprietors  of  English
soil.  Of  this  nature  is  the  more  modern  settlement
of  the  province  of  Oudh,  only  recently  consummated  ;
and  such  will  ultimately  be  the  position  of  the
Talukdars,  or  Barons,  among  whom  its  soil  has  been
divided.  Do  you  adopt  a  policy  different  from  either
of  those  which  I  have  indicated  and  make  your  ar-
rangements with  the  representative  of  the  village  com-
munity? You  find  that  you  have  arrested  a  process
of  change  which  was  steadily  proceeding.  You  have
given  to  this  peculiar  proprietary  group  a  vitality
which  it  was  losing,  and  a  stiffness  to  the  relations  of
the  various  classes  composing  it  which  they  never
had  before.

It  would  be  a  mere  conceit  to  try  to  establish  any
close  analogy  between  the  Teutonic  Kings  and  the
British  government  of  India.  Yet,  so  much  as  this
is  true  and  instructive.  The  only  owner  of  the  soil
of  India  with  whom  the  English  Government  has  any
relations,  is,  in  its  eyes,  a  mere  functionary.  It
chooses  him  where  it  pleases,  and  exacts  from  him
services,  chiefly  pecuniary,  but  to  a  certain  small
extent  personal.  It  is  found,  however,  that  when
an  official  appointed  by  a  powerful  government  acts
upon  the  loose  constitution  of  a  primitive  society  he
crushes  down  all  other  classes  and  exalts  that  to  which
he  himself  belongs. But  for  recent  legislation  this


152  MAHOMETAN ASSUMPTIONS.  lect.  v.

process  would  have  gone  to  any  length  in  India,  and
would  have  assuredly  affected  many  other  provinces
than  those  which  were  its  immediate  theatre.  It  may,
at  least,  be  said  that  by  observing  it  we  gain  a  clearer
conception  of  the  effect  of  beneficiary  gifts  on  the
general  tenure  of  land,  and  that  we  better  understand
the  enormous  power  acquired  by  the  chieftains  who
rendered  immediate  services  to  the  Teutonic  kings.

The  English  in  India  appear  to  have  started  with
the  assumption  of  the  Mahometans  that  the  sovereign
might lawfully select anybody  he  pleased as the
collector  of  his  revenue ;  but  they  soon  accepted  the
principle  that  the  class  to  be  '  settled  with  '  was  the
class  best  entitled  to  be  regarded  as  having  rights  of
property  in  the  soil. At  a  later  date  they  discovered
that,  even  when  this  class  was  determined,  they  had
to  decide  what  it  was  that  proprietary  rights  over
Indian  land  implied,  and  what  powers  they  carried
with  them. Ko  questions  fuller  of  inherent  diffi-
culties were  ever  proposed  for  solution. As  regards
the first  of  them, the functionaries administering
India  might,  with  some  eminent  exceptions,  but  still
not  unfairly,  be  distributed  into  two  great  schools —
the  partisans  of  the  theory  that  the  soil  belongs  to
the  peasantry  either  as  individuals  or  as  organised  in
groups  ;  and  the  partisans  of  the  theory  that  owner-
ship of  the  soil  ought  to  be,  and  but  for  British  in-
fluence would  be,  everywhere  in  India  vested  in  some
sort  of  native  aristocracy. As  regards  the second


LECT.  V.  INDIAN SCHOOLS OF OPINION.  153

question,  the  Indian  officials  are  much  more  exactly
divided  into  those  who  contend  that  the  highest  right
of  property  acknowledged  to  exist  over  the  soil
carries  with  it  the  same  powers  which  attach  to  an
English  owner  in  fee-simple  of  the  present  day,  and
into  those  who  are  of  opinion  that,  if  these  powers  are
to  square  with  native  idea  and  custom,  they  must  be
more  or  less  limited  and  controlled.  The  controver-
sies on  these  two  points  are  the  most  vehemently  de-
bated of  Indian  disputes  ;  and  none  ever  presented
greater  difficulties  to  the  person  who  tries  to  form  an
opinion  on  their  merits,  not  from  his  own  knowledge
but  upon  the  evidence  supplied  to  him  by  others.
He  finds  men  of  the  utmost  experience,  of  trained
power  of  observation,  and  of  the  most  unquestionable
good  faith,  stating  precisely  opposite  conclusions  with
precisely  equal  positiveness.  But  if  he  avail  himself
of  the  advantage  given  him  by  the  parallel  facts  of
European  tenure,  he  will,  perhaps,  venture  to  have  an
opinion,  and  to  think  that  in  these,  as  in  many  other
fierce  disputes,  both  sides  are  right  and  both  sides
are  wrong.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  first  point  at  issue  was
much  obscured,  and  attention  diverted  to  irrelevant
matter,  by  the  unlucky  experiment  tried  at  the  end
of  the  last  century  by  Lord  Cornwallis.  A  province,
like  Bengal  Proper,  where  the  village  system  had
fallen  to  pieces  of  itself,  was  the  proper  field  for  the
creation  of  a  peasant  proprietary;  but  Lord  Cornwallis


154  INDIAN FOEMS OP PKOPERTY.  lect.  v.

turned  it  into  a  country  of  great  estates,  and  was
compelled  to  take  his  landlords  from  the  tax-
gatherers  of  his  worthless  predecessors.  The  politi-
cal valuelessness  of  the  proprietary  thus  created,  its
failure  to  obtain  any  wholesome  influence  over  the
peasantry,  and  its  oppression  of  all  inferior  holders,  led
not  only  to  distrust  of  the  economical  principles  im-
plied in  its  establishment,  but  to  a  sort  of  reluctance
to  believe  in  the  existence  of  any  naturally  privileged
class  in  the  provinces  subsequently  acquired  and
examined.  The  most  distinguished  public  servants  of
that  day  have  left  much  on  record  which  unplies  an
opinion  that  no  ownership  of  Indian  land  was  dis-
coverable, except  that  of  the  village  communities,
subject  to  the  dominion  of  the  State.

But  in  fact  it  appears  that,  of  all  the  landmarks  on
the  line  of  movement  traced  by  German  and  English
scholars  from  the  Yillage  group  to  the  Manorial
group,  there  is  not  one  which  may  not  be  met  with
in  India,  saving  always  the  extreme  points  at  either
end.  I  have  not  had  described  to  me  any  village
community  under  the  unmodified  collective  govern-
ment of  the  heads  of  households,  but  there  are  those
who  think  they  find  the  vestiges  of  the  original  con-
stitution in  a  sort  of  democratic  spirit  and  habit  of
free  criticism  which  prevail  even  when  the  govern-
ment has  passed  to  an  hereditary  ofiicer.  If  any
thoroughly  authenticated  example  could  be  produced


LECT.  V.  THE HEADMAN.  155

of  a  community  exercising  absolute  liberty  of  choice
in  electing  its  Headman,  it  would  point  still  more
significantly  to  an  unmodified  original  equality ;  but
the  preference  alleged  to  be  invariably  shown  to  the
members  of  particular  families  appears  to  show  that
these  elections  belong  really  to  the  phenomena  of
hereditary  succession.  It  is  not,  however,  disputed
that  villages  are  found  in  great  numbers  in  which
the  government  is  lodged  with  a  council,  neither
claiming  to  be  nor  regarded  as  being  anything  more
than  a  representation  of  the  entire  cultivating  body.
The  instances,  however,  in  which  the  authority  has
passed  to  some  particular  family  or  families  are
extremely  numerous.  Sometimes  the  ofiice  of  Head-
man belongs  absolutely  to  the  head  of  a  particular
family ;  sometimes  it  belongs  to  him  primarily,  but
he  may  be  set  aside  for  incapacity  or  physical  blemish;
sometimes  there  is  a  power  of  choosing  him  limited
to  an  election  between  the  members  of  one  or  more
privileged  households .  The  powers  which  he  enjoys —
or  which  it  perhaps  should  be  said,  he  would  enjoy
under  native  conditions  of  society — are  also  very
various.  But  the  judicial  poAver  of  mediating  in
disputes  and  of  interpreting  customs  appears  to  be
certainly  vested  in  him,  together  with  the  duty
of  keeping  order;  and,  independently  of  the  func-
tions whith  he  discharges  with  the  consent  of  his
neighbours,  the  British  Government  often  expressly


156  PROPERTY RECOGNISED BY  THE ENGLISH, lect.  v.

confides  to  liim  a  certain  amount  of  regular  jurisdic-
tion and  of  regular  authority  in  matters  of  police.

There  is no  question  that  many  of  the  families
whom the English have recognised as  owners of
villages  were  privileged  families  enjoying  the  primacy
of  the  township  ;  but  the  widest  difference  of  opinion
has  prevailed  as  to  the  nature  and  origin  of  the  rights
claimed by certain families for their chiefs over
whole  tracts of  country, embracing  the  domain  of
several  village  communities. It  has  been strongly
contended  on  one  side  that  these  great  proprietors
are  nothing  but  the  descendants  of  farmers  of  the
revenue  under  Native  Governments  ;  on  the  other  it
is  asserted  that  in  some  cases  at  all  events  they  were
^CUA^/^  '^  Chieftains  of  Clans  who  were  selected  by  preference  to
^  -  l^^ryt^  represent  the  Royal  or  Imperial  native  government
jj^-  ^j:  in  districts  in  which  they  had  an  hereditary  influence.

There  appears  to  me  reasonable  evidence  that  this
last  theory  is  true  of  certain  localities  in  India.  Clan
society  is  also  in  Europe  the  Celtic  form  of  the  family
organisation  of  society;  and,  for  myself,  I  have  great
difficulty  in  conceiving  the  origin  of  customary  law
otherwise  than  by  assuming  the  former  existence  of
larger  groups,  under  patriarchal  chieftains,  which  at
a  later  date  dissolved  into  the  independent  collec-
tions of  families  forming  the  cultivating  commu-
nities of  the  Teutonic  (including  the  Scandinavian)
races  and  of  the  Hindoos.

If  it  be  taken  for  granted  that  the  English  in  India


LECT.  V.  ABSOLUTE OWNERSHIP.  157

were  bound  to  recognise  rights  of  property  some-
where, their  selection  of  the  persons  in  whom  these
rights  should  vest  does  not  seem  to  have  been  as
absurd  as  the  adherents  of  one  Indian  school  are  in
the  habit  of  hinting,  if  not  of  asserting.  Claims  to
some  sort  of  superior  right  over  land  in  fact  existed
which  corresponded  to  every  single  stage  through
which  the  conception  of  proprietorship  has  passed
in  the  Western  world,  excepting  only  the  later
stages.  The  variety  of  these  claims  was  practically
infinite,  and  not  only  did  not  diminish,  but  greatly
increased,  as  native  customs  and  ideas  were  more
accurately  examined.  Even  when  the  village  com-
munities were  allowed  to  be  in  some  sense  the  pro-
prietors of  the  land  which  they  tilled,  they  proved  on
careful  inspection  not  to  be  simple  groups,  but  highly
composite  bodies,  composed  of  several  sections  with
conflicting  and  occasionally  with  irreconcilable  claims.
The  English  officials  solved  a  problem  of  almost
hopeless  perplexity  by  registering  all  the  owners  of
superior  rights  as  landowners,  their  conception  of
ownership  being  roughly  taken  from  their  own
country  ;  but  the  fundamental  question  very  soon
revived  under  another  form  in  the  shape  of  the
second  issue  disputed  between  the  Indian  administra-
tive schools,  which  is,  whether  proprietorship  in
India  is  to  be  taken  to  be  the  same  assemblage  of
powers  which  constitutes  the  modern  English  owner-  '
ship  of  land  in  fee-simple.


158  NATURE OF RIGHTS OF PROPERTY. lect.  v.

It  seems  to  me  that  the  error  of  the  school  which
asserts  the  existence  of  strong  proprietary  rights  in
India  lies  much  less  in  merely  making  this  assertion
than  in  assuming  the  existence  of  a  perfect  analogy
between  rights  of  property  as  understood  in  India  and
as  understood  in  this  country.  The  presumption  is
strongly  against  the  reality  of  any  such  correspon-
dence. The  rights  of  property  are,  in  the  eye  of  the
jurist,  a  bundle  of  powers,  capable  of  being  mentally
contemplated  apart  from  one  another  and  capable
of  being  separately  enjoyed.  The  historical  enquirer
can  also,  whenever  there  are  materials  for  a  history
of  the  past,  trace  the  gradual  growth  of  the  conception
of  absolute  property  in  land.  That  conception  appears
to  me,  for  reasons  which  I  shall  afterwards  assign,  to
have  grown  out  of  the  ownership  of  the  lord  in  that
portion  of  his  domain  which  he  cultivated  by  his  im-
mediate personal  dependants,  and  therefore  to  be  a  late
and  gradually  matured  fruit  of  the  feudalisation  of
Europe.  A  process  closely  resembling  feudalisation  was
undoubtedly  once  at  work  in  India  ;  there  are  Indian
phenomena  answering  to  the  phenomena  of  nascent
absolute  ownership  in  England  and  Europe  ;  but  then
these  Indian  phenomena,  instead  of  succeeding  one
another,  are  all  found  existing  together  at  the  present
moment.  The  feudalisation  of  India,  if  so  it  may  be
called,  was  never  in  fact  completed.  The  character-
istic signs  of  its  consummation  are  wanting. It  may


r


LECT.  V. DEVELOPMENT OF ABSOLUTE OWNEESHIP.  159

be  doubted  whether  in  any  single  instance  the  whole
power  of  regulating  the  aifairs  of  the  village  com-
munity had  passed  to  an  hereditary  official  when  the
English  entered  the  country  ;  on  the  other  hand,  in
the  enormous  majority  of  examples  there  are  pecu-
liarities of  organisation  which  show  conclusively  that
the  village -group  is  either  unmodified  or  has  not  yet
nearly  passed  into  the  manorial  group.  Even,  how-
ever, were  we  at  liberty  to  believe  that  India  has  been
completely  feudalised,  we  should  still  be  as  far  as
possible  from  being  entitled  to  assume  that  the  high-
est Indian  form  of  ownership  corresponds  to  the  ab-
solute ownership  of  the  English  holder  in  fee-simple.
It  has  been  said  that  many  persons  talk  and  write  as
if  all  the  Englishmen  who  lived  between  the  Norman
Conquest  and  the  Reformation  lived  at  exactly  the
same  time  ;  but  this  Indian  assumption  implies  that
there  has  been  no  change  in  our  conception  of  landed
property  between  the  epoch  at  which  England  be-
came completely  feudal  and  the  epoch  (let  us  say)  at
which  the  Corn-laws  were  repealed.  Yet  during  all
these  centuries  England  has  been  legislatively  and  to
a  great  extent  judicially  centralised,  and  has  been
acted  on  by  economical  influences  of  very  great  uni-
formity. India,  from  the  earliest  ages  till  the  British
entered  it,  was  under  the  dominion  of  comparatively
powerful  kings,  who  swept  away  the  produce  of  the
labour  of  the  village  communities  and  carried  oiF  the


160  VESTED RIGHTS L\ INDIA.  lect.  v.

young  men  to  serve  in  their  wars,  but  did  not  other-
v\rise  meddle  with  the  cultivating  societies.  This  was
doubtless  the  great  cause  of  their  irregular  develop-
ment. Intertribal  wars  soon  gave  way  to  the  wars
of  great  kings  leading  mercenary  armies,  but  these
monarchs,  with  few  and  doubtful  exceptions,  neither
legislated  nor  centralised.  The  village  communities
were  left  to  modify  themselves  separately  in  their
own  way.

This  subject  is  one  of  much  practical  importance,
and  I  propose  to  treat  of  the  more  difficult  problems
which  it  raises  in  the  next  Lecture ;  at  present  I  will
content  myself  with  repeating  that  there  seems  to  me
the  heaviest  presumption  against  the  existence  in
any  part  of  India  of  a  form  of  ownership  conferring
the  exact  rights  on  the  proprietor  which  are  given  by
the  present  English  ownership  in  fee-simple.  There
are  now,  however,  a  vast  number  of  vested  rights  in
the  country,  fully  recognised  by  the  English  Govern-
ment, which  assume  the  identity  of  Indian  and
English  proprietorship,  and  neither  justice  nor  policy
permits  them  to  be  disturbed.  Moreover  it  is  ab-
stractedly possible  that  further  observation  of  par-
ticular localities  by  accurate  observers  may,  so  far  as
regards  those  localities,  rebut  the  presumption  of
which  I  have  spoken,  provided  that  the  enquirer  be
acquainted  with  the  parallel  phenomena  which  belong
to  European  legal  history, and  provided  that  he  possess


LECT.  V.  THE FEUDALISATION OF EUROPE.  161

the  faculty,  not  very  common  among  us,  of  distin-
guishing the  rudimentary  stages  of  legal  thought  from
its  maturity.  The  way  in  which,  among  the  unlet-
tered members  of  a  primitive  society,  law  and  morality
run  into  one  another  ought  especially  to  be  studied.
The  subordinate  holder  who  in  India  states  that  the
superior  holder  has  the  power  to  do  a  certain  act,  but
that  he  ought  not  to  do  it,  does  not  make  an  admis-
sion ;  he  raises  a  question  of  the  utmost  difficulty.

It  has  been  usual  to  speak  of  the  feudalisation  of
Western  Europe  as  if  it  had  been  an  unmixed  evil,
and  there  is  but  too  much  reason  to  believe  that  it
was  accompanied  in  its  course  by  a  great  amount  of
human  suffering.  But  there  are  some  facts  of  Indian
experience  which  may  lead  us  to  think  that  the
advantage  of  some  of  the  economical  and  juridical
results  which  it  produced  has  been  underrated.  If
the  process  indeed  had  really  consisted,  as  some  of
the  enthusiasts  for  its  repetition  in  India  appear  to
suppose  that  it  did,  merely  in  the  superposition  of
the  lord  over  the  free  owners  of  land,  with  power
to  demand  such  services  or  dues  as  he  pleased  and
to  vary  his  demands  at  pleasure,  very  little  indeed
could  be  said  for  it.  But  this  picture  of  it  is  cer-
tainly untrue  of  our  own  country.  We  are  not  at
liberty  to  assume  that  the  obligations  incurred  by  the
free  owner  of  land  who  commended  himself  to  a  lord
were  other than,  within certain limits,  fixed  and

M


162  CULTIVATION OF WASTE-LAND.  lect.  v.

definite  services ;  and  the  one  distinguishing  charac-
teristic which  the  Enghsh  feudists  discover  in  that
free  Socage  tenure  for  which  the  English  villagers
most  probably  exchanged  their  allodial  ownership  is
certainty,  regularity  and  permanence  of  service.  The
great  novelties  which  the  transition  from  one  form  of
property  to  another  produced  were,  the  new  authority
over  the  waste  which  the  lord  acquired  (and  which
was  connected  with  the  transfer  to  him  of  the  half
judicial,  half  legislative,  powers  of  the  collective
community)  and  the  emancipation  of  the  lord  within
his  own  domains  from  the  fetters  of  obligatory  agri-
cultural custom.  Now  Europe  was  then  full  of  great
wastes,  and  the  urgent  business  in  hand  was  to  reclaim
them.  I^arge  forests  were  to  be  felled,  and  wide
tracts  of  untilled  land  had  to  be  brought  under
cultivation.  In  England,  inexorably  confined  within
natural  boundaries,  there  pressed  with  increasing  force
the  necessity  for  adopting  the  methods  of  agriculture
which  were  fitted  to  augment  the  total  supply  of  food
for  a  growing  population.  But  for  this  work  society
organised  in  village  communities  is  but  little  adapted.
The  Indian  administrators  who  regard  the  cultivating
groups  with  most  favour,  contend  that  they  secure  a
large  amount  of  comfort  and  happiness  for  the  families
included  within  them,  that  their  industry  is  generally,
and  that  their  skill  is  occasionally,  meritorious.  But
their  admirers  certainly  do  not  claim  for  them  that


t


LECT.  V.  IMPROVEMENTS IN TILLAGE.  163

they  readily  adopt  new  crops  and  new  modes  of  tillage,
and  it  is  often  admitted  that  they  are  grudging  and
improvident  owners  of  their  waste  land.  The  British
Government,  as  I  before  stated,  has  applied  a  remedy
to  this  last  defect  by  acting  on  the  right  to  curtail
excessive  wastes  which  it  inherited  from  its  prede-
cessors; and  of  late  years  it  has  done  its  utmost  to
extend  and  improve  the  cultivation  of  one  great
staple.  Cotton — amid  difficulties  which  seem  to  be  very
imperfectly  understood  by  those  who  suppose  that  in
order  to  obtain  the  sowing  of  a  new  crop,  or  the
sowing  of  an  old  crop  in  a  new  way,  from  a  peasant
in  bondage  to  hereditary  custom,  it  is  enough  to
prove  to  him  that  it  is  very  likely  to  be  profitable.
There  is  Indian  evidence  that  the  forms  of  property  |
imitated  from  modern  English  examples  have  a  value  \
of  their  own,  when  reclamation  has  to  be  conducted
on  a  large  scale,  or  novelties  in  agriculture  have  to  be
introduced.  The  Zemindars  of  Lower  Bengal,  the
landed  proprietary  established  by  Lord  Cornwallis,
have  the  worst  reputation  as  landlords,  and  appear  to
have  frequently  deserved  it;  but  the  grants  of  land
originally  made  to  them  included  great  uncultivated
tracts,  and  at  the  time  when  their  power  over
subordinate  holders  was  least  limited  they  brought
large  areas  of  waste  land  under  tillage  by  the  colonies
of  peasants  which  they  planted  there.  The  pro-
prietorship conferred  on  them  has  also  much  to  do

M  2


164  VILLAGE COMMUNITIES AND CUSTOMS. lect.  v.

with  the  introduction  into  Lower  Bengal,  nearly-
alone  among  Indian  provinces,  of  new  and  vast
agricultural  industries,  which,  if  they  had  been  placed
under  timely  regulation  (which  unfortunately  they
were  not)  would  have  added  as  much  to  the  comfort
of  the  people  as  they  have  added  to  the  wealth  of  the
country.

It  appears  therefore  to  me  to  be  highly  probable  that
j^  I  the  autocratically  governed  manorial  group  is  better
\  suited  than  the  village  group  for  bringing  under  cul-
tivation a  country  in  which  waste  lands  are  extensive.
So  also  does  it  seem  to  me  likely  to  have  been  at  all
times  more  tolerant  of  agricultural  novelties.  It  is  a
serious  error  to  suppose  that  the  non-feudal  forms  of
property  which  characterised  the  cultivating  commu-
nities had  any  real  resemblance  to  the  absolute
property  of  our  own  day.  The  land  was  free  only
in  the  sense  of  being  free  from  feudal  services,  but  it
was  enslaved  to  custom.  An  intricate  net  of  usage
bound  down  the  allodial  owner,  as  it  now  binds  the
Indian  peasant,  to  a  fixed  routine  of  cultivation.
It  can  hardly  be  said  that  in  England  or  Germany
these  usages  had  ceased  to  exercise  a  deadening
influence  even  within  living  memory,  since  very
recent  writers  in  both  countries  complain  of  the  bad
agriculture  perpetuated  by  custom  in  the  open
common  fields.  The  famous  movement  against
Inclosures  under  the  Tudor  reigns  was  certainly  in


LECT.  V.  CUSTOMARY TILLAGE.  165

part  provoked  by  inclosures  of  plots  in  the  three
common  fields  made  with  the  intention  of  breaking
the  custom  and  extending  the  systematic  cultivation
of  grasses ;  and  it  is  curious  to  find  the  witnesses
examined  before  the  Select  Committee  of  1844  using
precisely  the  same  language  which  was  employed  by
the  writers  who  in  the  sixteenth  century  took  the
unpopular  side,  and  declaring  that  the  value  and
produce  of  the  intermixed  lands  might  be  very  greatly
increased  if  the  owner,  instead  of  having  one  plot  in
each  field,  had  three  plots  thrown  together  in  one
field  and  dealt  with  them  as  he  pleased.  As  I  said
before,  it  seems  to  me  a  plausible  conjecture  that  our
absolute  form  of  property  is  really  descended  from
the  proprietorship  of  the  lord  in  the  domain  which —
besides  planting  it  with  the  settlements  of  '  unfree  '
families — he  tilled,  when  it  was  close  to  his  castle  or
manor-house,  by  his  own  dependants  under  his  own
eye.  He  was  free  from  the  agricultural  customs
which  shackled  those  below  him,  and  the  services
exacted  from  above  were  not  of  a  kind  to  affect  his
management  of  the  land  which  he  kept  in  his  hands.
The  English  settlers  on  the  New  England  coast  did
not,  as  T  shall  point  out,  at  first  adopt  this  form  of
property,  but  they  did  so  very  shortly,  and  we
unquestionably  owe  to  it  such  an  achievement  as
the  cultivation  of  the  soil  of  North  America.

If,  however,  a  society  organised  in  groups  on  the


L


166  SERVILE DEPENDANTS OF  VILLAGES.  lect.  v.

primitive  model  is  ineffective  for  Production,  so  also
if  left  to  develop  itself  solely  under  primitive  influ-
ences it  fails  to  secure  any  considerable  improvement
in  Distribution.  Although  it  is  hardly  possible  to
avoid  speaking  of  the  Western  village  groups  as  in
one  stage  democratically  governed,  they  were  really
i|  oligarchies,  as  the  Eastern  communities  always  tend
to  become.  These  little  societies  had  doubtless
anciently  a  power  of  absorption,  when  men  were  of
more  value  than  land.  But  this  they  lose  in  time.
There  is  plenty  of  evidence  that,  when  Western
Europe  was  undergoing  feudalisation,  it  was  full  of
enthralled  classes ;  and  I  imagine  that  the  authority
acquired  by  the  feudal  chief  over  the  waste  was  much
more  of  an  advantage  than  the  contrary  to  these
classes,  whom  he  planted  largely  there  in  colonies
which  have  probably  been  sometimes  mistaken  for
assemblages  of  originally  free  villagers.  The  status
of  the  slave  is  always  deplorable ;  the  status  of
the  predial  slave  is  often  worse  than  that  of  the
^.personal  or  household  slave  ;  but  the  lowest  depth
of  miserable  subjection  is  reached  when  the  person
enthralled  to  the  land  is  at  the  mercy  of  peasants,
whether  they  exercise  their  powers  singly  or  in
communities.

Whether  the  Indian  village  communities  had
wholly  lost  their  capacity  for  the  absorption  of
strangers  when the British dominion began,  is a


LECT.  V. VILLAGES CEASE TO ABSORB STRANGERS.  167

point  on  which  I  have  heard  several  contradictory
opinions  ;  but  it  is  beyond  doubt  that  the  influence
of  the  British  Government,  which  in  this  respect  is
nothing  more  than  the  ordinary  influence  of  settled
authority,  has  tended  steadily  to  turn  the  com-
munities into  close  corporations.  The  definition  of
rights  which  it  has  eff*ected  through  its  various
judicial  agencies — the  process  of  law  by  which  it
punishes  violations  of  right — above  all  the  money
value  which  it  has  given  to  all  rights  by  the  security
which  it  has  established  from  one  end  of  India  to
another — have  all  helped  to  make  the  classes  in
possession  of  vested  rights  cling  to  them  with  daily
increasing  tenacity.  To  a  certain  small  extent  this
indirect  and  unintended  process  of  shutting  the  door
to  the  acquisition  of  new  communal  rights  has  been
counteracted  by  a  rough  rule  introduced  by  the
English,  and  lately  engrafted  on  the  written  law,
under  which  the  cultivator  of  the  soil  who  has  been
in  possession  of  it  for  a  period  of  years  is  in  some
parts  of  India  protected  against  a  few  of  the  extreme
powers  which  attach  to  ownership  of  the  modern
English  type.  But  the  rule  is  now  in  some  discredit,
and  the  sphere  of  its  operation  has  of  late  been  much
curtailed.  And  my  own  opinion  (which  I  shall  state
more  at  length  in  the  next  Lecture)  is,  that  even  if
the  utmost  efifect  were  given  to  it,  it  would  not  make
up  for  some  of  the  inequalities  of  distribution  between


168  NASSE  S WORK.  lect.  v.

classes  actually  included  in  the  village  group  which
have  made  their  way  into  it  through  the  influence  of
economical  ideas  originating  in  the  West.  On  the
whole  the  conclusion  which  I  have  arrived  at  con-
cerning the  village  communities  is  that,  during  the
primitive  struggle  for  existence  they  were  expansive
and  elastic  bodies,  and  these  properties  may  be  per-
petuated in  them  for  any  time  by  bad  government.
But  tolerably  good  government  takes  away  their
absorptive  power  by  its  indirect  effects,  and  can  only
restore  it  by  direct  interposition.

It  was  part  of  my  design  to  append  to  these
Lectures  an  epitome  of  the  work  in  which  Professor
Nasse  has  attempted  to  connect  the  actual  condition
of  landed  property  in  much  of  England  at  the  end  of
the  last  century  as  shown  in  the  various  publications
of  Marshall,  with  the  early  English  forms  of  tenure
and  cultivation  as  known  to  us  through  the  labours
of  English  and  German  scholars.  But  I  have  aban-
doned my  intention  on  learning  that  Nasse's  book  is
likely  to  be  made  generally  accessible  through  an
English  translation.  The  undertaking  is  one  which
presents  considerable  difficulties.  Nasse  complains
of  the  unusual  scarcity  of  English  records  bearing
on  tenure  and  agricultural  custom,  but  in  this  place
we  may  note  another  class  of  difficulties  having
its  source  in  those  abundant  technicalities  of  English
real-property  law  which  are  so  hard  to  read  by  any-


LECT.  V.  THE STATUTE OF DEVISES.  169

body  except  the  professional  lawyer ;  and  yet  another
in  the  historical  theory  of  their  land  law  which
almost  all  English  lawyers  have  adopted,  and  which
colours  all  English  treatises  and  all  the  decisions  of
English  Courts — a  theory  which,  it  is  not  unjust  to
say,  practically  regards  the  manorial  system  as  having
no  ascertainable  antecedents,  and  all  rights  prima
facie  inconsistent  with  it  as  having  established  them-
selves through  prescription  and  by  the  sufferance  of
the  lord.  I  may  be  allowed  to  say  that  the  book  in
which  Nasse  has  knotted  together  the  two  ends  of  the
historical  thread  is  a  very  extraordinary  one  to  be
written  by  a  foreigner.  Much  of  it  deals  with
matter  which  can  only  be  discussed  appropriately  in
other  departments  of  study;  but  I  may  notice  in  this
place  one  set  of  causes,  of  a  purely  juridical  nature,
which,  besides  those  assigned  by  Nasse,  tended  in
later  times  to  throw  small  or  yeomen  properties  into
the  hands  of  large  landowners.  The  popular  opinion
much  exaggerates  the  extent  to  which  this  accumu-
lation of  landed  properties  had  proceeded  before  the
great  inclosures  of  the  last  century,  but  still  it  had
gone  some  length,  and  undoubtedly  one  cause  was
the  influence,  not  at  first  strongly  felt,  of  the  Statute
of  Devises. Each  landed  proprietor  ultimately  ac-

»  quired  the  power — within  limits  certainly,  but  very
wide  ones^to  create  a  private  law  for  his  own  estate.


170  RULES FOR CONSTRUING  WILLS.  lect.  v.

this  chaos  made  it  rather  worse ;  for  the  expedient
which  they  adopted  for  the  purpose  was  to  give  a
forced  technical  meaning  to  the  popular  language  of
testators.  One  large  and  complex  branch  of  English
law  is  still  concerned  with  the  rules  for  construing
in  a  technical  sense  the  loose  popular  expressions
found  in  wills.  Every  estate,  willed  away  by  a  tes-
tator technically  unlearned,  was  in  danger  of  being
burdened  with  a  mass  of  conflicting  rights  and  in-
terests, for  the  most  part  never  contemplated  by  the
testator  himself.  There  was  only  one  way  of  insuring
oneself  against  this  consequence,  and  that  was  the
employment  of  an  expert  to  make  the  will ;  but  there
is  reason  to  believe  that  the  wholesale  employment
of  legal  experts  which  is  now  one  of  the  singularities
of  this  country  is  of  comparatively  modern  date,  since
it  is  one  of  the  traditions  of  the  English  Bar,  derived
from  the  last  generation  of  lawyers,  that  among  the
I  great  sources  of  litigation  were  at  one  time  wills
made  by  village  schoolmasters.  Estates  thus  bur-
dened could  only  be  held  by  very  rich  men ;  as  they
alone  could  provide  and  insure  against  the  technical
traps  which  abounded  in  the  private  law  under  which
the  land  was  held,  or  could  render  them  innocuous  by
continued  possession  ending  in  a  prescriptive  title.  It
is  impossible  not  to  see  that  the  practice  of  un-
shackled devise  tended  to  bring  small  estates  into  the
market  as  unprofitable  to the  holders  through  the


LECT.  V. RESTRAINTS ON TESTAMENTARY POWER.  171

complication  of  interests  in  them,  and  at  the  same
time  tended  to  make  them  purchaseable  by  rich  men
only.

The  simple  truth  is  that,  if  a  system  of  small  or  j
peasant  holdings  is  to  continue,  the  power  of  testators
must  be  severely  restrained  in  order  to  produce  sim-
plicity in  the  law  of  the  estate.  It  does  not  at  all
follow  that  the  restrictions  must  be  those  of  the  Code
Napoleon;  but  restrictions  there  must  be,  and  I
venture  to  think  that  a  not  unsatisfactory  solution  of
the  problem  is  to  be  found  in  the  law  by  which  the
Indian  Government  has  recently  sought  to  control
the  power  of  will-making,  which  the  early  English
judges  either  introduced  into  India  or  invested  with
proportions  which  had  never  belonged  to  it  before.


LECTURE  VI.

THE  EARLY  HISTOEY  OF  PRICE  AND  RENT,


CONTENTS.

Structure  of  Village  Communities— Divisions  of  tlie  Community— Pro-
perty within  the  Community — Tradition  as  to  Rights — Exactions  of
Indian  Sovereigns — Indian  Rent — Difficulty  of  Question — Anglo-
Indian  Ideas— Customary  and  Competition  Rents — The  Protected
Tenants — Indian  and  English  Forms  of  Property — True  Character  of
Problem — The  Irish  Clan — Rack-Rent  paid  by  Strangers — Primitive
Notion  as  to  Price — Early  Measure  of  Price — Basis  of  Political
Economy — The  Market — Markets  and  Neutrality — Influence  of  Market
Law — Sentiments  Adverse  to  Political  Economy — Primitive  Com-
mercial Principles — Influence  of  Carrying  Trade — Price  and  Rent —
Market  for  Land  in  England — New  Information  Required— Village
Communities  in  America,


I.ECT.  VI. STRUCTURE OF VILLAGE COMMUNITIES.  175


LECTURE  VL

THE EARLY HISTORY OF PRICE AND RENT.

The  VILLAGE  COMMUNITIES  which  are  still  found  in  the
Eastern  world,  exhibit,  at  first  sight,  a  much  simpler
structure  than  appears  on  close  examination*  At  the
outset  they  seem  to  be  associations  of  kinsmen,  united
by  the  assumption  (doubtless,  very  vaguely  con-
ceived) of  a  common  lineage.  Sometimes  the  com-
munity is  unconnected  with  any  exterior  body,  save
by  the  shadowy  bond  of  caste.  Sometimes  it  ac-
knowledges itself  to  belong  to  a  larger  group  or  clan.
But  in  all  cases  the  community  is  so  organised  as  to
be  complete  in  itself.  The  end  for  which  it  exists  is
the  tillage  of  the  soil,  and  it  contains  within  itself  the
means  of  following  its  occupation  without  help  from
outside.  The  brotherhood,  besides  the  cultivating
families  who  form  the  major  part  of  the  group,  com-
prises families  hereditarily  engaged  in  the  humble  arts
which  furnish  the  little  society  with  articles  of  use
and  comfort.  It  includes  a  village  watch  and  a
village  police,  and  there  are  organised  authorities  for


176  DIVISIONS OF THE COMMUNITY.  lect.  vi.

the  settlement  of  disputes  and  the maintenance  of
civil  order.

But,  when  the  Indian  village  communities  are  more
carefully  scrutinised,  a  more  complex  structure  dis-
closes itself.  I  told  you  that  some  dominant  family  oc-
casionally claims  a  superiority  over  the  whole  brother-
hood, and  even  over  a  number  of  separate  villages,
especially  when  the  villagers  form  part  of  a  larger
aggregate,  tribe  or  clan.  But,  besides  this,  the  com-
munity itself  is  found,  on  close  observation,  to  exhibit
divisions  which  run  through  its  internal  framework.
Sometimes  men  of  widely  different  castes,  or  Maho-
metans and  Hindoos,  are  found  united  in  the  same
village  group;  but  in  such  cases  its  artificial  struc-
ture is  not  disguised,  and  the  sections  of  the  commu-
nity dwell  in  different  parts  of  the  inhabited  area.
But  the  most  interesting  division  of  the  community
— though  the  one  which  creates  most  practical  diffi-
culty— may  be  described  as  a  division  into  several
Vparallel  social  strata.  There  are,  first,  a  certain  num-
ber of  families  who  are  traditionally  said  to  be  de-
scended from  the  founder  of  the  village;  and  I  may
here  repeat  a  statement  made  to  me  that  the  agricul-
tural traditions  of  India,  differing  in  this  from  the
heroic  traditions  which  furnish  a  subject  to  the  great
Sanscrit  poems,  imply  that  the  occupation  of  the  rich
Indian  plains  was  a  process  rather  of  colonisation  than
of  conquest. Below  these  families,  descended  from


1


1\  -J<»y/w,iv.


LECT.  VI. PEOPERTY WITIIIX THE COMMUNITY.  177

the  originators  of  the  colony,  there  are  others,  dis-
tributed into  well  ascertained  groups.  The  brother-
hood, in  fact,  forms  a  sort  of  hierarchy,  the  degrees  of
which  are  determined  by  the  order  in  which  the  'Wna^K  ^  «/
various  sets  of  families  were  amalgamated  with  the  ^^^f^-^  ouv^
community.  The  tradition  is  clear  enough  as  to  the
succession  of  the  groups  and  is  probably  the  representa-
tion of  a  fact.  But  the  length  of  the  intervals  of  time
between  each  successive  amalgamation,  which  is  also
sometimes  given  and  which  is  always  enormous,  may
be  safely  regarded  as  untrustworthy;  and,  indeed,
numbers  count  for  nothing  in  the  East.

The  relations  of  these  component  sections  to  one
another  have  furnished  Eastern  statesmen  with  the
problem  which,  of  all  others,  has  perplexed  them
most.  For  it  has  been  necessary  to  translate  them
into  proprietary  relations.  The  superiority  of  each
group  in  the  hierarchy  to  those  below  it  bears  un-
doubtedly some  analogy  to  superiority  of  ownership
in  the  land  which  all  alike  cultivate.  But  the
question  has  been.  What  is  the  superiority  to  carry
with  it  when  translated  into  a  higher  right  of  pro-
perty? What  division  is  it  to  imply  of  the  total
produce  of  the  village  domain?  What  power  is
it  to  confer  of  dealing  with  the  land  itself  ?  A
law  of  tenure  and  tenancy  had  in  fact  to  be  con-
structed, not  only  outside  but  inside  the  cultivating
group.

N


178  TRADITION AS TO RIGHTS.  lect.  vr.

It  is  easy  to  see  that  these  questions  were  not  of
the  kind  on  which  traditions  were  likely  to  throw  any
considerable  light.  For  traditions,  as  I  before  stated,
though  tenaciously  preserved  by  organised  primitive
societies,  are  only  thoroughly  to  be  depended  upon
when  there  have  been  acts  and  practices  correspond-
ing to  them.  It  is  extremely  likely  that  the  tradi-
tional respect  of  each  group  of  families  within  the
community  for  those  above  it  did  occasionally  take
some  concrete  form,  but  it  is  in  the  highest  degree
improbable  that  the  various  layers  of  the  little  society
were  connected  by  anything  like  the  systematic  pay-
ment of  rent.  For  what  is  it  which  in  primitive  states
of  society  forces  groups  of  men  to  submit  to  that  amal-
gamation of  strangers  with  the  brotherhood  which
seems  at  first  forbidden  by  its  very  constitution  ?  It  is
the  urgency  of  the  struggle  for  existence — a  struggle
in  the  West  probably  both  with  man  and  with  nature —
^\  in  the  East  a  struggle  less  with  savage  enemies  than
j  with  nature,  not  indeed  unkindly,  but  extraordinarily
capricious,  and  difficult  to  subdue  from  her  very
exuberance.  The  utmost  available  supply  of  human
labour  at  first  merely  extracts  from  the  soil  what  is
sufficient  for  the  subsistence  of  the  cultivating  group,
j(  and  thus  it  is  the  extreme  value  of  new  labour  which
1;  condones  the  foreign  origin  of  the  new  hands  which
bring  it.  No  doubt  there  comes  a  time  when  this
process  ceases,  when  the  fictions  which  conceal  it  seem


LECT.  VI. EXACTIONS OF INDIAN SOVEKEIGNS.  179

to  die  out,  and  when  the  village  community  becomes
a  close  corporation. As  soon  as  this  point  is  reached
there  is  no  doubt  that  any  new-comers  would  only  be
admitted  on  terms  of  paying money  or  rendering
service  for  the  use  and  occupation  of  land. But  in
India,  at  all  events,  another  set  of  influences  then  came
into  play  which  have  had  the  eiFect  of  making  the
vestiges  of  the  payment  of  rent  extremely  faint  and
feeble. All  Oriental  sovereigns  feed  their  courts  and
armies  by  an  unusually  large  share  of  the  produce  of
the  soil  which  their  subjects  till. The  Indian  mon-
archs  of  whose  practices  we  have  any  real  knowledge
took  so  much  of  the  produce  in  the  shape  of  land-
revenue  as  to  leave  to  the  cultivating  groups  little
more  than  the  means  of  bare  subsistence. There  is
no  discernible  difference  in  this  respect  between  the
Mahometan  Emperors  of  Delhi,  the  Mahratta  princes
who  were  dividing  the  Mogul  Empire  between  them
when  the  English  first  appeared,  or  the  still  more
modern  Hindoo  sectaries,  called  the  Sikhs,  from  whom
we  conquered  the  Punjab. Such  nobility  as  existed]
was  supported  not  by  rents  but  by  assignments  of  the  \
royal  revenue ; and  the  natural  aristocracy of  the  \
country  would  have  differed  in  little  from  the  humbler
classes  but  for  these  assignments,  or  for  the  money
which  stuck  to  their  fingers  as  the  tax-gatherers  of
the  king. The  fund  out  of  which  rent  is  provided

N  2


180  INDIAN RENT.  lect.  vi.

is  in  fact  a  Britisli  creation — the  fruit  of  the  peace
which  the  British  have  kept  and  of  the  moderation  of
their  fiscal  demands.

It  is  sometimes  said,  in  connection  with  this  subject,
that  the idea  of  property in  land  is  realised  with
extreme  distinctness  by  the  natives  of  India. The
assertion  is  true,  but  has  not  the  importance  which
it  at  first  appears  to  possess. Between  village  commu-
nity and  village  community,  between  total  group  and
total  group,  the  notion  of  an  exclusive  right  to  the
domain  is  doubtless  always  present; and  there  are
many  striking  stories  current  respecting  the  tenacity
with  which  expelled  communities  preserve  traditions
of  their  ancient  seat. But  to  convince  himself  that,
as  regards  the  interior  of  the  group,  the  notion  of
dependent  tenures  connecting  one  stratum  with  an-
other are  very  imperfectly  conceived,  it  is  only  neces-
sary for  an  impartial  person  to  read  or  listen  to  the
contradictory  statements  made  by  keen  observers  of
equal  good  faith. The  problem  of  Indian  Rent  cannot
be  doubted  to  be  one  of  great  intrinsic  difficulty. To
see  this,  it  need  only  be  stated. The  question  is  not
one  as  to  a  custom,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word  ;
the  fund  out  of  which  rent  comes  has  not  hitherto
existed  or  has  barely  existed,  and  hence  it  has  not
been  asserted on either  side  of  the dispute that
rent  (as  distinct  from  the  Government  revenue)  was
paid  for  the  use  or  occupation  of  land  before  the


LECT.  VI.  DIFFICULTY OF QUESTION.  181

establishment  of  the  British  Empire,  or  that,  if  it  was
paid,  it  bore  any  relation  to  the  competition  value  of
cultivable  soil. Nor  was  it  an  enquiry  as  to  a  tra^
dition,  because  the  further  you  recede  from  the  be-
ginning of  British  rule  the  greater  is  your  distance
from  the  conditions under which the exaction of
competition  rent  for  land  becomes  conceivable. The
true  problem  can  only  be  stated  by  making  an  assump*
tion  contrary  to  the  fact. Assume  a  market  for  land
and  assume  the  existence  of  the  fund  out  of  which
rent  comes — what  primitive  ideas  can  be  traced  which
point  to  the  distribution  of  the  fund  in  any  particular
way? Such  is  the  question. It  is  on  the  whole,  I
think, to  be  regretted  that  the  British  Government
allowed  its  servants  to  embark  on  such  an  enquiry.
However  desirable  it  may  be  to  govern  the  natives
of  the  country  in  harmony  with  their  own  ideas,  the
effect  of  attempting  to  grapple  with  a  problem  under
such  vague  conditions  has  led  to  violent  recoils  of
opinion  and  practice  on  a  matter  in  which  settled
policy  was  pre-eminently  counselled  by  justice  and
prudence  ;  and  in  this  case  it  would  have  been  better,
I  think,  to  abandon  the  historical  mode  of  dealing
with a practical question peculiar to the Indian
government,  to  choose  the  social  and  economical  prin-
ciples on  which  it  was  intended  to  act,  and  to  adhere
to  them  until  their  political  unsoundness  was  esta-
blished. But  to  the  student  of  legal  history  the  ques-


182  ANGLO-INDIAN IDEAS.  lect.  vi.

tion  is  one  of  very  considerable  interest,  and,  however
little  suited  it  may  be  for  the  Council  chamber,  it
may  very  excusably  be  handled  in  this  place.

When  first,  amid  the  general  discredit  of  the  ex-
periment tried  by  Lord  Cornwallis  in  Bengal  Proper,
the  Indian  administrators  of  fifty  years  or  sixty  years
since  began  to  recognise  the  village  community  as
the  true  proprietary  unit  of  the  country,  they  had
very  soon  to  face  the  problem  of  rent.  They  in  some
cases  recognised  an  ownership  superior  to  that  of  the
village  itself ;  though  it  is  alleged  by  their  critics  that
they  did  not  recognise  it  as  much  as  they  ought  to
have  done.  Within  the  village  community  they  in
all  cases  recognised  a  hierarchy  of  minor  groups,
distinguished  in  some  way  by  the  difi^erence  of  their
rights  in  the  soil.  Besides  their  observation  of  Indian
phenomena,  which  was  here  (as  I  have  explained)
conducted  under  extraordinary  difiiculties,  they  had
nothing  to  guide  them  to  a  conclusion  except  the  En-
glish forms  of  property  in  land ;  and  they  probably
accepted  unreservedly  from  the  lawyers  of  that  day
the  belief  that  the  system  actually  obtaining  in  Eng-
land was  not  only  the  ancient  system  of  the  country
but  that  it  was  semi-sacred.  A  further  misleading
influence  was  the  phraseology  already  introduced  by
the  Economists.  Between  customary  rents  and  compe-
tition rents  they  did  not  fail  to  distinguish,  and  would
probably  not  have  denied  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,


LECT.  VI. CUSTOMARY AXD COMPETITION RENTS.  183

customary  rents  were  more  common  and,  as  a  matter
of  recorded  history,  were  more  ancient  than  competi-
tion rents.  But  still,  misled  by  an  error  which  has  of
late  been  very  justly  compared  with  a  still  more  famous
delusion  of  the  Roman  lawyers,  they  believed  com-
petition-rents to  be,  in  some  sense  or  other,  more
natural  than  customary  rents,  and  to  competition-
rents  only  they  gave  the  name  Rent,  unqualified  by
an  epithet.  This  peculiar  and  (as  it  seems  to  me)  im-
proper selection  of  a  cardinal  term  is  not  probably  of
much  importance  in  this  country ;  but  few  sufficiently
instructed  persons,  who  have  followed  recent  Indian
controversies,  can  have  failed  to  observe  that  almost
all  the  obscurities  of  mental  apprehension  whicli  are
implied  in  the  use  of  Nature  as  a  juridical  term  clus-
ter in  India  round  the  word.  Rent.  Still  there  was
too  much  around  the  earliest  Anglo-Indian  observers
which  seemed  inconsistent  with  (to  say  the  least)  the
universal  occurrence  in  India  of  the  English  relation
between  landlord  and  tenant- at-will  for  them  to
assume  unhesitatingly  that  the  absolute  ownership  of
the  soil  was  vested  in  some  one  class,  and  that  the  rest
of  the  cultivating  community  were  simply  connected
with  the  proprietary  class  by  paying  for  the  use  of
the  land  whatever  the  members  of  that  class  saw  fit  to
demand.  They  did  assume  that  the  persons  who  were
acknowledged  to  be  entitled  to  have  the  highest  rights
in  the  soil,  whether  within  the  community  or  without


184  THE PROTECTED TENANTS.  lect.  vi.

it,  bore  a  very  close  analogy  to  English  landowners  in
fee  simple.  They  further  took  for  granted  that  the
great  mass  of  the  cultivators  were  tenants -at-will  of
the  English  pattern.  But  they  gave  effect  to  their
doubts  of  the  correctness  of  these  analogies  by  creating
between  landowner  and  tenant-at-will  an  intermediate
class  of  protected,  or,  as  they  are  called  in  the  East,
'  occupancy  '  tenants.  When,  under  the  government
dispossessed  by  the  British,  any  cultivator  was  shown
to  have  held  his  land  by  himself  or  his  ancestors  for
a  certain  space  of  time,  he  was  declared  to  be  entitled
to  a  qualified  protection  against  eviction  and  rack-rent.
By  a  recent  legislative  enactment  this  principle  has
been  generalised,  and  any  cultivator  who  even  under
the  British  Government  has  been  undisturbed  by  his
landlord  for  the  like  period  is  invested,  in  some  parts  of
India,  with  the  same  protection.  But  at  first  the  rule,
of  which  the  origin  is  uncertain,  was  probably  intended
as  a  rough  way  of  determining  a  class  which  in  some
sense  or  other  was  included  within  the  village  com-
munity. The  exact  period  of  occupation  selected
was  twelve  years;  the  longest  time  during  which  it
seems  to  have  been  thought  safe  to  carry  back  into
native  society  an  enquiry  upon  legal  evidence  into  a
question  of  fact.

On  this  rule  the  most  vehement  of  controversies
has  arisen.  It  is  strongly  asserted  by  a  school  of
observation  and  theory  which  has  many  adherents  in


LFT.T.  VT. IXDIAX  AXD  EXGLISII  FOEMS  OF  PROPERTY.  185

tlie  present  day  that  close  examination  of  village
communities  does  not  show  that  mere  lapse  of  time
conferred  any  rights  on  one  section  of  the  group  as
against  another.  In  Indian  disputes,  as  in  many
others,  the  advantage  is  at  first  with  destructive
criticism,  and,  upon  the  evidence  which  I  have  seen,
I  am  on  the  whole  disposed  to  think  that  the  school
of  which  I  am  speaking  is  in  the  right.  The  errors
into  which  it  has  fallen  appear  to  me  to  begin  at  a
subsequent  point.  Some  of  its  adherents  seem  to
think  that  a  certain  correspondence  being  assumed  to
exist  between  a  certain  Indian  class  and  owners  of
land  in  England,  and  a  certain  correspondence  being
further  assumed  between  another  Indian  class  and
English  tenants,  the  inference  inevitably  follows  that
the  correspondence  must  be  so  close  as  to  imply  all
the  incidents  of  the  English  relation  of  landlord  and
tenant-at-wilL  But  the  Indian  forms  of  property  in
land  are  founded  on  the  Village  Group  as  the  proprie-
tary unit  ;  the  English  forms  are  based  partly  on
the  Manorial  Group  and  partly  on  a  state  of  things
produced  by  its  disintegration — systems  historically
so  wide  apart  can  hardly  be  used  even  to  illustrate
one  another.  There  are  other  adherents  of  the  same
opinion  who,  conscious  perhaps  of  the  true  difficulty,
attempt  to  get  over  it  by  asking  the  peasants  belong-
ing to  the  village  community  what  their  customs  are
as  to  eviction,  rack-rent,  and  the  relation  of  landlord


18G TRUE  CHARACTER  OF  PROBLEM. lf.ct. vi.

and  tenant.  Now,  if  there  were  the  faintest  reason
for  supposing  that  there  ever  existed  in  India  an
open  market  for  land  and  a  system  of  competition-
rents,  such  an  enquiry  would  be  of  great  importance,
for  unquestionably  cultivating  village  groups  are
highly  retentive  of  tradition.  But,  eviction  being
admitted  to  have  been  rarely  (if  ever)  practised,  and
it  being  allowed  that  rent  was  never  paid  for  the  use
of  land  or  (if  paid)  was  not  paid  on  any  scale  which
indicated  its  principle,  to  ask  a  peasant  whether  a
given  class  of  tenants  ought  or  ought  not  to  be
subject  to  rack-rent  and  eviction  is  to  put  to  a  very
ignorant  man  a  question  at  once  extremely  complex,
extremely  ambiguous,  and  only  capable  of  being
answered  (so  far  as  it  can  be  answered  at  all)  after  a
careful  examination  of  the  parallel  phenomena  of
many  different  ancient  systems  of  law.  The  reference
to  the  peasantry  is  doubtless  honestly  made,  but  it  is
an  appeal  to  the  least  competent  of  tribunals.

The  question.  What  vestiges  remain  of  ancient  ideas
as  to  the  circumstances  under  which  the  highest  ob-
tainable rent  should  be  demanded  for  the  use  of  land,
is  of  some  interest  to  the  student  of  legal  antiquities ;
although  even  in  this  place  it  is  not  a  question  which
can  be  very  confidently  answered.  The  most  distinct
ancient  rule  which  I  have  discovered  occurs  in  the
first  of  the  official  volumes  containing  the  version  of
the  Ancient  Laws  of  Ireland  published  by  the  Irish


LECT.  vr.  THE IRISH CLA^^  187

Government.  '  The  three  rents/  it  says,  '  are  rack-
rent,  from  a  person  of  a  strange  tribe — a  fair  rent,
from  one  of  the  tribe — and  the  stipulated  rent,  which
is  paid  equally  by  the  tribe  and  the  strange  tribe.'
(Senchus  Mor,  p.  159.)

This  very  much  expresses  the  conclusion  on  the
subject  which  I  have  arrived  at  upon  the  less  direct
evidence  derived  from  a  variety  of  quarters.  The
Irish  clan  was  apparently  a  group  much  more  exten-
sive and  of  much  looser  structure  than  the  Eastern
or  Western  village  community ;  it  appears  even  to
have  embraced  persons  who  cannot  be  distinguished
from  slaves.  Yet  from  none  of  these  (apart  from
express  agreement)  could  any  rent  be  required  but
a  rent  fair  according  to  received  ideas,  or,  in  other
words,  a  customary  rent.  It  was  only  when  a  person
totally  unconnected  with  the  clan  by  any  of  those
fictions  explaining  its  miscellaneous  composition  which
were  doubtless  adopted  by  this  (as  by  all  other)  primi- 1
tive  groups — when  such  a  person  came  asking  for
leave  to,  occupy  land,  that  the  best  bargain  could  be
made  with  him  to  which  he  could  be  got  to  submit.
'  Rack-rent '  is  sometimes  used  as  a  dyslogistic  ex-
pression for  an  extreme  competition -rent ;  but  you
will  see  that  ideas  associated  with  competition-rents
in  the  economical  sense  have  no  relation  whatever  to
such  a  transaction.  In  a  primitive  society  the  person
who  submits  to  extreme  terms  from  one  group  is


188  RACK-EENT PAID BY STRANGERS.  i.eot.  vi.

pretty  sure  to  be  an  outcast  thrown  on  the  world  by
the  breaking  up  and  dispersion  of  some  other  group,
and  the  effect  of  giving  him  land  on  these  terms  is
not  to  bring  him  under  the  description  of  a  tenant
as  understood  by  the  Economists,  but  to  reduce  him
to  a  condition  resembling  predial  servitude.  I  need
hardly  add  that,  in  stating  what  seem  to  me  the
circumstances  under  which  a  rack-rent  could  be  de-
manded according  to  primitive  ideas,  I  am  merely
drawing  an  antiquarian  inference,  and  expressing  no
opinion  whatever  on  the  political  expediency  or  other-
wise of  limiting  the  claim  of  a  landlord  to  rent.

The  enquiry  into  these  primitive  ideas  may  also

be  conducted  by  another  route,  which  I  will  follow  for

a  brief  space  on  account  of  some  curious  collateral

questions  which  it  opens. Let  me  begin  by  saying

that the remains of ancient Roman law forcibly

suggest  that  in  ancient  times  transfers  of  the  pos-

;  session  of  land  were  extremely  rare. The  formalities

\  which  accompanied  them  were  of  extraordinary  cum-

j  brousness, and  these  formalities  had  to  be  strictly

I  observed  not  only  in  transactions  which  we  should

call  Conveyances,  but  also  in  the  transactions  which

at  a  later  date  were  styled  Contracts. The  ancient

law  further  gives  reason  to  think  that  the  letting  and

hiring  of  movable  property  for  a  consideration  was

unknown  or  uncommon. The  oldest  Roman  contracts

systematically  treated  of  are  the  Real  Contracts,  and


LECT.  VI.  PRIMITIVE NOTIONS AS TO PRICE.  189

to  this  class  belongs  Loan;  but  the  loans  there  spoken
of  are  gratuitous,  and  the  rules  laid  down  grew
probably  out  of  the  practice  of  lending  from  house
to  house  the  small  articles  of  movable  property  in
use  among  a  primitive  people.  There  is  some  inte-
rest in  observing  the  plentifulness  of  these  rules  in
a  system  so  comparatively  mature  as  Eoman  law
when  contrasted  with  their  scantiness  in  English
jurisprudence.  The  explanation  seems  to  be  that  the
abundant  manufacture  nowadays  of  all  articles  of
personal  property  causes  them  to  be  much  oftener
owned  than  lent,  so  that  minute  rules  on  the  subject
of  gratuitous  loans  become  superfluous.

It  would  almost  certainly  be  labour  wasted  to
search  among  the  records  of  ancient  law  for  any  trace
of  the  ideas  which  we  associate  with  competition-
rents.  But  if  land  in  primitive  times  was  very  rarely
sold  or  (in  our  sense)  rented,  and  if  movable  pro-
perty was  very  rarely  hired  for  money,  it  is  at  least
probable  that  from  a  very  early  date  movables  were
purchased.  It  does  not  appear  to  me  quite  an  hope-
less undertaking  to  trace  the  gradual  development
of  the  notions  connected  with  Price;  and  here,  if  at
all,  we  shall  be  able  to  follow  the  early  history  of
bargaining  or  competition.  Nor,  if  we  can  discover
any  primitive  ideas  on  the  point,  need  we  hesitate  to
transfer  them  from  the  sale  of  movables  to  the  com-
petition-rent of  land. The  Roman  laT\yers  remark


190  EARLY MEASURE OF PRICE.  lect.  vi.

of  tlie  two  contracts  called  Emptio  Venditio,  or  Sale
for  Price,  and  Locatio  Conductio,  or  Hiring  for  Con-
sideration, that  they  are  substantially  the  same,  and
that  the  rules  which  govern  one  may  be  applied  to
the  other.  The  observation  seems  to  me  not  only
true,  but  one  which  it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind.
You  cannot  indeed  without  forcing  language  speak
of  the  Contract  of  Sale  in  terms  of  the  Contract  of
Letting  and  Hiring;  but  the  converse  is  easy,  and
there  is  no  incorrectness  in  speaking  of  the  Letting
and  Hiring  of  Land  as  a  Sale  for  a  period  of  time,
with  the  price  spread  over  that  period.  I  must  con-
fess I  could  wish  that  in  some  famous  books  this
simple  truth  had  been  kept  in  view.  It  has  several
times  occurred  to  me,  in  reading  treatises  on  Political
Economy,  that  if  the  writer  had  always  recollected
that  a  competition-rent  is  after  all  nothing  but  price
payable  by  instalments,  much  unnecessarily  mys-
terious language  might  have  been  spared  and  some
(to  say  the  least)  doubtful  theories  as  to  the  origin
of  rent  might  have  been  avoided.  The  value  of  this
impression  anybody  can  verify  for  himself.

What,  in  a  primitive  society,  is  the  measure  of
Price  ?  It  can  only  be  called  Custom.  Although  in
jthe  East  influences  destructive  of  the  primitive  notion
are  actively  at  work,  yet  in  the  more  retired  villages
the  artificer  who  plies  an  ancient  trade  still  sells  his
wares  for  the  customary prices,  and  would  always


LECT.  VI.  BASIS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY.  191

change  their  quality  rather  than  their  price — a  prefer-
ence, I  must  remark,  which  has  now  and  then  ex-
posed the  natives  of  India  to  imputations  of  fraud  not
wholly  deserved.  And  in  the  West,  even  in  our  own
country,  there  are  traces  of  the  same  strong  feeling
that  price  should  be  determined  by  Custom  in  the
long  series  of  royal,  parliamentary,  and  municipal
attempts  to  fix  prices  by  tariff.  Such  attempts  are
justly  condemned  as  false  political  economy,  but  it  is
sometimes  forgotten  that  false  political  economy  may
be  very  instructive  history.

What,  then,  is  the  origin  of  the  proposition  on
which  the  whole  of  the  great  deductive  science  of
Political  Economy  is  based?  No  good  political  econo-
mist asserts  that,  as  matter  of  fact,  everybody  asks
for  his  saleable  commodities  the  highest  obtainable
price  ;  still  less  does  he  assert  that  everybody  ought
to  ask  it.  What  he  lays  down  is  that  the  practice  of
asking  it  is  sufficiently  general  to  make  it  safe  for
practical  purposes  to  treat  it  as  universal.  When,
however,  we  are  discussing  the  ideas  of  very  primitive
societies,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  draw  the  line
between  law,  morality,  and  fact.  It  is  of  the  very
essence  of  Custom,  and  this  indeed  chiefly  explains  its
strength,  that  men  do  not  clearly  distinguish  between
their  actions  and  their  duties — what  they  ought  to  do
is  what  they  always  have  done,  and  they  do  it.

What,  then,  is  the  origin  of  the  rule  that  a  man


192  THE MARKET.  lect.  vr.

may  ask — or,  if  you  clioose  so  to  put  it,  that  lie  does
ask — the  highest  available  price  for  the  wares  which
he  has  to  sell? I  think  that  it  is  in  the  beginning  a
Kule  of  the  Market,  and  that  it  has  come  to  prevail
in  proportion  to  the  spread  of  ideas  originating  in
the  Market. This  indeed  would  be  a  proposition  of
little  value,  if  I  did  not  go  farther. You  are  well
aware  that  the  fundamental  proposition  of  Political
economy  is  often  put  as  the  rule  of  buying  in  the
cheapest market and  selling  in  the dearest. But
since  the  primitive  period  the  character  of  markets
has  changed  almost  as  much  as  that  of  society  itself.
In  order  to  understand  what  a  market  originally  was,
you  must  try  to  picture  to  yourselves  a  territory
occupied  by  village  communities,  self-acting  and  as
yet  autonomous,  each  cultivating  its  arable  land  in
the  middle  of  its  waste,  and  each,  I  fear  I  must  add,
at  perpetual  war  with  its  neighbour. But  at  several
points,  points  probably  where  the  domains  of  two  or
three  villages  converged,  there  appear  to  have  been
spaces  of  what  we  should  now  call  neutral  ground.
These  were  the  Markets. They  were  probably  the
only  places  at  which  the  members  of  the  diiFerent  pri-
mitive groups  met  for  any  purpose  except  warfare,  and
the  persons  who  came  to  them  were  doubtless  at  first
persons  specially  empowered  to  exchange  the  produce
and  manufactures  of  one  little  village  community  for
those  of  another. Sir  John Lubbock  in  his  recent


LECT.  VI.  MARKETS AND NEUTRALITY.  193

volume  on  the  '  Origin  of  Civilisation,'  has  some
interesting  remarks  on  the  traces  which  remain  of  \
the  very  ancient  association  between  Markets  and
Neutrality  (p.  205)  ;  nor — though  I  have  not  now
an  opportunity  of  following  up  the  train  of  thought
— can  I  help  observing  that  there  is  an  historical
connection  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  moderns
between  the  two,  since  the  Jus  Gentium  of  the  j  i^tw^^!^
Koman  Prsetor,  which  was  in  part  originally  a
Market  Law,  is  the  undoubted  parent  of  our  In-
ternational Law.  But,  besides  the  notion  of  neu-
trality, another  idea  was  anciently  associated  with
markets.  This  was  the  idea  of  sharp  practice
and  hard  bargaining.  The  three  ideas  seem  all
blended  in  the  attributes  of  the  god  Hermes  or
Mercury — at  once  the  god  of  boundaries,  the  prince
of  messengers  or  ambassadors,  and  the  patron  of
trade,  of  cheating,  and  of  thieves.

The  Market  was  then  the  space  of  neutral
ground  in  which,  under  the  ancient  constitution  of
society,  the  members  of  the  different  autonomous
proprietary  groups  met  in  safety  and  bought  and
sold  unshackled  by  customary  rule.  Here,  it  seems
to  me,  the  notion  of  a  man's  right  to  get  the  best
price  for  his  wares  took  its  rise,  and  hence  it  spread
over  the  world.  Market  Law,  I  should  here  observe,
has  had  a  great  fortune  in  legal  history.  The  Jus
Gentium  of  the  Romans,  though  doubtless  intended

0


194  INFLUENCE OP MARKET LAW.  lect.  vi.

in  part  to  adjust  the  relations  of  Eoman  citizens  to  a
subject  population,  grew  also  in  part  out  of  commer-
cial exigencies,  and  the  Eoman  Jus  Gentium  was
gradually  sublimated  into  a  moral  theory  which,
among  theories  not  laying  claim  to  religious  sanction,
had  no  rival  in  the  world  till  the  ethical  doctrines  of
Bentham  made  their  appearance.  If,  however,  I  could
venture  to  detain  you  with  a  discussion  on  technical
law,  I  could  easily  prove  that  Market  Law  has  long
exercised  and  still  exercises  a  dissolving  and  trans-
forming influence  over  the  very  class  of  rules  which
are  profoundly  modifying  the  more  rigid  and  archaic
branches  of  jurisprudence.  The  Law  of  Personal  or
Movable  Property  tends  to  absorb  the  Law  of  Land  or
of  Immovable  Property,  but  the  Law  of  Movable
Property  tends  steadily  to  assimilate  itself  to  the  Law
of  the  Market.  The  wish  to  establish  as  law  that
which  is  commercially  expedient  is  plainly  visible  in
the  recent  decisions  of  English  courts  of  justice ;  a
[whole  group  of  legal  maxims  having  their  origin  in
the  law  of  the  market  (of  which  the  rule  of  caveat
emptor  is  the  most  significant)  are  growing  at  the  ex-
pense of  all  others  which  compete  with  them;  and  there
is  a  steady  tendency  in  English  legislation  to  engraft
new  rules,  as  from  time  to  time  they  are  developed
by  traders,  upon  the  commercial  law  of  England.
Finally,  the  most  recent  of  Indian  disputes  is  whether
native  opinion  admits  of  including  in  the  Civil  Code  of
the  country  the  rule  that  a  man  who  in  good  faith


LECT.  VI. SENTIMENTS  ADVERSE  TO  POLITICAL  ECONOMY. 195

has purchased goods  of  another  shall  have  them,
though  the  seller  had  really  no  title  to  them  and  ,
though  the  owner  claim  them. This  is  in  reality  an  j^
extreme  rule  of  Market  Law,  and  it  is  often  described
in  fact  as  the  rule  of  Market  Overt,  since  it  only  obtains  I
in  England  where  that  description  of  market  exists. 1  ^

Political  Economists  often  complain  of  the  vague
moral  sentiments  which  obstruct  the  complete  recep-
tion of  their  principles. It  seems  to  me  that  the  half-
conscious repulsions which men feel to doctrines
which  they  do  not  deny  might  often  be  examined
with  more  profit  than  is  usually  supposed. They  will
sometimes  be  found  to  be  the  reflection  of  an  older
order  of  ideas. Much  of  moral  opinion  is  no  doubt  in
advance  of  law,  for  it  is  the  fruit  of  religious  or  philo-
sophical theories  having  a  different  origin  from  law
and  not  yet  incorporated  with  it. But  a  good  deal  of
it  seems  to  me  to  preserve  rules  of  conduct  which,
though  expelled  from  law,  linger in sentiment  or
practice. The  repeal  of  the  Usury  Laws  has  made  it
lawful  to  take  any  rate  of  interest  for  money,  yet
the  taking  of  usurious  interest  is  not  thought  to  be
respectable,  and  our  Courts  of  Equity  have  evidently
great  difficulty  in  bringing  themselves  to  a  complete
recognition  of  the  new  principle. Bearing  this  exam-
ple in  mind,  you  may  not  think  it  an  idle  question  if
I  ask.  What  is  the  real  origin  of  the  feeling  that  it  is
not  creditable to  drive  a  hard  bargain  with  a  near

o  2


Aa.


19a  PRIMITIVE COMMERCIAL PRINCIPLES. lect.  vi.

relative  or  a  friend  ?  It  can  hardly  be  said  that  there
,  is  any  rule  of  morality  to  forbid  it.  The  feeling  seems
',  to  me  to  bear  the  traces  of  the  old  notion  that  men
united  in  natural  groups  do  not  deal  with  one  another
on  principles  of  trade.  The  only  natural  group  in
which  men  are  now  joined  is  the  family  ;  and  the  only
bond  of  union  resembling  that  of  the  family  is  that
which  men  create  for  themselves  by  friendship.  It  is
stated  that  there  is  the  strongest  repulsion  among  the
natives  of  India  to  that  extreme  rule  of  Market  Law
which  I  described  to  you  as  proposed  to  be  engrafted
on  the  civil  code.  The  point  is  doubtful  on  the
evidence,  but,  considering  the  prevalence  and  vitality
of  organised  natural  groups  in  India,  the  a  priori
presumption  is  certainly  in  favour  of  the  existence
of  the  alleged  repugnance.

All  indications  seem  to  me  therefore  to  point  to  the
same  conclusion.  Men  united  in  those  groups  out  of
which  modern  society  has  grown  do  not  trade  together
on  what  I  may  call  for  shortness  commercial  prin-
ciples. The  general  proposition  which  is  the  basis  of
Political  Economy,  made  its  first  approach  to  truth
under  the  only  circumstances  which  admitted  of  men
meeting  at  arm's  length,  not  as  members  of  the  same
group,  but  as  strangers.  Gradually  the  assumption  of
the  right  to  get  the  best  price  has  penetrated  into  the
interior  of  these  groups,  but  it  is  never  completely
received  so  long  as  the  bond  of  connection  between


LECT.  VI.  INFLUENCE OF CARRYING TRADE.  197

man  and  man  is  assumed  to  be  that  of  family  or  clan-
connection. The  rule  only  triumphs  when  the  primi-
tive community  is  in  ruins. What  are  the  causes
which  have  generalised  a  Rule  of  the  Market  until  it
has  been  supposed  to  express  an  original  and  funda-
mental tendency  of  human  nature,  it  is  impossible  to
state  fully,  so  multifarious  have  they  been. Every-
thing which  has  helped  to  convert  society  into  a  col-
lection of  individuals  from  being  an  assemblage  of
families,  has  helped  to  add  to  the  truth  of  the  assertion
made  of  human  nature  by  the  Political  Economists.  ^,J^l±.JC^^'
One  cause  may  be  assimed,  after  observation  of  the  ^^^'»'^'«^  \ff^
East,  in  the  substitution  of  caravan  or  carrying  trade  '^^^^^  ^  <fc-  >vJ,
for  the  frequentation  of  markets. When  the  first  3j8«a^

system  grows  up,  the  merchant,  often  to  some  extent
invested  with  the  privileges  of  an  ambassador,  carries
his  goods  from  the  place  of  production,  stores  them  in
local  entrep6ts,  and  sells  them  on  the  principles  of  the
Market.  You  will  here  call  to  mind  the  curious  fact,
stated  to  me  on  high  authority,  that  the  Grain-Dealer,
though  a  man  of  great  consequence  and  wealth,  is
often  excluded  in  India  from  village  or  municipal
privileges  to  which  the  small  tradesmen  whose  busi-
ness is  an  ancient  appendage  of  the  community  are
freely  admitted.  I  am  also  informed  that  the  natives
of  India  will  often  pay  willingly  a  competition  price
for  one  article,  when  they  would  think  it  unjust  to  be
asked  more  than  a  customary  price  for  another. A


198  PRICE AND RENT.  lect.  vi.

man  who  will  pay  the  price  of  the  day  for  corn  col-
lected from  all  parts  of  India,  or  for  cotton-cloth  from
England,  will  complain  (so  I  am  told)  if  he  is  asked
an  unaccustomed  price  for  a  shoe.

If  the  notion  of  getting  the  best  price  for  movable
property  has  only  crept  to  reception  by  insensible
steps,  it  is  all  but  certain  that  the  idea  of  taking  the
I  highest  obtainable  rent  for  land  is  relatively  of  very
1  modern  origin.  The  rent  of  land  corresponds  to  the
price  of  goods,  but  doubtless  was  infinitely  slower  in
conforming  to  economical  law,  since  the  impression  of
a  brotherhood  in  the  ownership  of  land  still  survived
when  goods  had  long  since  become  the  subject  of
individual  property.  So  strong  is  the  presumption
against  the  existence  of  competition  rents  in  a
country  peopled  by  village  communities  that  it
would  require  the  very  clearest  evidence  to  con-
vince me  that  they  were  anywhere  found  under
native  conditions  of  society,  but  the  evidence  (as  I
told  you)  is  remarkably  unconvincing.  I  of  course
admit  that  certain  classes  of  people  are  so  slightly
connected  with  the  village  community  that,  under
the  new  conditions  introduced  into  India  by  the
English,  their  rents  would  probably  have  become
competition  rents.  The  problem,  however,  presented
by  these  classes  is  not  antiquarian  but  political.  It
is  identical  with  that  terrible  problem  of  pauperism
which  began  to  press  on  English  statesmen  as  soon


LECT.  VI.  MARKET FOE LAND IN ENGLAND.  199

as  the  old  English  cultivating  groups  began  distinctly
to  fall  to  pieces.  In  India  the  solution  will  be  far
more  difficult  than  it  has  proved  here,  since  the
country  has  little  mineral  fuel  and  can  have  no
manufactures  on  a  scale  to  occupy  a  large  surplus
population;  and  emigration  for  the  most  part  is
regarded  as  mortal  sin.

The  right  to  take  the  highest  obtainable  rent  for
land is, as  a matter of  fact and  as  a matter  of
morality,  a  right  derived  from  a  rule  of  the  market.
Both  the  explanation and  the  justification  of  the
exercise  of  the  right  in  England  and  Scotland  is  that
in  these  countries  there  really  is  a  market  for  land.
Yet  it  is  notorious  that,  in  England  at  all  events,
land  is  not  universally  rackrented. But  where  is  it
that  the  theoretical  right  is  not  exercised? It  is
substantially  true  that,  where  the  manorial  groups
substituted  for  the  old  village  groups  survive,  there
are no rackrents. What is  sometimes called  the
feudal  feeling  has  much  in  common  with  the  old
feeling  of  brotherhood  which  forbade  hard  bargains,  j
though  like  much  else  it  has  passed  from  the  collective
community  to  the  modern  representative  of  its  auto-  ^
cratic  chieftain. Even  in  England  the  archaic  rules
I  have  been  describing  have  not  yet  quite  lost  their
authority.

Here  I  conclude  the  Lectures  of  the  Term. Their
chief  object,  as  I  have  repeatedly  stated,  has  been  to


200  NEW INFORMATION REQUIRED.  lect.  vi.

establish  a  connection  between  the  results  of  Indian
experience  and  observation  and  the  conclusions
arrived  at  by  German  and  English  learning.  But
another  purpose  will  have  been  served  if  some  of
those  who  have  attended  here  are  induced  to  help  in
adding  to  our  knowledge  of  ancient  English  tenures.
In  spite  of  the  information  collected  by  the  Select
Committee  of  1844,  we  know  far  too  little  of  Com-
mon and  Commonable  fields,  of  Lammas  lands,
Common  meadows,  and  limited  rights  over  Wastes,
and  generally  of  manorial  customs.  Yet  forms  of
property,  savouring  of  the  old  collective  enjoy-
ment, seem  to  occur  so  frequently  that  almost  any-
body has  the  opportunity  of  collecting  facts  which
may  have  an  important  bearing  on  our  enquiry.
The  speculative  interest  of  the  subject  I  need  scarcely
enlarge  upon,  but  these  ancient  joint-holdings  have
a  farther  interest  as  constituting  not  only  some  of
the  oldest,  but  some  of  the  most  lasting  phenomena
of  English  history.  It  is  a  striking  remark  of  Nasse
that  the  English  common  field  system  bears  the  marks
j^jlA.  ^vyyCc/wv  of  an  exotic  origin.  In  the  time  of  the  ruder  agri-
^u&^vc.  culture  which  has  now  given  way  to  scientific  tillage,

the  natural  fitness  of  the  soil  of  England  was  for  grass
farming,  and  the  tendency  to  resort  to  it  as  the  most
,  profitable  form  of  cultivation  was  apparently  irresis-
tible, and  out  of  it  grew  some  very  serious  agrarian
movements.  The  three-field  system  was  therefore
ibrought  by  our  Teutonic  ancestors^rom  some^  drier


LBCT.  VI.  VILLAGE-COMMUNITIES IN AMERICA.  201

region  of  the  Continent.  It  is  a  very  remarkable
fact  that  the  earliest  English  emigrants  to  North
America — who,  you  know,  belonged  principally  to
the  class  of  yeomanry — organised  themselves  at  first^^^^^^e^^^  c^^t^
in  village-communities  for  purposes  of  cultivation.  -  c^vm^lcu^
When  a  town  was  organised,  the  process  was  that
'  the  General  Court  granted  a  tract  of  land  to  a  com-
pany of  persons.  The  land  was  first  held  by  the
company  as  property  in  common.'  (Palfrey, '  History
of  New  England,'  ii.  13.)  An  American  commentator
on  this  passage  adds :  '  The  company  of  proprietors
proceeded  to  divide  the  land  by  assigning  first  house -
lots  (in  Marlborough  from  fifteen  to  twenty  acres),
then  tracts  of  meadow  land,  and  in  some  cases
mineral  land,  i.e.  where  bog-iron  ore  was  found.
Pasture  and  woodland  remained  in  common  as  the
property  of  the  company,  but  a  law  of  the  General
Court  in  1660  provided  that  "hereafter  no  cottage
or  dwelling-house  be  admitted  to  the  privilege  of
commonage  for  wood,  timber,  or  herbage  but  such
as  are  already  in  being,  or  shall  be  erected  with  the
consent  of  the  town."  From  that  time  the  com-
moners appear  as  a  kind  of  aristocracy,  and  the'
commons  were  gradually  divided  up.'  This  is  not
only  a  tolerably  exact  account  of  the  ancient  Euro-
pean and  existing  Indian  village -community,  but  it  is
also  a  history  of  its  natural  development,  where  the
causes  which  turn  it  into  a  manorial  group  are  absent,
and  of  its  ultimate  dissolution.


APPENDICES,


APPENDIX  U

MINUTE EECOEDED ON OCTOBER 1, 1868.

The  first  conclusion  which  I  draw  (from  a  Paper  '  showing
in  each  case  the  authority  at  whose  suggestion  the  Acts
of  the  Governor-General  in  Council,  from  No.  I.  of  1865,
to  No.  XXXYIII.  of  1867,  were  passed ')  is,  that  next
to  no  legislation  originates  with  the  Supreme  Government
of  India.  The  only  exceptions  to  complete  inaction  in
this  respect  which  are  worth  mentioning,  occur  in  the  case
of  Taxing  Acts — though,  as  there  is  often  much  communi-
cation with  the  Provincial  Governments  on  the  subject  of
these  Acts,  the  exception  is  only  partial — and  in  that  of  a
few  Acts  adapting  portions  of  English  Statute  law  to  India.
Former  Indian  Legislatures  introduced  into  India  certain
modern  English  Statutes,  limiting  their  operation  to
'  cases  governed  by  English  law.'  The  most  recent  Eng-
lish amendments  of  the  Statutes  were,  however,  not  fol-
lowed in  this  country  until  they  were  embodied  in  Indian
Acts  by  my  predecessor,  Mr.  Ritchie,  and  myself,  in  accord-
ance with  the  general  wish  of  the  Bench  and  Bar  of  the
High  Courts.  Examples  of  this  sort  of  legislation  are  Acts
XXYII.  and  XXVIII.  of  1866,  which  only  apply  to  '  cases
governed  by  English  law.'

The  second  and  much  the  most  important  interference
which  the  Paper  appears  to  me  to  suggest  is,  that  the
great  bulk  of  the  legislation  of  the  Supreme  Council  is

1  Vide  p.  70.


206  APPENDIX I.

attributable  to  its  being  the  Local  Legislature  of  many
Indian  Provinces.  At  the  present  moment,  the  Council
of  the  Governor-General  for  making  Laws  and  Eegulations
is  the  sole  Local  Legislature  for  the  North-Western  Pro-
vinces, for  the  Punjab,  for  Oudh,  for  the  Central  Provinces,
for  British  Burmah,  for  the  petty  Province  of  Coorg,  and
for  many  small  patches  of  territory  which  are  scattered
among  the  Native  States.  Moreover,  it  necessarily  divides
the  legislation  of  Bengal  Proper,  Madras,  and  Bombay
with  the  local  Councils  of  those  Provinces.  For,  under
the  provisions  of  the  High  Court's  Act  of  1861,  it  is  only
the  Supreme  Legislature  which  can  alter  or  abridge  the
jurisdiction  of  the  High  Courts,  and  as  this  jurisdiction  is
very  wide  and  far-reaching,  the  effect  is  to  throw  on  the
Governor-General's  Council  no  small  amount  of  legislation
which  would  naturally  fall  on  the  Local  Legislatures.
Occasionally,  too,  the  convenience  of  having  but  one  law
for  two  Provinces,  of  which  one  has  a  Council  and  the
other  has  none,  induces  the  Supreme  Government  to  legis-
late for  both,  generally  at  the  request  of  both  their  Govern-
ments.

Now  these  Provinces  for  which  the  Supreme  Council  is
the  joint  or  sole  Legislature,  exhibit  very  wide  diversities.
Some  of  these  differences  are  owing  to  distinctions  of  race,
others  to  differences  of  land-law,  others  to  the  unequal
spread  of  education.  Not  only  are  the  original  diversities
between  the  various  populations  of  India  believed  nowa-
days to  be  much  greater  than  they  were  once  thought  to
be,  but  it  may  be  questioned  whether,  for  the  present  at
all  events,  they  are  not  rather  increasing  than  diminishing
under  the  influence  of  British  Government.  That  in-
fluence  has  no  doubt  thrown  all  India  more  or  less  into
a  state  of  ferment  and  progress,  but  the  rate  of  progress
is  very  unequal  and  irregular.  It  is  growing  more  and
more  difficult  to  bring  the  population  of  two  or  more  Pro-


APPENDIX I.  207

vinces  under  any  one  law,  whicL.  goes  closely  home  to
their  daily  life  and  habits.

Not  only,  then,  are  we  the  Local  Legislature  of  a  great
many  Provinces,  in  the  sense  of  being  the  only  authority
which  can  legislate  for  them  on  all  or  certain  subjects,  but
the  condition  of  India  is  more  and  more  forcing  us  to  act
as  if  we  were  a  Local  Legislature,  of  which  the  powers  do
not  extend  beyond  the  Province  for  which  we  are  legisla-
ting. The real  proof,  therefore,  of  our  over-legislation
would  consist,  not  in  showing  that  we  pass  between  thirty
and  forty  Acts  in  every  year,  but  in  demonstrating  that
we  apply  too  many  new  laws  to  each  or  to  some  one  of  the
Provinces  subject  to  us. Now,  I  will  take  the  most  im-
portant of  the  territories  for  which  we  are  exclusively  the
Legislature — the  North- Western  Provinces  ; — and  I  will
take  the  year  in  which,  judging  from  the  Paper,  there  has
been most  North-Western  legislation — the year 1867.
The  amount  does  not  seem  to  have  been  very  great  or
serious. I  find  that  in  1867,  if  Taxing  Acts  be  excluded,
the  North- West  was  affected  in  common  with  all  or  other
parts  of  India  by  an  Act  repressive  of  Public  Gambling
(No.  III.)  ;  by  an  Act  for  the  Eegistration  of  Printing
Presses  (No.  XXV.) ;  and  by  five  Acts  (IV.,  VIL,  VIIL,
X.,  and  XXXIII.) ;  having  the  most  insignificant  tech-
nical objects. I  find  that  it  was  exclusively  affected  by
an  Act  (I.) empowering  its  Government  to  levy  certain
tolls  on  the  Ganges ;  by  an  Act  (XXII.)  for  the  Regula-
tion of  Native  Inns ;  by  an  Act  (XVIII.)  giving  a  legal
constitution  to  the  Courts  already  established  in  a  single
district,  and  by  an  Act (XXVIII.)  confirming  the  sen-
tences of  certain  petty  Criminal  Courts  already  existing.
I  find  further  that,  in  the  same  year,  1867,  the  English
Parliament  passed  85  Public  General  Acts  applicable  to
England  and  Wales,  of  which  one  was  the  Representation
of  the  People  Act. The  number  of  Local  and  Personal


208  APPENDIX I.

Acts  passed  in  the  same  year  was  188.  All  this  legisla-
tion too  came,  it  must  be  remembered,  on  the  back  of  a
vast  mass  of  statute-law,  compared  with  which  all  the
written  law  of  all  India  is  the  merest  trifle.  Now  the
population  of  England  and  Wales  is  rather  over  20  mil-
lions, that  of  the  North- Western  Provinces  is  supposed  to
be  above  30  millions.  No  trustworthy  comparison  can  be
instituted  between  the  two  countries ;  but,  regard  being
had  to  their  condition  thirty  years  ago,  it  may  be  doubted
whether,  in  respect  of  opinions,  ideas,  habits,  and  wants,
there  has  not  been  more  change  during  thirty  years  in  the
North- West  than  in  England  and  Wales.

A  third  inference  which  the  Paper  suggests  is,  that  our
legislation  scarcely  ever  interferes,  even  in  the  minutest
degree,  with  Private  Rights,  whether  derived  from  usage
or  from  express  law.  It  has  been  said  by  a  high  authority
that  the  Indian  Legislature  should  confine  itself  to  the
amendment  of  Adjective  Law,  leaving  Substantive  Law
to  the  Indian  Law  Commissioners.  It  is  meant  no  doubt
that  the  Indian  Legislature  should  only  occupy  itself,
propria  motu,  with  improvements  in  police,  in  administra-
tion, in  the  mechanism  and  procedure  of  courts  of  justice.
This  proposition  appears  to  me  a  very  reasonable  one  in
the  main,  but  it  is  nearly  an  exact  description  of  the
character  of  our  legislation.  We  do  not  meddle  with
Private  Eights  ;  we  only  create  Ofiicial  Duties.  No
doubt  Act  X.  of  1865  and  Act  XV.  of  1866  do  consider-
ably modify  Private  Eights,  but  the  first  is  a  chapter  and
the  last  a  section  of  the  Civil  Code  framed  in  England  by
the  Law  Commissioners.

The  Paper  does  not  of  course  express  the  urgency  with
which  the  measures  which  it  names  are  pressed  on  us  by
their  originators — the  Local  Governments.  My  Colleagues
are,  I  believe,  aware  that  the  earnestness  with  which  these
Governments  demand  legislation,  as  absolutely  necessar}^


»


APPENDIX T.  209

for  the  discharge  of  their  duties  to  the  people,  is
sometimes  very  remarkable.  I  am  very  far  indeed  from
believing  that,  as  they  are  now  constituted,  they  think
the  Supreme  Council  precipitate  in  legislation.  I  could
at  this  moment  name  half  a  dozen  instances  in  which  the
present  Lieutenant-Governors  of  Bengal  and  the  North-
West  deem  the  hesitation  of  the  Government  of  India  in
recommending  particular  enactments  to  the  Legislature
unnecessary  and  unjustifiable.

While  it  does  not  seem  to  me  open  to  doubt  that  the
Government  of  India  is  entirely  free  from  the  charge  of
initiating  legislation  in  too  great  abundance,  it  may
nevertheless  be  said  that  we  ought  to  oppose  a  firmer
resistance  to  the  demands  of  the  Local  Governments  and
other  authorities  for  legislative  measures.  It  seems
desirable  therefore  that  I  should  say  something  of  the
influences  which  prompt  these  Governments,  and  which
constitute  the  causes  of  the  increase  in  Indian  legislation.
I  must  premise  that  I  do  not  propose  to  dwell  on  causes
of  great  generality.  Most  people  would  admit  that,  for
good  or  for  evil,  the  country  is  changing  rapidly,  though
not  at  uniform  speed.  Opinion,  belief,  usage,  and  taste
are  obviously  undergoing  more  or  less  modification  every-
where. The  standard  of  good  government  before  the
minds  of  ofiicials  is  constantly  shifting,  perhaps  it  is  rising.
These  phenomena  are  doubtless  among  the  ultimate  causes
of  legislation;  but,  unless  more  special  causes  are  as-
signed, the  explanation  will  never  be  satisfactory  to  many
minds.

I  will  first  specify  a  cause  which  is  in  itself  of  a  merely
formal  nature,  but  which  still  contributes  greatly  for  the
time  to  the  necessity  for  legislation.  This  is  the  effect  of
the  Indian  Councils'  Act  of  1861  upon  the  system  which
existed  before  that  date  in  the  Non-Regulation  Provinces.
It  is  well  known  that,  in  any  strict  sense  of  the  word,  the

P


210  APPENDIX 1.

Executive  Government  legislated  for  those  Provinces  np  to
1861. The orders,  instructions,  circulars,  and  rules  for
the  guidance  of  officers  which  it  constantly  issued,  were,
to  a  certain  extent,  essentially  of  a  legislative  character,
but  then  they  were  scarcely  ever  in  a  legislative  form. It
is  not  matter  of  surprise  that  this  should  have  been  so,
for  the  authority  prescribing  the  rule  immediately  modified
or  explained  it,  if  it  gave  rise  to  any  inconvenience,  or  was
found  to  be  ambiguous. But  the  system  (of  which  the
legality  had  long  been  doubted) was destroyed  by  the
Indian  Councils'  Act. No  legislative  power  now exists
in  India  which  is  not  derived  from  this  Statute ;  but  to
prevent  a  wholesale  cancellation  of  essentially  legislative
rules,  the  25th  Section  gave  the  force  of  law  to  all  rules
made  previously  for  Non-Regulation  provinces  by  or  under
the  authority  of  the  Government  of  India,  or  of  a  Lieute-
nant-Governor. By this provision, an enormous and
most  miscellaneous mass of  rules, clothed to a great
extent  in general and popular  language,  was  suddenly
established as law,  and  invested  with  solidity  and  un-
changeableness  to  a  degree  which  its  authors  had  never
contemplated. The  difficulty  of  ascertaining  what  is  law
and  what  is  not  in  the  former  Non-Eegulation  Provinces,
is  really  incredible. I  have,  for  instance,  been  seriously
in  doubt  whether  a  particular  clause  of  a  Circular  in-
tended to  prescribe  a  rule  or  to  convey  a  sarcasm. The
necessity  for  authoritatively  declaring  rules  of  this  kiiid,
for putting them  into precise language,  for  amending
them  when  their  policy  is  doubted,  or  when  tried  by  the
severer  judicial tests now applied to them, they give
different  results  from  those  intended  by  their  authors,  is
among  the  most  imperative  causes  of  legislation. Such
legislation will, however, diminish as the process of
simplifying  and  declaring  these  rules  goes  on,  and  must
ultimately  come  to  a  close.


APPENDIX I.  211

I  now  come  to  springs  of  legislation  wliicli  appear  to
increase  in  activity  rather  tlian  otherwise.  First  among
these  I  do  not  hesitate  to  place  the  growing  influence  of
courts  of  justice  and  of  legal  practitioners.  Our  Courts
are  becoming  more  careful  of  precise  rule  both  at  the  top
and  at  the  bottom.  The  more  careful  legal  education  of
the  young  civilians  and  of  the  younger  Native  judges,
diffuses  th-e  habit  of  precision  from  below ;  the  High
Courts,  in  the  exercise  of  their  powers  of  supervision,  are
more  and  more  insisting  on  exactness  from  above.

An  even  more  powerful  influence  is  the  immense  mul-
tiplication of  legal  practitioners  in  the  country.  I  am
not  now  speaking  of  European  practitioners,  though  their
number  has  greatly  increased  of  late,  and  though  they
penetrate  much  further  into  the  Mofussil  than  of  old.
The  great  addition,  however,  is  to  the  numbers  and  in-
fluence of  the  native  Bar.  Practically  a  young  educated
Native,  pretending  to  anything  above  a  clerkship,  adopts
one  of  two  occupations — either  he  goes  into  the  service
of  Government,  or  he  joins  the  Native  Bar.  I  am  told,
and  I  believe  it  to  be  true,  that  the  Bar  is  getting  to  be
more  and  more  preferred  to  Government  service  by  the
educated  youth  of  the  country,  both  on  the  score  of  its
gainfulness  and  on  the  score  of  its  independence.

Now  the  law  of  India  is  at  present,  and  probably  will
long  continue  to  be,  in  a  state  which  furnishes  opportunity
for  the  suggestion  of  doubts  almost  without  limit.  The
older  written  law  of  India  (the  Eegulations  and  earlier
Acts)  is  declared  in  language  which,  judged  by  modern
requirements,  must  be  called  popular.  The  authoritative
Native  treatises  on  law  are  so  vague  that,  from  many  of
the  dicta  embodied  by  them,  almost  any  conclusion  can
be  drawn.  More  than  that,  there  are,  as  the  Indian  Law
Commissioners  have  pointed  out,  vast  gaps  and  interspaces
in  the  Substantive  Law  of  India;  there  are  subjects  on

p  2


212  APPENDIX I.

which  no  rules  exist,  and  the  rules  actually  applied  by
the  Courts  are  taken,  a  good  deal  at  haphazard,  from
popular  text-books  of  English  law.  Such  a  condition  of
things  is  a  mine  of  legal  difficulty.  The  Courts  are  getting
ever  more  rigid  in  their  demand  of  legal  warrant  for  the
actions  of  all  men,  officials  included.  The  lawyers  who
practise  before  them  are  getting  more  and  more  astute,
and  render  the  difficulty  of  pointing  to  such  legal  warrant
day  by  day  greater.  And  unquestionably  the  Natives  of
India,  living  in  the  constant  presence  of  courts  and
lawyers,  are  growing  every  day  less  disposed  to  regard  an
act  or  order  which  they  dislike  as  an  unkindly  dispensa-
tion of  Providence,  which  must  be  submitted  to  with  all
the  patience  at  their  command.  If  British  rule  is  doing
nothing  else,  it  is  steadily  communicating  to  the  Native
the  consciousness  of  positive  rights,  not  dependent  on
opinion  or  usage,  but  capable  of  being  actively  enforced.

It  is  not,  I  think,  difficult  to  see  how  this  state  of  the
law  and  this  condition  of  the  Courts  and  Bar  renders  it
necessary  for  the  Local  Governments,  as  being  responsible
for  the  efficiency  of  their  administration,  to  press  for
legislation.  The  nature  of  the  necessity  can  best  be
judged  by  considering  what  would  be  the  consequences
if  there  were  no  legislation,  or  not  enough.  A  vast  variety
of  points  would  be  unsettled  until  the  highest  tribunals
had  the  opportunity  of  deciding  them,  and  the  government
of  the  country  would  be  to  a  great  extent  handed  over  to
the  High  Courts,  or  to  other  Courts  of  Appeal.  No
court  of  justice,  however,  can  pay  other  than  incidental
regard  to  considerations  of  expediency,  and  the  result
would  be  that  the  country  would  be  governed  on  principles
which  have  no  necessary  relation  to  policy  or  statesmanship.
It  is  the  justification  of  legislation  that  it  settles  difficulties
as  soon  as  they  arise,  and  settles  them  upon  considerations
which  a  court  of  justice  is  obliged  to  leave  out  of  sight.


APPENDIX I.  -213

The  consequences  of  having  India  to  be  governed  by
the  courts  v^ould,  in  my  judgment,  be  most  disastrous.
The  bolder  sort  of  officials  would,  I  think,  go  on  v^^ithout
regard  to  legal  rule,  until  something  like  the  deadlock
vv^ould  be  reached  with  which  we  are  about  to  deal  in  the
Punjab.  But  the  great  majority  of  administrative  officials,
whether  weaker  or  less  reckless,  would  observe  a  caution
and  hesitation  for  which  the  doubtful  state  of  the  law
could  always  be  pleaded.  There  would,  in  fact,  be  a  para-
lysis of  administration  throughout  the  country.

The  fact  established  by  the  Paper,  that  the  duties
created  by  Indian  legislation  are  almost  entirely  official
duties,  explains  the  dislike  of  legislation  which  occasion-
ally shows  itself  here  and  there  in  India.  I  must  confess
that  I  have  always  believed  the  feeling,  so  far  as  it  exists,
to  be  official,  and  to  correspond  very  closely  to  the  re-
pugnance which  most  lawyers  feel  to  having  the  most
disorderly  branch  of  case-law  superseded  by  the  simplest
and  best  drawn  of  statutes.  The  truth  is,  that  nobody
likes  innovations  on  knowledge  which  he  has  once  ac-
quired with  difficulty.  If  there  was  one  legislative  change
which  seemed  at  the  time  to  be  more  rebelled  against  than
another,  it  was  the  supersession  of  the  former  Civil  Pro-
cedure of  the  Punjab  by  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure.
The  Civil  Procedure  of  the  Punjab  had  originally  been
exceedingly  simple,  and  far  better  suited  to  the  country
than  the  then  existing  procedure  of  the  Regulation  Pro-
vinces. But  two  years  ago  it  had  become  so  overlaid  by
explanations  and  modifications  conveyed  in  Circular
orders,  that  I  do  not  hesitate  to  pronounce  it  as  uncertain
and  difficult  a  body  of  rules  as  I  ever  attempted  to  study.
I  can  speak  with  confidence  on  the  point ;  for  I  came  to
India  strange  both  to  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure  and  to
the  Civil  Procedure  of  the  Punjab,  and,  while  the  first  has
always  seemed  to me  nearly  the  simplest  and clearest


214  APPENDIX I.

system  of  the  kind  in  the  world,  I  must  own  I  never  felt
sure  in  any  case  what  was  the  Punjab  rule.  The  intro-
duction of  the  Code  was,  in  fact,  the  merest  act  of  justice
to  the  young  generation  of  Punjab  officials,  yet  the  older
men  spoke  of  the  measure  as  if  some  ultra-technical  body
of  law  were  being  forced  on  a  service  accustomed  to  courts
of  primitive  simplicity.

It  must,  on  the  other  hand,  be  admitted  that,  in
creating  new  of&cial  duties  by  legislation,  we  probably  in
some  degree  fetter  official  discretion.  There  is  no  doubt
a  decay  of  discretionary  administration  throughout  India ;
and,  indeed,  it  may  be  said  that  in  one  sense  there  is  now
not  more,  but  much  less,  legislation  in  the  country  than
formerly ;  for,  strictly  speaking,  legislation  takes  place
every  time  a  new  rule  is  set  to  the  people,  and  it  may  be
taken  for  granted  that  in  earlier  days  Collectors  and  Com-
missioners changed  their  rules  far  oftener  than  does  the
Legislature  at  present.  The  truth  is,  discretionary  govern-
ment is  inconsistent  with  the  existence  of  regular  courts
and  trained  lawyers,  and,  since  these  must  be  tolerated,
the  proper  course  seems  to  me  not  to  indulge  in  vague
condemnation  of  legislation,  but  to  discover  expedients  by
which  its  tendency  to  hamper  discretion  may  be  mini-
mised. One  of  these  may  be  found  in  the  skilful  drafting
of  our  laws — in  confining  them  as  much  as  possible  to
the  statement  of  principles  and  of  well-considered  general
propositions,  and  in  encumbering  them  as  little  as  possible
with  detail.  Another  may  be  pointed  out  in  the  extension
of  the  wholesale  practice  of  conferring  by  our  Acts  on  Local
Governments  or  other  authorities  the  power  of  making
rules  consistent  with  the  Act — a  power  in  the  exercise  of
which  they  will  be  assisted  by  the  Legislative  Department
under  a  recent  order  of  His  Excellency.  Lastly,  but
principally,  we  may  hope  to  mitigate  the  inconveniences
of legislation by  the simplification of our  legislative


APPENDIX I.  215

machinery  as  applied  to  those  less  advanced  parts  of  the
country  where  a  large  discretion  must  inevitably  be  vested
in  the  administrator.  The  power  of  easily  altering  rules
when  they  chafe,  and  of  easily  indemnifying  officials  when
they  transgress  rules  in  good  faith,  is  urgently  needed  by
us  in  respect  of  the  wilder  territory  of  India.

While  I  admit  that  the  abridgment  of  discretion  by
written  laws  is  to  some  extent  an  evil — though,  under  the
actual  circumstances  of  India,  an  inevitable  evil — I  do  not
admit  the  proposition  which  is  sometimes  advanced  that
the  Natives  of  India  dislike  the  abridgment  of  official
discretion.  This  assertion  seems  to  me  not  only  unsup-
ported by  any  evidence,  but  to  be  contrary  to  all  the
probabilities.  It  may  be  allowed  that  in  some  cases
discretionary  government  is  absolutely  necessary ;  but
why  should  a  people,  which  measures  religious  zeal  and
personal  rank  and  respectability  by  rigid  adherence  to
usage  and  custom,  have  a  fancy  for  rapid  changes  in  the
actions  of  its  governors,  and  prefer  a  regimen  of  discretion
sometimes  coming  close  upon  caprice  to  a  regimen  of  law?
I  do  not  profess  to  know  the  Natives  of  this  country  as
well  as  others,  but  if  they  are  to  be  judged  by  their
writings,  they  have  no  such  preference.  The  educated
youth  of  India  certainly  affect  a  dislike  of  many  things
which  they  do  not  care  about,  and  pretend  to  many  tastes
which  they  do  not  really  share;  but  the  repugnance  which
they  invariably  profess  for  discretionary  government  has
always  seemed  to  me  genuinely  hearty  and  sincere.


21G


APPENDIX  11.^

G.  L.  V.  Maurer^  Einleitung  zur  Geschichte  der  Mark-,  Hof-,  Dorf-,
und  Stadt-Yerfassung  und  der  ofFentlichen  Gewalt. Munchen.

G.  L.  V.  Maurer^  Geschichte  der  Dorfverfassung  in  Deutschland.
Erlangen.

G.  L.  V.  Maurer,  Geschichte  der  Frohnhofe,  der  Bauernhbfe  und  der
Hofverfassung  in  Deutschland. Erlangen.

G.  L.  V.  Maurei^y  Geschichte  der  Markenverfassimg  in  Deutschland.
Erlangen.

G.  L.  V.  Maurer,  Geschichte  der  Stadteverfassung  in  Deutschland.
Erlangen.

E.  NassCf  Ueber  die  mittelalterliche  Feldgemeinschaft  und  die
Einhegungen  des  sechszehnten  Jahrhunderts  in  England.
Bonn.

G,  Landau,  Die  Territorien  in  Bezug  auf  ihre  Bildung  und  ihre
Entwicklung. Hamburg.

G.  Landau. Das  Salgut. Kassel.

Ch.  Lette,  Die  Vertheilung  des  Grundeigenthums  in  Zusammenhang
mit  der  Geschichte  der  Gesetzgebung  und  den  Volkszustanden.
Berlin.

N.  Kindlinger,  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Horigkeit,  insbesondere
der  sogenannten  Leibeigenschaft. Berlin.

W.  Gessner,  Geschichtliche  Entwickelung  der  gutsherrlichen  und
bauerlichen  Verhaltnisse  Deutschlands,  oder  practische  Ge-
schichte der  deutschen  Horigkeit. Berlin.

Von  Haxthausen,  Ueber  die  Agrarverfassung  in  Norddeutschland.
Berlin.

*  Vide  Preface.


INDEX


I


INDEX


3>«t:c


ACC

ACCOUNTANT,  village,  his  im-
portance in  India,  125

Administrators,  Indian,  their  fear  of
altering  native  custom,  39

Agriculture,  conditions  of,  in  India
as  compared  with  Northern  and
Central  Europe,  108.  See  Village
Communities

Arable  Mark,  existence  of  the,  in  the
Indian  village  community,  108.
See  Village  Communities

Austin,  John,  his  view  of  jurispru-
dence, 4


BENEFICES,  origin  and  influence
of,  on  feudalism,  132

Bengal,  Lower,  power  of  making  a
will  in,  40.  Decay  of  the  village
system  in,  104.  Lord  Cornwallis's
land  settlement  of,  105,  153.  Bad
reputation  of  the  Zemindars  of,  as
landlords,  163

Blamire,  Mr.,  adopts  the  popular
theory  on  landed  property,  84


CALCUTTA,  origin  of  the  city  of,
118
Carrying  trade,  influence  of  the,  in

India,  197
Caste,  real  nature  of,  in  India,  56,
57


CON

Cities,  European,  some  probably
the  Township  Mark  of  Teutonic
villages,  118

Cities,  Indian,  causes  of  the  growth
of  villages  into,  118.  Origin  of
the  formation  of  Indian  capitals,
119.  The  great  deserted  cities,  119

Civil  courts  in  India,  34.  Appeals
from  the  Settlement  and  Revenue
courts  to  the,  34.  Difi^erence  be-
tween a  High  and  a  Chief  court,
35.  The  Supreme  courts  and
their  j  udicial  powers,  36.  Dismay
caused  by  the  introduction  of
English  law,  38.  Native  and
English  laws  compared,  49

Clan  society,  the  Celtic  form  of
family  organisation,  156

Commercial  principles,  primitive,
196

Common,  commonable,  and  common
fields,  in  England,  85.  '  Stint  of
common,'  89.  The  Indian  waste
or  common  land,  120, 121.  Con-
troversy after  1857  as  to  waste
land  in  India,  121.  Action  of  the
government  respecting  it,  122.
Exotic  origin  of  the  ancient  three-
field  English  system,  200

Contract,  not  the  source  of  law  in
primitive  communities,  110.  De-
struction of  the  village  system  by
the  obligations  arising  out  of,  113


220


INDEX.


CON

Conveyances,  ancient,  of  land,  188

Cornwallis,  Lord,  his  settlement  of
Lower  Bengal,  105,  153

Council,  village,  legislation  of  the,
116,  123.  Sometimes  superseded
by  a  Headman,  122

Court  Baron,  authority  of  the  Lord
of  the  Manor  in  the,  134, 139

Court  Leet,  functions  of  the,  139,
140

Courts  of  Justice  established  by  the
English  in  India,  71.  None  in
some  of  the  semi-independent
native  States,  71

Custom,  stability  of,  in  India,  9.
Slavery  of  Indians  to,  13.  Indian
administrators  and  native  custom,
39.  Attachment  of  an  Oriental  to
his  local  custom,  39.  Varieties  of
native  usage,  51,  52.  Preserva-
tion of  customary  law,  65.  Agen-
cies by  which  this  preservation
has  been  effected,  55.  Antiquity
of  Indian  custom,  65, 66.  Changes
in  the  nature  of  usage,  72,  75.
Origin  and  growth  of  custom,
109

Customary  Manorial  Courts,  func-
tions of  the,  139,  140


DELHI,  exactions  of  the  Maho-
metan Emperors  of,  179
Devises,  Statute  of,  influence  of,  in
throwing  small  properties  into
the  hands  of  large  landowners,
169,  170
Distribution,  failure  of  primitive  till-
ing communities  for  securing,  166


ENGLAND, existence of the
Arable  Mark  and  Common  Mark
in, 85. Various names of  the


FRE

cultivated  portion  of  the  domain
in,  85.  True  succession  groups  of
proprietors  in,  135.  Waste,  or
common  land,  has  become  the
Lord's  waste,  135.  The  modern
legal  theory  of  the  Lord's  rights,
136.  Advantages  of  absolute  pro-
perty over  the  village  communit}'^
system,  162

English  in  India,  their  influence  on
legal  conceptions,  69.  Their  un-
willing assumption  of  sovereignty,
70.  Their  establishment  of  Courts
of  Justice,  71.  A  cause  of  the
growth  of  the  conception  of  right,
73

Eviction  rare  in  India,  186

Experts,  legal,  employment  of,  in
England,  in  modern  times,  170


FAMILY,  the  great  source  of  per-
sonal law,  11.  Formation  of
the  Patriarchal  Family,  15

Families,  leading,  causes  of  the  ag-
grandisement of,  145

Feudalism,  origin  of,  131,  132.  In-
fluence of  benefices,  132.  The
Manor,  133.  Causes  of  feudalisa-
tioD,  142,  143.  Growth  of  suze-
rainties, 144.  Elements  of  the
feudal  system,  146.  Systematic
feudalism,  147.  Imperfect  feuda-
lisation  of  India,  158-160.  Suf-
fering which  accompanied  feudali-
sation  in  Europe,  161.  Advan-
tages which  the  transition  of  one
form  of  property  to  another  pro-
duced, 162.  Cultivation  of  waste
land  in  Europe,  162.  Tendency
in  the  primitive  Teutonic  system
towards  feudalism,  21

Freeman,  Mr.,  his  identification  of
fragments  of  ancient  Teutonic
society  in  Switzerland,  9


INDEX.


221


GAM

GAME  not  strictly  private  property-
according  to  English  law,  142
Grain-dealer,  the,  excluded  in  India

from  privileges,  197
Grass-lands, customs of various
manors  respecting,  136


HEADMAN  of  an  Indian  village,
office of,  122, 155. Power
which  he  enjoys,  155. Nature  and
origin  of  the  rights  claimed by
certain  families,  156
Hereditary  offices,  tendency  among

Teutonic  races  to,  132
Hermes,  the  three  attributes  of  the
god,  193


INCLOSUEE  and  Inclosure  Acts,
importance  of  the  history  of,  85
India,  village  communities  of,  12,
et  seq.  India  regarded  in  England
as  uninteresting,  22.  Importance
of  the  English  conquest  and  go-
vernment, 23.  Ignorance  of  India
discreditable  in  Englishmen,  23.
Gradual  disappearance  of  Indian
phenomena,  24.  Ignorance  and
superstition  of  Indian  native  so-
ciety, 25.  Influence  of  Western
ideas,  of  physical  ideas,  and  of
British  dominion,  26,  27.  Eng-
lish compared  with  Indian  society,
56.  Influence  of  caste,  66,  57.
Influence  of  English  law,  74.
Discovery  and  recognition  of  the
existence  of  the  Indian  village
community,  103.  The  Maho-
metan theory  of  ownership  in  the
land,  104.  Conditions  of  agricul-
ture in  India  as  compared  with
Europe,  108,  Common  or  waste
lands  in,  120, 131. Peaceful  cha-


IRE

racter  of  the  people  of,  124.  Their
submission  to  the  power  of  mer-
cenary armies,  124.  The  'out-
siders '  of  Indian  villages,  127.
Shape  taken  by  all  disputes  in,  128.
Mode  of  dealing  with  a  newly-
annexed  province,  149.  The
various  land  settlements  and  their
results,  149-151.  Analogy  between
Teutonic  kings  and  the  British
government  in  India,  151.  Ma-
hometan assumptions,  152.  The
two  great  Indian  schools  of  opi-
nion respecting  the  functionaries
administering  the  country,  153.
Property  recognised  by  the  English,
156.  Absolute  ownership,  157.
Comparison  of  English  and  Indian
Conditions,  159.  Structure  of
village  communities  in  India,  175.
Exactions  of  Oriental  sovereigns,
179.  Questions  about  rent,  180,
181.  Influence  of  the  carrying
trade  in  India,  197.  Minute  on
the  over-legislation  attributed
to  the  English  Government,
205

Indian  Law,  sources  of,  31.  Custo-
mary law,  31.  Settlement,  32.
The  Kecord  of  Eights,  33.  Dis-
placement of  native  by  English
law,  37.  Dismay  with  which
English  law  was  regarded,  38.
Mode  of  administering  the  Hin-
doo code,  49-51.  Varieties  of
native  usage,  51,  52

Indians,  secrecy  of  their  family  life,
114.  Their  intellectual  quick-
ness, 56

International  Law,  the  undoubted
parent  of,  193

Ireland,  quantity  of  detail  in  the
ancient  Irish  law,  81.  The  three
ancient  kinds  of  rent  in,  186,
187


222


INDEX.


JUR


MAN


JURISPRUDENCE,  chief  func-
tl  tion  of  Comparative,  3,  4.
John  Austin's  views,  4.  The
comparative  and  historical  me-
thods, 6.  Instruction  which  India
may  yield  to  the  student  of  his-
torical j  urisprudence,  15
Jus  Gentium,  influence  and  impor-
tance of  the,  193,  194


LAMMAS  lands,  85.  Inclosures
removed  on  Lammas  Day,  86
Land,  Record  of  Eights  in,  72.
Oldest  forms  of  property  in,  76.
Scarcity  of  laws  as  to  the  tenure
of,  51.  Teutonic  origin  of  Eng-
lish theories  of  law  in,  83.  Un-
soundness of  the  popular  theory,
84.  Importance  of  the  history  of
inclosures  and  inclosure  acts,  85.
The  ancient  cultivated  portion  of
the  domain,  and  its  various  names,
86.  Modes  of  redistributing
the  shares,  86.  Effect  of  shifting
severalties,  87.  Great  extent  of
the  common  fields,  88.  And  of
the  pasturage  on  haulks  of  turf,  89.
Existing  baulks,  89.  Vestiges  of
the  Mark,  88.  Marshall's  account
of  the  ancient  state  of  England
quoted,  90-94.  The  Udal  tenures
of  Orkney  and  Shetland,  94,  95.
The  '  Burgess  Acres  '  in  the  burgh
of  Lauder,  95.  Mohometan  theory
of  ownership  in  land,  104.  Lord
Cornwallis's  settlement  of  Lower
Bengal,  105.  Estates  in  Oudh,
105.  Creation  of  a  peasant  pro-
prietary under  prosperous  condi-
tions, 105,  106.  Conditions  of
agriculture  in  India  as  compared
with  Europe,  108.  Customs  of
re-partition  of  the  cultivated  lands,
112. Common  or  waste  lands  in


India,  120,  121.  The  process  of
feudalisation,  131.  Benefices,  132.
The  Manorial  group,  133,  134.
Causes  of  the  growth  of  suze-
rainties, 144.  Causes  in  German
and  Scandinavian  cultivating  com-
munities leading  to  inequality  of
property  in  land,  146.  Land  set-
tlements in  India,  105,  149-52.
Ancient  rule  as  to  the  highest
obtainable  rent  for  the  use  of  land,

186.  Ancient Iiish rents, 186,

187.  Primitive  notions  as  to  price,
187.  Rarity  of  ancient  transfers
of  land,  188.  Competition-rent,
189

Lauder,  the  '  Burgess  Acres  '  in  the
burgh  of,  95,  96.  The  ^  Hill
parts,'  96

Law,  analysis  of  a,  66,  67.  Indian
conceptions  of  a,  68.  English  in-
fluence on  legal  conceptions,  69.
Sources  of,  in  primitive  commu-
nities, 110

Loans,  nature  of,  in  oldest  Roman
contracts,  188,  189

Lubbock,  Sir  John,  on  the  first  steps
of  mankind  towards  civilisation,
16. On  markets,  192


irCLENNAN,  Mr.,  on  civilisation,

Madras,  success  of  the  peasant  pro-
prietary of,  105

Mahometan  law,  foundation  of,  49.
Its  interest  for  the  jurist,  49

Mahometan  theory  of  ownership  of
land,  104

Mahratta  brigands,  their  rise  against
the  Mahometans,  124.  Exactions
of  their  princes,  179

Manor,  origin  and  formation  of  the,
133.  Authority  of  the  Lord  in
the Court Baron, 134. Tene-


INDEX.


223


MAN

mental  lands  and  tlie  Lord's  Do-
main, 134.  Eights  of  the  Lord  to
the  waste,  135.  The  ^  right  of
approvement'  aifirmed  by  the
Statute  of  Merton  and  subsequent
statutes,  135.  Modern  legal  theory
of  the  Lord's  rights,  136.  Changes
in  the  grass-lands,  136.  The
free  holders  of  Tenemental  land
corresponding  to  the  old  village
community,  137.  Settlement  of
villeins,  138.  The  Manorial  Courts,
139.  Encroachments  of  the  Lord,
141.  The  Manorial  group  better
suited  than  the  village  group  for
bringing  waste  lands  under  culti-
vation, 164.  Customary  tillage,
165

Manorial  Court,  Customary,  power
of  the,  134

Manorial  courts,  the  three,  139

Manu,  Code  of,  20.  Influence  of
Brahminical  theories  upon  the,  20.
Penetrates  but  little  among  the
people  of  India,  39.  Development
of  Hindoo  law,  46.  Mode  of  ad-
ministering it,  49-51

Mark,  or  township  of  Teutonic
families,  10.  System  of  the,  10.
Vestiges  of  it  in  England,  1 1

Mark,  the  Arable,  rights  and  duties
of  the  ancient  Teutons  respecting,
79,  80.  The  Mark  occasionally
shifted,  81.  Existence  of  the
Arable  Mark  in  England,  85

Mark,  the  Common,  in  ancient  Teu-
tonic Society,  rights  and  duties  of
the,  79

Markets,  origin  of,  192.  Association
between  markets  and  neutrality,
193.  Three  ideas  as  to,  193.
Extreme  rule  of  Market  Law,  195.
Eule  of  Market  Overt,  195.  Ten-
dency of  decisions  of  English
courts  towards the  law of the


OWN

Market,  194.  Causes  which  have
generalised  a  Kule  of  the  Market,
197

Marshall,  Mr.  W.,  his  account  of  the
ancient  state  of  agriculture  quoted,
90-94

Maurer,  Von,  on  the  law  of  the  Mark
or  township,  10.  On  the  feudal
tendency  of  the  primitive  Teutonic
system,  21.  His  inquiry  into  the
forms  of  Teutonic  village  property,
summary  of  his  conclusions,  77,
et  seq.

Morier,  Mr.,  his  paper  in  '  Sys-
tem of  Land  Tenure  in  Various
Countries,'  78.  His  account  of
the  vestiges  of  collective  property
in  Germany,  78.  On  the  aspects
of  the  Teutonic  freeman  as  a  lord
and  as  a  commoner,  82


NASSE,  Professor,  on  the  land-law
of  Germany  and  England,  11,
17.  Account  of  his  work,  168,
169
Neutrality,  ancient  association  be-
tween markets  and,  193
Nuncomar,  fairness  of  the  trial  of,
38


i  rvCCUPANCY  '  tenants in  In-
yj dia,  creation  of,  184. Period

of  time  required  for  determining

who  are,  184
Orkney  Isles,  system  of  the  township

in  the, 10. Sir  W.  Scott  on  the

Udal  tenure,  94
Oudh,  settlement  of  estates  in,  105.

Military  character given  to  the

naturally peaceful  population  of,

124
Ownership,  absolute,  of  the  English

in  India,  157-59


224


INDEX.


PAT


SWI


PATERFAMILIAS,  the,  in  an-
cient Teutonic  society,  78.  Ilis
authority,  78.  His  relations  to
the  other  heads  of  families,  79.
His  authority  in  the  Indian  villapfe
community,  107

Peasant  proprietary  in  India,  esta-
blishment and  success  of  the,
105

Personal  Property,  Law  of,  tenden-
cies of,  194

Police  of  Indian  villages,  recognised
and  paid  by  the  British  Govern-
ment, 125

Political  Economy,  the  contract  of
hiring  and  letting  in,  190.  The
proposition  which  forms  the  basis
of,  191. The  Market,  192

Price,  early  history  and  measure  of,
189

Prize  of  War,  theoretical  right  of
the  sovereign  to,  142

Production,  primitive  tilling  com-
munities ineffective  for,  166

Property,  collective,  native  control
over  testation  of,  41

Pundits,  consulted  in  the  courts,  50.
Charges  against  them,  50


EACE,  modern  theories  of,  ]  4
Rack-rents  in  ancient  Ireland,
187.  Generally,  187, 188.  Reason
why  rack-rents  do  not  exist  in
some  places,  199
Rent,  creation  and  difficulties  of,  in
India,  180,  181.  Ideas  of  Anglo-
Indians,  182.  Customary  and
competition  rents,  183.  Ancient
rule  as  to  the  highest  obtainable
rent  for  the  use  of  land,  186.
Rack-rents  generally,  187,  188.
Modern  origin  of  the  highest
obtainable  rent,  198. The  market


for  land  in  England  and  Scotland,
199.  Reason  why  rack-rents  do
not  exist  in  some  places,  199

Revenue  courts  and  officers  in  India,
and  their  duties,  33,  34

Roman  Law,  period  arrived  at  in,  19


SCOTT, Sir  Walter,  his  remarks
on  the  Udal  tenures  of  Orkney
and  Shetland,  94,  95

Seignory  in  gross,  134

Settlement,  Indian,  32.  Settlement
officers  and  their  reports,  32.  Re-
cord of  Rights,  and  its  importance,
33.  Settlement  in  newly-acquired
provinces  in  India,  149.  Various
forms  of,  150.  Mahometan  as-
sumptions, 152

Shetland  Isles,  system  of  township
in  the,  10.  Sir  W.  Scott  on  the
Udal  tenure  of,  94

Sikhs,  exactions  of  the,  179

Slavery,  generally,  predial,  and
under  peasants,  166

Sudder  courts,  powerful  influence  of
the  Supreme  courts  over  the,  39.
History  of,  43.  Appeals  to  them,
43.  Judges  of  the,  44.  Their  in-
fluence, 45.  Effect  of  judicial
commentaries  on  the,  47

Supreme  courts  of  India  and  their
powers,  36.  Condemnation  which
they  have  everywhere  received
except  in  India,  37,  38.  Their
powerful  influence  on  the  Sudder
courts,  39

Surnames,  possible  causes  of  the  fre-
quency of  trades  as,  in  England,
126

Suzerainties,  causes  of  the  growth  of,
144

Switzerland,  Mr.  Freeman's  identifi-
cation of  fragments  of  Teutonic
Society  in,  9


INDEX.


225


TAL


T


VIL


ALUKDARS,  settlement  of  the.


in  Oiidh,  and  its  results,  150,
151

Teutonic  society,  fragments  of  archaic,
in  Switzerland,  9.  Enquiries  of
Von  Maurer,  9,  77.  The  Teutonic
Mark,  10.  The  *  vicus '  described
"by  Tacitus,  10.  Resemblances  of
Indian  village  communities  to
Teutonic  townships,  12,  Account
of  an  ancient  Teutonic  cultivating
community,  78-82.  Tendency
among  the  Teutonic  races  to  here-
ditary offices,  132.  Causes  and
results  of  the  aggrandisement  of
leading  families,  145

Townships,  Teutonic. See  Mark

Trades,  hereditary,  of  Indian  villages,
125.  Possible  causes  of  the  plen-
tifulness  and  persistence  of  trades
as  surnames  in  England,  126

Tradition,  subject  of,  58.  Effect  of,
in  India,  58.  Different  forms  of,
58,  59.  Value  attached  just  now
to  traditional  law  in  India,  59


UDAL  tenures  of  Orkney  and  Shet-
land, 94,  95
Usury  laws, effect  of  the  repeal  of
the,  195


VICUS,  the,  described  by  Tacitus,
10
Village  Communities  of  India,  their
resemblance  to  Teutonic  town-
ships, 12.  The  land-law  of,  18.  De-
cay of  the  village  system  in  Lower
Bengal,  40,  104.  Coincidence  of
the  systems  of  India  and  Teutonic
society,  61,  62.  Rights  and  duties,
67.  Declarations  of  the  council  of
village  elders,  68,  69.  Discovery
and  recognition  of  the  existence  of


the  Indian  village  community,  103.
The  Mahometan  theory  of  owner-
ship, 104.  Secrecy  of  Indian
family  life,  114.  Dislike  of  Eng-
lish criminal  law,  115.  Legisla-
ture of  the  council  of  elders,  116,

123.  Their  customary  rules,  117.
Causes  of  the  growth  of  Indian
villages  into  cities,  118,  119.
Disputes  sometimes  decided  by  a
single  Headman,  122.  Submission
of  naturally  peaceful  villagers  to
the  power of mercenary  armies,

124.  The  village  community  or-
ganised and  self-acting,  125.  The
outsiders,  127.  Power  of  absorp-
tion of  strangers  by  the  commu-
nity, 128.  Tendency  of  agrarian
rights  to  decay,  150.  Effect  of
the  land  settlement  of  Oudh,  150.
The  office  of  Headman  in  various
places,  155.  Absolute  ownership
of  the  English,  157-59.  Imperfect
feudalisation  of  India,  158-60.  The
communities  left  to  their  own  way
by  great  kings  and  mercenary
armies,  160.  The  cultivating  com-
munity as  compared  with  the  ab-
solute property  of  our  own  day,
164.  Primitive  tilling  communities
ineffective  for  securing  Produc-
tion and  Distribution,  166.  State
of  the  servile  dependents  of  vil-
lagers, 166.  Reasons  why  stran-
gers ceased  to  be  absorbed  by
villages,  167,  168.  Structure  of
Indian  village  communities,  175.
Divisions  in  the  community  itself,

176.  Question  of  the  right  of
property  within the  community,

177.  Tradition  as  to  rights,  178.
Origin  and  difficulties  of  rent,  180,
181.  Analogy  of  the  holders  of
the  highest  rights  in  India  to
English  landowners  in  fee  simple,


226


INDEX


VIL

184.  Creation  of  '  occupancy  '
tenants,  184.  Comparison  of  In-
dian and  English  forms  of  pro-
perty/ 185.  Eviction  rarely  prac-
tised in  India,  186

Village  communities  in  North
America,  organisation  of  the,
201

Village  communities,  Teutonic,  78,
et  seq.


WASTE,  or common  lands,  the
cultivation  of,  demanded  hy  a
growing  population,  162
Water  rules  in  India,  109, 110


ZEM

Widows,  origin  of  the  oppressive
disabilities  of,  in  Hindoo  laws,  54.
The  written  restrictions  compared
with  unwritten  usage,  55

Will,  the,  of  Lower  Bengal,  40.  A
modern  Indian  will,  41,  42.  Dan-
gers caused  by  the  wills  of  un-
learned testators,  170.  Necessity  for
restraints  on  testamentary  power,
171


ZEMINDAES, their  settlement

and  its  results,  150.  Their  bad

reputation  in Lower  Bengal aa
landlords,  163


LONDON: PRINTKD BY

SPOTTISWOODB AND CO., NK\V-STUl£ET StiUARB

AND PAKLIAUENX STREET
