Dissertations on Early Law and Custom (Henry Sumner Maine, 1883)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1883 first edition (https://archive.org/details/dissertationson00main).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

EAELY  LAW  AND CUSTOM


I.OXnOS  : PRINTED liY
SrOTTISWOOIlK AND CO., XEW-STIIKKT SQUAUE  ^^

ASD rAELIAMEXT STilEET


DISSEKTATIONS


ON


EARLY  LAW  AND  CUSTOM


CHIEFLY SELECTED FEOM


LECTVnES DELIYERET) AT OXFORD


By  sir  HKXKV  SI'.MXER  MAINE,  K.C.S.I.  LL.D.  F.R.S.

AUTHOB  OV  •  ANCIENT  L-VW  ' •  VILL-^fiE-COMMUXITIKS  IX  THK  E.VST  AXD  WKKF ' ETC.


LONDON
JOHN MURRAY, ALP>KMARLK STREET

1883

.1// rhjUli i'n:rriU


i


PEEFACE.


Two  COUESES  of  lectures,  delivered  by  the  Author
while  he  had  the  honour  of  holding  the  Corpus
Professorship  of  Jurisprudence  in  the  University  of
Oxford,  have  been  already  published  with  the  titles
*  Village- Communities  in  the  East  and  West,'  and
'  The  Early  History  of  Institutions.'  The  substance
of  the  present  vohune  was  originally  contained  in
lectures  wliich  formed  part  of  various  other  courses
given  l)y  liim  at  Oxford;  ])ut  in  some  cases  the
fonn  has  been  materially  altered.

The  Author  continues  in  these  pages  the  line  of
investigation  which  he  has  followed  in  former  works.
He  endeavours  to  connect  a  ])ortion  of  existing
institutions  with  a  })art  of  the  primitive  or  very
ancient  usages  of  mankinfl.  and  of  tlie  ideas  asso-
ciated with  these  usages.  In  his  first  four  chaj)ters
he attempts,  with  the  help  of  the  invalua]>le  series


[n]  PREPACK.

of  '  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,'  translated  under  the
sii])erintendence  of  Professor  Max  Milller,  to  throw
some  light  on  that  close  implication  of  early  law
with  ancient  religion  which  meets  the  inquirer  on
the  threshold  of  the  legal  systems  of  several  societies
which  have  contributed  greatly  to  modern  civili-
sation. In  the  chapters  which  follow,  he  treats  of
another  influence  which  has  acted  strongly  on  early
law,  the  authority  of  the  King.  In  the  later  por-
tions of  the  book  lie  examines  certain  forms  of  pro-
perty and  tenure,  and  certain  legal  conceptions  and
legal  classifications,  which  have  survived  to  our  day,
but  which  appear  to  have  had  their  origm  in  remote
antiquity.  In  a  few  words  at  the  commencement  of
his  Seventh  Chapter,  the  writer  has  explained  his
reasons  for  prefixing  to  his  later  chapters  a  discussion
of  some  '  Theories  of  Primitive  Society.'

The  substance  of  Chapters  V.,  YL,  IX.,  and  XI.
has  already  appeared  in  the  '  Fortnightly  Review,'
and  the  bulk  of  Chapter  VIII.  in  the  '  Nineteenth
Century  ; '  and  the  Author  has  to  express  his  thanks
to  tlie  proprietors  of  those  periodicals  for  their  per-
mission to  republish  his  contributions.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  PAGE

I. The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Hixdus ....  1

,«» II. Religion  axd  Law 26

III.  Ancestor- AVoPvSHip 52

IV.  Ancestor-Worship  and  Inheritance . . . .  78
^- V. Royal  Succession  and  the  Salic  Law . . .125

— VL The  King,  in  his  relation  to  Early  Civil  Justice  .  IGO

faiyiJi, -|- VIL Theories  of  Primitive  Society 192

Vin. li\sT  European  House  Commlnities . . . .  232

^^ IX. The Decay of Feudal Property jn France and

England 21)1

TjuX rr^JIc^k X. CLAS.SIFICATI0N8  OF Proi'erty .'!.'{5

XL (classifications  of  Legal  Rules ....  .3(;2

LNDEX :m


m  iw»i  II  g  I


EAELY  LAW  AND  CUSTOM.


CHAPTER  I.

THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.

The  study  of  the  sacred  languages  of  India,  which
has  given  to  the  world  the  modern  science  of  Philo-
logy and  the  modern  theory  of  Race,  began  virtually
in  the  study  of  sacred  Indian  law.  Sir  William
Jones,  who.  though  he  was  not  absolutely  the  earliest
of  Anglo-Indian  Sanscritists,  was  the  first  to  teacli
the  West  that  there  was  in  the  East  such  a  language
as  Sanscrit,  and  a  literature  preserved  in  it,  does  not
appear  during  his  Oriental  studies  in  England  to  have
suspected  tlie  existence  of  the  treasure  he  was  destined
to  disinter.  He  seems  rather  to  have  sought  the  key
to  Eastern  knowledge  in  two  spoken  and  highly-
cultivated  lani{uafi:es — Arabic  and  Persian.  But  he
accepted  a  Judgeship  in  a  Court  of  Justice  newly  esta-
blished in  neri'^al,  und(,T  an  Act  of  Parliament  which
reserved  to  native  litigants  the  application  of  their
^^own  laws  and usages  in  nil  f|uestions  of  inheritance


V  THE SACRED I.AWS OF THE HINDUS.  chap.  i.

and  contract ;  and,  from  a  much  earlier  period,  it  had
been  the  practice  of  all  the  Indian  Courts  to  attach
to  themselves  Moolvies  and  Pundits — that  is,  native
professors  of  Mahommedan  and  Hindu  law — for  the
purpose  of  advising  them  on  the  legal  rules,  of  which
these  experts  represented  themselves  to  be  tlie  deposi-
taries. The  correspondence  of  Sir  William  Jones  re-
peatedly expresses  his  suspicions  (perhaps  not  always
quite  just)  of  the  fidelity  and  honesty  of  the  native
advisers  of  the  tribunals.  '  I  can  no  longer  bear,'  he
writes  in  September  1785,  'to  be  at  the  mercy  of  our
Pundits,  who  deal  out  Hindu  law  as  they  please,  and
make  it  at  reasonable  rates  when  they  cannot  find  it
ready-made.'  He  therefore  formed  a  determination  to
acquaint  himself  personally  with  the  sources  of  the  law
from  which  they  j^retended  to  draw  their  opinions.'
With  Arabic  he  was  already  fiimiliar,  and  he  therefore
required  no  assistance  in  his  studies  of  Mahommedan
law  ;  but  for  the  purpose  of  mastering  the  virtually
unknown  lano'uao-e  in  which  the  Hindu  law  was
contained,  he  found  it  necessary  to  visit  during  his
vacations  several  of  the  decaying  and  decayed  seats
of  learning  in  which  knowledge  of  it  was  still  pro-
fessed, and  he  organised  a  staff*  of  Hindu  scholars  to
aid  him  in  his  Sanscrit  studies,  and  to  record  their
results.  The  plan  for  improving  the  administration
of  Anglo-Indian  justice  which  finally  commended
itself  to  him  was  one  for  the  preparation  of  a  Digest


CHi.P.  I.  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  6

in  English  of  Hindu  and  Maliommedan  law,  which
should  need  no  Pundits  or  Moolvies  for  its  interpreta-
tion. Much  to  their  honour,  the  Indian  Government
of  the  day.  formed  of  Lord  Cornwallis  and  his  Council,
accepted  his  offer  to  preside  over  the  undertaking,  and
his  staff  of  native  experts,  considerably  increased,  was
taken  into  the  Government  service.  On  his  monument
by  Flaxman,  in  the  chapel  of  University  College  at
Oxford,  he  sits  surrounded  by  his  company  of  native
literates,  amid  conventional  Indian  foliage,  bareheaded,
in  the  open  air.

It  was  in  fact  from  these  native  Hindu  teachers  that
Sir  William  Jones  learned,  and  the  learned  and  curious
all  over  the  West  were  gradually  informed,  that  in  a
part  of  the  world  just  coming  under  the  British
sceptre  there  existed  an  ancient  language,  the  elder
sister  of  the  classical  lanf]^ua2:es  so  honoured  in  the
West,  a  series  of  poems  whicli  might  not  unjustly  be
compared  to  the  Iloineric  epics  and  the  Attic  drama,
and  laws  twice  as  old  as  the  legislation  of  Solon  and
the  Twelve  Tables  of  Uome.  It  is  impossible  now —
now  that  India  has  become  more  commonplace  as  slie
has  got  nearer  ;  now  that,  here  at  all  events,  she  is
associated  with  frontier  wars,  budgets,  opium,  and
grey  sliirtings — tr)  reproduce  the  keen  throb  of  intel-
lectual interest  which  tlie  literary  portion  of  these
discoveries  sent  through  I'^urope.  l>ut  Sir  William
Jones  was  even  more  of  a  jurist  than  a  scjjolar,  and

J! -J


4  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  chap,  i.

nothing  seems  to  have  surprised  and  interested  him
more  than  the  assurance  of  his  teachers  that,  in  the
ancient  lano:ua2:e  he  was  learnino^,  there  survived  leo'al
writino^s  asserted  to  be  of  sacred  orioin,  of  vast  an-
tiquity,  and  of  universal  obligation  among  Hindus.
The  oldest  of  them  was  said  to  have  been  dictated  by
Manu,  a  divine  being  who  had  been  mysteriously  asso-
ciated with  the  creation  of  all  things ;  and  it  was  de-
scribed as  the  acknowlediJ^ed  basis  of  all  Hindu  law  and
Hindu  institutions,  the  fountain  of  all  civil  obligation
to  more  than  a  hundred  millions  of  men.  The  book
was  actually  extant,  and  the  translation  of  it  which  he
gave  to  the  world,  with  the  title  '  Institutes  of  Hindu
Law,  or  the  Ordinances  of  Menu,  according  to  the
Gloss  of  Culliica,'  was  the  first-fruits  of  his  labours  on
the  Digest  which  he  had  planned.  He  seems,  in
fact,  to  have  regarded  it  as  standing  to  this  projected
Digest  much  in  the  same  relation  as  the  Roman
Institutes  to  the  celebrated  Digest  of  the  Emperor
Justinian.

It  does  not  seem  to  me  possible  to  doubt  that  the
acco  :nt  which  Sir  William  Jones  gave  of  the  Book
of  Manu  in  his  Preface  to  his  translation  was  a
rationalised  version  of  the  statements  made  to  him
by  his  native  teachers,  who  seem  all  to  have  belonged
to  one  particular  school  of  Hindu  learning,  accus-
tonu'l  to  hold  Manu  in  especial  honour.  Sir  William
Jon( V-  considered  this  personage,  who,  in  the  treatise


<:hap.  I. THE  SACKED  LAWS  OF  THE  HIXDUS. 5

called  after  him,  sits  *  reclining  on  his  arm.  with  his
attention  fixed  on  one  object,  the  supreme  God,'  as
a  real  individual  human  being,  and  the  personal
author  of  the  lesfislation  attributed  to  him.  Sir
William  Jones  compares  hun  to  the  Cretan  Minos
and  the  Egy^^tian  Men,  partly  on  account  of  the  con-
sonance of  names.  As  I  have  just  stated,  he  sees  an
analoofv"  in  this  law-book  to  the  Institutes  of  the
Roman  Justinian,  but  he  assigns  to  it  the  prodigious
date  of  1,280  years  before  Christ.  In  the  Hght  of  newer
knowledofe,  which  nevertheless  mioiit  not  have  existed
but  for  Jones,  we  can  see  that  these  statements  of  his
require  connection.  There  is  no  doubt  that,  if  Manu
is  to  be  compared  to  a  book  known  to  Englishmen,
it  should  have  been  to  a  book  a  o'ood  deal  more
familiar  to  them  than  the  Roman  Institutes,  the
book  of  Leviticus.  For  Manu,  though  it  contains
3.  goofl  deal  of  law,  is  essentially  a  book  of  ritual,  of
priestly  duty  and  religious  observance  ;  and  to  this
combination  of  law  with  religion  the  whole  family  of
Hindu  writings,  to  which  the  book  of  Manu  bekmgs,
owe  some  remarkable  characteristics  on  whicli  I  am
desirous  of  dwelling.  It  is  not  at  tlie  same  time  to
be  supposed  that  the  com])ination  is  peculiar  to  the
Hindus.  Tiierci  is  no  system  of  recorded  law,  literally
from  China  to  Peru,  wliich,  when  it  first  emerges  into
notice,  is  not  seen  to  b(*  entangh^d  witli  religious
ritual and  ol>servance. The  law  oi'  the  Romans  has


6  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  chap.  i.

been  thought  to  be  that  in  which  the  civil  and  Pontifi-
cal jurisprudence  were  earliest  and  most  completely
disentangled.  Yet  the  meao-re  extant  fra"Tnents  of
the  Twelve  Tables  of  Rome  contain  rules  which  are
plainly  religious  or  ritualistic  : —

Thou  slialt  not  square  a  funeral  pile  with  an  adze.
Let  not  women  tear  their  cheeks  at  a  funeral
Thou  shalt  not  put  gold  on  a  corpse.

We  are  told  by  Cicero  ('  De  Legibus/  2,  25,  64)
that  several  of  these  rules  contamed  in  the  Tenth  of
the  Roman  Tables  were  taken  from  Greek  originals.
He  attributes  the  Greek  rules  to  Solon,  and  explains
that  they  limited  the  costliness  of  the  ancient  ritual
of  funerals.

The  opinions  of  Sir  William  Jones  produced  great
effects  both  in  the  East  and  in  the  West.  One  result
which  followed  from  them  I  must  pass  by  with  notice
very  unequal  to  its  practical  hnportance.  The  Anglo-
Indian  Courts  accepted  from  the  school  of  Sanscritists
Av^hich  he  founded  the  assertion  of  his  Brahmanical
advisers,  that  the  sacred  laws  beginning  in  the  extant
book  of  Mann  were  acknowledged  by  all  Hindus  to
be  binding  on  them.  The  impression  in  the  mind  of
the  English  judicial  officers — an  impression  shared,  I
infer  from  its  language,  by  the  English  Parliament —
manifestly  was  that  the  sacerdotal  Hindu  law  corre-
sponded nearly  to  the  English  Common  Law,  and  was
at  least  the  substructure  of  all  the  rules  of  life  followed


CHAP.  I.  THE SACRED LATTS OF THE HIXDl'S.  7

by  Hindus.  It  is  only  just  beginning  to  be  perceived
that  this  opinion  had  a  very  slender  foundation,  for
it  is  probable  that  at  the  end  of  the  last  century  large
masses  of  the  Hindu  population  had  not  so  much  as
heard  of  Manu.^  and  knew  little  or  nothino-  of  the
legal  rules  supposed  to  rest  ultimately  on  his
authority.  The  original  range  of  operation  which  it
is  possible  to  allow  to  the  sacerdotal  laws  has  been
much  narrowed  by  very  recent  investigation.  Some
years  ago,  on  my  return  from  India,  I  stated  in  a
book  on  ^  Yillaoce  Communities  in  the  East  and  West '
(pp.  52,  53)  the  opinion  which  I  had  formed  after
personal  inquiry  among  Indian  judicial  officers.
*  The  conclusion,'  I  said,  '  arrived  at  by  the  persons
who  seem  to  me  of  highest  authority  is,  first,  that
the  codified  law — Manu  and  his  sflossators — embraced
originally  a  much  smaller  body  of  usage  than  had
been  imagined  ;  and  next,  that  the  customary  rules,
reduced  to  writing,  have  been  very  greatly  altered  by
Brahmanical  expositors,  constantly  in  spirit,  sometimes
in  tenor.  Indian  law  may  in  fact  be  affirmed  to  consist
of  a  very  great  number  of  local  bodies  of  usage,  and
of  one  set  of  customs,  reduced  to  writing,  pretending
to  a  diviner  authority  than  the  rest,  exercising  con-
sequently a  great  influence  over  them,  and  tending,

'  A  high  authority  informs  me  that  there  are  few,  if  any,  re-
ferences to  Manu  in  the  Sanscrit  literature  other  than  the  legal
treati.sf;s.  These  last  quote  a  *  Mann,'  but  the  writings  quoted
under  that  name  are  not  those  now  extant.


8  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  chap.  i.

if  not  checked,  to  absorb  them.'  Since  then,  my  con-
clusion has  been  greatly  fortified  by  more  systematic
examination  of  the  phenomena.  There  is  in  India
a  province,  the  Punjab,  the  country  of  the  Five
Rivers,  which  was  the  earliest  seat  of  the  Aryan
Hindus  on  their  descent  from  their  oriofinal  home
into  the  Indian  plains.  The  laws  and  institutions  of
this  province  have  quite  lately  been  the  subject  of  an
exhaustive  official  inquiry  ('  Punjab  Customary
Law,'  edited  by  C.  L.  Tupper,  Calcutta,  1881).
Among  several  results  of  great  interest  which  seem
to  me  to  have  been  reached,  one  is  that  we  have  in  the
Punjab  the  Hindu  institutions  very  much  in  the  state
in  which  they  were  before  the  Brahmanical  expositors
took  them  in  hand.  The  traces  of  the  religious  ideas
which  profoundly  influenced  the  development  of  what
is  known  as  the  Hindu  law  are  here  extremely  slight ;
and  few  things  can  be  more  instructive  to  the  legal
archaeologist  than  the  comparison  of  the  Punjab
rules  with  those  worked  out  in  Brahmanical  schools
far  to  the  south-east.  This  Punjab  Hindu  law  ex-
hibits in  fact  some  singularly  close  resemblances  to
the  most  ancient  Roman  law.  There  is  also  evidence
that  the  stream  of  Hinduism  which  at  some  time  or
another  flowed  over  the  southern  peninsula  of  India
was  extremely  superficial.'^ The  southern  Hindu  has

2  Much  attention  is  deserved  by  the  two  works  of  Mr.  J.  H.
Nelson,  A  Yieio  of  the  llimbo  Law  as  administered  hy  Hie  High


CHAP.  T.  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HIXDUS.  9

always  been  regarded  as  a  lax  Hindu  ;  but  the  truth
seems  to  be.  not  that  he  negligently  violates  the
Hindu  sacerdotal  law.  but  that  neither  he  nor  his
forefathers  ever  knew  it  m  anvthino-  like  its  inteoTity.
Some  other  ^dews.  which  are  not  now  accepted
by  the  most  learned  Sanscritists,  had  their  origin  in
the  theories  first  propounded  in  Sir  William  Jones's
preface.  The  probable  antiquity  of  Manu's  law-
book  was  much  exao-aerated. Its  true  date  is  un-

CO

known  :  in  Indian  literary  history  there  are  almost
no  trustworthy  dates  :  but  it  is  now  believed  to  be
relatively  modem — almost  the  most  modern  of  a
large  family  of  Sanscrit  writings  more  or  less  treating
of  law.  This  opinion  is  the  result  of  a  test  first
applied  by  Professor  Max  Miiller,  and  now  univer-
sally accepted  by  Sanscritists  as  conclusive.  The
law-book  of  Manu  is  in  verse,  and  Verse  is  one  of
the  expedients  for  lessening  the  burden  which  the
memory  has  to  bear  when  writing  is  unknown  or
very  little  used.  But  there  is  another  expedient
which  serves  the  same  object.  Tliis  is  Aphorism  or
Proverb.  Even  now,  in  our  own  country,  much  of
popular  wisdom  is  preserved  either  in  old  rhymes
or  in  old  proverbs  ;  and  it  is well  ascertained  that

Court  of  Ma/lraSf  and  llic  Sclfjitific  Study  of  tit f.  Jliwtu  Lair,  par-
ticularly the  first.  Tliere  may  be  a  question  whether  the  practical
evilg  pointed  out  in  these  books  are  now  remediable,  or,  if  they  are
reme^liable,  by  what  methods  they  should  be  removed  :  but  of  their
existence  I  do  not  think  there  can  be  any  reasonable  doubt.


10  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HLXUUS.  chap.  r.

durino;  the  Middle  Ao^es  much  of  law  and  not  a  little
of  medicine  was  preserved  among  professions,  not
necessarily  clerkly,  by  these  two  agencies.  A  great
deal  of  old  German  law  compressed  into  maxims  has
been  preserved,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  Latin  legal
maxims  well  known  to  English  lawyers,  and  some-
times spoken  of  as  the  quintessence  of  wisdom,  were
really  aids  to  recollection.  As  to  Yerse,  the  ordinary
medical  practitioner  once  carried  his  professional
knowledge  with  him  in  the  versified  Latin  rules  of
the  school  of  Salerno — that  curious  body  of  medical
precepts  which  begins  with  the  grim  warnuig,  '  con-
tra vim  mortis  non  est  medicamen  in  hortis.^  In  Sir
William  Jones's  day,  an  abridgment  of  Lord  Coke's
'  Reports  '  in  verse  was  in  existence ;  and  he  gravely
remarks  that,  if  the  verse  had  been  smoother  and  the
law  more  accurate,  every  student  might  have  been
advised  to  use  it.  Now,  the  Sanscrit  law-books  are
sometimes  in  aphoristic  prose,  sometimes  in  verse,
sometimes  in  a  mixture  of  both  ;  and  the  canon
established  by  Max  Milller  is  that,  in  India  at  all
events,  books  of  aphorisms  are  older  than  books  of
verse  ;  and  the  clue  being  once  found,  many  more
proofs  disclose  themselves  that  Manu,  which  is
wholly  in  verse,  is  much  more  recent  than  the  Hindu
law-books (such as Apastamba and Gautama,^

^  Apastamba  and  Gautama  are  translated  in  vol.  ii.  of  Max
Miiller's  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  Yasislitha  in  vol.  ix.,  Baud-


CH^p.  I.  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HIXDUS.  11

which  are  whoUy  in  aphoristic  prose),  and  even  more
modern  than  books  (like  Vishnu  and  Vasishtha*)
which  are  partly  in  prose  and  partly  in  verse.  '  In
the  whole  of  Yedic  (that  is  Hindu  scriptural)  litera-
ture/ says  Max  Mliller,  '  there  is  no  work  written,,
like  Manu,  in  the  regular  epic  sloka,  and  the  con-
tinuous employment  of  this  metre  is  a  characteristic
mark  of  post-Yedic  writings.'  Manu,  therefore,  in
spite  of  its  great  modern  reputation,  belongs  to  the
Hindu  Apocrypha.  Xor  is  it  believed  that  we  have
the  book  m  its  original  form.  Dr.  Jolly  (preface
to  Vishnu)  speaks  of  the  '  abundant  evidence '  for
its  havmg  undergone  modifications  and  entire  trans-
formations in  successive  periods.

The  result  of  all  this  literary  investigation  and
discussion  is,  that  no  book  has  had  so  many  dates
attributed  to  it  as  the  book  of  Manu.  Sir  W.
Jones  placed  its  age  at  1280  B.C.,  Schlegel  at  1000
B.C.,  Elphinstone  at  900  B.C.,  Monier  Williams  at
about  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  Max  Miiller  at  not  earlier
than  200  b.c.  l>ut  tlie  high  authority  of  the  late  Dr.
Burnell  is  now  cited  frjr  so  hite  an  a<i:e  of  tlie  original
book  as  400  a.d.,  and  it  has  even  been  attributed  in

hayana  in  the  same  volume,  and  his  most  impoi-tant  chapters  in
West  and  BUhler's  DifjfiHt  of  lliruhi,  Lavj.  Tliis  writer  is  regarded
by  learned  Hindus  as  an  extremely  old  authority,  but  the  extant
text  is  in  a  very  untrustworthy  condition,  as  may  be  seen  from  Dr.
Biihler's  Introduction.  Vislinu  is  translated  by  Jolly  in  vol.  v..
of  the  Sacred  Jiookn.  4 Ibid.


12  THE SACRP:D laws of the HINDUS.  chap,  i.

its  present  form  either  to  the  eleventh  or  the  four-
teenth century  of  our  era.  (See  Nelson,  '  Scientific
Study  of  Hindu  Law,'  p.  37.)  It  is  as  though  it
were  thought  doubtful  whether  a  particular  work
were  composed  at  the  fabulous  date  of  the  Taking
of  Troy,  or  at  the  historical  date  of  the  Battle  of
Bannockburn.  The  book  itself,  however,  purports
to  be  coeval  wdth  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  I
suppose  that  a  Hindu  holding  the  opinions  now
considered  orthodox  would  be  bound  to  claim  for  it
an  indefinitely  high  antiquity.  At  the  same  time,  its
audacious  pretension  to  be  of  divine  origin  is  out-
done in  some  of  the  writings  now  shown  to  be  older,
for  tlie  so-called  Code  of  A^islmu  professes  to  have
been  dictated  by  one  of  the  Persons  of  the  Hindu
Trinity  to  the  Goddess  of  the  Earth.

When  this  sacred  legal  literature  of  the  Hindus  is
surveyed  in  its  entirety,  it  is  impossible  not  to  recog-
nise the  plausibility  of  the  modern  theories  of  its
orio^in.  No  one  treatise,  and  still  less  the  a2^oTe2:ate
of  treatises,  is  the  production  of  an  individual  man  or
of  an  individual  mind.  The  literature  is  the  gradual
growth  of  schools  of  learned  Brahmans,  which  are
still  found  in  India.  They  are  companies  or  cor-
porations of  men  devoted  to  sacred  learning.  Per-
haps the  nearest  analogy  to  their  work  is  to  be  found
in  the  labours  of  the  Benedictines.  But  the  com-
parison must  not  be  pushed  too  far. The  conception


CHi.p.  I.  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HIXDUS.  lo

of  a  celibate  order  appears  to  have  been  imknown  to
the  earlv  Hindus.  Each  school  was  either  in  its
beginning  an  actual  family,  or,  if  origmally  it  was  a
mere  collection  of  voluntary  pupils  sitting  at  the  feet
of  a  teacher,  it  tended  to  shape  itself  upon  the  model
of  the  family,  as  the  only  known  form  of  permanent
association.  The  distinction  between  one  school  and
another  probably  consisted  in  the  particular  set  of
authorities  (as  it  would  now  be,  the  particular  stand-
ard books)  which  it  followed  ;  and,  as  it  went  on
from  generation  to  generation,  it  was  recruited  partly
by  voluntar}^  adherence  and  partly  by  hereditarv
descent.  The  double  process  is  clearly  reflected  in
the  text  of  one  of  our  oldest  authorities,  Apastamba.
The  student  desirous  of  being  initiated  into  sacred
learning  is  to  go  to  a  man  '  in  whose  family  it  is
hereditary,  who  himself  possesses  it,  and  who  is
devout  in  following  the  law'  (Apastamba,  i.  i.  1.
11).  On  the  other  hand,  the  pupil  is  directed  to
consider  the  teachers  of  his  teacher  as  his  ancestors^
(Apastamba,  i.  i.  7.  12).  This  view  of  the  relation
of  teacher  and  pupil  lias  by  no  means  died  out  ui
India.  The  Hindus  still  rej^ard  '  a  school  consisting"
of  a  succession  of  teachers  and  pupils  as  a  spiritual
family'  (Dr.  ]>iihler,  hn'.  cit.)  And  according  to
the  letter  of  the  law  recognised  by  the  Indian  Courts^
thongli  not  j>erhaps  according  to  the  actual  practice,
teacher  and  jjupil  btill inherit  from  one  another,  just


14  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  chap.  i.

as  they  did  in  the  remote  days  of  Apastamba,  who
lays  down  that,  on  failure  of  the  nearer  kmsmen,
*  the  spiritual  teacher  inherits,  and  in  failure  of  the
spiritual  teacher  a  pupil  shall  take  the  deceased's
wealth,  and  use  it  for  religious  works  for  the  deceased's
benefit,  or  he  may  himself  enjoy  it '  (ii.  vi.  14.  3).

There  are  analogies  to  this  sacredness  and  strict-
ness of  literary  relations  in  the  literary  history  of
two  societies  with  little  or  no  intellectual  likeness  to
the  Hindus.  Mr.  Grote's  theory  of  the  Homeric
poetry,  taken  in  a  mass  (ii.  176-178),  is  that  it  was
the  aggregate  production,  not  of  one  man,  but  of  a
gens  or  clan  of  Homeridae,  of  whom  Homer  was  the
name- giving  ancestor,  real  or  supposed,  the  '  divine
or  semi-divine  eponymus  or  progenitor,  in  whose
name  and  glory  the  individuality  of  every  member
of  the  gens  was  merged.'  '  Homer  is  no  individual,
but  the  divine  or  heroic  father  of  the  Homerids,  the
ideas  of  worship  and  ancestry,  coalescing,  as  they  con-
stantly did,  in  the  Grecian  mind.'  A  still  nearer
analogy  is  one  which,  like  many  others,  occurs  in  the
ancient  legal  literature  of  the  Irish.  '  Literary  foster-
age,' I  wrote  in  a  former  work  ('Early  Histor^^  of
Institutions,'  p.  242),  '  was  an  institution  nearly  con-
nected with  the  existence  of  the  Brehon  law  schools,
and  it  consisted  of  the  various  relations  established
between  the  Brehon  teacher  and  the  pupils  he  received
into  his  house  for  instruction  in  the  Brehon lore.


CHAP.  I.  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  15

However  it  may  surprise  us  that  the  connection
between  Schoolmaster  and  Pupil  was  regarded  as
peculiarly  sacred  by  the  ancient  Irish  and  as  closely
resembling  natural  fatherhood,  the  Brehon  tracts
leave  no  room  for  doubt  on  the  point.  It  is  expressly
laid  down ''  that  it  created  the  same  Patria  Potestas
as  actual  paternity  ;  and  the  literary  foster-father,
though  he  teaches  gratuitously,  has  a  claim  through
life  upon  portions  of  the  property  of  the  literary  foster-
son.  Thus  the  Brehon  with  his  pupils  constituted,
not  a  school  in  our  sense,  but  a  true  family.  While
the  ordinary  foster-father  was  bound  by  the  law  to
give  education  of  some  kind  to  his  foster-children —
to  the  sons  of  Chiefs  instruction  in  ridin2f,  shootinsr
with  the  bow,  swimming,  and  chess-playing,  and
instruction  to  their  daughters  in  sewing,  cutting  out,
and  embroidery — the  Brehon  trained  his  foster- sons
in  learning  of  the  liighest  dignity,  the  lore  of  the
chief  literary  profession.  He  took  payment,  l)ut  it
was  the  law  which  settled  it  for  him.  It  was  part  of
his  status,  and  not  the  result  of  a  bargain.'

On  the  whole,  few  literary  theories  of  modern
mintage  have  more  to  recommend  them  tlian  that
which  Professor  Max  Mliller  first  gave  of  the  large

*  The  literary  foster-father  has  the  power  of  pronouncing
judgment  and  proof  and  witness  upon  tlie  foster-pupiJ,  as  ]ias  the
father  u£X)n  the  son,  and  the  Church  upon  lier  tenant  of  ecclesias-
tical lands  {Ancifmt  Lav)8  of  Irdaml^  ii.  349).


16  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  chap.  i.

extant  body  of  Hindu  sacerdotal  legal  writings.
They  were  gradually  evolved  by  Brahmanic  families,
real  or  artificial.  '  The  great  number  of  these  writ-
ings,' he  says  in  his  letter,  first  printed  in  Morley's
Digest,^  '  is  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that
there  was  not  one  body  of  Kalpa- Sutras  binding  on
all  Brahmanic  families,  but  that  different  old  fami-
lies had  their  own  Kalpa- Sutras.  These  works  are
still  very  frequent  in  our  libraries,  yet  there  is  no
doubt  that  many  of  them  have  been  lost.  Sutras  are
quoted  which  do  not  exist  in  Europe,  and  the  loss  of
some  is  acknowledged  by  the  Brahmans  themselves.'
As  regards  the  Manava  Dharma  Shastra,  the  Manu
translated  by  Sir  William  Jones  and  asserted  by  his
native  teachers  to  be  the  basis  of  all  sacred  Hindu
law,  it  is  a  late  redaction  of  the  legal  doctrine  of  the
Manavas,  a  gens  or  clan  called  after  a  Manu  fre-
quently mentioned  in  Sanscrit  literature,  but  men-
tioned by  the  writer  of  the  extant  book  as  somebody
different  from  himself.  If  the  old  jManu  ever  com-
posed a  law-book  (which  is  doubtful),  it  would
certainly  not  have  been  composed  in  the  metre  of  the
extant  code.

The  theory  upon  which  these  schools  of  learned
men  worked,  from  the  ancient,  perhaps  very  ancient.
Apastamba  and  Gautama  to  the  late  Manu  and  the

6  Now  to  be  read  at  p.  1  of  the  Tntroduction  to  Apastamba,  m
vol.  ii.  of  the  Sacred  Books.


CHAP.  I.  THE SACKED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  17

still  later  Xarada,  is  perhaps  still  held  by  some  per-
sons of  earnest  relis^ious  convictions,  but  in  time  now
buried  it  affected  every  walk  of  thought. The  fun-
damental assumption  is, that a  sacred or  inspired
literature  beins^  once  believed  to  exist,  all  knowledo;e
is  contained  in  it. The  Hindu  way  of  putting  it  was,
and  is,  not  simply  that  the  Scripture  is  true,  but  that
everything  which  is  true  is  contained  in  the  Scripture.
From  very  ear^y  times,  the  Hindu  doctors  appear  to
have  been conscious  of  difficulties  in  the  interpre-
tation or application of  their theory. Sometimes
books  of  authority  contradicted  one  another. Some-
times they failed to supply  a basis for received
doctrines  or  for  immemorial  religious  practice. One
of  the  earliest  of  expedients  was  to  suppose  the  loss
of passages  in the most ancient portion of the
Scriptures. 'If  you ask,' says Apastamba, 'why
the  decision  of  the  Aryas  presupposes  the  existence
of  a  A'edic  passage,  then  I  answer.  All  precepts  were
originally  taught  in  the  ]>rahmanas,  but  these  texts
have  been  lost. Their  former  existence  may,  however,
be  inferred ihnn usage. It is not, however, per-
missible to infer  the former existence  of  a  Vedic
passage  where  pleasure  is  obtained  by  fcjllowing  the
ciistoni  ;  lie  who  follows such  usage  becomes  fit  for
Hell  '  (i  iv.  \'2.  \i)). With  the  aid  of  such  expedients,
of  which  several  are  still  in  use  among  learned  Hindus
the  theory  has  survived  ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that

c


-\^


18  THE SACKED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  chap.  i.

such  a  theory,  firmly  held  during  the  mfancy  of  syste-
matic thought,  tends  to  work  itself  into  fact.  As
the  human  mind  advances,  accumulatincf  observation
and  accumulating  reflection,  nascent  philosophy  and
dawning  science  are  read  into  the  sacred  literature,
while  they  are  at  the  same  time  limited  by  the  ruling
ideas  of  its  priestly  authors.  But  as  the  mass  of  this
literature  grows  through  the  additions  made  to  it  by
successive  expositors,  it  gradually  specialises  itself,
and  subjects,  at  first  mixed  together  under  vague
general  conceptions,  become  separated  from  one
another  and  isolated.  In  the  history  of  Law  the
most  important  early  specialisation  is  that  which
separates  what  a  man  ought  to  do  from  what  he
ought  to  know.  A  great  part  of  the  religious  litera-
ture, including  the  Creation  of  the  Universe,  the
structure  of  Heaven,  Hell,  and  the  World  or  Worlds
and  the  nature  of  the  Gods,  falls  under  the  last  head,
what  a  man  ought  to  know.  Law-books  first
appear  as  a  subdivision  of  the  first  branch,  what  a
man  should  do.  Thus  the  most  ancient  books  of  this
class  are  short  manuals  of  conduct  for  an  Aryan
Hindu  who  w^ould  lead  a  perfect  life.  They  contain
much  more  ritual  than  law,  a  great  deal  more  about  the
impurity  caused  by  touching  impure  things  than  about
crime,  a  great  deal  more  about  penances  than  about
punishments.  They  are  intended  to  guide  the  faithful
Hindu  of  the  three  higher  castes  from  birth  to  death,


CHAP.  I.  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HIXDUS.  19

and  a'ive  liim  fall  directions  for  livino;  first  as  a
student  of  lioly  books,  ne.vt  as  a  householder  (or,  as
Ave  should  say,  a  citizen),  and  finally — for  that  is
assumed  to  be  the  proper  lot  of  every  man  in  old  age —
as  a  reliofious  ascetic  or  a  hermit.'

This  remarkable  distribution  of  life  runs  through
the  whole  series  of  sacred  legal  writings,  and  only
disappears  when  they  become  mere  law-books.  The
Brahman  alone  teaches,  but  the  entire  youth  of  the
three  higher  castes,  Brahmans,  Kshatriyas,  and
A^aisyas,  come  and  sit  at  his  feet  to  be  instructed  in
sacred  learning  ;  it  is  rot  even  certain  from  some
passages  whether  the  lowest  and  most  despised  of
castes,  the  Sudras,  are  always  excluded.  This  is  the
period  of  Studentship.  When  it  comes  to  an  end,
the  instructed  Hindu  returns  to  liis  family  and  to
civil  affairs.  He  is  then  the  Householder.  But,
when  old  age  is  beginning,  it  is  assumed  in  these
books  (whatever  may  have  been  the  actual  practice)
that  he  withdraws  from  active  life  and  closes  his  days
as  a  Hermit  or  Ascetic,  following  a  code  of  self-denial
wliich  is  prescribed  for  him  in  i'liU  detail.  It  is  of
course  to  the  second  of  these  periods,  that  of  life  as  a
Householder,  that  we  must  look  for  whatever  li":}it  the
sacrefl  laws  of  the  Hindus  may  throw  upon  the  ancient

^  The  Student,  who  had  cornjjhited  hi.s  novitiato.  might  at  any
time  Ix'come  an  Ascetic,  but  the  regular  course  of  life  is  that  in-
dicated in  the  text.

(;  2


20  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE IIIXDUS.  chap.  r.

history  of  law.  The  first  of  them,  Studentship,  is
remarkable,  as  disclosing  the  true  secret  of  the  hold
of  the  sacred  literature  on  large  portions  of  the  Hindu
race,  and  of  the  respect  paid  by  it  to  the  teachers  of
the  race,  the  Brahmans.  For  the  education  of  the
young  Hindu  is  not  merely  an  education  in  the  holy
texts  and  doctrines;  it  is  a  training  in  reverence,  almost
amounting  to  abject  servility,  bestowed  on  the  litera-
ture and  its  professors  in  about  equal  proportions  and
inculcated  by  a  system  of  rules  adapted  with  extreme
skill  to  immature  minds.  The  third  period,  however,
that  of  Asceticism,  is  the  one  which  on  the  whole
seems  most  unintellii>:ible  to  the  modern  reader  of
these  books,  and  it  merits  some  special  attention  before
this  chapter  is  closed.  The  duty  of  adopting  the
ascetic  life,  and  the  rules  for  following  it,  referred
to  in  all  the  law  tracts,  are  discussed  at  much
length  by  Manu  in  the  sixth  chapter.  '  Having  thus
remained,'  it  is  written,  ^  in  the  order  of  Householders,
let  the  twice-born  man  ("  twice-born,"  that  is,  through
the  study  of  the  Yedas),  wdio  has  before  completed
his  studentship,  dwell  in  a  forest,  his  faith  being  firm
and  his  organs  wholly  subdued.  AVhen  the  flither  of
a  family  ])erceives  his  muscles  become  flaccid  and  his
hair  grey,  and  sees  the  child  of  his  child,  let  him  then
take  I'cfuge  in  a  forest.  Abandoning  all  food  eaten
in  towns,  and  all  his  household  uten-sils,  let  him  repair
to  the  lonely  wood,  committing  the  care  of  his  wife


_


COAP.  I.  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  21

to  his  sons,  or  accompanied  by  lier,  if  she  choose
to  attend  him  .  .  .  Let  him  be  constantly  engaged
in  reading  the  Vedas,  patient  of  all  extremities  .  .  .
Let  him  bear  a  reproachful  speech  vrith  patience  ;
let  him  not,  on  account  of  this  frail  and  feverish
body,  engage  in  hostility,  with  any  one  living.  With
an  anoTv  man  let  him  not  in  his  turn  be  an^-rv  ;
abused,  let  him  speak  mildly  ;  nor  let  him  utter  a
word  referrincr  to  vain  illusory  thincrs  .  .  .  Deliofhted
with  meditating  on  the  Supreme  Spirit,  sitting  fixed
in  such  meditation,  without  needing  anything  earthly,
without  any  companion  but  his  own  soul,  let  him
live  in  this  world,  seeking  the  bliss  of  the  next  .  .  .
A  gourd,  a  wooden  bowl,  an  earthen  dish,  or  a  basket
made  of  reeds,  has  Manu,  son  of  the  Self-existent,
declared  fit  vessels  to  receive  the  food  of  men  devoted
to  God.'

It  is  still  a  comparatively  common  practice  in
India  for  the  a^^ed  Hindu  to  retire  into  '  reli<''ion,'
and  the  law,  as  administered  ])y  tlie  British  tribunals,
makes  provision  in  many  jdaces  for  the  case  of  a
Hindu  wlio  has  embraced  a  religious  life,  and  ceased
to  participate  in  any. kind  of  secular  business.  Tliere
is  nothing  by  itself  surprising  in  the  custom,  consider-
ing the  tremendous  series  of  experiences  which  the
devout  behever  in  Hinduism  is  led  to  expect  as  await-
ing him  at  the  moment  of  liis  deatli.  Nevertheless,
there  is  reason  for  thinking  that  tlie  withdrawal  of  tlie


22  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE IIIXDUS.  chap.  r.

aged  from  activity  is  more  ancient  than  the  Hindu
theological  system,  and  lias  existed  independently  of
it,  as  a  secular  practice,  in  many  early  societies.  The
Patria  Potestas,  which  is  witnessed  to  by  the  ancient
law  or  custom  of  so  many  communities,  was  founded
on  power  quite  as  much  as  on  parentage  ;-  and  when
the  power  fails,  there  are  many  signs  that  the  patri-
archal authority  departs.  In  the  Hindu  law  of
Succession,  death  is  not  by  any  means  necessarily
the  occasion  of  inheritance  ;  the  contingency  quite  as
commionly  contemplated  is  withdrawal  from  secular
life ;  the  householder  quitting  his  family  and  dividing
his  substance  among  his  children — nay,  being  even
liable  (though  this  is  a  violently  disputed  point)  to
be  forced  into  retirement  by  his  sons.  There  is
some  evidence,  moreover,  that,  when  the  larger  asso-
ciations of  Hindu  kindred,  the  Joint  Families,  were  in
a  more  ancient  state  than  that  in  which  we  see  them,
they  recognised  three  classes  of  persons  as  entirely
helpless  and  therefore  dependent  on  the  group  at
large  ;  the  children,  the  unmarried  daughters  and
widows,  and  the  old  men.  The  'seniors'  not  in-
frequently mentioned  in  the  Irish  Brehon  law,  and
stated  to  be  persons  for  whom  the  sept  must  make
provision,  are  no  doubt  aged  men.

There  is  reason,  in  fact,  to  believe  that  at  some
period  of  human  history  a  revolution  took  place  in  the
status  of  aged  men,  not  perhaps  unlike  that  which  is


CHAP.  I.  THE SACRED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  23

Still  proceeding  in  the  case  of  women.  There  is
abundant  testimony  that  tribes,  long  pressed  hard  by
enemies  or  generally  in  straits  for  subsistence,  system-
atically put  their  members  to  death  when  too  old  for
labour  or  arms.  The  place  from  which  a  wild  Slavonic
race  compelled  their  old  men  to  leap  into  the  sea  is
still  shown.  And  the  fiercer  savage  has  often  in  many
parts  of  the  world  made  food  of  them.  Nevertheless,
the  ancient  records  of  many  communities,  especially
those  of  Aryan  speech,  show  us  old  age  invested
with  the  highest  authority  and  dignity.  ]Mr.  Free-
man (in  his  'Comparative  Politics,'  pp.  72,  73)  has
ffiven  a  lonsf  list  of  honorific  nanies  belonoino^  to
classes  or  institutions,  which  indicate  the  value  once
set  by  advancing  societies  on  the  judgment  of  the
old.  Among  them  are,  Senate,  yepovaia  (the  Spartan
Senate),  Sr}iioyepovTe<;  (its  Homeric  equivalent),  irpecr-
(3eL<;  (Ambassadors),  Ealdorman,  Elder,  Presbyter,
Monseigneur,  Seigneur,  Sire,  Sir,  and  Sheikh  ;  and
Mr.  Freeman  closes  with  the  Old  Man  of  the  Mountain.
So  great  a  number  of  titles,  civil  and  ecclesiastical,
are  evidence  of  a  very  strong  sentiment,  and  suggest
that  this  exaltation  of  old  i\<re  was  a  definite  stai>:e  in
the  ascent  to  civilisation.

There  is  a  story  of  a  Xew  Z(*aland  cliief  wlio,
questioned  as  to  the  fortunes  of  a  fellow-tribesman
long  ago  well  known  to  the  enquirer,  answered,  '  He
gave us so much good advice that we put  him


24  THE SACKED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  chap.  t.

mercifully  to  death.'  Tlie  reply,  if  it  was  ever  given,
combines  the  two  views  which  barbarous  men  appear
to  have  taken  at  different  times  of  the  aged.  At  first
they  are  useless,  burdensome,  and  importunate,  and
they  fare  accordingly.  But  at  a  later  j)eriod  a  new
sense  of  the  value  of  wisdom  and  counsel  raises  them
to  the  hio;hest  honour.  Their  lono'  life  comes  to  be
recognised  as  one  way  of  preserving  experience.  The
faculty  of  speech,  which  separates  man  from  the
brute,  and  the  art  of  writing,  by  which  the  society
capable  of  civilisation  is  distinguished  from  the
society  condemned  to  permanent  barbarism,  are  simply
methods  by  which  experience  is  enlarged,  compared,
and  transmitted,  and  by  which  mankind  is  enabled
to  have  more  of  it  than  is  contained  in  single
separate  lives.  Yet  the  individual  life  is  always  the
original  source  of  experience,  and  at  some  time  or
other  it  must  have  been  perceived  that  the  more  the
individual  life  was  prolonged,  the  larger  was  its
contribution  to  the  general  stock.  This  seems  the
best  explanation  of  the  vast  authority  which,  in  the
infancy  of  civilisation,  was  assigned  to  assemblies  of
aged  men,  independently  of  their  physical  power  or
military  prowess.  It  ])robably  sprang  up  among
communities  which  had  no  writings  to  learn  from,
and  who  were  conscious  that  the  importance  of  the
arts  which  were  necessary  for  their  very  existence
was  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  average  shortness  of


CHAP.  I.  THE SACKED LAWS OF THE HINDUS.  25

life.  Almost  everywhere  in  the  advancing  portions
of  the  ancient  world  we  find  that  the  old,  orenerallv
orofanised  in  assemblies,  had  a  laro-e  share  of  the
public  powers,  and  there  is  a  survival  of  these  ideas
in  the  minimum  limit  of  aee  which  has  been  made  the
condition  of  a  seat  in  the  artificial  Second  Chambers
which  have  been  constructed  over  most  of  the  civil-
ised AVest  as  supposed  counterparts  of  the  English
House  of  Lords.  But  these  modern  Second  Chambers
reverse  to  a  great  extent  the  functions  of  tlie  ancient
assemblies,  known,  from  their  names  and  otherwise,
to  have  originally  consisted  of  old  men.  The  Second
Chamber  is  nowadavs  assumed  to  have  a  veto  in  the
legislation  of  the  Chamber  which  has  the  initiative  ;
but  the  ancient  Senates,  in  their  primitive  condition
at  all  events,  decided  beforehand  Avhat  measures
should  be  submitted  to  the  Popular  Assembly,  and
if  they  legislated  themselves,  their  enactments  had
reference  to  special  departments  of  State,  such  as
religion  and  finance.  On  the  whole,  they  were  rather
administrative  than  legislative  bodies.  The  nearest
analogy  to  the  very  important  control  over  the  law-
makin;r  jiower  which  they  once  possessed,  must  be
sought  in  the  indefinite  but  most  real  and  efi^ective
autliority  whicli  an  l^nglish  Cabinet  enjoys  through
its  virtual  monopoly  of  the  initiative  in  legislation.


26  KELIGIOX AND LAW.


CHAr. II.


CHAPTER II.

RELIGION AXD LAW.

The  most  ancient  of  the  books  containino-  the  sacred
hiws  of  the  Hmdus  appear  to  me  to  throw  little  light
on  the  absolute  origin  of  Law  Some  system  of  actual
observance,  some  system  of  custom  or  usage,  must
lie  behind  them  ;  and  it  is  a  very  plausible  conjecture
that  it  was  not  unlike  the  existing  very  imperfectly
sacerdotalised  customary  law  of  the  Hindus  in  the
Punjab.  But  what  they  do  show  is,  if  not  the
beginning  of  law,  the  beginning  of  lawyers.  They
enable  us  to  see  how  law  was  first  regarded,  as  a
definite  subject  of  thought,  by  a  special  learned  class  ;
and  this  class  consisted  of  lawyers  who  were  first  of
all  priests.  There  are  signs  of  the  ancient  identity  of
the  two  professions  in  the  earliest  recorded  usages  of
several  races,  Celts,  Romans,  and  Greeks.  Nobody,
for  example,  will  understand  the  ancient  Roman
lawyer,  with  that  obstinate  adherence  of  his  to  texts
Avhich  has  characterised  his  profession  during  so  many
centuries, and  that  method  of  stating his  facts  in


n


CHAP.  ir.  RELIGION AXD LAW.  27

inflexible  formulas  which  has  only  just  died  out  in
this  country,  unless  it  is  realised  that  the  jurisconsult
sprang  from  the  pontiff  or  priest.  All  through  the
^Middle  Ages  the  lawyer  who  was  avowedly  a  priest
held  his  own  against  the  lawyer  who  professed  to  be
a  layman  ;  and  ours  is  the  only  country  in  which,
owing  to  the  peculiar  turn  of  our  legal  history,  it  is
diffictilt  to  see  that,  on  the  whole,  the  canonist  exer-
cised as  much  influence  on  the  course  of  legal  develop-
ment as  the  legist  or  civilian.  If  tlie  Roman  Empire
Lad  merely  transmitted  its  administrative  system  to
Western  Etirope,  and  if  it  had  not  bec|ueathed  to  it  a
coherent  body  of  codified  secular  law  making  con-
siderable approach  to  completeness,  it  is  very  doubtful
whether  the  general  law  of  the  AVest  would  not  even
now  reflect  a  particular  set  of  religious  ideas  as  dis-
tinctly as  the  Hindu  law  reflects  the  sacerdotal  con-
ceptions of  the  Brahmans.

It  is  necessary,  first  of  all,  to  observe  how  the
priestly  character  of  the  Brahmanical  atithors  of  the
law-books  affected  their  view  of  conduct^  a  word  which
must  bo  used  at  the  outset  in  preference  to  '  law.'
Shortly,  tliis  view  is  intimately  affected  throughout
by  their  belief  as  to  the  lot  which  awaits  human
)>eings  after  death.  This  lot  will  be  made  up  of
various  experiences,  some  of  which  correspond  to
direct  reward  or  punishment  in  Heaven  or  Hell,  as
conceivcfl  by  the  Western  religions, lint  the  Hindu


28  RELIG10^' AND LAW.  CHAr.  n.

belief  concerning  the  postlmmous  state  of  man,  and
the  Buddhist  belief  which  lias  mainly  sprung  from  it,
differ  from  the  most  widely  diffused  Western  beliefs
in  that  the  Transmiirration  of  Souls  fills  as  laro'e  a
space  as  direct  rew^ard  and  punishment,  and  in  that
rewards  and  punishments  in  all  tl>eir  forms  are  re-
garded, not  as  eternal,  but  as  essentially  transitory.
It  is  beside  my  purpose,  I  should  observe,  to  consider
what  may  have  been  the  most  ancient  faith  or  fiiiths
of  the  Hindus,  and  still  more  how  far  the  religious
ideas  reflected  in  the  books  before  us  represent  their
existinsf  reli^-ious  doctrine.  In  the  works  of  which
I  have  been  speaking,  the  early  manuals  of  law,  belief
has  reached  a  definite  stage,  which  may  be  examined
by  itself  and  which  seems  to  me  extremely  instructive.
Hindu  theology,  from  very  remote  times,  appears  to
have  regarded  the  universe  as  having  been  destroyed
and  again  created,  and  as  destined  to  be  destroyed
and  ai>'ain  created  ;  but  durinix  the  enormous  in-
tervals  between  these  destructions  and  creations  the
ao'jrreo'ate  of  existence  is  conceived  as  indestructible
and  as  incapable  of  increase  or  diminution.  The  sum
of  life,  in  particular,  is  always  constant.  This  essence,
life  or  soul,  is  regarded  as  running  in  a  continuous
stream  through  all  animate,  perhaps  we  might  say
through  all  organic,  nature  ;  but  it  is  always  re-
turnino^ on itself — never endina\ still beirinnin2:.

o  coo

This  stream  of  life  is  divided  into  portions  or  parcels,


CH.vr.  IT.  RELIGIOX AXD LAW.  29

which  are  temporarily  detained  in  external  forms,
but  which  are  constantly  passing  from  one  form,  to
another  without  losmg  their  identity.  Men.  animals,
holy  sages,  and  the  gods  themselves,  are  not  essentially
different  from  one  another.  The  same  life  or  soul
pervades  them  all.  clothing  itself  in  one  form  after
another.  Existence  itself  does  not  end,  but  its
successive  stasres  are  terminable  and  transitorv.
When  a  man  still  contaminated  by  impurity  dies,  his
spirit  passes  through  a  series  of  purgatories  ;  from
the  last  of  these  it  escapes  to  clothe  itself  with
one  animal  shape  after  another,  and  at  last  it  finds
embodiment  in  a  human  frame,  which  at  first  will
probably  be  frail  or  sickly.  But,  after  a  second  birth
through  the  study  of  the  Scriptures,  the  virtuous  at
death  pass  straight  into  Heaven,  where  their  stock  of
virtue  will  keep  tliem  for  long  ages  ;  but  it  will
gradually  wear  out,  until  some  remnant  of  it  carries
them  back  to  earth,  to  reappear  among  the  prosperous
and  the  powerful.  '  ^len  of  all  castes,  if  they  fulfil
tlieir  assigned  duties,  enjoy  in  Heaven  the  highest
imperishable  bliss.  Afterwards,  when  a  man  who
has  fulfilled  bis  duties  returns  to  this  world,  he  ob-
tains by  virtue  of  a  remainder  of  merit  Ijirtli  in  a
di>tinguished  family,  beauty  of  form,  beauty  of  com-
[)lexion,  strength,  aptitude  for  learning,  wisdom,
wealth,  and  tlie  gift  of  fulfilling  the  laws  of  h's  caste
or  order. Therefore in both worlds he dwells in


30  RELIGIOX AND LAW.  chat.  ir.

liappiness,  rolling  like  a  wheel  from  one  world  to  the
other'  (Apastamba,  ii.  i.  2.  2  and  3).  Even  the
gods  in  Heaven,  who  are  looked  upon  as  not  much
more  than  men  of  extraordinary  virtue,  will  in  time
exhaust  their  store  of  merit  and  pass  out  of  blessed-
ness. 'It  is  by  favour  of  the  Brahmans,'  says
Vishnu  (xix.  22),  'that  the  gods  reside  in  Heaven/

The  Wheel  mentioned  in  the  above  passage  from
Apastamba  is  a  favourite  image  with  these  writers.
They  figure  existence  as  a  wheel  spinning  round.
Religious  pictures,  representing  the  circle  of  life  with
its  various  compartments,  with  Heaven  at  the  top  and
Hell  at  the  bottom,  and  with  human  and  animal  ex-
istence at  the  sides,  are  common  in  the  East  ;  but
though  they  are  not  unknown  to  Hindus,  they  are
more  frequently  found  among  Buddhists,^  who  must
have  borrowed  the  symbol  of  the  AVheel  from  an
older  Hinduism,  and  who  appear  to  attach  to  it  a
special  spiritual  significance.  In  the  Buddhistic
Wheel-pictures,  Buddha  is  depicted  outside  the  cir-
cumference, in  the  attitude  of  benediction.  He  only
has  escaped  from  the  weary  cycle  of  existence,  and
stands  alone  in  Nirvana,  apart  from  gods  and  men.
The  assumption  of  such  a  possibility  would  doubtless
be  regarded  by  orthodox  Hindus  as  atheistic.  Ex-
alted religious  feeling  takes  with  them  the  form  of
meditation  on  Brahma,  the  Atman,  the  Infinite,  the

*  See  Note  A  at  the  end  of  this  chapter,  'Wheel-pictures.'


CHAP.  ir.  RELIGION AND LAW.  31

Self-Existent,  the  'immortal  and  spotless,'  who  'lies
enveloped  in  matter  and  is  the  dwelling  of  all  living
creatures,'  who  is,  '  like  a  city,  divided  into  many
streets.'  Here  and  there  they  express  themselves  on
this  topic  in  language  of  much  sublimity.

1  shall  have  occasion  to  explain  in  the  next
chapter  that  one  particular  religious  system  of  the
greatest  antiquity  which  is  shadowed  forth  in  these
books  stands  quite  apart  from  the  beliefs  which  I  have
been  examining.  It  is  very  probable  that  these  beliefs
were  themselves  compounded  of  divers  more  ancient
parts,  and  that  direct  reward  or  punishment,  and  in-
direct reward  or  punishment  by  transmigration,  did
not  originally  belong  to  the  same  body  of  doctrine.
Heaven  and  Hell  and  the  Transmigration  of  Souls
are,  however,  all  referred  to  in  the  oldest  of  the  law
treatises,  though  briefly  and  slightly.  In  the  more
recent  writings  (some  of  them,  however,  not  so
modern  as  Manu)  these  subjects  occupy  a  great  space,
and  have  l^een  vastly  amplified  by  gloomy  and  fan-
tastic imagination.  Heaven,  as  is  not  unusual  in
religious  systems,  is  but  faintly  sketched  ;  but  the
Hells,  or,  as  they  would  more  j)roperly  be  called,  the
l^urgatories  (since  they  are  essentially  transient),  are
described  with  the  utmost  minuteness  of  detail.
Tliey  are  twenty- two  in  number,  each  applying  a
new  variety  of  ])hy.sical  or  moral  ])ain.  It  would  be
a  mi.-^take,  i  think,  to  suppose  that  they  were  created


32  RELIGIOX AXD LAW.  chap.  ii.

by  a  single  imaginative  effort,  like  the  circles  of
Dante's  Inferno.  1'liey  ratlier  belong  to  widely
separated  grades  of  the  conception  of  punishment.
Such  places  of  retribution  as  the  twenty-first  of  these
Puriratories,  where  souls  wander  in  sword-leaved
forests  ;  the  nineteenth,  where  they  stray  over  rough
and  uneven  roads  ;  the  fifteenth,  where  they  isink  in
stinking  clay,  are  probably  much  older  than  the  first,
or  place  of  darkness  ;  the  fourth,  or  place  of  howling  ;
or  the  places  of  burning,  parching,  and  pressing  to-
gether, which  stand  tenth,  eleventh,  and  twelfth.
These  last  seem  to  me  not  older  than  the  infliction  of
regular  (but  originally  very  cruel)  criminal  punish-
ments by  civil  rulers  possessing  organised  authority.
The  torture  chambers  of  princes  have  very  strongly
influenced  the  conception  of  posthumous  punishment,
as  may  be  seen  by  comparing  what  remains  of  some  of
them — for  example,  of  that  in  the  free  city  of  Xurem-
berg — with  a  picture  in  which  some  painter  of  the
fourteenth  century  gives  form  to  the  popular  ideas
concerning  Purgatory  and  Hell.

The  sojourn  of  the  sinful  soul  in  each  of  these  places
of  punishment  is,  as  I  have  said,  always  terminable,  but
its  length  is  expressed  in  language  suited  to  astronomi-
cal magnitudes.  If,  for  example,  a  Brahman  be  slain,
as  many  as  are  tiie  pellets  of  dust  which  his  blood
makes  on  the  soil — that  is  to  say,  on  the  burnt -up  soil
of  India — so  many  are  the  periods  of  a  thousand  years


CHAP.  II.  RELIGION AND LAW.  33

the  slayer  must  pass  in  Hell  (Manu,  xi.  208).  The
duration  of  punishment  is  imagined  by  the  Bud-
dhists with  even  greater  extravagance  ;  and  indeed  on
all  these  subjects  they  seem  to  have  outdone  the  doc-
trine of  the  Hindus.  The  frightful  Buddhist  pictures
of  torments  in  hell  are  tolerably  well  known.  They
are  mostly  of  Chinese  origin,  and  probably  exagge-
rate (but  do  not  more  than  exaggerate)  the  criminal
justice  administered  from  time  immemorial  in  the  great
organised  Chinese  Empire  and  its  dependent  kingdoms,
in  which  "the  highest  importance  seems  always  to  have
been  attached  to  the  deterrent  effects  of  punishment.
The  series  of  Purgatories  is,  however,  at  last
worked  through,  and  the  soul  or  portion  of  life
emerges  to  besfin  a  course  of  transmio^ration  which
may  bring  it  again  to  humanity.  I  have  already
stated  my  opinion  that  the  purgation  of  sin  or  im-
purity by  transmigration,  and  its  purgation  by
punishment  in  hell,  did  not  originally  belong  to  the
same  system  of  religious  tli ought.  But  in  these
Hindu  law-books  they  are  blended  together  ;  and
the  sinful  spirit,  released  from  purgatorial  pains,  has
«till  to  pass  througli  a  succession  of  animal  or  vege-
table forms  before  it  is  again  clothed  with  a  human
body,  ft^  is  liard  nc^t  to  smile  at  the  grotesque
particularity  of  detail  with  which  such  writers  as
Vishnu  and  Manu  depict  the  transmigration  of  souls.
*  Criminals in the  hif^lx'st  deiz:ree enter the  bodies

I>


34  RELIGION AXD LAW.  chap.  ii.

of  all  plants  successively.  Mortal  sinners  enter
the  bodies  of  worms  or  insects.  Minor  offenders
enter  the  bodies  of  birds.  Criminals  in  the  fourth
degree  enter  the  bodies  of  aquatic  animals.  Those
who  had  committed  a  crime  affecting  loss  of  caste
enter  the  bodies  of  amphibious  animals  '  (Vishnu,
XLiv.  2).  These  general  statements  are  followed
by  a  prodigious  number  of  others,  mentioning  the
class  of  creature  into  which  particular  sinners  enter.
There  is  perhaps  a  natural  fitness  in  some  of  them,
but  others  look  like  arbitrary  assertions  or  wild
guesses.  One  who  has  appropriated  a  broad  passage
becomes  a  serpent  living  in  holes.  One  who  has
stolen  grain  becomes  a  rat.  One  who  has  stolen
water  becomes  a  water-fowl.  But  what  is  to  be  said
of  the  transformation  of  the  stealer  of  silk  into  a  part-
ridge ;  of  the  thief  of  linen  into  a  frog  ;  of  the  cattle-
stealer  into  an  iguana  ?  I  may  venture  at  the  same
time  to  suggest  that  what  seems  to  us  most  difficult
to  understand  in  these,  beliefs  once  appeared  simple
and  natural.  It  has  been  observed  that  savages  look
upon  the  transmutation  of  one  creature  into  another
as  almost  an  easy,  everyday  process.  Primitive  men,
living  constantly  in  the  presence  of  wild  animals,
preying  on  them  and  preyed  upon  by  them,  do  not
seem  to  have  been  struck  by  the  immense  superiority
of  the  man  to  the  brute.  They  appear  to  have
been impressed by the difference between living


-CHAP.  IT.  EELIGIOX AST) LAW.  35


things  and  ever}n]iing  else,  but  to  have  considered
the  forms  of  animate  being  as  separated  from  one
another  by  a  very  slight  barrier.  Some  very  interest-
ing inferences  have  recently  been  drawn  from  tliis
savage  characteristic  ;  and  it  has  been  pointed  out
how  in  those  survivals  of  a  very  ancient  world,  fairy
tales  and  myths,  one  creature  is  constantly  changing
into  another,  and  slipping  back  into  its  origmal  shape.
The  most  popular  child's  lx)ok  of  our  day  is  a  story
of  metamorphosis  :  but  that  story  of  Wonderland
owes  its  popularity  to  its  faithfrilly  followmg  the
operations  of  a  dream  ;  and  one  must  here  remark
that  much  of  the  material  of  ancient  superstition  is
literally  such  stuff  as  dreams  are  made  of.

But  these  Hindu  law-books  have  wrought  up  the
ancient  belief  into  a  moral  and  tlieological  philosophy
of  the  greatest  precision  and  amplitude.  Their  special
principle  is  that  man's  acts  and  experiences  in  one
form  of  being  determine  the  next.  Whetlier  he  will
in  a  future  existence  become  a  plant,  a  reptile,  a  bird,
a  woman,  a  Brahman,  or  a  semi-divine  sage,  depends
on  himself  He  goes  out  of  the  world  what  his  own
dee^Ls  have  mad^j  him  ;  and  the  impossibility  of  dis-
sociating the  past  from  the  future  is  declared  l^y  tliese
writers  in  language  of  mucli  solemnity,  if  a  man
departs  modified  by  voluntary  sinfulness  or  involun-
tary Impurity,  and  if  he  has  not  expelled  the  taint
]>y  due  j)enance, lie  will  become  one of  the  lowest

I.  ?.


36  RELIGION AND LAW.  chap.  ft.

creatures  ;  if  he  dies  purer  than  he  was  born,  he  may
reach  the  highest  stage  of  humanity  or  become  indis-
tinguishable from  divinity.  The  whole  theory  is
saved  from  contempt  by  its  power  of  satisfying  moral
cravings,  and  by  the  apparently  complete  explanation
which  it  offers  of  the  unequal  balance  of  ,good  and
evil  in  this  world.  The  last  King  of  Burmah  had
been  a  monk  before  he  ascended  the  throne,  and  he
remained  to  his  death  an  eminent  Buddhist  theologian.
An  Englishman  was  lecturing  him  on  the  militar}^,
scientific,  and  commercial  superiority  of  the  English
to  the  Burmese,  not  without  some  intention  of  hinting
that  this  pre-eminence  was  due  to  the  purer  faith  of  his
countrymen.  The  king  politely  assented,  but  added,
'  There  is  no  doubt  that  you  must  all  have  been  very
virtuous  Buddhists  in  some  former  state  of  existence.'
With  these  explanations,  some  features  of  those
writings  which  are  at  first  sight  very  perplexing  be-
come comparatively  intelligible.  Thus,  they  are  chiefly
called  law-books  because  they  contnin  rides  of  conduct
stated  with  the  utmost  precision.  But  what  happens
to  a  man  if  he  disobeys  the  rule  ?  This  is  the  principal
question  to  the  modern  jurist.  What  is  the  punish-
ment, or,  as  the  technical  phrase  is,  the  Sanction  ?
Understood  in  the  modern  sense,  it  is  hardly  noticed
in  the  oldest  of  these  books.  It  is  in  fact  to  be
inflicted  in  anotlier  state  of  existence,  and  therefore,
thouo-h  it  may  be  asserted,  no  directions  can  be  ffiven


<;hap.  it.  RELIGIO:^ AND LAW.  37

about  it.  Thus  the  place  which  in  a  modern  law-
book is  taken  by  the  Sanction — that  is,  by  the  various
penal  consequences  of  refusing  to  obey  a  law — is  taken
in  these  writings  by  Penances.  You  are  to  punish
yourself  here,  lest  a  worse  thing  happen  to  you  else-
where. These  penances  are  set  forth  in  the  most  un-
compromising language  and  in  apparent  good  faith. ^
In  one  place,  the  penitent  is  told  to  mutilate  himself
and  to  walk  on  in  a  particular  direction  till  he  drops
dead.  In  another  he  is  to  throw  himself  three  times
into  the  fire,  or  to  go  into  battle  and  expose  himself
as  a  target  to  the  enemy.  For  one  great  crime  he  is
to  extend  himself  on  a  red-hot  iron  bed,  or  to  enter  a
hollow  iron  imatre,  and,  having  li«:hted  a  fire  on  both
sides,  to  burn  himself  to  death.  For  the  comparatively
venial  offence  of  drinking  forbidden  liquor  a  Brahman
is  to  have  boiling  spirit  poured  down  his  throat.
Other  penances  are  extraordinary  from  the  length  and
intricacy  of  the  self-inflictions  which  they  suppose.
The  old  books  hint  a  doubt  here  and  there  as  to  the  effi-
cacy of  penance  :  what  good  can  it  do,  they  say,  since
the  evil  deed  itself  remains  ;  still,  they  add,  the  autho-
ritative opinion  is,  that  the  penance  should  be  per-
formed. '  Man  in  tliis  world,'  writes  Gautama  (xix.  2),
*  is  polluted  Vjy  a  vile  action,  such  as  sacrificing  for
men unworthy  to  offer  a  sacrifice,  eating  forbidden

^  Apa-stamba, i. i. 15; (iautama, xxii.;  Vishnu, xAxiv.

XXXV.


38  EELIGIOX AA'D LAW.  chap.  ii.

food,  speaking  what  ought  not  to  be  spoken,  neglect-
ing what  is  prescribed,  practising  what  is  forbidden.
They  {i,e.  some  Brahman  authorities)  are  in  doubt  if
he  shall  perform  a  penance  for  such  a  deed  or  if  he
shall  not  do  it.  Some  declare  that  he  shall  not  do
it,  because  the  deed  shall  7iot  jycrish.  (But)  the  most
excellent  opinion  is  that  he  shall  perform  a  penance.^
This  02)inion  is  then  supported  by  copious  quotations
from  the  Hmdu  scriptures.  The  remarkable  thing  is,,
that  no  one  of  these  writers  seems  to  feel,  what  would
be  our  doubt,  whether  anybody  could  be  got  to  per-
form the  severer  penances.

How  then  does  what  we  should  call  Law — that  is,
law,  civil  or  criminal,  enforced  by  sanctions  or  penal"
ties  to  be  inflicted  in  this  world — first  make  its  appear-
ance in  these  books  ?  It  appears  in  connection  with
the  personage  whom  we  call  the  King.  His  authority
is  more  or  less  assumed  to  exist  in  the  oldest  of  these
treatises,  but,  all  taken  together,  they  suggest  that
the  alliance  between  the  Kino;  and  the  Brahmans  was
very  gradually  formed.  The  most  ancient  of  the
books  give  comparatively  narrow  place  to  tlie  royal
authority,  but  the  space  allotted  to  the  King  and  his
functions  is  always  increasmg,  until  in  the  latest  trea-
tises (such  as  Manu)  the  whole  duty  of  a  King  is
one  of  the  sul)jects  treated  of  at  the  greatest  length
and  with  the  greatest  particularity.  It  may  be  ob-
served that,  with  the  increased  importance  attributed


CHAP.  ir.  KELIGIOX AXD LAW.  39

to  the  King,  there  is  a  change  in  the  sacerdotal  view
of  his  relation  to  the  law.  In  what  appear  to  me  to
be  the  most  ancient  portions  of  these  books,  the  King
is  only  represented  as  the  auxiliary  of  the  spiritual
director.  He  is  to  complete  and  enforce  penances.
^  If  any  persons,'  says  Apastamba  (ii.  v.  10.  13),
^  transgress  the  order  of  their  spiritual  dnector,  he  shall
take  them  before  the  Kino^.  The  Kino;  shall  consult
his  domestic  priest,  who  should  be  learned  in  the  law
and  in  the  art  of  o;overnino:.  He  shall  order  them  to
perform  the  proper  penance,  if  they  are  Brahmans,
and  reduce  them  to  reason  by  forcible  means,  except
corporal  punishment  and  servitude,  but  men  of  other
castes,  the  King,  after  examining  their  actions,  may
punish  even  by  death.'  In  a  later  treatise  (Yishnu,
III.  2)  the  duties  of  a  King  are  summed  up  in  two
rules  :  he  is  to  protect  his  people  ;  he  is  to  keep  the
four  castes,  and  the  four  orders  of  vStudent,  House-
holder, Hermit,  and  Ascetic,  in  the  practice  of  their
several  duties ;  or,  in  other  words,  he  is  to  enforce  the
whole  social  and  religious  system  as  conceived  by  the
sacerdotal  lawyers.  The  further  progress  of  change
consists  in  the  further  exaltation  of  the  personage  who
in  the  passage  from  Apastamlxa  is  called  the  King's
domestic  priest.  In  the  end,  the  law-books  come
to  contemplate  an  ideal  trilnmal  composed  of  the
King,  with  learned  Brahmans  as  assessors.  The  later
writings  clothe  the  Khi''-  with  ri^ht  divine. He  is


40  RELIGION A^B LAW.  chap.  ii.

formed  of  eternal  jDarticles  draiMi  from  the  substance
of  the  gods.  '  Thougli  even  a  child,  he  must  not  be
treated  lightly,  from  an  idea  that  he  is  a  mere  mortal.
No  ;  he  is  a  powerful  divinity  who  appears  in  human
shape'  (Manu,  vii.  iv.  8).  But  he  has  lost  in
actual  personal  power.  He  can  only  act  with  the
advice  of  his  Brahman  assessors.  '  Just  punishment
cannot  be  inflicted  by  an  ignorant  and  covetous  King,
who  has  no  wise  and  virtuous  assistants,  whose  un-
derstanding has  not  been  improved,  and  whose  heart
is  addicted  to  sensuality.  By  a  King,  wholly  pure,
faithful  to  his  promise,  observant  of  the  Scriptures,
with  good  assistants  and  sound  understanding  may
punishment  be  justly  inflicted  '  (Manu,  vii.  xxx.  31).
From  this  point  the  law  set  forth  in  these  trea-
tises becomes  true  civil  law,  enforced  by  penalties
imposed  in  this  world  by  the  Court  itself.  The
Brahmans  themselves  no  doubt  from  first  to  last
claim  a  considerable  benefit  of  clergy.  '  Corporal
punishment,'  it  is  written,  '  must  not  be  resorted  to
in  the  case  of  a  Brahman  ;  he  at  most  can  have  his
crime  proclaimed,  or  be  banished,  or  be  branded.'
At  the  same  time  the  abstract  doctrine  of  punish-
ments or  penal  sanctions  found  in  Manu  (vii.  17  et
seq.)  might  satisfy  the  English  jurists  who  make  the
sanction  the  principal  ingredient  in  a  law,  so  uncom-
promisingly is  it  declared.  Jeremy  Bentham  could
hardly  complain  of  such  language  as  this  : '  Punish-


CHAP.  II.  RELIGION A^'D LAW.  41

ment  governs  all  mankind  ;  punishment  alone  pre-
serves them  ;  punishment  wakes  when  their  guards
are  asleep  ;  if  the  King  j^^^nish  not  the  guilty,  the
stronger  would  oppress  the  weaker,  like  the  fish  in
the  sea.  The  whole  race  of  man  is  kept  in  order
by  punishment  ;  gods  and  demons,  singers  in  heaven
and  cruel  giants,  birds  and  serpents,  are  made  capable
by  just  correction  of  their  several  enjoyments '
(Manu,  loc.  cit.)  The  full  consequences  of  juridical
doctrine  like  this  do  not,  however,  appear  in  such  a
law-book  as  the  extant  Manu,  which,  besides  a  great
deal  of  civil  law,  contains  a  mass  of  sacerdotal  rules,
mostly,  as  it  seems  to  me,  in  a  state  of  dissolution  and
decay.  A  still  later  treatise,  Narada,^  is  almost
wholly  a  simple  law-book,  and  one  of  a  very  interest-
ing kind.  The  ancient  Brahmanical  system  has  been
toned  down  and  tempered  in  all  its  parts  by  the  good
sense  and  equity  of  the  school  of  lawyers  from  whom
this  book  proceeded.  The  portions  of  it  wliich  deal
with  Evidence  appear  to  me  especially  remarkable,  not
only  for  the  legal  doctrine,  which  (thougli  the  writer
believes  in  Ordeals)  is  on  the  whole  extremely  mo-
dem, but  for  the  elevation  of  moral  tone  displayed
in  its  language  on  the  subject  of  true  and  false  wit-
ness, which  should  be  set  off  against  tlie  unveracity
attributed  to  the  modern  Hindu. 'No  relatives,  no

^  TliC  '  InHtitutes  of  Narada  *  have  been  translated  into  English
by  Dr.  Julius  Jolly. London  :  Triibner  k  Co.,  1871.


42  EELIGIOX AND LAW.  chap.  ii.

friends,  no  treasures,  be  they  ever  so  great,  are  able
to  hold  him  back  who  is  about  to  dive  into  the  tre-
mendous darkness  of  Hell.  Thy  ancestors  are  in
suspense  when  thou  art  come  to  give  evidence,  and
ponder  in  their  mind,  "  Wilt  thou  deliver  us  from
Hell  or  precipitate  us  into  it?  "  Truth  is  the  soul
of  man  ;  everything  depends  upon  truth.  Strive  to
acquire  a  better  self  by  speaking  the  truth.  Thy
whole  lifetime,  from  the  ni2:ht  in  which  thou  wert  born
up  to  the  night  in  which  thou  wilt  die,  has  been  spent
in  vain  if  thou  givest  false  evidence.  There  is  no
higher  virtue  than  veracity  ;  nor  is  there  a  greater
crime  than  falsehood.  One  must  speak  the  truth,
therefore,  especially  when  asked  to  bear  testimony '
(Narada,  pp.  42,  43,  Jolly).  The  somewhat  analo-
gous passage  in  Manu  (viii.  112)  is  defaced  by  the
often  reprobated  qualification,  '  In  case  of  a  promise
made  for  the  preservation  of  a  Brahman,  it  is  no  deadly
sin  to  take  a  light  oath.'

The  difficulties  under  which  the  student  of  the  so-
called  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Hindus  has  so  long  laboured
have  been  almost  entirely  caused  by  the  transitional
character  of  the  book  which  was  first  introduced  to
European  scholarship  as  the  original  source  of  Hindu
Law.  If  the  sample  of  this  branch  of  Hindu  litera-
ture first  translated  into  a  Western  language  had  been
Karada,  it  would  have  been  regarded  as  a  law-book  of
a  familiar  type,  and  the  traces  of  sacerdotal  influence


CHAP. IT.


RELIGION Xyi) LAW.  4^


which  are  to  be  found  m  it  would  probably  have  been
neoiected.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  book  first  made
accessible  had  been  Gautama,  or  Baudhayana,  or
Apastamba,  it  would  probably  have  been  set  down  at
once  as  a  mantial  of  practical  religious  conduct,  the
Whole  Duty  of  a  Hindu  ;  the  law  contained  m  it
wotild  probably  have  been  considered  adventitious
or  accidental.  But  Manu,  which  Sir  AVilliam  Jone&
made  famous  in  Europe,  neither  falls  wholly  under  the
one  description  nor  wholly  under  the  other.  And  so
long  as  it  stood  by  itself  there  was  the  greatest  diffi-
culty in  determining  its  place  in  the  general  history
of  law.  A  good  many  years  ago  ('Ancient  Law,'
pp.  17,  18,  19),  I  showed  the  hesitation  I  felt  in
making  use  of  it  for  archaeological  ^^^^^rposes  ;  but
I  can  now  see  that  I  underrated  the  sacerdotal  ele-
ment in  the  structure  of  Manu.  The  whole  of  the
literature  to  which  it  belongs  sprang,  it  would  now
appear,  from  a  double  origin  ;  in  part  from  some
body  of  usage,  not  now  easy  to  determine  (though
the  recent  investigation  of  local  bodies  of  Indian
custom  has  thrown  some  light  upon  it),  but  chiefly
from  the  Hindu  scriptural  literature.  The  last  exer-
cised by  far  the  most  im[)ortant  influence.  Its  crea-
tors, far  back  in  antiquity,  did  not  start  with  any  idea
of  making  or  stating  law.  Beginning  with  religious
liymnology,  devotional  exercises,  religious  ritual,  and
theological speculation, some  of  their  schools were


44  RELIGION' AND LAW.  chap.  ii.

broiio;lit  to  Conduct,  and  to  statin^:  in  detail  what  a
devout  man  should  do,  what  would  happen  to  him  if
he  did  it  not,  and  by  what  acts,  if  he  lapsed,  he  could
restore  himself  to  uprightness.  Gradually  there  arose
in  these  schools  the  conviction  that,  for  the  purpose
of  regulating  Conduct  by  uniform  rules,  it  was  a
simpler  course  to  act  upon  the  rulers  of  men  than  on
men  themselves,  and  thus  the  King  was  called  in  to
help  the  Brahman  and  to  be  consecrated  by  liim.
The  beu'innin^:  of  this  alliance  with  the  Kino-  was  the
beo^innino^  of  true  civil  law.

Nothing  which  thus  happened  seems  to  me  to  be
very  unlike  what  would  have  happened  in  the  legal
history  of  Western  Europe,  if  the  Canonists  had
gained  a  complete  ascendency  over  Common  Lawyers
and  Civilians.  The  system  which  they  would  have
established  might  be  expected  to  give  great  import-
ance to  the  purgation  of  crime  by  penances.  This  in
fact  occurred  ;  the  preference  of  the  ecclesiastical  sys-
tem with  its  penances  over  the  secular  system  with
its  cruel  punishments,  had  mucli  to  do,  as  may  be
seen  from  the  legendary  stories,  with  the  popularity
of  St.  Thomas  (Becket).  Tlien  it  would  be  probable
that,  in  the  case  of  graver  sin,  the  ecclesiastical  law-
yer would  invoke  the  aid  of  the  secular  ruler  to  secure
the  proper  expiation  ;  and  this  again  occurred  in  the
form  of  entrusting  the  severer  punishments  to  the
secular  arm. Finally,  if  the  sole  advisers  and  instru-


CHAP.  II.  RELIGION A^B LAW.  45

ments  of  the  European  King  in  tlie  administration  of
civil  and  criminal  justice  had  been  ecclesiastics,  they
would  have  been  driven  m  the  long  run  to  construct
a  system  of  civil  and  criminal  law  with  proper  sanc-
tions enforced  by  the  Courts.  But  the  system  would
have  been  deeply  tinged  in  all  its  parts  with  ecclesias-
tical ideas,  and  though  it  would  possibly  have  bor-
rowed some  or  many  of  its  rules  from  older  usage,  it
would  have  been  very  hard  to  detect  their  sources
and  their  precise  original  fonn.

Here  we  have  one  of  the  chief  drawbacks  on  the
liistorical  usefulness  of  the  sacred  Hindu  laws.  In  the
course  of  their  growth  they  have  probably  absorbed
much  customary  law  frora  without  ;  but  even  in  the
earliest  of  them  it  probably  has  been  changed  in
transmission,  while  in  the  latest  it  may  have  been
borrowed  from  several  different  bodies  of  usage,
irreconcilable  in  the  principles  from  which  they  start.
On  the  whole,  the  most  valuable  portions  of  the  lite-
rature are  those  which  throw  light  on  the  derivation
of  certain  branches  of  law  from  a  set  of  entirely  reli-
gious beliefs.  One  example  of  this  derivation  will
be  discussed  in  the  next  chapter.

I  said  that  this  ancient  literature  threw  less  lio-ht
on  the  be^innin<^  of  law  than  on  tlie  bef>'innino'  of
lawyers.  But  it  is  of  course  to  be  understood  that
tlie  men  who  conceived  and  framed  it  were  much
more  than  lawyers. All  the  world  knows  that  they


46  KELIGIOX AXD LAW.  chap.  ir.

were  also  in  some  sense  priests  ;  but  they  were  mnch
more  than  priests.  What  we  have  to  bring  home  to
ourselves  is  the  existence  in  ancient  Indian  society  of
a  sole  instructed  class,  of  a  class  which  had  an  abso-
lute monopoly  of  all  learning.  It  included  the  only
lawyers,  the  only  priests,  the  only  professors,  the  sole
authorities  on  taste,  morality,  and  feeling,  the  sole
depositaries  of  whatever  stood  in  the  place  of  a  science.
These  books  are  one  long  assertion  that  the  Brahmans
hold  the  keys  of  Hell  and  Death,  but  they  also  show
that  the  Brahmans  aimed  at  commanding:  a  o^reat  deal
TQore  than  the  forces  of  the  intellect,  and  that  all  their
efforts  came  to  be  directed  towards  bringing  under
their  influence  the  mighty  of  the  earth  of  another
sort,  the  conquering  soldier  and  the  hereditary  king.
They  were  to  become  partners  with  princes  in  their
authority,  their  advisers  and  assessors.  '  A  King  and
a  Brahman  deeply  versed  in  the  Yedas,  these  two
uphold  the  moral  order  of  the  world '  ;  thus  it  is
written  in  one  of  the  oldest  of  the  books.  Doubtless,
the  alliance  between  Brahman  and  Kino-  was  often
sealed,  and  produced  great  effects  ;  for,  amid  the
•obscurities  of  early  Indian  history,  the  fact  does
seem  to  emerge  that,  although  religions  doubtless  at
first  extended  themselves  by  conversion,  they  were
established  over  wide  areas  and  again  overthrown
much  less  by  propagandism  than  by  the  civil  power.
On  the  whole,  the  impression  left  on  the  mind  by  the


CHAP.  II.  RELIGIOX AXD LAW.  47

study  of  these  books  is,  that  a  more  awful  tyranny
never  existed  than  this  which  proceeded  from  the
union  of  physical,  intellectual,  and  spiritual  ascend-
ency. At  the  same  time  it  would  be  altogether  a
mistake  to  regard  the  class  whose  ideas  are  reflected
in  the  literature  as  a  self-indulgent  ecclesiastical
aristocracy.  It  is  not  easy,  I  must  admit,  to  describe
adequately  the  intensity  of  the  professional  pride
which  shows  itself  in  all  parts  of  their  writings.
Everybody  is  to  minister  to  them  ;  everybody  is  to
give  way  to  them  ;  the  respectful  salutations  with
which  they  are  to  be  addressed  are  set  forth  with
the  utmost  minuteness.  They  are  to  be  free  of  the
criminal  law  which  they  themselves  prescribe.  '  A
Brahman,'  writes  Gautama,  '  must  not  be  subjected
to  corporal  punishment,  he  must  not  be  imprisoned,
he  must  not  be  fined,  he  must  not  be  exiled,  he  must
not  be  reviled  or  excluded  (from  society).'  Their
arrogance  perhaps  reaches  the  highest  point  in  a
passage  of  the  law-book  of  Vislmu,  where  it  is  written
that  '  the  Gods  are  invisible  deities;  the  Brahmans  are
visible  deities.  The  Brahmans  sustain  the  world.  It
is  by  favour  of  the  Brahmans  that  the  Gods  reside
in  Heaven.'  Yet  the  life  wliich  they  chalk  out  for
themselves  is  certainly  not  a  luxurious  and  scarcely
a  happy  life.  It  is  a  life  passed  from  first  to  last
under  the  shadow  of  terrible  possibilities.  The  Brah-
man in  youth  is  to  beg  for  liis  teacher ;  in  maturity,


'mmm


48  RELIGIOX AXD LAW.  chap,  ik

as  a  married  householder,  he  is  hedged  round  with
countless  duties,  of  which  the  invohmtary  breach  may-
consign  him  in  another  world  to  millions  of  years  of
degradation  or  pain  ;  in  old  age,  he  is  to  become  an
ascetic  or  a  hermit.  It  is  possibly  to  this  combina-
tion of  self-assertion  with  self-denial  and  self-abase-
ment that  the  wonderfully  stubborn  vitality  of  the
main  Brahmanical  ideas  may  be  attributed.  As  I
have  shown,  the  sacerdotal  legal  system,  as  a  system,
owes  probably  much  of  its  present  authority  to  its
adoption  by  the  Anglo-Indian  Courts  of  Justice  as
the  common  law  of  India  ;  but  some  of  the  points  of
belief  which  underlie  it,  as  they  do  the  whole  Brah-
manical literature,  make  the  most  durable  part  of  the
mental  stock  of  every  Hindu.  Some  of  these  ideas
are  not  wanting  either  in  religious  or  in  moral  eleva-
tion ;  but  on  the  whole  the  evil  has  prevailed  over
the  good.  We  can  find  in  this  most  ancient  litera-
ture the  germs  of  many  superstitions  still  exercising
])ernicious  effect — of  the  caste  ^^rejudice  which  forces
the  wounded  Sepoy  to  die  of  fever  rather  than  take
water  from  his  low-caste  fellow- soldier  or  his  Eng-
lish officer  ;  of  that  terror  of  pollution  which,  twenty -
five  years  since,  led  to  the  frightful  mutiny  of  the
mercenary  troops  ;  of  that  rejection  of  meat  and  drink
which  still  limits  the  food  supply  of  an  over- populated
country,  and  contributes  to  its  periodical  famines.
But  in  close  contact  with  tlii>^  frame  of  mind  there


CHAP.  II.  RELIGION AND LAW.  49

is  nowadays  an  ever-growing  body  of  thought
stirring  with  the  leaven  of  Western  knowledge  and
Western  scientific  method  ;  and  the  juxtaposition
of  the  two  makes  the  government  of  India  by  the
English  an  undertaking  without  a  parallel  in  its
novelty  and  difficulty,  and  in  the  amount  of  caution,
insight,  and  self-command  demanded  from  its  admi-
nistrators.


E


'X^.^-!JLJlfe.Lj


50  WHEEL  PICTURES.


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.
Note  A.

WHEEL-PICTURES.

Buddhist  wheel-pictures  are,  as  I  have  said,  com-
moner than  those  of  the  Hindus,  and  have  been  fre-
quently figured.  Mr.  Grant  Duff's  kindness  has,
however,  supplied  me  from  Madras  with  two  Hindu
pictures  of  the  class,  less  perfect  in  outline  than  the
Buddhist  wheel- pictures,  but  manifestly  following  the
same  model.

I  am  indebted  to  Professor  Cowell  for  the  follow-
ing curious  legendary  account  of  the  origin  of  the
Buddhist  pictures  : —

*  In  the  twenty-first  story  of  the  Northern  Bud-
dhist collection  of  legends  called  the  "  Divyavadana,"
there  is  an  account  how  Buddlia's  disciple,  Maud-
galydyana,  used  occasionally  to  visit  heaven  and  hell,
and  when  he  returned  to  earth  he  would  describe  the
difi'erent  sights  which  he  had  seen.

^  Buddha  said  to  Ananda,  "  Maudgalydyana  will
not  always  be  present,  nor  one  like  Maudgalyayana  ;
therefore  a  wheel  must  be  made  with  five  divisions
and  placed  in  the  chamber  of  the  gate."  The  mendi-
cants heard  that  Buddha  had  given  this  order,  but  they
did  not  know  wliat  sort  of  a  wheel  was  to  be  made.
Buddha  said,  "Five  paths  are  to  be  made — those  in


i


WHEEL-PICTURES.  51

the  hells,  animals,  pretas,^  gods  and  men.  Of  these
the  hells  are  to  be  made  lowest;  then  the  annuals  and
pretas  ;  and  above,  the  gods  and  men — i.e.  the  four
continents,  viz.,  Piirvavideha,  Aparagodam'ya,  Utta-
rakuru,  and  Jambudvipa.  In  the  centre  are  to  be
made  desire,  hatred  and  stupid  indifference  :  '^  desire
in  the  form  of  a  dove,  hatred  in  that  of  a  snake,
stupid  indifference  in  that  of  a  hog.  And  images  of
Buddha  are  to  be  made  pointing  out  the  circle  of
Nirvana.  Beings  are  to  be  represented  as  being
born  in  a  supernatural  way,  as  by  the  machinery  of
a  water-wheel,  falling  from  one  state  and  being  pro-
duced in  another.  All  round  is  to  be  represented
the  twelve-fold  circle  of  causation^  in  the  regular
and  in  the  reverse  order.  Everything  is  to  be  re-
presented as  devoured  by  Transitoriness,  and  the  two
gathas  are  to  be  written  there, —

*  Begin,  come  out,  be  zealous  in  the  doctrine  of  Buddha,
Shake  off  the  army  of  death  as  an  elephant  a  hut  of  reeds.
He  who  shall  walk  unfaltering  in  the  Doctrine  and  Discipline,"*
Leaving  behind  birth  and  mundane  existence,  shall  make  an  end
of  pain.

*  The  mendicants  carried  out  Buddha's  words,  and
made  the  wheel  with  live  divisions.  The  Brahmans
and  householders  came  and  asked,  "  Sir,  what  is  this
engraved  liere  ?  "  They  reply,  '^  Sirs,  even  we  do
not  know."  Jjuddha  said,  "  Let  a  certain  mendicant
be  appointed  to  stand  in  the  chamber  of  the  gate,  who
shall  show  it  to  all  the  jjrahmans  and  householders
who  come  from  time  to  time."  '

'  Gliosts  or  goblins  who  suffer  from  perpetual  hunger.
^  The  well-known  three  *  faults'  of  Hindu  philosophy.
3  See  Colehrooke's  IChhoij^  (ed.  2),  vol.  i.  pp.  4513-455.
^  Dhaniia  and  Vinaya.


V  2


52  AXCESTOR-WORSHIF.  chap.  iir.


CHAPTER  III.

ANCESTOR-WORSHIP.

1  Have  said  that  the  rules  of  life  contained  in  the
most  ancient  of  the  sacred  law-books  of  the  Hindus
are  strongly  affected  by  two  systems  of  religious  be-
lief which  were  probably  at  one  time  independent  of
one  another.  Although  welded  together  by  the  Hindu
sacerdotal  lawyers,  the  purgation  of  sin  by  post-
humous punishment  in  a  series  of  hells,  and  the  pur-
gation of  sin  by  transmigration  from  body  to  body,  are
distinct  solutions  of  the  same  problem.  The  breach
of  the  rules  set  forth  in  the  law-books  afflicts  the  law-
breaker with  a  special  taint,  which,  unless  he  be
cleansed  from  it  by  proper  penances  in  his  lifetime,
will  cling  to  his  spirit  after  death,  and  can  only  then
be  purged  away  by  far  severer  expiations.  Two
separate  views  of  the  life  after  death  would  appear  to
have  contributed  the  theory  of  successive  special  Pur-
gatories, and  the  theory  of  Transmigration,  to  the
maturer  Hindu  system  which  has  joined  them  to-
gether. But  besides  the  traces  of  this  two-fold
reUgious^  speculation,  there  is  plain  evidence  of  yet  a


I


CHAP.  III.  AIsCESTOE-WOKSHIP.  53

third,  and  perhaps  a  still  older  religion,  standing
quite  by  itself,  in  these  treatises.  This  is  the  Worship
of  Ancestors,  which  has  shaped  the  entire  Hindu  law
of  Inheritance.  The  connection  between  Ancestor-
Worship  and  Inheritance  is  not,  however,  peculiar  to
the  Hindus.  The  most  ancient  law  of  a  considerable
number  of  the  communities  which  have  contributed
most  to  civilisation  shows  us  the  performance  of  some
part  of  this  worship  as  a  duty  incumbent  on  expectant
heirs  and  as  the  condition  of  their  succession.  Tins
rude  and  primitive  belief  has  thus  very  strongly
influenced  the  branch  of  jurisprudence  which,  as  link-
ino^  the  venerations  each  to  each,  is  of  the  o:reatest
importance  to  all  advancing  societies.

Ancestor- worship  is  not  here  to  be  understood  in
the  sense  in  which  the  expression  has  usually  been
taken  by  scholars.  It  is  not  the  cult  of  some  long-
descended  and  generally  fabulous  ancestor,  of  some
Hero,  the  name-^ivin<i:  pro^^enitor  of  a  Kace,  a  Xa-
tion,  a  Tribe,  a  House  or  a  Family ;  an  Ion,  a  Romu-
lus, or  an  Enmolpus.  Xor,  again,  can  it  be  visibly
connected  with  the  superstitious  reverence  of  savages
for  tlieir  Totem,  even  though  It  symbolise  to  them
the  living  creature  from  which  they  conceive  them-
selves to  have  sprung.  In  the  case  before  us  the
ancestors  sought  to  be  prof)itiated  by  sacrifices  and
prayers  are  ancestors  actunlly  remembered,  or,  at
all events, capable  of being reinembered by tliQ


54


ANCESTOR-WOKSHIP.


CHAP.  iir.


worshipper.  Proximity  in  time  is  essential  to  the  wor-
ship of  which  I  am  speaking.  There  are  signs  that,
according  to  the  early  ideas  of  many  communities —
communities,  for  example,  so  fur  removed  from  one
another  as  the  Hindus  and  the  Irish — a  man  living  as
a  member  of  a  Joint  Household  or  Family  could  at
most  expect  to  see  at  some  time  during  life  three
generations  above  him  and  three  generations  below
him.  In  accordance  with  this  expectation,  the  ances-
tors worshipped  are  three  :  the  father  first,  then  the
grandfather,  and  then  the  great-grandfather.  The
reverence  paid  to  remoter  ancestors,  not  personally
remembered,  may  be  believed  to  be  a  later  oiF-growth
of  these  ideas.  Their  original  character,  and  the  nature
of  the  feelings  associated  with  them,  may  be  gathered
from  the  account  of  its  own  ancestor- worship  which
Canon  Callaway  (apud  Tylor,  '  Primitive  Culture,'
ii.  106)  attributes  to  a  group  of  South  African  tribes.
^Although  they  worship  the  many  Amatongo  (ances-
tral spirits)  of  their  tribe,  making  a  great  fence
around  them  for  protection,  yet  their  father  is  before
all  others  when  they  worship  the  Amatongo.  Their
ftither  is  a  G:reat  treasure  to  them  even  when  he  is
dead  ;  and  those  who  have  grown  up,  knew  him
thoroughly,  his  gentleness  and  his  bravery.  ....
Black  people  do  not  worship  all  Amatongo  indiffer-
ently— that  is,  all  the  dead  of  their  tribe.  Speaking
generally,  the  head  of  each  house  is  worshipped  by


CHAP.  ITI.  AXCESTOK-WORSHIP.  55

the  children  of  that  house,  for  they  do  not  know  the
ancients  who  are  dead.  But  their  father,  whom  they
knew,  is  the  head  by  whom  they  begin  and  end  in

their  prayer,  for  they  knew  him  best We  do

not  know,  they  say,  why  he  should  regard  others
besides  us  :  he  will  regard  us  only.'

^  Manes -worship,'  says  Mr.  Tylor  ('Primitive
Culture,'  ii.  108),  '  is  one  of  the  great  branches  of  the
religion  of  mankind.  Its  principles  are  not  difficult  to
understand,  for  they  plainly  keep  up  the  social  relations
of  the  living  world.  The  dead  ancestor,  now  passed
into  a  deity,  goes  on  protecting  his  family  and  receiving
from  them  suit  and  service  as  of  old.  The  dead  chief
still  watches  over  his  own  tribe,  still  holds  his  autho-
rity, by  helping  friends  and  harming  enemies,  still
rewards  the  right  and  sharply  punishes  the  wrong.'

Ancestor- worship,  the  worship  of  father,  grand-
father, and  great-grandfather,  has  among  the  Hindus
a  most  elaborate  liturgy  and  ritual,  of  which  the  out-
lines are  given  in  the  law-books,  and  with  special  ful-
ness in  the  Book  of  Vishnu,.  In  the  eye  of  the  ancient
Hindu  sacerdotal  lawyer,  the  whole  law  of  Inheritance
i.s  dependent  on  its  accurate  observance.  What  is
more  remarkable  is  that  the  same  close  interdepend-
ence of  ritual  and  inheritance  exists  in  the  eye  of
the  modern  Anj^lo- Indian  Jud<^e,  who,  after  lonjr  acres,
strives  to  interpret  the  old  books  and  to  apply  their
doctrine  to  the  case  before  him. There  are  few  more


56  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP  chap.  ni.

curious  meetings  of  the  Past  and  Present  than  when
an  English  Judge,  in  the  High  Court  (let  us  say)  of
Calcutta,  carefully  weighs  the  exact  amount  of
Spiritual  Benefit  derived  by  a  deceased  Hindu  from
the  sacrifices  of  a  descendant  or  collateral,  and  the
exact  dcOTce  of  blessino;  reflected  on  the  kinsman
who  has  offered  the  sacred  water  and  the  sacred  cake.
All  the  main  juridical  conceptions  of  the  Roman  law
of  Succession  are  to  be  found  in  the  Hindu  law,  but
the  terms  expressing  them  {suus  hceres^  agnate,  cog-
nate, actio  de  familid  erciscimdd,  and  so  forth)  mostly
translate  into  phrases  taking  their  meaning  from  the
liturgy  and  sacrificial  order  of  Hindu  Ancestor-
worship.

It  must  be  added,  for  the  full  understanding  of
the  subject,  that  the  Hindu  worship  of  ancestors  does
not  merely  affect  the  Hindu  law  of  Inheritance.  It
influences  the  everyday  life  of  that  vast  majority  of
the  people  of  India  who  call  themselves  in  some  sense
Hindus,  and  indeed  in  the  eyes  of  most  of  them
their  household  divinities  are  of  more  importance  than
the  whole  Hindu  pantheon.  '  It  is  a  common  saying
among  us,'  says  the  author  of  an  instructive  treatise
on  the  'Law  of  Inheritance'  (Professor  Rajkumar
Sarvadhikai'i)  '  that  a  man  may  be  pardoned  for
neglecting  all  his  social  duties,  but  he  is  for  ever
cursed  if  he  fails  to  perform  the  funeral  obsequies  of
his  parents,  and  to  present  them  with  the  offerings


CHAP.  III.  AXCESTOR-WORSHTP.  57

due  to  them.'  Ancestors,  as  divine  beings  to  be  wor-
shipped, are  referred  to  in  the  Vedas,  and  stand
rather  obscurely,  under  the  name  of  Pitris,  in  the
background  among  the  Hindu  gods  ;  but  every  day^
in  the  dwelling  of  a  Hindu  the  shradda  is  offered  to
father,  grandfather,  and  great-grandfather  ;  and  the  *
offering  is  made  with  special  observances  on  particu-
lar days  and  on  particular  occasions.  The  most
solemn  oblation  of  all  is  made  at  a  funeral,  and  the
rules  for  it  are  already  set  forth  in  rninute  detail  by
the  oldest  of  our  authorities  (Gautama,  xv.  i.  30).
The  first-fruits  of  the  earth,  the  first  portions  at  all
meals,  all  aTrap^oX  and  primitice^  are  the  special  share
of  these  ancestral  gods  ;  the  special  blessing  which
they  confer  is  length  of  days  and  the  unbroken  con-
tinuity of  the  famil3^  M.  Fustcl  de  Couhanges  was
the  first  modern  writer  to  brin^  into  full  li":ht,  in  his
brilliant  book  '  La  Cite  Antique,'  the  hitherto  little
observed  importance  of  the  privjite  or  family  Avorsliip
of  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  Almost  all  attention
had  been  concentrated  on  the  greater  Gods  of  these
societies.  In  their  honour,  temj)les  were  raised,  oxen
were  led  to  the  altar,  proccssion,s  moved  along  the
streets,  religious  confraternities  were  formed.  Iliese
were  Grxls  of  Nations  or  Tribes,  Gods  Ijorn  of  primi-
tive observation  (jf  Xatiirc^  and  j)rimitive  reverence
for  her,  Gods  sprung  from  wide-s])r('ading  emotional

' Sarvadliikari^  IHwJu  Law  <>f  Inhfiritaitcfi^  pp.  83  at  aeq.


SSESaeSB:^.  .^JtamMgammmam^mm


58  AXCESTOR-WORSHIP.  chap.  hi.

movements,  like  Dionysus  and  Cybele.  But  tliey
lived  far  away  in  their  own  Olympus,  and  the  real
effective  worship  of  the  Roman  was  to  the  Lares  and
Penates.  Their  clay  or  metal  images  stood  in  the
lararium  or  penetralia,  in  the  innermost  recesses  of
the  house,  and  represented  forefathers  who  in  the
earliest  days  had  actually  been  buried  in  it  before
the  hearth.  At  their  head  was  the  eldest  of  them,
the  Lar  Familiaris.  This  private  worship,  like  the
public  worship  of  the  greater  Gods,  had  its  ritual,  its
liturgy,  and  its  priesthood  within  the  circle  of  the
family  ;  and  the  intimacy  with  which  it  mixed  itself
with  all  family  relations  is  the  staple  of  the  striking
argument  which  fills  '  La  Cite  Antique.^

Ancestor- worship  is  still  the  practical  religion  of
much  the  largest  part  of  the  human  race.  We  who
belong  to  Western  civilisation  are  but  dimly  con-
scious of  this,  mainly  on  account  of  the  Hebrew
element  in  the  faith  of  Western  societies.  Sacrifice  to
ancestors  was  certainly  not  unknown  to  the  Hebrews
either  as  a  foreign  practice  or  as  a  prohibited  idola-
try. '  They  joined  themselves  unto  Baal-Peor,'  it  is
written  in  Psalm  cvi.  28,  '  and  ate  the  sacrifices  of  the
dead'  And  again  in  Deuteronomy  xxvi.  14  :  '  Thou
shalt  say  before  the  Lord  thy  God  ...  I  have
brought  away  the  hallowed  things  out  of  my  house
...  I  have  not  transgressed  thy  commandments,
neither  have  I  forgotten  them  ...  I  have  not  eaten


CHAP.  in.


ANCESTOR-WORSHIP.


59


thereof  in  my  mourning  ;  nor  have  I  taken  away
ought  thereof  for  any  unclean  use  ;  nor  given  ought
thereof  to  Hie  dead.''  But  it  has  been  generally
allowed  that  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  contain  few
allusions  to  this  wide-spread  practice  ;^  and  any  con-
tact with  it  which  may  be  found  in  Christianity  or
Mahommedanism  is  due  to  accidental  causes.  A
wild  Turkoman,  though  he  passes  as  a  fanatical
Mahommedan,  may  occasionally  worship  at  his  an-
cestor's ^rave,  as  did  his  forefathers  m  the  extreme
East,  and  here  and  there  a  locally  reverenced  Christian
saint  may  have  succeeded  to  the  supposed  miraculous
power  of  a  local  heathen  divinity  who,  in  his  origin,
may  have  been  a  deified  ancestor.  But  all  sects  of
Hindus,  and  all  the  multitudes  affected  by  Hinduism,
worship  their  ancestors. The  ancient  religion  lately

2  Hie  Fifth  Commandment,  which  promises  length  of  days  as
the  blessing  earned  V>y  honouring  father  and  mother  during  tlieir
lifetime,  may  be  compared  with  the  very  ancient  Chinese  litur-
gical odes  in  which  the  long  duration  of  the  family  is  descril>ed  as
the  special  reward  for  honouring  dead  parents  with  sacrifice.  See
the  fine  Chinese  hymn,  taken  from  the  ritual  of  Ancestor-worship,
and  translated  by  Dr.  Legge  (Shih-King,  *S'acr«o<^  liookn  of  tJio,  Kast^
vol.  iii.  pp.  348,  349).  '  With  happy  aus[)ices  and  purifications
thou  bringest  the  offerings  and  dost  present  them,  in  spring,
summer,  autumn,  and  winter,  to  the  dukes  and  former  kings.
And  they  say,  "  We  give  to  thee,  we  give  to  thee  myriads  of  years,
duration  unlimitexl.  'J'he  spirits  come  and  confer  on  thee  many
blessings.  .  .  .  Like  the  mwjn  advancing  to  the  full.  Like  the
gun  ascending  the  heavens.  Like  the  everlasting  southern  hilb^.
Never  waning,  never  falling.  Like  the  luxuriance  of  the  fir  and
the  cyj)re8.s. May  such  be  thy  succeeding  line  !  "  '


60  AXCESTOR-WOKSHIP.  chap.  in.

revived  by  State  authority  in  Japan  at  the  expense
of  Buddhism,  and  known  as  Shintoism,  appears  to  be
a  form  of  ancestor- worship  ;  the  Chinese  universally
worship  their  ancestors  ;  and  these,  with  ancestor-
worshipping  savages,  make  up  the  majority  of  the
human  race.

The  Chinese  are  the  great  example  of  a  commu-
nity earnestly  devoted  to  this  system  of  religious
belief  and  observance.  The  evidence  of  its  antiquity
and  of  its  prevalence  among  them  is  extremely  abun-
dant. Let  me  quote  what  is  probably  the  oldest  and
the  newest  testimony  on  the  subject.  The  most
ancient  Chinese  records  are  the  earlier  portions  of
those  famous  collections  in  prose  and  verse,  the  Shu-
King  and  the  Shih-King.  A  fairly  trustworthy  chro-
nology carries  back  the  earliest  prose  documents  in
the  Shu- King  to  the  twenty-fourth  century  before
the  Christian  era,  and  the  oldest  liturgical  odes  of
the  Shih-King  are  thought  to  be  contemporaneous
with  the  eighteenth  century  B.C.  The  second  of  the
pieces  in  the  Shu-King  speaks  of  Yao  retiring  from
government  '  in  the  temple  of  his  accomplished  an-
cestor,' and  the  first  and  most  ancient  hymn  in  the
Shih-King,  which  celebrates  a  sacrifice  to  ancestors,
represents  the  practice  as  even  then  old.  '  Here  are
set  our  hand-drums  and  drums.  The  drums  resound
harmonious  and  loud,  to  delight  our  meritorious
ancestor. The  descendant  of  Thang  invites  him  with


CHAP.  III.  ANCESTOR-WOKSHIP.  61

the  music  tliat  he  may  soothe  us  with  the  realisation
of  our  thoughts  .  .  .  From  of  old,  before  our  time,
the  former  men  set  us  the  example  how  to  be  mild
and  reverent  from  morning  to  night,  and  to  be
reverent  in  discharoino^  the  service.'

For  the  most  recent  evidence  I  refer  to  a  paper
published  in  1882,  and  manifestly  based  on  mission-
ary information.^

'  Great  (in  China)  are  the  expenses  entailed  by  the
dead  on  the  livinf^.  In  no  land  can  the  loss  of  a  kins-
man  be  more  severely  felt.  The  body  must  be  dressed
in  fine  new  clothes,  and  another  good  suit  must  be
burnt.  A  handsome  coffin  is  essential,  and  the  priests
must  be  largely  paid  for  funeral  services  at  the  house
of  the  deceased,  and  aj^ain  for  their  services  in  ascer-
taining  the  lucky  day  for  burial.  .  .  .  From  the  tenth
to  the  seventeenth  day  after  death,  the  priests,  whether
Taoist  or  Buddhist,  liold  service  in  the  house  to  pro-
tect the  living  from  tlie  inroads  of  hosts  of  spirits
wlio  are  supposed  to  crowd  iu,  in  the  wake  of  their
new  friend.  .  .  .  ^lany  families  are  permanently  im-
poverished by  the  drain  to  wliicli  they  are  subjected,
and  which  is  likely  to  recur  again  and  again.  To  omit
them  would  be  to  incur  the  anger  of  the  spiteful  dead,
who  are  now  in  a  position  to  avenge  themselves  on
the  living  by  inflicting all  manner  of  sickness  and

'  *  Niri^'[)0  and  the  Buddhist  Temples,'  by  Constance  Gordon
Cumming  {Ctatury^  September  lb82).


UMW


62  ANCESTOR  WORSHIP.  CHAP.  111.

suffering.  .  .  .  The  priests  pretend  to  have  had  reve-
lations from  the  spirit- world,  showing  the  unfortunate
dead  to  be  tortured  in  Purgatory,  and  that  he  can
only  be  extricated  by  a  fresh  course  of  costly  services
in  the  house.  The  price  to  be  paid  is  fixed  at  the
highest  sum  they  think  it  possible  to  extract.-  It  ends
in  the  family  raising  every  possible  coin,  and  even
selling  their  jewels,  to  procure  the  necessary  sum.'

Finally,  I  will  repeat  Mr.  Tylor's  reflections  on  the
whole  of  this  marvellous  system  of  belief  and  practice
('  Primitive  Culture,'  ii.  108)  :  'Interesting  problems
are  opened  out  to  the  Western  mind  by  the  spectacle
of  a  great  people  who  for  thousands  of  years  have
been  seeking  the  living  among  the  dead.  Nowhere
is  the  connection  between  parental  authority  and
conservatism  more  graphically  shown.  The  worship
of  ancestors,  begun  during  their  life,  is  not  interrupted
but  intensified  when  death  makes  them  deities.  The
Chinese,  prostrate  bodily  and  mentally  before  the
memorial  tablets  which  contain  the  souls  of  his  ances-
tors, little  thinks  that  he  is  all  the  while  proving  to
mankind  how  vast  a  power  unlimited  filial  obedience,
prohibiting  change  from  ancestral  institutions,  may
exert  in  stopping  the  advance  of  civilisation.  The
thought  of  the  souls  of  the  dead  as  sharing  the  glory
and  happiness  of  their  descendants  is  one  which
widely  pervades  the  world  ;  but  most  such  ideas
would  seem  vague  and  weak  to  the  Chinese,  who  wiM


CHAP.  in.  a:n'cestok-worship.  63

try  hard  for  honours  in  his  competitive  examination
with  the  special  motive  of  glorifying  his  dead  ancestors,
and  whose  titles  of  rank  will  raise  his  deceased  father
and  grandfather  a  grade  above  him,  as  though  with
us  Zachary  Macaulay  or  Copley  the  painter  should
have  viscounts'  coronets  officially  placed  on  their
tombstones.  As  so  often  happens,  what  is  jest  to
one  people  is  sober  sense  to  another.  There  are  300
millions  of  Chinese  who  would  hardly  see  a  joke  in
Charles  Lamb,  reviling  the  stupid  age  that  would  not
read  him,  and  declaring  that  he  would  write  for  an-
tiquity.'

The  relations  of  Ancestor- worship  to  other  reli-
gions held  in  honour  by  those  who  practise  it  appear
to  have  varied  much  from  community  to  community,
and  from  time  to  time  within  the  same  community.
In  China  it  seems  to  have  more  than  held  its  ground
against  the  other  more  famous  faiths.  Confucianism
is  deeply  implicated  with  it,  and  the  creeds  of  Buddha
and  of  Lao-Tze  have  assimilated  it,  and  tlieir  priests
indifferently  perform  its  ceremonies.  Sir  Alfred
Lyall  has  amusingly  described  the  liberties  which  the
Chinese  Government  takes  with  war-gods  and  river-
gods,  promoting  and  deposing  them  by  acts  of  State ;
but  it  may  be  doubted  whether  it  woidd  venture  on
any  serious  interference  with  the  service  of  the  dead.
Among  the  Hindus,  the  ancestral  deities  are  but
dimly seen amid the Vedic gods, but the later


64  A>'CESTOR-WORSIIIP.  CHAP;  in.

sacerdotal  law-writers  seem  conscious  of  a  rivalry  be-
tween them  and  these  greater  divinities.  The  ritual  of
ancestor-worship  given  in  the  book  of  Vishnu  begins
with  sacrifice  to  the  gods  (lxxiv.  1),  and  Manu
expressly  says  (in.  205),  '  Let  an  offering  to  the
ffods  be  made  at  the  beodnnino;  and  end  of  the  shrad-
dha  :  it  must  not  beii^in  and  end  with  an  offerinsf  to
ancestors,  for  he  who  begins  and  ends  it  with  an
oblation  to  the  Pitris  quickly  perishes  with  his  pro-
geny.' Nevertheless,  although  the  greater  Hindu  gods,
like  the  greater  divinities  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,
have  their  temples,  rites,  and  sacrifices,  though  they
have  their  special  devotees,  though  they  are  honoured
by  pilgrimages  and  festivals,  in  which  multitudes  take
part,  the  worship  offered  every  day  by  Hindus  in
their  private  dwellings  to  their  immediate  ancestors
is  perhaps  more  genuine,  and  is  certainly  far  more
continuous.  I  have  already  quoted  the  statement  of
a  learned  contemporary  native  lawyer,  that  every
other  crime  may  be  forgiven  to  his  co-religionists,  but
not  the  neglect  of  ancestral  sacrifices.  On  the  other
hand,  the  comparatively  scanty  Roman  evidence  con-
cerning the  sacra  2:)rivata  would  seem  to  show  that
they  dwindled  in  importance  and  popular  respect.
In  Cicero's  time  the  charges  for  them  were  still  a
heavy  burden  on  Inheritances,  but  they  seem  to
have  followed  a  course  of  change  not  unusual  else-
where, and  the  payments  for  them  were  in  the  nature


CHAP.  III.  AXCESTOR- WORSHIP.  65

of  fees  or  dues  to  the  College  of  Pontiffs.  There  are
sio^ns,  too,  that  the  household  o;ods  were  losinfif  their
divinity.  The  Lares  became  hardly  distinguishable
from  the  Larv^ — a  word  of  the  same  orio-in,  which  is
said  to  have  at  first  meant  spirits  not  laid  to  rest  with
the  proper  rites  ^ — and  indeed  from  the  Lemures,  mere
goblins  who  haunted  tombs.  The  '  Lars  and  Lemurs,'
who  moaned  '  with  midnight  plaint '  at  the  Nativity,
are  thus  not  improperly  coupled  together  in  Milton's

^  The  ancestor-worshipping  peoples  appear  to  have  agreed  in
thinking  that  the  gravest  consequences  depended  on  properly  dis-
posing of  the  bodies  of  the  dead. But  there  was  no  such  agree-
ment as  to  what  was  the  proper  mode  of  disposal. There  is  a
startling  contrast  between  the  last  prayer  of  Ajax  to  Zeus  that  he
be  at  least  buried,  so  that  dogs  and  birds  eat  not  his  body,  and  the
prayer  of  the  devout  Zoroastrian  that  he  be  not  buried,  and  that  dogs
and  birds  do  eat  his  remains. Compare  Sophocles,  Ajax,  826,  et  seq.
with  the  Zend  Avesta,  iii.  4,  30  (SacreA  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  iv.)  :
*  "  O  Maker  of  the  material  universe,  Thou  Holy  One,  if  a  man  shall
bury  a  corpse  in  the  earth  and  if  he  shall  not  disinter  it  within  the
second  year,  what  is  the  penalty  for  it  ? What  is  the  atonement
for  it  ?  " Ahura  Mazda  answered,  "  For  that  deed  there  is  nothing
can  pay,  nothing  can  atone  ;  nothing  can  cleanse  fiom  it ;  it  is  a
trespass  for  which  there  is  no  atonement  for  ever  and  ever." '  And
again,  at  vi.  4/44  :  "'0  Maker  of  the  material  world.  Thou  Holy
One,  whither  shall  we  bring,  where  shall  we  lay,  the  bodies  of  the
dead  T' Ahura  Mazda  answered,  "On  the  liigliest  summits,  where
they  know  there  are  always  corpae-eatiug  dogs  and  corpse-eating
bir-ds,  0  holy  Zarathrusta."  '  We  can sympathise  with  the  Greek
feeling,  though  not  in  its  full  .strength  ;  but  it  would  be  hardly
credible  that  a  vigorous  and comparatively  civilised  nation  once
followed  the  Zoroastrian  usage,  were  it  not  for  the  stubborn  survival
of  it  among  the  Painees,  whose  *  Towers  of  Silence '  are  among  the
first  objects  which  strike  the  eye  of  the traveller  on landing  in
Westei-n  India.

F


awn


66  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP.  chap.  hi.

verse.  But  though  this  most  ancient  religion  died,  its
effects  on  civil  law  remained,  and  indeed  still  survive.
One  curious  relic  of  it  may  be  found  in  the  Codes  of
the  Christian  Emperors.  There  is  a  classification  of
*  Things  '  which  divides  them  into  their  kinds,  and
then  subdivides  '  things  which  are  not  the  property
of  anybody '  into  Res  Sacrne,  Res  Sanctaj,  and  Res
Relif^fiosa^.  Res  Sacra9  are  thino-s  consecrated  to  the
greater  gods  ;  Res  Religios^e  are  expressly  defined  as
things  dedicated  to  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  the  Manes  ;
and  some  part  of  the  Roman  rules  relating  to  this
last  class  of  things  still  affects  our  law  of  church-
yards. But,  further  than  this,  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  our  law  of  Inheritance  is  still  partially  shaped
by  the  old  worship  of  the  Manes,  though  the  exact
decrree  in  which  it  has  been  influenced  is  not  now
ascertainable.  Almost  all  the  English  law  on  the
subject  of  the  descent  of  Personalty,  a  great  deal  of
Continental  law  on  the  same  subject,  and  some  part
of  our  law  of  Realty,  has  for  its  foundation  the  llStli
Novel,  or  Novella  Constitutio,  of  Justinian.  This
Novel  is  the  last  revision  of  the  older  Roman  law  of
Succession  after  death,  which  was  formed  by  the  fusion
of  the  rules  of  inheritance  contained  in  the  venerable
Twelve  Tables  with  the  Equity  of  the  Praator's  Edict ;
two  streams  of  law  profoundly  influenced  at  their
source,  as  no  reader  of  M.  Fustel  de  Couhmges  can
doubt,  by  the  worship  of  ancestors.

Modern investigators w^ho have made it their


CHAP.  Til.  .IXCESTOK-WORSHir.  67

special  business to  search  for  the  earhest  forms  of
mental  conceptions  among  the  present  ideas  of  savao*es
have  based  a  theory  of  the  origin  of  ancestor- worship
upon  the  phenomena  of  sleep  and  unconsciousness
as  they  present  themselves  to  men  not  yet  escaped,
or  barely  escaped,  from  savagery. '  The  idol,'  writes
Sir  John  Lubbock, '  usually  assumes  the  human  form
and  idolatry  is  closely  connected  with  that  form  of
religion  which  consists  in  the  worship  of  ancestors.
We  have  already  seen  how  imperfectly  civilised  man
realises  the  conception  of  death,  and  we  camiot  wonder
that  death  and  sleep  should  long  have  been  connected
together  in  the  human  mind. The  savage,  however
knows  well  that  in  sleep  the  spirit  lives,  even  thouo-]i
the  body  appear  to  be  dead. Morning  after  mornino-
he  wakes  himself  and sees  others  rise from sleep.
Naturally,  therefore,  he  endeavours  to  rouse  the  dead.
Nor  can  we  wonder  at  the  very  general custom  of
providing  food  and  other  necessaries  for  the  use  of
tlie  dead. Among  races  leading  a  settled  and  cpiiet
life this habit  would tend  to continue lonf^er  and
longer. Prayers  to  the  dead  would  reasonably  follow
from such customs,  for  even without  attributin^r  a
greater  power  to  the  dead  tlian  to  tlie  living,  they
might  yet, from their  diff(!rerit sphere  and  nature,
exercise  a considerable  power,  whether  for  ^^ood  or
evil. But  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  a  request  to
an  invisible  being  from  i>rayer,  or  a  powerful  spirit


««


68  AXCESTOR-WORSIIIP.  chap.  iir.

from  a  demi-god '  ('Origin  of  Civilisation  and
Primitive  Condition  of  Man,'  4th  ed.  1882).  In  har-
mony with  this  theory,  the  various  societies  of  man-
kind, in  their  rehation  to  belief  in  a  spirit  world,  have
been  thus  classed  by  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  ('  Principles
of  Sociology,'  p.  322) :  '  Taking  the  aggreg.ate  of  the
human  peoples,  tribes,  societies,  nations,  we  find  that
nearly  all  of  them  have  a  belief,  vague  or  wavering,
or  settled  and  distinct,  in  a  reviving  other-self  of  the
dead  man.  Withm  this  class  of  peoples,  almost  co-
extensive with  the  whole,  we  find  a  class,  not  quite  so
lartj-e,  by  the  members  of  which  the  other  self  of  the
dead  man,  definitely  believed  in,  is  supposed  to  exist
for  a  considerable  period  after  death.  Xearly  as
numerous  is  the  class  of  peoples  included  in  this  who
show  us  ghost  propitiation,  not  only  at  the  funeral  but
for  a  subsequent  interval.  Then  comes  the  narrower
class  included  in  the  last,  the  more  settled  and  ad-
vanced peoples  who,  along  with  the  developed  belief  in
a  ghost  that  permanently  exists,  show  us  a  persistent
anc^estor-worship.  Again,  somewhat  further  restricted,
though  by  no  means  small,  we  have  a  class  of  peo2:>les
whose  worship  of  distinguished  ancestors  begins  to
subordinate  that  of  undistinguished.  And  eventually
the  subordination,  growing  decided,  becomes  most
marked  when  the  ancestors  were  leaders  of  con-
quering races.'

The  theory,  fully  developed,  appears  to  be  that  the


CHAP.  nr.  AXCESTOR-WOESHIP.  09

dead  are  believed  by  savage  men  to  live  the  life  wlilcli
they  themselves  live  in  dreams,  a  life  very  like  that
of  their  waking  hours  and  yet  unlike  it.  It  is  thought
that  in  death,  as  in  the  visions  of  the  night,  the  spirit
meets  its  everyday  companions  and  kinsmen,  but  that
it  meets,  besides,  others  who  have  disappeared  from
the  living  world,  and  especially  those  whom  it  loved,
feared,  or  hated.  They  eat,  drink,  and  speak  as  of  old  ;
the  only  difference  between  their  world  and  that  of  life
is  perhaps  that  they  melt  into  other  forms  with  an  ease
and  rapidity  which  are  new,  but  which  have  ceased
to  surprise.  In  this  region,  the  visitant  most  fre-
quently meets  the  dead  whose  life  had  most  contact
with  his  own,  and  specially  the  Father  armed  with
his  Paternal  Power.  This  is  the  figure  which,  when
sleep  leaves  him,  he  best  remembers.  In  such  a
state  of  belief  and  feeling,  the  first  impulse  of  the
kinsmen  whose  chief  is  seen  to  have  finally  departed
for  the  spirit- world,  is  to  provide  him  with  food  and
drink,  perhaps  with  arms,  ornaments,  and  attendants,
for  his  new  home,  wliich  is  to  be  so  like  his  old  one.
In  these  impulses  the  bloody  funeral  rites,  which  are
still  described  in  the  Homeric  poems,  are  supposed  to
have  had  their  origin,  and  another  survival  is  the
sacrifice  of  the  Hindu  to  his  ancestors  with  the
*  water  and  the  cake.'  I  myself  certainly  think  that
the  theory  has  been  made  to  account  for  more  than
it  will  really  explain  by  some  of  the  eminent  writers


9KBmmBmm


70  ANCESTOR-WOKSHI?.  CKAr.  in.

who  have  adopted  it  ;  but  there  is  some  interesting
evidence  that,  so  far  as  the  early  Hindus  are  con-
cerned, it  oroGs  far  to  show  the  orioin  of  their  an-
cestor- worship.  There  is  manifest  perplexity  in  the
minds  of  the  sacerdotal  law-writers  at  the  contra-
dictions between  the  various  relisrious  doctrines
underlying  the  law.  How  is  the  doctrine  of  benefit
to  ancestors  by  ritual  and  sacrifice  to  be  reconciled
with  the  theory  of  transmigration  and  of  the  purgation
of  sin  by  punishment  after  death  ?  Nothing  seems
clearer  to  them  than  the  principle  that,  as  a  man  has
made  himself  by  his  acts,  so  he  leaves  this  life  for
the  next,  pure  or  impure,  sinful  or  sinless.  He
dies  when  that  result  is  entailed  by  the  result  of  his
acts  in  some  past  state ;  he  goes  into  the  next  state
according:  to  the  result  of  his  acts  here.  These
principles  are  laid  down  in  solemn  and  sometimes
eloquent  language.  ^  Single  is  each  man  born  ;
simrle  he  dies  :  sinoie  he  receives  the  reward  of  his
good,  and  single  the  punishment  of  his  evil  deeds.
When  he  leaves  his  corpse  like  a  log  or  a  heap  of
clay  upon  the  ground,  his  kindred  retire  with  averted
faces  ;  but  his  virtue  accompanies  his  soul.  Con-
tinually, therefore,  by  degrees  let  him  collect  virtue,
for  the  sake  of  securing  an  inseparable  companion ;
since,  with  virtue  for  his  guide,  he  will  traverse  a
gloom,  how  hard  to  be  traversed!'  (Manu,  iv.  240).
'  What thou  hast  to do to-morrow, do it  to-day.


CHAP.  III.  AXCESTOR-WORSniP.  / 1

What  thou  hast  to  do  in  the  afternoon,  do  it  in  the
forenoon,  for  death  may  come  at  any  moment.'
'  When  a  man's  mind  is  fixed  upon  his  field,  or  his
traffic,  or  his  house,  or  while  his  thoughts  are  en-
grossed by  some  beloved  object,  death  suddenly  carries
him  away  as  his  prey,  as  a  she-wolf  catches  a  lamb.
Time  is  no  one's  friend,  and  no  one's  enemy.  When
the  effect  of  his  acts  in  a  former  existence,  by  which
his  present  existence  is  caused,  has  expired,  Time
snatches  him  away  forcibly.  He  will  not  die  before
his  time  has  come,  even  though  he  has  been  pierced
by  a  thousand  shafts  ;  he  will  not  live  after  his  time
is  out,  though  he  has  only  been  touched  by  a  blade
of  kusa  grass'  (Vishnu,  xx.  44).  If  this  be  so,  it
is  a  ri<Torous  lo^^ical  conclusion  that  nothins;  which
the  living  can  do  will  help  the  dead.  But  the  writer
I  am  quoting  finds  a  solution  in  what  seems  to
us  the  most  unnatural  of  principles — that  relatives
of  the  dead  ought  not  to  mourn  for  him,  but  never-
theless should  offer  the  sncrifices.  '  As  both  a  man's
good  and  bad  actions  will  follow  him  after  death  like
associates,  wliat  does  it  matter  to  liiin  whether  his
relatives  mourn  over  him  or  not  ?  But,  a^  Ion"*  as
his  relatives  remain  impure,  tlie  departed  spirit  finds
no  rest,  and  returns  to  visit  his  relatives,  whose  duty
it  is  to  offer  up  to  liim  tlie  funeral  ball  of  rice  and
tlie  water  libation.  Till  the  Sapindikarana  has
been  performed,  the  dead  man  remains  a  disembodied


72  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP.  chap.  hi.

Spirit,  and  suffers  both  hunger  and  thirst.  Give
rice  and  ajar  with  water  to  the  man  who  has  passed
into  the  abode  of  disembodied  spirits.  .  .  .  Perform
therefore  the  Shradda  always,  abandoning  bootless
grief  (Vishnu,  xx.  31-36).  It  is  impossible  to
state  the  ancient  superstitious  belief  more  nakedly  ;
if  the  ghost  be  not  supplied  by  his  mourning  kinsmen
with  food  he  will  '  walk  ; '  but  the  law-writer  before
us  evidently  finds  the  doctrine  unaccountable,  and
maintains  it  because  there  is  authority  for  it.  It  is
at  the  same  time  to  be  observed  that  the  problem  is
solved  in  a  different  way  by  the  latest  Hindu  law,
which  declares  that  the  effect  of  sacrificing  to  a  dead
ancestor  is  to  deliver  him  from  one  special  purgatory,
the  '  Hell  called  Put.'  The  doctrine  of  direct  post-
humous punishment  has  to  this  extent  absorbed  the
opinion  that  the  perturbed  spirit  revisits  his  ancient
haunts.

There  is  one  peculiarity  of  ancestor- worship
which  recent  speculations  on  primitive  human  insti-
tutions invest  with  a  great  deal  of  interest.  Tlie
ancestors  worshipped  appear  to  have  .been  at  first
always  male  ancestors.  '  Although,'  says  Sir  John
Lubbock,  '  descent  amongst  the  lowest  savages  is
traced  in  the  female  line,  I  do  not  know  of  any
instance  in  Avhich  female  ancestors  were  worshipped.'
Female  ancestors  in  the  direct  line  are  now  wor-
shipped by  the  civilised  Cliinese,  but the evidence


CHAP.  III.  ANCESTOR- WOKSHIP.  73

shows  that  the  posthumous  honours  paid  to  women
are  of  later  origin  than  the  worship  of  men.  In  the
oldest  of  the.  Chinese  sacrificial  odes,  plausibly  dated
at  not  much  less  than  two  thousand  years  before
Christ,  the  '  accomplished  '  and  '  meritorious  '  ances-
tor celebrated  is  manifestly  a  man.  The  worship  of
female  ancestors  does  not  appear  till  a  much  later
division  of  the  hjnnns.  '  AVe  have  our  high  grana-
ries,' runs  the  ode  called  the  '  Fano-  Xien  ' — '  AYe
have  our  hio^h  o-ranaries,  with  mvriads  and  hun-
dreds  of  thousands  and  millions  of  measures  in
them,  for  spirits  and  sweet  spirits,  to  present  to  our
forefathers,  male  and  female  ;'  and  agam,  the  sacrificer
in  another  hymn  is  made  to  say, '  0  great  and  august
father,  comfort  me.  vour  filial  son.  ...  I  offer  this
sacrifice  to  my  meritorious  father,  and  to  my  accom-
plished mother.'  It  is  thought  that  the  still  existing
practice  of  placing  spirit  tablets  of  wives  along  with
those  of  husbands  in  their  shrines  had  by  this  time
begun.  So  too  in  the  most  ancient  Hindu  law-
books, the  funeral  oblation  is  confined  to  male  an-
cestors. At  this  rite,  says  Apastamba  (ii.  vii.  IG.  3),
the  manes  of  one's  father,  grandfather,  and  great-
grandfather are  the  deities  to  whom  the  sacrifice
is  offered.  The  rite  is  to  be  performed  in  the  latter
lialf  of  the  month  of  which  the  luckiest  day  is
the  fifth.  '  If  he  performs  it  on  the  fifth  day,  sons
will  be  born to  him  ;  he will have numerous  and


74  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP.  chap.  iir.

distinguished  offspring,  and  lie  will  not  die  childless.'
But  if  he  performs  it  on  the  first  day  of  the  half-
month,  the  caution  is  given  that  the  issue  of  the
sacrificer  will  consist  chiefly  of  daughters.  When,
however,  Ave  come  to  writers  of  a  much  later  era,
like  Vishnu,  we  find  a  distribution  of  the  sacri-
fices which  is  very  significant.  Yishnu  gives  us  a
summary  of  the  whole  ritual  of  ancestor- worship
as  practised  at  the  date  of  the  treatise  called  by
this  name  (A^ishnu,  chap.  Ixxiii.)  First  of  all  the
sacrificer  is  to  worship  the  (greater)  Gods.  Then
on  particular  days — the  ninth  days  of  the  dark  halves
of  certain  months — he  is  to  consecrate  an  ofFerino^
with  proper  hymns  and  scriptural  texts  and  present
it  to  three  Brahmans  present,  who  represent  his
father,  grandfather,  and  great-grandfather.  The
liturgy  and  ritual  which  he  is  to  follow  are  indicated,
head  by  head,  and  it  is  essential  for  the  virtue  of  the
sacrifice  that  a  company  of  Brahmans  should  have
been  invited.  On  certain  other  sacred  days,  the
Anvashtakas,  he  is  to  sacrifice  to  his  mother,  his
paternal  grandmother,  and  his  paternal  great-grand-
mother ;  and  lastly,  says  the  writer,  '  an  intelligent
man  ' — an  expression  which,  as  it  appears  to  me,  is
alwavs  used  of  a  doubtful  point — '  must  offer  shraddas
to  his  maternal  grandfixther,  and  to  the  father  and
fjrandfather  of  liim  in  the  same  wav.'  The  order  of
celebration  seems  to  me  to  follow  the  historical  order,


CHAP.  in.  AXCESTOR-TTOESHIP.  75

and  to  show  that  the  ancestors  first  worshipped  by
the  Hindus  were  the  father.  oTandfather,  and  o^reat-
o;r  and  father.

It  is  clear  then.  I  think,  that  wherever  ancestor-
worship  arose,  Paternity  was  fully  recognised  ;  and
as  the  texts  relating  to  this  worship  are  as  old  as
any  others  in  the  sacerdotal  law-books,  and  indeed
are  probably  the  oldest,  I  attach  small  import-
ance to  casual  expressions  foiuid  here  and  there  in
these  treatises  which  have  been  thouo-ht  to  show
that  their  writers  preserved  traditions  of  the  savage
custom  of  tracing  descent  through  females  only.
Still,  as  we  cannot  doubt  the  existence  and  preva-
lence among  some  part  of  mankind  of  this  savage
usage,  sometimes  called  '  Mother-law,'  it  is  im-
possible not  to  ask  oneself  tlie  question.  Did  the
worship  of  the  dead  bring  a1;out  the  recognition  of
paternity,  or  is  ancestor- worship  a  religious  inter-
pretation of,  or  a  religious  system  founded  upon,
an  already  existing  institution  ?  M.  Fustel  de  Cou-
langes,  without  refen'ing  to  the  custom  of  '  ]\Iother-
law,'  certainly  seems  to  me  to  ex[)ress  himself  occa-
sionally as  if  he  tliought  that  all  the  characteristics  of
the  so-called  Patriarchal  Family  were  created  by  the
worship  of  ancestors  which  was  ever  celel^rated  in
the  recesses  of  tlie  household  ;  and  that  from  this
worship  sprang  the  Father's  Power  as  its  high-priest,
and  also  the  denial  of  kinship  to  persons  no  longer


76  ANCESTOR- WORSHIP.  chap.  hi.

able  to  participate  in  it.  as  the  married  daughter  and
the  emancipated  son. It  may  well  be  believed  that
ancestor- worship, by  consecrathig, strengthened  all
family relations, but  in the  present  state  of  these
inquiries  tlie  evidence  certainly  seems  to  be  in  fevour
of  the  view  that  the  Father's  Power  is  older  than  the
practice  of  worshipping  him. Why  should  the  dead
Father  be  worshipped  more  than  any  other  member  of
the  household  unless  he  was  the  most  prominent — it
may  be  said,  the  most  awful — figure  in  it  daring  his
life  ? It  was  he, according  to  the  theory  which  I
have  described, who would most frequently show
himself, affectionate or menacing, to his sleeping
children. This opinion  is fortified by the recent
investigations  into  the  customary  law  of  the  Punjab,
the  earliest  Indian  home,  I  must  repeat,  of  the  Aryan
Hindus  after  their  descent  from  the  mountain-land  of
their  origin. Ancestor- worship  does  exist  among  the
Hindus  of  the  Punjab. But  it  is  a  comparatively
obscure  superstition. It  has  not  received  anything
like  the  elaboration  given  to  it  by  the  priesthood  in
the provinces to the south-east, many of whose
fundamental  doctrines  are  unknown  to  the  Punjabee
communities  of  Hindus. Nevertheless,  the  constitu-
tion of  tlie  Family  is  entirely,  to  use  the  Roman  phrase,
*  agnatic  ;'  kinship  is  counted  through  male  descents
only. There  is  a  very  strong  resemblance  between
these usages and the most ancient Roman law,
and  their  diflTercnccs,  where  they  diflfer,  tln*ow  very


CHAP.  HI.  AXCESTOR-WORSHIP.  t  i

valuable light on tlie more famous of the two
systems.

The  truth  seems  to  be  that,  although  Ancestor-
worship  had  at  first  a  tendency  to  consolidate  the
ancient  constitution  of  the  Family,  its  later  tendency
was  to  dissolve  it.  Looking  at  the  Hindu  svstem  as
a  whole,  we  can  see  that,  as  its  historical  growth  pro-
ceeded, the  sacerdotal  lawj'ers  fell  under  a  strong
temptation  to  multiply  the  persons  who  were  privi-
leged to  offer  the  sacrifices,  partly  in  the  interest
of  the  dead  ancestor,  chiefly  in  the  interest  of  the
living  Brahman.  In  this  way,  persons  excluded  from
the  ancient  family  circle,  such  as  the  descendants  of
female  kinsmen,  were  gradually  admitted  to  par-
ticipate in  the  oblations  and  share  in  the  inheritance.
Some  traces  of  a  movement  in  this  direction  are  to  be
found  throughout  the  law-books  ;  and  a  very  learned
Indian  lawyer  (Mr.  J.  D.  Mayne,  'Hindu  Law  and
Lsage,'  chap,  xvi.)  has  shown  that,  wherever  in
modern  India  the  doctrine  of  Spiritual  Benefit — that
is,  of  an  intimate  connection  between  the  reliaious
blessing  and  the  civil  riglit  of  succession — is  most
strongly  held,  women  and  the  descendants  of  women
are  oftenest  permitted  to  inherit.  It  is  remarkable  that
the  Equity  of  the  lioman  Pra.»tor,  which  was  probably
a  religious  before  it  was  a  philosophical  system,  had
j)recisely  the  same  effect  in  breaking  u])  the  structure
of  the  ancient  Roman  family,  governed  by  the  Father
as  itH  chief.


AXCESTOR-TVORSIIIP AND LNIIKRITAXCE.  cHAr.  iy.


CHAPTER IV.

ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE.

The  close  connection  between  succession  to  property
after  death  and  the  performance  of  some  sort  of
sacrificial  rites  in  honour  of  the  deceased  has  long
been  known  to  students  of  classical  antiquity.  A
considerable  proportion  of  the  not  very  plentiful
remains  of  Greek  le2:al  ar<2:ument  to  be  found  in  the
Athenian  Orators  is  occupied  with  questions  of  in-
heritance, and  the  advocate  or  litigant  frequently
speaks  of  the  sacrifices  and  the  succession  as  in-
separable. '  Decide  between  us,'  he  says,  '  which  of  us
should  have  the  succession  and  make  the  sacrifices
at  tlie  tomb  '  (Isoeus,  '  In  the  goods  of  Philoctemon,'
Or.  vi.)  '  I  beseech  you  by  the  gods  and  immortal
spirits  not  to  allow  the  dead  to  be  outraged  by  these
men  ;  do  not  suffer  his  worst  enemies  to  sacrifice  at
his  grave'  (Or.  ii.).  In  a  former  work  I  pointed  out
the  number,  costliness,  and  importance  of  these
ceremonies  and  oblations  among  the  Romans,  and  I
insisted  on  their  probable  significance  as  the  source


CHAP.  IT. AXCESTOR-WOKSHIP -\^'D IXHER1T.\>TE.  79

of  the  peculiar  fictions  which  cluster  round  early
family  law  (*  Ancient  Law.'  p.  191).  The  best  ex-
planation, I  argued,  of  the  facility  with  which  a
strano'er  can  be  made  a  son  is  that,  beino-  admitted
to  the  religious  observances,  he  is  not  distinguishable
from  a  son  under  his  religious  aspect.  The  later
experience  of  the  world  may  show  us  that  in  the
mere  blendinor  of  the  ideas  of  inheritance  and  ofFerino;
there  is  nothing  to  surprise  us.  It  is  natural  enough.
Where ver  it  has  been  matter  of  belief  that  the  sur-
viving members  of  a  dead  man's  family  could  do  any-
thincr  to  better  his  lot  in  the  world  after  death,  it
has  been  thought  their  duty  to  do  it  before  they
entered  upon  his  possessions.  The  mediaeval  Christian
Church  held  this  view  of  personal  or  movable  pro-
perty ;  it  was  primarily  a  fund  for  tlie  celebration  of
masses  to  deliver  the  soul  of  the  owner  from  pur-
gatory. Upon  this  doctrine  was  founded  the  juris-
diction of  our  P^cclesiastical  Courts,  in  which  all
property  of  this  kind  vested  in  tiie  first  instance  before
it  could  be  distributed  ;  and  this  jurisdiction,  coupled
with  the  necessary  powers  over  Executors  in  the
case  of  Wills,  and  of  Administrators  in  the  case  of
Intestacies,  has  descended  to  tlie  modern  Court  of
IVobate.  The  new  light  which  we  owe  to  tlie  author
of  '  La  Cite  Antique  '  is  his  determination  of  the
nature  of  the  divine  beings  to  wliom  the  oblati(jns,
which  exercised  so  powerful  an  influence  on  Athenian


OHi


SO  AXCESTOR-WORSIIIP AXD IXIIERITAXCE. chap,  tv.

and  Roman  heritages,  were  devoted.  They  were  of
course  not  offered  to  any  one  Supreme  God.  But
neither  were  they  offered  to  the  greater  deities  of  the
local  Pantheon.  '  Le  culte  des  dieux  de  I'Olympe  et
celui  des  Heros  et  des  Mane«  n'eurent  jamaLs  entre
eux  rien  de  commun,'  says  M.  Fustel  de  Coulanges.
The  worship  was  given  to  the  dead,  chiefly  to  the
remembered  dead  who  had  just  passed  away  into  a
life  not  further  removed  from  their  late  existence
than  a  sleep  from  reality.

I  will  note  in  passing  that  the  excessive  expensive-
ness  of  the  Roman  sacra  privata,  which  is  the  burden
of  Cicero's  complaints  in  his  private  letters,  seems  to
be  a  feature  of  still  surviving  ancestor- worship.  The
writer  of  a  paper  I  have  before  quoted  ('  Ningpo  and
Buddhist  Temples  ')  gives  a  curious  calculation,  upon
what  is  probably  American  missionary  authorit}^,  of
the  expenses  to  which  the  Chinese  are  put  by
worshipping  their  forefathers.  '  One  well  entitled  to
know  what  he  spoke  of  said  that  fully  thirty  millions
of  dollars  are  annually  expended  in  China  at  the  three
great  festivals  in  honour  of  the  dead,  and,  with  the
average  expenditure  of  each  family,  fully  150  millions
of  dollars  are  spent  in  quieting  the  spirits.'  There  is
no  doubt  also  that  funeral  rites  and  oblations  are
extremely  expensive  in  India,  and  I  have  heard  their
heavy  cost  seriously  urged  as  a  reason  against  im-
posing a  duty  on  legacies  and  successions. The  ex-


CHAP.  lY. Ais^CESTOil-AVORSHIP A:n^D INHERITANCE.  81

pensiveness  of  religions  observance  among  Hindus
arises  from  the  necessity  which  it  involves  of  feasting
Brahmans,  sometimes  in  multitudes,  and  making  them
gifts.  The  oldest  of  the  law-books  ^ta.X)ngly  inculcate
the  duty  of  emplojdng  the  ministry  of  Brahmans.
Three  are  especially  to  be  in  places  of  honour  at  all
funeral  celebrations,  who  are  to  represent  the  three
ancestors  worshipped — the  father,  grandfather,  and
great-grandfather.  But  many  more  are  to  be  enter-
tained. '  Pure,  with  composed  mind,  and  full  of
ardour,'  says  Apastamba,  *  he  shall  feed  Brahmans
who  know  the  Vedas.'  '  He  shall  feed  an  uneven
number  of  Brahmans,  at  least  nine,'  is  the  rule  of
Gautama,  '  or  let  him  feed  as  many  as  he  is  able  to
entertain.'  Some  singular  but  very  intelligible  texts
forbid  the  worshipper  to  make  these  sacred  feasts  a  ^:^

pretext  for  entertaining  his  own  relatives. ^  The  food  ^

eaten  at  a  sacrifice  by  persons  related  to  the  giver
is  a  gift  offered  to  goblins.  It  reaches  neither  the
Manes  nor  the  Gods.  Losing  its  power  to  procure
heaven,  it  wanders  about  in  this  world,  as  a  cow  that  .
has  lost  her  calf  runs  into  a  strange  stable'  (Apas-
tamba, II.  vii.  17.  8).

We  have  now  to  consider  some  of  the  ways  in
which  the  law  and  custom  of  ancestor- worshipping
societies  have  been  affected  by  their  peculiar  faith  and
religious  practice.  The  first  instance  of  a  trans-
fonnation  in  law  which  I  will  give  is  one  nearly  con-

G


82  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE. cbap  iv.

nected  with  the  growing  costliness  of  the  ritual.  By
this  ritual  a  religious  and  intellectual  aristocracy  lived.
One  of  the  commonest  popular  errors  about  the
Brahmans  even  now  current  in  England  is  that,
because  they  are  spiritually  the  highest,  they  are
therefore  the  Avealthiest  and  most  powerful  of  the
Hmdu  castes.  They  count  among  them  some  opulent
and  powerful  families,  and  one  Royal  house  in  India
is  Brahman,  but,  on  the  whole,  they  are  not  specially
wealthy.  It  would  be  more  accurate  to  describe
them  as  a  serving  and  ministering  class,  their  occu-
pations varying  from  the  high  administrative  duties
which  they  once  monopohsed  in  the  Mahratta  States
to  such  humble  functions  as  those  of  the  cook,  whose
service  is  a  luxury,  because  no  impurity  can  be  con-
tracted at  his  hands.  The  Brahman  of  the  old  law-
books is  still  a  priest  and  spiritual  director  more
than  anything  else,  though  with  a  visible  tendency
to  become  a  lawyer,  a  judge,  or  an  administrative
counsellor.  He  lives,  however,  by  the  bounty  of
others,  by  their  charitable  and  pious  gifts,  more  par-
ticularly those  given  to  him  on  the  great  occasions
of  sacrifice.  It  is  strongly  said  by  a  modern  writer
(J.  D.  Mayne,  '  Hindu  Law  and  Usage/  p.  205)  that
the  modern  law,  as  promulgated  by  Manu,  might  be
described  as  a  law  of  gifts  to  Brahmans.  '  Every  step
of  a  man's  life  from  his  birth  to  his  death  required
gifts  to  Brahmans. Every  sin  which  he  committed


1


CHi.P.  IT. a:S'CESTOFc-TVORSHIP AXD IXHERiTA^'CE.  83

might  be  expiated  by  gifts  to  Brahmans.  The  huge
endowments  for  religious  pm^poses  which  are  found
in  every  part  of  India  show  that  these  precepts  were
not  a  dead  letter.'  Xow  one  chief  impediment  to
pious  liberality  is  that  system  of  joint  ownershii)  by
groups  larger  than  families  which  is  still  common  in
India,  especially  in  that  earliest  home  of  the  Aryan
race,  the  Punjab.  Ever}^  man's  rights  m  such  a
gi'oup  are  more  or  less  limited  by  the  rights  of  every-
body else  ;  and,  as  a  rule,  the  assent  of  the  entire
group  is  necessary  before  any  part  of  its  property
can  be  alienated.  Hence  the  sacerdotal  system,  of
which  the  rudiments  are  to  be  seen  in  the  law-books,
is  most  manifestly  adverse  to  joint  forms  of  property.
The  writers  frankly  avow  their  motives  for  this  dis-
like of  co-ownership  and  for  their  partisanship  of
partition.  *  In  partition,'  says  Gautama,  ^  there  is
increase  of  spiritual  merit'  (x.  viii.  4).  The  prin-
ciple is  still  more  plainly  put  by  Manu  (ix.  iii.)  :
*  Either  let  them  live  together,  or,  if  they  desire
separately  to  perforin  religious  rites,  let  them  live
apart  ;  since  religious  duties  are  iiuiltiplicd  in
separate  houses,  their  separation  is  therefore  right
and  even  laudable.'  The  more  separate  households,
the  more  occasion  for  domestic  sacrifice,  the  more
opportunities  for  pious  largesse  to  the  sacred  order.

The  modern  writer  I  have  quoted  (J.  D.  Mayne,
p.  201)  cites  my  own  o])inion,  expressed  in  a  former


84  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE. chap.  iv.

work  ('  Early  History  of  Institutions,'  p.  104)  that
the  Christian  Church,  when  engaged  in  proselytism
among  barbarous  societies,  exerted  a  similarly  dis-
solving force  upon  tribal  ownership.  The  Church
certainly  introduced  its  barbarous  converts  to  the
Testament  or  Will ;  it  strove  to  strengthen  their
reverence  for  Contracts  ;  and  the  Irish  evidence  seems
to  prove  that  it  largely  extended  Separate,  as  dis-
tinguished from  Tribal,  ownership.  In  reading  the
Brehon  tracts,  you  remain  in  doubt  whether  the
writer  means  to  lay  down  that  tribal  land  under  cer-
tain circumstances  may  be  parted  with  generally  and
in  favour  of  anybody,  or  whether  it  is  only  to  be
alienated  in  favour  of  the  Church.  The  strong  pro-
bability is  that  he  intended  to  sanction  gifts  to  the
Church  primarily  ;  and  that  a  generally  enlarged
power  of  separate  alienation  was  the  consequence  of
such  rulings.  But  it  has  always  to  be  remembered
that  there  is  a  radical  difference  between  the  Brahman
encouragement  of  charitable  profusion  and  the  en-
largement of  legal  facilities  for  pious  endowment  by
the  mediaeval  Christian  Church.  Charity  with  the
Brahman  began  strictly  at  home  ;  he  was  wedded  to
it,  because  he  lived  by  it.  But  the  Church,  although
it  certainly  desired  to  fortify  by  endowments  every
asylum  and  stronghold  which  it  planted  amid  bar-
barism, had  other  classes  under  its  protection  besides
its  own  servants  and  clergy. It  fed  the  poor  and


I


CHAP.  IV. ANCESTOR-WOKSHIP AND INHERITANCE.  85

needy  at  its  gates.  It  was  ever  careful  for  the  orphan
and  the  widow.  But  the  Brahman  law-books,  with
much  elevation  and  some  tenderness  of  feeling,  are
constantly  offensive  in  the  contempt,  sometimes
amounting  to  loathing,  which  they  express  for  all
classes  except  the  sacred  caste  and  other  castes
powerful  enough  to  pretend  to  equality  with  it,  or
proximity  to  it.^

We  come  now  to  some  results  of  Ancestor-
worship  which  are  of  the  highest  interest  as  throw-
ing light  on  a  number  of  perplexing  questions  which
embarrass  our  first  steps  in  the  examination  of  very
ancient  societies.  It  seems  clear  that,  according  to
the  most  ancient  ideas,  not  only  must  the  ancestor
worshipped  be  a  male  ancestor,  but  the  worshipper
must  be  the  male  child  or  other  male  descendant.
Under  the  conditions  of  thought  we  have  been  sup-
posing, it  will  have  been  seen  that  the  verge  of  life
and  death  was  very  easily  overstepped.  The  dead
man  was  he  who  had  been  the  living  dreamer,  only
that  he  had  now  passed  permanently  into  the  life  of
dreams.  It  thus  seemed  proper  that  the  sacrifice
should  be  offered  by  a  person  who  one  day  would
take  his  place  in  the  chain  of  deified  ancestors,  and
this  could  only  be  a  male  descendant.  Hence  there
arose,  among  the  ancestor-worshipping  peoples,  a
most intense desire for male offspring  and,  as  a

^  See  Note  A  to  this  chapter.


86  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE. chap.  iv.

consequence  of  this  desire,  a  remarkable  set  of  ideas
about  paternity,  sonsbip,  and  inheritance,  which  must
have  been  widely  diffused  of  old  among  all  the  more
powerful  races  of  mankind,  and  specially  those  of
the  Aryan  stock.  There  are  manifest  traces  either  of
these  ideas,  or  of  the  customs  with  which  they  were
intermixed,  in  the  legal  antiquities  of  the  Athenians
and  of  the  Spartans,  of  the  Romans,  of  the  Celtic
Irish,  of  the  Hebrews,  and  of  the  Chinese.  As  is
natural,  from  the  deeply  sacerdotalised  character  of
their  legal  literature,  the  fullest  and  most  detailed
account  of  a  family  system  shaped  and  interpene-
trated by  ancestor- worship  is  to  be  found  in  the
ancient  books  of  the  Hindus.  It  cannot,  of  course,
be  taken  for  granted  that  this  system,  in  its  integrity,
once  existed  everywhere.  One  feature  of  it  is  found
here,  another  there.  But  there  does  seem  to  have
been  a  i>:eneral  likeness  between  the  deductions  which
the  priests  and  lawyers  of  a  large  number  of  ancient
societies  drew  from  the  principle  that  sacrifice  and
worship  were  due,  under  severe  supernatural  penalties,
from  male  children  to  their  dead  forefathers.

We  cannot,  as  it  appears  to  me,  frame  in  our
minds  any  reasonable  explanation  of  Ancestor- worship
and  its  legal  consequences,  unless  we  assume  that,
when  it  first  arose  among  men,  the  Father  of  each
family  appeared  to  them  in  the  form  in  which  he
constantly  shows  himself  on  the  threshold  of  juris-


CHAP.  IV. ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE.  87

prudence,  and  which  he  probably  wore^  when  the
human  race  began.  He  is  the  Pater  Familias.  The
physical  paternity  is  fully  recognised,  but  it  is
blended  with  protective  power.  Most  of  the  males
subject  to  him  are  really  his  children,  but,  even  if
they  have  not  sprung  from  him,  they  are  subject  to
him,  they  form  part  of  his  household,  they  (if  a  word
coloured  by  later  notions  be  used)  belong  to  him.
On  the  other  hand,  under  the  religious  aspect  of  these
relations,  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  sacerdotal
lawyer,  ttue  son  is  sunply  the  person  who  can  effica-
ciously offer  the  sacrifices.  Dr.  Blihler  (Preface  to
vol.  ii.  of '  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,'  p.  xix.)  writes
thus  of  Baudhayana,  whom  Sanscritists,  Indian  and
European,  generally  regard  as  one  of  the  oldest
of  the  law-writers.  '  Like  many  other  ancient
teachers,  Baudhayana  permits  childless  Aryans  to
satisfy  their  craving  for  representatives  bearing  their
name,  and  to  allay  their  fears  of  falling  after  death
into  the  regions  of  torment  through  a  failure  of  the
funeral  oblations,  by  tlic  affiliation  of  eleven  kinds  of
substitutes  for  a  legitimate  son.  Illegitimate  sons,
the  illegitimate  sons  of  wives,  the  legitimate  and
illegitimate  offspring  of  daughters,  and  the  children
of  relatives  and  even  of  strangers,  who  may  be
solemnly adopted or received as members of  the

2  See  Chapter  VIT.  (on  '  Modern  Theories  of  Primitive  Society')


88  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP  AND INHERITANCE. chap,  iy,

family  witliout  any  ceremony,  are  all  allowed  to  take
the  place  and  the  rights  of  legitimate  sons.'  I  will
proceed  to  examine  this  system  of  artificial  affiliation
at  some  length,  together  with  its  bearing  on  Inheri-
tance in  the  embryo.  Until  the  ideas  upon  which
it  rests  have  been  carefully  sifted,  it  seem.s  to  me
doubtful  whether  all  investigation  of  the  primitive
forms  of  society  is  not  likely  to  be  imperfect  and  pre-
mature.

First  of  all,  then,  the  person  who  offers  the  sacri-
fices with  the  best  chance  of  efficacy  in  the  world
beyond  the  grave  is  the  legitimate  son,  the  son  who
is  physically  the  offspring  of  his  father  and  who,  by
preference,  is  born  of  a  marriage  blessed  by  Brah-
mans  and  contracted  under  all  the  conditions  which
their  sacred  law  prescribes.  And,  among  all  sons,
the  eldest  son  is  most  likely  to  confer  spiritual  benefit
on  his  father.  Here,  however,  we  come  upon  one  of
the  most  remarkable  of  the  extensions  which  the
sacerdotal  lawyers  give  to  their  doctrine  in  order  to
prevent  its  miscarriage  in  particular  cases.  With  the
purpose  of  increasing  the  chance  of  there  being  legiti-
mate sons  to  present  the  oblation,  some  among  the
oldest  of  these  Brahmanical  teachers  relax  the  con-
ditions of  marriage,  and  show  leniency  to  strange
forms  of  wedlock,  so  numerous  as  almost  to  include
all  possible  unions  of  the  sexes.  Some  of  these  mar-
riages are very  strongly  condemned by the later


CffAP.  IV. AXCESTOR-WORSHir AND INHERITANCE.  89

Hindu  law-writers  ;  for  example,  marriage  with  a
purchased  bride  ;  others,  where  they  occur,  are  effec-
tuated by  violence  or  by  fraud.  Still,  it  is  to  be
observed  that  the  children  of  all  these  unions  would
be  physically  the  children  of  the  husband  ;  and  the
father  and  mother,  however  barbarous  their  con-
nection, are  probably  understood  to  have  been  un-
married before  it.

Among  all  the  sons  sprung  from  the  father,  the
eldest  is  preferred.  The  sacerdotal  reason  assigned
by  the  Hindu  lawyers  is  that,  by  his  birth,  the
religious  obligation  to  have  a  son  who  can  continue
the  chain  which  binds  toorether  the  living  and  the
dead  has  been  satisfied.  But  the  privileges  of  inheri-
tance corresponding  to  this  spiritual  primacy  are  very
variously  defined  in  the  law-books,  and,  even  when
they  approach  somewhat  to  modern  primogeniture,
they  are  still  very  unlike  it.  Sometimes  the  eldest
son  is  spoken  of  as  taking  the  whole  inheritance  of
his  father  and  supporting  the  rest  of  the  family,  and
this  is  very  probably  tlie  secular  custom  for  which
the  priestly  lawyers  invented  a  religious  reason.
More  often,  the  best  portion,  or  some  similar  advan-
tage, is  assigned  to  the  eldest  of  the  sons,  and  some-
times alternative  modes  of  providing  for  him  are
stated.  Of  two  ancient  authorities,  Gautama  defines
his  privileges  in  ambiguous  and  indeed  contradictory
language  (see  chap,  xxviii.),  while  Apastamba,  while


90  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE. chap,  it,

admitting  that  Primogeniture  gives  advantages  in
certain  countries,  argues  strongly  for  equal  division
among  all  the  sons  (ii.  vi.  14.  14).  It  seems  to  me
that,  at  the  epoch  of  these  law -treatises,  the  ancient
Primogeniture  was  decaying  among  the  Hindus,  as
we  know  that  it  decayed  in  the  barbaraus  world
generally.  Under  the  original  usage,  the  eldest
son  may  have  taken  everything  and  maintained  his
brethren  ;  but  the  Brahmans,  as  I  have  explained,
were  strong  partisans  of  multiplied  households,  and
this  feeling  must  have  militated  powerfully  against
the  privileges  of  the  eldest.  On  the  whole,  the  doc-
trine which  tends  to  prevail  is  that  the  division
should  be  equal  among  sons,  with  a  small  advantage
to  the  eldest  as  the  divider  of  the  inheritance,  which
may  have  been  meant  as  an  inducement  to  fairness.

Next  to  the  legitimate  sons,  as  proper  vehicles
for  spiritual  blessing,  the  greater  number  of  the
ancient  Hindu  law-writers  place  the  son  of  the  wife,
born  during  her  marriage  but  not  necessarily  of  her
husband.  At  first  sight  this  looks  like  an  application
of  the  long-descended  legal  maxim,  ^ pater  est  quern
mtptice  demonstrant^  but  all  the  ancient  texts  taken
together  suggest  a  diiferent  explanation,  and  I  will
consider  the  '  son  of  the  wife  '  a2:ain  when  I  come  to
the  son  of  the  widow.

The  person  who,  on  failure  of  all  the  inheritors  I
have  mentioned,  can  next  in  order  offer  the  sacrifices


I


CHAr.  iv. ANCESTOR-WORSHIP .\XD IXHERITA>'CE.  91

for  the  deceased  and  claim  his  succession,  is  the  son
of  his  •  appointed  '  daughter.  It  is  an  interesting
case  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  The  son  of  a  daughter,
regarded  by  himself,  would  not  satisfy  the  requuT-
ments  either  of  a  successor  or  of  a  worshipper.  From
the  secular  point  of  view,  he  is,  in  Roman  phrase,
a  •  cognate,'  a  kinsman  through  women  only,  who,
according  to  the  usage  prevailing  among  all  the  more
powerful  races  of  mankind  either  from  the  first  or  at
a  certain  stage  of  theu'  development,  cannot  continue
the  family.  The  religious  theoiy  of  ancestor-worship
would  not  take  any  notice  of  him,  for  the  parent  to
whom  he  would  sacrifice  would  be  a  woman,  and
women  could  not  in  the  earliest  times  be  objects  of
worship,  and  never  at  any  time  by  themselves.  But
the  ancient  law  allowed  the  father,  who  had  no  pro-
spect of  having  legitimate  sons,  to  '  appoint '  or  nomi-
nate a  daughter  who  should  bear  a  son  to  himself  and
not  to  her  own  husband.  Apparently  this  appoint-
ment could  be  made  against  the  husband's  will,  for
one  of  our  oldest  authorities  warns  the  Hindu  against
marrying  a  girl  who  has  no  brothers,  because  her
father  may  '  appoint '  her,  and  her  husband  may  have
his  own  naturally-ljom  son  converted  into  the  son  of
the  maternal  grandfather.  The  sacerdotal  formula  of
appointment  is  given  in  Gautama,  xxviii.  11).  18:
*  A  father  who  has  no  male  offspring  may  appoint  his
daughter  to  raise  up  a  son  for  him,  presenting  burnt


tmm


92  ANCESTOR- WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE. chap.  iv.

offerings  to  Agni  and  to  Pragapati,  the  lord  of  crea-
tures, and  addressing  the  bridegroom  with  these
words,  ^'  For  me  be  thy  male  offspring." '  '  Some
declare,'  adds  the  writer,  '  that  a  daughter  becomes
an  appointed  daughter  solely  by  the  intention  of  the
father.'

Some  customs  near  akin  to  the  Hindu  usage  of
^  appointing '  a  daughter  appear  to  have  been  very
widely  diffused  over  the  ancient  world,  and  traces  of
them  are  found  far  down  in  history.  The  daughter
here  becomes  neither  the  true  successor  of  her  father
nor  the  priestess  of  his  worship,  but  a  channel
through  which  his  blood  passes  to  a  male  child,
capable,  according  to  the  oldest  notions,  of  sacrificing
to  him  ;  and,  according  to  the  newer  ideas,  of  taking
his  property  and  preserving  the  continuity  of  the
household.  At  first  there  was  always,  I  should
imagine,  some  expression  of  the  father's  will,  coupled
with  some  religious  ceremony.  Among  the  Athenians,
when  our  knowledge  of  their  law  begins,  the  Testa-
ment or  Will  has  appeared,  though  its  operation  is
much  limited.  An  Athenian  father,  fearing  sonless-
ness,  might  have  a  son  raised  up  to  him  by  a
daughter  ;  and  the  commonest  mode  of  effecting  this
object  was  by  devising  his  property — or,  to  speak
more  strictly,  the  property  and  the  daughter  together
— to  a  person  selected  by  himself  on  condition  of
marrying  her. The  son  born  of  the  marriage  was.


CHAP.  IT. ANCESTOR- WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE.  93

on  coming  of  age,  transferred  to  the  family  of  his
maternal  grandfather — it  would  seem,  with  some  of
the  forms  of  adoption — and  took  his  name,  becoming
at  the  same  time  the  legal  representative  (/cvpto?)  of
his  own  mother.  This  is  essentially  the  same  method
of  obtaining  a  male  child  which  was  anciently  in  use
with  the  Hindus.  But  some  such  practice  must  have
been  followed,  and  some  such  ideas  must  have  pre-
vailed among  a  certain  portion  of  the  barbarous
communities  which  contributed  their  usages  to  the
enormous  body  of  rules  j&nally  consolidated  as  the
Feudal  Law.  According  to  some  systems  of  mediaeval
customary  law,  daughters  succeeded,  either  in  order
of  primogeniture  or  in  a  group,  when  sons  had  failed.
According  to  others,  they  were  excluded  altogether.
But  between  these  doctrines  there  was  an  intermediate
view,  that  a  daughter,  though  she  could  not  succeed
herself,  could  transmit  a  right  of  succession  to  her
male  children.  Hereafter,  I  shall  have  occasion  to
point  out  that  this  was  the  rule  on  which  our
Edward  III.  based  his  claim  to  the  throne  of  France  ;
he  admitted  that  the  Frencli  princess,  who  was  his
mother,  could  not  succeed,  but  he  contended  that  he
himself,  as  her  son,  was  entitled  to  succeed  his
maternal  grandfather.  This  argument  did  not  pre-
vail either  in  the  forum  of  arms  or  in  tlie  opinion  of
the  feudal  lawyers  ;  but  it  seems  to  be  clearly  con-
nected with  the  rano;c  of  Wal  notions  before  us.


94  ANCESTOR-AYORSIIIP AXD IXIIERITANCE. chap.  iy.

The  chief  interest  of  the  Hindu  '  appointment/
and  of  the  counterparts  of  it  in  the  law  of  other  races,
lies  in  their  probably  marking  one  of  the  points  at
which  the  right  of  women  to  inherit  made  its  way
into  the  strict  agnatic  systems  of  kinship  and  succes-
sion which  prevailed  among  the  more  advanced  of
the  barbarous  societies.  The  Brahman  compiler  of
Manu,  while  speaking  of  the  appomted  daughter,  uses
language  which  seems  to  show  the  natural  growth  of
feeling  :  '  The  son  of  a  man  is  even  as  himself,  and  as
the  son  so  is  the  daughter  ( '  thus  appointed  '  adds
the  commentator)  :  how  then,  if  he  have  no  son,  can
any  inherit  his  property  but  a  daughter  who  is  closely
united  with  his  own  soul  ?  '  As  the  law  developed
itself,  the  most  general  result  finally  attained  was
that  daughters  inherited  when  sons  had  failed.  But
it  was  not  reached  at  once.  Among  the  ancient
Hindu  writers,  Baudhayana  seems  to  have  wholly
denied  the  right  of  women  to  inherit :  Apastamba
places  the  daughter  at  the  very  end  of  the  list  of
mheritors,  but  the  more  modern  Vishnu  introduces
both  mother  and  daughter  immediately  after  the
sons.  In  works  treating  of  the  Athenian  law,  it  is
usually  stated  that  when  there  were  no  sons  daughters
succeeded.  But  this  is  not  an  adequate  statement
of  the  rule.  The  daughter  of  a  man  who  left  projDerty
but  no  sons,  was  not  in  strictness  his. heiress.  She
was, as  her Greek name (eVt/cXr^po?) indicates, a


CHAP.  IT. AXCESTOR-WOESHIP AXD IXHERITAXX'E.  95

'  person  who  went  with  the  property.'  ^  As  I  have  said
above,  her  father  might  compel  her  by  testament  to
marry  the  de^'isee  of  her  share  ;  but,  if  he  died  intes-
tate, she  was  subject  to  another  liability — marriage
to  his  nearest  kinsman — which  comiects  itself  with
some  singular  branches  of  our  subject  to  be  dis-
cussed presently.  In  all  these  Athenian  rules,  it
is  to  be  observed  that,  while  the  ancestral  sacrifices
are  constantly  mentioned,  the  object  of  special  care  is
the  devolution  of  the  estate  in  the  household.  The
religious  basis  tends  to  drop  away  from  the  law.
Indeed,  the  wish  to  prevent  daughters  from  carrying
off  the  patrimony  of  one  household  to  another  is  not
at  all  a  feature  exclusively  of  sacerdotalised  bodies  of
usage.  The  secular  law  of  the  unsacerdotalised  Hindus
of  the  Punjab  applies  the  same  principle  and  exhibits
gome  instructive  variants  of  the  Athenian  rules
('  Xotes  on  Punjab  Customary  Law,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  75,
81,  184,  239).  Under  some  Punjab  usages,  the
daughter,  when  there  are  no  sons,  inherits  a  limited
interest  in  her  father's  property  ;  but  she  must  resign
it  when  she  marries.  It  is  usual,  however,  for  the
husband  of  such  a  daughter  to  be  adopted  by  his
father-in-law.

The  legitimate  sons,  and  the  son  of  an  '  appointed '
daughter,  have  in  their  veins  the  blood  of  the  father

3  «^  jeij})^  ^ii^-^  Orators,  ii.  3 IS.


^<—|^lWI^ II ■!!■ U^


96  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AXD INHERITANCE. chap.  iv.

to  whom  they  sacrifice  and  succeed. But  when  there
are  no  sons,  and  when  there  has  been  no  appointment
of  a  daughter,  we  are  introduced  by  the  law-books  to
a  number of  possible successors  whose  sonship  is
altogether  fictitious. I  know  no  part  of  the  ancient
Hindu  law  more  curious  than this, or demanding
more  imperatively  to  be  taken  into  careful  account
by  all  who  investigate  the  beginnings of  organised
human  society. That  ancient  family  law  is  entangled
with  fictions  has  long  been  known. (  See  my  '  Ancient
Law,'  p.  130.) One  of  them  has  been  so  long  before
our  eyes  as  to  be  comparatively  familiar  to  us. This
is  Adoption,  the  engi'afting  on  the  family  a  son  from
a  strange  house. Its  importance as a private in-
stitution  at Rome and Athens is of  course well
known  to  students ;  and,  among  the  Romans  of  the
Empire,  it  became  politically  important  in  a  high  de-
gree as  one  of  the  chief  expedients  for  bringing  about
the  peaceable  succession  of  Prince  to  Prince. It  is
true  that  to  Englishmen,  nowadays,  it  is  little  more
than  a  name  ;  to  adopt  a child  is to  nurture and
educate  it,  and  perhaps  to  provide  for  it  by  Will. But
in  the  French  Civil Code  (liv. i. 8  ; tit.  8,  c.  1),
and  other  Continental  Codes  founded  on  the  French,
Adoption  survives  as  an  institution  :  a  childless  man,
though  under  somewhat  severely restrictive  condi-
tions, may  take  to  hmiself  an  adoptive  child  who  will
foe  entitled  to  succeed  to  his  property. This  fomili-


CHAP.  IV. ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE.  97

arity  with  Adoption,  during  such  a  length  of  history,
blinds  us  to  the  fact  that  it  is  one  of  the  most  violent
of  fictions.  The  faculty  of  accepting  them,  strong  as
it  is  in  ancient  communities,  must  have  been  strained
to  the  utmost  when,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  part  in
the  most  solemn  of  relis^ious  ceremonies  and  earn-
ing  a  consequent  right  of  inheritance,  a  strange  child
was  transferred  to  the  household,  or  a  man  alien  in
blood  was  permitted  to  enter  it  voluntarily.  Xo
doubt,  in  the  more  recent  practice  of  the  societies
accustomed  to  the  adoption  of  children,  the  violence
of  the  fiction  is  somewhat  diminished.  The  theory
may  be  that  the  child  adopted  is  a  stranger,  at  most
of  the  same  order  or  caste  as  the  person  adopting
him,  but  in  India  he  is  generally  a  blood-relation  of
some  kind ;  and,  on  looking  through  a  list  of  known
Roman  adoptions,  the  large  majority  will  be  seen  to
be  instances  of  the  adoption  of  '  cognatic  '  kinsmen —
that  is,  of  relatives  through  women.  But  the  ancient
feeling  on  the  subject  may  be  inferred  from  the  place
which  simple  adoption  occupies  in  the  list  of  expe-
dients for  continuing  the  family  of  a  childless  father
as  set  forth  in  these  early  Hindu  law-books.  ^  There
is  a  singular  disproportion,'  says  Mr.  J.  D.  Mayne,
*  between  the  space  necessarily  devoted  to  adoption
in  the  English  works  on  Iliiidn  law,  and  that  wliich
it  occupies  in  the  early  law-books.  One  might  read
through  all  the  texts  from  the  Sutra  writers  down  to

H


98  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AND INIIKRITAXCE. CHAr.  iv.

the  Daya-Bhaga  without  disco vermg  that  adoption
is  a  matter  of  any  j)rominence  in  the  Hindu  system  '
('  Hindu  Law,'  p.  81).  The  truth  is,  that  by  its  side
there  are  a  number  of  fictitious  affiliations  which
were  of  at  least  equal  antiquity  with  Adoption,  and
which,  I  suspect,  served  its  object  even  more  com-
pletely in  very  ancient  times.  They  are  startling  or
revolting  to  modern  sentiment,  but  they  seemed  per-
liaps  simpler  and  more  natural  to  ancient  thought
than  the  admission  of  a  mere  stranger  to  the  family.

These  fictitious  sons  are  called  by  Gautama
(xxviii.  32)  the  ^  son  born  secretly,'  the  '  son  of  an  un-
married damsel,'  the  '  son  of  a  pregnant  bride,'  and  the
son  of  a  '  twice  married  woman.'  It  is  sufficient  to  say
of  them  that  none  of  them  are  necessarily  the  sons  of
the  father  whom  they  are  permitted  to  worship  after
his  death,  while  some  of  them  cannot  possibly  be  his
children.  They  are  all,  to  use  modern  words,  illegi-
timate or  adulterine  offspring,  but  then  they  are  all  the
offspring  of  women  who  are  under  the  shelter  of  the
household,  or  who  are  brought  under  it.  These  women
are  under  the  protection  of  its  head;  they  belong  to  him,
and  the  status  of  their  children  is  settled  by  the  well-
known  rule  which,  in  Roman  law,  would  settle  the
status  of  a  slave.  Here  it  is  that  these  strange  usages
link  themselves  to  familiar  phenomena  of  primitive
societies.  Paternal  power  and  protective  power  are
inextricably  blended  together  ;  even  the Slave  is  in


-€HAP.  IV. AJsX'ESTOR-WORSHIP AND IXHEKITANCE.  99

some  sense  a  member  of  the  family.  We  know  in
fact  that  at  Rome  a  Slave  could  perform  the  family
sacrifices  on  his  master's  death  ;  and  it  was  a  com-
mon contrivance  of  men  who  expected  to  die  insolvent
to  nominate  a  slave  as  the  heir  in  the  last  resort,  in
order  that  the  bankruptcy  of  the  estate  might  be
declared  in  his  name.  Thus,  on  the  secular  side,  these
fictitious  sons  are  permitted  to  rank  as  in  some  remote
sense  sons,  because  they  are  born  of  women  protected
by  the  head  of  the  household,  and  because  they  are
themselves  protected  by  him.  On  the  religious  side,
they  are  permitted  to  ofi'er  the  ancestral  sacrifices  as
a  desperate  expedient  for  preserving  the  ancestor
from  a  total  faikire  of  male  offspring,  and  from  the
terrible  consequences  of  entering  the  world  of  the  dead
without  the  proper  oblations  and  rites.

It  must  be,  however,  understood  that  strong
moral  repugnance  to  the  fictitious  affiliation  of  these
illef^^itimate  and  adulterine  children  beo:ins  to  show
itself  among  the  oldest  of  the  Hindu  law-writers
whose  treatises  have  survived.  A  very  ancient
authority,  Apastamba,  gives  no  list  of  them,  protests
against  the  princi})le,  and  lays  down  l)roadly  that
^  the  son  belongs  to  the  begetter.'  Even  the  writers
who  mention  them  vary  greatly  as  to  their  place  in
the  order  of  succession,  and  ^lanu  aims  at  them  the
remark  (ix.  IGl)  that  'such  advantage  as  a  man
would  gain  who  should  attempt  to  pass  deep  water  in

n  2


100  ANCESTOR- WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE. chap.  iy.

a  boat  made  of  woven  reeds,  that  father  obtams  who
passes  the  gloom  of  death  leaving  only  contemptible
sons.'  I  cannot  doul^t  that  the  growing  popularity
of  Adoption,  as  a  method  of  obtaining  a  fictitious  son,
was  due  to  moral  dislike  of  the  other  modes  of  affilia-
tion which  was  steadily  rising  among  the  Brahman
teachers  in  the  law^- schools.

Let  us  now  suppose  the  head  of  the  household  to
have  died  without  havins;  left  a  son,  without  havino;
appointed  a  daughter,  without  having  taken  a  son  in
adoption,  without  male  children  born  in  the  house
who  can  satisfy  the  fiction  of  sonship, — is  there  any
escape  possible  from  the  dreaded  consequences  of
failure  in  the  family  succession  and  the  ancestral
sacrifices?  In  the  opinion  of  some  of  the  Hindu
doctors,  these  consequences  might  be  averted  by  an
institution  which  has  lately  received  a  great  deal  of
attention,  known  commonly  as  the  Levirate,  but  called
by  the  Hindus,  in  its  more  general  form,  the  Niyoga.
Under  it,  a  son  is  born  to  a  childless  man  of  his  wife
or  his  widow,  not  from  the  husband  himself  but  from
his  brother  or  nearest  kinsman.  The  practice  of  so  ob-
taining a  son  appears  to  have  extended,  with  various
modifications  and  with  or  without  the  relioious  sane-
tion,  over  many  branches  of  the  human  race.  We
come  upon  fiiint  but  still  recognisable  traces  of  it  in
the  law  of  tlie  Spartans  and  Athenians,  and  in  one  of
its  forms  it  was  certainJlir.iblLis^ed  by  the  Hebrews.


l^,lj  „„^- 1 k* ^'* " *


7-^  _ ..^(•\0


-CHAP.  LY. ANCESTOR-WORSHIP xVND INHERITANCE.  101

The  Levirate,  under  which,  the  son  is  born  to  the
dead  man  from  his  brother,  '  that  his  name  be  not  put
out  of  Israel,'  is  best  known  to  Englishmen  from  the
casuistical  question  of  the  Saclducees  in  the  twenty-
second  chapter  of  St.  Matthew  (v.  24  ct  scq.):
'  Master,  Moses  said.  If  a  man  die,  having  no  children,
his  brother  shall  marry  his  wife  and  raise  up  seed  to
his  brother.  Xow  there  were  with  us  seven  breth-
ren ;  and  the  first,  when  he  married,  deceased  and,
having  no  seed,  he  left  his  wife  unto  his  brother  :
Likewise  the  second  also,  and  the  third,  unto  the
seventh.  And  after  them  all,  the  woman  died.  In
the  Resurrection,  therefore,  whose  wife  shall  she  be  of
the  seven?  for  they  all  had  her.'  In  the  passage  here
expressly  referred  to  (Deuteronomy  xxv.  5)  the  duty
of  the  husband's  brother  is  declared  to  be  impera-
tive. '  If  brethren  dwell  togetlier,  and  one  of  them
die  and  have  no  child,  the  wife  of  the  dead  shall
not  marry  without  unto  a  stranger  :  her  husband's
brother  shall  go  in  unto  her,  and  take  lier  to  wife,
and  perform  the  duty  of  a  husband's  brother  unto  her.
And  it  shall  be  that  the  first-born  which  she  beareth
shall  succeed  in  the  name  of  his  brother  which  is
dead,  that  his  name  be  not  put  out  of  Israel.'  The
verses  w^hich  succeed  describe  the  procedure  which  is
to  be  followed  when  the  brother-in-law  declines  the
obligation  ;  and  this  procedure,  consisting  chiefly  of  a
symbolic  plucking  off  of  the  shoe,  reappears  in  the  Book


102  AXCESTOR-WOKSHIP AND INHERITANCE. chap.  iv..

of  Ruth,  where  the  idyllic  beaut}'  of  the  story  sometimes
blinds  the  reader  to  the  fact  it  is  meant  to  illustrate,
a  legal  rule  which  was  important  in  its  bearing  on  a
passage  in  the  genealogical  history  of  the  Royal
House  of  Judah.  The  most  ancient  form  of  the  insti-
tution appears,  however,  to  be  that  which  is  described
by  the  oldest  of  the  Hindu  law-writers.  '  A  woman
whose  husband  is  dead  and  who  desires  oiFsprmg  may
bear  a  son  to  her  brother-in-law.  Let  her  obtain  the
permission  of  her  Gurus  (that  is,  her  spiritual  direc-
tors). On  failure  of  a  brother-in-law,  she  may
obtain  offspring  by  cohabitmg  with  a  Sapinda,  a
Sagotra  (a  Roman  would  have  said,  an  '  Agnatus '  or
'  Gen  tills  '),  a  Samanapravara  (that  is,  one  of  the
same  literary  or  sacerdotal  clan  as  her  husband),  or
one  who  belongs  to  the  same  caste.  Some  declare
that  she  shall  cohabit  with  nobody  but  a  brother-m-
law.'  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  Gautama  does  not
appear  to  contemplate  that  the  widow  will  necessarily
become  the  wife  of  the  Levir,  and  that,  as  in  the  Book
of  Ruth,  the  obligation  is  extended  by  him  to  kins-
men remoter  than  a  brother-in-law,  though  he  notices
the  opinion  that  a  brother-in-hxw  alone  can  raise  up
seed  to  his  brother  (Gautama,  xviii.  6  et  seq.)

But  the  practice  here  and  there  received  an  exten-
sion even  more  revolting  to  modern  delicacy  than  the
shape  which  it  takes  in  the  Levirate.  '  The  child  be-
gotten at  a  living  husband's  request,  on  his  wife,'  says


CHAP.  IV. AXCESTOK-WORSHIP AXD I^'HERITA^X'E.  103

Gautama  (xviii.  11),  'belongs  to  the  husband.'
There  are  several  instances  of  such  requests  referred
to  in  the  Sanscrit  literature,  but  the  practice,  when
defined  as  an  institution  by  the  lawj-ers,  strictly
reqmred  that  the  natural  father  of  the  child  should
always  be  a  kinsman.  Gautama  immediately  adds  to
the  passage  just  quoted,  *  If  the  natural  father  of  the
child  was  a  strano-er,  that  is  not  of  kin  to  the  hus-
band,  it  belono;s  to  the  strano;er.'  And,  ao-ain,  in  his
list  of  sons,  this  ancient  writer  places  the  '  son  be-
gotten on  the  wife  by  a  kinsman.'  It  would  appear,
as  I  shall  have  to  point  out  presently,  that  Hindu
sacerdotal  feeling  was  divided  from  the  very  earliest
times  on  the  morality  of  the  Xiyoga  ;  but  we  must
bear  in  mind  that  its  coarser  form  was  not  necessarily
more  repugnant  to  the  old  teachers  than  the  form
which  seems  to  us  somewhat  less  offensive.  Xo
doubt  the  birth  of  the  son  from  the  widow  does  not
revolt  so  much  as  his  birth  from  the  wife.  But  then
the  ancient  law  made  little  difference  between  the
husband's  old  age  and  his  death.  It  is  assumed  that
an  old  man  will  quit  his  house  and  family  and  with-
draw to  spend  the  residue  of  his  life  in  asceticism  ;
and  the  fittest  moment  for  retirement  is  frequentl}'
described  as  the  time  at  which  he  becomes  incapable
of  fatherhood.

There  are  some  vestiges  of  the  class  of  functions
assigned  Ijy  the  Xiyoga  to the  nearest kinsman  in


104  A>X'EST0R-W0RSI1IP AND IXHERITANCE. chap.  iy.

the  records  of  both  the  great  States  of  Greece. A
well-known  story  told  by  Plutarch  (' Pyrrhus/  26)
of  the relations between a  brilliant  Lacedaemonian
officer,  Acrotatus,  and  Chelidonis,  the  wife  of  Cleo-
nymus,  and  of  the way in which  the  old  men  of
Sparta  applauded  these  relations  and  invoked  bless-
ings on  the  offspring  of  Chelidonis,  does  assuredly
suggest  that,  in  that  old-fashioned  and  never  very
delicate society,  some institution like that of  the
ancient  Hindus  survived  till  the  third  century  before
Christ. Cleonymus  was^an  aged  man.  and  Acrotatus,
his  grand-nephew, seems to  have  been  his  nearest
male  relative  in  the  flower  of  life. At  Athens,  the
most  nearly corresponding  institution  differed  con-
siderably from  the  Hindu  form. I  have  stated  that
an  Athenian  father  might  provide,  like  an  Hindu,  for
the  continuance  of  his  family  through  the son  of  a
daughter  ; but if, dying  sonless and  intestate,  he
allowed  his  property  to  descend  to  a  daughter  without
special  arrangement,  she  became  the  Or23han  Heiress
(or  iTTLKXrjpos),  who  makes  a  great  figure  in  Attic  law.
Slie  had  no  power  of  choosing  a  husband  for  herself,
but  it  was  the  right  of  her  nearest  kinsman  to  marry
lier  and  his  duty  to  marry  or  portion  her. The  right
seems  in  fact  to  have  been  keenly  disputed  ;  there
was  a  special  proceeding  (or  StaSt/cacrta)  for  deciding
between  different  claimants,  and  men  often  divorced
their  wives  in  order  to  marry  the  heiress. The  same


<;ffAP.  IT. AXCESTOR-WOESHIP AXD INHERITAXCE.  105

principle  was  applied  to  a  group  of  daughters,  whom
their  various  kinsmen  in  order  of  proximity  had  to
marry  or  provide  with  a  portion.  The  object,  of
course,  is  to  keep  the  property  in  the  family,  and,  if
possible,  to  provide  that  the  daughter's  children
should  derive  a  stream  of  its  blood  from  male  descents.
An  even  more  remarkable  application  of  the  principle
occurred  when  the  children  left  were  a  brother  and
sister.  In  such  a  case  the  duty  of  the  brother  was  to
portion  the  sister,  but  if  she  were  only  a  half-sister,
the  strong  Athenian  feeling  against  the  marriage  of
brothers  and  sisters  had  to  give  way,  and  he  might
marry  her  and  save  the  portion  to  the  estate.  This
power  could  not,  however,  be  exercised,  if  the  sister
were  uterine,  that  is,  a  child  by  the  same  mother
though  not  by  the  same  father  ;  and  this  limitation
has  been  thought  a  survival  of  the  remote  age
at  whicli  the  Athenians  counted  kinship  through
females  only.  But  marriage  with  an  uterine  sister
would  have  no  tendency  to  promote  the  object  aimed
at.  She  would  have  no  rights  over  the  father's  estate,
and  marrying  her  would  not  lielp  to  keep  it  from
diminution  and  to  preserve  in  its  integrity  the  fund
for  the  ancestral  sacrifices.'*  Let  me  repeat  that,  in
most of  the Athenian rules  about  the rights and

^  This  is  the  explanation  of  M.  Fustel  dc  Coulanges  (Cite
Antique,  p.  83),  which  KcemH  to  me  concluwive.  He  observes  that
an  emancij/ated  son  did  not  enjoy  the  j>rivilege.


106  ANCESTOR- WORSHIP AND I.VHKRITAXCE. chap.  iy.

duties  of  the  nearest  kinsman,  we  have  illustrations
of  the  tendency,  manifest  also  in  the  last  chapter  of
the  Book  of  Ixuth,  of  ancient  contrivances  for  continu-
ing the  family  to  become  mere  modes  of  succession  to
proj^erty.

A  few  words  will  not  be  thrown  away  on  the  pro-
bable origin  and  meaning  of  this  group  of  institutions.
The  Levirate,  which  is  a  special  case  of  the  Xiyoga
and  under  which  one  brother  raises  up  seed  to
another,  has  had  a  definite  place  assigned  to  it  by  the
late  Mr.  J.  F.  McLennan  in  the  evolution  of  society.
Originally,  I  understand  him  to  lay  down,  there  was
promiscuity  m  the  relations  of  the  sexes.  This  pro-
miscuity became  limited  by  Polyandry,^  one  wife
having  several  husbands.  These  plural  husbands
came  in  time  to  be  always  brothers,  and  the  Levi-
rate is  a  relic  of  this  form  of  Polyandry.  It  would
not  be  quite  easy  to  brmg  all  forms  of  the  Xiyoga
(of  which  the  Levirate  is,  as  I  have  said,  only  a
special  case)  under  this  ingenious  theory  ;  but  I  will
confine  myself  to  saying  that  the  explanation  is  not
the  one  .suggested,  to  my  mind  at  all  events,  by  the
antiquities  of  Hindu  law.  Let  us  suppose  that  in  a
2)articular  society  an  intense  desire  has  arisen  for
male  issue,  whether  through  its  worship  of  ancestors
or  otherwise. Let  us  assume  that  in  a  particular  case

5  See  Note  B,  '  Polyandr}-.'


CHAP.  lY. AyCESTOR-WOESHIP AND INHERITANCE.  307

actual  issue  of  the  father's  loins  is  impossible.  There
are  no  daughters.  The  accepted  fictions,  by  which
sons  are  created  for  the  sacrifice,  cannot  be  made  ser-
viceable. What  is  to  be  done,  that  the  name  of  tlie
aged  or  dead  man  be  not  put  out  on  earth  nor  his
lot  placed  in  jeojDardy  beyond  the  grave?  Xott  all
ancient  opinion,  religious  or  legal,  is  strongly  influ-
enced by  analogies,  and  the  child  bom  through  the
Xiyoga  is  verj^  like  a  real  son.  Like  a  real  son,  he  is
bom  of  the  wife  or  the  widow  :  and,  thouo-h  he  has
not  in  him  the  blood  of  the  husband,  he  has  in  him
the  blood  of  the  husband's  race.  The  blood  of  the
individual  cannot  be  continued,  but  the  blood  of  the
household  flows  on.  It  seems  to  me  very  natural  for
an  ancient  authority  on  customary  law  to  hold  that
under  such  circumstances  the  family  was  properly
continued,  and  for  a  priest  or  sacerdotal  lawyer  to
suppose  that  the  funeral  rites  would  be  performed  by
the  son  of  the  widow  or  of  the  wife  with  a  reasonable
prospect  of  ensuring  their  oljject.  The  very  difler-
ences  of  opinion  which  arose  on  the  subject  in  the
most  ancient  Brahmanical  law- schools  seem  to  me
exactly  those  which  would  be  provoked  by  a  plau-
sible and  yet  non-natural  contrivance.  There  was  a
division  of  opinion  about  the  Xiyoga,  especially  in  its
more  offensive  shape,  from  the  very  first.  Apastamba
condemns  it  in  the  stroncrest  lanfruaire,  while  Baud-
hayana  and  Gautama  have  nothing  to  say  against  it.


108  AXCESTOR-WORSHir AND IXIIERITAXCE. chap.  iv.

Manu,  in  a  later  age,  declares  it  is  only  fit  for  cattle
(ix.  65.  f)6),  but  Xarada,  a  still  more  recent  autho-
rity, almost  pervaded  by  the  modern  spirit,  takes  it
as  a  matter  of  course.

I  have  stated  that,  in  my  opinion,  the  capacity
which  came  to  be  recoi>'nised  in  dauo;hters,  to  transmit
to  a  male  child  the  religious  quality  of  sonship  to  his
maternal  grandfather,  is  connected  with  the  ultimate
admission  of  female  descendants  to  a  share  in  the
inheritance.  It  seems  to  me,  further,  a  plausible  con-
jecture that  the  capacity  of  the  widow  to  produce  a
son  to  her  deceased  husband  through  the  L evirate
has  helped  to  confer  on  her  the  life-interest  in  her
husband's  property  which  she  enjoys  in  parts  of
India  ;  and  has  also  led  to  the  power  very  generally
vested  in  her  by  Hindu  law  and  usage  of  taking  a
son  to  her  deceased  husband  by  simple  adoption.
My  subject,  however,  is  the  dependence  of  inheritance
on  ancestor- worship,  and  these  topics  are  too  far  re-
moved from  it  to  be  fitly  discussed  at  present.  In
any  inquiry  into  the  origins  of  the  succession  of
daughters  to  their  father's  estate,  it  would  be  neces-
sary to  examine  the  practice  of  givmg  them  portions
on  tlieir  marriage  which  prevailed  widely  in  the  an-
cient world.  The  gift  to  a  woman  or  the  provision
for  her  on  her  marriage  cannot  be  separated  from  her
right  of  succession.  Speaking  generally,  they  are
alternative  modes  of  providing  for  her  ;  and  the  ex-


I


CHAP.  lY. AXCESTOR-WOESHIP AXD INHERlTA^X'E.  109

elusion  of  daughters  from  inheritance  in  ancient  sys-
tems of  law  constantly  means  that  they  have  a  right
to  be  portioned,  as  a  rule,  out  of  the  movable  pro-
perty of  a  family.  The  ancient  Hindu  writers  scarcely
mention  the  daughter's  succession.  Baudhayana,  it
is  thought,  held  the  opinion  that  no  woman  could
inherit.  Apastamba  brings  in  the  daughter  not
only  after  the  male  relatives,  but  after  such  remote
successors  as  the  religious  teacher  and  the  fellow-
pupil  of  the  deceased.  But  still  these  writers  implicitly
recognise  some  separate  property  in  married  women
(Gautama,  xxviii.  24).  In  the  ancient  legal  systems
of  the  Western  world  there  is  a  visible  connection
between  inheritance  and  provision  upon  marriage.
Under  Athenian  law,  when  sons  have  failed  and  the
father  has  died  intestate,  daughters  must  be  either
married  to  kinsmen,  or  portioned  by  them  under  the
system  wliich  I  have  described.  The  ancient  Roman
law,  at.  the  earliest  stage  at  which  we  know  it,  is
thought  to  liave  allowed  some  share  of  their  fother's
inheritance  to  daughters.  But  the  Iloman  law  has
bequeathed  to  modem  jurisprudence  the  doctrine^
that,  under  certain  circumstances,  a  marriage  portion
is  to  be  deemed  an  '  advance '  of  a  legacy  to  a
daughter,  and,  conversely,  that  a  covenant  to  settle  a
portion  is  '  satisfied  '  by  a  legacy.  I  have  always  sus-
pected that  this  doctrine  inverted  tlie  princi[)lc  of  the
c  sjee  Difj.  XXX.  84,  G. Co<1.  vi.  37,  11.


110  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AXD IXHERITAXCE. chap.  it.

oldest  law  :  and  that,  anciently,  the  daughter  only
succeeded  when  she  had  not  been  portioned. In  the
Joint-Families  of  modern  India,  and  in  the  Slavonian
House -Communities,  though  the  estate  may  be  re-
o'arded  as  belono^ino^  to  the  male members of  the
household,  the  women are  entitled  to  a  portion  on
marriage,  generally  amounting  to  some  definite  frac-
tion of  the  share  which  their  brothers  would  receive
on  a  division  ;  and  in  India,  when  the  property  of  a
joint-family  is  distributed,  the  law  saddles  the  shares
with  a  liability  to  '  maintain '  the  unmarried  women
and  widows. Nowhere,  so  far  as  I  know,  are  women
left  without  provision  in  ancient  societies  which  have
made  even  a  slight  degree  of  advance. The real
prejudice  or  reluctance  is  against  allowing  them  to
confer  on  their  husbands,  to  whom  they  are  generally
married  in  infancy,  any  rights  over  the  kind  of  pro-
perty, such  as  land,  by  which  the  community  lives
and  holds  together. But  a  provision  for  them  by
means  of property  which  is  actually  movable  and
transferable  is  thought  not  merely  just  and  fair,  but
so  imperatively  required  that  it  would  be  a  violation
of  decency  and  a  blot  on  the  family  honour  to  omit
or  refuse  to  provide  it.

We  have  now  come  to  the  point  at  whicli,  if  there
were  any  close  analogy  between  a  modern  legal  writer
and  these  ancient  expositors  of  the  Brahmanical
^sacred  law,  they  would  take  up  for  discussion  (1)  the


CHAP.  lY. AXCESTOR-WORSHIP AXD IXHERITAXCE.  Ill

succession  of  ascendants  of  the  deceased,  of  his  male
paternal  ancestors,  if  any  survived  him,  and  (2)  the
succession  of  collaterals — that  is,  of  the  descendants  of
his  paternal  ancestors. The  second  of  these  subjects,
Collateral  Succession,  has  attained  a  vast  extent  and
complexity  in  the  modern  ^  law  of  the  Hindus  ;  and
on  the  whole  its  importance  has  increased  rather  than
diminished  in  Western  Europe. Englishmen  are  less
interested  in  Collateral  Succession  than  other  peoples,
and,  indeed,  it  may  be  said  in  all  succession  by  law,
throuD-h  their  almost  universal  habit  of  determininor'
the  devolution  of  their  property  by  marriage-settle-
ments or  wills. But  on  the  Continent,  prmcipally
through  the  operation  of  the  French  Code  and  of  the
Codes  modelled  on  it,  the  practice  of  testamentary
disposition  is  said  to  be  on  the  decline. The  rights
over  the  father's  property  secured to children  are
indefeasible,  and  the  chief  modern  object  of  a  Will,
the  distribution  of  property  among  children  according
to  their  character  and  needs,  being  thus  unattainable.
Wills  fall  into  disuse  and  the  law  is  left  to  settle  the
succession  of  more  distant  relatives. It  shows  the  re-
moteness of  the  legal  ideas  which  I  am  examining  from
those  now  prevalent,  that  the  ancient  lawyers  before

'  The  fixi.sting  Hindu  law  on  the  subject,  with  the  principles
on  which  the  two  rival  sets  of  doctrines  depend,  is  discussed  by
Mr.  J.  I).  Mayne  in  a  most  instructive  chapter  (xvi.)  of  his  Illndtc
Lav;  awl  Usaye.


112  AXCKSTOR-WORSHIP AND IMIER1TA>X'E. chap.  iv.

US  hardly  notice  collateral  succession.  They  provide
for  the  ultimate  succession,  on  failure  of  nearer  claim-
ants, of  spiritual  kinsmen,  the  Brahman  teacher,  and
the  fellow-pupil,  and  for  the  succession  of  the  King,
but  they  say  hardly  anything  of  Inheritance  as  now
understood,  save  in  tlie  direct  line  of  descent  or
ascent.  Their  lano:uao^e  on  the  remoter  succession  of
blood  relations  is  brief  and  obscure,  and  they  do  not
use  technical  terms  in  the  same  sense,  or  in  the  sense
of  the  modern  Hindu  law.^  They  pass  rapidly  to  the
spiritual  inheritors  whom  I  have  named,  and  to  the
King ;  and  one  of  them  adds  that  '  in  cases  for  which
no  rule  has  been  given  that  course  must  be  followed  of
which  at  least  ten  Brahmans,  who  are  well  instructed,
skilled  in  reasoning,  and  free  from  covetousness,
approve' (Gautama,  xxviii.  48).

The  brevity  and  obscurity  of  the  early  law-teachers
on  certain  topics  have  been  accounted  for  l)y  the
assumed  purpose  of  their  treatises,  which  is  to  o^iye  a

®  The  familiar  terms  of  the  mature  Hindu  law  indicating  classes
of  inheritors  (Sapinda,  Sagotra,  &c.)  occur  in  these  writers,  but  not
apparently  in  the  more  modern  sense.  A  text  attributed  to
Baudhayana  defines  '  Sapinda '  as  *  the  paternal  grandfather,
gi-andfather,  the  father,  the  man  himself,  his  uterine  brother  by  a
woman  of  equal  caste  (that  is,  the  son  of  his  father  by  the  same
mother  as  himself,  provided  she  be  of  equal  caste  with  her  husband),
his  son,  his  son's  son,  and  the  son  of  the  grandson.'  But  this
cannot  be  the  meaning  of  Sapinda  in  Gautama  (xiv.  13,  and
XVIII.  6).  Vishnu  seems  to  employ  Sapinda  and  Bandhu  as
synonymous  (xvii.  10).


/


CHAP.  IV. A^X•ESTOR-WOESHIP AXD IXHERITAXCE.  113

compendious  summary  of  the  law  in  aphoristic  lan-
guage. It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  they  are
foil  and  clear  enough  on  all  subjects  to  which  they
attach  importance. It  is,  I  think,  impossible  not  to
see  that,  so  far  as  regards  collateral  succession,  they
were  little  interested  in  it. The  truth  seems  to  me
to  be  that they  trusted,  for the  proper  devolution
of  the  inheritance,  to  their  various  contrivances  for
providing  a  son when legitimate sons had  failed,
to  the  appointment  of  a  daughter,  to  their  fictions
of  sonship, to  adoption  and  to  the  Xi3'oga. It is
probable that at first an efficacious sacrifice to
the  dead  could  only  be  offered  by a  descendant  in
the  direct  line  ;  and though some of  the  artificial
methods  of  obtaining  a  worshipping representative
were  disapproved  of,  it is ver}^  likely that a col-
lateral relative could not originally  sacrifice  at  all
with  any  prospect  of  conferring  or  receiving  spiritual
benefit. But  all  the  artificial  expedients,  save  one,
for  Y)roviding  sons  have  long  since  been  exploded  in
India. They  are  not  permitted,  says  the  orthodox
Hindu  doctor,  in  the  Iron  Age  in  which  we  now  live,
because of  the hardness of  men's hearts. As a
matter  of  fact,  a  current  of  feeling  adverse  to  some  or
all  of  them  runs  througli  the  most  ancient  of  the  Law-
books, and  this  is  the  source  of  the  opinion  whicli
has  ultimately  prevailed. Nowadays,  if  a  man  has
no  legitimate  sons,  he  has  no  resource  but  adoption,

1


114  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE. chap.  iv.

eitlier  by  himself  or  his  widow,  and  there  are  local
disputes  whether  the  widow  requires  his  consent  or
directions  to  be  given  before  he  dies,  and  if  she  re-
quires it,  in  what  form  it  should  be  given.  Such  a  state
of  the  law  adds  greatly  to  the  modern  importance  of
collateral  succession,  and  there  are  facts  which  co-ope-
rate with  the  law.  There  is  marked  infertility  amono-
Hmdus  of  high  rank,  and,  though  there  may  be  a
theoretical  preference  for  adopting  a  son  rather  than
allow  the  succession  to  go  to  a  collateral,  yet  (as  I
am  informed)  there  is  a  great  deal  of  the  same
superstitious  disrelish  for  effecting  an  adoption  which
is  known  sometimes  to  prevent  in  England  the
making  of  a  will.

The  original  authorities  for  the  very  extensive
body  of  modern  rules  governing  the  succession  of
collateral  relatives  are  far  less  the  ancient  law-books
than  the  so-called  mediaeval  Digests,  dating  approxi-
mately from  the  eleventh  to  the  fourteenth  century,  of
which  the  most  archaic  is  the  '  Mitakshara.'  The  most
general  feature  of  this  body  of  rules  is  thus  described
by  Mr.  J.  D.  Mayne  ('  Hindu  Law  and  Usage,'
p.  51)  :  'Except  in  Bengal,  agnates,  kmsmen  con-
nected through  male  descents,  exclude  cognates,  kins-
men through  females,  to  the  fourteenth  degree.'  The
same  preference  fol*  males  is  observable  in  the  rules
of  succession  shown  to  prevail  in  the  Punjab,  where
law  and  usage  are  '  essentially  unsacerdotal,  uusacra-


CHAP.  IV. A>X'ESTOIl-WOKSHIP AXD IXIIERITAXCE.  115

mentalj  secular.'  The  judicial  experience  of  the  Chief
Court  of  the  Punjab  here  coincides  with  the  conclu-
sions of  the  official  inquirers,  and  establishes  that
*  kinship  is  wholly  agnatic'  ^  There  can  be  no  doubt,
therefore,  that  agnatic  succession  among  collaterals  is
the  general  principle  of  Hindu  usage.  It  was  the  ex-
clusive principle  of  the  Roman  law  under  the  Twelve
Tables,  and  it  governed  the  remoter  collateral  suc-
cessions under  the  law  of  Athens,  which  prescribed
that  agnates  should  always  have  precedence  over
coonates  (Trport/xacr^at  tovs  ano  tcov  appivoiv  rcov  oltto
6rj\eL(x)v).  Indeed,  if  a  comparatively  recent  writer^
may  be  trusted,  agnatic  succession,  succession  through
males  exclusively,  was,  if  I  may  so  put  it,  the  common
law  of  Greece.

But  one  remarkable  exception  to  this  general
preference  for  males  in  India  is  specified  by  Mr.
I^Iayne.  In  the  populous  province  of  Bengal  Proper,
also  noticeable  for  the  nearly  total  disappearance  of
the  Village  Community,  cognates  are  largely  admitted
to  succeed,  and  sometimes  in  2^i*eference  to  agnates.
'  Heirs  in  the  female  line  frequently  take  before  very
near  Sapindas  in  tlie  direct  male  Ime  '  ('  Hindu  Law
and  Usage,'  p.  428).  Mr.  Mayne  has  very  copiously
illustrated  this  peculiarity  of  Bengal  law,  and  traced

'•*  See  Boulnoi.s  and  Rattigan,  Xotes  on  Punjab  Lav)^  p.  85.
'  ]Jiodoru.s  Siculus,  xii.  14  (commenting  on  a  probably  spiu'ious
law  attributed  to  Charondas).

I  2


116  ANCP:ST0R-W0KSI1IP and inheritance. chap.  IV.

it  to  its  causes,  in  his  sixteentli  chapter.  The  rela-
tively modern  authorities  followed  by  the  Brahmani-
cal  lawyers  of  that  provmce — the  Daya-Bhaga  and
Daya-Krama-Sangraha — are  charged  with  sacerdotal
doctrine.  They  display  not  only  a  close  connection
between  ancestor- worship  and  inheritance,  but  a  com-
plete dependence  of  the  last  upon  the  first.  The  first
question  is.  What  is  the  exact  amount  of  spiritual
benefit  received  by  the  ancestor  from  the  sacrifices,
and  what  is  the  precise  amount  reflected  on  the  wor-
shipper?— and  this  is  an  accurate  measure  of  the  place
of  the  worshipper  in  the  table  of  succession.

The  explanation  seems  to  me  to  be  that  the
original  Ancestor-worship  transformed  itself,  and  in
the  course  of  change  helped  to  modify  the  law,  but
did  not  affect  all  the  stream  of  legal  doctrine  in  the
same  degree.  Originally,  it  cannot  be  doubted,  the
ancestor  worshipped  was  a  male,  and  the  worship-
per was  his  direct  male  descendant  through  males.
Aerain,  nothinof  can  be  strons^er  than  the  denials  of
the  right  of  any  woman  to  offer  a  sacrifice  which  we
find  in  the  ancient  writers.  '  A  female  shall  not
offer  any  burnt  oblation '  (Apastamba,  ii.  vi.  15.  18).
But,  as  I  pointed  out  before,  there  seems  to  have
arisen  in  time  a  practice  of  associating  the  ancestor's
wife  with  the  ancestor  as  an  object  of  worship.  '  A
man  must  fare  by  himself  in  the  other  world,'  say
the Hindu doctors. *  Even were he to  die with


CHAP.  IV. ANCESTOR-WORSHIP .VND INHERITANCE.  117

him,  a  kinsman  cannot  follow  his  dead  relative.'  ^
^  All,  excepting  his  icife^  are  forbidden  to  follow  him
on  the  path  of  Yama ' — a  passage  which  in  later
times  became  one  of  the  chief  authorities  for  the
burning  of  the  widow.  Thus  in  early,  but  still  not
in  the  most  ancient,  times,  men  are  found  worship-
ping their  mother  as  well  as  their  father,  and  also  their
maternal  ancestors,  though  without  quite  putting  them
on  the  same  footino-  as  their  ancestors  throusrh  males.
One  great  breach  was  thus  made  in  the  ancient  sys-
tem. Another  transformation  of  religious  ideas,  which
did  not  perhaps  extend  beyond  particular  Brahmanical
schools,  may  be  traced  in  the  Daya-Bhaga.  The
growing  moral  dissatisfaction  with  the  artificial  modes
of  procuring  sons  must  have  increased  the  chance  of
childlessness^  and  therefore  of  a  failure  in  the  sacri-
fices. Such  a  prospective  result,  drawing  with  it  not
only  supernatural  penalties  on  the  dead,  but  secular
losses  to  the  Brahmans,  would  tend  to  produce  or
strengthen  the  belief  that  mere  collaterals  might
efficaciously  offer  sacrificial  honour  to  the  dead,  and,
further,  would  aid  in  enlarmno;  the  view  of  collateral
relationship  as  widely  as  possible.  This,  in  fact,  is
the  religious  system  shadowed  forth  in  the  treatises
of  authority  in  Ijengal.  It  is  a  system  aimed,  among
other  things,  at  bringing  as  large  a  number  of  rela-
tives as possible, including cognates, or kinsfolk

2  Vishnu,  XX.  39,


118  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP AND INHERITANCE. chap.  iv.

through  women,  witlim  the  circle  of  more  or  less
efficacious  worshippers.  It  is  moreover  a  system  full  of
that  minute  detail  and  of  those  subtle  inferences  from
supposed  principles  which  are  characteristic  of  a  highly-
developed  religion  which  has  long  since  departed  from
its  original  simplicity.  I  must  leave  the  distinctions
between  the  oblation  of  an  entire  funeral  cake,  the  offer-
ing of  the  fragments  left  on  the  hands  and  wiped  off
them,  and  the  mere  libation  of  water,  together  with
the  corresponding  distinctions  between  the  classes  of
relatives  admitted  to  the  succession,  to  be  studied  in
the  books  of  professed  writers  on  Hindu  law,  and
especially  in  the  works  of  Mr.  J.  D.  Mayne  and  of
Professor  Rajkuinar  Sarvadhikari.

I  have  already  stated  my  belief  that  at  the  back
of  the  ancestor- worship  practised  by  Hindus  there
lay  a  system  of  agnation,  or  kinship  through  males
only,  such  as  now  survives  in  the  Punjab.  I  so  far
agree  with  the  theory  of  M.  Fustel  de  Coulanges  that
I  believe  this  system  to  have  been  at  first  greatly
strengthened  by  ancestor- worship.  But  it  seems  to
me  plain  that  ancestor- worship  in  its  later  growth,
acted  as  a  weakening  and  dissolvmg  force  upon  the
ancient  kinship  and  the  ancient  family.  The  secular
law  followed  by  Hindus  was  not,^  however,  equally
or  universally  affected  by  the  religious  develop-
ment. The  Mitakshara,  which  is,  on  the  whole,
of  more  authority in India  than  the  Daya-Bhaga,


M


CHAP.  IT. A^X'ESTOR-WORSHI^ AXD IXHERITAXCE.  119

is  manifestly  based  in  the  main  npon  the  more
ancient  conception  of  kinship.  At  the  same  time  I
do  not  regard  the  system  of  the  Daya-Bhaga  as
simply  an  after -growth  of  the  system  reflected  in  the
more  archaic  treatise.  It  is  rather  a  separate  deve-
lopment of  the  ancient  sacerdotal  law.  The  ideas
which  led  to  it  are  more  or  less  discernible  in  the
oldest  treatises,  but  they  seem  to  have  been  carried  to
their  consequences  in  some  law-schools  more  rapidly
and  completely  than  others.  Xobody  will  understand
the  relatively  late  collection  of  rules  called  after
Manu,  who  does  not  recognise  that  it  has  been
materially  affected  by  the  religious  transformation.

Among  the  forces  which  have  caused  and  directed  the
progress  of  human  society,  one  of  the  most  powerful  has
been  the  Edict  of  the  Roman  Praetor,  which  gradually
brought  law  into  harmony  with  a  set  of  principles
known  under  their  most  general  designation  as  Equity.
It  completely  transmuted  the  Roman  jurisprudence;
and  the  system,  formed  by  its  infiltration  into  older
rules,  is  the  fountain  of  nearly  all  modern  Continen-
tal law,  of  some  part  of  the  English  law,  and  of  the
greatest  part  of  the  existing  Law  of  Nations.  These
principles  were  finally  considered  by  the  Roman
lawyers  to  fit  in  with  a  Greek  philosophical  concep-
tion, the  Law  of  Nature,  which  was  destined  to  have
a  serious  influence  on  human  thought  down  to  our
own  days. At  an  earlier  stage  of  legal  opinion the


120  ANCESTOR- Yv^ORSHIP AXD INHERITANCE. chap.  iv.

Praetor's  Edict  was  thought  to  embody  the  Jus  Gen-
tium, a  supposed  generalisation  of  the  usages  of  a  great
part  of  mankind.  But  of  the  most  ancient  history
of  the  Roman  Equity  we  cannot  be  said  to  know  any-
thing. We  have  evidence,  however,  that  the  Edict  was
employed  in  very  early  times  to  transform  the  Roman
law  of  Inheritance,  founding  it  on  a  view  of  kinship
very  faintly  recognised  previously  or  not  at  all.  Now
I,  at  all  events,  cannot  read  the  ancient  Hindu  law-
tracts  and  compare  them  with  such  treatises  as
the  Daya-Bhaga  and  Daya-Krama-Sangraha  without
being  led  to  the  conclusion  that,  in  the  interval  be-
tween the  two  states  of  the  law  reflected  in  the  older
and  the  later  books,  a  change  has  taken  place  among
the  Hindus  extremely  like  that  which  has  occurred
among  the  Romans  when  the  Agnatic  Inheritance  of
the  Twelve  Tables  had  been  altered  into  the  Cognatic
Succession  of  the  Edict.  But  the  ancient  Roman  law
of  inheritance  was  closely  Implicated  with  ancestor-
worship.  This  at  all  events  must  be  taken  as  placed
beyond  doubt  by  M.  Fustel  de  Coulanges.  The
ancient  Hindu  law  had  undoubtedly  the  same  basis,
but  it  underwent  in  parts  of  India  very  much  the
same  modifications  as  the  Roman  law,  and  became
a  system  of  inheritance,  allowing  kinsmen  through
females  to  inherit  as  well  as  kinsmen  through  males.
The  newer  Hindu  law,  however,  carries  with  it  the
explanation  of  its  own  origin  ;  the  religious  element


CHAP.  IT. AISX'ESTOE-WOESHIP AND INHERITANCE.  121

in  it  has  been  transmuted,  and  the  law  with  it.  I
suggest,  therefore,  that  the  Roman  Equity  had  its
beginning  before  legal  history  began,  in  a  modified
ancestor-worship  and  a  change  in  the  religious  con-
stitution and  religious  duties  of  the  family.  There
are  no  ancient  philosophies,  and  perhaps  not  many
modern  philosophies,  which  may  not  be  suspected  of
having  their  roots  in  a  religion.  The  Athenian  law
corresponds  in  some  of  its  rules  of  collateral  suc-
cession to  the  later  rather  than  to  the  earlier  Eoman
law,  and  here,  too,  I  suggest  that  a  change  was  pro-
duced by  an  alteration  of  religious  ideas.


122  HINDU TATRIA POTESTAS.


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS,
Note  A.

HINDU  PATRIA POTESTAS.

It  is  2:>ossible  that  the  ancient  sacerdotal  writers,
besides  being  led  by  the  dependent  position  of  their
order  into  denying  the  multiplication  of  religious
observances  through  the  dissolution  of  tribal  and
joint  family  groups,  were  also  desirous  that  the  period
at  which  each  household  broke  up  into  several  families
should  not  be  delayed  till  the  death  of  its  head.
Their  expectation  is  that  the  faithful  Hindu,  the  man
twice  born  through  the  study  of  the  Scriptures,  will
retire  in  advanced  years  from  active  life  and  become
an  ascetic  or  a  hermit.  There  are  a  few  texts  which
have  been  thought  to  imply  that  the  sons  of  an  aged
father  could  compel  his  retirement.  Gautama  (xv.
19),  while  condemning  such  a  practice,  perhaps  ad-
mits its  existence.  But,  whatever  be  the  meaning  of
these  texts,  I  cannot  allow  that  they  lend  any  counten-
ance to  an  opinion  that  sons  could  compel  a  partition
of  the  family  property  at  any  time  against  the  will  of
their  father.  I  regard  them  as  exclusively  applying
to  the  case  of  a  father  who  has  reached  an  ao-e  at
which  it  has  become  a  religious  duty  for  him  to
abandon  secular  life.  The  fulness  of  the  ancient
Hindu  Patria  Potestas  may  be  safely  inferred  fi^om
the  veneration  whicli  even  a  living  father  must  have
inspired  under  a  system of  ancestor-worship. At


rOLYAXDRY.  123

a  much  later  date  the  law-book  of  ]\Ianu  declares
that  '  Three  persons — a  wife,  a  son,  and  a  slave — are
declared  by  law  to  have  m  general  no  wealth  ex-
clusively their  own ;  the  wealth  which  they  may
earn  is  regailarly  acquu^ed  for  the  man  to  whom  they
belong  '  (Manu,  ^t:ii.  416).  A  still  more  recent,  but
still  ancient,  authority — Xarada  (v.  39) — says  that
a  son  is  '  of  age  and  independent  m  case  his  parents
be  dead  ;  during  their  lifetime  he  is  dependent,  even
thougli  he  be  grown  old.'  And  nowadays  Mr.  Xelson,
speaking  of  the  South  of  India,  over  which  the  crust
of  sacerdotal  Hinduism  is  thin,  describes  the  Patria
Potestas,  which  he  knows  by  observation,  as  the  one
great  standing  institution  of  the  Hmdu.  *  It  is  the
undoubted  fact  that  among  the  so-called  Hindus  of
the  Madras  pro\ance  the  father  is  looked  upon  by  all
at  the  present  day  as  the  Rajah  or  absolute  sovereign
of  the  family  that  depends  upon  him.  He  is  entitled
to  reverence  during  life  as  he  is  to  worship  after  his
death.  His  word  is  law,  to  be  obeyed  without  ques-
tion or  demur.  He  is  really  the  '  master  of  the
family, — of  his  wife,  of  his  sons,  of  his  slaves,  and  of
his  wealth  '  ('  View  of  the  Hindu  Law,'  p.  56).  And,
at  p.  38,  '  Resistance  to  the  will  of  the  father  appears
monstrous.'


Note  B.
polyandry.


I  SHOULD  be  sorry  to  have  it  supposed  that  I  doubt
the  existence  of  Polyandry,  and  specially  in  the  form
of  a  plurality  of  husbands  who  were  brotliers,  as  an
occasional  practice  of  the  ancient  world.  The  much-
discussed  story,  in  the  Mahal^harata,  of  Draupadi
becoming  the  wife  of  the  five  Pandavi  princes  may


124  POLYANDRY.

be  open  to  various  interpretations  (see  Mayne's
'  Hindu  Law  and  Usage,'  p.  52),  but  there  is  fairly-
good  evidence  (Polybius,  xii.  7,  732,  following  Timaeus)
that  the  Spartans  practised  polyandry.  What  I  doubt
(with  Mr.  L.  H.  Morgan)  is  the  importance  of  the
place  assigned  by  Mr.  McLennan  to  polyandry  in  the
evolution  of  society.  It  serves  as  a  caution  against
being  too  much  impressed  by  the  antiquity  of  the
Lidian  and  Greek  examples  to  be  reminded  that  the
President  de  Brosses  accused  the  Venetian  aristocracy
of  practising  the  polyandry  of  brothers  in  the  early
part  of  the  eighteenth  century  ('  Lettres  Ecrites
d'ltalie,  tom.  i.  p.  157).  The  Spartan  and  Venetian
aristocracies  were  both  noted  for  their  want  of  deli-
cacy in  sexual  relations,  and  in  both  cases  the  cause
of  the  practice  seems  to  have  been  the  levy  of  public
taxation  on  separate  households  which  did  not  come
into  existence  without  separate  marriages.  The
usage  seems  to  me  one  which  circumstances  over-
powering morality  and  decency  might  at  any  time
call  into  existence.  It  is  known  to  have  arisen  in
the  native  Indian  army.


1


CHAP.  T. EOYAL SUCCESSIOX AXD THE SALIC LA^. 125


CHAPTER  Y.

ROYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW.

In  the  legal  history  of  those  Western  societies  which
have  passed  through  feudalism,  Succession  to  Property
and  Succession  to  Thrones  are  intimately  connected
toofether.  When  Bruce  and  Baliol,  with  ten  other
competitors,  conduct  a  litigation  before  Edward  I.  of
England  respecting  the  right  to  the  Scottish  Crown,
the  arguments  are  not  distinguishable  in  principle  from
arguments  on  the  inheritance  of  an  ordinary  fief,  and  in
point  of  fact  this  famous  dispute  did  settle  some  points
in  the  law  of  succession  to  land  all  over  the  AVest.
But  the  law  systems  of  the  East,  which  contain  an
elaborate  law  of  succession  to  private  property,  con-
tain little  or  nothing  about  succession  to  thrones.
One  reigning  Mahommedan  house,  that  of  the  Otto-
man Sultans,  has  continued  to  our  day  a  system  of
royal  succession  of  the  highest  antiquity — tliat  under
which  the  eldest  male  relative  is  preferred  in  tlie  suc-
cession to  the  son  ;  but  there  is  no  clear  connection
between  tliis  rule  and  any  part  of  the  abundant  private


126 EOYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

law  of  inlieritunce  declared  by  the  Maliommedan  doc-
tors. At  most  we  may  trace  a  resemblance  in  the  places
respectively  assigned  to  the  son  and  to  the  paternal
uncle  in  the  Maliommedan  scheme.  Indeed,  of  all
systems  of  succession  to  property,  the  Mahommedan
system  is  the  most  difficult  to  adjust  to  royal  succes-
sions. It  is  a  system  of  minute  fractional  division  be-
tween a  number  of  relatives  whose  grouping  ^  nobody
seems  to  me  to  have  as  yet  successfully  explained.  I
agree  with  Sir  George  Campbell,  that  it  must  have
grown  up  among  a  race  whose  property  was  easily
divided  into  units,  and  possibly  consisted  of  flocks  and
herds  ;  and,  again,  I  think  that  Mr.  Almaric  Rumsey
('Mohammedan  Law  of  Inheritance')  has  conclu-
sively shown  that  its  greatest  apparent  difficulties
arise  from  the  fact  that,  whatever  was  tlie  algebraical
knowledge  of  later  Mahommedans,  the  earliest  ex-
positors of  this  law  were  ignorant  of  some  simple
principles  in  the  manipulation  of  fractions.  On  the
whole,  we  must  at  present  be  satisfied  with  the  ortho-
dox Maliommedan  explanation  of  the  rules,  which  is,
that  they  rest  upon  separate  utterances  of  authorities
supposed  to  speak  with  Divine  authority — of  the  Pro-
phet, his  companions,  and  those  who  talked  with
them  ;  and  that  they  are  not  therefore  necessarily
reducible  to  systematic  order.

^  The  difficulty  is  caused  by  the  composition  of  the  class  of
Mahommedan  Inheritors  known  as  the  Sharers.  The  two  remain-
ing classes  seem  to  exhibit  the  usual  preference  of  Agnates  to
Cognates.


CHAP.  V. ROYAL SUCCESSIOiS' AND THE SALIC LAW. 127

The  Hindu  law  of  succession  has  more  authentic
claims  than  that  of  the  Mahommedans  to  a  religious
origin.  Some  of  its  principles  can  be  applied  without
much  difficulty  to  a  royal  succession  ;  but  neverthe-
less it  is  essentially  a  law  of  succession  to  private
property.  It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  we  learn
little  from  the  ancient  Hindu  lawyers  of  the  rules
under  which  a  King  should  succeed.  For  when  they
have  once  recognised  the  King  as  an  important
auxiliary  of  the  Brahman,  they  are  not  chary  of
advice  to  him  or  of  opinions  on  his  duties.  First  of
all,  he  is  to  execute  justice  and  maintain  truth.  But
much  more  than  this  is  inculcated  on  him.  Even  so
old  an  authority  as  Apastamba  (ii.  x.  25.  1)  tells
him  how  to  build  a  city  and  a  palace.  '  The  palace
shall  stand  in  the  heart  of  the  town.  In  front  of  it
there  shall  be  a  hall.  That  is  called  the  Hall  of  In-
vitation. At  a  little  distance  from  the  town  to  the
south  he  shall  cause  to  be  built  an  assembly  house,
with  doors  on  the  south  and  on  the  north  sides,  so
that  one  can  see  what  passes  inside  and  outside.  In
all  these  three  places  fires  shall  burn  constantly,  and
oblations  shall  be  offered  in  them  daily,  or  at  the  daily
sacrifice  of  a  householder.  In  this  hall  he  shall  put
up  his  guests,  at  least  those  who  are  learned  in  the
Yedas.  Rooms,  a  couch,  meat  and  drink  should  be
given  to  them  according  to  their  good  qualities.  But
let  not  the  king  live  better  than  his  spiritual  directors


128 ROYAL SUCCESSION AND TUE SALIC LAW. chaj>.  v.

or  his  ministers.'  Elsewhere  he  is  taught  how  to
amuse  himself  with  dice,  4n  even  numbers,  made  of
vibhitaka  wood ; '  how  to  apj)oint  administrative
deputies ;  how  to  reward  successful  generals.  Gau-
tama compendiously  lays  down  that  the  king  is
^  master  of  all  with  the  exception  of  Brahmans  ; '  and
in  the  later  treatises,  Vishnu  and  Manu,  there  are
very  long  discussions  on  regal  duties,  the  teacher
even  giving  an  account  of  the  art  of  strategy  and  of
the  methods  of  taxation.  But  there  is  nothing  about
the  way  in  which  princes  succeed  to  thi-ones,  unless
a  trace  of  a  rule  be  sought  m  a  direction  to  a  vic-
torious king,  ^  not  to  extirpate  the  royal  race'  when
he  conquers  a  country,  but  to  invest  a  prince  of  this
race  with  the  royal  dignities.  The  modern  Hindu
applies  his  religious  law  to  royal  succession  only  by
analogy,  and  he  generally  applies  the  oldest  part  of
that  law.  The  family  customs  which  have  grown  up
in  Indian  royal  houses  reflect  the  ancient  rules,  barely
mentioned  by  our  oldest  authorities,  on  the  subject  of
primogeniture  and  indivisible  patrimony,  and  it  is  to
be  observed  that  they  show  a  marked  preference  for
Adoption  over  Collateral  Succession.

The  truth  is,  that  for  Oriental  systems  of  succes-
sion to  Thrones,  we  have  to  go  to  usages,  older  per-
haps than  the  great  religious  movements  which  have
swept  from  time  to  time  over  the  East,  and  having,
at  all  events,  a  history  independent  of  the  institutions


I


CHAP.  V. ROYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. 129

to  Trhich  these  movements  give  birth.  The  real  or
pretended  doubts,  the  bitter  disputes,  and  the  san-
guinary wars  which  the  application  of  these  customs
occasioned  were  once  among  the  chief  scourges  of
mankind  in  the  countries  in  which  they  prevailed,  but
the  area  of  such  troubles  has  been  much  contracted
by  the  British  Indian  Empire.  Yet  the  Empire  itself
was  only  the  other  day  mixed  up  with  one  contro-
versy of  the  kind  which  might  be  taken  as  a  typical
example  of  its  class.  One  can  never  be  very  sure  how
long  any  Indian  events  survive  in  English  memory,
and  yet  some  of  us  should  recollect  the  perplexity
caused  by  the  names  and  claims  of  the  various  Chiefs
or  Princes  who  appeared  during  three  or  four  years  in
the  newspaper  correspondence  as  pretenders  to  sove-
reign authority  in  Afghanistan.  We  heard  of  the
unhappy  Shere  Ali  Khan  who,  after  the  first  British
success,  retired  from  Cabul,  his  capital,  only  to  die —
of  Yakub  Khan,  now  a  State-prisoner  in  India,  who
ruled  at  Cabul  as  Shere  All's  successor  at  the  time  of
Sir  I.onis  Cavao-nari's  assassination — of  Abdurrhaman
Khan,  long  an  exile  in  Russia,  who  now  wears  the
most  distinct  badge  of  modem  Afghan  sovereignty
by  holding  the  three  great  cities  of  Cabul,  Candahar,
and  Herat — of  Ayub  Khan,  who,  after  inflicting  on
British  Indian  troops  the  first  defeat  in  the  open  field
which  they  had  suffered  for  seventy-eight  years,  was
utterly  routed  by  the  victorious  General  Roberts,  and

K


130 ROYAL SUCCESSION AXD THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

who,  after  another  success  agamst  his  rival  Abdurrha-
man,  was  finally  defeated  and  comj)elled  to  take  refuge
in  Persia.  There  were  also  the  obscurer  names  of
AbduUa  Jan,  now  dead,  who  was  a  younger  son
of  Shere  Ali  Khan,  and  who  was  long  accepted
by  all  except  his  elder  brother  as  his  father's  heir-
apparent,  and  of  Musa  Khan,  the  son  of  Yakub,  whom
I  have  seen  spoken  of  in  the  newspapers  as  the  only
legitimate  claimant  to  the  Afghan  throne.  All  the
princes  I  have  named  were  in  some  sense  pretenders  to
the  throne,  and  they  are  all  near  kinsmen,  being  all  de-
scendants of  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  against  whom  the
British  fought  in  the  old  Afghan  war  of  forty-four
years  since,  and  in  whose  room  they  set  up  for  a
while  a  client  of  their  own.  Shah  Suja.  How  was
it  that  so  many  near  relatives  claimed  to  be  the  suc-
cessors of  the  last  reigning  prince?  Hardly  one
of  them  is  entitled  under  the  rules  about  succession
to  thrones  to  which  we  are  accustomed.  Shere  Ali,
after  a  hard  struggle,  succeeded  his  father,  Dost
Mahomed,  but  he  was  not  his  father's  eldest  son.
Yakub  Khan  was  not  Shere  Ali's  eldest  son,  and  he
was  all  but  supplanted  by  a  much  younger  brother,
Abdul  la  Jan,  and  was  long  imprisoned  for  question-
ing his  claims.  Abdurrhaman  Khan,  the  now  reign-
ing Ameer,  is  not  a  son  of  Shere  Ali  at  aU,  but  the
son  of  his  elder  brother,  and  yet  not,  it  is  thought,  of
his  eldest  brother. Ayub  Khan,  on  the  other  hand,  is


CHAP.  V. ROYAL SUCCESSIOX AXD THE SALIC LAW. 131

a  son  of  Shere  Ali,  but  he  is  younger  than  his  brother
Yakub  Khan,  who  has  a  son  living,  the  Musa  Khan
who,  as  I  said  before,  has  been  called  the  leoitimate
heir  to  the  throne.  How  then  come  all  these  princes
to  be  rivals  of  one  another  ?  How  is  it  that  there  is
no  rule,  as  with  us,  to  regulate  (as  we  should  say)
the  descent  of  the  Crown  ?

The  great  difference  between  the  East  and  West
is  that  the  Past  of  the  West  lives  in  the  Present  of
the  East.  What  we  call  barbarism  is  the  infant  state
of  our  own  civilisation.  The  rivalries  of  these  Afghan
princes  bring  us  back  to  one  of  the  oldest  causes  of
war  and  bloodshed  among  men,  the  disputed  succes-
sion to  political  sovereignty.  And  the  source  of  these
disputes  is  to  be  sought  in  an  ancient  fact  too  often
neglected  or  forgotten.  When  political  sovereignty
first  shows  itself  (and  the  stage  of  human  history  at
which  it  shows  itself  is  by  no  means  the  earliest
ascertainable),  this  sovereignty  is  constantly  seen  to
reside,  not  in  an  individual  nor  in  any  definite  line  of
persons,  but  in  a  group  of  kinsmen,  a  House  or  Sept,
or  a  Clan.

In  Greek  history,  there  is  a  later  form  of  this
sovereignty  which  has  a  name  of  its  own  ;  it  is
called  a  hegemony,  the  political  ascendency  of  some
one  city  or  community  over  a  number  of  subject
commonwealths.  But  in  more  ancient  times  the
royal  or  ruling  body  was  more  often  a  group  of  kins-


132 ROYAL SUCCESSION  AND THE  SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

men,  a  Clan,  or  a  Sept,  called  in  India  a  Joint  Family.
In  the  ancient  world,  this  group  of  royal  kinsmen
had  often  a  purely  fictitious  pedigree,  and  pretended
to  be  descended  from  a  god ;  and  there  is  an  example
of  this  claim  in  our  own  day, since the Emperor
or  Mikado  of  Japan,  who  has  a  Minister  at  the  Eng-
lish Court,  lays  claim  to  a  divine  ancestry. Some-
times, however,  the  reigning  House  consists  of  the
descendants  of  a  known  historical  hero,  as  was  the
case  with  the  most  illustrious  of  all  royal  families,
the  Jewish  princes  descended  from  David,  the  son  of
Jesse. And  just  as  among  the  Hebrews  there  were  two
rival  royal  clans,  the  prmces  of  Judah  and  the  princes
of  Israel,  so  also  there  have  been  rival  clans  pretend-
ing to  the  Afghan  throne,  and  the  old  Afghan  war
was  not  so  much  a  struggle  between  Dost  Mahomed
and  Shah  Suja  as  between  the  clans  to  which  these
chiefs belonged, the Suddozies and  the Barukzies.
Bloody  wars  have  frequently  been  fought  between
the  partisans  of  rival  clans  and  houses,  bvit  in  some-
what later  times  civil  strife  has  chiefly  raged  between
individual  pretenders  belonging  to  the  same  house.
The  reason  of  this  is,  that  there  are  few  things  on
which  mankind  were  at  first  less  agreed,  few  things
on  which  their  usages  were  less  at  one,  than  the  rule
which  should  determine  which  of  the  family  should
have  its  headship. We  are  so  used  to  some  form  or
other  of  Primogeniture  as  the  system  which  regulates


CHAP.  V. KOYAL SUCCESSION  AND THE SALIC LAW. 133

the  devolution  of  crowns  tliat  we  have  some  difficulty
in understanding the  ancient disputes of  which  I
have spoken. Yet Primogeniture — to which as  a
political  institution  I  may  observe  that  the  human
race  has  been  deeply  indebted — did  not  at  first  appear
in  anything  like  the  shape  in  which  we  are  familiar
with  it ;  and,  even  when  it  approached  that  shape,
its  rules  were  subject  to  many  uncertainties. On  all
sides  we  find  evidence  that,  in  the  beginnings  of  his-
tory, quarrels  were  rife  within  reigning  families  as  to
the  particular  rule  or  usage  which  should  invest  one
of  the  royal  kinsmen  with  a  primacy  over  the  rest ;
and  these  quarrels  bore  fruit  in civil wars. The
commonest  type  of  an  ancient  civil  war  was  one  in
which  the  royal  family  quarrelled  among  themselves
and  the  nobility  or  the  people  took  sides. The  mad-
ness of  rivalry  took  possession  of  the  chiefs  and  the
people  were  smitten.

A  very  ancient,  possibly  the  most  ancient,  method
of  settling  these  quarrels  was  that  which  has  been
called  in  our  day  Xatural  Selection.  The  competing
chiefs  fought  it  out,  and  the  ablest,  or  the  strongest,
or  the  luckiest,  lifted  himself  into  supremacy.  Now
and  then,  one  of  the  kinsmen  has  had  the  oj)portunity
of  crushing  the  others  by  a  sudden  blow,  and  this  is
the  case  of  those  massacres  of  princes  which  from
time  to  time  appear  in  Oriental  history.  One  of  them
is  described  in  that  story  in  the  Hebrew  Chronicles


134 EOYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

wliicli  gives  its  plot  to  Racine's  line  play  of  '  Atlialie/
Athaliah,  the  queen-motlier  in  Judah,  that  ^  wicked
woman/  seeing  that  her  son  Kmg  Ahaziah  was  dead,
arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal  of  the  house
of  Judah.  One  child  was  saved  and  hidden  in  the
house  of  God  six  years  :  and  Athaliah  reigned  over
the  land  (2  Chron.  xxii.  10).  More  revolting,  be-,
cause  more  systematic,  were  the  massacres  of  their
near  collateral  relatives  by  the  Ottoman  Sultans ;  but
the  Turk  who  bore  no  brother  near  his  throne  had
his  excuse  in  a  peculiar  rule  of  royal  succession  of
which  I  will  say  something  presently.  The  atrocities
of  the  Seraglio  were  more  than  matched  only  the
other  day  by  those  committed  in  the  palace  at  Manda-
lay  by  the  present  King  of  Burmah,  Thebaw.  I  have
little  to  say  for  a  personage  who  in  the  course  of  a
single  week  shed  the  blood  of  nearly  every  relative,
male  or  female,  within  his  grasp  ;  but  undoubtedly,
when  there  is  no  clear  rule  of  royal  succession,  the
choice  may  unhappily  lie  between  one  of  these  mas-
sacres and  prolonged  and  desolating  civil  war.  Fortu-
nately a  great  deal  of  the  progressive  civilisation  of
the  human  race  has  consisted  in  the  discovery  of
remedies  against  violence  ;  and  the  evil  of  dynastic
contests  has  been  so  manifest,  and  so  little  tolerable,
that  men  seem  very  early  to  have  striven  to  find
contrivances  for  preventing  them.  Such  contrivances
were  indeed  not  absolutely  new  ;  most  of  them  were


CHAP.  V. EOYAL SUCCESSION AIS'D THE SALIC LAW.  135

still  more  ancient  tribal  or  family  usages  put  to a
new  use.

One  of  the  most  ancient  of  them  is  to  obtain  the
peaceful  consent  of  the  community  to  the  succession
of  a  particular  chief  either  before  the  death  of  the
last  reigning  sovereign  or  immediately  afterwards.
An  elective  monarchy,  much  modified  in  its  later
form,  survived  till  the  last  century  in  Poland,  and
the  most  august  throne  in  Europe,  that  of  the  Empire,
of  the  Roman  or  German  Empire,  was  till  the  begin-
ning of  the  present  century  open  in  theory,  as  Mr.
Freeman  puts  it,  to  every  baptized  Christian.  There
are  in  fact  few  monarchies  in  whose  records  some
trace  of  an  original  popular  election  or  confirmation
cannot  be  found,  and  there  is  even  a  survival  of  it  in
the  ceremonies  of  an  English  Coronation.  A  conve-
nient modification  of  the  system,  which  removes  a
dangerous  interval  between  prince  and  prmce,  is  to
have  the  election  during  the  lifetime  of  the  reigning
chief  or  king  ;  and  thus,  in  Germany,  a  King  of  the
Romans  was  generally  chosen  who  was  to  become
Emperor  on  the  Emperor's  death.  A  precaution  of
the  same  class,  particularly  where  there  is  a  numerous
progeny  of  princes  produced  by  polygamy,  lies  in  the
appointment  of  his  successor  by  the  reigning  chief
during  his  lifetime.  This  on  the  whole  seems  to  be
the  system  of  succession  prevailing  in  Afghanistan.
Shere  Ali  owed  his  throne  to  it  and  so  would  Shere


136 EOYAL SUCCESSIOX AXD THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

All's  heir-apparent,  Abdulla  Jan,  if  he had  lived.
But  that  it  has  to  compete  with  other  ideas  about
succession  is  plain  from  the  bloody  civil  war  which
followed Shere  All's accession and from  the later
quarrel  on  this  very  point  between  Yakub  Khan  and
his  father. The  present  Ameer,  Abdurrhaman  Khan,
owes  nothing  to  it. The  weakness  of  the  system  lies
in  its  tendency  to  produce  the  nomination  of  the  child
of  some  favourite  wife,  and  thus  to  lead  to  endless
palace-intrigues  which  sometimes  bear  fruit  in  civil
war. Yet  another  contrivance,  probably  much  older
and  in  Itself  extremely  rational,  was  once  very  widely
diffused  over  the  world,  but  has  now  only  one  field
of  operation  among  the  European  dynasties. This  is
the  descent  of  the  sovereignty  to  the  oldest  living
male of  the family. It still survives  among  the
Turks. The  present Sultan  succeeded  his  brother,
who  had  children  ; and  Sultan  Murad,  who  reigned
for  a  few  months, succeeded  his  uncle,  though  his
uncle,  Abdul  Aziz,  left  male  children. Where  the
system  may  be  observed  in  its  more  barbarous  form,
we  find it  generally  combined  with that  which  I
mentioned  first,  popular  or  tribal  election. The  Irish
tribesmen  and even  the clansmen  of  the Scottish
Highlands  once  elected  their  chiefs,  but  the  former
\  \ always  chose  the  brother  of  the  last  chief,  if  of  mature
years,  and  the  latter  seem  in  very  ancient  times  to
have  made  similar  elections. In  warlike  and  per-


CHAP.  T. KOYAL SUCCESSION AXD THE SALIC LAW. 137

petually  disturbed  societies  there  could  be  hardly  a
better  principle  to  follow,  for  it  has  the  great  advan-
tage of  providing  that  the  new  chieftain  shall  be  a
S^own  and  experienced  man  ;  and  barbarism  cannot
afford  to  face  the  dangers  of  royal  minorities.  Its
disadvantages  do  not  begin  till  princes  have  begun
to  live  in  palaces  amid  luxury  and  ease.  The  heir-
apparent  then  receives  a  training  which  more  than
compensates  for  his  maturity  of  years.  The  seclusion
in  which  he  is  kept,  the  jealousy  with  which  all  his
energies  are  repressed  by  the  reigning  monarch,  and
his  long  familiarity  with  the  harem,  make  it  too  pro-
bable that  he  will  prove  an  incapable  ruler  if  he  is
allowed  to  succeed.  But  the  interests  of  the  existino-
Chief,  and  still  more  of  his  children,  are  against  the
heir-apparent  continuing  to  live.  It  is  only  in  quite
recent  times  that  the  next  eldest  male  relative  of  a
Turkish  Sultan  could  be  reasonably  sure  of  the  suc-
cession. The  declaration  that  fratricide  is  a  rule  of
the  Ottoman  State  is  attributed  to  Mahommed  II.,
but  the  great  example  of  the  practice  was  set  by
Mahommed  III.,  who  massacred  nineteen  of  his
brothers  and  caused  to  be  drowned  twelve  of  his
father  s  wives  who  were  supposed  to  be  pregnant.

The  system  which  I  have  described,  that  under
which  not  the  eldest  son  hut  the  eldest  male  kinsman
succeeds,  now  bears  very  generally  the  name  of
Tanistry,  from  the  Celtic  word  which  points  to  its


138 ROYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

practice  in  ancient  Ireland.  Tanistry  seems  to  be
the  undoubted  parent  of  Primogeniture  as  we  know
it.  But  this  later  system  of  succession  to  thrones,
though  in  some  respects  a  great  advance  on  Tanistry,
was  not  at  all  free  from  dangerous  uncertainties  when
it  was  first  followed,  and  indeed  some  of  these  uncer-
tainties linger  about  it  still.  It  was  through  one  of
such  uncertainties  that  the  fortunes  of  this  country
came  to  be  mixed  up  with  a  disputed  succession,  and
that  our  ancestors  were  eno:ao;ed  in  a  foreicrn  war
which  lasted  a  hundred  years  and  which  entailed  a
bloody  civil  war  as  its  consequence.  The  Royal
House  or  Sept,  whose  disputed  headship  involved
England  in  these  calamities,  was  that  of  the  Capetians,
of  the  collective  body  of  the  descendants  of  Hugh
Capet,  who  m  987  got  himself  elected  King  of  the
Franks,  or  French,  and  founded  the  feudal  monarchy
of  the  country  which,  by  successive  additions,  has
since  become  so  famous  under  the  name  of  France.
The  progeny  of  Hugh  Capet,  continued  exclusively
through  males,  is  not  extinct  at  the  present  moment,
after  nine  centuries  ;  but  his  male  descendants,  in  the
direct  line  of  descent,  came  to  an  end  in  1328.
Philip  the  Fair,  the  man  of  strongest  character  in  the
whole  line  of  French  kings,  with  the  possible  excep-
tion of  Henry  IV.  of  France  and  Navarre,  had  died
in  1314,  leaving  three  sons  who  successively  ascended
the French  throne  under  the  names of  Louis  X.,


CHAP.  V. ROYAL SUCCESSION  AND THE SALIC LA^. 139

Philip  v.,  and  Charles  IV.  No  one  of  these  three
kinofs  left  sons,  but  two  of  them  left  each  a  dauo^hter,
and  one  left  three.  Now  Edward  III.  of  England,
who  held  the  English  Crown  by  an  independent
title,  was  a  Capetian  through  his  mother,  Isabel,  the
^  she- wolf  of  France  '  of  Gray's  well-known  Ode.
Isabel  was  a  daughter  of  Philip  the  Fair.  On  the
death  of  Charles  IV.  of  France,  the  youngest  of  the
three  royal  brothers  who  died  without  male  issue,
our  Edward  III.  put  m  a  claim  to  the  French
Crown.  It  is  usual  both  with  French  and  with
English  historians  to  describe  this  claim  as  wholly
untenable,  but,  though  I  will  not  here  discuss  what
is  really  a  point  of  technical  law,  I  will  pause  to  say
that  this  view  of  the  utter  baselessness  of  Edward's
title  seems  to  me  to  be  based  partly  on  ignorance  of
certain  peculiarities  in  ancient  systems  of  law  and
partly  on  the  assumption  that  certain  legal  rules,
which  were  then  unsettled,  were  as  clearly  recognised
as  they  now  are.  There  are  some  very  ancient  bodies
of  law  which,  though  showing  a  decided  preference
for  male  inheritance,  nevertheless  permit  the  family
to  be  continued  throu^-h  a  dau":hter  when  the  sons
have  failed.  The  ancient  Hindu  law  required  that  in
such  a  case  the  daughter  should  be^  appointed^  as  the
Sanscrit  word  is  translated,  to  bear  a  son  to  her
father. It  is  remarkable  that  this  was the exact

2  See  above,  Chapter  IV.


140 KOYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

position  of  Edward  III.  He  disclaimed  the  idea  that
France  could  be  ruled  by  a  woman,  but  he  contended
that,  her  brothers  having  died,  she  could  transmit
her  father^ s  right  to  her  own  male  child.  There  are
other  apparent  objections  to  Edward  III.'s  claim,
arising  from  the  fact  that  all  the  sons  of  Philip  the
Fair  had  left  daughters,  but  it  may  be  shown  from
the  law-books  of  the  time  that,  even  in  the  inheritance
of  private  property,  the  rules  of  succession  which
were  to  prevail  under  such  circumstances  were  still
uncertain.

It  is  probable,  then,  that  the  argument  of
Edward  III.  was  not  considered  in  his  day  to  be  as
imtenable  as  all  French  and  some  English  writers
have  represented  it,  but  that  it  answered  to  some
ideas  about  royal  and  other  successions  which  were
more  or  less  current.  But  the  point  was  no  doubt
regarded  ahvays  as  a  doubtful  one  ;  and  in  fact  in
1316,  on  the  death  of  the  eldest  son  of  Philip  the
Fair,  Louis  X.,  who  left  a  daughter,  an  Assembly  of
Notables,  which  is  sometimes  described  as  the  States -
General  of  France,  had  resolved  that  the  French
Crown  descended  exclusively  to  males  and  through
males.  Thus  the  question  of  law  was  fully  and  fairly
raised  ;  and  it  promptly  fell  under  the  only  juris-
diction by  which  it  could  possibly  be  decided.  It
was  put  to  the  arbitrament  of  the  sword.  From  the
commencement  of  active  liostilities  by  Edward  III.


CHAP.  V. ROYAL SUCCESSIOX AND THE SALIC LAW. 141

to  the  close  of  the  English  invasion  of  France  under-
taken by  Henry  V.,  the  years  of  war  between  the
English  and  French  were  as nearly  as possible  a
hundred  and twenty,  interrupted only once by  a
regular  peace,  and  always  on  the  question  of  royal
succession  ;  and  this  hundred  years'  war,  as  historians
now  call  it,  left  undoubtedly  as  a  legacy,  as  the  result
of  the  fierce  military  habits  which  it  produced,  the
bloody  struggle  known  as  the  Wars  of  the  Roses,  in
which,  to  say  the  truth,  the  symbols  of  the  two  con-
tending royal  houses,  the  White  Rose  and  the  Red,
were  no  more  to  the  turbulent  and  warlike  English
nobility  than  the  blue  and  green  colours  of  the  race-
course which  once  divided  the  populace  of  Constan-
tinople, the New  Rome, into fierce and seditious
factions. The  Eno-lish  kino:s  bore  the  title  of  Kino;
of  France, and  carried  the  French lilies on  their
arms,  down  to  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.
In the  repeated negotiations between the British
Government  and  the  first  French  Republic,  which  at
last  bore  fruit in the liollow  and  transient Peace
of  Amiens, the question of giving up this title
and armorial bearings played  a  considerable part,
as  may  be  seen  from  the  Papers  of  Lord  Malmes-
bury.

With  this  famous  dispute  between  the  English
and  French  kings — a  dispute  in  which  the  English
people  from  the  first  heartily  took  part,  and  in  which


142 EOYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. chap,  y,

the  French  people  first  imbibed  the  national  spirit
which  has  ever  since  characterised  them — with  this
dispute  there  are  considerations  connected  which
seem  to  me  sufficiently  interesting  to  deserve  to
occupy  the  rest  of  this  paper.  Some  of  this  interest
is  literary  ;  some  is  archaeological  ;  but  some  is  prac-
tical. We  Englishmen  are  satisfied  to  rest  the  title
of  our  Royal  House  on  the  Act  of  Settlement,  which
limits  the  right  of  succession  to  the  descendants  of
the  Electress  Sophia  of  Hanover.  But  in  other
countries  the  old  doubts  which  caused  the  war  of  a
hundred  years  have  still  vitality  enough  to  afi'ect
practical  politics.  As  I  before  stated,  the  Capetian
Sept  or  House,  composed  on  the  principle  laid  down
by  the  States -General  of  1316,  of  males  who  spring
from  males,  still  continues.  It  embraces  the  elder
branch  of  French  Bourbons,  represented  by  the
Count  de  Chambord,  the  younger  branch  consisting
of  the  Princes  of  Orleans,  the  Spanish  Bourbons,  and
the  Italian  Bourbons  sprung  from  them.  King
Alfonso  of  Spain  is  the  son  of  a  Bourbon  father  and
a  Bourbon  mother,  but  he  is  a  king  in  right  of  his
mother,  and  he  was  engaged  a  few  years  since  in  a
civil  war  with  his  cousin,  Don  Carlos,  whose  pre-
tensions to  the  throne  are  derived  exclusively  through
males.  The  conflict  of  title  between  the  Count  de
Chambord  and  the  Orleans  princes  is  of  another  kind
and  of  a  more  modern  type. All  of  them  are  full


CHAP.  T. ROYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. 143

Bourbons  ;  but  nevertheless  the  theory  of  sovereignty
and  government  called  Legitimisnij  which  is  still  a
factor  in  French  and  Spanish  politics,  is  ultimately
based  on  the  assumption  of  a  sort  of  sacred  and  inde-
feasible law  regulating  succession  to  the  Crown,  and
placing  it  beyond  competition  and  above  popular
sanction.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  belief  in  the  ex-
istence of  such  a  law  first  showed  itself  during  the  con-
troversy between  Edward  III.  and  Philip  of  Valois.

This  sacred  and  indefeasible  law  bears  a  familiar
name.  As  it  was  at  first  conceived  it  was  called  the
Sahc  law.  It  is  not  quite  certain  when  men  first
began  to  suppose  that  the  law  thus  designated  apphed
to  royal  successions,  but  clearly  this  view  prevailed
both  in  England  and  France  soon  after  the  beginning
of  the  hundred  years'  war.  What  were  the  ideas  about
the  Salic  law  which  were  common  in  this  country
from  one  hundred  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  after
the  conclusion  of  this  quarrel  may  be  gathered  from
Shakespeare's  ^  Henry  V.,'  act  i.  scene  2,  where  the
English  argument  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Arch-
bishop of  Canterbury.  It  amounts  to  what  lawyers  call
a  plea  in  confession  and  avoidance.  It  admits  the
existence  of  a  royal  Salic  law,  but  denies  that  it  applied
to  the  case  of  Edward  III.  and  his  rival.  Now  the
Salic  law,  like  the  Capetian  House,  is  still  in  existence,
and  we  can  put  our  finger  on  the  very  passage  which
was  supposed  to  confer  on  Philip  of  Valois  his  title


144 ROYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

to  the  French  throne.  But  both  to  the  French  arofu-
ment  and  to  the  counter- argument  which  Shakespeare
borrowed  from  the  English  chroniclers  there  is  one
fatal  objection.  The  Salic  law  does  not  apply  at  all
to  thrones  and  to  the  succession  to  thrones.  It
merely  regulates  the  succession  to  private  property.
When  this  most  indisputable  fact  was  first  discovered
in  the  sixteenth  century  by  the  rising  learning  of
those  times,  there  was  a  good  deal  of  scandal  in
France  and  some  little  dismay.  Montesquieu  in  the
eighteenth  century  popularised  the  discovery  ;  and
Voltaire  is  never  tired  of  jesting  at  the  Salic  law,
which  he  had  always  supposed,  he  says,  to  have  been
dictated  by  an  angel  to  Pharamond,  the  first  Frankish
king,  and  to  have  been  written  with  a  quill  from  the
angelic  wing.  The  Salic  law  might  in  fact  be  best
described  as  a  manual  of  law  and  legal  procedure  for
the  use  of  the  free  judges  in  the  oldest  and  most
nearly  universal  of  the  organised  Teutonic  Courts,  the
Court  of  the  Hundred  :  it  only  mentions  the  king  in
so  far  as  the  kino^  has  authoritv  in  the  Court.  It
was  once  supposed  to  contain  a  reference  to  some
peculiar  description  of  land  called  Salic  land  ;  but
the  new  English  edition  ^  clearly  shows  that  the  word
*  Salic  '  is  an  interpolation,  and  that  nothing  is  re-
ferred to  except  the  private  inheritance  of  simple  land.
It  becomes  therefore  a  matter  of  some  interest  to

^  See  below,  Chapter  VI.  p.  1G9.


CHAP.  V. ROYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. 14:0

search  out  the  true  origin  of  this  celebrated  rule
(erroneously  supposed  to  be  contained  in  the  Salic
law),  which  not  only  excluded  females  from  succession
to  thrones,  but  denied  the  royal  office  to  the  nearest
male  kinsman  if  his  connection  with  the  royal  house
was  through  a  female.  It  is  first  to  be  observed
that,  at  the  time  of  which  we  are  speaking,  the
middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  there  were  two  sys-
tems of  royal  succession  in  existence  of  much  greater
antiquity  than  either  the  Royal  House  of  England
or  the  Royal  House  of  France.  One  of  these  was
followed  by  semi-barbarous  tribes  at  the  very  ex-
tremity of  Europe,  but  it  is  of  immemorial  age,  and,
as  some  think,  almost  as  old  as  mankind  itself.  I
have  already  called  it  Tanistry,  the  system  under
which  the  grown  men  of  the  tribe  elect  their  own
chief,  generally  choosing  a  successor  before  the  ruling
chief  dies,  and  almost  invariably  electing  his  brother
or  nearest  mature  male  relative.  In  the  fourteenth '
century  this  system  was  confined  to  the  so-called
kings  or  chiefs  of  that  part  of  Ireland  which  lay
beyond  the  English  Pale,  but  there  is  a  far-oiF  echo
of  the  same  system  in  the  story  wliich  furnished
a  plot  to  the  tragedy  of  '  Hamlet,'  where  the  mur-
dered king  is  succeeded  not  by  his  son,  but  by  liis
brother,  who  strengthens  his  title  (according  to  a
usage  also  of  the  highest  antiquity)  by  marrying
the  widow  of  his  predecessor. The  very  iriemory  of

L


w


146 ROYAL SUCCESSION AXD THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

Tanistry  would  probably  have  died  out  of  Europe  if,
a  century  later,  this  method  of  succession  had  not
become  that  of  a  throne  once  the  most  exalted  in
Europe  through  the  capture  of  Constantinople  by  the
Ottoman  Turks.  The  Sultanate  in  their  hands  fol-
lowed this  rule  of  descent,  brother  succeeding  brother,
but  all  trace  of  election  by  the  people,  if  it  ever
existed,  was  lost.  As  followed  by  the  Turks,  the
system  of  course  excludes  females,  but  it  would  pro-
bably have  excluded  them  at  all  times,  as  its  mam
object  is  to  secure  a  military  leader  in  the  maturity
of  life.

The  other  system  of  regal  succession  to  which  I
referred  was  that  to  the  throne  and  crown  of  the
Roman  Empire,  which  still  theoretically  survived  in
Germany  and  Italy.  This  too  was  a  system  of
election,  but  the  right  to  have  a  voice  in  the  choice
of  the  Emperor  had  gradually  become  limited  to  a
certain  number  of  prelates  and  of  prmces  once  great
officers  of  the  Imperial  Court.  From  one  of  these,
whom  we  know  as  the  Elector  of  Hanover,  our  own
royal  family  is  descended.  The  parentage  of  the
elective  Roman  Empire  may  be  traced  to  the  acclaim
of  the  Roman  soldiery  saluting  a  successful  general
as  '  Imperator  ;  '  but  since  the  fall  of  the  Roman
Republic,  the  Imperial  dignity  had  a  tendency  to
concentrate  itself  in  particular  flimilies,  a  settled
succession  being  procured  by  the  practice  of  choosing


i


CHi.p.  y. KOYAL SUCCESSIOX ^^'D THE SALIC LAW. 147

the  new  Caesar  during  the  reignmg  Emperor's  life.
In  the  more  modern  or  Romano- German  Emph^e,  a
successor  might  be  elected,  before  the  death  of  the
reigning  Emperor,  under  the  name  of  the  King  of  the
Romans  ;  and  the  same  result  followed  in  the  prac-
tical limitation  of  the  Imperial  dignity  to  particular
families,  of  whom  the  House  of  Austria  was  the  last.
The  German  Empire,  considered  as  the  direct  suc-
cessor of  the  Roman  Empn-e,  fell  in  1806  ;  but  in  our
own  day  it  has  been  revived  without  a  revival  of
election  and  as  a  dignity  hereditary  in  the  Prussian
Royal  House.

When,  then,  France  and  England  entered  into
their  bloody  war  of  a  hundred  years,  which  was  to
decide  the  place  of  women  in  royal  successions,  there
were  two  systems  of  succession  in  Europe  which
would  have  undoubtedly  excluded  women  from  the
throne.  One  would  have  shut  them  out  from  the
most  august  dignity  in  the  West,  because  it  had  been
origiaally  an  honour  conferred  on  a  triumphant  soldier.
The  other  would  have  denied  to  them  a  petty  Irisli
chieftainship,  because  the  chief  was  intended  to  be  a
fio:htinoc  man  all  his  life.  But  in  the  monarchies
which  lay  between  these  extremes,  monarchies  of  the
class  which  we  call  feudal,  there  was  no  settled
rule  excluding  women,  and  still  less  their  male  chil-
dren. See  what  had  occurred  in  England  as  long  as
nearly  two  centuries  before  Edward  III.'s  time. The

L '1


148 UOYAL SUCCESSIOX A\D THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

country  had  been  desolated  by  the  war  between  the
Empress  Matilda  and  Stephen  of  Blois,  afterwards
King  Stephen  of  England.  But  Stephen's  claim  to
the  throne  was  derived  not  from  his  father,  but  from
his  mother  ;  and  Matilda,  herself  a  woman,  and  but
faintly  objected  to  by  the  English  barons,  on  that
account,  transmitted  an  unqaestioned  title  to  her
son  Henry  II.  How,  then,  came  such  a  difference
to  arise  between  countries  so  alike  as  France  and
Eno-land  then  were — between  monarchies  not  then
divided  by  a  silver  streak  of  sea,  since  the  English
kings  had  ever  since  the  Conquest  ruled  over  more
or  less  of  France,  sometimes  over  its  most  flourish-
ing provinces,  as  vassals  of  the  French  king  more
powerful  than  their  suzerain?

I  will  indicate  as  briefly  as  I  can  the  chief  con-
clusions to  which  a  long,  intricate,  and  diflicult  in-
quiry would  lead  us.  All  the  Western  European
monarchies,  lying  between  the  Eoman  Empire  and  the
tribal  chieftainships  of  the  Irish  and  of  the  Scottish
Highlanders,  were  (to  use  a  word  which  imperfectly
expresses  their  characteristics)  feudal.  Now  among
the  many  things  which  may  be  said  about  the  system
known  to  us  as  Feudalism,  one  of  the  least  doubtful
is  that  it  mixed  up  or  confounded  property  and  sove-
reignty. Every  Lord  of  the  Manor  or  Seigneur  was
in  some  sense  a  King.  Every  King  was  an  exalted
Lord  of  the  Manor. This  mixture  of  notions  which


i\


CHAP.  y. KOYAL SUCCESSIOX AXD THE SALIC LAW. 149

we  now  separate  had  been  unknown  to  the  Eomans  of
the  Empu'e,  and  had  somehow  been  introduced  mto
the  Western  world  by  the  barbarous  conquerors  of
the  Roman  Imperial  territories.  If  then  we  avert
our  eyes  from  the  ideas  about  chiefship  and  kmgship
entertained  by  barbarous  races- — ideas  generall}^  associ-
ated with  some  form  of  the  system  which  I  have  called
Tanistry — and  if  we  look  to  their  ideas  concerning  the
inheritance  of  property,  we  find  the  same  uncertainty
and  difference  of  view  about  the  rio-ht  of  women  to
succeed  to  it  which  we  observe  in  the  feudal  mon-
archies. Here  no  doubt  we  come  upon  a  set  of
phenomena  of  which  the  precise  significance  is  much
disputed  in  our  day  ;  but  j^robably  there  would  be
general  agreement  in  the  statement  which  follows.
The  greatest  races  of  mankind,  when  they  first
appear  to  us,  show  themselves  at  or  near  a  stage  of
development  in  which  relationship  or  kinship  is
reckoned  exclusively  tlu'ough  males.  They  are  in
this  stage  ;  or  they  are  tending  to  reach  it  ;  or  they
are  retreating  from  it.  ]\Iany  of  them  in  certain
contingencies,  generally  rare  or  remote,  give  women
and  the  descendants  of  women  a  place  in  succession,
and  the  question  Avitli  modern  inquirers  is  wliether
tlie  place  thus  assigned  to  them  is  tlie  survival  of  an
older  barbarism,  now  exemi>lified  in  savage  races,
which  traced  kinsliip  exclusively  through  females,  or
whether  it  results  from  the  dissolution,  under  various


150 KOYAL SUCCESSIOX AXD THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

influences,  of  ^  agnatic  '  relationship,  that  is,  of  re-
lationship through  males  only.^  The  position  of
women  in  these  barbarous  systems  of  inheritance
varies  very  greatly.  Sometimes  they  inherit,  either
as  mdividuals  or  in  classes,  only  when  males  of  the
same  generation  have  failed.  Sometimes  they  do  not
inherit,  but  transmit  a  right  of  inheritance  to  their
male  issue.  Sometimes  they  succeed  to  one  kind  of
property,  for  the  most  part  movable  property,  which
they  probably  took  a  great  share  in  producing  by
their  household  labour  ;  for  example,  in  the  real
Salic  law  (not  in  the  imaginary  Code)  there  is  a  set
of  rules  of  succession  which,  in  my  opinion,  clearly
admit  women  and  their  descendants  to  a  share  in  the
inheritance  of  movable  property,  but  confine  land
exclusively  to  males  and  the  descendants  of  males.
Indeed,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  under  a  purely
^  agnatic  '  system  of  relationship  governing  inherit-
ance, women  are  wholly  unprovided  for.  The  idea  is
that  the  proper  mode  of  providing  for  a  woman  is
by  giving  her  a  marriage-portion  ;  but  when  she  is
once  married  into  a  separate  community  consisting
of  strangers  in  blood,  neither  she  nor  her  children
are  deemed  to  have  any  further  claim  on  the  parent
group.

**  I  have  endeavoured  to  state  the  alternative  theories  as  I
suppose  they  wouhl  have  presented  themselves  to  the  mind  of  INIr.
J.  F.  McLennan,  prematurely  lost  to  this  brancli  of  inquir}^,  who
has  forced  all  interested  in  them  to  revise  or  review  their  opinions.


1


CHAP.  V. ROYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. 151

There  is  therefore  a  strong  probability  that,
among  the  miscellaneous  mass  of  barbarians  of  Aryan
breed  who  overran  Western  and  Southern  Europe,
all  sorts  of  ideas  prevailed  about  succession  to  pro-
perty. Some  would  exclude  the  descendants  of
women  altogether.  Others  would  admit  them  in
certain  contino:encies.  I  reo'ard  therefore  these  dis-
putes  about  the  right  of  succession  to  feudal  mon-
archies as  having  their  origin  in  differences  of  opinion
about  the  inheritance  of  property,  but  as  transferred
by  the  feudal  spirit  to  the  descent  of  crowns.^  '  They
are  a  late  survival  of  very  ancient  differences  of
usao-e  between  barbarous  communities,  now  mixed
together  as  conquerors  of  the  West.  The  claim
of  Edward  III.  to  the  French  throne  would  have
received  favourable  consideration  as  a  claim  to  j)ro-
perty  by  those  most  ancient  Brahman  lawyers  who
framed  the  Hindu  law-books  erroneously  called  by
Western  scholars  Codes.

It  will  therefore  be  perceived  that  the  question,
as  it  presents  itself  to  my  mind, is  not,  why  did

'  The  most  general  feudal  rule  about  succession  to  fiefs  is  that
contained  in  the  Customs  of  Normandy;  but  the  compiler,  as  is
usual  with  such  writers,  gives  merely  feudal  reasons  for  it.  Thus,
after  stating  that  the  rule  forl^idding  one  uterine  brother  to  succeed
to  another  {cwni  a  2)arnntihu8  suis  non  descendit)  is  subject  to
exception  in  the  case  of  a  fief  descending  from  the  mother,  he
goes  on  to  say  *  procrcati  autem  ex  feiainarum  lined,  vel  femince
auccesHionera  non  relinent  dum  alirpjAs  remanserit  de  fjenere  niascu-'
lorum!


152 EOYAL SUCCESSIOX AXD THE SALIC LAAV. chap.  v.

Edward  III.  of  England,  the  son  of  a.Capetian  Prin-
cess, become  a  pretender  to  the  throne  of  France  on
the  death  of  his  three  uncles  without  male  issue,  but
rather,  why  were  the  ruling  classes  of  the  provinces
then  composing  France  so  obstinately  persuaded  that
nobody  but  a  man  descended  through  men  from  the
founder  of  the  Royal  House  could  rightfully  reign
over  them  ?  I  think  there  is  an  explanation  of  this
strong  conviction  for  which  the  Frenchmen  of  that
day  fought  so  stoutly.  It  is  this.  There  are  some
peculiarities  in  the  Royal  House  founded  by  Hugh
Capet  which,  if  not  unique,  are  of  extreme  rarity.
The  Sept,  or,  as  it  is  called  in  India,  the  Joint-Family,
consisting  of  the  male  stock  of  the  founder,  of  male
descendants  tracing  their  descent  entirely  through
males,  still  exists,  although  not  much  less  than  900
years  have  elapsed  since  Hugh  Capet  died,  and  more-
over it  shows  no  signs  of  dying  out.  Several  times
in  the  course  of  this  long  history  it  has  seemed  on  the
point  of  extinction.  Twice  has  the  reigning  branch
ended  in  three  kings  'who  had  no  male  children.
The  direct  descendants  of  Hugh  Capet  ended,  as  you
have  heard,  in  1328.  Then  the  Yalois  succeeded,
and  they  too  came  to  an  end  in  three  brothers  who
had  nolegithnate  children,  male  or  female,  Francis  11. ,
Charles  IX.,  and  Henry  III.  But  the  fertility  of
some  younger  branch  has  always  remedied  the  decay
of  the  elder,  and  on  the  death  of  Henry  III.,  Henry


CHAP.  T. ROYAL SUCCESSIOX AXD THE SALIC LAW. 153

of  Xavarre  took  his  place,  just  as  a  Yalois  had  taken
the  place  of  the  lineal  heir  of  Hugh  Capet.  The
same  rule  of  the  infecundity  of  the  elder  line  being
repaired  by  the  fecundity  of  the  younger,  seems  still
to  hold  good.  Of  the  Bourbons  who  are  descended
from  Henry  of  Xavarre,  the  branch  of  Conde  was
exhausted  almost  in  our  own  day.  The  eldest  branch
of  the  same  house  seems  likely  to  close  with  the
childless  Prince  known  as  the  Count  de  Chambord,
and  the  elder  branch  of  the  Spanish  House  has  only
been  continued  throu^'h  women.  But  the  youno;er
lines  of  all  the  Bourbon  Houses  are  still  prolific,
represented  by  the  French  Princes  of  Orleans,  by  the
Italian  Bourbon  Princes,  and  by  the  Spanish  Princes
descended  from  the  first  Don  Carlos.  All  these
Princes  are  the  male  issue,  descended  exclusively
through  males,  of  Hugh  Capet,  who,  as  I  said,  died
nearly  900  years  ago.

These  facts  are  possibly  not  unexampled,  but  they
are  very  unusual  and  extremely  remarkable.  Their
rarity  may  be  concealed  from  us  by  our  English  way
of  talking  loosely  about  families  who  came  in  with  the
Conqueror,  and  through  our  English  usage  of  tracing
descent  indiscriminately  through  males  and  females.
No  doubt  there  are  longer  genealogies  which  are
matter  of  belief.  The  most  illustrious  of  all,  that  of
the  House  of  David,  is  longer,  but  then  the  Kings  of
Judah  were  polygamous, and  polygamy, though it


154 ROYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

sometimes  produces  sterility,  occasionally  results  in
families  like  that  of  the  Shah  of  Persia,  who  not  many
years  ago  left  eighty  sons.  In  India  there  are  pedigrees
greatly  longer,  for  there  are  princes  claiming  to  descend
from  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  But  I  need  scarcely  say
that  the  earlier  names  in  these  genealogical  trees  are
those  of  fabulous  personages,  and  indeed  under  a
system  of  succession  which,  like  most  of  the  Indian
systems,  permits  the  adoption  of  children,  there  can
be  but  little  assurance  of  the  absolute  purity  of  male
descent.  It  must  at  the  same  time  be  understood
that  I  am  not  asserting  the  impossibility  of  pedigrees
of  this  length,  but  only  their  rarity.  It  is  said  that
genuine  pedigrees  almost  as  long  may  be  found  among
the  English  gentry,  but  anybody  can  convince  himself
that  among  the  English  nobility  a  long  continuity  of
male  descents  is  very  rare,  though  there  are  excep-
tions, a  notable  one  being  that  of  the  Stanleys.

But,  rare  and  striking  as  is  this  peculiarity  in  the
family  history  of  the  Capetians,  that  House  presented
in  the  fourteenth  century  a  phenomenon  which  is
still  rarer  and  still  more  impressive.  The  kings
sprung  from  Hugh  Capet  succeeded  one  another,  son
to  father  or  brother  to  brother,  for  more  than  300
years.  Through  all  this  time  there  was  no  occasion
to  call  in  a  remote  collateral,  an  uncle  or  great-uncle
or  a  cousin.  How  unusual  is  such  a  succession  we
can  conceive  ourselves  by  taking  a  very  simple  test.


1


CHAP.  V. EOYAL SUCCESSIOX AXD THE SALIC LAW. 155

Let  us  take  any  half-dozen  conspicuous  men  of  a
hundred  years  since,  conspicuous  in  any  way  we
please,  statesmen  or  writers  or  simply  of  noble  birth,
and  we  shall  find  that  their  living  descendants
throuo^li  males  are  few,  thouo;h  their  descendants
through  women  may  be  numerous,  Go  hvo  hundred
years  back  and  you  will  see  that  the  fewness  of  male
descendants  through  males  from  men  of  eminence
much  increases,  and  if  you  go  three  hundred  years
back,  it  becomes  ^  extraordinary.  The  whole  sub-
ject belongs  to  a  branch  of  the  theory  (as  it  is  called)
of  Heredity  which  has  not  been  perfectly  investi-
gated as  yet,  and  which  it  would  be  out  of  place  to
discuss  here.  I  think,  however,  that  it  is  not  too
bold  a  proposition  that  the  greater  the  eminence  of
the  founder  of  a  non-polygamous  family,  the  greater
on  tlie  whole  is  the  tendency  of  the  family  to  con-
tinue itself  (if  it  continue  at  all)  through  women  in
the  direct  line ;  and  that  the  best  securities  for  a  pure
pedigree  through  males  are  comparative  obscurity
and  (I  could  almost  say)  comparative  poverty,  if  not
extreme.  The  rule  is  of  course  only  approximate,
and  the  example  of  the  Capetian  dynasty  sufficiently

6  The  subject,  as  respects  the  pedigrees  of  the  nobility,  is  dis-
cussed by  Mr.  Hay  ward  in  a  very  interesting  paper  in  his  Bio-
yrapJdcal  and  Critical  Essays,  Third  Series,  *  English,  Scotch,
Irish,  and  Continental  Nobility.'  See  page  200.  '  It  is  quite
startling  on  going  over  the  beadroll  of  English  worthies,  to  find
how  few  are  directly  represented  in  the  male  line.'


156 llOYAL SUCCESSION AND TllP: SALIC ].AW. cnAr.  v.

shows  that  there  are  exceptions  to  it.  At  the  same
time,  the  position  of  the  early  Capetians  must  not  be
judged  by  the  splendour  of  the  late  Kings  of  France.
They  were  comparatively  poor  and  comparatively
obscure,  and  for  long  could  hardly  make  head  against
even  the  humbler  of  their  nominal  vassals.

This,  then,  I  believe  to  be  the  true  secret  of  the
so-called  Salic  rule  of  succession.  There  is  nothing,
even  now,  very  uncommon  m  the  frame  of  mind
which  leads  men  to  think  that  everything,  of  which
they  know  or  remember  nothing  to  the  contrary,  has
existed  from  all  time  and  that  it  ought  to  continue
for  ever.  But  in  an  ao'e  in  which  historical  know-
ledge  was  all  but  non-existent,  and  in  which  the
mass  of  mankind  lived  by  usage,  such  a  habit  of
thought  must  have  been  incomparably  stronger  ;  and
we  cannot  doubt  that  men's  minds  were  powerfully
affected  by  this  unmterrupted  continuation  of  male
descents  in  the  royal  family  of  France,  which  even
to  us  is  impressive.  Nobody,  they  would  say,  has
reio:ned  in  France  but  a  Kino-  the  son  of  a  Kino-.
There  had  been  no  occasion  to  call  to  the  throne
a  collateral  relative,  much  less  a  kinsman  throusfh
women.  Amid  a  general  flux  of  men's  ideas  on  the
subject  of  succession  to  thrones,  the  French  law
would  at  all  events  have  appeared  to  have  solidified.
And,  such  being  the  preconceived  notions  of  French-
men, there  is  no  doubt  that  they  were  strengthened


r.7


CHAP.  V. ROYAL SUCCESSION AND THE SALIC LAW. 157

by  the  provision  of  the  real  Salic  law,  which  said
that  land — or,  as  it  was  once  read,  Salic  land — should
descend  exclusively  to  males  through  males.  This
legal  provision  was  in  fact  irrelevant  to  the  question,
but  it  may  very  easily  have  been  misunderstood  ;
and  it  is  a  significant  circumstance  that  manuscripts
of  the  true  Salic  Code,  the  Lex  Salica  of  the  Ger-
mans, appear  to  have  been  found  in  the  Eoyal  Library
at  Paris  from  the  time  of  its  first  foundation.

The  supposed  Salic  rule,  excludmg  women  and
their  descendants  from  royal  successions,  has  been
adopted  in  later  days  in  many  countries  in  which
women  were  at  one  time  permitted  to  succeed.  In
constitutionally  governed  States,  female  successions
have  always  been  popular  ;  and  quite  recently,  in
Spain  and  Portugal,  the  establishment  of  constitu-
tional o-overnment  coincided  with  the  overthrow  of
the  rule  which  excluded  queens  from  the  throne.
The  Spanish  monarchy  was  composed  of  portions  in
most  of  which  the  throne  might  be  filled  by  a
woman,  but  when  the  younger  branch  of  the  Bour-
bons obtained  the  Crown  of  Spain,  they  introduced
the  so-called  Salic  rule.  This  system  of  succession
is  manifestly  thought  to  be  convenient  wherever,
whether  there  be  a  Constitution  or  not,  a  large  mea-
sure of  authority  resides  with  tlie  sovereign.  Thus
the  succession  to  tlie  German  Empire,  following  that
of  the Prussian kingdom, is now Salic  ; and  in


158 ROYAL SUCCESSION AXD THE SALIC LAW. chap.  v.

Russia,  where  an  extremely  peculiar  rule  of  succes-
sion prevailed,  one  of  the  most  usual  successions
being  that  of  the  widow  of  the  late  Emperor,  the
exclusive  devolution  of  the  Crown  through  males  on
males  was  for  the  first  time  introduced  by  the
Emperor  Paul  I.

The  explanation  given  by  French  historians  of
the  memorable  rule  which  first  sprang  up  in  their
country  has  nothing  to  do  w^ith  reasons  of  conveni-
ence. They  say  that  the  exclusion  of  w^omen  and
their  issue  was  the  fruit  of  the  intense  national  spirit
of  Frenchmen.  If  it  had  not  been  for  this  principle
the  King  of  France  might  have  been  an  Englishman,
or  a  German,  or  a  Spaniard,  according  to  the  na-
tionality of  his  mother's  husband  ;  and  this  was  con-
trary to  the  genius  of  France,  which  imperatively
required  that  the  King  should  be  a  Frenchman.  But
this  is  the  error,  not  so  very  uncommon  in  the  philo-
sophy of  history,  of  taking  the  consequence  for  the
cause.  It  was  not  the  national  spirit  of  Frenchmen
which  created  the  Salic  ~  rule,  but  the  Salic  rule  had
a  great  share  in  creating  the  French  national  spirit.
No  country  grew  together  originally  so  much  through
chance  and  good  luck  as  France.  Originally  con-
fined to  a  small  territory  round  Paris,  province  after
province  became  incorporated  with  it  through  feudal
forfeitures,  through  royal  marriages,  or  through  the
failure  of  Imes  of  vassals  even  more  powerful  than


CHAP.  V. ROYAL SUCCESSION  AND THE SALIC LAW. 159

the  King  to  whom  they  owed  allegiance.  But  owing
to  the  Salic  rule,  the  King  always  belonged  to  the
heart  and  core  of  the  monarchy.  The  King  of  Eng-
land who  first  annexed  Ireland  was  a  Frenchman.
The  King  of  England  who  united  Scotland  with  her
was  a  Scotchman.  But  the  King  of  France  was
from  first  to  last  born  and  educated  a  Frenchman
The  same  vein  of  character  may  be  seen  running
throuo^h  the  whole  series  of  French  Kino;s,  broken

O  ■ CD ?

only  perhaps  in  the  unhappy  Prince  who  closed  the
dynasty  in  the  last  century.  Hence  the  whole  au-
thority of  the  French  Kings  was  exerted  to  bring
each  successive  acquisition  of  the  Crown  into  political
and  social  conformity  with  the  original  kernel  of  the
kingdom.  And  in  this  way  w^as  created  the  French
love  of  unity,  the  French  taste  for  centralisation,  the
French  national  spirit.  The  undoubted  power  which
France  possesses  of  absorbing  into  herself  and  im-
buing with  her  national  character  all  the  populations
united  with  her  has  been  attributed  to  the  French
Revolution  ;  in  reality  it  is  much  older,  and  may  be
traced  in  great  part  to  the  Salic  rule  of  royal  suc-
cession.


160  THE KIXG AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chip.  vi.


CHAPTER YI.

THE KING, IN HIS RELATION TO EARLY
CIVIL JUSTICE.

Whenever  in  the  records  of  very  ancient  societies,
belonging  to  races  with,  which  we  have  some  affinity,
we  come  upon  a  personage  resembling  him  whom  we
call  the  King,  he  is  almost  always  associated  with
the  administration  of  justice.  The  King  is  often
much  more  than  a  judge.  He  is  all  but  invariably  a
general  or  military  chief.  He  is  constantly  a  priest
and  chief  priest.  But,  whatever  else  he  may  be,  he
seldom  fails  to  be  a  judge,  though  his  relation  to
justice  may  not  be  exactly  that  with  which  we  are
familiar.

The  examples  of  this  association  which  I  will
give  must  be  few  among  many.  The  monuments  of
jurisprudence  which  lay  claim  to  the  highest  anti-
quity are  those  of  the  Hindus,  one  of  which  has  long
been  vaguely  known  to  Euro2)eans  under  the  name
of  the  Code  of  Manu.  ]\Iany  similar  collections  of
ancient  Indian  legal  rules  have  of  late  been  discovered,
and  some  have  been  translated,  but  it  is  to  be  ob-


CHAP.  VI. THE KI^'G AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE.  1 61

served  they  none  of  them  deserve  to  be  called  Codes.
They  are  in  fact  books  of  mixed  law  and  theology,
the  manuals  in  use  with  the  Indian  Brahmans  in  i  \  .  j
ancient  law- schools,  in  which  their  subjects  were  no  I  >,  j  ^
doubt  at  first  taught  orally  and  committed  to  memory
and  were  only  embodied  in  writing  in  comparatively
recent  times.  They  are  further,  as  we  have  them,
the  result  of  a  sort  of  literary  evolution.  The  origi-
nal treatises,  or  rather  bodies  of  learning,  dealt
with  all  things  divine  and  human  (regarded  no
doubt  fi'om  a  purely  theological  point  of  view),  but
the  various  portions  of  this  learning  became  gradually
specialised,  till  at  last  treatises  dealing  with  law
mainly,  or  law  entangled  with  religious  ritual,  were
finally  separated  from  the  rest.  In  these  ancient
law-books,  in  so  far  as  they  are  law-books,  the
authority  of  a  King  is  assumed.  He  sits  on  the
throne  of  justice.  He  has  the  book  of  the  law  before
him.  He  has  learned  Brahmans  for  assessors.  Some
part  of  these  ideas,  like  much  else  of  immemorial
antiquity,  survive  in  India.  A  gentleman  in  a  high
official  position  in  India  has  a  native  friend  who  has
devoted  his  life  to  preparing  a  new  book  of  Manu.
He  does  not,  however,  expect  or  care  that  it  should
be  put  in  force  by  any  agency  so  ignoble  as  a  British
Indian  legislature,  deriving  its  powers  from  an  Act
of  Parliament  not  a  century  old.  He  waits  till  there
arises  a  King  in  India  who  will  serve  God  and  take

M


162  THE KING AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  vi.

the  law  from  the  new  Manu  when  he  sits  in  his  court
of  justice.

If  we  pass  from  the  extreme  East  to  the  extreme
West,  from  the  easterly  to  the  westerly  wing  of  the
Indo-European  or  Aryan  race,  from  India  to  Ireland,
we  find  this  same  association.  That  most  interesting
system,  the  ancient  Irish  law,  is  known  as  the
Brelion  Law,  because  it  is  said  to  have  been  declared
by  the  Brehons,  who  are  in  fact  as  nearly  as  possible
the  Brahmans  of  India,  with  many  of  their  charac-
teristics altered,  and  indeed  their  whole  sacerdotal
authority  abstracted,  by  the  influence  of  Christianity.
Here,  too,  we  find  that  the  great  Brehons  are  Kings
or  King's  sons  ;  and  we  come  upon  the  significant
proposition  that,  though  a  King  is  necessarily  a
judge,  it  is  lawful  for  him  to  have  a  professional
*  I  lawyer for an assessor. There are many most

striking  resemblances,  often  on  the  most  unexpected
points,  between  ancient  Indian  and  ancient  Irish
law  ;  and  this  hint  as  to  the  proper  constitution  of  a
Court  of  Justice  is  one  of  them.

The  ancient  Hindu  lawyers  claimed  a  descent
from  supernatural  personages  only  second  to  the
gods.  The  ancient  Irish  lawyers  pretended  that  the
first  of  their  order  was  a  pupil  of  Moses  in  the  Desert.
But,  in  point  of  fact,  the  order  of  ideas  exhibited  by
both  systems  is  relatively  more  modern  than  that
which  we  can  trace  in  the  poems  attributed  to  Homer.


/I^  0u%ijM/\^h44^


CHAP.  Yi. THE KING AKD EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE.  163

Here  we  can  perceive  the  undeveloped  form  of  the
Indian  and  Irish  conception  of  a  Court.  The  Homeric
King  is  chiefly  busy  with  fighting.  But  he  is  also  a
judge,  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  he  has  no
assessors.  His  sentences  come  directly  into  his  mind
by  divme  dictation  from  on  high.  These  sentences,
or  6€fjLLcrTe<;  —  which  is  the  same  word  with  our
Teutonic  word  '  dooms  ' — are  doubtless  drawn  from
pre-existing  custom  or  usage,  but  the  notion  is  that
they  are  conceived  by  the  King  spontaneously  or
through  divine  prompting.  It  is  plainly  a  later
development  of  the  same  view  when  the  prompting
comes  from  a  learned  lawyer,  or  from  an  authoritative
law-book.

I  pause  on  one  more  instance  of  the  association
familiar  to  all  of  us.  The  Judges  of  the  Hebrews
represent  an  old  form  of  kingship.  The  exploits  told
of  them  in  the  Scriptural  Book  of  Judges  pomt  to
them  chiefly  as  heroes  raised  up  at  moments  of
national  disaster  ;  but,  independently  of  the  etymo-
logy of  the  name  by  which  they  are  designated,  they
were  clearly  exponents  of  law  and  administrators  of
justice.  Deborah,  the  prophetess,  who  is  counted
among  them,  judged  Israel.  She  dwelt  under  the
palm-tree  of  Deborah  in  Mount  Ephraim,  and  all
Israel  came  up  to  her  for  judgment.  Eli,  the  last
but  one  of  the  Judges,  had  judged  Israel  forty  years,
and  Samuel  the  prophet,  the  last  of  them,  expressly

H  2


164  THE KIXG AXD EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  vi.

claims  credit  in  his  old  age  for  tlie  purity  of  his
judgments.  On  the  other  hand,  the  decline  of  the
system  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  sons  of  Eli  are
expressly  charged  with  abuse  of  authority,  and  those
of  Samuel  witli  corruption.  In  the  more  mature
kingship  which  presently  succeeded,  the  military
functions  of  the  King  are  most  promineat  in  Saul
and  David,  but  the  judicial  authority  again  manifests
itself  in  Solomon.

There  is  one  portion  of  these  ancient  ideas  about
justice  on  which  it  is  necessary  to  dwell  for  a  moment
on  account  of  the  great  importance  which  they  prove
to  have  had  for  mankind.  It  would  seem  that,
in  these  early  times,  however  much  the  administra-
tion of  justice  might  be  organised,  even  though  a
system  of  law-courts  might  exist  competing  with  the
King's  justice  and  quite  independent  of  him,  even
though  all  or  some  part  of  the  law  might  have  been
set  forth  in  writing,  yet  there  was  always  supposed
to  be  what  may  be  called  a  supplementary  or  residu-
ary jurisdiction  in  the  King.  The  law,  however
administered^  was  never  believed  to  be  so  perfect  but
that  the  royal  authority  was  always  required  to  eke
out  and  correct  it.  Just  as,  accordinsf  to  the  most
modern  ideas  about  jurisprudence,  every  body  of
law  is  thouo'ht  certain  to  become  an  instrument  of

o

gross  tyranny  unless  there  is  somewhere  a  legislatiu-e
to amend  it, so  even  that servility  to  immemorial


CHAP.  vr. THE KIA^G AXD EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE.  165

usage  which  is  characteristic  of  very  ancient  times
did  not  exclude  the  correction  of  usage  by  the  autho-
rity of  the  King.  We  owe  to  this  belief  in  a  supple-
mentary judicial  authority  residing  in  the  King  some
branches  of  our  own  jurisprudence  which  are  in
great  credit,  e.g.  the  so-called  Equity  of  our  Court  of
Chancery  ;  and  others  of  much  less  repute  may  be
traced  to  it,  such  as  the  old  Court  of  Star  Chamber-^
which  was  established  by  a  belated  and  therefore  un-
popular exercise  of  this  same  residuary  royal  power.
But  a  large  part  of  mankind  is  indebted  for  much
more  than  this  to  these  ancient  notions.  Practically
at  this  moment  two  systems  of  law  divide  between
them  the  whole  civilised  world.  One  is  the  English
law,  followed  by  nearly  all  the  English-speaking
peoples — by  ourselves,  by  all  the  colonies  actually
planted  by  Englishmen,  by  all  the  Northern  and
Central  States  of  the  American  Union,  and  to  a
greater  extent  every  day  by  the  millions  of  India.
The  other  is  the  Roman  law,  whether  it  take  the
form,  as  in  Germany,  of  what  we  call  a  common
law,  or  whether  it  appears  under  a  slight  disguise
in  the  French  Civil  Code,  and  the  numerous  codes
descended  from  it.  But  the  real  indigenous  law  of
ancient  Rome  deserved  no  such  fortune  as  this. It

'  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Court  of  Star  Chamber  was  of
higher  antiquity  than  the  statutes  regulating  it,  3  Henry  VII.  c.  1,
and  21  Henry  VIII.  c.  20.


16G  THE KIXG AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  vi.

was  a  stiff  system  of  technical  and  ceremonious  law,
belonging  to  a  common  and  easily  recognisable  type.
But  it  underwent  a  transformation  through  this  very
residuary  or  supplementary  royal  authority  of  which
I  have  been  speaking.  The  judicial  powers  of  those
dimly  seen  and  half  fobulous  personages,  the  Kings
of  Rome,  descended,  at  the  establishment  of  the
Roman  Republic,  to  the  magistrate  known  as  the
Prn3tor  ;  and  the  old  belief  in  a  divme  or  semi-divine
inspiration,  dictating  judicial  rulings  to  the  ancient
King,  gradually  converted  itself  into  the  assump-
tion, first  of  a  religious  and  then  of  a  philosophical
theory,  guiding  the  more  modern  Pra3tor.  Augusta
Comte  might  have  appealed  to  the  change  as  illus-
tratino;  the  transformation  of  a  theolooical  into  a
metaphysical  conception.  What  has  descended  to  so
large  a  part  of  the  modern  world  is  not  the  coarse
Roman  law,  but  the  Roman  law  distilled  through  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Praetor,  and  by  him  gradually  bent
into  supposed  accordance  with  the  law  of  Nature.  The
origin,  therefore,  of  a  body  of  law,  regarded  by  some
of  the  most  civilised  societies  of  mankind  as  the  per-
fection of  reason,  and  spoken  of  by  contmental  law-
yers Avith  what  Englislmien  at  all  events  regard  as
extravagance  of  praise,  is  to  be  sought  in  this  most
ancient  belief  that  law,  custom,  and  judicature  were
all  necessarily  and  naturally  subject  to  correction  by
the  supreme  autliority  of  tlie  King.


CHAP.  VI. THE KING AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE.  1 67

I  wish,  however,  to  speak  less  of  early  Kings
in  general  than  of  the  early  Teutonic  or  Germanic
King  and  of  his  relation  to  civil  justice.  Our
own  Queen  Victoria  has  in  her  vems  the  blood  of
Cerdic  of  Wessex,  the  fierce  Teutonic  chief  out  of
whose  dignity  English  kingship  grew  ;  and  in  one
sense  she  is  the  most  perfect  representative  of  Teu-
tonic royalty,  as  the  English  institutions  have  never
been  so  much  broken  as  the  institutions  of  other
Germanic  societies  by  the  overwhelming  disturbance
caused  elsewhere  by  Roman  law  and  Roman  legal
ideas.

But,  though  this  is  true,  there  is  no  community
of  which  the  early  legal  history  is  more  obscure  than
ours,  much  as  English  and  German  learning  has
lately  done  for  it.  Fortunately,  for  an  account  of  the
early  relations  of  the  Germanic  King  to  justice,  we
can  turn  to  a  monument  of  ancient  Teutonic  law
constructed  at  a  time  when  piratical  chiefs  from  Jut-
land and  Friesland  were  be^finnino;  to  work  the  over-
throw  of  the  Roman  provincial  administration  in  our
island.  This  is  the  Salic  Law,  the  oldest  of  the
Teutonic  codes,  the  oldest  portrait  of  Germanic  insti-
tutions drawn  by  a  German.  Scholars  are  now
pretty  much  agreed  that  it  Ijclongs  to  the  fifth
century  after  Christ,  and  that  its  preparation  was
prompted  by  the  great  codification  of  Roman  law
effected  by  the  Emperor  Theodosius  II. Nothing  is


168  THE KliS'G AXD EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. cnAr.  vi.

more  sin<^ular  than  the  delusion,  so  long  and  so
obstinately  entertained  in  Europe,  that  the  Salic  Law
either  was  a  system  of  rules,  or  at  any  rate  comprised
a  set  of  rules,  regulating  the  succession  to  thrones
and  crowns.  In  reality  it  deals  with  much  humbler
matters.  It  is  concerned  with  the  daily  life  of  the
men  who  belonged  to  the  confederation  of  German
tribes  called  (it  is  not  altogether  known  why)  the
Salian  Franks.  It  deals  with  thefts  and  assaults,
with  cattle,  with  swine,  and  with  bees,  and  above  all
with  the  solemn  and  intricate  procedure  which  every
man  must  follow  who  would  punish  a  wrong  or
enforce  a  right.  It  might  be  best  described  as  a
manual  of  law  and  legal  procedure  for  the  use  or
guidance  of  the  free  judges  in  that  ancient  Teutonic
Court,  the  Court  of  the  Hundred.  It  is  written  in
phraseology  which  probably  reflects  accurately  the
way  in  which  the  Germans  of  the  fifth  century  spoke
Latin.  Some  of  the  manuscripts  of  it  contain  inter-
lineations in  a  very  old  Teutonic  dialect  which,
under  the  name  of  the  Malberg  Gloss,  still  excite  the
strongest  interest  among  philologists.  With  Kings
it  has  nothing  whatever  to  do,  except  so  far  as  the
King  is  concerned  with  the  administration  of  justice.
The  fiimous  passage  whicli  was  once  thought  to  justify
bloody  European  wars,  which  caused  the  war  of  a
hundred  years  between  England  and  France,  and
which  is  still  the  basis  of  tlie  theory  of  politics  called


CHAP.  VI. THE KING AND EAELY CIVIL JUSTICE.  169

Legitimism,  merely  gives  the  rule  of  inheritance  to
landed  property.^

This  Court  of  the  Hundred,  which  administered
the  Salic  law  to  the  Salian  Franks,  was  the  most
ancient  of  the  oro;anised  Courts  amono-  the  Germanic
races.  There  were  probably  '  natural '  prehistoric
Courts  which  were  older,  such  as  the  assemblies  (or
moots)  of  the  various  villaofe  communities,  but  the
Hundred  Court  was  the  result  of  a  dehberate  attempt
to  furnish  an  alternative  to  violence  and  bloodshed,
and  it  seems  to  have  been  practically  universal  among
the  Germanic  tribes.  It  has  bequeathed  to  this
country  a  territorial  description,  the  Hundred,  or
(as  it  is  called  in  the  north)  the  Wapentake  ;  and
Mr.  Gomme,  in  his  interesting  volume  on  '  Primitive
Folk  Moots,'  has  traced  many  of  the  sites  at  which
its  open-air  meetings  were  held.  They  seem  to  be
particularly  abundant  in  Xorfolk  and  m  the  east  of
England.  The  Hundred  Court,  however,  was  not  an
institution  which  had  great  vitality  in  our  country,
since  part  of  its  powers  seems  at  an  early  date  to
have  gone  over  to  the  larger  judicial  body  called  the
County  or  Shire  Court,  while  another  part  went  back

^  Da,  terrd  {Salicu)  in  mulierern  nulla  portio  hcnreditatis
ira/nsity  <kc.  The  word  '  Salica  '  is  certainly  an  interpolation,  as
may  }je  seen  at  a  glance  from  the  tfibulai-  comparison  of  the  MSS.
in  the  splendid  edition  of  the  Lex  Salica  by  Messrs.  Kem  and
Hessels. (London  :  Murray,  1880),  L.S.  379  et  seq.


170  THE KING AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  vl.

again  to  the  village  communities  under  their  newer
name  of  Manors.

As  the  Hundred  Court  appears  in  the  Salic  Law,
it  looks  at  first  sight  like  an  entirely  popular  tribunal
with  which  royal  authority  has  nothing  to  do.  The
judges  are  all  the  freemen  living  within  the  limits  of
the  Hundred.  The  President  is  elective  and  bears
the  name  of  the  Thunginus  or  Thingman.  I  will  say
no  more  of  its  general  characteristics  than  that  it  is
intensely  technical,  and  that  it  supplies  in  itself  suffi-
cient proof  that  legal  technicahty  is  a  disease  not  of
the  old  age,  but  of  the  infancy  of  societies.  But  it
has  one  remarkable  peculiarity,  that  in  a  large  class
of  cases  whicn  come  before  it,  those  based  on  contract
or  ownership,  it  does  not  enforce  its  own  decisions.
It  may  be  suspected  that,  at  a  still  earlier  date,  this
singular  inability  to  discharge  what  seems  to  us  the
most  distinctive  function  of  a  judicial  tribunal  ex-
tended to  all  the  decrees  of  the  Hundred  Court,  what-
ever might  be  their  object.  The  explanation  seems
to  be  that  the  most  ancient  Courts  deliberately  es-
tablished by  mankind  were  intended  to  be  what  we
should  call  Courts  of  Arbitration.  Their  great  func-
tion was  to  give  hot  blood  time  to  cool,  to  prevent
men  from  redressino;  their  own  wrono;s,  and  to  take
into  their  own  hands  and  regulate  the  method  of
redress.  The  earliest  penalty  for  disobedience  to  the
Court  was  probably  outlawry. The  man  who  would


CHAP.  Yi. THE KIXG AXD EAELY CIVIL JUSTICE.  171

not  abide  by  its  sentence  went  out  of  the  law.  If  he
were  killed,  his  kinsmen  were  forbidden,  or  were
deterred  by  all  the  force  of  primitive  opinion,  from
takino'  that  veno-eance  which  otherwise  would  have
been  their  duty  and  then'  right.

But  at  this  very  point  the  Salic  Law  puts  us  on
the  trace  of  one  of  the  greatest  services  which  royal
authority  has  rendered  to  civil  justice.  At  the  first
glance,  the  King  appears  to  have  nothing  to  do  with
the  Court  of  the  Hundred.  He  is  merely  repre-
sented in  it  by  a  class  of  officers  who  collect  his  share
of  the  fines  imposed — a  very  important  part  of  the
royal  revenues.  AVe  find,  however,  that  if  the  un-
successfal  litio^ant  in  the  Court  had  ao-reed  to  abide
by  the  sentence,  the  King's  officer  would  enforce  it ;
and  even  in  the  absence  of  such  an  agreement,  if  the
litigant  who  had  been  successful  went  to  the  King
in  person  and  petitioned  him,  the  King  would  do  him
justice  in  virtue  of  his  ultimate  residuary  authority.
These  are  the  first  feeble  and  uncertain  steps  of
royal  authority  towards  the  ascendency  which  in  all
Teutonic  countries  it  has  gained  over  the  primitive
popular  justice.  It  has  dwarfed  and  finally  absorbed
this  justice,  but  then  it  has  conferred  on  it  the  faculty
without  which  we  can  scarcely  conceive  it  existing.
The  King  has  nerved  its  arm  to  strike,  and  there
seems  no  doubt  that  the  process  by  which  the  whole
force  of  the  State  is  employed  to  enforce  the  com-


172  THE KING AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. CHAr.  vi.

mands  of  the  judge  is  the  result  of  the  contact,  ever
growing  in  closeness,  between  the  royal  authority
and  the  popular  court.  We  possess  in  the  Capitu-
laries of  the  Frankish  Kings  some  evidence  of  the
further  course  of  these  relations  between  the  King
and  the  Court.  After  a  while,  the  popular  president
of  the  Hundred  Court,  the  Thingman,  disappears,
and  his  j)lace  is  taken  by  the  Graf  or  Count,  the
deputy  of  the  King.  Royal  authority  is  therefore
constantly  growing,  and,  as  a  consequence,  we  find
that  the  Count  will  use  the  King's  power  to  enforce
all  decrees  of  the  tribunal,  without  reference  to  their
nature,  without  previous  agreement,  and  without
appeal  to  the  King's  supreme  equity.  The  presi-
dency of  the  royal  officer  over  the  Court  was  the
begmning  of  a  separate  set  of  changes  by  which  the
character  of  the  old  popular  justice  was  profoundly
changed.  Everywhere  in  the  Teutonic  countries  we
find  deputies  of  the  King  exercising  authority  in  the
ancient  courts,  insisting  that  justice  be  administered
in  the  King's  name,  and  finally  administering  a
simpler  justice  of  their  own  amid  the  ruins  of  the
ancient  judicial  structures  fallen  everywhere  into  dis-
repute and  decay.  Such  being  the  well-established
consequences  of  the  contact  between  the  Teutonic
King  and  the  Teutonic  Popular  Courts,  it  seems
worth  while  inquiring  what  were  the  weaknesses  of
those Courts, what  seeds  of  dissolution  they  con-


CHAP.  Yi. THE XIXG AND E.\ELY CIVIL JUSTICE.  173

tained,  and  what  there  was  in  the  King,  even  apart
from  this  power,  which  made  him  their  natural  suc-
cessor.

Two  forms  of  authority,  the  King  and  the  Popular
Assembly,  are  found  side  by  side  in  a  great  number  of
the  societies  of  mankind  when  they  first  show  them-
selves on  the  threshold  of  civilisation.  The  Popular
Assembly  and  the  Popular  Court  of  Justice  are  in
principle  the  same  institution  ;  they  are  gatherings
of  the  freemen  of  the  community  for  different  public
purposes.  The  King  ^^  political  chief  is  contrasted
with  the  Popular  Assembly  ;  as  military  leader  he  is
contrasted  with  the  host^  with  the  general  body  of
fighting  men  ;  with  the  Popular  Court  of  Justice  he
is  contrasted  as  judge,  as  depositary  of  the  special
judicial  authority  which  is  my  subject.  I  do  not  enter
upon  questions,  now  much  disputed,  whether  the
King  or  the  Popular  Assembly  is  the  older  of  the
two,  or  whether  they  have  co-existed  from  all  time,
and  1  will  merely  observe  that  the  tendency  of  recent
research  is  to  assign  the  higher  antiquity  to  the
assembly  of  tribesmen.  Taking  it,  however,  as  a
fact  that  the  two  authorities  very  generally  appear
together,  we  may  remark  a  further  law  of  progress
which  they  seem  to  follow.  In  such  communities  as
those  of  which  Athens  and  Rome  are  the  great
examples — in  that  walled  city  which  was  the  cradle
of  a large part of  modern ideas — the organs of


174  THE KING AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  vi.

freedom, as  we  should  say,  continually  increase  in
importance. The assemblies monopolise power.
The King either disappears or becomes a mere
shadow. But in communities spread over large
spaces  of  land,  and  without  walled  towns,  it  is  the
King  who  grows,  and  all  popular  institutions  tend  to
fall  into  decrepitude. Are  there,  then,  any  reasons
for this growth and decay,  so  far  as regards  the
particular  institutions  with  which  we  are  concerned
— -judicial mstitutions  ? One source of weakness
may,  I  think,  be  traced  in  the  ancient  popular  insti-
tutions, both  judicial and  political. This  was  the
great  number  of  men,  and  the  large  portion  of  every
man's  time,  which  they  required  for  their  efficient
working. Even in communities confined by  the
surrounding  wall  to  moderate dimensions,  we  can
see  the  difficulty  of  bringing  up  the  people  to  the
discharge  of  their  public  duties. Scholars  will  re-
member the vermilion- stained rope which was
dragged  along the streets  of  Athens  to  force the
citizens  to  the  place  of  assembly,  and  which  exposed
the  laggard  marked  by  it  to  a  fine  ;  and  their  recol-
lection will  also  dwell  on  the  famous  fee,  the  three
obols,  which  was  paid  for  attendance  there  and  at  the
popular  tribunal. Mr.  Freeman,  speakmg  of  the  later
revival  of  Hellenic  freedom  in  the  collection  of  States
united  by  the  Acha3an  League  ('  History  of  Federal
Government,'  i.  266),  has  noticed  the  effect  which


CHAP.  VI. THE KING AND EAELY CIVIL JUSTICE.  175

the  burden  of  attendance  on  political  duties  had  in
throwing  political  privilege  into  a  few  hands  and
thus  in  converting  democracies  into  aristocracies.
Much  of  ancient  freedom  was,  in  fact,  lost  through
the  vastness  of  the  payment  in  person  which  it  de-
manded. In  communities  of  the  other  class,  those
spread  in  villages  over  a  great  extent  of  country,  the
burdensomeness  of  pubhc  duties  must  always  have
been  considerable,  and  must  have  become  very  great
when  their  size  increased  through  the  absorption  of
many  tribes  in  the  same  nation.  Some  evidence  of
this  may  be  discerned  in  the  importance  which  old
Germanic  law  assigns  to  the  sunis  or  essoin^  a  word
which  once  puzzled  English  lawyers  greatly,  but
which  is  of  old  German  origin,  and  really  signifies
the  ground  of  legal  excuse  which  a  man  may  make
for  failing  to  discharge  any  duty  in  a  popular
Teutonic  tribunal.  But  the  difficulty  is  easily  un-
derstood in  another  way.  Although  its  pedigree  is
much  interrupted,  our  English  jury  is  a  survival  of
the  old  popular  justice  ;  yet  nobody  even  now,  I
suppose,  receives  a  summons  to  attend  a  jury  with
perfect  complacency.  What,  however,  must  the
necessity  for  attendance  have  been  when  the  place  of
meeting  was  at  the  other  side  of  the  hundred,  or
perhaps  of  the  county,  when  there  were  no  roads  in
England  except  the  iloman  roads,  when  the  eastern
counties  were  little  better  than  a  fen,  and  when  the


176  THE KING AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  vi.

Wealden  of  the  south  were  really  forests  ?  Yet  there
is  some  ground  for  thinking  that  the  burden  of
attendance  was  lighter  in  England  than  elsewhere.
On  the  Continent  of  Europe,  so  long  as  the  Hundred
Court  had  a  genuine  existence,  and  up  to  the  time
when  it  was  converted  into  a  limited  Committee  of
Experts,  we  cannot  trace  any  relaxation  of  the
severe  rule  that  every  man  of  full  age  and  free  must
be  present.  But,  even  in  this  particular,  the  begin-
nings of  that  representative  system  which  has  done  so
much  to  continue  the  EngHsh  form  of  Teutonic  liberty
in  life  can  be  perceived  specially  characterising  this
country.  From  very  early  times  the  English  Hundred
and  Shire  Courts  were  attended  not  by  every  freeman,
but  by  the  Lords  of  Manors,  and  by  the  Reeve  and
four  men  representing  each  village  or  parish.  Never-
theless there  can  be  little  doubt  that  even  in  England
the  duty  of  attendance  was  felt  to  be  very  burden-
some. In  the  Confirmation  of  Magna  Charta  by
Henry  III.  in  1217,  there  is  a  provision  that  the
County  Court  shall  not  meet  more  than  once  a  month;
and  Mr.  Stubbs  (^  Const.  Hist.'  i.  605)  suggests  the
explanation  that  the  sheriffs  had  abused  their  power  of
summoning  special  meetings  of  the  court  and  fining
absentees.  He  adds  that  it  was  the  direct  interest  of
the  sheriffs  to  multiply  the  occasions  of  summons.

This  multitudinousness,  if  I  may  so  describe  it,  of
all  Courts  of  Justice  except  those  of  the  King,  lasted


CHAP.  vr. THE KING AXD EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE.  177

far  down  into  the  feudal  period.  Feudalism  attained
its  greate>5t  completeness  in  France,  and  French  his-
torians are  astonished  at  the  number  of  persons  who
were  required  for  the  organisation  of  a  feudal  Court
of  Justice.  The  principle  is  expressed  in  a  phrase
familiar  to  us,  that  every  man  must  be  tried  by  his
peers,  which  originally  meant  that  his  judges  were
the  entire  body  of  persons  standing  in  the  same
degree  of  relation  with  himself  to  some  superior
above.  If  a  great  vassal  of  the  Crown  had  to  be
tried  for  treason  or  felony,  all  the  great  vassals  of  the
French  Kings  must  assemble  from  all  parts  of  the
territories  of  which  the  French  King  was  the  overlord ;
and  it  was  precisely  such  a  Court  which  deprived  our
King  John  of  the  fairest  provinces  of  France.  If,  on
the  other  hand,  a  villein  had  to  be  tried,  his  peers
were  the  villeins  of  the  same  seigneurie.  The  inevit-
able result  was  that  the  French  feudal  Courts
dwindled  into  bodies  which  confided  all  active  duties
to  a  small  committee  of  experts,  and  as  these  experts
were  for  the  most  part  devotees  of  the  Roman  law,
they  exercised  memorable  influence  in  diffusing
notions  of  the  absolute  power  of  the  King,  and
specially  of  his  rightful  authority  over  justice.
Quod  j/rincij/t  placuit,  legis  habet  virjorem — this  was
the  central  principle  of  the  developed  Roman  juris-
prudence.

It  may  thus  be  believed  that  the  ancient  Germanic


178  THE KIXG AXD EARLV CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  vr.

Popular  Courts,  and  probably  the  Popular  Courts  of
many  other  societies,  fell  into  disfavour  or  decay,  as
communities  of  men  grew  larger  by  tribal  inter-
mixture, through  the  multitude  of  judges  they  in-
cluded, and  through  the  great  difficulty  of  discharg-
ing judicial  functions.  The  freeman  who  ought  to
have  attended  preferred  to  stay  at  home,  sending  his
excuse  or  essoin  for  the  neglect,  and  submitting  to  a
fine  if  it  were  insufficient.  The  tribunals  were  thus
ever  changing  into  committees  of  legal  experts,  with
a  strong  bias  towards  royal  authority.  Meantime  we
know  from  other  evidence  that  the  King  and  the
King's  justice  were  ever  growing  at  their  expense ;
and  we  may  ask  ourselves  whether  there  was  any-
thing in  the  royal  office  and  functions  which  gave
them  an  advantage  in  this  competition  with  the
Popular  Local  Courts.  The  story  of  the  struggle  is
far  too  long  and  intricate  to  be  told  here  ;  but  the
habits  of  the  King  gave  him  one  advantage  which
there  is  some  interest  in  pointing  out,  all  the  more
because  it  is  often  overlooked.  I  do  not  suppose
that,  when  a  litigant  put  himself  from  the  first  into
the  King's  hands,  or  appealed  to  the  King  over  the
head  of  the  popular  tribunal,  he  went  to  some  royal
residence,  palace,  or  castle.  This  would  have  been
an  aggravation  of  the  difficulties  of  the  popular  local
justice.  It  was  not  the  litigant  who  went  to  the
King, but  the King  who came  to  the  litigant. I


CHAP.  VI. THE KING AND EARLY CIVIL .JUSTICE.  179

believe  upon  a  good  deal  of  evidence  ^  that  these
ancient  kings  were  itinerant,  travelling  or  ambulatory
personages.  When  they  became  stationary,  they  gene-
rally perished.  The  primitive  Kings  of  communities
confined  within  walls,  like  the  old  Athenian  and  the
old  Roman  Kings,  soon  dropped  out  of  sight.  Per-
haps, as  Mr.  Grote  has  suggested,  they  lived  too  much
in  full  view  of  their  subjects  for  their  humble  state  to
command  much  respect  when  the  belief  in  their
sacredness  had  been  lost.  But  the  more  barbarous
King  of  communities  spread  over  a  wide  territory  was
constantly  moving  about  it  ;  or,  if  he  did  not,  he  too
perished,  as  the  Kings  called  the  wis  faineants  of  the
Franks.  If  I  were  called  upon  to  furnish  the  oldest
evidence  of  these  habits  of  the  ancient  King,  I  should
refer  to  those  Irish  records  of  which  the  value  is
only  beginning  to  be  discerned,  for,  whatever  may  be
said  by  the  theorists  who  explain  all  national  charac-
teristics by  something  in  the  race  or  the  blood,  the
most  ancient  Irish  laws  and  institutions  are  nothino-
more  than  the  most  ancient  Germanic  laws  and  in-
stitutions at an  earlier  stage of  barbarism. Now,

3  See  Grimm,  Deutsche  Rechtaalterthumer  I.  237.  'Erstes
Geschaft  des  neuen  Konigs  war  sein  Reich  zu  umreiten.'  .  .  .
Grimm  quotes  Gregory  of  Tours,  4,  14,'  Deinde  ibat  rex  per  civi-
tates  in  cii-cuitu  positas.'  lie  refers  also  to  similar  duties  of  the
Swedish  King,  and  cites  the  prayer  of  the  Saxons  to  Henry  IV. :
'Ut  totam  in  sol^  Saxonia  letatem  inerti  otio  deditus  non  transifirat.
sed  interdum  regnum  suum  circumeat.'

N  2


180  THE KIXG AXD EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. cnAr.  \i.

when  Englishmen  like  Edmund  Spenser  first  began
to  put  their  observations  of  Ireland  into  writing  at
the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  there  was  one  Irisli
practice  of  which  they  spoke  with  the  keenest  indig-
nation. This  was  what  they  called  the  '  cuttings '
and  '  cosherings '  of  the  Irish  chiefs,  that  is,  their
periodical  circuits  among  their  tenantry  for  the
purpose  of  feastmg  with  their  company  at  the  tenants'
expense.  It  was,  in  fact,  only  a  late  survival  of
common  incidents  in  the  daily  life  of  the  barbarous
Chief  or  Khig,  who  had  no  tax-gatherers  to  collect  his
dues,  but  went  himself  to  exact  them,  living  as  a
matter  of  right  while  he  moved  at  the  cost  of  his
subjects.  The  theory  of  the  Irish  law  was,  though
it  is  impossible  to  say  how  far  it  corresponded  with
the  facts,  that  the  Chief  had  earned  this  right  by
stocking  the  clansman's  land  with  cattle  or  sheep.
We  find  a  highly  glorified  account  of  the  same
practice  in  ancient  records  of  the  life  and  state  of  those
Irish  Chiefs  who  called  themselves  Kings.  '  The  King
of  Munster,'  says  the  '  Book  of  Rights,'  ^  attended  by
the  chief  princes  of  his  kingdom,  began  his  visits  to
the  King  of  Connaught,  and  presented  to  him  100
steeds,  100  suits  of  miUtary  array,  100  swords,  and
100  cups  ;  in  return  for  which  the  said  King  was  to
entertain  him  for  two  months  at  his  palace  at  Ana-
chan,  and  then  to  escort  him  to  the  territories  of
Tyrconnell. He  presented  to  the  King  of  Tyrconnell


CHAP.  VI. THE KIXG AXD EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE.  181

20  steeds,  20  complete  armours,  and  20  cloaks,  for
which  the  said  King  supported  him  and  the  nobility  of
Munster  for  one  month,  and  afterwards  escorted  him
to  the  principahty  of  Tyrone.'  The  King  of  Munster
is  then  described  as  proceeding  through  Tj^rone,
Ulster,  Meath,  Lemster,  and  Ossory,  everywhere  be-
stowing gifts  on  the  rulers,  and  receiraig  entertain-
ment in  return.  I  suspect  that  the  entertainment  is
of  more  historical  reality  than  the  royal  gifts.  The
practice,  however,  described  with  this  splendour  by
the  chronicler  or  bard,  is  plainly  the  same  as  the
cutting  and  coshering  which  Spenser  and  others
denounce  as  one  of  the  curses  of  Ireland.

There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  Enaiish  Kino;s
itinerated  in  the  same  way  and  mainly  for  the  same
purpose.  The  '  Eyres  '  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  Kings  are
described  by  Palgrave  in  his  *  Eise  of  the  English
Commonwealth  '  (i.  286).  The  lawyer  might  suspect
the  continuance  of  the  practice  from  the  comparative
obscurity  of  some  of  the  places  at  which  some  of  the
most  pennanently  important  of  our  old  statutes  were
enacted — Clarendon,  Merton,  Marlbridge,  Acton  l^)ur-
nell.  The  novei-reader  comes  upon  a  survival  of  it  in
'  Kenil worth/  for  the  progresses  of  so  late  a  sovereign
as  Elizabeth  were  certainly  descended  from  the
itinerancy  of  her  predecessors.  But  there  is  other
evidence  of  a  rather  remarkable  kind.  T^vo  historical
.scholars,  Mr.  Eyton  and  the  late  SirT.  DufFus  Hardy,


182  TJIE KIXG AXD EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  vi.

have  constructed  from  documentary  testimony  ac-
counts of  tlie  movement  from  place  to  place,  during  a
long  space  of  time,  of  two  of  our  English  Kings,  King-
Henry  II.  and  King  John.  Neither  of  them  of  course
is  a  very  ancient  King,  and  m  both  there  may  have
been  a  certain  amount  of  native  restlessness,  but  their
activit}',  though  it  may  have  been  excessive,  was
certamly  not  a  new  royal  habit.  I  take  the  move-
ments of  Kino'  John  for  notice,  because  his  rei^-n
makes  an  epoch  not  only  in  English  political  but
in  English  judicial  history.  Sir  Thomas  Hardy's
'  Itinerary  of  King  John  '  gives  the  places  at  which
that  King  is  found  to  have  stayed  during  every  month
of  every  year  from  1200  to  1216,  the  regnant  year
then  beginnmg  on  Ascension  Day.  I  take  almost  at
a  venture  May  of  1207.  On  the  1st  of  May  the  King-
is  found  at  Pontefract,  on  the  3rd  at  Derby,  on  the
4th  at  Hunston,  on  the  5th  at  Lichfield,  on  the  8th
at  Gloucester,  on  the  lOtli  at  Bristol,  on  the  13th  at
Bath,  on  the  IGtli  at  Marlborough,  on  the  18th  at
Ludgershall,  on  the  20th  at  Winchester,  on  the  22nd
at  Southampton,  on  the  24th  at  Porches ter,  on  the
27th  at  Aldingbourn,  on  the  28tli  at  Arundel,  on  the
29th  at  Knep  Castle,  and  on  the  31st  at  Lewes.  The
King  must  of  course  have  made  all  these  journeys  on
horseback  over  a  country  scarcely  provided  with  any
roads  except  the  Koman  roads.  But,  again,  I  will
take  June  in  1212,  when  the  King  goes  to a  more


CHAP.  Yi. THE KING AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE.  183

distant  and  more  impracticable  tract  of  country.  On
June  4tli  he  leaves  the  Tower  of  London,  and  on  the
28th  is  at  Durham,  having  been  in  the  meantime  to
Hertford,  Doncaster,  Richmond  in  Yorkshire,  Bowes,
Appleby,  Wigton  in  Cumberland,  Carlisle  and  Hex-
ham. What  is  still  more  remarkable,  he  marches  at
much  the  same  rate  in  Ireland,  which  was  then  as
little  known  and  as  impassable  a  country  as  now  are
the  wildest  parts  of  the  Sierra  Nevada.  He  reaches
Waterford  with  his  troops  from  Haverfordwest  on
June  20th,  1210,  and  is  back  again  at  the  end  of
August,  having  been  at  every  place  of  importance  m
the  south-eastern  half  of  the  country.  It  must  be
understood  that  I  am  not  selecting  periods  m  which
the  King's  movements  were  exceptional  or  his  activity
greater  than  usual.  This  was  practically  his  life
during  every  month  of  every  year  of  his  reign.  King
John  passes  for  an  effeminate  sovereign,  but  no  com-
mercial traveller  of  our  day,  employed  by  a  pushing
house  of  business,  was  ever,  I  believe,  so  incessantly
in  movement,  and  for  so  many  successive  years,  with
all  the  help  of  railways.

We  are  able  to  see  how  the  itinerant  King  gradu-
ally became  a  monarch  of  the  modern  type.  The
change  may  be  attributed  to  the  growth  of  the  system
of  missi^  of  itinerant  deputies  of  the  sovereign,  his
servants,  as  the  English  phras(i  was,  in  eyre.  The
first  employment  of  the  raissi  was  much  older  than


184  THE KING AXD EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  \i.

the  reign  of  King  John  on  the  Continent,  and  con-
siderably older  in  England.  But,  as  is  usual  in  such
cases,  one  system  did  not  all  at  once  displace  the
other,  and  Kings,  though  gradually  becoming  more
stationary  or  sedentary,  did  not  suddenly  cease  to
move  about  their  dominions  when  they  began  to  be
represented  by  itinerant  justices  or  deputies  of  their
own.  The  transition,  however,  was  hastened  in  our
own  country  by  the  great  constitutional  change  of
which  I  will  speak  presently.

But  first  of  all  let  us  notice  how  this  ambulatory
life  of  the  ancient  Teutonic  King  gave  him  an  advan-
tage, as  a  great  judicial  authority,  over  the  ancient
local  Popular  Courts  which  had  possibly  existed  from
time  immemorial  by  his  side.  As  I  have  explained,
they  contained  in  themselves  certain  seeds  of  decay.
Their  numerous  members  had  the  strongest  reasons
for  evading  or  slackly  discharging  what  must  have
seemed  to  them  a  most  rigorous  duty.  They  had  to
waste  many  days  and  to  incur  many  dangers  while
travelling  by  forest  and  fen  to  the  place  of  meeting.
They  had  to  acquaint  themselves  with  all  the  circum-
stances of  the  cases  brought  them  without  any  of  the
aids  of  a  modern  Court  of  Justice.  They  had  often
to  visit  the  scene  of  alleged  acts  of  violence.  They
had  not  merely,  like  a  modern  jury,  to  decide  on
questions  of  fact ;  they  had  also  to  declare  the  law
or  usage  and  to  pronounce  the  sentence. And  then


CHAP.  \i. THE KIXG AXD EAKLY CIVIL JUSTICE.  185

after  all  this,  they  might  themselves  be  proceeded
against  for  a  wrongful  judgment,  and  even,  according
to  the  judicial  system  of  some  communities,  they
might  be  called  upon  to  defend  their  sentence  in  arms.
A  capitulary  of  Charles  the  Bald  bids  them  go  to
Court  armed  as  for  war,  for  they  might  have  to  fight
for  their  jurisdiction  ;  and  at  a  later  date  the  oath  of
ser\T[ce  exacted  by  the  feudal  lord  constantly  bound
the  vassal  just  as  closely  to  service  in  Court  as  to
ser\T.ce  in  arms.  The  burden  on  the  poor  man  was
so  severe  that  the  Church  interfered  in  his  favour,  and
a  Council  of  the  nmth  century  protested  against  the
cruelty  of  forcing  the  poor  to  do  suit  in  Court.

But  wliile  all  these  causes  were  weakening  and
emptying  the  Popular  Courts,  the  King  was  con-
stantly perambulating  the  country,  carrying  with  him
that  royal  justice  which  had  never  been  dissociated
from  him  since  his  dignity  existed.* The  justice  which

'*  A  passage  in  an  interesting  book,  Drew's  Kashmir  and
Jumrnoo,  curiously  illustrates  the  character  of  the  ancient  royal
jurisdiction,  and  also  one  of  the  motives  which  produced  the
King's  activity  in  exercising  it.  Here  is  an  account  of  what  still
goes  on  in  the  Curia  Regis  of  the  Maharajah  of  Cashmere,  himself
a  sovereign  much  more  modem  than  the  system  he  follows.  Gholab
Singh,  the  first  of  the  dynasty  which  was  established  by  the
English  in  1840,  was  (says  Mr.  Drew)  'always  accessible,  patient
and  ready  to  listen  to  complaints.  Me  was  much  given  to  looking
into  details,  so  that  the  smallest  thing  might  be  brought  before  him
and  receive  his  consideration.  With  the  customary  offering  of  a
rupee,  any  one  could  get  his  ear ;  even  in  a  crowd  one  could  catch
his  eye  by  holding  up  a  rupee  and  calling  out  "  My  Lord  the  King,


]  8G  TUE KING AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  vr.

he  dispensed  was  in  the  first  place  complete,  since  he
always  by  his  officers  executed  his  own  decrees.  It
was  also  irresistible,  since  he  generally  had  with  him
the  flower  of  the  military  strength  of  the  country.
It  was  probably  purer  than  that  of  the  popular
tribunal,  which  was  certainly  not  inaccessible  to  cor-
ruption ;  and  it  was  more  exact,  for  anything  like
precise  legal  knowledge  was  very  much  confined  to
the  experts  who  followed  the  King  in  his  progresses.
Moreover,  in  those  days,  whatever  answered  to  what
we  now  call  the  spirit  of  reform  was  confined  to  the
King  and  his  advisers  ;  he  alone  introduced  compara-
tive gentleness  into  the  law  and  simplified  its  pro-
cedure. Thus  the  royal  justice  was  ever  waxing
while  the  popular  justice  was  waning  ;  and  from  the
ascendency  which  the  first  finally  attained  are  in  fact
descended  most  of  the  characteristics  which  we  asso-
ciate with  the  law,  and  which  some  theorists  declare

a  petition  !  "  He  would  pounce  down  like  a  hawk  on  the  money,
and,  having  appropriated  it,  would  patiently  hear  out  the  peti-
tioner. Once  a  man  after  this  fashion  making  his  complaint,
when  the  Maharajah  was  taking  the  rupee,  closed  his  hand  on  it
and  said,  "  No  ;  first  hear  what  I  have  got  to  say."  Even  this  did
not  go  beyond  Gholab  Singh's  patience ;  he  waited  till  the  man  had
told  his  tale  and  opened  his  hand ;  then,  taking  the  money,  he
gave  orders  about  the  case.'  '  The  civil  and  criminal  cases,'  it  is
afterwards  stated,  '  have  usually  been  previously  inquired  into  by
judicial  officers  in  the  Courts  of  First  Instance,  and  perhaps  have
been  adjudicated  upon  by  the  Court  of  Appeal ;  but  it  is  open  to
suitors  and  complainants  to  try  theii*  fortune  with  the  Maharajah
himself.'


CHAP.  VI. THE KIIS-G AND EAKLY CIVIL JUSTICE.  187

to  be  inseparable  from  it — uniformity,  inflexibility,
and  irresistibility.

It  may  almost  be  laid  down  that  in  England
nothing  wholly  perishes.  The  itinerant  King  is  still
represented  among  ns  by  the  Judges  of  Assize  on
Circuit  ;  the  ancient  Popular  Court  survives  in  the
Jury,  though  in  the  last  instance  the  line  of  descent
is  far  dimmer  and  far  more  broken  than  in  the  first.
When  John  reigned,  the  delegation  of  the  royal
authority  to  itinerant  servants  of  the  King  for  some
purposes  had  long  been  known  ;  but  one  branch  of
royal  jurisdiction,  that  over  the  Common  Pleas,  or  in
other  words  over  the  greatest  part  of  the  more  im-
portant civil  litigation  of  the  nation,  was  carried
about  with  him  by  the  King  in  those  surprising  pro-
gresses of  which  I  have  spoken.  Hence  gradually
arose  a  great  abuse.  In  primitive  times,  when  ques-
tions were  simple,  the  King  as  he  approached  each
local  centre  in  turn  had  perhaps  no  difficulty  in  de-
ciding every  case  which  came  before  him  before  he
went  away.  But,  as  a  more  complex  and  wealthier
society  arose,  there  was  the  greatest  difficulty  in
getting  the  King,  as  it  was  called,  to  give  the  suitor
a  day.  Sir  Francis  Palgrave  has  printed  in  the  second
volume  of  his  *  Rise  of  the  English  Commonwealth  '  a
most  curious  document,  which  is  the  account  given  by
one  Itichard  de  Anesty  of  the  trouble  and  charges  to
which  lie  was  put  in  respect  of  a  mixed  civil and


188  THE KING AXD EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  vi.

ecclesiastical  case  which  he  had  before  the  Archbishop
of  Canterbury  and  the  King.  Besides  infinite  vexa-
tion from  the  Ecclesiastical  Courts,  he  had  to  follow
Henry  II.  across  the  sea  to  France  and  up  and  down
England  before  he  could  get  his  day.  After  reading
this  paper,  we  gain  a  vivid  idea  of  the  importance  of
the  provision  in  the  Great  Charter  that  the  '  Common
Pleas  shall  no  longer  follow  the  King.'  This  is  a  great
judicial  epoch,  marking  a  revolution  in  judicature  ;
and  King  John  at  once  proceeded  to  illustrate  the
necessity  for  it.  He  sealed  Magna  Charta  at  Runny-
mede  on  June  15,  1215,  and  before  July  15  he
had  been  over  the  whole  of  the  south  of  England  and
again  northwards  as  far  as  Oxford.  Meantime  the
judges  of  the  Common  Pleas  were  sitting — as  they
did  ever  since  till  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas  was
absorbed  the  other  day  in  the  High  Court  of  Justice
— at  Westminster,  and  at  Westminster  onl}^

With  the  sealing  of  the  Great  Charter  the  early
history  of  the  relation  of  the  English  King  to  civil
justice  comes  to  a  close,  and  the  modern  English
judicial  system  is  established.  It  is  distinguished  in
some  respects  from  the  corresponding  systems  of  the
European  Continent,  though  these  too  were  results  of
the  same  general  causes.  It  is  the  most  highly  cen-
tralised system  of  judicial  administration  in  the  world,
all  the  important  branches  of  judicial  business  being
localised  in London, and a portion  only  diifused


CHi.r.  vr. THE KIXG AND EAKLY CIVIL JUSTICE.  189

through  the  country  by  Judges  in  eyre,  the  old  missi
sent  from  the  side  of  the  King.  The  only  considerable
modification  of  these  principles  was  made  when  the
modern  County  Courts  were  established,  courts  ex-
tremely unlike  the  old  Shire  Courts.  These  last  have
left  the  merest  trace  behind  them,  perhaps  in  some
mound  now  oversfrown  with  trees  which  marks  their
ancient  place  of  open-air  meeting,  perhaps  in  some
trifling  fine  imposed  on  landliolders  for  failing  to
attend  a  non-existent  tribunal.  Even  with  the  ad-
dition of  the  newer  County  Courts,  the  Enghsh
judicial  system  has  another  feature  peculiar  to  itself —
the  fewness  of  the  judges  employed  in  administering
justice.

If  you  look  across  the  channel  to  France,  you
find  these  characteristics  reversed  —  comparatively
little  judicial  centralisation,  a  large  number  of  local
courts,  a  multitude  of  judges  distributed  over  the
various  tribunals.  The  French  Kino-  like  the  Eno-
lish  King,  became  the  theoretical  fountain  of  justice,
but  the  effect  was  produced  mucli  more  by  the  zeal
with  which  expert  lawyers  trained  in  the  Roman  law
preached  his  authority  than  by  direct  supersession  of
the  local  courts  by  emissaries  of  his  own.  On  the
other  hand,  the  character  of  the  law  itself,  however
administered,  was  much  more  changed  in  France  and
on  the  Continent  generally  than  in  J-^ngland.  The
Roman  law  gained everywhere  a  considerable,  and


190  THE KING AND EARLY CIVIL JUSTICE. chap.  vi.

here  and  tlicrc  a  complete,  ascendency  over  ancient
custom,  and  the  French  Civil  Code,  the  outcome  of
the  Revolution,  is  only  a  version  of  Roman  juris-
prudence. But,  though  much  is  obscure  in  the
beginnings  of  what  we  Englishmen  call  the  Common
Law,  it  was  undoubtedly  in  the  main  a  version  of
Germanic  usage,  generalised  by  the  King's  courts
and  justices.  Some  savour  of  the  ancient  opposition
between  the  popular  justice  and  the  royal  justice  still
clung  about  it,  since  we  know  that,  theoretically
administered  in  the  King's  name,  it  came  at  a  much
later  date  to  be  thought  the  barrier  of  popular  liberty
agamst  assertions  of  prerogative  by  Tudor  and  Stuart.
Meantime  that  residuary  authority  over  law  and
justice,  which  was  never  in  ancient  times  quite  dis-
sociated from  the  King,  survived  the  maturity  of  the
common  law.  From  this  sprang  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Court  of  Chancery,  which  cannot  be  said  to  have  ever
been  exactly  popular,  but  which  certainly  owed  what-
ever unpopularity  attached  to  it  not  to  any  supposed
inherent  badness,  but  to  incidental  vices,  its  dilatori-
ness  and  its  costliness.  But  then  from  this  same
residuary  authority  arose  the  criminal  jurisdiction  of
the  Star  Chamber,  which  has  become  with  ordinary
English  historians  a  very  proverb  of  judicial  oppres-
sion. The  true  historical  difference,  however,  between
the  so-called  equity  of  the  Court  of  Chancery,  and
the  illegalities  and  unconstitutionalities  of  the Star


CHAP.  Ti. THE KIXG AXD EAKLT CIVIL JUSTICE.  191

Chamber,  is  tliat  one  had  its  origin  before  the  autho-
rity whence  it  sprang  had  been  seriously  questioned,
while  the  other  did  not  obtain  an  effectual  juris-
diction till  its  time  had  gone  by.  The  depth  of  dis-
credit into  which  Star -Chamber  justice  fell  marks  the
decline  and  fall  of  the  Kings  beneficial  influence  over
law.  The  royal  judicial  authority  was  once  the  most
valuable  and  indeed  the  most  indispensable  of  all
reforming  agencies,  but  at  length  its  course  was  run,
-and  in  nearly  all  civilised  societies  its  inheritance
has  devolved  upon  elective  legislatures,  themselves
everywhere  in  the  western  world  the  children  of
the  British  Parliament.


192  THEORIES OF PELMITIVE SOCIETY.  CHAr.  vif.


CHAPTER VII.

THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.

Some  years  ago  (in  1861)  I  published  a  work  (on
^  Ancient  Law ')  which  I  described  in  the  preface  as
having  for  its  chief  object  to  '  indicate  some  of  the
earliest  ideas  of  mankind  as  they  are  reflected  in
Ancient  Law,  and  to  point  out  the  relation  of  these
ideas  to  modern  thought.'  It  was  not  part  of  my
object  to  determine  the  absolute  origin  of  human
society.  I  have  written  very  few  pages  which  have
any  bearing  on  the  subject,  and  I  must  confess  a
certain  distaste  for  inquiries  which,  when  I  have
attempted  to  push  them  far,  have  always  landed
me  in  mudbanks  and  fog.  The  undertaking  which
I  have  followed  in  the  work  just  mentioned,  and  in
others,  has  been  to  trace  the  real,  as  opposed  to
the  imaginary,  or  the  arbitrarily  assumed,  history
of  the  institutions  of  civilised  men.  When  I  began
it,  several  years  before  1861,  the  background  was
obscured  and  the  route  beyond  a  certain  point  ob-
structed  by  a  priori theories based  on the  hypo-


CHAP.  Til.  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  ]  9


o


thesis  of  a  law  and  state  of  Nature. In  endeavouring
to  get  past  this  barrier,  I  had  occasion  to  point  out
the claims of  the so-called Patriarchal theory of
society  to  be  considered a real historical theory  ;
that  is,  as  a  theory  giving  an  account  upon  rational
evidence  of  primitive  or  very  ancient  social  order.
The Patriarchal  theory  is  the  theory  of  the  origin
of  society  in  separate  families,  held  together  by  the
authority  and protection of  the eldest valid  male
ascendant ;  and,  having  dwelt  on  the  peculiar  import-
ance of  Roman  law  in  investigations  such  as  I  was
prosecuting,  I  insisted  in  a  few  pages  of  my  book  on
the  testimony  to  this  theory  supplied  by  the  earliest
records  of  Roman  jurisprudence. We  have  not  indeed
knowledge  of  any  working  system  of  institutions  in
which  the  Family  exactly  corresponds  to  the  primi-
tive  family  assumed by  the  theory. The  Roman
law, as  a  working  system,  takes  a  view  of  Family
and  Kinship  not very  different  from  that  accepted
in  modem  societies,  but  we  happen  to  have  unusual
facilities  for  ascertaining  a  very  ancient  condition  of
this  law,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  doubt  that,  when
the  law  was  in  this  state,  the  Family  and  the  Kin-
ship of  which  it  took  cognisance  had  for  their  basis
the  authority  of  the  eldest  male  ascendant. Other
bodies  of  old  usage and legal rule, less perfectly
known  to  us  than  the  Roman  from  the  scantiness  or
the  inferior  quality  of  their  materials,  seemed  to  me

0


194  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  chap.  vir.

to  suggest  that  a  Family  organised  on  the  Patriarchal
.model  had  been  the  near  or  remote  antecedent  of  the
Family  which  they  reflected.  The  Hindu  law  ap-
peared to  me  to  suggest  this  very  strongly.  So  did
Slavonian  law,  as  far  as  it  was  known.  Greek  law
seemed  to  point  to  the  same  conclusion,  less  dis-
tinctly yet  not  very  obscurely  ;  and,  more  doubt-
fully, the  ancient  law  of  the  Teutonic  races.  The
evidence  appeared  to  me  very  much  of  the  same  kind
and  strength  as  that  which  convinces  the  compara-
tive philologist  that  a  number  of  words  in  different
Aryan  languages  had  a  common  ancestral  form  m  a
now  unknown  ancestral  mother  tongue  ;  but  I  stated
with  some  caution  the  opinion  that,  at  that  stage  of
the  inquiry,  '  the  difficulty  was  to  know  where  to
stop  and  to  say  of  what  races  of  mankind  it  was  not
allowable  to  lay  down  that  the  society  in  which  they
were  united  was  originally  organised  on  the  patri-
archal model '  ('  Ancient  Law,'  123).  My  book  was
published  in  1861,  and  delivered  as  lectures  in  the
four  or  five  previous  years,  and  it  is  needless  to
say  that,  since  then,  all  this  evidence  has  been  added
to,  re-examined,  and  placed  in  new  lights.  We  now
can  discern  something  of  the  real  relation  which  the
sacerdotal  Hindu  law  bears  to  the  true  ancient  law
of  the  race.  Slavonian  law  and  usage,  chiefly  known
in  1861  from  the  books  of  Haxthausen,  is  becoming
a  more  trustworthy  subject of  study  through  the


CHAr. YIl.


THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  195


labours  of  Prof.  Bogisic. The  earliest  monuments
of  German  law  have  been  repeatedly  fought  over  by
earnest  controversialists,  with  no  very  certain  result.
The  Irish  Brehon  law,  once  inaccessible,  is  gradually
becoming  known  to  students  of  archaeology. Still,  if
the  inquiry  were  to  be  confined  to  the  ancient  insti-
tutions of  the  group  of  societies  which  I  examined
more  than  twenty  years  ago,  I  should  maintain  the
conclusions  which  I  reached,  subject  only  to  some
qualifications  which  are  suggested  in  the  first  four
chapters  of  the  present  work. But  much  testimony
of  an  altogether  new  kind  has  been  obtained,  since  I
wrote,  from  the  ideas  and  usages  of  societies  which
live  in  a  condition  of  barbarism  or  savagery,  and  the
two  zealous  inquirers,  now  lost  to  us,  J.  F.  McLennan
and  L.  H.  Morgan,  who  have  put  this  testimony  into
order,  have  been  led  by  it  to  form  opinions  on  the
primitive  or  very  early  condition  of  human  society
which  they  themselves at  all  events  consider  to  be
quite  inconsistent  with  the  Patriarchal  theory. I  am
desirous  of  stating  in  what  light  I  see  these  new  facts
and  theories,  and  of  showing  at  the  same  time  that  I
have  not  neglected  the  friendly  challenge  to  examine
them  which  Mr.  J.  F.  McLennan  addressed  to  me  in
the  preface  to  his  ^  Studies  in  Ancient  History.' I
trust  that  the  general  considerations  to  which  I  have
been  conducted  may  obtain  some  attention  from  per-
sons more  versed  than  I  am  in  this  special  line of


o 2


19G  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  chap.  yii.

study  ;  but  I  do  not  print  them  without  some  rehic-
tance,  since,  as  will  appear  from  remarks  m  the
following  pages,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  investi-
gation has  advanced  far  enough  to  admit  of  a  very
confident  opinion.

The  Patriarchal  theory  of  society  is,  as  I  have
said,  the  theory  of  its  origin  in  separate  families,
held  together  by  the  authority  and  protection  of
the  eldest  valid  male  ascendant.  It  is  unnecessary
to  add  that  this  theory  is  of  considerable  antiquity.
So  far  as  we  can  judge,  it  first  occurred  to  the
great  Greek  observers  and  philosophical  thinkers
of  the  fourth  century  before  Christ.  Plato  ('  Laws,'
iii.  680)  and  Aristotle  ('  Politics,'  i.  2)  both  enun-
ciate it,  the  first  briefly,  the  last  with  so  much
detail  that  little  has  been  added  in  more  recent
times  to  his  statement  of  it.  It  may  be  proper  here
to  remark  that  the  theory  was  not  founded  by  them
on  mere  conjecture.  They  both  profess  to  base  it  on
actual  observation.  Plato  expressly  says  that  forms
of  society,  answering  to  the  assumed  original  groups,
survived  in  his  day  ;  he  calls  them  by  the  obscure
name  Su^ao-retat  ('  chieftainships  ; '  Jowett,  '  lord-
ships').  Aristotle  expressly  appeals  to  the  actual
social  state  of  '  barbarians.'  It  should  be  noted  that
the  opportunities  of  these  observers  were  such  as
can  never  again  recur. Living  inore  than  2,000  years


CHAP.  Yir.  TIIEOKIES OF PKDIITIVE SOCIETY.  197

ao'o,  tliey  were  so  much  nearer  the  barbarism  of  the
greater  races  ;  the  societies  open  to  their  observation
were  not  the  mere  waifs  and  strays  of  humanity,  but
people  of  the  same  ethnical  stock  with  themselves
and  ourselves,  lagging,  however,  far  behind  the  Greeks
in  civilisation.  Aristotle,  whom  nobody  I  suppose
will  deny  to  have  been  a  good  observer,  had  abundant
material  for  his  conclusions.  He  was  born  in  the
scarcely  Hellenic  city  of  Stageira.  He  passed  much
of  his  life  at  the  semi-barbarous  Court  of  Pella,  where
his  father  was  physician  to  the  Macedonian  King.
And  he  left  a  special  treatise  on  '  Barbarian  Customs  '
(voiiLfxa  jSap^apLKa),  now  unfortunately  lost.

The  Patriarchal  theory,  during  the  dark  ages,
would  have  shared  the  fate  of  much  else  in  Greek
speculation  if  it  had  not  been  kept  alive  by  its  corre-
spondence with  the  Scriptural  account  of  the  Hebrew
Patriarchs.  But,  in  the  17th  and  18th  centuries,  its
place  was  taken  by  a  priori  theories  of  the  State  of
Nature  which  long  satisfied  curiosity  as  to  the  original
condition  of  mankind.  Its  revival  may  be  said  to  be
owing  to  Niebuhr's  discovery  of  the  ^  Commentaries
of  Gaius,'  which,  though  not  directly  treating  of
ancient  Roman  law,  enabled  us  to  divide  it  into
successive  stages  or  strata,  and  gave  us  a  singularly
complete  view  of  the  earliest  among  them.  I  am  not
sure,  however,  that  the  appeal  to  Poman  law  lias  not
done  disservice  with  some  minds  to  the  Patriarchal


198  THEORIES OF PRLAIITIVE SOCIETY.  chap.  Til

theory. It  lias  encouraged  the  belief  that  it  referred
to  a  relatively  advanced  social  order. Now  Plato  and
Aristotle  clearly  intended  to  describe  a  highly  bar-
barous condition  of  the  race. They  both  illustrate  it
by  the  Homeric  story  of  the  '  Cyclops/  '  who had
neither  assemblies  for  consultation  nor  dooms,  but
each  exercised  jurisdiction  over  (issued  dooms  to)  his
wives  and  children,  and  they  paid  no  regard  to  one
another.' But  the  family  groups  contemplated  by  the
theory  are  more  than  barbarous  ;  they  are  extremely
savage,  if  the  test  be  applied  of  analogy  to  the  life  of
animals. The  strongest  and  wisest  male  rules. He
jealously  guards  his  wife  or  wives. All  under  his
protection  are on an  equality. The  strange  child
who  is  taken  under  it,  the  stranger  who  is  brought
under  it  to  serve,  are  not  distinguished  from  the  child
born under  the  shelter. But  when  wife,  child,  or
slave  escapes,  there  is  an  end  to  all  relations  with  the
group,  and  the  kinship  which  means  submission  to
power  or  participation in protection  is  at  an  end.
This  is  the  family  (to  borrow  Sir  George  Cox's  ener-
getic expression)  of  the  wild  beast  in  his  den. But
when  these  several  relations  are  decorated  with  the
lioman  technical  names  of  Patria  Potestas,  Manus,
Dominion,  Adoption, Divorce, Agnation, Emanci-
pation (which  mean  precisely  the  same  things),  an
impression  of  recency  is  given  which  some  minds  are
clearly  unable  to  shake  off.


CHAP.  Yii.  THEORIES OF PEIMITIVE SOCIETY.  199

The  other  theory  which  is  now  opposed  to  that
long  called  Patriarchal  is  the  theory  of  the  origin  of
society,  not  in  the  Family  but  in  the  Horde.  Aris-
totle and  the  writers  who  have  followed  him  suppose
that  the  larger  groups  of  men  discernible  in  the
twilight  of  history  have  somehow  grown  out  of
isolated  families  like  that  of  the  Homeric  Cyclops.
As  these  larger  groups  first  show  themselves,  it  is
impossible  to  believe  that  they  are  composed  through-
out of  blood -relations,  but  the  Patriarchal  theory
according  to  recent  interpreters  assumes  that  there
is  a  real  core  of  consanguinity  in  some  or  most  of
them,  to  which  artificial  additions  have  been  made
by  a  number  of  fictions  of  which  Adoption  is  the
type  ;  and  that  others  have  been  created  by  a  pro-
cess, not  wholly  extinct,^  of  imitating  a  dominant
or  fashionable  model.  My  own  conclusion  in  my
*  Ancient  Law  '  was  thus  stated  :  '  The  conclusion
which  is  suggested  by  the  evidence  is  not  that  all
early  societies  were  fonned  by  descent  from  the  same
ancestor,  but  that  all  of  them  which  had  any  perma-
nence or  solidity  either  were  so  descended  or  assumed
that  they  were.  An  indefinite  number  of  causes
may  have  shattered  the  primitive  groups,  but  where-
ever their ingredients recombined, it was on  the

*  See  Sir  A.  Lyall's  paper  on  the  *  Formation  of  Clans  and
Castes/  now  forming  Chapter  IV.  of  his  Asiatic  Studies  ;  and  see
Note  A,  on  '  llie  Gens/  to  Chapter  VIII.  of  the  present  work.


200  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY. chap.  vii.

model or principle of  an association of kindred.
Whatever  were  the  fact,  all  thought,  language,  and
law  adjusted  themselves to the  assumption.' The
theory, which deserves to be associated  with  the
names  of  McLennan  and  Morgan,  may  be  said  in
some  sense  to  invert  this  account  of  the  matter. It
derives  the  smaller  from  the  larger  group,  not  the
larger from the smaller. Founded, as was the
Patriarchal  theory,  on  observation,  but  on  observation
of  the  ideas  and  practices  of  the  now  savage  races,  it
deduces  all  later  social  order  from  the  miscellaneous,
unorganised  Horde. I  must  confess  that  I  do  not
find  it  easy  to  bring  home  to  myself  the  nature  of
the  original  groups  as  conceived  either  by  McLennan
or  by  Morgan. But  I  think  I  may  lay  down  that
these  assemblages  are  regarded  as  companies  of  men
and  women,  in  which  the  relations  of  the  sexes  were
wholly unregulated at first, but passed through
various  stages  of  limitation  or  restriction  until  the
Family, Patriarchal or other, was reached. The
modern  social  order  is .  thus  the  result  of  a  modified
promiscuity. These two most original inquirers
differ  widely  in their determination of  the  stages
through  which  this  course  of  development  passed.
Totemism  (or  the  origm  of  the  conception  of  kinship
in  the  mark  placed  by  savages  on  their  bodies),  the
slaughter  of  female  children,  woman-stealing,  polyan-
dry (or  a  plurality  of  recognised  husbands),  and  the


OHAP.  \n. THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  201

well-known  Levirate,  play  a  great  part  in  the  system
of  Mr.  McLennan.  Consanguine  Marriage,  Punaluan
Marriage  (or  the  intermarriage  of  brothers  as  a  group
with  sisters  as  a  group),  and  Classificatory  Eelation-
ship  (or  the  confusion  under  the  same  general  view
and  name  of  all  members  of  the  tribe  belonging  to
the  same  generation)  are  all-important  to  Mr.
Morgan's  theory.  But  both  agree  in  considering
human  society  as  beginning  in  promiscuity,  and  as
continually  modified  by  its  progressive  regulation,  as
beginning  in  the  Horde  and  as  gradually  lifting  itself
till  the  Family  was  reached.  Both  writers  seem  to
me  to  hold  that  human  society  went  everywhere
through  the  same  series  of  changes,  and  Mr.
McLennan  at  any  rate  expresses  himself  as  if  all
these  stages  could  be  clearly  discriminated  from  one
another,  and  the  close  of  one  and  the  commencement
of  another  announced  with  the  distinctness  of  the
clock-bell,  telling  the  end  of  the  hour.

Before  I  go  further,  I  think  it  useful  to  remark
that  the  point  at  issue  seems  to  me  capable  of  being
more  simply  stated  than  it  usually  is  by  these  writers
and  their  followers.  The  chief  or  the  one  piece  of
evidence  obtained  from  now  savage  societies,  which
points  to  an  original  promiscuity,  is  their  habit  of
tracing  relationship  for  some  purposes  through  females
only.  When,  however,  the  inference  from  tliis  charac-
teristic is  stated  to  be  that '  tlie  exoiramous  totem-


202  THEORIES OF rRDIITIVE SOCIETY. chap.  vii.

kin '  of  McLennan,  or  the  group  which  Morgan  by
an  unhappy  pcUtio  principil  has  called  the  ^  gens/  is
necessarily  older  than  the  Family,  which  in  all  its
forms assumes some certainty of  male parentage,
such language may  lead to confusion  of  thought.
The  physiological  elements  of  the  Family  must  al-
ways have  been  present,  and  must  always  have  been
the source  of  the  larger  groups. A human  being
can  no more,  physiologically, be  the  child  of  two
fathers  than  of  two  mothers,  and  the  children  of  the
same  man,  no  less  than  of  the  same  woman,  must
always have  had  something  in  their  nature  which
distinguished  them  from  every  other  group  of  human
beings. What  therefore  is  meant  is,  that  though  the
Family must  always  have existed,  it  could  not  be
recognised  through  prevalent  habits,  and  through  the
consequent  uncertainty  of  paternity. I  think  it  im-
portant to  call  to  notice  that  the  fact  alleged  is  not
a  fact  of  human  nature  but  a  fact  of  human  know-
ledge. It is merely  intended  to be  asserted that
circumstances long prevented savage men from
discovering  and  recognising  paternity,  which  is  matter
of  inference,  as  opposed  to  maternity,  which  is  matter
of  observation. It  is  certainly  remarkable  that,  as
soon as intelligent curiosity was directed  to the
question,  it  seems  to  have  exaggerated  the  share  of
paternity  in  parentage. Probably  it  was  so  directed
very  early  ;  there  is  a  striking  remark  of  M.  Fustel


CHAP.  TTi.  THEORIES OF rRlMITIVE SOCIETY.  203

de  Coiilanges,  that  to  the  ancient  societies  based  on
kinship,  the  problem  of  generation  was  very  much
what  the  problem  of  creation  is  to  the  moderns.
Euripides^  distinctly  states  that  m  his  day  the
universal  physiological  doctrine  was  that  the  child
descended  exclusively  from  the  male  parent,  and
Hippocrates  (Trepi  TratScov) ,  in  energetically  combating
this  opinion,  and  contending  that  the  child  descended
from  both  parents,  seems  to  admit  that  it  was  a
prevalent  heresy.  For  the  purpose  of  agreeing  with
McLennan  and  Moro;an,  we  must  assume  that  the
not  very  difficult  observation  on  which  the  opinion
rested  could  not  be  made,  so  brief  and  so  little  ex-
clusive was  the  union  of  the  sexes.

It  appears  to  me  that,  while  the  Patriarchal  theory

2  Euripides,  Frag.  Stohceus,  77,  p.  455 —

AX,\ tor', f/iOt fXEV  OVTOQ OVK ifTTClL lOfJLOC

TO  fit)  ov  (Tf,  fjLriTepj  TrpoacptXi}  je/icu^  a£<,
kal  rov  tiKuiuv,  kcu  t(')K<jJV  twv  rrwv  -^apiy'

(JTipyit)  CE  TOl'  (^VfTaVTa tCjV  TVaVTljiV  ftpoTiov

fiuXiad  '  opti^(jj  Tovro,  ^al  (tv  fn)  (pdurei'
Ki'ivov  yap  l^iftXatTTOv^  oho'  uv  tic  uv))p
yviaitcoQ  avh'irreie)',  nWa  rov  Trarpoc.

This  passage  is  parallel  to  a  better  known  passage  in  the
Euriienides  of  ^schylus,  in  which  Apollo,  as  advocate  for  Orestes,
argues  that  he  was  not  of  kin  to  his  mother,  Clytemnestra,  whom
he  had  killed.  The  argument  seems  to  me  wholly  physiological,
and  not  in  any  way  archaeological.  Apollo,  like  an  advocate  of
the  present  day  with  a  doubtful  case,  appeals  to  the  newest
physiology.  The  *  ancient  rules'  which  the  Eimianules  on  the
other  side  declare  to  be  trampled  under  foot,  are  tliose  of  accepted
morality,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  first  lines  of  the  above  fragment.


j!04  THEORIES OF miMITIVE SOCIETY.  chap.  Yii.

and  the  counter-theory  of  whicli  I  have  been  speaking
each  explam  reasonal^ly  well  a  certain  number  of
ancient  social  phenomena,  both  are  open  to  consider-
able objection  as  universal  theories  of  the  genesis  of
society.  There  are  unquestionably  many  assemblages
of  savage  men  so  devoid  of  some  of  the  characteristic
features  of  Patriarchalism  that  it  seems  a  o'ratuitous
hypothesis  to  assume  that  they  had  passed  through
it.  It  ought  further  to  be  admitted  that  much  of  the
archaeological  evidence  for  the  Patriarchal  theory  is
capable  of  being  so  put  as  to  suggest  the  conclusion
that  the  societies,  seen  to  be  almost  but  not  quite  in
the  condition  from  which  the  theory  supposes  them
to  have  started,  are  approaching  that  condition  or
tendino'  towards  it,  rather  than  declinino-  from  it  as
an  older  state.  But  on  the  other  hand,  apart  from
all  disputes  as  to  the  value  of  the  evidence  in  detail,
the  newer  theory  is  surrounded  by  difficulties  quite
as  grave  or  graver.  Mr.  McLennan  compared  the
state  of  relations  out  of  which  he  conceived  human
society  to  have  lifted  itself  to  that  exhibited  by  the
unfortunate  class  now  found  in  great  European  cities.
But  the  comparison  suggests  the  reflection  that  this
class  is  almost  wholly  infertile  ;  and  though  doubtless
explanations  of  the  phenomenon  may  be  offered,  a
good  deal  of  evidence  ^  (which  at  the  same  time  I  do

3  An  eminent  living  physiologist  (Dr.  Carpenter)  who  visited
the  West  Indies  before  the  abolition  of  slavery,  well  remembers


CHAP.  Yii.  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  205

not  represent  as  conclusive)  tends  to  show  that  such
a  state  of  origmal  promiscuity  as  that  which  McLennan
and  Morgan  postulate  tends  nowadays  to  a  patho-
logical condition  very  unfavourable  to  fecundity  ;
and  infecundity,  amid  perpetually  belligerent  savages,
implies  weakness  and  ultimate  destruction.  A  far
greater  objection  is  that  the  theory  takes  for  granted
the  abeyance,  through  long  ages,  of  the  mightiest  of
all  passions,  a  passion  which  man  shares  with  all  the
higher  animals,  sexual  jealousy.  It  is  thus  strongly
contrasted  with  the  Patriarchal  theory,  which  vir-
tually assumes  this  jealousy  to  be  the  force  binding
together  and  propelling  the  ancient  social  order.  I
will  presently  deal  with  this  difficulty  at  greater
length.

I  have  never  myself  imagined  that  any  amount
of  evidence  of  law  or  usage,  written  or  observed,
would  by  itself  solve  the  problems  which  cluster
round  the  beginnings  of  human  society.  '  The  im-
perfection- of  the  geological  record '  is  a  mere  trifle

the  efforts  of  the  Planters  to  form  the  negroes  into  families,  as  the
promiscuity  into  which  they  were  liable  to  fall  produced  infertility,
and  fertility  had  hecome  important  to  the  slave-owner  through  the
prohibition  of  the  slave-trade.  It  should  be  added  that,  inde-
pendently of  pathological  evils,  the  same  infecundity  would  follow  j
if  the  promiscuity  arose  from  a  considerable  inferiority  in  number
of  women  to  men.  It  is  only  under  very  unusual  circumstances
that  a  small  number  of  women  would  give  birth  to  offspring
equalling  numerically  the  whole  parent  generation,  male  and
female.


20G  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  chap,  yu

to  the  imperfection  of  the  archseological  'record.
^  What  were  the  motives/  I  asked  in  my  '  Ancient
Law'  (p.  270),  ^  which  originally  prompted  men  to
hold  together  in  the  family  union  ?  '  'To  such  a
question/  I  answered,  '  Jurisprudence  unassisted  by
other  sciences  is  not  competent  to  give  a  reply/
This  anticipation  of  aid  to  be  expected  from  biological
science  has  been  fulfilled,  and  it  is  remarkable  that,
while  the  greatest  luminary  of  ancient  science  invented
or  adopted  the  Patriarchal  theory,  the  greatest  name
in  the  science  of  our  day  is  associated  with  it.  Mr.
Darwin  appears  to  me  to  have  been  conducted  by  his
own  observations  and  studies  to  a  view  of  the  primi-
tive condition  of  mankind,  which  cannot  be  dis-
tinguished from  this  theory.  '  We  may  conclude
('  Descent  of  Man,'  ii.  362)  from  what  we  know  of
the  passions  of  all  male  quadrupeds  that  promiscuous
intercourse  in  a  state  of  nature  is  extremely  im-
probable. ...  If  we  look  far  enough  back  in  the
stream  of  time,  it  is  exceedingly  improbable  that
primeval  men  and  women  lived  promiscuously  to-
gether. Judging  from  the  social  habits  of  man  as
he  now  exists  and  from  most  savages  being  poly-
gamists,  the  most  probable  view  is  that  primeval  men
aboriginally  lived  in  small  communities,  each  with
as  many  wives  as  he  could  support  or  obtain,  whom
he  would  have  jealously  guarded  against  all  other
men.  ...  In  primeval  times  men  .  .  .  would  pro-


CHAP.  VII.  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  207

bably  have  lived  as  polygamists  or  temporarily  as
monogamists.  .  .  .  They  would  not  at  that  period
have  lost  one  of  the  strongest  of  all  instincts,  common
to  all  the  lower  animals,  the  love  of  their  young
offspring '  (p.  367).  With  his  usual  candour  Mr.
Darwin  admits,  though  with  some  hesitation,  the
conclusions  of  writers  who  have  followed  a  different
path  of  inquiry  from  his,  but  he  thinks  that  the
licentiousness  attributed  to  savages  belonged  to  a
^  later  period  when  man  had  advanced  in  his  intellec-
tual powers  but  retrograded  in  his  instincts.'

It  must  be  remembered  that  a  difference  in  the
nature  of  the  sexual  union,  answering  to  the  difference
of  view  separating  the  Patriarchal  theory  from  its
opposite,  runs  through  the  whole  animal  world  ;  and,
under  such  circumstances,  considering  the  extreme
scantiness  of  the  archa3ological  evidence,  it  would
seem  reasonable  to  call  in  the  testimony  of  those  who
have  made  the  animal  world  their  study.  When
man  had  most  of  the  animal  in  him,  he  belonged  to
the  highest  animals  ;  and  this  is  the  consideration
which  gives  such  importance  to  Mr.  Darwin's  opinion.
It  would  be  possible  to  deny,  or  to  shrink  from,
the  absolute  conclusion  reached  in  the  book  (the
'Descent  of  Man  ')  in  wliich  this  opinion  is  stated  ;
and  yet  it  would  remain  a  most  wonderful  magazine
of  facts,  pointing  to  the  prodigious  influence  of  sexual
jealousy  in  the  animal  ^vorld, a  force  increasing  in


208  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  CHAr.  vu,

intensity as the  animal ascends  in  the scale,  and
compelling  the  sexes  to  associate  in  groups  closely
analofrous to those in which Plato  and Aristotle
conceived  primitive  men  to  be  united. The  foreign
labourers  in  the  field  which  McLennan  and  Morgan
have  occupied  with  us,  have  mostly  had  the  advantage
of  biological  training  ; and  they  seem  all  to  have
formed the same  conclusion  as Mr.  Darwin. Dr.
Letourneau,  whose  very  full  and  very  valuable  com-
pendium of  the  facts  of  savage  life  contains  a  protest
against  the  modern  English  theories  as  premature,^
is  quite  clear  as  to  the  nature  of  the  primitive  family.
'  Nos  primitifs  ancetres  errerent  alors  dans  les  forets,
par  petits  groupes,  composes  chacun  du  pere  (du  male
plut6t),  de  sa  ou  de  ses  femmes,  des  jeunes  ;  le  tout
formant une association temporaire sous  I'autorite
paternelle ' (Letourneau, '  La Sociologie/  p.  379).
Dr.  Le  Bon ('  L' Homme  et  les  Societes,' ii. 284)
strongly  denies  that  the  state  of  promiscuity  could
be  the  earliest  state  of  mankind. '  Dans  les  societes
des  animaux qui  se  rapprochent le plus de notre

'*  Ces  faits  et  bien  d'autres  prouvent  combien  il  est  prematura
aujourd'hui  de  pretendre  formuler  des  lois  sociologiques,  precises
et  rigoureuses,  comme  des  lois  scientifiques.  Rassembler  des  faits,
les  grouper,  et  hasarder  prudemment  qiielques  theories  generales,
sujettes  a  revision  :  voila  a  peu  pr6s  tout  ce  que  nous  pouvons  nous
permettre  dans  nos  essais  de  sociologie  (Letourneau,  p.  520).  La
prudence  du  serpent  est  la  vertu  qu'il  ne  faut  pas  se  lasser  de  re-
commander  aux  sociologistes  de  nos  joui's  (p.  332).


CHAP.  VII.  THEORIES OF PRDIITIYE SOCIETY.  209

espece,  nous  voyons  ranimal,  monogame  ou  poly-
game,  to uj ours  jaloux  de  ses  prerogatives  sexuelles,
les  defendre  avec  I'energie  pendant  le  temps  plus  ou
moins  long  que  dure  son  union,  c'est-a-dire  au  moins
pendant  la  periode  necessaire  pour  elever  ses  petit s.'
There  can  be  no  question  that  this  is  the  result
arrived  at  whenever  the  higher  animals  are  strong
enough  to  give  full  rein  to  sexual  jealousy.  But
sexual  jealousy,  indulged  through  Power,  might
serve  as  a  definition  of  the  Patriarchal  Family.

If,  however,  the  human  race  may  still  be  believed
to  have  started  with  the  Patriarchal  Family,  how  are
we  to explain  the  many  remarkable  phenomena  of
savagery  and infant civilisation for the  first  time
noticed  by  McLennan  and  ^lorgan,  and  woven by
them  into  rival  theories  of  the  original  condition  of
mankind? The inference that they point to an
absolute promiscuity must be received with the
greatest  hesitation,  botli for  Mr. Darwin's reasons
and  because  the  evils  Avliich  such  a  condition  would
draw  with  it  would  possibly  lead  to  the  extinction
or  the  dangerous  weakening  of  the  societies  which
practised  it. But  it cannot  be  doubted  that these
plienomena  do  suggest  such  a  relation  of  the  sexes
as  may  be  supposed to  leave  the  paternity  of  chil-
dren in  much  uncertainty. The  explanation  appears
to  me  to  lie  partly  in  Mr.  Darwin's  conjecture  that
these  phenomena  belong  to  a  '  later  period  when  man

P


210  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  chap.  vir.

had  advanced  in  his  intellectual  power  but  retro-
graded in  his  instincts/  and  partly  in  McLennan's
hypothesis  of  a  great  (and,  he  appears  to  think,  an  uni-
versal) deficiency  of  women  in  the  primitive  groups
of  men.  It  is  not  hard  to  see  that  the  cause  assigned
by  McLennan  for  the  phenomena  is  a  vera  causa — it  is
capable  of  producing  the  effects.  We  must  remember
that  the  monogamy  now  practised  by  the  greatest  part
of  mankind  (and  even  by  the  so-called  polygamous
races)  is  closely  connected  with  a  primary  natural
fact,  the  near  ecjuality  of  the  two  sexes  in  numbers.
The  idle  conjectures  which  were  once  common  as  to  the
preponderance  of  male  and  female  births  have  been
set  aside  by  observation,  which  shows  that  these
births  are  as  nearly  as  possible  equal  in  number.  At
the  same  time,  in  settled  modern  communities,  the
number  of  grown  women  is,  on  the  whole,  in  excess
of  the  number  of  grown  men,  because  of  the  more
rapid  exhaustion  of  the  males  through  war  or  dan-
gerous adventure.  Let  us,  however,  for  a  moment,
and  for  the  sake  of  argument,  assume  that  balance
to  be  very  seriously  disturbed.  Let  us  suppose  a
community  in  which  for  long  periods  together  there
is  a  large  excess  of  females  over  males.  There  is  no
question  that  monogamy  might  be  substantially
maintained  in  such  a  community,  by  the  precepts  of
some  widely  diffused  religion,  or  by  a  morality
derived  from  some  former  age  or  from  some  external


CHAP.  \u.  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  211

source ;  but  on  the  whole  we  should  expect  that
such  a  community  would,  in  some  of  its  parts,  be
polygamous.  Again,  let  us  make  the  counter-hypo-
thesis and  suppose  a  population  in  which  there  is
an  excess  of  males  over  females.  Here  again  the
Family,  as  we  understand  it,  the  Family  founded  on
monogamy,  might  be  long  preserved  by  the  power-
ful sanctions  of  religion,  morality,  or  law ;  but
nobody  would  be  surprised  that  the  practices  wit-
nessed to  as  prevailing  among  savages,  had  here
established  themselves  now  or  at  some  former  time,
that  morality  and  law  had  adjusted  themselves  to
social  habits,  and  that  explanations  of  them  or
justifications  of  them  were  even  to  be  found  in
religion.  Institutions  savouring  of  such  a  social
condition  might  still  be  in  existence,  though  they
had  lost  all  reality,  and  though  the  natural  balance
of  the  sexes  had  been  restored,  since  the  mere  sur-
vival of  an  institution  proves  nothing  as  to  the
length  of  time  which  may  have  elapsed  since  it  was
produced  by  circumstances.

Now  that,  during  a  large  part  of  human  history,
portions  of  the  human  race  liave  suffered  froui  a
disproportion  of  females  as  compared  with  males,  is
in  a  high  degree  probable.  McLennan,  as  is  well
known,  explained  it  )jy  tlie  virtually  universal  preva-
lence of  infanticide,  confined  to  female  children.
This  j)Osition  was  not  accepted  by Morgan,  and,  if

p  2


212  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  CKAr.  yii.

asserted  of  the  whole  human  race,  has  generally  been
considered  as  not  credible. Nevertheless  it  may  well
be believed  that under  unfavourable  circumstances
savage  men  have  constantly  prevented  their  weaker
offspring from li\dng. But there  are  many  other
causes  of  the  disproportion  of  the  sexes  which  dis-
close themselves  in  the  twilight  of  history. A  great
part  of  the  race,  when  we  first  obtain  a  glim2:)se  of  it,
is  in  a  state  of  movement. Portions  have  been  torn
away  from  larger  aggregates  and  are  wandering  far
and  wide,  either  pressed  by  enemies  or  searchmg  for
more abundant food. No community, when first
seen  by  the  historian,  can  be  certainly  said  to  occupy
its  original  seat. It  is  in  a  high  degree  likely  that
these wandering bodies included more men than
women. There  is  evidence  that  some  of  the  islands
of  the  Pacific  were  populated  by  boat-loads  of  men
and  a  few  women,  and  it  would  be  no  very  violent
conjecture that the aborigines of AustraUa and
America  originally  reached  their  present  homes  with
the  sexes  in  this  proportion.

It  is  needless  to  say  what  would  be  the  character
of  the  institutions  which  would  establish  themselves
under  such  circumstances.  In  fact,  it  may  be  said  to
have  been  the  usages  of  the  Australians  and  American
Indians  which  respectively  suggested  the  theories  of
McLeiman  and  Morgan,  and  it  is  singular  how  often,
wherever  a dim  glimpse of  similar institutions is


CHAP.  Yii.  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  21 0

caught  elsewhere,  it  is  amid  societies  originally  settled,
like  the  Irish,  by  wanderers  over  the  sea.  An  even
more  active  cause  of  inequality  between  the  sexes
must  have  been  war  ;  and  we  may  freely  admit  the
importance  and  significance  of  those  practices  of
woman- stealino'  on  which  McLennan  dwells  so
emphatically,  if  only  we  remember  that,  if  some
communities  lost  their  women  through  defeat,  others
must  have  gained  through  victory.  I  will  call
attention  to  one  strikins:  monument  of  the  scale  on
which  this  loss  and  gain  occurred,  which  has  not
been  much  noticed.  It  is  an  Egyptian  inscription,
on  the  reverse  of  a  stele  in  the  Berlin  Museum,
commemorating  tlie  results  of  a  conquering  expe-
dition.

Line  20.  I  sent  my  bowmen  against  the  foes  in
the  town  of  Makhenunem.  They  smote  it  and  made
a  great  slaughter,  taking  all  the  women  prisoners
and  all  the  beasts  of  burden — o05,349  Bulls,  and
Women  2,236.

Line  25.  I  made  a  slau^i^hter  amon^jf  all  that
were  the  chief  of  the  Land  of  Lobardu.  All  the
gold  he  liad.  Bulls  203,340,  Horned  Cattle  003,108.
All  the  women  who  were  spared,  the  chief  gave  us.

Line  27.  I  sent  my  soldiers  against  Arrosa.  I
made  a  great  slaughter,  taking  all  the  women
prisoners. Bulls  22,110. All  the  women.


n


214:  THEORIES OF PRIMITHT. SOCIETY.  chap.  vji.

Line  29.  From  Makhisherkert,  I  took  all  the...
men? All  the  women.

Line  32.  I  made  a  great  slaughter  against  those
with  the  chief  of  Tamakliv.  I  took  all  their  wives,
all  their  horses. Bulls  35,330.

In  all  this  inscription,  which  is  a  long  one,  there
is  only  one  line  which  may  be  thought  to  speak  of
takmo^  the  men  alive,  and  there  the  readino;  is  doubt-
ful.  With  other  records  of  ancient  warfare,  it  leaves
on  my  mind  no  doubt  that  the  common  rule  of  tribal
victory  was  to  take  only  the  women.  The  men
escaped  or  were  slain  ;  but  the  women  and  perhaps
the  children  were  spared  for  servitude,  and  this  seems
to  be  the  point  of  the  well-known  exhortation  of
Greek  generals  to  Greek  soldiers  on  the  eve  of  battle.

I  think  then  that  it  must  be  allowed  to  be  more
than  probable  that,  since  the  appearance  of  mankind
on  the  earth,  an  indefinite  portion  of  the  race  has
suffered  at  different  times  from  a  serious  inferiority
in  numbers  of  women  to  men.  It  must  further  be
acknowledged  that  the  advance  in  intelligence  of
which  Darwin  speaks  would  lead  men  to  establish
institutions  in  conformity  with  this  proportion  be-
tween the  sexes,  if  only  for  the  purpose  of  keeping
within  bounds  that  sexual  jealousy  which  could  not
fail  under  such  circumstances  to  produce,  if  unre-
strained, a  perpetuity  of  violence  and  bloodshed. It


CHAP.  vri.  THEOKIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  215

must  be  admitted  that  the  tendency  of  such  institu-
tions would  be  to  arrange  men  and  women  in  groups
very  unlike  those  in  which,  according  to  the  biolo-
gists and  according  to  the  Patriarchal  theory,  they
were  originally  combined.  If  however  it  be  impossible
to  say  what  portion  of  the  human  race  has  suffered
from  this  disproportion  between  the  sexes — if  we  are
unable  to  deny  that  some  fragments  of  the  vast
aggregates  of  men  speaking  languages  of  the  Aryan
and  Semitic  stocks  may  conceivably  at  some  time  or
other  have  had  this  experience — what  use,  it  may  be
asked,  is  there  in  insisting  on  the  Patriarchal  theory
as  expressing  the  primitive  grouping  of  mankind?
I  answer  that  there  is  the  greatest  use  ;  and  that,
unless  we  bring  home  to  ourselves  all  that  is  implied
in  the  Patriarchal  theory,  it  is  impossible  to  under-
stand a  number  of  phenomena  which  McLennan  and
Morgan  leave  unexplained  or  explain  unsatisfactorily.
The  Patriarchal  theory  in  the  first  place  fixes  on
Power,  the  Power  of  the  strong  man,  as  the  principal  ^U
formative  cause  of  the  groups  within  which  the
conception  of  kinship  first  grew  up.  The  counter-
theories  assume  the  abeyance,  during  long  ages,  of
Power.  On  this,  beyond  noting  the  improbability  of
the  assumption,  I  will  merely  now  remark  that
the  only  source  known  to  us  of  new  forms  of  kinship
is  Power.  It  is  a  special  form  of  Power,  that  called  by
jurists  Sovereignty, which  has created  the  modern


216  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY. chap.  vir.

Kinship  known  as  Nationality,  which  enables  us  to
speak  of  Englishmen,  Frenchmen,  Australians,  Ame-
ricans. In  the  next  place  the  Patriarchal  theory
supposes  that  the  motive  which  led  to  the  exertion
/•  ^1  of  power  was  sexual  jealousy.  The  counter- theories
assume  the  abeyance  during  long  ages  of  sexual
jealousy.  Now  it  is  of  course  possible  to  believe,
upon  sufficient  evidence,  that  the  passion  which  caused
the  wrath  of  Achilles  and  the  agony  of  Othello  was
unknown  to  men  originally,  or  was  neutralised  by  the
countervailing  pressure  of  circumstances  ;  but  if  it  be
once  believed  that  this  passion,  which  is  one  of  the
mightiest  of  the  forces  acting  on  man  in  the  height  of
his  moral  strength  and  the  plenitude  of  his  intellec-
tual vigour,  was  also  one  of  the  most  uncontrollable  of
his  instincts  when  he  had  most  of  the  animal  in  him,
the  whole  of  the  recently  observed  phenomena  appear
to  me  to  show  themselves  in  a  light  materially  differ-
ent from  that  in  which  the  observers  have  seen  them.
The  student,  then,  of  social  archaeology  who  is
called  upon  to  believe  that  the  Family  constituted  by
sexual  jealousy  indulging  itself  through  Power  is  of
modern  origin  or  of  rare  occurrence,  will  be  very
rigorous  in  his  scrutiny  of  the  evidence  presented  to
him.^  He  will  be  cautious  in  accepting  a  statement
about  savages,  or  an  interpretation  of  a  '  survival '  in

*  See  Note  A  to  this  Chapter,  on  the  *  Andaman  Islanders.'


CHAP.  vn.  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  217

a  system  of  institutions,  which  is  prima  facie  at
variance  with  observed  facts  of  human  nature.

Admitting  it  to  be  probable,  as  he  is  bound  to  do,
that  some  portions  of  mankind  have  at  some  time
been  united  in  groups,  which  included  considerably
fewer  women  than  men,  and  allowing  that  this
scarcity  of  women  would  probably  result  in  such
institutions  as  the  tracing  kinship  through  descent
from  females,  he  will  see  reasons  for  thinking  that  the
condition  out  of  which  these  institutions  arose  could
not,  as  a  general  rule,  be  more  than  temporary.  A
tribe  in  which  the  women  were  for  a  very  long  period
inferior  in  number  to  the  men  would  be  at  a  great
disadvantage  compared  with  tribes  in  which  the  sexes
were  on  a  near  equality.  It  would  be  liable  to  infecun-
dity,  possibly  from  disease,  certainly  from  the  relative
fewness  of  bnths  from  a  small  number  of  mothers.

Again,  he  will  imderstand  better  than  the  re-
cent inquirers  how  it  was  that  all  the  societies
which,  if  I  may  use  the  expression,  attained  to  any
degree  of  respectability,  recovered  at  last  what  he
will  believe  to  have  been  the  orifnnal  condition  of
the  Family.  Nothing  is  more  unsatisfactory  in  the
writings  of  McLennan  and  ^lorgan  than  tlieir  ac-
count of  the  recognition  of  Paternity.  Morgan
seems  almost  to  suppose  that  it  was  introduced  by
popular  vote.  McLennan  expressly  suggests  that
it arose from  a  custom  of  putative  fathers giving


218  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  chap.  vil.

presents  to  putative  children.  But  the  truth  is  that  a
great  natural  force  must  always  have  acted,  and  must
be  still  acting,  on  these  aberrant  forms  of  society,
tending  always  to  make  the  most  powerful  portion  of
each  community  arrange  itself  in  groups,  which  admit
of  the  recognition  of  fatherhood,  and  the  indulgence
of  the  parental  instincts.  And  thus  reasons  appear
why  it  is  that,  when  the  Family  does  reappear,  it
reappears  not  as  the  modern  Family,  but  as  the
Family  in  which  Kinship  is  blended  with  Power,  and
why  it  is  that  the  Family  so  often  discloses  itself  as
an  institution  of  aristocracies,  not  of  slaves,  nor  even
of  dependents.

He  too  who  is  alive  to  the  nature  of  this  oTeat
emotional  force,  ever  acting  upon  the  class  of  societies
of  which  I  have  been  speaking,  will  be  slow  to  believe
that  they  recovered  all  or  much  of  their  original  con-
dition by  a  series  of  changes  identically  the  same.
He  will  rather  suspect  that  the  stages  of  recovery
were  infinitely  various.  Thus  he  will  be  indifferent
to  many  or  most  of  the  points  of  controversy  between
the  school  of  McLennan  and  the  school  of  Morgan,
and  will  be  inclined  to  think  that  there  has  been
room,  not  only  for  two,  but  for  many  courses  of
modification  and  development,  each  proceeding  withia
its  own  area.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  there  is  nothiag
in  the  recorded  history  of  society  to  justify  the  belief
that,  during  that  vast  chapter  of  its  growth  which  is


CHAP.  Yii.  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  219

wholly  unwritten,  the  same  transformations  of  social
constitution  succeeded  one  another  everywhere,  uni-
formly if  not  simultaneously.  A  strong  force  lying
deep  in  human  nature,  and  never  at  rest,  might  no
doubt  in  the  long  run  produce  an  uniform  result,  in
spite  of  the  vast  varieties  of  circumstance  accompany-
ino'  the  stern  struo'^ie  for  existence  :  but  it  is  in  the
hig-hest  decree  incredible  that  the  action  of  this  force
would  be  uniform  from  beo'innino;  to  end.

Lastly,  if  we  consider  the  weight  of  argument
and  evidence  to  be  in  favour  of  the  commencement  of
human  society  in  Patriarchal  (or  Cyclopean)  families,
we  shall  think  it  not  only  not  incredible  but  highly
probable  that  certam  communities  which  have  sur-
vived to  historical  times  have  grown  without  mter-
ruption  out  of  their  original  condition.  '  In  most  of
the  Greek  States  and  in  Rome,'  I  wrote  in  '  Ancient
Law'  (p.  128),  'there  long  remained  the  vestiges  of
an  ascending  series  of  groups  out  of  which  the  State
was  at  first  constituted.  The  Family,  House,  and
Tribe  of  the  Romans  may  be  taken  as  the  type  of
them,  and  they  are  so  described  to  us  that  we  can
scarcely  help  conceiving  them  as  a  series  of  concentric
circles  which  have  expanded  from  the  same  point.
The  elementary  grou[)  is  tlie  Family,  connected  by
common  subjection  to  the  highest  male  ascendant.
The  airirreiration  of  Families  forms  the  Gens  or  House.


oo


The  aggregation  of  Houses  makes  the  Tribe. The


220  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  chap.  vii.

aggregation  of  Tribes  constitutes  the  Commonwealth.
Are  we  at  liberty  to  follow  these  indications  and  to
lay  down  that  the  commonwealth  is  a  collection  of
persons  united  by  common  descent  from  the  progeni-
tor of  an  original  family  ?  Of  this  we  may  at  least
be  certam,  that  all  ancient  societies  regarded  them-
selves as  having  proceeded  from  one  original  stock.'
Antecedently,  is  it  necessary  to  assume  that  such
societies  passed  through  a  stage  of  promiscuity,  more
or  less  modified  ?  That  would  depend  on  the  cir-
cumstances m  which  they  were  placed.  If  they
suffered  from  a  scarcity  of  women,  such  phenomena
as  polyandry  and  a  tracing  of  kinship  through  women
would  probably  show  themselves,  and  at  any  stage  of
social  growth.  But  some  communities  of  men  must
always  have  been  stronger,  cleverer,  more  fortunately
placed  than  others — must  have  had  fewer  motives
than  others  for  killing  their  female  children,  and  more
success  in  carrying  away  the  women  of  other  tribes.
The  great  reason  for  antecedently  doubting  the
alleged  evidence  of  promiscuity  in  the  branches  of
the  Aryan  race  is  that,  as  it  has  been  the  most  suc-
cessful, so  it  must  have  been  one  of  the  strongest
of  races.  Of  course  the  significance  of  some  pieces
of  this  evidence  cannot  fairly  be  denied,  nor  ca]i
it  be  thought  very  unlikely  that  some  of  the  divi-
sions of  this  race  which  wandered  furthest,  or  some
of  the  more  savage  communities  which  adopted  its


CHAP.  Yir.  THEORIES OF PEIMITIYE SOCIETY.  221

tonoTie,  fell  for  a  while  into  a  more  or  less  modi-
fied  promiscuity.  But  the  whole  question  must  be
decided  by  the  preponderance  one  way  or  the  other
of  the  not  very  plentiful  evidence.  Only  let  it  be
clearly  understood  what  the  problem  is.  I  have
recently  stated  it  in  the  following  words  :  ^  '  The
greatest  races  of  mankind  when  they  first  appear  to
us  show  themselves  at  or  near  a  stage  of  development
in  which  relationship  or  kinship  is  reckoned  exclu-
sively through  males.  They  are  in  this  stage  ;  or
they  are  tending  to  reach  it  ;  or  they  are  retreating
from  it.  Many  of  them,  in  certain  contingencies,
generally  rare  or  remote,  give  women  and  the  de-
scendants of  women  a  place  in  succession  ;  and  the
question  with  modern  inquirers  is  whether  the  place
thus  assifmed  to  them  is  the  survival  of  an  older  bar-
barism,  now  exemplified  in  savage  races,  which  traced
kinship  exclusively  through  females,  or  whether  it
results  from  the  dissolution,  under  various  influences,
of  "  agnatic "  relationship,  that  is,  of  relationship
through  males  only.'  The  influences'  in  question  (I
have  elsewhere  shown)  were  in  the  case  of  the  Roman
law,  that  of  the  Praetorian  equity,  and  in  the  case  of
the  sacerdotal  Hindu  law,  the  influence  of  Reliirion.

I  have  yet  a  few  words  to  say  on  a  topic  which
owes  the  importance  and  interest  now  commanded
]jy it almost  entirely  to the labours  of Mr. J. F.

^  Vi'la  Chapter  V.  above,  p.  149.


222  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  chap.  vii.

McLennan.  He  is  the  author  of  the  terms  ^  Exogamy  '
and  '  Endogamy  '  ;  the  first  signifying  the  practice  of
taking  wives  exclusively  beyond  the  limits  of  a  par-
ticular tribal  circle  :  the  last  indicatmsr  the  custom  of
marrying  within  that  circle.  The  fact  that  certain
ancient  races  extended  their  prohibitions  of  intermar-
riage far  beyond  the  narrow  boundaries  of  our  Table  of
Prohibited  Degrees — that,  theoretically  at  all  events,
they  forbade  a  man's  marrying  any  woman  whose
descent  from  the  same  ancestor  with  himself  was
ascertainable — was  not  unknown  to  students  of  Hindu
law  ;  but  Mr.  McLennan  was  the  first  to  point  out
the  wide  prevalence  of  these  prohibitions  among  bar-
barous societies  and  their  connection,  among  savage
races,  with  the  system  of  reckoning  kinship  through
women.  The  first  remark  which  I  have  to  make
on  these  discoveries,  which  are  closely  interwoven
with  Mr.  McLennan's  theory  of  social  advance,  is,
that  it  does  not  seem  to  me  certain  that  the  terms
'  exogamy  '  and  '  endogamy  '  can  be  directly  opposed
to  one  another.  Is  there  any  society  which  is  not  at
the  same  time  '  exogamous  '  and  '  endogamous  ^  ?
Let  us  fix  our  ideas,  as  it  is  always  desirable  to  do,
by  looking  at  the  ancient  Roman  law.  Any  marriage
of  a  Roman  citizen  within  a  circle  not  widely  different
from  that  traced  by  our  own  Table  of  Prohibited
Degrees  was  invalid  ;  and  the  children  of  such  a
marriage would be  illegitimate. But again, any


CHAP.  Tir.  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  223

inarriao*e  of  a  Roman  citizen  with  a  woman  who  was
not  herself  a  Roman  citizen,  or  who  did  not  belong  to
a  community  having  the  much- valued  and  always  ex-
pressly conferred  privilege  of  connuhium  with  Rome,
was  also  invalid  ;  and  no  legitimate  children  could
be  born  of  such  a  marriage.  Thus  Roman  society
was  both  exogamous  and  endogamous  ;  there  was
both  an  outer  and  an  inner  limit.  The  double  rule
is  found  in  the  Hindu  law.  A  Hindu  may  not  marry
a  woman  belonging  to  the  same  gotra,  all  members  of
the  got7rt  being  theoretically  supposed  to  have  de-
scended from  the  same  ancestor  ;  but  then  he  must
marry  within  his  own  caste.  Here  again,  therefore,
there  is  the  outer  and  the  inner  limit.  I  do  not  pre-
tend that  the  point  is  proved  by  the  evidence  respect-
ing the  great  number  of  savage  or  barbarous  tribes
which  have  been  shown  to  have  an  extended  '  ex-
ogamy.' My  suggestion  in  fact  is  that  the  outer
limit  within  which  a  man  must  marry  has  been
overlooked  through  the  interest  excited  by  the  long-
unnoticed  exogamous  prohibition ;  and  I  wish  to  urge
that  the  subject  requires  re- investigation.  I  myself,
though  not  a  professed  inquirer  in  this  field,  have  re-
peatedly found  indications  of  the  outer  or  endogamous
limit.  Thus  there  are  in  China  large  bodies  of  related
clansmen,  each  generally  bearing  the  same  clan-name.
They  are  '  exogamous '  ;  no  man  will  marry  a  woman
having  the  same  clan-name  with  himself ;  and  much


224  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  chap.  vii.

lias  been  made  of  this  fact.  But  one  of  a  group  of
earnest  inquirers,  who  are  investigating  Chinese  social
phenomena  on  the  spot,  3Ir.  Jamieson,  has  found
that  they  are  endogamous  also.  '  Externally  they
are  endogamous — they  refuse  marriage  with  any
surrounding  tribe ;  internally  they  are  exogamous  ;
they  refuse  marriage  with  anyone  whose  surname
shows  him  to  be  of  the  same  stock  '  ('China  Review,^
vol.  X.  No.  2).

These  limits,  outer  and  mner,  may  still  be  dis-
cerned in  the  most  civilised  Western  societies.  On
the  one  hand,  '  exogamy '  is  enforced  by  law.  There
are  always  some  of  his  near  kin  whom  a  man  may  not
marry.  The  law  rests  partly  on  considerations  of
physiology  and  partly  on  considerations  of  religion,
religion  and  physiology  not  being,  however,  quite
agreed  as  to  what  should  be  the  proper  Table  of  Pro-
hibited Degrees.  On  the  other,  the  outer  or  endoga-
mous limit,  within  which  a  man  or  woman  must
marry,  has  been  mostly  taken  under  the  shelter  of
fashion  or  prejudice.  It  is  but  faintly  traced  in  Eng-
land, though  not  wholly  obscured.  It  is  (or  perhaps
was)  rather  more  distinctly  marked  in  the  United
States,  through  prejudices  against  the  blending  of
white  and  coloured  blood.  But  in  Germany  certain
hereditary  dignities  are  still  forfeited  by  a  marriage
beyond  the  forbidden  limits  ;  and  in  France,  in  spite
of  all  formal  institutions,  marriages  between  a  person


CHAP.  VII.  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  225

belonging  to  the  noblesse  and  a  person  belonging  to  the

bourgeoisie  (distinguished  roughly  from  one  another

by  the  particle  'de')  are  wonderfully  rare,  though

they  are  not  unknown. The  Church,  it  may  be  added, ',

has  repeatedly  relaxed  the  '  exogamous  '  rule  which

forbids  the  intermarriage  of  near  kin  in  order  to  save

a  member  of  a  o:reat  Contmental  House  from  havins:  /  ^'t?

to  transgress  the  outer  limit  withm  which  he  is  bound

to  marry.

I  have  a  special  reason  for  dwelling  on  the  point.
Exogamy  plays  a  great  part  in  the  system  of
McLennan,  and  (though  not  under  the  same  name)
in  the  system  of  Morgan.  Both  hold  that  a  definite
stage  of  human  development  is  marked  by  the  appear-
ance of  a  group  which  Morgan  calls  the  '  Gens  '  and
McLennan  the  'exogamous  totem-kin,'  a  body  of
kinsmen  and  kinswomen  never  intermarrying  and
witnessing  to  their  kinship  by  a  common  mark  on
their  persons.  In  so  far  as  this  group  has  fallen
under  actual  observation,  in  America  and  Australia,
it  is  more  like  a  vSex  than  any  other  assemblage  of
human  beings  ;  it  cannot  reproduce  itself  unless  it
combines  with  some  similar  body,  for  the  men  cannot
find  wives  nor  the  women  husbands.  Consequently
it  is  always  nowadays  a  part  of  some  larger  social
aggregate.  But,  although  I  may  not  have  clearly
realised  McLennan's  conception,  1  understand  him  to
consider  that  this  group  is  the  developed  form  of  the

Q


226  . THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  chap.  vn.

independent  primitive  group,  which  he  believes  to
have  been  an  assemblage  of  men  and  much  fewer
women,  living  together  in  promiscuity,  and  therefore
very  unlike  the  Patriarchal  or  Cyclopean  family  as-
sumed by  the  older  theory.  The  fewness  of  women  was
produced  by  infanticide,  and  had  for  its  consequence
the  habit  of  stealing  women  from  other  groups,  still
supposed  to  be  witnessed  to  by  the  form  of  capture
widely  characterising  the  marriages  of  barbarians.
Under  the  influence  of  this  habit  the  practice  of  ^ex-
ogamy '  was  gradually  created.  On  the  other  hand,
Morgan,  though  he  too  believes  the  sexes  to  have
originally  lived  together  in  promiscuity,  does  not
seem  to  consider  that  their  numbers  were  very  un-
equal. He  supposes  that  primitive  men  very  early
discovered  the  evils  of  close  interbreeding,  and  that
all  the  early  transformations  of  human  society  were
the  results  of  a  constant  struggle  to  prevent  these
evils.  In  his  view,  therefore  (as  I  understand  it),
the  '  Gens,'  as  he  rather  unfortunately  calls  it  (the
'  exogamous  totem-kin'  of  McLennan),  is  not  a  primi-
tive group,  but  a  mere  subdivision  of  larger  tribal
societies  originally  promiscuous,  formed  for  the  pur-
pose of  limiting  interbreeding.

For  reasons  which  I  have  already  given,  I  have
no  wish  to  take  sides  with  Morgan  or  with  McLennan,
but  it  does  seem  to  me  that,  if  further  inquiry  should
disclose  the  prevalence  of  an  outer  '  endogamous  '  as


4;hap.  711.  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  227

well  as  an  inner  ^  exogamoiis  '  circle  of  consanguinity,
it  lends  some  strength  to  Morgan's  theory  of  develop-
ment, which  is  certainly  easier  to  understand  than
McLennan' s. I  merely  accept Morgan's  theory  so
far  as  it  is  an  explanation  of  the  original  formation
of  exogamous  groups,  and  in  so  far  as  it  considers
them  to  have  been  subdivisions  of  larger  communities,
and  formed  for  the  purpose  of  limiting  interbreeding.
The  difficulty  which  seems  to  be  felt  by  candid  op-
ponents of  this  hypothesis  is  that  primitive  men  are
unlikely  to  have  made  any such  physiological  dis-
covery. If  it  be  true  that  interbreeding  is  an  evil,
its  very  truth,  in their  view, militates  against  the
antiquity  of  human  knowledge  about  it. Indeed  it  is
not  certain  that  it  is true. Physiologists  are  not
agreed  as  to  Tables  of  Prohibited  Degrees. Some  no
doubt  would  considerably  extend  them,  but  others
deny  that  the  evil  which  they  prevent  is  of  serious
proportions. I  think,  liowever,  it  is  forgotten  that  the
assertion  made  by  Morgan  is  made  of  a  time  when
neither  Surgery  nor  Medicine  existed,  of  a  time  before
that  at  which,  according  to  the  Greek  tradition,  Pro-
metheus discovered  the  chopped  herbs  which  were  to
be  the  remedy  for  human  ailments. With  the  vast
resources  of  modern  medicine  at  hand,  the  evils  of
the  intermarriage  of  near  kin  may  have  been  reduced
to  a  minimum  or  may  have  come  to  be  doubted. But
what  is  invaluable  to  a  savage  is,  I  take  it,  what  we

Q 2


228  THEORIES OF PRIMITIVE SOCIETY.  CKAr.  vii.

should  call  a  good  constitution  ;  such  a  constitution
received  at  birth  as  will  not  easily  admit  disease,  or
will  easily  overcome  it  by  its  own  native  soundness.
For  among  such  men  disease  once  contracted  cannot
be  artificially  cured. Even  therefore  if  the  advantage
given  by  exogamous  marriage  to  the  children  be  now
a  slight  one,  it  might  be  beyond  price  to  primitive
mankind. I  cannot  see  why  the  men  who  discovered
the  use  of  fire  and  selected  the  wild  forms  of  certain
animals  for  domestication  and  of  vegetables  for  culti-
vation should  not  find  out  that  children  of  unsound
constitutions  were born  of  nearly  related parents.
If  such  children,  left  to  themselves,  are  really  weakly,
the  fact  would  be  forced  on  notice  by  the  stern  pro-
cess of  natural  selection,  affecting  either  the  individual
or  the  tribe. It  is  this  process  which  has  produced
those  wonderful  contrivances  for  the  intercrossing  of
plants  and  the  generation  of  a  healthier  vegetable
ofi'spring  which  have  recently  been  observed  by  men
of  science  ; but  if  the  process  ever  acted  without
check  on  mankind  I  should  imagine  that  their  earliest
intelligence  would  enable  them  to  note  its  operation.
It  should  be  added  that  the  earliest  serious  attempts
to  combat  disease  appear  to  have  taken  the  form  of
precautions,  of  training  and  of  the  formation  of  habits,
rather  than  of  remedies  as  now  understood.


THE ANDAMAIS^ ISLANDERS.  229


NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.


Note A.

THE  AXDAMAN  ISLANDERS.

I  AM  afraid  that  I  incurred  some  reproach  byremark-
ino;  in  an  earlier  work  ('  Yillaoe  Communities  in  the
East  and  AVest')  on  the  unconvincing  character  of
much  of  the  evidence  for  savage  customs  to  which  the
utmost  significance  had  been  attributed,  and  by  speak-
ing of  some  of  it  as  '  travellers'  tales.'  My  observa-
tions on  this  evidence  (which  has  since  then  con-
siderably improved)  were  coupled  with  a  statement
that  I  exjDected  much  from  the  critical  examination
which  was  bein^]:  i^iven  to  savage  or  barbarous  usa^e
by  officers  of  the  Indian  Government  engaged  in  the
administration  of  the  so-called  aboriginal  races  still
numerous  in  India.  The  expectation  has  been  abun-
dantly fulfilled  already,  and  1  will  instance  one  set  of
results.'

I  suppose  that  if  there  was  one  community  which,
looked  at  from  a  distance,  or  at  occasional  intervals,
seemed  more  than  others  to  constitute  tlie  '  missing-
link  '  between  the  brute  and  the  man,  it  was  the
population  of  the  Audainan  Islands.  In  the  IVeface
to  '  Selections  from  Records  of  the  Government  of  India
(Home  Department),'  No.  XXV.,  written  before  these
islands  were  finally  made  the  seat  of  a  convict  station,
it  is  said  that  *  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  any  human
beings  to  be  lower  in  the  scale  of  civilisation  than  are
the  Andaman  savages. The  little  that  is  known  of


230  THE ANDAMAN ISLANDERS.

tlieir  manners  and  customs  proves  tliem  to  be  without
religion  or  government,  and  that  they  live  in  per-
petual dread  of  the  contact  of  any  other  race.  .  .  .
The  traditions  of  so  absolutely  barbarous  a  race  are
not  likely  to  throw  au}^  light  on  their  origin.'  The
little  evidence  that  existed  seemed  fully  to  bear  out
this  unfavourable  judgment.  The  older  C)riental
accounts  had  represented  the  islanders  as  cannibals
(a  charge  which  now  appears  to  have  been  without
any  foundation),  and  in  the  '  Asiatic  Researches  '  of
1795,  Lieutenant  Colebrooke  wrote  of  them  :  '  The
Andaman  Islands  are  inhabited  bv  a  race  of  men  the
least  civilised  perhaps  in  the  world,  being  nearest  a
state  of  nature  than  any  people  we  read  of.  They
go  quite  naked  ;  the  women  wearing  at  times  a  kind
of  tassel  or  fringe  round  the  middle,  which  is  in-
tended merely  for  ornament,  as  they  do  not  betray
any  signs  of  bashfulness  when  seen  without  it.  .  .  .
The  men  are  cunning,  crafty,  and  revengeful.'  Other
authorities  to  the  same  effect  are  quoted  by  Lubbock
('  Prehistoric  Times,'  4th  ed.  p.  451).  '  The  Anda-
man Islanders  appear  to  be  entirely  without  any  sense
of  shame,  and  many  of  their  habits  are  like  those  of
beasts.  .  .  .  Marriage  only  lasts  til)  the  child  is  born
and  weaned,  when,  according  to  Lieutenant  St.  John,
as  quoted  by  Sir  E.  Belcher,  the  man  and  woman
generally  separate,  each  seeking  a  new  partner.'

The  Andaman  Islands  are  now  the  principal
convict  station  of  the  Government  of  India,  and  the
islanders  have  been  brought  under  British  adminis-
tration. A  most  interesting  account  of  them,  founded
on  actual  observation,  has  been  published  by  a  British
Indian  public  officer,  Mr.  E.  H.  Man  ('  Journal  of  the
Anthropological  Institute,'  XII.  i.  69,  and  ii.  13).
One  of  the  points  most  dwelt  on  in  this  account  it
the  modesty  of  the  women.  They  will  not  renew  theu'
leaf  aprons  even  in  one  another's  presence. Another


THE AXDAMAX ISLANDERS.  231

is  the  married  women's  chastity.  '  In  the  esteem  in
which  they  (the  islanders)  hold  their  virtues  (modesty
and  morality)  they  compare  favourably  with  that
existina^  in  certain  ranks  amono^  civilised  races.'
Marriage  is  a  well-defined  institution.  '  Marriages
never  take  place  till  both  parties  have  attained  ma-
turity, the  bridegroom  from  eighteen  to  twenty- two,
the  bride  from  sixteen  to  twenty.'  Bachelors  and
spinsters  are  placed  at  the  opposite  ends  of  the  large
common  dwelling-house  and  the  married  couples  in
the  middle.  Paternity  is  thoroughly  recognised  ;  the
father  is  generally  present  at  the  child's  birth.  There
is  no  example  of  a  cross-breed  in  the  islands.

There  is  a  government  by  chiefs  whose  au-
thority is  reflected  on  their  wives.  '  A  chief's
wife  enjoys  many  privileges,  especially  if  she  be  a
mother,  and,  in  virtue  of  her  husband's  rank,  she
rules  over  all  the  young  unmarried  women,  and  the
married  ones  not  senior  to  herself.'  '  There  is  much
mutual  affection  in  social  relations,'  says  Mr.  Man.
'  Children  are  taught  to  be  generous  and  self-denying.
The  duty  of  showing  respect  and  hospitality  to  friends
and  visitors  is  impressed  on  them  from  their  earliest
years.  Every  care  and  consideration  is  paid  to  all
classes,  to  the  very  young,  the  weak,  the  aged,  and
the  helpless.'

My  impression  is  that  there  is  no  subject  on  which
it  is  harder  to  obtain  trustworthy  information  than
the  relations  of  the  sexes  in  communities  very  unlike
that  to  which  the  inquirer  belongs.  The  state-
ments made  to  him  are  apt  to  be  affected  by  two
very  powerful  feelings — the  sense  of  shame  and  the
sense  of  the  ludicrous — and  he  himself  nearly  always
sees  the  facts  stated  in  a  wrong  perspective.  Almost
innumerable  delusions  are  current  in  England  as  to  the
social  condition,  in  regard  to  this  subject,  of  a  country
so  near  to  us  in  situation  and  civilisation  as  France.


232  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  vni.


CHAPTER YIII.

EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES.

Nothing  would  be  of  higher  vahie  to  scientific  archae-
ology than  any  addition  to  our  opportunities  of  ob-
serving societies  of  Aryan  race  still  remaining  in  a
condition  of  barbarism. The  practices  of  savage  men,
lying  altogether  beyond  the  circle  of  the  greater  races,
have  been  carefully  observed  and  compared  of  late
years,  and  some  generalisations  of  much  ingenuity
and  interest  have  been  founded  on  them  ;  but  the
relation  of  these  practices  to  the  beginnings  of  our
own  civilisation  is  far  from  satisfactorily  settled  at
present. The early usages of the now civilised
societies  can  be  partially  recovered  from  their  records,
their  traditions,  and  above  all  from  their  law  ;  but  it
is  just  where  these  sources  of  evidence  can  least  be
depended upon, where history runs into poetry,
tradition  into  legend,  and definite  law  into  dimly
seen  custom,  that  the  connection  between  barbarous
Aryan  usage  and  savage  non- Aryan  practice  has  to
be  established,  if  it  really  exists. What we  most
require  is the actual examination by  trained ob-


CFAP.  TUT. EAST EUKOPEAX HOUSE COMMUXITIES.  233

servers  of  sonie  barbarous  or  semi-barbarous  com-
munity, whose  Aiyan  pedigree  is  reasonably  pure.

India  has  made  contributions  of  great  importance
to.  the  study  of  early  institutions,  and  I  hope  to  show,
before  the  close  of  this  paper,  that  among  the  most
important  are  the  most  recent.  Many  portions  of
the  social  and  family  life  of  the  high-caste  Hindu
unquestionably  answer  to  stages  of  social  develop-
ment throusrh  which  the  earliest  civilised  com-
munities  of  the  AVest  may  just  be  seen  passing  in  the
twilight  of  their  history.  But  there  are  some  serious
drawbacks  on  the  value  of  Indian  social  facts,  and
some  considerable  limitations  of  their  impressiveness.
A  great  deal  of  the  very  ancient  usage  discoverable
in  India  is  non- Aryan.  There  are  no  doubt  abundant
remains  of  true  Aryan  barbarism,  but  it  is  not  always
easy  to  distinguish  this  from  barbarism  which  is  non-
Aryan,  and  that  which  is  really  Aryan  has  been
transformed  to  an  unknown  extent.  A  reliirion
which  has  lost  its  affinity  for  the  religions  of  the
West  is  constantly  penetrating  and  modifying  it,  and
the  newer  influences  of  the  English  dominion  are
working  upon  it  with  ever-increasing  effect.  What-
ever, too,  be  the  value  of  Indian  observations,  they
do  not  certainly  at  present  produce  the  impression
which  might  be  expected  on  the  European  historical
scholars  who  are  busy  with  the  rudiuients  of  Western
society. There  is  an  evident  distrust  of  illustrations


234  EAST EUROPEAX HOUSE COMMUXITIKS. chap.  vru.

of  social  growth  taken  from  the  usage  of  a  people  so
remote  as  the  Hindus,  and  so  long  parted  from  the
sister- communities  of  the  Aryan  group.

No  field  of  investigation  seems  to  me  to  promise
so  much  to  the  student  of  primitive  social  antiquity
as  that  opened  to  us  by  the  obvious  thinning  of  the
superficial  crust  of  Mahommedan  institutions  spread
over  so  great  a  part  of  the  once  civilised  world.  In
all  the  countries  now  or  lately  under  Mussulman
dominion,  strange  and  deeply  interesting  forms  of
ancient  social  organisation  from  time  to  time  come
into  the  light,  like  buried  cities  from  volcanic  ashes
or  lava.  This  remark  must  be  confined  to  com-
munities conquered  by  the  Mahommedans  and  made
tributary  to  them,  but  not  converted  to  the  Mahom-
medan faith.  For  the  purposes  of  the  scientific
archaeologist,  a  group  of  men  converted  to  Mahom-
medanism  becomes  practically  worthless,  because  from
the  moment  of  its  conversion  it  lives  under  a  civil
law  which  is  also  a  religious  law,  and  which  can  only
be  explained  at  present  as  a  religious  law.  The
portions  of  ancient  usage  whicli  in  the  present  state  of
these  inquiries  yield  most  to  the  student  of  early  m-
stitutions  are  those  which,  in  modern  phraseology,  we
should  call  the  law  'of  Inheritance  and  the  law  of
Marriage.  But  a  society  which  has  adopted  the  Ma-
hommedan law  of  inheritance  has  come  under  a  system
of  rules  of  succession  which  may  possibly  embody


CHAP.  vm. E.\ST EUROPEAX HOUSE COMMUXITIES.  235

some  Arabian  customs,  but  which  on  the  whole  can
only  be  accounted  for  as  consisting  of  strict  deduc-
tions from  the  letter  of  texts  assumed  to  be  sacred.
This  system  of  rules  arranges  the  heirs  in  classes
unHke  those  known  to  modified  or  unmodified  Aryan
custom,  and  it  is  moreover  a  system  of  extremely
definite  division  into  fractional  shares.  On  the
other  hand,  under  rudimentary  Aryan  usage,  it  is
not  the  individual,  but  rather  a  collective  group  of
kinsmen,  which  profits  by  the  death  of  a  relative  ;  and
it  is  exactly  because  the  composition  of  this  group,
and  the  mode  of  devolution  within  it,  probably  reflect
some  more  ancient  method  of  collective  enjoyment
during  life,  that  rules  of  intestate  succession  have
nowadays  so  profound  an  interest.  Again,  the
barbarous  Aryan,  still  following  Aryan  custom,  is
not  only  generally  monogamous,  but  (to  use  Mr.
McLennan's  extremely  convenient  term)  exogamous.
He  has  a  most  extensive  Table  of  Prohibited
Degrees'.  The  Mussulman,  however,  is  not  only
polygamous  but  endogamous  :  that  is,  his  law  per-
mits comparatively  near  relatives  to  intermarry.  It
has  been  noticed  by  good  observers  in  India,  that  the
coijiparative  liberty  of  intennarriage  permitted  by
Mahommedanism  is  part  of  the  secret  of  its  success  as
a  ]>roselytising  religion.  It  offers  a  bribe  to  the  con-
vert in  relieving  him  from  the  undoubtedly  vexatious
restraints  of  the  Brabmanical  law  of  marriaii:e.


236  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  vm.

But  where  communities  subject  to  Mussulman
rule  have  never  been  converted  to  the  Mussulman
faith,  the  effect  of  the  dominant  Mahommedanism  is
to  fix  and  stereotype  their  barbarism,  where  they  are
barbarous.  A  large  number  of  them  are  socially
organised  in  groups  held  together  by  the  reality  or
the  fiction  of  common  blood  ;  they  possibly  may
never  have  attained  to  a  higher  organisation  than  this,
or — what  is  more  probable — the  Mahommedan  con-
quest may  have  not  merely  arrested  their  civilisation,
but  may  have  actually  forced  some  of  them  to  retrace
part  of  the  path  by  which  they  had  ascended  from
a  primitive  barbarous  condition.  When,  however,
these  groups  are  once  organised  on  the  well-known
model  of  an  association  of  kinsmen  or  tribesmen,  there
is  much  in  Mahommedan  government  which  tends  to
tighten  the  bonds  by  which  they  are  held  together.
The  members  of  Christian  societies  are  most  reluct-
ant to  enter  the  Mahommedan  Courts,  and  thus  they
are  led  to  value  the  domestic  tribunals,  which  all
naturally  organised  brotherhoods  include.  Agam,
community  of  life  ba^ed  upon  consanguinity  always
implies  common  liability  to  the  discharge  of  legal
demands  ;  and  thus  the  fiscal  exactions  of  the
Mussulman  ruler  give  a  strong  motive  to  the  kins-
folk to  keep  the  burden  of  taxation  resting  on  as
many  shoulders  as  possible.  The  advantage  of  main-
taining the  liability  of  groups  rather  than  the  liability


CHAP.  Yiii. EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  237

of  individuals  is  also  felt  by  the  Mahommedan  Go-
vernments themselves,  and  they  are  thus  led  to  favour
the  integrity  of  these  natural  bodies,  just  as  the
French  seio;neurs  are  stated  in  mediaeval  law-books
to  have  favoured  the  existence  of  communities  of
villeins  living  au  meme  pot.  The  natural  processes
of  dissolution  to  which  such  groups  are  subject  are
also  much  retarded  by  the  indirect  influence  of
Mahommedan  power.  The  chief  dissolving  forces
acting  on  primitive  communities  are  war  and  com-
merce. One  tears  them  to  pieces  and  scatters  the
fragments  abroad,  the  other  disintegrates  them,  by
creating  inequalities  of  wealth  ;  and  nothing  is  harder
(as  will  be  seen  presently)  than  for  the  rich  and  poor
brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity.  But  a  Mahom-
medan Grovernment  on  the  whole  keeps  the  peace,  and
both  by  its  acts  of  commission  and  by  its  sins  of
omission,  by  its  irregular  taxation,  and  by  its  failure
to  provide  modes  of  easy  communication  and  a  pure
and  regular  administration  of  justice,  it  retards  or
puts  a  stop  to  the  accumulation  of  capital.

The  closer  examination  of  the  Turkish  provinces
in  P^urope  which  many  causes  have  recently  made
practicable  has  already  recovered  for  us  a  nearly
perfect  example  of  one  of  the  ohlest  institutions  of
the  Aryan  race — probably,  with  the  exception  of  the
Family,  the  very  oldest.  The  House  Community  is
not  peculiar  to  the  territories  and  dependencies  of  the


238  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  viir.

Turkish  Empire,  since  it  is  found  among  all  the
South  Slavonian  populations,  but  it  occurs  in  greatest
completeness  wherever  men  of  the  South  SlaTonian
stock  are  now  or  have  been  lately  under  Mussulman
government,  or  where,  hke  the  Montenegrins,  they
have  had  their  whole  history  determined  by  incessant
struggles  with  Mussulman  power.  The  importance
of  these  House  Communities  is  easily  understood  by
the  student  of  what  I  may  perhaps  venture  to  call
social  and  political  embryology.  They  are  a  living-
form,  very  near  to  us  and  constantly  brought  nearer,
of  institutions  rather  hinted  at  than  revealed  in  the
most  ancient  records  of  a  singularly  large  number  of
civilised  nations.  The  Eoman  law,  which  supplies
the  only  sure  route  by  which  the  mind  can  travel
back  without  a  check  from  civilisation  to  barbarism,
shows  us  society  organised  in  separate  families,  each
ruled  by  the  Paterfamilias,  its  despotic  chief.  But  it
also  exhibits  vestiges  of  institutions  not  wholly  for-
gotten, of  certain  associations  of  related  families
which  still  had  somethins:  in  common  and  miofht
once  have  had  a  common  life.  There  are  some  marks
of  these  associations  on  law,  and  some  more  on  re-
ligion, but  practically  in  Roman  legal  history  they
are  dead  institutions.  Next  above  the  Family,  there
were  vestiges  among  the  Romans  of  a  grouj)  which
had  no  special  collective  name,  the  Agnati,  or
Agnatic  Kindred,  the  collective  body  of  kinsmen  re-


CHAP.  vni. EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  239

lated  exclusively  through  male  descents,  who  either
were,  oi*  might  have  been,  under  the  paternal  power
of  the  same  ancestor.  Again,  above  the  Agnatic
Kindred,  there  was  yet  another  and  a  more  extensive
o-roup,  of  which  the  origin  was  lost  in  antiquity,  but
which  was  believed  by  the  Romans  themselves  to
have  been  formed  as  the  Agnati  were  formed — that  is,
by  descent  through  males  alone  from  a  real  common
male  ancestor.  This  was  the  Gens.  Nothing  can  be
more  interesting  than  to  find  alive  in  usage  these
groups  which,  as  bodies  having  a  corporate  existence,
are  dead  in  Roman  law.  There  can  be  no  reasonable
doubt  that  the  House  Community  of  the  South
Slavonians  corresponds  to  one  or  other  of  the  larger
Roman  groups,  to  the  Hellenic  yeuo^;,  the  Celtic  Sept,
the  Teutonic  Kin.  It  answers  still  more  closely  to  the
Joint  Family  of  the  Hindus,  which  is  itself  a  living
though  an  extremely  perishable  institution.  In  what
way  it  is  related  to  certain  associations  of  savage
families,  like  it  and  yet  very  unlike  it,  upon  which
our  attention  has  been  fixed  by  the  deeply  interest-
ing researches  of  Mr.  McLennan  (in  his  '  Primitive
Marriage ')  and  of  Mr.  Lewis  Morgan  (in  his
^Ancient  Society'),  is  a  point  upon  which  it  may
one  day  be  possible  to  have  a  clearer  opinion  when
the  savage  and  the  Aryan  group  have  been  fully
studied  in  the  life.^

'  See  Note  A  to  this  chapter,  on  *  The  Gens.'


240  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES. CHi.p.  viii.

Fifteen  or  twenty  years  ago  the  institutions  of
the  Slavonians  had  begun  to  attract  attention,  and  it
was  becoming  extremely  probable  that  they  would
prove  to  be  the  bridge  connecting  two  portions  of  the
earth  and  mankind  long  arbitrarily  se^^arated,  the
East  and  the  West.  The  Russian  Villao-e  Communi-
ties  were  seen  to  be  the  Indian  Village  Communities,
if  anything  in  a  more  archaic  condition  than  the
eastern  cultivating  group.  In  the  Village  Com-
munity, however,  the  bond  of  common  origin  and
kinship,  though  still  recognised  in  language  and  to
some  extent  in  feeling,  is  feeble  and  indistinct  ;  the
model  has  been  too  often  simulated  by  fictions  for
the  sense  of  reality  to  be  very  strong.  The  related
families  no  lono;er  hold  their  land  as  an  indistinoaiish-
able  common  fund — they  have  portioned  it  out,  at
most  they  redistribute  it  periodically  ;  sometimes
even  that  stage  has  been  passed.  They  are  on  the
high  road  to  modern  landed  proprietorship.  But  in
the  Joint  Family  of  the  Hindus  the  agnatic  group
of  the  Romans  absolutely  survives — or  rather,  but  for
the  Enoiish  law  and  Ensrlish  courts,  it  would  sur-
vive.  Here  there  is  a  real,  thoroughly  ascertained
common  ancestor,  a  genuine  consanguinity,  a  com-
mon fund  of  property,  a  common  dwelling.  And  the
Joint  Family  of  the  Hindus,  save  that  it  now  lasts
for  fewer  generations,  is  point  for  point  the  House
Community  of  the  South Slavonians. The  distri-


CHAP.  \ui. EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  241

bution  of  these  ancient  groups  in  the  countries  in
which  they  are  found  is  well  worth  remarking.  The
North  Slavonians  or  Russians  have  the  Village  Com-
munity. The  House  Community  belongs  specially
to  the  South  Slavonians,  the  Croatians,  Dalmatians,
Monteneorrins,  Servians,  and  the  now  Slavonised
Bulofarians.  On  the  other  hand,  in  India,  the  Joint
Family  and  the  Tillage  Community  are  often  found
side  by  side,  sometimes  mdeed  bound  together  by
complex  common  relations.  Even  there,  however,
it  has  been  observed  that,  where  joint  families  are
abundant,  the  village  organisation  is  weak  and  village
communities  are  rare  ;  and  this  is  notably  the  case
in  Lower  Bengal.

The  House  Community  then  is  an  extension  of
the  Family  :  an  association  of  several  and  even  of
many  related  families,  living  together  substantially  in
a  common  dwelling  or  group  of  dwellings,  following
a  common  occupation,  and  governed  by  a  common
chief.  The  law  or  custom  which  regulates  these
institutions  has  lately  been  subjected  to  a  close
examination  by  an  eminent  man  of  learning,  whose
writings  are  still  obscured  by  that  unfortunate  veil
of  language  which  hid(^s  Slavonian  literature  from
this  generation  of  Englishmen.  The  name  of  Pro-
fessor Bogisic  is  c(jnn(icted  with  several  places,  witii
which,  now  of  all  times,  we  should  least  expeet
to have literary associations. He  is  a native of

li


242  J':A.ST EUROrp:A>^ house communities. cnAr.  viii.

Ragusa  ;  his  last  work  is  published  by  the  Academy
of  Sciences  at  Agram  ;  he  is  a  professor  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Odessa  ;  and  he  has  codified  the  laws  of
Montenegro.  The  results  of  his  investigations  are
only  known  to  me  through  some  German  translations
of  passages  in  them,  and  through  a  summary  of  a
portion  of  them  by  M.  Fedor  Demelic.  Nothing,  in
my  opinion,  can  exceed  their  instructiveness.  They
show  us  the  very  way  in  which,  amid  a  primitive
tribal  society  of  Aryan  race,  the  personal  relations
and  ideas  of  men  become  modified  when  the  small
groups  of  which  they  form  part  are  absorbed  in  larger
assemblages,  both  the  large  and  the  small  group  being
respectively  tied  together  by  community  of  blood.
They  thus  disclose  to  us  Political  Power  in  the
embryo  :  the  Chief  growing  out  of  the  head  of  the
household,  the  State  taking  its  first  beginnings  from
the  Family.  They  are  entitled  to  take  their  place  by
the  side  of  some  recent  Indian  investigations  which
I  will  describe  presently,  as  new  materials  of  the
highest  value  for  a'  theory  of  the  condition  of  the
hio'her  races  of  men  in  a  state  of  barbarism.

It  would  appear  that  in  all  the  South  Slavonian
countries  Natural  Families,  as  they  are  called,  are
found  intermixed  with  the  House  Communities.  By
a  '  natural  family '  is  meant  a  group  consisting  of  the
descendants  of  an  ancestor  still  alive,  while  a  house
community  is (almost  invariably) an  association  of


<;hap.  Tm. EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  243

families  all  descended  from  a  common  ancestor  de-
ceased.  These  natm^al  families  have  not  been  as
carefully  examined  as  could  be  wished  ;  they  had  not
the  strangeness  of  the  house  community  in  the  eyes  of
the  observers,  who  ao-ain  show  no  sioris  of  beino;
acquainted  with  the  controversy  which  has  arisen  on
the  point  whether  the  larger  or  the  smaller  grouj)  is
the  more  ancient,  and  better  entitled  to  be  considered
the  cell  out  of  which  human  society  sprang.  I  have,
however,  no  doubt  myself,  from  a  variety  of  indica-
tions, that  these  families  are,  as  a  rule,  despotically
governed  by  the  eldest  ascendant.  Xot  only  the  legal
writers,  but  all  travellers  in  South  Slavonian  lands,
have  noticed  the  extraordinary  respect  of  the  South
Slavonians  for  old  ao;e.  '  Without  reverence  for  old
men  there  is  no  salvation,'  is  a  Servian  proverb.  '  A
father,'  says  another  Slavonian  maxim,  '  is  like  an
earthly  god  to  liis  son.'  A  less  reverent  adage  runs,
^  The  reason  why  the  devil  knows  so  much  is  that  he
is  so  extremely  old.'  Still  more  convincing  evidence  is
furnished  by  the  fact  observed  by  Professor  Bogisic,
that  the  South  Slavonians,  like  the  Romans,  maintain
a  clear  distinction  between  Agnatic  and  Cognatic  rela-
tionship, which  they  term  respectively  kinship  through
the  great  blood  and  kinship  through  the  little.  TIius
a  group  of  men,  connected  with  a  common  ancestor
through  male  descents  (natural  or  adoptive)  exclu-
3ively, are  kinsmen of  the  great blood  ; they are

K  2


244  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  viu..

kinsmen  of  the  little  blood  when  they  include  also  the
descendants  of  female  relatives.  Now  the  recognition
of  agnatic  relationship  is  good  evidence  that  patriar-
chal power  either  exists  or  has  once  existed  in  a
community ;  there  may  have  once  been  paternal
power  where  there  is  no  agnation,  but  where  there  is
agnation  there  must  almost  certainly  have  been  pater-
nal power,^  The  play,  then,  of  relation  between  the
Family  and  the  House  Community  is  exactly  what
we  observe  in  India  between  the  Family  and  the
Joint  Family.  The  family,  when  it  does  not  dissolve
by  the  swarming  off  of  tlie  children,  expands  into
the  house  community  ;  the  community  (though  not
so  often  as  in  India)  breaks  up  into  separate  natural
families.  The  process,  for  all  the  evidence  before  us,,
may  have  gone  on  from  time  immemorial.

The  House  Communities,  which  are  found  inter-
mixed with  the  natural  families,  and  which  are  con-
stantly springing  out  of  them,  are  as  far  as  possible
from  being  patriarchal  despotisms  ; and  they  illus-

2  I  learn  from  correspondence  with  Professor  Bogisid  that  the
Power  of  the  Father  is  stronger  among  the  Russians  than  among
the  South  Slavonians,  and  that  among  the  latter  it  is  stronger
near  the  coast  than  it  is  inland.  He  has  heard  a  young  man  say
to  his  father,  '  We  are  not  here  in  the  coast  country,  where  fathers
are  everything  and  sons  nothing.'  In  some  parts  of  these
countries  sons  cease  to  be  subject  to  the  father's  power  when  they
marry ;  but  in  this  case  marriage  seems  to  imply  severance  from
the  paternal  doniicil,  which  is  probably  the  Ciirliest  form  of  the
process  which  the  Romans  called  Emancipation.


•CHAP.  Till. EAST EUEOPEAX HOUSE COMMUXITIES.  245

trate  very  clearly  that  diminution  of  paternal  power
which,  as  I  have  frequently  insisted,  shows  itself
when  families,  instead  of  dissolving  at  the  death  of
an  ancestor,  hold  together  and  take  the  first  steps
towards  becoming  a  nation.  The  community  at
first  sight  is  rather  democratically  than  despotically
governed,  and  it  would  in  fact  depend  on  the  point  of
view  from  which  the  observer  regarded  it,  whether  he
considered  its  government  to  be  democratic,  aristo-
cratic, or  monarchical.  Every  member  of  the  body
has  an  absolute  rio-ht  to  be  maintained,  housed,  and
clothed  out  of  the  common  fund.  Every  daughter  of
the  associated  families  has  a  rio^ht  to  a  marriao'e
portion  when  she  marries  ;  every  son  has  a  right  to  a
provision  for  his  wife  when  he  introduces  her  into
the  community.  Every  male  of  the  brotherhood  has
a  voice  in  its  government.  The  assembly  of  kinsmen
(the  Skuptchina)  meets  every  day  as  a  rule,  generally
in  the  evening  after  work  is  over,  under  a  tree  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  common  dwelling.  All  the
affairs  of  the  community  are  tliere  discussed,  and
every  man  may  theoretically  mingle  in  the  delibera-
tions. Nevertheless,  as  a  rule,  it  is  the  old  men  who
debate  ;  the  authority  which,  as  I  before  said,  the
South  Slavonians  assign  to  old  age,  makes  the  opinion
of  the  old  far  more  weighty  than  their  indivi-
dual voice  ;  and  in  very  large  communities  it  would
.seem  that  it  is  generally  the  mature  heads  of  families


246  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  Yin.

who  attend  the  assembly.  All  this  is  exactly  in
harmony  with  what  we  know  of  the  beginnings  of
Aristocracy  throughout  the  Aryan  world  ;  but  it
should  always  be  remembered  that  if  the  association
were  habitually  militant,  both  the  old  men  and  the
youths  would  probably  fall  into  the  background,  and
the  authority  in  council  would  belong  to  the  mature
warrior  who  is  foremost  in  arms.

Under  another  aspect,  however,  the  government
of  the  community  is  monarchical,  and  at  all  times  its
most  important  member  is  the  House- Chief,  the  Do-
matchin.  He  alone  represents  the  association  in  its
dealings  with  other  persons  and  members.  The  ad-
ministration of  all  its  affairs  is  in  his  hands  :  he  allots
the  daily  tasks  ;  he  presides  at  the  common  meals
and  distributes  the  food  ;  he  reprimands  for  faults  or
delinquencies  ;  he  is  invariably  addressed  in  language
of  the  greatest  respect ;  all  rise  on  his  entrance  ;  no
one  covers  his  head  or  smokes  in  his  presence  ;  no
amusement  or  ceremony  commences  till  he  appears  or
has  announced  that  he  will  stay  away.  The  council
of  the  brotherhood  does  not  review  his  acts,  but  it  is
expected  that  he  will  submit  important  cases  to  it,
and  its  jurisdiction  is  called  into  exercise  when  new
principles  of  administration  have  to  be  settled.  The
women  of  the  community,  it  should  be  stated,  are  not
directly  under  his  authority  ;  there  is  a  house -mother
who  appoints  their  work,  but  she  is,  whenever  it  is


CHAP.  viiT. EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  247

possible,  the  wife  of  the  house-chief,  and  is  always
subordinate  to  him.

The  mode  of  appointing  the  House- Chief  is  in  the
highest  degree  interesting,  and  throws  a  strong  light
on  a  number  of  problems  which  meet  us  in  the
ancient  history  of  the  kingly  office.  The  student  of
political  embryology  is  familiar  with  the  seeming
contradictions  between  the  facts  just  seen  in  the  dim
light  which  surrounds  the  beginnings  of  royal  power.
Sometimes  the  office  of  the  Chief  or  Kino-  seems
wholly  elective,  and  its  bestowal  entirely  determined
by  personal  fitness  ;  sometimes  it  appears  to  be  here-
ditary, but  then  it  is  quite  uncertain  whether  it  will
descend  to  the  brother  or  to  the  eldest  son  of  the  last
sovereign  ;  in  general  the  office  is  confined  to  men,
yet  here  and  there  a  woman  in  certain  eventualities
becomes  lady  or  queen.  Very  ingenious  explanations
of  these  phenomena  have  lately  been  suggested.  But
the  system  of  choosing  the  South  Slavonian  house-
chief,  while  it  exhibits  exactly  tlic  same  apparent
uncertainty,  shows  at  the  same  time  that  it  arises
from  a  very  natural  and  intelligible  cause — from  the
conflict  between  a  sentiment  and  a  necessity,  between
a  very  powerful  feeling  of  respect  for  l)lood  and  a  ver}^
clear  sense  of  the  pressure  of  the  facts  of  life.  First,
the  chief  is  elected  by  the  collective  brotherhood  ;
but  the  brotherhood  rarely,  if  ever,  fiils  to  choose  a
member  of  the  family  connected with  the  common


248  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  viir.

ancestor  through  descents  of  primogeniture.  Its  in-
clination would  be  to  choose  the  eldest  son  of  the
last  chief,  but  its  veneration  for  age,  and  its  sense  of
the  value  of  experience  as  a  means  of  success  in  the
struggle  for  existence,  lead  it  constantly  to  elect  the
next  brother  of  the  last  administrator.  By  its  strong
appreciation  of  the  importance  of  individual  capacity
it  is  led  occasionally  to  put  a  woman  at  its  head —
who  in  this  case  is  quite  distinct  from  the  house-
mother, governing  the  women  under  the  house-chief.
The  practice  of  electing  a  woman  to  the  chieftainship
appears  to  be  less  common  than  was  supposed  by
the  travellers  who  first  observed  the  house  commu-
nities, and  it  is  not  impossible  that  they  failed  to
discriminate  between  the  two  shapes  which  the  author-
ity of  the  house-mother  takes.  But  undoubtedly
a  woman  is  occasionally  placed  not  only  over  the
women,  but  over  the  men  of  the  community,  and
wherever  this  occurs  it  is  for  reasons  of  her  especial
fitness  to  undertake  the  administration.  The  leading
case  mentioned  by  my  authorities  is  where  a  consider-
able part  of  the  revenue  of  a  community  was  derived
from  a  boarding-school  for  girls  kept  by  the  ladies
belonging  to  it.  Of  course,  no  such  reason  as  this
for  choosing  a  woman  to  rule  could  have  had  effect  in
primaeval  ages,  or  even  at  the  dawn  of  history.  The
explanation  of  the  early  female  successions  to  sove-
reignties and  lordships  no  doubt  is  that  the  circum-


•CHAP.  vin. EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  249

stances  of  the  time  allowed  unchecked  play  to  respect
for  the  claims  of  blood  ;  the  men  being  exhausted,  a
woman  was  taken  rather  than  a  new  strain  of  blood
introduced.  Nevertheless,  these  Slavonian  pheno-
mena suggest  that,  even  in  the  primitive  militant
communities,  eminent  capacity  in  a  woman  might
overweigh  the  disadvantages  of  sex,  and  that  every
now  and  then  a  Deborah  or  an  Artemisia  might  rule
the  tribe  as  the  house- mother  rules  the  house  com-
munity. Sometimes,  it  should  be  noted,  the  woman
chosen  is  the  widow  of  the  last  chief,  who  during  his
lifetime  shared  his  authority,  more  particularly  over
the  females  of  the  household.

It  appears  to  be  a  general  rule  of  all  these  house
communities  that  the  capital  stock  or  fund  necessary
for  carrying  on  the  busmess  of  the  association  is  in-
capable of  alienation.  The  nature  of  this  alienable
property  varies  a  good  deal  ;  thus,  witli  a  community
of  vine-growers,  the  fermenting  vats  cannot  be  parted
with  ;  and  it  is  the  usage  with  associations  of  dis-
tillers to  apply  the  ?same  principle  to  the  apparatus  of
distillation.  But  the  great  majority  of  the  house
communities  are  purely  agricultural,  and  it  is  remark-
aVjle  that  the  property  which  the  custom  of  these
communities  makes  inalienaljle  corresponds  very
closely  to  the  res  mancipi  of  the  older  Roman  law  :
that  is  to  say,  it  consists  of  land  and  plough  oxen.  Jt
has  often  been  suggested — by  myself  among  others


250  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE CO^LMUXITIES. chap,  yiil

— that  the  objects  placed  by  the  Romans  in  the  high-
est class  of  property  were  the  commodities  of  first
importance  to  an  agricultural  people  ;  and  though  we
only  know  the  Roman  res  mancipi  as  alienable  under
certain  circumstances,  the  very  complexity  of  the  for-
malities required  for  alienation  furnishes  a  hint  that
they  once  constituted  the  inalienable  capital  stock  of
the  ancient  Latin  cultivatino-  communities.  But  these
recently  observed  facts  from  Eastern  Europe  suggest
some  new  ideas,  not  only  concerning  the  res  mancipi
but  also  and  more  particularly  concerning  that  other
and  technically  inferior  class  of  property,  the  res  nee
mancipi^  in  which  the  Romans  placed  all  the  objects
of  enjoyment  not  mcluded  in  the  higher  division  of
things.  I  myself  conjectured,  some  years  ago,  that
the  articles  not  enumerated  among  the  favoured
objects  seem  to  have  been  placed  on  a  lower  standmg,
'  because  the  knowledge  of  their  value  was  posterior
to  the  epoch  at  which  the  catalogue  of  superior  pro-
perty was  settled.  They  were  at  first  unknown,  rare,
limited  in  their  uses,  or  else  regarded  as  mere  appen-
dages to  the  privileged  objects.'  I  still  think  this  de-
scription of  the  res  nee  mancipi  probably  true  of  some
stages  of  primitive  society,  and  if  the  last  words,
'appendages  to  tiie  privileged  objects,'  be  understood
of  the  products  as  distinguished  from  the  instruments
of  labour,  I  think  they  are  also  true  of  the  social
stage  of  the  ancient  world  to  which  the  Slavonian


CHAP.  Tin. E.\ST EUROPEAX HOUSE COMMUXITIES.  251

house  communities  most  nearly  correspond.  It  may
be  supposed  that  the  earliest  cultivatmg  communities
were  barely  self-sufficing  ;  that  they  never  parted
with  their  instruments  of  tillage,  and  consumed  all
the  fruits  which  the  earth  yielded  to  their  labour.
But  as  production  became  more  abundant,  as  intervals
of  peace  became  less  rare,  as  common  markets  were
gradually  established,  economical  forces  would  begm
to  operate  with  greater  activity,  and  the  res  nee
mancipi  would  obtain  their  first  step  in  dignity  as
commodities  exchangeable  at  a  profit.  All  the  sur-
plus produce  of  the  domain  would  be  res  nee  maneipi,
and,  if  not  stored,  would  be  bartered  or  sold.  AYe
can  see  from  the  Slavonian  examples  that  some  things
inckided  in  the  higher  class  might  locally  and  occa-
sionally Ijc  dealt  with  as  belonging  to  the  lower.  The
Roman  /y^  maneipi — land,  slaves,  horses,  and  oxen —
would  no  doubt  answer  to  the  commodities  which
primitive  agriculturists  would  almost  everywhere
regard  as  properly  inalienable,  ])ut  it  is  likely  that
Kom.an  authority  generalised  the  usage  beyond  its
primitive  area.  A  comnumity  of  cattle-breeders
would  regard  oxen  as  eminently  exchangeable,  and
even  an  agricultural  community  may  originally  have
confined  the  inalienability  to  the  oxen  which  served
as  Ijeasts  of  ])longh.

J*e<ullurft — ji few  head  of  oxen kept  n])art — was
the name  which  the  Romans  gave  to  the  permissive


252  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  viii.

separate  property  allowed  to  son  or  slave.  No  prin-
ciple was  more  persistent  in  Roman  law  than  the  sub-
jection of  the  pecidmm  to  the  authority  of  the  pater-
familias or  the  master,  should  he  choose  to  exercise
it ;  and  the  independent  holding  of  the  peculium,  even
by  sons,  was  secured  only  by  very  late  legislation.
These  Slavonian  usages  and  the  experience  of  the
Slavonian  communities  sive  us  reason  to  believe  that
the  separate  holding  of  property  by  the  members  of
the  brotherhood  had  a  much  more  important  influ-
ence in  other  societies  than  it  had  in  one  so  sternly
tenacious  of  a  central  principle  as  the  Roman.  The
peculium  seems  to  be  always  an  actively  dissolving
force.  It  had  this  effect  to  some  extent  with  the
Romans,  but  with  the  Hindus  it  is  the  great  cause
of  the  dissolution  of  the  joint  families,  and  it  seems  to
be  equally  destructive  in  the  South  Slavonian  coun-
tries. When  the  house  community  is  in  its  primitive
and  natural  state,  there  is  no  peculium  :  there  is  none
in  Montenegro  ;  the  dominant  notion  there  is  that,  as
the  community  is  liable  for  the  delinquencies  of  its
members,  it  is  entitled  to  receive  all  the  produce  of
their  labour  ;  and  thus  the  fundamental  rule  of  these
communities,  as  of  the  Hindu  joint  families,  is  that  a
member  workino-  or  tradincr  at  a  distance  from  the  seat
of  the  brotherhood  ought  to  account  to  it  for  his  profits.
But,  as  in  India,  all  sorts  of  exceptions  to  this  rule
tend  to  grow  up  ; the  most  ancient  and  most  widely


CHAP.  Yin. EAST EUROPEAX HOUSE COMMUXITIES.  25o-

accepted  appearing  to  be,  that  property  acquired  by
extremely  dangerous  adventure  belongs  independently
to  the  adventurer.  Thus,  even  in  MontenegTO,  spoil
of  vrav  is  retained  by  the  taker,  and  on  the  Adriatic
coast  the  ])rofits  of  distant  maritime  trade  have  from
time  immemorial  been  reserved  to  seafaring  members
of  these  brotherhoods.  But  the  reluctance  to  sur-
render individual  o;ains  is  a  sentiment  observed  to  be
gaining  in  force  everywhere,  and,  in  connection  with
some  other  causes  which  I  will  mention  afterwards,  it
universally  tends  to  bring  about  the  dissolution  of
the  communities.  Doubtless  it  was  always  among
the  most  potent  of  the  influences  which  began  to
transform  the  old  world  of  consanguinity  into  the
new  world  of  economical  relation.

The  situation  of  women  in  the  primitive  groups
of  barbarous  Aryans,  is  a  topic  which  calls  for  much
ampler  and  more  minute  discussion  than  can  be  given
to  it  within  my  present  limits.  I  will,  however,
briefly  note  one  or  two  points  among  a  considerable
number  which  deserve  separate  treatment,  (a)  The
house  community  of  the  South  Slavonians,  like
the  joint  family  of  the  Hindus,  is  primarily  a  com-
munity of  males.  Tlie  daught<*rs  are  entitled  to.
be  maiTied  and  portioned  at  its  expense,  and  steps
are  taken  to  bring  about  their  marriage  before
any  son  is  married,  l>ut  they  have  no  right  to  anj-
.s  fin  re of  the capital stock on the rare occasions;


254  EAST EUROPEAX HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  vtii.

on  which  it  is  divided,  (b)  At  present  a  certain
hberty  is  allowed  to  them  in  the  choice  of  a  hus-
band, but  in  the  South  Slavonian  lands,  as  else-
where, there  are  many  vestiges  of  infant  marriage.
Down  to  quite  recently,  a  Christian  girl  in  Eastern
Europe  was  irrevocably  betrothed,  though  not  married,
in  early  childhood,  (c)  The  wives  of  the  confederated
kinsmen  brought  into  the  community  from  outside
have  their  marriage  portion  reserved  to  them  as
separate  property  or  peculium^  and  a  certain  amount
of  money  or  goods  (which  many  customs  enable  us  to
trace  to  the  ancient  institution  of  the  '  morning  gift ' )
is  held  by  them  independently,  not  only  of  the  collec-
tive group,  but  of  their  husbands,  {d)  In  some  of  the
house  communities  both  this  property  and  the  mar-
riage portion,  both  the  parapherna  and  the  clos^
descend,  like  the  Hindu  Stridhan,  by  a  peculiar  line
of  succession  to  female  inheritresses.

Like  all  branches  of  the  Aryan  race  which  remain
in  a  condition  still  savouring  of  barbarism,  but  which
have  not  adopted  Mahommedan  institutions,  the
South  Slavonians  bring  their  wives  into  the  groups
in  which  they  are  socially  organised  from  a  consider-
able distance  outside.  To  this  '  exogamy,'  in  the
primitive  militant  state,  they  no  doubt  owed  hardi-
hood, physical  vigour,  and  relative  success,  in  the
struggle  for  existence  ;  and  at  the  present  moment
the  common  residence  of  so  many  persons  of  both


CHAP.  YiiT. EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  255

sexes  in  the  same  household  may  be  said  to  be  only-
possible  through  their  belief  that  any  union  of  kins-
men and  kinswomen  would  be  mcestuous.  The  South
Slavonian  Table  of  Prohibited  Degrees  is  extremely
wide.  Every  marriage  which  requires  an  ecclesiasti-
cal dispensation  is  regarded  as  disreputable  ;  and,
though  the  rule  of  ecclesiastical  jurisprudence  on  pro-
hibitions against  intermarriage  is  tolerably  followed,  it
is  rendered  excessively  stringent  by  a  peculiar  method
of  counting  the  degrees.  The  distaste  of  the  South
Slavonians  for  suing  in  the  Turkish  Courts  is  largely
caused  by  these  ideas  about  intermarriage.  Mahom-
medanism,  as  I  before  stated,  is  an  '  endogamous '
religion  ;  it  derives  from  its  Semitic  origin  a  rather
limited  Table  of  Prohibited  Degrees  ;  and  thus  a
Turkish  Court,  though  not  jDrofessing  to  apply  the
Mahommedan  rules,  is  constantly  found  admittiii"'
the  legitimacy  of  children  born  of  a  marriage  which
the  Christian  Slavonians  consider  to  be  incestuous.
Nobody  can  wonder  at  the  repugnance  of  the  Slavo-
nians towards  entering  the  Turkish  Courts  as  liti-
gants in  cases  where  their  women  are  concerned  ;  l)iit
undoubtedly  some  of  the  principles  which  they  accuse
the  Turkish  judges  of  applying  have  more  in  common
with  our  ideas  than  with  theirs.  Besides  this  com-
plaint on  the  subject  of  intermarriage  and  legitimacy,
the  Slavonians  are  said  l^y  I*rofessor  Bogisic  to
resent the application of rules, Mahommedan in


256  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES. chap.  vni.

origin,  to  the  inheritance  of  property  by  women.
Under  Mahommedan  law,  wherever  sons  and  daugh-
ters take  together,  the  daughters  take  half  a  son's
share.  Now  the  custom  of  the  house  communities
excludes  the  daughters  from  any  share  when  the
common  fund  is  divided,  either  at  a  death  or  otherwise.
The  deeply  rooted  and  very  ancient  notion  is  that  an
unmarried  daughter  is  only  entitled  to  maintenance,
and  that  a  married  daughter  is  finally  and  exclusively
provided  for  by  her  marriage  portion.

I  have  here  noticed  the  practices  called  by  Mr.
McLennan  '  exogamy '  and  '  endogamy  '  chiefly  for
the  purpose  of  calling  attention  to  the  manifold  and
surprismg  fictions  by  which  an  inherited  sense  of  the
advantage  of  exogamy  and  of  the  disadvantage  of
close  intermarriage  is  re'conciled  with  the  doctrine
of  the  Eastern  Church  on  the  point.  It  is  to  be
remarked  that  every  variety  of  fiction  heretofore
observed  among  ancient  societies  held  together  by  the
assumption  of  common  descent  is  found  among  the
Christian  Slavonians  of  Eastern  Europe.  Kinship  is
in  the  first  place  created  artificially  by  Adoption,  and
in  this  case  the  adopted  member  of  a  family  or  house
community  is  assimilated  to  the  naturally  born  kins-
man for  all  purposes  indiscriminately.  Entire  sub-
families are  engrafted  on  the  house  communities  ;
individuals  are  taken  into  the  subfamilies  ;  and  occa-
sionally aged  men,  strangers  in  blood  to  the  brother-


CHAP.  Till. EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUiS^ITIES.  257

hood,  are  admitted  to  a  place  among  the  elders  of
the  jomt  household  from  whom  labour  is  no  longer
exacted  or  expected.  It  seems  to  be  a  universal  con-
dition of  the  Slavonian  adoption,  that  the  person  or
family  received  into  the  house  community  shall  be
virtually  without  natural  ties  through  the  death  or
emigration  of  the  natural  kindred  :  a  precaution
which  may  remind  us  of  the  extreme  care  bestowed
by  the  Roman  College  of  Pontiffs,  that  the  ceremonial
observ^ances  of  two  families  should  not  be  confounded
through  a  precipitate  adoption.  But  besides  the  arti-
ficial adoptive  relation,  Avhich  stands  for  all  purposes
on  the  same  level  as  natural  connection  of  blood,  there
are  numerous  other  fictitious  relationships  which
exist  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  intermar-
riage. Several  of  these  correspond  to  the  fictitious
ties  which  are  shown  by  their  ancient  law  to  have
been  common  among  the  Celtic  Irish  at  the  opposite
end  of  Europe.  Thus  the  relation  of  foster-parent
to  foster-child  creates  relations  between  their  respec-
tive families  which  operate  as  a  bar  to  intermarriage.
Gossipred,  spiritual  parentage,  the  connection  between
sponsor  and  godchild,  has  the  same  effects  among  the
South  Slavonians  which  it  once  had  over  the  whole
Christian  world.  l>ut  there  are  in  Eastern  Europe
forms  of  fictitious  consanguinity  hitherto  unknown  to
tlie  study  of  ancient  institutions.  The  groomsman
at  a  wedding  comes  under  a  set  of  rules  which  restrict


258  EAST EUROPEANS' HOUSE COMMUNITIES. chap.  tut.

intermarriage  with  the  family  of  the  bride  to  just  the
same  effect  as  if  he  had  been  naturally  the  brother  of
the  bridegroom. Confraternity,  fictitious  brotherhood
— which  is  an  artificial  creation  of  fraternity,  just  as
adoption  is  an  artificial  creation  of  parentage — retains
probably  in  these  Slavonian  lands  the  shape  which  it
wore  in  more  westerly  countries  before  it  became  the
central  principle  of  so  many  orders  of  knighthood  ;  it
is  solemnised  with  a  special  ritual  of  the  Slavo- Greek
Church,  and  it  is  the  source  of  a  special  Table  of
Prohibited  Degrees. But  perhaps  the  most  singular
illustration  of  the  tendency  of  kinship  to  extend  itself
artificially  under  the  empire  of  primitive  ideas  is  to
be  found  in  certain  Slavonic  forms  of  gossipred  or
spiritual  relationship. Here  we  have  fiction  upon
fiction. The  relation  of  sponsor  to  godchild  imitates
consanguinity  ;  the  Slavonian  gossipred  imitates  the
ecclesiastical  gossipred. A  man  whose  life  is  endan-
gered by  the  enmity  of  another  may  make  him  an
offer  of  what  is  called  gossipred  by  misfortune. If
the  enemy  refuses,  he^  may  be  lawfully  killed  even  by
treachery. If  he  accepts,  he  becomes  connected  with
his  former  adversary  by  a  kind  of  spiritual  relation-
ship, and  is  in  fact  compelled  to  become  sponsor  to
his  next-born  child. These  peculiar  artificial  relations
in  the  wilder  Slavonian  countries,  and  particularly
in  Montenegro,  are  found  extremely  useful  in  stamich-
ing  blood-feuds. When  a  momentary  reconciliation


CHAP.  Ylil. EAST EUROPEAX HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  259

has  been  effected  by  friends  or  neighbours  between
Montenegrin  Capulets  and  Montagues,  it  is  common
to  give  it  stability  by  insisting  that  the  heads  of  the
contending  houses  shall  become  spiritually  related  to
one  another.  The  expedient  is  well  known  as  the
gossipred  of  reconciliation.  The  truth  is  that  mere
sentiment  has  not  among  these  people  solidity
enouo-h  to  form  a  bindino;  tie  between  man  and  man.
If  it  is  to  bear  the  ordinary  strains  of  barbarous
life,  it  must  have  a  core  of  fictitious  consanguinity.

I  stated  that  the  House  Communities  and  Natural
Families  which  make  up  the  bulk  of  South  Slavonian
society  are  constantly  running  into  one  another ;  the
community  dissolving  into  a  mere  collection  of  fami-
lies, the  family  expanding  into  the  community.  But
both  these  groups  occasionally  dissolve  in  other  ways,
and  some  instruction  may  be  obtained  from  observing
the  mode  of  dissolution.  When  a  natural  family
breaks  up,  room  is  made,  I  need  scarcely  say,  for  the
operation  of  the  body  of  rules  which  we  call  Inheri-
tance ;  and  in  those  portions  of  the  South  Slavonian
countries  which  are  under  Codes,  as,  for  example,
those  which  belong  to  the  Austro-IIungarian  Mon-
archy, the  law  settles  the  distribution  of  the  family
i'und,  and  to  some  extent  the  personal  relations  of  the
kinsmen  to  one  another.  But  where,  as  in  Turkey,
the  local  usage  is  left  to  its  unchecked  operation,  one
of  the  systems  of  succession  commonly  followed  has

s  a


2 GO  EAST EUROPE.\X HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  viii.

a  great  deal  of  interest  for  us.  Each  son  of  the  family,
as  he  grows  up  and  marries,  leaves  his  father's  house-
hold, taking  with  him  the  share  of  its  possessions
which  under  developed  law  would  have  devolved
upon  him  at  his  father's  death,  and  he  goes  elsewhere,
often  into  a  far  country,  to  seek  a  new  fortune.  Per-
haps there  are  few  things  which  at  first  sight  seem  to
have  a  more  distant  connection  with  one  another  than
the  customs  of  Primogeniture  and  Borough  English
and  the  Scriptural  parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son.  Yet
precisely  the  same  group  of  usages  lies  at  the  root  of
the  institution  and  gives  its  point  to  the  story.  The
division  of  the  family  property  does  not  wait  for  the
father's  death.  The  son  who  wishes  to  leave  the
family  home  takes  his  share  with  him,  and  goes  abroad
to  add  to  it  or  waste  it.  The  son  who  remains  at
home  continues  under  patria  potestas^  serving  his
father  and  never  transgressing  his  commandments,
but  entitled  at  his  death  to  the  entire  remnant  of  his
property.  '  Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all  that
I  have  is  thine,'  says  the  father  in  the  parable,  and
this  is  precisely  the  foundation  of  the  rule  of  ancient
law.  Which  mdeed  shall  be  the  home- staying  son  is
a  point  on  which  there  has  been  much  diversity  of
usage.  In  the  Scriptural  example,  it  is  the  eldest
son.  Primogeniture,  as  we  know  it  in  our  law,  had
rather  a  political  than  a  civil  origin,  and  comes  from
the  authority  of  the  feudal  lord  and  probably  from


CRAP.  Till. EAST I-:UKOPE.A>s' HOUSE COMMUXITIES.  261

that  of  the  tribal  chief :  but  here  and  there  on  the
Continent  there  are  traces  of  it  as  a  civil  institution,
and  in  such  cases  the  succession  of  the  eldest  son  does
not  exclude  pro^^sion  for  the  yoiuiger  sons  by  what
are  called  ajipanages.  The  evidence  of  ancient  law
and  usasfe  would,  however,  seem  to  show  that  it  was
usually  the  youngest  son  who  remained  at  home  with
his  father  to  serve  him  through  hfe  and  succeed  to
his  remaining  property  at  his  death  :  and  thus  the
Slavonian  usage  accurately  reflects  the  earliest  stage
of  the  Enorlish  custom  of  Borouo^h  Eno-Hsh.^

If  we  take  a  survey  of  the  Slavonian  usages  as
a  whole  we  shall  have  little  doubt  that  the  natural
development  of  the  House  Community  would  be  into
the  Village  Community.  It  has  almost  universally
assumed  this  form  in  the  Russian  territories.  The
number  of  families  included  in  the  brotherhood  has
now  become  much  larger.  Professor  Bogisic  says
that  the  house  communities  rarely  include  more  than
sixty  individuals,  which  is  greatly  less  than  tlie
number  of  persons  making  up  tlie  community  of  an
Indian  or  Russian  village.  But  with  tlie  extensions
have  come  a  variety  of  changes.  The  land,  instead
of  being  cultivated  absolutely  in  common,  is  divided
Ixitween  the  component  families,  the  lots  shifting
among  them  periodically,  or  perhaps  vesting  in  them

^  See  VAUm,  Orlyins  of  Ewjlish  llistorij,  pp.  184  ei  seq. Mr.
Eltori*H  work  is  rich  in  new  information  on  this  subject.


262  EAST EUROrEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  viir.

as  their  property,  subject  to  a  power  in  the  collective
body  of  villagers  to  veto  its  sale. The  tie  of  brother-
hood has  also  become  greatly  weakened  ;  all  sorts  of
fictions  have  enfeebled  it,  and  so  many  strangers  in
blood  have  been  admitted, that  the tradition  of  a
common  origin  is  dim  or  lost. The  common  house
of  the  House  Communities  tends  constantly  in  the
South Slavonian countries to become  a group  of
dwellings,  but  the  Village  Community  is  essentially
an assemblage of separate houses, each ruled by
its  own  chief. The  reason  why  the Southern  com-
munities have  held compactly together, while the
Northern  communities  have relaxed and  extended
themselves,  can  in  the  main  only  be  guessed  at  ;  but
we  can  hardly  be  very  wrong  in  conjecturing  that
the  nearness  or  remoteness  of  Mahommedan  power
had  a  great  deal  to  do  with  it. This  Mahommedan
power  is  doubtless  the  secret  of  the  survival  of  both
forms  of  the  community  ;  but  the  South  Slavonian
communities,  closer  to  the  headquarters  of  Ottoman
dominion,  needed  a  stronger  and  more  compact  orga-
nisation to  protect  their  possessions,  institutions,  and
faith,  while  the  Russian  populations  were  only  occa-
sionally and  mtermittently  scourged  by  the  invasions
of  their Tartar  suzerain. In  comparatively  recent
times,  the  house  communities have chiefly  had  to
complain  of  irregular  exactions  from  their  Turkish
masters  ;  on  the  wliole  the  Turkish  Government  has


CHAP.  Till, EAST EUKOPEAN' HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  263

encouraged  them,  just  as  the  French  feudal  lords
seem  to  have  encouraged  the  house  communities
lately  discovered  in  France,  on  account  of  their  rela-
tive opulence,  and  on  account  of  the  better  security
thus  afforded  for  the  punctual  payment  of  taxes  and
dues.

Assuming  that  the  decay  or  dissolution  of  the
House  Communities  is  matter  of  regret,  there  is  no
doubt  as  to  the  quarter  in  which  they  find  their  most
dangerous  foes.  It  is  not  barbarism  which  they
have  to  dread,  but  civilisation.  All  the  recent  ob-
servers of  the  South  Slavonian  communities  lament
the  influence  of  modern  codes  in  undermining  or
destroying  them.  The  same  destructive  effects  are
attributed  to  the  older  Austrian  code  which  is  in  force
on  the  Eastern  shores  of  the  Adriatic,  and  to  the
newer  laws  introduced  into  the  Slavonic  lands  de-
pendent on  the  Hungarian  Crown.  I  can  well  be-
lieve these  statements,  as  1  have  frequently  observed
the  unintended  disintegration  of  the  Indian  joint
families  by  the  less  violent  operation  of  Anglo-Indian
law.  Legal  maxims  apparently  the  most  innocent
prove  to  be  fraught  with  peril.  Long  since  I  pointed
out  that  the  widespread  principle  of  modern  law,
'  Nemo  in  conimunione  potest  invitus  detineri^  '  No
one  can  be  kept  in  co-ownership  against  his  will,'
was  irreconcilable  with  archaic  usaffc :  and  Professor
Bogi.^ici  dwells  on  the  destructiveness  of  a  well-known


264


EAST  EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  yiii.


doctrine  of  the  eminent  German  jurist,  Puchta,  that,
where  a  law  and  an  usage  are  at  conflict,  the  same
rules  of  interpretation  should  be  applied  in  harmonis-
ing them  which  are  employed  to  reconcile  two  contra-
dictory provisions  of  law.  It  is  very  justly  objected
that  laws  theoretically  proceed  from  the  same  legis-
lator, who  is  assumed  to  have  contradicted  himself
by  accident,  whereas  law  and  usage  constantly  spring
from  historically  different  sources.  The  tendency  of
modern  courts  administering  modern  law  is  in  short
to  look  upon  the  house  communities  as  bodies  of
voluntary  partners,  and  to  draw  from  it  the  inference
that  they  may  dissolve  at  the  will  either  of  any  one
associate  or  at  all  events  of  a  majority.

These  purely  legal  causes  of  dissolution  are  further
strengthened  by  economical  causes,  which  now  con-
stantly tend,  as  probably  they  have  always  tended,  to
sap  all  associations  founded  on  consanguinity.  The
adventurous  and  energetic  member  of  the  brother-
hood is  always  rebelling  against  its  natural  com-
munism. He  goes  abroad  and  makes  his  fortune,
and  strenuously  resists  the  demand  of  his  relatives  to
bring  it  into  the  common  account.  Or  perhaps  he
thinks  that  his  share  of  the  common  stock  would  be
more  profitably  employed  by  him  as  capital  in  a
mercantile  venture.  In  either  case  he  becomes  a  dis-
satisfied member  or  a  declared  enemy  of  the  brother-
hood. And  just  where  this  kind  of  discontent  is


CHAP.  Tin. EAST EUKOPEAX HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  265

commonest,  the  facilities  for  indulging  it  are  greatest.
For  the  Slavonian  countries  which  have  Codes  are  of
course  the  best  governed  Slavonian  comitries.  There
wealth  is  more  easily  obtained,  and  its  preservation
is  easier ;  and  there  also  the  courts  of  justice  are
open  to  arguments  which,  if  successful,  are  fatal  to
the  cohesion  of  the  house  communities,  because  they
appeal  to  principles  born  amid  a  civilisation  to  which
the  ancient  natural  associations  of  mankind  were
foreign  or  unknown.  The  first  French  E evolution
has  sometimes  been  cliaro^ed  with  havino-  left  its  chief
mark  on  law  in  an  excessive  preference  for  partitions
and  for  sharply  drawn  lines  of  division  between
proprietaiy  rights  ;  and  it  has  been  thought  to
have  thus  led  by  reaction  to  the  modern  theories  of
Socialism  and  Communism.  But  this  preference  is
as  characteristic  of  the  Roman  law  as  of  the  French
Code  ;  and  in  fact  the  Austrian  Code,  which  has
proved  so  fatal  to  the  house  communities,  was  begun
before  the  Revolution  by  the  Emperor  Joseph  II.  I
have  no  doubt  that  the  peculiarity  is  less  attributable
to  the  discontents  of  the  eighteenth  century"  than  to
its  growing  wealth,  and  to  the  increasing  activity  of
all  economical  forces.

The  legal  history  of  the  North  Slavonians  seems
likely  to  furnish  us  with  a  mass  of  information  on
the  mode  in  which  feudal  lordships  and  the  kinds  of
property  dependent  upon  them  grew  out  of  tlie  older


266  EAST EUROFEAX HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  yrir.

social  and  proprietary  organisations.  But  the  South
Slavonian  House  Community  I  believe  to  be  older  in
order  of  development  than  the  Village  Community  of
the  Eussians,  and  hence  it  helps  little  to  throw  light
on  the  most  difficult  of  all  historico -legal  problems^
the  rise  of  feudal  ownership.  One  significant  state-
ment is  however  made,  that  on  the  Austrian  military
frontier,  where  house  communities  were  planted  on
lands  held  by  a  tenure  of  military  service,  the  au-
thority of  the  house- chief  assumed  more  and  more
of  a  despotic  character,  and  he  could  sometimes
be  hardly  distinguished  from  a  sole  owner  of  the
originally  common  domain.

These  new  Slavonian  materials  for  a  theory  of  the
growth  of  Aryan  society,  valuable  as  they  are,  have
one  drawback  ;  they  are  the  phenomena  of  tribal
groups  which  for  a  long  period  of  time  have  not  been
fully  exposed  to  the  stern  process  of  natural  selec-
tion. The  Mahommedan  governments  above  them
have  on  the  whole  prevented  their  engaging  in  war
or  brigandage  ;  if  they  have  fought,  it  has  generally
been  against  a  common  Mussulman  foe.  Fortunately,
it  has  just  now  become  possible  to  place  by  their  side
another  set  of  novel  facts,  gleaned  by  an  Indian
observer  from  an  Aryan  society  which  has  hardly
ceased  to  be  violently  disturbed.  These  results,  ob-
tained by  actual  inspection  of  Rajputana,  the  home
of  the  Rajput  clans,  are  in  fact  related  to  the  results


CHAP.  Yin. EAST ja^EOPEAX HOUSE CO.ADIUXITIES.  267

of  Professor  Bogisid,  as  are  the  phenomena  of  bar-
barous and  militant  to  the  phenomena  of  barbarous
but  peaceful  communities.  Excellent  observers  have
never  been  wanting  in  the  Indian  services,  but  it
is  the  exceptional  distinction  of  Sir  Alfred  Lyall,
the  gentleman  to  whom  I  am  referring,  that  he
understands  the  nature  of  the  problems  suggested
/  by  the  most  recent  archaeological  research  ;  and  thus
his  appointment  to  a  Commissionership  in  the  wild
province  of  Berar  in  Central  India,  and  to  the  high
office  of  Agent  of  the  Governor- General  in  Raj-
putana,  may  be  said  to  have  begun  a  new  epoch  in
the  investigation  of  Indian  Aryan  usage  in  the  stage
most  conveniently  called  barbarous.  For  what  fol-
lows I  am  indebted  to  his  writings,  now  collected  in
a  volume  called  '  Asiatic  Studies  ;  '  and  more  parti-
cularly to  chapter  vii.,  on  the  'Formation  of  Clans
and  Castes,'  and  chapter  viii.,  on  '  The  Rajput  States
of  India.'

The  Social  system  of  Rajputana  is  pure  clanship  ;
society  is  held  together  entirely  by  the  tie  of  blood  ;
nor  is  there  any  serious  question  that  its  kernel  con-
sists of  Aryans,  still  barbarous,  indeed,  but  of  the
purest  breed.  Though  the  pretension  is  resisted  by
the  Brahmans,  the  Rajputs  claim  to  represent  the
ancient  regal  and  military  caste  of  the  Sanscrit  reli-
gious literature,  the  Kchatryas.  The  circumstance
that villages of Rajputs,  often of  a  very  humble


268  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES. CHAr.  viii.

station,  are  occasionally  found  over  most  of  Xorthern
India,  admits  of  a  simple  explanation.  Originally  a
conquering  and  military  race,  the  Eajputs  seem  to
have  been  first  weakened  by  the  attacks  of  indigenous
tribes  of  humbler  origin,  and  finally  overwhelmed  by
Maliommedan  conquest.  Some  of  them  bowed  their
necks  to  the  yoke,  and  remained  as  peaceful  culti-
vators in  the  plains  of  India  ;  but  others  migrated
into  the  great  natural  fastness  now  called  from  them
Rajputana,  where  they  founded  societies  all  of  one
type.  The  valour  of  the  Eajputs  and  the  strength
of  their  country  long  preserved  them  from  being
reduced  into  mere  subjects  of  the  Mogul,  but  perhaps
their  greatest  influence  has  been  derived  from  their
intense  pride  in  blood  and  birth.  No  princesses  were
so  much  coveted  for  wives  by  the  emperors  at  Agra
and  Delhi  as  the  daughters  of  Oodeypore  and  Jey-
pore  ;  and  alliance  with  them  is  still  regarded  by
Hindus  as  above  all  price.  The  lowest  point,  how-
ever, which  their  fortunes  reached  was  just  before  the
British  conquest  of  Northern  India  ;  no  states  owe
more  to  the  success  of  the  British  arms,  and  none  are
governed  by  princes  more  loyal  to  the  British  Crown.
These  Rajput  clans  have  long  been  recognised  as
in  the  highest  degree  interesting  and  worthy  of  the
most  careful  observation.  As  I  said  before,  good
observers  of  social  phenomena  have  been  plentiful  in
India,  but  unfortunately,  in  the  case  of  Rajputana,


CHAP.  Tin. EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  269

the  interpretation  of  the  phenomena  has  been  much
\itiated  by  a  false  historical  theory.  One  of  the  most
careful,  learned,  and  valuable  books  ever  written
about  India  is  Tod's  'Rajasthan,'  but  the  author
laboured  under  the  erroneous  impression  that  the
most  ancient  type  of  society  is  that  Trhich  we  call
feudal.  Society  in  Eajputana  or  Rajasthan  is  not,
however,  feudal  ;  it  is  pra3-feudal  or  tribal  ;  at  the
utmost,  some  of  the  signs  of  inchoate  feudalism  may
be  detected  in  it  ;  and  thus  Colonel  Tod's  constant
references  to  the  well-known  mcidents  of  feudal  tenure
are  extremely  misleading.  Sir  Alfred  Lyall  has  now
shown  that  the  true  instructiveness  of  the  country
comes  from  its  illustrating,  not  the  mechanism  of
feudalism,  but  the  method  of  tribal  formation  and
development,  the  stages  by  which  Aryan  consan-
guinity grew  to  its  perfect  form.

It  results  from  the  inquiries  and  observations  of
Sir  Alfred  Lyall  that  in  Rajputana,  the  land  of  the
clans,  and  in  the  wilder  Indian  countries  under  Raj-
put clannish  influence,  two  sets  of  forces  or  agencies
are  constantly  at  work,  disintegrating  agencies  and
organising  agencies,  forces  of  dispersion  and  forces  of
consolidation.  All  of  these  have  seemingly  been  in
operation  from  time  immemorial,  though  some  of
them  are  losing  their  activity  under  l^ritish  super-
vision or  administration,  and  may  ultimately  die  out
altogether.


270  EAST  EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  yni.

The  dispersing  forces  are  mainly  war,  pestilence,
and  famine.  AVar,  in  the  countries  under  British
authority,  takes  now  the  form  of  brigandage,  but
pestilence  and  famine  have  at  most  been  brought
under  some  degree  of  control.  '  It  is  well  known,'
says  Lyall,  '  from  history,  and  on  a  small  scale  from
experience  of  the  present  day,  how  famines,  wide
desolating  invasions,  pestilences,  and  all  great  social
catastrophes,  shatter  to  pieces  the  framework  of
Oriental  societies,  and  disperse  the  fragments  abroad,
like  seeds,  to  take  root  elsewhere.'  There  are  clans
apparently  of  real  common  descent  which  are  also
local  clans,  still  occupying  the  seats  of  which  they
first  took  possession,  or  to  which  they  emigrated  as
a  body  ;  but  many  of  these  circles  of  kinsmen  have
been  and  still  are  broken  up,  and  all  of  them  or
portions  of  them  have  been  driven  away  to  any  place
in  which  they  can  find  refuge  or  subsistence.  The
Fuidhir,  or  broken  man,  is  as  common  in  Central
India  as  he  was  in  ancient  Ireland.  Yet  it  is  not  to
be  supposed  that  the,  original  kinship  is  broken  m
idea  as  it  is  in  fact.  Each  fugitive  or  emigrant
retains  the  memory  of  the  stock  from  which  he
sprang,  partly  from  pride  of  blood,  partly  because  he
carries  with  him  his  usages  of  intermarriage,  and
would  think  it  incest  to  marry  a  son  or  daughter
within  the  prohibited  degree.  Thus,  wherever  he
settles,  he  tends  to  become  a  new  root  for  a  Rajput


CHAP.  vni. EAST  EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  271

yei^o^,  gens,  or  sept,  and  the  centre  of  a  new  circle  of
affinity.  The  effect  is  to  produce  a  structure  of
society  extremely  like  that  which  meets  us  in  the  begin-
nings of  classical  history.  As  will  be  seen  presently,
the  fugitive  is  at  once  placed  under  a  new  order  of
relations  with  the  neighbouring  families  in  contact
with  whom  he  actually  lives,  but  he  is  not  released
from  connection  with  his  natural  kith  and  kin,  just
as  a  Roman  or  Athenian  noble,  settled  at  any  point
of  the  Ager  Romanus  or  the  Attic  territory,  would
still  count  himself  a  member  of  his  patrician  house  or
eupatrid  tribe.

It  seems  to  me  highly  probable  that  these  forces
of  dispersion  acted  on  the  ancient  tribal  organisation
of  more  northerly  branches  of  the  Aryan  race.  But,
if  the  conjecture  may  be  permitted,  I  should  say  that
they  operated  on  a  smaller  scale.  Wars  were  pro-
bably as  bloody  and  frequent  among  the  forerunners
of  the  Romans  and  Athenians  as  among  the  Raj-
puts, but  pestilence  and  famine  have  always  been
more  destructive  in  tropical  regions.  Thus  the  fugi-
tive was  driven  to  a  smaller  distance.  It  is,  however,
no  more  incredible  that  an  Athenian  family  settled
in  a  particular  locality  of  Attica  should  have  been  at
some  time  expelled  from  its  original  tribal  home,
than  that,  in  later  times,  a  citizen  of  Athens  should
deem  himself  a  hopeless  exile  at  Corinth  or  Megara.
In  order  to  understand the  most  ancient  condition


272  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  viii.

of  human  society,  all  distances  must  be  reduced,  and
we  must  look  at  mankind,  so  to  speak,  through  the
wrong  end  of  the  historical  telescope.

It  has  still  to  be  considered  how  it  comes  that  an
emigrant  or  fugitive  Rajput,  besides  retaining  his
connection  with  his  natural  tribe  of  descent,  enters
into  new  relations  with  the  famihes  among  whom  he
has  settled.  Here,  in  order  to  understand  some  of
the  most  interesting  of  Sir  Alfred  LyalFs  observa-
tions, we  must  attend  to  his  distinction  between  pure
and  impure  tribes.

A  pure  tribe  is  a  tribe  of  descent,  living  together
generally  in  the  same  local  seat,  and  having  a  real
genealogy.  Such  tribes  are  still  founded  in  the  same
way  in  which  they  have  always  been  founded.
'  Whereas,^  says  Sir  Alfred  Lyall,  '  in  modern  times
great  men  of  action  found  dynasties  or  noble  families,
which  transmit  the  founder's  name  down  along  the
chain  of  direct  lineage,  so  in  prehistoric  ages  men  of
the  same  calibre  founded  clans  or  septs,  in  which  not
only  the  founder's  actual  kinsfolk  who  followed  his
fortunes  were  enrolled,  but  all  who  had  any  share  in
his  enterprises.'  All  such  clans  in  Rajputana  claim
to  run  up  to  a  single  ancestor  ;  and  probably  the
pedigree  even  of  those  which  pretend  to  the  most
prodigious  antiquity  is  to  a  great  extent  genuine.
For  literature  in  Rajputana  still  retains  that  which
we  may  believe  to  have  been  its  most  ancient  form —


CHAP.  Ylll. H-^ST EUKOPHAX HOUSE COMMIWITIES.  273

ill  the  sono's  of  the  hereditary  bard,  celebratinof  the
exploits,  and  above  all  the  antiquity,  of  the  family  of
which  he  is  the  honoured  retainer.  These  bardic
genealogies  may  probably  be  trusted  up  to  a  certam
point ;  but  even  the  least  imaginary  of  them  have  \
been  doubtless  to  some  extent  affected  by  fictions.
Not  only  are  the  kinsfolk  of  the  eponymous  heroic
founder  mentioned,  but  all  who  followed  Mm  in  the
original  adventure  come  in  time  to  be  reckoned  as
kinsmen.  The  pedigree  is  lengthened  sometimes
through  unintentional  error,  clansmen  who  lived  at
the  same  time  beiuo;  counted  as  belono-iriD;  to  succes-
sive  generations,  and  sometimes  through  deliberate
or  poetical  exaggeration.  The  main  trunk  of  the
family  tree  is  carried  beyond  the  true  founder,  and
finds  its  root  in  a  o^od  or  amonof  the  luminaries  of
heaven.  The  proudest  princely  houses  of  Eajpu-
tana  pretend  to  a  descent  fi'om  the  sun  and  the  moon,
but  a  real  human  founder,  an  adventurous  and  suc-
cessful warrior,  can  generally  be  detected.  As  Sir
Alfi'ed  Lyall  says,  the  best  type  of  the  founder  of  a
pure  clan  is  David,  the  son  of  Jesse,  with  his  hard-
fighting  kinsmen,  the  sons  of  Zeruiah.

The  most  original  result  of  Sir  Alfred  Lyall' s
investigations  is  his  determination  of  the  manner  in
whicli  impure  clans  are  formed.  In  a  work  published
Bome  years  ago,  I  said  that  the  conclusion  suggested
by  the  evidence  then  accessible  was,  '  not  that  all  early

T


274  EAST EUROPEAX HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  Tin.

societies  were  formed  by  descent  from  the  same  an-
cestor, but  that  all  of  them  which  had  any  permanence
or  solidity  either  were  so  descended,  or  assumed  that
they  were.  An  indefinite  number  of  causes  may  have
shattered  the  primitive  groups,  but  wherever  their  in-
gredients recombined,  it  was  on  the  model  or  principle
of  an  association  of  kindred.'  ^  An  impure  tribe  or
clan  is  not  a  body  of  kinsmen,  but  a  body  formed
on  the  model  or  principle  of  an  association  of  kinsmen.
Sir  Alfred  Lyall  has  been  fortunate  enough  to  see
these  associations  in  the  actual  course  of  fonnation.

Not  only  (he  says)  do  robber  tribes  receive  bands  of  recruits
during  periods  of  confusion,  but  there  goes  on  a  steady  enlistment
of  individuals  or  families  whom  a  variety  of  incidents  or  offences,
public  opinion  or  private  feuds,  drives  out  of  the  pale  of  settled
life  and  beyond  their  orthodox  cii^cles.  Upon  this  dissolute  collec-
tion of  masterless  men  the  idea  of  kinship  begins  to  operate  afresh,
and  to  rearrange  them  systematically  in  groups.  Each  new  im-
migrant becomes  one  of  a  new  tribe,  but  he  adheres  nevertheless
so  far  to  his  origin  and  his  custom  as  to  insist  on  setting  up  a
separate  circle  under  the  name  of  his  lost  clan,  caste,  family,  or
lands.  Where  an  Englishman,  settling  perforce  in  Botany  Bay,  or
spontaneously  in  AVestern  America,  kept  up  familiar  local  as-
sociations by  naming  his  homestead  after  the  county  town  in  his
old  country,  a  Rajput,  driven  into  the  jungles,  tries  to  perpetuate
the  more  primitive  recollection  of  race.

In  this  way  new  clans  are  constantly  formmg,
under  the  presidency  or  hegemony  of  some  successfiil
family,  and  always  with  a  mechanism  of  social
arrangements  closely  copied  from  the  internal  rela-

*  Ancient  Law,  p.  31.


CHAP.  VIII. EAST EUKOPEAX HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  275

tions  of  the  principal  group.  The  leading  family
Tvill  often  consist  of  real  Rajput  emigrants,  and  in
this  case  the  whole  of  the  new  clan  will  have  a  faint
sort  of  claim  to  be  recognised  as  of  Eajput  origin,
but  the  proud  Eajputs  of  the  ancient  stock  will  only
allow  the  pretension  after  very  strict  examination  of
the  emigrant's  pedigree.  Sometimes  it  will  happen
that  the  chief  who  becomes  the  kernel  of  the  new
association  is  a  mere  captain  of  robbers,  but  it  is
generally  found  that  in  a  generation  or  two  his  de-
scendants will  lay  claim  on  curiously  slender  grounds
to  a  Rajput  extraction.  A  great  many  of  the  stories
current  in  India  about  the  loves  of  gods,  and  about
princes  or  princesses  stolen  in  then'  infancy,  have
really  been  devised  to  give  colour  to  fictitious  pedi-
grees ;  and  this  is  the  humble  and  commonplace  be-
ginning of  many  popular  tales  for  which  the  Com-
parative Mythologists  have  claimed  a  more  august
origin.  At  the  same  time  it  is  not  to  be  supposed
that  all  associations  of  men  are  successful  in  consoli-
dating themselves  into  a  clan.

A  vast  number  of  rudimentary  clans  are  cut  off  or  disqualified
early  in  their  formation  by  one  or  other  of  the  innumerable
calamities  which  beset  primitive  mankind,  .  .  .  the  blood  is  cor-
rupted, the  genealogy  is  lost,  the  brethren  are  scattered  aljroad  to
new  habits  of  life  and  unauthorised  means  of  subsistence,  to  strange
gods  and  maimed  rites.  But  the  broken  groups  re-form  again
like  a  fissi parous  sjjecies.  And  as  the  great  majority  of  these
circles  fade  away  in  outline,  or  break  up  again  into  atoms  ])efore
they  can  consolidate,  there  goes  on  a  constant  decom])osition  and

T 2


276  EAST EUROPKAX HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  viii.

reproduction  of  groups  at  various  stages,  whence  we  get  at  the
extraordinary  multitude  of  circles  of  aflSnity  ....  which  make
up  the  miscellany  of  Indian  society.

The  chief  secret  of  a  stage  of  social  evolution
which  is  now  utterly  strange  to  us,  is  the  condition
of  mind  which  I  recently  dwelt  upon  in  describing
ancient  Irish  society.^  In  the  mental  state  which  has
survived  in  Central  India,  ideas  are  few,  and  additions
to  them  scanty  and  slow.  The  problem  which  must
have  obtruded  itself  on  men  ever  since  their  existence
became  the  same  thing  as  thought,  the  question  why
they  had  relations  and  sympathies  with  one  another,
is  solved  by  an  appeal  to  kinship.  The  fundamental
assumption  is,  that  all  men  not  united  with  you  in
blood  are  your  enemies  or  your  slaves.  To  associate
on  terms  of  equality  or  friendship  with  a  man  who  is
not  in  some  sense  your  brother  is  an  unnatural  con-
dition ;  if  it  be  prolonged  your  neighbour  grows  into
your  brother.  The  modern  reason  for  holding  to-
gether in  social  union,  that  you  and  your  neighbours
belong  to  the  same  territorial  sovereignty,  is  new  and
even  monstrous  in  Eajputana  and  the  countries  under
its  influence.  The  British  Government  of  India  in-
deed recognises  nothing  but  territorial  sovereignty  as
the  principle  on  which  men  are  grouped  together.
The  Maharana  of  Oodeypore,  the  Maharajahs  of  Jey-
pore  and  Jodhpore,  are  only  known  to  the  Calcutta

*  Early  History  of  Institutions,  Lecture  8.


CUAP.  Yiir. EAST EUROPE.V^' HOUSE COMMUXITIES.  277

Foreign  Office  as  princes  ruling  over  certain  defined
territories  ;  but  to  all  the  native  dwellers  in  Central
India  they  are  the  semi- sacred  chiefs  of  clans  of  the
purest  blood,  deriving  their  patriarchal  authority  from
heroic  or  divine  forefathers.  Sir  Alfred  Lvall  rives
some  striking  illustrations  of  the  unpopularity  of
territorial  sovereignty  in  Central  India.  It  is  con-
doned in  the  case  of  the  British  Government,  which
delivered  the  Rajput  clans  from  oppression,  and
probably  saved  them  from  extinction  ;  but  the  sub-
ordination of  pure  Rajputs  to  low-caste  Mahrattas
or  Mussulman  apostates  is  resented  as  a  crying  in-
justice. AVe  have  all  heard  what  Camerons  and
Macdonalds  thought  of  being  required  to  obey  the
Earl  of  Argyll,  not  because  he  was  McCallum  More,
but  because  he  had  obtained  a  grant  of  feudal  supe-
riority from  the  Scottisli  king ;  but  the  Indian  princes
who  rule  over  many  Rajputs,  Scindiah  the  Slipper-
bearer  and  Holkar  the  Shepherd,  are  in  their  eyes  less
like  chiefs  of  the  Campbells  than  like  upstarts  sprung
from  the  enslaved  tribes  who  hewed  wood  and  drew
water  for  the  great  clan  of  the  Western  Highlands.

Among  the  more  special  causes  of  the  process  of
tribal  aggregation  is  the  convenience  of  the  arrange-
ment to  men  who  regard  a  more  or  less  strict  ex-
ogamy as  sanctified  by  usage  and  religion.  Tlie  pure
Rajput  has  a  prodigious  table  of  proliibited  degrees;
but  lie  is also  surrounded  by  a  circle  within  which


278  EAST EUROPEAX HOUSE COMMUNITIES, chap.  yiji.

he  must  marry.  He  must  marry  within  his  caste  ;
he  may  not  marry  within  his  special  clan.  He  has
great  difficulty  in  finding  wives  for  his  sons  ;  he  has
still  greater  difficulty  in  finding  husbands  for  his
dauo-hters.  These  vexatious  rules  of  intermarriao-e
are  extremely  mischievous  to  the  pure  clans,  which
are  greatly  weakened  by  the  necessity  for  their  obser-
vance, and  are  even  said  to  be  slowly  dying  out  for
lack  of  reproduction.  But  to  the  emigrant  Kajput
it  is  a  positive  advantage  to  be  grouped  in  the  same
vaofue  and  extensive  tribal  bond  with  a  number  of
families  or  septs  whom  he  has  not  yet  learned  to
regard  as  literally  of  the  same  blood  with  himself.
He  must  marry,  to  borrow  the  Roman  expressions,
within  his  tribe  ;  he  may  not  marry  within  his  gen.'<.
When  the  tribal  union  is  just  definite  enough  to  serve
as  a  substitute  for  caste,  and  when  the  various  septs
included  in  it  are  separate  from  one  another — strung
together,  to  use  Sir  Alfred  Lyall's  language,  like  rings
on  a  curtain  rod — the  chances  for  the  fertility  of  the
clan  are  at  the  highest  point,  and  give  it  a  manifest
advantage  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  At  the  outset,
being  perhaps  little  more  than  a  horde  of  brigands,
it  may  sufi'er  from  the  scarcity  of  women  within  its
circle  ;  and  at  this  stage  all  sorts  of  fictions  are
adopted  to  bring  stolen  girls  within  the  tribal  outline.
At  the  other  end  of  its  development  it  will  again
8ufier,  because  all  the  families  or  septs  in  the  clan


CHAP.  Tin. EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE C0:\[MUN1TIES.  279

will  now  have  come  to  be  looked  upon  as  akin  to  one
another,  and  debarred  from  intermarriage.  The  in-
termediate stage  of  which  I  have  been  speaking  is  the
most  convenient  of  all.

But  the  most  interesting  result  of  these  inquiries
into  the  origin  of  impure  clans  is  the  determination
of  the  principal  fiction  at  work  in  their  formation.
It  is  one  which  has  not  by  any  means  died  out  of  the
Western  world,  into  which  it  was  reintroduced  by  the
revival  of  feudal  and  nmnicipal  aristocracy.  The  odour
of  vulgarity  which  it  has  now  contracted  makes  it,
perhaps,  hard  to  understand  its  prunitive  importance,
since  it  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  fiction  of  a
better  family  and  a  longer  pedigi'ee  than  one  is  really
entitled  to.  What  was  once  a  force  in  the  West
has  now  become  a  foible  ;  but  in  the  East,  among
societies  held  together  by  kinship,  it  is  still  a  force.
Lyall's  explanation  of  the  problem  with  which  we
started  is  that,  to  quote  his  words,  'the  different
stocks  congregate  by  force  of  circumstances,  and  tend
to  form  a  tribe  and  clans  within  a  tribe,  under  the
name  and  within  the  influence  of  the  most  successful
groups.'  The  Indian  mode  of  bringing  the  fiction  as
near  as  possible  to  a  fact  is,  I  should  observe,  ma-
terially different  from  any  contrivance  resorted  to  in
this  part  of  the  world.  It  })y  no  means  consists  in
bold  assertion,  or  getting  a  false  entry  introduced  into
a  nul/dmire  or  peerage. In  India  a  man's rank is


280  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES. CFAr.  viir.

measured,  not  by  his  wealth  or  power,  not  even  by  what
is  written  about  him,  but  by  the  number  of  things  he
may  or  may  not  do.  A  family  on  its  promotion  prac-
tises the  most  rigid  abstinence  from  particular  kinds
of  food  and  drink,  abstains  from  all  sorts  of  actions,
is  scrupulously  careful  about  the  marriage  of  its
daughters,  and  goes  daily  through  a  punctilious  cere-
mony of  domestic  worship.  It  engages  a  Brahman
chaplain  and  a  Brahman  cook  ;  and  thus  the  entire
Brahman  priesthood  of  the  country  will  perhaps  be
led  to  countenance  its  pretensions  to  high-caste  extrac-
tion. Once  taken  under  the  shelter  of  Brahmanism,
the  fiction  can  hardly  be  distinguished  from  a  fact.

The  effect  of  these  remarkable  observations  is  to
suggest  a  theory  of  the  origin  and  growth  of  society
among  the  higher  races  of  mankind,  which  differs  in
some  material  respects  from  any  hitherto  propounded,
though  it  is  much  more  consistent  with  some  of  the
current  theories  than  with  others.  Sir  Alfred  Lyall
follows  Mr.  Carlyle  in  saying  that  '  the  perplexed
jungle  of  primitive  society  springs  from  many  roots  ;
but  the  Hero  is  the  taproot  from  which  in  a  great
degree  all  the  rest  are  nourished  and  grown.'  A
mighty  man  of  valour,  with  his  kinsmen  and  retainers,
founds  a  clan.  Through  the  very  fact  of  success,
this  clan  is  saved  from  the  first  from  the  calamities
which  arise  from  an  unequal  balance  of  the  sexes —
the  real  secret,  as  I  believe,  of  those  unhappy  usages


CHAP.  Yiii. EAST EUEOPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES.  281

which  have  been  saddled  by  recent  theories  upon  all
mankind.  It  becomes  therefore  a  pure  clan,  having
a  genuine  pedigree,  in  which  certainty  of  paternal
descent  from  the  famous  founder  or  founders  is  as-
sumed from  the  outset.  It  may  also  be  exogamous,
either  through  the  number  of  female  captives  which
always  formed  part  of  its  spoil,  or  simply  because
the  practice  of  taking  its  wives  from  a  distance,  how-
ever this  came  about,  increased  its  physical  vigour
and  caused  it  to  prevail  in  the  struggle  for  existence.
The  formation  of  such  a  clan  might  be  a  fact  by  itself,
and,  so  far  as  we  have  gone,  it  would  be  a  plausible
objection  that  the  wholesale  formation  of  such  clans
was  highly  improbable.  But  now  we  see  how  such  a
clan  acts  on  the  masses  of  men  around  it.  It  starts  a
process  of  ferment  and  crystallisation  by  which  all
tribes  and  assemblages  in  its  neighbourhood  or  within
its  influence  group  themselves  in  circles  as  nearly  as
possible  adjusted  to  the  heroic  model.  The  original
communities  of  men  may  have  taken  all  sorts  of
forms  :  in  the  present  state  of  these  inquiries  it  is
impossible  not  to  suspect  that  no  statements  can  be
hazarded  on  the  subject  which  are  at  once  safe  and
very  general.  But  evidence  of  many  different  kinds
suggests  that  this  ^  miscellany  ^  of  primitive  society
was  brought  into  shape  by  the  influence  of  dominant
types,  acting  on  the  faculty  of  imitation  which  must
have  always  belonged  to  mankind. The  communi-


282  EAST EUROPEAN HOUSE COMMUNITIES. chap.  viu.

ties  which  were  destined  to  civilisation  seem  to  have
experienced  an  attraction  which  drew  them  towards
one  exemplar,  the  pure  clan,  generally  exogamous
among  the  Aryans,  generally  endogamous  among  the
Semites,  but  always  believing  in  purity  of  paternal
descent,  and  always  looking  back  to  some  god  or  hero
as  the  first  of  the  race.


1


THE GEXS.  283


NOTES AXD ILLUSTRATIOXS.

XOTE A.
THE GENS.

The  passage  in  tlie  text  respecting  the  ancient  groups
more  or  less  answering  to  the  still  extant  House
Community  has  been  somewhat  altered  since  it  was
first  printed  in  the  '  Nineteenth  Century.'

It  will  be  seen  that,  in  the  present  state  of  these
inqumes,  I  do  not  accept  the  account  of  the  origin  of
the  Gens  given  either  by  Mr.  McLennan  or  by  Mr.
Morgan  as  universally  true.  I  do  not,  for  example,
venture  to  dissent  from  the  view  which  the  Romans
themselves  took  of  the  history  of  this  peculiar  group
as  known  to  themselves.  What  this  view  was  may
be  inferred  from  a  ])assage  in  Varro  ('De  Lingua
Latina,'.\TLii.  4)  which  has  been  often  quoted.  The
grammarian  observes  that  there  is  a  certain  '  agnation  '
and  '  gentility '  among  words.  All  the  cases  of  the
noun  '  ^^milius  '  are  descended  from  the  nominative,
just  as  all  the  members  of  the  Gens  yl^milia,  all  the
yKmilii,  are  descended  from  a  sinf^-le  orionnal  Tlunilius.
The  Romans,  therefore,  regarded  '  gentility '  as  a  kin-
ship among  men  not  essentially  different  from  '  agna-
tion.' The  Agnati  were  a  group  of  actual  or  ad(jptive
descendants,  through  males,  from  a  known  and  remem-
bered ancestor  ;  the  Gentiles  were  a  simihir  group  of  de-
scendants from  an  ancestor  long  since  forgotten. It  is


284  THE GENS.

true  that  some  learned  Romans  seem  to  have  perceived
or  thought  that  this  Gentile  rehitionship  was  to  some
extent  fictitious  ;  but,  on  the  whole,  they  figured  it
to  themselves  as  a  form  of  kinship  arising  from  de-
scent, through  males,  from  a  common  male  ancestor.
For  reasons  given  in  Chapter  VII.,  I  think  that  the
lioman  theory  of  the  origin  of  the  Roman  Gens  was
at  least  probable.  •  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  that,
though  some  of  the  gentes  may  have  been  fictitious,
and  others  partially  fictitious,  there  was  a  real  core
of  agnatic  consanguinity  in  most  of  them  from  the
very  first.  The  probable  character  of  the  fictions
which  clustered  round  this  core  may  be  gathered
fi-om  the  latter  part  of  the  preceding  chapter.  As
Sir  Alfred  Ly all's  description  of  the  mode  in  which
groups  simulatmg  true  tribal  groups  are  formed  is
now  printed  in  his  '  Asiatic  Studies,'  I  might  have
omitted  my  abridgment  of  it  ;  but  I  retain  it,  be-
cause nothing  seems  to  me  to  have  more  afiected
primitive  society,  and  yet  to  have  been  more  neglected
by  those  who  have  theorised  on  it,  than  the  imitative
faculty  which  man  has  always  possessed  and  which
Sir  Alfred  Lyall  has  witnessed  in  actual  employment
by  barbarous  men.

On  superficial  consideration,  we  are  apt  to  think
that  man's  mimetic  faculty  confines  itself  to  matters
of  taste  and  personal- habit.  But,  in  truth,  there  is
no  successful,  or  conspicuous,  or  simply  fashionable
model  which  men,  in  tlie  various  stages  of  their  pro-
gress, will  not  endeavour  to  imitate.  The  habit  of
political  imitation,  which  has  always  been  strong,
still  survives.  '  Make  us  a  King  to  judge  us,  like  nil
the  nations^^  said  the  Israelites  to  Samuel  (1  Sam.
viii.  5).  '  Give  us  a  Constitution  to  regulate  our
liberty,  like  tliat  of  one  particuhvr  nation,'  is  the
corresponding  modern  and  Western  demand. If  any-


THE GEXS.  285

body  is  inclined  to  think  that  the  process  of  copying
models  by  entire  societies  is  extinct,  he  should  look
at  the  way  in  which  the  British  Constitution,  which
was  once  regarded  by  men  more  civilised  than  the
English  as  an  eccentric  political  oddity,  has  spread
over  nearly  all  Europe  in  less  than  seventy  years.
What  Sir  Alfred  Lyall  has  shown  from  his  own
observations  is  the  activity  of  this  process  of  imita-
tion in  barbarous  stages  of  society.  Barbarous  men
will  copy  any  successful  or  fashionable  social  type —
a  Tribe,  a  Sept,  a  Gens,  a  Village  Community,  the
rules  of  '  exogamy  '  or  '  endogamy,'  the  practice  of
infanticide  or  suttee.  The  agency  by  which  the
imitation  is  carried  out  is  Fiction,  sometimes  of  the
most  audacious  kind,  and  through  it  an  old  order  is
constantly  giving  place  to  a  new,  and  even  broken
hordes,  mere  miscellanies  of  men,  are  transmuted  into
definite  social  forms,  which  afterwards  might  seem  as
if  they  had  all  sprung  together  from  roots  deep  in
the  Past.

The  important  lesson  is  that  in  sociological  in-
vestigation it  is  never  possible  to  discover  more  than
the  way  in  which  the  Type  has  been  formed.  If  an
institution  is  once  successful,  it  extends  itself  throuo;h
the  imitative  faculty,  which  is  stronger  in  barbarous
than  in  civilised  man.  It  follows  from  this  that  no
universal  theory,  attempting  to  account  for  all  social
forms  by  supposing  an  evolution  from  within,  can
possibly  be  true.  A  person  perfectly  ignorant  of
European  history  might  suppose  that  the  Ijritish
Constitution  and  the  Belgian  Constitution,  which
are  extremely  like  one  another,  were  produced  by
analogous  courses  of  development  ;  yet  the  Belgian
Constitution  is  really  the  copy  of  a  copy,  and  the
true  growth  of  constitutionalism  can  only  be  traced
in  the  history  of  the  English  Constitution.


286  THE GEXS.

The  eminent  writers  I  have  named,  if  I  have
rightly  understood  them,  are  of  opinion  that  the
Roman  Gens  and  all  similar  bodies  are  derived,
without  exception,  from  older  groups  still  to  be
observed  among  savages.  Among  the  so-called  abo-
rigines of  Australia,  among  the  Xorth  and  South
American  Indians,  and  elsewhere,  but  always  among
sUghtly  advanced  communities,  there  are  found  groups
of  men  and  women  tracing  kinship  exclusively  through
the  female  parent,  and  not  through  the  male.  Wherever
they  liave  any  tradition  of  human  ancestry,  they  trace
their  parentage,  according  to  Mr.  Morgan,  to  a  com-
mon ancestress,  and  not  to  an  ancestor.  Their  most
distinct  characteristics  are  that  they  mark  their  bodies
with  some  common  mark  or  '  totem,'  and  that  the
members  of  the  same  group  never  intermarry  ;  and
thus,  as  I  have  said  in  the  text,  they  resemble  a  Sex
rather  than  any  other  combination  of  human  beings
now  familiar  to  us.  On  the  other  hand,  amonof
several  barbarous  or  semi-barbarous  communities  we
can  still  observe,  and  in  the  ancient  history  of  several
civilised  or  semi-civilised  societies  we  can  still  detect,
another  class  of  groups  having  a  close  resemblance  to
the  Roman  Gens.  They  attribute  their  origin  to  a  single
common  male  ancestor,  and  they  trace  kinship  through
the  male  parent,  real  or  adoptive,  alone.  The  members
of  such  groups  much  more  frequently  intermarry  than
do  the  members  of  the  savage  group  ;  but  occasionally
they  will  not  intermarry,  at  all  events  as  a  matter  of
theory.  Such  is  the  Hindu  theory  with  reference  to
kinsmen  and  kinswomen  belonoinor  to  the  same  Gotra,
and  there  is  some  faint  evidence  of  a  similar  feelino;
once  existino:  in  the  l^oman  Gens.  Even  among;
savages,  examples  of  groups  tracing  relfitionship
tln^ougli  males  are  found  intermingled  with  groups
acknowledging  female  descents  only ;  and  Mr.  Morgan


THE GENS.  287

insists  that  the  first  groups  are  merely  the  last  in  a
transmuted  shape,  and  that  the  transformation  oc-
curred everywhere,  in  the  societies  now  civilised  as
well  as  in  those  still  savage  or  barbarous.  He  several
times  thus  describes  the  process  :  '  Descent  in  the
Gens  was  changed  from  the  female  to  the  male  line,'
giving  the  name  Gens  indiiferently  to  both  groups.

Whatever  the  facts  may  have  been,  the  language
of  Mr.  Morgan  seems  to  me  to  be  open  to  much
objection.  One  of  these  two  groups  did  not  really
succeed  the  other,  but  the  two  co- existed  from  all
time,  and  were  always  distinct  from  one  another.  We
must  be  carefal,  in  theorising  on  these  subjects,  not  to
confound  mental  operations  with  substantive  realities.
The  '  Agnatic '  Gentile  grovips,  consisting  of  all  the
descendants,  through  males,  of  a  common  male  an-
cestor, began  to  exist  in  every  association  of  men  and
women  which  held  together  for  more  than  a  single
generation.  They  existed  because  they  existed  in
nature.  Similarly  the  group  consisting  of  the  de-
scendants, through  women,  of  a  single  ancestress  still
survives,  and  its  outline  may  still  be  marked  out,  if
it  be  worth  anybody's  while  to  trace  it.  What  was
new  at  a  certain  stage  of  the  history  of  all  or  of  a
portion  of  the  human  race  must  have  occurred,  not
in  connection  with  the  Gens,  but  in  connection  with
the  Family.  There  was  always  one  male  parent  of
each  child  born,  Init  prevalent  habits  prevented  his
being  individualised  in  the  mind.  At  some  point
of  time,  some  change  of  surrounding  facts  enabled
paternity,  which  had  always  existed,  to  be  mentally
contemplated  ;  and  further,  as  a  consequence  of  its
recogiiitioij,  enabled  the  kinship  flowing  from  com-
mon paternity  to  be  mentally  conteiriplated  also.  As
to  the  new  facts  which  led  to  this  reco":nition,  all
that.  in.  niy  opmion,  can  be  said  of  them  is  that  they


288  TJIE GENS.

must  have  been  such  as  again  to  give  free  play  to  an
overmastering  emotional  force.  Believing,  as  I  do,
that  when  Paternity  reappeared,  it  reappeared  in
association  with  Power  and  Protection,  I  require  no
explanation  of  the  fact  that  the  kinship  then  recog-
nised was  kinship  through  male  descents  only.

Mr.  Morgan's  application  of  the  same  name  to
the  group  mentally  formed  by  attending  solely  to
female  descents  and  to  tlie  group  constituted  by
looking  only  at  male  descents,  seems  to  me  unfor-
tunate, because  it  tends  to  put  out  of  sight  the  essen-
tial differences  between  the  two.  It  is  hard  to  see
how  the  savage  gi^oup  can  be  self- existing,  or  indeed
anything  but  an  organisation  for  matrimonial  purposes
spread  over  a  larger  tribal  community.  The  men  born
of  the  women  belonging  to  it  are  themselves  members
of  it,  but  the  sons  of  these  men  leave  it  because  they
belong  to  the  same  group  as  their  mothers.  But  the
other  group,  formed  by  male  descents  from  males,
retains  uninterruptedly  the  flower  of  its  masculine
strength,  and  this  strength  is  constantly  reproducing
itself.  Hence  it  tends  to  be  a  self-existent  militant
body.  The  famous  exploit  of  the  Fabian  Gens  at  Rome,
when  they  collectively  attacked  Yeii,  and  were  all  but
extirpated,  is  thus  in  itself  perfectly  credible.  No
doubt  it  is  said  that  Australian  savages  will  sometimes
travel  great  distances  to  join  in  the  quarrels  of  men
having  the  same  '  totem ; '  but  these  contests  between
people  wlio  have  hardly  any  interests  in  common  can
be  scarcely  more  than  faction-fights  between  men
wearing  different  colours.  At  the  same  time,  I  admit
that  further  information  of  the  precise  way  in  which
these  peculiar  organisations  affect  the  practical  life  of
the  communities  subject  to  them  is  greatly  needed  ;
and  I  regret  that  Mr.  Morgan's  death  prevented  his
communicating  to  me  tlie  result  of  some  investigations


I


THE GEXS.  289

on  the  subject  which  he  had  promised  to  make.  As
to  the  South  Slavonian  communities,  the  actual  oriofin
of  many  of  them  has  been  recorded  or  is  otherwise
known.  With  the  limitations  mentioned  in  the  text,
they  are  composed  of  the  descendants,  through  males,
of  a  common  male  ancestor.

I  have  said  above  that  workers  in  the  new  field
of  investigation  opened  by  the  life  and  usages  of
savage  societies  seem  to  me  to  be  under  some  tempta-
tion to  take  mental  operations  for  substantive  realities.
Mr.  Morgan,  it  is  well  known,  considered  that  the
savage  habit  of  grouping  relatives  in  large  classes,
without  reference  to  degree — of  grouping,  for  instance,
a  man's  father  and  his  uncles  too:ether  and  callino;
them  all  his  fathers,  or  forming  his  brothers  and
male  cousins  in  one  class  and  calling  them  all  his
brothers — is  a  relic  of  a  state  of  society  in  which  the
relations  of  the  sexes  were  very  unlike  those  to  which
we  are  accustomed.  Earnest,  and  indeed  bitter,  con-
troversies have  already  arisen  on  this  theory  of
Classificatory  Relationship,  and  ingenious  efforts
are  from  time  to  time  made  to  identify  and  recover
the  lost  forms  of  marriage.  May  I  suggest  that  it
is  at  least  worthy  of  consideration  whether  all  or
part  of  the  explanation  may  not  lie  in  an  imperfection
of  mental  grasp  on  the  part  of  savages  ?  The  reader
of  Dr.  Macfarlane's  remarkable  ^Analysis  of  Relation-
ships of  Consanguinity  and  Affinity'  ('Journal  of
Anthropological  Institute,'  xii.  1)  will  require  no
further  proof  that  the  comprehension  of  a  large  body
of  complex  relationships  demands  a  prodigious  mental
effort,  even  now  requiring  for  its  success  the  aid  of  a
special  notation.  Some  communities  have  surmounted
a  part  of  the  difficulty  by  giving  separate  names  to
the  nearer  relationships,  which  is  what  Mr.  Morgan
calls  the  Descriptive  System ;  but  is  there  not  ground

u


290  THE GENS.

for  a  suspicion  that  the  savage  classification  is  after
all  nothing  more  than  a  rude  and  incomplete  attempt
at  the  mental  contemplation  of  a  tolerably  numerous
tribal  body  ?  Is  it  more  than  a  conception  of  com-
plex relationship,  reached  by  looking  only  at  genera-
tions and  by  eliminating  the  idea  of  grade  or  degree  ?
The  rough  view  of  a  community  as  consisting  of
generations  is  common  enough.  It  appears  alike  in
the  Hindu  sacerdotal  distribution  of  life  into  that  of
the  Student,  the  Householder,  and  the  Ascetic,  and
in  the  fine  Greek  song  of  the  militant  Dorians  which
makes  the  men  boast  that  they  are  warriors,  the
children  that  they  will  be  warriors  some  day,  and  the
old  men  that  they  were  warriors  once.


CHAP.  IX.  DECAY OF FEUDAL rROPERTY.  291


CHAPTER IX.

THE  DECAY  OF  FEUDAL  PROPERTY  IN  FRANCE
AND  ENGLAND.

Considering  the  immense  space  which  the  first  French
Revolution  filled  in  the  eyes  of  the  generation  which
immediately  succeeded  it,  it  is  surprising  at  first  sight
that  the  search  after  authentic  materials  for  an  opinion
concerning  its  causes,  course,  and  character  was  for
a  while  but  slackly  prosecuted. A  virtually  inex-
haustible store  of  such  materials  existed  in  the  cahiers
• — the  statements of  grievances  which,  according  to
the ancient practice  of  the  French States -General,
were  sent  up  from  every  administrative  subdivision
of  France  to  the  body  which  became  the  first  Con-
stituent Assembly. Yet  it  is  only  in  comparatively
recent days that this and other similar  stores  of
historical  wealth  have  been  critically  examined. The
story  runs  (I  do  not  know  whether  it  has  found  its
way  into  print)  that  a  well-known  Grerman  historian
once  expressed  his  amazement  at  having  pointed  out
to  him  in  Paris  some  dusty  bundles  of  papers,  with
the remark that they had lain undisturbed  since

V  2


292  DECAY OF FEUDAL PRO  PERT  V IX  chap,  ix,

they  were  deposited  in  tlie  Arcliives  on  the  recon-
struction, after  the  close  of  the  Reign  of  Terror,  of
the  gloomily  famous  Committees  of  Public  Salvation
and  General  Security.  ^  But  you  have  classical
histories  of  the  Revolution,'  he  said  ;  '  have  not  these
documents  been  examined  by  their  writers?  '  '  No,'
was  the  reply,  'that  is  the  dust  of  1794.'

There  is,  however,  some  account  to  be  given  of
this  neglect,  especially  as  regards  the  cahiers.  One
cause  of  it  has  undoubtedly  been  that  preference  for
general  explanations  of  phenomena  which  has  always
been  a  heavy  drawback  on  French  genius  ;  and  the
general  explanations  of  the  first  French  Revolution
current  in  France  are  a  multitude.  But  another,  and
probably  the  most  powerful,  cause  is  the  nearness  of
the  Revolution  itself  De  Tocqueville,  who  first  dug
deep  into  the  cahiers^  and  showed  what  great  result*s
might  be  obtained  by  thoroughly  exploring  that  mine,
has  left  the  strikino;  remark  that  no  foreimer  can
properly  appreciate  the  state  of  sentiment  in  one
section  of  French  society,  where  there  is  scarcely  a
single  family  in  which  the  guillotining  of  a  parent  or
a  near  relative  is  not  a  recollection  or  a  fresh  tradi-
tion ;  and  one  of  the  fruits  of  this  condition  of  feel-
inof  is  a  stron^^  reluctance  to  connect  the  France  of
the  Revolution  with  the  France  of  the  Monarcliy.
Another,  and  a  much  larger,  portion  of  the  nation
traces its political and  social  rights  to  the  period


CHAr.  IX.  FRANCE A^'D EXGLAXD.  293

duriiio:  which  all  this  blood  was  shed  ;  and  hence
arises  a  manifest  disposition  to  regard  the  Revolution
as  a  historical  catastrophe,  terrible  but  inevitable,  and
to  look  on  the  society  which  succeeded  it  as  no  more
closely  related  to  that  which  preceded  it  than  is  the
veo'etation  which  has  o^rown  on  the  sides  of  Vesuvius
after  an  eruption  to  the  vegetation  which  the  lava
destroyed.  Between  unwillingness  to  find  the
parentage  of  the  Revolution  in  the  old  regime  before
it,  and  unwillingTiess  to  have  its  crimes  placed  in  full
light,  the  first  condition  of  scientific  history,  the
critical  examination  of  its  sources  was  too  much  and
too  long  overlooked.  But  of  late,  and  mainly  owing
to  the  influence  of  that  mvaluable  work  on  the  rela-
tions between  Old  and  Xew  France,  on  which  De
Tocqueville  was  still  engaged  at  his  death,  the  busi-
ness of  correcting  preconceived  opinions  by  the  aid
of  authentic  historical  materials  has  been  rapidly
proceeding.  Two  interesting  books,  one  by  M.
Chassin  ('  Le  Genie  de  la  Revolution  '),  and  the  other
by  M.  Doniol  ('  La  Revolution  Franc^aise  et  la  Feo-
dalite'),  are  among  the  first-fruits  of  renewed  ex-
amination of  the  cahiers  ;  and  in  the  three  volumes
of  his  '  Origins  of  Contemporary  France,'  whicli
]\I.  Taine  has  lately  published,  he  has  given  us  in-
stalments of  a  work  which,  apart  from  its  great
literary  merits,  is  not  unworthy  to  be  compared
witli  De  Tocqucvillc's  fragment  in  the  originality  and


294  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROPERTY L\  cn.vp.  tx.

carefulness  of  the  research  of  which  it  gives  proof.
M.  Doniol  states  that  great  quantities  of  the  original
cahiers  are  to  be  found  in  the  French  Archives  ;  but,
though  some  of  them  were  separately  printed  in  1789,
I  am  not  acquainted  with  any  collection  of  them
fuller  than  that  published,  many  years  ago,  hj
Prudhomme  and  Laurent  de  Mezieres.

But  although  the  diligent  prosecution  of  these
inquiries  is  comparatively  recent,  it  has  already  led
to  considerable  results.  Some  new  facts  have  been
discovered,  some  already  known  have  been  brought
into  clearer  light,  and  several  errors  have  been  de-
tected. Among  the  passages  in  the  Revolution
hitherto  obscure  which  may  now  be  better  under-
stood, one  or  two  deserve  especial  remark.  The
hostility  of  the  cultivating  peasantry  to  the  territorial
nobility  in  all  provinces  of  France  except  Brittany
and  Anjou,  has  generally  been  recognised,  not  merely
as  one  of  the  causes  of  the  Revolution,  but  as  the
chief  cause  of  the  rapidity  with  which  it  gathered
head  and  of  the  comparative  stability  which  it  mani-
fested. The  provincial  cities  and  towns  were  slowly
drawn  into  the  movement  throuo-h  the  action  of
Jacobin  clubs,  gradually  established  in  them,  and
taking  their  instructions  from  the  central  body  in
Paris,  which  no  doubt  from  the  first  was  a  furnace
of  revolutionary  agitation.  But  the  peasantry,  always
excepting  those  of  the  western  provinces,  were  from


CHAP.  IX.  FKAXCE A^'D EXGLAXD.  295

the  very  beginning  enthusiasts  for  the  destruction  of
the  ancient  institutions,  and  so  they  remained  until
they  gained  their  objects. This  universal  hatred  of
the  peasants  had  for  one  of  its  effects  a  condition  of
the  country  which,  no  doubt,  has  often  perplexed  the
reader  of  the  ordinary  histories. After  a  while  France
became hermetically closed, and escape from the
guillotine  became  almost  impossible. Some  writers,
in  explaining  this,  have  attributed  to  Robespierre  a
special  genius  for  police  organisation  ;  but  the  truth
seems  to  be  that  the  cultivating  classes,  who  at  first
witnessed  with  pleasure  the  emigration  of  the  nobility,
constituted  themselves  a  voluntary  police  as  soon  as
they  found  that,  by  detaining  the  nobles  in  France,
they  would  probably  send  them  to  the  scaffold. This
extremity  of  detestation  is  not  sufficiently  accounted
for  by  assigning  general  reasons  for  it. The  com-
plicity of  the  peasants  with  the  rulers  of  the  Reign
of  Terror  was  undoubtedly  connected  with  a  wish  to
preserv'e  certain  advantages  which  they  had  obtained
just  at  the  very  period  when  France  became  a  re-
public ;  and  similarly  an  earlier  series of  incidents,
which  testify  to  the  same  unqualified  bitterness  of
feeling,  are  now  shown  to  have  had  a  special  rather
than  a  general  cause. M.  Taine  has  described  in  the
subdivision  of  his work  called '  L 'Anarchic  Spon-
tan^e ' those terriljle outbreaks of  violence which
occurred even as early as 1789, and which are


296  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROPERTY l.\  chap.  ix.

sometimes  designated  collectively  the  '  burning  of
the  chateaux/  What  is  now  seen  clearly,  but  had
only  been  suspected  before,  is  that  the  acts  of  the
incendiaries  had  a  distinct  object.^  The  object  in
setting  fire  to  a  chateau  was  to  burn  the  muniment-
room  ;  and  the  object  of  burnmgthe  muniment-room
was  to  destroy  the  titres  or  title-deeds  of  the  seigneur
of  the  fief— as  we  should  say,  of  the  lord  of  the
manor.  All  this  would  be  hardly  intelligible  but
for  a  fact,  now  established,  which  possibly  requires  a
lawyer  rather  than  an  historian  to  appreciate  it — the
fact  that  the  French  nobility  were  everywhere  en-
gaged in  never-ceasmg  litigation  with  the  peasants.
The  majority  of  the  French  nobles,  it  should  be
understood,  had  little  or  no  analogy  to  what  we
understand  by  a  landed  aristocracy.  A  certain  num-
ber of  them,  relatively  but  a  few,  had  great  estates  ;
but  the  largest  part  of  them  had  little  or  no  land  let
for  rent  to  lessees  or  tenants-at-will.  The  multitude
of  petty  noblemen  and  gentlemen — classes  indistin-
guishable from one another  in Old France — lived

'  See  Taine,  vol.  i.  of  La  li evolution  (vol.  ii.  of  the  entire
work),  pp.  94  et  seq.  It  will  be  observed  in  how  many  cases  the
attack  on  the  chateau  ends  with  the  burning  or  pillage  of  the
muniments.  M.  Taine  observes  that  the  anarchy  was  sure  to
spread.  'Remarquez,'  he  writes,  *que  les  chartriers  et  les  titres
feodaux  sont  encore  intacts  dans  les  trois  quarts  de  France,
que  le  paysan  a  besoin  de  les  voir  dispai^aitre,  et  qu'il  est  toujours
arme.'


CHAP.  IX. FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND.  297

on  the  money  produce  of  the  small  incidental  services
due,  as  we  should  say,  from  owners  of  land  held  in
copyhold  to  the  lord  of  the  manor.  Thus  they  had
their  finances^  the  '  fines  '  of  our  copyhold  tenure,  the
dues  payable  to  the  lord  by  the  peasant  proprietor  on
death  or  on  the  sale  of  his  land.  They  had  also  their
monopolies,  such  as  the  obligation  of  the  peasant  to
send  his  grain  to  the  lord's  mill  for  grinding,  or  his
beast  to  the  lord's  market  for  sale.  And  they  had
a  number  of  miscellaneous  and  nondescript  sources
of  income,  such  as  a  sole  right  to  have  a  dovecote
stocked  with  pigeons,  which  fed  on  the  peasants'  corn.
Now  on  the  legal  foundations  of  these  privileges  a
strong  controversy  was  proceeding  among  the  French
lawyers  during  the  half-century  preceding  the  Eevo-
lution.  Some  maintained  the  legal  doctrine  which
had  made  great  way  in  France  at  the  period  when  feu-
dalism was  really  strong — Nulle  terre  sans  seigneur^
'  No  lord,  no  land.'  On  this  principle,  the  presump-
tion was  always  in  favour  of  the  liability  to  feudal
dues,  and  the  right  to  them  could  always  be  estab-
lished by  prescription.  But  another  school,  no  doubt
unconsciously  influenced  by  the  economical  doctrines
which  had  excited  such  interest  among  the  educated
classes  in  the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,
contended  that  the  lord  must  show  his  titrcs^  and
almost  went  the  length  of  arguing  that  no  feudal
rights  had  a  legal  basis  unless  documentary  evidence


298  DECAY OF FEUDAL PTIOPERTV IX  chap.  IX.

of  title  could  be  produced.  The  struggle  between
the  competing  principles  produced  an  enormous
amount  of  litigation,  sometimes  the  lord  encroaching
on  the  strength  of  one  view,  sometimes  the  peasant
on  the  strength  of  the  other.  In  any  event,  the
title-deeds  of  the  lord  had  become  of  the  greatest
importance,  and  the  advantage  which  the  tenants
gained  by  their  destruction  is  obvious  enough.  At
a  later  date  it  lost  its  value  in  the  eyes  of  the
peasantry,  because  more  drastic  remedies  for  their
grievances  had  then  been  devised.  The  legislation
of  the  Constituent  Assembly  swept  away  the  greatest
part  of  the  feudal  dues,  and  provided  compensation
for  only  a  part  of  them.  The  Legislative  or  Second
Assembly  abolished  the  residue  and  withdrew  the
compensation.  The  Convention,  or  Third,  found
almost  nothing  to  destroy,  though  it  was  passionately
eager  to  fasten  on  a  hated  institution,  and  though
the  Revolutionary  lawyers,  who  abounded  in  it,  were
the  real  authors  of  the  legislative  provisions,  after-
wards engrafted  on  the  Code  Napoleon,  which  for
ever  prevented  the  revival  of  feudal  ownership  in
France.  The  transfer  of  property  from  one  class  to
another  through  the  abolition  of  the  feudal  dues  was
much  more  important  than  has  been  commonly
supposed,  and  had  much  greater  influence  over  the
course  of  the  Revolution.  When  in  flxct  the  Revolu-
tion ceased  to be a social movement, it lost the


CHAP.  IX. FRAXCE  AXD  EXGLAND.  299

greatest  part  of  its  aliment,  and  nothing  remained
for  its  authors  except  to  tear  one  another  to  pieces.

While,  however,  the  re -examination  of  the  cahiers
has  placed  beyond  question  the  character  of  the  griev-
ances of  the  French  peasantry,  it  has  raised  some
new  problems.  Bitterly  and  strongly  as  these  griev-
ances were  felt,  were  they  of  extraordinary  propor-
tions? Does  the  comparison  of  the  relations  between
the  French  peasant  and  his  lord  with  similar  relations
in  other  countries  suo^scest  that  the  small  cultivator
in  France  had  exceptional  and  intolerable  burdens  to
bear?

If  I  were  to  say  that  the  first  French  Revolution
took  place  because  a  great  part  of  the  soil  of
France  was  held  on  Copyhold  Tenure,  the  state-
ment would  doubtless  sound  like  a  paradox.  Those
who  have  any  practical  knowledge  of  Copyhold,  know
it  to  be  certainly  an  inconvenient  form  of  landed  pro-
perty, but  hold  it  probably  to  be,  like  all  property,
rather  a  privilege  than  a  grievance.  Those  again  who
have  paid  any  attention  to  its  history,  have  possibly
heard  that  Copyhold  Tenure  has  descended  from  the
precarious  holdings  of  Bondmen  or  Slaves,  a  condi-
tion to  which  the  greatest  part  of  the  Anglo-Saxon
population  is  supposed  to  have  been  reduced  after  the
alleged  destruction  of  the  ancient  land-law  of  England
and  confiscation  of  its  soil  by  William  the  Conqueror.
Tlio  popular  theory  of  the  origin  of  Copyhold,  or  at


300  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROPERTY IX  chap.  tx.

all  events  the  theory  in  which  most  lawyers  are  edu-
cated, is  explicitly  set  forth  in  a  tract  on  the  ^  Use  of
the  Law/ commonly  printed  in  collections of  the
writings  of  Lord  Bacon  (Spedding's  edition,  vol.  vii.
pp. 481 et  seq.) The  Conqueror is  described as
having  ^  got  by  conquest  all  the  land  of  the  realm
(except  Church  lands  and  the  lands  of  Kent)  into  his
own  hands  in  demesne,  taking  from  every  man  all
estate, tenure,  property,  and  liberty of  and  in the
same.' He  then  distributed  the soil of England
among  his  tenants  in  capite,  '  reserving  some  retri-
bution of  rents  or  services  or  both  to  him  and  his
heirs  '  ; and '  by  example  and resemblance  of  the
king's  policy  in  these  institutions  of  tenures,  the  great
men  and  gentlemen  of  the  realm  did  the  like  as  near
as  they  could.' Each  of  them,  after  reserving  to  him-
self the  land  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  his
mansion-house,  or  manor,  gave  a  certain  portion  of
the  '  uttermost  parts  '  of  his  estate  to  some  '  trusty
servants,  to  find  a  liorse  for  war  and  go with  him
when he went with  the  king to the  wars,  .  .  .
which  tenant  is  called  a  tenant  of  knio-ht- service.'
Smaller  parcels  of  hand  he  assigned  to  socage  tenants,
who  were  to  plough  part  of  the  domain  of  the  lord
and  bring  home  the  harvest ;  and  the  remainder  of  this
domain,  '  which  he  kept  to  himself,'  he  cultivated  by
his  bondmen,  and  '  he  appointed  them  at  the  courts
of  his  manor  how  they  should  hold  it,  making  an


CHAP.  IX. FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND.  301

entry  of  it  into  the  roll  of  his  court ;  yet  still  in  the
lord's  power  to  take  it  away  ;  and  therefore  they  were
called  tenants -at-will  by  copy  of  court-roll,  being  in
truth  bondmen  at  the  beginning  ;  but,  having  at-
tained freedom  of  their  persons,  they  are  now  called
copyholders,  are  and  so  privileged  by  the  custom  that
the  lord  cannot  put  them  out/  The  writer  adds  that
*  Manors  being  in  this  sort  at  first  made,  it  grew  out
of  reason  that  the  lord  of  the  manor  should  hold  a
court,  which  is  no  more  than  to  assemble  his  tenants
at  times  to  be  by  him  appointed.  .  .  .  This  court  is
called  a  Court  Baron  ;  and  herein  a  man  may  sue  for
any  debt  or  trespass  under  forty  shillings'  value  ;  and
the  freeholders  are  to  judge  of  the  cause  upon  the
proofs  produced  on  both  sides.'

The  tract  on  the  '  Use  of  the  Law '  appears  to  be
wrongly  attributed  to  Lord  Bacon,  who  has  elsewhere
shown  that  he  had  much  sounder  ideas  than  its  writer
of  the  true  history  of  English  institutions.  The
account,  however,  which  it  gives  of  the  origin  of
Manors  and  of  copyhold  tenures  is  the  one  which,  on
the  whole,  has  generally  prevailed,  and  there  is  un-
doubtedly a  good  deal  in  the  received  authorities  on
copyhold  to  suggest  it.  Yet  it  is  certainly  not  true,
and  perhaps  the  least  drawback  on  it  is  that  it  is
not  true.  For,  by  substituting  for  the  truth  a  set
of  plausible  fictions,  it  gives  a  wrong  point  to  some
instructive political lessons, and has besides the


ont


02  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROPERTY IN  cuap.  ix.

mischievous  indirect  effect  of  disguising  from  us  that
institutions,  like  forms  of  organic  life,  are  subject  to
the  great  law  of  evolution.

The  real  facts  are  being  gradually,  though  but
slowly,  established  by  very  recent  researches,  but,  so
far  as  they  can  be  stated  in  the  space  at  our  com-
mand, they  are  as  follows  : —

When  Western  Europe  has  settled  down  into  com-
parative peace  after  the  deadly  strife  which  followed,
first,  the  irruption  of  the  Germanic  races  into  the
Roman  provinces,  and  next,  the  disruption  of  the  Car-
lovingian  Empire,  and  when  the  feudal  world  has  at  last
been  constituted,  it  wears  superficially  a  variety  and
irregularity  of  outline  very  unlike  the  apparent  uni-
formity of  the  Roman  Empire.  But,  on  close  inspec-
tion, all  feudal  society  is  seen  to  be  a  reproduction  of
a  single  typical  form.  This  unit  consists  of  a  group
of  men  settled  on  a  definite  space  of  land,  and  form-
ing what  we  Englishman  call  a  Manor,  and  what  in
France  was  called  a  Fief.  The  great  misconception
which  runs  through  the  account  of  this  group  which
I  took  from  the  tract  passing  under  Bacon's  name,  is
as  follows  :  the  writer  regards  the  Manor  entirely  as
a  mode  of  property,  the  manorial  organisation  as  a
mere  proprietary  arrangement.  But  the  Manor  or
Fief,  in  its  origin,  was  as  much  a  political  as  a  proprie-
tary body,  as  nearly  akin  to  a  State  as  to  an  Estate.
It  retained  even  in  its  decay  some  of  the  characteristic


CHAP.  IX.  FKANCE AND ENGLAND.  30


o


and  curiously  persistent  marks  of  Aryan  political
organisms.  The  Lord  is  the  ySacriXeu?,  the  rex,  the
king.^  The  free  tenants  are  the  yepovaia,  the
senate,  the  council.  The  villeins  are  the  mass  of
the  people  ;  and  below  them  are  the  true  bondmen,
the  slaves,  or  thralls,  or,  in  later  legal  language,  the
villeins  in  gross.  The  Signorial  Court,  the  Court
Baron,  is  the  ancient  village  assembly,  in  which  the
administration  of  justice  has  now  taken  precedence  of
other  public  concerns,  but  in  which  those  public  con-
cerns continue  to  be  discussed,  the  lord  presiding,
the  free  tenants  advisino;,  the  villeins  attendin^:  with-
out  definite  share  or  voice  in  the  deliberations,  like
the  crowd  in  the  Homeric  Agora.  Those  fines,  dues,
and  monopolies  which  still  annoy  the  English  copy-
holder of  our  day,  which  went  far  to  cause  the  first

^  In  the  series  of  papers,  called  *  Souvenirs  d'Enfance/  which
M.  Renan  is  publishing  in  the  Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,  he  de-
scribes a  class  of  territorial  nobles  who  were  found  in  Brittany,
just  before  the  Revolution,  and  who  were  quite  distinct  from  the
later  nobility  of  royal  creation.  They  had  fallen  into  great
poverty,  but  they  received  much  consideration  from  the  peasantiy,
who  regarded  them  as  the  lay  chiefs  of  the  parishes  of  which  the
cur^s  were  the  ecclesiastical  heads.  M.  Renan  mentions  the  re-
markable fact  that  they  touched  for  the  king's  evil.  He  says  of
one  of  them  :  *  On  croyait  que  comme  chef  il  etait  d^positaire  de
la  force  de  son  sang,  qu'il  poss6dait  ^minemment  les  dons  de  sa
race,  et  qu'il  pouvait  avec  sa  salive  et  ses  attouchements  la  relever
quand  elle  6tait  affaiblie.  On  (itait  persuade  que  pour  op6rer  des
gu^risons  de  cette  sorte  il  fallait  un  nombre  6norme  de  quartiers
de  noblesse.' — Revue  des  Deux  Mondes ^  March  15,  1876.


304  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROrERTY IN  chap.  ix.

French  Revolution,  and  which  had  to  be  cleared  away
by  a  timely  stroke  of  statesmanship  before  Prussia
could  begin  a  struggle  to  relieve  herself  from  French
military  despotism,  were  in  their  origin  rather  in  the
nature  of  taxes  than  in  the  nature  of  rent.  They
represent  the  ancient  provision  for  the  service  of  the
little  village  commonwealth.  Some  of  them  may
have  sprung  from  the  oppressions  of  the  lord,  and  some
from  agreement  with  him  ;  but  the  greatest  part  had
their  origin  in  regulated  force,  the  sovereignty  of  the
little  State.

The  Lord,  the  Seigneur  of  France,  is  answerable
for  the  conduct  of  the  whole  manorial  group  to  its
superiors  and  its  neighbours.  He  is  the  manager  or
governor  of  the  little  society,  with  the  advice  of  his
free  tenants.  He  is  arbiter  of  its  affairs  in  the  sig-
norial  court.  He  is  not  the  owner  of  all  the  land  of
the  Manor  ;  but  he  generally  owns  some  of  it  under
the  name  of  his  domain.  Much,  however,  of  his
revenues,  and  here  and  there  the  most  important  part
of  them,  consists  of  the  various  dues  payable  to  him
from  all  classes  of  his  tenants.  Immediately  under
him  are  his  freeholders,  who  render  him  military  or
other  honourable  service  and  do  suit,  which  involves
giving  an  opinion  on  the  judicial  or  other  matters
arising  in  the  Court  Baron.  But  the  greatest  part  of
the  land  included  in  the  Manor  or  Fief,  in  some  cases
much  the  largest  part  of  it,  is in  the  hands  of  the


CHAP.  li, FEANCE  AND  ENGLAND.  305

Villeins.  It  was  inevitable  that  the  position  of  this
stratum  of  the  manorial  community  should  be  much
misunderstood  until  the  Comparative  Method  of  In-
quiry let  in  light  upon  it  through  observation  of  those
more  backward  societies  which  have  preserved  to  our
days  the  life  and  social  forms  of  the  eleventh  and
twelfth  centuries.  The  villeins  owe  to  the  lord  all
sorts  of  dues  and  services,  personal  labour,  among
others,  on  the  lands  which  form  his  domain ;  they
may  not  leave  the  Manor  without  his  permission  ;  no
one  of  them  can  succeed  to  the  land  of  another  with-
out his  assent  ;  and  the  legal  theory  even  is  that  the
movable  property  of  the  villein  belongs  to  the  lord.
Yet  it  may  confidently  be  laid  down  that,  in  the
light  of  modern  research,  none  of  these  disadvantages
prove  an  absolutely  servile  status,  and  that  all  may
be  explained  without  reference  to  it.^  Those  who
remember  that,  twenty-five  years  ago,  the  Russian
serfs  were  popularly  supposed  in  England  to  be  as
much  slaves  as  the  negroes  of  a  Mississippi  plan-
ter, but  nevertheless  are  aware  that  under  the  great

*  Bracton  most  clearly  explains  that  in  the  thirteenth  cen-
tury Villenage  was  a  tenure  and  not  a  personal  status.  Either  a
freeman  or  a  bondman  might  hold  in  villenage,  but  *  the  tene-
ment changes  not  the  condition  of  a  freeman  any  more  than  of  a
slave.  For  a  freeman  may  hold  in  mere  villenage,  doing  whatever
service  thereto  belongs,  and  shall  not  the  less  be  free  since  he  does
this  in  regard  of  his  villenage  and  not  in  regard  of  his  person.'  I
give  the  whole  passage  in  Note  A  to  this  chapter.


306  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROFERTY IN  chap.  ix.

measure  of  1861  the  serfs,  and  not  the  lords,  obtained
much  the  largest  part  of  the  land,  may  be  prepared
for  the  assertion  that  the  villeins  of  the  middle  ages
were  never  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word  slaves,
and  never  ceased  to  be  in  some  sense  landed  pro-
prietors.

To  the  typical  form  which  I  have  described.
Kingdoms  were  adjusted  no  less  than  Manors.  The
sovereign  who  became  the  most  powerful  in  Europe,
the  King  of  France,  was  the  lord  of  an  exalted
Manor.  His  free  tenants  were  the  Dukes  of  Nor-
mandy and  Burgundy,  the  Counts  of  Toulouse  and
Champagne  ;  his  domain  consisted  of  Paris  and  of
the  old  Duchy  of  France.  These  continental  insti-
tutions were  reproduced  in  England,  but,  as  has  often
been  the  case,  icith  a  difference.  The  great  power  of
the  early  Anglo-Norman  kings  came  from  their
allowing  nobody  to  be  absolutely  interposed,  like  a
Duke  of  Burgundy,  between  themselves  and  their
subjects,  and  from  their  exacting  fealty  and  therefore
military  service  from  all  Englishmen  (Freeman,  ^  Nor-
man Conquest,'  iv.  694).  We  can  trace  the  Manorial
group  backwards  to  an  earlier  social  form,  a  body  of
men  democratically  or  rather  aristocratically  governed,
in  which  the  free  tenants  had  as  yet  no  lord,  the
village  community.^ We  can  also  trace  its  gradual

*  See Note  A to this chapter, '  Village  Communities and
Manors.'


CHAP.  IX.  FRAjSXE and ENGLAND.  307

dissolution,  until  the  forms  of  landed  property  were
established  ^vith  which  we  are  all  familiar.  The
exact  point  before  us  is,  Why  did  the  Manor  in  its
decay  produce  such  different  results  in  England  and
France?  Why  did  its  transformation  end  in  one
country  in  a  revolution  which  is  an  epoch  of  history?
Why,  in  another,  in  a  somewhat  inconvenient  form  of
landed  property?

It  is,  in  the  first  place,  to  be  observed  that  the
French  peasant  tenures  of  1789  wear,  externally^  the
strongest  resemblance  to  the  copyhold  tenures  which
were  found  at  the  same  date  in  England,  and  which
indeed  still  survive,  though  their  area  is  much
limited.  From  my  own  researches,  I  should  be
inclined  to  doubt  whether  there  is  a  single  service  of
the  French  peasantry  established  by  authentic  evi-
dence of  which  at  least  a  trace  cannot  be  discovered
among  the  incidents  of  English  copyholds.  Arthur
Young,  who  travelled  just  before  and  just  after  the
outbreak  of  the  Revolution,  singles  out  certain  French
services  for  their  especial  grotesqueness,  but  feudal
obligations  nearly  answering  to  several  of  them  are
mentioned  by  one  or  other  of  the  witnesses  examined
by  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons
on  Copyholds  which  sat  in  1850  and  1851.  There
are,  no  doubt,  certain  alleged  incidents  of  the  French
tenure,  implying  an  extreme  degradation  of  the
tenant,  which  do  not  appear  to  have  ever  had  their

X  2


308  DECAY OF FEUDAL mOrERTr IX  chap.  ix.

counterparts  in  England,  though  they  have  been
thought  to  be  discoverable  in  the  half- legendary
history  of  Scotland  ;  but  the  evidence  of  them  has  of
late  been  considered  to  be  extremely  doubtful,  and  it
certainly  consists  in  some  cases  of  a  misapprehension
of  the  meaning  of  old  French  juridical  terms.  On  the
whole,  the  correspondence  of  the  French  and  English
tenures  is  remarkably  close  ;  and  nothing  can  exceed
the  surprise  of  M.  Doniol — the  first  of  his  country-
men, I  believe,  who  has  become  aUve  to  this  corre-
spondence— that  grievances  which  all  his  authorities
declare  to  have  brought  about  the  great  Eevolution,
are  in  England  grievances  of  no  political  significance
whatever.  M.  Doniol  has  imamied  the  followms:
infjenious  illustration  of  the  disadvantao'es  of  the
existing  English  copyhold  tenure.  He  supposes  a
capitalist  from  the  South  of  England  beguming
negotiations  for  the  ])urchase  of  an  estate  m  the
North  which  has  struck  his  fancy.  His  solicitor  tells
him  that  Manors  abound  in  the  Northern  counties,
and  that  the  estate  is  mostly  copyhold.  On  further
inquiry,  he  is  informed  that  the  land  is  subject  to
arbitrary  fines — the  finances  of  old  French  law — and
that  a  sum  of  money  is  therefore  payable  to  the  lord  of
the  manor  every  time  a  copyholder  dies  or  sells  his
land  ;  and  every  time  the  lord  dies,  a  similar  sum
must  be  paid  to  his  successor.  These  arhitrary  fines
were  once  really  arbitrary,  but  the  King's  Court  long


CHAP.  IX.  FRAJ^CE AND ENGLAND.  309

ago  declared  that  (save  in  some  very  exceptional
cases)  they  must  be  reasonable  and  must  not  exceed
two  years'  value  of  the  land.  The  consequence,
however,  is,  that  every  time  any  one  in  a  series  of
hereditary  copyhold  tenants  (father,  son,  or  grandson)
dies,  and  every  time  a  death  occurs  in  a  similar  series
of  lords  of  the  manor,  two  years'  value  of  the  land
must  be  paid.  Hence,  M.  Doniol's  would-be  pur-
chaser is  warned  that  it  never  can  be  worth  his  while
to  make  improvements  on  his  property,  since  they
would  only  add  to  the  standard  of  the  line  leviable
in  these  eventualities.  He  is  further  warned  that,
on  his  death,  the  most  valuable  piece  of  personal
property  he  possesses  will  be  liable  to  be  seized  by
the  lord  under  the  name  of  a  Heriot  ;  and  it  is  a  fact
that  the  Pitt  Diamond  and  the  famous  picture  of
Rubens,  the  ^  Chapeau  de  Paille,'  which  is  the  gem
of  the  Peel  Collection  in  the  National  Gallery,  were
barely  saved  from  seizure  as  Heriots,  and  the  most
valuable  racehorse  of  its  time  was  actually  seized,
their  owners  happening  to  liave  some  fragments  of
copyhold  amid  their  estates.  M.  Doniol's  solicitor
then  goes  on  to  enumerate  a  number  of  smaller
inconveniences  of  the  tenure.  One  of  them  was  in
France  one  of  the  chief  grievances  of  the  peasantry.
On  being  properly  summoned  the  copyholder  must
supply  a  man  to  assist  in  reaping  the  lord's  harvest.
In old France, tluj peasant went himself, but  in


310  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROPERTV TX  chap.  IX'

England  it  merely  comes  f o  this,  that  the  copyholder
loses  a  day's  work  of  one  of  his  labourers  ;  the  lord,
however,  does  not  gain  it,  for  the  labourer  sent  to  him
does  as  little  work  as  possible,  and  by  the  custom  he
is  entitled  to  a  dinner,  which  is  worth  more  than  the
value  of  his  labour  at  its  best.

M.  Doniol  concludes  by  asking  who  in  his  senses
could  buy  such  a  property.  The  incidents  of  copy-
hold which  he  specifies  have  a  real  existence  and
are  very  familiar  to  lawyers  ;  many  others  equally
singular  in  the  eyes  of  a  foreigner  were  described  to
the  Select  Committees  of  the  House  of  Commons.
Nevertheless,  as  M.  Doniol  himself  admits,  there  is
a  certain  fallacy  in  his  account.  For  purposes  of
illustration,  he  assumes  that  all  copyhold  land  is
burdened  everywhere  with  these  onerous  services.
The  truth  is  that,  the  picture  is  made  up  by  uniting
burdens  spread  over  a  great  number  of  manors  ;  and
it  may  be  asserted  generally  that  in  the  southern
counties  of  En^rland  manorial  liabilities  are  seldom  of
much  importance  ;  and  everywhere  they  have  been
extinguished  in  great  quantities  during  the  last  five-
and-twenty  years  by  the  proceedings  of  the  Copyhold
Commissioners.

The  reasons  which  may  ultimately  lead  to  the
compulsory  enfranchisement  on  equitable  terms  of  all
English  copyhold  land  are  not  at  all  likely  to  be  the
grievances  of  the  copyholder. If  he  were  to  urge  them,.


CHAP.  IX.  FRA^X'E AXD ENGLAND.  311

the  answer  openty  or  tacitly  given  would  be  that  he
is  fortunate  to  have  even  an  inconvenient  kind  of
property,  and  that  he  is  no  more  entitled  to  the
public  pity  than  a  shareholder  in  a  railway  which
pays  intermittent  dividends  or  none  at  all.  Very
probably  he  would  be  told  that,  whatever  be  the
disadvantages  of  his  property,  they  were  doubtless
allowed  for  in  the  price  which  he  or  his  predecessors
paid  for  it.  The  grounds  on  which  enfranchisement
will  be  enforced,  if  at  all,  will  be,  that  copyhold
tenure  is  an  obstacle  to  agricultural  improvement,  on
which  it  entails  a  direct  penalty,  and  that  it  is  a
restraint  on  the  productiveness  of  the  soil.  It  is  to
be  remarked,  however,  that  this  reasoning,  or  at  least
its  cogency,  is  extremely  modern.  As  recently  as
two  centuries  ago,  an  observer,  not  over- sensitive  to
other  people's  interests,  described  the  grievances  of
copyholders  in  language  curiously  like  that  used  of
the  wrongs  of  the  French  peasantry  in  the  cahiers
sent  up  to  the  French  States -General.  Eoger  North,
in  his  delightful  book,  '  The  Lives  of  the  Norths,'  tells
us  that  the  Lord  Keeper  Guilford  qualified  himself
for  practice  at  the  bar  by  acting  as  the  steward  of
various  manors,  and  he  quotes  a  good  deal  of  the
Lord  Keeper's  conversation  on  the  subject  of  manorial
rights.  Guilford  was  in  the  habit  of  saying  that  he
found  himself  the  executioner  of  the  cruelty  of  the
Lords  and  Ladies  of  Manors  upon  poor  men  ;  that


312  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROPERTY IN  chap.  ix.

small  tenements  and  pieces  of  land  which  had  been
men's  inheritances  for  generations  were  devoured  by
fines  ;  that  it  was  wonderful  how  Parliament,  which
took  away  the  royal  tenures  in  capite^  had  never
relieved  the  poorest  landowners  of  the  nation  from
extortion  and  oppression,  and  that  the  tenure  ought
to  be  abolished.  Here  is  the  very  muttering  of  the
volcano  before  the  French  revolutionary  eruption  ;
but  there  is  this  difference,  that  the  class  compassion-
ated by  Xorth  is  a  relatively  small  one  as  well  as  a
poor  one,  for  he  goes  on  to  observe  on  the  large
number  of  manors  which  had  become  altogether  or
partially  extinct  in  England.

Now,  if  a  hundred  years  ago,  a  great  part  of
the  class  which,  as  a  fact,  consisted  of  agricultural
labourers,  and  a  considerable  part  of  the  class  which,
as  a  fact,  consisted  of  tenant  farmers,  had  been  made
up  of  copyholders  standing  to  the  Lord  of  the  Manor
in  the  relations  which  North  describes,  and  if,  under
the  law  of  the  equal  division  of  property  these  copy-
holders were  constantly  multiplying  their  numbers
without  severing  themselves  from  the  land,  there
would  liave  been  in  this  country  a  state  of  agrarian
society  very  nearly  resembling  that  of  France.  It
must  be  allowed,  I  think,  that  if  no  similar  convulsion
had  resulted  from  it,  it  would  not  have  been  for  want
of  explosive  material.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  nothing
of  the  kind  occurred,  and  the  veiy  suggestion  of  an


CHAP.  IX.  FBANCE AND ENGLAND.  313

English  E evolution  caused  by  the  oppression  of
copyhold  tenants  strikes  every  one  as  an  absurdity.
How  then  came  the  feudal  edifice  of  which  the
outline  had  been  extremely  similar  in  England  and
France,  to  break  into  such  different  shapes?  How
came  the  same  institution  to  become  a  grievance  of
the  first  order  in  one  country,  at  most  an  incon-
venience in  the  other?  The  answer  to  this  question
divides  itself  into  many  branches  ;  some  of  them  I
could  not  follow  without  retracing  much  of  the  long
and  intricate  history  of  English  land-law,  and  without
using  much  technical  language,  but  the  consideration
of  a  few  may  not  be  out  of  place  here.

One  powerful  cause  of  the  diff*erence  lay  in  the
strong  distinction  between  the  judicial  organisation
of  France and of  England. In  both  countries,  a
considerable  part  of  the  popular  law,  the  law  which
affected the mass of  the people  in most  of  their
concerns,  had been  once  administered  by  the  local
courts,  the  Manor  courts,  and  signorial  courts,  pre-
sided over  theoretically  by  the  lord,  but  practically
by  an  expert  deputy,  the  steward,  attorney,  or  hailli.
The  French  signorial  court  is  extinct,  and  the  only
picture  which  remains  is  a  caricature,  in  the  play  of
Keaumarchais  called  the  '  Mariage  de  Figaro.' Yet
even  the  sketch  of  Beaumarchais  is  a  sketch  of  a
tribunal  in  its  way  powerful  and  important,  and  thus
very unlike  those  Manor  courts  which,  though  still


314  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROPEHTY IX  chap.  tx.

summoned  in  our  day  for  the  transaction  of  business,
hetray  in  every  part  of  their  proceeding  their  extreme
decay.  A  century  since,  the  English  Manor  court
was  very  much  what  it  now  is  ;  but  the  signorial
court  of  France  was  a  comparatively  flourishing
mstitution.  The  English  country  gentleman,  who
was  lord  of  the  manor,  was  administratively  a  person
of  great  authority  and  influence ;  but  his  ancient
jurisdiction  was  in  extreme  decrepitude,  and  the  only
judicial  powers  which  he  prized  were  probably  those
which  he  derived,  as  a  Justice  of  the  Peace,  from  the
King.  The  French  Seigneur,  on  the  other  hand,  was
administratively  a  cipher ;  as  Tocqueville  has  pointed
out,  the  agents  of  the  centralised  royal  authority  had
usurped  jill  serious  administrative  functions  ;  but
then  the  court  of  his  signory,  though  it  had  lost
much,  had  retained  a  good  deal  of  its  ancient  autho-
rity and  activity.

The  different  condition  of  the  local  jurisdictions
in  the  two  countries  was  certainly  due  to  the  different
action  upon  them  of  courts  outside  and  above  them.
In  England  the  King's  Courts  at  Westminster  Hall
constantly  corrected  the  jurisdiction  of  the  manorial
courts,  limiting  the  area  of  land  subject  to  it,  confin-
ing it  rigorously  to  specific  cases,  and  strictly  pre-
scribing the  manner  in  which  it  should  be  exercised.
The  heads  of  the  little  manorial  societies  long
struggled  against  what  they  deemed  to  be  an  usurpa-


CHAP.  IX. FEAXCE  AXD  EXGLAXD.  315

tion.  Too  few  manor  rolls  have  been  published  ;
but  in  those  which  have  been  made  accessible  you
frequently  find  the  lord  and  the  homage  (that  is,  the
assembly  of  free  tenants)  making  rules  against  resort
to  the  King's  Court.  Thus,  if  we  turn  to  page  239  of
Mr.  Scrope's  ^  History  of  the  Manor  of  Castle  Combe,'
we  find  an  entry  of  a  distress  made  on  the  goods  of  a
copyholder  for  violating  the  constitutional  rule  (com-
munis  ordinatio)  of  the  Manor,  that  '  no  tenant  is  in
any  way  or  for  any  reason  to  implead,  or  procure  the
impleading  of  any  other  tenant,  in  any  external
court.'  Not  only  did  the  King's  Courts  disregard  all
such  rules,  but  they  established  the  principle  that
the  lord  mio:ht  be  made  to  answer  to  the  Kino^  for
any  excess  of  his  authority,  or  of  his  customary  privi-
leges. Some  of  the  best-known  principles  limiting
manorial  rights  were  settled  in  this  way ;  among
others,  the  doctrine  whicli  in  its  origin  must  have
been  most  beneficial  to  the  copyholder,  that  all  so-
called  arbitrary"  fines  must  be  reasonable,  the  standard
of  reasonableness  being  taken  at  two  years'  value.
The  most  destructive  influence  exercised  by  the
King's  Courts  over  the  manorial  jurisdictions  con-
sisted probably  in  the  inclination  of  the  higher
tribunal  to  narrow  the  area  of  land  lield  on  tenures
traceable  to  the  ancient  villenage.  The  King's  Court
would  bind  a  lord  to  prove  strictly  that  a  parti-
cular piece  of  land  was copyhold. The  free  tenure,


316  DECAY OP FEUDAL rROPERTY IN  chap.  ix.

technically  called  socage,  was  thus  always  extend-
ing at  the  expense  of  servile  tenures  ;  and  Roger
North  expressly  tells  us  that,  at  the  time  of
which  he  writes — that  is,  about  the  middle  of  the
seventeenth  century — '  most  manors  in  England
were  more  than  half  lost.'

What  the  Courts  at  Westminster  Hall  were  to  the
English  Manor,  the  French  Parliaments  were  to  the
French  Fief.  They  were  originally  creations  of  the
King  ;  the  pedigree  of  the  Parliament  of  Paris  is  as
distinctly  traceable  as  that  of  the  Queen's  Bench  to  the
ancient  Curia  Regis  ;  and  originally  the  Parliaments
were  as  untiring  as  the  Courts  of  the  English  Kings,
and  in  the  teeth  of  far  fiercer  protests  from  the  French
nobility,  in  extending  the  authority  of  royal  law  at
the  cost  of  local  law.  Not  only  did  they  employ
against  the  signorial  courts  the  same  weapons  which
were  used  by  the  English  judges,  but  they  borrowed
a  special  instrument  of  attack  from  the  Roman  law,
by  insisting  on  their  right  to  hear  appeals  from  all
subordinate  jurisdictions.  Yet  there  is  no  doubt
that  this  hostility  slackened  after  a  while.  Although,
as  I  before  said,  a  special  current  of  decision  set  in  in
the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  yet,  on  the
whole,  the  later  doctrine  of  the  French  Parliaments
was  '  Nulle  terre  sans  seigneur  ; '  and  thus  there  was
always  a  presumption  against  the  existence  of  the
free  tenure  most  nearly  corresponding  to  our  socage.


CHAP.  EX. FKAXCE  AND  ENGLAND.  317

The  Parliament  of  Paris,  just  before  the  Revolution,
ordered  the  work  of  Boncerf,  '  On  the  Inconveniences
of  Feudal  Rights,'  to  be  publicly  burnt ;  and  the
decree  no  doubt  testifies  to  the  opinions  most  strongly
and  permanently  held  by  the  majorit}^  of  the  French
judges.

There  is  a  general  agreement  among  historians  of
French  law  that  this  later  tenderness  of  the  French
Parliaments  to  signorial  rights  and  signorial  jurisdic-
tions is  attributable  to  the  interest  which  the  French
^  nobility of  the  gown '  had acquired in signorial
privileges. The  change  of  feelmg  is  connected  with
the  innovation,  generally  regarded  as  disastrous,  by
which  offices  in  the  great  French  judicial  assemblies
became  purchasable  and  hereditary. Thenceforward,
as  M.  Fustel  de  Coulanges  has  observed,  a  judge  was
almost  invariably  a  man  of  inherited  wealth  ;  in  the
France  of  that  day,  the  only  investment  for  wealth
was  land  or  interests  in  land,  and  proj)rietorship  was
just  as  likely  to  consist  in  a  right  to  signorial  dues
as  in  ownership  of  the  soil. I  am  not  in  a  position
to  controvert  this  view  ;  yet  I  may  venture  to  inter-
pose the  remark  that  the  student  of  English  history
will  perhaps  doubt  whether  in  all  states  of  society
the  saleableness  of  judicial  office  is  an  unmixed  evil.
Our associations with  the French Parliaments do
them  a  certain  amount  of  injustice. 1  hey  had in
fact inherited, from a time Avhen leuislative and


318  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROrEKTY IX  chap.  ix.

judicial  power  were  not  clearly  separated  from  one
another,  a  claim  to  check  the  legislation  of  the  Kings
of  France,  by  refusing  to  register  their  edicts  when
they  were,  as  we  should  say,  unconstitutional.  Their
not  always  wise  and  almost  always  feeble  efforts  to
stand  in  the  way  of  high-handed  legislation,  are  apt
to  lead  us  into  contrasting  them  unfavourably  with
that  famous  body  bearing  the  same  name  which  has
so  long  made  laws  for  Englishmen.  But,  as  courts
of  justice,  they  were  extremely  remarkable,  more
especially  for  havmg  much  of  that  independence
which  we  are  used  to  consider  a  natural  and  necessary
characteristic  of  legislatures.  The  very  defects  of  their
constitution  contributed  to  this  independence.  While
the  justice  admmistered  in  the  English  Courts  was
from  very  early  times  more  emphatically  than  in  any
other  European  country  the  King's  Justice — ^while
each  of  the  four  Stuart  Kings  found  no  difficulty  in
packing  the  English  bench  with  his  creatures — the
seats  in  a  French  Parliament  were  filled  by  men  who
retained  a  certain  measure  of  independence,  exactly
because  they  had  purchased  or  inherited  their  offices.
The  Parliaments  may  be  justly  taxed  with  many
faults,  but  they  were  never  servile  instruments  or
pliant  nominees  of  the  King,  down  to  the  day  when
the  States -General,  which  had  not  met  since  1614,
a<Tain  assembled  in  1789,  and  ground  the  King  and  the
Parliaments  and  all  French  institutions  to  powder.


CHAP.  IX. FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND.  319

There  were  other  causes,  besides  the  tendency  of
judicial  decision  in  the  King's  Courts,  which  helped
to  prevent  the  growth  in  this  country  of  that  spirit
of  discontent which exploded among the French
peasantry  in  1789  and  1790. I  have  no  doubt  that
we  must  reckon  among them that aggregation  of
property  in  large  estates  which  is  of  old  date  in  this
country,  though  the  pace  at  which  it  has  proceeded
has  greatly  increased  of  late. It  may  have  produced
other  evils,  but  it  reduced  the  particular  evil  of  which
I  have  been  speaking  to  insignificant  proportions. I
could  not  fully  account  for  this  aggregation  without
entering  upon  the  technical  history  of  land-law  ;  but
one  of  its  economical  causes  may be  noticed  here.
The  English  Lords  of  Manors — a  class  which,  it  must
be  borne  in  mind,  includes  the  forerunners  of  both
the  English  nobility  and  the  English  gentry — had
been  originally  much  poorer  than  the  corresponding
order in France. The  forerunners of  the  French
nobility  had  settled  or  risen  to  power  in  some  of  the
wealthiest,  most  populous,  and  most  highly  cultivated
provinces  of  the  Koman  empire  ; and  the  imposts
which  afterwards  became  their  feudal  dues  gave  them
no  doubt  great  relative  opulence. But  England  was  a
country  of  large  forests  and  wastes,  as  indeed  might
be  inferred  from  Macaulay's  famous  Third  Chapter,  de-
scribing its  condition  in  comparatively  modern  times.
Now  one  of  the best ascertained  incidents  in  the


320  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROPERTY IN  chap.  ix.

growth  of  feudalism  is  the  falling  of  the  waste  lands
of  the  manor  into  the  hands  of  the  lord,  and  a  par-
ticular circumstance  gave  an  especial  importance  to
this  gradually  acquired  property. England  in  the
middle  ages  had  a  source  of  national  wealth  which  can
only  be  compared  with  our  present  coal  and  iron,
with  the  wines  of  modern  France,  or  with  the  gold
of  Australia  and  California. Her  soil,  her  climate,
and  doubtless  her  tenures,  were  specially  fitted  for
the  production  of  wool — those *  wools  of  England  '
w^hich  the  King,  in  the  Roll  of  the  Ordinance  of  the
Staple,  is  made  to  call  ^  the  sovereign  merchandise
and  jewel  of  our  realm.' The  English  wool  supplied
the  industrious  cities  of  Flanders  with  material  for
their  looms, and was carried  to  all  points of  the
Mediterranean seaboard. This  it  was  which  turned
a  poor  nobility  into  a  rich  nobility  ;  and,  when  the
Wars  of  the  Roses  have  closed,  a  popular  movement
which  has  attracted  too  little  attention  and  which  has
been  much  misunderstood  shows  the  English  lords  of
manors  rapidly  acquiring  land,  and  acquiring  it  for
purposes  of  sheep-farming  and  of  agriculture  on  a
great  scale. But  the  French  noblesse  seem  to  have
never  been  able  to buy  up the holdings  of  their
former  villeins. A  certain  number  of  them  had  the
vast  estates  described  in M. Taine's  recently  pub-
lished volumes  ;  but,  taking  France  as  a  whole,  and
excluding Church and  Crown lands,  the sense  of


CHAP.  IX. FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND.  321

property  in  land  was  not  in  the  seigneur  but  in  the
peasant.  It  is  one  of  the  most  vulgar  of  errors  to
suppose  that  small  properties  in  France  date  from  the
Revolution  ;  immediately  before  it,  Arthur  Young,
one  of  the  most  observant  of  English  travellers,  ex-
presses himself  as  amazed  at  their  multitude.  And
this  multitude  was  increasing,  since  the  peasants  were
buying  up  the  domains  of  the  richer  nobility,  ruined
by  the  court  hfe  at  Versailles.  But  all  this  mass  of
petty  proprietors  was  subject  to  the  payment  of  feudal
dues  and  to  the  curtailment  of  their  profits  by  small
monopolies  ;  and  we  may  gain  a  feeble  notion  of  the
exasperation  which  the  system  caused  by  recalling
the  days  when  the  English  farmer  had  to  allow  the
tithe-owner's  agent  to  take  every  tenth  sheaf  from
his  field.  But  perhaps  fiction  is  even  more  instruc-
tive on  the  point  than  history.  Turn  to  the  '  Bride
of  Lammermoor,'  and  gather  from  it  the  opinion
which  the  feudal  tenants  of  the  Lord  of  Ravenswood
had  of  the  raids  of  Caleb  Balderstone  on  Wolfshope
— extend  this  to  a  whole  population  and  understand
that  a  legion  of  Caleb  Balderstones  overran  France —
and  one  may  be  able  to  bring  home  to  oneself  the
view  which  the  French  peasantry  took  of  the  insti-
tutions under  which  they  lived.

If  we  turn  to  England,  we  have  reason  to  think
that,  by  the  end  of  the  last  century,  the  bulk  of  the
class  c(;rresponding  to  the  French  peasantry  consisted

Y


322  DECAY OF FEUDAL FROPERTY IX  chap.  ix.

either  of  agricultural  labourers  or  of  tenant  farmers.
Doubtless  much  might  be  said  on  the  excessive
multiplication  in  this  country,  as  compared  with
others,  of  the  first  portion  of  this  class,  the  agri-
cultural labourers  ;  but  the  tenant  farmers,  though
not  given  to  hide  their  grievances,  have  never  been
politically  dangerous.  It  is  not  indeed  to  be  sup-
posed that  the  Copyholder,  cultivating  his  own  land,
is  never  found  even  now  ;  probably  a  part  of  the
very  considerable  number  of  small  landowners  which
the  so-called  new  Domesday  Book  shows  to  be  left  to
us  consists  of  this  class.  Several  of  them  were  ex-
amined by  the  Committees  of  the  House  of  Commons
which  inquired  into  copyhold  tenures,  and  they  were
pressed  with  the  question  whether  they  were  not  at
all  events  better  off  than  the  farmer  holding  on  lease
who  paid  a  rent,  not  at  irregular  periods,  but  re-
gularly every  half-year.  The  true  answer  is,  that  a
copyholder  is  not  a  hirer  but  an  owner  of  land,  but
the  comparison  implied  in  the  question  is  significant.
No  doubt  the  status  of  the  tenant  farmer  has  had
much  effect  on  the  feeling  of  cultivating  copyholders.
It  has  served  as  a  standard  with  which  to  compare
their  own  condition  ;  and  indeed  it  is  a  fact  now
known  to  lawyers  that  copyholders  in  the  sixteenth
and  seventeenth  centuries  frequently  impaired  their
legal  position  by  accepting  leases  of  their  land  from
the  lord of  the  manor. But  the  French  peasant,


CHAP.  IX. FRANCE  AND  EXGLAXD.  323

holding  by  servile  tenure,  never  compared  himself
with  the  farmers  of  the  domain  land  of  the  nobles,
who  Avere  a  very  special  class,  the  metayers^  not  only
hirinof  their  land  from  the  lord,  but  havino;  it  stocked
by  him.  The  peasant  compared  his  lot  with  that  of  the
nobles  themselves,  and  bitterly  chafed  at  the  contrast.
I  have  yet  to  mention  one  cause  which  perhaps
more  than  any  other  prevented  not  only  manorial
riofhts  but  all  rio-hts  in  land  from  beinof  seen  in
England  at  the  end  of  the  last  century  in  precisely
the  same  light  in  which  they  were  viewed  in  Conti-
nental countries.  It  is  a  fact  of  great  political  and
juridical  interest  that  from  very  early  times  landed
property  changed  hands  by  purchase  and  sale  more
frequently  in  England  than  elsewhere.  The  unusual
Itgal  facilities  for  this  which  existed  here  belong  to
that  technical  history  of  law  from  which,  as  before,
I  abstain  ;  but  it  was  certainly  the  early  wealth  of
the  country  which  led  chiefly  to  these  transfers.
Some  jurists  have  laid  down,  as  a  general  principle,
that  every  acquisition  of  property  is  founded  on  a
previous  contract  or  agreement.  This  no  doubt  is
liistorically  untrue,  but  the  mistake  is  one  which  is
closely  connected  with  some  of  the  most  widely
received  ideas  of  the  eighteenth  century.  The  sacred-
ness  of  contract  was  one  of  the  fundamental  ideas
of  the  French  philosophical  creed,  and  it  strongly
influenced  the  proceedings by  whicli  the manorial

y  -2


324  DECAY or FEUDAL PROPERTY IX  CHAr.  ix.

rights  of  the  French  nobility  were  taken  away.  In
the  end,  the  nobles  received  no  compensation  for  the
loss  of  these  rio^hts  ;  as  the  flame  of  revolution
gathered  head,  it  was  as  much  as  they  could  do  if
they  saved  their  lives.  But  this  was  not  at  all
intended  by  the  First  or  Constituent  Assembly.  It
abolished  without  compensation  those  rights  only
which  it  supposed  to  have  sprung  from  the  ancient
helplessness  of  the  villein  ;  but  wherever  any  class  of
rights  seemed  to  it  to  have  originated  in  a  contract
between  the  lord  and  his  vassal,  it  abolished  them
indeed  but  provided  for  the  lord's  receiving  their
money-value.  The  distinction  did  some  honour  to
the  spirit  of  justice  prevailing  in  the  First  Assembly,
but  no  doubt  it  was  founded  on  historical  error.
There  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  manorial  rights
originated  in  simple  violence,  but  there  is  equally
little  for  supposing  that  any  large  number  of  them
originated  in  agreement.

What,  however,  was  untrue  of  France,  was  true
in  a  certain  sense  of  England,  and  is  still  truer  now.
The  title  of  the  Lord  of  the  Manor  and  the  title  of
the  Copyholder  were  then,  as  now,  far  more  deeply
rooted  in  agreement  than  in  any  other  deeply  feu-
dalised country.  The  lord  had  often,  personally,  or
through  his  predecessors,  purchased  his  rights  ;  the
copyholder  had  constantly  obtained  his  land subject


€HAP.  IX.  FRAXCE AND ENGLAND.  325

to  manorial  rights,  by  purchase  from  somebody  else.
It  will  be  found  that  English  political  economy  and
English  popular  notions  are  very  deeply  and  exten-
sively pervaded  by  the  assumption  that  all  property
has  been  acquired  through  an  original  transaction  of
purchase,  and  that,  whatever  be  the  disadvantages  of
the  form  it  takes,  they  were  allowed  for  in  the  con-
sideration for  the  original  sale.  I  cannot  doubt  that
this  assumption,  to  a  very  great  extent  a  true  one,  is
a  very  valuable  safeguard  to  property  ;  perhaps  in
our  day  not  less  valuable  than  the  general  sense  of
its  expediency  and  than  that  feeling,  as  old  as  the
oldest  rudiments  of  civilisation,  which  has  translated
itself  into  the  legal  rules  of  prescription  and  into  the
respect  of  the  most  permanently  powerful  section  of
€very  society  for  its  established  institutions.  If  this
be  so,  the  immediate  practical  lesson  is  that  we  owe
our  best  wishes  to  those  attempts,  hitherto  not  very
successful,  which  have  been  made  to  give  an  impetus
to  the  exchangeableness  of  land.  If  they  ever  suc-
ceed, they  will  facilitate  one  of  the  most  conservative
and  reparative  of  processes,  the  purification  by  con-
tract of  the  title  to  property.

I  do  not  wish  to  be  understood  that  the  contrast
between  the  view  of  feudal  obligations  and  rights
taken  in  England  and  France  is  wholly  to  be  ex-
])lairjed  by  the  causes  which  T  have  analysed  in  this


326  DECAY OF FEUDAL PROPERTY IX  chap.  ix.

paper.  This  set  of  causes  appears  to  me  to  have  been
kept  too  much  in  the  background,  and  therefore  I
have  thought  them  not  undeserving  of  attention.  It
belongs  to  the  civil  historian  to  bring  to  light  others
which  are  interminoled  with  the  whole  structure  of
French  society.  De  Tocqueville  has  strongly  sug-
gested, and  others  after  him  will  probably  demon-
strate, that  the  enormous  social  prestige  of  the  French
Court  and  its  constant  indulgence  of  its  mihtary
tastes  had at leno-th  turned  the  French  territorial

o

nobility  into  a  caste  as  distinct  from  the  cultivating
peasantry  a^  is  the  Rajput  from  the  Sudra,  as  dis-
tinct as  was  the  white  planter  of  the  Southern  States
from  the  ne^TO  who  laboured  in  his  cane-fields.  The
effect  of  this  deep  alienation  was  completely  to  alter
the  normal  or  natural  character  of  the  social  group  of
which  I  have  spoken,  the  Manor  or  Fief.  Left  to
itself,  it  is  one  of  the  most  conservative  of  all  insti-
tutions. In  our  own  country  the  Manor  is  in  extreme
decay,  and  chiefly  survives  in  its  ecclesiastical  organi-
sation as  the  Parish.  '  In  France  a  revolution  has
passed  over  the  Fief,  and  it  has  become  a  mere
administrative  subdivision,  the  Commune.  But,  as
we  move  eastwards  through  the  German  and  Scla-
vonic countries,  this  primitive  social  organism  grows
stronger  and  stronger.  It  is  plainly  discernible
under  the  supei'ficial  crust  of  Mussulman  institutions,


CHAP.  IX.  FKA^X'E AXD EXGL.\XD.  327

until  in  India  it  emerges  in  its  most  ancient  form,  as
the  Village- Commmiity,  a  brotherhood  of  self-styled
kinsmen,  settled  on  a  space  of  land.  Everyivhere,
however,  it  offers  a  more  or  less  stubborn  resistance
to  change  ;  whether  the  instrument  of  change  be
militaiy  conquest  or  the  centralising  legislation  of
well-intentioned  rulers,  who  from  the  nature  of  the
case  can  only  look  on  nations  as  miscellaneous  aggre-
gates of  individuals,  and  can  at  most  aim  at  the
greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number.  Xobody
who  knows  England  outside  cities  and  towns  will
think  that  deference  to  the  Squire  and  the  Parson  is
a  phenomenon  only  fit  to  pomt  a  sarcasm  or  a  joke.
Xo  Frenchman,  except  a  Parisian,  will  laugh  at  what
Frenchmen  call  the  patriotism  of  the  Steeple.  But
in  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  normal
operation  of  the  Fief  was  reversed  in  France.  Many
causes,  and  among  them  that  personal  friction  which
is  the  despair  of  all  who  would  make  History  a
science,  had  produced  among  the  peasantry  such
intensity  of  hatred  to  their  lord  that  they  were  ready
to  find  allies  against  him  anywhere — before  the  Revo-
lution, in  the  despotic  King  and  his  usurping  agents
— after  the  Revolution,  in  the  Convention,  in  the
Jacobin  Club,  in  the  Directory,  in  the  First  Consul,
who  was  soon  to  be  the  Emperor.  And  even  now
the  tradition  of  the  feudal  dues  and  the  fear  of  their


328


DECAY  OF  FEUDAL  PROPERTY.


CHAP. IX.


revival  are  political  influences  of  the  first  order,
tending  to  make  a  gi^eat  part  of  the  nation  ready,  or
not  reluctant,  to  throw  itself  (as  a  great  French
orator  said)  into  the  arms  of  the  first  lucky  corporal
who  makes  it  believe  that  he  can  preserve  the  insti-
tutions created  by  the  Revolution,  without  bringing
back  the  Revolution  itself.


VILLAGE-C0MMU>'1TIES AND MANORS.  329


XOTES AXD ILLUSTRATIOXS.

XOTE A.
VILLAGE-COMMUNITIES  AND  MANORS.

Although  no  question  has  been  more  discussed  by
German  and  Enolish  scholars,  the  exact  mode  in
which  the  Manor  or  Fief  arose  out  of  pre-existing
social  forms  is  still  a  very  obscure  problem.  In  a
TTork  published  ten  years  ago  ( '  Village  Communities
in  the  East  and  AVest'),  I  gave  an  abridged  ac-
count of  all  that  was  then  known  or  had  been  con-
jectured on  the  subject,  but  additions  are  being
constantly  made  to  our  knowledge — in  some  small
degree,  I  hope,  owing  to  the  book  I  have  named —
— and  much  information  may  be  expected  from
Russia,  where  the  growth  of  lordships  and  of  the  chief
incidents  of  villenage  are  of  relatively  recent  date,  and
where  there  appears  to  be  materials  for  an  authentic
history  of  this  social  transformation.  I  trust  that
Mr.  Mackenzie  Wallace  will  not  long  withhold  those
results  of  special  investigation  which  he  promised  in
the  preface  to  his  work  on  Russia.  Un  another
aspect  of  the  subject,  a  forthcoming  work  of  Mr.
Frederick  Seebohm,  which  I  have  had  the  privilege
of  seeing,  will  throw  a  great  deal  of  light.

This,  however,  is  a  walk  of  investigation  in
which  the  caution  given  in  a  Xote  on  '  The  Gens  '
to  Chapter  VIII.  is  especially  necessary.  We  must
make  full  allowance  for  the  imitativeness  of  man-
kind. A  great  number  of  Village- Communities to


330  VILLAGE-CO-AIMUMTIES AND MANORS.

be  found  in  the  various  parts  of  the  world,  and  a
erreat  number  of  Manors  which  still  exist  in  En<2:-
land  in  extreme  decay,  must  have  been  originally
mere  reproductions  of  a  model  which  had  grown
into  favour.  Much  of  the  waste  land  of  India,  at
most  held  previously  in  vague  tribal  ownership,  was
colonised  by  groups  of  men  who  settled  down  in
Village- Communities  because  they  knew  no  other
form  of  common  cultivation,  and  the  waste  places
of  Europe  were  extensively  l^rought  under  tillage  by
colonists  arranged  in  manorial  groups  under  religious
bodies  or  powerful  men  who  had  obtained  large
grants  of  land.  There  are,  and  have  been  from  time
immemorial,  parts  of  the  world  in  which  settlers
would  as  naturally  plant  themselves  in  these  groups,
as  English  or  Scottish  emigrants  in  Canada  or  New
Zealand  would  now  establish  themselves  on  separate
farms  to  be  cultivated  by  themselves  and  their  chil-
dren, or  by  hired  labour.  All,  then,  that  we  can
hope  to  discover  is  the  typical  form.  Now  the  typical
Village- Community — a  body  of  self-styled  kinsmen,
havinof  a  o'overnment  of  their  own,  and  eno;ao'ed
under  fixed  rules  in  common  cultivation — is  too
peculiar  a  group  to  have  arisen  by  accident,  or  to
have  had  its  origin  in  individual  caprice.  The
evidence  seems  conclusive  that  it  first  grew  up  in
remote  barbarism,  though  in  barbarism  probably  not
older  than  the  period  at  which  mankind  began  to
cultivate  cereals,  or  to  combine  that  cultivation  with
the  pasturing  of  flocks  and  herds.  It  may  give  an
idea  of  the  wide  diffusion  of  the  Village- Community
in  its  more  archaic  shapes  if  I  mention  that  it  has
been  observed  not  only  in  the  largest  part  of  India,
but  in  the  Fiji  Islands  (by  Sir  Arthur  Gordon),
and  among  the  Berbers  of  North  Africa  (by  M.
Ernest Renan), and that what appears to be a


VILLAGE-COMMUXITIES AXD MAXORS.  331

distinct  form  of  it,  followed  by  the  more  southerly
tribes  of  Xorth  American  Indians,  is  described  by
Mr.  Moro^an  in  the  fourth  volume  of  the  United
States  Survey  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  region,  which
appeared  last  year.  Xor  is  it  possible  for  me  to
doubt  that  the  typical  Manor  arose  out  of  the
Village -Community.  Everybody  who  has  made  for
hunself  a  clear  mental  picture  of  the  last  group  will
see  that  it  contains  everything  which  is  found  in  the
earhest  Manors,  with  no  differences  except  those
which  come  from  the  substitution  of  indi\^dual  for
popular  authority.  Everything  which  the  lord  can
do  can  be  done  by  the  council  of  village  elders,  or  by
the  village-headman,  these  last,  however,  being  re-
sponsible to  the  community,  while  the  lord  tends
more  and  more  to  become  a  mere  owner,  just  as  the
King  of  France  came  to  be  called  by  the  lawyers  the
King- Proprietor  of  all  French  land.  But  beyond
this  account  of  the  relation  between  the  Types,  it
would  not  be  safe  to  go.  Both  the  type  of  the
^^il]  age- Community  and  the  type  of  the  Manor  have
been  extensively  copied,^  and  here  and  there  in  sur-
prisingly recent  times.  Their  wide  extension  by
colonisation  is,  I  suppose,  the  source  of  a  paradoxical
opinion  which  I  have  seen,  that  their  most  distinctive
peculiarities  are  altogether  modern.

The  question  of  the  origin  of  ilanors  or  Fiefs
established  in  Western  Europe,  and  then  spread  far
and  wide  by  artificial  agency,  is  wrapt  in  obscurity.
I  argued  in  a  former  work  that  everything  which  con-
trilnited  to  what  we  call  feudalism  must  have  sprung

'  The  earliest  settlers  in  New  England  appear  to  have  planted
themselves  in  townships  having  a  strong  resemblance  to  village-
communities.  Manors  were  found  in  the  Southern  settlements.
See  John  Hopkins  University  Studies,  edited  by  H.  C.  Adams.
1882.


332  VILLAGE-COMMUNITIES AND MANORS.

either  from  barbarous  custom  or  from  Roman  law
('Ancient  Law,'  pp.  364  ct  se.q.)  ;  but  from  which
source  were  the  germs  of  manorial  authority  derived  ?
On  the  one  hand,  the  examination  of  the  Theodosian
Code  shows  that  the  great  estates  of  the  Roman  pro-
prietary— their  villce^  cultivated  by  coloni  and  slaves —
contracted  a  certain  resemblance  to  the  Manor,  which  I
myself  am,  on  the  whole,  disposed  to  explain  by  the
number  of  cultivators  of  barbarous  origin  with  Avhich
they  were  filled.  I  have  always  distrusted  the  implied
assertion  of  the  Roman  lawyers  that  the  multitudinous
Roman  slaves  had  no  institutions  at  all  ;  and  I  ima-
gine that  a  vast  property,  crowded  with  barbarians,
would  naturally  fall  under  a  system  of  management
not  unlike  the  mechanism  of  one  of  the  most  wide-
spread of  barbarous  institutions.  It  is  certainly  sig-
nificant that  the  Germanic  draftsmen  of  Codes  and
Charters  always  used  the  word  '  villa  '  for  what  we
call  a  village- community.  While  I  certainly  cannot
accept  the  conclusion  to  which  some  learned  French-
men incline,  that  the  Manors  of  the  continent  are  in
their  origin  nothing  but  Roman  villce^  still  it  seems
only  reasonable  to  suppose  that  in  the  former  Roman
provinces  the  organisation  of  the  villce  did  assist  in
causing  the  cultivating  groups  to  take  the  manorial
form  rather  than  that  of  self-governed  village-commu-
nities. It  is  to  be  noted  at  the  same  time  that  the
oldest  of  the  barbarous  codes,  the  Lex  Salica,  knows
nothing  in  its  earlier  and  genuine  portions  of  manorial
authority.  Tho,  poicsta.'i  dominica  of  which  it  speaks
is  '  royal '  power.  It  knows  the  village-community
under  the  name  of  villa  (see  the  Title  45,  '  De
Migrantibus  '),  and  in  describing  one  of  its  even  now
marked  characteristics,  its  rigid  exclusiveness,  it  im-
plies that  the  community  is  one  of  freemen  entitled  to
sue before  the  free Coin^t  of  the Hundred. The


VILLAGE-COMMUNITIES AXD MANORS.  333

Manor  appears,  however,  to  have  been  known  to  the
compilers  of  the  later  Leges  Barbarorum.

The  difficulty  of  attributing  the  origin  of
English  Manors  to  the  Roman  Villa  need  hardly  be
stated.  The  particular  Teutonic  tribes  which  con-
quered Britain  came  from  homes  so  northerly  that
they  can  hardly  have  so  much  as  seen  a  great  Roman
estate,  and,  even  if  they  had,  it  is  not  easy  to  under-
stand adventurous  warriors  settling'  down  as  serfs  or
villeins  in  their  oversea  conquests.  This  subject,
however,  is  one  of  those  most  fuUv  treated  in  Mr.
Seebohm's  volume.

It  may  be  convenient  that  I  should  give  in  full
the  passage  from  Bracton  stating  the  legal  theory  of
villenage  which  prevailed  in  his  day.  '  The  tenement
changes  not  the  condition  of  a  free  man  any  more
than  of  a  slave.  For  a  free  man  may  hold  in  mere
villenasre,  doino;  whatever  service  thereto  belonsfs.  and
shall  not  the  less  be  free,  since  he  does  this  in  reo:ard
of  the  villenage  and  not  in  regard  of  his  person.  .  .  .
Mere  villenaofe  is  a  tenure  renderinsf  uncertain  and  un-
limited  services,  where  it  cannot  be  known  at  eventide
what  service  hath  to  be  done  in  the  morning — that  is.
where  the  tenant  is  bound  to  do  whatever  is  com-
manded him'  (fo.  26r/).  Again  :  'Another  kind  of
tenement  is  villenafre,  whereof  some  is  mere  and  other
privileged.  Mere  villenage  is  that  which  is  so  held
that  the  tenant  in  villenafi:e,  whether  free  or  bond,  shali
do  of  villein  service  whatever  is  commanded  him,  and
may  not  know  at  nightfall  what  he  must  do  on  the
morrow,  and  shall  ever  be  held  to  uncertain  dues  ;
and  he  may  be  taxed  at  the  will  of  the  lord  for  more
or  for  less,  .  .  .  yet  so  that  if  he  be  a  free  man  lie
doth  this  in  the  name  of  villenaoe  and  not  in  the
name  of  personal  service  ;  .  .  .  but  if  he  be  a  villein
[by  blood] he  shall  do  all  these  things  in  regard  as


334  VILLAGE-COMMUNITIES AND MANORS.

well  of  the  villenage  as  of  his  person'  (fo.  208^).
The  only  difference  in  the  services  was  that  the  mer-
clietum  on  marrying  a  daughter,  being  an  incident  of
personal  servitude  (as  a  fine  paid  to  the  lord  for
depriving  him  of  a  slave),  was  not  demandable  from
the  free  man  holding  in  villenage'  (F.  Pollock,
^  Notes  on  Early  English  Land  Law,'  '  Law  Maga-
zine and  Review'  for  May  1882).  The  whole  of
Mr.  Pollock's  valuable  paper  deserves  consideration.


■^1


<:HAr.  X.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  335


CHAPTER X.

CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.

All  who  have  any  knowledge  of  Legal  History  are
aware  of  certain  distinctions  which  run  throiio;h  all
commodities  or  through  large  departments  of  them,
and  which  cause  the  objects  of  enjoyment  lying  on
either  side  of  the  line  to  belong,  in  the  eyes  of  law-
yers, to  widely  different  provinces  of  law.  Among
these  distinctions,  there  is  that  which  the  ancient
Roman  lawyers  drew  between  Res  Mancipi  and  Res
nee  Mancipi — that  is,  between  Things  which  required
and  Things  which  did  not  require  for  their  transfer  the
conveyance  of  Mancipation  ;  there  is  the  mediaeval
West  European  distinction  between  the  Allod  and  the
Feud,  between  allodial  land  and  feudal  land  ;  there  is
the  still  surviving  English  distinction  between  Realty
and  Personalty,  and  finally  there  is  the  late  Roman
and  modern  European  distinction  between  Res  Mo-
biles and  Res  Immobiles,  between  movable  and  im-
movable property.

We  only  know  the  distinction  between  Movables
and  Immovables  as  relatively  modern  in  the  Roman


336  CLASSIFICATI0X8 OF PROPERri'.  chap.  x.

State  and  in  Europe.  It  is  tlie  result  of  an  attempt
of  the  Roman  lawyers  to  abandon  the  old  historical
classifications,  and  to  classify  commodities,  Property,
the  objects  of  enjoyment,  according  to  their  actual
nature.  The  generalisation  has  required  but  little
subsequent  correction  ;  the  difficulties  which  have
arisen  in  using  it  have  l)een  insignificant,  and  have
occurred  only  on  the  very  border-line  between  the
two  great  classes  of  Things.  In  the  Middle  Ages,  the
fact  that  a  tree,  though  immovable,  generally  acquires
value  throuo'h  beino;  hewn  down  and  becomino^  mov-
able,  and  possibly  some  local  practice  of  employing
movable  wooden  frames  in  the  structure  of  houses,
suggested  to  the  expositors  of  a  few  early  German
legal  systems  a  definition  of  movables  as  everything
which  could  be  destroyed  by  fire  ;  and,  in  more
recent  times,  the  question  of  the  proper  place  to  be
assigned  to  a  class  of  things  of  which  modern  manu-
facturing industry  has  greatly  mcreased  the  import-
ance— '  fixtures,'  as  we  call  them,  the  '  immovables
by  destination  '  of  French  law — has  occasioned  doubts
and  disputes.  Still,  on  the  whole,  if  law  had  really
been  founded  on  the  principles  imagined  in  the  last
century  to  constitute  its  basis — on  those  principles  of
simplicity  or  fitness  or  good  sense  which  are  associated
with  the  words  '  Nature '  and  '  Natural ' — it  is  pro-
bable that  no  classification  of  commodities  would
have  struck  mankind  sooner  than  that  which  divides


CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIOXS OF PROPERTY.  337

them  into  movable  and  immovable.  We  know,
nevertheless,  that  the  whole  course  of  Roman  legal
modification  from  the  Twelve  Tables  to  the  reforms
of  Justinian  had  to  be  2fone  throuo^h  before  this
seemingly  obvious  distinction  formally  superseded
the  old  historical  distinction  between  Res  Mancipi
and  Res  nee  Mancipi,  the  first  including  Land,
Slaves,  Horses,  and  Oxen,  and  the  second  everything
else  ;  and  the  curious  fact  remains  that  the  English-
speaking  communities — England,  her  colonies,  and
considerably  more  than  half  the  States  of  the  American
Union — still  reject  the  imjDroved  Roman  classification,
and,  separating  leases  of  land  for  years  from  the  bulk
of  immovable  property,  join  them  to  personalty  or
movables.  Thus  stubbornly  do  the  old  historical
classifications  hold  their  oround.  But  still,  if  we
firmly  grasp  the  truth  that  these  historical  classifi-
cations can  only  mean  that  the  commodities  which
they  place  in  the  highest  class  must  have  been  at
some  time  or  other  the  sole  important  subjects  of
proprietary  right,  and  that  the  others  either  did  not
exist  or  were  of  trifling  value,  we  cannot  but  see  that
there  must  have  been  a  still  earlier  time  when  the
accepted  historical  classifications  were  themselves
modern.  The  most  archaic  of  them,  one  probably  as
old  as  any  conscious  attempt  to  draw  this  kind  of
distinction,  is  that  bequeathed  to  us  by  the  Romans.
Yet  land,  slaves,  horses,  and  oxen  cannot,  as  subjects

z


338  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  chap.  x.

of  individual  property,  have  been  of  contemporaneous
origin. There  must  have  been  a  time  when  a  wild
animal  tamed,  which  was  a  rarity,  was  of  more  value
than a hundred  acres of  land, which  was super-
abundant. The  domain  of  a  tribe,  as  soon  as the
history  of  mankind  began,  may  have  been  jealously
guarded  by  it  as  exclusive  hunting-ground,  as  mark-
ing the  limits  which  none  but  a  tribesman  could  step
within  save  for  bloodshed  or  plunder,  or  may  have
been  reserved  by  it  (in  a  later  stage  of  society)  for
pasture  ;  but  each  man's  share  of  this  domain  was  of
less  value  to  him  individually  than  a  slave,  a  horse,
an  ox,  or  even  than  a  flint -headed  axe  or  spear. All
this  follows  from  the  simplest  economical  axioms  ;
but  the  vestiges  of  the  older  (and  yet  probably  not
the  oldest) state  of  the  primitive  objects  of  enjoy-
ment are  plainly  stamped  upon  one  authentic  record
of  archaic  custom,  the  ancient  Irish  law  ;  and  they
seem  to  me  equally  discernible  in  the  ancient  Teu-
tonic Code,  the  Lex  Salica,  which,  whatever  else  it
is,  is pre-eminently  a  body  of  rules  protecting  the
ownership  of  kine,  swine,  sheep,  goats,  horses,  and
even  bees.

I  pass  to  a  distmction  which  rose  into  importance
in  an  age  nearer  our  own — the  distinction  between
the  allod  and  the  feud^  between  allodial  and  feudal
land.  The  allud  in  some  form  or  other  is  probably
as  old  as  the  institution  of  individual  landed  property,


CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  339

and  we  may  regard  it  as  equivalent  to  or  directly
descended  from  the  share  which  each  man  took  in
the  appropriated  portion  of  the  domain  of  the  group
to  which  he  belonged — tribe,  joint-family,  village
community,  or  nascent  city.  But  many  facts — facts
which  are  receiving  constant  additions — appear  to  me
to  show  that  this  share  was  not  at  first  a  definite
area,  but  what  we  should  now  call  a  fraction  or
aliquot  part  of  the  divisible  land.  The  shares  of  the
domain  which  each  family  or  household  could  claim
shifted  among  the  households  under  a  system  of
distribution  in  turns  or  by  lot,  and  each  share  very
^slowly  became  appropriated  to  particular  families.
We  only  know  the  society  of  the  Roman  Common-
wealth when  it  had  reached  this  last  stage  ;  indeed,
the  hungry  struggle  for  the  public  domain  which
begins  authentic  Roman  history  would  seem  to  show
that  the  system  of  'shifting  severalties,'  which  had  not
quite  died  out  in  England  fifty  years  ago,  was  long
over  among  the  free  Roman  peasantry  ;  and  the
traces  of  an  older  economical  condition  must  be
sought  in  that  copious  law  of  servitudes  or  easements
into  which  modern  lawyers  of  all  nations  have  dug  as
into  an  inexhaustible  mine,  and  which  seems  to  show
that  the  agricultural  land  of  every  Roman  was  really
servient^  as  the  technical  phrase  ran,  to  his  neigh-
bours in  respect  of  rights  of  way,  rig] its  of  riding,
driving,  and  draught,  rights  of  drawing  and  lending

z  -2


340  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  chap.  x.

water,  and  a  mass  of  other  rights,  far  beyond  all
modern  experience  and  example.  The  abundant
Roman  servitudes  appear  to  me  to  point  back  to  the
same  modified  common  enjoyment  of  land  which
characterised  other  Aryan  races  ;  but  the  early
period  at  which  the  land  of  a  free  Roman  peasant
became  appropriated  to  his  family  m  strict  severalty
affected  the  legal  and  economical  history  of  Roman
society  very  strongly,  and  thus  becomes  a  fact  of
much  importance  in  the  development  of  the  Western
world.

There  are  indications  that  at  first  the  possession
of  allodial  land  was  everywhere  the  distinctive  privi-
lege of  the  freeman.  Down  indeed  to  the  first
French  Revolution  the  exceptional  tenure  of  land
in  '  franc -alleu,'  which  here  and  there  survived  amid
the  general  feudalisation,  was  held  by  Frenchmen
in  high  honour.  Nevertheless,  the  modern  history
of  allodial  land  is  essentially  the  history  of  the  hold-
ing of  land  by  servile  or  by  very  liumble  classes.
It  bequeathed  its  great  characteristic,  its  divisibility
at  death  between  all  the  children  or  all  the  sons,  to
that  lowest  stratum  of  landed  right  upon  which  the
feudal  structure  reposed,  either  because  communities
originally  free  had  sunk  on  all  sides  into  villenage,
or  because  the  allod  was  the  type  of  all  enjoyment
of  land,  and  was  followed  in  colonies  of  serfs  planted
by  a  Roman  dominus  or  Teutonic  lord. All  peasant


<JHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  341

holdings  in  France  were  adjusted  to  this  type  till
the  Revolution,  and  so  were  German  peasant  estates
down  to  a  considerably  later  date.  We  have  traces
of  its  peculiar  rules  in  the  Gavelkind  of  Kent,  and
in  much  copyhold  land  ;  and  a  comparison  of  the
treatises  of  Glanvill  and  Bracton  enables  us  to  fix  the
time  when  the  most  widely  diffused  of  English  tenures
— socage — was  just  putting  off  the  characteristics
of  the  allod,  and  putting  on  those  of  the  feud.  But
our  current  Real  Property  Law  is  coloured  through-
out by  the  feudal  view  of  land,  which  is  that,  when
held  in  indi\4dual  enjoyment,  it  is  primarily  im-
partible or  indivisible.  The  great  system  of  land-
law,  resting  on  this  feudal  conception,  though  occa-
sionally wrested  into  departure  from  it  by  sovereign
authority,  is  essentially  a  system  of  rules  regulating
the  tenure  of  land  by  noble  classes.  The  allodial
tenure,  which  is  believed  to  have  been  originally  the
tenure  of  freemen,  became  in  the  Middle  Ages  the
tenure  of  serfs.  The  feudal  tenure,  which  was  cer-
tainly at  first  the  tenure  of  servants  who,  but  for  the
dignity  of  their  master,  might  have  been  called  slaves,
became  in  the  Middle  Ages  the  tenure  of  noblemen.
It  was  by  an  exception,  and  a  remarkable  one,  that
in  our  country  the  land-law  of  the  nobles  became  the
land-law  of  the  people.

We  know thus  much  of  the  beginnings  of  that
feudal  system, of  which  the  feudal  land-law  was  a


342  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  chap,  x..

part,  that  it  had  several  diverse  origins.  The  land  on
the  border  lines  of  the  Roman  Empire  was  held  by
soldier-cultivators  on  tenure  of  military  service  ;  and
this  must  have  had  somethino;  to  do  with  it.  The
Roman  law  of  Patron  and  Client  must  have  had
something  to  do  with  it  ;  for  it  plainly  suggested
many  customary  relations  of  lord  and  vassal.  We
see  much  which  cannot  but  have  contributed  to  it
in  the  primitive  or  barbarous  usages  of  the  Aryan
races  re -introduced  into  the  Roman  Empire  by  the
Germans.  Among  these,  society  was  distributed  into
compact  groups  of  families  or  clans,  the  first  ad-
ministered by  the  eldest  member  subject  to  a  species
of  election,  the  second  often,  if  not  always,  governed
by  some  member  of  a  ruling  family,  selected  by  the
process  which  the  Irish  called  Tanistry.  And  these
Chiefs  or  Kings  were  in  the  habit  of  bujdng  or
rewarding  the  services  of  their  immediate  retainers
by  gifts.  We  can  put  our  finger  on  a  variety  of  the
ingredients  of  feudalism  spread  over  a  large  surface.
Nevertheless,  with  all  our  knowledge,  there  is  still
the  greatest  obscurity  on  one  point.  How  was  the
conception  of  landed  property  so  completely  changed  ?
Nothing  can  be  more  singularly  unlike  than  the  legal
aspect  of  allodial  land,  or,  as  the  Romans  Avould  have
called  it,  land  held  in  dominium^  and  the  legal  aspect
of  feudal  land.  In  passing  from  one  to  the  other,
you  find  yourself  among  a  new  order  of  legal  ideas.


CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIOiS^S OF PROPEKTY.  343

Perhaps  it  requires  a  lawyer  alive  to  the  signifi-
cance of  technicalities,  and  tolerably  acquainted  with
the  later  Roman  and  earlier  feudal  law,  fully  to  esti-
mate the  thoroughness  of  the  transmutation.  An
account  of  all  which  it  implies  would  be  out  of  place
here  ;  but,  to  take  only  one  phase  of  it,  no  sub-
version of  an  accepted  legal  notion  can  be  more
striking  than  that  of  the  Roman  (which  is  the
developed  allodial)  view  of  land  as  essentially  divisible
by  the  feudal  conception  of  land  as  essentially  im-
partible. The  Roman  lawyers  note,  as  a  fundamental
difi*erence  between  immovable  and  movable  pro-
perty, that  land  is  divisible  ad  infinitum,  and  may  be
always  so  conceived  though  actually  undivided,  while
movables  are  not  properly  capable  of  division.  They
could  conceive  land  as  held  (so  to  speak)  under
different  legal  dispensations,  as  belonging  to  one
person  in  Quiritarian  and  to  another  in  Bonitarian
ownership,  a  splitting  of  ownership  which,  after
feudalism  had  fallen  into  decay,  revived  in  our
country  in  the  distinction  between  the  legal  and  the
equitable  estate.  But  there  is  no  symptom  that  a
Roman  lawyer  could  conceive  what  we  call  a  series
of  estates — that  is,  a  number  of  owners  entitled  to
enjoy  the  same  piece  of  land  in  succession,  and
capable  of  being  contemplated  together.  It  is  a  very
remarkable  fact  that  when  these  a*reat  le^al  thinkers
had  to  form  an  idea  of  an  interest  in  land  so  familiar


344  CLASSIFICATIONS OF TROrERTY.  chap.  x.

to  US  as  an  estate  for  life,  they  had  to  go  for  an
analogy  to  the  law  of  servitudes  or  easements.  A
Roman  usufruct  of  land  was  in  its  practical  effects
very  much  the  same  as  an  English  estate  for  life  ;  1

^  Tuf  Ituk;  but  the  Roman  jurists  classed  it  with  rights  of  way  I

iJo^v^  '"^i/  ^  over  another  man's  field,  or  a  right  of  drawing  water  I

f-^^ —  ' from  another  man's  well. The  impression  left  on  my

mind  by  a  variety  of  passages  in  the  Roman  legal
records  is  that,  if  a  Roman  lawyer  had  been  asked  to
take  into  his  mental  view  a  number  of  persons  having
rights  together  over  the  same  property,  he  would
have  contemplated  them  not  as  enjoying  it  in  turn,
but  as  dividing  it  at  once  between  them.  Thus  far
was  he  from  conceiving  the  ownership  of  the  same
area  of  soil  as  distributed  over  tenants  for  life  and
remainder  men,  tenants  in  tail  male,  and  tenants  in
tail  female,  doweresses,  tenants  by  the  courtesy  of
England,  and  reversioners.  This  long  series  of
persons,  all  having  ascertainable  rights  capable  of
co-existing  in  the  same  property — this  long  succes-
sion of  partial  ownerships,  making  up  together  one
complete  ownership,  the  feodum  or  fee — could  not
have  been  dreamed  of  till  a  wholly  new  conception
of  landed  property  had  arisen.  When,  several  cen-
turies after  the  birth  of  feudalism,  lawyers  sought
to  employ  the  Roman  law  to  express  the  feudal  rela-
tions, it  had  to  be  violently  wrested  from  its  true
meaning  and  purpose  ;  as  was  notably  the  case  with


CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIOXS OF PROrEKTY.  345

the  law  of  Fidei-commissa,  or  testamentaiy  gifts  in
trust.

One  particular  agency  by  which  this  great  revo-
lution of  legal  ideas  was,  at  least,  partially  effected,
has  been  of  late  the  subject  of  controversy  between
some  of  the  most  learned  men  of  our  dav  ;  and  the
controversy,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  has  been  marked  by
much  of  the  bitterness  peculiar  to  disj)utes  which  are
still  confined  to  the  learned  and  have  not  yet  become
popular.  The  Beneficium,  or  Benefice,  an  assignment
of  land  by  a  conquering  Teutonic  king  as  the  reward
or  price  of  militar}^  service,  is  allowed  on  all  sides  to
have  had  much  to  do  with  this  great  change  in  the
legal  point  of  view.  Whether  the  benefice  was  always
a  gift  of  public  land — as  M.  Fustel  de  Coulanges  in-
sists that  it  was — in  the  countries  which  passed  under
the  sceptre  of  the  House  of  Clovis,  or  a  gift  of  con-
fiscated land — as  there  is  reason  to  think  it  was,  at
all  events,  in  some  subjugated  provinces  of  the
Roman  Empire — it  began  a  new  stage  in  the  history
of  land -law.  In  its  earliest  form  it  was  unlike  the
estates  of  matured  feudalism,  since  (according  to  the
better  opinion)  it  was  not  at  first  generally  hereditary  ;
but  it  was  still  more  unlike  the  allodial  lot  of  the
Teutonic  freedman  and  the  fundus  of  the  Roman
provincial  citizen.  One  modification  of  Roman  landed
property  came  near  it — the  Emphyteusis  ;  and  I  still
hold,  to  the  opinion  that  we  have  here  one  of  the


346  CLASSIFICATIONS OF rROPERTY.  chap.  x.

sources  of  the  new  legal  conception.  But  though
this  explanation  is  plausible,  as  far  as  it  goes,  it  is
only  partial  ;  and,  moreover,  the  symptoms  of  a
change  in  the  legal  view  of  landed  property  are  not
confined  to  countries  which  had  formed  part  of  the
Roman  Empire,  but  are  found  in  purely  Teutonic
lands.

Feodum,  the  later  Teutonised  name  of  the  Bene-
ficium,  is  now  allowed  to  have  been  derived  from  the
old  Gothic  word  ^  jihu^  or  ''  Jiii! — cattle.  The  term  is
supposed  to  have  come  to  mean  ^  property,'  just  as
pecunia,  from  pecus^  contracted  this  meaning.  A  few
years  ago,  after  pointing  out  the  great  part  played  by
cattle  in  converting:  Irish  tribal  holdinsrs  into  some-
thing  like  feudal  tenures,  I  stated  that  I  suspected
^  feodum '  to  have  a  closer  connection  with  cattle
than  the  usual  etymology  implied.  M.  de  Laveleye,
commenting  on  this  remark,  has  stated  that  he  has
no  doubt  of  the  association  ;  and  he  observes  that  we
thus  see  the  meaning  of  the  original  contrast  between
allodium  and  feodum — al-od,  the  complete  property ;
fe-od,  the  cattle  property.  Plausible  as  this  is,  I
should  have  hesitated  to  build  on  it  as  a  basis  but
for  the  remarkable  results  disclosed  by  the  examina-
tion of  the  Sahc  Law.  It  undoubtedly  shows  that  an
ancient  Law  of  Movable  Property  may  deeply  affect
a  Law  of  Land.  Now,  we  know  that  among  the
Germans  observed  by  Tacitus  or  his  informants  the


CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  347

chiefs  were  rewarded  by  King  or  Commonwealth
with  assignments  of  cattle  and  corn  ;  the  companions
of  the  chief,  living  in  his  house,  received  a  horse  and
anns  as  pay.  It  was  exactly  the  system  which  pre-
vails at  this  moment  at  the  Court  of  a  Kaffir  chieftain
in  Xorth  Africa.  Xow,  let  us  conceive  this  system
modified  by  the  growth  of  population  or  by  conquest,
but  otherwise  unaltered.  In  the  first  case,  land  in-
creases in  value  through  natural  economical  causes.
In  the  second,  the  Teutonic  host  become  the  masters
of  lands  long  since  populous  and  filled  with  wealth
accumulated  during  the  Pax  Romana.  If,  then,  we
assume  that,  at  once  in  the  occupied  provinces  and
more  gradually  in  Teutonic  territory,  gifts  of  land
took  the  place  of  gifts  of  cattle  and  arms,  but  that
the  old  associations  with  assignments  of  movables
continued  to  attach  to  a  Benefice  in  land,  the  transfer
of  idea — to  my  mind,  at  all  events — explahis  better
than  anything  else  the  transformation  of  the  legal
aspect  of  landed  property.  I  can  now  understand
why  the  Benefice  was  not  at  first  hereditary  ;  why,
even  when  it  became  hereditary,  the  donor  could
select  the  son  who  was  to  inherit  ;  why  he  could
cause  it,  after  the  death  of  any  holder,  to  remain  to
somebody  else  ;  why,  like  a  horse,  or  a  suit  of
armour,  or  a  herd  of  cattle,  it  could  pass  through
a  feuccession  of  hands  and  then  rercrt  to  the  giver  ;
why  it  was  impartible,  the  ancient  gift  of  movables


o48  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  chap.  X.

having  to  be  restored  entire  either  in  genere  or  in
specie  ;  and  lastly,  to  pass  to  more  technical  matters,
why  such  importance  was  attached  by  the  early
feudal  law  to  seisin,  or  actual  possession,  and  why
the  gift  of  a  feudal  estate  implied  warranty  of  the
title  to  it,  which  a  grant  of  allodial  land  never  did.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  liave  in  the  Irish  usages
lately  brought  to  our  knowledge  a  system  just  such
as  we  might  expect  if  we  were  permitted  a  view  of
Teutonic  customs  somewhere  between  the  first  and
the  fifth  century — a  feudal  system  (if  we  may  so  call
it)  dependent  on  cattle  and  kinship  instead  of  land
and  tenure.  I  will  not  now  repeat  the  account  which
I  gave  on  former  occasions  of  the  remarkable  social
mechanism  disclosed  by  the  Brehon  laws  ;  but  those
who  will  examine  it  carefully  will  find  a  number  of
special  feudal  rules  much  more  simply  explained  by
the  relations  of  Irish  chief  and  Iri^h  clansman  than
by  any  theory  founded  on  the  exigencies  of  military
service  or  on  spontaneous  modifications  of  property
in  land.

I  must  not  be  understood  as  affecting  to  offer  a
complete  account  of  the  complicated  system  of  rights
and  duties,  some  personal  and  some  proprietary,
which  made  up  what  we  call  feudalism.  The  mailed
knight  of  the  days  of  chivalry,  who  is  spoken  of  in
much  of  history  and  historical  romance  as  if  he  were
a  product  of  one  age  and  one  region,  may  be  shown


I


CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF FROPERTY.  349

to  have  obtained  from  all  sorts  of  quarters  the
materials  of  the  ascendency  which  he  long  exercised
in  "Western  Em^ope.  His  iron  armour  came  from  the
household  cavalry  of  the  Eastern  Caesar  at  Byzantium:
the  stirrups,  "without  which  he  could  not  have  worn  it
on  horseback,  were  brought,  with  his  horseshoes,  by
Tartar  riders  from  the  steppes  of  the  furthest  Asia.
Just  so  feudahsm,  which  in  the  twelfth  century  looks
to  us  all  of  a  piece,  is  undoubtedly  the  result  of  many
converging  lines  of  descent.  We  are  now  only  con-
cerned with  the  feudal  land-law,  and  to  attribute  it  to
a  single  origin  would  be  quite  inadmissible.  We  must
give  due  weight  to  the  influence  of  purely  Roman
ideas  :  those  connected  with  the  Emphyteutic  form
of  property,  those  springing  up  among  the  military
colonies  on  the  German  border,  and  those  which  had
their  origin  in  the  Roman  law  of  Patron  and  Client.
Competing  with  these  Roman  ideas  are  others  even
more  potent,  of  barbarous  or  primitive  origin.  I
cannot,  doubt  that,  when  the  Benefice  or  Feud  became
hereditary,  the  plan  of  succession  was  mainly  taken
from  that  which  the  men  of  primitive  Aryan  race  had
considered  as  appropriate  to  chiefships  or  sovereignties,
and  which  in  one  of  its  stages  the  Irish  called  Tanistry.
As  little  can  I  doubt  that  the  general  tumult  of  the
Western  world,  during  the  dissolution  of  the  Caro-
lingian  Empire,  contributed  to  diffuse  succession  by
Primogeniture on the one hand, and to produce


350  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  chap.  x.

Villenage  on  the  other.  The  imminent  daily  clanger
caused  little  societies  to  cluster  round  their  natural
leader,  or  some  soldier  of  fortune  who  had  taken  his
place  ;  the  general  impoverishment  caused  men  to  be
depressed  to  the  condition  of  beasts  of  burden.  Un-
questionably the  squalor  and  poverty  which  meet  us
on  the  threshold  of  tlie  Middle  Ages  did  not  charac-
terise the  provinces  of  the  Roman  Empire,  even  on
the  eve  of  its  fall.  There  can  be  no  greater  delusion
than  that  the  Roman  provincials  were  pauperised  by
taxation  ;  and  M.  Fustel  de  Coulanges  seems  to  me
to  have  quite  proved  in  his  last  work  that  Gaul,
at  all  events,  even  when  swarming  with  barbarians,
was  still  full  of  wealth  and  splendour.  But  no
surer  ruin  can  be  wrought  to  the  hoarded  capital
of  centuries  than  by  such  an  anarchy  as  prevailed
on  the  relaxation  of  the  Carolingian  power.  Lord
Macaulay,  in  contrasting  India  as  the  English  found
it  with  the  impressions  of  it  entertained  by  Euro-
pean adventurers,  has  said  that  it  is  really  a  very
poor  country  ;  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  believe  this
of  so  great  an  area  of  fertile  soil  crowded  for  ages
by  an  industrious  population.  The  true  secret  of
the  poverty  of  India,  from  which  she  is  slowly  re-
covering, I  take  to  be  the  desolation  caused  by  the
wars  and  bri2;andao^e  of  about  2,000  several  chiefs
while  the  Mogul  dominion  was  dissolving.  I  think
that  India  during  the  reigns  of  Akhbar  and  Jehangir


%


CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  351

was  very  probably  as  ricb  as  the  Western  world
thought  it  ;  but  its  carefully  hoarded  capital  was
destroyed  as  were  the  accumulations  of  the  Roman
Empire.  There  are  some  very  singular  analogies
between  the  dissolution  of  the  Mogul  and  the  disso-
lution of  the  Carolingian  power — to  some  extent  in
their  course,  but  in  a  much  greater  degree  in  their
social  effects.  These,  however,  cannot  be  conveniently
considered  here.

One  result  of  this  revolution  of  lesral  ideas,  which
arose  from  assimilating  immovable  property  to
movable,  was,  I  need  hardly  say,  greatly  to  com-
plicate the  law  of  land.  The  complex  land -law
of  the  feudal  ages  was,  on  the  Continent  of  Europe,
essentially  the  law  of  noble  classes  ;  but  in  this
country  it  became  the  general  land -law,  as  I  before
stated,  by  exception.  Among  the  many  proposals
which  have  been  made  for  reforming  it  since  Bentham
became  an  authority  among  us,  one  frequently  put
forward  may  be  described  as  a  proposal  to  carry  to
its  farthest  consequences  the  early  process  of  change
in  which  feudalism  begun.  The  suggestion  has  often
been  made  that  real  property  should  be  closely  assimi-
lated to  personalty,  more  especially  in  respect  of  con-
veyance. There  ought  to  be  no  more  difficulty,  it  is
said,  in  transferring  a  piece  of  land  than  in  selling  a
horse.  I  believe  the  analogy  to  be  unsound,  and  the
route  indicated  a  false  one. There  is  far  more  promise


352  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  chap.  x.

in  reversing  than  in  extending  the  principle,  in
treating  land  as  essentially  unlike  movables,  and
in  a  return  to  the  ancient  methods  of  conveying
allodial  land.  The  subject  is,  for  several  reasons,
worthy  of  our  attention.

It  is  to  be  recollected,  first,  that  the  primitive
conveyances  of  allodial  land  were  before  all  things
public.  Land  belonged  to  the  tribe,  joint-family,  or
village -community  before  it  belonged  to  the  individual
household  ;  even  when  it  became  private  property,
the  brotherhood  retained  large  rights  over  it,  and
without  the  consent  of  tlie  collective  brotherhood  it
could  not  be  transferred.  The  public  consent  of  the
village  to  a  sale  of  land  is  still  required  over  much  of
the  Aryan  world.  Although,  as  we  know  the  Man-
cipation in  Roman  legal  history,  it  is  a  form  of
private  transfer,  it  plainly  bears  the  stamp  of  its
original  publicity.  The  five  witnesses  who  had  to
assist  at  a  Mancipation  represent  the  old  consenting
community,  according  to  a  principle  of  representation
by  fives  widely  difi^used  among  primitive  races.  As
a  private  conveyance.  Mancipation  was  extremely
clumsy,  and  I  have  no  doubt  it  was  a  great  advan-
tage to  Roman  society  when  this  ancient  conveyance
was  first  subordinated  to  Tradition,  or  simple  de-
livery, and  finally  superseded  by  it.  Nevertheless,
the  most  successful  modern  experiments  have  re-
verted  in principle to  a  method of  transfer even


CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  353

older  than  Mancipation,  and  the  latest  simplifications
of  the  conveyance  of  land  are  a  reproduction  of  the
primitive  pubhc  transfers  in  the  face  of  the  com-
munity, in  a  new  form  appropriate  to  large  and
miscellaneous  societies.

In  France,  and  in  the  territories  incorporated
with  the  Empire  of  Napoleon  I.,  there  has  existed,
ever  since  the  establishment  or  introduction  of  the
Code  called  by  his  name,  a  system  of  publicly
reodsterino;  sales  and  morto-ao'es  of  land.  In  some
of  the  Grermanic  countries  there  was  long  a  disin-
clination to  adopt  these  expedients  ;  but  they  have
now  been  almost  universally  copied  on  the  Con-
tinent, and,  as  sometimes  happens,  the  new  system
is  most  perfect  where  the  delay  in  accepting  it  was
lono;est.  The  land-retristries  which  have  the  hio-hest
commendation  fi'om  juridical  writers  are  those  of
certain  small  Teutonic  communities — e.g.  the  state
of  Hesse- Darmstadt,  and  the  Swiss  canton  of  Zurich.
I  can  here  give  but  a  brief  description  of  the
mechanism.  The  land  of  the  community  is  divided
into  a  number  of  circumscriptions  of  no  great  area.
For  each  of  these  a  central  office  is  established,  with
a  staff  of  functionaries  who  are  to  some  extent  ex-
perts, and  at  each  office  a  register  is  opened  in  which
separate  portions  or  groups  of  pages  are  appropriated
to  separate  masses  of  land.  There  has  been  some
controversy  as  to  what  the  area  selected  for  separate

A A


354  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  chap.  x.

treatment  should  be — whether  a  space  determined  by
land-measurement,  or,  as  we  should  say,  an  estate,  an
aggregate  of  lands  once  held  as  a  single  property  ;
but  I  believe  that  the  historical  system,  that  which
deals  with  estates  rather  than  with  areas  settled  by
land-surveyors,  has  been  found  practically  the  most
convenient.  When  the  register  has  once  been
opened,  the  legal  history  of  every  parcel  of  every
area  is  thenceforward  recorded  in  it,  and  every
transfer  or  mortgage  must  be  registered  in  it,  under
pain  of  invalidity.  Whether  a  person  wishing  to  sell
or  mortgage  has  the  right  to  do  so  it  is  the  business
of  the  staff  of  experts  to  ascertain.  It  is  absolutely
essential  to  the  system  that  the  register  should  be
easily  accessible,  and  the  formalities  of  registration
simple  and  cheap.

The  nearest  English  analogy  to  these  new  foreign
systems  is  to  be  sought  in  the  Court  Rolls  of  Manors  ;
and  it  is  sometimes  asserted  by  lawyers  that  the
manifold  disadvantages  of  copyhold  property  are
compensated  by  the  many  conveniences  arising  from
its  registration  in  these  rolls.  As  to  the  great  mass
of  English  freehold  property,  there  is  a  general  ad-
mission among  lawyers  of  the  expediency  of  registra-
tion, but  vehement  dispute  as  to  the  best  method,
and  a  certain  disposition  to  look  upon  the  practical
difficulties  as  insuperable.  It  is  true  that  these
difficulties  are  for  greater  than  abroad. Our  land


-CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIOXS OP PROPERTY.  355

law  is  much  more  complex  than  the  land  law  of
Continental  countries,  where  it  has  its  counterpart,
if  it  has  any,  in  the  exceptional  law  applied  to  the
estates  of  a  limited  number  of  noble  families  ;  and
English  real -property  law  has  been  still  further  com-
plicated by  the  liberty  of  transfer  and  devise  which
we  have  enjoyed  from  a  comparatively  early  period.
The  great  difficulty  with  us  lies  in  the  preliminary
process  of  ascertaining  whether  a  person  desirous  of
sellino^  or  morto^aoino;  has  the  rio-ht  to  do  it  ;  but
this  is  in  most  Continental  countries  a  comparatively
easy  matter,  the  bulk  of  the  land  having  been  held
until  the  early  part  of  this  century  by  a  tenure  of
strict  villenage,  or,  as  we  should  say,  in  copyhold.

My  immediate  object,  however,  is  not  to  pass  an
eulogy  on  the  principle  of  conveyance  by  entries  on
a  register,  or  to  weigh  one  system  of  registra-
tion against  another.  I  wish  rather  to  point  out
some  remarkable  consequences  of  registration  which
ought  .to  have  our  attention  in  our  special  branch  of
study.  A  short  time  since  I  stated  that  the  problems
once  solved  by  the  expedient  of  Warranty  were  com-
mon to  all  bodies  of  jurisprudence.  What  is  to  be
done  in  the  case  of  the  man,  who  is  in  fact  exercising
all  the  powers  of  an  owner,  but  who  has  no  title  to
show  ?  Is  he  to  be  at  the  mercy  of  anybody  who
chooses  to  injure  or  disturb  him  ?  The  Roman  law
?inswers  this  question  by  providing  the  vast  body  of


A A 2


356  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  chap.  x.

rules  which  constitute  the  chapter  on  Possession.
What  has  to  be  done  with  the  man  who  has  bought,
with  the  proper  formalities,  but  not  from  the  true
owner — or  from  the  true  owner,  but  not  with  the
proper  formalities  ?  The  answer  of  the  Roman  law
consists  in  the  doctrines  of  bond  fide  Possession  and
of  ownership  in  bonis  —  Bonitarian  or  Equitable
ownership.  Is  the  Bonitarian  owner  or  the  Possessor,
with  or  without  good  faith,  always  to  have  an  im-
perfect title  ?  The  reply  is  in  the  great  departments
of  law  concerned  with  Usucaption  and  Prescription.
If  a  man  mortgages  his  property  to  a  number  of
creditors,  in  what  order  are  they  to  be  satisfied  ?
The  volume  of  rules  by  which  all  systems  try  to
solve  this  problem  is  quite  enormous.  But  it  is  very
remarkable  that  where  there  is  a  perfect  system  of
land  registry  the  strong  tendency  is  to  revert  to  the
doctrines  of  Roman  law  as  it  must  have  been  before
Possession,  Usucapion,  and  Bonitarian  ownership
grew  up.  The  registry  of  the  sale  or  mortgage  of
land  being  extremely  £asy,  expeditious,  and  cheap,
there  is  a  marked  disposition  among  the  authors  and
expositors  of  law  to  say  to  the  members  of  the  com-
munity, '  Eitlier  register  your  transfers  or  mortgages,
or  cause  them  to  be  registered,  or  you  shall  have  no
rights  whatever.  If  you  neglect  doing  that  which
it  is  m  your  power  to  do  at  any  moment  and  at  a
trifling  cost  in  time  and  money,  you  shall  not  have


CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  357

the  benefit  of  Possession,  of  Bonitarian  ownership,  of
Usucapion,  or  Prescription.  At  most,  there  shall  be
an  Action  of  Contract  to  compel  the  seller  of  land  to
register  and  the  buyer  to  pay  the  purchase-money.
As  regards  mortgages,  they  shall  rank  in  the  order
of  priority  of  registration,  and  if  you  delay  going
through  the  proper  formalities,  or  compelling  them
to  be  gone  through,  you,  the  mortgagee,  will  be
postponed  to  creditors  more  diligent  than  yourself,
and  you  will  be  satisfied  after  them.'  I  follow
German  writers  of  authority  in  saying  that  this  is
the  condition  to  which  legal  doctrine  is  approximating
in  much  of  Germany,  though  it  is  not  quite  adjusted
to  it.  The  singular  result  is  that  some  of  the  most
intricate  and  difiicult  chapters  of  law  cease  to  be  of
any,  or  much,  importance.  The  expedient  of  public
registration  is,  it  will  be  seen,  purely  mechanical.  A
contrivance  very  like  it  in  principle  spontaneously
and  very  early  suggested  itself  to  the  human  race.
Nevertheless,  where  a  public  registry  of  mortgage
and  land  transfer  has  been  established,  some  of  the
most  famous  and  luxuriant  branches  of  law  show  a
tendency  to  dwindle  and  wither  away  under  its
shadow.  Possession,  Usucapion,  Bonitarian  owner-
ship, and  Hypothek  occupy  together  a  prodigious
space  in  the  Roman  jurisprudence  ;  the  bulk  of  what
corresponds  to  them  in  other  systems  of  law  is  very
great; if  they  are reduced to  a  fraction of  their


or:


58  CLASSIFICATrOXS OF PROPERTY.  chap.  x.

23resent  dimensions,  the  diminution  of  the  aggregate
body  of  Law  will  be  extraordinary  and  will  have
been  produced  in  a  most  unexpected  way.

I  have  dwelt  on  these  Continental  systems  of
land  registration,  and  on  the  effects  attributed  to
them  by  German  juridical  opinion,  for  two  reasons.
In  the  first  place,  the  fact  is  certainly  curious  that
the  latest  improvements  m  the  mechanism  of  mort-
gage and  land  transfer  involve  a  reversion  to  the
primitive  publicity  of  conveyance.  The  public  regis-
ter at  some  accessible  spot,  in  which  all  transactions
must  be  registered  under  penalty  of  immediately
forfeiting  all  their  benefits,  pretty  much  corresponds
to  the  primitive  assembly  of  the  village  before  which
all  transfers  of  shares  in  the  domain  must  be  accom-
plished, in  order  that  the  brotherhood  may  consent
to  them  and  supply  evidence  of  them  by  the  general
recollection.  It  is  true  that  the  ancient  formalities
had  one  object  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
modern.  The  primitive  publicity  of  transfer  went
with  a  most  rigid  exchrsiveness,  and  the  public  con-
sent which  was  insisted  upon  was  employed  to  refuse
the  power  of  purchase  to  strangers.  The  decay  of
the  ancient  public  conveyances  was  very  probably
caused  by  a  change  of  circumstances  which  made  the
communities  either  unable  or  unwilling  to  maintain
their  collective  control  over  the  land  of  their  domain.
In  modern  India  the  growth  of  wealth  has  greatly


CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIOXS OF PROrERTr.  359

stimulated  the  spirit  of  individualism  ;  buyers  and
sellers  of  land  alike  become  impatient  of  the  necessity
for  obtaining  the  public  consent  of  the  villagers  to
their  bargain  ;  the  modern  Anglo-Indian  law  is  un-
favourable to  these  archaic  restrictions  ;  and  thus
the  primitive  public  methods  of  alienation  are  every-
where giving  way  to  private  transfers.^  In  the  his-
torically ancient  world,  the  same  results  were  most
probably  produced  by  conquest  and  by  the  absorp-
tion of  one  or  more  of  the  primitive  proprietary
groups  by  others  stronger  than  themselves.  In  the
Eoman  State,  including  a  population  ever  more  and
more  miscellaneous,  we  find,  at  the  outset  of  legal
history,  a  mere  shadow  of  the  old  forms  of  transfer
in  the  Mancipation  ;  and  Mancipation,  long  before
its  abolition  by  Justinian,  was  subordinated  by  every
sort  of  legal  contrivance  to  mere  Delivery  or  Tra-
dition. Yet  even  Tradition,  when  it  became  the
sole  Roman  conveyance,  retained  some  trace  of  the
institutions  out  of  which  it  grew.  The  Roman  law
never  to  the  last  allowed  the  dominium  or  right  of
property  to  be  passed  from  one  person  to  another  by
a  mere  contract  ;  it  was  absolutely  necessary  that  the
contract  should  be  followed  by  the  delivery  of  the
Thing  which  was  its  subject. This  is  a  peculiarity

'  Two  valuable  Acts  of  the  Indian  Legislature,  the  Registration
and  Transfer  of  Property  Acts,  aie  mitigating  the  evils  arising
from  the  privacy  and  heterogeneous  forms  of  these  transfers.


360  CLASSIFICATIOiS^S OF PKOPERTY.  chap.  x.

wliich  has  more  than  once  caused  perplexity  to  per-
sons who  have  consulted  the  Roman  law  of  Transfer
in  ignorance  of  its  being  founded  on  a  principle
which  the  English  law  and  the  French  Code  have
abandoned.

The  other  fact  to  which  I  wish  to  call  attention
is  not  merely  curious,  but  highly  instructive. The
tendency  of  German  juridical  opinion,  which  I  have
mentioned, shows  that  we  are in  danger  of  over-
estimating the  stability  of  legal  conceptions. Legal
conceptions  are  indeed  extremely  stable  ; many  of
them  have  their  roots  in  the  most  solid  portions  of
our  nature,  and  those  of  them  with  which  we  are
most  familiar  have  been  for  ages  under  the  protection
of  irresistible  sovereign  power. Their  great  stability
is  apt  to  suggest  that  they  are  absolutely  permanent
and  indestructible  ;  and  this  assumption  seems  to  me
to  be  sometimes  made  not  only  by  superficial  minds,
but  by  strong  and  clear  intellects. I  am  not  sure
tliat  even  such  juridical  thinkers as  Bentham  and
Austin  are  quite  free  from  it. They  sometimes  write
as  if  they  thought  that,  although  obscured  by  false
theory, false logic, and false statement, there is
somewhere behind all the delusions which they
expose  a  framework  of  permanent  legal  conceptions
which is discoverable by a trained eye, looking
through  a  dry  light,  and  to  which  a  rational  Code
may  always  be  fitted. What  I  have  stated  as  to  the


CHAP.  X.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF PROPERTY.  361

effects  upon  law  of  a  mere  mechanical  improvement
in  land  registration  is  a  very  impressive  warning  that
this  position  is  certainly  doubtful,  and  possibly  not
true.  The  legal  notions  which  I  described  as  decay-
ing and  dwindling  have  always  been  regarded  as
belonging  to  what  may  be  called  the  osseous  structure
of  jurisprudence  ;  the  fact  that  they  are  nevertheless
perishable  suggests  very  forcibly  that  even  juris-
prudence itself  cannot  escape  from  the  great  law  of
Evolution.


362  CLASSIFICATIOXS OF LEGAL RULES.  chap  xi.


CHAPTER XI.

CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.

Almost  the  first  thing  which  is  learnt  by  the  student
of  Roman  law  is,  that  the  classical  jurists  of  Rome
divided  the  whole  body  of  legal  rules  into  the  Law  of
Persons,  the  Law  of  Things,  and  the  Law  of  Actions.
Although,  however,  his  studies,  as  law  is  now  taught
amongst  us,  may  soon  introduce  him  to  some  vehe-
ment disputes  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  classification,
he  may  be  long  in  becoming  alive  to  the  extent  and
importance  of  the  literature  to  which  it  has  given
birth.  It  would  seem,  in  fact,  that  in  the  seven-
teenth century,  which  was  a  great  juridical  era,  theories
of  legal  classification  took  very  much  the  place  of
those  theories  of  law  reform  which  so  occupied  the
minds  of  the  last  generation  of  Englishmen.  The
continuous  activity  of  legislatures  is  an  altogether
modern  phenomenon  ;  and,  before  it  began,  an  intel-
lect of  the  type  of  Bentham's,  instead  of  speculating
on  the  possibility  of  transforming  the  law  into  con-
formity with  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest
number,  or  with  any  other  principle,  speculated  rather


I


CHAP XI.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL KULES.  363

on  the  possibility  of  rearranging  it  in  new  and  more
philosophical  order.  The  improvement  in  view  was
thus  rather  a  reform  of  law-books  than  a  reform  of
law.  The  most  extreme  example  of  such  theories  is,
perhaps,  to  be  found  in  the  attempt  of  Domat  to  dis-
tribute all  law  under  its  two  '  great  commandments  '
as  set  forth  in  the  twenty- second  chapter  of  St.
Matthew's  Gospel — love  to  God  and  love  to  one's
neio^hbour.  But  on  the  whole  the  arrano'ement  in
which  the  compilers  of  Justinian's  '  Institutes  ^  followed
Gains,  distributing  law  in  Law  of  Persons,  Law  of
Things,  and  Law  of  Actions,  became  the  point  of
departure  for  theories  of  legal  classification.  Its  his-
tor}'  has  been  not  unlike  that  of  several  equally
famous  propositions.  After  long  neglect,  it  came  to
be  regarded  as  an  expression  of  absolute  truth,  and
an  essential  and  fundamental  distinction  was  assumed
to  exist  between  the  three  great  departments  into
which  the  Komans  divided  law.  English  jurispru-
dence was,  no  doubt,  very  little  affected  by  this  as-
sumption, but  English  lawyers  occasionally  come
across  the  inferences  from  it  when  they  have  to  deal
with  Private  International  law,  or,  in  other  words,
with  the  conditions  upon  which  one  community  will
recognise  and  apply  a  portion  of  the  jurisprudence  of
another.  At  a  later  date  certain  difficulties  were  ob-
Berved  in  the  rigorous  application  of  the  Roman  doc-
trine, and  much  ingenuity  was  expended  in  removing


364  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  chap.  xi.

them,  or  explaining  them  away.  Finally,  it  was
pronounced  to  be  theoretically  untenable,  and  only
deserving  of  being  retained  on  account  of  its  his-
torical importance.  According  to  the  general  agree-
ment of  modern  writers  on  jurisprudence,  the  Roman
distribution  of  law  into  Law  of  Persons,  Law  of
Things,  and  Law  of  Actions,  must  be  regarded  as
now  exploded.

As  a  perfect  classification  of  legal  rules  would
distribute  them  according  to  their  real  relations  with
one  another,  and  would  therefore  be  founded  on  a
complete  analysis  of  all  the  legal  conceptions,  the
subject  has  not  lost  its  interest  for  very  powerful
minds  in  this  century.  The  speculations  of  Austin
on  classification  almost  fill  such  writings  of  his  as
remain  to  us,  and  a  valuable  essay  of  John  Stuart
Mill  on  these  speculations  may  be  read  in  the  third
volume  of  his  '  Dissertations  and  Discussions.'  On
the  Continent  of  Europe  a  more  practical  interest
has  been  given  to  such  questions  by  the  gradual
codification  of  the  law  of  the  whole  civilised  world,
except  England  and  the  countries  under  the  influence
of  the  English  legal  system  ;  for  a  Code  must  be
arranged  somehow,  and  few  would  deny  that  the  more
philosophical  the  arrangement  the  better.  But  the
great  majority  of  writers  on  the  subject,  whatever
their  title  to  be  heard,  are  agreed  in  depreciating
the  Roman  classification  and  all  classifications  de-


CHAP.  XI.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  365

scended  from  it,  and  sometimes  their  censure  is  sur-
prisingly strong.  This  modern  fashion  of  decrying,
and  even  of  reviling,  the  arrangement  of  the  Roman
Institutes  threatens  to  produce  some  reaction,  and  I
see  that  a  manful  attempt  to  rehabilitate  it  has  been
made  in  America.  A  book  pubhshed  at  Chicago,
and  written  by  a  Law  Professor  of  the  State  Uni-
versity of  Iowa,  is  not  likely  perhaps  to  come  into  the
hands  of  many  English  readers,  but  Mr.  Hammond's
Preface  to  the  American  issue  of  Mr.  Sandars's  well-
known  edition  of  the  '  Institutes  of  Justinian  '  con-
tains much  the  best  defence  I  have  seen  of  the
classical  distribution  of  law.  Mj^  own  opmion  is
that  the  now  common  depreciation  of  this  distribu-
tion is  not  so  much  mistaken  as  misplaced.  The
legal  classifications  proposed  by  the  most  modern
thinkers  on  these  subjects  are  classifications  of  legal
Eights.  Every  one  of  such  systems  has  legal  Eight
for  its  centre  and  pivot.  But,  singular  as  the  fact
may  appear  to  those  unacquainted  with  it,  the  Eomans
had  not  attained,  or  liad  not  fully  attained,  to  the
conception  of  a  legal  Eight,  which  seems  to  us  ele-
mentary. According  to  the  general  usage  of  the
Eoman  lawyers  Jus  meant  not  'a  right,'  but  Maw'
and  usually  a  particular  branch  of  law.  There  are
undoubtedly,  certain  senses  of  Jus  in  which  the
meaning  of  '  right '  is  approached,  and  even  closely
approached  ;  but,  on  the  whole,  the  Eomans  must  be


366  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  chap.  xi.

considered  to  have  constructed  their  memorable  sys-
tem without  the  help  of  the  conception  of  legal  Right.
We  have  constantly  to  be  on  our  guard  against  illu-
sions produced  by  the  undoubted  stability  of  law  as
compared  with  other  provinces  of  thought.  Some
modern  writers  speak  of  the  Romans  as  if  they  were
to  blame  for  not  having  clearly  conceived  a  legal
Right  ;  even  Mill  speaks  of  their  language  on  the
point  as  '  unhappy  ;  '  but  the  truth  is,  and  it  is  very
impressive,  that  the  legal  idea  of  a  Right  was  very
slowly  evolved.  In  the  minds  of  the  Roman  lawyers
it  was  entangled  with  other  notions,  and  was  there-
fore obscure.  In  the  Middle  Ages  it  became  clearer,
doubtless  through  its  examination  by  the  scholastics.
But,  unquestionably,  a  clear  and  consistent  meaning
was,  for  the  first  time,  given  to  the  expression  ^  a
right '  by  the  searching  analysis  of  Bentham  and
Austin.  I  object,  therefore,  to  the  contemptuous
language  sometimes  applied  to  the  Roman  map  of  the
provinces  of  law,  as  in  effect  taxing  persons  who  had
not  yet  attained  to  the  conception  of  a  legal  Right,
with  not  having  anticipated  methods  of  classification
of  which  Rights  are  the  basis.  In  order  to  give  their
due  to  the  ancient  lawyers  who  first  divided  law  into
Law  of  Persons,  Law  of  Things,  and  Law  of  Actions,
we  must  try  to  bring  home  to  ourselves  the  view  of
the  field  of  law  which  this  division  superseded  ;  and
then  we  shall  see,  I  think,  that  the  new  arrangement


CHAP.  XI.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  367

may  have  been  a  great  feat  of  abstraction.  The  object
of  this  paper  will  be  to  show  what  was  the  original
Eoman  notion  of  the  contents  of  a  legal  system  ;  but
it  will  derive  such  interest  as  it  possesses  from  the
light  which  the  inquiry  throws  on  certain  primitive
ideas  regarding  law  and  justice  which  appear  to  have
been  once  diffused  over  a  great  portion  of  mankind.

The  respect,  which  once  amounted  to  reverence,
for  the  classification  of  law  in  the  Roman  Institutes,
though  it  has  had  time  to  culminate  and  decline,  is
relatively  modem.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose
that  the  Roman  lawyers  set  any  extraordinary  value
on  it.  It  was  confined  to  their  Institutional  treatises
or  primers  of  law,  the  educational  manuals  placed  in
the  hands  of  beginners.  The  student  was  soon  ad-
vanced to  the  Praetorian  Edict,  and  the  greatest  part
of  his  pupilage  was  passed  in  the  close  examination
of  it,  and  in  reading  the  numerous  commentaries  of
which  it  was  the  text.  But  the  Edict  of  the  Praetor,
even  when  consolidated  by  Julianus,  did  not  divide
law  into  Law  of  Persons,  Law  of  Things,  and  Law  of
Actions.  The  Twelve  Tables,  older  than  the  Edict,
have  no  trace  of  this  classification  ;  nor  has  any  later
compendium  of  Roman  law.  The  Gregorian  and
Hermogenian  Codes  were  arranged  upon  a  different
principle ;  so  was  the  Code  of  Theodosius  the  Second  ;
80,  manifestly,  are  the  Code  and  Digest  of  Justinian.
When  the  study  of  Roman  law  revived  in  the  Middle


o


68  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES. chap.  xi.


Ages,  it  was  not  the  arrangement  of  the  Institutes
which  regulated  the  course  of  legal  study  soon  fol-
lowed by  thousands  of  students. As  may  be  seen
from  Mr.  Hammond's  Preface,  the  mediaeval  teachers
followed  the  so-called  '  legal  order,'  that  is,  the  actual
order  of  legal  topics  m  the  text  of  the  book  before
the  class. The  ascendency of  the  classification  of
the  Institutes  in  fact  took  its  rise  in  dissatisfaction
with this '  leo'al order.' It  survived  in  the  law-
schools, says Mr. Hammond, to the end of the
eighteenth  century,  consequently  till  after  the  time
of  Blackstone  ;  '  but  the  increased  importance  of  the
Institutes  in  the  plan  of  study  gradually  made  their
arranofement  to  be  rea:arded  as  the  basis  of  all  scien-
tific  systems  of  jurisprudence.' It  has  now,  how-
ever, become  plain,  and  with  regard  to  matters  far
more  important  than  legal  classification,  that  much
which  the  eighteenth  century  abandoned  in  the  name
of  science  and  in  equally  respectable  names  must  be
recovered  and  re-examined,  if  the  thread  of  human
thouorht  is  ever  to  be  knitted  anew. What  then  was
the  ^  legal  order,'  which  appears  in  the  RoDian  Digest
and  Code,  and  which,  when  those  bodies  of  law  were
put  together,  had  already  maintained  its  place  for
about  ten  centuries  in  the  legal  records  of  a  society
of  pre-eminent  legal  genius? I  think  that  the  ques-
tion will  be  found  to  have  more  than  a  merely  tech-
nical and  more  than  a  merely  antiquarian  interest.


1


CHAP.  XI. CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL EULKS.  369

The  arrangement  of  legal  topics  which  can  be
shown  to  have  been  extraordinarily  persistent  in  the
Eoman  law  is  first  discovered  in  the  fraofments  of
those  Twelve  Tables  which  to  the  last  were  its  theo-
retical basis.  The  contents  of  all  the  Tables  except  the
Eleventh  and  Twelfth  have  been  known  m  a  general
way  since  the  time  of  Gothofred  ;  but  we  are  now
only  under  the  necessity  of  attending  to  the  subjects
of  the  first  three,  and  especially  of  the  First.  This
First  Table  of  the  primitive  Code  contained  a  number
of  rules  de  in  jus  vocando,  on  the  first  steps  in  a
judicial  proceeding,  on  summons  to  the  defendant,
and  on  the  excuses,  or — to  employ  the  later  Teu-
tonic word  which  found  its  way  into  our  own  early
law — the  ^  essoins,'  which  he  might  make  for  not
attending.  The  Second  Table  had  to  do,  first,  with
the  Procedure  to  be  followed  when  the  case  was
actually  in  Court,  and  next  (so  it  is  commonly  be-
lieved) with  theft ;  it  went  at  once  from  legal  pro-
cedure to  the  fraudulent  subtraction  of  a  movable.
The  Third  Table  contained  rules  as  to  Deposits.  We
need  not  go  further,  and  all  which  must  be  recol-
lected is  that  the  earliest  Roman  Code  treated  first  of
legal  procedure,  and  then,  either  at  once  or  shortly
afterwards,  dealt  with  the  subjects  of  Thefts  and
Deposits  ;  all  the  other  heads  of  law  discussed  in  the
remaining  Tables  followed  the  same  apparently  hap-
hazard arrangement. Let  us  now  turn  to  the  Prae-

B B


370  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES. chap.  xi.

torian  or  Perpetual  Edict,  the  body  of  Roman  Equity
jurisprudence  as  opposed  to  the  Roman  Common
Law  constructed  out  of  the  Twelve  Tables  and  out
of  the  accretion  of  legal  rules  which  had  them  for  a
nucleus.  The  Edict  had  unquestionably  an  order  of
subjects  of  its  own.  I  will  not  now  discuss  the  time
at  which,  or  the  mode  in  which,  this  order  first  ap-
peared. It  began  with  a  title  manifestly  corre-
sponding to  the  first  Decemviral  Table,  though  usually
given  in  different  words,  de  actione  dandd.  The
Second  Title,  like  the  Second  Table,  dealt  with  Pro-
cedure in  Court.  Deposit  was  treated  of  in  the  Third
Title  ;  but  Theft,  instead  of  taking  the  first  place
after  Procedure,  as  it  is  thought  to  have  done  in  the
primitive  Code,  occupied  the  last  part  of  the  Fourth
Title,  in  which  it  was  preceded  by  Marriage  Portions
and  Tutelage.  There  is  a  general  but  not  exact
correspondence  with  the  Twelve  Tables  throughout
the  remaining  Titles,  and  on  the  whole  the  classifica-
tion of  the  Edict  looks  like  a  modernised  form  of  the
ancient  order  of  the  Twelve  Tables.  It  is  well  es-
tablished that  the  distribution  of  subjects  of  the  Edict
was  observed  in  the  great  mass  of  Roman  legal  litera-
ture, and  that  it  influenced  the  earlier  attempts  at
codification,  but  it  was  long  a  matter  of  dispute
whether  it  determined  the  order  followed  in  the  Code
and  Digest  of  Justinian.  At  first  sight  there  is  no
trace  of  resemblance  or  correspondence,  but  the  reason


CHAP.  XI. CLASSIFICATIOJiTS OP LEGAL RULES.  371

is  that  a  great  quantity  of  prefatory  matter  introduces
the  true  classification  in  both  of  these  famous  com-
pilations. In  the  Code  the  preface  is  ecclesiastical ;
in  the  Digest  there  are  first  some  general  propositions
about  law,  and  then  an  account  of  various  Imperial
officers  connected  with  the  administration  of  the  law
or  having  some  sort  of  jurisdiction.  The  real  body
of  the  Digest  commences  at  the  Fourth  Title  of  the
Second  Book,  and  begins  with  the  very  subject  of
the  First  Table  of  the  Decemvh'al  Law,  de  in  jus
vocando.  A  close  correspondence  between  these  ear-
liest and  latest  monuments  of  Roman  law  may  be
discerned  running  through  no  less  than  nmeteen
books  of  the  Digest  ;  only  Theft  has  dropped  into  an
obscurity  characteristic  of  modern  as  distinguished
fi'om  ancient  law.

From  this  brief  summary  of  an  inquiry  which  has
occupied  the  minds  of  several  generations  of  learned
men,  it  would  appear  that  the  form  of  the  Roman
law  throughout  the  whole  course  of  its  history  was
strongly  influenced  by  the  primitive  arrangement  of
subjects  in  the  Twelve  Tables.  Have  we  any  clue  to
the  meaning  or  principle  of  this  ancient  legal  classi-
fication? At  first  sight  it  is  simply  disorderly,  even
less  capable  of  being  referred  to  any  dominant  notion
than  the  arrangement  of  our  classical  English  Digest,
Bacon's  '  Abridgment,'  which  begins  with  *  Plea  in
Abatepaent  to  the  Jurisdiction  of  a  Court,'  and  goes

JJ  B  2


372  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES. chap.  xi.

on  to  treat  of  Ambassadors  and  Attorneys,  but  which
at  all  events  may  lay  claim  to  the  convenience  of  an
alphabetical  order.  The  suspicion,  however,  that
some  light  might  be  thrown  on  the  arrangement  of
the  Twelve  Tables  by  what  has  more  recently  been
called  Comparative  Jurisprudence  is  not  new.  Ever
since  the  earliest  and  purest  of  the  Teutonic  Codes,
the  Frankish  '  Lex  Salica,'  has  been  examined,  it  has
been  seen  that  it  exhibited  some  curious  general  re-
semblances to  the  course  of  legal  topics  followed  in
all  the  monuments  of  Roman  law  except  the  Institutes.
The  first  title  is  de  mannire,  on  Summons  to  a  Court,
thus  exactly  answering  to  the  First  of  the  Roman
Tables,  and  to  the  First  Title  of  the  Edict.  The  next
seven  Titles  are  concerned  with  Thefts,  just  as  was
the  second  part  of  the  Second  Roman  Table.  The
Salic  titles  on  thefts  of  swine,  thefts  of  kine,  thefts  of
tame  birds,  and  so  forth,  succeed  one  another  down
to  the  ninth  Title,  where  the  subject  of  Trespass  is
taken  up  ;  but  the  code-maker  immediately  returns
to  Theft,  and  though  he  interrupts  himself  to  treat
of  Homicide  and  other  serious  crimes,  he  is  constantly
recurring  to  Theft  throughout  a  great  part  of  the
Code.  The  title  corresponding  most  nearly  to  the
Roman  Deposits  does  not  present  itself  till  the  middle
of  the  Salic  Law  is  reached  :  it  is  numbered/ fifty,'
and  has  the  barbarous  Latin  heading  dc  Jides  facias  ;
but  it  is  most  elaborately  framed,  and  has  furnished


CHAP.  XI. CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  373

plentiful  food  to  modern  German  erudition. The
fact  remains  that  the  German  Salic  Law  begins,  as  did
the  Roman  Twelve  Tables,  with  committing  what  to
a  modern  legal  eye  is  the  paralogism  of  placing  the
Law  of  Action  in  front  of  the  law  ;  that,  like  the
Twelve  Tables,  it  gives  a  very  high  place  to  Theft — in
modern  law  one  of  the  most  insignificant  of  subjects  ;
and  that  it  elaborately  discusses  contractual  obliga-
tions, but  that  it  puts  them  in  no  place  in  the  smallest
degree  corresponding  to  that  reserved  in  the  Roman
Institutes  for  the  Law  of  Contract. These  resem-
blances, as  I  stated,  attracted  notice  some  time  ago  ;
but  it  was  matter  of  dispute  whether  they  proved
anything  more  than  that  the  Frankish  code-maker
had  heard somethino;  of  the  Roman 'leo:al order.'
On the one side the  strong  probability  might  be
urged  that  the Theodosian  Code  had  something  to
do  with  the  Prankish  codification  ;  on  the  other,  it
might  be  said  that  the  substantive  haw  of  the  Lex
Salica  shows  no  signs  of  derivation  from  the  Roman
jurisprudence. It  is  purely  barbarous. Again,  the
order  of  topics  in  the  Lex  Salica  is  not  that  of  the
later  Roman  law,  which  the  Frank  might  conceivably
have  followed,  but  that  of  the  earliest  Roman  law,  of
which  it  is  almost  impossible  that  he  can  have  known
anything. After  Procedure,  the  Salic  Law  deals  with
Theft. So,  according  to  the  better  opinion,  did  the
Twelve  Tables  ;  but  in  the  later  Roman  law  Theft


374  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL KULES. ohap.  xr.

had  become  a  criminal  offence,  and  not  one  of  any
importance.  The  fact  is.  the  prominent  place  as-
signed to  Theft  is  a  distinctive  mark  of  barbarous
law.  It  belongs  to  the  period  when  movables  ai^e
of  far  higher  value  than  immovables,  personal  pro-
perty than  land.  Xo  surer  inference  can  be  drawn
from  the  insistence  of  a  lawgiver  on  Theft  than  that
the  community  for  which  he  legislated  had  more  land
than  sufficed  for  cultivation,  and  that  the  common
prey  of  violence  or  fraud  was  the  movable,  the  slave,
the  domestic  animal,  or  the  ornament  or  utensil  which
was  the  product  of  workmen  making  up  for  unskil-
fulness  by  laboriousness.

The  arguments  against  the  derivation  of  the  Salic
from  the  Roman  arrangement  have  always  seemed  to
me  to  pre2)onderate,  independently  of  new  materials
for  an  opinion.  But  these  new  materials  place  the
matter  beyond  a  doubt.  By  itself  indeed  the  lately
revealed  Irish  law  would  carry  us  a  very  little  wa}'.
Its  great  peculiarity  is  the  extraordinary  prominence
it  gives  to  Procedure.  The  principal  Irish  law-book,
pretending  to  be  a  Code  and  claiming  m  its  preface
to  have  been  framed  when  ^  Theodosius  was  monarch
of  the  world,'  is  almost  wholly  taken  up  with  the
law  of  Distress.  Undoubtedly  we  have  here  the
Celtic  counterpart  of  the  First  Roman  Table,  de  in
jws  vocando.  Distramt  is  the  ancient  Irish  method,
and  probabl}'  it  was  once  the  Greek,  the  Roman,  the


CHAP.  XI. CLASSIFICATIOXS OF LEGAL RULES.  375


German,  and  tlie  Hindu  method,  possibly  it  was  the
universal  method,  of  vocatio  in  jus,  of  compelling  a
person  complained  against  to  come  into  Court  and
submit  the  quarrel  to  arbitration  or  adjudication.
The  state  of  things  is  that  of  which  we  have  a  bare
trace  in  Roman  and  Hindu,  but  traces  somewhat
more  abundant  in  Teutonic  law  ;  you,  having  re-
ceived an  injury,  so  far  availed  yourself  of  the  primi-
tive natural  remedy  of  forcible  reprisals  that  you  used
it,  with  the  sufferance  or  under  the  control  of  the  law,
to  compel  your  adversary  to  come  into  Court.  But,
though  this  amount  of  correspondence  is  manifest,  no
further  resemblance  to  the  Roman  Twelve  Tables
can  be  discovered  amid  the  sino'ular  confusions  of
the  Irish  jurisprudence.  The  subject  discussed  in
the  great  Code,  the  Senchus  Mor,  next  after  Distress
is  the  law  of  '  Hostage-securities,'  and  it  may  cer-
tainly be  asserted  that  this  must  have  been  an  im-
portant branch  of  law  amid  a  community  perpetually
bellio:erent  like  the  ancient  Irish.  But  in  fact  a  screat
part  of  law  is  incidentally  discussed  in  the  Senchus
Mor  under  the  head  of  Distress,  and  it  must  on  the
whole  be  admitted  that  neither  in  that  nor  in  any
other  Irish  law-book  is  there  any  clear  sign  of  de-
signed classification.  All  we  can  say  with  confi-
dence is — and  this  is  an  important  proposition — that
the  Irish  Brehon  lawyers  regarded  the  mode  of
bringing  of  a  defendant  into  Court  as  the  legal  topic


376


CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.


CHAP. XI.


Ot^


I'y^'


Hi^l^,


t/^TW.^^^^


which  rightfully  and  naturally  took  precedence  of  all
others.

It  appears  to  me  that  the  key  to  these  mysteries
may  be  found  in  those  Hindu  law-books  which  have
been  more  or  less  known  to  us  under  the  extremely
inappropriate  name  of  Codes.  One  of  them  has  been
long  accessible  to  English  students  through  the  trans-
lation of  Sir  William  Jones,  and  this  so-called  Code
of  Manu  is  believed  by  orthodox  Hindus  to  be  the
very  collection  of  '  sacred  laws  '  which  Manu,  '  whose
powers  were  measureless,'  declared  to  the  '  divine
sages '  who  approached  him  as  he  '  sat  reclined  with
his  attention  fixed  on  one  object.'  But  the  sacred
laws  thus  promulgated  in  no  way  answer  to  the
modern  conception  of  a  Code.  They  are  contained
in  a  book  which,  among  other  things,  is  a  treatise  on
the  seen  and  unseen  worlds,  on  the  art  of  govern-
ment, and  on  the  various  classes  of  Hindu  society.
Similarly  the  Christian  Brehon  laws  are  found  mixed
up  with  discussions  on  cosmogony  and  logic  ;  and
tlie  Roman  Twelve  Tables  clearly  consisted  in  some
})arts  of  ritual.  The  Code  of  Manu  would  in  fact  by
itself  suggest  that  Law,  as  a  subject  of  conscious  reflec-
tion, is  the  result  of  a  gradual  evolution.  It  was  not
at  first  dissociated  from  all  sorts  of  propositions  on
matters  which  affect  life  in  this  world  or  the  next.
The  Sanscritists  of  our  day,  as  I  have  explained  in  the
earlier  chapters  of  this  work,  are  not  at  all  inclined


CHAP.  XI. CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  377

to  concede  to  the  later  Hindu  law-books  that  vast
antiquity  which  was  once  claimed  for  them.  Follow-
ing a  theory  of  Professor  Max  Mliller,  they  trace  the
rhythmical  texts  of  the  so-called  Codes  to  collections
of  maxims  expressed  in  language  so  concise  as  to
fasten  themselves  on  the  memory,  and  finally  to  their
fountain-head  in  the  oldest  literature  of  the  Aryan
race.  But  the  law-books  once  framed  appear  to  have
undergone  a  further  specialisation.  Ritual,  of  which
there  are  plain  traces  in  the  Roman  Twelve  Tables,
has  a  compendium  of  rules  entirely  appropriated  to
itself  in  that  remarkable  record  of  another  Italian
community,  the  Eugubine  Tables,  which  till  the
other  day  no  man  could  read  ;  and  in  the  book  of
Narada,  now  open  to  the  English  reader,  he  will  find
a  version  of  the  '  sacred  laws  '  of  Manu  in  which  Law
proper  has  been  isolated  from  other  subjects,  and  is
regarded  very  much  in  the  same  light  in  which  it
would  be  viewed  by  the  author  of  a  modern  Code.

In  the  mediaeval  Digests  of  Hindu  law,  which  are
the  actual  sources  of  the  law  now  administered  in
India,  Narada  is  sometimes  quoted  as  of  almost  equal
autliority  with  Manu.  In  point  of  fact,  both  Manu
and  Narada  are  entirely  mythical,  and  the  books
called  after  their  names  are  notliinff  more  than  com-
pendia  of  the  teaching  of  particular  Hindu  law-
schools,  formed  more  or  less  on  the  model  of  a  gens  or
clan. Both  these  law-books  pretend  to  an  origin  in


378  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LbXiAL RULES.  chap.  xi.

the  sacred  laws  declared  by  that  Manu  who  took  part
in  the  creation  of  the  world  ;  but  the  author  of  the
extant  book,  which  purports  to  contain  the  whole
teaching  of  Manu,  quotes  '  Manu  '  as  a  personage  dis-
tinct from  himself ;  and  the  preface  to  the  book  of
Xarada  describes  at  length  the  process  by  which  a
supposed  original  Code  of  Manu  was  gradually  spe-
cialised, until  it  became  at  last  a  treatise  on  civil  law.
Manu,  says  the  writer,  composed  a  work  which,  among
other  things,  told  of  the  creation  of  the  world,  spoke
of  the  classification  of  bemgs  in  it,  and  gave  the  enu-
meration of  the  countries  assigned  to  them,  and  it
contained  100,000  slokas,  legal  texts  or  verses.  Manu
delivered  it  to  Narada,  who  made  the  very  reasonable
remark,  '  This  book  cannot  be  easily  studied  by
human  beins^s  on  account  of  its  lenoth.'  He  accord-
ingiy  abridged  it  to  12,000  verses,  and  his  disciple,
Sumati,  further  abridged  it  to  4,000.  It  is  only  the
gods,  says  the  introduction,  who  read  the  original
Code.  Men  read  the  second  abridgment,  smce  human
capacity  has  been  brought  to  this  through  the  lessen-
ing of  life.

The  chief  interest  of  the  book  of  Narada,  which
has  recentl}'  been  translated  into  English  by  Dr.
Julius  Jolly,  of  AVurzburg,  is  that  its  writer  is  much
more  of  a  pure  lawyer  than  the  writer  of  Manu,  and
his  work  is  much  more  nearly  a  work  on  law.  Both
of  them  were  certainly  Brahmans.  The  writer  of  Manu


CHAP.  xr.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  379

is  intensely  sacerdotal,  and  like  earlier  authorities,  still
contemplates  the  civil  and  earthly  sanction  as  a  sup-
plement and  aid  to  the  spiritual  penalty.  On  the
other  hand,  the  author  of  Narada  depends  almost
wholly  on  the  civil  sanction,  and  his  religious  cha-
racter shows  itself  chiefly  in  earnest  and  often  very
impressive  exhortations  to  observance  of  the  law  and
of  the  moral  duties  implicated  with  legal  obligations.
For  my  present  purpose,  however,  I  have  only  to
point  out  that  these  Brahmanical  code -makers,  differ-
ing sensibly  in  some  respects  from  one  another,  and
each  probably  reflecting  the  doctrine  of  some  vener-
ated school,  agree  essentially  in  their  conception  of
the  order  and  contents  of  a  Code.  The  classification
of  subjects  whicli  they  follow  may  be  seen  by  ex-
amining the  eighth  chapter  of  the  Code  of  Manu  in
Sir  William  Jones's  translation,  and  it  is  observed
throughout  the  law-book  of  Narada.  I  will  describe
it  from  the  last,  since  it  is  plainer  in  the  more  purely
legal  treatise.  The  following  account  of  it  will  be
found  at  page  6  of  Dr.  Jolly's  version  in  slokas  IG
to  20  :—

'  The  eight  constituent  parts  of  a  legal  proceeding
are  the  King,  his  Oflicer,  the  Assessors,  the  Law-
book, the  Accountant  and  Scribe,  gold  and  fire  for
Ordeals,  and  water  for  refreshment.

'  Recovery  of  a  Debt,  Deposits,  Concerns  among
Partners, Abstraction of  Gift, Breach of  promised


380  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES. chap.  xi.

Obedience,  Non-payment  of  Wages,  Sale  without
Ownership,  Non-delivery  of  a  Commodity  sold,  Re-
scission of  Purchase,  Breach  of  Order,  Contests  about
l^oundaries,  the  Duties  of  Man  and  Wife,  the  Law  of
Inheritance,  Violence,  Abuse  and  Assault,  Gambling,
Miscellaneous  Disputes.

'  These  are  the  Eighteen  Heads  of  Dispute.'
This  distribution  of  subjects  is,  on  the  whole,
rigorously  observed  throughout  the  treatise,  except
apparently  in  one  particular.  The  mechanism  of  a
Court  of  Justice  and  its  procedure  are  first  elaborately
described.  The  Kino;  seats  himself  on  the  throne
with  the  book  of  the  law  in  his  hands  ;  but,  though
the  justice  described  is  throughout  royal  justice,  the
King  is  significantly  directed  to  follow  the  opinion
of  his  Chief  Judge  or  Assessor.  After  a  full  account
of  judicature,  the  writer  (subject  to  a  remark  which
I  will  make  presently)  takes  up  the  subject  of  Evi-
dence, which,  in  his  view,  includes  Ordeals  ;  and
then,  having  started  with  a  summary  of  what  we  who
live  in  the  light  of  Bentham  should  call  Adjective
Law,  he  proceeds  to  divide  the  Substantive  Law  into
eigliteen  branches,  which  he  calls  '  heads  of  dispute.'
The  order  in  which  he  discusses  these  is  that  in  which
he  placed  them  in  the  passage  which  I  quoted  ;  with
this  exception,  that  tlie  first  head  of  dispute.  Recovery
of  a  Debt,  is  interpolated  between  Judicature  and
Evidence. This  may  be  the  result  of  a  mere  acci-


CHAP.  XI. CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  381

dental  disarrangement  of  the  oldest  compendia  of
Hindu  law,  but  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  something
like  the  same  misplacing  of  '  recovery  of  debts  '  shows
itself  in  the  treatise  of  Manu,  and  it  is  conceivable
that  it  may  have  been  caused  by  the  inherent  diffi-
culty of  explaining  adjective  law  without  reference  to
substantive  law^  and  that  one  '  head  of  dispute  '  may
have  been  taken  out  of  its  place  with  the  view  of  fur-
nishino;  illustrations  to  the  text-writer.

The  principle  and  meaning  of  this  ancient  classi-
fication strike  me  as  obvious.  The  compiler  of
Narada  or  his  original  makes  the  assumption  that
men  do  quarrel,  and  he  sets  forth  the  mode  in  which
their  quarrels  may  be  adjudicated  upon  and  settled
without  bloodshed  or  violence.  The  dominant  notion
present  to  his  mind  is  not  a  Law,  or  a  Right,  or  a
Sanction,  or  the  distinction  between  Positive  and
Natural  Law,  or  between  Persons  and  Things,  but
a  Court  of  Justice.  The  great  fact  is  that  there
now  exists  an  alternative  to  private  reprisals,  a  mode
of  stanching  personal  or  hereditary  blood -feuds  other
than  slaughter  or  plunder.  Hence  in  front  of  every-
thing he  places  the  description  of  a  Court,  of  its
mechanism,  of  its  procedure,  of  its  tests  of  alleged
facts.  Having  thus  begun  with  an  account  of  the  great
institution  which  settles  quarrels,  he  is  led  to  distri-
bute law  according  to  the  subject-matter  of  quarrels,
accordino; to the  relations  between human beincs


o


82  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  chap.  xi.


which  do,  as  a  fact,  give  rise  to  civil  disputes.  Thus
Debt,  Partnership,  the  Marital  Relation,  Inheritance,
and  Donation  are  considered  as  matters  about  which
men  at  a  certain  point  of  civilisation  do,  as  a  fact,
have  differences,  and  the  various  rio;hts  and  liabilities
(as  we  should  call  them)  to  which  they  give  rise,  are
set  forth  simply  as  guides  towards  determining  the
judgment  which  a  Court  of  Justice  should  give  when
called  upon  to  adjudicate  on  quarrels.

It  appears  to  me  that  this  explanation  covers  the
whole  of  the  problem  suggested  by  the  classification
of  subjects  in  the  primitive  Codes  which  I  cited.
They  all  seem  to  begin  with  Judicature,  and  to  dis-
tribute substantive  law  into  '  heads  of  dispute.'  The
Irish  law  never,  indeed,  gets  farther  than  the  initial
steps  of  procedure.  All  the  learning  and  ingenuity
of  the  contributing  Brehon  lawyers  are  bestowed
on  defining  the  rules  by  which  adversaries  may  be
brouofht  under  the  control  of  the  institution,  which
the  Roman  and  Hindu  Codes  assume  to  have  been
lonof  since  in  existence  and  lono^  since  in  active  and
regular  operation.  The  testimony,  however,  to  the
early  overshadowing  importance  of  Judicature  is  all
the  more  striking.  As  we  have  seen,  the  Roman,
Frankish,  and  Hindu  Codes  also  divide  the  subjects
of  the  quarrels  which  are  the  materials  for  litigation
into  several  branches  ;  and,  as  to  the  order  in  wliicli
these  '  heads  of  dispute '  are  taken  up,  it  seems  to  me


CHAP.  XL  CLASSIFICATIONS OP LEGAL RULES.  383

that  it  depends  on  their  relative  importance  at  the
time  when  that  order  was  fixed.  I  do  not  at  all
doubt  that  the  arrangement  is  in  a  certain  degree  at
haphazard,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  there  must  have
been  a  meaning  in  the  prominence  given  to  Deposits
in  the  Roman  and  Hindu  law,  and  in  the  prominence
assiofned  to  Thefts  in  the  law  both  of  the  Romans  and
of  the  Salian  Franks.  At  the  reasons  of  the  special
importance  of  Deposits  we  can  only  guess,  but  I  have
already  stated  my  opinion  that  the  importance  of
Thefts  belongs  to  a  particular  stage  of  economical
and  social  advance.  We  can  see  the  signs  in  Roman
law  of  their  dwindling  importance,  which  is  exactly
what  we  should  expect  from  the  growth  of  popula-
tion, from  the  rising  value  of  land,  from  the  greater
plentifulness  of  capital,  and  from  the  freer  multipli-
cation of  movable  articles  of  use  or  luxury,  and  from
their  consequent  relative  cheapness.  It  is  curious
that,  though  Theft  is  not  a  specific  Head  of  Dispute
in  the  book  of  Narada,  casual  allusions  to  Thefts
occur  during  the  discussion  of  Deposits,  possibly
derived  from  an  older  state  of  the  law.

The  suggestion,  then,  which  I  offer  is  that  the
authority  of  the  Court  of  Justice  overshadowed  all
other  ideas  and  considerations  in  the  minds  of  these
early  code-makers,  belonging  to  societies  of  the  Aryan
race  so  remote  from  one  another  and  so  imlike  to
one  another. The  evidence  of  tliis  position  does  not


384  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  chap.  xi.

solely  arise  from  the  probabilities  or  depend  on  infer-
ence from  the  construction  of  the  ancient  legal  com-
pendia. There  is  a  whole  literature,  the  Icelandic,
which  gives  the  most  vivid  impression  of  the  power
and  majesty  of  Courts  of  Justice  in  an  ancient  society.
It  may  almost  be  said  that  in  the  Iceland  revealed  to
us  by  the  labour  and  learning  of  Konrad Maurer
there  is  no  institution  worth  speakmg  of  except  the
Court  ;  all  society  is  moulded  round  it  and  all  ideas
centre  in  it. It  affects  all  literature,  both  poetry  and
prose. It  is  manifestly  in  the  most  intimate  relation
to  every  passage,  incident,  affection,  and  passion  of
life. And  as  the  society  depicted  is  in  the  highest
degree  bloody  and  violent,  so  long  as  it  follows  its
natural  bent,  it  becomes  clear  that  it  is  not  the  Court
as  we  understand  it,  but  the  Court  standing  before
all  men's  sight  as  the  alternative  to  forcible  reprisals,
and  as  the  avenger  of  their  victim,  which  has  attained
to  this  commanding  altitude. We  need  not,  more-
over, go  to  historical  records  for  the  proof  that  this
is  a  natural  condition  of  men's  minds. The  pheno-
mena can  be  reproduced,  and  are  in  fact  not  uncom-
monly reproduced  in the country which  has  only
lately  emerged  from  the  anarchy  into  which  it  fell
long  after  the  laws  of  Manu  and  Narada  had  ceased
to  be  administered  in  it by  tribunals which they
describe. When a province hitherto specially  ill-
governed  is  annexed  to  British  India,  the  first  effect


CHAP.  XL CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  385

ordinarily  is  neither  satisfaction  nor  discontent^
neither  the  peaceable  continuance  of  old  usages  nor
the  sudden  adoption  of  new,  but  an  extraordinary-
influx  of  litigation  into  the  British  Courts,  which  are
always  at  once  established.  The  fact  occurs  too  uni-
formly, and  at  first  sight  is  too  inexplicable,  not  to
have  attracted  notice,  but  it  has  generally  been  ob-
served upon  ^^ith  regret,  and,  after  a  while,  when
there  has  been  time  to  forget  the  original  condition
of  the  annexed  territory,  this  new  litigiousness  is
sometimes  adduced  to  show  that  in  exchangrinof  native
for  British  rule  a  community  does  not  obtain  an  un-
mixed blessing.  But  the  proper  conclusion  to  draw
is  that  already  drawn  in  this  paper,  that  Courts  of
Justice  have  an  immense  ascendency  over  men^s
minds  and  a  singular  attraction  for  their  tastes,  when
they  are  first  presented  as  a  means  of  settling  disputes
which  were  either  violently  adjusted  or  slumbered
because  they  could  only  be  settled  at  prodigious  risk.

Another  phase  in  the  history  of  Courts  of  Justice
is  instructively  illustrated  in  the  more  settled  parts
of  British  India.  The  commands  of  the  British
Indian  Government  and  of  the  British  Indian  legfis-
lature  are  far  more  implicitly  obeyed  than  the  com-
mands of  any  previously  existing  authority  in  India,
far  more  implicitly  than  the  orders  of  the  most  power-
ful Mogul  Emperors.  The  law  is  obeyed  in  India
as  uniformly  as  in  England,  but  then  it  is  much  more

c  c


386  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL KULES.  chap.  xi.

consciously  obeyed.  At  present  (and  for  a  long  while
to  come  it  will  probably  be  so)  the  fact  of  the  exist-
ence of  Courts  of  Justice  regularly  enforcing  the  law
is  constantly  before  the  minds  of  the  natives  of  India
subject  to  their  jurisdiction  to  a  degree  which  we  in
this  country  can  scarcely  conceive.  The  law  and  the
Court  have  an  importance  which  may  be  measured
by  a  circumstance  related  to  me  on  good  authority,
that  in  many  parts  of  India  youths  learn  the  texts  of
the  Penal  and  Procedure  Codes  in  daily  lessons,  as
did  the  young  Romans  of  Cicero's  day  the  cantilena
of  the  Twelve  Tables.  But  with  us,  I  need  scarcely
say,  there  is  little  conscious  observance  of  legal  rules.
The  law  has  so  formed  our  habits  and  ideas  that
Courts  of  Justice  are  rarely  needed  to  compel  obedi-
ence to  it,  and  thus  they  have  apparently  fallen  into
the  background.  It  is  only  when  the  law  happens
to  be  uncertain,  or  when  facts  with  wliich  we  are
concerned  happen  to  get  unusually  entangled,  that
most  of  us,  who  are  not  lawyers,  ever  come  into  con-
tact with  the  administration  of  the  law.  No  doubt
the  force  which  arms  the  law  is  still  there  ;  but  it
lies  in  reserve,  in  (so  to  speak)  a  compact  and  con-
centrated form,  which  enables  it  to  keep  out  of  sight.
On  the  whole  the  effect  of  jDcace  and  civilisation  is
to  diminish  the  conscious  reverence  of  mankind  for
Courts  of  Justice,  and  the  abiding  sense  of  their
im[)ortance.


^


CHAP.  XI. CLASSIFICATION'S OF LEGAL RULES.  387

"We  may  believe  tliat  the  impressiveness  of  the
early  Courts  of  Justice  was  in  part  created  by  what
to  a  modern  eve  were  their  infirmities.  It  would
seem  that  by  their  side  the  very  practices  long  sur-
vived which  it  was  their  object  to  suppress.  The
tenderness  of  early  judicial  procedure  to  immemorial
barbarism  is  shown  by  its  partial  recognition  of  the
remedy  which  we  call  Distraint  and  the  Germans
'  self-help,'  the  remedy  of  private  reprisals  on  the
property  of  an  adversary  ;  and  there  is  much  signi-
ficant evidence  that  the  early  tribunals  had  no  power
of  directlv  enforcinsr  their  own  decrees.  The  man
who  disobeyed  the  order  of  Court  went  out  of  the
law  ;  his  kinsmen  ceased  to  be  responsible  for  his
acts,  and  the  kinsmen  of  those  who  injured  him  be-
came also  irresponsible  ;  and  thus  he  carried  his  life
in  his  hand.  We  cannot  then  doubt  that  the  vio-
lence and  bloodshed  which  the  law  licensed  under
certain  circumstances  were  generally  rife  dtu'ing  the
infancy  of  Courts  of  Justice,  and  that  their  earliest
service  to  mankind  was  to  furnish  an  alternative  to
savagery,  not  to  suppress  it  wholly.  Tlieir  value
and  beneficence  were  therefore  probably  all  the  more
conspicuous  while  as  yet  their  power  ^v^as  imi^erfect
and  their  operation  irregular.  But  gradually,  as  the
sovereign  power  of  the  State  developed  itself,  and
was  more  and  more  placed  at  tlie  disposal  of  the
tribunals,  their  decrees  became  inflexibly effectual.

c  c  2


388  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL KULES.  chap.  xi.

Obedience  to  tliein  came  to  be  unhesitating  and  im-
plicit, and  a  mass  of  habits  and  ideas  were  formed  of
which  the  centre  and  pivot  is  unquestioning  observ-
ance of  law.  This  formation  of  law-abiding  habits,
and  the  consequent  banishment  of  the  penal  sanctions
of  law  into  the  background,  are  the  secret  of  many
transformations  of  juridical  theory.  We  have  seen
that  the  '  legal  order'  of  the  Roman  Twelve  Tables,
testifying  to  the  primitive  importance  of  procedure,
survived  long  after  it  had  lost  its  meaning  ;  but  in
the  Roman  State,  always  relatively  well  ordered  and
in  the  end  the  type  of  order  and  peace,  the  force
which  is  the  motive-power  of  law  early  retreated  into
the  distance.  The  classification  of  the  Roman  Insti-
tutes, assigning  the  Law  of  Actions  not  to  the  first
place  but  to  the  third  and  last,  is  one  testimony  to
the  formation  of  a  habit  of  obedience  to  the  law  so
confirmed  as  to  be  unconscious  ;  but  another  and
more  striking  piece  of  evidence  is  the  rise  of  the  con-
ception of  the  Law  of  Nature,  which  is  in  truth  law
divorced  from  its  penal  sanctions.  The  retreat  out
of  sight,  if  I  may  so  speak,  of  the  force  which  is  the
motive-power  of  law,  has  been  even  more  complete  in
the  modern  than  in  the  Roman  world  ;  partly  because
the  decrees  of  Courts  of  Justice  are  everywhere  in-
exorable, but  also  doubtless  from  the  long  ascendency
of  theories  directly  or  indirectly  descended  from  the
Roman Jus  Naturale. The  great difliiculty  of  the


CHAP.  XI.  CLASS! FlCATiONS OF LEGAL KULIvS.  389

modern  Analytical  Jurists,  Bentham  and  Austin,  lias
been  to  recover  from  its  hiding-place  the  force  which
gives  its  sanction  to  law.  They  had  to  show  that  it
had  not  disappeared  and  could  not  disappear  ;  but
that  it  was  only  latent  because  it  had  been  trans-
formed into  law-abidmo'  habit.  Even  now  their  as-
sertion,  that  it  is  everywhere  present  where  there  are
Courts  of  Justice  administering  law,  has  to  many  the
idea  of  a  paradox — which  it  loses,  I  think,  when
their  analysis  is  aided  by  history.

The  primary  distinction  between  the  early  and
rude,  and  the  modern  and  refined,  classifications  of
leofal  rules,  is  that  the  Rules  relatino'  to  Actions,  to
pleading  and  procedure,  fall  into  a  subordinate  place
and  become,  as  Bentham  called  them.  Adjective  Law.
So  far  as  this  the  Roman  Institutional  writers  had
advanced,  since  they  put  the  Law  of  Actions  into  the
third  and  last  compartment  of  their  system.  Xobody
should  know  better  than  an  Englishman  that  this  is
not  an  arrangement  which  easily  and  spontaneously
suo^(?ests  itself  to  the  mind.  So  in^eat  is  the  ascend-
ency  of  the  Law  of  Actions  in  the  infancy  of  Courts
of  Justice,  that  substantive  law  has  at  first  the  look
of  being  gradually  secreted  in  the  interstices  of  pro-
cedure ;  and  the  early  lawyer  can  only  see  the  law
through  the  envelope  of  its  technical  forms.  It  would
even  seem  that  civilised  societies  experience  reversions
towards  this  condition  of  thouo-ht. Tliere  are  men


390  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL EULES.  CHAP.  XI.

still  alive  who  recollect  tliat  the  tendency  towards
active  law-reform  which  was  part  of  the  great  move-
ment associated  with  the  Reform  Act  of  1832,  first
showed  itself  in  an  enero-etic  resuscitation  of  strict-
ness  in  pleading,  so  that  for  many  years  the  practical
questions  at  issue  were  altogether  thrown  into  ob-
scurity by  questions  of  the  proper  mode  of  stating
them  to  the  Courts.  It  was  the  very  state  of  things
which  existed  when  the  ancient  Hundred  Courts  of
the  Germans  were  administering  the  rude  Salic  law.
The  effects  of  the  ^  New  Rules  of  Pleading  '  wore
away  very  slowly,  and  it  was  only  the  other  day  that
the  Judicature  Acts,  of  which  the  full  influence  has
not  yet  been  felt,  placed  the  Procedure  of  Courts  of
Justice  on  the  footing  which  would  naturally  be
given  to  it  by  a  society  which  regards  it  only  as
Adjective  Law.

The  most  modern  classifiers,  again,  distribute  law
not  with  reference  to  the  distinction  between  Persons
and  Things,  but  with  reference  to  the  diff^erences  be-
tween kinds  of  Rights.  I  stated  before  that  the  clear
conception  of  a  legal  right  is  not  ancient,  or  even
Roman,  but  that  it  belongs  distmctively  to  the  modern
world.  Doubtless,  before  it  can  be  realised,  the  sense
of  a  Court  of  Justice  as  ever  active,  and  as  dominat-
ing the  whole  field  of  law,  must  have  somewhat
decayed.  As  regards  one  great  class  of  Rights,  those
arising  out  of  Contract  and  Delict,  the  Romans  un-


CHAr.  XI.  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  391

questionably  mixed  together  the  notions  of  legal
Eight  and  legal  Duty.  They  considered  the  parties
as  bound  together  by  a  vinculum  juris,  a  bond  or
chain  of  law,  and  '  Obligation/  which  is  the  name  for
this  chain,  signified  rights  as  well  as  duties  ;  the
right,  for  example,  to  have  a  debt  paid  as  well  as  the
duty  of  paying  it.  As  I  have  said  elsewhere,  ^  the
Romans  kept,  in  fact,  the  entire  picture  of  the  "  legal
chain ''  before  their  eyes,  and  regarded  one  end  of  it
no  more  and  no  less  than  the  other.'  But  it  was  the
Court  of  Justice  which  had  welded  this  chain,  and
the  explanation  of  this  and  other  blended  ideas  which
we  can  detect  in  Roman  legal  phraseology  is,  I  pre-
sume, that  the  dominancy  of  the  Court  of  Justice
over  all  legal  notions  still  continued  to  influence  the
Roman  view  of  law.  Although,  however,  the  authors
of  the  Roman  Institutional  manuals  did  not  invent,
and  could  not  have  invented,  arrangements  of  law
based  on  classification  of  Rights,  they  did,  as  we  have
seen,  attain  to  the  conception  of  law  as  something
distinct  from  Procedure,  and  they  did  conceive  it  as
distributable  into  the  Law  of  Persons  and  the  Law  of
Things.  The  exact  relation  of  these  two  departments
to  one  another  has  been  keenly  disputed  by  modern
writers,  and  it  cannot  be  conveniently  considered
here  ;  but  anybody  who  can  bring  home  to  himself
the  ancient  ideas  of  law  on  which  I  have  sought  to
throw  liglit  may,  perhaps,  convince  himself  that  the


392  CLASSIFICATIONS OF LEGAL RULES.  chap.  xr.

conception  of  a  Law  of  Things,  at  all  events,  was  a
great  achievement  in  mental  abstraction  ;  and  that
it  must  have  been  a  man  of  leo-al  p'cnius  who  first
discerned  that  Law  might  be  thought  of  and  set  forth
apart  from  the  Courts  of  Justice  which  administered
it  on  the  one  hand,  and  apart  from  the  classes  of
persons  to  whom  they  administered  it  on  the  other.


INDEX.


ACTIONS

ACTIONS,  law  of,  place  assigned  to
it  by  Eoman  Jurists,  388,  389

Adams,  H.  C,  his  '  Historical  Studies  '
referred  to,  Note  A,  330

Adoption,  practice  and  importance  of
at  Eome  and  Athens,  96,  97 ;  its
survival  as  an  institution  on  the  Con-
tinent, 96  ;  practice  of  among  Hin-
dus and  in  India  generally,  97,  154;
Eoman  usage  of  referred  to,  198

Aged  men  among  Hindus,  withdrawal
of  into  'religion,'  21,  22;  status  of,
22  et  iseq.

Agnatic  kindred,  238,  239

Agnation,  system  of,  among  Eomans
referred  to,  198  ;  among  words  re-
ferred to,  Note  A,  283

*  Alice  in  Wonderland  '  referred  to,  35

Allod,  the,  meaning  and  description  of,
338  ct  seq. ;  its  difference  from  the
feud,  341,  342  ;  how  it  passed  into
the  feud,  343  et  seq.

Amatongo,  the,  worship  of  referred  to,
54

Ancestor-worship,  incumbent  upon  heirs
in  most  early  communities,  53 ;  theory
of  its  origin,  67-70  ;  subsequent  to
recognition  of  Paternity,  75,  76 ;  its
tendency  to  dissolve  the  family,  77  ;
its  connection  with  Inheritance,  53,
78,  79;  intense  desire  fcr  male  off-
spring created  by,  85 ;  among  Chi-
nese, described,  60  H  seq. ;  expense
of,  61  ;  honours  not  originally  paid  to
women,  72,  73  ;  in  reference  to  fu-
neral rites,  80 ;  intense  desire  for
male  offspring  created  by,  86  ;  among
Christians  and  Mahommedans  merely
accidental,  59  ;  its  relation  to  Con-
fucianism  and Buddhism, 03, 64


ANCESTOR

among  Greeks  compared  with  Hindu
worship,  57,  58  ;  among  Hebrews  re-
ferred to,  58 ;  among  Hindus,  sense
in  which  it  is  to  be  regarded,  53  ;
proximity  in  time  essential  to,  54 ;
reverence  paid  to  remote  ancestors
later  in  point  of  time,  54 ;  its  ela-
borate liturgy  and  ritual,  55  ;  law  of
Inheritance  dependent  upon,  55 ;  as
it  affects  dail}''  life,  56  ;  distinction
between  general  and  daily  worship,
57,  64  ;  under  name  of  Pitris  referred
to,  57 ;  difficulty  of  reconciliation
between  it  and  Purgatory  and  Trans-
migration, 70,  71,  72;  honours  not
originally  paid  to  women,  73,  74;
Vishnu's  summary  of,  74  ;  its  exist-
ence in  tlie  Punjab,  76 ;  in  reference
to  funeral  rites,  81 ;  its  effect  upon
law,  81-83  ;  analogy  between  such
effect  and  that  created  by  mediae-
val Church,  84 ;  intense  desire  for
male  offspring,  85 ;  consequence  of
that  desire,  86 ;  eldest  legitimate
son  of  lather  if  possible  to  offer
sacrifices,  88,  89 ;  this  spiritual
primacy  as  relating  to  primogeni-
ture and  succession,  89,  90  ;  failing
legitimate  son  of  father,  eldest  son  of
wif(!  to  sacrifice,  90;  failing  either,
son  of  '  appointed '  daughter  to  sacri-
fice, 91  ;  modifications  of,  Note  A,
122,  and  changes  in,  116,  118  ;  among
Eomans,  distinction  botwoen  general
and  daily  worship,  57,  64  ;  compared
with  Hindu  worship,  57,58;  decline
of  private  celebration  of,  64 ;  its
effect  on  Civil  law,  66  ;  result  of  this
effect  upon  P]ngli8li  and  Continental
law  of  Inheritance,  60  ;  in  reference


394


IXDEX.


ANCIENT

to  funeral  rites,  80;  intense  desire
for  male  offspring,  86

Ancient  Societies,  kings  judges  in,  160
et  seq,

Andiiniiin  Islanders,  the,  account  of,
Note  A,  229  et  seq.

Apastamba.  Law-Book  of,  quoted,  13,
17,  30,  7:5,  81,  89,  94,  127  ;  referred
to,  43,  107,  109,  115

Aphorisms,  as  determining  dates  of  an-
cient law-books,  referred  to,  9,  10

Appointment,  explanation  of,  91  ;  sacer-
dotal formula  of,  91  ;  customs  akin
to,  92  ;  practice  of  among  Athenifins,
92;  theory  of  in  mediaeval  law,  93;
theory  upon  which  Edward  III.  of
England  based  his  claim  to  throne  of
France,  93  ;  effect  of  upon  right  of
women  to  inherit,  94  ;  Hindu  testi-
mony as  to  female  right  of  inheri-
tance, 94

Aristotle,  his  view  and  illustration  of
Patriarchal  theory  of  Society  re-
ferred to,  196,  198;  his  treatise  on
'  Barbarian  Customs  '  alluded  to,  197

Austin,  the  jurist,  his  speculations  on
legal  Classification  mentioned,  364,
389

Austrian  Code,  the,  referred  to,  265


BACOX,  Lord,  his  'Abridgement'
referred  to,  371

Baudhayana,  Law-books  of,  referred  to,
43,  107,  109,  112  n.;  his  judgment
upon  '  affiliation '  referred  to,  87

Beaumarchais,  his  '  ]\Iariage  de  Figaro  '
alluded  to,  313

Belgian  Constitution,  the,  referred  to,
Note  A,  28o

Beneficiiim,  the,  stage  in  the  history  of
land  law  marked  by,  34-5  ;  its  simi-
larity to  the  Emphyteusis,  34-5  ;  dis-
pute as  to  application  of,  34o  ;  called
the  Feodum,  346

Bentham,  the  jurist,  referred  to,  351,
360,  362,  389

Bogisic,  Professor,  his  opinions  referred
to,  195,  241,  242,  244;/,  255,  261,
263

Bonitarian  Ownership.  Sec  Possession,
law  of,  and  343

Boulnois  and  Pattigan,  Messrs.,  their
'  Notes '  on  Punjab  law  referred  to,
115w.


CFANCERT

Bracton,  his  legal  treatises  referred  to,
341  ;  his  treatise  on  Villeinage
quoted,  305  n,  Note  A,  333

Brahmanism,  system  of,  its  superstition,
vitality,  and  perpetual  growth,  48,
49

Brahmans,  sacred  schools  of,  alluded  to,
12  et  seq. ;  relations  between  teachers
and  pupils,  13  ;  likeness  to  Ho-
meric Clans  and  Irish  Brehon  Law
Schools,  14,  15

—  the,  their  absolute  ascendency,  46;
their  self-denial,  47  et  seq. ;  support
of,  alluded  to,  82 ;  compared  with
that  encouraged  by  early  Christian
Churches,  84,  85

Brahnianical  legal  authors,  priestly
character  of,  as  affecting  their  books,
27,  28

Brehon  Law  Schools,  the,  referred  to,
14,  15

Brehon  laws,  the,  alluded  to,  84,  348,
375,  376

Bricish  Constitution,  the,  referred  to.
Note  A,  285

'  Broken  Man,'  the. See  Fuidhir

Brosses,  De,  President,  his  '  Lettres
Ecrites  d'ltalie '  referred  to.  Note  B,
124

Buddha,  Buddhism,  30,  31

Biihler,  Dr.,  his  preface  in  '  Sacred
Books  of  the  East'  quoted,  87

'  Burning  of  the  Chateaux,'  meaning
and  object  of,  296  ct  seq.


CAHIERS,  the,  neglect  of  informa-
tion contained  in  them,  291  ;  rea-
sons for  this  neglect,  292  et  seq.;
examination  of  these  reasons  by  De
Tocqueville,  292;  collections  of  them
published  by  Prudhomme  and  Lau-
rent de  Mezieres,  294  ;  statements  in
referred  to,  311

Callaway,  Canon,  his  observations
quoted,  54

Capetians,  the,  Eoyal  House  of  referred
to,  138,  142,  152,  154,  155

Carolingian  power,  the  dissolution  of
noticed,  349  et  seq.  ;  this  dissolution
compared  with  that  of  Mogul,  351

Carpenter,  Dr.,  his  observations  referred
to,  204  71.

Chancery,  English  Court  of,  referred  to,
165;  its  origin  mentioned, 190;  its


INDEX.


395


CHASSIS

identity  ■with, and  difference from
Court  of  Star  Cliamber,  190

Chassin,  Mens.,  his  'Le  Genie  de  la
Ee volution  '  referred  to,  293

Chronicles,  2nd  Book  of,  referred  to,
134

Cicero,  his  '  De  Legibus '  quoted,  6

Classificatorj  Eelationship,  theory  of,
referred  to,  201,  Xote  A,  289

Colebrooke,  Lieutenant,  his  '  Asiatic
Eesearches '  quoted,  Note  A,  230

Commentaries  of  Gains,  discovery  of  by
yiebuhr,  197

Common  Pleas,  English  Court  of,  former
relation  of  the  King  to,  187

Commune,  the,  its  displacement  of  the
Eief,  326

Communities,  barbarous  Aryan,  infor-
mation about  most  valuable,  233 ;
difficulty  in  obtaining  such  informa-
tion, 233

Comte,  Auguste,  his  philosophy  alluded
to,  166

Consanguine  marriage,  practice  of,  al-
luded to,  201

Copyhold  Commissioners,  the,  their
work  referred  to,  310,  322

Copyhold,  tenure  by,  actual  origin  of,
302  et  seq.

Copyholder,  the,  difference  of  status  be-
tween him  and  the  tenant-farmer,  322

Coulanges,  Fustel  de,  M.,  his  opinions
generally  referred  to,  66,  7'3,  80,
lOo/h,  118,  120,  203,  317,  350:  his
'  La  Cite  Antique '  specially  referred
to,  57;  his  opinion  of  the  Eeneficium
allude<l  to,  345
County  Courts  in  England,  system  of,
referred  to,  1 89

Court  Baron,  in  England  and  on  the
Continent,  the,  its  analogy  to  Home-
ric Agora,  303
Court  of  Justice,  the,  its  paramount
authority  in  the  eyea  of  early  cfxle-
makers,  380,  381,  383;  its  position
in  ancient  Iceland  described,  384 ;
its  paramount  tendencies  as  illus-
trated by  British  India,  385  et  seq. ;
its  early  authority  enhanced  by  its
tenderness  to  barbarism,  387
Court  of  the  Hundred,  the,  referre<l  to,
168  f'f  seq.;  peculiarity  of,  170;
penalty  for  disol^ediencc  to,  170  ;  re-
lation of  the  King  to,  171  ;  duty  of
attendance  at,  176


EXOGAMY

Cowell,  Professor, quoted,  Note  A,  50,

51
Cox,  Sir  George,  his  opinions  referred

to,  198
Cumnnng,  3Iiss  C.  G.,  her  'Ningpo  and

the  Buddliist  Temples '  quoted, 61 ;

alluded  to,  80


DAXTE,  Inferno  of,  referred  to,  32
Dar\nn, Mr., his 'Descent of
3Ian  '  quoted,  206 ;  alluded  to,  207

Daughters,  provision  for  among  Athe-
nians mentioned,  109

Dava-Bhaga,  the,  referred  to,  116-118,
120

Daya-Krama-Sangraha,  the,  referred  to,
116,  120

Deuteronomy,  Book  of,  quoted,  58,  101

'  Distribution  of  Life,'  theory  of  among
Hindus  described,  19  et  seq.,  Note  A,
290

Divorce  among  Eomans  referred  to,
198

Domat,  his  theorj-  of  legal  Classification
referred  to,  363

Domatchin,  the,  his  position  in  the
House-Community,  246 ;  mode  of
appointment  of,  247 ;  sometimes  a
woman,  248

Dominion,  Eoman  usage  of  referred  to,
198

Doniol,  31.,  his  '  La  Eevolution  Eran-
9ai8e  et  la  Feodalite  '  referred  to,  293,
294  ;  his  view  of  the  disadvantage  of
English Copyhold  referred  to,  308

Drew,  Mr.,  his  '  Kashmir  and  Jum-
moo  '  quoted,  1 85  «.

Dynastic  Contests,  contrivances  for  pre-
venting, 135,  136


ELTON.  Mr.,  his  '  Origins  of  English
History  '  referreil  to,  261  n.
Emancipation,  among  Eomans,  referred

to,  198
Emphyteusis,  the. See  Beneficium
Ef^uity, Eoinan law of, referred to,

119
Essoin,  the. .S'^eSunis;  also  369
Euripidfs.  Fraq/nent  on  male  parentage

referred  to,  203  n.
Exogamy  and  Endogamy,  meaning  of,

222; practice of among Chinese,


Q(


OG


JXDEX.


EXOGAMY

223  ci  scq. ;  Hindus,  223  ;  Koiiuins,
223 ;  practice  of  among  Western
nations,  224 ef  acq.

Exogamy,  practice  among  South  Slavo-
nians, result  of,  2o4  ;  part  played  by
in  tlieories  of  3Iessrs.  McLennan  and
INIorgan,  225  ;  difference  of  view  be-
tween tliem,  226;  Morgan's  theory
preferable  on  the  whole,  227

Eyton,  Mr.,  his  researches  referred  to,
181,  182


FAMILY,'  the,  developed  from  the
*  horde,' according to Messrs.
Morgan  and  McLennan,  200,  201

'Fang-Nien,'  Ode  quoted,  73

Feodum,  the.  See  '  Beneficium,'  and  for
its  effect  upon  law  of  land,  346

Fend,  the. See  A  Hod,  the

Feudal  dues,  abolition  of,  in  France,
298

Feudal  land  laws,  the,  many  origins  of,
341,  342,  349

Feudal  rules  among  early  Irish,  ol)ser-
vations  upon,  348

Feudalism,  confusion  between  property
and  sovereignty  created  by,  148

Fictitious  sons,  origin  of  name,  98  ;
status  of,  98  ;  repugnance  to  in  Hindu
law,  99

Fidei-commissa,  law  of,  alluded  to,  345

Fief. See  Manor

Fifth  Commandment,  the,  alluded  to,
59  71.

*  Finances '  of  old  French  law,  the,
alluded  to,  308

Fines,  the. Sec  '  Finances'

Fratricide  among  Maliommedans  al-
luded to,  137

Freeman,  Mr.  E.  A.,  his  'Comparative
Polities'  referred  to,  23;  his  'His-
tory of  Federal  Government '  referred
to,  174  ;  his  'Norman  Conquest'  re-
ferred to.  306

French  Civil  Code,  the,  referred  to,  96,
165,  265

French  J^irliaments,  origin  of,  316  ;
their  authority  over  the  Fief,  316,
318;  reasons  for  their  later  tender-
ness to  signorial  rights,  317

French  Ecivolution,  the  first,  referred
to,  265,  291  ;  some  causes  for,  294

Fuidhir,  the,  described,  270


HINDU

GAUTAMA,  Law-book  of,  described,
10,  16  ;  quoted  81,  83,  89,  91,  98,
102,  103,  112,  128;  alluded  to,  43,
57,  107,  109,  112  7/.,  Note  A,  122

'Gens,'  the,  account  of,  by  Messrs.
McLennan  and  Morgan,  referred  to,
Note  A,  283  ;  among  Komans,  239,
Note  A,  283

Gens  Fabia,  the,  referred  to.  Note  A,
288

Germanic  king,  the,  his  relation  to  civil
justice,  167  ef  seq.

Germany,  Lex  Salica  of,  referred  to,
157  ;  its  real  origin,  167  ;  its  relation
to  daily  life,  168

Glan^^ll,  his  legal  treatises  referred  to,
341

Gomme,  Mr.,  his  '  Primitive  Folk-
Moots'  alluded  to,  169

Gordon,  Sir  Arthur,  his  observations  in
Fiji  alluded  to.  Note  A,  331

Gossipred,  practice  of,  among  South
Slavonians,  257,  258

Gotra,  the,  referred  to,  Note  A,  286

Government  of  India,  Eecords  of,
quoted.  Note  A,  229

Graf,  tlie,  as  deputy  of  the  king,  alluded
to,  172

Grimm,his'DeutscheRechtsalterthiimer'
referred  to,  179  w.

Grote,  Mr.,  the  late,  his  theory  of  Ho-
meric poetry  referred  to,  14  ;  his
*  History  of  Greece'  referred  to,  179


HAMLET,'  play  of,  referred  to,  145
Hammond,  Mr.,  liis  preface  to
American  edition  of  Sandars'  'In-
stitutes of  Justinian '  quoted,  368  ;
and  alluded  to,  365

Hardv,  Sir  T.  D.,  the  late,  his '  Itinerary
of  king  John'  alluded  to,  181,  182

Ilayward,  Mr.  A.,  his  '  Biographical  and
Critical  Essays'  referred  to,  155  ii.

Haxthausen,  his  books  upon  law  and
usage  referred  to,  1 94

Hell,  torments  of,  Buddhist  pictures  of,
33

Heredity,  theory  of,  referred  to,  155

Heriot,  the,  cK'linition  of,  309

Hesse-Darmstadt,  Land  registry  of,  de-
scription, 353  et  seq.

Hessels,  Mr. See  Kern,  Mr.

Hindu  doctors,  legal  theory  of,  stated,
17  ; legal  writings, their vast an-


INDEX.


397


HORDE

tiqiiity  discovered  by  Sir  W.  Jones,
4 ;  Sacred  Law,  gradual  o-r()wth  of,
enlarged  upon,  12;  Sacred  La^v-Books,
why  so  called,  36 ;  most  valuable
portions  of,  -io  ;  drawbacks  to,  45

Horde,  tlie  theory  of,  stated,  199,  200  ;
opposed  to  patriarchal  theory,  199;
as  advanced  by  McLennan  and  Mor-
gan, 200,  201  ;  objections  to  stated,
204,  205,  220

House  chief,  the. See  '  Domatchin '

House  Communities  and  'Natural  Fa-
milies,'mutual  change  into  described,
259

House-Community,  the,  one  of  the  oldest
institutions  of  Aryan  race,  237 ;  its
completeness  in  South  Slavonian  pro-
vinces, 238,  241 ;  its  analogies  among
the  Komans,  238  et  seq. ;  its  corre-
spondence with  the  Celtic  *  sept,'  the
Hellenic  *  y4vos,'  the  Teutonic  '  kin,'
the  Hindu  '  Joint-Family,'  239,  240  ;
its  distinctness  from  the  Village-Com-
munity of  Russia  and  India,  240  ;  an
extension  of  the  'Family,'  241  ;  its
relationship  to  the  '  Family '  identical
with  relationship  between  '  Joint-
Family  '  and  '  Family '  in  India,  244  ;
government  both  democratic  and
monarchical,  245,  246 ;  its  rules  of
common  property  corresponding  with
the  res  mancipi  and  the  res  nee  man-
cipi  of  the  Romans,  249  et  seq.  ;
different  development  of  in  Northern
and  Southern  Slavonic  provinces,  262 ;
development  into  a  Village-Commu-
nity in  Russo-Slavonic  provinces,  261 ;
result  of  this  development,  261  et
seq. ;  decay  of  the  system,  263  et  seq.

House  of  Commons,  the,  its  Select  Com-
mittee on  Copyholds  referred  to,  307,
310

House  of  Lords  referred  to,  25  ;  second
chambers  in  imitation  of,  25

Hypotliek,  law  of,  mentioned,  357


IMPURE  Tribes,  fictitious  formation
of,  279  et  seq.;  among  Rajpoots,
description  of,  274  et  seq.
Inheritancr;,  biw  of,  as  it  affected  women
among  Ath<!nians,  94,  95  ;  Athenian
and  ilindu-Piinjal;  ruh^s  of  compared,
95  ;  its  implication  witli  ancestor-
worship  au4ong  Hindas  and  Romans,


KING

]  20 ;  as  affecting  the  portion  of
daughters  among  Romans,  109 ;  among
Mahonimcidans,  235  ;  as  applied  to
South  Slavonian  provinces,  259  et
seq.

Ireland,  Brehon  law  of,  referred  to,  162 ;
Brehons  of,  their  similarity  to  the
Brahmans,  162

Irish  Book  of  Rights,  the,  quoted,  180

Isseus  quoted,  78


JAMIESON,  Mr.,  his  communications
to  the  '  China  Review'  quoted,  224

Jebb,  Professor,  his  'Attic  Orations'
quoted,  'dbn.

Joint-Families,  system  of,  alluded  to,
22  ;  connection  with  '  Village-Com-
munities,' 241 ;  of  India  referred  to,
120,  152  ;  reasons  for  decay  of,  263

Jolly,  Dr.,  his  translation  of  Vishnu
referred  to,  11  and  n.

Jones,  Sir  W.,  his  '  Oriental  Studies '
referred  to,  1-6 ;  his  plan  for  im-
proving the  administration  of  Anglo-
Indian  justice,  2,  3  ;  his  translation
of  '  Book  of  Manu '  referred  to,  4,
376,  379  ;  result  of  his  conclusions,
6,7

Judges,  Book  of,  referred  to,  163

Judicial  administration,  difft^rence  of
in  modern  England  and  France  re-
ferred to,  189

Jus  Gentium  referred  to,  119;  Naturale,
Roman  conception  of  referred  to,  388 ;
Roman  lawyers  meaning  of  stated,
365

Justice,  Feudal  Court  of,  in  France,  re-
ferred to,  177;  popular  Courts  of,
their  gradual  change  into  committees
of  experts,  177  etseq.;  advantage  of
justice  at  king's  hands  over  described,
178  et  seq.,  184  et  seq.

Justinian,  Code  and  Digest  of,  corre-
spondence of  its  legal  classification
with  that  of  'Twelve  Tables,'  367;
his  118th  'Novella  Constitutio '  re-
ferred to,  66


KERN and Hessels, Messrs., their
edition of the Lex Salica re-
ferred to,  1G9  w.
King,  the,  functions  of,  38  et  seq.; liis
divine  right,  39  ;  his  relation  to  the


398


INDEX.


KINGDOMS

Brahmans,  39  ;  his  alliance  with  the
Brahman  the  beginning  of  civil  law,
44 ;  influence  of  his  supreme  autho-
rity upon  law  and  usage,  164  et  seq.
Kingdoms,  the,  adjusted  to  the  same
form  as  the  Manors,  306


LAND  law,  Eoman,  the,  referred  to,
342,  343,  344

Land  Registration,  Continental  systems
of,  enlarged  upon,  353,  356  et  seq.  ;
analogous  to  Roman  system  of '  man-
cipation,' 358

Land,  sale  of,  in  India,  private  transfers
preferred  to  public,  359

Larvae,  the,  meaning  of,  65

Law,  first  appearance  of  in  Brahmini-
cal  books,  38 ;  Roman  and  English
systems  as  dividing  the  civilised
world  referred  to,  165  ;  Gregorian,
Hermogenian  Codes,  367 ;  Justinian,
Theodosius  2nd,  Codes  of,  referred  to,
367;  Roman,  its  division  into  law
of  persons  and  law  of  things  391  ;
Dig,  XXX.  84,  6,  and  Cod.  vi.  37,  H,
referred  to,  109  n. ;  '  Twelve  Tables '
of  alluded  to,  3,  6,  66,  75,  115,  337,
367,  369,  388  ;  of  Nature,  Greek
philosophical  conception  of  referred
to,  119

Lawyers,  origin  of,  according  to  Hindu
Sacred  Books,  25 ;  ancient,  identical
with  priests,  26,  27

Lavalrye,  M.  de,  his  opinions  referred
to.  346

Le  Bon,  Dr.,  his  '  L'Homme  et  les
)Societes  '  quoted,  208

Legal  conceptions,  their  instability  re-
ferred to,  360

Legal  Rules,  classification  of,  according
to  '  Institutes '  of  Justinian  and
Gains  enlarged  upon,  362  et  seq.  ;
this  arrangement  exploded  according
to  many  modern  jurists,  364;  this
system  not  regarded  as  perfect  by
Eoman  jurists,  367  ;  renewed  sup-
port the  system  has  received  in
America,  365  ;  difference  of  arrange-
ment in  other  Roman  Codes,  367  ;
according  to  '  Twelve  Tables,'  369
rt  seq.  ;  according  to  '  Edict  of  the
Praetor,'  370  ;  according  to  Lex
Salica,  372  et  seq.;  this  arrange-
ment not  derived  from  Roman  sys-


MALES

tem,  374  ;  according  to  early  Irish
law,  374  et  seq. ;  according  to  Book
of  Manu,  376;  according  to  Book  of
Narada,  379  et  seq. ;  principle  and
meaning  of  this  system,  381  ;  ar-
rangement of  primitive  codes  ex-
plained by  this  system,  382  et  seq. ;
study  of  in  Middle  Ages  alluded  to,
368  ;  distinctions  between  ancient  and
modern  arrangements,  389  et  seq.

Legge,  Dr.,  his  contributions  to  '  Sacred
Books  of  the  East '  quoted,  59  n.

Letourneau,  Dr.,  his  *  La  Sociologie '
quoted,  208  and  n.

Levirate,  the,  alluded  to,  201  ;  among
Hindus,  100,  102,  106  ;  among  Spar-
tans and  Athenians,  100,  104,  105;
among  Hebrews,  101

Leviticus,  Book  of,  compared  to  Book
•  of  Manu,  5

Lex  Salica,  the,  referred  to.  Note  A,
332,  338,  346,  372,  373

Lubbock,  Sir  John,  his  •  Origin  of
Civilisation'  etc.  quoted,  67,  68,
72;  his  '  Prehistoric  Times' quoted,
Note  A,  230

Lyall,  Sir  A.,  his  *  Asiatic  Studies '
quoted,  270,  272,  274,  275,  279;
alluded  to,  63,  199  n.,  267,  277,
Note  A,  284,  285


MACAULAY,  Lord,  his 'History  of
England' referred  to, 319; his

statement  about  the  poverty  of  India

noticed,  350
Macfarlane,  Dr.,  his  paper  in  '  Journal

of  Anthropological  Institute'  referred

to,  Note  A,  289
Magna Charta, effect of sealing of,

stated,  188
Mahommedanism,  its  effect  upon  com-
munities subject  to  Mussulman  rule,

but  not  to  that  faith,  236
Maine, Sir H., his 'Ancient Law'

quoted, 192. 199, 206, 219, 294  ;

referred  to,  43,  78,  79,  96,  Note  A,

331,  332  ;  theory  of  primitive  society

in his  'Ancient  Law,'  193  et seq.;

his '  Early Hist, of Institutions '

quoted. 14, 84  ; referred to, 276 ;

his  '  Village  Commxinities '  quoted,  7  ;

alluded  to.  Note  A,  329
Males,  excess  of  females  over  referred

to,  210  ;  disproportion  of  females  to


IXDEX.


399


MALiLESBrEY

referred  to,  211,  211;  as  borne  out
by  inscription  in  Berlin  Museum,  213  ;
preference  for  succession  by,  in  India,
Greece,  and  Eome,  114,  llo  ;  ex-
ception to  this  feeling  in  Bengal
proper,  llo

Malmesbury,  Lord,  papers  of  referred
to,  141

Man,  Mr.  E.  H.,  bis  contributions  to
'  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  In-
stitute' quoted,  Note  A,  230  ct  §€([.

Manavas,  Clan  of,  its  legal  doctrines  re-
ferred to,  16

Mancipation,  system  of,  subordinate  to
system  of  'Tradition,'  352,  359  ;  pub-
lic convevance  bv  among  Romans,
352

Manor,  the,  original  nature  of  described
and  referred  to,  302,  303,  Note  A,
329  ;  differing  results  from  decay  of
in  France  and  England.  307,  313,
319  et  seq..  326;  its  sunnval  in  the
'  parish,'  326  ;  Court  of  the,  difference
from  Signorial  Court,  and  reasons  for,
313,  314,  323,  et  seq. ;  Lord  of  the,  his
status  referred  to,  304,  319,  324

Manors,  Court  Rolls  of,  in  England
compared  with  Continental  Land
Registries,  354

Manu,  Book  of,  quoted,  33,  40,  41,  64,
70,  83,  94,  Note  A,  123  ;  referred  to,
4,  5,  7,  16,  107,  128,  160,  376-379  ;
its  double  origin,  43  ;  suggested
dates  of,  5,  9.  10,  11  ;  its  combina-
tions of  law  and  ritual,  5
Manus,'  Roman  usage  of  referred  to,
198

Marriage,  Mahommedan  law  of  re-
ferred to,  235

Matthew,  Gospel  of,  quoted,  101  ;
alluded  to,  303

Maurer.  Konra^l,  his  Icelandic  re-
searches referred  to,  384

Max  Miiller,  Professor,  his  test  for
date  of  Hindu  Bo<jks  referred  to,  9  ;
his  theory  of  Hindu  legal  writings
quot/'d,  15,  16  ;  referred  to,  377  ;
his  contributions  to  'Sacred  }k>ok8
of  the  East'  referred  to,  10  n.

Majne,  Mr.  J.  D.,  his  '  Hindu  L'lw  and
Usage  '  quoted,  114,  115,  117;  re-
ferre^l  to,  77,  82,  83,  07,  HI  ».,  124

Mcl>innan,  Mr.  J.  1'.,  the  late,  his
theories  referred  to,  106,  Note  B,
124,  150  n.,  203,  209,211,  212,  218,


PATERXITr

2-56;  his  "Studies  in  Ancient  His-
tory' referred  to.  195;  his  'Primi-
tive Marriage"  alluded  to,  239

Mill,  3Ir.  John  Stuart,  his  speculations
on  legal  classification  mentioned,
364

Missi,  system  of,  explained,  183  ;  and
alluded  to,  189

Mitakshara.  Digest  of  the,  alluded  to,
114,  118

Montesquieu  referred  to,  144

Moolries,  the,  alluded  to,  2,  3

Morgan,  Mr.,  his  contributions  to
•  L'nited  States'  Sui-vey  of  Rocky
Mountains  '  referred  to,  Note  A,  331

■ —  Mr.  L.  H.,  the  late,  his  theories
referred  to,  195,  203,  209.  211,  212,
218,  Note  A,  286,  287,  288,  289;
his  'Ancient  S<jciety'  alluded  to,  239

'Mother-law,'  usage  of,  referred  to,  75


VfAEADA,  Book of, description of,

li  377  ct  scq.  ;  its  distinction  from
Book  of  Manu,  379  ;  quoted,  41,  42,
Note  A,  123,  378,  379;  referred  to,
17,  41,  107

Natural  Family,  meaning  of,  and  dis-
tinction from  a  '  House  Community,'
242

Nelson,  ;>Ir.  J.  H.,  his  'View  of  the
Hindu  Law'  and  'Scientific  Study  of
Hindu  Law'  referred  to,  8  n.,  12;
quoted.  Note  A,  123

New Zealand Chief, story of men
tioned,  23

Niyoga,  sysU-m  of,  100,  106,  107

Normandv,  customs  of  referred  to,
151  n.  '

North,  Roger,  his  '  Lives  of  the  Norths '
quoted,  316;  alluded  to,  311  ct  .sry.


OBLirJATION,  Roman  legal  theory
of  referred  to,  391
'Orphan Heiress' in Attic law, tbe,
referred  to,  104


PALGR.WE,  Sir  F.,  his  '  Rise  of  the
English  Commonwealth  '  referred
to,  181,  187
Paternity,  recogniti(ni  of,  account  of,
according  to  McLennan  and  Morgan,
217  ;  true  account  of,  218


400


INDEX.


PATRIA

Patria  Potestas,  the,  referred  to,  198 ;
among  Hindus  referred  to,  Xote  A,
122

Patriarchal  theory,  difficulties  of
stated,  204  ;  development  of  '  Power '
\)y  through  sexual  jealousy,  215,
216

Peasantry  of  France,  the,  their  hos-
tility to  the  nobility  prior  to  the
Revolution,  294  et  scq.

Peculium,  Koman  law  of,  practice  of
among  South  Slavonians  and  Hindus,
2o2,  253

Penances  among  Hindus,  description
of,  37,  38  ;  exemption  from  claimed
by  Brahmans,  40,  47

Plato,  his  view  '  and  illustration  of
Patriarchal  theory,  196,  198

'Pleading,  New  rules  of,'  alluded  to,
390

Plutarch,  'Lives'  quoted,  104

Pollock,  Mr.  F.,  his  'Notes  on  Early
English  Land  Law'  referred  to,  Note
A,  334

Polyandry,  practice  of  referred  to,  106,
Note  B,  123,  200

Popular  Assembly,  the,  relation  of  the
king  to,  173  ;  Popular  Court  of  Jus-
tice identical  with,  173

Popular  institutions,  source  of  weak-
ness of  stated,  1 74  et  seq.

Possession,  law  of  among  Romans
alluded  to,  356,  357

Prescription,  law  of. See  Usurpation

Primogeniture,  system  of  referred  to,
132,  133;  dangerous  example  of,
138  c^  seq.

Prodigal  Son,  parable  of,  illustration
afforded  by,  of  primogeniture  and
•  Borough  English,'  260

Prohibited  degrees,  Mahommedan  and
South  Slavonian,  tables  of,  255  ;  Spe-
cial table  of  as  regards  Confraternity
in  Slavo-Greek  Church,  258

Property,  legal  Classification  of  re-
ferred to,  335  et  seq.  ;  Registration
of,  Act  of  Indian  Legislature  referred
to,  359  n. ;  succession  to  among  Ma-
hommedans,  126  ;  transfer  of  in
India,  see  Property,  Registration  of

I'roverbs. See  Aphorisms

Psalm  cvi.  quoted,  58

Puchta,  the  jurist,  referred  to,  264

Punaluan  Marriage  alluded  to,  201

Pundits,  the,  referred  to,  2,  3


RTJTH

'  Punjab,  Hindu  law  of,'  referred  to'
8,26;  '  Punjab  Customary  Law,  notes
on  '  referred  to,  95

Pure  tribes  among  Rajputs,  descrip-
tion of,  272

Purgatories,  Hindu,  description  of,  30
et  seq.


QUIRITARIAN ownership,  the,  al-
luded to,  343


EAJKUMAR  SARVADHIKARI,
Professor,  his  '  Hindu  Law  of  In-
heritance '  quoted,  56  ;  referred  to,
57  n.

Rajput  Clans,  the,  origin  and  high
birth  of,  268  ;  social  system  of,  267  ;
disintegrating  and  organising  forces
at  work  among,  269,  277  et  seq. ;
observations  of  by  Sir  A.  Lyall
referred  to,  267,  269

Rajputana. See  Rajput  Clans.

Real  Property,  Conveyance  of,  alluded
to,  351

Relationship,  •  agnatic  '  system  of  re-
ferred to,  114,  115,  140,  145,  150,
152;  '  cognatic '  system  of  referred
to,  97,  114,  139,  145,  147,  151  ;
artificial  forms  of  among  South
Slavonians,  256  et  seq.

Relatives,  collateral,  modern  rules  for
succession  of,  114,  115

Renan,  M.,  his  'Souvenirs  d'Enfiince'
quoted,  303  n.  ;  his  observations
among  Berbers  of  North  Africa
alluded  to,  Note  A,  331

Roman  Empire,  its  system  of  regal
succession  referred  to,  146

Roman  pr?etor,  edict  of,  its  nature  and
effect  stated,  119,  120;  referred  to,
66,  77,  166,  367

Roses,  Wars  of,  referred  to,  141

Royal  succession,  among  Hindus,  no
law  for,  125,  127,  128  ;  Oriental  sys-
tems of,  their  confusion,  129  et  seq. ;
among  Hebrews  and  Oriental  nations,
132  ;  conflicts  between  chiefs  and
clans  to  obtain  mentioned  and  illus-
trated, 131,  l'S2  cf  seq.

Rumsey,  Mr.  Alniaric,  his  '  Mahom-
medan Law  of  Inheritance  '  referred
to,  126

Ruth,  Book  of,  referred  to,  102,  106


I


INDEX.


401


SALIC

SALIC  Law,  the,  referred  to  generally,
143,  150,  167;  description  of  and
application  to  private  property,  144  ;
application  of  to  royal  succession,
143,  148  et  seq.,  157;  as  applied  to
France,  explanation  of  given  by
French  historians,  158

Samuel,  first  Book  of,  quoted,  Note  A,
284

Sanction,  the. See  Penances

Sapinda,  the. See  112  n.

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  his  '  Bride  of  Lam-
mermoor '  referred  to,  321  ;  his
'  Kenil worth'  referred  to,  181

Scrope,  Mr.,  his  '  History  of  the  Manor
of  Castle  Combe'  quoted,  315

Seigneur,  the. See  Lord  of  the  Manor

Senates,  the  ancient,  referred  to,  25

Settlement,  Act  of,  referred  to,  142

Shakespeare,  his  play  of  '  Henry  V.'
referred  to,  143

Shintoism,  system  of,  alluded  to,  60

Shire  Courts,  the,  alluded  to,  169,  189

Shradda,  the,  daily  oflfering  of,  57

Siculus,  Diodorus,  referred  to,  115  n.

Signorial  Court,  the. See  Court  Baron

Sister,  uterine,  marriage  system  of,
described,  105

Slavonian  provinces,  rise  of  feudalism
among,  265,  266

Socage,  tenure  by,  referred  to,  341

Society,  Patriarchal  theory  of  de-
scribed, 193,  196  et  seq.;  origin  of,
Patriarchal  theory  to  be  adopted,
215,  219

Sons,  artificial,  creation  of,  absence  of
in  modern  India,  117;  consequences
of  dissatisfaction  with,  117

Sophocles,  his  'Ajax'  compared  witli
Zend  Avesta,  65  n.

Souls,  transmigration  of,  referred  to,
33  et  fieq.

South  Slavonians,  their  distinction  be-
tween agnatic  and  cognatic  relati(;ii-
ships,  and  their  respect  for  old  age,
243;  position  of  women  among  as
to  marriage  and  property,  253  et  icq.

Spencer,  Mr.  Herbert,  his  'Principles
of  Sociology '  quoted,  08

Spenser,  Edmund,  his  observations  on
Ireland  referred  to,  180,  181

Stanley,  English  House  of,  referred  to,
154

Star-Chamber ,  Court  of,  referred  to,
165  and  n.  190


VILLA

Stubbs,  Professor,  his 'Constitutional

History'  referred  to,  176
Succession,  collateral,  on  the  Continent

and among ancient and modern

Hindus,  111,  112,  113; Hindu  law

of  referred  to,  22
Sunis,  the,  meaning  of,  175  ;  referred

to,  178
System Descriptive,  the,  referred to,

Note  A,  290


TAINE,  M.,  his  'L'Anarchie  Spon-
tanee '  referred  to,  295  ;  his  '  La
Revolution  '  referred  to,  296  u. ;  his
*  Origins  of  Contemporary  France '
referred  to,  293

Tanistry,  system  of,  referred  to,  137,
145,  342,  349

Territorial  sovereignty,  unpopularity  of
in  Central  India,  277

Theft,  prominent  place  assigned  to  it
in  early  Koman  and  Prankish  legal
classifications,  reasons  for,  374

'  Thingman,'  the,  described,  170

Thunginus. Sec  Thingman

Tocqueville,  De,  his  observations  re-
ferred to,  314;  his  theory  of  the
peasant  hostility  to  the  French  no-
bility referred  to,  376

Tod,  Colonel,  his  *  Rajasthan  '  referred
to,  269

Totem,  the.  Note  A,  286

Totemism,  practice  of  referred  to,  200

Tupper,  Mr.  C.  L.,  his  '  Punjab  Custo-
mary Law '  quoted,  8

Tylor,  Mr.  E.  B.,  his  '  Primitive  Cul-
ture '  alluded  to,  54 ;  quoted,  55,  62


UNIVERSE, Hindu  ^  conception of
described,  82  et  seq.
'  Use  of  the  Law,'  tract  upon  quoted,
300,  301  ; erroneous  account given
in  of  the  origin  of  Manors  and  Copy-
hold tenures,  299  c/  seq.
Usucaplion,  law  of,  referred  to,  356


VARRO, his 'De Lingua Latin4'
quoted.  Note  y\,  283
Vashishtha,  Book  of,  referred  to,  1 1
Verse,  as  determining  dates  of  Ancient

Law  Books,  9,  10
'  Villa '  the,  use  of  the  word  by  Ger-


D D


402


INDEX.


VILL^

manic  legal  draftsmen,  and  in  Lex
Salica,  Note  A,  332

•  Villae,'  the,  as  understood  among
Eomans,  Note  A,  332

Village  Community,  the,  its  existence
among  North  SlaYonians,  2-41  ;  re-
ferred to,  327,  Note  A,  329  ct  seq.

Villeins,  the,  description  and  status  of,
305

Vishnu,  Book  of,  alluded  to,  11,  64,
Win.,  128;  quoted,  30,  33,34,47,
71,  72,  74,  94

Voltaire,  his  contempt  for  the  Lex
Salica  referred  to,  144


ZURICH

WARRANTY,  expedient  of,  referred
to,  355
West  and  Elihler,  Messrs.,  their  '  Di-
gest of  Hindu  Law  '  referred  to,  1 1  t^.
Wheel,  Hindu  symbol  of,  described,  30
Women, property of, according to
Gautama,  1 09  ;  pronsion  for  among
Romans  and  in  India,  109,  110

YOUNG,  ARTHUR,  his  observations
referred  to,  307,  321

ZURICH,  Land  Registry  of,  descrip
tion  of,  353  et  seq.


I.ONDOS  : PRINTBD BY

SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-8TRKF.T SQCABE

A^U PAaLIAUSNT STBEET
