I.  PROSPECTS  OP  POPULAR  GOVERNMENT
II.  NATURE  OF  DEMOCRACY

III.  AGE  OF  PROGRESS

IV.  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES


By  SIK  HENEY  SUMNEE  MAINE,  F.E.S.

AUTHOR  OF •  ANCIENT L.\W  '


LONDON
JOHN MUERAY, ALBEMAELE STEEET, AV.

1918


Hi


First  Edition  .
Second  Edition
Third  Edition  .
Fourth  Edition
Fifth  Edition  .
Sixth  (Popular)  Eduton
Reprinted  . . . .


.  October, i88s

.  December,  i8S^

.  April, 1886

.  October, i8go

.  August, i8g'j

.  February,  igog

.  July, igiS


I  !PR.'inv f


tf  ,  i  '.  k


T16'690
I  yH!VERS;iY£FTj,ibiiiQ  j


All  Rights  Reserved


PEEFAOB.


The  four  Essays  which  follow  are  connected  with
studies  to  which,  during  much  of  my  life,  I  have
devoted  such  leisure  as  I  have  been  able  to  command.
Many  years  ago  I  made  the  attempt,  in  a  work  or
"  Ancient  Law,"  to  apply  the  so-called  Historical
Method  of  inquiry  to  the  private  laws  and  institutions
of  Mankind.  But,  at  the  outset  of  this  undertaking,
I  found  the  path  obstructed  by  a  number  of  a  ^wr/
theories  which,  in  all  minds  but  a  few,  satisfied
curiosity  as  to  the  Past  and  paralysed  speculation  as
to  the  Future.  They  had  for  their  basis  the  hypo-
thesis of  a  Law  and  State  of  Nature  antecedent  to
all  positive  institutions,  and  a  hypothetical  system  of
Rights  and  Duties  appropriate  to  the  natural  con-
'  dition.  The  gradual  recovery  of  the  natural  condi-
1  tion  was  assumed  to  be  the  same  thing  as  the  pro-
\gressive  improvement  of  human  institutions.  Upon
tlie  examination,  which  was  indispensable,  of  the  true


VI  PREFACE.

origin  and  real  history  of  these  theories,  I  found  them
to  rest  upon  a  very  slender  philosophical  foundation,
but  at  the  same  time  they  might  be  shown  to  have
been  extremely  powerful  both  for  good  and  for  evil.
One  of  the  characteristics  most  definitely  associated
with  Nature  and  her  LaAV  was  simplicity,  and  thus
the  theories  of  which  I  am  speaking  brought  about
(though  less  in  ll^ngland  than  in  other  countries)
many  valuable  reforms  of  private  law,  by  simplifying
it  and  clearing  it  from  barbarous  technicalitieg.  They
liad,  further,  a  large  share  in  the  parentage  of  Inter-
national Law,  and  they  thus  helped  to  mitigate  in
some  small  degree  the  sanguinary  quarrelsomeness
which  has  accompanied  the  human  race  through  the
whole  course  of  its  history.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
they  in  uiy  judgment  unnerved  the  human  intellect,
and  thus  made  it  capable  of  the  extravagances  into
which  it  fell  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century.
And  they  certainly  gave  a  false  bias  to  all  historical
inquiry  into  the  growth  of  society  and  the  develop-
ment of  law.

It  had  always  been  my  desire  and  hope  to  apply
the  Historical  Method  to  the  political  institutions  of
men. .  But,  here  again,  the  inquiry  into  the  history  of
these  institutions,  and  the  attempt  to  estimate  their  true
value  by  the  results  of  such  an  inquiry,  are  seriously


^


PREFACE.  Vll

embarrassed  by  a  mass  of  ideas  and  beliefs  which  bave
grown  up  in  our  day  on  the  subject  of  one  particular
form  of  government,  that  extreme  form  of  popular
government  which  is  called  Democracy.  A  portion
of  the  notions  which  prevail  in  Europe  concerning
Popular  Government  are  derived  (and  these  are  worthy
of  all  respect)  from  observation  of  its  practical  work-
ing ;  a  larger  portion  merely  reproduce  technical
rules  of  the  British  or  American  Constitutions  in
an  altered  or  disguised  form  ;  but  a  multitude  of
ideas  on  this  subject,  ideas  which  are  steadily  absorb-
ing or  displacing  all  others,  appear  to  me.  like  the
theories  of  jurisprudence  of  which  I  have  spoken,  to
have  been  conceived  a  priori.  They  are,  in  fact,
another  set  of  .deductions  from  the  assumption  of  a
State  of  Nature. Their  true  source  has  never  been


forgotten  on  the  Continent  of  Europe,  where  they  are
well  known  to  have  sprung  from  the  teaching  of  Jean-
Jacques  Rousseau,  who  believed  that  men  emerged
from  the  primitive  natural  condition  by  a  process
which  made  every  form  of  government,  except  Demo-
cracy, illegitimate.  In  this  country  they  are  not
often  explicitly,  or  even  consciously,  referred  to  their
real  origin,  which  is,  nevertheless,  constantly  betrayed
by  the  language  in  which  they  are  expressed.  Demo-
cracy is  commonly  described  as  having  an  inherent


Vm  PREFACE.

superiority  over  every  other  form  of  government.  It
is  supposed  to  advance  with  an  irresistible  and  pre-
ordained movement.  It  is  thought  to  be  full  of  the
promise  of  blessings  to  mankind  ;  yet  if  it  fails  to
bring  with  it  these  blessings,  or  even  proves  to  be
prolific  of  the  heaviest  calamities,  it  is  not  held  to
deserve  condemnation.  These  are  the  familiar  marks
of  a  theory  Avhich  claims  to  be  independent  of  ex-
perience and  observation  on  the  plea  that  it  bears
the  credentials  of  a  golden  age,  non -historical  and
unverifiable.

During  the  half-century  in  which  an  a  priori
political  theory  has  been  making  way  among  all  the
civilised  societies  of  the  West,  a  set  of  political  facts
have  disclosed  themselves  by  its  side  which  appear
to  me  to  deserve  much  more  consideration  than  they
have  received.  Sixty  or  seventy  years  ago,  it  was
inevitable  that  an  inquirer  into  political  science  should
mainly  employ  the  deductive  method  of  investigation.
Jeremy  Bentham,  who  was  careless  of  remote  history,
had  little  before  him  beyond  the  phenomena  of  the
British  Constitution,  which  he  saw  in  the  special  light
of  his  own  philosophy  and  from  the  point  of  view  of
a  reformer  of  private  law.  Besides  these  he  had  a
few  facts  supplied  by  the  short  American  Constitu-
tional experience,  and  he  had  the  brief  and most


PREFACE.  IX

unsuccessful  experiments  of  the  French  in  democratic
government.  But  since  1815,  and  especially  since
1830,  Popular  Government  has  been  introduced  into
nearly  all  Continental  Europe  and  into  all  Spanish
America,  North,  Central,  and  South  ;  and  the  working
of  these  new  institutions  has  furnished  us  with  a  num-
ber of  facts  of  the  highest  interest.  Meantime,  the
ancient  British  Constitution  has  been  modifying  itself
with  a  rapidity  which  could  not  be  foreseen  in  Ben-
tham's  day.  I  suspect  that  there  were  few  observant
Englishmen  who,  in  presence  of  the  agitation  which
filled  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1884,  were  not  aston-
ished to  discover  the  extent  to  which  the  Constitution
of  their  country  had  altered,  under  cover  of  old  language
and  old  forms.  And,  all  the  while,  the  great  strength
of  some  of  the  securities  which  the  American  Federal
Constitution  has  provided  against  the  infirmities  of
popular  government  has  been  proving  itself  in  a
most  remarkable  way.  Thus,  in  nearly  all  the
civilised  w^orld,  a  large  body  of  new  facts  has  been
formed  by  which  1  endeavour,  in  these  Essays,  to
test  the  value  of  the  opinions  which  are  gaining
currency  in  our  day  concerning  Popular  Government
as  it  verges  on  Democracy.

It  would  argue  ignorance  or  bad  faith  to  deny  the
benefits  for  which,  amid  some  calamities,  mankind  is


t  PfeEFACfi.

indebted  to  Popular  Government.  Nevertheless,  if
there  be  even  an  approximation  to  truth  in  the  con
elusions  which  I  have  reached  in  the  three  papers  first
printed  in  this  volume,  some  assumptions  commonly
made  on  the  subject  must  be  discarded.  In  the
Essay  on  the  "  Prospects  of  Popular  Government "
I  have  shown  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Popular
Government,  since  its  reintroduction  into  the  world,  -^
has  proved  itself  to  be  extremely  fragile.  In  theV^
Essay  on  the  "  Nature  of  Democracy  "  I  have  given
some  reasons  for  thinking  that,  in  the  extreme  form
to  which  it  tends,  it  is,  of  all  kinds  of  government,  by
far  the  most  difficult.  In  the  "Age  of  Progress  "  1
have  argued  that  the  perpetual  change  which,  as
understood  in  modern  times,  it  appears  to  demand,  is
not  in  harmony  with  the  normal  forces  ruling  human
nature,  and  is  apt  therefore  to  lead  to  cruel  disappoint-
ment or  serious  disaster.  If  I  am  in  any  degree  right,
Popular  Government,  especially  as  it  approaches  the
democratic  form,  will  tax  to  the  utmost  all  the
political  sagacity  and  statesmanship  of  the  world  to
keep  it  from  misfortune.  Happily,  if  there  are  some
facts  which  augur  ill  for  its  duration  and  success,
there  are  others  which  suggest  that  it  is  not  beyond
the  powers  of  human  reason  to  discover  remedies  for
its  infirmities. For  the  purpose  of  bringing  out  a


PREFACE.  XI

certain  number  of  these  latter  facts,  and  at  the  same
time  of  indicating  the  quarter  in  which  the  political
student  (once  set  free  from  a  jpmr/ assumptions)  may
seek  materials  for  a  reconstruction  of  his  science,
I  have  examined  and  analysed  the  Constitution  of  the
United  States,  a  topic  on  which  much  misconception
seems  to  be  abroad.  There  are  some  who  appear  to
suppose  that  it  sprang  at  once  from  the  brain  like  the
Goddess  of  AVisdom,  an  idea  very  much  in  harmony
with  modern  Continental  fancies  respecting  the  origin
of  Democracy.  I  have  tried  to  show  that  its  birth
was  in  reality  natural,  from  ordinary  historical  ante-
cedents ;  and  that  its  connection  with  wisdom  lay
in  the  skill  with  which  sagacious  men,  conscious
that  certain  weaknesses  which  it  had  inherited  would
be  aggravated  by  the  new  circumstances  in  which  it
would  be  placed,  provided  it  with  appliances  cal-
culated to  minimise  them  or  to  neutralise  them  alto-
gether. Its  success,  and  the  success  of  such  American
institutions  ae  have  succeeded,  appears  to  me  to  have
arisen  rather  from  skilfully  applying  the  curb  to
popular  impulses  than  from  giving  them  the  rein.
While  the  British  Constitution  has  been  insensibly
transforming  itself  into  a  popular  government  sur-
rounded on  all  sides  by  difficulties,  the  American
Federal Constitution has proved that, nearly a


Xn  PREFACE.

century  ago,  several  expedients  were  discovered  by
whicli  some  of  these  difficulties  may  be  greatly  miti-
gated and  some  altogether  overcome.

The  publication  of  the  substance  of  these  Essays
in  the  *'  Quarterly  Review,"  besides  giving  me  a  larger
audience  than  could  be  expected  for  a  dissertation  on
abstract  and  general  Politics  which  had  little  direct
bearing  on  the  eager  controversies  of  Party,  has
gained  for  me  the  further  advantage  of  a  number  of
criticisms  which  reached  me  before  this  volume  took
its  final  shape.  At  the  head  of  these  I  must  place  a
series  of  observations  with  which  Lord  Acton  has
favoured  me.  I  have  freely  availed  myself  of  these
I  results  of  his  great  learning  and  profound  thought.

H.  S.  MAINE.

LojTDON  :  1885.


CONTENTS.


ESSAT  PAOX

I. THE  PROSPECTS  OF  POPULAR  GOVERNMENT  . 1

n. THE  NATURE  OF  DEMOCRACY  . • . • . 66

m. THE  AGE  OF  PROGRESS  ...... 127

IV. THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES . 196

INDEX ......•♦•*. 256


ESSAY  I.

THE  PROSPECTS OF  POPULAR GOVERNMENT.

The  blindness  of  the  privileged  classes  in  France  to
the  Revolution  Avhich  was  about  to  overwhelm  them
furnishes  some  of  the  best- worn  commonplaces  of
modern  history.  There  was  no  doubt  much  in  it
to  surprise  us.  What  King,  Noble,  and  Priest  could
pot  see,  had  been  easily  visible  to  the  foreign  observer.
"  In  short,^'  runs  the  famous  passage  in  Chesterfield's
letter  of  December  25, 1753,  ''  all  the  symptoms  which
I  ever  met  with  in  history  previous  to  great  changes
and  revolutions  in  government  now  exist  and  daily
increase  in  France."  A  large  number  of  writers  of
our  day,  manifesting  the  wisdom  which  comes  after
the  event,  have  pointed  out  that  the  signs  of  a  terrible
time  ought  not  to  have  been  mistaken.  The  Court,
the  Aristocracy,  and  the  Clergy  should  have  under-
stood that,  in  face  of  the  irreligion  which  was  daily
becoming  more  fashionable,  the  belief  in  privilege
conferred  by  birth  could  not  be  long  maintained.
They  should have  noted  the  portents  of  imminent


2  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essay  I

political  disturbance  in  thejntense  jealousj;  of  classj^.
They  should  have  been  prepared  for  a  tremendous
social  upheaval  by  the  squalor  and  misery  of  the
peasants.  They  should  have  observed  the  immediate
causes  of  revolution  in  the  disorder  of  the  finances  and
in  the  gross  inequality  of  taxation.  They  should
have  been  wise  enough  to  know  that  the  entire  struc-
ture, of  which  the  keystone  was  a  stately  and  scanda-
lous Court,  was  undermined  on  all  sides.  '^  Beautiful
Armida  Palace,  where  the  inmates  live  enchanted
X/  lives  ;  lapped  in  soft  music  of  adulation  ;  waited  on
by  the  splendours  of  the  world  ;  which  nevertheless
hangs  wondrously  as  by  a  single  hair."  ^

But  although  Chesterfield  appeals  to  history,  the
careful  modern  student  of  history  will  perhaps  think
the  blindness  of  the  French  nobility  and  clergy
eminently  pardonable.  The  Monarchy,  under  whose
broad  shelter  all  privilege  grew  and  seemed  to  thrive,
appeared  to  have  its  roots  deeper  in  the  past  than
any  existing  European  institution.  The  countries
which  now  made  up  France  had  enjoyed  no  ex-
perience of  popular  government  since  the  rude
Gaulish  freedom.  From  this,  they  had  passed  into
the  condition  of  a  strictly  administered,  strongly
governed,  highly  taxed,  Roman  province.  The  in-
vestigations of  the  young  and  learned  school  of
historians rising in France leave it questionable

*  Carlyle,  French  Revolution,  i,  4.


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAK GOVERNMENT.  3

whether  the  Germans,  who  are  sometimes  supposed
to  have  redeemed  their  own  _^ai:fca|i^Q^  by  reviving
liberty,  brought  anything  like  freedom  to  Gaul.
There  was  little  more  than  a  succession  of  German  to
Roman  privileged  classes.  German  captains  shared
the  great  estates,  and  assumed  the  rank,  of  the  half-
official,  half- hereditary  nobility,  who  abounded  in  the
province.  A  German  King,  who  was  in  reality  only  a
Roman  general  bearing  a  barbarous  title,  reigned  over
much  of  Gaul  and  much  of  Central  Europe.  When  his
race  was  supplanted  by  another  in  its  kingship,  the
new  power  got  itself  decorated  w^ith  the  old  Roman
Imperial  style  ;  and  when  at  length  a  third  dynasty
arose,  the  monarchy  associated  with  it  gradually
developed  more  vigour  and  vitality  than  any  other
political  institution  in  Europe.  From  the  accession
of  Hugh  Capet  to  the  French  Revolution,  there  had
been  as  nearly  as  possible  800  years.  During  all
this  time,  the  French  Royal  House  had  steadily
gained  in  power.  It  had  wearied  out  and  beaten
back  the  victorious  armies  of  England.  It  had
emerged  stronger  than  ever  from  the  wars  of  religion
which  humbled  English  kingship  in  the  dust,  dealing
it  a  blow  from  vrhich  it  never  thoroughly  recovered.
It  had  grown  in  strength,  authority,  and  splendour,
till  it  dazzled  all  eyes.  It  had  become  the  model  for
all  princes.  Nor  had  its  government  and  its  relation
to  its  subjects  struck  all  men  as  they  seem  to  have


4  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essay  l.

struck  Chesterfield.  Eleven  years  before  Chester-
field  wrote,  JDavid  liumej^  a  careful  observer  of
France,  had  thus  writteiTm  1742,  "  Though  all  kinds
of  government  be  improved  in  modern  times,  yet
monarchical  government  seems  to  have  made  the
greatest  advance  to  perfection.  It  may  now  be
affirmed  of  civilised  monarchies,  what  was  formerly
said  of  republics  alone,  that  they  are  a  government  of
laws,  not  of  men.  They  are  found  susceptible  of
order,  method,  and  constancy,  to  a  surprising  degree.
Property  is  there  secure  ;  industry  is  encouraged  ;
the  arts  flourish  ;  and  the  Prince  lives  among  his
subjects  like  a  father  among  his  children."  And
Hume  expressly  adds  that  he  saw  more  ''  sources  of
degeneracy"  in  free  governments  like  England  than
in  France,  "the  most  perfect  model  of  pure  mon-
archy." 2

Nevertheless,  Hume  was  unquestionably  wrong
in  his  conclusion,  and  Chesterfield  was  as  unquestion-
ably right.  The  French  privileged  classes  might
conceivably  have  foreseen  the  great  Revolution,  sim-
ply because  it  happened.  The  time,  however,  which
is  expended  in  wondering  at  their  blindness,  or  in
pitying  it  with  an  air  of  superior  wisdom,  is  as
nearly  as  possible  wasted.  Next  to  what  a  modern
satirist  has  called  '*  Hypothetics  " — the  science  of  that
which  might  have  happened  but  did  not — there  is  no
^  Hume,  Essay  XII.  "  Of  Civil  Liberty/'


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNiAIENT.  6

more  unprofitable  study  than  the  investigation  of  the
possibly  predictable,  which  was  never  predicted.  It
is  of  far  hioher  advantao^e  to  note  the  mental  con-
dition  of  the  French  upper  classes  as  one  of  the  most
remarkable  facts  in  history,  and  to  ask  ourselves
whether  it  conveys  a  caution  to  other  generations
than  theirs.  This  line  of  speculation  is  at  the  least
interesting.  We  too^  who  belong  to  Western  Europe
towards  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century,  live  under
a  set  of  institutions  which  all,  except  a  small
minority,  regard  as  likely  to  be  perpetual.  Nine^
men  out  of  ten,  some  hoping,  some  fearing,  look  upon  |
the  popular  government  which,  ever  widening  its
basis,  has  spread  and  is  still  spreading  over  the
world,  as  destined  to  last  for  ever,  or,  if  it  changes
its  form,  to  change  it  in  one  single  direction.  The
democratic  principle  has  gone  forth  conquering  and
to  conquer,  and  its  gainsayers  are  few  and  feeble.
Some  Catholics,  from  whose  minds  the  diplomacy  of
the  present  Pope  has  not  banished  the  Syllabus  of
the  last,  a  fairly  large  body  of  French  and  Spanish
Legitimists,  and  a  few  aged  courtiers  in  the  small
circles  surrounding  exiled  German  and  Italian
princes,  may  still  , believe  that  the  cloud  of  demo-
cratic ascendency  will  pass  away.  Their  hopes  may
/be  as  vain  as  their  regrets  ;  but  nevertheless  those
j  who  recollect  the  surprises  which  the  future  had  in
f store  for  men  equally  confident  in  the  perpetuity  of


6  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. ESSAY  I.

the  present,  will  ask  themselves  whether  it  is  really
true  that  the  expectation  of  virtual  permanence  for
governments  6f  the  modern  type  rests  upon  solid
grounds  of  historical  experience  as  regards  the  past,
and  of  rational  probability  as  regards  the  time  to  come.
I  endeavour  in  these  pages  to  examine  the  question
in  a  spirit  different  from  that  which  animates  most  of
those  who  view  the  advent  of  democracy  either  with
enthusiasm  or  with  despair.

Out  of  the  many  names  commonly  applied  to  the
political  system  prevailing  or  tending  to  prevail  in
all  the  civilised  portions  of  the  world,  I  have  chosen
"popular  government"^  as  the  name  which,  on  the
whole,  is  least  open  to  objection.  But  what  we  are
witnessing  in  West  European  politics  is  not  so  much
the  establishment  of  a  definite  system,  as  the  con-
tinuance, at  varying  rates,  of  a  process.  The  truth
is  that,  within  two  hundred  years,  the  view  taken  jOT
government,  or  (as  the  jurists  say)  of ^erel^iij^p.  of
sovereign  to  subject,  of  political  superior  to  political
inferior,  has  been  changing,  sometimes  partially  and
slowly,  sometimes  generally  and  rapidly.  The  cha-
racter j9f  "tiiis  change  has  been  described  by  John
Stuart  ..Mill  i^  the  early  pages  of  his  "  Essay  on
Liberty,"  and  more  recently  by  Mr.  Justice  Stephen,

^  It  will  be  seen  that  I  endeavour  to  use  the  term  "  demo-
cracy," throughout  this  volume,  in  its  proper  and  only  consistent
Hense  ;  that  is,  for  a  particular  form  of  government.


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  7

who  in  his  "History  of  the  Criminal  Law  of  England  "
very  strikingly  uses  the  contrast  between  the  old  and
the  new  view  of  government  to  illustrate  the  differ-
ence between  two  views  of  the  law  of  seditious  libel.
I  will  quote  the  latter  passage  as  less  coloured  than
the  language  of  Mill  by  the  special  preferences  of  the
writer  : —

Two  different  views  may  be  taken  (says  Sir  James
Stephen)  of  the  relation  between  rulers  and  their  subjects.
If  the  ruler  is  regarded  as  the  superior  of  the  subject,
as  being  by  the  nature  of  his  position  presumably  wise  and
good,  the  rightful  ruler  and  guide  of  the  whole  population,  it
must  necessarily  follow  that  it  is  wrong  to  censure  him
openly,  and,  even  if  he  is  mistaken,  his  mistakes  should  be
pointed  out  with  the  utmost  respect,  and  that,  whether
mistaken  or  not,  no  censure  should  be  cast  on  him  likely  or
designed  to  diminish  his  authority.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
the  ruler  is  regarded  as  the  agent  and  servant,  and  the
subject  as  the  wise  and  good  master,  who  is  obliged  to  dele-
gate his  power  to  the  so-called  ruler  because,  being  a
multitude,  he  cannot  use  it  himself,  it  must  be  evident  that
this  sentiment  must  be  reversed.  Every  member  of  the
public  who  censures  the  ruler  for  the  time  being  exercises
in  his  own  person  the  right  which  belongs  to  the  whole  of
which  he  forms  a  part.  He  is  finding  fault  with  his  own
servant.*

The  States  of  Europe  are  now  regulated  by  poli-
tical institutions  answering  to  the  various  stages  of

*  Stephen's  History  of  the  Criminal  Law  of  England^  ii.  299,


y


8  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essit  t.

the  transition  from  the  old  view,  that  "  rulers  are  pre-
'-  sumably  wise  and  good,  the  rightful  rulers  and  guides
of  the  whole  population,"  to  the  newer  view,  that
"the  ruler  is  the  agent  and  servant,  and  the  subject
the  wise  and  good  master,  who  is  obliged  to  delegate
his  power  to  the  so-called  ruler  because,  being  a
multitude,  he  cannot  use  it  himself."  Russia  and
Turkey  are  the  only  European  States  which  com-
pletely reject  the  theory  that  governments  hold  their
powers  by  delegation  from  the  community,  the  word
"  community  "  being  somewhat  vaguely  understood,
but  tending  more  and  more  to  mean  at  least  the  whole
of  the  males  of  full  age  living  within  certain  terri-
torial limits.  This  theory,  which  is  known  on  the
Continent  as  the  theory  of  national  sovereignty,  has
been  fully  accepted  in  France,  Italy,  Spain,  Portugal,
Holland,  Belgium,  Greece,  and  the  Scandinavian
States.  In  Germany  it  has  been  repeatedly  repu-
diated by  the  Emperor  and  his  powerful  Minister,
but  it  is  to  a  very  great  extent  acted  upon.  England,
as  is  not  unusual  with  her,  stands  by  herself.  There
is  no  country  in  which  the  newer  view  of  govern-
ment is  more  thoroughly  applied  to  practice,  but
almost  all  the  language  of  the  law  and  constitution  is
still  accommodated  to  the  older  ideas  concerning  the
relation  of  ruler  and  subject.

But,  although  no  such  inference  could  be  drawn
from  English  legal  phraseology,  there  is  no  doubt


tssAY  r. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  9

I  that  the  modern  popular  government  of  our  day  is
i  of  purely  English  origin.  When  it  came  into  exist-
\  ence,  there  were  Republics  in  Europe,  but  they
exercised  no  moral  and  little  political  influence.
Although  in  point  of  fact  they  were  most  of  them
strict  oligapehies,  they  were  regarded  as  somewhat
plebeian  governments,  over  which  monarchies  took
rightful  precedence.  "  The  Republics  in  Europe/'
writes  Hume  in  1742,  "are  at  present  noted  for  want
of  politeness.  The  good  manners  of  a  Swiss  civilised
in  Holland  is  an  expression  for  rusticity  among  the
French.  The  English  in  some  degree  fall  under  the
same  censure,  notwithstanding  their  learning  and
genius.  And  if  the  Venetians  be  an  exception,  they
owe  it  perhaps  to  their  communication  with  other
Italians."  If  a  man  then  called  himself  a  Republican,
he  was  thinking  of  the  Athenian  or  Roman  Republic,
one  for  a  while  in  a  certain  sense  a  democracy,  the
other  from  first  to  last  an  aristocracy,  but  both  ruling
a  dependent  empire  with  the  utmost  severity.  In
reality,  the  new  principle  of  government  was  solely
established  in  England,  which  Hume  always  classes
with  Republics  rather  than  with  Monarchies.  After
tremendous  civil  struggles,  the  doctrine  that  govern-
ments serve  the  community  was,  in  spirit  if  not  in
words,  affirmed  in  1689.  But  it  was  long  before
this  doctrine  was  either  fully  carried  out  by  the
nation  or  fully  accepted  by  its  rulers. William  III,


10  PROSPECTS OF  POPULAR GOVERmfENT. essay  I,

was  merely  a  foreign  politician  and  general,  who  sub-
mitted to  the  eecentricities  of  his  subjects  for  the
sake  of  using  their  wealth  and  arms  in  foreign
war:  On  this  point  the  admissions  of  Macaulay  are
curiously  in  harmony  with  the  view  of  William  taken
in  the  instructions  of  Louis  XIY.  to  his  diplomatists
which  have  lately  been  published.  Anne  certainly
believed  in  her  own  quasi-divine  right ;  and  George  I.
and  George  II.  were  humbler  kings  of  the  same  type
as  William,  who  thought  that  the  proper  and  legiti-
mate form  of  government  was  to  be  found,  not  in
England,  but  in  Hanover.  As  soon  as  England  had
in  George  III.  a  king  who  cared  more  for  English
politics  than  for  foreign  war,  he  repudiated  the
doctrine  altogether ;  nor  can  it  be  said  that  it  was
really  admitted  by  any  English  sovereign  until,
possibly,  the  present  reign.  But  even  when  the
horror  of  the  French  Eevolution  was  at  its  highest,
the  politician,  who  would  have  been  in  much  danger  of
prosecution  if  he  had  toasted  the  People  as  the  "sole
legitimate  source  of  power,'^  could  always  save  him-
self by  drinking  to  ^^  the  principles  which  placed  the
House  of  Hanover  on  the  throne."  These  principles
in  the  meantime  were  more  and  more  becoming  the
actual  rule  of  government,  and  before  George  III.  died
they  had  begun  their  victorious  march  over  Europe.

Popular government, as first known to the
English,  began  to  command  the  interest  of  the  Con-


ESSAY  1. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  11

tinent  through  the  admiration  with  which  it  inspired
a  certain  set  of  French  thinkers  towards  the  middle
of  the  last  century.  A^th^outset^jt.  wa^^^
Liberty  which  attracted  them,  hut  English  Toleration
and  also  English  Irreligionj  the  last  one  of  the  most
fugitive  phases  through  which  the  mind  of  a  portion
of  the  nation  passed,  but  one  which  so  struck  the
foreign  observer  that,  at  the  beginning  of  the  present
century,  we  find  Napoleon  Bonaparte  claiming  the
assistance  of  the  Pope  as  rightfully  his  because  he
was  the  enemy  of  the  British  misbeliever.  Gradually
the  educated  classes  of  France,  at  w^hose  feet  sat  the
educated  class  of  all  Continental  countries,  came  to
interest  themselves  in  English  political  institutions;
and  then  came  two  events,  one  of  which  greatly
encouraged,  while  the  other  in  the  end  greatly  dis-
couraged, the  tendency  of  popular  government  to
diffuse  itself.  The  first  of  them  was  the  foundation
of  the  United  States.  The  American  O^y^stitaii-imi^i^-
disjdnc^iY^d^JEiiglij^  this  might  be  proved  alone,  as
Mr.  Freeman  has  acutely  observed,  by  its  taking  two
Houses,  instead  of  one,  or  three,  or  more,  as  the
normal  structure  of  a  legislative  assembly.  It  is  in
fact  the  English  Constitution  carefully  adapted  to  a
body  of  Englishmen  who  had  never  had  much  to  do
with  an  hereditary  king  and  an  aristocracy  of  birth,
and  who  had  determined  to  dispense  with  them
altogether. The American Republic has greatly


12  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essay  i.

influenced  the  favour  into  which  popular  government
grew. It  disproved  the  once  universal  assumptions,
that  no  Republic  could  govern  a  large  territory,  and
that no  strictly Eepublican government could be
stable. But  at  first  the  Republic  became  interesting
for  other  reasons. It  now  became  possible  for  Con-
tinental Europeans to  admire  popular  government
without  submitting  to  the  somewhat  bitter  necessity
of  admiring  the  English,  who  till  lately  had  been  the.
most  unpopular  of  European  nations. Frenchmen  in
particular,  who  had  helped  and  perhaps  enabled  the
Americans  to  obtain their  independence, naturally
admired  institutions  which  were  indirectly  their  own
creation  ;  and  Frenchmen  who  had  not  served  in  the
American  War  saw  the  American  freeman  reflected
in Franklin, who pleased the school of Voltaire
because he believed nothing, and the school of
Rousseau  because  he  wore  a  Quaker  coat. The  other
event strongly  influencing  the  fortunes  of  popular
government  was  the French  Revolution,  which  in
the  long-run  rendered  it  an  object  of  horror. The
French,  in  their  new  Constitutions,  followed  first  the
English  and  then  the  American  model,  but  in  both
cases  with  large  departures  from  the  originals. The
result in both cases was miserable miscarriage.
Political  liberty  took  long  to  recover  from  the  dis-
credit into  which  it  had  been  plunged  by  the  Reign
of  Terror. In  England,  detestation  of  the  Revolution


ESSAT  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  13

did  not  cease  to  influence  politics  till  1830.  But,
abroad,  there  was  a  reaction  to  the  older  type  of
popular  government  in  1814  and  1815  ;  and  it  was
thought  possible  to  combine  freedom  and  order  by
copying,  with  very  slight  changes,  the  British  Con-
stitution. From  a  longing  for  liberty,  combined
with  a  loathing  of  the  French  experiments  in  it,  there
sprang  the  state  of  opinion  in  which  the  constitu-
tional movements  of  the  Continent  had  their  birth.
The  British  political  model  was  followed  by  France,
by  Spain  and  Portugal,  and  by  Holland  and  Belgium,
combined  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands  ;  and,
after  a  long  interval,  by  Germany,  Italy,  and  Austria.
The  principle  of  modern  popular  government
was  thus  affirmed  less  than  two  centuries  ago,  and
the  practical  application  of  that  principle  outside  these
islands  and  their  dependencies  is  not  quite  a  century
old.  What  has  been  the  political  history  of  the
commonwealths  in  which  this  principle  has  been
carried  out  in  various  degrees?  The  inquiry  is
obviously  one  of  much  importance  and  interest  ;  but,
though  the  materials  for  it  are  easily  obtained,  and
indeed  are  to  a  large  extent  within  the  memory  of
living  men,  it  is  very  seldom  or  very  imperfectly
prosecuted.  I  undertake  it  solely  with  the  view  of
ascertaining,  within  reasonable  limits  of  space,  how
far  actual  experience  countenances  the  common
assumption  of  our  day,  that  popular  government  is
c


14  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essay  I.

likely  to  be  of  indefinitely  long  duration.  I  will  first
take  France,  which  began  with  the  imitation  of  the
English,  and  has  ended  with  the  adoption  of  the
American  model.  Since  the  introduction  of  political
freedom  into  France,  the  existing  government,  nomi-
nally clothed  with  all  the  powers  of  the  State,  has
been  three  times  overturned  by  the  mob  of  Paris,  in
1792,  in  1830,  and  in  1848.  It  has  been  three  times
overthrown  by  the  Army  ;  first  in  1797,  on  the  4th
of  September  (18  Fructidor),  when  the  majority  of
the  Directors  with  the  help  of  the  soldiery  annulled
the  elections  of  forty- eight  departments,  and  deported
fifty-six  members  of  the  two  Assemblies,  condemning
also  to  deportation  two  of  their  own  colleagues.  The
second  military  revolution  was  efi^ected  by  the  elder
Bonaparte  on  the  9  th  of  November  (18  Brumaire),
1799  ;  and  the  third  by  the  younger  Bonaparte,  on
December  2,  1851.  The  French  Government  has
also  been  three  times  destroyed  by  foreign  invasion,
in  1814,  1815,  and  1870;  the  invasion  having  been
in  each  case  provoked  by  French  aggression,  sympa-
thised in  by  the  bulk  of  the  French  people.  In  all,
putting  aside  the  anomalous  period  from  1870  to
1885,  France,  since  she  began  her  political  experi-
ments, has  had  forty -four  years  of  liberty  and  thirty-
seven of stern dictatorship.^ But it has to be

*  I  include  in  the  thirty-seven  years  the  interval  between  Sep*
teruber  1797  and  November  1799.


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  15

remembered,  and  it  is  one  of  the  curiosities  of  this
period  of  history,  that  the  elder  Bourbons,  who  in
practice  gave  very  wide  room  to  political  freedom,
did  not  expressly  admit  the  modern  theory  of  popular
government  ;  while  the  Bonapartes,  who  proclaimed
the  theory  without  qualification,  maintained  in  practice
a  rigid  despotism.

Popular  government  was  introduced  into  Spain
just  when  the  fortune  of  war  was  declaring  itself  de-
cisively in  favour  of  Wellington  and  the  English
army.  The  Extraordinary  Cortes  signed  at  Cadiz  a
Constitution,  since  then  famous  in  Spanish  politics
as  the  Constitution  of  1812,  which  proclaimed  in  its
first  article  that  sovereignty  resided  in  the  nation.
Ferdinand  VIL,  on  re-entering  Spain  from  France,
repudiated  this  Constitution,  denouncing  it  as  Jaco-
binical ;  and  for  about  six  years  he  reigned  as  abso-
lutely as  any  of  his  forefathers.  But  in  1820  General
Riego,  who  was  in  command  of  a  large  force  stationed
near  Cadiz,  headed  a  military  insurrection  in  which
the  mob  joined  ;  and  the  King  submitted  to  the  Con-
stitution of  1812.  In  1823  the  foreign  invader
appeared  ;  the  French  armies  entered  Spain  at  the
instigation  of  the  Holy  Alliance,  and  re-established
Ferdinand's  despotism,  which  lasted  till  his  death.
Popular  government  was,  however,  reintroduced  by
his  widow  as  Regent,  for  his  daughter,  no  doubt  for
the  purpose  of  strengthening  Isabella's  title  to  the


16  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essay  i.

throne  against  her  uncle,  Don  Carlos.  It  is  probably
unnecessary  to  give  the  subsequent  political  history
of  Spain  in  any  detail.  There  are  some  places  in
South  America  where  the  people  date  events,  not
from  the  great  earthquakes,  but  from  the  years  in
which,  by  a  rare  intermission,  there  is  no  earthquake
at  all.  On  the  same  principle  we  may  note  that
during  the  nine  years  following  1845,  and  the  nine
years  following  1857,  there  was  comparative,  though
not  complete,  freedom  from  military  insurrection  in
Spain.  As  to  the  residue  of  her  political  history,  my
calculation  is  that  between  the  first  establishment  of
popular  government  in  1812  and  the  accession  of  the
present  King,  there  have  been  forty  military  risings
of  a  serious  nature,  in  most  of  which  the  mob  took
part.  Nine  of  them  were  perfectly  successful,  either
overthrowing  the  Constitution  for  the  time  being,  or
reversing  the  principles  on  which  it  was  administered.
I  need  hardly  say  that  both  the  Queen  Regent,
Christina,  and  her  daughter  Isabella,  were  driven  out
of  Spain  by  the  army  or  the  fleet,  with  the  help  of
the  mob  ;  and  that  the  present  King,  Alfonso,  was
placed  on  the  throne  through  a  military  pronuncia-
wiento  at  the  end  of  1874.  It  is  generally  thought
that  he  owes  his  retention  of  it  since  1875  to  states-
manship of  a  novel  kind.  As  soon  as  he  has  assured
himself  that  the  army  is  in  earnest,  he  changes  his
ministers.


isssAY  I. PKOSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  17

The  real  beginning  of  popular  or  parliamentary
government  in  Germany  and  the  Austrian  dominions,
otiier  than  Hungary,  cannot  be  placed  earlier  than
1848.  The  interest  of  German  politics  from  1815  to
that  year  consists  in  the  complaints,  ever  growing
fainter,  of  the  German  communities  who  sought  to
compel  the  Princes  to  redeem  their  promises  of  Con-
stitutions made  during  the  War  of  Independence,  and
of  the  efforts  of  the  Princes  to  escape  or  evade  their
pledges.  Francis  the  Second  expressed  the  prevailing
feeling  in  his  own  way  when  he  said  to  the  Hungarian
Diet,  '  totus  mundus  stultizat,  et  vult  habere  novas
constitutiones.'  With  some  exceptions  in  the  smaller
States  there  were  no  parliamentary  institutions  in
Germany  till  the  King  of  Prussia  conceded,  just
before  1848,  the  singular  form  of  constitutional
government  which  did  not  survive  that  year.  But
as  soon  as  the  mob  of  Paris  had  torn  up  the  French
Constitutional  Charter,  and  expelled  the  Constitutional
King,  mobs,  with  their  usual  accompaniment  the
army,  began  to  influence  German  and  even  Austrian
politics.  National  Assemblies,  on  the  French  pattern,
were  called  together  at  Berlin,  at  Vienna,  and  at
Frankfort.  All  of  them  were  dispersed  in  about  a
year,  and  directly  or  indirectly  by  the  army.  The
more  recent  German  and  Austrian  Constitutions  are
all  of  royal  origin.  Taking  Europe  as  a  whole,
the  most  durably  successful  experiments  in  popular


18  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essaf  I.

government  have  been  made  either  in  small  States,
too  weak  for  foreign  war,  such  as  Holland  and  Bel-
gium, or  in  countries,  like  the  Scandinavian  States,
where  there  was  an  old  tradition  of  political  freedom.
The  ancient  Hungarian  Constitution  has  been  too
much  aifected  by  civil  war  for  any  assertion  about  it
to  be  safe.  Portugal,  for  a  while  scarcely  less  troubled
than  Spain  by  military  insurrection,  has  been  free
from  it  of  late  ;  and  Greece  has  had  the  dynasty  of
her  kings  once  changed  by  revolution.

If  we  look  outside  Europe  and  beyond  the  circle
of  British  dependencies,  the  phenomena  are  much  the
same.  The  civil  war  of  1861-65,  in  the  United
States,  was  as  much  a  war  of  revolution  as  the  war  of
1775-1782.  It  was  a  war  carried  on  by  the  adhe^
rents  of  one  set  of  principles  and  one  construction  of
the  Constitution  against  the  adherents  of  another
body  of  principles  and  another  Constitutional  doc-
trine. It  would  be  absurd,  however,  to  deny  the
relative  stability  of  the  Government  of  the  United
States,  which  is  a  political  fact  of  the  first  import-
ance ;  but  the  inferences  which  might  be  drawn  from
it  are  much  weakened,  if  not  destroyed,  by  the  re-
markable speciacle  furnished  by  the  numerous  re-
publics set  up  from  the  Mexican  border-line  to  the
Straits  of  Magellan.  It  would  take  many  of  these
pages  even  to  summarise  the  whole  political  history
of  the  Spanish -American  communities. There  have


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  19

been  entire  periods  of  years  during  which  some  of
them  have  been  disputed  between  the  multitude  and
the  military,  and  again  when  tyrants,  as  brutal  as
Caligula  or  Commodus,  reigned  over  them  like  a
Roman  Emperor  in  the  name  of  the  Roman  people.
It  may  be  enough  to  say  of  one  of  them,  Bolivia,
which  was  recently  heard  of  through  her  p?irt  in  the
war  on  the  Pacific  coast,  that  out  of  fourteen  Presi-
dents of  the  Bolivian  Republic  thirteen  have  died
assassinated  or  in  exile.^  There  is  one  partial  expla-
nation of  the  inattention  of  English  and  Euroj)ean
politicians  to  a  most  striking,  instructive,  and  uniform
body  of  facts  :  Spanish — though,  next  to  English,  it
is  the  most  widely  diffused  language  of  the  civilised
world — is  little  read  or  spoken  in  England,  France,
or  Germany.  There  are,  however,  other  theories  to
account  for  the  universal  and  scarcely  intermitted
political  confusion  which  at  times  has  reigned  in  all
Central  and  South  America,  save  Chili  and  the  Bra-
zilian Empire.  It  is  said  that  the  people  are  to  a
great  extent  of  Indian  blood,  and  that  they  have  been
trained  in  Roman  Catholicism.  Such  arguments
would  be  intelligible  if  they  were  used  by  persons
who  maintained  that  a  highly  special  and  exceptional
political  education  is  essential  to  the  successful  prac-
tice of  popular  government  ;  but  they  proceed  from
those  who  believe  that  there  is  at  least  a  strong  pre-
^  Arana,  Guerre,  dti  Pacifique,  i.  33.


20  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. £SSAY  i.

sumption  in  favour  of  democratic  institutions  every-
where. And  as  regards  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,
it  should  at  least  be  remembered  that,  whatever  else
it  may  be,  it  is  a  great  school  of  equality.

I  have  now  given  shortly  the  actual  history  of
popular  government  since  it  was  introduced,  in  its
modern  shape,  into  the  civilised  world.  I  state  the
facts,  as  matter  neither  for  congratulation  nor  for
lamentation,  but  simply  as  materials  for  opinion. It


\


is  manifest  that,  so  far  as  they  go,  they  do  little  to
support  the  assumption  that  popular  government  has
an  indefinitely  long  future  before  it.  Experience!
rather  tends  to  show  that  it  is  characterised  by  great  I
"fragility,  and  that,  since  its  appearance,  all  forms  of
government  have  become  more  insecure  than  they
were  before.  The  true  reason  why  the  extremely
accessible  facts  which  I  have  noticed  are  so  seldom
observed  and  put  together  is  that  the  enthusiasts  for
popular  government,  particularly  when  it  reposes  on
a  wide  basis  of  suffrage,  are  actuated  by  much  the
same  spirit  as  the  zealots  of  Legitimism.  They  as-.
sume  their  principle  to  have  a  sanction  antecedent  Jo
fact.  ^  It  is  not  thought  to  be  in  any  way  invalidated
by  practical  violations  of  it,  which  merely  constitute
so  many  sins  the  more  against  imprescriptible  right.
The  convinced  partisans  of  democracy  care  little  for
instances  which  show  democratic  governments  to  be
unstable. These  are  merely  isolated  triumphs  of  the


/"


Essii  I.  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMIiNT. 21

principle  of  evil.  But  the  conclusion  of  the  sober
student  of  history  will  not  be  of  this  kind.  He  will
rather  note  it  as  a  fact,  to  be  considered  in  the  most
serious  spirit,  that  since  the  century  during  which  the
Roman  Emperors  were  at  the  mercy  of  the  PraBtorian
soldiery,  there  has  been  no  such  insecurity  of  govern-
ment as  the  world  has  seen  since  rulers  became
delegates  of  the  community.

Is  it  possible  to  assign  any  reasons  for  this
singular  modern  loss  of  political  equilibrium  ?  I
think  that  it  is  possible  to  a  certain  extent.  It  may
be  observed  that  two  separate  national  sentiments
have  been  acting  on  Western  Europe  since  the  be-
ginning of  the  present  century.  To  call  them  by
names  given  to  them  by  those  who  dislike  them,  one
is  Jhnperialism  and  the  other  is  Radicalism."^  They
are  not  in  the  least  purely  British  forms  of  opinion,
but  are  coextensive  with  civilisation.  Almost  all
men  in  our  day  are  anxious  that  their  country  should
be  respected  of  all  and  dependent  on  none,  that  it
should  enjoy  greatness  and  perhaps  ascendency  ;  and
this  passion  for  national  dignity  has  gone  hand  in
hand  with  the  desire  of  the  many,  ever  more  and
more  acquiesced  in  by  the  few,  to  have  a  share  of
political  power  under  the  name  of  liberty,  and  to
govern  by  rulers  who  are  their  delegates.  The  two
newest  and  most  striking  of  political  creations  in
Europe,  the  German  Empire,  and  the  Italian  King-


1*2  PllOSrECTS or i\)rULAJl GOVERNMENT. £6SAY  i,

doin,  are  joint  products  of  these  forces.  But  for  the
first  of  these  coveted  objects,  Imperial  rank,  great
armies  and  fleets  are  indispensable,  and  it  becomes
y^-  -^t  over  more  a  necessity  that  the  men  under  arms  should
be  nearly  coextensive  with  the  whole  of  the  males  in
the  flower  of  life.  It  has  yet  to  be  seen  how  far  great
armies  are  consistent  with  popular  government  resting
on  a  wide  suffrage.  No  two  organisations  can  be
more  opposed  to  one  another  than  an  army  scienti-
fically disciplined  and  equipped,  and  a  natiga -demp-x'''^^
cratically  governed.  The  great  militaryi^jyirtue,,4s\
obedience;  the  great  military  sin  is  slackness  in  \
obeying.  It  is  forbidden  to  decline  to  carry  out/
orders,  even  with  the  clearest  conviction  of  their  in-
expediency. But  thje_chief_de^^  the
right  to  censure  superiors  ;  fpublic  opinion,  which
means  censure  as  well  as  praise,  is  the"' motive  force
of  democratic  societies.  The  maxims  of  the  two
systems  flatly  contradict  one  another,  and  the  man
who  would  loyally  obey  both  finds  his  moral  con-
stitution cut  into  two  halves.  It  has  been  found  by
recent  experience  that  the  more  popular  the  civil
institutions,  the  harder  it  is  to  keep  the  army  from
meddUng  with  politics.  Military  insurrections  are
made  by  officers,  but  not  bsfore  every  soldier  has
discovered  that  the  share  of  power  which  belongs  to
him  as  a  unit  in  a  regiment  is  more  valuable  than
his  fragment  of  power  as  a  unit  in  a  constituency.


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS OP POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  23

Military  revolts  are  of  universal  occurrence  ;  but  far
the  largest  number  have  occurred  in  Spain  and  the
Spanish-speaking  countries.  There  have  been  in-
genious explanations  of  the  phenomenon,  but  the
manifest  explanation  is  Habit.  An  army  which  has
once  interfered  with  politics  is  under  a  strong  tempta-
tion to  interfere  again.  It  is  a  far  easier  and  far
more  effective  way  of  causing  an  opinion  to  prevail
than  going  to  a  ballot-box,  and  far  more  profitable
to  the  leaders.  I  may  add  that,  violent  as  is  the
improbability  of  military  interference  in  some  coun-
tries, there  is  probably  no  country  except  the  United
States  in  which  the  army  could  not  control  the
government,  if  it  were  of  one  mind  and  if  it  retained
its  military  material.

Popular  governments  have  been-jrepeatedly  over-
turned by  the  AxXDS^  and  the  Mob  in  combination;
but  on  the  whole  the  violent  destruction  of  these
governments  in  their  more  extreme  forms  has  been
effected  by  the  army,  while,  in  their  more  moderate
shapes  they  have  had  the  mob,  for  their  principal
assailant.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  recent  times
mobs  Jiave  materially  changed  both  their  character
and  their  method  of  attack.  A  mob  was  once  a
portion  of  society  in  a  state  of  dissolution,  a  collec-
tion of  people  who  for  the  time  had  broken  loose
from  the  ties  which  bind  society  together.  It  may
have  had a  vague  preference  for  some  political  or


(


24 PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  ESSAT  I.

religions  cause,  but  the  spirit  which  animated  it  was
mainly  one  of  mischief,  or  of  disorder,  or  of  panic.
But  mobs  have  now  come  more  and  more  to  be  the
organs  of  definite  opinions.  Spanish  mobs  have  im-
partially worn  all  colours  ;  but  the  French  mob
which  overthrew  the  government  of  the  elder  Bour-
bons in  1830,  while  it  had  a  distinct  political  object
in  its  wish  to  defeat  the  aggressive  measures  of  the
King,  had  a  further  bias  towards  Ultra- Radicalism
or  Republicanism,  which  showed  itself  strongly  in
the  insurrectionary  movements  that  followed  the
accession  of  Louis  Philippe  to  the  throne.  The  mob,
which  in  1848  overturned  the  government  of  the
younger  Bourbons,  aimed  at  establishing  a  Republic,
but  it  had  also  a  leaning  to  Socialism  ;  and  the
frightful  popular  insurrection  of  June  1848  was
entirely  Socialistic.  At  present,  whenever  in  Europe
there  is  a  disturbance  like  those  created  by  the  old
mobs,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the  parties  which  style
themselves  Irreconcileable,  and  which  refuse  to  sub-
mit their  opinions  to  the  arbitration  of  any  govern-
ments, however  wide  be  the  popular  suffrage  on
which  they  are  based.  But  besides  their  character,
mobs  have  changed  their  armament.  They  formerly
wrought  destoction  by  the  undisciplined  force  of^
tsheer  numbers  ;  but  the  mob  of  Paris,  the  most  suc-
cessful of  all  mobs,  owed  its  success  to^he  Barricade.
It  has  now  lost  this  advantage  ;  and  a  generation


EssiT  r. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  25

is  coming  to  maturity,  which  perhaps  will  never  have
learned  that  the  Paris  of  to  day  has  been  entirely
constructed  with  the  view  of  rendering  for  ever  im-
possible the  old  barricade  of  paving-stones  in  the
narrow  streets  of  the  demolished  city.  Still  more
recently,  however,  the  mob  has  obtained  new  arms.
During  the  last  quarter  of  a  century,  a  great  part,
perhaps  the  greatest  part,  of  the  inventive  faculties  of
mankind  has  been  given  to  the  arts  of  destruction  ;
and  among  the  newly  discovered  modes  of  putting  an
end  to  human  life  on  a  large  scale,  the  most  effective
and  terrible  is  a  manipulation  of  explosive  com-
pounds quite  unknown  till  the  other  day.  The  bomb
of  nitro -glycerine  and  the  parcel  of  dynamite  are  as
characteristic  of  the  new  enemies  of  government  as

"  their  Irreconcileable  opinions.

There  can  be  no  more  formidable  symptom  of  our
time,  and  none  more  menacing  to  popular  govern-
ment, than  the  growth  of  Irreconcileable  bodies
within  the  mass  of  the  population.  Church  and
State  j.re" alike  convulsed  by  them  ;  but,  in  civil  life,

vlffeconcileables  are  associations  of  men  who  hold
political  opinions  as  men  once  held  religious  opinions.
They  cling  to  their  creed  with  the  same  intensity  of
belief,  the  same  immunity  from  doubt,  the  same  con-
fident expectation  of  blessedness  to  come  quickly,
which  characterises  the  disciples  of  an  infant  faith.
They  are  doubtless  a  product  of  democratic  senti-


26  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. :fcssAr  u

ment ;  they  hcwe  borrowed  from  it  its  promise  of  a,
new  and  good  time  at  hand,  but  they  insist  on  the
immedig^te  redemption  of  the  pledge,  and  they  utterly
refuse  to  wait  until  a  popular  majority  gives  effect  to
their  opinions.  Nor  ^'\T)uld  the  vote  of  such  a  ma-
jority have  the  least  authority  with  them,  if  it  sanc-
tioned any  departure  from  their  principles.  It  is
possible,  and  indeed  likely,  that  if  the  Russians  voted
by  universal  suffrage  to-morrow,  they  would  confirm
the  Imperial  authority  by  enormous  majorities  ;  but
not  a  bomb  nor  an  ounce  of  dynamite  would-  be
spared  to  the  reigning  Emperor  by  the_J^hilistSj_
The  Irreconcileables  are  of  course  at  feud  with
governments  of  the  older  type,  but  these  govern-
ments make  no  claim  to  their  support ;  on  the  other
hand,  they  are  a  portion  of  the  governing  body  of
democratic  commonwealths,  and  from  this  vantage
ground^  tjiey.,.  am..,ibia.^lo  .Jn^^^^
popular  government.  There  is  in  reality  no  closer
analogy  than  between  these  infant  political  creeds
and  the  belligerent  religions  which  are  constantly
springing  up  even  now  in  parts  of  the  world  ;  for
instance,  that  of  the  Tae-pings  in  China.  Even  in
our  own  country  we  may  observe  that  the  earliest
political  Irreconcileables  were  religious  or  semi-
religious  zealots.  Such  were  both  the  Independents
and  tji^  Jacobites.  Cromwell,  who  for  many  striking
ons  migiit  have  been  a  personage  of  a  much  later


E:<SAT  T. PEOSPECTS or POPULAR GOVEKNMENT.  27

age,  was  an  Irreconcileable  at  the  liead  of  an  army  ;
and  we  all  know  what  he  thought  of  the  Parliament
which  anticipated  the  democratic  assemblies  of  our
day.

Of  all  modern  Irreconcileables,  the  Nationalists
appear  to  be  the  most  impracticable,  and  of  all
governments,  popular  governments  seem  least  likely
to  cope  with  them  successfully.  Xobody  can  say
exactly  what  Nationalism  is,  and  indeed  the  dan-
gerousness  of  the  theory  arises  from  its  vagueness.
It  seems  full  of  the  seeds  of  future  civil  convulsion.
As  it  is  sometimes  put,  it  appears  to  assume  that
men  of  one  particular  race  suffer  injustice  if  they  are
placed  under  the  same  political  institutions  with  men
of  another  race.  But  Race  is  quite  as  ambiguous  a
term  as  Nationality.  The  earlier  philologists  had
certainly  supposed  that  the  branches  of  mankind
speaking  languages  of  the  same  stock  were  soiiiehow
connected  by  blood  ;  but  no  scholar  now  believes
that  this  is  more  than  approximately  true,  for  con-
quest, contact,  and  the  ascendency  of  a  particular
literate  class,  have  quite  as  much  to  do  witk  com-
munity of  language  as  common  descent.  Moreover,
several  of  the  communities  claiming  the  benefit  of  the
new  theory  are  certainly  not  entitled  to  it.  The
Irish  are  an  extremely  mixed  race,  and  it  is  only  by
a  perversion  of  language  that  the  Italians  can  be
called  a  race  at  all. The  fact  is  that  any  portion  of  a


D


28  PllOSPECTS OF POPULAK GOVERNMEN'T. essai  1,

political  society,  which  has  had  a  somewhat  different
history  from  the  rest  of  the  parts,  can  take  advantage
of  the  theory  and  claim  independence,  and  can  thus
threaten  the  entire  society  with  dismemberment.
Where  royal  authority  survives  in  any  vigour,  it  can
to  a  certain  extent  deal  with  these  demands.  Almost
all  the  civilised  States  derive  their  national  unity
from  common  subjection,  past  or  present,  to  royal
power ;  the  Americans  of  the  United  States,  for  ex-
ample, are  a  nation  because  they  once  obeyed  a  king.
Hence  too  it  is  that  such  a  miscellany  of  races  as
those  which  make  up  the  Austro- Hungarian  Mon-
archy can  be  held  together,  at  all  events  temporarily,
by  the  authority  of  the  Emperor-King.  But  demo-
cracies are  quite  paralysed  by  the  plea  of  Nationality.
There  is  no  more  effective  way  of  attacking  them
than  by  admitting  the  right  of  the  majority  to
govern,  but  denying  that  the  majority  so  entitled  is

L the  particular  majority  which  claims  the  right.

The  difficulties  of  popular  government,  which
arise  from  the  modern  military  spirit  and  from  the
modern  growth  of  Irreconcileable  parties,  could  not
perhaps  have  been  determined  without  actual  ex-
perience. But  there  are  other  difficulties  which
might  have  been  divined,  because  they  proceed  from

\  ^he  inherent  nature  of  democracy.  In  stating  some
of^them,  I  will  endeavour  to  avoid  those  which  are
suggested  by  mere  dislike  or  alarm  :  those  which  I


ESSAY  I. PKOSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  29

propose  to  specify  were  in  reality  noted  more  than
two  centuries  ago  by  the  powerful  intellect  of
Hobbes,  and  it  will  be  seen  what  light  is  thrown  on
some  political  phenomena  of  our  day  by  his  searching
analysis.

Political  liberty,  said  Hobbes,  is  political  power.
When  a  man  burns  to  be  free,  he  is  not  longing  for
the  "  desolate  freedom  of  the  wild  ass  "  ;  what  he
wants  is  a  share  of  political  government.  But,  in
wide  democracies,  political  power  is  minced  into
morsels,  and  each  man's  portion  of  it  is  almost  in-
finitesimally  small.  One  of  the  first  results  of  this
political  comminution  is  described  by  Mr.  Justice
en  ill  a  work  '^  of  earlier  date  than  that  which  I
have  quoted  above.  It  is  that  two  of  the  historical
watchwords  of  Democracy  exclude  one  another,  and
that,  where  there  is  political  Liberty,  there  can  be  no
Equality.


pUilLll

(  Steph


frag- I
rest.  I


The  man  who  can  sweep  the  greatest  number  of
ments  of  poUtical  power  into  one  heap  will  govern  the
The  strongest  man  in  one  form  or  another  will  always  rule.
If  the  government  is  a  military  one,  the  qualities  which  make
a  man  a  great  soldier  will  make  him  a  ruler.  If  the  govern-
ment is  a  monarchy,  the  qualities  which  kings  value  in  coun-
sellors, in  administrators,  in  generals,  will  give  power.  In  a
pure  democracy ^J:he  ruling  men  will  be  the  Wire-pullers  and

^  Liberty^  Fraternity^  and  Equality. By  Sir  James  Stephea
1873. P.  239.


80  PBOSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essat  I.

their  friends ;  but  they  will  be  no  more  on  an  equality  with
the  people  than  soldiers  or  Ministers  of  State  are  on  an
equality  with  the  subjects  of  a  Monarchy.  ...  In  some  ages,^
a  powerful  character,  in  others  cunning,  in  others  power  of
transacting  business,  in  others  eloquence,  in  others  a  good
hold  upon  commonplaces  and  a  facility  in  applying  tliem  to
practical  purposes,  will  enable  a  man  to  climb  on  his  neigh-
bours' shoulders  and  direct  them  this  way  or  that ;  but  under
all  circumstances  th,e  rank  and  fi|e  are  directed  by  leaders  of
one  kind  or  another  who  get  the  command  of  their  collective
force.

There  is  no  doubt  that,  in  popular  governments'
resting  on  a  wide  suffrage,  either-^witliaut  .an  army  or
having  little  reason  to  fear  i^  the  kii3er,  )whetlier  or


/


/


not  he  be  cunning,  or  eloquenjt^j^Melllprovided  with
commonplaces,  will  be  th|  Wire-puller.) The  pro-


cess of  cutting  up  political  power  into  petty  frag-
ments has  in  him  its  most  remarkable  product.  The
morsels  of  power  are  so  small  that  men,  if  left  to
themselves,  would  not  care  to  employ  them.  In
England,  they  would  be  largely  sold,  if  the  law  per-
mitted it ;  in  the  United  States  they  are  extensively
sold  in  spite  of  the  law  ;  and  in  France,  and  to  a  less
extent  in  England,  the  number  of  "  abstentions  '*
shows  the  small  value  attributed  to  votes.  But  the
political  cldffonnier  who  collects  and  utilises  the  frag-
ments is  the  Wire-puller,  i  think,  however,  that  it
is  too  much  the  habit  in  this  country  to  describe  him
as  a  mere  organiser,  contriver,  and  manager. The


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  81

particular  meclianism  which  he  constrncts  is  no
doubt  of  much  importance.  The  form  of  this  me-
chanism recently  erected  in  this  country  has  a  close
resemblance  to  the  system  of  the  Wesleyan  Method-
ists ;  one  system,  however,  exists  for  the  purpose  of
keeping  the  spirit  of  Grace  a-flame,  the  other  for
maintaining  the  spirit  of  Party  at  a  white  heat.  The
Wire-puller  is  not  intelligible  unless  we  take  into
account  one  of  the  strongest  forces  acting  on  human
nature-^arty  feeling.  Party  feeling  is  probably  far
more  a  survival  of  the  primitive  combativeness  of
mankind  than  a  consequence  of  conscious  intellectual
differences  between  man  and  man.  It  is  essentially
the  same  sentiment  which  in  certain  states  of  society
leads  to  civil,  intertribal,  or  international  war  ;  and
it  is  as  universal  as  humanity.  It  is  better  studied
in  its  more  irrational  manifestations  than  in  those  to
which  we  are  accustomed.  It  is  said  that  Australian
savages  will  travel  half  over  the  Austi^alian  continent
to  take  in  a  fight  the  side  of  combatants  who  wear
the  same  Totem  as  themselves.  Two  Irish  factions
who  broke  one  another's  heads  over  the  whole  island
are  said  to  have  originated  in  a  quarrel  about  the
colour  of  a  cow.  In  Southern  India,  a  series  of
dangerous  riots  are  constantly  arising  through  the
rivalry  of  parties  who  know  no  more  of  one  another
than  that  some  of  them  belong  to  the  party  of  the
right  hand  and  others  to  that  of  the  left  hand. Once


33  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essay  l

a  year,  large  numbers  of  English  ladies  and  gentle-
men, who  have  no  serious  reason  for  preferring  one
University  to  the  other,  wear  dark  or  light  blue
colours  to  signify  good  wishes  for  the  success  of
Oxford  or  Cambridge  in  a  cricket-match  or  boat-race.
Party  differences,  properly  so  called,  are  supposed  to
indicate  intellectual,  or  moral,  or  historical  pre-
ferences ;  but  these  go  a  very  little  way  down  into  the
population,  and  by  the  bulk  of  partisans  they  are
hardly  understood  and  soon  forgotten.  "  Guelf  "and
^'  Ghibelline  "  had  once  a  meaning,  but  men  were
under  perpetual  banishment  from  their  native  land
for  belonging  to  one  or  other  of  these  parties  long
after  nobody  knew  in  what  the  difference  consisted.
Some  men  are  Tories  or  Whigs  by  conviction  ;  but
thousands  upon  thousands  of  electors  vote  simply  for
yellow,  blue,  or  purple,  caught  at  most  by  the  appeals
of  some  popular  orator.

It  is  through  this  great  natural  tendency  to  take
sides  that  the  Wire-puller  works.  Without  it  he
would  be  powerless.  His  business  is  to  fan  its  flame  ;
to  keep  it  constantly  acting  upon  the  man  who  has
once  declared  himself  a  partisan  ;  to  make  escape  from
it  difficult  and  distasteful.  His  art  is  that  of  the
Nonconformist  preacher,  who  gave  importance  to  a
body  of  commonplace  religionists  by  persuading  them
to  wear  a  uniform  and  take  a  military  title,  or  of  the
man  who  made  the  success  of  a  Temperance  Society


EPFAT  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  33

by  prevailing  on  its  members  to  wear  always  and
openly  a  blue  ribbon.  In  the  long-run,  these  con-
trivances cannot  be  confined  to  any  one  party,  and
their  eJffects  on  all  parties  and  their  leaders,  and  on
the  whole  ruling  democracy,  must  be  in  the  highest
degree  serious  and  lasting.  The  first  of  these  effects
will  be,  I  think,  to  make  all  parties  very  like  one
another,  and  indeed  in  the  end  almost  indistinguish-
able, however  leaders  may  quarrel  and  partisan  hate
partisan.  In  the  next  place,  each  party  will  probably
becomeLm^MCfi^mid .more^iomogeneous  ;  and  the  opi-
nions it  professes,  and  the  policy  which  is  the  out-
come of  those  opinions,  will  less  and  less  reflect  the
individual  mind  of  any  leader,  but  only  the  ideas
which  seem  to  that  mind  to  be  most  likely  to  win
favour  with  the  greatest  number  of  supporters.
Lastly,  the  wire-pulling  system,  when  fully  developed,
will  infallibly  lead  to  the  constant  enlargement  of
the  area  of  suffrage.  What  is  called  universal  suffrage
has  greatly  declined  in  the  estimation,  not  only  of
philosophers  who  follow  Bentham,  but  of  the  a  'priori
theorists  who  assumed  that  it  was  the  inseparable
accompaniment  of  a  Republic,  but  who  found  that  in
practice  JjLjTiis  the  natural  basis  of  a  tyranny.  But
extensions  of  the  suffrage,  though  no  longer  believed
to  be  good  in  themselves,  have  now  a  permanent
place  in  the  armoury  of  parties,  and  are  sure  to  be  a
favourite  weapon  of  the  Wire-puller. The  Athenian


84  PROSPECTS OF POPUIiAR GOVERNMENT. essat  I

statesmen  who,  worsted  in  a  quarrel  of  aristocratic
cliques,  "  took  the  people  into  partnership,"  have  a
close  parallel  in  the  modern  politicians  who  introduce
household  suffrage  into  towns  to  "  dish  "  one  side,  and
into  counties  to  ''  dish  "  the  other.

Let  us  now  suppose  the  competition  of  Parties,

stimulated  to  the  utmost  by  the  modern  contrivances

of  the  Wire-puller,  to  have produced an electoral

system  under  which  every  adult  male  has  a  vote,  and

perhaps  every  adult  female. Let  us  assume  that  the

new  machinery  lias  extracted  a  vote  from  every  one

/ of  these  electors. How  is  the  result  to  be  expressed?

/ It  is,  that  the  average  opinion  of  a  great  multitude

has  been  obtained, and that  this average opinion

becomes  the  basis  and  standard  of  all  government

and  law. There  is  hardly  any  experience  of  the  way

in  which  such  a  system  would  work,  except  in  the

eyes  of  those  who  believe  that  history  began  since

their  own  birth. The universal  suffrage  of  white

males  in  the  United  States  is  about  fifty  years  old  ;

that  of  white  and  black  is  less  than  twenty. The

/  French  threw  away  universal  suffrage  after  the  Reign

f of  Terror  ;  it  was  twice  revived  in  France,  that  the

\ Napoleonic  tyranny  might  be founded  on  it ;  and

. it  was  introduced into  Germany,,  that  the  personal

>  power  of  Prince  Bismarck  might  be  confirmed,  ^jui.

^ne_of  the  strangest  of  vulgar  ideas  is  that  a  very

JKideJSuffrage  could  or  would  promote  progress,  new


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS or POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  86

/  ideas,  new  discoveries  and  inventions,  new  arts  of
I  life.  Such  a  suffrage  is  commonly  associated  with
Eadicalism  ;  and  no  doubt  amid  its  most  certain
effects  would  be  the  extensive  destruction  of  existing
institutions  ;  but  the  chances  are  that,  in  the  long-
run,  it  would  produce  a  mischievous  form  of  Con-
v^servatism,  and  drug  society  with  a  potion  compared
with  which  Eldonine  would  be  a  salutary  draught.
For  to  what  end,  towards  what  ideal  state,  is  the
process  of  stamping  upon  law  the  average  opinion  of
an  entire  community  directed?  The  end  arrived  at
is  identical  with  that  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,
which  attributes  a  similar  sacredness  to  the  average
opinion  of  the  Christian  world.  "  Quod  semper,  quod
ubique,  quod  ab  omnibus,"  was  the  canon  of  Vincent
of  Lerins.  "  Securus  judicat  orbis  terraram,"  were
the  words  which  rang  in  the  ears  of  Newman  and
produced  such  marvellous  effects  on  him.  But  did
any  one  in  his  senses  ever  suppose  that  these  were
maxims  of  progress?  The  principles  of  legislation
at  which  they  point  would  probably  put  an  end  to  all
social  and  political  activities,  and  arrest  everything
which  has  ever  been  associated  with  Liberalism. ,  A
moment's  reflection  will  satisfy  any  competently
instructed  person  that  this  is  not  too  broad  a  pro-
position. Let  him  turn  over  in  his  mind  the  great
epochs  of  scientific  invention  and  social  change  during
the  last  two  centuries,  and  consider  what  would  have


38  PROSPECTS OF  POPULAR GOVERXMENT. essay  I.

occurred  if  universal  suffrage  had  been  established  at
any  one  of  them.  Universal  suffrage,  which  to-day
excludes  Free  Trade  from  the  United  States,  would
certainly  have  prohibited  the  spinning -jenny  and  the
power-loom.  It  would  certainly  have  forbidden  the
threshing-machine.  It  would  have  prevented  the
adoption  of  the  Gregorian  Calendar ;  and  it  would
have  restored  the  Stuarts.  It  would  have  proscribed
the  Roman  Catholics  with  the  mob  which  burned
Lord  Mansfield's  house  and  library  in  1780,  and  it
would  have  proscribed  the  Dissenters  with  the  mob
which  burned  Dr.  Priestley's  house  and  library  in
1791.

There  are  possibly  many  persons  who,  without
denying  these  conclusions  in  the  past,  tacitly  assume
that  no  such  mistakes  will  be  committed  in  the  future,
because  the  community  is  already  too  enlightened  for
^them,  and  will  become  more  enlightened  through
popular  education.  But  without  questioning  the  ad-
vantages of  popular  education  under  certain  aspects,
its  manifest  tendency  is  to  diffuse  popular  common-
places, to  fasten  them  on  the  mind  at  the  time  when
it  is  most  easily  impressed,  and  Jims  to  stereotype-
average  opinion/^  It  is  of  course  possible  that  uni-
versal suffrage  would  not  now  force  on  governments
the  same  legislation  which  it  would  infallibly  have
dictated  a  hundred  years  ago ;  but  then  we  are
necessarily  ignorant  what  germs  of  social  and  material


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  87

improvement  there  may  be  in  the  womb  of  time,  and
how  far  they  may  conflict  with  the^pppular  prejudiccu
jvhiQh^  J^j^^ft^£^will_be^^  o  There  is  in  fact

just  enough  evidence  to  show  that  even  now  there  is
a  marked  antagonism  between  democratic  opinion  and
scientific  truth  as  applied  to  human  societies.  The
central  seat  in  all  Political  Economy  was  from  the
first  occupied  by  the  theory  of  Population.  Thi^
theory  has  now  been  generalised  by  Mr.  Darwin  and
his  followers,  and,  stated  as  the  principle  of  the  sur-
vival of  the  fittest,  it  hasbecometjhije  central  truth  oL
jJljy.ologicd,j^§B,g^^_^^  Yet  it  is  evidently  disliked  by
the  multitude,  and  thrust  into  the  background  by
those  whom  the  multitude  permits  to  lead  it.  It  has
long  been  intensely  unpopular  in  France  and  the
continent  of  Europe  ;  and,  among  ourselves,  proposals
for  recognising  it  through  the  relief  of  distress  by
emigration  are  visibly  being  supplanted  by  schemes
founded  on  the  assumption  that,  through  legislative
experiments  on  society,  a  given  space  of  land  may
always  be  made  to  support  in  comfort  the  population
which  from  historical  causes  has  come  to  be  settled
on  it.

It  is  perhaps  hoped  that  this  opposition  between
democracy  and  science,  which  certainly  does  not
promise  much  for  the  longevity  of  popular  govern-
ment, may  be  neutralised  by  the  ascendency  of  in-
structed leaders. Possibly  the  proposition  would  not


88  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essay  l

be  very  unsafe,  that  he  who  calls  himself  a  friend  of
democracy  because  he  believes  that  it  will  be  always
under  wise  guidance  is  in  reality,  whether  he  knows
it  or  not,  an  enemy  of  democracy.  But  at  all  events
the  signs  of  our  time  are  not  at  all  of  favourable
augury  for  the  future  direction  of  great  multitudes
by  statesmen  wiser  than  themselves.  The  relation  of
political  leaders  to  political  followers  seems  to  me  to
be  undergoing  a  twofold  change.  The  leaders  may
be  as  able  and  eloquent  as  ever,  and  some  of  them
certainly  appear  to  have  an  unprecedentedly  "  good
hold  upon  commonplaces,  and  a  facility  in  applying
them  ;  "  but  they  are  manifestly  listening  nervously
at  one  end  of  a  speaking-tube  which  receives  at  its
other  end  the  suggestions  of  a  lower  intelligence.  On
the  other  hand,  the  followers,  who  are  really  the
rulers,  are  manifestly  becoming  impatient  of  the
hesitations  of  their  nominal  chiefs,  and  the  wrangling
of  their  representatives.  I  am  very  desirous  of
keeping  aloof  from  questions  disputed  between  the
two  great  English  parties  ;  but  it  certainly  seems  to
me  that  all  over  Continental  Europe,  and  to  some
extent  in  the  United  States,  parliamentary  debates
are  becoming  ever  more  formal  and  perfunctory,  they
are  more  and  more  liable  to  being  peremptorily  cut
I  short,  and  the  true  springs  of  policy  are  more  and
more  limited  to  clubs  and  associations  deep  below  the
level  of  the  highest  education  and  expedience. There


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  39

is  one  State  or  group  of  States,  whose  political  con-
dition deserves  particular  attention.  This  is  Switzer-
land, a  country  to  which  the  student  of  politics  may
always  look  with  advantage  for  the  latest  forms  and
results  of  democratic  experiment.  About  forty  years
ago,  just  when  Mr.  Grote  was  giving  to  the  world
the  earliest  volumes  of  his  "  History  of  Greece,"  he
published  "  Seven  Letters  on  the  recent  Politics  of
Switzerland,"  explaining  that  his  interest  in  the  Swiss
Cantons  arose  from  their  presenting  ''a  certain  analogy
nowhere  else  to  be  found  in  Europe  '^  to  the  ancient
Greek  States.  Now,  if  Grote  had  one  object  more
than  another  at  licart  in  writing  his  History,  it  was  to
show,  by  the  example  of  the  Athenian  democracy,
that  wide  popular  governments,  so  far  from  meriting
the  reproach  of  fickleness,  are  sometimes  characterised
by  the  utmost  tenacity  of  attachment,  and  will  follow
,  the  counsels  of  a  wise  leader,  like  Pericles,  at  the  cost
of  any  amount  of  suffering,  and  may  even  be  led  by
an  unwise  leader,  like  Nicias,  to  the  very  verge  of
destruction.  But  he  had  the  acuteness  to  discern  in
Switzerland  the  particular  democratic  institution,
which  was  likely  to  tempt  democracies  into  dispensing
with  prudent  and  independent  direction.  He  speaks
with  the  strongest  disapproval  of  a  provision  in  the
Constitution  of  Lucerne,  by  which  all  laws,  passed
by  the  Legislative  Council,  were  to  be  submitted  for
veto  or  sanction  to  the  vote  of  the  people  throughout


40  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. ess  AT  i.

the  Canton.  This  was  originally  a  contrivance
of  the  ultra- Catholic  party,  and  was  intended  to
neutralise  the  opinions  of  the  Catholic  Liberals,  by
bringing  to  bear  on  them  the  average  opinion  of  the
whole  Cantonal  population.  A  year  after  Mr.  Grote
had  published  his  *'  Seven  Letters,"  the  French  Re-
volution of  1848  occurred,  and,  three  years  later,  the
violent  overthrow  of  the  democratic  institutions
established  by  the  French  National  Assembly  was
consecrated  by  the  very  method  of  voting  which  he
had  condemned,  under  th^  name  of  the  Plebiscite.
The  arguments  of  the  French  Liberal  party  against
the  Plebiscite,  during  the  twenty  years  of  stern
despotism  which  it  entailed  upon  France,  have  always
appeared  to  me  to  be  arguments  in  reality  against  the
very  principle  of  democracy.  After  the  misfortunes
of  1870,  the  Bonapartes  and  the  Plebiscite  were  alike
involved  in  the  deepest  unpopularity  ;  but  it  seems
impossible  to  doubt  that  Gambetta,  by  his  agitation
for  the  scrutin  de  liste^  was  attempting  to  recover  as
much  as  he  could  of  the  plebiscitary  system  of  voting.
Meantime,  it  has  become,  in  various  shapes,  one  of
the  most  characteristic  of  Swiss  institutions.  One
article  of  the  Federal  Constitution  provides  that,  if
fifty  thousand  Swiss  citizens,  entitled  to  vote,  demand
the  revision  of  the  Constitution,  the  question  whether
the  Constitution  be  revised  shall  be  put  to  the  vote  of
the  people  of  Switzerland,  '*  aye  "  or  "  no." Another


ESSAT  I. TROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  41

enacts  that,  on  the  petition  of  thirty  thousand  citizens,
every  Federal  law  and  every  Federal  decree,  which
is  not  urgent,  shall  be  subject  to  the  referendum  ;  that
is,  it  shall  be  put  to  the  popular  vote.  These  pro-
visions, that  when  a  certain  number  of  voters  demand
a  particular  measure,  or  require  a  further  sanction  for
a  particular  enactment,  it  shall  be  put  to  the  vote  of
the  whole  country,  seems  to  me  to  have  a  consider-
able future  before  them  in  democratically  governed
societies.  When  Mr.  Labouchere  told  the  House  of
Commons  in  1882  that  the  people  were  tired  of  the
deluge  of  debate,  and  would  some  day  substitute  for
it  the  direct  consultation  of  the  constituencies,  he
had  more  facts  to  support  his  opinion  than  his  auditors
were  perhaps  aware  of.

Here  then  we  have  one  great  inherent  infirmity  of
popular  governments,  an  infirmity  deducible  from
the  principle  of  Hobbes,  that  liberty  is  power  cut
into  fragments.  Popular  governments  can  only  b3
worked  by-^-a^p^oce&s  which  incidentally  entails  the.
^further  sijbdivision  of  the  morsels  of  political  powec;
and  thus  the  tendency  of  these  governments,  as  they
widen  their  electoral  basis,  is  towards  a  dead  level  of
commonplace  opinion,  which  they  are  forced  to  adopt
as  the  standard  of  legislation  and  policy.  The  evils
likely  to  be  thus  produced  are  rather  those  vulgarly
associated  with  Ultra- Conservatism  than  those  of
Ultra- Radicalism. So  far  indeed  as  the  human  race


42  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. rssat  I.

has  experience,  it  is  not  by  political  societies  in  any-
way resembling  those  now  called  democracies  that
human  improvement  has  been  carried  on.  History,
said  Strauss — and,  considering  his  actual  part  in  life,
this  is  perhaps  the  last  opinion  which  might  have
been  expected  from  him — History  is  a  sound  aristo-
crat.^ There  may  be  oligarchies  close  enough  and
jealous  enough  to  stifle  thought  as  completely  as  an
Oriental  despot  who  is  at  the  same  time  the  pontiff
of  a  religion  ;  but  the  progress  of  mankind  has
hitherto  been  eiFected  by  the  rise  and  fall  of  aristo-
cracies, by  the  formation  of  one  aristocracy  within
another,  or  by  the  succession  of  one  aristocracy
to  another.  There  have  been  so-called  democra-
cies, which  have  rendered  services  beyond  price  to
civilisation,  but  they  were  only  peculiar  forms  of
aristocracy.  The  short-lived  Athenian  democracy,
under  whose  shelter  art,  science,  and  philosophy
shot  so  wonderfully  upwards,  was  only  an  aristo-
cracy which  rose  on  the  ruins  of  one  much  nar-
rower. The  splendour  which  attracted  the  original
genius  of  the  then  civilised  world  to  Athens  was
provided  by  the  severe  taxation  of  a  thousand  sub-
ject cities; and  the  skilled labourers  who  worked

*  The  opinion  of  Strauss  appears  to  be  shared  by  M.  Ernest
Renan.  It  occurs  twice  in  the  singular  piece  which  he  calls
Caliban.  "  Toute  civilisation  est  d'origine  aristocratique  "  (p.  77).
"Toute  civilisation  est  I'ffiuvre  des  aristocrates  "  (p.  91).


E8SAT  I. PKOSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVEKNMENT.  4S

under  Phidias,  and  who  built  the  Parthenon,  were
slaves.

The  infirmities  of  popular  government,  which
consist  in  its  occasional  wanton  destructiveness,  have
been  frequently  dwelt  upon  and  require  less  attention.
In  the  long-run,  the  most  interesting  question  which
they  suggest  is,  to  what  social  results  does  the  pro-
gressive overthrow  of  existing  institutions  promise  to
conduct  mankind  ?  I  will  again  quote  Mr.  Labou-
chere,  who  is  not  the  less  instructive  because  he  may
perhaps  be  suspected  of  taking  a  certain  malicious
pleasure  in  stating  roundly  what  many  persons  who
employ  the  same  political  watchwords  as  himself  are
reluctant  to  say  in  public,  and  possibly  shrink  from
admitting  to  themselves  in  their  own  minds.

Democrats  are  told  that  they  are  dreamers,  and  why?
Because  they  assert  that,  if  power  be  placed  in  the  hands  of
the  many,  the  many  will  exercise  it  for  their  own  benefit.
Is  it  not  a  still  wilder  dream  to  suppose  that  the  many  will
in  future  possess  power,  and  use  it  not  to  secure  what  they
consider  to  be  their  interests,  but  to  serve  those  of  others  ?
...  Is  it  imagined  that  artisans  in  our  great  manufacturing
towns  are  so  satisfied  with  their  present  position  that  they
will  hurry  to  the  polls,  to  register  their  votes  in  favour  of  a
system  which  divides  us  socially,  politically,  and  economically,
into  classes,  and  places  them  at  the  bottom  with  hardly  a
possibility  of  rising  ?  ...  Is  the  lot  (of  the  agricultural
labourer)  so  happy  a  one  that  he  will  humbly  and  cheerfully
affix  his  cross  to  the  name  of  tbe  man  who  tells  him  that  it
can  never  be  changed  for  the  better  ?  .  ,  .  We  know  that


44  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essay  I.

artisans  and  agricultural  labourers  will  approach  the  con-
sideration of  political  and  social  problems  with  fresh  and
vigorous  minds.  .  .  .  For  the  moment,  we  demand  the
equalisation  of  the  franchise.  .  .  .  Our  next  demands  will  be
electoral  districts,  cheap  elections,  payment  of  members,  and
abolition  of  hereditary  legislators.  When  our  demands  are
complied  with,  we  shall  be  thankful,  but  we  shall  not  rest.
On  the  contrary,  having  forged  an  instrument  for  democratic
legislation,  we  shall  use  it.®

The  persons  who  charged  Mr.  Labouchere  with
dreaming  because  he  thus  predicted  the  probable
course,  and  defined  the  natural  principles,  of  future
democratic  legislation,  seem  to  me  to  have  done  him
much  injustice.  His  forecast  of  political  events  is
extremely  rational ;  and  1  cannot  but  agree  with  him
in  thinking  it  absurd  to  suppose  that,  if  the  hard-
toiled  and  the  needy,  the  artisan  and  the  agricultural
labourer,  become  the  depositaries  of  power,  and  if
they  can  find  agents  through  whom  it  becomes
possible  for  them  to  exercise  it,  they  will  not  employ
it  for  what  they  may  be  led  to  believe  are  their  own  i
interests.  But  in  an  inquiry  whether,  independently  \
of  the  alarm  or  enthusiasm  which  they  excite  in
certain  persons  or  classes,  democratic  institutions
contain  any  seed  of  dissolution  or  extinction,  Mr.
Labouchere's  speculation  becomes  most  interesting
just  where  it  stops.  What  is  to  be  the  nature  of  the
legislation  by  which  the  lot  of  the  artisan  and  of  the
*  Fortniglitly  Review,  March  1,  1883.


r^


BSSAT  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  45

agricultural  labourer  is  to  be  not  merely  altered  for
the  better,  but  exchanged  for  whatever  station  and
fortune  they  may  think  it  possible  to  confer  on  them-
selves by  their  own  supreme  authority  ?  Mr.  La-
bouchere's  language,  in  the  above  passage  and  in
other  parts  of  his  paper,  like  that  of  mnny  persons
who  agree  with  him  in  the  belief  that  government
can  indefinitely  increase  human  happiness,  un-
doubtedly suggests  the  opinion,  that  the  stock  of
good  things  in  the  world  is  practically  unlimited  in
quantity,  that  it  is  (so  to  speak)  contained  in  a  vast
storehouse  or  granary,  and  that  out  of  this  it  is  now
doled  in  unequal  shares  and  unfair  proportions.  It
is  this  unfairness  and  inequality  which  democratic
law  will  some  day  correct.  Now  I  am  not  concerned
to  deny  that,  at  various  times  during  the  history  of
mankind,  narrow  oligarchies  have  kept  too  much  of
the  wealth  of  the  world  to  themselves,  or  that  false
economical  systems  have  occasionally  diminished  the
total  supply  of  wealth,  and,  by  their  indirect  opera-
tion, have  caused  it  to  be  irrationally  distributed.
Yet  nothing  is  more  certain,  than  that  the  mental
picture  which  enchains  the  enthusiasts  for  benevolent
democratic  government  is  altogether  false,  and  that,
if  the^^^^f^ankind  were  to  make  an  attempt  at
redmdingthe  common  stock  of  good  things,  they
would  resemble,  not  a  number  of  claimants  insisting
on  the  fair  division  of  a  fund,  but  a  mutinous  crew,


■f


0


PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essat  r.


feasting  on  a  ship's  provisions,  gorging  themselves
I  on  the  meat  and  intoxicating  themselves  with  the
I  liquors,  but  refusing  to  navigate  the  vessel  to  port.
It  is  among  the  simplest  of  economical  truths,  that
far  the  largest  part  of  the  wealth  of  the  world  is  con-
stantly perishing  by  consumption,  and  that,  if  it  be
not  renewed  by  perpetual  toil  and  adventure,  either
the  human  race,  or  the  particular  community  making
the  experiment  of  resting  without  being*  thankful,
will  be  extinguished  or  brought  to  the  very  verge  of
extinction.

This  position,  although  it  depends  in  part  on
a  truth  of  which,  according  to  John  Stuart  Mill,^
nobody  is  habitually  aware  who  has  not  bestowed
some  thought  on  the  matter,  admits  of  very  simple
ilhistration.  It  used  to  be  a  question  hotly  debated
among  Economists  how  it  was  that  countries  re-
covered with  such  surprising  rapidity  from  the
effects  of  the  most  destructive  and  desolating  wars.
^'  An  enemy  lays  waste  a  country  by  fire  and  sword,
and  destroys  or  carries  away  nearly  all  the  movable
wealth  existing  in  it,  and  yet,  in  a  few  years  after,
everything  is  much  as  it  was  before."  Mill,'^  follow-
ing Chalmers,  gives  the  convincing  explanation  that
nothing  in  such  a  case  has  happened  which  would
not  have  occurred  in  any  circumstances. "  What  the

*  Mill,  Principles  of  Political  Economy ^  \.  d.  5.
«  Ibid.  i.  5.  7.


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  47

enemy  has  destroyed  would  have  been  destroyed  in  a
little  time  by  the  inhabitants  themselves  ;  the  wealth
which  they  so  rapidly  reproduce  would  have  needed
to  be  reproduced  and  would  have  been  reproduced  in
any  case,  and  probably  in  as  short  an  interval."  In
fact,  the  fund  by  which  the  life  of  the  human  race
and  of  each  particular  society  is  sustained,  is  never
in  a  statical  condition.  It  is  no  more  in  that  con-
dition than  is  a  cloud  in  the  sky,  which  is  perpetually
dissolving  and  perpetually  renewing  itself.  "Every-
thing which  is  produced  is  consumed  ;  both  what  is
saved  and  what  is  said  to  be  spent ;  and  the  former
quite  as  rapidly  as.,  the  latter."  The  wealth  of  man-
kind is  the  result  of  a  continuing  process,  everywhere
complex  and  delicate,  and  nowhere  of  such  complexity
and  delicaay  as  in  the  British  Islands.  So  long  as
this  process  goes  on  under  existing  influences,  it  is
not,  as  we  have  seen,  interrupted  by  earthquake,
flood,  or  war  ;  and,  at  each  of  its  steps,  the  wealth
which  perishes  and  revives  has  a  tendency  to
increase.  But  if  we  alter  the  character  or  diminish
the  force  of  these  influences,  are  we  sure  that  wealth,
instead  of  increasing,  will  not  dwindle  and  perhaps
disappear?  Mill  notes  an  exception  to  the  revival  of
a  country  after  war.  It  may  be  depopulated,  and  if
there  are  not  men  to  carry  it  on,  the  process  of  repro-
duction will  stop.  But  may  it  not  be  arrested  by
any  means short  of  exterminating  the  population  ?


48  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. KSSAT  1.

An  experience,  happily  now  rare  in  the  world,
shows  that  wealth  may  come  very  near  to  peri'^hing
through  diminished  energy  in  the  motives  of  the  men
who  reproduce  it.  You  may,  so  to  speak,  take  the
heart  and  spirit  out  of  the  labourers  to  such  an  extent
that  they  do  not  care  to  work.  Jeremy  Bentham
observed  about  a  century  ago  that  the  Turkish
Government  had  in  his  day  impoverished  some  of  the
richest  countries  in  the  world  far  more  by  its  action
on  motives  than  by  its  positive  exactions  ;  and  it  has
always  appeared  to  me  that  the  destruction  of  the
vast  wealth  accumulated  under  the  Roman  Empire,
one  of  the  most  orderly  and  efficient  of  governments,
and  the  decline  of  Western  Europe  into  the  squalor
and  poverty  of  the  Middle  Ages,  can  only  be
accounted  for  on  the  same  principle.  The  failure  of
reproduction  through  relaxation  of  motives  was  once
an  everyday  phenomenon  in  the  East  ;  and  this  ex-
plains to  students  of  Oriental  history  why  it  is  that
throughout  its  course  a  reputation  for  statesmanship
was  always  a  reputatioi;  for  financial  statesmanship.
In  the  early  days  of  the  East  India  Company,  villages
"  broken  by  a  severe  settlement "  were  constantly
calling  for  the  attention  of  the  Government ;  the
assessment  on  them  did  not  appear  to  be  excessive
on  Englisli  fiscal  principles,  but  it  had  been  heavy
enough  to  press  down  the  motives  to  labour,  so  that
they  could  barely  recover  themselves The  pheno-


ESSAT  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  40

menon,  however,  is  not  confined  to  the  East,  where
no  doubt  the  motives  to  toil  are  more  easily  affected
than  in  Western  societies.  No  later  than  the  end  of
the  last  century,  large  portions  of  the  French  pea-
santry ceased  to  cultivate  their  land,  and  large
numbers  of  French  artisans  declined  to  work,  in  de-
spair at  the  vast  requisitions  of  the  Revolutionary
Government  during  the  Reign  of  Terror;  and,  as  might
be  expected,  the  penal  law  had  to  be  called  in  to
compel  their  return  to  their  ordinary  occupations.^

It  is  perfectly  possible,  I  think,  as  Mr.  Herbert
Spencer  has  shown  in  a  recent  admirable  volume,^  to
revive  even  in  our  day  the  fiscal  tyranny  which  once
left  even  European  populations  in  doubt  whether  it
was  worth  while  preserving  life  by  thrift  and  toil.
You  have  only  to  tempt  a  portion  of  the  population
into  temporary  idleness  by  promising  them  a  share
in  a  fictitious  hoard  lying  (as  Mill  puts  it)  in  an
imaginary  strong-box  which  is  supposed  to  contain
all  human  wealth.  You  have  only  to  take  the
heart  out  of  those  who  would  willingly  labour  and
save,  by  taxing  them  ad  misericordiam  for  the  most
laudable  philanthropic  objects.  For  it  makes  not  the
smallest  difierence  to  the  motives  of  the  thrifty  and

3  Taine,  Origines  de  la  France  Contemporaine,  torn,  iii.,  'La
Revolution.'  See,  as  to  artisans,  p.  75  (note),  and  as  to  cultiva-
tors, p.  511.

''  The  Man  versus  the  State^  hj  Herbert  Spencer.  London,
1881


60  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essay  i.

industrious  part  of  mankind  whether  their  fiscal
oppressor  be  an  Eastern  despot,  or  a  feudal  baron,  or
a  democratic  legislature,  and  whether  they  are  taxed
for  the  benefit  of  a  Corporation  called  Society,  or  for
the  advantage  of  an  individual  styled  King  or  Lord.
Here  then  is  the  great  question  about  democratic
legislation,  when  carried  to  more  than  a  moderate
length.  How  will  it  affect  human  motives  ?  What
motives  will  it  substitute  for  those  now  acting  on
men  ?  The  motives,  which  at  present  impel  man-
kind to  the  labour  and  pain  which  produce  the
resuscitation  of  wealth  in  ever-increasing  quantities,
are  such  as  infallibly  to  entail  inequality  in  the  dis-
tribution of  wealth.  They  are  the  springs  of  action
called  into  activity  by  the  strenuous  and  never-ending
struggle  for  existence,  the  beneficent  private  war
which  makes  one  man  strive  to  climb  on  the  shoulders
of  another  and  remain  there  through  the  law.  of  the
survival  of  the  fittest.

These  truths  are  best  exemplified  in  the  part  of
the  world  to  which  the  superficial  thinker  would  per-
haps look  for  the  triumph  of  the  opposite  principle.
The  United  States  have  justly  been  called  the  home
of  the  disinherited  of  the  earth ;  but,  if  those  van-
quished under  one  sky  in  the  struggle  for  existence
had  not  continued  under  another  the  same  battle  in
which  they  had  been  once  worsted,  there  would  have
been  no  such  exploit  performed  as  the  cultivation  of


ESSAY  I. PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  61

the  vast  American  territory  from  end  to  end  and  from
side  to  side.  There  could  be  no  grosser  delusion
than  to  suppose  this  result  to  have  been  attained  by
democratic  legislation.  It  has  really  been  obtained
through  the  sifting  out  of  the  strongest  by  natural
selection.  The  Government  of  the  \Jnited  States,
which  I  examine  in  another  part  of  this  volume,  now
rests  on  universal  suffrage,  but  then  it  is  only  a
political  government.  It  is  a  government  under
which  coercive  restraint,  except  in  politics,  is  reduced
to  a  minimum.  There  has  hardly  ever  before  been  a
community  in  which  the  weak  have  been  pushed  so
pitilessly  to  the  wall,  in  which  those  who  have  suc-
ceeded have  so  uniformly  been  the  strong,  and  in
which  in  so  short  a  time  there  has  arisen  so  great
an  inequality  of  private  fortune  and  domestic  luxury.
And  at  the  same  time,  there  has  never  been  a  country
in  which,  on  the  whole,  the  persons  distanced  in  the
race  have  suffered  so  little  from  their  ill-success.  All
this  beneficent  prosperity  is  the  fruit  of  recognising
the  principle  of  population,  and  the  one  remedy  for
its  excess  in  perpetual  emigration.  It  all  reposes  on
the  sacredness  of  contract  and  the  stability  of  private
property,  the  first  the  implement,  and  the  last  the
reward,  of  success  in  the  universal  competition.
These,  however,  are  all  principles  and  institutions
which  the  British  friends  of  the  '  artisan  '  and  '  agri-
cultural labourer  '  seem  not  a  little  inclined  to  treat


52  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essay  I.

as  their  ancestors  did  agricultural  and  industrial
machinery.  The  Americans  are  still  of  opinion  that
more  is  to  be  got  for  human  happiness  by  private
energy  than  by  public  legislation.  The  Irish,  how*
ever,  even  in  the  United  States,  are  of  another  opinion,
and  the  Irish  opinion  is  manifestly  rising  into  favour
here.  But  on  the  question,  whether  future  demo-
cratic legislation  will  follow  the  new  opinion,  the
prospects  of  popular  government  to  a  great  extent
depend.  There  are  two  sets  of  motives,  and  two
only,  by  which  the  great  bulk  of  the  materials  of
human  subsistence  and  comfort  have  hitherto  been
produced  and  reproduced.  One  has  led  to  the  culti-
vation of  the  territory  of  the  Northern  States  of  the
American  Union,  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific.
The  other  had  a  considerable  share  in  bringing
about  the  industrial  and  agricultural  progress  of  the
Southern  States,  and  in  old  days  it  produced  the
wonderful  prosperity  of  Peru  under  the  Incas.  One
system  is  economical  competition  ;  the  other  consists
in  the  daily  task,  perhaps  fairly  and  kindly  allotted,
but  enforced  by  the  prison  or  the  scourge.  So  far  as  we
have  any  experience  to  teach  us,  we  are  driven  to  the
conclusion,  that  every  society  of  men  must  adopt  one
system  or  the  other,  or  it  will  pass  through  penury  to
starvation.

I  have  thus  shown  that  popular  governments  of
the  modern  type  have  not  hitherto  proved  stable  as


KSSAr  I. PROSFECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  fi3

compared  with  other  forms  of  political  rule,  and  that
they  include  certain  sources  of  weakness  which  do
not  promise  security  for  them  in  the  near  or  remote
future.  _3Iy --cJ\ief_gDD clusioE^ can  only  be  stated
negatively.  There  is  not  at  present  sufficient  evidence
to  warrant  the  common  belief,  that  these  governments
are  likely  to  be  of  indefinitely  long  duration.  There
is,  however,  one  positive  conclusion  from  which  no
one  can  escape  who  bases  a  forecast  of  the  prospects

Lof  popular  government,  not  on  moral  preference  or
a  'priori  assumption,  .^hjajtl^n^^ ^actual  experience^  as^
mtnessed  to  by  history.  If  there  be  any  reason  for
thinking  that  constitutional  freedom  will  last,  it  is
a  reason  furnished  by  a  particular  set  of  facts,  with
which  Englishmen  ought  to  be  familiar,  but  of  which
many  of  them,  under  the  empire  of  prevailing  ideas,
are  exceedingly  apt  to  miss  the  significance.  The
British  Constitution  has  existed  for  a  considerable
length  of  time,  and  therefore  free  institutions  generally
may  continue  to  exist.  I  am  quite  aware  that  this
will  seem  to  some  a  commonplace  conclusion,  perhaps
as  commonplace  as  the  conclusion  of  M.  Taine,  who,
after  describing  the  conquest  of  all  France  by  the
Jacobin  Club,  declares  that  his  inference  is  so  simple,
that  he  hardly  ventures  to  state  it.  "  Jusqu'a  present,
je  n'ai  guere  trouve  qu'un  (principe)  si  simple  qu'il
semblera  pueril  et  que  j'ose  a  peine  I'enonCer.  11
consiste  tout entier dans cette remarque, qu\me


64  PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT. essat  I.

eoci^t^  humaine,  surtout  une  societe  moderne,  est  ime
chose  vaste  et  compliquee."  This  observation,  that  "a
human  society,  and  particularly  a  modern  society,  is
a  vast  and  complicated  thing,"  is  in  fact  the  very
proposition  which  Burke  enforced  with  all  the  splen-
dour of  his  eloquence  and  all  the  power  of  his  argu-
ment ;  but,  as  M.  Taine  says,  it  may  now  seem  to
some  too  simple  and  commonplace  to  be  worth  put-
ting into  words.  In  the  same  way,  many  persons  in
whom  familiarity  has  bred  contempt,  may  think  it  a
trivial  observation  that  the  British  Constitution,  if
not  (as  some  call  it)  a  holy  thing,  is  a  thing  unique
and  remarkable.  A  series  of  undesigned  changes
brought  it  to  such  a  condition,  that  satisfaction  and
impatience,  the  two  great  sources  of  political  conduct,
were  both  reasonably  gratified  under  it.  In  this  con-
dition it  became,  not  metaphorically  but  literally,  the
envy  of  the  world,  and  the  world  took  on  all  sides  to
copying  it.  The  imitations  have  not  been  generally
happy.  One  nation  alone,  consisting  of  Englishmen,
has  practised  a  modification  of  it  successfully,  amidst
abounding  material  plenty.  It  is  not  too  much  to
say,  that  the  only  evidence  worth  mentioning  for  the
duration  of  popular  government  is  to  be  found  in  the
success  of  the  British  Constitution  during  two  cen-
turies under  special  conditions,  and  in  the  success  of
the  American  Constitution  during  one  century  under
conditions  still  more  peculiar  and  more  unlikely  to


ESSAY  r, PROSPECTS OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT.  55

recur.  Yet,  so  far  as  our  own  Constitution  is  con-
cerned, that  nice  balance  of  attractions,  which  caused
it  to  move  eYezdy  on  its  stately  path,  is  perhaps  des-
tined to  be  disturbed.  One  of  the  forces  governing
it  may  gain  dangerously  at  the  expense  of  the  other ;
and  the  British  political  system,  with  the  national
greatness  and  material  prosperity  attendant  on  it,
may  yet  be  launched  into  space  and  find  its  last
affinities  in  silence  and  cold


^  THE NATUKE OF DEMOCKACY.  ESSAT  li.


ESSAY II.

THE  NATURE  OF  DEMOCRACY.

John  Austin,  a  name  honoured  in  the  annals  of
English  jurisprudence,  published  shortly  before  his
death  a  pamphlet  called  a  "  Plea  for  the  Constitution."
In  this  publication,^  which  marks  the  farthest  re-
bound of  a  powerful  mind  from  the  peculiar  philo-
sophical Radicalism  of  the  immediate  pupils  of
Jeremy  Bentham,  Austin  applies  the  analytical
power,  on  which  his  fame  rests,  to  a  number  of  ex-
pressions which  entered  in  his  day,  as  they  do  in  ours,
into  every  political  discussion.  Among  them,  he
examines  the  terms  Aristocracy  and  Democracy,  and
of  the  latter  he  says  : —

Democracy  is  still  more  ambiguous  than  Aristocracy.  It
signifies  properly  a  form  of  government,  that  is,  any  govern-
ment in  which  the  governing  body  is  a  comparatively  large
fraction  of  the  entire  nation.  As  used  loosety,  and  par-
ticularly  by French writers, it  signifies the  body  of  the

I  A  riea/or  the  Constituiion,  by  John  Austin. London,  1859.


ESSAY  II.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  67

nation,  or  the  lower  part  of  the  nation,  or  a  way  of  thinking
and  feeling  favourable  to  democratical  government.  It  not
unfrequently  bears  the  meaning  which  is  often  given  to  the
word  "people,"  or  the  words  "  sovereign  people,"  that  is,  some
large  portion  of  the  nation  which  is  not  actually  sovereign,
but  to  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  speaker,  the  sovereignty
ought  to  be  transferred.

The  saiDe  definition  of  Democracy,  in  its  only
proper  and  consistent  sense,  is  given  by  M.  Edmond
Scherer,  in  his  powerful  and  widely  circulated  pam-
phlet, named  "  La  Democratic  et  la  France."  ^  I  shall
have  to  refer  presently  to  M.  Scherer's  account  of  the
methods  by  which  the  existing  French  political  sys-
tem is  made  to  discharge  the  duties  of  government  ;
but,  meantime,  the  greatest  merit  of  his  publication
does  not  seem  to  me  to  lie  in  its  exposure  of  the
servility  of  the  deputies  to  the  electoral  committees,
or  of  the  public  extravagance  by  which  their  support
is  purchased.  It  lies  rather  in  M.  Scherer's  examina-
tion of  certain  vague  abstract  propositions^  which  are
commonly  accepted  without  question  by  the  Repub-
lican politicians  of  France,  and  indeed  of  the  whole
Continent.  In  our  day,  when  the  extension  of  popu-
lar government  is  throwing  all  the  older  political
ideas  into  utter  confusion,  a  man  of  ability  can  hardly
render  a  higher  service  to  his  country,  than  by  the

^  La  Democratie  et  la  France, Etudes  par  Edmond  Schorer.
Paris,  1883.


58  THE NATURE OF DEMOCEACT.  essay  ii.

analysis  and  correction  of  the  assumptions  whicli  pass
from  mind  to  mind  in  the  multitude,  without  inspir-
ing a  doubt  of  their  truth  and  genuineness.  Some
part  of  this  intellectual  circulating  medium  was  base
from  the  first  ;  another  was  once  good  coin,  but  it
is  clipped  and  worn  on  all  sides  ;  another  consists
of  mere  tokens,  which  are  called  by  an  old  name,
because  there  is  a  conventional  understanding  that  it
shall  still  be  used.  It  is  urgently  necessary  to  rate
all  this  currency  at  its  true  value  j  and,  as  regards  a
part  of  it,  this  was  done  once  for  all  by  Sir  J.  F.
Stephen,  in  his  admirable  volume  on  "  Liberty,  Fra-
ternity, and  Equality."  But  the  political  smashers
are  constantly  at  work,  and  their  dupes  are  perpetually
multiplying,  while  there  is  by  no  means  a  correspond-
ing activity  in  applying  the  proper  tests  to  all  this
spurious  manufacture.  We  Englishmen  pass  on  the
Continent  as  masters  of  the  art  of  government ;  yet
it  may  be  doubted  whether,  even  among  us,  the
science,  which  corresponds  to  the  art,  is  not  very
much  in  the  condition  of  Political  Economy  before
Adam  Smith  took  it  in  hand.  In  France  the  condi-
tion of  political  thought  is  even  worse.  Englishmen
abandon  a  political  dogma  when  it  has  led  to  practical
disaster.  But  it  has  been  the  lot  of  Frenchmen  to
have  their  attention  fastened  on  the  last  eleven  years
of  the  last  century  and  on  the  first  fifteen  of  the
present,  almost  to  the  exclusion  of  the  rest  of  their


IS9AT  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  69

history  ;  and  the  political  ideas  which  grew  up
during  this  period  have  hardly  relaxed  their  hold  on
the  French  intellect  at  all,  after  seventy  years  of
further  experience.

M.  Scherer,  so  far  as  my  knowledge  extends,  has
been  the  first  French  writer  to  bring  into  clear  light
the  simple  truth  stated  by  Austin,  that  Democracy
means  properly  a  particular  form  of  government.'
This  truth,  in  modern  Continental  politics,  is  the
beginning  of  wisdom.  There  is  no  word  about  which
a  denser  mist  of  vague  language,  and  a  larger  heap
of  loose  metaphors,  has  collected.  Yet,  although
Democracy  does  signify  something  indeterminate,
there  is  nothing  vague  about  it.  It  is  simply  and
solely  a  form  of  government.  It  is  the  government
of  the  State  by  the  Many,  as  opposed,  according  to
the  old  Greek  analysis,  to  its  government  by  the  Few,
and  to  its  government  by  One.  The  border  between
the  Few  and  the  Many,  and  again  between  the  varieties
of  the  Many,  is  necessarily  indeterminate  ;  but  Demo-
cracy not  the  less  remains  a  mere  form  of  govern-
ment ;  and,  inasmuch  as  of  these  forms  the  most
definite  and  determinate  is  Monarchy — the  govern-
ment of  the  State  by  one  person— Democracy  is  most
accurately  described  as  inverted  Monarchy.  And  this
description  answers  to  the  actual  historical  process  by
which  the  great  modern  Kepublics  liave  been  formed.
*  Scherer,  p.  3.


'X>  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  n.

Villari*  has  shown  that  the  modern  State  of  the
Continental  type,  with  distinctly  defined  administra-
tive departments  as  its  organs,  was  first  constituted
in  Italy.  It  grew,  not  out  of  the  medifBval  Republican
municipalities,  which  had  nothing  in  common  with
modern  government,  but  out  of  that  most  ill-famed
of  all  political  sysfems,  the  Italian  tyranny  or  Prince-
dom. The  celebrated  Italian  state-craft,  spread  all
over  Europe  by  Italian  statesmen,  who  were  generally
ecclesiastics,  was  applied  to  France  by  Louis  XIV.
and  Colbert,  the  pupils  of  Cardinal  Mazarin  ;  and
out  of  the  contact  of  this  new  science  with  an  ad-
ministrative system  in  complete  disorder,  there  sprang
Monarchical  France.  The  successive  French  Repub-
lics have  been  nothing  but  the  later  French  Monarchy,
upside  down.  Similarly,  the  Constitutions  and  the
legal  systems  of  the  several  North  American  States,
and  of  the  United  States,  would  be  wholly  unintel-
ligible to  anybody  who  did  not  know  that  the  an-
cestors of  the  Anglo-Americans  had  once  lived  under
a  King,  himself  the  representative  of  older  Kings
infinitely  more  autocratic,  and  who  had  not  observed
that  throughout  these  bodies  of  law  and  plans  of
government  the  People  had  simply  been  put  into  the
King*s  seat,  occasionally  filling  it  with  some  awk-
wardness. JDhe  advanced  Radical  politician  of  our
day  would  seem  to  have  an  impression  that  Demo-

*  Villari,  Macldavellij  i.  15,  36,  37.


(d


ESSAY  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  6J

cracy  diffei\s  frQm„JkIx2M£ch^J^^  There  c^n

be  no  grosser  mistake  than  thisj  and  none  more  fertile
of  further  delusions.  Democracy,  the  government  of
the  commonwealth  by  a  numerous  but  indeterminate
portion  of  the  community  taking  the  place  of  the
Monarch,  has  exactly  the  same  conditions  to  satisfy
as  Monarchy  ;  it  has  the  same  functions  to  discharge,
though  it  discharges  them  through  different  organs.
The  tests  of  success  in  the  performance  of  the  neces-
sary and  natural  duties  of  a  government  are  precisely
the  same  in  both  cases.

Thus  in  the  very  first  place,  Democracy,  like
Monarchy,  like  Aristocracy,  like  any  other  govern-
ment, must  preserve  the  national  existence.  The
first  necessity  of  a  State  is  that  it  should  be  durable.
Among  mankind  regarded  as  assemblages  of  indivi-
duals, the  gods  are  said  to  love  those  who  die  young  ;
but  nobody  has  ventured  to  make  such  an  assertion
of  States.  The  prayers  of  nations  to  Heaven  have
been,  from  the  earliest  ages,  for  long  national  life,  life
from  generation  to  generation,  life  prolonged  far
beyond  that  of  children's  children,  life  like  that  of
the  everlasting  hills.  The  historian  will  sometimes
speak  of  governments  distinguished  for  the  loftiness
of  their  aims,  and  the  brilliancy  of  the  talents  which
they  called  forth,  but  doomed  to  an  existence  all  too
brief.  The  compliment  is  in  reality  a  paradox,  for  in
matters  of  government  all  objects  are  vain  and  all


ft9  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  n.

talents  wasted,  when  they  fail  to  secure  national  dur-
ability. One  might  as  well  eulogise  a  physician  for
>^the  assiduity  of  his  attendance  and  the  scientific
beauty  of  his  treatment,  when  the  patient  has  died
under  his  care.  Next  perhaps  to  the  paramount
^-^  duty  of  maintaining  national  existence,  comes  the
^— ^/  obligation  incumbent  on  Democracies,  as  on  all
governments,  of  securing  the  national  greatness  and
dignity..  Loss  of  territory,  loss  of  authority,  loss  of
general  respect,  loss  of  self-respect,  may  be  unavoid-
able evils,  but  they  are  terrible  evils,  judged  by  the
pains  the}^  inflict  and  the  elevation  of  the  minds  by
which  these  pains  are  felt ;  and  the  Government
^v^hich  fails  to  provide  a  sufficient  supply  of  generals
and  statesmen,  of  soldiers  and  administrators,  for  the
prevention  and  cure  of  these  evils,  is  a  government
which  has  miscarried.  It  will  also  have  miscarried,
if  it  cannot  command  certain  qualities  which  are
essential  to  the  success  of  national  action.  In  all
their  relations  with  one  another  (and  this  is  a  funda-
mental assumption  of  International  law)  ^^Jbatesjmiu^
'^^■iflifit^i  i^iS  ^dividijial,4ag|lar-  The  defects  which  are  defects
in  individual  men,  and  perhaps  venial  defects,  are
faults  in  States,  and  generally  faults  of  the  extremest
gravity.  In  all  war  and  all  diplomac}^,  in  every  part
of  foreign  policy,  caprice,  wilfulness,  loss  of  self-
command,  timidity,  temerity,  inconsistency,  inde-
cency, and  coarseness,  are  weaknesses  which  rise  to  the


2SSAT  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  ^

level  of  destructive  vices  ;  and  if  Democracy  is  more
liable  to  them  than  are  other  forms  of  government,
it  is  to  that  extent  inferior  to  them.  It  is  better  for
a  nation,  according  to  an  English  prelate,  to  be  free
than  to  be  sober.  If  the  choice  has  to  be  made,
and  if  there  is  ajiy  real  connection  between  Demo-
cracy and  liberty,  it  is  better  to  remain  a  nation
capable  of  displaying  the  virtues  of  a  nation  than
even  to  be  free.

If  we  turn  from  the  foreign  to  the  domestic  duties
of  a  nation,  we  shall  find  the  greatest  of  them  to  be,
that  its  government  should  compel  obedience  to  the
law,  criminal  and  civil.  The  vulgar  impression  no
doubt  is,  that  laws  enforce  themselves.  Some  com-
munities  are  supposed  to  be  iiaturally  law-abiding,
and  some  are  not.  -  But  the  truth  is  (and  this  is  a
commonplace  of  the  modern  jurist)  that  it  is  always
the  State  which  causes  laws  to  be  obeyed.  It  is  quite
true  that  this  obedience  is  rendered  by  the  great  bulk
of  all  civilised  societies  without  an  effort  and  quite
unconsciously.  But  that  is  only  because,  in  the
course  of  countless  ages,  the  stern  discharge  of  their
chief  duty  by  States  has  created  habits  and  senti-
ments which  save  the  necessity  for  penal  interference,
because  nearly  everybody  shares  them.  The  vener-
able legal  formulas,  which  make  laws  to  be  adminis-
tered in  the  name  of  the  King,  formulas  which  modern
Republics have borrowed, are  a, monument  of  the


iU  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  u.

grandest  service  which  governments  have  rendered,
and  continue  to  render,  to  mankind.  If  any  govern-
ment should  be  tempted  to  neglect,  even  for  a  moment,
its  function  of  compelling  obedience  to  law — if  a
Democracy,  for  example,  were  to  allow  a  portion  of
the  multitude  of  which  it  consists  to  set  some  law
at  defiance  which  it  happens  to  dislike — it  Avould  be
guilty  of  a  crime  which  hardly  any  other  virtue  could
redeem,  and  which  century  upon  century  might  fail
to  repair.

On  the  whole,  the  dispassionate  student  of  politics,
who  has  once  got  into  his  head  that  Democracy  is
only  a  form  of  governmant,  who  has  some  idea  of
what  the  primary  duties  of  government  are,  and  who
sees  the  main  question,  in  choosing  between  them,  to
be  which  of  them  in  the  long-run  best  discharges  these
duties,  has  a  right  to  be  somewhat  surprised  at  the
feelings  which  the  advent  of  Democracy  excites.
The  problem  which  this  event,  if  it  be  near  at  hand,
suggests,  is  not  sentimental  but  practical  ;  and  one
might  have  expected  less  malediction  on  one  side,  and
less  shouting  and  throwing  up  of  caps  on  the  other.
The  fact,  however,  is  that,  when  the  current  of  human
political  tastes,  which  in  the  long  course  of  ages  has
been  running  in  all  sorts  of  directions,  sets  strongly
towards  one  particular  point,  there  is  always  an  out-
burst of  terror  or  enthusiasm  ;  and  the  explanation
of  the  feelings  roused  on  such  occasions,  which  is  true


ESSAY  U.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY,  65

for  our  day  and  of  a  tendency  towards  Democracy,  is
probably  true  also  for  all  time.  The  great  virtue  of
Democracies  in  some  men's  eyes,  their  great  vice  in
the  eyes  of  others,  is  that  they  are  thought  to  be  more
active  than  other  forms  of  government  in  the  dis-
charge of  one  particular  function.  This  is  the  altera-
tion and  transformation  of  law  and  custom — the
process  known  to  us  as  reforming  legislation.  As
a  matter  of  fact,  this  process — which  is  an  indispens-
able, though  in  the  long-run  a  very  subordinate,
province  of  a  good  modern  government — is  not  at  all
peculiar  to  Democracies.  If  the  whole  of  the  known
history  of  the  human  race  be  examined,  we  shall  see
that  the  great  authors  of  legislative  change  have  been
powerful  Monarchies.  The  long  wail  at  the  iniquities
of  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  which  runs  through  the
latter  part  of  the  Old  Testament,  is  the  expression
of  Jewish  resentment  at  the  "  big  legislation  "  with
which  the  nations  that  most  study  the  Old  Testament
are  supposed  to  have  fallen  in  love.  The  trituration  \-^
of  old  usage  was  carried  infinitely  further  by  the
Eoman  Emperors,  ever  increasing  in  thoroughness  as
the  despotism  grew  more  stringent.  The  Emperor
was  in  fact  the  symbolic  beast  which  the  Prophet  saw
devouring,  breaking  to  pieces  and  stamping  the  residue
with  its  feet.  We  ourselves  live  in  the  dust  of  Koman
Imperialism,  and  by  far  the  largest  part  of  modern
law  is  nothing  more  than  a  sedimentary  formation  left


68  THE NATURE OF  DEMOCRACT.  essay  ii.

by  the  Roman'  legal  reforms.  The  rule  holds  good
through  all  subsequent  history.  The  one  wholesale
legal  reformer  of  the  Middle  Ages  was  Charles  the
Great.  It  was  the  French  Empire  of  the  Bonapartes
that  gave  real  practical  currency  to  the  new  French
jurisprudence  which  has  overrun  the  civilised  world,
for  the  governments  immediately  arising  out  of  the
Revolution  left  little  behind  them  beyond  projects  of
law  or  laws  which  were  practically  inapplicable  from
the  contradictions  which  they  contained.

The  truth  seems  to  be  that  the  extreme  forms  of
government,  Monarchy  and  Democracy,  have  a  pecu-
liarity which  is  absent  from  the  more  tempered  politi-
cal systems  founded  on  compromise,  Constitutional
Kingship  and  Aristocracy.  When  they  are  first
established  in  absolute  completeness,  they  are  highly
destructive.  There  is  a  general,  sometimes  chaotic,
upheaval,  while  the  nouvelles  couches  are  settling  into
their  place  in  the  transformed  commonwealth.  The
new  rulers  sternly  insist,  that  everything  shall  be
brought  into  strict  conformity  with  the  central
principle  of  the  system  over  which  they  preside  ;  and
they  are  aided  by  numbers  of  persons  to  whom  the
old  principles  were  hateful,  from  their  fancy  for  ideal
reforms,  from  impatience  of  a  monotonous  stability,  or
irom  a  natural  destructiveness  of  temperament.  What
rthe  old  monarchies,  established  in  the  valleys  of  the
great  Eastern  rivers,  had  to  contend  against  was  reli-


fiHSAT  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  ffl

gious  tenacity  and  tribal  obstinacy  ;  and  th(iy  trans-
ported whole  populations  in  order  tbat  these  might  be
destroyed.  What  a  modern  Democracy  fights  with  is
^^rivilege  ;  and  it  knows  no  rest  till  this  is  trampled
out.  But  the  legislation  of  absolutism,  democratic
or  otherwise,  is  transitory.  Before  the  Jews  had
taken  home  their  harps  from  Babylon,  they  found
themselves  the  subjects  of  another  mighty  conquering
Monarchy,  of  which  they  observed  with  wonder  that
the  law  of  the  Medes  and  Persians  altereth  not.
There  is  no  belief  less  warranted  by  actual  experience,
than  that  a  democratic  republic  is,  after  the  first  and
in  the  long-run,  given  to  reforming  legislation.  As
is  well  known  to  scholars,  the  ancient  republics
hardly  legislated  at  all  ;  their  democratic  energy  was
expended  upon  war,  diplomacy,  and  justice;  but  they
put  nearly  insuperable  obstacles  in  the  way  of  a
change  of  law.  The  Americans  of  the  United  States
^  have  hedged  themselves  round  in  exactly  the  same
way.  They  only  make  laws  within  the  limits  of  their
Constitutions,  and  especially  of  the  Federal  Constitu-
tion ;  and,  judged  by  what  has  become  the  English
standard,  their  legislation  within  these  limits  is
almost  trivial.  As  I  attempted  to  show  in  my  first
,  essay,  the  legislative  infertility  of  democracies  springs
I  from  permanent  causes.  The  prejudices  of  the  people
are  far  stronger  than  those  of  the  privileged  classes  ;


68  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  ii.

they  are  far  more  vulgar  ;  and  they  are  far  more
dangerous,  because  they  are  apt  to  run  counter  to
scientific  conclusions.  This  assertion  is  curiously
confirmed  by  the  political  phenomena  of  the  moment.
The  most  recent  of  democratic  inventions  is  the
*'  Referendum  "  of  the  Swiss  Federal  Constitution,
and  of  certain  Cantonal  Constitutions.  On  the
demand  of  a  certain  number  of  citizens,  a  law  voted
by  the  Legislature  is  put  to  the  vote  of  the  entire
population,  lest  by  any  chance  its  "mandate"  should
have  been  exceeded.  But  to  the  confusion  and  dis-
may of  the  Radical  leaders  in  the  Legislature,  the
measures  which  they  most  prized,  when  so  put,  have
been  negatived.

Democracy  being  what  it  is,  the  language  used  of
it  in  our  day,  under  its  various  disguises  of  Freedom,
the  "  Revolution,"  the  "Republic,"  Popular  Govern-
ment, the  Reign  of  the  People,  is  exceedingly  remark-
able. Every  sort  of  metaphor,  signifying  irresistible
force,  and  conveying  admiration  or  dread,  has  been
applied  to  it  by  its  friends  or  its  enemies.  A  great
English  orator  once  compared  it  to  the  Grave,  which
takes  everything  and  gives  nothing  back.  The  most
widely  read  American  historian  altogether  loses  him-
self in  figures  of  speech.  "  The  change  which  Divine
wisdom  ordained,  and  w^hich  no  human  policy  or  force
could  hold  back,  proceeded  as  uniformly  and  majesti-
cally as  the  laws  of  being,  and  was  as  certain  as  the


ESSAY  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  fiO

decrees  of  eternity."  ^  And  again,  ''  The  idea  of  free-
dom had  never  been  wholly  unknown  ;  .  .  .  the  rising
light  flashed  joy  across  the  darkest  centuries,  and  its
growing  energy  can  be  traced  in  the  tendency  of  the
ages."  ^  These  hopes  have  even  found  room  for  them-
selves among  the  commonplaces  of  after-dinner  ora-
tory. *'  The  great  tide  of  Democracy  is  rolling  on,
and  no  hand  can  stay  its  majestic  course,"  said  Sir
Wilfrid  Lawson  of  the  Franchise  Bill.^  But  the
strongest  evidence  of  the  state  of  excitement  into  which
some  minds  are  thrown  by  an  experiment  in  govern-
ment, which  is  very  old  and  has  never  been  particu-
larly successful,  is  afforded  by  a  little  volume  with
the  title  "  Towards  Democracy."  The  writer  is  not
destitute  of  poetical  force,  but  the  smallest  conception
of  what  Democracy  really  is  makes  his  rhapsodies
about  it  astonishing.  '^  Freedom  !  "  sings  this  disciple
of  Walt  Whitman—

And  among  the  far  nations  there  is  a  stir  hke  the  stir  of
the  leaves  of  the  forest.

Joy,  joy,  arising  on  earth.

*  Bancroft,  History  of  the  United  States,  "The  American
Revolution,"  vol.  i.  p.  1.  Mr.  Bancroft  was  almost  verbally  anti-
cipated in  this  sentence  by  a  person  whom  he  resembles  in  nothing
except  in  his  love  of  phrases.  "  Frangais  republicains,"  said  Maxi-
milian Kobespierre,  in  his  speech  at  the  festival  of  the  Supreme
Being,  "  n'est-ce  pas  I'Etre  Supreme  qui,  des  le  commencement
dos  temps,  decreta  la  Republique  ? "

^  Bancroft,  tihi  supra,  p.  2.

^  On  April  15,  1884.


70  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACIT.  essay  n.

And  lo'!  the  banners  lifted  from  point  to'  point,-  and  the
spirits  of  tlie  ancient  races  looking  abroad — the  divinely
beautiful  daughters  of  God  calling  to  their  children.

Lo  !  the  divine  East  from  ages  and  ages  back  intact  her
priceless  jewel  of  thought — the  germ  of  Democracy — bringing
down !

•  •••••

0  glancing  eyes!  0  leaping  shining  waters  !  Do  I  not
know  that  thou,  Democracy,  dost  control  and  inspire ;  that
thou  too  hast  relations  to  them.

As  surely  as  Niagara  has  relations  to  Erie  and  Ontario  ?


Towards  the  close  of  the  poem  this  line  occurs —
*  I  heard  a  voice  say,  What  is  Freedom  ?  "  It  is  im-
possible that  the  voice  could  ask  a  more  pertinent
question.  If  the  author  of  "Towards  Democracy"
had  ever  heard  the  answer  of  Hobbes,  that  Freedom
is  "political  power  divided  into  small  fragments,"  or
the  dictum  of  John  Austin  and  M.  Scherer,  that  "  De-
mocracy is  a  form  of  government,"  his  poetical  vein
might  have  been  drowned,  but  his  mind  would  have
been  invigorated  by  the  healthful  douche  of  cold
water.

The  opinion  that  Democracy  was  irresistible  and
inevitable,  and  probably  perpetual,  would,  only .  a
century  ago,  have  appeared  a  wild  paradox.  There
had  been  more  than  2,000  years  of  tolerably  well-
ascertained political history, and at its outset,


ESSAT  II.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  71

]\Ionarcliy,  Aristocracy,  and  Democracy,  were  all
plainly  discernible.  The  result  of  a  long  experience
was,  that  some  Monarchies  and  some  Aristocracies
had  shown  themselves  extremely  tenacious  of  life.  The
French  monarchy  and  the  Yenetian  oligarchy  were  in
particular  of  great  antiquity,  and  the  Roman  empire
was  not  even  then  quite  dead.  But  the  democracies
which  had  risen  and  perished,  or  had  fallen  into  ex-
treme insignificance,  seemed  to  show  that  this  form  of
government  was  of  rare  occurrence  in  political  history,
and  was  characterised  by  an  extreme  fragility.  This
was  the  opinion  of  the  fathers  of  the  American  Federal
Republic,  who  over  and  over  again  betray  their  regret
that  the  only  government  which  it  was  possible  for
them  to  establish  was  one  which  promised  so  little-
stability.  It  became  very  shortly  the  opinion  of  the
French  Revolutionists,  for  no  sooner  has  the  Consti-
tutional Monarchy  fallen  than  the  belief  that  a  new
era  has  begun  for  the  human  race  gives  signs  of
rapidly  fading ;  and  the  language  of  the  Revolutionary
writers  becomes  stained  with  a  dark  and  ever-growing
suspiciousness,  manifestly  inspired  by  genuine  fear
that  Democracy  must  perish,  unless  saved  by  unflag-
ging energy  and  unsparing  severity.  Nevertheless,
the  view  that  Democracy  is  irresistible  is  of  French
origin,  like  almost  all  other  sweeping  political  gene-
ralisations. It  may  be  first  detected  about  fifty  years
ago,  and  it  was  mainly  spread  over  the  world  by  the


VJ  the nature of democracy.  essay  ll.

book  of  De  Tocqiieville  on  Democracy  in  America.
Some  of  the  younger  speculative  minds  in  France  were
^deeply  struck  by  the  revival  of  democratic  .idgas  in
France  at  the  Revolution  of  1830,  and  among  them
was  .Alexis  de  Tocquevillcj^orn  a  noble  and  educated
in  Legitimism.  The  whole  fabric  of  French  Revolu-
tionary belief  had  apparently  been  ruined  beyond  hope
of  recovery,  ruined  by  the  crimes  and  usurpations  of
the  Convention,  by  military  habits  and  ideas,  by  the
tyranny  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  by  the  return  of  the
Bourbons  with  a  large  part  of  the  system  of  the  older
monarchy,  by  the  hard  repression  of  the  Holy  Alliance.
Yet  so  slight  a  provocation  as  the  attempt  of  Charles
X.  to  do  what  his  brother  had  done^  without  serious
resistance,  brought  back  the  whole  torrent  of  revolu-
tionary sentiment  and  dogma,  which  at  once  overran
the  entire  European  continent.  No  doubt  it  seemed
as  if  there  were  something  in  Democracy  which  made
it  resistless  ;  and  yet,  as  M.  Scherer  has  ^hown  in  one
of  the  most  valuable  parts  of  his  pamphlet,  the  French-
men of  that  idea  j^d  not  mean,  the  same  thing  as  the
modem  French  Extremist  or  the  English  Radical
when  they  spoke  of  Democracy.  If  their  view  be  put  \
affirmatively,  they  meant  the  ascendency  of  the  middle
classes  ;  if  negatively,  they  meant  the  non-revival  of
the  old  feudal  society.  The  French  people  were  very
long  in  shaking  off  their  fear  that  the  material  advan-
8  By  hig  Ordinance  of  September  1816.


ESSAY  II.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  73

tages,  secured  to  them  by  the  first  French  Revolution,
were  not  safe  ;  and  this  fear  it  was  which,  as  we  per-
ceive from  the  letters  of  Mallet  du  Pan,^  reconciled
them  to  the  tyranny  of  the  Jacobins  and  caused  them
to  look  with  the  deepest  suspicion  on  the  plans  of  the
Sovereigns  allied  against  the  Kepublic.  Democracy,
however,  gradually  took  a  new  sense,  chiefly  under  the
influence  of  wonder  at  the  success  of  the  American
Federation,  in  which  most  of  the  States  had  now
adopted  universal  suff'rage ;  and  by  1848  the  word  had
come  to  be  used  very  much  with  its  ancient  meaning,
the  government  of  the  commonwealth  by  the  Many.
It  is  perhaps  the  scientific  tinge  which  thought  is  as-
suming among  us  that  causes  so  many  Englishmen
to  take  for  granted  that  Democracy  is  inevitable,  be-
cause many  considerable  approaches  to  it  have  been
made  in  our  country.  No  doubt,  if  adequate  causes
are  at  work,  the  eff'ect  will  always  follow ;  but,  in  poli-
tics, the  most  powerful  of  all  causes  are_the  timidity^
the  listlessness,  and  the  superficiality,  of  the  gene-

*  The  newly  published  correspondence  of  Mallet  du  Pan  with
the  Court  of  Vienna,  between  1794  and  1798,  is  of  the  highest
interest  and  value.  M.  Taine,  who  contributes  the  Preface,  has
several  times  aifirmed  that  Mallet  was  one  of  the  very  few-
persons  who  understood  the  French  Revolution.  It  seems  clear
that,  while  these  letters  were  being  written,  the  Republic  was
falling  into  the  deejoest  unpopularity,  mitigated  only  by  the  fears
of  which  we  have  spoken  above.  It  was  undoubtedly  saved  by
the  military  genius  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte.  The  one  serious
mistake  of  Mallet  was  his  blindness  to  that  genius.  He  thought
Geneml  Bonaparte  a  charlatan.


r


74  THE  NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  n.

rality  of  minds.  If  a  large  number  of  Englishmen,
belonging  to  classes  which  are  powerful  if  they  ex^rt
themselves,  continue  saying  to  themselves  and  others
that  Democracy  is  irresistible  and  must  come,  beyond
all  doubt  it  will  come.

The  enthusiasm  for  Democracy,  which  is  conveyed
by  the  figures  of  speech  applied  to  it,  is  equally
modern  with  the  impression  of  its  inevitableness.  In
reality,  considering  the  brilliant  stages  in  the  history
of  a  certain  number  of  commonwealths  with  which
Democracy  has  been  associated,  nothing  is  more  re-
markable than  the  small  amount  of  respect  for  it
professed  by  actual  observers,  who  had  the  oppor-
tunity and  the  capacity  for  forming  a  judgment  on
it.  Mr.  ,fij^e  did  his  best  to  explain  away  the  poor
opinion  of  the  Athenian  Democracy  entertained  by
the  philosophers  who  filled  the  schools  of  Athens  ;
but  the  fact  remains  that  the  founders  of  political
philosophy  found  themselves  in  presence  of  Demo-
cracy, in  its  pristine  vigour,  and  thought  it  a  bad
form  of  government.  The  panegyrics  of  which  it  is
now  the  object  are,  again,  of  French  origin.  They
come  to  us  from  the  oratory  and  literature  of  the
first  French  Revolution,  which,  however,  soon  ex-
changed glorification  of  the  new  birth  of  the  human
race  for  a  strain  of  gloomy  suspicion  and  homicidal
denunciation.  The  language  of  admiration  which
prevailed  for  a  while  had  still  remoter  sources ;  and


RSSAr  II.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  76

it  may  he  observed,  as  an  odd  circumstance,  that,
while  the  Jacobins  generally  borrowed  their  phraseo-
logy from  the  legendary  history  of  the  early  Roman
Eepublic,  the  Girondius  preferred  resorting  for  meta-
phors to  the  literature  which  sprang  from  Rousseau.
On  the  whole,  I  think  that  the  historical  ignorance
which  made  heroes  of  Brutus  and  Sca3Vola  was  less
abjectly  nonsensical  than  the  philosophical  silliness
wliich  dwelt  on  the  virtues  of  mankind  in  a  state
of  natural  democracy.  If  anybody  wishes  to  know
what  was  the  influence  of  Rousseau  in  diffusing  the
belief  in  a  golden  age,  when  men  lived,  like  brothers,
in  freedom  and  equality,  he  should  read,  not  so  much
the  writings  of  tlie  sage,  as  the  countless  essays  printed
in  France  by  his  disciples  just  before  1789.  They
furnish  very  disagreeable  proof  that  the  intellectual
flower  of  a  cultivated  nation  may  be  brought,  by
fanatical  admiration  of  a  social  and  political  theory,
into a  condition of  downright mental  imbecility.^

*  Brissot,  the  Girondin  leader,  while  still  a  young  man  and
an  enthusiastic  E-oyalist,  had  argued,  long  before  Proudhon,  that
Property  is  Theft.  There  is,  he  said,  a  natural  right  to  correct
the  injustice  of  the  institution,  by  stealing.  But  he  held  the
still  more  remarkable  opinion,  that  cannibalism  is  natural  and
justifiable.  Since,  he  argued,  under  the  reign  of  Nature  the
sheep  does  not  spare  the  insects  on  the  grass,  and  the  wolf  and
the  man  eat  the  sheep,  why  have  not  all  these  creatures  a  natural
right  to  eat  creatures  of  their  own  kind  ?  [Reclierches  phi{o^
sojyhiques  siir  le  droit  de  2:)ropriete  et  sur  le  vol  consider e  dans  sa
nature. Par  Brissot  de  Warville.)


A


76  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  ii.

The  language  of  the  Jacobins  and  the  language  of
the  Gu-ondins  might  be  thought  to  have  perished
amid  ridicule  and  disgust ;  but,  in  fact,  it  underwent
a  rehabilitation,  like  that  which  has  fallen  to  the  lot
of  Catiline,  of  Nero,  and  of  Richard  III.  Tocqueville
thought  Democracy  was  inevitable,  but  he  looked
on  its  approach  with  distrust  aijd  dr^iid.  In  the
course,  however,  of  the  succeeding  fifteen  years  two
books  were  published,  which,  whatever  their  popu-
laritj^,  might  fairly  be  compared  with  the  writings  of
which  we  have  spoken  above, ^forjiJtotalab^n^^
f  common  sense.  Louis  Blanc '^  took  the  homicidal
pedant,  Robespierre,  for  his  hero ;  Lamartine,  the
feeble  and  ephemeral  sect  of  Girondins  ;  and  from
the  works  of  these  two  writers  has  proceeded  much
the  largest  part  of  the  language  eulogistic  of  Demo-
cracy, which  pervades  the  humbler  political  literature
of  the  Continent,  and  now  of  Great  Britain  also.

There  is  indeed  one  kind  of  praise  which  Demo-
cracy has  received,  and  continues  to  receive,  in  the
greatest  abundance.  This  is  praise  addressed  to  the
governing  Demos  by  those  who  fear  it,  or  desire  to
conciliate  it,  or  hope  to  use  it. When  it  has  once

*  The  Histoire  des  Girondins  of  Lamartine  was  published  in
1847.  The  publication  of  the  Histoire  de  la  Revolution  Frangaise
of  Louis  Blanc  began  in  1847,  and  went  on  till  1862  ;  the  Histoire
de  Dix  Ans  of  the  same  writer  had  been  published  in  1841-44.
The  first  part  of  De  Tocqueville's  work  was  published  in  1835,  the
second  in  1839.


i


ESSAY  II.  THE NATURE OF  DEMOCRACY.  ?7

become  clear  that  Democracy  is  a  form  of  government,
it  will  be  easily  understood  what  panegyrics  of  the  ^
multitude  amount  to.  Democracy  is  Monarchy  in-
verted,  and  the  niodes  of  addressing  the  multitude
l^^jype,  tie  same  as  the  modes  of  addressing  kings.  The
more  powerful  and  jealous  the  sovereign,  the  more
unbounded  is  the  eulogy,  the  more  extravagant  is
the  tribute.  "  0  King,  live  for  ever,"  was  the  ordi-
nary formula  of  beginning  an  address  to  the  Baby-
lonian or  Median  king,  drunk  or  sober.  ^'  Your
ascent  to  power  proceeded  as  uniformly  and  majesti-
cally as  the  laws  of  being  and  was  as  certain  as  the
decrees  of  eternity,"  says  Mr.  Bancroft  to  the  Ameri-
can people.  Such  flattery  proceeds  frequently  from
the  ignobler  parts  of  human  nature,  but  not  always.
What  seems  to  us  baseness,  passed  two  hundred  years
ago  at  Versailles  for  gentleness  and  courtliness ;  and
many  people  have  every  day  before  them  a  monument  ,
of  what  was  once  thought  suitable  language  to  use  of
a  King  of  England,  in  the  Dedication  of  the  English
Bible  to  James  I.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose
that  this  generation  will  feel  any  particular  shame  at
flattery,  though  the  flattery  will  be  addressed  to  the
people  and  not  to  the  King.  It  may  even  become
commoner,  through  the  growth  of  scientiiic  mode?
of  thought.  Dean  Church,  in  his  recent  volume  on
"  Bacon/'  has  made  the  original  remark  that  Bacon
behaved  himself  to  powerful  men  as  he  behaved  him-


78  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  ii.

self  to  Nature.  Parendo  vinces.  If  you  resist  Nature,
she  will  crush  you  ;  but  if  you  humour  her,  she  will
place  her  tremendous  forces  at  your  disposal.  It  is
madness  to  offer  direct  resistance  to  a  royal  virago  or
a  royal  pedant,  but  by  subservience  you  may  command
either  of  them.  There  is  much  of  this  feeling  in  the
state  of  mind  of  intelligent  and  highly  educated  Radi-
cals, when  they  are  in  presence  of  a  mob.  They  make
their  choice,  according  to  the  composition  of  their
audience,  between  two  wonderful  alternative  theories
of  our  day — one,  that  the  artisan  of  the  towns  knows
everything,  because  his  work  is  so  monotonous,  and
because  he  has  so  much  time  on  his  hands  ;  the
other,  that  the  labourer  of  the  country  districts  knows
everything,  because  his  work  is  so  various  and  his
faculties  so  constantly  active  through  this  variety.
Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  an  audience  composed  of
roughs  or  clowns  is  boldly  told  by  an  educated  man
that  it  has  more  political  information  than  an  equal
number  of  scholars.  This  is  not  the  opinion  of  the
speaker  ;  but  it  may  be  made,  he  thinks,  the  opinion
of  the  mob,  and  he  knows  that  the  mob  could  not
act  as  if  it  were  true,  unless  it  worked  through
scholarly  instruments.

The  best  safeguard  against  the  various  delusions.
and  extravagances  which  I  have  been  examining  is
a  little  better  knowledge  of  the  true  lines  of  move-
ment  which  the  political affairs  of mankind  have


ESSAY  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  79

followed.  In  the  opinion  of  a  number  of  English
gentlemen,  whose  authority  is  now  somewhat  on  the
decline,  political  history  began  in  1688.  Mr.  Bright
seems  to  me  to  express  himself  often  as  if  he  thought
that  it  began  with  the  commencement  of  the  Anti-
Corn-Law  agitation,  and  might  be  considered  as  hav-
ing been  practically  arrested  when  the  Corn-Law  was
repealed  in  1846.  There  are  younger  men  who  are
persuaded  that  it  commenced  with  a  certain  crisis  in
the  municipal  history  of  Birmingham.  The  truth,
however,  is,  that  we  live  in  a  day  in  which  a  strand  is
unwinding  itself,  which  was  steadily  knitting  itself  up
during  long  ages.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  a  more
baseless  historical  generalisation  than  that  which  Mr.
Bancroft  addresses  to  his  American  readers.  Duri'ng
all  the  period  when  a  change  was  proceeding  "which
no  human  policy  could  hold  back,"  the  movement  of
political  affairs — what  Mr.  Bancroft  calls  the  "ten-
dency of  the  ages  " — was  as  distinctly  towards  Mon-
archy as  it  now  is  towards  Democracy.  Mankind
appear  to  have  begun  that  stage  in  their  history,
which  is  more  or  less  visible  to  our  eyes,  with  the
germs  in  each  society  of  all  the  three  definite  forms  of
government — Monarchy,  Aristocracy ,  and  Democracy.
Everywhere  the  King  and  Popular  Assembly  are  seen
side  by  side,  the  first  a  priestly  and  judicial,  but  pri-
jnarily  a  fighting,  personage  ;  the  last  sometimes
under  the  control  of  an  aristocratic  Senate,  and  itself


80  THE  NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  n;

varying  from  a  small  oligarchy  to  something  like  the
entirety  of  the  free  male  population. At  the  dawn  of
history,  Aristocracy  seems  to  be  gaining  on  Monarchy,
and  Democracy  on  Aristocracy. And  this  passage  of
political  development  is  especially  well  known  to  us
through  the  accidents  which  have  preserved  to  us  a
portion  of  the  records  of  two  famous  societies,  the
Athenian  Republic,  the  cradle  of  philosophy  and  art,
and  the  Roman  Republic,  which  began  the  conquests
destined  to  embrace  a  great  part  of  the  world. This
last  Republic  was  always  more  or  less  of  an  Aristo-
cracy ;  but  from  the  time  of  its  fall,  and  the  establish-
ment of  the  Roman  Empire,  there  was  on  the  whole,
for  seventeen  centuries,  an  all  but  universal  movement
towards  kingship. There  were,  no  doubt,  evanescent
revivals  of  popular  government.  The  barbarian  races,
when  they  broke  into  the  central  Roman  territory,
brought  with  them  very  generally  some  amount  of  the
anpient  tribal  liberty  which,  reintroduced  into  Mediter-
ranean Europe,  seemed  again  for  a  while  likely  to  prove
the  seed  of  political  freedom. The  Roman  municipal
system,  leftvto  work unchecked  within the  walled
cities  of  Northern  Italy,  reproduced  a  form  of  de-
mocracy But Italian  Commonwealths,  and  feudal
Estates  and  Parliaments,  all  sank,  with  one  memor-
able exception,  before  the  ever-growing  power  and
prestige  of  military  despotic  governments. The  his-
torian of  our  day  is  apt  to  moralise  and  lament  over


ESSAT  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  81

the  change,  but  it  was  everywhere  in  the  highest
degree  popular,  and  it  called  forth  an  enthusiasm  quite
as  genuine  as  that  of  the  modern  Radical  for  the
coming  Democracy.  The  Roman  Empire,  the  Italian
tyrannies,  the  English  Tudor  Monarchy,  the  French
centralised  Kingship,  the  Napoleonic  despotism,  were
all  hailed  with  acclamation,  most  of  it  perfectly  sin-
cere, either  because  anarchy  had  been  subdued,  or
because  petty  local  and  domestic  oppressions  were
kept  under,  or  because  new  energy  was  infused  into
national  policy.  In  our  own  country,  the  popular
government,  born  of  tribal  freedom,  revived  sooner
than  elsewhere ;  protected  by  the  insularity  of  its
home,  it  managed  to  live  ;  and  thus  the  British  Con-
stitution became  the  one  important  exception  to  the
"  tendency  of  the  ages,"  and  through  its  remote  in-
fluence this  tendency  was  reversed,  and  the  movement
to  Democracy  began  again.  Nevertheless,  even  with
us,  though  the  King  might  be  feared  or  disliked,  the
King's  office  never  lost  its  popularity.  The  Common-
wealth and  the  Protectorate  were  never  for  a  moment
in  real  favour  with  the  nation.  The  true  enthusiasm
was  reserved  for  the  Restoration.  Thus,  from  the
reign  of  Augustus  Caesar  to  the  establishment  of  the
United  States,  it  was  Democracy  which  was  always,
as  a  rule,  on  the  decline,  nor  was  the  decline  arrested
till  the  American  Federal  Government  was  founded,
itself  the  offspring  of  the  British  Constitution. At


82  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  ii.

this  moment.  Democracy  is  receiving  the  same  un-
qualified eulogy  which  was  once  poured  on  Mon-
archy ;  and  though  in  its  modern  shape  it  is  the  pro-
duct of  a  whole  series  of  accidents,  it  is  regarded  by
some  as  propelled  in  a  continuous  progress  by  an
irresistible  force.

Independently  of  the  historical  question,  how  the
fashion  of  bowing  profoundly  before  Democracy  grew
up,  it  has  to  be  considered  how  far  the  inverted  Mon-
archy, which  bears  this  name,  deserves  the  reverence
paid  to  it.  The  great  philosophical  writer  who  had
the  best  opinion  of  it  was  Jeremy  Bentham.  His
authority  had  to  do  with  the  broad  extension  of  the
suffrage  in  most  of  the  States  of  the  American  Union,
and  he  was  the  intellectual  father  of  the  masculine
school  of  English  Radicals  which  died  out  with  Mr.
Grote.  He  claimed  for  governments  having  the  essen-
tial characteristics  of  Democracy,  that  they  were  much
more  free  than  other  governments  from  what  he  called
*'  sinister  '^  influences.  He  meant  by  a  sinister  influ-
ence, a  motive  leading  a  government  to  prefer  the
interest  of  small  portions  of  a  community  to  the  in-
terest of  the  whole.  I  certainly  think  that,  with  an
all -important  qualification  to  be  mentioned  presently,
this  credit  was  justly  claimed  for  Democracy  by  Ben-
tham, and  with  especial  justice  in  relation  to  the  cir-
cumstances of  his  own  time.  During  the  most  active
period  of  his  long  life  the  French  Revolution  had


KssiY  n.  THE  NATUEE OF DEMOCRACY.  68

stopped  all  progress,  and  amid  the  relaxation  of
public  watchfulness  which  followed,  all  sorts  of  small
interests  had  found  themselves  niches  in  the  English
Budget,  like  the  robber  barons  of  mediaBval  Italy  and
Germany  on  every  precipitous  hill.  Bentham  thought
it  natural  that  they  should  do  this.  The  lords  of  life,
he  said,  are  pleasure  and  pain.  Every  man  follows
his  own  interest  as  he  understands  it,  and  the  part  of
the  community  which  has  political  power  will  use  it
for  its  own  objects.  The  remedy  is  to  transfer  political
power  to  the  entire  community.  It  is  impossible  that
they  should  abuse  it,  for  the  interest  which  they  will
try  to  promote  is  the  interest  of  all,  and  the  interest
of  all  is  the  proper  end  and  object  of  all  legislation.

On  this  apparently  irresistible  reasoning,  one  or
two  remarks  have  to  be  made.  In  the  first  place,  the
praise  here  claimed  for  Democracy  is  shared  by  it  with
Monarchy,  particularly  in  its  most  absolute  forms.
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Roman  Emperor  cared
more  for  the  general  good  of  the  vast  group  of  socie-
ties subject  to  him,  than  the  aristocratic  Roman  Re-
public had  done.  The  popularity  of  the  great  kings
who  broke  up  European  feudalism,  arose  from  their
showing  to  all  their  vassals  a  far  more  even  imparti<
ality  than  could  be  obtained  from  petty  feudal  rulers  ;
and  in  our  own  day,  vagae  and  shadowy  as  are  the
recommendations  of  what  is  called  a  Nationality,  a
State  founded  on  this  principle  has  generally  one  real


84  THE  NATURE OF  DEMOCRACY.  essay  ii.

practical  advantage  through  its  obliteration  of  small
tyrannies  and  local  oppressions.  It  has  further  to  be
observed,  that  a  very  serious  weakness  in  Bentham's
argument  has  been  disclosed  by  the  experience  of  half
a  century,  an  experience  which  might  be  carried  much
farther  back  with  the  help  of  that  historical  inquiry
which  J3entham  neglected  and  perhaps  despised.  De
ratic  governments  no  doubt  attempt  to  legislate
and  administer  in  the  interests  of  Democracy,  provided
only  the  words  are  taken  to  mean  the  interests  which
Democracy  supposes  to  be  its  own.  For  purposes  of
actual  government,  the  standard  of  interest  is  not  any
which  Bentham  would  have  approved,  but  merely
popular  opinion.  Nobody  would  have  acknowledged
this  more  readily  thanJBentham,  if  his  marvellously
long  life  could  have  been  prolonged  to  this  day.  He
was  the  ancestor  of  the  advanced  Liberals  or  Radicals
who  now  carry  everything  before  them.  All  their
favourite  political  machinery  came  from  his  intellec-
ual  workshop.  Household  suffrage  (which  he  faintly
preferred  to  universal  suffrage),  vote  by  ballot,  and
the  short  Parliaments  once  in  favour,  received  his
energetic  advocacy ;  and  he  detested  the  House  of
Lords.  Yet  there  is  no  political  writer  whose
strongest  and  most  fundamental  opinions  are  so
directly  at  variance  with  the  Radical  ideas  of  the
moment.  One  has  only  to  turn  over  his  pages  for
abundant  evidence  of  this  assertion* Over  and  over


ESSAY  II.  THE  NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  85

again,  you  come  upon  demonstration  that  all  the
mechanism  of  human  society  depends  on  the  satisfac-
tion of  reasonable  expectations,  and  therefore  on  the
strict  maintenance  of  proprietary  right,  and  the  in-
violability of  contract.  You  find  earnest  cautions
against  the  hasty  acquisition  of  private  property  by
the  State  for  public  advantage,  and  vehement  protests
against  the  removal  of  abuses  without  full  compensa-
tion to  those  interested  in  them.  Amid  his  denun-
ciation of  these  capital  vices  of  the  legislator,  it  is
amusing  to  read  his  outbreaks^  of  enthusiasm  for  the
inclosure  of  commons-,  now  sometimes  described  as
stealing  the  inheritance  of  the  poor.  The  very  vices
of  political  argument  which  he  was  thought  to  have
disposed  of  for  ever  have  gained  a  new  vitality  among
the  political  school  he  founded.  The  "  Anarchical
Sophisms ''  which  he  exposed  have  migrated  from
France  to  England,  and  may  be  read  in  the  literature
of  Advanced  Liberalism  side  by  side  with  the  Par-
liamentary Fallacies  which  he  laughed  at  in  the
debates  of  a  Tory  House  of  Commons.

The  name  of  Jeremy  Bentham,  one  of  the  few  who

•  "  In  England,  one  of  the  greatest  and  best  understood  im-
provements is  the  inclosure  of  commons.  When  we  pass  over
the  lands  which  have  undergone  this  happy  change,  we  are
enchanted  as  with  the  appearance  of  a  new  colony ;  harvests,
flocks,  and  smiling  habitations,  have  now  succeeded  to  the  sad-
ness and  sterility  of  the  desert.  Happy  conque^^ts  of  peaceful
industry  !  Noble  aggrandisements  which  inspire  no  alarms  and
pj'ovoke  no  enemiejs !  " — Bentham 's  Worksj  i.  3i2.


/


86  THE  NATURE OF  DEMOCRACY.  essay  n.

have  wliolly  lived  for  what  they  held  to  be  the  good  of
the  human  race,  has  become  even  among  educated  men
la  byword  for  what  is  called  his  "  low  view  '^  of  human
I  nature. The  fact  is  that,  under  its  most  important
^  aspect,  he  greatly  overrated  human  nature. He  over-
estimated its  intelligence. He  wrongly  supposed  that
the  truths  which  he  saw,  clearly  cut  and  distinct,  in
the  dry  light  of  his  intellect,  could  be  seen  by  all
other  men  or  by  many  of  them. He  did  not  under-
stand that  they  were  visible  only  to  the  Few-^to^^^
mteUectual  aristocracy. His  delusion  was  the  greater
from  his  inattention  to  facts  which  lay  little  beyond
the  sphere  of  his  vision. Knowing  little  of  history,
and  caring  little  for  it,  he  neglected  one  easy  method
of  assuring  himself  of  the  extreme  falseness  of  the
conceptions  of  their  interest,  w^hich  a  multitude  of
men  may  entertain. "  The  world,"  said  Machiavelli,
*^  is  made  up  of  the  vulgar =" Thus  Bentham's  funda-
mental proposition  turns  against  himself. It  is  that,
if  you  place  power  in  men's  hands,  they  will  use  it
for  their  interest. Applying  the  rule  to  the  whole  of
a  political  community,  we  ought  to  have  a  perfect
system  of  government ;  but,  taking  it  in  connection
with  the  fact  that  multitudes  include  too  much  ignor-
ance to  be  capable  of  understanding  their  interest,  it
furnishes  the  principal  argument  against  Democracy.
The  immunity  from  sinister  influences,  the  free-
dom from  temptation  to  prefer  the  smaller  interest  to


ESSA.T  II.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  87

the  greater,  whicli  Bentham  claimed  for  Democracy,
should  thus  have  been  extended  by  him  to  the  more
absolute  forms  of  Monarchy.  If  indeed  this  sugges-
tion had  been  made  to  him,  he  would  probably  have
replied  that  Monarchy  has  a  tendency  to  show  unjust
favours  to  the  military,  the  official,  and  the  courtly
classes,  the  classes  nearest  to  itself.  Monarchy,  how-
ever, had  had  a  very  long  history  in  Bentham's  day,
and  Democracy  a  very  short  one  ;  and  it  is  only
as  the  political  history  of  the  American  Union  has
developed  itself,  that  we  are  able  to  detect  in  wide
popular  governments  the  same  infirmities  that  charac-
terised the  kingly  governments,  of  which  they  are
the  inverted  reproductions.  Under  the  shelter  of  one
government  as  of  the  other,  all  sorts  of  selfish  inter-
ests breed  and  multiply,  speculating  on  its  weaknesses
and  pretending  to  be  its  servants,  agents,  and  dele-
gates. Nevertheless,  after  making  all  due  qualifica-
tions, I  do  not  at  all  deny  to  Democracies  some  por-
tion of  the  advantage  which  so  masculine  a  thinker
as  Bentham  claimed  for  them.  But,  putting  this
advantage  at  the  highest,  it  is  more  than  compensated
by  one  great  disadvantage.  Of  all  the  forms  of
government.  Democracy  is  by  far  the  most  difficult.
Little  as  the  governing  multitude  is  conscious,  of  this
difficulty,  prone  as  the  masses  are  to  aggravate  it  by
their  avidity  for  taking  more  and  more  powers  into
their  direct  management,  it  is  a  fact  which  experience


«8  THE  NATURE OF  DEMOCRACY.  essay  n.

has  placed  beyond  all  dispute. It  is  the  difficulty  of
democratic  government  that  mainly  accounts  for  its
ephemeral  duration.
/ The  greatest,  most  permanent,  and  most  funda-

C  mental  of  all  the  difficulties  of  Democracy,  lies  deep
in  the  constitution,  of  human  nature.  Democracy  is
a  form  of  government,  and  in  all  governments  acts  of
State  are  determined  by  an  exertion  of  will.  But  in
what  sense  can  a  multitude  exercise  volition  ?  The
student  of  politics  can  put  to  himself  no  more  per-
tinent question  than  this.  No  doubt  the  vulgar
opinion  is,  that  the  multitude  makes  up  its  mind  as
the  individual  makes  up  his  mind  ;  the  Demos  deter-
mines like  the  Monarch.  A  host  of  popular  phrases
testify  to  this  belief.  The  "  will  of  the  People,"  "pub-
lic opinion,*'  the  "  sovereign  pleasure  of  the  nation,"
"  Vox  Populi,  Vox  Dei,"  belong  to  this  class,  which
indeed  constitutes  a  great  part  of  the  common  stock
of  the  platform  and  the  press.  But  what  do  such
expressions  mean  ?  They  must  mean  that  a  great
number  of  people,  on  a  great  number  of  questions,
can  come  to  an  identical  conclusion,  and  found  an
identical  determination  upon  it.  But  this  is  manifestly
true  only  of  the  simplest  questions.  A  very  slight
addition  of  difficulty  at  once  sensibly  diminishes  the
chance  of  agreement,  and,  if  the  difficulty  be  consi-
derable, an  identical  opinion  can  only  be  reached  by
trained  minds  assisting  themselves  by  demonstration


V


XSSAT  H.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACT.  89

more  or  less  rigorous.  On  tlie  complex  questions  of
politics,  which  are  calculated  in  themselves  to  task  to
the  utmost  all  the  powers  of  the  strongest  minds,  but
are  in  fact  vaguely  conceived,  vaguely  stated,  dealt
with  for  the  most  part  in  the  most  haphazard  manner
by  the  most  experienced  statesmen,  the  common  de-
termination of  a  multitude  is  a  chimerical  assumption;
and  indeed,  if  it  were  really  possible  to  extract  am
opinion  upon  them  from  a  ffreat  mass  of  men,  and
to  shape  the  administrative  and  legislative  acts  of  a
State  upon  this  opinion  as  a  sovereign  command,  it  is
probable  that  the  most  ruinous  blunders  would  be
committed,  and  all  sociat  progress  would  be  arrested.
/  The  truth  is,  that  the  modern  enthusiasts  for  Demo-
l  cracy  make  one  fundamental  confusion.  They  mix
up  the  theory,  that  the  Demos  is  capable  of  volition,
with  the  fact,  that  it  is  capable  of  adopting  the  opinions  .
of  one  man  or  of  a  limited  number  of  men,  and  of/
founding  directions  to  its  instruments  upon  them.  I
The  fact,  that  what  is  called  the  will  of  the  people}
really  consists  in  their  adopting  the  opinion  of  one
person  or  a  few  persons,  admits  of  a  very  convincing
illustration  from  experience.  Popular  Government
and  Popular  Justice  were  originally  the  same  thing.
The  ancient  democracies  devoted  much  more  time  and
attention  to  the  exercise  of  civil  and  criminal  juris-
diction than  to  the  administration  of  their  public
affairs  ;  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  popular  justice  has


90  THE  NATUEE OF DEMOCRACY,  essay  u

lasted  longer,  has  had  a  more  continuous  history,  and
has  received  much  more  observation  and  cultivation,
than  popular  government.  Over  much  of  the  world
it  gave  way  to  Eoyal  Justice,  which  was  of  at  least
equal  antiquity,  but  it  did  not  give  way  as  universally
or  as  completely  as  popular  government  did  to  mon-
archy. We  have  in  England  a  relic  of  the  ancient
Popular  Justice  in  the  functions  of  the  Jury.  The
Jury — technically  known  as  the  '*  country  " — is  the
old  adjudicating  Democracy,  limited,  modified,  and
improved,  in  accordance  with  the  principles  suggested
by  the  experience  of  centuries,  so  as  to  bring  it  into
harmony  with  modern  ideas  of  judicial  efficiency.*
The  change  which  has  had  to  be  made  in  it  is  in  the
highest  degree  instructive.  The  Jurors  are  twelve,
instead  of  a  multitude.  Their  main  business  is  to
say  "  Aye  '^  or  "  No  "  on  questions  which  are  doubtless
important,  but  which  turn  on  facts  arising  in  the
transactions  of  everyday  life.  In  order  that  they  may
reach  a  conclusion,  they  are  assisted  by  a  system  of
contrivances  and  rules  of  the  highest  artificiality  and
elaboration.  An  expert  presides  over  their  investi-
gations— the  Judge,  the  representative  of  the  rival
and  royal  justice — and  an  entire  literature  is  con-
cerned with  the  conditions  under  which  evidence  on

*  This  intricate  subject  is  discussed  by  Stephen  (History  of
Criminal  LaWy  i.  254) ;  Stubbs  (Constitutional  History,  i.  685,
especially  Note  3)  ;  Maine  (Early  Law  and  Cicstonif  p.  160).


ESSAY  II.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  W

the  facts  in  dispute  may  be  laid  before  tliem.  There
is  a  rigid  exclusion  of  all  testimony  which  has  a  ten-
dency to  bias  them  unfairly.  They  are  addressed,  as
of  old,  by  the  litigants  or  their  advocates,  but  their
inquiry  concludes  with  a  security  unknown  to
antiquity,  the  summing-up  of  the  expert  President,
who  is  bound  by  all  the  rules  of  his  profession  to  the
sternest  impartiality.  If  he  errs,  or  if  they  flagrantly
err,  the  proceedings  may  be  quashed  by  a  superior
Court  of  experts.  Such  is  Popular  Justice,  after  ages
of  cultivation.  Now  it  happens  that  the  oldest  Greek
poet  has  left  us  a  picture,  certainly  copied  from  reality,
of  what  Popular  Justice  was  in  its  infancy.  The
primitive  Court  is  sitting  ;  the  question  is  "  guilty  "
or  "  not  guilty.'^  The  old  men  of  the  community
give  their  opinions  in  turn  ;  the  adjudicating  Demo-
cracy, the  commons  standing  round  about,  applaud
the  opinion  which  strikes  them  most,  and  the  applause
determines  the  decision.  The  Popular  Justice  of  the
ancient  republics  was  essentially  of  the  same  charac-
ter. The  adjudicating  Democracy  simply  followed
the  opinion  which  most,impressed  them  in  the  speech
of  the  advocate  or  litigant.  Nor  is  it  in  the  least
doubtful  that,  but  for  the  sternly  repressive  authority
of  the  presiding  Judge,  the  modern  English  Jury
would,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  blindly  surrender  its
verdict  to  the  persuasiveness  of  one  or  other  of  the
counsel  who  have  been  retained  to  address  it.


9-2  THE  NATURE OF  DEMOCRACY.  essay  a,

A  modern  governing  democracy  is  the  old  adjudi-
cating democracy  very  slightly  changed.  It  cannot
indeed  be  said  that  no  attempt  has  been  made  to
introduce  into  the  multitudinous  government  modi-
fications resembling  those  which  have  turned  the
multitudinous  tribunal  into  the  Jury,  for  a  variety
of  expedients  for  mitigating  the  difficulty  of  popular
government  have  been  invented  and  applied  in  Eng-
land and  the  United  States.  But  in  our  day  a
movement  appears  to  have  very  distinctly  set  in
towards  unmodified  democracy,  the  government  of  a
great  multitude  of  men  striving  to  take  the  bulk  of
their  own  public  affairs  into  their  own  hands.  Such
a- government  can  only  decide  the  questions  submitted
to  it,  as  the  old  popular  Courts  of  Justice  decided
them,  by  applauding  somebody  who  speaks  to  it.
The  ruling  multitude  will  only  form  an  opinion  by
following  the  opinion  of  somebody — it  may  be  of  a
great  party  leader— it  may  be,  of  a  small  local  poli-
tician— it  may  be,  of  an  organised  association — it
may  be,  of  an  impersonal  newspaper.  The  process
of  deciding  in  accordance  with  plausibilities  (in  the
strict  sense  of  this  last  word)  goes  on  over  an  enor-
mous area,  growing  ever  more  confused  and  capricious,
and  giving  results  even  more  ambiguous  or  inarticu-
late, as  the  numbers  to  be  consulted  are  multiplied.

The  most  interesting,  and  on  the  whole  the  most
successful,  experiments  in  popular  government,  are


ESSAT  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  83

those  which  have  frankly  recognised  the  difficulty
under  which  it  labours.  At  the  head  of  these  we
must  place  the  virtually  English  discovery  of  govern-
ment by  Representation,  which  caused  Parliamentary
institutions  to  be  preserved  in  these  islands  from  the
destruction  which  overtook  them  everywhere  else,  and
to  devolve  as  an  inheritance  upon  the  United  States.
Under  this  system,  when  it  was  in  its  prime,  an  elec-
to:  al  body,  never  in  this  country  extraordinarily  large,
chose  a  number  of  persons  to  represent  it  in  Parlia-
ment, leaving  them  unfettered  by  express  instruc-
tions, but  having  with  them  at  most  a  general
understanding,  that  they  would  strive  to  give  a  par-
ticular direction  to  public  policy.  The  effect  was  to
diminish  the  difficulties  of  popular  government,  in
exact  proportion  to  the  diminution  in  the  number  of
persons  who  had  to  decide  public  questions.  But
this  famous  system  is  evidently  in  decay,  through
the  ascendency  over  it  which  is  being  gradually  ob-
tained by  the  vulgar  assumption  that  great ^masseg^.of
men  can  directly  decide  all  necessary  questions  for
themselves.  The  agency,  by  which  the  representa-
tive is  sought  to  be  turned  into  the  mere  mouthpiece
of  opinions  collected  in  the  locality  which  sent  him
to  the  House  of  Commons,  is,  we  need  hardly  say,
that  which  is  generally  supposed  to  have  been  intro-
duced from  the  United  States  under  the  name  of  the
Caucus, but which had very possibly  a  domestic


94  THE  NATURE OF  DEMOCRACY.  essay  n.

exemplar  in  the  ecclesiastical  organisation  of  the
Wesleyan  Methodists.  The  old  Italian  toxicologists
are  said  to  have  always  arranged  their  discoveries  in  a
series  of  three  terms — first  the  poison,  next  the  anti-
dote, thirdly  the  drug  which  neutralised  the  antidote.
The  antidote  to  the  fundamental  infirmities  of  demo-
cracy was  Representation,  but  the  drug  which  defeats
it  has  now  been  found  in  the  Caucus.  And,  by  an
unhappy  mischance,  the  rapid  conversion  of  the  un-
fettered representative  into  the  instructed  delegate
has  occurred  just  at  the  time  when  the  House  of
Commons  itself  is  beginning  to  feel  the  inevitable
difiiculties  produced  by  its  numerousness.  Jeremy
Bentham  used  to  denounce  the  non-attendance  of
Members  of  Parliament  at  all  sittings  as  a  grave
abuse  ;  but  it  now  appears  that  the  scanty  attend-
ance of  members,  and  the  still  scantier  participation
of  most  of  them  in  debate,  were  essential  to  the  con-
duct of  business  by  the  House  of  Commons,  which
was  then,  as  it  is  still,  the  most  numerous  deliberative
Assembly  in  the  world.  The  Obstruction  spoken  of
by  politicians  of  experience  with  lamentation  and  sur-
prise is  nothing  more  than  a  symptom  of  the  familiar
disease  of  large  governing  bodies  ;  it  arises  from  the
numbers  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and  from  the
variety  of  opinions  struggling  in  it  for  utterance.
The  remedies  hitherto  tried  for  the  cure  of  Obstruc-
tion will  prove,  in  my  judgment,  to  be  merely  pal-


ESSAY  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  95

iiatives.  No  multitudinous  assembly  whicli  seeks
really  to  govern  can  possibly  be  free  from  it  ;  and
it  will  probably  lead  to  a  constitutional  revolution,
the  House  of  Commons  abandoning  the  greatest  part
of  its  legislative  authority  to  a  Cabinet  of  Executive
Ministers.

Another  experiment,  which,  like  the  system  of
Representation,  is  founded  on  the  acknowledgment  of
fundamental  difficulties,  has  been  attempted  several
times  in  our  generation,  though  not  in  our  country.
In  one  of  its  forms  it  has  been  known  as  the  Plebis-
cite. A  question,  or  a  series  of  questions,  is  simplified
as  much  as  possible,  and  the  entire  enfranchised  por-
tion of  the  community  is  asked  to  say  "  Aye "  or
''No"  to  it.  The  zealots  of  democracy  are  beginning
to  forget,  or  conveniently  to  put  aside,  the  enormous
majorities  by  which  the  French  nation,  now  supposed
to  be  governing  itself  as  a  democracy,  gave  only  the
other  day  to  a  military  despot  any  answer  which  he
desired  ;  but  it  may  be  conceded  to  them  that  the
question  put  to  the  voters  was  not  honestly  framed,
however  much  it  was  simplified  in  form.  Whether
Louis  Napoleon  Bonaparte  should  be  President  for
life  with  large  legislative  powers  ?  whether  he  should
be  an  hereditary  Emperor  ?  whether  he  should  be
allowed  to  divest  himself  of  a  portion  of  the  autho-
rity he  had  assumed?  were  not  simple,  but  highly
complex  questions,  incapable  of  being  replied  to  by


3^  THE NATURE OF  DEMOCRACY.  essay  ii.

a  naked  "  Yes  "  or  "  No." But  the  principle  of  the
Plebiscite  has  been  engrafted  on  the  Swiss  Federal
Constitution  ;  and  in  some  of  the  Cantonal  Constitu-
tions the  "  Referendum,"  as  it  is  called,  had  existed
from  an  earlier  date. Here  there  is  no  ground  for  a
charge  of  dishonesty. A  new  law  is  first  thoroughly
debated,  voted  upon,  and  amended,  by  the  Legisla-
ture ;  and  the  debates  are  carried  by  the  newspapers
to  every  corner  of  Swiss  territory. But  it  does  not
come  at  once  into  force. If  a  certain  number  of  citi-
zens so  desire,  the  entire  electoral  body  is  called  upon
to  say  "  Aye  "  or  "  No  "  to  the  question  whether  the
law  shall  become  operative. I  do  not  undertake  to
say  that  the  expedient  has  failed,  but  it  can  only  be
considered  thoroughly  successful  by  those  who  wish
that  there  should  be  as  little  legislation  as  possible.
Contrary  to  all  expectations,^  to  the  bitter  disappoint-
ment of  the  authors  of  the  Referendum,  laws  of  the

^  What  these  expectations  were,  may  be  gathered  from  the
language  of  M.  Numa  Dyoz.  M.  Droz  calls  the  Referendum
"Fessai  le  plus  grandiose  qu'une  Republique  ait  jamais  tente."
The  effect,  however,  has  been  that,  since  the  commencement  of  the
experiment  in  1874  there  have  been  vetoed,  among  other  laws
passecl  by  the  Federal  Legislature,  an  Electoral  Law  (twice  over),
a  Law  on  Currency,  a  Law  creating  a  Department  of  Education,
a  Law  creating  a  Department  of  J  ustice,  a  Law  providing  a  salary
for  a  Secretary  of  Legation  at  Washington,  and  a  Law  periisiitting
the  Venice  to  be  changed  to  the  Federal  Court  when  there  is  reason
to  suspect  the  fairness  of  a  Cantonal  tribunal.  It  is  remarkable
that,  under  a  Cantonal  Referendum,  a  Law  establishing  a  pro-
gressive Income  Tax  was  negatived.


ESSAY  n.  THE  NATURE OF  DEMOCRACY.  97

highest  importance,  some  of  them  openly  framed  for
popularity,  have  been  vetoed  by  the  People  after  they
had  been  adopted  by  the  Federal  or  Cantonal  Legis-
lature. This  result  is  sufficiently  intelligible.  It  is
possible,  by  agitation  and  exhortation,  to  produce  in
the  mind  of  the  average  citizen  a  vague  impression
that  he  desires  a  particular  change.  But,  when  the
agitation  has  settled  down  on  the  dregs,  when  the
excitement  has  died  away,  when  the  subject  has  been
threshed  out,  when  the  law  is  before  him  with  all  its
detail,  he  is  sure  to  find  in  it  much  that  is  likely  to
disturb  his  habits,  his  ideas,  his  prejudices,  or  his  in-
terests ;  and  so,  in  the  long-run,  he  votes  "  No  "  to
every  proposal.  The  delusion  that  Democracy,  when
it  has  once  had  all  things  put  under  its  feet,  is  a  pro-
gressive form  of  government,  lies  deep  in  the  convic-
tions of  a  particular  political  school;  but  there  can
no  delusion  grosser.  It  receives  no  countenance
^ther  from  experience  or  from  probability.  English-
men in  the  East  come  into  contact  with  vast  popula-
tions of  high  natural  intelligence,  to  which  the  very
notion  of  innovation  is  loathsome  ;  and  the  very  fact
that  such  populations  exist  should  suggest  that  the
true  difference  between  the  East  and  the  West  lies
merely  in  this,  that  in  Western  countries  there  is  a
larger  minority  of  exceptional  persons  who,  for  good
reasons  or  bad,  have  a  real  desire  for  change.  All
that  has  made  England  famous,  and  all  that  has  made


OB  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  n.

England  wealthy,  has  been  the  work  of  minorities,
sometimes  very  small  ones.  It  seems  to  me  quite
certain  that,  if  for  four  centuries  there  had  been  a
very  widely  extended  franchise  and  a  very  large  elec-
toral body  in  this  country,  there  would  have  been
no  reformation  of  religion,  no  change  of  dynasty,  no
toleration  of  Dissent,  not  even  an  accurate  Calendar.
The  threshing-machine,  the  power-loom,  the  spinning-
jenny,  and  possibly  the  steam-engine,  would  have  been
prohibited.  Even  in  our  day,  vaccination  is  in  the
utmost  danger,  and  we  may  say  generally  that  the
gradual  establishment  of  the  masses  in  power  is  of
the  blackest  omen  for  all  legislation  founded  on
scientific  opinion,  which  requires  tension  of  mind  to
understand  it  and  self-denial  to  submit  to  it.

The  truth  is,  that  the  inherent  difficulties  of
democratic  government  are  so  manifold  and  enor-
mous that,  in  large  and  complex  modern  societies,
it  could  neither  last  nor  work  if  it  were  not  aided  by
certain  forces  which  are  not  exclusively  associated
with  it,  but  of  which  it  greatly  stimulates  the  energy.
Of  these  forces,  the  one  to  which  it  owes  most  is
unquestionably  Party.

No  force  acting  on  mankind  has  been  less  care-
fully examined  than  Party,  and  yet  none  better
deserves  examination.  The  difficulty  which  Eng-
lishmen in  particular  feel  about  it  is  very  like  that
which  men  once  experienced  when  they  were  told


ESSAY  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  99

that  the  air  had  weight.  It  enveloped  them  so  evenly
and  pressed  on  them  so  equally,  that  the  assertion
seemed  incredible.  Nevertheless  it  is  not  hard  to
show  that  Party  and  Party  Government  are  "very
extraordinary  things.  Let  us  suppose  it  to  be  still
the  fashion  to  write  the  apologues  so  dear  to  the  last
century,  in  which  some  stranger  from  the  East  or
West,  some  Persian  full  of  intelligent  curiosity,  some
Huron  still  unspoilt  by  civilisation,  or  some  unpre-
judiced Bonze  from  India  or  China,  described  the
beliefs  and  usages  of  European  countries,  just  as  they
struck  him,  to  his  kinsmen  at  the  other  end  of  the
world.  Let  us  assume  that  in  one  of  these  trifles,  by
a  Voltaire  or  a  Montesquieu,  the  traveller  gave  an
account  of  a  cultivated  and  powerful  European  Com-
monwealth, in  which  the  system  of  government  con-
sisted in  half  the  cleverest  men  in  the  country  taking
the  utmost  pains  to  prevent  the  other  half  from  go-
verning. Or  let  us  imagine  some  modern  writer,  with
the  unflinching  perspicacity  of  a  Machiavelli,  analysing
the  great  Party  Hero — leader  or  agitator — as  the
famous  Italian  analysed  the  personage  equally  inte-
resting and  important  in  his  day,  the  Tyrant  or
Prince.  Like  Machiavelli,  he  would  not  stop  to
praise  or  condemn  on  ethical  grounds  :  "  he  would
follow  the  real  truth  of  things  rather  than  an  imagi-
nary view  of  them.'^^  "Many  Party  Heroes,"  he
•  Ths  Prince,  xv.  (101).


100  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  lu

would  say,  "  have  been  imagined,  who  were  never
seen  or  known  to  exist  in  reality.'^  But  he  would
describe  them  as  they  really  were.  Allowing  them
every  sort  of  private  virtue,  he  would  deny  that  their
virtues  had  any  effect  on  their  public  conduct,  except
so  far  as  they  helped  to  make  men  believe  their  public
conduct  virtuous.  But  this  public  conduct  he  would
find  to  be  not  so  much  immoral  as  non-moral.  He
would  infer,  from  actual  observation,  that  the  party
Hero  was  debarred  by  his  position  from  the  full  prac-
tice of  the  great  virtues  of  veracity,  justice,  and  moral
intrepidity.  He  could  seldom  tell  the  full  truth  ;  he
could  never  be  fair  to  persons  other  than  his  followers
and  associates ;  he  could  rarely  be  bold  except  in  the
interests  of  his  faction.  The  picture  drawn  by  him
would  be  one  which  few  living  men  would  deny  to  be
correct,  though  they  might  excuse  its  occurrence  in
nature  on  the  score  of  moral  necessity.  And  then,  a
century  or  two  later,  when  Democracies  were  as  much
forgotten  as  the  Italian  Princedoms,  our  modern  Ma-
chiavelli  would  perhaps  be  infamous  and  his  work  a
proverb  of  immorality.

Party  has  many  strong  affinities  with  Religion.
Its  devotees,  like  those  of  a  religious  creed,  are  apt  to
substitute  the  fiction  that  they  have  adopted  it  upon
mature  deliberation  for  the  fact  that  they  were  born
into  it  or  stumbled  into  it.  But  they  are  in  the
highest  degree  reluctant  to  come  to  an  open  breach


ESSAY  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  101

with  it  ;  they  count  it  shame  to  speak  of  its  weak
points,  except  to  co-religionists  ;  and,  whenever  it  is
in  serious  difficulty,  they  return  to  its  assistance  or
rescue.  Their  relation  to  those  outside  the  pale — the
relation  of  Whig  to  Tory,  of  Conservative  to  Liberal
— is  on  the  whole  exceedingly  like  that  of  Jew  to

/^  Samaritan.  But  the  closest  resemblances  are  between
party  discipline  and  military  discipline  ;  and  indeed,
historically  speaking,  Party  is  probably  nothing  more

V  than  a  survival  and  a  consequence  of  the  primitive
combativeness  of  mankind.  It  is  war  without  the
city  transmuted  into  war  within  the  city,  but  miti-
gated in  the  process.  The  best  historical  justification
which  can  be  offered  for  it  is  that  it  has  often
enabled  portions  of  the  nation,  who  would  otherwise
be  armed  enemies,  to  be  only  factions.  Party  strife,
like  strife  in  arms,  develops  many  high  but  imper-
fect and  one-sided  virtues  ;  it  is  fruitful  of  self-denial
and  self-sacrifice.  But  wherever  it  prevails,  a  great
part  of  ordinary  morality  is  unquestionably  sus-
pended ;  a  number  of  maxims  are  received,  which
are  not  those  of  religion  or  ethics  ;  and  men  do  acts
which,  except  as  between  enemies,  and  except  as
between  political  opponents,  would  be  very  generally
classed  as  either  immoralities  or  sins.
j  Party  disputes  were  originally  the  occupation  of

I aristocracies,  which  joined  in  them  because  they  loved
I the  sport  for  its  own  sake  ;  and  the  rest  of  the  com-


102  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  ESSA.Y  ii.

munity  followed  one  side  or  the  other  as  its  clients.
Now-a-days,  Party  has  become  a  force  acting  with  vast
energy  on  multitudinous  democracies,  and  a  number
of  artificial  contrivances  have  been  invented  for  facili-
tating and  stimulating  its  action.  Yet,  in  a  demo-
cracy, the  fragment  of  political  power  falling  to  each
man's  share  is  so  extremely  small,  that  it  would  be
hardly  possible,  with  all  the  aid  of  the  Caucus,  the
Stump,  and  the  Campaign  newspaper,  to  rouse  the
interests  of  thousands  or  millions  of  men,  if  Party
were  not  coupled  with  another  political  force.  This,
to  speak  plainly,  is  Corruption.  A  story  is  current'
respecting  a  conversation  of  the  great  American,
Alexander  Hamilton,  with  a  friend  who  expressed
wonder  at  Hamilton's  extreme  admiration  of  so
corrupt  a  system  as  that  covered  by  the  name  of
the  British  Constitution.  Hamilton  is  said  to  have,
in  reply^  expressed  his  belief  that  when  the  corrup-
tion came  to  an  end  the  Constitution  would  fall  to
pieces.  The  corruption  referred  to  was  that  which
had  been  openly  practised  by  the  Whig  Ministers
of  George  I.  and  George  II.  through  the  bestowal
of  places  and  the  payment  of  sums  of  money,  but
which  in  the  reign  of  George  III.  had  died  down
to  an  obscurer  set  of  malpractices,  ill-understood,
but  partially  explained  by  the  constant  indebtedness
of  the  thrifty  King.  Hamilton  of  course  meant  that,
amid  the  many  difficulties  of  popular  government,


ES8AT  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  103

he  doubted  whether,  in  its  English  form,  it  could  be
carried  on,  unless  support  were  purchased  by  governr
ments  ;  and  this  opinion  might  very  plausibly  have
been  held  concerning  the  early  governments  of  the
Hanoverian  dynasty,  so  deeply  unpopular  did  the
"  Revolution  Settlement "  soon  become  with  large
classes  of  Englishmen.  What  put  an  end  to  this
corruption  was  in  reality  not  an  English  but  a  French
phenomenon — the  Revolution  begun  in  1789,  which,
through  the  violent  repulsion  with  which  it  inspired
the  greatest  part  of  the  nation,  and  the  half- avowed
attraction  which  it  had  for  the  residue,  supplied  the
English  parties  with  principles  of  action  which  did
not  need  the  co-operation  of  any  corrupt  inducement
to  partisanship.  The  corruption  which  we  find  de-
nounced by  Bentham  after  the  close  of  the  great  war
was  not  bribery,  but  vested  interest ;  nor  did  the  old
practices  ever  revive  in  England  in  their  ancient
shape.  Votes  at  elections  continued  to  be  bought
and  sold,  but  not  votes  in  Parliament.

Whether  Hamilton  looked  forward  to  an  era  of
purity  in  his  own  country,  cannot  be  certainly
known.  He  and  his  coadjutors  undoubtedly  were
unprepared  for  the  rapid  development  of  Party
which  soon  set  in  ;  they  evidently  thought  that  their
country  would  be  poor  ;  and  they  probably  expected
to  see  all  evil  influences  defeated  by  the  elaborate
contrivances  of  the  Federal  Constitution* But  the


104  THE  NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essat  li.

TJnited  States  became  rapidly  wealthy  and  rapidly
populous  ;  and  the  universal  suffrage  of  all  white
men,  native-born  or  immigrant,  was  soon  established
by  the  legislation  of  the  most  powerful  States.  With
wealth,  population,  and  widely  diffused  electoral
power,  corruption  sprang  into  vigorous  life.  President
Andrew  Jackson,  proclaiming  the  principle  of  "to
the  victors  the  spoils,"  which  all  parties  soon  adopted,
expelled  from  office  all  administrative  servants  of
the  United  States  who  did  not  belong  to  his
faction  ;  and  the  crowd  of  persons  filling  these
offices,  which  are  necessarily  very  numerous  in  so
vast  a  territory,  together  with  the  groups  of  wealthy
men  interested  in  public  lands  and  in  the  countless
industries  protected  by  the  Customs  tariff,  formed  an
extensive  body  of  contributors  from  whom  great
amounts  of  money  were  levied  by  a  species  of  taxa-
tion, to  be  presently  expended  in  wholesale  bribery.
A  reaction  against  this  system  carried  the  present
President  of  the  United  States  into  office  ;  but  the
opinion  of  almost  all  the  politicians  who  the  other  day
supported  Mr.  Blaine  bore  probably  the  closest  resem-
blance to  Hamilton's  opinion  about  Great  Britain.
They  were  persuaded  that  the  American  Party  system
cannot  continue  without  corruption.  It  is  impossible
to  lay  down  M.  Scherer's  pamphlet  ^  without  a  convic-
tion, that  the  same  opinion  is  held  of  France  by  the
'  See  especially  pages  24,  25,  27,  29,  35.


K88AT  U.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  105

public  men  who  direct  the  public  affairs  of  the  French
Republic.  The  account  which  this  writer  gives  of
the  expedients  by  which  all  French  Governments
have  sought  to  secure  support,  since  the  resignation
of  Marshal  MacMahon,  is  most  deplorable.  There  is
a  scale  of  public  corruption,  with  an  excessive  and
extravagant  scheme  of  public  works  at  one  end  of  it,
and  at  the  other  the  open  barter  of  votes  by  the
electoral  committees  for  the  innumerable  small  places
in  the  gift  of  the  highly  centralised  French  adminis-
tration. The  principle  that  the  spoils  belong  to  the
victors  has  been  borrowed  from  the  United  States,
and  receives  a  thoroughgoing  application.  Every
branch  of  the  public  service — even,  since  M.  Scherer
wrote,  the  judicial  bench — has  been  completely  purged
of  functionaries  not  professing  allegiance  to  the  party
in  power  for  the  time  being.

We  Englishmen,  alone  among  popularly  governed
communities,  have  tried  an  expedient  peculiar  to  our-
selves. We  have  handed  over  all  patronage  to  the
Civil  Service  Commissioners,  and  we  have  adopted
the  Corrupt  Practices  Act.  It  is  a  most  singular
fact,  that  the  only  influences  havmg  an  affinity  for
the  old  corruption,  which  still  survive  in  Great
Britain,  are  such  as  can  be  brought  to  bear  on  those
exalted  regions  of  society,  in  which  stars,  garters,
ribands,  titles,  and  lord-lieutenancies,  still  circulate.
What  will  be  the  effect  on  British  government  of  the


k


lOe  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  n.

heroic  remedies  we  have  administered  to  ourselves,
has  yet  to  be  seen.  What  will  come  of  borrowing
the  Caucus  from  the  United  States,  and  refusing  to
soil  our  fingers  with  the  oil  used  in  its  native  country
to  lubricate  the  wheels  of  the  machine?  Perhaps  we
are  not  at  liberty  to  forget  that  there  are  two  kinds
of  bribery.  It  can  be  carried  on  by  promising  or
giving  to  expectant  partisans  places  paid  out  of  the
taxes,  or  it  may  consist  in  the  directer  process  of
legislating  away  the  property  of  one  class  and  trans-
ferring it  to  another.  It  is  this  last  which  is  likely
to  be  the  corruption  of  these  latter  days.

Party  and  Corruption,  as  influences  which  have
shown  themselves  capable  of  bringing  masses  of  men
under  civil  discipline,  are  probably  as  old  as  the  very
beginning  of  political  life.  The  savage  ferocity  of
party  strife  in  the  Greek  States  has  been  described
by  the  great  Greek  historian  in  some  of  his  most
impressive  sentences ;  and  nothing  in  modern  times
has  approached  the  proportions  of  the  corruption
practised  at  the  elections  of  the  Roman  Republic,
in  spite  of  all  the  impediments  placed  in  its  way
by  an  earlier  form  of  the  Ballot.  But  in  quite
recent  times  a  third  expedient  has  been  discovered
for  producing,  not  indeed  agreement,  but  the  sem-
blance of  agreement,  in  a  multitude  of  men.  This
is  generalisation,  the  trick  of  rapidly  framing,  and
confidently  uttering,  general  propositions  on  political


ESSAY  Ti.  THE NATURE OF  DEMOCRACY.  107

subjects. It was once supposed that the power
of  appreciating  general  propositions  was especially
characteri3tic of  the highest minds,  which  it  dis-
tinguished  from those of  a vulgar  stamp always
immersed in detail and in particulars. Once or
twice,  indeed, in the course of  their intellectual
history, mankind have fallen on their knees to
worship generalisation; and indeed, without help
from  it,  it is  probable that  the  strongest  intellect  j
would  not be able  to  bear  the ever- accumulating  I
burden  of  particular  facts. But,  in  these  latter  days,  j
a  ready  belief  in  generalities  has  shown  itself  to  be  I
a  characteristic,  not  indeed of  wholly  uneducated,
but  of  imperfectly  educated  minds. Meantime,  men
ambitious  of  political  authority  have  found  out  the
secret  of  manufacturing  generalities  in  any  number.
Nothing  can  be  simpler. All  generalisation  is  the
product  of  abstraction  ; all abstraction  consists  in
dropping  out  of  sight  a  certain  number  of  particular
facts,  and  constructing  a  formula  which  will  embrace
the  remainder  ;  and  the  comparative  value  of  general I
propositions  turns  entirely  on  the  relative  importance
of  the  particular  facts  selected  and  of  the  particular
facts  rejected. The  modern  facility  of  generalisation
is  obtained  by  a  curious  precipitation  and  careless-
ness in this  selection and rejection, which, when
properly  carried out^  is the only  difficult  part  of
the  entire  process. General  formulas,  which  can  be


108  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  ii.

seen  on  examination  to  have  been  arrived  at  by
attending  only  to  particulars  few,  trivial,  or  irrele-
vant, are  turned  out  in  as  much  profusion  as  if
they  dropped  from  an  intellectual  machine ;  and
debates  in  the  House  of  Commons  may  be  constantly
read,  which  consisted  wholly  in  the  exchange  of
weak  generalities  and  strong  personalities.  On  a
pure  Democracy  this  class  of  general  formulas  has
a  prodigious  effect.  Crowds  of  men  can  be  got  to
assent  to  general  statements,  clothed  in  striking
language,  but  unverified  and  perhaps  incapable  of
verification  ;  and  thus  there  is  formed  a  sort  of  sham
and  pretence  of  concurrent  opinion.  There  has  been
a  loose  acquiescence  in  a  vague  proposition,  and  then
the  People,  whose  voice  is  the  voice  of  God,  is
assumed  to  have  spoken.  Useful  as  it  is  to  demo-
cracies, this  levity  of  assent  is  one  of  the  most
enervating  of  national  habits  of  mind.  It  has
seriously  enfeebled  the  French  intellect.  It  is  most
injuriously  affecting  the  mind  of  England.  Ilj
threatens  little  short  of  ruin  to  the  awakening  intel-
lect of  India,  where  political  abstractions,  founded
exclusively  upon  English  facts,  and  even  here  re-
quiring qualidcation,  are  applied  by  the  educated
minority,  and  by  their  newspapers,  to  a  society
which,  through  nine-tenths  of  its  structure,  belongs
to  thoJiJiiciienth  century  of  the  West.

The  points  which  I  have  attempted  to  establish


BSSAY  11.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  109

are  these.  Without  denying  to  democratic  govern-
ments some  of  the  advantages  which  were  claimed
for  them  by  the  one  thinker  of  the  first  order  who
has  held  Dea^.ocracy  to  be  in  itself  a  good  form  of
government,  I  have  pointed  out  that  it  has  the  signal
disadvantage  of  being  the  most  difficult  of  all  govern-
ments, and  that  the  principal  inlkiences  by  which
this  difficulty  has  hitherto  been  mitigated  are  in-
jurious either  to  the  morality  or  to  the  intellect  of
the  governing  multitude.  If  the  government  of  the
Many  be  really  inevitable,  one  would  have  thought
that  the  possibility  of  discovering  some  other  and
newer  means  of  enabling  it  to  fulfil  the  ends  for
which  all  governments  exist,  would  have  been  a
question  exercising  all  the  highest  powers  of  the
strongest  minds,  particularly  in  the  community
which,  through  the  success  of  its  popular  institutions,
has  paved  the  way  for  all  modern  Democracy.  Yet
hardly  anything  worth  mentioning  has  been  pro-
duced on  the  subject  in  England  or  on  the  Continent.
I  ought,  however,  to  notice  a  series  of  discussions
which  have  long  been  going  on  in  the  little  State
of  Belgium,  ending  in  a  remarkable  experiment.
Alarmed  by  a  reckless  agitation  for  universal  suffrage,
the  best  heads  in  the  country  have  devised  an
electoral  law,^  which  is  worthy  of  the  most  respectful

^  Cede  Electoral  Belge^ p.  289. Provincial  and Communal
Law  of  August  24,  1883.
I


110  THE  NATURE OF  DEMOCRACY.  essay  ii.

attention.  Under  its  provisions,  an  attempt  is  made
to  attach  the  franchise,  not  only  to  property,  but  to
proved  capacity  in  all  its  manifestations,  to  confer  it
not  simply  on  the  men  who  contribute  a  certain
amount  to  the  revenue,  but  on  every  man  who  has
taken  honours  at  a  High  School  or  at  College,  on
everybody  who  can  pass  an  examination  with  credit,
on  every  foreman  of  a  workshop  or  factory.  The
idea  is  to  confer  power  not  on  the  Many,  but  on  the
strongest  among  the  Many.  The  experiment,  how-
ever, is  at  present  confined  to  Provincial  and  Com-
munal Elections ;  and  we  have  yet  to  see  whether  an
electoral  system,  which  would  be  attended  by  pecu-
liar difficulties  in  England,  can  be  successfully  carried
out  even  in  Belgium.  On  the  whole,  there  is  only
one  country  in  which  the  question  of  the  safest  and
most  workable  form  of  democratic  government  has
been  adequately  discussed,  and  the  results  of  discus-
sion tested  by  experiment.  This  is  the  United  States
of  America.  American  experience  has,  I  think,  shown
that,  by  wise  Constitutional  provisions  thoroughly
thought  out  beforehand.  Democracy  may  be  made
tolerable.  The  public  powers  are  carefully  defined  ;
the  mode  in  which  they  are  to  be  exercised  is  fixed  ;
and  the  amplest  securities  are  taken  that  none  of  the
more  important  Constitutional  arrangements  shall  be
altered  without  every  guarantee  of  caution  and  everj?"
opportunity  for  deliberation. The  expedient  is  not


ESSAI  II.  TflE NATURE Oi'  DEMOCRACY.  Ill

concli^ive,  for  the  Americans,  settled  in  a  coimtry
of  boundless  unexhausted  wealth,  have  never  been
tempted  to  engage  in  socialistic  legislation ;  but,  as  far
as  it  has  gone,  a  large  measure  of  success  cannot  be
denied  to  it,  success  which  has  all  but  dispelled  the
old  ill-fame  of  democracies.  The  short  history  of  the
United  States  has,  at  the  same  time,  established  one
momentous  negative  conclusion.  When  a  democracy
governs,  it  is  not  safe  to  leave  unsettled  any  im-
portant question  concerning  the  exercise  of  public
powers.  I  might  give  many  instances  of  this,  but
the  most  conclusive  is  the  War  of  Secession,  which
was  entirely  owing  to  the  omission  of  the  "  fathers  "
to  provide  beforehand  for  the  solution  of  certain
Constitutional  problems,  lest  they  should  stir  the
topic  of  negro  slavery.  It  would  seem  that,  by  a  wise
Constitution,  Democracy  may  be  made  nearly  as  calm
as  water  in  a  great  artificial  reservoir ;  but  if  there  is
a  weak  point  anywhere  in  the  structure,  the  mighty
force  which  it  controls  will  burst  through  it  and
spread  destruction  far  and  near.

This  warning  deserves  all  the  attention  of  English-
men. They  are  opening  the  way  to  Democracy  on  all
sides.  Let  them  take  heed  that  it  be  not  admitted
into  a  receptacle  of  loose  earth  and  sand.  And,  in
laying  this  caution  to  heart,  it  would  be  well  for  them
to  consider  what  sort  of  a  Constitution  it  is  to  which
they  must  trust  for  the  limitation  of  the  powers,  and


1


119  THE NATUKE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  n.

the  neutralisation  of  tlie  weaknesses,  of  the  t^jvo  or
three  millions  of  voters  who  have  been  admitted  to
the  suffrage,  in  addition  to  the  multitude  enfranchised
in  1867.  The  events  of  the  summer  and  autumn  of
1884  were  not  reassuring.  During  ail  that  time,
the  air  was  hot  and  thick  with  passionate  asser-
tions  of  contradictory  opinions.  The  points  on  which
the  controversy  turned  were  points  in  the  construc-
tion of  the  Constitution,  and  the  fact  that  the  ablest '
men  in  the  country  took  sides  upon  them  proves  them
to  be  unsettled.  Nor  does  there  exist  any  acknow-
ledged authority  by  which  they  can  be  adjudicated
upon  and  decided.  It  is  useless  to  appeal  to  the  law,
for  the  very  charge  against  the  House  of  Lords  was,
that  the  law  had  been  put  abusively  into  operation.
It  is  useless  to  allege  the  authority  of  the  electoral
body,  for  the  very  charge  against  the  House  of  Com-
mons was,  that  it  did  not  represent  the  constituencies.
To  describe  such  a  dispute  as  serious,  is  hardly  to  do
it  justice  :  but,  in  order  to  bring  into  full  light  the
scope  and  number  of  the  doubtful  questions  which  it
proved  to  exist,  I  will  mention  in  turn  the  principal
depositaries  of  public  authority  in  this  country — the
Crown,  the  Cabinet,  the  House  of  Lords,  and  the
House  of  Commons — and  I  will  note  the  various
opinions  which  appear  to  be  held  as  to  the  part  which
each  of  them  should  take  in  legislation  by  which  the
structure  of  the  Constitution  is  altered.


tSBxt  m  THE  NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  113

The  powers  over  legislation  whicli  the  law  re-
cognises in  the  Crown  are  its  power  to  veto  Bills
which  have  passed  both  the  House  of  Commons  and
the  House  of  Lords,  and  its  power  to  dissolve  Parlia-
ment. The  first  of  these  powers  has  probably  been
lost  through  disuse.  There  is  not,  at  the  same  time,
the  smallest  reason  for  supposing  that  it  was  aban-
doned through  any  inconsistency  with  popular  go-
vernment. It  was  not  employed,  because  there  was
no  occasion  for  employing  it.  The  reigns  of  the  first
Hanoverian  Sovereigns  were  periods  of  activity  in
foreign  policy,  and  the  legislation  of  the  time  was
utterly  insignificant ;  the  King^s  Government  was,
moreover,  steadily  drawing  to  itself  the  initiative  in
legislation,  and  for  more  than  a  century  the  Kings
succeeded  on  the  whole  in  governing  through  what
Ministers  they  pleased.  As  to  the  right  to  dissolve
Parliament  by  an  indej^endent  exercise  of  the  royal
will,  it  cannot  be  quite  confidently  asserted  to  have
become  obsolete.  The  question  has  been  much  dis-
cussed in  the  Colonies  which  attempt  to  follow  the
British  Constitutional  procedure,  and  it  seems  to  be
generally  allowed  that  a  representative  of  the  Crown
cannot  be  blamed  for  insisting  on  a  dissolution  of  the
Legislature,  though  his  Ministers  are  opposed  to  it.
It  is  probable,  however,  that  in  this  country  the  object
would  be  practically  attained  in  a  different  way.  The
Crown  would  appoint Ministers  who  were  willing


114  THE  NATURE OF  DEMOCRACY.  essay  ii.

to  take  the  not  very  serious  risks  involved  in  appeal-
ing  to  the  constituencies.  The  latest  precedent  in
this  case  is  quite  modern.  William  lY.,  her  Majesty's
uncle  and  immediate  predecessor,  replaced  Lord  Mel-
bourne by  Sir  Robert  Peel  in  1834,  and  Sir  Robert
Peel,  as  he  afterwards  told  the  House  of  Commons,
took  upon  himself  the  entire  responsibility  of  dis-
solving Parliament.

The  Cabinet,  which  through  a  series  of  Constitu-
tional fictions  has  succeeded  to  all  the  powers  of  the
Crown,  has  drawn  to  itself  all,  and  more  than  all,  of
the  royal  power  over  legislation.  It  can  dissolve
Parliament,  and,  if  it  were  to  advise  the  Crown  to
veto  a  Bill  which  has  been  passed  through  both
Houses,  there  is  no  certainty  that  the  proceeding
would  be  seriously  objected  to.  That  it  can  arrest  a
measure  at  any  stage  of  its  progress  through  either
House  of  Parliament,  is  conceded  on  all  hands  ;  and
indeed  the  exercise  of  this  power  was  exemplified  on
the  largest  scale  at  the  end  of  the  Session  of  1884,
when  a  large  number  of  Bills  of  the  highest  import-
ance were  abandoned  in  deference  to  a  Cabinet  deci-
sion. The  Cabinet  has  further  become  the  sole  source
of  all  important  legislation,  and  therefore,  by  the
necessity  of  the  case,  of  all  Constitutional  legislation  ;
and  as  a  measure  amending  the  Constitution  passes
through  the  House  of  Commons,  the  modification  or
maintenance  of  its  details  depends  entirely  on  the  fiat
of  the  Ministers  of  the  day. Although  the  Cabinet,


SS8AT  n.  THE NATUEE OF  DEMOCRACY.  115

as  such,  is  quite  unknown  to  the  law,  it  is  manifestly
the  English  institution  which  is  ever  more  and  more
growing  in  authority  and  influence  ;  and  already,
besides  wielding  more  than  the  legislative  powers  of
the  Crown,  it  has  taken  to  itself  nearly  all  the  legisla-
tive powers  of  Parliament,  depriving  it  in  particular
of  the  whole  right  of  initiation.  The  long  familiarity
of  Englishmen  with  this  institution,  and  with  the
copies  of  it  made  in  the  European  countries  which
possess  Constitutions,  has  blinded  them  to  its  extreme
singularity.  There  is  a  fashion  among  historians  of
expressing  wonder,  not  unmixed  with  dislike,  at  the
secret  bodies  and  councils  which  they  occasionally
find  invested  with  authority  in  famous  States.  In
ancient  history,  the  Spartan  Ephors — in  modern
history,  the  Venetian  Council  of  Ten — are  criticised
in  this  spirit.  Many  of  these  writers  are  Englishmen,
and  yet  they  seem  quite  unconscious  that  their  own
country  is  governed  by  a  secret  ^  Council.  There  can
be  very  little  doubt  that  the  secrecy  of  the  Cabinet
is its strength. A great  part  of  the  weakness  of

^  No  secret  has  been  better  kept  than  that  of  English  Cabi-
net procedure.  Apart  from  Cabinet  Ministers,  past  and  present,
there  are  probably  not  a  dozen  men  in  the  country  who  know-
accurately  how  Cabinets  conduct  their  deliberations,  and  how
they  arrive  at  a  conclusion.  Some  information  may,  however,  be
obtained  from  the  published  Diaries  of  the  second  Lord  Ellen-
borough,  from  some  printed,  but  unpublished,  Memoirs  left  by
Lord  Broughton  (Sir  J.  Cam  Hobhouse),  and  in  some  degree
from  Lord  Malmesbury's  recent  Memoirs  of  an  ex- Minister,


116  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  ll.

Democracy  springs  from  publicity  of  discussion ;  and
nobody  who  has  had  any  share  in  public  business  can
have  failed  to  observ^C;  that  the  chances  of  agreement
among  even  a  small  number  of  persons  increase  in
nearly  exact  proportion  to  the  chances  of  privacy.  If
the  growth  in  power  of  the  Cabinet  is  checked,  it  will
probably  be  from  causes  of  very  recent  origin.  It  is
essentially  a  committee  of  the  men  who  lead  the  party
which  has  a  majority  in  the  House  of  Commons.  But
there  are  signs  that  its  authority  over  its  party  is
passing  to  other  committees,  selected  less  for  eminence
in  debate  and  administration  than  for  the  adroit  ma-
nagement of  local  political  business.

The  House  of  Lords,  as  a  matter  of  strict  law,
has  the  right  to  reject  or  amend  any  measure  which
is  submitted  to  it ;  nor  has  this  legal  right  in  either
of  its  forms  been  disused  or  abandoned,  save  as  re-
gards money-bills.  But  it  has  lately  become  evident
that,  when  the  right  is  exerted  over  measures  amend-
ing the  Constitution,  strong  differences  of  opinion
exist  as  to  the  mode  and  conditions  of  its  exercise ;
and,  as  is  not  uncommon  in  this  country,  it  is  very
difficult  to  gather  from  the  violent  language  of  the
disputants,  whether  they  contend  that  the  law  should
be  altered,  or  that  the  exertion  of  power  with  which
they  are  quarrelling  is  forbidden  by  usage,  precedent,
conventional  underctanding,  or  mere  expediency.
rhe  varieties  of  doctrine  are  many  and  wide  apart.


MSAY  II.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  117

On  the  one  hand,  one  extreme  party  compares  the  re-
jection of  a  Bill  by  the  House  of  Lords  to  the  veto
of  a  Bill  by  the  Crown,  and  insists  that  the  first
power  should  be  abandoned  as  completely  as  the  last
is  believed  to  have  been.  Conversely,  the  most  in-
fluential ^  members  of  the  House  of  Lords  allow  that
it  would  act  improperly  in  rejecting  a  constitutional
measure,  of  which  the  electoral  body  has  signified
its  approval  by  the  result  of  a  general  election.  Be-
tween these  positions  there  appear  to  be  several  inter-
mediate opinions,  most  of  them,  however,  stated  in
language  of  the  utmost  uncertainty  and  vagueness.
Some  persons  appear  to  think  that  the  House  of
Lords  ought  not  to  reject  or  postpone  a  constitutional
measure  which  affects  the  powers  of  the  House  of
Commons,  or  its  relation  to  the  constituencies,  or  the
constituencies  themselves.  Others  seem  to  consider
that  the  power  of  rejection  might  be  exercised  on
such  a  measure,  if  the  majority  by  which  it  has
passed  the  House  of  Commons  is  small,  but  not  if
it  exceeds  a  certain  number.  Lastly,  little  can  be
extracted  from  the  language  of  a  certain  number  of
controversialists,  violent  as  it  is,  except  an  opinion
that  the  House  of  Lords  ought  not  to  do  wrong,  and
that  it  did  wrong  on  one  particular  occasion.

*  Lord  Salisbury  strongly  urged  this  principle  upon  the  House
of  Lords  when  the  Bill  for  disestablishing  and  disendowing  the
Established  Church  of  Ireland  was  before  it.  This  speech  pro-
bal)ly  secured  the  passing  of  the  BilL


118  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essay  ii.

The  power  of  the  House  of  Commons  over  legis-
lation, including  constitutional  legislation,  might
seem  at  first  sight  to  be  complete  and  unqualified.
Nevertheless,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  it  some  time
ago  surrendered  the  initiative  in  legislation,  and  it
is  now  more  and  more  surrendering  the  conduct  of
it,  to  the  so-called  Ministers  of  the  Crown.  It  may
further  be  observed  from  the  lans^uaore  of  those  who,
on  the  whole,  contend  for  the  widest  extension  of  its
powers,  that  a  new  theory  has  made  its  appearance,
which  raises  a  number  of  embarrassing  questions  as
to  the  authority  of  the  House  of  Commons  in  con-
stitutional legislation.  This  is  the  theory  of  the
Mandate.  It  seems  to  be  conceded  that  the  electoral
body  must  supply  the  House  of  Commons  with  a
Mandate  to  alter  the  Constitution.  It  has  been  as-
serted that  a  Mandate  to  introduce  Household  Suf-
frage into  the  counties  was  given  to  the  House  of
Commons  elected  in  1880,  but  not  a  Mandate  to  con-
fer the  suffrage  on  Women.  What  is  a  Mandate?
As  used  here,  the  word  has  not  the  meaning  which
belongs  to  it  in  English,  French,  or  Latin.  I  conjec-
ture that  it  is  a  fragment  of  a  French  phrase,  mandat
imperatit\  which  means  an  express  direction  from  a
constituency  which  its  representative  is  not  permitted
to  disobey,  and  I  imagine  the  mutilation  to  imply
that  the  direction  may  be  given  in  some  loose  and
general  manner. But  in  what  manner? Is  it  meant


ESSAT  II.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  •  119

that,  if  a  candidate  in  an  election  address  declares
that  he  is  in  favour  of  household  suffraofe  or  woman

o

suffrage,  and  is  afterwards  elected,  he  has  a  mandate
to  vote  for  it,  but  not  otherwise  ?  And,  if  so,  how
many  election  addresses,  containing  such  references,
and  how  many  returns,  constitute  a  Mandate  to  the
entire  House  of  Commons  ?  Again,  assuming  the
Mandate  to  have  been  obtained,  how  long  is  it  in
force  ?  The  House" of  Commons  may  sit  for  seven
years  under  the  Septennial  Act ;  but  the  strict  law
has  hardly  ever  prevailed,  and  in  the  great  majority
of  cases  the  House  of  Commons  has  not  lasted  for
nearly  the  whole  period.  May  it  give  effect  to  its
Mandate  in  its  fourth,  or  fifth,  or  sixth  Session,  or
must  an  alteration  of  the  Constitution  be  the  earliest
measure  to  which  a  Parliament  commissioned  to  deal
with  it  must  address  itself  ?

These  unsettled  questions  formed  the  staple  of  the
controversy  which  raged  among  us  for  months,  but
the  prominence  which  they  obtained  is  not  in  the
very  least  arbitrary  or  accidental.  The  question  of
the  amount  and  nature  of  the  notice  which  the
electoral  body  shall  receive  of  an  intended  change  in
the  Constitution ;  the  question  whether  anything
like  a  ^'  Mandate  "  shall  be  given  by  that  body  to  the
Legislature  ;  the  question  whether  existing  consti-
tuencies shall  have  full  jurisdiction  over  proposed  con-
stitutional innovation  ;  the  question  of  the  majority


120  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  kssay  ii.

whicli  sliall  be  necessary  for  the  decision  of  the
Legislature  on  a  constitutional  measure;  all  these
questions  belong  to  the  very  essence  of  constitutional
doctrine.  There  is  no  one  of  them  which  is  peculiar
to  this  country  ;  what  is  peculiar  to  this  country  is
the  extreme  vagueness  with  which  all  of  them  are
conceived  and  stated.  The  Americans  of  the  United
States,  feeling  on  all  sides  the  strongest  pressure  of
Democracy,  but  equipped  with  a  remarkable  wealth
of  constitutional  knowledge  inherited  from  their  fore-
fathers, have  had  to  take  up  and  solve  every  one
of  them.  I  will  endeavour  to  show  what  have  been
their  methods  of  solution.  I  w^ill  not  at  present  go
for  an  example  to  the  Constitution  of  the  United
States,  abounding  as  it  does  in  the  manifold  restric-
tions thought  necessary  by  its  framers  for  the  pur-
pose of  securing  in  a  probably  democratic  society
the  self-command  without  which  it  could  not  become
or  remain  a  nation.  It  will  be  sufficient  for  my  ob-
ject to  quote  the  provisions  respecting  the  procedure
to  be  followed  on  constitutional  amendments,  con-
tained in  the  Constitutions  of  individual  States,
which,  I  need  not  say,  can  only  legislate  within  the
limits  permitted  to  them  by  the  Federal  Constitution.
One  of  the  subjects,  however,  on  which  the  powers
of  the  several  States  were  till  lately  exclusive  and  are
still  most  extensive,  is  the  Franchise  ;  and  this  gives
a  peculiar  value  and  interest  to  the  provisionB  which


ESS  AT  II.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  121

I  will  proceed  to  extract  from  the  Constitution  of
the  great  State  of  New  York.

Article  13  of  the  Constitution  of  New  York,
which  is  still  in  force,  runs  as  follows  : —

Any  amendment  or  amendments  to  tliis  Constitution  may
be  proposed  to  the  Senate  and  Assembly ;  and  if  the  same
be  agreed  to  by  a  majority  of  the  members  elected  to  each
of  the  two  Houses,  such  amendment  or  amendments  shall
be  entered  on  their  journals  with  the  "  Yeas  "  and  "  Nays  "
taken  thereon,  and  referred  to  the  Legislature  to  be  chosen
at  the  next  general  election,  and  shall  be  published  for  three
months  previous  to  the  time  of  making  such  choice ;  and  if,
in  the  Legislature  so  next  chosen  as  aforesaid,  such  proposed
amendment  or  amendments  shall  be  agreed  to  by  a  majority
of  all  the  members  elected  to  each  House,  then  it  shall  be
the  duty  of  the  Legislature  to  submit  such  proposed  amend-
ment or  amendments  to  the  people  in  such  manner  and  at
such  time  as  the  Legislature  shall  prescribe ;  and  if  the
people  shall  approve  and  ratify  such  amendment  or  amend-
ments by  a  majority  of  the  electors  qualified  to  vote  for
members  of  the  Legislature  voting  thereon,  such  amendment
or  amendments  shall  become  part  of  the  Constitution.

Section  2  of  the  Article  provides  an  alternative
mode  of  amendment.

At  the  general  election  to  be  held  (in  each  twentieth
year),  and  also  at  such  time  as  the  Legislature  may  by  law
provide,  the  question  "  Shall  there  be  a  Convention  to  revise
the  Constitution  and  amend  the  same  ?  "  shall  be  decided  by
the  electors  qualified  to  vote  for  members  of  the  Legislature,
and  in  case  a  majority  of  the  electors  so  qualifie  1  voting  at


122  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  fiSBAT  II.

such  election  shall  decide  in  favour  of  a  Convention  for  such
purpose,  the  Legislature  at  the  next  Session  shall  provide  by
law  for  the  election  of  delegates  to  such  Convention.

These  provisions  of  the  Constitution  of  New  York,
regulating  the  procedure  to  be  followed  in  constitu-
tional amendments,  and  therefore  in  measures  extend-
ing or  altering  the  electoral  franchise,  are  substantially
repeated  in  the  Constitutions  of  nearly  all  the  Ameri-
can States.  Where  there  are  variations,  they  are
generally  in  the  direction  of  greater  stringency.  The
Constitution  of  Ohio,  for  example,  requires  that  there
shall  be  at  the  least  a  three-fifths  majority  in  each
branch  of  the  Legislature  proposing  an  amendment,
and  a  two-thirds  majority  is  necessary  if  it  is  sought
to  summon  a  Convention.  When  an  amendment  is
proposed  in  Massachusetts,  a  two-thirds  majority  is
demanded  in  the  Lower  House  ;  and  the  same  majority
must  be  obtained  in  both  Houses  before  the  Consti-
tution of  Louisiana  can  be  amended.  The  Constitu-
tion of  New  Jersey  gives  greater  precision  to  the
provision  of  the  New  York  Constitution  for  the
ultimate  ratification  of  the  proposed  amendment  by
the  constituencies,  by  inserting,  after  the  words  ''the
people  shall  ratify  and  approve,'^  the  words  "  at  a
special  election  to  be  held  for  that  purpose  only."
The  same  Constitution  declares  that  "  no  amendment
shall  be  submitted  to  the  people  more  than  once  in
five  years  ; "  and,  like  the  Constitutions  of  several


MSAT  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRAOY.  128

other  States,  it  gives  no  power  to  summon  a  revising
Convention.

No  doubt  therefore  is  possible  as  to  the  mode  in
which  these  American  State  Constitutions  settle  the
formidable  questions  Avhich  the  discussion  of  1884
has  shown  to  be  unsettled  in  this  country.  First  of
all,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  electoral  body  recognised
by  all  the  Constitutions,  without  exception,  as  having
an  exclusive  jurisdiction  over  amendments  of  the
Constitution,  is  the  existing  electoral  body,  and  not
any  electoral  body  of  the  future.  Next,  the  most
ample  notice  is  given  to  it  that  an  amendment  of  the
Constitution  will  be  brouoj-ht  before  the  next  Leodsla-
ture  which  it  is  called  upon  to  choose  ;  both  branches
of  the  outgoing  Legislature  must  record  a  resolution
with  the  numbers  of  the  division  upon  it,  and  this
resolution  must  be  published  three  months  before  a
general  election.  It  is  quite  clear,  therefore,  that  the
representatives  chosen  at  this  election  will  have  what
may  be  called  a  "  Mandate."  The  amendment  must
then  be  agreed  to  by  an  absolute  majority  of  the
members  of  both  Houses  of  the  new  Legislature  ;  or,
as  is  required  in  some  States,  by  a  two -thirds  or
three-fifths  majority  in  both  Houses,  or  one  of  them.
But  there  is  a  final  security  in  addition.  The  Man-
date must  be  ratified.  The  amendment  must  be
submitted  to  the  people  in  any  way  which  the
Legislature  may  provide ;  and,  as  is  shown  by  the


124  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  '  essay  a.

Constitution  of  New  Jersey,  the  ratification  is  usually
placed  in  tLe  hands  of  a  special  legislature  specially
elected  for  the  purpose  of  giving  or  refusing  it.

Such  are  the  securities  against  surprise  or  haste
in  conducting  the  most  important  part  of  legislation,
which  American  political  sagacity  has  devised. They
may  very  we.ll  suggest  to  the  English  politician  some
serious  reflections. What  was  most  remarkable  in
the  discussion  of  twelve  months  since  was,  far  less
the  violent  and  inflammatory  language  in  which  it
was  carried  on,  than  the  extreme  vagueness  of  the
considerations  upon  which  it  has  turned. The  House
of  Lords,  for  instance,  was  threatened  with  extinction
or  mutilation  for  a  certain  offence. Yet  when  the
off^ence  is  examined,  it  appears  to  have  consisted  in
the  violation  of  some  rule  or  understanding,  never
expressed  in  writing,  at  variance  with  the  strict  law,
and not perhaps construed  in  precisely  the same
way  by  any  two  thinking  men  in  the  country. Po-
litical  history shows that men  have at all times
quarrelled  more  fiercely  about  phrases  and  formulas,
than  even  about  material  interests  ;  and  it  would  seem
that  the  discussion  of  British  Constitutional  legislation
is  distinguished  from  the  discussion  of  all  other  legis-
lation by  having  no  fixed  points  to  turn  upon,  and
therefore  by  its  irrational  violence. Is  it  therefore
idle  to  hope  that  at  some  calmer  moment — now  that
the  creation  of  two  or  three  million  more  voters  has


ERSAT  n.  THE NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  126

been  accomplished — we  may  borrow  a  few  of  the
American  securities  against  surprise  and  irreflection
in  constitutional  legislation,  and  express  them  with
something  like  the  American  precision  ?  Is  it  always
to  be  possible  in  this  country  that  a  great  amendment
of  the  Constitution  should^  first  of  all,  be  attempted  to
be  carried  by  tumultuary  meetings  of  the  population,
enfranchised  and  unenfranchised — next,  that  it  should
be  conducted  through  Parliament  by  a  process  which
practically  excluded  Parliament  from  all  share  in
shaping  its  provisions — and,  lastly,  that  it  should
hardly  become  law  before  it  was  hurriedly  altered  for
the  purpose  of  giving  votes  to  a  particular  class  of
paupers  ?  Some  have  supposed  that  the  only  remedy
would  be  one  which  involved  tlie  conversion  of  the
unvvritten  Constitution  of  Great  Britain  into  a  written
Constitution.  But  a  great  part  of  our  Constitution  is
already  written.  Many  of  the  powers  of  the  Crown
— many  of  the  powers  of  the  House  of  Lords,  includ-
ing the  whole  of  its  judicial  powers — much  of  the
constitution  of  the  House  of  Commons  and  its  entire
relation  to  the  electoral  body — have  long  since  been
defined  by  Act  of  Parliament.  There  does  not  seem
to  be  any  insuperable  objection,  first  of  all,  to  making
a  distinction  between  ordinary  legislation  and  legis-
lation which  in  any  other  country  would  be  called
Constitutional ;  and  next,  to  requiring  for  the  last  a
special legislative procedure, intended to secure


126  THE  NATURE OF DEMOCRACY.  essai  u.

caution  and  deliberation,  and  as  near  an  approach
to  impartiality  as  a  system  of  party  government  will
admit  of.  The  alternative  is  to  leave  imsettled  all  the
questions  which  the  controversy  of  1884  brought  to
light,  and  to  give  free  play  to  a  number  of  ten-
dencies already  actively  at  work.  It  is  quite  plain
whither  they  are  conducting  us.  We  are  drifting
towards  a  type  of  government  associated  with  terrible
events — a  single  Assembly,  armed  with  full  powers
over  the  Constitution,  which  it  may  exercise  at
pleasure.  It  will  be  a  theoretically  all-powerful  Con-
vention, governed  by  a  practically  all-powerful  secret
Committee  of  Public  Safety,  but  kept  from  complete
submission  to  its  authority  by  Obstruction,  for  which
its  rulers  are  always  seeking  to  find  a  remedy  in  some
kind  of  moral  guillotine.


uasATiii.  THE AGE OF  PROGRESS.  187


ESSAY  III.

TEE  AGE  OF  PROGRESS.

There  is  no  doubt  that  some  of  the  most  inventive,
most  polite,  and  best  instructed  portions  of  the  human
race  are  at  present  going  through  a  stage  of  thought
which,  if  it  stood  by  itself,  would  suggest  that  there
is  nothing  of  which  human  nature  is  so  tolerant,  or
so  deeply  enamoured,  as  the  transformation  of  laws
and  institutions.  A  series  of  political  and  social
changes,  which  a  century  ago  no  man  would  have
thought  capable  of  being  effected  save  by  the  sharp
convulsion  of  Revolution,  is  now  contemplated  by  the
bulk  of  many  civilised  communities  as  sure  to  be
carried  out,  a  certain  number  of  persons  regarding  the
prospect  with  exuberant  hope,  a  somewhat  larger
number  with  equanimity,  many  more  with  indif-
ference or  resignation.  At  the  end  of  the  last  century,
a  Revolution  in  France  shook  the  whole  civilised
world  ;  and  the  consequence  of  the  terrible  events
and  bitter  disappointments  which  it  brought  with  it
was  to  arrest  all  improvement  in  Great  Britain  for


ial V


IJ&jJ  THE AGE OF FKOGRESS.  essat  ni

thirty  years,  merely  because  it  was  innovation.  But
in  1830  a  second  explosion  occurred  in  France,  fol-
lowed by  the  reconstruction  of  the  British  electorate
in  1832,  and  with  the  British  Reformed  Parliament
began  that  period  of  continuous  legislation  through
which,  not  this  country  alone,  but  all  Western  Europe
appears  to  be  passing.  It  is  not  often  recognised  how
excessively  rare  in  the  world  was  sustained  legislative
activity  till  rather  more  than  fifty  years  ago,  and  thus
sufficient  attention  has  not  been  given  to  some  charac-
teristics of  this  particular  mode  of  exercising  sovereign
power,  which  we  call  Legislation.  It  has  obviously
many  advantages  over  Revolution  as  an  instrument
of  change  ;  while  it  has  quite  as  trenchant  an  edge,
it  is  milder,  juster,  more  equable,  and  sometimes
better  considered.  But  in  one  respect,  as  at  present
understood,  it  may  prove  to  be  more  dangerous  than
revolution.  Political  insanity  takes  strange  forms,
and  there  may  be  some  persons  in  some  countries  who
look  forward  to  "  The  Revolution  "  as  implying  a  series
of  revolutions.  But,  on  the  whole,  a  Revolution  is
regarded  as  doing  all  its  work  at  once.  Legislation,
however,  is  contemplated  as  never-ending.  One  stage
of  it  is  doubtless  more  or  less  distinctly  conceived.  It
will  not  be  arrested  till  the  legislative  power  itself,
and  all  kinds  of  authority  at  any  time  exercised  by
States,  have  been  vested  in  the  People,  the  Many,  the
gi-eat  majority  of  the  human  beings  making  up  each


ESSAY  III.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  129

community.  The  prospect  beyond  that  is  dim,  and
perhaps  will  prove  to  be  as  fertile  in  disappointment
as  is  always  the  morrow  of  a  Revolution.  But  doubt-
less the  popular  expectation  is  that,  after  the  esta-
blishment of  a  Democracy,  there  will  be  as  much
reforming  legislation  as  ever.

This  zeal  for  political  movement,  gradually  identi-
fying itself  with  a  taste  for  Democracy,  has  not  as
yet  fully  had  its  way  in  all  the  societies  of  Western
Europe.  But  it  has  greatly  affected  the  institutions
of  some  of  them  ;  even  when  it  is  checked  or  arrested,
it  is  shared  by  considerable  minorities  of  their  popula-
tion ;  and  when  (as  in  Russia)  these  minorities  are
very  small,  the  excessive  concentration  of  the  passion
for  change  has  a  manifest  tendency  fo  make  it  dan-
gerously explosive.  The  analogies  to  this  state  of
feeling  in  the  Past  must  be  sought  rather  in  the
history  of  Religion  than  in  the  history  of  Politics.

C There  is  some  resemblance  between  the  period  of
political  reform  in  the  nineteenth  century  and  the
period  of  religious  reformation  in  the  sixteenth.
Now,  as  then,  the  multitude  of  followers  must  be
distinguished  from  the  smaller  group  of  leaders.
Now,  as  then,  there  are  a  certain  number  of  zealots
who  desire  that  truth  shall  prevail.  Some  of  them
conceive  the  movement  which  they  stimulate  as  an
escape  from  what  is  distinctly  bad  ;  others  as  an
advance  from what  is barely  tolerable  to  what  is


130  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  essay  m.

greatly  better  ;  and  a  few  as  an  ascent  to  an  ideal
state,  sometimes  conceived  by  them  as  a  state  of
Nature,  and  sometimes  as  a  condition  of  millennial
blessedness.  But,  behind  these,  now  as  then,  there  is
a  crowd  which  has  imbibed  a  delight  in  change  for
its  own  sake,  who  would  reform  the  Suffrage,  or  the
House  of  Lords,  or  the  Land  Laws,  or  the  Union
with  Ireland,  in  precisely  the  same  spirit  in  which
the  mob  behind  the  reformers  of  religion  broke  the
nose  of  a  saint  in  stone,  or  made  a  bonfire  of  copes
and  surplices,  or  shouted  for  the  government  of  the
Church  by  presbyteries.  The  passion  for  religious
reform  is,  however,  far  more  intelligible  than  the
passion  for  political  change,  as  we  now  see  it  in
operation.  In  an  intensely  believing  society,  the
obligation  to  think  aright  was  enforced  by  tremendous
penalties  ;  and  the  sense  of  this  obligation  was  the
propelling  force  of  the  Reformation,  as  at  an  earlier
date  it  had  been  the  propelling  force  of  the  rise  and
spread  of  Christianity.  But  what  propelling  force  is
there  behind  the  present  political  movement,  of  such
inherent  energy  that  it  not  only  animates  the  minority,
who  undoubtedly  believe  in  their  theories  of  demo-
cracy, or  reform,  or  regeneration,  but  even  makes
itself  felt  by  the  multitude  which  reasons  blindly  or
does  not  reason  at  ail?  "  If  you  have  wrong  ideas
about  Justification,  you  shall  perish  everlastingly,"
is  a  very  intelligible  proposition ;  but  it  is  not  exactly


E8SAT  m.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  181

a  proposition  of  the  same  order  as  that  into  which
most  English  democratic  philosophy  translates  itself  -
"  If  you  vote  straight  with  the  Blues,  your  great-
grandchild will  be  on  a  level  with  the  average  citizen
of  the  United  States."  The  truth  seems  to  be,  that
a  great  number  of  persons  are  satisfied  to  think  that
democracy  is  inevitable  and  the  democratic  movement
irresietible  ;  which  means  that  the  phenomenon  exists^
that  they  see  no  way  of  arresting  it,  and  that  they
feel  no  inclination  to  throw  themselves  in  its  way
There  are  others  who  appear  to  think  that  when  ij^
man  submits  to  the  inevitable  it  is  ''greatly  to  his
credit "  ;  as  it  was  to  Mr.  Gilbert's  nautical  hero
to  remain  an  Englishman  because  he  was  bom  an
Englishman.  So  they  baptise  the  movement  with
various  complunentary  names,  of  which  the  com-
monest is_Progress,  a  word  of  which  I  have  never
seen  any  definition,  and  which  seems  to  have  all  sorts
of  meanings,  many  of  them  extraordinary  ;  for  some
politicians  in  our  day  appear  to  employ  it  for  mere
aimless  movement,  while  others  actually  use  it  for
movement  backwards,  towards  a  state  of  primitive
nature.

It  is  an  inquiry  of  considerable  interest,  whether
the  passion  for  change  which  has  possession  of  a  cer-
tain number  of  persons  in  this  age,  and  the  acquies-
cence in  it  which  characterises  a  much  larger  number,
are  due  to  any  exceptional  causes  aflPecting  the  sphere


182  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  essay  ii.

of  politics,  or  whether  they  are  universal  and  perma-
nent phenomena  of  human  nature.  There  are  some
striking  facts  which  appear  to  point  to  the  first  con^;^
elusion  as  the  more  correct.  The  most  remarkable  is
the  relatively  small  portion  of  the  human  race  which
will  so  much  as  tolerate  a  proposal  or  attempt  to
change  its  usages,  laws,  and  institutions.  Vast,
populations,  some  of  them  with  a  civilisation  con-
siderable but  peculiar,  detest  that  which  in  the
language  of  the  West  would  be  called  reform.  The
entire  Mahommedan  world  detests  it.  The  multi-
tudes of  coloured  men  who  swarm  in  the  great
Continent  of  Africa  detest  it,  and  it  is  detested  by
that  large  part  of  mankind  which  we  are  accustomed
to  leave  on  one  side  _as  barbarous  or  savao;e.  The
millions  upon  millions  of  men  who  fill  the  Chinese
Empire  loathe  it  and  (what  is  more)  despise  it.
There  are  few  things  more  remarkable  and,  in  their
way,  more  instructive,  than  the  stubborn  incredulity
and  disdain  which  a  man  belonging  to  the  cultivated
part  of  Chinese  society  opposes  to  the  vaunts  of
Western  civilisation  which  he  frequently  hears  ;  and
his  confidence  in  his  own  ideas  is  alike  proof  against
his  experience  of  Western  military  superiority  and
against  that  spectacle  of  the  scientific  inventions  and
discoveries  of  the  West  which  overcame  the  exclu-
siveness  of  the  undoubtedly  feebler  Japanese.  There
is  in  India  a  minority,  educated  at  the  feet  of  Englisli


ESSAY  III.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  133

politicians  and  in  books  saturated  with  English
political  ideas,  which  has  learned  to  repeat  their
language  ;  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  even  these,  if
they  had  a  voice  in  the  matter,  would  allow  a  finger
to  be  laid  on  the  very  subjects  with  which  European
legislation  is  beginning  to  concern  itself,  social  and
religious  usage.  There  is  not,  however,  the  shadow
of  a  doubt  that  the  enormous  mass  of  the  Indian
population  hates  and  dreads  change,  as  is  natural  in
the  parts  of  a  body- social  solidified  by  caste.  The
chief  difficulty  of  Indian  government  is  even  less  the
difficulty  of  reconciling  this  strong  and  abiding  sen-
timent with  the  fainter  feeling  of  the  Anglicised
minority,  than  the  practical  impossibility  of  getting
it  understood  by  the  English  people.  It  is  quite
evident  that  the  greatest  fact  in  Anglo-Indian  history,
the  Mutiny  of  the  mercenary  Sepoy  Army,  is  as  much
a  mystery  to  the  average  man  of  the  West  as  are
certain  colours  to  the  colour-blind  ;  and  even  his-
torians are  compelled  to  supply  wholly  or  partially
fictitious  explanations  of  the  events  of  1857  to  a
public  which  cannot  be  brought  to  believe  that  a  vast
popular  uprising  was  produced  by  a  prejudice  about
a  greased  cartridge.  The  intense  conservatism
of  much  the  largest  part  of  mankind  is,  however,
attested  by  quite  as  much  evidence  as  is  the  pride  of
certain  nations  in  railways,  electric  telegraphs,  or
democratic  governments.


134  THE AGE OF PROGRESS,  essat  iu*

In  spite  of  overwlielming  evidence  (I  wrote  in  1861),
it  is  most  difficult  for  a  citizen  of  Western  Europe  to  bring
thoroughly  home  to  himself  the  truth  that  the  civilisation
which  surrounds  him  is  a  rare  exception  in  the  history  of  the
world.  The  tone  of  thought  common  among  us,  all  our  hopes,
fears,  and  speculations,  would  be  materially  affected,  if  we
had  vividly  before  us  the  relation  of  the  progressive  races  to
the  totality  of  human  life.  It  is  indisputable  that  much  the
greatest  part  of  mankind  has  never  shown  a  particle  of  desire
that  its  civil  institutions  should  be  improved,  since  the  mo-
ment when  external  completeness  was  first  given  to  them  by
their  embodiment  in  some  permanent  record.  One  set  of
usages  has  occasionally  been  violently  overthrown  and  super-
seded by  another ;  here  and  there  a  primitive  code,  pretending
to  a  supernatural  origin,  has  been  greatly  extended  and  dis-
torted into  the  most  surprising  forms  ;  but,  except  in  a  small
section  of  the  world,  there  has  been  nothing  like  the  gradual
amelioration  of  a  legal  system.  There  has  been  material
civilisation,  but  instead  of  the  civilisation  expanding  the  law,
the  law  has  limited  the  civilisation.^

To  the  fact  that  the  enthusiasm  for  change  is
comparatively  rare  must  be  added  the  fact  that  it  is
extremely  modern.  It  is  known  but  to  a  small  part
of  mankind,  and  to  that  part  but  for  a  short  period
during  a  history  of  incalculable  length.  It  is  not
older than the  free employment  of  legislation  by


-a


■Ancient  Law,  chap.  ii.  pp.  22,  23.  These  opinions  were
adopted  by  Mr.  Grote.  See  his  PlatOf  vol.  ii.  chap.  v.  p.  253
(note)


BS8A.r  ni.  THE AGE OF  PBOGRESS.  136

popular  governments.  Thei^e  are  few  historical  errors
more  serious  than  the  assumption  that  popular
governments  have  always  been  legislating  govern-
ments. Some  of  them,  no  doubt,  legislated  on  a  scale
which  would  now  be  considered  extremely  moderate ;
but,  on  the  whole,  their  vigour  has  shown  itself  iix
struggles  to  restore  or  maintain  some  ancient  consti-
tution, sometimes  lying  far  back  in  a  partly  real  and
partly  imaginary  Past,  sometimes  referred  to  a  wholly
unhistorical  state  of  nature,  sometimes  associated  with
the  great  name  of  an  original  legislator.  We,  English-
men, have  had  for  several  centuries  a  government  in
which  there  was  a  strong  popular  element,  and  for
two  centuries  we  have  had  a  nearly  unqualified  popu^  i


lar  govemnieiit^  Yet  what  our  forefathers  contended  j
for  was  not  a  typical  constitution  in  the  Future,
but  a  typical  constitution  in  the  Past.  Our  periods
of  what  would  now  be  called  legislative  reforming
activity  have  been  connected  with  moments,  not  of
violent  political  but  of  violent  religious  emotion —
with  the  outbreak  of  feeling  at  the  Reformation,  with
the  dominion  of  Cromwell  and  the  Independents  (the
true  precursors  of  the  modern  Irreconcileables),  and
with  the  revival  of  dread  and  dislike  of  the  Eoman
Catholic  Church  during  the  reign  of  James  II.
During  the  period  at  which  English  popular  govern-
ment was  attracting  to  itself  the  admiration  of  the

•  See  above,  p.  6.


186  THE  AGE OF  PROGRESS.  essay  in.

educated  classes  throughout  the  civilised  world,  the
Parliament  of  our  Hanoverian  Kings  was  busy  with
controlling  executive  action,  with  the  discussion  of
foreign  policy,  with  vehement  debates  on  foreign
wars  ;  but  it  hardly  legislated  at  all.  The  truth  is
that  the  enthusiasm  for  legislative  change  took  its
rise,  not  in  a  popularly  governed  but  in  an  auto-
cratically governed  country,  not  in  England  but  in
France.  The  English  political  institutions,  so  envied
v^d  panegyrised  on  the  Continent,  could  not  be  copied
without  sweeping  legislative  innovations,  but  the
grounds  and  principles  on  which  these  innovations
were  demanded  were,  as  we  shall  see,  wholly  unlike
an^T-thing  known  to  any  class  of  English  politicians.
Nevertheless,  in  their  final  effects,  these  French  ideas
have  deeply  leavened  English  political  thought,  mix-
ing with  another  stream  of  opinion  which  is  of  recent
but  still  of  English  origin.

An  absolute  intolerance  even  of  that  description
of  change  which  in  modem  language  we  call  political
thus  characterises  much  the  largest  part  of  the  human
race,  and  has  characterised  the  whole  of  it  during  the
largest  part  of  its  history.  Are  there  then  any
reasons  for  thinking  that  the  love  for  change  which
in  our  day  is  commonly  supposed  to  be  overpowering,
and  the  capacity  for  it  which  is  vulgarly  assumed  to
be  infinite,  are,  after  all,  limited  to  *a  very  narrow
ephere  of  human  action,  that  which  we  call  politics,


ISSAT  III.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  137

and  perhaps  not  even  to  the  whole  of  this  sphere  ?
Let  us  look  at  those  parts  of  human  nature  which
have  no  points  of  contact  with  politics,  because  the
authority  of  the  sovereign  state  is  not  brought  to
bear  upon  them  at  all,  or  at  most  remotely  and  in-
directly. Let  us  attend  for  a  moment  to  human
Habits,  those  modes  of  conduct  and  behaviour  which
we  follow  either  quite  unconsciously  or  with  no  better
reason  to  assign  for  them  than  that  we  have  always

.  followed  them.  Do  we  readily  change  our  habits  ?
Man is a creature  of  habit, says  an  adage  which  v^

I  doubtless  sums  up  a  vast  experience.  It  is  true  that  j
the  tenacity  with  which  men  adhere  to  habit  is  not  |
precisely  the  same  in  all  parts  of  the  globe. It  is

_  strictest  in  the  East.  It  is  relaxed  in  the  West,  and
of  all  races  the  English  and  their  descendants,  the
Americans,  are  least  reluctant  to  submit  to  a  con-
siderable change  of  habit  for  what  seems  to  them  an
adequate  end.  Yet  the  exception  is  one  of  the  sort
which  proves  the  rule.  The  Englishman,  who  trans-
ports himself  to  Australia  or  to  India,  surrounds
himself,  under  the  greatest  difficulties,  with  as  close
an  imitation  of  English  life  as  he  can  contrive,  and
submits  all  the  while  to  a  distasteful  exile  in  the
hope  of  some  day  returning  to  the  life  which  he  lived
in  his  youth  or  childhood,  though  under  somewhat
more  favourable  conditions.  The  truth  is  that  men
do  alter  their  habits,  but  within  narrow  limits,  and


138  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  essat  hi.

almost  always  with  more  or  less  of  reluctance  and
pain.  And  it  is  fortunate  for  them  that  they  are  so
constituted,  for  most  of  their  habits  have  been  learned
by  the  race  to  which  they  belong  through  long
experience,  and  probably  after  much  suffering.  A
man  cannot  safely  eat  or  drink,  or  go  downstairs,  or
cross  a  street,  unless  he  be  guided  and  protected  by
habits '  which  are  the  long  result  of  time.  One  set  in
particular  of  these  habits,  and  perhaps  the  most  sur-
prising, that  which  enables  us  to  deal  safely  with  the
destructive  element  of  fire,  was  probably  not  acquired
by  mankind  without  infinite  pain  and  injury.  And
all  this,  for  all  we  know,  may  be  true  of  the  public
usages  which  men  follow  in  common  with  their
fellows.

Let  us  turn  from  Habits  to  Manners,  that  is,  to
those  customs  of  behaviour  which  we  not  only  prac-
tise ourselves,  but  expect  other  men  to  follow.  Do
these  suggest  that  men  are  naturally  tolerant  of
departure  from  a  usage  or  an  accustomed  line  of
conduct  ?  Rarely  as  the  subject  is  examined,  it  is  a
very  curious  one.  What  is  the  exact  source  of  the
revulsion  of  feeling  which  is  indubitably  caused  by  a

\J  solecism  in  manners  or  speech,  and  of  the  harshness
of  the  judgment  passed  on  it  ?  Why  should  the
unusual  employment  of  a  fork  or  a  finger-glass,  or

s\  the  mispronunciation  of  a  vowel  or  an  aspirate,  have
the effect of instantly quenching  an appreciable


ESSAY  ni.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  139

amount  of  human  sympathy  ?  Some  things  about
the  sentiment  are  certain.  It  is  not  modern,  but  very
ancient,  and  probably  as  old  as  human  nature.  The
incalculabl}^  ancient  distinctions  between  one  race  and
another,  between  Greek  and  Barbarian,  with  all  the
mutual  detestation  they  carried  with  them,  appear  to
have  been  founded  originally  on  nothing  more  than
dislike  of  diiferences  in  speech.  Again,  the  sentiment
is  not  confined  to  the  idle  and  possibly  superfine  V
regions  of  societ\\  It  goes  down  to  the  humblest
social  spheres,  where,  though  the  code  of  manners  is
different,  it  is  even  more  rigidly  enforced.  Whatever
else  these  facts  may  suggest,  they  assuredly  do  not
suggest  the  changeableness  of  human  nature.

There are,  however,  other  facts,  even  more  re-
markable and  instructive,  which  point  to  the  same
conclusion. One  half  of  the  human  race — at  this
moment  and  in  our  part  of  the  world,  the  majority  of
it — have  hitherto  been  kept  aloof  from  politics  ;  nor,
till  quite  recently,  was  there  any  evidence  that  any
portion  of  this  body  of  human  beings  cared  more  to .
embark  in  politics  than  to  engage  in  war. There  is  !
therefore  in  all  human  societies  a  great  and  influential
class,  everywhere  possessed  of  intellectual  power,  and
here  of  intellectual  cultivation,  which  is  essentially
non-political. Are,  then.  Women  characterised  by  a  1
passion  for  change  ? Surely  there  is  no  fact  witnessed
to  by  a  greater  amount  of  experience  than  that,  in  all


140  THE AGE OF  PROGRESS.  essay  m.

communities,  they  are  the  strictest  conservators  of
usage  and  the  sternest  censors  of  departure  from
accepted  rules  of  morals,  manners,  and  fashions.
Souvefiit  femme  varie,  says  indeed  the  French  song
attributed  to  Francis  I.  ;  but  subtler  observers  of
female  nature  than  a  French  king  of  extraordinary
dissoluteness  have  come  to  a  very  different  con-
clusion^  and,  even  in  the  relations  of  the  sexes,  have
gone  near  to  claiming  constancy  as  a  special  and
distinctive  female  virtue.  This  seems  to  have  been
an  article  of  faith  with  Thackeray  and  TroUope,  but
the  art  which  Thackeray  and  Trollope  followed  is
itself  furnishing  striking  illustrations  of  the  conser-
vatism of  Women.  During  the  last  fifteen  years,  it
has  fallen  very  largely  into  their  hands.  What,  then,
is  the  view  of  life  and  society  which  is  taken  on  the
whole  by  this  literature  of  Fiction,  produced  in
enormous  and  ever-growing  abundance,  and  read  by
multitudes  ?  I  may  at  least  say  that,  if  no  other
part  of  the  writings  of  this  generation  survived,  the
very  last  impression  which  this  branch  of  literature
would  produce  would  be  that  we  had  lived  in  an  age
of  feverish  Progress.  For  in  tbe  world  of  novels,  it
is  the  ancient  and  time-hallowed  that  seems,  as  a  rule,
to  call  forth  admiration  or  enthusiasm  ;  the  conven-
tional distinctions  of  society  have  a  much  higher
importance  given  to  them  than  belongs  to  them  in
real  life  ;  wealth  is  on  the  whole  regarded  as  ridi-


TOSAT  ni.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  141

culous,  unless  associated  with  birth  ;  and  zeal  for
reform  is  in  much  danger  of  being  identified  with
injustice,  absurdity,  or  crime.  These  books,  ever
more  written  by  Women,  and  read  by  increasing
multitudes  of  Women,  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the
fundamental  character  of  female  taste  and  opinion.
It  must  be  admitted,  on  the  other  hand,  that  one
special  set  of  customs,  which  we  know  collectively  as
Fashion,  have  been  left  to  the  peculiar  guardianship
of  Women,  and  there  is  no  doubt  a  common  impres-
sion that  Fashion  is  always  changing.  But  is  it  true
that  fashions  vary  very  widely  and  very  rapidly  ?
Doubtless  they  do  change.  In  some  of  the  great
cities  of  Europe  something  like  real  genius  is  called
into  activity,  and  countless  experiments  are  tried,  in
order  that  something  may  be  devised  which  is  new,
and  yet  shall  not  shock  the  strong  attachment  to  the
old.  Much  of  this  ingenuity  fails,  some  part  of  it
sometimes  succeeds  ;  yet  the  change  is  very  seldom
great,  and  it  is  just  as  often  a  reversion  to  the  old  as
an  adoption  of  something  new.  "  We  speak,"  I  said
in  a  former  work,  "  of  the  caprices  of  Fashion  ;  yet,
on  examining  them  historically,  we  find  them  extra-
ordinarily limited,  so  much  so  that  we  are  sometimes
tempted  to  regard  Fashion  as  passing  through  cycles
of  form  ever  repeating  themselves." ' The eccen-

'  I  quote  the  whole  of  the  passage  in  which  this  sentence
occurs  in  Note  A  appended  to  this  chapter.
L


142  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  essay  ni.

tricities  of  female  dress  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment may  still  be  recognised ;  the  Greek  lady
represented  by  the  so-called  Tanagra  figures*  is
surprisingly  like  a  lady  of  our  time  ;  and,  on  looking
through  a  volume  of  mediaeval  costumes,  we  see
portions  of  dress  which,  slightly  disguised,  have  been
over  and  over  again  revived  by  the  dressmaking
inventiveness  of  Paris.  Here,  again,  we  may  observe
that  it  is  extremely  fortunate  for  a  large  part  of  the
human  race  that  female  fashions  do  not  alter  exten-
sively and  rapidly.  For  sudden  and  frequent  changes
in  them — changes  which  would  more  or  less  affect
half  of  mankind  in  the  wealthiest  regions  of  the
world — would  entail  industrial  revolutions  of  the
most  formidable  kind.  One  may  ask  oneself  what  is
the  most  terrible  calamity  which  can  be  conceived  as
befalling  great  populations.  The  answer  might  per-
haps be — a  sanguinary  war,  a  desolating  famine,  a
deadly  epidemic  disease.  Yet  none  of  these  disasters
would  cause  as  much  and  as  prolonged  human  suffer-
ing as  a  revolution  in  fashion  under  which  women
should  dress,  as  men  practically  do,  in  one  material
of  one  colour.  There  are  many  flourishing  and
opulent  cities  in  Europe  and  America  which  would
be  condemned  by  it  to  bankruptcy  or  starvation,  and

*  The  chief  differences  are  that  the  Greek  lady  is  without
stays,  and  occasionally  wears  a  parasol  as  a  fixed  part  of  her  head-
dress


ESSAY  rn.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  143

it  would  be  worse  than  a  famine  or  a  pestilence  in
China,  India,  and  Japan.

This  view  of  the  very  slight  changeableness  of
human  nature  when  left  to  itself,  is  much  strength-
ened by  the  recent  inquiries  which  have  extended  the
history  of  the  human  race  in  new  directions.  The
investigations  inconveniently  called  prehistoric  are
really  aimed  at  enlarging  the  domain  of  history,  by
collecting  materials  for  it  beyond  the  point  at  which
it  began  to  be  embodied  in  writing.  They  proceed
by  the  examination  of  the  mcJes  of  life  and  social
usages  of  men  in  a  savage,  barbarous,  or  semi-
civilised  condition,  and  they  start  from  the  assump-
tion that  the  civilised  races  were  once  in  that  state,
or  in  some  such  state.  Unquestionably,  these  studies
are  not  in  a  wholly  satisfactory  stage.  As  often
happens  where  the  labourers  are  comparatively  few  and
the  evidence  as  yet  scanty,  they  abound  in  rash  con-
clusions and  peremptory  assertions.  But  they  have
undoubtedly  increased  our  knowledge  of  social  states
which  are  no  longer  ours,  and  of  civilisations  which
are  unlike  ours.  And  on  the  whole,  they  suggest
that  the  differences  which,  after  ages  of  change,
separate  the  civilised  man  from  the  savage  or  bar-
barian, are  not  so  great  as  the  vulgar  opinion  would
have  them.  _  Moji  h^.s  ohnmQpA  TYmch-ir>  WostoCTu
Europe.  but  itJk^nffla^kF-4^owLjix3ijjL..Ql-lM^avag^
there_aiJlLis.in^m^  independeaiJjL..af  Ihe  identity-of


144  THE  AGE  OF  PROGRESS.  msat  ni.

the  physical  constitution  which  has  always  belonged
to  him.  There  are  a  number  of  occupations  which
civilised  men  follow  with  the  utmost  eagerness,  and  a
number  of  tastes  in  which  they  indulge  with  the
keenest  pleasure,  without  being  able  to  account  for
them  intellectually,  or  to  reconcile  them  with  accepted
morality.  These  pursuits  and  tastes  are,  as  a  rule,
common  to  the  civilised  man  and  the  savage.  Like
the  savage,  the  Englishman,  Frenchman,  or  American
makes  war ;  J[ikejhe^^^^av2;gej,  J^  hunts  ;  like  the
savage,  he  dances  ;  like  the,_savage,  he  indulges  in
\  endless  deliberation ;  like  the  savage,  he  sets  an
extravagant  value  on  rhetoric  ;  like  the  savage,  he  is
a  man  of  party,  with  a  newspaper  for  a  totem,  instead
of  a  mark  on  his  forehead  or  arm  ;  and,  like  a  savage,
he  is  apt  to  make  of  his  totem  his  God.  He  submits
to  having  these  tastes  and  pursuits  denounced  in
books,  speeches,  or  sermons  ;  but  he  probably  derives
acuter  pleasure  from  them  than  from  anything  else  he
does.

If,  then,  there  is  any  reason  for  supposing  that
human  nature,  taken  as  a  whole,  is  not  wedded  to
change,  and  that,  in  most  of  its  parts,  it  changes
only  by  slow  steps,  or  within  narrow  limits — if  the
maxim  of  Seneca  be  true  of  it,  non  jit  statim  ex  diverso
in  diversum  tra/nsitus — it  is  worth  our  while  to  inves-
tigate the  probable  causes  of  the  exceptional  en-
thusiasm for  change  in  politics  which  seems  to  grow


■saAT  ui.  THE AGE OF PEOGRESS.  146

up  from  time  to  time,  giving  to  many  minds  the
sense  of  having  in  their  presence  an  inflexible,  inex-
orable, predetermined  process.  I  may  first  observe
that,  in  the  popular  mind,  there  is  a  manifest  associa-
tion of  political  innovation  with  scientific  advance.
It  is  not  uncommon  to  hear  a  politician  supporting
an  argument  for  a  radical  reform  by  asserting  that
this  i&-an.-Age-x£JBj?ogi?es%  and  appealing  for  proof  of
the  assertion  to  the  railway,  the  gigantic  steamship,
the  electric  light,  or  the  electric  telegraph.  Now  it
is  quite  true  that,  if  Progress  be  understood  with  its
only  intelligible  meaning,  that  is,  as  the  continued
production  of  new  ideas,  scientific  invention  and
scientific  discovery  are  the  great  and  perennial  sources
of  these  ideas.  Every  fresh  conquest  of  Nature  by
man,  giving  him  the  command  of  her  forces,  and  every
new  and  successful  interpretation  of  her  secrets,  gene-
rates a  number  of  new  ideas,  which  finally  displace
the  old  ones,  and  occupy  their  room.  But,  in  the
Western  world,  the  mere  formation  of  new  ideas  does
not  often  or  necessarily  create  a  taste  for  innovating
legislation.  In  the  East,  no  doubt,  it  is  otherwise.
Where  a  community  associates  the  bulk  of  its  social
usages  with  a  religious  sanction,  and  again  associates
its  religion  with  an  old  and  false  interpretation  of
/  Nature,  the  most  elementary  knowledge  of  geography
or  physics  may  overthrow  a  mass  of  fixed  ideas  con-
cerning the  constitution  of  society. An  Indian  youth


146  THE AGE OF PROGBESS.  BSSAT  m.

learns  that  a  Brahman  is  semi-divine,  and  that  it  is
a  deadly  sin  to  taste  the  flesh  of  a  cow,  but  he  also
learns  that  Ceylon,  which  is  close  to  India,  is  an
island  peopled  with  demons  ;  and  the  easy  exposure
of  such  delusions  may  change  his  entire  view  of
human  life,  and  indeed  is  the  probable  explanation
of  the  great  gulf  which  in  India  divides  the  educated
class  from  the  uneducated.  A  similar  revolution  of
ideas  is  very  rare  in  the  West,  and  indeed  experience
shows  that  innovating  legislation  is  connected  not  so
much  with  Science  as  with  the  scientific  air  which
certain  subjects,  not  capable  of  exact  scientific  treat-
ment, from  time  tO'-time-^sume.  To  this  class  of
B subjects  belonged  Bentham^scheme  of  Law-Reform,
and,^...above  all.  Political  Economy  as  treated  by
|Ricardo.}  Both  have  been  extremely  fertile  sources
of  legislation  during  the  last  fifty  years.  But  both
have  now  fallen  almost  entirely  out  of  fashion ;  and
their  present  disfavour  may  serve  as  a  warning
against  too  l^astily  assuming  that  the  existing  friendly
alliance  between  advanced  politicians  and  advancing
science  will  always  continue.  When  invention  has
been  successfully  applied  to  the  arts  of  life,  the  dis-
turbance of  habits  and  displacement  of  industries,
which  the  application  occasions,  has  always  been  at
first  profoundly  unpopular.  Men  have  submitted  to
street-lighting  and  railway- travelling,  which  they
once  clamoured  against ;  but  Englishmen  never  sub-


ESSAT  III.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  147

mitted  to  the  Poor  Law — the  first  great  effort  of
economical  legislation — and  it  has  got  to  be seen
whether  they  will  submit  to  Free  Trade. The  pre-  I
judices  of  the  multitude  against  scientific  inventions  j
are  dismissed  by  the  historian  ^  with  a  sarcasm  ;  but,  i
when  the  multitude  is  all-powerful, this prejudice T7

mgy_afford^iaj;.eriaL^r  history^ ____-- — J-^

The  principal  cause  of  an  apparent  enthusiasm
for  innovating  legislation  is  not  as  often  assigned  as
it  should  be.  --T.pg'^Rlntion  is  one  of  the  activities  of
popular  gnvprmnpnt ;  and  the  keenest  interest  in
these  activities  is  felt  by  all  the  popularly  governed
communities.  It  is  one  great  advantage  of  popular
government  over  government  of  the  older  type,  that
it  is  so  intensely  interesting.  For  twenty  years,  we
had  close  to  our  shores  a  striking  example  of  this
point  of  inferiority  in  absolute  monarchies  during  the
continuance  of  the  Second  Bonapartist  Empire  in
France.  It  never  overcame  the  disadvantage  it  suf-
fered through  the  dulness  of  its  home  politics.  The
scandal,  the  personalities,  the  gossip,  and  the  trifling
which  occupied  its  newspapers  proved  no  substitute
for  the  political  discussions  which  had  filled  them
while  the  Republic  and  the  Constitutional  Monarchy

*  Macaulay,  History^  I.  c.  iii.  p.  283.  "  There  were  fools  in
that  age  (1685)  who  opposed  the  introduction  of  what  was  called
the  new  light,  as,  strenuously  as  fools  in  our  age  have  opposed  the
introduction  of  vaccination  and  railroads.''


148  THE  AGE OF  PROGRESS.  essay  liL

lasted.  The  men  who  ruled  it  were  acutely  conscious
of  the  danger  involved  in  this  decline  of  excitement
and  amusement  suitable  to  cultivated  and  masculine
minds  ;  and  their  efforts  to  meet  it  led  directly  to
their  overthrow,  by  tempting  them  to  provide  the
French  public  with  distractions  of  a  higher  order,
through  adventurous  diplomacy  and  war.  There  are,
again,  good  observers  who  trace  the  political  inse-
curity of  Russia,  the  aggressiveness  of  her  govern-
ment abroad,  and  the  wild  attempts  on  it  at  home,
to  the  general  dulness  of  Russian  life  during  peace.
Englishmen  would  find  it  almost  impossible  to  con-
ceive what  would  compensate  them  for  the  with-
drawal of  the  enthralling  drama  which  is  enacted
before  them  every  morning  and  evening.  A  cease-
less flow  of  public  discussion,  a  throng  of  public
events,  a  crowd  of  public  men,  make  up  the  spectacle.
Nevertheless,  in  our  country  at  all  events,  over-
indulgence in  what  has  no  doubt  become  a  passion
with  elevated  minds  is  growing  to  be  dangerous.
For  the  plot  of  the  performance  which  attracts  such
multitudes  turns,  now-a-days,  almost  always  on  the
fortunes  of  some  legislative  measure.  The  English
Parliament,  as  has  been  said,  legislated  very  little  until
fifty  years  since,  when  it  fell  under  the  influence  of
ntham-a^d  his  disciples.  Ever  since  the  first
Reform  Act^owever,  the  volume  of  legislation  has
been  increasing,  and  this  has  been  very  much  owing


ESSAY  in.  THE AGE OF  PROGRESS.  149

to  the  unlooked-for  operation  of  a  venerable  constitu-
tional form,  the  Royal  Speech  at  the  commencement
of  each  Session.  Once  it  was  the  King  who  spoke,
now  it  is  the  Cabinet  as  the  organ  of  the  party  who
supports  it  ;  and  it  is  rapidly  becoming  the  practice
for  parties  to  outbid  one  another  in  the  length  of  the
tale  of  legislation  to  which  they  pledge  themselves  in
successive  Royal  Speeches.

There  is  undoubted  danger  in  looking  upon
politics  as  a  deeply  interesting  game,  a  never-ending
cricket-match  between  Blue  and  Yellow.  The  prac-
tice is  yet  more  dangerous  when  the  ever- accumulat-
ing stakes  are,.  legJBlatis:^  measures  upon  which  the  VI
whole  future  of  this  country  is  risked  ;  and  the-i — ^
danger  is  peculiarly  great  under  a  constitutional
system  which  does  not  provide  for  measures  reform-
ing the  Constitution  any  different  or  more  solemn  pro-
cedure than  that  which  is  followed  in  ordinary
legislation.  Neither  experience  nor  probability
affords  any  ground  for  thinking  that  there  may  be
an  infinity  of  legislative  innovation,  at  once  safe  and
beneficent.  On  the  contrary,  it  would  be  a  safer
conjecture  that  the  possibilities  of  reform  are  strictly
limited.  The  possibilities  of  heat,  it  is  said,  reach
2,000  degrees  of  the  Centigrade  thermometer ;  the
possibilities  of  cold  extend  to  about  300  degrees
below  its  zero  ;  but  all  organic  life  in  the  world  is
only  possible  through  the  accident  that  temperature


160  T^E  AGE  OF  PROGRESS.  essay  m.

in  it  ranges  between  a  maximum  of  120  degrees  and
a  minimum  of  a  few  degrees  below  zero  of  the  Centi-
grade.  For  all  we  know,  a.  similarly  narrow  limita-
tion may  hold  of  legislative  changes  in  the  structure
of  human  society.  We  can  no  more  argue  that,
because  some  past  reforms  have  succeeded,  all  reforms
will  succeed,  than  we  can  argue  that,  because  the
human  body  can  bear  a  certain  amount  of  heat,  it  can
bear  an  indefinite  amount.

There  are,  however,  many  accidents  of  their
history,  and  particularly  of  their  recent  history,
which  blind  Englishmen  to  the  necessity  of  caution
while  they  indulge  in  the  pastime  of  politics,  particu-
larly when  the  two  sides  into  which  they  divide
themselves  compete  in  legislative  innovation.  We
are  singularly  little  sensible,  as  a  nation,  of  the
extraordiuary  good  luck  which  has  befallen  us
since  the  beginning  of  the  century.  Foreign  ob-
servers (until  perhaps  the  other  day)  were  always
dwelling  on  it,  but  Englishmen,  as  a  rule,  do  not
notice  it,  or  (it  may  be)  secretly  believe  that  they
deserve  it.  The  fact  is  that,  since  the  century  began,
we  have  been  victorious  and  prosperous  beyond  all
example.  We  have  never  lost  a  battle  in  Europe  or
a  square  mile  of  territory  ;  we  have  never  taken  a
ruinous  step  in  foreign  politics  ;  we  have  never  made
an  irreparable  mistake  in  legislation.  If  we  compare
our history with recent French history, there  is


ESSAY  m.  THE AGE OF PKOGRESS.  161

nothing  in  it  like  the  disaster  at  Sedan  or  the  loss  of
Alsace-Lorraine  ;  nothing  like  the  gratuitous  quarrel
with  Germany  about  the  vacant  Crown  of  Spain ;
nothing  like  the  law  of  May  1850,  which,  by  altering
the  suffrage,  gave  the  great  enemy  of  the  Republic  the
opportunity  for  which  he  had  been  waiting.  Yet,  if
we  multiply  occasions  for  such  calamities,  it  is  pos-
sible and  even  probable  that  they  will  occur  ;  and  it
is  useless  to  deny  that,  with  the  craving  for  political
excitement  which  is  growing  on  us  every  day,  the
chances  of  a  great  false  step  are  growing  also.

I  do  not  think  it  likely  to  be  denied,  that  the

activity  of  popular  government  is  more and  more

tending  to  exhibit  itself  in  legislation,  or  that  the

materials  for  legislation  are  being  constantly  supplied

in  ever-increasing  abundance  through  the  competition  ^

^^jotparties,  or,  lastly,  that  the  keen  interest  which  the

community  takes  in  looking  on,  as_a^_boiyjQfji2ectar.

.  ,  yLTtors,  at  the  various  activities  of  popular  government,

^ is  the  chief  reason  of  the  general  impression  th

._^_is  an  Age  of  Progreas^  to  be  indefinitely  continued.

There  are,  however,  other  causes  of  this  impression  or

belief,  which  are  much  less  obvious  and  much  less

easily  demonstrated  to  the  ordinary  English  politician.

At  the  head  of  them,  are  a  group  of  words,  phrases,

maxims,  and  general  propositions,  which  have  their

root  in  political  theories,  not  indeed  far  removed  from

us  by  distance  of  time,  but  as  much  forgotten  by  the


152  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  -*«ssax  hi.

mass  of  mankind  as  if  they  had  belonged  to  the
remotest  antiquity.  How  is  one  to  convince  the
advanced  English  politician  who  announces  with  an
air  of  pride  that  he  is  Radical,  and  indeed  a  Radical
and  something  more,  that  he  is  calling  himself  by  a
name  which  he  would  never  have  had  the  courage  to
adopt,  so  deep  was  its  disrepute,  if  Jeremy  Bentham
had  not  given  it  respectability  by  associating  it  with
a  particular  theory  of  legislation  and  politics  ?  How
is  one  to  persuade  him,  when  he  speaks  of  the
Sovereign  People,  that  he  employs  a  combination  of
words  which  would  never  have  occurred  to  his  mind
if  in  1762  a  French  philosopher  had  not  written  a
speculative  essay  on  the  origin  of  society,  the  forma-
tion of  States,  and  the  nature  of  government  ?
Neither  of  these  theories,  the  theory  of  Rousseau
which  starts  from  the  assumed  Natural  Rights  of
Man,  or  the  theory  of  Bentham  which  is  based  on  the
hypothetical  Greatest  Happiness  principle,  is  now-a-
days  explicitly  held  by  many  people.  The  natural
rights  of  man  have  indeed  made  their  appearance  in
recent  political  discourse,  producing  much  the  same
effect  as  if  a  professed  lecturer  on  astronomy  were  to
declare  his  belief  in  the  Ptolemaic  spheres  and  to  call
upon  his  audience  to  admire  their  music  ;  but,  of  the
two  theories  mentioned  above,  that  of  Rousseau
which  recognises  these  rights  is  much  the  most
thoroughly,  forgotten. For  the  attempt  to  apply  it


WAIT  m.  THE AGE OF PROGKESS.  168

led  to  terrible  calamities,  while  the  theory  of  Bentham
has  at  present  led  to  nothing  worse  than  a  certain
amount  of  disappointment.  How  is  it  then  that
these  wholly  or  partially  exploded  speculations  still
exercise  a  most  real  and  practical  influence  on  politi-
cal thought  ?  The  fact  is  that  political  theories  are
endowed  with  the  faculty  possessed  by  the  hero  of
the  Border-ballad.  When  their  legs  are  smitten  off
they  fight  upon  their  stumps.  They  produce  a  host
of  words,  and  of  ideas  associated  with  those  words,
which  remain  active  and  combatant  after  the  parent
speculation  is  mutilated  or  dead.  Their  posthumous
influence  often  extends  a  good  way  beyond  the
domain  of  politics.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  a  fan-
tastic assertion  that  the  ideas  of  one  of  the  great
npvelis^^s  of  the  last  generation  may-he  traced  to
^enth am,j and  those  of  another  ^  Eousseavi.  Dickens,
who  spent  his  early  manhood  among  the  politicians
of  1832  trained  in  Bentham^s  school,  hardly  ever
wrote  a  novel  without  attacking  an  abuse.  The
procedure  of  the  Court  of  Chancery  and  of  the
Ecclesiastical  Courts,  the  delays  of  the  Public  Offices,
the  costliness  of  divorce,  the  state  of  the  dwellings  of
the  poor,  and  the  condition  of  the  cheap  schools  in
the  North  of  England,  furnished  him  with  what  he
seemed  to  consider,  in  all  sincerity,  the  true  moral  of
a  series  of  fictions.  The  opinions  of  Thackeray  have
a  strong  resemblance  to  those  to  which Rousseau


164  THE  AGE OF  PBOGRESS.  essay  in.

gave  popularity.  It  is  a  very  just  remark  of  Mill,
that  the  attraction  which  Nature  and  the  State  of
Nature  had  for  Rousseau  may  be  partly  accounted  for
as  a  reaction  against  the  excessive  admiration  of  civi-
lisation and  progress  which  took  possession  of  edu-
cated men  during  the  earlier  part  of  the  eighteenth
century.  Theoretically,  at  any  rate,  Thackeray  hated
the  artificialities  of  civilisation,  and  it  must  be  owned
that  some  of  his  favourite  personages  have  about
them  something  of  Rousseau's  natural  man  as  he
would  have  shown  himself  if  he  had  mixed  in  real
life — something,  that  is,  of  the  violent  blackguard.

The  influence  which  the  political  theory  originat-
ing in  France  and  the  political  theory  originating  in
England  still  exercise  over  politics  seems  to  me  as
certain  as  anything  in  the  history  of  thought  can  be.
It  is  necessary  to  examine  these  theories,  because
there  is  no  other  way  of  showing  the  true  value  of
the  instruments,  the  derivative  words  and  derivative
ideas,  through  which  they  act.  I  will  take  first  the
famous  constitutional  theory  of  Rousseau,  which,
long  unfamiliar  or  discredited  in  this  country,  is  the
fountain  of  many  notions  which  have  suddenly
become  popular  and  powerful  among  us.  There  is
much  difficulty  in  the  attempt  to  place  it  in  a  clear
light,  for  reasons  well  known  to  all  who  have  given
attention  to  the  philosophy  of  the  remarkable  man
who  produced  it. This  philosophy  is  the  most  strik-


ESSAY  in.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  155

ing  example  extant  of  a  confusion  which  may  be
detected  in  all  corners  of  non  -  scientific  modern
thought,  j(iLe_jcgnfusion,

Qlight to bje,  between  what did as a fact occur

and  what  under  certain  conditions  would  have
occurred.  The  "  Contrat  Social,"  which  sets  forth  the
political  theory  on  which  I  am  engaged,  appears  at
first  sight  to  give  an  historical  account  of  the  emer-
gence of  mankind  from  a  State  of  Nature.  But
whether  it  is  meant  that  mankind  did  emerge  in  this
way,  whether  the  writer  believes  that  only  a  happily
circumstanced  part  of  the  human  race  had  this  ex-
perience, or  whether  he  thinks  that  Nature,  a  bene-
ficent legislatress,  intended  all  men  to  have  it,  but
that  her  objects  were  defeated,  it  is  quite  impossible
to  say  with  any  confidence.  The  language  of  Rous-
seau sometimes  suggests  that  he  meant  his  picture
of  early  social  transformations  to  be  rega  rded  as  ima-
ginary ;  ^  but  nevertheless  the  account  given  of  them

•  "  Comment  ce  changement  s'est-il  fait  1  Je  I'ignore." —
Contrat  Social,  chap.  i.  I  have  myself  no  doubt  that  very  much
of  the  influence  of  Rousseau  over  the  men  of  his  own  generation,
and  of  the  next,  arose  from  the  belief  widely  spread  among  them
that  his  account  of  natural  and  of  early  political  society  was
literally  true.  There  is  a  remarkable  passage  in  the  Pensees  of
Pascal  (III.  8)  which  describes  the  powerful  revolutionary  effects
which  may  be  produced  by  contrasting  an  existing  institution  with
some  supposed  "  fundamental  and  primitive  law  "  of  the  State.
The  reflection  was  obviously  suggested  by  the  sedition  of  the
Fronde. The  Parliament  of  Paris  firmly  believed  in  the  "  funda-


166  THE AGE OF  PROGRESS.  essay  iir.

is  SO  precise,  detailed,  and  logically  built  up,  that  it
is  quite  inconceivable  its  author  should  not  have  in-
tended it  to  express  realities.  This  celebrated  theory
is  briefly  as  follows.  Rousseau,  who  in  his  earlier
writings  had  strongly  insisted  on  the  disadvantages
which  man  had  sustained  through  the  loss  of  his
natural  rights,  begins  the  "  Contrat  Social  "  with  the
position  that  Man  was  originally  in  the  State  of
Nature.  So  long  as  he  remained  in  it,  he  was  before
all  things  free.  But,  in  course  of  time,  a  point  is
reached  at  which  the  obstacles  to  his  continuance  in
the  natural  condition  become  insuperable.  Mankind
then  enter  into  the  Social  Com[)act  under  which  the
State,  society,  or  community  is  formed.  Their  con-
sent to  make  this  compact  must  be  unanimous  ;  but
the  effect  of  its  completion  isthe^ahsolute  alienatioxv""'^
or  surrender,  by  every  individual  human  being,  of  his  „
person  and  all  his  rights  to  the  aggregate  community i?^
The  community  then  becomes  the  sovereign,  the  true
and  original  Sovereign  People,  and  it  is  an  autocratic
sovereign.  It  ought  to  maintain  liberty  and  equality
among  its  subjects,  but  only  because  the  subjection  of

mental  and  primitive  laws  "  o£  France  ;  and,  a  century  later,  tho
disciples  of  Rousseau  had  exactly  the  same  faith  in  the  State  of
Nature  and  the  Social  Compact.

^  "  Le  pacte  social  se  reduit  aux  termes  suivants  :  chacun  de
nous  mit  en  (jommun  sa  personne  et  toute  sa  puissance  sous  la
supreme  direction  de  la  volont^  g^nerale  ;  et  nous  recevons  encore
chaque  membre  comme  partie  individuelle  du  tout." — Contrat
Social,,  c.  i.  6.


BS8ATm.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  167

one  individual  to  another  is  a  loss  of  force  to  the
State,  and  because  there  cannot  be  liberty  without
equality.^  The  collective  despot  cannot  divide,  or
alienate,  or  delegate  his  power.  JIhe- 6o.Yernment  isu-
his  servant,  and  is  merely  the  organ  of  correspondence
between  the  sovereign  and  the  people.  No  representa-
tion of  the  people  is  allowed.  Rousseau  abhorred  the
v.,representatiye  system ;  but  periodical  assemblies  of
the  entire  community  are  to  be  held,  and  two  ques-
tions are  to  be  submitted  to  them — whether  it  is  the
pleasure  of  the  sovereign  to  maintain  the  present  form
of  government — and  whether  the  sovereign  pleases  to
leave  the  administration  of  its  affairs  to  the  persons
who  now  conduct  it.*  The  autocracy  of  the  aggre-
gate community  and  the  indivisibility,  perpetuity,
and  incommunicable  character  of  its  power,  are  in-
sisted upon  in  every  part  of  the  "  Contrat  Social "  and
in  every  form  of  words.  ■

As  is  almost  always  the  case  with  sweeping
theories,  portions  of  Rousseau's  ideas  may  be  discovered
in  the  speculations  of  older  writers.  A  part  may  be
found,  a  century  earlier,  in  the  writings  of  Hobbes  ;y
another  part  in  tlit)se  of  the  nearly  contemporary
school  of  French  Economists.  But  the  theory,  as
he  put  it  together,  owes to  him  its  extraordinary

•  Contrat  Social,  ii.  11.

^  Contrat  Social,  iii.  18.  The  decision  is  in  this  case  to  be
by  majority  ;  Rousseau  requires  unanimity  for  the  consent  to
enter  into  the  Social  Compact,  but  not  otherwise.

M


I«5B  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  essay  m.

influence  ;  and  it  is  the  undoubted  parent  of  a  host
of  phrases  and  associated  notions  which,  after  having
long  had  currency  in  France  and  on  the  Continent,
are  beginning  to  have  serious  effect  in  this  country,  as
the  democratic  element  in  its  Constitution  increases.
From  this  origin  sprang  the  People  (with  a  capital^
P),  the  Sovereign  People,  the  People  the  sole  source
of  all  legitimate  power.  From  this  came  the  sub-
ordination of  Governments,  not  merely  to  electorates
but  to  a  vaguely  defined  multitude  outside  them,  or
to  the  still  vaguer  mastership  of  floating  opinion.<i
Hence  began  the  limitation  of  legitimacy  in  govern-
ments to  governments  which  approximate  to  demo-
cracy. A  vastly  more  formidable  conception_b.e-„
queathed  to  us  by  Rousseau  is  that  of  the  omnipotent,  _
democratic  Sta'ta^rooted  in  natural  ri^ht  ;  the  State
which  has  at  its  absolute  disposal  everything  which
individual  men  value,  their  property,  their  persons,
and  their  independence  ;  the  State  which  is  bound
to  respect  neither  precedent  nor  prescription  ;  the
State  which  may  make  laws  for  its  subjects  ordaining
what  they  shall  drink  or  eat,  and  in  what  way  they
shall  spend  their  earnings  ;  the  State  which  can  con-
fiscate all  the  land  of  the  community,  and  which,
if  the  efi'ect  on  human  motives  is  what  it  may
be  expected  to  be,  may  force  us  to  labour  on  it  when
the  older  incentives  to  toil  have  disappeared.  Never-
theless this  political  speculation,  of  which  the  remote


E88AT  in.  THE AGE OF  PBOGRESS.  169

and  indirect  consequences  press  us  on  all  sides,  is  of  *
all  speculations  the  most  baseless.  The  natural  con-
dition from  which  it  starts  is  a  simple  figment  of  the
imagination.  So  far  as  any  research  into  the  nature
of  primitive  human  society  has  any  bearing  on  so  mere
a  dream,  all  inquiry  has  dissipated  it.  The  process  by
which  Rousseau  supposes  communities  of  men  to  have
been  formed,  or  by  which  at  all  events  he  wishes-'u^
assume  that  they  were'  formed,  is  again  ^^  chimem
No  general  assertion  as  to  the  way  in  which  human
societies  grew  up  is  safe,  but  perhaps  the  safest  of  all
is  that  none  of  them  were  formed  in  the  way  imagined
by  Rousseau.  The  true  relation  of  sonie  parts  of  the
theory  to  fact  is  very  instructive.  Some  particles  of
Rousseau^s  thought  may  be  discovered  in  the  mental
f  A  atmosphere  of  his  time.  "  Natural  law  "  and  "  na-
i  Jbaral.  rights  "  are  phrases  properly  belonging  to  a
£  theory  not  of  politics,  but  of  jurisprudence,  which,
■i  originating  with  the  Roman  jurisconsults,  had  a
L  great  attraction  for  the  lawyers  of  France.  The
despotic  sovereign  of  the  "  Contrat  Social,"  the  all-
powerful  community,  is  an  inverted  copy  of  the  King
of  France  invested  with  an  authority  claimed  for  him
by  his  courtiers  and  by  the  more  courtly  of  his  law-
yers, but  denied  to  him  by  all  the  highest  minds  in
the  country,  and  specially  by  the  great  luminaries  of
the  French  Parliaments.  The  omnipotent  democracy
is  the  King- Proprietor,  the  lord  of  all  men's  fortunes


160  THE  AGE OF  PROGRESS.  essay  m.

and  persons  ;  but  it  is  the  French  King  turned  up-
side down.  The  mass  of  natural  rights  absorbed  by
the  sovereign  community  through  the  Social  Compact
is,  again,  nothing  more  than  the  old  divine  right  of
kings  in  a  new  dress.  As  for  Rousseau's  dislike  of
representative  systems  and  his  requirement  that  the
entire  community  should  meet  periodically  to  exercise
its  sovereignty,  his  language  in  the  "  Contrat  Social "
suggests  that  he  was  led  to  these  opinions  by  the  ex-
ample of  the  ancient  tribal  democracies.  But  at  a  later
date  he  declared  that  he  had  the  Constitution  of  Geneva
before  his  mind  ;  ^  and  he  cannot  but  have  known  that
the  exact  method  of  government  which  he  proposed
still  lived  in  the  oldest  cantons  of  Switzerland.

This  denial  to  the  coUeotive  community  of  all
power  of  acting  in  its  sovereign  capacity  through
representatives  is  so  formidable,  as  apparently  to  for-
bid any  practical  application  of  Rousseau's  theory.
Rousseau,  indeed,  expressly  says  ^  that  his  principles
apply  to  small  communities  only,  hinting  at  the  same
time  that  they  may  be  adapted  to  States  having  a
large  territory  by  a  system  of  confederation  ;  and  in
this  hint  we  may  suspect  that  we  have  the  germ  of
the  opinion,  which  has  become  an  article  of  faith  in
modern  Continental  Radicalism,  that  freedom  is  best
secured  by  breaking  up  great  commonwealths  into

^  Lettres  ecrites  de  la  Montague^  paxt  i.  letter  6,  p.  328.
*  Contrat  Social^  iii.  16.


ESSAY  III.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  161

small  self-governing  communes.  But  the  time  was
not  ripe  for  sucli  a  doctrine  at  the  end  of  the  last
century ;  and  real  vitality  was  for  the  first  time
given  t€rthB'*^eculation  of  Rousseau  by  that  pamph-
let of vSieyes/"  Qu'est-ce  que  le  Tiers  Etat  ?  "  which
did  so  much  to  determine  the  early  stages  of  the
French  Revolution.  As  even  the  famous  first  page*
of  this  pamphlet  is  often  misquoted,  what  follows  it
is  not  perhaps  always  carefully  read,  and  it  may  have
escaped  notice  that  much  of  it^  simply  reproduces
the  theory  of  Rousseau.  But  then  Sieyes  reproduces
this  theory  with  a  difference.  The  most  important
claim  which  he  advanced,  and  which  he  succeeded
in  making  good,  was  that  the  Three  Orders  should
sit  together  and  form  a  National  Assembly.  The
argument  by  which  he  reaches  this  conclusion  is  sub-
stantially that  of  the  "  Contrat  Social."  With  Sieyes,
as  with  Rousseau,  man  begins  in  the  natural  condi-
tion ;  he  enters  society  by  a  social  compact ;  and  by
virtue  of  this  compact  an  all-powerful  community  is
formed.  But  then  Sieyes  had  not  the  objection  of
Rousseau  to  representation,  which  indeed  was  one  of

•  The  first  page  runs  :  "  1.  Qu'est-ce  que  le  Tiers  !^tat  ? — Tout.

2.  Qu'a-t-il ete  jusqu'^  present  dans  Tordre politique  ? — Rien.

3.  Que  demande-t-il  1 — A  etre  quelque  chose."  It  is  misquoted
by  Alison,  History  of  Europe  during  the  French  BevohUion,  vol.  i,
c.  iii.  p.  453.

*  The  argument  fills  the  long  chapter  v. The  edition  before
me  is  the  third,  published  in  1789.


168  THE AGE OF PBOGRESS.  essay  ut

his  favourite  subjects  of  speculation  during  life.  He
allows  the  community  to  make  a  large  preliminary
delegation  of  its  powers  by  representation.  Thus  is
formed  the  class  of  representative  bodies  to  which
the  future  National  Assembly  of  France  was  to  be-
long. Si^y^s  calls  them  extraordinary^  and  describes
them  as  exercising  their  will  like  men  in  a  state  of
nature,  as  standing  in  place  of  the  nation,  as  incapable
of  being  tied  down  to  any  particular  decision  or  line
of  legislation.  Ordinary  representative  bodies  are,
on  the  other  hand,  legislatures  deriving  their  powers
from  a  Constitution  which  the  extraordinary  Assem-
bly has  formed  and  strictly  confined  to  the  exercise-
of  these  powers.  The  extraordinary  assembly  is  thus
the  sovereign  community  of  Kousseau  ;  the  ordinary
assembly  is  his  government.  To  the  first  class
belong  those  despotic  bodies  which,  under  the  name
of  National  Assembly  or  Convention,  have  four  times
governed  France,  never  successfully  and  sometimes
disastrously.  To  the  second  belong  the  Legislative
Assemblies  and  Chambers  of  Deputies  so  often  over-
thrown by  revolution.

The  other  theory,  from  which  a  number  of  politi-
cal phrases  and  political  ideas  now  circulating  among
us  have  descended,  is  of  English  origin,  and  had
V^Jeremy  Bentham  for  its  author.  Its  contribution  to
this  currency  is  at  this  moment  smaller  than  that
which  may  be  traced  to  a  French  source  in  the  "  Con-


ESSiLY  in.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  163

trat  Social/'  but  it  was  at  one  time  much  larger.  It
must  be  carefully  borne  in  mind  that  during  the
earlier  and  greater  part  of  his  long  life  Bentham  was  S
not  a  reformer  of  Constitutions,  but  a  reformer  of  Law.  J
He  was  the  first  Englishman  to  see  clearly  how  the
legislative  powers  of  the  State,  very  sparingly  em-
ployed for  this  object  before,  could  be  used  to  rearrange
and  reconstruct  civil  jurisprudence  and  adapt  it  to
its  professed  ends.  He  became  a  Radical  Reformer
— an  expression  to  which,  as  I  said  before,  he  gave
a  new  respectability — through  sheer  despair? V*  The
British  Constitution  in  his  day  might  no  doubt  have
been  improved  in  many  of  its  parts,  but,  in  his  im-
patience of  delay  in  legislative  reforms,  he  attributed
to  inherent  defects  in  the  Constitution  obstructions
which  were  mainly  owing  to  the  effects  produced  on  '
the  entire  national  mind  by  detestation  of  principles,
strongly  condemned  by  himself,  which  had  brought
on  France  the  Reign  of  Terror  and  on  the  entire
Continent  the  military  despotism  of  Kapoleon  Bona-
parte. Superficially,  the  ideal  political  system  for
which  he  argued  in  a  series  of  pamphlets  has  not  a
little  resemblance  to  that  of  Rousseau  and  Si^y^s.
There  was  to  be  a  single-chambered  democracy,  one
all-powerful  representative  assembly,  with  powers
unrestricted  theoretically,  but  with  its  action  facili-

(  ^  See  the  Introduction  to  his  plan  of  Parliamentary  Reform.

^\^Worhs,  iii.  436,


164  THE AGE OF  PROGRESS.  essat  m.

lated  and  guided  by  a  strange  and  complex  apparatus
of  subordinate  institutions.^  The  real  difference
between  his  plans  and  those  of  the  French  theorist
lay  in  their  philosophical  justification.  The  system
of  Rousseau  was  based  on  the  pretended  Natural
Rights  of  men,  and  it  owes  to  this  basis  a  hold  on
weaker  and  less  instructed  minds,  which  is  rather
increasing  than  diminishing.  But  Bentham  utterly
repudiated  those  Natural  Rights,  and  denounced  the
conception  of  them  as  absurd  and  anarchical.  During
the  first  or  law-reforming  period  of  his  life,  which
lasted  till  he  was  more  than  sixty  years  old,  he  had
firmly  grasped  the  "  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest
\  J  number  "  {a  form  of  words  found  in  Beccaria)  as  the
i  proper  standard  of  legislative  reform  ;  but,  observing


/


the  close  association  of  law  with  morals,  he  had  made
^/-'Ithe  bolder  attempt  to  reform  moral  ideas  on  the  same
principle,  and  by  a  sort  of  legislation  to  force  men  to
think  and  feel,  as  well  as  to  act,  in  conformity  with
his  standard.  As  the  great  war  proceeded,  the  time
became  more  and  more  unfavourable  for  Bentham's
experiment,  and  finally  he  himself  declared  that  the
cause  of  reform  was  lost  on  the  plairls  of  Waterloo.
It  was  then  that  he  began  his  attack  on  the  British
Constitution,  and  published  his  proposals  for  recon-
structing it  from  base  to  apex.  As  the  classes  which
it  placed  in  power  refused  to  recognise  or  promote

^  ConstitiUional  Code. WorkSy  ix.  1.


TOBAT  m.  THE AGJ3 OF  PROGRESS.  16&

the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number,  he
proposed  to  displace  them  and  to  hand  over  all
political  authority  to  the  greatest  number  itself.  It
must  necessarily  follow  his  standard,  he  argued;
every  man  and  every  number  of  men  seeks  its  own
happiness,  and  the  greatest  number  armed  with  legis-
lative power  must  legislate  for  its  own  happiness.
This  reasoning  had  great  effect  on  some  of  the  most
powerful  minds  of  Bentham's  day.  His  disciples —
Grote,  the  two  Mills^  Molesworth,  the  two  Austins,
and  Eoebuck — did  really  do  much  to  transform  the
British  Constitution.  Some- of  them,  ho  we  ver^  lived
long  enough  to  be  disenchanted  by  the  results  p 'and,
I  have  attempted  to  show  in  a  former  Essay,  many
of  these  results  would  have  met  with  the  deepest  dis-
approval from  Bentham  himself.  The  truth  is,  there
was  a  serious  gap  in  his  reasoning. Little  can  be

^  I  quote  the  following  passage  from  the  Preface  to  John
Austin's  Flea  for  the  Constitution.  "  In  the  course  of  the  follow-
ing Essay  I  have  advanced  opinions  which  are  now  unpopular,  and
which  may  possibly  expose  me  to  some  obloquy,  though  I  well
remember  the  time  (for  I  was  then  a  Radical)  when  the  so-called
Liberal  opinions  which  are  now  predominant  exposed  the  few
who  professed  them  to  political  and  social  proscription.  I  have
said  that  the  bulk  of  the  working-classes  are  not  yet  qualified  for
political  power.  ...  I  have  said  this  because  I  think  so.  I
am  no  worshipper  of  the  great  and  rich,  and  have  no  fancy  for
their  style  of  living.  I  am  by  origin,  and  by  my  strongest  sym-
pathies, a  man  of  the  people  ;  and  I  have  never  desired,  for  a
single  moment,  to  ascend  from  the  modest  station  which  I  have
always  occupied."


166  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  essay  ui.

said  against  'Hhe  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest
number  "  as  a  standard  of  legislation,  and  indeed  it  is
the  only  standard  which  the  legislative  power,  when
once  called  into  action,  can  possibly  follow.  It  is
inconceivable  that  any  legislator  should  deliberately
propose  or  pass  a  measure  intended  to  diminish  the
happiness  of  the  majority  of  the  citizens.  But  when
this  multitudinous  majority  is  called  to  the  Govern-
ment for  the  purpose  of  promoting  its  own  happiness,
it  now  becomes  evident  that,  independently  of  the
enormous  difficulty  of  obtaining  any  conclusion  from
a  multitude  of  men,  there  is  no  security  that  this
multitude  will  know  what  its  own  happiness  is,  or
how  it  can  be  promoted.  On  this  point  it  must  be
owned  that  Rousseau  shows  himself  wiser  than  Ben-
^  tham.  He  claimed  for  the  entire  community  that  it
should  be  sovereign  and  that  it  should  exercise  its
sovereignty  in  the  plenitude  of  power,  beca,use  these
were  its  Natural  Rights  ;  but,  though  he  claimed  for
it  that  it  should  be  all-powerful,  he  did  not  claim
that  it  was  all- wise,  for  he  knew  that  it  was  not.  The
People,  he  said,  always  meant  well ;  but  it  does  not
always  judge  well.

Comment  une  multitude  aveugle,  qui  souvent  iie  sait  ce
qu'elle  veut,  parce  qu'elle  sait  rarement  ce  qui  lui  est  bon,
executerait-elle  d'elle-mSme  une  entreprise  aussi  grande,
aussi  difficile,  qu'un  syst^me  de  legislation  ?  De  lui-mema
le  peuple  veut  toujours  le  bien,  mais  de  lui-meme  il  ne  le  voit


HSSA.Y  m.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  167

pas  toujours. La  volonte  generale  est  toujours  droite,  mais
le  jugement  qui  la  guide  n'est  pas  toujours  eclair^.  *

Rousseau  was  led  by  these  misgivings  almost  to
doubt  the  practical  possibility  of  wise  legislation  by
his  ideal  democracy.  He  seems  to  have  thought  that
the  legislator  who  could  properly  guide  the  people  in
the  exercise  of  their  sovereign  powers  would  only
appear  at  long  intervals,  and  must  virtually  be  semi-
divine.  In  connection  with  these  ideas,  he  made  a
prediction  which  has  contributed  nearly  as  much  to
his  fame  as  any  of  his  social  and  political  speculations.
Sharing  the  general  interest  and  sympathy  which  the
gallant  struggle  of  the  Corsicans  for  independence
had  excited  in  his  day,  he  persuaded  himself  that  the
ideal  legislator  would  most  probably  arise  in  Corsica.
"  J'ai  quelque  pressentiment,''  he  writes,  "  qu'un
jour,  cette  petite  ile  etonnera  TEurope."  The  pro-
phecy has  been  repeatedly  taken  to  mean  that
Rousseau  foresaw  the  birth  in  Corsica,  seven  years
later,  of  a  military  genius  after  whom  the  Code  Civil
of  France  would  be  named.

One  further  remark,  not  perhaps  at  first  sight
obvious,  ought  to  be  made  of  these  political  theories
of  Rousseau  and  Bentham  which  contribute  so  largely
to  the  mental  stock  of  the  classes  now  rising  to  power
in Europe. These theories  were, in their  origin,

•  Contrat  Social,  ii. 6. The  latter  part  of  this  chapter  is
replete  with  good  sense.


•^


VjQ8^  THE  AGE VF  PROGKESS.  essat  hi.

theories  not  of  constitutional  reform,  but  of  law-
reform.  It  is  unnecessary  to  give  new  proof  of  this
assertion  as  respects  Bentham.  But  it  is  also  true
of  Rousseau.  The  conceptions  of  Nature,  of  Natural
Law,  and  of  Natural  Right,  which  prompted  and

^  shaped  his  political  speculations,  are  first  found  in
the  language  of  the  Roman  lawyers.  It  is  more  than
doubtful  whether  these  illustrious  men  ever  believed
in  the  State  of  Nature  as  a  reality,  but  they  seem  to
have  thought  that,  under  all  the  perverse  technicali-
ties of  ancient  law,  there  lay  a  simple  and  symmetrical
system  of  rules  which  were  in  some  sense  those  of
Nature.  Their  natural  law  was,  for  all  practical
purposes,  simple  or  simplified  law.  This  view,  with
all  its  philosophical  defects,  led  to  a  great  simplifica-
tion of  law  both  in  the  Roman  State  and  in  modern
Europe,  and  indeed  was  the  chief  source  of  law-
reform  until  the  system  of  Bentham,  which  also
aimed  at  the  simplification  of  law,  made  its  appear-
ance. But  the  undoubted  descent  both  of  the  French
and  the  English  political  theory  from  theories  of  law-
reform  points  to  a  serious  weakness  in  them.  That
because  you  can  successfully  reform  jurisprudence  on
certain  principles,  you  can  successfully  reform  Consti-
tutions on  the  same  principles,  is  not  a  safe  inference.
In  the  first  place,  the  simplification  of  civil  law,  its
disentanglement  from  idle  forms,  technicalities,  obscu-
rities, and  illogicalities,  can  scarcely  be  other  than  a


ESSAY  HI.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  169

beneficial  process.  It  may  indeed  lead  to  disappoint-
ment. Bentham  thought  that,  if  law  were  reformed
on  his  principles,  litigation  would  be  easy,  cheap,  and
expeditious  ;  yet,  now  that  nearly  all  his  proposals
have  been  adopted,  the  removal  of  legal  difficulties
seems  to  have  brought  into  still  greater  nakedness
the  difficulties  of  questions  of  fact.  But,  though  the
simplification  of  law  may  lead  to  disappointment,  it
can  scarcely  lead  to  danger.  It  is,  however,  idle  to
conceal  from  oneself  that  the  simplification  of  political
institutions  leads  straight  to  absolutism,  the  abso-
lutism not  of  an  expert  judge,  but  of  a  single  man  or
of  a  multitude  striving  to  act  as  if  it  were  a  single
man.  The  illogicalities  swept  away  in  the  process  may
really  be  buttresses  which  helped  to  support  the  vast
burden  of  government,  or  checks  which  mitigated  the
consequences  of  the  autocrat's  undeniable  fallibility.
Again,  a  mistake  in  law-reform  is  of  small  import-
ance. It  mainly  affects  a  class  of  whose  grievances,
I  may  observe,  Bentham  had  far  too  exalted  a
notion,  the  small  part  of  the  community  which  actu-
ally "goes  to  law."  If  committed,  it  can  be  corrected
with  comparative  ease.  But  a  mistake  in  constitu-
tional innovation  directly  affects  the  entire  community
and  every  part  of  it.  It  may  be  fraught  with  calamity
or  ruin,  public  or  private.  And  correction  is  virtually
impossible.  It  is  practically  taken  for  granted  among
us,  that  air  constitutional  changes  are  final  and  must


170  THE  AGE OF PROGRESS.  essay  hi,

be  submitted  to,  whatever  their  consequences.  Doubt-
less this  assumption  arises  from  a  general  belief  that,
in  these  matters,  we  are  propelled  by  an  irresistible

C  force  on  a  definite  path  towards  an  unavoidable  end  j
— towards  Democracy,  as  towards  Death.  ^

If  there  be  force  in  the  considerations  which  I
have  urged,  the  ideas  current  among  us  as  to  the
Age  of  Progress  through  which  we  are  supposed  to
be  passing  will  stand  in  need  of  a  great  deal  of  modi-
fication. In  one  important  particular,  they  will  have
to  be  exactly  reversed.  -!I]ie.jnatural  condition  of
mankind  (if  that  word  "  natural ''  is  used)  is  naJL  i^
the  progressive condition. It is a condition not 1

of changeableness but of  unchangeableness. The. J

immobility  of  society  is  the  rule ;  its  mobility  is  the
exception.  The  toleration  of  change  and  the  belief
in  its  advantages  are  still  confined  to  the  smallest
portion  of  the  human  race,  and  even  with  that  portion
they  are  extremely  modern.  They  are  not  much
more  than  a  century  old  on  the  Continent  of  Europe ;
and  not  much  more  than  half  a  century  old  in  Great
Britain.  When  they  are  found,  the  sort  of  change
which  they  contemplate  is  of  a  highly  special  kind,
being  exclusively  political  change.  The  process  is
familiar  enough  to  Englishmen.  A  number  of  per-
sons, often  a  small  minority,  obtain  the  ear  of  the
governing  part  of  the  community,  and  persuade  it  to
force  the  entire  community  to  conform  itself  to  their


R8SAT  III.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  IH

ideas.  Doubtless  there  is  a  general  submission  to
this  process,  and  an  impression  even  among  those
who  dislike  it  that  it  will  go  very  far.  But  when
the  causes  of  this  state  of  feeling  are  examined,  they
appear  to  arise  in  a  very  small  degree  from  intelligent
conviction,  but  to  a  very  great  extent  from  the
remote  effects  of  words  and  notions  derived  from
broken-down  political  theories.  If  this  be  the  truth,
or  even  an  approximation  to  the  truth,  it  suggests
some  very  simple  and  obvious  inferences.  If  modern
society  be  not  essentially  and  normally  change-
able, the  attempt  to  conduct  it  safely  through  the
unusual  and  exceptional  process  of  change  is  not
easy  but  extremely  difficult.  What  is  easy  to  a  man
is  that  which  has  come  to  him  through  a  long-in-
herited experience,  like  walking  or  using  his  fingers ;
what  is  difficult  to  him  is  that  in  which  such  expe-
rience gives  him  little  guidance  or  none  at  all,  like
riding  or  skating.  It  is  extremely  probable  that  the
Darwinian  rule,  "  small  changes  benefit  the  organism,"
holds  good  of  communities  of  men,  but  a  sudden
sweeping  political  reform  constantly  places  the  com-
munity in  the  position  of  an  individual  who  should
mount  a  horse  solely  on  the  strength  of  his  studies  in
a  work  on  horsemanship.

These  conclusions,  which  I  venture  to  think  are
conclusions  of  common  sense,  go  a  long  way  to  ex-
plain a  series  of  facts  which  at  first  sight  are  not


172  THE  AGE OF  PROGRESS.  ussat  hi.

quite  intelligible.  What  is  the  reason  of  the  advan-
tage which  historical  Constitutions,  Constitutions
gradually  developed  through  the  accumulation  of
experience,  appear  as  a  fact  to  enjoy  over  a  'priori
Constitutions,  Constitutions  founded  on  speculative
assumptions  remote  from  experience  ?  That  the
advantage  exists,  will  hardly  be  denied  by  any  edu-
cated Englishman.  With  Conser\'atives  this  is  of
course  an  axiom,  but  there  are  few  really  eminent
men  on  the  opposite  side  who  do  not  from  time  to
time  betray  the  same  opinion,  especially  in  presence
of  a  catastrophe  suiFered  by  some  Constitution  of  the
last-mentioned  type.  Not  many  persons  in  the  last
century  could  have  divined  from  the  previous  opinions
of  Edmund  Burke  the  real  substructure  of  his
political  creed,  or  did  in  fact  suspect  it  till  it  was
uncovered  by  the  early  and  comparatively  slight
miscarriage  of  French  revolutionary  institutions.  A
great  disillusion  has  always  seemed  to  me  to  separate
the  "  Thoughts  on  the  Present  Discontents  in  1770  '*
and  the  "  Speech  on  American  Taxation  in  1774  '*
from  the  magnificent  panegyric  on  the  British  Con-
stitution in  1790.

Our  political  system  is  placed  in  a  just  correspondence
and  symmetry  with  the  order  of  the  world  and  with  the  mode
of  existence  decreed  to  a  permanent  body  composed  of  transi-
tory parts;  wherein,  by  the  disposition  of  a  stupendous
wisdom,  moulding  together  the  great  mysterious  incorpora-


>


BSSAT  III.  THE AGE OF  PROGRESS.  173

tion  of  the  human  race,  the  whole,  at  one  time,  is  never  old,
or  middle-aged,  or  young,  but  in  a  condition  of  unchangeable
constancy  moves  on  through  the  varied  tenour  of  perpetual
decay,  fall,  renovation,  and  progression.  Thus,  in  preserving
that  method  of  nature  in  the  conduct  of  the  State,  in  what
we  improve  we  are  never  wholly  new ;  in  what  we  retain,  we
are  never  wholly  obsolete.®

Macaulay,  again,  happened  to  have  to  close  his
account  of  the  Revolution  of  1688  just  when  a  new
French  experiment  in  a  priori  Constitution-building
had  spread  confusion  through  the  Continent  of
Europe,  and  his  picture  of  the  events  which  gave
birth  to  the  party  that  had  a  monopoly  of  his  ad-
miration would  almost  rob  them  of  their  historical
name  of  "  Revolution  Whigs,"  which  he  nevertheless
claimed  for  them.

As  our  Revolution  was  a  vindication  of  ancient  rights,  so
it  was  conducted  with  strict  attention  to  ancient  formalities.
In  almost  every  word  and  act  may  be  discerned  a  profound
reverence  for  the  Past.  The  Estates  of  the  Realm  deliberated
in  the  old  halls  and  according  to  the  old  rules.  .  .  .  The
speeches  present  an  almost  ludicrous  contrast  to  the  revolu-
tionary oratory  of  every  other  country.  Both  the  English
parties  agreed  in  treating  with  solemn  respect  the  ancient
constitutional  traditions  of  the  State.  The  only  question  was,
in  what  sense  these  traditions  were  to  be  understood.  The
assertors  of  liberty  said  nothing  about  the  natural  equality  of
men  and  the  inalienable  sovereignty  of  the  people,  about

^  Burke,  Rejlections  on  the  Revolution  in  France^  vol. v of
Works,  p.  70.

N


174  THE AGE OF  PROGRESS.  essay  hl

Harmodius  or  Timoleon,  Brutus  the  elder  or  Brutus  the
younger.  When  they  were  told  that,  by  the  English  law,
the  Crown,  at  the  moment  of  a  demise,  must  descend  to  the
next  heir,  they  answered  that,  by  the  English  law,  a  living
man  could  have  no  heir.  When  they  were  told  that  there
was  no  precedent  for  declaring  the  throne  vacant,  they  pro-
duced from  among  the  records  in  the  Tower  a  roll  of  parch-
ment, near  three  hundred  years  old,  on  which,  in  quaint
characters  and  barbarous  Latin,  it  was  recorded  that  the
Estates  of  the  Realm  had  declared  vacant  the  throne  of  a
perfidious  and  tyrannical  Plantagenet.  When  at  length  the
dispute  had  been  accommodated,  the  new  sovereigns  were
proclaimed  with  the  old  pageantry.  All  the  fantastic  pomp
of  heraldry  was  there,  Clarencieux  and  Norroy,  Portcullis  and
Rouge  Dragon,  the  trumpets,  the  banners,  the  grotesque
coats  embroidered  with  lions  and  lilies.  The  title  of  King
of  France,  assumed  by  the  conqueror  of  Cressy,  was  not
omitted  in  the  royal  style.  To  us,  who  have  lived  in  the  year
1848,  it  may  seem  almost  an  abuse  of  terms  to  call  a  pro-
ceeding, conducted  with  so  much  deliberation,  with  so  much
sobriety,  and  with  such  minute  attention  to  prescriptive
etiquette,  by  the  terrible  name  of  RevolutioiJ:  ]

In  the  light  of  historical  facts  neither  the  rhetoric
of  Burke  nor  the  rhetoric  of  Macaulay  is  unjust.  I
will  not  undertake  to  hold  the  balance  of  success  or
failure  among  the  §50  Constitutions  which  a  modern
writer  ^  declares  to  have  come  into  existence  since  the
beginning  of  this  century  ;  but  if  we  take  our  stand-

'  Macaulay,  History  of  England,  chap.  x. Works,  ii. 395,
396.

2  Lieber,  Civil  Liberty  and  Self-government. Introductioii.


ESSAY  in.  tHE  AGE OF PROGRESS.  176

ing  ground  at  the  end  of  the  century  preceding,  when
a  priori  Constitutions  first  appeared,  we  find  it  certain
that  among  all  historical  Constitutions  there  have
been  no  failures  so  great  and  terrible  as  those  of
Constitutions  of  the  other  class.  There  have  been
oppressive  Constitutions  of  the  historical  type  ; .  there
have  been  Constitutions  which  mischievously  ob-
structed the  path  of  improvement ;  but  with  these
there  has  been  nothing  like  the  disastrous  course  and
end  of  the  three  Constitutions  which  announce  their
character  by  beginning  with  a  Declaration  of  the
Rights  of  Man,  the  French  semi-monarchical  Consti-
tution of  1791,  the  French  Republican  Constitution
of  1793,  and  l;he  French  Republican-Directorial  Con-
stitution of  1795.  Nor  has  any  historical  Constitu-
tion had  the  ludicrous  fate  of  the  Constitution  of
December  1799,  which  came  from  the  hands  of
Sieyes  a  marvel  of  balanced  powers,  and  became  by  a
single  transposition  the  charter  of  a  pure  despotism.
All  this,  however,  is  extremely  intelligible,  if  human
nature  has  always  a  very  limited  capacity,  as  in  general
it  has  very  slight  taste,  for  adjusting  itself  to  new  con-
ditions. The  utmost  it  can  do  is  to  select  parts  of  its
experience,  and  apply  them  tentatively  to  these  con-
ditions ;  and  this  process  is  always  awkward  and
often  dangerous.  A  community  with  a  new  a  priori-
political  constitution  is  at  best  in  the  disagreeable  ]|
position of  a  British  traveller whom a  hospitable  ''


176  THE AGE OF  PROGRESS.  essay  hi.

Chinese  entertainer  has  constrained  to  eat  a  dinner
with  chopsticks.  Let  the  new  institutions  be  extra-
ordinarily wide  of  experience,  and  inconvenience  be-
comes imminent  peril.  The  bgdj;-poJifcifi«is  in  that'
case  like  the  body-natural  transported  to  a  new
climate,  unaccustomed  food,  and  strange  surround-
ings. Sometimes  it  perishes  altogether.  Sometimes
the  most  unexpected  parts  of  its  organisation  develop
themselves  at  the  expense  of  others  ;  and  when  the
ingenious  legislator  had  counted  on  producing  a
nation  of  self-denying  and  somewhat  sentimental
patriots,  he  finds  that  he  has  created  a  people  of
Jacobins  or  a  people  of  slaves.

It  is  in  a  high  degree  likely  that  the  British
Parliament  and  the  British  electorate  will  soon  have
to  consider  which  of  these  two  principles,  assumption
or  experience,  they  will  apply  to  a  great  and  ancient
institution,  of  all  our  institutions  the  one  which  on
the  whole  has  departed  least  from  its  original  form.
I  put  aside  the  question  which  of  them  it  is  that  has
been  applied  to  the  constituent  body  of  the  House  of
Commons.  That  is  over,  and  its  consequences,  in
Homeric  phrase,  "  lie  upon  the  knees  of  the  gods."
But,  surprising  as  was  the  way  in  which  the  question
of  Franchise  and  Redistribution  ended,  and  in  which
the  question  of  reconstructing  the  House  of  Lords,
which  had  been  mixed  up  with  it,  fell  suddenly  into
the  background,  no  observant  man  can  doubt  that


iSBLT  m.  THE AGE OE PROGRESS.  177

the  last  question  will  before  long  press  again  for
attention.  The  very  variety  of  opinion  which,  as
I  pointed  out  in  the  last  Essay,  prevails  among
politicians  of  every  party  colour  as  to  the  mode
iji  which  the  legal  power  of  the  House  of  Lords
should  be  exercised,  is  an  earnest  of  a  controversy
soon  to  be  revived  ;  and  indeed  the  mere  demand  for
continuous  important  legislation  will  soon  force  into
notice  so  great  an  addition  to  the  supply  as  the
reform  of  the  Upper  House.  The  quarrel  which
raged  for  a  while  on  platforms  and  in  the  newspapers
threw  up  a  great  number  of  suggestions  for  change,
out  of  which  very  few  were  worthy  of  consideration.
They  varied  from  a  proposal  to  dispense  altogether
with  a  Second  Chamber  to  proposals  for  a  Chamber  of
Peers  nominated  for  life  ;  proposals  for  empowering
the  Grown  to  select  a  limited  number  of  Peers  out
of  the  present  body  for  service  in  each  Parliament ;
proposals  for  giving  to  the  entire  present  House  of
Lords  the  right  to  elect  this  limited  number ;  proposals
for  a  Second  Chamber  of  experienced  executive  officers,
and  proposals  for  a  Senate  to  which  the  Local  Govern-
ment Circles  (as  yet  unformed)  should  furnish  consti*
tuencies.  But,  amid  these  loose  guesses  at  a  reasonable
solution  of  a  great  question,  there  was  much  language
employed  which  seemed  to  me  to  betray  serious  mis-
conception of  the  nature  of  a  Second  or  Upper  House,
and  these  opinions  merit  some  consideration^


Vf^  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  essai  «l

Let  me  take  first  the  most  trenchant  of  the  pro-
posals recently  before  the  country,  the  scheme  for
governing  through  a  Parliament  consisting  of  a  single
Chamber.  This  plan  was  advocated  by  Mr.  J.  S.
Mill  in  one  of  his  later  writings,  but  it  is  just  to  him
to  bear  in  mind  that  in  the  single  Chamber  he  pro-
posed there  was  to  be  a  minutely  accurate  representa-
tion of  minorities.  This  condition  was  dropped  in
the  late  controversy,  and  it  was  thought  enough  to
quote  the  well-known  epigram  of  Si^yes  on  the  sub-
ject of  Second  Chambers.  "  If,"  it  runs,  "  a  Second
Chamber  dissents  from  the  First,  it  is  mischievous  ;
if  it  agrees,  it  is  superfluous.''  It  has  perhaps  escaped
notice  that  this  saying  is  a  conscious  or  unconscious
parody  of  that  reply  of  the  Caliph  Omar  about  the
books  of  the  Alexandrian  Library  which  caused  them
to  be  burnt.  "  If  the  books,"  said  the  Commander  of
the  Faithful  to  his  lieutenant,  "  differ  from  the  book
of  the  Prophet,  they  are  impious  ;  if  they  agree,  they
are  useless."  The  reasoning  is  precisely  the  same  in
both  cases,  and  starts  from  the  same  assumption.  It
takes  for  granted  that  a  particular  utterance  is  divine.
If  the  Koran  is  the  inspired  and  exclusive  word  of
God,  Omar  was  right ;  if  Vox  Populi,  Vox  Dei,  ex-
presses a  truth,  Si^yes  was  right.  If  the  decisions
of  the  community,  conveyed  through  one  particular
organ,  are  not  only  imperative  but  all-wise,  a  Second
Chamber  is  a  superfluity  or  an  impertinence. There


ESSAT  III.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  179

is  no  question  that  the  generality  of  First  Chambers,
or  popularly  elected  Houses,  do  make  the  assumption
on  which  this  argument  rests.  They  do  not  now-a-
days  rest  their  claim  to  authority  on  the  English
theory  of  the  advantages  of  a  balance  of  the  historical
elements  in  a  given  society.  They  do  not  appeal  to
the  wise  deduction  from  experience,  as  old  as  Ari-
stotle, which  no  student  of  constitutional  history  will
deny,  that  the  best  Constitutions  are  those  in  which
there  is  a  large  popular  element.  It  is  a  singular
proof  of  the  widespread  influence  of  the  speculations
of  Roiisseau  that,  although  very  few  First  Chambers
really  represent  the  entire  community  (indeed,  there
is  no  agreement  as  to  what  the  entire  community  is,
and  nobody  is  quite  sure  how  it  can  be  represented),
navertheless  in  Europe  they  almost  invariably  claim
to  reflect  it,  and,  as  a  consequence,  they  assume  an
air  of  divinity  which,  if  it  rightfully  belonged  to
them,  would  be  fatal  to  all  argument  for  a  Second
Chamber.

There  appears  to  me  to  be  no  escaping  from  the
fact  that  all  such  institutions  as  a  Senate,  a  House  of
Peers,  or  a  Second  Chamber,  are  founded  on  a  denial
or  a  doubt  of  the  proposition  that  the  voice  of  the
people  is  the  voice  of  God.  They  express  the  revolt
of  a^eat  mass  of  human  common  sense  against  it.
They  are  the  fruit  of  the  agnosticism  of  the  political
,  understanding. Their authors and advocates do


180  THE AGE OF  PROGRESS.  essay  in.

not  assert  that  the  decisions  of  a  populorly  elected
Chamber  are  always  or  generally  wrong.  These
decisions  are  very  often  right.  But  it  is  impossible
to  be  sure  that  they  are  right.  And  the  more  the
difficulties  of  multitudinous  government  are  probed,
and  the  more  carefully  the  influences  acting  upon  it
are  examined,  the  stronger  grows  the  doubt  of  the
infallibility  of  popularly  elected  legislatureis.  What,
then,  is  expected  from  a  well-constituted  Second
Chamber  is  not  a  rival  infallibility,  but  an  additional
security.  It  is  hardly  too  much  to  say  that,  in  this
view,  almost  any  Second  Chamber  is  better  than
none.  No  such  Chamber  can  be  so  completely  un-
satisfactory that  its  concurrence  does  not  add  some
weight  to  a  presumption  that  the  First  Chamber  is  in
the  right ;  but  doubtless  Upper  Houses  may  be  so
constituted,  and  their  discussions  so  conducted,  that
their  concurrence  would  render  this  presumption
virtually  conclusive.  The  conception  of  an  Upper
House  as  a  mere  revising  body,  trusted  with  the
privilege  of  dotting  i's  and  crossing  t's  in  measures
sent  up  by  the  other  Chamber,  seems  to  me  as  irra-
tional as  it  is  poor.  What  is  wanted  from  an  Upper
House  is  the  security  of  its  concurrence,  after  full
examination  of  the  measure  concurred  in.

It  requires  some  attention  to  facts  to  see  how
widely  spread  is  the  misgiving  as  to  the  absolute
wisdom  of  popularly  elected  Chambers. I  will  not


188AT  m.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  181

Btop  to  examine  the  American  phenomena  of  this
claBs,  but  will  merely  observe  in  passing,  that  the
one  thoroughly  successful  institution  which  has  been
established  since  the  tide  of  modern  democracy  began
to  run,  is  a  Second  Chamber,  the  American  Senate.
On  the  Continent  of  Europe  there  are  no  States  with-
out Second  Chambers,  except  three — Greece,  Servia,
and  Bulgaria — all  resembling  one  another  in  having
long  been  portions  of  the  Turkish  Empire,  and  in
being  now  very  greatly  under  the  influence  of  the
Russian  Government.  Russia  has  not,  Turkey  never
had,  any  true  aristocracy,  any  "  root  Of  gentlemen,"
to  repeat  Bacon's  expression  ;  and  we  shall  see  pre-
sently that  the  framers  of  Constitutions,  in  their
search  for  materials  of  a  Second  Chamber  other  than
the  ordinary  forms  of  popular  election,  have  con-
stantly had  to  build,  at  all  events  partially,  on  the
foundation  of  an  aristocracy.  But,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  three  communities  just  mentioned,  all  the
European  States  have  Second  Chambers,  varying
from  that  of  Norway,  where,  after  a  single  general
election,  a  certain  number  of  the  deputies  returned
are  told  off  to  make  an  Upper  House,  to  the  ultra-
aristocratic  House  of  Magnates  established  from  the
earliest  time  ^  under  the  ancient  Hungarian  Constitu-

•  Since  this  essay  appeared  in  its  first  form,  the  House  of
Magnates  has  undergone  a  reform  which  still  leaves  it  a  highly
aristocratic  body.


182  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  essay  m,

tion. Hereditary  Peers,  generally  mixed  with  Life
Peers and  elective  Peers,  are  still  common  in  the
Second  Chambers  of  the  Continent ;  they  are  foun(i
in Cis-Leitlian  Austria,  in Prussia,  in  Bavaria,  in
many  of  the  smaller  German  States,  in  Spain,  and  in
Portugal. There  is  much  reason  to  believe  that  the
British  House  of  Lords  would  have  been  exclusively,
or  at  all  events  much  more  extensively,  copied  in  the
Constitutions  of  the  Continent,  but  for  one  remark-
able difficulty. This  is  not  in  the  least  any  dislike
or  distrust  of  the  hereditary  principle,  but  the  ex-
treme numerousness  of  the  nobility  in  most  Con-
tinental  societies, and the  consequent  difficulty  of
selecting  a  portion  of  them  to  be  exclusively  pri-
vileged. Sieyes,  in  his  famous  pamphlet,  observes
that  in  1789  the  higher  French  aristocracy  was  eager*
to have  a  House  of  Lords engrafted on  the new
French  Constitution  ;  and  this  ambition,  as  Burke
noticed,  was  the  secret  of  the  fervour — the  suicidal
fervour,  as  it  afterwards  turned  out — with  which  a
certain  number  of  the  noblest  French  families  threw
in their lot with the Kevolutionary movement.
Sieyes,  however, pointed  out  the  fatal obstacle  to
these  hopes. It  was  the  number  and  the  theoretical
equality  of  the  nobles. His  calculation  was  that,  in

*  Sieyfes,  Qu'est-ce  que  le  Tiers  Mat?  chap.  iv.  "Tout  oe
qui  tient  aux  quatre  cents  families  les  plus  distinguees  soupire
apr^s  retablissement  d'une  Cliambre  Haute,  semblable  a  celle
d'Angleterre."


ESSAY  ni.  THE AGE OF  PROGRESS,  183

all  France,  there  were  no  less  than  110,000  noble-
men ;  there  were  10,000  in  Brittany  alone.  The
proportions  which  this  difficulty  sometimes  still
assumes  on  the  Continent  may  be  inferred  from  one
curious  instance.  The  combined  Parliament  of  the
two  small  States  called  respectively  Mecklenburg-
Schwerin  and  Mecklenburg-Strelitz  is  a  mediaeval
Diet,  very  slightly  changed.  It  now  consists  of  731
members,  of  whom  684  are  persons  of  knightly  rank,
holding  land  by  knightly  tenure.  As  a  rule,  how-
ever, this  numerousness  of  the  nobility  causes  the
privilege  of  sitting  in  the  Upper  House  to  be  confined
to  comparatively  few  Peers  of  very  high  and  uni-
versally acknowledged  rank,  and  hereditary  Peers
are  seldom-  found  without  an  intermixture  of  Life
Peers.  Life  Peers  also  occur  by  themselves,  but  the
Crown  is  generally  directed  by  the  Constitution  to
select  them  from  certain  classes  of  distinguished  men.
The  best  example  of  an  Upper  House  formed  by  this
method  is  the  Italian  Senate.

In  the  French  Republic  and  in  most  of  the  Mon-
archical European  States,  elective  Senators  are  found,
either  by  themselves  or  together  with  Life  Senators
or  Hereditary  Peers.  The  mode  of  choosing  them
deserves  careful  attention.  Sometimes  the  Senatorial
electorate  is  different  from  that  which  chooses  the
Lower  House  ;  where,  for  instance,  there  is  a  pro-
perty qualification,  it  is  often  higher  in  the  case  of


184  THE AGE OF  PROGRESS.  essay  hl

Senatorial  electors  than  in  the  case  of  electors  for  a
Chamber  of  Deputies.  More  often,  however,  as  in
the  case  of  France,  Sweden,  Denmark,  the  Nether-
lands, and  Belgium,  the  elective  Senators  are  chosen
by  an  electorate  which  in  principle  is  the  same  with
that  which  returns  the  other  Chamber.  But  then
the  dectors  are  differently  grouped.  Provinces,
cities,  communes,  elect  the  Senators ;  while  the
Deputies  are  assumed  to  be  chosen  by  the  nation
at  large.  Nothing  brings  out  so  clearly  as  does  this
class  of  contrivances  a  fundamental  doubt  afflictinof
the  whole  Democratic  theory.  It  is  taken  for  granted
that  a  popular  electorate  will  be  animated  by  a  dif-
ferent spirit  according  as  it  is  grouped  ;  but  why
should  there  be  any  connection  between  the  grouping
of  the  People  and  the  Voice  of  the  People  ?  The
truth  is,  that  as  soon  as  we  begin  to  reflect  seriously
on  modes  of  practically  applying  the  democratic  prin-
ciple, we  find  that  some  vital  preliminary  questions
have  never  been  settled.  Granting  that  the  People  is
entitled  of  right  to  govern,  how  is  it  to  give  its  deci-
sions and  orders  ?  Rousseau  answers  that  all  th
people  must  meet  j)eriodically  in  assembly.  Sieyes
replies  that  it  may  speak  through  representatives,  but
he  spent  a  life  and  displayed  marvels  of  ingenuity
in  devising  systems  of  representation  ;  and  the  diffi-
culties which  he  never  succeeded  in  solving  still
perplex  the  absolute  theorist. Vox  Populi  may  be


ESSAY  III.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  186

Vox  Dei,  but  very  Kttle  attention  shows  that  there
never  has  been  any  agreement  as  to  what  Vox  means
or  as  to  what  Populus  means.  Is  the  voice  of  the
People  the  voice  which  speaks  through  scrutin
cC arrondissement  or  through  scrutin  de  liste^  by  Plebis-
cite or  by  tumultuary  assembly  ?  Is  it  a  sound
in  which  the  note  struck  by  minorities  is  entirely
silent  ?  Is  the  People  which  speaks,  the  People
according  to  household  suffrage,  or  the  People  ac-
cording to  universal  suffrage,  the  People  with  all  the
women  excluded  from  it,  or  the  People,  men,  women,
and  children  together,  assembling  casually  in  volun-
tary meeting  ?  None  of  these  questions  have  been
settled  ;  some  have  hardly  been  thought  about.  In
reality,  the  devotee  of  Democracy  is  much  in  the
same  position  as  the  Greeks  with  their  oracles.  All
agreed  that  the  voice  of  an  oracle  was  the  voice  of
a  god  ;  but  everybody  allowed  that  when  he  spoke
he  was  not  as  intelligible  as  might  be  desired,  and
nobody  was  quite  sure  whether  it  was  safer  to  go  to
Delphi  or  to  Dodona.

It  is  needless  to  say  that  none  of  these  difficulties
embarrass  the  saner  political  theorist  who  holds  that,
in  secular  matters,  it  is  better  to  walk  by  sight  than
by  faith.  As  regards  popularly  elected  Chambers,  he
will  be  satisfied  that,  to  Englishmen  as  to  Greeks,
experience  has  shown  the  best  Constitutions  to  be
those  in  which  the  popular  element  is  large ;  and  he


180  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  EssiT  ni.

will  readily  admit  that,  as  the  structure  of  eacK
society  of  men  slowly  alters,  it  is  well  to  alter
and  amend  the  organisation  by  which  this  element
makes  itself  felt.  But,  as  regards  the  far  more
difficult  undertaking  of  reconstructing  an  Upper
House,  he  will  hope  that  it  will  fall  into  the  hands  of
men  who  have  thoroughly  brought  home  to  them-
selves the  truth,  that  only  two  Second  Chambers
have  as  yet  had  any  duration  to  speak  of — the
American  Senate,  with  all  its  success  a  creation  of
yesterday,  and  the  ancient  English  House  of  Lords.
It  is  very  difficult  to  obtain  from  the  younger  insti-
tution any  lessons  which  can  be  of  use  in  the  recon-
struction of  the  older.  The  Senate  of  the  United
States  is,  in  strictness,  no  more  a  democratic  insti-
tution than  the  House  of  Lords.  As  I  shall  point
out  in  the  following  Essay,  it  is  founded  on  in-
equality of  representation,  not  on  equality.  But  then,
on  the  other  hand,  thirteen  of  the  States  which
severally  depute  the  senators  to  Washington  are  of
older  origin  than  the  Federal  Union  ;  they  still  retain
sonie  portion  of  sovereignty  ;  and  thus  no  artificial
Local  Government  circles  which  may  be  created  in  this
country  will  have  more  than  a  superficial  resemblance
to  them.  It  is  only,  I  am  persuaded,  by  careful
examination  of  infirmities  which  experience  has  shown
to  exist  in  the  House  of  Lords,  and  by  careful  con-
sideration of  doubts  which  have  actually  arisen  as  to


E8SAT  Iff.  THE AGE OF PKOGRESS.  187

the  principles  proper  for  it  to  follow  in  exercising  itfil
legal  powers,  that  hints  of  any  kind  can  be  gathered
respecting  its  possible  improvement.  The  most  com-
petent reformers  of  the  House  of  Lords  will  probably
be  those  who  understand  it  from;  belonging  to  it ;
and  doubtless  there  are  times  when  the  maxim  of
For  talis  applies,  "  II  faut  innover  quand  la  plus
funeste  de  toutes  les  innovations  serait  de  ne  point
innover/'  Meantime,  there  does  not  seem  to  me  to
be  anything  in  the  thought  and  tendencies  of  our  day
which  lends  support  to  the  vague  propositions —
powerful,  I  admit,  through  their  very  vagueness —
which  suggest  that  the  improvement  of  the  House  of
Lords  is  a  desperate  undertaking.  One  hears  it  said
that  the  House  of  Lords  consists  of  great  landowners,
and  that  the  history  of  landed  property  in  great
masses  is  nearly  ended  ;  that  the  privileges  of  the
Peers  are  hereditary,  and  that  an  hereditary  right  to
share  in  government  is  absurd  ;  and  that  the  age  of
aristocracies  and  of  aristocratic  ascendency  is  gone
for  ever.  These  are  very  broad  generalities,  against
which  may  be  set  off  other  generalities,  perhaps
equally  broad,  but  much  better  supported  by  expe^
rience  and  observation.  It  certainly  does  appear
that,  for  the  morpent,  landed  property  is  seriously
threatened.  Yet  it  demands  but  little  penetration  of
mind  to  see  that  most  of  the  current  objections  to  it
are  objections  to  aU  private  property,  and  there  may


188  THE  AGE OF PROGRERS.  1IB8A.T  m.

again  be  a  time  when  it  is  recognised  that  the  pos-
session of  a  great  estate,  as  is  natural  in  a  form
of  ownership  probably  descended  from  a  form  of
sovereignty,^  implies  more  administrative  power  and
kindlier  relations  with  other  classes  having  subordi-
nate interests  than  almost  any  other  kind  of  supe-
riority founded  on  wealth.  The  assertion  of  the
inherent  absurdity  of  an  hereditary  legislature  will
seem  itself  absurd  to  those  who  can  follow  the  course
of  scientific  thought  in  our  day.  Under  all  systems
of  government,  under  Monarchy,  Aristocracy,  and
Democracy  alike,  it  is  a  mere  chance  whether  the
individual  called  to  the  direotion  of  public  affairs  will
be  qualified  for  the  undertaking  ;  but  the  chance  of
his  competence,  so  far  from  being  less  under  Aristo-
cracy than  under  the  other  two  systems,  is  distinctly
greater.  If  the  qualities  proper  for  the  conduct  of
government  can  be  secured  in  a  limited  class  or  body
of  men,  there  is  a  strong  probability  that  they  will
be  transmitted  to  the  corresponding  class  in  the  next
generation,  although  no  assertion  be  possible  as  to
individuals.  Whether — and  this  is  the  last  objection
— the  age  of  aristocracies  be  over,  I  cannot  take  upon
myself  to  say.  I  have  sometimes  thought  it  one  of
the  chief  drawbacks  on  modern  democracy  that,  while
it  gives  birth  to  despotism  with  the  greatest  facility,

•  I  have  discussed  this  point  in  an  earlier  work,  Early  History
9f  Institutions,  pp.  \\b  et  seq.  and  pp.  130  et  seq.


E8SAT  iir.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  180

it  does  not  seem  to  be  capable  of  producing  aristo-
cracy, though  from  that  form  of  political  and  social
ascendency  all  improvement  has  hitherto  sprung.
But  some  of  the  keenest  observers  of  democratic
society  in  our  day  do  not  share  this  opinion.  Noticing
that  the  modern  movement  towards  democracy  is
coupled  with  a  movement  towards  scientific  perfection,
they  appear  to  be  persuaded  that  the  world  will  some
day  fall  under  intellectual  aristocracies.  Society  is
to  become  the  Church  of  a  sort  of  political  Calvinism,
in  which  the  Elect  are  to  be  the  men  with  excep-
tional brains.  This  seems  to  be  the  view  suggested
by  French  democratic  society  to  M.  Ernest  Renan.^
Whether  such  an  aristocracy,  if  it  wielded  all  the
power  which  the  command  of  all  scientific  results
placed  in  its  hands,  would  be  exactly  beneficent,  may
possibly  be  doubted.  The  faults  to  which  the  older
privileged  orders  are  liable  are  plain  enough  and  at

^  Kenan,  Dialogues  Philosophiques.  Third  Dialogue.  A
younger  writer,  M.  Paul  Bourget,  expresses  himself  as  follo\vg  in
a  remarkable  book  called  Easais  de  Psychologie  contemporaine.
"  11  est  possible,  en  effet,  qu'une  divergence  eclate  entre  ces  deux
grandes  forces  des  societes  modernes  :  la  democratie  et  la  science.
II  est  certain  que  la  premiere  tend  de  plus  en  plus  k  niveler,
tandis  que  la  seconde  tend  de  plus  en  plus  a  creer  des  differences.
'  Savoir,  c'est  pouvoir,'  disait  le  philosophe  de  Finduction,  savoir
dix  fois  plus  qu'un  autre  homme,  c'est  pouvoir  dix  fois  ce  qu'il  peut,
et  comme  la  chimere  d'une  instruction  egalement  repartie  sur
tous  les  individus  est,  sans  aucun  doute,  irrealisable,  par  suite  de
Tin^galite  des  intelligences,  I'antinomie  se  manifestera  de  plus  en
plus  entre  les  tendances  de  la  democratie  et  les  resultats  sociaux
de  la  science  "  (pp.  106,  107).


190  THE AGE 0¥ PROGRESS.  essay  hi.

times  very  serious.  They  are  in  some  characters
idleness,  luxuriousness,  insolence,  and  frivolity  ;  in
others,  and  more  particularly  in  our  day,  they  are
timidity,  distrust  of  the  permanence  of  anything
ancient  and  great,  and  (what  is  worse)  a  belief  that
no  reputation  can  be  made  by  a  member  of  an  ancient
and  great  institution  except  by  helping  to  pull  it
down.  But,  assuming  the  utmost  indulgence  in
these  faults,  I  may  be  permitted  to  doubt  whether
mankind  would  derive  unmixed  advantage  from
putting  in  their  place  an  ascetic  aristocracy  of  men
of  science,  with  intellects  perfected  by  unremitting
exercise,  absolutely  confident  in  themselves  and  abso-
lutely sure  of  their  conclusions.  The  question,  how-
ever, will  not  long  or  deeply  trouble  those  who,  like
me,  have  the  strongest  suspicion  that,  if  there  really
arise  a  conflict  between  Democracy  and  Science,
Democracy,  which  is  already  taking  precautions
against  the  enemy,  will  certainly  win.


NOTE  A?

"  Mr. Tylor  has  justly  observed  that  the  true
"  lesson  of  the  new  science  of  Comparative  Mythology

^  This  Note  is  taken  from  my  Ea/rly  History  of  Institutions,
pp.  225-230.


KS8AT  m.  THE  AGE OF  PROGRESS.  191

"  is  the  barrenness  in  primitive  times  of  the  faculty
'*  which  we  most  associate  with  mental  fertility,  the
"  Imagination.  Comparative  Jurisprudence,  as  might
"  be  expected  from  the  natural  stability  of  law  and
"  custom,  yet  more  strongly  suggests  the  same  infer-
*^  ence,  and  points  to  the  fewness  of  ideas  and  the
"  slowness  of  additions  to  the  mental  stock  as  among
*'  the  most  general  characteristics  of  mankind  in  its
"  infancy."

"  The  fact  that  the  generation  of  new  ideas  does  not
"  proceed  in  all  states  of  society  as  rapidly  as  in  that
"  to  which  we  belong,  is  only  not  familiar  to  us  through
"  our  inveterate  habit  of  confining  our  observation  of
"  human  nature  to  a  small  portion  of  its  phenomena.
"  When  we  undertake  to  examine  it,  we  are  very  apt
"  to  Igok  exclusively  at  a  part  of  Western  Europe  and
"  perhaps  of  the  American  Continent.  We  constantly
**  leave  aside  India,  China,  and  the  whole  Mahometan
"  East.  This  limitation  of  our  field  of  vision  is  per-
"  fectly  justifiable  when  we  are  occupied  with  the
"  investigation  of  the  laws  of  Progress.  Progress  is,  in
"  fact,  the  same  thing  as  the  continued  production  of
**  new  ideas,  and  we  can  only  discover  the  law  of  this
"  production  by  examining  sequences  of  ideas  where
**  they  are  frequent  and  of  considerable  length.  But
"  the  primitive  condition  of  the  progressive  societies  is
"  best  ascertained  from  the  observable  condition  of
**  those  which  are  non-progressive ;  and  thus  we  leave


192  •  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  essay  nL

"  0  senous  gsup  in  our  knowledge  when  we  put  aside
**  the  mental  state  of  the  millions  upon  millions  of  men
"  who  fill  what  we  vaguely  call  the  East  as  a  pheno-
"  menon  of  little  interest  and  of  no  instructiveness.
*^  The  fact  is  not  unknown  to  most  of  us  that,  among
"  these  multitudes,  Literature,  Religion,  and  Art — or
"  what  corresponds  to  them — move  always  within  a
**  distinctly  drawn  circle  of  unchanging  notions  ;  but
"  the  fact  that  this  condition  of  thought  is  rather  the
**  infancy  of  the  human  mind  prolonged  than  a  dif-
*'  ferent  maturity  from  that  most  familiar  to  us,  is
"  very  seldom  brought  home  to  us  with  a  clearness
**  rendering  it  fruitful  of  instruction.

"  I  do  not,  indeed,  deny  that  the  difference  between
"  the  East  and  the  West,  in  respect  of  the  different
**  speed  at  which  new  ideas  are  produced,  is  only  a
*^  difference  of  degree.  There  were  new  ideas  produced
"  in  India  even  during  the  disastrous  period  just  before
"  the  English  entered  it,  and  in  the  earlier  ages  this
*^  production  must  have  been  rapid.  There  must  have
"  been  a  series  of  ages  during  which  the  progress  of
*^  China  was  very  steadily  maintained,  and  doubtless
*^  our  assumption  of  the  absolute  immobility  of  the
**  Chinese  and  other  societies  is  in  part  the  expression
"  of  our  ignorance.  Conversely,  I  question  whether
"  new  ideas  come  into  being  in  the  West  as  rapidly
"  as  modern  literature  and  conversation  sometimes
"  suggest. It  cannot,  indeed,  be  doubted  that  causes,


ESSAY  m.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  lOS

*  unknown  to  the  ancient  world,  lead  among  us  to  the

*  multiplication  of  ideas.  Among  them  are  the  never-
'  ceasing  discovery  of  new  facts  of  nature,  inventions

*  changing  the  circumstances  and  material  conditions

*  of  life,  and  new  rules  of  social  conduct  ;  the  chief  of
'  this  last  class,  and  certainly  the  most  powerful  in  the
^  domain  of  law  proper,  I  take  to  be  the  famous  maxim
^  that  all  institutions  should  be  adapted  to  produce  the
'  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number.  Never-
'  theless,  there  are  not  a  few  signs  that  even  conscious
'  efforts  to  increase  the  number  of  ideas  have  a  very
'  limited  success.  Look  at  Poetry  and  Fiction.  From
'  time  to  time  one  mind  endowed  with  the  assemblage

*  of  qualities  called  genius  makes  a  great  and  sudden
'  addition  to  the  combinations  of  thought,  word,  and

*  sound  which  it  is  the  province  of  those  arts  to  pro-
'  duce ;  yet  as  suddenly,  after  one  or  a  few  such  efforts,
'  the  productive  activity  of  both  branches  of  invention
^  ceases,  and  they  settle  down  into  iraitativeness  for
'  perhaps  a  century  at  a  time.  An  humbler  example
^  may  be  sought  in  rules  of  social  habit.  We  speak
^  of  the  caprices  of  Fashion  ;  yet,  on  examining  them
'  historically,  we  find  them  singularly  limited,  so  much
'  so,  that  we  are  sometimes  tempted  to  regard  Fashion
^  as  passing  through  cycles  of  form  ever  repeating
'  themselves. There  are,  in  fact,  more  natural  limita-

*  tions  on  the  fertility  of  intellect  than  we  always

*  admit  to  ourselves,  and  these,  reflected in  bodies


194  THE  AGE  OF  PBOGEESS.  essay  hi.

"  of  men,  translate  themselves  into  that  weariness  of
"  novelty  which  seems  at  intervals  to  overtake  whole
"  Western  societies,  including  minds  of  every  degree
"  of  information  and  cultivation.

"  My  present  object  is  to  point  out  some  of  the
"  results  of  mental  sterility  at  a  time  when  society  is  in
"  the  stage  which  we  have  been  considering.  Then,
"  the  relations  between  man  and  man  were  summed  up
"  in  kinship. The  fundamental  assumption  was  that

all  men,  not  united  with  you  by  blood,  were  your
"  enemies  or  your  slaves. Gradually  the  assumption

became  untrue  in  fact,  and  men,  who  were  not  blood
"  relatives,  became  related  to  one  another  on  terms  of
"peace  and  mutual  tolerance  or  mutual  advantage.
"  Yet  no  new  ideas  came  into  being  exactly  harmonis-
"  ing  with  the  new  relation,  nor  was  any  new  phraseo-
"  logy  invented  to  express  it.  The  new  member  of
•  ^  each  group  was  spoken  of  as  akin  to  it,  was  treated  as
"  akin  to  it,  was  thought  of  as  akin  to  it.  So  little
"  were  ideas  changed  that,  as  we  shall  see,  the  very
•'affections  and  emotions  which  the  natural  bond
'^  evoked  were  called  forth  in  extraordinary  strength
"  by  the  artificial  tie.  The  clear  apprehension  of  these
''  facts  throws  light  on  several  historical  problems,  and
"  among  them  oh  some  of  Irish  history.  Yet  they
"  ought  not  greatly  to  surprise  us,  since,  in  a  modified
^'  form,  they  make  part  of  our  everyday  experience.
*^  Almost  everyl)ody  can  observe  that,  when  new  cir-


ESSAr  III.  THE AGE OF PROGRESS.  195

"  cumstances  arise,  we  use  our  old  ideas  to  bring  them
^'  home  to  us  ;  it  is  only  afterwards,  and  sometimes
"  long  afterwards,  that  our  ideas  are  found  to  have
"  changed.  An  English  Court  of  Justice  is  in  great
"  part  an  engine  for  working  out  this  process.  New
"  combinations  of  circumstance  are  constantly  arising,
"  but  in  the  first  instance  they  are  exclusively  inter-
"  preted  according  to  old  legal  ideas.  A  little  later
"  lawyers  admit  that  the  old  ideas  are  not  quite  what
"they  were  befcre  the  new  circumstances  arose.

"The  slow  generation  of  ideas  in  ancient  times
"  may  first  be  adduced  as  necessary  to  the  explanation
"  of  that  great  family  of  Fictions  which  meet  us  on
"  the  threshold  of  history  and  historical  j  urispru-
''  dence."


196 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  it.


ESSAY  IV.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES.

The  Constitution  of  the  United  States  of  America
is  much  the  most  important  political  instrument  of
modern  times.  The  country,  whose  destinies  it  con-
trols and  directs,  has  this  special  characteristic,  that
all  the  territories  into  which  its  already  teeming
population  overflows  are  so  placed,  that  political
institutions  of  the  same  type  can  be  established  in
every  part  of  them.  The  British  Empire  contains  a
much  larger  population,  but  its  portions  lie  far  apart
from  one  another,  divided  by  long  stretches  of  sea,
and  it  is  impossible  to  apply  the  popular  government
of  the  British  Islands  to  all  of  them.,  and  to  none  of
them  can  it  be  applied  without  considerable  modifi-
cations. Russia  has  something  like  the  compactness
of  the  United  States,  and  her  population  is  at  present
more  numerous,  although  her  numbers  seem  likely  to
be  overtaken  in  no  long  time  by  those  included  in  the
American  Federation.  All  the  Russian  Empire  is
nominally  governed  through  the  sole  authority  of  the


ESSiT  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 197

Emperor,  but  there  are  already  great  differences  be-
tween  the  bureaucratic  despotism  of  Western  Russia
and  the  military  autocracy  which  presides  over  the
East ;  and,  whenever  the  crisis  comes  through  which
Russian  institutions  seem  doomed  to  pass,  the  differ-
ence between  the  eastern  and  western  systems  of
Russian  Government  cannot  fail  to  be  accentuated.
But  the  United  States  of  America,  from  the  Atlantic
to  the  Pacific,  from  the  Canadian  lakes  to  the  Mexican
border,  appear  destined  to  remain  for  an  indefinite
time  under  the  same  political  institutions  ;  and  there
is  no  evidence  that  these  will  not  continue  to  belong
to  the  popular  type.  Of  these  institutions,  the  most
important  part  is  defined  by  the  Federal  Constitution.
The  relative  importance,  indeed,  of  the  Government
of  the  United  States  and  of  the  State  Governments
did  not  always  appear  to  be  as  clearly  settled  as  it
appears  at  the  present  moment.  There  was  a  time
at  which  the  authority  of  the  several  States  might  be
thought  to  be  gaining  at  the  expense  of  the  authority
of  the  United  States  ;  but  the  War  of  Secession  re-
versed this  tendency,  and  the  Federation  is  slowly  but
decidedly  gaining  at  the  cost  of  the  States.  Thus,
the  life  and  fortunes  of  the  most  multitudinous  and
homogeneous  population  in  the  world  will,  on  the
whole  and  in  the  main,  be  shaped  by  the  Constitution
of  the  United  States.

The  political  liberty  of  the  United  States  exercises


198 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essat  IV.

more  or  less  influence  upon  all  forms  of  free  govern-
ment in  the  older  world.  But  to  us  of  the  present
generation  it  has  the  greatest  interest  for  another
reason.  The  success  of  the  United  States  has  sus-
tained the  credit  of  Republics — a  word  which  was
once  used  with  a  good  deal  of  vagueness  to  signify  a
government  of  any  sort  without  an  hereditary  king
at  its  head,  but  which  has  lately  come  to  have  the
additional  meaning  of  a  government  resting  on  a
widely  extended  suffrage.  It  is  not  at  all  easy  to
bring  home  to  the  men  of  the  present  day  how  low
the  credit  of  Republics  had  sunk  before  the  establish-
ment of  the  United  States.  I  called  attention  in  my
first  Essay  to  the  language  of  contempt  in  which  the
writers  of  the  last  century  speak  of  the  Republics
then  surviving.  The  authors  of  the  famous  American
collection  of  papers  called  the  "  Federalist,"  of  which
I  shall  have  much  to  say  presently,  are  deeply  troubled
by  the  ill- success  and  ill-repute  of  the  only  form  of
government  which  was  possible  for  them.  The  very
establishment  of  their  independence  had  left  them  a
cluster  of  Republics  in  the  old  sense  of  the  word,
and,  as  hereditary  kingship  was  out  of  the  question,
their  Federal  Constitution  was  necessarily  Republican.
They  tried  to  take  their  own  Republic  out  of  the  class
as  commonly  understood.  What  they  chiefly  dreaded
was  disorder,  and  they  were  much  impressed  by  the
turbulence^  the  ^^  fugitive  and  turbulent  existence,"


B8SAT  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 199

of  thp  ancient  Republics.  But  these,  they  said,^  were
not  Republics  in  the  true  sense  of  the  name.  They
were  "democracies,"  commonwealths  of  the  primitive
type,  governed  by  the  vote  of  the  popular  assembly,
which  consisted  of  the  whole  mass  of  male  citizens
met  together  in  one  place.  The  true  Republic  must
always  be  understood  as  a  commonwealth  saved  from
disorder  by  representative  institutions.

But  soon  after  the  emancipated  Americans  began
their  great  experiment,  its  credit  had  to  be  sustained
against  a  much  more  terrible  exemplification  of  the
weaknesses  of  republican  institutions,  for  the  French
Republic  was  established.  The  black  shadow  of  its
crimes  still  hangs  over  the  century,  though  it  is  fading
imperceptibly  into  the  distance.  But  what  has  not
been  sufficiently  noticed,  is  its  thorough  political
miscarriage.  It  tried  every  expedient  by  which  weak
governments,  directed  by  unscrupulous  men,  attempt
to  save  themselves  from  open  discomfiture.  It  put
to  death  aU  who  were  likely  to  oppose  it,  and  it  con-
ducted its  executions  on  a  scale  which,  for  the  quantity
of  blood  spilt  within  narrow  limits  of  time,  had  been
unknown  since  the  Tartar  invasions.  It  tried  foreign
war,  and  it  obtained  success  in  the  field  beyond  its
wildest  hopes.  It  tried  military  usurpation,  and  it
sent  the  most  distinguished  and  virtuous  of  the  new
constitutional  school  of  French  politicians,  which  was

*  Federalist^  No.  10  (Madison).


200 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  iv.

beginning  to  control  it,  to  perish  in  tropical  swamps.
Yet  it  sank  lower  and  lower  into  contempt,  and  died
without  a  struggle.  There  are  not  many  of  the
charges  brought  against  Napoleon  Bonaparte  which
are  altogether  unjust,  but  he  must  at  any  rate  be
acquitted  of  having  destroyed  a  Republic,  if  by  a
Republic  is  to  be  understood  a  free  government.
What  he  destroyed  was  a  military  tyranny,  for  this
had  been  the  character  of  the  French  Government
since  the  September  of  1797 ;  and  he  substituted  for
this  military  tyranny  another  still  severer  and  in-
finitely more  respected.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the
credit  of  American  Republican  institutions,  and  of
such  institutions  generally,  did  greatly  decline  through
the  miserable  issue  of  the  French  experiment.  The
hopes  of  political  freedom,  which  the  Continental  com-
munities were  loth  to  surrender,  turned  in  another
direction,  and  attached  themselves  exclusively  to
Constitutional  Monarchy.  American  publicists  not«
the  first  fifteen  years  of  the  present  century  as  the
period  during  which  their  country  was  least  respected
abroad  and  their  Government  treated  with  most  con-
tumely by  European  diplomacy.^  And  just  when
the American  Federation  was  overcoming  the  low

•  See  the  language  employed  by  Canning,  as  lately  as  1821,
in  conversation  with  John  Quincy  Adams,  then  American  Minister
in  London  (Morse's  Life  of  J.  0  Adams,  p.  141).


BSSAT  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 201

opinion  of  all  Republics  which  had  become  common,
a  set  of  events  happened  close  to  its  doors  which
might  have  overwhelmed  it  in  general  shame.  The
Spanish  Colonies  in  North,  Central,  and  South  America
revolted,  and  set  up  Republics  in  which  the  crimes
and  disorders  of  the  French  Republic  were  repeated
in  caricature.  The  Spanish  American  Republicans
were  to  the  French  what  Hebert  and  Anacharsis
Clootz  had  been  to  Danton  and  Robespierre.  This
absurd  travesty  of  Republicanism  lasted  more  than
fifty  years,  and  even  now  the  curtain  has  not  quite
fallen  upon  it.  Independently,  therefore,  of  the
history  of  the  United  States,  it  would  have  seemed
quite  certain  what  the  conclusion  of  political  philo-
sophy must  have  been  upon  the  various  forms  of
Government  as  observed  under  the  glass  of  experi-
ence. If  we  clear  our  mental  view  by  adopting  the
Aristotelian  analysis,  and  classify  all  governments  as
governments  of  the  One,  governments  of  the  Few,
and  governments  of  the  Many,  we  shall  see  that  man-
kind had  had  much  experience  of  government  by  the
One,  and  a  good  deal  of  government  by  the  Few,  and
also  some  very  valuable  experience  of  attempts  at
combining  these  two  forms  of  Government,  but  that
of  government  by  the  Many  it  had  very  slight  experi-
ence, and  that  whatever  it  had  was  on  the  whole
decidedly  unfavourable.  The  antecedent  doubt,
whether  government  by  the  Many  was  really  possible


202 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  iv.

— ^whether  in  any  intelligible  sense,  and  upon  any
theory  of  volition,  a  multitude  of  men  could  be  said
to  bave  a  common  will — would  have  seemed  to  be
strengthened  by  the  fact  that,  whenever  government
by  the  Many  had  been  tried,  it  had  ultimately  pro-
duced monstrous  and  morbid  forms  of  government  by
the  One,  or  of  government  by  the  Few.  This  con-
clusion would,  in  truth,  have  been  inevitable,  but  for
the  history  of  the  United  States,  so  far  as  they  have
had  a  history.  The  Federal  Constitution  has  survived
the  mockery  of  itself  in  France  and  in  Spanish
America.  Its  success  has  been  so  great  and  striking,
that  men  have  almost  forgotten  that,  if  the  whole  of\
the  known  experiments  of  mankind  in  government  be  ]
looked  at  together,  there  has  beeu  no  form  of  govern-  j
ment  so  unsuccessful  as  the  Republican.  ^^^

The  antecedents  of  a  body  of  institutions  like  this,
and  its  mode  of  growth,  manifestly  deserve  attentive
study  ;  and  fortunately  the  materials  for  the  inquiry
are  full  and  good.  The  papers  called  the  "  Federal^
ist,"  which  were  published  in  1787  and  1788  by
Hamilton,  Madison,  and  Jay,  but  which  were  chiefly
from  the  pen  of  Hamilton,  were  originally  written  to
explain  the  new  Constitution  of  the  United  States,
then  awaiting  ratification,  and  to  dispel  misconstruc-
tions of  it  which  had  got  abroad.  They  are  thus,
undoubtedly,  an  ex  post  facto  defence  of  the  new
institutions,  but  they  show  us  with  much  clearness


KSSAT  IT, CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 203

either  the  route  by  which  the  strongest  minds  among
the  American  statesmen  of  that  period  had  travelled
to  the  conclusions  embodied  in  the  Constitution,  or
the  arguments  by  which  they  had  become  reconciled  to
them.  The  ''  Federalist"  has  generally  excited  some-
thing like  enthusiasm  in  those  who  have  studied  it,
and  among  these  there  have  been  some  not  at  all
given  to  excessive  eulogy.  Talleyrand  strongly
recommended  it ;  and  Guizot  said  of  it  that,  in  the
application  of  the  elementary  principles  of  government
to  practical  administration,  it  was  the  greatest  work
known  to  him.  An  early  number  of  the  "  Edinburgh
Review  "  (No.  24 )  described  it  as  a  "  work  little  known
in  Europe,  but  which  exhibits  a  profundity  of  re-
search and  an  acuteness  of  understanding  which
would  have  done  honour  to  the  most  illustrious
statesmen  of  modern  times."  The  American  com-
mendations of  the  "Federalist "  are  naturally  even  less
qualified.  "  I  know  not,"  wrote  Chancellor  Kent,  "  of
any  work  on  the  principles  of  free  government  that  is
to  be  compared  in  instruction  and  in  intrinsic  value
to  this  small  and  unpretending  volume  of  the  '  Fe-
deralist ' ;  not  even  if  we  resort  to  Aristotle,  Cicero,
Machiavel,  Montesquieu,  Milton,  Locke,  or  Burke.
It  is  equally  admirable  in  the  depth  of  its  wisdom,
the  comprehensiveness  of  its  views,  the  sagacity  of
its  reflections,  and  the  freshness,  patriotism,  candour,
simplicity,  and  eloquence,  with  which  its truths  are


•204 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES, essat  iy.

uttered  and  recommended/'  Those  who  have  atten-
tively read  these  papers  will  not  think  such  praise
pitched,  on  the  whole,  too  high.  Perhaps  the  part
of  it  least  thoroughly  deserved  is  that  given  to  their
supposed  profundity  of  research.  There  are  few
traces  in  the  "  Federalist "  of  familiarity  with  previous
speculations  on  politics,  except  those  of  Montesquieu
in  the  "  Esprit  des  Lois,"  the  popular  book  of  that
day.  The  writers  attach  the  greatest  importance  to
all  Montesquieu's  opinions.  They  are  much  discom-
posed by  his  assertion,  that  Republican  government
is  necessarily  associated  with  a  small  territory,  and
they  are  again  comforted  by  his  admission,  that  this
difficulty  might  be  overcome  by  a  confederate  Re-
public. Madison  indeed  had  the  acuteness  to  see
that  Montesquieu's  doctrine  is  as  often  polemical  as
philosophical,  and  that  it  is  constantly  founded  on  a
tacit  contrast  between  the  institutions  of  his  own
country,  which  he  disliked,  with  those  of  England,
which  he  admired.  But  still  his  analysis,  as  we  shall
hereafter  point  out^  had  much  influence  upon  the
founders  and  defenders  of  the  American  Constitution.
On  the  whole,  Guizot's  criticism  of  the  "  Federalist "
is  the  most  judicious.  It  is  an  invaluable  work  on
the  application  of  the  elementary  principles  of  govern-
ment to  practical  administration.  Nothing  can  be
more  sagacious  than  its  anticipation  of  the  way  in
which  the  new  institutions  would  actually  work,  oi


ESSAY  ir. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 205

more  conclusive  than  its  exposure  of  the  fallacies
which  underlay  the  popular  objections  to  some  of
them.

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Hamilton,  Jay,  and
Madison  were  careless  of  historical  experience.  They
had  made  a  careful  study  of  many  forms  of  govern-
ment, ancient  and  modern.  Their  observations  on
the  ancient  Republics,^  which  were  shortly  after-
wards to  prove  so  terrible  a  snare  to  French  political
theorists,  are  extremely  just.  The  cluster  of  common-
wealths woven  together  in  the  "  United  Netherlands  "*
is  fully  examined,  and  the  weaknesses  of  this  anomalous
confederacy  are  shrewdly  noted.  The  remarkable
structure  of  the  Romano- German  Empire  °  is  depicted,
and  there  is  reason  to  suspect  that  these  institutions,
now  almost  forgotten,  influenced  the  framers  of  the
American  Constitution,  both  by  attraction  and  by
repulsion.  But  far  the  most  important  experience  to
which  they  appealed  was  that  of  their  own  country,
at  a  very  recent  date.  The  earliest  link  had  been
supplied  to the revolted colonies by  the first or

'  Federalist^  No.  14  (Madison).

*  Ibid.  No.  20  (Hamilton  and  Madison).

*  Ibid.  No.  19  (Hamilton  and  Madison).  Nos.  19  and  20  are
attributed  to  Hamilton  and  Madison  in  Mr.  J.  C.  Hamilton's
edition  of  the  Federalist^  but  Hamilton's  share  in  them  is  not
acknowledged  in  the  list  left  by  Madison.  See  Bancroft,  History
of  the  Formation  of  the  Coiistitution  of  the  United  States,  ii
p.  336.

P


/


206 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  iv.

American  "  Continental "  Congress,  which  issued  the
Declaration  of  Independence.  There  had  subsequently
been  the  ^^  Articles  of  Confederation,"  ratified  in  1781.
These  earlier  experiments,  their  demonstrable  mis-
carriage in  many  particulars,  and  the  disappointments
to  which  they  gave  rise,  are  a  storehouse  of  instances
and  a  plentiful  source  of  warning  and  reflection  to
the  writers  who  have  undertaken  to  show  that  their
vices  are  removed  in  the  Constitution  of  1787-89.

Nevertheless,  there  is  one  fund  of  political  ex-
perience upon  which  the  "Federalist"  seldom  draws,
and  that  is  the  political  experience  of  Great  Britain.
The  scantiness^  of  these  references  is  at  first  sight
inexplicable.  The  writers  must  have  understood
Great  Britain  better  than  any  other  country,  except
their  own.  They  had  been  British  subjects  during
most  of  their  lives.  They  had  scarcely  yet  ceased  to
breathe  the  atmosphere  of  the  British  Parliament  and
to  draw  strength  from  its  characteristic  disturbances.
Next  to  their  own  stubborn  valour,  the  chief  secret  of
the  colonists'  success  was  the  incapacity  of  the  English
generals,  trained  in  the  stiff  Prussian  system  soon  to
perish  at  Jena,  to  adapt  themselves  to  new  conditions
of  warfare,  an  incapacity  which  newer  generals,  full  of
admiration  for  a  newer  German  system,  were  again  to

'  References  to  Great  Britain  occur  in  Federalist,  No.  5  (Jay)  ;
and  (for  the  purpose  of  disproving  a  supposed  analogy)  in
Federalist^  No.  69  (Hamilton).


BSSAT  IT. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 207

manifest  at  Majuba  Hill  against  a  meaner  foe.  But
the  colonists  had  also  reaped  signal  advantage  from
the  encouragements  of  the  British  Parliamentary
Opposition.  If  the  King  of  France  gave  "  aid,"  the
English  Opposition  gave  perpetual  *'  comfort  "  to  the
enemies  of  the  King  of  England.  It  was  a  fruit  of
the  English  party  system  which  was  to  reappear,
amid  much  greater  public  dangers,  in  the  Peninsular
"War  ;  and  the  revelation  of  domestic  facts,  the  asser-
tion of  domestic  weakness,  were  to  assist  the  arms  of
a  military  tyrant,  as  they  had  assisted  the  colonists
fighting  for  independence.  Various  observations^
in  the  "  Federalist "  on  the  truculence  of  party  spirit
may  be  suspected  of  having  been  prompted  by  the
recollection  of  what  an  Opposition  can  do.  But  there
could  be  no  open  reference  to  this  in  its  pages  ;  and,
on  the  whole,  it  cannot  but  be  suspected  that  the
fewness  of  the  appeals  to  British  historical  examples
had  its  cause  in  their  unpopularity.  The  object  of
Madison,  Hamilton,  and  Jay  was  to  persuade  their
countrymen  ;  and  the  appeal  to  British  experience
would  only  have  provoked  prejudice  and  repulsion.
I  hope,  however,  to  show  that  the  Constitution  of  the
United  States  is  coloured  throughout  by  political
ideas  of  British  origin,  and  that  it  is  in  reality  a
jgrsipn  of  the  British  Con  as  it  must  have

'  Federalist,  No.  70  (Hamilton).


208 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  it,

presented  itself  to  an  observer  in  the  second  half  of
the  last  century.

It  has  to  be  carefully  borne  in  mind  that  the  con-
struction of  the  American  Constitution  was  extremely
unlike  that  process  of  founding  a  new  Constitution
which  in  our  day  may  be  witnessed  at  intervals  of  a
few  years  on  the  European  Continent,  and  that  it  bore
even  less  resemblance  to  the  foundation  of  a  new
Republic,  as  the  word  is  now  understood.  Whatever
be  the  occasion  of  one  of  these  new  European  Con-
stitutions, be  it  ill  success  in  war,  or  escape  from
foreign  dominion,  or  the  overthrow  of  a  government
by  the  army  or  the  mob,  the  new  institutions  are
always  shaped  in  a  spirit  of  bitter  dissatisfaction  with
the  old,  which,  at  the  very  best,  are  put  upon  their
trial.  But  the  enfranchised  American  colonists  were
more  than  satisfied  with  the  bulk  of  their  institutions,
which  were  those  of  the  several  colonies  to  which  they
belonged.  And,  although  they  had  fought  a  success-
ful war  to  get  rid  of  the  King  of  Great  Britain  and
of  the  British  Parliament,  they  had  no  quarrel  with
kings  or  parliaments  as  such.  Their  contention  was
that  the  British  King  and  the  British  Parliament  had
forfeited  by  usurpation  whatever  rights  they  had,  and
that  they  had  been  justly  punished  by  dispossession.
Born  free  Englishmen,  they  were  not  likely  to  deny
the  value  of  parliaments,  and,  even  as  to  kings,  it  is
probable  that  many  of  them  had  at  one  time  shared


B6SAT  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 209

the  youthful  opinion  of  Alexander  Hamilton,  who,
while  totally  denying  the  claim  of  parliamentary
supremacy  over  the  British  colonies,  except  so  far  as
they  had  conceded  it,  had  argued  that  the  "  connect-
ing, pervading  principle,"  necessary  to  unite  a  number
of  individual  communities  under  one  conimon  head,
could  only  be  found  in  the  person  and  prerogative  of
the  King,  who  was  "  King  of  America  by  virtue  of  a
compact  between  the  colonists  and  the  Kings  oj.  Great
Britain."  ^  When  once,  however,  the  war  had  been
fought  out,  and  the  connection  with  the  Parliament
and  the  King  alike  had  been  broken,  the  business  in
hand  was  to  supply  their  place.  This  new  constitu-
tional link  had  now  to  be  forged  from  local  mate-
rials. Among  these,  there  were  none  for  making
an  hereditary  King,  hardly  any  for  manufacturing  an
hereditary  Second  Chamber  ;  but  yet  the  means  of
enabling  the  now  separated  portion  of  the  British
Empire  to  discharge  the  functions  of  a  fully  organised
State,  as  completely  as  they  had  been  performed  by
the  kingdom  from  which  it  was  severed,  must  some-
how be  found  on  the  west  of  the  Atlantic.  The
Constitution  of  the  United  States  was  the  fruit  of
signal  sagacity  and  prescience  applied  to  these  neces-
sities. But,  again,  there  was  almost  no  analogy
between  the  new  undertaking  and  the  establishment

*  See  Preface  to  J.  C.  Hamilton's  edition  of  the  Federalist^
p.  10-


210 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  it.

of  a  modern  Continental  KepubKc.  The  common-
wealth founded  in  America  was  only  called  a  Eepublic
because  it  had  no  hereditary  king,  and  it  had  no
hereditary  king  because  there  were  no  means  of  having
one.  At  that  time  every  community  without  an
hereditary  monarchy  was  considered  to  be  republican.
There  was  a  King  of  Poland  elected  for  life,  but  his
kingdom  was  styled  the  Polish  Eepublic.  In  the
style  of  the  elective  Komano-Germaa  Empire  there
were  still  traces  of  the  old  Roman  Republican  Con-
stitution. The  Venetian  Republic  was  a  stern  oli-
garchy ;  and,  in  fact,  the  elective  Doges  of  Venice
and  Genoa  were  as  much  kings  of  the  old  type  as
those  ancient  Kings  of  Rome  who  originally  gave  its
name  to  Royal  authority.  Many  of  the  Swiss  Can-
tons were  Republics  of  the  most  primitive  kind,
where  the  whole  population  met  once  a  year  in
assembly  to  legislate  and  elect  public  officers ;  but
one  section  in  some  cantons  severely  governed  the
others,  and  some  cantons  held  then'  dependent  terri-
tories in  the  hardest  subjection.  Now-a-days,  however,
the  establishment  of  a  Republic  means  the  substitu-
tion, in  all  the  functions  of  government,  of  the  Many
for  the  One  or  the  Few — of  the  totality  of  the  com-
munity for  a  determinate  portion  of  it — an  experiment
of  tremendous  and  perhaps  insuperable  difficulty,
which  the  colonists  never  thought  of  undertaking.
The  suffrage,  as  I  shall  have  to  show,  was  extremely


ESSAY  lY. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 211

limited  in  many  of  the  States,  and  it  is  unnecessary
to  state  that  about  half  of  them  were  slaveholding
communities.

I  now  propose  to  take  in  turn  the  great  Federal
institutions  set  up  by  the  Americans — the  President
of  the  United  States,  the  Supreme  Court,  the  Senate,
and  the  House  of  Representatives — and,  in  sum-
marily considering  them,  to  point  out  their  relation
to  pre-existing  European,  and  especially  British,  insti-
tutions. What  I  may  say  will  perhaps  serve  in  some
degree  as  a  corrective  of  the  vague  ideas  betrayed,
not  only  in  the  loose  phraseology  of  the  English
platform,  but  by  the  historical  commonplaces  of  the
Americans  themselves.

On  the  face  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United
States,  the  resemblance  of  the  President  of  the  United
States  to  the  European  King,  and  especially  to  the
King  of  Great  Britain,  is  too  obvious  for  mistake.
The  President  has,  in  various  degrees,  a  number  of
powers  which  those  who  know  something  of  King-
ship in  its  general  history  recognise  at  once  as
peculiarly  associated  with  it  and  with  no  other  insti-
tution. The  whole  Exeeutive  power  is  vested  in
him.^  He  is  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  and
Navy.^  He  makes  treaties  with  the  advice  and  con-
sent of  the  Senate,  and  with  the  same  advice  and
consent  he  appoints  Ambassadors,  Ministers,  Judges,
»  C.  of  U.S.  Art.  n.  »  Ibid,  1,  2.


212 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. ESSlT  it.

and  all  high  functionaries. He  has  a  qualified  veto
on legislation. He  convenes Congress, when no
special  time  of  meeting  has  been  fixed. It  is  con-
ceded  in  the  ''Federalist"  that  the  similarity  of  the
new  President's  office  to  the  functions  of  the  British
King  was  one  of  the  points  on  which  the  opponents
of  the  Constitution  fastened. Hamilton  replies  ^  to
their  arguments,  sometimes  with  great  cogency,  some-
times, it  must  be  owned,  a little captiously. He
urges  that  the  only  alternative  to  a  President  was  a
plural  Executive,  or  Council,  and  he  insists  on  the
risk  of  a  paralysis  of  Executive  authority  produced
by  party  opposition  in  such  a  body. But  he  mainly
relies  on  the  points  in  which  the  President  differs  from
the  King — on  the  terminability  of  the  office,  on  the
participation  of  the  Senate  in  the  exercise  of  several  of
his  powers,  on  the  limited  nature  of  his  veto  on  Bills
passed  by  Congress. It  is,  however,  tolerably  clear
that  the  mental  operation  through  which  the  framers
of  the  American  Constitution  passed  was  this  :  they
took  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  went  through  his
powers,  and  restrained  them  whenever  they  appeared
to  be  excessive  or  unsuited  to  the  circumstances  of
the  United  States. It  is  remarkable  that  the  figure
they  had  before  them  was  not  a  generalised  English
king  nor  an  abstract  Constitutional  monarch  ;  it  was
no  anticipation  of  Queen  Victoria,  but  George  IIL.
*  Federalist^  No.  ^Q  (Hamilton).


E8S1Y  ir. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 213

himself  whom  they  took  for  their  model.  Fifty  years
earlier,  or  a  hundred  years  later,  the  English  king
would  have  struck  them  in  quite  a  different  light.
There  had  been  a  tacit  compact  between  the  first
two  Georges  and  the  Whig  aristocracy,  that  the
King  should  govern  Hanover  and  the  Whig  Ministry
Great  Britain  ;  and  such  differences  as  arose  between
the  King  and  his  subjects  were  attributable  to  the
fact  that  European  wars  began  in  the  Hanoverian
department.  But  George  HI.  cared  nothing  for
Hanover  and  much  for  governing  England.  He  at
once  took  a  new  departure  in  policy  by  making  peace,
and  setting  himself  to  conduct  the  government  of
England  in  his  own  way.  Now,  the  original  of  the
President  ctf  the  United  States  is  manifestly  a  treaty-
making  king,  and  a  king  actively  influencing  the
Executive  Government.  Mr.  Bagehot  insisted  that
the  great  neglected  fact  in  the  English  political  system
was  the  government  of  England  by  a  Committee
of  the  Legislature,  calling  themselves  the  Cabinet.
This  is  exactly  the  method  of  government  to  which
George  HI.  refused  to  submit,  and  the  framers  of  the
American  Constitution  take  George  HI.^s  view  of
the  kingly  office  for  granted.  They  give  the  whole
Executive  Government  to  the  President,  and  they  do
not  permit  his  Ministers  to  have  seat  or  speech  in
either  branch  of  the  Legislature.  They  limit  his
power  and  theirs,  not,  however,  by  any  contrivance


214 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES, essay  it.

known  to  modern  English  constitutionalism,  but  by
making  the  office  of  President  terminable  at  intervals
of  four  years.

If  Hamilton  had  lived  a; hundred  years  later,  his
comparison  of  the  President  with  the  King  would
have  turned  on  very  different  points.  He  must  have
conceded  that  the  Republican  functionary  was  much
the  more  powerful  of  the  two.  He  must  have  noted
that  the  royal  veto  on  legislation,  not  thought  in
1789  to  be  quite  lost,  was  irrevocably  gone.  He
must  have  observed  that  the  powers  which  the
President  shared  with  the  Senate  had  been  altogether
taken  away  from  the  King.  The  King  could  make
neither  war  nor  treaty  ;  he  could  appoint  neither
Ambassador  nor  Judge  ;  he  could  not  even  name
his  own  Ministers.  He  could  do  no  executive  act.
All  these  powers  had  gone  over  to  Mr.  Bagehot's
Committee  of  Parliament.  But,  a  century  ago,  the
only  real  and  essential  difference  between  the  Pre-
sidential and  the  Royal  office  was  that  the  first
was  not  hereditary.  The  succession  of  President
to  President  cannot  therefore  have  been  copied
from  Great  Britain.  But  there  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  method  of  election  was  suddenly
evolved  from  the  brain  of  American  statesmen.
Two  features  of  the  original  plan  have  very  much
fallen  out  of  sight.  The  President,  though  appointed
for four years only, was to be indefinitely re-


ESSAT  IT. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 216

eligible  ;  ^  the  practical  limitation  of  the  term  of
office  to  a  maximum  period  of  eight  years  was
finally  settled  only  the  other  day.  And  again,  the
elaborate  machinery  of  election*  provided  in  the
Constitution  was  intended  to  be  a  reality.  Each
State  was  to  appoint  Electors,  and  the  choice  of  a
President  was  to  be  the  mature  fruit  of  an  independent
exercise  of  judgment  by  the  electoral  college.  Know-
ing what  followed,  knowing  how  thoroughly  the
interposition  of  electors  became  a  futile  fiction,  and
what  was  the  effect  on  the  character  of  elections
to  the  Presidency,  one  cannot  but  read  with  some
melancholy  the  prediction  of  Hamilton,  that  "this
process  of  election  afi'ords  a  moral  certainty  that  the
office  of  President  will  seldom  fall  to  the  lot  of  any
man  who  is  not  in  an  eminent  degree  endowed  with
the  requisite  qualifications."  Understanding,  then,
that  there  was  to  be  a  real  election,  by  a  selected
body,  of  a  President  who  might  conceivably  serve
for  life,  we  must  recollect  that  elective  Kings  had  not
died  out  of  Europe.  Not  long  before  the  War  of
Independence,  at  the  commencement  of  the  troubles
about  the  American  Stamp  Act,  a  King  of  the
Romans — who,  as  Joseph  II.,  turned  out  to  be  much
more  of  a  Radical  Reformer  than  ever  was  George
Washington — had  been  elected  by  the  Electoral
College  of  the  Empire,  and  the  unfortunate  Govern-

»  Federalist,  No.  69  (Hamilton). *  Ibid.  No.  68  (Hamilton).


218 CONSTITUTION OF THE  UNITED STATES, essay  it

ment  called  the  Polish  Republic  had  chosen  its  last
King,  the  luckless  Stanislaus  Poniatowski.  It  seems
probable  that  the  framers  of  the  Constitution  of  the
United  States  deliberately  rejected  the  last  example,
but  were  to  a  considerable  extent  guided  by  the  first.
The  American  Republican  Electors  are  the  German
Imperial  Electors,  except  that  they  are  chosen  by  the
several  States.  The  writers  in  the  "  Federalist "  had
made  an  attentive  study  of  the  Romano -German
Empire,  which  is  analysed  in  much  detail  by
Hamilton  and  Madison.^  They  condemn  it  as  a
government  which  can  only  issue  commands  to
governments  themselves  sovereign,  but  not  for  the
mode  of  electing  its  executive  head.  There  is  some
interest  in  observing  that  the  Electoral  Colleges  of
the  United  States  and  of  the  Empire  failed  in  exactly
the  same  way.  The  electors  fell  under  the  absolute
control  of  the  factions  dominant  in  the  country.  The
German  electors  came  to  belong^  to  the  French  or
Austrian  party,  just  as  the  American  electors  took
sides  with  the  Federalists,  or  with  the  old  Repub-
licans, or  with  the  Whigs,  the  new  Republicans,  or
the  Democrats.

*  Federalist^  No.  19  (Hamilton  and  Madison).  But  see  note
at  p.  205.

^  The  account  of  the  intrigues,  French  and  Austrian,  which
preceded  the  election  of  a  king  of  the  Romans  forms  one  of  the
most  amusing  portions  of  the  Due  de  Broglie's  recent  work,
Frederic  II,  et  Marie  Therese,


fSSAT  IV. CONSTITUTION  OF  THE UNITED STATES. 217

The  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  which
is  the  American  Federal  institution  next  claiming
our  attention,  is  not  only  a  most  interesting  but  a
virtually  unique  creation  of  the  founders  of  the  Con-
stitution. The  functions  which  the  Judges  of  this
Court  have  to  discharge  under  provisions  of  the
Constitution  arise  primarily  from  its  very  nature.'
The  Executive  and  Legislative  authorities  of  the
United  States  have  no  powers,  except  such  as  are
expressly  conferred  on  them  by  the  Constitution  it-
self;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  several  States  are
forbidden  by  the  Constitution  to  do  certain  acts
and  to  pass  certain  laws.  What  then  is  to  be  done
if  these  limitations  of  power  are  transgressed  by
any  State,  or  by  the  United  States  ?  The  duty  of
annulling  such  usurpations  is  confided  by  the  Third
Article  of  the  Constitution  to  the  Supreme  Court,
and  to  such  inferior  Courts  as  Congress  may  from
time  to  time  ordain  and  establish.  But  this  remark-
able power  is  capable  only  of  indirect  exercise  ;  it  is
called  into  activity  by  "  cases,"  by  actual  contro-
versies,^ to  which  individuals,  or  States,  or  the
United  States,  are  parties. The  point  of  unconsti-

'  See  on  this  subject  the  valuable  remarks  of  Mr.  A.  V.  Dicey
in  a  paper  on  •'  ^Federal  Government,"  in  the  first  number  of  the
Law  Quarterly  Review  {3^11.  1885).  Before  the  Revolution,  the
British  Privy  Council  had  adjudicated  on  certain  (^[uestiona
arising  between  Colony  and  Colony.

»  Const,  of  U,S.  Art.  III.  s.  2.


218 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essat  rf.

tutionality  is  raised  t>y  the  arguments  in  such  con-
troversies ;  and  the  decision  of  the  Court  follows  the
view  which  it  takes  of  the  Constitution.  A  declara-
tion of  unconstitutionality,  not  provoked  by  a  definite
dispute,  is  unknown  to  the  Supreme  Court.

The  success  of  this  experiment  has  blinded  men
to  its  novelty.  There  is  no  exact  precedent  for  it,
either  in  the  ancient  or  in  the  modern  world.  The
builders  of  Constitutions  have  of  course  foreseen  the
violation  of  constitutional  rules,  but  they  have  gene-
rally sought  for  an  exclusive  remedy,  not  in  the  civil,
but  in  the  criminal  law,  through  the  impeachment  of
the  offender.  And,  in  popular  governments,  fear  or
jealousy  of  an  authority  not  directly  delegated  by  the
people  has  too  often  caused  the  difficulty  to  be  left
for  settlement  to  chance  or  to  the  arbitrament  of  arms.
"Je  ne  pense  pas,"  wrote  De  Tocqueville,  in  his
"Democratic  en  Amerique,"  "que  jusqu'a  present
aucune  nation  du  monde  ait  constitue  le  pouvoir
judiciaire  de  la  meme  maniere  que  les  Am^ricains.*'

Yet,  novel  as  was  the  Federal  Judicature  esta-
blished by  the  American  Constitution  as  a  whole,  it
nevertheless  had  its  roots  in  the  Past,  and  most  of
their  beginnings  must  be  sought  in  England.  It
may  be  confidently  laid  down,  that  neither  the  insti-
tution of  a  Supreme  Court,  nor  the  entire  structure
of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  were  the
least  likely  to  occur  to  anybody's  mind  before  the
publication  of  the "Esprit  des Lois." We  have


ESSAY  IV. COJSSTITUTION OJ^ THE UNITED STATES. 219

already  observed  that  the  "Federalist*'  regards  the

opinions  of  Montesquieu  as  of  paramount  authority,

and  no  opinion  had  more  weight  with  its  writers

than  til  at  which  affirmed  the  essential  separation  of

the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial powers.

The  distinction  is  so  familiar  to  us,  that  we  find  it

hard  to  believe  that  even  the  different  nature  of  the

j  Executive  and[  Legislative  powers  was  not  recognised

Ltill^iheJGDiirteenth^  century  ;  but  it  was  not  till  the

Wghteenth that the  "  Esprit des Lois "  made  the

analysis  of  the  various  powers  of  the  State  part  of

the  accepted  political  doctrine  of  the  civilised  world.

Yet,  as  Madison  saw,  Montesquieu  was  really  writing

of  England  and  contrasting  it  with  France.

Tlie  British  ^  Constitution  was  to  Montesquieu  what
Homer  has  been  to  the  didactic  writers  on  Epic  poetry.  As
the  latter  have  considered  the  works  of  the  immortal  bard
the  perfect  model  from  which  the  principles  and  rules  of  the
epic  art  were  to  be  drawn,  and  by  which  all  similar  works
were  to  be  judged,  so  the  great  political  critic  appears  to
have  viewed  the  Constitution  of  England  as  the  standard,  or,
to  use  his  own  expression,  as  the  mirror,  of  political  liberty ;
and  to  have  delivered,  in  the  form  of  elementary  truths,  the
several  characteristic  principles  of  that  particular  system.

The  fact  was  that,  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
century,  it  was  quite  impossible  to  say  where  the

®  It  occurs  in  the  Defensor  Pads  of  the  great  Ghibelline
jurist,  Marsilio  da  Pad  ova  (1327),  with  many  other  curious  anti-
cipations of  modem  political  ideas.

*  Federalist.  No.  47.


220 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. ESSAY  IT.

respective  provinces  of  tlie  French  King  and  of  the
French  Parliaments  in  legislation,  and  still  more  of
the  same  authorities  in  judicature,'^  began  and  ended.
To  this  indistinctness  of  boundary  Montesquieu  op-
posed the  considerable  but  yet  incomplete  separation
of  the  Executive,  Legislative,  and  Judicial  powers  in
England  ;  and  he  founded  on  the  contrast  his  famous
generalisation.

Montesquieu  adds  to  his  analysis  the  special  pro-
position, "  There  is  no  liberty,  if  the  Judicial  power
be  not  separated  from  the  Legislative  and  the  Execu-
tive  ;  "  and  here  we  have,  no  doubt,  the  principal
source  of  the  provisions  of  the  American  Constitution
respecting  the  Federal  Judicature.  It  is  impossible
to  read  the  chapter  (chap.  vi.  liv.  xi.)  of  the  "  Esprit
des  Lois,"  in  which  the  words  occur,  without  per-
ceiving that  they  must  have  been  suggested  to  the
writer  by  what  was,  on  the  whole,  the  English  prac-
tice. There  were,  however,  other  practices  of  their
English  kinsmen  which  must  have  led  the  framers  of
the  American  Constitution  to  the  same  conclusion.
They  must  have  been  keenly  alive  to  the  incon-
venience of  discussing  questions  of  constitutional  law
in  legislative  assemblies.  The  debates  in  both  Houses
of  Parliament,  from  the  accession  of  George  IIL  to
the  recognition  of  American  Independence,  are  asto-

^  A  good  account  of  this  confusion  is  given  by  M.  Louis  dt
Loiuenie  in  the  twelfth  chapter  of  his  Beaumarchais  et  Son  Temps.


KSSAT  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 221

nishingly  unlike  those  of  tlie  present  day  in  one  par-
ticular. They  turn  to  a  surprising  extent  on  law,
and  specially  on  Constitutional  law.  Everybody  in
Parliament  is  supposed  to  be  acquainted  with  law,
and,  above  all,  the  Ministers.  The  servants  of  the
Crown  may  not  plead  the  authority  of  its  Law  officers
for  their  acts  ;  nay,  even  the  Attorney-  and  Solicitor-
General  may  not  publicly  admit  that  they  have  been
consulted  beforehand,  but  have  to  pretend  that  they
are  arguing  the  legal  question  before  the  House  on
the  spur  of  the  moment.  There  is  an  apparent  sur-
vival of  these  strange  fictions  in  the  doctrine  which
still  prevails,  that  the  opinions  of  the  Law  Officers
of  the  Crown  are  strictly  confidential.  During  the
whole  period  of  the  bitter  controversies  provoked  by
the  grievances  of  Wilkes  and  the  discontent  of  the
colonies,  it  is  hard  to  say  whether  Parliament  or  the
Courts  of  Justice  are  the  proper  judges  of  the  points
of  law  constantly  raised.  Sometimes  a  Judge  of  great
eminence  speaks  with  authority,  as  did  Lord  Camden
on  general  warrants,  and  Lord  Mansfield  on  Wilkes's
outlawry  ;  but  Parliament  is  just  as  often  the  field  to
which  the  perpetual  strife  is  transferred.  The  con-
fusion reaches  its  height  when  Lord  Chatham  in  the
House  of  Lords  declares  the  House  of  Commons  to
be  open  to  a  civil  action  for  not  giving  Wilkes  a  seat,
when  Lord  Mansfield  covers  this  opinion  with  ridicule,
and  when  Lord  Camdeo  to  some  extent  supports
Q


S22 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  IT,

Lord  Chatham.  These  are  the  true  causes  of  the  un»
satisfactory  condition  of  English  Constitutional  law,
and  of  its  many  grave  and  dangerous  uncertainties.

The  impression  made  on  American  minds  by  a
system  under  which  legal  questions  were  debated  with
*^the  utmost  acrimony,  but  hardly  ever  solved,  must
have  been  deepened  by  their  familiarity  with  the  very
question  at  issue  between  the  mother- country  and  the
colonies.  On  this  question  Englishmen,  content  as  is
their  wont  with  the  rough  rule  of  success  or  failure
as  the  test  of  right  or  wrong  in  national  undertakings,
have  generally  accepted  the  view  which  was,  on  the
whole,  that  of  the  Whig  Opposition.  And  it  must
be  allowed  that  the  statesmen  of  the  most  unpopular
country  in  Europe  ought  to  have  known  that  it  could
not  attempt  to  subdue  a  great  and  distant  dependency,
without  bringing  its  most  powerful  European  enemies
on  its  back.  As  for  American  opinion,  the  merits
of  the  issue  have  been  buried  deep  in  the  nauseous
grandiloquence  of  the  American  panegyrical  historians.
Yet,  in  reality,  the  question  was  in  the  highest  de-
gree technical,  in  the  highest  degree  difficult,  in  the
highest  degree  fitted  for  adjudication  by  an  impartial
Court,  if  such  a  tribunal  could  have  been  imagined
What  was  the  exact  significance  of  the  ancient  con-
stitutional formula  which  connected  taxation  with
representation  ?  When  broadly  stated  by  the  colonists,
it  must  have  struck  many  Englishmen  of  that  day


BSFAT  IV. CONSTITUTION OP THE UNITED STATES. 223

as  a  mischievous  paradox,  since  it  seemed  to  deny  the
right  of  Parliament  to  tax,  not  only  Massachusetts,
but  Manchester  and  Birmingham,  which  were  not
represented  in  any  intelligible  sense  in  the  House  of
Commons.  On  the  other  hand,  the  American  conten-
tion is  largely  accounted  for  by  the  fact,  that  the  local
assemblies  in  which  the  colonists  were  represented
*'  were  not  formally  instituted,  but  grew  up  by  them-
selves, because  it  was  in  the  nature  of  Englishmen  to
assemble.'^  ^  They  were  a  natural  product  of  soil
once  become  British.  The  truth  is  that,  from  the
popular  point  of  view,  either  the  affirmation  or  the
denial  of  the  moot  point  led  straight  to  an  absurdity  ;
and  when  the  dispute  was  over,  its  history  must  have
suggested  to  thoughtful  men,  who  had  once  recovered
their  calmness,  the  high  expediency  of  judicial  media-
tion in  questions  between  State  and  State  ackaow-
ledging  the  same  sovereignty.

Let  me  finally  note  that  the  Constitution  of  the
United  States  imposes  (Art.  III.  s.  2)  on  the  Judges
of  the  Supreme  Court  a  method  of  adjudication  which
is  essentially  English.  No  general  proposition  is  laid
down  by  the  English  tribunal,  unless  it  arises  on  the
facts  of  the  actual  dispute  submitted  to  it  for  adjudi-
cation. The  success  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the

^  See  Seeley,  The  Expansion  of  England.  Professor  Seeloy,
at  p.  67  of  this  excellent  book,  quotes  from  Hutchinson,  the
statement :  "  This  year  (1619)  a  House  of  Burgesses  broke  oui  in
Virginia.**


224 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. ESSAY  IT.

United  States  largely  results  from  its  following  this
mode  of  deciding  questions  of  constitutionality  and
unconstitutionality.  The  process  is  slower,  but  it  is
freer  from  suspicion  of  pressure,  and  much,  less  pro-
vocative of  jealousy,  than  the  submission  of  broad
and  emergent  political  propositions  to  a  judicial  body  ;
and  this  submission  is  what  an  European  foreigner
thinks  of  when  he  contemplates  a  Court  of  Justice
deciding  on  alleged  violations  of  a  constitutional  rule
or  principle.

The  Congress  or  Legislature  of  the  United  States,
sharply  separated  from  the  Executive  in  conformity
with  Montesquieu's  principle,  consists,  I  need
scarcely  say,  of  the  Senate  and  the  House  of  Repre-
sentatives. And  here  I  follow  Mr.  Freeman  in  noting
this  two -chambered  legislature  as  a  plain  mark  of  the
descent  of  the  American  Federal  Constitution,  as  it  was
at  an  earlier  date  of  the  descent  of  American  Colonial
Constitutions,  from  a  British  original.  If  we  could
conceive  a  political  architect  of  the  eighteenth  century
endeavouring  to  build  a  new  Constitution  in  ignorance
of  the  existence  of  the  British  Parliament,  or  with
the  deliberate  determination  to  neglect  it,  he  might
be  supposed  to  construct  his  Legislature  with  one
Chamber,  or  three,  or  four  ;  he  would  have  been  in
the  highest  degree  unlikely  to  construct  it  with  two.
The  "  Federalist,"  no  doubt,  seems  ^  to  regard  the
*  Federalist,  No.  63  (Hamilton).


B8SAT  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 2:iO

Senates  of  the  ancient  world  as  in  some  sense  Second
Chambers  of  a  Legislature,  but  these  peculiar  bodies,
originally  consisting  of  the  old  men  of  the  community,
would  have  been  found  on  closer  inspection  to  answer
very  slightly  to  this  conception.^  The  first  real
anticipation  of  a  Second  Chamber,  armed  with  a  veto
on  the  proposals  of  a  separate  authority,  and  repre-
senting a  different  interest,  occurs  in  that  much- mis-
understood institution,  the  Roman  Tribunate.  In
the  modern  feudal  world,  the  community  naturally
distributed  itself  into  classes  or  Estates,  and  there  are
abundant  traces  of  legislatures  in  which  these  classes
were  represented  according  to  various  principles.
But  the  Estates  of  the  Realm  were  grouped  in  all
sorts  of  ways.  In  France,  the  States-General  were
composed  of  three  orders,  the  Clergy,  the  Nobility,
and  the  rest  of  the  Nation  as  the  Tiers  Etat.  There
were  three  orders  also  in  Spain.  In  Sweden  there
were  four,  the  Clergy,  the  Nobility,  the  Burghers,
and  the  Peasants.  The  exceptional  two  Houses  of
the  British  Constitution  arose  from  special  causes.
The  separate  Parliamentary  representation  of  the
Clergy  came  early  to  an  end  in  England,  except  so
far  the  great  dignitaries  of  the  Church  were  sum-
moned to  the  House  of  Lords  ;  and  the  Knights  of
the  Shire,  who  represented  the  great  mass  of  landed

*  See  Maine,  Early  Lav)  and  Custom,  pp.  24,  25.


226 CONSTITUTION  OF TH^ UNITED STATES. bssat  iv.

proprietors,  were  disjoined  from  the  nobility,  and  sat
with  the  representatives  of  the  towns  in  the  House  of
Commons.

The  Senate  of  the  United  States,  constituted
under  section  3  of  the  First  Article  of  the  Federal
Constitution,  is  at  this  moment  one  of  the  most
powerful  political  bodies  in  the  world.  In  point  of
dignity  and  authority,  it  has  in  no  wise  disappointed
the  sanguine  expectations  of  its  founders.  As  I  have
already  said,  it  is  not  possible  to  compare  the  predic-
tions of  the  "  Federalist  "  with  the  actual  history  of
the  Presidency  of  the  United  States,  without  being
forced  to  acknowledge  that  in  this  particular  the
hopes  of  Hamilton  and  his  coadjutors  have  failed  of
fulfilment.  But  the  Senate  has,  on  the  whole,  justi-
fied the  hopes  of  it  which  they  expressed.

Through  the  medium  of  the  State  legislatures,  which  are
select  bodies  of  men,  and  who  are  to  appoint  the  members
of  the  National  Senate,  there  is  reason  to  expect  that  this
branch  will  generally  be  composed  with  peculiar  care  and
judgment ;  that  these  circumstances  promise  greater  know-
ledge and  more  comprehensive  information  in  the  national
annals ;  and  that,  on  account  of  the  extent  of  country  from
which  will  be  drawn  those  to  whose  direction  they  will  be
committed,  they  will  be  less  apt  to  be  tainted  by  the  spirit
of  faction,  and  more  out  of  the  reach  of  those  occasional
ill-humours,  or  temporary  prejudices  and  propensities,  which
in  smaller  societies  frequently  contaminate  the  public  delibera-
tions, beget  injustice  and  oppression  towards  a  part  of  the


ESSAY  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 227

«

community,  and  engender  schemes  whicli,  though  they
gratify  a  momentary  inclination  or  desire,  terminate  in
general  distresg;,  dissatisfaction,  and  disgust.^

We  may  not  reasonably  doubt  that  the  Senate  is
indebted  for  its  power — a  power  which  has  rather
increased  than  diminished  since  the  Federal  Constitu-
tion came  into  force — and  for  its  hold  on  the  public
respect,  to  the  principles  upon  which  it  was  delibe-
rately founded,  to  the  mature  age  of  the  Senators,  to
their  comparatively  long  tenure  of  office,  which  is  for
six  years  at  least,  and  above  all  to  the  method  of  their
election  by  the  Legislatures  of  the  several  States.

It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  mode  of  choosing
the  Senate  finally  adopted  did  not  commend  itself  to
some  of  the  strongest  minds  employed  on  the  con-
struction of  the  Federal  Constitution.  Its  First
Article  provides  (in  s.  3)  that  "the  Senate  of  the
United  States  shall  be  composed  of  two  Senators  from
each  State,  chosen  by  the  Legislatures  thereof,  for  six
years."  Hence  it  follows  that  the  Senate  is  a  poli-
tical body,  of  which  the  basis  is  not  equality,  but
inequality.  Each  State  elects  no  more  and  no  fewer
than  two  Senators.  Khode  Island,  Delaware,  and
Maryland  have  the  same  representation  in  the  Senate,
as  the  great  and  populous  Stiites  of  New  York  and
Pennsylvania. The Constitutional composition of

*  Federalist,  No.  27  (Hamilton).


228 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  it,

the  Senate  is  therefore  a  negation  of  equality.  Now,
the  writer  whose  prediction  I  quoted  above  is  Alex-
ander Hamilton,  and  Hamilton  himself  had  proposed
a  very  different  mode  of  constituting  a  Senate.  His
plan  had  been  that  the  Senate  should  consist  of  "per-
sons to  be  chosen  by  Electors,  elected  for  that  purpose
by  the  citizens  and  inhabitants  of  the  several  States
who  shall  have  in  their  own  right,  or  in  right  of  their
wives,  an  estate  in  land  for  not  less  than  life,  or  a
term  of  years  whereof,  at  the  time  of  giving  their
votes,  there  shall  be  at  least  fourteen  years  unexpired."
The  scheme  further  provided  that  each  Senator  should
be  elected  from  a  District,  and  that  the  number  of
Senators  should  be  apportioned  between  the  different
States  according  to  a  rule  roughly  representing  popu-
lation. The  blended  political  and  economical  history
of  Europe  has  now  shown  us  that  Hamilton's  plan
would  not,  in  all  probability,  have  proved  durable.
Tt  is  founded  on  inequality  of  property,  and  specially
on  inequality  of  landed  property.  We  are  now,  how-
ever, in  a  position  to  lay  down,  as  the  result  of
experience  and  observation,  that,  although  popular
government  has  steadily  extended  itself  in  the  Wes-
tern world,  and  although  liberty  is  the  parent  of
inequalities  in  fortune,  these  inequalities  are  viewed
•by  democratic  societies  with  a  peculiar  jealousy,  and
that  no  form  of  property  is  so  much  menaced  in  such
societies as property  in  land. When the Federal


ESSAY  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 229

Constitution  was  framed,  there  were  property  qualifi-
cations for  voting  in  the  greater  number  of  tliei
American  States,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  these  limi-
tations of  the  suffrage  were  allowed  to  have  influence
in  the  House  of  Representatives.  But  they  have
given  way  almost  everywhere  to  a  suffrage  very  little
short  of  universal,  and  the  foundation  of  Hamilton's
Senate  would  probably  have  undergone  a  similar
change.  Nevertheless,  though  inequalities  of  fortune
are  resented  by  modern  democracy,  historical  inequa-
lities do  not  appear  to  be  resented  in  the  same  degree
— possibly  to  some  extent  because  the  consideration
which  Science  has  finally  secured  for  the  heredity  of
the  individual  has  insensibly  extended  to  the  heredity
of  commonwealths.  Now  the  Senate  of  the  United
States  reflects  the  great  fact  of  their  history,  the
original  political  equality  of  the  several  States.  Since
the  War  of  Secession  and  its  event  in  the  triumph  of
the  North,  this  fact  has  become  purely  historical ;  but
it  illustrates  all  the  more  an  apparent  inference  from
modern  European  experiments  in  constitution-build-
ing— from  the  actual  history  in  Europe  of  Constitu-
tional Kings,  Presidents  of  a  Republic,  and  Second
Legislative  Chambers — that  nothing  but  an  historical
principle  can  be  successfully  opposed  to  the  principle
of  making  all  public  powers  and  all  parliamentary
assemblies  the  mere  reflection  of  the  average  opinion
of  the  multitude. On  all  questions  connected  with


230 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essat  it.

the  Federal  Senate,  Hamilton  unconsciously  took  the
less  Conservative  side.  Not  only  would  he  have
distinguished  the  electoral  body  choosing  the  Senate
from  the  electoral  body  choosing  the  House  of  Repre-
sentatives by  a  property  qualification  solely,  but  he
would  have  annulled  from  the  first  the  self-govern-
ment of  the  States  by  giving  the  appointment  of
the  Governor  or  President  of  each  separate  State  to
Federal  authority.*^

The  House  of  Representatives,  which  shares  with
the  Senate  the  legislative  powers  of  the  United  States,
is  unquestionably  a  reproduction  of  the  House  of
Commons.  No  Constitution  but  the  British  could
have  suggested  section  7  of  Article  I.  of  the  Federal
Constitution,  which  lays  down  a  British  principle,
and  settles  a  dispute  which  had  arisen  upon  it  in  a
particular  way.  "  All  Bills  raising  Revenue  shall
originate  in  the  House  of  Representatives  ;  but  the
Senate  may  propose  or  concur  with  amendments  as
in  other  Bills."  There  is  a  common  impression  in
this  country,  that  the  American  House  of  Represen-
tatives was  somehow  intended  to  be  a  more  demo-
cratic assembly  than  our  House  of  Commons.  But
this  is  a  vulgar  error.  The  Constitutional  provision
on  the  subject  is  contained  in  section  2  of  the  First
Article,  which  is  to  the  eifect  that  the  House  is  to  be

'  Alexander  Hamilton's  scheme  of  a  Constitution  is  printed
at  page  31  of  Mr.  J.  C.  Hamilton's  edition  of  the  Federalist


E8SAT  nr. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED BTATES. 231

composed  of  members  chosen  every  second  year  by
the  people  of  the  several  States,  and  that  the  electors
in  each  State  are  to  "  have  the  qualifications  requisite
for  Electors  of  the  most  numerous  branch  of  the
State  Legislature.'*  The  "  Federalist "  expressly
tells  us  that  the  differences  in  the  qualification  were
at  that  time  "  very  material."  "  In  every  State,"  it
adds,*  "a  certain  proportion  of  the  inhabitants  are
deprived  of  this  right  by  the  Constitution  of  the  State."
Nor  had  the  provision  for  biennial  elections  the  signi-
ficance which  would  have  been  attached  to  it  at  a
later  date.  Our  present  ideas  have  been  shaped  by
the  Septennial  Act,  but  it  is  quite  evident  that  in
Hamilton's  day  the  Septennial  Act  was  still  regarded
as  a  gross  usurpation,  and  that  the  proper  English
system  was  thought  to  be  one  of  triennial  Parliaments.
Election  every  two  years  seems  to  have  been  taken  as
a  fair  mean  between  the  systems  of  the  States  which
made  up  the  Federation.  There  were  septennial
elections  in  Virginia,  which  had  been  one  of  the  most
forward  of  the  States  in  pressing  on  the  Revolution  ;
but  in  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island  there  were
actually  half-yearly  elections,  and  annual  elections  in
South  Carolina.

The  House  of  Representatives  is  a  much  more
exclusively  legislative  body  than  either  the  Senate  of

*  FedercdiH,  No.  54  (Hamilton).  '


232 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  iv.

the  United  States  or  than  the  present  British  House
of  Commons.  Many  of  the  Executive  powers  vested
in  the  President  cannot  be  exercised  save  with  the
consent  of  the  Senate.  And,  as  the  Congress  has
not  yet  repealed  the  legislation  by  which  it  sought  to
trammel  the  recalcitrant  President,  Andrew  Johnson,
after  the  War  of  Secession,  the  Executive  authority
of  the  Senate  is  now  probably  wider  than  it  was
ever  intended  to  be  by  the  framers  of  the  Constitu-
tion. The  House  of  Representatives  has  no  similar
rights  over  the  province  of  the  Executive  ;  and  this
restriction  of  power  is  itself  a  feature  connecting  it
with  the  British  House  of  Commons,  as  known  to
the  American  statesmen  of  the  Revolution.  The  far-
reaching  and  perpetual  interference  with  the  Executive
Government,  which  is  now  exercised  by  the  House  of
Commons  through  the  interrogation  of  the  Ministers,
was  then  at  most  in  its  first  feeble  beginnings  ;  and
moreover  the  right  of  the  House  to  designate  the
public  servants,  who  are  nominally  the  Ministers  of
the  Crown,  had  for  a  considerable  time  been  success-
fully disputed  by  the  King.  George  I.  and  George  II.
had,  on  the  whole,  carried  out  the  understanding  that
their  Ministers  should  be  taken  from  a  particular
class  ;  but  George  III.  had  conducted  the  struggle
with  the  Colonists  through  servants  of  his  own  choos-
mg,  and,  when  the  Americans  were  framing  their
Constitution,  he  had  established  his  right  for  the  rest


E88AT  nr. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 233

of  liis  reign.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  Constitu-
tion of  the  United  States  settles  the  quarrel  in  the
sense  contended  for  by  the  King  of  England.  The
heads  of  the  Executive  Departments  subordinated  to
the  President  do  not  sit  in  the  Senate  or  in  the
House.  They  are  excluded  from  both  by  section  6
of  Article  I.,  which  provides  that  "no  person  holding
any  office  under  the  United  States  shall  be  a  member
of  either  House  during  his  continuance  in  office."

We  are  here  brought  to  one  of  the  most  interest-
ing subjects  which  can  engage  the  attention  of  the
Englishman  of  our  day,  the  points  of  difference  be-
tween the  Government  of  the  United  States,  as  it
works  under  the  provisions  of  the  Federal  Constitu-
tion, and  the  Government  of  Great  Britain  as  it  has
developed  itself  independently  of  any  express  control*
ling  instrument.  In  order  to  bring  out  a  certain
number  of  these  differences  clearly,  I  will  first  de-
scribe the  manner  in  which  the  American  House  of
Representatives  carries  on  its  legislation,  and  its
method  of  regulating  that  occasional  contact  between
the  Executive  authorities  and  the  Legislature,  which
is  inseparable  from  free  government.  I  will  then
contrast  the  system  with  that  which  is  followed  by
the  British  House  of  Commons  at  this  moment.  The
difference  wiU  be  found  to  be  striking,  and,  to  an
Englishman,  perhaps  disquieting.

The  House  of  Representatives  distributes  itself,


234 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  nt.

under  its  Tenth  Rule,  into  no  less  than  forty  Stand-
ing Committees,  independently  of  Joint- Committees
of  Senators  and  Representatives.  The  subjects  over
which  these  Committees  have  jurisdiction  comprise
the  whole  business  of  Government,  from  Financial,
Foreign,  and  Military  Affairs,  to  the  Codification  of
the  Law  and  the  Expenditure  on  Public  Buildings.
The  Eleventh  Rule  provides  that  "all  proposed  legis-
lation shall  be  referred  to  the  Committees  named  in
the  Tenth  Rule."  As  there  are  no  officials  in  the
House,  all  Bills  are  necessarily  introduced  by  private
members,  who  draft  them  as  they  please.  I  believe
that,  practically,  every  such  Bill  is  allowed  to  go  to
the  appropriate  Committee,  but  that  the  proportion
of  them  which  are  "reported"  by  the  Committees
and  come  back  to  the  House  is  extremely  small.
Lawyers  abound  in  the  House,  and  the  Committee,
in  fact,  re-draws  the  Bill.  Every  measure,  therefore,
has  its  true  beginning  in  the  bosom  of  a  strictly
legislative  body.  How  this  contrasts  with  the  early
stages  of  British  legislation  will  be  seen  presently.
The  differences  in  the  mode  of  contact  between  the
House  and  the  Executive  Departments  differ  still
more  widely  in  the  two  countries.  This  contact  is
governed  in  the  United  States  by  the  Twenty-fourth
Rule  of  the  House.  First  of  all,  if  information  be
required  from  the  Secretary  of  State  or  other
Ministers,  a  resolution  of  the  House  must  be  ob-


BSSAT  IT. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 235

tained.  Once  a  week,  under  tlie  Eule,  and  on  that
occasion  only,  "  resolutions  of  inquiry  directed  to  the
heads  of  the  Executive  Departments  shall  be  in  order
for  reference  to  appropriate  Committees,  which  reso-
lutions shall  be  reported  to  the  House  within  one
week  thereafter."  Sometimes,  I  believe,  the  Minister
attends  the  Committee  ;  but,  if  he  pleases,  he  may
answer  the  resolution  by  a  formal  communication
addressed  to  the  Speaker  of  the  House.  This  care-
fully guarded  procedure  answers  to  the  undefined
and  irregular  practice  of  putting  and  answering
questions  in  our  own  House  of  Commons.

The  procedure  of  the  American  House  of  Repre-
sentatives, both  in  respect  of  the  origination  of  bills
and  of  the  interrogation  of  Ministers,  is  that  of  a
political  body  which  considers  that  its  proper  func-
tions are  not  executive,  but  legislative.  The  British
House  of  Commons,  on  the  other  hand,  which  the
greatest  part  of  the  world  regards  as  a  legislative
assembly  (though  it  never  quite  answered  to  that
description),  has,  since  1789,  taken  under  its  super-
vision and  control  the  entire  Executive  government
of  Great  Britain,  and  much  of  the  government  of  her
colonies  and  dependencies.  There  are  no  theoretical
limits  to  its  claim  for  official  information,  not  merely
concerning  general  lines  of  policy,  but  concerning
the  minute  details  of  administration.  It  gives  effect
to  its  claim  by  questions  put  publicly  to  Ministers  on


236 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES, essay  it,

the  Treasury  Bench,  and,  independently  of  all  other
results  of  this  practice,  the  mere  time  consumed  by
the  multitude  of  questions  and  replies  is  beginning
to  encroach  very  seriously  on  the  time  available  for
legislation.  A  singularly  small  number  of  these
questions  appear  to  have  their  origin  in  the  interest
which  a  member  of  the  House  of  Commons  may
legitimately  feel  in  foreign  and  domestic  policy.
Some,  no  doubt,  spring  from  innocent  curiosity ;
some  from  pardonable  vanity  ;  but  not  a  few  are
deliberately  intended  to  work  public  mischief.  It  is  a
minor  objection,  that  the  number  of  questions  which
are  flagrantly  argumentative  is  manifestly  increasing.
All  legislative  proposals  which  have  any  serious
chance  of  becoming  law,  proceed  in  the  United  States
from  Committees  of  the  Senate  or  of  the  House  of
Representatives.  Where  are  we  to  place  the  birth  of
an  English  legislative  measure  ?  He  who  will  give
his  mind  to  this  question  will  find  it  one  of  the
obscurest  which  ever  perplexed  the  political  observer.
Some  Bills  undoubtedly  have  their  origin  in  the
Executive  Departments,  where  the  vices  of  existing
laws  or  systems  have  been  disclosed  in  the  process  of
actual  administration.  Others  may  be  said  to  be
conceived  in  the  House  of  Commons,  having  for  their
embryo  either  the  Report  of  a  Committee  of  the
House  or  of  a  resolution  passed  by  it  which,  according
to  a  modem  practice,  suggested  no  doubt  by  the  dif-


ESSAY  IT. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 237

iiculties  of  legislation,  has  taken  the  place  of  the
private  member's  Bill.  But  if  we  may  trust  the
experience  of  1883,  by  far  the  most  important
measures,  measures  fraught  with  the  gravest  conse-
quence to  the  whole  future  of  the  nation,  have  a
much  more  remarkable  beginning.  One  of  the  great
English  political  parties,  and  naturally  the  party
supporting  the  Government  in  power,  holds  a  Con-
ference of  gentlemen,  to  whom  I  hope  I  may  without
offence  apply  the  American  name  "  wire-pullers,"
and  this  Conference  dictates  to  the  Government,  not
only  the  legislation  which  it  is  to  submit  to  the
House  of  Commons,  but  the  order  in  which  it  is  to
be  submitted.  Here  we  are  introduced  to  the  great
modern  paradox  of  the  British  Constitution.  While
the  House  of  Commons  has  assumed  the  supervision
of  the  whole  Executive  Government,  it  has  turned
over  to  the  Executive  Government  the  most  import-
ant part  of  the  business  of  legislation.  Eor  it  is  in
the  Cabinet  that  the  effective  work  of  legislation
begins.  The  Ministers,  hardly  recruited  from  the
now  very  serious  fatigues  of  a  Session  which  lasts  all
but  to  the  commencement  of  September,  assemble  in
Cabinet  in  November,  and  in  the  course  of  a  series  of
meetings,  extending  over  rather  more  than  a  fort-
night, determine  what  legislative  proposals  are  to  be
submitted  to  Parliament.  These  proposals,  sketched,
we  may  believe,  in  not  more  than  outline,  are  then

R


238 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essat  I7.

placed  in  the  hands  of  the  Government  draftsman  ;
and,  so  much  is  there  in  all  legislation  which  consists
in  the  manipulation  of  detail  and  in  the  adaptation  of
vaguely  conceived  novelties  to  pre-existing  law,  that
we  should  not  probably  go  far  wrong  if  we  attributed
four-fifths  of  every  legislative  enactment  to  the  ac-
complished lawyer  who  puts  into  shape  the  Govern-
ment Bills.  From  the  measures  which  come  from
his  hand,  the  tale  of  Bills  to  be  announced  in  the
Queen's  Speech  is  made  up,  and  at  this  point  English
legislation  enters  upon  another  stage.

The  American  political  parties  of  course  support
and  oppose  particular  legislative  measures.  They  are
elated  at  the  success  of  a  particular  Bill,  and  disap-
pointed by  its  failure.  But  no  particular  consequences
beyond  disappointment  follow  the  rejection  of  a  Bill.
The  Government  of  the  country  goes  on  as  before.  In
England  it  is  otherwise.  Every  Bill  introduced  into
Parliament  by  the  Ministry  (and  we  have  seen  that
all  the  really  important  Bills  are  thus  introduced)
must  be  carried  through  the  House  of  Commons
without  substantial  alteration,  or  the  Ministers  will
resign,  and  consequences  of  the  gravest  kind  may
follow  in  the  remotest  parts  of  an  empire  extending
to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Thus  a  Government  Bill
has  to  be  forced  through  the  House  of  Commons  with
the  whole  strength  of  party  organisation,  and  in  a
shape  very  closely  resembling  that  which  the  Executive


ES8AT  IT. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 239

Government  gave  to  it.  It  should  then  in  strictness
pass  through  a  searching  discussion  in  the  House  of
Lords  ;  but  this  stage  of  English  legislation  is  becom-
ing merely  nominal,  and  the  judgment  on  it  of  the
Crown  has  long  since  become  a  form.  It  is  therefore
the  Executive  Government  which  should  be  credited
with  the  authorship  of  English  legislation.  We  have
thus  an  extraordinary  result.  The  nation  whose
constitutional  practice  suggested  to  Montesquieu  his
memorable  maxim  concerning  the  Executive,  Legis-
lative, and  Judicial  powers,  has  in  the  course  of  a
century  falsified  it.  The  formal  Executive  is  the  true
source  of  legislation  ;  the  formal  Legislature  is  inces-
santly concerned  with  Executive  Government.

After  its  first  birth,  nothing  can  be  more  equable
and  nothing  can  be  more  plain  to  observation  than
the  course  of  an  American  legislative  measure.  A
Bill,  both  in  the  House  of  Representatives  and  the
Senate,  goes  through  an  identical  number  of  stages  of
about  equal  length.  When  it  has  passed  both  Houses,
it  must  still  commend  itself  to  the  President  of  the
United  States,  who  has  a  veto  on  it  which,  though
qualified,  is  constantly  used,  and  is  very  difficult  to
overcome.  An  English  Bill  begins  in  petty  rivulets
or  stagnant  pools.  Then  it  runs  underground  for
most  of  its  course,  withdrawn  from  the  eye  by  the
secrecy  of  the  Cabinet.  Emerging  into  the  House  of
Commons,  it  can  no  more  escape  from  its  embank-


f40 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  it.

merits  than  the  water  of  a  canal ;  but  once  dismissed
from  that  House,  it  overcomes  all  remaining  obstacles
with  the  rush  of  a  cataract,  and  mixes  with  the  track-
less ocean  of  British  institutions.

The  ver}^  grave  dangers  entailed  on  our  country
by  this  eccentric  method  of  legislation  arise  from  its
being  followed,  not  only  in  the  enactment  of  ordinary
laws,  but  in  the  amendment  of  what,  if  it  be  still  per-
mitted to  us  to  employ  the  word,  is  called  the  British
Constitution.  "En  Angleterre,"  writes  De  Tocque-
ville,  "  la  Constitution  pent  changer  sans  cesse  ;  ou
plutdt  elle  rCexiste  pas^  There  are  doubtless  strong
Conservative  forces  still  surviving  in  England  ;  they
survive  because,  though  our  political  institutions  have
been  transformed,  the  social  conditions  out  of  which
they  originally  grew  are  not  extinct.  But  of  all  the
infirmities  of  our  Constitution  in  its  decay,  there  is
none  more  serious  than  the  absence  of  any  special  pre-
cautions to  be  observed  in  passing  laws  which  touch
the  very  foundations  of  our  political  system.  The
nature  of  this  weakness,  and  the  character  of  the  mani-
fold and  elaborate  securities  which  are  contrasted  with
it  in  America,  may  be  well  illustrated  by  considering
two  famous  measures— the  Reform  of  the  London
Corporation,  which  is  still  unaccomplished,  and  the
County  Franchise  Bill,  now  become  law.  The  recon-
struction of  the  London  Municipality,  though  a  very
difficult  undertaking,  would  belong  in  America  to  the


ESSAr  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 241

ordinary  State  Legislatures.  The  Legislature  of  New
York  State  has,  in  fact,  several  times  attempted  to  re-
model the  municipality  of  New  York  City,  which  has
repeatedly  shown  itself  to  be  corrupt,  unmanageable,
and  inefficient ;  and  these  attempts  call  for  no  special
remark,  except  that  they  have  hitherto  met  with  only
the  most  moderate  success.  But  a  measure  distantly
resembling  the  English  County  Franchise  Bill  would
be,  both  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  several  States
and  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  United  States,  a
Constitutional  amendment.  In  the  least  considerable,
the  least  advanced,  and  the  most  remote  American
State,  its  enactment  would  have  to  be  coupled  with
the  carefully  devised  precautionary  formalities  which
I  described  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Second  Essay.  If
an  American  County  Franchise  Bill  were  proposed  to
be  enforced  by  Federal  authority,  the  designed  diffi-
culty of  carrying  it  would  be  vastly  greater.  As  a
rule,  the  Federal  Constitution  does  not  interfere  with
the  franchise;  it  leaves  the  right  of  voting  to  be  regu-
lated by  the  several  States,  gradually  and  locally,
according  to  the  varying  circumstances  of  each,  and
the  political  views  prevailing  in  it.  But  the  rule  has
now  been  departed  from  in  the  new  Article,  securing
the  suffrage  to  the  negroes  ;  and  there  is  no  question
that,  if  a  measure  were  contemplated  in  America,
bearing  to  the  entirety  of  American  institutions  the
same  relation  which  the  County  Franchise  Bill  bore


242 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  it.

to  the  entirety  of  ours — nay,  even  if  a  simple  change
in  the  franchise  had  to  be  introduced  into  all  the
States,  or  into  the  bulk  of  them,  simultaneously — the
object  could  only  be  effected  by  an  amendment  of  the
Constitution  of  the  United  States.  It  would  therefore
have  to  be  dealt  with  under  the  Fifth  Article  of  the
Constitution.  This  article,  which  is  the  keystone  of
the  whole  Federal  fabric,  runs  as  follows  : —

The  Congress,  whenever  two-thirds  of  both  Houses  shall
deem  it  necessary,  shall  propose  Amendments  to  this  Con-
stitution ;  or,  on  the  application  of  the  Legislatures  of  two-
thirds  of  the  several  States,  shall  call  a  Convention  for
proposing  Amendments  which,  in  either  case,  shall  be  valid
to  all  intents  and  purposes  as  part  of  this  Constitution,  when
ratified  by  the  Legislatures  of  three-fourths  of  the  several
States  or  by  Conventions  in  three-fourths  thereof,  as  one  or
the  other  mode  of  ratification  may  be  proposed  by  the
Congress.

The  mode,  therefore,  of  proceeding  with  a  measure
requiring  an  amendment  of  the  Constitution  would  be
this.  First  of  all,  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  and
the  House  of  Representatives  must  resolve,  by  a  two-
thirds  majority  of  each  Chamber,  that  the  proposed
amendment  is  desirable.  The  amendment  has  then
to  be  ratified  by  the  Legislatures  of  three-fourths  of
the  several  States.  Now,  there  are  at  the  present  mo-
ment thirty-eight  States  in  the  Am&rican  Union.  The
number  of  Legislatures  which  must  join  in  the  ratifi-


E8SAT  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 243

cation  is  therefore  twenty-nine.  I  believe,  however,
that  there  is  no  State  in  which  the  Legislature  does
not  consist  of  two  Houses,  and  we  arrive,  therefore,
at  the  surprising  result  that,  before  a  constitutional
measure  of  the  gravity  of  the  English  County  Fran-
chise Bill  could  become  law  in  the  United  States,  it
must  have  at  the  very  least  in  its  favour  the  concur-
ring vote  of  no  less  than  fifty-eight  separate  legislative
chambers,  independently  of  the  Federal  Legislature,
in  which  a  double  two-thirds  majority  must  be  ob-
tained. The  alternative  course  permitted  by  the  Con-
stitution, of  calling  separate  special  Conventions  of
the  United  States  and  of  the  several  States,  would
prove  probably  in  practice  even  lengthier  and  more
complicated.

The  great  strength  of  these  securities  against
hasty  innovation  has  been  shown  beyond  the  possi-
bility of  mistake  by  the  actual  history  of  the  Federal
Constitution.  On  March  4,  1789,  the  day  fixed  for
commencing  the  operation  of  the  new  Federal  Govern-
ment, the  Constitution  had  been  ratified  by  all  the
States  then  established,  except  three.  One  of  the
first  acts  of  the  new  Congress  was  to  propose  to  the
States,  on  September  25,  1789,  a  certain  number  of
amendments  on  comparatively  unimportant  points,
which  had  no  doubt  been  suggested  by  the  discussions
on  the  draft- Constitution,  and  the  several  States  rati-
fied these  amendments  in  the  course  of  the  following


244 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essai  it.

year.  An  amendment  of  more  importance,  relating
to  the  power  of  the  Supreme  Court,  was  declared
to  have  been  ratified  on  September  5,  1794  ;  and
another,  remedying  a  singular  inconvenience  which
had  disclosed  itself  in  the  original  rule  regulating
the  election  of  the  President  and  of  the  Vice-
President,  had  its  ratification  completed  in  Sep-
tember 1804.  After  these  early  amendments,  which
were  comparatively  easy  of  adoption  through  the
small  number  of  the  original  States,  there  was  no
change  in  the  Federal  Constitution  for  sixty  years.
The  Thirteenth,  Fourteenth,  and  Fifteenth  Amend-
ments, which  became  part  of  the  Constitution  in  the
period  between  the  beginning  of  1865  and  the  begin-
ning of  1870,  were  the. fruits  of  the  conquest  of  the
SoLith  by  the  North.  They  abolish  slavery,  provide
against  its  revival,  forbid  the  abridgment  of  the  right
to  vote  on  the  ground  of  race  or  colour,  impose  penal-
ties on  the  vanquished  adherents  of  the  seceding  States,
and  incidentally  give  a  constitutional  guarantee  to
the  Public  Debt  of  the  Federation.  But  they  could
not  have  been  either  proposed  or  ratified,  if  the  South
had  not  lain  under  the  heel  of  the  North.  The  military
forces  of  the  United  States  controlled  the  Executive
Governments  of  the  Southern  States,  and  virtually  no
class  of  the  population,  except  the  negroes,  was  repre-
sented in  the  Southern  Legislatures.  The  War  of
Secession,  which  was  itself  a  war  of  Revolution,  was
in  fact  succeeded  by  a  Revolutionary  period  of  several


ESSAY  IT. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 245

years, ^  duriDg  which  not  only  the  institutions  of  the
Southern  States,  but  the  greater  part  of  the  Federal
institutions  were  more  or  less  violently  distorted  to
objects  not  contemplated  by  the  framers  of  the  Con-
stitution. But  the  form  of  the  Federal  institutions  was
always  preserved,  and  they  gradually  recovered  their
reality,  until  at  the  present  moment  the  working  of  the
Constitution  of  the  United  States  does  not,  save  for  the
disappearance  of  negro  slavery,  differ  from  the  mode  of
its  operation  before  the  civil  convulsion  of  1861-65.

The  powers  and  disabilities  attached  to  the
United  States  and  to  the  several  States  by  the  Federal
Constitution,  and  placed  under  the  protection  of  the
deliberately  contrived  securities  we  have  described,
have  determined  the  whole  course  of  American  his-
tory. That  history  began,  as  all  its  records  abun*
dantly  show,  in  a  condition  of  society  produced  by
war  and  revolution,  which  might  have  condemned
the  great  Northern  Republic  to  a  fate  not  unlike  that
of  her  disorderly  sisters  in  South  America.  But  the
provisions  of  the  Constitution  have  acted  on  her  like
those  dams  and  dykes  which  strike  the  eye  of  the
traveller  along  the  Rhine,  controlling  the  course  of  a
mighty  river  which  begins  amid  mountain  torrents,
and  turning  it  into  one  of  the  most  equable  water -

^  A  striking  account  of  the  perversion  of  the  Constitution
during  this  revolutionary  interval,  now  brought  to  a  close,  may
be  found  in  the  work  of  Mr.  Louis  J.  Jennings,  Republican
Government  in  the  United  States.


246 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  iv,

ways  in  the  world.  The  English  Consiitution,  on
the  other  hand,  like  the  great  river  of  England,  may
perhaps  seem  to  the  observer  to  be  now-a-days  always
more  or  less  in  flood,  owing  to  the  crumbling  of  the
banks  and  the  water  poured  into  it  from  millions
of  drain-pipes.  The  observation  is,  however,  worth
making,  that  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution  of  the
United  States  which  have  most  influenced  the  des-
tinies of  the  American  people  are  not  always  those
which  the  superficial  student  of  it  would  first  notice.
Attention  is  easily  attracted  by  Article  IV.  section  4,
which  makes  the  United  States  guarantee  to  every
State  in  the  Union  a  Republican  form  of  government,
and,  on  the  other  hand,  protection  against  domestic
violence ;  and  again,  by  sections  9  and  10  of  Article  I.,
which  prohibit  the  United  States  and  the  several
States  from  granting  titles  of  Nobility.  No  man  can
mistake  the  importance  of  the  portions  of  the  First
Article  which  forbid  the  several  States  to  enter  into
any  treaty,  alliance,  or  confederation,  to  make  any-
thing but  gold  or  silver  coin  a  tender  in  payment  of
debts,  and  (Avithout  the  consent  of  Congress)  to  keep
troops  or  ships  of  war  in  time  of  peace.  But  a  hasty
reader  might  under-estimate  the  practical  effects  of
the  provisions  in  Article  I.  which  empower  the
United  States  "  to  promote  the  progress  of  science
and  the  useful  arts,  by  securing  for  limited  times  to
authors  and  inventors  the  exclusive  right  to  then-


ESSAY  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 247

respective  writings  and  discoveries;"  and,  again,  of
the  parts  of  the  same  Article  which  prohibit  the
United  States  and  the  several  States  from  laying  any
tax  or  duty  on  articles  exported  from  any  State ;  and,
lastly,  of  the  remarkable  provision  which  forbids  a
State  to  pass  any  law  impairing  the  obligation  of
contracts.  The  po^Yer  to  grant  patents  by  Federal
authority  has,  however,  made  the  American  people
the  first  in  the  world  for  the  number  and  ingenuity
of  the  inventions  by  which  it  has  promoted  the
"  useful  arts'' ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  neglect
to  exercise  this  power  for  the  advantage  of  foreign
writers  has  condemned  the  whole  American  com-
munity to  a  literary  servitude  unparalleled  in  the
history  of  thought.  The  prohibition  against  levying
duties  on  commodities  passing  from  State  to  State  is
again  the  secret  both  of  American  Free-trade  and  of
American  Protection.  It  secures  to  the  producer  the
command  of  a  free  market  over  an  enormous  territory
of  vast  natural  wealth,  and  thus  it  secondarily  recon-
ciles the  American  people  to  a  tariff  on  foreign  im-
portations as  oppressive  as  ever  a  nation  has  submitted
to.  I  have  seen  the  rule  which  denies  to  the  several
States  the  power  to  make  any  laws  impairing  the
obligation  of  contracts  criticised  as  if  it. were  a  mere
politico- economical  flourish ;  but  in  point  of  fact  there
is  no  more  important  provision  in  the  whole  Constitu-
tion. Its  principle  was  much  extended  by  a  decision  of


215 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  it.

the  Supreme  Court/^^vhich  ought  now  to  interest  a
large  number  of  Englishmen,  since  it  is  the  basis  of
the  credit  of  many  of  the  great  American  Railway  In-
corporations. But  it  is  this  prohibition  which  has  in
reality  secured  full  play  to  the  economical  forces  by
which  the  achievement  of  cultivating  the  soil  of  the
North  American  Continent  has  been  performed  ;  it  is
the  bulwark  of  American  individualism  against  demo-
cratic impatience  and  Socialistic  fantasy.  We  may
usefully  bear  in  mind  that,  until  this  prohibition,  as
interpreted  by  the  Federal  Courts,  is  got  rid  of,  certain
communistic  schemes  of  American  origin,  which  are
said  to  have  become  attractive  to  the  English  labour-
ing classes  because  they  are  supposed  to  proceed  from
the  bosom  of  a  democratic  community,  have  about
as  much  prospect  of  obtaining  practical  realisation  in
the  United  States  as  the  vision  of  a  Cloud- Cuckoo-
borough  to  be  built  by  the  birds  between  earth  and
sky.

It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  all  the  hopes  of  the
founders  of  the  American  Constitution  would  be  ful-
filled. They  do  not  seem  to  have  been  prepared  for
the  rapid  development  of  party,  chiefly  under  the  in-
fluence of  Thomas  Jefl*erson,  nor  for  the  thorough
organisation  with  which  the  American  parties  before
long  provided  themselves. They  may  have  expected

*°  In  Dartmouth  College  v.  Woodward^  a  case  argued  by  DanieJ
Webster  in  1818,


F3SAY  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 249

the  House  of  Representatives,  which  is  directly
elected  by  the  people,  to  fall  under  the  dominion  of
faction,  but  the  failure  of  their  mechanism  for  the
choice  of  a  President  was  a  serious  disappointment,
I  need  hardly  say  that  the  body  intended  to  be  a  true
Electoral  College  has  come  to  consist  of  mere  deputies
of  the  two  great  contending  parties,  and  that  a  Presi-
dential Elector  has  no  more  active  part  in  choosing  a
President  than  has  a  balloting  paper.  The  miscar-
riage has  told  upon  the  qualities  of  American  Presi-
dents. An  Electoral  College  may  commit  a  blunder,
but  a  candidate  for  the  Presidency,  nominated  for
election  by  the  whole  people,  will,  as  a  rule,  be  a  man
selected  because  he  is  not  open  to  obvious  criticism,
and  will  therefore  in  all  probability  be  a  mediocrity.
But,  although  the  President  of  the  United  States  has
not  been  all  which  Washington  and  Hamilton,  Madi-
son and  Jay,  intended  him  to  be,  nothing  has
occurred  in  America  to  be  compared  with  the  distor-
tion which  the  Presidency  has  suffered  at  the  hands
of  its  copyists  on  the  European  Continent.  It  is  pro-
bable that  no  foreigner  but  an  Englishman  can  fuliy
understand  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,
though  even  an  Englishman  is  apt  to  assume  it  to
have  been  much  more  of  a  new  poiitical  departure
than  it  really  was,  and  to  forget  to  compare  it  with
the  English  institutions  of  a  century  since.  But,
while  it  has  made  the  deepest  possible  impression  on


250 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. ESSAr  I7.

Continental  European  opinion,  it  lias  been  hardly  ever
comprehended.  Its  imitators  have  somethnes  made
the  historical  mistake  of  confounding  the  later  work-
ing of  some  of  its  parts  with  that  originally  intended
by  its  founders.  And  sometimes  they  have  fallen
into  the  practical  error  of  attempting  to  combine  its
characteristics  with  some  of  the  modern  character-
istics of  the  British  Constitution.  The  President  of
the  Second  French  Kepublic  was  directly  elected  by
the  French  people  in  conformity  with  the  modern
practice  of  the  Americans,  and  the  result  was  that,
confident  in  the  personal  authority  witnessed  to  by
the  number  of  his  supporters,  he  overthrew  the  Re
public  and  established  a  military  despotism.  The
President  of  the  Third  French  Republic  is  elected
in  a  different  and  a  safer  way  ;  but  the  Ministers
whom  he  appoints  have  seats  in  the  French  Legisla-
ture, mix  in  its  debates,  and  are  responsible  to  the
Lower  House,  just  as  are  the  members  of  an  English
Cabinet.  The  effect  is,  that  there  is  no  living  func-
tionary who  occupies  a  more  pitiable  position  than  a
French  President.  The  old  Kings  of  France  reigned
and  governed.  The  Constitutional  King,  according
to  M.  Thiers,  reigns,  but  does  not  govern.  The  Pre-
sident of  the  United  States  governs,  but  he  does  not
reign.  It  has  been  reserved  for  the  President  of  the
French  Republic  neither  to  reign  nor  yet  to  govern.
The  Senate  has  proved  a  most  successful  institu-


ESSAY  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 261

tion  except  in  one  particular.  Congress  includes
many  honourable  as  well  as  very  many  able  men,  but
it  would  be  affectation  to  claim  for  the  American
Federal  Legislature  as  a  whole  that  its  hands  are
quite  clean.  It  is  unnecessary  to  appeal  on  this  point
to  satire  or  fiction ;  the  truth  is,  that  too  many  Eng-
lishmen have  been  of  late  years  concerned  with  Con-
gressional business  for  there  to  be  any  want  of
evidence  that  much  money  is  spent  in  forwarding  it
which  is  not  legitimately  expended.  One  provision
of  the  Constitution  has  here  defeated  another.  One
portion  of  the  6th  section  of  the  First  Article  pro-
vides securities  against  corruption  on  the  part  of
Senators  and  Representatives,  but  the  portion  imme-
diately preceding  provides  that  "  Senators  and  Repre-
sentatives shall  have  a  compensation  for  their  services,
to  be  ascertained  by  law  and  paid  out  of  the  Treasury
of  the  United  States."  This  system  of  payment  for
legislative  services,  which  prevails  throughout  the
whole  of  the  Union,  has  produced  a  class  of  profes-
sional politicians,  whose  probity  in  some  cases  has
proved  unequal  to  the  strain  put  upon  it  by  the
power  of  dealing  with  the  public  money  and  the
public  possessions  of  what  will  soon  be  the  wealthiest
community  in  the  world.  It  is  a  point  of  marked
inferiority  to  the  British  political  system,  even  in  its
decline.

It  may  be  thought  that  a  great  American  institu-


252 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES, essay  IT.

tion  failed  on  one  occasion  conspicuously  and  disas-
trously. The  Supreme  Court  of  tlie  United  States
did  not  succeed  in  preventing  by  its  mediation  the
War  of  Secession.  But  the  inference  is  not  just.
The  frauiers  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,
like  succeeding  generations  of  American  statesmen,
deliberately  thrust  the  subject  of  Slavery  as  far  as
they  could  out  of  their  own  sight.  It  barely  dis-
closes itself  in  the  method  of  counting  population
for  the  purpose  of  fixing  the  electoral  basis  of  the
House  of  Representatives,  and  in  the  subsequently
famous  provision  of  the  Fourth  Article,  that  persons
"bound  to  service  or  labour  in  one  State"  shall  be
delivered  up  if  they  escape  into  another.  But,  on
the  whole,  the  makers  of  the  Constitution  pass  by  on
the  other  side.  They  have  not  the  courage  of  their
opinions,  whatever  they  were.  They  neither  guaran-
tee Slavery  on  the  one  hand,  nor  attempt  to  regulate
it  on  the  other,  or  to  provide  for  its  gradual  extinc-
tion. When  then,  about  seventy  years  afterwards,
the  Supreme  Court  was  asked  to  decide  whether  the
owner  of  slaves  taking  them  into  one  of  the  terri-
tories of  the  Union,  not  yet  organised  as  a  State,
retained  his  right  of  ownership,  it  had  not  in  reality
sufficient  materials  for  a  decision.  The  grounds  of
its  judgment  in  the  Dred  Scott  case  may  have  been
perhaps  satisfactory  to  lawyers,  but  in  themselves
they  satisfied  nobody  else. It  is  extremely  signiii-


ESSAY  IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. 253

cant  that,  in  the  one  instance  in  which  the  authors
of  the  Constitution  declined  of  set  purpose  to  apply
their  political  wisdom  to  a  subject  which  they  knew
to  be  all-important,  the  result  was  the  bloodiest  and
costliest  war  of  modern  times.

Let  me  repeat  the  points  which  I  trust  I  have
done  something  towards  establishing.  The  Consti-
tution of  the  United  States  is  a  modified  version  of
the  British  Constitution  ;  but  the  British  Constitu-
tion which  served  as  its  original  was  that  which  was
in  existence  between  1760  and  1787.  The  modifica-
tions introduced  were  those,  and  those  only,  which
were  suggested  by  the  new  circumstances  of  the
American  Colonies,  now  become  independent.  These
circumstances  excluded  an  hereditary  king,  and  vir-
tually excluded  an  hereditary  nobility.  When  the
American  Constitution  was  framed,  there  was  no
such  sacredness  to  be  expected  for  it  as  before  1789
was  supposed  to  attach  to  all  parts  of  the  British
Constitution.  There  was  every  prospect  of  political
mobility,  if  not  of  political  disorder.  The  signal
success  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  in
stemming  these  tendencies  is,  no  doubt,  owing  in
part  to  the  great  portion  of  the  British  institutions
which  were  preserved  in  it ;  but  it  is  also  attribut-
able to  the  sagacity  with  which  the  American  states-
men filled  up  the  interstices  left  by  the  inapplicability
of  certain  of  the  then  existing  British  institutions  to


254 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. essay  iv.

the  emancipated  colonies.  This  sagacity  stands  out  in
every  part  of  the  ''Federalist,"  and  it  may  be  tracked
in  every  page  of  subsequent  American  history.  It
may  well  fill  the  Englishmen  who  now  live  in  fcece
Romuli  with  wonder  and  envy.


INDEX.


ABSOLUTISM

ABSOLUTISM,  169
America,  U.S.  of,  revolution  in,
18;  Government  of,  18,211;  sta-
bility of,  18;  universal  suffrage
in,  34,  51  ;  results  of  industry  in,
60  ;  oppression  of  the  weak,  51  ;
corruption  in,  103  ;  party  system
dependent  on  corruption,  101  ;
democracy  tolerable  in,  110;  cha-
racteristics of,  196 ;  extent  and
population,  196;  jealousy  of  Great
Britain  in  bygone  years,  206 ;
British  King  and  his  relations  to,
209,211;  War  of  Secession,  111,
a  war  of  Kevolution,  18,  244;  in-
fluence of  Patent  laws,  247  ;  railway
incorporations,  248
American  Constitution,  English  ori-
gin, 11,  60,207,218,224,230,253;
compared  with  British,  54 ;  its
characteristics  67,  202  ;  safeguards
of,  110,  120,  218,  235,  240,  242;
Articles  of  the  Constitution  of  New
York,  121  ;  and  of  Ohio,  122  ;  and
of  Massachusetts,  122;  origin  of
the  Senate,  179,  186,  211,  226
sqq.,  250  ;  its  importance,  196,  226  ;
prospects  of,  197  ;  its  rise  and  pro-
gress, 199,  205;  its  success,  202 ;
its  framers,  205,  216,  249 ;  its
institutions  described,  211  ;  Minis-
ters have  no  seat  in  the  Legislature,
213  (scePresident);  Supreme  Court,
217  ;  its  success,  223 ;  Congress,
224 ;  House  of  Representatives,
211,  230 ;  differs  from  British,  233,
246 ;  its  forty  Standing  Commit-
tees, 234 ;  amendments  of,  242  sqq. ;
abolition  of  slavery,  244,  252


BOUEGET

Arana,  referred  to,  19  ?*

Aristocracy,  influence  of,  42;  Austin's
opinion  of,  56 ;  compared  with
democracy,  61,  QQ,  79,  188;  and
party  disputes,  101  ;  does  not  exist
in  Russia  and  Turkey,  181

Armies,  their  relation  to  popular  go-
vernments, 22;  their  control  of
governments,  23 ;  tyranny  of,  in
France,  200

Athens,  democracy  in,  9;  really  an
aristocracy,  42,  74

Austin,  John,  his  plea  for  the  Consti-
tution, 56, 164 ;  on  democracy,  70  ;
a  follower  of  Bentham,  165


BACON,  Church's  Life  of,  cited,  77
Bagehot,  Mr.,  on  the  Cabinet,  213

Ballot,  106

Bancroft  on  democracy,  68,  77,  79

Belgium,  electoral  experiment  in,  109

Bentham,  J.,  on  the  Turkish  Govern-
ment, 48 ;  criticised  by  Austin,  56  ;
admirer  of  democracy,  82;  his
school,  84,  152,  165;  flaws  in  his
theory,  84 ;  his  views  of  human
nature,  85 ;  ignonince  of  history,
86;  scheme  of  law-reform,  146,
162,  167;  influence  on  Parliament,
148;  his  Radicalism,  152,  162;
compared  wich  Rousseau,  163

Blaine,  Mr.,  referred  to,  104

Bolivia,  Republic  of,  19

Bonapartes,  the,  15,  147 ;  as  re-
formers, 65  ;  destroyed  military
tyranny,  200

Bourget,  Paul,  on  modern  Freuch
society,  189  n


256


INDEX.


BBIGHl

Bright,  Mr.,  narrow  view  of  history,
79

Brissot  on  property,  75

British  Constitution,  the,  duration  of,
63,  81  ;  envied  by  other  nations,  54,
136  ;  Alexander  Hamilton's  idea,
102,  209 ;  contradictory  opinions
of,  112;  changes  in,  119,  149,  240;
violence  of  discussion  about,  124;
Bentham's  views,  162,  165  ;  Aus-
tin's, 1G5  n\  pattern  of  the  Ameri-
can {q.  v.),  207  sqq. ,  Montesquieu's
and  Madison's  views,  219;  diifer-
eni*e  from  American,  233,  245 ;
legislation  under,  its  dangers,  240

Hroglie,  Due  de,  quoted,  216

Broughton,  Lord,  memoirs  of,  referred
to,  115  w

Burke,  Edmund,  change  in  his  views
on  the  Constitution,  172


CABINET,  British,  power  and  func-
tions of,  114,  149,  237;  Mr.
Bagehot's  views  of,  213

Canning  quoted,  200

Carlyle  cited,  2

Caucus,  the,  93,  102,  106

Chambers,  First  and  Second,  176
sqq.,  209 ;  Mr.  Freeman's  views,
224

Change,  passion  for,  1 32 ;  a  mod^irn
growth,  134  ;  limited  to  Politics,
136  ;'  not  inherent  in  women,  139  ;
or  mankind  generally,  132,  146,
170

Charles  the  Great,  a  great  reformer,
66

Charles  X.  and  the  Revolution,  72

Chesterfield's  Letter  on  French  Revo-
lution, 1

Chinese,  their  hatred  of  change,  132  ;
progress  of,  192

Civilisation,  Western,  134, 143

Commons,  House  of,  powers,  118,
221  ;  compared  with  House  of
Representatives,  230  ;  its  executive
power,  232,  235

Community,  the,  theories  of,  8 ;  its
relation  to  government,  9,  83,  86,
179,  210  ;  insecurity  of  its  power,
21  ;  belief  in  the  enlightenment  of,
86;  in  the  East  and  West,  145;
formation  and  powers  of,  according


DEMOCRACY

toRousseau,  156,  158, 166;  affected
by  Reform,  169,  171

Congress  in  United  States,  224

Conservatism,  a  mischievous  form  of,
produced  by  Radicalism,  35  ;  inhe-
rent in  large  portion  of  the  human
race,  133  ;  in  women,  140

Constitution  {vide  also  British ;  Ame-
rican), historical  and  a  priori,  171;
350  said  to  have  sprung  up  in  pre-
sent century,  174  ;  dangers  and  diffi-
culties, 175  ;  popular  element  in,
178,  184;  the  French.  220

"  Contrat  Social,"  the,  of  Rousseau,
155

Corruption,  influence  of,  102;  in
America,  104;  in  France,  105;
comparative  freedom  of  England,
1 05  ;  in  Senate  of  United  States,
251

Corsica,  Rousseau's  saying  concern-
ing, 167

Cromwell,  referred  to,  26,  81,  135

Crown,  British,  power  of,  113, 11,
213, 232;  right  of, 173;  relation
to  American  colonies,  209,  212


DELEGATES  and  Representa-
tives, 94;  idea  of,  repudiated  in
Russia,  8
Democracy,  ascendency  of,  5 ;  defi-
nition of  the  word,  6,  59,  76 ;  in-
stances of  instability,  20,  71  ;  chief
rights  of,  22  ;  political  power  in,
29  ;  influence  of  party  feeling  {q.  v.)
in,  33;  opposition  to  science,  37,
1 90 ;  in  Switzerland,  39 ;  Mr.  Grote's
theories,  39 ;  the  Athenian,  42,  74 ;
Austin's  opinion  of,  56 ;  in  France,
M.  Scherer's  book,  57  ;  a  particular
form  of  Government,  59,  70,  87;
compared  with  monarchy,  60,  66,
83,  86,  188;  its  virtues  and  vices,
64,  87,  109  ;  false  ideas  of,  68  sqq.;
opinion  of  Bancroft,  08 ;  of  Sir  W.
Lawson,  69  ;  conflicting  ideas  of,
72;  in  England,  81;  princi/pal
argument  against,  86;  adjudicating,
91 ;  not  a  progressive  form  of
government,  97  ;  its  inherent  diffi-
culties, 98,  184;  power  of  gene-
ralities in,  108;  expectations  of,
129  ;  regarded  as  inevitable, 131,


INDEX


257


DEMOCRATIC

160  ;  Rousseau's  views  of natural
rights,  \58sqq.;  distinct  from re-
public, 199
Democratic legislation,  how  "will it

affect  human  motives  ?  60
—  opinion,  opposed  to  scientific  truth,
37 ; in  America  and  England,  248
Democrats,  the,  in  America,  216
Despotism,  in  Spain,  15  ;  in  France,
40, 163, 175; effects  of,  49; in
Italy,  59;  of  Jacobins,  73;  at  Eome,
80;  of  the  people,  156,  159;  arises
from  democracy,  188 ; in Russia,
197  ;  military,  200
Dicey,  Mr.  A.  V.,  referred  to,  217  n
Dickens influenced  by  Eentham,  153
Dictatorship  in  France,  14
Droz,  M.  Numa,  referred  to,  96  n


EDUCATION,  Popular,  tendency  to
diffuse  commonplaces,  36

Enclosure  of  commons,  Bentham's
views  on,  85  n

England,  sovereigns,  10 ;  political
institutions,  11  ;  her  Constitution
adapted  to  America,  11  ;  duration
of  her  Constitution,  53,  81 ;  political
character  of  Englishmen  held  on
the  Continent,  68 ;  survival  of
Parliamentary  institutions,  92  ;  her
greatness  the  work  of  minorities,
97  ;  opening  way  to  democracy.  111,
125;  reform  in,  135;  Envied  by
foreigners,  136  ;  her  dangers,  149  ;
her  Revolution  compared  with  the
French,  151,  173  ;  relative  popula-
tion of  British  Empire,  196

Equality,  political,  and  liberty,  irre-
concileable,  29 ;  inseparable,  accord-
ing to  Rousseau,  156  ;  not  identical
with  equality  of  representation,  1 86 ;
not  the  basis  of  Senate  of  United
States,  227 ;  in  American  States,  229

Executive  powers  distinct  from  legis-
lative, 218 ;  powers  of  American
President  and  British  House  of
Commons,  232  sqq.


Ij^ASHION,  characteristics  of, 141;
capr'ces  of,  193
Federal Constitution {see American
Constitution)


aOVERNArENT

•'Federalist,"  the,  198,  202;  scanty
reference  to  British  Empire,  206 ;
on  Montesquieu,  204,  219

Fortnightly  Review,  44

France  (see  Revolution,  Monarchy,
Popular  Government),  vicissitudes
of  her  Grovernments,  14;  influence
of  mobs,  24 ;  universal  suffragtj
abandoned,  34;  working  of  the
Government,  57,  147;  origin  of
monar.*hy,  60 ;  Rousseau's  influence,
75  ;  influence  on  Engl  and,  136,154;
compared  with  England  in  recent
years,  151  ;  origins  of  the  National
Assembly,  161 ;  her  numerous  Con-
stitutions, 174;  her  numerous  no-
bility, 182;  democratic  society  in,
189;  Republic  of,  199,  250;  States-
General,  225  ;  old  Kings  of,  250

Franchise  agitation  in  England  in
1884,  176

—  Bill,  240,  241

Franklin,  Benjamin,  12

Free  Trade  and  Protection  in  America,
36,  247;  in  England,  147

Freedom,  false  ideas  of,  58 ;  not  the
first  requisite  in  states,  63  ;  Hobbes'
definition,  70 ;  hopes  of,  clinging  to
monarchy,  200


eENERALISATION,  power  of,  in
politics,  107
German  influence  on  France,  3
Germany,  Popular  Government  in,  17 ;
Government  compared  with  Italian,
21 ;  compared  with  American,  216
Girondins,  their  phraseology,  74,  75
Government,  forms  of,  6  (see  Popular
Government) ; J.  S.  Mill  and  Mr.
Justice Stephen quoted, 7  ; of
Russia  and  Turkey,  8; of  other
European  States, 8, 210;  British
model  followed  throughout  Europe,
13  ;  of  Spain,  15  ;  of  Germany,  17;
danger  from  Irreconcileables, 26  :
theory  that  it  can  increase  human
happiness,  45  ;  Scherer  on  France,
57  ;  democracy,  a  form  of,  59 ;  its
chief  duties,  63,  64 ;  by  the  Many,
73, 201 ;  by Representation, 92  ;
Party,  98  ;  difficulties  of,  in  India,
133  ;  servant  of  the  people,  accord-
I ing to Rousseau, 156  ; "  muUi-


258


INDEX.


OEOTE

tudinous"  difficulties  of,  179;  ex-
pedients of  weak,  199  ;  classifica-
tion of,  201

Grote,  George,  on  democracies,  39,  74  ;
a  follower  of  Bentham,  82,  1  do

Gnizot,  M.,  criticism  of  the  ♦'  Fcde-
ralifct,"  203


HABIT,  force  of,  in  polities,  23, 63,
70;  characteristics  of,  137

Hamilton,  Alexinder,  on  British  Con-
stitution, 102,  209  ;  his  ideas  on  re-
publics, 205  ;  on  colonies,  209  ;  on
the  powers  of  the  President,  214;
failure  of  his  anticipations,  226  ;
his  scheme  of  a  Constitution,  230  w

History,  a  sound  aristocrat,  42  ;  ex-
periences of,  65,  70,  143,  150,  201,
229  ;  narrow  Anews  about,  78

Hobbes,  on  political  liberty,  29,  70  ;
anticipates  Kousscau,  157

Hume,  David,  on  the  French  mon-
archy, 4;  on  republics  of  Europe,
9

Hungary,  Government  of,  181

"  Hypothetics,"  4


IDEAS,  generation  of,  more  rapid
in  the  West  than  the  East,  191 ;

development  of,  194
Imperialism,  opposed  to  Radicalism,

23  ;  the  Roman,  65
India,  the natives  naturally  dislike

change,  133;  Mutiny,  133;  progress

of  ideas  in,  192
Inventions,  number  and  ingenuity  of,

in  America,  247
Irish,  the,  in  America,  52
Irreconcileables,  25  ;  their  character-
istics, 26
Italy,  Kingdom  of,  8,  21  ;  tyranny  in,

60 ;  conimonwealtlis  of,  80 ;  toxi-

cologists,  94


TACKSON,  Andrew,  en  corruption,
104
Jacobins,  tyranny  of,  73,  170;  their

phraseology,  74
Jay,  Mr.,  his  ideas  on  republics,  205  ;
and tlie Constitution  of United
States.  206,  207


LOEDS

Johnson,  Andrew,  and  Congress,  232
Jury,  the,  a  relic  of  pop\dar  juslu'e,

89  ;  its  functions,  90
Justice, popular, surviving in the

jury,  89  fi^q. ;  administration  of,  in

United  States,  217


KINGvS,  and  democrats,  77  ;  popu-
larity  of,  83 ;  powers  of  (.seg
Crown),  149  ;  impossible  in  United
States,  198,  210;  jealousy  of  the
British,  in  United  States.  207;
resemblance  of  the  President  of
United  States  to,  211 ;  elective,  in
Europe,  215,  216;  constitutional,
M.  Thiers'  view,  250
Kinship,  origins  of,  193


TABOUCHERE, Mr., on derao-

XJ cracy,  41,  43

Labour,  productive,  suppression  of  by
Governments,  48 ;  motives  which
impel  mankind  to,  50  ;  experiences
of  America,  51

Laws,  as  enforc<  d  by  states,  63  ;  re-
form of  {see  Bentham)  adminis-
tration of,  221

Legislation,  power  of,  in  United
States,  67,  218,  232  sqq.  ;  in  Switz-
erland, 68;  in  British  Cabinet,
114;  in  House  of  Commons,  118  ;
distinctions  in,  125;  nature  of,  and
compared  with  revolution,  128;  not
continuous  in  England,  135;  modern
sources  of,  146;  in  Popular  Govern-
ments, 147  ;  increase  of,  in  England
since  Reform  Bill,  148,  151 ;  Bent-
ham's  views,  162 ;  Rousseau's,  166  ;
powers  of,  distinct  from  executive,
219,  232  sqq. ;  power  of,  in  House  of
Representatives,  230  ;  in  England
and  America  compared,  235  sqq.

Liberty,  political,  in  France,  14 ;  de-
fined by  Hobbes,  29  ;  and  equality,
156  ;  in  the  United  States,  197  ;  in
England,  Montesquieu's  view,  219  ;
parent  of  inequality  in  fortunes,
228

Lieber  cited,  174

I^omeiiie,  Mr.,  cited,  220  n

Lords,  House  of,  its  powers  and  func-
tions. 116;  differences  of  oT)inior«


INDEX.


MACATTLA?

117;  ngitation  of  1884,  176;  cha-
raetoristics,  180;  its  duration.  18G;
improvement  of,  187  ;  representa-
tion of  clergy  in,  225


MACAULAY,  on  the  prejudices  of
the multitude, 1-17  w;  on the
Eevolution  of  1C88,  172,  173
Maehiavelli,  quoted,  8G,  99
Madison's opinion of Montesquieu,
204,  219 ;  and  the  American  Con-
stitution, 216
Mallet  du  Pan,  correspondence  of,  72
"Mandate,"  the,  theory  of,  118;  defi-
nition of,  119
Manners,  compared  with  Habits,  138
Massachusetts,  Constitution  of,  122
Melbourne,  Lord,  referred  to,  114
Mill,  J.  S.,  on  Government,  7  ;  on  the
consumption and reproduction  of
wealth,  47  ;  reference  to  Kousseau,
164;  views  on  Parliament,  177
Minorities,  influence  of,  97,  130,  170
Mobs,  their  influeni-e,  23,  36,  77  ;  their
ignorance,  86  ;  irrational  dcsiro  for
Reform,  130
Monarchy,  defined,  59  ;  compared  with
democracy,  60.  66,  79,  86  ;  greatest
author  of  political  change,  65 ;  dis-
advantages of  absolute,  147;  and
fjoedom,  200 ;  compared  with  re-
publics, 210

—  English,  9,  10,  207

—  French,  2  sqq. ;  of  Bourbons,  com-
pared with  Bonapartist  rule,  15;
origin  of,  60  ;  its  history,  70

Montesquieu's  "Esprit  des  Lois,"  204,
219

Multitude,  ignorance  of,  86 ;  incapable
of  making  up  its  mind,  88  ;  or  of
forming  an  opinion,  92 ;  its  evil  in-
fiuence,  97  ;  power  of,  147,  166


VTATIONAL  Sovereignty,  theory  of.

Nationalists,  27

New  Jersey,  Constitution  of,  122

New York, Constitution of, 121  ;

Legislature  of,  240
Newman,  J.  H.,  referred  to,  35
Nineveh  and  Babylon,  Governments

of,  65


POrULAR


Novels,  their  origin  and  influence  on
mankind,  140,  153


OBSTRUCTION  a  symptom  of  Par-
liamentary  decay,  95
Ohio,  Constitution  of,  122
Oligarchy, Venetian, 70,  210;  com-
pared with  other  Governments,  201,
210
Omar,  Caliph,  his  saying  about  the
Alexandrian  Library,  178


PARIS,  mobs  of,  24
Parliament,  degeneracy  of  de-
bates, 38  ;  preservation  of,  in  Eng-
land, 93;  its  decay,  94,  236;  in-
fluence of  Bentham,  148;  a  single
Chamber  advocated  by  Mill,  177;
American  jealousy  of,  208 ;  changes
in  spirit  of,  221 ;  duration  of,  231  ;

Party  feeling,  force  of,  31,  236 ;  tend-
ency to  assimilate  parties,  33 ;  desiro
to  "dish"  adversaries,  34;  ivifiucnce
on  democratic  Government,  98,  248  ;
affinity  -with  religion,  100;  origin
of,  101;  in  ancient  states,  106;  iho
"  Federalist,"  2C7

Party  heroes,  imaginary,  100

Peel,  Sir  R.,  referred  to,  114

Peers  in  European  States,  181

People,  the,  source  of  power,  10;
sovereignty  of,  57, 128, 152, 156, 157;
their  prejudices,  67  ;  "  the  will  of,"
88,  89 ;  cannot  make  up  its  mind,
88;  incapable  of  volition,  89;  the
voice  of,  108,  166,  178,  184;  diffi-
culties of  voting,  184

Plebiscite,  in  France,  40,  95,  184;  in
Switzerland,  40,  96

Polish  Republic,  the,  216

Political  economy,  theories  of,  37,  58,
163;  Ricardo's,  146

—  equilibrium,  loss  of,  in  modern
times,  21

Politics,  the  chief  sphere  of  love  of
change,  136,  144  ;  majority  of  man-
kind keep  aloof  from,  139

Popular  Government,  absence  of,  in
France,  2;  of  English  origin,  9;
admired  in  France,  11;  inlluen -os
of  French  Revolution,  12  ;  principle
o^ 13,  20;  prospects of  duration,


260


INDEX.


POrULATION

14,  20,  52  ;  adopted  in  France,  14  ;
in  Spain,  15;  in  Grermany,  17  ;  ex-
perience of,  in  Europe,  18;  armies
of,  22 ;  overturned  by  armies  and
mobs,  23  ;  danger  to,  from  IiTecon-
cileables,  25 ;  power  of  wire-pullers,
30  ;  danger  of  subdivision  of  power,
30;  inherent  infirmities  of,  41,  43,
87  ;  stability  and  weakness  of,  62  ;
in  Eoman  State,  80 ;  originally
identical  with  popular  justice,  89  ;
not  necessarily  legislative,  135  ;  at-
tractions of,  147  ;  Rousseau's  thf  o-
ries,  156;  prospects  of,  in  United
States,  197 ;  its  extension  in  the
West,  228  ;  parent  of  inequality  of
fortune,  228

Population,  theory  of,  37 ;  unpopu-
larity of,  in  France  and  America,  37  ;
in  United  States,  Russia,  &c.,  196

President,  the,  of  United  States,  211 ;
duration  of  office,  214;  mode  of
election,  215,  244,  249;  executive
powers,  232  ;  likely  to  be  a  medi-
ocrity, 249

Privilege,  opposed  to  democracy,  66;
privileged  classes,  4  ;  their  preju-
dices, 69  ;  of  House  of  Lords/'lS/)

Progress,  an  undefined  term,V.  131/f
ideas  "^  ^ihf "1  ^&^;  a  "continued
production  of  new  ideas,"  191

Property  regarded  as  theft,  75 ;  outcry
against,  187


EACE  and  language,  theories  of,  27
Radicalism  in  Europe,  21,  160;
associated  with  universal  suffrage,
35  ;  of  Eeiithani  and  his  pupils,  56,
82,  84,  162;  subserviency  to  mobs,
77

"  Referendum,"  the,  of  Swiss  Govern-
ment, 41,  67,  96

Reform,  chiefly  carried  out  by  mon-
archies, 65,  214;  not  by  democracies,
67  ;  history  of,  128  ;  detested  by
large  masses  of  mankind,  132  ;  jks-
sociated  with  religious  emotion,  135;
consequences  of,  in  England,  148  ;
dangers  attending,  149,  171 ;  "cause
of,  lost  at  Waterloo,"  164 ;  of  laws
(see  Bentham);  G.  Washington  as  a
reformer,  216

Reformation,  propelling  force  oi,  130


EOMAN

Religion,  lack  of,  in  France,  1;  in  Eng-
land, 11;  tenacity  of,  in  ancient
states,  66 ;  affinity  to  party,  100  ;
history  of,  129

Ren  an,  E.,  42  7J ;  on  French  democratic
s-ocioty,  189

Representation,  Government  by,  92,
93;  Rousseau's  views,  155,  159;
Si^yes'  views,  161,  184;  ordinary
and  extraordinary  representative
bodies,  161,  198;  equality  of,  186;
and  taxation,  222

Representatives,  House  of,  in  America,
211,  230,  249

Republican  party,  the,  in  America,
216

Republics,  of  Europe,  9.  199,  250;  of
America,  12,  18,  198,201  ;  of  Rome
and  Athens,  80 ;  universal  suffrage
in,  33  ;  modern,  formation  of,  59 ;
democratic,  not  reforming,  67 ;  false
ideas  of,  68,  202  ;  credit  of,  sustained
by  United  States,  198;  definition  of,
iy9;  most  unsuccessful  form  of
Government,  202

Revolution,  characteristics  of,  127  ;  in
Fashion,  its  probable  effects,  142;
in  ideas  more  prevalent  in  the  East
than  the  West,  146

—  French,  blindness  of  privileged
classes,  1 ;  causes  of,  2;  influence
on  Popular  Government,  12,  127,
200  ;  detestation  of,  in  England,  13,
103  ;  its  results,  66 ;  suspicions  of
democracy,  7 1 ;  discredited  by  its  own
crimes,  71,  200;  oratory  and  litera-
ture of,  74 ;  hindrarce  to  progress,
&2;  influence  on  England,  103,  128;
influenced  by  Si  eyes'  pamphlet,  100 ;
compared  with  the  English  of  1688
by  Macaulay,  1 72

—  of  1830,  72,  128

—  of  1848,  40

Ricardo,  theories  of  political  economy,

146
Ricgo,  General,  military  insurrection

of,  16
Rights,  Natural,  Rousseau's theory,

162,  163,  166
Roebuck,  Mr,,  referred  to,  165
Roman  Catholic  Church,  a  school  of

equality,  20
Roman  Empire,  cause  of  destructioc

of  wealth  in,  48  ;  an  example,  65


INDEX.


261


ROUSSEAU

absence  of  Popular  Grovcrnment,
80 ;  tribunate,  225

Rousseau  and  his  school,  74  ;  in-
fluence of,  75,  152,  153;  his  con-
Btitutioual  tlieory,  15-i  ;  the  "  Con-
trat  Social,"  155  ;  and  Sieyes,  160 ;
andBentbam,  162;  views  of  Natural
Rights,  163,  167

Russia,  repudiates  thenry  of  delega-
tion, 8 ;  suppression  of  zeal  for  po-
litical movement  in,  129;  assigned
causes  of  the  political  insecurity,
148  ;  has  no  true  aristocracy,  181  ;
compared  with  United  States,  196


SALISBURY,  Lord,  1 17  w
Scherer,  M.,  "La  Democratie  et
la  France,"  57,  104

Seeley,Prof.,  "Expansion  of  England,"
quoted,  223  n

Senate  of  United  States,  origin  of,  180,
186,  211;  great  power  of,  226;
Hamilton's  views  falsified,  228;  its
one  failing,  251

Seneca,  maxim  of,  144

Si^y^s,  Abbe,  his  pamphlet  on  the
Tiers-Etat,  160,  182;  his  Constitu-
tion, 175 ;  on  Second  Chambers,  178

Slavery,  abolition  of,  in  United  States,
244,  252

Smith,  Adam,  and  political  economy,
58

Socialism,  and  mobs,  24 ;  not  prevalent
in  America,  111

Sovereignty,  national,  8  ;  royal,  in-
fluence of,  28 ;  of  the  people,  57,  156

Spain,  Popular  Government  in,  8,  15  ;
Constitution  of  1812, 15  ;  frequency
of  military  revolts  in,  23  ;  iulluencc
of  mobs.  24  ;  revolt  of  her  Ameri-
can colonies,  201

Spanish  language,  wide  diffusion  of,  19

Spencer,  Herbert,  referred  to,  49

States,  formation  of,  59;  necessities
of,  61 ;  compared  with  individuals,
62  ;  Rousseau's  views  of,  158 ;  com-
parison of,  210

Stephen,  Mr.  Justice,  on  rulers  and
subjects,  7  ;  on  liberty,  29,  58

Strauss,  referred  to,  42

Stubbs,  Prof,  referred  to,  90

Suflrage,  area  of,  increased  by  wire-
pulling, 33;  universal,  33;  in  France


WOMKN

I  and  Germany,  34,  73  ;  destructive
I  of  progress,  36;  tendency  of  the
J  increase  of,  41  ;  in  America,  73,  1 04,
I 243; basis of,  in Helgium, 110;

household,  and  the Mandate, 84,

118, 119;  in  various  states, 210;

limitations of, ia United States,

229,  231  ;  negro,  241
Supreme Court, the, in United

States, 217-2.^4, 244; and the

slavery  question,  252
Switzerland,  experiences  of  democracy

in, 39, 67 ;  origin of  Rousseau's

theories,  160 ;  Government  of,  210


TATNE,  M.,  on  human  society,  49,  53
Taxation  and  Representation,
222 ;  power  of,  in  United  States,  247

Terror,  Reign  of,  its  evil  effects,  12,
48  ;  its  causes,  163

Thackeray,  influence  of,  140 ;  in-
fluenced by,  Ruusseau,  154

Tocqueville,  de,  on  democracy,  71,
75 ;  on  the  Constitution  of  the
United  States,  218  ;  and  of  Eng-
land, 240.J

"  Towards  Democracy,"  cited,  69

TroUope,  A.,  referred  to,  140

Turkey,  Government  of,  8  ;  Bentham'a
remarks  on  the  injuries  inflicted  by
her,  48

Tylor,  Mr.,  on  Comparative  Mythology.
190


VENETIAN  Government,  9,  70, 115,
200,210
Villari,  on  modern  states,  60
Vincent  of  Lerins,  canon  of,  35


117  EALTII  of  the  world  constantly
V  ? prrisliing  by  consumption,  46  ;

motives  which  lead  to  reproduction

of,  52
Whitman,  Walt.,  quoted,  69
William  III.,  as  a  ruler,  9
Wire-puller,  the,  power  of, 30; his

functions,  31;  dependent  on  party

feeling, 32;  tendency  of  the  syi-

tem,  33,  237
Women  naturally  opposed  to  change,

UO


PRINTED  BY

HAZELL,  WATSON  AND  VINEY, LD.,

LONDON  AND  AYLESBURY,

ENGLAND.


/%<(^


cP^


M


o


JLy-


4.|


o


■r


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


M2
1918


JC  ke:Lne, vi>-Lry Henry  Surriier

Z^  Populsr  government.

c6th  ed.3
