English Law and the Renaissance (Frederic William Maitland, 1901)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1901 edition (https://archive.org/details/lawenglishrena00maituoft).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

English Law and the
Renaissance


Eontom: C.  J.  CLAY  AND  SONS,

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
AVE MARIA  LANE,

AND

STEVENS AND SONS, LTD,
119  AND  120,  CHANCERY  LANE.


(Elasgofo: 50,  WELLINGTON  STREET.

ILeipjtg: F.  A.  BROCKHAUS.

tfo  gorfe: THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY.

Bombay: E. SEYMOUR  HALE.


[All  Rights  reserved.}


English Law  and  the
Renaissance

(The  Rede  Lecture  for  1901)


with  some  Notes

by

Frederic  William  Maitland,  LL.D.,  Hon.D.c.L.,

of  Lincoln's  Inn,  Barrister-at-Law,

Downing  Professor  of  the  Laws  of  England
in  the  University  of  Cambridge


CAMBRIDGE

at  the  University  Press

1901


Cambridge :

PRINTED BY  J. AND C. P. CLAY,
AT THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS.


/TUNT1D IM  GRCAT


TO
JAMES BRADLEY THAYER, LL.D.

PROFESSOR  OF LAW

AT

HARVARD UNIVERSITY.


ENGLISH LAW
AND THE RENAISSANCE.


Mr  Vice-Chancellor  and  Fellow-Students :

WERE  we  to  recall  to  life  the  good  Sir
Robert  Rede  who  endowed  lecturers  in  this
university,  we  might  reasonably  hope  that  he
would  approve  and  admire  the  fruit  that  in
these  last  years  has  been  borne  by  his  liberality.
And  then,  as  in  private  duty  or  private  interest
bound,  I  would  have  him  speak  thus:  'Yes,  it
is  marvellous  and  more  than  marvellous  this
triumph  of  the  sciences  that  my  modest  rent-
charge  stimulates  you  annually  to  record ;  nor  do
I  wonder  less  at  what  my  lecturers  have  said  of
humane  letters  and  the  fine  arts,  of  the  history
•of  all  times  and  of  my  time,  of  Erasmus  whom

M.  I


English  Law


I  remember,  and  that  age  of  the  Renaissance
(as  you  call  it)  in  which  (so  you  say)  I  lived.
But  there  is  one  matter,  one  science  (for  such
we  accounted  it)  of  which  they  seem  to  have
said  little  or  nothing  ;  and  it  happens  to  be  a
matter,  a  science,  in  which  I  used  to  take  some
interest  and  which  I  endeavoured  to  teach.  You
have  not,  I  hope,  forgotten  that  I  was  not  only
an  English  judge,  but,  what  is  more,  a  reader
in  English  law1.'

Six  years  ago  a  great  master  of  history,
whose  untimely  death  we  are  deploring,  worked
the  establishment  of  the  Rede  lectures  into
the  picture  that  he  drew  for  us  of  The  Early
Renaissance  in  England2.  He  brought  Rede's
name  into  contact  with  the  names  of  Fisher  and
More.  That,  no  doubt,  is  the  right  environment
and  this  pious  founder's  care  for  the  humanities>
for  logic  and  for  philosophy  natural  and  moral
was  a  memorable  sign  of  the  times.  Neverthe-
less the  fact  remains  that,  had  it  not  been  for
his  last  will  and  testament,  we  should  hardly


and  the  Renaissance


have  known  Sir  Robert  except  as  an  English
lawyer  who  throve  so  well  in  his  profession  that
he  became  Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Bench.
And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Robert  Rede — we
might  say — and  the  arguments  that  he  urged
and  the  judgments  that  he  pronounced,  are  they
not  written  in  queer  old  French  in  the  Year
Books  of  Henry  VII  and  Henry  VIII  ?  Those
ancient  law  reports  are  not  a  place  in  which
we  look  for  humanism  or  the  spirit  of  the
Renaissance :  rather  we  look  there  for  an
amazingly  continuous  persistence  and  develop-
ment of  medieval  doctrine.

Perhaps  we  should  hardly  believe  if  we  were
told  for  the  first  time  that  in  the  reign  of
James  I  a  man  who  was  the  contemporary  of
Shakespeare  and  Bacon,  a  very  able  man  too
and  a  learned,  who  left  his  mark  deep  in  English
history,  said,  not  by  way  of  paradox  but  in  sober
earnest,  said  repeatedly  and  advisedly,  that  a
certain  thoroughly  medieval  book  written  in
decadent  colonial  French  was  '  the  most  perfect

I 2


English  Law


and  absolute  work  that  ever  was  written  in
any  human  science3.'  Yet  this  was  what  Sir
Edward  Coke  said  of  a  small  treatise  written
by  Sir  Thomas  Littleton,  who,  though  he  did
not  die  until  1481,  was  assuredly  no  child  of
the  Renaissance.

I  know  that  the  names  of  Coke  and  Littleton
when  in  conjunction  are  fearsome  names  or  tire-
some, and  in  common  honesty  I  am  bound  to
say  that  if  you  stay  here  you  will  be  wearied.
Still  I  feel  that  what  is  at  fault  is  not  my  theme.
A  lecturer  worthy  of  that  theme  would — I  am
sure  of  it — be  able  to  convince  you  that  there  is
some  human  interest,  and  especially  an  interest
for  English-speaking  mankind,  in  a  question
which  Coke's  words  suggest : — How  was  it  and
why  was  it  that  in  an  age  when  old  creeds  of
many  kinds  were  crumbling  and  all  knowledge
was  being  transfigured,  in  an  age  which  had
revolted  against  its  predecessor  and  was  fully
conscious  of  the  revolt,  one  body  of  doctrine
and  a  body  that  concerns  us  all  remained  so


and  the  Renaissance


intact  that  Coke  could  promulgate  this  pro-
digious sentence  and  challenge  the  whole  world
to  contradict  it4?  I  have  not  the  power  to  tell
and  you  to-day  have  not  the  time  to  hear  that
story  as  it  should  be  told.  A  brief  outline  of
what  might  be  said  is  all  that  will  be  possible
and  more  than  will  be  tolerable.

Robert  Rede  died  in  January,  1519.  Let  us
remember  for  a  moment  where  we  stand  at  that
date.  The  Emperor  Maximilian  also  was  dying.
Henry  VIII  was  reigning  in  England,  Francis  I
in  France,  Charles  I  in  Spain,  Leo  X  at  Rome.
But  come  we  to  jurisprudence.  Is  it  beneath
the  historic  muse  to  notice  that  young  Mr  More,
the  judge's  son,  had  lately  lectured  at  Lincoln's
Inn6?  Perhaps  so.  At  all  events  for  a  while
we  will  speak  of  more  resonant  exploits.  We
could  hardly  (so  I  learn  at  second-hand)  fix  a
better  date  than  that  of  Rede's  death  for  the
second  new  birth  of  Roman  law.  More's  friend
Erasmus  had  turned  his  back  on  England  and
was  by  this  time  in  correspondence  with  two


English  Law


accomplished  jurists,  the  Italian  Andrea  Alciato
and  the  German  Ulrich  Zasi.  They  and  the
French  scholar  Guillaume  Bude  were  publishing
books  which  mark  the  beginning  of  a  new  era6.
Humanism  was  renovating  Roman  law.  The
medieval  commentators,  the  Balduses  and  Barto-
luses,  the  people  whom  Hutten  and  Rabelais7
could  deride,  were  in  like  case  with  Peter
Lombard,  Duns  Scotus  and  other  men  of  the
night.  Back  to  the  texts !  was  the  cry,  and  let
the  light  of  literature  and  history  play  upon
them8.  The  great  Frenchmen  who  were  to  do
the  main  part  of  the  work  and  to  make  the
school  of  Bourges  illustrious  were  still  young  or
unborn;  Cujas  was  born  in  1522;  but  already
the  advanced  guard  was  on  the  march  and  the
flourish  of  trumpets  might  be  heard9.  And
then  in  1520 — well,  we  know  what  happened
in  1520  at  Wittenberg,  but  perhaps  we  do  not
often  remember  that  when  the  German  friar
ceremoniously  and  contumeliously  committed
to  the  flames  some  venerated  lawbooks — this,


and  the  Renaissance  7

if  an  event  in  the  history  of  religion,  was  also
an  event  in  the  history  of  jurisprudence.  A
current  of  new  life  was  thrilling  through  one
Corpus  Juris10;  the  other  had  been  sore  stricken,
and,  if  it  escaped  from  violent  death,  might
perish  yet  more  miserably  of  a  disease  that
becomes  dangerous  at  the  moment  when  it  is
discovered.

A  few  years  afterwards  an  enlightened  young
humanist,  of  high  rank  and  marked  ability,  a
man  who  might  live  to  be  pope  of  Rome  or
might  live  to  be  king  of  England,  was  saying
much  evil  of  the  sort  of  law  that  Rede  had
administered  and  taught ;  was  saying  that  a
wise  prince  would  banish  this  barbaric  stuff
and  receive  in  its  stead  the  civil  law  of  the
Romans.  Such,  so  we  learn  from  one  of  his
friends,  was  the  talk  of  Reginald  Pole,  and  a
little  knowledge  of  what  was  happening  in
foreign  countries  is  enough  to  teach  us  that
such  talk  deserves  attention11.

This  was the  time  when Roman law  was


8  English  Law


driving  German  law  out  of  Germany  or  forcing
it  to  conceal  itself  in  humble  forms  and  obscure
corners12.  If  this  was  the  age  of  the  Renaissance
and  the  age  of  the  Reformation,  it  was  also  the
age  of  the  '  Reception.'  I  need  not  say  that  this
Reception — the  reception  of  Roman  law — plays
a  large  part  in  modern  versions  of  German
history,  and  by  no  means  only  in  such  as  are
written  by  lawyers.  I  need  not  say  that  it
has  been  judged  from  many  different  points  of
view,  that  it  has  been  connected  by  some  with
political,  by  others  with  religious  and  by  yet
others  with  economic  changes.  Nor  need  I  say
that  of  late  years  few  writers  have  had  a  hearty
good  word  for  the  Reception.  We  have  all  of
us  been  nationalists  of  late.  Cosmopolitanism
can  afford  to  await  its  turn13.

Then  we  observe  that  not  long  after  Pole
had  been  advocating  a  Reception,  his  cousin
King  Henry,  whose  word  was  law  supreme  in
church  and  state,  prohibited  the  academic  study
of  one  great  and  ancient  body  of  law — the  canon


and  the  Renaissance


law14 — and  encouraged  the  study  of  another —
the  civil  law — by  the  foundation  of  professor-
ships at  Oxford  and  Cambridge.  We  observe
also  that  his  choice  of  a  man  to  fill  the  chair
at  Cambridge  fell  on  one  who  was  eminently
qualified  to  represent  in  his  own  person  that
triad  of  the  three  R's — Renaissance,  Reforma-
tion and  Reception.  We  know  Professor  Thomas
Smith  as  a  humanist,  an  elegant  scholar  with
advanced  opinions  about  the  pronunciation  of
Greek.  We  know  the  Reverend  Thomas  Smith
as  a  decided,  if  cautious,  protestant  whose  doings
are  of  some  interest  to  those  who  study  the
changeful  history  of  ecclesiastical  affairs.  Then
we  know  Dr  Thomas  Smith  as  a  doctor  in  law
of  the  university  of  Padua,  for  with  praise-
worthy zeal  when  he  was  appointed  professor  at
Cambridge  he  journeyed  to  the  fountain-head
for  his  Roman  law  and  his  legal  degree15.  Also
he  visited  those  French  universities  whence  a
new  jurisprudence  was  beginning  to  spread.
He  returned  to  speak  to  us  in  two  inaugural


io  English  Law


lectures  of  this  new  jurisprudence:  to  speak
with  enthusiasm  of  Alciatus  and  Zasius16:  to
speak  hopefully  of  the  future  that  lay  before
this  conquering  science — the  future  that  lay
before  it  in  an  England  fortunately  ruled  by  a
pious,  wise,  learned  and  munificent  Prince.  Then
in  Edward  VI's  day  Thomas  Smith  as  a  Master
of  Requests  was  doing  justice  in  a  court  whose
procedure  was  described  as  being  'altogether
according  to  the  process  of  summary  causes  in
the  civil  law '  and  at  that  moment  this  Court  of
Requests  and  other  courts  with  a  like  procedure
seemed  to  have  time,  reason  and  popularity
upon  their  side17.  Altogether,  the  Rev.  Prof.
Dr  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  Knt.,  M.P.,  Dean  of
Carlisle,  Provost  of  Eton,  Ambassador  to  the
Court  of  France  and  Secretary  of  State  to
Queen  Elizabeth  was  a  man  of  mark  in  an
age  of  great  events.  Had  some  of  those  events
been  other  than  they  were,  we  might  now  be
saying  of  him  that  he  played  a  prominent  part
in  Renaissance,  Reformation  and  Reception,


and  the  Renaissance  1 1

and  a  part  characteristic  of  that  liberal  and
rational  university  of  which  he  was  professor,
public  orator  and  vice-chancellor38.

Some  German  historians,  as  you  are  aware,
have  tried  to  find  or  to  fashion  links  that  will
in  some  direct  and  obvious  manner  connect  the
Reformation  and  the  Reception.  In  one  popular
version  of  the  tale  protestantism  finds  a  congenial
ally  in  the  individualism  and  capitalism  of  the
pagan  Digest19.  In  truth  I  take  it  that  the  story
is  complex.  Many  currents  and  cross-currents
were  flowing  in  that  turbid  age.  It  so  happens
that  in  this  country  we  can  connect  with  the
heresiarchal  name  of  Wyclif  a  proposal  for  the
introduction  of  English  lav/,  as  a  substitute  for
Roman  law,  into  the  schools  of  Oxford  and
Cambridge20.  On  the  other  hand,  the  desire  for
a  practical  Reception  of  the  civil  law  is  ascribed
to  the  future  cardinal,  who  in  his  last  days
reconciled  England  for  a  moment,  not  with  the
Rome  of  the  Digest,  but  with  the  Rome  of  the
Decretals.  And  by  the  way  we  may  notice


12  English  Law


that  when  the  cardinal  was  here  upon  his
reconciliatory  errand  he  had  for  a  while  as  his
legal  adviser  one  of  the  most  learned  lawyers  of
that  age,  the  Spaniard  Antonio  Agustin.  But
we  in  England  take  little  notice  of  this  famous
man,  who,  so  foreigners  assure  us  now-a-days,
began  the  historical  study  of  the  canon  law  and
knew  more  about  the  false  Isidore  than  it  was
comfortable  for  him  to  know21.  Our  Dr  Smith
was  protestant  enough ;  but  his  Oxford  col-
league Dr  John  Story  showed  zeal  in  the
cremation  of  protestants,  helped  Alva  (so  it  is
said)  to  establish  the  Inquisition  in  the  Nether-
lands, was  hanged  as  a  traitor  at  Tyburn  in
1571  and  beatified  as  a  martyr  at  Rome  in
1886.  Blessed  John  Story  was  zealous;  but
his  permanent  contribution  to  the  jurisprudence
of  his  native  land  was  (so  far  as  I  am  aware)
an  early  precedent  for  the  imprisonment  of  a
disorderly  member  by  the  House  of  Commons,
and  a  man  may  be  disorderly  without  being  a
jurist22.  Ulrich  Zasi  went  part  of  the  way  with


and  the  Renaissance  13

Luther;  but  then  stayed  behind  with  Erasmus23.
He  had  once  compared  the  work  that  he  was
doing  for  the  Corpus  Juris  with  the  work  that
Luther  was  doing  for  the  Bible24.  The  great
Frenchmen  answered  the  religious  question  in
different  ways.  One  said  '  That  has  nothing  to
do  with  the  praetor's  edict.'  His  rivals  charged
him  with  a  triple  apostasy25.  Three  or  four  of
them  were  stout  huguenots,  and  we  must  not
forget  that  Calvin  and  Beza  had  both  been  at
Bourges  and  had  both  studied  the  civil  law.
Melanchthon  also  was  a  warm  admirer  of  Roman
jurisprudence26.  It  is  reported  that  Elizabeth
invited  Francis  Hotman  to  Oxford27.  He  was
protestant  enough,  and  fierce  enough  to  ex-
change letters  with  a  tiger28.  He  is  best  known
to  English  law-students  as  the  man  who  spoke
light  words  of  Littleton  and  thus  attracted
Coke's  thunderbolt29;  but  if  he  thought  badly
of  Littleton,  he  thought  badly  of  Tribonian
also,  and  would  have  been  the  last  man  to
preach  a  Reception.  Professor  Alberigo  Gentili


14  English  Law

of  Oxford,  he  too  was  protestant  enough  and
could  rail  at  the  canonists  by  the  hour ;  but
then  he  as  an  Italian  had  a  bitter  feud  with
the  French  humanizers,  and  stood  up  for  the
medieval  gloss30.

Plainly  the  story  is  not  simple  and  we  must
hurry  past  it.  Still  the  perplexity  of  detail
should  not  obscure  the  broad  truth  that  there
was  pleasant  reading  in  the  Byzantine  Code  for
a  king  who  wished  to  be  monarch  in  church  as
well  as  state :  pleasanter  reading  than  could
be  found  in  our  ancient  English  law-books.
Surely  Erastianism  is  a  bad  name  for  the  theory
that  King  Henry  approved :  Marsilianism  seems
better,  but  Byzantinism  seems  best31.  A  time
had  come  when,  medieval  spectacles  being  dis-
carded, men  could  see  with  the  naked  eye  what
stood  in  the  Code  and  Novels  of  Constantinople.
In  1558  on  the  eve  of  an  explosive  Reformation
'the  Protestants  of  Scotland,'  craving  'remedy
against  the  tyranny  of  the  estate  ecclesiastical,'
demanded  that  the  controversy  should  be  judged


and  the  Renaissance  15

by  the  New  Testament,  the  ancient  fathers  '  and
the  godly  approved  laws  of  Justinian  the  em-
peror32.' University-bred  jurists,  even  such  as
came  from  an  oldish  school,  were  very  service-
able to  King  Henry  in  the  days  .of  the  great
divorce  case  and  the  subsequent  quarrel  with
the  papacy.  Tunstall,  Gardiner,  Bonner,  Samp-
son and  Clerk,  to  say  nothing  of  the  Leghs  and
Laytons,  were  doctors  of  law  and  took  their  fees
in  bishoprics  and  deaneries33.  Certainly  they
were  more  conspicuous  and  probably  they  were
much  abler  men  than  those  who  were  sitting  in
the  courts  of  the  common  law.  With  the  one
exception  of  Anthony  Fitzherbert,  the  judges
of  Henry's  reign  are  not  prominent  in  our  legal
history,  and  we  have  little  reason  for  attributing
deep  knowledge  of  any  sort  of  law  to  such
chancellors  as  Audley,  Wriothesley  and  Rich.
I  doubt  our  common  lawyers  easily  accom-
modated themselves  to  ecclesiastical  changes.
Some  years  after  Elizabeth's  accession  the
number  of  barristers  who  were  known  to  the


1 6  English  Law

government  as  *  papists '  was  surprisingly  large
and  it  included  the  great  Plowden34.  But  we
must  go  back  to  our  main  theme.

A  Reception  there  was  not  to  be,  nor  dare
I  say  that  a  Reception  was  what  our  Regius
Professor  or  his  royal  patron  desired.  As  to
Smith  himself,  it  is  fairly  evident  that  some
time  afterwards,  when  he  had  resigned  his  chair
and  was  Elizabeth's  ambassador  at  the  French
court,  he  was  well  content  to  contrast  the  public
law  of  England  with  that  of  '  France,  Italy,
Spain,  Germany  and  all  other  countries  which '
to  use  his  words  '  do  follow  the  civil  law  of  the
Romans  compiled  by  Justinian  into  his  Pandects
and  Code35.'  The  little  treatise  on  the  Common-
wealth of  England  which  he  wrote  at  Toulouse
in  1565 — a  remarkable  feat  for  he  had  no  English
books  at  hand36 — became  a  classic  in  the  next
century,  and  certainly  did  not  underrate  those
traditional,  medieval,  Germanic  and  parliamen-
tary elements  which  were  still  to  be  found  in
English  life  and  law  under  the  fifth  and  last  of


and  the  Renaissance  17

the  Tudors.  Nevertheless  I  think  that  a  well-
equipped  lecturer  might  persuade  a  leisurely
audience  to  perceive  that  in  the  second  quarter
of  the  sixteenth  century  the  continuity  of  Eng-
lish legal  history  was  seriously  threatened37.

Unquestionably  our  medieval  law  was  open
to  humanistic  attacks.  It  was  couched  partly
in  bad  Latin,  partly  in  worse  French.  For  the
business  Latin  of  the  middle  age  there  is  much
to  be  said.  It  is  a  pleasant  picture  that  which
we  have  of  Thomas  More  puzzling  the  omni-
scient foreigner  by  the  question  '  An  averia
carucae  capta  in  withernamio  sunt  irreplegi-
bilia38.'  He  asked  a  practical  question  in  the
only  Latin  in  which  that  question  could  have
been  asked  without  distortion.  Smith's  acute
glance  saw  that  withernamium  must  have  some-
thing to  do  with  the  German  wiedernehmen ;
for  among  his  other  pursuits  our  professor  had
interested  himself  in  the  study  of  English
words39.  But  this  business  Latin  was  a  pure
and  elegant  language  when  compared  with  what
M.  2


1 8  English  Law

served  our  lawyers  as  French.  Pole  and  Smith
might  well  call  it  barbarous ;  that  it  was  fast
becoming  English  was  its  one  redeeming  feature.
You  are  likely  to  know  what  I  must  not  call  the
classical  passage :  it  comes  from  the  seventeenth
century.  In  all  the  Epistolae  Obscurorum  Viro-
rum  there  is  nothing  better  than  the  report
which  tells  how  one  of  Sir  Robert  Rede's
successors  was  assaulted  by  a  prisoner  'que
puis  son  condemnation  ject  un  brickbat  a  le  dit
justice  que  narrowly  mist40.'  It  is  as  instructive
as  it  is  surprising  that  this  jargon  should  have
been  written  in  a  country  where  Frenchmen  had
long  been  regarded  as  hereditary  foes.  This
prepares  us  for  the  remark  that  taught  law  is
tough  law.  But  when  '  Dunce '  had  been  set  in
Bocardo  (and  it  was  a  doctor  of  the  civil  law
who  set  him  there41),  why  should  the  old  law
books  be  spared  ?  They  also  were  barbarous  ;
they  also  were  sufficiently  papistical.

Turning  to  a  more  serious  aspect  of  affairs,
it  would  not  I  think  be  difficult  to  show  that


and  the  Renaissance  19

the  pathway  for  a  Reception  was  prepared.
Not  difficult  but  perhaps  wearisome.  At  this
point  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  forget  that  the
year  1485,  if  important  to  students  of  English
history  for  other  reasons,  is  lamentably  impor-
tant for  this  reason,  that  there  Dr  Stubbs  laid
down  his  pen.  In  his  power  of  marshalling
legal  details  so  as  to  bring  to  view  some  living
principle  or  some  phase  of  national  develop-
ment he  has  had  no  rival  and  no  second  among
Englishmen.  Howbeit,  we  may  think  of  the
subjected  church  and  the  humbled  baronage,  of
the  parliament  which  exists  to  register  the  royal
edicts,  of  the  English  Lex  Regia  which  gives  the
force  of  statute  to  the  king's  proclamations42,  of
the  undeniable  faults  of  the  common  law,  of  its
dilatory  methods,  of  bribed  and  perjured  juries,
of  the  new  courts  which  grow  out  of  the  King's
Council  and  adopt  a  summary  procedure  devised
by  legists  and  decretists.  Might  not  the  Council
and  the  Star  Chamber  and  the  Court  of  Re-
quests— courts  not  tied  and  bound  by  ancient

2 — 2


2O  English  Law

formalism, — do  the  romanizing  work  that  was
done  in  Germany  by  the  Imperial  Chamber
Court,  the  Rcichskammergerickt*1  This  was  the
time  when  King  Henry's  nephew  James  V  was
establishing  a  new  court  in  Scotland,  a  College
of  Justice,  and  Scotland  was  to  be  the  scene  of
a  Reception44.

It  seems  fairly  certain  that,  besides  all  that
he  effected,  Henry  had  at  times  large  projects
in  his  mind  :  a  project  for  a  great  college  of
law  (possibly  a  College  of  Justice  in  the  Scotch
sense),  a  project  for  the  reformation  of  the  Inns
of  Court,  which  happily  were  not  rich  enough  to
deserve  dissolution43,  also  perhaps  a  project  for
a  civil  code  as  well  as  the  better  known  project
for  a  code  ecclesiastical.  In  Edward  VI's  day
our  Regius  and  German  Professor  of  Divinity,
Dr  Martin  Butzer,  had  heard,  so  it  seems,  that
such  a  scheme  had  been  taken  in  hand,  and  he
moved  in  circles  that  -were  well  informed.  He
urged  the  young  Josiah  to  go  forward  in  the
good  work ;  he  denounced  the  barbarism  of


and  the  Renaissance  2 1

English  law  and  (to  use  Bentham's  word)  its
incognoscibility40.  The  new  ecclesiastical  code,
as  is  generally  known,  was  never  enacted  ;  but
we  know  equally  well  that  the  draft  is  in  print.
Its  admired  Latinity  is  ascribed  to  Prof.  Smith's
immediate  successor,  Dr  Walter  Haddon.  I
take  it  that  now-a-days  few  English  clergymen
wish  that  they  were  living — or  should  I  not  say
dying? — under  Dr  Haddon's  pretty  phrases47.
Codification  was  in  the  air.  Both  in  France
and  in  Germany  the  cry  for  a  new  Justinian  was
being  raised,  and  perhaps  we  may  say  that  only
because  a  new  Justinian  was  not  forthcoming,
men  endeavoured  to  make  the  best  that  they
could  of  the  old48.  How  bad  that  best  would
be  Francis  Hotman  foretold.

And  then  we  see  that  in  1535,  the  year  in
which  More  was  done  to  death,  the  Year  Books
come  to  an  end :  in  other  words,  the  great
stream  of  law  reports  that  has  been  flowing  for
near  two  centuries  and  a  half,  ever  since  the
days  of  Edward  I,  becomes  discontinuous  and


22  English  Law

then  runs  dry.  The  exact  significance  of  this
ominous  event  has  never  yet  been  duly  ex-
plored ;  but  ominous  it  surely  is49.  Some  words
that  once  fell  from  Edmund  Burke  occur  to  us :
'  To  put  an  end  to  reports  is  to  put  an  end  to
the  law  of  England50.'  Then  in  1547  just  after
King  Henry's  death  a  wail  went  up  from  'divers
students  of  the  common  laws.'  The  common
laws,  they  said,  were  being  set  aside  in  favour
of  '  the  law  civil '  insomuch  that  the  old  courts
had  hardly  any  business51.  Ten  years  later,  at
the  end  of  Mary's  reign,  we  read  that  the  judges
had  nothing  to  do  but  '  to  look  about  them,'  and
that  for  the  few  practitioners  in  Westminster
Hall  there  was  'elbow  room  enough5*.'  In
criminal  causes  that  were  of  any  political  im-
portance an  examination  by  two  or  three  doctors
of  the  civil  law  threatened  to  become  a  normal
part  of  our  procedure53.  In  short,  I  am  per-
suaded that  in  the  middle  years  of  the  sixteenth
century  and  of  the  Tudor  age  the  life  of  our
ancient  law  was  by  no  means  lusty.


and  the  Renaissance  23

And  now  we  may  ask  what  opposing  force,
what  conservative  principle  was  there  in  Eng-
land ?  National  character,  the  genius  of  a
people,  is  a  wonder-working  spirit  which  stands
at  the  beck  and  call  of  every  historian.  But
before  we  invoke  it  on  the  present  occasion  we
might  prudently  ask  our  books  whether  in  the
sixteenth  century  the  bulk  of  our  German
cousins  inherited  an  innate  bias  towards  what
they  would  have  called  a  Welsh  jurisprudence.
There  seems  to  be  plentiful  evidence  that  the
learned  doctores  iuris  who  counselled  the  German
princes  and  obtained  seats  in  the  courts  were
cordially  detested  by  the  multitude.  In  modern
times  they  often  have  to  bear  much  blame  for
that  terrible  revolt  which  we  know  as  the
Peasants'  War54.  No  doubt  there  were  many
differences  between  England  and  Germany,  be-
tween England  and  France,  between  England
and  Scotland55.  Let  us  notice  one  difference
which,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  marked  off  England
from  the  rest  of  the  world.  Medieval  England
had  schools  of  national  law.


24  English  Law

The  importance  of  certain  law  schools  will
be  readily  conceded,  even  to  one  who  is  in
some  sort  officially  bound  to  believe  that  law
schools  may  be  important.  A  history  of  civili-
zation would  be  miserably  imperfect  if  it  took
no  account  of  the  first  new  birth  of  Roman  law
in  the  Bologna  of  Irnerius.  Indeed  there  are
who  think  that  no  later  movement, — not  the
Renaissance,  not  the  Reformation — draws  a
stronger  line  across  the  annals  of  mankind  than
that  which  is  drawn  about  the  year  uoowhen
a  human  science  won  a  place  beside  theology.
I  suppose  that  the  importance  of  the  school  of
Bourges  would  also  be  conceded.  It  may  be
worth  our  while  to  remark  that  the  school  of
Bologna  had  a  precursor  in  the  school  of  Pavia,
and  that  the  law  which  was  the  main  subject  of
study  in  the  Pavia  of  the  eleventh  century  was
not  Roman  law  but  Lombard  law :  a  body  of
barbaric  statutes  that  stood  on  one  level  with
the  Anglo-Saxon  laws  of  the  same  age.  This
I  say,  not  in  order  that  I  may  remind  you  what
sort  of  law  it  was  that  Archbishop  Lanfranc


and  the  Renaissance  25

studied  when  as  a  young  man  he  was  a  shining
light  in  the  school  of  Pavia,  but  because  this
body  of  Lombard  law,  having  once  become  the
subject  of  systematic  study,  showed  a  remarkable
vitality  in  its  struggle  with  Roman  jurisprudence.
Those  Italian  doctors  of  the  middle  age  who
claimed  for  their  science  the  fealty  of  all  man-
kind might  have  been  forced  to  admit  that  all
was  not  well  at  home.  They  might  call  this
Lombard  law  ius  asininum  and  the  law  of  brute
beasts,  but  it  lingered  on,  and  indeed  I  read
that  it  was  not  utterly  driven  from  the  kingdom
of  Naples  until  Joseph  Bonaparte  published  the
French  code.  Law  schools  make  tough  law86.

Very  rarely  do  we  see  elsewhere  the  academic
teaching  of  any  law  that  is  not  Roman  :  imperi-
ally or  papally  Roman.  As  a  matter  of  course
the  universities  had  the  two  legal  faculties,
unless,  as  at  Paris,  the  Pope  excluded  the  legists
from  an  ecclesiastical  preserve.  The  voice  of
John  Wyclif  pleading  that  English  law  was  the
law  that  should  be  taught  in  English  universi-


26  English  Law


ties  was  a  voice  that  for  centuries  cried  in  the
wilderness.  It  was  1679  before  French  law  ob-
tained admission  into  the  French  universities57.
It  was  1709  before  Georg  Beyer,  a  pandectist
at  Wittenberg,  set  a  precedent  for  lectures  on
German  law  in  a  German  university58.  It  was
1758  before  Blackstone  began  his  ever  famous
course  at  Oxford.  The  chair  that  I  cannot
fill  was  not  established  until  the  transatlantic
Cambridge  was  setting  an  example  to  her  elderly
mother59.  But  then,  throughout  the  later  middle
age  English  law  had  been  academically  taught.

No  English  institutions  are  more  distinc-
tively English  than  the  In.ns  of  Court ;  of  none
is  the  origin  more  obscure.  We  are  only  now
coming  into  possession  of  the  documents  whence
their  history  must  be  gathered,  and  apparently
we  shall  never  know  much  of  their  first  days60.
Unchartered,  unprivileged,  unendowed,  without
remembered  founders,  these  groups  of  lawyers
formed  themselves  and  in  course  of  time  evolved
a  scheme  of  legal  education :  an  academic  scheme


and  the  Renaissance  27

of  the  medieval  sort,  oral  and  disputatious.  For
good  and  ill  that  was  a  big  achievement :  a  big
achievement  in  the  history  of  some  undiscovered
continents.  We  may  well  doubt  whether  aught
else  could  have  saved  English  law  in  the  age
of  the  Renaissance.  What  is  distinctive  of
medieval  England  is  not  parliament,  for  we  may
everywhere  see  assemblies  of  Estates,  nor  trial
by  jury,  for  this  was  but  slowly  suppressed  in
France.  But  the  Inns  of  Court  and  the  Year
Books  that  were  read  therein,  we  shall  hardly
find  their  like  elsewhere.  At  all  events  let
us  notice  that  where  Littleton  and  Fortescue
lectured,  there  Robert  Rede  lectures,  Thomas
More  lectures,  Edward  Coke  lectures,  Francis
Bacon  lectures,  and  highly  technical  were  the
lectures  that  Francis  Bacon  gave.  Now  it  would,
so  I  think,  be  difficult  to  conceive  any  scheme
better  suited  to  harden  and  toughen  a  traditional
body  of  law  than  one  which,  while  books  were
still  uncommon,  compelled  every  lawyer  to  take
part  in  legal  education  and  every  distinguished


28  English  Law

lawyer  to  read  public  lectures.  That  was  what
I  meant  when  I  made  bold  to  say  that  Robert
Rede  was  not  only  an  English  judge  but  '  what
is  more '  a  reader  in  English  law.

Deus  bone!  exclaimed  Professor  Smith  in  his
inaugural  lecture,  and  what  excited  the  learned
doctor  to  this  outcry  was  the  skill  in  disputation
shown  by  the  students  of  English  law  in  their
schools  at  London.  He  was  endeavouring  to
persuade  his  hearers  that  in  many  ways  the
study  of  law  would  improve  their  minds.  If,
he  urged,  these  young  men,  cut  off  as  they  are
from  all  the  humanities,  can  reason  thus  over
their  'barbaric  and  semi-gallic  laws,'  what  might
not  you,  you  cultivated  scholars  do  if  you
studied  the  Digest  and  Alciatus  and  Zasius  ?
And  then  the  professor  expressed  a  hope  that
he  might  be  able  to  spend  his  vacation  in  the
Inns  of  Court61.  His  heart  was  in  the  right
place  :  in  a  school  of  living  law.  Even  for  the
purposes  of  purely  scientific  observation  the  live
dog  may  be  better  than  the  dead  lion.


and  the  Renaissance  29

When  the  middle  of  the  century  is  past  the
signs  that  English  law  has  a  new  lease  of  life
become  many.  The  medieval  books  poured
from  the  press,  new  books  were  written,  the
decisions  of  the  courts  were  more  diligently
reported,  the  lawyers  were  boasting  of  the  inde-
pendence and  extreme  antiquity  of  their  system62.
We  were  having  a  little  Renaissance  of  our
own  :  or  a  gothic  revival  if  you  please.  The
Court  of  Requests  in  which  Prof.  Smith  and
Prof.  Haddon  had  done  justice  was  being  tried
for  its  life.  Its  official  defender  was,  we  ob-
serve, Italian  by  blood  and  Parisian  by  degree :
Dr  Adelmare,  known  to  Englishmen  as  Sir
Julius  Caesar63.  That  wonderful  Edward  Coke
was  loose.  The  medieval  tradition  was  more
than  safe  in  his  hands.  You  may  think  it
pleasant  to  turn  from  this  masterful,  masterless
man  to  his  great  rival.  It  is  not  very  safe  to
say  what  Thomas  More  did  not  know,  less  safe
to  say  what  was  unknown  to  Francis  Bacon,  but
I  cannot  discover  that  either  of  these  scholars,


30  English  Law

these  philosophers,  these  statesmen,  these  law
reformers,  these  schemers  of  ideal  republics,
these  chancellors  of  the  realm,  these  law  lec-
turers, had  more  than  a  bowing  acquaintance
with  Roman  law.

If  Reginald  Pole's  dream  had  come  true,  if
there  had  been  a  Reception — well,  I  have  not
the  power  to  guess  and  you  have  not  the  time
to  hear  what  would  have  happened  ;  but  I  think
that  we  should  have  had  to  rewrite  a  great  deal
of  history.  For  example,  in  the  seventeenth
century  there  might  have  been  a  struggle  be-
tween king  and  parliament,  but  it  would  hardly
have  been  that  struggle  for  the  medieval,  the
Lancastrian,  constitution  in  which  Coke  and
Selden  and  Prynne  and  other  ardent  searchers
of  mouldering  records  won  their  right  to  be
known  to  school-boys.  In  1610  when  the  con-
flict was  growing  warm  a  book  was  burnt  by  the
common  hangman  :  it  was  written  by  an  able
man  in  whom  Cambridge  should  take  some
pride,  Dr  Cowell,  our  Regius  Professor,  and


and  the  Renaissance  31

seemed  to  confirm  the  suspicion  that  Roman
law  and  absolute  monarchy  went  hand  in  hand64.

The  profit  and  loss  account  would  be  a  long
affair.  I  must  make  no  attempt  to  state  it.  If
there  was  the  danger  of  barbarism  and  stupidity
on  the  one  side,  there  was  the  danger  of  pedantry
on  the  other:  the  pedantry  that  endeavours  to
appropriate  the  law  of  another  race  and  galva-
nizes a  dead  Corpus  Juris  into  a  semblance  of
life.  Since  the  first  of  January  1900  the  attempt
to  administer  law  out  of  Justinian's  books  has
been  abandoned  in  Germany.  The  so-called
'Roman-Dutch'  law  of  certain  outlying  parts
of  the  British  Empire  now  stands  alone65,  and
few,  I  imagine,  would  foretell  for  it  a  brilliant
future,  unless  it  passes  into  the  hand  of  the
codifier  and  frankly  ceases  to  be  nominally
Roman.  Let  us  observe,  however,  that  much
had  been  at  stake  in  the  little  England  of  the
sixteenth  century.

In  1606  Coke  was  settling  the  first  charter  of
Virginia66.  In  1619  elected  'burgesses'  from  the


32  English  Law

various  'hundreds'  of  Virginia  were  assembling,
and  the  first-born  child  of  the  mother  of  parlia-
ments saw  the  light67.  Maryland  was  granted
to  Lord  Baltimore  with  view  of  frankpledge  and
all  that  to  view  of  frankpledge  doth  belong,  to
have  and  to  hold  in  free  and  common  socage  as
of  the  castle  of  Windsor  in  the  county  of  Berks,
yielding  yearly  therefor  t\vo  Indian  arrows  of
those  parts  on  the  Tuesday  in  Easter  week68.
The  port  and  island  of  Bombay  in  one  hemi-
sphere69, and  in  another  Prince  Rupert's  land
stretching  no  one  knew  how  far  into  the  frozen
north  were  detached  members  of  the  manor  of
East  Greenwich  in  the  county  of  Kent70.  Nearly
twenty-five  hundred  copies  of  Blackstone's  Com-
mentaries were  absorbed  by  the  colonies  on  the
Atlantic  seaboard  before  they  declared  their
independence.  James  Kent,  aged  fifteen,  found
a  copy,  and  (to  use  his  own  words)  was  inspired
with  awe71;  John  Marshall  found  a  copy  in  his
father's  library72;  and  the  common  law  went
straight  to  the  Pacific73.


33

A  hundred  legislatures — little  more  or  less —
are  now  building  on  that  foundation :  on  the
rock  that  was  not  submerged.  We  will  not  say
this  boastfully.  Far  from  it.  Standing  at  the
beginning  of  a  century  and  in  the  first  year  of
Edward  VII,  thinking  of  the  wide  lands  which
call  him  king,  thinking  of  our  complex  and
loosely-knit  British  Commonwealth,  we  cannot
look  into  the  future  without  serious  misgivings.
If  unity  of  law — such  unity  as  there  has  been —
disappears,  much  else  that  we  treasure  will  dis-
appear also,  and  (to  speak  frankly)  unity  of  law
is  precarious.  The  power  of  the  parliament  of
the  United  Kingdom  to  legislate  for  the  colonies
is  fast  receding  into  the  ghostly  company  of  legal
fictions.  Men  of  our  race  have  been  litigious ;
the  great  Ihering  admired  our  litigiousness74;  it
is  one  of  our  more  amiable  traits;  but  it  seems
to  me  idle  to  believe  that  distant  parts  of  the
earth  will  supply  a  tribunal  at  Westminster
with  enough  work  to  secure  uniformity.  The
so-called  common  law  of  one  colony  will  swerve

M.  3


34  English  Law

from  that  of  another,  and  both  from  that  of
England.  Some  colonies  will  have  codes75.  If
English  lawyers  do  not  read  Australian  reports
(and  they  cannot  read  everything),  Australian
lawyers  will  not  much  longer  read  English
reports.

Still  the  case  is  not  yet  desperate.  Heroic
things  can  be  done  by  a  nation  which  means  to
do  them:  as  witness  the  mighty  effort  of  science
and  forbearance  which  in  our  own  time  has
unified  the  law  of  Germany,  and,  having  handed
over  the  Corpus  Juris  to  the  historians,  has  in
some  sort  undone  the  work  of  the  Reception76.
Some  venerable  bodies  may  understand  the
needs  of  the  time,  or,  if  I  may  borrow  a  famous
phrase,  '  the  vocation  of  our  age  for  jurispru-
dence and  legislation.'  Our  parliament  may
endeavour  to  put  out  work  which  will  be  a
model  for  the  British  world.  It  can  still  set
an  example  where  it  can  no  longer  dictate,  and
at  least  it  might  clear  away  the  rubbish  that
collects  round  every  body  of  law.  To  make


and  the  Renaissance  35

law  that  is  worthy  of  acceptance  by  free  com-
munities that  are  not  bound  to  accept  it,  this
would  be  no  mean  ambition.  Nihil  aptius,  niliil
efficacius  ad  plures  provincial  sub  uno  imperio
retinendas  et  fovendas77.  But  it  is  hardly  to
parliament  that  our  hopes  must  turn  in  the
first  instance.  Certain  ancient  and  honourable
societies,  proud  of  a  past  that  is  unique  in  the
history  of  the  world,  may  become  fully  conscious
of  the  heavy  weight  of  responsibility  that  was
assumed  when  English  law  schools  saved,  but
isolated,  English  law  in  the  days  of  the  Recep-
tion. In  that  case,  the  glory  of  Bourges,  the
glory  of  Bologna,  the  glory  of  Harvard  may
yet  be  theirs78.


3—2


NOTES.

1  Robert  Rede  was  Autumn  Reader  at  Lincoln's  Sir  />.  Rede's
Inn  in  1481,  Lent  Reader  in  1485  :  Black  Book  oflectures'
Lincoln's  Inn,  vol.  I.,  pp.  71,  83.

2  Creighton,  The  Early  Renaissance  in  England,
Camb.  1895.

3  Coke, Introductory Letter  to  Part 10  of  the
Reports,  and  Preface  to  First  Institute.

4  Sohm,  Frdnkisches  Recht  und  romisches  Recht,  English  law
1880,  p.  77:  '...Thatsachen  in  Folge  deren  die  Re-  ™£%fsanff
naissance  an  dem  englischen  Rechtsleben  so  gut

wie  spurlos  voriiberging.'

6  Thomas More  was  Autumn Reader  in 1511,  Sir  T.  Mor<?s
Lent  Reader  in  1515  :  Black  Book  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  lectltres-
vol.  I.,  pp.  162,  175.

6  Etienne  Pasquier,  Recherches  sur  la  France,  The

IX. 39 (cited by Dareste, Essai sur Franqois  Renaissance

and  Roman
Hotman, Paris, 1850,  p. 17): *  Le  siecle  de  1  an /aw

mil  cinq  cens  nous  apporta  une  nouvelle  estude  de
loix  qui  fut  de  faire  un  manage  de  Pestude  du
droict  avec  les  lettres  humaines  par  un  langage


38  Note  6

latin  net  et  poly :  et  trouve  trois  premiers  entre-
preneurs de  ce  nouveau  mesnage,  Guillaume  Bude",
Frangois,  enfant  de  Paris,  Andrd  Alciat,  Italien
Milanois,  Udaric  Zaze,  Alleman  ne"  en  la  ville  de
Constance.'  Savigny,  Geschichte  des  romischen
Rechts  im  Mittelalter,  ed.  2,  vol.  vi.,  p.  421  :  'Nun
sind  es  zwei  Manner,  welche  als  Stifter  und  Fiihrer
der  neuen  Schule  angesehen  werden  konnen :  Alciat
in  Italien  und  Frankreich,  Zasius  in  Deutschland.
Die  ersten  Schriften,  worin  die  neue  Methode
erscheint,  fallen  in  das  zweite  Decennium  des
fiinfzehnten  \corr.  sechzehnten]  Jahrhunderts.'
Alciato  and  Andrea  Alciato  was  born  at  Alzate  near  Milan
in  1492,  studied  at  Pavia  and  Bologna,  in  1518  was
called  to  teach  at  Avignon,  went  to  Milan  in  1520,
to  Bourges  in  1528,  was  afterwards  at  Pavia,
Bologna  and  Ferrara,  died  at  Pavia  in  1550
(Fertile,  Storia  del  diritto  italiano,  ed.  2,  vol.  II.  (2),
p.  428).  Ulrich  Zasi  was  born  in  1461,  studied  at
Tubingen  and  at  Freiburg  where  he  became  town-
clerk  and  afterwards  professor  of  law,  died  in  1535.
See  Stintzing,  Ulrich  Zasius,  Basel,  1857,  where
(pp.  162 — 216)  the  intercourse  between  Erasmus,
Zasi,  Alciato  and  Bude"  is  described.  The  early
Italian  humanists  had  looked  on  jurisprudence
with  disdain  and  disgust.  See  Geiger,  Renaissance
und  Hiimanismus,  1882,  pp.  500—503;  Voigt,  Die
Wiederbclebung  des  classischen  Alterthums,  ed.  3,
vol.  II.,  pp.  477 — 484.  Gradually,  so  I  understand,
philologians  such  as  Budd  (d.  1540)  began  to  dis-
cover that  there  was  matter  interesting  to  them  in


Notes  6,  7  39


the  Corpus  Juris,  and  a  few  jurists  turned  towards
the  new  classical  learning.  See  Tilley,  Humanism
under  Francis  /.,  in  English  Historical  Review,
vol.  xv.,  pp.  456  ff.  In  1520  Zasi,  writing  to
Alciato,  said  'All  sciences  have  put  off  their  dirty
clothes:  only  jurisprudence  remains  in  her  rags.'
(Stintzing,  Ulrich  Zasius,  p.  107.)

7  Rabelais,  Pantagruel,  liv.  II.,  ch.  X. : '  Sottes  Rabelais  and
et  desraisonnables  raisons  et  ineptes  opinions  de  "

Accurse,  Balde,  Bartole,  de  Castro,  de  Imola,  Hip-
polytus,  Panorme,  Bertachin,  Alexander,  Curtius  et
ces  autres  vieux  mastins,  qui  jamais  n'entendirent
la  moindre  loy  des  Pandectes,  et  n'estoient  que
gros  veaulx  de  disme,  ignorans  de  tout  ce  qu'est
necessaire  a  1'intelligence  des  loix.  Car  (comme
il  est  tout  certain)  ilz  n'avoient  cognoissance  de
langue  ny  grecque,  ny  latine,  mais  seulement  de
gothique  et  barbare....Davantage,  veu  que  les  loix
sont  extirpe'es  du  milieu  de  philosophic  morale  et
naturelle,  comment  1'entendront  ces  folz,  qui  ont
par  Dieu  moins  estudie'  en  philosophic  que  ma
mulle.  Au  regard  des  lettres  d'humanite'  et  cog-
noissance des  antiquites  et  histoires  ilz  en  estoient
charge's  comme  un  crapaud  de  plumes,  et  en  usent
comme  un  crucifix  d'un  pifre,  dont  toutesfois  les
droits  sont  tous  pleins,  et  sans  ce  ne  peuvent  estre
entenduz.'  W.  F.  Smith,  Rabelais,  vol.  I.,  p.  257,
translates  the  last  sentence  thus :  '  With  regard  to
the  cultivated  literature  and  knowledge  of  antiquities
and  history,  they  were  as  much  provided  with  those


Notes  7 — 10


Back  to  the
texts  !


The  French
school.


faculties  as  is  a  toad  with  feathers  and  have  as
much  use  for  them  as  a  drunken  heretic  has  for  a
crucifix....'

8  Stintzing,  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Rechtsivis-
senschaft,  vol.  I.,  p.  96  :  '  Man  wird  sich  bewusst,  dass
nicht  in  der  iiberlieferten  Schulweisheit  das  Wesen
der  Wissenschaft  stecke ;  dass  es  auch  hier  gelte,
dem  Rufe  des  Humanismus  "zuriick  zu  den  Quel-
len  !"  zu  folgen.'

9  The  greatest names appear to  be those of
Fran£ois Duaren or  more  correctly  Le  Douarin
(1509— 1 559),  Jacques  Cujas  (1522—1590),  Hugues
Doneau  (Donellus,  1527 — 1592),  Francois  Baudouin
(Balduinus,  1520 — 1573),  Francois  Hotman  (1524 —
1591),  Denis  Godefroy  (1549— 1622),  Jacques  Gode-
froy(i587 — 1652).  Besides  these  there  is  Charles  Du
Moulin  (Molinaeus,  1500 — 1566)  whose  chief  work,
however,  was  done  upon  French  customary  law,
and  who  in  the  study  of  Roman  law  represents  a
conservative  tradition. (Esmein,  Histoire  du  droit

fran$ais,  ed.  2,  p.  776.)  Dareste  (Essai  sur  Francois
Hotman,  p.  2)  marks  the  five  years  1546—1551  as
those  in  which  'nos  quatre  grands  docteurs  du
seizieme  siecle'  ( Hotman,  Baudouin,  Cujas,  Doneau)
entered  on  their  careers.

ATew  life  of  the 10  Viollet,  Droit  civil  franqais,  p.  25: 'C'est  le

Corpus jurts. mouvement scientifique de la Renaissance qui,

semblable  a  un courant  d'electricite,  donne  ainsi

au vieux droit remain une vie nouvelle. Son

autorite"  s'accroit  par  1'action  d'une  science,  pleine


Notes  10,  n  41

de  jeunesse  et  d'ardeur,  d'une  science  qui,  comme
toutes  les  autres  branches  de  1'activite'  humaine,
s'e'panouit  et  renait.'  Flach,  in  Nouvelle  revue
historique  de  droit,  vol.  vn.,  p.  222:  'En  France
Cujas  porte  a  son  apogee  le  renom  de  1'ecole
nouvelle.  Quelle  autre  preoccupation  cette  e'cole
pouvait-elle  avoir  que  de  faire  revivre  le  veritable
droit  de  la  Rome  ancienne,  celui  que  la  pratique
avail  touche  de  son  souffle  impur,  celui  qu'elle
avait  corrompu  ? '

11  Starkey' s  England,  Early  English  Text  Society,  Reginald  Pole
1878,  pp.  192  ff. ;  and  see  Letters  and  Papers,  and  the
Henry  VIIL,  vol.  vni.,  pp.  81—84,  and  Ibid.  vol.
XII.,  pt.  i,  pp.  xxxii — xxxiv.  Thomas  Starkey  was
employed  in  the  endeavour  to  win  Reginald  Pole
to  King  Henry's  side  in  the  matter  of  the  divorce
from  Catherine  and  the  consequent  breach  with
Rome.  The  negotiation  failed,  but  Starkey  took
the  opportunity  of  laying  before  Henry  a  dialogue
which  he  (Starkey)  had  composed.  The  inter-
locutors in  this  dialogue  were  Pole  and  the  well-
known  scholar  Thomas  Lupset,  and  Pole  was
represented  as  expounding  his  opinions  touching
political  and  ecclesiastical  affairs.  How  far  at  all
points  Starkey  fairly  represented  Pole's  views  may
be  doubted.  Still  we  have  respectable  evidence
that  Pole  had  talked  in  the  strain  of  the  following
passage,  and  at  any  rate  Starkey  thought  that  in
King  Henry's  eyes  he  was  befriending  Pole  by
making  him  speak  thus.


42  Note  ii

Defects  of  l  Thys  ys  no  dowte  but  that  our  law  and  ordur

English  law.  thereof  ys  over-confuse.  Hyt  ys  infynyte,  and
without  ordur  or  end.  Ther  ys  no  stabyl  grounde
therin,  nor  sure  stay  ;  but  euery  one  that  can  coloure
reson  makyth  a  stope  to  the  best  law  that  ys  before
tyme  deuysyd.  The  suttylty  of  one  sergeant  schal
enerte  [enerve?]  and  destroy  al  the  jugementys
of  many  wyse  men  before  tyme  receyuyd.  There
is  no  stabyl  ground  in  our  commyn  law  to  leyne
vnto.  The  jugementys  of  yerys  [i.e.  the  Year
Books]  be  infynyte  and  ful  of  much  controuersy;
and,  besyde  that,  of  smal  authoryte.  The  jugys
are  not  bounden,  as  I  vnderstond,  to  folow  them  as
a  rule,  but  aftur  theyr  owne  lyberty  they  haue
authoryte  to  juge,  accordyng  as  they  are  instructyd
by  the  sergeantys,  and  as  the  cyrcumstance  of  the
cause  doth  them  moue.  And  thys  makyth  juge-
mentys and  processe  of  our  law  to  be  wythout
end  and  infynyte ;  thys  causyth  sutys  to  be  long
in  decysyon.  Therefor,  to  remedy  thys  mater
groundly,  hyt  were  necessary,  in  our  law,  to  vse
the  same  remedy  that  Justynyan  dyd  in  the  law  of
the  Romaynys,  to  bryng  thys  infynyte  processe  to
certayn  endys,  to  cut  away  thys  long  lawys,  and,
by  the  wysdome  of  some  polytyke  and  wyse  men,
instytute  a  few  and  bettur  lawys  and  ordynancys.
The  statutys  of  kyngys,  also,  be  ouer-many,  euen
as  the  constytutyonys  of  the  emperorys  were.
Wherefor  I  wold  wysch  that  al  thes  lawys  schold
be  brought  into  some  smal  nombur,  and  to  be
wryten  also  in  our  mother  tong,  or  els  put  into  the


Note  ii  43

Latyn,  to  cause  them  that  studye  the  cyuyle  law  of

our  reame  fyrst  to  begyn  of  the  Latyn  tong,  wherin

they myght also afturward lerne many  thyngys

to helpe thys professyon. Thys ys one thyng

necessary  to  the  educatyon  of  the  nobylyte,  the

wych  only  I  wold  schold  be  admyttyd  to  the  study

of  thys  law. Then  they  myght  study  also  the  lawys

of  the  Romaynys,  where  they  schold  see  al  causys

and controuersys decyded by rulys more con-

uenyent  to  the  ordur  of  nature  then  they  be  in

thys  barbarouse  tong  and  Old  French,  wych  now

seruyth  to  no  purpos  els. Thys,  Mastur  Lvpset,  ys

a  grete  blote  in  our  pollycy,  to  see  al  our  law  and

commyn dyscyplyne wryten in thys barbarouse

langage,  wych,  aftur  when  the  youth  hath  lernyd,

seruyth  them  to  no  purpos  at  al ;  and,  besyde  that,

to  say  the  truth,  many  of  the  lawys  themselfys  be

also  barbarouse  and  tyrannycal,  as  you  haue  before

hard. [Here  follows  an  attack  on  primogeniture

and entail.] The wych al by  thys one  remedy  Reception  of

schold be amendvd and correct, yf we ™VZ^

induce the hedys of  our cuntrey to admyt the

same  : that  ys,  to  receyue  the  cyuyle  law  of  the

Romaynys, the wych ys now the commyn law

almost  of  al  Chrystyan  natyonys. The  wych  thyng

vndowtydly  schold  be  occasyon  of  infynyte  gudness

in  the  ordur  of  our  reame,  the  wych  I  coud  schow

you  manyfestely,  but  the  thyng  hyt  selfe  ys  so  open

and  playn,  that  hyt  nedyth  no  declaratyon  at  al ;

for  who  ys  so  blynd  that  seth  not  the  grete  schame

to our natyon, the grete infamy and rote that


44  Note  ii

remeynyth  in  vs,  to  be  gouernyd  by  the  lawys
gyuen  to  vs  of  such  a  barbarouse  natyon  as  the
Normannys  be?  Who  ys  so  fer  from  rayson  that
consyderyth  not  the  tyranycal  and  barbarouse  in-
stytutionys,  infynyte  ways  left  here  among  vs,
whych  al  schold  be  wypt  away  by  the  receyuyng
of  thys  wych  we  cal  the  veray  cyuyle  law  ;  wych  ys
vndowtydly  the  most  auncyent  and  nobyl  monu-
ment of  the  Romaynys  prudence  and  pollycy,  the
wych  be  so  wryte  wyth  such  grauyte,  that  yf  Nature
schold  herselfe  prescrybe  partycular  meanys  wher-
by  mankynd  schold  obserue  hyr  lawys,  I  thynke
sche  wold  admyt  the  same  :  specyally,  yf  they  were,
by  a  lytyl  more  wysedome,  brought  to  a  lytyl  bettur
ordur  and  frame,  wych  myght  be  sone  downe  and
put  in  effect.  And  so  ther  aftur  that,  yf  the  no-
bylyte were  brought  vp  in  thys  lawys  vndoubtydly
our  cuntrey  wold  schortly  be  restoryd  to  as  gud
cyuylyte  as  there  ys  in  any  other  natyon ;  ye,  and
peradventure  much  bettur  also.  For  though  thes
lawys  wych  I  haue  so  praysyd  be  commyn  among
them,  yet,  bycause  the  nobylyte  ther  commynly
dothe  not  exercyse  them  in  the  studys  thereof,  they
be  al  applyd  to  lucur  and  gayne,  bycause  the
popular  men  wych  are  borne  in  pouerty  only  doth
exercyse  them  for  the  most  parte,  wych  ys  a  grete
ruyne  of  al  gud  ordur  and  cyuylyte.  Wherefor,
Master  Lvpset,  yf  we  myght  bryng  thys  ij.  thyngys
to  effecte — that  ys  to  say,  to  haue  the  cyuyle  law
of  the  Romaynys  to  be  the  commyn  law  here  of
Englond  with  vs  ;  and,  secondary,  that  the  nobylyte


Note  ii  45

in  theyr  youth  schold  study  commynly  therin — I
thynk  we  schold  not  nede  to  seke  partycular
remedys  for  such  mysordurys  as  we  haue  notyd
before ;  for  surely  thys  same  publyke  dyscyplyne
schold  redresse  them  lyghtly ;  ye,  and  many  other
mow,  the  wych  we  spake  not  yet  of  at  al.'

Lupset  thereupon  objects  that,  seeing  we  have  so
many  years  been  governed  by  our  own  law,  it  will
be  hard  to  bring  this  reform  to  pass.  Pole  replies
that  the  goodness  of  a  prince  would  bring  it  to  pass
quickly :  '  the  wych  I  pray  God  we  may  onys  see.'

The  Pole  of  the  Dialogue  wished  to  make  the  Pole  and  the
power  to  entail  lands  a  privilege  of  the  nobility.  g^J^f**
A  project  of  this  kind  had  been  in  the  air :  perhaps
in  King  Henry's  mind.  See  Letters  and  Papers,
Henry  VI I L,  vol.  iv.,  pt.  2,  p.  2693  (A.D.  1529):
'Draft  bill... proposing  to  enact  that  from  I  Jan.
next  all  entails  be  annulled  and  all  possessions  be
held  in  fee  simple... The  Act  is  not  to  affect  the
estates  of  noblemen  within  the  degree  of  baron.'
This  is  one  of  the  proposals  for  restoring  the  king's
feudal  revenue  which  lead  up  to  the  Statute  of
Uses :  an  Act  whose  embryonic  history  has  not  yet
been  written,  though  Dr  Stubbs  has  thrown  out
useful  hints.  (Seventeen  Lectures,  ed.  3,  p.  321.)

When Pole  left England in 1532 he went to  Starkey's  legal
Avignon  where  Alciato  had  lately  been  lecturing  studies-
and  became  for  a  short  while  a  pupil  of  Giovanni
Francesco Ripa (Zimmermann, Kardinal Pole,
1893,  p. 51),  who  was  both  canonist  and legist.
Whether  at  any  time  Pole  made  a  serious  study  of


46


Notes  ii — 13


The

Reception
in  Germany.


Modern


the  civil  law  I  do  not  know.  In  1534  Pole  and
Starkey  were  together  at  Padua  ;  Pole  was  studying
theology,  Starkey  the  civil  law.  Starkey  in  a  letter
says  '  Francis  Curtius  is  dead,  to  the  grief  of  those
who  follow  the  doctrine  of  Bartholus.'  Perhaps  we
may  infer  from  this  that  Starkey  was  in  the
camp  of  the  Anti-Bartolists  (Letters  and  Papers,
Henry  VII L,  vol.  vn.,  p.  331).  In  1535  he  says
that  he  has  been  studying  the  civil  law  in  order  to
form  'a  better  judgment  of  the  politic  order  and
customs  used  in  our  country'  (Ibid.  vol.  vm.,
p.  80).

12  For  a  general  view  of  the  Reception  in  Germany
with  many  references  to  other  books,  see  Schroder,
Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte,  ed.  2,  pp.  743  ff. ;  ed.  3,
pp.  767  ff.

13  For  a  moderate  defence  of  the  Reception,  see
Windscheid,  Pandektenrecht,  ed.  7,  vol.  I.,  pp.  23  ff.
(§  10). Ihering  appeals  from  Nationality  to  Uni-
versality (cosmopolitanism)  ; Geist  des  romischen
Rechts,  ed.  5,  vol.  I.,  p.  12  : 'So  lange  die  Wissen-
schaft  sich  nicht  entschliesst,  dem  Gedanken  der
Nationalitat den der Universalitat als gleich-
berechtigten  zur  Seite  zu  setzen,  wird  sie  weder  im
Stande  sein die  Welt, in  der  sie  selber  lebt,  zu
begreifen,  noch  auch  die  geschehene  Reception  des
romischen  Rechts  wissenschaftlich  zu  rechtfertigen.'
The  following  sentences  may,  I  believe,  be  taken
as  typical  of  much  that  has  been  written  of  late


Notes  13,  14  47

years.  Brunner,  Grundzitge  der  deutschen  Rechts-
geschichte,  1901,  p.  231  :  'Allein  was  stets  Tadel
und  Vorwurf  hervorrufen  wird,  ist  die  Art,  wie  die
Rezeption...durchgefiihrt  wurde.  Ein  nationales
Ungliick  war  jenes  engherzige  Ignorieren  des
deutschen  Rechts,  jenes  geistlose  und  rein  aus-
serliche  Aufpfropfen  romischer  Rechtssatze  auf
einheimische  Verhaltnisse,  die  Unkenntnis  des
Gegensatzes  zwischen  diesen  und  dem  romischen
Rechte,  welche  taub  machte  gegen  die  Wahrheit,
dass  kein  Volk  mit  der  Seele  eines  anderen  zu
denken  vermag.'

14  Injunctions  of  1 535,  Stat.  Acad.  Cantab,  p.  134 :  Public  reading
'  Quare  volumus  ut  deinceps  nulla  legatur  palam  et
publice  lectio  per  academiam  vestram  totam  in
iure  canonico  sive  pontificio  nee  aliquis  cuiuscunque
conditionis  homo  gradum  aliquem  in  studio  illius
iuris  pontificii  suscipiat  aut  in  eodem  inposterum
promoveatur  quovis  modo.'  See  Mullinger,  Hist.
Univ.  Camb.  vol.  I.,  p.  630 ;  Cooper,  Annals  of
Cambridge,  vol.  I.,  p.  375  ;  and  for  Oxford,  Ellis,
Original  Letters,  Ser.  II.,  vol.  II.,  p.  60.  In
September  1535  Legh  and  Ap  Ryce  declare  that
the  canon  laws  are  '  profligate  out  of  this  realm.'
(Letters  and  Papers,  Henry  VIIL,  vol.  IX.,  p.  138.)

Despite  a  doubt  suggested  by  Stubbs  (Seventeen
Lectures,  ed.  3,  p.  368),  I  cannot  believe  that  the
slightest  hint  of  a  degree  in  canon  law  lurks  at
Cambridge  in  the  title  '  Legum  Doctor'  (LL.D.):
not  even  'a  shadowy  presentment  of  the  double


48  Notes  14—16

honour.'  See  E.  C.  Clark,  Cambridge  Legal  Studies,
1888,  pp.  56  ff.,  where  that  title  is  well  explained.
On  the  continent  a  settled  usage  contrasted
the  doctores  legum  and  the  doctores  decretorum.
See  e.g.  Stintzing,  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Rechts-
wissenschaft,  vol.  I.,  p.  25  :  'In  Italien  hatten  die
Legisten  und  Decretisten  verschiedene  Schulen
gebildet.  In  Deutschland  waren  sie  zwar  zu  einer
Facultat  vereinigt,  bildeten  jedoch  lange  Zeit  zwei
getrennte  Abtheilungen,  von  denen  jede  ihre  eigenen
akademischen  Grade  ertheilte.  Neben  einander
erscheinen  die  Doctores  Legum  und  Doctores  De-
cretorum, bis  seit  dem  Anfang  des  16.  Jahrhunderts
diese  Scheidung  schwindet  und  die  Doctores  utrius-
que  iuris  immer  haufiger  und  endlich  zur  Regel
werden.'

Sir  T.  Smith.  u  See  Mr  Pollard's  life  of  Smith  in  Diet.  Nat.
Biog.  Some  important  facts,  especially  about  his
ordination,  were  revealed  by  J.  G.  Nichols,  in
Archaeologia,  xxxvin.  98-127.

Smith  and  16  Smith  says  that  when  he  first  became  a  member

°f  the  senate  at  Cambridge  he  bought  the  Digest
and  Code  and  certain  works  of  Alciatus,  Zasius
and  Ferrarius.  (See  Mullinger,  History  of  the
University  of  Cambridge,  vol.  II.,  p.  130.)  Ferrarius
is,  I  suppose,  Arnaud  Ferrier,  the  master  of
Cujas.  Mr  Mullinger  (p.  126)  suggests  that  the
Spaniard  Ludovico  Vives  while  resident  at  Oxford
may  have  propagated  dissatisfaction  with  the  tradi-
tional teaching  of  Roman  law.


Notes  17,  1  8  49

17  Select  Cases  in  the  Court  of  Requests  (Selden  The  Court
Society),  1898,  p.  cxxiii. Mr  Leadam's  introduction  *f  &*$«****.
to  this  volume  contains  a  great  deal  of  new  and
valuable  matter  concerning  this  important  court.

The  title  of  the  'masters  of  requests'  seems
certainly  to  come  hither  from  France.  Just  at  this
time  there  was  a  good  deal  of  borrowing  in  these
matters  :  witness  the  title  of  the  '  secretaries  of
state,'  which,  it  is  said,  spreads  outwards  from
Spain  to  make  the  tour  of  the  world.

18  Of  Smith's  two  orations there  is  a  copy  in  Smith's


Camb.  Univ.  Libr.  Baker  MSS.  XXXVH.  394,  414.  t

orations.
Mr  Mullinger  (Hist.  Univ.  Cambr.,  vol.  II.,  p.  127)

has  given  an  excellent  summary.  The  following
passage  is  that  in  which  the  Professor  approaches
the  question  whether  in  England  there  is  a  career
open  to  the  civilian.  He  has  been  saying  that  we
ought  not  to  study  merely  for  the  sake  of  riches.
'Tamen  si  qui  sint  qui  hoc  requirant,  sunt  archiva
Londini,  sunt  pontificia  fora,  forum  est  praefecti
quoque  classis,  in  quibus  proclamare  licet  et  vocem
vendere  ;  est  scriptura  ;  singuli  pontifices  cancellarios
suos  habent  et  officiales  et  commissarios,  qui  propter
civilis  et  pontificii  iuris  professionem  in  hunc  locum
accipiuntur.'  The  orator  proceeds  to  ask  whether
there  is  any  youth  who  ungratefully  thinks  that
proficiency  in  legal  science  will  not  find  an  adequate
reward.  '  In  quo  regno  aut  in  cuius  regis  imperio
tarn  stulta  ilium  opinio  tenebit?  In  hoccine  nobi-
lissimi  atque  invictissimi  nostri  principis  Henrici
M.  4


5<D  Note  1 8


octavi  regno,  cuius  magnificentia  in  bonas  literas,
studiumque  in  literates,  omnium  omnis  memoriae
principum  facta  meritaque  superavit,  cuius  ingentia
in  academias  beneficia,  licet  nulla  unquam  tacebit
posteritas,  tamen  omni  celebratione  maiora  re-
perientur.  Cum  strenue  laboraveris  et  periculum
ingenii  tui  feceris,  teque  non  lusisse  operam  sed
dignum  aliquo  operae  precio  et  honore  ostenderis,
curdejiciesanimum?  Cur  desperatione  conflictabis?
Cur  de  tanto  fautore  ingeniorum,  tarn  insigni  bonae
indolis  exploratore,  tarn  potenti  Rege,  tarn  munifico,
tarn  liberali  et  egregio  amatore  suorum  demisse
viliterque  sentias?'

Diplomacy  There  follows  much  more  flattery  of  the  king  as

and  the  civil  r. . ,  i  • j <  T • -j

law  a  patron  of  learning  of  every  kind. luns  quidem

civilis  consulti  facultas  in  hac  republica  cum  ad
multos  usus  pernecessaria  est,  turn  a  principe
nostro  nequaquam  negligi  aut  levem  haberi,  vel  hoc
argumento  esse  potest,  quod  tarn  amplo  planeque
regio  stipendio  et  meam  hie  apud  vos  mediocritatem
et  alium  Oxonii  disertum  ac  doctum  virum  ius  hoc
civile  praelegere  profiterique  voluit.'  And  the  study
of  the  civil  law  is  the  high  road  to  diplomatic  service.
4  Ius  vero  civile  sic  est  commune  ut  cum  ex  Anglia
discesseris,  nobiles,  ignobiles,  docti,  indocti,  sacer-
dotes  etiam  ac  monachi  cum  aliquod  specimen
eruditionis  videri  volunt  exhibuisse,  nihil  fere  aliud
perstrepunt  quam  quod  ex  hoc  iure  civili  et  ponti-
ficio  sit  depromptum.'  The  king  has  wisely
employed  civilians  in  his  many  legations.  There
follow  compliments  paid  to  Stephen  Gardiner,


Note  1 8


Thomas  Thirlby,  William  Paget,  Thomas  Wrio-
thesley,  and  Thomas  Legh.  On  the  whole,  the
professor  can  hold  out  to  his  pupils  the  prospect  of
diplomatic  employment,  of  masterships  in  the
chancery  ('sunt  archiva  Londini'),  of  practice  in
the  ecclesiastical  courts  and  the  court  of  admiralty,
and  besides  this  they  are  to  remember  that  the
king  is  a  great  patron  of  learning.  I  do  not  see
any  hint  that  knowledge  of  Roman  law  will  help  a
man  at  the  bar  of  the  ordinary  English  courts.

For  more  of  the  -attempt  to  put  new  life  into  the  The  rewards
study  of  Roman  law  at  Cambridge,  see  Mullinger,  for  c™lians-
op.  tit.,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  132  ff.  Though  Somerset
desired  to  see  a  great  civil  law  college  which
should  be  a  nursery  for  diplomatists,  the  Edwardian
or  Protestant  Reformation  of  the  church  was  in
one  way  very  unfavourable  to  the  study  of  the
civil  law.  Bishoprics  and  deaneries  were  thence-
forth reserved  for  divines,  and  thus  what  had  been
the  prizes  of  his  profession  were  placed  beyond  the
jurist's  reach.  Dr  Nicholas  Wotton  (d.  1567),  dean
of  Canterbury  and  York,  may  be  regarded  as  one
of  the  last  specimens  of  an  expiring  race.  Men
who  were  not  professionally  learned,  men  like
Sir  Francis  Bryan  (d.  1550)  and  Sir  Thomas  Wyatt
(d.  1542),  had  begun  to  compete  with  the  doctors
for  diplomatic  missions  and  appointments.  Also
the  chancellorship  of  the  realm  had  come  within
the  ambition  of  the  common  lawyer,  and  (though
Bishop  Goodrich  may  be  one  instance  to  the
,  contrary)  the  policy  which  would  commit  the  great

4—2


Notes  18—20


seal  to  the  hands  of  a  prelate  was  the  policy  which
would  resist  or  reverse  ecclesiastical  innovations.
Even  the  mastership  of  the  rolls,  which  had  been
held  by  doctors  of  Padua  and  Bologna,  fell  to
the  common  lawyers.  Thomas  Hannibal,  master
of  the  rolls  (1523 — 1527),  must,  one  would  think,
have  been  an  Italian,  as  were  the  king's  Latin
secretaries  Andrea  Ammonio  and  Pietro  Vannes.


The  heathenry  19  See  Janssen,  Geschichte  des  deiitschen  Volkes,
of  the  Digest.  yoj  ^  pp  ^j — ^OI>  where  the  cry  of  '  heathenry  ! '
is  raised  against  the  civil  law.  Janssen's  attempt
to  praise  the  canon  law  as  radically  Germanic
while  blaming  the  'absolutistic'  tendencies  of  the
civil  law  seems  strange.  Was  not  the  canon  law,
with  its  pope,  qui  omnia  iura  habet  in  scrinio
pectoris  sttt,  absolutistic  enough?


Wyclifon

English  and
Roman  law.


20  \Vyclif,  Tractatns  de  officio  regis,  Wyclif
Society,  1887,  pp.  56,  193,  237,  250:  'Leges  regni
Anglic  excellunt  leges  imperiales  cum  sint  pauce
respectu  earum,  quia  supra  pauca  principia  relin-
quunt  residuum  epikerie  [  =  e7rteiKfta]  sapientum...
Non  credo  quod  plus  viget  in  Romana  civilitate
subtilitas  racionis  sive  iusticia  quam  in  civilitate
Anglicana...Non  pocius  est  homo  clericus  sive
philosophus  in  quantum  est  doctor  civilitatis  Ro-
mane  quam  in  quantum  est  iusticiarius  iuris  Angli-
cani...Unde  videtur  quod  si  rex  Anglie  non
permitteret  canonistas  vel  civilistas  ad  hoc  sus-
tentari  de  suis  elemosinis  vel  patrimonio  crucifixi


Note  20  53

ut  studeant  tales  leges... non  dubium  quin  clerus
foret  utilior  sibi  et  ad  ecclesiasticam  promocionem
humilior  ex  noticia  civilitatis  proprie  quam  ex
noticia  civilitatis  duplicis  aliene.'  By  'the  patri-
mony of  the  crucified'  Wyciif  means  ecclesiastical
revenues,  which  some  of  the  bishops  have  been
using  in  the  endowment  of  legal  studies  at  the
universities  :  e.g.  Bishop  Bateman  at  Cambridge.

Wyciif,  Select  English Works,  ed.  Arnold,  vol.  Wyciif  and

III.,  p.  326  :  *  It  were  more  profit  boj>e  to  body  and  the  law  °f the

emperor.
soule  pat  cure  curatis  lerneden  and  taujten  many  of

pe  kyngis  statutis,  pan  lawe  of  pe  emperour.  For
oure  peple  is  bounden  to  )>e  kyngis  statutis  and  not
to  pe  emperours  lawe,  but  in  as  moche  as  it  is
enclosid  in  Goddis  hestis.  panne  moche  tresour
and  moch  tyme  of  many  hundrid  clerkis  in  unyver-
site  and  opere  placis  is  foule  wastid  aboute  bookis
of  pe  emperours  lawe  and  studie  about  hem.... It
semep  pat  curatis  schulden  rapere  lerne  and  teche
pe  kyngis  statutis,  and  namely  pe  Crete  Chartre,
pan  pe  emperours  lawe  or  myche  part  of  the  popis.
For  men  in  oure  revvme  ben  bounden  to  obeche  to
pe  kyng  and  his  ri3tful  lawes  and  not  so  to  pe
emperours  ;  and  pei  my3tten  wonder  wel  be  savyd,
pou3  many  lawes  of  pe  pope  had  nevere  be  spoken,
in  pis  world  ne  pe  topere.'

Wyciif,  Unprinted  English  Works,  Early  English  Wyciif  and
Text  Society,  1880,  p.  157:  <pe  fyue  and  twentij*^9"*1'"'*  law'
errour :  pei  chesen  newe  lawis  maad  of  synful  men
and  worldly  and  couetyse  prestis  and  clerkis... for
now hepenne mennus lawis and worldly clerkis


54  Notes  20,  21


statutis  ben  red  in  vnyuersitees,  and  curatis  lernen
hem  faste  wij?  grete  desire,  studie  and  cost.../^^.
p.  184  :...lawieris  maken  process  bi  sotilte  and
cauyllacions  of  lawe  cyule,  J?at  is  moche  he^ene
mennus  lawe,  and  not  accepten  the  forme  of  \>e
gospel,  as  3if  }?e  gospel  were  no  so  good  as  paynymes
lawe.'  It  is  interesting  to  see  Janssen's  denuncia-
tion of  Roman  law  as  Pagan  thus  forestalled  by  the
great  heretic,  in  whose  eyes  the  Decretals  were  but
little,  if  at  all,  better  than  the  Digest.

21  For  Antonio  Agustin  (born  1517,  bishop  of
Alife  1556,  bishop  of  Lerida  1561,  archbishop  of
Tarragona  1576,  died  1586)  see  Schulte,  Geschichte
der  Quellen  und  Literatur  des  canonischen  Rechts,
vol.  III.,  p.  723  ;  Maasen,  Geschichte  der  Quellen
des  canonischen  Rechts,  vol.  I.,  pp.  xix  ff.  His  stay
in  England  is  attested  in  the  Venetian  Calendars,
1S55—  6>  PP-  20,  24,  32,  34,  56,  1 66.  See  also  Ibid.,
1556 — 7,  p.  1335.  See  also  the  funeral  oration  by
And.  Schott  suffixed  to  Ant.  Augustini  De  emenda-
tione  Gratiani  dialogorum  libri  duo,  Par.  1607,
p.  320:  'lulius  tertius  P.  M....adeo  Antonium
dilexit  ut  et  intimis  consiliis  adhibuerit,  legatumque
summa  cum  auctoritate  in  Britanniam  insulam  opi-
bus  florentissimam  miserit,  cum  Rex  vere  Catholicus
Philippus  secundus  Mariam  reginam,  Catholicorum
regum  Ferdinandi  et  Isabellae  neptem,duxit  uxorem.
...Anno  1555  revertit  ex  Anglia  Romam  Augustinus.'
Apparently  he  was  sent,  not  merely  in  order  that  he
might  congratulate  Philip  and  Mary,  but  also  that


Notes  21—25  55

'tanquam  iurisconsultus  legato  adesset'  (Schulte,
op.  tit.,  p.  724).  He  is  charged  by  modern  historians
with  not  having  spoken  plainly  all  that  he  knew
about  the  origin  of  the  Pseudo-Isidorian  decretals.
England  may  have  contributed  a  little  towards  the
explosion  of  the  great  forgery  by  means  of  books
that  were  lent  to  the  Magdeburg  Centuriators  by
Queen  Elizabeth  and  Abp.  Parker.  See  Foreign
Calendar,  1561—2,  pp.  117 — 9.

22  See  Mr  Pollard's  life  of  Story  in  Diet.  Nat.  B.John  Story.
Biog. See also Dyer's Reports,  f. 300. On his
arraignment for  high treason Story  ineffectually

pleaded  that  he  had  become  a  subject  of  the  king
of  Spain.

23  See  Stintzing,  Ulrich  Zasius,  pp.  216  ff.

24  Ranke,  History  of  the  Reformation  in  Germany  Zasius  and
(transl.  Austin),  vol.  II.,  pp.  97—8.

25  The Nihil hoc ad edictum praetoris ! is  The  French
currently ascribed to Cujas, but the ultimate
authority for the story I do not know. See
Brissaud,  Histoire  du  droit  fran^ais,  p.  355: 'La

science  la'ique  ddclarait  par  la  bouche  d'un  de
ses  plus  grands  repre'sentants  qu'elle  n'e'tait  plus
1'humble  servante  de  la  the'ologie  ;  elle  affirmait  sa
secularisation.'  It  seems  that  Cujas  ('  wie  beinahe
alle  Rechtsgelehrten  seiner  Zeit')  at  first  sided  with
the  Reformers,  but  that  he  afterwards,  at  least
outwardly,  made  his  peace  with  the  Catholic  church
(Spangenberg,  Jacob  Cujas  und  seine  Zeitgenossen,


Notes  25 — 27


Leipz.  1822,  p.  162  ;  Haag,  La  France  protestante,
ed.  2,  vol.  iv.,  col.  957 — 970).  Doneau  was  a
Calvinist ;  driven  from  France  by  Catholics  and
from  Heidelberg  by  Lutherans,  he  went  to  Leyden
and  ultimately  to  Altdorf.  Hotman  was  a  Calvinist,
intimately  connected  with  the  church  of  Geneva.
Baudouin  was  compelled  to  leave  France  for
Geneva,  whence  he  went  to  Strassburg  and  Heidel-
berg ;  but  he  quarrelled  with  Calvin  and  was
accused  of  changing  his  religion  six  times.  Charles
Du  Moulin  also  had  been  an  exile  at  Tubingen.
It  is  said  that  after  a  Calvinistic  stage  he  became
a  Lutheran  ;  on  his  death-bed  he  returned  to
Catholicism  :  such  at  least  was  the  tale  told  by
Catholics.  (See  Brodeau,  La  vie  de  Mais  f  re  Charles
Du  Molin,  Paris,  1654;  Haag,  La  France  protes-
tante, ed.  2,  vol.  V.,  col.  783 — 789.)  To  say  the  least,
he  had  been  'ultra-gallican.'  (Schulte,  Geschichte
der  Quellen  des  canonischen  Rechts,  vol.  iv.,  p.  251.)
Of  Le  Douaiin  also  it  is  said  'il  etait  reTormd  de
cceur5  (La  France  protestante,  ed.  2,  vol.  v.,  col.  508).
*  Die  grosse  Mehrzahl  der  hervorragenden  Juristen
bekannte  sich  mit  grosserer  oder  geringerer  Ent-
schiedenheit  zur  Partei  der  Hugenotten'  (Stintzing,
Geschichte  der  deutschen  Rechtsivissenschaft,  vol.  I.,
P-  372).

2(5  Stintzing, Geschichte der deutschen Rcchts-
ivissenschaft,  vol.  I.,  p.  284.

Francis  27  Elizabeth's  invitation  to  Hotman  is  mentioned

England™' *n  the  ^°S^um  °f  him  prefixed  to  his  Opera  (1599),


Note  27  57

p.  viii,  and  in  Dareste's  essay  (p.  5).  His  son  John
spent  some  time  at  Oxford.  In  1583  John  tells  his
father  that  at  Oxford  he  has  plenty  of  time  for
study  'quamvis  hie  miris  modis  frigeat  iuris  civilis
studium  et  mea  hac  in  re  opera  nemini  grata  possit
esse  in  Anglia '  (Hotomanorum  Epistolae,  Amstd.,
1620,  p.  325).  In  1584  John  was  consulted  along
with  Alberigo  Gentili  by  the  English  government
in  the  Mendoza  case  (Holland,  Albericus  Gentilis,
pp.  14,  15).  There  is  nothing  improbable  in  the
story  that  Francis  was  offered  a  post  at  Oxford.
He  must  have  been  well  known  to  Cecil.  In  1562
he  was  active  in  bringing  Conde  into  touch  with
Elizabeth  and  so  in  promoting  the  expedition  to
Havre.  Conde's  envoy  brought  to  Cecil  a  letter
of  introduction  from  Hotman  (Foreign  Calendar,
1561 — 2,  p.  601).  Baudouin  also  at  this  time  was
making  himself  useful  to  the  English  government.
(See  e.g.  Foreign  Calendar,  1558 — 9,  p.  173;  1561 — 2,
pp.  60,  367,  454,  481,  510.)  It  has  been  said  that
Queen  Elizabeth  spoke  of  Charles  Du  Moulin  as
her  kinsman  (Brodeau,  Vie  de  C.  Du  Molin,  p.  4).
Whether  in  the  pedigree  of  the  Boleyns  there  is
any  ground  for  this  story  I  do  not  know.  See  La
France  protestante,  ed.  2,  vol.  v.,  col.  783.  Sir
Thomas  Craig,  who  is  an  important  figure  in  the
history  of  Scotch  law,  sat  at  the  feet  of  Baudouin,
and  Edward  Henryson,  who  in  1566  became  a  lord
of  session,  had  been  a  professor  at  Bourges  (Diet.
Nat.  Biog.\


Notes  28,  29


Francis
Hotman  and
Reman  law.


Coke  and
Hotman.


8  The  Epistre  adresste  au  tygre  de  la  France,  a
violent  invective  against  the  Cardinal  of  Lorraine,
still  finds  admirers  among  students  of  French  prose.
Apparently  Hotman  would  have  been  the  last  man
to  preach  a  Reception  of  Roman  law  in  England.
Being  keenly  alive  to  the  faults  of  Justinian's  books,
he  resisted  the  further  romanization  of  French  law,
demanded  a  national  code,  admired  the  English
limited  monarchy,  and  by  his  Franco-Gallia  made
himself  in  some  sort  the  ancestor  of  the  '  German-
ists.'  Some  of  these  '  elegant '  French  jurists  were
so  much  imbued  with  the  historical  spirit  that  in
their  hands  the  study  of  Roman  law  became  the
study  of  an  ancient  history.  The  following  words
cited  and  translated  by  Dareste  from  Baudouin
(Francois  Hotman,  p.  19)  have  a  wonderfully
modern  sound :  '  Ceux  qui  ont  e'tudie  le  droit
auraient  pu  trouver  dans  1'histoire  la  solution  de
bien  des  difficultes,  et  ceux  qui  ont  dcrit  1'histoire
auraient  mieux  fait  d'etudier  le  developpement  des
lois  et  des  institutions,  que  de  s'attacher  a  passer
en  revue  les  arme'es,  a  ddcrire  les  camps,  a  raconter
les  batailles,  k  compter  les  morts.'  *  Sine  historia
caecam  esse  iurisprudentiam,  disait  Baudouin : '
(Brissaud,  Histoire  dn  droit  franqais,  p.  349).

29  Coke,  Introductory  Letter  to  Part  10  of  the
Reports,  and  Preface  to  Coke  upon  Littleton  (First
Institute).  The  words  of  Hotman  which  moved
Coke  to  wrath  will  be  found  in  De  verbis  feudalibus
commentarius  (F.  Hotmani  Opera,  ed.  1599,  vol.  II.,


Note  29  59

p.  913)  s.v.  feodum.  Hotman  remarks  that  the
English  use  the  word  fee  (longissime  tamen  a
Langobardici  iuris  ratione  et  institute)  to  signify
'praedia  omnia  quae  perpetuo  iure  tenentur.'  He
then  adds  that  Stephanus  Pasquerius  (the  famous
Etienne  Pasquier)  had  given  him  Littleton's  book  :
'ita  incondite,  absurde  et  inconcinne  scriptum,  ut
facile  appareat  verissimum  esse  quod  Polydorus
Virgilius  in  Anglica  Historia  de  iure  Anglicano
testatus  est,  stultitiam  in  eo  libro  cum  malitia  et
calumniandi  studio  certare.'  To  a  foreign  'feudist'
Littleton's  book  would  seem  absurd  enough,  because
in  England  the  feudum  had  become  the  general
form  in  which  all  land-ownership  appeared.  Brun-
ner  (Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte,  vol.  II.,  p.  11)  puts
this  well  :  'Wo  jedes  Grundeigentum  sich  in  Lehn
verwandelt,  wird  das  Lehn,  wie  die  Entwicklung
des  englischen  Rechtes  zeigt,  schliesslich  zum
Begrifif  des  Grundeigentums.'

I  have  not  found  in  Polydore  Virgil's  History  Polydore
anything  about  Littleton.  There  is  a  passage
however  in  lib.  IX.  (ed.  Basil.  1556,  p.  154)  in
which  he  denounces  the  unjust  laws  imposed  by
William  the  Conqueror  and  (so  he  says)  still
observed  in  his  own  day:  'Non  possum  hoc  loco
non  memorare  rein  tametsi  omnibus  notam,  admi-
ratione  tamen  longe  dignissimam,  atque  dictu
incredibilem  :  eiusmodi  namque  leges  quae  ab
omnibus  intelligi  deberent,  erant,  ut  etiam  nunc
sunt,  Normanica  lingua  scriptae,  quam  neque  Galli
nee  Angli  recte  callebant.'  Among  the  badges  of


60  Notes  29 — 31


Norman  iniquity  is  trial  by  jury,  which  Polydore
cannot  find  in  the  laws  of  Alfred.  This  Italian
historiographer  may  well  be  speaking  what  was
felt  by  many  Englishmen  in  Henry  VIII's  day
when  he  holds  up  to  scorn  and  detestation  'illud
terribile  duodecim  virorum  iudicium.'  Fisher  and
More  were  tried  by  jury.

Albcrigo  so  por  Gentili  see  Holland,  Inaugural  Lecture,

1874,  and  Diet.  Nat.  Biog.  For  his  attack  on  canon
law  see  De  nuptiis,  lib.  I.,  c.  19.  For  his  quarrel
with  the  'elegant'  Frenchmen,  see  De  tun's  interpre-
tibus  dialogi  sex.  The  defenders  of  the  new  learning
and  the  inos  Gallicus,  as  it  was  called,  threw  at  their
adversaries  the  word  '  barbarian ' ;  the  retort  of  the
conservative  upholders  of  the  mos  Italicus  was
'mere  grammarian.'  By  expelling  such  men  as
the  Gentilis,  Italy  forfeited  her  pre-eminence  in
the  world  of  legal  study.  Nevertheless  it  is  said
that  both  in  France  and  Germany  the  practical
Roman  law  of  the  courts  was  for  a  long  time  the
law  of  the  'Bartolist'  tradition.  Esmein  (Histoire
du  droit  fran^ais,  ed.  2,  p.  776)  says  :  'Cujas  exer^a
sur  le  developpement  des  theories  de  droit  remain
suivies  en  France  une  action  beaucoup  moins
puissante  que  Du  Moulin,  et  la  filiation  du  romaniste
Du  Moulin  n'est  pas  niable  :  par  la  forme  comme
par  le  fond,  c'est  le  dernier  des  grands  Bartolistes.'

Marsilianisni 31  Thomas  Starkey,  when  he  was  trying  to  win

"danfsm'1' Over  ReSinald Pole  to Henry's  side,  wrote  thus  :

'Thes  thyngs  I  thynke  schal  be  somewhat  in  your


Note  31  6 1

mynd  confermyd  by  the  redyng  of  Marsilius,  whome
I  take,  though  he  were  in  style  rude,  yet  to  be  of
grete  iugement,  and  wel  to  set  out  thys  mater,  both
by  the  authoryte  of  scripture  and  good  reysonys
groundyd  in  phylosophy,  and  of  thys  I  pray  you
send  me  your  iugement.'  (Starkey's  England,  Early
Engl.  Text  Soc.  1878,  p.  xxv.)  Chapuis  (the  imperial
ambassador  at  Henry's  court)  to  Charles  V,  3  Jan.
1534  (Letters  and  Papers  of  Henry  VI 77.,  vol.  vn.,
p.  6) :  '  The  little  pamphlet  composed  by  the
Council,  which  I  la-tely  sent  to  your  Majesty,  is
only  a  preamble  and  prologue  of  others  more  im-
portant which  are  now  being  printed.  One  is
called  Defensorium  Pads,  written  in  favour  of
the  emperor  Loys  of  Bavaria  against  apostolic
authority.  Formerly  no  one  dared  read  it  for  fear
of  being  burnt,  but  now  it  is  translated  into  English
so  that  all  the  people  may  see  and  understand  it.'
William  Marshall  to  Thomas  Cromwell  (Ibid.,
p.  178):  'Whereas  you  promised  to  lend  me  ^20
towards  the  printing  of  Dcfensor  Pacts,  which  has
been  translated  this  twelve-month,  but  kept  from
the  press  for  lack  of  money,  in  trust  of  your  offer  I
have  begun  to  print  it.  I  have  made  an  end  of  the
Gift  of  Constantine  and  of  Erasmus  upon  the  Creed.'
The  'Gift  of  Constantine'  must  be  the  famous
treatise  of  Laurentius  Valla.  The  translation  of
Marsilius  appeared  on  27  July,  1535  (Diet.  Nat.
Biog.  s.n.  William  Marshall).  In  October  twenty-
four  copies  had  been  distributed  among  the  Car-
thusians in  London  (Letters  and  Papers,  vol.  IX.,


62


Notes  31—33


The  Scotch
Protestants
and
Justinian.


p.  171).  In  1536  Marshall  complained  that  the
book  had  not  sold,  though  it  was  the  best  book  in
English  against  the  usurped  power  of  the  bishop  of
Rome  (Ibid.,  vol.  XL,  p.  542).  As  to  Byzantinism,
if  it  be  an  accident  it  is  a  memorable  accident  that
the  strongest  statement  of  King  Henry's  divinely
instituted  headship  of  the  church  occurs  in  a  statute
which  enables  unordained  doctors  of  the  civil  (not
canon)  law  to  exercise  that  plenitude  of  ecclesiastical
jurisdiction  which  God  has  committed  to  the  king
(Stat.  37  Hen.  VIII.,  c.  17).

32  Foreign  Calendar,  1558— 9,  p.  8.  This  seems
to  mean  that  the  normal  and  rightful  relation  of
church  to  state  is  that  which  is  to  be  discovered  in
Justinian's  books.  If  so,  'the  Protestants  of  Scot-
land' soon  afterwards  changed  their  opinions  under
the  teaching  of  Geneva  and  claimed  for  '  the  estate
ecclesiastical'  a  truly  medieval  independence.

The  Henridan  33  The  following  facts  are  taken  from  the  Die-
doctors  of  law.  tionary  of  National  Biography.  Cuthbert  Tunstall
(afterwards  bishop  of  Durham)  'graduated  LL.D.  at
Padua.'  Stephen  Gardiner  (afterwards  bishop  of
Winchester)  of  Trinity  Hall,  Cambridge,  'proceed-
ed doctor  of  the  civil  law  in  1520  and  of  the  canon
law  in  the  following  year.... In  1524  he  was  appointed
one  of  Sir  Robert  Rede's  lecturers  in  the  University.'
Edmund  Bonner  of  Broadgate  Hall,  Oxford,  'in  1519
he  took  on  two  successive  days  (12  and  13  June)  the
degrees  of  bachelor  of  civil  and  of  canon  law.. ..On
12  July,  1525,  he  was  admitted  doctor  of  civil  law.'


Note  33  63

Thomas  Thirlby  (afterwards  bishop  of  Ely)  of
Trinity  Hall,  Cambridge,  'graduated  bachelor  of
the  civil  law  in  1521... and  proceeded  doctor  of  the
civil  law  in  1528  and  doctor  of  the  canon  law  in
1530.'  Richard  Sampson  (afterwards  bishop  of
Lichfield)  of  Trinity  Hall,  Cambridge,  'proceeded
B.C.L.  in  1505.  Then  he  went  for  six  years  to
Paris  and  Sens  and  returning  proceeded  D.C.L.
in  1513.'  John  Clerk  (afterwards  bishop  of  Bath
and  Wells,  Master  of  the  Rolls),  'B.A.  of  Cambridge
1499  and  M.A.  1502,  studied  law  and  received  the
doctor's  degree  at  Bologna.'  Richard  Layton  (after-
wards dean  of  York)  '  was  educated  at  Cambridge,
where  he  proceeded  B.C.L.  in  1522  and  afterwards
LL.D.'  Thomas  Legh  of  King's  College  (?),  Cam-
bridge, 'proceeded  B.C.L.  in  1527  and  D.C.L.  in
1531.'  Instances  of  legal  degrees  obtained  in  foreign
universities  are  not  very  uncommon.  John  Taylor,
Master  of  the  Rolls  in  1527,  'graduated  doctor  of
law  at  some  foreign  university,  being  incorporated
at  Cambridge  in  1520  and  at  Oxford  in  1522.'
James  Denton,  dean  of  Lichfield,  proceeded  B.A.
in  1489  and  M.A.  in  1492  at  Cambridge.  'He
subsequently  studied  canon  law  at  Valencia  in
which  faculty  he  became  a  doctor  of  the  university
there.'  (For  an  earlier  instance,  that  of  Thomas
Alcock  of  Bologna,  see  Grace  Book  A,  Luard
Memorial,  p.  209.  There  are  other  instances  in
Boase,  Register  of  the  University  of  Oxford;  con-
sult index  under  Padua,  Bologna,  Paris,  Orleans,
Bourges,  Louvain.)


64  Notes  33—35

4  The  kings That  wonderful  divorce  cause,  which  shook  the
great  matter: world?  created  a  large  demand  for  the  sort  of  know.

ledge  that  the  university-bred  jurist  was  supposed
to  possess,  especially  as  a  great  effort  was  made
to  obtain  from  foreign  doctors  and  universities
opinions  favourable  to  the  king.  The  famous  Cam-
bridge '  Grecian '  Richard  Croke  was  employed  in
ransacking  Italian  libraries  for  the  works  of  Greek
theologians  and  in  taking  council  with  Hebrew
rabbis.  In  Italy,  France  and  Spain,  as  well  as  in
England,  almost  every  canonist  of  distinction,  from
the  celebrated  Philip  Decius  downwards,  must  have
made  a  little  money  out  of  that  law  suit,  for  the
emperor  also  wanted  opinions.

Papists  in  the  M  See  the  remarkable  paper  printed  in  Calendar
Inns  of  Court.  Of  jnner  Temple  Records,  vol.  I.,  p.  470;  also
Mr  Inderwick's  preface  pp.  1  ff.  In  1570  Lincoln's
Inn  had  not  been  exacting  the  oath  of  supremacy:
Black  Book,  vol.  I.,  pp.  369 — 372.  See  also  the
lives  of  Edmund  Plowden,  William  Rastell  and
Anthony  Browne  (the  judge)  in  Diet.  Nat.  Biog. :
and  for  Browne  see  also  Spanish  Calendar,  1558 —
67,  pp.  369,  640.

Sir  T.  Smith's  35  Smith,  Commonwealth  of  England,  ed.  1601,
'  Co**!***-  p  ^y  .  <  i  haue  declared  summarily  as  it  were  in  a
chart  or  map,  or  as  Aristotle  termeth  it  us  eV  TVTTUI
the  forme  and  maner  of  gouernment  of  England,
and  the  policy  therof,  and  set  before  your  eyes  the
principall  points  wherin  it  doth  differ  from  the  policy
or  gouernment  at  this  time  vsed  in  France,  Italy,


Notes  35—37


Spaine,  Germanic,  and  all  other  Countries,  which
doe  follow  the  ciuill  law  of  the  Romaines,  compiled
by  lustinian  into  his  pandects  and  code :  not  in  that
sort  as  Plato  made  his  commonwealth,  or  Xenophon
his  kingdome  of  Persia,  nor  as  Sir  Thomas  More
his  Vtopia,  beeing  fained  commonwealths,  such  as
neuer  was  nor  neuer  shall  be,  vaine  imaginations,
phantasies  of  Philosophers  to  occupie  the  time,  and
to  exercise  their  wits :  but  so  as  England  standeth,
&  is  gouerned  at  this  day  the  xxviij.  of  March.
Anno  1565.  in  the  -vij.  yeare  of  the  raigne  and
administration  thereof  by  the  most  vertuous  &
noble  Queene  Elizabeth,  daughter  to  King  Henry
the  eight,  and  in  the  one  and  fiftieth  yeare  of  mine
age,  when  I  was  Ambassadour  for  her  Maiestie,  in
the  Court  of  Fraunce,  the  Scepter  whereof  at  that
time  the  noble  Prince  and  of  great  hope  Charles
Maximilian  did  holde,  hauing  then  raigned  foure
yeares.'

36  Smith  to  Haddon,  6  Ap.  1565,  in  G.  Haddoni  Smith  writes
Orationes, Lond. 1567, pp. 302-7: '  nostrarum  wit'm<t  book'
legum  ne  unum  quidem  librum  mecum  attuli  hie

nee  habebam  iure  consultos  quos  consulerem.'  He
has  been  telling  how  he  wrote  The  Commonwealth
of  England.

37  From  the  time  of  Bracton  to  the  present  day  Roman  law  on
Englishmen  have  often  allowed  themselves  phrases

which  exaggerate  the  practical  prevalence  of  Roman
law  on  the  continent  of  Europe.  Smith,  for  instance,
who  had  been  in  many  parts  of  northern  France  and

M.  5


66  Note  37

was  a  learned  and  observant  man,  must  have  known
that  (to  use  Voltaire's  phrase)  he  often  changed
law  when  he  changed  horses  and  that  the  Estates
General  had  lately  been  demanding  a  unification  of
the  divergent  customs  (Viollet,  Histoire  du  droit
civil  franqais,  p.  202;  Planiol,  Droit  civil,  1900,
vol.  I.,  p.  1 6).  Germans,  who  know  what  an  attempt
to  administer  Roman  law  really  means,  habitually
speak  of  French  law  as  distinctively  un- Roman.
Thus  Rudolph  Sohm  (Frankisches  Recht  und
romisches  Recht,  Weimar,  1880,  p.  76):  'die  Ge-
setzbiicher  Napoleons  I.  zeigen,  dass  noch  heute
wenigstens  das  Privatrecht  und  Processrecht  Frank-
reichs  ein  Abkommling  nicht  des  romischen,  noch
des  italienischen,  sondern  des  frankischen  Rechtes
ist.'  So  Planiol  (op.  tit.,  vol.  I.,  p.  26):  'Deux
courants  se  sont  trouve's  en  presence  lors  de  1'uni-
fication  du  droit  franc,ais :  1'esprit  romain  et  les
traditions  coutumieres.  Ce  sont  ces  dernieres  qui
1'ont  emporte'.  Le  Code  a  i\.€  re'dige'  a  Paris,  en
plein  pays  coutumier  ;  les  conseillers  d'Etat  appar-
tenaient  en  majoritd  aux  provinces  septentrionales;
le  parlement  de  Paris  avait  eu  dans  1'ancien  droit
un  role  preponderant.  II  n'y  a  done  rien  d'dtonnant
a  voir  1'esprit  des  coutumes  prddominer  dans  le
Code  ;  le  contraire  eiit  i\.€  un  non-sens  historique/
Until  the  other  day  it  was,  I  believe,  a  common
remark  that  the  large  part  of  Germany  which  stood
under  the  French  code  either  in  a  translated  or
untranslated  form — and  this  part  contained  about
one-sixth  of  the  Empire's  population — was  the  part


Note  37  67

of  Germany  in  which  the  law  was  least  Roman  and
most  Germanic.  The  division  of  France  into  two
great  districts  was  not  equal :  before  the  acquisition
of  Elsass  from  Germany  'les  pays  de  droit  ^crit
comprenaient  a  peine  les  deux  cinquiemes  de  la
France'  (Planiol,  op.  dt.,  vol.  I.,  p.  11).  See  the
useful  map  in  Brissaud,  Histoire  du  droit  fran^ais^
p.  152.  Even  in  the  south  there  was  much  custom-
ary law.  A  famous  sentence  in  the  custumal  of
Bordeaux  placed  'the  written  law'  below  'natural
reason '  (Viollet,  op.  'at.,  p.  1 50).  Still  it  is  not  to
be  denied  that  a  slow  process  of  romanization —
very  different  from  the  catastrophic  Reception  in
Germany — went  on  steadily  for  some  five  or  six
centuries  ;  and  a  system  which  as  a  whole  seems
very  un- Roman  to  a  student  of  what  became  '  the
common  law '  of  Germany  may  rightly  seem  Roman
to  an  Englishman.  Francis  Bacon  knew  that  France
could  not  be  compendiously  described  as  a  country
governed  by  the  civil  law.  In  his  speech  on  the
Union  of  Laws  (Spedding,  Life  and  Letters^  vol.  in.,
p.  337)  he  accurately  distinguishes  *  Gascoigne,
Languedock,  Provence,  Dolphinie'  which  are
'  governed  by  the  letter  or  text  of  the  civil  law '
from  'the  Isle  of  France,  Tourayne,  Berry,  Anjou
and  the  rest,  and  most  of  all  Brittain  and  Nor-
mandy,' which  are  'governed  by  customs  which
amount  unto  a  municipal  law,  and  use  the  civil  law
but  only  for  grounds  and  to  decide  new  and  rare
cases.'  English  readers  should  at  least  know  the
doctrine,  strongly  advocated  in  modern  Germany,

5—2


68  Notes  37—40


that  the  private  law  which  was  developed  in  England
by  a  French-speaking  court  was  just  one  more
French  coutume.  Sohm,  Frdnkisches  Recht  und
romisches  Recht,  p.  69 :  'Die  Vorgeschichte  des
englischen  Rechts  von  heute  hat  nicht  in  England,
sondern  in  Nordfrankreich  ihre  Heimath...Stolz
kann  die  Lex  Salica  auf  die  zahlreichen  und  mach-
tigen  Rechte  blicken,  welche  sie  erzeugt  hat.'

38  Blackstone, Commentaries, vol. III.,  p.  149 ;
J.  H[oddesdon],  Tho.  Mori  Vita,  Lond.  1652,  p.  26.

39  Smith, Commonwealth^ ed. 1601, p. 141  :
'  wtthernam . .  .\s  in plaine  Dutch  and  in  our  olde
Saxon  language  ivyther  nempt?

Barbarous  40  Pollock,  First  Book  of  Jitrisprudence,  p.  283,

language^  from  Dyer's  Reports,  i88£,  in  the  notes  added  in
ed.  1688  :  '  Richardson,  ch.  Just,  de  C.  Bane,  al
Assises  at  Salisbury  in  Summer  1631.  fuit  assault
per  prisoner  la  condemne  pur  felony  que  puis  son
condemnation  ject  un  Brickbat  a  le  dit  Justice  que
narrowly  mist,  &  pur  ceo  immediately  fuit  indict-
ment drawn  per  Noy  envers  le  prisoner,  &  son
dexter  manus  ampute  &  fix  al  Gibbet  sur  que  luy
mesme  immediatment  hange  in  presence  de  Court/
In  France  the  Ordonnance  of  Villers-Cotterets
(1539)  decreed  that  the  judgments  of  the  French
courts  should  be  recorded  no  longer  in  Latin  but  in
French.  '  L'utilite  de  cette  innovation. ..se  com-
prend  assez  d'elle-meme.  On  dit  qu'un  motif  d'une
autre  nature,  1'inte'ret  des  belles-lettres,  ne  contribua


Notes  40 — 43  69


pas  moins  a  y  decider  le  roi  [Frar^ois  I],  cheque*
du  latin  barbare  qu'employaient  les  tribunaux.  Un
arret  rendu  en  ces  termes  :  Dicta  curia  debotavit  et
debotat  dictum  Colinum  de  sua  demanda,  fut,  dit  on,
ce  qui  entraina  la  suppression  du  latin  judiciaire.'
Henri  Martin,  Histoire  de  France,  vol.  vili.,  pp.
272 — 3  ;  see  also  Christie,  Etienne  Dolet,  ed.  2,
p.  424.

41  Ellis,  Original  Letters,  Ser.  II.,  vol.  II.,  p.  61,  The  fate  of
Dr  Layton  to  Cromwell  :  'We  have  sett  Dunce  in  Duns  Scotus'
Bocardo  and  have  utterly  banished  him  Oxforde  for

ever,  with  all  his  blynd  glosses,  and  is  now  made  a
common  servant  to  evere  man,  fast  nailede  up  upon
posts  in  all  common  howses  of  easement.'

42  Stat.  31  Hen.  VIII.,  cap.  8. Already  in  1535  The  English
Cromwell  reports  with  joy  an  opinion  obtained  from  Lex  Regia.
the  judges  to  the  effect  that  in  a  certain  event  the

king  might  issue  a  proclamation  which  would  be
'as  effective  as  any  statute'  (Letters  and  Papers,
Henry  VIIL,  vol.  vni.,  p.  411).

43  The story (with which we are familiar in  Civilians  in

England)  of  the  evolution  of  various  councils  and  councils  and

in  cotirts.
courts  from  an  ancient  Curia  Regis  seems  to  have

a  close  parallel  in  French  history  :  so  close  that
imitation  on  one  side  or  the  other  may  at  times  be
suspected.  After  the  .parlement  with  its  various
chambers  (which  answer  to  our  courts  of  common
law)  has  been  established,  the  royal  council  inter-
feres with  judicial  matters  in  divers  ways,  and


7O  Note  43

sections  of  the  council  become  tribunals  which
compete  with  the  parlement.  (See,  e.g.  Esmein,
Histoire  du  droit  franqais,  ed.  2,  pp.  4696°.,  and
the  pedigree  of  courts  and  councils  in  Lavisse  et
Rambaud,  Histoire  generate,  vol.  iv.,  p.  143  ;  also
the  pedigree  in  N.  Valois,  Le  conseil  du  roi  (1888),
p.  1 1  ;  and  Brissaud,  Histoire  du  droit  franqais,
pp.  8i6ff.)  In  Germany  the  doctors  of  civil  law
made  their  way  first  into  councils  and  then  into
courts.  'Die  fremdrechtlich  geschulten  Juristen
wurden  in  Deutschland  anfanglich  nur  in  Ver-
waltungssachen  verwendet.  Zur  Rechtsprechung
gelangten  sie  dadurch,  dass  die  Verwaltung  diese
an  sich  zog,  und  zwar  zuerst  am  Hofe  des  Konigs'
(Brunner,  Grundziige  der  deutschenRechtsgeschichte,
1901,  p.  227).  In  the  England  of  Henry  VIIl's  day
there  seems  no  little  danger  that  die  fremdrechtlich
geschulten  Jurhten,  of  whom  there  are  a  good  many
in  the  king's  service,  will  gain  the  upper  hand  in
the  new  courts  that  have  emerged  from  the  council,
and  will  proceed  from  Verwaltung  to  Recht-
sprechung. There  came  a  time  when  Dr  Tunstall
(who  got  his  law  at  Padua)  was  presiding  over  the
Council  of  the  North  and  Dr  Roland  Lee  over  the
Council  of  the  Marches.  In  1538  Dr  Lee,  who  was
endeavouring  to  bring  Wales  to  order,  said  in  a
letter  to  Cromwell,  '  If  we  should  do  nothing  but
as  the  common  law  will,  these  things  so  fnr  out  of
order  will  never  be  redressed ;  (Diet.  Nat.  Biog.,
vol.  xxxn.,  p.  375).

Project  for  a jn  ic^  there  was  a  project  for  the  erection  of
neiv  court.


Notes  43—45  71

yet  another  new  court.  See  Letters  and  Papers,
Henry  VIIL,  vol.  vn.,  p.  603:  'Draft  act  of  parlia-
ment for  the  more  rigid  enforcement  of  previous
statutes,  appointing  a  new  court,  to  consist  of  six
discreet  men,  of  whom  three  at  least  shall  be  outer
barristers  in  the  Inns  of  Court,  who  shall  be  called
justices  or  conservators  of  the  common  weal  and
sit  together  in  the  White  Hall  at  Westminster  or
elsewhere,  with  power  to  discuss  all  matters  relating
to  the  common  weal  and  to  call  before  them  all
persons  who  have  violated  any  act  of  parliament
made  since  the  beginning  of  Henry  VIII.'s  reign.'
If  only  three  of  these  judges  need  be  barristers,
what  are  the  rest  to  be?

44  Acts  of  the  Parliament  of  Scotland,  vol.  II.,
P-  335-

45  See  the  two  papers  that  are  printed  by  Water-  Reform  of  the
hous,  Fortescutus  Restitutus,  1663,  pp. 539, 543.  Inns

In  one  of  these  Thomas  Denton,  Nicholas  Bacon
and  Robert  Gary  are  answering  an  inquiry  ad-
dressed to  them  by  Henry  VIII  touching  the  plan
of  legal  education  pursued  in  the  Inns  of  Court.
In  this  there  are  some  phrases  that  tell  of  the
revival  of  learning.  The  writers  thank  Almighty
God  for  giving  them  a  king  'endued  and  adorned
himself  with  all  kincles  and  sortes  of  good  learning
as  well  divine  as  prophane'  and  one  who  'purposeth
to  set  forward  and  as  it  were  to  revive  the  study
and  perfect  knowledge  thereof  [i.e.  of  good  learning],
of  long  time  detested  and  almost  trodden  under


72  Note  45

foot.'  They  remark  also  that  many  good  and
gentle  wits  have  perished  'chiefly  for  that  most
of  them  in  their  tender  years,  indifferent  to  receive
both  good  and  bad,  were  so  rooted  and  seasoned,
as  it  were,  in  barbarous  authors,  very  enemies  to
good  learning,  that  hard  it  was,  yea  almost  im-
possible, to  reduce  them  to  goodness.'

The  king's  The  other  paper  contains  a  project  for  the  king's

College  of  College  of  Law  submitted  by  the  same  three  writers.
This  looks  like  an  attempt  to  obtain  a  royally
endowed  school  of  English  law,  and  it  is  curious  to
observe  that,  not  English,  but  good  French  is  to
take  the  place  of  bad  French.  '  The  inner  barristers
shall  plead  in  Latine,  and  the  other  barristers  reason
in  French  ;  and  either  of  them  shall  do  what  they
can  to  banish  the  corruption  of  both  tongues.'  One
learned  in  French  is  'to  teach  the  true  pronuntiation
of  the  French  tongue.'  One  of  excellent  knowledge
in  the  Latin  and  Greek  tongues  is  to  read  'some
orator  or  book  of  rhetoric,  or  else  some  other  author
which  treateth  of  the  government  of  a  common-
wealth, openly  to  all  the  company.'  Students  of
this  college  are  to  be  sent  abroad  to  accompany
ambassadors,  and  two  students  are  to  act  as  his-
toriographers of  the  realm.  Nothing  is  said  of
the  civil  law.  On  the  whole,  this  seems  to  be
a  conservative  proposal  emanating  from  English
barristers  for  bettering  the  education  of  the  common
lawyer,  and  thus  rendering  unnecessary  such  a
Reception  as  Pole  had  proposed.  We  do  not  know
that  it  represents  Henry's  thoughts.  It  was  'a  civil


Notes  45-  46  73


law  college'  that  Somerset  wished  to  establish  at
Cambridge  by  a  fusion  of  Trinity  Hall  and  Clare.
(See  Mullinger,  Hist.  Univ.  Camb.,  vol.  II.,  pp.

134—1370

46  Bucerus,  De  regno  Christi,  lib.  n.,  cap.  56  Butzer  on
(Scripta  Anglica,  Basil.  1577,  p.  148) :  'Passim  enim  2
queri  bonos  viros  audio,  leges  regni  huius  decorum  Codification
\corr.  de  rerum]  proprietatibus  et  commutationibus,
de  successionibus  in  bonis  atque  aliis  huius  generis
civilibus  contractibus  et  commerciis,  esse  per-
obscuras  atque  implicatas  :  adeoque  etiam  lingua
perscriptas  quadam  obsoleta  ut  a  nemine  queant
intelligi,  qui  non  et  earn  linguam  didicerit  et  earum
legum  intelligentiam  multo  fuerit  studio  assecutus  :
indeque  fieri  ut  plerique  eorum  qui  eas  leges  aliquo
modo  habent  cognitas,  iurisque  magis  quam  ius-
ticiae  sunt  consulti,  his  ipsis  legibus  abutantur  pro
hominum  decipulis  retibusque  pecuniarum.  Quo
regni  non  tolerando  incommode  permotum  aiunt
praestantissimum  principem  S.  M.  T.  patrem  ut
corrigendis,elucidandisque  his  legibus  certos  pridem
homines  deputarit.  Cum  autem  isti  legum  designati
instauratores,  vel  mole  operis  absterriti,  vel  aliis
impediti  abstractique  negociis,  huic  malo  adhuc
nullum  attulerint  remedium,  abusioque  et  perversio
legum  indies  magis  invalescere  dicatur,  eo  certe  id
erit  S.  M.  T.  et  maturius  et  pertinacius  elaborandum
quo  leges  illae  quam  rectissime  ac  planissime  ex-
tent explicatae.-.Quid  autem  interest  nullae  existant
leges,  aut  quae  existunt  sint  civibus  ignoratae?'


74


Notes  46—48


Butzer,  as  this  treatise  shows,  had  some  know-
ledge of  the  civil  law,  at  least  in  the  matter  of
divorce.  He  seems  to  think  that  a  code  for  England
might  be  so  simple  an  affair  that  it  could  be  put
into  rhyme  and  be  sung  by  children.  (See  Mul-
linger,  Hist.  Univ.  Camb.,  vol.  II.,  p.  238.)

Codification 47  Cardwell,  The  Reformation  of  the  Ecclesiastical


tical  law.


The  demand
for  Codifi-
cation.


tyrologist  (1571)  testifies  to  the  beauty  of  Haddon's
Latin,  and  then  says:  'Atque  equidem  lubens
optarim,  si  quid  votis  meis  proficerem,  ut  consimili
exemplo,  nee  dissimili  etiam  oratione  ac  stylo,  pro-
siliat  nunc  aliquis,  qui  in  vernaculis  nostris  legibus
perpoliendis  idem  efficiat,  quod  in  ecclesiasticis
istis  praestitit  clarissimae  memoriae  hie  Haddonus.'
On  the  question  as  to  the  intended  fate  of  heretics
(including  both  Roman  Catholics  and  Lutherans)
under  the  Reformatio  Legum,  see  Hallam,  Const.
Hist.,  ed.  1832,  vol.  I.,  p.  139;  Maitland,  Canon
Law  in  England,  p.  178.

48  Commines  attributes  to  Louis  XI  (circ.  an.
1479)  a  project  of  reducing  to  uniformity  all  the
customs  of  France.  Francis  Bacon  more  than
once,  when  urging  his  schemes  of  law  reform,  re-
ferred to  Louis's  abortive  project  (Spedding,  Life
and  Letters,  vi.  66;  vn.  362).  Commines's  story-
is  not  rejected  by  modern  historians  of  French
law.  The  official  redaction  of  the  various  'general
customs '  (customs  of  provinces)  was  commanded


Note  48  75


in  1453  by  the  ordinance  of  Montils-les-Tours.
Little,  however,  was  done  in  this  matter  until  the
reigns  of  Charles  VIII  and  Louis  XII.  Many
customs  were  redacted  about  the  year  1510:  that
of  Orleans  in  1509;  that  of  Paris  in  1510.  This
might  be  described  as  a  measure  of  codification  :
'elle  fit,  des  coutumes,  de  ve>itables  lois  ecrites"1  or,
as  we  might  say,  statute  law.  (Esmein,  Histoire
du  droit  fran$ais,  746  ff. ;  Viollet,  Histoire  du  droit
franqaiS)  142  flf. ;  Planiol,  Droit  civil,  I.  12,  16).  Then
the  Estates  General  at  Orleans  in  1560  in  effect
demanded  a  general  code  :  '  Nous  voulons  une  foy,
une  loy,  un  roy '  said  the  prolocutor  of  the  clergy.
(Dareste,  Hotmail,  p.  20.)  Both  Du  Moulin  and
Hotman  recommended  codification  and  apparently
thought  that  the  task  would  not  be  difficult.
(Viollet,  op.  cit.,  p.  209;  Dareste,  op.  «'/.,  p.  21.)
Then  as  to  Germany: — 'An  die  Klagen  iiber  die
Verwirrung,  in  welche  das  Recht  durch  die  scho-
lastische  Wissenschaft  gerathen  ist,  kniipft  sich
seit  dem  Anfange  des  16.  Jahrhunderts  regelmassig
das  Verlangen,  der  Kaiser  moge  als  ein  neuer
Justinian  das  gemeine  Recht  des  Reichs  zur  Ein-
fachheit  und  Klarheit  gesetzlich  reformiren...Das
Verlangen  nach  einer  Codification  des  gemeinen
Rechts  zieht  sich  durch  das  ganze  16.  Jahrhundert.'
(Stintzing,  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Rechtswissen-
schaft,  vol.  I.,  pp.  58 — 9.)  In  1532  after  a  prolonged
effort  the  Empire  actually  came  by  a  criminal
code,  the  so-called  Carolina  (Constitutio  Carolina
Criminalis ;  die  peinliche  Halsgerichtsordnung


76  Note  48

Karls  V.),  but  its  operation  was  confined  by  a
clause  which  sanctioned  the  ever  increasing  par-
ticularism of  the  various  states  by  saving  their
ancient  customs.  (Ibid.,  pp.  621  ff.)  Within  some
of  these  states  or  'territories'  there  was  in  the
sixteenth  century  a  good  deal  of  comprehensive
legislation,  amounting  in  some  cases  to  the  publi-
cation of  what  we  might  call  codes.  A  Landrecht
(to  be  contrasted  with  Reichsrechf]  was  issued  by
the  prince.  His  legislative  action  was  not  always
hampered  by  any  assembly  of  Estates ;  he  desired
uniformity  within  his  territory;  and  the  jurists  who
fashioned  his  law-book  were  free  to  romanize  as
much  as  they  pleased.  The  Wiirtemberg  Land-
recht of  1555  issued  by  Duke  Christopher,  a  prince
well  known  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  is  one  of  the  chief
instances  (Stintzing,  op.  cit.,  vol.  I.,  pp.  537  ff.  ;
Schroder,  Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte,  ed.  3,  pp.
886  ff.).  The  transmission  of  the  cry  for  codifica-
tion from  Hotman  to  Leibnitz,  and  then  to  the
enlightened  monarchy  of  the  eighteenth  century  is
traced  by  Baron,  Franz  Hotmans  Antitribonian,
Bern,  1888.  In  Scotland  also  the  Regent  Morton
(d.  1581)  entertained  a  project  of  codification.  A
commission  was  appointed  to  prepare  a  uniform
and  compendious  order  of  the  laws.  It  seems  to
be  a  question  among  Scotch  lawyers  how  far  the
book  known  as  Balfour's  Prac  ticks  represents  the
work  of  the  commissioners.  See  Diet.  Nat.  Biog.,
vol.  XV.,  p.  317;  vol.  III.,  p.  53.


Note  49  77

49  The  cessation  of  the  Year  Books  in  1535  at  The  expiration

the  moment  when  the  Henrician  Terror  is  at  its  *£ * ar

Books.
height  is  dramatically  appropriate. A  great  deal,

however,  has  yet  to  be  done  before  the  relevant
facts  will  be  fully  known.  Mr  C.  C.  Soule's
Year-Book  Bibliography,  printed  in  Harvard  Law
Review,  vol.  xiv.,  p.  557,  is  of  high  importance.
If  by  'the  Year  Books'  we  mean  a  series  of  books
that  have  been  printed,  then  the  Year  Books  be-
come intermittent  some  time  before  they  cease.
The  first  eleven  years  of  Henry  VIII  are  un-
represented, and  there  are  gaps  between  years  14
and  1 8  and  between  19  and  26.  It  remains  to  be
seen  whether  there  are  MSS.  more  complete  than
the  printed  series.  Then  we  have  on  our  hands
the  question  raised  by  what  Plowden  says  in  the
Preface  to  his  Commentaries  touching  the  existence
of  official  reporters.  Plowden  says  that  he  began
to  study  the  law  in  30  Hen.  VIII,  and  that  he  had
heard  say  that  in  ancient  times  there  were  four
reporters  paid  by  the  king.  His  words  make  it
clear  that  the  official  reporters,  if  they  ever  existed,
came  to  an  end  some  considerable  time  before
30  Hen.  VIII.  The  question  whether  they  ever
existed  cannot  be  raised  here.  Mr  Pike's  investi-
gations have  not,  so  I  think,  tended  to  bear  out  the
tale  that  Plowden  had  heard  ;  and  if  the  king  paid
stipends  to  the  reporters,  some  proof  of  this  should
be  forthcoming  among  the  financial  records.  The
evidence  of  Francis  Bacon  is  of  later  date  and
looks  like  a  mere  repetition  of  what  Plowden  said


Notes  49—51


(Bacon,  Amendment  of  the  Law;  Spedding,  Life
and  Letters,  vol.  v.,  p.  86).

Decline  of  But,  be  all  this  as  it  may,  the  fact  seems  clear

that  the  ancient  practice  of  law  reporting  passed
through  a  grave  crisis  in  the  sixteenth  century.
We  know  the  reign  of  Edward  IV  and  even  that
of  Edward  II  better  than  we  know  that  of
Edward  VI.  The  zeal  with  which  Tottell  from
1553  onwards  was  printing  old  reports  makes  the
dearth  of  modern  reports  the  more  apparent.  Then
Plowden  expressly  says  that  he  reported  '  for  my
private  instruction  only,'  and  Dyer's  Reports  (which
comprise  some  cases  too  early  to  have  been  re-
ported by  him)  were  posthumously  published.  The
total  mass  of  matter  from  the  first  half  of  the
century  that  we  obtain  under  the  names  of  Broke,
Benloe,  Dalison,  Keilwey,  Moore  and  Anderson  is
by  no  means  large,  and  in  many  cases  its  quality
will  not  bear  comparison  with  that  of  the  Year
Books  of  Edward  IV.  (J.  W.  Wallace,  The  Re-
porters, ed.  4,  Boston,  1882,  is  an  invaluable  guide;
see  also  V.  V.  Veeder,  The  English  Reports,  in
Harvard  Law  Review,  vol.  xv.,  p.  i.)

Burke  on  M  Burke,  Report  from Committee  appointed  to

law  reports. inspect  the  Lords'  Journals \ 'To  give  judgment

privately  is  to  put  an  end  to  reports  ;  and  to  put

an  end  to  reports  is  to  put  an  end  to  the  law  of

England.'

The  Students' 51  Acts  of  the  Privy  Council,  1 547—  1 550,  pp.  48—
petition  in ^Q Petition  of  divers  students of  the common


Note  51  79

laws  to  the  Lord  Protector  and  the  Privy  Council :
'Pleasith  it  your  honorable  Lordships  to  call  to
your  remembrance  that  whereas  the  Imperial
Crowne  of  this  realme  of  Inglande  and  the  hole
estate  of  the  same  have  been  alwayes  from  the
beginning  a  Reame  Imperial,  having  a  lawe  of
itself  called  the  Commen  Lawes  of  the  realme  of
Inglande,  by  which  Lawe  the  Kinges  of  the  same
have  as  Imperial  Governours  thereof  ruled  and
governed  the  people  and  subjectes  in  suche  sorte
as  the  like  thereof. hath  nat  been  seen  in  any
other.... So  it  is,  if  it  like  your  good  Lordships,  that
now  of  late  this  Commen  Lawes  of  this  realme,
partely  by  Injunctions,  aswel  before  verdictes,  juge-
mentes  and  execucions  as  after,  and  partly  by
writtes  of  Sub  Pena  issuing  owte  of  the  Kinges
Courte  of  Chauncery,  hath  nat  been  only  stayed
of  their  directe  course,  but  also  many  times  altrid
and  violated  by  reason  of  Decrees  made  in  the
saide  Courte  of  Chauncery,  most  grounded  upon
the  lawe  civile  and  apon  matter  depending  in  the
conscience  and  discrecion  of  the  hearers  thereof,
who  being  Civilians  and  nat  lerned  in  the  Comen
Lawes,  setting  aside  the  saide  Commen  Lawes,
determyne  the  waighty  causes  of  this  realme  ac-
cording either  to  the  saide  Lawe  Civile  or  to  their
owne  conscience ;  which  Lawe  Civile  is  to  the
subjectes  of  this  realme  unknowne,  and  they  nat
bounden  ne  inheritable  to  the  same  lawe,  and
which  Jugementes  and  Decrees  grownded  apon
conscience  ar  nat  grounded  ne  made  apon  any


8o


Note


Incroachment
of  the  civil
law.


Civilians  as
judges.


rule  certeine  or  lawe  written.... And  for  a  more
amplyfyeng  and  inlarging  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the
saide  Courte  of  Chauncery  and  derogacion  of  the
saide  Comen  Lawes  there  is  of  late  a  Commission
made  contrary  to  the  saide  Commen  Lawes  unto
certaine  persones,  the  more  part  whereof  be
Civilians  nat  learned  in  the  saide  Lawes  of  this
realme,  autorising  them  to  heare  and  determyne
all  matters  and  cawses  exhibited  into  the  saide
Courte  of  Chauncery,  by  occasion  whereof  the
matters  there  do  daily  more  and  more  increase,
insomuch  as  very  fewe  matters  be  now  depending
at  the  Comen  Lawes.... And  by  reason  thereof
there  hath  of  late  growne  such  a  discourage  unto
the  studentes  of  the  saide  Commen  Lawes,  and
the  said  Commen  Lawes  have  been  of  late  so
little  estemed  and  had  in  experience,  that  fewe
have  or  do  regarde  to  take  paynes  of  the  pro-
fownde  and  sincere  knolege  of  the  same  Lawe,  by
reason  whereof  there  ar  now  very  few,  and  it  is  to
be  doubted  that  within  fewe  yeares  there  shall  nat
be  sufficient  of  lerned  men  within  this  realme  to
serve  the  king  in  that  facultie.  It  therfore  may
please  your  honorable  Lordships  to  make  suche
speady  reformacion  in  the  premisses  as  unto  your
Lordships  shall  seem  moste  mete  and  convenient.'
This  petition  led  to  the  disgrace  and  punish-
ment of  the  chancellor,  the  Earl  of  Southampton
(Wriothesley),  for  having  issued  a  commission
without  warrant  and  without  consulting  his  fellow-
executors  of  King  Henry's  will.  With  Somerset's


Note  51  8 1

motives  for  thrusting  Southampton  aside  we  are
not  concerned.  (See  Pollard,  England  under  the
Protector  Somerset,  pp.  31 — 33.)  That  he  had  any
desire  to  protect  the  common  lawyers  we  must  not
assume  ;  but  the  petition  itself  deserves  attention.
The  commissioners  to  whom  Southampton  had
delegated  judicial  powers  were  Robert  Southwell
(master  of  the  rolls),  John  Tregonwell,  John  Oliver,
and  Anthony  Bellasyse  (masters  of  chancery).
Tregonwell,  Oliver  and  Bellasyse  were  all  doctors
of  the  civil  law  (Diet.  Nat.  Biog.\

In  1536  during  the  Pilgrimage  of  Grace  one  of  Common  law
the  demands  of  the  catholic  insurgents  was  '  that  "p^  ^JjL
the  common  laws  may  have  place  as  was  used  at  of  Graf e.
the  beginning  of  the  reign  and  that  no  injunctions
be  granted  unless  the  matter  has  been  determined
in  chancery.'  This  comes  at  the  end  of  a  long
reactionary  programme,  which  desires  the  restora-
tion of  the  monasteries,  of  the  papal  supremacy
and  so  forth  :  also  the  repeal  of  the  statute  '  That
no  man  shall  not  will  his  lands'  [Statute  of  Uses].
The  heretical  bishops  [Cranmer  and  his  like]  are
to  be  burnt ;  Cromwell  is  '  to  have  condign  punish-
ment.' Also  'a  man  is  to  be  saved  by  his  book,'
i.e.  there  is  to  be  no  infringement  of  the  benefit  of
clergy.  The  heresies  to  be  suppressed  are  those  of
*  Luther,  Wyclif,  Husse,  Malangton,  Elicampadus
[Oecolampadius],  Bucerus,  Confessa  Germaniae
(Augsburg  Confession],  Apolugia  Malanctons,  the
works  of  Tyndall,  of  Barnys,  of  Marshall,  Raskell
[Rastell,  the  printer  of  law  books],  Seynt  Germayne

M.  6


82  Notes  51,  52

[author  of  Doctor  and  Student]  and  such  other
heresies  of  Anibaptist.'  As  I  understand  the
protest  against  injunctions,  it  means  that  the
chancery  may  interfere  with  an  action  at  common
law,  only  if  that  action  is  opening  a  question
already  decided  in  the  chancery.  It  will  be  seen
that  in  1536  the  cause  of  'the  common  laws'  finds
itself  in  very  queer  company  :  illiterate,  monkish
and  papistical  company,  which  apparently  has
made  a  man  of  'Anibaptist.'  (For  this  important
manifesto,  see  Letters  and  Papers,  Henry  VIIL,
vol.  XL,  pp.  506—507.)

'Elbow-room  62  Stow,  Annals,  ed.  1615,  p.  631  :  'This  yeere
(J557)  in  Michaelmas  terme  men  might  have  scene
in  Westminster  hall  at  the  Kinges  bench  barre  not
two  men  of  law  before  the  Justices ;  there  was  but
one  named  Fostar,  who  looked  about  and  had
nothing  to  doe,  the  iudges  looking  about  them.  In
the  common  place  [Court  of  Common  Pleas]  no
moe  sergeants  but  one,  which  was  sergeant  Bouloise
[Bendlowes  ?],  who  looked  about  him,  there  was
elbow  roome  enough,  which  made  the  lawyers
complaine  of  their  iniuries  in  that  terme.'  In  1536
John  Rastell  the  lawyer  and  printer  of  law  books
complains  to  Cromwell  that  in  both  capacities  he  is
in  a  bad  way  :  he  used  to  print  from  two  to  three
hundred  reams  every  year  but  now  prints  not  a
hundred  reams  in  two  years  ;  he  used  to  make
forty  marks  a  year  by  the  law  and  now  does  not
make  forty  shillings  (Ellis,  Original  Letters,  Ser.


Notes  52—54  83

III.,  vol.  II.,  p.  309).  On  such  stories  as  these
little  stress  is  laid  ;  but  until  the  judicial  records
of  the  Tudor  reigns  are  statistically  examined,
scraps  of  information  may  be  useful.

63  For  an instance see the  examination of a  Examination
servant  of  the  Abbot  of  Sawley  by  Drs  Layton,  "  in
Legh  and  Petre  (Letters  and  Papers,  Henry  VIII.,  cases.

vol.  XII.,  pt.  r,  p.  231).

64  As  to  the  evil  done  to  the  peasants  in  Germany  The  doctors  of
by  the  Reception  of  Roman law, see Egelhaaf,

Deutsche  Geschichte  (Zeitalter  der  Reformation},  War.
vol.  I.,  pp.  544  ff.  ;  Lamprecht,  Deutsche  Geschichte,
vol.  v.,  pp.  99  ff.  Dr  Brunner  (Grundzilge  der
deutschen  Rechtsgeschichte,  1901,  p.  216)  has  lately
said  that  Roman  jurisprudence  'auch  wenn  sie
nicht  geradezu  bauernfeindlich  war,  doch  kein
Verstandnis  besass  fur  die  Mannigfaltigkeit  der
bauerlichen  Besitzformen  des  deutschen  Rechtes.*
One  of  the  revolutionary  programmes  proposed  an
exclusion  of  all  doctors  of  civil  or  canon  law  from
the  courts  and  councils  of  the  princes.  See
Egelhaaf,  op.  tit.,  pp.  499,  598.  The  following  is  a
pretty  little  tale  : — '  So  geschah  es  wirklich  einmal
zu  Frauenfeld  im  Thurgau,  wo  die  Schoffen  einen
Doctor  aus  Constanz,  der  sich  fiir  die  Entscheidung
eines  Erbschaftsstreites  auf  Bartolus  und  Baldus
berufen  wollte,  zur  Thiire  hinauswarfen  mit  den
Worten :  "  Hort  ihr,  Doctor,  wir  Eidgenossen
fragen  nicht  nach  dem  Bartele  und  Baldele.  Wir
haben  sonderbare  Landbrauche  und  Rechte.  Naus

6—2


84  Notes  54,  55


mit  euch,  Doctor,  naus  mit  euch ! "  Und  habe,
heisst  es  in  dem  Berichte  weiter,  der  gute  Doctor
miissen  abtreten,  und  sie  Amtleute  haben  sich
einer  Uriel  verglichen,  den  Doctor  wieder  ein-
gefordert  und  ein  Urtel  geben  wider  den  Bartele
und  Baldele  und  wider  den  Doctor  von  Constanz.'
(Janssen,  Geschichte  des  deutschen  Volkes,  vol.  I.,
p.  490.)  It  is  a  serious  question  what  would  have
become  of  our  English  copyholders  if  in  the
sixteenth  century  Roman  law  had  been  received.
The  practical  jurisprudence  of  this  age  seems  to
have  been  kinder  to  the  French  than  to  the  German
peasant ;  perhaps  because  it  was  less  Roman  in
France  than  in  Germany.  See  E.  Levasseur  in
Lavisse  et  Rambaud,  Histoire  generate,  vol.  iv.,
p.  1 88:  'Des  jurisconsultes  commencerent  a  con-
siddrer  1'infe'odation  comme  une  alienation  et  le
colon  censitaire  comme  le  veritable  proprie'taire  de
la  terre  sur  laquelle  le  seigneur  n'aurait  posse'de
qu'un  droit  eminent?  The  true  Romanist,  I  take
it,  can  know  but  one  dominium,  and  is  likely  to  give
that  one  to  the  lord.

England  and  55  As  regards  Germany,  the  theoretical  continuance
Germany.  of  the  Roman  empire  is  not  to  be  forgotten,  but  its
influence  on  the  practical  Reception  of  Roman  law
may  be  overrated.  In  the  age  of  the  Reception
Roman  law  came  to  the  aid,  not  of  imperialism,  but
of  particularism.  Then  it  is  true  that  English  law
was  inoculated  in  the  thirteenth  century  when
Bracton  copied  from  Azo  of  Bologna.  The  effect


Note  55  85

of  this  is  well  stated  by  Dr  Brunner  in  the  inaugural
address  delivered  by  him  as  rector  of  the  University
of  Berlin  (Der  Antheil  des  deiitschen  Rechtes  an  der
Entwicklung  der  Universitiiten,  Berlin,  1896,  p.  15):
'  In  England  und  Frankreich,  wo  die  Aufnahme
romischer  Rechtsgedanken  friiher  erfolgte,  hat
diese  nach  Art  einer  prophylactischen  Impfung
gewirkt  und  das  mit  ihnen  gesattigte  nationale
Recht  widerstandsfahig  gemacht  gegen  zerstorende
Infectionen.'  As  to  the  Roman  law  in  Bracton,
I  may  be  allowed  to  refer  to  Bracton  and  Azo,
Selden  Society,  1895  :  in  tne  introduction  to  that
volume  I  have  ventured  to  controvert  some  sentences
that  were  written  by  Sir  H.  Maine.  Bracton
became  important  for  a  second  time  in  the  six-
teenth century  when  (1569)  his  book  was  printed,  for
it  helped  Coke  to  arrange  his  ideas,  as  any  one  may
see  who  looks  at  the  margin  of  Coke's  books.  The
medieval  chancery  has  often  been  accused  of
romanizing.  Its  procedure  was  suggested  by  a
summary  procedure  that  had  been  devised  by
decretists  and  legists  :  the  general  aim  of  that
scheme  was  the  utmost  simplicity  and  rapidity.
(Contrast  this  summary  procedure  as  revealed  by
Select  Cases  in  Chancery,  ed.  Baildon,  and  Select
Cases  in  the  Court  of  Requests,  ed.  Leadam,  with
the  solemn  procedure  of  the  civil  law  exemplified
by  Select  Cases  in  the  Court  of  Admiralty,  ed.
Marsden :  these  three  books  are  published  by  the
Selden  Society.)  On  the  other  hand,  no  proof  has
been  given  that  in  the  middle  age  the  chancery


86  Note  55

introduced  any  substantive  law  of  Roman  origin.
At  a  later  time  when  it  began  to  steal  work  (suits
for  legacies  and  the  like)  from  the  ecclesiastical
courts,  it  naturally  borrowed  the  rules  by  which
those  matters  had  theretofore  been  governed.
T!ic  Reception  A  full  history  of  the  Reception  in  Scotland
in  Scotland.  be  &  desideratum>  But  see  Goudy,  Fate


of  Roman  Law  (Inaugural  Lecture),  1894;  also
J.  M.  Irvine,  Roman  Law  in  Green's  Encyclopedia
of  the  Law  of  Scotland.  Whether  at  any  time
the  Reception  in  Scotland  ran  the  length  that  it
ran  in  Germany  may  be  doubted  ;  but  the  influence
exercised  by  English  example  since  1603  would
deserve  the  historian's  consideration.  Even  if  this
influence  went  no  further  than  the  establishment
of  the  habit  of  finding  'authority'  in  decided  cases,
it  would  be  of  great  importance.  Where  such  a
habit  is  established  in  practice  and  sanctioned  by
theory,  any  return  to  the  pure  text,  such  as  that
which  was  preached  in  Germany  by  '  the  historical
school,'  would  be  impossible.  Also  it  may  be
suggested  that  the  Roman  law  which  played
upon  the  law  of  Scotland  in  the  seventeenth  and
eighteenth  centuries  was  not  always  very  Roman,
but  was  strongly  dashed  with  '  Natural  Law.'  For
instance,  if  in  Scotland  the  firm  of  partners  is  a
'legal  person,'  this  is  not  due  to  the  influence  of
Roman  law  as  it  is  now  understood  by  famous
expositors,  or  as  it  was  understood  in  the  middle
ages.  Also  (to  take  another  example)  it  seems
impossible  to  get  the  Scotch  '  trust  '  out  of  Roman


Notes  55—57  87

law  by  any  fair  process.  The  suggestion  that  it  is
'a  contract  made  up  of  the  two  nominate  contracts
of  deposit  and  mandate'  seems  a  desperate  effort
to  romanize  what  is  not  Roman.

50  Fertile,  Storia  del  diritto  italiauo,  ed.  2,  vol.  The  persistence
II.  (2),  p.  69  :  'Laonde  puo  dirsi  che  1'  abrogazione  of  Lombard
definitiva  ed  espressa  della  legislazione  longobardica
nel  regno  di  Napoli  non  abbia  avuto  luogo  se  non
al  principio  del  nostro  secolo,  sotto  Giuseppe
Bonaparte,  al  momento  in  cui  vennero  publicati
cola  i  codici  francesi.'  On  p.  65  will  be  found  some
of  the  opprobrious  phrases  that  the  civilians  applied
to  Lombard  law  :  '  nee  meretur  ius  Lombardorum
lex  appellari  sed  faex':  'non  sine  ratione  dominus
Andreas  de  Isernia  vocat  leges  illas  ius  asininum.'


57  Esmein, Histoire du droit  fran^ais, ed. 2,  French  law  in


p.  757:  'C'est  seulement  en  1679  que  1'enseigne-  ..
ment  du  droit  frangais  regut  une  place  bien  modeste
dans  les  universite's.'  Viollet,  Histoire  du  droit  civil
fran^ais,  p.  217:  'Lorsqu'en  1679,  Louis  XIV.  drigea
k  la  faculte  de  Paris  une  chaire  de  droit  frangais  et
une  chaire  de  droit  romain,  le  premier  professeur
de  droit  frangais,  Fr.  de  Launay,  commenta  les
Institutes  de  Loisel,  qui  prirent  ainsi  une  situation
quasi-officielle  a  cotd  des  Institutes  de  Justinien.'
Brissaud,  Histoire  du  droit  fran$ais,  p.  237:  '  Le
latin  avait  e'te'  jusque-lk  la  langue  de  1'ecole.  Le
premier  professeur  en  droit  frangais  k  Paris,  de
Launay,  fit  son  cours  en  langue  frangaise.'


88  Notes  58—60

German  ICTM M  Siegel,  Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte,  ed.  3,  p.  152:

in  thenm- <i}en  ersten  un(}  ZUgleich  entscheidenden  Schritt  in
varsities.

dieser Richtung that Georg Beyer, vvelcher...

zunachst  durch  einen  Zufall  veranlasst  wurde,  an
der  Wittenberger  Universitat,  wohin  er  als  Pan-
dektist  berufen  worden  war,  1707  eine  Vorlesung
u'ber  das  ins  germanicum  anzukiindigen  und  zu
halten.'

Professorships  '9  Thayer,  The  Teaching  of  English  Law  at
in  America.  Universities  in  Harvard  Law  Review,  vol.  ix.,  p.
171  :'  Blackstone's  example  was  immediately  follow-
ed here.. ..In  1779.. .a  chair  of  law  was  founded  in
Virginia  at  William  and  Mary  College... and  in  the
same  year  Isaac  Royall  of  Massachusetts,  then  a
resident  in  London,  made  his  will,  giving  property
to  Harvard  College  for  establishing  there  that
professorship  of  law  which  still  bears  his  name.'
The  Royall  professorship  was  actually  founded  in
1815  (Officers  and  Graduates  of  Harvard,  1900,
p.  24).  At  Cambridge  (England)  the  Downing
professorship  was  founded  in  1800.

The  Inns  °°  See Records of the Honorable Society of

of  Court.  Lincoln's  Inn,  1896  ff.  ;  Calendar  of  the  Records  of

the  Inner  Temple,  1896.  The  records  of  Gray's  Inn
are,  so  I  understand,  to  be  published.  See  also
Philip  A.  Smith,  History  of  Education  for  the
English  Bar,  1860;  Joseph  Walton,  Early  History
of  Legal  Studies  in  England,  1900,  read  at  a
meeting  of  the  American  Bar  Association  in  1899.
In  foreign  countries  there  were  gilds  or  fraternities


Notes  60,  6 1  89

of  lawyers.  Thus  in  Paris  the  avocats  and  procu-
reurs  about  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century
formed  a  fraternity  of  St  Nicholas  :  'dont  le  chef
porte  le  baton  ou  banniere  (de  Ik  le  nom  de  baton-
nier) ' :  Brissaud,  Histoire  du  droit  franqais,  p.  898.
But,  though  a  certain  care  for  the  education  of
apprentices  was  a  natural  function  of  the  medieval
craft-gild,  I  cannot  find  that  elsewhere  than  in
England  fraternities  of  legal  practitioners  took  upon
themselves  to  educate  students  and  to  give  what  in
effect  were  degrees,  and  degrees  which  admitted  to
practice  in  the  courts.  R.  Delachenal,  Histoire  des
avocats  au  parlement  de  Paris  (Paris,  1885),  says
that,  though  not  proved,  it  is  probable  that  already
in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  the  avocat
had  to  be  either  licende  en  lots  or  licencie'  en  decret :
in  other  words,  a  legal  degree  given  by  an  university
was  necessary  for  the  intending  practitioner.  As
regards  the  England  of  the  same  age  two  interesting
questions  might  be  asked.  Was  there  any  con-
siderable number  of  doctors  or  bachelors  of  law
who  were  not  clergymen  ?  Had  the  English  judge
or  the  English  barrister  usually  been  at  an  univer-
sity? I  am  inclined  to  think  that  a  negative  answer
should  be  given  to  the  first  question  and  perhaps
to  the  second  also.  Apparently  Littleton  (to  take
one  example)  is  not  claimed  by  Oxford  or  Cam-
bridge.

01  Smith,  Inaugural  Oration,  MS.  Baker,  xxxvii.  Sir  T.  Smith
409 (Camb. Univ. Lib.): '...At vero nostrates,


90  Notes  6 1,  62


et  Londinenses  iurisconsulti,  quibuscum  disputare,
cum  ruri  sim  et  extra  academiam,  non  illibenter
soleo,  qui  barbaras  tantum  et  semigallicas  nostras
leges  inspexerint,  homines  ab  omnibus  suis  humani-
oribus  disciplinis  et  hac  academiae  nostrae  instruc-
tione  semotissimi,  etiam  cum  quid  e  philosophia,
theologiave  depromptum  in  quaestione  ponatur,
Deus  bone  !  quam  apte,  quamque  explicate  singula
resumunt,  quanta  cum  facilitate  et  copia,  quantaque
cum  gratia  et  venustate,  vel  confirmant  sua,  vel
refellunt  aliena  !  Certe  nee  dialecticae  vim  multum
in  eis  desideres,  nee  eloquentiae  splendorem.  Eorum
oratio  est  Anglicana  quidem,  sed  non  sordida,  non
inquinata,  non  trivialis,  gravis  nonnunquam  et
copiosa,  saepe  urbana  et  faceta,  non  destituta
similitudinum  et  exemplorum  copia,  lenis  et  aequa-
bilis,  et  pleno  velut  alveo  fluens,  nusquam  impedita.
Quae  res  tantam  mini  eorum  hominum  admira-
tionem  concitavit,ut  aliquandiuvehementer  optarim,
secessionem  aliquam  ab  ista  academia  facere  et
Londinum  concedere,  ut  eos  in  suis  ipsis  scholis
ac  circulis  disputantes  audirem,  quod  an  sim  facturus
aliquando,  cum  feriae  longae,  et  quasi  solenne  ius-
ticium,  nostris  praelectionibus  indicatur,  haud  equi-
dem  pro  certo  affirmaverim.'

Multiplication 62  Soule, Year  Book  Bibliography,  in  Harvard

of  English Law  RevieWi  vol.  XIV.,  p.  564:  'In 1553  the  field

of  Year-Book  publication  was  entered  by  Richard

Tottell,  who  for  thirty-eight  years  occupied  it  so

fully  as  to  admit  no  rival. There  are  about  225


Note  62  91


known  editions  of  separate  Years  or  groups  of
Years  which  bear  his  imprint  or  can  be  surely
attributed  to  his  press.. ..He  is  pre-eminently  the
publisher  of  Year  Books,  and  he  so  completely  put
them  '  in  print '  and  so  cheapened  their  price  that
he  evidently  made  them  a  popular  and  profitable
literature.'

In  1550  an  English  lawyer's  library  of  printed
books  might  apparently  have  comprised  (besides
some  Statutes  and  Year  Books)  Littleton's  Tenures,
The  Old  Tenures,  Statham's  Abridgement,  Fitz-
herbert's  Abridgement,  Liber  Intrationum,  The  Old
Natura  Brevium,  perhaps  a  Registrum  Brevium  (if
that  book,  printed  in  1531,  was  published  before
1553),  Institutions  or  principal  grounds  etc.  [1544],
Carta  feodi  simplicis,  [Phaer's]  New  book  of  pre-
sidentes,  Diversite  de  courts,  Novae  Narrationes,
Articuli  ad  novas  narrationes,  Modus  tenendi  curiam
baronis,  Modus  tenendi  unum  hundredum,  Fitz-
herbert's  Justice  of  the  Peace,  Perkins's  Profitable
Book,  Britton,  Doctor  and  Student.  A  great  part
of  what  was  put  into  print  was  of  medieval  origin
and  had  been  current  in  manuscript.  In  1600  the
following  might  have  been  added  :  Glanvill,  Bracton,
Fitzherbert's  Natura  Brevium,  Broke's  Abridgement,
Broke's  New  Cases,  Rastell's  Entries,  Staundford's
Prerogative  and  Pleas  of  the  Crown,  Crompton's
Justice  of  the  Peace,  Crompton's  Authority  of
Courts,  West's  Symbolaeography,  Theloall's  Digest,
Smith's  Commonwealth,  Lambard's  Archaionomia
and  Eirenarcha,  Fulbecke's  Direction  or  Prepara-


92


Notes  62—65


tive  to  the  Study  of  the  Law  [1600],  PlowderTs
Commentaries,  Dyer's  Reports  and  the  first  volume
of  Coke's  Reports  [1600].  This  represents  a
great  advance.  Already  Fulbecke  in  his  curious
book  (which  was  reprinted  as  still  useful  in  1829)
attempts  a  review  of  English  legal  literature  :
a  critical  estimate  of  Dyer,  Plowden,  Staundford,
Perkins  and  other  writers.  Lambard's  revelation  of
the  Anglo-Saxon  laws  was  not  unimportant,  for  a
basis  was  thus  laid  for  national  boasts  ;  and,  but  for
the  publication  of  Glanvill,  Bracton  and  Britton,
the  work  that  was  done  by  Coke  would  have  been
impossible.

Were  any  books  about Roman law  printed  in
England  before  1600,  except  a  few  of  Gentili's  ?

The  Court  of  <®  See  Mr  Leadam's  Introduction  to  Select  Pleas
in  the  Court  of  Requests  (Seld.  Soc.)  and  Diet.  Nat.
Biog.  s.n.  Caesar,  Sir  Julius.


CowelFs

•  Interpreter?


(!4  See Gardiner, Hist. England, 1603  —  1642,
VQ] n^  pp  66_68  .  E c Clark)  Cambridge  Legal

Studies,  pp.  74  —  75.  Co  well's  Institutions  (less
known  than  the  Interpreter]  are  an  attempt,  '  in  the
main  very  able,'  so  Dr  Clark  says,  to  bring  English
materials  under  Roman  rubrics.  It  is  a  book  which
might  have  played  a  part  in  a  Reception  ;  but  it
came  too  late.


Roman-Dutch <>5  There  can  now  be  few,  if  any,  countries  outside

law-  the  British  Empire  in  which  a  rule  of  law  is  enforced

because  it  is  (or  is  deemed  to  be)  a  rule  of  Roman


Notes  65—68  93

law.  See  Galliers  v.  Ry croft  [1901]  A.  C.  130,  for  a
recent  discussion  before  the  Judicial  Committee  (on
an  appeal  from  Natal)  of  the  import  of  a  passage
in  the  Digest.  Are  there  many  lands  in  which  so
much  respect  would  be  paid  by  a  tribunal  and  for
practical  purposes  to  a  response  of  Papinian's  ?  I
think  not.

{i6  Macdonald,  Select  Charters,  1899,  p.  I  :  'The  First  Charter
first  draft  of  the  charter.. .was  probably  drawn  by  °f  VirS*nia'
Sir  John  Popham...but  the  final  form  was  the  work
of  Sir  Edward  Coke,  attorney  general,  and  Sir  John
Uodderidge,  solicitor  general.'

67  Doyle,  The  English  in  America,  vol.  I.,  p.  21 1  :  First  Assembly
'On  the  30th  of  July,  1619,  the  first  Assembly  met

in  the  little  church  at  Jamestown.  A  full  report  of
its  proceedings  still  exists  in  the  English  Record
Office  (Colonial Papers,  July  30,  1619).'  An  abstract
is  printed  in  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Colonial,
1574 — 1660,  p.  22.

68  Charter  of  Maryland,  1632,  Macdonald,  Select  The  tenure  of
Charters,  p.  53. In  1620  the  grant  to  the  Council

of  New  England  (Ibid.,  p.  23)  referred  to  the  manor
of  East  Greenwich  and  reserved  by  way  of  rent  a
fifth  part  of  the  ore  of  gold  and  silver.  The  grant
of  Carolina  (Ibid.,  p.  121)  reserved  a  rent  of  twenty
marks  and  a  fourth  of  the  ore.  The  grant  of
New  Netherlands  to  the  duke  of  York  (Ibid.,  p.  136)
reserved  a  rent  of  forty  beaver  skins,  if  demanded.
The  grant  of  Pennsylvania  to  William  Penn  speaks


94  Notes  68—71


of  the  Castle  of  Windsor  and  reserves  two  beaver
skins  and  a  fifth  of  the  gold  and  silver  ore  (Ibid.,
p.  185).  Georgia  was  holden  as  of  the  honour  of
Hampton  Court  in  the  county  of  Middlesex  at  a
rent  of  four  shillings  for  every  hundred  acres  that
should  be  settled  (Ibid.,  p.  242).

The  tenure  69  Charter  of  1 669  printed  among  Charters  granted

of  Bombay. fff  ^  Rast  /;/^  Company  (no  date  or  publisher's

name) :  '  to  be  holden  of  us,  our  heirs  and  successors
as  of  the  manor  of  East  Greenwich  in  the  county  of
Kent,  in  free  and  common  soccage  and  not  in  capite
nor  by  knight's  service,  yielding  and  paying  therefor
to  us,  our  heirs  and  successors  at  the  Custom  House,
London,  the  rent  or  sum  of  ten  pounds  of  lawful
money  of  England  in  gold  on  the  thirtieth  day  of
September  yearly  for  ever.'

The  tenure  of  70  Charter  of  1670  incorporating  the  Hudson's
Ruperfs  land.  Bav  Company,  printed  by  Beckles  Wilson,  The
Great  Company,  vol.  II.,  pp.  318,  327:  'yielding
and  paying  yearly  to  us... two  elks  and  two  black
beavers,  whensoever  and  as  often  as  we  our  heirs
and  successors  shall  happen  to  enter  into  the  said
countries,  territories  and  regions  hereby  granted.'

Kent  and  71  Thayer, The Teaching  of  English Law at

Blackstone.  Universities  in  Harvard  Law  Review,  vol.  IX.,
p.  170 :  ' "  I  retired  to  a  country  village,"  Chancellor
Kent  tells  us  in  speaking  of  the  breaking  up  of  Yale
College  by  the  war,  where  he  was  a  student  in  1779,
"and,  finding  Blackstone's  Commentaries,  I  read  the


Notes  71—73  95

four  volumes... The  work  inspired  me  at  the  age  of
fifteen  with  awe,  and  I  fondly  determined  to  be  a
lawyer.". .."There  is  abundant  evidence,"  if  we  may
rely  upon  the  authority  of  Dr  Hammond,  whose
language  I  quote,  "  of  the  immediate  absorption  of
nearly  twenty-five  hundred  copies  of  the  Commen-
taries in  the  thirteen  colonies  before  the  Declaration
of  Independence." '

72  Thayer,  John  Marshall, 1901,  p.  6: '  When  Marshall  and
Marshall  was  about  eighteen  years  old  he  began  Blackstone'
to  study  Blackstone... 'He  seems  to  have  found  a

copy  of  Blackstone  in  his  father's  house... Just  now
the  first  American  edition  was  out  (Philadelphia,
1771 — 2),  in  which  the  list  of  subscribers,  headed
by  the  name  of  "John  Adams,  barrister  at  law,
Boston,"  had  also  that  of  "  Captain  Thomas
Marshall,  Clerk  of  Dunmore  County."'

73  It  may  be  interesting  to  notice  that  in  1856,  Roman  law
and  perhaps  even  in  1871,  Sir  H.  Maine  believed  in  America~
that  the  Code  of  Louisiana  ('of  all  republications

of  Roman  law  the  one  which  appears  to  us  the
clearest,  the  fullest,  the  most  philosophical  and  the
best  adapted  to  the  exigencies  of  modern  society ')
had  a  grand  destiny  before  it  in  the  United  States.
*  Now  it  is  this  code,  and  not  the  Common  Law  of
England  which  the  newest  American  States  are
taking  for  the  substratum  of  their  laws.... The
Roman  law  is,  therefore,  fast  becoming  the  lingua
franca  of  universal  jurisprudence.'  (Maine,  Roman
Law  and  Legal  Education,  1856,  reprinted  in  Village


96


Notes  73—75


Ihering  and
the  litigious
English  man.


Codes  in
English
Colonies.


Communities,  ed.  3, pp.  360 — I.)  Nowadays  this  hope
or  fear  of  a  Reception  of  Roman  law  in  the  United
States  seems,  so  I  am  given  to  understand,  quite
unfounded.  See  e.g.  J.  F.  Dillon,  Laws  and  Juris-
prudence of  England  and  America,  1894,  p.  155:
'the  common  law  [in  distinction  from  the  Roman
or  civil  law]  is  the  basis  of  the  laws  of  every  State
and  Territory  of  the  Union,  with  comparatively
unimportant  and  gradually  waning  exceptions.'

74  Ihering,  Der  Kampf  urn's  Recht,  ed. 10,  pp.
45,  69  : 'Ich  habe  bereits  oben  das  Beispiel  des
kampflustigen  Englanders  angefiihrt,  und  ich  kann
hier  nur  wiederholen,  was  ich  dort  gesagt  :  in  dem
Gulden,  um  den  er  hartnackig  streitet,  steckt  die
politische  Entwicklung  Englands. Einem  Volke,
bei dem es allgemeine Uebung ist, dass Jeder
auch  im  Kleinen  und  Kleinsten  sein  Recht  tapfer
behauptet,  wird  Niemand  wagen,  das  Hochste,  was
es  hat,  zu  entreissen,  und  es  ist  daher  kein  Zufall,
dass dasselbe  Volk des Alterthums,  welches im
Innern die hochste politische Entwicklung und
nach  Aussen  hin  die  grosste  Kraftentfaltung  auf-
zuweisen  hat,  das  romische,  zugleich  das  ausgebil-
detste  Privatrecht  besass.'

75  Thus  in  particular  Queensland  in  1899  enacted
a  criminal  code  of  707  sections. See  Journal  of  the
Society  of  Comparative  Legislation,  New  Ser.,  vol.
VI.,  pp.  555 — 560:  'The  precedents  utilised  in  fram-
ing the  Code  were  the  [in  England  abortive]  draft
English  codes  of  1879  and  '880,  the  Italian  Penal


Notes  75,  76  97


Code  of  1888,  and  the  Penal  Code  of  the  State  of
New  York.'  See  also  Ilbert,  Legislative  Methods,
p.  155.

76  Some  information  in  English  about  the  new  The  German
German  code  will  be  found  in  articles  by  Mr  E.  Civil  Code-
Schuster,  Law  Quarterly  Review,  vol.  xn.,  p.  17,
and  Journal  of  the  Society  of  Comparative  Legisla-
tion, Old  Series,  vol.  I.,  p.  191.  Despite  the  careful
exclusion  of  almost  all  words  derived  from  the  Latin
(except  Hypothek,  which  happens  to  be  Greek),  the
new  law  book  may  look  Roman  to  an  Englishman  ;
but  then  it  does  not  look  Roman  to  Germans.  The
following  sentences  are  taken  from  a  speech  de-
livered in  the  Reichstag  (Mugdan,  Materialien  zum
biirgerlichen  Gesetzbuch,  vol.  I.,  pp.  876 — 7):  '-In
dieser  Beziehung  ist  vor  Allem  der  Vorwurf  gegen
den  Entwurf  erhoben,  er  enthalte  materiell  kein
deutsches  Recht...Selten  ist  ein  Vorwurf  unbe-
griindeter  gewesen...Das  Sachenrecht  ist  von  A
bis  Z  durchaus  deutsches  Recht...Was  dann  den
Begriff  des  Besitzes  betrifft,  von  der  ganzen  ro-
mischen  Besitztheorie  ist  nichts  iibrig  geblieben...
Der  allgemeine  Theil  des  Obligationenrechtes  ist
natiirlich  romischen  Ursprunges...Kommen  wir
aber  zu  den  einzelnen  speziellen  Rechtsgeschaften,
so  treffen  wir  auch  da  sofort  wieder  deutsches
Recht...Auch  das  Familienrecht  ist  durchaus
deutschrechtlich...Dann  ist  das  Erbrecht  durch
und  durch  deutschrechtlichen  Ursprunges....'  The
supposition  that  codification  means  romanization

M.  7


98  Notes  76—78


is  baseless ;  it  may  mean  deromanization.  But  the
great  lesson  to  be  learnt  by  Englishmen  from  the
German  Code  is  that  a  democratically  elected
assembly,  which  is  for  many  purposes  divided  into
bitterly  contending  fractions,  can  be  induced  to
show  a  wonderful  forbearance  when  uniformity  of
law  is  to  be  attained.

Unity  oflaiv.  77  Molinaeus  (Charles  Du  Moulin),  Oratio  de
concordia  et  union e  consuetudinum  Franciae,  in
Opera  (1681),  vol.  II.,  p.  691  :  '  Mihi  quoque  videtur
nihil  aptius,  nihil  efficacius  ad  plures  provincias
sub  eodem  imperio  retinendas  et  fovendas,  nee
fortius  nee  honestius  vinculum  quam  communio
et  conformitas  eorundem  morum  legumve  utilium
et  aequabilium.'

The  school  at  78  The  name  of  Harvard  is  here  mentioned
without  prejudice  to  the  just  claims  of  any  other
American  university  ;  but  the  Harvard  Law  Re-
view, edited  by  a  committee  of  students,  is  a
journal  of  which  any  school  might  be  proud.


CAMBRIDGE:  PRINTED  BY  j.&  c.  F.  CLAY,  AT  THR  UNIVERSITY  I-KKSS.
