Epistles and other writings of Malchion (Malchion)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf06.vi.ix.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

  Malchion

 Malchion.

 ------------------------

 Translator's Biographical Notice.

 [a.d. 270.] Eusebius [1388] speaks of Malchion as a man accomplished in
 other branches of learning [1389] and well-versed in Greek letters in
 particular, and as holding the presidency of the Sophists' school at
 Antioch. Jerome [1390] says that he taught rhetoric most successfully
 in the same city.  Nor was it only that he excelled in secular
 erudition; but for the earnest sincerity of his Christian faith he
 obtained the dignity of presbyter in the church of that place, as
 Eusebius also tells us. He took part in the Synod of Antioch, which
 Eusebius calls the final council, and which Gallandi and others call
 the second, in opposition to Pearson, who holds that there was but one
 council at Antioch. This synod met apparently about a.d. 269, and dealt
 with Paul of Samosata, who had introduced the heresy of Artemon into
 the church of Antioch; and Eusebius says that Malchion was the only one
 who, in the discussion which took place there with the arch-heretic,
 and which was taken down by stenographers who were present, was able to
 detect the subtle and crafty sentiments of the man. Paul's real
 opinions being thus unveiled, after he had baffled the acuteness of his
 ecclesiastical judges for some time, he was at length convicted; and
 the discussion was published, and a synodical epistle was sent on the
 subject to Dionysius, bishop of Rome, and to Maximus of Alexandria, and
 to all the provinces, which, according to Jerome (De vir. illustr., ch.
 71), was written by Malchion, and of which we have extracts in
 Eusebius. [1391]

 [1388] Hist. Eccles., vii. 29.

 [1389] aner ta te alla logios.

 [1390] De viris illustr., ch. 71.

 [1391] In Eusebius, vii. 30. [Elucidation I., p. 172.]

 I.--The Epistle Written by Malchion,

 In Name of the Synod of Antioch, Against Paul of Samosata.

 ------------------------

 To Dionysius and Maximus, and to all our fellows in the ministry
 throughout the world, both bishops and presbyters and deacons, and to
 the whole Catholic Church under heaven, Helenus and Hymenæus and
 Theophilus and Theotecnus and Maximus, Proclus, Nicomas, and Ælianus,
 and Paul and Bolanus and Protogenes and Hierax and Eutychius and
 Theodorus and Malchion and Lucius, and all the others who are with us,
 dwelling in the neighbouring cities and nations, both bishops and
 presbyters and deacons, together with the churches of God, send
 greeting to our brethren beloved in the Lord.

 1. After some few introductory words, they proceed thus:--We wrote to
 many of the bishops, even those who live at a distance, and exhorted
 them to give their help in relieving us from this deadly doctrine;
 among these, we addressed, for instance, Dionysius, the bishop of
 Alexandria, and Firmilian of Cappadocia, those men of blessed name. Of
 these, the one wrote to Antioch without even deigning to honour the
 leader in this error by addressing him; nor did he write to him in his
 own name, but to the whole district, [1392] of which letter we have
 also subjoined a copy. And Firmilian, who came twice in person,
 condemned the innovations in doctrine, as we who were present know and
 bear witness, and as many others know as well as we. But when he (Paul)
 promised to give up these opinions, he believed him; and hoping that,
 without any reproach to the Word, the matter would be rightly settled,
 he postponed his decision; in which action, however, he was deceived by
 that denier of his God and Lord, and betrayer of the faith which he
 formerly held. And now Firmilian was minded to cross to Antioch; and he
 came as far as Tarsus, as having already made trial of the man's
 infidel [1393] iniquity. But when we had just assembled, and were
 calling for him and waiting for his arrival, his end came upon him.

 2. After other matters again, they tell us in the following terms of
 what manner of life he was:--But there is no need of judging his
 actions when he was outside (the Church), when he revolted from the
 faith and turned aside to spurious and illegitimate doctrines. Nor need
 we say any thing of such matters as this, that, whereas he was formerly
 poor and beggarly, having neither inherited a single possession from
 his fathers, nor acquired any property by art or by any trade, he has
 now come to have excessive wealth by his deeds of iniquity and
 sacrilege, and by those means by which he despoils and concusses the
 brethren, casting the injured unfairly in their suit, [1394] and
 promising to help them for a price, yet deceiving them all the while
 and to their loss, taking advantage of the readiness of those in
 difficulties to give in order to get deliverance from what troubled
 them, and thus supposing that gain is godliness. [1395] Neither need I
 say any thing about his pride and the haughtiness with which he assumed
 worldly dignities, and his wishing to be styled procurator [1396]
 rather than bishop, and his strutting through the market-places, and
 reading letters and reciting them [1397] as he walked in public, and
 his being escorted by multitudes of people going before him and
 following him; so that he brought ill-will and hatred on the faith by
 his haughty demeanour and by the arrogance of his heart. Nor shall I
 say any thing of the quackery which he practises in the ecclesiastical
 assemblies, in the way of courting popularity and making a great
 parade, and astounding by such arts the minds of the less
 sophisticated; nor of his setting up for himself a lofty tribunal and
 throne, so unlike a disciple of Christ; nor of his having a secretum
 [1398] and calling it by that name, after the manner of the rulers of
 this world; nor of his striking his thigh with his hand and beating the
 tribunal with his feet; nor of his censuring and insulting those who
 did not applaud him nor shake their handkerchiefs, [1399] as is done in
 the theatres, nor bawl out and leap about after the manner of his
 partisans, both male and female, who were such disorderly listeners to
 him, but chose to hear reverently and modestly as in the house of God;
 nor of his unseemly and violent attacks in the congregation upon the
 expounders of the Word who have already departed this life, and his
 magnifying of himself, not like a bishop, but like a sophist and
 juggler; nor of his putting a stop to the psalms sung in honour of our
 Lord Jesus Christ, as the recent compositions of recent men, and
 preparing women to sing psalms in honour of himself in the midst of the
 Church. in the great day of the Paschal festival, which choristers one
 might shudder to hear. And besides, he acted on those bishops and
 presbyters, who fawned upon him in the neighbouring districts and
 cities, to advance the like opinions in their discourses to their
 people.

 3. For we may say, to anticipate a little what we intend to write
 below, that he does not wish to acknowledge that the Son of God came
 down from heaven. And this is a statement which shall not be made to
 depend on simple assertion; for it is proved abundantly by those
 memoranda which we sent you, and not least by that passage in which he
 says that Jesus Christ is from below. And they who sing his praise and
 eulogise him among the people, declare that their impious teacher has
 come down as an angel from heaven. And such utterances the haughty man
 does not check, but is present even when they are made. And then again
 there are these women--these adopted sisters, [1400] as the people of
 Antioch call them--who are kept by him and by the presbyters and
 deacons with him, whose incurable sins in this and other matters,
 though he is cognisant of them, and has convicted them, he connives at
 concealing, with the view of keeping the men subservient to himself,
 and preventing them, by fear for their own position, from daring to
 accuse him in the matter of his impious words and deeds. Besides this,
 he has made his followers rich, and for that he is loved and admired by
 those who set their hearts on these things. But why should we write of
 these things? For, beloved, we know that the bishop and all the clergy
 [1401] ought to be an example in all good works to the people. Nor are
 we ignorant of the fact that many have fallen away through introducing
 these women into their houses, while others have fallen under
 suspicion. So that, even although one should admit that he has been
 doing nothing disgraceful in this matter, yet he ought at least to have
 avoided the suspicion that springs out of such a course of conduct,
 lest perchance some might be offended, or find inducement to imitate
 him. For how, then, should any one censure another, or warn him to
 beware of yielding to greater familiarity with a woman, lest perchance
 he might slip, as it is written: [1402] if, although he has dismissed
 one, he has still retained two with him, and these in the bloom of
 their youth, and of fair countenance; and if when he goes away he takes
 them with him; and all this, too, while he indulges in luxury and
 surfeiting?

 4. And on account of these things all are groaning and lamenting with
 themselves; yet they have such a dread of his tyranny and power that
 they cannot venture on accusing him. And of these things, as we have
 said already, one might take account in the case of a man who held
 Catholic sentiments and belonged to our own number; but as to one who
 has betrayed [1403] the mystery (of the faith), and who swaggers [1404]
 with the abominable heresy of Artemas,--for why should we hesitate to
 disclose his father?--we consider it unnecessary to exact of him an
 account for these things.

 5. Then at the close of the epistle they add the following words:--We
 have been compelled, therefore, to excommunicate this man, who thus
 opposeth God Himself, and refuses submission, and to appoint in his
 place another bishop for the Church Catholic, and that, as we trust, by
 the providence of God--namely, the son of Demetrianus, a man of blessed
 memory, and one who presided over the same Church with distinction in
 former times, Domnus by name, a man endowed with all the noble
 qualities which become a bishop. And this fact we have communicated to
 you in order that ye may write him, and receive letters of communion
 [1405] from him. And that other may write to Artemas, if it please him;
 and those who think with Artemas may hold communion with him, if they
 are so minded.

 [1392] paroikia [= jurisdiction. See p. 163, note 3, supra.]

 [1393] arnesitheou .

 [1394] katabrabeuon, perhaps = "receiving" bribes from.

 [1395] 1 Tim. vi. 5.

 [1396] doukenarios, the name given under the Emperors to those
 procurators who received 200 sestertia of annual salary.

 [1397] hupagoreuon. [Letters, e.g., from Zenobia.]

 [1398] sekreton (from the Latin secerno, to separate) was the name
 given to the elevated place, railed in and curtained, where the
 magistrate sat to decide cases.

 [1399] kataseiousi tais othonais, alluding to the custom of shaking the
 oraria or linen handkerchiefs as a token of applause. [Elucid. II.]

 [1400] suneisaktous gunaikas, priests'-housekeepers. See Lange on
 Nicephorus vi. 30, and B. Rhenanus on Rufinus, vii. The third canon of
 the Nicene Council in the Codex Corbeiensis has this title, De
 subintroductis id est adoptivis sororibus. Of the subintroduced, that
 is, the adopted sisters.See also on the abuse, Jerome, in the Epistle
 to Eustochius. They appear also to have been called commanentes and
 agapetæ. See the note of Valesius in Migne. [Vol. ii. p. 47, and (same
 vol.) Elucidation II. p. 57.]

 [1401] hierateion.

 [1402] Referring either to Proverbs vi. or to Ecclesiasticus xxv.

 [1403] exorchesamenon, danced away.

 [1404] empompeuonta.

 [1405] koinonika grammata. On this Valesius gives the following
 note:--The Latins call these litteræ communicatoriæ, the use of which
 is of very ancient date in the Church. They called the same also
 formatæ, as Augustine witnesses in Epistle 163. There were, moreover,
 two kinds of them. For there were some which were given to the clergy
 and laity when about to travel, that they might be admitted to
 communion by foreign bishops. And there were others which bishops were
 in the way of sending to other bishops, and which they in turn received
 from others, for the purpose of attesting their inter-communion; of
 which sort the Synod speaks here. These were usually sent by
 recently-ordained bishops soon after their ordination. Augustine,
 Epistle 162; Cyprian, in the Epistle to Cornelius, p. 320; and the
 Synodical Epistle of the Council of Sardica, appear to refer to these,
 though they may refer also to the formatæ. [Vol. i. p. 12, n. 9.]

 II.--Fragments Apparently of the Same Epistle of the Synod of Antioch;

 To Wit, of that Part of It Which It is Agreed that Eusebius Left
 Unnoticed. [1406]

 ------------------------

 He says, therefore, in the commentaries (they speak of Paul), that he
 maintains the dignity of wisdom.

 And thereafter:

 If, however, he had been united [1407] according to formation and
 generation, this is what befalls the man. And again:  For that wisdom,
 as we believe, was not congenerate [1408] with humanity substantially,
 but qualitatively. [1409]

 And thereafter:

 In what respect, moreover, does he mean to allege that the formation
 [1410] of Christ is different and diverse from ours, when we hold that,
 in this one thing of prime consequence, His constitution differs from
 ours, to wit, that what in us is the interior man, is in Him the Word.
 [1411]

 And thereafter:

 If he means to allege that Wisdom dwells in Him as in no other, this
 expresses indeed the same mode of inhabitation, though it makes it
 excel in respect of measure and multitude; He being supposed to derive
 a superior knowledge from the Wisdom, say for example, twice as large
 as others, or any other number of times as large; or, again, it may be
 less than twice as large a knowledge as others have. This, however, the
 catholic and ecclesiastical canons disallow, and hold rather that other
 men indeed received of Wisdom as an inspiration from without, which,
 though with them, is distinct from them; [1412] but that Wisdom in
 verity came of itself substantially into His body by Mary.

 And after other matters:

 And they hold that there are not two Sons. But if Jesus Christ is the
 Son of God, and if Wisdom also is the Son of God; and if the Wisdom is
 one thing and Jesus Christ another, there are two Sons.

 And thereafter:

 Moreover understand (Paul would say) the union with Wisdom in a
 different sense, namely as being one according to instruction and
 participation; [1413] but not as if it were formed according to the
 substance in the body.

 And after other matters:

 Neither was the God who bore the human body and had assumed it, without
 knowledge [1414] of human affections [1415] in the first instance;
 [1416] nor was the human body without knowledge, in the first instance,
 of divine operations in him in whom He (the God) was, and by whom He
 wrought these operations. He was formed, in the first instance, as man
 in the womb; and, in the second instance, [1417] the God also was in
 the womb, united essentially with the human, [1418] that is to say, His
 substance being wedded with the man.

 [1406] In Leontius of Byzantium, contra Nestor., book iii., towards the
 end.

 [1407] Copulatus erat.

 [1408] Congeneratum.

 [1409] Secundum qualitatem.

 [1410] Formationem.

 [1411] We say, that as the exterior and the interior man are one
 person, so God the Word and humanity have been assumed as one person, a
 thing which Paul denies.--Can.

 [1412] Alia est apud ipos.

 [1413] Secundum disciplinam et participationem. Paul of Samosata used
 to say that the humanity was united with the Wisdom as instruction
 (disciplina) is united with the learner by participation.--Can. [See
 Hooker, book v. cap. 52, sec. 4.]

 [1414] Expers.

 [1415] Passionum, sufferings.

 [1416] Principaliter.

 [1417] Secundario, i.e., kata deuteron logon.--Turrian.

 [1418] sunousiomenos to anthropino.

 III.--From the Acts of the Disputation Conducted by Malchion Against
 Paul of Samosata. [1419]

 ------------------------

 The compound is surely made up of the simple elements, [1420] even as
 in the instance of Jesus Christ, who was made one (person), constituted
 by God the Word, and a human body which is of the seed of David, and
 who subsists without having any manner of division between the two, but
 in unity. You, however, appear to me to decline to admit a constitution
 [1421] after this fashion: to the effect that there is not in this
 person, the Son of God according to substance, but only the Wisdom
 according to participation. For you made this assertion, that the
 Wisdom bears dispensing, and therefore cannot be compounded; [1422] and
 you do not consider that the divine Wisdom remained undiminished, even
 as it was before it evacuated itself; [1423] and thus in this
 self-evacuation, which it took upon itself in compassion (for us), it
 continued undiminished and unchangeable. And this assertion you also
 make, that the Wisdom dwelt in Him, just as we also dwell in houses,
 the one in the other, [1424] and yet not as if we formed a part of the
 house, or the house a part of us.

 [1419] In Petrus Diaconus, De Incarnat. ad Fulgentium, ch. 6. Among the
 works of Fulgentius, Epistle 16.

 [1420] Ex simplicibus fit certe compositum.

 [1421] Compositionem.

 [1422] Quia sapientia dispendium patiatur et ideo composita esse non
 possit--the sense intended being perhaps just that Paul alleged that
 the divine Wisdom admitted of being dispensed or imparted to another,
 but not of being substantially united with him.--Tr.

 [1423] Exinanisset.

 [1424] Some read alter in altero, others alter in altera.

 IV.--A Point in the Same Disputation. [1425]

 ------------------------

 Did I not say before that you do not admit that the only-begotten Son,
 who is from all eternity before every creature, was made substantially
 existent [1426] in the whole person of the Saviour; [1427] that is to
 say, was united with Him according to substance?

 [1425] From the same Acts in Leontius, as above.

 [1426] ousiosthai.

 [1427] In toto Salvatore.

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (The epistle written by Malchion, p. 169.)

 Malchion, though a presbyter of Antioch, reflects the teaching of
 Alexandria, and illustrates its far-reaching influence. Firmilian,
 presiding at the Council of Antioch, was a pupil of Origen; and
 Dionysius was felt in the council, though unable to be present.
 Malchion and Firmilian, therefore, vindicate the real mind of Origen,
 though speaking in language matured and guarded. This council was,
 providentially, a rehearsal for Nicæa.

 II.

 (Putting a stop to psalms, etc., p. 170.)

 Coleridge notes this, with an amusing comment on Paulus Samosatenus,
 [1428] and refers to Pliny's letter, of which see vol. v. p. 604, this
 series. Jeremy Taylor, from whom Coleridge quotes, gives the passage of
 our author as follows: "Psalmos et cantus qui ad Dom. nostri J. C.
 honorem decantari solent, tanquam recentiores et a viris recentioris
 memoriæ editos, exploserit" (Works, ii. p. 281, ed. Bohn, 1844).
 Observe what Coleridge says elsewhere [1429] on errors attributed to
 Origen: "Never was a great man so misunderstood as Origen." He adds:
 "The caro noumenon was what Origen meant by Christ's flesh
 consubstantial with His Godhead.'"

 [1428] Notes on English Divines, vol. i. p. 199.

 [1429] Ibid., p. 313.

  Archelaus

 Archelaus.

 [Translated by the Rev. S. D. F. Salmond, M.A.]

 Introductory Notice

 to

 Archelaus.

 ------------------------

 [a.d. 277.] The Manichæan heresy, which was destined to operate so
 terribly against the Church and the purity of the Gospel, encountered
 its earliest successful antagonism in the Thebaid; and I have not
 doubted the wisdom of prefixing this Disputation to the veritable name
 and work of Alexander of Lycopolis, as important to the complete
 history of the great Alexandrian school. The Edinburgh translator of
 this work regards it as an "authentic relic of antiquity," in spite of
 Beausobre, who treats it as a romance. I have forced myself, in this
 republication, to reject no theory of the Edinburgh collaborators to
 which I have not been able to give as much critical attention, at
 least, as they have evidently bestowed upon their work. It seems to me
 a well-sustained presumption that the work is fundamentally real, and
 Dr. Neander admits its base of fact. It is useful, at any rate, in its
 form and place, as here presented, and so much may be inferred from the
 following:--

 Translator's Introductory Notice.

 A certain memorable Disputation, which was conducted by a bishop of the
 name of Archelaus with the heretic Manes, is mentioned by various
 writers of an early date. [1430] What professes to be an account of
 that Disputation has come down to us in a form mainly Latin, but with
 parts in Greek. A considerable portion of this Latin version was
 published by Valesius in his edition of Socrates and Sozomen, and
 subsequently by others in greater completeness, and with the addition
 of the Greek fragments. [1431] There seems to be a difference among the
 ancient authorities cited above as to the person who committed these
 Acts to writing. Epiphanius and Jerome take it to have been Archelaus
 himself, while Heraclianus, bishop of Chalcedon, represents it to have
 been a certain person named Hegemonius. In Photius [1432] there is a
 statement to the effect that this Heraclianus, in confuting the errors
 of the Manichæans, made use of certain Acts of the Disputation of
 Bishop Archelaus with Manes which were written by Hegemonius. And there
 are various passages in the Acts themselves which appear to confirm the
 opinion of Heraclianus. [1433] Zacagnius, however, thinks that this is
 but an apparent discrepancy, which is easily reconciled on the
 supposition that the book was first composed by Archelaus himself in
 Syriac, and afterwards edited, with certain amendments and additions,
 by Hegemonius. That the work was written originally in Syriac is clear,
 not only from the express testimony of Jerome, [1434] but also from
 internal evidence, and specially from the explanations offered now and
 again of the use of Greek equivalents. It is uncertain who was the
 author of the Greek version; and we can only conjecture that
 Hegemonius, in publishing a new edition, may also have undertaken a
 translation into the tongue which would secure a much larger audience
 than the original Syriac. But that this Greek version, by whomsoever
 accomplished, dates from the very earliest period, is proved by the
 excerpts given in Epiphanius. As to the Latin interpretation itself,
 all that we can allege is, that it must in all probability have been
 published after Jerome's time, who might reasonably be expected to have
 made some allusion to it if it was extant in his day; and before the
 seventh century, because, in quoting the Scriptures, it does not follow
 the Vulgate edition, which was received generally throughout the West
 by that period. That the Latin translator must have had before him, not
 the Syriac, but the Greek copy, is also manifest, not only from the
 general idiomatic character of the rendering, but also from many nicer
 indications. [1435]

 The precise designation of the seat of the bishopric of Archelaus has
 been the subject of considerable diversity of opinion. Socrates [1436]
 and Epiphanius [1437] record that Archelaus was bishop of Caschar, or
 Caschara. [1438] Epiphanius, however, does not keep consistently by
 that scription. [1439] In the opening sentence of the Acts themselves
 it appears as Carchar. [1440] Now we know that there were at least two
 towns of the name of Carcha: for the anonymous Ravenna geographer
 [1441] tells us that there was a place of that name in Arabia Felix;
 and Ammianus Marcellinus [1442] mentions another beyond the Tigris,
 within the Persian dominion. The clear statements, however, to the
 effect that the locality of the bishopric of Archelaus was in
 Mesopotamia, make it impossible that either of these two towns could
 have been the seat of his rule. Besides this, in the third chapter of
 the Acts themselves we find the name Charra occurring; and hence
 Zacagnius and others have concluded that the place actually intended is
 the scriptural Charran, or Haran, in Mesopotamia, which is also written
 Charra in Paulus Diaconus, [1443] and that the form Carchar or Carchara
 was either a mere error of the transcribers, or the vulgar provincial
 designation. It must be added, however, that Neander [1444] allows this
 to be only a very uncertain conjecture, while others hold that Caschar
 is the most probable scription, and that the town is one altogether
 different from the ancient Haran.

 The date of the Disputation itself admits of tolerably exact
 settlement. Epiphanius, indeed, [1445] says that Manes fled into
 Mesopotamia in the ninth year of the reign of Valerianus and Gallienus,
 and that the discussion with Archelaus took place about the same time.
 This would carry the date back to about 262 a.d. But this statement,
 although he is followed in it by Petrus Siculus and Photius, is
 inconsistent with the specification of times which he makes in dealing
 with the error of the Manichæans in his book On the Heresies. From the
 37th chapter of the Acts, however, we find that the Disputation took
 place, not when Gallienus, but when Probus held the empire, and that is
 confirmed by Cyril of Jerusalem. [1446] The exact year becomes also
 clearer from Eusebius, who [1447] seems to indicate the second year of
 the reign of Probus as the time when the Manichæan heresy attained
 general publicity--Secundo anno Probi...insana Manichæorum hæresis in
 commune humani generis malum exorta; and from Leo Magnus, who in his
 second Discourse on Pentecost also avers that Manichæus became
 notorious in the consulship of Probus and Paulinus. And as this
 consulship embraced part of the first and part of the second years of
 the empire of Probus, the Disputation itself would thus be fixed as
 occurring in the end of a.d. 277 or the beginning of 278, or, according
 to the precise calculation of Zacagnius, between July and December of
 the year 277.

 That the Acts of this Disputation constitute an authentic relic of
 antiquity, seems well established by a variety of considerations.
 Epiphanius, for instance, writing about the year a.d. 376, makes
 certain excerpts from them which correspond satisfactorily with the
 extant Latin version. Socrates, again, whose Ecclesiastical History
 dates about 439, mentions these Acts, and acknowledges that he drew the
 materials for his account of the Manichæan heresy from them. The book
 itself, too, offers not a few evidences of its own antiquity and
 authenticity. The enumeration given of the various heretics who had
 appeared up to the time of Archelaus, the mention of his presence at
 the siege of the city, [1448] and the allusions to various customs,
 have all been pressed into that service, as may be seen in detail in
 the elaborate dissertation prefixed by Zacagnius in his Collectanea
 Monumentorum Ecclesiæ Græcæ. At the same time, it is very evident that
 the work has come down to us in a decidedly imperfect form. There are,
 for example, arguments by Manes and answers by Archelaus recorded in
 Cyril [1449] which are not contained in our Latin version at all. And
 there are not a few notes of discrepancy and broken connections in the
 composition itself, [1450] which show that the manuscripts must have
 been defective, or that the Latin translator took great liberties with
 the Greek text, or that the Greek version itself did not faithfully
 reproduce the original Syriac. On the historical character of the work
 Neander [1451] expresses himself thus: [1452] "These Acts manifestly
 contain an ill-connected narrative, savouring in no small degree of the
 romantic. Although there is some truth at the bottom of it--as, for
 instance, in the statement of doctrine there is much that wears the
 appearance of truth, and is confirmed also by its agreement with other
 representations: still the Greek author seems, from ignorance of
 Eastern languages and customs, to have introduced a good deal that is
 untrue, by bringing in and confounding together discordant stories
 through an uncritical judgment and exaggeration."

 [1430] Thus Cyril of Jerusalem, in the sixth book of his Catecheses, §§
 27 and 30, tells us how Manes fled into Mesopotamia, and was met there
 by that shield of righteousness (hoplon dikaiosunes) Bishop Archelaus,
 and was refuted by him in the presence of a number of Greek
 philosophers, who had been brought together as judges of the
 discussion. Epiphanius, in his Heresies, lxvi., and again in his work
 De Mensuris et Poderibus, § 20, makes reference to the same occasion,
 and gives some excerpts from the Acts of the Disputation. And there are
 also passages of greater or less importance in Jerome (De vir.
 illustr., ch. 72), Socrates (Hist. Eccles., i. 22), Heraclianus bishop
 of Chalcedon (as found in Photius, Bibliotheca, Cod. xcv.), Petrus
 Siculus (Historia Manichæorum, pp. 25, 35, 37), Photius (Adversus
 Manichæos, book i., edited in the Biblioth. Coislin., Montfaucon, pp.
 356, 358), and the anonymous authors of the Libellus Synodicus, ch. 27,
 and the Historia Hæreseos Manichæorum in the Codex Regius of Turin.
 [See Cyril's text in Routh, R. S., vol. v. pp. 198-205.]

 [1431] As by Zacagnius at Rome, in 1698, in his Collectanea
 Monumentorum Veterum Ecclesiæ Græcæ ac Latinæ; by Fabricius, in the
 Spicilegium Sanctorum Patrum Sæculi, iii., in his edition of
 Hippolytus, etc.

 [1432] Biblioth., Cod. lxxxv. [Coleridge thinks "Manes" himself a myth,
 "a doubtful Ens."]

 [1433] See especially ch. 39 and 55. [Note reference to John de Soyres,
 vol. v. p. 604, this series.]

 [1434] De vir. illustr., ch. 72.

 [1435] Such as the apparent confusion between aer and aner in ch. 8,
 and again between loimos and limos in the same chapter, and between
 pessei and plessei in ch. 9, and the retention of certain Greek words,
 sometimes absolutely, and at other times with an explanation, as cybi,
 apocrusis, etc.

 [1436] Hist. Eccles., i. 22.

 [1437] Hæres., lxvi. ch. 5 and 7, and De Mens. et Pond., ch. 20.

 [1438] Kascharon.

 [1439] For elsewhere (Hæres., lxvi. 11) he writes Kascharen, or,
 according to another reading, which is held by Zacagnius to be corrupt
 Kalcharon.

 [1440] And that form is followed by Petrus Siculus (Hist. Manich., p.
 37) and Photius (lib. i., Adv. Manich.), who, in epitomizing the
 statements of Epiphanius, write neither Kascharon nor Kalcharon, but
 Karcharon.

 [1441] Geogr., book. ii. ch. 7.

 [1442] Book xviii. 23, and xxv. 20, 21.

 [1443] Hist. Misc., xxii. 20.

 [1444] Church History, ii. p. 165, ed. Bohn.

 [1445] De Mensur. et Pond., ch. 20.

 [1446] Cateches., vi. p. 140.

 [1447] Chronicon, lib. post., p. 177.

 [1448] In ch. 24.

 [1449] Catech., vi. p. m. 147.

 [1450] As in the 12th, 25th, and 28th chapters.

 [1451] [Compare Routh, Reliquiæ Sacræ, vol. v. pp. 4-206, and his
 everywhere learned notes.]

 [1452] Church History, ii. pp. 165, 166, ed. Bohn. [Compare Robertson,
 vol. i. pp. 136-144.]

 The Acts of the Disputation [1453] with the Heresiarch Manes.

 ------------------------

 1. The true Thesaurus; [1454] to wit, the Disputation conducted in
 Carchar, a city of Mesopotamia, before Manippus [1455] and Ægialeus and
 Claudius and Cleobolus, who acted as judges. In this city of
 Mesopotamia there was a certain man, Marcellus by name, who was
 esteemed as a person worthy of the highest honour for his manner of
 life, his pursuits, and his lineage, and not less so for his discretion
 and his nobility of character: he was possessed also of abundant means;
 and, what is most important of all, he feared God with the deepest
 piety, and gave ear always with due reverence to the things which were
 spoken of Christ. In short, there was no good quality lacking in that
 man, and hence it came to pass that he was held in the greatest regard
 by the whole city; while, on the other hand, he also made an ample
 return for the good-will of his city by his munificent and oft-repeated
 acts of liberality in bestowing on the poor, relieving the afflicted,
 and giving help to the distressed. But let it suffice us to have said
 thus much, lest by the weakness of our words we rather take from the
 man's virtues than adduce what is worthy of their splendour. I shall
 come, therefore, to the task which forms my subject. On a certain
 occasion, when a large body of captives were offered to the bishop
 Archelaus by the soldiers who held the camp in that place, their
 numbers being some seven thousand seven hundred, he was harassed with
 the keenest anxiety on account of the large sum of money which was
 demanded by the soldiers as the price of the prisoners' deliverance.
 And as he could not conceal his solicitude, all aflame for the religion
 and the fear of God, he at length hastened to Marcellus, and explained
 to him the importance and difficulty of the case. And when that pattern
 of piety, Marcellus, heard his narration, without the least delay he
 went into his house, and provided the price demanded for the prisoners,
 according to the value set upon them by those who had led them captive;
 and unlocking the treasures of his goods, he at once distributed the
 gifts of piety [1456] among the soldiers, without any severe
 consideration of number or distinction, [1457] so that they seemed to
 be presents rather than purchase-moneys. And those soldiers were filled
 with wonder and admiration at the grandeur of the man's piety and
 munificence, and were struck with amazement, and felt the force [1458]
 of this example of pity; so that very many of them were added to the
 faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and threw off the belt of military
 service, [1459] while others withdrew to their camp, taking scarcely a
 fourth part of the ransom, and the rest made their departure without
 receiving even so much as would defray the expenses of the way.

 [1453] Of Archelaus, bishop of Caschar in Mesopotamia.

 [1454] Treasury.

 [1455] In Epiphanius, Hæres., lxvi. 10, it is Marsipus.

 [1456] Pietatis pretia.

 [1457] Nec numero aliquo nec discretione ulla distinguit. For
 distinguit, some propose distribuit.

 [1458] Reading commonentur, as in the text. Commoventur is also
 suggested, ="were deeply moved."

 [1459] On the attitude of the Christians of the primitive Church
 towards warfare, see Tertullian's De Corona Militis, ch. 11, and the
 twelfth canon of the Nicene Council.

 2. Marcellus, as might well be expected, was exceedingly gratified by
 these incidents; and summoning one of the prisoners, by name Cortynius,
 he inquired of him the cause of the war, and by what chance it was that
 they were overcome and bound with the chains of captivity. And the
 person addressed, on obtaining liberty to speak, began to express
 himself in these terms: "My lord Marcellus, we believe in the living
 God alone. And we have a custom of such a nature as I shall now
 describe, which has descended to us by the tradition of our brethren in
 the faith, and has been regularly observed by us up to the present day.
 The practice is, that every year we go out beyond the bounds of the
 city, in company with our wives and children, and offer up
 supplications to the only and invisible God, praying Him to send us
 rains for our fields and crops. [1460] Now, when we were celebrating
 this observance at the usual time and in the wonted manner, evening
 surprised us as we lingered there, and were still fasting. Thus we were
 feeling the pressure of two of the most trying things men have to
 endure,--namely, fasting and want of sleep. But about midnight sleep
 enviously and inopportunely crept upon us, and with necks drooping and
 unstrung, and heads hanging down, it made our faces strike against our
 knees. [1461] Now this took place because the time was at hand when by
 the judgment of God we were to pay the penalty proper to our deserts,
 whether it might be that we were offenders in ignorance, or whether it
 might be that with the consciousness of wrong we nevertheless had not
 given up our sin. Accordingly at that hour a multitude of soldiers
 suddenly surrounded us, supposing us, as I judge, to have lodged
 ourselves in ambush there, and to be persons with full experience and
 skill in fighting battles; and without making any exact inquiry into
 the cause of our gathering there, they threatened us with war, not in
 word, but at once by the sword. And though we were men who had never
 learned to do injury to any one, they wounded us pitilessly with their
 missiles, and thrust us through with their spears, and cut our throats
 with their swords. Thus they slew, indeed, about one thousand and three
 hundred men of our number, and wounded other five hundred. And when the
 day broke clearly, they carried off the survivors amongst us as
 prisoners here, and that, too, in a way showing their utter want of
 pity for us. For they drove us before their horses, spurring us on by
 blows from their spears, and impelling us forward by making the horses'
 heads press upon us. And those who had sufficient powers of endurance
 did indeed hold out; but very many fell down before the face of their
 cruel masters, and breathed out their life there; and mothers, with
 arms wearied, and utterly powerless with their burdens, and distracted
 by the threats of those behind them, suffered the little ones that were
 hanging on their breasts to fall to the ground; while all those on whom
 old age had come were sinking, one after the other, to the earth,
 overcome with their toils, and exhausted by want of food. The proud
 soldiers nevertheless enjoyed this bloody spectacle of men continually
 perishing, as if it had been a kind of entertainment, while they saw
 some stretched on the soil in hopeless prostration, and beheld others,
 worn out by the fierce fires of thirst and with the bands of their
 tongues utterly parched, lose the power of speech, and beheld others
 with eyes ever glancing backwards, groaning over the fate of their
 dying little ones, while these, again, were constantly appealing to
 their most unhappy mothers with their cries, and the mothers
 themselves, driven frantic by the severities of the robbers, responded
 with their lamentations, which indeed was the only thing they could do
 freely. And those of them whose hearts were most tenderly bound up with
 their offspring chose voluntarily to meet the same premature fate of
 death with their children; while those, on the other hand, who had some
 capacity of endurance were carried off prisoners here with us. Thus,
 after the lapse of three days, during which time we had never been
 allowed to take any rest, even in the night, we were conveyed to this
 place, in which what has now taken place after these occurrences is
 better known to yourself."

 [1460] [The similar institution of the Rogation fasts in the West is
 referred to the fifth century. Pellicia, p. 372; Hooker, book v. cap.
 xli. 2.]

 [1461] Reading cervicibus degravatis et laxis, demisso capite, frontem
 genibus elidit. The text gives demerso.

 3. When Marcellus, the man of consummate piety, had heard this recital,
 he burst into a flood of tears, touched with pity for misfortunes so
 great and so various. But making no delay, he at once prepared victuals
 for the sufferers, and did service with his own hand for the wearied;
 in this imitating our father Abraham the patriarch, who, when he
 entertained the angels hospitably on a certain occasion, did not
 content himself with merely giving the order to his slaves to bring a
 calf from the herd, but did himself, though advanced in years, go and
 place it on his shoulders and fetch it in, and did with his own hand
 prepare food, and set it before the angels. So Marcellus, in discharge
 of a similar office, directed them to be seated as his guests in
 companies of ten; and when the seven hundred tables were all provided,
 he refreshed the whole body of the captives with great delight, so that
 those who had strength to survive what they had been called to endure,
 forgot their toils, and became oblivious of all their ills. When,
 however, they had reached the fifteenth day, and while Marcellus was
 still liberally supplying all things needful for the prisoners, it
 seemed good to him that they should all be put in possession of the
 means of returning to their own parts, with the exception of those who
 were detained by the attention which their wounds demanded; and
 providing the proper remedies for these, he instructed the rest to
 depart to their own country and friends. And even to all these
 charities Marcellus added yet larger deeds of piety. For with a
 numerous band of his own dependants he went to look after the burying
 of the bodies of those who had perished on the march; and for as many
 of these as he could discover, of whatsoever condition, he secured the
 sepulture which was meet for them. And when this service was completed
 he returned to Charra, and gave permission to the wounded to return
 thence to their native country when their health was sufficiently
 restored, providing also most liberal supplies for their use on their
 journey. And truly the estimate of this deed made a magnificent
 addition to the repute of the other noble actions of Marcellus; for
 through that whole territory the fame of the piety of Marcellus spread
 so grandly, that large numbers of men belonging to various cities were
 inflamed with the intensest desire to see and become acquainted with
 the man, and most especially those persons who had not had occasion to
 bear penury before,--to all of whom this remarkable man, following the
 example of a Marcellus of old, furnished aid most indulgently, so that
 they all declared that there was no one of more illustrious piety than
 this man. Yea, all the widows, too, who were believers in the Lord had
 recourse to him, while the imbecile also could reckon on obtaining at
 his hand most certain help to meet their circumstances; and the
 orphaned, in like manner, were all supported by him, so that his house
 was declared to be the hospice for the stranger and the indigent. And
 above all this, he retained in a remarkable and singular measure his
 devotion to the faith, building up his own heart upon the rock that
 shall not be moved.

 4. Accordingly, [1462] as this man's fame was becoming always the more
 extensively diffused throughout different localities, and when it had
 now penetrated even beyond the river Stranga, the honourable report of
 his name was carried into the territory of Persia. In this country
 dwelt a person called Manes, who, when this man's repute had reached
 him, deliberated largely with himself as to how he might entangle him
 in the snares of his doctrine, hoping that Marcellus might be made an
 upholder of his dogma. For he reckoned that he might make himself
 master of the whole province, if he could only first attach such a man
 to himself. In this project, however, his mind was agitated with the
 doubt whether he should at once repair in person to the man, or first
 attempt to get at him by letter; for he was afraid lest, by any sudden
 and unexpected introduction of himself upon the scene some mischance
 might possibly befall him. At last, in obedience to a subtler policy,
 he resolved to write; and calling to him one of his disciples, by name
 Turbo, [1463] who had been instructed by Addas, he handed to him an
 epistle, and bade him depart and convey it to Marcellus. This adherent
 accordingly received the letter, and carried it to the person to whom
 he had been commissioned by Manes to deliver it, overtaking the whole
 journey within five days. The above-mentioned Turbo, indeed, used great
 expedition on this journey, in the course of which he also underwent
 very considerable exertion and trouble. For whenever he arrived, [1464]
 as [1465] a traveller in foreign parts, at a hospice,--and these were
 inns which Marcellus himself had supplied in his large hospitality,
 [1466] --on his being asked by the keepers of these hostels whence he
 came, and who he was, or by whom he had been sent, he used to reply: "I
 belong to the district of Mesopotamia, but I come at present from
 Persis, having been sent by Manichæus, a master among the Christians."
 But they were by no means ready to welcome a name unknown [1467] to
 them, and were wont sometimes to thrust Turbo out of their inns,
 refusing him even the means of getting water for drinking purposes. And
 as he had to bear daily things like these, and things even worse than
 these, at the hands of those persons in the several localities who had
 charge of the mansions and hospices, unless he had at last shown that
 he was conveying letters to Marcellus, Turbo would have met the doom of
 death in his travels.

 [1462] At this point begins the portion of the work edited by Valesius
 from the Codex Bobiensis, which is preserved now in the Ambrosian
 Library.

 [1463] The Codex Bobiensis reads Adda Turbonem. This Adda, or Addas, as
 the Greek gives it below in ch. xi., was one of those disciples of
 Manes whom he charged with the dissemination of his heretical opinions
 in the East, as we see from ch. xi.

 [1464] Codex Bobiensis adds, ad vesperam, towards evening.

 [1465] The text gives veluti peregrinans. The Codex Bobiensis has
 quippe peregrinans.

 [1466] On the attention paid by the primitive Church to the duties of
 hospitality, see Tertullian, De Præscriptionibus, ch. 20 [vol. iii. p.
 252, this series]; Gregory Nazianzenus, in his First Invective against
 Julian; also Priorius, De literis canonicis, ch. 5, etc.; and
 Thomassin, De Tesseris hospitalitatis, ch. 26.

 [1467] In the text, ignotum; in the Codex Bobiensis, ignoratum.

 5. On receiving the epistle, then, Marcellus opened it, and read it in
 the presence of Archelaus, the bishop of the place. And the following
 is a copy of what it contained: [1468] --

 Manichæus, an apostle of Jesus Christ, and all the saints who are with
 me, and the virgins, to Marcellus, my beloved son: Grace, mercy, and
 peace be with you from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ;
 and may the right hand of light preserve you safe from this present
 evil world, and from its calamities, and from the snares of the wicked
 one. Amen.

 I was exceedingly delighted to observe the love cherished by you, which
 truly is of the largest measure. But I was distressed at your faith,
 which is not in accordance with the right standard. Wherefore, deputed
 as I am to seek the elevation of the race of men, and sparing, [1469]
 as I do, those who have given themselves over to deceit and error, I
 have considered it needful to despatch this letter to you, with a view,
 in the first place, to the salvation of your own soul, and in the
 second place also to that of the souls of those who are with you, so as
 to secure you against [1470] dubious opinions, and specially against
 notions like those in which the guides of the simpler class of minds
 indoctrinate their subjects, when they allege that good and evil have
 the same original subsistence, [1471] and when they posit the same
 beginning for them, without making any distinction or discrimination
 between light and darkness, and between the good and the evil or
 worthless, and between the inner man and the outer, as we have stated
 before, and without ceasing to mix up and confound together the one
 with the other. But, O my son, refuse thou thus thoughtlessly to
 identify these two things in the irrational and foolish fashion common
 to the mass of men, and ascribe no such confusion to the God of
 goodness. For these men refer the beginning and the end and the
 paternity of these ills to God Himself,--"whose end is near a curse."
 [1472] For they do not believe the word spoken by our Saviour and Lord
 Jesus Christ Himself in the Gospels, [1473] namely, that "a good tree
 cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth
 good fruit." [1474] And how they can be bold enough to call God the
 maker and contriver of Satan and his wicked deeds, is a matter of great
 amazement to me. Yea, would that even this had been all the length to
 which they had gone with their silly efforts, and that they had not
 declared that the only-begotten Christ, who has descended from the
 bosom of the Father, [1475] is the son of a certain woman, Mary, and
 born of blood and flesh and the varied impurities proper to women!
 [1476] Howbeit, neither to write too much in this epistle, nor to
 trespass at too great length upon your good nature,--and all the more
 so that I have no natural gift of eloquence,--I shall content myself
 with what I have said. But you will have full knowledge of the whole
 subject when I am present with you, if indeed you still continue to
 care for [1477] your own salvation. For I do not "cast a snare upon any
 one," [1478] as is done by the less thoughtful among the mass of men.
 Think of what I say, most honourable son.

 [1468] This letter, along with the reply of Marcellus, is given by
 Epiphanius in his Heresies, n. 6, from which the Greek text is taken.

 [1469] pheidomenos. The Latin gives subveniens, relieving.

 [1470] The Greek text of Epiphanius gave pros to adiakriton. Petavius
 substituted pros to me adiakriton; and that reading is confirmed by the
 Latin, uti ne indiscretos animos geras.

 [1471] apo tou autou pheresthai.

 [1472] hon to telos kataras engus. Cf. Heb. vi. 8.

 [1473] The text gives en tois eiremenois euangeliois, for which tois
 eiremenois en tois euangeliois may be proposed.

 [1474] Matt. vii. 18.

 [1475] John i. 18.

 [1476] tes alles dusodias ton gunaikon.

 [1477] pheide.

 [1478] 1 Cor. vii. 35.

 6. On reading this epistle, Marcellus, with the kindest consideration,
 attended hospitably to the needs of the bearer of the letter.
 Archelaus, on the other hand, did not receive very pleasantly the
 matters which were read, but "gnashed [1479] with his teeth like a
 chained lion," impatient to have the author of the epistle given over
 to him. Marcellus, however, counselled him to be at peace; promising
 that he would himself take care to secure the man's presence. And
 accordingly Marcellus resolved to send an answer to what had been
 written to him, and indited an epistle containing the following
 statements:--

 Marcellus, a man of distinction, to Manichæus, who has made himself
 known to me by his epistle, greeting.

 An epistle written by you has come to my hand, and I have received
 Turbo with my wonted kindness; but the meaning of your letter I have by
 no means apprehended, and may not do so unless you give us your
 presence, and explain its contents in detail in the way of
 conversation, as you have offered to do in the epistle itself.
 Farewell.

 This letter he sealed and handed to Turbo, with instructions to deliver
 it to the person from whom he had already conveyed a similar document.
 The messenger, however, was extremely reluctant to return to his
 master, being mindful of what he had to endure on the journey, and
 begged that another person should be despatched in his stead, refusing
 to go back to Manes, or to have any intercourse whatever with him
 again. But Marcellus summoned one of his young men, [1480] Callistus by
 name, and directed him to proceed to the place. Without any loss of
 time this young man set out promptly on his journey thither; and after
 the lapse of three days he came to Manes, whom he found in a certain
 fort, that of Arabion [1481] to wit, and to whom he presented the
 epistle. On perusing it, he was glad to see that he had been invited by
 Marcellus; and without delay he undertook the journey; yet he had a
 presentiment that Turbo's failure to return boded no good, and
 proceeded on his way to Marcellus, not, as it were, without serious
 reflections. Turbo, for his part, was not at all thinking of leaving
 the house of Marcellus; neither did he omit any opportunity of
 conversing with Archelaus the bishop. For both these parties were very
 diligently engaged in investigating the practices of Manichæus, being
 desirous of knowing who he was and whence he came, and what was his
 manner of discourse. And he, Turbo, accordingly gave a lucid account of
 the whole position, narrating and expounding the terms of his faith in
 the following manner: [1482] --

 If you are desirous of being instructed in the faith of Manes by me,
 attend to me for a short space. That man worships two deities,
 unoriginated, self-existent, eternal, opposed the one to the other. Of
 these he represents the one as good, and the other as evil, and assigns
 the name of Light to the former, and that of Darkness to the latter. He
 alleges also that the soul in men is a portion of the light, but that
 the body and the formation of matter are parts of the darkness. He
 maintains, further, that a certain commingling or blending [1483] has
 been effected between the two in the manner about to be stated, the
 following analogy being used as an illustration of the same; to wit,
 that their relations may be likened to those of two kings in conflict
 with each other, who are antagonists from the beginning, and have their
 own positions, each in his due order. And so he holds that the darkness
 passed without its own boundaries, and engaged in a similar contention
 with the light; but that the good Father then, perceiving that the
 darkness had come to sojourn on His earth, put forth from Himself a
 power [1484] which is called the Mother of Life; and that this power
 thereupon put forth from itself the first man, and the five elements.
 [1485] And these five elements are wind, [1486] light, water, fire, and
 matter. Now this primitive man, being endued with these, and thereby
 equipped, as it were, for war, descended to these lower parts, and made
 war against the darkness. But the princes of the darkness, waging war
 in turn against him, consumed that portion of his panoply which is the
 soul. Then was that first man grievously injured there underneath by
 the darkness; and had it not been that the Father heard his prayers,
 and sent a second power, which was also put forth from Himself and was
 called the living Spirit, and came down and gave him the right hand,
 and brought him up again out of the grasp of the darkness, that first
 man would, in those ancient times, have been in peril of absolute
 overthrow. From that time, consequently, he left the soul beneath. And
 for this reason the Manichæans, if they meet each other, give the right
 hand, in token of their having been saved from darkness; for he holds
 that the heresies have their seat all in the darkness. Then the living
 Spirit created the world; and bearing in himself three other powers, he
 came down and brought off the princes, and settled [1487] them in the
 firmament, which is their body, (though it is called) the sphere. Then,
 again, the living Spirit created the luminaries, which are fragments of
 the soul, and he made them thus to move round and round the firmament;
 and again he created the earth in its eight species. [1488] And the
 Omophorus [1489] sustains the burden thereof beneath; and when he is
 wearied with bearing it he trembles, and in that manner becomes the
 cause of a quaking of the earth in contravention of its determinate
 times. On account of this the good Father sent His Son forth from His
 own bosom [1490] into the heart of the earth, and into these lowest
 parts of it, in order to secure for him the correction befitting him.
 [1491] And whenever an earthquake occurs, he is either trembling under
 his weariness, or is shifting his burden from one shoulder to the
 other. Thereafter, again, the matter also of itself produced growths;
 [1492] and when these were carried off as spoil on the part of some of
 the princes, he summoned together all the foremost of the princes, and
 took from all of them individually power after power, and made up the
 man who is after the image of that first man, and united [1493] the
 soul (with these powers) in him. This is the account of the manner in
 which his constitution was planned.

 [1479] The text gives infrendebat; the Codex Bobiensis has
 infringebat.[It seems to be a proverb, and I have so marked it. We
 should say, "he chafed like a lion," etc.]

 [1480] Ex pueris suis.

 [1481] Epiphanius, under this Heresy, num. 7, says that this was a fort
 situated on the other side of the river Stranga, between Persia and
 Mesopotamia.

 [1482] The section extending from this point on to ch. xii. is found
 word for word in the Greek of Epiphanius, num. 25.

 [1483] mixin de etoi sunkrasin.

 [1484] proballein ex autou dunamin. But the Codex Bobiensis gives
 produxit ex virtute, put forth from His power one, etc. The Codex
 Casinensis has produxerit et esse virtutem, etc.

 [1485] The text is simply kai auten probeblekenai ton proton anthropon,
 ta pente stoicheia. The Latin, with emendations from the Codex
 Bobiensis and Epiphanius, gives quâ virtute circumdedit primum hominem,
 quæ sunt quinque elementa, etc., = with which power He begirt the first
 man, which is the same as the five elements, etc. With slight
 differences the Codex Bobiensis reads quâ circumdedit, and the Codex
 Casinensis, quæ virtute.Petavius pointed out that there is probably an
 omission in the text here. And from a passage in Epiphanius, Hær.,
 lxvi. n. 45, it has been proposed to fill out the sentence thus:
 proballein ex heautou dunamin metera tes zoes, kai auten probeblekenai
 ton proton anthropon, auten de ten metera tes zoes ton te proton
 anthropon ta pente stoicheia. The sense might then be that the good
 Father put forth from Himself a power called the Mother of Life, that
 this Mother of Life put forth the first man, and that the said Mother
 of Life and the first man put forth (or constituted) the five elements.
 See the note in Routh's Reliquiæ Sacræ, v. p. 49.

 [1486] The Codex Bobiensis omits the ventus, wind.

 [1487] The Greek gives estereosen en to stereomati. The Latin version
 has, "crucifixit eos in firmamento." And Routh apparently favours the
 reading estaurosen = crucified them, etc. Valesius and the Codex
 Bobiensis have, "descendens eduxit principes Jesu, exiens in
 firmamentum quod est," etc.

 [1488] eis eide okto. The Latin however, gives et sunt octo, "and they
 are eight;" thus apparently having read eisi de okto, instead of eis
 eide okto.

 [1489] i.e., one who bears on his shoulders, the upholder.

 [1490] Reading ek ton kolpon, de sinibus suis. But the Codex Bobiensis
 gives de finibus, from His own territories.

 [1491] The Greek text is, hopos auto ten prosekousan epitimian do. The
 Latin gives, "quo illum, ut par erat, coerceret." The Codex Bobiensis
 reads, "quod illum, ut pareret, coerceret." It is clear also that
 Petavius read correctly epitimian for epithumian in Epiphanius.

 [1492] ta phuta.

 [1493] edesen. The Codex Bobiensis gives, "vexit animam in eo."

 8. But when the living Father perceived that the soul was in
 tribulation in the body, being full of mercy and compassion, He sent
 His own beloved Son for the salvation of the soul. For this, together
 with the matter of Omophorus, was the reason of His sending Him. And
 the Son came and transformed Himself into the likeness of man, and
 manifested [1494] Himself to men as a man, while yet He was not a man,
 and men supposed that He was begotten. Thus He came and prepared the
 work which was to effect the salvation of the souls, and with that
 object constructed an instrument with twelve urns, [1495] which is made
 to revolve by the sphere, and draws up with it the souls of the dying.
 And the greater luminary receives these souls, and purifies them with
 its rays, and then passes them over to the moon; and in this manner the
 moon's disc, as it is designated by us, is filled up. For he says that
 these two luminaries are ships or passage-boats. [1496] Then, if the
 moon becomes full, it ferries its passengers across toward the east
 wind, and thereby effects its own waning [1497] in getting itself
 delivered of its freight. And in this manner it goes on making the
 passage across, and again discharging its freight of souls drawn up by
 the urns, until it saves its own proper portion of the souls. [1498]
 Moreover, he maintains that every soul, yea, every living creature that
 moves, partakes of the substance of the good Father. And accordingly,
 when the moon delivers over its freight of souls to the æons of the
 Father, they abide there in that pillar of glory, which is called the
 perfect air. [1499] And this air is a pillar of light, for it is filled
 with the souls that are being purified. Such, moreover, is the agency
 by which the souls are saved. But the following, again, is the cause of
 men's dying: A certain virgin, fair in person, and beautiful in attire,
 and of most persuasive address, aims at making spoil of the princes
 that have been borne up and crucified on the firmament by the living
 Spirit; and she appears as a comely female to the princes, but as a
 handsome and attractive young man to the princesses. And the princes,
 when they look on her in her splendid figure, are smitten with love's
 sting; and as they are unable to get possession of her, they burn
 fiercely with the flame of amorous desire, and lose all power of
 reason. While they thus pursue the virgin, she disappears from view.
 Then the great prince sends forth from himself the clouds, with the
 purpose of bringing darkness on the whole world, in his anger. And
 then, if he feels grievously oppressed, his exhaustion expresses itself
 in perspiration, just as a man sweats under toil; and this sweat of his
 forms the rain. At the same time also the harvest-prince, [1500] if he
 too chances to be captivated by the virgin, scatters pestilence [1501]
 on the whole earth, with the view of putting men to death. Now this
 body (of man) is also called a cosmos, i.e., a microcosm, in relation
 to the great cosmos, i.e., the macrocosm of the universe; and all men
 have roots which are linked beneath with those above. Accordingly, when
 this prince is captivated by the virgin's charms, he then begins to cut
 the roots of men; and when their roots are cut, then pestilence
 commences to break forth, and in that manner they die. And if he shakes
 the upper parts of the root mightily, [1502] an earthquake bursts, and
 follows as the consequence of the commotion to which the Omophorus is
 subjected. This is the explanation of (the phenomenon of) death.

 [1494] But certain codices read et parebat, "and was obedient," in
 stead of apparebat.

 [1495] kadous.

 [1496] porthmein.

 [1497] apokrousin. The Codex Casinensis has apocrisin; but the Codex
 Bobiensis gives apocrusin.

 [1498] The text gives tes psuches. But from the old Latin version,
 which has animarum, we may conjecture that ton psuchon was read.

 [1499] The Latin version has "vir perfectus,"--a reading which is due
 apparently to the fact that the author had mistaken the aer of the
 Greek for aner. [See note 2, p. 176, supra.]

 [1500] ho therismos archon. The version of Petavius has, "Sic et
 princeps alter, messor appellatus." Perhaps the reading should be ho
 therismou archon.

 [1501] loimon. Other codices give famem, as reading limon, famine.

 [1502] ean de ta ano tes rhizes pono saluse. It may be also = And if
 the upper parts of the root shake under the exertion.

 9. I shall explain to you also how it is that the soul is transfused
 into five bodies. [1503] First of all, in this process some small
 portion of it is purified; and then it is transfused into the body of a
 dog, or a camel, or some other animal. But if the soul has been guilty
 of homicide, it is translated into the body of the celephi; [1504] and
 if it has been found to have engaged in cutting; [1505] it is made to
 pass into the body of the dumb. Now these are the designations of the
 soul,--namely, intelligence, reflection, prudence, consideration,
 reasoning. [1506] Moreover, the reapers who reap are likened to the
 princes who have been in darkness from the beginning, [1507] since they
 consumed somewhat of the panoply of the first man. On this account
 there is a necessity for these to be translated into hay, or beans, or
 barley, or corn, or vegetables, in order that in these forms they, in
 like manner, may be reaped and cut. And again, if any one eats bread,
 he must needs also become bread and be eaten. If one kills a chicken,
 [1508] he will be a chicken himself. If one kills a mouse, he will also
 become a mouse himself. If, again, one is wealthy in this world, it is
 necessary that, on quitting the tabernacle of his body, he should be
 made to pass into the body of a beggar, so as to go about asking alms,
 and thereafter he shall depart into everlasting punishment. Moreover,
 as this body pertains to the princes and to matter, it is necessary
 that he who plants a persea [1509] should pass though many bodies until
 that persea is prostrated. And if one builds a house for himself, he
 will be divided and scattered among all the bodies. [1510] If one
 bathes in water, he freezes [1511] his soul; and if one refuses to give
 pious regard [1512] to his elect, he will be punished through the
 generations, [1513] and will be translated into the bodies of
 catechumens, until he render many tributes of piety; and for this
 reason they offer to the elect whatever is best in their meats. And
 when they are about to eat bread, they offer up prayer first of all,
 addressing themselves in these terms to the bread: "I have neither
 reaped thee, nor ground thee, nor pressed thee, nor cast thee into the
 baking-vessel; but another has done these things, and brought thee to
 me, and I have eaten thee without fault." And when he has uttered these
 things to himself, he says to the catechumen, [1514] "I have prayed for
 thee;" and in this manner that person then takes his departure. For, as
 I remarked to you a little before, if any one reaps, he will be reaped;
 and so, too, if one casts grain into the mill, he will be cast in
 himself in like manner, or if he kneads he will be kneaded, or if he
 bakes he will be baked; and for this reason they are interdicted from
 doing any such work. Moreover, there are certain other worlds on which
 the luminaries rise when they have set on our world. [1515] And if a
 person walks upon the ground here, he injures the earth; and if he
 moves his hand, he injures the air; for the air is the soul (life) of
 men and living creatures, both fowl, and fish, and creeping thing. And
 as to every one [1516] existing in this world, I have told you that
 this body of his does not pertain to God, but to matter, and is itself
 darkness, and consequently it must needs be cast in darkness.

 [1503] pos metangizetai he psuche eis pente somata. But the Codex
 Bobiensis reads transferuntur; and the Latin version gives "quomodo et
 animæ in alia quoque corpora transfunduntur" = how the souls are also
 transfused into other bodies.

 [1504] The text gives kelephon, which is spoken of in Migne as an
 unknown animal, though kelephos (thus accentuated) occurs in
 ecclesiastical writers in the sense of a leper. It is proposed to read
 elephantion, "of elephants;" and so the Codex Bobiensis gives
 "elephantorum corpora," and Codex Casinensis has "in elefantia eorum
 corpora," which is probably an error for "in elephantiacorum corpora."
 Routh suggests elephanteion. [Reliqu. Sac., vol. v. p. 58.]

 [1505] theriasa, reaping.

 [1506] nous, ennoia, phronesis, enthumesis, logismos. The Latin version
 renders, mens, sensus, prudentia, intellectus, cogitatio. Petavius
 gives, mens, notio, intelligentia, cogitatio, ratiocinatio.

 [1507] tois aparches ousin eis skotos. But the Latin version gives "qui
 ex materia orti," etc.--who, having sprung from matter, are in
 darkness.

 [1508] hornithion.

 [1509] Explained as a species of Egyptian tree, in which the fruit
 grows from the stem. The Codex Casinensis has the strange reading, per
 se ad illam, for perseam, etc. See also Epiphanius, num. 9.

 [1510] eis ta hola somata.

 [1511] pessei. But the Latin version gives vulnerat, "wounds," from the
 reading plessei. [Note 2, p. 176, supra.]

 [1512] eusebeian. But the Latin version gives alimenta.

 [1513] eis tas geneas. But the Latin version has "poenis subdetur
 gehennæ" = will suffer the pains of hell. [Compare p. 185, infra,
 "Gehen."]

 [1514] But the Latin version gives, "respondet ad eum qui ei detulit" =
 he makes answer to the person who brought it to him.

 [1515] The text is, kai palin eisin heteroi kosmoi tines, ton phosteron
 dunanton apo toutou tou kosmou, ex hon anatellousi. Routh suggests ois
 tines, deleting ex hon.

 [1516] Reading ei tis, as in the text. Routh suggests ei ti, = As to
 everything existing in this world, I have told you that the body
 thereof does, etc.

 10. Now, with respect to paradise, it is not called a cosmos. [1517]
 The trees that are in it are lust and other seductions, which corrupt
 the rational powers of those men. And that tree in paradise, by which
 men know the good, is Jesus Himself, or [1518] the knowledge of Him in
 the world. He who partakes thereof discerns the good and the evil. The
 world itself, however, is not God's work; but it was the structure of a
 portion of matter, and consequently all things perish in it. And what
 the princes took as spoil from the first man, that is what makes the
 moon full, and what is being purged day by day of the world. And if the
 soul makes its exit without having gained the knowledge of the truth,
 it is given over to the demons, in order that they may subdue it in the
 Gehennas of fire; and after that discipline it is made to pass into
 bodies with the purpose of being brought into subjection, and in this
 manner it is cast into the mighty fire until the consummation. Again,
 regarding the prophets amongst you, [1519] he speaks thus: Their spirit
 is one of impiety, or of the lawlessness of the darkness which arose at
 the beginning. And being deceived by this spirit, they have not spoken
 truth; for the prince blinded their mind. And if any one follows their
 words, he dies for ever, bound to the clods of earth, because he has
 not learned the knowledge of the Paraclete. He also gave injunctions to
 his elect alone, who are not more than seven in number. And the charge
 was this: "When ye cease eating, pray, and put upon your head an olive,
 sworn with the invocation of many names for the confirmation of this
 faith." The names, however, were not made known to me; for only these
 seven make use of them. And again, the name Sabaoth, which is
 honourable and mighty with you, he declares to be the nature of man,
 and the parent of desire; for which reason the simple [1520] worship
 desire, and hold it to be a deity. Furthermore, as regards the manner
 of the creation of Adam, he tells us that he who said, "Come and let us
 make man in our image, after our likeness," or "after the form which we
 have seen," is the prince who addressed the other princes in terms
 which may be thus interpreted: "Come, give me of the light which we
 have received, and let us make man after the form of us princes, even
 after that form which we have seen, that is to say, [1521] the first
 man." And in that manner he [1522] created the man. They created Eve
 also after the like fashion, imparting to her of their own lust, with a
 view to the deceiving of Adam. And by these means the construction of
 the world proceeded from the operations of the prince.

 [1517] But the Latin has "qui vocatur," etc. = which is called, etc.
 And Routh thereof proposes hos kaleitai for ou kaleitai.

 [1518] The text gives simply he gnosis. The Codex Bobiensis has et
 scientia. Hence Routh would read kai he gnosis, and the knowledge.

 [1519] Retaining the reading humin, though Petavius would substitute
 emin, us. [Routh corrects Petav., R. S., vol. v. pp. 63, 64.]

 [1520] haplarioi, in the Latin version Simpliciores, a name apparently
 given to the Catholics by the Manichæans. See Ducangii Glossarium mediæ
 et infimæ Græcitatis. [Routh, v. p. 65, worth noting.]

 [1521] The text gives ho esti protos anthropos. Routh proposes ho esti,
 etc.

 [1522] Or, they.

 11. He holds also that God has no part with the world itself, and finds
 no pleasure in it, by reason of its having been made a spoil of from
 the first by the princes, and on account of the ill that rose on it.
 Wherefore He sends and takes away from them day by day the soul
 belonging to Him, through the medium of these luminaries, the sun and
 the moon, by which the whole world and all creation are dominated. Him,
 again, who spake with Moses, and the Jews, and the priests, he declares
 to be the prince of the darkness; so that the Christians, and the Jews,
 and the Gentiles are one and the same body, worshipping the same God:
 for He seduces them in His own passions, being no God of truth. For
 this reason all those who hope in that God who spake with Moses and the
 prophets have to be bound together with the said deity, [1523] because
 they have not hoped in the God of truth; for that deity spake with him
 in accordance with their own passions. Moreover, after all these
 things, he speaks in the following terms with regard to the end, [1524]
 as he has also written: When the elder has displayed his image, [1525]
 the Omophorus then lets the earth go from him, and so the mighty fire
 gets free, and consumes the whole world. Then, again, he lets the soil
 go with the new æon, [1526] in order that all the souls of sinners may
 be bound for ever. These things will take place at the time when the
 man's image [1527] has come. [1528] And all these powers put forth by
 God, [1529] --namely, Jesus, who is in the smaller ship, [1530] and the
 Mother of Life, and the twelve helmsmen, [1531] and the virgin of the
 light, and the third elder, who is in the greater ship, and the living
 spirit, and the wall [1532] of the mighty fire, and the wall of the
 wind, and the air, and the water, and the interior living fire,--have
 their seat in the lesser luminary, until the fire shall have consumed
 the whole world: and that is to happen within so many years, the exact
 number of which, however, I have not ascertained. And after these
 things there will be a restitution of the two natures; [1533] and the
 princes will occupy the lower parts proper to them, and the Father the
 higher parts, receiving again what is His own due possession.--All this
 doctrine he delivered to his three disciples, and charged each to
 journey to a separate clime. [1534] The Eastern parts fell thus to the
 lot of Addas; Thomas [1535] obtained the Syrian territories as his
 heritage; and another, to wit, Hermeias, directed his course towards
 Egypt. And to this day they, sojourn there, with the purpose of
 establishing the propositions contained in this doctrine. [1536]

 [1523] met' autou echousi dethenai.

 [1524] epi telei.

 [1525] The text is kathos autos egrapsen; O presbutes, etc. The Codex
 Bobiensis gives, "Sicut ipse senior scripsit: Cum manifestam feceris,"
 etc., = As the elder himself wrote: When thou hast, etc. The elder here
 is probably the same as the third elder farther on.

 [1526] The Greek is, aphiesi ton bolon meta tou neou aionos; but the
 Latin version has the strangely diverse rendering, "dimittunt animam
 quæ objicitur inter medium novi sæculi" = they let go the soul that is
 placed in the midst of the new age. [Routh has ten bolon.]

 [1527] andrias.

 [1528] But the Latin gives, "cum statuta venerit dies" = when the
 appointed day has come.

 [1529] hai de probolai pasai.

 [1530] ploio. [See Routh, p. 68, on this locus mire depravatus.]

 [1531] kubernetai.

 [1532] teichos.

 [1533] ton duo phuseon. But the Latin version gives duorum luminarium,
 and the Codex Casinensis has luminariorum, the two luminaries.

 [1534] Reading klimata, with Petavius, for klemata.

 [1535] The Codex Casinensis makes no mention of Thomas.

 [1536] Here ends the Greek of Epiphanius.

 12. When Turbo had made this statement, Archelaus was intensely
 excited; but Marcellus remained unmoved, for he expected that God would
 come to the help of His truth. Archelaus, however, had additional cares
 in his anxiety about the people, like the shepherd who becomes
 concerned for his sheep when secret perils threaten them from the
 wolves. Accordingly Marcellus loaded Turbo with the most liberal gifts,
 and instructed him to remain in the house of Archelaus the bishop.
 [1537] But on that selfsame day Manes arrived, bringing along with him
 certain chosen youths and virgins to the number of twenty-two. [1538]
 And first of all he sought for Turbo at the door of the house of
 Marcellus; and on failing to find him there, he went in to salute
 Marcellus. On seeing him, Marcellus at first was struck with
 astonishment at the costume in which he presented himself. For he wore
 a kind of shoe which is usually called in common speech the quadrisole;
 [1539] he had also a party-coloured cloak, of a somewhat airy [1540]
 appearance; in his hand he grasped a very sturdy staff of ebony-wood;
 [1541] he carried a Babylonian book under his left arm; his legs were
 swathed in trousers of different colours, the one being red, and the
 other green as a leek; and his whole mien was like that of some old
 Persian master and commandant. [1542] Thereupon Marcellus sent
 forthwith for Archelaus, who arrived so quickly as almost to outstrip
 the word, and on entering was greatly tempted at once to break out
 against him, being provoked to that instantly by the very sight of his
 costume and his appearance, though more especially also by the fact
 that he had himself been turning over in his mind in his retirement
 [1543] the various matters which he had learned from the recital of
 Turbo, and had thus come carefully prepared. But Marcellus, in his
 great thoughtfulness, repressed all zeal for mere wrangling, and
 decided to hear both parties. With that view he invited the leading men
 of the city; and from among them he selected as judges of the
 discussion certain adherents of the Gentile religion, four in number.
 The names of these umpires were as follows: Manippus, a person deeply
 versed in the art of grammar and the practice of rhetoric; Ægialeus,
 [1544] a very eminent physician, and a man of the highest reputation
 for learning; and Claudius and Cleobolus, [1545] two brothers famed as
 rhetoricians. [1546] A splendid assemblage was thus convened; so large,
 indeed, that the house of Marcellus, which was of immense size, was
 filled with those who had been called to be hearers. And when the
 parties who proposed to speak in opposition to each other had taken
 their places in view of all, then those who had been elected as judges
 took their seats in a position elevated above all others: and the task
 of commencing the disputation was assigned to Manes. Accordingly, when
 silence was secured, he began [1547] the discussion in the following
 terms: [1548] --

 [1537] The words, the bishop, are omitted in the Codex Bobiensis.

 [1538] But Codex Bobiensis gives duodecim, twelve.

 [1539] But the Codex Bobiensis gives trisolium, the trisole. Strabo,
 book xv., tells us that the Persians wore high shoes.

 [1540] Aërina, sky-like. [This portrait seems from life.]

 [1541] Ducange in his Glossary, under the word Ebellinos, shows from
 Callisthenes that the prophets or interpreters of sacred things carried
 an ebony staff. [Ezek. xxvii. 15; Routh, p. 71.]

 [1542] The text is, "vultus vero ut senis Persæ artificis et bellorum
 ducis videbatur." Philippus Buonarruotius, in the Osservazioni sopra
 alcuni frammenti di vasi antichi di Vetro, Florence, 1716, p. 69,
 thinks that this rendering has arisen from the Latin translator's
 having erroneously read hos demiourgou kai strategou instead of hos
 demarchou kai strategou. Taking strategou, therefore, in the civil
 sense which it bears in various passages, he would interpret the
 sentence thus: "His whole mien was like that of an old Persian tribune
 and magistrate." See Gallandi's note [in Routh, p. 71].

 [1543] The text is secretius factum, etc. Routh suggests secretius
 factus, etc.

 [1544] The Codex Bobiensis reads "Ægidius."

 [1545] Epiphanius gives Kleoboulos.

 [1546] Codex Casinensis reads rectores, governors. And Epiphanius, num.
 10, makes the first a professor of Gentile philosophy, the second a
 physician, the third a grammarian, and the fourth a rhetorician.

 [1547] For primum the Codex Casinensis reads plurima, = he began a
 lengthened statement, etc.

 [1548] Thus far Valesius edited the piece from the Codex Bobiensis.

 13. My brethren, I indeed am a disciple of Christ, and, moreover, an
 apostle of Jesus; and it is owing to the exceeding kindness of
 Marcellus that I have hastened hither, with the view of showing him
 clearly in what manner he ought to keep the system of divine religion,
 so that the said Marcellus verily, who at present has put himself, like
 one who has surrendered himself prisoner, under the doctrine of
 Archelaus, may not, like the dumb animals, which are destitute of
 intellect and understand not what they do, be fatally smitten to the
 ruin of his soul, in consequence of any failure in the possession of
 further facilities for setting about the right observance of divine
 worship. I know, furthermore, and am certain, that if Marcellus is once
 set right, [1549] it will be quite possible that all of you may also
 have your salvation effected; for your city hangs suspended upon his
 judgment. If vain presumption is rejected by every one of you, and if
 those things which are to be declared by me be heard with a real love
 for the truth, ye will receive the inheritance of the age to come, and
 the kingdom of heaven. I, in sooth, am the Paraclete, whose mission was
 announced of old time by Jesus, and who was to come to "convince the
 world of sin and unrighteousness." [1550] And even as Paul, who was
 sent before me, said of himself, that "he knew in part, and prophesied
 in part," [1551] so I reserve the perfect for myself, in order that I
 may do away with that which is in part. Therefore receive ye this third
 testimony, that I am an elect apostle of Christ; and if ye choose to
 accept my words, ye will find salvation; but if ye refuse them, eternal
 fire will have you to consume you. For as Hymenæus and Alexander were
 "delivered unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme," [1552]
 so will all ye also be delivered unto the prince of punishments,
 because ye have done injury to the Father of Christ, in so far as ye
 declare Him to be the cause of all evils, and the founder of
 unrighteousness, and the creator of all iniquity. By such doctrine ye
 do, indeed, bring forth from the same fountain both sweet water and
 bitter,--a thing which can in no possible way be either done or
 apprehended. For who ought to be believed? Should it be those masters
 of yours whose enjoyment is in the flesh, and who pamper themselves
 with the richest delights; or our Saviour Jesus Christ, who says, as it
 is written in the book of the Gospels, "A good tree cannot bring forth
 evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit," [1553]
 and who in another place assures us that the "father of the devil
 [1554] is a liar and a murderer from the beginning," [1555] and tells
 us again that men's desire was for the darkness, [1556] so that they
 would not follow that Word that had been sent forth in the beginning
 from the light, [1557] and (once more shows us) the man who is the
 enemy of the same, the sower of tares, [1558] and the god and prince of
 the age of this world, who blinds the minds of men that they may not be
 obedient to the truth in the Gospel of Christ? [1559] Is that God good
 who has no wish that the men who are his own should be saved? And, not
 to go over a multitude of other matters, and waste much time, I may
 defer [1560] till another opportunity the exposition of the true
 doctrine; and taking it for granted that I have said enough on this
 subject for the present, I may revert to the matter immediately before
 me, and endeavour satisfactorily to demonstrate the absurdity of these
 men's teaching, and show that none of these things can be attributed to
 the God and Father of our Lord and Saviour, but that we must take Satan
 to be the cause of all our ills. To him, certainly, these must be
 carried back, for all ills of this kind are generated by him. But those
 things also which are written in the prophets and the law are none the
 less to be ascribed to him; for he it is who spake then in the
 prophets, introducing into their minds very many ignorant notions of
 God, as well as temptations and passions. They, too, set forth that
 devourer of blood and flesh; and to that Satan and to his prophets all
 these things properly pertain which he wished to transfer [1561] to the
 Father of Christ, prepared as he was to write a few things in the way
 of truth, that by means of these he might also gain credence for those
 other statements of his which are false. Hence it is well for us to
 receive nothing at all of all those things which have been written of
 old even down to John, and indeed to embrace only the kingdom of
 heaven, which has been preached in the Gospel since his days; for they
 verily but made a mockery of themselves, introducing as they did things
 ridiculous and ludicrous, keeping some small words given in obscure
 outline in the law, but not understanding that, if good things are
 mixed up with evil, the result is, that by the corruption of these evil
 things, even those others which are good are destroyed. And if, indeed,
 there is any one who may prove himself able to demonstrate that the law
 upholds the right, that law ought to be kept; but if we can show it to
 be evil, then it ought to be done away with and rejected, inasmuch as
 it contains the ministration of death, which was graven, [1562] which
 also covered and destroyed the glory on the countenance of Moses.
 [1563] It is a thing not without peril, therefore, for any one of you
 to teach the New Testament along with the law and the prophets, as if
 they were of one and the same origin; for the knowledge of our Saviour
 renews the one from day to day, while the other grows old and infirm,
 and passes almost into utter destruction. [1564] And this is a fact
 manifest to those who are capable of exercising discernment. For just
 as, when the branches of a tree become aged, or when the trunk ceases
 to bear fruit any more, they are cut down; and just as, when the
 members of the body suffer mortification, they are amputated, for the
 poison of the mortification diffuses itself from these members through
 the whole body, and unless some remedy be found for the disease by the
 skill of the physician, the whole body will be vitiated; so, too, if ye
 receive the law without understanding its origin, ye will ruin your
 souls, and lose your salvation. For "the law and the prophets were
 until John;" [1565] but since John the law of truth, the law of the
 promises, the law of heaven, the new law, is made known to the race of
 man. And, in sooth, as long as there was no one to exhibit to you this
 most true knowledge of our Lord Jesus, ye had not sin. Now, however, ye
 both see and hear, and yet ye desire to walk in ignorance, [1566] in
 order that ye may keep [1567] that law which has been destroyed and
 abandoned. And Paul, too, who is held to be the most approved apostle
 with us, expresses himself to the same effect in one of his epistles,
 when he says: "For if I build again the things which I destroyed, I
 make myself a prevaricator." [1568] And in saying this he pronounces on
 them as Gentiles, because they were under the elements of the world,
 [1569] before the fulness of faith came, believing then as they did in
 the law and the prophets.

 [1549] Reading emendato. Codex Casinensis gives enim dato.

 [1550] John xvi. 8. Injustitia. This reading, de injustitia, may be due
 to an error on the part of the scribe, but is more probably to be
 referred to the practice pursued by Manes in altering and corrupting
 the sacred text to suit his own tenets. See Epiphanius on this heresy,
 num. 53, and cap. 53, infra. ["He introduced much new matter."]

 [1551] 1 Cor. xiii. 9.

 [1552] 1 Tim. i. 20.

 [1553] Matt. vii. 18.

 [1554] Patrem diaboli.

 [1555] John viii. 44.

 [1556] Referring, perhaps, to John i. 5.

 [1557] The text gives, "ut insequerentur....Verbum, et inimicum," etc.
 The sense seems to be as above, supposing either that the verb
 insequerentur is used with the meaning of assailing, persecuting, or
 that the ut is put for ut ne, as is the case with the excæcat ut at the
 close of the sentence.

 [1558] Matt. xiii. 25.

 [1559] Eph. vi. 12; 2 Cor. iv. 4.

 [1560] Reading differens. But Codex Casinensis gives disserens.

 [1561] Transformare.

 [1562] Informatum.

 [1563] 1 Cor. iii. 7.

 [1564] Cf. Heb. viii. 13.

 [1565] Luke xvi. 16.

 [1566] In inscitias ire vultis. It is proposed to read inficias = and
 yet ye desire to deny the truth. Routh suggests, et odistis et in
 inscitiam ire vultis = and ye hate it, and choose to take your way into
 ignorance.

 [1567] Supplying observetis in the clause ut legem, etc.

 [1568] Prævaricatorem. Gal. ii. 18 [Vulgate. But see p. 176].

 [1569] Gal. iv. 3.

 14. The judges said: If you have any clearer statement yet to make,
 give us some explanation of the nature [1570] of your doctrine and the
 designation [1571] of your faith. Manes replied: I hold that there are
 two natures, one good and another evil; and that the one which is good
 dwells indeed in certain parts proper to it, but that the evil one is
 this world, as well as all things in it, which are placed there like
 objects imprisoned [1572] in the portion of the wicked one, as John
 says, that "the whole world lieth in wickedness," [1573] and not in
 God. Wherefore we have maintained that there are two localities,--one
 good, and another which lies outside of this, [1574] so that, having
 space therein in his, it might be capable of receiving into itself the
 creature, i.e., creation, of the world. For if we say that there is but
 a monarchy of one nature, and that God fills all things, and that there
 is no location outside of Him, what will be the sustainer of the
 creature, i.e., creation? where will be the Gehenna of fire? where the
 outer darkness? where the weeping? Shall I say in Himself? God forbid;
 else He Himself will also be made to suffer in and with these.
 Entertain no such fancies, whosoever of you have any care for your
 salvation; for I shall give you an example, in order that you may have
 fuller understanding of the truth. The world is one vessel; [1575] and
 if [1576] the substance of God has already filled this entire vessel,
 how is it possible now that anything more can be placed in this same
 vessel? If it is full, how shall it receive what is placed in it,
 unless a certain portion of the vessel is emptied? Or whither shall
 that which is to be emptied out make its way, seeing that there is no
 locality for it? Where then is the earth? where the heavens? where the
 abyss? where the stars? where the settlements? [1577] where the powers?
 where the princes? where the outer darkness? Who is he that has laid
 the foundations of these, and where? No one is able to tell us that
 without stumbling on blasphemy. And in what way, again, has He been
 able to make the creatures, if there is no subsistent matter? For if He
 has made them out of the non-existent, it will follow that these
 visible creatures should be superior, and full of all virtues. But if
 in these there are wickedness, and death, and corruption, and whatever
 is opposed to the good, how say we that they owe their formation to a
 nature different from themselves? Howbeit if you consider the way in
 which the sons of men are begotten, you will find that the creator of
 man is not the Lord, but another being, who is also himself of an
 unbegotten [1578] nature, who has neither founder, nor creator, nor
 maker, but who, such as he is, has been produced by his own malice
 alone. In accordance with this, you men have a commerce with your
 wives, which comes to you by an occasion of the following nature. When
 any one of you has satiated himself with carnal meats, and meats of
 other kinds, then the impulse of concupiscence rises in him, and in
 this way the enjoyment [1579] of begetting a son is increased; and this
 happens not as if that had its spring in any virtue, or in philosophy,
 or in any other gift of mind, but in fulness of meats only, and in lust
 and fornication. And how shall any one tell me that our father Adam was
 made after the image of God, and in His likeness, and that he is like
 Him who made him? How can it be said that all of us who have been
 begotten of him are like him? Yea, rather, on the contrary, have we not
 a great variety of forms, and do we not bear the impress of different
 countenances? And how true this is, I shall exhibit to you in parables.
 Look, for instance, at a person who wishes to seal up a treasure, or
 some other object, and you will observe how, when he has got a little
 wax or clay, he seeks to stamp it with an impression of his own
 countenance from the ring which he wears; [1580] but if another
 countenance also stamps the figure of itself on the object in a similar
 manner, will the impression seem like? By no means, although you may be
 reluctant to acknowledge what is true. But if we are not like in the
 common impression, and if, instead of that, there are differences in
 us, how can it fail to be proved thereby that we are the workmanship of
 the princes, and of matter? For in due accordance with their form, and
 likeness, and image, we also exist as diverse forms. But if you wish to
 be fully instructed as to that commerce which took place at the
 beginning, and as to the manner in which it occurred, I shall explain
 the matter to you.

 [1570] Or, standard.

 [1571] Titulo.

 [1572] Ergastula.

 [1573] Or, in the wicked one. 1 John v. 19.

 [1574] The text gives "extra eum." Routh suggests Deum, outside of God.

 [1575] Vas.

 [1576] The text gives simply "quod Dei substantia," etc. We may perhaps
 adopt, with Routh, "quod si Dei," etc.

 [1577] Sedes. ["Thrones," as in Milton.] Routh suggests sidera,
 luminaries.

 [1578] Ingenitæ.

 [1579] Fructus.

 [1580] The reference is to the ancient custom of using wax and certain
 earths and clays for the purpose of affixing, by means of the ring, a
 seal with an impression on any object which it was desired to secure.
 Thus Herodotus, ii. 38, tell us how the Egyptians marked the pure
 victim by wrapping it round the horns with papyrus, and then smearing
 some sealing earth (gen semantrida) on it, and stamping it with a ring.
 See also Cicero, Pro Flacco, where he speaks of the laudatio obsignata
 cretâ illa Asiatica; and Plautus, Pseudolus, Scene i., where he
 mentions the expressam in cera ex annulo suam imaginem, etc. [Compare
 vol. v. p. 466, note 3, this series.]

 15. The judges said: We need not inquire as to the manner in which that
 primitive commerce took place until we have first seen it proved that
 there are two natural principles. For when once it is made clear that
 there are two unbegotten natures, then others of your averments may
 also gain our assent, even although something in them may not seem to
 fit in very readily with what is credible. For as the power of
 pronouncing judgment has been committed to us, we shall declare what
 may make itself clear to our mind. We may, however, also grant to
 Archelaus the liberty of speaking to these statements of yours, so
 that, by comparing what is said by each of you, we may be able to give
 our decision in accordance with the truth. Archelaus said:
 Notwithstanding, the adversary's intent is replete with gross audacity
 and blasphemy. Manes said: Hear, O judges, what he has said of the
 adversary. [1581] He admits, then, that there are two objects.
 Archelaus said: It seems to me that this man is full of madness rather
 than of prudence, who would stir up a controversy with me to-day
 because I chance to speak of the adversary. But this objection of yours
 may be removed with few words, notwithstanding that you have supposed
 from this expression of mine that I shall allow that there are these
 two natures. [1582] You have come forward with a most extravagant
 [1583] doctrine; for neither of the assertions made by you holds good.
 For it is quite possible that one who is an adversary, not by nature,
 but by determination, may be made a friend, and cease to be an
 adversary; and thus, when the one of us has come to acquiesce with the
 other, we twain shall appear to be, as it were, one and the same
 object. This account also indicates that rational creatures have been
 entrusted with free-will, [1584] in virtue of which they also admit of
 conversions. And consequently there cannot be two unbegotten natures.
 [1585] What do you say, then? Are these two natures inconvertible? or
 are they convertible? or is one of them converted? Manes, however, held
 back, because he did not find a suitable reply; for he was pondering
 the conclusion which might be drawn from either of two answers which he
 might make, turning the matter over thus in his thoughts: If I say that
 they are converted, he will meet me with that statement which is
 recorded in the Gospel about the trees; [1586] but if I say that they
 are not convertible, he will necessarily ask me to explain the
 condition and cause of their intermingling. In the meantime, after a
 little delay, Manes replied: They are indeed both inconvertible in so
 far as contraries are concerned; but they are convertible as far as
 properties [1587] are concerned. Archelaus then said: You seem to me to
 be out of your mind, and oblivious of your own propositions; yea, you
 do not appear even to recognise the powers or qualities of the very
 words which you have been learning. [1588] For you do not understand
 either what conversion is, or what is meant by unbegotten, or what
 duality implies, or what is past, or what is present, or what is
 future, as I have gathered from the opinions to which you have just now
 given expression. For you have affirmed, indeed, that each of these two
 natures is inconvertible so far as regards contraries, but convertible
 so far as regards properties. But I maintain that one who moves in
 properties does not pass out of himself, but subsists in these same
 properties, in which he is ever inconvertible; while in the case of one
 who is susceptible of conversion, the effect is that he is placed
 outside the pale of properties, and passes within the sphere of
 accidents. [1589]

 [1581] The text is "quid dixerit adversarii;" some propose "quod" or
 "quia dixerit," etc.

 [1582] The manuscript reading is, "tam si quidem ex hoc arbitratus est
 se affirmaturum." For this it is proposed to read, as in the
 translation, "tametsi quidem ex hoc arbitratus es me affirmaturum."

 [1583] The text gives ingentem. Routh suggests inscientem, stupid.

 [1584] [Vol. iii. 301-302. See Coleridge (on Donne), English Divines,
 vol. i. p. 87.]

 [1585] Adopting the proposed reading, "et ideo duæ, ingenitæ naturæ
 esse non possunt." The text omits the duæ, however; and in that case
 the sense would be simply, And consequently there cannot be unbegotten
 natures; or perhaps, And so they (the creatures) cannot be of an
 unbegotten nature.

 [1586] [Matt. vii. 15-20.]

 [1587] Propria.

 [1588] Didicisti. But perhaps we ought to read dixisti, which you have
 been uttering.

 [1589] Aliena, of what is alien.

 16. The judges said: Convertibility translates the person whom it
 befalls into another; as, for example, we might say that if a Jew were
 to make up his mind to become a Christian, or, on the other hand, if a
 Christian were to decide to be a Gentile, this would be a species of
 convertibility, and a cause of the same. [1590] But, again, if we
 suppose a Gentile to keep by all his own heathen properties, and to
 offer sacrifices to his gods, and to do service to the temples as
 usual, surely you would not be of opinion that he could be said to be
 converted, while he yet holds by his properties, and goes on in them?
 What, then, do you say? Do they sustain convertibility or not? And as
 Manes hesitated, Archelaus proceeded thus: If, indeed, he says that
 both natures are convertible, [1591] what is there to prevent our
 thinking them to be one and the same object? For if they are
 inconvertible, then surely in natures which are similarly inconvertible
 and similarly unbegotten there is no distinction, neither can the one
 of them be recognised as good or as evil. But if they are both
 convertible, then, forsooth, the possible result may be both that the
 good is made evil, and that the evil is made good. If, however, this is
 the possible result, why should we not speak of one only as unbegotten,
 [1592] which would be a conception in worthier accordance with the
 reckoning of truth? For we have to consider how that evil one became so
 at first, or against what objects he exercised his wickedness before
 the formation of the world. When the heavens had not yet appeared, when
 the earth did not yet subsist, and when there was neither man nor
 animal, against whom did he put his wickedness in operation? whom did
 he oppress unjustly? whom did he rob and kill? But if you say that he
 first appeared in his evil nature to his own kin, [1593] then without
 doubt you give the proof that he comes of a good nature. And if, again,
 all these are also evil, how can Satan then cast out Satan? [1594] But
 while thus reduced to a dilemma on this point, you may change your
 position in the discussion, and say that the good suffered violence
 from the evil. But none the more is it without peril for you to make
 such a statement, to the effect of affirming the vanquishing of the
 light; for what is vanquished has destruction near it. [1595] For what
 says the divine word? "Who can enter into a strong man's house, and
 spoil his goods, except he be stronger than he?" [1596] But if you
 allege that he first appeared in his evil nature to men, and only from
 that time showed openly the marks of his wickedness, then it follows
 that before this time he was good, and that he took on this quality of
 conversion because the creation of man [1597] was found to have emerged
 as the cause of his wickedness. But, in fine, let him tell us what he
 understands by evil, lest perchance he may be defending or setting up a
 mere name. And if it is not the name but the substance of evil that he
 speaks of, then let him set before us the fruits of this wickedness and
 iniquity, since the nature of a tree can never be known but by its
 fruit.

 [1590] The text runs thus: "ut si dicamus, Judæus, si velit fieri
 Christianus, aut si Christianus velit esse gentilis, hæc species est
 convertibilitatis et causa."

 [1591] The text gives convertibiles. Routh suggests inconvertibiles,
 inconvertible.

 [1592] The text is unum dicamus ingenitum. Routh suggests unum bonum,
 etc. = Why should we not speak of only one unbegotten good?

 [1593] The text is, "quod si suis eum dicas extitisse malum, sine dubio
 ergo ostenditur illum bonæ esse naturæ." Routh suggests, "quia istis
 suis adversatur qui mali sunt," etc. = The fact that he is adverse to
 those who are of his own kin, and who are evil, would be a proof that
 he comes of a good nature.

 [1594] Mark iii. 23.

 [1595] Or, kin to it, vicinum habet interitum.

 [1596] Mark iii. 27.

 [1597] The text is, "creati hominis causa invenitur exstitisse
 malitiæ," for which we read "creatio hominis," etc.

 17. Manes said: Let it first be allowed on your side that there is an
 alien root of wickedness, which God has not planted, and then I shall
 tell you its fruits. Archelaus said: Truth's reckoning does not make
 any such requirement; and I shall not admit to you that there is a root
 of any such evil tree, of the fruit whereof no one has ever tasted. But
 just as, when a man desires to make any purchase, he does not produce
 the money unless he first ascertains by tasting the object whether it
 is of a dry or a moist species, so I shall not admit to you that the
 tree is evil and utterly corrupt, unless the quality of its fruit is
 first exhibited; for it is written, that "the tree is known by its
 fruits." [1598] Tell us, therefore, O Manes, what fruit is yielded by
 that tree which is called evil, or of what nature it is, and what
 virtue it is, that we may also believe with you that the root of that
 same tree is of that character which you ascribe to it. Manes said: The
 root indeed is evil, and the tree is most corrupt, but the increase is
 not from God. Moreover, fornications, adulteries, murders, avarice, and
 all evil deeds, are the fruits of that evil root. Archelaus said: That
 we may credit you when you say that these are the fruits of that evil
 root, give us a taste of these things; for you have pronounced the
 substance of this tree to be ungenerate, [1599] the fruits of which are
 produced after its own likeness. Manes said: The very unrighteousness
 which subsists in men offers the proof itself, and in avarice too you
 may taste that evil root. Archelaus said: Well, then, as you have
 stated the question, those iniquities which prevail among men are
 fruits of this tree. Manes said: Quite so. Archelaus proceeded: If
 these, then, are the fruits, that is to say, the wicked deeds of men,
 it will follow that the men themselves will hold the place of the root
 and of the tree; for you have declared that they produce fruits of this
 nature. Manes said: That is my statement. Archelaus answered: Not well
 say you, That is my statement: for surely that cannot be your
 statement; otherwise, when men cease from sinning, this tree of
 wickedness will appear to be unfruitful. Manes said: What you say is an
 impossibility; for even though one or another, or several, were to
 cease sinning, there would yet be others doing evil still. Archelaus
 said: If it is at all possible for one or another, or several, as you
 admit, not to sin, it is also possible for all to do the same; for they
 are all of one parent, and are all men of one lump. And, not to follow
 at my ease those affirmations which you have so confusedly made through
 all their absurdities, I shall conclude their refutation by certain
 unmistakeable counter-arguments. Do you allege that the fruits of the
 evil root and the evil tree are the deeds of men, that is to say,
 fornications, adulteries, perjuries, murders, and other similar things?
 Manes said: I do. Archelaus said: Well, then, if it happened that the
 race of men was to die off the face of the earth, so that they should
 not be able to sin any more, the substance of that tree would then
 perish, and it would bear fruit no more. Manes said: And when will that
 take place of which you speak? Archelaus said: What [1600] is in the
 future I know not, for I am but a man; nevertheless I shall not leave
 these words of yours unexamined. What say you of the race of men? Is it
 unbegotten, or is it a production? Manes said: It is a production.
 Archelaus said: If man is a production, who is the parent of adultery
 and fornication, and such other things? Whose fruit is this? Before man
 was made, who was there to be a fornicator, or an adulterer, or a
 murderer? Manes said: But if the man is fashioned of the evil nature,
 it is manifest that he is such a fruit, [1601] albeit he may sin,
 albeit he may not sin; whence also the name and race of men are once
 for all and absolutely of this character, whether they may do what is
 righteous or what is unrighteous. Archelaus said: Well, we may also
 take notice of that matter. If, as you aver, the wicked one himself
 made man, why is it that he practises his malignity on him?

 [1598] Matt. vii. 16.

 [1599] Ingenitam.

 [1600] The text gives "quoniam quod futurum est nescio, homo enim sum,
 non tamen," etc. Routh suggests "quonam? quod futurum," etc. = What has
 that to do with the matter? The future I know not, etc.

 [1601] The text is, "sed homo a mala natura plasmatus manifestum est
 quia ipse sit fructus," etc.

 18. The judges said: We desire to have information from you on this
 point, Manichæus, to wit, to what effect you have affirmed him to be
 evil. Do you mean that he has been so from the time when men were made,
 or before that period? For it is necessary that you should give some
 proof of his wickedness from the very time from which you declare him
 to have been evil. Be assured [1602] that the quality of a wine cannot
 be ascertained unless one first tastes it; and understand that, in like
 manner, every tree is known by its fruit. What say you, then? From what
 time has this personality been evil? For an explanation of this problem
 seems to us to be necessary. Manes said: He has always been so.
 Archelaus said: Well, then, I shall also show from this, most excellent
 friends, and most judicious auditors, that his statement is by no means
 correct. For iron, to take an example, has not been an evil thing
 always, but only from the period of man's existence, and since his art
 turned it to evil by applying it to false uses; and every sin has come
 into existence since the period of man's being. Even that great serpent
 himself was not evil previous to man, but only after man, in whom he
 displayed the fruit of his wickedness, because he willed it himself.
 If, then, the father of wickedness makes his appearance to us after man
 has come into being, according to the Scriptures, how can he be
 unbegotten who has thus been constituted evil subsequently to man, who
 is himself a production? But, again, why should he exhibit himself as
 evil just from the period when, on your supposition, he did himself
 create man? [1603] What did he desire in him? If man's whole body was
 his own workmanship, what did he ardently affect in him? For one who
 ardently affects or desires, desires something which is different and
 better. If, indeed, man takes his origin from him in respect of the
 evil nature, we see how man was his own, as I have frequently shown.
 [1604] For if man was his own, he was also evil himself, just as it
 holds with our illustration of the like tree and the like fruit; for an
 evil tree, as you say, produces evil fruit. And seeing that all were
 evil, what did he desiderate, or in what could he show the beginning of
 his wickedness, if from the time of man's formation man was the cause
 of his wickedness? Moreover, the law and precept having been given to
 the man himself, the man had not by any means the power to yield
 obedience to the serpent, and to the statements which were made by him;
 and had the man then yielded no obedience to him, what occasion would
 there have been for him to be evil? But, again, if evil is unbegotten,
 how does it happen that man is sometimes found to be stronger than it?
 For, by obeying the law of God, he will often overcome every root of
 wickedness; and it would be a ridiculous thing if he, who is but the
 production, should be found to be stronger than the unbegotten.
 Moreover, whose is that law with its commandment--that commandment, I
 mean, which has been given to man? Without doubt it will be
 acknowledged to be God's. And how, then, can the law be given to an
 alien? or who can give his commandment to an enemy? Or, to speak of him
 who receives the commandment, how can he contend against the devil?
 that is to say, on this supposition, how can he contend against his own
 creator, as if the son, while he is a debtor to him for deeds of
 kindness, were to choose to inflict injuries on the father? Thus you
 but mark out the profitlessness [1605] of man on this side, if you
 suppose him to be contradicting by the law and commandment him who has
 made him, and to be making the effort to get the better of him. Yea, we
 shall have to fancy the devil himself to have gone to such an excess of
 folly, as not to have perceived that in making man he made an adversary
 for himself, and neither to have considered what might be his future,
 nor to have foreseen the actual consequence of his act; whereas even in
 ourselves. who are but productions, there are at least some small gifts
 of knowledge, and a measure of prudence, and a moderate degree of
 consideration, which is sometimes of a very trustworthy nature. And
 how, then, can we believe that in the unbegotten there is not some
 little portion of prudence, or consideration, or intelligence? Or how
 can we make the contrary supposition, according to your assertion,
 namely, that he is discovered to be of the most senseless apprehension,
 and the dullest heart and in short rather like the brutes in his
 natural constitution? But if the case stands thus, again, how is it
 that man, who is possessed of no insignificant power in mental capacity
 and knowledge, could have received his substance from one who thus is,
 of all beings, the most ignorant and the bluntest in apprehension? How
 shall any one be rash enough to profess that man is the workmanship of
 an author of this character? But, again, if man consists both of soul
 and of body, and not merely of body without soul, and if the one cannot
 subsist apart from the other, why will you assert that these two are
 antagonistic and contrary to each other? For our Lord Jesus Christ,
 indeed, seems to me to have spoken of these in His parables, when He
 said: "No man can put new wine into old bottles, else the bottles will
 break, and the wine run out." [1606] But new wine is to be put into new
 bottles, as there is indeed one and the same Lord for the bottle and
 for the wine. For although the substance may be different, yet by these
 two substances, in their due powers, and in the maintenance of their
 proper mutual relations, [1607] the one person of man subsists. We do
 not say, indeed, that the soul is of one substance with the body, but
 we aver that they have each their own characteristic qualities; and as
 the bottle and the wine are applied in the similitude to one race and
 one species of men, so truth's reckoning requires us to grant that man
 was produced complete by the one God: for the soul rejoices in the
 body, and loves and cherishes it; and none the less does the body
 rejoice that it is quickened by the soul. But if, on the other hand, a
 person maintains that the body is the work of the wicked one, inasmuch
 as it is so corruptible, and antiquated, and worthless, it would follow
 then that it is incapable of sustaining the virtue of the spirit or the
 movement of the soul, and the most splendid creation of the same. For
 just as, when a person puts a piece of new cloth into an old garment,
 the rent is made worse; [1608] so also the body would perish if it were
 to be associated, under such conditions, with that most brilliant
 production the soul. Or, to use another illustration: just as, when a
 man carries the light of a lamp into a dark place the darkness is
 forthwith put to flight and makes no appearance; so we ought to
 understand that, on the soul's introduction into the body the darkness
 is straightway banished, and one nature at once effected, and one man
 constituted in one species. And thus, agreeably therewith, it will be
 allowed that the new wine is put into new bottles, and that the piece
 of new cloth is not put into the old garment. But from this we are able
 to show that there is a unison of powers in these two substances, that
 is to say, in that of the body and in that of the soul; of which unison
 that greatest teacher in the Scriptures, Paul, speaks, when he tells
 us, that "God hath set the members every one of them in the body as it
 hath pleased Him." [1609]

 [1602] Routh, however, points differently, so that the sense is: Be
 assured that it is necessary to give some proof, etc....For the quality
 of a wine, etc.

 [1603] The text is, "ex hominis tempore a se creati cur malus
 ostendatur," which is taken to be equivalent to, "ex tempore quo
 hominem ipse creavit," etc.

 [1604] The reading adopted by Migne is, "si ergo ex eo homo est, mala
 natura, demonstratur quomodo suus fuit, ut frequenter ostendi." Others
 put the sentence interrogatively = If man takes his origin from him,
 (and) the evil nature is thus demonstrated, in what sense was man his
 own, etc.? Routh suggests ex quo for ex eo = If the evil nature is
 demonstrated just from the time of man's existence, how was man, etc.?

 [1605] The reading is inutilitatem. But Routh points that this is
 probably the translation of ten euteleian, vilitatem, meanness.

 [1606] Matt. ix. 17.

 [1607] Dominatione et observantiæ usu.

 [1608] Matt. ix. 16.

 [1609] 1 Cor. xii. 18.

 19. But if it seems difficult for you to understand this, and if you do
 not acquiesce in these statements, I may at all events try to make them
 good by adducing illustrations. Contemplate man as a kind of temple,
 according to the similitude of Scripture: [1610] the spirit that is in
 man may thus be likened to the image that dwells in the temple. Well,
 then, a temple cannot be constituted unless first an occupant is
 acknowledged for the temple; and, on the other hand, an occupant cannot
 be settled in the temple unless the structure has been erected. Now,
 since these two objects, the occupant and the structure, are both
 consecrated together, how can any antagonism or contrariety be found
 between them, and how should it not rather appear that they have both
 been the products of subjects that are in amity and of one mind? And
 that you may know that this is the case, and that these subjects are
 truly at one both in fellowship and in lineage, He who knows and hears
 [1611] all has made this response, "Let us make man," and so forth. For
 he who constructs [1612] the temple interrogates him who fashions the
 image, and inquires carefully about the measurements of magnitude, and
 breadth, and bulk, in order that he may mark off the space for the
 foundations in accordance with these dimensions; and no one sets about
 the vain task of building a temple without first making himself
 acquainted with the measurement needed for the placing of the image. In
 like manner, therefore, the mode and the measure of the body are made
 the subject of inquiry, in order that the soul may be appropriately
 lodged in it by God, the Artificer of all things. But if any one say
 that he who has moulded the body is an enemy to the God who is the
 Creator of my soul, [1613] then how is it that, while regarding each
 other with a hostile eye, these two parties have not brought disrepute
 upon the work, by bringing it about either that he who constructs the
 temple should make it of such narrow dimensions as to render it
 incapable of accommodating what is placed within it, or that he who
 fashions the image should come with something so massive and ponderous,
 that, on its introduction into the temple, the edifice would at once
 collapse? If such is not the case, then, with these things, let us
 contemplate them in the light of what we know to be the objects and
 intents of antagonists. But if it is right for all to be disposed with
 the same measures and the same equity, and to be displayed with like
 glory, what doubt should we still entertain on this subject? We add, if
 it please you, this one illustration more. Man appears to resemble a
 ship which has been constructed by the builder and launched into the
 deep, which, however, it is impossible to navigate without the rudder,
 by which it can be kept under command, and turned in whatsoever
 direction its steersman may wish to sail. Also, that the rudder and the
 whole body of the ship require the same artificer, is a matter
 admitting no doubt; for without the rudder the whole structure of the
 ship, that huge body, will be an inert mass. And thus, then, we say
 that the soul is the rudder of the body; that both these, moreover, are
 ruled by that liberty of judgment and sentiment which we possess, and
 which corresponds to the steersman; and that when these two are made
 one by union, [1614] and thus possess a unison of function applicable
 to all kinds of work, whatever may be the products of their own
 operation, they bear a testimony to the fact that they have both one
 and the same author and maker.

 [1610] 1 Cor. iii. 17; 2 Cor. vi. 16.

 [1611] The reading is scit et audit. Routh somewhat needlessly suggests
 scite audit = he who hears intelligently.

 [1612] The codex gives "hic enim qui exstruis." It is proposed to read
 "sic enim qui exstruit" = For in this very way he who constructs.

 [1613] The text gives "quod si dicat quis inimicum esse eum qui
 plasmaverit corpus; Deus qui Creator," etc. The Codex Casinensis reads
 Deum. We adopt the emendation Deo and the altered punctuation, thus:
 "quod si dicat quis inimicum esse eum qui plasmaverit corpus Deo qui
 creator est animæ," etc.

 [1614] Reading "per conjunctionem" for the simple conjunctionem.

 20. On hearing these argumentations, the multitudes who were present
 were exceedingly delighted; so much so, indeed, that they were almost
 laying hands on Manes; and it was with difficulty that Archelaus
 restrained them, and kept them back, and made them quiet again. The
 judges said: Archelaus has given us proof sufficient of the fact that
 the body and soul of man are the works of one hand; because an object
 cannot subsist in any proper consonance and unison as the work of one
 hand, if there is any want of harmony in the design and plan. But if it
 is alleged that one could not possibly have sufficed to develop both
 these objects, namely, body and soul, this is simply to exhibit the
 incapacity of the artificer. For thus, even though one should grant
 that the soul is the creation of a good deity, it will be found to be
 but an idle work so far as the man is concerned, unless it also takes
 to itself the body. And if, again, the body is held to be the formation
 of an evil deity, the work will also none the less be idle unless it
 receives the soul; and, in truth, unless the soul be in unison with the
 body by commixture and due introduction, so that the two are in mutual
 connections, the man will not exist, neither can we speak of him. Hence
 we are of opinion that Archelaus has proved by a variety of
 illustrations that there is but one and the same maker for the whole
 man. Archelaus said: I doubt not, Manes, that you understand this,
 namely, that one who is born and created [1615] is called the son of
 him who begets or creates. But if the wicked one made man, then he
 ought to be his father, according to nature. And to whom, then, did the
 Lord Jesus address Himself, when in these terms He taught men to pray:
 "When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven;" [1616] and again,
 "Pray to your Father which is in secret?" [1617] But it was of Satan
 that He spoke when He said, that He "beheld him as lightning fall from
 heaven;" [1618] so that no one dare say that He taught us to pray to
 him. And surely Jesus did not come down from heaven with the purpose of
 bringing men together, and reconciling them to Satan; but, on the
 contrary, He gave him over to be bruised beneath the feet of His
 faithful ones. However, for my part, I would say that those Gentiles
 are the more blessed who do indeed bring in a multitude of deities, but
 at least hold them all to be of one mind, and in amity with each other;
 whereas this man, though he brings in but two gods, does not blush to
 posit enmities and discordant sentiments between them. And, in sooth,
 if these Gentiles were to bring in [1619] their counterfeit deities
 under conditions of that kind, we would verily have it in our power to
 witness something like a gladiatorial contest proceeding between them,
 with their innumerable natures and diverse sentiments.

 [1615] Reading "natus est et creatus." The Codex Casinensis has "natus
 est creatus."

 [1616] Matt. vi. 9; Luke xi. 2.

 [1617] Matt. vi. 6.

 [1618] Luke x. 18.

 [1619] Codex Casinensis gives introduceret; but, retaining the
 reference to the Gentiles we read introducerent.

 21. But now, what it is necessary for me to say on the subject of the
 inner and the outer man, may be expressed in the words of the Saviour
 to those who swallow a camel, and wear the outward garb of the
 hypocrite, begirt with blandishments and flatteries. It is to them that
 Jesus addresses Himself when He says: "Woe unto you, scribes and
 Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of
 the platter, but within they are full of uncleanness. Or know you not,
 that He that made that which is without, made that which is within
 also?" [1620] Now why did He speak of the cup and of the platter? Was
 He who uttered these words a glassworker, or a potter who made vessels
 of clay? Did He not speak most manifestly of the body and the soul? For
 the Pharisees truly looked to the "tithing of anise and cummin, and
 left undone the weightier matters of the law;" [1621] and while
 devoting great care to the things which were external, they overlooked
 those which bore upon the salvation of the soul. For they also had
 respect to "greetings in the market-place," [1622] and "to the
 uppermost seats at feasts:" [1623] and to them the Lord Jesus, knowing
 their perdition, made this declaration, that they attended to those
 things only which were without, and despised as strange things those
 which were within, and understood not that He who made the body made
 also the soul. And who is so unimpressible and stolid in intellect, as
 not to see that those sayings of our Lord may suffice him for all
 cases? Moreover, it is in perfect harmony with these sayings that Paul
 speaks, when he interprets to the following intent certain things
 written in the law: "Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that
 treadeth out the corn. Doth God take care for oxen? Or saith He it
 altogether for our sakes?" [1624] But why should we waste further time
 upon this subject? Nevertheless I shall add a few things out of many
 that might be offered. Suppose now that there are two unbegotten
 principles, and that we determine fixed localities for these: it
 follows then that God is separated, [1625] if He is supposed to be
 within a certain location, and not diffused everywhere; and He will
 consequently be represented as much inferior to the locality in which
 He is understood to be for the object which contains is always greater
 [1626] than the object which is contained in it: and thus God is made
 to be of that magnitude which corresponds with the magnitude of the
 locality in which He is contained, just as is the case with a man in a
 house. [1627] Then, further, reason asks who it is that has divided
 between them, or who has appointed for them their determinate limits;
 and thus both would be made out to be the decided inferiors of man's
 own power. [1628] For Lysimachus and Alexander held the empire of the
 whole world, and were able to subdue all foreign nations, and the whole
 race of men; so that throughout that period there was no other in
 possession of empire besides themselves under heaven. And how will any
 one be rash enough to say that God, who is the true light that never
 suffers eclipse, and whose is also the kingdom that is holy and
 everlasting, is not everywhere present, as [1629] is the way with this
 most depraved man, who, in his impiety, refuses to ascribe to the
 Omnipotent God even equal power with men? [1630]

 [1620] Matt. xxiii. 25; Luke xi. 39.

 [1621] Luke xi. 42.

 [1622] Matt. xxiii. 6; Mark xii. 38; Luke xx. 46.

 [1623] The Codex Casinensis gives a strangely corrupt reading here:
 "primos discipulos subitos in coenis, quod scientes Dominus." It is
 restored thus: "primos discubitus in coenis, quos sciens Dominus," etc.

 [1624] 1 Cor. ix. 9.

 [1625] Dividitur.

 [1626] Reading majus for the inept malus of the Codex Casinensis.

 [1627] Routh refers us here to Maximus, De Natura, § 2. See Reliquiæ
 Sacræ, ii. 89-91.

 [1628] The text is "multo inferior virtutis humanæ," which is probably
 a Græcism.

 [1629] Reading ceu for the eu of the Codex Casinensis.

 [1630] The Codex Casinensis gives "nec quæ vellem quidem," for which
 "nec æqualem quidem," etc., is suggested, as in the translation.

 22. The judges said: We know that a light shines through the whole
 house, and not in some single part of it; as Jesus also intimates when
 He says, that "no man lighting a candle puts it under a bushel, but on
 a candlestick, that it may give light unto all that are in the house."
 [1631] If, then, God is a light, it must needs be that light (if Jesus
 is to be credited) shall shine on the whole world, and not on any
 portions of it merely. And if, [1632] then, that light holds possession
 of the whole world, where now can there be any ungenerated darkness? or
 how can darkness be understood to exist at all, unless it is something
 simply accidental? Archelaus said: Forasmuch, indeed, as the word of
 the Gospel is understood much better by you than by this person who
 puts himself forward as the Paraclete, although I could call him rather
 parasite than paraclete, I shall tell you how it has happened that
 there is darkness. When the light had been diffused everywhere, God
 began to constitute the universe, and commenced with the heaven and the
 earth; in which process this issue appeared, to wit, that the midst,
 [1633] which is the locality of earth covered with shadow, as a
 consequence of the interposition [1634] of the creatures which were
 called into being, was found to be obscure, in such wise that
 circumstances required light to be introduced into that place, which
 was thus situated in the midst. Hence in Genesis, where Moses gives an
 account of the construction of the world, he makes no mention of the
 darkness either as made or as not made. But he keeps silence on that
 subject, and leaves the explanation of it to be discovered by those who
 may be able to give proper attention to it. Neither, indeed, is that a
 very arduous and difficult task. For to whom may it not be made plain
 that this sun of ours is visible, when it has risen in the east, and
 taken its course toward the west, but that when it has gone beneath the
 earth, and been carried farther within that formation which among the
 Greeks is called the sphere, it then ceases to appear, being
 overshadowed in darkness in consequence of the interposition of the
 bodies? [1635] When it is thus covered, and when the body of the earth
 stands opposite it, a shadow is superinduced, which produces from
 itself the darkness; and it continues so until again, after the course
 of the inferior space has been traversed in the night, it rolls towards
 the east, and is seen to rise once more in its wonted seats. Thus,
 then, the cause of the shadow and the night is discovered in the
 solidity of the body of the earth,--a thing, indeed, which a man may
 understand from the fact of the shadow cast by his own body. [1636] For
 before the heaven and the earth and all those corporeal creatures
 appeared, the light remained always constant, without waning or
 eclipse, as there existed no body which might produce shadow by its
 opposition or intervention; and consequently one must say that nowhere
 was there darkness then, and nowhere night. For if, to take an
 illustration, it should please Him who has the power of all things to
 do away with the quarter [1637] which lies to the west, then, as the
 sun would not direct its course toward that region, there would nowhere
 emerge either evening or darkness, but the sun would be on its course
 always, and would never set, but would almost always hold the centre
 tract of heaven, and would never cease to appear; and by this the whole
 world would be illumined with the clearest light, in virtue of which no
 part of it would suffer obscuration, but the equal power of one light
 would remain everywhere. But on the other hand, while the western
 quarter keeps its position, and the sun executes [1638] its course in
 three parts of the world, then those who are under the sun will be seen
 to be illuminated more brightly; so that I might almost say, that while
 the people who belong to the diverse tract are still asleep, those
 former are in possession of the day's beginning. But just [1639] as
 those Orientals have the light rising on them earlier than the people
 who live in the west, so they have it also more quickly obscured, and
 they only who are settled in the middle of the globe see always an
 equality of light. For when the sun occupies the middle of the heavens,
 there is no place that can appear to be either brighter or darker (than
 another), but all parts of the world are illuminated equally and
 impartially by the sun's effulgence. [1640] If, then, as we have said
 above, that portion of the western tract were done away with, the part
 which is adjacent to it would now no more suffer obscuration. And these
 things I could indeed set forth somewhat more simply, as I might also
 describe the zodiacal circle; but I have not thought of looking into
 these matters at present. [1641] I shall therefore say nothing of
 these, but shall revert to that capital objection urged by my
 adversary, in his affirming so strenuously [1642] that the darkness is
 ungenerated; which position, however, has also been confuted already,
 as far as that could have been done by us.

 [1631] Matt. v. 16.

 [1632] The text gives a quo si, etc. Routh suggests atqui si, etc.

 [1633] Medietas.

 [1634] Reading objectu...creaturarum, instead of obtectu, etc., in
 Codex Casinensis.

 [1635] The text of this sentence stands thus in Migne and Routh: "cui
 enim non fiat manifestum, solem istum visibilem, cum ab oriente fuerit
 exortus, et tetenderit iter suum ad occidentem, cum sub terram ierit,
 et interior effectus fuerit ea quæ apud Græcos sphæra vocatur, quod
 tunc objectu corporum obumbratus non appareat?" The Codex Casinensis
 reads quod nunc oblectu, etc. We should add that it was held by
 Anaximander and others that there was a species of globe or sphere
 (sphaira) which surrounded the universe. [Vol. ii. p. 136. n. 2.]

 [1636] Reading ex suimet ipsius umbra for exuet ipsius umbra, which is
 given in the Codex Casinensis.

 [1637] Plagam.

 [1638] Ministrante.

 [1639] The text is "Sicut autem ante," etc. Routh suggests, Sole
 adeunte, etc.

 [1640] Reading "ex æquo et justo, solis fulgore," etc. The Codex
 Casinensis has "ex ea quo solis fulgure."

 [1641] The text is altogether corrupt--sed non intui hunc fieri ratus
 sum; so that the sense can only be guessed at. Routh suggests istud for
 intui.

 [1642] Codex Casinensis gives "omni nisi," for which we adopt "omni
 nisu."

 23. The judges said: If we consider that the light existed before the
 estate of the creatures was introduced, and that there was no object in
 an opposite position which might generate shadow, it must follow that
 the light was then diffused everywhere, and that all places were
 illuminated with its effulgence, as has been shown by what you have
 stated just now; and as we perceive that the true explanation is given
 in that, we assign the palm to the affirmations of Archelaus. For if
 the universe is clearly divided, as if some wall had been drawn through
 the centre of it, and if on the one side the light dwells, and on the
 other side the darkness, it is yet to be understood that this darkness
 has been brought accidentally about through the shadow generated in
 consequence of the objects which have been set up in the world; and
 hence again we must ask who it is that has built this wall between the
 two divisions, provided you indeed admit the existence of such a
 construction, O Manichæus. But if we have to take account of this
 matter on the supposition that no such wall has been built, then again
 it comes to be understood that the universe forms but one locality,
 without any exception, and is placed under one power; and if so, then
 the darkness can in no way have an ungenerated nature. Archelaus said:
 Let him also explain the following subject with a view to what has been
 propounded. If God is seated in His kingdom, and if the wicked one in
 like manner is seated in his kingdom, who can have constructed the wall
 between them? For no object can divide two substances except one that
 is greater than either, [1643] even as it is said [1644] in the book of
 Genesis, that "God divided the light from the darkness." [1645]
 Consequently the constructor of this wall must also be some one of a
 capacity like that: for the wall marks the boundaries of these two
 parties, just as among people who dwell in the rural parts a stone is
 usually taken to mark off the portion of each several party; which
 custom, however, would afford a better apprehension of the case were we
 to take the division to refer specially to the marking out of an
 inheritance falling to brothers. But for the present I have not to
 speak of matters like these, however essential they may appear. For
 what we are in quest of is an answer to the question, Who can have
 constructed the wall required for the designation of the limits of the
 kingdom of each of these twain? No answer has been given. Let not this
 perfidious fellow hesitate, but let him now acknowledge that the
 substance of his duality has been reduced again to a unity. Let him
 mention any one who can have constructed that middle wall. What could
 the one of these two parties have been engaged in when the other was
 building? Was he asleep? or was he ignorant of the fact? or was he
 unable to withstand the attempt? or was he bought over with a price?
 Tell us what he was about, or tell us who in all the universe was the
 person that raised the construction. I address my appeal to you, O
 judges, whom God has sent to us with the fullest plenitude of
 intelligence; judge ye which of these two could have erected the
 structure, or what the one could have been doing all the while that the
 other was engaged in the building.

 [1643] Reading utriusque majus. The Codex Casinensis has utrunque
 majus.

 [1644] The text is dicit, for which dicitur may be adopted.

 [1645] Gen. i. 4.

 24. The judges said: Tell us, O Manes, who designated the boundaries
 for the kingdom of each, and who made the middle wall? For Archelaus
 begs that due importance be attached to the practice of interrogation
 in this discussion. Manes said: The God who is good, and who has
 nothing in common with evil, placed the firmament in the midst, in
 order to make it plain [1646] that the wicked one is an alien to Him.
 Archelaus said: How fearfully you belie the dignity of that name! You
 do indeed call Him God, but you do so in name only, and you make His
 deity resemble man's infirmities. At one time out of the non-existent,
 and at another time out of underlying matter, which indeed thus existed
 before Himself, you assert that He did build the structure, as builders
 among men are wont to do. Sometimes also you speak of Him as
 apprehensive, and sometimes as variable. It is, however, the part of
 God to do what is proper to God, and it is the part of man to do what
 is proper to man. If, then, God, as you say, has constructed a wall,
 this is a God who marks Himself out as apprehensive, and as possessed
 of no fortitude. For we know that it is always the case that those who
 are suspicious of the preparation of secret perils against them by
 strangers, and who are afraid of the plots of enemies, are accustomed
 to surround their cities with walls, by which procedure they at once
 secure themselves in their ignorance, and display their feeble
 capacity. But here, too, we have something which ought not to be passed
 over by us in silence, but rather brought prominently forward; so that
 even by the great abundance of our declarations on the subject our
 adversary's manifold craftiness may be brought to nought, with the help
 of the truth on our side. We may grant, then, that the structure of the
 wall has been made with the purpose of serving to distinguish between
 the two kingdoms; for without this one division [1647] it is impossible
 for either of them to have his own proper kingdom. But granting this,
 then it follows further that in the same manner it will also be
 impossible for the wicked one to pass without his own proper limits and
 invade the territories of the good King, inasmuch as the wall stands
 there as an obstacle, unless it should chance first to be cast down,
 for we have heard that such things have been done by enemies, and
 indeed with our own eyes we have quite recently seen an achievement of
 that nature successfully carried out. [1648] And when a king attacks a
 citadel surrounded by a strong wall, he uses first of all the ballista
 [1649] and projectiles; then he endeavours to cut through the gates
 with axes, and to demolish the walls by the battering-rams; and when he
 at last obtains an entrance, and gains possession of the place, he does
 whatever he listeth, whether it be his pleasure to carry off the
 citizens into captivity, or to make a complete destruction of the
 fortress and its contents, or whether, on the other hand, it may be his
 will to grant indulgence to the captured stronghold on the humble suit
 of the conquered. What, then, does my opponent here say to this
 analogy? Did no adversary substantially--which is as much as to say,
 designedly--overthrow the muniment cast up between the two? [1650] For
 in his former statements he has avouched that the darkness passed
 without its own limits, and supervened upon the kingdom of the good
 God. Who, then, overthrew that munition before the one could thus have
 crossed over to the other? For it was impossible for the evil one to
 find any entrance while the munition stood fast. Why are you silent?
 Why do you hesitate, Manichæus? Yet, although you may hold back, I
 shall proceed with the task of my own accord. For if we suppose you to
 say that God destroyed it, then I have to ask what moved Him in this
 way to demolish the very thing which He had Himself previously
 constructed on account of the importunity of the wicked one, and for
 the purpose of preserving the separation between them? In what fit of
 passion, or under what sense of injury, did He thus set about
 contending against Himself? Or was it that He lusted after some of the
 possessions of the wicked one? But if none of these things formed the
 real cause that led God to destroy those very things which He had
 constructed a long time before with the view of estranging and
 separating the wicked one from Him, then it must needs be considered no
 matter of surprise if God should also have become delighted with his
 society; [1651] for, on your supposition, the munition which had been
 set up with the purpose of securing God against trouble from him, will
 appear to have been removed just because now he is to be regarded no
 more as an enemy, but as a friend. And, on the other hand, if you aver
 that the wall was destroyed by the wicked one, tell us then how it can
 be possible for the works of the good God to be mastered by the wicked
 one. For if that is possible, then the evil nature will be proved to be
 stronger than God. Furthermore, how can that being, seeing that he is
 pure and total darkness, surprise the light and apprehend it, while the
 evangelist gives us the testimony that "the light shineth in darkness,
 and the darkness comprehended it not?" [1652] How is this blind one
 armed? How does the darkness fight against the kingdom of light? For
 even as the creatures of God [1653] here cannot take in the rays of the
 sun with uninjured eye, [1654] so neither can that being bear the clear
 vision of the kingdom of light, but he remains for ever a stranger to
 it, and an alien.

 [1646] Reading "patefaceret" for the "partum faceret" of Codex
 Casinensis.

 [1647] The text gives sine hoc uno. But perhaps Routh is right in
 suggesting muro for uno = without this wall.

 [1648] Some suppose that Archelaus refers here to the taking of Charræ
 by the Persians in the time of Valerianus Augustus, or to its recapture
 and restoration to the Roman power by the Eastern king Odenathus during
 the empire of Gallienus.

 [1649] The ballista was a large engine fitted with cords somewhat like
 a bow, by which large masses of stone and other missiles were hurled to
 a great distance.

 [1650] The sense is obscure here. The text gives, "non substantia id
 est proposito adversarius quis dejecit," etc. Migne edits the sentence
 without an interrogation. We adopt the interrogative form with Routh.
 The idea perhaps is, Did no adversary with materials such as the kings
 of earth use, and that is as much as to say also with a determinate
 plan, overthrow, etc.?

 [1651] The Codex Casinensis has "nec mirum putandum est consortio,"
 etc. We read with Routh and others, si ejus consortio, or quod ejus
 consortio, etc.

 [1652] John i. 5.

 [1653] The text gives simply, sicut enim hæc. Routh suggests hæ.

 [1654] Reading illæsis oculis for the illius oculis of Codex
 Casinensis.

 25. Manes said: Not all receive the word of God, but only those to whom
 it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. [1655] And
 even now [1656] I know who are ours; for "my sheep," He says, "hear my
 voice." [1657] For the sake of those who belong to us, and to whom is
 given the understanding of the truth, I shall speak in similitudes. The
 wicked one is like a lion that sought to steal upon the flock of the
 good shepherd; and when the shepherd saw this, he dug a huge pit, and
 took one kid out of the flock and cast it into the pit. Then the lion,
 hungering to get at it, and bursting with passion to devour it, ran up
 to the pit and fell in, and discovered no strength sufficient to bring
 him out again. And thereupon the shepherd seized him and shut him up
 carefully in a den, and at the same time secured the safety of the kid
 which had been with him in the pit. And it is in this way that the
 wicked one has been enfeebled,--the lion, so to speak, possessing no
 more capacity for doing aught injurious; and so all the race of souls
 will be saved, and what once perished will yet be restored to its
 proper flock. Archelaus said: If you compare the wicked one to the
 lion, and God to the true shepherd, tell us, whereunto shall we liken
 the sheep and the kid? Manes said: The sheep and the kid seem to me to
 be of one nature: and they are taken as figures of souls. Archelaus
 said: Well, then, God gave a soul over to perdition when He set it
 before the lion in the pit. Manes said: By no means; far from it. But
 He was moved by a particular disposition, [1658] and in the future He
 will save that other, the soul. Archelaus said: Now, surely it would be
 an absurd procedure, my hearers, if a shepherd who dreaded the inroad
 of a lion were to expose to the beast's devouring fury a lamb that he
 was wont to carry in his bosom, and if it were then to be said that he
 meant to save the creature hereafter. Is not this something supremely
 ridiculous? Yea, there is no kind of sense in this. For on the
 supposition implied in your similitude God thus handed over to Satan a
 soul that he might seize and ruin. But when did the shepherd ever do
 anything like that? [1659] Did not David deliver a sheep out of the
 mouth of a lion or of a bear? And we mention this on account of the
 expression, out of the mouth of the lion; for, on your theory, this
 would imply that the shepherd can bring forth out of the mouth of the
 lion, or out of the belly of the same, the very object which it has
 devoured. [1660] But you will perhaps make this answer, that it is of
 God we speak, and that He is able to do all things. Hear, however, what
 I have to say to that: Why then do you not rather assert His real
 capacity, and affirm simply His ability to overcome the lion in His own
 might, or with the pure power of God, and without the help of any sort
 of cunning devices, or by consigning a kid or a lamb to a pit? [1661]
 Tell me this, too, if the lion were to be supposed to come upon the
 shepherd at a time when he has no sheep, what would the consequence be?
 For he who is here called the shepherd is supposed to be unbegotten,
 and he who is here the lion is also unbegotten. Wherefore, when man did
 not yet exist--in other words, before the shepherd had a flock--if the
 lion had then come upon the shepherd, what would have followed, seeing
 that there could have been nothing for the lion to eat before the kid
 was in existence? Manes said: The lion certainly had nothing to devour,
 but yet he exercised his wickedness on whatever he was able to light
 upon as he coursed over the peaks of the mountains; and if at any time
 food was a matter of necessity with him, he seized some of the beasts
 which were under his own kingdom. Archelaus said: Are these two
 objects, then, of one substance--the beasts which are under the kingdom
 of the wicked one, and the kids which are in the kingdom of the good
 God? [1662] Manes said: Far from it; not at all: they have nothing in
 common either between themselves or between the properties which
 pertain to them severally. Archelaus said: There is but one and the
 same use made of the food in the lion's eating. And though he sometimes
 got that food from the beasts belonging to himself, and sometimes from
 those belonging to the good God, there is still no difference between
 them as far as regards the meats furnished; and from this it is
 apparent that those are of but one substance. On the other hand, if we
 say that there is a great difference between the two, we do but ascribe
 ignorance to the shepherd, [1663] in so far as he did not present or
 set before the lion food adapted to his use, but rather alien meats. Or
 perchance again, in your desire to dissemble your real position, you
 will say to me that lion ate nothing. Well, supposing that to be the
 case, did God then in this way challenge that being to devour a soul
 while he knew not how to devour aught? and was the pit not the only
 thing which God sought to employ with the view of cheating him?--if
 indeed it is at all worthy of God to do that sort of thing, or to
 contrive deceitful schemes. And that would be to act like a king who,
 when war is made upon him, puts no kind of confidence in his own
 strength, but gets paralyzed with the fears of his own feebleness, and
 shuts himself up within the walls of his city, and erects around him a
 rampart and other fortifications, and gets them all equipped, and
 trusts nothing to his own hand and prowess; whereas, if he is a brave
 man, the king so placed will march a great distance from his own
 territories to meet the enemy there, and will put forth every possible
 exertion until he conquers and brings his adversary into his power.

 [1655] Matt. xix. 11.

 [1656] The text gives et jam quidem for the etiam quidem of the Cod.
 Casin.

 [1657] John x. 27.

 [1658] Apprehensus est hoc ingenio. For hoc here, Routh suggests hic in
 reference to the leo so that the sense might be = But by this plan the
 lion was caught, and hereafter He will save the soul.

 [1659] The text is, "Quando enim pastor, nonne David de ore leonis,"
 etc. We adopt the amended reading, "Quando enim pastor hoc fecit? Nonne
 David," etc.

 [1660] Routh would put this interrogatively = Can he bring out of the
 mouth or the belly of the lion what it has once devoured?

 [1661] This seems to be the sense intended. The text in the Codex
 Casinensis runs thus: "Cur igitur quod possit non illud potius asseris
 quod poterit propria virtute vincere leonem, si et pura Dei potentia,"
 etc. For si et pura we may read sive pura, or si est pura, etc.

 [1662] Routh takes it as a direct assertion = It follows, then, that
 these two objects are of one substance, etc.

 [1663] The text runs, "sed aliud alio longe differre ignorantiam
 pastori ascribimus;" for which we adopt the emendation, "sed alium ab
 alio longe differre si dicamus, ignorantiam pastori ascribimus."

 26. The judges said: If you allege that the shepherd exposed the kid or
 the lamb to the lion, when the said lion was meditating an assault
 [1664] on the unbegotten, the case is closed. For seeing that the
 shepherd of the kids and lambs is himself proved to be in fault to
 them, on what creature can he pronounce judgment, if it happens that
 the lamb which has been given up [1665] through the shepherd's weakness
 has proved unable to withstand the lion, and if the consequence is that
 the lamb has had to do whatever has been the lion's pleasure? Or, to
 take another instance, that would be just as if a master were to drive
 out of his house, or deliver over in terror to his adversary, one of
 his slaves, whom he is unable afterwards to recover by his own
 strength. Or supposing that by any chance it were to come about that
 the slave was recovered, on what reasonable ground could the master
 inflict the torture on him, if it should turn out that the man yielded
 obedience to all that the enemy laid upon him, seeing that it was the
 master himself [1666] who gave him up to the enemy, just as the kid was
 given up to the lion? You affirm, too, that the shepherd understood the
 whole case beforehand. Surely, then, the lamb, when under the lash, and
 interrogated by the shepherd as to the reason why it had submitted to
 the lion in these matters, would make some such answer as this: "Thou
 didst thyself deliver me over to the lion, and thou didst offer no
 resistance to him, although thou didst know and foresee what would be
 my lot, when it was necessary for me to yield myself to his
 commandments." And, not to dilate on this at greater length, we may say
 that by such an illustration neither is God exhibited as a perfect
 shepherd, nor is the lion shown to have tasted alien meats; and
 consequently, under the instruction of the truth itself, it has been
 made clear that we ought to give the palm to the reasonings adduced by
 Archelaus. Archelaus said: Considering that, on all the points which we
 have hitherto discussed, the thoughtfulness of the judges has assigned
 us the amplest scope, it will be well for us to pass over other
 subjects in silence, and reserve them for another period. For just as,
 if [1667] a person once crushes the head of a serpent, he will not need
 to lop off any of the other members of its body; so, if we once dispose
 [1668] of this question of the duality, as we have endeavoured to do to
 the best of our ability, other matters which have been maintained in
 connection with it may be held to be exploded along with it.
 Nevertheless I shall yet address myself, at least in a few sentences,
 to the assertor of these opinions himself, who is now in our presence;
 so that it may be thoroughly understood by all who he is, and whence he
 comes, and what manner of person he proves himself to be. For he has
 given out that he is that Paraclete whom Jesus on His departure
 promised to send to the race of man for the salvation of the souls of
 the faithful; and this profession he makes as if he were somewhat
 superior even to Paul, [1669] who was an elect vessel and a called
 apostle, and who on that ground, while preaching the true doctrine,
 said: [1670] "Or seek ye a proof of that Christ who speaks in me?"
 [1671] What I have to say, however, may become clearer by such an
 illustration as the following: [1672] --A certain man gathered into his
 store a very large quantity of corn, so that the place was perfectly
 full. This place he shut and sealed in a thoroughly satisfactory
 fashion, and gave directions to keep careful watch over it. And the
 master himself then departed. However, after a lengthened lapse of time
 another person came to the store, and affirmed that he had been
 despatched by the individual who had locked up and sealed the place
 with a commission also to collect and lay up a quantity of wheat in the
 same. And when the keepers of the store saw him, they demanded of him
 his credentials, in the production of the signet, in order that they
 might assure themselves of their liberty to open the store to him and
 to render their obedience to him as to one sent by the person who had
 sealed the place. And when he could [1673] neither exhibit the keys nor
 produce the credentials of the signet, for indeed he had no right, he
 was thrust out by the keepers, and compelled to flee. For instead of
 being what he professed to be, he was detected to be a thief and a
 robber by them, and was convicted and found out [1674] through the
 circumstance that, although, as it seemed, he had taken it into his
 head to make his appearance a long time after the period that had been
 determined on beforehand, he yet could neither produce keys, or signet,
 or any token whatsoever to the keepers, nor display any knowledge of
 the quantity of corn that was in store: all which things were so many
 unmistakeable proofs that he had not been sent across by the proper
 owner; and accordingly, as was matter of course, [1675] he was
 forbidden admittance by the keepers.

 [1664] Migne reads irrueret. Routh gives irruerat, had made an assault.

 [1665] The text gives si causa traditus, etc. Routh suggests sive
 causa. Traditus, etc.; so that the sense would be, For on what creature
 can the shepherd of the kids and lambs pronounce judgment, seeing that
 he is himself proved to be in fault to them, or to be the cause of
 their position? For the lamb, having been given up, etc.

 [1666] Reading eum ipse for eum ipsum.

 [1667] Reading si quis for the simple quis of Codex Casinensis.

 [1668] Reading "quæstione rejecta" for the relecta of Codex Casinensis.

 [1669] This seems to be the general sense of the corrupt text here, et
 non longe possit ei Paulus, etc., in which we must either suppose
 something to have been lost, or correct it in some such way as this:
 "ut non longe post sit ei Paulus." Compare what Manes says also of Paul
 and himself in ch. xiii. above. It should be added, however, that
 another idea of the passage is thrown out in Routh. According to this
 the ei refers to Jesus, and the text being emended thus, etsi non longe
 post sit ei, the sense would be: although not long after His departure
 He had Paul as an elect vessel, etc. The allusion thus would be to the
 circumstance that Manes made such a claim as he did, in spite of the
 fact that after Christ's departure Paul was gifted with the Spirit in
 so eminent a measure for the building up of the faithful.

 [1670] Reading aiebat for the agebat of Codex Casinensis.

 [1671] 2 Cor. xiii. 3. The reading here is, "Aut documentum quæritis,"
 etc. The Vulgate also gives An experimentum, for the Greek epei, etc.

 [1672] The text is, "et quidem quod dico tali exemplo sed clarius." For
 sed it is proposed to read fit, or sit, or est.

 [1673] Codex Casinensis has quicunque. We adopt the correction, qui cum
 nec.

 [1674] Reading confutatus for confugatus.

 [1675] The text gives "et ideo ut consequenter erat," etc. Codex
 Casinensis omits the ut. Routh proposes, "et ideo consequenter
 thesaurus," etc. = and thus, of course, the treasure was preserved,
 etc. Comp. ch. xxvii. and xxxiv.

 27. We may give yet another illustration, if it seems good to you. A
 certain man, the head of a household, and possessed of great riches,
 was minded to journey abroad for a time, and promised to his sons that
 he would send them some one who would take his place, and divide among
 them equally the substance falling to them. And, in truth, not long
 after that, he did despatch to them a certain trustworthy and righteous
 and true man. And on his arrival, this man took charge of the whole
 substance, and first of all exerted himself to arrange it and
 administer it, giving himself great labour in journeying, and even
 [1676] working diligently with his own hands, and toiling like a
 servant for the good of the estate. Afterwards feeling that his end was
 at hand, [1677] the man wrote out a will, demitting the inheritance to
 the relations and all the next of kin; and he gave them his seals, and
 called them together one by one by name, and charged them to preserve
 the inheritance, and to take care of the substance, and to administer
 it rightly, even as they had received it, and to take their use of its
 goods and fruits, as they were themselves left its owners and heirs.
 If, moreover, any person were to ask to be allowed to benefit by the
 fruits of this field, they were to show themselves indulgent to such.
 But if, on the other hand, any one were to declare himself partner in
 the heirship with them, and were to make his demands on that ground,
 [1678] they were to keep aloof from him, and pronounce him an alien;
 and further, they were to hold that the individual who desired to be
 received among them ought all the more on that account to do work.
 [1679] Well, then, granting that all these things have been well and
 rightly disposed of and settled, and that they have continued in that
 condition for a very long time, how shall we deal with one who presents
 himself well-nigh three hundred years after, and sets up his claim to
 the heirship? Shall we not cast him off from us? Shall we not justly
 pronounce such a one an alien--one who cannot prove himself to have
 belonged to those related to our Master, who never was with our
 departed Lord in the hour of His sickness, who never walked in the
 funeral procession of the Crucified, who never stood by the sepulchre,
 who has no knowledge whatsoever of the manner or the character of His
 departure, and who, in fine, is now desirous of getting access to the
 storehouse of corn without presenting any token from him who placed it
 under lock and seal? Shall we not cast him off from us like a robber
 and a thief, and thrust him out of our number by all possible means?
 Yet this man is now in our presence, and fails to produce any of the
 credentials which we have summarized in what we have already said, and
 declares that he is the Paraclete whose mission was presignified by
 Jesus. And by this assertion, in his ignorance perchance, he will make
 out Jesus Himself to be a liar; [1680] for thus He who once said that
 He would send the Paraclete no long time after, will be proved only to
 have sent this person, if we accept the testimony which he bears to
 himself, after an interval of three hundred years and more. [1681] In
 the day of judgment, then, what will those say to Jesus who have
 departed this life from that time on to the present period? Will they
 not meet Him with words like these: "Do not punish us rigorously if we
 have failed to do Thy works. For why, when Thou didst promise to send
 the Paraclete under Tiberius Cæsar, to convince us of sin and of
 righteousness, [1682] didst Thou send Him only under Probus the Roman
 emperor, and didst leave us orphaned, not withstanding that Thou didst
 say, I will not leave you comfortless (orphaned),' [1683] and after
 Thou hadst also assured us that Thou wouldest send the Paraclete
 presently after Thy departure? What could we orphans do, having no
 guardian? We have committed no fault; it is Thou that hast deceived
 us." But away with such a supposition in the case of our Lord Jesus
 Christ, the Saviour of every soul. [1684] For He did not confine
 Himself to mere promises; [1685] but when He had once said, "I go to my
 Father, and I send the Paraclete to you," [1686] straightway He sent
 (that gift of the Paraclete), dividing and imparting the same to His
 disciples,--bestowing it, however, in greater fulness upon Paul. [1687]

 [1676] The text has, "sedens ipse per se," etc.; for which we adopt
 "sed et ipse," etc.

 [1677] The Codex Casinensis gives, "deinde die moriturus," which may be
 either a mistake for "deinde moriturus," or a contraction for "deinde
 die qua moriturus"--then on the day that he was about to die, etc.

 [1678] The codex has, "Sin autem conderem se dicens, exposceret,
 devitarent persequi," etc.; which is corrected to, "Sin autem cohæredem
 se dicens exposceret, devitarent atque," etc., which emendation is
 followed in the translation.

 [1679] Opus autem magis facere debere.

 [1680] The same sort of argument is employed against the Montanists by
 Theodorus of Heracleia on John's Gospel, ch. xiv. 17.

 [1681] It is remarked in Migne, that it is only in the heat of his
 contention that this statement is made by Archelaus as to the date of
 the appearance of Manes; for from the death of Christ on to the time of
 this discussion there are only some 249 years. [Is it not probable that
 here is a token of the spurious character of not a little of this
 work?]

 [1682] John xvi. 8.

 [1683] John xiv. 18.

 [1684] Reading "sed absit hoc a Domino nostro Jesu Christo Salvatore
 omnis animæ," instead of the codex's "sed absit hanc a Domino Jesu
 Christo Salvatore omne animæ."

 [1685] If the reference, however, is to 2 Pet. iii. 9, as Routh
 suggests, it may rather be = He was not slack concerning His promises.
 The text is, "non enim moratus est in promissionibus suis." [A
 noteworthy reference to the second Epistle of St. Peter. For, if this
 work be a mere romance, yet its undoubted antiquity makes it useful,
 not only in this, but in many other critical matters.]

 [1686] John xiv. 12; xvi. 28.

 [1687] Reading "abundantius vero conferens Paulo," instead of the
 corrupt text in the Codex Casinensis, "abundantibus vero confitens
 Paulo."

 28. Manes said: [1688] You are caught in the charge you yourself bring
 forward. For you have been speaking now against yourself, and have not
 perceived that, in trying to cast reproaches in my teeth, you lay
 yourself under the greater fault. Tell me this now, I pray you: if, as
 you allege, those who have died from the time of Tiberius on to the
 days of Probus are to say to Jesus, "Do not judge us if we have failed
 to do Thy works, for Thou didst not send the Paraclete to us, although
 Thou didst promise to send Him;" [1689] will not those much more use
 such an address who have departed this life from the time of Moses on
 to the advent of Christ Himself? And will not those with still greater
 right express themselves in terms like these: "Do not deliver us over
 to torments, [1690] seeing that we had no knowledge of Thee imparted to
 us?" And will it only be those that have died thus far previously to
 His advent who may be seen making such a charge with right? Will not
 those also do the same who have passed away from Adam's time on to
 Christ's advent? For none of these either obtained any knowledge of the
 Paraclete, or received instruction in the doctrine of Jesus. But only
 this latest generation of men, which has run its course from Tiberius
 onward, as you make it out, [1691] is to be saved: for it is Christ
 Himself that "has re-deemed them from the curse of the law;" [1692] as
 Paul, too, has given these further testimonies, that "the letter
 killeth, and quickeneth no man," [1693] and that "the law is the
 ministration of death," [1694] and "the strength of sin." [1695]
 Archelaus said: You err, not knowing the Scriptures, neither the power
 of God. [1696] For many have also perished after the period of Christ's
 advent on to this present period, and many are still perishing,--those,
 to wit, who have not chosen to devote themselves to works of
 righteousness; whereas only those who have received Him, and yet
 receive Him, "have obtained power to become the sons of God." [1697]
 For the evangelist has not said all have obtained that power; neither,
 on the other hand, however, has he put any limit on the time. But this
 is his expression: "As many as received Him." Moreover, from the
 creation of the world He has ever been with righteous men, and has
 never ceased to require their blood at the hands of the wicked, from
 the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zacharias. [1698] And
 whence, then, did righteous Abel and all those succeeding worthies,
 [1699] who are enrolled among the righteous, derive their righteousness
 when as yet there was no law of Moses, and when as yet the prophets had
 not arisen and discharged the functions of prophecy? Were they not
 constituted righteous in virtue of their fulfilling the law, "every one
 of them showing the work of the law written in their hearts, their
 conscience also bearing them witness?" [1700] For when a man "who has
 not the law does naturally the things contained in the law, he, not
 having the law, is a law unto himself." [1701] And consider now the
 multitude of laws thus existing among the several righteous men who
 lived a life of uprightness, at one time discovering for themselves the
 law of God implanted in their hearts, at another learning of it from
 their parents, and yet again being instructed in it further by the
 ancients and the elders. But inasmuch as only few were able to rise by
 this medium [1702] to the height of righteousness, that is to say, by
 means of the traditions of parents, when as yet there was no law
 embodied in writing, God had compassion on the race of man. and was
 pleased to give through Moses a written law to men, since verily the
 equity of the natural law failed to be retained in all its perfection
 in their hearts. In consonance, therefore, with man's first creation, a
 written legislation was prepared which was given through Moses in
 behoof of the salvation of very many. For if we reckon that man is
 justified without the works of the law, and if Abraham was counted
 righteous, how much more shall those obtain righteousness who have
 fulfilled the law which contains the things that are expedient for men?
 And seeing that you have made mention only of three several scriptures,
 in terms of which the apostle has declared that "the law is a
 ministration of death," [1703] and that "Christ has redeemed us from
 the curse of the law," [1704] and that "the law is the strength of
 sin," [1705] you may now advance others of like tenor, and bring
 forward any passages which may seem to you to be written against the
 law, to any extent you please.

 [1688] The opening sentences of this chapter are given in a very
 corrupt form in our Codex Casinensis. Its text stands thus: "Tuum et
 ipsius indicio comprehensus es; hæc enim versum te locutus, ignorans,
 qui dum, me vis probra conjicere majori culpæ se succumbit. Dic age
 mihi studias qua Tiberio usque ad Probum defuncti sunt, dicent ad Jesum
 nolite nos judicare," etc. We have adopted these emendations: tuimet
 for tuum et; adversum for versum; ignoras for ignorans; in me for me;
 succumbis for se succumbit; si, ut ais, qui a, for studias qua; and
 noli for nolite.

 [1689] Supplying missurum, which is not in the codex.

 [1690] Reading "noli nos tradere tormentis," instead of the meaningless
 "noli nostra de tormentis" of the codex.

 [1691] Reading ut ais instead of ut eas.

 [1692] Gal. iii. 13.

 [1693] Nec quemquam vivificat. 2 Cor. iii. 6.

 [1694] 2 Cor. iii. 7.

 [1695] 1 Cor. xv. 56.

 [1696] Matt. xxii. 29.

 [1697] John i. 12.

 [1698] Matt. xiii. 35.

 [1699] Reading reliqui per ordinem for the qui per ordinem of the
 codex.

 [1700] Rom. ii. 15.

 [1701] Rom. ii. 14.

 [1702] Reading "per hunc modum." But the Codex Casinensis gives "per
 hunc mundum"--through this world.

 [1703] 2 Cor. iii. 7.

 [1704] Gal. iii. 13.

 [1705] 1 Cor. xv. 56.

 29. Manes said: Is not that word also to the same effect which Jesus
 spake to the disciples, when He was demonstrating those men to be
 unbelieving: "Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your
 father ye will do?" [1706] By this He means, in sooth, that whatever
 the wicked prince of this world desired, and whatever he lusted after,
 he committed to writing through Moses, and by that medium gave it to
 men for their doing. For "he was a murderer from the beginning, and
 abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he
 speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the
 father of it." [1707] Archelaus said: Are you satisfied [1708] with
 what you have already adduced, or have you other statements still to
 make? Manes said: I have, indeed, many things to say, and things of
 greater weight even than these. But with these I shall content myself.
 Archelaus said: By all means. Now let us select some instance from
 among those statements which you allege to be on your side; so that if
 these be once found to have been properly dealt with, other questions
 may also be held to rank with them; and if the case goes otherwise, I
 shall come under the condemnation of the judges, that is to say, I
 shall have to bear the shame of defeat. [1709] You say, then, that the
 law is a ministration of death, and you admit that "death, the prince
 of this world, reigned from Adam even to Moses;" [1710] for the word of
 Scripture is this: "even over them that did not sin." [1711] Manes
 said: Without doubt death did reign thus, for there is a duality, and
 these two antagonistic powers were nothing else than both unbegotten.
 [1712] Archelaus said: Tell me this then,--how can an unbegotten death
 take a beginning at a certain time? For "from Adam" is the word of
 Scripture, and not "before Adam." Manes said: But tell me, I ask you in
 turn, how it obtained its kingdom over both the righteous and the
 sinful. Archelaus said: When you have first admitted that it has had
 that kingdom from a determinate time and not from eternity, I shall
 tell you that. Manes said: It is written, that "death reigned from Adam
 to Moses." Archelaus said: And consequently it has an end, because it
 has had a beginning in time. [1713] And this saying is also true, that
 "death is swallowed up in victory." [1714] It is apparent, then, that
 death cannot be unbegotten, seeing that it is shown to have both a
 beginning and an end. Manes said: But in that way it would also follow
 that God was its maker. Archelaus said: By no means; away with such a
 supposition! "For God made not death; neither hath He pleasure in the
 destruction of the living." [1715] Manes said: God made it not;
 nevertheless it was made, as you admit. Tell us, therefore, from whom
 it received its empire, or by whom it was created. Archelaus said: If I
 give the most ample proof of the fact that death cannot have the
 substance of an unbegotten nature, will you not confess that there is
 but one God, and that an unbegotten God? Manes said: Continue your
 discourse, for your aim is to speak [1716] with subtlety. Archelaus
 said: Nay, but you have put forward those allegations in such a manner,
 as if they were to serve you for a demonstration of an unbegotten root.
 Nevertheless the positions which we have discussed above may suffice
 us, for by these we have shown most fully that it is impossible for the
 substances of two unbegotten natures to exist together.

 [1706] John viii. 44.

 [1707] John viii. 44.

 [1708] The text is "sufficit tibi hæc sunt an habes et alia." Routh
 proposes "sufficientia tibi hæc sunt," etc.

 [1709] Routh would make it = You will come under the condemnation...you
 will have to bear: he suggests eris ergo for ero ego, and feras for
 feram.

 [1710] Rom. v. 14.

 [1711] Rom. v. 14.

 [1712] Nec aliter nisi essent ingenita. Routh, however, would read
 esset for essent, making it = and that death could be nothing else than
 unbegotten.

 [1713] Reading ex tempore for the corrupt exemplo re of the codex.

 [1714] 1 Cor. xv. 54.

 [1715] Wisd. i. 13.

 [1716] The text gives discere, to learn; but dicere seems the probable
 reading.

 30. The judges said: Speak to those points, Archelaus, which he has
 just now propounded. Archelaus said: By the prince of the world, and
 the wicked one, and darkness, and death, he means one and the same
 thing, and alleges that the law has been given by that being, on the
 ground of the scriptural statement that it is "the ministration of
 death," as well as on the ground of other things which he has urged
 against it. Well, then, I say [1717] that since, as we have explained
 above, the law which was written naturally on men's hearts did not keep
 carefully by the memory of evil things, and since there was not a
 sufficiently established tradition among the elders, inasmuch as
 hostile oblivion always attached itself to the memory, [1718] and one
 man was instructed in the knowledge of that law by master, and another
 by himself, it easily came about that transgressions of the law
 engraved by nature did take place, and that through the violation of
 the commandments death obtained its kingship among men. For the race of
 men is of such a nature, that it needs to be ruled by God with a rod of
 iron. And so death triumphed and reigned with all its power on to
 Moses, even over those who had not sinned, in the way which we have
 explained: over sinners indeed, as these were its proper objects, and
 under subjection to it,--men after the type of Cain and Judas; [1719]
 but also over the righteous, because they refused to consent to it, and
 rather withstood it, by putting away from themselves the vices and
 concupiscence of lusts,--men like those who have arisen at times from
 Abel on to Zacharias; [1720] --death thus always passing, up to the
 time of Moses, upon those after that similitude. [1721]

 But after Moses had made his appearance, and had given the law to the
 children of Israel, and had brought into their memory all the
 requirements of the law, and all that it behoved men to observe and do
 under it, and when he delivered over to death only those who should
 transgress the law, then death was cut off from reigning over all men;
 for it reigned then over sinners alone, as the law said to it, "Touch
 not those that keep my precepts." [1722] Moses therefore served the
 ministration of this word upon death, while he delivered up to
 destruction [1723] all others who were transgressors of the law; for it
 was not with the intent that death might not reign in any territory at
 all that Moses came, inasmuch as multitudes were assuredly held under
 the power of death even after Moses. And the law was called a
 "ministration of death" from the fact that then only transgressors of
 the law were punished, and not those who kept it, and who obeyed and
 observed the things which are in the law, as Abel did, whom Cain, who
 was made a vessel of the wicked one, slew. However, even after these
 things death wished to break the covenant which had been made by the
 instrumentality of Moses, and to reign again over the righteous; and
 with this object it did indeed assail the prophets, killing and stoning
 those who had been sent by God, on to Zacharias. But my Lord Jesus, as
 maintaining the righteousness of the law of Moses, was wroth with death
 for its transgression of the covenant [1724] and of that whole
 ministration, and condescended to appear in the body of man, with the
 view of avenging not Himself, but Moses, and those who in a continuous
 succession after him had been oppressed by the violence of death. That
 wicked one, however, in ignorance of the meaning of a dispensation of
 this kind, entered into Judas, thinking to slay Him by that man's
 means, as before he had put righteous Abel to death. But when he had
 entered into Judas, he was overcome with penitence, and hanged himself;
 for which reason also the divine word says: "O death, where is thy
 victory? O death, [1725] where is thy sting?" And again: "Death is
 swallowed up of victory." [1726] It is for this reason, therefore, that
 the law is called a "ministration of death" because it delivered
 sinners and transgressors over to death; but those who observed it, it
 defended from death; and these it also established in glory, by the
 help and aid of our Lord Jesus Christ.

 [1717] Reading inquam for the iniquam of the Codex Casinensis. But
 Routh suggests iniquæ, in reference to what has been said towards the
 close of ch. xxviii.

 [1718] The codex gives, "cum eas inimica semper memoriæ ineresis sed
 oblivio;" which is corrected thus, "cum eis inimica semper memoriæ
 inhæsisset oblivio."

 [1719] The text writes it Juda.

 [1720] Matt. xxiii. 35.

 [1721] This would appear to be the meaning of these words, "transferens
 semper usque ad tempus in similes illius," if we suppose the speaker
 still to be keeping Rom. v. 12-14 in view. Routh suggests transiens.

 [1722] Referring perhaps to Ps. cv. 15.

 [1723] Reading interitui tradens for the interit ut tradens of the
 codex.

 [1724] Reading pacti for the acti of the codex.

 [1725] Mors.

 [1726] 1 Cor. xv. 54, 55.

 31. Listen also to what I have to say on this other expression which
 has been adduced, viz., "Christ, who redeemed us from the curse of the
 law." [1727] My view of this passage is that Moses, that illustrious
 servant of God, committed to those who wished to have the right vision,
 [1728] an emblematic [1729] law, and also a real law. Thus, to take an
 example, after God had made the world, and all things that are in it,
 in the space of six days, He rested on the seventh day from all His
 works; by which statement I do not mean to affirm that He rested
 because He was fatigued, but that He did so as having brought to its
 perfection every creature which He had resolved to introduce. And yet
 in the sequel it, the new law, says: "My Father worketh hitherto, and I
 work." [1730] Does that mean, then, that He is still making heaven, or
 sun, or man, or animals, or trees, or any such thing? Nay; but the
 meaning is, that when these visible objects were perfectly finished, He
 rested from that kind of work; while, however, He still continues to
 work at objects invisible with an inward mode of action, [1731] and
 saves men. In like manner, then, the legislator desires also that every
 individual amongst us should be devoted unceasingly to this kind of
 work, even as God Himself is; and he enjoins us consequently to rest
 continuously from secular things, and to engage in no worldly sort of
 work whatsoever; and this is called our Sabbath. This also he added in
 the law, that nothing senseless [1732] should be done but that we
 should be careful and direct our life in accordance with what is just
 and righteous. Now this law was suspended over men, discharging most
 sharply its curse against those who might transgress it. But because
 its subjects, too, were but men, and because, as happens also
 frequently with us, controversies arose and injuries were inflicted,
 the law likewise at once, and with the severest equity, made any wrong
 that was done return upon the head of the wrong-doer; [1733] so that,
 for instance, if a poor man was minded to gather a bundle of wood upon
 the Sabbath, he was placed under the curse of the law, and exposed to
 the penalty of instant death. [1734] The men, therefore, who had been
 brought up with the Egyptians were thus severely pressed by the
 restrictive power of the law, and they were unable to bear the
 penalties and the curses of the law. But, again, He who is ever the
 Saviour, our Lord Jesus Christ, came and delivered those men from these
 pains and curses of the law, forgiving them their offences. And He
 indeed did not deal with them as Moses did, putting the severities of
 the law in force, and granting indulgence to no man for any offence;
 but He declared that if any man suffered an injury at the hands of his
 neighbour, he was to forgive him not once only, nor even twice or
 thrice, nor only seven times, but even unto seventy times seven; [1735]
 but that, on the other hand, if after all this the offender still
 continued to do such wrong, he ought then, as the last resource, to be
 brought under the law of Moses, and that no further pardon should be
 granted to the man who would thus persist in wrong-doing, even after
 having been forgiven unto seventy times seven. And He bestowed His
 forgiveness not only on a transgressor of such a character as that, but
 even on one who did offence to the Son of man. But if a man dealt thus
 with the Holy Spirit, He made him subject to two curses,--namely, to
 that of the law of Moses, and to that of His own law; to the law of
 Moses in truth in this present life, but to His own law at the time of
 the judgment: for His word is this: "It shall not be forgiven him,
 neither in this world, neither in the world to come." [1736] There is
 the law of Moses, thus, that in this world gives pardon to no such
 person; and there is the law of Christ that punishes in the future
 world. From this, therefore, mark how He confirms the law, not only not
 destroying it, but fulfilling it. Thus, then, He redeemed them from
 that curse of the law which belongs to the present life; and from this
 fact has come the appellation "the curse of the law." This is the whole
 account which needs be given of that mode of speech. But, again, why
 the law is called the "strength of sin," we shall at once explain in
 brief to the best of our ability. Now it is written that "the law is
 not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for
 the ungodly and for sinners." [1737] In these times, then, before
 Moses, there was no written law for transgressors; whence also Pharaoh,
 not knowing the strength of sin, transgressed in the way of afflicting
 the children of Israel with unrighteous burdens, and despised the
 Godhead, not only himself, but also all who were with him. But, not to
 make any round-about statement, I shall explain the matter briefly as
 follows. There were certain persons of the Egyptian race mingling with
 the people of Moses, when that people was under his rule in the desert;
 and when Moses had taken his position on the mount, with the purpose of
 receiving the law, the impatient people, I do not mean those who were
 the true Israel, but those who had been intermixed with the Egyptians,
 [1738] set up a calf as their god, in accordance with their ancient
 custom of worshipping idols, with the notion that by such means they
 might secure themselves against ever having to pay the proper penalties
 for their iniquities. [1739] Thus were they altogether ignorant of the
 strength of their sin. But when Moses returned (from the mount) and
 found that out, he issued orders that those men should be put to death
 with the sword. From that occasion a beginning was made in the correct
 perception of the strength of sin on the part of these persons through
 the instrumentality of the law of Moses, and for that reason the law
 has been called the "strength of sin."

 [1727] Gal. iii. 13.

 [1728] Recte videre. But perhaps we should read "recte vivere," to lead
 a righteous life.

 [1729] The phrase is imaginariam legem.On this expression there is a
 note in Migne, which is worth quoting, to this effect: Archelaus calls
 the Old Testament an emblematic or imaginary law, because it was the
 type or image of a future new law. So, too, Petrus de Vineis, more than
 once in his Epistles, calls a messenger or legate a homo imaginarius,
 as Du Cange observes in his Glossary, because he represents the person
 by whom he is sent, and, as it were, reflects his image. This word is
 also used in a similar manner by the old interpreter of Evagrius the
 monk, in the Disputation between Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria, and
 Simon the Jew, ch. 13, where the Sabbath is called the requies
 imaginaria of that seventh day on which God rested. Hence Archelaus, in
 his answer to the presbyter Diodorus, ch xli. beneath, devotes himself
 to proving that the Old Testament is not to he rejected, because, like
 a mirror, it gives us a true image of the new law.

 [1730] John v. 17.

 [1731] Reading "invisibilia autem et intrinsecus." The Codex Casinensis
 has "invisibili autem et trinsecus."

 [1732] Absurdam, standing probably for atopon, which may also be =
 flagitious.

 [1733] The codex reads, "ultionem fecerat retorquebat." We adopt either
 "ultionem quam fecerat retorquebat," or "ultionem fecit retorqueri."

 [1734] Num. xv. 32.

 [1735] Matt. xviii. 21.

 [1736] Matt. xii. 32.

 [1737] 1 Tim. i. 9.

 [1738] This is one of those passages in which we detect the tendency of
 many of the early fathers to adopt the peculiar opinions of the Jewish
 rabbis on difficult points of Scripture. See also the Disputation
 between Theophilus of Alexandria and the Jew Simon, ch. 13. In
 accordance with the opinion propounded here by Archelaus, we find, for
 instance, in the Scemoth Rabba, p. 157, col. 1, that the making of the
 golden calf is ascribed to the Egyptian proselytes. See the note in
 Migne. [The passage is a note of antiquity and in so far of
 authenticity.]

 [1739] The text is in quo nec scelerum poenas aliquando rependeret.

 32. Moreover, as to this word which is written in the Gospel, "Ye are
 of your father the devil," [1740] and so forth, we say in brief that
 there is a devil working in us, whose aim it has been, in the strength
 of his own will, to make us like himself. For all the creatures that
 God made, He made very good; and He gave to every individual the sense
 of free-will, in accordance with which standard He also instituted the
 law of judgment. To sin is ours, and that we sin not is God's gift, as
 our will is constituted to choose either to sin or not to sin. And this
 you doubtless understand well enough yourself, Manes; for you know
 that, although you were to bring together all your disciples and
 admonish [1741] them not to commit any transgression or do any
 unrighteousness, every one of them might still pass by the law of
 judgment. And certainly whosoever will, may keep the commandments; and
 whosoever shall despise them, and turn aside to what is contrary to
 them, shall yet without doubt have to face this law of judgment. Hence
 also certain of the angels, refusing to submit themselves to the
 commandment of God, resisted His will; and one of them indeed fell like
 a flash of lightning [1742] upon the earth, while others, [1743]
 harassed by the dragon, sought their felicity in intercourse with the
 daughters of men, [1744] and thus brought on themselves the merited
 award of the punishment of eternal fire. And that angel who was cast
 down to earth, finding no further admittance into any of the regions of
 heaven, now flaunts about among men, deceiving them, and luring them to
 become transgressors like himself, and even to this day he is an
 adversary to the commandments of God. The example of his fall and ruin,
 however, will not be followed by all, inasmuch as to each is given
 liberty of will. For this reason also has he obtained the name of
 devil, because he has passed over from the heavenly places, and
 appeared on earth as the disparager of God's commandment. [1745] But
 because it was God who first gave the commandment, the Lord Jesus
 Himself said to the devil, "Get thee behind me, Satan;" [1746] and,
 without doubt, to go behind God is the sign of being His servant. And
 again He says, "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt
 thou serve." [1747] Wherefore, as certain men were inclined to yield
 obedience to his wishes, they were addressed in these terms by the
 Saviour: "Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father
 ye will do." [1748] And, in fine, when they are found to be actually
 doing his will, they are thus addressed: "O generation of vipers, who
 hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore
 fruits meet for repentance." [1749] From all this, then, you ought to
 see how weighty a matter it is for man to have freedom of will.
 However, let my antagonist here say whether there is a judgment for the
 godly and the ungodly, or not. Manes said: There is a judgment.
 Archelaus said: I think that what we [1750] have said concerning the
 devil contains no small measure of reason as well as of piety. For
 every creature, moreover, has its own order; and there is one order for
 the human race, and another for animals, and another for angels.
 Furthermore, there is but one only inconvertible substance, the divine
 substance, eternal and invisible, as is known to all, and as is also
 borne out by this scripture: "No man hath seen God at any time, save
 the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father." [1751] All
 the other creatures, consequently, are of necessity visible,--such as
 heaven, earth, sea, men, angels, archangels. But if God has not been
 seen by any man at any time, what consubstantiality can there be
 between Him and those creatures? Hence we hold that all things
 whatsoever have, in their several positions, their own proper
 substances, according to their proper order. You, on the other hand,
 allege that every living thing which moves is made of one, [1752] and
 you say that every object has received like substance from God, and
 that this substance is capable of sinning and of being brought under
 the judgment; and you are unwilling to accept the word which declares
 that the devil was an angel, and that he fell in transgression, and
 that he is not of the same substance with God. Logically, you ought to
 do away with any allowance of the doctrine of a judgment, and that
 would make it clear which of us is in error. [1753] If, indeed, the
 angel that has been created by God is incapable of falling in
 transgression, how can the soul, as a part of God, be capable of
 sinning? But, again, if you say that there is a judgment for sinning
 souls, and if you hold also that these are of one substance with God;
 and if still, even although you maintain that they are of the divine
 nature, you affirm that, notwithstanding that fact, they do not keep
 [1754] the commandments of God, then, even on such grounds, my argument
 will pass very well, [1755] which avers that the devil fell first, on
 account of his failure to keep the commandments of God. He was not
 indeed of the substance of God. And he fell, not so much to do hurt to
 the race of man, as rather to be set at nought [1756] by the same. For
 He "gave unto us power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all
 the strength of the enemy." [1757]

 [1740] John viii. 44.

 [1741] Reading commonens for communis ne. Communiens is also suggested.

 [1742] Luke x. 18.

 [1743] We have another instance here of a characteristic opinion of the
 Jewish rabbis adopted by a Christian father. This notion as to the
 intercourse of the angels with the daughters of men was a current
 interpretation among the Jews from the times of Philo and Josephus, and
 was followed in whole or in part by Tertullian, Justin, Irenæus,
 Clemens Alexandrinus, Athenagoras, Methodius, Cyprian, Lactantius, etc.
 Consult the note in Migne; [also p. 131, note 2, supra].

 [1744] We give the above as a possible rendering. Routh, however,
 understands the matter otherwise. The text is, "alii vero in felicitate
 hominum filiabus admisti a dracone afflicti," etc. Routh takes the
 phrase in felicitate as ="adhuc in statu felici existentes:" so that
 the sense would be, "others, while they still abode in the blessed
 estate, had intercourse," etc. [Routh, R. S., vol. v. pp. 118-122.]

 [1745] Archelaus seems here to assign a twofold etymology for the name
 devil, deriving the Greek diabolos, accuser, from diaballo, in its two
 senses of trajicere and traducere, to cross over and to slander.

 [1746] Matt. iv. 10.

 [1747] Matt. iv. 10.

 [1748] John viii. 44.

 [1749] Matt iii. 7, 8.

 [1750] Reading a nobis for the a vobis of the codex.

 [1751] John i. 18.

 [1752] Ex uno.

 [1753] The sense is obscure here. The text runs, "Interimere debes
 judicii ratione ut quis nostrum fallat appareat." Migne proposes to
 read rationem, as if the idea intended was this: That, consistently
 with his reasonings, Manes ought not to admit the fact of a judgment,
 because the notions he has propounded on the subject of men and angels
 are not reconcilable with such a belief.--If this can be accepted as
 the probable meaning, then it would seem that the use of the verb
 interimere may be due to the fact that the Greek text gave anairein,
 between the two senses of which--viz. to kill and to remove--the
 translator did not correctly distinguish. Routh, however, proposes to
 read interimi, taking it as equivalent to condemnari, so that the idea
 might be = on all principles of sound judgment you ought to be
 condemned, etc.

 [1754] The codex reads simply, Dei servare mandata. We may adopt either
 Dei non servare mandata, as above, or, Dei servare vel non servare
 mandata, in reference to the freedom of will, and so = they may or may
 not keep the commandments.

 [1755] The codex has præcedit, for which procedit is proposed.

 [1756] Reading "læderet--illuderetur." But might it not rather be
 "læderet--illidertur," not to bruise, but rather to be bruised, etc.?

 [1757] Luke x. 19.

 33. The judges said: He has given demonstration enough of the origin of
 the devil. And as both sides admit that there will be a judgment, it is
 necessarily involved in that admission that every individual is shown
 to have free-will; and since this is brought clearly out, there can be
 no doubt that every individual, in the exercise of his own proper power
 of will, may shape his course in whatever direction he pleases. [1758]
 Manes said: If (only) the good is from (your) God, as you allege, then
 you make Jesus Himself a liar. [1759] Archelaus said: In the first
 place, admit that the account of what we have adduced is true, and then
 I will give you proof about the "father of him." [1760] Manes said: If
 you prove to me that his father is a liar, and yet show me that for all
 that you ascribe no such (evil) notion to God, then credit will be
 given you on all points. Archelaus said: Surely when a full account of
 the devil has once been presented, and the dispensation set forth, any
 one now, with an ordinarily vigorous understanding, might simply, by
 turning the matter carefully over in his own mind, get an idea of who
 this is that is here called the father of the devil. But though you
 give yourself out to be the Paraclete, you come very far short of the
 ordinary sagacity of men. Wherefore, as you have betrayed your
 ignorance, I shall tell you what is meant by this expression, the
 "father of the devil." Manes said: I say so [1761] ...; and he added:
 Every one who is the founder or maker of anything may be called the
 father, parent, of that which he has made. Archelaus said: Well, I am
 verily astonished that you have made so correct an admission in reply
 to what I have said, and have not concealed either your intelligent
 apprehension of the affirmation, or the real nature of the same. Now,
 from this learn who is this father of the devil. When he fell from the
 kingdom of heaven, he came to dwell upon earth, and there he remained,
 ever watching and seeking out some one to whom he might attach himself,
 and whom, through an alliance with himself, he might also make a
 partner in his own wickedness. Now as long, indeed, as man was not yet
 existent, the devil was never called either a murderer or a liar
 together with his father. But subsequently, when man had once been
 made, and when further he had been deceived by the devil's lies and
 craftiness, and when the devil had also introduced himself into the
 body of the serpent, which was the most sagacious of all the beasts,
 then from that time the devil was called a liar together with his
 father, and then [1762] also the curse was made to rest not only on
 himself, but also on his father. Accordingly, when the serpent had
 received him, and had indeed admitted him wholly into its own being, it
 was, as it were, rendered pregnant, for it bore the burden of the
 devil's vast wickedness; and it was like one with child, and under the
 strain of parturition, as it sought to eject the agitations [1763] of
 his malignant suggestions. For the serpent, grudging the glory of the
 first man, made its way into paradise; and harbouring these pains of
 parturition in itself, [1764] it began to produce mendacious addresses,
 and to generate death for the men who had been fashioned by God, and
 who had received the gift of life. The devil, however, was not able to
 manifest himself completely through the serpent; but he reserved his
 perfection for a time, in order that he might demonstrate it through
 Cain, by whom he was generated completely. And thus through the
 serpent, on the one hand, he displayed his hypocrisies and deceits to
 Eve; while through Cain, on the other hand, he effected the beginning
 of murder, introducing himself into the firstlings of the "fruits,"
 which that man administered so badly. From this the devil has been
 called a murderer from the beginning, and also a liar, because he
 deceived the parties to whom he said, "Ye shall be as gods;" [1765] for
 those very persons whom he falsely declared destined to be gods were
 afterwards cast out of paradise. Wherefore the serpent which conceived
 him in its womb, and bore him, and brought him forth to the light of
 day, is constituted the devil's first father; and Cain is made his
 second father, who through the conception of iniquities produced pains
 and parricide: for truly the taking of life was the perpetrating of
 iniquity, unrighteousness, and impiety all together. Furthermore, all
 who receive him, and do his lusts, are constituted his brothers.
 Pharaoh is his father in perfection. Every impious man is made his
 father. Judas became his father, since he conceived him indeed, though
 he miscarried: for he did not present a perfect parturition there,
 since it was really a greater person who was assailed through Judas;
 and consequently, as I say, it proved an abortion. For just as the
 woman receives the man's seed, and thereby also becomes sensible of a
 daily growth within her, so also did Judas make daily advances in evil,
 the occasions for that being furnished him like seed by the wicked one.
 And the first seed of evil in him, indeed, was the lust of money; and
 its increment was theft, for he purloined the moneys which were
 deposited in the bag. Its offspring, moreover, consisted of less
 vexations, and compacts with the Pharisees, and the scandalous bargain
 for a price; yet it was the abortion, and not the birth, that was
 witnessed in the horrid noose by which he met his death. And exactly in
 the same way shall it stand also with you: if you bring the wicked one
 to light in your own deeds, and do his lusts, you have conceived him,
 and will be called his father; but, on the other hand, if you cherish
 penitence, and deliver yourself of your burden, you will be like one
 that brings to the birth. [1766] For, as in school exercises, if one
 gets the subject-matter from the master, and then creates and produces
 the whole body of an oration by himself, he is said to be the author of
 the compositions to which he has thus given birth; [1767] so he who has
 taken in any little leaven of evil from the prime evil, is of necessity
 called the father and procreator of that wicked one, who from the
 beginning has resisted the truth. The case may be the same, indeed,
 with those who devote themselves to virtue; for I have heard the most
 valiant men say to God, "For Thy fear, O Lord, we have conceived in the
 womb, and we have been in pain, and have brought forth the spirit of
 salvation." [1768] And so those, too, who conceive in respect of the
 fear of the wicked one, and bring forth the spirit of iniquity, must
 needs be called the fathers of the same. Thus, on the one hand, they
 are called sons of that wicked one, so long as they are still yielding
 obedience to his service; but, on the other hand, they are called
 fathers if they have attained to the perfection of iniquity. For it is
 with this view that our Lord says to the Pharisees, "Ye are of your
 father the devil," [1769] thereby making them his sons, as long as they
 appeared still to be perturbed [1770] by him, and meditated in their
 hearts evil for good toward the righteous. Accordingly, while they
 deliberated in such a spirit with their own hearts, and while their
 wicked devices were made chargeable upon [1771] themselves, Judas, as
 the head of all the evil, and as the person who carried out their
 iniquitous counsels to their consummation, was constituted the father
 of the crime, having received at their hands the recompense of thirty
 pieces of silver for his impious cruelty. For "after the sop Satan
 entered into him" [1772] completely. But, as we have said, when his
 womb was enlarged, and the time of his travail came on, he delivered
 himself only of an abortive burden in the conception of
 unrighteousness, and consequently he could not be called the father in
 perfection, except only at that very time when the conception was still
 in the womb; and afterwards, when he betook himself to the hangman's
 rope, he showed that he had not brought it to a complete birth, because
 remorse [1773] followed.

 [1758] This appears to be general sense of the very corrupt passage,
 "Quo videntur ostenso nulli dubium est unusquisque in quamcunque
 elegerit partem propria usus arbitrii potestate." In Migne it is
 amended thus: "Quo evidenter ostenso, nulli dubium est, quod
 unusquisque in quamcunque elegerit partem, propria usus fuerit arbitrii
 potestate."

 [1759] Adopting the emendation, "si a Deo bonus, ut asseris, mendacem
 esse dixisti Jesum." In the Codex Casinensis it stands thus: "sic a Deo
 bonus ut as mendacem esse dixisti Jesus." But Routh would substitute
 "si a Deo diabolus" = if the devil is from God.

 [1760] The argumentation throughout this passage seems to rest on the
 fact that, in support of the dogma of the evil deity, Manes perverted,
 among other passages, our Lord's words in John viii. 44, as if they
 were not only "Ye are of your father the devil" but possibly also, "Ye
 are of the father of the devil;" and again, "He is a liar, and the
 father of him is the same." Thus what Manes urges against Archelaus is
 this: If only what is good proceeds from the Deity, and if He is the
 Supreme Good Himself, you make out Jesus to have spoken falsely, when
 in John's Gospel He uses expressions which imply that the devil's
 father is a liar, and also the Creator of the lying devil.

 [1761] There are some words deficient in this sentence. The text reads,
 "Manes dixit:...dico: et adjecit, Omnis qui conditor est vel Creator
 aliquorum pater eorum...condiderit appellatur." It is proposed to
 supply jam before dico, and quæ before condiderit.

 [1762] Reading et effectum for the ut effectum of the codex.

 [1763] Or it may be "cogitations," reading cogitata for agitata.

 [1764] Conceptis in se doloribus.

 [1765] Gen. iii. 5.

 [1766] The text gives parturies. Routh suggests parturiens. The sense
 then might be, But if you repent, you will also deliver yourself of
 your burden like one who brings to the birth.

 [1767] Reading Domine for Dominum, which is given in the text.

 [1768] The quotation may refer to Isa. xxvi. 18. [A curious version.]

 [1769] John viii. 44.

 [1770] Conturbari.

 [1771] Translatis in se.

 [1772] John xiii. 27.

 [1773] Poenitentia. [2 Cor. vii. 10.]

 34. I think that you cannot fail to understand this too, that the word
 "father" is but a single term indeed, and yet one admitting of being
 understood in various ways. For one is called father, as being the
 parent of those children whom he has begotten in a natural way; another
 is called father, as being the guardian of children whom he has but
 brought up; and some, again, are called fathers in respect of the
 privileged standing accruing through time or age. Hence our Lord Jesus
 Christ Himself is said to have a variety of fathers: for David was
 called His father, and Joseph was reckoned to be His father, while
 neither of these two was His father in respect of the actuality of
 nature. For David is called His father as touching the prerogative of
 time and age, [1774] and Joseph is designated His father as concerning
 the law of upbringing; but God Himself is His only Father by nature,
 who was pleased to make all things manifest in short space [1775] to us
 by His word. And our Lord Jesus Christ, making no tarrying, [1776] in
 the space of one year [1777] restored multitudes of the sick to health,
 and gave back the dead to the light of life; and He did indeed embrace
 all things in the power of His own word. [1778] And wherein, forsooth,
 did He make any tarrying, so that we should have to believe Him to have
 waited so long, even to these days, before He actually sent the
 Paraclete? [1779] Nay, rather, as has been already said above, He gave
 proof of His presence with us forthwith, and did most abundantly impart
 Himself to Paul, whose testimony we also believe when he says, "Unto me
 only is this grace given." [1780] For this is he who formerly was a
 persecutor of the Church of God, but who afterwards appeared openly
 before all men as a faithful minister of the Paraclete; by whose
 instrumentality His singular clemency was made known to all men, in
 such wise that even to us who some time were without hope the largess
 of His gifts has come. For which of us could have hoped that Paul, the
 persecutor and enemy of the Church, would prove its defender and
 guardian? Yea, and not that alone, but that he would become also its
 ruler, the founder and architect of the churches? Wherefore after him,
 and after those who were with Himself--that is, the disciples--we are
 not to look for the advent of any other (such), according to the
 Scriptures; for our Lord Jesus Christ says of this Paraclete, "He shall
 receive of mine." [1781] Him therefore He selected as an acceptable
 vessel; and He sent this Paul to us in the Spirit. Into him the Spirit
 was poured; [1782] and as that Spirit could not abide upon all men, but
 only on Him who was born of Mary the mother of God, so that Spirit, the
 Paraclete, could not come into any other, but could only come upon the
 apostles and the sainted Paul. "For he is a chosen vessel," He says,
 "unto me, to bear my name before kings and the Gentiles." [1783] The
 apostle himself, too, states the same thing in his first epistle, where
 he says: "According to the grace that is given to me of God, that I
 should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering
 [1784] the Gospel of God." [1785] "I say the truth in Christ, I lie
 not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost." [1786]
 And again: "For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which
 Christ hath not wrought by me by word and deed." [1787] "I am the last
 of all the apostles, that am not meet to be called an apostle. But by
 the grace of God I am what I am." [1788] And it, is his wish to have to
 deal with [1789] those who sought the proof of that Christ who spake in
 him, for this reason, that the Paraclete was in him: and as having
 obtained His gift of grace, and as being enriched with magnificent,
 honour, [1790] he says: "For this thing I besought the Lord thrice,
 that it might depart from me. And He said unto me, My grace is
 sufficient for thee; for strength is made perfect in weakness." [1791]
 Again, that it was the Paraclete Himself who was in Paul, is indicated
 by our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel, when He says: "If ye love me,
 keep my commandments. And I will pray my Father, and He shall give you
 another Comforter." [1792] In these words He points to the Paraclete
 Himself, for He speaks of "another" Comforter. And hence we have given
 credit to Paul, and have hearkened to him when he says, "Or [1793] seek
 ye a proof of Christ speaking in me?" [1794] and when he expresses
 himself in similar terms, of which we have already spoken above. Thus,
 too, he seals his testament for us as for his faithful heirs, and like
 a father he addresses us in these words in his Epistle to the
 Corinthians: "I delivered unto you first of all that which I also
 received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the
 Scriptures; and that He was buried, and that He rose again the third
 day according to the Scriptures; and that He was seen of Cephas, then
 of the eleven apostles: [1795] after that He was seen of above five
 hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this
 present, but some are fallen asleep. After that He was seen of James;
 then of all the apostles. And last of all He was seen of me also, as of
 one born out of due time. For I am the last of the apostles." [1796]
 "Therefore, whether it were I or they, so we preach, and so ye
 believed." [1797] And again, in delivering over to his heirs that
 inheritance which he gained first himself, he says: "But I fear, lest
 by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your
 minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. For if
 he that cometh preacheth another Christ, [1798] whom we have not
 preached, or if ye receive another Spirit, which we have not received,
 or another gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with
 him. For I suppose that I did nothing less for you than the other
 apostles." [1799]

 [1774] Ætatis ac temporis privilegio.

 [1775] Velociter.

 [1776] Nec in aliquo remoratus.

 [1777] The text gives "inter unius anni spatium," for which intra,
 etc., is proposed. With certain others of the fathers, Archelaus seems
 to assign but one year to the preaching of Christ and to His working of
 miracles. See ch. xlix. [Vol. i. p. 391, this series.]

 [1778] Referring probably to Heb. i. 3.

 [1779] Migne gives this sentence as a direct statement. We adopt the
 interrogative form with Routh.

 [1780] Eph. iii. 8. Mihi autem soli, etc.

 [1781] John xvi. 14.

 [1782] The text reads, "quem misit ad nos Paulum in Spiritus influxit
 Spiritus," etc. We adopt the emendation, "quem misit ad nos Paulum in
 Spiritu. Influxit Spiritus," etc. Routh suggests, "Paulum cujus in
 spiritum influxit Spiritus" = this Paul, into whose spirit the Spirit
 was poured.

 [1783] In conspectu regum et gentium. Acts ix. 15.

 [1784] Consecrans. [Vol. v. p. 290, note 8; also p. 409.]

 [1785] Rom. xv. 15, 16.

 [1786] Rom. ix. 1.

 [1787] Rom. xv. 18.

 [1788] 1 Cor. xv. 9, 10. Archelaus here gives "novissimus omnium
 apostolorum" for the elachistos of the Greek, and the "minimus" of the
 Vulgate. ["The last" instead of least.]

 [1789] Vult habere.

 [1790] Reading "magnifico honore" for the "magnifico hoc ore" of the
 codex.

 [1791] 2 Cor. xii. 8, 9.

 [1792] John xiv. 15, 16.

 [1793] Aut.

 [1794] 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

 [1795] Undecim apostolis.

 [1796] 1 Cor. xv. 3-9. [Note 8, supra.]

 [1797] 1 Cor. xv. 11.

 [1798] Christum.

 [1799] Nihil minus feci vobis a cæteris apostolis. 2 Cor. xi. 3-5.

 35. These things, moreover, he has said with the view of showing us
 that all others who may come after him will be false apostles,
 deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ.
 And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed, like an angel of
 light. What great thing therefore is it, if his ministers also be
 transformed into the ministers of righteousness?--whose end shall be
 according to their works. [1800] He indicates, further, what manner of
 men these were, and points out by whom they were being circumvented.
 And when the Galatians are minded to turn away from the Gospel, he says
 to them: "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from Him that called you
 unto another gospel: which is not another; but there be some that
 trouble you, and would turn you away [1801] from the Gospel of Christ.
 But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto
 you than that which has been delivered to you, let him be accursed."
 [1802] And again he says: "To me, who am the least of all the apostles,
 [1803] is this grace given;" [1804] and," I fill up that which was
 behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh." [1805] And once more,
 in another place, he declares of himself that he was a minister of
 Christ more than all others, [1806] as though after him none other was
 to be looked for at all; for he enjoins that not even an angel from
 heaven is thus to be received. And how, then, shall we credit the
 professions of this Manes, who comes from Persis, [1807] and declares
 himself to be the Paraclete? By this very thing, indeed, I rather
 recognise in him one of those men who transform themselves, and of whom
 the Apostle Paul, that elect vessel, has given us very clear indication
 when he says: "Now in the last times some shall depart from the faith,
 giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; speaking lies
 in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron;
 forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God
 hath created to be received [1808] with thanksgiving of them which
 believe and know the truth. For every creature of God is good, and
 nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving." [1809] The
 Spirit in the evangelist Matthew is also careful to give note of these
 words of our Lord Jesus Christ: "Take heed that no man deceive you: for
 many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive
 many. But if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there;
 believe it not. For there shall arise false Christs, and false
 apostles, [1810] and false prophets, and shall show great signs and
 wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the
 very elect. Behold, I have told you before. If they shall say unto you,
 Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth: if they shall say, Behold,
 he is in the secret chambers; believe it not." [1811] And yet, after
 all these directions, this man, who has neither sign nor portent of any
 kind to show, who has no affinity to exhibit, who never even had a
 place among the number of the disciples, who never was a follower of
 our departed Lord, in whose inheritance we rejoice,--this man, I say,
 although he never stood by our Lord in His weakness, and although he
 never came forward as a witness of His testament, yea rather, although
 he never came even within the acquaintance of those who ministered to
 Him in His sickness, and, in fine, although he obtains the testimony of
 no person whatsoever, desires us to believe this profession which he
 makes of being the Paraclete; whereas, even were you to do signs and
 wonders, we would still have to reckon you a false Christ, and a false
 prophet, according to the Scriptures. And therefore it is well for us
 to act with the greater caution, in accordance with the warning which
 the sainted apostle gives us, when, in the epistle which he wrote to
 the Colossians, he speaks in the following terms: "Continue in the
 faith grounded and rooted, [1812] and not to be moved away [1813] from
 the hope of the Gospel, which we have heard, [1814] and which was
 preached to every creature which is under heaven." [1815] And again:
 "As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in
 Him; rooted and built up in Him, and stablished in the faith, as ye
 have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. Beware lest any
 one spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the rudiments
 of the world, and not after Christ. For in Him dwelleth all the fulness
 of the Godhead." [1816] And after all these matters have been thus
 carefully set forth, the blessed apostle, like a father speaking to his
 children, adds the following words, which serve as a sort of seal to
 his testament: "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course,
 [1817] I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a
 crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give
 me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love
 His appearing." [1818]

 [1800] 2 Cor. ix. 14, 15. The text gives "velut angelum lucis," as if
 the Greek had read hos. So also Cyprian, in the beginning of his book
 on The Unity of the Church. [Vol. v. p. 422, sec. 3.]

 [1801] Avertere vos.

 [1802] Gal. i. 6-8.

 [1803] Infimo omnium apostolorum.

 [1804] Eph. iii. 8.

 [1805] Col. i. 24.

 [1806] 2 Cor. xi. 23.

 [1807] The Codex Casinensis gives, "de Persida venientem monet;" for
 which corrupt reading it is proposed to substitute "de Perside
 venientem Manem," etc.

 [1808] Reading percipiendum with the Vulgate. But the Codex Casinensis
 has perficiendum.

 [1809] 1 Tim. iv. 1-4.

 [1810] These words falsi apostoli seem to be added by way of
 explanation, as they are not found either in the Greek or the Vulgate.

 [1811] Matt. xxiv. 4, 5, 23-26.

 [1812] Radicati.

 [1813] Immobiles.

 [1814] Audivimus.

 [1815] Col. i. 23.

 [1816] Col. ii. 6-9.

 [1817] The text gives "circum cucurri," perhaps for "cursum cucurri."
 The Vulgate has "cursum consummavi."

 [1818] 2 Tim. iv. 7, 8.

 36. None of your party, [1819] O Manes, will you make a Galatian;
 neither will you in this fashion divert us [1820] from the faith of
 Christ. Yea, even although you were to work signs and wonders, although
 you were to raise the dead, although you were to present to us the very
 image of Paul himself, you would remain accursed still. [1821] For we
 have been instructed beforehand with regard to you: we have been both
 warned and armed against you by the Holy Scriptures. You are a vessel
 of Antichrist; and no vessel of honour, in sooth, but a mean and base
 one, used by him as any barbarian or tyrant may do, who, in attempting
 to make an inroad on a people living under the righteousness of the
 laws, [1822] sends some select vessel on beforehand, as it were
 destined to death, with the view of finding out the exact magnitude and
 character of the strength possessed by the legitimate king and his
 nation: for the man is too much afraid to make the inroad himself
 wholly at unawares, and he also lacks the daring to despatch any person
 belonging to his own immediate circle on such a task, through fear that
 he may sustain some harm. And so it is that your king, Antichrist, has
 despatched you in a similar character, and as it were destined to
 death, to us who are a people placed under the administration of the
 good and holy King. And this I do not say inconsiderately or without
 due inquiry; but from the fact that I see you perform no miracle, I
 hold myself entitled to entertain such sentiments concerning you. For
 we are given to understand beforehand that the devil himself is to be
 transformed into an angel of light, and that his servants are to make
 their appearance in similar guise, and that they are to work signs and
 wonders, insomuch that, if it were possible, the very elect should be
 deceived. [1823] But who, pray, are you then, to whose lot no such
 position of kinship has been assigned by your father Satan? [1824] For
 whom have you raised from the dead? What issue of blood do you ever
 staunch? What [1825] eyes of the blind do you ever anoint with clay,
 and thus cause them to have vision? When do you ever refresh a
 hungering multitude with a few loaves? Where do you ever walk upon the
 water, or who of those who dwell in Jerusalem has ever seen you? O
 Persian barbarian, you have never been able to have a knowledge of the
 language of the Greeks, or of the Egyptians, or of the Romans, or of
 any other nation; but the Chaldean tongue alone has been known to you,
 which verily is not a language prevalent among any great number of
 people, [1826] and you are not capable of understanding any one of
 another nationality when he speaks. Not thus is it with the Holy
 Spirit: God forbid; but He divides to all, and knows all kinds of
 tongues, and has understanding of all things, and is made all things to
 all men, so that the very thoughts of the heart cannot escape His
 cognizance. For what says the Scripture? "That every man heard the
 apostles speak in his own language through the Spirit, the Paraclete."
 [1827] But why should I say more on this subject? [1828] Barbarian
 [1829] priest and crafty coadjutor of Mithras, you will only be a
 worshipper of the sun-god Mithras, who is the illuminator of places of
 mystic import, as you opine, and the self-conscious deity; [1830] that
 is, you will sport as his worshippers do, and you will celebrate,
 though with less elegance as it were, his mysteries. [1831] But why
 should I take all this so indignantly? Is it not accordant with all
 that is fitting, that you should multiply yourself like the tares,
 until that same mighty father of yours comes, raising the dead, as he
 will profess to do, and persecuting almost to hell itself all those who
 refuse to yield to his bidding, keeping multitudes in check by that
 terror of arrogance in which he entrenches himself, and employing
 threatenings against others, and making sport of them by the changing
 of his countenance and his deceitful dealing? [1832] And yet beyond
 that he shall proceed no further; for his folly shall be made manifest
 to all men, as was the case with Jamnes and Mambres. [1833] The judges
 said: As we have heard now from you, as Paul himself also seems to tell
 us, and, further, as we have learned likewise from the earlier account
 given in the Gospel, an introduction to preaching, or teaching, or
 evangelizing, or prophesying, is not, in this life at least, held out
 on the same terms to any person in times subsequent to the apostle's:
 [1834] and if the opposite appears ever to be the case, the person can
 only be held to be a false prophet or a false Christ. Now, since you
 have alleged that the Paraclete was in Paul, and that He attested all
 things in him, how is it that Paul himself said, "We know in part, and
 we prophesy in part; but when that which is perfect is come, then that
 which is in part shall be done away?" [1835] What other one did he look
 for, when he uttered these words? For if he professes himself to be
 looking for some perfect one, and if some one must needs come, show us
 who it is of whom he speaks; lest that word of his perchance appear to
 carry us back to this man, Manes, or to him who has sent him, that is
 to say, Satan, according to your affirmation. But if you admit that
 that which is perfect is yet to come, then this excludes Satan; and if
 you look for the coming of Satan, then that excludes the perfect.

 [1819] The text gives "ex vobis." But perhaps we should read "ex nobis"
 = none of us.

 [1820] The Codex Casinensis has "Galatam facies vicit, o nostras
 feras", for which we adopt the correction, "Galatam facies, nec ita
 nos."

 [1821] O Satan! The Codex Casinensis gives "anathema esse ana," which
 may be an error, either for "anathema es, Satana," or for "anathema es
 et maranatha." ["O Satan" is less probable.]

 [1822] The text is legum; for which regum, kings, is also suggested.

 [1823] Matt. xxiv. 24.

 [1824] The text gives, "qui neque necessarium aliquem locum sortitus
 es," etc. Routh proposes "necessarii." The sense seems to be that Manes
 had nothing to prove any connection between him and Christ.

 [1825] Reading "quos luto," etc., for the "quod luto" of the codex.

 [1826] [Note, against Canon Farrar and moderns, the persuasion of
 antiquity as to the miraculous gift of tongues; the charismata of
 others, also, besides the Apostles.] The text is, "quæ ne in numerum
 quidem aliquem ducitur."

 [1827] Acts ii. 6.

 [1828] The text gives "Quid dicabo," which may stand for "quid dicam;"
 or perhaps the translator intends to use "dicare" in the sense of urge.

 [1829] Reading barbare, for which the text offers barba.

 [1830] Conscium. [For Mithras, see vol. iii. p. 475.]

 [1831] In this sentence the sense is somewhat obscure, in consequence
 of the corruptions of the text in the codex. We adopt the emendations
 "locorum mysticorum," for mysteriorum, and "apud eos ludes" for ludis.
 In the end of the clause Migne gives, as in the translation, "et
 tanquam minus elegans," etc. But Routh reads mimus = and like an
 elegant pantomimist, etc.

 [1832] The Codex Casinensis gives the sentence thus: "...adveniat?
 suscitans mortuos? pene usque ad gehennam omnes persequens, qui si ut
 obtemperare noluerit, plurimos deterrens arrogantiæ metu, Quod est ipse
 circumdatus, aliis adhibet minas vultus sui conversione circumdatio
 ludificat." The emendation adopted by Migne and Routh consist in
 removing these two interrogative marks, and in reading qui sibi for qui
 si ut, noluerint for noluerit, quo est for Quod est, adhibens for
 adhibet, and et circumductione ludificans for the last two words.

 [1833] 2 Tim. iii. 8, 9.

 [1834] The sense is again obscure throughout this sentence, owing to
 the state of the text. The codex gives us this clause, "nulli alio
 atque posterum," etc., for which "nulli alii æque in posterum" is
 proposed.

 [1835] 1 Cor. xiii. 9, 10.

 37. Archelaus said: Those sayings which are put forth by the blessed
 Paul were not uttered without the direction of God, and therefore it is
 certain that what he has declared to us is that we are to look for our
 Lord Jesus Christ as the perfect one, who [1836] is the only one that
 knows the Father, with the sole exception of him to whom He has chosen
 also to reveal Him, [1837] as I am able to demonstrate from His own
 words. But let it be observed, that it is said that when that which is
 perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. Now
 this man (Manes) asserts that he is the perfect one. Let him show us,
 then, what he has done away with; for what is to be done away with is
 the ignorance which is in us. Let him therefore tell us what he has
 done away with, and what he has brought into the sphere of our
 knowledge. If he is able to do anything of this nature, let him do it
 now, in order that he may be believed. These very words of Paul's, if
 one can but understand them in the full power of their meaning, will
 only secure entire credit to the statements made by me. For in that
 first Epistle to the Corinthians, Paul speaks in the following terms of
 the perfection that is to come: "Whether there be prophecies, they
 shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there
 be knowledge, it shall be destroyed: for we know in part, and we
 prophesy in part; but when that which is perfect is come, then that
 which is in part shall be done away." [1838] Observe now what virtue
 that which is perfect possesses in itself, and of what order that
 perfection is. And let this man, then, tell us what prophecy of the
 Jews or Hebrews he has done away with; or what tongues he has caused to
 cease, whether of the Greeks or of others who worship idols; or what
 alien dogmas he has destroyed, whether of a Valentinian, or a Marcion,
 or a Tatian, or a Sabellius, or any others of those who have
 constructed for themselves their peculiar systems of knowledge. Let him
 tell us which of all these he has already done away with, or when he is
 yet to do away with any one of them, in this character of the perfect
 one. Perchance he seeks some sort of truce--does he? [1839] But not
 thus inconsiderable, not thus obscure [1840] and ignoble, will be the
 manner of the advent of Him who is the truly perfect one, that is to
 say, our Lord Jesus Christ. Nay, but as a king, when he draws near to
 his city, does first of all send on before him his life-guardsmen,
 [1841] his ensigns and standards and banners, [1842] his generals and
 chiefs and prefects, and then forthwith all objects are roused and
 excited in different fashions, while some become inspired with terror
 and others with exultation at the prospect of the king's advent; so
 also my Lord Jesus Christ, who is the truly perfect one, at His coming
 will first send on before Him His glory, and the consecrated heralds of
 an unstained and untainted kingdom: and then the universal creation
 will be moved and perturbed, uttering prayers and supplications, until
 He delivers it from its bondage. [1843] And it must needs be that the
 race of man shall then be in fear and in vehement agitation on account
 of the many offences it has committed. Then the righteous alone will
 rejoice, as they look for the things which have been promised them; and
 the subsistence of the affairs of this world will no longer be
 maintained, but all things shall be destroyed: and whether they be
 prophecies or the books of prophets, they shall fail; whether they be
 the tongues of the whole race, they shall cease; for men will no longer
 need to feel anxiety or to think solicitously about those things which
 are necessary for life; whether it be knowledge, by what teachers
 soever it be possessed, it shall also be destroyed: for none of all
 these things will be able to endure the advent of that mighty King. For
 just as a little spark, if [1844] taken and put up against the
 splendour of the sun, at once perishes from the view, so the whole
 creation, all prophecy, all knowledge, all tongues, as we have said
 above, shall be destroyed. But since the capacities of common human
 nature are all insufficient to set forth in a few words, and these so
 weak and so extremely poor, the coming of this heavenly King,--so much
 so, indeed, that perchance it should be the privilege only of the
 saintly and the highly worthy to attempt any statement on such a
 subject,--it may yet be enough for me to be able to say that I have
 advanced what I have now advanced on that theme on the ground of simple
 necessity,--compelled, as I have been, to do thus much by this person's
 importunity, and simply with the view of showing you what kind of
 character he is.

 [1836] Reading "qui solus," for the sed, etc., of the codex. See also
 Luke x. 22.

 [1837] Matt. xi. 27.

 [1838] 1 Cor. xiii. 8-10.

 [1839] Inducias fortassis aliquas quærit.

 [1840] Reading "non plane, non tam obscure," etc., instead of the "non
 plane nota," etc., of the Codex Casinensis.

 [1841] "Protectores," on which term consult Ducangius in his Glossary.

 [1842] Signa, dracones, labaros.

 [1843] Rom. viii. 21, 22.

 [1844] The text gives simply, sicut enim parva. We may adopt, with
 Routh, "sicut enim cum parva," etc.

 38. And, in good truth, I hold Marcion, and Valentinian, and Basilides,
 and other heretics, to be sainted men when compared [1845] with this
 person. For they did display a certain kind of intellect, and they did,
 indeed, think themselves capable of understanding all Scripture, and
 did thus constitute themselves leaders [1846] for those who were
 willing to listen to them. But notwithstanding this, not one of these
 dared to proclaim himself to be either God, or Christ, or the
 Paraclete, as this fellow has done, who is ever disputing, on some
 occasions about the ages, [1847] and on others about the sun, and how
 these objects were made, as though he were superior to them himself;
 for every person who offers an exposition of the method in which any
 object has been made, puts himself forward as superior to and older
 than the subject of his discussion. But who may venture to speak of the
 substance of God, unless, it may be, our Lord Jesus Christ alone? And,
 indeed, I do not make this statement on the bare authority of my own
 words, but I confirm it by the authority of that Scripture which has
 been our instructor. For the apostle addresses the following words to
 us: "That ye may be lights in this world, holding [1848] the word of
 life for my glory against the day of Christ, seeing that I have not run
 in vain, neither laboured in vain." [1849] We ought to understand what
 is the force and meaning of this saying; for the word may suit the
 leader, but the effectual work suits the king. [1850] And accordingly,
 as one who looks for the arrival of his king, strives to be able to
 present all who are under his charge as obedient, and ready, and
 estimable, and lovely, and faithful, and not less also as blameless,
 and abounding in all that is good, so that he may himself get
 commendation from the king, and be deemed by him to be worthy of
 greater honours, as having rightly governed the province which was
 entrusted to his administration; so also does the blessed Paul give us
 to understand our position when he uses these words: "That ye may be as
 lights in this world, holding the word of life for my glory against the
 day of Christ." For the meaning of this saying is, that our Lord Jesus
 Christ, when He comes, will see that his doctrine has proved profitable
 in us, and that, finding that he, the apostle, has not run in vain,
 neither laboured in vain, He will bestow on him the crown of
 recompense. And again, in the same epistle, he also warns us not to
 mind earthly things, and tells us that we ought to have our
 conversation in heaven; from which also we look for the Saviour, our
 Lord Jesus Christ. [1851] And as the knowledge of the date of the last
 day is no secure position for us, he has given us, to that effect, a
 declaration on the subject in the epistle which he wrote to the
 Thessalonians, thus: "But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye
 have no need that I write unto you; for yourselves know perfectly that
 the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night." [1852] How,
 then, does this man stand up and try to persuade us to emigrate his
 opinions, importuning every individual whom he meets to become a
 Manichæan, and going about and creeping into houses, and endeavouring
 to deceive minds laden with sins? [1853] But we do not hold such
 sentiments. Nay, rather, we should be disposed to present the things
 themselves before you all, and bring them into comparison, if it please
 you, with what we know of the perfect Paraclete. For you observe that
 [1854] sometimes he uses the interrogative style, and sometimes the
 deprecatory. But in the Gospel of our Saviour it is written that those
 who stand on the left hand of the King will say: "Lord, when saw we
 Thee an hungered, or athirst, or naked, or a stranger, or in prison,
 and did not minister unto Thee?" [1855] Thus they will implore Him to
 be indulgent with them. But what reply is that righteous Judge and King
 represented as making to them? "Depart from me into everlasting fire,
 ye workers of iniquity." [1856] He casts them into everlasting fire,
 although they cease not to direct their entreaties to Him. Do you see,
 then, O Manes, what manner of event that advent of the perfect King is
 destined to be? Do you not perceive that it will not be such a
 perfection, or consummation, as you allege? But if the great day of
 judgment is to be looked for after that King, surely this man is
 greatly inferior to Him. But if he is inferior, he cannot be perfect.
 And if he is not to be perfect, it is not of him that the apostle
 speaks. But if it is not of him that the apostle speaks, while he still
 makes the mendacious statement that it is of himself that the said word
 of the apostle was spoken, then surely he is to be judged a false
 prophet. Much more, too, might be said to the same effect. But if we
 were to think of going over in detail all that might thus be adduced,
 time would fail us for the accomplishment of so large a task. Hence I
 have deemed it abundantly sufficient thus to have brought under your
 notice only a few things out of many, leaving the yet remaining
 portions of such a discussion to those who have the inclination to go
 through with them.

 [1845] Reading "sic ut istius comparatione," for the "sicut istius
 paratione" of the codex.

 [1846] Reading se ductores, for the seductores, etc., of the codex.

 [1847] Seculis.

 [1848] Continentes.

 [1849] Phil. ii. 13.

 [1850] The precise meaning and connection are somewhat obscure here.
 The text gives, "verbum enim ducis obtinet locum, opera vero regis."
 And the idea is taken to be, that the actual work of thoroughly doing
 away with the ignorance of men was something that suited only the
 perfect King who was expected, and that had not been accomplished by
 Manes.

 [1851] Phil. iii. 19.

 [1852] 1 Thess. v. 1, 2.

 [1853] Alluding to 2 Tim. iii. 6.

 [1854] Routh inserts interdum poenitet = sometimes he uses the
 penitential style, which Migne omits.

 [1855] Matt. xxv. 44.

 [1856] Matt. xxv. 46; Luke xiii. 27.

 39. On hearing these matters, those who were present gave great glory
 to God, and ascribed to Him such praise as it is meet for Him to
 receive. And on Archelaus himself they bestowed many tokens of honour.
 Then Marcellus rose up; and casting off his cloak, [1857] he threw his
 arms round Archelaus, and kissed him, and embraced him, and clung to
 him. Then, too, the children who had chanced to gather about the place
 began and set the example of pelting Manes and driving him off; [1858]
 and the rest of the crowd followed them, and moved excitedly about,
 with the intention of compelling Manes to take to flight. But when
 Archelaus observed this, he raised his voice like a trumpet above the
 din, in his anxiety to restrain the multitude, and addressed them thus:
 "Stop, my beloved brethren, lest mayhap we be found to have the guilt
 of blood on us at the day of judgment; for it is written of men like
 this, that there must be also heresies among you, that they which are
 approved may be made manifest among you.'" [1859] And when he had
 uttered these words, the crowds of people were quieted again. [1860]
 --Now, because it was the pleasure of Marcellus that this disputation
 should have a place given it, [1861] and that it should also be
 described, I could not gainsay his wish, but trusted to the kind
 consideration of the readers, believing that they would pardon me if my
 discourse should sound somewhat inartistic or boorish: for the great
 thing which we have had in view has been, that the means of knowing
 what took place on this occasion should not fail to be brought within
 the reach of all who desired to understand the subject. Thereafter, it
 must be added, when Manes had once taken to flight, he made his
 appearance nowhere there again. His attendant Turbo, however, was
 handed over by Marcellus to Archelaus; and on Archelaus ordaining him
 as a deacon, he remained in the suite of Marcellus. But Manes in his
 flight came to a certain village which was at a considerable distance
 from the city, and bore the name of Diodorus. Now in that place there
 was also a presbyter whose name likewise was Diodorus, [1862] a man of
 quiet and gentle disposition, and well reputed both for his faith and
 for the excellence of his general character. Now when, on a certain
 day, Manes had gathered a crowd of auditors around him, and was
 haranguing [1863] them, and putting before the people who were present
 certain outlandish assertions altogether foreign to the tradition of
 the fathers, and in no way apprehending any opposition that might be
 made to him on the part of any of these, Diodorus perceived that he was
 producing some effect by his wickedness, and resolved then to send to
 Archelaus a letter couched in the following terms:--

 Diodorus sends greeting to Bishop Archelaus, [1864]

 [1857] The text gives the plural form stolas, perhaps for stolam.

 [1858] The text gives fugere, apparently in the sense of fugare.

 [1859] 1 Cor. xi. 19.

 [1860] [Note the testimony against the persecution of heretics,--a
 characteristic of early Christians which too soon began to disappear,
 notably in Alexandria under Cyril.]

 [1861] Excipi.

 [1862] This Diodorus appears to be called Trypho by Epiphanius, on this
 Manichæan heresy, n. 11.

 [1863] Reading concionaretur for continuaretur.

 [1864] This epistle is also mentioned, and its argument noticed, by
 Epiphanius, Hæres., 11.

 40. I wish you to know, most pious father, that in these days there has
 arrived in our parts a certain person named Manes, who gives out that
 he is to complete the doctrine of the New Testament. And in the
 statements which he has made there have been some things, indeed, which
 may harmonize with our faith; but there have been also certain
 affirmations of his which seem very far removed from what has come down
 to us by the tradition of our fathers. For he has interpreted some
 doctrines in a strange fashion, imposing on them certain notions of his
 own, which have appeared to me to be altogether foreign and opposed to
 the faith. On the ground of these facts I have now been induced to
 write this letter to you, knowing the completeness and fulness of your
 intelligence in doctrine, and being assured that none of these things
 can escape your cognizance. Accordingly, I have also indulged the
 confident hope that you cannot be kept back by any grudge [1865] from
 explaining these matters to us. As to myself, indeed, it is not
 possible that I shall be drawn away into any novel doctrine;
 nevertheless, in behalf of all the less instructed, I have been led to
 ask a word with your authority. For, in truth, the man shows himself to
 be a person of extraordinary force of character, both in speech and in
 action; and indeed his very aspect and attire also bear that out. But I
 shall here write down for your information some few points which I have
 been able to retain in my memory out of all the topics which have been
 expounded by him: for I know that even by these few you will have an
 idea of the rest. You well understand, no doubt, that those who seek to
 set up any new dogma have the habit of very readily perverting into a
 conformity with their own notions any proofs they desire to take from
 the Scriptures. [1866] In anticipation, however, of this, the apostolic
 word marks out the case thus: "If any one preach any other gospel unto
 you than that which you have received, let him be accursed." [1867] And
 consequently, in addition to what has been once committed to us by the
 apostles, a disciple of Christ ought to receive nothing new as
 doctrine. [1868] But not to make what I have got to say too long, I
 return to the subject directly in view. This man then maintained that
 the law of Moses, to speak shortly, does not proceed from the good God,
 but from the prince of evil; and that it has no kinship with the new
 law of Christ, but is contrary and hostile to it, the one being the
 direct antagonist of the other. When I heard such a sentiment
 propounded, I repeated to the people that sentence of the Gospel in
 which our Lord Jesus Christ said of Himself: "I am not come to destroy
 the law, but to fulfil it." [1869] The man, however, averred that He
 did not utter this saying at all; for he held that when we find that He
 did abrogate [1870] that same law, we are bound to give heed, above all
 other considerations, to the thing which He actually did. Then he began
 to cite a great variety of passages from the law, and also many from
 the Gospel and from the Apostle Paul, which have the appearance of
 contradicting each other. All this he gave forth at the same time with
 perfect confidence, and without any hesitation or fear; so that I
 verily believe he has that serpent as his helper, who is ever our
 adversary. Well, he declared that there in the law God said, "I make
 the rich man and the poor man;" [1871] while here in the Gospel Jesus
 called the poor blessed, [1872] and added, that no man could be His
 disciple unless he gave up all that he had. [1873] Again, he maintained
 that there Moses took silver and gold from the Egyptians when the
 people [1874] fled out of Egypt; [1875] whereas Jesus delivered the
 precept that we should lust after nothing belonging to our neighbour.
 Then he affirmed that Moses had provided in the law, that an eye should
 be given in penalty for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; [1876] but
 that our Lord bade us offer the other cheek also to him who smote the
 one. [1877] He told us, too, that there Moses commanded the man to be
 punished and stoned who did any work on the Sabbath, and who failed to
 continue in all things that were written in the law, [1878] as in fact
 was done to that person who, yet being ignorant, had gathered a bundle
 of sticks on the Sabbath-day; whereas Jesus cured a cripple on the
 Sabbath, and ordered him then also to take up his bed. [1879] And
 further, He did not restrain His disciples from plucking the ears of
 corn and rubbing them with their hands on the Sabbath-day, [1880] which
 yet was a thing which it was unlawful to do on the Sabbaths. And why
 should I mention other instances? For with many different assertions of
 a similar nature these dogmas of his were propounded with the utmost
 energy and the most fervid zeal. Thus, too, on the authority of an
 apostle, he endeavoured to establish the position that the law of Moses
 is the law of death, and that the law of Jesus, on the contrary, is the
 law of life. For he based that assertion on the passage which runs
 thus: "In which also may God make us [1881] able ministers of the New
 Testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter
 killeth, but the spirit giveth life. But if the ministration of death,
 engraven in letters on the stones, [1882] was made in glory, so that
 the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses
 for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done away; how
 shall not the ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious? For if the
 ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration
 of righteousness exceed in glory. For even that which was made glorious
 had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth.
 For if that which shall be done away is glorious, much more that which
 remaineth is glorious." [1883] And this passage, as you are also well
 aware, occurs in the second Epistle to the Corinthians. Besides, he
 added to this another passage out of the first epistle, on which he
 based his affirmation that the disciples of the Old Testament were
 earthly and natural; and in accordance with this, that flesh and blood
 could not possess the kingdom of God. [1884] He also maintained that
 Paul himself spoke in his own proper person when he said: "If I build
 again the things which I destroyed, I make myself a transgressor."
 [1885] Further, he averred that the same apostle made this statement
 most obviously on the subject of the resurrection of the flesh, when he
 also said that "he is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that
 circumcision which is outward in the flesh," [1886] and that according
 to the letter the law has in it no advantage. [1887] And again he
 adduced the statement, that "Abraham has glory, but not before God;"
 [1888] and that "by the law there comes only the knowledge of sin."
 [1889] And many other things did he introduce, with the view of
 detracting from the honour of the law, on the ground that the law
 itself is sin; by which statements the simpler people were somewhat
 influenced, as he continued to bring them forward; and in accordance
 with all this, he also made use of the affirmation, that "the law and
 the prophets were until John." [1890] He declared, however, that John
 preached the true kingdom of heaven; for verily he held, that by the
 cutting off of his head it was signified that all who went before him,
 and who had precedence over him, were to be cut off, and that what was
 to come after him was alone to be maintained. With reference to all
 these things, therefore, O most pious Archelaus, send us back a short
 reply in writing: for I have heard that you have studied such matters
 in no ordinary degree; and that capacity which you possess is God's
 gift, inasmuch as God bestows these gifts upon those who are worthy of
 them, and who are His friends, and who show themselves allied to Him in
 community of purpose and life. For it is our part to prepare ourselves,
 and to approach the gracious and liberal mind, [1891] and forthwith we
 receive from it the most bountiful gifts. Accordingly, since the
 learning which I possess for the discussion of themes like these does
 not meet the requirements of my desire and purpose, for I confess
 myself to be an unlearned man, I have sent to you, as I have already
 said more than once, in the hope of obtaining from your hand the
 amplest solution to this question. May it be well with you,
 incomparable and honourable father!

 [1865] Invidia.

 [1866] [Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 251, this series.]

 [1867] Gal. i. 8.

 [1868] [Against Scripture and the torrent of patristic testimony, the
 men of this generation have seen new dogmas imposed upon a great
 portion of Christendom by the voice of a single bishop, and without
 synodical deliberation or consent. The whole claim to "Catholicity"
 perishes wherever such dogmas are accepted.]

 [1869] Matt. v. 17.

 [1870] Resolvisse.

 [1871] Prov. xxii. 2.

 [1872] Matt. v. 3.

 [1873] Luke xiv. 33.

 [1874] Reading cum populis for the cum populo of the text.

 [1875] Ex. xii. 35.

 [1876] Ex. xxi. 24.

 [1877] Luke vi. 29.

 [1878] Num. xv. 32.

 [1879] Mark ii. 11.

 [1880] Luke vi. 1.

 [1881] Faciat Deus.

 [1882] In litteris formatum in lapidibus.

 [1883] 2 Cor. iii. 6-11.

 [1884] 1 Cor. xv. 46-50.

 [1885] Gal. ii. 18.

 [1886] Rom. ii. 28.

 [1887] Rom. iv. 1.

 [1888] Rom. iv. 2.

 [1889] Rom. iii. 20.

 [1890] Luke xvi. 16.

 [1891] Reading "præparare et proximos fieri benignæ ac diviti menti"
 for "præparet proximus fieri benignæ hac," etc., as it stands in the
 Codex Casinensis. Routh suggests "præparare proximos fieri benignæ ac
 diviti menti et continuo...consequemur" = to take care to draw near to
 the gracious and liberal mind, and then we shall forthwith receive
 steadily from it, etc.

 41. On receiving this epistle, Archelaus was astonished at the man's
 boldness. But in the meantime, as the case called for the transmission
 of a speedy reply, he immediately sent off a letter with reference to
 the statements made by Diodorus. That epistle ran in the following
 terms: [1892] --

 Archelaus sends greeting to the presbyter Diodorus, his honourable son.

 The receipt of your letter has rejoiced me exceedingly, my dearly
 beloved friend. I have been given to understand, moreover, that this
 man, who made his way to me before these days, and sought to introduce
 a novel kind of knowledge here, different from what is apostolic and
 ecclesiastical, has also come to you. To that person, indeed, I gave no
 place: for presently, when we held a disputation together, he was
 confuted. And I could wish now to transcribe for your behoof all the
 arguments of which I made use on that occasion, so that by means of
 these you might get an idea of what that man's faith is. But as that
 could be done only with leisure at my disposal, I have deemed it
 requisite, in view of the immediate exigency, to write a short reply to
 you with reference to what you have written me on the subject of the
 statements advanced by him. I understand, then, that his chief [1893]
 effort was directed to prove that the law of Moses is not consonant
 with the law of Christ; and this position he attempted to found on the
 authority of our Scriptures. Well, on the other hand, not only did we
 establish the law of Moses, and all things which are written in it, by
 the same Scripture; but we also proved that the whole Old Testament
 agrees with the New Testament, and is in perfect harmony with the same,
 and that they form really one texture, just as a person may see one and
 the same robe made up of weft and warp together. [1894] For the truth
 is simply this, that just as we trace the purple in a robe, so, if we
 may thus express it, we can discern the New Testament in the texture of
 the Old Testament; for we see the glory of the Lord mirrored in the
 same. [1895] We are not therefore to cast aside the mirror, [1896]
 seeing that it shows us the genuine image of the things themselves,
 faithfully and truly; but, on the contrary, we ought to honour it all
 the more. Think you, indeed, that the boy who is brought by his
 pædagogue to the teachers of learning [1897] when he is yet a very
 little fellow, ought to hold that pædagogue in no honour [1898] after
 he has grown up to manhood, simply because he needs his services [1899]
 no longer, but can make his course without any assistance from that
 attendant to the schools, and quickly find his way to the
 lecture-rooms? Or, to take another instance, would it be right for the
 child who has been nourished on milk at first, after he has grown to be
 capable of receiving stronger meats, then injuriously to spurn the
 breasts of his nurse, and conceive a horror of them? Nay, rather he
 should honour and cherish them, and confess himself a debtor to their
 good services. We may also make use, if it please you, of another
 illustration. A certain man on one occasion having noticed an infant
 exposed on the ground and already suffering excessively, picked it up,
 and undertook to rear it in his own house until it should reach the age
 of youth, and sustained all the toils and anxieties which are wont to
 fall to the lot of those who have to bring up children. After a time,
 however, it happened that he who was the child's natural father came
 seeking the boy, and found him with this person who had brought him up.
 [1900] What ought this boy to do on learning that this is his real
 father? For I speak, of course, of a boy of the right type. Would he
 not see to it, that he who had brought him up should be recompensed
 with liberal gifts; and would he not then follow his natural father,
 having his proper inheritance in view [1901] Even so, then, I think we
 must suppose that that distinguished servant of God, Moses, in a manner
 something like this, found [1902] a people afflicted by the Egyptians;
 and he took this people to himself, and nurtured them in the desert
 like a father, and instructed them like a teacher, and ruled them as a
 magistrate. This people he also preserved against the coming of him
 whose people they were. And after a considerable period the father
 [1903] did come, and did receive, his sheep. Now will not that guardian
 be honoured in all things by him to whom he delivered that flock; and
 will he not be glorified by those who have been preserved by him? Who,
 then, can be so senseless, my dearly beloved Diodorus, as to say that
 those are aliens to each other who have been allied with each other,
 who have prophesied in turn for each other, and who have shown signs
 and wonders which are equal and similar, the one to the other, and of
 like nature with each other; [1904] or rather, to speak in truth, which
 belong wholly to the same stock the one with the other? For, indeed,
 Moses first said to the people: "A Prophet will the Lord our God raise
 up unto you, like unto me." [1905] And Jesus afterwards said: "For
 Moses spake of me." [1906] You see [1907] how these twain give the
 right hand to each other, although [1908] the one was the prophet and
 the other was the beloved Son, [1909] and although in the one we are to
 recognise the faithful servant, but in the other the Lord Himself. Now,
 on the other hand, I might refer to the fact, that one who of old was
 minded to make his way to the schools without the pædagogue was not
 taken in by the master. For the master said: "I will not receive him
 unless he accepts the pædagogue." And who the person is, who is spoken
 of under that figure, I shall briefly explain. There was a certain rich
 man, [1910] who lived after the manner of the Gentiles, and passed his
 time in great luxury every day; and there was also another man, a poor
 man, who was his neighbour, and who was unable to procure even his
 daily bread. It happened that both these men departed this life, that
 they both descended into the grave, [1911] and that the poor man was
 conveyed into the place of rest, and so forth, as is known to you. But,
 furthermore, that rich man had also five brothers, living as he too had
 lived, and disturbed by no doubt as to lessons which they had learned
 at home from such a master. The rich man then entreated that these
 should be instructed in the superior doctrine together and at once.
 [1912] But Abraham, knowing that they still stood in need of the
 pædagogue, said to him: "They have Moses and the prophets." For if they
 received not these, so as to have their course directed by him, i.e.,
 Moses, as by a pædagogue, they would not be capable of accepting the
 doctrine of the superior master.

 [1892] This epistle is edited not only from the Codex Casinensis, but
 also by Valesius from the Codex Bobiensis. The most important varieties
 of reading shall therefore be noted.

 [1893] Summum studium. But the Codex Bobiensis reads suum studium.

 [1894] Reading "ex subtegmine atque stamine," etc., with the Codex
 Bobiensis, instead of "subtemine et, quæ stamine," etc., as it is given
 in the Codex Casinensis. [A beautiful anticipation of Augustine's
 dictum, "The New is veiled in the Old, the Old unveiled in the New."]

 [1895] We read here "gloriam enim Domini in eodem speculamur." The
 Codex Bobiensis is vitiated here, giving gloriam um Domini, which was
 changed by Valesius into gloriam Jesu, etc.

 [1896] Reading, with the Codex Bobiensis, "speculum, cum nobis ipsam
 imaginem," etc., instead of "speculum nobis per ipsam imaginem," etc.

 [1897] [Here is the literal use of the word "pædagogue," with which
 Clement took liberties. Vol. ii. p. 209, note 3, this series.] Adopting
 "qui ad doctores a pædagogo," instead of "qui a doctore iis a
 pædagogo."

 [1898] "Dehonorare," or, as in the Codex Bobiensis, "dehonestare."

 [1899] Reading "opera ejus non indiget." But the Codex Casinensis gives
 "ore ejus," etc.

 [1900] The Codex Bobiensis reads here, "accidit vero post tempus ut is
 qui...requireret," etc. The other codex has, "accedit vero post tempus
 is qui...requirere."

 [1901] Reading pro respectu with Codex Bobiensis. The other codex gives
 prospectu.

 [1902] Reading invenisse. The Codex Casinensis gives venisse.

 [1903] Routh suggests pastor, the shepherd, for pater.

 [1904] Reading cognata, with Codex Bobiensis, instead of cognita.

 [1905] Deut. xviii. 18.

 [1906] John v. 46.

 [1907] We adopt the reading vides, instead of the faulty unde of the
 Codex Casinensis.

 [1908] Reading quamvis for quum.

 [1909] See Heb. iii. 5, 6.

 [1910] Luke xvi. 19, etc.

 [1911] Infernum. [Sheol, rather, or Hades.]

 [1912] The reading of the Codex Casinensis is, "rogavit dives simul uno
 tempore ut edisceret majorem doctrinam." But the other codex gives,
 "uno tempore discere majorem doctrinam ab Abraham" = entreated that he
 might learn the superior doctrine of Abraham. For edisceret we may read
 with Routh ediscerent.

 42. But I shall also offer, to the best of my ability, some expositions
 of the other words referred to; that is to say, I shall show that Jesus
 neither said nor did aught that was contrary to Moses. And first, as to
 the word, "An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth," [1913] --that
 is the expression of justice. And as to His injunction, that a man,
 when struck on the one cheek, should offer the other also, that is the
 expression of goodness. Well, then, are justice and goodness opposed to
 each other? Far from it! There has only been an advance from simple
 justice to positive goodness. And again, we have the saying, "The
 workman is worthy of his hire." [1914] But if a person seeks to
 practise any fraud therein, it is surely most just [1915] that what he
 has got possession of by fraud should be required of him, most
 especially when the hire is large. Now this I say, that when the
 Egyptians afflicted the children of Israel by the taskmasters who were
 set over them in the process of making bricks, Moses required and
 exacted the whole at once, with penalties, within one moment of time.
 But is this, then, to be called iniquity? Far from it! Surely it is the
 abstinence [1916] of goodness, indeed, when one makes but a moderate
 use of what is really necessary, and gives up all that goes beyond
 that. Let us look, again, at the fact that in the Old Testament we find
 the words, "I make the rich man and the poor man," [1917] whereas Jesus
 calls the poor blessed. [1918] Well, in that saying Jesus did not refer
 to those who are poor simply in worldly substance, but to those who are
 poor in spirit, that is to say, who are not inflamed [1919] with pride,
 but have the gentle and lowly dispositions of humility, not thinking of
 themselves more than they ought to think. [1920] This question,
 however, is one which our adversary has not propounded correctly. For
 here I perceive that Jesus also looks on willingly at the gifts of the
 rich men, when they are put into the treasury. [1921] All too little,
 at the same time, is it [1922] if gifts are cast into [1923] the
 treasury by the rich alone; and so there are the two mites of the poor
 widow which are also received with gladness; and in that offering
 verily something is exhibited that goes beyond what Moses prescribed on
 the subject of the receipt of moneys. For he received gifts from those
 who had; but Jesus receives them even from those who have not. But this
 man says, further, that it is written, that "except a man shall forsake
 all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple." [1924] Well, I observe
 again, that the centurion, a man exceedingly wealthy and well dowered
 with worldly influence, possessed a faith surpassing that of all
 Israel; [1925] so that, even if there was any one who had forsaken all,
 that man was surpassed in faith by this centurion. But some one may now
 reason with us thus: It is not a good thing, consequently, to give up
 riches. Well, I reply that it is a good thing for those who are capable
 of it; but, at the same time, to employ [1926] riches for the work of
 righteousness and mercy, is a thing as acceptable as though one were to
 give up the whole at once. Again, as to the assertion that the Sabbath
 has been abolished, we deny that He has abolished it plainly; [1927]
 for He was Himself also Lord of the Sabbath. [1928] And this, the law's
 relation to the Sabbath, was like the servant who has charge of the
 bridegroom's chamber, and who prepares the same with all carefulness,
 and does not suffer it to be disturbed or touched by any stranger, but
 keeps it intact against the time of the bridegroom's arrival; so that
 when he is come, the same may be used as it pleases himself, or as it
 is granted to those to use it whom he has bidden enter along with him.
 And the Lord Jesus Christ Himself gave His testimony to what we affirm,
 when He said with His heavenly voice, "Can ye make the children of the
 bride-chamber fast so long as the bridegroom is with them?" [1929] And
 again, He did not actually reject circumcision; but we should rather
 say that He received in Himself and in our stead the cause of
 circumcision, [1930] relieving us by what He Himself endured, and not
 permitting us to have to suffer any pain to no purpose. [1931] For
 what, indeed, can it profit a man to circumcise himself, if
 nevertheless he cherishes the worst of thoughts against his neighbour?
 He desired, accordingly, rather to open up to us the ways of the
 fullest life by a brief path, [1932] lest perchance, after we had
 traversed lengthened courses of our own, we should find our day
 prematurely closing upon us in night, and lest, while outwardly indeed
 we might appear splendid to men's view, we should inwardly be
 comparable only to ravening wolves, [1933] or be likened to whited
 sepulchres. [1934] For far above any person of that type of character
 is to be placed the man who, although clad only in squalid and
 threadbare attire, keeps no evil hidden in his heart against his
 neighbour. For it is only the circumcision of the heart that brings
 salvation; and that merely carnal circumcision can be of no advantage
 to men, unless they happen also to be fortified with the spiritual
 circumcision. Listen also to what Scripture has to say on this subject:
 "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." [1935] What
 need, therefore, is there for me to labour and suffer, seeing that I
 have been made acquainted with the compendious way of life, [1936] and
 know that it shall be mine if only I can be pure in heart? And that is
 quite in accordance with the truth which we have learned now, to wit,
 that if one prevails in the keeping of the two commandments, he fulfils
 the whole law and the prophets. [1937] Moreover Paul, the chief of the
 apostles, after all these sayings, gives us yet clearer instruction on
 the subject, when he says, "Or seek ye a proof of that Christ who
 speaketh in me?" [1938] What have I then to do with circumcision,
 seeing that I may be justified in uncircumcision? For it is written:
 "Is any man circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised. Or is any in
 uncircumcision? let him not be circumcised. For neither of these is
 anything, but only the keeping of the commandments of God." [1939]
 Consequently, as circumcision is incompetent to save any, it is not
 greatly to be required, especially when we see that if a man has been
 called in uncircumcision, and wishes then to be circumcised, he is made
 forthwith a transgressor [1940] of the law. For if I am circumcised, I
 also fulfil the commandments of the law with the view of being in a
 position to be saved; but if I am uncircumcised, and remain in
 uncircumcision, much more in keeping the commandments shall I have
 life. For I have received the circumcision of the heart, in the spirit,
 and not that of the letter in the mere ink, [1941] in which former
 there is praise, not of men, but of God. [1942] Wherefore let no charge
 of this kind be brought against me. For just as the man of wealth, who
 possesses great treasures of gold and silver, so that he gets
 everything which is necessary for the uses of his house made of these
 precious metals, has no need to display any vessel of earthenware in
 anything belonging to his family and yet it does follow from this
 circumstance that the productions of the potter, or the art of making
 vessels of pottery, [1943] are to be held in abhorrence by him; so also
 I, who have been made rich by the grace of God, and who have obtained
 the circumcision of the heart, cannot by any means [1944] stand in need
 of that most profitless fleshly circumcision, and yet, for all that, it
 does not follow that I should call it evil. Far be it from me to do so!
 If, however, any one desires to receive still more exact instruction on
 these matters, he will find them discussed with the greatest fulness in
 the apostle's first epistle. [1945]

 [1913] Matt. v. 32.

 [1914] Matt. x. 10.

 [1915] The Codex Casinensis gives, "exige ab eo illa quæ fraudem
 interceperat;" the other codex gives, "et exigi ab eo illa quæ fraude
 interceperat." The correct reading probably would be, "exigi ab eo illa
 quæ per fraudem interceperat."

 [1916] We adopt the conjecture of Valesius, viz., abstinentia. The
 Codex Bobiensis gives absentia.

 [1917] Prov. xxii. 2.

 [1918] Matt. v. 3.

 [1919] Reading inflammantur. It may perhaps be inflantur = puffed up.

 [1920] Rom. xii. 3.

 [1921] Mark xii. 41.

 [1922] Reading et parum hoc est, with Codex Bobiensis, instead of the
 et pauperum hoc est of Codex Casinensis. We may also render it as ="but
 it is far from being the case that gifts are cast," etc.

 [1923] The Codex Bobiensis reads inferuntur; the other codex gives
 offeruntur, offered.

 [1924] Luke xiv. 33.

 [1925] Matt. viii. 10.

 [1926] The text gives sed abuti, and the Codex Bobiensis has sed et
 abuti. But the reading ought probably to be sed et uti, or sed etiam
 uti. Routh, however, notices that abutor is found with the sense of
 utor.

 [1927] Plane.

 [1928] Matt. xii. 8.

 [1929] Mark ii. 19. [I have slightly accommodated the translation to
 this text.]

 [1930] In semetipsum causam circumcisionis excepit.

 [1931] [From Job (ii. 10) to St. Paul (Heb. iv. 15 and vi. to 8)
 Scripture abounds in this teaching. Comp. Lam. iii. 33.]

 [1932] The Codex Bobiensis gives, "viæ compendiosum nobis tramitem
 demonstrare." We adopt the reading, "viæ spatia compendioso nobis
 tramite demonstrare."

 [1933] Matt. vii. 15.

 [1934] Matt. xxiii. 27.

 [1935] Matt. v. 8.

 [1936] Compendia viæ.

 [1937] Matt. vii. 12.

 [1938] 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

 [1939] 1 Cor. vii. 18, 19.

 [1940] Reading "prævaricator" instead of "prædicator." The sense would
 seem strictly to require, a debtor to the law.

 [1941] Atramentum.

 [1942] Rom. ii. 29.

 [1943] The Codex Bobiensis gives, "figuli opus aufers aut fictilium."
 The Codex Casinensis has, "figuli opus et ars aut fictilium." We adopt
 "figuli opus aut ars fictilium."

 [1944] Adopting "nequaquam" for "nec quemquam."

 [1945] By this he means the Epistle to the Romans, to which the first
 place among the epistles of Paul was assigned from the most ancient
 times. In Epiphanius, under heresy 42, it is alleged as an offence
 against Marcion, that he put the Epistle to the Romans in the fourth
 place among Paul's epistles. See a note in Migne. [Again, this
 expression is a note of genuine antiquity.]

 43. I shall speak now with the utmost brevity of the veil of Moses and
 the ministration of death. For I do not think that these things at
 least can introduce very much to the disparagement of the law. The text
 in question, [1946] then, proceeds thus: "But if the ministration of
 death, engraven [1947] in letters on the stones, was made in glory, so
 that the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of
 Moses for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done
 away;" [1948] and so on. Well, this passage at any rate acknowledges
 the existence of a glory on the countenance of Moses, and that surely
 is a fact favourable to our position. And even although it is to be
 done away, and although there is a veil in the reading of the same,
 that does not annoy me or disturb me, provided there be glory in it
 still. Neither is it the case, that whatever is to be done away is
 reduced thereby under all manner of circumstances to a condition of
 dishonour. [1949] For when the Scripture speaks of glory, it shows us
 also that it had cognizance [1950] of differences in glory. Thus it
 says: "There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon,
 and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another
 star in glory." [1951] Although, then, the sun has a greater glory than
 the moon, it does not follow that the moon is thereby reduced to a
 condition of dishonour. And even thus, too, although my Lord Jesus
 Christ excelleth Moses in glory, as the lord excelleth the servant, it
 does not follow from this that the glory of Moses is to be scorned. For
 in this way, too, we are able to satisfy our hearers, as the nature of
 the word itself carries the conviction [1952] with it in that we affirm
 what we allege on the authority of the Scriptures themselves, or verily
 make the proof of our statements all the clearer also by illustrations
 taken from them. Thus, although a person kindles a lamp in the
 night-time, after the sun has once risen he has no further need of the
 paltry light of his lamp, on account of that effulgence of the sun
 which sends forth its rays all the world over; and yet, for all that,
 the man does not throw his lamp contemptuously away, as if it were
 something absolutely antagonistic to the sun; but rather, when he has
 once found out its use, he will keep it with all the greater
 carefulness. Precisely in this way, then, the law of Moses served as a
 sort of guardian to the people, like the lamp, until the true Sun, who
 is our Saviour, should arise, even as the apostle also says to us: "And
 Christ shall give thee light." [1953] We must look, however, to what is
 said further on: "Their minds were blinded: for until this day
 remaineth the same veil in the reading of the Old Testament; it is
 untaken away, because it is done away in Christ. [1954] For even unto
 this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart.
 Nevertheless, when it shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall be taken
 away. Now the Lord is that Spirit." [1955] What, then, is meant by
 this? Is Moses present with us even unto this day? Is it the case that
 he has never slept, that he has never gone to his rest, that he has
 never departed this life? How is it that this phrase "unto this day" is
 used here? Well, only mark the veil, which is placed, where he says it
 is placed, on their hearts in their reading. This, therefore, is the
 word of censure upon the children of Israel, because they read Moses
 and yet do not understand him, and refuse to turn to the Lord; for it
 is He that was prophesied of by Moses as about to come. This, then, is
 the veil which was placed upon the face of Moses, [1956] and this also
 is his testament; [1957] for he says in the law: [1958] "A prince shall
 not be wanting from Judah, nor a leader from his thighs, [1959] until
 He come whose he is; [1960] and He will be the expectation of the
 nations: who shall bind [1961] His foal unto the vine, and His ass's
 colt unto the choice vine; He shall wash His garments in wine, and His
 clothes in the blood of grapes; His eyes shall be suffused [1962] with
 wine, and His teeth white with milk;" and so on. Moreover, he indicated
 who He was, and whence He was to come. For he said: "The Lord God will
 raise up unto you a Prophet from among your brethren, like unto me:
 unto Him hearken ye." [1963] Now it is plain that this cannot be
 understood to have been said of Jesus the son of Nun. [1964] For there
 is nothing of this circumcision [1965] found in him. After him, too,
 there have still been kings from Judah; and consequently this prophecy
 is far from being applicable to him. And this is the veil which is on
 Moses; for it was not, as some among the unlearned perhaps fancy, any
 piece of linen cloth, or any skin that covered his face. But the
 apostle also takes care to make this plain to us, when he tells us that
 the veil is put on in the reading of the Old Testament, inasmuch as
 they who are called Israel from olden time still look for the coming of
 Christ, and perceive not that the princes have been wanting from Judah,
 and the leaders from his thighs; as even at present we see them in
 subjection to kings and princes, and paying tribute to these, without
 having any power left to them either of judgment or of punishment, such
 as Judah certainly had, for after he had condemned Thamar, he was able
 also to justify her. [1966] "But you will also see your life hang (in
 doubt) before your eyes." [1967]

 [1946] Reading "propositus" for "propheticus."

 [1947] The Codex Casinensis has formatum; the other codex gives
 firmatum.

 [1948] 2 Cor. iii. 7.

 [1949] The text gives, "neque vero omnigene in ignobilitatem
 redigitur," etc. The Codex Bobiensis has, "neque vero omni genere in
 nobilitate."

 [1950] Reading "scisse se differentias gloriæ," etc. Codex Bobiensis
 gives scis esse, etc. = you know that there are differences.

 [1951] 1 Cor. xv. 21.

 [1952] Sicut et verbi ipsius natura persuadet. Reading "natura
 persuadet." But the Codex Bobiensis gives demonstrat, demonstrates.

 [1953] Eph. v. 14.

 [1954] Non revelatur quia in Christo destruitur.

 [1955] 2 Cor. iii. 14-17.

 [1956] Ex. xxxiv. 33; 2 Cor. iii. 13.

 [1957] The text is, "hoc est velamen, quod erat positum super faciem
 Moysi, quod est testamentum ejus," etc.

 [1958] Gen. xlix. 10-12.

 [1959] The reading in the text is, "non deficiet princeps ex Juda,
 neque dux de femoribus ejus usquequo veniat," etc. Codex Bobiensis
 coincides, only giving "de femore ejus." On the whole quotation, which
 is given in forms so diverse among the old versions and fathers, see
 Novatian, De Trin., ch. 9 [vol. v. p. 618], and Cyprian, Adv. Judæos,
 i. 21 [vol. v. p. 513].

 [1960] The text gives, "veniat, cujus est," etc. Prudentius Maranus on
 Justin's Apology, i. § 32 [vol. i. p. 173, this series], thinks this
 was originally an error of transcription for cui jus est, which reading
 would correspond very much with the ho apokeitai of some of the most
 ancient authorities. See Cotelerius on the Constitut. Apostol., i. 1,
 and the note in Migne.

 [1961] Qui alligabit. But Codex Casinensis has "quia alligabit," and
 Codex Bobiensis "qui alligavit."

 [1962] Suffusi oculi. Codex Bobiensis gives "effusi oculi." See, on the
 whole, Grabe's Dissert. De variis vitiis LXX. interpret., 19, p. 36.

 [1963] Deut. xviii. 15.

 [1964] We adopt the reading "Jesu Nave." But the Codex Bobiensis gives
 "Jesu Mane." See a discussion on this name by Cotelerius on the Epistle
 of Barnabas, ch. 12. [Vol. i. p. 145, this series.]

 [1965] For circumcisionis Routh suggests circumstationis, which might
 perhaps be taken as = these surroundings do not suit him.

 [1966] Gen. xxxviii. 26. We read "justificare." But the Codex
 Casinensis gives "justificari" = he (or she) could be justified.

 [1967] The text is, "sed et videbitis vitam vestram pendentem ante
 oculos vestros." The reference is apparently to Deut. xxviii. 66.

 44. Now this word also has the veil. For up to the time of Herod they
 did appear to retain a kingdom in some sort; and it was by Augustus
 that the first enrolment took place among them, and that they began to
 pay tribute, and to be rated. [1968] Now it was also from the time when
 our Lord Jesus Christ began to be prophesied of and looked for that
 there began to be princes from Judah and leaders of the people; and
 these, again, failed just at the approach of His advent. If, then, the
 veil is taken away which is put on in that reading of theirs, they will
 understand the true virtue of the circumcision; and they will also
 discover that the generation of Him whom we preach, and His cross, and
 all the things that have happened in the history of our Lord, are those
 very matters which had been predicted of that Prophet. And I could
 wish, indeed, to examine every such passage of Scripture by itself, and
 to point out its import, as it is meet that it should be understood.
 [1969] But as it is another subject that is now urgent, these passages
 shall be discussed by us at some season of leisure. For at present,
 what I have already said may be sufficient for the purpose of showing,
 that it is not without reason that the veil is (said to be) put upon
 the heart of certain persons in the reading of the Old Testament. But
 those who turn to the Lord shall have the veil taken away from them.
 What precise force all these things, however, may possess, I leave to
 the apprehension of those who have sound intelligence. Let us come now
 again to that word of Moses, in which he says: "The Lord your God shall
 raise up a Prophet unto you, of your brethren, like unto me." In this
 saying I perceive a great prophecy delivered by the servant Moses, as
 by one cognizant [1970] that He who is to come is indeed to be
 possessed of greater authority than himself, and nevertheless is to
 suffer like things with him, and to show like signs and wonders. For
 there, Moses after his birth was placed by his mother in an ark, and
 exposed beside the banks of the river; [1971] here, our Lord Jesus
 Christ, after His birth by Mary His mother, was sent off in flight into
 Egypt through the instrumentality of an angel. [1972] There, Moses led
 forth his people from the midst of the Egyptians, and saved them;
 [1973] and here, Jesus, leading forth His people from the midst of the
 Pharisees, transferred them to an eternal salvation. [1974] There,
 Moses sought bread by prayer, and received it from heaven, in order
 that he might feed the people with it in the wilderness; [1975] here,
 my Lord Jesus by His own power satisfied [1976] with five loaves five
 thousand men in the wilderness. [1977] There, Moses when he was tried
 was set upon the mountain and fasted forty days; [1978] and here, my
 Lord Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness when He was
 tempted of the devil, and fasted in like manner forty days. [1979]
 There, before the sight of Moses, all the first-born of the Egyptians
 perished on account of the treachery of Pharaoh; [1980] and here, at
 the time of the birth of Jesus, every male among the Jews suddenly
 perished by reason of the treachery of Herod. [1981] There, Moses
 prayed that Pharaoh and his people might be spared the plagues; [1982]
 and here, our Lord Jesus prayed that the Pharisees might be pardoned,
 when He said, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do."
 [1983] There, the countenance of Moses shone with the glory of the
 Lord, so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly look upon his
 face, on account of the glory of his countenance; [1984] and here, the
 Lord Jesus Christ shone like the sun, [1985] and His disciples were not
 able to look upon His face by reason of the glory of His countenance
 and the intense splendour of the light. There, Moses smote down with
 the sword those who had set up the calf; [1986] and here, the Lord
 Jesus said, "I came to send a sword upon the earth, and to set a man at
 variance with his neighbour," [1987] and so on. There, Moses went
 without fear into the darkness of the clouds that carry water; [1988]
 and here, the Lord Jesus walked with all power upon the waters. [1989]
 There, Moses gave his commands to the sea; [1990] and here, the Lord
 Jesus, when he was on the sea, [1991] rose and gave His commands to the
 winds and the sea. [1992] There, Moses, when he was assailed, stretched
 forth his hands and fought against Amalek; [1993] and here, the Lord
 Jesus, when we were assailed and were perishing by the violence of that
 erring spirit who works now in the just, [1994] stretched forth His
 hands upon the cross, and gave us salvation. But there are indeed many
 other matters of this kind which I must pass by, my dearly beloved
 Diodorus, as I am in haste to send you this little book with all
 convenient speed; and these omissions of mine you will be able yourself
 to supply very easily by your own intelligence. Write me, however, an
 account of all that this servant of the adversary's cause may do
 hereafter. May the Omnipotent [1995] God preserve you whole in soul and
 in spirit!

 [1968] Censum dare.

 [1969] Reading "sermonem, et ostendere ut intelligi dignum est." The
 Codex Bobiensis gives a mutilated version: "sermonem, ut intelligi,
 dignum est."

 [1970] Reading "Moysi scientis," which is the emendation of Valesius.
 But Codex Casinensis gives "scientibus," and Codex Bobiensis has
 "scientes."

 [1971] Ex. ii.

 [1972] Matt. ii. 13.

 [1973] Ex. xiv.

 [1974] Mark viii. 15.

 [1975] Ex. xvi.

 [1976] Adopting "satiavit." The Codex Bobiensis gives "saturavit."

 [1977] Matt. xiv.

 [1978] Ex. xxxiv.

 [1979] Matt. iv. 2.

 [1980] Ex. xii.

 [1981] Matt. ii. 16.

 [1982] Ex. viii.

 [1983] Luke xxiii. 34.

 [1984] Ex. xxxiv. 35.

 [1985] Matt. xvii. 2.

 [1986] Ex. xxxii.

 [1987] Matt. x. 34.

 [1988] Ex. xxiv. 18.

 [1989] Matt. xiv. 25.

 [1990] Ex. xiv.

 [1991] Reading "in mari." But the Codex Bobiensis has in navi = on a
 ship.

 [1992] Matt. viii. 26.

 [1993] Ex. xvii.

 [1994] The text gives in justis. But the Codex Bobiensis has in istis =
 in those men. The true reading may be in injustis = in the unrighteous.
 See Eph. ii. 2.

 [1995] But the Codex Casinensis gives "Deus omnium" = the God of all.

 45. On receipt of this letter, Diodorus made himself master of its
 contents, and then entered the lists against Manes. This he did too
 with such spirit, that he was commended greatly by all for the careful
 and satisfactory demonstration which he gave of the fact that there is
 a mutual relationship between the two testaments, and also between the
 two laws. [1996] Discovering also more arguments for himself he was
 able to bring forward many points of great pertinency and power against
 the man, and in defence of the truth. He also reasoned in a conclusive
 manner against his opponent on verbal grounds. [1997] For example, he
 argued with him in the following manner:--Did you say that the
 testaments are two? Well, then, say either that there are two old
 testaments, or that there are two new testaments. For you assert that
 there are two unbegottens [1998] belonging to the same time, or rather
 eternity: and if there are in this way two, there should be either two
 old testaments or two new testaments. If, however, you do not allow
 this, but affirm, on the contrary, that there is one old testament and
 that there is also another new testament, that will only prove again
 that there is but one author for both; and the very sequence will show
 that the Old Testament belongs to Him to whom also the New Testament
 pertains. We may illustrate this by the case of a man who says to some
 other individual, [1999] Lease me your old house. For by such a mode of
 address does he not pronounce the man to be also the owner of a new
 house? Or, on the other hand, if he says to him, Show me [2000] your
 new house; does he not by that very word designate him also as the
 possessor of an old house? Then, again, this also is to be considered,
 that since there are two beings, having an unbegotten nature, it is
 also necessary from that to suppose each of them to have (what must be
 called) an old testament, and thus there will appear to be two old
 testaments; if indeed you affirm that both these beings are ancient,
 and both indeed without a beginning. [2001] But I have not learned
 doctrine like that; neither do the Scriptures contain it. You, however,
 who allege that the law of Moses comes from the prince of evil, and not
 from the good God, tell me who those were who withstood Moses to the
 face--I mean Jamnes and Mambres? [2002] For, every object that
 withstands, withstands not itself, but some other one, either better or
 worse; as Paul also gives us to understand when he writes in the
 following terms in his second Epistle to Timothy: "As Jamnes and
 Mambres withstood Moses, so have these also resisted the truth: men of
 corrupt mind, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall proceed no
 further: for their folly is manifest unto all men, as theirs also was."
 [2003] Do you observe how he compares Jamnes and Mambres to men of
 corrupt mind, and reprobate concerning the faith; while he likens
 Moses, on the other hand, to the truth? But the holy John, the greatest
 of the evangelists, also tells us of the giving and diffusing of grace
 for grace; [2004] for he indicates, indeed, that we have received the
 law of Moses out of the fulness of Christ, and he means that for that
 one grace this other grace has been made perfect in us through Jesus
 Christ. It was also to show this to be the case that our Lord Jesus
 Christ Himself spake in these terms: "Do not think that I will accuse
 you to the Father: there is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom
 ye hope. For had ye believed Moses, ye would indeed have believed me:
 for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye
 believe my words?" [2005] And besides all these words, there are still
 many other passages that might be adduced both from the Apostle Paul
 and from the Gospels, by which we are able to prove that the old law
 belongs to no other one than that Lord to whom also the new testament
 appertains, and which it would suit us very well to set forth, and to
 make use of in a satisfactory manner. [2006] Now, however, the evening
 prevents us from doing so; for the day is drawing to its close, and it
 is right that we should now bring our disputation to an end. But an
 opportunity will be given you to-morrow to put questions to us on any
 points you are pleased to take up. And after these words they went
 their way. [2007]

 [1996] [See p. 215, supra.]

 [1997] Ex nominibus. The Codex Bobiensis offers the extraordinary
 reading, ex navibus.

 [1998] Ingenita.

 [1999] We read, with the Codex Bobiensis, "dicat homini, Loca mihi,"
 etc. The Codex Casinensis has the meaningless reading, "homini diviti,"
 etc.

 [2000] Præsta.

 [2001] The text of this obscure passage runs thus: "Quia ex quo duo
 sunt, ingenitam habentes naturam, ex eo necesse est etiam habere
 unumquemque ipsorum vetus Testamentum, et fient duo vetera Testamenta;
 si tamen ambos antiquos et sine initio esse dicis." The Codex Bobiensis
 gives a briefer but evidently corrupt reading: "ex quo duo sunt
 ingenita habentes naturam ipsorum Testamentum, et fient," etc.

 [2002] Jamnem dico et Mambrem. [So in Vulg., except "Jannes."]

 [2003] 2 Tim. iii. 8, 9.

 [2004] Gratiam gratia præstare et differre. John i. 16.

 [2005] John v. 45-47.

 [2006] The Codex Bobiensis gives, "exponere et a Patre ut convenit."
 For these meaningless words Valesius proposed to read, "exponere et
 aperire ut convenit." The Codex Casinensis, however, offers the
 satisfactory reading, "exponere et aptare convenit."

 [2007] Here ends the section edited by Valesius.

 46. Next morning, however, Archelaus suddenly made his appearance at
 this residence [2008] in which Diodorus was staying, before any one was
 yet stirring abroad. Manes accordingly, all unconscious of the fact
 that Archelaus was now on the spot again, challenged Diodorus publicly
 to engage in a disputation with him; his intention being to crush him
 with a verbal display, because he perceived that he was a man of a
 simple nature, and not very deeply learned in questions concerning the
 Scriptures. For he had now had a taste of the doctrine of Archelaus.
 When, therefore, the multitudes had again collected in the place
 usually set apart for the disputation, and when Manes had just begun to
 reason, all on a sudden Archelaus appeared among them, and embraced
 Diodorus, and saluted him with an holy kiss. Then truly were Diodorus,
 and all those who were present, filled with wonder at the dispensation
 of divine providence which thus provided that Archelaus should arrive
 among them at the very time when the question was just raised; for in
 reality, as must be confessed, Diodorus, with all his religiousness,
 had been somewhat afraid of the conflict. But when Manes caught sight
 of Archelaus, he at once drew back from his insulting attitude; and
 with his pride cast down not a little, he made it quite plain that he
 would gladly flee from the contest. The multitude of hearers, however,
 looked upon the arrival of Archelaus as something like the advent of an
 apostle, because he had shown himself so thoroughly furnished, and so
 prompt and ready for a defence of the truth by speech. Accordingly,
 after demanding silence from the people by a wave of his right
 hand,--for no inconsiderable tumult had arisen,--Archelaus began an
 address in the following terms:--Although some amongst us have gained
 the honour of wisdom and the meed of glory, yet this I beg of you, that
 you retain in your minds the testimony of those things which have been
 said before my arrival. [2009] For I know and am certain, brethren,
 that I now take the place of Diodorus, not on account of any
 impossibilities attaching to him, [2010] but because I came to know
 this person here at a previous time, when he made his way with his
 wicked designs into the parts where I reside, by the favour of
 Marcellus, [2011] that man of illustrious name, whom he endeavoured to
 turn aside from our doctrine and faith, with the object, to wit, of
 making him an effective supporter of this impious teaching.
 Nevertheless, in spite of all his plausible addresses, he failed to
 move him or turn him aside from the faith in any one particular. For
 this most devout Marcellus was only found to be like the rock on which
 the house was built with the most solid foundations; and when the rain
 descended, and the floods and the winds burst in and beat upon that
 house, it stood firm: for it had been built on the most solid and
 immoveable foundations. [2012] And the attempt thus made by this person
 who is now before you, brought dishonour rather than glory upon
 himself. Moreover, it does not seem to me that he can be very excusable
 if he proves to be ignorant of what is in the future; for surely he
 ought to know beforehand those who are on his own side: certainly he
 should have this measure of knowledge, if it be true indeed that the
 Spirit of the Paraclete dwells in him. But inasmuch as he is really a
 person blinded with the darkness of ignorance, he ran in vain when he
 journeyed to Marcellus, and he did but show himself to be like the
 stargazer, [2013] who busies himself with describing things celestial,
 while all the time he is ignorant of what is passing in his own home.
 But lest it should appear as if I were setting aside the question in
 hand by speaking in this strain, I shall now refrain from such
 discourse. And I shall also give this man the privilege of taking up
 any point which may suit him best as a commencement to any treatment of
 the subject and the question. And to you, as I have said already, I
 only address the request that ye be impartial judges, so as to give to
 him who speaks the truth the proper honour and the palm.

 [2008] Castellum. [Note, infra, the "holy kiss."]

 [2009] The text runs: "tametsi prudentiam, gloriam etiam, nostrorum
 nonnulli assecuti sunt, tamen hoc vos deprecor ut eorum quæ ante me
 dicta sunt, testimonium reservetis." Routh suggests prudentia =
 Although by their prudence some have gained glory, etc.

 [2010] Pro ipsius impossibilitate. But Routh suggests that the
 impossibiIitate is just an inexact translation of the adunatia =
 impotentia, incapacity, which may have stood in the Greek text.

 [2011] Reading "Marcelli viri illustris gratia." The Codex Casinensis
 has, "viri in legis gratia."

 [2012] Matt. vii. 24.

 [2013] The text gives "similis facere astrologo," for which Routh
 proposes "similis factus est," etc.

 47. Then Manes, after silence had been secured among all, thus began
 his address: Like others, Archelaus, you too smite me with the most
 injurious words, notwithstanding that my sentiments on the subject of
 God are correct, and that I hold also a proper conception of Christ;
 and yet the family of the apostles is rather of the character that
 bears all things and endures all things, even although a man may assail
 them with revilings and curses. If it is your intention to persecute
 me, I am prepared for it: and if you wish to involve me in punishment,
 I shall not shrink from it; yea, if you mean even to put me to death, I
 am not afraid: "For we ought to fear Him only who is able to destroy
 both soul and body in hell." [2014] Archelaus said: Far be that from
 me! Not such is my intention. For what have you ever had to suffer at
 my hands, or at the hands of those who think with us, even when you
 were disparaging us and doing us injury, and when you were speaking in
 detraction of the traditions of our fathers, and when it was your aim
 to work the death of the souls of men that were well established in the
 truth, and that were kept with the most conscientious carefulness; for
 which, in truth, the whole wealth of the world would not sere as a
 sufficient compensation? [2015] Nevertheless, what ground have you for
 assuming this position? What have you to show? Tell us this,--what
 signs of salvation have you to bring before us? For the bare bravado of
 words will not avail to satisfy the multitude here present, neither
 will it be enough to qualify them for recognising which of us holds the
 knowledge of the truth the more correctly. Wherefore, as you have got
 the opportunity of speaking first, tell us first to what particular
 head of the subject you wish us to direct the disputation. Manes said:
 If you do not offer a second time an unfair resistance to the positions
 which shall be stated with all due propriety by us, I shall speak with
 you; but if you mean to show yourself still in the character which on a
 former occasion I perceived you to take up, I shall address myself to
 Diodorus, and shall keep clear of your turbulence. Archelaus said: I
 have already expressed my opinion that we shall be simply abusing the
 occasion by the mere bandying of empty words. If any one on one side is
 found to offer an unfair resistance, leave that to the decision of the
 judges. But now, tell us what you have got to advance. Manes said: If
 you do not mean a second time merely to gainsay the positions which are
 stated with all due correctness by me, I shall begin. Archelaus said:
 "If not this," and "if not that," are ways of speaking which mark out
 an ignorant man. You are ignorant, therefore, of what is in the future.
 But as to this particular thing which you do declare to be still
 future, to gainsay or not to gainsay is a matter in my own power. How,
 then, will that argument about the two trees stand, in which you place
 your trust as in a buckler of the most approved strength? For if I am
 of the contrary side, how do you require my obedience? And if, on the
 other hand, there is in me the disposition of obedience, how are you so
 greatly alarmed lest I should gainsay you? For you maintain that evil
 remains evil always, and that good remains good always, in utter
 ignorance of the force of your words. Manes said: Have I employed you
 as the advocate of my words, so that you may determine also the
 intelligence that may suit my knowledge? And how will you be able to
 explain what belongs to another person, when you cannot make what
 pertains to yourself clear? But if Diodorus now admits himself to be
 vanquished, my reasonings will then be addressed to you. If, however,
 he still stands out, and is prepared to speak, I beg you to give over
 and cease from interfering with the substantiating of the truth. For
 you are a strange sheep; nevertheless hereafter you will be introduced
 into the number of the same flock, as the voice of Jesus [2016] also
 intimates,--that Jesus, namely, who appeared in the form of man indeed,
 and yet was not a man. Archelaus said: Are you not, then, of opinion
 that He was born of the Virgin Mary? Manes said: God forbid that I
 should admit that our Lord Jesus Christ came down to us through the
 natural womb of a woman! For He gives us His own testimony that He came
 down from the Father's bosom; [2017] and again He says, "He that
 receiveth me, receiveth Him that sent me;" [2018] and, "I came not to
 do mine own will, but the will of Him that sent me;" [2019] and once
 more, "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel."
 [2020] And there are also innumerable other passages of a similar
 import, which point Him out as one that came, and not as one that was
 born. But if you are greater than He, and if you know better than He
 what is true, how do we yet believe Him? Archelaus said: Neither am I
 greater than He, for I am His servant nor can I be even the equal of my
 Lord, for I am His unprofitable servant; I am a disciple of His words,
 and I believe those things which have been spoken by Him, and I affirm
 that they are unchangeable. Manes said: A certain person somewhat like
 you once said to Him, "Mary Thy mother, and Thy brethren, stand
 without;" [2021] and He took not the word kindly, but rebuked the
 person who had uttered it, saying, "Who is my mother, and who are my
 brethren?" And He showed that those who did His will were both His
 mothers and His brethren. If you, however, mean to say that Mary was
 actually His mother, you place yourself in a position of considerable
 peril. For, without any doubt, it would be proved on the same
 principles that He had brethren also by her. Now tell me whether these
 brethren were begotten by Joseph or by the same Holy Spirit. For if you
 say that they were begotten by the same Holy Spirit, it will follow
 that we have had many Christs. And if you say that these were not
 begotten by the same Holy Spirit, and yet aver that He had brethren,
 then without doubt we shall be under the necessity of understanding
 that, in succession to the Spirit and after Gabriel, the most pure and
 spotless virgin [2022] formed an actual marriage connection with
 Joseph. But if this is also a thing altogether absurd--I mean the
 supposition that she had any manner of intercourse with Joseph--tell me
 whether then He had brethren. Are you thus to fix the crime of adultery
 also on her, most sagacious Marcellus? [2023] But if none of these
 suppositions suits the position of the Virgin undefiled, how will you
 make it out that He had brothers? And if you are unable to prove
 clearly to us that He had brethren, will it be any the easier for you
 to prove Mary to be His mother, in accordance with the saying of him
 who ventured to write, [2024] "Behold, Thy mother and Thy brethren
 stand without?" Yet, although that man was bold enough to address Him
 thus, no one can be mightier or greater than this same person Himself
 who shows us His mother or His brethren. Nay, He does not deign even to
 hear it said that He is David's son. [2025] The Apostle Peter, however,
 the most eminent of all the disciples, was able to acknowledge Him on
 that occasion, when all were putting forth the several opinions which
 they entertained respecting Him: for he said, "Thou art the Christ, the
 Son of the living God;" [2026] and immediately He names him blessed,
 addressing him thus: "For my heavenly Father hath revealed it unto
 thee." Observe what a difference there is between these two words which
 were spoken by Jesus. For to him who had said, "Behold, Thy mother
 stands without," He replied, "Who is my mother, or who are my
 brethren?" But to him who said, "Thou art the Christ the Son of the
 living God," He makes the return of a beatitude and benediction.
 Consequently, if you will have it that He was born of Mary, then it
 follows that no less than Peter, He is Himself thus proved to have
 spoken falsely. But if, on the other hand, Peter states what is true,
 then without doubt that former person was in error. And if the former
 was in error, the matter is to be referred back to the writer. [2027]
 We know, therefore, that there is one Christ, according to the Apostle
 Paul, whose words, as in consonance at least [2028] with His advent, we
 believe.

 [2014] Matt. x. 28.

 [2015] The text is, "quibus utique repensari non possunt," etc. Routh
 proposes repensare.

 [2016] Reading "sicut vox Jesu." The Codex Casinensis gives, "sicut vos
 Jesu." Routh suggests servator.

 [2017] John i. 18; iii. 13.

 [2018] Matt. x. 40.

 [2019] John vi. 38.

 [2020] Matt. xv. 24.

 [2021] Matt. xii. 47.

 [2022] The text gives, "Virgo castissima et immaculata ecclesia," = the
 most pure virgin and spotless church. But the word "ecclesia" is
 probably an erroneous addition by the hand of the scribe. Or, as Routh
 hints, there may be an allusion, in the word ecclesia, to the beginning
 of the twelfth chapter of the Apocalypse. [See Pearson, On the Creed,
 art. iii. p. 290.]

 [2023] From this it may perhaps be gathered that Marcellus had now come
 along with Archelaus to the residence of Diodorus.

 [2024] Scribere ausus est. Compare (note 1) p. 224, infra.

 [2025] Matt. xxii. 42. We read Davidis essefor David Jesse.

 [2026] Matt. xvi. 16.

 [2027] The text gives, "Quod si prior fefellit, causa ad scriptorem
 rejicienda est." [i.e., to the copyist; in this case the corrupter.]

 [2028] Consonantibus duntaxat.

 48. On hearing these statements, the multitudes assembled were greatly
 moved, as if they felt that these reasonings gave the correct account
 of the truth, and that Archelaus could have nothing to urge against
 them; for this was indicated by the commotion which arose among them.
 But when the crowd of auditors became quiet again, Archelaus made
 answer in the following manner: No one, truly, shall ever be able to
 prove himself mightier than the voice of our Lord Jesus Christ, neither
 is there found any name equal to His, as it is written: "Wherefore God
 hath exalted Him, and given Him a name which is above every name."
 [2029] Nor, again, in the matter of testimony can any one ever be equal
 to Him; and accordingly I shall simply adduce the testimonies of His
 own voice in answer to you,--first of all, indeed, with the view of
 solving those difficulties which have been enunciated by you, so that
 you may not say, as is your wont to do, that these are matters which
 are not in harmony with the Person Himself. [2030] Now, you maintain
 that the man who brought the word to Jesus about His mother and His
 brethren was rebuked by Him as if he was in error, as the writer was in
 error. [2031] Well, I affirm that neither was this person rebuked who
 brought Him the message about His mother and His brethren, nor was
 Peter only named blessed above him; but each of these two parties
 received from Him the answer that was properly called forth by their
 several utterances, as the discourse will demonstrate in what follows.
 When one is a child, he thinks as a child, he speaks as a child; but
 when he becomes a mature man, those things are to be done away which
 are proper for a child: [2032] in other words, when one reaches forth
 unto those things which are before, he will forget those which are
 behind. [2033] Hence, when our Lord Jesus Christ was engaged in
 teaching and healing the race of men, so that all pertaining to it
 might not utterly perish together, and when the minds of all those who
 were listening to Him were intently occupied with these interests, it
 made an interruption altogether inopportune when this messenger came in
 and put Him in mind of His mother and His brethren. What then? Ought
 He, now, [2034] yourself being judge, [2035] to have left those whom He
 was healing and instructing, and gone to speak with His mother and His
 brethren? Would you not by such a supposition at once lower the
 character of the Person Himself? When, again, He chose certain men who
 were laden and burdened with sins for the honour of discipleship,
 [2036] to the number of twelve, whom He also named His apostles, He
 gave them this injunction, Leave father and mother, that you may be
 made worthy of me; [2037] intending by this that thence forward the
 memory of father or mother should no more impair the stedfastness of
 their heart. And on another occasion, when a different individual chose
 to say to Him, "I will go and bury my father," He answered, "Let the
 dead bury their dead." [2038] Behold, then, how my Lord Jesus Christ
 edifies His disciples unto all things necessary, and delivers His
 sacred words to every one, in due accordance with what is meet for him.
 And just in the same way, too, on this other occasion, when a certain
 person came in with the inconsiderate message about His mother, He did
 not embrace the occurrence as an opportunity for leaving His Father's
 commission unattended to even for the sake of having His mother with
 Him. But in order to show you still more clearly that this is the real
 account of the matter, let me remind you that Peter, on a certain
 season, subsequent to the time of his receiving that declaration of
 blessedness from Him, said to Jesus, "Be it far from Thee, Lord: [2039]
 this shall not be unto Thee." [2040] This he said after Jesus had
 announced to him that the Son of man must go up to Jerusalem, and be
 killed, and rise again the third day. [2041] And in answer then to
 Peter He said: "Get thee behind me, Satan; for thou savourest not the
 things that be of God, but those that be of men." [2042] Now, since it
 is your opinion that the man who brought the message about His mother
 and His brethren was rebuked by Jesus, and that he who said a little
 before, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God," obtained the
 word of blessing, mark you that Jesus (may be said to have) rather
 preferred that person to whom He condescended to give the more gracious
 and indulgent answer; whereas Peter, even after that benediction, now
 got no appellation expressive of indulgence addressed to him, by reason
 of his having failed carefully to observe the nature of the
 announcement that was made to him. For the error of that messenger was
 at once corrected by the tenor of the reply; but the dulness of this
 apostle's apprehension was condemned with a severer rebuke. And from
 this you may perceive that the Lord Jesus, observing what was proper
 and opportune with regard to the interrogations thus addressed to Him,
 gave to each the reply that was worthy of it, and suited to it. But
 supposing that, as you say, Peter was pronounced blessed on the ground
 of his having said what was true, and that that messenger was reproved
 on account of the error he committed, tell me then why it is, that when
 the devils confessed Him, and said, "We know Thee, who Thou art, the
 holy God," [2043] He rebuked them, and commanded them to be silent?
 [2044] Why was it not the case, if He does indeed take pleasure in the
 testimonies borne to Him by those who confess Him, that He recompensed
 them also with benedictions, as He did to Peter when he gave utterance
 to the truth? But if that would be an absurd supposition, it only
 remains that we must understand the words spoken by Him always in
 accordance with the place, the time, the persons, the subjects, and the
 due consideration of the circumstances. [2045] For only this method
 will save us from falling into the error of pronouncing rashly on His
 sayings, and thus making ourselves liable to merited chastisement: and
 this will also help me to make it more and more intelligible to you,
 that the man who brought the tidings of His mother was much rather the
 person honoured. [2046] However, in forgetfulness of the subject which
 was proposed to us for discussion, you have turned off to a different
 theme. Nevertheless listen to me for a brief space. For if you choose,
 indeed, to consider those words somewhat more carefully, we shall find
 that the Lord Jesus displayed great clemency in the case of the former
 of these two parties; and this I shall prove to you by illustrations
 suited to your capacity. A certain king who had taken up arms, and gone
 forth to meet an enemy, was earnestly considering and planning how he
 might subdue those hostile and foreign forces. And when his mind was
 occupied with many cares and anxieties, after he had forced his way
 among his adversaries, and when, further, as he began afterwards to
 make captives of them, the anxious thought was now also pressing upon
 him as to how he might secure the safety and interests of those who had
 toiled with him, and borne the burden of the war, [2047] a certain
 messenger broke inopportunely in upon him, and began to remind him of
 domestic matters. But he was astonished at the man's boldness, and at
 his unseasonable suggestions, and thought of delivering such a fellow
 over to death. And had that messenger not been one who was able to
 appeal to his tenderest affections in bringing the news that it was
 well with those at home, and that all went on prosperously and
 successfully there, that punishment might have been his instant and
 well-merited doom. For what else should be a king's care, so long as
 the time of war endures, than to provide for the safety of the people
 of his province, and to look after military matters? And even thus it
 also was that that messenger came inopportunely in upon my Lord Jesus
 Christ, and brought the report about His mother and His brethren
 unseasonably, just when He was fighting against ills which had assailed
 the very citadel of the heart, and when He was healing those who for a
 long time had been under the power of diverse infirmities, and when He
 had now put forth His utmost effort to secure the salvation of all. And
 truly that man might have met with a sentence like that pronounced on
 Peter, or even one severer still. But the hearing of the name of His
 mother and His brethren drew forth His clemency.

 [2029] Phil. ii. 9.

 [2030] Sibi ipsi.

 [2031] Secundum id quod scriptorem fefellit. [i.e. on that
 supposition.]

 [2032] 1 Cor. xiii. 11.

 [2033] Phil. iii. 13.

 [2034] Reading "debuitne etiam" for the bad version of the Codex
 Casinensis, "debuit et etiam."

 [2035] The text gives, "se ipso judicante," for which "te ipso," etc.,
 may be substituted.

 [2036] In the Codex Casinensis the sentence stands in this evidently
 corrupt form: "cum enim peccatis bonus et gravatus ad discipulatum
 diligit." We adopt the emendation given in Migne: "cum enim peccatis
 onustos et gravatos ad discipulatum delegit."

 [2037] Matt. x. 37.

 [2038] Luke ix. 59, 60.

 [2039] Propitius esto, Domine.

 [2040] Matt. xvi. 22. [Possibly the first words by which Satan fell.]

 [2041] Matt. xvi. 21.

 [2042] Matt. xvi. 23. [Satan seems to have rebelled against man's
 creation.]

 [2043] Luke iv. 34, reading sanctus Deus. [i.e., not the received
 text.]

 [2044] Reading silere. The Codex Casinensis gives sinire, which may be
 meant for sinere = give over.

 [2045] Pro accidentium salute.

 [2046] We have adopted Migne's arrangement of these clauses. Routh,
 however, puts them thus: And that it may be made more intelligible to
 you, etc.,... (for in forgetfulness, etc., you have turned off, etc.),
 listen to me now for a brief space.

 [2047] Reading "pondus belli toleraverant," instead of the "pondus
 bellico tolerarant" of the Codex Casinensis.

 49. But in addition to all that has been said already, I wish to adduce
 still further proof, so that all may understand what impiety is
 contained in this assertion of yours. For if your allegation is true,
 that He was not born, then it will follow undoubtedly that He did not
 suffer; for it is not possible for one to suffer who was not also born.
 But if He did not suffer, then the name of the cross is done away with.
 And if the cross was not endured, then Jesus did not rise from the
 dead. And if Jesus rose not from the dead, then no other person will
 rise again. And if no one shall rise again, then there will be no
 judgment. For it is certain that, if I am not to rise again, I cannot
 be judged. But if there is to be no judgment, then the keeping of God's
 commandments will be to no purpose, and there will be no occasion for
 abstinence: nay, we may say, "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we
 shall die." [2048] For all these consequences follow when you deny that
 He was born of Mary. But if you acknowledge that He was born of Mary,
 then His passion will necessarily follow, and His resurrection will be
 consequent on His passion, and the judgment on His resurrection: and
 thus the injunctions of Scripture will have their proper value [2049]
 for us. This is not therefore an idle question, but there are the
 mightiest issues involved in this word. For just as all the law and the
 prophets are summed up in two words, so also all our hope is made to
 depend on the birth by the blessed Mary. Give me therefore an answer to
 these several questions which I shall address to you. How shall we get
 rid of these many words of the apostle, so important and so precise,
 which are expressed in terms like the following: "But when the good
 pleasure of God was with us, He sent His Son, made of a woman;" [2050]
 and again, "Christ our passover is sacrificed for us;" [2051] and once
 more, "God hath both raised up the Lord, and will raise up us together
 with Him by His own power?" [2052] And there are many other passages of
 a similar import; as, for example, this which follows: "How say some
 among you, [2053] that there is no resurrection of the dead? For if
 there be no resurrection of the dead, then is not Christ risen: and if
 Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain. Yea, and we shall be
 found false witnesses of God; who have testified against God that He
 raised up Christ: whom He raised not up. For if the dead rise not, then
 is not Christ risen: and if Christ be not raised, your [2054] faith is
 vain; ye are yet in your sins. Then they also which are fallen asleep
 in Christ are perished. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we
 are more miserable than all men. But now is Christ risen from the dead,
 the beginning [2055] of them that sleep;" [2056] and so on. Who, then,
 I ask, can be found so rash and audacious as not to make his faith fit
 in with these sacred words, in which there is no qualification [2057]
 nor any dubiety? Who, I ask you, O foolish Galatian, has bewitched you,
 as those were bewitched "before whose eyes Jesus Christ was evidently
 set forth, crucified?" [2058] From all this I think that these
 testimonies should suffice in proof of the judgment, and the
 resurrection, and the passion; and the birth by Mary is also shown to
 be involved naturally and at once in these facts. And what matters it
 though you refuse to acquiesce in this, when the Scripture proclaims
 the fact most unmistakeably? Nevertheless I shall again put a question
 to you, and let it please you to give me an answer. When Jesus gave His
 testimony concerning John, and said, "Among them that are born of women
 there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist: notwithstanding,
 he that is less [2059] in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he,"
 [2060] tell me what is meant by there being a greater than he in the
 kingdom of heaven. Was Jesus less in the kingdom of heaven than John? I
 say, God forbid! Tell me, then, how this is to be explained, and you
 will certainly surpass yourself. Without doubt the meaning is, that
 Jesus was less than John among those that are born of woman; but in the
 kingdom of heaven He is greater than he. [2061] Wherefore tell me this
 too, O Manichæus: If you say that Christ was not born of Mary, but that
 He only appeared like a man, while yet He was not really a man, the
 appearance being effected and produced by the power that is in Him,
 tell me, I repeat, on whom then was it that the Spirit descended like a
 dove? Who is this that was baptized by John? If He was perfect, if He
 was the Son, if He was the Power, the Spirit could not have entered
 into Him; [2062] just as a kingdom cannot enter within a kingdom. And
 whose, too, was that voice which was sent forth out of heaven, and
 which gave Him this testimony, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
 well pleased?" [2063] Come, tell me; make no delay; who is this that
 acquires [2064] all these things, that does all these things? Answer
 me: Will you thus audaciously adduce blasphemy for reason, and will you
 attempt to find a place for it? [2065]

 [2048] 1 Cor. xv. 32.

 [2049] Salva.

 [2050] Gal. iv. 4. The reading is, "cum autem fuit Dei voluntas in
 nobis." The Vulgate, following the ordinary Greek text, gives, "at ubi
 venit plenitudo temporis." And so Irenæus, Tertullian, Cyprian, etc.
 [This should have been in the margin of the Revised Version.]

 [2051] 1 Cor. v. 7.

 [2052] 1 Cor. vi. 14. The text here inserts the words cum illo, which
 are found neither in the Greek, nor in the Vulgate, nor in Irenæus,
 Adv. Hæres., v. 6, 7 [vol. i. pp. 530, 532, this series], nor in
 Tertullian, Adv. Marc., v. 7, etc. [vol. iii. p. 443, this series].
 According to Sabatier, however, they are found in Jerome, Ep. ad Amand.

 [2053] Reading in vobis. But the Codex Casinensis seems to give in
 nobis, amongst us.

 [2054] But the Codex Casinensis seems to make it fides nostra, our
 faith.

 [2055] Initium.

 [2056] 1 Cor. xv. 12-20.

 [2057] Distinctio.

 [2058] Gal. iii. 1. The word in the text is rescriptus est. The Vulgate
 gives præscriptus est. The Vetus Itala proscriptus est.

 [2059] Minor.

 [2060] Matt. xi. 11.

 [2061] It would seem that Archelaus read the passage in Matthew as
 meaning, notwithstanding, he that is less, is, in the kingdom of
 heaven, greater than he. Thus, he that is less is understood to be
 Jesus in His natural relations. [A very lean and hungry proculdubio of
 the author.]

 [2062] Routh appends a note here which may be given. It is to this
 effect: I am afraid that Archelaus has not expressed with sufficient
 correctness the mystery of the Divine Incarnation, in this passage as
 well as in what follows; although elsewhere he has taught that the Lord
 Jesus was conceived by divine power, and in ch. xxxiv. has called the
 Virgin Mary Dei genetrix, Theotokos. For at the time of the Saviour's
 baptism the Holy Spirit was not given in His first communication with
 the Word of God (which Word, indeed, had been united with the human
 nature from the time of the conception itself), but was only received
 by the Christ anThropinos and oikonomikos, and for the sake of men. See
 Cyril of Alexandria, De Rectâ Fide, xxxiv. vol. v. 2, p. 153, editio
 Auberti.[Routh, R.S., vol. v. p. 178.]

 [2063] Matt. iii. 17.

 [2064] Parat.

 [2065] Inferre coneris.

 50. Manes said: No one, certainly, who may be able to give a reply to
 what has just been alleged by you need fear incurring the guilt of
 blasphemy, but should rather be deemed thoroughly worthy of all
 commendation. For a true master of his art, [2066] when any matters are
 brought under his notice, ought to prepare his reply with due care, and
 make all clearly to understand the points that are in question or under
 doubt; and most especially ought he to do so to uninstructed persons.
 Now since the account of our doctrine does not satisfy you, be pleased,
 like a thorough master of your art, to solve this question also for me
 in a reasonable manner. For to me it seems but pious to say that the
 Son of God stood in need of nothing whatsoever in the way of making
 good His advent upon earth; and that He in no sense required either the
 dove, or baptism, or mother, or brethren, or even mayhap a
 father,--which father, however, according to your view, was Joseph; but
 that He descended altogether by Himself alone, and transformed Himself,
 according to His own good pleasure, into the semblance of a man, in
 accordance with that word of Paul which tells us that "He was found in
 fashion as a man." [2067] Show me, therefore, what thing He could
 possibly need who was able to transform Himself into all manner of
 appearances. For when He chose to do so, He again transformed this
 human fashion [2068] and mien into the likeness of the sun. But if you
 gainsay me once more, and decline to acknowledge that I state the faith
 correctly, listen to my definition of the position in which you stand.
 For if you say that He was only man as born of Mary, [2069] and that He
 received the Spirit at His baptism, it will follow that He will be made
 out to be Son by increase [2070] and not by nature. If, however, I
 grant you to say that He is Son according to increase, [2071] and that
 He was made as a man, your opinion is that He is really a man, that is
 to say, one who is flesh and blood. [2072] But then it will necessarily
 follow that the Spirit also who appeared like a dove was nothing else
 than a natural dove. For the two expressions are the same,--namely, "as
 a man" and "like [2073] a dove;" and consequently whatever may be the
 view you take of the one passage which uses the phrase "as a man," you
 ought to hold that same view [2074] also of this other passage in which
 the expression "like a dove" is used. It is a clear matter of necessity
 to take these things in the same way, for only thus can we find out the
 real sense of what is written concerning Him in the Scriptures.
 Archelaus said: As you cannot do so much for yourself, like a thorough
 master of your art, so neither should I care to put this question right
 and with all patience to make it clear, and to give the evident
 solution of the difficulty, [2075] were it not for the sake of those
 who are present with us, and who listen to us. For this reason,
 therefore, I shall also explain the answer that ought to be given to
 this question as it may be done most appropriately. It does not seem to
 you, then, to be a pious thing to say that Jesus had a mother in Mary;
 and you hold a similar view on certain other positions which you have
 now been discussing in terms which I, for my part, altogether shrink
 from repeating. [2076] Now, sometimes a master of any art happens to be
 compelled by the ignorance of an opponent both to say and to do things
 which time would make him decline; [2077] and accordingly, because the
 necessity is laid upon me, by consideration for the multitude present,
 I may give a brief answer to those statements which have been made so
 erroneously by you. Let us suppose, now, your allegation to be that if
 we understand Jesus to be a man made of Mary after the course of
 nature, and regard him consequently as having flesh and blood, it will
 be necessary also to hold that the Holy Spirit was a real dove, and not
 a spirit. Well, then, how can a real dove enter into a real man, and
 abide in him? For flesh cannot enter into flesh. Nay rather, it is only
 when we acknowledge Jesus to be a true man, and also hold him who is
 there said to be like a dove to be the Holy Spirit, that we shall give
 the correct account according to reason on both sides. For, according
 to right reason, it may be said that the Spirit dwells in a man, and
 descends upon him, and abides in him; and these, indeed, are things
 which have happened already in all due competence, and the occurrence
 of which is always possible still, as even you yourself admit, inasmuch
 as you did aforetime profess to be the Paraclete of God, you flint,
 [2078] as I may call you, and no man, so often forgetful of the very
 things which you assert. For you declared that the Spirit whom Jesus
 promised to send has come upon you; and whence can He come but by
 descending from Heaven? And if the Spirit descends thus on the man
 worthy of Him, then verily must we fancy that real doves descended upon
 you? Then truly should we rather discover in you the thieving
 dove-merchant, [2079] who lays snares and lines for the birds. For
 surely you well deserve to be made a jest of with words of ridicule.
 However, I spare you, lest perchance I appear to offend the auditors by
 such expressions, and also most especially because it is beside my
 purpose to throw out against you all that you deserve to hear said
 about you. But let me return to the proper subject. For I am mindful of
 that transformation of thine, [2080] in virtue of which you say that
 God has transformed Himself into the fashion of a man or into that of
 the sun, by which position you think to prove that our Jesus was made
 man only in fashion and in appearance; which assertion may God save any
 of the faithful from making. Now, for the rest, that opinion of yours
 would reduce the whole matter to a dream, so far as we are concerned,
 and to mere figures; and not that only, [2081] but the very name of an
 advent would be done away: for He might have done what He desired to
 do, though still seated in heaven, if He is, as you say, a spirit, and
 not a true man. But it is not thus that "He humbled Himself, and took
 the form of a servant;" [2082] and I say this of Him who was made man
 of Mary. For what? Might not we, too, have set forth things like those
 with which you have been dealing, and that, too, all the more easily
 and the more broadly? But far be it from us to swerve one jot or one
 tittle from the truth. For He who was born of Mary is the Son, who
 chose of His own accord to sustain this [2083] mighty
 conflict,--namely, Jesus. This is the Christ of God, who descended upon
 him who is of Mary. If, however, you refuse to believe even the voice
 that was heard from heaven, all that you can bring forward in place of
 the same is but some rashness of your own; and though you were to
 declare yourself on that, no one would believe you. For forthwith Jesus
 was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil;
 and as the devil had no correct knowledge of Him, he said to Him, "If
 thou be the Son of God." [2084] Besides, he did not understand the
 reason of this bearing of the Son of God by Mary, who preached the
 kingdom of heaven, whose was also indeed a great tabernacle, [2085] and
 one that could not have been prepared by any other: [2086] whence, too,
 He who was nailed to the cross, on rising again from the dead, was
 taken up thither where Christ the Son of God reigned; so that when He
 begins to conduct His judgment, those who have been ignorant of Him
 shall look on Him whom they pierced. [2087] But in order to secure your
 credence, I propose this question to you: Why was it, that although His
 disciples sojourned a whole year with Him, not one of them fell
 prostrate on his face before Him, as you were saying a little ago, save
 only in that one hour when His countenance shone like the sun? Was it
 not by reason of that tabernacle which had been made for Him of Mary?
 For just as no other had the capacity sufficient for sustaining the
 burden of the Paraclete except only the disciples and the blessed Paul,
 so also no other was able to bear the Spirit who descended from heaven,
 and through whom that voice of the Father gave its testimony in these
 terms, "This is my beloved Son," [2088] save only He who was born of
 Mary, and who is above all the saints,--namely, Jesus. But now give us
 your answer to those matters which I bring forward against you. If you
 hold that He is man only in mien and form, how could He have been laid
 hold of and dragged off to judgment by those who were born of man and
 woman--to wit, the Pharisees--seeing that a spiritual body cannot be
 grasped by bodies of grosser capacities? But if you, who as yet have
 made no reply to the arguments brought before you, have now any kind of
 answer to offer to the word and proposition I have adduced, proceed, I
 pray you, and fetch me at least a handful or some fair modicum of your
 sunlight. [2089] But that very sun, indeed, inasmuch as it is possessed
 of a more subtle body, is capable of covering and enveloping you; while
 you, on the other hand, can do it no injury, even although you were to
 trample it under foot. My Lord Jesus, however, if He was laid hold of,
 was laid hold of as a man by men. If He is not a man, neither was He
 laid hold of. If He was not laid hold of, neither did He suffer, nor
 was He baptized. If He was not baptized, neither is any of us baptized.
 But if there is no baptism, neither will there be any remission of
 sins, but every man will die in his own sins. Manes said: Is baptism,
 then, given on account of the remission of sins? Archelaus said:
 Certainly. Manes said: Does it not follow, then, that Christ has
 sinned, seeing that He has been baptized? Archelaus said: God forbid!
 Nay, rather, He was made sin for us, taking on Him our sins. [2090] For
 this reason He was born of a woman, and for this reason also He
 approached the rite of baptism, in order that He might receive the
 purification of this part, [2091] and that thus the body which He had
 taken to Himself might be capable of bearing the Spirit, who had
 descended in the form of a dove.

 [2066] Artifex.

 [2067] Phil. ii. 7.

 [2068] Hominem.

 [2069] Hominem eum tantummodo ex Maria.

 [2070] Or, effect, per profectum.

 [2071] Effect. [i.e., progressively.]

 [2072] Routh puts this interrogatively = Is it then your position that
 He really is a man, that is to say, one who is flesh and blood? Well,
 but if so, then it will follow, etc.

 [2073] Or, as.

 [2074] Reading "sicut homo, hac opinione," for the "sicut homo ac
 opinione" of the Codex Casinensis.

 [2075] The Codex Casinensis reads, "hanc quæstionem diffigenter aptare
 tam manifestarem atque manifeste dissolverem." We follow the
 emendation, "hanc quæstionem diligenter aptatam manifestarem," etc.

 [2076] [A signum verecundiæ which rebukes the awful inquisitiveness
 concerning the conception of Mary which disgraced the late pontiff,
 Pius IX. To what blasphemous pruriency of thought and expression has
 not such an invasion of decency given rise! See St. Bernard, Opp. tom.
 i. p. 392. He rebukes the heresy as profane.]

 [2077] The text gives tempus recusat. Routh proposes tempus requirit =
 which the occasion requires.

 [2078] This is a purely conjectural reading, "ut dicam silex," etc. The
 Codex Casinensis gives, "ut dicam dilere non homo." But Routh, in
 reference to ch. xv., throws out the idea that we should read delire =
 thou dotard, or, lunatic. [P. 190, supra, as if Manes = manikos.]

 [2079] Columbarium furem.

 [2080] The text gives suæ. Routh suggests tuæ.

 [2081] The text is, "non solum autem, sed adventus nomen delebitur." It
 may perhaps be = and not the foundation, but the name, of an advent
 would be done away.

 [2082] Phil. ii. 7.

 [2083] The text gives "quo magnum," etc., for which we adopt "quod
 magnum," etc.

 [2084] Matt. iv. 3.

 [2085] Or perhaps, = which was also, quod erat tabernaculum, etc.

 [2086] The Codex Casinensis gives "Ignorabat autem propter qui
 genuisset Filium Dei prædicabat regnum coelorum, qui erat," etc. We
 follow generally the emendations adopted in Migne: "Ignorabat autem
 propter quid genuisset Filium Dei, qui prædicabat regnum coelorum, quod
 erat habitaculum magnum," etc. Routh would read "genitus esset Filius
 Dei," etc.

 [2087] John xix. 37.

 [2088] Matt. iii. 17.

 [2089] Pugillum plenum solis mihi affer aut modium plenum.

 [2090] 2 Cor. v. 21.

 [2091] Partis.

 51. When Archelaus had finished this speech, the crowds of people
 marvelled at the truth of his doctrine, and expressed their vehement
 commendations of the man with loud outcries, so that they exerted
 themselves most energetically, and would have kept him from his return.
 [2092] Thereafter, however, they withdrew. After some time, again, when
 they were gathered together, Archelaus persuaded them to accede to his
 desire, and listen quietly to the word. And among his auditors were not
 only those who were with Diodorus, but also all who were present from
 his province and from the neighbouring districts. When silence, then,
 was secured, Archelaus proceeded to speak to them of Manes in the
 following manner: You have heard, indeed, what is the character of the
 doctrine which we teach, and you have got some proof of our faith; for
 I have expounded the Scriptures before you all, precisely in accordance
 with the views which I myself have been able to reach in studying them.
 But I entreat you now to listen to me in all silence, while I speak
 with the utmost possible brevity, with the view of giving you to
 understand who this person is who has made his appearance among us, and
 whence he comes, and what character he has, exactly as a certain man of
 the name of Sisinius, one [2093] of his comrades, has indicated the
 facts to me; which individual [2094] I am also prepared, if it please
 you, to summon in evidence of the statements I am about to make. And,
 in truth, this person did not decline to affirm the very same facts
 which we now adduce, [2095] even when Manes was present; for the
 above-mentioned individual became a believer of our doctrine, as did
 also another person who was with me, named Turbo. Accordingly, all that
 these parties have conveyed in their testimony to me, and also all that
 we ourselves have discovered in the man, I shall not suffer to be kept
 back from your cognizance.

 Then, indeed, the multitudes became all the more excited, and crowded
 together to listen to Archelaus; for, in good sooth, the statements
 which were made by him offered them the greatest enjoyment.
 Accordingly, they earnestly urged him to tell them all that he pleased,
 and all that he had on his mind; and they declared themselves ready to
 listen to him there and then, and engaged to stay on even to the
 evening, and until the lights should be lit.

 Stimulated therefore by their heartiness, Archelaus began his address
 with all confidence in the following terms:--My brethren, you have
 heard, indeed, the primary causes [2096] relating to my Lord Jesus,--I
 mean those which are decided out of the law and the prophets; and of
 the subsidiary causes also relating to my Lord Jesus Christ, our
 Saviour, you are not ignorant. And why should I say more? From the
 loving desire for the Saviour we have been called Christians, as the
 whole world itself attests, and as the apostles also plainly declare.
 Yea, further, that best master-builder of His, Paul himself, [2097] has
 laid our foundation, [2098] that is, the foundation of the Church and
 has put us in trust of the law, ordaining ministers, and presbyters,
 [2099] and bishops in the same, and describing in the places severally
 assigned to that purpose, in what manner and with what character the
 ministers of God ought to conduct themselves, of what repute the
 presbyters ought to be possessed, and how they should be constituted,
 and what manner of persons those also ought to be who desire the office
 of bishop. [2100] And all these institutions, which were once settled
 well and rightly for us, preserve their proper standing and order with
 us to this day, and the regular administration of these rules abides
 amongst us still. But as to this fellow, Manes by name, who has at
 present burst boastfully forth upon us from the province of Persia, and
 between whom and me disputation has now for the second time been
 stirred, I shall tell you about his lineage, and that, too, in all
 fulness; and I shall also show you most lucidly the source from which
 his doctrine has descended. This man is neither the first nor the only
 originator of this type of doctrine. But a certain person belonging to
 Scythia, bearing the name Scythianus, [2101] and living in the time of
 the apostles, was the founder and leader of this sect, just as many
 other apostates have constituted themselves founders and leaders, who
 from time to time, through the ambitious desire of arrogating positions
 of superior importance to themselves, have given out falsehoods for the
 truth, and have perverted the simpler class of people to their own
 lustful appetencies, on whose names and treacheries, however, time does
 not permit us at present to descant. This Scythianus, then, was the
 person who introduced this self-contradictory dualism; and for that,
 too, he was himself indebted to Pythagoras, as also all the other
 followers of this dogma have been, who all uphold the notion of a
 dualism, and turn aside from the direct course of Scripture: but they
 shall not gain any further success therein.

 [2092] The text is, "et ultra ei non sinerent ad propria remeare."
 Routh suggests ultro for ultra.

 [2093] Reading unus, instead of "vos, comitibus," etc.

 [2094] Reading "quem etiam" instead of "quæ etiam."

 [2095] The Codex Casinensis gives, "ipse quidem me dicere recusavit,"
 etc. We adopt the correction in Migne, "sed ne ipse quidem dicere
 recusavit," etc.

 [2096] Superiores quidem causas Domini, etc.

 [2097] Reading "sed et optimus architectus ejus, fundamentum," etc. The
 Codex Casinensis has the corrupt lection, "sed et optimos architectos
 ei fundamentum," etc. [Had this been said of Peter?]

 [2098] Cf. 1 Cor. iii. 10. [Had this been said of Peter, what then?]

 [2099] Cf. Acts xiv. 23.

 [2100] Cf. 1 Tim. iii. 1. [Clement cap. xliv., vol. i. p. 17, this
 series.]

 [2101] Various other forms are found for this name Scythianus. Thus we
 find Scutianus and Excutianus,--forms which may have arisen through
 mere clerical errors. The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives Stutianus. [But
 see Routh, R. S., vol. v. p. 186.]

 52. No one, however, has ever made such an unblushing advance in the
 promulgation of these tenets as this Scythianus. For he introduced the
 notion of a feud between the two unbegottens, and all those other
 fancies which are the consequences of a position of that kind. This
 Scythianus himself belonged to the stock of the Saracens, and took as
 his wife a certain captive from the Upper Thebaid, who persuaded him to
 dwell in Egypt rather than in the deserts. And would that he had never
 been received by that province, in which, as he dwelt in it for a
 period, he found the opportunity for learning the wisdom of the
 Egyptians! [2102] for, to speak truth, he was a person of very decided
 talent, and also of very liberal means, as those who knew him have
 likewise testified in accounts transmitted to us. Moreover, he had a
 certain disciple named Terebinthus, [2103] who wrote four books for
 him. To the first of these books he gave the title of the Mysteries, to
 the second that of the Heads, [2104] to the third that of the Gospel,
 and to the last of all that of the Treasury. [2105] He had these four
 books, and this one disciple whose name was Terebinthus. As, then,
 these two persons had determined to reside alone by themselves for a
 considerable period, Scythianus thought of making an excursion into
 Judea, with the purpose of meeting with all those who had a reputation
 there as teachers; but it came to pass that he suddenly departed this
 life soon after that, without having been able to accomplish anything.
 That disciple, moreover, who had sojourned with him had to flee, [2106]
 and made his way toward Babylonia, a province which at present is held
 [2107] by the Persians, and which is distant now a journey of about six
 days and nights from our parts. On arriving there, Terebinthus
 succeeded in giving currency to a wonderful account of himself,
 declaring that he was replete with all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and
 that he was really named now, not Terebinthus, but another Buddas,
 [2108] and that this designation had been put upon him. He asserted
 further that he was the son of a certain virgin, and that he had been
 brought up by an angel [2109] on the mountains. A certain prophet,
 however, of the name of Parcus, and Labdacus the son of Mithras, [2110]
 charged [2111] him with falsehood, and day after day unceasingly they
 had keen and elevated contentions [2112] on this subject. But why
 should I speak of that at length? Although he was often reproved, he
 continued, nevertheless, to make declarations to them on matters which
 were antecedent to the world, [2113] and on the sphere, and the two
 luminaries; and also on the question whither and in what manner the
 souls depart, and in what mode they return again into the bodies; and
 he made many other assertions of this nature, and others even worse
 than these,--as, for instance, that war was raised with God among the
 elements, [2114] that the prophet himself might be believed. However,
 as he was hard pressed for assertions like these, he betook himself to
 a certain widow, along with his four books: for he had attached to
 himself no disciple in that same locality, with the single exception of
 an old woman who became an intimate of his. [2115] Then, [2116] on a
 subsequent occasion, at the earliest dawn one morning, he went up to
 the top [2117] of a certain house, and there began to invoke certain
 names, which Turbo has told us only the seven elect have learned. He
 ascended to the housetop, then, with the purpose of engaging in some
 religious ceremony, or some art of his own; and he went up alone, so as
 not to be detected by any one: [2118] for he considered that, if he was
 convicted of playing false with, or holding of little account, the
 religious beliefs of the people, he would be liable to be punished by
 the real princes of the country. And as he was revolving these things
 then in his mind, God in His perfect justice decreed that he should be
 thrust beneath earth by a spirit; [2119] and forthwith he was cast down
 from the roof of the house; and his body, being precipitated lifeless
 to the ground, was taken up in pity by the old woman mentioned above,
 and was buried in the wonted place of sepulture.

 [2102] This seems the general idea meant to be conveyed. The text,
 which is evidently corrupt, runs thus: "in qua cum eum habitaret cum
 Ægyptiorum sapientiam didicisset." The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, "in
 qua cum habitaret, et Ægyptiorum," etc. In Migne it is proposed to fill
 up the lacunæ thus: "in qua cum diu habitaret, depravatus est, cum
 Ægyptiorum sapientiam didicisset." Routh suggests, "in qua cum ea
 habitaret," etc.

 [2103] The Codex Casinensis reads Terbonem for Terebinthum.But in Cyril
 of Jerusalem, in his Catechesis, 6, as well as in others, we regularly
 find Terbinthon, Terbinthum, or Terebinthum, given as the name of the
 disciple of Scythianus. The form Tereventus is also given; and the
 Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. has Terybeneus. The statement made here as to
 these books being written by Terebinthus is not in accordance with
 statements made by Cyril and others, who seem to recognise Scythianus
 alone as the author. As to the name Terebinthus itself, C. Ritter, in
 his Die Stupa's, etc., p. 29 thinks that it is a Græcized form of a
 predicate of Buddha, viz., Tere-hintu, Lord of the Hindoos. Others take
 it simply to be a translation of the Hebrew hl'", the terebinth.See a
 note on this subject in Neander's Church Hist., ii. 166 (Bohn). [Routh,
 ut supra, p. 187.]

 [2104] Capitulorum.

 [2105] Thesaurus.

 [2106] The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. inserts here, "omnibus quæcunque ejus
 fuerant congregatis" = gathering together all that was his.

 [2107] Reading "habetur." But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives habitatur, is
 inhabited.

 [2108] The Codex Casinensis gives, "sed aliud cujusdam homine." We
 adopt "sed alium Buddam nomine," with which the narratives of Cyril,
 Epiphanius, and others agree. Routh proposes "alio Buddam nomine" = by
 another name, Buddas. [Buddha is a title, not a name.]

 [2109] The text gives "natum esse, simul et ab angelo." The Codex Reg.
 Alex. Vat. reads, "natum se esse simulabat et ab angelo."

 [2110] On these Persian priests, see Epiphanius on this heresy, num. 3.

 [2111] Reading arguebant, with Routh, for arguebat.

 [2112] Animosa exaggeratio.

 [2113] Ante seculum.

 [2114] Or, in the origins of things, in principiis.

 [2115] Particeps ejus.

 [2116] Reading tunc for nunc.

 [2117] Solarium quoddam excelsum.

 [2118] The Codex Casinensis gives, "ut inde ab aliquo convinci possit."
 But the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, "ut ne ab aliquo," etc. We adopt,
 therefore, "ne ab aliquo," etc., taking the idea to be, as is suggested
 in Migne, that Manes went up alone, because he feared that, if observed
 by Parcus and Labdacus, the priests of Mithras, he might expose himself
 to punishment at the hands of the Persian rulers for an offence against
 their religion. [Manes here seems put for Terebinthus.]

 [2119] Sub terras eum detrudi per spiritum.

 53. After this event all the effects which he had brought with him from
 Egypt remained in her possession. And she rejoiced greatly over his
 death, and that for two reasons: first, because she did not regard his
 arts with satisfaction; and secondly, because she had obtained such an
 inheritance, for it was one of great value. [2120] But as she was all
 alone, she bethought herself of having some one to attend her; and she
 got for that purpose a boy of about seven years of age, named
 Corbicius, [2121] to whom she at once gave his freedom, and whom she
 also instructed in letters. When this boy had reached his twelfth year
 the old woman died, and left to him all her possessions, and among
 other things those four books which Scythianus had written, each of
 them consisting of a moderate number of lines. [2122] When his mistress
 was once buried, Corbicius began to make his own use of all the
 property that had been left him. Abandoning the old locality, he took
 up his abode in the middle of the city, where the king of Persia had
 his residence; and there altering his name, he called himself Manes
 instead of Corbicius, or, to speak more correctly, not Manes, but Mani:
 [2123] for that is the kind of inflection employed in the Persian
 language. Now, when this boy had grown to be a man of well-nigh sixty
 years of age, [2124] he had acquired great erudition in all the
 branches of learning taught in those parts, and I might almost say that
 in these he surpassed all others. Nevertheless he had been a still more
 diligent student of the doctrines contained in these four books; and he
 had also gained three disciples, whose names were Thomas, Addas, and
 Hermas. Then, too, he took these books, and transcribed [2125] them in
 such wise that he introduced into them much new matter which was simply
 his own, and which can be likened only to old wives' fables. Those
 three disciples, then, he thus had attached to him as conscious
 participants in his evil counsels; and he gave, moreover, his own name
 to the books, and deleted the name of their former owner, as if he had
 composed them all by himself. Then it seemed good to him to send his
 disciples, with the doctrines which he had committed to writing in the
 books, into the upper districts of that province, and through various
 cities and villages, with the view of securing followers. Thomas
 accordingly determined to take possession of the regions of Egypt, and
 Addas those of Scythia, while Hermas alone chose to remain with the man
 himself. When these, then, had set out on their course, the king's son
 was seized with a certain sickness; and as the king was very anxious to
 see him cured, he published a decree offering a large reward, and
 engaging to bestow it upon any one who should prove himself capable of
 restoring the prince. [2126] On the report of this, all at haphazard,
 like the men who are accustomed to play the game of cubes, which is
 another name for the dice, [2127] Manes presented himself before the
 king, declaring that he would cure the boy. And when the king heard
 that, he received him courteously, and welcomed him heartily. But not
 utterly to weary my hearers with the recital of the many things which
 he did, let me simply say that the boy died, or rather was bereft of
 life, in his hands. Then the king ordered Manes to be thrust into
 prison, and to be loaded with chains of iron weighing half a
 hundredweight. [2128] Moreover, those two disciples of his who had been
 sent to inculcate his doctrine among the different cities were also
 sought for with a view to punishment. But they took to flight, without
 ever ceasing, [2129] however, to introduce into the various localities
 which they visited that teaching of theirs which is so alien to the
 faith, and which has been inspired only by Antichrist.

 [2120] But the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, "erat enim multum pecuniæ
 arida"--for she had a great greed for money.

 [2121] But Cyril, Epiphanius, and others, make the name Cubricus
 (Koubrikos).

 [2122] Versuum.

 [2123] This may express with sufficient nearness the original, "nec
 Manem sed Manes."

 [2124] The Codex Casinensis gives sexaginta regularly. The Codex Reg.
 Alex. Vat. reads septuaginta, seventy.

 [2125] Transfert eos. It may be also "translated them."

 [2126] The text gives, "edictum proposuit in vita," etc. For in vita it
 is proposed to read invitans; and that is confirmed by the Codex Reg.
 Alex. Vat.

 [2127] We adopt the reading "qui cubum, quod nomen est tali, ludere
 solent." The text gives, "qui cibum quod nomen est tale eludere
 solent." The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. seems to read, "qui cubum quod nomen
 est aleæ ludere solent."

 [2128] Ferri talento.

 [2129] The text gives, "quique fugientes licet nunquam cessarunt," etc.
 Codex Reg. Alex. Vat has, "licet nunquam cessarent" etc.

 54. But after these events they returned to their master, and reported
 what had befallen them; and at the same thee they got an account of the
 numerous ills which had overtaken him. When, therefore, they got access
 to him, as I was saying, [2130] they called his attention to all the
 sufferings they had had to endure in each several region; and as for
 the rest, they urged it upon him that regard ought now to be had to the
 question of safety; [2131] for they had been in great terror lest any
 of the miseries which were inflicted on him should fall to their own
 lot. But he counselled them to fear nothing, and rose to harangue them.
 And then, while he lay in prison, he ordered them to procure copies of
 the books of the law of the Christians; for these disciples who had
 been despatched by him through the different communities were held in
 execration by all men, and most of all by those with whom the name of
 Christians was an object of honour. Accordingly, on receiving a small
 supply of money, they took their departure for those districts in which
 the books of the Christians were published; [2132] and pretending that
 they were Christian messengers, [2133] they requested that the books
 might be shown them, with a view to their acquiring copies. And, not to
 make a lengthened narrative of this, they thus got possession of all
 the books of our Scriptures, and brought them back with them to their
 master, who was still in prison. On receiving these copies, that astute
 personage set himself to seek out all the statements in our books that
 seemed to favour his notion of a dualism; which, however, was not
 really his notion, but rather that of Scythianus, who had promulgated
 it a long time before him. And just as he did in disputing with me, so
 then too, by rejecting some things and altering others in our
 Scriptures, he tried to make out that they advanced his own doctrines,
 only that the name of Christ was attached to them there. That name,
 therefore, he pretended on this account to assume to himself, in order
 that the people in the various communities, hearing the holy and divine
 name of Christ, might have no temptation to execrate and harass [2134]
 those disciples of his. Moreover, when they [2135] came upon the word
 which is given us in our Scriptures touching the Paraclete, he took it
 into his head that he himself might be that Paraclete; for he had not
 read with sufficient care to observe that the Paraclete had come
 already,--namely, at the time when the apostles were still upon earth.
 Accordingly, when he had made up these impious inventions, he sent his
 disciples also to proclaim these fictions and errors with all boldness,
 and to make these false and novel words known in every quarter. But
 when the king of Persia learned this fact, he prepared to inflict
 condign punishment upon him. Manes, however, received information of
 the king's intention, having been warned of it in sleep, and made his
 escape out of prison, and succeeding in taking to flight, for he had
 bribed his keepers with a very large sum of money. Afterwards he took
 up his residence in the castle of Arabion; and from that place he sent
 by the hand of Turbo the letter which he wrote to our Marcellus, in
 which letter he intimated his intention of visiting him. On his arrival
 there, a contest took place between him and me, resembling the
 disputation which you have observed and listened to here; in which
 discussion we sought to show, as far as it was in our power, that he
 was a false prophet. I may add, that the keeper of the prison who had
 let him escape was punished, and that the king gave orders that the man
 should be sought for and apprehended wherever he might be found. And as
 these things have come under my own cognizance, it was needful that I
 should also make the fact known to you, that search is being made for
 this fellow even to the present day by the king of Persia.

 [2130] Reading "dicebam." But the Codex Casinensis gives "dicebant,"
 and the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. has "decebat"--as became them.

 [2131] Reading "converti ad salutem," for "conventi," etc., as it is
 given in the Codex Casinensis.

 [2132] Conscribebantur. [Note this concerning the Christian books.]

 [2133] Nuntios. But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives "novitios," novices.

 [2134] The text gives "fatigarent." But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives
 "fugarent"--expel.

 [2135] The text gives "invenientes." The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. more
 correctly has "inveniens"--when he came upon.

 55. On hearing this, the multitude wished to seize Manes and hand him
 over to the power of those foreigners who were their neighbours, and
 who dwelt beyond the river Stranga, [2136] especially as also some time
 before this certain parties had come to seek him out; who, however, had
 to take their leave again without finding any trace of him, for at that
 time he was in flight. However, when Archelaus made this declaration,
 Manes at once took to flight, and succeeded in making his escape good
 before any one followed in pursuit of him. For the people were detained
 by the narrative which was given by Archelaus, whom they heard with
 great pleasure; [2137] nevertheless some of them did follow in close
 pursuit after him. But he made again for the roads by which he had
 come, and crossed the river, and effected his return to the castle of
 Arabion. [2138] There, however, he was afterwards apprehended and
 brought before the king, who, being inflamed with the strongest
 indignation against him, and fired with the desire of avenging two
 deaths upon him,--namely, the death of his own son, and the death of
 the keeper of the prison,--gave orders that he should be flayed and
 hung before the gate of the city, and that his skin should be dipped in
 certain medicaments and inflated; his flesh, too, he commanded to be
 given as a prey to the birds. [2139] When these things came under the
 knowledge of Archelaus at a later period, he added an account of them
 to the former discussion, so that all the facts might be made known to
 all, even as I, who have written [2140] narrative of [2141] these
 matters, have explained the circumstances in what precedes. And all the
 Christians, therefore, having assembled, resolved that the decision
 should be given against him transmitting that as a sort of epilogue to
 his death which would be in proper consonance with the other
 circumstances of his life. Besides that, Archelaus added words to the
 following effect:--My brethren, let none of you be incredulous in
 regard to the statements made by me: I refer to the assertion that
 Manes was not himself the first author of this impious dogma, but that
 it was only made public by him in certain regions of the earth. For
 assuredly that man is not at once to be reckoned the author of anything
 who has simply been the bearer of it to some quarter or other, but only
 he has a right to that credit who has been the discoverer of it. For as
 the helmsman who receives the ship which another has built, may convey
 it to any countries he pleases, and yet he remains one who has had
 nothing to do with the construction of the vessel, so also is this
 man's position to be understood. For he did not impart its origin to
 this matter really from the beginning; but he was only the means of
 transmitting to men what had been discovered by another, as we know on
 the evidence of trustworthy testimonies, on the ground of which it has
 been our purpose to prove to you that the invention of this wickedness
 did not come from Manes, [2142] but that it originated with another,
 and that other indeed a foreigner, who appeared a long time before him.
 And further, that the dogma remained unpublished for a time, until at
 length the doctrines which had thus been lying in obscurity for a
 certain period were brought forward publicly by him as if they were his
 own, the title of the writer having been deleted, as I have shown
 above. Among the Persians there was also a certain promulgator of
 similar tenets, one Basilides, [2143] of more ancient date, who lived
 no long time after the period of our apostles. This man was of a shrewd
 disposition himself, and as he observed that at that time all other
 subjects were preoccupied, he determined to affirm that same dualism
 which was maintained also by Scythianus. And as, in fine, he had
 nothing to advance which was properly his own, he brought the sayings
 of others before his adversaries. [2144] And all his books contain some
 matters at once difficult and extremely harsh. The thirteenth book of
 his Tractates, however, is still extant, which begins in the following
 manner: "In writing the thirteenth book of our Tractates, the wholesome
 word furnished us with the necessary and fruitful word." [2145] Then he
 illustrates how it, the antagonism between good and evil, is produced
 under the figures of a rich principle and a poor principle, of which
 the latter is by nature without root and without place, and only
 supervenes upon things. [2146] This is the only topic [2147] which the
 book contains. Does it not then contain a strange [2148] word; [2149]
 and, as certain parties have been thus minded, will ye not also all be
 offended with the book itself, which has such a beginning as this?--But
 Basilides, returning to the subject after an introduction of same five
 hundred lines, [2150] more or less, proceeds thus: "Give up this vain
 and curious variation, [2151] and let us rather find out what inquiries
 the foreigners [2152] have instituted on the subject of good and evil,
 and what opinions they have been led to adopt on all these subjects.
 For certain among them have maintained that there are for all things
 two beginnings, [2153] to which they have referred good and evil,
 holding that these beginnings are without beginning and ungenerate;
 that is to say, that in the origins of things there were light and
 darkness, which existed of themselves, and which were not merely
 declared to exist. [2154] While these subsisted by themselves, they led
 each its own proper mode of life, such as it was its will to lead, and
 such as was competent to it; for in the case of all things, what is
 proper to any one is also in amity with the same, and nothing seems
 evil to itself. But after they came to know each other, and after the
 darkness began to contemplate the light, then, as if fired with a
 passion for something superior to itself, the darkness pressed on to
 have intercourse with the light."

 [2136] But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads "Stracum fluvium."

 [2137] The text gives, "evadere potuit dum nemo eum insequeretur. Sed
 populus, cum Archelai quem libenter audiebant relatione teneretur,"
 etc. The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads "evadere potuit dum ne eum
 insequeretur is populus, et Archelai quem libenter audiebant relatione
 tenerentur." Routh suggests, "dum eum nemo insequeretur, sed populus
 Archelai," etc.

 [2138] The same Codex Vat. reads Adrabion here.

 [2139] The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. ends with these words.

 [2140] [See p. 177, supra. A fair discussion as to authenticity.]

 [2141] Inscripsi.

 [2142] Codex Casinensis reads, "non ex Manen originem mali hujus Manes
 esse." We adopt the conjecture, "non ex Mane originem mali hujus
 manasse."

 [2143] The following note on this Basilides may be given from
 Migne:--"Although Eusebius (Hist. Eccles., iv. 7) tells us that the
 Basilides who taught heresy shortly after the times of the apostles was
 an Alexandrian, and opened schools of error in Egypt, the Basilides
 mentioned here by Archelaus may still be one and the same person with
 that Alexandrian, notwithstanding that it is said that he taught his
 heresy among the Persians. For it may very well be the case that
 Basilides left Alexandria, and made an attempt to infect the Persians
 also with his heretical dogmas. At the same time, there is no mention
 among ancient authorities, so far as I know, of a Persian Basilides.
 The Alexandrian Basilides also wrote twenty-four books on the Gospel,
 as the same Eusebius testifies; and these do not appear to be different
 from those books of Tractates which Archelaus cites, and from the
 Exegetics, from the twenty-third book of which certain passages are
 given by Clement of Alexandria in the fourth book of his Stromateis.It
 is not clear however, whether that Gospel on which Basilides wrote was
 the Gospel of the Apostles, or another which he made up for himself,
 and of which mention is made in Origen's first Homily on Luke, in
 Jerome's prologue to his Commentary on Matthew, and in Ambrose's
 prologue to the Gospel of Luke." We may add that Gieseler (Studien und
 Kritiken, i. 1830, p. 397) denies that the person meant here is
 Basilides the Gnostic, specially on account of the peculiar
 designation, Basilides quidam antiquior.But his objections are combated
 by Baur and Neander. See the Church History of the latter, ii. p. 50,
 ed. Bohn.

 [2144] The text is, "aliis dictis proposuit adversariis." Perhaps we
 may read, "aliorum dicta," etc.

 [2145] The text is, "necessarium sermonem uberemque salutaris sermo
 præstavit." May it be = the word of salvation furnished the word which
 was requisite, etc.?

 [2146] The text is, "per parvulam divitis et pauperis naturam sine
 radice et sine loco rebus supervenientem unde pullulaverit indicat."
 The reading seems defective. But the general intention of this very
 obscure and fragmentary sentence appears to be as given above. So
 Neander understands it as conveying a figurative description of the two
 principles of light and darkness, expressed in the Zoroastrian doctrine
 immediately cited,--the rich being the good principle, and the poor the
 evil. He also supposes the phrase "without root and without place" to
 indicate the "absoluteness of the principle, that springs up all at
 once, and mixes itself up with the development of existence."--See
 Church History, ii. 51 (Bohn). Routh confesses his inability to
 understand what can be meant by the term parvulam, and suggests
 parabolam.

 [2147] Caput.

 [2148] Alium.

 [2149] Routh adopts the interrogative form here, so as to make the
 connection stand thus: But is this the only topic which the book
 contains? Does it not also contain another discussion, etc.?

 [2150] Versibus.

 [2151] Varietate.

 [2152] By the barbari here are evidently meant the Persians.

 [2153] Principles.

 [2154] The text is, "non quæ esse dicebantur." Routh proposes, "non quæ
 factæ, or genitæ, esse dicebantur," = which were not declared to have
 been made.

 A Fragment of the Same Disputation. [2155]

 ------------------------

 The fragment is introduced by Cyril in the following terms: --He, i.e.,
 Manes, fled from prison and came into Mesopotamia; but there he was met
 by that buckler of righteousness, [2156] Bishop Archelaus. And in order
 to bring him to the test in the presence of philosophical judges, this
 person convened an assembly of Grecian auditors, so as to preclude the
 possibility of its being alleged that the judges were partial, as might
 have been the case had they been Christians. Then the matter proceeded
 as we shall now indicate:--

 [2155] From Cyril of Jerusalem, Catecheses, vi. § 27-29. [And see the
 Introductory Notice, p. 175.]

 [2156] Reading hoplon dikaiosunes . Others read hoplo = Archelaus met
 him with the buckler of righteousness.

 1. Archelaus said to Manes: Give us a statement now of the doctrines
 you promulgate.--Thereupon the man, whose mouth was like an open
 sepulchre, [2157] began at once with a word of blasphemy against the
 Maker of all things, saying: The God of the Old Testament is the
 inventor of evil, who speaks thus of Himself: "I am a consuming fire."
 [2158] --But the sagacious Archelaus completely undid this blasphemy.
 For he said: If the God of the Old Testament, according to your
 allegation, calls Himself a fire, whose son is He who says, "I am come
 to send fire upon the earth?" [2159] If you find fault with one who
 says, "The Lord killeth and maketh alive," [2160] why do you honour
 Peter, who raised Tabitha to life, [2161] but also put Sapphira to
 death? [2162] And if again, you find fault with the one because He has
 prepared a fire, [2163] why do you not find fault with the other, who
 says, "Depart from me into everlasting fire?" [2164] If you find fault
 with Him who says, "I, God, make peace, and create evil," [2165]
 explain to us how Jesus says, "I came not to send peace, but a sword."
 [2166] Since both persons speak in the same terms, one or other of
 these two things must follow: namely, either they are both good [2167]
 because they use the same language; or, if Jesus passes without censure
 though He speaks in such terms, you must tell us why you reprehend Him
 who employs a similar mode of address in the Old Testament.

 [2157] Ps. v. 9.

 [2158] Deut. iv. 24.

 [2159] Luke xii. 49.

 [2160] 1 Sam. ii. 6.

 [2161] Acts ix. 40.

 [2162] Acts v. 10.

 [2163] Deut. xxxii. 22.

 [2164] Matt. xxv. 41.

 [2165] Isa. xlv. 7.

 [2166] Matt. x. 34. Various of the mss. add, epi ten gen, upon the
 earth.

 [2167] The text gives kaloi. Routh seems to prefer kakoi, evil.

 2. Then Manes made the following reply to him: And what manner of God
 now is it that blinds one? For it is Paul who uses these words: "In
 whom the God of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe
 not, lest the light of the Gospel should shine in them." [2168] But
 Archelaus broke in and refuted this very well, saying: Read, however, a
 word or two of what precedes that sentence, namely, "But if our Gospel
 be hid, it is hid in them that are lost." You see that it is hid in
 them that are lost. "For it is not meet to give the holy things to
 dogs." [2169] And furthermore, is it only the God of the Old Testament
 that has blinded the minds of them who believe not? Nay, has not Jesus
 Himself also said: "Therefore speak I to them in parables: that seeing,
 they may not see?" [2170] Is it then because He hated them that He
 desired them not to see? Or is it not on account of their unworthiness,
 since they closed their own eyes? For wherever wickedness is a matter
 self-chosen, there too there is the absence of grace. "For unto him
 that hath shall be given, but from him that hath not shall be taken
 away even that which he seemeth to have." [2171]

 [2168] 2 Cor. iv. 4.

 [2169] Matt. vii. 6.

 [2170] Matt. xiii. 13. The text is, hina blepontes me bleposi.

 [2171] Matt. xxv. 29.

 3. But even although [2172] we should be under the necessity of
 accepting the exegesis advocated by some,--for the subject is not
 altogether unworthy of notice,--and of saying thus, that He hath
 actually blinded the minds [2173] of them that believe not, we should
 still have to affirm that He hath blinded them for good, in order that
 they may recover their sight to behold things that are holy. For it is
 not said that He hath blinded their soul, [2174] but only that He hath
 blinded the minds of them that believe not. And that mode of expression
 means something like this: Blind the whorish mind of the whore-monger,
 and the man is saved; blind the rapacious and thievish mind of the
 thief and the man is saved. But do you decline to understand the
 sentence thus? Well, there is still another interpretation. For the sun
 blinds those who have bad sight; and those who have watery eyes are
 also blinded when they are smitten by the light: not, however, because
 it is of the nature of the sun to blind, but because the eye's own
 constitution [2175] is not one of correct vision. And in like manner,
 those whose hearts are afflicted with the ailment of unbelief are not
 capable of looking upon the rays of the glory of the Godhead. And
 again, it is not said, "He hath blinded their minds lest they should
 hear the Gospel," but rather "lest the light of the glory of the Gospel
 of our Lord Jesus Christ should shine unto them." For to hear the
 Gospel is a thing committed [2176] to all; but the glory of the Gospel
 of Christ is imparted only to the sincere and genuine. For this reason
 the Lord spake in parables to those who were incapable of hearing, but
 to His disciples He explained these parables in private. For the
 illumination of the glory is for those who have been enlightened, while
 the blinding is for them who believe not. These mysteries, which the
 Church now declares to you who are transferred from the lists of the
 catechumens, it is not her custom to declare to the Gentiles. For we do
 not declare the mysteries touching the Father, and the Son, and the
 Holy Spirit to a Gentile; neither do we speak of the mysteries plainly
 in presence of the catechumens; but many a time we express ourselves in
 an occult manner, so that the faithful who have intelligence may
 apprehend the truths referred to, while those who have not that
 intelligence may receive no hurt.

 [2172] For ei de dei kai hos, etc., various codices read ei de dikaios,
 etc.

 [2173] noemata, thoughts.

 [2174] psuchen.

 [2175] hupostasis.

 [2176] ephietai.

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (Spotless virgin, etc. p. 223 and note 7.)

 Oh that "foolish and unlearned questions" had been avoided, as the
 Scripture [2177] bids! Surely, we should be as decent about the
 conjugal relations of the Blessed Virgin as we are socially in all such
 matters. Pearson, as in the note, says all that should be said on such
 a subject. Photius, in his thirtieth epistle, expounds the text Matt.
 i. 25. But it did not rest there. Let it rest here.

 II.

 (Get thee behind me, Satan, p. 224 and note 13.)

 I adopt the views of those who reverently suppose that when it was
 said, "Let us make man," etc., Lucifer conceived rebellion, and said,
 "This be far from Thee, Lord;" fearing the creature made in God's own
 image might outshine himself. Hence our Lord applies the epithet
 "Satan" to Peter when he ventures to use similar language. Possibly
 there lurks a reference to this in such language as Job iv. 18. I have
 previously referred to the Messias and Anti-Messias of the Rev. Charles
 Ingham Black (London, 1854), in which this view is singularly well
 argued. It is well to halt, however, with a confession, that, while it
 seems intimated in Holy Scripture, it cannot be proved as revealed.
 Hence let us reverently say what is said by the Psalmist in Psa. cxxxi.
 1, and confess what is written in Deut. xxix. 29. I go so far, only
 because the words on which this note is a comment seem to authorize
 inquiry as to the force of "Satan" just there. I state what seems the
 reference, but go no farther. Compare Dan. iv. 35.

 III.

 (I shrink from repeating, p. 227 and note 10.)

 The delicacy of feeling here expressed is most honourable to the
 sentiment of the Church at this period. Not till St. Bernard's day was
 it hinted [2178] even in the West, that the Blessed Virgin was
 conceived without taint of original sin; and he rebukes the innovators
 with a holy indignation. [2179] It shocks him that questions were thus
 raised as to her parents, their amplexus maritales, etc.

 IV.

 (In presence of the catechumens, p. 235.)

 Here is testimony to the catechumen system of the primitive Church
 which appears to me not inconsistent with the period to which it is
 assigned. No doubt this gradual instruction of the disciple is based
 upon the example of our Lord Himself, who spoke in parables, [2180] and
 taught "as they were able to hear it." But the disciplina arcani was
 designed chiefly to protect the Church from the profaneness of the
 heathen, and it fell into desuetude after the Council of Nice.

 [2177] 2 Tim. ii. 23; Tit. iii. 9.

 [2178] St. Bernard, Opp., tom. i. Compare note 10, p. 227, supra. See
 the Abbé Laborde on the Impossibility, etc., translated by the editor
 of this series, ed. Baltimore, 1855.

 [2179] Save only by Mohammed.

 [2180] Matt. xiii. 34; Mark iv. 33.

 General Note.

 ------------------------

 As I have not infrequently treated the rise of the great Alexandrian
 school as an outcrop from the learning and piety of Apollos, I take
 this space to record my reasons: 1. Apart from the question in formal
 shape, I hold that the character and influence of this brilliant
 Alexandrian must have operated upon Alexandrian converts. 2. But the
 frequent employment by the Alexandrians of the expressions (Acts xviii.
 24) used concerning him by St. Luke, almost textually, confirms my
 suspicion that they had his high example always before them. 3. The
 catechetical school was certainly established in Alexandria from
 apostolic times. [2181] By whom more probably than by Apollos? 4. St.
 Mark's connection with Alexandria rests on no scriptural evidence, yet
 it is credited. 5. That of Apollos is narrated in Scripture, and I can
 conceive of nothing so probable as that, remembering his own
 instruction by Aquila and Priscilla (Acts xviii. 26), he should have
 founded catechetical schools for others. 6. All this is conjectural,
 indeed, but it agrees with known facts. 7. The silence of Clement and
 the rest is an objection quite as fatal to the claims of St. Mark. 8.
 The unanimity of the Alexandrians, from Pantænus downward, in assigning
 to St. Paul the authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews, while it was
 so much debated elsewhere, suggests that they had early evidence on
 this point. 9. Clement's testimony about St. Luke convinces me that
 Apollos had no claim to it, but had testified to the Alexandrians that
 the Apostle was the author, and St. Luke his inspired amanuensis by
 whom the words were not servilely taken down, but reported in idioms of
 his own: whether out of St. Paul's "Hebrew" or not, is another
 question. 10. Apollos disappears from history about a.d. 64, on his way
 homeward, [2182] bearing the Epistle to Titus, and (who can doubt?) a
 copy of that to the Hebrews, written the previous year. All these facts
 agree with my conjectures that Apollos closed his labours in his native
 city.

 [2181] See vol. ii. p. 342, Elucidation II., this series. Note also, in
 the same volume, what is said, pp. 166-167.

 [2182] Lewin, St. Paul, vol. ii. p. 340.

  Of the Manichaeans

 Alexander.

 [Translated by the Rev. James B. H. Hawkins, M.A., Oxon.]

 Introductory Notice

 to

 Alexander, Bishop of Lycopolis. [2183]

 ------------------------

 [a.d. 301.] To the following account, translated from Galland, I prefix
 only the general date of Alexander's episcopate. He was succeeded in
 the bishopric of Lycopolis by the turbulent Meletius, of whose schism
 we need not say anything here. But his early relations with the heresy
 of Manes, and his subsequent orthodoxy (in all which he was a
 foreshadowing of Augustine), render his treatise on the Manichæan
 opinions especially valuable.

 Combefis conjectured that Alexander was called Lukopolites , as having
 been born at Lycus, a city of the Thebaid, and so by race an Egyptian,
 and to his opinion both Cave and Fabricius are inclined. But this
 conjecture is plainly uncertain, if we are to trust Photius, in his
 Epitome De Manichæis, which Montfaucon has edited. [2184] For in this
 work Photius, whilst speaking of the authors who wrote against those
 heretics, makes mention also of Alexander as bishop of the city of
 Lycus, hote tes poleos Lukon 'Alexandros tous archieratikous nomous
 enkecheirismenos . [2185] So that it is no easy matter to state whether
 our author was called Lukopolites, because he was born either at
 Lycopolis in the Thebaid, or at another Lycopolis in Lower Egypt, which
 Stephanus places close to the sea in the Sebennytic nome, or whether he
 was not rather called Lukopolites , as having held the bishopric of
 Lycopolis. The unwonted manner of speaking employed by Photius need not
 delay the attention of anyone, when he makes Alexander to have been
 Archbishop of Lycopolis; for it is established that the Bishop of
 Alexandria alone was Archbishop and Patriarch of the whole Egyptian
 diocese. Epiphanius [2186] certainly says, when speaking of Meletius,
 [2187] the schismatical Bishop of Lycopolis, edokei de ho Meletios ton
 kata ten Aigupton proekon, kai deutereuon to Petro to tes 'Alexandreias
 kata ten archiepiskopen. And to the same purpose he says elsewhere,
 Meletios, ho tes Aiguptou apo Thebaidos dokon einai kai autos
 archiepiskopos. But however these matters are understood, it is
 admitted that Alexander came just before Meletius in the See of
 Lycopolis, and we know that he occupied the episcopal chair of that
 city in the beginning of the fourth century, in which order Le Quien
 places him among the Lycopolitan prelates, on the authority of Photius.

 In the time of Constantine, the Eastern and Western Empire were each
 divided into seven districts, called dioceses, [2188] which comprised
 about one hundred and eighteen provinces; [2189] each province
 contained several cities, each of which had a district [2190] attached
 to it. The ecclesiastical rulers of the dioceses were called
 patriarchs, exarchs, or archbishops, of whom there were fourteen; the
 rulers of the provinces were styled metropolitans, i.e., governors of
 the metropolis or mother city, and those of each city and its districts
 were called bishops. So that the division which we now call a diocese,
 was in ancient times a union of dioceses, and a parish was a
 combination of modern parishes. [2191]

 But however it be, whether Alexander was called Lukopolites from his
 birthplace, or from his episcopal See, this is certain and
 acknowledged, that he of good right claims for himself a place among
 ecclesiastical writers, for he has given us an elaborate treatise
 against the Manichæan tenets; and he is therefore styled by Allatius
 auctor eruditissimus et philosophikotatos, and his work libellus
 aureus. Allatius wrote out and brought to light two passages from it,
 while as yet it was lying hid in the libraries. From the inscription of
 the work, we learn that Alexander was first a pagan; and afterwards,
 having given up the religion of the Greeks, became an adherent of the
 Manichæan doctrines, which he says that he learnt from those who were
 on terms of familiar intercourse with the heresiarch, apo ton gnorimon
 tou andros; [2192] so that he would seem to be not far wrong in his
 conjecture who would place our author at no very distant date from the
 times of Manes himself. From the errors of this sect he was divinely
 reclaimed, and, taking refuge in the Church, he exposed the scandals
 attaching to the heresiarch, and solidly refuted his unwholesome
 dogmas. From having been an adherent of the sect himself, he has given
 us more information concerning their tenets than it was in the power of
 others to give, and on that account his treatise seems to be held in
 much estimation. [2193]

 [2183] Translated from Gallandi, Vet. Patr. Biblioth. The reverend
 translator is styled in the Edinburgh edition, "Curate of Ilminster,
 Somerset."

 [2184] Cf. Combef., Auctar. Noviss., part ii. p. 2; Cav., Dissert. de.
 Script. Eccl., incert. ætat. p. 2; Fabricius, Bibl. Gr., tom. v. p.
 287; Montfaucon, Bibl. Coisl., p. 349, seqq.

 [2185] Photius, Epist. de Manich., Bibliotheca Coisliniana, p. 354.

 [2186] Epiph., Hær., lxviii. n. 1, lxix. n. 2; Le Quien, Oriens
 Christianus, tom. ii. p. 597.

 [2187] Meletius of Lycopolis, a schismatical bishop of the third and
 fourth centuries. Athanasius tells us that Meletius, who was Bishop of
 Lycopolis in Upper Egypt at the time of the persecution under
 Diocletian and his successors, yielded to fear and sacrificed to idols:
 and being subsequently deposed, on this and other charges, in a Synod
 over which Peter, Bishop of Alexandria, presided, determined to
 separate from the Church, and to constitute with his followers a
 separate community. Epiphanius, on the other hand, relates that both
 Peter and Meletius, being in confinement for the faith, differed
 concerning the treatment to be used toward those who, after renouncing
 their Christian profession, became penitent, and wished to be restored
 to the communion of the Church. The Meletians afterwards co-operated
 with the Arians in their hostility to Athanasius.--See Art. Meletius,
 in Smith's Biograph. Dict.--Tr.

 [2188] dioikeseis.

 [2189] eparchiai.

 [2190] paroikia.

 [2191] [More simply, the Church's system naturally kept to the lines of
 the civil divisions. A dioecese was, in fact, a patriarchate; a
 province was presided over by a metropolitan; a parish was what we call
 a diocese. Before Constantine's time these arrangements existed for
 convenience, but were not invested with worldly consequence. Neale
 adopts this twofold spelling (dioecese and diocese) in his Alexandra,
 vol. i. p. xiv.

 [2192] Cf. Alex., De Manich. placit., cap. 2.

 [2193] This treatise of Alexander was first published by Combefis, with
 a Latin version, in the Auctarium novissimum, Bibl. S. S. Patrum, Ps.
 ii. p. 3. It is published also by Gallandi, Bibl. Patrum, vol. iv. p.
 73.

 Of the Manichæans. [2194]

 ------------------------

 Chapter I.--The Excellence of the Christian Philosophy; The Origin of
 Heresies Amongst Christians.

 The philosophy of the Christians is termed simple. But it bestows very
 great attention to the formation of manners, enigmatically insinuating
 words of more certain truth respecting God; the principal of which, so
 far as any earnest serious purpose in those matters is concerned, all
 will have received when they assume an efficient cause, very noble and
 very ancient, as the originator of all things that have existence. For
 Christians leaving to ethical students matters more toilsome and
 difficult, as, for instance, what is virtue, moral and intellectual;
 and to those who employ their time in forming hypotheses respecting
 morals, and the passions and affections, without marking out any
 element by which each virtue is to be attained, and heaping up, as it
 were, at random precepts less subtle--the common people, hearing these,
 even as we learn by experience, make great progress in modesty, and a
 character of piety is imprinted on their manners, quickening the moral
 disposition which from such usages is formed, and leading them by
 degrees to the desire of what is honourable and good. [2195]

 But this being divided into many questions by the number of those who
 come after, there arise many, just as is the case with those who are
 devoted to dialectics, [2196] some more skilful than others, and, so to
 speak, more sagacious in handling nice and subtle questions; so that
 now they come forward as parents and originators of sects and heresies.
 And by these the formation of morals is hindered and rendered obscure;
 for those do not attain unto certain verity of discourse who wish to
 become the heads of the sects, and the common people is to a greater
 degree excited to strife and contention. And there being no rule nor
 law by which a solution may be obtained of the things which are called
 in question, but, as in other matters, this ambitious rivalry running
 out into excess, there is nothing to which it does not cause damage and
 injury.

 [2194] A treatise on their tenets by Alexander of Lycopolis, who first
 turned from paganism to the Manichæan opinions.

 [2195] [Note the practical character of Christian ethics, which he so
 justly contrasts with the ethical philosophy of the heathen. This has
 been finely pointed out by the truly illustrious William Wilberforce in
 his Practical View, cap. ii. (Latin note), p. 25, ed. London, 1815.]

 [2196] en tois eristikois. The philosophers of the Megarean school, who
 were devoted to dialectics, were nicknamed hoi 'Eristikoi. See Diog.
 Lærtius.

 Chapter II.--The Age of Manichæus, or Manes; His First Disciples; The
 Two Principles; Manichæan Matter.

 So in these matters also, whilst in novelty of opinion each endeavours
 to show himself first and superior, they brought this philosophy, which
 is simple, almost to a nullity. Such was he whom they call Manichæus,
 [2197] a Persian by race, my instructor in whose doctrine was one Papus
 by name, and after him Thomas, and some others followed them. They say
 that the man lived when Valerian was emperor, and that he served under
 Sapor, the king of the Persians, and having offended him in some way,
 was put to death. Some such report of his character and reputation has
 come to me from those who were intimately acquainted with him. He laid
 down two principles, God and Matter. God he called good, and matter he
 affirmed to be evil. But God excelled more in good than matter in evil.
 But he calls matter not that which Plato calls it, [2198] which becomes
 everything when it has received quality and figure, whence he terms it
 all-embracing--the mother and nurse of all things; nor what Aristotle
 [2199] calls an element, with which form and privation have to do, but
 something beside these. For the motion which in individual things is
 incomposite, this he calls matter. On the side of God are ranged
 powers, like handmaids, all good; and likewise, on the side of matter
 are ranged other powers, all evil. Moreover, the bright shining, the
 light, and the superior, all these are with God; while the obscure, and
 the darkness, and the inferior are with matter. God, too, has desires,
 but they are all good; and matter, likewise, which are all evil.

 [2197] Manes, or Manichæus, lived about a.d. 240. He was a Persian by
 birth, and this accounts for the Parseeism which can be detected in his
 teaching. He was probably ordained a priest, but was afterwards
 expelled from the Christian community, and put to death by the Persian
 government. His tenets spread considerably, and were in early youth
 embraced by St. Augustine. [See Confess., iii. 6.]

 [2198] Plato, Timæus, 51.

 [2199] In substance, but not in words, Aristotle, Met., Book L 4 (1070´
 b).

 Chapter III.--The Fancies of Manichæus Concerning Matter.

 It came to pass on a time that matter conceived a desire to attain to
 the superior region; and when it had arrived there, it admired the
 brightness and the light which was with God. And, indeed, it wished to
 seize on for itself the place of pre-eminence, and to remove God from
 His position. God, moreover, deliberated how to avenge Himself upon
 matter, but was destitute of the evil necessary to do so, for evil does
 not exist in the house and abode of God. He sent, therefore, the power
 which we call the soul into matter, to permeate it entirely. For it
 will be the death of matter, when at length hereafter this power is
 separated from it. So, therefore, by the providence of God, the soul
 was commingled with matter, an unlike thing with an unlike. Now by this
 commingling the soul has contracted evil, and labours under the same
 infirmity as matter. For, just as in a corrupted vessel, the contents
 are oftentimes vitiated in quality, so, also the soul that is in matter
 suffers some such change, and is deteriorated from its own nature so as
 to participate in the evil of matter. But God had compassion upon the
 soul, and sent forth another power, which we call Demiurge, [2200] that
 is, the Creator of all things; and when this power had arrived, and
 taken in hand the creation of the world, it separated from matter as
 much power as from the commingling had contracted no vice and stain,
 and hence the sun and moon were first formed; but that which had
 contracted some slight and moderate stain, this became the stars and
 the expanse of heaven. Of the matter from which the sun and the moon
 was separated, part was cast entirely out of the world, and is that
 fire in which, indeed, there is the power of burning, although in
 itself it is dark and void of light, being closely similar to night.
 But in the rest of the elements, both animal and vegetable, in those
 the divine power is unequally mingled. And therefore the world was
 made, and in it the sun and moon who preside over the birth and death
 of things, by separating the divine virtue from matter, and
 transmitting it to God.

 [2200] demiourgos.

 Chapter IV.--The Moon's Increase and Wane; The Manichæan Trifling
 Respecting It; Their Dreams About Man and Christ; Their Foolish System
 of Abstinence.

 He ordained this, forsooth, to supply to the Demiurge, [2201] or
 Creator, another power which might attract to the splendour of the sun;
 and the thing is manifest, as one might say, even to a blind person.
 For the moon in its increase receives the virtue which is separated
 from matter, and during the time of its augmentation comes forth full
 of it. But when it is full, in its wanings, it remits it to the sun,
 and the sun goes back to God. And when it has done this, it waits again
 to receive from another full moon a migration of the soul to itself,
 and receiving this in the same way, it suffers it to pass on to God.
 And this is its work continually, and in every age. And in the sun some
 such image is seen, as is the form of man. And matter ambitiously
 strove to make man from itself by mingling together all its virtue, so
 that it might have some portion of soul. But his form contributed much
 to man's obtaining a greater share, and one beyond all other animals,
 in the divine virtue. For he is the image of the divine virtue, but
 Christ is the intelligence. Who, when He had at length come from the
 superior region, dismissed a very great part of this virtue to God. And
 at length being crucified, in this way He furnished knowledge, and
 fitted the divine virtue to be crucified in matter. Because, therefore,
 it is the Divine will and decree that matter should perish, they
 abstain from those things which have life, and feed upon vegetables,
 and everything which is void of sense. They abstain also from marriage
 and the rites of Venus, and the procreation of children, that virtue
 may not strike its root deeper in matter by the succession of race; nor
 do they go abroad, seeking to purify themselves from the stain which
 virtue has contracted from its admixture with matter.

 [2201] demiourgos.

 Chapter V.--The Worship of the Sun and Moon Under God; Support Sought
 for the Manichæans in the Grecian Fables; The Authority of the
 Scriptures and Faith Despised by the Manichæans.

 These things are the principal of what they say and think. And they
 honour very especially the sun and moon, not as gods, but as the way by
 which it is possible to attain unto God. But when the divine virtue has
 been entirely separated off, they say that the exterior fire will fall,
 and burn up both itself and all else that is left of matter. Those of
 them who are better educated, and not unacquainted with Greek
 literature, instruct us from their own resources. From the ceremonies
 and mysteries, for instance: by Bacchus, who was cut out from the womb,
 is signified that the divine virtue is divided into matter by the
 Titans, as they say; from the poet's fable of the battle with the
 Giants, is indicated that not even they were ignorant of the rebellion
 of matter against God. I indeed will not deny, that these things are
 not sufficient to lead away the minds of those who receive words
 without examining them, since the deception caused by discourse of this
 sort has drawn over to itself some of those who have pursued the study
 of philosophy with me; but in what manner I should approach the thing
 to examine into it, I am at a loss indeed. For their hypotheses do not
 proceed by any legitimate method, so that one might institute an
 examination in accordance with these; neither are there any principles
 of demonstrations, so that we may see what follows on these; but theirs
 is the rare discovery of those who are simply said to philosophize.
 These men, taking to themselves the Old and New Scriptures, though they
 lay it down that these are divinely inspired, draw their own opinions
 from thence; and then only think they are refuted, when it happens that
 anything not in accordance with these is said or done by them. And what
 to those who philosophize after the manner of the Greeks, as respects
 principles of demonstration, are intermediate propositions; this, with
 them, is the voice of the prophets. But here, all these things being
 eliminated, and since those matters, which I before mentioned, are put
 forward without any demonstration, and since it is necessary to give an
 answer in a rational way, and not to put forward other things more
 plausible, and which might prove more enticing, my attempt is rather
 troublesome, and on this account the more arduous, because it is
 necessary to bring forward arguments of a varied nature. For the more
 accurate arguments will escape the observation of those who have been
 convinced beforehand by these men without proof, if, when it comes to
 persuasion, they fall into the same hands. For they imagine that they
 proceed from like sources. There is, therefore, need of much and great
 diligence, and truly of God, to be the guide of our argument.

 Chapter VI.--The Two Principles of the Manichæans; Themselves
 Controverted; The Pythagorean Opinion Respecting First Principles; Good
 and Evil Contrary; The Victory on the Side of Good.

 They lay down two principles, God and Matter. If he (Manes) separates
 that which comes into being from that which really exists, the
 supposition is not so faulty in this, that neither does matter create
 itself, nor does it admit two contrary qualities, in being both active
 and passive; nor, again, are other such theories proposed concerning
 the creative cause as it is not lawful to speak of. And yet God does
 not stand in need of matter in order to make things, since in His mind
 all things substantially exist, so far as the possibility of their
 coming into being is concerned. But if, as he seems rather to mean, the
 unordered motion of things really existent under Him is matter, first,
 then, he unconsciously sets up another creative cause (and yet an evil
 one), nor does he perceive what follows from this, namely, that if it
 is necessary that God and matter should be supposed, some other matter
 must be supposed to God; so that to each of the creative causes there
 should be the subject matter. Therefore, instead of two, he will be
 shown to give us four first principles. Wonderful, too, is the
 distinction. For if he thinks this to be God, which is good, and wishes
 to conceive of something opposite to Him, why does he not, as some of
 the Pythagoreans, set evil over against Him? It is more tolerable,
 indeed, that two principles should be spoken of by them, the good and
 the evil, and that these are continually striving, but the good
 prevails. For if the evil were to prevail, all things would perish.
 Wherefore matter, by itself, is neither body, nor is it exactly
 incorporeal, nor simply any particular thing; but it is something
 indefinite, which, by the addition of form, comes to be defined; as,
 for instance, fire is a pyramid, air an octahedron, water an
 eikosahedron, and earth a cube; how, then, is matter the unordered
 motion of the elements? By itself, indeed, it does not subsist, for if
 it is motion, it is in that which is moved; but matter does not seem to
 be of such a nature, but rather the first subject, and unorganized,
 from which other things proceed. Since, therefore, matter is unordered
 motion, was it always conjoined with that which is moved, or was it
 ever separate from it? For, if it were ever by itself, it would not be
 in existence; for there is no motion without something moved. But if it
 was always in that which is moved, then, again, there will be two
 principles--that which moves, and that which is moved. To which of
 these two, then, will it be granted that it subsists as a primary cause
 along with God?

 Chapter VII.--Motion Vindicated from the Charge of Irregularity;
 Circular; Straight; Of Generation and Corruption; Of Alteration, and
 Quality Affecting Sense.

 There is added to the discourse an appendix quite foreign to it. [2202]
 For you may reasonably speak of motion not existing. And what, also, is
 the matter of motion? Is it straight or circular? Or does it take place
 by a process of change, or by a process of generation and corruption?
 The circular motion, indeed, is so orderly and composite, that it is
 ascribed to the order of all created things; nor does this, in the
 Manichæan system, appear worthy to be impugned, in which move the sun
 and the moon, whom alone, of the gods, they say that they venerate. But
 as regards that which is straight: to this, also, there is a bound when
 it reaches its own place. For that which is earthly ceases entirely
 from motion, as soon as it has touched the earth. And every animal and
 vegetable makes an end of increasing when it has reached its limit.
 Therefore the stoppage of these things would be more properly the death
 of matter, than that endless death, which is, as it were, woven for it
 by them. But the motion which arises by a process of generation and
 corruption it is impossible to think of as in harmony with this
 hypothesis, for, according to them, matter is unbegotten. But if they
 ascribe to it the motion of alteration, as they term it, and that by
 which we suffer change by a quality affecting the sense, it is worth
 while to consider how they come to say this. For this seems to be the
 principal thing that they assert, since by matter it comes to pass, as
 they say, that manners are changed, and that vice arises in the soul.
 For in altering, it will always begin from the beginning; and,
 proceeding onwards, it will reach the middle, and thus will it attain
 unto the end. But when it has reached the end, it will not stand still,
 at least if alteration is its essence. But it will again, by the same
 route, return to the beginning, and from thence in like manner to the
 end; nor will it ever cease from doing this. As, for instance, if a and
 g suffer alteration, and the middle is b, a by being changed, will
 arrive at b, and from thence will go on to g. Again returning from the
 extreme g to b, it will at some time or other arrive at a; and this
 goes on continuously. As in the change from black, the middle is dun,
 and the extreme, white. Again, in the contrary direction, from white to
 dun, and in like manner to black; and again from white the change
 begins, and goes the same round.

 [2202] to atakton.

 Chapter VIII.--Is Matter Wicked? Of God and Matter.

 Is matter, in respect of alteration, an evil cause? It is thus proved
 that it is not more evil than good. For let the beginning of the change
 be from evil. Thus the change is from this to good through that which
 is indifferent. But let the alteration be from good. Again the
 beginning goes on through that which is indifferent. Whether the motion
 be to one extreme or to the other, the method is the same, and this is
 abundantly set forth. All motion has to do with quantity; but quality
 is the guide in virtue and vice. Now we know that these two are
 generically distinguished. But are God and matter alone principles, or
 does there remain anything else which is the mean between these two?
 For if there is nothing, these things remain unintermingled one with
 another. And it is well said that if the extremes are intermingled,
 there is a necessity for some thing intermediate to connect them. But
 if something else exists, it is necessary that that something be either
 body or incorporeal, and thus a third adventitious principle makes its
 appearance. First, therefore, if we suppose God and matter to be both
 entirely incorporeal, so that neither is in the other, except as the
 science of grammar is in the soul; to understand this of God and matter
 is absurd. But if, as in a vacuum, as some say, the vacuum is
 surrounded by this universe; the other, again, is without substance,
 for the substance of a vacuum is nothing. But if as accidents, first,
 indeed, this is impossible; for the thing that wants substance cannot
 be in any place; for substance is, as it were, the vehicle underlying
 the accident. But if both are bodies, it is necessary for both to be
 either heavy or light, or middle; or one heavy, and another light, or
 intermediate. If, then, both are heavy, it is plainly necessary that
 these should be the same, both among light things and those things
 which are of the middle sort; or if they alternate, the one will be
 altogether separate from the other. For that which is heavy has one
 place, and that which is middle another, and the light another. To one
 belongs the superior, to the other the inferior, and to the third the
 middle. Now in every spherical figure the inferior part is the middle;
 for from this to all the higher parts, even to the topmost superficies,
 the distance is every way equal, and, again, all heavy bodies are borne
 from all sides to it. Wherefore, also, it occurs to me to laugh when I
 hear that matter moving without order,--for this belongs to it by
 nature,--came to the region of God, or to light and brightness, and
 such-like. But if one be body, and the other incorporeal, first,
 indeed, that which is body is alone capable of motion. And then if they
 are not intermingled, each is separate from the other according to its
 proper nature. But if one be mixed up with the other, they will be
 either mind or soul or accident. For so only it happens that things
 incorporeal are mixed up with bodies.

 Chapter IX.--The Ridiculous Fancies of the Manichæans About the Motion
 of Matter Towards God; God the Author of the Rebellion of Matter in the
 Manichæan Sense; The Longing of Matter for Light and Brightness Good;
 Divine Good None the Less for Being Communicated.

 But in what manner, and from what cause, was matter brought to the
 region of God? for to it by nature belong the lower place and darkness,
 as they say; and the upper region and light are contrary to its nature.
 Wherefore there is then attributed to it a supernatural motion; and
 something of the same sort happens to it, as if a man were to throw a
 stone or a lump of earth upwards; in this way, the thing being raised a
 little by the force of the person throwing, when it has reached the
 upper regions, falls back again into the same place. Who, then, hath
 raised matter to the upper region? Of itself, indeed, and from itself,
 it would not be moved by that motion which belongs to it. It is
 necessary, then, that some force should be applied to it for it to be
 borne aloft, as with the stone and the lump of earth. But they leave
 nothing else to it but God. It is manifest, therefore, what follows
 from their argument. That God, according to them, by force and
 necessity, raised matter aloft to Himself. But if matter be evil, its
 desires are altogether evil. Now the desire of evil is evil, but the
 desire of good is altogether good. Since, then, matter has desired
 brightness and light, its desire is not a bad one; just as it is not
 bad for a man living in vice, afterwards to come to desire virtue. On
 the contrary, he is not guiltless who, being good, comes to desire what
 is evil. As if any one should say that God desires the evils which are
 attaching to matter. For the good things of God are not to be so
 esteemed as great wealth and large estates, and a large quantity of
 gold, a lesser portion of which remain with the owner, if one effect a
 transfer of them to another. But if an image of these things must be
 formed in the mind, I think one would adduce as examples wisdom and the
 sciences. As, therefore, neither wisdom suffers diminution nor science,
 and he who is endowed with these experiences no loss if another be made
 partaker of them; so, in the same way, it is contrary to reason to
 think that God grudges matter the desire of what is good; if, indeed,
 with them we allow that it desires it.

 Chapter X.--The Mythology Respecting the Gods; The Dogmas of the
 Manichæans Resemble This: the Homeric Allegory of the Battle of the
 Gods; Envy and Emulation Existing In God According to the Manichæan
 Opinion; These Vices are to Be Found in No Good Man, and are to Be
 Accounted Disgraceful.

 Moreover, they far surpass the mythologists in fables, those, namely,
 who either make Coelus suffer mutilation, or idly tell of the plots
 laid for Saturn by his son, in order that that son might attain the
 sovereignty; or those again who make Saturn devour his sons and to have
 been cheated of his purpose by the image of a stone that was presented
 to him. For how are these things which they put forward dissimilar to
 those? When they speak openly of the war between God and matter, and
 say not these things either in a mythological sense, as Homer in the
 Iliad; [2203] when he makes Jupiter to rejoice in the strife and war of
 the gods with each other, thus obscurely signifying that the world is
 formed of unequal elements, fitted one into another, and either
 conquering or submitting to a conqueror. And this has been advanced by
 me, because I know that people of this sort, when they are at a loss
 for demonstration, bring together from all sides passages from poems,
 and seek from them a support for their own opinions. Which would not be
 the case with them if they had only read what they fell in with some
 reflection. But, when all evil is banished from the company of the
 gods, surely emulation and envy ought especially to have been got rid
 of. Yet these men leave these things with God, when they say that God
 formed designs against matter, because it felt a desire for good. But
 with which of those things which God possessed could He have wished to
 take vengeance on matter? In truth, I think it to be more accurate
 doctrine to say that God is of a simple nature, than what they advance.
 Nor, indeed, as in the other things, is the enunciation of this fancy
 easy. For neither is it possible to demonstrate it simply and with
 words merely, but with much instruction and labour. But we all know
 this, that anger and rage, and the desire of revenge upon matter, are
 passions in him who is so agitated. And of such a sort, indeed, as it
 could never happen to a good man to be harassed by them, much less then
 can it be that they are connected with the Absolute Good.

 [2203] Hom., Il., xx. 23-54.

 Chapter XI.--The Transmitted Virtue of the Manichæans; The Virtues of
 Matter Mixed with Equal or Less Amount of Evil.

 To other things, therefore, our discourse has come round about again.
 For, because they say that God sent virtue into matter, it is worth our
 while to consider whether this virtue, so far as it pertains to good,
 in respect of God is less, or whether it is on equal terms with Him.
 For if it is less, what is the cause? For the things which are with God
 admit of no fellowship with matter. But good alone is the
 characteristic of God, and evil alone of matter. But if it is on equal
 terms with Him, what is the reason that He, as a king, issues His
 commands, and it involuntarily undertakes this labour? Moreover, with
 regard to matter, it shall be inquired whether, with respect to evil,
 the virtues are alike or less. For if they are less, they are
 altogether of less evil. By fellowship therefore with the good it is
 that they become so. For there being two evils, the less has plainly by
 its fellowship with the good attained to be what it is. But they leave
 nothing good around matter. Again, therefore, another question arises.
 For if some other virtue, in respect of evil, excels the matter which
 is prevailing, it becomes itself the presiding principle. For that
 which is more evil will hold the sway in its own dominion.

 Chapter XII.--The Destruction of Evil by the Immission of Virtue
 Rejected; Because from It Arises No Diminution of Evil; Zeno's Opinion
 Discarded, that the World Will Be Burnt Up by Fire from the Sun.

 But that God sent virtue into matter is asserted without any proof, and
 it altogether wants probability. Yet it is right that this should have
 its own explanation. The reason of this they assert, indeed, to be that
 there might be no more evil, but that all things should become good. It
 was necessary for virtue to be intermingled with evil, after the manner
 of the athletes, who, clasped in a firm embrace, overcome their
 adversaries, in order that, by conquering evil, it might make it to
 cease to exist. But I think it far more dignified and worthy of the
 excellence of God, at the first conception of things existent, to have
 abolished matter. But I think they could not allow this, because that
 something evil is found existing, which they call matter. But it is not
 any the more possible that things should cease to be such as they are,
 in order that one should admit that some things are changed into that
 which is worse. And it is necessary that there should be some
 perception of this, because these present things have in some manner or
 other suffered diminution, in order that we might have better hopes for
 the future. For well has it been answered to the opinion of Zeno of
 Citium, who thus argued that the world would be destroyed by fire:
 "Everything which has anything to burn will not cease from burning
 until it has consumed the whole; and the sun is a fire, and will it not
 burn what it has?" Whence he made out, as he imagined, that the
 universe would be destroyed by fire. But to him a facetious fellow is
 reported to have said, "But I indeed yesterday, and the year before,
 and a long time ago, have seen, and now in like manner do I see, that
 no injury has been experienced by the sun; and it is reasonable that
 this should happen in time and by degrees, so that we may believe that
 at some time or other the whole will be burnt up." And to the doctrine
 of Manichæus, although it rests upon no proof, I think that the same
 answer is apposite, namely, that there has been no diminution in the
 present condition of things, but what was before in the time of the
 first man, when brother killed brother, even now continues to be; the
 same wars, and more diverse desires. Now it would be reasonable that
 these things, if they did not altogether cease, should at least be
 diminished, if we are to imagine that they are at some time to cease.
 But while the same things come from them, what is our expectation of
 them for the future?

 Chapter XIII.--Evil by No Means Found in the Stars and Constellations;
 All the Evils of Life Vain in the Manichæan Opinion, Which Bring on the
 Extinction of Life; Their Fancy Having Been Above Explained Concerning
 the Transportation of Souls from the Moon to the Sun.

 But what things does he call evil? As for the sun and moon, indeed,
 there is nothing lacking; but with respect to the heavens and the
 stars, whether he says that there is some such thing, and what it is,
 it is right that we should next in order examine. But irregularity is
 according to them evil, and unordered motion, but these things are
 always the same, and in the same manner; nor will any one have to blame
 any of the planets for venturing to delay at any time in the zodiac
 beyond the fixed period; nor again any of the fixed stars, as if it did
 not abide in the same seat and position, and did not by circumvolution
 revolve equally around the world, moving as it were one step backward
 in a hundred years. But on the earth, if he accuses the roughness of
 some spots, or if pilots are offended at the storms on the sea; first,
 indeed, as they think, these things have a share of good in them. For
 should nothing germinate upon earth, all the animals must presently
 perish. But this result will send on much of the virtue which is
 intermingled with matter to God, and there will be a necessity for many
 moons, to accommodate the great multitude that suddenly approaches. And
 the same language they hold with respect to the sea. For it is a piece
 of unlooked-for luck to perish, in order that those things which perish
 may pursue the road which leads most quickly to God. And the wars which
 are upon the earth, and the famines, and everything which tends to the
 destruction of life, are held in very great honour by them. For
 everything which is the cause of good is to be had in honour. But these
 things are the cause of good, because of the destruction which
 accompanies them, if they transmit to God the virtue which is separated
 from those who perish.

 Chapter XIV.--Noxious Animals Worshipped by the Egyptians; Man by Arts
 an Evil-Doer; Lust and Injustice Corrected by Laws and Discipline;
 Contingent and Necessary Things in Which There is No Stain.

 And, as it seems, we have been ignorant that the Egyptians rightly
 worship the crocodile and the lion and the wolf, because these animals
 being stronger than the others devour their prey, and entirely destroy
 it; the eagle also and the hawk, because they slaughter the weaker
 animals both in the air and upon the earth. But perhaps also, according
 to them, man is for this reason held in especial honour, because most
 of all, by his subtle inventions and arts, he is wont to subdue most of
 the animals. And lest he himself should have no portion in this good,
 he becomes the food of others. Again, therefore, those generations are,
 in their opinion, absurd, which from a small and common seed produce
 what is great; and it is much more becoming, as they think, that these
 should be destroyed by God, in order that the divine virtue may be
 quickly liberated from the troubles incident to living in this world.
 But what shall we say with respect to lust, and injustice, and things
 of this sort, Manichæus will ask. Surely against these things
 discipline and law come to the rescue. Discipline, indeed, using
 careful forethought that nothing of this sort may have place amongst
 men; but law inflicting punishment upon any one who has been caught in
 the commission of anything unjust. But, then, why should it be imputed
 to the earth as a fault, if the husbandman has neglected to subdue it?
 because the sovereignty of God, which is according to right, suffers
 diminution, when some parts of it are productive of fruits, and others
 not so; or when it has happened that when the winds are sweeping,
 according to another cause, some derive benefit therefrom, whilst
 others against their will have to sustain injuries? Surely they must
 necessarily be ignorant of the character of the things that are
 contingent, and of those that are necessary. For they would not else
 thus account such things as prodigies.

 Chapter XV.--The Lust and Desire of Sentient Things; Demons; Animals
 Sentient; So Also the Sun and the Moon and Stars; The Platonic
 Doctrine, Not the Christian.

 Whence, then, come pleasure and desire? For these are the principal
 evils that they talk of and hate. Nor does matter appear to be anything
 else. That these things, indeed, only belong to animals which are
 endowed with sense, and that nothing else but that which has sense
 perceives desire and pleasure, is manifest. For what perception of
 pleasure and pain is there in a plant? What in the earth, water, or
 air? And the demons, if indeed they are living beings endowed with
 sense, for this reason, perhaps, are delighted with what has been
 instituted in regard to sacrifices, and take it ill when these are
 wanting to them; but nothing of this sort can be imagined with respect
 to God. Therefore those who say, "Why are animals affected by pleasure
 and pain?" should first make the complaint, "Why are these animals
 endowed with sense, or why do they stand in need of food?" For if
 animals were immortal, they would have been set free from corruption
 and increase; such as the sun and moon and stars, although they are
 endowed with sense. They are, however, beyond the power of these, and
 of such a complaint. But man, being able to perceive and to judge, and
 being potentially wise,--for he has the power to become so,--when he
 has received what is peculiar to himself, treads it under foot.

 Chapter XVI.--Because Some are Wise, Nothing Prevents Others from Being
 So; Virtue is to Be Acquired by Diligence and Study; By a Sounder
 Philosophy Men are to Be Carried Onwards to the Good; The Common Study
 of Virtue Has by Christ Been Opened Up to All.

 In general, it is worth while to inquire of these men, "Is it possible
 for no man to become good, or is it in the power of any one?" For if no
 man is wise, what of Manichæus himself? I pass over the fact that he
 not only calls others good, but he also says that they are able to make
 others such. But if one individual is entirely good, what prevents all
 from becoming good? For what is possible for one is possible also for
 all. And by the means by which one has become virtuous, by the same all
 may become so, unless they assert that the larger share of this virtue
 is intercepted by such. Again, therefore, first, What necessity is
 there for labour in submitting to discipline (for even whilst sleeping
 we may become virtuous), or what cause is there for these men rousing
 their hearers to hopes of good? For even though wallowing in the mire
 with harlots, they can obtain their proper good. But if discipline, and
 better instruction and diligence in acquiring virtue, make a man to
 become virtuous, let all become so, and that oft-repeated phrase of
 theirs, the unordered motion of matter, is made void. But it would be
 much better for them to say that wisdom is an instrument given by God
 to man, in order that by bringing round by degrees to good that which
 arises to them, from the fact of their being endowed with sense, out of
 desire or pleasure, it might remove from them the absurdities that flow
 from them. For thus they themselves who profess to be teachers of
 virtue would be objects of emulation for their purpose, and for their
 mode of life, and there would be great hopes that one day evils will
 cease, when all men have become wise. And this it seems to me that
 Jesus took into consideration; and in order that husbandmen,
 carpenters, builders, and other artisans, might not be driven away from
 good, He convened a common council of them altogether, and by simple
 and easy conversations He both raised them to a sense of God, and
 brought them to desire what was good.

 Chapter XVII.--The Manichæan Idea of Virtue in Matter Scouted; If One
 Virtue Has Been Created Immaterial, the Rest are Also Immaterial;
 Material Virtue an Exploded Notion.

 Moreover, how do they say, did God send divine virtue into matter? For
 if it always was, and neither is God to be understood as existing prior
 to it, nor matter either, then again, according to Manichæus, there are
 three first principles. Perhaps also, a little further on, there will
 appear to be many more. But if it be adventitious, and something which
 has come into existence afterwards, how is it void of matter? And if
 they make it to be a part of God, first, indeed, by this conception,
 they assert that God is composite and corporeal. But this is absurd,
 and impossible. And if He fashioned it, and is without matter, I wonder
 that they have not considered, neither the man himself, nor his
 disciples, that if (as the orthodox say, the things that come next in
 order subsist while God remains) God created this virtue of His own
 free-will, how is it that He is not the author of all other things that
 are made without the necessity of any pre-existent matter? The
 consequences, in truth, of this opinion are evidently absurd; but what
 does follow is put down next in order. Was it, then, the nature of this
 virtue to diffuse itself into matter? If it was contrary to its nature,
 in what manner is it intermingled with it? But if this was in
 accordance with its nature, it was altogether surely and always with
 matter. But if this be so, how is it that they call matter evil, which,
 from the beginning, was intermingled with the divine virtue? In what
 manner, too, will it be destroyed, the divine virtue which was mingled
 with it at some time or other seceding to itself? For that it preserves
 safely what is good, and likely to be productive of some other good to
 those to whom it is present, is more reasonable than that it should
 bring destruction or some other evil upon them.

 Chapter XVIII.--Dissolution and Inherence According to the Manichæans;
 This is Well Put, Ad Hominem, with Respect to Manes, Who is Himself in
 Matter.

 This then is the wise assertion which is made by them--namely, that as
 we see that the body perishes when the soul is separated from it, so
 also, when virtue has left matter, that which is left, which is matter,
 will be dissolved and perish. First, indeed, they do not perceive that
 nothing existent can be destroyed into a nonexistent. For that which is
 non-existent does not exist. But when bodies are disintegrated, and
 experience a change, a dissolution of them takes place; so that a part
 of them goes to earth, a part to air, and a part to something else.
 Besides, they do not remember that their doctrine is, that matter is
 unordered motion. But that which moves of itself, and of which motion
 is the essence, and not a thing accidentally belonging to it--how is it
 reasonable to say that when virtue departs, that which was, even before
 virtue descended into it, should cease to be? Nor do they see the
 difference, that every body which is devoid of soul is immoveable. For
 plants also have a vegetable soul. But motion itself, and yet unordered
 motion they assert to be the essence of matter. But it were better,
 that just as in a lyre which sounds out of tune, by the addition of
 harmony, everything is brought into concord; so the divine virtue when
 intermixed with that unordered motion, which, according to them, is
 matter, should add a certain order to it in the place of its innate
 disorder, and should always add it suitably to the divine time. For I
 ask, how was it that Manichæus himself became fitted to treat of these
 matters, and when at length did he enunciate them? For they allow that
 he himself was an admixture of matter, and of the virtue received into
 it. Whether therefore being so, he said these things in unordered
 motion, surely the opinion is faulty; or whether he said them by means
 of the divine virtue, the dogma is dubious and uncertain; for on the
 one side, that of the divine virtue, he participates in the truth;
 whilst on the side of unordered motion, he is a partaker in the other
 part, and changes to falsehood.

 Chapter XIX.--The Second Virtue of the Manichæans Beset with the
 Former, and with New Absurdities; Virtue, Active and Passive, the
 Fashioner of Matter, and Concrete with It; Bodies Divided by Manichæus
 into Three Parts.

 But if it had been said that divine virtue both hath adorned and does
 adorn matter, it would have been far more wisely said, and in a manner
 more conducing to conciliate faith in the doctrine and discourses of
 Manichæus. But God hath sent down another virtue. What has been already
 said with respect to the former virtue, may be equally said with
 respect to this, and all the absurdities which follow on the teaching
 about their first virtue, the same may be brought forward in the
 present case. But another, who will tolerate? For why did not God send
 some one virtue which could effect everything? If the human mind is so
 various towards all things, so that the same man is endowed with a
 knowledge of geometry, of astronomy, of the carpenter's art, and the
 like, is it then impossible for God to find one such virtue which
 should be sufficient for him in all respects, so as not to stand in
 need of a first and second? And why has one virtue the force rather of
 a creator, and another that of the patient and recipient, so as to be
 well fitted for admixture with matter. For I do not again see here the
 cause of good order, and of that excess which is contrary to it. If it
 was evil, it was not in the house of God. For since God is the only
 good, and matter the only evil, we must necessarily say that the other
 things are of a middle nature, and placed as it were in the middle. But
 there is found to be a different framer of those things which are of a
 middle nature, when they say that one cause is creative, and another
 admixed with matter? Perhaps, therefore, it is that primary antecedent
 cause which more recent writers speak of in the book peri ton
 diaphoron. But when the creative virtue took in hand the making of the
 world, then they say that there was separated from matter that which,
 even in the admixture, remained in its own virtue, and from this the
 sun and the moon had their beginning. But that which to a moderate and
 slight degree had contracted vice and evil, this formed the heaven and
 the constellations. Lastly came the rest encompassed within these, just
 as they might happen, which are admixtures of the divine virtue and of
 matter.

 Chapter XX.--The Divine Virtue in the View of the Same Manichæus
 Corporeal and Divisible; The Divine Virtue Itself Matter Which Becomes
 Everything; This is Not Fitting.

 I, indeed, besides all these things, wonder that they do not perceive
 that they are making the divine virtue to be corporeal, and dividing
 it, as it were, into parts. For why, as in the case of matter, is not
 the divine virtue also passible and divisible throughout, and from one
 of its parts the sun made, and from another the moon? For clearly this
 is what they assert to belong to the divine virtue; and this is what we
 said was the property of matter, which by itself is nothing, but when
 it has received form and qualities, everything is made which is divided
 and distinct. If, therefore, as from one subject, the divine virtue,
 only the sun and the moon have their beginning, and these things are
 different, why was anything else made? But if all things are made, what
 follows is manifest, that divine virtue is matter, and that, too, such
 as is made into forms. But if nothing else but the sun and moon are
 what was created by the divine virtue, then what is intermixed with all
 things is the sun and moon; and each of the stars is the sun and moon,
 and each individual animal of. those who live on land, and of fowls,
 and of creatures amphibious. But this, not even those who exhibit
 juggling tricks would admit, as, I think, is evident to every one.

 Chapter XXI.--Some Portions of the Virtue Have Good in Them, Others
 More Good; In the Sun and the Moon It is Incorrupt, in Other Things
 Depraved; An Improbable Opinion.

 But if any one were to apply his mind to what follows, the road would
 not appear to be plain and straightforward, but more arduous even than
 that which has been passed. For they say that the sun and moon have
 contracted no stain from their admixture with matter. And now they
 cannot say how other things have become deteriorated contrary to their
 own proper nature. For if, when it was absolute and by itself, the
 divine virtue was so constituted that one portion of it was good, and
 another had a greater amount of goodness in it, according to the old
 tale of the centaurs, who as far as the breast were men, and in the
 lower part horses, which are both good animals, but the man is the
 better of the two; so also, in the divine virtue, it is to be
 understood that the one portion of it is the better and the more
 excellent, and the other will occupy the second and inferior place. And
 in the same way, with respect to matter, the one portion possesses, as
 it were, an excess of evil; while others again are different, and about
 that other the language will be different. [2204] For it is possible to
 conceive that from the beginning the sun and moon, by a more skilful
 and prudent judgment, chose for themselves the parts of matter that
 were less evil for the purposes of admixture, that they might remain in
 their own perfection and virtue; but in the lapse of time, when the
 evils lost their force and became old, they brought out so much of the
 excess in the good, while the rest of its parts fell away, not, indeed,
 without foresight, and yet not with the same foresight, did each object
 share according to its quantity in the evil that was in matter. But
 since, with respect to this virtue, nothing of a different kind is
 asserted by them, but it is to be understood throughout to be alike and
 of the same nature, their argument is improbable; because in the
 admixture part remains pure and incorrupt, while the other has
 contracted some share of evil.

 [2204] This passage and the following sentences are corrupt. Possibly
 something is wanting.--Tr.

 Chapter XXII.--The Light of the Moon from the Sun; The Inconvenience of
 the Opinion that Souls are Received in It; The Two Deluges of the
 Greeks.

 Now, they say that the sun and the moon having by degrees separated the
 divine virtue from matter, transmit it to God. But if they had only to
 a slight degree frequented the schools of the astronomers, it would not
 have happened to them to fall into these fancies, nor would they have
 been ignorant that the moon, which, according to the opinion of some,
 is itself without light, receives its light from the sun, and that its
 configurations are just in proportion to its distance from the sun, and
 that it is then full moon when it is distant from the sun one hundred
 and eighty degrees. It is in conjunction when it is in the same degree
 with the sun. Then, is it not wonderful how it comes to pass that there
 should be so many souls, and from such diverse creatures? For there is
 the soul of the world itself, and of the animals, of plants, of nymphs,
 and demons, and amongst these are distinguished by appearance those of
 fowls, of land animals, and animals amphibious; but in the moon one
 like body is always seen by us. And what of the continuity of this
 body? When the moon is half-full, it appears a semicircle, and when it
 is in its third quarter, the same again. How then, and with what
 figure, are they assumed into the moon? For if it be light as fire, it
 is probable that they would not only ascend as far as the moon, but
 even higher, continually; but if it be heavy, it would not be possible
 for them at all to reach the moon. And what is the reason that that
 which first arrives at the moon is not immediately transmitted to the
 sun, but waits for the full moon until the rest of the souls arrive?
 When then the moon, from having been full, decreases, where does the
 virtue remain during that time? until the moon, which has been emptied
 of the former souls, just as a desolated city, shall receive again a
 fresh colony. For a treasure-house should have been marked out in some
 part of the earth, or of the clouds, or in some other place, where the
 congregated souls might stand ready for emigration to the moon. But,
 again, a second question arises. What then is the cause that it is not
 full immediately? or why does it again wait fifteen days? Nor is this
 less to be wondered at than that which has been said, that never within
 the memory of man has the moon become full after the fifteen days. Nay,
 not even--in the time of the deluge of Deucalion, nor in that of
 Phoroneus, when all things, so to speak, which were upon the face of
 the earth perished, and it happened that a great quantity of virtue was
 separated from matter. And, besides these things, one must consider the
 productiveness of generations, and their barrenness, and also the
 destruction of them; and since these things do not happen in order,
 neither ought the order of the full moon, nor the these of the waning
 moon, to be so carefully observed.

 Chapter XXIII.--The Image of Matter in the Sun, After Which Man is
 Formed; Trifling Fancies; It is a Mere Fancy, Too, that Man Is Formed
 from Matter; Man is Either a Composite Being, or a Soul, or Mind and
 Understanding.

 Neither is this to be regarded with slight attention. For if the divine
 virtue which is in matter be infinite, those things cannot diminish it
 which the sun and moon fashion. For that which remains from that finite
 thing which has been assumed is infinite. But if it is finite, it would
 be perceived by the senses in intervals proportionate to the amount of
 its virtue that had been subtracted from the world. But all things
 remain as they were. Now what understanding do these things not
 transcend in their incredibleness, when they assert that man was
 created and formed after the image of matter that is seen in the sun?
 For images are the forms of their archetypes. But if they include man's
 image in the sun, where is the exemplar after which his image is
 formed? For, indeed, they are not going to say that man is really man,
 or divine virtue; for this, indeed, they mix up with matter, and they
 say that the image is seen in the sun, which, as they think, was formed
 afterwards from the secretion of matter. Neither can they bring forward
 the creative cause of all things, for this they say was sent to
 preserve safety to the divine virtue; so that, in their opinion, this
 must be altogether ascribed to the sun; for this reason, doubtless,
 that it happens by his arrival and presence that the sun and moon are
 separated from matter.

 Moreover, they assert that the image is seen in the star; but they say
 that matter fashioned man. In what manner, and by what means? For it is
 not possible that this should fashion him. For besides that, thus
 according to them, man is the empty form of an empty form, and having
 no real existence, it has not as yet been possible to conceive how man
 can be the product of matter. For the use of reason and sense belongs
 not to that matter which they assume. Now what, according to them, is
 man? Is he a mixture of soul and body? Or another thing, or that which
 is superior to the entire soul, the mind? But if he is mind, how can
 the more perfect and the better part be the product of that which is
 worse; or if he be soul (for this they say is divine virtue), how can
 they, when they have taken away from God the divine virtue, subject
 this to the creating workmanship of matter? But if they leave to him
 body alone, let them remember again that it is by itself immovable, and
 that they say that the essence of matter is motion. Neither do they
 think that anything of itself, and its own genius, is attracted to
 matter. Nor is it reasonable to lay it down, that what is composed of
 these things is the product of this. To think, indeed, that that which
 is fashioned by any one is inferior to its fashioner seems to be beyond
 controversy. For thus the world is inferior to its Creator or
 Fashioner, and the works of art inferior to the artificer. If then man
 be the product of matter, he must surely be inferior to it. Now, men
 leave nothing inferior to matter; and it is not reasonable that the
 divine virtue should be commingled with matter, and with that which is
 inferior to it. But the things which they assert out of indulgence, as
 it were, and by way of dispensation, these they do not seem to
 understand. For what is the reason of their thinking that matter has
 bound the image of God to the substance of man? Or, why is not the
 image sufficient, as in a mirror, that man should appear? Or, as the
 sun himself is sufficient for the origination and destruction of all
 things that are made, hath he imitated an image in the work of their
 creation? With which of those things which he possessed? Was it with
 the divine virtue which was mingled with it, so that the divine virtue
 should have the office of an instrument in respect of matter? Is it by
 unordered motion that he will thus give matter a form? But all like
 things, in exquisite and accurate order, by imitating, attain their
 end. For they do not suppose that a house, or a ship, or any other
 product of art, is effected by disorder; nor a statue which art has
 fashioned to imitate man.

 Chapter XXIV.--Christ is Mind, According to the Manichæans; What is He
 in the View of the Church? Incongruity in Their Idea of Christ; That He
 Suffered Only in Appearance, a Dream of the Manichæans; Nothing is
 Attributed to the Word by Way of Fiction.

 Christ, too, they do not acknowledge; yet they speak of Christ, but
 they take some other element, and giving to the Word, designating His
 sacred person, some other signification than that in which it is
 rightly received, they say that He is mind. But if, when they speak of
 Him as that which is known, and that which knows, and wisdom as having
 the same meaning, they are found to agree with those things which the
 Church doctors say of Him, how comes it then that they reject all that
 is called ancient history? But let us see whether they make Him to be
 something adventitious and new, and which has come on from without, and
 by accident, as the opinion of some is. For they who hold this opinion
 say, as seems very plausible, that the seventh year, when the powers of
 perception became distinct, He made His entrance into the body. But if
 Christ be mind, as they imagine, then will He be both Christ and not
 Christ. For before that mind and sense entered, He was not. But if
 Christ, as they will have it, be mind, then into Him already existing
 does the mind make its entrance, and thus, again, according to their
 opinion, will it be mind. Christ, therefore, is and is not at the same
 time. But if, according to the more approved sect of them, mind is all
 things which are, since they assume matter to be not produced, and
 coeval so to speak with God, this first mind and matter they hold to be
 Christ; if, indeed, Christ be the mind, which is all things, and matter
 is one of those things which are, and is itself not produced.

 They say it was by way of appearance, and in this manner, that the
 divine virtue in matter was affixed to the cross; and that He Himself
 did not undergo this punishment, since it was impossible that He should
 suffer this; which assertion Manichæus himself has taken in hand to
 teach in a book written upon the subject, that the divine virtue was
 enclosed in matter, and again departs from it. The mode of this they
 invent. That it should be said, indeed, in the doctrine of the Church,
 that He gave Himself up for the remission of sins, obtains credit from
 the vulgar, and appears likewise in the Greek histories, which say that
 some "surrendered themselves to death in order to ensure safety to
 their countrymen." And of this doctrine the Jewish history has an
 example, which prepares the son of Abraham as a sacrifice to God.
 [2205] But to subject Christ to His passion merely for the sake of
 display, betrays great ignorance, for the Word is God's representative,
 to teach and inform us of actual verities.

 [2205] Gen. xxii. 1.

 Chapter XXV.--The Manichæan Abstinence from Living Things Ridiculous;
 Their Madness in Abhorring Marriage; The Mythology of the Giants; Too
 Allegorical an Exposition.

 They abstain also from living things. If, indeed, the reason of their
 abstinence were other than it is, it ought not to be too curiously
 investigated. But if they do so for this reason, that the divine virtue
 is more or less absent or present to them, this their meaning is
 ridiculous. For if plants be more material, how is it in accordance
 with reason to use that which is inferior for food and sustenance? or,
 if there be more of the divine virtue in them, how are things of this
 sort useful as food, when the soul's faculty of nourishing and making
 increase is more corporeal? Now in that they abstain from marriage and
 the rites of Venus, fearing lest by the succession of the race the
 divine virtue should dwell more in matter, I wonder how in thinking so
 they allow of themselves? For if neither the providence of God
 suffices, both by generations and by those things which are always and
 in the same manner existent, to separate off the divine virtue from
 matter, what can the cunning and subtlety of Manichæus effect for that
 purpose? For assuredly by no giant's co-operation does assistance come
 to God, in order by the removal of generations to make the retreat of
 the divine virtue from matter quick and speedy. But what the poets say
 about the giants is manifestly a fable. For those who lay it down about
 these, bring forward such matters in allegories, by a species of fable
 hiding the majesty of their discourse; as, for instance, when the
 Jewish history relates that angels came down to hold [2206] intercourse
 with the daughters of men; for this saying signifies that the nutritive
 powers of the soul descended from heaven to earth. But the poets who
 say that they, when they had emerged in full armour from the earth,
 perished immediately after they stirred up rebellion against the gods,
 in order that they might insinuate the frail and quickly-perishing
 constitution of the body, adorn their poetry in this way for the sake
 of refreshing the soul by the strangeness of the occurrence. But these,
 understanding nothing of all this, wheresoever they can get hold of a
 paralogism from whatsoever quarter it comes, greedily seize on it as a
 God-send, and strive with all their arts to overturn truth by any
 means.

 [2206] Gen. vi. 2.

 Chapter XXVI.--The Much-Talked-of Fire of the Manichæans; That Fire
 Matter Itself.

 That fire, endowed indeed with the power of burning, yet possessing no
 light, which is outside the world, in what region has it place? For if
 it is in the world, why does the world hitherto continue safe? For if
 at some time or other it is to destroy it, by approaching it, now also
 it is conjoined with it. But if it be apart from it, as it were on high
 in its own region, what will hereafter happen to make it descend upon
 the world? Or in what way will it leave its own place, and by what
 necessity and violence? And what substance of fire can be conceived
 without fuel, and how can what is moist serve as fuel to it, unless
 what is rather physiologically said about this does not fall within the
 province of our present disquisition? But this is quite manifest from
 what has been said. For the fire existing outside the world is just
 that which they call matter, since the sun and the moon, being the
 purest of the pure, by their divine virtue, are separate and distinct
 from that fire, no part of them being left in it. This fire is matter
 itself, absolutely and per se, entirely removed from all admixture with
 the divine virtue. Wherefore when the world has been emptied of all the
 divine virtue which is opposed to it, and again a fire of this sort
 shall be left remaining, how then shall the fire either destroy
 anything, or be consumed by it? For, from that which is like, I do not
 see in what way corruption is to take place. For what matter will
 become when the divine virtue has been separated from it, this it was
 before that the divine virtue was commingled with it. If indeed matter
 is to perish when it is bereft of the divine virtue, why did it not
 perish before it came in contact with the divine virtue, or any
 creative energy? Was it in order that matter might successively perish,
 and do this ad infinitum? And what is the use of this? For that which
 had not place from the first volition, how shall this have place from
 one following? or what reason is there for God to put off things which,
 not even in the case of a man, appears to be well? For as regards those
 who deliberate about what is impossible, this is said to happen to
 them, that they do not wish for that which is possible. But if nothing
 else, they speak of God transcending substance, and bring Him forward
 as some new material, and that not such as intelligent men always think
 to be joined with Him, but that which investigation discovers either to
 be not existing at all, or to be the extreme of all things, and which
 can with difficulty be conceived of by the human mind. For this fire,
 devoid of light, is it of more force than matter, which is to be left
 desolate by divine virtue, or is it of less? And if it is of less, how
 will it overcome that which is of more? but if it is of more, it will
 be able to bring it back to itself, being of the same nature; yet will
 it not destroy it, as neither does the Nile swallow up the streams that
 are divided off from it.

 Elucidation.

 ------------------------

 If anything could be more dreary than the Manichæan heresy itself, it
 may be questioned whether it be not the various views that have been
 entertained concerning our author. I have often remarked the
 condensation of valuable information given by Dr. Murdock in his notes
 upon Mosheim, but he fails to get in the half that needs to be noted.
 [2207] He tells us that "Alexander of Lycopolis flourished probably
 about a.d. 350." He adds, "Fabricius supposes that he was first a Pagan
 and a Manichee, and afterwards a Catholic Christian. Cave is of the
 same opinion. Beausobre thinks he was a mere pagan. [2208] Lardner
 thinks he was a Gentile, but well acquainted with the Manichees and
 other Christians, [2209] and that he had some knowledge of the Old and
 New Testaments, to which he occasionally refers. He speaks with respect
 of Christ and the Christian philosophy, and appears to have been "a
 learned and candid man." Of an eminent Christian bishop, all this seems
 very puzzling; and I feel it a sort of duty to the youthful student to
 give the statements of the learned Lardner in an abridged form, with
 such references to the preceding pages as may serve in place of a
 series of elucidations.

 According to this invaluable critic, the learned are not able to agree
 concerning Alexander. Some think he was a Christian, others believe
 that he was a heathen. Fabricius, who places him in the fourth century,
 holds to this latter opinion; [2210] all which agrees with our Cave.
 [2211] Photius makes him Archbishop of Nicopolis. [2212] Tillemont
 thinks [2213] he was a pagan philosopher, who wrote to persuade his
 friends to prefer "the doctrine of the churches" to that of Manes.
 Combefis, his editor, [2214] thinks him very ancient, because he
 appears to have learned the principles of this heresy from the
 immediate disciples of the heretic. Beausobre, [2215] the standard
 authority, is of like opinion, and Mosheim approves his reasoning.

 Nothing in his work, according to Lardner, proves that our author wrote
 near the beginning of the fourth century, and he decides upon the
 middle of that century as his epoch.

 Alexander gives a very honourable character to the genuine Christian
 philosophy, and asserts its adaptation to the common people, and,
 indeed, to all sorts of men. [2216] He certainly is not mute as to
 Christ. His tribute to the Saviour is, if not affectionate, yet a just
 award to Him. [2217] By the "council of all together," he intends the
 College of the Apostles, [2218] made up of fishermen and publicans and
 tent-makers, in which he sees a design of the blessed Jesus to meet
 this class, and, in short, all classes. It is clear enough that
 Alexander has some knowledge of Christ, some knowledge of the received
 doctrine of the churches, [2219] or orthodox Christians; and he appears
 to blame the Manichees for not receiving the Scripture of the Old
 Testament. [2220]

 He argues against their absurd opinion that Christ was "Mind;" [2221]
 also that, though crucified, He did not suffer: [2222] and he affirms
 [2223] that it would be more reasonable to say, agreeably to the
 ecclesiastical doctrine, that "He gave Himself for the remission of
 sins." He refers to the sacrifice of Isaac, [2224] and to the story of
 Cain and Abel; [2225] also to the mysterious subject of the angels and
 the daughters of men. [2226] Like an Alexandrian theologian, he
 expounds this, however, against the literal sense, as an allegory.

 My reader will be somewhat amused with the terse summing-up of Lardner:
 "I am rather inclined to think he was a Gentile....He was evidently a
 learned and rational man. His observations concerning the Christian
 philosophy deserve particular notice. To me this work of Alexander
 appears very curious."

 [2207] Mosheim, E. H., vol. i. p 383, note 5, Murdock's edition, New
 York, 1844. His references to Lardner in this case do not accord with
 my copy.

 [2208] Histoire des Manichéens (Lardner's reference), pp. 236-237.

 [2209] Credib., vol. vii. p. 574, ed. London, 1829.

 [2210] Lardner's reference is: Bib. G., lib. v. c. 1, tom. 5, p. 290.

 [2211] Long extract from Cave ubi supra. He quotes the Latin of Cave's
 Diss. on Writers of Uncertain Date.

 [2212] Lardner's reference is to Photius, Contra Manich., i. cap. 11.

 [2213] Lardner quotes from the Hist. des Manich., art. 16., Mémoires,
 etc., tom. iv.

 [2214] Reference defective. See Lardner, Credib., vol. iii. 269. Here
 will be found (p. 252) a learned examination of Archelaus, and what
 amounts to a treatise on these Manichæans.

 [2215] For Beausobre's summary of Alexander's deficiencies, see
 condensed statement in Lardner, vol. iii. p. 575.

 [2216] Cap. i. p. 241, supra. A beautiful exordium. A recent writer,
 speaking of Potamiæna and Herais, virgin martyrs, and catechumens of
 Origen, remarks, that "the number of young women of high character who
 appreciated the teachings of this great master, many of whom were
 employed as copyists of his works, is creditable to the state of
 Christian society at that period" (Mahan, Church Hist., p. 237). It was
 to avoid scandal as well as temptation in his relations with these that
 he fell into his heroic mistake.

 [2217] Cap. xxiv. p. 251, supra. Who can imagine that the author of
 this chapter is not a Christian? Observe what he says of "the Word."

 [2218] Cap. xvi. p. 247.

 [2219] Cap. xxiv. p. 251.

 [2220] Cap. xxiv. p. 251.

 [2221] Cap. xxiv. p. 251.

 [2222] Cap. xxiv. p. 251.

 [2223] Cap. xxiv. p. 251.

 [2224] Cap. xxiv. p. 251.

 [2225] Note the reference to the Old and New Testaments entire, p. 243,
 supra.

 [2226] Cap. xxv. p. 252, supra.

  The Canonical epistle, with the Commentaries of Theodore Balsamon and John
  Zonaras

 Peter.

 [Translated by the Rev. James B. H. Hawkins, M.A.]

 Introductory Notice

 to

 Peter, Bishop of Alexandria.

 ------------------------

 [a.d. 260 [2227] -300-311.] Entering upon the fourth century, we may
 well pause to reflect upon what Alexandria has been to the Church of
 Christ,--the mother of churches, the mother of saints, maintaining
 always the intellectual and even the ecclesiastical primacy of
 Christendom. "Ye are the light of the world," said the great
 Enlightener to the Galileans of an obscure and despised Roman province.
 But who could have prophesied that Egypt should again be the pharos of
 the world, as it was in Moses? Who could have foreseen the "men of
 Galilee" taking possession of the Alexandrian Library, and
 demonstrating the ways of Providence in creating the Bible of the
 Seventy, and in the formation of the Hellenistic Greek, for their
 ultimate use? Who could have imagined the Evangelist Mark and the
 eloquent Apollos to be the destined instruments for founding the
 schools of Christendom, and shaping scientific theology? Who would not
 have looked for all this in some other way, and preferably in Athens or
 in Rome? But who would have expected the visit of God Incarnate to
 Nazareth, and not to Alexandria?

 In Peter's day Antioch was coming to be a school under the influence of
 Malchion's genius and that of the bishops who withstood Paulus of
 Samosata. Malchion had taught there in the "School of Sciences," and
 learning was once more to be made the handmaid of true religion. But
 Alexandria was still the seat of Christian illumination and the
 fountain of orthodoxy; its very ferment always clarifying its thought,
 and leaving "wine well refined," and pure from the lees.

 To this subject I shall have occasion to refer again in an elucidation
 subjoined to the works of Alexander (successor to Peter), in which, for
 a final view of the great Alexandrian school, I shall gather up some
 fragments in brief outline. Here it may be enough to remark, that,
 until the definite development of the school of Antioch (circa a.d.
 350), I have regarded the whole Orient as dominated and formed by the
 brain of the grand metropolis of Egypt and the Pentapolis. I have
 considered the great Dionysius as really presiding in the Synod of
 Antioch, though absent in the body, and have regarded Malchion as his
 voice in that council, which we must not forget was presided over by
 Firmilian, a pupil of Origen, and a true Alexandrian disciple.

 Peter's conflict with Meletius shall be noted in an elucidation. We
 shall see that the heresy of Paulus as well as the Meletian schism are
 but chapters in one prolonged history, of which the outcrop was
 Arianism. Now, as to Alexandria we owe the intrepid defenders of truth
 in all these conflicts, we must not forget that they are to be judged
 by the product of their united testimony, and not by their occasional
 individualisms and infirmities of mind and speech while they were
 creating the theological dialect of Christendom and the formulas of
 orthodoxy.

 Peter was able to maintain his canonical authority against the
 mischievous rebellion of Meletius; and the history of this schism is
 forcibly illustrative of those archaia ethe which the Nicene Synod
 recognized, confirming the primacy of Alexandria, and striving to
 suppress Meletianism by firm but moderate measures based upon the
 primitive maxims. Peter left a pure and holy memory to the Church, and
 sealed his testimony in martyrdom.

 Translator's Introductory Notice. [2228]

 Eusebius alone, of the more ancient writers, speaks in terms of the
 highest praise of Peter, Bishop of Alexandria. He was, says he, a
 divine bishop, both for the sanctity of his life, and also for his
 diligent study and knowledge of the Holy Scriptures; [2229] and in
 another place he styles him "that excellent doctor of the Christian
 religion," who, indeed, during the whole period of his episcopate,
 which he held for twelve years, obtained for himself the highest
 renown. He obtained the bishopric of Alexandria next in succession to
 Theonas. He governed that church about three years before the
 persecution broke out: [2230] the rest of his time he spent in the
 exercise of a closer discipline over himself, yet did he not in the
 meanwhile neglect to provide for the common interests of the Church. In
 the ninth year of the persecution he was beheaded, and gained the crown
 of martyrdom. So far we have the account of Eusebius, whom Dodwell
 [2231] proves to have accurately distributed the years of Peter's
 episcopate. After Peter had spent twelve years as bishop, and in the
 ninth year of the persecution which broke out under Maximin, he was
 beheaded; so that his martyrdom falls in the year of our Lord 311--as
 the Egyptians reckon on the 29th day of the month Athyr, which answers
 to our 25th of November, as Lequien, [2232] after Renaudot, [2233] has
 observed.

 St. Peter wrote in the fourth year of the persecution, a.d. 306, some
 Canons Penitential with reference to those who had lapsed. They are to
 be met with in every collection of Canons. In the Pandecta Canonum of
 Bishop Beveridge, [2234] they are accompanied by the notes of Joannes
 Zonaras and Theodorus Balsamon. Upon these Penitential Canons, however,
 Tillemont [2235] should be consulted. Moreover, according to Renaudot,
 [2236] Echmimensis, Ebnapalus, Abulfaragius, and other Oriental
 Christians of every sect, make use of the testimony of these Canons;
 and in the anonymous collections of them called Responsa, some
 fragments of other works of Peter are extant. Some of these are praised
 by the Jacobites, in the work which they call Fides patrum. In another
 work, entitled Unio pretiosus, occurs a homily of Peter on the baptism
 of Christ.

 The fragments of the other writings of this holy martyr, which have
 been preserved by the Greeks, are here appended to the Penitential
 Canons. For instance: (1) An extract from his book De Deitate, which is
 extant in the Acta Conciliorum Ephesini et Chalcedonensis; (2) Another
 fragment from the homily De Adventu Salvatoris, cited by Leontius
 Byzantinus in his first book against Nestorius and Eutyches; (3) An
 epistle of the same prelate to the Alexandrine Church recently
 published, together with some other old ecclesiastical monuments by
 Scipio Maffei. [2237] Peter is said to have written this epistle after
 one addressed to Meletius, Bishop of Lycopolis. In it, after
 interdicting the Alexandrians from communion with Meletius, he says
 that he will himself come in company with some wise doctors, and will
 examine into his tenets; alluding, most probably, to the synod held
 afterwards at Alexandria, in which Meletius was deposed from his
 office. Athanasius says, [2238] respecting this synod, "Peter, who was
 amongst us as bishop before the persecution, and who died a martyr in
 the persecution, deposed in common council of the bishops, Meletius, an
 Egyptian bishop, who had been convicted of many crimes." But with
 respect to the time in which the mournful Meletian schism commenced,
 Maffei [2239] defends the opinions of Baronius, [2240] who connects it
 with the year a.d. 306, against Pagius and Montfaucon, both from this
 epistle of Petrus Alexandrinus, and also from another of the four
 bishops, of which Peter makes mention in his own; (4) A passage from
 the Sermo in Sanctum Pascha, or from some other work of Peter's on the
 same subject, is given in the Diatriba de Paschate, prefixed to the
 Chronicon Alexandrinum S. Paschale, and published separately in the
 Uranologion of Petavius, fol. Paris, 1630, p. 396.

 [2227] This first date is conjectural.

 [2228] [After Gallandi, by the translator, the Rev. James B. H.
 Hawkins, M.A.]

 [2229] theion episkopon chrema, biou te kai aretes heneka kai tes ton
 hieron logon sunaskeseos. Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., lib. ix. cap. 6;
 lib. viii. cap. 13; lib. vii. cap. 32, towards the end.

 [2230] pro tou diogmou trisin oud' holois hegesamenos tes Ekklesias.

 [2231] Dodwell, Dissert. Sing. ad. Pears., cap. 6, sec. 21, p. 74.

 [2232] Lequien, Oriens Christ, tom. ii. p. 397.

 [2233] Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex., p. 60.

 [2234] Sunodikon. Vol. ii. p. 8, fol., Oxon., 1672.

 [2235] Tillemont, Mem., tom. v. p. 450.

 [2236] Renaudot, l. c., p. 61, seqq.

 [2237] Maffei, Osservazione Letterarie, tom. iii. p. 17.

 [2238] Athanasius, Apol. contra Arian, sec. 39, tom. i. p. 177.

 [2239] Maffei, l. c., p. 24.

 [2240] Baronius, Ad Annum, 306, sec. 44. [Elucidation I.]

 The Genuine Acts of Peter. [2241]

 ------------------------

 Were all the limbs of my body to be turned into tongues, and all the
 joints of my limbs to utter articulate sounds, it would noways be
 sufficient to express who, how great and how good, was our most blessed
 Father Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria. Especially incongruous do I
 consider it to commit to paper what perils he underwent by tyrants,
 what conflicts he endured with Gentiles and heretics, lest I should
 seem to make these the subjects of my panegyric rather than that
 passion to which he manfully submitted to make safe the people of God.
 Nevertheless, because the office of the narrator must fail in narrating
 his inmost conversation and wonderful deeds, and language is noways
 sufficient for the task, I have considered it convenient to describe
 only those exploits of his by which he is known to have attained to the
 pontificate, [2242] and after Arius had been cut off from the unity of
 the Church, [2243] to have been crowned with the martyr's laurel. Yet
 this do I consider to be a glorious end, and a spectacle of a
 magnificent contest, sufficient for those who do not doubt of a
 truthful narration, which is unstained by falsehood. In commencing,
 therefore, our account of the episcopate of this most holy man, let us
 call to our aid his own language, in order that we may make it
 co-operate with our own style.

 Alexandria is a city of exceeding magnitude, which holds the first
 place not only among the Egyptians, but the Thebans also and the
 Libyans, who are at no great distance from Egypt. [2244] A cycle of two
 hundred and eighty-five years from the incarnation of our Lord and
 Saviour Jesus Christ had rolled round, when the venerable Theonas, the
 bishop of this city, by an ethereal flight, mounted upwards to the
 celestial kingdoms. To him Peter, succeeding at the helm of the Church,
 was by all the clergy and the whole Christian community appointed
 bishop, the sixteenth in order from Mark the Evangelist, who was also
 archbishop of the city. He in truth, like Phosphor rising among the
 stars, shining forth with the radiance of his sacred virtues, most
 magnificently governed the citadel of the faith. Inferior to none who
 had gone before him in his knowledge of Holy Scripture, he nobly
 applied himself to the advantage and instruction of the Church; being
 of singular prudence, and in all things perfect, a true priest and
 victim of God, he watchfully laboured night and day in every sacerdotal
 care.

 But because virtue is the mark of the zealot, "it is the tops of the
 mountains that are struck by lightning," [2245] he hence endured
 multifarious conflicts with rivals. Why need I say more? He lived in
 persecution almost the whole of his life. Meanwhile he ordained
 fifty-five bishops. Meletius lastly--in mind and name most black--was
 made the schismatical bishop of the city of Lycopolis, doing many
 things against the rule of the canons, and surpassing even the bloody
 soldiery in cruelty who, at the time of the Lord's Passion, feared to
 rend His coat; he was so hurried on by giving the rein to his madness,
 that, rending asunder the Catholic Church not only in the cities of
 Egypt, but even in its villages, he ordained bishops of his own party,
 nor cared he aught for Peter, nor for Christ, who was in the person of
 Peter. To him Arius, who was yet a laic, and not marked with the
 clerical tonsure, [2246] adhered, and was to him and his family most
 dear; and not without reason: every animal, as says the Scripture,
 loves its like. But upon this coming to his knowledge, the man of God
 being affected with grief, said that this persecution was worse than
 the former. And although he was in hiding, yet, so far as his strength
 permitted, directing everywhere his exhortations, and preaching up the
 unity of the Church, he strengthened men to withstand the ignorance and
 nefarious temerity of Meletius. Whence it came to pass that not a few,
 being influenced by his salutary admonitions, departed from the
 Meletian impiety.

 Nearly about the same time Arius, armed with a viper's craft, as if
 deserting the party of Meletius, fled for refuge to Peter, who at the
 request of the bishops raised him to the honours of the diaconate,
 being ignorant of his exceeding hypocrisy. For he was even as a snake
 suffused with deadly poison. Yet neither can the imposition of hands
 upon this false one be imputed as a crime to this holy man, as the
 simulated magic arts of Simon is not ascribed to Philip. Meanwhile, the
 detestable wickedness of the Meletians increased beyond measure; and
 the blessed Peter, fearing lest the plague of heresy should spread over
 the whole flock committed to his care, and knowing that there is no
 fellowship with light and darkness, and no concord betwixt Christ and
 Belial, by letter separated the Meletians from the communion of the
 Church. And because an evil disposition cannot long be concealed, upon
 that instant the wicked Arius, when he saw his aiders and abettors cast
 down from the dignity of the Church, gave way to sadness and
 lamentation. This did not escape the notice of this holy man. For when
 his hypocrisy was laid bare, immediately using the evangelical sword,
 "If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee,"
 [2247] and cutting off Arius from the body of the Church as a putrid
 limb, he expelled and banished him from the communion of the faithful.

 This done, the storm of persecution suddenly abating, peace, although
 for a short time, smiled. Then this most choice priest of the Lord
 shone manifestly before the people, and the faithful began to run in
 crowds to keep the memory of the martyrs, and to assemble in
 congregations to the praise of Christ. Whom this priest of the divine
 law quickened with his holy eloquence, and so roused and strengthened
 that the multitude of believers increased continually in the Church.
 But the old enemy of salvation of man did not long remain quiet and
 look on these things with favouring eyes. For on a sudden the
 storm-cloud of paganism gave forth its hostile thunder, and like a
 winter shower struck against the serenity of the Church, and chased it
 away in flight. But that this may be understood more clearly, we must
 necessarily turn back to the atrocities of Diocletian, that impious
 one, and rebel against God, and also to Maximian Galerius, who at that
 time, with his son Maximin, harassed the regions of the East with his
 tyrannical sway.

 For in the time of this man the fire of Christian persecution so raged,
 that not only in one region of the universe, but even throughout the
 whole world, both by land and by sea, the storm of impiety gave forth
 its thunder. The imperial edicts and most cruel decrees running hither
 and thither, the worshippers of Christ were put to death now openly,
 and now by clandestine snares; no day, no night, passed off free from
 the effusion of Christian blood. Nor was the type of slaughter of one
 kind alone; some were slain with diverse and most bitter tortures; some
 again, that they might want the humanity of kinsmen, and burial in
 their own country, were transported to other climes, and by certain new
 machinations of punishment, and as yet to the age unknown, were driven
 to the goal of martyrdom. Oh, the horrible wickedness! So great was
 their impiety that they even upturned from their foundations the
 sanctuaries of divine worship, and burned the sacred books in the fire.
 Diocletian of execrable memory having died, Constantinus Major was
 elected to administer the kingdom, and in the western parts began to
 hold the reins of government.

 In these days information was brought to Maximin about the aforesaid
 archbishop, [2248] that he was a leader and holding chief place among
 the Christians; and he, inflamed with his accustomed iniquity, on the
 instant ordered Peter to be apprehended and cast into prison. For which
 purpose he despatched to Alexandria five tribunes, accompanied with
 their bands of soldiers, who, coming thither as they had been
 commanded, suddenly seized the priest of Christ and committed him to
 the custody of a prison. Wonderful was the devotion of the faithful!
 When it was known that this holy man was shut up in the dungeon of the
 prison, an incredibly large number ran together, principally a band of
 monks and of virgins, and with no material arms, but with rivers of
 tears and the affection of pious minds. surrounded the prison's
 circuit. [2249] And as good sons towards a good father, nay, rather as
 the Christian members of a most Christian head, adhered to him with all
 their bowels of compassion, and were to him as walls, observing that no
 pagan might get an opportunity of access to him. One indeed was the vow
 of all, one their voice, and one their compassion and resolve to die
 rather than see any evil happen to this holy man. Now while the man of
 God was being kept for a few days in the same stocks, with his body
 thrust back, the tribunes made a suggestion to the king concerning him,
 but he, after his ferocious manner, gave his sentence for capitally
 punishing the most blessed patriarch. And when this got to the ears of
 the Christians, they all with one mind began to guard the approaches to
 the prison with groaning and lamentation, and persistently prevented
 any Gentile from obtaining access to him. And when the tribunes could
 by no means approach him to put him to death, they held a council, and
 determined that the soldiers should with drawn swords break in upon the
 crowd of people, and so draw him forth to behead him; and if any one
 opposed, he should be put to death.

 Arius, in the meanwhile, having as yet been endowed only with the
 dignity of a Levite, [2250] and fearing lest, after the death of so
 great a father, he should noways be able to get reconciled to the
 Church, came to those who held the chief place amongst the clergy, and,
 hypocrite that he was, by his sorrowful entreaties and plausible
 discourse, endeavoured to persuade the holy archbishop to extend to him
 his compassion, and to release him from the ban of excommunication. But
 what is more deceptive than a feigned heart? What more simple than a
 holy composure? There was no delay; those who had been requested went
 in to the priest of Christ, and, after the customary oration,
 prostrating themselves on the ground, and with groans and tears kissing
 his sacred hands, implored him, saying: "Thee, indeed, most blessed
 father, for the excellence of thy faith, the Lord hath called to
 receive the martyr's crown, which we noways doubt does quickly await
 thee. Therefore do we think it right that, with thy accustomed piety,
 thou shouldest. pardon Arius, and extend thy indulgence to his
 lamentations."

 Upon hearing this the man of God, moved with indignation, put them
 aside, and, raising his hands to heaven, exclaimed: "Do ye dare to
 supplicate me on behalf of Arius? Arius, both here and in the future
 world, will always remain banished and separate from the glory of the
 Son of God, Jesus Christ our Lord." [2251] He thus protesting, all who
 were present, being struck with terror, like men dumb, kept silence.
 Moreover they suspected that he, not without some divine notification,
 [2252] gave forth such a sentence against Arius. But when the merciful
 father beheld them silent and sad from compunction of heart, he would
 not persist in austerity, or leave them, as if in contempt, without
 satisfaction; but taking Achillas and Alexander, who amongst the
 priests appeared to be the elders and the most holy, having one of them
 at his right hand, and the other on his left, he separated them a
 little from the rest, and at the end of his discourse said to them: "Do
 not, my brethren, take me for a man inhuman and stern; for indeed I too
 am living under the law of sin; but believe my words. The hidden
 treachery of Arias surpasses all iniquity and impiety, and not
 asserting this of mine own self, have I sanctioned his excommunication.
 For in this night, whilst I was solemnly pouring forth my prayers to
 God, there stood by me a boy of about twelve years, the brightness of
 whose face I could not endure, for this whole cell in which we stand
 was radiant with a great light. He was clothed with a linen tunic
 [2253] divided into two parts, from the neck to the feet, and holding
 in his two hands the rents of the tunic, he applied them to his breast
 to cover his nudity. At this vision I was stupefied with astonishment.
 And when boldness of speech was given to me, I exclaimed: Lord, who
 hath rent thy tunic? Then said he, Arius hath rent it, and by all means
 beware of receiving him into communion; behold, to-morrow they will
 come to entreat you for him. See, therefore, that thou be not persuaded
 to acquiesce: nay, rather lay thy commands upon Achillas and Alexander
 the priests, who after thy translation will rule my Church, not by any
 means to receive him. Thou shalt very quickly fulfil the lot of the
 martyr. Now there was no other cause of this vision. So now I have
 satisfied you, and I have declared unto you what I was ordered. But
 what you will do in consequence of this, must be your own care." Thus
 much concerning Arius.

 He continued: "Ye know too, beloved, and ye know well, what has been
 the manner of my conversation amongst you, and what conflicts I have
 endured from the idolatrous Gentiles, who, being ignorant of the Lord
 and Saviour, do not cease in their madness to spread abroad the fame of
 a multitude of gods who are no gods. Ye know likewise how, in avoiding
 the rage of my persecutors, I wandered an exile from place to place.
 For long time I lay in hiding in Mesopotamia, and also in Syria amongst
 the Phoenicians; in either Palestine also I had for a long time to
 wander: and from thence, if I may so say, in another clement, that is,
 in the islands, I tarried no short time. Yet in the midst of all these
 calamities I did not cease day and night writing to the Lord's flock
 committed to my poor care, and confirming them in the unity of Christ.
 For an anxious solicitude for them constantly kept urging my heart, and
 suffered me not to rest; then only did I think it to be more tolerable
 to me when I committed them to the Power above.

 "Likewise also, on account of those fortunate prelates, Phileus, I
 mean, Hesychius and Theodorus, who of divine grace have received a
 worthy vocation, what great tribulation agitated my mind. For these, as
 ye know, for the faith of Christ were with the rest of the confessors
 wasted with diverse torments. And because in such a conflict they were
 not only of the clergy but of the laity also the standard-bearers and
 preceptors, I on this account greatly feared lest they should be found
 wanting under their long affliction, and lest their defection, which is
 terrible to speak of, should be to many an occasion of stumbling and of
 denying the faith, for there were more than six hundred and sixty
 confined along with them within the precincts of a dungeon. Hence,
 although oppressed with great labour and toil, I ceased not to write to
 them with reference to all those predicted passages, [2254] exhorting
 them to earn the martyr's palm with the power of divine inspiration.
 But when I heard of their magnificent perseverance, and the glorious
 end of the passion of them all, falling on the ground I adored the
 majesty of Christ, who had thought fit to count them amongst the throng
 of the martyrs.

 "Why should I speak to you about Meletius of Lycopolis? What
 persecutions, what treachery, he directed against me, I doubt not but
 that ye well know. Oh, the horrible wickedness! he feared not to rend
 asunder the holy Church, which the Son of God redeemed with His
 precious blood, and to deliver which from the tyranny of the devil He
 hesitated not to lay down His life. This Church, as I have begin to
 say, the wicked Meletius rending asunder, ceased not to imprison in
 dungeons, and to afflict holy bishops even, who have a little before us
 by martyrdom penetrated to the heavens. Beware therefore of his
 insidious devices. For I, as ye see, go bound by divine charity,
 preferring above all things the will of God. I know, indeed, that under
 their breath the tribunes whisper of my death with eager haste; but I
 will not from this circumstance open any communication with them, nor
 will I count my life more precious than myself. Nay, rather, I am
 prepared to finish the course which my Lord Jesus Christ hath deigned
 to promise to me, and faithfully render up to Him the ministry which
 from Him I have received. Pray for me, my brothers; you will not see me
 longer living in this life with you. Wherefore I testify before God and
 your brotherhood, that before all of you have I preserved a clean
 conscience. For I have not shunned to declare unto you the injunctions
 of the Lord, and I have refused not to make known to you the things
 which will hereafter be necessary.

 "Wherefore take heed unto yourselves, and the whole flock over which
 the Holy Ghost has appointed you as overseers in succession--thee
 Achillas in the first place, and next to thee Alexander. Behold with
 living voice I protest to you, that after my death men will arise in
 the Church speaking perverse things, [2255] and will again divide it,
 like Meletius, drawing away the people after their readiness. So I have
 told you before. But I pray you, mine own bowels, be watchful; for ye
 must undergo many tribulations. For we are no better than our fathers.
 Are ye ignorant what things my father endured from the Gentiles, he who
 brought me up, the most holy bishop Theonas, whose pontifical [2256]
 chair I have under taken to fill? Would that I had his manners also!
 Why too should I speak of the great Dionysius his predecessor, who
 wandering from place to place sustained many calamities from the
 frantic Sabellius? Nor will I omit to mention you, ye most holy fathers
 and high priests of the divine law, Heraclius and Demetrius, for whom
 Origen, that framer of a perverse dogma, laid many temptations, who
 cast upon the Church a detestable schism, which to this day is throwing
 it into confusion. But the grace of God which then protected them,
 will, I believe, protect you also. But why do I delay you longer, my
 very dear brethren, with the outpouring of my prolix discourse. It
 remains, that with the last words of the Apostle [2257] who thus prayed
 I address you: And now I commend you to God and the word of His grace,
 which is powerful to direct both you and His flock.'" When he had
 finished, falling on his knees, he prayed with them. And his speech
 ended, Achillas and Alexander kissing his hands and feet and bursting
 into tears sobbed bitterly, specially grieving at those words of his
 which they heard when he said that they should henceforth see him in
 this life no more. Then this most gentle teacher going to the rest of
 the clergy, who, as I have said, had come in to him to speak in behalf
 of Arius, spake to them his last consoling words, and such as were
 necessary; then pouring forth his prayers to God, and bidding them
 adieu, he dismissed them all in peace. [2258]

 These things having thus ended, it was everywhere published far and
 wide that Arius had not been cut off from the Catholic unity without a
 divine interposition. But that contriver of deceit, and disseminator of
 all wickedness, ceased not to keep hidden his viper's poison in the
 labyrinth of his bosom, hoping that he should be reconciled by Achillas
 and Alexander. This is that Arius the heresiarch, the divider of the
 consubstantial and indivisible Trinity. This is he who with rash and
 wicked mouth, was not afraid to blaspheme the Lord and Saviour, beyond
 all other heretics; the Lord, I say, and Saviour, who out of pity for
 our human wanderings, and being sorely grieved that the world should
 perish in deadly destruction and condemnation, deigned for us all to
 suffer in the flesh. For it is not to be believed that the Godhead
 which is impassible was subject to the passion. But because the
 theologians and fathers have taken care in better style to remove from
 Catholic ears the blasphemies of this nature, and another task is ours,
 let us return to our subject.

 This most sagacious pontiff [2259] then, perceiving the cruel device of
 the tribunes, who, in order to bring about his death, were willing to
 put to the sword the whole Christian multitude that was present, was
 unwilling that they should together with him taste the bitterness of
 death, but as a faithful servant imitating his Lord and Saviour, whose
 acts were even as his words, "The good Shepherd giveth His life for the
 sheep," [2260] prompted by his piety, called to him an elder of those
 who there waited on his words, and said to him: "Go to the tribunes who
 seek to kill me, and say to them, Cease ye from all your anxiety, lo! I
 am ready and willing of mine own accord to give myself to them." Bid
 them come this night to the rereward of the house of this prison, and
 in the spot in which they shall hear a signal given on the wall from
 within, there let them make an excavation, and take me and do with me
 as they have been commanded. The elder, obeying the commands of this
 most holy man,--for so great a father could not be
 contradicted,--departed to the tribunes, and made the intimation to
 them as he had been commanded. They, when they had received it, were
 exceedingly rejoiced, and taking with them some stonemasons, came about
 the dawn of the day without their soldiers to the place which had been
 pointed out to them. The man of God had passed the whole night as a
 vigil, without sleep, in prayer and watchfulness. But when he heard
 their approach, whilst all who were with him were rapt in slumber, with
 a slow and gentle step he descended to the interior part of the prison,
 and according to the agreement made, made a sound on the wall; and
 those outside hearing this, forcing an aperture, received this athlete
 of Christ armed on all sides with no brazen breastplate, but with the
 virtue of the cross of the Lord, and fully prepared to carry out the
 Lord's words who said, "Fear not them which kill the body, but are not
 able to kill the soul: but rather fear Him which is able to destroy
 both soul and body in hell." [2261] Wonderful was the occurrence! Such
 a heavy whirlwind of wind and rain prevailed during that night, that no
 one of those who kept the door of the prison could hear the sound of
 the excavation. This martyr most constant too, kept urging on his
 murderers, saying, Do what ye are about to do, before those are aware
 who are guarding me.

 But they took him up and brought him to the place called Bucolia, where
 the holy St. Mark underwent martyrdom for Christ. Astonishing is the
 virtue of the saints! As they carried him along, and beheld his great
 constancy and strength of mind when in peril of death, on a sudden a
 fear and trembling came upon them to such a degree, that none of them
 could look stedfastly into his face. Moreover, the blessed martyr
 entreated them to allow him to go to the tomb of St. Mark, for he
 desired to commend himself to his patronage. [2262] But they from
 confusion, looking down on the ground, said, "Do as you wish, but make
 haste." Therefore approaching the burial-place of the evangelist, he
 embraced it, and speaking to him as if he were yet alive in the flesh,
 and able to hear him, he prayed after this manner: "O father most
 honourable, thou evangelist of the only-begotten Saviour, thou witness
 of His passion, thee did Christ choose, who is the Deliverer of us all,
 to be the first pontiff and pillar of this See; to thee did He commit
 the task of proclaiming the faith throughout the whole of Egypt and its
 boundaries. Thou, I say, hast watchfully fulfilled that ministry of our
 human salvation which was intrusted to thee; as the reward of this
 labour thou hast doubtless obtained the martyr's palm. Hence, not
 without justice, art thou counted worthy to be saluted evangelist and
 bishop. Thy successor was Anianus, and the rest in descending series
 down to the most blessed Theonas, who disciplined my infancy, and
 deigned to educate my heart. To whom I, a sinner and unworthy, have
 been beyond my deservings appointed as successor by an hereditary
 descent. And, what is best of all, lo! the largeness of the divine
 bounty has granted me to become a martyr of His precious cross and
 joyful resurrection, giving to my devotion the sweet and pleasant odour
 of His passion, that I should be made meet to pour out unto Him the
 offering of my blood. And because the time of making this offering is
 now instant, pray for me that, the divine power assisting me, I may be
 meet to reach the goal of this agony with a stout heart and ready
 faith. I commend also to thy glorious patronage the flock of Christ's
 worshippers which was committed to my pastoral care; to thee, I say, I
 with prayers commend it, who are approved as the author and guardian of
 all preceding and subsequent occupiers of this pontifical chair, and
 who, holding its first honours, art the successor not of man, but of
 the God-man, Christ Jesus." Saying these words, [2263] he went back to
 a little distance from the sacred tomb, and, raising his hands to
 heaven, prayed with a loud voice, saying: "O thou Only-begotten, Jesus
 Christ, Word of the Eternal Father, hear me invoking Thy clemency.
 Speak peace, I beseech Thee, to the tempest that shakes Thy Church, and
 with the effusion of my blood, who am Thy servant, make an end to the
 persecution of Thy people." Then a certain virgin dedicated to God, who
 had her cell adjoining to the tomb of the evangelist, as she was
 spending the night in prayer, heard a voice from heaven, saying: "Peter
 was the first of the apostles, Peter is the last of the martyred
 bishops of Alexandria."

 Having ended his prayer, he kissed the tomb of the blessed evangelist,
 and of the other pontiffs who were buried there, and went forth to the
 tribunes. But they seeing his face as it had been the face of an angel,
 being terror-stricken, feared to speak to him of his instant agony.
 Nevertheless, because God does not desert those who trust in Him, He
 willed not to leave His martyr without consolation in the moment of so
 great a trial. For lo! an old man and an aged virgin, coming from the
 smaller towns, were hastening to the city, one of whom was carrying
 four skins for sale, and the other two sheets of linen. The blessed
 prelate, when he perceived them, recognised a divine dispensation with
 reference to himself. He inquired of them on the instant, "Are ye
 Christians?" And they replied, "Yes." Then said he, "Whither are ye
 going?" And they replied, "To the market in the city to sell these
 things that we are carrying." Then the most merciful father answered,
 "My faithful children, God has marked you out, persevere with me." And
 they immediately recognising him, said, "Sire, let it be as thou hast
 commanded." Then turning to the tribunes, he said, "Come, do what ye
 are about to do, and fulfil the king's command; for the day is now on
 the point of breaking." [2264] But they, suffering violence as it were
 on account of the wicked decree of the prince, brought him to a spot
 opposite to the sanctuary of the evangelist, into a valley near the
 tombs. Then said the holy man, "Spread out, thou aged man, the skins
 which thou carriest, and thou too, O aged woman, the linen sheets."
 [2265] And when they had been spread out, this most constant martyr,
 mounting upon them, extended both his hands to heaven, and bending his
 knees on the ground, and fixing his mind upon heaven, returned his
 thanks to the Almighty Judge [2266] of the contest, and fortifying
 himself with the sign of the cross, said, Amen. Then loosening his
 omophorion [2267] from his neck, he stretched it forth, saying, "What
 is commanded you, do speedily."

 Meanwhile the hands of the tribunes were paralyzed, and looking upon
 one another in turn, each urged his fellow to the deed, but they were
 all held fast with astonishment and fear. At length they agreed that
 out of their common stock a reward for the execution should be
 appointed, and that the man who should venture to perpetrate the murder
 should enjoy the reward. There was no delay, each of them brought forth
 five solidi. [2268] But, as says the heathen poet,--

 "Quid non mortalia pectora cogis,

 Auri sacra fames?" [2269]

 one of them, after the manner of the traitor Judas, emboldened by the
 desire of money, drew his sword and beheaded the pontiff, on the 25th
 day of November, after he had held the pontificate twelve years--three
 of which were before the persecution, but the nine remaining were
 passed by him under persecutions of diverse kinds. The blood-money
 being instantly claimed by the executioner, these wicked purchasers, or
 rather destroyers, of man's life quickly returned, for they feared the
 multitude of the people, since, as I have said, they were without their
 military escort. But the body of the blessed martyr, as the fathers
 affirm who went first to the place of execution, remained erect, as if
 instant in prayer, until many people, coming together, discovered it
 standing [2270] in the same posture; so that what was his constant
 practice whilst living, to this his inanimate body testified. They
 found also the aged man and woman watching with grief and lamentation
 the most precious relic of the Church. So, honouring him with a
 triumphal funeral, they covered his body with the linen sheets; but the
 sacred blood which had been poured forth, they collected reverently in
 a wallet.

 In the meanwhile an innumerable multitude of either sex, flocking
 together from the populous city, with groans and ejaculations asked
 each other in turn, being ignorant, in what manner this had happened.
 In truth, from the least to the greatest, a very great grief was
 prevalent amongst all. For when the chief men of the city beheld the
 laudable importunity of the multitude, who were busied in dividing his
 sacred spoils to keep them as relics, they wrapped him up the tighter
 in the skins and linen sheets. For the most holy minister of God was
 always clothed in sacerdotal vestments of a white colour [2271] --that
 is, with the tunic, the kolobion, and the omophorion. Then there arose
 among them no small contention; for some were for carrying the most
 sacred limbs to the church which he had himself built, and where he now
 rests, but others were endeavouring to carry him to the sanctuary of
 the evangelist, where he attained the goal of martyrdom; and since
 neither party would yield to the other, they began to turn their
 religious observance into a wrangling and a fight. [2272] In the
 meanwhile a spirited body of senators of those who are engaged in the
 public transport service, seeing what had happened, for they were near
 the sea, prepared a boat, and suddenly seizing upon the sacred relics,
 they placed them in it, and scaling the Pharos from behind, by a
 quarter which has the name of Leucado, they came to the church of the
 most blessed mother of God, and Ever-Virgin Mary, which, as we began to
 say, he had constructed in the western quarter, in a suburb, for a
 cemetery of the martyrs. Thereupon the throng of the people, as if the
 heavenly treasure had been snatched from them, some by straight roads,
 and others by a more devious route, followed with hasty steps. And when
 they at length arrived there, there was no longer any altercation where
 he was to be placed, but by a common and unimpeachable counsel they
 agreed first to place him in his episcopal chair, and then to bury him.

 And this, most prudent reader, I would not have you regard as a wild
 fancy and superstition, since, if you learn the cause of this novelty,
 you will admire and approve of the zeal and deed of the populace. For
 this blessed priest, when he celebrated the sacrament of the divine
 mysteries, did not, as is the ecclesiastical custom, sit upon his
 pontifical throne, but upon its footstool underneath, which, when the
 people beheld, they disliked, and complainingly exclaimed, "Thou
 oughtest, O father, to sit upon thy chair;" and when they repeated this
 frequently, the minister of the Lord rising, calmed their complaints
 with tranquil voice, and again took his seat upon the same stool. So
 all this seemed to be done by him from motives of humility. But upon a
 certain great festival it happened that he was offering the sacrifice
 of the mass, [2273] and wished to do this same thing. Thereupon, not
 only the people, but the clergy also, exclaimed with one voice, "Take
 thy seat upon thy chair, bishop." But he, as if conscious of a mystery,
 feigned not to hear this; and giving the signal for silence,--for no
 one dared pertinaciously to withstand him,--he made them all quiet, and
 yet, nevertheless, sat down on the footstool of the chair; and the
 solemnities of the mass [2274] having been celebrated as usual, each
 one of the faithful returned to his own home.

 But the man of God sending for the clergy, with tranquil and serene
 mind, charged them with rashness, saying, "How is it that ye blush not
 for having joined the cry of the laity, and reproaching me? Howbeit,
 since your reproach flows not from the muddy torrent of arrogance, but
 from the pure fountain of love, I will unfold to you the secret of this
 mystery. Very often when I wish to draw near to that seat, I see a
 virtue as it were sitting upon it, exceeding radiant with the
 brightness of its light. Then, being in suspense between joy and fear,
 I acknowledge that I am altogether unworthy to sit upon such a seat,
 and if I did not hesitate to cause an occasion of offence to the
 people, without doubt I should not even venture to sit upon the stool
 itself. Thus it is, my beloved sons, that I seem to you, in this, to,
 transgress the pontifical rule. [2275] Nevertheless, many times when I
 see it vacant, as ye yourselves are witnesses, I refuse not to sit upon
 the chair after the accustomed manner. Wherefore do ye, now that ye are
 acquainted with my secret, and being well assured that, if I shall be
 indulged, I will sit upon the chair, for I hold not in slight esteem
 the dignity of my order, cease any further from joining in the
 exclamations of the populace." This explanation the most holy father
 whilst he was yet alive, was compelled to give to the clergy. The
 faithful of Christ, therefore, remembering all this with pious
 devotion, brought his sacred body, and caused it to sit upon the
 episcopal throne. As much joy and exultation arose then to heaven from
 the people, as if they were attending him alive and in the body. Then
 embalming him with sweet spices, they wrapped him in silken coverings;
 what each one of them could be the first to bring, this he accounted to
 himself as greatest gain. Then carrying palms, the tokens of victory,
 with flaming tapers, with sounding hymns, and with fragrant incense,
 celebrating the triumph of his heavenly victory, they laid down the
 sacred relics, and buried them in the cemetery which had been long ago
 constructed by him, where too from henceforth, and even to this day,
 miraculous virtues cease not to show themselves. Pious vows, forsooth,
 are received with a propitious hearing; the health of the impotent is
 restored; the expulsion of unclean spirits testifies to the martyr's
 merits. These gifts, O Lord Jesus, are Thine, whose wont it is thus
 magnificently to honour Thy martyrs after death: Thou who with the
 Father and the Holy Consubstantial Spirit livest and reignest for
 evermore. Amen.

 After this, how that wolf and framer of treachery, that is Arius,
 covered with a sheep's skin, entered into the Lord's fold to worry and
 torment it, or in what manner he was enabled to attain to the dignity
 of the priesthood, let us employ ourselves in relating in brief. [2276]
 And this not to annoy those who ventured to recall to the
 threshing-floor of the Lord those tares of apostacy and contagion that
 had been winnowed out of the Church by a heavenly fan; for these are
 without doubt reckoned eminent for sanctity, but thinking it a light
 thing to believe so holy a man, they transgressed the injunctions of
 the divine command. What then? Do we reprehend them? By no means. For
 as long as this corruptible body weighs us down, and this earthly
 habitation depresses the sense of our infirmity, many are easily
 deceived in their imaginations, and think that which is unjust to be
 just, that to be holy which is impure. The Gibeonites who, by the
 divine threatenings, were to be utterly destroyed, having one thing in
 their wishes and another in their voice and mien, were able quickly to
 deceive Joshua, [2277] that just distributor of the land of promise.
 David [2278] also, full of prophetic inspiration, when he had heard the
 words of the deceitful youth, although it was by the inscrutable and
 just judgment of God, yet acted very differently from what the true
 nature of the case required. What also can be more sublime than the
 apostles, who have not removed themselves from our infirmity? For one
 of them writes, "In many things we offend all;" [2279] and another, "If
 we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in
 us." [2280] But when we repent of these, so much the more readily do we
 obtain pardon, when we have sinned not willingly, but through ignorance
 or frailty. And certainly offences of this sort come not of
 prevarication, but of the indulgence of compassion. But I leave to
 others to write an apology for this; let us pursue what is in hand.
 After that magnificent defender of the faith, Peter, worthy of his
 name, had by the triumph of martyrdom, etc.

 The Rest is Wanting.

 [2241] As interpreted by Anastasius Bibliothecarius. Apud Maium,
 Spicilegii, tom. iii. p. 671. That Anastasius Bibliothecarius
 translated from the Greek the Passion of St. Peter, Bishop of
 Alexandria, is affirmed by Anastasius himself in his prologue, Ad
 Passionem Martyrum, MCCCCLXXX., published by Mabillon in the Museum
 Italicum, tom. i. part ii, p. 80: "Post translatam a me ad petitionem
 sanctitatis tunæ (he is addressing Peter, Bishop of Gavinum), passionem
 præcipui doctoris et martyris, Petri Alexandrinæ urbis episcopi." And
 then an anonymous biographer of John viii., in Muratori R. I. S., tom.
 iii. p. i. p. 269, confirms the same. Anastasius, the librarian of the
 Roman church, translated from the Greek into Latin the Passion of St.
 Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria. But it is a matter of conjecture which
 of the different Passions of St. Peter Anastasius translated. Of the
 Acts of St. Peter, there are three different records:--(1) Acta
 Sincera, which, according to Baronius, are the most genuine. (2) A
 shorter Latin version, by Surius. (3) A Greek version, by Combefis.

 [2242] [Significant to find this term applied from Western thought to
 this great bishopric by such a translator as Anastasius.]

 [2243] [See p. 257, supra, and p. 263, infra, note 2. Not his final
 rejection after the Nicene Council.]

 [2244] [He is here speaking of its civil importance only.]

 [2245] Hor., Od., ii. 10, 11.

 [2246] [Anastasius, more Romano, uses the Middle-Age terminology as if
 it had existed in the Ante-Nicene period. So all the successors of the
 apostles at Rome, including St. Peter himself, are transformed into
 "Popes." We owe this abuse to the "False Decretals," of which we treat
 hereafter. But why is exploded fiction and demonstrated untruth
 perpetuated by enlightened historians? See vol. v. p. 155.]

 [2247] Matt. v. 29.

 [2248] [Post-Nicene terminology, condemned even by the Gallicans, as,
 e.g., Dupin. Alexandria, founded by St. Mark, was virtually an
 Apostolic See, though commonly called the Evangelic See.]

 [2249] Thus watched the faithful at Milan around Ambrose, their bishop,
 against whom the wrath of the Arian Empress Justina was directed,
 according to the testimony of Augustine, who was an eye-witness. Cf.
 Confess., lib. ix. cap. 7.

 [2250] [i.e., deacon; Isa. lxvi. 21. So Clement of Rome, cap. xl. p.
 14, vol. i., this series.]

 [2251] The Acta Combefisiana add, "quemadmodem ille Dei Filium a
 paterna gloria et substantia sequestravit," even as he has separated
 the Son of God from the glory and substance of His Father. But Arius
 had not as yet laid bare his heresy, but had been excluded from the
 Church for joining in the Meletian schism, and a suspicious course of
 action.

 [2252] ["The dying are wont to vaticinate;" but the prophetic
 charismata (1 Cor. xiv. 31) were not yet extinct in the Church, in all
 probability, hence this conjecture was natural.]

 [2253] kolobion--this is the tunicle, tunica, tunicella, dalmatica. It
 originally had no sleeves; it is said that wide sleeves were added in
 the West about the fourth century; and the garment was then called
 dalmatic, and was the deacon's vestment when assisting at the holy
 communion; while that worn by sub-deacons, called by the Anglo-Saxons
 "roc," and "tunicle" generally after the 13th century, was of the same
 form, but smaller and less ornamented (Palmer, Orig. Liturgicæ, vol.
 ii. p. 314). The word, in its classical use, meant an under-garment
 with its sleeves curtailed (kolobos)--i.e., reaching only half down to
 the elbow, or entirely without sleeves. [But the reference here is
 clearly to St. John xix. 23; and the introduction of the mediæval
 dalmatic, to translate kolobion, is out of place.]

 [2254] Of Scripture.

 [2255] Cf. 1 Tim. iv. 1.

 [2256] [Another anachronism, but noteworthy as applied to the See of
 Alexandria. See p. 261, note 2.]

 [2257] Cf. St. Paul's farewell address to the elders at Miletus, Acts
 xx. 28. [Acts xx. 32. The whole of this affecting address is borrowed
 from the touching eloquence of St. Paul.]

 [2258] [Acts xx. 38. The spirit of Ignatius and of Polycarp is here
 clearly to be recognized in the fourth century.]

 [2259] [Another anachronism; but, as applied to the Alexandrian
 primate, it is a concession to truth. The word was already used in the
 West, but not exclusively with respect to the Apostolic Sees. See vol.
 v. p. 270, note 1.]

 [2260] John x. 11.

 [2261] Matt. x. 28.

 [2262] [Another anachronism. No such invocation of saints at this
 period. See note 6, p. 261, supra.]

 [2263] [Wholly apocryphal in all probability, or based on a mere
 apostrophe. Such "patronage" was yet unknown.]

 [2264] [Gen. xxxii. 26.]

 [2265] The Latin reads here: "Spread out, ye aged men, the skins which
 ye are carrying."

 [2266] agonothetes--the president of the Grecian games, the judge.

 [2267] [Probably he wore ordinarily what afterwards became an
 ecclesiastical ornament. So the casula and other vestments were
 retained by the clergy after they ceased to be commonly worn. Marriott,
 Vestiar. Christian., p. 198.] The omophorion, which is worn by every
 Eastern bishop, resembles the Latin pallium, except that it is broader,
 and tied round the neck in a knot. Cf. following passage from Neale's
 Introduction to the Translation of the Eastern Liturgies: "But while
 the Gospel is being read, the bishop lays aside his omophorion, thereby
 making profession of his service to the Lord. For since it is the Lord
 who is represented as speaking by the Gospel, and is, as it were,
 Himself present, the bishop at that time ventures not to be arrayed
 with the symbol of His incarnation--I mean, the omophorion; but taking
 it off from his shoulders, he gives it to the deacon, who holds it
 folded in his right hand, himself standing near the bishop, and
 preceding the holy gifts. When he has finished the liturgy, and comes
 to the communion, he again assumes the omophorion, manifesting that
 before this he was one of the ministers, and was afraid to put upon
 himself that holy garment. But when the work is accomplished, and he
 goes on to elevate the bread, and to divide it into parts, and to
 receive it himself, and distribute it to others, it is necessary that
 he should put on all the sacred symbols of his dignity; and since the
 omophorion is the principal vest of a pontiff, he necessarily assumes
 that, and in that is partaker of the most divine things." [All this
 unknown to antiquity.]

 [2268] A solidus or aureus worth 25 denarii, being 8½d.; it was worth
 17s. 8½d.; five solidi, £4, 8s. 6½d. [More than $20.]

 [2269] Virgil, Æn., book iii. 56:-- "O sacred hunger of pernicious
 gold, What bands of faith can impious lucre hold?" --Dryden.

 [2270] [Here "standing" = continuing. He knelt, no doubt, to be
 beheaded; but the corpse remained in this posture. A noble horse, shot
 on the field of Antietam, remained on the field in an attitude of
 raising himself from the ground, as I saw it myself.]

 [2271] [This may be credited. See Cyprian's Passion. But the technical
 names which follow seem an anachronism if technically understood. I say
 this with no spirit of objection to these vestments, however.]

 [2272] [See Kingsley's Hypatia. In Cyril's time this might have
 happened: one trusts that for Peter's day this, too, is an
 anachronism.]

 [2273] [Another anachronism, and Occidental also.]

 [2274] [See vol. v. p. 256, note 6, and p. 259, Elucidation II. Missa,
 a Latin word, has clearly no place here save by the Roman rule of
 reading modern rites into antiquity. Thus, in Raphael's picture
 illustrating the story of 2 Macc. iii. 15, the Jewish high-priest is
 made a Roman pontiff. (Compare note 6, p. 261, supra.]

 [2275] [See note 2, p. 265, supra.]

 [2276] Achillas, the successor of Peter, admitted Arius to the
 priesthood.

 [2277] Cf. Joshua ix.

 [2278] Perhaps Absalom, or it may be Ziba, is referred to. (2 Sam. xiv.
 33; xvi. 3.)

 [2279] James iii. 2.

 [2280] 1 John i. 8.

 The Canonical Epistle, [2281]

 With the Commentaries of Theodore Balsamon and John Zonaras.

 ------------------------

 The Canons of the Blessed Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria, as They are
 Given in His Sermon on Penitence. [2282]

 Canon I.

 But since the fourth passover of the persecution has arrived, it is
 sufficient, in the case of those who have been apprehended and thrown
 into prison, and who have sustained torments not to be borne, [2283]
 and stripes intolerable, and many other dreadful afflictions, and
 afterwards have been betrayed by the frailty of the flesh, even though
 they were not at the first received on account of their grievous fall
 that followed, yet because they contended sorely and resisted long; for
 they did not come to this of their own will, but were betrayed by the
 frailty of the flesh; for they show in their bodies the marks of Jesus,
 [2284] and some are now, for the third year, bewailing their fault: it
 is sufficient, I say, that from the time of their submissive approach,
 other forty days should be enjoined upon them, to keep them in
 remembrance of these things; those forty days during which, though our
 Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ had fasted, He was yet, after He had been
 baptized, tempted of the devil. And when they shall have, during these
 days, exercised themselves much, and constantly fasted, then let them
 watch in prayer, meditating upon what was spoken by the Lord to him who
 tempted Him to fall down and worship him: "Get thee behind me, Satan;
 for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only
 shalt thou serve." [2285]

 Balsamon. The present canons treat of those who have in the persecution
 denied the faith, and are doing penance. And the first canon ordains,
 that upon those who after many torments have sacrificed to the gods,
 not being able by reason of frailty to persevere, and who have passed
 three years in penitence, other forty days should be enjoined, and that
 then they should be admitted into the Church. Observe these present
 canons which lay down various and useful rules in favour of those who
 have denied their God, and seek for repentance, and concerning those
 who have of their own accord sought martyrdom, and have lapsed, and
 then have again confessed the faith, and other things of the like
 nature. Consult also, for you will profitably do so, many canons of the
 Council of Ancyra.

 Zonaras. Amongst those who in these turbulent times denied the faith,
 the holy Peter makes a distinction, and says, that upon those who had
 been brought before the tyrant, and thrown into prison, and who had
 endured very grievous torments, and intolerable scourgings, and such as
 could be cured by no care or medicine (for akos signifies medical care,
 and anekeston is the same as immedicabile), and other dreadful
 afflictions, and afterwards yielding, sacrificed to the gods, being
 betrayed as it were by the weakness of the flesh, which could not hold
 out under the pain unto the end, that for them the time past should
 suffice for punishment; since, indeed, says he, the fourth passover has
 now past since they made this very grievous fall. And although perhaps
 at first, when they approached in penitence, they were not received,
 yet because they did not of their own free-will proceed to sacrifice to
 the gods, and resisted long, and bear about with them the marks of
 Jesus, that is to say, the scars of the wounds which, in behalf of
 Christ, they have endured, and the third year has now elapsed since
 they first bewailed their fall, he decrees that, as an additional
 punishment, other forty days from the time that they came asking to be
 admitted to communion should be enjoined on them in the place of any
 further severity; during which they should exercise a still greater
 degree of penance, and should fast more earnestly, that is, with more
 attentive care, keeping guard over themselves, being watchful in
 prayer, meditating upon, that is, turning over perpetually in their
 minds, and saying in words, the text quoted by the Lord against the
 tempter, "Get thee behind me, Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt
 worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve."

 [2281] [The Canonical Epistles of Basil have been heretofore mentioned.
 Vol. v. p. 572, elucidation.]

 [2282] These Canons of Peter of Alexandria are interesting as bearing
 upon the controversy between Cyprian and the clergy of Carthage, with
 regard to the treatment of the lapsed. They also bear upon the
 subject-matter of the Novatian schism.

 [2283] Another reading is anekestous, "which cannot be cured."

 [2284] The marks of Jesus, stigmata. Cf. Gal. vi. 17.

 [2285] Matt. iv. 10.

 Canon II.

 But in the case of those who, after that they were thrown into prison,
 and in the dungeon, as in a place besieged, endured afflictions and
 nauseous odours, but afterwards, without the conflict of torments, were
 led captive, being broken in spirit by poverty of strength, and a
 certain blindness of the understanding, a year in addition to the
 foregoing time will suffice; for they gave themselves up to be
 afflicted for the name of Christ, even though in their dungeon they
 enjoyed much consolation from their brethren; which, indeed, they shall
 return many fold, desiring to be set free from that most bitter
 captivity of the devil, especially remembering Him who said: "The
 spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He hath anointed me to preach
 the Gospel to the poor; He hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to
 preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the
 blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised; to preach the
 acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of recompense unto our God."
 [2286]

 Balsamon. This canon enacts that those who have only been evil
 entreated in prison, and who without torment have lapsed, should be
 punished after the three years with an additional year. For though they
 obtained consolation, certain of the faithful ministering to them the
 necessaries of life, yet they ought to obtain pardon, as being those
 who have suffered severely for the faith.

 Zonaras. In the second order, he places those who have only been thrown
 into prison, and evil entreated in the dungeon, and yet, though
 harassed by no torments, have offended; upon whom, besides the time
 past, the three years, namely, of which we have spoken, he proposes to
 inflict the penalty of an additional year, since they also, says he,
 have for Christ's name endured hardness, even though it may be that
 they obtained some consolation from the brethren whilst in prison. For
 it is probable that the faithful, who were not in custody, ministered
 to those in bonds the necessaries of life, and brought to them some
 alleviation of their lot. Which things, indeed, they shall return many
 fold; for those consolations which they enjoyed in prison they shall
 vex themselves with penance, and afflict themselves in diverse ways, if
 they wish to be set free from the captivity of the devil, having become
 his captives and slaves by their denial of Christ. He subjoins the word
 of the prophet, taken from Isaiah, which he says that they ought to
 keep in remembrance.

 [2286] Isa. lxi. 1, 2; Luke iv. 18, 19.

 Canon III.

 But as for those who have suffered none of these things, and have shown
 no fruit of faith, but of their own accord have gone over to
 wickedness, being betrayed by fear and cowardice, and now come to
 repentance, it is necessary and convenient to propose the parable of
 the unfruitful fig-tree, as the Lord says: "A certain man had a
 fig-tree planted in his vineyard; and he came and sought fruit thereon,
 and found none. Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold,
 these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree, and find none:
 cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground? And he answering, said unto
 him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and
 dung it. And if it bear fruit, well; and if not, then after that thou
 shalt cut it down." Keeping this before their eyes, and showing forth
 fruit worthy of repentance, after so long an interval of time, they
 will be profited.

 Balsamon. Those who from fear only and timidity deserted the faith, and
 then had an eye towards repentance, the canon punishes with three
 years' exclusion, according to the parable of the fig-tree in the
 Gospels. For the Lord said, Three years I come to it seeking fruit, and
 find none; but the vine-dresser replies, Lord, let it alone this year
 also.

 Zonaras. But those, he says, who having suffered no hardness, have
 deserted from fear only and timidity, in that they of their own accord
 have approached to wickedness, and then looked towards repentance,
 their case the parable of the fig-tree in the Gospels will exactly
 suit. Let them keep this before their eyes, and show forth for an equal
 period labours worthy of penitence, and they shall be profited; that
 is, after the fourth year. For the Lord said, Three years I come to it
 seeking fruit, and find none; and the vine-dresser answered, Lord, let
 it alone this year also.

 Canon IV.

 To those who are altogether reprobate, and unrepentant, who possess the
 Ethiopian's unchanging skin, [2287] and the leopard's spots, it shall
 be said, as it was spoken to another fig-tree, "Let no fruit grow on
 thee henceforward for ever; and it presently withered away." [2288] For
 in them is fulfilled what was spoken by the Preacher: "That which is
 crooked cannot be made straight; and that which is wanting cannot be
 numbered." [2289] For unless that which is crooked shall first be made
 straight, it is impossible for it to be adorned; and unless that which
 is wanting shall first be made up, it cannot be numbered. Hence also,
 in the end, will happen unto them what is spoken by Esaias the prophet:
 "They shall look upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed
 against Me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be
 quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh." [2290] Since
 as by the same also has been predicted, "But the wicked are like the
 troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
 There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." [2291]

 Balsamon. What has been previously said of the lapsed, has been said of
 the repentant. But against those who are unrepentant, he brings forward
 the cursing of another fig-tree, to which the Lord said, because of its
 unprofitableness, "No fruit grow on thee hence-forward for ever."

 Zonaras. What has been previously said of the lapsed, has been said of
 the repentant. Against those whom, from desperation or depraved
 opinion, are impenitent, and carry about with them perpetually the
 inherent and indelible blackness of sin, as of an Ethiopian's skin, or
 the leopard's spots, he brings forward the cursing of another fig-tree.
 To which the Lord said for its barrenness, "Let no fruit grow on thee
 henceforward for ever." And he says that in them must be fulfilled that
 word of the Preacher: "That which is crooked cannot be made straight;
 and that which is wanting cannot be numbered." Then having explained
 these things, he subjoins the words of Isaiah.

 [2287] Jer. iii. 23.

 [2288] Matt. xxi. 19.

 [2289] Eccles. i. 15.

 [2290] Isa. lxvi. 24.

 [2291] Isa. lvii. 20, 21.

 Canon V.

 But upon those who have used dissimulation like David, who feigned
 himself to be mad [2292] to avoid death, being not mad in reality; and
 those who have not nakedly written down their denial of the faith, but
 being in much tribulation, as boys endowed with sagacity and prudence
 amongst foolish children, have mocked the snares of their enemies,
 either passing by the altars, or giving a writing, or sending heathen
 to do sacrifice instead of themselves, even though some of them who
 have confessed have, as I have heard, pardoned individuals of them,
 since with the greatest caution they have avoided to touch the fire
 with their own hands, and to offer incense to the impure demons; yet
 inasmuch as they escaped the notice of their persecutors by doing this,
 let a penalty of six months' penance be imposed upon them. For thus
 will they be the rather profited, meditating upon the prophet's words,
 and saying, "Unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given; and the
 government shall be upon His shoulder: and His name shall be called the
 Messenger of My mighty counsel." [2293] Who, as ye know, when another
 infant in the sixth month [2294] of his conception had preached before
 His coming repentance for the remission of sins, was himself also
 conceived to preach repentance. Moreover, we hear both also preaching,
 in the first place, not only repentance, but the kingdom of heaven,
 which, as we have learned, is within us; [2295] for the word which we
 believe is near us, in our mouth, and in our heart; which they, being
 put in remembrance of, will learn to confess with their mouths that
 Jesus is the Christ; believing in their heart that God hath raised him
 from the dead, and being as those who hear, that "with the heart man
 believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made
 unto salvation." [2296]

 Balsamon. But if any have pretended to approach the altars, or to write
 their denial of the faith, and have not done this nakedly and openly,
 but by feigned arts have illuded those who offered them violence, as
 David did, who, when he was flying from Saul, and was amongst
 strangers, feigned himself to be mad, and thus escaped death. So they
 mocked the snares of their enemies, as children endowed with wisdom and
 prudence mock foolish children; for they deceived the impious heathen,
 in that they seemed to sacrifice, although they did not sacrifice, or
 perhaps they suborned heathens and infidels to take their place, and by
 these means they thought that they offered sacrifice; for them, he
 says, a period of six months will suffice for penance. For although
 they did not sacrifice, yet because they promised to sacrifice, or sent
 others to do so in their place, they are thought to stand in need of
 repentance, even though some of those who have given their testimony
 for the faith have pardoned individuals of them. He compares them to
 children, as not having manfully withstood the idolaters, but to
 prudent children, because by artifice they avoided doing sacrifice.

 Zonaras. But if any have pretended to approach the altars, or to write
 their denial of the faith, but have not nakedly written down their
 abnegation, that is, not manifestly, not openly; but by a sort of trick
 have cheated those who offered them violence; as David, who while he
 was flying from Saul, and had come amongst strange people, feigned
 himself to be mad, and in this way avoided death. They mocked indeed,
 he says, the insidious devices of their enemies; as prudent children,
 endowed with wisdom and sagacity, and those who skilfully take counsel,
 deceive foolish children. Now he compares those to prudent children by
 whom the impious heathen were deceived, and those who though they did
 not sacrifice, yet seemed to sacrifice, prudent indeed, as having thus
 far avoided sacrificing; but children, in that they did not show forth
 a mature and manly spirit, and did not nobly resist the worshippers of
 idols, but covenanted to sacrifice, even though they suborned some in
 their places, heathens, forsooth, and infidels, and when these
 sacrificed, they were considered to have sacrificed. For men of this
 sort, he says, a period of six months will suffice for penance. For
 although they did not sacrifice, yet because they covenanted to
 sacrifice, or suborned others to do so, and thus themselves appeared to
 have sacrificed, they were judged to stand in need of repentance; even
 though some confessors might have pardoned individuals of them; for
 some of those who witnessed to the faith and suffered for it, pardoned
 those who by an artifice, as has been said, escaped offering sacrifice,
 and admitted them to communion with the faithful, because they
 studiously avoided offering sacrifice to demons. And on account of the
 fixing of this term of six months, he calls to remembrance the
 annunciation made by Gabriel, in the sixth month of the conception of
 the Forerunner, in which the Lord was conceived. Then he subjoins the
 words of the apostle.

 [2292] Cf. 1 Sam. xxi. 13.

 [2293] Isa. ix. 6.

 [2294] Luke i. 76, 77.

 [2295] Luke xvii. 21.

 [2296] Rom. x. 8-10.

 Canon VI.

 In the case of those who have sent Christian slaves to offer sacrifice
 for them, the slaves indeed as being in their master's hands, and in a
 manner themselves also in the custody of their masters, and being
 threatened by them, and from their fear having come to this pass and
 having lapsed, shall during the year show forth the works of penitence,
 learning for the future, as the slaves of Christ, to do the will of
 Christ and to fear Him, listening to this especially, that "whatsoever
 good thing any man doeth, the same shall he receive of the Lord,
 whether he be bond or free." [2297]

 Balsamon. The slaves who under the commands and threatenings of their
 masters offered sacrifice, this father punishes with a year's
 exclusion; yet he pardons them as having acted under the orders of a
 master, and does not inflict a heavy punishment upon them. But yet
 since they are much more the servants of Christ, even as they ought to
 fear Him more, he imposes on them a moderate punishment; for, as says
 the great Paul, "whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall he
 receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free."

 Zonaras. Some have sent their own Christian servants, even against
 their will, to offer sacrifice in their stead. These servants,
 therefore, although not of their own free-will, but being compelled by
 their masters, they offered sacrifice, this father ordains shall pass a
 year in penance, and enjoins them to remember that, being of the number
 of the faithful, they are the servants of Christ, and that Him they
 ought rather to fear; for "whatsoever any man doeth," says the great
 apostle, "the same shall he receive, whether he be bond or free."

 [2297] Eph. vi. 8.

 Canon VII.

 But the freemen shall be tried by penance for three years, both for
 their dissimulation, and for having compelled their fellow-servants to
 offer sacrifice, inasmuch as they have not obeyed the apostle, who
 would have the masters do the same things unto the servant, forbearing
 threatening; [2298] knowing, says he, that our and their Master is in
 heaven; and that there is no respect of persons with Him. [2299] Now,
 if we all have one Master, with whom is no respect of persons, since
 Christ is all and in all, in barbarian, Scythian, bond or free, [2300]
 they ought to consider what they have done, wishing to preserve their
 own lives. They have drawn their fellow-servants to idolatry who would
 have been able to escape, had they given to them that which is just and
 equal, as again says the apostle.

 Balsamon. But upon the freemen, or the masters of the servant compelled
 to sacrifice, he enjoins a punishment of three years, both because they
 pretended to sacrifice, and seemed to assent to it; and also because
 they compelled their fellow-servants to offer sacrifice, and did not
 obey the apostle, who ordered them to forbear threatening their
 servants, inasmuch as they themselves, the masters, are the servants of
 God, and fellow-servants with their own domestics. And then they have
 made haste to preserve their own lives, and have driven their
 fellow-servants to idolatry who might have escaped.

 Zonaras. But upon the freemen, that is, the masters of the servants who
 were compelled to sacrifice, he enjoins a penalty of three years, both
 because they pretended to sacrifice, and altogether appeared to
 succumb; and also because they compelled their fellow-servants to offer
 sacrifice, and did not obey the apostle's injunction to forbear
 threatening their servants; since they also, the masters, are the
 servants of God, and the fellow-servants of their own domestics. And
 they indeed made haste to preserve their own lives, and drove their
 fellow-servants, who might have escaped, to idolatry.

 [2298] Eph. vi. 9.

 [2299] Rom. ii. 11.

 [2300] Col. iii. 11.

 Canon VIII.

 But to those who have been delivered up, and have fallen, who also of
 their own accord have approached the contest, confessing themselves to
 be Christians, and have been tormented and thrown into prison, it is
 right with joy and exultation of heart to add strength, and to
 communicate to them in all things, both in prayer, and in partaking of
 the body and blood of Christ, and in hortatory discourse; in order that
 contending the more constantly, they may be counted worthy of "the
 prize of their high calling." [2301] For "seven times," he says, "a
 just man falleth, and riseth up again," [2302] which, indeed, if all
 that have lapsed had done, they would have shown forth a most perfect
 penitence, and one which penetrates the whole heart.

 Balsamon. Some had had information laid against them before the tyrant,
 and had been delivered up, or themselves had of their own accord given
 themselves up, and then being overcome by their torments, had failed in
 their testimony. Afterwards repenting, and acknowledging what was right
 and good, they confessed themselves to be Christians, so that they were
 cast into prison, and afflicted with torments. These this holy man
 thinks it right to receive with joy of heart, and to confirm in the
 orthodox faith, and to communicate with, both in prayers and in
 partaking of the sacraments, and to exhort with cheering words, that
 they may be more constant in the contest, and counted worthy of the
 heavenly kingdom. And that it might not be thought that they ought not
 to be received, because they had lapsed, he brings forward the
 testimony of Scripture to the effect that "seven times," that is,
 often, "the just man falleth, and riseth up again." And, says he, if
 all who have failed in their confession had done this, namely, taken up
 their struggle again, and before the tyrant confessed themselves to be
 Christians, they would have shown forth a most perfect penitence. The
 subject, therefore, comprehended in this canon differs from that
 contained in the first canon, for there indeed those who by reason of
 their torment had lapsed, were not converted so as to confess the faith
 before the tyrants; but here those who by reason of their torment have
 lapsed, with a worthy penitence, confess the Lord before the tyrants,
 wherefore they are reckoned not to have fallen.

 Zonaras. But, says he, if any have had information laid against them
 before the tyrants, and have been delivered up, or have of themselves
 given themselves up, and being overcome by the violence of their
 torments have failed in their testimony, not being able to endure the
 distresses and afflictions with which in the dungeon they were
 afflicted; and afterwards taking up the contest anew, have confessed
 themselves to be Christians, so that they have been again cast into
 prison and afflicted with torments: such men this holy martyr judges it
 reasonable that they should be joyfully received; and that they should
 be strengthened, that is, have strength, spirit, and confidence added
 to them, in order that they may confess the faith, and that they should
 be communicated with in all things, both in prayer, and in partaking of
 the sacraments, and that they should be exhorted with loving words, to
 rouse themselves to give testimony to the faith, that they may be more
 constant in the contest, and counted worthy of the heavenly kingdom.
 And that it might not be thought by any that they ought not to be
 received from the fact that they had lapsed, and sacrificed to the
 idols, he brings forth this testimony from Holy Scripture: "Seven
 times," that is, often, "the just man falleth, and riseth up again."
 And, says he, if all who have failed in their confession had done this,
 that is, after their fall, taken up the contest afresh, and confessed
 themselves to be Christians before the tyrants, they would have given
 proof of a most perfect repentance.

 [2301] Philipp. iii. 14.

 [2302] Prov. xxiv. 16.

 Canon IX.

 With those also who, as it were from sleep, themselves leap forth upon
 a contest which is travailing long and likely to be protracted, and
 draw upon themselves the temptations as it were of a sea-fight, and the
 inundations of many waves, or rather are for the brethren kindling the
 coals of the sinners, with them also we must communicate, inasmuch as
 they come to this in the name of Christ, even though they take no heed
 unto His words, when He teaches us "to pray that we enter not into
 temptation;" [2303] and again in His prayer, He says to His Father,
 "and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil." [2304] And
 perhaps also they know not that the Master of the House and our Great
 Teacher often retired from those who would lay snares for Him, and that
 sometimes He walked not openly because of them; and even when the time
 of His passion drew on, He delivered not up Himself, but waited until
 they came to Him with "swords and staves." He said to them therefore,
 "Are ye come out, as against a thief with swords and staves, for to
 take Me?" [2305] And they "delivered Him," He says, "to Pilate." [2306]
 As it was with Him it happens to those who walk keeping Him before them
 as an example, recollecting His divine words, in which, confirming us,
 He speaks of persecution: "Take heed unto yourselves, for they will
 deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their
 synagogues." [2307] Now, He says, they will deliver you up, and not, ye
 shall deliver up yourselves; and "ye shall be brought before rulers and
 kings for My sake," [2308] but not, ye shall bring yourselves, for He
 would have us pass from place to place as long as there are those who
 persecute us for His name's sake; even as again we hear Him saying,
 "But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another."
 [2309] For He would not have us go over to the ministers and satellites
 of the devil, that we might not be the cause to them of a manifold
 death, inasmuch as thus we should be compelling them both to be
 harsher, and to carry out their deadly works, but He would have us to
 wait, and to take heed to ourselves, to watch and to pray, lest we
 enter into temptation. [2310] Thus first Stephen, pressing on His
 footsteps, suffered martyrdom, being apprehended in Jerusalem by the
 transgressors, and being brought before the council, he was stoned, and
 glorified for the name of Christ, praying with the words, "Lord, lay
 not this sin to their charge." [2311] Thus James, in the second place,
 being of Herod apprehended, was beheaded with the sword. Thus Peter,
 the first of the apostles, having been often apprehended, and thrown
 into prison, and treated with igominy, was last of all crucified at
 Rome. Likewise also, the renowned Paul having been oftentimes delivered
 up and brought in peril of death, having endured many evils, and making
 his boast in his numerous persecutions and afflictions, in the same
 city was also himself beheaded; who, in the things in which he gloried,
 in these also ended his life; and at Damascus he was let down by night
 in a basket by the wall, and escaped the hands [2312] of him who sought
 to take him. For what they set before themselves, first and foremost,
 was to do the work of an evangelist, and to teach the Word of God, in
 which, confirming the brethren, that they might continue in the faith,
 they said this also, "that we must out of much tribulation enter into
 the kingdom of God." [2313] For they sought not what was profitable for
 them, but that which was profitable for the many, that they might be
 saved, and that they might be enabled to say unto them many things
 conducing to this, that they might act suitably to the Word of God,
 "unless," as says the apostle, "the time should fail me in speaking."
 [2314]

 Balsamon. Those who have but just arisen from sleep, and especially if
 they were weighed down with a heavy and profound sleep, have no
 constant reason, but one perturbed and unsteady. To such as these this
 blessed martyr likens those who, not in due order, but rashly and
 inconsiderately, thrust themselves upon the contest, which is as it
 were in travail, and delayed and protracted, inasmuch as it has not yet
 burst forth openly, but meditates and delays, hesitating in truth to
 bring forth the combatants, who bring temptation upon themselves, or
 draw it towards them. Now these especially are, for the rest of the
 faithful, kindling the coals of the sinners, that is to say, the
 punishment of the tyrants. But although he reprehends those who act so,
 yet he enjoins the faithful nevertheless to communicate with them,
 because on account of Christ they have undergone the contest, even
 though they have ignored His teaching, for He teaches them to pray that
 they may not be tempted; and He did not deliver up Himself, but was
 delivered up; and we are not to go over to the tormentors, that we may
 not be the cause of bringing upon them the guilt of many murders, as
 those do who incite them to inflict punishment upon the godly. The
 canon brings forward different examples from Holy Scripture.

 Zonaras. Those who have recently arisen from sleep, especially if they
 were oppressed with a heavy sleep, have no steady reason, but one
 inconstant and perturbed. To men of this sort this holy martyr likens
 those who rush upon the contest, that is, those who, not in due course,
 but rashly and inconsiderately, intrude themselves upon it. It is, as
 it were, in travail, and delayed and protracted, inasmuch as it has not
 yet burst forth openly, but meditates and delays, and hesitates to
 bring forth the combatants, who bring temptation upon themselves, that
 is, draw it towards themselves, or rather, for the rest of the
 faithful, kindle the coals of the sinners, the torments, namely, which
 are by the tyrants inflicted. But although he finds fault with those
 who act in this way, he nevertheless decrees that the faithful must
 communicate with them, because in the name of Christ they come forward
 to this, trusting, that is, in Christ, or in His name demanding this
 trial for themselves, even though, perhaps, they are not obeying His
 precepts; for He taught them to pray that they might not be tempted;
 and they are ignoring the fact too that the Lord retired from those who
 were laying snares for Him, and was wont sometimes to walk not openly;
 neither did He give up Himself to His passion, but was given up by
 others; and He commanded His disciples, when their enemies persecuted
 them, to fly from city to city, and not of their own accord to give
 themselves up to the tormentors, lest they should be the cause of
 bringing the guilt of much blood upon their heads, irritating them as
 it were to inflict punishment upon godly men. And he brings forward the
 example of the apostles, of Stephen, of James, and the chiefs of the
 order, Peter and Paul.

 [2303] Matt. xxvi. 41.

 [2304] Matt. vi. 13.

 [2305] Matt. xxvi. 55.

 [2306] Matt. xxvii. 2.

 [2307] Matt. x. 17.

 [2308] Matt. x. 18.

 [2309] Matt. x. 23.

 [2310] Matt. xxvi. 41.

 [2311] Acts vii. 59.

 [2312] 2 Cor. xi. 32, 33.

 [2313] Acts xiv. 22.

 [2314] Heb. xi. 32.

 Canon X.

 Whence it is not right either that those of the clergy who have
 deserted of their own accord, and have lapsed, and taken up the contest
 afresh, should remain any longer in their sacred office, inasmuch as
 they have left destitute the flock of the Lord, and brought blame upon
 themselves, which thing did not one of the apostles. For when the
 blessed apostle Paul had undergone many persecutions, and had shown
 forth the prizes of many contests, though he knew that it was far
 better to "depart, and to be with Christ," yet he brings this forward,
 and says, "Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you."
 [2315] For considering not his own advantage but the advantage of many,
 that they might be saved, he judged it more necessary than his own rest
 to remain with the brethren, and to have a care for them; who also
 would have him that teacheth to be "in doctrine" [2316] an example to
 the faithful. Whence it follows that those who, contending in prison,
 have fallen from their ministry, and have again taken up the struggle,
 are plainly wanting in perception. For how else is it that they seek
 for that which they have left, when in this present time they can be
 useful to the brethren? For as long as they remained firm and stable,
 of that which they had done contrary to reason, of this indulgence was
 accorded them. But when they lapsed, as having carried themselves with
 ostentation, [2317] and brought reproach upon themselves, they can no
 longer discharge their sacred ministry; and, therefore, let them the
 rather take heed to pass their life in humility, ceasing from
 vainglory. For communion is sufficient for them, which is granted them
 with diligence and care for two causes; both that they should not seem
 to be afflicted with sorrow, and hence by violence seize on their
 departure from this world; and also lest any of the lapsed should have
 a pretext for being remiss by occasion of the punishment. And these
 indeed will reap more shame and ignominy than all others, even as he
 who laid the foundation and was not able to finish it; for "all that
 pass by," He says, "will begin to mock him, saying, This man laid the
 foundation, and was not able to finish it.'"

 Balsamon. The father having spoken of those who of their own accord
 went over to the contest of martyrdom, now also speaks of those of the
 clergy who are in such a case, and he says, that if any clergyman hath
 of his own accord sought the contest, and then, not being able to bear
 the tortures, has fallen, but returning to himself, has recanted his
 error, and before the tyrants confessed himself a Christian, such a one
 shall no longer discharge his sacred ministry, because he hath deserted
 the Lord's flock, and because, having of his own accord sought the
 contest, through not being able to endure the torment, he hath brought
 reproach upon himself. For to neglect the teaching of the people, and
 to prefer their own advantage, this did not the apostles. For the
 mighty Paul, after that he had endured many torments, though he
 perceived that it was far better to leave this life, yet chose rather
 to live and to be tormented for the salvation and instruction of the
 people. They are therefore altogether devoid of perception who seek the
 sacred ministry from which they have fallen of their own accord. For
 how is it that they seek for that which they have left, when they are
 able in this season of persecution, that is, to be useful to their
 brethren? If indeed they had not fallen, of that which they had done
 contrary to reason, their spontaneous flight for instance, or their
 slackness in teaching and confirming the brethren, of these things
 indulgence would be extended to them. But if from their own arrogance
 and conceit they have lapsed,--for of such a nature is it rashly to
 venture to expose themselves to torture, and not to be able to endure
 it, and thus a triumph has been gained over them,--they cannot any
 longer execute their sacred office. Wherefore let them the rather take
 heed that they perfect their confession by humility, ceasing from the
 vainglory of seeking for the sacred ministry; for communion with the
 faithful is sufficient for them, which is granted for two reasons, with
 diligent caution, and just judgment. For if we say that we will not
 hold them to be communicants, we shall both afflict them with grief,
 giving our sentence as it were that they should depart this life with
 violence; and we shall cause others also, who may have lapsed, and wish
 to return to what is right, to be negligent and remiss in this respect,
 having as a pretext, that they will not be admitted to communicate with
 the faithful, even though after their fall they should confess the
 faith, who, if they are not converted, will undergo more shame and
 ignominy than others, even as he who laid the foundation, and did not
 finish the building. For such a one do those resemble, who, for
 Christ's sake indeed, have offered themselves to be tormented, and
 having laid as it were a good foundation, have not been able to perfect
 that which is good by reason of their fall. Observe, then, that not
 even confession for Christ's sake restores him who has once lapsed and
 thus become an alien from his clerical office.

 Zonaras. The father having spoken of those who have of their own accord
 exposed themselves to the contest of martyrdom, now begins to discourse
 about those of the clergy who have done the same thing; and says that
 if any clergyman has of his own accord given himself up, and then, not
 being able to endure the violence of the torment, has fallen, and again
 recollecting himself has roused himself afresh to the contest, and has
 confessed himself a Christian before the tyrants, a man of this sort is
 not any longer to be admitted to the sacred ministry. And the reason of
 this he subjoins; because he has forsaken the Lord's flock, and because
 having of his own accord offered himself to the enemy, and not having
 with constancy endured his torments, he has brought reproach upon
 himself. But that they should despise the instruction of the people,
 and prefer their own advantage, this did not the apostles. For the
 mighty Paul, though he had endured many torments, and felt that it was
 better for him to leave this life, preferred to live and to be
 tormented for the salvation and instruction of the people. Wherefore he
 demonstrates those to be altogether devoid of perception who ask for
 the sacred ministry from which they have voluntarily fallen. For how is
 it, says he, that they ask for that which they have left, when in a
 season of this sort, of raging persecution forsooth, they can be of
 great assistance to the brethren? As long as they were free from the
 charge of having lapsed, they would have obtained pardon for their
 action that was rashly undertaken, that, namely, of voluntarily
 offering themselves to the adversary, or their negligence in
 instructing the brethren. But since they have fallen, inasmuch as they
 have acted ostentatiously, they are not to be permitted any longer to
 discharge their sacred functions. If, says he, that they had not fallen
 they would have obtained pardon for their action which was devoid of
 reason; calling that action devoid of reason, not only because they
 gave themselves up to the enemy, but rather because they deserted the
 Lord's flock, and did not remain to guard it, and to confirm the
 brethren who were harassed in this time of persecution. But if they
 have fallen, from the fact that they have carried themselves
 vauntingly, and he here calls pride and arrogance perpereia , because
 it is from arrogance that they have put confidence in themselves, and
 have put an end to the contest, and have brought reproach upon
 themselves; that is, by reason of their fall, they have contracted a
 blemish and stain, it is not lawful for them any longer to be occupied
 in the sacred ministry. Wherefore let them study, says he, to perfect
 their confession by humility, ceasing forsooth from all vainglory. For
 in that they seek to be enrolled in the sacred ministry, this proceeds
 from ambition and self-seeking. For communion is sufficient for them,
 that the faithful should communicate with them, and pray with them, and
 that they should participate in the sacred mysteries. And this should
 be granted with diligent caution and care, both lest they should seem
 to be afflicted with grief, seizing on a dissolution of this life,
 lest, that is, as he says, being overcome with grief, they should
 depart and get free from the body, that is, go out from it, from the
 violence of the torment and afflictions which they undergo in the
 prison; and that none should have the pretext of their punishment for
 carrying themselves dissolutely and cowardly in the contest of
 confession, and thus fall away. Who will the rather be put to shame,
 according to the saying in the Gospel, "Who could not finish after that
 he had laid the foundation." [2318]

 Moreover, let those apply their minds to what is in this place brought
 forward by this great father and holy martyr, who say that it is lawful
 for bishops to give up their Sees, and to retain the dignity of the
 priesthood. For if to the clergy who voluntarily offered themselves to
 the contest of confession, and who, when tormented, failed in constancy
 and yielded, and afterwards returned to the contest, if to them
 indulgence is scarcely granted, because they deferred to execute their
 ministerial duties; nor, in the opinion of this divine father, is any
 thing else objected to them but that they deserted the brethren, when
 in adverse and turbulent times they might have been useful in
 confirming them in the faith, and that after that they had been counted
 worthy to bear testimony to the faith, and carried about in their flesh
 the marks of Christ; how shall that chief priest and pastor, who ought
 to lay down his life for the sheep, when he has deserted the flock that
 was committed unto him, and repudiated its care and administration, and
 as far as in him lies given it over to the wolf, be thought worthy to
 retain the dignity of the sacred ministry, and not rather be judged
 worthy of the severest punishments for deserting the people entrusted
 to his care? Nay, but he will demand a reward for this thing, or rather
 he will himself supply it to himself: refusing that which brings labour
 to them, namely, the office of teaching and of correcting vice; but
 embracing that which gains for them honour and glory, making it their
 own, keeping hold of it with their teeth as it were, and not letting it
 go in the least. For if in the case of the clergy it be called an
 action contrary to reason to desert the people, and to go away from
 them to the contest in the cause of piety; how much more contrary to
 reason shall it be judged for a bishop to desert his people, not in
 order that he may contend in a contest, but that he may deliver himself
 up to ease and indolence, and lay aside and escape entirely from his
 cares for the salvation of souls? The sixteenth canon also of the
 Seventh OEcumenical Council [2319] gravely accuses those of folly who
 decree that the dignity of the sacred ministry can be retained by a
 bishop who has repudiated his bishopric. For if according to the
 sentence of the aforesaid canon, a bishop who has been absent from his
 See more than six months, unless some one of the causes there
 enumerated shall have intervened, has both fallen from the episcopate
 and the highest dignity of the priesthood, and is deprived of both; how
 shall he who has repudiated the episcopate, and refuses any longer to
 feed the flock entrusted to him, and despises the care of it through
 his desire of an easy life, be held to be of the number of bishops? For
 if he who has committed the lesser fault, of leaving for more than six
 months the people placed under him destitute of the care and
 administration of a pastor, incurs the privation of the episcopate and
 of his sacred dignity; he who offends in a way greater and much more
 grievous, namely, in deserting altogether the multitude which the grace
 of the Holy Spirit has committed to him to be cared for and guarded,
 shall deservedly be punished with greater severity, and will pay the
 heavier penalty of losing, as far as he is concerned, the flock of
 which he was appointed shepherd by the great and chief Shepherd and
 High Priest. But those who decree the dignity of the priesthood to him
 as a reward and honorarium for declining his office, in my opinion make
 both themselves and him obnoxious to the judgment of God.

 [2315] Philipp. i. 23, 24.

 [2316] Tit. ii. 7.

 [2317] Cf. St. Paul's description of charity, 1 Cor. xiii. 4: "Charity
 vaunteth not itself," ou perpereuetai.

 [2318] A digression which follows is entirely directed against Muzalon.

 [2319] [Not OEcumenical.]

 Canon XI.

 For those who first, when the persecution waxed warm, leaped forth,
 standing around the judgment-seat, and beholding the holy martyrs who
 were hastening to the "prize of their high calling," [2320] then, fired
 with a holy zeal, gave themselves up to this, using much boldness, and
 especially when they saw those who were drawn aside and lapsed, on
 their account they were roused mightily within, and, as it were by some
 inward voice, impelled to war down and subdue the adversary who was
 exulting; for this they earnestly contended, that he might not seem "to
 be wise in his own conceit," [2321] on account of those things in which
 by reason of his subtlety they appeared to be inferior to him, even
 though it escaped his observation that he was overcome by those who
 with constancy endured the torments of the lash and scourge, and the
 sharp edge of the sword, the burning in the fire, and the immersion in
 the water. To those also who entreat that the prayers and supplications
 of faith should be made either in behalf of those who have been
 punished by imprisonment, and have been delivered up by hunger and
 thirst, or for those who out of prison have by the judges been tortured
 with whippings and scourgings, and afterwards have been overcome by the
 infirmity of the flesh, it is right to give our consent. For to
 sympathize with the sorrow and affliction of those who sorrow and mourn
 for those who in the contest have been overcome by the great strength
 of the evil-contriving devil, whether it be for parents, or brethren,
 or children, hurts no one. For we know that on account of the faith of
 others some have obtained the goodness of God, both in the remission of
 sins, and in the health of their bodies, and in the resurrection of the
 dead. Therefore, being mindful of the many labours and distresses which
 for the name of Christ they have sustained, since they have themselves
 also repented, and have bewailed that which was done by them through
 their being betrayed by the languor and mortification of the body; and
 since, besides this, they testify that in their life they have as it
 were been aliens from their city, let us pray together with them and
 entreat for their reconciliation, together with other things that are
 befitting, through Him who is "our Advocate with the Father, and makes
 propitiation for our sins." "And if any man sin," says he, "we have an
 Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and He is the
 propitiation for our sins." [2322]

 Balsamon. The saint having said before that those who of their own
 accord entered upon the contest and lapsed, and did not repent nor
 recant their error, would be covered with more shame, as being like men
 who did not go on with the building beyond the foundation, that is, did
 not perfect that which is good, now brings forward a confirmation of
 this and other matters, saying, Those who taking their stand in the
 fervour and vehemence of the persecution, seeing the holy martyrs, and
 with what divine zeal they contended to receive the celestial crown,
 gave themselves up to martyrdom with much boldness, and especially when
 they saw some drawn aside, that is, led astray and deluded by the
 devil, and lapsing or denying godliness; wherefore being inwardly
 inflamed, and with hearts enkindled, as hearing that they by this means
 should war down and subdue the proud adversary the devil, were eager to
 undergo martyrdom lest the devil should boast and seem "to be wise in
 his own conceit," as having by his subtlety and malice overcome those
 who of their own accord sought martyrdom: even though it escaped him
 that he was rather overcome by those combatants who bravely withstood
 the torments. Therefore to the faithful who pray for those who are
 enduring punishment, and afflicted by it, it is right to assent or to
 concur in this, which is also decreed; and it can by no means be
 hurtful to sympathize in their sorrow and affliction with the parents
 or other relatives in behalf of those who have given their testimony
 and undergone martyrdom, but have lapsed by the arts and snares of the
 devil. For we know that many have obtained the goodness and compassion
 of God by the prayers of others. Therefore we will pray for them that
 remission of their sins be granted them by God; and with the others who
 have lapsed, and have afterwards recanted their error, and confessed
 godliness, we will communicate, being mindful of those contests which
 before their fall they sustained for God's sake, and also of their
 subsequent worthy repentance, and that they testify that on account of
 their sin they have been as it were aliens from their city; and we will
 not only communicate with them, but pray also for their reconciliation,
 together with other things that are convenient, either with the good
 works which ought to be done by them--fasting, for instance,
 almsgiving, and penance; by which things He who is our Advocate makes
 the Father propitious towards us. Then he makes use of a passage of
 Holy Scripture, and this is taken from the first catholic epistle of
 the holy apostle and evangelist John.

 Zonaras. The meaning of the present canon is as follows:--Those, he
 says, who set in the fervour of the persecution, that is, in its
 greatest height and most vehement heat, beheld the martyrdoms of the
 saints, and how eagerly they hastened to receive the celestial crown,
 fired with a holy emulation, gave themselves up to martyrdom, leaping
 as it were into the contest with much boldness, in imitation of the
 saints who suffered, and offered themselves readily for the confirming
 of the faith by their testimony; and on that account especially,
 because they behold many who were drawn aside, that is, led astray,
 denying their faith. Whereupon they being inflamed, that is, tired in
 heart, endeavoured to subdue the adversary that was hostile to them,
 that he might not, as a victor, exult over the godly. Although it
 escaped him that he was rather conquered by them, many even unto death
 showing forth constancy for the faith. They hastened, therefore, says
 he, to do this, but overcome by the violence of their torments, by
 reason of the infirmity of the flesh, being some of them evil entreated
 in prison, and others punished by decree of the judges, and not being
 able to endure their punishment. It is meet, therefore, to sympathize
 with those who mourn for their sakes. Now they mourn, says he, some the
 lapse of parents, others of brethren, and others of children. To mourn,
 therefore, with those who bewail the lapsed, hurts no one; neither to
 join in prayer and grief with those who pray for themselves, together
 with other things that are reasonable, namely, that they who have
 lapsed may show forth other things that are consistent with penitence;
 such as are fasting and tears and other humiliations, and observe the
 punishment inflicted on them, and, if their means allow, bestow money
 upon the poor; by which means He who is the Advocate in our behalf will
 render the Father propitious to us. Then he brings forward a passage
 from Holy Scripture, which is taken from the first epistle of the holy
 apostle and evangelist John.

 [2320] Philipp. iii. 14.

 [2321] Rom. xii. 16.

 [2322] 1 John ii. 1.

 Canon XII.

 Against those who have given money that they might be entirely
 undisturbed by evil, [2323] an accusation cannot be brought. For they
 have sustained the loss and sacrifice of their goods that they might
 not hurt or destroy their soul, which others for the sake of filthy
 lucre have not done; and yet the Lord says, "What is a man profited, if
 he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" [2324] and
 again, "Ye cannot serve God and mammon." [2325] In these things, then,
 they have shown themselves the servants of God, inasmuch as they have
 hated, trodden under foot, and despised money, and have thus fulfilled
 what is written: "The ransom of a man's life are his riches." [2326]
 For we read also in the Acts of the Apostles that those who in the
 stead of Paul and Silas were dragged before the magistrates at
 Thessalonica, were dismissed with a heavy fine. For after that they had
 been very burdensome to them for his name, and had troubled the people
 and the rulers of the city, "having taken security," he says, "of
 Jason, and of the others, they let them go. And the brethren
 immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea." [2327]

 Balsamon. After that the saint had finished his discourse concerning
 those who of their own accord had offered themselves to martyrdom, he
 said that those were not to be reprehended who by a sum of money paid
 down freed themselves from the affliction of persecution. For they
 preferred to make a sacrifice of their money rather than of their
 souls. Then he confirms this, and brings forward different Scripture
 examples from the Acts of the Apostles concerning the blessed apostle
 Paul and others.

 Zonaras. But those, he says, are not to be reprehended who have paid
 money down, and thus escaped, and maintained their piety, nor for this
 thing may any one bring an accusation against them. For they have
 preferred to lose their money rather than their souls, and have shown
 that they wish to serve God and not mammon; that is, riches. And he
 brings forward the words of Scripture, and the example, as in the Acts
 of the Apostles, of the blessed apostle Paul and others. Now, when it
 is said that they have been undisturbed by all evil, [2328] it is to be
 so taken, either that they have been left undisturbed, so far as the
 denial of the faith is concerned, which overcomes all evil, [2329] or
 he means [2330] the afflictions of persecutions.

 [2323] kakia.

 [2324] Matt. xvi. 26.

 [2325] Matt. vi. 24.

 [2326] Prov. xiii. 8.

 [2327] Acts xvii. 9, 10.

 [2328] kakia.

 [2329] kakia.

 [2330] By kakias.

 Canon XIII.

 Hence neither is it lawful to accuse those who have left all, and have
 retired for the safety of their life, as if others had been held back
 by them. For at Ephesus also they seized Gaius and Aristarchus instead
 of Paul, and rushed to the theatre, these being Paul's companions in
 travel [2331] and he wishing himself to enter in unto the people, since
 it was by reason of his having persuaded them, and drawing away a great
 multitude to the worship of the true God, that the tumult arose. "The
 disciples suffered him not," he says. "Nay, moreover, certain of the
 chief of Asia, who were his friends, sent unto him, desiring him that
 he would not adventure himself into the theatre." But if any persist in
 contending with them, let them apply their minds with sincerity to him
 who says, "Escape for thy life; look not behind thee." [2332] Let them
 recall to their minds also how Peter, the chief of the apostles, "was
 thrown into prison, and delivered to four quaternions of soldiers to
 keep him;" [2333] of whom, when he had escaped by night, and had been
 preserved out of the hand of the Jews by the commandment of the angel
 of the Lord, it is said, "As soon as it was day, there was no small
 stir among the soldiers, what was become of Peter. And when Herod had
 sought for him, and found him not, he examined the keepers, and
 commanded that they should be put to death," [2334] on account of whom
 no blame is attributed to Peter; for it was in their power, when they
 saw what was done, to escape, just as also all the infants in
 Bethlehem, [2335] and all the coast thereof, might have escaped, if
 their parents had known what was going to happen. These were put to
 death by the murderer Herod, in order to secure the death of one Infant
 whom he sought, which Infant itself also escaped at the commandment of
 the angel of the Lord, who now began quickly to spoil, and to hasten
 the prey, according to the name whereby he was called: as it is
 written, "Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz: for before the child
 shall have knowledge to cry, My father and my mother, the riches of
 Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king
 of Assyria." [2336] The Magi then as now having been despoiled and
 divided for a prey, humbly, and in the guise of suppliants, adore the
 Child, opening their treasures, and offering unto Him gifts most
 opportune and magnificent--gold, and frankincense, and myrrh--as to a
 king, to God, and to man; whence they were no longer willing to return
 to the Assyrian king, being forbidden to do so by Providence. For
 "being warned of God in a dream," he says, "that they should not return
 to Herod, they departed into their own country another way." [2337]
 Hence the bloodthirsty "Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the
 wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth," he says, "and slew all
 the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coast thereof, from
 two years old and under, according to the time that he had diligently
 inquired of the wise men." [2338] Together with whom, having sought to
 kill another infant that had been previously born, and not being able
 to find him, he slew the child's father Zacharias between the temple
 and the altar, the child having escaped with his mother Elisabeth.
 [2339] Whence these men that have withdrawn themselves are not at all
 to be blamed.

 Balsamon. But if any, says he, have left their good and gone away, lest
 they should be detailed and brought into peril, as being those perhaps
 who might not be able to persist in their confession to the end, on
 account of the cruelty of their tormentors, they shall not be found
 fault with, even though others have been detained on their account. And
 he brings forward as an instance on this score Gaius and Aristarchus,
 who were detained instead of Paul; the soldiers who kept Peter; the
 infants who were massacred by Herod on account of Christ; and
 Zacharias, the father of the revered and blessed forerunner.

 Zonaras. But if any, says he, have left their possessions, and have
 gone away, lest being detained they should be endangered, and because,
 perhaps, they would not be able to persist in their confession unto the
 end on account of the cruelty of the tormentors, they are not to be
 accused, even if others are detained and punished on their account.
 And, again, he brings forward an example from the Acts of the Apostles,
 saying that at Ephesus also Gaius and Aristarchus were apprehended in
 the stead of Paul, and that Paul was not blamed for this; nor was
 Peter, when he was brought forth out of prison by an angel, and escaped
 the danger, and the soldiers who guarded him were on his account
 punished. Then he cites another example from the Gospel, namely, the
 infants who were put to death by Herod; on account of which, says he,
 our Lord was not blamed. And when Elisabeth had taken to flight with
 John, and had preserved him, his father Zacharias was put to death, the
 child being demanded of him; nor was this imputed as a crime to John.

 [2331] Acts xix. 26-30.

 [2332] Gen. xix. 17.

 [2333] Acts xii. 4.

 [2334] Acts xii. 18, 19.

 [2335] Matt. ii. 13-16.

 [2336] Isa. viii. 3, 4. The literal meaning of the name
 Maher-shalal-hash-baz is, "In speed spoil, booty hastens."

 [2337] Matt. ii. 11-13.

 [2338] Matt. ii. 16.

 [2339] [Matt. xxiii. 35.]

 Canon XIV.

 But if any have endured much violence and the strong pressure of
 necessity, receiving into their mouths iron and chains, and for their
 good affection towards the faith have bravely borne the burning of
 their hands that against their will had been put to the profane
 sacrifice, as from their prison the thrice-blessed martyrs have written
 to me respecting those in Libya, and others their fellow-ministers;
 such, on the testimony of the rest of their brethren, can be placed in
 the ministry amongst the confessors, as those who have been mortified
 by many torments, and were no longer able either to speak, or to give
 utterance, or to move, so as to resist those who vainly offered them
 violence. For they did not assent to their impiety; as I have again
 heard from their fellow-ministers, they will be reckoned amongst the
 confessors, as also he who hath after the example of Timothy ordered
 his life, obeying him who says, "Follow after righteousness, godliness,
 faith, love, patience, meekness. Fight the good fight of faith, lay
 hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also called, and hast
 professed a good profession before many witnesses." [2340]

 Balsamon. Those who by the violence of the tyrant seemed to eat meat
 that had been offered to idols, or to drink wine from the Greek
 libations,--for it happened sometimes that they were thrown upon the
 ground, and hooks or pieces of iron put into their mouths to keep them
 open, and then the tyrants poured wine down their throats, or threw
 into them pieces of meat; or putting hot coals into their hands,
 together with incense, they compelled them to sacrifice,--if they were
 clergymen, the canon decrees that they should each in his own degree be
 ranked amongst the confessors; but if laymen, that they should be
 reckoned as martyrs, because they did not these things of their own
 free-will, nor did they at all assent to the action. As also amongst
 the confessors are to be reckoned those who from the extremity of the
 tortures lost their strength of body, and were not able to resist those
 who poured into their mouths the wine of the libations. And next in
 order he speaks of those who give the testimony of a good conscience,
 and enumerates them amongst the confessors.

 Zonaras. Those who chastised the blessed martyrs, after many torments,
 in the case of some violently poured into their mouths the wine of the
 libations, or even crammed into their mouths some of the meat that had
 been offered to idols, and putting incense into their hands, they
 dragged them to the altars, and then violently seizing on their hands,
 they either sprinkled the incense upon the altar or placed hot coals
 together with the incense into their hands, that, not being able to
 bear the pain of the burning, they might drop the incense together with
 the coals upon the altar; for they were constrained by them. Men of
 this sort, he affirms, can remain enrolled in the sacred ministry, or
 rather be placed in the rank of confessors. For they did not by their
 own choice either taste the libations, or place the incense upon the
 altar, but being compelled by violence, their reason not consenting to
 the action; as also those who from the extremity of the suffering lost
 their bodily vigour, so as neither to be able to speak or move, nor to
 resist those who were violently pouring into their months the wine of
 libations, these also are to be placed amongst the confessors. And next
 in order he discourses of those who give the testimony of a good
 conscience, and places them also in the number of confessors.

 [2340] 1 Tim. vi. 11, 12.

 Canon XV.

 No one shall find fault with us for observing the fourth day of the
 week, and the preparation, [2341] on which it is reasonably enjoined us
 to fast according to the tradition. [2342] On the fourth day, indeed,
 because on it the Jews took counsel for the betrayal of the Lord; and
 on the sixth, because on it He himself suffered for us. But the Lord's
 day we celebrate as a day of joy, because on it He rose again, on which
 day we have received it for a custom not even to bow the knee.

 Balsamon. Conformably to the sixty-fourth Apostolical canon, which
 decrees that we are not to fast on the Sabbath, with one exception, the
 great Sabbath; and to the sixty-ninth canon, which severely punishes
 those who do not fast in the Holy Lent, and on every fourth day of the
 week and day of preparation. Thus also does the present canon decree.

 Zonaras. Always, says he, are the fourth and sixth days of every week
 to be kept as fasts; nor will any one find fault with us for fasting on
 them; and the reasons he subjoins. But on the Lord's day we ought not
 to fast, for it is a day of joy for the resurrection of the Lord, and
 on it, says he, we have received that we ought not even to bow the
 knee. This word, therefore, is to be carefully observed, "we have
 received," and "it is enjoined upon us according to the tradition." For
 from hence it is evident that long-established custom was taken for
 law. [2343] Moreover, the great Basil annexes also the causes for which
 it was forbidden to bend the knee on the Lord's day, and from the
 Passover to Pentecost. Read also the sixty-sixth and sixty-ninth
 Apostolical canons. [2344]

 [2341] The sixth day, the day before the Hebrew Sabbath.--Tr. [The
 Parasceve.]

 [2342] [Stationary days. See Vol. ii. p. 33, note 6.]

 [2343] [Vol. v. pp. 382, 571, the notes.]

 [2344] [So called. Vol. viii., this series. Elucidation II.]

 Note by the American Editor.

 ------------------------

 Here may be noted the historic fact that this terrible epoch of
 persecutions had driven many to the deserts, where they dwelt as
 hermits. [2345] It now introduced monasticism, in its earliest and
 least objectionable forms, into Egypt, whence it soon spread into the
 Church at large. For a favourable view of the character and life of St.
 Antony, see Neale's history [2346] of this period; but, if he turns it
 into an indirect plea for the subsequent history of monasticism, we
 shall find in Canon Kingsley's Hypatia a high-wrought testimony of an
 antagonistic character. Bingham, [2347] avoiding the entanglements of
 primitive with mediæval history, affords a just view of what may be
 said of the rise of this mighty institution, based upon two texts
 [2348] of Holy Scripture, proceeding from the Incarnate Word Himself,
 which impressed themselves on the fervid spirit of Antony. Who can
 wonder that fire and sword and ravening wolves predisposed men and
 women to avoid the domestic life, and the bringing of hapless families
 into existence as a prey to the remorseless cruelty of the empire? Far
 be it from me to forget what the world owes, directly and indirectly,
 to the nobler and purer orders,--what learning must ever acknowledge as
 its debt to the Benedictines of the West. [2349] But, on the other
 hand, after the melancholy episcopate of Cyril, we cannot but trace, in
 the history of Oriental monasticism, not only the causes of the decay
 of Alexandrian scholarship and influence, but of the ignominious fate
 of the Byzantine Empire, and of that paltry devotion to images which
 seemed to invoke the retributions of a "jealous god," and which
 favoured the rise of an impostor who found in his "abhorrence of idols"
 an excuse for making himself the "Scourge of God."

 [2345] Luke i. 80; ix. 10; Gal. i. 17. But compare 1 Kings xix. 9.

 [2346] Patriarchate, etc., vol. i. p. 107. Antony was born circa a.d.
 251, died a.d. 356.

 [2347] Antiqu., book vii. cap. i.

 [2348] Matt. xix. 21 and Matt. vi. 34.

 [2349] Montalembert's Monks of the West is but a fascinating romance,
 but is well worthy of attention.

 Fragments from the Writings of Peter.

 ------------------------

 I.--Letter to the Church at Alexandria. [2350]

 Peter, to the brethren beloved and established in the faith of God,
 peace in the Lord. Since I have found out that Meletius acts in no way
 for the common good,--for neither is he contented with the letter of
 the most holy bishops and martyrs,--but, invading my parish, [2351]
 hath assumed so much to himself as to endeavour to separate from my
 authority the priests, [2352] and those who had been entrusted with
 visiting the needy; [2353] and, giving proof of his desire for
 pre-eminence, has ordained in the prison several unto himself; now,
 take ye heed to this, and hold no communion with him, until I meet him
 in company with some wise and discreet men, and see what the designs
 are which he has thought upon. Fare ye well.

 [2350] From Gallandius.

 [2351] [See p. 240, supra. But note, the parish was greater than the
 diocese in ancient terminology.]

 [2352] [Presbyters.]

 [2353] [Deacons.]

 II.--On the Godhead. [2354]

 Since certainly "grace and truth came by Jesus Christ," [2355] whence
 also by grace we are saved, according to that word of the apostle, "and
 that not of yourselves, nor of works, lest any man should boast;"
 [2356] by the will of God, "the Word was made flesh," [2357] and "was
 found in fashion as a man." [2358] But yet He was not left without His
 divinity. For neither "though He was rich did He become poor" [2359]
 that He might absolutely be separated from His power and glory, but
 that He might Himself endure death for us sinners, the just for the
 unjust, that He might bring us to God, "being put to death in the
 flesh, but quickened by the Spirit;" and afterwards other things.
 Whence the evangelist also asserts the truth when he says, "The Word
 was made flesh, and dwelt among us;" then indeed, from the time when
 the angel had saluted the virgin, saying, "Hail, thou that art highly
 favoured, the Lord is with thee." Now when Gabriel said, "The Lord is
 with thee," he meant God the Word is with thee. For he shows that He
 was conceived in the womb, and was to become flesh; as it is written,
 "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest
 shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing which shall be
 born of thee shall be called the Son of God;" [2360] and afterwards
 other things. Now God the Word, in the absence of a man, by the will of
 God, who easily effects everything, was made flesh in the womb of the
 virgin, not requiring the operation of the presence of a man. For more
 efficacious than a man was the power of God overshadowing the virgin,
 together with the Holy Ghost also who came upon her.

 [2354] A fragment from his book, from the Acts of the Council of
 Ephesus, i. and vii. 2.--Galland.

 [2355] John i. 17.

 [2356] Eph. ii. 8, 9.

 [2357] John i. 14.

 [2358] Phil. ii. 7.

 [2359] 2 Cor. viii. 9.

 [2360] Luke i. 35.

 III.--On the Advent of Our Saviour. [2361]

 And He said unto Judas, "Betrayest thou the Son of God with a kiss?"
 [2362] These things and the like, and all the signs which He showed,
 and His miracles, prove that He is God made man. Both things therefore
 are demonstrated, that He was God by nature, and that He was man by
 nature.

 [2361] A fragment from the homily. Apud Leontium Byzant., lib. i.,
 contra Nestor. et Eutych., tom. i. Thes. Canis., p. 550.

 [2362] Luke xxii. 48.

 IV.--On the Sojourning of Christ with Us. [2363]

 Both therefore is proved, that he was God by nature, and was made man
 by nature.

 [2363] A fragment from the homily. Ex Leontio Hierosolymitano, contra
 Monophysitas, Ap. Mai. Script. Vet., tom. vii. p. 134.

 V.--That Up to the Time of the Destruction of Jerusalem, the Jews
 Rightly Appointed the Fourteenth Day of the First Lunar Month.

 I. [2364]

 1. Since the mercy of God is everywhere great, let us bless Him, and
 also because He has sent unto us the Spirit of truth to guide us into
 all truth. For for this cause the month Abib was appointed by the law
 to be the beginning of months, and was made known unto us as the first
 among the months of the year; both by the ancient writers who lived
 before, and by the later who lived after the destruction of Jerusalem,
 it was shown to possess a most clear and evidently definite period,
 especially because in some places the reaping is early, and sometimes
 it is late, so as to be sometimes before the time and sometimes after
 it, as it happened in the very beginning of the giving of the law,
 before the Passover, according as it is written, "But the wheat and the
 rye were not smitten, for they were not grown up." [2365] Whence it is
 rightly prescribed by the law, that from the vernal equinox, in
 whatsoever week the fourteenth day of the first month shall fall, in it
 the Passover is to be celebrated, becoming and conformable songs of
 praise having been first taken up for its celebration. For this first
 month, says he, "shall be unto you the beginning of months," [2366]
 when the sun in the summer-time sends forth a far stronger and clearer
 light, and the days are lengthened and become longer, whilst the nights
 are contracted and shortened. Moreover, when the new seeds have sprung
 up, they are thoroughly purged, and borne into the threshing floor; nor
 only this, but also all the shrubs blossom, and burst forth into
 flower. Immediately therefore they are discovered to send forth in
 alternation various and diverse fruits, so that the grape-clusters are
 found at that time; as says the lawgiver, "Now, it was the time of
 spring, of the first ripe grapes;" [2367] and when he sent the men to
 spy out the land, they brought, on bearers, a large cluster of grapes,
 and pomegranates also, and figs. For then, as they say, our eternal God
 also, the Maker and Creator of all things, framed all things, and said
 to them, "Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and
 the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself
 upon the earth." Then he adds, "And it was so; and God saw that it was
 good." [2368] Moreover, he makes quite clear that the first month
 amongst the Hebrews was appointed by law, which we know to have been
 observed by the Jews up to the destruction of Jerusalem, because this
 has been so handed down by the Hebrew tradition. But after the
 destruction of the city it was mocked at by some hardening of heart,
 which we observing, according to the law, with sincerity have received;
 and in this, according to the Word, when he speaks of the day of our
 holy festivity, which the election hath attained: but the rest have
 become hardened, [2369] as said the Scripture; and after other things.

 2. And He says as follows: "All these things will they do unto you for
 My name's sake, because they know not Him that sent Me." [2370] But if
 they knew not Him who sent, and Him who was sent, there is no reason to
 doubt but that they have been ignorant of the Passover as prescribed by
 the law, so as not merely to err in their choice of the place, but also
 in reckoning the beginning of the month, which is the first amongst the
 months of the year, on the fourteenth day of which, being accurately
 observed, after the equinox, the ancients celebrated the Passover
 according to the divine command; whereas the men of the present day now
 celebrate it before the equinox, and that altogether through negligence
 and error, being ignorant how they celebrated it in its season, as He
 confesses who in these things was described.

 3. Whether therefore the Jews erroneously sometimes celebrate their
 Passover according to the course of the moon in the month Phamenoth, or
 according to the intercalary month, every third year in the month
 Pharmuthi [2371] matters not to us. For we have no other object than to
 keep the remembrance of His Passion, and that at this very time; as
 those who were eye-witnesses of it have from the beginning handed down,
 before the Egyptians believed. For neither by observing the course of
 the moon do they necessarily celebrate it on the sixteenth day of
 Phamenoth, but once every three years in the month Pharmuthi; for from
 the beginning, and before the advent of Christ, they seem to have so
 done. Hence, when the Lord reproves them by the prophet, He says, "They
 do always err in their heart; and I have sworn in My wrath that they
 shall not enter into My rest." [2372]

 4. Wherefore, as thou seest, even in this thou appearest to be lying
 greatly, not only against men, but also against God. First, indeed,
 since in this matter the Jews never erred, as consorting with those who
 were eye-witnesses and ministers, much less from the beginning before
 the advent of Christ. For God does not say that they did always err in
 their heart as regards the precept of the law concerning the Passover,
 as thou hast written, but on account of all their other disobedience,
 and on account of their evil and unseemly deeds, when, indeed, He
 perceived them turning to idolatry and to fornication.

 5. And after a few things. So that also in this respect, since thou
 hast slumbered, rouse thyself much, and very much, with the scourge of
 the Preacher, being mindful especially of that passage where he speaks
 of "slipping on the pavement, and with the tongue." [2373] For, as thou
 seest again, the charge cast by thee upon their leaders is reflected
 back; nay, and one may suspect a great subsequent danger, inasmuch as
 we hear that the stone which a man casts up on high falls back upon his
 head. Much more reckless is he who, in this respect, ventures to bring
 a charge against Moses, that mighty servant of God, or Joshua, the son
 of Nun, who succeeded him, or those who in succession rightly followed
 them and ruled; the judges, I mean, and the kings who appeared, or the
 prophets whom the Holy Spirit inspired, and those who amongst the
 high-priests were blameless, and those who, in following the
 traditions, changed nothing, but agreed as to the observance of the
 Passover in its season, as also of the rest of their feasts.

 6. And after other things. But thou oughtest rather to have pursued a
 safer and more auspicious course, and not to have written rashly and
 slanderously, that they seem from the beginning, and always, to have
 been in error about the Passover, which you cannot prove, whatever
 charge you may wish to bring against those who, at the present time,
 have erred with a grievous wandering, having fallen away from the
 commandment of the law concerning the Passover and other things. For
 the ancients seem to have kept it after the vernal equinox, which you
 can discover if you read ancient books, and those especially which were
 written by the learned Hebrews.

 7. That therefore up to the period of the Lord's Passion, and at the
 time of the last destruction of Jerusalem, which happened under
 Vespasian, the Roman emperor, the people of Israel, rightly observing
 the fourteenth day of the first lunar month, celebrated on it the
 Passover of the law, has been briefly demonstrated. Therefore, when the
 holy prophets, and all, as I have said, who righteously and justly
 walked in the law of the Lord, together with the entire people,
 celebrated a typical and shadowy Passover, the Creator and Lord of
 every visible and invisible creature, the only-begotten Son, and the
 Word co-eternal with the Father and the Holy Spirit, and of the same
 substance with them, according to His divine nature, our Lord and God,
 Jesus Christ, being in the end of the world born according to the flesh
 of our holy and glorious lady, Mother of God, and Ever-Virgin, and, of
 a truth, of Mary the Mother of God; and being seen upon earth, and
 having true and real converse as man with men, who were of the same
 substance with Him, according to His human nature, Himself also, with
 the people, in the years before His public ministry and during His
 public ministry, did celebrate the legal and shadowy Passover, eating
 the typical lamb. For "I came not to destroy the law, or the prophets,
 but to fulfil them," the Saviour Himself said in the Gospel.

 But after His public ministry He did not eat of the lamb, [2374] but
 Himself suffered as the true Lamb in the Paschal feast, as John, the
 divine and evangelist, teaches us in the Gospel written by him, where
 he thus speaks: "Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of
 judgment: and it was early; and they themselves went not into the
 judgment-hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat the
 passover." [2375] And after a few things more. "When Pilate therefore
 heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the
 judgment-seat, in a place that is called the Pavement, but in the
 Hebrew, Gabbatha. And it was the preparation of the passover, and about
 the third hour," [2376] as the correct books render it, and the copy
 itself that was written by the hand of the evangelist, which, by the
 divine grace, has been preserved in the most holy church of Ephesus,
 and is there adored by the faithful. And again the same evangelist
 says: "The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the
 bodies should not remain upon the cross on the Sabbath-day (for that
 Sabbath-day was an high day), besought Pilate that their legs might be
 broken, and that they might be taken away." [2377] On that day,
 therefore, on which the Jews were about to eat the Passover in the
 evening, our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ was crucified, being made
 the victim to those who were about to partake by faith of the mystery
 concerning Him, according to what is written by the blessed Paul: "For
 even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us;" [2378] and not as some
 who, carried along by ignorance, confidently affirm that after He had
 eaten the Passover, He was betrayed; which we neither learn from the
 holy evangelists, nor has any of the blessed apostles handed it down to
 us. At the time, therefore, in which our Lord and God Jesus Christ
 suffered for us, according to the flesh, He did not eat of the legal
 Passover; but, as I have said, He Himself, as the true Lamb, was
 sacrificed for us in the feast of the typical Passover, on the day of
 the preparation, the fourteenth of the first lunar month. The typical
 Passover, therefore, then ceased, the true Passover being present: "For
 Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us," as has been before said,
 and as that chosen vessel, the apostle Paul, teaches. [2379]

 II. [2380]

 Now it was the preparation, about the third hour, as the accurate books
 have it, and the autograph copy itself of the Evangelist John, which up
 to this day has by divine grace been preserved in the most holy church
 of Ephesus, and is there adored [2381] by the faithful.

 [2364] Apud Galland, Ex Chronico Paschal., p. 1, seqq., edit. Venet.,
 1729.

 [2365] Exod. ix. 32.

 [2366] Exod. xii. 2.

 [2367] Num. xii. 24.

 [2368] Gen. i. 11, 12. [As "in summer-time," probably.]

 [2369] Rom. xi. 7. ["Our holy festivity" = Easter.]

 [2370] John xv. 21.

 [2371] [Vol. ii. p. 333, note 4. Clement is always worth noting, for
 his influence is thus traceable very widely in the early literature.]

 [2372] Ps. xcv. 10, 11.

 [2373] Ecclus. xx. 18.

 [2374] [But compare Browne, On the Thirty-nine Articles, p. 717, note
 3, American edition, 1874.]

 [2375] John xviii. 28.

 [2376] John xix. 13, 14. And about the sixth hour is the reading of our
 English version. According to St. Mark, the crucifixion took place at
 the third hour (chap. xxv. 25). Eusebius, Theophylact, and Severus (in
 the Catena, ed. Lücke, ii.) suppose that there has been some very early
 erratum in our copies. See Alford's note on the passage.

 [2377] John xix. 31.

 [2378] 1 Cor. v. 7.

 [2379] [Compare Anatolius, p. 151, supra.]

 [2380] Apud Galland, Ex Chronico Paschal., p. 175, D.

 [2381] [Adored, i.e., etymologically, = kissed.]

 VI.--Of the Soul and Body. [2382]

 The things which pertain to the divinity and humanity of the Second Man
 from heaven, in what has been written above, according to the blessed
 apostle, we have explained; and now we have thought it necessary to
 explain the things which pertain to the first man, who is of earth and
 earthy, being about, namely, to demonstrate this, that he was created
 at the same time one and the same, although sometimes he is separately
 designated as the man external and internal. For if, according to the
 Word of salvation, He who made what is without, made also that which is
 within, He certainly, by one operation, and at the same time, made
 both, on that day, indeed, on which God said, "Let us make man in our
 image, after our likeness;" [2383] whence it is manifest that man was
 not formed by a conjunction of the body with a certain pre-existent
 type. For if the earth, at the bidding of the Creator, brought forth
 the other animals endowed with life, much rather did the dust which God
 took from the earth receive a vital energy from the will and operation
 of God.

 [2382] Ex Leontii et Joannis Rer. Sacr., lib. ii. Apud Mai, Script.
 Vet., tom. vii. p. 85. From his demonstration that the soul was not
 pre-existent to the body.

 [2383] Gen. i. 26.

 VII.--Fragment. [2384]

 Wretch that I am! I have not remembered that God observes the mind, and
 hears the voice of the soul. I turned consciously to sin, saying to
 myself, God is merciful, and will bear with me; and when I was not
 instantly smitten, I ceased not, but rather despised His forbearance,
 and exhausted the long-suffering of God.

 [2384] Ex Leontio et Joanne Rer. Sacr., lib. ii. Apud Mai, Script.
 Vet., tom. vii. p. 96.

 VIII.--On St. Matthew. [2385]

 And in the Gospel according to Matthew, the Lord said to him who
 betrayed Him: "Betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss?" which Peter
 the Martyr and Archbishop of Alexandria expounding, says, this and
 other things like, "All the signs which He showed, and the miracles
 that He did, testify of Him that He is God incarnate; both things
 therefore are together proved, that He was God by nature, and was made
 man by nature."

 [2385] From the Treatise of the Emperor Justinian against the
 Monophysites. Apud Mai, Script. Vet., vii. 306, 307.

 IX.--From a Sermon. [2386]

 In the meanwhile the evangelist says with firmness, "The Word was made
 flesh, and dwelt among us." [2387] From this we learn that the angel,
 when he saluted the Virgin with the words, "Hail, thou that art highly
 favoured, the Lord is with thee," [2388] intended to signify God the
 Word is with thee, and also to show that He would arise from her bosom,
 and would be made flesh, even as it is written, "The Holy Ghost shall
 come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee;
 therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be
 called the Son of God." [2389]

 [2386] Or, from a treatise on theology.

 [2387] John i. 14.

 [2388] Luke i. 28.

 [2389] Luke i. 35.

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (Meletian schism, p. 259.)

 The date of the Meletian schism is very much in need of elucidation. I
 follow Neale, however, as follows: Athanasius places its origin a.d.
 306 (according to Tillemont and Baronius) or a.d. 301; the latter more
 probable, as demonstrated by the Benedictine editors. But the dates
 are, perhaps, the least of the difficulties which encumber the whole
 matter. Somewhat distrustfully I have, after several efforts to
 construct an original elucidation, adopted the theory of Neale, as a
 diligent and conscientious inquirer whose Oriental studies qualify him
 to utter almost a decisive voice, albeit he never forgets his
 Occidentalism, and hence fails to speak with absolute fidelity to the
 spirit of Catholic antiquity.

 We know something of Lycopolis from the blessed Alexander; it seems to
 have been a sort of centre to the bishoprics of the Thebais. It was
 just the sort of centre, in a region sufficient for a separate
 patriarchate, to suggest to an ambitious and unscrupulous prelate an
 effort at independency. Meletius, who succeeded the good Alexander, was
 just the man to set up for himself; a man not unlikely to be stimulated
 by the bad example of Paul of Samosata, and by the ingenuity that
 triumphed over the first council that called Paul to account. Bearing
 all this in mind, we may accept Neale's conviction that Meletius had
 long been a scandal to the churches, and in the time of persecution had
 lapsed, and sacrificed to idols. Peter summoned him to a council, by
 which he was convicted and degraded; whereupon he not only refused to
 submit, but arrogated to himself the cathedra of Alexandria, and began
 to ordain other bishops, and, in short, to reorganize its jurisdiction.
 [2390] Owing, I think probable, to the exceptional and overgrown extent
 of this enormous "patriarchate," as it was called a little later, the
 schism gained a considerable following. The distance of Lycopolis from
 Lower Egypt must have favoured the attempt, and Peter's recent
 accession made it easy for Meletius to circulate evil stories against
 him. The schism, as usual, soon developed into heresy, which even the
 Nicene Synod failed to extinguish. Arius had joined the first outbreak,
 but conformed for a time, and was ordained a deacon by Achillas. His
 troublesome spirit, however, soon showed itself again after his
 ordination to the priesthood; and the remnant of the Meletians made
 common cause with him after his condemnation at Nicæa. Of Peter's
 legitimate exercise of authority, and of the impurity and wickedness of
 Meletius before his invasion of Alexandria, there is no reason to
 doubt; but for the details, recourse must be had to Neale. [2391] The
 famous Sixth Canon of Nice finds its explanation in this rebellion;
 but, incidentally, it defines the position of other great centres,
 which now began to be known as patriarchates. Neale's remarks [2392] on
 the excessive leniency of the council in settling the case of Meletius,
 are specially to be noted.

 II.

 (Canonical Epistle, p. 279.)

 The judgment of Dupin is so exceptionally eulogistic touching these
 canons, that I quote it, as follows: [2393] --

 "Of all the canons of antiquity concerning the discipline of the
 lapsed, there are none more judicious or more equitable than those we
 have now described. There appear in them a wisdom and prudence
 altogether singular in tempering the rigours of punishment by a
 reasonable moderation, without which justice would be weakened. He
 examines carefully all the circumstances which might augment or
 diminish the quality of the crime; and as he does not lengthen out
 penance by methods too severe, so neither does he deceive the sinner by
 a facility too remiss."

 Like the famous Canonical Epistles of St. Basil, however, these are
 compilations of canons accepted by the churches of his jurisdiction.
 Dupin says of those of Basil [2394] (To Amphilochius), "They are not to
 be considered as the particular opinions of St. Basil, but as the laws
 of the Church in his time; and therefore they are not written in the
 form of personal letters, but after the manner of synodical decisions."

 The Roman Emperors.

 In the study of these volumes a table is useful, such as I find it
 convenient to place here, showing the Ante-Nicene succession of Cæsars.

 a.d.

 1. Augustus--1

 2. Tiberius--14

 3. Caligula--37

 4. Claudius--41

 5. Nero--54

 6. Galba--68

 7. Otho--69

 8. Vitellius--69

 9. Vespasian--69

 10. Titus--79

 11. Domitian--81

 12. Nerva--96

 13. Trajan--98

 14. Hadrian--117

 15. Antoninus Pius--138

 16. Marcus Aurelius--161

 17. Commodus--180

 18. Pertinax--192

 19. Didius Julianus (Niger)--193

 20. Septimius Severus--193

 21. Caracalla (Geta)--211

 22. Macrinus--217

 23. Heliogabalus--218

 24. Alexander Severus--222

 25. Maximinus--235

 26. Gordian--235

 27. Pupienus (Balbinus)--235

 28. Gordian the Younger--238

 29. Philip--244

 30. Decuis--249

 31. Gallus (Volusianus)--251

 32. Valerian--254

 33. Gallienus--260

 34. Claudius II--268

 35. Aurelian--270

 36. Tacitus (Probus)--275

 37. Florian--276

 38. Carus (Carinus, Numerian)--282

 39. Diocletian--284

 40. Maximian (Galerius)--286

 41. Constantius Chlorus--292

 42. Maximin--306

 43. Constantine the Great (Licinius, Etc.)--307

 Suetonius includes Julius, and therefore his Twelve Cæsars end with
 Domitian, the last of the Flavian family. With Nerva the "five good
 emperors" (so called) begin, but the "good Aurelius" was a persecutor.
 St. John, surviving the cruelty of Domitian, lived and died under
 Trajan.

 The "vision of Constantine" is dated, at Treves, a.d. 312.

 The Labarum became the Roman standard thenceforth.

 The Dominical ordinance dates from Milan, June 2, a.d. 321.

 He founds the city of Constantinople a.d. 324, convokes the Council of
 Nicæa a.d. 325.

 [2390] He reported to the Nicene Council that he had ordained
 twenty-eight bishops and eight priests or deacons.

 [2391] Patriarchate of Alexandria, vol. i. pp. 91, 146.

 [2392] Ibid., p. 146.

 [2393] Eccl. Hist. Cent. IV., sub tit. "Peter of Alexandria."

 [2394] Ibid., sub tit. "Basil."

  Epistles on the Arian Heresy and the Deposition of Arius

 Alexander.

 [Translated by the Rev. James B. H. Hawkins, M.A.]

 Introductory Notice

 to

 Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria.

 ------------------------

 [a.d. 273 [2395] -313-326.] The records of the Ante-Nicene period, so
 far as Alexandria is concerned, are complete in this great primate, the
 friend and patron of Athanasius, and, with him, the master-spirit of
 the great Council of Nicæa. I have so arranged the "Fragments" of the
 Edinburgh series in this volume as to make them a great and important
 integer in rounding out and fulfilling the portraiture of the school
 and the See of Alexandria. The student will thus have at hand the
 materials for a covetable survey of the Alexandrian Fathers,--their
 history, their influence, and their immense authority in early
 Christendom. In an elucidation [2396] I venture to condense my thoughts
 upon some points which it has been the interest of unbelievers to
 misrepresent, and to colour for their own purposes. But, as the
 limitations of my editorial duty do not allow me to enter upon a
 dissertation, I am thankful to refer the reader to the truly valuable
 though by no means exhaustive work of Dr. Neale on The Patriarchate of
 Alexandria. His statements are not, indeed, to be received with
 unreserving confidence; for, in spite of his pure and lofty purposes,
 his mind had been formed under the strong bias of a transient fashion
 in divinity, and he always surveyed his subject from an Occidental if
 not from a Latin (I do not mean a strictly Roman) point of view. To
 other popular historians I need not refer the student, save, by
 anticipation, to the list of authorities which will be furnished in the
 concluding volume of this series. [2397]

 Let us reflect, then, upon the epoch to which we have now come. The
 intense sufferings, labours, and intellectual as well as moral
 struggles, of the three heroic centuries, are closing, and Alexander of
 Alexandria is the grand figure of the period. Diocletian is preparing
 to let loose upon the sheep of Christ the ferocious wolves of the tenth
 persecution. Lucian is founding the school of Antioch, [2398] revising
 the New Testament, and, in fact, the whole Bible of the Fathers, for
 his labours included the version of the Seventy. Unhappily, the
 ambitious Arius, who calls him master, has begun to trouble the
 evangelical See of St. Mark; and Achillas, notwithstanding the warnings
 of Peter, has laid hands upon him, and made him a presbyter. He aspires
 to be made a bishop. But anon a boy is playing on the shore at
 Alexandria in whom a flaming genius for the priesthood already
 manifests itself. Alexander, looking forth from his windows, sees him
 "playing church" with his schoolmates, and actually dipping a young
 pagan in the sea, "in the name of the Father," etc. No doubt something
 of the kind did occur, and thus was the boy Athanasius brought to the
 notice of his bishop. But even Dupin rejects the rest of the story,
 that Alexander decided the question of the boy-baptism in favour of its
 validity, as the Latins would have us believe. Anyhow, we have this
 miracle of precocity attending Alexander as his deacon at the Council
 of Nicæa, and then soon after succeeding to his episcopal chair.
 Athanasius is the grandest figure of the primitive ages after the
 apostles fell asleep. Raised up to complete their testimony to the
 eternal Logos, and to suffer like them, we soon behold him the noble
 example of constancy against the new perils of the world's favour and
 the patronage of the Cæsars. "Athanasius against the world" was in two
 senses his great encomium, and the epitome of his glorious life and
 warfare. Not less was it "Athanasius for the world." Alas! the majestic
 school of Pantænus and Clement soon after comes to its enigmatical
 decline. Some plants, when they have borne their superlative flower and
 fruit, mysteriously decay. It was so, alas! with the great Christian
 academy that not improbably owes its beginnings to Apollos.

 Translator's Introductory Notice.

 Alexander was appointed successor to Achillas, [2399] as Bishop of
 Alexandria, about a.d. 312. The virtues of this prelate, which Eusebius
 has passed over entirely without mention, other ecclesiastical writers
 have greatly extolled. For on all sides he is styled "the staunchest
 upholder of evangelical doctrine," "the patron and protector of
 apostolic doctrine;" and "that bishop of divine faith, full of wisdom
 and of zeal enkindled by the Holy Spirit." He was the first to detect
 and to condemn Arius; [2400] and taking his stand upon passages of Holy
 Scripture, as Theodoret remarks, [2401] he taught that the Son of God
 was of one and the same majesty with the Father, and had the same
 substance with the Father who begat Him.

 At first he sought to bring back Arius from his heresy. But when he
 perceived that he openly and obstinately taught his false doctrines, he
 assembled a first and then a second synod of the bishops of Egypt, and
 degraded him from the order of the priesthood, [2402] and cut him off
 from the communion of the Church. This proving ineffectual, the Council
 of Nicæa was convened, in which he was finally condemned. In combating
 the Arian heresy, Alexander endured, although at a great age, many
 trials, and died shortly after the holding of the council.

 [2395] The first date is conjectural.

 [2396] Elucidation I.

 [2397] For liberal references, consult Hagenbach, Text-Book of the
 History of Doctrine; by all means using Professor Smith's edition, New
 York, 1861.

 [2398] For the matters touching the theology of the period, the student
 should prepare himself by consulting Waterland, History of the
 Athanasian Creed (Works, vol. iv., London), and Van Oosterzee,
 Christian Dogmatics, New York, 1874. I wonder that Professor Smith
 could, so unreservedly, commend Hagenbach.

 [2399] [Here given Achilles; but I preserve unity of usage in this
 respect, the rather as Achilles is the name of a contemporary heretic.]

 [2400] [i.e., in his great and final heresy. Of his former
 condemnation, see pp. 262-263, supra.]

 [2401] H. E., i. 2.

 [2402] [To which Achilles had admitted him. See p. 268, supra. In spite
 of the warnings, pp. 263-265, supra.]

 Epistles [2403] on the Arian Heresy

 And

 the Deposition of Arius.

 ------------------------

 I.--To Alexander, Bishop of the City of Constantinople.

 To the most reverend and like-minded brother, Alexander, Alexander
 sends greeting in the Lord:

 1. The ambitious and avaricious will of wicked men is always wont to
 lay snares against those churches which seem greater, by various
 pretexts attacking the ecclesiastical piety of such. For incited by the
 devil who works in them, to the lust of that which is set before them,
 and throwing away all religious scruples, they trample under foot the
 fear of the judgment of God. Concerning which things, I who suffer,
 have thought it necessary to show to your piety, in order that you may
 be aware of such men, lest any of them presume to set foot in your
 dioceses, whether by themselves or by others; for these sorcerers know
 how to use hypocrisy to carry out their fraud; and to employ letters
 composed and dressed out with lies, which are able to deceive a man who
 is intent upon a simple and sincere faith. Arius, therefore, and
 Achilles, [2404] having lately entered into a conspiracy, emulating the
 ambition of Colluthus, have turned out far worse than he. For
 Colluthus, indeed, who reprehends these very men, found some pretext
 for his evil purpose; but these, beholding his [2405] battering of
 Christ, endured no longer to be subject to the Church; but building for
 themselves dens of thieves, they hold their assemblies in them
 unceasingly, night and day directing their calumnies against Christ and
 against us. For since they call in question all pious and apostolical
 doctrine, after the manner of the Jews, they have constructed a
 workshop for contending against Christ, denying the Godhead of our
 Saviour, and preaching that He is only the equal of all others. And
 having collected all the passages which speak of His plan of salvation
 and His humiliation for our sakes, they endeavour from these to collect
 the preaching of their impiety, ignoring altogether the passages in
 which His eternal Godhead and unutterable glory with the Father is set
 forth. Since, therefore, they back up the impious opinion concerning
 Christ, which is held by the Jews and Greeks, in every possible way
 they strive to gain their approval; busying themselves about all those
 things which they are wont to deride in us, and daily stirring up
 against us seditions and persecutions. And now, indeed, they drag us
 before the tribunals of the judges, by intercourse with silly and
 disorderly women, whom they have led into error; at another time they
 cast opprobrium and infamy upon the Christian religion, their young
 maidens disgracefully wandering about every village and street. Nay,
 even Christ's indivisible tunic, which His executioners were unwilling
 to divide, these wretches have dared to rend. [2406]

 2. And we, indeed, though we discovered rather late, on account of
 their concealment, their manner of life, and their unholy attempts, by
 the common suffrage of all have [2407] cast them forth from the
 congregation of the Church which adores the Godhead of Christ. But
 they, running hither and thither against us, have begun to betake
 themselves to our colleagues who are of the same mind with us; in
 appearance, indeed, pretending to seek for peace and concord, but in
 reality seeking to draw over some of them by fair words to their own
 diseases, asking long wordy letters from them, in order that reading
 these to the men whom they have deceived, they may make them impenitent
 in the errors into which they have fallen, and obdurate in impiety, as
 if they had bishops thinking the same thing and siding with them.
 Moreover, the things which amongst us they have wrongly taught and
 done, and on account of which they have been expelled by us, they do
 not at all confess to them, but they either pass them over in silence,
 or throwing a veil over them, by feigned words and writings they
 deceive them. Concealing, therefore, their pestilent doctrine by their
 specious and flattering discourse, they circumvent the more
 simple-minded and such as are open to fraud, nor do they spare in the
 meanwhile to traduce our piety to all. Hence it comes to pass that
 some, subscribing their letters, receive them into the Church, although
 in my opinion the greatest guilt lies upon those ministers who venture
 to do this; because not only does the apostolic rule not allow of it,
 but the working of the devil in these men against Christ is by this
 means more strongly kindled. Wherefore without delay, brethren beloved,
 I have stirred myself up to show you the faithlessness of these men who
 say that there was a time when the Son of God was not; and that He who
 was not before, came into existence afterwards, becoming such, when at
 length He was made, even as every man is wont to be born. For, they
 say, God made all things from things which are not, comprehending even
 the Son of God in the creation of all things rational and irrational.
 To which things they add as a consequence, that He is of mutable
 nature, and capable both of virtue and vice. And this hypothesis being
 once assumed, that He is "from things which are not," they overturn the
 sacred writings concerning His eternity, which signify the immutability
 and the Godhead of Wisdom and the Word, which are Christ.

 3. We, therefore, say these wicked men, can also be the sons of God
 even as He. For it is written, "I have nourished and brought up
 children." [2408] But when what follows was objected to them, "and they
 have rebelled against me," which indeed is not applicable to the nature
 of the Saviour, who is of an immutable nature; they, throwing off all
 religious reverence, say that God, since He foreknew and had foreseen
 that His Son would not rebel against Him, chose Him from all. For He
 did not choose Him as having by nature anything specially beyond His
 other sons, for no one is by nature a son of God, as they say; neither
 as having any peculiar property of His own; but God chose Him who was
 of a mutable nature, on account of the carefulness of His manners and
 His practice, which in no way turned to that which is evil; so that, if
 Paul and Peter had striven for this, there would have been no
 difference between their sonship and His. And to confirm this insane
 doctrine, playing with Holy Scripture, they bring forward what is said
 in the Psalms respecting Christ: "Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest
 wickedness: therefore God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of
 gladness above Thy fellows." [2409]

 4. But that the Son of God was not made "from things which are not,"
 and that there was no "time when He was not," [2410] the evangelist
 John sufficiently shows, when he thus writes concerning Him: "The
 only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father." [2411] For since
 that divine teacher intended to show that the Father and the Son are
 two things inseparable the one from the other, he spoke of Him as being
 in the bosom of the Father. Now that also the Word of God is not
 comprehended in the number of things that were created "from things
 which are not," the same John says, "All things were made by Him." For
 he set forth His proper personality, saying, "In the beginning was the
 Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. All things were
 made by Him; and without Him was not anything made that was made."
 [2412] For if all things were made by Him, how comes it that He who
 gave to the things which are made their existence, at one time Himself
 was not. For the Word which makes is not to be defined as being of the
 same nature with the things which are made; since He indeed was in the
 beginning, and all things were made by Him, and fashioned "from things
 which are not." Moreover, that which is seems to be contrary to and far
 removed from those things which are made "from things which are not."
 For that indeed shows that there is no interval between the Father and
 the Son, since not even in thought can the mind imagine any distance
 between them. But that the world was created "from things which are
 not," indicates a more recent and later origin of substance, since the
 universe receives an essence of this sort from the Father by the Son.
 When, therefore, the most pious John contemplated the essence of the
 divine Word at a very great distance, and as placed beyond all
 conception of those things that are begotten, he thought it not meet to
 speak of His generation and creation; not daring to designate the
 Creator in the same terms as the things that are made. Not that the
 Word is unbegotten, for the Father alone is unbegotten, but because the
 inexplicable subsistence of the only-begotten Son transcends the acute
 comprehension of the evangelists, and perhaps also of angels.

 5. Wherefore I do not think that he is to be reckoned amongst the pious
 who presumes to inquire into anything beyond these things, not
 listening to this saying: "Seek not out the things that are too hard
 for thee, neither search the things that are above thy strength."
 [2413] For if the knowledge of many other things that are incomparably
 inferior to this, are hidden from human comprehension, such as in the
 apostle Paul, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
 into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that
 love Him." [2414] As also God said to Abraham, that "he could not
 number the stars;" [2415] and that passage, "Who can number the sand of
 the sea, and the drops of rain." [2416] How shall any one be able to
 investigate too curiously the subsistence of the divine Word, unless he
 be smitten with frenzy? Concerning which the Spirit of prophecy says,
 "Who shall declare his generation?" [2417] And our Saviour Himself, who
 blesses the pillars of all things in the world, sought to unburden them
 of the knowledge of these things, saying that to comprehend this was
 quite beyond their nature, and that to the Father alone belonged the
 knowledge of this most divine mystery. "For no man," says He, "knoweth
 the Son, but the Father: neither knoweth any man the Father, save the
 Son." [2418] Of this thing also I think that the Father spoke, in the
 words, "My secret is to Me and Mine."

 6. Now that it is an insane thing to think that the Son was made from
 things which are not, and was in being in time, the expression, "from
 things which are not," itself shows, although these stupid men
 understand not the insanity of their own words. For the expression,
 "was not," ought either to be reckoned in time, or in some place of an
 age. But if it be true that "all things were made by Him," it is
 established that both every age and time and all space, and that "when"
 in which the "was not" is found, was made by Him. And is it not absurd
 that He who fashioned the times and the ages and the seasons, in which
 that "was not" is mixed up, to say of Him, that He at some time was
 not? For it is devoid of sense, and a mark of great ignorance, to
 affirm that He who is the cause of everything is posterior to the
 origin of that thing. For according to them, the space of time in which
 they say that the Son had not yet been made by the Father, preceded the
 wisdom of God that fashioned all things, and the Scripture speaks
 falsely according to them, which calls Him "the First-born of every
 creature." Conformable to which, that which the majestically-speaking
 Paul says of Him: "Whom He hath appointed heir of all things. By whom
 also He made the worlds. But by Him also were all things created that
 are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether
 they be thrones or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things
 were created by Him, and for Him; and He is before all things." [2419]

 7. Wherefore, since it appears that this hypothesis of a creation from
 things which are not is most impious, it is necessary to say that the
 Father is always the Father. But He is the Father, since the Son is
 always with Him, on account of whom He is called the Father. Wherefore,
 since the Son is always with Him, the Father is always perfect, being
 destitute of nothing as regards good; who, not in time, nor after an
 interval, nor from things which are not, hath begotten His
 only-begotten Son. How, then, is it not impious to say, that the wisdom
 of God once was not which speaks thus concerning itself: "I was with
 Him forming all things; I was His delight;" [2420] or that the power of
 God once did not exist; or that His Word was at any time mutilated; or
 that other things were ever wanting from which the Son is known and the
 Father expressed? For he who denies that the brightness of the glory
 existed, takes away also the primitive light of which it is the
 brightness. And if the image of God was not always, it is clear also
 that He was not always, of which it is the image. Moreover, in saying
 that the character of the subsistence of God was not, He also is done
 away with who is perfectly expressed by it. Hence one may see that the
 Sonship of our Saviour has nothing at all in common with the sonship of
 the rest. For just as it has been shown that His inexplicable
 subsistence excels by an incomparable excellence all other things to
 which He has given existence, so also His Sonship, which is according
 to the nature of the Godhead of the Father, transcends, by an ineffable
 excellence, the sonship of those who have been adopted by Him. For He,
 indeed, is of an immutable nature, every way perfect, and wanting in
 nothing; but these since they are either way subject to change, stand
 in need of help from Him. For what progress can the wisdom of God make?
 What increase can the truth itself and God the Word receive? In what
 respect can the life and the true light be made better? And if this be
 so, how much more unnatural is it that wisdom should ever be capable of
 folly; that the power of God should be conjoined with infirmity; that
 reason should be obscured by unreason; or that darkness should be mixed
 up with the true light? And the apostle says, on this place, "What
 communion hath light with darkness? and what concord hath Christ with
 Belial?" [2421] And Solomon says, that it is not possible that it
 should come to pass that a man should comprehend with his understanding
 "the way of a serpent upon a rock," which is Christ, according to the
 opinion of Paul. But men and angels, who are His creatures, have
 received His blessing that they might make progress, exercising
 themselves in virtues and in the commandments of the law, so as not to
 sin. Wherefore our Lord, since He is by nature the Son of the Father,
 is by all adored. But these, laying aside the spirit of bondage, when
 by brave deeds and by progress they have received the spirit of
 adoption, being blessed by Him who is the Son by nature, are made sons
 by adoption.

 8. And His proper and peculiar, natural and excellent Sonship, St. Paul
 has declared, who thus speaks of God: "Who spared not His own Son, but
 for us," who were not His natural sons, "delivered Him up." [2422] For
 to distinguish Him from those who are not properly sons, He said that
 He was His own Son. And in the Gospel we read: "This is My beloved Son,
 in whom I am well pleased." [2423] Moreover, in the Psalms the Saviour
 says: "The Lord hath said unto Me, Thou art my Son." [2424] Where,
 showing that He is the true and genuine Son, He signifies that there
 are no other genuine sons besides Himself. And what, too, is the
 meaning of this: "From the womb before the morning I begat thee"?
 [2425] Does He not plainly indicate the natural sonship of paternal
 bringing forth, which he obtained not by the careful framing of His
 manners, not by the exercise of and increase in virtue, but by property
 of nature? Wherefore, the only-begotten Son of the Father, indeed,
 possesses an indefectible Sonship; but the adoption of rational sons
 belongs not to them by nature, but is prepared for them by the probity
 of their life, and by the free gift of God. And it is mutable as the
 Scripture recognises: "For when the sons of God saw the daughters of
 men, they took them wives," [2426] etc. And in another place: "I have
 nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled against Me,"
 [2427] as we find God speaking by the prophet Isaiah.

 9. And though I could say much more, brethren beloved, I purposely omit
 to do so, as deeming it to be burdensome at great length to call these
 things to the remembrance of teachers who are of the same mind with
 myself. For ye yourselves are taught of God, nor are ye ignorant that
 this doctrine, which hath lately raised its head against the piety of
 the Church, is that of Ebion and Artemas; nor is it aught else but an
 imitation of Paul of Samosata, bishop of Antioch, who, by the judgment
 and counsel of all the bishops, and in every place, was separated from
 the Church. [2428] To whom Lucian succeeding, remained for many years
 separate from the communion of three bishops. [2429] And now lately
 having drained the dregs of their impiety, there have arisen amongst us
 those who teach this doctrine of a creation from things which are not,
 [2430] their hidden sprouts, Arius and Achilles, and the gathering of
 those who join in their wickedness. And three bishops in Syria, having
 been, in some manner, consecrated on account of their agreement with
 them, incite them to worse things. But let the judgment concerning
 these be reserved for your trial. For they, retaining in their memory
 the words which came to be used with respect to His saving Passion, and
 abasement, and examination, and what they call His poverty, and in
 short of all those things to which the Saviour submitted for our sakes,
 bring them forward to refute His supreme and eternal Godhead. But of
 those words which signify His natural glory and nobility, and abiding
 with the Father, they have become unmindful. Such as this: "I and My
 Father are one," [2431] which indeed the Lord says, not as proclaiming
 Himself to be the Father, nor to demonstrate that two persons are one;
 but that the Son of the Father most exactly preserves the expressed
 likeness of the Father, inasmuch as He has by nature impressed upon Him
 His similitude in every respect, and is the image of the Father in no
 way discrepant, and the expressed figure of the primitive exemplar.
 Whence, also, to Philip, who then was desirous to see Him, the Lord
 shows this abundantly. For when he said, "Show us the Father," [2432]
 He answered: "He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father," since the
 Father was Himself seen through the spotless and living mirror of the
 divine image. Similar to which is what the saints say in the Psalms:
 "In Thy light shall we see light." [2433] Wherefore he that honoureth
 the Son, honoureth the Father also;" [2434] and with reason, for every
 impious word which they dare to speak against the Son, has reference to
 the Father.

 10. But after these things, brethren beloved, what is there wonderful
 in that which I am about to write, if I shall set forth the false
 calumnies against me and our most pious laity? For those who have set
 themselves in array against the Godhead of Christ, do not scruple to
 utter their ungrateful ravings against us. Who will not either that any
 of the ancients should be compared with them, or suffer that any of
 those whom, from our earliest years, we have used as instructors should
 be placed on a level with them. Nay, and they do not think that any of
 all those who are now our colleagues, has attained even to a moderate
 amount of wisdom; boasting themselves to be the only men who are wise
 and divested of worldly possessions, the sole discoverers of dogmas,
 and that to them alone are those things revealed which have never
 before come into the mind of any other under the sun. Oh, the impious
 arrogance! Oh, the immeasurable madness! Oh, the vainglory befitting
 those that are crazed! Oh, the pride of Satan which has taken root in
 their unholy souls. The religious perspicuity of the ancient Scriptures
 caused them no shame, nor did the consentient doctrine of our
 colleagues concerning Christ keep in check their audacity against Him.
 Their impiety not even the demons will bear, who are ever on the watch
 for a blasphemous word uttered against the Son.

 11. And let these things be now urged according to our power against
 those who, with respect to matter which they know nothing of, have, as
 it were, rolled in the dust against Christ, and have taken in hand to
 calumniate our piety towards Him. For those inventors of stupid fables
 say, that we who turn away with aversion from the impious and
 unscriptural blasphemy against Christ, of those who speak of His coming
 from the things which are not assert, that there are two unbegottens.
 For they ignorantly affirm that one of two things must necessarily be
 said, either that He is from things which are not, or that there are
 two unbegottens; nor do those ignorant men know how great is the
 difference between the unbegotten Father, and the things which were by
 Him created from things which are not, as well the rational as the
 irrational. Between which two, as holding the middle place, the only
 begotten nature of God, the Word by which the Father formed all things
 out of nothing, was begotten of the true Father Himself. As in a
 certain place the Lord Himself testified, saying, "Every one that
 loveth Him that begat, loveth Him also that is begotten of Him." [2435]

 12. Concerning whom we thus believe, even as the Apostolic Church
 believes. In one Father unbegotten, who has from no one the cause of
 His being, who is unchangeable and immutable, who is always the same,
 and admits of no increase or diminution; who gave to us the Law, the
 prophets, and the Gospels; who is Lord of the patriarchs and apostles,
 and all the saints. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son
 of God; not begotten of things which are not, but of Him who is the
 Father; not in a corporeal manner, by excision or division as Sabellius
 and Valentinus thought, but in a certain inexplicable and unspeakable
 manner, according to the words of the prophet cited above: "Who shall
 declare His generation?" [2436] Since that His subsistence no nature
 which is begotten can investigate, even as the Father can be
 investigated by none; because that the nature of rational beings cannot
 receive the knowledge of His divine generation by the Father. But men
 who are moved by the Spirit of truth, have no need to learn these
 things from me, for in our ears are sounding the words before uttered
 by Christ on this very thing, "No man knoweth the Father, save the Son;
 and no man knoweth who the Son is, save the Father." [2437] That He is
 equally with the Father unchangeable and immutable, wanting in nothing,
 and the perfect Son, and like to the Father, we have learnt; in this
 alone is He inferior to the Father, that He is not unbegotten. For He
 is the very exact image of the Father, and in nothing differing from
 Him. For it is clear that He is the image fully containing all things
 by which the greatest similitude is declared, as the Lord Himself hath
 taught us, when He says, "My Father is greater than I." [2438] And
 according to this we believe that the Son is of the Father, always
 existing. "For He is the brightness of His glory, the express image of
 His Father's person." [2439] But let no one take that word always so as
 to raise suspicion that He is unbegotten, as they imagine who have
 their senses blinded. For neither are the words, "He was," or "always,"
 or "before all worlds," equivalent to unbegotten. But neither can the
 human mind employ any other word to signify unbegotten. And thus I
 think that you understand it, and I trust to your right purpose in all
 things, since these words do not at all signify unbegotten. For these
 words seem to denote simply a lengthening out of time, but the Godhead,
 and as it were the antiquity of the only-begotten, they cannot worthily
 signify; but they have been employed by holy men, whilst each,
 according to his capacity, seeks to express this mystery, asking
 indulgence from the hearers, and pleading a reasonable excuse, in
 saying, Thus far have we attained. But if there be any who are
 expecting from mortal lips some word which exceeds human capacity,
 saying that those things have been done away which are known in part,
 it is manifest that the words, "He was," and "always," and "before all
 ages," come far short of what they hoped. And whatever word shall be
 employed is not equivalent to unbegotten. Therefore to the unbegotten
 Father, indeed, we ought to preserve His proper dignity, in confessing
 that no one is the cause of His being; but to the Son must be allotted
 His fitting honour, in assigning to Him, as we have said, a generation
 from the Father without beginning, and allotting adoration to Him, so
 as only piously and properly to use the words, "He was," and "always,"
 and "before all worlds," with respect to Him; by no means rejecting His
 Godhead, but ascribing to Him a similitude which exactly answers in
 every respect to the Image and Exemplar of the Father. But we must say
 that to the Father alone belongs the property of being unbegotten, for
 the Saviour Himself said, "My Father is greater than I." [2440] And
 besides the pious opinion concerning the Father and the Son, we confess
 to one Holy Spirit, as the divine Scriptures teach us; who hath
 inaugurated both the holy men of the Old Testament, and the divine
 teachers of that which is called the New. And besides, also, one only
 Catholic and Apostolic Church, which can never be destroyed, though all
 the world should seek to make war with it; but it is victorious over
 every most impious revolt of the heretics who rise up against it. For
 her Goodman hath confirmed our minds by saying, "Be of good cheer, I
 have overcome the world." [2441] After this we know of the resurrection
 of the dead, the first-fruits of which was our Lord Jesus Christ, who
 in very deed, and not in appearance merely, carried a body, of Mary
 Mother of God, who in the end of the world came to the human race to
 put away sin, was crucified and died, and yet did He not thus perceive
 any detriment to His divinity, being raised from the dead, taken up
 into heaven, seated at the right hand of majesty.

 13. These things in part have I written in this epistle, thinking it
 burdensome to write out each accurately, even as I said before, because
 they escape not your religious diligence. Thus do we teach, thus do we
 preach. These are the apostolic doctrines of the Church, for which also
 we die, esteeming those but little who would compel us to forswear
 them, even if they would force us by tortures, and not casting away our
 hope in them. To these Arius and Achilles opposing themselves, and
 those who with them are the enemies of the truth, have been expelled
 from the Church, as being aliens from our holy doctrine, according to
 the blessed Paul, who says, "If any man preach any other gospel unto
 you than that ye have received, let him be accursed; even though he
 feign himself an angel from heaven." [2442] And also, "If any man teach
 otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus
 Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness; he is
 proud, knowing nothing," [2443] and so forth. These, therefore, who
 have been anathematized by the brotherhood, let no one of you receive,
 nor admit of those things which are either said or written by them. For
 these seducers do always lie, nor will they ever speak the truth. They
 go about the cities, attempting nothing else but that under the mark of
 friendship and the name of peace, by their hypocrisy and blandishments,
 they may give and receive letters, to deceive by means of these a few
 "silly women, and laden with sins, who have been led captive by them,"
 [2444] and so forth.

 14. These men, therefore, who have dared such things against Christ;
 who have partly in public derided the Christian religion; partly seek
 to traduce and inform against its professors before the judgment-seats;
 who in a time of peace, as far as in them lies, have stirred up a
 persecution against us; who have enervated the ineffable mystery of
 Christ's generation; from these, I say, beloved and like-minded
 brethren, turning away in aversion, give your suffrages with us against
 their mad daring; even as our colleagues have done, who being moved
 with indignation, have both written to us letters against these men,
 and have subscribed our letter. Which also I have sent unto you by my
 son Apion the deacon, being some of them from the whole of Egypt and
 the Thebaid, some from Libya and Pentapolis. There are others also from
 Syria, Lycia, Pamphylia, Asia, Cappadocia, and the other neighbouring
 provinces. After the example of which I trust also that I shall receive
 letters from you. For though I have prepared many helps towards curing
 those who have suffered injury, this is the especial remedy that has
 been devised for healing the multitudes that have been deceived by
 them, that they may comply with the general consent of our colleagues,
 and thus hasten to return to repentance. Salute one another, together
 with the brethren who are with you. I pray that ye may be strong in the
 Lord, beloved, and that I may profit by your love towards Christ.

 [2403] [a.d. 321.] Apud. Theodoritum, Hist. Eccl., book i. chap. 4.

 [2404] [See p. 290, note 1, supra.]

 [2405] Colluthus, being a presbyter of Alexandria, puffed up with
 arrogance and temerity, had acted as a bishop, and had ordained many
 priests and deacons. But in the synod that was assembled at Alexandria
 all his acts of ordination were rescinded; and those who had been
 ordained by him degraded to the rank of laymen.--Tr.

 [2406] [Perhaps a quotation, and hence a token of verity as to what is
 narrated of Peter, p. 263, note 4, supra.]

 [2407] It is inferred from these words that this letter of Alexander
 was written after the Synod of Alexandria in which Arius and his
 companion were condemned. But Alexander convened two synods of the
 bishops of Egypt against Arius and his friends.--Tr.

 [2408] Isa. i. 2.

 [2409] Ps. xlv. 7.

 [2410] [The two tests, or criteria, of Arianism. The Arians affirmed
 (1) the formula ex ouk onton , and (2) the en pote hote ouk en.

 [2411] John i. 18.

 [2412] John i. 1-3.

 [2413] Ecclus. iii. 22. [Compare the canonical equivalent, Ps. cxxxi.
 1.]

 [2414] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

 [2415] Gen. xv. 5.

 [2416] Ecclus. i. 2.

 [2417] Isa. liii. 8.

 [2418] Matt. xi. 27.

 [2419] Col. i. 16, 17.

 [2420] Prov. viii. 30 (LXX.).

 [2421] 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15.

 [2422] Rom. viii. 32.

 [2423] Matt. iii. 17.

 [2424] Ps. xi. 7.

 [2425] Ps. cx. 3 (LXX.).

 [2426] Gen. vi. 2.

 [2427] Isa. i. 2.

 [2428] [a.d. 269.]

 [2429] [By the canons three bishops were necessary to ordain one to the
 episcopate, nor was communion with fewer than these Catholic.]

 [2430] [See p. 292, note 3, supra.]

 [2431] John x. 30.

 [2432] John xiv. 8, 9.

 [2433] Ps. xxxvi. 9.

 [2434] Ps. xxxvi. 9.

 [2435] John v. 1.

 [2436] Isa. liii. 8.

 [2437] Matt. xi. 27.

 [2438] John xiv. 28.

 [2439] Heb. i. 3.

 [2440] John xiv. 28.

 [2441] John xvi. 33.

 [2442] Gal. i. 8, 9.

 [2443] 1 Tim. vi. 3, 4.

 [2444] 2 Tim. iii. 4.

 II.--Epistle Catholic. [2445]

 To our beloved and most reverend fellow-ministers of the Catholic
 Church in every place, Alexander sends greeting in the Lord:

 1. Since the body of the Catholic Church is one, [2446] and it is
 commanded in Holy Scripture that we should keep the bond of unanimity
 and peace, it follows that we should write and signify to one another
 the things which are done by each of us; that whether one member suffer
 or rejoice we may all either suffer or rejoice with one another. In our
 diocese, then, not so long ago, there have gone forth lawless men, and
 adversaries of Christ, teaching men to apostatize; which thing, with
 good right, one might suspect and call the precursor of Antichrist. I
 indeed wished to cover the matter up in silence, that so perhaps the
 evil might spend itself in the leaders of the heresy alone, and that it
 might not spread to other places and defile the ears of any of the more
 simple-minded. But since Eusebius, the present bishop of Nicomedia,
 imagining that with him rest all ecclesiastical matters, [2447]
 because, having left Berytus and cast his eyes upon the church of the
 Nicomedians, and no punishment has been inflicted upon him, he is set
 over these apostates, and has undertaken to write everywhere,
 commending them, if by any means he may draw aside some who are
 ignorant to this most disgraceful and Antichristian heresy; it became
 necessary for me, as knowing what is written in the law, no longer to
 remain silent, but to announce to you all, that you may know both those
 who have become apostates, and also the wretched words of their heresy;
 and if Eusebius write, not to give heed to him.

 2. For he, desiring by their assistance to renew that ancient
 wickedness of his mind, with respect to which he has for a time been
 silent, pretends that he is writing in their behalf, but he proves by
 his deed that he is exerting himself to do this on his own account. Now
 the apostates from the Church are these: Arius, Achilles, [2448]
 Aithales, Carpones, the other Arius, Sarmates, who were formerly
 priests; Euzoius, Lucius, Julius, Menas, Helladius, and Gaius, formerly
 deacons; and with them Secundus and Theonas, who were once called
 bishops. And the words invented by them, and spoken contrary to the
 mind of Scripture, are as follows:--

 "God was not always the Father; but there was a time when God was not
 the Father. The Word of God was not always, but was made from things
 that are not;' for He who is God fashioned the non-existing from the
 non-existing; wherefore there was a time when He was not. For the Son
 is a thing created, and a thing made: nor is He like to the Father in
 substance; nor is He the true and natural Word of the Father; nor is He
 His true Wisdom; but He is one of the things fashioned and made. And He
 is called, by a misapplication of the terms, the Word and Wisdom, since
 He is Himself made by the proper Word of God, and by that wisdom which
 is in God, in which, as God made all other things, so also did He make
 Him. Wherefore, He is by His very nature changeable and mutable,
 equally with other rational beings. The Word, too, is alien and
 separate from the substance of God. The father also is ineffable to the
 Son; for neither does the Word perfectly and accurately know the
 Father, neither can He perfectly see Him. For neither does the Son
 indeed know His own substance as it is. Since He for our sakes was
 made, that by Him as by an instrument God might create us; nor would He
 have existed had not God wished to make us. Some one asked of them
 whether the Son of God could change even as the devil changed; and they
 feared not to answer that He can; for since He was made and created, He
 is of mutable nature."

 3. Since those about Arius speak these things and shamelessly maintain
 them, we, coming together with the Bishops of Egypt and the Libyas,
 nearly a hundred in number, have anathematized them, together with
 their followers. But those about Eusebius have received them, earnestly
 endeavouring to mix up falsehood with truth, impiety with piety. But
 they will not prevail; for the truth prevails, and there is no
 communion betwixt light and darkness, no concord between Christ and
 Belial. [2449] For who ever heard such things? or who, now hearing
 them, is not astonished, and does not stop his ears that the pollution
 of these words should not touch them? Who that hears John saying, "In
 the beginning was the Word," [2450] does not condemn those who say
 there was a time when He was not? Who that hears these words of the
 Gospel, "the only-begotten Son;" [2451] and, "by Him were all things
 made," [2452] will not hate those who declare He is one of the things
 made? For how can He be one of the things made by Him? or how shall He
 be the only-begotten who, as they say, is reckoned with all the rest,
 if indeed He is a thing made and created? And how can He be made of
 things which are not, when the Father says, "My heart belched forth a
 good Word;" [2453] and, "From the womb, before the morning have I
 begotten Thee?" [2454] Or how is He unlike to the substance of the
 Father, who is the perfect image and brightness of the Father, and who
 says, "He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father?" [2455] And how, if
 the Son is the Word or Wisdom and Reason of God, was there a time when
 He was not? It is all one as if they said, that there was a time when
 God was without reason and wisdom. How, also, can He be changeable and
 mutable, who says indeed by Himself: "I am in the Father, and the
 Father in Me," [2456] and, "I and My Father are one;" [2457] and by the
 prophet, "I am the Lord, I change not?" [2458] For even though one
 saying may refer to the Father Himself, yet it would now be more aptly
 spoken of the Word, because when He became man, He changed not; but, as
 says the apostle, "Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, today, and for
 ever." [2459] Who hath induced them to say, that for our sakes He was
 made; although Paul says, "for whom are all things, and by whom are all
 things?" [2460]

 4. Now concerning their blasphemous assertion who say that the Son does
 not perfectly know the Father, we need not wonder: for having once
 purposed in their mind to wage war against Christ, they impugn also
 these words of His, "As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the
 Father." [2461] Wherefore, if the Father only in part knoweth the Son,
 then it is evident that the Son doth not perfectly know the Father. But
 if it be wicked thus to speak, and if the Father perfectly knows the
 Son, it is plain that, even as the Father knoweth His own Word, so also
 the Word knoweth His own Father, of whom He is the Word.

 5. By saying these things, and by unfolding the divine Scriptures, we
 have often refuted them. But they, chameleon-like, changing their
 sentiments, endeavour to claim for themselves that saying: "When the
 wicked cometh, then cometh contempt." [2462] Before them, indeed, many
 heresies existed, which, having dared more than was right, have fallen
 into madness. But these by all their words have attempted to do away
 with the Godhead of Christ, have made those seem righteous, since they
 have come nearer to Antichrist. Wherefore they have been excommunicated
 and anathematized by the Church. [2463] And indeed, although we grieve
 at the destruction of these men, especially that after having once
 learned the doctrine of the Church, they have now gone back; yet we do
 not wonder at it; for this very thing Hymenæus and Philetus suffered,
 [2464] and before them Judas, who, though he followed the Saviour,
 afterwards became a traitor and an apostate. Moreover, concerning these
 very men, warnings are not wanting to us, for the Lord foretold: "Take
 heed that ye be not deceived: for many shall come in My Name, saying, I
 am Christ; and the time draweth near: go ye not therefore after them."
 [2465] Paul, too, having learnt these things from the Saviour, wrote,
 "In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to
 seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils which turn away from the
 truth." [2466]

 6. Since, therefore, our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ has thus Himself
 exhorted us, and by His apostle hath signified such things to us; we,
 who have heard their impiety with our own ears, have consistently
 anathematized such men, as I have already said, and have declared them
 to be aliens from the Catholic Church and faith, and we have made known
 the thing, beloved and most honoured fellow-ministers, to your piety,
 that you should not receive any of them, should they venture rashly to
 come unto you, and that you should not trust Eusebius or any one else
 who writes concerning them. For it becomes us as Christians to turn
 with aversion from all who speak or think against Christ, as the
 adversaries of God and the destroyers of souls, and "not even to wish
 them Godspeed, lest at any time we become partakers of their evil
 deeds," [2467] as the blessed John enjoins. Salute the brethren who are
 with you. Those who are with me salute you.

 Signators

 Presbyters of Alexandria.

 I, Colluthus, presbyter, [2468] give my suffrage to the things which
 are written, and also for the deposition of Arius, and those who are
 guilty of impiety with him.

 Alexander, presbyter, in like manner.

 Dioscorus, presbyter, in like manner.

 Dionysius, presbyter, in like manner.

 Eusebius, presbyter, in like manner.

 Alexander, presbyter, in like manner.

 Nilaras, presbyter, in like manner.

 Arpocration, presbyter, in like manner.

 Agathus, presbyter.

 Nemesius, presbyter.

 Longus, presbyter.

 Silvanus, presbyter.

 Perous, presbyter.

 Apis, presbyter.

 Proterius, presbyter.

 Paulus, presbyter.

 Cyrus, presbyter, in like manner.

 Deacons.

 Ammonius, deacon, in like manner.

 Macarius, deacon.

 Pistus, deacon, in like manner.

 Athanasius, deacon.

 Eumenes, deacon.

 Apollonius, deacon.

 Olympius, deacon.

 Aphthonius, deacon.

 Athanasius, deacon. [2469]

 Macarius, deacon, in like manner.

 Paulus, deacon.

 Petrus, deacon.

 Ambytianus, deacon.

 Gaius, deacon, in like manner.

 Alexander, deacon.

 Dionysius, deacon.

 Agathon, deacon.

 Polybius, deacon, in like manner.

 Theonas, deacon.

 Marcus, deacon.

 Commodus, deacon.

 Serapion, deacon.

 Nilus, deacon.

 Romanus, deacon, in like manner.

 Presbytery of Mareotis.

 I, Apollonius, presbyter, give my suffrage to the things which are
 written, and also for the deposition of Arius, and of those who are
 guilty of impiety with him.

 Ingenius, presbyter, in like manner.

 Ammonius, presbyter.

 Tyrannus, presbyter.

 Copres, presbyter.

 Ammonas, presbyter.

 Orion, presbyter.

 Serenus, presbyter.

 Didymus, presbyter.

 Heracles, presbyter.

 Dioscorus, presbyter.

 Sostras, presbyter.

 Theon, presbyter.

 Boccon, presbyter.

 Agathus, presbyter.

 Achilles, presbyter.

 Paulus, presbyter.

 Thalelæus, presbyter.

 Dionysius, presbyter, in like manner.

 Deacons.

 Sarapion, deacon, in like manner.

 Justus, deacon, in like manner.

 Didymus, deacon.

 Demetrius, deacon.

 Maurus, deacon.

 Alexander, deacon.

 Marcus, deacon.

 Comon, deacon.

 Tryphon, deacon.

 Ammonius, deacon.

 Didymus, deacon.

 Ptollarion, deacon.

 Seras, deacon.

 Gaius, deacon.

 Hierax, deacon.

 Marcus, deacon.

 Theonas, deacon.

 Sarmaton, deacon.

 Carpon, deacon.

 Zoilus, deacon, in like manner.

 [2445] Taken from the Works of St. Athanasius, vol. i. part i. p. 397,
 seqq., edit. Benedic. Paris, 1698.

 [2446] [Elucidation II.]

 [2447] [Imagining. Compare Hippolytus, vol. v. pp. 156 and 158, supra.
 This expression seems to have been a sort of formula.]

 [2448] [See p. 290, note 1, supra.]

 [2449] 2 Cor. vi. 14.

 [2450] John i. 1.

 [2451] John i. 18.

 [2452] John i. 3.

 [2453] Ps. xlv. 1.

 [2454] Ps. cx. 3; Heb. i. 3.

 [2455] John xiv. 9.

 [2456] John xiv. 10.

 [2457] John x. 30.

 [2458] Mal. iii. 6.

 [2459] Heb. xiii. 8.

 [2460] Heb. xi. 10.

 [2461] John x. 15.

 [2462] Prov. xviii. 3.

 [2463] [See the signators to this decree in the subjoined fragment.]

 [2464] 2 Tim. ii. 17.

 [2465] Luke xxi. 8.

 [2466] 1 Tim. iv. 1.

 [2467] 2 John 10.

 [2468] [See p. 291, note 3, supra.]

 [2469] [Note this name.]

 III.--Epistle. [2470]

 Alexander, to the priests and deacons, Alexandria and Mareotis, being
 present to them present, brethren beloved in the Lord, sends greeting:

 Although you have been forward to subscribe the letters that I sent to
 those about Arius, urging them to abjure their impiety, and to obey the
 wholesome and Catholic faith; and in this manner have shown your
 orthodox purpose, and your agreement in the doctrines of the Catholic
 Church; yet because I have also sent letters to all our
 fellow-ministers in every place with respect to the things which
 concern Arius and his companions; I have thought it necessary to call
 together you the clergy of the city, and to summon you also of
 Mareotis; especially since of your number Chares and Pistus, the
 priests; Sarapion, Parammon, Zosimus, and Irenæus, the deacons, have
 gone over to the party of Arius, and have preferred to be deposed with
 them; that you may know what is now written, and that you should
 declare your consent in these matters, and give your suffrage for the
 deposition of those about Arius and Pistus. For it is right that you
 should know what I have written, and that you should each one, as if he
 had written it himself retain it in his heart.

 [2470] Athanas. ibid., p. 396. On the deposition of Arius and his
 followers by Alexander, archbishop of Alexandria.

 IV.--Epistle to Æglon, Bishop of Cynopolis, Against the Arians. [2471]

 From a letter of St. Alexander, bishop of Alexandria, to Æglon, bishop
 of Cynopolis, against the Arians.

 1. Natural will is the free faculty of every intelligent nature as
 having nothing involuntary which is in respect of its essence.

 2. Natural operation is the innate motion of all substance. Natural
 operation is the substantial and notifying reason of every nature.
 Natural operation is the notifying virtue of every substance.

 [2471] Two fragments from an epistle. St. Maxim., Theological and
 Polemical Works, vol. ii. pp. 152-155. Edit. Paris, 1675.

 V.--On the Soul and Body and the Passion of the Lord. [2472]

 1. The Word which is ungrudgingly sent down from heaven, is fitted for
 the irrigation of our hearts, if we have been prepared for His power,
 not by speaking only, but by listening. For as the rain without the
 ground does not produce fruit, so neither does the Word fructify
 without hearing, nor hearing without the Word. Moreover, the Word then
 becomes fruitful when we pronounce it, and in the same way hearing,
 when we listen. Therefore since the Word draws forth its power, do you
 also ungrudgingly lend your ears, and when you come to hear, cleanse
 yourselves from all ill-will and unbelief. Two very bad things are
 ill-will and unbelief, both of which are contrary to righteousness; for
 ill-will is opposed to charity, and unbelief to faith; just in the same
 way as bitterness is opposed to sweetness, darkness to light, evil to
 good, death to life, falsehood to truth. Those, therefore, who abound
 in these vices that are repugnant to virtue, are in a manner dead; for
 the malignant and the unbelieving hate charity and faith, and they who
 do this are the enemies of God.

 2. Since therefore ye know, brethren beloved, that the malignant and
 the unbelieving are the enemies of righteousness, beware of these,
 embrace faith and charity, by which all the holy men who have existed
 from the beginning of the world to this day have attained unto
 salvation. And show forth the fruit of charity, not in words only, but
 also in deeds, that is, in all godly patience for God's sake. For, see!
 the Lord Himself hath shown His charity towards us, not only in words
 but also in deeds, since He hath given Himself up as the price of our
 salvation. Besides, we were not created, like the rest of the world, by
 word alone, but also by deed. For God made the world to exist by the
 power of a single word, but us He produced by the efficacy alike of His
 word and working. For it was not enough for God to say, "Let us make
 man in our image, after our likeness," [2473] but deed followed word;
 for, taking the dust from the ground, He formed man out of it,
 conformable to His image and similitude, and into him He breathed the
 breath of life, so that Adam became a living soul.

 3. But when man afterwards by his fall had inclined to death, it was
 necessary that that form should be recreated anew to salvation by the
 same Artificer. For the form indeed lay rotting in the ground; but that
 inspiration which had been as the breath of life, was detained separate
 from the body in a dark place, which is called Hades. There was,
 therefore, a division of the soul from the body; it was banished ad
 inferos, whilst the latter was resolved into dust; and there was a
 great interval of separation between them; for the body, by the
 dissolution of the flesh, becomes corrupt; the soul being loosened from
 it, its action ceases. For as when the king is thrown into chains, the
 city falls to ruin; or as when the general is taken captive, the army
 is scattered abroad; or as when the helmsman is shaken off, the vessel
 is submerged; so when the soul is bound in chains, its body goes to
 pieces; as the city without its king, so its members are dissolved; as
 is the case with an army when its general is lost, they are drowned in
 death, even as happens to a vessel when deprived of its helmsman. The
 soul, therefore, governed the man, as long as the body survived; even
 as the king governs the city, the general the army, the helmsman the
 ship. But it was powerless to rule it, from the time when it was
 immoveably tied to it, and became immersed in error; therefore it was
 that it declined from the straight path, and followed tempters, giving
 heed to fornication, idolatry, and shedding of blood; by which evil
 deeds it has destroyed the proper manhood. Nay, but itself also being
 carried at length to the lower regions, it was there detained by the
 wicked tempter. Else was it wont, as the king restores the ruined city,
 the general collects the dispersed army, the sailor repairs the broken
 ship, even so, I say, the soul used to minister supplies to the body
 before that the body was dissolved in the dust, being not as yet itself
 bound fast with fetters. But after that the soul became bound, not with
 material fetters but with sins, and thus was rendered impotent to act,
 then it left its body in the ground, and being cast down to the lower
 regions, it was made the footstool of death, and despicable to all.

 4. Man went forth from paradise to a region which was the sink of
 unrighteousness, fornication, adultery, and cruel murder. And there he
 found his destruction; for all things conspired to his death, and
 worked the ruin of him who had hardly entered there. Meanwhile man
 wanted some consolation and assistance and rest. For when was it well
 with man? In his mother's womb? But when he was shut up there, he
 differed but little from the dead. When he was nourished with milk from
 the breast? Not even then, indeed, did he feel any joy. Was it rather
 whilst he was coming to maturity? But then, especially, dangers
 impended over him from his youthful lusts. Was it, lastly, when he grew
 old? Nay, but then does he begin to groan, being pressed down by the
 weight of old age, and the expectation of death. For what else is old
 age but the expectation of death? Verily all the inhabitants of earth
 do die, young men and old, little children and adults, for no age or
 bodily stature is exempt from death. Why, then, is man tormented by
 this exceeding grief? Doubtless the very aspect of death begets
 sadness; for we behold in a dead man the face changed, the figure dead,
 the body shrunk up with emaciation, the mouth silent, the skin cold,
 the carcase prostrate on the ground, the eyes sunken, the limbs
 immoveable, the flesh wasted away, the veins congealed, the bones
 whitened, the joints dissolved, all parts of him reduced to dust, and
 the man no longer existing. What, then, is man? A flower, I say, that
 is but for a little time, which in his mother's womb is not apparent,
 in youth flourishes, but which in old age withers and departs in death.

 5. But now, after all this bondage to death and corruption of the
 manhood, God hath visited His creature, which He formed after His own
 image and similitude; and this He hath done that it might not for ever
 be the sport of death. Therefore God sent down from heaven His
 incorporeal Son to take flesh upon Him in the Virgin's womb; and thus,
 equally as thou, was He made man; to save lost man, and collect all His
 scattered members. For Christ, when He joined the manhood to His
 person, united that which death by the separation of the body had
 dispersed. Christ suffered that we should live for ever.

 For else why should Christ have died? Had He committed anything worthy
 of death? Why did He clothe Himself in flesh who was invested with
 glory? And since He was God, why did He become man? And since He
 reigned in heaven, why did He come down to earth, and become incarnate
 in the virgin's womb? What necessity, I ask, impelled God to come down
 to earth, to assume flesh, to be wrapped in swaddling clothes in a
 manger-cradle, to be nourished with the milk from the breast, to
 receive baptism from a servant, to be lifted up upon the cross, to be
 interred in an earthly sepulchre, to rise again the third day from the
 dead? [2474] What necessity, I say, impelled Him to this? It is
 sufficiently discovered that He suffered shame for man's sake, to set
 him free from death; and that He exclaimed, as in the words of the
 prophet, "I have endured as a travailing woman." [2475] In very deed
 did He endure for our sakes sorrow, ignominy, torment, even death
 itself, and burial. For thus He says Himself by the prophet: "I went
 down into the deep." [2476] Who made Him thus to go down? The impious
 people. Behold, ye sons of men, behold what recompense Israel made unto
 Him! She slew her Benefactor, returning evil for good, affliction for
 joy, death for life. They slew by nailing to the tree Him who had
 brought to life their dead, had healed their maimed, had made their
 lepers clean, had given light to their blind. Behold, ye sons of men!
 behold, all ye people, these new wonders! They suspended Him on the
 tree, who stretches out the earth; they transfixed Him with nails who
 laid firm the foundation of the world; they circumscribed Him who
 circumscribed the heavens; they bound Him who absolves sinners; they
 gave Him vinegar to drink who hath made them to drink of righteousness;
 they fed Him with gall who hath offered to them the Bread of Life; they
 caused corruption to come upon His hands, and feet who healed their
 hands and feet; they violently closed His eyes who restored sight to
 them; they gave Him over to the tomb, who raised their dead to life
 both in the time before His Passion and also whilst He was hanging on
 the tree.

 6. For when our Lord was suffering upon the cross, the tombs were burst
 open, the infernal region was disclosed, the souls leapt forth, the
 dead returned to life, and many of them were seen in Jerusalem, whilst
 the mystery of the cross was being perfected; what time our Lord
 trampled upon death, dissolved the enmity, bound the strong man, and
 raised the trophy of the cross, His body being lifted up upon it, that
 the body might appear on high, and death to be depressed under the foot
 of flesh. Then the heavenly powers wondered, the angels were
 astonished, the elements trembled, every creature was shaken whilst
 they looked on this new mystery, and the terrific spectacle which was
 being enacted in the universe. Yet the entire people, as unconscious of
 the mystery, exulted over Christ in derision; although the earth was
 rocking, the mountains, the valleys, and the sea were shaken, and every
 creature of God was smitten with confusion. The lights of heaven were
 afraid, the sun fled away, the moon disappeared, the stars withdrew
 their shining, the day came to end; [2477] the angel in astonishment
 departed from the temple after the rending of the veil, and darkness
 covered the earth on which its Lord had closed His eyes. Meanwhile hell
 [2478] was with light resplendent, for thither had the star descended.
 The Lord, indeed, did not descend into hell in His body but in His
 Spirit. He forsooth is working everywhere, for whilst He raised the
 dead by His body, by His spirit was He liberating their souls. For when
 the body of the Lord was hung upon the cross, the tombs, as we have
 said, were opened; hell was unbarred. the dead received their life, the
 souls were sent back again into the world, and that because the Lord
 had conquered hell, had trodden down death, had covered the enemy with
 shame; therefore was it that the souls came forth from Hades, and the
 dead appeared upon the earth.

 7. Ye see, therefore, how great was the effect of the death of Christ,
 for no creature endured His fall with equal mind, nor did the elements
 His Passion, neither did the earth retain His body, nor hell His
 Spirit. All things were in the Passion of Christ disturbed and
 convulsed. The Lord exclaimed, as once before to Lazarus, Come forth,
 ye dead, from your tombs and your secret places; for I, the Christ,
 give unto you resurrection. For then the earth could not long hold the
 body of our Lord that in it was buried; but it exclaimed, O my Lord,
 pardon mine iniquities, save me from Thy wrath, absolve me from the
 curse, for I have received the blood of the righteous, and yet I have
 not covered the bodies of men or Thine own body! What is at length this
 wonderful mystery? Why, O Lord, didst Thou come down to earth, unless
 it was for man's sake, who has been scattered everywhere: for in every
 place has Thy fair image been disseminated? Nay! but if thou shouldest
 give but one little word, at the instant all bodies would stand before
 Thee. Now, since Thou hast come to earth, and hast sought for the
 members of Thy fashioning, undertake for man who is Thine own, receive
 that which is committed to Thee, recover Thine image, Thine Adam. Then
 the Lord, the third day after His death, rose again, thus bringing man
 to a knowledge of the Trinity. Then all the nations of the human race
 were saved by Christ. One submitted to the judgment, and many thousands
 were absolved. Moreover, He being made like to man whom He had saved,
 ascended to the height of heaven, to offer before His Father, not gold
 or silver, or precious stones, but the man whom He had formed after His
 own image and similitude; and the Father, raising Him to His right
 hand, hath seated Him upon a throne on high, and hath made Him to be
 judge of the peoples, the leader of the angelic host, the charioteer of
 the cherubim, the Son of the true Jerusalem, the Virgin's spouse, and
 King for ever and ever. Amen.

 [2472] Many writings of the ancients, as Cardinal Mai has remarked, may
 be disinterred from the Oriental manuscripts in the Vatican library,
 some of which have been brought to light by that eminent scholar. In an
 Arabic ms. he discovered a large portion of the following discourse by
 St. Alexander, the patriarch of Alexandria, which he afterwards met
 with entire in the Syrian Vatican manuscript 368. The Greek version
 being lost, Mai, with the assistance of the erudite Maronites, Matthæus
 Sciahuanus, and Franciscus Mehasebus, translated the discourse into
 Latin, and his version has been chiefly followed in the following
 translation. Of its genuineness there is no doubt, and it is quite
 worthy of a place among his other writings.

 [2473] Gen. i. 26.

 [2474] The passage, as far as to "rise again the third day from the
 dead," is generally marked with inverted commas, and Mai remarks that
 it had been already brought to light by him under the name of the same
 Alexander, in the Spicileg. Roman., vol. iii. p. 699, amongst some
 extracts of the Fathers from the Arabic Vatican Codex, 101, in which is
 contained the celebrated Monophysite work entitled Fides Patrum. It is
 established therefore that this discourse was written in Greek by
 Alexander, and afterwards translated not only into the Syriac, but also
 into the Arabic language. [I have made this passage into a paragraph
 distinct from the rest.]

 [2475] Isa. xlii. 14.

 [2476] Jonah ii. 4.

 [2477] [Vol. iii. 58, this series. The patristic testimony is
 overwhelming and sufficient. See Africanus, p. 136, supra, and a full
 discussion of his statement in Routh, R. S., ii. p. 477.]

 [2478] Hades.

 VI.--The Addition in the Codex, with a Various Reading.

 God, therefore, wishing to visit His own form which He had fashioned
 after His own image and similitude, hath in these last times sent into
 the world His incorporeal and only Son, who being in the Virgin's womb
 incarnate, was born perfect man to raise erect lost man, re-collecting
 His scattered members. For why else should Christ have died? Was He
 capitally accused? And since He was God, why was He made man? Why did
 He who was reigning in heaven come down to earth? Who compelled God to
 come down to earth, to take flesh of the holy Virgin, to be wrapped in
 swaddling clothes and laid in a manger, to be nourished with milk, to
 be baptized in the Jordan, to be mocked of the people, to be nailed to
 the tree, to be buried in the bosom of the earth, and the third day to
 rise again from the dead; in the cause of redemption to give life for
 life, blood for blood, to undergo death for death? For Christ, by
 dying, hath discharged the debt of death to which man was obnoxious.
 Oh, the new and ineffable mystery! the Judge was judged. He who
 absolves from sin was bound; He was mocked who once framed the world;
 He was stretched upon the cross who stretched out the heavens; He was
 fed with gall who gave the manna to be bread; He died who gives life.
 He was given up to the tomb who raises the dead. The powers were
 astonished, the angels wondered, the elements trembled, the whole
 created universe was shaken, the earth quaked, and its foundations
 rocked; the sun fled away, the elements were subverted, the light of
 day receded; because they could not bear to look upon their crucified
 Lord. [2479] The creature, in amazement, said, What is this novel
 mystery? The judge is judged and is silent; the invisible is seen and
 is not confounded; the incomprehensible is grasped and is not indignant
 at it; the immeasurable is contained in a measure and makes no
 opposition; the impassable suffers and does not avenge its own injury;
 the immortal dies and complains not; the celestial is buried and bears
 it with an equal mind. What, I say, is this mystery? The creature
 surely is transfixed with amazement. But when our Lord rose from death
 and trampled it down, when He bound the strong man and set man free,
 then every creature wondered at the Judge who for Adam's sake was
 judged, at the invisible being seen, at the impassable suffering, at
 the immortal dead, at the celestial buried in the earth. For our Lord
 was made man; He was condemned that He might impart compassion; He was
 bound that He might set free; He was apprehended that He might
 liberate; He suffered that He might heal our sufferings; He died to
 restore life to us; He was buried to raise us up. For when our Lord
 suffered, His humanity suffered, that which He had like unto man; and
 He dissolves the sufferings of him who is His like, and by dying He
 hath destroyed death. It was for this cause that He came down upon
 earth, that by pursuing death He might kill the rebel that slew men.
 For one underwent the judgment, and myriads were set free; one was
 buried, and myriads rose again. He is the Mediator between God and man;
 He is the resurrection and the salvation of all; He is the Guide of the
 erring, the Shepherd of men who have been set free, the life of the
 dead, the charioteer of the cherubim, the standard-bearer of the
 angels, and the King of kings, to whom be glory for ever and ever.
 Amen.

 [2479] Here, again, we have this fact insisted on. See p. 301, note 4.

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (Some points, p. 289.)

 That the theology of the great school of Alexandria had a character of
 its own, is most apparent; I should be the last to deny it. As its
 succession of teachers was like that of hereditary descent in a family,
 a family likeness is naturally to be found in this school, from the
 great Clement to the great Athanasius. It is a school that hands on the
 traditions in which Apollos had been reared; it not less reflects the
 Greek influences always dominant in the capital of the Macedonian hero;
 but it is a school in which the Gospel of Christ as the Light of the
 world was always made predominant: and, while a most liberal view of
 human knowledge was inculcated in it, yet the faith was always exalted
 as the mother and mistress of the true gnosis and of all science. The
 wise men of this world were summoned with an imperial voice, from this
 eldest seat and centre of Christian learning, to cast their crowns and
 their treasures at the feet of Jesus. With a generous patronage Clement
 conceded all he could to the philosophy of the Greeks, and yet
 sublimely rose above it to a sphere it never discovered, and looked
 down upon all merely human intellect and its achievements like Uriel in
 the sun.

 It was the special though unconscious mission of this school to prepare
 the way, and to shape the thought of Christendom, for the great epoch
 of the (nominal) conversion of the empire, and for the all-important
 synodical period, its logical consequence. It was in this school that
 the technical formulas of the Church were naturally wrought out. The
 process was like that of the artist who has first to make his own
 tools. He does many things, and resorts to many contrivances, never
 afterwards necessary when once the tools are complete and his
 laboratory furnished with all he wants for his work. To my mind,
 therefore, it is but a pastime of no practical worth to contrast the
 idiosyncrasies of Clement with those of Origen, and to set up
 distinctions between the Logos of this doctor and that. [2480] The
 differences to be descried belong to the personal peculiarities of
 great minds not yet guided to unity of diction by a scientific
 theology. The marvel is their harmony of thought. Their ends and their
 antagonisms are the same. The outcome of their mental efforts and their
 pious faith is seen in the result. Alexander was their product, and
 Athanasius (bringing all their sheaves to the Church's garner, winnowed
 and harvested) is the perpetual gnomon of the Alexandrian school. Its
 testimony, its prescription, its harmony and unity, are all summed up
 in him.

 It is extraordinary that many truly evangelical critics seem to see, in
 the subordination taught by Origen, [2481] something not reconcileable
 with the Nicene orthodoxy. Even Bishop Bull is a subordinationist, and
 so are all the great orthodox divines. When Origen maintains the
 monarchia (the Father as the root and source of the Godhead, as do all
 the Greeks [2482] ), and also a subordination of the Son in the divine
 ousia, he is surely consistent with the Athanasian doctrine; [2483]
 and, if he is led to affirm a diversity of essence in connection with
 this subordination, he does it with such limitations as should convince
 us that he, too, would have subscribed the homoousion, in which
 Alexandrians no whit inferior to him finally formulated the convictions
 and testimonies of their predecessors. [2484]

 II.

 (Since the body of the Catholic Church is one, etc., p. 296.)

 As so shortly preceding the meeting of the Great Council, this letter
 is most important as a clear testimony to the meaning the first council
 attached to that article of the Creed which affirms "one holy Catholic
 and Apostolic Church." We must compare the Treatises of Cyprian for the
 West, with this and the Letter of Firmilian [2485] for the East, as
 clearly elucidating the contemporary mind of the Church, and hence the
 meaning of those words which reflect their mind in the Creed. To make
 any reflections of my own would be out of place, save only, negatively,
 as I compare it with the modern creed of the Council of Trent (Pius
 IV.), which defines the Catholic Church to be the communion which
 acknowledges the Church of Rome as "the mother and mistress of
 churches."

 The concluding section of this letter is decisive as to the absolute
 autonomy of the Alexandrian dioecese. [2486] To all the other churches
 Alexander merely communicates his sentence, which they are all bound to
 respect. Whether the Christian Church at this period reflected the
 Apostolic Institutions is not the question, but merely what its theory
 was in the fourth century, and how far East and West accorded with the
 theory of Cyprian.

 [2480] See, against Petavius and others, Dr. Holmes's learned note,
 vol. iii. p. 628, Elucidation I.

 [2481] Vol. iv. p. 343, this series; also Elucidation II. p. 382.

 [2482] On Tertullian's orthodoxy, see notes, vol. iii. p. 600, etc.

 [2483] When we consider his refinements about the words substance,
 idea, image, etc., in the dispute with Celsus, while yet these terms
 were not reduced to precision, we cannot but detect his effort to
 convey an orthodox notion. Observe Dr. Spencer's short but useful note,
 vol. iv. p. 603, note 3.

 [2484] See vol. iv. p. 382, Elucidations I., II., and III.

 [2485] Vol. v. p. 390, this series.

 [2486] See the force of this spelling, p. 240, supra.

  The Banquet of the Ten Virgins; or Concerning Chastity

 Methodius.

 [Translated by the Rev. William R. Clark, M.A., Vicar of St. Mary
 Magdalen, Taunton.]

 Introductory Notice

 to

 Methodius.

 ------------------------

 [a.d. 260-312]. Considering the strong language in which Methodius is
 praised by ancient writers, as well as by the moderns, I feel that our
 learned translator has too hastily dismissed his name and works in the
 biographical introduction below. Epiphanius makes great use of him in
 his refutations of Origen; and Dupin's critical and historical notice
 of him is prolonged and highly discriminating, furnishing an abridgment
 of all his writings and of those vulgarly attributed to him heretofore.
 [2487] I have made into an elucidation some references which may be of
 use to the student. In like manner, I have thrown into the form of
 notes and elucidations what would be less pertinent and less useful in
 a preface. There are no facts to be added to what is here given by the
 translator; and remarks on the several works, which he has too
 sparingly annotated, will be more conveniently bestowed, perhaps, on
 the pages to which they immediately refer. The following is the
 translator's brief but useful

 Introduction.

 Methodius, who is also called Eubulius, [2488] was, first of all
 bishop, simultaneously of Olympus and Patara, in Lycia, as is testified
 by several ancient writers. [2489] He was afterwards removed, according
 to St. Jerome, to the episcopal See of Tyre in Phoenicia, and at the
 end of the latest of the great persecutions of the Church, about the
 year 312, he suffered martyrdom at Chalcis in Greece. Some consider
 that it was at Chalcis in Syria, and that St. Jerome's testimony ought
 to be thus understood, as Syria was more likely to be the scene of his
 martyrdom that Greece, as being nearer to his diocese. Others affirm
 that he suffered under Decius and Valerian; but this is incorrect,
 since he wrote not only against Origen long after the death of
 Adamantius, but also against Porphyry, whilst he was alive, in the
 reign of Diocletian.

 Methodius is known chiefly as the antagonist of Origen; although, as
 has been pointed out, he was himself influenced in no small degree by
 the method of Origen, as may be seen by his tendency to allegorical
 interpretations of Holy Scripture. The only complete work of this
 writer which has come down to us is his Banquet of the Ten Virgins, a
 dialogue of considerable power and grace, in praise of the virginal
 life. His antagonism to Origen, however, comes out less in this than in
 his works On the Resurrection, and On Things Created. The treatise On
 Free Will is, according to recent critics, of doubtful authorship,
 although the internal evidence must be said to confirm the ancient
 testimonies which assign it to Methodius. His writings against
 Porphyry, with the exception of some slight fragments, are lost, as are
 also his exegetical writings. [2490]

 Combefis published an edition of his works in 1644; but only so much of
 the Banquet as was contained in the Bibliotheca of Photius. In 1656 Leo
 Allatius published for the first time a complete edition of this work
 at Rome from the Vatican ms. Combefis in 1672 published an edition
 founded chiefly upon this; and his work has become the basis of all
 subsequent reprints.

 The following translation has been made almost entirely from the text
 of Migne, which is generally accurate, and the arrangement of which has
 been followed throughout. The edition of Jahn in some places rearranges
 the more fragmentary works, especially that On the Resurrection; but,
 although his text was occasionally found useful in amending the old
 readings, and in improving the punctuation, it was thought better to
 adhere in general to the text which is best known.

 A writer who was pronounced by St. Epiphanius [2491] to be "a learned
 man and a most valiant defender of the truth," and by St. Jerome,
 disertissimus martyr, [2492] who elsewhere speaks of him as one who
 nitidi compositique sermonis libros confecit, [2493] cannot be
 altogether unworthy the attention of the nineteenth century.

 [2487] [In Dr. Schaff's History (vol. ii. p. 809) is just such a notice
 and outline as would be appropriate here.]

 [2488] St. Epiph. Hæres., 64, sec. 63. [But this seems only his nom de
 plume, assumed in his fiction of the Banquet.]

 [2489] St. Hieronymus, De viris illustr., c. 83.

 [2490] For the larger fragments we are indebted to Epiphanius (Hæres.,
 64) and Photius (Bibliotheca, 234-237).

 [2491] Epiph., Hær., 64, sec. 63. aner logios kai sphodra peri tes
 aletheias agonisamenos. [Petavius renders this: "vir apprime doetus
 acerrimusque veritatis patronus."]

 [2492] Hieron., Com. in Dan., c. 13.

 [2493] Id., De vir. ill., c. 83. Many more such testimonies will be
 found collected in the various editions of his works in Greek.

 The Banquet of the Ten Virgins; [2494]

 Or,

 Concerning Chastity.

 ------------------------

 Persons of the Dialogue: Euboulios, [2495] Gregorion, Arete; Marcella,
 Theophila, Thaleia, Theopatra, Thallousa, Agathe, Procilla, Thekla,
 Tusiane, Domnina.

 Introduction.--Plan of the Work; Way to Paradise; Description and
 Personification of Virtue; The Agnos a Symbol of Chastity; Marcella,
 the Eldest and Foremost Among the Virgins of Christ.

 Euboulios. You have arrived most seasonably, Gregorion, for I have just
 been looking for you, wanting to hear of the meeting of Marcella and
 Theopatra, and of the other virgins who were present at the banquet,
 and of the nature of their discourses on the subject of chastity; for
 it is said that they argued with such ability and power that there was
 nothing lacking to the full consideration of the subject. If,
 therefore, you have come here for any other purpose, put that off to
 another time, and do not delay to give us a complete and connected
 account of the matter of which we are inquiring.

 Gregorion. [2496] I seem to be disappointed of my hope, as some one
 else has given you intelligence beforehand on the subject respecting
 which you ask me. For I thought that you had heard nothing of what had
 happened, and I was flattering myself greatly with the idea that I
 should be the first to tell you of it. And for this reason I made all
 haste to come here to you, fearing the very thing which has happened,
 that some one might anticipate me.

 Euboulios. Be comforted, my excellent friend, for we have had no
 precise information respecting anything which happened; since the
 person who brought us the intelligence had nothing to tell us, except
 that there had been dialogues; but when he was asked what they were,
 and to what purpose, he did not know.

 Gregorion. Well then, as I came here for this reason, do you want to
 hear all that was said from the beginning; or shall I pass by parts of
 it, and recall only those points which I consider worthy of mention?

 Euboulios. By no means the latter; but first, Gregorion, relate to us
 from the very beginning where the meeting was, and about the setting
 forth of the viands, and about yourself, how you poured out the wine

 "They in golden cups

 Each other pledged, while towards broad heaven they looked." [2497]

 Gregorion. You are always skilful in discussions, and excessively
 powerful in argument--thoroughly confuting all your adversaries.

 Euboulios. It is not worth while, Gregorion, to contend about these
 things at present; but do oblige us by simply telling us what happened
 from the beginning.

 Gregorion. Well, I will try. But first answer me this: You know, I
 presume, Arete, [2498] the daughter of Philosophia?

 Euboulios. Why do you ask?

 Gregorion. "We went by invitation to a garden of hers with an eastern
 aspect, to enjoy the fruits of the season, myself, and Procilla, and
 Tusiane." I am repeating the words of Theopatra, for it was of her I
 obtained the information. "We went, Gregorion, by a very rough, steep,
 and arduous path: when we drew near to the place," said Theopatra, "we
 were met by a tall and beautiful woman walking along quietly and
 gracefully, clothed in a shining robe as white as snow. Her beauty was
 something altogether inconceivable and divine. Modesty, blended with
 majesty, bloomed on her countenance. It was a face," she said, "such as
 I know not that I had ever seen, awe-inspiring, yet tempered with
 gentleness and mirth; for it was wholly unadorned by art, and had
 nothing counterfeit. She came up to us, and, like a mother who sees her
 daughters after a long separation, she embraced and kissed each one of
 us with great joy, saying, O, my daughters, you have come with toil and
 pain to me who am earnestly longing to conduct you to the pasture of
 immortality; toilsomely have you come by a way abounding with many
 frightful reptiles; for, as I looked, I saw you often stepping aside,
 and I was fearing lest you should turn back and slip over the
 precipices. But thanks to the Bridegroom to whom I have espoused [2499]
 you, my children, for having granted an effectual answer to all our
 prayers.' And, while she is thus speaking," said Theopatra, "we arrive
 at the enclosure, the doors not being shut as yet, and as we enter we
 come upon Thekla and Agathe and Marcella preparing to sup. And Arete
 immediately said, Do you also come hither, and sit down here in your
 place along with these your fellows.' Now," said she to me, "we who
 were there as guests were altogether, I think, ten in number; and the
 place was marvellously beautiful, and abounding in the means of
 recreation. The air was diffused in soft and regular currents, mingled
 with pure beams of light, and a stream flowing as gently as oil through
 the very middle of the garden, threw up a most delicious drink; and the
 water flowing from it, transparent and pure, formed itself into
 fountains, and these, overflowing like rivers, watered all the garden
 with their abundant streams; and there were different kinds of trees
 there, full of fresh fruits, and the fruits that hung joyfully from
 their branches were of equal beauty; and there were ever-blooming
 meadows strewn with variegated and sweet-scented flowers, from which
 came a gentle breeze laden with sweetest odour. And the agnos [2500]
 grew near, a lofty tree, under which we reposed, from its being
 exceedingly wide-spreading and shady."

 Euboulios. You seem to me, my good friend, to be making a revelation of
 a second paradise. [2501]

 Gregorion. You speak truly and wisely. "When there," she said, "we had
 all kinds of food and a variety of festivities, so that no delight was
 wanting. After this Arete, [2502] entering, gave utterance to these
 words:--

 "Young maidens, the glory of my greatness, beautiful virgins, who tend
 the undefiled meadows of Christ with unwedded hands, we have now had
 enough of food and feasting, for all things are abundant and plentiful
 with us. [2503] What is there, then, besides which I wish and expect?
 That each of you shall pronounce a discourse in praise of virginity.
 Let Marcella begin, since she sits in the highest place, and is at the
 same time the eldest. I shall be ashamed of myself if I do not make the
 successful disputant an object of envy, binding her with the unfading
 flowers of wisdom.'

 "And then," I think she said, "Marcella immediately began to speak as
 follows."

 [2494] [The idea, and some of the ideas borrowed from the Symposium of
 Plato, but designed to furnish a contrast as strong as possible between
 the swinish sensuality of false "philosophy" in its best estate, and
 the heavenly chastity of those whom the Gospel renders "pure in heart,"
 and whose life on earth is controlled by the promise, "they shall see
 God."]

 [2495] In Migne's ed. Euboulion, but apparently with less authority;
 and probably because the name is connected with that of Gregorion.
 Euboulios is a man, and Gregorion a woman.

 [2496] [Gregorion answers to the Diotima of Socrates in Plato's
 Banquet, and talks like a philosopher on these delicate subjects.]

 [2497] Hom., Il., iv. 3, 4.

 [2498] A personification of virtue, the daughter of philosophy. [i.e.,
 of philosophy not falsely so called.]

 [2499] 2 Cor. xi. 2.

 [2500] "A tall tree like the willow, the branches of which were strewn
 by matrons on their beds at the Thesmophoria, vitex agnuscastus. It was
 associated with the notion of chastity, from the likeness of its name
 to hagnos."-- Liddell and Scott.

 [2501] [Much of this work suggests a comparison with the Hermas of vol.
 ii., and Minucius Felix seems not infrequently reflected.]

 [2502] [Virtue presides, and "to the pure all things are pure;" but the
 freedoms of the converse must offend unless we bear in mind that these
 are allegorical beings, not women in flesh and blood.]

 [2503] [See the oration on Simeon and Anna, cap. 10, infra.]

 Discourse I.--Marcella.

 Chapter I.--The Difficulty and Excellence of Virginity; The Study of
 Doctrine Necessary for Virgins.

 Virginity is something supernaturally great, wonderful, and glorious;
 and, to speak plainly and in accordance with the Holy Scriptures, this
 best and noblest manner of life alone is the root [2504] of
 immortality, and also its flower and first-fruits; and for this reason
 the Lord promises that those shall enter into the kingdom of heaven who
 have made themselves eunuchs, in that passage [2505] of the Gospels in
 which He lays down the various reasons for which men have made
 themselves eunuchs. Chastity with men is a very rare thing, and
 difficult of attainment, and in proportion to its supreme excellence
 and magnificence is the greatness of its dangers. [2506]

 For this reason, it requires strong and generous natures, such as,
 vaulting over the stream of pleasure, direct the chariot of the soul
 upwards from the earth, not turning aside from their aim, until having,
 by swiftness of thought, lightly bounded above the world, and taken
 their stand truly upon the vault of heaven, they purely contemplate
 immortality itself as it springs forth [2507] from the undefiled bosom
 of the Almighty.

 Earth could not bring forth this draught; heaven alone knew the
 fountain from whence it flows; for we must think of virginity as
 walking indeed upon the earth, but as also reaching up to heaven. And
 hence some who have longed for it, and considering only the end of it,
 have come, by reason of coarseness of mind, ineffectually with unwashed
 feet, and have gone aside out of the way, from having conceived no
 worthy idea of the virginal manner of life. For it is not enough to
 keep the body only undefiled, just as we should not show that we think
 more of the temple than of the image of the god; but we should care for
 the souls of men as being the divinities of their bodies, and adorn
 them with righteousness. And then do they most care for them and tend
 them when, striving untiringly to hear divine discourses, they do not
 desist until, wearing the doors of the wise, [2508] they attain to the
 knowledge of the truth.

 For as the putrid humours and matter of flesh, and all those things
 which corrupt it, are driven out by salt, in the same manner all the
 irrational appetites of a virgin are banished from the body by divine
 teaching. For it must needs be that the soul which is not sprinkled
 with the words of Christ, as with salt, should stink and breed worms,
 as King David, openly confessing with tears in the mountains, cried
 out, "My wounds stink and are corrupt," [2509] because he had not
 salted himself with the exercises of self-control, and so subdued his
 carnal appetites, but self-indulgently had yielded to them, and became
 corrupted in adultery. And hence, in Leviticus, [2510] every gift,
 unless it be seasoned with salt, is forbidden to be offered as an
 oblation to the Lord God. Now the whole spiritual meditation of the
 Scriptures is given to us as salt which stings in order to benefit, and
 which disinfects, without which it is impossible for a soul, by means
 of reason, to be brought to the Almighty; for "ye are the salt of the
 earth," [2511] said the Lord to the apostles. It is fitting, then, that
 a virgin should always love things which are honourable, and be
 distinguished among the foremost for wisdom and addicted to nothing
 slothful or luxurious, but should excel, and set her mind upon things
 worthy of the state of virginity, always putting away, by the word, the
 foulness of luxury, lest in any way some slight hidden corruption
 should breed the worm of incontinence; for "the unmarried woman careth
 for the things of the Lord," how she may please the Lord, "that she may
 be holy both in body and in spirit," [2512] says the blessed Paul. But
 many of them who consider the hearing of the word quite a secondary
 matter, think they do great things if they give their attention to it
 for a little while. But discrimination must be exercised with respect
 to these; for it is not fitting to impart divine instruction to a
 nature which is careful about trifles, and low, and which counterfeits
 wisdom. For would it not be laughable to go on talking to those who
 direct all their energy towards things of little value, in order that
 they may complete most accurately those things which they want to bring
 to perfection, but do not think that the greatest pains are to be taken
 with those necessary things by which most of all the love of chastity
 would be increased in them?

 [2504] Lit. the udder.

 [2505] Matt. ix. 12.

 [2506] [I think evidence abounds, in the course of this allegory, that
 it was designed to meet the painful discussions excited in the Church
 by the fanatical conduct of Origen, vol. iv. pp. 225-226.]

 [2507] Lit. "leaps out."

 [2508] Ecclus. vi. 36.

 [2509] Ps. xxxvii. 6 (LXX.), xxxviii. 5 (E.V.).

 [2510] Lev. ii. 13; Mark ix. 40.

 [2511] Matt. v. 13.

 [2512] 1 Cor. vii. 34.

 Chapter II.--Virginity a Plant from Heaven, Introduced Late; The
 Advancement of Mankind to Perfection, How Arranged.

 For truly by a great stretch of power the plant of virginity was sent
 down to men from heaven, and for this reason it was not revealed to the
 first generations. For the race of mankind was still very small in
 number; and it was necessary that it should first be increased in
 number, and then brought to perfection. Therefore the men of old times
 thought it nothing unseemly to take their own sisters for wives, until
 the law coming separated them, and by forbidding that which at first
 had seemed to be right, declared it to be a sin, calling him cursed who
 should "uncover the nakedness" of his sister; [2513] God thus
 mercifully bringing to our race the needful help in due season, as
 parents do to their children. For they do not at once set masters over
 them, but allow them, during the period of childhood, to amuse
 themselves like young animals, and first send them to teachers
 stammering like themselves, until they cast off the youthful wool of
 the mind, and go onwards to the practice of greater things, and from
 thence again to that of greater still. And thus we must consider that
 the God and Father of all acted towards our forefathers. For the world,
 while still unfilled with men, was like a child, and it was necessary
 that it should first be filled with these, and so grow to manhood. But
 when hereafter it was colonized from end to end, the race of man
 spreading to a boundless extent, God no longer allowed man to remain in
 the same ways, considering how they might now proceed from one point to
 another, and advance nearer to heaven, until, having attained to the
 very greatest and most exalted lesson of virginity, they should reach
 to perfection; that first they should abandon the intermarriage of
 brothers and sisters, and marry wives from other families; and then
 that they should no longer have many wives, like brute beasts, as
 though born for the mere propagation of the species; and then that they
 should not be adulterers; and then again that they should go on to
 continence, and from continence to virginity, when, having trained
 themselves to despise the flesh, they sail fearlessly into the peaceful
 haven of immortality. [2514]

 [2513] Lev. xviii. 19; xx. 17.

 [2514] [Contending with the worse than bestial sensuality of paganism,
 and inured to the sorrows of martyr-ages, when Christian families could
 not be reared in peace, let us not wonder at the high conceptions of
 these heroic believers, based on the words of Christ Himself, and on
 the promise, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God."]

 Chapter III.--By the Circumcision of Abraham, Marriage with Sisters
 Forbidden; In the Times of the Prophets Polygamy Put a Stop To;
 Conjugal Purity Itself by Degrees Enforced.

 If, however, any one should venture to find fault with our argument as
 destitute of Scripture proof, we will bring forward the writings of the
 prophets, and more fully demonstrate the truth of the statements
 already made. Now Abraham, when he first received the covenant of
 circumcision, seems to signify, by receiving circumcision in a member
 of his own body, nothing else than this, that one should no longer
 beget children with one born of the same parent; showing that every one
 should abstain from intercourse with his own sister, as his own flesh.
 And thus, from the time of Abraham, the custom of marrying with sisters
 has ceased; and from the times of the prophets the contracting of
 marriage with several wives has been done away with; for we read, "Go
 not after thy lusts, but refrain thyself from thine appetites;" [2515]
 for "wine and women will make men of understanding to fall away;"
 [2516] and in another place, "Let thy fountain be blessed; and rejoice
 with the wife of thy youth," [2517] manifestly forbidding a plurality
 of wives. And Jeremiah clearly gives the name of "fed horses" [2518] to
 those who lust after other women; and we read, "The multiplying brood
 of the ungodly shall not thrive, nor take deep rooting from bastard
 slips, nor lay any fast foundation." [2519]

 Lest, however, we should seem prolix in collecting the testimonies of
 the prophets, let us again point out how chastity succeeded to marriage
 with one wife, taking away by degrees the lusts of the flesh, until it
 removed entirely the inclination for sexual intercourse engendered by
 habit. For presently one is introduced earnestly deprecating, from
 henceforth, this seduction, saying, "O Lord, Father, and Governor of my
 life, leave me not to their counsels; give me not a proud look; let not
 the greediness of the belly, nor lust of the flesh, take hold of me."
 [2520] And in the Book of Wisdom, a book full of all virtue, the Holy
 Spirit, now openly drawing His hearers to continence and chastity,
 sings on this wise, "Better it is to have no children, and to have
 virtue, for the memorial thereof is immortal; because it is known with
 God and with men. When it is present men take example at it; and when
 it is gone they desire it: it weareth a crown and triumpheth for ever,
 having gotten the victory, striving for undefiled rewards." [2521]

 [2515] Ecclus. xviii. 30.

 [2516] Ecclus. xix. 2.

 [2517] Prov. v. 18.

 [2518] Jer. v. 8.

 [2519] Wisd. iv. 3.

 [2520] Ecclus. xxiii. 1, 4, 6.

 [2521] Wisd. iv. 1, 2.

 Chapter IV.--Christ Alone Taught Virginity, Openly Preaching the
 Kingdom of Heaven; The Likeness of God to Be Attained in the Light of
 the Divine Virtues.

 We have already spoken of the periods of the human race, and how,
 beginning with the intermarriage of brothers and sisters, it went on to
 continence; and we have now left for us the subject of virginity. Let
 us then endeavour to speak of this as well as we can. And first let us
 inquire for what reason it was that no one of the many patriarchs and
 prophets and righteous men, who taught and did many noble things,
 either praised or chose the state of virginity. Because it was reserved
 for the Lord alone to be the first to teach this doctrine, since He
 alone, coming down to us, taught man to draw near to God; for it was
 fitting that He who was first and chief of priests, of prophets, and of
 angels, should also be saluted as first and chief of virgins. [2522]
 For in old times man was not yet perfect, and for this reason was
 unable to receive perfection, which is virginity. For, being made in
 the Image of God, he needed to receive that which was according to His
 Likeness; [2523] which the Word being sent down into the world to
 perfect, He first took upon Him our form, disfigured as it was by many
 sins, in order that we, for whose sake He bore it, might be able again
 to receive the divine form. For it is then that we are truly fashioned
 in the likeness of God, when we represent His features in a human life,
 like skilful painters, stamping them upon ourselves as upon tablets,
 learning the path which He showed us. And for this reason He, being
 God, was pleased to put on human flesh, so that we, beholding as on a
 tablet the divine Pattern of our life, should also be able to imitate
 Him who painted it. For He was not one who, thinking one thing, did
 another; nor, while He considered one thing to be right, taught
 another. But whatever things were truly useful and right, these He both
 taught and did.

 [2522] [This seems to me admirable. Our times are too little willing to
 see all that Scripture teaches in this matter.]

 [2523] A distinction common among the Fathers.

 Chapter V.--Christ, by Preserving His Flesh Incorrupt in Virginity,
 Draws to the Exercise of Virginity; The Small Number of Virgins in
 Proportion to the Number of Saints.

 What then did the Lord, who is the Truth and the Light, take in hand
 when He came down from heaven? He preserved the flesh which He had
 taken upon Him incorrupt in virginity, so that we also, if we would
 come to the likeness of God and Christ, should endeavour to honour
 virginity. For the likeness of God is the avoiding of corruption. And
 that the Word, when He was incarnate, became chief Virgin, in the same
 way as He was chief Shepherd and chief Prophet of the Church, the
 Christ-possessed John shows us, saying, in the Book of the Revelation,
 "And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with Him an
 hundred forty and four thousand, having His name and His Father's name
 written in their foreheads. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the
 voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder; and I heard
 the voice of harpers harping with their harps: And they sung as it were
 a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the
 elders: and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and
 four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. These are they which
 were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they who
 follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth;" [2524] showing that the Lord
 is leader of the choir of virgins. And remark, in addition to this, how
 very great in the sight of God is the dignity of virginity: "These were
 redeemed from among men, being the first-fruits unto God and to the
 Lamb. And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without
 fault," [2525] he says, "and they follow the Lamb whithersoever He
 goeth." And he clearly intends by this to teach us that the number of
 virgins was, from the beginning, restricted to so many, namely, a
 hundred and forty and four thousand, while the multitude of the other
 saints is innumerable. For let us consider what he means when
 discoursing of the rest. "I beheld a great multitude, which no man
 could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues."
 [2526] It is plain, therefore, as I said, that in the case of the other
 saints he introduces an unspeakable multitude, while in the case of
 those who are in a state of virginity he mentions only a very small
 number, so as to make a strong contrast with those who make up the
 innumerable number. [2527]

 This, O Arete, is my discourse to you on the subject of virginity. But,
 if I have omitted anything, let Theophila, who succeeds me, supply the
 omission.

 [2524] Rev. xiv. 1-4.

 [2525] Rev. xiv. 4, 5.

 [2526] Rev. vii. 9.

 [2527] [Compare Cyprian, vol. v. p. 475, this series.]

 Discourse II.--Theophila.

 Chapter I.--Marriage Not Abolished by the Commendation of Virginity.

 And then, she said, Theophila spoke:--Since Marcella has excellently
 begun this discussion without sufficiently completing it, it is
 necessary that I should endeavour to put a finish to it. Now, the fact
 that man has advanced by degrees to virginity, God urging him on from
 time to time, seems to me to have been admirably proved; but I cannot
 say the same as to the assertion that from henceforth they should no
 longer beget children. For I think I have perceived clearly from the
 Scriptures that, after He had brought in virginity, the Word did not
 altogether abolish the generation of children; for although the moon
 may be greater than the stars, the light of the other stars is not
 destroyed by the moonlight.

 Let us begin with Genesis, that we may give its place of antiquity and
 supremacy to this scripture. Now the sentence and ordinance of God
 respecting the begetting of children [2528] is confessedly being
 fulfilled to this day, the Creator still fashioning man. For this is
 quite manifest, that God, like a painter, is at this very time working
 at the world, as the Lord also taught, "My Father worketh hitherto."
 [2529] But when the rivers shall cease to flow and fall into the
 reservoir of the sea, and the light shall be perfectly separated from
 the darkness,--for the separation is still going on,--and the dry land
 shall henceforth cease to bring forth its fruits with creeping things
 and four-footed beasts, and the predestined number of men shall be
 fulfilled; then from henceforth shall men abstain from the generation
 of children. But at present man must cooperate in the forming of the
 image of God, while the world exists and is still being formed; for it
 is said, "Increase and multiply." [2530] And we must not be offended at
 the ordinance of the Creator, from which, moreover, we ourselves have
 our being. For the casting of seed into the furrows of the matrix is
 the beginning of the generation of men, so that bone taken from bone,
 and flesh from flesh, by an invisible power, are fashioned into another
 man. And in this way we must consider that the saying is fulfilled,
 "This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh." [2531]

 [2528] Gen. i. 28.

 [2529] heos arti, even until now. John v. 17.

 [2530] Gen. i. 28.

 [2531] Gen. ii. 23.

 Chapter II.--Generation Something Akin to the First Formation of Eve
 from the Side and Nature of Adam; God the Creator of Men in Ordinary
 Generation.

 And this perhaps is what was shadowed forth by the sleep and trance of
 the first man, which prefigured the embraces of connubial love. When
 thirsting for children a man falls into a kind of trance, [2532]
 softened and subdued by the pleasures of generation as by sleep, so
 that again something drawn from his flesh and from his bones is, as I
 said, fashioned into another man. For the harmony of the bodies being
 disturbed in the embraces of love, as those tell us who have experience
 of the marriage state, all the marrow-like and generative part of the
 blood, like a kind of liquid bone, coming together from all the
 members, worked into foam and curdled, is projected through the organs
 of generation into the living body of the female. And probably it is
 for this reason that a man is said to leave his father and his mother,
 since he is then suddenly unmindful of all things when united to his
 wife in the embraces of love, he is overcome by the desire of
 generation, offering his side to the divine Creator to take away from
 it, so that the father may again appear in the son.

 Wherefore, if God still forms man, shall we not be guilty of audacity
 if we think of the generation of children as something offensive, which
 the Almighty Himself is not ashamed to make use of in working with His
 undefiled hands; for He says to Jeremiah, "Before I formed thee in the
 belly I knew thee;" [2533] and to Job, "Didst thou take clay and form a
 living creature, and make it speak upon the earth?" [2534] and Job
 draws near to Him in supplication, saying, "Thine hands have made me
 and fashioned me." [2535] Would it not, then, be absurd to forbid
 marriage unions, seeing that we expect that after us there will be
 martyrs, and those who shall oppose the evil one, for whose sake also
 the Word promised that He would shorten those days? [2536] For if the
 generation of children henceforth had seemed evil to God, as you said,
 for what reason will those who have come into existence in opposition
 to the divine decree and will be able to appear well-pleasing to God?
 And must not that which is begotten be something spurious, and not a
 creature of God, if, like a counterfeit coin, it is moulded apart from
 the intention and ordinance of the lawful authority? And so we concede
 to men the power of forming men.

 [2532] Remark the connection, ekstasis and existatai.

 [2533] Jer. i. 5.

 [2534] Job xxxviii. 14 (LXX.).

 [2535] Job x. 8.

 [2536] Matt. xxiv. 22.

 Chapter III.--An Ambiguous Passage of Scripture; Not Only the Faithful
 But Even Prelates Sometimes Illegitimate.

 But Marcella, interrupting, said, "O Theophila, there appears here a
 great mistake, and something contrary to what you have said; and do you
 think to escape under cover of the cloud which you have thrown around
 you? For there comes that argument, which perhaps any one who addresses
 you as a very wise person will bring forward: What do you say of those
 who are begotten unlawfully in adultery? For you laid it down that it
 was inconceivable and impossible for any one to enter into the world
 unless he was introduced by the will of the divine Ruler, his frame
 being prepared for him by God. And that you may not take refuge behind
 a safe wall, bringing forward the Scripture which says, As for the
 children of the adulterers, they shall not come to their perfection,'
 [2537] he will answer you easily, that we often see those who are
 unlawfully begotten coming to perfection like ripe fruit.

 And if, again, you answer sophistically, O, my friend, by those who
 come not to perfection I understand being perfected in Christ-taught
 righteousness;' he will say, But, indeed, my worthy friend, very many
 who are begotten of unrighteous seed are not only numbered among those
 who are gathered into the flock of the brethren, but are often called
 even to preside over them. [2538] Since, then, it is clear, and all
 testify, that those who are born of adultery do come to perfection, we
 must not imagine that the Spirit was teaching respecting conceptions
 and births, but rather perhaps concerning those who adulterate the
 truth, who, corrupting the Scriptures by false doctrines, bring forth
 an imperfect and immature wisdom, mixing their error with piety.' And,
 therefore, this plea being taken away from you, come now and tell us if
 those who are born of adultery are begotten by the will of God; for you
 said that it was impossible that the offspring of a man should be
 brought to perfection unless the Lord formed it and gave it life."

 [2537] Wisd. iii. 16.

 [2538] [Bastardy seems to have been regarded as washed out by baptism,
 thousands of pagan converts having been born under this stain.]

 Chapter IV.--Human Generation, and the Work of God Therein Set Forth.

 Theophila, as though caught round the middle by a strong antagonist,
 grew giddy, and with difficulty recovering herself, replied, "You ask a
 question, my worthy friend, which needs to be solved by an example,
 that you may still better understand how the creative power of God,
 pervading all things, is more especially the real cause in the
 generation of men, making those things to grow which are planted in the
 productive earth. For that which is sown is not to be blamed, but he
 who sows in a strange soil by unlawful embraces, as though purchasing a
 slight pleasure by shamefully selling his own seed. For imagine our
 birth into the world to be like some such thing as a house having its
 entrance lying close to lofty mountains; and that the house extends a
 great way down, far from the entrance, and that it has many holes
 behind, and that in this part it has circular." "I imagine it," said
 Marcella. "Well, then, suppose that a modeller seated within is
 fashioning many statues; imagine, again, that the substance of clay is
 incessantly brought to him from without, through the holes, by many men
 who do not any of them see the artist himself. Now suppose the house to
 be covered with mist and clouds, and nothing visible to those who are
 outside but only the holes." "Let this also be supposed," she said.
 "And that each one of those who are labouring together to provide the
 clay has one hole allotted to himself, into which he alone has to bring
 and deposit his own clay, not touching any other hole. And if, again,
 he shall officiously endeavour to open that which is allotted to
 another, let him be threatened with fire and scourges.

 "Well, now, consider further what comes after this: the modeller within
 going round to the holes and taking privately for his modelling the
 clay which he finds at each hole, and having in a certain number of
 months made his model, giving it back through the same hole; having
 this for his rule, that every lump of clay which is capable of being
 moulded shall be worked up indifferently, even if it be unlawfully
 thrown by any one through another's hole, for the clay has done no
 wrong, and, therefore, as being blameless, should be moulded and
 formed; but that he who, in opposition to the ordinance and law,
 deposited it in another's hole, should be punished as a criminal and
 transgressor. For the clay should not be blamed, but he who did this in
 violation of what is right; for, through incontinence, having carried
 it away, he secretly, by violence, deposited it in another's hole."
 "You say most truly."

 Chapter V.--The Holy Father Follows Up the Same Argument.

 And now that these things are completed, it remains for you to apply
 this picture, my wisest of friends, to the things which have been
 already spoken of; comparing the house to the invisible nature of our
 generation, and the entrance adjacent to the mountains to the sending
 down of our souls from heaven, and their descent into the bodies; the
 holes to the female sex, and the modeller to the creative power of God,
 which, under the cover of generation, making use of our nature,
 invisibly forms us men within, working the garments for the souls.
 Those who carry the clay represent the male sex in the comparison; when
 thirsting for children, they bring and cast in seed into the natural
 channels of the female, as those in the comparison cast clay into the
 holes. For the seed, which, so to speak, partakes of a divine creative
 power, is not to be thought guilty of the incentives to incontinence;
 and art always works up the matter submitted to it; and nothing is to
 be considered as evil in itself, but becomes so by the act of those who
 used it in such a way; for when properly and purely made use of, it
 comes out pure, but if disgracefully and improperly, then it becomes
 disgraceful. For how did iron, which was discovered for the benefit of
 agriculture and the arts, injure those who sharpened it for murderous
 battles? Or how did gold, or silver, or brass, and, to take it
 collectively, the whole of the workable earth, injure those who,
 ungratefully towards their Creator, make a wrong use of them by turning
 parts of them into various kinds of idols? And if any one should supply
 wool from that which had been stolen to the weaving art, that art,
 regarding this one thing only, manufactures the material submitted to
 it, if it will receive the preparation, rejecting nothing of that which
 is serviceable to itself, since that which is stolen is here not to be
 blamed, being lifeless. And, therefore, the material itself is to be
 wrought and adorned, but he who is discovered to have abstracted it
 unjustly should be punished. So, in like manner, the violators of
 marriage, and those who break the strings of the harmony of life, as of
 a harp, raging with lust, and letting loose their desires in adultery,
 should themselves be tortured and punished, for they do a great wrong
 stealing from the gardens of others the embraces of generation; but the
 seed itself, as in the case of the wool, should be formed and endowed
 with life.

 Chapter VI.--God Cares Even for Adulterous Births; Angels Given to Them
 as Guardians.

 But what need is there to protract the argument by using such examples?
 for nature could not thus, in a little time, accomplish so great a work
 without divine help. For who gave to the bones their fixed nature? and
 who bound the yielding members with nerves, to be extended and relaxed
 at the joints? or who prepared channels for the blood, and a soft
 windpipe for the breath? or what god caused the humours to ferment,
 mixing them with blood and forming the soft flesh out of the earth, but
 only the Supreme Artist making us to be man, the rational and living
 image of Himself, and forming it like wax, in the womb, from moist
 slight seed? or by whose providence was it that the foetus was not
 suffocated by damp when shut up within, in the connexion of the
 vessels? or who, after it was brought forth and had come into the
 light, changed it from weakness and smallness to size, and beauty, and
 strength, unless God Himself, the Supreme Artist, as I said, making by
 His creative power copies of Christ, and living pictures? Whence, also,
 we have received from the inspired writings, that those who are
 begotten, even though it be in adultery, are committed to guardian
 angels. But if they came into being in opposition to the will and the
 decree of the blessed nature of God, how should they be delivered over
 to angels, to be nourished with much gentleness and indulgence? and
 how, if they had to accuse their own parents, could they confidently,
 before the judgment seat of Christ, invoke Him and say, "Thou didst
 not, O Lord, grudge us this common light; but these appointed us to
 death, despising Thy command?" "For," He says, "children begotten of
 unlawful beds are witnesses of wickedness against their parents at
 their trial." [2539]

 [2539] Wisd. iv. 6.

 Chapter VII.--The Rational Soul from God Himself; Chastity Not the Only
 Good, Although the Best and Most Honoured.

 And perhaps there will be room for some to argue plausibly among those
 who are wanting in discrimination and judgment, that this fleshly
 garment of the soul, being planted by men, is shaped spontaneously
 apart from the sentence of God. If, however, he should teach that the
 immortal being of the soul also is sown along with the mortal body, he
 will not be believed; for the Almighty alone breathes into man the
 undying and undecaying part, as also it is He alone who is Creator of
 the invisible and indestructible. For, He says, He "breathed into his
 nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul." [2540] And
 those artificers who, to the destruction of men, make images in human
 form, not perceiving and knowing their own Maker, are blamed by the
 Word, which says, in the Book of Wisdom, a book full of all virtue,
 [2541] "his heart is ashes, his hope is more vile than earth, and his
 life of less value than clay; forasmuch as he knew not his Maker, and
 Him that inspired into him an active soul, and breathed in a living
 spirit;" [2542] that is, God, the Maker of all men; therefore, also,
 according to the apostle, He "will have all men to be saved, and to
 come unto the knowledge of the truth." [2543] And now, although this
 subject be scarcely completed, yet there are others which remain to be
 discussed. For when one thoroughly examines and understands those
 things which happen to man according to his nature, he will know not to
 despise the procreation of children, although he applauds chastity, and
 prefers it in honour. For although honey be sweeter and more pleasant
 than other things, we are not for that reason to consider other things
 bitter which are mixed up in the natural sweetness of fruits. And, in
 support of these statements, I will bring forward a trustworthy
 witness, namely, Paul, who says, "So then he that giveth her [2544] in
 marriage doeth well; but he that giveth her not in marriage doeth
 better." [2545] Now the word, in setting forth that which is better and
 sweeter, did not intend to take away the inferior, but arranges so as
 to assign to each its own proper use and advantage. For there are some
 to whom it is not given to attain virginity; and there are others whom
 He no longer wills to be excited by procreations to lust, and to be
 defiled, but henceforth to meditate and to keep the mind upon the
 transformation of the body to the likeness of angels, when they
 "neither marry nor are given in marriage," [2546] according to the
 infallible words of the Lord; since it is not given to all to attain
 that undefiled state of being a eunuch for the sake of the kingdom of
 heaven, [2547] but manifestly to those only who are able to preserve
 the ever-blooming and unfading flower of virginity. For it is the
 custom of the prophetic Word to compare the Church to a flower covered
 and variegated meadow, adorned and crowned not only with the flowers of
 virginity, but also with those of child-bearing and of continence; for
 it is written, "Upon thy [2548] right hand did stand the queen in a
 vesture of gold, wrought about with divers colours." [2549]

 These words, O Arete, I bring according to my ability to this
 discussion in behalf of the truth.

 And when Theophila had thus spoken, Theopatra said that applause arose
 from all the virgins approving of her discourse; and that when they
 became silent, after a long pause, Thaleia arose, for to her had been
 assigned the third place in the contest, that which came after
 Theophila. And she then, as I think, followed, and spoke.

 [2540] Gen. ii. 7.

 [2541] [This language shows that it is not cited as Holy Scripture. It
 confirms St. Jerome's testimony, Prolog. in Libros Salomonis.]

 [2542] Wisd. xv. 10, 11.

 [2543] 1 Tim. ii. 4.

 [2544] His virgin. [St. Paul was married, and then a widower, in the
 opinion of many of the ancients. See Euseb., H. E., iii. 30.]

 [2545] 1 Cor. vii. 38.

 [2546] Matt. xxii. 30.

 [2547] Matt. xix. 12.

 [2548] The bridegroom's.

 [2549] Ps. xlv. 10 (xliv. 10, LXX.).

 Discourse III.--Thaleia.

 Chapter I.--Passages of Holy Scripture [2550] Compared.

 You seem to me, O Theophila, to excel all in action and in speech, and
 to be second to none in wisdom. For there is no one who will find fault
 with your discourse, however contentious and contradictory he may be.
 Yet, while everything else seems rightly spoken, one thing, my friend,
 distresses and troubles me, considering that that wise and most
 spiritual man--I mean Paul--would not vainly refer to Christ and the
 Church the union of the first man and woman, [2551] if the Scripture
 meant nothing higher than what is conveyed by the mere words and the
 history; for if we are to take the Scripture as a bare representation
 wholly referring to the union of man and woman, for what reason should
 the apostle, calling these things to remembrance, and guiding us, as I
 opine, into the way of the Spirit, allegorize the history of Adam and
 Eve as having a reference to Christ and the Church? For the passage in
 Genesis reads thus: "And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and
 flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out
 of man. Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and
 shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh." [2552] But
 the apostle considering this passage, by no means, as I said, intends
 to take it according to its mere natural sense, as referring to the
 union of man and woman, as you do; for you, explaining the passage in
 too natural a sense, laid down that the Spirit is speaking only of
 conception and births; that the bone taken from the bones was made
 another man, and that living creatures coming together swell like trees
 at the time of conception. But he, more spiritually referring the
 passage to Christ, thus teaches: "He that loveth his wife loveth
 himself. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and
 cherisheth it, even as the Lord the Church: for we are members of His
 body, of His flesh, and of His bones. For this cause shall a man leave
 his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two
 shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning
 Christ and the Church." [2553]

 [2550] Gen. ii. 23, 24, and Eph. v. 28-32.

 [2551] Eph. v. 32. [A forcible argument.]

 [2552] Gen. ii. 23, 24.

 [2553] Eph. v. 28-32. [Compare the next chapter, note 4.]

 Chapter II.--The Digressions of the Apostle Paul; The Character of His
 Doctrine: Nothing in It Contradictory; Condemnation of Origen, Who
 Wrongly Turns Everything into Allegory.

 Let it not disturb you, if, in discussing one class of subjects, he,
 i.e., Paul, should pass over into another, so as to appear to mix them
 up, and to import matters foreign to the subject under consideration,
 departing from the question, as now for instance. For wishing, as it
 seems, to strengthen most carefully the argument on behalf of chastity,
 he prepares the mode of argument beforehand, beginning with the more
 persuasive mode of speech. For the character of his speech being very
 various, and arranged for the purpose of progressive proof, begins
 gently, but flows forward into a style which is loftier and more
 magnificent. And then, again changing to what is deep, he sometimes
 finishes with what is simple and easy, and sometimes with what is more
 difficult and delicate; and yet introducing nothing which is foreign to
 the subject by these changes, but, bringing them all together according
 to a certain marvellous relationship, he works into one the question
 which is set forth as his subject. It is needful, then, that I should
 more accurately unfold the meaning of the apostle's arguments, yet
 rejecting nothing of what has been said before. For you seem to me, O
 Theophila, to have discussed those words of the Scripture amply and
 clearly, and to have set them forth as they are without mistake. For it
 is a dangerous thing wholly to despise the literal meaning, [2554] as
 has been said, and especially of Genesis, where the unchangeable
 decrees of God for the constitution of the universe are set forth, in
 agreement with which, even until now, the world is perfectly ordered,
 most beautifully in accordance with a perfect rule, until the Lawgiver
 Himself having re-arranged it, wishing to order it anew, shall break up
 the first laws of nature by a fresh disposition. But, since it is not
 fitting to leave the demonstration of the argument unexamined--and, so
 to speak, half-lame--come let us, as it were completing our pair, bring
 forth the analogical sense, looking more deeply into the Scripture; for
 Paul is not to be despised when he passes over the literal meaning, and
 shows that the words extend to Christ and the Church.

 [2554] This is the obvious English equivalent of the Greek text.--Tr.
 [A singularly cautious testimony against Origen, whom our author
 follows too closely in allegorizing interpretations of Scripture.
 Origen, having literalized so sadly in one case, seems to have erred
 ever afterward in the other extreme. Here is a prudent caveat.]

 Chapter III.--Comparison Instituted Between the First and Second Adam.

 And, first, we must inquire if Adam can be likened to the Son of God,
 when he was found in the transgression of the Fall, and heard the
 sentence, "Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return." [2555] For
 how shall he be considered "the first-born of every creature," [2556]
 who, after the creation of the earth and the firmament, was formed out
 of clay? And how shall he be admitted to be "the tree of life" who was
 cast out for his transgression, [2557] lest "he should again stretch
 forth his hand and eat of it, and live forever?" [2558] For it is
 necessary that a thing which is likened unto anything else, should in
 many respects be similar and analogous to that of which it is the
 similitude, and not have its constitution opposite and dissimilar. For
 one who should venture to compare the uneven to the even, or harmony to
 discord, would not be considered rational. But the even should be
 compared to that which in its nature is even, although it should be
 even only in a small measure; and the white to that which in its nature
 is white, even although it should be very small, and should show but
 moderately the whiteness by reason of which it is called white. Now, it
 is beyond all doubt clear to every one, that that which is sinless and
 incorrupt is even, and harmonious, and bright as wisdom; but that that
 which is mortal and sinful is uneven and discordant, and cast out as
 guilty and subject to condemnation.

 [2555] Gen. iii. 19.

 [2556] Col. i. 15.

 [2557] Rev. ii. 7.

 [2558] Gen. iii. 22.

 Chapter IV.--Some Things Here Hard and Too Slightly Treated, and
 Apparently Not Sufficiently Brought Out According to the Rule of
 Theology.

 Such, then, I consider to be the objections urged by many who,
 despising, as it seems, the wisdom of Paul, dislike the comparing of
 the first man to Christ. For come, let us consider how rightly Paul
 compared Adam to Christ, not only considering him to be the type and
 image, but also that Christ Himself became the very same thing, [2559]
 because the Eternal Word fell upon Him. For it was fitting that the
 first-born of God, the first shoot, the only-begotten, even the wisdom
 of God, should be joined to the first-formed man, and first and
 first-born of mankind, and should become incarnate. And this was
 Christ, a man filled with the pure and perfect Godhead, and God
 received into man. For it was most suitable that the oldest of the Æons
 and the first of the Archangels, when about to hold communion with men,
 should dwell in the oldest and the first of men, even Adam. And thus,
 when renovating those things which were from the beginning, and forming
 them again of the Virgin by the Spirit, He frames the same [2560] just
 as at the beginning. When the earth was still virgin and untilled, God,
 taking mould, formed the reasonable creature from it without seed.
 [2561]

 [2559] Namely, the second Adam.

 [2560] Second Adam.

 [2561] The obscurity of this chapter is indicated in the heading placed
 over it by the old Latin translator. The general meaning, however, will
 be clear enough to the theological reader.--Tr.

 Chapter V.--A Passage of Jeremiah Examined.

 And here I may adduce the prophet Jeremiah as a trustworthy and lucid
 witness, who speaks thus: "Then I went down to the potter's house; and,
 behold, he wrought a work on the wheels. And the vessel that he made of
 clay was marred in the hand of the potter: so he made it again another
 vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make it." [2562] For when Adam,
 having been formed out of clay, was still soft and moist, and not yet,
 like a tile, made hard and incorruptible, sin ruined him, flowing and
 dropping down upon him like water. And therefore God, moistening him
 afresh and forming anew the same clay to His honour, having first
 hardened and fixed it in the Virgin's womb, and united and mixed it
 with the Word, brought it forth into life no longer soft and broken;
 lest, being overflowed again by streams of corruption from without, it
 should become soft, and perish as the Lord in His teaching shows in the
 parable of the finding of the sheep; where my Lord says to those
 standing by, "What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one
 of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go
 after that which is lost until he find it? and when he hath found it,
 he layeth it on his shoulders rejoicing; and when he cometh home, he
 calleth together his friends and neighbours, saying unto them, Rejoice
 with me; for I have found my sheep which was lost."

 [2562] Jer. xviii. 3, 4.

 Chapter VI.--The Whole Number of Spiritual Sheep; Man a Second Choir,
 After the Angels, to the Praise of God; The Parable of the Lost Sheep
 Explained.

 Now, since He truly was and is, being in the beginning with God, and
 being God, [2563] He is the chief Commander and Shepherd of the
 heavenly ones, whom all reasonable creatures obey and attend, who tends
 in order and numbers the multitudes of the blessed angels. For this is
 the equal and perfect number of immortal creatures, divided according
 to their races and tribes, man also being here taken into the flock.
 For he also was created without corruption, that he might honour the
 king and maker of all things, responding to the shouts of the melodious
 angels which came from heaven. But when it came to pass that, by
 transgressing the commandment (of God), he suffered a terrible and
 destructive fall, being thus reduced to a state of death, for this
 reason the Lord says that He came from heaven into (a human) life,
 leaving the ranks and the armies of angels. For the mountains are to be
 explained by the heavens, and the ninety and nine sheep by the
 principalities and powers [2564] which the Captain and Shepherd left
 when He went down to seek the lost one. For it remained that man should
 be included in this catalogue and number, the Lord lifting him up and
 wrapping him round, that he might not again, as I said, be overflowed
 and swallowed up by the waves of deceit. For with this purpose the Word
 assumed the nature of man, that, having overcome the serpent, He might
 by Himself destroy the condemnation which had come into being along
 with man's ruin. For it was fitting that the Evil One should be
 overcome by no other, but by him whom he had deceived, and whom he was
 boasting that he held in subjection, because no otherwise was it
 possible that sin and condemnation should be destroyed, unless that
 same man on whose account it had been said, "Dust thou art, and unto
 dust thou shalt return," [2565] should be created anew, and undo the
 sentence which for his sake had gone forth on all, that "as in Adam" at
 first "all die, even so" again "in Christ," who assumed the nature and
 position of Adam, should "all be made alive." [2566]

 [2563] St. John i. 1.

 [2564] Eph. i. 21; iii. 10.

 [2565] Gen. iii. 19.

 [2566] 1 Cor. xv. 22.

 Chapter VII.--The Works of Christ, Proper to God and to Man, the Works
 of Him Who is One.

 And now we seem to have said almost enough on the fact that man has
 become the organ and clothing of the Only-begotten, and what He was who
 came to dwell in him. But the fact that there is no moral inequality or
 discord [2567] may again be considered briefly from the beginning. For
 he speaks well who says that that is in its own nature good and
 righteous and holy, by participation of which other things become good,
 and that wisdom is in connection with [2568] God, and that, on the
 other hand, sin is unholy and unrighteous and evil. For life and death,
 corruption and incorruption, are two things in the highest degree
 opposed to each other. For life is a moral equality, but corruption an
 inequality; and righteousness and prudence a harmony, but
 unrighteousness and folly a discord. Now, man being between these is
 neither righteousness itself, nor unrighteousness; but being placed
 midway between incorruption and corruption, to whichever of these he
 may incline is said to partake of the nature of that which has laid
 hold of him. Now, when he inclines to corruption, he becomes corrupt
 and mortal, and when to incorruption, he becomes incorrupt and
 immortal. For, being placed midway between the tree of life and the
 tree of the knowledge of good and evil, of the Fruit of which he
 tasted, [2569] he was changed into the nature of the latter, himself
 being neither the tree of life nor that of corruption; but having been
 shown forth as mortal, from his participation in and presence with
 corruption, and, again, as incorrupt and immortal by connection with
 and participation in life; as Paul also taught, saying, "Corruption
 shall not inherit incorruption, nor death life," [2570] rightly
 defining corruption and death to be that which corrupts and kills, and
 not that which is corrupted and dies; and incorruption and life that
 which gives life and immortality, and not that which receives life and
 immortality. And thus man is neither a discord and an inequality, nor
 an equality and a harmony. But when he received discord, which is
 transgression and sin, he became discordant and unseemly; but when he
 received harmony, that is righteousness, he became a harmonious and
 seemly organ, in order that the Lord, the Incorruption which conquered
 death, might harmonize the resurrection with the flesh, not suffering
 it again to be inherited by corruption. And on this point also let
 these statements suffice.

 [2567] In Him.

 [2568] Here, as in the previous chapter, and in many other passages, I
 have preferred the text of Jahn to that of Migne, as being generally
 the more accurate.--Tr.

 [2569] Gen. ii. 9.

 [2570] 1 Cor. xv. 22. The words are, "Neither doth corruption inherit
 incorruption."

 Chapter VIII.--The Bones and Flesh of Wisdom; The Side Out of Which the
 Spiritual Eve is Formed, the Holy Spirit; The Woman the Help-Meet of
 Adam; Virgins Betrothed to Christ.

 For it has been already established by no contemptible arguments from
 Scripture, that the first man may be properly referred to Christ
 Himself, and is no longer a type and representation and image of the
 Only-begotten, but has become actually Wisdom and the Word.

 For man, having been composed, like water, of wisdom and life, has
 become identical with the very same untainted light which poured into
 him. Whence it was that the apostle directly referred to Christ the
 words which had been spoken of Adam. For thus will it be most certainly
 agreed that the Church is formed out of His bones and flesh; and it was
 for this cause that the Word, leaving His Father in heaven, came down
 to be "joined to His wife;" [2571] and slept in the trance of His
 passion, and willingly suffered death for her, that He might present
 the Church to Himself glorious and blameless, having cleansed her by
 the laver, [2572] for the receiving of the spiritual and blessed seed,
 which is sown by Him who with whispers implants it in the depths of the
 mind; and is conceived and formed by the Church, as by a woman. so as
 to give birth and nourishment to virtue. For in this way, too, the
 command, "Increase and multiply," [2573] is duly fulfilled, the Church
 increasing daily in greatness and beauty and multitude, by the union
 and communion of the Word who now still comes down to us and falls into
 a trance by the memorial of His passion; for otherwise the Church could
 not conceive believers, and give them new birth by the laver of
 regeneration, unless Christ, emptying Himself for their sake, that He
 might be contained by them, as I said, through the recapitulation of
 His passion, should die again, coming down from heaven, and being
 "joined to His wife," the Church, should provide for a certain power
 being taken from His own side, so that all who are built up in Him
 should grow up, even those who are born again by the laver, receiving
 of His bones and of His flesh, that is, of His holiness and of His
 glory. For he who says that the bones and flesh of Wisdom are
 understanding and virtue, says most rightly; and that the side [2574]
 is the Spirit of truth, the Paraclete, of whom the illuminated [2575]
 receiving are fitly born again to incorruption. For it is impossible
 for any one to be a partaker of the Holy Spirit, and to be chosen a
 member of Christ, unless the Word first came down upon him and fell
 into a trance, in order that he, being filled [2576] with the Spirit,
 and rising again from sleep with Him who was laid to sleep for his
 sake, should be able to receive renewal and restoration. For He may
 fitly be called the side [2577] of the Word, even the sevenfold Spirit
 of truth, according to the prophet; [2578] of whom God taking, in the
 trance of Christ, that is, after His incarnation and passion, prepares
 a help-meet for Him [2579] --I mean the souls which are betrothed and
 given in marriage to Him. For it is frequently the case that the
 Scriptures thus call the assembly and mass of believers by the name of
 the Church, the more perfect in their progress being led up to be the
 one person and body of the Church. For those who are the better, and
 who embrace the truth more clearly, being delivered from the evils of
 the flesh, become, on account of their perfect purification and faith,
 a church and help-meet of Christ, betrothed and given in marriage to
 Him as a virgin, according to the apostle, [2580] so that receiving the
 pure and genuine seed of His doctrine, they may co-operate with Him,
 helping in preaching for the salvation of others. And those who are
 still imperfect and beginning their lessons, are born to salvation, and
 shaped, as by mothers, by those who are more perfect, until they are
 brought forth and regenerated unto the greatness and beauty of virtue;
 and so these, in their turn making progress, having become a church,
 assist in labouring for the birth and nurture of other children,
 accomplishing in the receptacle of the soul, as in a womb, the
 blameless will of the Word.

 [2571] Eph. v. 31.

 [2572] Eph. v. 26, 27.

 [2573] Gen. i. 18.

 [2574] Rib.

 [2575] Commonly used by the Greek Fathers for the Baptized. [Following
 Holy Scripture, Heb. x. 32, and Calvin's Commentary, ad loc. Also his
 comment on Tit. iii. 5.]

 [2576] Jahn's reading, anaplestheis. Migne has anaplastheis, moulded.

 [2577] Rib.

 [2578] Isa. xi. 2.

 [2579] Gen. ii. 18.

 [2580] 2 Cor. xi. 12.

 Chapter IX.--The Dispensation of Grace in Paul the Apostle.

 Now we should consider the case of the renowned Paul, that when he was
 not yet perfect in Christ, he was first born and suckled, Ananias
 preaching to him, and renewing him in baptism, as the history in the
 Acts relates. But when he was grown to a man, and was built up, then
 being moulded to spiritual perfection, he was made the help-meet and
 bride of the Word; and receiving and conceiving the seeds of life, he
 who was before a child, becomes a church and a mother, himself
 labouring in birth of those who, through him, believed in the Lord,
 until Christ was formed and born in them also. For he says, "My little
 children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in
 you;" [2581] and again, "In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through
 the Gospel." [2582]

 It is evident, then, that the statement respecting Eve and Adam is to
 be referred to the Church and Christ. For this is truly a great mystery
 and a supernatural, of which I, from my weakness and dulness, am unable
 to speak, according to its worth and greatness. Nevertheless, let us
 attempt it. It remains that I speak to you on what follows, and of its
 signification.

 [2581] Gal. iv. 19.

 [2582] 1 Cor. iv. 15.

 Chapter X.--The Doctrine of the Same Apostle Concerning Purity.

 Now Paul, when summoning all persons to sanctification and purity, in
 this way referred that which had been spoken concerning the first man
 and Eve in a secondary sense to Christ and the Church, in order to
 silence the ignorant, now deprived of all excuse. For men who are
 incontinent in consequence of the uncontrolled impulses of sensuality
 in them, dare to force the Scriptures beyond their true meaning, so as
 to twist into a defence of their incontinence the saying, "Increase and
 multiply;" [2583] and the other, "Therefore shall a man leave his
 father and his mother;" [2584] and they are not ashamed to run counter
 to the Spirit, but, as though born for this purpose, they kindle up the
 smouldering and lurking passion, fanning and provoking it; and
 therefore he, cutting off very sharply these dishonest follies and
 invented excuses, and having arrived at the subject of instructing them
 how men should behave to their wives, showing that it should be as
 Christ did to the Church, "who gave Himself for it, that He might
 sanctify and cleanse it by the washing [2585] of water by the Word,"
 [2586] he referred back to Genesis, mentioning the things spoken
 concerning the first man, and explaining these things as bearing on the
 subject before him, that he might take away occasion for the abuse of
 these passages from those who taught the sensual gratification of the
 body, under the pretext of begetting children.

 [2583] Gen. ii. 18.

 [2584] Gen. ii. 24.

 [2585] [Laver (Gr. loutron). Compare Tit. iii. 5 and Calvin's comment,
 Opp., tom. ii. p. 506, ed. 1667.]

 [2586] Eph. v. 25, 26. [Baptismus = lavacrum animæ.--Calvin, Ib., p.
 350.]

 Chapter XI.--The Same Argument.

 For consider, O virgins, how he, [2587] desiring with all his might
 that believers in Christ should be chaste, endeavours by many arguments
 to show them the dignity of chastity, as when he says, [2588] Now,
 concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: It is good for a man
 not to touch a woman," thence showing already very clearly that it is
 good not to touch [2589] a woman, laying it down. and setting it forth
 unconditionally. But afterwards, being aware of the weakness of the
 less continent, and their passion for intercourse, he permitted those
 who are unable to govern the flesh to use their own wives, rather than,
 shamefully transgressing, to give themselves up to fornication. Then,
 after having given this permission, he immediately added these words,
 [2590] "that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency;" which means,
 "if you, such as you are, cannot, on account of the incontinence and
 softness of your bodies, be perfectly continent, I will rather permit
 you to have intercourse with your own wives, lest, professing perfect
 continence, ye be constantly tempted by the evil one, and be inflamed
 with lust after other men's wives."

 [2587] Paul.

 [2588] 1 Cor. vii. 1. [All vulgar familiarity included.]

 [2589] In the original the two words are different. In the quotation
 from St. Paul it is haptesthai; here it is prospsauein . Nothing could
 be gained by using two words in the translation.--Tr.

 [2590] 1 Cor vii. 5.

 Chapter XII.--Paul an Example to Widows, and to Those Who Do Not Live
 with Their Wives.

 Come, now, and let us examine more carefully the very words which are
 before us, and observe that the apostle did not grant these things
 unconditionally to all, but first laid down the reason on account of
 which he was led to this. For, having set forth that "it is good for a
 man not to touch a woman," [2591] he added immediately, "Nevertheless,
 to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife" [2592] --that
 is, "on account of the fornication which would arise from your being
 unable to restrain your voluptuousness"--"and let every woman have her
 own husband. Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and
 likewise also the wife unto the husband. The wife hath not power of her
 own body, but the husband: and likewise also the husband hath not power
 of his own body, but the wife. Defraud ye not one the other, except it
 be with consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to prayer;
 [2593] and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your
 incontinency. But I speak this by permission, and not of commandment."
 [2594] And this is very carefully considered. "By permission" he says,
 showing that he was giving counsel, "not of command;" for he receives
 command respecting chastity and the not touching of a woman, but
 permission respecting those who are unable, as I said, to chasten their
 appetites. These things, then, he lays down concerning men and women
 who are married to one spouse, or who shall hereafter be so; but we
 must now examine carefully the apostle's language respecting men who
 have lost their wives, and women who have lost their husbands, and what
 he declares on this subject.

 "I say therefore," he goes on, [2595] "to the unmarried and widows, It
 is good for them if they abide even as I. But if they cannot contain,
 let them marry: for it is better to marry than to burn." Here also he
 persisted in giving the preference to continence. For, taking himself
 as a notable example, in order to stir them up to emulation, he
 challenged his hearers to this state of life, teaching that it was
 better that a man who had been bound to one wife should henceforth
 remain single, as he also did. [2596] But if, on the other hand, this
 should be a matter of difficulty to any one, on account of the strength
 of animal passion, he allows that one who is in such a condition may,
 "by permission," contract a second marriage; not as though he expressed
 the opinion that a second marriage was in itself good, [2597] but
 judging it better than burning. Just as though, in the fast which
 prepares for the Easter celebration, one should offer food to another
 who was dangerously ill, and say," In truth, my friend, it were fitting
 and good that you should bravely hold out like us, and partake of the
 same things, [2598] for it is forbidden even to think of food to-day;
 but since you are held down and weakened by disease, and cannot bear
 it, therefore, by permission,' we advise you to eat food, lest, being
 quite unable, from sickness, to hold up against the desire for food,
 you perish." Thus also the apostle speaks here, first saying that he
 wished all were healthy and continent, as he also was, but afterwards
 allowing a second marriage to those who are burdened with the disease
 of the passions, lest they should be wholly defiled by fornication,
 goaded on by the itchings of the organs of generation to promiscuous
 intercourse, considering such a second marriage far preferable to
 burning and indecency.

 [2591] 1 Cor. vii. 1. [All vulgar familiarity included.]

 [2592] 1 Cor. vii. 2.

 [2593] E.V. "Fasting and prayer." As in the best mss., te nesteia kai
 is wanting in the text.

 [2594] 1 Cor. vii. 2-6.

 [2595] 1 Cor. vii. 8, 9.

 [2596] [See p. 316, supra (note), and also Eusebius, there cited. Per
 contra, see Lewin, vol. i. 382, 386.]

 [2597] Kalon. It is the same word which is translated good in ver. 1,
 "It is good for a man."

 [2598] i.e., participate in the same ordinances, and in their fruits.

 Chapter XIII.--The Doctrine of Paul Concerning Virginity Explained.

 I have now brought to an end what I have to say respecting continence
 and marriage and chastity, and intercourse with men, and in which of
 these there is help towards progress in righteousness; but it still
 remains to speak concerning virginity--if, indeed, anything be
 prescribed on this subject. Let us then treat this subject also; for it
 stands thus: [2599] "Now concerning virgins, I have no commandment of
 the Lord: yet I give my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of
 the Lord to be faithful. I suppose therefore that this is good for the
 present distress; I say, that it is good for a man so to be. Art thou
 bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife?
 seek not a wife. But and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned; and if a
 virgin marry, she has not sinned. Nevertheless such shall have trouble
 in the flesh: but I spare you." Having given his opinion with great
 caution respecting virginity, and being about to advise him who wished
 it to give his virgin in marriage, so that none of those things which
 conduce to sanctification should be of necessity and by compulsion, but
 according to the free purpose of the soul. for this is acceptable to
 God, he does not wish these things to be said as by authority, and as
 the mind of the Lord, with reference to the giving of a virgin in
 marriage; for after he had said, [2600] "if a virgin marry, she hath
 not sinned," directly afterwards, with the greatest caution, he
 modified his statement, showing that he had advised these things by
 human permission, and not by divine. So, immediately after he had said,
 "if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned," he added, "such shall have
 trouble in the flesh: but I spare you." [2601] By which he means: "I
 sparing you, such as you are, consented to these things, because you
 have chosen to think thus of them, that I may not seem to hurry you on
 by violence, and compel any one to this. [2602] But yet if it shall
 please you who find chastity hard to bear, rather to turn to marriage;
 I consider it to be profitable for you to restrain yourselves in the
 gratification of the flesh, not making your marriage an occasion for
 abusing your own vessels to uncleanness." Then he adds, [2603] "But
 this I say, brethren, the time is short: it remaineth, that both they
 that have wives be as though they had none." And again, going on and
 challenging them to the same things, he confirmed his statement,
 powerfully supporting the state of virginity, and adding expressly the
 following words to those which he had spoken before, he exclaimed,
 [2604] "I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried
 careth for the things that belong to the Lord: [2605] but he that is
 married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please
 his wife. There is a difference also between a wife and a virgin. The
 unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy
 both in body and in spirit: but she that is married careth for the
 things of the world, how she may please her husband." Now it is clear
 to all, without any doubt, that to care for the things of the Lord and
 to please God, is much better than to care for the things of the world
 and to please one's wife. For who is there so foolish and blind. as not
 to perceive in this statement the higher praise which Paul accords to
 chastity? "And this," he says, [2606] "I speak for your own profit, not
 that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is comely."

 [2599] 1 Cor. vii. 25-28.

 [2600] 1 Cor. vii. 28.

 [2601] 1 Cor. vii. 28.

 [2602] Which I recommend.

 [2603] 1 Cor. vii. 29. [Nobody can feel more deeply than I do the
 immeasurable evils of an enforced celibacy; nobody can feel more deeply
 the deplorable state of the Church which furnishes only rare and
 exceptional examples of voluntary celibacy for the sake of Christ. On
 chastity, see Jer. Taylor's Holy Living, Works, i. p. 424.]

 [2604] 1 Cor. vii. 32-34.

 [2605] A clause is omitted here in the text.

 [2606] 1 Cor. vii. 35.

 Chapter XIV.--Virginity a Gift of God: the Purpose of Virginity Not
 Rashly to Be Adopted by Any One.

 Consider besides how, in addition to the words already quoted, he
 commends the state of virginity as a gift of God. Wherefore he rejects
 those of the more incontinent, who, under the influence of vain-glory,
 would advance to this state, advising them to marry, lest in their time
 of manly strength, the flesh stirring up the desires and passions, they
 should be goaded on to defile the soul. For let us consider what he
 lays down: [2607] "But if any man think that he behaveth himself
 uncomely towards his virgin," he says," if she pass the flower of her
 age, and need so require, let him do what he will, he sinneth not: let
 him marry;" properly here preferring marriage to "uncomeliness," in the
 case of those who had chosen the state of virginity, but afterwards
 finding it intolerable and grievous, and in word boasting of their
 perseverance before men, out of shame, but indeed no longer having the
 power to persevere in the life of a eunuch. But for him who of his own
 free will and purpose decides to preserve his flesh in virgin purity,
 "having no necessity," [2608] that is, passion calling forth his loins
 to intercourse, for there are, as it seems, differences in men's
 bodies; such a one contending and struggling, and zealously abiding by
 his profession, and admirably fulfilling it, he exhorts to abide and to
 preserve it, according the highest prize to virginity. For he that is
 able, he says, and ambitious to preserve his flesh pure, does better;
 but he that is unable, and enters into marriage lawfully, and does not
 indulge in secret corruption, does well. And now enough has been said
 on these subjects.

 Let any one who will, take in his hand the Epistle to the Corinthians,
 and, examining all its passages one by one, then consider what we have
 said, comparing them together, as to whether there is not a perfect
 harmony and agreement between them. These things, according to my
 power, O Arete, I offer to thee as my contribution on the subject of
 chastity.

 Euboulios. Through many things, O Gregorion, she has scarcely come to
 the subject, having measured and crossed a mighty sea of words.

 Gregorion. So it seems; but come, I must mention the rest of what was
 said in order, going through it and repeating it, while I seem to have
 the sound of it dwelling in my ears, before it flies away and escapes;
 for the remembrance of things lately heard is easily effaced from the
 aged.

 Euboulios. Say on, then; for we have come to have the pleasure of
 hearing these discourses.

 Gregorion. And then after, as you observed, Thaleia had descended from
 her smooth and unbroken course to the earth, Theopatra, she said,
 followed her in order, and spoke as follows.

 [2607] 1 Cor. vii. 36. [On virginity, see Taylor, i. 426, ed. London,
 1844.]

 [2608] 1 Cor. vii. 37.

 Discourse IV.--Theopatra.

 Chapter I.--The Necessity of Praising Virtue, for Those Who Have the
 Power.

 If the art of speaking, O virgins, always went by the same ways, and
 passed along the same path, there would be no way to avoid wearying you
 for one who persisted in the arguments which had already been urged.
 But since there are of arguments myriads of currents and ways, God
 inspiring us "at sundry times and in divers manners," [2609] who can
 have the choice of holding back or of being afraid? For he would not be
 free from blame to whom the gift has been given, if he failed to adorn
 that which is honourable with words of praise. Come then, we also,
 according to our gifts, will sing the brightest and most glorious star
 of Christ, which is chastity. For this way of the Spirit is very wide
 and large. Beginning, therefore, at the point from which we may say
 those things which are suitable and fitting to the subject before us,
 let us from thence consider it.

 [2609] polumeros kai polutropos. Heb. i. 1.

 Chapter II.--The Protection of Chastity and Virginity Divinely Given to
 Men, that They May Emerge from the Mire of Vices.

 Now I at least seem to perceive that nothing has been such a means of
 restoring men to paradise, and of the change to incorruption, and of
 reconciliation to God, and such a means of salvation to men, by guiding
 us to life, as chastity. And I will now endeavour to show why I think
 so concerning these things, that having heard distinctly the power of
 the grace already spoken of, you may know of how great blessings it has
 become the giver to us. Anciently, then, after the fall of man, when he
 was cast out by reason of his transgression, the stream of corruption
 poured forth abundantly, and running along in violent currents, not
 only fiercely swept along whatever touched it from without, but also
 rushing within it, overwhelmed the souls of men. And they, [2610]
 continuously exposed to this, were carried along dumb and stupid,
 neglecting to pilot their vessels, [2611] from having nothing firm to
 lay hold of. For the senses of the soul, as those have said who are
 learned in these things, when, being overcome by the excitements to
 passion which fall upon them from without, they receive the sudden
 bursts of the waves of folly which rush into them, being darkened turn
 aside from the divine course its whole vessel, which is by nature
 easily guided. Wherefore God, pitying us who were in such a condition,
 and were able neither to stand nor to rise, sent down from heaven the
 best and most glorious help, virginity, that by it we might tie our
 bodies fast, like ships, and have a calm, coming to an anchorage
 without damage, as also the Holy Spirit witnesses. For this is said in
 the hundred and thirty-sixth [2612] psalm, where the souls send
 joyfully up to God a hymn of thanksgiving, [2613] as many as have been
 taken hold of and raised up to walk with Christ in heaven, that they
 might not be overwhelmed by the streams of the world and the flesh.
 Whence, also, they say that Pharaoh was a type of the devil in Egypt,
 since he mercilessly commanded the males to be cast into the river,
 [2614] but the females to be preserved alive. For the devil, ruling
 [2615] from Adam to Moses over this great Egypt, the world, took care
 to have the male and rational offspring of the soul carried away and
 destroyed by the streams of passions, but he longs for the carnal and
 irrational offspring to increase and multiply.

 [2610] i.e., hai psuchai.

 [2611] The body.

 [2612] Ps. cxxxvii. E.V., and in Heb. [Does not our author follow the
 Hebrew here? I must think his reference here is to the cxxxvith Psalm
 as we have it. It is Eucharistic, and verses 10-16 seem to be specially
 referred to.]

 [2613] Or, Eucharistic hymn.

 [2614] Exod. i. 16.

 [2615] Rom. v. 14.

 Chapter III.--That Passage of David Explained; [2616] What the Harps
 Hung Upon the Willows Signify; The Willow a Symbol of Chastity; The
 Willows Watered by Streams.

 But not to pass away from our subject, come, let us take in our hands
 and examine this psalm, which the pure and stainless souls sing to God,
 saying: [2617] "By the rivers of Babylon there we sat down; yea, we
 wept, when we remembered Zion. We hanged our harps upon the willows in
 the midst thereof," clearly giving the name of harps to their bodies
 which they hung upon the branches of chastity, fastening them to the
 wood that they might not be snatched away and dragged along again by
 the stream of incontinence. For Babylon, which is interpreted
 "disturbance" or "confusion," signifies this life around which the
 water flows, while we sit in the midst of which the water flows round
 us, as long as we are in the world, the rivers of evil always beating
 upon us. Wherefore, also, we are always fearful, and we groan and cry
 with weeping to God, that our harps may not be snatched off by the
 waves of pleasure, and slip down from the tree of chastity. For
 everywhere the divine writings take the willow as the type of chastity,
 because, when its flower is steeped in water, if it be drunk, it
 extinguishes whatever kindles sensual desires and passions within us,
 until it entirely renders barren, and makes every inclination to the
 begetting of children without effect, as also Homer indicated, for this
 reason calling the willows destructive of fruit. [2618] And in Isaiah
 the righteous are said to "spring up as willows by the water courses."
 [2619] Surely, then, the shoot of virginity is raised to a great and
 glorious height, when the righteous, and he to whom it is given to
 preserve it and to cultivate it, bedewing it with wisdom, is watered by
 the gentlest streams of Christ. For as it is the nature of this tree to
 bud and grow through water, so it is the nature of virginity to blossom
 and grow to maturity when enriched by words, so that one can hang his
 body [2620] upon it.

 [2616] "By the waters of Babylon," etc. [He passes to the next psalm.]

 [2617] Ps. cxxxvii. 1, 2. [Here is a transition to Psalm cxxxvii.,
 which has been the source of a confusion in the former chapter. This
 psalm is not Eucharistic, but penitential.]

 [2618] Odyss. K'. 510.

 [2619] Isa. xliv. 4.

 [2620] organon. The word used for harp above, and here employed with a
 double meaning. ["Body" here = "man"'s physical system.]

 Chapter IV.--The Author Goes on with the Interpretation of the Same
 Passage.

 If, then, the rivers of Babylon are the streams of voluptuousness, as
 wise men say, which confuse and disturb the soul, then the willows must
 be chastity, to which we may suspend and draw up the organs of lust
 which overbalance and weigh down the mind, so that they may not be
 borne down by the torrents of incontinence, and be drawn like worms to
 impurity and corruption. For God has bestowed upon us virginity as a
 most useful and a serviceable help towards incorruption, sending it as
 an ally to those who are contending for and longing after Zion, as the
 psalm shows, which is resplendent charity and the commandment
 respecting it, for Zion is interpreted "The commandment of the
 watchtower." [2621] Now, let us here enumerate the points which follow.
 For why do the souls declare that they were asked by those who led them
 captive to sing the Lord's song in a strange land? Surely because the
 Gospel teaches a holy and secret song, which sinners and adulterers
 sing to the Evil One. For they insult the commandments, accomplishing
 the will of the spirits of evil, and cast holy things to dogs, and
 pearls before swine, [2622] in the same manner as those of whom the
 prophet says with indignation, "They read the law [2623] without;"
 [2624] for the Jews were not to read the law going forth out of the
 gates of Jerusalem or out of their houses; and for this reason the
 prophet blames them strongly, and cries that they were liable to
 condemnation, because, while they were transgressing the commandments,
 and acting impiously towards God, they were pretentiously reading the
 law, as if, forsooth, they were piously observing its precepts; but
 they did not receive it in their souls, holding it firmly with faith,
 but rejected it, denying it by their works. And hence they sing the
 Lord's song in a strange land, explaining the law by distorting and
 degrading it, expecting a sensual kingdom, and setting their hopes on
 this alien world, which the Word says will pass away, [2625] where
 those who carry them captive entice them with pleasures, lying in wait
 to deceive them.

 [2621] In Hebrew the word means simply "a memorial."

 [2622] Matt. vii. 6.

 [2623] i.e., To those without.

 [2624] Amos iv. 5 (LXX.). The E.V. is, "Offer a sacrifice of
 thanksgiving in the leaven."

 [2625] 1 Pet. ii. 10.

 Chapter V.--The Gifts of Virgins, Adorned with Which They are Presented
 to One Husband, Christ.

 Now, those who sing the Gospel to senseless people seem to sing the
 Lord's song in a strange land, of which Christ is not the husbandman;
 but those who have put on and shone in the most pure and bright, and
 unmingled and pious and becoming, ornament of virginity, and are found
 barren and unproductive of unsettled and grievous passions, do not sing
 the song in a strange land; because they are not borne thither by their
 hopes, nor do they stick fast in the lusts of their mortal bodies, nor
 do they take a low view of the meaning of the commandments, but well
 and nobly, with a lofty disposition, they have regard to the promises
 which are above, thirsting for heaven as a congenial abode, whence God,
 approving their dispositions, promises with an oath to give them choice
 honours, appointing and establishing them "above His chief joy;" for He
 says thus: [2626] "If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand
 forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to
 the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy;"
 meaning by Jerusalem, as I said, these very undefiled and incorrupt
 souls, which, having with self-denial drawn in the pure draught of
 virginity with unpolluted lips, are "espoused to one husband," to be
 presented "as a chaste virgin to Christ" [2627] in heaven, "having
 gotten the victory, striving for undefiled rewards." [2628] Hence also
 the prophet Isaiah proclaims, saying, [2629] "Arise, shine, [2630] for
 thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee." Now
 these promises, it is evident to every one, will be fulfilled after the
 resurrection. [2631] For the Holy Spirit does not speak of that
 well-known town in Judea; but truly of that heavenly city, the blessed
 Jerusalem, which He declares to be the assembly of the souls which God
 plainly promises to place first, "above His chief joy," in the new
 dispensation, settling those who are clothed in the most white robe of
 virginity in the pure dwelling of unapproachable light; because they
 had it not in mind to put off their wedding garment--that is, to relax
 their minds by wandering thoughts.

 [2626] Ps. cxxxvii. 5, 6.

 [2627] 2 Cor. xi. 2.

 [2628] Wisd. iv. 2.

 [2629] Isa. lx. 1.

 [2630] O Jerusalem.

 [2631] Commentators have remarked the allusion to Phil. iii. 11. See
 Migne's note. The thought of the marriage of the heavenly bridegroom,
 Christ, to His virgin bride, the Church, at the second Advent, when
 "the dead shall be raised," was obviously present to the mind of the
 writer.

 Chapter VI.--Virginity to Be Cultivated and Commended in Every Place
 and Time.

 Further, the expression in Jeremiah, [2632] "That a maid should not
 forget her ornaments, nor a bride her attire," [2633] shows that she
 should not give up or loosen the band of chastity through wiles and
 distractions. For by the heart are properly denoted our heart and mind.
 Now the breastband, the girdle which gathers together and keeps firm
 the purpose of the soul to chastity, is love to God, which our Captain
 and Shepherd, Jesus, who is also our Ruler and Bridegroom, O
 illustrious virgins, commands both you and me to hold fast unbroken and
 sealed up even to the end; for one will not easily find anything else a
 greater help to men than this possession, pleasing and grateful to God.
 Therefore, I say, that we should all exercise and honour chastity, and
 always cultivate and commend it.

 Let these first-fruits of my discourse suffice for thee, O Arete, in
 proof of my education and my zeal. "And I receive the gift," she said
 that Arete replied, "and bid Thallousa speak after thee; for I must
 have a discourse from each one of you." And she said that Thallousa,
 pausing a little, as though considering somewhat with herself, thus
 spoke.

 [2632] Jer. ii. 32. The author, in quoting from the LXX., slightly
 alters the text, so as to make it almost a command, instead of a
 question. The original has epilesetai; in the text it is epilathesthai.

 [2633] Literally, breastband.

 Discourse V.--Thallousa.

 Chapter I.--The Offering of Chastity a Great Gift. [2634]

 I pray you, Arete, that you will give your assistance now too, that I
 may seem to speak something worthy in the first place of yourself, and
 then of those who are present. For I am persuaded, having thoroughly
 learnt it from the sacred writings, that the greatest and most glorious
 offering and gift, to which there is nothing comparable, which men can
 offer to God, is the life [2635] of virginity. For although many
 accomplished many admirable things, according to their vows, in the
 law, they alone were said to fulfil a great vow who were willing to
 offer themselves of their free-will. For the passage runs thus: "And
 the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel,
 and say unto them, when either man or woman shall separate
 themselves...unto the Lord." [2636] One vows to offer gold and silver
 vessels for the sanctuary when he comes, another to offer the tithe of
 his fruits, another of his property, another the best of his flocks,
 another consecrates his being; and no one is able to vow a great vow to
 the Lord, but he who has offered himself entirely to God.

 [2634] [Compare vol. v. p. 587, this series.]

 [2635] Lit. game or toil, athlon.

 [2636] Lit. shall greatly vow a vow to offer, with sacrifices of
 purification, chastity to the Lord. Num. vi. 1, 2.

 Chapter II.--Abraham's Sacrifice of a Heifer Three Years Old, of a
 Goat, and of a Ram Also Three Years Old: Its Meaning; Every Age to Be
 Consecrated to God; The Threefold Watch and Our Age.

 I must endeavour, O virgins, by a true exposition, to explain to you
 the mind of the Scripture according to its meaning. [2637] Now, he who
 watches over and restrains himself in part, and in part is distracted
 and wandering, is not wholly given up to God. Hence it is necessary
 that the perfect man offer up all, both the things of the soul and
 those of the flesh, so that he may be complete and not lacking.
 Therefore also God commands Abraham, [2638] "Take Me an heifer of three
 years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years
 old, and a turtle dove, and a young pigeon;" which is admirably said;
 for remark, that concerning those things, He also gives this command,
 Bring them Me and keep them free from the yoke, even thy soul
 uninjured, like a heifer, and your flesh, and your reason; the last
 like a goat, since he traverses lofty and precipitous places, and the
 other like a ram, that he may in nowise skip away, and fall and slip
 off from the right way. For thus shalt thou be perfect and blameless, O
 Abraham, when thou hast offered to Me thy soul, and thy sense, and thy
 mind, which He mentioned under the symbol of the heifer, the goat, and
 the ram of three years old, as though they represented the pure
 knowledge of the Trinity.

 And perhaps He also symbolizes the beginning, the middle, and the end
 of our life and of our age, wishing as far as possible that men should
 spend their boyhood, their manhood, and their more advanced life
 purely, and offer them up to Him. Just as our Lord Jesus Christ
 commands in the Gospels, thus directing: "Let not your lights be
 extinguished, and let not your loins be loosed. Therefore also be ye
 like men who wait for their lord, when he will return from the wedding;
 that, when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto him immediately.
 Blessed are ye, when he shall make you sit down, and shall come and
 serve you. And if he come in the second, or in the third watch, ye are
 blessed." [2639] For consider, O virgins, when He mentions three
 watches of the night, and His three comings, He shadows forth in symbol
 our three periods of life, that of the boy, of the full-grown man, and
 of the old man; so that if He should come and remove us from the world
 while spending our first period, that is, while we are boys, He may
 receive us ready and pure, having nothing amiss; and the second and the
 third in like manner. For the evening watch is the time of the budding
 and youth of man, when the reason begins to be disturbed and to be
 clouded by the changes of life, his flesh gaining strength and urging
 him to lust. The second is the time when, afterwards advancing to a
 full-grown man, he begins to acquire stability, and to make a stand
 against the turbulence of passion and self-conceit. And the third, when
 most of the imaginations and desires fade away, the flesh now withering
 and declining to old age.

 [2637] There are two readings. The above rendering may fairly embrace
 them both.

 [2638] Gen. xv. 9. [Our author has in mind (the triad) 1 Thess. v. 23.]

 [2639] Luke xii. 35-38. The author apparently quotes from memory.

 Chapter III.--Far Best to Cultivate Virtue from Boyhood.

 Therefore, it is becoming that we should kindle the unquenchable light
 of faith in the heart, and gird our loins with purity, and watch and
 ever wait for the Lord so that, if He should will to come and take any
 of us away in the first period of life, or in the second, or in the
 third, and should find us most ready, and working what He appointed, He
 may make us to lie down in the bosom of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
 Jacob. Now Jeremiah says, "It is good for a man that he bear the yoke
 in his youth;" [2640] and "that his soul should not depart from the
 Lord." It is good, indeed, from boyhood, to submit the neck to the
 divine Hand, and not to shake off, even to old age, the Rider who
 guides with pure mind, when the Evil One is ever dragging down the mind
 to that which is worse. For who is there that does not receive through
 the eyes, through the ears, through the taste and smell and touch,
 pleasures and delights, so as to become impatient of the control of
 continence as a driver, who checks and vehemently restrains the horse
 from evil? Another who turns his thoughts to other things will think
 differently; but we say that he offers himself perfectly to God who
 strives to keep the flesh undefiled from childhood, practising
 virginity; for it speedily brings great and much-desired gifts of hopes
 to those who strive for it, drying up the corrupting lusts and passions
 of the soul. But come, let us explain how we give ourselves up to the
 Lord.

 [2640] Lam. iii. 27.

 Chapter IV.--Perfect Consecration and Devotion to God: What It is.

 That which is laid down in the Book of Numbers, [2641] "greatly to vow
 a vow," serves to show, as, with a little more explanation, I proceed
 to prove, that chastity is the great vow above all vows. For then am I
 plainly consecrated altogether to the Lord, when I not only strive to
 keep the flesh untouched by intercourse, but also unspotted by other
 kinds of unseemliness. For "the unmarried woman," it is said, [2642]
 "careth for the things of the Lord, how she may please the Lord.;" not
 merely that she may bear away the glory in part of not being maimed in
 her virtue, but in both parts, according to the apostle, that she may
 be sanctified in body and spirit, offering up her members to the Lord.
 For let us say what it is to offer up oneself perfectly to the Lord.
 If, for instance, I open my mouth on some subjects, and close it upon
 others; thus, if I open it for the explanation of the Scriptures, for
 the praise of God, according to my power, in a true faith and with all
 due honour, and if I close it, putting a door and a watch upon it
 [2643] against foolish discourse, my mouth is kept pure, and is offered
 up to God. "My tongue is a pen," [2644] an organ of wisdom; for the
 Word of the Spirit writes by it in clearest letters, from the depth and
 power of the Scriptures, even the Lord, the swift Writer of the ages,
 that He quickly and swiftly registers and fulfils the counsel of the
 Father, hearing the words, "quickly spoil, swiftly plunder." [2645] To
 such a Scribe the words may be applied, "My tongue is a pen;" for a
 beautiful pen is sanctified and offered to Him, writing things more
 lovely than the poets and orators who confirm the doctrines of men. If,
 too, I accustom my eyes not to lust after the charms of the body, nor
 to take delight in unseemly sights, but to look up to the things which
 are above, then my eyes are kept pure, and are offered to the Lord. If
 I shut my ears against detraction and slanders, and open them to the
 word of God, having intercourse with wise men, [2646] then have I
 offered up my ears to the Lord. If I keep my hands from dishonourable
 dealing, from acts of covetousness and of licentiousness, then are my
 hands kept pure to God. If I withhold my steps from going [2647] in
 perverse ways, then have I offered up my feet, not going to the places
 of public resort and banquets, where wicked men are found, but into the
 right way, fulfilling something of the [2648] commands. What, then,
 remains to me, if I also keep the heart pure, offering up all its
 thoughts to God; if I think no evil, if anger and wrath gain no rule
 over me, if I meditate in the law of the Lord day and night? And this
 is to preserve a great chastity, and to vow a great vow.

 [2641] Num. vi. 2 (LXX.).

 [2642] 1 Cor. vii. 34; quoted from memory.

 [2643] Cf. Ps. cxxxix. 4, and cxli. 3.

 [2644] Ps. xlv. 2.

 [2645] Isa. viii. 1. The LXX is quoted from memory. The meaning,
 however, is nearer the original than the E.V. Cf. Keil and Delitzsch,
 Bib. Com., in loc.

 [2646] Cf. Ecclus. vi. 36.

 [2647] to poreutikon, the power of going.

 [2648] Divine.

 Chapter V.--The Vow of Chastity, and Its Rites in the Law; Vines,
 Christ, and the Devil.

 I will now endeavour to explain to you, O virgins, the rest of that
 which is prescribed; for this is attached to your duties, consisting of
 laws concerning virginity, which are useful as teaching how we should
 abstain, and how advance to virginity. For it is written thus: [2649]
 "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of
 Israel, and say unto them, When either man or woman shall separate
 themselves to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate themselves unto the
 Lord; he shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, and shall
 drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he
 drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes, or dried, all the
 days of his separation." And this means, that he who has devoted and
 offered himself to the Lord shall not take of the fruits of the plant
 of evil, because of its natural tendency to produce intoxication and
 distraction of mind. For we perceive from the Scriptures two kinds of
 vines which were separate from each other, and were unlike. For the one
 is productive of immortality and righteousness; but the other of
 madness and insanity. The sober and joy-producing vine, from whose
 instructions, as from branches, there joyfully hang down clusters of
 graces, distilling love, is our Lord Jesus, who says expressly to the
 apostles, [2650] "I am the true vine, ye are the branches; and my
 Father is the husbandman." But the wild and death-bearing vine is the
 devil, who drops down fury and poison and wrath, as Moses relates,
 writing concerning him, [2651] "For their vine is of the vine of Sodom,
 and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their
 clusters are bitter: their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel
 venom of asps." The inhabitants of Sodom having gathered grapes from
 this, were goaded on to an unnatural and fruitless desire for males.
 Hence, also, in the time of Noah, men having given themselves up to
 drunkenness, sank down into unbelief, and, being overwhelmed by the
 deluge, were drowned. And Cain, too, having drawn from this, stained
 his fratricidal hands, and defiled the earth with the blood of his own
 family. Hence, too, the heathen, becoming intoxicated, sharpen their
 passions for murderous battles; for man is not so much excited, nor
 goes so far astray through wine, as from anger and wrath. A man does
 not become intoxicated and go astray through wine, in the same way as
 he does from sorrow, or from love, or from incontinence. And therefore
 it is ordered that a virgin shall not taste of this vine, so that she
 may be sober and watchful from the cares of life, and may kindle the
 shining torch of the light of righteousness for the Word. "Take heed to
 yourselves," says the Lord, [2652] "lest at any time your hearts be
 overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life,
 and so that day come upon you unawares, as a snare."

 [2649] Num. vi. 1-4.

 [2650] St. John xv. 1, 5.

 [2651] Deut. xxxii. 32, 33.

 [2652] Luke xxi. 34.

 Chapter VI.--Sikera, a Manufactured and Spurious Wine, Yet
 Intoxicating; Things Which are Akin to Sins are to Be Avoided by a
 Virgin; The Altar of Incense (a Symbol Of) Virgins.

 Moreover, it is not only forbidden to virgins in any way to touch those
 things which are made from that vine, but even such things as resemble
 them and are akin to them. For Sikera, which is manufactured, is called
 a spurious kind of wine, whether made of palms or of other fruit-trees.
 For in the same way that draughts of wine overthrow man's reason, so do
 these exceedingly; and to speak the plain truth, the wise are
 accustomed to call by the name of Sikera all that produces drunkenness
 and distraction of mind, besides wine. In order, therefore, that the
 virgin may not, when guarding against those sins which are in their own
 nature evil, be defiled by those which are like them and akin to them,
 conquering the one and being conquered by the other, that is,
 decorating herself with textures of different cloths, or with stones
 and gold, and other decorations of the body, things which intoxicate
 the soul; on this account it is ordered that she do not give herself up
 to womanish weaknesses and laughter, exciting herself to wiles and
 foolish talking, which whirl the mind around and confuse it; as it is
 indicated in another place, [2653] "Ye shall not eat the hyæna and
 animals like it; nor the weasel and creatures of that kind." For this
 is the straight and direct way to heaven, not merely not to avoid any
 stumbling-block which would trip up and destroy men who are agitated by
 a desire for luxuries and pleasures, but also from such things as
 resemble them.

 Moreover, it has been handed down that the unbloody altar of God
 signifies the assembly of the chaste; thus virginity appears to be
 something great and glorious. Therefore it ought to be preserved
 undefiled and altogether pure, having no participation in the
 impurities of the flesh; but it should be set up before the presence of
 the testimony, gilded with wisdom, for the Holy of holies, sending
 forth a sweet savour of love to the Lord; for He says, [2654] "Thou
 shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: of shittim-wood shalt thou
 make it. And thou shalt make the staves of shittim-wood, and overlay
 them with gold. And thou shalt put it before the veil that is by the
 ark of the testimony, before the mercy-seat that is over the testimony,
 where I will meet with thee. And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense
 every morning: when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon
 it. And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall burn incense
 upon it; a perpetual incense before the Lord throughout your
 generations. Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor
 burnt-sacrifices nor meat-offering; neither shall ye pour
 drink-offering thereon."

 [2653] Lev. xi. 29; not an exact quotation.

 [2654] Exod. xxx. 1-9.

 Chapter VII.--The Church Intermediate Between the Shadows of the Law
 and the Realities of Heaven.

 If the law, according to the apostle, is spiritual, containing the
 images "of future good things," [2655] come then, let us strip off the
 veil of the letter which is spread over it, and consider its naked and
 true meaning. The Hebrews were commanded to ornament the Tabernacle as
 a type of the Church, that they might be able, by means of sensible
 things, to announce beforehand the image of divine things. For the
 pattern which was shown to Moses [2656] in the mount, to which he was
 to have regard in fashioning the Tabernacle, was a kind of accurate
 representation of the heavenly dwelling, which we now perceive more
 clearly than through types, yet more darkly than if we saw the reality.
 For not yet, in our present condition, has the truth come unmingled to
 men, who are here unable to bear the sight of pure immortality, just as
 we cannot bear to look upon the rays of the sun. And the Jews declared
 that the shadow of the image (of the heavenly things which was afforded
 to them), was the third from the reality; but we clearly behold the
 image of the heavenly order; for the truth will be accurately made
 manifest after the resurrection, when we shall see the heavenly
 tabernacle (the city in heaven "whose builder and maker is God" [2657]
 ) "face to face," and not "darkly" and "in part." [2658]

 [2655] Heb. x. 1. The apostle says, "a shadow," and "not the very
 image." The difference, however, is verbal only.--Tr.

 [2656] Exod. xxv. 40.

 [2657] Heb. xi. 10.

 [2658] 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

 Chapter VIII.--The Double Altar, Widows and Virgins; Gold the Symbol of
 Virginity.

 Now the Jews prophesied our state, but we foretell the heavenly; since
 the Tabernacle was a symbol of the Church, and the Church of heaven.
 Therefore, these things being so, and the Tabernacle being taken for a
 type of the Church, as I said, it is fitting that the altars should
 signify some of the things in the Church. And we have already compared
 the brazen altar to the company and circuit of widows; for they are a
 living altar of God, to which they bring calves and tithes, and
 free-will offerings, as a sacrifice to the Lord; but the golden altar
 within the [2659] Holy of holies, before the presence of the testimony,
 on which it is forbidden to offer sacrifice and libation, has reference
 to those in a state of virginity, as those who have their bodies
 preserved pure, like unalloyed gold, from carnal intercourse. Now gold
 is commended for two reasons: the first, that it does not rust, and the
 second, that in its colour it seems in a measure to resemble the rays
 of the sun; and thus it is suitably a symbol of virginity, which does
 not admit any stain or spot, but ever shines forth with the light of
 the Word. Therefore, also, it stands nearer to God within the Holy of
 holies, and before the veil, with undefiled hands, like incense,
 offering up prayers to the Lord, acceptable as a sweet savour; as also
 John indicated, saying that the incense in the vials of the
 four-and-twenty elders were the prayers of the saints. This, then, I
 offer to thee, O Arete, on the spur of the moment, according to my
 ability, on the subject of chastity.

 And when Thallousa had said this, Theopatra said that Arete touched
 Agathe with her sceptre, and that she, perceiving it, immediately arose
 and answered.

 [2659] An apparent confusion between the altar of incense, to which the
 author refers, and which stood in the Holy Place, and the Mercy-Seat,
 which was within the vale in the Holy of holies.--Tr.

 Discourse VI.--Agathe.

 Chapter I.--The Excellence of the Abiding Glory of Virginity; The Soul
 Made in the Image of the Image of God, that is of His Son; The Devil a
 Suitor for the Soul.

 With great confidence of being able to persuade, and to carry on this
 admirable discourse, O Arete, if thou go with me, will I also
 endeavour, according to my ability, to contribute something to the
 discussion of the subject before us; something commensurate to my own
 power, and not to be compared with that which has already been spoken.
 For I should be unable to put forth in philosophizing anything that
 could compete with those things which have already been so variously
 and brilliantly worked out. For I shall seem to bear away the reproach
 of silliness, if I make an effort to match myself with my superiors in
 wisdom. If, however, you will bear even with those who speak as they
 can, I will endeavour to speak, not lacking at least in good will. And
 here let me begin.

 We have all come into this world, O virgins, endowed with singular
 beauty, which has a relationship and affinity to divine wisdom. For the
 souls of men do then most accurately resemble Him who begat and formed
 them, when, reflecting the unsullied representation of His likeness,
 and the features of that countenance, to which God looking formed them
 to have an immortal and indestructible shape, they remain such. For the
 unbegotten and incorporeal beauty, which neither begins nor is
 corruptible, but is unchangeable, and grows not old and has need of
 nothing, He resting in Himself, and in the very light which is in
 unspeakable and inapproachable places, [2660] embracing all things in
 the circumference of His power, creating and arranging, made the soul
 after the image of His image. Therefore, also, it is reasonable and
 immortal. For being made after the image of the Only-begotten, as I
 said, it has an unsurpassable beauty, and therefore evil spirits [2661]
 love it, and plot and strive to defile its godlike and lovely image, as
 the prophet Jeremiah shows, reproaching Jerusalem, "Thou hadst a
 whore's forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed;" [2662] speaking of her
 who prostituted herself to the powers which came against her to pollute
 her. For her lovers are the devil and his angels, who plan to defile
 and pollute our reasonable and clear-sighted beauty of mind by
 intercourse with themselves, and desire to cohabit with every soul
 which is betrothed to the Lord.

 [2660] Cf. 1 Tim. vi. 16.

 [2661] pneumatika tes ponerias (Eph. vi. 12). In E.V. "spiritual
 wickedness."

 [2662] Jer. iii. 3.

 Chapter II.--The Parable of the Ten Virgins. [2663]

 If, then, any one will keep this beauty inviolate and unharmed, and
 such as He who constructed it formed and fashioned it, imitating the
 eternal and intelligible nature of which man is the representation and
 likeness, and will become like a glorious and holy image, he will be
 transferred thence to heaven, the city of the blessed, and will dwell
 there as in a sanctuary. Now our beauty is then best preserved
 undefiled and perfect when, protected by virginity, it is not darkened
 by the heat of corruption from without; but, remaining in itself, it is
 adorned with righteousness, being brought as a bride to the Son of God;
 as He also Himself suggests, exhorting that the light of chastity
 should be kindled in their flesh, as in lamps; since the number of the
 ten virgins s signifies the souls that have believed in Jesus Christ,
 symbolizing by the ten the only right way to heaven. Now five of them
 were prudent and wise; and five were foolish and unwise, for they had
 not the forethought to fill their vessels with oil, remaining destitute
 of righteousness. Now by these He signifies those who strive to come to
 the boundaries of virginity, and who strain every nerve to fulfil this
 love, acting virtuously and temperately, and who profess and boast that
 this is their aim; but who, making light of it, and being subdued by
 the changes of the world, come rather to be sketches of the shadowy
 image of virtue, than workers who represent the living truth itself.

 [2663] [Which has suggested the form of this allegorical work.]

 Chapter III.--The Same Endeavour and Effort After Virginity, with a
 Different Result.

 Now when it is said [2664] that "the kingdom of heaven is likened unto
 ten virgins, which took their lamps and went forth to meet the
 bridegroom," this means that the same way towards the goal had been
 entered upon, as is shown by the mark X. [2665] By profession they had
 equally proposed the same end, and therefore they are called ten,
 since, as I have said, they chose the same profession; but they did
 not, for all that, go forth in the same way to meet the bridegroom. For
 some provided abundant future nourishment for their lamps which were
 fed with oil, but others were careless, thinking only of the present.
 And, therefore, they are divided into two equal numbers of five,
 inasmuch as the one class preserved the five senses, which most people
 consider the gates of wisdom, pure and undefiled by sins; but the
 others, on the contrary, corrupted them by multitudes of sins, defiling
 themselves with evil. For having restrained them, and kept them free
 from righteousness, they bore a more abundant crop of transgressions,
 in consequence of which it came to pass that they were forbidden, and
 shut out from the divine courts. For whether, on the one hand, we do
 right, or, on the other, do wrong through these senses, our habits of
 good and evil are confirmed. And as Thallousa said that there is a
 chastity of the eyes, and of the ears, and of the tongue, and so on of
 the other senses; so here she who keeps inviolate the faith of the five
 pathways of virtue--sight, taste, smell, touch, and hearing--is called
 by the name of the five virgins, because she has kept the five forms of
 the sense pure to Christ, as a lamp, causing the light of holiness to
 shine forth clearly from each of them. For the flesh is truly, as it
 were, our five-lighted lamp, which the soul will bear like a torch,
 when it stands before Christ the Bridegroom, on the day of the
 resurrection, showing her faith springing out clear and bright through
 all the senses, as He Himself taught, saying, [2666] "I am come to send
 fire on the earth; and what will I if it be already kindled?" meaning
 by the earth our bodies, in which He wished the swift-moving and fiery
 operation of His doctrine to be kindled. Now the oil represents wisdom
 and righteousness; for while the soul rains down unsparingly, and pours
 forth these things upon the body, the light of virtue is kindled
 unquenchably, making its good actions to shine before men, so that our
 Father which is in heaven may be glorified. [2667]

 [2664] Matt. xxv.

 [2665] In Greek i = ten. The word employed signifies the index of a
 sun-dial.--Tr. [The lamps found in the Roman catacombs have this mark
 (X), which is at once a monogram for Christ and a reference to the ten
 virgins. In the Greek the accented Iota might yet be associated with
 the initial of Jesus.]

 [2666] Luke xii. 49. The Latin version is certainly more accurate,
 "Quid volo nisi ut accendatur?"--Tr. [A visionary interpretation
 follows. But has not this text been too much overlooked in its literal
 significance? "It is the last time." The planet is now on fire.]

 [2667] Matt. v. 16.

 Chapter IV.--What the Oil in the Lamps Means.

 Now they offered, in Leviticus, [2668] oil of this kind, "pure oil
 olive, beaten for the light, to cause the lamps to burn continually,
 without the veil...before the Lord." But they were commanded to have a
 feeble light from the evening to the morning. For their light seemed to
 resemble the prophetic word, which gives encouragement to temperance,
 being nourished by the acts and the faith of the people. But the temple
 (in which the light was kept burning) refers to "the lot of their
 inheritance," [2669] inasmuch as a light can shine in only one house.
 Therefore it was necessary that it should be lighted before day. For he
 says, [2670] "they shall burn it until the morning," that is, until the
 coming of Christ. But the Sun of chastity and of righteousness having
 arisen, there is no need of other light.

 So long, then, as this people treasured up nourishment for the light,
 supplying oil by their works, the light of continence was not
 extinguished among them, but was ever shining and giving light in the
 "lot of their inheritance." But when the oil failed, by their turning
 away from the faith to incontinence, the light was entirely
 extinguished, so that the virgins have again to kindle their lamps by
 light transmitted from one to another, bringing the light of
 incorruption to the world from above. Let us then supply now the oil of
 good works abundantly, and of prudence, being purged from all
 corruption which would weigh us down; lest, while the Bridegroom
 tarries, our lamps may also in like manner be extinguished. For the
 delay is the interval which precedes the appearing of Christ. Now the
 slumbering and sleeping of the virgins signifies the departure from
 life; and the midnight is the kingdom of Antichrist, during which the
 destroying angel passes over the houses. [2671] But the cry which was
 made when it was said, [2672] "Behold the bridegroom cometh, go ye out
 to meet him," is the voice which shall be heard from heaven, and the
 trumpet, when the saints, all their bodies being raised, shall be
 caught up, and shall go on the clouds to meet the Lord. [2673]

 For it is to be observed that the word of God says, that after the cry
 all the virgins arose, that is, that the dead shall be raised after the
 voice which comes from heaven, as also Paul intimates, [2674] that "the
 Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of
 the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall
 rise first;" that is the tabernacles, [2675] for they died, being put
 off by their souls. "Then we which are alive shall be caught up
 together with them," meaning our souls. [2676] For we truly who are
 alive are the souls which, with the bodies, having put them on again,
 shall go to meet Him in the clouds, bearing our lamps trimmed, not with
 anything alien and worldly, but like stars radiating the light of
 prudence and continence, full of ethereal splendour.

 [2668] Lev. xxiv. 2, 3.

 [2669] Ps. cv. 11.

 [2670] Lev. xxiv. 3.

 [2671] Exod. xi., xii.

 [2672] Matt. xxv. 6. [This parable greatly stimulated primitive
 celibacy.]

 [2673] 1 Thess. iv. 16, 17.

 [2674] 1 Thess. iv. 16.

 [2675] Bodies.

 [2676] 1 Thess. iv. 17. Commentators have remarked on the peculiarity
 of the interpretation. We give simply the writer's meaning.--Tr.

 Chapter V.--The Reward of Virginity.

 These, O fair virgins, are the orgies of our mysteries; these the
 mystic rites of those who are initiated in virginity; these the
 "undefiled rewards" [2677] of the conflict of virginity. I am betrothed
 to the Word, and receive as a reward the eternal crown of immortality
 and riches from the Father; and I triumph in eternity, crowned with the
 bright and unfading flowers of wisdom. I am one in the choir with
 Christ dispensing His rewards in heaven, around the unbeginning and
 never-ending King. I have become the torch-bearer of the unapproachable
 lights, [2678] and I join with their company in the new song of the
 archangels, showing forth the new grace of the Church; for the Word
 says that the company of virgins always follow the Lord, and have
 fellowship with Him wherever He is. And this is what John signifies in
 the commemoration of the hundred and forty-four thousand. [2679]

 Go then, ye virgin band of the new ages. Go, fill your vessels with
 righteousness, for the hour is coming when ye must rise and meet the
 bridegroom. Go, lightly leaving on one side the fascinations and the
 pleasures of life, which confuse and bewitch the soul; and thus shall
 ye attain the promises, "This I swear by Him who has shown me the way
 of life." This crown, woven by the prophets, I have taken from the
 prophetic meadows, and offer to thee, O Arete.

 Agathe having thus admirably brought her discourse to an end, she said,
 and having been applauded for what she had uttered, Arete again
 commanded Procilla to speak. And she, rising and passing before the
 entrance, spoke thus.

 [2677] Wisd. iv. 2.

 [2678] Although the Greek word is not the same as in 1 Tim. vi. 16, the
 meaning is probably this rather than unquenchable, as it is rendered in
 the Latin.--Tr. [See Discourse XI. cap. 2, infra.]

 [2679] Rev. vii. 4; xiv. 4.

 Discourse VII.--Procilla.

 Chapter I.--What the True and Seemly Manner of Praising; The Father
 Greater Than the Son, Not in Substance, But in Order; Virginity the
 Lily; Faithful Souls and Virgins, the One Bride of the One Christ.

 It is not lawful for me to delay, O Arete, after such discourses,
 seeing that I confide undoubtingly in the manifold wisdom of God, which
 gives richly and widely to whomsoever it wills. For sailors who have
 experience of the sea declare that the same wind blows on all who sail;
 and that different persons, managing their course differently, strive
 to reach different ports. Some have a fair wind; to others it blows
 across their course; and yet both easily accomplish their voyage. Now,
 in the same way, the "understanding Spirit, [2680] holy, one only,"
 [2681] gently breathing down from the treasures of the Father above,
 giving us all the clear fair wind of knowledge, will suffice to guide
 the course of our words without offence. And now it is time for me to
 speak. This, O virgins, is the one true and seemly mode of praising,
 when he who praises brings forward a witness better than all those who
 are praised. For thence one may learn with certainty that the
 commendation is given not from favour, nor of necessity, nor from
 repute, but in accordance with truth and an unflattering judgment. And
 so the prophets and apostles, who spoke more fully concerning the Son
 of God, and assigned to Him a divinity above other men, did not refer
 their praises of Him to the teaching of angels, but to Him upon whom
 all authority and power depend. For it was fitting that He who was
 greater than all things after the Father, should have the Father, who
 alone is greater than Himself, [2682] as His witness. And so I will not
 bring forward the praises of virginity from mere human report, but from
 Him who cares for us, and who has taken up the whole matter, showing
 that He is the husbandman of this grace, and a lover of its beauty, and
 a fitting witness. And this is quite clear, in the Song of Songs,
 [2683] to any one who is willing to see it, where Christ Himself,
 praising those who are firmly established in virginity, says, [2684]
 "As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters;"
 comparing the grace of chastity to the lily, on account of its purity
 and fragrance, and sweetness and joyousness. For chastity is like a
 spring flower, always softly exhaling immortality from its white
 petals. Therefore He is not ashamed to confess that He loves the beauty
 of its prime, in the following words: [2685] "Thou hast ravished my
 heart, my sister, my spouse; thou hast ravished my heart with one of
 thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. How fair is thy love, my
 sister, my spouse! how much better is thy love than wine! and the smell
 of thine ointments than all spices! Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the
 honeycomb; honey and milk are under thy tongue; and the smell of thy
 garments is like the smell of Lebanon. A garden enclosed is my sister,
 my spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed."

 These praises does Christ proclaim to those who have come to the
 boundaries of virginity, describing them all under the one name of His
 spouse; for the spouse must be betrothed to the Bridegroom, and called
 by His name. And, moreover, she must be undefiled and unpolluted, as a
 garden sealed, in which all the odours of the fragrance of heaven are
 grown, that Christ alone may come and gather them, blooming with
 incorporeal seeds. For the Word loves none of the things of the flesh,
 because He is not of such a nature as to be contented with any of the
 things which are corruptible, as hands, or face, or feet; but He looks
 upon and delights in the beauty which is immaterial and spiritual, not
 touching the beauty of the body.

 [2680] pneuma here and for wind above.

 [2681] Literally, only begotten. Wisd. vii. 22.

 [2682] St. John xiv. 28.

 [2683] [That the Canticles demand allegorical interpretation, we may
 admit; nor can I object to our author's ideas here.]

 [2684] Cant. ii. 2.

 [2685] Cant. iv. 9-12.

 Chapter II.--The Interpretation of that Passage of the Canticles.
 [2686]

 Consider now, O virgins, that, in saying to the bride, "Thou hast
 ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse," He shows the clear eye of the
 understanding, when the inner man has cleansed it and looks more
 clearly upon the truth. For it is clear to every one that there is a
 twofold power of sight, the one of the soul, and the other of the body.
 But the Word does not profess a love for that of the body, but only
 that of the understanding, saying, "Thou hast ravished my heart with
 one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck;" which means, By the
 most lovely sight of thy mind, thou hast urged my heart to love,
 radiating forth from within the glorious beauty of chastity. Now the
 chains of the neck are necklaces which are composed of various precious
 stones; and the souls which take care of the body, place around the
 outward neck of the flesh this visible ornament to deceive those who
 behold; but those who live chastely, on the other hand, adorn
 themselves within with ornaments truly composed of various precious
 stones, namely, of freedom, of magnanimity, of wisdom, and of love,
 caring little for those temporal decorations which, like leaves
 blossoming for an hour, dry up with the changes of the body. For there
 is seen in man a twofold beauty, of which the Lord accepts that which
 is within and is immortal, saying, "Thou hast ravished my heart with
 one chain of thy neck;" meaning to show that He had been drawn to love
 by the splendour of the inner man shining forth in its glory, even as
 the Psalmist also testifies, saying, "The King's daughter is all
 glorious within." [2687]

 [2686] Chap. iv. ver. 9-12.

 [2687] Ps. xlv. 14.

 Chapter III.--Virgins Being Martyrs First Among the Companions of
 Christ.

 Let no one suppose that all the remaining company of those who have
 believed are condemned, thinking that we who are virgins alone shall be
 led on to attain the promises, not understanding that there shall be
 tribes and families and orders, according to the analogy of the faith
 of each. And this Paul, too, sets forth, saying, [2688] "There is one
 glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of
 the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also
 is the resurrection of the dead." And the Lord does not profess to give
 the same honours to all; but to some He promises that they shall be
 numbered in the kingdom of heaven, to others the inheritance of the
 earth, and to others to see the Father. [2689] And here, also, He
 announces that the order and holy choir of the virgins shall first
 enter in company with Him into the rest of the new dispensation, as
 into a bridal chamber. For they were martyrs, not as bearing the pains
 of the body for a little moment of time, but as enduring them through
 all their life, not shrinking from truly wrestling in an Olympian
 contest for the prize of chastity; but resisting the fierce torments of
 pleasures and fears and griefs, and the other evils of the iniquity of
 men, they first of all carry off the prize, taking their place in the
 higher rank of those who receive the promise. Undoubtedly these are the
 souls whom the Word calls alone His chosen spouse and His sister, but
 the rest concubines and virgins and daughters, speaking thus: [2690]
 "There are threescore queens and fourscore concubines, and virgins
 without number. My dove, my undefiled, is but one; she is the only one
 of her mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her: the
 daughters saw her and blessed her: yea, the queens and the concubines,
 and they praised her." For there being plainly many daughters of the
 Church, one alone is the chosen and most precious in her eyes above
 all, namely, the order of virgins.

 [2688] 1 Cor. xv. 41, 42.

 [2689] Matt. v. 3-16.

 [2690] Cant. vi. 8, 9.

 Chapter IV.--The Passage [2691] Explained; The Queens, the Holy Souls
 Before the Deluge; The Concubines, the Souls of the Prophets; The
 Divine Seed for Spiritual Offspring in the Books of the Prophets; The
 Nuptials of the Word in the Prophets as Though Clandestine.

 Now if any one should have a doubt about these things, inasmuch as the
 points are nowhere fully wrought out, and should still wish more fully
 to perceive their spiritual significance, namely, what the queens and
 the concubines and the virgins are, we will say that these may have
 been spoken concerning those who have been conspicuous for their
 righteousness from the beginning throughout the progress of time; as of
 those before the flood, and those after the flood, and so on of those
 after Christ. The Church, then, is the spouse. The queens are those
 royal souls before the deluge, who became well-pleasing to God, that
 is, those about Abel and Seth and Enoch. The concubines [2692] those
 after the flood, namely, those of the prophets, in whom, before the
 Church was betrothed to the Lord, being united to them after the manner
 of concubines, He sowed true words in an incorrupt and pure philosophy,
 so that, conceiving faith, they might bring forth to Him the Spirit of
 salvation. For such fruits do the souls bring forth with whom Christ
 has had intercourse, fruits which bear an ever-memorable renown. For if
 you will look at the books of Moses, or David, or Solomon, or Isaiah,
 or of the prophets who follow, O virgins, you will see what offspring
 they have left, for the saving of life, from their intercourse with the
 Son of God. Hence the Word has with deep perception called the souls of
 the prophets concubines, because He did not espouse them openly, as He
 did the Church, having killed for her the fatted calf. [2693]

 [2691] Cant. vi. 8, 9.

 [2692] [Here allegorizing is refuted and perishes in fanciful and
 over-strained analogies.]

 [2693] Luke xv. 23.

 Chapter V.--The Sixty Queens: Why Sixty, and Why Queens; The Excellence
 of the Saints of the First Age.

 In addition to these matters, there is this also to be considered, so
 that nothing may escape us of things which are necessary, why He said
 that the queens were sixty, and the concubines eighty, and the virgins
 so numerous as not to be counted from their multitude, but the spouse
 one. And first let us speak of the sixty. I imagine that He named under
 the sixty queens, those who had pleased God from the first-made man in
 succession to Noah, for this reason, since these had no need of
 precepts and laws for their salvation, the creation of the world in six
 days being still recent. For they remembered that in six days God
 formed the creation, and those things which were made in paradise; and
 how man, receiving a command not to touch [2694] the tree of knowledge,
 ran aground, the author of evil having led him astray. [2695] Thence he
 gave the symbolical name of sixty queens to those souls who, from the
 creation of the world, in succession chose God as the object of their
 love, and were almost, so to speak, the offspring of the first age, and
 neighbours of the great six days' work, from their having been born, as
 I said, immediately after the six days. For these had great honour,
 being associated with the angels, and often seeing God manifested
 visibly, and not in a dream. For consider what confidence Seth had
 towards God, and Abel, and Enos, and Enoch, and Methuselah, and Noah,
 the first lovers of righteousness, and the first of the first-born
 children who are written in heaven, [2696] being thought worthy of the
 kingdom, as a kind of first-fruits of the plants for salvation, coming
 out as early fruit to God. And so much may suffice concerning these.

 [2694] This was Eve's testimony to the serpent, not the original
 command.--Tr. [But I do not see the force of this note. Eve in her
 innocency is surely a competent witness.]

 [2695] Gen. iii. 3.

 [2696] Heb. xi. 23.

 Chapter VI.--The Eighty Concubines, What; The Knowledge of the
 Incarnation Communicated to the Prophets.

 It still remains to speak concerning the concubines. To those who lived
 after the deluge the knowledge of God was henceforth more remote, and
 they needed other instruction to ward off the evil, and to be their
 helper, since idolatry was already creeping in. Therefore God, that the
 race of man might not be wholly destroyed, through forgetfulness of the
 things which were good, commanded His own Son to reveal to the prophets
 His own future appearance in the world by the flesh, in which the joy
 and knowledge of the spiritual eighth day [2697] shall be proclaimed,
 which would bring the remission of sins and the resurrection, and that
 thereby the passions and corruptions of men would be circumcised. And,
 therefore, He called by the name of the eighty virgins the list of the
 prophets from Abraham, on account of the dignity of circumcision, which
 embraces the number eight, in accordance with which also the law is
 framed; because they first, before the Church was espoused to the Word,
 received the divine seed, and foretold the circumcision of the
 spiritual eighth day.

 [2697] Here, and in many other places, the prevalent millenarian belief
 of the first centuries is expressed by Methodius.--Tr. [See Barnabas,
 vol. i. p. 147, this series; also Irenæus (same vol.), p. 562, at note
 11.]

 Chapter VII.--The Virgins, [2698] the Righteous Ancients; The Church,
 the One Only Spouse, More Excellent Than the Others.

 Now he calls by the name of virgins, who belong to a countless
 assembly, those who, being inferior to the better ones, have practised
 righteousness, and have striven against sin with youthful and noble
 energy. But of these, neither the queens, nor the concubines, nor the
 virgins, are compared to the Church. For she is reckoned the perfect
 and chosen one beyond all these, consisting and composed of all the
 apostles, the Bride who surpasses all in the beauty of youth and
 virginity. Therefore, also, she is blessed and praised by all, because
 she saw and heard freely what those desired to see, even for a little
 time, and saw not, and to hear, but heard not. For "blessed," said our
 Lord to His disciples, [2699] "are your eyes, for they see; and your
 ears, for they hear. For verily I say unto you, That many prophets have
 desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and
 to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them." For this
 reason, then, the prophets count them blessed, and admire them, because
 the Church was thought worthy to participate in those things which they
 did not attain to hear or see. For "there are threescore queens, and
 fourscore concubines, and virgins without number. My dove, my
 undefiled, is but one." [2700]

 [2698] This word, as being that employed in the E. T. of the Canticles,
 is adopted throughout. It must be remembered, that, in this connection,
 it stands for neanides, and not for parthenoi.-- Tr.

 [2699] Matt. xiii. 16, 17.

 [2700] Cant. vi. 8, 9.

 Chapter VIII.--The Human Nature of Christ His One Dove.

 Can any one now say otherwise than that the Bride is the undefiled
 flesh of the Lord, for the sake of which He left the Father and came
 down here, and was joined to it, and, being incarnate, dwelt in it?
 Therefore He called it figuratively a dove, because that creature is
 tame and domestic, and readily adapts itself to man's mode of life. For
 she alone, so to speak, was found spotless and undefiled, and excelling
 all in the glory and beauty of righteousness, so that none of those who
 had pleased God most perfectly could stand near to her in a comparison
 of virtue. And for this reason she was thought worthy to become a
 partaker of the kingdom of the Only-begotten, being betrothed and
 united to Him. And in the forty-fourth psalm, [2701] the queen who,
 chosen out of many, stands at the right hand of God, clothed in the
 golden ornament of virtue, whose beauty the King desired, [2702] is, as
 I said, the undefiled and blessed flesh, which the Word Himself carried
 into the heavens, and presented at the right hand of God, "wrought
 about with divers colours," that is, in the pursuits of immortality,
 which he calls symbolically golden fringes. For since this garment is
 variegated and woven of various virtues, as chastity, prudence, faith,
 love, patience, and other good things, which, covering, as they do, the
 unseemliness of the flesh, adorn man with a golden ornament.

 [2701] The forty-fifth in our arrangement.

 [2702] Ps. xlv. 2.

 Chapter IX.--The Virgins Immediately After the Queen and Spouse.

 Moreover, we must further consider what the Spirit delivers to us in
 the rest of the psalm, after the enthronization of the manhood assumed
 by the Word at the right hand of the Father. "The virgins," He says,
 [2703] "that be her fellows shall bear her company, and shall be
 brought unto thee. With joy and gladness shall they be brought, and
 shall enter into the King's palace." Now, here the Spirit seems quite
 plainly to praise virginity, next, as we have explained, to the Bride
 of the Lord, who promises that the virgins shall approach second to the
 Almighty with joy and gladness, guarded and escorted by angels. For so
 lovely and desirable is in truth the glory of virginity, that, next to
 the Queen, whom the Lord exalts, and presents in sinless glory to the
 Father, the choir and order of virgins bear her company, assigned to a
 place second to that of the Bride. Let these efforts of mine to speak
 to thee, O Arete, concerning chastity, be engraven on a monument.

 And Procilla having thus spoken, Thekla said, It is my turn after her
 to continue the contest; and I rejoice, since I too have the favouring
 wisdom of words, perceiving that I am, like a harp, inwardly attuned,
 and prepared to speak with elegance and propriety.

 Arete. I most willingly hail thy readiness, O Thekla, in which I
 confide to give me fitting discourse, in accordance with thy powers;
 since thou wilt yield to none in universal philosophy and instruction,
 instructed by Paul in what is fitting to say of evangelical and divine
 doctrine.

 [2703] Ps. xlv. 15, 16.

 Discourse VIII.--Thekla.

 Chapter I.--Methodius' Derivation of the Word Virginity: [2704] Wholly
 Divine; Virtue, in Greek--arete, Whence So Called.

 Well, then, let us first say, beginning from the origin of the name,
 for what cause this supreme and blessed pursuit was called parthenia,
 what it aims at, what power it has, and afterwards, what fruits it
 gives forth. For almost all have been ignorant of this virtue as being
 superior to ten thousand other advantages of virtue which we cultivate
 for the purification and adornment of the soul. For virginity [2705] is
 divine by the change of one letter, [2706] as she alone makes him who
 has her, and is initiated by her incorruptible rites like unto God,
 than which it is impossible to find a greater good, removed, as it is,
 from pleasure and grief; and the wing of the soul sprinkled by it
 becomes stronger and lighter, accustomed daily to fly from human
 desires.

 For since the children of the wise have said that our life is a
 festival, and that we have come to exhibit in the theatre the drama of
 truth, that is, righteousness, the devil and the demons plotting and
 striving against us, it is necessary for us to look upwards and to take
 our flight aloft, and to flee from the blandishments of their tongues,
 and from their forms tinged with the outward appearance of temperance,
 more than from the Sirens of Homer. For many, bewitched by the
 pleasures of error, take their flight downwards, and are weighed down
 when they come into this life, their nerves being relaxed and unstrung,
 by means of which the power of the wings of temperance is strengthened,
 lightening the downward tendency of the corruption of the body. Whence,
 O Arete, whether thou hast thy name, signifying virtue, because thou
 art worthy of being chosen [2707] for thyself, or because thou raisest
 [2708] and liftest up to heaven, ever going in the purest minds, come,
 give me thy help in my discourse, which thou hast thyself appointed me
 to speak.

 [2704] parthenia.

 [2705] parthenia.

 [2706] parthenia...partheia.

 [2707] hairete.

 [2708] airein.

 Chapter II.--The Lofty Mind and Constancy of the Sacred Virgins; The
 Introduction of Virgins into the Blessed Abodes Before Others.

 Those who take a downward flight, and fall into pleasures, do not
 desist from grief and labours until, through their passionate desires,
 they fulfil the want of their intemperance, and, being degraded and
 shut out from the sanctuary, they are removed from the scene of truth,
 and, instead of procreating children with modesty and temperance, they
 rave in the wild pleasures of unlawful amours. But those who, on light
 wing, ascend into the supramundane life, and see from afar what other
 men do not see, the very pastures of immortality, bearing in abundance
 flowers of inconceivable beauty, are ever turning themselves again to
 the spectacles there; and, for this reason, those things are thought
 small which are here considered noble--such as wealth, and glory, and
 birth, and marriage; and they think no more of those things. [2709] But
 yet if any of them should choose to give up their bodies to wild beasts
 or to fire, and be punished, they are ready to have no care for pains,
 for the desire of them or the fear of them; so that they seem, while in
 the world, not to be in the world, but to have already reached, in
 thought and in the tendency of their desires, the assembly of those who
 are in heaven.

 Now it is not right that the wing of virginity should, by its own
 nature, be weighed down upon the earth, but that it should soar upwards
 to heaven, to a pure atmosphere, and to the life which is akin to that
 of angels. Whence also they, first of all, after their call and
 departure hence, who have rightly and faithfully contended as virgins
 for Christ, bear away the prize of victory, being crowned by Him with
 the flowers of immortality. For, as soon as their souls have left the
 world, it is said that the angels meet them with much rejoicing, and
 conduct them to the very pastures already spoken of, to which also they
 were longing to come, contemplating them in imagination from afar,
 when, while they were yet dwelling in their bodies, they appeared to
 them divine.

 [2709] Than of the most ordinary things of life.

 Chapter III.--The Lot and Inheritance of Virginity.

 Furthermore, when they have come hither, they see wonderful and
 glorious and blessed things of beauty, and such as cannot be spoken to
 men. They see there righteousness itself and prudence, and love itself,
 and truth and temperance, and other flowers and plants of wisdom,
 equally splendid, of which we here behold only the shadows [2710] and
 apparitions, as in dreams, and think that they consist of the actions
 of men, because there is no clear image of them here, but only dim
 copies, which themselves we see often when making dark copies of them.
 For never has any one seen with his eyes the greatness or the form or
 the beauty of righteousness itself, or of understanding, or of peace;
 but there, in Him whose name is I AM, [2711] they are seen perfect and
 clear, as they are. For there is a tree of temperance itself, and of
 love, and of understanding, as there are plants of the fruits which
 grow here--as of grapes, the pomegranate, and of apples; and so, too,
 the fruits of those trees are gathered and eaten, and do not perish and
 wither, but those who gather them grow to immortality and a likeness to
 God. Just as he from whom all are descended, before the fall and the
 blinding of his eyes, being in paradise, enjoyed its fruits, God
 appointing man to dress and to keep the plants of wisdom. For it was
 entrusted to the first Adam to cultivate those fruits. Now Jeremiah saw
 that these things exist specially in a certain place, removed to a
 great distance from our world, where, compassionating those who have
 fallen from that good state, he says: [2712] "Learn where is wisdom,
 where is strength, where is understanding; that thou mayest know also
 where is length of days, and life, where is the light of the eyes, and
 peace. Who hath found out her place? or who hath come into her
 treasures?" The virgins having entered into the treasures of these
 things, gather the reasonable fruits of the virtues, sprinkled with
 manifold and well-ordered lights, which, like a fountain, God throws up
 over them, irradiating that state with unquenchable lights. And they
 sing harmoniously, giving glory to God. For a pure atmosphere is shed
 over them, and one which is not oppressed by the sun.

 [2710] The influence of Plato is traceable, here and elsewhere,
 throughout the works of Methodius. It has been fully examined in the
 able work of Jahn, Methodius Platonizans.--Tr. [Elucidation I.]

 [2711] Exod. iii. 14.

 [2712] Baruch iii. 14, 15. The apocryphal book of Baruch, as bearing
 the name of the companion of Jeremiah, was usually quoted, in the
 second and third centuries, as the work of that great prophet.--Tr.

 Chapter IV.--Exhortation to the Cultivation of Virginity; A Passage
 from the Apocalypse [2713] is Proposed to Be Examined.

 Now, then, O Virgins, daughters of undefiled temperance, let us strive
 for a life of blessedness and the kingdom of heaven. And do ye unite
 with those before you in an earnest desire for the same glory of
 chastity, caring little for the things of this life. For immortality
 and chastity do not contribute a little to happiness, raising up the
 flesh aloft, and drying up its moisture and its clay-like weight, by a
 greater force of attraction. And let not the uncleanness which you hear
 creep in and weigh you down to the earth; nor let sorrow transform your
 joy, melting away your hopes in better things; but shake off
 incessantly the calamities which come upon you, not defiling your mind
 with lamentations. Let faith conquer wholly, and let its light drive
 away the visions of evil which crowd around the heart. For, as when the
 moon brightly shining fills the heaven with its light, and all the air
 becomes clear, but suddenly the clouds from the west, enviously rushing
 in, for a little while overshadow its light, but do not destroy it,
 since they are immediately driven away by a blast of the wind; so ye
 also, when causing the light of chastity to shine in the world,
 although pressed upon by afflictions and labours, do not grow weary and
 abandon your hopes. For the clouds which come from the Evil One are
 driven away by the Spirit, [2714] if ye, like your Mother, who gives
 birth to the male Virgin in heaven, fear nothing the serpent that lies
 in wait and plots against you; concerning whom I intend to discourse to
 you more plainly; for it is now time.

 John, in the course of the Apocalypse, says: [2715] "And there appeared
 a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon
 under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars: and she,
 being with child, cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be
 delivered. And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a
 great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns
 upon his heads. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of
 heaven, and did cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before the
 woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon
 as it was born. And she brought forth a man-child, who was to rule all
 nations with a rod of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and
 to His throne. And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a
 place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two
 hundred and threescore days." So far we have given, in brief, the
 history of the woman and the dragon. But to search out and explain the
 solution of them is beyond my powers. Nevertheless, let me venture,
 trusting in Him who commanded to search the Scriptures. [2716] If,
 then, you agree with this, it will not be difficult to undertake it;
 for you will quite pardon me, if I am unable sufficiently to explain
 the exact meaning of the Scripture.

 [2713] Rev. xii. 1-6.

 [2714] The same word in the text which is translated wind: pneuma. The
 play upon the word cannot be preserved in the translation.--Tr.

 [2715] Rev. xii. 1-6.

 [2716] St. John v. 39.

 Chapter V.--The Woman Who Brings Forth, to Whom the Dragon is Opposed,
 the Church; Her Adornment and Grace.

 The woman who appeared in heaven clothed with the sun, and crowned with
 twelve stars, and having the moon for her footstool, and being with
 child, and travailing in birth, is certainly, according to the accurate
 interpretation, our mother, [2717] O virgins, being a power by herself
 distinct from her children; whom the prophets, according to the aspect
 of their subjects, have called sometimes Jerusalem, sometimes a Bride,
 sometimes Mount Zion, and sometimes the Temple and Tabernacle of God.
 For she is the power which is desired to give light in the prophet, the
 Spirit crying to her: [2718] "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and
 the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, the darkness
 shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord
 shall arise upon thee, and His glory shall be seen upon thee. And the
 Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy
 rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see; all they gather
 themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far,
 and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side." It is the Church whose
 children shall come to her with all speed after the resurrection,
 running to her from all quarters. She rejoices receiving the light
 which never goes down, and clothed with the brightness of the Word as
 with a robe. For with what other more precious or honourable ornament
 was it becoming that the queen should be adorned, to be led as a Bride
 to the Lord, when she had received a garment of light, and therefore
 was called by the Father? Come, then, let us go forward in our
 discourse, and look upon this marvelous woman as upon virgins prepared
 for a marriage, pure and undefiled, perfect and radiating a permanent
 beauty, wanting nothing of the brightness of light; and instead of a
 dress, clothed with light itself; and instead of precious stones, her
 head adorned with shining stars. For instead of the clothing which we
 have, she had light; and for gold and brilliant stones, she had stars;
 but stars not such as those which are set in the invisible heaven, but
 better and more resplendent, so that those may rather be considered as
 their images and likenesses.

 [2717] [i.e., the Church. See p 337, note 4, infra.]

 [2718] Isa. lx. 1-4.

 Chapter VI.--The Works of the Church, the Bringing Forth of Children in
 Baptism; The Moon in Baptism, the Full Moon of Christ's Passion.

 Now the statement that she stands upon the moon, as I consider, denotes
 the faith of those who are cleansed from corruption in the laver of
 regeneration, because the light of the moon has more resemblance to
 tepid water, and all moist substance is dependent upon her. The Church,
 then, stands upon our faith and adoption, under the figure of the moon,
 until the fulness of the nations come in, labouring and bringing forth
 natural men as spiritual men; for which reason too she is a mother. For
 just as a woman receiving the unformed seed of a man, within a certain
 time brings forth a perfect man, in the same way, one should say, does
 the Church conceive those who flee to the Word, and, forming them
 according to the likeness and form of Christ, after a certain time
 produce them as citizens of that blessed state. Whence it is necessary
 that she should stand upon the laver, bringing forth those who are
 washed in it. And in this way the power which she has in connection
 with the laver is called the moon, [2719] because the regenerate shine
 being renewed with a new ray, [2720] that is, a new light. Whence,
 also, they are by a descriptive term called newly-enlightened; [2721]
 the moon ever showing forth anew to them the spiritual full moon,
 namely, the period and the memorial of the passion, until the glory and
 the perfect light of the great day arise.

 [2719] selene.

 [2720] selas.

 [2721] neophotistoi.

 Chapter VII.--The Child of the Woman in the Apocalypse Not Christ, But
 the Faithful Who are Born in the Laver.

 If any one, for there is no difficulty in speaking distinctly, should
 be vexed, and reply to what we have said: "But how, O virgins, can this
 explanation seem to you to be according to the mind of Scripture, when
 the Apocalypse plainly defines that the Church brings forth a male,
 while you teach that her labour-pains have their fulfilment in those
 who are washed in the laver?" We will answer, But, O faultfinder, not
 even to you will it be possible to show that Christ Himself [2722] is
 the one who is born. For long before the Apocalypse, the mystery of the
 Incarnation of the Word was fulfilled. And John speaks concerning
 things present and things to come. But Christ, long ago conceived, was
 not caught up to the throne of God when He was brought forth, from fear
 of the serpent injuring Him. But for this was He begotten, and Himself
 came down from the throne of the Father, that He should remain and
 subdue the dragon who made an assault upon the flesh. So that you also
 must confess that the Church labours and gives birth to those who are
 baptized. As the spirit says somewhere in Isaiah: [2723] "Before she
 travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered
 of a man-child. Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things?
 Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be
 born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her
 children." [2724] From whom did he flee? Surely from the dragon, that
 the spiritual Zion might bear a masculine people, who should come back
 from the passions and weakness of women to the unity of the Lord, and
 grow strong in manly virtue.

 [2722] It is hardly necessary to observe, that amid many
 interpretations of the passage, this which Methodius condemns is
 probably the true one, as it is certainly the most natural.--Tr. [It is
 certainly worth observing, that Methodius has on his side a strong
 following among the ancients; the interpretation the translator favours
 having little support save among modern defenders of the late pontiff's
 bull Ineffabilis. Elucidation II.]

 [2723] Isa. lxvi. 7, 8.

 [2724] In the LXX. "a male."

 Chapter VIII.--The Faithful in Baptism Males, Configured to Christ; The
 Saints Themselves Christs.

 Let us then go over the ground again from the beginning, until we come
 in course to the end, explaining what we have said. Consider if the
 passage seems to you to be explained to your mind. For I think that the
 Church is here said to give birth to a male; since the enlightened
 [2725] receive the features, and the image, and the manliness of
 Christ, the likeness of the form of the Word being stamped upon them,
 and begotten in them by a true knowledge and faith, so that in each one
 Christ is spiritually born. And, therefore, the Church swells and
 travails in birth until Christ is formed in us, [2726] so that each of
 the saints, by partaking of Christ, has been born a Christ. According
 to which meaning it is said in a certain scripture, [2727] "Touch not
 mine anointed, [2728] and do my prophets no harm," as though those who
 were baptized into Christ had been made Christs [2729] by communication
 of the Spirit, the Church contributing here their clearness and
 transformation into the image of the Word. And Paul confirms this,
 teaching it plainly, where he says: [2730] "For this cause I bow my
 knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole
 family in heaven and earth is named, that He would grant you, according
 to the riches of His glory, to be strengthened with might by His Spirit
 in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith." For
 it is necessary that the word of truth should be imprinted and stamped
 upon the souls of the regenerate.

 [2725] The baptized.

 [2726] Gal. iv. 19.

 [2727] Ps. cv. 15.

 [2728] christon.

 [2729] Anointed.

 [2730] Eph. iii. 14-17.

 Chapter IX.--The Son of God, Who Ever Is, is To-Day Begotten in the
 Minds and Sense of the Faithful.

 Now, in perfect agreement and correspondence with what has been said,
 seems to be this which was spoken by the Father from above to Christ
 when He came to be baptized in the water of the Jordan, "Thou art my
 son: this day have I begotten thee;" [2731] for it is to be remarked
 that He was declared to be His Son unconditionally, and without regard
 to time; for He says "Thou art," and not "Thou hast become," showing
 that He had neither recently attained to the relation of Son, nor
 again, having begun before, after this had an end, but having been
 previously begotten, [2732] that He was to be, and was the same. But
 the expression, "This day have I begotten thee," signifies that He
 willed that He who existed before the ages in heaven should be begotten
 on the earth--that is, that He who was before unknown should be made
 known. Now, certainly, Christ has never yet been born in those men who
 have never perceived the manifold wisdom of God--that is, has never
 been known, has never been manifested, has never appeared to them. But
 if these also should perceive the mystery of grace, then in them too,
 when they were converted and believed, He would be born in knowledge
 and understanding. Therefore from hence the Church is fitly said to
 form and beget the male Word in those who are cleansed. [2733] So far I
 have spoken according to my ability concerning the travail of the
 Church; and here we must change to the subject of the dragon and the
 other matters. Let us endeavour, then, to explain it in some measure,
 not deterred by the greatness of the obscurity of the Scripture; and if
 anything difficult comes to be considered, I will again help you to
 cross it like a river.

 [2731] Ps. ii. 7.

 [2732] Certain phrases like this have led to the opinion that Methodius
 was inclined to Arianism. There is no ground for the supposition. In
 the writer's mind, as is clear from the previous statements, the
 previous generation was eternal.--Tr.

 [2733] In the baptismal font.

 Chapter X.--The Dragon, the Devil; The Stars Struck from Heaven by the
 Tail of the Dragon, Heretics; The Numbers of the Trinity, that Is, the
 Persons Numbered; Errors Concerning Them.

 The dragon, which is great, and red, and cunning, and manifold, and
 seven-headed, and horned, and draws down the third part of the stars,
 and stands ready to devour the child of the woman who is travailing, is
 the devil, who lies in wait to destroy the Christ-accepted mind of the
 baptized, and the image and clear features of the Word which had been
 brought forth in them. But he misses and fails of his prey, the
 regenerate being caught up on high to the throne of God--that is, the
 mind of those who are renovated is lifted up around the divine seat and
 the basis of truth against which there is no stumbling, being taught to
 look upon and regard the things which are there, so that it may not be
 deceived by the dragon weighing them down. For it is not allowed to him
 to destroy those whose thoughts and looks are upwards. And the stars,
 which the dragon touched with the end of his tail, and drew them down
 to earth, are the bodies of heresies; for we must say that the stars,
 which are dark, obscure, and falling, are the assemblies of the
 heterodox; since they, too, wish to be acquainted with the heavenly
 ones, and to have believed in Christ, and to have the seat of their
 soul in heaven, and to come near to the stars as children of light. But
 they are dragged down, being shaken out by the folds of the dragon,
 because they did not remain within the triangular forms of godliness,
 falling away from it with respect to an orthodox service. Whence also
 they are called the third part of the stars, as having gone astray with
 regard to one of the three Persons of the Trinity. As when they say,
 like Sabellios, that the Almighty Person of the Father Himself
 suffered; [2734] or as when they say, like Artemas, that the Person of
 the Son was born and manifested only in appearance; [2735] or when they
 contend, like the Ebionites, that the prophets spoke of the Person of
 the Spirit, of their own motion. For of Marcion and Valentinus, and
 those about Elkesaios and others, it is better not even to make
 mention.

 [2734] Patripassianism: nearly the same as Sabellianism.--Tr.

 [2735] Dokesei, hence Docetæ.--Tr.

 Chapter XI.--The Woman with the Male Child in the Wilderness the
 Church; The Wilderness Belongs to Virgins and Saints; The Perfection of
 Numbers and Mysteries; The Equality and Perfection of the Number Six;
 The Number Six Related to Christ; From This Number, Too, the Creation
 and Harmony of the World Completed.

 Now she who brings forth, and has brought forth, the masculine Word in
 the hearts of the faithful, and who passed, undefiled and uninjured by
 the wrath of the beast, into the wilderness, is, as we have explained,
 our mother the Church. And the wilderness into which she comes, and is
 nourished for a thousand two hundred and sixty days, which is truly
 waste and unfruitful of evils, and barren of corruption, and difficult
 of access and of transit to the multitude; but fruitful and abounding
 in pasture, and blooming and easy of access to the holy, and full of
 wisdom, and productive of life, is this most lovely, and beautifully
 wooded and well-watered abode of Arete. [2736] Here the south wind
 awakes, and the north wind blows, and the spices flow out, [2737] and
 all things are filled with refreshing dews, and crowned with the
 unfading plants of immortal life; in which we now gather flowers, and
 weave with sacred fingers the purple and glorious crown of virginity
 for the queen. For the Bride of the Word is adorned with the fruits of
 virtue. And the thousand two hundred and sixty days that we are staying
 here, O virgins, is the accurate and perfect understanding concerning
 the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit, in which our mother increases,
 and rejoices, and exults throughout this time, until the restitution of
 the new dispensation, when, coming into the assembly in the heavens,
 she will no longer contemplate the I AM through the means of human
 knowledge, but will clearly behold entering in together with Christ.
 For a thousand, [2738] consisting of a hundred multiplied by ten,
 embraces a full and perfect number, and is a symbol of the Father
 Himself, who made the universe by Himself, and rules all things for
 Himself. Two hundred embraces two perfect numbers united together, and
 is the symbol of the Holy Spirit, since He is the Author of our
 knowledge of the Son and the Father. But sixty has the number six
 multiplied by ten, and is a symbol of Christ, because the number six
 proceeding [2739] from unity is composed of its proper parts, so that
 nothing in it is wanting or redundant, and is complete when resolved
 into its parts. Thus it is necessary that the number six, when it is
 divided into even parts by even parts, should again make up the same
 quantity from its separated segments. [2740] For, first, if divided
 equally, it makes three; then, if divided into three parts, it makes
 two; and again, if divided by six, it makes one, and is again collected
 into itself. For when divided into twice three, and three times two,
 and six times one, when the three and the two and the one are put
 together, they complete the six again. But everything is of necessity
 perfect which neither needs anything else in order to its completion,
 nor has anything over. Of the other numbers, some are more than
 perfect, as twelve. For the half of it is six, and the third four, and
 the fourth three, and the sixth two, and the twelfth one. The numbers
 into which it can be divided, when put together, exceed twelve, this
 number not having preserved itself equal to its parts, like the number
 six. And those which are imperfect, are numbers like eight. For the
 half of it is four, and the fourth two, and the eighth one. Now the
 numbers into which it is divided, when put together, make seven, and
 one is wanting to its completion, not being in all points harmonious
 with itself, like six, which has reference to the Son of God, who came
 from the fulness of the Godhead into a human life. For having emptied
 Himself, [2741] and taken upon Him the form of a slave, He was restored
 again to His former perfection and dignity. For He being humbled, and
 apparently degraded, was restored again from His humiliation and
 degradation to His former completeness and greatness, having never been
 diminished from His essential perfection.

 Moreover, it is evident that the creation of the world was accomplished
 in harmony with this number, God having made heaven and earth, and the
 things which are in them, in six days; the word of creative power
 containing the number six, in accordance with which the Trinity is the
 maker of bodies. For length, and breadth, and depth make up a body. And
 the number six is composed of triangles. On these subjects, however,
 there is not sufficient time at present to enlarge with accuracy, for
 fear of letting the main subject slip, in considering that which is
 secondary.

 [2736] Virtue.

 [2737] Cant. iv. 16.

 [2738] Methodius is not the first or the last who has sought to explore
 the mystery of numbers. An interesting and profound examination of the
 subject will be found in Bähr's Symbolik; also in Delitzsch's Bib.
 Psychology.--Tr. [On the Six Days' Work, p. 71, translation, Edinburgh,
 1875.]

 [2739] i.e., in a regular arithmetical progression.

 [2740] i.e., its divisors or dividends.

 [2741] "Make Himself of no reputation."--E. T., Phil. ii. 7.

 Chapter XII.--Virgins are Called to the Imitation of the Church in the
 Wilderness Overcoming the Dragon.

 The Church, then, coming hither into this wilderness, a place
 unproductive of evils, is nourished, flying on the heavenward wings of
 virginity, which the Word called the "wings of great eagle," [2742]
 having conquered the serpent, and driven away from her full moon the
 wintry clouds. It is for the sake of these things, meanwhile, that all
 these discourses are held, teaching us, O fair virgins, to imitate
 according to our strength our mother, and not to be troubled by the
 pains and changes and afflictions of life, that you may enter in
 exulting with her into the bride-chamber, showing your lamps. Do not,
 therefore, lose courage on account of the schemes and slanders of the
 beast, but bravely prepare for the battle, armed with the helmet of
 salvation, [2743] and the breastplate, and the greaves. For you will
 bring upon him an immense consternation when you attack him with great
 advantage and courage; nor will he at all resist, seeing his
 adversaries set in array by One more powerful; but the many-headed and
 many-faced beast will immediately allow you to carry off the spoils of
 the seven contests:--

 "Lion in front, but dragon all behind,

 And in the midst a she-goat breathing forth

 Profuse the violence of flaming fire.

 Her slew Bellerophon in truth. And this

 Slew Christ the King; for many she destroyed,

 Nor could they bear the fetid foam which burst

 From out the fountain of her horrid jaws;" [2744]

 unless Christ had first weakened and overcome her, making her powerless
 and contemptible before us.

 [2742] Ezek. xvii. 3.

 [2743] Eph. vi. 17.

 [2744] Hom., Il., vi. 181.

 Chapter XIII.--The Seven Crowns of the Beast to Be Taken Away by
 Victorious Chastity; The Ten Crowns of the Dragon, the Vices Opposed to
 the Decalogue; The Opinion of Fate the Greatest Evil.

 Therefore, taking to you a masculine and sober mind, oppose your armour
 to the swelling beast, and do not at all give way, nor be troubled
 because of his fury. For you will have immense glory if you overcome
 him, and take away the seven crowns which are upon him, on account of
 which we have to struggle and wrestle, according to our teacher Paul.
 For she who having first overcome the devil, and destroyed his seven
 heads, becomes possessed of the seven crowns of virtue, having gone
 through the seven great struggles of chastity. For incontinence and
 luxury is a head of the dragon; and whoever bruises this is wreathed
 with the crown of temperance. Cowardice and weakness is also a head;
 and he who treads upon this carries off the crown of martyrdom.
 Unbelief and folly, and other similar fruits of wickedness, is another
 head; and he who has overcome these and destroyed them carries off the
 honours connected with them, the power of the dragon being in many ways
 rooted up. Moreover, the ten horns and stings which he was said to have
 upon his heads are the ten opposites, O virgins, to the Decalogue, by
 which he was accustomed to gore and cast down the souls of many
 imagining and contriving things in opposition to the law, "Thou shalt
 love the Lord thy God," [2745] and to the other precepts which follow.
 Consider now the fiery and bitter horn of fornication, by which he
 casts down the incontinent; consider adultery, consider falsehood,
 covetousness, theft, and the other sister and related vices, which
 flourish by nature around his murderous heads, which if you root out
 with the aid of Christ, you will receive, as it were, divine heads, and
 will bloom with the crowns gained from the dragon. For it is our duty
 to prefer and to set forward the best things, who have received, above
 the earth-born, a commanding and voluntary mind, and one free from all
 necessity, so as to make choice like masters of the things which please
 us, not being in bondage to fate or fortune. And so no man would be
 master of himself and good, unless selecting the human example of
 Christ, and bringing himself to the likeness of Him, he should imitate
 Him in his manner of life. For of all evils the greatest which is
 implanted in many is that which refers the causes of sins to the
 motions of the stars, and says that our life is guided by the
 necessities of fate, as those say who study the stars, with much
 insolence. For they, trusting more in guessing than in prudence, that
 is, in something between truth and falsehood, go far astray from the
 sight of things as they are. Whence, if you permit me, O Arete, now
 that I have completed the discourse which you, my mistress, appointed
 to be spoken, I will endeavour, with your assistance and favour, to
 examine carefully the position of those who are offended, and deny that
 we speak the truth, when we say that man is possessed of free-will, and
 prove that

 "They perish self-destroyed,

 By their own fault," [2746]

 choosing the pleasant in preference to the expedient.

 Arete. I do permit you and assist you; for your discourse will be
 perfectly adorned when you have added this to it.

 [2745] Deut. vi. 5.

 [2746] Hom., Od., i. 7.

 Chapter XIV.--The Doctrine of Mathematicians Not Wholly to Be Despised,
 When They are Concerned About the Knowledge of the Stars; The Twelve
 Signs of the Zodiac Mythical Names.

 Thekla. Resuming then, let us first lay bare, in speaking of those
 things according to our power, the imposture of those who boast as
 though they alone had comprehended from what forms the heaven is
 arranged, in accordance with the hypothesis of the Chaldeans and
 Egyptians. For they say that the circumference of the world is likened
 to the turnings of a well-rounded globe, the earth having a central
 point. For its outline being spherical, it is necessary, they say,
 since there are the same distances of the parts, that the earth should
 be the centre of the universe, around which, as being older, the heaven
 is whirling. For if a circumference is described from the central
 point, which seems to be a circle,--for it is impossible for a circle
 to be described without a point, and it is impossible for a circle to
 be without a point,--surely the earth consisted before all, they say,
 in a state of chaos and disorganization. Now certainly the wretched
 ones were overwhelmed in the chaos of error, "because that, when they
 knew God, they glorified Him not as God, neither were thankful; but
 became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
 darkened;" [2747] and their wise men said that nothing earth-born was
 more honourable or more ancient than the Olympians. Whence they are not
 mere children who know Christ, like the Greeks, who, burying the truth
 in fairies and fictions, rather than in artistic words, ascribing human
 calamities to the heavens, are not ashamed to describe the
 circumference of the world by geometrical theorems and figures, and
 explain that the heaven is adorned with the images of birds and of
 animals that live in water and on dry land, and that the qualities of
 the stars were made from the calamities of the men of old, so that the
 movements of the planets, in their opinion, depended upon the same kind
 of bodies. And they say that the stars revolve around the nature of the
 twelve signs of the Zodiac, being drawn along by the passage of the
 circle of the Zodiac, so that through their intermingling they see the
 things which happen to many, according to their conjunctions and
 departures, their rising and setting.

 For the whole heaven being spherical, and having the earth for its
 central point, as they think, [2748] because all the straight lines
 from the circumference falling upon the earth are equal to one another,
 holds back from the circles which surround it, of which the meridian is
 the greatest; and the second, which divides it into two equal parts, is
 the horizon; and the third, which separates these, the equinoctial; and
 on each side of this the two tropics, the summer and the winter--the
 one on the north, and the other on the south. Beyond is that which is
 called the axis, around which are the greater and lesser Bears, and
 beyond them is the tropic. And the Bears, turning about themselves, and
 weighing upon the axis, which passes through the poles, produce the
 motion of the whole world, having their heads against each other's
 loins, and being untouched by our horizon.

 Then they say that the Zodiac touches all the circles, making its
 movements diagonally, and that there are in it a number of signs, which
 are called the twelve signs of the Zodiac, beginning with the Ram, and
 going on to the Fishes, which, they say, were so determined from
 mythical causes; saying that it was the Ram that conveyed Helle, the
 daughter of Athamas, and her brother Phryxos into Scythia; and that the
 head of the Ox is in honour of Zeus, who, in the form of a Bull,
 carried over Europe into Crete; and they say the circle called the
 Galaxy, or milky way, which reaches from the Fishes to the Ram, was
 poured forth for Herakles from the breasts of Hera, by the commands of
 Zeus. And thus, according to them, there was no natal destiny before
 Europe or Phryxos, and the Dioscuroi, [2749] and the other signs of the
 Zodiac, which were placed among the constellations, from men and
 beasts. But our ancestors lived without destiny. Let us endeavour now
 to crush falsehood, like physicians, taking its edge off, and quenching
 it with the healing medicine of words, here considering the truth.

 [2747] Rom. i. 21.

 [2748] ["As they think." Had Methodius any leaning to Pythagoras and
 his school? To "science" the world owes its rejection of the true
 theory of the universe for two thousand years, till Copernicus, a
 Christian priest, broke that spell. Could the Christian Fathers know
 more than science taught them? Methodius hints it.]

 [2749] Castor and Pollux.

 Chapter XV.--Arguments from the Novelty of Fate and Generation; That
 Golden Age, Early Men; Solid Arguments Against the Mathematicians.

 If it were better, O wretched ones, that man should be subject to the
 star of his birth, than that he should not, why was not his generation
 and birth from the very time when the race of man began to be? And if
 it was, what is the need of those which had lately been placed among
 the stars, of the Lion, the Crab, the Twins, the Virgin, the Bull, the
 Balance, the Scorpion, the Ram, the Archer, the Fishes, the Goat, the
 Watercarrier, Perseus, Cassiopeia, Cepheus, Pegasus, Hydra, the Raven,
 the Cup, the Lyre, the Dragon, and others, from which you introduce, by
 your instructions, many to the knowledge of mathematics, or, rather, to
 a knowledge which is anathema? [2750] Well, then, either there was
 generation among those before, and the removal of these creatures above
 was absurd; or else there was not, and God changed human life into a
 better state and government than that of those who before that lived an
 inferior life. But the ancients were better than those of the present
 time; whence theirs was called the golden age. There was then no natal
 destiny.

 If the sun, driving through the circles and passing along the signs of
 the Zodiac in his annual periods, accomplishes the changes and turnings
 of the seasons, how did those who were born before the signs of the
 Zodiac were placed among the stars, and the heaven was adorned with
 them, continue to exist, when summer, autumn, winter, and spring, were
 not as yet separated from each other, by means of which the body is
 increased and strengthened? But they did exist, and were longer lived
 and stronger than those who live now, since God then disposed the
 seasons in the same manner. The heaven was not then diversified by such
 shapes.

 If the sun and the moon and the other stars were made for the division
 and protection of the members of the time, [2751] and for the adornment
 of the heaven, and the changes of the seasons, they are divine, and
 better than men; for these must needs pass a better life, and a blessed
 and peaceful one, and one which far exceeds our own life in
 righteousness and virtue, observing a motion which is well-ordered and
 happy. But if they are the causes of the calamities and mischief of
 mortals, and busy themselves in working the lasciviousness, and the
 changes and vicissitudes of life, then they are more miserable than
 men, looking upon the earth, and their weak and lawless actions, and
 doing nothing better than men, if at least our life depends upon their
 revolutions and movements.

 [2750] We cannot preserve the play upon words of the original. There it
 is--mathematiken and katathematiken .--Tr.

 [2751] Gen. i. 14, etc.

 Chapter XVI.--Several Other Things Turned Against the Same
 Mathematicians.

 If no action is performed without a previous desire, and there is no
 desire without a want, yet the Divine Being has no wants, and therefore
 has no conception of evil. And if the nature of the stars be nearer in
 order to that of God, being better than the virtue of the best men,
 then the stars also are neither productive of evil, nor in want.

 And besides, every one of those who are persuaded that the sun and moon
 and stars are divine, will allow that they are far removed from evil,
 and incapable of human actions which spring from the sense of pleasure
 and pain; for such abominable desires are unsuitable to heavenly
 beings. But if they are by nature exempt from these, and in no want of
 anything, how should they be the causes to men of those things which
 they do not will themselves, and from which they are exempt?

 Now those who decide that man is not possessed of free-will, and affirm
 that he is governed by the unavoidable necessities of fate, and her
 unwritten commands, are guilty of impiety towards God Himself, making
 Him out to be the cause and author of human evils. For if He
 harmoniously orders the whole circular motion of the stars, with a
 wisdom which man can neither express nor comprehend, directing the
 course of the universe; and the stars produce the qualities of virtue
 and vice in human life, dragging men to these things by the chains of
 necessity; then they declare God to be the Cause and Giver of evils.
 But God is the cause of injury to no one; therefore fate [2752] is not
 the cause of all things.

 Whoever has the least intelligence will confess that God is good,
 righteous, wise, true, helpful, not the cause of evils, free from
 passion, and everything of that kind. And if the righteous be better
 than the unrighteous, and unrighteousness be abominable to them, God,
 being righteous, rejoices in righteousness, and unrighteousness is
 hateful to Him, being opposed and hostile to righteousness. Therefore
 God is not the author of unrighteousness.

 If that which profits is altogether good, and temperance is profitable
 to one's house and life and friends, then temperance is good. And if
 temperance be in its nature good, and licentiousness be opposed to
 temperance, and that which is opposed to good be evil, then
 licentiousness is evil. And if licentiousness be in its nature evil,
 and out of licentiousness come adulteries, thefts, quarrels, and
 murders, then a licentious life is in its nature evil. But the Divine
 Being is not by nature implicated in evils. Therefore our birth is not
 the cause of these things.

 If the temperate are better than the incontinent, and incontinence is
 abominable to them, and God rejoices in temperance, being free from the
 knowledge of passions, then incontinence is hateful also to God.
 Moreover, that the action which is in accordance with temperance, being
 a virtue, is better than that which is in accordance with incontinence,
 which is a vice, we may learn from kings and rulers, and commanders,
 and women, and children, and citizens, and masters, and servants, and
 pedagogues, and teachers; for each of these is useful to himself and to
 the public when he is temperate; but when he is licentious he is
 injurious to himself and to the public. And if there be any difference
 between a filthy man and a noble man, a licentious and a temperate; and
 if the character of the noble and the temperate be the better, and that
 of the opposite the worse; and if those of the better character be near
 to God and His friends, and those of the worse be far from Him and His
 enemies, those who believe in fate make no distinction between
 righteousness and unrighteousness, between filthiness and nobility,
 between licentiousness and temperance, which is a contradiction. For if
 good be opposed to evil, and unrighteousness be evil, and this be
 opposed to righteousness and righteousness be good, and good be hostile
 to evil, and evil be unlike to good, then righteousness is different
 from unrighteousness. And therefore God is not the cause of evils, nor
 does He rejoice in evils. Nor does reason commend them, being good. If,
 then, any are evil, they are evil in accordance with the wants and
 desires of their minds, and not by necessity.

 "They perish self-destroyed,

 By their own fault." [2753]

 If destiny [2754] leads one on to kill a man, and to stain his hands
 with murder, and the law forbids this, punishing criminals, and by
 threats restrains the decrees of destiny, such as committing injustice,
 adultery, theft, poisoning, then the law is in opposition to destiny;
 for those things which destiny appointed the law prohibits, and those
 things which the law prohibits destiny compels men to do. Hence law is
 hostile to destiny. But if it be hostile, then lawgivers do not act in
 accordance with destiny; for by passing decrees in opposition to
 destiny they destroy destiny. Either, then, there is destiny and there
 was no need of laws; or there are laws and they are not in accordance
 with destiny. But it is impossible that anyone should be born or
 anything done apart from destiny; for they say it is not lawful for
 anyone even to move a finger apart from fate. And therefore it was in
 accordance with destiny that Minos and Dracon, and Lycurgus, and Solon,
 and Zaleukos were law-givers and appointed laws, prohibiting
 adulteries, murders, violence, rape, thefts, as things which neither
 existed nor took place in accordance with destiny. But if these things
 were in accordance with destiny, then the laws were not in accordance
 with destiny. For destiny itself would not be destroyed by itself,
 cancelling itself, and contending against itself; here appointing laws
 forbidding adultery and murders, and taking vengeance upon and
 punishing the wicked, and there producing murders and adulteries. But
 this is impossible: for nothing is alien and abhorrent to itself, and
 self-destructive, and at variance with itself. And, therefore, there is
 no destiny.

 If everything in the world falls out in accordance with destiny, and
 nothing without it, then the law must needs be produced by destiny. But
 the law destroys destiny, teaching that virtue should be learnt, and
 diligently performed; and that vice should be avoided, and that it is
 produced by want of discipline. Therefore there is no destiny.

 If destiny makes men to injure one another, and to be injured by one
 another, what need is there of laws? But if laws are made that they may
 check the sinful, God having a care for those who are injured, it were
 better that the evil should not act in accordance with Fate, than that
 they should be set right, after having acted. But God is good and wise,
 and does what is best. Therefore there is no fixed destiny. Either
 education and habit are the cause of sins, or the passions of the soul,
 and those desires which arise through the body. But whichever of these
 be the cause, God is not the cause. If it is better to be righteous
 than to be unrighteous, why is not man made so at once from his birth?
 But if afterwards he is tempered by instruction and laws, that he may
 become better, he is so tempered as possessing free-will, and not by
 nature evil. If the evil are evil in accordance with destiny, by the
 decrees of Providence, they are not blameworthy and deserving of the
 punishment which is inflicted by the laws, since they live according to
 their own nature, and are not capable of being changed.

 And, again, if the good, living according to their own proper nature,
 are praiseworthy, their natal destiny being the cause of their
 goodness; yet the wicked, living according to their own proper nature,
 are not blamable in the eye of a righteous judge. For, if we must speak
 plainly, he who lives according to the nature which belongs to him, in
 no way sins. For he did not make himself thus, but Fate; and he lives
 according to its motion, being urged on by unavoidable necessity. Then
 no one is bad. But some men are bad: and vice is blameworthy, and
 hostile to God, as reason has shown. But virtue is lovable and
 praiseworthy, God having appointed a law for the punishment of the
 wicked. Therefore there is no Fate.

 [2752] genesis = birth, i.e., our life is not controlled by the star of
 our nativity.--Tr. [See Hippolytus, vol. v. p. 27, this series.]

 [2753] Hom., Od., i. 7.

 [2754] genesis = birth, h. the star of man's nativity, h. destiny.

 Chapter XVII.--The Lust of the Flesh and Spirit: Vice and Virtue.

 But why do I draw out my discourse to such length, spending the time
 with arguments, having set forth the things which are most necessary
 for persuasion, and to gain approval for that which is expedient; and
 having made manifest to all, by a few words, the inconsistency of their
 trick, so that it is now possible even for a child to see and perceive
 their error; and that to do good or evil is in our own power, and not
 decided by the stars. For there are two motions in us, the lust of the
 flesh and that of the soul, differing from each other, [2755] whence
 they have received two names, that of virtue and that of vice. And we
 ought to obey the most noble and most useful leading of virtue,
 choosing the best in preference to the base. But enough on these
 points. I must come to the end of my discourse; for I fear, and am
 ashamed, after these discourses on chastity, that I should be obliged
 to introduce the opinions of men who study the heavens, or rather who
 study nonsense, who waste their life with mere conceits, passing it in
 nothing but fabulous figments. And now may these offerings of ours,
 composed from the words which are spoken by God, be acceptable to thee,
 O Arete, my mistress.

 Euboulios. How bravely and magnificently, O Gregorion, has Thekla
 debated!

 Gregorion. What, then, would you have said, if you had listened to
 herself, speaking fluently, and with easy expression, with much grace
 and pleasure? So that she was admired by every one who attended, her
 language blossoming with words, as she set forth intelligently, and in
 fact picturesquely, the subjects on which she spoke, her countenance
 suffused with the blush of modesty; for she is altogether brilliant in
 body and soul.

 Euboulios. Rightly do you say this, Gregorion, and none of these things
 is false; for I knew her wisdom also from other noble actions, and what
 sort of things she succeeded in speaking, giving proof of supreme love
 to Christ; and how glorious she often appeared in meeting the chief
 conflicts of the martyrs, procuring for herself a zeal equal to her
 courage, and a strength of body equal to the wisdom of her counsels.

 Gregorion. Most truly do you also speak. But let us not waste time; for
 we shall often be able to discuss these and other subjects. But I must
 now first relate to you the discourses of the other virgins which
 followed, as I promised; and chiefly those of Tusiane and Domnina; for
 these still remain. When, then, Thekla ceased speaking these things,
 Theopatra said that Arete directed Tusiane to speak; and that she,
 smiling, passed before her and said.

 [2755] Gal. v. 17.

 Discourse IX.--Tusiane.

 Chapter I.--Chastity the Chief Ornament of the True Tabernacle; Seven
 Days Appointed to the Jews for Celebrating the Feast of Tabernacles:
 What They Signify; The Sum of This Septenary Uncertain; Not Clear to
 Any One When the Consummation of the World Will Be; Even Now the Fabric
 of the World Completed.

 O Arete, thou dearest boast to the lovers of virginity, I also implore
 thee to afford me thine aid, lest I should be wanting in words, the
 subject having been so largely and variously handled. Wherefore I ask
 to be excused exordium and introductions, lest, whilst I delay in
 embellishments suitable to them, I depart from the subject: so
 glorious, and honourable, and renowned a thing is virginity.

 God, when He appointed to the true Israelites the legal rite of the
 true feast of the tabernacles, directed, in Leviticus, how they should
 keep and do honour to the feast; above all things, saying that each one
 should adorn his tabernacle with chastity. I will add the words
 themselves of Scripture, from which, without any doubt, it will be
 shown how agreeable to God, and acceptable to Him, is this ordinance of
 virginity: "In the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have
 gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord
 seven days: on the first day shall be a Sabbath, and on the eighth day
 shall be a Sabbath. And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs
 of goodly trees, branches of palm-trees, and the boughs of thick trees,
 and willows [2756] of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the Lord
 your God seven days. And ye shall keep it a feast unto the Lord seven
 days in the year. It shall be a statute for ever in your generations;
 ye shall celebrate it in the seventh month. Ye shall dwell in booths
 seven days; all that are Israelites born shall dwell in booths; that
 your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to dwell
 in booths, when I brought them out of Egypt: I am the Lord your God."
 [2757]

 Here the Jews, fluttering about the bare letter of Scripture, like
 drones about the leaves of herbs, but not about flowers and fruits as
 the bee, fully believe that these words and ordinances were spoken
 concerning such a tabernacle as they erect; as if God delighted in
 those trivial adornments which they, preparing, fabricate from trees,
 not perceiving the wealth of good things to come; whereas these things,
 being like air and phantom shadows, foretell the resurrection and the
 putting up of our tabernacle that had fallen upon the earth, which at
 length, in the seventh thousand of years, resuming again immortal, we
 shall celebrate the great feast of true tabernacles in the new and
 indissoluble creation, the fruits of the earth having been gathered in,
 and men no longer begetting and begotten, but God resting from the
 works of creation. [2758]

 For since in six days God made the heaven and the earth, and finished
 the whole world, and rested on the seventh day from all His works which
 He had made, and blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, [2759] so
 by a figure in the seventh month, when the fruits of the earth have
 been gathered in, we are commanded to keep the feast to the Lord, which
 signifies that, when this world shall be terminated at the seventh
 thousand years, when God shall have completed the world, He shall
 rejoice in us. [2760] For now to this time all things are created by
 His all-sufficient will and inconceivable power; the earth still
 yielding its fruits, and the waters being gathered together in their
 receptacles; and the light still severed from darkness, and the
 allotted number of men not yet being complete; and the sun arising to
 rule the day, and the moon the night; and four-footed creatures, and
 beasts, and creeping things arising from the earth, and winged
 creatures, and creatures that swim, from the water. Then, when the
 appointed times shall have been accomplished, and God shall have ceased
 to form this creation, in the seventh month, the great
 resurrection-day, it is commanded that the Feast of our Tabernacles
 shall be celebrated to the Lord, of which the things said in Leviticus
 are symbols and figures, which things, carefully investigating, we
 should consider the naked truth itself, for He saith, "A wise man will
 hear, and will increase learning; and a man of understanding shall
 attain unto wise counsels: to understand a proverb, and the
 interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark sayings." [2761]

 Wherefore let it shame the Jews that they do not perceive the deep
 things of the Scriptures, thinking that nothing else than outward
 things are contained in the law and the prophets; for they, intent upon
 things earthly, have in greater esteem the riches of the world than the
 wealth which is of the soul. For since the Scriptures are in this way
 divided that some of them give the likeness of past events, some of
 them a type of the future, the miserable men, going back, deal with the
 figures of the future as if they were already things of the past. As in
 the instance of the immolation of the Lamb, the mystery of which they
 regard as solely in remembrance of the deliverance of their fathers
 from Egypt, when, although the first-born of Egypt were smitten, they
 themselves were preserved by marking the door-posts of their houses
 with blood. Nor do they understand that by it also the death of Christ
 is personified, by whose blood souls made safe and sealed shall be
 preserved from wrath in the burning of the world; whilst the
 first-born, the sons of Satan, shall be destroyed with an utter
 destruction by the avenging angels, who shall reverence the seal of the
 Blood impressed upon the former.

 [2756] The LXX. adds "And of the Agnos." See note on this tree at the
 beginning of the treatise, p. 310, note 2.]

 [2757] Lev. xxiii. 39-42.

 [2758] [Methodius did not adopt the errors of the Chiliasts, but he
 kept up the succession of witnesses to this primitive idea. Coleridge's
 remarks on Jeremy Taylor, touching this point, may be worth consulting.
 Notes on Old English Divines, vol. i. p. 218.]

 [2759] Gen. ii. 1.

 [2760] Ps. civ. 31.

 [2761] Prov. i. 5, 6.

 Chapter II.--Figure, Image, Truth: Law, Grace, Glory; Man Created
 Immortal: Death Brought in by Destructive Sin.

 And let these things be said for the sake of example, showing that the
 Jews have wonderfully fallen from the hope of future good, because they
 consider things present to be only signs of things already
 accomplished; whilst they do not perceive that the figures represent
 images, and images are the representatives of truth. For the law is
 indeed the figure and the shadow of an image, that is, of the Gospel;
 but the image, namely, the Gospel, is the representative of truth
 itself. For the men of olden time and the law foretold to us the
 characteristics of the Church, and the Church represents those of the
 new dispensation which is to come. Whence we, having received Christ,
 saying, "I am the truth," [2762] know that shadows and figures have
 ceased; and we hasten on to the truth, proclaiming its glorious images.
 For now we know "in part," and as it were "through a glass," [2763]
 since that which is perfect has not yet come to us; namely, the kingdom
 of heaven and the resurrection, when "that which is in part shall be
 done away." [2764] For then will all our tabernacles be firmly set up,
 when again the body shall rise, with bones again joined and compacted
 with flesh. Then shall we celebrate truly to the Lord a glad
 festal-day, when we shall receive eternal tabernacles, no more to
 perish or be dissolved into the dust of the tomb. Now, our tabernacle
 was at first fixed in an immoveable state, but was moved by
 transgression and bent to the earth, God putting an end to sin by means
 of death, lest man immortal, living a sinner, and sin living in him,
 should be liable to eternal curse. Wherefore he died, although he had
 not been created liable to death or corruption, and the soul was
 separated from the flesh, that sin might perish by death, not being
 able to live longer in one dead. Whence sin being dead and destroyed,
 again I shall rise immortal; and I praise God who by means of death
 frees His sons from death, and I celebrate lawfully to His honour a
 festal-day, adorning my tabernacle, that is my flesh, with good works,
 as there did the five virgins with the five-lighted lamps.

 [2762] St. John xiv. 16.

 [2763] 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

 [2764] 1 Cor. xiii. 10.

 Chapter III.--How Each One Ought to Prepare Himself for the Future
 Resurrection.

 In the first day of the resurrection I am examined whether I bring
 these things which are commanded, whether I am adorned with virtuous
 works, whether I am overshadowed by the boughs of chastity. For account
 the resurrection to be the erection of the tabernacle. Account that the
 things which are taken for the putting together of the tabernacle are
 the works of righteousness. I take, therefore, on the first day the
 things which are set down, that is, on the day in which I stand to be
 judged, whether I have adorned my tabernacle with the things commanded;
 if those things are found on that day which here in time we are
 commanded to prepare, and there to offer to God. But come, let us
 consider what follows.

 "And ye shall take you," He says, "on the first day the boughs of
 goodly trees, branches of palm-trees, and the boughs of thick trees,
 and willows (and the tree of chastity) of the brook; and ye shall
 rejoice before the Lord your God." [2765] The Jews, uncircumcised in
 heart, think that the most beautiful fruit of wood is the citron wood,
 on account of its size; nor are they ashamed to say that God is
 worshipped with cedar, to whom not all the quadrupeds of the earth
 would suffice as a burnt-offering or as incense for burning. And
 moreover, O hard breasts, if the citron appear beautiful to you, why
 not the pomegranate, and other fruits of trees, and amongst them
 apples, which much surpass the citron? Indeed, in the Song of Songs,
 [2766] Solomon having made mention of all these fruits, passes over in
 silence the citron only. But this deceives the unwary, for they have
 not understood that the tree of life [2767] which Paradise once bore,
 now again the Church has produced for all, even the ripe and comely
 fruit of faith.

 Such fruit it is necessary that we bring when we come to the
 judgment-seat of Christ, on the first day of the feast; for if we are
 without it we shall not be able to feast with God, nor to have part,
 according to John, [2768] in the first resurrection. For the tree of
 life is wisdom first begotten of all. "She is a tree of life to them
 that lay hold upon her," says the prophet; [2769] "and happy is every
 one that retaineth her." "A tree planted by the waterside, that will
 bring forth his fruit in due season;" [2770] that is, learning and
 charity and discretion are imparted in due time to those who come to
 the waters of redemption.

 He that hath not believed in Christ, nor hath understood that He is the
 first principle and the tree of life, since he cannot show to God his
 tabernacle adorned with the most goodly of fruits, how shall he
 celebrate the feast? How shall he rejoice? Desirest thou to know the
 goodly fruit of the tree? Consider the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
 how pleasant they are beyond the children of men. Good fruit came by
 Moses, that is the Law, but not so goodly as the Gospel. For the Law is
 a kind of figure and shadow of things to come, but the Gospel is truth
 and the grace of life. Pleasant was the fruit of the prophets, but not
 so pleasant as the fruit of immortality which is plucked from the
 Gospel.

 [2765] Lev. xxiii. 40.

 [2766] Cant. iv. 13.

 [2767] Gen. ii. 9.

 [2768] Rev. xx. 6.

 [2769] Prov. iii. 18.

 [2770] Ps. i. 3.

 Chapter IV.--The Mind Clearer When Cleansed from Sin; The Ornaments of
 the Mind and the Order of Virtue; Charity Deep and Full; Chastity the
 Last Ornament of All; The Very Use of Matrimony to Be Restrained.

 "And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly trees,
 branches of palm-trees." [2771] This signifies the exercise of divine
 discipline, by which the mind that subdues the passions is cleansed and
 adorned by the sweeping out and ejection from it of sins. For it is
 necessary to come cleansed and adorned to the feast, arrayed, as by a
 decorator, in the discipline and exercise of virtue. For the mind being
 cleansed by laborious exercises from the distracting thoughts which
 darken it, quickly perceives the truth; as the widow in the Gospels
 [2772] found the piece of money after she had swept the house and cast
 out the dirt, that is, the passions which obscure and cloud the mind,
 which increase in us from our luxuriousness and carelessness.

 Whoso, therefore, desires to come to that Feast of Tabernacles, to be
 numbered with the saints, let him first procure the goodly fruit of
 faith, then palm branches, that is, attentive meditation upon and study
 of the Scriptures, afterwards the far-spreading and thickly-leaved
 branches of charity, which He commands us to take after the palm
 branches; most fitly calling charity dense boughs, because it is all
 thick and close and very fruitful, not having anything bare or empty,
 but all full, both branches and trunks. Such is charity, having no part
 void or unfruitful. For "though I sell all my goods and give to the
 poor, and though I yield up my body to the fire, and though I have so
 great faith that I can remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
 nothing." [2773] Charity, therefore, is a tree the thickest and most
 fruitful of all, full and abounding copiously abounding in graces.

 After this, what else does He will that we should take? Willow
 branches; by that figure indicating righteousness, because "the just,"
 according to the prophet, shall spring up "as grass in the midst of the
 waters, as willows by the watercourses," [2774] flourishing in the
 word. Lastly, to crown all, it is commanded that the bough of the Agnos
 tree be brought to decorate the Tabernacle, because it is by its very
 name the tree of chastity, by which those already named are adorned.
 Let the wanton now be gone, who, through their love of pleasure, reject
 chastity. How shall they enter into the feast with Christ who have not
 adorned their tabernacle with boughs of chastity, that God-making and
 blessed tree with which all who are hastening to that assembly and
 nuptial banquet ought to be begirt, and to cover their loins? For come,
 fair virgins, consider the Scripture itself, and its commands, how the
 Divine word has assumed chastity to be the crown of those virtues and
 duties that have been mentioned, showing how becoming and desirable it
 is for the resurrection, and that without it no one will obtain the
 promises which we who profess virginity supremely cultivate and offer
 to the Lord. They also possess it who live chastely with their wives,
 and do, as it were about the trunk, yield its lowly branches bearing
 chastity, not being able like us to reach its lofty and mighty boughs,
 or even to touch them; yet they, too, offer no less truly, although in
 a less degree, the branches of chastity. [2775] But those who are
 goaded on by their lusts, although they do not commit fornication, yet
 who, even in the things which are permitted with a lawful wife, through
 the heat of unsubdued concupiscence are excessive in embraces, how
 shall they celebrate the feast? how shall they rejoice, who have not
 adorned their tabernacle, that is their flesh, with the boughs of the
 Agnos, nor have listened to that which has been said, that "they that
 have wives be as though they had none?" [2776]

 [2771] Lev. xxiii. 40.

 [2772] Luke xv. 8.

 [2773] 1 Cor. xiii. 2, 3. Quoted from memory and in meaning, not
 verbally.--Tr.

 [2774] Isa. xliv. 4. The reading of the LXX.

 [2775] [See Jer. Taylor, Holy Living, cap. ii. sec. 3, Works, vol. i.
 p. 427, ed. Bohn, 1844. This is a token of antiquity.]

 [2776] 1 Cor. vii. 29.

 Chapter V.--The Mystery of the Tabernacles.

 Wherefore, above all other things, I say to those who love contests,
 and who are strong-minded, that without delay they should honour
 chastity, as a thing the most useful and glorious. For in the new and
 indissoluble creation, whoever shall not be found decorated with the
 boughs of chastity, shall neither obtain rest, because he has not
 fulfilled the command of God according to the law, nor shall he enter
 into the land of promise, because he has not previously celebrated the
 Feast of Tabernacles. For they only who have celebrated the Feast of
 Tabernacles come to the Holy Land, setting out from those dwellings
 which are called tabernacles, until they come to enter into the temple
 and city of God, advancing to a greater and more glorious joy, as the
 Jewish types indicate. For like as the Israelites, having left the
 borders of Egypt, first came to the Tabernacles, [2777] and from hence,
 having again set forth, came into the land of promise, so also do we.
 For I also, taking my journey, and going forth from the Egypt of this
 life, came first to the resurrection, which is the true Feast of the
 Tabernacles, and there having set up my tabernacle, adorned with the
 fruits of virtue, on the first day of the resurrection, which is the
 day of judgment, celebrate with Christ the millennium of rest, which is
 called the seventh day, even the true Sabbath. Then again from thence
 I, a follower of Jesus, "who hath entered into the heavens," [2778] as
 they also, after the rest of the Feast of Tabernacles, came into the
 land of promise, come into the heavens, not continuing to remain in
 tabernacles--that is, my body not remaining as it was before, but,
 after the space of a thousand years, changed from a human and
 corruptible form into angelic size and beauty, where at last we
 virgins, when the festival of the resurrection is consummated, shall
 pass from the wonderful place of the tabernacle to greater and better
 things, ascending into the very house of God above the heavens, as,
 says the Psalmist, "in the voice of praise and thanksgiving, among such
 as keep holy day." [2779] I, O Arete, my mistress, offer as a gift to
 thee this robe, adorned according to my ability.

 Euboulios. I am much moved, O Gregorion, considering within myself in
 how great anxiety of mind Domnina must be from the character of the
 discourses, perplexed in heart as she is, and with good cause, fearing
 lest she should be at a loss for words, and should speak more feebly
 than the rest of the virgins, since they have spoken on the subject
 with such ability and variety. If, therefore, she was evidently moved,
 come and complete this too; for I wonder if she had anything to say,
 being the last speaker.

 Gregorion. Theopatra told me, Euboulios, that she was greatly moved,
 but she was not perplexed from want of words. After, therefore, Tusiane
 had ceased, Arete looked at her and said, Come, my daughter, do thou
 also deliver a discourse, that our banquet may be quite complete. At
 this Domnina, blushing, and after a long delay, scarcely looking up,
 rose to pray, and turning round, invoked Wisdom to be her present
 helper. And when she had prayed, Theopatra said that suddenly courage
 came to her, and a certain divine confidence possessed her, and she
 said:--

 [2777] In Hebrew, Succoth. Num. xxxiii. 5.

 [2778] Heb. iv. 14.

 [2779] Ps. xlii. 4.

 Discourse X.--Domnina.

 Chapter I.--Chastity Alone Aids and Effects the Most Praiseworthy
 Government of the Soul.

 O Arete, I also, omitting the long preludes of exordiums, will
 endeavour according to my ability to enter upon the subject, lest, by
 delaying upon those matters which are outside the subject in hand, I
 should speak of them at greater length than their importance would
 warrant. For I account it a very great part of prudence not to make
 long speeches, which merely charm the ears, before coming to the main
 question, but to begin forthwith at the point in debate. So I will
 begin from thence, for it is time.

 Nothing can so much profit a man, O fair virgins, with respect to moral
 excellence, as chastity; for chastity alone accomplishes and brings it
 about that the soul should be governed in the noblest and best way, and
 should be set free, pure from the stains and pollutions of the world.
 For which reason, when Christ taught us to cultivate it, and showed its
 unsurpassable beauty, the kingdom of the Evil One was destroyed, who
 aforetime led captive and enslaved the whole race of men, so that none
 of the more ancient people pleased the Lord, but all were overcome by
 errors, since the law was not of itself sufficient to free the human
 race from corruption, until virginity, succeeding the law, governed men
 by the precepts of Christ. Nor truly had the first men so often run
 headlong into combats and slaughter, into lust and idolatry, if the
 righteousness that is by the law had been to them sufficient for
 salvation. Now truly they were then confused by great and frequent
 calamities; but from the time when Christ was incarnate, and armed and
 adorned His flesh with virginity, the savage tyrant who was master of
 incontinence was taken away, and peace and faith have dominion, men no
 longer turning so much as before to idolatry.

 Chapter II.--The Allegory of the Trees Demanding a King, in the Book of
 Judges, [2780] Explained.

 But lest I should appear to some to be sophistical, and to conjecture
 these things from mere probabilities, and to babble, I will bring
 forward to you, O virgins, from the Old Testament, written prophecy
 from the Book of Judges, to show that I speak the truth, where the
 future reign of chastity was already clearly foretold. For we read:
 "The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and they
 said unto the olive-tree, Reign thou over us. But the olive-tree said
 unto them, Should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honour God
 and man, and go to be promoted over the trees? And the trees said to
 the fig-tree, Come thou, and reign over us. But the fig-tree said unto
 them, Should I forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to be
 promoted over the trees? Then said the trees unto the vine, Come thou,
 and reign over us. And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine,
 which cheereth God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees? Then
 said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou, and reign over us. And
 the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over
 you, then come and put your trust in my shadow; and if not, let fire
 come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon."

 Now, that these things are not said of trees growing out of the earth,
 is clear. For inanimate trees cannot be assembled in council to choose
 a king, inasmuch as they firmly fixed by deep roots to the earth. But
 altogether are these things narrated concerning souls which, before the
 incarnation of Christ, too deeply luxuriating in transgressions,
 approach to God as suppliants, and ask His mercy, and that they may be
 governed by His pity and compassion, which Scripture expresses under
 the figure of the olive, because oil is of great advantage to our
 bodies, and takes away our fatigues and ailments, and affords light.
 For all lamp-light increases when nourished by oil. So also the mercies
 of God entirely dissolve death, and assist the human race, and nourish
 the light of the heart. [2781] And consider whether the laws, from the
 first created man until Christ in succession, were not set forth in
 these words by the Scripture by figments, in opposition to which the
 devil has deceived the human race. And it has likened the fig-tree to
 the command given to man in paradise, because, when he was deceived, he
 covered his nakedness with the leaves of a fig-tree; [2782] and the
 vine to the precept given to Noah at the time of the deluge, because,
 when overpowered by wine, he was mocked. [2783] The olive signifies the
 law given to Moses in the desert, because the prophetic grace, the holy
 oil, had failed from their inheritance when they broke the law. Lastly,
 the bramble not inaptly refers to the law which was given to the
 apostles for the salvation of the world; because by their instruction
 we have been taught virginity, of which alone the devil has not been
 able to make a deceptive image. For which cause, also, four Gospels
 have been given, because God has four times given the Gospel [2784] to
 the human race, and has instructed them by four laws, the times of
 which are clearly known by the diversity of the fruits. For the
 fig-tree, on account of its sweetness and richness, represents the
 delights of man, which he had in paradise before the fall. Indeed, not
 rarely, as we shall afterwards show, the Holy Spirit [2785] takes the
 fruit of the fig-tree as an emblem of goodness. But the vine, on
 account of the gladness produced by wine, and the joy of those who were
 saved from wrath and from the deluge, signifies the change produced
 from fear and anxiety into joy. [2786] Moreover, the olive, on account
 of the oil which it produces, indicates the compassion of God, who
 again, after the deluge, bore patiently when men turned aside to
 ungodliness, so that He gave them the law and manifested Himself to
 some, and nourished by oil the light of virtue, now almost
 extinguished.

 [2780] Judg. ix. 8-15.

 [2781] For this use of heart, cf. 2 Cor. iv. 6.--Tr. [See Coleridge on
 Leighton, Old English Divines, vol. ii. p. 137.]

 [2782] Gen. iii. 7.

 [2783] Gen. ix. 22.

 [2784] Good news.

 [2785] Jer. viii. 13.

 [2786] Joel ii. 22.

 Chapter III.--The Bramble and the Agnos the Symbol of Chastity; The
 Four Gospels, that Is, Teachings or Laws, Instructing to Salvation.

 Now the bramble commends chastity, for the bramble and the agnos is the
 same tree: by some it is called bramble, by others agnos. [2787]
 Perhaps it is because the plant is akin to virginity that it is called
 bramble and agnos; bramble, because of its strength and firmness
 against pleasures; agnos, because it always continues chaste. Hence the
 Scripture relates that Elijah, fleeing from the face of the woman
 Jezebel, [2788] at first came under a bramble, and there, having been
 heard, received strength and took food; signifying that to him who
 flies from the incitements of lust, and from a woman--that is, from
 pleasure--the tree of chastity is a refuge and a shade, ruling men from
 the coming of Christ, the chief of virgins. For when the first laws,
 which were published in the times of Adam and Noah and Moses, were
 unable to give salvation to man, the evangelical law alone has saved
 all.

 And this is the cause why the fig-tree may be said not to have obtained
 the kingdom over trees, which, in a spiritual sense, mean men; and the
 fig-tree the command, because man desired, even after the fall, again
 to be subject to the dominion of virtue, and not to be deprived of the
 immortality of the paradise of pleasure. But, having transgressed, he
 was rejected and cast far away, as one who could no longer be governed
 by immortality, nor was capable of receiving it. And the first message
 to him after the transgression was preached by Noah, [2789] to which,
 if he had applied his mind, he might have been saved from sin; for in
 it he promised both happiness and rest from evils, if he gave heed to
 it with all his might, just as the vine promises to yield wine to those
 who cultivate it with care and labour. But neither did this law rule
 mankind, for men did not obey it, although zealously preached by Noah.
 But, after they began to be surrounded and drowning by the waters, they
 began to repent, and to promise that they would obey the commandments.
 Wherefore with scorn they are rejected as subjects; that is, they are
 contemptuously told that they cannot be helped by the law; the Spirit
 answering them back and reproaching them because they had deserted
 those men whom God had commanded to help them, and to save them, and
 make them glad; such as Noah and those with him. "Even to you, O
 rebellious," said he, "I come, to bring help to you who are destitute
 of prudence, and who differ in nothing from dry trees, and who formerly
 did not believe me when I preached that you ought to flee from present
 things."

 [2787] Jahn's reading is here followed. [This is a puzzle as well as a
 parable; the Seventy give rhamnos, which is not = agnos. It spoils the
 force of Jotham's caustic satire to adopt this conception of our
 author.]

 [2788] 1 Kings xix. 4.

 [2789] Gen. v. 29.

 Chapter IV.--The Law Useless for Salvation; The Last Law of Chastity
 Under the Figure of the Bramble.

 And so those men, having been thus rejected from the divine care, and
 the human race having again given themselves up to error, again God
 sent forth, by Moses, a law to rule them and recall them to
 righteousness. But these, thinking fit to bid a long farewell to this
 law, turned to idolatry. Hence God gave them up to mutual slaughters,
 to exiles, and captivities, the law itself confessing, as it were, that
 it could not save them. Therefore, worn out with ills and afflicted,
 they again promised that they would obey the commandments; until God,
 pitying man the fourth time, sent chastity to rule over them, which
 Scripture consequently called the bramble. And she consuming pleasures
 threatens besides, that unless all undoubtingly obey her, and truly
 come to her, she will destroy all with fire, since there will be
 hereafter no other law or doctrine but judgment and fire. For this
 reason, man henceforth began to do righteousness, and firmly to believe
 in God, and to separate himself from the devil. Thus chastity was sent
 down, as being most useful and helpful to men. For of her alone was the
 devil unable to forge an imitation to lead men astray, as is the case
 with the other precepts.

 Chapter V.--The Malignity of the Devil as an Imitator in All Things;
 Two Kinds of Fig-Trees and Vines.

 The fig-tree, as I said, from the sweetness and excellence of its
 fruit, being taken as a type of the delights of paradise, the devil,
 having beguiled the man by its imitations, led him captive, persuading
 him to conceal the nakedness of his body by fig-leaves; that is, by
 their friction he excited him to sexual pleasure. Again, those that had
 been saved from the deluge, he intoxicated with a drink which was an
 imitation of the vine of spiritual joy; and again he mocked them,
 having stripped them of virtue. And what I say will hereafter be more
 clear.

 The enemy, by his power, always imitates [2790] the forms of virtue and
 righteousness, not for the purpose of truly promoting its exercise, but
 for deception and hypocrisy. For in order that those who fly from death
 he may entice to death, he is outwardly dyed with the colours of
 immortality. And hence he wishes to seem a fig-tree or vine, and to
 produce sweetness and joy, and is "transformed into an angel of light,"
 [2791] ensnaring many by the appearance of piety.

 For we find in the Sacred Writings that there are two kinds of
 fig-trees and vines, "the good figs, very good; and the evil, very
 evil;" [2792] "wine that maketh glad the heart of man," [2793] and wine
 which is the poison of dragons, and the incurable venom of asps. [2794]
 But from the time when chastity began to rule over men, the fraud was
 detected and overcome, Christ, the chief of virgins, overturning it. So
 both the true fig-tree and the true vine yield fruit after that the
 power of chastity has laid hold upon all men, as Joel the prophet
 preaches, saying: "Fear not, O land; be glad and rejoice, for the Lord
 will do great things. Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field; for the
 pastures of the wilderness do spring, for the tree beareth her fruit,
 the fig-tree and the vine do yield their strength. Be glad then, ye
 children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God, for He hath given
 you food unto righteousness;" [2795] calling the former laws the vine
 and the fig, trees bearing fruit unto righteousness for the children of
 the spiritual Zion, which bore fruit after the incarnation of the Word,
 when chastity ruled over us, when formerly, on account of sin and much
 error, they had checked and destroyed their buds. For the true vine and
 the true fig-tree were not able to yield such nourishment to us as
 would be profitable for life, whilst as yet the false fig-tree,
 variously adorned for the purpose of fraud, flourished. But when the
 Lord dried up the false branches, the imitations of the true branches,
 uttering the sentence against the bitter fig-tree, "Let no fruit grow
 on thee henceforward for ever," [2796] then those which were truly
 fruit-bearing trees flourished and yielded food unto righteousness.

 The vine, and that not in a few places, refers to the Lord Himself,
 [2797] and the fig-tree to the Holy Spirit, as the Lord "maketh glad
 the hearts of men," and the Spirit healeth them. And therefore Hezekiah
 is commanded [2798] first to make a plaster with a lump of figs--that
 is, the fruit of the Spirit--that he may be healed--that is, according
 to the apostle--by love; for he says, "The fruit of the Spirit is love,
 joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
 temperance;" [2799] which, on account of their great pleasantness, the
 prophet calls figs. Micah also says, "They shall sit every man under
 his vine and under his fig-tree; and none shall make them afraid."
 [2800] Now it is certain that those who have taken refuge and rested
 under the Spirit, and under the shadow of the Word, shall not be
 alarmed, nor frightened by him who troubles the hearts of men.

 [2790] [Diabolus simia Dei, an idea very common to the Fathers. He is
 the malignant caricature of the Most High, exulting in the deformity
 which he gives to his copies. Exod. vii. 11.]

 [2791] 2 Cor. xi. 14.

 [2792] Jer. xxiv. 3.

 [2793] Ps. civ. 15.

 [2794] Deut. xxxii. 33.

 [2795] Joel ii. 21-23. The last words of the quotation are from the
 LXX. version.--Tr.

 [2796] Matt. xxi. 19.

 [2797] John xv. 1.

 [2798] 2 Kings xx. 7; Isa. xxxviii. 21.

 [2799] Gal. v. 22, 23.

 [2800] Micah iv. 4.

 Chapter VI.--The Mystery of the Vision of Zechariah.

 Moreover, Zechariah shows that the olive shadows forth the law of
 Moses, speaking thus: "And the angel that talked with me came again and
 waked me, as a man that is wakened out of his sleep, and said unto me,
 What seest thou? And I said, I have looked, and behold a candlestick
 all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it....And two olive-trees by
 it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left
 side thereof." [2801] And after a few words, the prophet, asking what
 are the olives on the right and left of the candlestick, and what the
 two olive-boughs in the hands of the two pipes, the angel answered and
 said: "These are the two sons of fruitfulness [2802] which stand by the
 Lord of the whole earth," signifying the two first-born virtues that
 are waiting upon God, which, in His dwelling, supply around the wick,
 through the boughs, the spiritual oil of God, that man may have the
 light of divine knowledge. But the two boughs of the two olives are the
 law and the prophets, around, as it were, the lot [2803] of the
 inheritance, of which Christ and the Holy Spirit are the authors, we
 ourselves meanwhile not being able to take the whole fruit and the
 greatness of these plants, before chastity began to rule the world, but
 only their boughs--to wit, the law and the prophets--did we formerly
 cultivate, and those moderately, often letting them slip. For who was
 ever able to receive Christ or the Spirit, unless he first purified
 himself? For the exercise which prepares the soul from childhood for
 desirable and delectable glory, and carries this grace safely thither
 with ease, and from small toils raises up mighty hopes, is chastity,
 which gives immortality to our bodies; which it becomes all men
 willingly to prefer in honour and to praise above all things; some,
 that by its means they may be betrothed to the Word, practising
 virginity; and others, that by it they may be freed from the curse,
 "Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return." [2804]

 This, O Arete, is the discourse on virginity which you required of me,
 accomplished according to my ability; which I pray, O mistress,
 although it is mediocre and short, that thou wilt receive with kindness
 from me who was chosen to speak last.

 [2801] Zech. iv. 1-3.

 [2802] E.V. "Anointed ones," ver. 14.

 [2803] schoinisma : same word as that translated "wick."--Tr.

 [2804] Gen. iii. 19.

 Discourse XI.--Arete.

 Chapter I.--The True and Chaste Virgins Few; Chastity a Contest; Thekla
 Chief of Virgins.

 I do accept it, Theopatra related that Arete said, and approve of it
 all. For it is an excellent thing, even although you had not spoken so
 clearly, to take up and go through with earnestness those things which
 have been said, not to prepare a sweet entertainment for those who
 listen, but for correction, recollection, and abstinence. For whoever
 teaches that chastity is to be preferred and embraced first of all
 among my pursuits, rightly advises; which many think that they honour
 and cultivate, but which few, so to speak, really honour. For it is not
 one who has studied to restrain his flesh from the pleasure of carnal
 delight that cultivates chastity, if he do not keep in check the rest
 of the desires; but rather he dishonours it, and that in no small
 degree, by base lusts, exchanging pleasures for pleasures. Nor if he
 have strongly resisted the desires of the senses, but is lifted up with
 vainglory, and from this cause is able to repress the heats of burning
 lust, and reckon them all as nothing, can he be thought to honour
 chastity; for he dishonours it in that he is lifted up with pride,
 cleansing the outside of the cup and platter, that is, the flesh and
 the body, but injuring the heart by conceit and ambition. Nor when any
 one is conceited of riches is he desirous of honouring chastity; he
 dishonours it more than all, preferring a little gain to that to which
 nothing is comparable of those things that are in this life esteemed.
 For all riches and gold "in respect of it are as a little sand." [2805]
 And neither does he who loves himself above measure, and eagerly
 considers that which is expedient for himself alone, regardless of the
 necessities of his neighbour, honour chastity, but he also dishonours
 it. For he who has repelled from himself charity, mercy, and humanity,
 is much inferior to those who honourably exercise chastity. Nor is it
 right, on the one hand, by the use of chastity to keep virginity, and,
 on the other hand, to pollute the soul by evil deeds and lust; nor here
 to profess purity and continence, and there to pollute it by indulgence
 in vices. Nor, again, here to declare that the things of this world
 bring no care to himself; there to be eager in procuring them, and in
 concern about them. But all the members are to be preserved intact and
 free from corruption; not only those which are sexual, but those
 members also which minister to the service of lusts. For it would be
 ridiculous to preserve the organs of generation pure, but not the
 tongue; or to preserve the tongue, but neither the eyesight, the ears,
 nor the hands; or lastly, to preserve these pure, but not the mind,
 defiling it with pride and anger.

 It is altogether necessary for him who has resolved that he will not
 err from the practice of chastity, to keep all his members and senses
 clean and under restraint, as is customary with the planks of ships,
 whose fastenings the ship-masters diligently join together, lest by any
 means the way and access may lie open for sin to pour itself into the
 mind. For great pursuits are liable to great falls, and evil is more
 opposed to that which is really good than to that which is not good.
 For many who thought that to repress vehement lascivious desires
 constituted chastity, neglecting other duties connected with it, failed
 also in this, and have brought blame [2806] upon those endeavouring
 after it by the right way, as you have proved who are a model in
 everything, leading a virgin life in deed and word. And now what that
 is which becomes a virgin state has been described.

 And you all in my hearing having sufficiently contended in speaking, I
 pronounce victors and crown; but Thekla with a larger and thicker
 chaplet, as the chief of you, and as having shone with greater lustre
 than the rest.

 [2805] Wisd. vii. 9.

 [2806] [Compare our Lord's wisdom and mercy, Matt. xix. 11.]

 Chapter II.--Thekla Singing Decorously a Hymn, the Rest of the Virgins
 Sing with Her; John the Baptist a Martyr to Chastity; The Church the
 Spouse of God, Pure and Virgin.

 Theopatra said that Arete having said these things, commanded them all
 to rise, and, standing under the Agnos, to send up to the Lord in a
 becoming manner a hymn of thanksgiving; and that Thekla should begin
 and should lead the rest. And when they had stood up, she said that
 Thekla, standing in the midst of the virgins on the right of Arete,
 decorously sang; but the rest, standing together in a circle after the
 manner of a chorus, responded to her: "I keep myself pure for Thee, O
 Bridegroom, and holding a lighted torch I go to meet Thee." [2807]

 Thekla. 1. From above, O virgins, the sound of a noise that wakes the
 dead has come, bidding us all to meet the Bridegroom in white robes,
 and with torches towards the east. Arise, before the King enters within
 the gates.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 2. Fleeing from the sorrowful happiness of mortals, and having
 despised the luxuriant delights of life and its love, I desire to be
 protected under Thy life-giving arms, and to behold Thy beauty for
 ever, O blessed One.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 3. Leaving marriage and the beds of mortals and my golden home
 for Thee, O King, I have come in undefiled robes, in order that I might
 enter with Thee within Thy happy bridal chamber.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 4. Having escaped, O blessed One, from the innumerable
 enchanting wiles of the serpent, and, moreover, from the flame of fire,
 and from the mortal-destroying assaults of wild beasts, I await Thee
 from heaven.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 5. I forget my own country, O Lord, through desire of Thy
 grace. [2808] I forget, also, the company of virgins, my fellows, the
 desire even of mother and of kindred, for Thou, O Christ, art all
 things to me.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 6. Giver of life art Thou, O Christ. Hail, light that never
 sets, receive this praise. The company of virgins call upon Thee,
 Perfect Flower, Love, Joy, Prudence, Wisdom, Word.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 7. With open gates, O beauteously adorned Queen, admit us
 within thy chambers. O spotless, gloriously triumphant Bride, breathing
 beauty, we stand by Christ, robed as He is, celebrating thy happy
 nuptials, O youthful maiden.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 8. The virgins standing without the chamber, [2809] with bitter
 tears and deep moans, wail and mournfully lament that their lamps are
 gone out, having failed to enter in due time the chamber of joy.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 9. For turning from the sacred way of life, unhappy ones, they
 have neglected to prepare sufficiency of oil for the path of life;
 bearing lamps whose bright light is dead, they groan from the inward
 recesses of their mind.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 10. Here are cups full of sweet nectar; let us drink, O
 virgins, for it is celestial drink, which the Bridegroom hath placed
 for those duly called to the wedding.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 11. Abel, clearly prefiguring Thy death, [2810] O blessed One,
 with flowing blood, and eyes lifted up to heaven, said, Cruelly slain
 by a brother's hand, O Word, I pray Thee to receive me.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 12. Thy valiant son Joseph, [2811] O Word, won the greatest
 prize of virginity, when a woman heated with desire forcibly drew him
 to an unlawful bed; but he giving no heed to her fled stripped, and
 crying aloud:--

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 13. Jephthah offered his fresh slaughtered virgin daughter a
 sacrifice to God, like a lamb; and she, nobly fulfilling the type of
 Thy body, O blessed One, bravely cried:--

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 14. Daring Judith, [2812] by clever wiles having cut off the
 head of the leader of the foreign hosts, whom previously she had
 allured by her beautiful form, without polluting the limbs of her body,
 with a victor's shout said:--

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 15. Seeing the great beauty of Susanna, the two Judges,
 maddened with desire, said, O dear lady, we have come desiring secret
 intercourse with thee; but she with tremulous cries said:--

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 16. It is far better for me to die than to betray my nuptials
 to you, O mad for women, and so to suffer the eternal justice of God in
 fiery vengeance. Save me now, O Christ, from these evils.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 17. Thy Precursor, washing multitudes of men in flowing lustral
 water, unjustly by a wicked man, on account of his chastity, was led to
 slaughter; but as he stained the dust with his life-blood, he cried to
 Thee, O blessed One:--

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 18. The parent of Thy life, that unspotted Grace [2813] and
 undefiled Virgin, bearing in her womb without the ministry of man, by
 an immaculate conception, [2814] and who thus became suspected of
 having betrayed the marriage-bed, she, O blessed One, when pregnant,
 thus spoke:--

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 19. Wishing to see Thy nuptial day, O blessed One, as many
 angels as Thou, O King, calledst from above, bearing the best gifts to
 Thee, came in unsullied robes:--

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 20. In hymns, O blessed spouse of God, we attendants of the
 Bride honour Thee, O undefiled virgin Church of snow-white form, dark
 haired, chaste, spotless, beloved.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 21. Corruption has fled, and the tearful pains of diseases;
 death has been taken away, all folly has perished, consuming mental
 grief is no more; for again the grace of the God-Christ has suddenly
 shone upon mortals.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 22. Paradise is no longer bereft of mortals, for by divine
 decree he no longer dwells there as formerly, thrust out from thence
 when he was free from corruption, and from fear by the various wiles of
 the serpents, O blessed One.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 23. Singing the new song, now the company of virgins attends
 thee towards the heavens, O Queen, all manifestly crowned with white
 lilies, and bearing in their hands bright lights.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 Thekla. 24. O blessed One, who inhabited the undefiled seats of heaven
 without beginning, who governed all things by everlasting power, O
 Father, with Thy Son, we are here, receive us also within the gates of
 life.

 Chorus. I keep myself pure for Thee, O Bridegroom, and holding a
 lighted torch I go to meet Thee.

 [2807] The text of Jahn is here followed.--Tr. [I have been obliged to
 arrange this hymn (so as to bring out the refrain as sung by the chorus
 of virgins) somewhat differently from the form in the Edinburgh
 edition. I invite a comparison.]

 [2808] Ps. xlv. 10.

 [2809] Matt. xxv. 11.

 [2810] Gen. iv. 10.

 [2811] Gen. xxxix. 12.

 [2812] Jud. viii.

 [2813] Matt. i. 18.

 [2814] [The only one. See p. 355, Elucidation II., infra.]

 Chapter III.--Which are the Better, the Continent, or Those Who Delight
 in Tranquillity of Life? Contests the Peril of Chastity: the Felicity
 of Tranquillity; Purified and Tranquil Minds Gods: They Who Shall See
 God; Virtue Disciplined by Temptations.

 Euboulios. Deservedly, O Gregorion, has Thekla borne off the chief
 prize.

 Gregorion. Deservedly indeed.

 Euboulios. But what about the stranger Telmisiake? [2815] Tell me, was
 she not listening from without? I wonder if she could keep silence on
 hearing of this banquet, and would not forthwith, as a bird flies to
 its food, listen to the things which were spoken.

 Gregorion. The report is that she was present with Methodios [2816]
 when he inquired respecting these things of Arete. But it is a good as
 well as a happy thing to have such a mistress and guide as Arete, that
 is virtue.

 Euboulios. But, Gregorion, which shall we say are the better, those who
 without lust govern concupiscence, or those who under the assaults of
 concupiscence continue pure?

 Gregorion. For my part, I think those who are free from lust, for they
 have their mind undefiled, and are altogether uncorrupted, sinning in
 no respect.

 Euboulios. Well, I swear by chastity, and wisely, O Gregorion. But lest
 in any wise I hinder you, if I gainsay your words, it is that I may the
 better learn, and that no one hereafter may refute me.

 Gregorion. Gainsay me as you will, you have my permission. For,
 Euboulios, I think that I know sufficient to teach you that he who is
 not concupiscent is better than he who is. If I cannot, then there is
 no one who can convince you.

 Euboulios. Bless me! I am glad that you answer me so magnanimously, and
 show how wealthy you are as regards wisdom.

 Gregorion. A mere chatterer, so you seem to be, O Euboulios.

 Euboulios. Why so?

 Gregorion. Because you ask rather for the sake of amusement than of
 truth.

 Euboulios. Speak fair, I pray you, my good friend; for I greatly admire
 your wisdom and renown. I say this because, with reference to the
 things that many wise men often dispute among themselves, you say that
 you not only understand them, but also vaunt that you can teach
 another.

 Gregorion. Now tell me truly whether it is a difficulty with you to
 receive the opinion, that they who are not concupiscent excel those who
 are concupiscent, and yet restrain themselves? or are you joking?

 Euboulios. How so, when I tell you that I do not know? But, come, tell
 me, O wisest lady, in what do the non-concupiscent and chaste excel the
 concupiscent who live chastely?

 Gregorion. Because, in the first place, they have the soul itself pure,
 and the Holy Spirit always dwells in it, seeing that it is not
 distracted and disturbed by fancies and unrestrained thoughts, so as to
 pollute the mind. But they are in every way inaccessible to lust, both
 as to their flesh and to their heart, enjoying tranquillity from
 passions. But they who are allured from without, through the sense of
 sight, with fancies, and receiving lust flowing like a stream into the
 heart, are often not less polluted, even when they think that they
 contend and fight against pleasures, being vanquished in their mind.

 Euboulios. Shall we then say that they who serenely live and are not
 disturbed by lusts are pure?

 Gregorion. Certainly. For these [2817] are they whom God makes gods in
 the beatitudes; they who believe in Him without doubt. And He says that
 they shall look upon God with confidence, because they bring in nothing
 that darkens or confuses the eye of the soul for the beholding of God;
 but all desire of things secular being eliminated, they not only, as I
 said, preserve the flesh pure from carnal connection, but even the
 heart, in which, especially, as in a temple, the Holy Spirit rests and
 dwells, is open to no unclean thoughts.

 Euboulios. Stay now; for I think that from hence we shall the better go
 on to the discovery of what things are truly the best; and, tell me, do
 you call anyone a good pilot?

 Gregorion. I certainly do.

 Euboulios. Whether is it he that saves his vessel in great and
 perplexing storms, or is it he who does so in a breathless calm?

 Gregorion. He that does so in a great and perplexing storm.

 Euboulios. Shall we not then say that the soul, which is deluged with
 the surging waves of the passions, and yet does not, on that account,
 weary or grow faint, but direct her vessel--that is, the flesh--nobly
 into the port of chastity, is better and more estimable than he that
 navigates in calm weather?

 Gregorion. We will say so.

 Euboulios. For to be prepared against the entrance of the gales of the
 Evil Spirit, and not to be cast away or overcome, but to refer all to
 Christ, and strongly to contend against pleasures, brings greater
 praise than he wins who lives a virgin life calmly and with ease.

 Gregorion. It appears so.

 Euboulios. And what saith the Lord? Does He not seem to show that he
 who retains continence, though concupiscent, excels him who, having no
 concupiscence, leads a virgin life?

 Gregorion. Where does He say so?

 Euboulios. Where, comparing a wise man to a house well founded, He
 declares him immoveable because he cannot be overthrown by rains, and
 floods, and winds; likening, as it would seem, these storms to lusts,
 but the immoveable and unshaken firmness of the soul in chastity to the
 rock.

 Gregorion. You appear to speak what is true.

 Euboulios. And what say you of the physician? Do you not call him the
 best who has been proved in great diseases, and has healed many
 patients?

 Gregorion. I do.

 Euboulios. But the one who has never at any time practised, nor ever
 had the sick in his hands, is he not still in all respects the
 inferior?

 Gregorion. Yes.

 Euboulios. Then we may certainly say that a soul which is contained by
 a concupiscent body, and which appeases with the medicaments of
 temperance the disorders arising from the heat of lusts, carries off
 the palm for healing, over one to whose lot it has fallen to govern
 aright a body which is free from lust. [2818]

 Gregorion. It must be allowed.

 Euboulios. And how is it in wrestling? Whether is the better wrestler
 he who has many and strong antagonists, and continually is contending
 without being worsted, or he who has no opponents?

 Gregorion. Manifestly he who wrestles.

 Euboulios. And, in wrestling, is not the athlete who contends the more
 experienced?

 Gregorion. It must be granted.

 Euboulios. Therefore it is clear that he whose soul contends against
 the impulses of lust, and is not borne down by it, but draws back and
 sets himself in array against it, appears stronger than he who does not
 lust. [2819]

 Gregorion. True.

 Euboulios. What then? Does it not appear to you, Gregorion, that there
 is more courage in being valiant against the assaults of base desires?

 Gregorion. Yes, indeed.

 Euboulios. Is not this courage the strength of virtue?

 Gregorion. Plainly so.

 Euboulios. Therefore, if endurance be the strength of virtue, is not
 the soul, which is troubled by lusts, and yet perseveres against them,
 stronger than that which is not so troubled?

 Gregorion. Yes.

 Euboulios. And if stronger, then better?

 Gregorion. Truly.

 Euboulios. Therefore the soul which is concupiscent, and exercises
 self-control, as appears from what has been said, is better than that
 which is not concupiscent, and exercises self-control. [2820]

 Gregorion. You speak truly, and I shall desire still more fully to
 discourse with you concerning these things. If, therefore, it pleases
 you, tomorrow I will come again to hear respecting them. Now, however,
 as you see, it is time to betake ourselves to the care of the outward
 man.

 [2815] In Jahn, Telmesiake.--Tr. [Comp. p. 356, n. 2, infra.]

 [2816] [Contrast the shameful close of Plato's Symposium.]

 [2817] Matt. v. 8.

 [2818] [Recur to what is said of Origen and his epoch on p. 224, vol.
 iv. of this series.]

 [2819] [Recur to what is said of Origen and his epoch on p. 224, vol.
 iv. of this series.]

 [2820] [Here is our author's conclusive condemnation of Origen, whose
 great mistake, I have supposed, gave occasion to this extraordinary
 work. Possibly the epoch of Anthony had revived such discussions when
 this was written.]

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (We here behold only shadows, etc., p. 335.)

 Schleiermacher, [2821] in commenting on Plato's Symposium, remarks:
 "Even natural birth (i.e., in Plato's system) was nothing but a
 reproduction of the same eternal form and idea....The whole discussion
 displays the gradation, not only from that pleasure which arises from
 the contemplation of personal beauty through that which every larger
 object, whether single or manifold, may occasion, to that immediate
 pleasure of which the source is in the Eternal Beauty," etc. Our author
 ennobles such theorizing by mounting up to the great I Am.

 II.

 (Christ Himself is the one who is born, p. 337.)

 Wordsworth, and many others of the learned, sustain our author's
 comment on this passage. [2822] So Aquinas, ad loc., Bede, and many
 others. Methodius is incorrectly represented as rejecting [2823] the
 idea that "the woman" is the Blessed Virgin Mary, for no such idea
 existed for him to reject. He rejects the idea that the man-child is
 Christ; but that idea was connected with the supposition that the woman
 was the Church of the Hebrews bringing forth the Messiah. Gregory the
 Great regards the woman as the Christian Church. So Hippolytus: [2824]
 "By the woman...is meant most manifestly the Church, endued with the
 Father's Word, whose brightness is above the sun," etc. Bossuet says
 candidly, [2825] "C'est l'Église, tout éclatante de la lumière de J.
 C.," etc.

 Now, note the progress of corruption, one fable engendering another.
 The text of Gen. iii. 15, contrary to the Hebrew, the Seventy, the
 Syriac, and the Vulgate itself, in the best mss., is made to read, "She
 shall bruise thy head," etc. The "woman," therefore, becomes the Mother
 of our Lord, and the "great red dragon" (of verse 3), from which the
 woman "fled into the wilderness," is next represented as under her feet
 (where the moon appears in the sacred narrative); and then the
 Immaculate Conception of her Holy Seed is transferred back to the
 mother of Mary, who is indecently discussed, and affirmed to have been
 blest with an "Immaculate Conception" when, in the ordinary process of
 nature, she was made the mother of the Virgin. So, then, the bull
 Ineffabilis--comes forth, eighteen hundred years after the event,
 [2826] with the announcement that what thousands of saints and many
 bishops of Rome have denounced as a fable must be received by all
 Christians on peril of eternal damnation. [2827] The worst of it all is
 the fact, that, as the mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God has
 heretofore been the only "Immaculate Conception" known to the faith of
 Christendom, thousands now imagine that this is what was only so lately
 set forth, and what we must therefore renounce as false.

 [2821] Introduction to the Dialogues, etc., Dobson's translation,
 Cambridge, 1836.

 [2822] See his work On the Apocalypse, Lecture IX. p. 198, ed.
 Philadelphia, 1852.

 [2823] Speaker's Com., ad loc.

 [2824] Vol. v. p. 217, this series.

 [2825] Works, vol. i. p. 447, ed. Paris, 1845.

 [2826] Dec. 8, 1854.

 [2827] See The Eirenicon of Dr. Pusey, ed. New York, 1866.

 Concerning Free-Will. [2828]

 ------------------------

 Orthodoxus. The old man of Ithaca, according to the legend of the
 Greeks, when he wished to hear the song of the Sirens, on account of
 the charm of their voluptuous voice, sailed to Sicily in bonds, and
 stopped up the ears of his companions; not that he grudged them the
 hearing, or desired to load himself with bonds, but because the
 consequence of those singers' music to those who heard it was death.
 For such, in the opinion of the Greeks, are the charms of the Sirens.
 Now I am not within hearing of any such song as this; nor have I any
 desire to hear the Sirens who chant men's dirges, and whose silence is
 more profitable to men than their voice; but I pray to enjoy the
 pleasure of a divine voice, which, though it be often beard, I long to
 hear again; not that I am overcome with the charm of a voluptuous
 voice, but I am being taught divine mysteries, and expect as the
 result, not death but eternal salvation. For the singers are not the
 deadly Sirens of the Greeks, but a divine choir of prophets, with whom
 there is no need to stop the ears of one's companions, nor to load
 one's-self with bonds, in fear of the penalty of hearing. For, in the
 one case, the hearer, with the entrance of the voice, ceases to live;
 in the other, the more he hears, the better life will he enjoy, being
 led onwards by a divine Spirit. Let every one come, then, and hear the
 divine song without any fear. There are not with us the Sirens from the
 shore of Sicily, nor the bonds of Ulysses, nor the wax poured melting
 into men's ears; but a loosening of all bonds, and liberty to listen to
 every one that approaches. For it is worthy of us to hear such a song
 as this; and to hear such singers as these, seems to me to be a thing
 to be prayed for. But if one wishes to hear the choir of the apostles
 as well, he will find the same harmony of song. For the others sang
 beforehand the divine plan in a mystical manner; but these sing an
 interpretation of what has been mystically announced by the former. Oh,
 concordant harmony, composed by the Divine Spirit! Oh, the comeliness
 of those who sing of the mysteries of God! Oh, that I also may join in
 these songs in my prayer. Let us then also sing the like song, and
 raise the hymn to the Holy Father, glorifying in the Spirit Jesus, who
 is in His bosom. [2829]

 Shun not, man, a spiritual hymn, nor be ill-disposed to listen to it.
 Death belongs not to it; a story of salvation is our song. Already I
 seem to taste better enjoyments, as I discourse on such subjects as
 these; and especially when there is before me such a flowering meadow,
 that is to say, our assembly of those who unite in singing and hearing
 the divine mysteries. Wherefore I dare to ask you to listen to me with
 ears free from all envy, without imitating the jealousy of Cain, [2830]
 or persecuting your brother, like Esau, [2831] or approving the
 brethren of Joseph, [2832] because they hated their brother on account
 of his words; but differing far from all these, insomuch that each of
 you is used to speak the mind of his neighbour. And, on this account,
 there is no evil jealousy among you, as ye have undertaken to supply
 your brother's deficiencies. O noble audience, and venerable company,
 and spiritual food! That I may ever have a right to share in such
 pleasures, be this my prayer!

 Valentinian. As I was walking yesterday evening, my friend, along the
 shore of the sea, and was gazing on it somewhat intently, I saw an
 extraordinary instance of divine power, and a work of art produced by
 wise science, if at least such a thing may be called a work of art. For
 as that verse of Homer [2833] says,--

 "As when two adverse winds blowing from Thrace,

 Boreas and Zephyrus, the fishy deep

 Vex sudden, all around, the sable flood

 High curled, flings forth the salt weed on the shore;"--

 So it seemed to me to have happened yesterday. For I saw waves very
 like mountain-tops, and, so to speak, reaching up to heaven itself.
 Whence I expected nothing else but that the whole land would be
 deluged, and I began to form in my mind a place of escape, and a Noah's
 ark. But it was not as I thought; for, just as the sea rose to a crest,
 it broke up again into itself, without overstepping its own limits,
 having, so to speak, a feeling of awe for a divine decree. [2834] And
 as oftentimes a servant, compelled by his master to do something
 against his will, obeys the command through fear, while he dares not
 say a word of what he suffers in his unwillingness to do it, but, full
 of rage, mutters to himself,--somewhat so it appeared to me that the
 sea, as if enraged and confining its awe within itself, kept itself
 under, as not willing to let its Master perceive its anger.

 On these occurrences I began to gaze in silence, and wished to measure
 in my mind the heaven and its sphere. I began to inquire whence it
 rises and where it sets; also what sort of motion it had--whether a
 progressive one, that is to say, one from place to place, or a
 revolving one; and, besides, how its movement is continued. And, of a
 truth, it seemed worth while to inquire also about the sun,--what is
 the manner of his being set in the heaven; also what is the orbit he
 traverses; also whither it is that, after a short time, he retires; and
 why it is that even he does not go out of his proper course: but he,
 too, as one may say, is observing a commandment of a higher power, and
 appears with us just when he is allowed to do so, and departs as if he
 were called away.

 So, as I was investigating these things, I saw that the sunshine was
 departing, and the daylight failing, and that immediately darkness came
 on; and the sun was succeeded by the moon, who, at her first rising,
 was not of full size, but after advancing in her course presented a
 larger appearance. And I did not cease inquiring about her also, but
 examined the cause of her waning and waxing, and why it is that she,
 too, observes the revolution of days; and it seemed to me from all this
 that there is a divine government and power controlling the whole,
 which we may justly call God.

 And thereupon I began to praise the Creator, as I saw the earth fast
 fixed, and living creatures in such variety, and the blossoms of plants
 with their many hues. But my mind did not rest upon these things alone;
 but thereupon I began to inquire whence they have their origin--whether
 from some source eternally co-existent with God, or from Himself alone,
 none co-existing with Him; for that He has made nothing out of that
 which has no existence appeared to me the right view to take, unless my
 reason were altogether untrustworthy. For it is the nature of things
 which come into being to derive their origin from what is already
 existing. And it seemed to me that it might be said with equal truth,
 that nothing is eternally co-existent with God distinct from Himself,
 but that whatever exists has its origin from Him, and I was persuaded
 of this also by the undeniable disposition of the elements, and by the
 orderly arrangement of nature about them.

 So, with some such thoughts of the fair order of things, I returned
 home. But on the day following, that is today, as I came I saw two
 beings of the same race--I mean men--striking and abusing one another;
 and another, again, wishing to strip his neighbour. And now some began
 to venture upon a more terrible deed; for one stripped a corpse, and
 exposed again to the light of day a body that had been once hidden in
 the earth, and treated a form like his own with such insult as to leave
 the corpse to be food for dogs; while another bared his sword, and
 attacked a man like himself. And he wanted to procure safety by flight;
 but the other ceased not from pursuing, nor would control his anger.
 And why should I say more? It is enough that he attacked him, and at
 once smote him with his sword. So the wounded man became a suppliant to
 his fellow, and spread out his hands in supplication, and was willing
 to give up his clothing, and only made a claim for life. But the other
 did not subdue his anger, nor pity his fellowman, nor would he see his
 own image in the being before him; but, like a wild beast, made
 preparations with his sword for feeding upon him. And now he was even
 putting his mouth to the body so like his own, such was the extent of
 his rage. And there was to be seen one man suffering injurious
 treatment, and another forthwith stripping him, and not even covering
 with earth the body which he denuded of clothing. But, in addition to
 these, there was another who, robbing others of their marriage rights,
 wanted to insult his neighbour's wife, and urged her to turn to
 unlawful embraces, not wishing her husband to be father to a child of
 his own.

 After that I began to believe the tragedies, and thought that the
 dinner of Thyestes had really taken place; and believed in the unlawful
 lust of Oinomaos, nor doubted of the strife in which brother drew the
 sword on brother.

 So, after beholding such things as these, I began to inquire whence
 they arise, and what is their origin, and who is the author of such
 devices against men, whence came their discovery, and who is the
 teacher of them. Now to dare to say that God was the author of these
 things was impossible; for surely it could not even be said that they
 have from Him their substance, or their existence. For how were it
 possible to entertain these thoughts of God? For He is good, and the
 Creator of what is excellent, and to Him belongs nothing bad. Nay, it
 is His nature to take no pleasure in such things; but He forbids their
 production, and rejects those who delight in them, but admits into His
 presence those who avoid them. And how could it be anything but absurd
 to call God the maker of these things of which He disapproves? For He
 would not wish them not to be, if He had first been their creator; and
 He wishes those who approach Him to be imitators of Him.

 Wherefore it seemed to me unreasonable to attribute these things to
 God, or to speak of them as having sprung from Him; though it must
 certainly be granted that it is possible for something to come into
 existence out of what has no existence, in case He made what is evil.
 For He who brought them into existence out of non-existence would not
 reduce them to the loss of it. And again, it must be said that there
 was once a time when God took pleasure in evil things, which now is not
 the case. Wherefore it seems to me impossible to say this of God. For
 it is unsuitable to His nature to attach this to Him. Wherefore it
 seemed to me that there is co-existent with Him somewhat which has the
 name of matter, from which He formed existing things, distinguishing
 between them with wise art, and arranging them in a fair order, from
 which also evil things seem to have come into being. For as this matter
 was without quality or form, and, besides this, was borne about without
 order, and was untouched by divine art, God bore no grudge against it,
 nor left it to be continually thus borne about, but began to work upon
 it, and wished to separate its best parts from its worst, and thus made
 all that it was fitting for God to make out of it; but so much of it as
 was like lees, so to speak, this being unfitted for being made into
 anything, He left as it was, since it was of no use to Him; and from
 this it seems to me that what is evil has now streamed down among men.
 This seemed to me the right view to take of these things. But, my
 friend, if you think that anything I have said is wrong, mention it,
 for I exceedingly desire to hear about these things.

 Orthodoxus. I appreciate your readiness, my friend, and applaud your
 zeal about the subject; and as for the opinion which you have expressed
 respecting existing things, to the effect that God made them out of
 some underlying substance, I do not altogether find fault with it. For,
 truly, the origin of evil is a subject that has called out opinions
 from many men. [2835] Before you and me, no doubt, there have been many
 able men who have made the most searching inquiry into the matter. And
 some of them expressed the same opinion as you did, but others again
 represented God as the creator of these things, fearing to allow the
 existence of substance as coeval with Him; while the former, from fear
 of saying that God was the author of evil, thought fit to represent
 matter as coeval with Him. [2836] And it was the fate of both of these
 to fail to speak rightly on the subject, in consequence of their fear
 of God not being in agreement with an accurate knowledge of the truth.

 But others declined to inquire about such a question at all, on the
 ground that such an inquiry is endless. As for me, however, my
 connection with you in friendship does not allow me to decline the
 subject of inquiry, especially when you announce your own purpose, that
 you are not swayed by prejudice,--although you had your opinion about
 the condition of things derived from your conjectures,--but say that
 you are confirmed in a desire of knowing the truth.

 Wherefore I will willingly turn to the discussion of the question. But
 I wish this companion of mine here to listen to our conversation.
 [2837] For, indeed, he seems to have much the same opinions about these
 things as you have, wherefore I wish that you should both have a share
 in the discussion. For whatever I should say to you, situated as you
 are, I shall say just as much to him. If, then, you are indulgent
 enough to think I speak truly on this great subject, give an answer to
 each question I ask; for the result of this will be that you will gain
 a knowledge of the truth, and I shall not carry on my discussion with
 you at random.

 Valentinian. I am ready to do as you say; and therefore be quite ready
 to ask those questions from which you think I may be able to gain an
 accurate knowledge of this important subject. For the object which I
 have set before myself is not the base one of gaining a victory, but
 that of becoming thoroughly acquainted with the truth. Wherefore apply
 yourself to the rest of the discussion.

 Orthodoxus. Well, then, I do not suppose you are ignorant that it is
 impossible for two uncreated things to exist together, although you
 seem to have expressed nearly as much as this in an earlier part of the
 conversation. Assuredly we must of necessity say one of two things:
 either that God is separate from matter, or, on the other hand, that He
 is inseparable from it. If, then, one would say that they are united,
 he will say that that which is uncreated is one only, for each of the
 things spoken of will be a part of the other; and as they are parts of
 each other, there will not be two uncreated things, but one composed of
 different elements. For we do not, because a man has different members,
 break him up into many beings. But, as the demands of reason require,
 we say that a single being, man, of many parts, has been created by
 God. So it is necessary, if God be not separate from matter, to say
 that that which is uncreated is one only; but if one shall say that He
 is separate, there must necessarily be something intermediate between
 the two, which makes their separation evident. For it is impossible to
 estimate the distance of one thing from another, unless there be
 something else with which the distance between them may be compared.
 And this holds good, not only as far as the instance before us, but
 also to any number of others. For the argument which we advanced in the
 case of two uncreated things would of necessity be of equal force, were
 the uncreated things granted to be three in number. For I should ask
 also respecting them, whether they are separate from each other, or, on
 the other hand, are united each to its neighbour. For if any one
 resolve to say that they are united, he will be told the same as
 before; if, again, that they are separate, he will not escape the
 necessary existence of that which separates them.

 If, then, any one were to say that there is a third account which might
 fitly be given of uncreated things, namely, that neither is God
 separate from matter, nor, again, are they united as part of a whole;
 but that God is locally situate in matter, and matter in God, he must
 be told as the consequence, [2838] that if we say that God is placed in
 matter, we must of necessity say that He is contained within limits,
 and circumscribed by matter. But then He must, equally with matter, be
 carried about without order. And that He rests not, nor remains by
 Himself, is a necessary result of that in which He is being carried,
 now this way, and now that. And besides this, we must say that God was
 in worse case still.

 For if matter were once without order, and He, determining to change it
 for the better, put it into order, there was a time when God was in
 that which had no order. And I might fairly ask this question also,
 whether God filled matter completely, or existed in some part of it.
 For if one resolve to say that God was in some part of matter, how far
 smaller than matter does he make Him; that is, if a part of it
 contained God altogether. But if he were to say that He is in all of
 it, and is extended through the whole of matter, he must tell us how He
 wrought upon it. For we must say that there was a sort of contraction
 of God, which being effected, He wrought upon that from which He was
 withdrawn, or else that He wrought in union with matter, without having
 a place of withdrawal. But if any one say that matter is in God, there
 is equal need of inquiry, namely, whether it is by His being separated
 from Himself, and as creatures exist in the air, by His being divided
 and parted for the reception of the beings that are in Him; or whether
 it is locally situated, that is to say, as water in land; for if we
 were to say, as in the air, we must say that God is divisible; but if,
 as water in earth,--since matter was without order and arrangement, and
 besides, contained what was evil,--we must say, that in God were to be
 found the disorderly and the evil. Now this seems to me an unbecoming
 conclusion, nay, more a dangerous one. For you wish for the existence
 of matter, that you may avoid saying that God is the author of evil;
 and, determining to avoid this, you say that He is the receptacle of
 evil.

 If, then, under the supposition that matter is separate from created
 substances, you had said that it is uncreated, I should have said much
 about it, to prove that it is impossible for it to be uncreated; but
 since you say that the question of the origin of evil is the cause of
 this supposition, it therefore seems to me right to proceed to inquire
 into this. For when it is clearly stated how evil exists, and that it
 is not possible to say that God is the cause of evil, because of matter
 being subject to Him, it seems to me to destroy such a supposition, to
 remark, that if God created the qualities which did not exist, He
 equally created the substances. [2839]

 Do you say then, that there co-exists with God matter without qualities
 out of which He formed the beginning of this world?

 Valentinian. So I think.

 Orthodoxus. If, then, matter had no qualities, and the world were
 produced by God, and qualities exist in the world, then God is the
 maker of qualities?

 Valentinian. It is so.

 Orthodoxus. Now, as I heard you say some time ago that it is impossible
 for anything to come into being out of that which has no existence,
 answer my question: Do you think that the qualities of the world were
 not produced out of any existing qualities?

 Valentinian. I do.

 Orthodoxus. And that they are something distinct from substances?

 Valentinian. Yes.

 Orthodoxus. If, then, qualities were neither made by God out of any
 ready at hand, nor derive their existence from substances, because they
 are not substances, we must say that they were produced by God out of
 what had no existence. Wherefore I thought you spoke extravagantly in
 saying that it was impossible to suppose that anything was produced by
 God out of what did not exist.

 But let our discussion of this matter stand thus. For truly we see
 among ourselves men making things out of what does not exist, although
 they seem for the most part to be making them with something. As, for
 instance, we may have an example in the case of architects; for they
 truly do not make cities out of cities, nor in like manner temples out
 of temples. [2840]

 * *
 * * * *

 But if, because substances underlie these things, you think that the
 builders make them out of what does exist, you are mistaken in your
 calculation. For it is not the substance which makes the city or the
 temples, but art applied to substance. And this art is not produced out
 of some art which lies in the substances themselves, but from that
 which is not in them.

 But you seem likely to meet me with this argument: that the artificer
 makes the art which is connected with the substance out of the art
 which he has. Now I think it is a good reply to this to say, that in
 man it is not produced from any art lying beneath; for it is not to be
 granted that substance by itself is art. For art is in the class of
 accidents, and is one of the things that have an existence only when
 they are employed about some substance. For man will exist even without
 the art of building, but it will have no existence unless man be
 previously in being. Whence we must say that it is in the nature of
 things for arts to be produced in men out of what has no existence. If,
 then, we have shown that this is so in the case of men, why was it
 improper to say that God is able to make not only qualities, but also
 substances, out of that which has no existence? For as it appears
 possible for something to be produced out of what exists not, it is
 evident that this is the case with substances. To return to the
 question of evil. Do you think evil comes under the head of substances,
 or of qualities of substances?

 Valentinian. Of qualities.

 Orthodoxus. But matter was found to be without quality or form?

 Valentinian. It was.

 Orthodoxus. Well, then, the connection of these names with substance is
 owing to its accidents. For murder is not a substance, nor is any other
 evil; but the substance receives a cognate name from putting it into
 practice. For a man is not (spoken of as) murder, but by committing it
 he receives the derived name of murderer, without being himself murder;
 and, to speak concisely, no other evil is a substance; but by
 practising any evil, it can be called evil. Similarly consider, if you
 imagine anything else to be the cause of evil to men, that it too is
 evil by reason of its acting by them, and suggesting the committal of
 evil. For a man is evil in consequence of his actions. For he is said
 to be evil, because he is the doer of evil. Now what a man does, is not
 the man himself, but his activity, and it is from his actions that he
 receives the title of evil. For if we were to say that he is that which
 he does, and he commits murders, adulteries, and such-like, he will be
 all these. Now if he is these, then when they are produced he has an
 existence, but when they are not, he too ceases to be. Now these things
 are produced by men. Men then will be the authors of them, and the
 causes of their existing or not existing. But if each man is evil in
 consequence of what he practises, and what he practises has an origin,
 he also made a beginning in evil, and evil too had a beginning. Now if
 this is the case, no one is without a beginning in evil, nor are evil
 things without an origin.

 Valentinian. Well, my friend, you seem to me to have argued
 sufficiently against the other side. For you appeared to draw right
 conclusions from the premises which we granted to the discussion. For
 truly if matter is without qualities, then God is the maker of
 qualities; and if evils are qualities, God will be the author of evils.
 But it seems to me false to say that matter is without qualities; for
 it cannot be said respecting any substance that it is without
 qualities. But indeed, in the very act of saying that it is without
 qualities, you declare that it has a quality, by describing the
 character of matter, which is a kind of quality. Therefore, if you
 please, begin the discussion from the beginning; for it seems to me
 that matter never began to have qualities. For such being the case, I
 assert, my friend, that evil arises from its emanation.

 Orthodoxus. If matter were possessed of qualities from eternity, of
 what will God be the creator? For if we say substances, we speak of
 them as pre-existing; if, again, we say qualities, these too are
 declared to have an existence. Since, then, both substances and
 qualities exist, it seems to me superfluous to call God a creator. But
 answer me a question. In what way do you say that God was a creator?
 Was it by changing the existence of those substances into
 non-existence, or by changing the qualities while He preserved the
 substances?

 Valentinian. I think that there was no change of the substances, but
 only of the qualities; and in respect to these we call God a creator.
 And just as if one might chance to say that a house was made of stones,
 it cannot be said of them that they do not still continue stones in
 substance, because they are called a house; for I affirm that the house
 is made by the quality of construction. So I think that God, while
 substance remained, produced a change of its qualities, by reason of
 which I say that this world was made by God.

 Orthodoxus. Do you think, too, that evil is among the qualities of
 substances?

 Valentinian. I do.

 Orthodoxus. And were these qualities in matter from the first, or had
 they a beginning?

 Valentinian. I say that these qualities were eternally co-existent with
 matter.

 Orthodoxus. But do you not say that God has made a change in the
 qualities?

 Valentinian. I do say this.

 Orthodoxus. For the better?

 Valentinian. I think so.

 Orthodoxus. If, then, evil is among the qualities of matter, and its
 qualities were changed by God for the better, the inquiry must be made
 whence evil arose. For either all of them, being evil, underwent a
 change for the better, or some of them being evil, and some not, the
 evil ones were not changed for the better; but the rest, as far as they
 were found superior, were changed by God for the sake of order.

 Valentinian. That is the opinion I held from the beginning.

 Orthodoxus. How, then, do you say it was that He left the qualities of
 evil as they were? Was it that He was able to do away with them, or
 that, though He wished to do so, He was unable? For if you say that He
 was able, but disinclined to do so, He must be the author of these
 things; because, while He had power to bring evil to an end, He allowed
 it to remain as it was, especially when He had begun to work upon
 matter. For if He had had nothing at all to do with matter, He would
 not have been the author of what He allowed to remain. But since He
 works upon a part of it, and leaves a part of it to itself, while He
 has power to change it for the better, I think He is the author of
 evil, since He left part of matter in its vileness. He wrought then for
 the ruin of a part; and, in this respect, it seems to me that this part
 was chiefly injured by His arranging it in matter, so that it became
 partaker of evil. For before matter was put in order, it was without
 the perception of evil; but now each of its parts has the capacity of
 perceiving evil. Now, take an example in the case of man. Previously to
 becoming a living creature, he was insensible to evil; but from the
 time when he is fashioned by God into the form of man, he gains the
 perception of approaching evil. So this act of God, which you say was
 done for the benefit of matter, is found to have happened to it rather
 for the worse. But if you say that God was not able to stop evil, does
 the impossibility result from His being naturally weak, or from His
 being overcome by fear, and in subjection to some more powerful being?
 See which of these you would like to attribute to the almighty and good
 God. But, again, answer me about matter. Is matter simple or compound?
 For if matter be simple and uniform, and the universe compound, and
 composed of different substances, it is impossible to say that it is
 made of matter, because compound things cannot be composed of one pure
 and simple ingredient. For composition indicates the mixture of several
 simple things. But if, on the other hand, you say that matter is
 compound, it has been entirely composed of simple elements, and they
 were once each separately simple, and by their composition matter was
 produced; for compound things derive their composition from simple
 things. So there was once a time when matter did not exist--that is to
 say, before the combination of the simple elements. But if there was
 once a time when matter did not exist, and there was never a time when
 what is uncreated did not exist, then matter is not uncreated. And from
 this it follows that there are many things which are uncreated. For if
 God were uncreated, and the simple elements of which matter was
 composed were uncreated, the number of the uncreated would be more than
 two. But to omit inquiring what are the simple elements, matter or
 form--for this would be followed by many absurdities--let me ask, do
 you think that nothing that exists is contrary to itself?

 Valentinian. I do.

 Orthodoxus. Yet water is contrary to fire, and darkness to light, and
 heat to cold, and moisture to dryness.

 Valentinian. I think it is.

 Orthodoxus. If, then, nothing that exists is contrary to itself, and
 these are contrary to one another, they will not be one and the same
 matter--no, nor formed from one and the same matter. But, again, I wish
 to ask, do you think that the parts of a thing are not destructive of
 one another?

 Valentinian. I do.

 Orthodoxus. And that fire and water, and the rest likewise, are parts
 of matter?

 Valentinian. I hold them to be so.

 Orthodoxus. Why, then, do you not think that water is destructive of
 fire, and light of darkness, and so on with the rest?

 Valentinian. I do.

 Orthodoxus. Then, if parts of a thing are not destructive of one
 another, and these are found to be so, they will not be parts of the
 same thing. But if they are not parts of the same thing, they will not
 be parts of one and the same matter. And, indeed, they will not be
 matter either, because nothing that exists is destructive of itself.
 And this being the case with the contraries, it is shown that they are
 not matter. This is enough on the subject of matter.

 Now we must come to the examination of evils, and must necessarily
 inquire into the evils among men. As to these, are they forms of the
 principle of evil, or parts of it? If forms, evil will not have a
 separate existence distinct from them, because the species are to be
 sought for in the forms, and underlie them. But if this is the case,
 evil has an origin. For its forms are shown to have an origin--such as
 murder, and adultery, and the like. But if you will have them to be
 parts of some principle of evil, and they have an origin, it also must
 have an origin. For those things whose parts have an origin, are of
 necessity originated likewise. For the whole consists of parts. And the
 whole will not exist if the parts do not, though there may be some
 parts, even if the whole be not there.

 Now there is nothing existing of which one part is originated, and
 another part not. But if I were even to grant this, then there was a
 time when evil was not complete, namely, before matter was wrought by
 God. And it attains completeness when man is produced by God; for man
 is the maker of the parts of evil. And from this it follows that the
 cause of evil being complete, is God the Creator, which it is impious
 to say. But if you say that evil is neither of the things supposed, but
 is the doing of something evil, you declare that it has an origin. For
 the doing of a thing makes the beginning of its existence. And besides
 this, you have nothing further to pronounce evil. For what other action
 have you to point out as such, except what happens among men? Now, it
 has been already shown that he who acts is not evil according to his
 being, but in accordance with his evil doing.

 Because there is nothing evil by nature, but it is by use that evil
 things become such. So I say, says he, that man was made with a
 free-will, not as if there were already evil in existence, which he had
 the power of choosing if he wished, but on account of his capacity of
 obeying or disobeying God.

 For this was the meaning of the gift of Free Will. And man after his
 creation receives a commandment from God; and from this at once rises
 evil, for he does not obey the divine command; and this alone is evil,
 namely, disobedience, which had a beginning.

 * *
 * * * *

 For man [2841] received power, and enslaved himself, not because he was
 overpowered by the irresistible tendencies of his nature, nor because
 the capacity with which he was gifted deprived him of what was better
 for him; for it was for the sake of this that I say he was endowed with
 it (but he received the power above mentioned), in order that he may
 obtain an addition to what he already possesses, which accrues to him
 from the Superior Being in consequence of his obedience, and is
 demanded as a debt from his Maker. For I say that man was made not for
 destruction, but for better things. For if he were made as any of the
 elements, or those things which render a similar service to God, he
 would cease to receive a reward befitting deliberate choice, and would
 be like an instrument of the maker; and it would be unreasonable for
 him to suffer blame for his wrong-doings, for the real author of them
 is the one by whom he is used. But man did not understand better
 things, since he did not know the author (of his existence), but only
 the object for which he was made. I say therefore that God, purposing
 thus to honour man, and to grant him an understanding of better things,
 has given him the power of being able to do what he wishes, and
 commends the employment of his power for better things; not that He
 deprives him again of free-will, but wishes to point out the better
 way. For the power is present with him, and he receives the
 commandment; but God exhorts him to turn his power of choice to better
 things. For as a father exhorts his son, who has power to learn his
 lessons, to give more attention to them inasmuch as, while he points
 out this as the better course, he does not deprive his son of the power
 which he possessed, even if he be not inclined to learn willingly; so I
 do not think that God, while He urges on man to obey His commands,
 deprives him of the power of purposing and withholding obedience. For
 He points out the cause of His giving this advice, in that He does not
 deprive him of the power. But He gives commands, in order that man may
 be able to enjoy better things. For this is the consequence of obeying
 the commands of God. So that He does not give commands in order to take
 away the power which He has given, but in order that a better gift may
 be bestowed, as to one worthy of attaining greater things, in return
 for his having rendered obedience to God, while he had power to
 withhold it. I say that man was made with free-will, not as if there
 were already existing some evil, which he had the power of choosing if
 he wished,...but that the power of obeying and disobeying God is the
 only cause. [2842]

 For this was the object to be obtained by free-will. And man after his
 creation receives a commandment from God, and from this at once rises
 evil; for he does not obey the divine command, and this alone is evil,
 namely, disobedience, which had a beginning. For no one has it in his
 power to say that it is without an origin, when its author had an
 origin. But you will be sure to ask whence arose this disobedience. It
 is clearly recorded in Holy Scripture, by which I am enabled to say
 that man was not made by God in this condition, but that he has come to
 it by some teaching. For man did not receive such a nature as this. For
 if it were the case that his nature was such, this would not have come
 upon him by teaching. Now one says in Holy Writ, that "man has learnt
 (evil)." [2843] I say, then, that disobedience to God is taught. For
 this alone is evil which is produced in opposition to the purpose of
 God, for man would not learn evil by itself. He, then, who teaches evil
 is the Serpent.

 * *
 * * * *

 For my part, I said that the beginning of evil was envy, and that it
 arose from man's being distinguished by God with higher honour. Now
 evil is disobedience to the commandment of God.

 [2828] [This debate between Orthodoxus and a Valentinian reminds us of
 the Octavius of Minucius Felix, vol. iv.]

 [2829] John i. 18.

 [2830] Gen. iv. 5.

 [2831] Gen. xxvii. 41.

 [2832] Gen. xxxvii. 4.

 [2833] Iliad, ix. 4, H. (Cowper's Tr.).

 [2834] Job xxxviii. 11.

 [2835] [See the essay of Archbishop King On the Origin of Evil, ed.
 Cambridge, 1739. Law's annotations in this edition are valuable. See
 also Dr. Bledsoe, Theodicy, and Elucidation VIII. p. 522, vol. ii, this
 series. Of Leibnitz (refuting Bayle), no need to speak here. Comp.
 Addison, Spectator, Nos. 237 and 519; also Parnell's Hermit; also Jer.
 xii. 1.]

 [2836] The reader will here naturally think of the great and
 long-continued Manichæan controversy.--Tr.

 [2837] [See Routh, R. S., tom. ii. p. 98, and note p. 115, and all
 Routh's notes on Maximus, the original of Methodius, of whom see
 Eusebius, H. E., book v. cap. 27.]

 [2838] Jahn's reading is here followed.

 [2839] The text is here in an uncertain state. Cf. Migne and Jahn.

 [2840] Imperfect. The rest from the Bibliotheca of Photius.

 [2841] The whole of this work, as preserved, is in a very fragmentary
 state. We have followed Migne in general, as his edition is most widely
 known, and but little is gained by adopting Jahn's, which is somewhat
 more complete.--Tr.

 [2842] Of the bestowal of free-will.

 [2843] Jer. xiii. 23.
