Crime and Custom in Savage Society (Bronislaw Malinowski, 1926)
==========================================================
The founding text of legal anthropology: law without courts in the Trobriands. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (bronislaw-malinowski-crime-and-custom-in-savage-society-1922).

Tar
bt ans Li)


fee Hen ar eee


tn, Sint de -2
A ES
x


q e e


" ABSDEDO hee


A IMU


VO AYVy8N 3031100 ALINNWWOO 3


DATE DUE


| Bez


| Mal Malinowski
| Crime and custom in savage
society


Glendale College
Library


Kahle/Austin Foundation


Crime and Custom
in Savage Society


SCAR’


By
BRONISLAW MALINOWSKI, D.Sc.


Author of Argonauts of the Western Pacific
and Sexual Life of Savages


LONDON
ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL, LTD.
BROADWAY HOUSE: 68-74 CARTER LANE, E.C.4


First Published 1926
Second Impression 1932


Third z 1940
Fourth FR 1947
Fifth s 1949
Sixth 5 1951
Seventh 5 1961


eee A ZA
Printed in Great Britain by
Lowe & Brydone (Printers) Ltd., London


To
SIR RICHARD GREGORY, D.Se.
Editor of Nature


TT.


CONTENTS


Preface
Introduction


PART I
PRIMITIVE LAW AND ORDER


The Automatic Submission to Custom
and the Real Problem
Melanesian Economics and the Theory
of Primitive Communism. :
The Binding Force of Economic
Obligations ; ; :
Reciprocity and Dual Organization
Law, Self-interest, and Social Ambition
The Rules of Law in Religious Acts
The Law of Marriage :
The Principle of  Give-and-take
Pervading Tribal Life ;
Reciprocity as the Basis of Social
Structure
The Rules of Ci Defined and
Classified
An Anthropological Definition of Law
Specific Legal Arrangements
Conclusion and Forecast


PAGE


viii CONTENTS


PART II
PRIMITIVE CRIME AND ITS PUNISHMENT
PAGE
I. The Law in Breach and the Restoration
of Order ; : : 3 - oa


—


I. Sorcery and Suicide as Legal Influences 85
III. Systems of Law in Conflict 3 . 100
IV. The Factors of Social Cohesion in a

Primitive Tribe . h ; . ae


Index . A A E 2 3 : . I30


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


PLATE
Y, Fishing Canoes on the Lagoon . Front.
II. Bundles of Fish taken over from the
Fishermen by the Inland Natives . 22
III. Obligatory Display of Grief in Ritual
Wailing : : ; : - 34
IV. Ceremonial Offering of Yams, carried
in specially made wooden measures. 58


V. A Conical Heap of Yams is put up in
front of a Chief's Storehouse by his
wife's relations : : : . 70
VI. A ceremonial act of the Kula before the
Chief’s personal hut at Omarakana.
The Ethnographer's tent in the
background . z ; : . I4


PREFACE


a modern anthropological explorer, who goes
into the field fully trained in theory, charged
with problems, interests, and maybe preconceptions,
is neither able nor well-advised to keep his observa-
tions within the limits of concrete facts and detailed
data. He is bound to receive illumination on matters
of principle, to solve some of his fundamental
difficulties, to settle many moot points as regards
general perspective. He is bound, for example, to
arrive at some conclusions as to whether the primitive
mind differs from our own or is essentially similar ;
whether the savage lives constantly in a world of
supernatural powers and perils, or on the contrary,
has his lucid intervals as often as any one of us;
whether clan-solidarity is such an overwhelming
and universal force, or whether the heathen
can be as self-seeking and self-interested as any
Christian.
In the writing up of his results the modern
anthropologist is naturally tempted to add his wider,
somewhat diffused and intangible experiences to his


x PREFACE


descriptions of definite fact; to present the details
of custom, belief, and organization against the back-
ground of a general theory of primitive culture. This
little book is the outcome of a field worker’s yielding
to such temptation. In extenuation of this lapse—
if lapse it be—I should like to urge the great need
for more theory in anthropological jurisprudence,
especially theory born from actual contact with
savages. I should also point out that in this work
reflections and generalizations stand out clearly from
the descriptive paragraphs. Last, not least, I should
like to claim that my theory is not made of conjecture
or hypothetical reconstruction but is simply an
attempt at formulating the problem, at introducing
precise concepts and clear definitions into the
subject.

The circumstances under which this thesis came into
being have also contributed towards its present form.
The material was first prepared and the conclusions -
framed in response to an invitation from the Royal
Institution of Great Britain, before which a paper
was read (on the “Forces of Law and Order in
a Primitive Community ”) on Friday evening,
13th February, 1925. As often happens, 1 found
myselí with more material on my hands and many
more conclusions framed than could be included in
an hour's address. Some of these I have had the


privilege of publishing in Nature (see Supplement,


PREFACE xi


6th February, 1926, and article, 15th August,
1925). The full version is contained in this little
book.

I wish to express my thanks to the Council of the
Royal Institution for the kind loan of blocks and the
permission to reproduce them. To Sir Richard
Gregory, the Editor of Nature, I am indebted for
allowing me to reprint the articles mentioned. I
owe him much, moreover, for the help and encourage-
ment I received from him in my earlier work.

In the preparation of this volume I received
competent assistance from Mr. Raymond Firth, who is
carrying on research work at the London School of
Economics in the Department of Ethnology. I was
able to secure his help through a grant from the Laura
Spelman Rockefeller Memorial. The Board of this
institution bas of late devoted some special attention
to the furtherance of anthropology, as a part of its
interest in the development of the social sciences.
The study of the rapidly vanishing savage races is
one of those duties of civilization—now actively
engaged in the destruction of primitive life—which
so far has been lamentably neglected. The task is
not only of high scientific and cultural importance,
but also not devoid of considerable practical value,
in that it can help the white man to govern, exploit,


í


and “improve” the native with less pernicious


results to the latter.


xii PREFACE


The Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial, through
its enlightened interest in anthropology as a branch
of the social studies, will earn a deep gratitude from
present and future humanists in erecting a lasting
monument to the noble woman in whose memory it


has been founded.
B. M.


New YORK CITY.
March, 1926.


INTRODUCTION


NTHROPOLOGY is still to most laymen and to
many specialists mainly an object of antiquarian
interest. Savagery is still synonymous with absurd,
cruel, and eccentric customs, with quaint superstitions
and revolting practices. Sexual licence, infanticide,
head-hunting, couvade, cannibalism and what not,
have made anthropology attractive reading to many,
a subject of curiosity rather than of serious scholar-
ship to others. There are, however, certain aspects of
anthropology which are of a genuine scientific character,
in that they do not lead us beyond empirical fact into
realms of uncontrollable conjecture, in that they widen
our knowledge of human nature, and are capable of
a direct practical application. I mean such a subject,
for example, as primitive economics, important for our
knowledge of man’s economic disposition and of value
to those who wish to develop the resources of tropical
countries, employ indigenous labour and trade with
the natives. Or again, a subject such as the com-
parative study of the mental processes of savages, a
line of research which has already proved fertile to
psychology and might be made useful to those engaged
in educating or morally improving the native. Last, but


2 INTRODUCTION


not least, there is the subject of primitive law, the
study of the various forces which make for order,
uniformity and cohesion in a savage tribe. The know-
ledge of these forces should have formed the foundation
of anthropological theories of primitive organization
and should have yielded the guiding principles of
Colonial legislation and administration. A fuller
knowledge of the so-called savages has revealed “ Ye


tJ


beastly devices of Ye heathen ” as the product of firm
law and of strict tradition, due to biological, mental
and social needs of human nature, rather than as the
outcome of unbridled passion and unfettered excess.
Law and order pervade the tribal usages of primitive
races, they govern all the humdrum course of daily
existence, as well as the leading acts of public
life, whether these be quaint and sensational or
important and venerable. Yet of all branches of
anthropology, primitive jurisprudence has received
in recent times the scantiest and the least satisfactory `
treatment.

Anthropology has not always been so indifferent
about savage justice and the methods of its adminis-
tration as it is at present. About half a century ago
there was a positive epidemic of research into primitive
law, especially on the Continent, more particularly in
Germany. It is enough to mention the names of
Bachofen, Post, Bernhéft, Kohler and the other


writers grouped round the Zeitschrift für vergleichende


INTRODUCTION 3


Rechtswissenschaft to remind the sociologist of the scope,
volume and quality of the work done by them. This
work, however, was heavily handicapped. The writers
had to rely upon the data of the early amateur
ethnographers—modern field-work of the trained
specialist, done with method, purpose and knowledge
of the problems, was at that time not yet in existence.
In an abstract and complex subject such as primitive
law, amateur observations are on the whole useless.

The early German students of savage law again were
all and one committed to the hypothesis of ‘ primitive
promiscuity’ and ‘ group-marriage’, just as their
British contemporary, Sir Henry Maine, was
handicapped by his too narrow adhesion to the
patriarchal scheme. Most of these continental efforts in
anthropological jurisprudence were directed to—in
fact, wasted upon—the task of proving that Morgan’s
theories were correct. The myth of * group-marriage ’
was casting its shadow on all their arguments and
descriptions and it infected their juridical constructions
with the kindred concepts of ‘ group-responsibility ’,
‘ group-justice ’, ‘ group-property *, and * communism ’,
in short, with the dogma of the absence of individual
rights and liabilities among savages.

Underlying all these ideas was the assumption that
in primitive societies the individual is completely
dominated by the group—the horde, the clan or the


tribe—that he obeys the commands of his community,


4 INTRODUCTION


its traditions, its public opinion, its decrees, with a
slavish, fascinated, passive obedience. This assumption,
which gives the leading tone to certain modern dis-
cussions upon the mentality and sociality of savages,
still survives in the French school of Durkheim, in
most American and German works and in some
English writings.

Thus handicapped by insufficient material and base-
less assumptions, the early school of anthropological
jurisprudence was driven into an impasse of artificial
and sterile constructions. In consequence it proved
incapable of real vitality, and the whole interest in the
subject heavily slumped—in fact, almost entirely
subsided—-after its first short-lived boom. One or two
important books on the subject appeared—Steinmetz’s
inquiries into the beginnings of punishment,
Durkheim’s analysis of early criminal and civil law—
but, on the whole, the first impetus has proved so little
inspiring that most modern anthropologists, both in |
theory and in field-work, ignore its very existence.
In the standard manual Notes and Queries on
Anthropology, ‘law’ appears neither in the index
nor in the table of contents, and the few lines devoted
to it under the heading of ‘‘ Government : Politics ”,
excellent as they are, do not correspond in any way to
the importance of the subject. In the book of the late
Dr. Rivers on Social Organization the problem of
primitive law is discussed only incidentally, and, as we


INTRODUCTION 5


shall see, it is rather banished from primitive sociology
than included in it by the author’s brief reference.
This lacuna in modern anthropology is due, not to
any oversight of primitive legality, but on the contrary
to its over-emphasis. Paradoxical as it sounds, it is
yet true that present-day anthropology neglects
primitive law just because it has an exaggerated, and
I will add at once, a mistaken idea of its perfection.


PART I


PRIMITIVE LAW AND ORDER


I


THE AUTOMATIC SUBMISSION TO CUSTOM
AND THE REAL PROBLEM


Wy) MeN we come to inquire why rules of conduct,
however hard, irksome, or unwelcome, are
obeyed; what makes private life, economic co-
operation, public events run so smoothly ; of what, in
short, consist the forces of law and order in savagery—
the answer is not easy to give, and what anthropology
has had to say about it is far from satisfactory. So
long as it could be maintained that the ‘savage’ is
really savage, that he follows what little law he has
but fitfully and loosely, the problem did not exist.
When the question became actual, when it became plain
that hypertrophy of rules rather than lawlessness is
characteristic of primitive life, scientific opinion
veered round to the opposite point. the savage
was made not only into a model of the law-abiding
citizen, but it became an axiom that in submitting
to all his tribal rules and fetters, he follows the
natural trend of his spontaneous impulses; that in
this way he glides, so to speak, along the line of least
resistance.
The savage—so runs to-day’s verdict of competent


GLENDALE COLLEGE LIBRAR


IO CRIME AND CUSTOM


anthropologists—has a deep reverence for tradition and
custom, an automatic submission to their biddings.
He obeys them ‘slavishly’, ‘unwittingly ’,
‘ spontaneously ’, through ‘ mental inertia’, combined
with the fear of public opinion or of supernatural
punishment ; or again through a ‘pervading group-
sentiment if not group-instinct’. Thus we find the
following in a recent book: “ The savage is far from
being the free and unfettered creature of Rousseau’s
imagination. On the contrary, he is hemmed in on
every side by the customs of his people, he is bound
in the chains of immemorial tradition not merely in
his social relations, but in his religion, his medicine,
in his industry, his art: in short, every aspect of his
life” (E. Sidney Hartland in Primitive Law, p. 138).
With all this we might agree, except that it seems
doubtful whether the “chains of tradition” are
identical or even similar in art and in social relations,
in industry, and in religion. But when, immediately,
we are told that “ these fetters are accepted by him
(the savage) as a matter of course; he never seeks to
break forth ”—we must enter a protest. Is it not
contrary to human nature to accept any constraint
as a matter of course, and does man, whether civilized
or Savage, ever carry out unpleasant, burdensome, cruel
regulations and taboos without being compelled to ?


And compelled by some force or motive which he cannot
resist ?


LAW AND ORDER EL


Yet this automatic acquiescence, this instinctive
submission of every member of the tribe to its laws, is
the fundamental axiom laid at the basis of the inquiry
into primitive order and adherence to rule. Thus
another foremost authority on the subject, the late
Dr. Rivers, speaks in the book already mentioned of
an “ unwitting or intuitive method of regulating social


€


life ’’, which is, according to him, “ closely connected
with primitive communism.” And he proceeds to tell
us: “ Among such a people as the Melanesians there
is a group sentiment which makes unnecessary any
definite social machinery for the exertion of authority,
in just the same manner as it makes possible the
harmonious working of communal ownership, and
insures the peaceful character of a communistic system
of sexual relations ” (Social Organization, p. 169).

Thus here again we are assured that ‘ unwitting’
or ‘intuitive methods’, ‘instinctive submission’ and
some mysterious ‘ group-sentiment’ account for law,
order, communism and sexual promiscuity alike!
This sounds altogether like a Bolshevik paradise, but
is certainly not correct in reference to Melanesian
societies, which I know at first hand.

A similar idea is expressed by a third writer, a
sociologist, who has contributed more towards our
understanding of the organization of savages from the
point of view of mental and social evolution than
perhaps any one living anthropologist. Professor


12 CRIME AND CUSTOM


Hobhouse, speaking of the tribes on a very low level


of culture, affirms that ‘‘ such societies, of course,
have their customs, which are doubtless felt as
binding by their members, but if we mean by law a
body of rules enforced by an authority independent
of personal ties of kinship and friendship, such
an institution is not compatible with their social
organization ” (Morals in Evolution, 1915, p. 73). Here
we have to question the phrase “felt as binding ”
and ask whether it does not cover and hide the real
problem instead of solving it. Is there not, with regard
to some rules at least, a binding mechanism, not
perhaps enforced by any central authority, but backed
up by real motives, interests and complex sentiments ?
Can severe prohibitions, onerous duties, very burden-
some and galling liabilities, be made binding by a mere
‘feeling’? We should like to know more about
this invaluable mental attitude, but the author
simply takes it for granted. Again, the minimum
definition of law as the “ body of rules enforced by an
authority independent of personal ties ”, seems to me
to be too narrow and not to lay the emphasis on the
relevant elements. There are among the many norms
of conduct in savage societies certain rules regarded
as compulsory obligations of one individual or group
towards another individual or group. The fulfilment
of such obligations is usually rewarded according to


the measure of its perfection, while non-compliance is


LAW AND ORDER 13


«visited upon the remiss agent. Taking our stand upon
such a comprehensive view of law and inquiring
into the nature of the forces which make it obligatory,
we shall be able to arrive at much more satisfactory
results than if we were to discuss questions of authority,
government and punishment.

To take another representative opinion, that of one
of the highest anthropological authorities in the United
States, we find Dr. Lowie expressing a very similar
view: “Generally speaking, the unwritten laws of
customary usage are obeyed far more willingly than
our written codes, or rather they are obeyed
spontaneously.”* To compare the ‘willingness’ in
obedience to law of an Australian savage with a New
Yorker, or of a Melanesian with a nonconformist
citizen of Glasgow, is a perilous proceeding and its
results have to be taken very “generally” indeed,
until they lose all meaning. The fact is that no society
can work in an efficient manner unless laws are obeyed
‘willingly’ and ‘spontaneously’. The threat of
coercion and the fear of punishment do not touch the
average man, whether ‘ savage’ or ‘ civilized’, while,
on the other hand, they are indispensable with regard
to certain turbulent or criminal elements in either
society. Again, there is a number of laws, taboos and
obligations in every human culture which weigh heavily
on every citizen, demand great self-sacrifice, and are


1 Primitive Society, Chap. on “* Justice ”, p. 387, English edition.


14 CRIME AND CUSTOM


obeyed for moral, sentimental or matter-of-fact
reasons, but without any ‘ spontaneity ’.

It would be easy to multiply statements and to
show that the dogma of the automatic submission to
custom dominates the whole inquiry into primitive law.
In all fairness, however, it must be stresséd that any
shortcomings in theory or observation are due to the
real difficulties and pitfalls of which this subject is
so full.

The extreme difficulty of the problem lies, I think,
in the very complex and diffuse nature of the forces
which constitute primitive law. Accustomed as we
are to look for a definite machinery of enactment,
administration, and enforcement of law, we cast round
for something analogous in a savage community and,
failing to find there any similar arrangements, we
conclude that all law is obeyed by this mysterious
propensity of the savage to obey it.

Anthropology seems here to be faced by a similar
difficulty as the one overcome by Tylor in his
“minimum definition of religion ”. By defining the
forces of law in terms of central authority, codes,
courts, and constables, we must come to the conclusion
that law needs no enforcement in a primitive com-
munity and is followed spontaneously. That the savage
does break the law sometimes, though rarely and
occasionally, has been recorded by observers and taken
into account by builders of anthropological theory, who


LAW AND ORDER 15


have always maintained that criminal law is the only
law of savages. But that his observance of the rules of
law under the normal conditions, when it is followed
and not defied, is at best partial, conditional, and
subject to evasions; that it is not enforced by any
wholesale motive like fear of punishment, or a general
submission to all tradition, but by very complex
psychological and social inducements—all this is a
state of affairs which modern anthropology has so
far completely overlooked. In the following account
I shall try to establish it for one ethnographic province,
north-west Melanesia, and 1 shall show reasons why
observations of similar nature to those carried out by
myself should be extended to other societies in order
to give us some idea about their legal conditions.

We shall approach our facts with a very elastic and
wide conception of the problem before us. In looking
for “law” and legal forces, we shall try merely to
discover and analyse all the rules conceived and acted
upon as binding obligations, to find out the nature of
the binding forces, and to classify the rules according to
the manner in which they are made valid. We shall see
that by an inductive examination of facts, carried
out without any preconceived idea or ready-made
definition, we shall be enabled to arrive at a satis-
factory classification of the norms and rules of a
primitive community, at a clear distinction of primitive
law from other forms of custom, and at a new, dynamic


16 CRIME AND CUSTOM


conception of the social organization of savages. Since
the facts of primitive law described in this article have
been recorded in Melanesia, the classical area of
‘communism’ and ‘promiscuity’, of ‘ group-
sentiment’, ‘clan-solidarity’, and ‘spontaneous
obedience’, the conclusions we shall be able
to draw—which will dispose of these catch-words
and all they stand for—may be of special interest.


II


MELANESIAN ECONOMICS AND THE THEORY
OF PRIMITIVE COMMUNISM


me Trobriand Archipelago, which is inhabited by
the Melanesian community referred to, lies to the
north-east of New Guinea and consists of a group of flat
coral islands, surrounding a wide lagoon. The plains of
the land are covered with fertile soil and the lagoon
teems with fish, while both afford easy means of inter-
communication to the inhabitants. Accordingly, the
islands support a dense population mainly engaged in
agriculture and fishing, but expert also in various arts
and crafts and keen on trade and exchange.
a Like all coral islanders, they spend a great deal of
their time on the central lagoon. On a calm day it is
alive with canoes carrying people or produce, or engaged
in one of their manifold systems of fishing. A super-
ficial acquaintance with these pursuits might leave one
with an impression of arbitrary disorder, anarchy, com-
plete lack of system. Patient and painstaking observa-
tions would soon reveal, however, not only that the
natives have definite technical systems of catching
fish and complex economic arrangements, but also that


18 CRIME AND CUSTOM


they have a close organization in their working teams,
and a fixed division of social functions.

Thus, within each canoe it would be found that there
is one man who is its rightful owner, while the rest act as
a crew. | All these men, who as a rule belong to the
same sub-clan, are bound to each other and to their
fellow-villagers by mutual obligations ; when the whole
community go out fishing, the owner cannot refuse his
canoe. He must go out himself or let some one else
do it instead. The crew are equally under an obliga-
tion to him. For reasons which will presently become
clear, each man must fill his place and stand by his
task. Each man also receives his fair share in the
distribution of the catch as an equivalent of his service.
Thus the ownership and use of the canoe consist of
a Series of definite obligations and duties uniting a group
of people into a working team.

What makes the conditions even more complex is
that the owners and the members of the crew are |
entitled to surrender their privileges to any one of their
relatives and friends. This is often done, but always
for a consideration, for a repayment. To an observer
who does not grasp all the details, and does not follow
all the intricacies of each transaction, such a state of
affairs looks very much like communism: the canoe
appears to be owned jointly by a group and used indis-
criminately by the whole community.

Dr. Rivers in fact tells us that ‘ one of the objects of


LAW AND ORDER 19


Melanesian culture which is usually, if not always, the
subject of common ownership is the canoe’’, and further
on, in reference to this statement, he speaks about “ the
great extent to which communistic sentiments concern-
ing property dominate the people of Melanesia”
(Social Organization, pp. 106 and 107). In another
work, the same writer speaks about “ the socialistic or
even communistic behaviour of such societies as those
of Melanesia” (Psychology and Politics, pp. 86
and 87). Nothing could be more mistaken than such
generalizations. There is a strict distinction and
definition in the rights of every one and this makes
ownership anything but communistic. We have in
Melanesia a compound and complex system of holding
property, which in no way partakes of the nature
of ‘socialism’ or ‘communism’. A modern joint-
stock company might just as well be called a
* communistic enterprise’. As a matter of fact, any
descriptions of a savage institution in terms such as
‘communism’, ‘capitalism’ or ‘joint-stock company’,
borrowed from present-day economic conditions or
political controversy, cannot but be misleading.
The only correct proceeding is to describe the legal
state of affairs in terms of concrete fact. Thus, the
ownership of a Trobriand fishing canoe is defined by
the manner in which the object is made, used and
regarded by the group of men who produced
it and enjoy its possession. The master of the


20 CRIME AND CUSTOM


canoe, who acts at the same time as the head of the team
and as the fishing magician of the canoe, has first of all
to finance the building of a new craft, when the old one
is worn out, and he has to maintain it in good repair,
helped in this by the rest of his crew. In this they
remain under mutual obligations to one another to
appear each at his post, while every canoe is bound to
come when a communal fishing has been arranged.

In using the craft, every joint owner has a right to
a certain place in it and to certain duties, privileges, and
benefits associated with it. He has his post in the
canoe, he has his task to perform, and enjoys the corre-
sponding title, either of ‘master’ or ‘ steersman ”, or
“keeper of the nets’, or ‘watcher for fish’. His
position and title are determined by the combined
action of rank, age, and personal ability. Each canoe
also has its place in the fleet and its part to play in the
manceuvres of joint fishing. Thus on a close inquiry
we discover in this pursuit a definite system of division
of functions and a rigid system of mutual obligations,
into which a sense of duty and the recognition of the
need of co-operation enter side by side with a realiza-
tion of self-interest, privileges and benefits. Owner-
ship, therefore, can be defined neither by such words as
“communism ’ nor ‘individualism’, nor by reference
to ‘joint-stock company’ system or ‘ personal enter-
prise ’, but by the concrete facts and conditions of use.


It is the sum of duties, privileges and mutualities


LAWOAND ORDER ar


which bind the joint owners to the object and to each
. Other.

Thus, in connexion with the first object which
attracted our attention—the native canoe—we are met
by law, order, definite privileges and a well-developed
system of obligations.


II


THE BINDING FORCE OF ECONOMIC
OBLIGATIONS


O enter more deeply into the nature of these bind-
ing obligations, let us follow the fishermen to the
shore. Let us see what happens with the division of the
catch. In most cases only a small proportion of it
remains with the villagers. As a rule we should find a
number of people from some inland community waiting
on the shore. They receive the bundles of fish from the
fishermen and carry them home, often many miles
away, running so as to arrive while it is still fresh.
Here again we should find a system of mutual services
and obligations based on a standing arrangement
between two village communities. The inland village _
supplies the fishermen with vegetables: the coastal
community repays with fish. This arrangement is
primarily an economic one. It has also a ceremonial
aspect, for the exchange has to be done according to an
elaborate ritual. But there is also the legal side, a
system of mutual obligations which forces the fisher-
man to repay whenever he has received a gift from his
inland partner, and vice versa. Neither partner can


refuse, neither may stint in his return gift, neither
should delay.


Plat. IT,


Mo Ñ ahi
Ml o Y A


of Fish taken ove


Bundles


LAW AND ORDER 23


What is the motive force behind these obligations ?
The coastal and inland villages respectively have to
reply upon each other for the supply of food. On the
coast the natives never have enough vegetable food,
while inland the people are always in need of fish.
Moreover, custom will have it that on the coast all
the big ceremonial displays and distributions of food,
which form an extremely important aspect of the public
life of these natives, must be made with certain
specially large and fine varieties of vegetable food, which
grow only on the fertile plains inland. There, on the
other hand, the proper substance for a distribution and
feast is fish. Thus to all other reasons of value of the
respectively rarer food, there is added an artificially,
culturally created dependence of the two districts upon
one another. So that on the whole each community is
very much in need of its partners. If at any time pre-
viously these have been guilty of neglect, however,
they know that they will be in one way or another
severely penalized. Each community has, therefore, a
weapon for the enforcement of its rights: reciprocity.

This is not limited to the exchange of fish for vege-
tables. As a rule, two communities rely upon each
other in other forms of trading and other mutual
services as well. Thus every chain of reciprocity is
made the more binding by being part and parcel of a
whole system of mutualities.


IV
RECIPROCITY AND DUAL ORGANIZATION


I HAVE found only one writer who fully appreciates
the importance of reciprocity in primitive social
organization. The leading German anthropologist,
Prof. Thurnwald of Berlin, clearly recognizes “ die
Symmetrie des Gesellschaftsbaus ” and the correspond-
ing “ Symmetrie von Handlungen ”.* Throughout his
monograph, which is perhaps the best account
of the social organization of a savage tribe extant,
Prof. Thurnwald shows how the symmetry of
social structure and of actions pervades native life.
Its importance as a legal binding form is not, however,
explicitly stated by the writer, who seems to be aware
of its psychological foundation ‘in human feeling’
rather than of its social function in safeguarding the
continuity and adequacy of mutual services.
The old theories of tribal dichotomy, the discussions
about the ‘ origins’ of ‘ phratries’ or ‘ moieties’ and


1 “Die Symmetrie von Handiungen aber nennen wir das Prinzip
der Vergeltung. Dieses liegt tief verwurzelt im menschlichen
Empfinden—als adaquate Reaktion—und ihm kam von jeher die
grösste Bedeutung im sozialen Leben zu” (Die Gemeinde der
Bánaro, Stuttgart, 1921, p. 10).


LAW AND ORDER 25


of the duality in tribal subdivisions, never entered into
the inner or differential foundations of the external
phenomenon of halving. The recent treatment of the
“dual organization’ by the late Dr. Rivers and his
school suffers badly from the defect of looking for
recondite causes instead of analysing the phenomenon
itself. The dual principle is neither the result of
‘fusion’ nor ‘splitting’ nor of any other sociological
cataclysm. It is the integral result of the inner
symmetry of all social transactions, of the reciprocity
of services, without which no primitive community
could exist. A dual organization may appear clearly
in the division of a tribe into two ‘ moieties’ or
be almost completely obliterated—but I venture to
foretell that wherever careful inquiry be made,
symmetry of structure will be found in every savage
society, as the indispensable basis of reciprocal
obligations.

The sociological manner in which the relations of
reciprocity are arranged, makes them yet more
stringent. Between the two communities the exchanges
are not carried out haphazard, any two individuals
trading with each other at random. On the contrary,
every man has his permanent partner in the exchange,
and the two have to deal with each other. They are
often relatives-in-law, or else sworn friends, or partners
in the important system of ceremonial exchange called
kula. Within each community again the individual


26 CRIME AND CUSTOM


partners are ranged into totemic sub-clans. So that the
exchange establishes a system of sociological ties of an
economic nature, often combined with other ties
between individual and individual, kinship group and
kinship group, village and village, district and district.

Going over the relations and transactions previously
described, it is easy to see that the same principle of
mutuality supplies the sanction for each rule. There is
in every act a sociological dualism: two parties who
exchange services and functions, each watching over the
measure of fulfilment and the fairness of conduct of the
other. The master of the canoe, whose interests and
ambitions are bound up with his craft, looks after order in
the internal transactions between the members of the
crew and represents the latter externally. To him each
member of the crew is bound at the time of con-
struction and ever after, when co-operation is necessary.
Reciprocally, the master has to give each man the
ceremonial payment at the feast of construction; the
master cannot refuse any one his place in the boat ;
and he has to see that each man receives his fair share
of the catch. In this and in all the manifold activities
of economic order, the social behaviour of the natives
is based on a well-assessed give-and-take, always
mentally ticked off and in the long run balanced. There
is no wholesale discharge of duties or acceptance of
privileges; no ‘communistic’ disregard of tally and
ear-mark. The free and easy way in which all


LAW AND ORDER 27


transactions are done, the good manners which pervade
all and cover any hitches or maladjustments, make it
difficult for the superficial observer to see the keen
self-interest and watchful reckoning which runs right
through. To one who knows the natives intimately,
nothing is more patent than this. The same control
which the master assumes within his canoe, is taken
within the community by the headman who is, as a
rule, also the hereditary magician.


V


LAW, SELF-INTEREST, AND SOCIAL AMBITION


m scarcely needs to be added that there are also

other driving motives, besides the constraint of
reciprocal obligations, which keep the fishermen to their
task. The utility of the pursuit, the craving for the
fresh, excellent diet, above all, perhaps, the attraction
of what to the natives is an intensely fascinating
sport-—move them more obviously, more consciously
even, and more effectively than what we have described
as the legal obligation. But the social constraint, the
regard for the effective rights and claims of others is
always prominent in the mind of the natives as well as
in their behaviour, once this is well understood. It is
also indispensable to ensure the smooth working of their
institutions. For in spite of all zest and attractions,
there are on each occasion a few individuals, indisposed,
moody, obsessed by some other interest—very often
by an intrigue—who would like to escape from their
obligation, if they could. Anyone who knows how
extremely difficult, if not impossible, it is to organize
a body of Melanesians for even a short and amusing


pursuit requiring concerted action, and how well and


LAW AND ORDER 29


readily they set to work in their customary enterprises,
will realize the function and the need of compulsion,
due to the native’s conviction that another man has a
claim on his work.

There is yet another force which makes the
obligations still more binding. I have mentioned
already the ceremonial aspect of the transactions. The
gifts of food in the system of exchange described above
must be offered according to strict formalities, in
specially made measures of wood, carried and presented
in a prescribed manner, in a ceremonial procession and
with a blast of conch-shells. Now nothing has a greater
sway over the Melanesian’s mind than ambition and
vanity associated with a display of food and wealth.
In the giving of gifts, in the distribution of their
surplus, they feel a manifestation of power, and an
enhancement of personality. The Trobriander keeps
his food in houses better made and more highly
ornamented than his dwelling huts. Generosity is the
highest virtue to him, and wealth the essential element
of influence and rank. The association of a semi-
commercial transaction with definite public ceremonies
supplies another binding force of fulfilment through
a special psychological mechanism: the desire for
display, the ambition to appear munificent, the extreme
esteem for wealth and for the accumulation of food.

We have thus gained some insight into the nature of
the mental and social forces which make certain rules


30 CRIME AND CUSTOM


of conduct into binding law. Nor is the binding force
superfluous. Whenever the native can evade his
obligations without the loss of prestige, or without the
prospective loss of gain, he does so, exactly as a
civilized business man would do. When the ‘ automatic
smoothness’ in the run of obligations so often
attributed to the Melanesian is studied more closely,
it becomes clear that there are constant hitches in the
transactions, that there is much grumbling and
recrimination and seldom is a man completely satisfied
with his partner. But, on the whole, he continues in
the partnership and, on the whole, every one tries to
fulfil his obligations, for he is impelled to do so partly
through enlightened self-interest, partly in obedience
to his social ambitions and sentiments. Take the real
savage, keen on evading his duties, swaggering and
boastful when he has fulfilled them, and compare him
with the anthropologist's dummy who slavishly follows

custom and automatically obeys every regulation. l
There is not the remotest resemblance between the
teachings of anthropology on this subject and the
reality of native life. We begin to see how the dogma
of mechanical obedience to law would prevent the
field-worker from seeing the really relevant facts of
primitive legal organization. We understand now that
the rules of law, the rules with a definite binding
obligation, stand out from the mere rules of custom.
We can see also that civil law, consisting of positive


LAW AND ORDER 3I


ordinances, is much more developed than the body of
mere prohibitions, and that a study of purely
criminal law among savages misses the most
important phenomena of their legal life.

It is also obvious that the type of rules which we have
been discussing, although they are unquestionably
rules of binding law, have in no way the character of
religious commandments, laid down absolutely, obeyed
rigidly and integrally. The rules here described are
essentially elastic and adjustable, leaving a con-
siderable latitude within which their fulfilment is
regarded as satisfactory. The bundles of fish, the
measures of yams, or bunches of taro, can only be
roughly assessed, and naturally the quantities
exchanged vary according to whether the fishing
season or the harvest is more abundant. All this is
taken into account and only wilful stinginess, neglect,
or laziness are regarded as a breach of contract. Since,
again, largesse is a matter of honour and praise, the
average native will strain all his resources to be lavish
in his measure. He knows, moreover, that any excess
in zeal and generosity is bound sooner or later
to be rewarded.

We can see now that a narrow and rigid conception
of the problem—a definition of ‘ law’ as the machinery
of carrying out justice in cases of trespass — would leave
on one side all the phenomena to which we have
referred. In all the facts described, the element or aspect


32 CRIME AND CUSTOM


of law, that is of effective social constraint, consists
in the complex arrangements which make people keep
to their obligations. Among them the most important
is the manner in which many transactions are linked
into chains of mutual services, every one of them having
to be repaid at some later date. The public and
ceremonial manner in which these transactions are
usually carried out, combined with the great ambition
and vanity of the Melanesian adds also to the safe-
guarding forces of law.


VI


THE RULES OF LAW IN RELIGIOUS ACTS


HAVE referred so far mainly to economic relations,
for civil law is primarily concerned with owner-
ship and wealth among savages as well as among
ourselves. But we could find the legal aspect in any
other domain of tribal life. Take for example the most
characteristic acts of ceremonial life—the rites of
mourning and sorrow for the dead. At first we perceive
in them, naturally, their religious character: they are
acts of piety towards the deceased, caused by fear or
love or solicitude for the spirit of the departed. As the
ritual and public display of emotion they are also
part of the ceremonial life of the community.

Who, however, would suspect a legal side to such
religious transactions ? Yet in the Trobriands there is
not one single mortuary act, not one ceremony, which is
not considered to be an obligation of the performer
towards some of the other survivors. The widow weeps
and wails in ceremonial sorrow, in religious piety and
fear—but also because the strength of her grief affords
direct satisfaction to the deceased man’s brothers and
maternal relatives. It is the matrilineal group of


34 CRIME AND CUSTOM


kindred who, according to the native theory of kinship
and mourning, are the people really bereaved. The
wife, though she lived with her husband, though she
should grieve at his death, though often she really and
sincerely does so, remains but a stranger by the rules
of matrilineal kinship. It is her duty towards the
surviving members of her husband's clan, accordingly,
to display her grief, to keep a long period of mourning
and to carry the jaw-bone of her husband for some
years after his death. Nor is this obligation without
reciprocity. At the first big ceremonial distribution,
some three days after her husband’s death, she will
receive from his kinsmen a ritual payment, and a
substantial one, for her tears ; and at later ceremonial
feasts she is given more payments for the subsequent
services of mourning. It should also be kept in mind
that to the natives mourning is but a link in the life-
long chain of reciprocities between husband and wife
and between their respective families. Í


Pare III.


Obligatory display of grief in Ritual Wailing.


¡face p. 34-1


Vil
THE LAW OF MARRIAGE


HIS brings us to the subject of marriage, extremely
important for the understanding of native law.
Marriage establishes not merely a bond between
husband and wife, but it also imposes a standing
relation of mutuality between the man and the wife’s
family, especially her brother. A woman and her
brother are bound to each other by characteristic and
highly important ties of kinship. In a Trobriand
family a female must always remain under the special
guardianship of one man—one of her brothers, or, if
she has none, her nearest maternal kinsman. She has
to obey him and to fulfil a number of duties, while he
looks after her welfare and provides for her economically
even after she is married.

The brother becomes the natural warden of her
children, who therefore have to regard him and not
their father as the legal head of the family. He in
turn has to look after them, and to supply the
household with a considerable proportion of its food.
This is the more burdensome since marriage being


36 CRIME AND CUSTOM


patrilocal, the girl has moved away to her husband’s
community, so that every time at harvest there is a
general economic chassé-croisé all over the district.
After the crops are taken out, the yams are classified
and the pick of the crop from each garden is put into a
conical heap. The main heap in each garden plot is
always for the sister’s household. The sole purpose of
all the skill and labour devoted to this display of food
is the satisfaction of the gardener’s ambition. The
whole community, nay, the whole district, will see the
garden produce, comment upon it, criticize, or praise.
A big heap proclaims, in the words of my informant :
“ Look what I have done for my sister and her family.
I am a good gardener and my nearest relatives, my
sister and her children, will never suffer for want of
food.” After a few days the heap is dismantled, the
yams carried in baskets to the sister's village, where
they are put up into exactly the same shape in front of
the yam-house of the sister's husband ; there again |
the members of the community will see the heap and
admire it. This whole ceremonial side of the transaction
has a binding force which we know already. The display,
the comparisons, the public assessment impose a
definite psychological constraint upon the giver—
they satisfy and reward him, when successful work
enables him to give a generous gift, and they penalize


and humiliate him for inefficiency, stinginess, or bad
luck.


LAW AND ORDER 37


Besides ambition, reciprocity prevails in this
transaction as everywhere else; at times, indeed, it
steps in almost upon the heels of an act of fulfilment.
First of all the husband has to repay by definite
periodical gifts every annual harvest contribution.
Later on, when the children grow up, they will come
directly under the authority of their maternal uncle ;
the boys will have to help him, to assist him in every-
thing, to contribute a definite quota to all the payments
he has to make. His sister’s daughters do but little for
him directly, but indirectly, in a matrilineal society,
they provide him with his heirs and descendants of
two generations below.

Thus placing the harvest offerings within their
sociological context, and taking a long view of the
relationship, we see that every one of its transactions
is justified as a link in the chain of mutualities. Yet
taking it isolated, torn out of its setting, each
transaction appears nonsensical, intolerably burden-
some and sociologically meaningless, also no doubt
* communistic”! What could be more economically
absurd than this oblique distribution of garden produce,
where every man works for his sister and has to rely
in turn on his wife's brother, where more time and
energy is apparently wasted on display, on show, on
the shifting of the goods, than on real work? Yet a
closer analysis shows that some of these apparently
unnecessary actions are powerful economic incentives,


D


38 CRIME AND CUSTOM


that others supply the legal binding force, while others,
again, are the direct result of native kinship ideas. It
is also clear that we can understand the legal aspect
of such relations only if we look upon them integrally
without over-emphasizing any one link in the chain


of reciprocal duties.


VIII


THESPINENCIPLE OF GIVE AND TAKE
PERVADING TRIBAL LIFE


ia the foregoing we have seen a series of pictures
from native life, illustrating the legal aspect of the
marriage relationship, of co-operation in a fishing
team, of food barter between inland and coastal
villages, of certain ceremonial duties of mourning.
These examples were adduced with some detail, in
order to bring out clearly the concrete working of
what appears to me to be the real mechanism of law,
social and psychological constraint, the actual forces,
motives, and reasons which make men keep to their
obligations. If space permitted it would be easy to
bring these isolated instances into a coherent picture
and to show that in all social relations and in all the
various domains of tribal life, exactly the same legal
mechanism can be traced, that it places the binding
obligations in a special category and sets them apart
from other types of customary rules. A rapid though
comprehensive survey will have to suffice.
To take the economic transactions first: barter
of goods and services is carried on mostly within a


40 CRIME AND CUSTOM


standing partnership, or is associated with definite
social ties or coupled with a mutuality in non-economic
matters. Most if not all economic acts are found to
belong to some chain of reciprocal gifts and counter-
gifts, which in the long run balance, benefiting both
sides equally. i

I have already given an account of the economic
conditions in N.W. Melanesia, in “ The Primitive
Economics of the Trobriand Islanders” (Economic
Journal, 1921) and in Argonauts of the Western Pactfic,
1923. Chapter vi of that volume deals with matters
here discussed, i.e. the forms of economic exchange.
My ideas about primitive law were not mature at that
time, and the facts are presented there without any
reference to the present argument—their testimony
only the more telling because of that. When, however,
I describe a category of offerings as ‘ Pure Gifts’ and
place under this heading the gifts of husband to wife
and of father to children, I am obviously committing
a mistake. I have fallen then, in fact, into the error
exposed above, of tearing the act out of its context, of
not taking a sufficiently long view of the chain of
transactions. In the same paragraph I have supplied,
however, an implicit rectification of my mistake in
stating that “a gift given by the father to his son is
said [by the natives] to be a repayment for the man’s
relationship to the mother” (p. 179). I have also
pointed out there that the ‘ free gifts’ to the wife are


LAW AND ORDER 41


also based on the same idea. But the really correct
account of the conditions—correct both from the legal
and from the economic point of view—would have been
to embrace the whole system of gifts, duties, and
mutual benefits exchanged between the husband on
one hand, wife, children, and wife’s brother on the
other. It would be found then in native ideas that
the system is based on a very complex give and
take, and that in the long run the mutual services
balance.!

The real reason why all these economic obligations
are normally kept, and kept very scrupulously, is that
failure to comply places a man in an intolerable
position, while slackness in fulfilment covers him with
opprobrium. The man who would persistently disobey
the rulings of law in his economic dealings would soon
find himself outside the social and economic order—
and he is perfectly well aware of it. Test cases are
supplied nowadays, when a number of natives through
laziness, eccentricity, or a non-conforming spirit of
enterprise, have chosen to ignore the obligations of


1 Compare also the apposite criticism of my expression “ pure
gift” and of all it implies by M. Marcel Mauss, in L’ Année
Sociologique, Nouvelle Série, vol. i, pp. 171 sqq. I had written the
above paragraph before I saw M. Mauss’s strictures, which sub-
stantially agreed with myown. It isgratifying to a field-worker when
his observations are sufficiently well presented to allow others to
refute his conclusions out of his own material. It is even more
pleasant for me to find that my maturer judgment has led me inde-
pendently to the same results as those of my distinguished friend
M. Mauss.


42 CRIME AND CUSTOM


their status and have become automatically outcasts
and hangers-on to some white man or other.

The honourable citizen is bound to carry out his
duties, though his submission is not due to any instinct
or intuitive impulse or mysterious * group-sentiment ’,
but to the detailed and elaborate working of a system,
in which every act has its own place and must be
performed without fail. Though no native, however
intelligent, can formulate this state of affairs in a
general abstract manner, or present it as a sociological
theory, yet every one is well aware of its existence and
in each concrete case he can foresee the consequences.

In magical and religious ceremonies almost every
act, besides its primary purposes and effects, is also
regarded as an obligation between groups and
individuals, and here also there comes sooner or later an
equivalent repayment or counter-service, stipulated by
custom. Magic in its most important forms is a public
institution in which the communal magician, who as a
rule holds his office by inheritance, has to officiate on
behalf of the whole group. Such is the case in the magic
of gardens, fishing, war, weather, and canoe-building.
As necessity arises, at the proper season, or in certain
circumstances he is under an obligation to perform his
magic, to keep the taboos, and at times also to control
the whole enterprise. For this he is repaid by small
offerings, immediately given, and often incorporated
into the ritual proceedings. But the real reward lies


LAW AND ORDER 43


in the prestige, power, and privileges which his position
confers upon him.! In cases of minor or occasional
magic, such as love charms, curative rites, sorcery,
magic of toothache and of pig-welfare, when it is
performed on behalf of another, it has to be paid for
substantially and the relation between client and
professional is based on a contract defined by custom.
From the point of view of our present argument, we
have to register the fact that all the acts of communal
magic are obligatory upon the performer, and that the
obligation to carry them out goes with the status of
communal magician, which is hereditary in most cases
and always is a position of power and privilege. A man
may relinquish his position and hand it over to the next
in succession, but once he accepts it, he has to carry
on the work incumbent, and the community has to
give him in return all his dues.

As to the acts which usually would be regarded as
religious rather than magical—ceremonies at birth or
marriage, rites of death and mourning, the worship of
ghosts, spirits, or mythical personages—they also
have a legal side clearly exemplified in the case of
mortuary performances, described above. Every


1 For further data referring to the social and legal status of the
hereditary magician, see Chap. xvii on *“* Magic ”, in Argonauts of
the Western Pacific, as well as the descriptions of and sundry
references to canoe magic, sailing magic, and kaloma magic. Compare
also the short account of garden magic in '* Primitive Economics ””
(Economic Journ., 1921); of war magic, in Man, 1920 (No. 5 of
article) ; and of fishing magic, in Man, 1918 (No. 53 of article).


44 CRIME AND CUSTOM


important act of a religious nature is conceived as a
moral obligation towards the object, the ghost, spirit,
or power worshipped ; it also satisfies some emotional
craving of the performer ; but besides all this it has also
as a matter of fact its place in some social scheme,
it is regarded by some third person or persons
as due to them, watched and then repaid or returned
in kind. When, for example, at the annual return
of the departed ghosts to their village you give an
offering to the spirit of a dead relative, you satisfy
his feelings, and no doubt also his spiritual appetite,
which feeds on the spiritual substance of the meal ;
you probably also express your own sentiment towards
the beloved dead. But there is also a social obligation
involved : after the dishes have been exposed for some
time and the spirit has finished with his spiritual share,
the rest, none the worse it appears for ordinary con-
sumption after its spiritual abstraction, is given to
a friend or relation-in-law still alive, who then returns
a similar gift later on.! I can recall to my mind not
one single act of a religious nature without some such
sociological by-play more or less directly associated
with the main religious function of the act. Its
importance lies in the fact that it makes the act a social
obligation, besides its being a religious duty.


1 Comp. the writer’s account of the Milamala, the feast of the
annual return of the spirits, in * Baloma ; the spirits of the dead in
the Trobriand Islands ” (Journ. of the R. Anthrop. Institute, 1916).
The food offerings in question are described on p. 378.


LAW AND ORDER 45


` I could still continue with the survey of some other

phases of tribal life and discuss more fully the legal
aspect of domestic relations, already exemplified above,
or enter into the reciprocities of the big enterprises,
and so on. But it must have become clear now that
the detailed illustrations previously given are not
exceptional isolated cases, but representative instances
of what obtains in every walk of native life.


IX


RECIPROCITY AS THE BASIS OF SOON
STRUCTURE


GAIN, recasting our whole perspective and looking
at matters from the sociological point of view,
i.e. taking one feature of the constitution of the
tribe after another, instead of surveying the various
types of their tribal activities, it would be possible to
show that the whole structure of Trobriand society
is founded on the principle of legal status. By this
I mean that the claims of chief over commoners,
husband over wife, parent over child, and vice
versa, are not exercised arbitrarily and one-sidedly,
but according to definite rules, and arranged into well- i
balanced chains of reciprocal services.

Even the chief, whose position is hereditary, based on
highly venerable mythological traditions, surrounded
with semi-religious awe, enhanced by a princely
ceremonial of distance, abasement, and stringent
taboos, who has a great deal of power, wealth, and
executive means, has to conform to strict norms and is
bound by legal fetters. When he wants to declare war,
organize an expedition, or celebrate a festivity, he


LAW AND ORDER 47


must issue formal summons, publicly announce his
will, deliberate with the notables, receive the tribute,
services and assistance of his subjects in a ceremonial
manner, and finally repay them according to a definite
scale.t It is enough to mention here what has been
previously said about the sociological status of
marriage, of the relations between husband and wife,
and of the status between relatives-in-law.* The
whole division into totemic clans, into sub-clans of
a local nature and into village communities, is
characterized by a system of reciprocal services and
duties, in which the groups play a game of give and
take.

What perhaps is most remarkable in the legal nature
of social relations is that reciprocity, the give-and-take
principle, reigns supreme also within the clan, nay
within the nearest group of kinsmen. As we have seen
already, the relation between the maternal uncle and


1 Comp. for more detail, the various aspects of chieftainship I
have brought out in art. cit. “ Primitive Economics’’, op. cit.
(Argonauts), and the articles on '* War” and on “ Spirits”, also
referred to previously.

2 Here again I must refer to some of my other publications, where
these matters have been treated in detail, though not from the
present point of view. See the three articles published in Psyche of
October, 1923 (‘‘ The Psychology of Sex in Primitive Societies ’’) ;
April, 1924 (‘‘ Psycho-Analysis and Anthropology ’’) ; and January,
1925 (‘‘ Complex and Myth in Mother-Right ””), in which many
aspects of sexual psychology, of the fundamental ideas and customs
of kinship and relationship, have been described. The two latter
articles appear uniform with this work in my Sex and Repression
in Savage Society (1926).


48 CRIME AND CUSTOM


his nephews, the relations between brothers, nay the
most unselfish relation, that between a man and his
sister, are all and one founded on mutuality, and the
repayment of services. It is just this group which has
always been accused of ‘ primitive communism’, The
clan is often described as the only legal person, the one
body and entity, in primitive jurisprudence. “‘ The
unit is not the individual, but the kin. The individual
is but part of the kin,” are the words of Mr. Sidney Hart-
land. This is certainly true if we take into considera-
tion that part of social life in which the kinship group—
totemic clan, phratry, moiety, or class—plays the
reciprocity game against co-ordinate groups. But
what about the perfect unity within the clan? Here
we are offered the universal solution of the “ pervading
group-sentiment, if not group-instinct ”, which is said
to be specially rampant in the part of the world with
which we are concerned, inhabited by “a people
dominated by such a group-sentiment as actuates the
Melanesian ” (Rivers). This, we know, is quite a
mistaken view. Within the nearest kinship group
rivalries, dissensions, the keenest egotism flourish and
dominate indeed the whole trend of kinship relations.
To this point I shall have to return presently,
for more facts and more definitely telling ones are
necessary finally to explode this myth of kinship-
communism, of the perfect solidarity within the group
related by direct descent, a myth recently revived by


LAW AND ORDER 49


Dr. Rivers, and in some danger therefore of gaining
general currency.

Having thus shown the range of facts to which our
argument applies, having shown indeed that Jaw covers
the whole culture and the entire tribal constitution of
these natives, let us formulate our conclusions in a
coherent manner


XxX


THE RULES OF CUSTOM DEFINED AND
CEASSPePIED


T the beginning of Section 1 examples were given

of current opinions which attribute to primitive

man an automatic obedience to law. Now with this

assumption there are associated certain more special

propositions which are universally current in anthro-

pology and yet fatal to the study of primitive
jurisprudence.

First of all, if the rules of custom are obeyed by
the savage through sheer inability to break them, then
no definition can be given of law, no distinction can be
drawn between the rules of law, morals, manners, and.
other usages. For the only way in which we can
classify rules of conduct is by reference to the motives
and sanctions by which they are enforced. So that
with the assumption of an automatic obedience to all
custom, anthropology has to give up any attempt at
introducing into the facts order and classification,
which is the first task of science.

We have seen already that Mr. Sidney Hartland
regards the rules of art, medicine, social organization,
industry, and what-not as hopelessly mixed up and


LAW AND ORDER 51


lumped together in all savage societies, both in the
native’s own comprehension and in the reality of
social life. He states this view emphatically on several


ce


occasions : ... The savage’s perception of re-
semblances differs very much from our own. He
sees resemblances between objects which, to our eyes,
have not a single point in common ” (l.c. p. 139). ‘‘ For
the savage . . . the policy of a tribe is one and indi-
visible. . . . They [the savages] see nothing grotesque
or incongruous in publishing in the name of God a code
combining ritual, moral, agricultural, and medical with
what we understand as strictly juridical prescriptions.
. . . We may sever religion from magic, and magic
from medicine ; the members of the community draw
no such distinctions ” (pp. 213, 214).

In all this Mr. Sidney Hartland gives lucid and
moderate expression to the current views about
“primitive prelogical mentality ”, “ confused savage
categories ”, and the general shapelessness of early
culture. These views, however, cover but one side of
the case, express but a half-truth—as regards law, the
views here quoted are not correct. The savages have
a class of obligatory rules, not endowed with any
mystical character, not set forth in ‘‘ the name of God ”,
not enforced by any supernatural sanction but provided
with a purely social binding force.

If we designate the sum total of rules, conventions,
and patterns of behaviour as the body of custom, there


GLENDALE COLLEGE LIBR ARY


52 CRIME AND CUSTOM


is no doubt that the native feels a strong respect for all
of them, has a tendency to do what others do, what
every one approves of, and, if not drawn or driven in
another direction by his appetites or interests, will
follow the biddings of custom rather than any other
course. The force of habit, the awe of traditional
command and a sentimental attachment to it, the
desire to satisfy public opinion—all combine to make
custom be obeyed for its own sake. In this the
‘savages * do not differ from the members of any self-
contained community with a limited horizon, whether
this be an Eastern European ghetto, an Oxford college,
or a Fundamentalist Middle West community. But
love of tradition, conformism and the sway of custom
account but to a very partial extent for obedience to
rules among dons, savages, peasants, or Junkers.
Limiting ourselves strictly to savages once more,
there are among the Trobrianders a number of tradi-_
tional rules instructing the craftsman how to ply his
trade. The inert and uncritical way in which these
rules are obeyed is due to the general ‘ conformism of
savages’ as we might call it. But in the main these
tules are followed because their practical utility is
recognized by reason and testified by experience.
Again, other injunctions of how to behave in associating
with your friends, relatives, superiors, equals and so on,
are obeyed because any deviation from them makes
a man feel and look, in the eyes of others, ridiculous,


LAW AND ORDER 53


clumsy, socially uncouth. These are the precepts of
good manners, very developed in Melanesia and most
strictly adhered to. There are further rules laying
down the proceedings at games, sports, entertainments
and festivities, rules which are the soul and substance
of the amusement or pursuit and are kept because
it is felt and recognized that any failure to ‘play
the game’ spoils it—that is, when the game is
really a game. In all this, it will be noted, there are
no mental forces of inclination or of self-interest, or even
inertia, which would run counter to any rule and make
its fulfilment a burden. It is quite as easy to follow
the rule as not, and once you embark upon a sporting
or pleasurable pursuit, you really can enjoy it only if
you obey all its rules whether of art, manners,
or the game.

There are also norms pertaining to things sacred and
important, the rules of magical rite, funerary pomp and
such like. These are primarily backed up by super-
natural sanctions and by the strong feeling that sacred
matters must not be tampered with. By an equally
strong moral force are maintained certain rules of
personal conduct towards near relatives, members of
the household and others towards whom strong senti-
ments of friendship, loyalty, or devotion are felt, which
back up the dictates of the social code.

This brief catalogue is not an attempt at a classifica-
tion, but is mainly meant to indicate clearly that,


E


54 CRIME AND CUSTOM


besides the rules of law, there are several other types of
norm and traditional commandment which are backed
up by motives or forces, mainly psychological, in any
case entirely different from those which are character-
istic of law in that community. Thus, though in my
survey attention has naturally been mainly focussed on
the legal machinery, I was not intent on proving that all
social rules are legal, but on the contrary, I wanted to
show that the rules of law form but one well-defined
category within the body of custom.


XI


AN ANTHROPOLOGICAL DEFINITION OF LAW


HE rules of law stand out from the rest in that they
are felt and regarded as the obligations of one
person and the rightful claims of another. They are
sanctioned not by a mere psychological motive, but by
a definite social machinery of binding force, based, as we
know, upon mutual dependence, and realized in the
equivalent arrangement of reciprocal services, as well
as in the combination of such claims into strands of
multiple relationship. The ceremonial manner in
which most transactions are carried out, which entails
public control and criticism, adds still more to their
binding force.
We may therefore finally dismiss the view that
* group-sentiment ’ or ‘collective responsibility’ is
the only or even the main force which ensures
adhesion to custom and which makes it binding or
legal. Esprit de corps, solidarity, pride in one’s com-
munity and clan exist undoubtedly among the Mela-
nesians—no social order could be maintained without
them in any culture high or low. I only want to enter
a caution against such exaggerated views as those of
Rivers, Sidney Hartland, Durkheim, and others, which


56 > CRIME AND CUSTOM


would make this unselfish, impersonal, unlimited group-
loyalty the corner-stone of all social order in primitive
cultures. The savage is neither an extreme “ collect-
ivist ’ nor an intransigent ‘ individualist "—he is, like
man in general, a mixture of both. l

It results also from the account here given that
primitive law does not consist exclusively or even
chiefly of negative injunctions, nor is all savage law
criminal law. And yet it is generally held that with
the description of crime and punishment the subject
of jurisprudence is exhausted as far as a savage com-
munity is concerned. As a matter of fact the dogma of
automatic obedience, i.e. the absolute rigidity of the
rules of custom implies an over-emphasis of criminal
law in primitive communities and a corresponding
denial of the possibility of civil law. Absolutely rigid
rules cannot be stretched or adapted to life, they need
not be enforced—but they can be broken. So much
even the believers in a primitive super-legality must
admit. Hence crime is the only legal problem to be
studied in primitive communities, there is no civil law
among savages, nor any civil jurisprudence for anthro-
pology to work out. This view has dominated com-
parative studies of law from Sir Henry Maine to the
most recent authorities, such as Prof. Hobhouse,
Dr. Lowie, and Mr. Sidney Hartland. Thus we read in
Mr. Hartland’s book that in primitive societies “ the
core of legislation is a series of taboos ”, and that


LAW AND ORDER 57


“almost all early codes consist of prohibitions ”
(Primitive Law, p. 214), And again, “the general
belief in the certainty of supernatural punishment and
the alienation of the sympathy of one’s fellows generate
an atmosphere of terror which is quite sufficient to
prevent a breach of tribal customs . . .” (p. 8—the
italics are mine). There is no such “ atmosphere of
terror ” unless perhaps in the case of a few very excep-
tional and sacred rules of ritual and religion, and on the
other hand the breach of tribal customs is prevented by
a special machinery, the study of which is the real
field of primitive jurisprudence.

In all this again Mr. Hartland is not alone. Steinmetz
in his learned and competent analysis of primitive
punishment insists on the criminal character of early
jurisprudence, on the mechanical, rigid, almost un-
directed and unintentional nature of the penalties in-
flicted and on their religious basis. His views are fully
endorsed by the great French sociologists Durkheim and
Mauss, who add besides one more clause: that responsi-
bility, revenge, in fact all legalreactions are founded in
the psychology of the group and not of theindividual.*
Even such acute and well-informed sociologists as Prof.
Hobhouse and Dr. Lowie, the latter acquainted at first
hand with savages, seem to follow the trend of the


1 Steinmetz, Ethnologische Studien zur ersten Entwickelung der
Strafe, 1894; Durkheim in L’Année Sociologique, i. pp. 353 sqq. ;
Mauss in Revue de l’Histoive des Religions, 1897.


58 CRIME AND CUSTOM


general bias in their otherwise excellent chapters on
justice in primitive societies.

In our own province we have so far met with positive
commandments only, the breach of which is penalized
but not punished, and the machinery of which can by
no procrustean methods be stretched beyond the line
which separates civil from criminal law. If we have
to provide the rules described in these articles with
some modern, hence necessarily inappropriate label,
—they must be called the body of ‘ civil law’ of the
Trobriand Islanders.

‘Civil law,’ the positive law governing all the
phases of tribal life, consists then of a body of binding
obligations, regarded as a right by one party and
acknowledged as a duty by the other, kept in force by
a specific mechanism of reciprocity and publicity in-
herent in the structure of their society. These rules of
civil law are elastic and possess a certain latitude.
They offer not only penalties for failure, but also
premiums for an overdose of fulfilment. Their
stringency is ensured through the rational appreciation
of cause and effect by the natives, combined with a
number of social and personal sentiments such as
ambition, vanity, pride, desire of self-enhancement by
display, and also attachment, friendship, devotion and
loyalty to the kin.

It scarcely needs to be added that “law ’ and “legal
phenomena’, as we have discovered, described and


PES AG


(6z 2594 225)
"SOINSTIMA USPOOM peu Á[[erdads UT pares


“SUBA jo SUYO [eruotu9Jao)


‘AI 4LV1Ig


ry


LAW AND ORDER 59


defined them in a part of Melanesia, do not consist in
any independent institutions. Law represents rather
an aspect of their tribal life, one side of their structure,
than any independent, self-contained social arrange-
ments. Law dwells not in a special system of decrees,
which foresee and define possible forms of non-fulfil-
ment and provide appropriate barriers and remedies.
Law is the specific result of the configuration of obliga-
tions, which makes it impossible for the native to shirk
his responsibility without suffering for it in the future.


XII
SPECIFIC LEGAL ARRANGEMENTS


HE rare quarrels which occur at times take the form
of an exchange of public expostulation (yakala) in
which the two parties assisted by friends and relatives
meet, harangue one another, hurl and hurl back
recriminations. Such litigation allows people to give
vent to their feelings and shows the trend of public
opinion, and thus it may be of assistance in settling
disputes. Sometimes it seems, however, only to
harden the litigants. In no case is there any definite
sentence pronounced by a third party, and agreement
is but seldom reached then and there. The yakala
therefore is a special legal arrangement, but of small —
importance and not really touching the heart of legal
constraint.

Some other specific legal mechanisms may also be
mentioned here. One of them is the kaytapaku, the
magical protection of property by means of conditional
curses. When a man owns coco or areca palms in
distant spots, where it is impossible to keep watch over
them, he attaches a palm leaf to the trunk of the tree, an
indication that a formula has been uttered, which


automatically would bring down ailment on the thief.


LAW AND ORDER 61


Another institution which has a legal side is the kaytu-
butabu, a form of magic performed over all the coco-nut
trees of a community to bring about their fertility, as
a rule in view of an approaching feast. Such magic
entails a strict prohibition to gather the nuts or to
partake of coco-nut, even when imported. A similar
institution is the gwava.1 A pole is planted on the reef,
and this places a taboo on any export of certain
valuable objects, exchanged ceremonially in the kula,
while their importation on the contrary is encouraged.
This is a sort of moratorium, stopping all payments,
without any interference with the receipts, which also
aims at an accumulation of valuable objects before a
big ceremonial distribution. Another important legal
feature is a sort of ceremonial contract, called kayasa.?
Here the leader of an expedition, the master of a feast,
or the entrepreneur in an industrial venture gives a big
ceremonial distribution. Those who participate in it and
benefit by the bounty are under an obligation to assist
the leader throughout the enterprise.

All these institutions, kayasa, kaytapaku, and kaytu-
butabu, entail special binding ties. But even they
are not exclusively legal. It would be a great


1 Comp. the account of this institution in Argonauts of the Western
Pacific (references in Index s.v. Gwara). Also descriptions in Prof.
Seligman’s '* Melanesians ’’, and in the present writer’s ‘‘ The Natives
of Mailu ” (Trans. R. Soc. of S. Australia, vol. 39), of the gola or gora
among the Western Papuo-Melanesians.

2 Argonauts. See in Index s.v. Kayasa.


62 CRIME AND CUSTOM


mistake to deal with the subject of law by a simple
enumeration of these few arrangements, each of which
subserves a special end and fulfils a very partial
function. The main province of law is in the social
mechanism, which is to be found at the bottom of all
the real obligations and covers a very vast portion of
their custom, though by no means all of it, as we know.


XIII
CONCLUSION AND FORECAST


] HAVE dealt here only with one province of

Melanesia, and the conclusions arrived at have
naturally a limited range. These conclusions, however,
are based on facts observed by a new method and
regarded from a new point of view, so that they might
stimulate other observers to take up a similar line of
study in other parts of the world.

Let us sum up the contrast between current views on
the subject and the facts here presented. In modern
anthropological jurisprudence, it is universally assumed
that all custom is law to the savage and that
he has no law but his custom. All custom again is
obeyed automatically and rigidly by sheer inertia.
There is no civil law or its equivalent in savage
societies. The only relevant facts are the occasional
breaches in defiance of custom—the crimes. There is no
mechanism of enforcement of the primitive rules of
conduct except the punishment of flagrant crime.
Modern anthropology, therefore, ignores and sometimes
even explicitly denies the existence of any social
arrangements or of any psychological motives which
make primitive man obey a certain class of custom for


64 CRIME AND CUSTOM


purely social reasons. According to Mr. Hartland and
all the other authorities, religious sanctions, super-
natural penalties, group responsibility and solidarity,
taboo and magic are the main elements of juris-
prudence in savagery.

All these contentions are, as I have already indicated,
either directly mistaken or only partially true, or, at
least, they can be said to place the reality of native life
in a false perspective. Perhaps there is no further need
to argue that no man, however ‘ savage ’ or ‘ primitive ’
will instinctively act against his instincts, or unwittingly
obey a rule which he feels inclined cunningly to
evade or wilfully to defy; or that he will not spon-
taneously act in a manner contrary to all his appetites
and inclinations. The fundamental function of law is
to curb certain natural propensities, to hem in and
control human instincts and to impose a non-spon-
taneous, compulsory behaviour—in other words, to
ensure a type of co-operation which is based on mutual ~
concessions and sacrifices for a common end. A new
force, different from the innate, spontaneous endow-
ment must be present to perform this task.

In order to make this negative criticism conclusive,
we have given a positive statement of a concrete case
to present the facts of primitive law as it really is,
and have shown in what the compulsory nature of
primitive legal rules consists.

The Melanesian of the region here treated has


LAW AND ORDER 63


unquestionably the greatest respect for his tribal
custom and tradition as such. Thus much may be
conceded to the old views at the outset. All the rules of
his tribe, trivial or important, pleasant or irksome,
moral or utilitarian, are regarded by him with reverence
and felt to be obligatory. But the force of custom, the
glamour of tradition, if it stood alone, would not be
enough to counteract the temptations of appetite or
lust or the dictates of self-interest. The mere sanction of
tradition—the conformism and conservatism of the
“savage ’—operates often and operates alone in
enforcing manners, customary usage, private and public
behaviour in all cases where some rules are necessary
to establish the mechanism of common life and co-
operation and to allow of orderly proceedings—but
where there is no need to encroach on self-interest
and inertia or to prod into unpleasant action or thwart
innate propensities.

There are other rules, dictates and imperatives which
require and possess their special type of sanction,
besides the mere glamour of tradition. The natives in
the part of Melanesia described have to conform, for
example, to a very exacting type of religious ritual,
especially at burial and in mourning. There are, again,
imperatives of behaviour between relations. There
exists finally the sanction of tribal punishment, due to
a reaction in anger and indignation of the whole com-
munity. By this sanction human life, property, and,


66 CRIME AND CUSTOM


last though not least, personal honour are safeguarded
in a Melanesian community, as well as such institutions
as chieftainship, exogamy, rank and marriage, which
play a paramount part in their tribal constitution.

Each class of rules just enumerated is distinguishable
from the rest by its sanctions and by its relation to the
social organization of the tribe and to its culture. They
do not form this amorphous mass of tribal usage or
‘cake of custom” of which we have been hearing so
much. The last category, the fundamental rules safe-
guarding life, property and personality form the class
which might be described as ‘criminal law ’—very
often over-emphasized by anthropologists and falsely
connected with the problem of ‘ government’ and
‘central authority’ and invariably torn out of its
proper context of other legal rules. For—and here we
come at last to the most important point—there exists
a class of binding rules which control most aspects of
tribal life, which regulate personal relations between”
kinsmen, clansmen and tribesmen, settle economic
relations, the exercise oí power and of magic, the status
of husband and wife and of their respective families.
These are the rules of a Melanesian community which
correspond to our civil law.

There is no religious sanction to these rules, no fear,
superstitious or rational, enforces them, no tribal
punishment visits their breach, nor even the stigma of


LAW AND ORDER 67


` public opinion or moral blame. The forces which
make these rules binding we shall lay bare and find
them not simple but clearly definable, not to be
described by one word or one concept, but very real
none the less. The binding forces of Melanesian civil law
are to be found in the concatenation of the obligations,
in the fact that they are arranged into chains of mutual
services, a give and take extending over long periods of
time and covering wide aspects of interest and activity.
To this there is added the conspicuous and ceremonial
manner in which most of the legal obligations have to
be discharged. This binds people by an appeal to their
vanity and self-regard, to their love of self-enhancement
by display. Thus the binding force of these rules is
due to the natural mental trend of self-interest,
ambition and vanity, set into play by a special social
mechanism into which the obligatory actions are
framed.

With a wider and more elastic ‘ minimum definition ’
of law, there is no doubt that new legal phenomena of
the same type as those found in N.W. Melanesia will be
discovered. There is no doubt that custom is not
based only on a universal, undifferentiated, ubiquitous
force, this mental inertia, though this unquestionably
exists, and adds its quota to other constraint. There
must be in all societies a class of rules too practical to
be backed up by religious sanctions, too burdensome


68 CRIME AND CUSTOM


to be left to mere goodwill, too personally vital to
individuals to be enforced by any abstract agency.
This is the domain of legal rules, and I venture to
foretell that reciprocity, systematic incidence, publicity
and ambition will be found to be the main factors in the


binding machinery of primitive law.


PART I


PRIMITIVE CRIME AND ITS
PUNISHMENT


zi


I


THE LAW IN BREACH AND THE RESTORATION
OF ORDER


T lies in the nature of scientific interest, which is
but refined curiosity, that it turns more readily
to the extraordinary and sensational than to the
normal and matter-of-course. At first, in a new
line of research or in a young branch of study, it is
the exception, the apparent breach of the natural
law, which attracts attention and gradually leads to
the discovery of new universal regularities. For—
and here lies the paradox of scientific passion—
systematic study takes up the miraculous only to
transform it into the natural. Science in the long run
builds up a Universe well-regulated, founded on
generally valid laws, driven by definite all-pervading
forces, ordered according to a few fundamental
principles.

Not that wonder, the romance of the marvellous
and mysterious, should be banished by science from
reality. The philosophic mind is ever kept on its
course by the desire for new worlds and new experiences,
and metaphysics lures us on by the promise of a vision
beyond the rim of the furthest horizon. But the


72 CRIME AND CUSTOM


character of curiosity, the appreciation of what
really is marvellous has been changed in the mean-
time by the discipline of science. The contemplation
of the great lines of the world, the mystery of immediate
data and ultimate ends, the meaningless impetus
of ‘creative evolution’ make reality sufficiently
tragic, mysterious, and questionable to the naturalist
or student of culture, if he chooses to reflect upon
the sum total of his knowledge and contemplate
its limits. But to the mature scientific mind there
can be no more thrills from the unexpected accident,
no isolated sensation of a new, unrelated landscape
in the exploration of reality. Every new discovery
is but a step further on the same road, every new
principle merely extends or shifts our old horizon.
Anthropology, still a young science, is now on the
way to free itself from the control of pre-scientific
interest, though certain recent attempts at offering
extremely simple and, at the same time, sensational
solutions of all the riddles of Culture are still dominated
by crude curiosity. In the study of primitive law we
can perceive this sound tendency in the gradual
but definite recognition that savagery is not ruled by
moods, passions, and accidents, but by tradition
and order. Even then there remains something of the
old ‘shocker’ interest in the over-emphasis of
criminal justice, in the attention devoted to the
breaches of the law and their punishment. Law in


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 73


modern Anthropology is still almost exclusively
studied in its singular and sensational manipulations,
in cases of blood-curdling crime, followed by tribal
vendetta, in accounts of criminal sorcery with retalia-
tion, of incest, adultery, breach of taboo or murder.
In all this, besides the dramatic piquancy of the
incidents, the anthropologist can, or thinks he can,
trace certain unexpected, exotic, astonishing features
of primitive law: a transcending solidarity of the
kindred group, excluding all sense of self-interest ;
a legal and economic Communism; a submission
to a rigid, undifferentiated tribal law.!

As a reaction against the method and the principles
just stated, I have tried toapproach the facts of primitive
law in the Trobriands from the other end. Ihave started
with the description of the ordinary, not the singular ;
of the law obeyed and not the law broken; of the
permanent currents and tides in their social life
and not its adventitious storms. From the account
given, I have been able to conclude that contrary
to most established views civil law—or its savage


1 Thus Rivers speaks of a “‘ group sentiment of the clan system
with its accompanying communistic practices ’’, supposed to exist
in Melanesia, and he adds that to such natives the “ principle * each
man for himself’ is beyond the reach of understanding ” (Social
Organization, p. 170). Sidney Hartland imagines that in savagery
“ The same code in the same Divine Name, and with equal authority,
may make regulations for the conduct of commercial transactions
and of the most intimate conjugal relations, as well as for a complex
and splendid ceremonial of divine worship ” (Primitive Law, p. 214).
Both statements are misleading. Comp. also the quotations in
Part I, Sections I and X.


74 CRIME AND CUSTOM


equivalent—is extremely well developed, and that
it rules all aspects of social organization. We also
found that it is clearly distinguishable, and
distinguished by the natives, from the other types of
norm, whether morals or manners, rules of art or
commands of religion. The rules of their law, far
from being rigid, absolute or issued in the Divine
Name, are maintained by social forces, understood
as rational and necessary, elastic and capable of
adjustment. Far also from being exclusively a group
affair, his rights and his duties are in the main the
concern of the individual, who knows perfectly well
how to look after his interests and realizes that he has
to redeem his obligations. We found indeed that the
native’s attitude towards duty and privilege is very
much the same as in a civilized community—to the
extent in fact that he not only stretches but also
at times breaks the law. And this subject, not yet_
discussed, will claim our attention in these chapters.
It would be a very one-sided picture indeed of the
law in the Trobriands, if the rules were shown only
in good working order, if the system were only described
in equilibrium! That law functions only very
imperfectly, that there are many hitches and break-
downs, I have now and again indicated, but a full
description of the criminal and dramatic issues is
necessary, though, as I have said, it should not be
unduly emphasized.


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 75


There is still one reason why we must have a close
look at native life in disorder. We found that in the
Trobriands, social relations are governed by a number
oí legal principles. The most important of these is
Mother-right, which rules that a child is bodily related
and morally beholden by kinship to its mother and
to her only. This principle governs succession to
rank, power and dignities, economic inheritance,
the rights to soil and to local citizenship and member-
ship in the totemic clan. The status between brother
and sister, the relations between the sexes and most
of their private and public social intercourse is defined
by rules forming part of matriarchal law. The
economic duties of a man towards his married sister
and her household constitute a strange and important
feature of this law. The whole system is based on
mythology, on the native theory of procreation,
on certain of their magico-religious beliefs and it
pervades all the institutions and customs of the
tribe.

But, side by side with the system of Mother-right,
in its shadow so to speak, there exist certain other,
minor systems of legal rules. The law of marriage,
defining the status of husband and wife, with its
patrilocal arrangements, with its limited but clear
bestowal of authority on the man and of guardianship
over his wife and children in certain specified matters,
is based on legal principles independent of Mother-


76 CRIME AND CUSTOM


right, though on several points intertwined with it
and adjusted to it. The constitution of a village
community, the position of the headman in his village
and of the chief in his district, the privileges and duties
of the public magician—all these are independent
legal systems.

Now since we know that primitive law is not perfect,
the problem emerges: how does this composite
body of systems behave under the strain of circum-
stances? Is each system well harmonized within
its own limits? Does such a system, moreover,
keep within its limits or has it a tendency to encroach
upon alien ground? Do the systems then come into
conflict, and what is the character of such conflict ?
Here once more we have to appeal to the criminal,
disorderly, disloyal elements of the community to
furnish us with material from which we can answer
our questions.

In the accounts to which we now proceed—and
which will be given concretely and with some detail—
we shall keep before us the main problems still
unsolved: the nature of criminal acts and procedure
and their relation to civil law; the main factors
active in the restitution of the disturbed equilibrium ;
the relations and the possible conflicts between the
several systems of native law.

While engaged in my field-work in the Trobriands,
I used always to live right among the natives, pitching


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 7


my tent in the village, and being thus forcibly present
at all that happened, trivial or solemn, hum-drum
or dramatic. The event which 1 now proceed to
relate happened during my first visit in the Trobriands,
a few months only after 1 had started my field-work
in the archipelago.

One day an outbreak of wailing and a great com-
motion told me that a death had occurred somewhere
in the neighbourhood. I was informed that Kima’i,
a young lad of my acquaintance, of sixteen or so, had
fallen from a coco-nut palm and killed himself.

I hastened to the next village where this had
occurred, only to find the whole mortuary proceedings
in progress. This was my first case of death, mourning,
and burial, so that in my concern with the ethno-
graphical aspects of the ceremonial, I forgot the
circumstances of the tragedy even though one
or two singular facts occurred at the same time
in the village which should have aroused my suspicions.
I found that another youth had been severely wounded
by some mysterious coincidence. And at the funeral
there was obviously a general feeling of hostility
between the village where the boy died and that into
which his body was carried for burial.

Only much later was I able to discover the real
meaning of these events: the boy had committed
suicide. The truth was that he had broken the rules
of exogamy, the partner in his crime being his maternal


78 CRIME AND CUSTOM


cousin, the daughter of his mother’s sister. This had
been known and generally disapproved of, but nothing
was done until the girl’s discarded lover, who had
wanted to marry her and who felt personally injured,
took the initiative. This rival threatened first to use
black magic against the guilty youth, but this had not
much effect. Then one evening he insulted the
culprit in public—accusing him in the hearing of the
whole community of incest and hurling at him certain
expressions intolerable to a native.

For this there was only one remedy; only one
means of escape remained to the unfortunate youth.
Next morning he put on festive attire and ornamenta-
tion, climbed a coco-nut palm and addressed the
community, speaking from among the palm leaves
and bidding them farewell. He explained the reasons
for his desperate deed and also launched forth a veiled
accusation against the man who had driven him to his
death, upon which it became the duty of his clansmen
to avenge him. Then he wailed aloud, as is the
custom, jumped from a palm some sixty feet high
and was killed on the spot. There followed a fight
within the village in which the rival was wounded ;
and the quarrel was repeated during the funeral.

Now this case opened up a number of important
lines of inquiry. I was here in the presence of a
pronounced crime: the breach of totemic clan
exogamy. The exogamous prohibition is one of the


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 79


‘corner-stones of totemism, mother-right, and the
classificatory system of kinship. All females of his
clan are called sisters by a man and forbidden as such.
It is an axiom of Anthropology that nothing arouses
a greater horror than the breach of this prohibition,
and that besides a strong reaction of public opinion,
there are also supernatural punishments, which visit
this crime. Nor is this axiom devoid of foundation
in fact. If you were to inquire into the matter among
the Trobrianders, you would find that all statements
confirm the axiom, that the natives show horror
at the idea of violating the rules of exogamy and that
they believe that sores, disease and even death might
follow clan incest. This is the ideal of native law,
and in moral matters it is easy and pleasant strictly
to adhere to the ideal—when judging the conduct of
others or expressing an opinion about conduct in
general.

When it comes to the application of morality
and ideals to real life, however, things take on a
different complexion. In the case described it was
obvious that the facts would not tally with the ideal
of conduct. Public opinion was neither outraged
by the knowledge of the crime to any extent, nor did
it react directly—it had to be mobilized by a public
statement of the crime and by insults being hurled
at the culprit by an interested party. Even then
he had to carry out the punishment himself. The


80 CRIME AND CUSTOM


‘group-reaction’ and the ‘supernatural sanction ’
were not therefore the active principles. Probing
further into the matter and collecting concrete
information, I found that the breach of exogamy—
as regards intercourse and not marriage—is by no
means a rare occurrence, and public opinion is lenient,
though decidedly hypocritical. If the affair is carried
on sub rosa with a certain amount of decorum, and if
no one in particular stirs up trouble—‘ public opinion ’
will gossip, but not demand any harsh punishment.
If, on the contrary, scandal breaks out—every one
turns against the guilty pair and by ostracism and
insults one or the other may be driven to suicide.

As regards the supernatural sanction, this case led
me to an interesting and important discovery. I
learned that there is a perfectly well established
remedy against any pathological consequences of this
trespass, a remedy considered practically infallible,
if properly executed. That is to say the natives possess
a system of magic consisting of spells and rites
performed over water, herbs, and stones, which when
correctly carried out, is completely efficient in undoing
the bad results of clan incest.

That was the first time in my field-work that I came
across what could be called a well-established system
of evasion and that in the case of one of the most
fundamental laws of the tribe. Later on I discovered


that such parasitic growths upon the main branches


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 81


- of tribal order exist in several other cases, besides the
counteraction of incest. The importance of this fact
is obvious. It shows clearly that a supernatural
sanction need not safeguard a rule of conduct with an
automatic effect. Against magical influence there
may be counter-magic. It is no doubt better not to
run the risk—the counter-magic may have been
imperfectly learned or faultily performed—but the
risk is not great. The supernatural sanction shows
then a considerable elasticity, in conjunction with
a suitable antidote.

This methodical antidote teaches us another lesson.
In a community where laws are not only occasionally
broken, but systematically circumvented by well-
established methods, there can be no question of
a ‘ spontaneous ’ obedience to law, of slavish adherence
to tradition. For this tradition teaches man
surreptitiously how to evade some of its sterner
commands—and you cannot be spontaneously pushed
forwards and pulled back at the same time!

Magic to undo the consequences of clan incest is
perhaps the most definite instance of methodical
evasion of law, but there are other cases besides.
Thus a system of magic to estrange the affections
of a woman from her husband and to induce her to
commit adultery is a traditional way of flouting
the institution of marriage and the prohibition of
adultery. To a slightly different category perhaps


82 CRIME AND CUSTOM


belong the various forms of -deleterious and malicious
magic: to destroy the crops, to thwart a fisherman,
to drive the pigs into the jungle, to blight bananas,
coco-nuts or areca palms, to spoil a feast or a Kula
expedition. Such magic, being levelled at established
institutions and important pursuits, is really an
instrument of crime, supplied by tradition. As such
it is a department of tradition, which works against
law and is directly in conflict with it, since law in
various forms safeguards these pursuits and institu-
tions. The case of sorcery, which is a special and very
important form of black magic, will be discussed
presently, as also certain non-magical systems of
evasion of tribal law.

The law of exogamy, the prohibition of marriage
and intercourse within the clan is often quoted as
one of the most rigid and wholesale commandments
of primitive law, in that it forbids sexual relations
within the clan with the same stringency, regardless
of the degree of kinship between the two people con-
cerned. The unity of the clan and the reality of the
* classificatory system of relationship * are—it is urged
—most fully vindicated in the taboo of clan incest.
It lumps together all the men and all the women of
the clan as ‘ brothers’ and ‘sisters’ to each other
and debars them absolutely from sexual intimacy.
A careful analysis of the relevant facts in the
Trobriands completely disposes of this view. It is


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 83


again one of these figments of native tradition, taken
over at its face value by anthropology and bodily
incorporated into its teachings.. In the Trobriands,
the breach of exogamy is regarded quite differently
according to whether the guilty pair are closely related
or whether they are only united by bonds of common
clanship. Incest with a sister is to the natives an
unspeakable, almost unthinkable crime—which again
does not mean that it is never committed. The breach
in the case of a matrilineal first cousin is a very serious
offence, and it can have, as we have seen, tragic conse-
quences. As kinship recedes, the stringency lessens
and, when committed with one who merely belongs to
the same clan, the breach of exogamy is but a venial
offence, easily condoned. Thus, as regards this pro-
hibition, the females of his clan are to a man not one
compact group, not one homogeneous ‘clan’, but a
well-differentiated set of individuals, each standing ina
special relation, according to her place in his genealogy.

1 To give an illustration, reversing the róle of savage and civilized,
of ethnographer and informant: many of my Melanesian friends,
taking at its face value the doctrine of ‘ brotherly love’ preached
by Christian Missionaries and the taboo on warfare and killing
preached and promulgated by Government officials, were unable to
reconcile the stories about the Great War, reaching—through
planters, traders, overseers, plantation hands—the remotest
Melanesian or Papuan village. They were really puzzled at hearing
that in one day white men were wiping out as many of their own
kind as would make up several of the biggest Melanesian tribes.
They forcibly concluded that the White Man was a tremendous


liar, but they were not certain at which end the he lay—whether
in the moral pretence or in his bragging about war achievements.


84 CRIME AND CUSTOM


From the point of view of the native libertine,
suvasova (the breach of exogamy) is indeed a specially
interesting and spicy form of erotic experience. Most
of my informants would not only admit but actually
did boast about having committed this offence or that of
adultery (kaylast) ; and I have many concrete, well-
attested cases on record.

So far I have spoken of intercourse. Marriage
within the same clan is a much more serious affair.
Nowadays even, with the general relaxation of the
rigour of traditional law, there are only some two or
three cases of marriage within the clan in existence, the
most notorious being that of Modulabu, headman of the
large village of Obweria, with Ipwaygana, a renowned
witch, who is also suspected of intercourse with the
tauva'u, supernatural evil spirits who bring disease.
Both of these people belong to the Malasi clan. It is
remarkable that this clan is traditionally associated
with incest. There is a myth of brother and sister
incest, which is the source of love magic, and this
happened in the Malasi clan. The most notorious case
of brother-sister incest of recent times also occurred in
this clan.1 Thus the relation of actual life to the ideal
state of affairs, as mirrored in traditional morals and
law, is very instructive.


1 For an ampler account of this subject, see the writer's article
on “Complex and Myth in Mother-right ”, Psyche, vol. v, No. 3,
Jan., 1925; reprinted in op. cit., Sex and Repression in Savage
Society, uniform with this work.


II


SORCERY AND SUICIDE AS LEGAL
INFLUENCES


N the preceding section 1 have described a case of
breach of tribal law and discussed the nature of
criminal tendencies as well as of the forces which set
about to restore order and tribal equilibrium as soon as
it has been upset.

We touched in our account upon two incidents—
the use of sorcery as means of coercion and the practice
of suicide as expiation and challenge. A more detailed
discussion must now be devoted to these two subjects.
Sorcery is practised in the Trobriands by a limited
number of specialists—as a rule men of outstanding
intelligence and personality, who acquire the art by
learning a number of spells and submitting to certain
conditions. They exercise their power on their own
behalf, and also professionally for a fee. Since the
belief in sorcery is deeply rooted and every serious
sickness and death is attributed to black magic, the
sorcerer is held in great awe, and, at first sight, his
position lends itself inevitably to abuse and blackmail.
It has been in fact frequently affirmed that sorcery is
the main criminal agency, as regards Melanesia and


G


86 CRIME AND CUSTOM


elsewhere. Speaking of the region I know from
personal experience, N.W. Melanesia, this view repre-
sents one side of the picture. Sorcery gives a man
power, wealth, and influence; and this he uses to
further his own ends, but the very fact that he has
much to lose and little to gain by flagrant abuses makes
him as a rule very moderate. The chief, the notables,
and the other sorcerers watch over him carefully ;
moreover not infrequently one sorcerer is believed to
be put away by another on behalf of a chief and by the
chief’s orders.

As regards his services, sold professionally, those in
power—chiefs, men of rank and wealth—have again
the first claim on him. When appealed to by lesser
people, the sorcerer would not lend himself to unjust
or fantastic requests. He is too rich and big a man to
do anything outside the law and he can afford to be
honest and just. When a real injustice or a thoroughly
unlawful act is to be punished on the other hand, the —
sorcerer feels the weight of public opinion with him
and he is ready to champion a good cause and to receive
his full fee. In such cases also the victim, on learning
that a sorcerer is at work against him, may quail
and make amends or come to an equitable arrangement.
Thus ordinarily, black magic acts as a genuine legal
force, for it is used in carrying out the rules of tribal
law, it prevents the use of violence and restores
equilibrium.


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 87


An interesting denouement, illustrating the legal
aspect of sorcery, is furnished by the custom of finding
out the reasons for which a man has been killed by
witchcraft. This is achieved by the correct interpreta-
tion of certain marks or symptoms to be seen on the
exhumed body. Some 12 to 24 hours after the pre-
liminary burial, at the first subsequent sunset, the
grave is opened, the body washed, anointed and
examined. The custom has been forbidden by Govern-
ment Orders—it is ‘ disgusting’ to the white man,
who anyhow has no opportunity nor any business to
be there—but it is still surreptitiously practised in
remoter villages. I have assisted several times at an
exhumation and once, when it was done somewhat
earlier, before the sun had set, I was able to obtain
photographs. The proceedings are highly dramatic.
A throng presses round the grave, some people rapidly
remove the earth amid loud wailing, others intone
magical spells against mulukwaust (corpse-devouring
and man-killing flying witches) and spit over all those
present with chewed ginger. As they come nearer the
bundle of mats enshrouding the corpse, they wail and
chant louder and louder, until the body is uncovered
amid an outburst of screams and the throng sweep
and press nearer. All urge forward to see it, wooden
platters with coco-nut cream are given to those nearest
to wash the body with, ornaments are taken off the
corpse, it is rapidly washed, wrapped up again and


88 CRIME AND CUSTOM


buried. During the time it is out the marks have to
be registered. It is not a formal affair and differences
of opinion are frequent. Often there are no clear
marks and still more often people cannot agree in their
verdict.

But there are marks (kala wabu) about which there
can be no doubt, which unequivocally indicate a habit,
propensity or characteristic of the dead one, which had
provoked the hostility of some one who had then
commissioned a sorcerer to kill the victim. If the body
shows scratches, especially on the shoulder, similar to
kimali, the erotic scratches impressed during sexual
dalliance, this means that deceased has been guilty
of adultery or has been too successful with women, to
the annoyance of a chief, man of power, or a sorcerer.
This frequent cause of death produces also other
symptoms: the exhumed body is found with the
legs apart; or with the mouth pursed, as if to emit
the smacking sound used to call a desired person
to a secret tryst. Or again the body is found swarming
with lice, since lousing one another is a favourite tender
occupation of lovers. Sometimes certain symptoms
appear before death: the other day a dying man was
observed to move his arm to and fro in a beckoning
gesture, and lo! after his body was exhumed there
were kimali marks on the shoulders. Again in another
concrete case, the dying man was heard to emit a
smacking sound, and later on at exhumation he


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 89


` swarmed with lice. It had been notorious that this
man had allowed himself to be loused in public by
some of the wives of Numakala, one of the former
paramount chiefs of Kiriwina—and he had been
obviously punished by high order.

When signs are discovered which suggest decoration,
face painting or certain dancing ornamentations, or
when the corpse’s hand trembles, as does the master-
dancer’s in wielding the kaydebu (dancing shield) or
the bisila (bunch of pandanus leaves)—his personal
beauty or those achievements which gain favour with
the fair sex had set sorcery against the defunct Don
Juan. Red, black and white hues on the skin, patterns
suggestive of the designs on a noble’s house and
store, swellings like the beams of a rich yam-house—
signify that the dead one indulged in too ambitious
decorations of his hut or store, and thus aroused the
chiefs resentment. Taro-shaped tumours or an
inordinate craving for this vegetable shortly before
death indicate that deceased had too splendid taro-
gardens or did not pay sufficient tribute of this com-
modity to the chief. Bananas, coco-nuts, sugar-cane
produce mutatis mutandis similar effects, while betel-
nut colours the mouth of the corpse red. If the body
is found foaming at the mouth, it shows that the man
was too much addicted to opulent and ostentatious
eating or bragging about food. A loose skin, peeling
off in folds means in particular abuse of pork diet or


90 CRIME AND CUSTOM


dishonest dealing in the stewardship of pigs, which
are the chief’s monopoly and only given into the care
of lesser men. The chief also resents it when a man has
not kept to the ceremonial and not bent before him
low enough ; such a man will be found doubled up
in his grave. Putrid matter flowing in strings out of
the nostrils represents, in this post-mortem sorcery
code, the valuable necklaces of shell-discs and thus too
great a success in the Kula trade; while circular
swellings on the arms indicate the same through the
means of mwali (armshells). Finally, a man killed for
the reason that he is a sorcerer himself, produces,
besides the normal spirit (baloma), also a material
ghost (kousi), which spooks round the grave and plays
various pranks.! The body of a sorcerer is also often
found disarranged, distorted in the grave.

I have obtained this list by discussing concrete
cases and noting symptoms actually registered. It is
very important to realize that frequently, I should say
in most cases, no signs are found on the body or there
is no agreement about them. Needless to say, a sick
man always suspects, in fact thinks he knows who is
the sorcerer guilty of his ailment, on whose behalf
he acts and for what reason. So that the ‘ finding ”

1 Compare the article on ‘ Baloma * in the Journal of the Royal
Anthrop. Inst., 1916, where I describe the beliefs in the two surviving
principles in detail, without mentioning that the kousi is


found exclusively in the case of a sorcerer. This I found out
during my third expedition to New Guinea.


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT gI


of a mark has all the characters of an a posteriori
verification of what is already known. In this light,
the above list, which includes the ‘ causes of death’
openly discussed and readily found, receives a special
significance: it shows us which offences are not
altogether considered dishonourable or contemptible,
and also those which are not too burdensome on the
survivors. In fact sexual success, beauty, skill in
dancing, ambition for wealth and recklessness in display
and in the enjoyment of worldly goods, too much power
by sorcery—these are enviable failings or sins,
dangerous, since they arouse the jealousy of the mighty,
but surrounding the culprit with a halo of glory. On
the other hand, since almost all these offences are
resented by the chief of the district, rightly resented at
that and legally punished, the survivors are relieved of
the burdensome duty of vendetta.

The point of real importance in our argument, how-
ever, is that all these standard symptoms show us how
much resented is any prominence, any excess of
qualities or possessions not warranted by social position,
any outstanding personal achievement or virtue not
associated with rank or power. These things are
punishable and the one who watches over the
mediocrity of others is the chief, whose essential
privilege and duty to tradition is to enforce the golden
mean upon others. The chief, however, cannot use direct


bodily violence in such matters, when only a suspicion


92 CRIME AND CUSTOM


or a shade of doubt or a tendency tell against the
delinquent. The proper legal means for him is to resort
to sorcery and be it remembered he has to pay for it
out of his private purse. He was allowed to use violence
(i.e. before white man’s ‘ orders’ came in), to punish
any direct breach of etiquette or ceremonial as well as
flagrant offences, such as adultery with any of his wives,
theft of his private possessions or any personal insult.
A man who would dare to place himself above the chief’s
head, to touch that tabooed part of his neck or
shoulders, to usecertain filthy expressions in his presence,
to commit such breach of etiquette as sexually to allude
to his sister—would have been immediately speared by
one of the chief’s armed attendants. This applies in
full stringency to the paramount chief of Kiriwina
only. Cases are on record in which by an accident a
man offended the chief, and had to fly for his life. A
recent case is that of a man who during warfare from
the opposite camp had hurled an insult at the chief.
This man was actually killed after peace had been
concluded, and his death was regarded as a just
retribution for his offence and no vendetta followed.
We can see thus that in many, in fact in most
cases, black magic is regarded as the chief’s principal
instrument in the enforcement of his exclusive
privileges and prerogatives. Such cases pass, of course,
imperceptibly into actual oppression and crass injustice,
of which I could mention also a number of concrete


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 93


instances. Even then, since it invariably ranges itself
on the side of the powerful, wealthy, and influential,
sorcery remains a support of vested interest ; hence in
the long run, of law and order. It is always a con-
servative force, and it furnishes really the main source
of the wholesome fear of punishment and retribution
indispensable in any orderly society. There is hardly
anything more pernicious, therefore, in the many
European ways of interference with savage peoples,
than the bitter animosity with which Missionary,
Planter, and Official alike pursue the sorcerer.1 The
rash, haphazard, unscientific application of our morals,
laws, and customs to native societies, and the
destruction of native law, quasi-legal machinery and
instruments of power leads only to anarchy and moral
atrophy and in the long run to the extinction of culture
and race.

Sorcery, in fine, is neither exclusively a method of
administering justice, nor a form of criminal practice.
It can be used both ways, though it is never employed
in direct opposition to law, however often it might be
used to commit wrongs against a weaker man on behalf
of a more powerful. In whatever way it works, it isa
way of emphasizing the status quo, a method of

1 The sorcerer, who stands for conservatism, the old tribal
order, the old beliefs and apportionment of power, naturally resents
the innovators and the destroyers of his Welianschauung. He is


as a rule the natural enemy of the white man, who therefore hates
him.


94 CRIME AND CUSTOM


expressing the traditional inequalities and of counter-
acting the formation of any new ones. Since con-
servatism is the most important trend in a primitive
society, sorcery on the whole is a beneficent agency, of
enormous value for early culture.

These considerations show clearly how’ difficult it
is to draw a line between the quasi-legal and quasi-
criminal applications of sorcery. The ‘criminal’
aspect of law in savage communities is perhaps even
vaguer than the ‘civil’ one, the idea of “justice” in
our sense hardly applicable and the means of restoring
a disturbed tribal equilibrium slow and cumbersome.

Having learnt something about Trobriand
criminology from the study of sorcery, let us now pass
to suicide. Though by no means a purely juridical
institution, suicide possesses incidentally a distinct
legal aspect. -It is practised by two serious methods
lou (jumping off a palm top) and the taking of
irremediable poison from the gall bladder of a globe-
fish (soka); and by the milder method of partaking
of some of the vegetable poison tuva, used for stunning
fish. A generous dose of emetic restores to life one
poisoned by ¿uva, which is therefore used in lovers’
quarrels, matrimonial differences, and similar cases,
of which several occurred during my stay in the
Trobriands, none fatal.

The two fatal forms of suicide are used as means of
escape from situations without an issue and the


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 95


‘underlying mental attitude is somewhat complex,
embracing the desire of self-punishment, revenge,
re-habilitation, and sentimental grievance. A number
of concrete cases briefly described will illustrate best
the psychology of suicide.

A case somewhat similar to that of Kima’i, described
above, was that of a girl, Bomawaku, who was in love
with a youth of her own clan and had an official and
acceptable suitor, for whom she did not care. She lived
in her bukumatula (unmarried peoples’ dormitory),
built for her by her father and received there her
unlawful lover. Her suitor discovered this, insulted her
in public, upon which she put on festive dress and
ornamentation, wailed from the palm top, and jumped
off. This is an old story, told me by an eye-witness,
in reminiscence of the Kima’i event. The girl had also
sought an escape from an intolerable impasse, into
which her passion and the traditional prohibitions had
placed her. But the immediate and the real cause of
the suicide was the moment of insult. If not for that,
the deeper but less poignant conflict between love and
taboo would never have led to a rash act.

Mwakenuwa of Liluta, a man of high rank, great
magical powers, and outstanding personality, whose
fame has reached down to our times across a couple
of generations, had among other wives one Isowa’i,
to whom he was very attached. He used to quarrel


with her sometimes and one day in the course of a


96 CRIME AND CUSTOM


violent dissention he insulted her by one of the worst
formule (kwoy lumuta) which, especially from husband
to wife, is regarded as unbearable.* Isowa’i acted up
to the traditional idea of honour and committed suicide
on the spot by lou (jumping off a palm). Next day,
while the wailing for Isowa’i was in progress,
Mwakenuwa followed 'her and his corpse was placed
beside hers to be bewailed together. Here it was rather
a matter of passion than of law. But the case well shows
how strongly the traditional feeling and sense of honour
was averse to any excess, to any transgression of the
even calm tone. It shows also how strongly the survivor
could be moved by the self-inflicted fate of the one
who had taken her life.

A similar case occurred some time ago, in which the
husband accused his wife of adultery, upon which she
jumped off a palm and he followed her. Another event
of more recent date, was the suicide by poisoning of
Isakapu of Sinaketa, accused by her husband of |
adultery. Bogonela, a wife of the chief Kouta'uya of
Sinaketa, discovered guilty of misconduct during his
absence by a fellow wife, committed suicide on the spot.
A few years ago in Sinaketa a man pestered by one of
his wives, who accused him of adultery and other
transgressions, committed suicide by poisoning.


1 For an account and analysis of abuse and obscene expressions,
cf. op. cit., Sex and Repression in Savage Society or the writer's article
in Psyche, v. 3, 1925.


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 97


Bolubese, wife of one of the previous paramount
chiefs of Kiriwina, ran away from her husband to her
own village, and threatened by her own kinsmen
(maternal uncle and brothers) to be sent back by force,
killed herself by lo'u. There came to my notice a
number of similar cases, illustrating the tensions
between husband and wife, between lovers, between
kinsmen.

Two motives must be registered in the psychology of
suicide: first, there is always some sin, crime or
passionate outburst to expiate, whether a breach of
exogamous rules, or adultery, or an unjust injury
done, or an attempt to escape one’s obligations ;
secondly, there is a protest against those who have
brought this trespass to light, insulted the culprit
in public, forced him into an unbearable situation.
One of these two motives may be at times more
prominent than the other, but as a rule there is
a mixture of both in equal proportions. The person
publicly accused admits his or her guilt, takes all the
consequences, carries out the punishment upon his
own person, but at the same time declares that he has
been badly treated, appeals to the sentiment of those
who have driven him to the extreme if they are his
friends or relations, or if they are his enemies appeals
to the solidarity of his kinsmen, asking them to carry
on a vendetta (lugwa).

Suicide is certainly not a means of administering


98 CRIME AND CUSTOM


justice, but it affords the accused and oppressed one—
whether he be guilty or innocent—a means of escape
and rehabilitation. It looms large in the psychology
of the natives, is a permanent damper on any violence
of language or behaviour, on any deviation from custom
or tradition, which might hurt or offend another.
Thus suicide, like sorcery, is a means of keeping the
natives to the strict observance of the law, a means of
preventing people from extreme and unusual types
of behaviour. Both are pronounced conservative
influences and as such are strong supports of law and
order.

What have we learned from the facts of crime
and its punishment recorded in this and the fore-
going chapters? We have found that the principles
according to which crime is punished are very vague,
that the methods of carrying out retribution are fitful,
governed by chance and personal passion rather than
by any system of fixed institutions. The most
important methods, in fact, are a bye-product of non-
legal institutions, customs, arrangements and events
such as sorcery and suicide, the power of the chief,
magic, the supernatural consequences of taboo and
personal acts of vindictiveness. These institutions and
usages, far from being legal in their main function, only
very partially and imperfectly subserve the end of
maintaining and enforcing the biddings of tradition.
We have not found any arrangement or usage which


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 99


could be classed as a form of ‘administration of
justice”, according to a code and by fixed methods.
All the legally effective institutions we found are rather
means of cutting short an illegal or intolerable state of
affairs, of restoring the equilibrium in social life and
of giving vent to the feelings of oppression and injustice
felt by individuals. Crime in the Trobriand society
can be but vaguely defined—it is sometimes an outburst
of passion, sometimes the breach of a definite taboo,
sometimes an attempt on person or property (murder,
theft, assault), sometimes an indulgence in too high
ambitions or wealth, not sanctioned by tradition, in
conflict with the prerogatives of the chief or some
notable. We have also found that the most definite
prohibitions are elastic, since there exist methodical
systems of evasion.

I shall now proceed to the discussion of instances in
which law is not broken by an act of definitely illegal
nature, but where it is confronted by a system of
legalized usage, almost as strong as traditional law
itself.


IIT
SYSTEMS OF LAW IN CONFLIÇT


RIMITIVE law is not a homogeneous, perfectly
unified body of rules, based upon one principle
developed into a consistent system. So much we know
already from our previous survey of legal facts in the
Trobriand Islands. The law of these natives consists
on the contrary of a number of more or less independent
systems, only partially adjusted to one another. Each
of these—matriarchy, father-right, the law of marriage,
the prerogatives and duties of a chief and so on—has
a certain field completely its own, but it can also
trespass beyond its legitimate boundaries. This resulis
in a state of tense equilibrium with an occasional
outbreak. The study of the mechanism of such conflicts —
between legal principles, whether overt or masked, is
extremely instructive and it reveals to us the very
nature of the social fabric in a primitive tribe. I shall
therefore proceed now to the description of one
or two occurrences and then to their analysis.

I shall describe first a dramatic event which
illustrates the conflict between the main principle of
law, Mother-right, and one of the strongest sentiments,
paternal love, round which there cluster many usages,


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IOI


tolerated by custom, though in reality working against
the law.

The two principles Mother-right and Father-love
are focussed most sharply in the relation of a man to
his sister’s son and to his own son respectively. His
matrilineal nephew is his nearest kinsman and the legal
heir to all his dignities and offices. His own son on the
other hand isnot regarded asa kinsman; legally he is
not related to his father, and the only bond is the
sociological status of marriage with the mother.

Yet in the reality of actual life the father is much
more attached to his own son than to his nephew.
Between father and son there obtains invariably friend-
ship and personal attachment; between uncle and
nephew not infrequently the ideal of perfect solidarity
is marred by the rivalries and suspicions inherent in
any relationship of succession.

Thus the powerful legal system of Mother-right is
associated with a rather weak sentiment, while Father-
love, much less important in law, is backed by a strong
personal feeling. In the case of a chief whose power is
considerable, the personal influence outweighs the
ruling of the law and the position of the son is as strong
as that of the nephew.

That was the case in the capital village of
Omarakana, the residence of the principal chief, whose


1 Cf. The Father in Primitive Psychology (1926), originally
published in Psyche, vol. iv, No. 2,


H


102 CRIME AND CUSTOM


power extends over the whole district, whose influence
reaches many archipelagoes, and whose fame is spread
all over the eastern end of New Guinea. I soon found
out that there was a standing feud between his sons
and nephews, a feud which assumed a really acute form
in the ever recurrent quarrels between his favourite
son Namwana Guya'u and his second eldest nephew
Mitakata.

The final outbreak came when the chief's son
inflicted a serious injury on the nephew in a
litigation before the resident government official of
the district. Mitakata, the nephew, was in fact con-
victed and put to prison for a month or so.

When the news of this reached the village, the short
exultation among the partisans of Namwana Guya'u
was followed by a panic, for everyone felt that things
had come to a crisis. The chief shut himself up in his
personal hut, full of evil forebodings of the con-
sequences for his favourite, who was felt to have acted
rashly and in outrage of tribal law and feeling. The
kinsmen of the imprisoned young heir to chieftainship
were boiling with suppressed anger and indignation.
As night fell, the subdued village settled down to a
silent supper, each family over its solitary meal. There
was nobody on the central place—Namwana Guya'u was
not to be seen, the chief To'uluwa hid in his hut, most
of his wives and their families also remained indoors.
Suddenly a loud voice rang out across the silent village.


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 103


- Bagido’u, the heir apparent, and eldest brother of the
imprisoned man, standing before his hut, spoke out,
addressing the offender of his family :—

“ Namwana Guya’u, you are a cause of trouble. We,
the Tabalu of Omarakana, allowed you to stay here, to
live among us. You had plenty of food in Omarakana,
you ate of our food, you partook of the pigs brought to
us as a tribute and of the fish. You sailed in our
canoe. You built a hut on our soil. Now you
have done us harm. You have told lies. Mitakata is
in prison. We do not want you to stay here. This
is our village! You are a stranger here. Go away !
We chase you away! We chase you out of
Omarakana.”

These words were uttered in a loud piercing voice,
trembling with strong emotion, each short sentence
spoken after a pause, each like an individual missile,
hurled across the empty space to the hut where
Namwana Guya'u sat brooding. After that the younger
sister of Mitakata also arose and spoke, and then a
young man, one of the maternal nephews. Their words
were almost the same as in the first speech, the burden
being the formula of chasing away, the yoba. The
speeches were received in deep silence. Nothing stirred
in the village. But, before the night was over, Namwana
Guya'u had left Omarakana for ever. He had gone over
and settled in his own village, in Osapola the village
whence his mother came, a few miles distant. For weeks


104 CRIME AND CUSTOM


his mother and sister wailed for him with the loud
lamentations of mourning for the dead. The chief
remained for three days in his hut, and when he came
out looked older and broken up by grief. All his
personal interest and affection were on the side of his
favourite son, of course. Yet he could do nothing
to help him. His kinsmen had acted in complete
accordance with their rights and, according to tribal
law, he could not possibly dissociate himself from them.
No power could change the decree of exile. Once the
‘Go away ’—(bukula), ‘we chase thee away ’—
(kayabaim), were pronounced, the man had togo. These
words, very rarely uttered in dead earnest, have a
binding force and almost ritual power when pronounced
by the citizens of a place against a resident outsider. A
man who would try to brave the dreadful insult
involved in them and remain in spite of them, would be
dishonoured for ever. In fact, anything but immediate
compliance with a ritual request is unthinkable for a
Trobriand Islander.

The chief’s resentment against his kinsmen was deep
and lasting. At first he would not even speak to them.
For a year or so, not one of them dared to ask to be
taken on overscas expeditions by him, although they
were fully entitled to this privilege. Two years later
in 1917, when I returned to the Trobriands, Namwana
Guya'u was still resident in the other village and keeping
aloof from his father’s kinsmen, though he frequently


(‘Sz ofod aay)


punoisyoeq əy} ur 4U3} s 190yde1S0uy1g 1
Buey VE my jeuosiod s Jary) oqp voq vy


eyl JO WY [Bloody y


i


serail 3


IA 3LVIA


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 105


paid visits to Omarakana in order to be in attendance
on his father, especially when To'uluwa went abroad.
The mother had died within a year after the expulsion.
As the natives described it: “ She wailed and wailed,
refused to eat, and died.” The relations between
the two main enemies were completely broken and
Mitakata, the young chieftain who had been imprisoned,
had sent away his wife who belonged to the same sub-
clan as Namwana Guya'u. There was a deep rift in the
whole social life of Kiriwina.

The incident was one of the most dramatic events
which I have ever witnessed in the Trobriands. I have
described it at length, as it contains a clear illustration
of Mother right, of the power of tribal law and of the
passions which work in spite of it.

The case though exceptionally dramatic and telling is
by nomeans anomalous. In every village where there is
a chief of high rank, an influential notable or a powerful
sorcerer, he favours his sons and allows them privileges,
which are, strictly speaking, not theirs. Often this
produces no antagonisms within the community—
when both son and nephew are moderate and tactful.
Kayla’i, the son of M'tabalu, the recently deceased
chief of highest rank of Kasanai, lives on in his father’s
village, carries on most of the communal magic and
is on excellent terms with his father’s successor. In
the cluster of villages of Sinaketa, where there reside
several chiefs of high rank, some of the son-favourites


106 CRIME AND CUSTOM


are good friends with the rightful heirs, some in open
hostility to them.

In Kavataria, the village adjoining the Mission and
the Government Station, the last chief’s son, one
Dayboya, has completely ousted the real masters,
supported in this by European influence, which
naturally worked for patrilineal claims. But the
conflict, more acute nowadays and carried on with
greater force by the paternal principle, because of the
backing it inevitably receives from the white man, is
as old as mythological tradition. It is expressed in the
stories told for amusement, the kukwanebu, where
latula guya’u, the chief’s son, is a standard type,
arrogant, pampered, pretentious, often the butt of
practical jokes. In serious myths, he is sometimes the
villain, sometimes the contending hero—but the
opposition of the two principles is clearly marked.
But most convincing as to the age and cultural depth
of the conflict, is the fact that it is embedded in a
number of institutions, with which we shall presently
become acquainted. Among the people of low
rank, the opposition between Mother-right and Father-
love also exists, and it shows itself in the
father’s tendency to do all he can for his son, at
the nephew’s expense. And again after the father’s
death the son has to return to the heirs practically all
the benefits and possessions received during the father’s
lifetime. This naturally leads to a good deal of


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 107


discontent, friction, and round-about methods of
arriving at a satisfactory settlement.

We are, then, once more face to face with the dis-
crepancy between the ideal of law and its realization,
between the orthodox version and the practice of
actual life. We have already met with it in exogamy,
in the system of counter-magic, in the relation between
sorcery and law, and, indeed, in the elasticity of all
the rules of civil law. Here, however, we find the very
foundations of the tribal constitution challenged,
indeed systematically flouted by a tendency entirely
incompatible with it. Mother-right as we know is the
most important and the most comprehensive principle
of law, underlying all their customs and institutions.
It rules that kinship has to be counted through females
only and that all social privileges follow the maternal
line. Thus it excludes the legal validity of a direct
bodily tie between father and child and of any filiation
in virtue of this tie.? With all this, the father loves the


1 The natives are ignorant of the fact of physiological fatherhood,
and, as I have shown in op. cit., The Father in Primitive Psychology,
1926, have a supernatural theory of the causes of birth. There is
no physical continuity between the male and the children of his
wife. Yet the father loves his child even from birth—to the extent
at least to which the normal European father does. Since this
cannot be due to any ideas that they are his offspring, this must be
due to the outcome of some innate tendency in the human
species, on the part of the male to feel attached to the children
born by a woman with whom he’ is mated, has been living
permanently and has kept watch over during her pregnancy.
This appears to me the only plausible explanation of the ‘ voice


108 CRIME AND CUSTOM


child invariably and this sentiment finds a limited
recognition in law ; the husband has the right and duty
to act as a guardian to his wife’s children till puberty.
This, of course, is the only line which law can possibly
take in a culture with patrilocal marriage. Since small
children cannot be severed from the mother, since she
has to be with her husband, often at a distance from her
own people, since she and her children need a male
guardian and protector on the spot—the husband
necessarily fulfils this róle and he does it by strict and
orthodox law. The same law, however, orders the boy—


not the girl, who remains with the parents till


marriage—to leave the father’s house at puberty and
to move to his mother’s community and pass into the
tutelage of his maternal uncle. This, on the whole,
runs counter to the wishes of the father, of the son and
of the latter’s uncle—the three men concerned, with
the result that there has grown a number of usages,
tending to prolong paternal authority and to establish
an additional bond between father and son. The strict
law declares that the son is citizen of the maternal
villes, that inehis favwer’s He is but .amstrangér
(fomakava)—usage allows him to remain there and to
enjoy miost of the privileges of citizenship. For
of blood’ which speaks in societies ignorant of fatherhood as
well as those that are emphatically patnmarchal, which makes a
father love his physiologically own child as. well as one born


through adultery—as long as he does not know of it. The
tendency is of the greatest use to the species.


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 109


ceremonial purposes, in a funeral or mourning per-
formance, in a feast and as a rule in fight, he will stand
side by side with his maternal uncle. In daily execution
of nine-tenths of all the pursuits and interests of life
he is bound to his father.

The usage of keeping the son after puberty, often
after marriage, is a regular institution: there exist
definite arrangements to meet it, it is done according to
strict rules and definite procedure, which make the
usage anything but clandestine and irregular. There is
first the accredited pretext that the son remains there
to be able better to fill his father's yam-house, which
he does in the name of his mother's brother and as his
successor. In the case of a chief again there are certain
offices, considered to be most appropriately filled by the
chief's own son. When this latter marries he builds
a house on his father's site, near the father's own
dwelling.

The son naturally has to live and eat, he must there-
fore make gardens and carry on other pursuits. The
father gives him a few baleko (garden plots) from his
own lands, gives him a place in his canoe, grants him
rights of fishing—hunting is of no importance in the
Trobriands—equips him with tools, nets and other
fishing tackle. As a rule, the father goes further. He
allows his son certain privileges and gives him presents,
which by right he should keep till he hands them on to
his heirs. It is true that he will give such privileges and


110 CRIME AND CUSTOM


presents to his heirs during his life-time, when they
solicit it by a payment called pokala. He cannot even
refuse the deal. But then his younger brother or his
nephew has substantially to pay for land, magic,
Kula rights, heirlooms, or ‘ mastership °’ in dances and
ceremonies ; even though they belong to him by right
and he would inherit them in any case. Now established
usage allows the man to give such valuables or privileges
to the son free of charge. So that here the usage,
established but non-legal, not only takes great liberties
with the law, but adds insult to injury by granting the
usurper considerable advantages over the rightful
owner.

The most important arrangement by which a
temporary father-line is smuggled into Mother-right
is the institution of cross-cousin marriage. A man in
the Trobriands who has a son and whose sister gives
birth to a girl child has the right to ask that this infant
be betrothed to his son. Thus his grandchildren will be
of his own kin, and his son will become the brother-in-
law of the heir to chieftainship. This latter will, there-
fore, be under an obligation to supply the son's house-
hold with food and in general to be a helpmate to his
brother-in-law and protector of his sister's family.
Thus the very man on whose interest the son is likely
to encroach is prevented from resenting it and, indeed,
made to regard it as his own privilege. Cross-cousin
marnage in the Trobriands is an institution by


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 111


which a man can secure for his son a definite though
roundabout right to remain for life in the father's
community, through an exceptional matrilocal
marriage, and enjoy almost all the privileges of full
citizenship.

Thus round the sentiment of Father-love there
crystallizes a number of established usages, sanctioned
by tradition and regarded as the most natural course by
the community. Yet they are contrary to strict law or
involve exceptional and anomalous proceeding such as
matrilocal marriage. If opposed and protested against
in the name of the law, they must give way toit. Cases
are on record, when the son, even though married to
his father's niece, had to leave the community. And not
infrequently the heirs put a stop to their uncle’s illegal
generosity, by demanding with pokala what he is
about to give to his son. But any such opposition gives
offence to the man in power, provokes hostilities and
frictions, and is resorted to only in extreme cases.


NS


THE FACTORS GF sOCI\L COMESION IN @
PRIMITIVE TRIBE


|‘ analysing the clash between Mother-right and
Father-love, we have focussed our attention on the
personal relations between the man, his son and his
nephew respectively. But the problem is also that ot the
unity of the clan. For the group of two tormed by the
man in power (whether chief, notable, village headman,
or sorgerer) and lis her is the very cor of tie
matrilineal Clan. The unite, hotmepenreity, AN
solidarity of the clan can be no greater than that of its
core, and since we find that this core 1s fissured, that
there are normally tensions and antagonisms between
the two men, we cannot accept the axiom that the clan
is a pertectly welded unit. But the * clan-dogma * or
“sib-dogma *, to use Dr. Lowie’s apposite expression,
is not without its foundations, and though we have
shown that in its very nucleus the clan is split, and
also that it is not homogeneous as regards exogamy,
it will be good to show exactly how much truth there
is in the contention of clan unity.
It may be stated at once that here, again,


Anthropology has taken over the orthodox native


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 113


doctrine or rather their legal fiction at its face
value, and has been thus duped by mistaking the
legal ideal for the sociological realities of tribal
life. The position of native law in this matter
is consistent and clear. Accepting Mother-right
as the exclusive principle of kinship in legal
matters, and applying it to its furthest consequences,
the native divides all human beings into those
connected with himself by the matrilineal tie whom
he calls kinsmen (veyola), and those who are not thus
related, and whom he calls strangers (tomakava). This
doctrine then is combined with the ‘classificatory
principle of Kinship’, which fully governs only the
vocabulary, but to a limited extent also influences
legal relations. Both Mother-right and the classificatory
principle are further associated with the totemic
system, by which all human beings fall into four clans,
subdivided further into an irregular number of sub-
clans. A man or woman is a Malasi, Lukuba,
Lukwasisiga, or Lukulabuta, of such and such sub-
clan, and this totemic identity is as fixed and definite
as sex, colour of skin, or size of body; it does not
cease with death, the spirit remaining what the man
has been, and it existed before birth, the ‘ spirit-child ’
being already member of a clan and sub-clan. Member-
ship in sub-clan means a common ancestress, unity of
kinship, unity of citizenship in a local community,
common title to lands and co-operation in many


114 CRIME AND CUSTOM


economic and in all ceremonial activities. Legally it
implies the fact of common clan and sub-clan name,
common responsibilities in vendetta (/ugwa), the rule of
exogamy, finally the fiction of an overweening interest
in one another’s welfare, so that by a death the sub-
clan first and to some extent the clan are considered
bereft and the whole mourning ritual is tuned to this
traditional view. The unity of the clan and still more
of the sub-clan is, however, expressed most tangibly in
the great festive distributions (sagalz), in which the
totemic groups play a game of ceremonially-economic
give and take. Thus there is a multiple and a real
unity of interests, activities and necessarily some
feelings, uniting the members of a sub-clan and the
component sub-clans into a clan and this fact is
very strongly emphasized in many institutions, in
mythology, in vocabulary and in the current sayings
and traditional maxims.

But there is also the other side to the picture, of l
which we have had clear indications already, and this
we must concisely formulate. First of all, though all
ideas about kinship, totemic division, unity of
substance, social duties, etc., tend to emphasize the
‘clan dogma ’, not all the sentiments follow this lead.
While in any contest of social, political, or ceremonial
nature a man through ambition, pride, and patriotism
invariably sides with his matrilineal kindred, softer
feelings, loving friendship, attachments make him


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 115


often neglect clan for wife, children, and friends, in the
ordinary situations of life. Linguistically, the term
veyogu (my kinsman) has an emotional colouring of
cold duty and pride, the term lubaygu (my friend and
my sweetheart), on the other hand, possesses a
distinctly warmer, more intimate tone. In their after
death beliefs, too, the ties of love, conjugal attachment
and friendship are made—in a less orthodox but more
personal belief—to endure into the spirit world, even
as totemic identity endures.

As to the definite duties of the clan, we have seen
in detail, on the example of exogamy, how much
elasticity, evasion, and breach there is. In economic
matters as we know already, the exclusiveness of clan
co-operation suffers a serious leakage through the
father’s tendency to give to his son and to take him
into clan enterprises. Lugwa (the vendetta) is carried
out but seldom: the payment of lula (peace-making
price) is again a traditional form of compensation for,
really of evasion of the sterner duty. In sentiment,
the father or the widow is often far more keen on
avenging the murdered one’s death than his kinsmen
are. On all occasions when the clan acts as one
economic unit in ceremonial distributions, it remains
homogeneous only with regard to other clans. Within,
strict accounts are kept between the component
sub-clans and within the sub-clan between individuals.
Thus here again the unity exists on one side, but


116 CRIME AND CUSTOM


it is combined on the other with a thorough-going
differentiation, with strict watch over the particular
self-interests, and last but not least with a thoroughly
business-like spirit not devoid of suspicion, jealousy
and mean practices. l

If a concrete survey of the personal relations within
the sub-clan were taken, the strained and distinctly
unfriendly attitude between maternal uncle and nephew
as we saw it in Omarakana, would be by no means
infrequently found. Between brothers sometimes there
exists real friendship, as was the case with Mitakata and
his brothers, and with Namwana Guya’u and his. On
the other hand, strong hatreds and acts of violence and
hostility are on record both in legend and actual life.
I shall give a concrete example of fatal disharmony
within what should be the nucleus of a clan. a group
of brothers.

In a village quite close to where I was camping
at that time, there lived three brothers, the eldest
of whom, the headman of the clan, was blind.
The youngest brother used to take advantage of this
infirmity and to gather the betel-nut from the palms
even before it was properly ripe. The blind man was
thus deprived of his share. One day when he discovered
again that he was cheated of his due, he broke into a
passion of fury, seized an axe, and entering his
brother’s house in the dark, he succeeded in wounding


him. The wounded man escaped and took refuge in the


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 17


third brother’s house. This one, indignant at the
outrage done to the youngest brother, took a spear
and killed the blind man. The tragedy had a prosaic
ending, for the murderer was put into jail for one
year by the magistrate. In the olden days—on this
all my informants were unanimous—he would have
committed suicide.

In this case we meet the two standard criminal acts,
theft and murder, combined and it will be well to make
a brief digression on them. Neither delict plays any
considerable part in the life of the Trobriand natives.
Theft is classified under two concepts: kwapatu (lit.
to catch hold), which word is applied to unlawful
appropriation of objects of personal use, implements,
and valuables ; and vayla’u, a special word, applied
to theft of vegetable food either from gardens or
yam-houses, also used when pigs or fowl are
purloined. While the thieving of personal objects is
felt to be a greater nuisance, stealing of food is
more despicable. There is no greater disgrace to a
Trobriander than to be without food, in need of it,
to beg for it, and an admission by act that one has been
in such straits as to steal it entails the greatest
humiliation conceivable. Again, since the theft of
valuables is almost out of question, because they are
all earmarked,! thieving of personal objects cannot


1 Cf. the writer’s op. cit., Argonauts of the Western Pacific.


I


118 CRIME AND CUSTOM


inflict any serious loss on the rightful owner. The
penalties in either case would consist in the shame and
ridicule which covers the culprit and, indeed, all cases
of theft brought to my notice were perpetrated by
feeble-minded people, social outcasts, or minors.
Depriving the white man of his superfluous possessions,
such as trade goods, tinned food or tobacco, which he
keeps locked in a niggardly fashion without using, is
in a class by itself, and is naturally not considered
a breach of law, morality or gentlemanly manners.

A murder is an extremely rare occurrence. In fact,
apart from the case just described, only one
occurred during my residence. the spearing of a
notorious sorcerer at night, while he was surreptitiously
approaching the village. This was done in defence of the
sick man, the victim of the sorcerer, by one of the armed
guard who keep watch during the night on such
occasions.

. A few cases are told of killing as punishment for -
adultery caught in flagranti, insults to people of high
rank, brawls and skirmishes. Also, of course, killing
during regular war. In all cases when a man is killed
by people of another sub-clan, there is the obligation
of talion. This, in theory, is absolute, in practice it is
regarded obligatory only in cases of a male adult of
rank or importance; and even then it is considered
superfluous when the deceased had met his fate for a


fault clearly his own. In other cases, when vendetta


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 119


is obviously demanded by the honour of the sub-clan,
it is still evaded by the substitution of blood-money
(lula). This was a regular institution in the making of
peace after war, when a compensation was given to the
other side for every one killed and wounded. But also
when murder or homicide were committed, a lula
would relieve the survivors from the duty of talion
(lugwa).

And that brings us back to the problem of clan unity.
All the facts quoted above show that the unity of
the clan is neither a mere fairy tale, invented by
Anthropology, nor yet the one and only real principle
of savage law, the key to all its riddles and difficulties.
The actual state of affairs, fully seen and thoroughly
understood, is very complex, full of apparent as well as
of real contradictions and of conflicts due to the play
of the Ideal and its actualization, to the imperfect
adjustment between the spontaneous human tendencies
and rigid law. The unity of the clan is a legal fiction in
that it demands—in all native doctrine, that is in all
their professions, and statements, sayings, overt rules
and patterns of conduct—an absolute subordination
of all other interests and ties to the claims of clan
solidarity, while, in fact, this solidarity is almost
constantly sinned against and practically non-existent
in the daily run of ordinary life. On the other hand, at
certain times, in the ceremonial phases of native life
above all, the clan unity dominates everything and in


120 CRIME AND CUSTOM


cases of overt clash and open challenge it will overrule
personal considerations and failings which under
ordinary conditions would certainly determine the
individual’s conduct. There are, therefore, two sides
to the question, and most of the important events of
native life, as well as of their institutions, customs,
and tendencies cannot be properly understood without
the realization of both sides and of their interaction.

It is not difficult to see also, why Anthropology
fixed upon one side of the question, why it presented
the rigid but fictitious doctrine of native law as the
whole truth. For this doctrine represents the intel-
lectual, overt, fully conventionalized aspect of the
native attitude, the one set into clear statements, into
definite legal formule. When the native is asked what
he would do in such and such a case, he answers what
he should do ; he lays down the pattern of best possible
conduct. When he acts as informant to a field-anthro-
pologist, it costs him nothing to retail the Ideal of the
law. His sentiments, his propensities, his bias, his
self-indulgences as well as tolerance of others’ lapses,
he reserves for his behaviour in real life. And even
then, though he acts thus, he would be unwilling to
admit often even to himself, that he ever acts below
the standard of law. The other side, the natural,
impulsive code of conduct, the evasions, the com-
promises and non-legal usages are revealed only to the
field-worker, who observes native life directly, registers


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 121


facts, lives at such close quarters with his * material ”
as to understand not only their language and their
statements, but also the hidden motives of behaviour,
and the hardly ever formulated spontaneous line of
conduct. ‘Hearsay Anthropology’ is constantly
exposed to the danger of ignoring the seamy side of
savage law. This side, it can be said without exaggera-
tion, exists and is tolerated as long as it is not squarely
faced, put into words, openly stated and thus challenged.
This accounts perhaps for the old theory of the ‘ un-
trammelled savage ’ whose customs are none and whose
manners are beastly. For the authorities who gave us
this version knew well the intricacies and irregularities ;
of native behaviour which by no means conforms to
strict law, while they ignored the structure of native
legal doctrine. The modern field-worker constructs
it without much trouble from his native informant’s
statements, but he remains ignorant of the blurs made
by human nature on this theoretical outline. Hence
he has re-shaped the savage into a model of legality.
Truth is a combination of both versions and our
knowledge of it reveals the old as well as the new figment
as futile simplifications of a very complicated state of
things.

This, like everything else in human cultural reality į
is not a consistent logical scheme, but rather a seething
mixture of conflicting principles. Among these the
clash of matriliny and paternal interest is probably the


122 CRIME AND CUSTOM


most important. The discrepancy between the totemic
clan solidarity on the one hand, and the bonds of
family or dictates of self-interest comes next. The
struggle of the hereditary principle oí rank with the
personal influences of prowess, economic success and
magical craft is also ofimportance. Sorcery asa persona!
instrument of power deserves special mention, for the
sorcerer is often a dreaded competitor cf the chief or
headman. If space permitted I could give examples of
other conflicts of a more concrete, accidental nature ;
the historically ascertainable gradual spread of political
power of the Tabalu sub-clan (of the Malasi clan), in
which we can see the principle of rank override beyond
its legitimate field the law of strictly local citizenship,
based on mythological claims and matrilineal succession.
Or else I might describe the secular contest between
the same Tabalu and the Toliwaga sub-clan (of the
Lukwasisiga clan), in which the former have on their
side rank, prestige and established power and the
latter a stronger military organization, war-like
qualities and greater success in fighting.

The most important fact from our point of view in
this struggle of social principles is that it forces us to
re-cast completely the traditional couception of law
and order in savage communities. We have to abandon
now definitely the idea of an inert, solid ‘ crust’ or
“cake” of custom rigidly pressing from outside upon the
whole surface of tribal life. Law and order arise out of


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 123


the very processes which they govern. But they are not
rigid, nor due to any inertia or permanent mould. They’
obtain on the contrary as the result of a constant
struggle not merely of human passions against the law,
but of legal principles with one another. The struggle,
however, is not a free fight: it is subject to definite
conditions, can take place only within certain limits
and only on the condition that it remains under the
surface of publicity. Once an open challenge has been
entered, the precedence of strict law over legalized
usage or over an encroaching principle of law is
established and the orthodox hierarchy of legal systems
controls the issue.

For as we have seen the conflict takes place between
strict law and legalized usage, and it is possible because
the former has the strength of more definite tradition
behind it, while the latter draws force from personal
inclinations and actual power. There exist thus within
the body of law not only different types such as quasi-
civil and quasi-criminal, or the law of economic
transactions, of political relations, etc., but there can be
distinguished degrees of orthodoxy, stringency, and
validity, placing the rules into a hierarchy from the
main law of Mother-right, totemism, and rank down
to the clandestine evasions and the traditional means
of defying law and abetting crime.

Herewith our survey of law and legal institutions in
the Trobriand Islands comes to an end. In its course


124 CRIME AND CUSTOM


we have reached a number of conclusions about the
existence of positive and elastic and yet binding obliga-
tions, which correspond to the civil law in more
developed cultures ; about the influence of reciprocity,
public enactment and the systematic incidence of such
obligations, which supply their main binding forces ;
about the negative rulings of law, the tribal prohibitions
and taboos, which we have found as elastic and
adaptable as the positive rules although fulfilling a
different function. We were also able to suggest a new
classification of the rules of custom and tradition ;
a revised definition of law as a special class of customary
rules and to indicate further sub-divisions within the
body of law itself. In this, besides the main division
between quasi-civil and quasi-criminal we found that
a distinction must be made between the various grades
of law which can be arranged into a hierarchy from the
statutes of main legitimate law, through legally
tolerated usages down to evasions and traditional!
methods of flouting the law. We also had to dis-
criminate between a number of distinct systems which
together form the body of tribal law such as Mother-
right and Father-love, political organization and
magical influence, systems which at times enter
into conflict, arrive at compromises and re-adjustments.
There is no need to go further into detail about all this,
for our conclusions were both substantiated with
evidence and discussed theoretically at length.


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 125


But it is worth while to realize once more that
throughout our discussion we found the real problem
not in bald enumeration of rules, but in the ways and
means by which these are carried out. Most instructive
we found the study of the life situations which call for
a given rule, the manner in which this is handled by
the people concerned, the reaction of the community
at large, the consequences of fulfilment or neglect.
All this, which could be called the cultural-context of a
primitive system of rules is equally important, if not
more so, than the mere recital of a fictitious native
corpus juris codified into the ethnographer’s note-book
as the result of question and answer, in the hearsay
- method of field-work.

With this we are demanding a new line of anthro-
pological field-work: the study by direct observation
of the rules of custom as they function in actual life.
Such study reveals that the commandments of law and
custom are always organically connected and not
isolated ; that their very nature consists in the many
tentacles which they throw out into the context of social
life, that they only exist in the chain of social trans-
actions in which they are but a link. I maintain that
the staccato manner in which most accounts of tribal
life are given is the result of imperfect information,
and that it is in fact incompatible with the general
character of human life and the exigencies of social
organization. .A native tribe bound by a code of


126 CRIME AND CUSTOM


disconnected inorganic customs would fall to pieces
under our very eyes.

We can only plead for the speedy and complete
disappearance from the records of field-work of the
piecemea! items of information, of customs, beliefs, and
rules of conduct floating in the air, or rather leading a
flat existence on paper with the third-dimension, that
of life, completely Jacking. With this the theoretical
arguments of Anthropology will be able to drop the
lengthy litanies of threaded statement, which make us
anthropologists feel silly, and the savage look ridiculous.
I mean by this the long enumerations of bald state-
ment such as, for example, “Among the Brobdig-
nacians when a man meets his mother-in-law, the two
abuse each other and each retires with a black eye” ;
“When a Brodiag encounters a Polar bear he runs
away and sometimes the bear follows”; “in old
Caledonia when a native accidentally finds a whiskey
bottle by the road-side he empties it at one gulp, after
which he proceeds immediately to look for another ”—
and so forth. (I am quoting from memory so the state-
ments may be only approximate, though they sound
plausible.)

It is easy, however, to poke fun at the litany-method,
but it is the field-worker who is really responsible. There
is hardly any record in which the majority of state-
ments are given as they occur in actuality and not as
they should or are said to occur. Many of the earlier


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 129


accounts were written to startle, to amuse, to be
facetious at the expense of the savage, till the tables
were turned and it is more easy now to be facetious at
the anthropologist’s expense. To the old recorders
what mattered really was the queerness of the custom,
not its reality. The modern anthropologist, working
through an interpreter by the question and answer
method can again collect only cpinions, generaliza-
tions, and bald statements. He gives us no reality, for
he has never seen it. The touch of ridicule which hangs
about most writings of anthropology is due to the
artificial flavour of a statement torn out of its life-
context. The true problem is not to study how human
life submits to rules—it simply does not; the real
problem is how the rules become adapted to life.

As regards our theoretical gains the analysis of
Trobriand law has given us a clear view of the forces
of cohesion in a primitive society, based on solidarity
within the group as well as on the appreciation of
personal interest. The opposition of primitive ‘ group-
sentiment ’, “joint personality ’ and ‘ clan absorption ’
to civilized individualism and pursuit of selfish ends
appear to us altogether artificial and futile. No society,
however primitive or civilized, can be based on a
figment or on a pathological growth on human nature.

The results of this memoir point to one more moral.
Although I have confined myself principally to
descriptions and statements of fact, some of these led


128 CRIME AND CUSTOM


naturally to a more general theoretical analysis which
yielded certain explanations of the facts discussed. Yet
in all this not once was it necessary to resort to any
hypotheses, to any evolutionary or historical recon-
structions. The explanations here given consisted in
an analysis of certain facts into simpler elements and
of tracing the relations between these elements. Or
else it was possible to correlate one aspect of culture
with another and to show which is the function fulfilled
by either within the scheme of culture. The relation
between Mother-right and the paternal principle and
their partial conflict accounts, as we have seen, for a
series of compromise formations such as cross-cousin
marriage, types of inheritance and economic
transactions, the typical constellation of father, son,
and maternal uncle, and certain features of the clan
system.! Several characteristics of their social life, the
chains of reciprocal duties, the ceremonial enactment
of obligations, the uniting of a number of disparate
transactions into one relationship have been explained
by the function which they fulfil in supplying the
coercive forces of law. The relation between hereditary
prestige, the power of sorcery, and the influence of
personal achievement as we find them in the Trobriands
could be accounted for by the cultural parts played by
each principle respectively. While remaining on strictly


1 The relation between Mother-right and Father-love is more
fully discussed in op. cit., Sex and Repression in Savage Society.


CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 129


empirical ground we were able to account for all these
facts and features, show their conditions as well as the
ends which they fulfil, and thus to explain them
in a scientific manner. This type of explanation
by no means excludes further investigation as
to the evolutionary level of such customs or as
to their historical antecedents. There is room for the
antiquarian interest as well as the scientific, but the
former should not claim an exclusive or even
predominant sway over Anthropology. It is high time
that the student of Man should also be able to say
“ hypotheses non fingo”.


INDEX


Adultery, 81, 96; punishment,
92, 118; marks on corpse,
84; and child, 108 n.

Ambition, 29, 30, 32, 58, 67-68 ;
in gardening, 36

Année Sociologique, 41 n., 57 n.

Anthropology, scientific nature,


1-2, 71-74; practical value,
1-2

Bachofen, 2

Baloma (v. Spirits)

Bernhóít, 2


Black Magic (v. Sorcery)

Blood money, 115, 119

Breach of law, Pt. II, Ch, I, et
passim

Brother, and sister in Trobriand
law, 35-38; murder of,
116-117


Canoe, ownership, 18-21 ; master
and crew, 26-27

Ceremonial, display, 23, 29, 32,
36-37, 55, 67, 128; distribu-
tion, 34, 61, 114, 115

Chief, 46-47, 66, 76; power
of punishment, 89-92; and
son, 101-106, 110

Civil law among savages, 30-31,
33, 56-59, 63-68, 73-74,
123-124

Clan, 47-49, 55, 75;
112-120, 127;
122; (v. also
Mother-right)

Classificatory system of relation-
ship, 82, 113

Cohesion, forces in tribe, 112-120

Communism, primitive : concept
criticized, 3, 11, 16, 18-21,
26, 48-49, 73, and Pt. I, Ch. 11


unity,
conflict of,
Exogamy,


Conflict of principles in law, 76,
100-111, 121-123

Conformism of savages, 52

Co-operation, 18-21, 26-27

Counter-magic, 80-81

Crime, 63, 117 ; and punishment,
Pt. IL; 94, 97-99, 117-119
(v. also Criminal law)

Criminal law, 56-58, 66

Cross-cousin marriage, 110-111

Cultural context in anthropo-
logical study, 125-127

Custom, automatic submission
to, Pt. I, Ch. I; 34 30
50-52, 56, 63-68, 73, 122;
force of, 65; rules of, 50-54


Dual organization, 24-25
Durkheim, 4, 55, 57 n.


Economic relations, 25-208
35-42; in fishing, 17-21;
coastal and inland, 22-23

Elasticity of law, 31, 58

European war, native view, 83 n.

Evasion, of obligations, 28, 30; .
of results of breach of law,
80-81

Exchange, 22, 23, 25-27 (v. also
Kula)

Exhumation, 87-90

Exogamy, 77-80, 82-84


Father and son, strangers, 101,
107, 108

Fatherhood, ignorance of physio-
logy of, 107-108 n.

Father-love, 100-111

Feasts, 114

Fieldwork methods,
125-127

Fishing, 17-18, 20; motives in,
26-28


120-121,


INDEX


. Food, its social value, 29, 117
(v. also Ceremonial display and
distribution, Fishing, Pigs)

Funeral rites, 33-34, 44, 53,
87-90, 114


Garden produce, its distribution,
36-37

Gifts, 40-41

Give and take (v. Reciprocity)

Group marriage, 3; sentiment,
10, 11, 42, 48, 55; solidarity,
3, 4; (v. also Communism,
Custom, etc.)

Gwara, taboo pole, 61


Hartland, Sidney, 64, 73 n; on
communism, 48; on criminal
law, 55-57; on primitive
categories, 50-51 ; on
tradition, 10

Hobhouse, L. T., 56, 57; on
binding custom, 12

Husband and wife, 34, 35, 40-41,
75, 95-97, 108 (v. also
Marriage)


Ideal of law and reality, 79-80,
82-84, 107-111, 120-121

Incest, 78-83 ; and Malasi clan,
84

Insults, and suicide, 78, 95-96 ;
to chief, 92


Jurisprudence, primitive, 2;
real field, 56-59; summary
of views, 63-68


Kala wabu, marks on corpse,
87-90

Kayasa, ceremonial contract, 61

Kaylast (v. Adultery)

Kaytapaku, magical protection
of property, 60, 61

Kaytubutabu, magic of coco-nuts,
61

Killing as punishment, 92, 118

Kimali, erotic scratches, 88

Kinsmen, 113, 115

Kohler, 2

Koust (v. Spirits)

Kukwanebu, stories, 106


KAN


Kula, overseas trading, 25, 61,
82, 90, 104, 110
Kwapatu (v. Theft)


Law, primitive, and custom, 30,
50-54, 63; definition, 14-16,
31-32, 58-59, 67; funda-
mental function, 64; not
all negative, 56-58 ; rules of,
55-74 ; theories of, 2-5, 9-16,
50-51, 56-58, 63-64, 73; in
economics, 18-23, 26-31; in
marriage, 35-38, 43-44; in
religion, 33-34; and chief,
46-47, 91-92 (v. also Ideal,
Civil Law, etc.)

Lowie, R. H., 13, 56, 57

Lugwa (v. Vendetta)

Lula (v. Blood-money)


Magic, 42-43, 53, 60-61; and
clan incest, 80-81; criminal
instrument, 81-82 (v. also
Sorcery)

Mailu, gora in, 61 n.

Maine, 3, 56


Manners, rules of, 52-53

Marriage, 35-38, 75-76; within
the clan, 84; (v. Husband
and wife)

Mauss, M. Marcel, 41 n., 57

Milamila, feast for spirits, 44

Moratorium, analogy with
gwara, 61

Mother-right, 75-76, 113; and
father-love, 100-111, 128

Motives, in work, 26, 28-30

Mourning (v. Funeral rites)

Mulukwausi, flying witches, 87

Murder, 116-118

Mythology, indicative of law, 106


Negative injunctions in primitive
law (v. Prohibitions)

Norms of conduct (v. Custom,
rules)

Notes and Queries in Anthro-


pology, 4


Obedience to law (v. Custom,
automatic submission)


137


Obligations, 58, 67: in
economics, 18-21, 25-29; in
religious acts, 33-34 ; binding
force, Pt. I, Ch. III and VIII
passim

Ownership, 109-110; 117-118
(v. also Canoe)


Pigs, 82, 90

Pokala, payment for privileges,
110, 111

Post, 2

Primitive economics,
study, 1

Primitive mentality, 1, 51

Prohibitions, 56-57, 79, 82-83,
99 (v. also Law)

Public opinion, 79-80

Punishment (v. Crime)


value of


Reciprocity, 22, 23, 34, 37, 68;
Pt. I, Ch. IV, VIII, IX

Religion, 33-34; sanction, 53,
80; no part in civil law,
66-67 (v. also Spirits)

Rivers, on communism, 19-20;
dual organization, 25; group
sentiment, 11, 48, 49, 55,
73 n.; primitive law, 4


Sagali, feasts, 114

Sanctions for rules of conduct,
50, 53, 55, 65-68, 80

Science, philosophy of, 71-72

Self-interest, 26-27, 30, 48, 65,
67


Sex, 40, 47 n., 92
Sorcery, as legal influence, 78, 82,
85-86, 93-94; diagnosis of


INDEX


marks on corpse, 87-91 ; legal
weapon of chief, 91-93;
instrument of power, 122


Spirits, 44, 90; intercourse
with, 84

Steinmetz, 57 ,

Suicide, 77-79; legal aspect,
94-98


Summary of views on custom
and law, 63-68 ; of argument,
124 et seq. i

Suvasova, breach of exogamy
(v. Exogamy)

Symmetry of social structure,
24-25


Taboo, 42, 56, 61, 73, 79,:82-83,
92, 98, 99

Theft, 117-118

Thurnwald, on reciprocity, 24

Tomakava, stranger, 113 (v.
Father)

Totemism, 26, 113

Tradition, conformity to, 52, 65

Trobriand Archipelago, 17


Valuables, 61, 90, 109-110, 117

Vayla'u (v. Theft)

Vendetta, 78, 97, 114, 115, 118,
119

Veyola, kinsmen, 113, 115


Yakala, public recriminations,
0


Yoba, ceremonial expulsion,
103-104
Zeitschrift f. vergl. Rechts-


wissenschaft, 2


ERK NENA RURAL RKAS


G


X


The


International Library


OF
PSYCHOLOG Y, PHILOSOPHY
AND SCIENTIFIC METHOD


Edited by


C. K. OGDEN, M.A.
Late Fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge


The International Library, of which over one hundred and fifty
volumes have been published, is both in quality and quantity a unique
achievement in this department of publishing. Its purpose is to give
expression, in a convenient form, to the remarkable developments
which have recently occurred in Psychology and its allied sciences.
The older philosophers were preoccupied by metaphysical interests
which for the most part have ceased to attract the younger investi-
gators, and their forbidding terminology too often acted as a
deterrent for the general reader. The attempt to deal in clear
language with current tendencies whether in England and America
or on the Continent has met with a very encouraging reception, and
not only have accepted authorities been invited to explain the newer
theories, but it has been found possible to include a number of
origina] contributions of high merit.


Published by
ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL LTD


BROADWAY HOUSE: 68-74 CARTER LANE, LONDON, E.C.4.


1964


SEAS AS AS ASAE AS AS ASS ASS


CASAS AS AS AS AS ASAE ASAE ASAE ASAE SEAR ASAE ASAE


INTERNATIONAL LIBRARY OF PSYCHOLOGY,
PHILOSOPHY AND SCIENTIFIC METHOD


All prices are net


A. PSYCHOLOGY


GENERAL AND DESCRIPTIVE


The Mind and its Place in Nature. By C. D. Broad. £2 15s.
Thought and the Brain. By Henri Piéron. Trans. by C. K. Ogden. £1.
The Nature of Laughter. By J. C. Gregory. 18s.


The Gestalt Theory and the Problem of Configuration. By Bruno
Petermann. Tllustrated. £1 5s.


Principles of Gestalt Psychology. By K. Koffka. £3.
Analysis of Perception. By J. R. Smythies. £1 Is.


The Psychology of Character: with a Survey of Personality in General.
By A. A. Roback. Revised Edition. £2 10s.


ANALYSIS


pe and Theory of Individual Psychology. By Alfred Adler
10s.


Psychological Types. By C. G. Jung. Translated with a Foreword by
H. Godwin Baynes. £2 5s.


Character and the Unconscious: a Critical Exposition of the Psychology
of Freud and Jung. By J. H. van der Hoop. £1.


2


LANGUAGE AND SYMBOLISM


The Symbolic Process, and Its Integration in Children. By J. F.
Markey. 14s.


The Meaning of Meaning: a Study of the Influence of Language upon
Thought and of the Science of Symbolism. By C. K. Ogden and
I. A. Richards. £1 12s.


Principles of Literary Criticism. By I. A. Richards. £1 5s.
The Spirit of Language in Civilization. By K. Vossler. £1.


CHILD PSYCHOLOGY, EDUCATION, ETC.


The Growth of the Mind: an Introduction to Child Psychology. By
K. Koffka. Translated by R. M. Ogden. £2.


The Language and Thought of the Child. By Jean Piaget. Preface by
E. Claparéde. Third Edition (revised and enlarged). £1 Ss.


Moral Judgment of the Child. By Jean Piaget. £1 15s.

The Child’s Conception of the World. By Jean Piaget. £1 15s.
The Child’s Conception of Number. By Jean Piaget. £1 5s.
Judgment and Reasoning in the Child. By Jean Piaget. £1 5s.
The Origin of Intelligence in the Child. By Jean Piaget. £1 15s.
The Child’s Conception of Space. By Jean Piaget. £2 2s.


The Child’s Conception of Geometry. By Jean Piaget, Barbel Inhelder
and Alina Szeminska. £2 5s.


The Mental Development of the Child. By Karl Bühler. 15s.
The Psychology of Intelligence. By Jean Piaget. 18s.


The Psychology of Children’s Drawings: From the First Stroke to the
Coloured Drawing. By Helga Eng. Second Edition. £1 5s.


THE STUDY OF COMMUNITIES


The Mentality of Apes, with an Appendix on the Psychology of Chim-
panzees. By W. Koehler. With 9 plates and 19 figures. £1 5s.


Crime and Custom in Savage Society. By B. Malinowski. With six
plates. 18s.


Sex and Repression in Savage Society. By B. Malinowski. £1 ls.
3


B. PHILOSOPHY


Philosophical Studies. By G. E. Moore. £1 10s.


The Philosophy of “ As If”: a System of the Theoretical, Practical,
and Religious Fictions of Mankind. By H. Vaihinger.’ Translated
by C. K. Ogden. £1 10s.


Five Types of Ethical Theory. By C. D. Broad. £1 10s.


Speculations: Essays on Humanism and the Philosophy of Art. By
T. E. Hulme. Edited by Herbert Read. With a frontispiece and
Foreword by Jacob Epstein. £1 Is.


The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science, with special
reference to Man’s Relation to Nature. By E. A. Burtt. £1 8s.


Bentham's Theory of Fictions. Edited with an Introduction and
Notes by C. K. Ogden. £1 10s.


Ideology and Utopia: an Introduction to the Sociology of Knowledge.
By Karl Mannheim. £1 8s.


The Philosophy of Peirce. Selected Writings. Edited by Justus
Biichler. £1 15s.


Ethics and the History of Philosophy: Selected Essays. By C. D.
Broad, £1 5s.


Sense-Perception and Matter : A Critical Analysis of C. D. Broad’s
Theory of Perception. By Martin E. Lean. £1 Ss.


The Structure of Metaphysics. By Morris Lazerowitz. £1 10s.


Methods and Criteria of Reasoning. An inquiry into the structure of
controversy. By Rupert Crawshay-Williams. £1 12s.


Reasons and Faiths. By Ninian Smart. £1 5s.


LOGIC


Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. By L. Wittgenstein. German text.
with an English Translation en regard, and an Introduction by
Bertrand Russell, F.R.S. £1 1s.


The Foundations of Mathematics, and other Logical Essays. By F. P.
Ramsey. £1 3s.


The Nature of Mathematics: a Critical Survey. By Max Black. £1 4s.
Logical Syntax of Language. By Rudolf Carnap. £2.
4


Bertrand Russell’s Construction of the External World. By Charles A.
PEZ JUDE £1" 3S.


Logical Studies. By G. H. von Wright. £1 8s.


C. SCIENTIFIC METHOD


Scientific Thought: a Philosophical Analysis of some of its Funda-
mental Concepts in the light of Recent Physical Developments.
By C. D. Broad. £2.


The Limits of Science: Outline of Logic and of the Methodology of
the Exact Sciences. By Leon Chwistek. Introduction and
Appendix by H. C. Brodie. £1 12s.


HISTORY, ETC.
An Historical Introduction to Modern Psychology. By Gardner
Murphy. With a Supplement by H. Kluver. £2.


The History of Materialism and Criticism of its Present Importance.
By F. A. Lange. Introduction by Bertrand Russell. £3 10s.


Outlines of the History of Greek Philosophy. By E. Zeiler. £1 8s.
Plato’s Theory of Art. By R. C. Lodge. £1 5s.
The Philosophy of Plato. By R. C. Lodge. £1 12s.


Plato’s Phaedo. A translation with an Introduction, Notes and
Appendices, by R. S. Bluck. £1 Is.


Plato’s Theory of Knowledge. The Theaetetus and the Sophist of Plato.
Translated, with a Running Commentary, by F. M. Cornford.
£1 8s.


Plato’s Cosmology: The Timaeus of Plato. Translated, with a Running
Commentary, by F. M. Cornford. £1 15s.


Plato and Parmenides. Parmenides’ * Way of Truth °” and Plato’s
** Parmenides °. Translated with an Introduction and Running
Commentary, by F. M. Cornford. £1 4s.


Aristotle’s Theory of Contrariety. By John P. Anton. £1 Ss.
5


A LIST OF BOOKS PUBLISHED IN THE LIBRARY BUT AT PRESENT OUT OF PRINT
Analysis of Matter. By B. Russell.

Art of Interrogation. By E. R. Hamilton.

Biological Memory. By Eugenio Rignano.

Biological Principles. By J. H. Woodger.

Chance Love and Logic. By C. S. Peirce.

Charles Peirce’s Empiricism. By Justus Biichler.

Child’s Conception of Physical Causality. By Jean Piaget.
Child’s Discovery of Death. By Sylvia Anthony.

Colour Blindness. By Mary Collins.

Colour and Colour Theories. By Christine Ladd-Franklin.
Communication. By K. Britton.

Comparative Philosophy. By P. Masson-Oursel.

Concentric Method. By M. Laignel-Lavastine.

Conditions of Knowing. By Angus Sinclair.

Conflict and Dream. By W. H. R. Rivers.

Conscious Orientation. By J. H. Van der Hoop.
Constitution-Types in Delinquency. By W. A. Willemse.
Contributions to Analytical Psychology. By C. G. Jung.
Creative Imagination. By June E. Downey.

Crime, Law and Social Science. By J. Michael and M. J. Adler.
Development of the Sexual Impulses. By R. E. Money Kyrle.
Dialectic. By M. J. Adler.

Doctrine of Signatures. By Scott Buchanan.

Dynamics of Education. By Hilda Taba.

Dynamic Social Research. By J. T. Hader and E. C. Lindeman.
Education Psychology. By C. Fox.

Effects of Music. By M. Schoen.

Eidetic Imagery. ByE. R. Jaensch.

Emotion and Insanity. By S. Thalbitzer.

Emotions of Normal People. By W, M. Marston.

Ethical Relativity. By E. Westermarck.

Examination of Logical Positivism. By Julius Weinberg.
Foundations of Geometry. By Jean Nicod.

Growth of Reason. By F. Lorimer.


6


History of Chinese Political Thought. By Liang Chi-Chao.
How Animals Find their Way About. By E. Rabaud.
Human Speech. By Sir Richard Paget.

Individual and the Community. Ey Wen Kwei Liao.
Infant Speech. By M. M. Lewis.

Integrative Psychology. By W. M. Marston et al.
Invention and the Unconscious. By J. M. Montmasson.
Law and the Social Sciences. By H. Cairns.

Laws of Feeling. By F. Paulhan.

Measurement of Emotion. By W. Whately Smith.
Medicine, Magic and Religion. By W. H. Rivers.
Mencius on the Mind. By I. A. Richards.

Mind and its Body. By Charles Fox.

Misuse of Mind. By K. Stephen.

Nature of Intelligence. By L. L. Thurstone.

Nature of Learning. By G. Humphrey.

Nature of Life. By E. Rignano.

Neural Basis of Thought. By G. G. Campion and Sir G. E. Smith.
Neurotic Personality. By R. G. Gordon.

Philosophy of Music. By W. Pole.

Philosophy of the Unconscious. By E. von Hartmann.
Physique and Character. By E. Kretschmer.
Personality. By R. B. Gordon.

Plato’s Theory of Education. By R. C. Lodge.
Plato’s Theory of Ethics. By R. C. Lodge.

Pleasure and Instinct. By A. H. B. Allen.

Politica] Pluralism. By Kung Chuan Hsiao.

Possibity. By Scott Buchanan.

Primitive Mind and Modern Civilization. By C. R. Aldrich.
Principles of Experimental Psychology. By H. Pieron
Problems of Personality. Edited by A. A. Roback.
Problems in Psychopathology. By T. W. Mitchell.
Psyche. By E. Rohde.

Psychology and Ethnology. By W. H. R. Rivers.
Psychology and Politics. By W. H. R. Rivers.
Psychology of Animals, By F. Alverdes.

Psychology of Emotion. By J. T. MacCurdy.
Psychology of Intelligence and Will. By H. G. Wyatt.


1


Psychology of Men of Genius. By E. Kretschmer.

Psychology of a Musical Prodigy. By G. Revesz.

Psychology of Philosophers. By Alexander Herzberg.
Psychology of Reasoning. By E. Rignano.

Psychology of Religious Mysticism. By J. H. Leuba.
Psychology of Time. By Mary Sturt. h
Religion, Philosophy and Psychical Research. By C. D. Broad.
Religious Conversion. By Sante de Sanctis.

Sciences of Man in the Making. By E. A. Kirkpatrick.
Scientific Method. By A. D. Ritchie.

Social Basis of Consciousness. By T. Burrow.

Social Insects By W. M. Wheeler.

Social Life in the Animal World. By F. Alverdes.

Social Life of Monkeys and Apes. By S. Zuckerman.

Speech Disorders. By S. M. Stinchfield.


Statistical Method in Economics and Political Science. By P. Sargant
Florence.


Technique of Controversy. By B. B. Bogoslovsky.

Telepathy and Clairvoyance. By R. Tischner.

Theoretical Biology. By J. von Vexkuell.

Theory of Legislation. By Jeremy Bentham.

Trauma of Birth. By O. Rank.

Treatise on Induction and Probability. By G. H. von Wright.
What is Value? By Everett M. Hall.


== = A o = —— -A


764. PRINTED BY HEADLEY BROTHERS LTD 109 KINGSWAY LONDON WC2 AND ASHFORD KENT


HOR panty sy
“Spe ehaor,


Dri prp.
Se


